古文：起屠维单阏十月，尽玄黓敦牂，凡三年有奇。
现代文：起屠维单阏十月，尽玄黓敦牂，凡三年有奇。
English: From Tuwei in October alone, the whole country has been affected by the earthquake, which has been strange for three years.

古文：均王下贞明五年
现代文：后梁均王贞明五年
English: Five years after Liang Jun Wang Zhenming

古文：冬，十月，出濛为楚州团练使。
现代文：冬季十月，吴国派杨出任楚州团练使。
English: In the winter of October, the State of Wu sent Yang to serve as the Chuzhou group training envoy.

古文：晋王如魏州，发徒数万，广德胜北城，日与梁人争，大小百馀战，互有胜负。
现代文：晋王到魏州，派数万名士卒扩建德胜北城，每天都和后梁争战，大小战争百余次，互有胜负。
English: Jin Wang went to Weizhou, sent tens of thousands of soldiers to expand Desheng Beicheng, and fought with Houliang every day. There were more than a hundred large and small wars, with mutual victory and defeat.

古文：左射军使石敬塘与梁人战于河壖，梁人击敬瑭，断其马甲，横冲兵马使刘知远以所乘马授之，自乘断甲者徐行为殿；梁人疑有伏，不敢追，俱得免，敬瑭以是亲爱之。
现代文：左射军使石敬瑭和后梁军在黄河边上交战，后梁军攻打石敬瑭，击断了石敬瑭战马的铠甲，横冲兵马使刘知远把自己的战马给了石敬瑭，自己骑着断了甲的马在军队在后面慢慢走。后梁军怀疑晋军有伏兵，不敢靠近，因此他们都幸免于难。因此，石敬瑭更加宠爱刘知远。
English: The left-shooting army made Shijingshan and Houliang's army fight on the edge of the Yellow River. Houliang's army attacked Shijingshan and broke the armor of Shijingshan's horse. The rampaging soldiers made Liu Zhiyuan give his horse to Shijingshan, and he rode the broken horse slowly behind the army. Houliang's army suspected that the Jin army had an ambush and dared not approach, so they all survived. Therefore, Shijingshan was more fond of Liu Zhiyuan.

古文：敬瑭、知远，其先皆沙陀人。
现代文：石敬瑭、刘知远的先人都是沙陀人。
English: The ancestors of Shi Jingyao and Liu Zhirong were both Sadu people.

古文：敬瑭，李嗣源之婿也。
现代文：石敬瑭是李嗣源的女婿。
English: Shi Jingyao is the son-in-law of Li Sigen.

古文：刘鄩围张万进于兗州经年，城中危窘，晋王方与梁人战河上，力不能救。
现代文：刘鄩在兖州包围张万进已经一年多，城中危急窘困，这时晋王正和后梁军在黄河上作战，无力解救兖州。
English: Liu Bei had been besieging Zhang Wanjin in Ganzhou for more than a year, and the city was in dire straits. At this time, Jin Wang was fighting with Hou Liang's army on the Yellow River and was powerless to save Ganzhou.

古文：万进遣亲将刘处让乞师于晋，晋王未之许，处让于军门截耳曰： 苟不得请，生不如死！ 
现代文：张万进派遣他的亲信将领刘处让向晋王请求援兵，晋王没有答应。刘处让在军营门口割掉自己的耳朵，说： 如果不答应请求，活着不如死了。 
English: Zhang Wanjin sent his close confidant, General Liu Shuzhen, to Jin Wang to request reinforcements, but Jin Wang did not agree. Liu Shuzhen cut off his ear at the gate of the military camp, saying, "If you do not agree to the request, it is better to die than to live."

古文：晋王义之，将为出兵，会鄩已屠兗州，族万进，乃止。
现代文：晋王认为他很义气，准备出兵援救兖州。这时正好刘已经攻下兖州，灭了张万进家族，才停止出兵援助。
English: Jin Wang thought he was very righteous and was ready to send troops to rescue Zhang Zhou. At this time, Liu had just conquered Zhang Zhou and killed Zhang Wanjin's family, before he stopped sending troops to help.

古文：以处让为行台左骁卫将军。
现代文：晋王任命刘处让为行台左骁卫将军。
English: The Jin king appointed Liu Shuzhen as the general of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：处让，沧州人也。
现代文：刘处让是沧州人。
English: Liu Shujang is from Cangzhou.

古文：十一月，吴武宁节度使张崇寇安州。
现代文：十一月，吴国武宁节度使张崇率兵侵犯安州。
English: In November, Wu's Wu Ning Festival made Zhang Chong lead an army to invade Anzhou.

古文：丁丑，以刘鄩为泰宁节度使、同平章事。
现代文：丁丑，后梁帝任命刘为泰宁节度使、同平章事。
English: After the death of Emperor Dingwu, Emperor Liang appointed Liu to be Taining's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：辛卯，王瓚引兵至戚城，与李嗣源战，不利。
现代文：辛卯，王瓒率兵到了戚城，与李嗣源交战，没有取胜。
English: Xinwu, Wang Qian led the troops to Qicheng, and fought with Li Siyuan, but did not win.

古文：梁筑垒贮粮于潘张，距杨村五十里，十二月，晋王自将骑兵自河南岸西上，邀其饷者，俘获而还；梁人伏兵于要路，晋兵大败。
现代文：后梁军在潘张修筑营垒，储蓄粮食，潘张离杨村五十里。十二月，晋王率领骑兵从黄河南岸向西行进，阻截后梁军的送粮人，俘虏了送粮人而返。后梁军在要害路段埋伏了士兵，晋军大败。
English: Hou Liang's army built a camp and stored grain in Pan Zhang, and Pan Zhang was fifty miles away from Yang Cun. In December, Jin Wang led the cavalry from the south bank of the Yellow River to the west, intercepted Hou Liang's grain deliverer, captured the grain deliverer and returned. Hou Liang's army ambushed the soldiers in the critical section of the road, and the Jin army was defeated.

古文：晋王以数骑走，梁数百骑围之，李绍荣识其旗，单骑奋击救之，仅免。
现代文：晋王领着几个骑兵逃走，后梁军用几百骑兵包围了他们。晋将李绍荣认出是自己军队的旗帜，就一个人骑马去奋力解救晋王，仅使晋王免于一死。
English: Jin Wang led several cavalrymen to escape, and Hou Liang's army surrounded them with several hundred cavalrymen. Jin identified Li Shaorong as the flag of his own army, and he rode alone to rescue Jin Wang, only to save Jin Wang from death.

古文：戊戌，晋王复与王瓚战于河南，瓚先胜，获晋将石君立等；既而大败，乘小舟渡河，走保北城，失亡万计。
现代文：戊戌，晋王又和王瓒在黄河南岸交战，王瓒先取得胜利，俘获了晋将石君立等。过了一阵，王瓒的军队被晋军打败，王瓒乘小船渡过黄河，跑回北城坚守。
English: Wusong, Jin Wang and Wang Yao also fought on the south bank of the Yellow River. Wang Yao won first and captured the Jin general Shi Junli. After a while, Wang Yao's army was defeated by the Jin army. Wang Yao crossed the Yellow River in a small boat and ran back to Beicheng to hold on.

古文：帝闻石君立勇，欲将之，系于狱而厚饷之，使人诱之。
现代文：这次战败，有一万多士卒逃跑或被杀。后梁帝听说石君立非常勇敢，打算让他做自己的将领，把他关在监狱里，给他丰厚的待遇，并派人去劝诱他。
English: After this defeat, more than ten thousand soldiers fled or were killed. Later, Emperor Liang heard that Shijunli was very brave and planned to make him his own general, put him in prison, give him rich treatment, and send someone to persuade him.

古文：君立曰： 我晋之败将，而为用于梁，虽竭诚效死，谁则信之！
现代文：石君立说： 我是晋军的败将，如果在梁国被起用，虽竭诚效死，有谁能相信我呢？ 
English: Shi Junli said, "I am the loser of the Jin army. If I am appointed in Liang Province, even if I die with all my heart, who can believe me?

古文：人各有君，何忍反为仇雠用哉！ 帝犹惜之，尽杀所获晋将，独置君立。
现代文：后梁帝还是很爱惜他，把俘获的其他晋将全部杀掉，只留下了石君立。
English: Emperor Hou Liang was still very fond of him and killed all the other captured Jin generals, leaving only Shi Junli.

古文：晋王乘胜遂拔濮阳。
现代文：晋王乘胜前进，一举攻下了濮阳。
English: Jin Wang took advantage of the victory to advance and captured Suyang in one fell swoop.

古文：帝召王瓚还，以天平节度使戴思远代为北面招讨使，屯河上以拒晋人。
现代文：后梁帝把王瓒召回，任命天平节度使戴思远代理北面招讨使，驻扎在黄河抵御晋军。
English: Later, Emperor Liang recalled Wang Qian and appointed Tianping Jiedu to make Dai Siyuan the acting northern envoy, stationed in the Yellow River to resist the Jin army.

古文：己酉，蜀雄武节度使兼中书令王宗朗有罪，削夺官爵，复其姓名曰全师朗，命武定节度使兼中书令桑弘志讨之。
现代文：己酉，前蜀国雄武节度使兼中书令王宗朗犯了罪，前蜀主解除了他的官爵，恢复了他的姓名叫全师朗，命令武定节度使兼中书令桑弘志讨伐他。
English: In Jiwu, Wang Zonglang, the former Shu State's powerful military governor and middle secretary, committed a crime. The former Shu ruler relieved him of his title and restored his name to Quan Shilang, and ordered the military governor and middle secretary, Kuang Hongzhi, to fight him.

古文：吴禁民私畜兵器，盗贼益繁。
现代文：吴国禁止百姓私藏武器，盗贼越来越多。
English: Wu prohibited people from hiding weapons, and the number of thieves is on the rise.

古文：御史台主簿京兆卢枢上言： 今四方分争，宜教民战。
现代文：御史台主簿京兆人卢枢上奏说： 现在四方纷争，应当教百姓熟习战斗。
English: Lu Zuo, a member of the Beijing Zhaozhou, the main book of the Imperial History Museum, said in his report: Now that the four sides are in conflict, the people should be taught to be familiar with fighting.

古文：且善人畏法禁而奸民弄干戈，是欲偃武而反招盗也。
现代文：况且善良的人是惧怕法律禁令的，而不安分守己的人舞弄干戈，这是想禁止争斗反而招来盗贼啊！
English: Moreover, good-hearted people are afraid of legal prohibitions, while people who are not afraid to defend themselves play war. This is to ban fighting, but it attracts thieves!

古文：宜团结民兵，使之习战，自卫乡里。 
现代文：应当组织民兵，让他们熟习战斗，各自保卫自己的家乡。 
English: Let the militia be gathered together, that they may learn war, and defend every man his city.

古文：从之。
现代文：吴王听从了卢枢的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：均王下贞明六年
现代文：贞明六年
English: Zhenming six years old

古文：春，正月，戊辰，蜀桑弘志克金州，执全师朗，献于成都，蜀主释之。
现代文：春季正月，戊辰，前蜀将领桑弘志攻克金州，抓获全师朗，送到成都，前蜀主把他释放了。
English: In the first month of spring, the former Shu general, Kuang Hongzhi, invaded Jinzhou, captured all of Shilang, and sent him to Chengdu. The former Shu lord released him.

古文：吴张崇攻安州，不克而还。
现代文：吴将张崇进攻安州，没有攻下，率兵返回。
English: Wu sent Zhang Chong to attack Anzhou, failed to capture it, and led his troops back.

古文：崇在庐州，贪暴不法。
现代文：张崇在庐州，贪暴不法。
English: In Zhangzhou, Zhang Chong is corrupt and lawless.

古文：庐江民讼县令受赇，徐知诰遣侍御史知杂事杨廷式往按之，欲以威崇，廷式曰： 杂端推事，其体至重，职业不可不行。 
现代文：庐江的百姓上诉，说庐江县令接受了贿赂。徐知诰派侍御史知杂事杨廷式前往检查，打算以此来威胁张崇一下。杨廷式说： 杂端推事官，体制上非常重要，本职工作，不可不做。 
English: The people of Minjiang appealed, saying that the county magistrate of Minjiang had accepted bribes. Xu Zhigang sent his attendant Yang Tingshih to inspect, intending to threaten Zhang Chong. Yang Tingshih said: The judge is very important in the system, and must do his job.

古文：知诰曰： 何如？ 
现代文：徐知诰说； 怎么办呢？ 
English: Xu Zhisheng said; What should we do?

古文：廷式曰： 械系张崇，使吏如升州，簿责都统。 
现代文：杨廷式说： 给张崇戴上刑具，派一个官吏去升州，反复诘责都统。 
English: Yang Tingshi said: Put torture instruments on Zhang Chong, send an official to Shengzhou, and repeatedly blame Duotong.

古文：知诰曰： 所按者县令耳，何至于是！ 
现代文：徐知诰说： 现在查办的不过是一个县令，何至如此！ 
English: Xu Zhisheng said, "What is being investigated now is nothing more than a county ordinance, what a farce!

古文：廷式曰： 县令微官，张崇使之取民财转献都统耳，岂可舍大而诘小乎！ 
现代文：杨廷式说： 县令虽然是个小官，但张崇让他收取的民财都转献给了都统，难道可以舍去大官而去诘责一个小官吗？ 
English: Yang Tingshi said: Although the county magistrate is a minor official, the people's wealth collected by Zhang Chong has all been donated to the government. Is it possible to blame a minor official instead of a major official?

古文：知诰谢之曰： 固知小事不足相烦。 
现代文：徐知诰道歉说： 本来知道小事不足以麻烦你。 
English: Xu Zhisheng apologized and said, "I knew that minor things would not be enough to trouble you.

古文：以是益重之。
现代文：徐知诰因此更加器重杨廷式。
English: As a result, Xu Zhisheng paid more attention to Yang Ting style.

古文：廷式，泉州人也。
现代文：杨廷式是泉州人。
English: Yang Tingshi is from Quanzhou.

古文：晋王自得魏州，以李建及为魏博内外牙都将，将银枪效节都。
现代文：自从晋王得到魏州以后，任命李建及为魏博内外牙都将，统率禁卫军银枪效节都。
English: After Jin Wang gained control of Weizhou, he appointed Li Jianyi to be the commander of the Inner and Outer Divisions of Weibo and the commander of the Guards' Silver Rifle Division.

古文：建及为人忠壮，所得赏赐，悉分士卒，与同甘苦，故能得其死力，所向立功；同列疾之。
现代文：李建及为人忠诚壮节，得到的赏赐全部分给士卒，与士卒们同甘共苦，所以能够得到士卒们对他尽心尽力，只要他出去作战，一定会立功，同僚们很嫉妒他。
English: Li Jianhe was a man of great loyalty, and the rewards he received were all given to the soldiers. He shared the joys and sorrows with the soldiers, so he was able to get the soldiers to do their best for him. As long as he went out to fight, he would surely make a contribution, and his colleagues were very jealous of him.

古文：宦者韦令图监建及军，谮于晋王曰： 建及以私财骤施，此其志不小，不可使将牙兵。 
现代文：宦官韦令图监管李建及的军队，偷偷地对晋王说： 李建及用自己的财物多次分给士卒，如此看来，他的志向不小，不能让他率领禁卫军了。 
English: Wei Lingtu, the eunuch who supervised Li Jianji's army, secretly said to the King of Jin: Li Jianji used his own wealth to distribute it to the soldiers many times, so it seems that his ambition is not small, and he cannot be allowed to lead the Imperial Guard.

古文：王疑之。
现代文：晋王产生了怀疑。
English: Jin Wang became suspicious.

古文：建及知之，自恃无它，行之自若。
现代文：李建及知道后，行之自若。
English: After learning this, Li Jianhe acted with confidence.

古文：三月，王罢建及军职，以为代州刺史。
现代文：三月，晋王免去李建及的军职，任命他为代州刺史。
English: In March, Jin Wang relieved Li Jianji of his military post and appointed him as the governor of Daizhou.

古文：汉杨洞潜请立学校，开贡举，设铨选；汉主岩从之。
现代文：南汉杨洞潜请求建立学校，开设贡举，量才授官，南汉主刘岩听从了他的意见。
English: Yang Dongqian of the Southern Han Dynasty requested the establishment of a school, the establishment of a tribute, and the appointment of officials only by quantity. Liu Yan, the head of the Southern Han Dynasty, listened to his opinion.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，以尚书右丞李琪为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：夏季四月，乙亥，后梁帝任命尚书左丞李琪为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Yihai appointed Shangshu Zuorong Li Qi as the secretary of the Central Committee and the same rank.

古文：琪，珽之弟也，性疏俊，挟赵岩、张汉杰之势，颇通贿赂。
现代文：李琪是李的弟弟，他的性情开朗出众，依仗赵岩、张汉杰的势力，颇通贿赂。
English: Li Qi was Li's younger brother. He had an outstanding and cheerful disposition. He relied on the influence of Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie and was quite adept at bribery.

古文：萧顷与琪同为相，顷谨密而阴伺琪短。
现代文：萧顷和李琪同为宰相，萧顷谨慎秘密地观察李琪的短处。
English: Xiao He and Li Qi were both prime ministers. Xiao He carefully and secretly observed Li Qi's shortcomings.

古文：久之，有以摄官求仕者，琪辄改摄为守，顷奏之。
现代文：过了很久，有人想将试用的官改为正式的官，李琪就给他改试用官为守官，萧顷把这件事上奏给后梁帝。
English: After a long time, someone wanted to change the probationary official into a formal official, Li Qi changed the probationary official into a guarding official, and Xiao He reported the matter to Emperor Houliang.

古文：帝大怒，欲流琪远方，赵、张左右之，止罢为太子少保。
现代文：后梁帝十分生气，想把李琪流放到远方，经赵岩、张汉杰帮助，才未流放，降为太子少保。
English: Emperor Hou Liang was very angry and wanted to exile Li Qi to a distant place, but with the help of Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie, he was not exiled and was reduced to a minor prince.

古文：河中节度使冀王友谦以兵袭取同州，逐忠武节度使程全晖，全晖奔大梁。
现代文：河中节度使冀王朱友谦率兵袭击并夺取了同州，赶走了忠武节度使程全晖。程全晖逃到了大梁。
English: In the middle of the river, Zhu Youqian, the king of Ji, led his troops to attack and capture the same state, driving away Cheng Quanzhang, who was sent by Zhongwu. Cheng Quanzhang fled to Daliang.

古文：友谦以其子令德为忠武留后，表求节钺，帝怒，不许。
现代文：朱友谦任命他的儿子朱令德为忠武留后，并上表皇帝请求赐发符节和斧钺，后梁帝十分生气，没有答应。
English: After Zhu Youqian appointed his son Zhu Lingde as Zhongwu Liu, and the above-mentioned emperor requested to be given the symbols and axes, Emperor Liang was very angry and did not agree.

古文：既而惧友谦怨望，己酉，以友谦兼忠武节度使。
现代文：后来后梁帝害怕朱友谦心怀不满，己酉，任命朱友谦兼任忠武节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Liang was afraid that Zhu Youqian would be dissatisfied with him, so he appointed Zhu Youqian to serve as a loyal military envoy.

古文：制下，友谦已求节钺于晋王，晋王以墨制除令德忠武节度使。
现代文：后梁帝的命令下达时，朱友谦已向晋王请求到符节和斧钺，归降于晋王，于是晋王直接发出亲笔手令任命朱令德为忠武节度使。
English: Later, when Emperor Liang's order was issued, Zhu Youqian had already asked the Jin king for a rune and an axe to surrender to the Jin king, so the Jin king directly issued a handwritten order to appoint Zhu Lingde as a loyal military envoy.

古文：吴宣王重厚恭恪，徐温父子专政，王未尝有不平之意形于言色，温以是安之。
现代文：吴宣王很厚道，而且谦恭谨慎，徐温父子掌管全权，宣王从来没有不平之意表现在脸色上，徐温因此就安然自在。
English: Wu Xuan Wang is very kind and modest. Xu Wen and his son are in full control. Xuan Wang has never shown any dissatisfaction on his face, so Xu Wen is at ease.

古文：及建国称制，尤非所乐，多沉饮鲜食，遂成寝疾。
现代文：到了建国称王以后，宣王更没有什么所高兴的，经常喝酒，很少吃饭，慢慢就卧床生病了。
English: After the founding of the country and his crowning as king, King Xuan had nothing to be happy about. He often drank alcohol, rarely ate, and gradually fell ill in bed.

古文：五月，温自金陵入朝，议当为嗣者。
现代文：五月，徐温从金陵回朝，商议谁当为继承王位的人。
English: In May, Xu Wen returned to the imperial court from Jinling to discuss who should succeed to the throne.

古文：或希温意言曰： 蜀先主谓武侯： 嗣子不才，君宜自取。  
现代文：有人迎合徐温的心意说： 蜀先主刘备对武侯说： 嗣子没有才能，您可以自代王位。  
English: Some people catered to Xu Wen's wishes and said: Liu Bei, the ancestor of Shu, said to Wuhou: Your heir has no talent, you can take the throne yourself.

古文：温正色曰： 吾果有意取之，当在诛张颢之初，岂至今日邪！
现代文：徐温严肃地说： 我如果真有心取代王位，是在杀掉张颢的时候，哪能等到今日！
English: Xu Wen said seriously, "If I really wanted to replace the throne, I would have killed Zhang Ye when I had the chance. I couldn't wait until today!"

古文：使杨氏无男，有女亦当立之。
现代文：即使杨氏没有儿子，有女儿也应当立她为王。
English: Even if the Yang family doesn't have a son, if they have a daughter, they should make her king.

古文：敢妄言者斩！ 
现代文：再有敢胡说的，一律杀掉。 
English: If anyone dares to talk nonsense again, kill them all.

古文：乃以王命迎丹杨公溥监国，徙溥兄濛为舒州团练使。
现代文：于是以宣王之命迎接丹杨公杨溥回来代行处理政事，调杨溥的哥哥杨任舒州团练使。
English: Therefore, by the order of King Xuanzong, Danyang Prince Yang Hui returned to deal with political affairs on his behalf, and Yang Hui's brother Yang was appointed as the Shuzhou regimental training envoy.

古文：己丑，宣王殂。
现代文：己丑，宣王去世。
English: Ashamed of himself, Emperor Xuanwu died.

古文：六月，戊申，溥即吴王位。
现代文：六月，戊申，杨溥登吴王位。
English: In June, Wushin, Yang Hui ascended the throne of Wu.

古文：尊母王氏曰太妃。
现代文：尊称他的母亲王氏为太妃。
English: He called his mother, Wang, "Tao Hui" (太妃).

古文：丁巳，蜀以司徒兼门下侍郎、同平章事周庠同平章事，充永平节度使。
现代文：丁巳，前蜀主让司徒兼门下侍郎、同平章事周以同平章事衔，出任永平节度使。
English: At that time, the former Shu master appointed Sito, who was also a servant of his disciple, and Tongping Zhang Zhizhou, with the title of Tongping Zhang Zhizhou, to serve as Yongping Festival Envoys.

古文：帝以泰宁节度使刘鄩为河东道招讨使，帅感化节度使尹皓、静胜节度使温昭图、庄宅使段凝攻同州。
现代文：后梁帝任命泰宁节度刘为河东道招讨使，率领感化节度使尹皓、静胜节度使温昭图、庄宅使段凝一起攻打同州。
English: Later, Emperor Liang appointed Taining Jietuo Liu as the envoy of the river host, led by the influence of the Jietuo Jietuo, the Jingcheng Jietuo, and the Zhuangzhai Jietuo to attack Tongzhou.

古文：闰月，庚申朔，蜀主作高祖原庙于万里桥，帅后妃、百官用亵味作鼓吹祭之。
现代文：闰五月，庚申朔，前蜀主在万里桥修建了高祖原庙，带领后妃、百官，供上高祖生前最喜欢吃的食品，击鼓吹乐来祭祀高祖。
English: In leap May, Geng Shenshuo, the former Shu master built the original temple of Gao Zu in Wanli Bridge, leading the empress and hundreds of officials to offer Gao Zu's favorite food, drumming and music to worship Gao Zu.

古文：华阳尉张士乔上疏谏，以为非礼，蜀主怒，欲诛之，太后以为不可，乃削官流黎州，士乔感愤，赴水死。
现代文：张士乔感到愤怒，跳水自杀。
English: Zhang Shijo felt angry and jumped into the water to commit suicide.

古文：刘鄩等围同州，硃友谦求救于晋。
现代文：刘鄩等包围了同州，朱友谦请求晋国援救。
English: Liu Bei and others surrounded Tongzhou, and Zhu Youqian asked Jin Guo to come to the rescue.

古文：秋，七月，晋王遣李存审、李嗣昭、李建及、慈州刺史李存质将兵救之。
现代文：秋季，七月，晋王派遣李存审、李嗣昭、李建及、慈州刺史李存质率兵前去援救。
English: In the autumn, in July, the king of Jin dispatched Li Cunxuan, Li Shizhao, Li Jian and Li Cunqiao, the leader of Cizhou Jishi, to go to the rescue.

古文：乙卯，蜀主下诏北巡，以礼部尚书兼成都尹长安韩昭为文思殿大学士，位在翰林承旨上。
现代文：乙卯，前蜀主颁发诏书，准备到北边巡视。任命礼部尚书兼成都尹长安人韩昭为文思殿大学士，地位在翰林承旨之上。
English: Second, the former Lord of Shu issued an imperial edict to prepare for a tour to the north, and appointed Han Zhao, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a native of Chengdu, Yin Chang'an, as a scholar of the University of Wensi, with a status above that of Hanlin's successor.

古文：昭无文学，以便佞得幸，出入宫禁，就蜀主乞通、渠、巴、集数州刺史卖之以营居第，蜀主许之。
现代文：韩昭没有文才，用花言巧语、阿谀逢迎得到的前蜀主宠幸，出入宫禁，在接近前蜀主时，请求卖通、渠、巴、集四州刺史官爵，用来修建他的住宅，前蜀主答应了。
English: Han Zhao did not have literary talent. He was a favorite of the former Shushi, who welcomed him with flowery language and flattery. He was banned from entering the palace. When he approached the former Shushi, he requested to sell Tong, Qu, Ba, and Ji to the four states to build his house. The former Shushi agreed.

古文：识者知蜀之将亡。
现代文：明白这件事的人知道前蜀将要灭亡。
English: Those who understand this matter know that the former Shu will perish.

古文：八月，戊辰，蜀主发成都，被金甲，冠珠帽，执弓矢而行，旌旗兵甲，亘百馀里。
现代文：八月，戊辰，前蜀主从成都出发，他身披金甲，头戴珠帽，手执弓箭而行，随从的旌旗兵甲，连接起来有百余里长。
English: In August, at the time of Wu Chen, the former Shu master set out from Chengdu. He was dressed in golden armor, wearing a beaded cap, walking with a bow and arrow in his hand, and his attendant banner and armor were more than a hundred miles long.

古文：雒令段融上言： 不宜远离都邑，当委大臣征讨。 
现代文：雒县守令段融上书说： 不宜远离都城，应委派大臣出去征讨。 
English: The letter said: It is not appropriate to stay away from the capital, and the minister should be appointed to go out to solicit.

古文：不从。
现代文：前蜀主不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：九月，次安远城。
现代文：九月，军队驻扎在安远城。
English: In September, the army was stationed in Anyuan City.

古文：李存审等至河中，即日济河。
现代文：李存审等到了河中，当天过了黄河。
English: Li Cunxin waited in the river and crossed the Yellow River the same day.

古文：梁人素轻河中兵，每战必穷追不置。
现代文：后梁军平时很轻视河中兵，每次战斗都要穷追不舍。
English: Hou Liang's army usually despised the soldiers in the river, and they had to pursue them relentlessly in every battle.

古文：存审选精甲二百，杂河中兵，直压刘鄩垒，鄩出千骑逐之；知晋人已至，大惊，自是不敢轻出。
现代文：李存审挑选了二百名精兵，其中又搀杂了一些河中兵，一直逼近刘的军营。刘率领一千骑兵出去追逐，发现晋军已经来到，十分吃惊，从此以后，刘不敢轻易出动。
English: Li Cunxuan selected two hundred elite soldiers, mixed with some river soldiers, and kept approaching Liu's camp. Liu led a thousand cavalry out to chase, and was very surprised to find that the Jin army had arrived. From then on, Liu did not dare to easily dispatch.

古文：晋人军于朝邑。
现代文：晋军驻扎在朝邑。
English: Jin troops were stationed in the morning.

古文：河中事梁久，将士皆持两端。
现代文：河中事奉后梁时间已经很长，将士们都是脚踩两只船。
English: It has been a long time since they served in the middle of the river, and the generals are stepping on two boats.

古文：诸军大集，刍粟踊贵，友谦诸子说友谦且归款于梁，以退其师，友谦曰： 昔晋王亲赴吾急，秉烛夜战。
现代文：各路军队都集中在河中，粮草价格昂贵，朱友谦的儿子们劝说朱友谦诚心归服后梁，以此来让后梁军撤兵，朱友谦说； 从前晋王亲自率兵解救我的危急，手持火把连夜作战。
English: The armies of all directions are concentrated in the river, the price of grain and grass is expensive, Zhu Youqian's sons persuaded Zhu Youqian to sincerely submit to Houliang, in order to let Houliang's army withdraw, Zhu Youqian said; In the past, Jin Wang personally led the troops to relieve my critical situation, and fought overnight with torches.

古文：今方与梁相拒，又命将星行，分我资粮，岂可负邪！ 
现代文：现在正和后梁军相持，晋王又命令将帅披星戴月赶来援救，还给我们物资粮食，我们怎么能辜负他呢？ 
English: Now he is in a standoff with Hou Liang's army, and the King of Jin has also ordered the great warrior Dai Yue to come to the rescue and return to us supplies of grain. How can we fail him?

古文：晋人分兵攻华州，坏其外城。
现代文：晋军分兵去攻打华州，破坏了华州的外城。
English: The Jin army detachment went to attack Huazhou and destroyed the outer city of Huazhou.

古文：李存审等按兵累旬，乃进逼刘鄩营，鄩等悉众出战，大败，收馀众退保罗文寨。
现代文：李存审等按兵不动，几十天后才逼近刘的军营，刘等率领全军出来迎战，被打得大败，只好收拾剩下的军队退守罗文寨。
English: Li Cunxin and others did not move their troops, and only approached Liu's military camp after dozens of days. Liu and others led the whole army out to fight, and were defeated, so they had to gather the remaining troops and retreat to Luowenzhai.

古文：又旬馀，存审谓李嗣昭曰： 兽穷则搏，不如开其走路，然后击之。 
现代文：又过了十几天，李存审对李嗣昭说： 野兽到了最困难的时候就会拼死搏斗，不如放开一条路让他们逃走，然后从后面追击他们。 
English: After another dozen days, Li Cunxin said to Li Shizhao: When the beast is in the most difficult time, it will fight to the death. It is better to let them escape by letting them go one way and then chasing them from behind.

古文：乃遣人牧马于沙苑。
现代文：于是李嗣昭派出人到沙苑去放马。
English: As a result, Li Shizhao sent a messenger to Shayuan to release the horses.

古文：鄩等宵遁，追击至渭水，又破之，杀获甚众，存审等移檄告谕关右，引兵略地至下邽，谒唐帝陵，哭之而还。
现代文：刘等乘夜逃跑，李嗣昭率兵追击到渭水，又将刘的军队打败，斩杀和俘获很多。李存审等张贴檄文，告示关右，同时率兵攻占了很多地方，一直到下，谒拜了唐帝的陵墓，在陵前痛哭一番后返回。
English: Liu et al. fled by night, Li Shizhao and his soldiers pursued them to Lanshui, and defeated Liu's army, killing and capturing many. Li Cunxun et al. posted a memorial, announcing Guan Zhi, and at the same time led the soldiers to conquer many places, all the way down, worshiped the Tang Emperor's tomb, and returned after crying in front of the tomb.

古文：河中兵进攻崇州，静胜节度使温昭图甚惧。
现代文：河中的军队向崇州发起进攻，静胜节度使温昭图非常害怕。
English: The army in the middle of the river launched an attack on Chongzhou, and the quiet victory made Wen Zhaotu very afraid.

古文：帝使供奉官窦维说之曰： 公所有者华原、美原两县耳，虽名节度使，实一镇将，比之雄籓，岂可同日语也，公有意欲之乎？ 
现代文：后梁帝派供奉官窦维劝他说： 你仅仅有华原、美原两个县罢了，虽然名为节度使，其实是一个镇将，和一些强大的藩镇来比，怎么可以同日而语，你想扩大一点吗？ 
English: Later, Emperor Liang sent the tributary official Dou Wei to persuade him: "You only have two counties, Hua Yuan and Mei Yuan. Although it is called the Festival Envoy, it is actually a town marshal. Compared to some powerful townships, how can it be the same language? Do you want to expand a little?

古文：昭图曰： 然。 
现代文：温昭图说： 当然。 
English: Wen Zhaotu said: Of course.

古文：维曰： 当为公图之。 
现代文：窦维说： 让我为你来谋划。 
English: Dou Wei said: Let me plan for you.

古文：即教昭图表求移镇，帝以汝州防御使华温琪权知静胜留后。
现代文：于是就让温昭图上书请求改换个地方。后梁帝于是让汝州防御使华温琪暂为静胜留后。
English: So he asked Wen Zhaotu to write a letter requesting a change of location. Later, Emperor Liang ordered the defense of Ruzhou to make Hua Wenqi temporarily stay behind for Jing Sheng.

古文：冬，十月，辛酉，蜀主如武定军，数日，复还安远。
现代文：冬季十月，辛酉，前蜀主去了武定军，几天以后又回到安远。
English: In the winter of October, Xinlu, the former Shu Lord went to the Wuding Army, and a few days later he returned to Anyuan.

古文：十一月，戊子朔，蜀主以兼侍中王宗俦为山南节度使、西北面都招讨、行营安抚使，天雄节度使、同平章事王宗昱、永宁军使王宗晏、左神勇军使王宗信为三招讨以副之，将兵伐岐，出故关，壁于咸宜，入良原。
现代文：十一月，戊子朔，前蜀主任命兼侍中王宗俦为山南节度使、西北面都招讨、行营安抚使，任命天雄节度使、同平章事王宗昱，永宁军使王宗晏，左神勇军使王宗信为三名招作为副职，辅助王宗俦领兵伐岐。他们率兵出故关，在咸宜修筑壁垒，后进入良原。
English: In November, Wu Zixuo, the former Lord of Shu, appointed Wang Zongxun, who was also an attendant, as the festival envoy to Shannan, the envoy to invite and camp in the northwest, the envoy to pacify, appointed the festival envoy to Tianxiong, Wang Zongxun, the envoy to Tongping, Wang Zongxun, the envoy to Yongning, and Wang Zongxin, the envoy to Zuo Shenyong, as three envoys as deputy positions to assist Wang Zongxun in leading the troops to cut off the Qi. They led the troops out of the old pass, built a barrier in

古文：丁酉，王宗俦攻陇州，岐王自将万五千人屯汧阳。
现代文：丁酉，王宗俦向陇州发起进攻，岐王亲自率领一万五千军队驻扎在阳。
English: Ding Rong and Wang Zong Rong launched an attack on Zhangzhou, and King Qi personally led fifteen thousand troops stationed in Yang.

古文：癸卯，蜀将陈彦威出散关，败岐兵于箭筈岭，蜀兵食尽，引还。
现代文：癸卯，前蜀将陈彦威从散关出兵，在箭岭击败了岐兵。前蜀军的粮食吃完后，才率兵回去。
English: However, the former Shu general Chen Yanwei sent troops from Sanguan and defeated the Qi soldiers in Jialing. After eating the grain of the former Shu army, he led the soldiers back.

古文：宗昱屯秦州，宗俦屯上邽，宗晏、宗信屯威武城。
现代文：王宗昱驻扎在泰州，王宗俦驻扎在上，王宗晏和王宗信驻扎在武威城。
English: Wang Zonglu was stationed in Taizhou, Wang Zonglu was stationed in Shang, and Wang Zonglu and Wang Zongxin were stationed in Wuwei City.

古文：庚戌，蜀主发安远城。十二月，庚申，至利州，阆州团练使林思谔来朝，请幸所治，从之。
现代文：庚戌，前蜀主自安远城出发，十二月，庚申，到达利州，阆州团练使林思谔来朝拜，请求前蜀主巡视阆州，前蜀主答应了他的请求。
English: Gyeongbokgung, the former Shu ruler, set out from Anyongseong and arrived in Gyeongsang in December. The Bozhou group sent Lin Siyu to pay homage and asked the former Shu ruler to inspect Bozhou. The former Shu ruler agreed to his request.

古文：癸亥，泛江而下，龙舟画舸，辉映江渚，州县供办，民始愁怨。
现代文：癸亥，顺江而下，龙舟彩船，光辉照映在江的两岸，这些都是强制沿江州县供应，老百姓开始发愁抱怨。
English: Bonfire, down the river, dragon boat, shining on both sides of the river, these are mandatory supplies along Jiangzhou County, and the people began to worry and complain.

古文：壬申，至阆州，州民何康女色美，将嫁，蜀主取之，赐其夫家帛百匹，夫一恸而卒。
现代文：壬申，前蜀主到了阆州，阆州的百姓何康有个很漂亮的女儿，将要出嫁，前蜀主就夺为己有，然后赏赐给她的夫家一百匹丝帛，那个未婚夫极其悲痛而死。
English: Jinshin, the former Shushi arrived in Ganzhou. The people of Ganzhou, He Kang, had a very beautiful daughter who was about to get married. The former Shushi took possession of her and then gave her husband's family a hundred silk cocoons. The fiancé died in great grief.

古文：癸未，至梓州。
现代文：癸未，前蜀主到了梓州。
English: Soon after, the former emperor arrived in Azusa.

古文：赵王镕自恃累世镇成德，得赵人心，生长富贵，雍容自逸，治府第园沼，极一时之盛，多事嬉游，不亲政事，事皆仰成于僚佐，深居府第，权移左右，行军司马李蔼、宦者李弘规用事于中外，宦者石希蒙尤以谄谀得幸。
现代文：赵王王熔依仗世代镇守成德，颇得赵地人心，生活富裕，地位显贵，容仪温文，悠然自得。他治理的府第园池，在当时是最好的。他经常游玩，不问政事，一切政事都依靠僚佐来处理。他深居府第，把大权交给了他的左右官员。行军司马李蔼、宦官李弘规掌管内外事务。宦官石希蒙尤其靠阿谀奉承得到宠爱。
English: Zhao Wang Wang Rong, relying on generations of Zhenshu Chengde, won the hearts of Zhao people. He lived a rich life, held a distinguished position, was mild-mannered and leisurely. The palace he governed was the best at the time. He often visited, did not ask about politics, and relied on his colleagues to handle all political affairs. He lived deep in the palace and handed over power to his left and right officials. Marching Sima Li Yan and eunuch Li Hong Gui were in charge of domestic and foreign affairs. Eunuch Shishimeng was especially favored by flattery.

古文：初，刘仁恭使牙将张文礼从其子守文镇沧州，守文诣幽州省其父，文礼于后据城作乱，沧人讨之，奔镇州。
现代文：当初，刘仁恭派牙将张文礼随他的儿子刘守文去镇守沧州，刘守文到幽州去看望父亲，张文礼随后占据了沧州城发动叛乱，沧州人讨伐他，他逃到了镇州。
English: At first, Liu Rengong sent Zhang Wenli, the commander of the dental corps, to Zhenshou Cangzhou with his son Liu Shouwen. Liu Shouwen went to Yuzhou to visit his father. Zhang Wenli then occupied Cangzhou City to launch a rebellion. The people of Cangzhou fought against him, and he fled to Zhenzhou.

古文：文礼好夸诞，自言知兵，越王镕奇之，养以为子，更名德明，悉以军事委之。
现代文：张文礼喜欢吹大话，自称会打仗，赵王王熔认为他很奇特，于是收为养子，并改名为德明，把全部的军事委托给他。
English: Zhang Wenli liked to boast, claiming that he could fight a war. Zhao Wang Wang Rong thought he was very strange, so he adopted him as an adopted son, changed his name to Deming, and entrusted all military affairs to him.

古文：德明将行营兵从晋王，镕欲寄以腹心，使都指挥使符习代还，以为防城使。
现代文：德明率领着行军部队跟随着晋王，王熔想委派一个亲信去，于是派都指挥使符习替代德明，让他回来，任防城使。
English: Deming led the marching troops to follow the king of Jin. Wang Rong wanted to appoint a close confidant to go, so he sent Fu Xi to replace Deming, let him come back, and appointed him as the city defense envoy.

古文：镕晚年好事佛及求仙，专讲佛经，受符箓，广斋醮，合炼仙丹，盛饰馆宇于西山，每往游之，登山临水，数月方归，将佐士卒陪从者常不下万人，往来供顿，军民皆苦之。
现代文：王熔晚年信佛，喜欢求仙，专门讲习佛经，又学习道家符，广设斋醮向仙道祈祷，冶炼金丹。在西山把馆宇装饰的非常华丽，经常去那里游玩。他登山观水，几个月后才回来，陪他的左右将士经常不下一万人。来往食宿，耗资巨大，军民都深受其苦。
English: In his later years, Wang Rong believed in Buddhism, liked to seek immortality, specialized in studying Buddhist sutras, and studied Taoist symbols. He set up a wide range of temples to pray to immortality and smelt gold. He decorated the museum in Xishan very gorgeously, and often went there to play. He climbed mountains to watch the water, and only returned after a few months. He was often accompanied by more than ten thousand soldiers. Travel and accommodation cost a lot of money, and the military and the people suffered from it.

古文：是月，自西山还，宿鹘营庄，石希蒙劝王复之它所。
现代文：这个月，从西山回返，住在鹘营庄，石希蒙劝王熔再到别的地方去玩。
English: This month, after returning from Xishan and living in Shuyingzhuang, Shi Ximeng advised Wang Rong to go and play somewhere else.

古文：李弘规言于王曰： 晋王夹河血战，栉风沐雨，亲冒矢石，而王专以供军之资奉不急之费，且时方艰难，人心难测，王久虚府第，远出游从，万一有奸人为变，闭关相距，将若之何？ 
现代文：李弘规对王熔说： 晋王在黄河两岸和梁军血战，栉风沐雨，亲自冒着箭石率兵前进。而大王专门把供给军队用的物质挪用于一些不急的事情，况且时下正处在困难时期，人心难测，大王如果长期离开府第，远出游玩，万一有奸人叛变，关起关门，把我们隔在外面，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Li Hongzhi said to Wang Rong: King Jin fought a bloody battle with Liang's army on both sides of the Yellow River, braved the wind and rain, and personally led the soldiers forward. And the great king specially diverted the materials used to supply the army to some non-urgent matters. Moreover, it is a difficult time, and people's hearts are unpredictable. If the great king leaves the capital for a long time and travels far away, what should he do if there is a traitor, close the door, and separate us from the outside?

古文：王将归，希蒙密言于王曰： 弘规妄生猜间，出不逊语以劫胁王，专欲夸大于外，长威福耳。 
现代文：赵王准备回去，石希蒙又偷偷地和赵王说： 李弘规胡乱猜想，口出不逊之言来威胁大王，专门对外夸示自己，以提高自己的威福。 
English: When King Zhao was about to go back, Shi Ximeng secretly said to King Zhao, "Li Honggui is making wild guesses, threatening the great king with insolent words, and bragging about himself to the outside world in order to enhance his prestige.

古文：王遂留，信宿无归志。
现代文：于是赵王又留了下来，连续住了两夜还不想回去。
English: So Zhao Wang stayed there again. He stayed for two consecutive nights and still did not want to go back.

古文：弘规乃教内牙都将苏汉衡帅亲军，擐甲拔刃，诣帐前白王曰： 士卒暴露已久，愿从王归！ 
现代文：李弘规于是让内牙都将苏汉衡率领亲军穿甲持刀，到帐篷前面对赵王说： 士卒们离家在外已经很长时间了，都希望跟从大王回去。 
English: Li Hongbai then let the inner tusk lead Su Hanheng and his relatives to pierce the armor and hold the knife, to the front of the tent to face Zhao Wang and said: The soldiers have been away from home for a long time, and they all hope to follow the great king back.

古文：弘规因进言曰： 石希蒙劝王游从不已，且闻欲阴谋为逆，请诛之以谢众。 
现代文：李弘规因此也劝赵王说： 石希蒙劝大王没完没了地游玩，而且还听说他准备谋害大王，请把他杀掉来向大家认错。 
English: Li Hongzhi therefore also advised Zhao Wang, saying: Shi Ximeng advised the great king to play endlessly, and also heard that he was preparing to assassinate the great king, please kill him to admit his mistake to everyone.

古文：王不听，牙兵遂大噪，斩希蒙首，诉于前。
现代文：赵王不听，于是卫队士卒大声喧哗起来，杀了石希蒙，拿着他的头到赵王面前诉说。
English: Zhao Wang did not listen, so the guards shouted loudly, killed Shi Ximeng, took his head to Zhao Wang and told him.

古文：王怒且惧，亟归府。
现代文：赵王十分生气也很害怕，于是赶快回到了府第。
English: Zhao Wang was very angry and scared, so he quickly returned to the prefecture.

古文：是夕，遣其长子副大使昭祚与王德明将兵围弘规及李霭之第，族诛之，连坐者数十家。
现代文：当天晚上赵王就派他的长子副大使王昭祚和王德明率兵包围了李弘规和李蔼的住宅，把他的全家全部杀掉，受牵连的有几十家。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhao Wang sent his eldest son, Vice-Ambassador Wang Zhaoren and Wang Deming, to surround the homes of Li Hongbin and Li Yan, killing his entire family. Dozens of families were implicated.

古文：又杀苏汉衡，收其党与，穷治反状，亲军大恐。
现代文：又将苏汉衡杀掉，拘捕了他的党羽，彻底追究他们反叛的情况，赵王的亲信部队感到十分惊恐。
English: He also killed Su Hanheng, arrested his followers, and thoroughly investigated the circumstances of their rebellion. Zhao Wang's trusted troops were very frightened.

古文：吴金陵城成，隐彦谦上费用册籍，徐温曰： 吾既任公，不复会计！ 
现代文：吴国修筑的金陵城落成，陈彦谦将开支帐册送给徐温过目，徐温说： 我既然任用你办，我就不再检查核算了。 
English: When Jinling City, built by the State of Wu, was completed, Chen Yanqian sent the expense account book to Xu Wen for inspection. Xu Wen said: Since I have appointed you to do it, I will no longer check the accounting.

古文：悉焚之。
现代文：于是把那些帐簿全部烧了。
English: So they burned all those books.

古文：初，闽王审知承制加其从子泉州刺史延彬领平卢节度使。
现代文：当初闽王王审知承照制书让他的侄儿泉州刺史王延彬兼任平卢节度使。
English: At the beginning, the king of Qi, Wang Xunzhi, allowed his nephew, Quanzhou Prince Wang Yanbin, to serve as the envoy of the Pinglu Festival.

古文：延彬治泉州十七年，吏民安之。会得白鹿及紫芝，僧浩源以为王者之符，延彬由是骄纵，密遣使浮海入贡，求为泉州节度使。
现代文：王延彬治理泉州十七年，官民都安居乐业，正好在这个时候，王延彬得到了白鹿和紫芝等祥瑞物品，僧人浩源认为这是王延彬要做帝王的征兆。王延彬因此骄傲放肆起来，他偷偷派人过海去帝王那里纳贡，并请求闽王任命他为泉州节度使。
English: In the seventeenth year of Wang Yanbin's governance of Quanzhou, the government and the people all lived and worked in peace. It was just at this time that Wang Yanbin obtained auspicious items such as white deer and purple mushrooms. The monk Hao Yuan believed that this was a sign that Wang Yanbin wanted to become emperor. Wang Yanbin became proud and arrogant. He secretly sent someone across the sea to pay tribute to the emperor, and asked the king to appoint him as the Quanzhou festival envoy.

古文：事觉，审知诛浩源及其党，黜延彬归私第。
现代文：事情败露后，王审知诛灭了浩源及其同党，罢免了王延彬的官爵，打发他回了家。
English: After the affair was exposed, Wang Xizhi annihilated Hao Yuan and his co-partisans, removed Wang Yanbin's official title and sent him back home.

古文：汉主岩遣使通好于蜀。
现代文：南汉主刘岩派遣使者到蜀国去互通友好。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty, Liu Yan, sent an envoy to Shu to establish friendly relations.

古文：吴越王镠遣使为其子传琇求婚于楚，楚王殷许之。
现代文：吴越王钱派遣使者到楚国为他的儿子钱传求婚，楚王马殷答应了他的请求。
English: King Qian of Wuyue sent an envoy to Chu to propose marriage for his son Qian Chuan. King Ma Yin of Chu agreed to his request.

古文：均王下龙德元年
现代文：龙德元年
English: In the first year of the Longde era

古文：春，正月，甲午，蜀主还成都。
现代文：春季正月，甲午，前蜀主回到了成都。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month of spring, the former Shu master returned to Chengdu.

古文：初，蜀主之为太子，高祖为聘兵部尚书高知言女为妃，无宠，及韦妃入宫，尤见疏薄，至是遣还家，知言惊仆，不食而卒。
现代文：当初，前蜀主为太子时，高祖王建为他聘兵部尚书高知言的女儿为妃，不受喜欢。韦妃入宫后，对高氏更加疏远，把她送回娘家。高知言为此吓得摔倒，吃不下饭死去。
English: At first, when the former Shushi was crown prince, Gaozhu Wang Jian hired the daughter of the military commander Shangshu Gao Chigen as his wife, which was not liked. After Wei Fei entered the palace, she became even more estranged from Gao and sent her back to her daughter's home. Gao Chigen was so frightened that he fell down and could not eat and died.

古文：韦妃者，徐耕之孙也，有姝色，蜀主适徐氏，见而悦之，太后因纳于后宫，蜀主不欲娶于母族，托云韦昭度之孙。
现代文：韦妃是徐耕的孙女，长得很漂亮，前蜀主到他的母亲徐氏那里，见到此女十分喜欢，因此太后就把她留在后宫。前蜀主不愿意娶母亲家族的人为妻，于是假托说是韦昭度的孙女。
English: Wei Fei was the granddaughter of Xu Gong, and she was very beautiful. The former Shulun went to his mother, Xu, and saw that she was very fond of her, so the empress dowager kept her in the harem. The former Shulun did not want to marry someone from his mother's family, so he pretended to be the granddaughter of Wei Zhaodu.

古文：初为婕妤，累加元妃。
现代文：开始任她为婕妤，后来逐渐升为正妃。
English: At first, she was the Empress Dowager, and later she gradually rose to the rank of the Crown Princess.

古文：蜀主常列锦步障，击球其中，往往远适而外人不知，爇诸香，昼夜不绝。
现代文：前蜀主经常挂起锦缎围成一个屏幕，在里面击球，往往到较远的地方而外人不知道。他经常烧香，昼夜不绝。
English: The former shu master often hung up brocades around a screen and hit balls inside, often to distant places without outsiders knowing. He often burned incense, day and night.

古文：久而厌之，更爇皁荚以乱其气。
现代文：时间长了，又讨厌烧香，改用烧皂荚来改变室内气味。
English: It took a long time, and I hated burning incense, so I switched to burning soap to change the smell of the room.

古文：结缯为山，及宫殿楼观于其上，或为风雨所败，则更以新者易之。
现代文：他还把缯帛堆成山的样子，然后在上面做一些宫殿楼观，有时经风吹雨淋坏了，就用新的把坏的换掉。
English: He also piled the cocoons into a mountain shape, and then made some palace views on it. Sometimes, when they were damaged by wind and rain, he replaced the damaged ones with new ones.

古文：或乐饮缯山，涉旬不下。
现代文：有时在缯山上饮酒作乐，一住十来天还不想下来。
English: Sometimes I drink and make merry on Shaoshan, and I don't want to come down after living here for ten days.

古文：山前穿渠通禁中，或乘船夜归，令宫女秉蜡炬千馀居前船，却立照之，水面如昼。
现代文：在缯山的前面挖一条渠，一直通往前蜀主的宫内，有时晚上乘船回宫中，命令宫女们手拿着一千余支蜡烛在前面的船上，脸朝后面站着，水面上如同白天一样明亮。
English: In front of Shaoshan, a canal was dug, which led all the way to the former emperor's palace. Sometimes, in the evening, he would take a boat back to the palace and order the princesses to stand on the front of the boat with more than a thousand candles in their hands, facing backwards. The water was as bright as day.

古文：或酣馀禁中，鼓吹沸腾，以至达旦。
现代文：有时在宫中大吃大喝，鼓乐沸腾，通宵达旦。
English: Sometimes they eat and drink a lot in the palace, the drums are booming, and the party goes on all night.

古文：以是为常。
现代文：这种情况是经常的。
English: It happens all the time.

古文：甲辰，徙静胜节度使温昭图为匡国节度使，镇许昌。
现代文：甲辰，后梁帝调静胜节度使温昭图任匡国节度使，镇守许昌。
English: Jiachen, after Emperor Liang transferred Jing Sheng to Wen Zhaotu as the governor of the state, and the town guard was Xu Chang.

古文：昭图素事赵岩，故得名籓。
现代文：温昭图一向事奉赵岩，所以他能得到有名的藩镇。
English: Wen Zhaotu has always served Zhao Yan, so he can get the famous hanzhen from him.

古文：蜀主、吴主屡以书劝晋王称帝，晋王以书示僚佐曰： 昔王太师亦尝遗先王书，劝以唐室已亡，宜自帝一方。
现代文：前蜀主、吴主曾多次写信劝晋王称帝，晋王把这些书信让他的僚属们看，并说： 从前王太师也曾给先王书信，劝说唐室已经灭亡，应该自己称帝，占据一方。
English: The former Shu and Wu emperors had repeatedly written letters to advise Jin Wang to proclaim himself emperor. Jin Wang showed these letters to his subordinates and said, "Once upon a time, Wang Taishi also wrote letters to the previous king, persuading him that the Tang dynasty had already perished, and that he should proclaim himself emperor and occupy one side.

古文：先王语余云： 昔天子幸石门，吾发兵诛贼臣，当是之时，威振天下，吾若挟天子据关中，自作九锡禅文，谁能禁我！
现代文：先王对我说： 从前天子巡视石门时，我派兵去诛灭了乱臣贼子，当时，威振天下，我如果在那时挟持天子，占据关中，自己起草赐封九锡和禅让的文告，谁能禁止我？
English: The Ancestor King said to me, "Once upon a time, when the Son of Heaven was inspecting the Stone Gate, I sent an army to exterminate the ruffian thieves. At that time, when I held the whole world in awe, if I had taken the Son of Heaven by the hand, occupied the gate, and drafted a proclamation to grant Jiuxi and Zenzhong, who could stop me?

古文：顾吾家世忠孝，立功帝室，誓死不为耳。
现代文：但是我家世代效忠皇帝，常为朝廷立功，我誓死不能这样做。
English: But my family has been loyal to the emperor for generations, and has often rendered meritorious service to the imperial court. I swear on my life that I cannot do this.

古文：汝它日当务以复唐社稷为心，慎勿效此曹所为！ 
现代文：你以后应当全心全意恢复唐朝社稷，小心不要效法这些人的做法。 
English: In the future, you should wholeheartedly restore the Tang Dynasty, and be careful not to follow the practices of these people.

古文：言犹在耳，此议非所敢闻也。 
现代文：先王对我讲的话好像还在耳边，这种建议我听都不敢听。 说完就哭了。
English: It was as if the words spoken to me by the late king were still ringing in my ears. I didn't dare to listen to this kind of advice, and I ended up crying.

古文：因泣。既而将佐及蕃镇劝进不已，乃令有司市玉造法物。
现代文：不久，晋王的左右将佐以及藩镇官吏们不断地劝他称帝，于是他让有关部门购买玉石制作传国宝物。
English: Soon after, Jin Wang's generals on his left and right, as well as the officials of the domain and town, constantly urged him to proclaim himself emperor, so he asked the relevant departments to purchase jade to make a national treasure.

古文：黄巢之破长安也，魏州僧传真之师得传国宝，藏之四十年，至是，传真以为常玉，将鬻之，或识之，曰： 传国宝也。 
现代文：以前黄巢攻破长安的时候，魏州僧人传真的师父得到过传国之宝，珍藏了四十年，这时，传真以为是一块普通的玉石，将准备把它卖掉，有人认出这块宝玉来，对传真说： 这是传国之宝。 
English: In the past, when the Yellow Nest broke through Chang'an, the master of the Weizhou monk Faxian obtained the national treasure and treasured it for forty years. At that time, Faxian thought it was an ordinary jade stone and was preparing to sell it. Someone recognized this precious stone and said to Faxian: This is a national treasure.

古文：传真乃诣行台献之，将佐皆奉觞称贺。
现代文：于是传真就到魏州行台献上宝玉。晋王的左右将佐们都举怀祝贺。
English: As a result, the fax went to Weizhou Xingtai to present the precious jade. Jin Wang's left and right generals congratulated each other.

古文：张承业在晋阳闻之，诣魏州谏曰： 吾王世世忠于唐室，救其患难，所以老奴三十馀年为王捃拾财赋，召补兵马，誓灭逆贼，复本朝宗社耳。
现代文：张承业在晋阳听说这件事后，到魏州劝晋王说： 大王世世代代效忠唐朝王室，解救了唐朝的不少患难，所以老奴我三十多年来为大王收集财赋，招兵买马，誓死消灭叛逆之人，恢复唐朝的宗庙社稷。
English: After Zhang Chengye heard about this in Jinyang, he went to Weizhou to persuade the King of Jin and said: The Great King has been loyal to the Tang Dynasty royal family for generations and has rescued the Tang Dynasty from many hardships. Therefore, I have been collecting wealth for the Great King for more than 30 years, recruiting soldiers and buying horses, swearing to destroy the traitors, and restoring the Tang Dynasty's ancestral temples and shrines.

古文：今河北甫定，硃氏尚存，而王遽即大位，殊非从来征伐之意，天下其谁不解体乎！
现代文：现在黄河以北刚刚安定下来，朱氏还存在，大王就急急忙忙登帝位，和你当初奋力作战的意思大不一样，这样天下的人心怎么能不离散呢？
English: Now the north of the Yellow River has just settled down, the Zhu clan still exists, and the great king hurriedly ascended to the throne, which is very different from your original intention to fight hard. How can the world's people not be scattered?

古文：王何不先灭硃氏，复列圣之深仇，然后求唐后而立之，南取吴，西取蜀，汛扫宇内，合为一家，当是之时，虽使高宜、太宗复生，谁敢居王上者？
现代文：大王何不先灭掉朱氏，报了各位先王的深仇，然后寻到唐王室的后人拥立为帝，向南夺取吴国，向西夺取蜀国，横扫天下，合为一家，到那时候，即使高祖、太宗起死回生，又有谁敢位于你的上面呢？
English: Why didn't the great king first wipe out the Zhu clan and avenge the deep vengeance of the previous kings, and then found the descendants of the Tang royal family to support and establish themselves as emperors, to the south to seize the State of Wu, to the west to seize the State of Shu, to sweep the world and unite as one family. At that time, even if Gaozu and Taizong came back to life, who would dare to be above you?

古文：让之愈久则得之愈坚矣。
现代文：谦让的时间越长，所得到的就越牢固。
English: The longer you wait to concede, the more secure your position becomes.

古文：老奴之志无它，但以受先王大恩，欲为王立万年之基耳。 
现代文：老奴我没有别的想法，只是因为接受了先王的大恩，愿为大王创建万年大业的基础。 
English: Old man, I have no other idea, just because I accepted the great favor of the previous king, I am willing to create the foundation of the great cause for the great king.

古文：王曰： 此非余所愿，奈群下意何。 
现代文：晋王听了以后说： 这并不是我的愿望，只是对左右大臣的意见无可奈何。 
English: After listening, Jin Wang said, "This is not my wish, but I can't do anything about the opinions of the left and right ministers.

古文：承业知不可止，恸哭曰： 诸侯血战，本为唐家，今王自取之，误老奴矣！ 
现代文：张承业知道阻止不了，痛哭着说： 诸侯们浴血奋战，本来是为了恢复唐朝大业，现在大王自己取得帝位，欺骗了老奴我啊。 
English: Zhang Chengye knew he couldn't stop it, and cried bitterly: "The princes fought with blood and sweat, originally to restore the great cause of the Tang Dynasty, but now the great king has taken the throne himself, and deceived me, the old slave.

古文：即归晋阳邑，成疾，不复起。
现代文：马上把自己的封地交还给晋王。后来张承业得了病，没能再起来。
English: He immediately returned his fief to the Jin king. Later, Zhang Chengye fell ill and could not get up again.

古文：二月，吴改元顺义。
现代文：二月，吴国改年号为顺义。
English: In February, Wuzhong changed its name to Shunyi.

古文：赵王既杀李弘规、李霭，委政于其子昭祚。
现代文：赵王王熔把李弘规、李蔼杀掉后，让他的儿子王昭祚掌管政权。
English: After Zhao Wang Wang Rong killed Li Hongbin and Li Yan, he put his son Wang Zhaojun in charge of the government.

古文：昭祚性骄愎，既得大权，曏时附弘规者皆族之。
现代文：王昭祚性情骄傲，刚愎自用，掌握大权以后，把从前依附李弘规的人们都全家斩杀。
English: Wang Zhaohui was proud and self-serving, and after seizing power, he killed the entire family of those who had previously adhered to Li Honggui.

古文：弘规部兵五百人欲逃，聚泣偶语，未知所之。
现代文：李弘规部队的五百士卒打算逃跑，他们聚集在一起一边哭一边小声私语，不知道该往哪里去。
English: The 500 soldiers of Li Honggui's army are planning to flee. They have gathered together, crying and whispering, not knowing where to go.

古文：会诸军有给赐，赵王仇亲军之杀石希蒙，独不时与，众益惧。
现代文：正好这时赏赐各部队，赵王恨他的亲军杀死石希蒙，便没有分给他们，大家更感到害怕。
English: It was just at this time that rewards were given to the troops. Zhao Wang hated that his own troops had killed Shishimeng, so he did not give them to them. Everyone was even more afraid.

古文：王德明素蓄异志，因其惧而激之曰： 王命我尽坑尔曹。
现代文：太保王德明平素就怀有异心，现在利用他们心里恐惧而更加激发他们说： 赵王命令我把你们这些人全部坑杀。
English: Taibo Wang Deming, who had always harbored evil intentions, now used the fear in their hearts to further inspire them and said, "King Zhao ordered me to kill all of you."

古文：吾念尔曹无罪并命，欲从王命则不忍，不然又获罪于王，奈何？ 
现代文：我觉得你们没有罪却被杀死，想服从赵王的命令但又不忍心杀你们，不杀你们我又得罪了赵王，怎么办呢？ 
English: I feel that you are not guilty but are being killed. I want to obey King Zhao's order but I can't bear to kill you. If I don't kill you, I have offended King Zhao. What should I do?

古文：众皆感泣。
现代文：大家都感动得流下了眼泪。
English: Everyone was moved to tears.

古文：是夕，亲军有宿于潭城西门者，相与饮酒而谋之。
现代文：这天晚上，赵王的亲军中有人住在潭城的西门，他们在一起喝酒，相与谋划。
English: That night, some of Zhao Wang's relatives lived in the West Gate of Tancheng. They drank together and plotted together.

古文：酒酣，其中骁健者曰： 吾曹识王太保意，今夕富贵决矣！ 
现代文：喝得高兴的时候，有位勇敢的人说： 我们很明白王太保的意思，今晚上就能让大家富贵了。 
English: When they were happily drinking, one brave man said, "We understand what Wang Taibao meant. Tonight, we can make everyone rich."

古文：即逾城入。赵王方焚香受箓，二人断其首而出，因焚府第。
现代文：说完他们就翻过城墙进入城内，此时赵王正在烧香，接受道主天尊所受符，两个人杀死王熔，焚烧了赵王的住宅。
English: After saying this, they climbed over the city wall and entered the city. At this time, King Zhao was burning incense and receiving the amulet from the Taoist God. The two men killed Wang Liao and burned down King Zhao's residence.

古文：军校张友顺帅众诣德明第，请为留后，德明复姓名曰张文礼，尽灭王氏之族，独置昭祚之妻普宁公主以自托于梁。
现代文：军校张友顺率领士卒来到王德明的住地，请他作留后官，王德明恢复了姓名叫张文礼，把王氏的家族全部杀掉，只留下王昭祚的妻子普宁公主，以此来托身于后梁。
English: Zhang Youshun, a military school, led his soldiers to Wang Deming's residence and asked him to serve as an aide-de-camp. Wang Deming restored his name to Zhang Wenli and killed all of Wang's family, leaving only Wang Zhaohui's wife, Princess Puning, as a means of protecting himself.

古文：三月，吴人归吴越王镠从弟龙武统军镒于钱唐，镠亦归吴将李涛于广陵。
现代文：三月，吴国把吴越王钱堂弟龙武统军钱镒送回钱唐，钱也把吴国将领涛送回广陵。
English: In March, the State of Wu sent Qian Ye, the cousin of King Qian of Wuyue, Longwu, to Qiantang, and Qian also sent the general of the State of Wu, Luo Tao, to Guangling.

古文：徐温以涛为右雄武统军，镠以镒为镇海节度副使。
现代文：徐温任命李涛为右雄武统军，钱任命钱镒为镇海节度副使。
English: Xu Wen appointed Li Tao as the right-hand man of the unified armed forces, and Qian appointed Qian Ye as the deputy envoy of the Zhenhai Festival.

古文：张文礼遣使告乱于晋王，且奉笺劝进，因求节钺。
现代文：张文礼派遣使者告诉晋王，赵州已乱，并且写信给晋王劝晋王称帝，请求晋王授予他符节和斧钺。
English: Zhang Wenli sent an envoy to tell Jin Wang that Zhaozhou was in chaos, and wrote a letter to Jin Wang to persuade Jin Wang to declare himself emperor, requesting Jin Wang to grant him the rune and axe.

古文：晋王方置酒作乐，闻之，投杯悲泣，欲讨之。
现代文：这时晋王正在饮酒作乐，听到这件事后，扔掉酒杯悲痛地哭起来，准备去讨伐张文礼。
English: At this time, Jin Wang was drinking and having fun. After hearing this, he threw away his wine glass and wept with grief, preparing to fight Zhang Wenli.

古文：僚佐以为文礼罪诚大，然吾方与梁争，不可更立敌于肘腋，宜且从其请以安之。
现代文：晋王的左右僚臣们认为张文礼的罪过确实很大，然而晋王与后梁争战，不能再在近处树敌，应该答应他的请求来安定他们。
English: Jin Wang's left and right ministers thought that Zhang Wenli's crime was indeed great. However, Jin Wang was at war with Houliang and could no longer make enemies nearby. He should agree to his request to stabilize them.

古文：王不得已，夏，四月，遣节度判官卢质承制授文礼成德留后。
现代文：晋王不得已，于夏季四月派节度判官卢质秉承晋王的旨意授张文礼为成德留后。
English: As a last resort, in the summer of April, the Jin king sent the judge of the festival, Lu Qing, to uphold the will of the Jin king to award Zhang Wenli to Chengde.

古文：陈州刺史惠王友能反，举兵趣大梁，诏陕州留后霍彦威、宣义节度使王彦章、控鹤指挥使张汉杰将兵讨之。
现代文：陈州刺史惠王朱友能反叛，率军直趋大梁城。后梁帝下诏书命令陕州留后霍彦威、宣义节度使王彦章、控鹤指挥使张汉杰率兵讨伐朱友能。
English: Chen Zhou rebelled against Shi Hui Wang Zhu Youneng and led his army straight to Daliang City. Later, Emperor Liang issued an edict ordering Shaanxi to stay behind Huo Yanwei, Xuan Yi Festival to send Wang Yanzhang, and Crane Control Commander to send Zhang Hanjie to lead the troops to fight Zhu Youneng.

古文：友能至陈留，兵败，走还陈州，诸军围之。
现代文：朱友能到了陈留以后被打败，又退还陈州，各路军队包围了陈州。
English: After Zhu Youneng arrived in Chenliu, he was defeated and returned to Chenzhou. All the armies surrounded Chenzhou.

古文：五月，丙戌朔，改元。
现代文：五月，丙戌朔，后梁改换年号。
English: In May, the date was changed from April to May.

古文：初，刘鄩与硃友谦为婚。
现代文：当初，刘与示友谦有姻亲关系。
English: At first, Liu and Shi Youqian were related by marriage.

古文：鄩之受诏讨友谦也，至陕州，先遣使移书，谕以祸福；待之月馀，友谦不从，然后进兵。尹皓、段凝素忌鄩，因谮之于帝曰： 鄩逗遛养寇，俾俟援兵。 
现代文：刘接受命令去讨伐朱友谦。到了陕州以后，先派遣使者给朱友谦送了一封信，给他讲明白怎么做会有祸，怎么做会有福。等待了一个多月，朱友谦不听从刘的意见，刘然后才进兵，尹皓、段凝向来很忌恨刘，就在后梁帝面前诬陷他说； 刘在那里耽搁时间，保护敌人，使敌人有时间等待援兵。 
English: Liu accepted the order to fight Zhu Youqian. After arriving in Shaanxi, he first sent an envoy to send a letter to Zhu Youqian, telling him to understand how to do it will be a disaster, how to do it will be a blessing. He waited for more than a month, Zhu Youqian did not listen to Liu's opinion, Liu then entered the army, Yin Xi and Duan Jian always hated Liu, and framed him in front of Emperor Hou Liang; Liu was there to delay time, protect the enemy, and give the enemy time to wait for reinforcements.

古文：帝信之。鄩既败归，以疾请解兵柄，诏听于西都就医，密令留守张宗奭鸩之，丁亥，卒。
现代文：后梁帝相信了他们的话，等到刘战败回来，因病请求解除自己的兵权，后梁帝下诏书，让他在西都洛阳看病，并秘密让洛阳留守张宗用毒酒害他，丁亥，刘死去。
English: Emperor Hou Liang believed their words, and when Liu returned from the defeat and requested that he be relieved of his military powers due to illness, Emperor Hou Liang issued an edict to let him see a doctor in the western capital Luoyang, and secretly let Luoyang stay Zhang Zong use poisoned wine to kill him, Ding Hai, Liu died.

古文：六月，乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，乙卯朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋，七月，惠王友能降。
现代文：秋季，七月，惠王朱友能投降。
English: In the autumn, in July, Hui Wang Zhu You Neng surrendered.

古文：庚子，诏赦其死，降封房陵侯。
现代文：庚子，后梁帝下诏免去他的死罪，降他为房陵侯。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Liang later pardoned him of the death penalty and demoted him to Fong Ling Hou.

古文：晋王既许籓镇之请，求唐旧臣，欲以备百官。
现代文：晋王既然同意了藩镇官吏们的请求，就访求唐韩旧臣，打算准备朝廷百官。
English: Since Jin Wang agreed to the request of the officials of the domain and town, he visited Tang Han's old vassal and planned to prepare a hundred officials for the imperial court.

古文：硃友谦遣前礼部尚书苏循诣行台，循至魏州，入牙城，望府廨即拜，谓之拜殿。
现代文：朱友谦派前礼部尚书苏循到行台，苏循到了魏州，进入牙城，看到官府就拱手弯腰行礼，这叫做拜殿。
English: Zhu Youqian sent the former etiquette department Shang Shu Su to Xingtai, Su Su to Weizhou, and entered Asheng. When he saw the government office, he bent over and bowed. This is called the worship hall.

古文：见王呼万岁舞蹈，泣而称臣。
现代文：见了晋王就高万岁，手舞足蹈，边哭边自称臣下。
English: When he saw Jin Wang, he shouted "Long live Jin Wang" and danced with his hands and feet, crying and calling himself a vassal.

古文：翌日，又献大笔三十枚，谓之 画日笔 。
现代文：第二天，苏循又献给晋王三十支大笔，叫做 画日笔 。
English: The next day, Su Cui also dedicated 30 large pens to Jin Wang, called "painting day pens."

古文：王大喜，即命循以本官为河东节度副使，张承业深恶之。
现代文：晋王十分高兴，马上就恢复苏循的原职，任命他为河东节度副使。张承业对苏循特别反感。
English: Jin Wang was very pleased and immediately restored Su Xuan to his original position, appointing him as the deputy envoy of the Hedong Festival. Zhang Chengye was particularly disgusted with Su Xuan.

古文：张文礼虽受晋命，内不自安，复遣间使因卢文进求援于契丹；又遣间使来告曰： 王氏为乱兵所屠，公主无恙。
现代文：张文礼虽然接受了晋王的命令，但心里很不安，又秘密派使者通过卢文进向契丹求援。同时秘密派使者来告诉后梁说： 王氏被敌兵杀死，但公主十分安全。
English: Although Zhang Wenli accepted the order of the Jin king, he was very uneasy in his heart, and secretly sent an envoy to Luwenjin to seek help from the Khitan. At the same time, he secretly sent an envoy to tell Houliang: Wang was killed by enemy soldiers, but the princess was very safe.

古文：臣已北召契丹，乞朝廷发精甲万人相助，自德、棣渡河，则晋人遁逃不暇矣。 
现代文：现在我已经向北面招请契丹人，请求朝廷派出一万精锐部队相助，从德州、棣州渡过黄河，这样晋人就没有空隙逃跑了。 
English: Now I have invited the Khitans to the north, and asked the imperial court to send ten thousand elite troops to help, crossing the Yellow River from Dezhou and Zhangzhou, so that the Jin people will not have a gap to escape.

古文：帝疑未决。
现代文：后梁帝犹疑不决。
English: Emperor Hou Liang hesitated.

古文：敬翔曰： 陛下不乘此衅以复河北，则晋人不可复破矣。
现代文：敬翔说： 陛下如果不乘这个机会收复黄河以北，那么晋人是很难再被攻破的。
English: Jing Xiang said: If Your Majesty does not take this opportunity to recover the north of the Yellow River, then the Jin people will be difficult to be broken.

古文：宜徇其请，不可失也。 
现代文：应当顺从他们的请求，机不可失啊！ 
English: Their request should be complied with, the opportunity must not be lost!

古文：赵、张辈皆曰： 今强寇近在河上，尽吾兵力以拒之，犹惧不支，何暇分万人以救张文礼乎！
现代文：赵岩、张汉杰等人都说： 现在强大的敌人离我们很近，就在黄河边上，用我们的全部兵力来抵抗他们，还怕支持不下来，哪里能够分出一万多士卒去援救张文礼呢！
English: Zhao Yan, Zhang Hanjie and others all said: Now the powerful enemy is very close to us, right on the edge of the Yellow River. We will use all our forces to resist them, and we are afraid that we will not be able to support them. Where can we allocate more than ten thousand soldiers to rescue Zhang Wenli?

古文：且文礼坐持两端，欲以自固，于我何利焉！ 
现代文：况且张文礼脚踩两只船，打算以此来巩固自己，对于我们有什么好处呢？
English: Moreover, Zhang Wenli stepped on two boats, intending to consolidate himself in this way. What is the benefit for us?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：于是后梁帝停止了对张文礼的援救。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：晋人屡于塞上及河津获文礼蜡丸绢书，晋王皆遣使归之，文礼惭惧。
现代文：晋人曾多次在边境上和黄河的渡口边抓获张文礼送给契丹和后梁国的用蜡丸密封、用白绢书写的书信，晋王每次都派使者给张文礼送回去，张文礼感到惭愧惧怕。
English: The Jin people had repeatedly captured Zhang Wenli's letters to Khitan and Houliang, which were sealed with wax pellets and written in white ink, on the border and at the ferry of the Yellow River. The Jin king sent an envoy to Zhang Wenli every time to send them back. Zhang Wenli felt ashamed and afraid.

古文：文礼忌赵故将，多所诛灭。
现代文：张文礼十分忌恨赵王原来的将领们，大多数都被诛杀。
English: Zhang Wenli was very jealous of Zhao Wang's original generals, and most of them were killed.

古文：符习将赵兵万人从晋王在德胜，文礼请召归，以它将代之，且以习子蒙为都督府参军，遣人赍钱帛劳行营将士以悦之。
现代文：符习率领一万多赵国士卒随从着晋王在德胜，张文礼请求将符习召回，由别的将领代替，并且用符习的儿子符蒙作为都督府参军，张文礼还派人带着钱财物品去慰劳前线将士，以讨好他们。
English: Fu Xi led more than ten thousand Zhao soldiers to follow the Jin king in Desheng. Zhang Wenli requested that Fu Xi be recalled and replaced by other generals, and used Fu Xi's son Fumong to join the army as the governor. Zhang Wenli also sent people with money and goods to comfort the front-line soldiers in order to please them.

古文：习见晋王，泣涕请留，晋王曰： 吾与赵王同盟讨贼，义犹骨肉，不意一旦祸生肘腋，吾诚痛之。
现代文：符习见到晋王以后，一边哭泣一边请求留下，晋王说； 我和赵王曾经订立同盟共同抗敌，其情义像骨肉一般，不料一下子在身边发生祸端，我确实痛心。
English: After meeting Jin Wang, he wept and begged to stay, Jin Wang said; I and Zhao Wang had made an alliance to fight together against the enemy, the situation was like flesh and blood, but suddenly a disaster happened around me, I was really heartbroken.

古文：汝苟不忘旧君，能为之复仇乎？
现代文：你如果没有忘记过去的君主，能为他报仇吗？
English: If you have not forgotten your former master, can you avenge him?

古文：吾以兵粮助汝。 
现代文：我将援助你士卒和粮食。 
English: I will help you with men and food.

古文：习与部将三十馀人举身投地恸哭曰： 故使授习等剑，使之攘除寇敌。
现代文：符习和三十多位部将一起跪在地上边哭边说： 王熔交给我符习等人宝剑，让我们消灭敌寇。
English: Fuxi and more than thirty generals knelt on the ground together, weeping and saying, "Wang Rong, give me Fuxi and the others' swords, and let us wipe out the enemy bandits."

古文：自闻变故以来，冤愤无诉，欲引剑自刭，顾无益于死者，今大王念故使辅佐之勤，许之复冤，习等不敢烦霸府之兵，愿以所部径前搏取凶竖，以报王氏累世之恩，死不恨矣！ 
现代文：自从发生变乱以来，深冤大恨无处可诉，本想引剑自杀，但又想到这样对死去的人没有什么好处。现在大王怀念王熔对你的辅佐之恩，答应为王熔报仇，我符习等不敢麻烦尊府的士兵，我们愿意率领部下前去杀凶手，来报答王氏对我们世世代代的恩情，虽然死去也没什么悔恨的。 
English: Since the turmoil occurred, there has been no place to complain about the deep resentment and hatred. I originally wanted to commit suicide by drawing a sword, but I thought that it would not be good for the dead. Now the great king misses Wang Rong's assistance to you, and promises to avenge Wang Rong. I, Fuxi and other soldiers who do not dare to trouble the government, are willing to lead our subordinates to kill the murderer, to repay Wang's kindness to us for generations to come, although there is nothing to regret after death.

古文：八月，庚申，晋王以习为成德留后，又命天平节度使阎宝、相州刺史史建瑭将兵助之，自邢洺而北。
现代文：八月，庚申，晋王任命符习为成德留后，又命令天平节度使阎宝、相州刺史史建瑭率兵帮助他，从邢州、州向北进发。
English: In August, Goshun, after the king of Jin appointed Fu Xi to stay in Chengde, he also ordered Tianping Jiedu to make Yan Bao and Xiangzhou Jishi Jianye lead soldiers to help him and go northward from Zhangzhou and Zhoushou.

古文：文礼先病腹疽；甲子，晋兵拔赵州，刺史王铤降，晋王复以为刺史，文礼闻之，惊惧而卒。
现代文：张文礼原先肚子上长了个毒疮，甲子，晋军攻下了赵州，赵州刺史王铤投降了晋军，晋王仍任命为赵州刺史，张文礼听说以后，惊恐而死。
English: Zhang Wenli originally had a poisonous sore on his stomach, and the Jin army captured Zhaozhou. Zhaozhou's chief historian, Wang Qi, surrendered to the Jin army. The Jin king was still appointed as the chief historian of Zhaozhou. After Zhang Wenli heard about this, he died of fright.

古文：其子处瑾秘不发丧，与其党韩正时谋悉力拒晋。
现代文：张文礼的儿子张处瑾不发布张文礼死亡的消息，而与他的同党韩正时谋划如何全力抵御晋军。
English: Zhang Wenli's son, Zhang Duanzhang, did not release the news of Zhang Wenli's death, but he and his fellow party member, Han Zheng, plotted how to resist the Jin army.

古文：九月，晋兵渡滹沱，围镇州，决漕渠以灌之，获其深州刺史张友顺。
现代文：九月，晋军渡过了滹沱河，包围了镇州，并把漕渠挖开，用水灌镇州，抓获了深州刺史张友顺。
English: In September, the Jin army crossed the Minhe River, encircled Zhenzhou, and dug out the canals to irrigate Zhenzhou with water, and captured Zhang Youshun, the chief of Shenzhou.

古文：壬辰，史建瑭中流矢卒。
现代文：壬辰，史建瑭被流箭击中而身亡。
English: In Imjin, Shi Jiankun was hit by a stray arrow and died.

古文：晋王欲自分兵攻镇州，北面招讨使戴思远闻之，谋悉杨村之众袭德胜北城，晋王得梁降者，知之，冬，十月，己未，晋王命李嗣源伏兵于戚城，李存审屯德胜，先以骑兵诱之，伪示羸怯。
现代文：晋王打算分出一部分兵力去攻打镇州，后梁北面招讨使戴思远听说以后，谋划用杨村的人马去袭击德胜北城。晋王抓到投降的后梁兵后才知道了这件事。冬季，十月，已未，晋王命令李嗣源在戚城埋伏下士卒，命令李存审驻扎在德胜，先用骑兵去引诱后梁军，假装害怕。
English: Jin Wang planned to allocate a part of his forces to attack Zhenzhou. After hearing about the invitation to the north of Houliang, Dai Siyuan planned to use the men and horses of Yang Village to attack the northern city of Desheng. Jin Wang only learned about this after he caught the surrendering soldiers of Houliang. In winter, in October, not yet, Jin Wang ordered Li Siyuan to ambush the corporals in Qicheng, ordered Li Cunxin to be stationed in Desheng, and first used cavalry to lure Houliang's army, pretending to be afraid.

古文：梁兵竞进，晋王严中军以待之；梁兵至，晋王以铁骑三千奋击，梁兵大败，思远走趣杨村，士卒为晋兵所杀伤及自相蹈藉、坠河陷冰，失亡二万馀人。
现代文：后梁兵于是争先恐后地向前推进，晋王率领主力部队严阵以待。后梁兵到了以后，晋王命令三千名铁骑奋力出击，后梁兵大败，戴思远逃往杨村，他的士卒有的被晋军所杀死杀伤，有的在逃跑时自相践踏，有的掉在河中的冰窟窿里，损失了两万余人。
English: Hou Liang's soldiers then scrambled forward, and Jin Wang led the main force to wait in a tight line. After Hou Liang's soldiers arrived, Jin Wang ordered three thousand iron horsemen to attack vigorously. Hou Liang's soldiers were defeated, and Dai Siyuan fled to Yangcun. Some of his soldiers were killed and injured by the Jin army, some trampled each other while fleeing, and some fell into the ice caves in the river, losing more than twenty thousand people.

古文：晋王以李嗣源为蕃汉内外马步副总管、同平章事。
现代文：晋王任命李嗣源为蕃汉内外马步副总管、同平章事。
English: Jin Wang appointed Li Siyuan to be the deputy head of Ma Bu in and out of Shanhan and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：初，义武节度使兼中书令王处直未有子，妖人李应之得小儿刘云郎于陉邑，以遗处直曰： 是儿有贵相。 
现代文：起初，义武节度使兼中书令王处直没有儿子，妖人李应之在陉邑得到一个名叫刘云郎的小孩儿，把他送给了王处直，并且说： 这个小孩儿有贵人相。 
English: At first, Wang Shuntao, the Grand Marshal of the Yiwu Festival and the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, did not have a son. Li Yingzhi, a genie, obtained a child named Liu Yunro in Zouyi and gave him to Wang Shuntao, saying, "This child has the appearance of a noble person."

古文：使养为子，名之曰都。
现代文：让他收养为儿子，并起名叫王郁。
English: They adopted him as their son and named him Wang Yu.

古文：及壮，便佞多诈，处直爱之，置新军，使典之。
现代文：王都长大后，很分阿谀逢迎，弄虚作假，王处直特别喜欢他。后来王处直新建了一支军队，让他来统率。
English: When Wang Du grew up, he was very fond of flattery and deceit, and Wang Shanzhi especially liked him. Later, Wang Shanzhi built an army and asked him to lead it.

古文：处直有孽子郁，无宠，奔晋，晋王克用以女妻之，累迁至新州团练使。
现代文：另外，王处直还有一个非嫡妻所生的儿子。名叫王郁，没有得到王处直的宠爱，于是就投奔到晋国，晋王李克用把自己的女儿嫁给了他，一直把他提拔到新州团练使。
English: In addition, Wang Shanzhi also had a son born of an illegitimate wife. His name was Wang Yu. Wang Yu was not favored by Wang Shanzhi, so he fled to Jin. Jin King Li Ke used his own daughter to marry him and promoted him to Xinzhou regimental training envoy.

古文：馀子皆幼；处直以都为节度副大使，欲以为嗣。
现代文：王处直的其他儿子都还幼少。后来王处直又任命王都为节度副大使，准备把他立为继承人。
English: Wang Shanzhi's other sons were still young. Later, Wang Shanzhi also appointed Wang Du as deputy ambassador of the festival, preparing to make him the heir.

古文：及晋王存勖讨张文礼，处直以平日镇、定相为脣齿，恐镇亡而定孤，固谏，以为方御梁寇，且宜赦文礼。
现代文：晋王李存勖讨伐张文礼的时候，王处直认为平时镇州、定州唇齿相依，恐怕镇州失守后定州就十分孤单，因此坚决王处直对这件事十分忧劝说晋王，认为现在正在防御后梁军的侵略，应该对张文礼宽大处理。
English: When the Jin king Li Cunxu fought against Zhang Wenli, Wang Shancai thought that in normal times, Zhenzhou and Dingzhou were as close as lips and teeth, and feared that Dingzhou would be very lonely after Zhenzhou was defeated. Therefore, Wang Shancai was very worried about this matter and persuaded the Jin king that he was now defending against the invasion of Houliang's army, and that Zhang Wenli should be treated leniently.

古文：晋王答以文礼弑君，义不可赦；又潜引梁兵，恐于易定亦不利。
现代文：晋王回答说，因为张文礼有弑君之罪，从道义上讲不能宽大。王处直又想暗中勾引后梁军，但又怕对易州、定州不利。
English: The Jin king replied that because Zhang Wenli was guilty of slandering the prince, he could not be lenient from a moral point of view. Wang Shizhi also wanted to secretly seduce Houliang's army, but he was afraid of being unfavorable to Yizhou and Dingzhou.

古文：处直患之，以新州地邻契丹，乃潜遣人语郁，使赂契丹，召令犯塞，务以解镇州之围；其将佐多谏，不听。
现代文：王处直对这件事十分忧虑。他认为新州与丹契相邻，于是偷偷派人劝王郁，让他贿赂契丹，使侵略晋国的边境，以此来解镇州之围。王郁的左右将领们曾多次劝说，王郁没有听从。
English: Wang Zuanzhi was very worried about this matter. He thought that Xinzhou was adjacent to Danchi, so he secretly sent someone to persuade Wang Yu to bribe Khitan to invade the border of Jin to relieve the siege of Zhenzhou. Wang Yu's generals on both sides had repeatedly persuaded him, but Wang Yu did not listen.

古文：郁素疾都冒继其宗，乃邀处直求为嗣，处直许之。
现代文：王郁平素非常嫉妒王都冒其宗族继承家业，于是就以此来请求王处直把自己立为继承人，王处直答应了他的请求。
English: Wang Yupingsu was very jealous of Wang Du risking his clan to inherit the family business, so he used this to request Wang Shanzhi to make himself the heir. Wang Shanzhi agreed to his request.

古文：军府之人皆不欲召契丹，都亦虑郁夺其处，乃阴与书吏和昭训谋劫处直。
现代文：军府的人们都不愿招致契丹人入侵，王都也忧虑王郁夺取他的地位，于是与书吏和昭训密谋劫持王处直。
English: People in the military government did not want to invite the Khitan invasion, and the king was also worried about Wang Yu seizing his position, so he plotted with the clerk and Zhaoxun to kidnap Wang Zhanzhong.

古文：会处直与张文礼使者宴于城东，暮归，都以新军数百伏于府第，大噪劫之，曰： 将士不欲以城召契丹，请令公归西第。 
现代文：正好遇上王处直与张文礼在城东喝酒吃饭，王处直晚上回来，王都将他统领的几百名新军士卒埋伏在王处直的住地，一起冲出来边呼边嚷将王处直劫持，并说： 将士们不愿以城招致契丹人的入侵，请您回到西院。 
English: Just as Wang Zhenzhi and Zhang Wenli were drinking and dining in the east of the city, Wang Zhenzhi came back in the evening. Wang led hundreds of new soldiers to ambush Wang Zhenzhi's residence. They rushed out together, shouting and shouting to kidnap Wang Zhenzhi, and said: The soldiers do not want to invite the Khitan invasion with the city, please return to the West Courtyard.

古文：乃并其妻妾幽之西第，尽杀处直子孙在中山及将佐之为处直腹心者。
现代文：于是把他和他的妻妾们幽禁在西院，并杀掉王处直在中山的全部子孙和他身边的心腹将佐。
English: He then imprisoned him and his wives and concubines in the West Court, and killed all of Wang Shuchang's descendants in Zhongshan, as well as his close confidant.

古文：都自为留后，具以状白晋王。
现代文：王都自称为留后，并将这些情况全部告诉了晋王。
English: The kings all claimed to be left behind, and they told the Jin kings all of this.

古文：晋王因以都代处直。
现代文：晋王就让王都代替了王处直的职位。
English: Jin Wang let Wang Du replace Wang Shanzhong's position.

古文：吴徐温劝吴王祀南郊，或曰： 礼乐未备且唐祀南郊，其费巨万，今未能办也。 
现代文：吴国徐温劝说吴王去南郊祀，有人说： 现在礼乐还没有准备好。况且唐朝在南郊祭祀时，耗资巨万，现在也办不到。 
English: Xu Wen of the State of Wu persuaded the King of Wu to go to the southern suburbs to worship. Some people said: Now the ritual music is not yet ready. Moreover, when the Tang Dynasty sacrificed in the southern suburbs, it cost a huge amount of money, and now it can't be done.

古文：温曰： 安有王者而不事天乎！
现代文：徐温说： 哪有做了王不祭祀天的！
English: Xu Wen said, "Who has ever made a king without sacrificing to the gods?"

古文：吾闻事天贵诚，多费何为！
现代文：我听说侍奉上天贵在心诚，多耗费又有什么用呢？
English: I've heard that it's important to serve God wholeheartedly. What's the use of spending more money?

古文：唐每郊祀，启南门，灌其枢用脂百斛。此乃季世奢泰之弊，又安足法乎！ 
现代文：每当唐朝在南郊祭天，打开南门时，都要用一百斛油脂灌大门的枢纽，这都是衰世挥霍无度的弊病，怎么能效法呢？ 
English: Whenever the Tang Dynasty in the southern suburb of the city held a heavenly sacrifice and opened the southern gate, they had to use a hundred ounces of grease to fill the hub of the gate. These are all the ills of decadence and extravagance. How can we imitate them?

古文：甲子，吴王祀南郊，配以太祖。
现代文：甲子，吴王在南郊祭天，并以太祖配享。
English: In the Southern Suburbs, the King of Wu offered sacrifices to the heavens, and shared them with his great-great-grandfather.

古文：乙丑，大赦；加徐知诰同平章事，领江州观察使。寻以江州为奉化军，以知诰领节度使。
现代文：乙丑，实行大赦。加封徐知诰为同平章事，兼任江州观察使，不久以后又改江州为奉化军，让徐知诰兼任节度使。
English: Second, the amnesty was implemented. Xu Zhisheng was given the title of Tongping, and also served as the Jiangzhou observation envoy. Soon after, Jiangzhou was changed to Fenghua Army, and Xu Zhisheng also served as the festival envoy.

古文：徐温闻寿州团练使崔太初苛察失民心，欲征之，徐知诰曰： 寿州边隅大镇，征之恐为变，不若使其入朝，因留之。 
现代文：徐温听说寿州团练使崔太初因苛刻繁琐失掉民心，打算征调他。徐知诰说： 寿州是边陲大镇，如果追究崔太初，恐怕引起动乱，不如令他回朝，这样把他留在朝廷。 
English: Xu Wen heard that the Shoushou group exercise had made Cui Taichu lose the hearts of the people due to the rigor and complexity, and planned to recruit him. Xu Zhisheng said: Shoushou is a border town, if Cui Taichu is investigated, I am afraid it will cause turmoil, it is better to let him return to the imperial court, so leave him at the imperial court.

古文：温怒曰： 一崔太初不能制，如他人何！ 
现代文：徐温十分生气地说： 一个崔太初尚不能制服，其他人又怎么样呢？ 
English: Xu Wen said very angrily: One Cui Taichu still can't be subdued, what about the others?

古文：征为右雄武大将军。
现代文：于是调他为右雄武大将军。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the post of Ukyo-take-daisho (Major General of the Right Division).

古文：十一月，晋王使李存审、李嗣源守德胜，自将兵攻镇州。
现代文：十一月，晋王派李存审、李嗣源镇守德胜，他亲自率兵攻打镇州。
English: In November, the Jin king sent Li Cunxin and Li Siyuan to guard Dezheng, and he personally led the troops to attack Zhenzhou.

古文：张处瑾遣其弟处琪、幕僚齐俭谢罪请服，晋王不许，尽锐攻之，旬日不克。
现代文：后梁将领张处瑾派其弟张处琪、幕僚齐俭向晋王认罪并请求投降，晋王没有答应，率领全部精锐部队继续进攻镇州，结果十几天也没攻下来。
English: Hou Liang sent his brother Zhang Shuanqi and his staff member Qi Jian to Jin Wang to plead guilty and surrender. Jin Wang did not agree and led all the elite troops to continue attacking Zhenzhou. As a result, they did not attack it for ten days.

古文：处瑾使韩正时将千骑突围出，趣定州，欲求救于王处直。晋兵追至行唐，斩之。
现代文：张处瑾派韩正时率领一千多骑兵冲出包围圈，直奔定州，打算向王处直请求援救，晋军一直追到行唐，把韩正时俘获斩杀。
English: Zhang sent Han Zhengji, leading more than a thousand cavalry, to break out of the encirclement and go straight to Dingzhou, intending to request rescue from Wang Zhengji. The Jin army chased them all the way to Xingtan and captured and killed Han Zhengji.

古文：契丹主既许卢文进出兵，王郁又说之曰： 镇州美女如云，金帛如山，天皇王速往，则皆己物也，不然，为晋王所有矣。 
现代文：契丹主已经允许卢文进出兵援救张文礼，王郁又劝他说： 镇州的美女如云，金帛如山，天皇王如能迅速赶到，那里的美女金帛都归您所有，不然的话，就归晋王所有了。 
English: The Khitan lord had already allowed Lu Wen to go in and out of the army to rescue Zhang Wenli, and Wang Yu advised him: "The beautiful women in Zhenzhou are like clouds, and the gold nuggets are like mountains. If the emperor can arrive quickly, the beautiful gold nuggets there will all belong to you. Otherwise, they will all belong to the Jin king."

古文：契丹主以为然，悉发所有之众而南。述律后谏曰： 吾有西楼羊马之富，其乐不可胜穷也，何必劳师远山以乘危徼利乎！
现代文：契丹主认为王郁说得对，于是带领全部人马向南进发，述律后劝他说： 我们有西楼羊马之富，这里的乐趣已不可穷尽，何必要劳师远征而且冒着危险去求得那利益呢？
English: The Khitan lord thought that Wang Yu was right, so he led all the men and horses to the south and advised him: "We have the wealth of the west tower, the fun here is inexhaustible, why do we have to go on an expedition and risk the danger to get that benefit?

古文：吾闻晋王用兵，天下莫敌，脱有危败，悔之何及！ 
现代文：我听说晋王用兵，天下无敌，如有危险或被击败，后悔也就来不及了。 
English: I heard that Jin Wang used soldiers, the world is invincible, if there is danger or defeat, it is too late to regret.

古文：契丹主不听，十二月，辛未，攻幽州，李绍宏婴城自守。
现代文：契丹主没有听从述律后的劝说，十二月，辛未，契丹人向幽州发起进攻，晋将李绍宏环城自守。
English: The Khitan lord did not listen to the persuasion after the lecture. In December, Xin Wei, the Khitan people launched an attack on Yuzhou, and the Jin general Li Shaohong ringed the city to defend himself.

古文：契丹长驱而南，围涿州，旬日拔之，擒刺史李嗣弼。
现代文：契丹人向南深入，包围了涿州，十几天后攻下，抓获了涿州刺史李嗣弼。
English: The Khitans penetrated deep into the south and encircled Zhangzhou. After a dozen days, they captured Li Shizhen, the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：进攻定州，王都告急于晋，晋王自镇州将亲军五千救之，遣神武都指挥使王思同将兵戍狼山之南以拒之。
现代文：又前进攻打定州。王都向晋王告急，晋王从镇州率领五千亲军前往援救，并派遣神武都指挥使王思同率兵驻扎在狼山以南抵御契丹人。
English: They also advanced to attack Dingzhou. Wang Du was in a hurry to get to Jin Wang, who led five thousand of his own troops from Zhenzhou to the rescue, and dispatched the commander of Shenwu Du to make Wang Sitong and his soldiers stationed in the south of Wolf Mountain to resist the Khitan.

古文：高季昌遣都指挥使倪可福以卒万人修江陵外郭，季昌行视，责功程之慢，杖之。
现代文：后梁高季昌派都指挥使倪可福带领一万多士卒修筑江陵的外城，高季昌巡察时，指责工程进展太慢，用棍杖打了倪可福。
English: Later, Liang Gao Jichang sent Ni Kefu to lead more than ten thousand soldiers to build the outer city of Gangneung. When Gao Jichang inspected, he accused the project of progressing too slowly and hit Ni Kefu with a stick.

古文：季昌女为可福子知进妇，季昌谓其女曰： 归语汝舅：吾欲威众办事耳。 
现代文：高季昌的女儿是倪可福的儿子倪知进的妻子，高季昌对他的女儿说： 回去告诉你公公说，我打算用威势迫使众人给我办事。 
English: Gao Jichang's daughter is the wife of Ni Zhijin, the son of Ni Kefu, Gao Jichang said to his daughter: Go back and tell your father-in-law that I plan to use my power to force everyone to do things for me.

古文：以白金数百两遗之。
现代文：并将数百两白金送他。
English: and gave him several hundred taels of platinum.

古文：是岁，汉以尚书左丞倪曙同平章事。
现代文：这一年，汉以尚书左丞倪曙为同平章事。
English: In this year, Han treated Shangshu Zuoying and Ni Shuguang as equals.

古文：辰、溆蛮侵楚，楚宁远节度副使姚彦章讨平之。
现代文：辰州、溆浦的蛮夷侵犯楚国，楚宁远节度副使姚彦章率军击败他们。
English: The barbarians from Chenzhou and Weipo invaded the State of Chu, and the deputy envoy of Chu Ning, Yao Yanzhang, led the army to defeat them.

古文：均王下龙德二年
现代文：龙德二年
English: The Second Year of Longde

古文：春，正月，壬午朔，王都省王处直于西第，处直奋拳殴其胸，曰： 逆贼，我何负于汝！ 
现代文：春季正月，壬午朔，王都到西院看望王处直，王处直愤怒地用拳打王都的胸部，说： 逆贼，我什么地方对不起你？ 
English: In the first month of spring, at the crack of dawn, Wang Du went to the West Courtyard to visit Wang Zhanzhong. Wang Zhanzhong angrily punched Wang Du in the chest and said, "Traitor, where am I sorry to you?

古文：既无兵刃，将噬其鼻，都掣袂获免。
现代文：王处直手中没有武器，就想用嘴咬他的鼻子，王都用衣服挡住才避免咬伤。
English: Wang Du did not have a weapon in his hand, so he tried to bite his nose with his mouth. Wang Du used his clothes to block the bite.

古文：未几，处直忧愤而卒。
现代文：没过多久，王处直因忧愤而死。
English: Not long after, Wang Shiguang died of grief and anger.

古文：甲午，晋王至新城南，候骑白契丹前锋宿新乐，涉沙河而南；将士皆失色，士卒有亡去者，主将斩之不能止。
现代文：甲午，晋王到达新城南面，侦察的骑兵回来说契丹军的前锋驻扎在新乐，准备过了沙河向南进军。将士们听后都感到害怕，士卒们有临阵逃跑的，主将把逃路的杀了，也无法禁止。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, when King Jin arrived in the south of Xincheng, the scouting cavalry returned to say that the vanguard of the Khitan army was stationed in Xinle, preparing to march south across the Sand River. The soldiers were afraid after hearing this. If the soldiers had to flee, the commander would kill the escape route, and it could not be forbidden.

古文：诸将皆曰： 虏倾国而来，吾众寡不敌；又闻梁寇内侵，宜且还师魏州以救根本，或请释镇州之围，西入井陉避之。 
现代文：诸将都说： 契丹人把全国的军队都调这里来，我们寡不敌众。又听说梁军入侵，应当把部队调回魏州以救根本之地。或者撤了包围镇州的部队，向西进入井陉来回避一下。 
English: All the generals said: The Khitans have brought all the troops from all over the country here, and we are outnumbered. They also heard that the Liang army had invaded, so they should move the troops back to Weizhou to save the original place. Or they should withdraw the troops that had surrounded Zhenzhou and go west into the wells to avoid it.

古文：晋王犹豫未决，中门使郭崇韬曰： 契丹为王郁所诱，本利货财而来，非能救镇州之急难也。
现代文：晋王犹豫不决。郭崇韬说： 契丹人被王郁所诱惑，本来是为了夺取货财来的，他们并不能解救镇州的危难。
English: Jin Wang hesitated. Guo Chongyu said, "The Khitan were tempted by Wang Yu. They originally came to seize goods and wealth. They cannot save Zhenzhou from danger.

古文：王新破梁兵，威振夷、夏，契丹闻王至，心沮气索，苟挫其前锋，遁走必矣。 
现代文：大王最近击败梁军，威振夷、夏，契丹人听到大王已经到来。一定会灰心丧气，如果能锉败其前锋部队，后面的部队就一定会逃跑。 
English: The great king had recently defeated Liang's army, Wei Zhenyi and Xia, and the Khitan people heard that the great king had arrived. They must be disheartened, and if they could defeat their forward troops, the rear troops would certainly flee.

古文：李嗣昭自潞州至，亦曰： 今强敌在前，吾有进无退，不可轻动以摇人心。 
现代文：李嗣昭从潞州来到这里，也说： 现在强敌在前，我们只能前进，不能后退，不能轻易动摇人心。 
English: Li Shizhao, who came here from Zhangzhou, also said: Now the strong enemy is in front, we can only advance, not retreat, and cannot easily shake people's hearts.

古文：晋王曰： 帝王之兴，自有天命，契丹其如我何！
现代文：晋王说： 帝王的兴起，自有天命，契丹人能把我怎么样呢？
English: Jin Wang said: The rise of the emperor has its own destiny. What can the Khitan people do to me?

古文：吾以数万之众平定山东，今遇此小虏而避之，何面目以临四海！ 
现代文：我曾用数万军队平定了太行山以东地区，现在遇到这样小的敌人就回避他们，我还有什么面目来见天下人呢？ 
English: I once used tens of thousands of troops to pacify the area east of Taihang Mountain. Now, when encountering such a small enemy, I avoid them. What kind of face do I have left to show to the world?

古文：乃自帅铁骑五千先进。
现代文：于是他亲自率领五千骑兵率先前进。
English: So he personally led five thousand cavalry to take the lead.

古文：至新城北，半出桑林，契丹万馀骑见之，惊走。
现代文：到了新城北面，一半军队刚走出桑林，契丹军一万多骑兵看到，都吓得逃跑了。
English: When they reached the northern side of the new city, half of the army had just come out of the jungle. When the more than ten thousand cavalrymen of the Khitan army saw them, they fled in fear.

古文：晋王分军为二逐之，行数十里，获契丹主之子。
现代文：晋王将部队分为两路追逐他们，追出数十里，抓获契丹主的儿子。
English: Jin Wang divided his troops into two and chased them for dozens of miles, capturing the son of the Khitan lord.

古文：时沙河桥狭冰薄，契丹陷溺死者甚众。
现代文：当时沙河桥窄冰薄，契丹人掉在河里淹死了很多。
English: At that time, the bridge over the Jinsha River was narrow and the ice was thin. Many Khitan fell into the river and drowned.

古文：是夕，晋王宿新乐。
现代文：当天晚上，晋王住在新乐。
English: On the evening of the same day, Jin Wang lived in Xinle.

古文：契丹主车帐在定州城下，败兵至，契丹举众退保望都。
现代文：契丹主随军带的车帐扎在定州城下，败兵到来，契丹军全部退到望都坚守。
English: The car of the Khitan leader with his army was stuck under the city of Dingzhou. When the defeated soldiers arrived, the entire Khitan army retreated to the city of Wangdu and held out.

古文：晋王至定州，王都迎谒于马前，宴于府第，请以爱女妻王子继岌。
现代文：晋王来到定州，王都到马前去迎接，请求把自己的爱女嫁给晋王的儿子李继岌。
English: When Jin Wang came to Dingzhou, Wang Du went to Ma to meet him and asked him to marry his beloved daughter to Jin Wang's son, Li Jizhe.

古文：戊戌，晋王引兵趣望都，契丹逆战，晋王以亲军千骑先进，遇奚酋秃馁五千骑，为其所围。
现代文：戊戌，晋王率兵直捣望都，契丹兵迎战，晋王率亲军一千多骑兵率先前进，正好遇上奚族首领秃馁五千多骑兵，被秃绥所包围。
English: In Wuyi, Jin Wang led the troops to directly attack the capital, Khitan soldiers to meet the battle, Jin Wang led the pro-army of more than one thousand cavalry to take the lead, just met the leader of the Shan people, Vulture, more than five thousand cavalry, surrounded by vultures.

古文：晋王力战，出入数四，自午至申不解。
现代文：晋王奋力冲战，出入好几次，从午时起一直战到申时都没有冲开包围。
English: Jin Wang fought hard, entering and exiting several times, and did not break out of the encirclement from the afternoon until the evening.

古文：李嗣昭闻之，引三百骑横击之，虏退，王乃得出。
现代文：李嗣昭听说以后，率领三百骑兵从侧面攻打秃馁部队，秃馁的部队退走，晋王才从包围中解救出来。
English: After Li Shizhao heard of this, he led three hundred cavalry to attack the vulture troops from the side, the vulture troops retreated, and Jin Wang was rescued from the siege.

古文：因纵兵奋击，契丹大败，逐北至易州。
现代文：于是放手让士卒奋力追击，契丹大败，一直向北追到易州。
English: So he let go and let the soldiers pursue vigorously. Khitan was defeated and chased north to Yizhou.

古文：会大雪弥旬，平地数尺，契丹人马无食，死者相属于道。
现代文：此时正好遇上十几天下大雪，平地积雪有几尺厚，契丹军的人马都没有吃的，冻饿死的人一个挨着一个在一个在道路上。
English: At this time, heavy snow fell for more than a dozen days. The snow on the flat ground was several feet thick. The people of the Khitan army had nothing to eat. The people who died of cold and hunger were one by one on the road.

古文：契丹主举手指天，谓卢文进曰： 天未令我至此。 
现代文：契丹主举起手指着天，对卢文进说： 老天没有让我到这里来。 
English: The Khitan lord raised his finger to the sky and said to Lu Wenjin: "God did not let me come here.

古文：乃北归。
现代文：于是向北回去。
English: So I headed back north.

古文：晋王引兵蹑之，随其行止，见其野宿之所，布藁于地，回环方正，皆如编剪，虽去，无一枝乱者，叹曰： 虏用法严乃能如是，中国所不及也。 
现代文：晋王带兵跟踪，契丹人走，晋军也走，契丹人休息，晋军也休息。晋王看到契丹人在野外睡觉的地方，地上铺草，环绕的方方正正，都像编起来用剪刀剪过似的，虽然他们已经离开这里，地上铺的草还没有一棵乱的，晋王很感叹地说： 契丹人执法很严格，所以才能这样，这是中原地区的部队所不如的。 
English: Jin Wang led the soldiers to follow, the Khitan people left, the Jin army also left, the Khitan people rested, and the Jin army also rested. Jin Wang saw the place where the Khitan people slept in the open, the grass was spread on the ground, and the surrounding squares were like they had been knitted together and cut with scissors. Although they had left here, the grass on the ground was not a single disordered tree. Jin Wang said with great regret: The Khitan people enforce the law very strictly, so they can do this, which is inferior to the troops in the Central Plains region.

古文：晋王至幽州，使二百骑蹑契丹之后，曰： 虏出境即还。 
现代文：晋王到了幽州，派二百骑兵跟在契丹军后面，并告诉他们： 契丹人出了边境以后你们就返回来。 
English: When the Jin king arrived in Yuzhou, he sent two hundred horsemen to follow the Khitan army and told them: "You will return after the Khitan have left the border.

古文：骑恃勇追击之，悉为所擒，惟两骑自它道走免。
现代文：这些骑兵依仗他们勇敢，边追边打，结果被契丹人全部抓获，只有两个骑兵从别的路上逃跑才没有被抓获。
English: These cavalrymen fought bravely, chasing and fighting, and as a result, they were all captured by the Khitans. Only two cavalrymen escaped from another road and were not captured.

古文：契丹主责王郁，絷之以归，自是不听其谋。
现代文：契丹主责怪王郁，把他捆着带回来。从此以后契丹主不再听他的计谋了。
English: The Khitan lord blamed Wang Yu and brought him back in chains. From then on, the Khitan lord would no longer listen to his schemes.

古文：晋代州刺史李嗣肱将兵定妫、儒、武等州，授山北都团练使。
现代文：晋国代州刺史李嗣肱平定了妫、儒、武等州，晋王授予他山北都团练使。
English: Li Shizhen, the vicar-general of Jin, subdued the states of Yao, Confucius, and Wu, and was awarded the post of regimental drill sergeant of the Northern Capital of Shan.

古文：晋王之北攻镇州也，李存审谓李嗣源曰： 梁人闻我在南兵少，不攻德胜，必袭魏州。
现代文：晋王北攻镇州的时候，李存审对李嗣源说： 梁人听说我们在南边的兵少，他们不攻德胜，必袭魏州。
English: When Jin Wang attacked Zhenzhou from the north, Li Cunxin said to Li Siyuan: Liang people have heard that we have fewer soldiers in the south. If they do not attack Desheng, they must attack Weizhou.

古文：吾二人聚于此何为！
现代文：我们两个人都集中在这里干什么呢？
English: What are the two of us doing gathered here?

古文：不若分军备之。 
现代文：不如把军队分开来防备梁军的进攻。 
English: It would be better to separate the armies to prevent Liang's army from attacking.

古文：遂分军屯澶州。
现代文：于是两人就把军队分开，一部分驻扎在澶州。
English: As a result, the two men separated the army and stationed part of it in Zhangzhou.

古文：戴思远果悉杨村之众趣魏州，嗣源引兵先之，军于狄公祠下，遣人告魏州，使为之备。
现代文：戴思远果然率领全部杨村的军队直奔魏州，李嗣源率兵走在他们的前面，驻扎在狄公祠，并派人通告了魏州方面，使他们有所准备。
English: Dai Siyuan indeed led the entire Yangcun army straight to Weizhou, and Li Siyuan led the soldiers in front of them, stationed in the Di Gongsi, and sent someone to inform the Weizhou side so that they were prepared.

古文：思远至魏店，嗣源遣其将石万全将骑兵挑战。
现代文：戴思远到魏店，李嗣源派出将领石万全率骑兵挑战。
English: Dai Siyuan went to Wei shop, and Li Siyuan sent his general Shi Wanquan to challenge the cavalry.

古文：思远知有备，乃西渡洹水，拔成安，大掠而还。
现代文：戴思远知道晋军有了防备，就向西渡过洹水，攻下成安，大肆抢掠后返回。
English: Dai Siyuan knew that the Jin army was prepared, so he crossed the Surabaya River to the west, captured Cheng'an, and returned after plundering.

古文：又将兵五万攻德胜北城，重堑复垒，断其出入，昼夜急攻之，李存审悉力拒守。
现代文：后来戴思远又率领五万士卒向德胜北城发起进攻，在城外挖了一条条壕沟，又修筑了层层墙垒，切断了晋军的出入之路，昼夜连续进攻，李存审全力坚守。
English: Later, Dai Siyuan also led fifty thousand soldiers to launch an attack on Desheng Beicheng, dug a trench outside the city, built layers of walls, cut off the entry and exit routes of the Jin army, and attacked continuously day and night. Li Cunxuan held out with all his might.

古文：晋王闻德胜势危，二月，自幽州赴之，五日至魏州。
现代文：晋王听说德胜的形势危急，二月，从幽州出发，五天到达魏州。
English: Jin Wang heard that the situation in Desheng was critical. In February, he set out from Yuzhou and arrived in Weizhou in five days.

古文：思远闻之，烧营遁还杨村。
现代文：戴思远听说晋王率军将要到来，就烧毁了军营逃回杨村。
English: When Dai Siyuan heard that the army led by Jin Wang was about to arrive, he burned down the military camp and fled back to Yangcun.

古文：蜀主好为微行，酒肆、倡家靡所不到，恶人识之，乃下令士民皆著大裁帽。
现代文：前蜀主喜欢微服出行，酒肆、歌舞艺人的家里无所不去。后来他怕人们认出他来，就下令让士民们都戴大帽子。
English: The former shu master liked to travel in micro-clothing, going everywhere from liquor stores to the homes of singing and dancing artists. Later, he was afraid that people would recognize him, so he ordered that the people should all wear large hats.

古文：晋天平节度使兼侍中阎宝筑垒以围镇州，决滹沱水环之。
现代文：晋国天平节度使兼侍中阎宝修筑墙垒把镇州包围起来，并引滹沱水环绕在镇州四周。
English: During the Tianping Festival of the Jin Dynasty, Yan Bao, who was also an attendant, built a wall to encircle Zhenzhou, and diverted water to surround Zhenzhou.

古文：内外断绝，城中食尽。
现代文：镇州城继绝了与外界的联系，城内的粮食也快吃完了。
English: Zhenzhou City has been cut off from the outside world, and the food in the city is almost finished.

古文：丙午，遣五百馀人出求食。
现代文：丙午，镇州城派五百余人出城找食物。
English: At noon, Zhenzhou City sent more than 500 people out of the city to look for food.

古文：宝纵其出，欲伏兵取之；其人遂攻长围，宝轻之，不为备，俄数千人继至。
现代文：阎宝让他们出来，打算用伏兵把他们抓获。但这些人出来后就攻打工事，阎宝轻视他们，没有任何防备，不一会儿又有数千人到来。
English: Yan Bao let them come out, intending to ambush them and capture them. However, after these people came out, they attacked the construction site. Yan Bao treated them with contempt and did not take any precautions. Soon, thousands more people arrived.

古文：诸军未集，镇人遂坏长围而出，纵火攻宝营，宝不能拒，退保赵州。
现代文：这时阎宝的军队还没有集合，镇州人毁坏了阎宝的包围工事冲了出去，并放火攻击阎宝的军营，阎宝不能抵御，退到赵州坚守。
English: At this time, Yan Bao's army had not yet assembled, the Zhenzhou people destroyed the encirclement of Yan Bao and rushed out, and set fire to the military camp of Yan Bao. Yan Bao could not resist and retreated to Zhaozhou to stand firm.

古文：镇人悉毁晋之营垒，取其刍粟，数日不尽。
现代文：镇州人把晋军修筑的墙垒等工事全部毁掉，并把他们的粮草拿走，好几天都拿不完。
English: The Zhenzhou people destroyed all the walls and other constructions built by the Jin army, and took away their grain and grass, which they could not finish for several days.

古文：晋王闻之，以昭义节度使兼中书令李嗣昭为北面招讨使，以代宝。
现代文：晋王听说此事，调昭义节度使兼中书令李嗣昭为北面招讨使，代替阎宝。
English: When Jin Wang heard about this, he transferred Zhao Yiyi to be the chief envoy of the Qing Dynasty and ordered Li Shizhao to be the envoy of the Northern Court to invite Yan Bao.

古文：夏，四月，蜀军使王承纲女将嫁，蜀主取之入宫。
现代文：夏季，四月，前蜀军使王承纲的女儿将要出嫁，前蜀主把她收取宫内。
English: In the summer, in April, the daughter of the former Shu army envoy Wang Chenggang was about to be married, and the former Shu lord took her to the palace.

古文：承纲请之，蜀主怒，流于茂州。女闻父得罪，自杀。
现代文：镇州的士卒也射箭还周，击中了李嗣昭的脑部，李嗣昭箭袋子里的箭用完了，从脑袋上拔下那根箭来继续射杀镇州人，一箭就射一个。
English: Zhenzhou's soldiers also shot arrows at Zhou, hitting Li Shizhao's brain, Li Shizhao ran out of arrows in his quiver, pulled the arrow from his head to continue shooting Zhenzhou people, and shot one arrow at a time.

古文：甲戌，张处瑾遣兵千人迎粮于九门，李嗣昭设伏于故营，邀击之，杀获殆尽，馀五人匿于墙墟间，嗣昭环马而射之，镇兵发矢中其脑，嗣昭中矢尽，拔矢于脑以射之，一发而殪。会日暮，还营，创流血不止。是夕卒。晋王闻之，不御酒肉者累日。
现代文：这时太阳正好落山，李嗣昭回到了军营里，被射伤的地方流血不止，当天晚上李嗣昭就死了。
English: At this time, the sun had just set, and Li Shizhao returned to the military camp. The place where he was shot was bleeding profusely, and that evening, Li Shizhao died.

古文：嗣昭遗命：悉以泽、潞兵授节度判官任圜，使督诸军攻镇州，号令如一，镇人不知嗣昭之死。
现代文：晋王听说后，好几天不食酒肉。李嗣昭的遗言说： 把泽州、潞州的兵全部交给节度判官任圜，让他率领诸军继续攻打镇州。 任圜发布的命令和以前完全一样，镇州人不知道李嗣昭被射死。
English: After hearing this, Jin Wang did not eat meat or drink for several days. Li Shizhao's last words were: "Hand over all the soldiers from Zezhou and Zhangzhou to the judge of the festival, Ren Hui, and let him lead the army to continue to attack Zhenzhou." The order issued by Ren Hui was exactly the same as before, and the people of Zhenzhou did not know that Li Shizhao had been shot dead.

古文：圜，三原人也。
现代文：任圜是三原人。
English: Ren Rong is a native of Mihara.

古文：晋王以天雄马步都指挥使、振武节度使李存进为北面招讨使。
现代文：晋王任命天雄马步都指挥、振武节度使李存进为北面招讨使。
English: Jin Wang appointed Tian Xiong as the commander of Ma Budu, and Zhenwu Jiedu appointed Li Cunjin as the envoy to the north.

古文：命嗣昭诸子护丧归葬晋阳；其子继能不受命，帅父牙兵数千，自行营拥丧归潞州。
现代文：命令李嗣昭的儿子们护送李嗣昭的灵柩回晋阳，并把他安葬在那里。他的儿子李继能不接受归葬晋阳的命令，而率领他父亲的几千名牙兵，从军营护丧送回潞州。
English: He ordered the sons of Li Shizhao to escort the coffin of Li Shizhao back to Jinyang and bury him there. His son Li Jianeng did not accept the order to be buried in Jinyang, but led several thousand of his father's soldiers from the military camp to escort the funeral back to Zhangzhou.

古文：晋王遣母弟存渥驰骑追谕之，兄弟俱忿，欲杀存渥，存渥逃归。
现代文：晋王派遣他的同母弟弟李存渥骑马急速追上李继能，并给他讲明要护丧到晋阳，李继能的兄弟们都感到忿怒，想杀掉李存渥，李存渥逃回。
English: The king of Jin dispatched his half-brother Li Cunwo on horseback to quickly catch up with Li Jinao, and told him that he would escort the funeral to Jinyang. Li Jinao's brothers were angry and wanted to kill Li Cunwo, and Li Cunwo fled back.

古文：嗣昭七子、继俦、继韬、继达、继忠、继能、继袭、继远。
现代文：李嗣昭有七个儿子：李继俦、李继韬、李继达、李继忠、李继能、李继袭、李继远。
English: Li Shizhao had seven sons: Li Jizhe, Li Jizhe, Li Jida, Li Jizhong, Li Jicheng, Li Jizhe, and Li Jiyuan.

古文：继俦为泽州刺史，当袭爵，素懦弱。
现代文：李继俦是泽州刺史，应当接替父亲的爵位，他平素比较软弱。
English: Li Jizhe is the history of Zhezhou, he should succeed his father's title, he is usually weak.

古文：继韬凶狡，囚继俦于别室，诈令士卒劫己为留后，继韬阳让，以事白晋王。
现代文：李继韬凶暴狡猾，把李断俦囚禁在另外一个房间里，假装让士卒们劫持他请为留后，李继韬再公开谦让一番，然后把这件事报告晋王。
English: Li Jizhe was fierce and cunning. He imprisoned Li Danzhong in another room and asked the soldiers to kidnap him. After pretending to stay, Li Jizhe made another public concession and then reported the matter to the Jin king.

古文：晋王以用兵方殷，不得已，改昭义军曰安义，以继韬为留后。
现代文：晋王因为战争正在高潮，在不得已的情况下，改昭义军为安义，任命李继韬为留后。
English: Because the war was at its climax, the king of Jin, as a last resort, changed the name of the rebel army to Anyi and appointed Li Jixuan as his successor.

古文：阎宝惭愤，疽发于背，甲戌卒。
现代文：阎宝战败后感到悲愤，背上长了个毒疮，在甲戌那一天病死。
English: After the defeat of Yan Bao, he felt sad and angry. A poisonous sore grew on his back, and he died of illness on the day of the battle.

古文：汉主岩用术者言，游梅口镇避灾。
现代文：南汉国主刘岩按照术士的话，到梅口镇去躲避灾难。
English: According to the words of the sorcerer, Liu Yan, the ruler of Southern Han, went to Meikou Town to avoid the disaster.

古文：其地近闽之西鄙，闽将王延美将兵袭之，未至数十里，侦者告之，岩遁逃仅免。
现代文：这个地方接近闽的西部边境，闽将王延美率兵来袭击他，走到离刘岩还几十里的地方时，侦察的人告诉了刘岩，刘岩赶紧逃跑，才免遭袭击。
English: This place is close to the western border of Handan. Handan sent Wang Yanmei and his soldiers to attack him. When they reached a place dozens of miles away from Liuyan, the reconnaissance person told Liuyan that Liuyan had to run away quickly to avoid being attacked.

古文：五月，乙酉，晋李存进至镇州，营于东垣渡，夹滹沱水为垒。
现代文：五月、乙酉，晋将李存进到达镇州，在东垣渡安营扎寨，在滹沱水两侧修筑营垒。
English: In May, at the time of the Battle of Acetylene, Jin sent Li Cunxin to Zhenzhou, where he set up camp at Donggakdu and built barracks on both sides of the Yanshui River.

古文：晋卫州刺史李存儒，本姓杨，名婆儿，以俳优得幸于晋王。
现代文：晋国卫州刺史李存儒，本姓杨，名婆儿，因为会演戏，得到晋王的宠爱。
English: Li Cunru, whose real surname was Yang, was a famous grandma in the state of Weizhou in the Jin Dynasty. He was favored by the King of Jin because he could act.

古文：颇有膂力，晋王赐姓名，以为刺史；志事掊敛，防城卒皆征月课纵归。
现代文：他颇有膂力，晋王赐给他姓名，任命为刺史。他专门搜括民财，对防城的兵卒，也向他们每月征收钱币，然后放归，以免防守之役。
English: He was so powerful that the king of Jin gave him his name and appointed him as the chief historian. He specialized in collecting people's wealth, and he also collected coins from the soldiers defending the city every month, and then released them, so as to avoid the defensive battle.

古文：八月，庄宅使段凝与步军都指挥使张朗引兵夜渡河袭之，诘旦登城，执存儒，遂克卫州。
现代文：八月，后梁庄宅使段凝和步军都指挥使张朗率兵连夜渡过黄河袭击，第二早晨登城，抓获李存儒，攻下卫州。
English: In August, after Liang Zhuang's residence, Duan Rong and the infantry were commanded by Zhang Lang, who led the troops to cross the Yellow River overnight and attacked. The next morning, he went to the city, captured Li Cunru, and conquered Weizhou.

古文：戴思远又与凝攻陷淇门、共城、新乡，于是澶州之西，相州之南，皆为梁有；晋人失军储三之一，梁军复振。
现代文：戴思远又和段凝攻下淇门、共城、新乡，到这时，澶州以西、相州以南的地区都归后梁所有。晋军失去了三分之一的军用储备，后梁军又振作起来。
English: Dai Siyuan and Duan Jie attacked Qimen, Gongcheng and Xinxiang. By this time, the areas west of Zhangzhou and south of Xiangzhou were all owned by Houliang. The Jin army lost a third of its military reserves, and Houliang's army cheered up again.

古文：帝以张朗为卫州刺史。
现代文：后梁帝任命张朗为卫州刺史。
English: Later, Emperor Liang appointed Zhang Lang as the governor of Weizhou.

古文：朗，徐州人也。
现代文：张朗是徐州人。
English: Zhang Lang is from Xuzhou.

古文：九月，戊寅朔，张处瑾使其弟处球乘李存进无备，将兵七千人奄至东垣渡。
现代文：九月，戊寅朔，张处瑾派其弟张处球乘李存进没有防备，率兵七千突然到达东垣渡。
English: In September, Wu Yinshuo, Zhang Duxuan sent his brother Zhang Duqiu to take Li Cunjin unprepared, leading seven thousand soldiers to suddenly arrive in Donggakdu.

古文：时晋之骑兵亦向镇州城下，两不相遇。
现代文：这时晋国的骑兵也向镇州城开进，但两军并没有相遇。
English: At this time, the cavalry of Jin also advanced to Zhenzhou City, but the two armies did not meet.

古文：镇兵及存进营门，存进狼狈引十馀人斗于桥上，镇兵退，晋骑兵断其后，夹击之，镇兵殆尽，存进亦战没。
现代文：镇州的士卒赶到李存进营门，李存进十分狼狈地率领着十几个人在桥上作战，镇州的士卒被击退，晋国的骑兵切断了他们后面的部队，前后夹攻，镇州的士卒几乎被消灭光，李存进战死。
English: Zhenzhou's soldiers rushed to Li Cunxin's camp gate, Li Cunxin was very confused and led more than a dozen people to fight on the bridge, Zhenzhou's soldiers were repulsed, Jin's cavalry cut off the troops behind them, attacked back and forth, Zhenzhou's soldiers were almost wiped out, Li Cunxin died in battle.

古文：晋王以蕃汉马步总管李存审为北面招讨使。
现代文：晋王任命蕃汉马步总管李存审为北面招讨使。
English: Jin Wang appointed Li Cunxin, the general manager of Shihamabou, as the north side recruiting envoy.

古文：镇州食竭力尽，处瑾遣使诣行台请降，未报，存审兵至城下。丙午夜，城中将李再丰为内应，密投缒以纳晋兵，比明毕登，执处瑾兄弟家人及其党高濛、李翥、齐俭送行台，赵人皆请而食之，磔张文礼尸于市。
现代文：镇州城内食尽力竭，张处瑾派出使者到行台请求投降，还没有得到回报，李存审的部队已兵临城下，丙午夜晚，镇州城中将领李再丰为内应，秘密地用绳子从城墙上把晋军拉进来，到天亮就全部登上了城，抓获了张处瑾的兄弟家人以及他的同党高、李翥、齐俭等，把他们送到了行台，赵人都请求把他们斩杀吃掉，张文礼的尸体在市上被车裂。
English: The food in the city of Zhenzhou was exhausted. Zhang Duxuan sent an envoy to Xingtai to request surrender, but did not receive a return. Li Cunxin's troops were already under the city. At noon in the evening, the general of the city of Zhenzhou, Li Zaifeng, secretly used a rope to pull the Jin army in from the city wall. By dawn, they had all boarded the city. They captured Zhang Duxuan's brothers and family members as well as his fellow party members Gao, Li Yu, Qi Jian, etc. and sent them to Xingtai. Zhao people all asked to be killed and eaten. Zhang Wenli

古文：赵王故侍者得赵王遗骸于灰烬中，晋王命祭而葬之。
现代文：赵王王熔原来的侍者在灰烬中找到了赵王的遗骸，晋王命令祭祀赵王，并将遗骸埋葬。
English: The original waiter found Zhao Wang's remains in the ashes, and Jin Wang ordered to sacrifice Zhao Wang and bury the remains.

古文：以赵将符习为成德节度使，乌震为赵州刺史，赵仁贞为深州刺史，李再丰为冀州刺史。
现代文：晋王任命赵将符习为成德节度使，乌震为赵州刺史，赵仁贞为深州刺史，李再丰为冀州刺史。
English: Jin Wang appointed Zhao Shou Fu Xi as the Chengde Festival Envoy, Wu Zhen as the Zhao State Historian, Zhao Renzhen as the Shenzhou Historian, and Li Zaifeng as the Jizhou Historian.

古文：震，信都人也。
现代文：乌震是信都人。
English: Wu Zhen is from Xindu.

古文：符习不敢当成德，辞曰： 故使无后而未葬，习当斩衰以葬之，俟礼毕听命。 
现代文：符习不敢接受成德节度使，他辞让说： 原来的节度使没有儿子而且还未安葬，我符习应当服重丧然后把他安葬，等到葬礼完毕之后，我再听从大王的命令。 
English: Fu Xi didn't dare to accept Chengde Festival's request, so he gave in and said: The original festival didn't have a son and he hasn't been buried yet. I, Fu Xi, should perform the funeral and then bury him. After the funeral is over, I will follow the king's order.

古文：既葬，即诣行台。
现代文：安葬以后，他到了行台。
English: After the burial, he went to Xingtai.

古文：赵人请晋王兼领成德节度使，从之。
现代文：赵人请求晋王兼领成德节度使，晋王答应了赵人的请求。
English: The Zhao people asked the Jin king to also receive the Chengde Festival envoy, and the Jin king agreed to the request of the Zhao people.

古文：晋王割相、卫二州置义宁军，以习为节度使。
现代文：晋王割出相、卫二州设置义宁军，任命符习为义宁军节度使。
English: Jin Wang cut out the phase, set up the Yining Army in the two states of Wei, and appointed Fuxi as the Yining Army's festival envoy.

古文：习辞曰： 魏博霸府，不可分也，愿得河南一镇，习自取之。 
现代文：符习又辞让说： 魏、博是大王的藩镇，不能分割，我希望得到黄河以南的一个镇，我符习自已去攻占。 
English: Fu Xi also gave in and said: Wei and Bo are the king's towns, and cannot be divided. I hope to get a town south of the Yellow River, and I will conquer it myself.

古文：乃以为天平节度使、东南面招讨使。
现代文：于是晋王任命他为天平节度使、东南面招讨使。
English: As a result, the Jin king appointed him as the envoy of the Tianping Festival and the envoy of the Southeast Invitation.

古文：加李存审兼侍中。
现代文：加任李存审兼侍中。
English: He was appointed to the post of Li Cunxin and also a chamberlain.

古文：十一月，戊寅，晋特进、河东监军使张承业卒，曹太夫人诣其第，为之行服，如子侄之礼。
现代文：十一月，戊寅，晋特进、河东监军使张承业去世，曹太夫人到张承业的府第为他服丧，和他的儿子、侄儿们服的丧礼一样。
English: In November, Zhang Chengye, the military governor of Henan Province, died. Mrs. Cao went to Zhang Chengye's hometown to hold a funeral for him, just like his sons and nephews.

古文：晋王闻其丧，不食者累日。
现代文：晋王听到张承业死的消息后，好几天都不吃饭。
English: After Jin Wang heard the news of Zhang Chengye's death, he did not eat for several days.

古文：命河东留守判官何瓚代知河东军府事。
现代文：晋王命令河东留守判官何瓒代管河东军府事。
English: Jin Wang ordered the magistrate who stayed in Hedong to take charge of the affairs of the military government in Hedong.

古文：十二月，晋王以魏博观察判官晋阳张宪兼镇冀观察判官，权镇州军府事。
现代文：十二月，晋王任命魏博观察判官晋阳人张宪兼任镇冀观察判官，暂管镇州军府事。
English: In December, the king of Jin appointed Zhang Xian, an observer judge from Weibo and a native of Jinyang, to also serve as an observer judge from Zhenji, temporarily in charge of the affairs of the Zhenzhou Military Government.

古文：魏州税多逋负，晋王以让司录济阴赵季良，季良曰： 殿下何时当平河南？ 
现代文：魏州的赋税拖欠得很多，晋王因此责怪司济阴人赵季良，赵季良说： 殿下什么时候能平定黄河以南？ 
English: There were many tax arrears in Weizhou, so the Jin king blamed Zhao Jiliang, the secretary of Jilin Province. Zhao Jiliang said: "When will your highness be able to pacify the south of the Yellow River?"

古文：王怒曰： 汝职在督税，职之不修，何敢预我军事！ 
现代文：晋王十分生气地说： 你的职务是监督税赋，自己的职务都没干好，怎么敢干预我的军事！ 
English: Jin Wang said very angrily, "Your duty is to supervise taxes. You have not done your duty well. How dare you interfere in my military affairs!"

古文：季良对曰： 殿下方谋攻取而不爱百姓，一旦百姓离心，恐河北亦非殿下之有，况河南乎！ 
现代文：赵季良回答说： 殿下正在谋划攻取而不爱惜百姓，一旦百姓对你离心，恐怕连黄河以北也不能归殿下所有，更何况黄河以南呢！ 
English: Zhao Jiliang replied, "Your highness is plotting to conquer without sparing the people. Once the people are alienated from you, I am afraid that even the north of the Yellow River cannot be owned by your highness, let alone the south of the Yellow River!

古文：王悦，谢之。
现代文：晋王十分高兴，并且向他道歉。
English: Jin Wang was very happy and apologized to him.

古文：自是重之，每预谋议。
现代文：从此以后，晋王对赵季良很重视，每次商量大事都让他参与谋划。
English: From then on, Jin Wang attached great importance to Zhao Jiliang, and let him participate in the planning of every major event.

古文：是岁，契丹改元天赞。
现代文：这一年，契丹改年号为天赞。
English: In this year, Khitan changed its name to Tianzan.

古文：大封王躬乂，性残忍，海军统帅王建杀之，自立，复称高丽王，以开州为东京，平壤为西京。
现代文：大封王躬义，性情残忍，海军统帅王建把他杀死，自己继位，仍然称高丽王，并以开州为东京，平壤为西京。
English: Wang Jian, the commander-in-chief of the navy, killed him and succeeded to the throne himself. He was still called the King of Goryeo, and called Kaeshu as Tokyo and Pyongyang as Saikyo.

古文：建俭约宽厚，国人安之。
现代文：王建生活节俭，对人宽厚。国内人民生活安定。
English: Wang Jian lives a frugal life and is generous to others. People in China enjoy a stable life.

