古文：《传》曰： 不有君子，其能国乎？ 
现代文：《左传》说： 不拥有君子，难道能治理好国家吗？ 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: Can a country be governed well without having a gentleman?

古文：古之为国，言辞抑扬，率以有人无人占轻重。
现代文：古时候治理国家，讲起道理有高下之分，真正分量轻重全凭有无人才来检验。
English: In ancient times, when a country was governed, there was a difference between those who spoke the truth and those who did not. The true weight of the weight depended on the fact that there was no one to check it.

古文：晋以诈取士会于秦，绕朝曰： 子无谓秦无人，吾谋适不用也。 
现代文：晋国用诈谋从秦国争取到足智多谋的士会，临行时绕朝对他说： 您别说秦国没有人才，我的计谋正好不被使用罢了。 
English: Jin used trickery to obtain a resourceful and resourceful taxi association from Qin. When he was about to leave, he went around to Qin and said to him, "Don't say that Qin has no talent. My trick is just not being used."

古文：楚子反曰： 以区区之宋，犹有不欺人之臣，可以楚而无乎？ 
现代文：楚国的子反曾说： 凭着微不足道的宋国，尚且有不欺人的臣子，可以认为楚国就没有吗？ 
English: The son of Chu once said: With the insignificant Song state, even if there are not deceitful courtiers, can it be considered that Chu does not exist?

古文：宋受郑赂，郑师慧曰： 宋必无人。 
现代文：宋国多次向郑国索取财礼，郑国的师慧说： 宋国必定没有贤才。 
English: Song repeatedly asked Zheng for financial gifts. Zheng's master Hui said, "There must be no genius in Song."

古文：鲁盟臧纥之罪，纥曰： 国有人焉。 
现代文：鲁国季武子采纳孟椒的意见把臧纥的罪行写入盟辞，臧纥听到了，说： 国内有人才啊！ 
English: Lu Guo Jiwu adopted Meng Jiao's suggestion to write Zou's crime into the oath, Zou heard it and said: There is talent in this country!

古文：贾谊论匈奴嫚侮，曰： 倒悬如此，莫之能解，犹谓国有人乎？ 
现代文：贾谊在《治安策》中论及匈奴对汉的嫚侮侵略时说： 本末颠倒到这地步而不能解救，难道能说国内有明智之人吗？ 
English: In "Security Policy," when discussing the Hun's aggression against Han, Jia Yi said: If the situation has been turned upside down to this point and cannot be saved, can it be said that there are wise people in the country?

古文：后之人不能及此，然知敌之不可犯，犹曰彼有人焉，未可图也。
现代文：后代的人达不到这一步，然而明知敌对一方不可侵犯，仍说对方有人才，这是不可图谋的。
English: Future generations will not be able to reach this level, but it is unthinkable to say that the other side has talent, knowing that the other side is inviolable.

古文：一士重于九鼎，岂不信然？
现代文：一个贤士比政权还重要，难道不是如此吗？
English: Isn't it true that a wise man is more important than a regime?

