古文：李子苌袁安严遵李崇魏先生李义琛蒋恒王璥李杰裴子云郭正一张楚金董行成张鷟张松寿苏无名赵涓袁滋
现代文：李子苌袁安严遵李崇魏先生李义琛蒋恒王璥李杰裴子云郭正一张楚金董行成张鷟张松寿苏无名赵涓袁滋
English: Li Zizhi, Yuan An, Yan Zun, Li Chong Wei, Mr. Li Yixuan, Jiang Heng Wang, Li Jie, Pei Zi, Yun Guo Zheng, Chu Jin, Dong Xingcheng, Zhang Xuan, Zhang Song Shou, Su Nameless, Zhao Xuan Yuan Zi

古文：李子苌
现代文：李子苌
English: Li Zixuan

古文：汉李子苌为政，欲知囚情。
现代文：汉朝的李子苌处理政务，想要知道关押在监狱里的罪犯的情况。
English: The Han Dynasty's Li Zicheng was in charge of government affairs and wanted to know the status of criminals in prison.

古文：以梧槚为人，象囚人形，凿地为陷，以芦为郭，卧木囚其中。
现代文：他便将木头当作人，将木头刻成罪犯的形状，在地上挖一个坑作为监狱，用芦苇插成监狱的墙壁，然后将木人横放在里面。
English: He took wood as a person, carved it into the shape of a criminal, dug a pit in the ground as a prison, used reeds to make the walls of the prison, and then placed the wooden man inside.

古文：囚罪正是，木囚不动；囚冤侵夺，木囚动出。
现代文：如果木人所代表的那个罪犯所判定的罪行正确，则木人不动。如果木人所代表的罪犯有冤屈，木人就会自动跃出来。
English: If the criminal represented by the wooden man is found guilty, the wooden man does not move. If the criminal represented by the wooden man has a grievance, the wooden man will automatically jump out.

古文：不知囚之精神著木人邪？将天神之气动木囚也！袁安
现代文：不知道是罪犯的灵魂附在了木人身上，还是有神仙在操纵木人？袁安
English: I don't know if the criminal's soul is attached to the wooden man, or if a god is manipulating the wooden man. Yuan An

古文：汉袁安为楚相。会楚王坐事，平相牵引，拘系者千余人。毒楚横暴，囚皆自诬。
现代文：汉朝的袁安是楚国的丞相，楚王获罪，牵连到其他的人，陆续抓了一千多人，这些人经受不住毒刑拷打，全都自己诬陷自己。
English: The Han Dynasty's Yuan An was the chancellor of the State of Chu. The King of Chu was convicted, implicated other people, and successively arrested more than a thousand people. These people could not stand the torture, and all of them framed themselves.

古文：历三年而狱不决，坐掠幽而死者百余人。
现代文：经过了三年，也没有审理清楚这个案子，关押的人被拷打死一百多人。
English: After three years, the case has yet to be heard, and more than a hundred detainees have been tortured to death.

古文：天用炎旱，赤地千里。
现代文：天降旱灾，几千里地看不到庄稼。
English: Due to the drought, crops cannot be seen for thousands of miles.

古文：安授拜，即控辔而行。
现代文：袁安接受了审理此案的任务，他骑马赶往那里，到了以后立即审理案件。
English: Yuan An accepted the task of hearing the case. He rode there and immediately heard the case.

古文：既到，决狱事，人人具录辞状，本非首谋，为王所引，应时理遣。一日之中，延千人之命。
现代文：他让每个人如实陈述自己的情况，只要不是主谋，而是受到了楚王牵连的，立即释放，一天之内，保全了上千人的性命。
English: He asked everyone to truthfully report their situation. As long as they were not the mastermind, but were implicated by King Chu, they were immediately released. Within one day, he saved thousands of lives.

古文：其时甘两滂霈，岁大丰稔。
现代文：这时久旱的天气下起了大雨，当年的庄稼获得了大丰收。
English: At this time, under the weather of long drought, heavy rain fell, and the crops of that year gained a large harvest.

古文：严遵
现代文：严遵
English: Yan Zun

古文：严遵为扬州刺史，行部，闻道傍女子哭而声不哀。
现代文：严遵是扬州刺史，八月份巡视部属时听到路旁有女子在哭，但声音并不悲哀。
English: Yan Zun is a historical figure in Yangzhou. In August, when he was inspecting his subordinates, he heard a woman crying on the side of the road, but the sound was not sad.

古文：问之，亡夫遭烧死。
现代文：严遵询问那个女子，女子回答丈夫被火烧死了。
English: Yan Zun questioned the woman, who replied that her husband had been burned to death.

古文：遵敕吏舆尸到，令人守之曰：当有物往。
现代文：严遵命令差人将尸体运来，派人守着。他说：会有东西来到尸体旁边。
English: Yan obeyed the order of the policeman to bring the body and sent someone to guard it. He said: "Something will come next to the body."

古文：更日，有蝇聚头所。遵令披视，銕锥贯顶。
现代文：第二天，有苍蝇聚集在尸体的头顶，严遵命令拨开头发查看，发现有一铁锥插在死者的头顶。
English: The next day, flies gathered on the head of the corpse. Strictly following the order, they opened the hair and found an iron cone stuck on the top of the dead man's head.

古文：考问，以淫杀夫。
现代文：经过拷问那个女子，知道这个女子同别人淫乱将自己的丈夫杀了。
English: After torturing the woman, he killed her husband when he learned that she had committed adultery with another man.

古文：李崇
现代文：李崇
English: Li Chong

古文：北齐顿丘李崇，陈留公诞之子。
现代文：北齐时顿丘的李崇是陈留公陈诞的儿子。
English: Li Chong from Dongqiu, North Qi, is the son of Chen Ruigong and Chen Xizhao.

古文：高祖时，为兖州刺史。
现代文：高祖皇帝时，他担任兖州刺史。
English: When Gaozhu was emperor, he served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：兖州比多劫盗，崇乃村置一楼，楼悬一鼓，盗发之处，槌鼓乱击。
现代文：兖州的土匪很多，李崇叫人在每一个村庄修建一座亭楼，楼上悬挂一面鼓。如果有土匪抢劫，那里的人们便使劲敲鼓。
English: There are many bandits in Luzhou. Li Chong asked people to build a pavilion in every village with a drum hanging from the top. If there is a bandit robbery, the people there will beat the drum hard.

古文：四面诸村，始闻者挝鼓一通，次闻者复挝以为节，俄顷之间，声布百里。
现代文：四周的村庄听到鼓声，立即敲一通鼓。远处的村子听到鼓声，也陆续敲一通鼓。
English: When the surrounding villages heard the sound of the drums, they immediately beat a drum. When the distant villages heard the sound of the drums, they also successively beat a drum.

古文：伏其险要，无不擒获。诸州置鼓，自此始也。
现代文：倾刻之间，鼓声响彻百里，然后派出队伍，埋伏在险要的地方，没有一次不将土匪抓获的。各州设置鼓，便是从这个时候开始的。
English: It was at this time that the states began to set up drums, and the drums were heard for hundreds of miles, and then teams were sent out to lie in wait in the most dangerous places, and not once did they fail to capture the bandits.

古文：世宗时，除扬州刺史。
现代文：世宗皇帝的时候，李崇出任扬州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sejong, Li Chong served as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：崇明察审，奸邪惮之，号曰卧虎。
现代文：他擅长调查处理案件，违法做坏事的人全都怕他，给他起了个绰号卧虎。
English: He is good at investigating and handling cases. People who do bad things in violation of the law are all afraid of him and have given him the nickname Crouching Tiger.

古文：魏先生
现代文：魏先生
English: Mr. Wei

古文：魏先生生于周，家于宋，儒书之外，详究乐章。
现代文：魏先生出生在北周时代，家在宋国。他除了学习儒家经典之外，还精通音乐理论。
English: Mr. Wei was born in the Northern Zhou Dynasty and lived in the Song Dynasty. In addition to studying Confucian classics, he is also proficient in music theory.

古文：隋初，出游关右。值太常考乐，议者未平，闻先生来，竞往谒问。
现代文：隋朝初年，他旅行到了关右，正赶上太常寺考核选拔音乐人才，参加评论的官员意见不统一，他们听说魏先生来了，便去拜访请教。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he traveled to Guanzhong, just in time for the Taizhong Temple to assess and select musical talents. The officials who participated in the review did not have a unified opinion. When they heard that Mr. Wei was coming, they went to visit and ask for advice.

古文：先生乃取平陈乐器，与乐官林夔、蔡子元等，详其律度，然后金石丝竹，咸得其所，内致清商署焉。
现代文：魏先生取出自己的标准乐器，与掌管音乐的乐官林夔和蔡子元等人详细判定音调，然后将钟磬、弦乐和竹制乐器的音调和音阶调整正确。
English: Mr. Wei took out his standard musical instrument, determined the tone in detail with the music officials Lin Qi and Cai Ziyuan, who were in charge of the music, and then adjusted the tone and scale of the gongs, strings and bamboo instruments correctly.

古文：太乐官敛帛二百段以酬之，先生不复入仕，遂归梁宋，以琴酒为娱。
现代文：太乐官准备了二百块丝织品送给他作为酬劳。魏先生不想当官，又回到家里，将喝酒和弹琴作为娱乐。
English: Mr. Wei did not want to be an official, so he went back home and enjoyed drinking and playing the piano.

古文：及隋末兵兴，畅玄感战败，谋主李密亡命雁门，变姓名以教授。先生同其乡曲，由是遂相来往。
现代文：等到隋朝末年，战争兴起的时候，杨玄感被打败，为他出谋划策的李密逃到雁门。他隐姓埋名，作了一名教书先生，魏先生和他同在一个村里。互相有了来往。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, when war broke out, Yang Xuanxuan was defeated, and Li Mi, who advised him, fled to Ganmen. He went incognito and became a teacher, and Mr. Wei was in a village with him. They got to know each other.

古文：常论钟律，李密颇能。
现代文：他们经常在一起讨论音乐，李密对音乐也有很高的造诣。
English: They often discuss music together, and Li Mi is also highly proficient in music.

古文：先生因戏之曰：观吾子气沮而目乱，心摇而语偷。
现代文：魏先生同他开玩笑说：我看你神情沮丧，目光散乱，心中矛盾，说话吞吞吐吐。
English: Mr. Wei joked with him, "I can see that you are depressed, your eyes are distracted, you are conflicted, and your speech is slurred.

古文：气沮者新破败；目乱者无所主；心摇者神未定；语偷者思有谋于人。
现代文：神情沮丧是因为刚刚被打败，目光散乱是因为无处投靠，心中矛盾是因为心神未定，说话吞吞吐吐是害怕别人知道你曾经给反叛出过主意。
English: The dejected look is because you have just been defeated, the eyes are distracted because you have nowhere to turn, the conflict in your heart is because you are undecided, and the stammering is because you are afraid that others will know that you once had the idea to rebel.

古文：今方捕蒲山党，得非长者乎？
现代文：如今正在搜捕叛乱者的余党，你莫非不是个好人？
English: Now that the remaining rebels are being hunted down, aren't you a good person?

古文：李公惊起，捉先生手曰：既能知我，岂不能救我欤？
现代文：李密吃惊地跳了起来，握着魏先生的手说：你既然知道，难道不能救一救我吗？
English: Li Mi jumped up in surprise, shook Mr. Wei's hand and said, "Since you know, can't you save me?"

古文：先生曰：吾子无帝王规模，非将帅才略，乃乱世之雄杰耳。
现代文：魏先生说：你没有帝王的气概，也没有将帅的才智，只是个扰乱社会的草莽英雄。
English: Mr. Wei said, "You don't have the temperament of an emperor, nor do you have the intelligence of a general. You are just a reckless hero who disturbs society."

古文：李公曰：为吾辩析行藏，亦当由此而退。
现代文：李密说：我被你看破了身份来历，应当从此隐退。
English: Li Mi said, "You have seen through my identity and background, and I should withdraw from this."

古文：先生曰：夫为帝王者，宠罗天地，仪范古今。外则日用而不知，中则岁功而自立。
现代文：魏先生说：能够成为帝王的人，心胸包罗天地，威严震慑古今，不注意生活中的琐碎事物，只知道推动时代发展和建立巩固政权。
English: Mr. Wei said: Those who can become emperors have a heart that embraces heaven and earth, with a majesty that shocks the past and the present. They do not pay attention to the trivial things in life, but only know how to promote the development of the times and establish and consolidate political power.

古文：尧询四岳，举鲧而殛羽山，此乃出于无私；汉任三杰，纳良而围垓下，亦出于无私也。
现代文：尧征求分管四方的诸侯四岳的意见，四岳推荐鲧去治水，而鲧治水九年没有成功，被舜杀死在羽山，这些都是出于无私。汉朝任用了张良、萧和、韩信三杰，采纳他们的计策，将项羽围困消灭在垓下，也是因为出于无私。
English: The Han Dynasty appointed Zhang Liang, Xiao He and Han Xin, and adopted their strategy to eliminate the siege of Xiang Yu under the yoke, also because of selflessness.

古文：故凤有爪吻而不施，麟有蹄突而永废者，能付其道，而永自集于时者，此帝王规模也。
现代文：所以凤凰有利爪和尖嘴而不用作进攻的武器，麒麟有可以进攻的脚趾，然而永远也不使用。能够掌握命运，顺应时代潮流的人，才是帝王的气概。
English: Therefore, the phoenix has claws and a sharp beak, but they are not used as offensive weapons. The unicorn has toes that can be attacked, but they are never used. Those who can control their destiny and conform to the trend of the times are the spirit of the emperor.

古文：凡为将帅者，幕建太一旗，驱无战之师，伐有民之罪。
现代文：凡是作为将帅的人，帐幕前插着旗帜，率领军队维护社会安定，讨伐对百姓有罪的叛乱者。
English: Anyone who is a commander-in-chief has a banner in front of his tent, leads the army to maintain social stability, and fights rebels who are guilty of crimes against the people.

古文：乃凋戈既授，玉弩斯张，诚负羁之有言，那季良之犹在。所以务其宴犒，致逸待劳，修其屯田。观衅而动。遂使风生虎啸，不可抗其威，云起龙骧，不可攘其势。
现代文：既然接受武器，掌握了兵权，担负起责任，象季良的威风，所以要爱护休整军队，以逸待劳，开荒种地养兵，根据敌人的动向调动部署军队，于是便可以操纵控制战争形势。
English: Now that we have accepted weapons, mastered military power, and shouldered responsibilities, we should cherish and rest the army, take advantage of idleness, cultivate wasteland and raise soldiers, and mobilize and deploy the army according to the enemy's movement, so that we can manipulate and control the war situation.

古文：仲尼曰：我战则克，孟柯云： 夫谁与敌？ 
现代文：就像虎啸风起，龙行云起一样，没有人能抵抗和夺取他的威风和气势。孔子说，我出战必胜。孟子说，谁是我的对手？
English: Just as the tiger roars and the wind blows, and the dragon walks in the clouds, no one can resist and seize his authority and momentum. Confucius said, I will go to war and win. Mencius said, who is my opponent?

古文：此将帅之才也。
现代文：这才是将帅之才呢！
English: This is what makes a great general!

古文：至有衷其才智，动以机钤，公于国则为帅臣，私于己则曰乱盗。
现代文：就是说忠诚而有才智，动以机钤，为公为国的人、才能成为将帅。而为私为己的人，只能称为叛逆和强盗。
English: That is to say, only those who are loyal, intelligent, and resourceful, who are for the public and the country, can become generals, while those who are for themselves can only be called rebels and robbers.

古文：私于己者，必掠取财色，屠其城池。
现代文：为个人利益的人，必然抢夺财物和美色，滥杀无辜。
English: Those who seek personal gain will inevitably rob property and beauty, and kill innocents indiscriminately.

古文：朱亥为前席之宾，樊哙为升堂之客。
现代文：朱亥受人尊敬而被请到前席入座，樊哙因为勇猛而被请到堂上。
English: Zhu Hai was respected and invited to sit in the front seat, and Zou was invited to the hall because of his bravery.

古文：朝闻夕死，公孙终败于邑中；宁我负人，曹操岂兼于天下。
现代文：主张早上知道了理，晚上死也无憾的公孙终败于邑中。信奉宁教我负天下人，不教天下人负我的曹操，怎么能够兼并天下？
English: Gongsun, who claimed to have known the truth in the morning and died without regret in the evening, was eventually defeated in the middle of the town. Believing in Cao Cao, who would rather teach me to defeat the people of the world than teach the people of the world to defeat me, how could he annex the world?

古文：是忘辇千金之贶，陈一饭之恩，有感谢之人，无怀归之众。
现代文：是忘了人家千金之赠，想一饭之恩，才有感谢之人，无怀归之众。
English: Is to forget the gift of thousands of people, think of a meal of grace, only those who are grateful, no one to return.

古文：且鲁史之诫曰度德，连山之文曰待时。
现代文：鲁史告诫说，要衡量自己的德行和能力，连山的文章提倡要等待时机。
English: Lu Shi cautioned that it is necessary to measure one's own virtue and ability, and Lianshan's article advocated waiting for the right time.

古文：尚欲谋于人，不能惠于己。
现代文：为别人谋划造反，而对自己又没有什么好处。
English: He plots rebellion for others, but has nothing to gain for himself.

古文：天人厌乱，历数有归。
现代文：上天和百姓都反对战乱，朝代的更换是有规律的。
English: Both heaven and the people are opposed to war, and dynasties change regularly.

古文：时雨降而袄蕣除，太阳升而层冰释。引绳缚虎，难希飞兔之门，赴水持瓶，岂是安生之地？
现代文：就像天降大雨清除妖邪之气，太阳出来融化坚冰一样，拿着绳子去缚虎，不要希望会像绑兔子一样获得成功，拿着瓶子进入水中，怎么会是安全的地方。
English: Just as the rain falls from the sky to clear the evil spirits and the sun comes out to melt the hard ice, take the rope to tie the tiger, do not hope to succeed like tying a rabbit, take the bottle into the water, how can it be a safe place.

古文：吾尝望气汾晋，有圣人生。
现代文：我曾经观察发现在汾晋一带，会有圣贤出现。
English: I once observed that in the vicinity of Bijin, sages would appear.

古文：能往事之，富贵可取。
现代文：如果你能去投靠效力，可以取得富贵。
English: If you can rely on efficiency, you can get rich.

古文：李公拂衣而言曰：隋氏以弑杀取天下，吾家以勋德居人表。振臂一呼，众必响应。提兵时伐，何往不下。
现代文：李密提着衣服说：隋炀帝杀死父亲而取得天下，我以德行作人们的表率，振臂一呼，百姓必然响应，带兵征伐，有什么攻不下的城池。
English: Li Miti said, holding up his clothes: Sui and Qian killed my father and took over the world. I set an example for people by virtue of my actions. The people will inevitably respond by raising their arms and leading soldiers to conquer. What city is impregnable?

古文：道行可以取四海，不行亦足王一方。
现代文：成功了得到江山，不成功也可以割据一方称王。
English: If you succeed, you win the country. If you fail, you can be crowned king.

古文：因寓怀赋诗，为乡吏发觉，李公脱身西走，所在收兵。
现代文：委屈地呆在这里，实在无法忍受，你真是个书呆子，不足以共同商量大事。
English: It's unbearable to stay here feeling aggrieved. You're too much of a nerd to discuss big things together.

古文：北依黎阳，而南据洛口，连营百万，与王充争衡，首尾三年，终见败覆。
现代文：从此李密和魏先生断绝了来往。因为他在住所的墙上题诗，被乡里的官员发现，李密向西逃走。他招兵买马，北靠黎阳，南据洛口，修建了无数的营寨。他与王允作战，前后一共打了三年，终于失败。
English: From then on, Li Mi and Mr. Wei broke off contact. Because he inscribed a poem on the wall of his residence and was found by the officials in the village, Li Mi fled to the west. He recruited soldiers and horses, built countless camps north of Liyang and south of Lokou. He fought with Wang Yun for a total of three years before and after, and finally failed.

古文：追思魏生之言，即日遂归于唐。乃授司农之官。后复桃林之叛。
现代文：这时他想起魏先生的话，便归顺了唐朝，被封为司农，后来他又在桃林发动叛乱。
English: At this time, he remembered Mr. Wei's words, so he submitted to the Tang Dynasty, was named a farmer, and later he launched a rebellion in Taolin.

古文：魏生得道之士，不志其名，盖文真之宗亲也。
现代文：魏先生是个有高深学问和修养的人，没有记录他的名字和所作所为，他其实是魏徵的本家。
English: Mr. Wei is a highly educated and cultivated person. His name and deeds are not recorded. He is actually Wei Zheng's own family.

古文：李义琛
现代文：李义琛
English: Lee Eui-yong

古文：太宗朝，文成公主自吐蕃贡金数百，至岐州遇盗。
现代文：唐太宗时，文成公主从西藏向皇帝进贡黄金数百万两，押运到岐州被盗贼劫去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, Princess Wencheng paid a tribute of several million taels of gold from Tibet to the emperor. She was escorted to Qizhou, where she was kidnapped by thieves.

古文：前后发使案问，无获贼者。
现代文：先后派了几名官员，专程去进行调查，都没有抓住盗贼。
English: Several officials were sent to investigate, but the thieves were never caught.

古文：太宗召诸御史目之，特命李义琛前曰：卿神清俊拔，暂劳卿推逐，必当获贼。
现代文：太宗皇帝将各位御史召集到一起进行挑选，特意把李义琛叫到跟前说：你的神采气概俊秀出众，暂时有劳你去进行调查，一定能够将盗贼抓获。
English: Emperor Taizong called all the emperors together to make a selection, and specifically called Li Yixuan to his side and said: Your spirit is outstanding, you are handsome, you are temporarily busy with the investigation, and you will definitely be able to catch the thief.

古文：琛受命，施以密计，数日尽获贼矣。
现代文：李义琛接受命令以后，实施了巧妙的计策，数日之后将盗贼一网打尽。
English: After receiving the order, Li Yixuan implemented a clever strategy, and after a few days, the thieves were completely defeated.

古文：太宗喜，特加七阶，锡金二十两。
现代文：太宗皇帝很高兴，特意将李义琛的官阶提升了七级，并赏赐给他二十两金子。
English: Emperor Taizong was so pleased that he specially raised Li Yixuan's official rank by seven levels and awarded him 22 gold coins.

古文：蒋恒
现代文：蒋恒
English: Jiang Heng

古文：贞观中，卫州板桥店主张迪妻归宁。
现代文：唐朝贞观年间。卫州板桥旅店的店主张迪的妻子回娘家了。
English: During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, the owner of the Weizhou Banqiao Hotel suggested that Di's wife return to her daughter's home.

古文：有卫州三卫杨真等三人投宿，五更早发。
现代文：晚上有卫州城负责警卫工作的杨真等三名卫士前来住宿，五更天又早早出发了。
English: In the evening, three guards from Weizhou City, including Yang Zhen, who was in charge of guard work, came to stay, and five days later, they left early.

古文：夜有人取三卫刀杀张迪，其刀却内鞘中，真等不之知。
现代文：夜里有人拿他们的刀把店主张迪杀了，然后又把刀放回刀鞘中，杨真等三人一点都没察觉。
English: At night, someone took their knife and killed the shop owner, and then put the knife back in the sheath. Yang Zhen and the other three did not notice at all.

古文：至明，店人追真等，视乃有血痕，囚禁拷讯。
现代文：天亮以后，旅店里的人追上杨真三人，检查他们的刀上有血迹，便把他们三人抓起来拷打审讯。
English: After dawn, the people in the hotel caught up with the three Yang Zhen, checked their knives for bloodstains, and arrested the three of them for torture and interrogation.

古文：真等苦毒，遂自诬。
现代文：他们三人经受不住严酷的折磨，只好诬陷自己杀了人。
English: The three of them could not stand the severe torture, so they had to frame themselves for the murder.

古文：上疑之，差御史蒋恒覆推。
现代文：皇帝对这个案件产生了怀疑，派御史蒋恒重新进行审理。
English: The emperor had doubts about the case and sent the imperial historian Jiang Heng to re-examine the case.

古文：至，总追店人十五已上集。为人不足，且散。惟留一老婆年八十已上，晚放出。
现代文：蒋恒到了以后，店内十五个人已经赶集去了，剩下的人不够，并且已经分散，只留下一个八十多岁的老太太在店里。
English: After Jiang Heng arrived, the fifteen people in the store had already gone to the market. The remaining people were not enough and had dispersed, leaving only an octogenarian old lady in the store.

古文：令狱典密觇之。
现代文：蒋恒命令傍晚将老太太放出去，派办案人员在后面跟踪观察。
English: Jiang Heng ordered the old lady to be let out in the evening, and sent case officers to follow and observe her.

古文：曰：婆出，当有一人与婆语者，即记取姓名，勿令漏泄。
现代文：蒋恒说：老太太一出去，一定有一个人同老太太说话，你要调查记住这个人的姓名，不要走漏消息。
English: Jiang Heng said: As soon as the old lady went out, there must be a person talking to the old lady. You should investigate and remember the name of this person, and do not leak the news.

古文：果有一人共语，即记之。
现代文：果然有一个人同老太太说话，办案人员查明并记了他的姓名。
English: A man did indeed speak to the elderly woman, and the officers identified him and took down his name.

古文：明日复尔，其人又问婆：使人作何推勘。
现代文：第二天老太太出去，这个人又问老太太，朝廷派来的官员怎样调查这个案件。
English: The next day when the old lady went out, the man again asked the old lady how the official sent by the court would investigate the case.

古文：如是者三日，并是此人。恒总追集男女三百余人。就中唤与老婆语者一人出，余并放散。
现代文：连续三天，都是这个人，蒋恒召集了男女三百多人，从中把与老太太说话的那个人叫了出来，其余的人全都遣散。
English: For three days in a row, it was this man. Jiang Heng gathered more than three hundred men and women, and called out the one who spoke to the old lady, and the rest were all dismissed.

古文：问之具伏。云：与迪妻奸杀有实。
现代文：经过审问，这个人全都招供了，承认他与张迪的妻子通奸，所以把张迪杀了。
English: After being interrogated, this person confessed everything, admitting that he had committed adultery with Zhang Di's wife, so he killed Zhang Di.

古文：奏之，敕赐帛二百段，除侍御史。
现代文：蒋恒将审理结果上报，皇帝赏赐他丝织物二百段，并且提拔他为侍御史。
English: Jiang Heng reported the results of the trial, and the emperor rewarded him with two hundred pieces of silk fabric and promoted him to the rank of attendant historian.

古文：王璥
现代文：王璥
English: Wang Yao

古文：贞观中，左丞李行廉。弟行诠，前妻子忠，璥其后母，遂私将潜藏。云敕追入内，行廉不知，乃进状。
现代文：贞观年间，左丞相李行廉的弟弟李行诠的儿子李忠同继母通奸，将继母偷偷藏了起来，然后谎称他的继母被皇帝叫进宫去了。
English: During the Zhenguan era, Li Zhong, the son of Li Xinglian, the younger brother of the Minister of the Left, Li Xinglian, committed adultery with his stepmother, secretly hid his stepmother, and then falsely claimed that his stepmother was called into the palace by the emperor.

古文：奉敕推诘峻急，其后母诈以领中勒项，卧街中。
现代文：李行廉不知道事情的真相，便向皇帝反映了这件事。
English: Li Xinglian did not know the truth of the matter and reported it to the emperor.

古文：长安县诘之，云：有人诈宣敕唤去，一紫袍人见留数宿，不知姓名，勒项送置街中。
现代文：长安县在皇帝的命令下追查得很急。李忠的继母假装被人用披巾勒住了脖子，躺在大街中间，长安县的办案人员询问她，她说有人假传皇帝的命令将她骗去，有一个穿紫衣服不知姓名的人留她住了几宿，又把她的脖子勒上，送到大街上。
English: Li Zhong's stepmother pretended to be strangled with a shawl around her neck and lay in the middle of the street. Chang'an County investigators questioned her. She said that someone had faked the emperor's order to deceive her. An unknown person in purple clothes kept her for a few nights, and then strangled her and sent her to the street.

古文：忠惶恐，私就卜问，被不良人疑之，执送县。
现代文：李忠心中惊慌，偷偷地去算卦，被官府的侦探发现，产生了怀疑，将他送到长安县衙门。
English: Li Zhong panicked in his heart, secretly went to calculate, was discovered by the government's detectives, became suspicious, and sent him to Lvmen, Chang'an County.

古文：县尉王璥引就房内，推问不承。
现代文：县尉王璥将他叫到屋里审问，他什么也没承认。
English: County Lieutenant Wang Qi called him into the room for interrogation, but he did not admit anything.

古文：璥先令一人伏案褥下听之，令一人报云；长使唤，璥锁房门而去。
现代文：王璥事先叫一个人藏在床底下偷听，又安排另一个人来说：长使叫您。王璥锁上门走了。
English: In advance, Wang Yao told one person to hide under the bed and eavesdrop, and arranged for another person to say: "The chief envoy is calling for you." Wang Yao locked the door and left.

古文：子母相谓曰：必不得承。
现代文：李忠和他的继母互相约定说：千万不能承认。
English: Li Zhong and his stepmother mutually agreed that they must not admit it.

古文：并私密之语。
现代文：并且秘密商量对策。
English: And secretly discuss countermeasures.

古文：璥至开门，案下人亦起。
现代文：王璥回来打开门，床底下的人也出来了。
English: Wang Yao came back and opened the door. The person under the bed also came out.

古文：母子大惊。并具承，伏法。
现代文：李忠和他的继母大吃一惊，只好全都招认，受到了法律的制裁。
English: Li Zhong and his stepmother were so shocked that they all confessed and were punished by the law.

古文：李杰
现代文：李杰
English: Li Jie

古文：李杰为河南尹。有寡妇告其子不孝。
现代文：李杰担任河南尹，有个寡妇告状说她的儿子不孝顺。
English: Li Jie served as Henan Yin, a widow complained that her son was not filial.

古文：其子不能自理，但云。得罪于母，死所甘分。
现代文：她的儿子不辩解，只是说：得罪了母亲，甘愿一死。
English: Her son did not defend himself, but only said that he had offended his mother and was willing to die.

古文：杰察其状，非不孝子。
现代文：观察他不是个不孝顺的儿子，对寡妇说：你守寡，只有这一个儿子。
English: Seeing that he was not a disobedient son, he said to the widow, "Behold, you are a widow with an only son.

古文：谓寡妇曰：汝寡居，唯有一子，今告之，罪至死，得无悔乎？寡妇曰：子无赖，不顺母，宁复惜乎？
现代文：今天告他，他罪该处死，你不会后悔吗？寡妇说：儿子是个无赖，不顺从母亲，有什么可怜惜的！
English: If you were to accuse him today of a crime punishable by death, wouldn't you regret it? The widow said, "My son is a scoundrel, he doesn't obey his mother, what's there to be sorry about!"

古文：杰曰：审如此，可买棺木，来取儿尸。
现代文：李杰说：既然如此，你可以去买棺材，来收取你儿子的尸体。
English: Li Jie said: In that case, you can go and buy a coffin to collect your son's body.

古文：因使人觇其后。
现代文：然后派人偷偷地跟在她的后面。
English: Then he sent someone to sneak up behind her.

古文：寡妇既出，谓一道士曰：事了矣。
现代文：寡妇出去以后对一个道士说：事情办完了。
English: After the widow went out, she said to a Taoist priest: "It's done.

古文：俄持棺至，杰尚冀有悔，再三喻之，寡妇执意如初。
现代文：一会儿，寡妇买来棺材。李杰还希望她能回心转意，再三询问她，寡妇还是坚持原来的意见。
English: After a while, the widow bought a coffin. Li Jie also hoped that she would change her mind and repeatedly asked her if the widow still insisted on her original opinion.

古文：道士立于门外，密令擒之。
现代文：道士站在门外，李杰秘密派人将他抓来，一经审问，他全都承认了。
English: The Taoist priest stood outside the door, and Li Jie secretly sent someone to arrest him. After being interrogated, he confessed everything.

古文：一讯承伏，与寡妇私通，常为儿所制，故欲除之。
现代文：原来是道士和寡妇通奸，经常被她的儿子所制止，所以想要除掉她的儿子。
English: It turned out that the priest had committed adultery with the widow, and was often stopped by her son, so he wanted to get rid of her son.

古文：杰放其子，杖杀道士及寡妇，便同棺盛之。
现代文：李杰释放了寡妇的儿子，将道士和寡妇用棍子打死，一同装到了寡妇买来的棺材里。
English: Li Jie released the widow's son, beat the Taoist priest and the widow to death with a stick, and put them together in a coffin bought by the widow.

古文：裴子云
现代文：裴子云
English: Pei Ziyun

古文：卫州新乡县令裴子云好奇策。
现代文：卫州新乡县令裴子云擅长制订奇妙的计策。
English: Pei Ziyun, the governor of Weizhou Xinxiang County, is good at devising wonderful strategies.

古文：部人王敬戍边，留牸牛六头于舅李进处。
现代文：他所管辖地区的老百姓王敬当兵去守卫边疆，留下六头母牛寄养在舅舅李进家中。
English: Wang Jing, a commoner from the area under his jurisdiction, went to guard the border as a soldier, leaving six cows to be fostered at his uncle Li Jinlu's home.

古文：养五年，产犊三十头。
现代文：李进养牛五年，生下了三十头牛犊，每一头都价值十贯钱以上。
English: Li Jin has been raising cattle for five years and has given birth to thirty calves, each of which is worth more than ten yuan.

古文：例十贯已上，敬还索牛。
现代文：王敬回来以后，要求李进归还牛。
English: After Wang Jing returned, he asked Li Jin to return the cow.

古文：两头已死，只还四头老牛，余并非汝牛生，总不肯还。
现代文：那六头母牛已经死了两头，李进只将剩下的四头老牛还给他，说剩下的牛不是他的牛所生的，总也不肯还给他。
English: Two of the six cows had already died, and Li Jin Rong only returned the remaining four old cows to him, saying that the remaining cows were not born from his cows, and he would never give them back to him.

古文：敬忿之，投县陈牒。子云令送敬付狱禁，叫追盗牛贼李进。
现代文：王敬气愤地到县衙告状，裴子云命令将王敬关押起来，并派人去传盗牛贼李进。
English: Wang Jing angrily filed a complaint with the county magistrate. Pei Ziyun ordered Wang Jing to be detained and sent someone to summon the cattle thief Li Jin.

古文：进急，乃吐疑云：三十头牛，总是外甥牸牛所生，实非盗得。
现代文：李进既惊慌又害怕地来到县衙。裴子云训斥他说：盗贼带着你共同偷了三十头牛，藏在你们家里。然后让他站在南墙根，将他的脑袋用布衫包上，再和盗贼对质。
English: Panicked and afraid, Li Jin went to the county magistrate. Pei Ziyun scolded him: "The thief took you along to steal thirty cows and hid them in your home. Then let him stand at the south wall, wrap his head in a cloth shirt, and then confront the thief.

古文：云遣去布衫，进见是敬曰，此是外甥也。
现代文：李进着急地说：三十头牛都是外甥的母牛所生的，实在不是偷来的。
English: Li Jin said anxiously, "The thirty cows were all born from my nephew's cows, they really weren't stolen.

古文：云曰：若是，即还他牛。
现代文：裴子云说：如果是，立即还给他牛。
English: Pei Ziyun said: If so, immediately return the cow to him.

古文：进默然。
现代文：李进不说话了，裴子云说：养牛五年辛苦。
English: Li Jin stopped talking, and Pei Ziyun said, "Raising cattle for five years is hard work.

古文：云曰：五年养牛辛苦，与数头，余并还敬。一县服其精察。
现代文：给你留下几头，其它的全都还给王敬。全县的人都佩服裴子云的案子断得明白。
English: I'll leave a few heads for you, and the rest will all be returned to Wang Jing. People all over the county admire Pei Ziyun's case, which is completely understandable.

古文：郭正一
现代文：郭正一
English: Guo Zhengyi

古文：中书舍人郭正一破平壤，得一高丽婢，名玉素，极姝艳，令专知财物库。
现代文：中书舍人郭正一在朝廷的军队攻破平壤以后，得到了一名朝鲜婢女，名字叫玉素，长得异常美丽，郭正一叫她管理财物仓库。
English: After the imperial army broke through Pyongyang, Guo Zhengyi, a Chinese scholar, received a Korean maid, named Yusu, who was unusually beautiful. Guo Zhengyi asked her to manage the property warehouse.

古文：正一夜须浆水粥，非玉素煮之不可。玉素乃毒之而进。正一急曰：此婢药我！
现代文：郭正一每天晚上要喝一碗粥，不是玉素煮的他不吃，玉素便在粥里放了毒药以后送给他，郭正一喝了粥以后有所察觉，着急地大喊：这个婢女想药死我！
English: Guo Zhengyi wanted to drink a bowl of porridge every night, but he wouldn't eat anything that wasn't made with yakitori. Yakitori then put poison in the porridge and gave it to him. After drinking the porridge, Guo Zhengyi became aware of something and urgently shouted: "This maid is trying to kill me with medicine!"

古文：索土浆甘草服之，良久乃解。
现代文：然后要来解毒的药物土浆和甘草服下。过了好长时间才把毒性解了。
English: Then I took the detoxifying medicine, mud and licorice, and it took a long time to get rid of the toxicity.

古文：觅婢不得，并失金银器物余十事。
现代文：这时再寻找婢女玉素已经不见了，并且丢失了十多件金银器物。将这件事上报以后，皇帝命令长安万年县捉拿。
English: At this time, he was looking for his maid, Gyokusu, who had disappeared and lost more than ten pieces of gold and silverware. After reporting the incident, the emperor ordered Chang'an County to arrest her.

古文：录奏，敕令长安万年捉，不良脊烂，求贼鼎沸，三日不获。
现代文：结果兴师动众，将刑侦人员的脊背都用鞭子打烂了，过了三天也没有抓到。
English: As a result, Xing Shi rallied the crowd and beat the backs of the investigators with a whip, and they were not caught for three days.

古文：不良主帅魏昶有策略，取舍人家奴，选年少端正者三人，布衫笼头至街。
现代文：刑事侦察人员的主帅魏昶有了新的办法，他在郭正一的奴仆中挑选出三个长得比较端正的，用布口袋把他们的脑袋罩上之后带到大街上。
English: Wei Wei, the head of the criminal investigation officers, had a new method. He selected three of Guo Zhengyi's servants who were relatively well-groomed, covered their heads with cloth bags and took them to the street.

古文：缚卫士四人，问十日内已来，何人觅舍人家。
现代文：又抓了四个站岗的士兵，问他们在这十天以内，有什么人寻找过郭正一家。
English: They also arrested four soldiers who were standing guard and asked them if anyone had searched for the Guo Zheng family in the past ten days.

古文：卫士云：有投化高丽留书，遣付舍人捉马奴。
现代文：士兵说：有一个投降归顺的朝鲜人留下一封书信。派人到郭正一家把养马的奴仆抓住，搜出那封信。
English: The soldier said, "A North Korean who surrendered and surrendered left a letter. Send someone to the Guo Zheng family to catch the horse-breeding servant and find the letter."

古文：书见在。检云：金城坊中有一空宅，更无语。
现代文：打开后见上面写着：金城胡同里有一所空宅院。
English: After opening it, you will see the following written on it: There is an empty house in Jincheng Hutong.

古文：不良往金城坊空宅，并搜之。
现代文：再没有别的话，办案人员前往金城胡同搜查空宅院。
English: If nothing else, the investigators went to the Jincheng alley to search the empty house.

古文：至一宅，封锁甚密。打锁破开之，婢及高丽并在其中。
现代文：来到一所宅院前，看见院门锁得很严密，他们将门锁砸开以后进去，婢女玉素和那个朝鲜人都在里面。
English: When they came to a courtyard, they saw that the courtyard door was tightly locked. After they broke the lock, they went inside. Their maid, Yusu, and the North Korean man were both inside.

古文：拷问，乃是投化高丽共捉马奴藏之。
现代文：经过拷问得知，女婢玉素是那个朝鲜人和养马人共同隐藏的。
English: After being interrogated, it was learned that the maidservant Gyokusu was hidden by the North Korean man and the horse breeder.

古文：奉敕斩于东市。
现代文：奉皇帝的命令，将他三人押到东市杀了。
English: On the emperor's orders, the three of them drove him to Dongshi and killed him.

古文：张楚金
现代文：张楚金
English: Zhang Chukin

古文：垂拱年，则天监国，罗织事起。
现代文：唐朝垂拱年间，武则天代行处理国政，兴起了一股编造罪名陷害别人的风气。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Wu Zetian handled state affairs on behalf of the emperor, a culture of fabricating charges to frame others arose.

古文：湖州佐史江琛取刺史裴光判书，割字合成文理，诈为徐敬业反书以告。
现代文：湖州佐史江琛，剪下刺史裴光书写的公文上的字，拼凑成了表达新的意思的文章，伪装成同徐敬业一起谋反的书信向朝廷告状。
English: Huzhou Sashi Jiangjun cut out the words on the official document written by the assassin Shi Peiguang and pieced together an article expressing a new meaning, disguised as a letter of rebellion with Xu Jingye to complain to the court.

古文：差使推光，款书是光书，疑语非光语。
现代文：朝廷派官员调查裴光，认为落款签名是裴光写的，但怀疑内容不像是裴光说的话。
English: The court sent officials to investigate Baiguang, believing that the signature was written by Baiguang, but suspected that the content did not seem to be what Baiguang said.

古文：前后三使推，不能决。
现代文：前后派了三名官名，都没有把这个案件审理清楚。
English: Three officials were sent back and forth, but none of them were able to clear up the case.

古文：敕令差能推事人，勘当取实。
现代文：武则天决定派一名擅于推理判断，一定能调查清楚的官员。
English: Wu Zetian decided to send an official who was good at reasoning and judgment and would be able to investigate clearly.

古文：佥曰：张楚金可，乃使之。楚金忧闷，仰卧西窗。日到，向看之，字似。补作平看则不觉，向日则见之。
现代文：太阳照了过来，他拿着那封伪造的书信对着阳光观看，发觉字和字之间有破绽，放平了则看不见，对着太阳则能看见。
English: The sun shone down, and he held the forged letter and looked at it in the sun. He noticed that there was a gap between the letters. When it was flattened, he couldn't see it, but when it was facing the sun, he could.

古文：令唤州官集，索一瓮水，令琛投书于水中，字一一解散。
现代文：于是他将州府的官员召集到一起，让人拿来一盆水，命令江深把信扔到水里，信上的文字一个个分散开来。
English: So he called together officials from the state capital, had them fetch a basin of water, and ordered Jiang Sheng to throw the letter into the water, scattering the letters one by one.

古文：琛叩头伏罪。敕令决一百，然后斩之。赏楚金绢百匹。
现代文：江琛磕头承认了罪行，武则天命令打江琛一百大板，然后将他杀了，赏赐给张楚金一百匹绢。
English: Jiang Shantou confessed to the crime, and Wu Zetian ordered that Jiang Shantou be beaten with a hundred large boards, and then killed him, and rewarded Zhang Chujin with a hundred yaks.

古文：董行成
现代文：董行成
English: Dong Xicheng

古文：怀州河内县董行成能策贼。
现代文：怀州河内县的董行成能够看出谁是盗贼。
English: Dong Xingcheng, of Hanoi County, Huizhou, can tell who the thieves are.

古文：有一人从河阳长店，盗行人驴一头并皮袋。
现代文：有一个人在河阳老店，偷了一位旅客的驴和皮口袋。
English: A man stole a donkey and a leather bag from a traveler at the old store in Heyang.

古文：天欲晓，至怀州。
现代文：天快亮时，跑到怀州。
English: When it was nearly dawn, he ran to Huai Zhou.

古文：行成至街中见之，叱曰：个贼住！
现代文：董行成在街上看见了，喊到：盗贼站住！
English: Dong Xingcheng saw it on the street and shouted: "Stop thief!

古文：即下驴来，遂承伏。
现代文：盗贼下了驴，承认了偷驴的罪行。
English: The thief dismounted and confessed to stealing the donkey.

古文：捉送县。有顷，驴主寻踪至，皆如其言。
现代文：董行成将盗贼送到县衙，不一会儿，驴的主人顺着踪迹找来了，实际情况和董行成说的一样。
English: Dong Xingcheng sent the thief to the county magistrate's office, and after a while, the donkey's owner followed the trail and found him. The actual situation was the same as what Dong Xingcheng said.

古文：张鷟
现代文：张鷟
English: Zhang Ye

古文：张鷟为河阳县尉日，有构架人吕元伪作仓督冯忱书，盗粜仓栗。
现代文：张鷟当河阳县尉的时候，有一个陷害别人的人叫吕元，他伪造了一份仓督冯忱的文字材料，诬陷冯忱盗卖仓库的粮食。
English: When Zhang Qian was a lieutenant of Heyang County, there was a person named Lyu Yuan who set up others. He forged a copy of warehouse supervisor Feng Zhen's written materials and framed Feng Zhen for stealing and selling grain from the warehouse.

古文：忱不认书，元乃坚执，不能定。
现代文：冯忱不承认是自己写的，而吕元是坚持说是冯忱写的，一时无法判定。
English: Feng Zhen did not admit that he wrote it himself, while Lü Yuan insisted that it was written by Feng Zhen. For a moment, it was impossible to judge.

古文：鷟取吕元告牒，括两头，唯留一字，问：是汝书，即注是字，不是，即注非字。
现代文：张鷟取来吕元写的状子，压住两头，只露出来一个字，问吕元说：如果是你写的字，你就注上一个是字，如果不是，就注上一个非字。
English: Zhang Xuan took the letter written by Lyu Yuan, pressed the two ends, only revealed one word, and asked Lyu Yuan: "If it is a letter written by you, you should mark one as a word, if not, you should mark one as a non-word."

古文：元乃注曰非。去括，即是元牒，且决五下。
现代文：吕元注了一个非字，打开一看正是吕元写的状子，一连判断了五次。
English: Lyu Yuan annotated a non-word, opened it and saw that it was written by Lyu Yuan, and judged it five times in a row.

古文：又括诈冯忱书上一字，以问之，注曰是。
现代文：张鷟又压上伪造的冯忱的文字材料，仅留下一个字，又问吕元，吕元注了一个是字。
English: Zhang Yao also pressed the forged Feng Zhen's writing materials, leaving only one word, and asked Lv Yuan, Lv Yuan noted one is a word.

古文：去括，乃诈书也。元连项赤，叩头伏罪。
现代文：打开一看，正是伪造的文字材料，吕元连脖子都红了，磕头承认了罪行。
English: When he opened it, it was the forged writing materials. Lyu Yuan's neck turned red, and Shantou confessed to the crime.

古文：又有一客，驴缰断，并鞍失，三日访不获，告县。
现代文：还有一次，一个旅客的驴的缰绳断了，驴和鞍子一块丢了。这个人自己找了三天没找到，报告了县衙。
English: On another occasion, a traveller's donkey's bridle broke and the donkey and saddle were lost. The traveller searched for three days and reported the incident to the county magistrate.

古文：鷟推勘急。夜放驴出，而藏其鞍，可直五千钱。
现代文：张鷟追查的很紧迫，偷驴的人在晚上把驴放了出来，而将鞍子留下藏了起来，因为鞍子价值五千文钱。
English: Zhang Qian's investigation is very urgent. The person who stole the donkey let the donkey out at night, but left the saddle behind and hid it, because the saddle is worth five thousand yuan.

古文：鷟曰：此可知也。
现代文：张鷟说：有驴就能找到鞍子。
English: Zhang Ye said, "If you have a donkey, you can find a saddle."

古文：令将却笼头放之，驴向旧喂处。
现代文：命令将驴的笼头摘下来放掉，驴自动走向喂它的地方。
English: He ordered the donkey's cage to be taken down and let it go, and the donkey automatically went to the place where it was being fed.

古文：鷟令搜其家，其鞍于草积下得之。
现代文：张鷟命令搜查这户人家，从草垛底下找到了鞍子。
English: Zhang Ye ordered a search of the house, and a saddle was found under the grass.

古文：人伏其能。
现代文：人们都佩服张鷟的才能。
English: People admire Zhang Ye's talent.

古文：张松寿
现代文：张松寿
English: Zhang Songju

古文：张松寿为长安令，时昆明池侧有劫杀。
现代文：张松寿提任长安县令，昆明池旁发生了抢劫杀人案。
English: Zhang Songshou was appointed as the magistrate of Chang'an County, and a robbery and murder case occurred next to Kunming Lake.

古文：奉敕，日内须获贼，如违，所由科罪。
现代文：张松寿接到命令，必须在限期内抓获罪犯，否则，有关人员治罪。
English: Zhang Songshou received an order that the criminal must be caught within the time limit, otherwise, the relevant personnel will be punished.

古文：寿至行劫处，寻踪绪。
现代文：张松寿来到案发地点。寻找线索。
English: Zhang Songshou came to the scene of the crime, looking for clues.

古文：见一老婆于树下卖食。
现代文：他看见附近树下有一个老太太在树下卖食品。
English: He saw an old lady selling food under a tree nearby.

古文：至，以从骑驮来入县，供以酒食。
现代文：张松寿叫随行人员用马将老太太驮到县衙，好酒好菜侍候。
English: Zhang Songshou asked his entourage to escort the old lady to the county seat by horse, and served good wine and food.

古文：经三日，还以马送旧坐处。
现代文：过了三天，又用马送回原来的地方。
English: After three days, they sent the horses back to the original place.

古文：令一腹心人看，有人共婆语，即捉来。
现代文：张松寿派了一名心腹人员，前去观察。如果发现有人和老太太说话，立即抓回来。
English: Zhang Songshou sent a confidant to observe. If anyone was found talking to the old lady, they would be immediately arrested.

古文：须臾，一人来问：明府若为推逐？
现代文：过了一会，有一个人过来问老太太：县令怎样判断这个案子？
English: After a while, someone came and asked the old lady: How does the county judge this case?

古文：即被布衫笼头，送县。
现代文：立即被抓住，用布衫罩上脑袋送到县衙。
English: He was immediately caught and sent to the county magistrate with his head covered with a cloth.

古文：一问具承，并赃并获。
现代文：一经审问，这个人全都承了，人赃并获。
English: After interrogation, the man confessed to everything and was arrested.

古文：时人以为神明。
现代文：人们都认为张松寿像神仙一样明察善断。
English: People all think that Zhang Songshou is as perceptive and decisive as a god.

古文：苏无名
现代文：苏无名
English: So nameless

古文：天后时，赏赐太平公主细器宝物两食合，所直黄金千镒。
现代文：天后武则天代行处理朝政的时候，赏赐太平公主金银珠宝整整装满了两个盛食物的盒子，价值黄金几万两。
English: When Emperor Tenko, acting on behalf of Emperor Wuzetian, dealt with the affairs of the Imperial Court, he rewarded Princess Taiping with gold, silver, and jewels. Two boxes full of food, worth tens of thousands of taels of gold, were given to her.

古文：公主纳之藏中，岁余取之，尽为盗所将矣。
现代文：太平公主收藏起来，一年以后再去取，全部被盗贼偷走了。
English: Taiping Princess collected them and went to retrieve them a year later, but they were all stolen by thieves.

古文：公主言之，天后大怒。召洛州长史谓曰：三日不得盗，罪。
现代文：太平公主报告了武则天，武则天十分生气，把洛州的长史找来说：三天之内，抓不住盗贼，就将你治罪。
English: Princess Taiping reported to Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian was very angry and told her the long history of Loshou: If you can't catch the thief within three days, you will be punished.

古文：长史惧，谓两县主盗官曰：两日不得贼，死。
现代文：长史很害怕，对所管辖两个县主管侦破刑事案的官员县尉说：两天之内抓不住盗贼，就把你们处死。
English: Changshi was very afraid, and said to the county lieutenant, who was in charge of the criminal investigation of the two counties under his jurisdiction: If you can't catch the thief within two days, you will be put to death.

古文：尉谓吏卒游徼曰：一日必擒之，擒不得，先死。
现代文：县尉对手下的刑事侦察人员说：一天之内就必须抓住盗贼，抓不到，先处死你们。
English: The county lieutenant said to his criminal investigators: "We must catch the thieves within one day. If we can't, we'll execute you first."

古文：吏卒游徼惧，计无所出。
现代文：衙役和侦探都很害怕，但是找不到破案的办法。
English: The bailiff and the detective are scared, but can't find a way to solve the case.

古文：衢中遇湖州别驾苏无名，相与请之至县。
现代文：他们在街上遇到了湖州别驾苏无名，大家把他请到县衙。
English: They met a nameless Huzhou bailiff named Su in the street, and everyone invited him to the county government.

古文：游徼白尉：得盗物者来矣。
现代文：侦探对县尉说：找来偷东西的盗贼了。
English: The detective said to the prefectural lieutenant, "The thief who came to steal things has been found.

古文：无名遽进至阶，尉迎问故。无名曰：吾湖州别驾也。入计在兹。
现代文：苏无名快步走到台阶下，县尉迎上问这是怎么回事，苏无名说：我是湖州别驾，同他们在这里商量计策。
English: Su Muzhong walked briskly to the bottom of the steps. The county lieutenant greeted him and asked what was going on. Su Muzhong said, "I'm from Huzhou, and I'm here to discuss strategies with them."

古文：尉呼吏卒，何诬辱别驾？
现代文：县尉训斥手下人说：为什么诬蔑别驾？
English: The county lieutenant reprimanded his subordinates, saying: "Why do you resort to slander?

古文：无名笑曰：君无怒吏卒，抑有由也。
现代文：苏无名笑着说：您不要怪罪他们，他们也是有原因的。
English: "Don't blame them, they also have their reasons," Su said with a smile.

古文：无名历官所在，擒奸擿伏有名。
现代文：我当官经历的地方，擒贼破案很有名。
English: In the places where I have worked as a police officer, it is very common for thieves to solve crimes.

古文：每偷，至无名前，无得过者。
现代文：只要是小偷，在我面前没有能逃过去的。
English: If you are a thief, you cannot get away from me.

古文：此辈应先闻，故将来，庶解围耳。尉喜，请其方。
现代文：他们也有耳闻，所以把我请来。县尉很高兴，向他请教破案的方法。
English: They had also heard about it, so they invited me. The prefectural lieutenant was very happy and asked him for advice on how to solve the case.

古文：无名曰：与君至府，君可先入白之。
现代文：苏无名说：我和你去州府，你可以先进去说明。
English: "I'll go with you to the prefectural government, you can go first to explain.

古文：尉白其故，长史大悦。降阶执其手曰：今日遇公，却赐吾命，请遂其由。
现代文：县尉同长史讲述了苏无名的情况，长使非常高兴，走下台阶握着苏无名的手说：今天遇到您，就等于赏赐给我一条性命，请您讲一下我们应该怎么办？
English: The county lieutenant and Changshi recounted the circumstances of Su's namelessness. The chief envoy was very happy, walked down the steps holding Su's nameless hand and said: "Meeting you today is tantamount to awarding me a life, please tell us what we should do?"

古文：无名曰：请与君求见对玉阶，乃言之。
现代文：苏无名说：请你和我去求见天后，那时我将说明白。
English: Su said anonymously, "Please let me and you go to see the Queen of Heaven, and then I will explain."

古文：于是天后召之，谓曰：卿得贼乎？
现代文：于是他们请示以后受到了武则天的召见。武则天问：你抓到盗贼了吗？
English: So, after they asked for instructions, they were summoned by Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian asked: Have you caught the thief?

古文：无名曰：若委臣取贼，无拘日月，且宽府县，令不追求，仍以两县擒盗吏卒，尽以付臣，臣为陛下取之，亦不出数十日耳。
现代文：苏无名说：如果委派我去抓贼，必须取消限期，并且放宽对府县的催促，叫他们暂时不要追查。还要把两个县的刑事侦察人员全都归我指挥。我为陛下抓获盗贼，也不会超过几十天的时间。
English: Su Muzhong said, "If you assign me to catch the thief, you must cancel the deadline, and relax the urging of the prefectures and counties, telling them not to pursue the investigation for the time being. You must also put all the criminal investigators in the two counties under my command. I will catch the thief for His Majesty, and it will not take more than tens of days."

古文：天后许之。
现代文：武则天同意了。
English: Wu Zetian agreed.

古文：无名戒使卒：缓则相闻。月余，值寒食。
现代文：苏无名告诉刑侦人员放松追查，一个月以后，到了寒食节这一天。
English: A month later, on the day of the Cold Food Festival, Su Muxing told the investigators to relax the investigation.

古文：无名尽召吏卒，约曰：十人五人为侣，于东门北门伺之。
现代文：苏无名把刑侦人员全都召集起来，命令他们说：十五个人一伙，到东门和北门等候。
English: Su Wumao called all the investigators together and ordered them to wait in groups of fifteen at the east and north gates.

古文：见有胡人与党十余，皆衣衰绖，相随出赴北邙者，可踵之而报。
现代文：如果看见有十多个回民，全都穿着丧服，一同出城往北邙山方向去，可以跟踪观察并派人告诉我。
English: If you see more than ten Hui people, all wearing mourning clothes, leave the city together in the direction of Beilun Mountain, you can follow them and send someone to tell me.

古文：吏卒伺之，果得。
现代文：这些人去等候，果然发现了一伙回族人。
English: They went to wait and found a group of Hui people.

古文：驰白无名。
现代文：他们立刻派人报告苏无名。
English: They immediately sent someone to report that Su had no name.

古文：往视之，问伺者：诸胡何若？
现代文：苏无名赶去以后问跟踪的人：这些回族人干了些什么？
English: After the nameless Su had driven away, he asked the person who was following him: What did these Hui people do?

古文：伺者曰：胡至一新冢，设奠，哭而不哀。
现代文：跟踪观察的人说：回族人到了一座新坟之前，摆设供品进行祭奠。
English: Follow-up observers said: Before the Hui people arrived at a new grave, they set up offerings to pay tribute.

古文：亦撤奠，即巡行冢旁，相视而笑。
现代文：他们哭泣的声音并不显得悲伤，撤了祭物以后，他们围绕坟墓观看，互相笑着交换眼色。
English: The sound of their weeping is not mournful, and after the offering they look around the tomb, smiling and exchanging glances with one another.

古文：无名喜曰：得之矣。
现代文：苏无名高兴地说：可以动手了。
English: Su Nameless said happily: I can start.

古文：因使吏卒，尽执诸胡，而发其冢。
现代文：命令刑侦人员将这伙回族人全部逮捕。
English: He ordered the investigators to arrest the entire group of Hui.

古文：冢开，割棺视之，棺中尽宝物也。
现代文：然后挖开那座坟墓，打看棺材一看，里面装的全是丢失的金银珠宝。
English: Then they dug up the grave, looked inside the coffin and saw that it was full of lost gold and silver jewelry.

古文：奏之，天后问无名：卿何才智过人，而得此盗？
现代文：报告武则天以后，武则天问苏无名：你为什么才智超过别人，能够抓住这伙盗贼？
English: After reporting to Wu Zetian, Wu Zetian asked Su Wu Rong: Why are you more intelligent than others and able to catch this group of thieves?

古文：对曰：臣非有他计，但识盗耳。
现代文：苏无名回答说：我并不是有别的计策，只是会识别盗贼。
English: Su Miao replied, "I don't have any other strategy, I just know how to identify thieves."

古文：当臣到都之日，即此胡出葬之时。臣亦见即知是偷，但不知其葬物处。
现代文：我刚到京城那天，正遇上这伙回民人抬着棺材假装出葬，我观察认定他们是盗贼，但不知道他们把东西埋在什么地方。
English: On the day I just arrived in Beijing, I met this group of Hui people carrying a coffin and pretending to bury it. I observed that they were thieves, but I don't know where they buried the things.

古文：今寒节拜扫，计必出城，寻其所之，足知其墓。
现代文：今年寒食节扫墓，我估计他们必然出城。跟踪他们，就可以找到埋东西的地方。
English: On this year's Tomb-Sweeping Day, I expect them to leave the city. If you follow them, you can find where they buried things.

古文：贼既设奠而哭不哀，明所葬非人也。
现代文：盗贼祭奠时哭声不悲痛，说明墓中所埋的不是人。
English: The fact that there is no cry of grief during the thief's memorial indicates that the person buried in the grave is not a human being.

古文：奠而哭毕，巡冢相视而笑，喜墓无损伤也。
现代文：祭奠结束，他们围绕坟墓观看微笑，是高兴坟墓没有人动过。
English: At the end of the ceremony, they looked around the grave and smiled, happy that no one had touched the grave.

古文：向若陛下迫促府县，此贼计急。
现代文：如果当初陛下您催促州府和县衙破案，这些盗贼着急害怕，必然会取出珍宝逃走。
English: If Your Majesty had urged the prefectural and county governments to solve the case, these thieves would have been so scared that they would have taken the treasure and run away.

古文：必取之而逃，今者更不追求，自然意缓，故未将出。天后曰：善。
现代文：而我们不再追查，他们必然放松警惕，所以没有逃走。天后武则天说：很正确！
English: And since we no longer pursued them, they must have relaxed their vigilance, which is why they didn't run away. The Queen Mother Wu Zetian said: That's right!

古文：赐金帛，加秩二等。
现代文：奖励给他金子和布匹，并且增加两级俸禄。
English: He was rewarded with gold and cloth, and his salary was increased by two grades.

古文：赵涓
现代文：赵涓
English: Zhao Wei

古文：永泰初，禁中失火，焚屋室数十间，与东宫稍迫近，代宗深惊疑之。
现代文：永泰初年，皇宫中着火，烧毁了几十间房屋，因为失火的地点距离东宫很近，代宗皇帝对此感到非常怀疑。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, a fire broke out in the Imperial Palace, destroying dozens of houses. As the location of the fire was very close to the East Palace, Emperor Daizong was very suspicious.

古文：赵涓为巡使，令即讯。
现代文：赵涓担任巡使，奉命进行调查。
English: Zhao Jun, acting as an inspector, was ordered to investigate.

古文：涓周立案验，乃上直中官遗火所致也。
现代文：赵涓立案侦察，查明火灾原因是由于值班太监遗落的火种而引起的。
English: Zhao Jun filed a case for investigation and ascertained that the cause of the fire was caused by the eunuch on duty leaving the kindling.

古文：推鞫明审，颇尽事情，代宗甚嘉赏焉。
现代文：调查推理的过程报告得十分详细，事实非常清楚。代宗皇帝对他很赞赏。
English: The process of investigation and deduction was reported in great detail, and the facts were very clear. Emperor Daizong appreciated him very much.

古文：德宗在东宫，常感涓之究理详细。
现代文：德宗皇帝当时为东宫太子，非常感谢赵涓调查得详细明白。
English: Emperor Dezong was the crown prince of the Eastern Court at that time, and he was very grateful to Zhao Jun for his detailed investigation.

古文：及典衢州，年老，韩滉奏请免其官。
现代文：等到赵涓出任衢州刺史以后，年岁已高。韩滉请示皇帝想要免除他的官职。
English: By the time Zhao Jun was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, he was very old. Han Jun asked the emperor to remove him from his post.

古文：德宗见其名，谓宰相曰：岂非永泰初御史赵涓乎？
现代文：德宗皇帝见到请求公文上赵涓的名字问宰相：是不是永泰初年那个御史赵涓？
English: When Emperor Dezong saw Zhao Yao's name on the request document, he asked the prime minister, "Isn't Zhao Yao, who was Yongtai's first-year regent, Zhao Yao?"

古文：对曰：然。
现代文：宰相回答说：是。
English: The Prime Minister replied: Yes.

古文：即日拜尚书左丞。
现代文：没过几天，皇帝任命赵涓为监察百官、权势极大的尚书左丞。
English: A few days later, the emperor appointed Zhao Zhen as the overseer of hundreds of officials, the extremely powerful Shang Shuzhong.

古文：袁滋
现代文：袁滋
English: Yuan Zhi

古文：李汧公勉镇凤翔，有属邑编甿因耨田，得马蹄金一瓮。
现代文：汧公李勉镇守凤翔时，他所管辖的地区有一个编入户籍的普通农民，在田间锄草的时候，挖出了一大坛子马蹄形的金子。
English: When Gong Li was the town watchman of Fengxiang, there was an ordinary farmer in the area under his jurisdiction who was enrolled in the household register. When he was weeding in the fields, he dug out a large jar of horseshoe-shaped gold.

古文：里民送于县署。公牒将置府庭。
现代文：村子里的人把金子送到县衙，县衙用公文向州府报告，准备将金子送往州府。
English: The people in the village sent the gold to the county government, and the county government used official documents to report to the state government, preparing to send the gold to the state government.

古文：宰邑者喜获兹宝，欲自以为殊绩。
现代文：宰邑对挖出珍宝很高兴，准备作为自己的政绩向上级请功。
English: Zaiyi is very happy to have dug out the treasure and is ready to ask his superiors for credit for his achievement.

古文：虑公藏主守不严，因使实于私室。
现代文：他害怕金子在公家的仓库里不安全，便存放在自己家里。
English: He stored the gold in his home, fearing it would not be safe in a government warehouse.

古文：信宿，与官吏重开视之，则皆为块矣。
现代文：过了一宿，他和其他官员重新打开观看，金子全都变成了土块。
English: After an overnight stay, he and other officials reopened the mine and watched as the gold turned to dirt.

古文：瓮金出土之际，乡社悉来观验，遽为变更，靡不惊骇。
现代文：一坛金子出土时，乡里的官员、里正都去观看检验，如今突然发生变化，没有不吃惊的。
English: When a pot of gold was unearthed, the village officials and villagers all went to watch the inspection, and now there is a sudden change, which is surprising.

古文：以状闻于府主。议者佥云：奸计换之。
现代文：他们上告到主管官员那里，人们议论是有人用奸计将金子换走了。
English: They complained to the officials in charge, and there was talk that someone had swapped the gold by trickery.

古文：遂遣理曹掾与军吏数人，就鞠其案。
现代文：于是上级派理曹掾带了一部分士兵来审问处理这个案子。
English: As a result, his superiors sent Li Caoqi with a group of soldiers to interrogate and handle the case.

古文：于是获金里社，咸共证。宰邑者为众所挤，拥沮莫能自由。既而诘辱滋甚，遂以易金伏罪。词款具存，未穷隐用之所。
现代文：挖出金子的乡里的里正共同为这件事作证，宰邑受到众人的谴责，沮丧地失去了人身自由，受到反复的询问和污辱，只好承认自己偷换了金子，并且在供词上签了里了，有的说扔到水里了，纷纷说自己冤枉。
English: The villagers in the village where the gold was dug out are jointly testifying to the incident. The mayor has been condemned by everyone, has lost his personal freedom in frustration, has been repeatedly interrogated and insulted, and had to admit that he had stolen the gold, and signed the confession, some said he had thrown it into the water, and said that he was innocent.

古文：令拘絷仆隶，胁以刑辟。或云藏于粪壤，或云投于水中。
现代文：审理结束，将这些人关到监狱，然后将审理结果上报。
English: At the end of the trial, they will be sent to prison and the results will be reported.

古文：纷纭枉挠。结成，具司备狱，以案上闻。
现代文：汧公李勉看了报告后很生气，过了一会他去赴宴，喝酒的时候说到了这件事。
English: After reading the report, Gong Li was very angry. After a while, he went to a banquet and talked about it while drinking.

古文：汧公览之亦怒。俄而因有宴，停杯语及斯事。列坐宾客，咸共谈谑。或云效齐人之攫，或云有杨震之癖。谈笑移时，以为胠箧穿窬，无足讶也。
现代文：在坐的宾客，都把这件事当作笑谈的话题，有的说宰邑是效仿齐人的贪婪，有人说他也许有杨震的癖好，说笑了很长时间，都以为这只是个跳墙撬锁的一般性案件，没有什么出奇的地方。
English: The guests who were present all treated the matter as a topic of conversation. Some said that Zaiyun was emulating the greed of the Qi people. Some said that he might have the habit of Yang Zhen and talked and laughed for a long time. They all thought that this was just a general case of jumping the wall and locking the door. There was nothing surprising about it.

古文：时袁相国滋亦在幕中，俯首略无词对。
现代文：当时相国袁滋也在场，他低着头没有说话。
English: His father-in-law, Yuan Zi, was also present at the time, but he kept his head down and did not speak.

古文：李公目之数四曰：宰邑者非判官懿亲乎？
现代文：汧公李勉用眼睛看了他几次以后对他说：宰邑同判官你是亲戚吗？
English: Gong Li Mian looked at him with his eyes several times and then said to him, "Are you related to the judge?"

古文：袁相曰：与之无素。
现代文：袁滋说：我和他没有关系。
English: Yuan Zhi said: I have nothing to do with him.

古文：李公曰：闻彼之罪，何不乐甚乎？
现代文：李勉说：讲了他的罪状，你为什么不高兴？
English: Li Mian said, "Why aren't you happy that I told you about his crime?"

古文：袁相曰：甚疑此事未了，便请相公详之。
现代文：袁滋说：我非常怀疑这件事没完，请您详细调查。
English: Yuan Zhi said: I very much suspect that this matter is not over, please investigate in detail.

古文：汧公曰：换金之状极明，若言未了，当别有所见，非判官莫探情伪。
现代文：李勉说：偷换金子的事实非常清楚，如果说没完，是还有不同的看法，不是你无法调查清楚。
English: Li Mian said: The fact of the illegal exchange of gold is very clear. If it is said endlessly, there are still different opinions. It is not that you cannot investigate clearly.

古文：袁相曰：诺。因俾移狱于府中案问。
现代文：袁滋说：可以，将这个案子移袁滋府中审理。
English: Yuan Zi said, "Yes, we can move this case to Yuan Zi's office for trial."

古文：乃令阅瓮间，得二百五十余块，诘其初获者，即本质存焉。
现代文：袁滋检查收藏坛子的房间，得到了二百五十多个金子形状的土块。袁滋问最初挖到金子的人，认定这些土块的形状和数量同原来的金子一样。
English: Yuan Zi inspected the room where the jars were kept and found more than 250 gold-shaped clods. Yuan Zi asked the person who originally dug out the gold and confirmed that the shape and quantity of these clods were the same as the original gold.

古文：遂于列肆索金，镕写与块形相等。
现代文：于是袁滋从市场上的各个商店里借来金子，熔化铸成土块一样大小的金块。
English: So Yuan Zi borrowed gold from various shops in the market and melted it down to make gold nuggets the size of clods of earth.

古文：既成，始秤其半，已及三百斤矣。
现代文：铸造完成以后，只秤了其中的一半金子，就已经是三百斤了。
English: After the casting was completed, only half of the gold was weighed, and it was already three hundred kilos.

古文：询其负担人力，乃二农夫，以竹舁至县境。
现代文：袁滋询问是什么人把金子送到县衙的，回答是两个农夫，用竹扁担抬到县衙的。
English: Yuan Zi asked who had sent the gold to the county magistrate. The answer was that two farmers had carried it to the county magistrate on a bamboo stretcher.

古文：计其金大数，非二人以竹担可举，明其即路之时，金已化为土矣。
现代文：计算一下，仅是这些金子里的大部分，也不是两个人所能用扁担抬动的，袁滋明白了，金子在没有上路之前，就已经全部化成土块了。
English: Yuan Zi understood that most of the gold was not even big enough for two people to carry on a flat-bed truck. The gold had all turned into clods of earth before it hit the road.

古文：于是群疑大豁。宰邑者遂获清雪。
现代文：这下大家的疑虑都解除了，宰邑的冤案得到了澄清。
English: Now everyone's doubts have been resolved, and the unjust case of Zaiyi has been clarified.

古文：汧公叹伏无已，每言才智不如。
现代文：汧公李勉对此表示赞叹和佩服，多次说自己的才智不如袁滋。
English: Gong Li expressed admiration and admiration for this, saying many times that his talent was not as good as Yuan Zi.

古文：其后履历清途，至德宗朝为宰相。
现代文：袁滋从这件事以后，多次担任重要官职，正确处理了多起案件。到了德宗皇帝即位以后，他当上了宰相。
English: After this incident, Yuan Zi held many important official positions and correctly handled many cases. After Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he became the prime minister.

古文：愚常闻金宝藏于土中，偶见者或变其质。
现代文：经常听说金银珠宝埋在土里，偶然发现以后有可能会变成别的东西。
English: It is often said that gold, silver and jewels are buried in the ground, and if they are found by chance, they may turn into something else later.

古文：东都敦化坊有麟德废观，殿悉皆颓毁。
现代文：东都的敦化胡同有一座废弃的道观麟德观，主要建筑已经倒塌毁坏。
English: In Dongdu's Dunhua Hutong, there is an abandoned Taoist Lingde Temple. The main building has collapsed and been destroyed.

古文：咸通中，毕诚相国，别令营造，建基址间，得巨瓮，皆贮白银。
现代文：咸通年间，相国华諴命令在别的地方重新建造一座麟德观。在挖地基的时候，挖出了一个巨大的坛子，里面装满了白银。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiantong, Emperor Huayuan ordered a new Lingde Temple to be built in another place. While digging the foundation, a huge jar filled with silver was unearthed.

古文：辇材者与工匠三四十人，当昼，惧为官中所取，遂辇材木盖之，以伺昏黑。
现代文：运送建筑材料的人和工匠有三四十人，他们发现银子的时候正是白天，害怕被官员们没收，便用木材把银子盖上，以便等到天黑。
English: The delivery of building materials and the craftsmen, thirty or forty of them, found the silver during the day and, fearing confiscation by officials, covered it with wood to wait until nightfall.

古文：及夜，各以衣服包裹而归。
现代文：当天夜里，这些人各自用衣服包上银子回家。
English: In the evening of the same day, each of these people wrapped the silver in their clothes and went home.

古文：明旦开之，如坚土削成为银梃。所说与此正同。
现代文：天亮以后打开一看，全都变成了用坚实的土块削制成的银子形状的东西，所传说的故事和这个案件的情形一样。
English: When they were opened after dawn, they all turned into silver-shaped things made of solid earth, and the story told was the same as the circumstances of this case.

