古文：腾少质直，明解吏事。
现代文：孙腾，字龙雀，咸阳石安人。
English: Sun Teng, Zhaolongjiao, Xianyang Shi'anren.

古文：魏正光中，北方扰，归尔硃荣。
现代文：他从小就很正直，熟悉官场的情况。北魏孝明帝正光年间，北方骚乱，他归顺了尔朱荣。
English: He has been very honest since childhood and is familiar with the officialdom. During the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming's reign, when the north was in turmoil, he submitted to Zhu Rong.

古文：寻为齐神武都督长史。
现代文：不久，任神武帝高欢的都督长史。
English: Soon, the governor of the capital, who was highly favored by Emperor Jimmu, died.

古文：神武为晋州，又引为长史，封石安县伯。
现代文：高欢任晋州刺史，又命他为长史，被朝廷封为石安县伯。
English: Gao Huan was appointed as the prefect of Jinzhou, and he was also appointed as the prefect of Shian County by the imperial court.

古文：及起兵于信都，常以诚款预谋策。
现代文：高欢在信都起兵，孙腾常以他的忠诚参与谋划决策，多次升迁，官爵晋至郡公。
English: Gao Huan raised an army in Xindu, and Sun Teng often participated in planning and decision-making with his loyalty. He was promoted many times, and was promoted to county magistrate.

古文：累迁郡公，入为侍中，寻兼尚书左仆射。
现代文：进入朝廷，被任为侍中，不久，兼任尚书左仆射。
English: He entered the imperial court and was appointed as a chamberlain. Soon, he also served as a court secretary.

古文：时魏京兆王愉女平原公主寡，腾愿尚之，而公主欲侍中封隆之。
现代文：这时，北魏京兆王元愉的女儿平原公主寡居，他希望迎娶她，而平原公主却想嫁给侍中封隆之。
English: At this time, Princess Pingyuan, the daughter of the Northern Wei King Yuan Yu, was widowed. He hoped to marry her, but Princess Pingyuan wanted to marry the chamberlain Feng Long.

古文：腾妒隆之，遂相间构。
现代文：他嫉妒封隆之，便找机会诋毁人家。
English: He was jealous of Feng Long, so he looked for opportunities to slander others.

古文：神武启免腾官，俄而复之。
现代文：高欢奏请朝廷免去孙腾的官职，不久又被恢复。
English: Gao Huanseo asked the court to remove Sun Teng from his post, but he was reinstated soon after.

古文：与斛其椿同掌机密，隆之见忌虑祸，奔晋阳。
现代文：他与斛斯椿共同掌握朝廷的机密，因被斛斯椿忌恨怕遭受祸殃，便逃到晋阳。
English: He shared the secrets of the imperial court with Emperor Xizang, and because he was hated by Emperor Xizang and feared that he would suffer misfortune, he fled to Jinyang.

古文：兼司空，除侍中，兼尚书令。
现代文：高欢入京城讨伐斛斯椿，让孙腾在并州留守。他又进入朝廷任尚书左仆射，朝廷内外的事情，他全都知道。
English: Gao Huan went to the capital to fight against Jinshuchan, leaving Sun Teng behind in Bianzhou. He also entered the imperial court as Shang Shushi's right-hand man, and he knew everything inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：时西魏攻南衮州，诏腾率诸将讨之。
现代文：这时，西魏进攻南兖州，朝廷命他率领各路将领讨伐。
English: At this time, the Western Wei Dynasty attacked the Southern Luzhou, and the imperial court ordered him to lead the generals to fight.

古文：腾性怯无威略，失利而还。
现代文：他性情胆怯，又没有威望和谋略，军队失利撤还。
English: He was timid, without prestige or strategy, and withdrew his army in defeat.

古文：又除司徒，余官如故。初北境乱，腾亡一女。及贵，推访不得，疑其为人婢。
现代文：最初北部边境骚乱，他丢失了一个女儿，等他身份显贵，访察不到，怀疑女儿成了别人家的婢子。
English: At the beginning of the northern border riot, he lost a daughter, and when he was a dignitary and could not visit, he suspected that his daughter had become someone else's maid.

古文：及为司徒，奴婢诉良者皆免之，愿免千人，冀得其女。
现代文：他任司徒，奴婢请求归良的他都同意免去她们的奴仆身份，希望从中找到他的女儿。
English: He served as a tutor, and he agreed to free slaves who asked to be reconciled, hoping to find his daughter.

古文：初，博陵崔孝芬取贫家子贾氏为养女。
现代文：高欢知道了异常恼怒，免去了他的司徒职务。原先，博陵的崔孝芬收养了一个姓贾的穷人家的女孩为养女。
English: Gao Huan was aware of the unusual anger and removed him from the post of tutor. Originally, Bo Ling's Cui Xiaofeng adopted a girl from a poor family with the surname Jia as his adopted daughter.

古文：孝芬死，其妻元更适郑伯猷，携贾于郑氏。
现代文：崔孝芬去世，他的妻子元氏改嫁给郑伯猷，元氏带着养女到了郑家。
English: Cui Xiaofeng died, and his wife, Ms. Yuan, was remarried to Mr. Zheng Boqin. Mr. Yuan took his adopted daughter to Ms. Zheng's home.

古文：贾有色，腾纳之为妾。
现代文：这位养女贾氏颇有姿色，孙腾便将她纳为小妾。
English: This adopted daughter of the Jia clan was quite attractive, and Sun Teng then took her as a concubine.

古文：其妻袁死，腾以贾有子，正以为妻，诏封丹阳郡君。复请以袁氏爵回授其女。
现代文：他的妻子袁氏去世，因为贾氏生了儿子，便将她扶为正妻。朝廷下诏封她为丹杨郡君，他又请求把袁氏的封爵改授给贾氏。
English: His wife Yuan died, because Jia gave birth to a son, he made her his legal wife. The court made her the ruler of Danyang County, and he requested that Yuan's title be changed to Jia.

古文：其违礼肆情，多此类也。
现代文：他的违背礼教，肆情自为的事情，大多有类如此。
English: Most of his violations of etiquette and self-indulgence are of this kind.

古文：腾早依神武，神武深信待之，置于魏朝，寄以心腹。
现代文：他早年依附神武帝高欢，高欢对他非常信任，把他安置在朝廷内，作为自己的心腹。
English: In his early years, he was attached to Emperor Shenwu Gao Huan. Gao Huan trusted him very much and placed him in the imperial court as his confidant.

古文：遂志气骄盈，与夺自己。
现代文：他志得意满，不可一世。予取予夺，一任自己。
English: He aspires to be satisfied, but not for life. Take it or leave it, it's up to you.

古文：纳贿不知纪极，官赠非财不行。
现代文：他纳贿不考虑法度，提拔和委任官职，非给他送礼不可。
English: He accepted bribes without regard to the law, promoted and appointed officials, and had to give him gifts.

古文：肴藏银器，盗为家物，亲狎小人，专为聚敛。
现代文：府库中贮藏的银器，他也偷回家中变成私有。亲近一帮无耻小人，专门为了聚敛财货。
English: He also stole the silverware stored in the prefectural treasury and made it private. He was close to a group of shameless villains, specifically in order to accumulate wealth.

古文：与高岳、高隆之、司马子如，号四贵。非法专恣，腾为甚焉。
现代文：他与高岳、高隆之、司马子如号称四贵，其中，违犯法纪，恣意横行，孙腾最为严重。
English: Together with Gao Yue, Gao Longzhi and Sima Zi, he is known as the Four Noblemen. Among them, Sun Teng is the most serious for violating laws and regulations and acting arbitrarily.

古文：神武、文襄，屡加诮让，终不悛改，朝野深非笑之。
现代文：高欢和高澄多次谴责与训诫，他始终不肯改悔，朝野上下都鄙视和嘲笑他。
English: Gao Huan and Gao Cheng condemned and admonished him many times, but he still refused to repent, and he was despised and ridiculed by people at all levels.

古文：武定六年薨，赠太师、开府、录尚书事，谥曰文。
现代文：武定六年，孙腾去世。高隆之，字延兴，洛阳人，是宦官徐成的养子。
English: In the sixth year of Wuding, Sun Teng died. Gao Longzhi, surnamed Yanxing, from Luoyang, was the adopted son of the eunuch Xu Cheng.

古文：神武命为弟，仍云勃海蓚人。
现代文：有人说他的父亲高干被姑夫高氏养育长大，因而从了高姓。
English: Some people say that his father, Gao Gan, was raised by his uncle, Gao, and thus took the surname Gao.

古文：干赠司徒公。
现代文：他后来立下了决定朝廷命运的大功。
English: He later played a major role in determining the fate of the imperial court.

古文：隆之身长八尺，美须髯，深沉有志气。
现代文：高欢命他为自己的兄弟，他便说自己是高欢的同乡，渤海地人。他身高八尺，须髯秀美，性情深沉，颇有志气。
English: Gao Huan said that he was Gao Huan's brother, so he said that he was Gao Huan's fellow countryman, a Haitian. He was eight feet tall, with a beautiful mustache, a deep temperament, and quite ambitious.

古文：初，行台于晖引为郎中，与神武深相结托。
现代文：当初，行台于晖命他为郎中，他与高欢交情很深，互相寄托心事。
English: At the beginning, he was the son-in-law of Gyoda Yushin, and he and Gao Huan had a deep friendship, and they confided in each other.

古文：后从起兵于山东，累迁并州刺史，入为尚书右仆射。
现代文：后来，他跟着高欢在山东起兵，多次升迁，任并州刺史。进入朝廷，任尚书右仆射。
English: Later, he followed Gao Huan to raise an army in Shandong, and was promoted several times. He was appointed to the post of provincial secretary, and entered the imperial court as the second-in-command.

古文：时初给人田，权贵皆占良美，贫弱咸受脊薄，隆之启神武，更均平之。
现代文：当时，刚分给百姓土地，权贵们都占有肥沃的，贫穷的人接受瘠薄的，他奏请神武帝高欢，重新将土地平均分配。
English: At that time, land had just been allotted to the people. The rich and powerful were taking possession of the fertile land, while the poor were receiving the poor land. He appealed to Emperor Shenwu to redistribute the land equally.

古文：又领营构大将，以十万夫彻洛阳宫殿，运于鄴，构营之制，皆委隆之。
现代文：他又任营构大将，用十万工役拆掉洛阳的宫殿，将砖瓦木料运到邺城。
English: He also served as a construction general and used 100,000 construction workers to demolish the palace in Luoyang and transport the bricks and timber to Lucheng.

古文：增筑南城，周二十五里。
现代文：邺城建筑的规模形状，高欢都让他来负责。他加筑了南城，周围长二十五里。
English: Gao Huan put him in charge of the scale and shape of the buildings in Lucheng. He built up Nancheng, with a circumference of twenty-five miles.

古文：以漳水近帝城。起长堤以防泛溢。又凿渠引漳水，周流城郭，造水碾硙并有利于时。
现代文：因漳河临近京城，他又建起长堤用来防止洪水泛滥；又开挖河渠，引出漳河水，围绕京城流过，并在渠上建造水碾水磨，对百姓很有利。
English: Because the Min River was close to the capital, he built a long dike to prevent flooding. He also dug a canal, diverted the water of the Min River to flow around the capital, and built a water mill on the canal, which was very beneficial to the people.

古文：魏自孝昌之后，天下多难。刺史、太守皆为当部都督，虽无兵事，皆立佐僚，所在颇为烦扰。
现代文：北魏自从孝明帝孝昌年以后，天下骚乱，多灾多难，刺史、太守这些地方长官都担任着都督一职，虽然不打仗，也都设置辅助的官职，到处都很繁琐，对地方也有骚扰。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, after the year of Emperor Xiaoming and Emperor Xiaochang, the world was in turmoil, with many disasters and hardships. These local governors, such as Zhishi and Taizhou, all held the position of governor, and although they did not fight, they also set up auxiliary official positions. They were very cumbersome everywhere, and they also harassed the localities.

古文：隆之请非实边要，见兵马者，悉断之。
现代文：隆之奏请朝廷，不是真正的边防要塞，现在驻扎着兵马的，都把地方官兼任的军职和辅助的官员全部取消。
English: Takanosuke asked the imperial court to abolish all military posts and auxiliary officials concurrently serving as local officials, regardless of whether it was a real border fortress or where soldiers and horses were currently stationed.

古文：又朝贵多假常侍以取貂蝉之饰，隆之自表解侍中，并陈诸假侍中服者，请亦罢之。
现代文：另外，朝廷的显贵们多凭借常侍这个职务，在帽子上加貂蝉的装饰。隆之上表请求解除自己侍中的职务，并陈奏所有凭借侍中职务增加帽子上装饰的，也希望能够停止。
English: In addition, the dignitaries of the imperial court mostly used the position of the attendant to add the decoration of the boa constrictor to the hat. Takashi requested that he be relieved of his position as an attendant, and all those who added decoration to the hat by virtue of the attendant position also hoped to be able to stop.

古文：诏皆如表。
现代文：朝廷都下诏采纳了他的意见。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict adopting his opinion.

古文：自军国多事，冒名窃官者，不可胜数，隆之奏请检括，旬日获五万余人。
现代文：自从国家多事，冒名顶替，窃取官职的人不可胜数。他上疏请求朝廷进行检查，十来天时间就查出五万多人。
English: Since the country has been troubled, there have been innumerable people who have impersonated and stolen official positions. He went to the court to request an inspection, and more than 50,000 people were found in about ten days.

古文：而群小讠雚嚣，隆之惧而止。
现代文：而那些冒名顶替的小人却气焰嚣张，隆之因畏惧而停止了检查。
English: But those impostors were arrogant, and Takayuki stopped the inspection out of fear.

古文：诏监起居事，进位司徒。
现代文：朝廷下诏，命他监修起居录，晋封为司徒。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, ordering him to supervise the registration of residents, and he was promoted to the position of magistrate.

古文：武定中，除尚书令，迁太保。
现代文：东魏武定时，他被任命为尚书令，迁任为太保。
English: During the Eastern Wei and Wu Dynasties, he was appointed as Shang Shuling (尚書令) and transferred to Taibo (太保).

古文：文襄作宰，风俗肃清。
现代文：文襄帝高澄任宰相，朝廷旧有的风气全被肃清，而高隆之却不断收受贿赂。
English: Emperor Gaocheng was appointed prime minister, and the old imperial tradition was completely swept away, but Gao Longzhi continued to accept bribes.

古文：隆之时有受纳，文襄于尚书省大加责让。齐受禅，进爵为王。
现代文：高澄在尚书省对他大加责备。北齐受东魏禅让，建立新朝，高隆之晋升爵位为王。
English: Gao Cheng severely reprimanded him in Shangshu Province. Northern Qi was conquered by Eastern Wei and established a new dynasty, and Gao Longzhi was promoted to the title of king.

古文：寻以本官录尚书事，领大宗正卿，监国史。
现代文：不久，以原来的职务任录尚书事，兼领大宗正卿，负责监修国史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of record keeper of records and books, concurrently holding the post of Daizong Zhengqing, responsible for supervising the national history.

古文：隆之性好小巧，至于公家羽仪，百戏服制，时有改易，不循典故。时论非之。
现代文：他喜欢玩弄些小的技巧，对于朝廷的仪仗，百官们的服装样式，不断有所改变，但却不遵守典章故事，因而遭到非议。
English: He liked to play with small tricks, constantly changing the ceremonial battle of the court, the clothing style of the centurions, but he did not follow the rules and was criticized.

古文：于射堋土上立三人像，为壮勇之势。
现代文：他在射箭的靶子上树立三个人的形象，以增加射手的勇气。
English: He places three figures on an archery target to increase the courage of the archer.

古文：文宣曾至东山，因射，谓隆之曰： 堋上可作猛兽，以存古义，何为终日射人？ 
现代文：文宣帝曾到山东，因到靶场射箭，对隆之说： 箭靶上可以作猛兽的形象，以保存古代尚武的精神，为什么成天对着人的形象射？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan once went to Shandong to shoot arrows at an archery range. He said to Long Zhi, "You can make the image of a ferocious beast on the arrow target to preserve the ancient martial spirit. Why do you always shoot at the image of a person?

古文：隆之无以对。
现代文：隆之听了无言以对。
English: Takashi was speechless.

古文：先是，文襄委任崔暹、崔季舒等。
现代文：先前，文襄帝高澄重用崔暹、崔季舒等人。
English: Previously, Emperor Gaozhen of Wenzhong had made heavy use of Choe Siem, Choe Ji Shu and others.

古文：及文襄崩，隆之启文宣，并欲害之，不见许。
现代文：高澄去世后，隆之启奏文宣帝，想加害崔暹等人，文宣帝不同意。
English: After Gao Cheng's death, Long Zhiqi appealed to Emperor Wenxuan to harm Cui Siam and others, but Emperor Wenxuan did not agree.

古文：文宣以隆之旧齿，委以政事。
现代文：文宣帝认为他是有德望的旧臣，将朝廷的事情委任给他。
English: Emperor Wenzhong considered him to be a venerable old retainer and entrusted the affairs of the imperial court to him.

古文：隆之子淫于杨遵彦前妻，帝妹也，故遵彦谗毁日至。
现代文：他的儿子与杨遵彦的前妻通奸，遵彦的前妻是文宣帝的妹妹，所以，杨遵彦每天都在文宣帝的面前诋毁他。
English: His son had committed adultery with Yang Zunyan's ex-wife. Zunyan's ex-wife was Emperor Wenzhong's sister, so Yang Zunyan slandered him in front of Emperor Wenzhong every day.

古文：崔季舒等仍以前隙，谮云： 隆之每见诉讼者，辄加哀矜之意，以示非己能裁。 
现代文：崔季舒等人也因过去的矛盾，攻击他说： 高隆之每见到告状的人，都表示同情，以显示不是他就不能裁决案件。 
English: Cui Jishu and others also attacked him for past contradictions, saying: "Every time Gao Longzhi saw the complaint, he expressed sympathy to show that he could not decide the case without him.

古文：文宣以其受任既久，知有冤状，便宜申浟，何过要名，非大臣义。
现代文：文宣帝听后，认为他担任官职已经很久，如果知道有冤枉的案子，应该向朝廷申奏改正，何必沽名钓誉？这不是大臣应有的品质。
English: After listening to Emperor Wenxuan, he thought that he had been in office for a long time. If he knew that there was a wrongful case, he should report to the imperial court to correct it. Why should he seek fame? This is not the quality that a minister should have.

古文：天保五年，禁止尚书省。
现代文：天保五年，朝廷禁止他到尚书省去。
English: In the fifth year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court forbade him to go to Shangshu Province.

古文：隆之曾与元昶宴，语昶曰： 与王交游，当死生不相背。 
现代文：他曾与元昶一起饮酒，对元昶说： 我与您交往，到死都不会背叛您。 
English: He once drank alcohol with Yuan Shao and said to Yuan Shao, "I have been in contact with you, and I will never betray you until I die."

古文：人有密言之者。
现代文：有人偷偷地将这句话奏报给文宣帝。
English: Someone secretly reported this sentence to Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：又帝未登庸日，隆之意常侮帝。帝将受禅，大臣咸言未可，隆之又在其中。帝深衔之。
现代文：另外，文宣帝没有即位前，高隆之常对他流露出轻蔑的神态；他即将接受东魏孝静帝的禅让，大臣们都认为不应该，隆之也在持反对意见的人当中，文宣帝早就对他怀恨在心。
English: In addition, before Emperor Wenxuan ascended the throne, Gao Long often showed contempt for him; he was about to accept Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty's concession, and the ministers all thought that it was not appropriate. Longzhi was also among those who held opposing views. Emperor Wenxuan had long held a grudge against him.

古文：因此大怒，骂曰： 徐家老公！ 
现代文：听到密报后，异常恼怒，骂道 ：这个徐家老公的后代。 
English: After hearing the secret report, he was extremely angry and scolded: This is the offspring of the husband of the Xu family.

古文：令壮士筑百余拳，放出。
现代文：让壮士们打了高隆之一百多拳，然后放出来。
English: Let the strongmen hit more than a hundred punches to Gao Long, and then let it out.

古文：渴，将饮水，人止之，隆之曰： 今日何在！ 
现代文：他感到口渴，想要喝水，有人劝阻他，他说： 我不知道今天自己还会不会活着！ 
English: He felt thirsty and wanted to drink water, but someone dissuaded him, saying: "I don't know if I'll still be alive today!"

古文：遂饮之。
现代文：便喝了许多水。
English: He drank a lot of water.

古文：因从驾，死于路中。
现代文：因为跟随文宣帝外出，所以死在路途上。
English: Because he went out with Emperor Wenzhong, he died on the way.

古文：赠太尉、太保、阳夏王，竟不得谥。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太尉、太保、阳夏王，竟没有给他谥号。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the titles of Taijun, Taiho, and Yangxia Wang, but did not give him a posthumous title.

古文：隆之虽不学涉，而钦尚文雅，搢绅名流，必存礼接。
现代文：高隆之虽然没有读书，却崇尚文雅，对于缙绅名流，他一定礼貌接待。
English: Although Gao Longzhi did not read books, he advocated elegance. For the gentry and celebrities, he must receive them politely.

古文：寡姊为尼，事之如母。训督诸子，必先文义。世以此称之。
现代文：他寡居的姐姐当了尼姑，他对她就像母亲一样，教育孩子，一定先让他们懂得文章的内容和涵义，人们都因此称赞他。
English: His widowed sister became a nun, and he treated her like a mother, teaching his children that they must first understand the content and meaning of the article. People praised him for this.

古文：文宣末年，多猜害，追忿隆之，执其子司徒中兵慧登等二十人于前。慧登言乞命，帝曰： 不得已。 
现代文：文宣帝末年，常猜忌迫害朝臣。他又追想和恼怒起高隆之来，把高隆之的儿子、司徒中兵高慧登等二十多人抓到面前，慧登乞求饶命，他说 ：没办法。 
English: In the last years of Emperor Wenxuan, he was often suspicious of persecuting courtiers. He recalled and angered Gao Longzhi, and caught Gao Longzhi's son, and more than 20 people, including the soldier Gao Huiden, in front of him. Huiden begged for his life to be spared. He said, "There is no way."

古文：以鞭扣鞍，一时头绝，并投之漳水。
现代文：用马锤击打，不大一会头被打烂，这些人的尸体都被投入漳水河中。
English: They were beaten with horse-hammers, and their heads were soon smashed. The bodies of these people were thrown into the Surabaya River.

古文：发隆之冢，出尸，其貌不败。
现代文：文宣帝又派人掘开高隆之的坟墓，从棺木中取出尸体，他的面貌仍然没有腐烂。
English: Emperor Wenxuan also sent someone to dig up Gao Longzhi's grave and remove the body from the coffin. His face was still not rotten.

古文：斩骸骨焚之，弃于漳流。
现代文：文宣帝将他的尸骨砍断烧掉，扔到漳淮河里。
English: Emperor Wenzhong chopped up his bones, burned them, and threw them into the Huai River.

古文：天下冤之。
现代文：天下人都认为他一家很冤枉。
English: People all over the world think that his family was very wronged.

古文：隆之嗣遂绝。
现代文：他的后代也因此灭绝。
English: His descendants also died out as a result.

古文：乾明中，诏其兄子子远为隆之后，袭爵阳夏王，还其财产。
现代文：文宣帝死后，其子高殷即位，下诏让隆之哥哥的儿子子远过继给隆之，继承阳夏王的爵位，归还过去被抄没的家产。
English: After the death of Emperor Wenxuan, his son Gao Yin ascended to the throne, and issued an edict to let the son of Long Zi's brother succeed to Long Zi, inherit the title of Yangxia King, and return the family property that had been confiscated in the past.

古文：隆之见信神武，性阴毒，仪同三司崔孝芬以结婚姻不果，太仆卿任集同知营构，颇相乖异；瀛州刺史元晏请托不遂。
现代文：高隆之被高欢信任，他的性情阴险毒辣。仪同三司崔孝芬因为同他家缔结婚姻关系不满意；太仆卿任集与他共同担任营构一职，意见常常同他不一致；瀛州刺史元晏拒绝他的请托，他都捏造罪状，将他们害死。
English: Gao Longzhi was trusted by Gao Huan, and his disposition was insidious and poisonous. Yi Tong and Third Secretary Cui Xiaofeng were not satisfied because they had concluded a marital relationship with his family; Taigu Renji held a construction position together with him, and their opinions often disagreed with him; Zhangzhou Zhishi Yuanjun refused his request, and he fabricated charges and killed them.

古文：并构成其罪，诛害之，终至家门殄灭。
现代文：他终于全家被诛灭，人们都认为这是他应得的报应。
English: In the end, his entire family was annihilated, and people believed that this was the retribution he deserved.

古文：论者谓有报应焉。司马子如，字遵业，自云河内温人也，徙居云中，因家焉。
现代文：司马子如，字遵业，自称是河内温地人，迁移到云中居住，因而在那里建起家业。
English: Sima Ziru, also known as Zunye, claimed to be a native of Hà Ni's Hu Province. He moved to the Yunnan Province and established a family business there.

古文：子如初为怀朔镇省事，与齐神武相结托，分义甚深。
现代文：他初任怀朔镇省事，与齐神武帝高欢相识，两个人情谊很深。
English: When he was first appointed as the governor of Waisaku Town, he became acquainted with Emperor Qishenwu Gao Huan, and the friendship between the two was very deep.

古文：孝昌中，北州沦陷，子如南奔肆州，为尔硃荣所礼，封平遥子，稍迁大行台郎。
现代文：北魏孝明帝孝昌时，北部州郡沦陷，他向南逃向肆州，被尔朱荣所信任，封为平遥子，不久，迁任大行台郎。
English: During the Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor Xiaochang's reign, when the northern prefectures fell, he fled south to Zhouzhou. He was trusted by Er Zhu Rong and was named Pingyao's son. Soon, he was transferred to the post of Dagong Tairo.

古文：荣死，随荣妻子与尔硃世隆等走出京城。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，他随尔朱荣的妻子和尔朱世隆等人离开京城洛阳。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, he left the capital Luoyang with Er Zhu Rong's wife and Er Zhu Shilong and others.

古文：节闵帝立，以前后功，进爵阳平郡公。
现代文：节闵帝即皇帝位，积累他前后建立的功勋，给他晋爵为阳平郡公。
English: Emperor Jiechi, that is, the emperor, accumulated the merits he established before and after, and gave him the title of Yangping County.

古文：神武入洛，以为大行台尚书，朝夕左右，参知军国。
现代文：高欢进入洛阳，任命他为大行台尚书。他天天与高欢在一起，参与军国大事的谋划。
English: Gao Huan entered Luoyang and appointed him as the grand marshal. He was with Gao Huan every day and participated in the planning of military and national events.

古文：天平初，除尚书左仆射、开府，与高岳、孙腾、高隆之等共知朝政，甚见信重。
现代文：东魏天平初年，他被任命为尚书左仆射、开府，与高岳、孙腾、高隆之等人共同执掌朝政，很被信任和重用。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as Shang Shuzo's right-hand man and the head of the government. He was in charge of the imperial government together with Gao Yue, Sun Teng and Gao Longzhi. He was highly trusted and highly valued.

古文：神武镇晋阳，子如时往谒见。
现代文：高欢坐镇晋阳，他常常去谒见。
English: Gao Huan sits in the town of Jinyang, and he often goes to see Mao.

古文：及还，神武、武明后俱有赍遗，率以为常。
现代文：回来时，神武帝高欢和武明后都给他馈赠礼物，这已是习以为常的事情。
English: When he came back, Emperor Gao Huan and Emperor Wu Ming both gave him gifts, which was a matter of course.

古文：子如性既豪爽，兼恃恩旧，簿领之务，与夺任情，公然受纳。
现代文：他的性情豪爽，再加上倚仗自己是德高望重的旧臣，在处理公务时，专断任性，公然接受贿赂。
English: He is of a high-spirited nature, and, relying on the fact that he is a highly respected former minister, he is arbitrary and capricious when handling official business, and openly accepts bribes.

古文：兴和中，以北道行台巡检诸州守令已下，至定州，斩深泽令；至冀州，斩东光令，皆稽留时刻，致之极刑。
现代文：兴和时，他以北道行台的身份检查各州郡守令以下的官员。到定州，他将深泽的太守斩首；在冀州，他处死了东光的守令。这些人都被关进监狱，施以残酷的刑罚。
English: At the time of Xinghe, he checked the officials below the county shouling of each state with the identity of Hokkedo Gangdai. In Dingzhou, he beheaded the shouling of Shuzawa; in Jizhou, he executed the shouling of Dongguang. These people were all put in prison and subjected to cruel punishment.

古文：进退少不合旨者，便令武士顿曳，白刃临颈。
现代文：下面的官员举动稍不符合他的心意，他都命随从的武士马上拉过来，把刀架在他们脖子上。
English: The following official's actions were a little out of character for him, and he ordered his attendant samurai to immediately pull them over and put their swords around their necks.

古文：士庶惶惧，不知所为。
现代文：官吏们惶恐不安，无所适从。
English: The officials were panicked and had no choice.

古文：转尚书令。
现代文：后来他又转任为尚书令。
English: Later, he was transferred to Shang Shuling.

古文：及文襄辅政，以贿为御史中尉崔暹劾，在狱一宿而发皆白。
现代文：文襄帝高澄辅弼朝政，子如因贿赂的事被御史中尉崔暹弹劾，在监狱里被关了一个晚上，头发就全部变白。
English: Emperor Gaozhen of the Song Dynasty assisted the government, and his son was impeached for bribery by Lieutenant Cui Sie, and was held in prison for one night, and his hair turned completely white.

古文：辞曰： 司马子如本从夏州策一杖投相王，王给露车一乘，牸牛犊。
现代文：他替自己辩解说 ：我从夏州拄了根棍子投奔相王，相王送我一辆不带篷幔的车，车上套着一头母牛和一头牛犊。
English: He defended himself by saying: "I took a stick from Xiazhou and ran to the king of shepherds. The king of shepherds sent me a car without a canopy, with a cow and a calf on it.

古文：犊在道死，唯角存。
现代文：牛犊在道路上死去，只剩下长着弯曲的双角的母牛。
English: Calves die on the road, leaving only cows with curved horns.

古文：此外，皆人上取得。 
现代文：其他东西，都是他人得到的。 
English: Everything else was given to others.

古文：神武书敕文襄曰： 马令是吾故旧，汝宜宽之。 
现代文：高欢也写信告谕高澄： 司马子如是我的老朋友，你应该宽大他。 
English: Gao Huan also wrote a letter to Gao Cheng: If Sima Zi is my old friend, you should be lenient with him.

古文：文襄驻马行街，以出子如，脱其锁。
现代文：高澄看信后在大街上停下马，命将子如从狱中提出，去掉他身上的枷锁。他很害怕，问： 该不是要杀死我吧？ 
English: After reading the letter, Gao Cheng stopped his horse on the street and asked his son to remove the shackles from his body. He was very scared and asked, "Aren't you going to kill me?"

古文：子如惧曰： 非作事邪？ 于是，除削官爵。
现代文：于是，免去他的官爵。
English: As a result, he was stripped of his title.

古文：神武后见之，哀其憔悴，以膝承其首，亲为择虱，赐酒百瓶，羊五百口，粳米五百石。
现代文：高欢后来见到他，可怜他面容憔悴，让他爬在自己膝盖上，亲自给他逮头上的虱子，赐给他酒一百瓶，羊五百只，粳米五百石。
English: Gao Huan saw him later, felt sorry for his sad face, let him crawl on his knees, personally caught the lice on his head, and gave him a hundred bottles of wine, five hundred sheep, and five hundred kilos of glutinous rice.

古文：子如曰： 无事尚被囚几死，若受此，岂有生路邪？ 
现代文：他发牢骚说： 没有事还被囚禁，几乎死掉。如果这样，难道还有生路吗？ 
English: He complained: "I've been imprisoned and almost died for nothing. If that's the case, is there any way to survive?

古文：未几，起行冀州事，能自改厉，甚有声誉。
现代文：不久，朝廷又起用他为冀州刺史。他能够接受教训，严格自律，因而颇有声誉。
English: Not long after, the imperial court appointed him to write the history of Jizhou. He was able to accept lessons and strictly self-discipline, so he had quite a reputation.

古文：诏复官爵，别封野王县男。
现代文：朝廷下诏恢复他原来的官爵，另外封为野王县男。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict reinstating his former rank and title, and he was also given the title of "the man of Yowang County."

古文：齐受禅，以翼赞功，别封须昌县公。
现代文：文宣帝高洋接受东魏孝静帝的禅让，即皇帝位。司马子如因参与此事有功，另外又被封为须昌县公。
English: Emperor Gaoyang of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaozhing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty accepted the abdication of Emperor Gaoyang. Sima Zi, who played a significant role in this event, was also made the governor of Suchang County.

古文：寻除司空。
现代文：不久，又被任命为司空。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：子如性滑稽，不事检裁，言戏秽亵，识者非之。
现代文：他的性情滑稽，不加检点和约束。说话多戏谑污秽，认识他的人都因此非议他。
English: He had a playful, irreverent and uninhibited personality, and spoke in a playful and filthy manner, which was criticized by those who knew him.

古文：而事姊有礼，抚诸兄子慈笃，当时名士，并加钦爱，复以此称之。
现代文：而他对姐姐很有礼貌，抚养弟兄们的孩子也很慈爱诚笃。对待当时的名士，他很钦敬喜爱，人们又因此称赞他。
English: On the other hand, he was very polite to his sister, and he raised his brothers' children with loving sincerity. He treated the celebrities of the time with great admiration and affection, and people praised him for it.

古文：然素无鲠正，不能以平道处物。
现代文：然而，他却没有耿直公正之心，不能按公平正道处理事情。
English: However, he does not have a straightforward and fair mind, and cannot handle things in a fair and just manner.

古文：文襄时，中尉崔暹、黄门郎崔季舒俱被任用。
现代文：高澄主持朝政时，中尉崔暹、黄门郎崔季舒都被重用。
English: When Gao Cheng presided over the imperial government, Lieutenant Cui Siam and Huangmen Lang Cui Jishu were both given important positions.

古文：文襄崩，暹等赴晋阳，子如以纠劾之衅，乃启文宣，言其罪，劝帝诛之。
现代文：高澄去世后，崔暹等人都到晋阳。司马子如因崔暹过去曾纠劾过他，便奏报文宣帝，捏造他们的罪状，劝文宣帝诛杀他们。
English: After Gao Cheng's death, Choi Siam and the others all went to Jinyang. Sima Zi, who was angry because Choi Siam had reprimanded him in the past, sent a report to Emperor Xuan, fabricated their charges, and persuaded Emperor Xuan to kill them.

古文：后子如以马度关，为有司所奏。
现代文：后来，他把马匹悄悄运出关外，被有司举劾。
English: Later, he quietly shipped the horses out of the county and was impeached by a magistrate.

古文：文宣让之曰： 崔暹、季舒事朕先世，有何大罪，卿令我杀之！ 
现代文：文宣帝斥责他说： 崔暹、崔季舒侍奉我的先世，有什么大罪，你却让我杀死他们！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan rebuked him, saying, "Cui Siem and Cui Jishu served me in my previous life, what is the great sin, but you let me kill them!

古文：赠太师、太尉，谥曰文明。
现代文：因而将他免去官职。过了很久，文宣帝又认为他是先帝的旧臣故交，封他为太尉。
English: Therefore, he was removed from his official position. After a long time, Emperor Wenzhong also considered him to be an old vassal of the former emperor, and made him a captain.

古文：长子消难嗣。消难字道融。
现代文：不久，他因患病去世。司马消难，字道融。
English: Soon after, he passed away due to illness. Sima passed away peacefully.

古文：幼聪慧，微涉经史，有风神，好自矫饰，以求名誉。
现代文：幼时聪明颖悟，多少读了些经史著作。颇有风度神韵，喜欢自我矫饰标榜，以博取名誉。
English: When he was young, he was clever and enlightened, and read some historical works. He was quite personable and charming, and liked to flaunt himself and gain fame.

古文：子如既当朝贵盛，消难亦爱宾客，邢子才、王元景、魏收、陆仰、崔瞻等皆游其门。
现代文：他的父亲司马子如是当朝的显贵，他也爱交结宾客名士，邢子才、王元景、魏收、陆、崔瞻等都与他交游。
English: His father, Sima Zi, was a dignitary of the dynasty, and he also loved to make friends with famous guests. Zizi Cai, Wang Yuanjing, Wei Jie, Lu, and Cui Zhan all traveled with him.

古文：稍迁光禄卿，出为北豫州刺史。
现代文：迁任光禄卿，出任北豫州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Guangluqing and served as the chief historian of North Henan Province.

古文：文宣末年，昏虐滋甚，消难常有自全之谋，曲意抚纳，颇为百姓所附。
现代文：文宣帝末年，昏庸暴虐，日甚一日，消难却常常有自我保全的办法。他尽量安抚，颇受百姓拥戴。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wenxuan's reign, the tyranny of the barbarians became more and more rampant, but there was often a way of self-preservation. He tried his best to appease them, and was well-loved by the people.

古文：不能廉洁，为御史所劾。
现代文：由于不能为政清廉，因而被御史弹劾。
English: He was impeached by Emperor Hirohito because he could not be a clean politician.

古文：又尚公主，而情好不睦，公主诉之。
现代文：他娶了高欢的女儿为妻，而两个人情感不睦，公主常向文宣帝诉说。
English: He married the daughter of Gao Huan as his wife, and the two did not get along well, the princess often told Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：属文宣在并州，驿召上党王焕，焕惧害，斩使者东奔，鄴中大扰，后竟获于济州。
现代文：文宣帝在并州，命驿使召见上党王高涣，高涣害怕有灾难降临，杀死使者率兵东逃，邺中一带大受骚扰，后来在济州被抓获。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was in Bozhou when he was summoned by the emperor to meet with the king of the upper party, Gao Jue. Gao Jue was afraid of a disaster, killed the messenger and led the soldiers to flee east. He was greatly harassed in and around Bozhou, and was later captured in Jeju.

古文：焕之初走，朝士疑赴成皋，云： 若与司马北豫连谋，必为国患。 
现代文：高涣刚逃走时，朝臣们怀疑他逃向成皋，说： 他如果和司马消难管辖的北豫州联合起来共同谋反，一定会成为国家的祸患。 
English: When Gao Jun had just fled, the courtiers suspected that he had fled to Chengdu, saying, "If he joins forces with Beiyuzhou, which is under the jurisdiction of Sima Qishan, and conspires together to rebel, he will surely become a scourge to the country."

古文：此言达于文宣，颇见疑。
现代文：这话传到文宣帝那里，很引起了他的怀疑。
English: Word of this reached Emperor Wenxuan, arousing his suspicions.

古文：消难惧，密令所亲人河东裴藻间行入关，请降。
现代文：消难畏惧，偷偷派亲信河东人裴藻秘密从小路入关，向西周请降。
English: To dispel the fear, he secretly sent a trusted person from the east of the river, Baimao, to secretly enter the pass from a small road and ask for a descent to the west of Zhou.

古文：入周，封荥阳郡公，累迁大司寇。
现代文：进入西周后，被封为荥阳郡公，多次升迁，官至大司寇。
English: After entering the Western Zhou Dynasty, he was made the governor of Fenyang County, and was promoted several times to the position of grand secretary.

古文：从武帝东伐，还除梁州总管。
现代文：他跟随章武帝宇文邕东伐，归来任梁州总管。
English: He followed Emperor Zhangwu's Eastern Expedition and returned as the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：大象初，迁大后丞，女为静帝后。
现代文：周静帝大象初年，他又迁任大后丞，女儿为静帝的皇后。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhou Jing's reign, he was transferred to the post of grand empress dowager, and his daughter became the empress of Emperor Jing.

古文：寻出为云阝州总管。
现代文：不久，他出任为云阝州总管。
English: Soon after, he became the general manager of Yunnan Province.

古文：及隋文帝辅政，消难乃与蜀公尉迟回合势举兵，使其子永质于陈，以求援。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚替年幼的周静帝辅助朝政，消难便与蜀公尉迟回联合举兵讨伐杨坚，把他的儿子司马永送到南陈作人质，以向陈国请求援兵。
English: Yang Jian, the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty, took the place of the young Emperor Zhou Jing and assisted the imperial government. When the difficulties were over, he and Shu Guofeng returned late to jointly raise an army to fight against Yang Jian, and sent his son Sima Yong to Nan Chen as a hostage to request reinforcements from Chen Guo.

古文：隋文帝命襄州总管王谊讨之，消难奔陈。位司空，随郡公。
现代文：杨坚命襄州总管王谊进讨，消难逃到南陈，被陈封为司空，赐爵为隋郡公。
English: Yang Jian ordered Wang Xi, the chief administrator of Xiangzhou, to advance the discussion, and he was able to escape to Nanchen. He was appointed by Chen as Sikuo and knighted as Sui County Governor.

古文：初，隋武元帝之迎消难，结为兄弟，情好甚笃，隋文每以叔礼事之。
现代文：开初，杨坚的父亲杨忠迎来由齐降周的司马消难，两个人结拜为异性兄弟，情谊十分深厚，杨坚常用对待叔父的礼节对待他。
English: At the beginning of the year, Yang Jian's father, Yang Zhong, ushered in the death of Sima, who fell from Qi to Zhou, and the two men became brothers of the opposite sex. The friendship was very deep, and Yang Jian often treated him with the courtesy of an uncle.

古文：及平陈，消难至，特免死配为乐户，二旬而免。
现代文：隋朝灭掉南陈后，消难归隋，隋文帝特免去他的死罪，将他配为乐户，过了二十天，又免去了乐户的户籍。
English: After the Sui Dynasty eliminated Nan Chen, he was returned to the Sui Dynasty, and the Sui Emperor exempted him from the death penalty and assigned him to a pleasure household. Twenty days later, he was exempted from the household registration of a pleasure household.

古文：犹以旧恩，特被引见。
现代文：因为过去的感情，特被朝廷引见。
English: Because of past feelings, he was specially introduced to the Imperial Court.

古文：寻卒于家。
现代文：不久，死在家里。
English: He died at home a short time later.

古文：消难性贪淫，轻于去就，故世言反覆者，皆以方之。
现代文：他的性情贪婪好淫，决断轻率。所以，人们如果说反复无常的人，一定拿他作比方。
English: His nature was avaricious and lascivious, and he was hasty in making decisions, so that he was held up as an example of a man of changeable mind.

古文：文襄犹以子如恩旧，免其诸弟死罪，徙北边。
现代文：他的妻子高氏是神武帝高欢的女儿，在邺城时，他极力给予礼遇。
English: His wife, Lady Gao, was the daughter of Emperor Gao Huan. When he was in Lucheng, he tried his best to treat her with courtesy.

古文：世云以侯景败于涡阳，复有异志，为景所杀。
现代文：入关降周后便冷淡起来。他到云阝州任总管，留下妻子和三个儿子住在京城，妻子高氏说 ：消难带着他宠爱的小妾上任，一定不再顾念我们，望能防范他。 
English: He left his wife and three sons behind to live in Beijing. Gao's wife said, "He took his beloved concubine with him when he took office. He must no longer care about us. I hope we can protect ourselves from him."

古文：世云弟膺之。
现代文：消难降陈后，高氏母子因而被免于株连。
English: After the difficulties were eliminated, Gao's mother and son were exempted from the stock company.

古文：膺之字仲庆。
现代文：司马膺之，字仲庆。
English: Sima Yanzhi, alias Zhongqing.

古文：美须髯，有风貌，好学，厚自封植，神气甚高。
现代文：须髯飘逸，容貌俊美，风采动人。爱好学习，努力自我修养，志向十分高远。
English: His beard is flowing, his face is handsome, and his demeanor is charming. He loves to study, strives to cultivate himself, and has very high aspirations.

古文：历中书、黄门侍郎。
现代文：历任中书、黄门侍郎。
English: He was successively appointed as Chushu and Huangmenzhangro.

古文：天平中，叔父子如执钧当轴。膺之既宰相犹子，兼自有名望，所与游集，尽一时名流。
现代文：东魏天平时，他的叔父司马子如在朝廷参与枢机，膺之既然是宰辅的侄子，又兼有名望，所以同他交游的，都是当时的名流大家。
English: When the Eastern Wei Dynasty was at peace, his uncle Sima Zi Rong was a cardinal in the imperial court. Since he was the nephew of Zaisuke and also famous, his friends were all famous people at that time.

古文：与邢子才、王景等，并为莫逆之交。
现代文：他与邢子才、王元景等人结为莫逆之交。
English: He became good friends with Zou Zizai, Wang Yuanjing and others.

古文：及兄世云陷于逆乱，期亲皆应诛。
现代文：他的哥哥司马世云参与侯景之乱，应服丧一年的亲属都应被株连处死。
English: His brother Sima Shiyun took part in the Houjing Rebellion, and his relatives who should have mourned for a year were all executed by the company.

古文：膺之及诸弟并有人才，为朝廷所惜，文襄特减死徙近镇。
现代文：膺之和他的弟弟们都是秀拔杰出的人才，被朝廷所爱惜，文襄帝高澄特意减去他们的死罪，改为流配附近的城镇。
English: Xizhi and his brothers were all outstanding talents who were cherished by the imperial court. Emperor Gaozhen specifically commuted their death sentences to exile in a nearby town.

古文：文宣嗣业，得还。
现代文：文宣帝继承父亲高澄的事业，膺之得以还朝。
English: Emperor Wenxuan succeeded his father Gao Cheng's career and was able to return to the throne.

古文：齐受禅，子如别封须昌县公，回授膺之。
现代文：北齐代魏，司马子如被封为须昌县公，他又将这个爵位传授给膺之。
English: In the Northern Qi Dynasty of Wei, if Sima Zi was made the governor of Suchang County, he would pass on this title to Yu Yu.

古文：子如抚爱甚慈，膺之昆季，事之如父。
现代文：子如对他的抚爱十分慈祥，膺之兄弟几人侍奉子如有如亲生的父亲。
English: His son was very kind to him, and several of his brothers served him as if he were their own father.

古文：性方古，不会俗旧。
现代文：膺之性情端方古朴，不会媚俗。
English: His temperament is simple and quaint, not kitschy.

古文：与杨愔同为黄门郎。至愔为尚书令，抗礼如初。
现代文：他与杨原来同任黄门郎，到了杨任尚书令后，他就像当初一样，与杨行对等的礼节。
English: He and Yang were originally the same Huangmenro, but after Yang Ren Shang's edict, he, as in the beginning, had the same courtesy as Yang Xing.

古文：愔尝有从姊惨，尚书卿尹皆跪吊，膺之执手而出。
现代文：杨的姐姐去世，尚书省的官员们都跪着祭吊，膺之只握一下杨的手走出。
English: Yang's sister passed away, and the officials of Shangshu Province all knelt down to pay their respects, only shaking Yang's hand before walking out.

古文：曾路逢愔，威仪道引，乃于树下侧避之。愔于车望见，令呼谓曰： 兄何意避弟？ 
现代文：他曾在路上遇着杨，杨的仪仗在前面导引，他在路边的树下回避，被坐在车中的杨看见，令人喊他来，问 ：老兄为何要躲避小弟？ 
English: He once met Yang on the road, Yang's ceremonial battle in front of the guide, he avoided under the roadside trees, was seen by Yang sitting in the car, called him to come, asked: Why does the older brother want to avoid the younger brother?

古文：膺之曰： 我自避赤棒，本不避卿。 
现代文：他答 ：我是躲避赤棒，本意不是避开你。 
English: He replied: I was dodging the red stick, I didn't mean to avoid you.

古文：愔甚重之。
现代文：杨对他十分看重。
English: Yang attaches great importance to him.

古文：然以其疏简傲物，竟天保间，沦滞不齿。
现代文：然而，因为他的疏放简慢，傲视别人，竟然在天保一世，沉沦淹滞，不被拔擢。
English: However, because of his slowness to release, and his arrogance towards others, he ended up drowning in Tembo I and was not promoted.

古文：乾明中，除卫尉少卿，迁国子祭酒。
现代文：废帝乾明时，才被任命为卫尉少卿，升迁为国子祭酒。
English: When Emperor Qianming was deposed, it was only then that he was appointed to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and promoted to the position of Imperial Son's sacrificial wine.

古文：河清末，拜金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：河清末年，被封为金紫光禄大夫。
English: At the end of the Heqing Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：患泄痢，积年不起。
现代文：他由于患痢疾腹泻，多年卧床不起。
English: He was bedridden for years due to dysentery and diarrhea.

古文：武平中，就家拜仪同三司。
现代文：武平年间，朝廷到他家中封他为仪同三司。
English: During the Wuping era, the imperial court came to his home to appoint him as the third secretary of Ji Tong.

古文：班台之贵，近世专以赏勋勤，膺之虽为猥杂，名器犹重。
现代文：台阁中的重要职衔，近世专门赏赐那些功勋卓著，勤于政事的官员。司马膺之虽然功绩平庸，但是声望颇高。
English: An important position in the cabinet, which in recent times has been specially awarded to officials who have made outstanding contributions and are diligent in politics. Although Sima Qizhi's achievements are mediocre, his reputation is quite high.

古文：初，司徒赵彦深起自孤微，为子如管记，膺之甚相忽略，不为之礼。
现代文：开初，司徒赵彦深出身寒微，又无支援，任膺之的叔父司马子如的管理文牍的小官吏，膺之轻视他，对他很不礼貌。
English: At the beginning, Shitou Zhao Yancheng was from a humble background and had no support. He was despised and treated very rudely by the minor officials who managed Wenzhou, such as Shitou's uncle Sima Zi.

古文：及彦深为宰相，朝士辐氵奏，膺之自念，故被延请，永不至门，每与相见，捧袂而已。
现代文：赵彦深任宰相，朝臣们都想趋奉拜谒。膺之因叔父的关系，所以被彦深邀请，膺之不到彦深家里去，每次见面，只是捧一下衣袖。
English: Zhao Yancheng was the prime minister, and the courtiers all wanted to pay homage to him. Because of his uncle's relationship, Yan Zhi was invited by Yan Sheng. Yan Zi did not go to Yan Sheng's home, and every time they met, they just tucked up their sleeves.

古文：太常卿段孝言，左丞相孝先之弟也，位望甚隆，尝诣其弟幼之，举座倾敬。
现代文：太常卿段孝言是左丞相段孝先的兄弟，地位和名望都很高。曾来拜访他的弟弟司马幼之，在座的人都被孝言倾倒，向他表达敬意。
English: Tai Changqing Duan Xiao Gan is the brother of Zuo Zhengxiang Duan Xiao Xian, and his status and reputation are very high. When he came to visit his younger brother Sima Youzhi, everyone present was bowled over by Xiao Gan and showed him respect.

古文：膺之时牵疾，在外斋冯几而坐，不为动容。直言： 我患痢久，太常不得致怪。 
现代文：膺之这时正被疾病缠扰，只是在外屋靠着茶几坐下，脸上也没有表现出殷勤欢迎的神态，说： 我患痢疾已经很久，太常卿不要见怪。 
English: At this time, Shizhi was being plagued by illness, but he just sat down in the outhouse by the tea table, and his face did not show a welcoming attitude, saying: I have been suffering from dysentery for a long time, so don't be surprised.

古文：黄门郎陆杳，贵游后进，膺之尝与棋。杳忽后至，寒温而已，棋遂辍。
现代文：黄门郎陆杳，是王公贵族的后代。膺之曾与他一起下棋，陆杳忽然不能按时来到，膺之只跟他寒喧几句，不再跟他下棋。
English: Huangmen Lang Lu Yao, is a descendant of Wanggong aristocrats. Yao Zhi used to play chess with him. Lu Yao suddenly couldn't come on time. Yao Zi only exchanged a few cold words with him and stopped playing chess with him.

古文：园宅闲素，门无杂客，性不饮酒，而不爱重宾游。
现代文：他在家里清静闲适，没有闲杂的客人。他不喜欢饮酒，也不爱和那些地位高的人交往。
English: He likes his home to be quiet and uncluttered, he doesn't like to drink alcohol and he doesn't like to socialise with people of high status.

古文：病久，不复堪读书，或以奕棋永日。
现代文：病了很久，体力不堪再读书，有时成天下棋消磨时光。
English: He had been ill for a long time and was too weak to study any more. Sometimes he would play chess to pass the time.

古文：名士有素怀者，时相寻候。无杂言，唯论经史。
现代文：名士们想念他的，不断来问候，对坐不说别的，只是谈论经史。
English: Celebrities miss him, keep coming to say hello, and don't say anything else to him, just talk about history.

古文：好读《太玄经》，又注扬雄《蜀都赋》。每云： 我欲与扬子云周旋。 
现代文：他爱读《太玄经》，又注释了扬雄的《蜀都赋》，常说： 我想和扬雄交往啊。 
English: He loved to read the "Tao Xuan Jing," and also annotated Yang Xiong's "Shu Du Fu." He often said: "I want to socialize with Yang Xiong."

古文：患痢十七年，竟不愈。
现代文：他患了十七年的痢疾，竟不痊愈。
English: He suffered from dysentery for seventeen years and never recovered.

古文：泰贵，追赠司徒。
现代文：北齐灭亡的那一年，病逝。窦泰，字世宁，太安捍殊人。
English: In the year of Bei Qi's demise, he died of illness. Dou Tai, Zha Shining, Taian Han Shuren.

古文：初，泰母梦风雷暴起，若有雨状。出庭观之，见电光夺目，驶雨沾洒。
现代文：开初，他的母亲梦见刮起大风，响起惊雷，好像天要降雨，她到院子里观看，只见电光闪耀，夺人眼目，疾雨降落。
English: At the beginning of the year, his mother dreamed of a strong wind blowing, a thunderstorm sounded, as if the sky was going to rain, she went to the yard to watch, only to see lightning flashing, eye-catching, heavy rain falling.

古文：寤而惊汗，遂有娠。
现代文：睡梦中惊出一身汗水，便怀有身孕。
English: She woke up sweating in her sleep and found out she was pregnant.

古文：期而不产，大惧。
现代文：怀胎期满而不分娩，他的母亲十分恐惧。
English: His mother was terrified when she did not give birth at full term.

古文：有巫曰： 度河湔裙，产子必易。 
现代文：有一个巫婆告诉她 ：渡河时弄湿裙子，生孩子就一定容易。 
English: A witch once told her: "If you wet your skirt when you cross the river, it will be easier to have a baby."

古文：便向水所。忽见一人曰： 当生贵子，可徙而南。 
现代文：她便到水边，忽然看见一个人对她说： 你当生贵子，可迁移到南边去住。 
English: She went to the water's edge, and suddenly saw a man who said to her: "You should be born a nobleman, and you can move to the south to live.

古文：泰母从之，俄而生泰。
现代文：他的母亲听从了这些劝告，不久生下窦泰。
English: His mother heeded the advice and soon gave birth to Dou Tai.

古文：及长，善骑射，有勇略。泰父兄战殁于镇，泰身负骸骨归尔硃荣。
现代文：他长大后，善于骑马射箭，颇有勇气和胆略，他的父兄都在战场上牺牲，他背着他们的尸骨去投奔尔朱荣。
English: When he grew up, he was good at horseback riding, archery, and had a lot of courage and daring. His father and brother were both killed on the battlefield, and he carried their corpses on his back to rush to Zhurong.

古文：以从讨邢杲功，赐爵广阿子。
现代文：因跟随尔朱荣讨伐邢杲有功，被赐爵为广阿子。
English: He was awarded the title of Guang A Zi for his contribution to the campaign of Zhu Rong against the Mongols.

古文：神武之为晋州，请泰为镇城都督，参谋军事。
现代文：神武帝高欢任晋州刺史，征请窦泰为镇城都督，参与谋划军事。
English: Emperor Jimmu Gao Huan appointed Jinzhou as the historical capital, recruited Dou Tai as the township governor, and participated in military planning.

古文：累迁侍中、京畿大都督，寻领御史中尉。
现代文：他多次升迁，官至侍中、京畿大都督，不久，任御史中尉，他以勋臣贵戚的身份位居台阁。
English: He was promoted many times, rising to the rank of chamberlain and the governor of Gyeonggi Province, and was soon appointed lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency. He held a seat in the cabinet as an honored retainer and distinguished relative.

古文：泰以勋戚居台，虽无多纠举，而百僚畏惧。
现代文：虽然对朝中弊端没有进行过多的弹劾纠察，然而，百官对他都很畏惧。
English: Although there have not been too many impeachment pickets against the evils of the DPRK and China, however, officials are afraid of him.

古文：天平三年，神武西讨，令泰自潼关入。
现代文：东魏孝静帝天平三年，高欢率兵进讨西魏，命窦泰从潼关进攻。
English: In the third year of the Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing's Tenpyeong era, Gao Huan led an army into the Western Wei and ordered Dou Tai to attack from Shaoguan.

古文：四年，泰至小关，为周文帝所袭，众尽没，泰自杀。
现代文：天平四年，他投军来到小关，被宇文泰袭击，全军覆没，他自尽身亡。
English: In the fourth year of the balance of power, he joined the army and came to Xiaoguan. He was attacked by Uwentai, the whole army was wiped out, and he committed suicide.

古文：初，泰将发鄴，鄴有惠化尼，谣云： 窦行台，去不回。 
现代文：他将从邺地出发西进时，邺城有一个叫惠化的僧人散布谣谚说： 窦行台，去不回。 
English: When he set out from Handan to the west, there was a monk in Handan named Huihua who spread a rumor saying: "Doo Xingtai, you can't go back."

古文：未行之前夜，三更，忽有硃衣冠帻数千人入台，云收窦中尉。
现代文：临出发的前一天晚上三更时分，忽然有数千名穿着红衣服戴着头巾的人来到御史台，说是来收回窦中尉。
English: At three o'clock in the evening on the eve of the departure, suddenly thousands of people wearing red clothes and headscarves came to the Observatory, saying that they had come to recover Lieutenant Dou.

古文：宿直兵吏皆惊。
现代文：值班的官吏和士兵都很惊奇。
English: The officers and soldiers on duty were surprised.

古文：其人入数屋。俄顷而去。
现代文：这些人进入几个屋子，不久离去。
English: The men entered several houses and left soon after.

古文：齐受禅，祭告其墓。皇建初，配享神武庙庭。子孝敬嗣，位仪同三司。尉景，字士真，善无人也。
现代文：第二天看门上的锁都没有动，大家才知道来的这些都不是人，便知道窦泰出兵必败。死后，朝廷追赠他为大司马、太尉、录尚书事，谥号武贞。尉景，字士真，善无人。
English: The next day, the locks on the gate did not move, and everyone knew that these were not people, so they knew that Dou Tai's troops would be defeated. After his death, the court posthumously awarded him the title of grand steward, lieutenant, record keeper, and his nickname was Wu Zhen. There was no one like him.

古文：泰、汉置尉堠官，其先有居此职者，因以氏焉。
现代文：秦、汉之际设置尉堠一职，他的祖先有人担任过这个职务，因此，以官职为姓。
English: On the occasion of the Qin and Han dynasties, the position of 尉 was set up. Some of his ancestors had held this position, so he took the official position as his surname.

古文：景性温厚，颇有侠气。魏孝昌中，北镇反，景与神武入杜洛周中，仍共归尔硃荣。
现代文：他性情温和淳厚，颇有豪侠之气，北魏孝明帝孝昌时，北部军镇反叛，尉景与高欢先跟随杜洛周，后又归附尔朱荣。
English: He was mild-mannered and honest, with a heroic air. During the Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor Xiaochang's reign, the northern military towns rebelled. First, Li Jing and Gao Huan followed Du Luo Zhou, and later they were annexed by Er Zhu Rong.

古文：以军功，封博野县伯。
现代文：因建立军功，他被封为博野县伯。
English: For his military exploits, he was awarded the title of Bono County nobleman.

古文：后从神武起兵信都。韩陵之战，唯景所统失利。
现代文：后来跟着高欢在信都起兵，韩陵大战，高欢大胜，惟有尉景统率的军队失利。
English: Later, following Gao Huan's raising of an army in Xindu, the Hanling War, Gao Huan won a great victory, but the army led by Lieutenant Jing lost.

古文：神武入洛，留景镇鄴。
现代文：高欢率兵进入洛阳，让尉景留下来镇守邺城。
English: Gao Huan led the soldiers into Luoyang, and let Ye Jing stay behind to guard Lucheng.

古文：寻进封为公。
现代文：不久，他又晋封为公。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the court.

古文：景妻常山君，神武之姊也。
现代文：他的妻子常山君，是高欢的妹妹。
English: His wife, Changshan Jun, is Gao Huan's younger sister.

古文：以勋戚，每有军事，与厍狄干常被委重。
现代文：因为是高欢的亲戚，所以每有军事行动，他与厍狄干经常被委以重任。
English: Because he was a relative of Gao Huan, whenever there was a military operation, he and Zi Dikang were often entrusted with important tasks.

古文：而不能忘怀财利，神武每嫌责之。
现代文：他不能忘怀于财货利益，高欢因此常训斥他。
English: He couldn't forget about his financial interests, so Gao Huan often scolded him.

古文：转冀州刺史，又大纳贿，发夫猎，死者三百人。
现代文：他任冀州刺史，大量收受贿赂，调集役夫打猎，死了三百人。
English: He made history in Jizhou, took a large amount of bribes, and mobilized officials to go hunting. Three hundred people died.

古文：厍狄干与景在神武坐，请作御史中尉。神武曰： 何意下求卑官？ 
现代文：厍狄干与他一起在高欢那里座谈。厍狄干请求作御史中尉，高欢问： 你为什么屈尊要求担任这个官职呢？ 
English: Zhi Dikang and Gao Huan had a discussion. Zi Dikang asked to be made a lieutenant of imperial history, and Gao Huan asked: "Why did you deign to ask for this position?"

古文：干曰： 欲捉尉景。 
现代文：他答道 ：想捉拿像尉景这样的贪官。 
English: He replied, "I want to catch corrupt officials like Lt. King."

古文：神武大笑，令优者石董桶戏之。
现代文：高欢听了大笑，命俳优石董桶戏谑尉景。
English: Gao Huan listened to the laughter, and the life of Hao Youshi Dongbui was a joke.

古文：董桶剥景衣曰： 公剥百姓，董桶何为不剥公？ 
现代文：石董桶去剥尉景的衣服，说： 您剥百姓，我为啥不能剥您呢？ 
English: Shi Dongbu went to peel off Yi Jing's clothes and said: You peel off the people, why can't I peel you off?

古文：神武诫景曰： 可以无贪也。 
现代文：高欢告诫他说 ：以后不要再有贪心了。 
English: Gao Huan warned him, "Don't be greedy anymore."

古文：景曰： 与尔计生活孰多，我止人上取，尔割天子调。 
现代文：他说 ：与您计算一下我们谁得到的多，我只从百姓身上取一些，您却从天子身上夺取调捐。 
English: He said, "Let me count with you which of us has received more. I only take from the people, but you take from the Son of God."

古文：神武笑不答。
现代文：高欢听了只笑不答。
English: Gao Huan only laughed and did not answer.

古文：改封长乐郡公，历位太保、太傅。
现代文：他又被改封为长乐郡公，历任太保、太傅。
English: He was also given the title of Changle County magistrate, and successively held the posts of Taibo and Taifu.

古文：坐匿亡人，见禁止。
现代文：因隐匿逃人获罪，被逮捕关押。
English: He was arrested and detained after being found guilty of hiding a fugitive.

古文：使崔暹谓文襄曰： 语阿惠，兒富贵，欲杀我邪？ 
现代文：他让崔暹对文襄帝高澄说： 对阿惠说，这小儿富贵了，想杀死我吗？ 
English: He told Choi Siam to say to Emperor Gaocheng: Tell Ah Hui, this child has become rich, does he want to kill me?

古文：神武闻之泣，诣阙曰： 臣非尉景无以至今日。 
现代文：高欢听后不禁哭泣，到宫中对天子说： 我要没有尉景就没有今天。 
English: After listening to Gao Huan, she couldn't help but cry, and went to the palace to say to Tianzi: "If I didn't have Ijing, I wouldn't have today."

古文：三请，帝乃许之。
现代文：多次请求，天子才同意将他释放。
English: After many requests, Tenzin agreed to release him.

古文：于是黜为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：于是，将他降职为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: As a result, he was demoted to the post of grand general of cavalry and appointed to the post of the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：神武造景，景恚，卧不动，叫曰： 杀我时趣邪？ 
现代文：高欢到他家里看望他，他很生气，躺在那里不动，大声问： 杀我的时候你到哪里去了？ 
English: Gao Huan went to his home to visit him. He was very angry, lay there motionless, and loudly asked, "Where did you go when you killed me?"

古文：常山君谓神武曰： 老人去死近，何忍煎迫至此！ 
现代文：他的妻子常山君对哥哥高欢说： 他离死不远了，怎么忍心再这样煎熬他！ 
English: His wife, Changshan Jun, said to her brother Gao Huan: "He is not far from death, how can I bear to torture him like this!

古文：又曰： 我为尔汲水，胝生。 因出其掌。
现代文：又说 ：他过去替您提水，手上都磨出了厚厚的老茧。 
English: He also said: "He used to carry water for you, and his hands are covered with thick calluses.

古文：神武抚景，为之屈膝。
现代文：并伸出手掌让高欢看。高欢抚慰尉景，不觉向他屈膝下跪。
English: Gao Huan stretched out his palm to let him see. Gao Huan comforted the lieutenant and kneeled down unconsciously.

古文：先是，景有果下马，文襄求之，景不与，曰： 土相扶为墙，人相扶为王。
现代文：早先，尉景有一匹果下马，高欢的长子高澄向他索求，他不给，说： 许多土互相粘合在一起就成了墙，人互相扶持就成了王。
English: In the early days, there was a stallion born in Lijing. Gao Huan's eldest son, Gao Cheng, asked him for it, but he would not give it to him. He said, "A lot of soil glued together becomes a wall, and people who support each other become kings."

古文：一马亦不得畜而索也？ 
现代文：我连一匹马也不能养，你竟然来要？ 
English: I can't even keep a horse, and you want a pony?

古文：神武对景及常山君责文襄而杖之。
现代文：高欢对着尉景和常山君责骂高澄，并用棍子打他。
English: Gao Huan scolded Gao Cheng against Lieutenant Jing and Changshan Jun and beat him with a stick.

古文：常山君泣救之，景曰： 小兒惯去，放使作心腹，何须干啼湿哭，不听打邪？ 
现代文：常山君哭着救护高澄，尉景说： 小孩子被惯坏了，如果你把他当成骨肉腹心，何必哭哭啼啼，不让我好好地教训他呢？ 
English: Changshan Jun cried and came to rescue Gao Cheng. Fei Jing said, "The child has been spoiled. If you regard him as a flesh-and-blood confidant, why should you cry and not let me teach him well?"

古文：皇建初，配享神武庙庭，追封长乐王。
现代文：不久，他任青州刺史。他的操行志节大为改变，百姓都安居乐业。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the mayor of Qingzhou. His behavior changed dramatically, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：子粲，少历显职，性粗武。
现代文：朝廷命他为大司马，他患病，在青州去世。他的儿子尉粲从小就历任显要的官职，性格粗鲁。
English: The imperial court appointed him as grand steward, but he fell ill and died in Qingzhou. His son, Guo Wei, was rude and had held important official positions since childhood.

古文：天保初，封厍狄干等为王，粲以父不预王爵，大恚恨，十余日闭门不朝。
现代文：天保初年，朝廷封厍狄干等人王爵，尉粲因为父亲没有被授予王爵，十分愤恨，十多天闭门在家，不去上朝。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court made Dickan and others into kings and queens. Because his father was not given the title of kings and queens, he was very angry and stayed at home for more than ten days and did not go to the imperial court.

古文：帝怪，遣使就宅问之。
现代文：文宣帝很奇怪，派人到他家去询问。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was puzzled and sent someone to his home to inquire.

古文：隔门谓使人曰： 天子不封粲父作王，粲不如死。 
现代文：他隔着门对来人说 ：天子不封我的父亲为王，我还不如死掉的好。 
English: He said to the man through the door: "If the Son of God does not make my father king, I might as well die."

古文：使云： 须开门受敕。 
现代文：使者说： 你应该开门接受天子的敕命。 
English: The messenger said: You should open the door and accept the command of the Son of God.

古文：粲遂弯弓隔门射。
现代文：他便拉开弓箭，隔着门射去。
English: He drew his bow and arrow and shot through the door.

古文：使者以状闻之，文宣使段韶谕旨。
现代文：使者把情况奏报给文宣帝，文宣帝又派段韶去宣布谕旨。
English: The envoy reported the situation to Emperor Wenzhong, who sent Duan Er to announce the edict.

古文：厍狄干，善无人也。
现代文：他见到段韶，只是抚着胸脯失声痛哭，一句话也不回答。
English: When he saw Duan Qian, he just stroked his chest and burst into tears, without answering a word.

古文：曾祖越豆眷，魏道武时，以功割善无之西腊汗山地方百里以处之。
现代文：文宣帝亲自到他家慰问，他才上朝。不久，朝廷追封他的父亲尉景为长乐王，由他继承王爵。厍狄干，善无人。他的曾祖父厍狄越豆眷在北魏道武帝时因建立军功，朝廷将善无西部腊汉山一带方圆百里的土地封赏给他。
English: Emperor Wenxuan himself came to his home to offer condolences, and only then did he ascend to the throne. Soon after, the imperial court posthumously crowned his father, Fei Jing, as the King of Changle, and he succeeded to the title of prince. Zhi Dikang was a good man. His great-grandfather, Zhi Di Yue Douzhen, had established military merit during the time of Emperor Daowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the imperial court awarded Zhenwu a hundred-mile radius of land around Mount Lachan in the west.

古文：后率部落北迁，因家朔方。
现代文：他后来率领部落的家口向北迁移，因而，家住在北部边境。
English: He later led the tribe's family to move north, so the family now lives on the northern border.

古文：干鲠直少言，有武艺。
现代文：他性情耿直，寡言少语，身怀武艺。
English: He has a straightforward nature, is taciturn, and is skilled in martial arts.

古文：魏正光初，除扫逆党，授将军，宿卫于内。
现代文：北魏孝明帝正光初年，因帮助朝廷扫除逆党，被授为将军，负责保卫皇宫大内。
English: In the first year of the Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor Zhengguang, he was awarded the rank of general for helping the imperial court to sweep away the rebel party, and was responsible for defending the imperial palace.

古文：以家在寒乡，不宜毒暑，冬得入京师，夏归乡里。
现代文：因为长时间居住在寒冷的地方，所以，不适应中原的炎夏酷暑，冬天才能到京城洛阳，夏天又回到家乡避暑。
English: Because they have lived in cold places for a long time, they cannot adapt to the hot summer heat of the Central Plains. In winter, they can only go to the capital Luoyang, and in summer they return to their hometown for the summer.

古文：孝昌元年，北边扰乱，奔云中，为刺史费穆送于尔硃荣。
现代文：孝昌元年，北部边境发生动乱，他逃向云中，被刺史费穆送交给尔朱荣。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, there was turmoil on the northern border, he fled to the clouds, and was stabbed by Shi Feimu and handed over to Er Zhu Rong.

古文：以军主随荣入洛。
现代文：以军主的身份随尔朱荣率兵进据洛阳。
English: As the commander of the army, he marched into Luoyang with Zhu Rong.

古文：后从神武起兵，破四胡于韩陵，封广平县公，寻进郡公。
现代文：后来又跟着高欢起兵，在韩陵打败尔朱氏，被封为广平县公。不久，晋封为郡公。
English: Later, he followed Gao Huan in raising an army, defeated the Er Zhu clan in Hanling, and was made the Guangping County magistrate. Soon, he was promoted to county magistrate.

古文：河阴之役，诸将大捷，唯干兵退。
现代文：河阴一仗，各位将军都传捷报，惟有他的部队败退。
English: In a battle in the shadow of the river, all the generals reported success, but his troops were defeated.

古文：神武以其旧功，竟不责黜。
现代文：高欢因念他过去的功劳，没有对他谴责和降职。
English: Gao Huan did not reprimand or demote him for his past achievements.

古文：寻转太保、太傅。
现代文：不久，他转任太保、太傅。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Taiho and Taifu.

古文：及高仲密以武牢叛，神武讨之，以干为大都督，前驱。
现代文：高仲密在武牢关叛变，高欢率兵进讨，命厍狄干为大都督，作为部队的先锋。
English: Gao Zhongmi rebelled in Wudongguan, Gao Huan led the troops to advance, and ordered Dikan to be the grand governor, as the vanguard of the troops.

古文：干上道不过家，见侯景，不遑食，景使骑追馈之。
现代文：他出发后连家门都不路过。为了见侯景，连饭都顾不上吃，侯景派骑兵追着给他送饭吃。
English: After his departure, he did not even pass by the door of his home. In order to see Hou Jing, he did not even have time to eat. Hou Jing sent cavalry to chase him to bring him food.

古文：时周文自将兵至洛阳，军容甚盛。
现代文：这时，宇文泰亲自率兵到达洛阳，军威十分雄壮。
English: At this time, Yu Wentai personally led the troops to Luoyang, and the military prestige was very strong.

古文：诸将未欲南度，干决计济河，神武大兵继至，遂大破之。
现代文：东魏的将领们都不想渡河南进，厍狄干却决定渡过黄河，进攻洛阳。高欢率领大军接踵而至，将宇文泰的军队打得大败。
English: The generals of the Eastern Wei Dynasty did not want to cross the river to the south of Henan, but Zhi Dikang decided to cross the Yellow River and attack Luoyang. Gao Huan led the army one after another, and defeated the army of Uwentai.

古文：还为定州刺史。
现代文：归来后他任定州刺史，由于他不精通吏治，为政多繁剧骚扰。
English: After his return, he was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, but because he was not familiar with the bureaucracy, he was harassed by many politicians.

古文：不闲吏事，事多烦扰，然清约自居，不为吏人所患。
现代文：然而，却能清廉俭约，励节自守，不被官吏和百姓所厌恶。
English: However, they are able to be frugal and thrifty, self-disciplined, and are not disliked by officials and the people.

古文：迁太师。
现代文：又迁任太师。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Grand Master.

古文：天平初，以干元勋佐命，封章武郡王，转太宰。
现代文：天保初年，因为他是国家的元勋，又有佐命立国的功劳，被朝廷封为章武郡王，又转为太宰。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, because he was the founder of the country, and also had the merit of founding the country, he was named the King of Zhangwu County by the court, and was also transferred to Dazai.

古文：干尚神武妹乐陵长公主，以亲地见待。
现代文：厍狄干与高欢的妹妹乐陵公主结婚，因为是朝廷的亲戚而被厚待。
English: Gao Dickan married Gao Huan's younger sister, Princess Le Ling, and was treated well because she was a relative of the imperial court.

古文：自预勤王，常总大众，威望之重，为诸将所伏。
现代文：他参与为王事尽力的事情，常常总领大众。其威望之高，被将领们所佩服。
English: He took part in everything that was done for the king, and often led the people. His prestige was so high that the generals admired him.

古文：而最为严猛。曾诣京师，魏谯王元孝友于公门言戏过常，无能面折者，干正色责之，孝友大惭，时人称善。
现代文：他最为严肃威猛，曾到京城，魏谯王元孝友在朝臣面前戏谑过甚，没有人敢当面批评他的过失。厍狄干却正言厉色地予以斥责，元孝友大为惭愧，人们都称赞他。
English: He was the most serious and powerful. Once, when he was in Beijing, the Wei dynasty king, Yuan Xiaoyou, made a lot of jokes in front of the courtiers, and no one dared to criticize his mistake in person. However, Yan Dikang rebuked him in a forthright manner. Yuan Xiaoyou was very ashamed, and people all praised him.

古文：干，皇建初配享神武庙庭。
现代文：去世后，朝廷追赠他为假黄钺、太宰，送给他鍂车京丧车一辆，谥号为景烈。
English: After his death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of pseudo-Huang Zi and Dazai, and gave him a Beijing funeral carriage, with the posthumous name of Jing Rong.

古文：子伏敬，位仪同三司卒，子士文嗣。
现代文：厍狄干不认识字，在公文上签名为干字，那一竖画却向上画出，人们都称之为穿槌。
English: Zhai Dickian didn't know Chinese characters. He signed his name as "干字" on the official document, but the vertical line was drawn upwards. People called it "piercing the hammer."

古文：士文性孤直，虽邻里至亲，莫与通狎。
现代文：厍狄士文是厍狄干的儿子，他性情孤高正直，即使是邻居和至亲好友，没有人与他嬉戏耍笑的。
English: He is the son of Zhi Dijian. His character is lonely and honest. Even if he is a neighbor and a close friend, no one plays and laughs with him.

古文：在齐，袭封章武郡王，位领军将军。
现代文：在北齐，他继承了章武郡王的爵位，官至领军将军。
English: In Northern Qi, he inherited the title of the King of Zhangwu County and became the leading general.

古文：周武帝平齐，山东衣冠多来迎，唯士文闭门自守。
现代文：周武帝宇文邕平定北齐，山东的缙绅官宦都出来迎接，惟有他闭门在家。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu, Emperor Yuwen, Emperor Ding of the North Qi, and the nobles, officials and people of Shandong all came out to welcome him, but he stayed at home behind closed doors.

古文：帝奇之，授开府仪同三司、随州刺史。
现代文：周武帝很器重他，封他为开府仪同三司、随州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu valued him very highly, and he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Zuo and Suizhou Shi Shi.

古文：隋文受禅，加上开府，封湖陂县子，寻拜贝州刺史。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚接受周静帝的禅让即皇帝位，封士文为上开府，赐爵为湖陂县子，不久，任命他为贝州刺史。
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty accepted Emperor Zhou Jingdi's offer of abdication as the emperor's throne, sealed Shifen as Shangkaifu, conferred a title of nobility on him as the son of Hubei County, and soon appointed him as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：性清苦，不受公料，家无余财。
现代文：他清廉艰苦，不贪占公家的任何东西，家中没有多余的钱财。
English: He is honest and hardworking, does not covet anything from the public, and there is no extra money in the family.

古文：其子尝啖官厨饼，士文枷之于狱累日，杖之二百，步送还京。
现代文：他的儿子曾吃了官厨中的饼子，他便给儿子戴上枷锁，关进监狱许多天，又打了二百棍，步行押送回京。
English: He put his son in shackles, put him in prison for many days, beat him with two hundred sticks, and escorted him back to Beijing on foot.

古文：僮隶无敢出门。
现代文：家中的书僮奴仆没有人敢轻易走出府门。
English: No one in the family dares to step out of the gate.

古文：所买盐菜，必于外境。
现代文：家里吃的油盐菜蔬，一定到他管辖的区域以外公平采买。
English: The oil and salt vegetables and greens eaten at home must be purchased fairly outside the area under his jurisdiction.

古文：凡有出入，皆封署其门，亲故绝迹，庆吊不通。
现代文：府中有人出入，都要在门口登记，亲朋故交都因此断绝往来，庆贺吊唁，互不相通。
English: Anyone entering or leaving the prefecture had to register at the entrance. As a result, friends and relatives cut off contacts, exchanged congratulations and condolences, and did not communicate with each other.

古文：法令严肃，吏人股战，道不拾遗。
现代文：他颁布了严刑峻法，官吏百姓有违法者，无不胆颤股栗。贝州境内，道不拾遗。
English: He promulgated a severe punishment law, officials and people have violators, all are afraid. In the territory of Bozhou, there is no way out.

古文：有细过，必深文陷害。
现代文：就是有人犯了小的过失，他也要严加追究，决不宽贷。
English: Even if someone has made a small mistake, he must be strictly investigated and will never be forgiven.

古文：尝入朝，遇上赐公卿入左藏，任取多少。
现代文：他曾回京城朝拜天子，正遇上隋文帝将国库里的东西赏赐给公卿大臣，让他们任意拿取。
English: He once went back to Beijing to worship the Son of Heaven, just as he was about to meet the Emperor Sui Wen, who was giving gifts from the treasury to the nobles and ministers, allowing them to take as much as they wanted.

古文：人皆极重，士文独口衔绢一匹，两手各持一匹。
现代文：许多人都拿得又多又重，惟有士文用嘴咬着一匹绢，两只手各拿了一匹。
English: Many of them were carrying large and heavy loads, but Shiven was biting a donkey with his mouth and holding one in each hand.

古文：上问其故，士文曰： 臣口手俱足，余无所须。 
现代文：隋文帝问他为什么拿得这样少，他答道： 我的口和手都得到满足，其他就没什么需求的。 
English: Sui Wen Di asked him why he took so little, and he replied: My mouth and hands are satisfied, and I have no need for anything else.

古文：上异之，别赏遗之。
现代文：隋文帝很惊异，另外赏赐给他一些东西。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very surprised and gave him something else.

古文：士文至州，发摘奸谄，长吏尺布斗粟之赃，无所宽贷。
现代文：他在州刺史任上，揭发并惩治那些丑恶奸邪的犯罪行为，官吏们有一尺布一斗粟的贪污或受贿，他也严惩不贷。
English: In his post as the state chief historian, he exposed and punished the most heinous and evil criminal acts, and he also severely punished officials who had a foot of cloth and a bucket of corn for corruption or bribery.

古文：得千人，奏之，悉配防岭南。
现代文：共处治一千人，奏报给朝廷后，都发配到岭南。
English: Together, they ruled over a thousand people, and after reporting to the imperial court, they were all sent to Lingnan.

古文：亲戚相送，哭声遍于州境。
现代文：为罪犯送行的亲属哭声遍于贝州全境。
English: The cries of the relatives who saw the criminals off were heard throughout the whole of Bechuanaland.

古文：至岭南遇瘴厉，死者十八九。
现代文：这些人到了岭南，遇上那里的由湿热的空气而传染的疾病，十有八九都死掉了。
English: When these people arrived in Lingnan and encountered the diseases transmitted by the hot and humid air there, nine times out of ten they died.

古文：于是父母妻子，唯哭士文。
现代文：于是，他们的父母兄弟，妻子儿女，都哭喊着厍狄士文的名字控诉叫骂。
English: As a result, their parents and brothers, wives and children, all cried out the name of Zi Di Shwen, complained and scolded.

古文：士文闻之，令人捕搦，捶楚盈前而哭孝弥甚。
现代文：他听说后，派人将他们捕来，鞭打棍击，而哭喊的声音更高。
English: When he heard about it, he sent his men to catch them and beat them with sticks, while they cried louder.

古文：司马京兆韦焜、清河令河东赵达，二人并苛刻，唯长史有惠政。
现代文：司马京兆人韦棍、清河县令河东人赵达，二人也都为政苛刻，只有长史惠爱百姓。
English: Sima Jingzhao's Wei Jian and Qinghe County's Linghe Dongren's Zhao Da were both harsh politicians, but only Changshi Hui loved the people.

古文：时人语曰： 刺史罗杀政，司马蝮蛇瞋，长史含笑判，清河生吃人。 
现代文：当时人们传说： 刺史为政就像阎罗王，司马发怒好比蝮蛇瞪眼睛，只有长史对着百姓笑，清河这地方真是生吃活人。 
English: At that time, people said: stabbing history for politics is like the king of hell, Sima's anger is like a boa constrictor's staring eyes, only Changshi smiles at the people, Qinghe is a place that really eats people alive.

古文：上闻，叹曰： 士文暴过毒兽！ 
现代文：隋文帝听说后叹息道 ：士文的暴政超过了猛兽！ 
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Sui Wen sighed, "The tyranny of scholars has surpassed that of wild beasts!"

古文：竟坐免。未几，为雍州长史。
现代文：坐罪免去官职，不久，又被任命为雍州长史。
English: He was pardoned and removed from office, and was soon appointed as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：谓人曰： 我向法深，不能窥候贵要，无乃必死此官！ 
现代文：他对别人说 ：我过去立法严格，不能看贵臣显要的眼色行事，不久一定会死在这个官位上！ 
English: He said to others: "I used to be a strict legislator, and I cannot act with the pompous eye of a high-ranking minister. I will surely die in this post soon!"

古文：及下车，执法严正，不避贵戚，宾客莫敢至门，人多怨望。
现代文：上任后，执法严格公正，不回避勋臣贵戚，客人们不敢到他的家门请托，人们对他产生了埋怨的情绪。
English: After taking office, he enforced the law in a strict and fair manner, and did not shy away from court nobles and their relatives. Guests did not dare to come to his house to ask for favors, and people had a grudge against him.

古文：士文从妹为齐氏嫔，有色，齐灭后，赐薛公长孙览。
现代文：他的从妹原来是北齐天子的嫔妃，颇有姿色。北齐灭亡后，被朝廷赐给了薛公长孙览。
English: His sister-in-law was originally the concubine of the son of Northern Qi, and was quite beautiful. After the death of Northern Qi, she was given to Xue Gongchang Sunzhan by the imperial court.

古文：览妻郑氏妒，谮之文献后，令览离绝。
现代文：长孙览的妻子嫉妒，到文献后那里进谗，让长孙览把士文的从妹休弃。
English: The wife of the eldest grandson of the survey was jealous, and went there after the document, and asked the eldest grandson of the survey to abandon the scholar from his sister.

古文：士文耻之，不与相见。后应州刺史唐君明居母忧，娉以为妻。
现代文：士文感到很羞耻，不与他的从妹相见，后来，应州刺史唐君明在为母亲守丧期间聘娶他的从妹为妻子。
English: Shifeng felt very ashamed not to see his younger sister, and later, during his mother's funeral, the governor of Yingzhou, Tang Junming, hired his younger sister as his wife.

古文：由是君明、士文并为御史劾。
现代文：因此，他与君明都被御史弹劾。
English: As a result, both he and Junming were impeached by the Emperor.

古文：士文性刚，在狱数日，愤恚而死。
现代文：士文性情刚烈，在狱中被拘押数日，就愤恨死去。
English: He was a man of strong character. When he was detained in prison for a few days, he died of indignation.

古文：赠假黄钺、太宰、太师，谥曰肃武。
现代文：家中没有多余的钱财，他有三个儿子，生活穷困，吃了上顿没有下顿，亲戚朋友却没有人帮助他们。
English: There is no extra money in the family, he has three sons, lives in poverty, has never had enough to eat, relatives and friends have no one to help them.

古文：皇建初，配享文襄庙庭。
现代文：韩晋明，北齐大司马、安德郡王韩轨之子。
English: Han Jinming, the son of North Qi Da Sima, the king of Ande County, Han Cao.

古文：子晋明嗣。天统中，改封东莱王。
现代文：他继承了父亲的爵位，天统时，又改封为东莱王。
English: He inherited his father's title of nobility, and when he ascended to the throne, he changed his title to King of Donglai.

古文：晋明有侠气，诸勋贵子孙中，最留心学问。
现代文：他颇有豪侠之气，在勋贵王公的子孙中，他最留心学问。
English: He was quite heroic, and he was the most studious of the sons and grandsons of distinguished princes.

古文：好酒诞纵。
现代文：他喜好饮酒，并因此任性放纵。
English: He likes to drink alcohol and indulges in self-indulgence.

古文：招引宾客，一席之费，动至万钱，犹恨俭率。
现代文：宴请宾客，一顿酒席的费用，常至一万钱，但还嫌太节俭。
English: The cost of inviting guests to a banquet, a banquet, is often up to ten thousand dollars, but it is still too frugal.

古文：朝廷欲处之贵要地，必以疾辞，告人云： 废人饮美酒，对名胜。安能作刀笔吏，披反故纸乎？ 
现代文：朝廷想把他安置到富裕重要的地方任官职，他必定以身体患病拒绝，对别人说 ：我这个没用的人只能饮美酒佳酿，观山水名胜，怎么能当刀笔官吏，被束缚在故纸堆中呢？ 
English: If the imperial court wanted to place him in a rich and important place to hold an official post, he would certainly refuse on the grounds of physical illness, saying to others: "I am a useless person who can only drink fine wine and watch scenic spots. How can I be a bureaucrat and be bound in a pile of old papers?"

古文：二年，重赠大司马、尚书令、武威王。
现代文：武平末年，他被朝廷任命为尚书左仆射，只干了一百来天，便称病辞去官职。
English: At the end of Wuping's life, he was appointed by the imperial court as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man. He only worked for about a hundred days, and then resigned from his official post, saying he was ill.

古文：长子韶嗣。韶字孝先，少工骑射，有将领才略。
现代文：段韶，字孝先，少年时工于骑马射箭，有将领的才能胆略。
English: Duan Xuan, also known as Xiao Xian, worked as a boy riding a horse and shooting arrows. He had a general's talent for daring.

古文：以武明皇后甥，神武益器爱之，常置左右，以为心腹，领亲信都督。
现代文：因为他是武明皇后的姨外甥，高欢更加器重和喜欢他。常让他在自己的身边，当做心腹，任他为亲信都督。
English: Because he was the niece and nephew of Empress Wu Ming, Gao Huan valued and liked him even more. He often had him by his side, as a confidant, and appointed him as a trusted governor.

古文：神武拒尔硃兆于广阿，惮兆兵众。
现代文：高欢率兵在广阿与尔朱兆所部对峙，却惧怕敌兵数量众多。
English: Gao Huan's soldiers were in a confrontation with Lzhu Zhao's troops in Guang'a, but they were afraid of the large number of enemy soldiers.

古文：韶曰： 所谓众者，得众人之死；所谓强者，得天下之心。
现代文：段韶劝慰他说 ：所说的众，就是要让众人乐于为你去死；所说的强，就是要得到天下人的心。
English: Duan Er consoled him, saying, "The word'many' means to make people willing to die for you; the word'strong' means to win the hearts of people all over the world."

古文：尔硃裂冠毁冕，拔本塞原。芒山之会，搢绅何罪？杀主立君，不脱旬朔。
现代文：尔朱氏分裂朝廷，破坏了国家的元气，群臣们都到邙山去迎接尔朱荣，有什么罪过，他却杀死少主，又立新君，不过在旬月之间就改朝换代。
English: The Lzhu clan split the imperial court and undermined the vitality of the country. All the courtiers went to Shaoshan to meet Lzhu Rong. What was his crime? He killed the young lord and installed a new prince. However, he changed the dynasty and generation between the lunar months.

古文：天下从乱，士室而九。
现代文：弄得天下动乱，十室九空。
English: Causing turmoil in the world, ten rooms, nine skies.

古文：王躬昭德义，诛君侧之恶，何往而不克哉！ 
现代文：您亲自彰明德义，诛杀天子身边的恶人，攻到哪里不会胜利呢？ 
English: You personally promote virtue and righteousness, fight and kill the evildoers around the Son of Heaven, where will you not win?

古文：神武曰： 吾虽以顺讨逆，恐无天命。 
现代文：神武帝高欢说： 我虽然坚持正义，讨伐逆贼，恐怕没有皇天相助。 
English: Shenwu Emperor Gao Huan said: Although I adhere to justice and fight against traitors, I am afraid that there is no heavenly help.

古文：韶曰： 闻小能敌大，小道大淫，皇天无亲，唯德是辅。
现代文：段韶说： 我听说力量小的能战胜力量大的，德义会由小到大，逐渐扩展。皇天没有远近亲疏，只要有德于民，有义于国，它都会帮助您。
English: Duan Yu said: I have heard that a small force can defeat a large force, and the virtue and righteousness will gradually expand from small to large. The emperor has no distant relatives, as long as there is virtue in the people and righteousness in the country, it will help you.

古文：今尔硃外贼天下，内失善人，智者不为谋，勇者不为斗。
现代文：现在尔朱氏在外骚扰天下，成为人们心目中的乱臣贼子，对内失去一切正直善良的朝臣的支持。有智慧的人不为他出谋划策，有勇力的人不替他拼死搏斗。
English: Now, the Er Zhu clan is harassing the world from the outside, becoming a ruffian thief in people's minds, and losing the support of all honest and kind courtiers inside. People with wisdom do not make plans for him, and people with courage do not fight for him.

古文：不肖失职，贤者取之，复何疑也！ 
现代文：不肖者已经失职，贤能的人就要取而代之，还有什么犹豫的呢？ 
English: The unscrupulous have already lost their jobs, and the virtuous are about to take their place. What is there to hesitate about?

古文：遂与挑战，败之。频以军功，封下洛县男，后回赐父爵姑臧县侯。
现代文：高欢接受他的劝告，便向尔朱兆的军队发动进攻，将敌军打败。段韶多次建立军功，被封为下洛县男。后来，他又继承父亲段荣的爵位，为姑臧县侯。
English: Gao Huan accepted his advice and launched an attack on the army of Er Zhu Zhao, defeating the enemy army. Duan Yu repeatedly established military merit and was named the man of Xiangluo County. Later, he also inherited the title of his father Duan Rong and became the lord of Guzhen County.

古文：芒山之役，为贺拔胜所窘，韶从傍驰马反射，毙其马，追骑不敢进，遂免。
现代文：邙山之役，高欢被贺拔胜追赶，他从旁边驰马用箭射死贺拔胜的战马，追赶的骑兵不敢前进，高欢才得以逃脱。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, Gao Huan was chased by He Baxing. He shot He Baxing's horse with an arrow from a nearby galloping horse. The pursuing cavalry did not dare to advance, and Gao Huan was able to escape.

古文：赐鞍下马并金，进爵为公。
现代文：朝廷为此赐给他马匹鞍鞯和金银，晋封爵位为公。
English: For this, the imperial court gave him horses, saddles, gold and silver, and a title of nobility.

古文：及征玉壁，攻城未下，神武不豫。
现代文：段韶随高欢进讨玉壁，城池没有攻下，高欢就患重病。
English: Duan Yu followed Gao Huan into the siege of Yuping, and when the castle was not taken, Gao Huan fell seriously ill.

古文：谓大司马斛律金、司徒韩轨、左卫将军刘丰等曰： 吾每谓孝先论兵，殊有英略，若比来用其谋，可无今日之劳矣。
现代文：他对大司马斛律金、司徒韩轨、左卫将军刘丰等人说： 我一向认为段韶论说军事，很有谋略。如果过去采纳他的计谋，可免去今日的征讨之劳。
English: He said to Daishi Ma Ying-jin, Szeto Han-rao, General of the Left Division Liu Feng and others, "I have always believed that Duan Xi is very strategic when it comes to military affairs. If we had adopted his strategies in the past, we would have been spared the burden of collecting taxes today."

古文：吾患危笃，欲委孝先以鄴下事，若何？ 
现代文：我的病情严重，想把朝廷的大事委托给他，你们认为如何？ 
English: My illness is serious, and I want to entrust the important affairs of the imperial court to him. What do you think?

古文：金等咸曰： 知臣莫若君，实无出孝先者。 
现代文：斛律金等人都说 ：了解臣子都不如国君，实在是没有人能超过段孝先的。 
English: Koryukin and others all said, "Understand that the vassals are not as good as the sovereign. In fact, no one can surpass Duan Xiaosen."

古文：仍令韶从文宣镇鄴，召文襄赴军顾命。
现代文：高欢便命他与文宣帝高洋一起镇守邺城，召集文襄帝高澄到军中来准备接受神武帝的遗诏。
English: Gao Huan then ordered him and Emperor Gaoyang to jointly guard Lucheng, and summoned Emperor Gao Cheng to the army to prepare to accept Emperor Shenwu's will.

古文：文襄以孝先为托，令军旅大事，并与筹之。
现代文：高澄也把段韶作为寄托，军中的大事，都与他一起筹划。
English: Gao Cheng also relied on Duan Rong, and major events in the army were planned together with him.

古文：及神武崩，侯景反，文襄还鄴，留韶守晋阳，委以军事。
现代文：神武帝去世，侯景反叛，高澄回到邺城，让段韶留守晋阳，把军国大事都托付给他。
English: Emperor Jimmu died, Houjing rebelled, Gaocheng returned to Lucheng, leaving Duan Rong to stay in Jinyang, entrusting him with the military affairs of the country.

古文：加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：加封他为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry and the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：文宣受禅，除尚书右仆射，迁冀州刺史。
现代文：文宣帝高洋代魏立齐，又任命他为尚书右仆射，迁任冀州刺史。
English: Emperor Wenzhong of the Gaoyang Dynasty of Wei Dynasty appointed him as the right-hand man of Shangshu and moved him to Jizhou.

古文：天保四年，梁将东方白额潜至宿豫，诏韶讨之。
现代文：天保四年，南梁将领东方白额领兵悄悄进至宿豫，朝廷命段韶率军进讨。
English: In the 4th year of the Tenpo era, the general Nan Liang and the leader of the Eastern White Front quietly marched into Sukuyuan, and the imperial court ordered Duan Xuan to lead the army to advance.

古文：既至，会梁将严超达等军逼泾州，陈霸先将攻广陵，尹令思谋袭盱眙，三军咸惧。
现代文：到达宿豫，适逢梁将严超达等股军队逼攻泾州，陈霸先准备攻打广陵，尹令思阴谋袭击盱眙。北齐的军队都很恐慌。
English: When Liang arrived in Suiyu, he forced the troops of Yan Chaoda and other units to attack Bozhou. Chen Baxi prepared to attack Guangling first, while Yin Lingsi plotted to attack Handan. The troops in North Qi were very panicked.

古文：韶谓诸将曰： 自梁氏丧乱，国无定主，人怀去就。
现代文：段韶对将领们说 ：自从萧梁发生动乱，南朝没有固定的国君，人人各怀离异之心。
English: Duan Yu said to the generals, "Since the disturbance in Xiao Liang, the Southern Dynasty has not had a fixed sovereign, and everyone harbors a heart of dissent.

古文：霸先外托同德，内有离心，吾揣之熟矣。 
现代文：陈霸先口说要与朝廷同心同德，内心里却有背离的想法，我估量得已经很透彻了。 
English: Chen Ba first said that he wanted to be of one mind and one heart with the imperial court, but in his heart he had the idea of deviating from it. In my estimation, I was already very thorough.

古文：乃留仪同三司敬显俊等围宿豫，自倍道赴泾州。
现代文：他留下仪同三司敬显俊等人围攻宿豫，亲自率兵星夜兼程赶赴泾州。
English: He left Yi with the Third Division of Jing Xianjun and others to besiege Suyuan, and personally led the soldiers to drive to Zhangzhou at night.

古文：涂出盱眙，令思不虞大军卒至，望旗而奔。
现代文：途径盱眙，梁将尹令思没料想齐军会突然来到，望风披靡，纷纷南逃。
English: By the way, Liang will Yin Ling thought unexpectedly that the Qi army would suddenly come, the wind was overwhelming, and they fled south.

古文：进破超达军。回赴广陵，霸先遁走。
现代文：齐军打败严超达，由泾州驰回广陵，陈霸先不战而逃。
English: The Qi army defeated Yan Chaoda and raced back to Guangling from Zhangzhou. Chen Badu fled without a fight.

古文：旋师宿豫，遣辨士喻白额。白额开门请盟。
现代文：然后，齐军又以凯旋之师进赴宿豫，段韶派能言善辩之士进城劝说东方白额，白额打开城门，出来与段韶缔结盟约。
English: Then, the Qi army went to Sukuyuan with the triumphant division, and Duan Yu sent a well-spoken and well-argued person into the city to persuade the Eastern White Front to open the city gate and come out to make an alliance with Duan Yu.

古文：盟讫，度白额终不为用，斩之，并其诸弟，并传首京师。
现代文：盟约订完，他估计白额不会遵守，将白额和他的几位兄弟一起斩首，并将他们的头颅送到京城。
English: After the pact was signed, he estimated that Paige would not comply, beheaded Paige along with several of his brothers, and sent their heads to the capital.

古文：封平原郡王，历司空、司徒、大将军、尚书令、太子太师。
现代文：朝廷封他为平原郡王，历任司空、司徒、大将军、尚书令、太子太师。
English: The Imperial Court named him the King of Pingyuan County, and his successors included Siku, Sito, Daisen, Shang Shurei, and Taishi.

古文：以继母忧，去职。
现代文：因继母去世，他辞去官职回家守丧。
English: Due to the death of his stepmother, he resigned from his post and went home to mourn.

古文：寻起为大司马，仍为尚书令，迁录尚书事、并州刺史。
现代文：不久，被朝廷起用，任大司马，仍然任尚书令，又迁任录尚书事、并州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed by the imperial court as the chief secretary of the imperial court, and was still appointed as the secretary of the imperial court. Later, he was transferred to the post of the secretary of the imperial court, and became the secretary of the imperial court.

古文：后与东安王娄睿平高归彦，迁太傅，仍莅并州。
现代文：后来，与东安王娄睿一起平定高归彦的叛乱，迁升为太傅，仍任并州刺史。
English: Later, together with Dong'an Wang Zhaorui, he quelled Gao Guihang's rebellion, was promoted to Taifu, and was still appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：为政不存小察，甚得人和。
现代文：他为政不计较别人细微的过失，颇得官吏们拥戴。
English: He is a politician who does not care about the minor faults of others, and is quite popular with officials.

古文：周文遣将率羌夷与突厥合众逼晋阳，武成自鄴倍道赴之。
现代文：宇文泰派将领率羌族与突厥人联合进攻晋阳，武成帝高湛从邺城率兵兼程赶来救援。
English: Uwentai sent generals to lead the Yi people and Turks to jointly attack Jinyang, and Emperor Wu Chengdi Gaotan led troops from Shicheng to come to the rescue.

古文：时大雪，诸将或欲逆之，韶曰： 不如阵以待之。彼劳我逸，破之必矣。 
现代文：当时天降大雨，将领们有人想主动出击敌人，段韶却阻止说： 我们不如严阵以待，彼劳我逸，将敌人打败是确定无疑的事情。 
English: At that time, it was raining heavily. Some of the generals wanted to attack the enemy on their own initiative, but Duan Yu stopped them, saying, "We'd better wait and see. Let others help us. Defeating the enemy is a sure thing."

古文：遂大破之。进位太师。
现代文：果然大败敌军，他被晋封为太师。
English: He defeated the enemy and was promoted to Grand Master.

古文：周冢宰宇文护母阎氏，先配中山宫，护闻尚存，乃因边境移书，请还其母，并通邻好。
现代文：北周的宰辅宇文护的母亲阎氏先许配给中山宫，宇文护听说她还活着，便从边境送书信给北齐，请求送还他的母亲，并表示两国今后要和睦通好。
English: The mother of Northern Zhou's chief aide, Uwengu, Yan, was first assigned to Zhongshan Palace. When Uwengu heard that she was still alive, he sent a letter from the border to Northern Qi, requesting that his mother be returned, and said that the two countries should be in harmony in the future.

古文：韶以为护外托为相，其实王也。
现代文：段韶认为宇文护表面是北周的宰相，而实际却掌握王权。
English: Duan Rong thought that while Uwen Rong was ostensibly the chancellor of Northern Zhou, he actually held the royal power.

古文：为母请和，不通一介之使，据移送书，恐示以弱。
现代文：为了他的母亲请求与我们通好讲和，不派一个使者，仅仅靠投递书信，恐怕是不愿向我们示弱。
English: For the sake of his mother's request to make peace with us, I am afraid that he does not want to show his weakness to us by not sending a messenger, but only by delivering a letter.

古文：且外许之，待通和往复，放之未晚。
现代文：我们先暂时答应送还他的母亲，待两国通好，互相往来后，再送还也不算晚。
English: First, we temporarily agreed to return his mother. As long as the two countries are friendly and have mutual exchanges, it is not too late to return him.

古文：不听，遂遣使以礼将送。
现代文：朝廷没有采纳他的建议，便派使者按礼节将宇文护的母亲送回。
English: The court did not accept his suggestion and sent an emissary to return the mother of Umenosuke according to etiquette.

古文：护得母，仍遣将尉迟迥等袭洛阳。
现代文：宇文护与母亲团聚不久，便派将军尉迟回等人进袭洛阳。
English: Shortly after the reunion between Uwen and his mother, he sent a lieutenant to attack Luoyang.

古文：诏兰陵王长恭、大将军斛律光击之。
现代文：朝廷命兰陵王高长恭、大将军斛律光迎战周军。
English: The imperial court ordered Lanling King Gao Changqiong and General Bao Riguang to fight against the Zhou army.

古文：军次芒山下，逗留未进。
现代文：齐军行至邙山脚下，却逗留不前。
English: The Qi army marched to the foot of Lushan Mountain, but lingered.

古文：武成召韶，欲赴洛阳围，但以突厥为虑。
现代文：武成帝召请段韶，想让他赶赴洛阳解围，但又顾虑突厥人进攻。
English: Emperor Wucheng summoned Duan Yu and wanted him to rush to Luoyang to relieve the siege, but he was worried about the Turks attacking.

古文：韶曰： 北虏侵边，事等疥癣；西羌窥逼，是膏肓之病。 
现代文：段韶说 ：突厥人侵犯北部边境，事情就像身上长了癣疥，北周人的进攻，才是深入膏肓的大病。 
English: Duan Yu said: The Turks violated the northern border, and it was like having a boil on one's body. It was the attack by the Northern Zhou people that was the deep-rooted serious illness.

古文：帝仍令韶督精骑一千发晋阳，五日便济河。
现代文：武成帝命他率一千精锐骑兵从晋阳出发，五天便渡过黄河。
English: At the behest of Emperor Wu Cheng, he led a thousand elite cavalry from Jinyang and crossed the Yellow River in five days.

古文：遇周军于大和谷，与诸将阵以待之。
现代文：他在大和谷与周军相遇，便与各路将领布好阵势等待敌军。
English: He met the Zhou army in Yamato Valley, and then waited for the enemy with the generals from all directions.

古文：韶为左军，兰陵王为中军，斛律光为右军。
现代文：他率领左军，兰陵王高长恭率领中军，斛律光率领右军。
English: He led the left army, Lanling Wang Gao Changgyong led the middle army, and Bao Riguang led the right army.

古文：上山逆战，韶且却引，待其力弊，下马击之，周人大溃。洛城围亦即奔遁。
现代文：周军奔上邙山与齐军作战，段韶故意暂时领军退却，等待敌兵精疲力尽，再下马反击，把周军打得溃不成军，洛阳的包围立即被解除。
English: The Zhou army ran up the Lushan Mountain to fight against the Qi army. Duan Rong deliberately led the army to retreat temporarily, waiting for the enemy soldiers to be exhausted, and then counterattacked, defeating the Zhou army, and the siege of Luoyang was immediately lifted.

古文：除太宰，封灵武县公。
现代文：朝廷任命他为太宰，封爵为灵武县公。
English: The imperial court appointed him as Dazai and ennobled him as Lingwu County official.

古文：天统三年，除左丞相。
现代文：天统三年，被授予左丞相的职务。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tenjo, he was given the position of the left chancellor.

古文：四年，别封永昌郡公。食沧州干。
现代文：四年，另外封爵为永昌郡公，领取沧州的俸禄。
English: In four years, he was also knighted as Yongchang County Governor and received a salary from Cangzhou.

古文：武平二年，出晋州道，到定陇，筑威敌、平寇二城而还。
现代文：武平二年，他从晋州道出发，到达定陇，修建威敌、平寇两座城堡，尔后返回。
English: In the second year of Wuping, he set out from Jinzhou Road, arrived at Dinglu, built two castles of the great enemy, Pingke, and then returned.

古文：二月，周师来寇，遣韶与右丞相斛律光、太尉兰陵王长恭往。
现代文：这年二月，北周军队前来进攻，朝廷派他与右丞相斛律光、太尉兰陵王高长恭前往抵御。
English: In February of that year, the Northern Zhou army came to attack, and the imperial court sent him, together with the Minister of the Right, Yao Liguang, and the Lieutenant Lanling Wang Gao Changqin, to defend against them.

古文：行达西境，有柏谷城者，敌之绝险，诸将莫肯攻围。
现代文：军队到达西部边境。有一座柏谷城，是敌人占领的十分险要的地方，北齐的将领都不敢包围攻打，段韶说 ：汾水以北黄河以东，一直是我们的领土。
English: The army reached the western border. There is a Kashiwa Valley City, which is a very dangerous place for the enemy to occupy. The generals of the Northern Qi did not dare to encircle and attack. Duan Yu said: North of Surabaya and east of the Yellow River has always been our territory.

古文：韶曰： 汾北河东，势为国家之有，若不去柏谷，事同痼疾。计彼会兵在南道。今断其要路，救不能来。
现代文：如不拿下柏谷城，就好像留下一个不好医治的疾病。估计敌人在南道会合，现在切断他们的咽喉要道，救兵就不能进来。
English: If we don't take Kashiwa-dani, it will be like leaving behind an incurable disease. It is estimated that the enemy will meet in the south, and now we will cut their throat, and the rescuers will not be able to enter.

古文：城势虽高，其中甚狭，火弩射之，一旦可尽。 
现代文：柏谷城地势虽然很高，但里面却很狭窄，用火箭射击，很快就可以烧成灰烬。 
English: Although Kashiwa Castle is very high, it is very narrow inside. If it is shot with a rocket, it will quickly burn to ashes.

古文：遂攻之，城溃。
现代文：齐军进攻柏谷，将城中的敌人击溃。
English: The Qi army attacked Kashiwa Valley and defeated the enemy in the city.

古文：仍城华谷，置戍而还。
现代文：齐军在华谷建立城堡，留下戍守的部队便撤还。
English: The Qi army built a castle in Huaguan, and the troops that stayed behind were withdrawn.

古文：封广平郡公。
现代文：朝廷封他为广平郡公。
English: The imperial court named him Guangping County Governor.

古文：是月，周又遣将攻边，斛律光先率军御之，韶亦请行。
现代文：这一月，周军又派将领进攻北齐的边境，斛律光先率领军队前去抗击，段韶也请求领兵前往。
English: This month, the Zhou army also sent generals to attack the border of North Qi, Bao Riguang first led the army to fight, and Duan Yu also requested to lead the troops.

古文：五月，到服秦城。
现代文：五月，他率军到达服秦城。
English: In May, he led his army to Qincheng.

古文：西人于姚襄城南更起城镇，韶抽壮士从北袭之，使人潜度河告姚襄城中，内外相应，进战大破之。
现代文：周军在姚襄城的南面又建起一座城堡。他抽调精壮勇士从新城北边袭击，又派人暗中渡河与姚襄城中联系，相约里应外合，夹击敌人，将敌人打得大败。
English: Zhou's army built another castle to the south of Yao Xiang City. He dispatched elite warriors to attack from the north side of the new city, and sent people to secretly cross the river and contact Yao Xiang City. They agreed to cooperate with each other, clamped down on the enemy, and defeated the enemy.

古文：诸将咸欲攻其新城，韶曰： 此城一面阴河，三面地险，不可攻。
现代文：将领们都想进攻新城，段韶劝阻道： 这座城堡一面被河水阻挡，三面地形险要，不能攻取。
English: The generals all wanted to attack the new city, but Duan Yu dissuaded them: This castle is blocked by the river on one side, and the terrain on three sides is precarious and cannot be captured.

古文：不如更作一城，壅其要道。
现代文：不如再建造一座城堡，堵塞住它与外面联系的道路。
English: It would be better to build another castle and block the road connecting it to the outside.

古文：破服秦，并力图之。 
现代文：打破服秦城后，再集中兵力图谋它。 
English: After defeating Qincheng, they concentrated their forces to attack it.

古文：从之。
现代文：将领们都听从他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：六月，徙围定阳。七月，屠其外城。
现代文：六月，齐军围攻定阳；七月，消灭了定阳外城的敌人。
English: In June, the Qi army besieged and attacked Dingyang; in July, the enemy in the outer city of Dingyang was eliminated.

古文：时韶病在军中，谓兰陵王曰： 此城三面重涧，并无走路，唯虑东面一处耳。
现代文：这时，他病在军中，对兰陵王说： 这座城池三面有深涧环绕，并无退路，只担心东面的一个地方。
English: At this time, he was ill in the army, and said to the king of Lanling: This city is surrounded on three sides by deep water, and there is no escape, only one place in the east is worried.

古文：贼若突围，必从此出。 
现代文：敌人如果突围，一定从那里出来。 
English: If the enemy breaks through the encirclement, it will definitely come out from there.

古文：韶出总军旅，入参帏幄，功既居高，重以婚媾之故，望倾朝野。
现代文：兰陵王便在那里设下埋伏。这天夜晚，果如段韶预料，敌兵从东面突围，埋伏的齐军突然袭击，将周军打得溃不成军。段韶竟因此病重去世。段韶外出就率领军队征讨，入朝便与朝臣们运筹帷幄，功业很高。
English: The king of Lanling then set up an ambush there. That night, as expected by Duan Qian, the enemy soldiers broke through from the east, the ambushed Qi army suddenly attacked, and the Zhou army was defeated. Duan Qian actually died of serious illness. Duan Qian went out to lead the army to collect, and entered the court to negotiate with the courtiers, and his achievements were very high.

古文：而长于计略，善于御众，得将士之心。
现代文：又加上他是武明皇后的外甥，所以，威望倾动朝野。他长于计谋，善于管理众人，颇得将士们的拥护爱戴。
English: In addition, he was the nephew of Empress Wu Ming, so his prestige spread far and wide. He was good at scheming, good at managing people, and was well loved by his subordinates.

古文：又雅性温慎，有宰相之风。
现代文：他的性情又十分温和谨慎，有宰相的风貌气质。
English: His temperament is also very gentle and cautious, and he has the demeanor and temperament of a prime minister.

古文：教训子弟，闺门雍肃，事后母以孝闻。
现代文：他能严格训诫子弟，闺门内严肃和谐。侍奉继母以孝敬著名。
English: He is able to strictly discipline his son and daughter-in-law in a serious and harmonious manner. He serves his stepmother and is known for his filial piety.

古文：齐代勋贵家，罕有及者。
现代文：北齐一代的勋贵权势之家，很少有人赶得上他的。
English: He is one of the most distinguished and powerful families of the Beiqi generation, and very few people can match him.

古文：然僻于好色，虽居要重，微服间行。
现代文：然而，他却贪好女色，虽然位居显要，却常穿上便服私行访艳。
English: However, he was greedy for women, and although he was in a prominent position, he often put on casual clothes to visit porn stars.

古文：魏黄门郎元瑀妻皇甫氏，缘瑀谋逆，没官。
现代文：魏黄门郎元王禹的妻子皇甫氏，因元王禹参与谋反，被籍没入官。
English: Wei Huangmen Lang, the wife of Yuan Wang Yu, was not allowed to enter the government because Yuan Wang Yu was involved in plotting a rebellion.

古文：韶美之，上启固请，文襄赐之。
现代文：段韶很喜欢她，他上奏章坚持请求，文襄帝才把皇甫氏赐给他。
English: Duan Qian liked her very much. He insisted on playing the music, and Emperor Wenzhong gave him the title of "Imperial Father."

古文：入周，拜大将军、郡公，坐事死。
现代文：他将她放在别宅安置，对她的礼遇好像明媒正娶的妻子一样。他在钱财上尤为吝啬，对于亲戚故旧，没有任何施舍。
English: He placed her in a second home and treated her as if she were the wife he was marrying. He was particularly stingy with money and did not give any alms to relatives.

古文：亮字德堪。隋大业初，位汴州刺史。
现代文：他的儿子段深与公主结为婚姻，并省的丞郎在他家帮助料理十多天事务，事情办完辞别回省，他只赐给每人一杯酒。
English: His son Duan Sheng married the princess, and the provincial chancellor helped to prepare more than ten days of affairs in his home. After the affairs were completed, he left for the province. He only gave each person a glass of wine.

古文：卒于汝南郡守。韶弟孝言，少警发，有风仪。
现代文：段孝言，段韶的兄弟，从小就警拔奋发，颇有仪表风度。
English: Duan Xiao Yan, Duan Yao's brother, has been alert and diligent since childhood, and has quite a demeanor.

古文：齐受禅，其兄韶以别封霸城县侯授之。
现代文：北齐受禅代魏，他的哥哥段韶把朝廷另外封赏的霸城县侯的爵位让给他。
English: Bei Qi received Zen during the Wei Dynasty, and his brother Duan Qi gave him the title of Marquis of Baicheng County, which was also awarded by the imperial court.

古文：历中书黄门侍郎。典机密。
现代文：他任中书黄门侍郎，参与朝廷机密。
English: He served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters and took part in the Imperial Court's secrets.

古文：又历秘书监、度支尚书、清都尹。
现代文：又任秘书监、度支尚书、清都尹。
English: He also served as Secretary Supervisor, Doushi Shangshu, and Qingdu Yin.

古文：孝言本以勋戚致位通显，骄奢无惮。
现代文：他本来靠勋贵子弟的身份位至要职，所以，骄奢淫逸，肆无忌惮。
English: He originally rose to high office by virtue of his status as the son of a nobleman, so he was arrogant, lascivious, and unscrupulous.

古文：曾夜过其客宋孝王家，呼坊人防援，不时赴，遂拷杀之。
现代文：他曾夜晚经过他的客人宋孝王的家里，让同坊的人出来为他站岗，由于站岗的人没有按时赶来，便将人家拷打致死。
English: He once passed by the house of his guest Song Xiaowang at night and asked his classmates to stand guard for him. Since the guards did not arrive on time, he tortured them to death.

古文：又与诸淫妇密游。其夫觉，又拷掠而殒。
现代文：他又与姘头们秘密在一个地方纵欲寻欢，被她们的丈夫发觉，他竟将姘头的丈夫打死。
English: He also secretly indulged in a place of pleasure with the hoes, and when their husbands found out, he actually beat the hoe's husband to death.

古文：时苑内须果木，课人间及僧寺备输，孝言悉分向其私宅种植。
现代文：当时，皇家苑林内需要栽植果树，让百姓和寺院输交树苗。他却把交纳的果树苗全都栽种在自家的园子里。
English: At that time, fruit trees needed to be planted in the forest of the Royal Garden, and people and temples were asked to donate saplings. However, he planted all of the donated saplings in his own garden.

古文：又殿内及园中须石，差车从漳河运载，复分车回取。
现代文：另外，宫殿和皇家园林中需要石头，派车从漳河边运来，他又从中截取。
English: In addition, stones were needed for the palace and the royal garden. A car was sent to bring them from the Shaohe River, and he cut them from them.

古文：事发，出为海州刺史。
现代文：事情败露，被调出京城，任海州刺史。
English: When the affair was exposed, he was transferred out of the capital and appointed as the chief historian of Haizhou.

古文：累迁吏部尚书。
现代文：后来又升任为吏部尚书。
English: He was successively transferred to the Personnel Department of the Ministry of Education.

古文：祖珽执政，将废赵彦深，引孝言为助，加侍中。
现代文：祖王廷执掌朝政，准备排挤赵彦深，便援引段孝言帮助他，加封孝言为侍中。
English: The ancestor Wang Ting, who was in charge of the imperial government, was preparing to oust Zhao Yanshen, so he invoked Duan Xiao Yan to help him and appointed Xiao Yan as an attendant.

古文：孝言待物不平，抽擢非贿则旧。
现代文：孝言处理政务很不公平，提拔的人不是向他行贿，就是跟他有旧的交情。
English: His handling of government affairs is very unfair. Those who promoted him either bribed him or had old friendships with him.

古文：有将作丞崔成于众中抗言： 尚书，天下尚书，岂独段家尚书也！ 
现代文：有一个叫崔成的将作丞在一个公开场合大声说 ：尚书，是天下的尚书，怎么能只是段家的尚书呢？ 
English: There was a general named Cui Chengzongzhuang who said loudly in a public place: Shangshu, is the world's Shangshu, how can it only be the Duan family's Shangshu?

古文：孝言元辞以对，唯厉色遣下。
现代文：他无言以对，只有疾言厉色地将崔成斥退。
English: He was speechless, and had no choice but to forcefully push Cui Cheng back.

古文：寻除中书监，加特进。
现代文：不久，任中书监，加封为特进。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the book supervisor, and his seal was added as a special promotion.

古文：又托韩长鸾共构祖珽之短。
现代文：他又与韩长鸾一起揭发祖王廷的过错。
English: Together with Han Changtao, he also exposed the wrongdoing of Zu Wangting.

古文：及珽出后，孝言除尚书右仆射，仍掌选。恣情用舍，请谒大行。
现代文：祖王廷被调出朝廷后，他任尚书右仆射，仍掌握选拔人才的职务，他任意取舍官吏，不是重大的行动就不向天子请谒。
English: After Zowangting was transferred out of the imperial court, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man and still held the position of selecting talents. He arbitrarily chose officials, and did not ask the heavenly son for help unless the action was serious.

古文：敕浚京城北隍，孝言监作。
现代文：朝廷命疏通京城北边的护城河，让他任监作。
English: The Imperial Court ordered the dredging of the moat on the north side of the capital, and he was put in charge of the work.

古文：仪同三司崔士顺、将作大匠元士将、太府少卿郦孝裕、尚书左户郎中薛叔昭、司州中从事崔龙子、清都尹丞李道隆、鄴县令尉长卿、临漳令崔象、成安令高子彻等，并在孝言部下典作。
现代文：仪同三司崔士顺、将作大匠元士将、太府少卿郦孝裕、尚书左户郎中薛叔昭等人，都在他的部下负责工程。每天他们设酒宴会饮，这些人跪伏在那里，对着孝言用膝盖行走，举杯向他祝福。
English: Yi Tong, Third Secretary Cui Shishun, Master Craftsman Yuan Shijun, Dafu Shaoqing Zou Xiaoyu, and Shangshu Zuo Rongzhong Xue Shuzhao were all in charge of the project under his subordinates. Every day, they held a wine banquet, where these people knelt down, walked on their knees in front of Xiao Yan, and raised their cups to bless him.

古文：日别置酒高会，诸人膝行跪伏，称觞上寿，或自陈屈滞，更请转官。孝言意色扬扬，以为己任，皆随事报答，许有加授。
现代文：有的人自己陈述长久淹滞，没有升官，请求他提拔官职。他听后意气洋洋，骄矜志满，把这些人的话当成自己的责任，都随时答应，同意提拔他们。
English: Some people who said they had been stagnant for a long time and had not been promoted asked him to promote them. After listening to them, he was full of enthusiasm and pride. He took these people's words as his responsibility and agreed to promote them at any time.

古文：富商大贾，多被铨擢，所进用人士，咸是险纵之流。
现代文：富商大贾，也多被遴选提拔，他任用的人都是险恶放纵的家伙。
English: The rich merchant Dajia was also mostly selected and promoted, and the people he appointed were all sinister and indulgent fellows.

古文：寻迁左仆射，特进、侍中如故。
现代文：不久，段孝言又迁任为左仆射，特进和侍中的职务不变。
English: Soon after, Duan Xiaojin was transferred to the position of Zuoying, while the positions of Tejin and Zhanzhong remained unchanged.

古文：孝言富贵豪侈，尤好女色。
现代文：他富贵奢侈，更喜好女色。
English: He is rich and extravagant, and prefers women.

古文：后取娄定远妾董氏，大耽爱之。
现代文：后来娶娄定远的妾董氏，十分喜爱。
English: Later, he married Gong Dingyuan's concubine, Ms. Dong, whom he loved very much.

古文：为此内外不和，更相纠列。
现代文：为此，家庭内外颇不和睦，互相纠缠争吵。
English: For this reason, there is quite a bit of discord inside and outside the family, and quarrels are entangled with each other.

古文：又于晋阳监作，坐事除名，徙光州。
现代文：他又在晋阳监督工程，因犯罪被免官，流放到光州。
English: He also supervised the project in Jinyang, but was dismissed for a crime and exiled to Gwangju.

古文：隆化主败后，有敕追还。
现代文：隆化时齐后主高纬禅位给幼主高恒，朝廷下诏将他调回京城。
English: After the master Gaoyu gave the young master Gao Heng the post of Zen priest, the imperial court ordered him to return to the capital.

古文：孝言虽黩货无厌，恣情酒色，然举止风流。
现代文：段孝言虽然贪得无厌，纵情酒色，然而举止言谈，潇洒风流。
English: Although Duan Xiao Yan is insatiably greedy and indulges in alcohol, his manner of speech is cool and elegant.

古文：招致名士。
现代文：延请名士，接纳才俊；良辰美景，不曾虚度。
English: If you invite famous people, you will receive talented people; if you have a good time and beautiful scenery, you have not wasted your time.

古文：美景良辰，未尝虚弃；赋诗奏伎，以尽欢洽。虽草莱之士，粗关文艺，多引入宾馆，与同兴赏。
现代文：或吟诵诗赋，或看伎女歌舞，尽情欢娱。虽然是乡间草莱的读书人，只要粗通文墨，多被他引入宾馆，以礼对待，一同游戏赏玩。
English: or chanting poems, or watching female comedians dance and sing, and enjoying themselves to the full. Although he was a reader from a rural village, as long as he was not fluent in writing, he would often take him to a hotel, treat him with courtesy, and enjoy games together.

古文：其贫踬者，亦时乞遗。
现代文：那些贫困的人也不断来乞请馈赠。
English: Those who are poor also keep coming to beg for gifts.

古文：时论复以此多之。
现代文：人们议论起来又因此称赞他。
English: People are talking about it and praising him for it.

古文：齐亡入周，位上开府。
现代文：北齐灭亡进入北周，他被封为上开府。
English: After the fall of Northern Qi, he entered Northern Zhou and was given the title of Shangkaifu.

古文：斛律金，字阿六敦，朔州敕勒部人也。
现代文：斛律金，字阿六敦，朔州敕勒部人。
English: He was a member of the Shuozhou Xingle Club.

古文：高祖倍侯利，魏道武时内附，位大羽真，赐爵孟都公。
现代文：他的高祖倍侯利，道武帝拓跋王圭时归附北魏，被封为大羽针，赐爵为孟都公。
English: His great-great-great-grandfather, Beholi, was a vassal of the Northern Wei Dynasty at the time of the Taoist Emperor Tuoba Wang Gui, and was given the title of Great Feather Needle and the title of Prince of Mengdu.

古文：祖幡地斤，殿中尚书。
现代文：祖父幡地斤，任殿中尚书。
English: His grandfather, Hatajiki, was a high-ranking official in the imperial court.

古文：父那瑰，光禄大夫。赠司空。
现代文：父亲斛律那王襄，任光禄大夫，去世后赠封为司空。
English: His father, Wang Xiang, was a doctor of Guanglu, and after his death, he was awarded the title of Sikuo.

古文：金性敦直，善骑射，行兵用匈奴法，望尘知马步多少，嗅地知军度远近。
现代文：斛律金性格淳厚爽直，善于骑马射箭，指挥军队采用匈奴人的方法，一看尘土飞扬的情况就知道有多少人马，闻一闻地下的气味就知道敌军距离的远近。
English: He was good at horseback riding and archery, and commanded the army using the methods of the Huns. He knew how many men and horses there were just by looking at the dusty situation, and he knew how far away the enemy was just by smelling the underground.

古文：初为军主，与怀朔镇将杨钧送蠕蠕主阿那环。
现代文：最初担任军主，他与怀朔镇将杨钧负责护送蠕蠕族首领阿那王襄。
English: At the beginning, he served as the military commander, and together with Yang Jie, the commander of the town of Waishuo, he was responsible for escorting the leader of the Humen people, Ana Wangxiang.

古文：环见金猎射，叹其工。
现代文：阿那王襄见斛律金打猎射箭，叹服他的武艺精深。
English: King Anawang was impressed by his martial arts skills when he saw him play hunting and archery.

古文：金度陵终败，乃统所部叛陵，诣云州。
现代文：破六韩拔陵叛逆，斛律金率众归属。破六韩拔陵封他为王。
English: After defeating the rebels of the Six Han Dynasty, he was crowned as the king.

古文：魏除为第二领人酋长，秋朝京师，春还部落，号曰雁臣。
现代文：他估计破六韩拔陵最终必定失败，便率领部下背叛而去，到了云中，北魏命他为第二领人酋长。他秋天到京城朝拜，春天返回部落，被称为雁臣。
English: He estimated that breaking the Six Han Tombs would eventually fail, so he led his subordinates to betray and went to the clouds, and the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered him to be the second leader. He went to Beijing to worship in the fall, and returned to the tribe in the spring, and was called the Wild Goose Minister.

古文：仍稍引南出黄瓜堆，为杜洛周所破。
现代文：他领兵南进黄瓜堆，被杜洛周打败。
English: He led his troops south into the cucumber heap and was defeated by Du Luo Zhou.

古文：与兄平二人脱身归尔硃荣，为别将。孝庄立，赐爵阜城男。位金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：他与哥哥斛律平逃出，投奔尔朱荣，尔朱荣命他为别将，孝庄帝即位，赐给他阜城男的爵号，封为金紫光禄大夫。
English: He escaped with his brother, Yao Rufei, and joined Zhu Rong. Zhu Rong ordered him to be his second-in-command, and Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne. He was given the title of Fucheng Baron and the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：神武密怀匡复，金赞成大谋。太昌初，为汾州刺史，进爵为侯。
现代文：神武帝高欢暗中准备匡扶社稷，斛律金赞成他宏大的计谋，孝武帝太昌初年，朝廷命斛律金为汾州刺史，晋封爵位为侯。
English: Emperor Shenwu Gao Huan was secretly preparing to invade Shaoshan, and Guo Rujin approved of his grand strategy. In the first year of Emperor Taichang, the imperial court ordered Guo Rujin to be the governor of Shaoshan and to be promoted to the peerage as marquis.

古文：从神武破纥豆陵于河西。
现代文：他跟随高欢在黄河以西打败纥豆陵。
English: He followed Gao Huan to defeat Pea Ling in the west of the Yellow River.

古文：沙苑之役，神武以地厄少却，军为西师所乘，遂乱。
现代文：沙苑之役，高欢因地形不利稍有退却，齐军被西魏的军队乘势进攻，阵脚溃乱。
English: In the Battle of Shayuan, Gaohuan retreated slightly due to the unfavorable terrain, the Qi army was attacked by the West Wei army, and the battle broke out.

古文：张华原以簿帐历营点兵，莫有应者。
现代文：张华原拿着簿册逐营查点士兵，没有人应声回答的。
English: Zhang Hua Yuan took the book to check the soldiers camp by camp, but no one answered.

古文：神武将集兵便战，金曰： 众散将离，其势不可复用，宜急向河东。 
现代文：高欢想聚集部队重新开战，斛律金劝阻说： 士兵与将领分散，这种情形已不能再用来打仗，应赶快撤回河东。 
English: Gao Huan wanted to gather troops to restart the war, but Yu Liujin dissuaded him, saying, "The soldiers and generals are scattered. This situation can no longer be used for war, and we should quickly withdraw to the east of the river.

古文：神武据鞍未动，金以鞭拂马，神武乃还。
现代文：高欢坐在马鞍上没有行动，他用鞭子抽打高欢的坐骑，才撤退。
English: Gao Huan sat motionless in the saddle. He whipped Gao Huan's horse before retreating.

古文：于是大崩，丧甲士八万。侯景敛。
现代文：于是军队崩溃，损失带甲士兵八万人，由侯景负责收拾。
English: As a result, the army collapsed, with the loss of 80,000 armored soldiers, and Hou Jing was responsible for cleaning up the mess.

古文：西魏力人持大棒守河桥，衣甲厚，射之不入。贺拔仁候其转面，射，一发毙之。
现代文：西魏的一位力大无比的武士把守河上的桥梁，身上穿着很厚的衣甲，箭射不进去，贺拔仁等他转过脸来，一箭将他射死，东魏军队才得以过桥逃脱。
English: An extremely powerful samurai from the Western Wei Dynasty guarded the bridge over the river. He was wearing very thick armor and could not shoot an arrow. He Ba Ren waited for him to turn his face and shot him dead with an arrow, and the Eastern Wei Army was able to cross the bridge and escape.

古文：是役也，无金先请还，几至危矣。
现代文：这一仗如果没有斛律金请求撤退，几乎到了绝境。
English: This battle is almost at a dead end if there is no demand for withdrawal.

古文：及高仲密西叛，周文攻洛阳，从神武破之。
现代文：高仲密叛投西魏，宇文泰率兵进攻洛阳，斛律金跟随高欢一一将他们打败。
English: Gao Zhongmi defected to the Western Wei Dynasty, Yu Wentai led the troops to attack Luoyang, and Gong Li Jin followed Gao Huan to defeat them one by one.

古文：还，除大司马，改封石城郡公。
现代文：归来，被任命为大司马，改封爵号为石城郡公。
English: After his return, he was appointed as the grand steward, and his title was changed to the Lord of Shicheng County.

古文：金性质直，不识文字。
现代文：他性格质直坦率，不认识字。
English: He has a straightforward personality and doesn't know the alphabet.

古文：本名敦，苦其难署，改名为金，从其便易，犹以为难。
现代文：原来的名字叫敦，因为署名时难写，所以又改名为金，是为了简便易写，但仍感到很为难。
English: His original name was Tun, but because it was difficult to write his name, he changed it to Kim, to make it easier to write, but he still felt embarrassed.

古文：司马子如教为金字，作屋况之，其字乃就。
现代文：司马子如教他学写金字，画了房子的样子作比喻，他才把这个字学会。
English: Sima Zi taught him how to write gold characters, and he only learned the characters after drawing a picture of a house as a metaphor.

古文：神武重其古质，每诫文襄曰： 尔所使多汉，有谗此人者，勿信之。 
现代文：高欢很看重他的古朴质直，常告诫儿子高澄说 ：你任用了许多汉人，有人进谗某个人的，你不要相信他们。 
English: Gao Huan valued his simplicity and straightforwardness very much. He often admonished his son Gao Cheng, saying: "You have appointed many Han people. If someone insults someone, don't believe them."

古文：及文襄嗣事，为肆州刺史。
现代文：文襄帝高澄接替父亲高欢掌管朝政，命斛律金为肆州刺史。
English: Emperor Gaocheng succeeds his father Gao Huan in ruling the imperial court, and his death is recorded in the history of Wuzhou.

古文：文宣受禅，封咸阳郡王。
现代文：文宣帝高洋接受东魏孝静帝的禅让，又封他为咸阳郡王。
English: Emperor Gaoyang of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaozhing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty accepted Zen's resignation and made him the king of Xianyang County.

古文：天保三年，就除太师。
现代文：天保三年，又封为太师。
English: In the third year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed Grand Master again.

古文：四年，解州，以太师还晋阳。
现代文：四年，解除肆州刺史的职务，以太师的身份回到晋阳。
English: Four years later, he was relieved of his duties as the chief historian of Zhouzhou and returned to Jinyang as an etheric teacher.

古文：车驾幸其第，六宫及诸王尽从，置酒极夜方罢。
现代文：文宣帝亲自到他家里看望，六宫的嫔妃以及各位王侯都跟从同来，摆设酒宴通宵畅饮才结束。
English: Emperor Wenxuan personally visited his home, and the concubines of the Six Palaces and all the princes came along, and the all-night drinking party was over.

古文：帝欣甚，诏金第二子丰乐为武卫大将军，赐帛五千匹。
现代文：文宣帝十分高兴，下诏命斛律金的二儿子斛律丰乐为武卫大将军，赐给绢帛五千匹。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was very pleased, and issued an edict ordering the second son of Gong Li Jin, Gong Li Feng Le, to become General Wu Wei, and gave him five thousand yakitori.

古文：谓曰： 公元勋佐命，父子忠诚，朕当结以婚姻，永为籓卫。 
现代文：文宣帝对斛律金说 ：你帮助朝廷建立丰功伟业，父子二人对国家都很忠诚，我当和你结成儿女婚姻，让你家永远成为朝廷的藩卫。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said to Gong Liujin: You have helped the imperial court to establish a great achievement. Both father and son are very loyal to the country. I should marry you into a son-daughter marriage, so that your family will always be the imperial court's defender.

古文：仍诏金孙武都尚义宁公主。
现代文：便命斛律金的孙子斛律武都娶义宁公主。
English: He then ordered the grandson of Gong Li Jin, Gong Li Wudu, to marry Princess Yining.

古文：成礼之日，帝从皇太后幸金宅，皇后、太子、诸王皆从。
现代文：举行结婚大礼那一天，文宣帝跟着皇太后到斛律金的府第，皇后、太子、各王都一起到来。
English: On the day of the grand wedding ceremony, Emperor Wenxuan followed the empress dowager to the palace of Li Ruijin. The empress, the prince, and the kings all came together.

古文：其见待如此。
现代文：他被天子的厚待就像这次一样。
English: He was treated just as well as this.

古文：后蠕蠕为突厥破散，虑其犯塞，诏金屯兵白道以备之。
现代文：后来，蠕蠕族被突厥攻破，因担心突厥军队会侵犯北齐的要塞，朝廷命斛律金屯兵在白道以作防备。
English: Later, the Cm Cm tribe was invaded by the Turks. Fearing that the Turkish army would invade the fortress in North Qi, the imperial court ordered the Lu Jin soldiers to be stationed in Baidu as a precaution.

古文：多所俘获，并表陈虏可取状。文宣乃与金共讨之。
现代文：齐军俘虏了很多突厥人，他上表陈述敌人可以攻取的情况，文宣帝便亲自出战，与斛律金一起挥兵讨伐。
English: The Qi army captured a lot of Turks, and he made a report on the situation that the enemy could capture, and Emperor Wenzhong personally went to war and waged a crusade with Baolujin.

古文：进位右丞相，食齐州干。
现代文：朝廷又升任他为右丞相，把齐州作为食邑。
English: The imperial court also promoted him to the post of chancellor, and he made Qizhou the capital of food.

古文：迁左丞相。
现代文：他又迁任左丞相。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Left Minister.

古文：帝晚年败德，尝持槊走马以拟金胸者三，金立不动，于是赐物千段。
现代文：文宣帝晚年丧失道德，昏聩骄狂，曾骑着马持长矛多次要刺斛律金的胸膛，他面对锋芒站立不动，于是，文宣帝赐给他布帛物品一千段。
English: In his later years, Emperor Wenzhong lost his morals and became arrogant. He rode a horse with a spear and repeatedly tried to stab Lujin's chest. He stood still in the face of the blade, so Emperor Wenzhong gave him a thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：孝昭践阼，纳其孙女为皇太子妃。
现代文：孝昭帝登皇帝位，纳斛律金的孙女为皇太子妃。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao ascended to the throne, and the granddaughter of Nagarjuna became the crown princess.

古文：诏金朝见，听乘步挽车至阶。
现代文：命他朝见天子，可以乘轿到皇宫的台阶前。
English: If he is ordered to see the emperor in the morning, he can take a limousine to the steps of the imperial palace.

古文：武成即位，礼遇弥重，又纳其孙女为太子妃。
现代文：武成帝即位，对他的礼遇更重，又将他的孙女纳为太子的王妃。
English: When Emperor Wucheng ascended the throne, he was treated with even greater courtesy, and his granddaughter was made the princess of the crown prince.

古文：金曾遣人献食，中书舍人李若误奏，云金自来。
现代文：他曾派人给武成帝进献食品，中书舍人李若误奏，说斛律金亲自到来。
English: He had sent someone to present food to Emperor Wu Chengdi, but Li Ruo, the person in charge of the Chinese school, made a mistake and said that Gong Li Jin had come in person.

古文：武成出昭阳殿，敕侍中高文遥将羊车引之。
现代文：武成帝到昭阳殿，命侍中高文遥将斛律金坐的羊车领来。
English: Emperor Wucheng went to the Shoyang Palace, and the attendant of the order, Zhong Gao Wenyao, brought the sheep cart in which Gong Li Jin was sitting.

古文：若知事误，更不敢出映廊下。
现代文：李若知道自己奏报有误，越发不敢在宫殿的廊下出现。
English: If Li Ruo knew that he had made a mistake in the report, he would not dare to appear in the corridor of the palace.

古文：文遥还覆奏，帝骂若云： 空头汉，合杀！ 
现代文：高文遥奏报了真实情况，武成帝骂李若说： 这个头脑简单的汉人，真该杀！ 
English: Gao Wenyao reported the true situation, and Emperor Wucheng scolded Li Ruo, saying, "This simple-minded Han Chinese should really be killed!

古文：亦不加罪。
现代文：但却不加罪。
English: But no charges were filed.

古文：金长子光，大将军。次子羡及孙武都，并开府仪同三司，出镇方岳。其余子孙，皆封侯贵达。
现代文：他的长子斛律光为大将军，次子斛律羡以及孙子斛律武都，都为开府仪同三司，出镇一方土地和山川；其余的子孙都封为侯爵，官位显赫。
English: His eldest son, Li Ruiguang, was a great general, his second son, Luo En, and his grandson, Li Wudu, were all the heads of the government and the three departments, and the land and mountains and rivers on the other side of the town; the rest of his descendants were made marquesses and had prominent official positions.

古文：一门一皇后，二太子妃，三公主，尊宠当时莫比。
现代文：他家一门有一位皇后，两位太子妃，三位公主，受朝廷的信任宠爱，当时无人可比。
English: His family included a queen, two princesses, and three princesses, who were trusted and loved by the imperial court. At that time, there was no one comparable.

古文：金尝谓光曰： 我虽不读书，闻古来外戚梁冀等，无不倾灭。
现代文：他曾对长子斛律光说： 我虽然不读书，听说古时候的外戚梁冀等人，无不身死家灭。
English: He once said to his eldest son, Hao Riguang, "Although I don't read, I heard that in ancient times, my maternal relative, Liang Ji, and others were all killed.

古文：女若有宠，诸贵人妒；女若无宠，天子嫌之。
现代文：女的如被天子宠幸，其他嫔妃就会嫉妒；女的如不被宠幸，天子就会嫌弃她。
English: If a woman is favored by the Son of Heaven, other concubines will be jealous; if a woman is not favored, the Son of Heaven will reject her.

古文：我家直以立勋抱忠致富贵，岂藉女也？ 
现代文：我家应该以建立功勋，胸怀忠心获取富贵，怎么能凭借女儿们呢？ 
English: My family should gain wealth by establishing merit, with loyalty in mind. How can we rely on our daughters?

古文：辞不获免，常以为忧。
现代文：他想辞去各种职务，不被朝廷允许，因此，常常忧虑。
English: He wanted to resign from various positions, but was not allowed to do so by the imperial court, so he was often worried.

古文：天统三年薨，年八十，赠假黄钺、相国、太尉公，赠钱百万。谥曰武。
现代文：天统三年去世，享年八十岁，朝廷赠封为假黄钺、相国、太尉公；赠给他家钱一百万；谥号为武。
English: Tian Rong passed away three years later, at the age of eighty. The imperial court granted him the titles of "False Huang Xuan," "Son of the Fatherland" and "Grand Officer"; he was given one million family money; and his posthumous name was Wu.

古文：子光嗣。光字明月，马面彪身，神爽雄杰，少言笑，工骑射。
现代文：斛律光，字明月，长着一张马一样的面孔，老虎一样的身躯。神情清爽，气宇雄杰。寡于言笑，善于骑射。
English: The rhythmic light, the word bright moon, has a face like a horse and a body like a tiger. He is fresh-faced and handsome. He is not good at talking and laughing, but is good at riding and shooting.

古文：初为侯景部下，彭乐谓高敖曹曰： 斛律家小兒，不可三度将行，后夺人名。 
现代文：最初为侯景的部下，彭乐曾对高敖曹说： 斛律家的这个小孩不可三次封为将军，今后一定会超过别人的声望。 
English: Originally a subordinate of Hou Jing, Peng Le once said to Gao Yu Cao: This child of the Yu family should not be made a general for the third time. In the future, he will certainly surpass the reputation of others.

古文：以库直事文襄。从出野，见雁双飞来，文襄使光驰射之，以二矢俱落焉。
现代文：他以库直小吏的身份侍奉文襄帝高澄，跟随高澄到野外，看见双雁飞来，高澄命他骑马射雁，他用两支箭将两只雁射落。
English: He served the Emperor Gaochun as a clerk, followed Gaochun to the field, saw two geese flying, Gaochun ordered him to shoot the geese on horseback, and he shot down the two geese with two arrows.

古文：后从金西征，周文帝长史莫孝晖在行间，光年十七，驰马射中之，因禽于阵。
现代文：后来，又跟从父亲斛律金西征，周文帝宇文泰的长史莫孝晖也在军旅中，斛律光年龄才十七岁，骑马将莫孝晖射中，并在军阵中将他擒获。
English: Later, Shimo Xiaojuan, who followed his father, Jiu Li, Jin Xi Zheng, and Zhou Wen Diyu, was also in the military expedition. Jiu Li Guang was only seventeen years old. He shot Mo Xiaojuan on horseback and captured him in the army.

古文：神武即擢授都督，封永乐子。
现代文：神武帝高欢因此提拔斛律光为都督，封为永乐子。
English: Emperor Jimmu Gao Huan therefore promoted Baoliguang to be the governor of the capital and named him Yongle Zi.

古文：双尝从文襄于洹桥校猎。
现代文：他又曾跟随高澄在洹桥打猎，在云端见飞来一只大鸟。
English: He also once followed Takasumi on a hunting trip in Takahashi, and saw a large bird flying in the clouds.

古文：云表见一大鸟，射之正中其颈，形如车轮，旋转而下，乃雕也。
现代文：他弯弓箭发，正射中大鸟的脖颈，大鸟像车轮一样旋转着落下，原来这是一只大雕啊。
English: He bent his bow and arrow and hit the neck of the big bird. The big bird spun like a wheel and fell down. It turned out to be a large eagle.

古文：丞相属邢子高叹曰： 此射雕手也。 
现代文：丞相的部属郑子高感叹地说 ：这是射雕的强手呀。 
English: Zheng Zigao, a subordinate of the prime minister, said with exclamation: This is a strong shot.

古文：当时号落雕都督。
现代文：当时，军中称他为射雕都督。
English: At that time, the military called him the "shooting star governor."

古文：齐受禅，别封西安县子。
现代文：北齐受东魏禅让，又封他为西安县子。
English: Northern Qi was conquered by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and he was also named the son of Xi'an County.

古文：皇建元年，进爵钜鹿郡公。
现代文：皇建元年，晋封爵位为钜鹿公。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted to the peerage as the Lord of the Elk.

古文：时乐陵王百年为皇太子，求妃。
现代文：这时，乐陵王高百年为皇太子，求纳王妃。
English: At this time, Le Ling Wang Gao was crown prince for a hundred years and courted Princess Na.

古文：孝昭以光世载醇谨，纳其长女为太子妃。
现代文：孝昭帝认为斛律家世代淳厚恭谨，便纳斛律光的长女为太子的妃子。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaodi thought that the generations of the Li Li family were honest and respectful, so he took the eldest daughter of Li Li Guang as the prince's concubine.

古文：历位太子太保、尚书令、司空、司徒。
现代文：他历任太子太保、尚书令、司空、司徒等职。
English: He has successively held the posts of prince, eunuch, secretary, secretary, and secretary.

古文：河清三年，周大司马尉迟迥、齐公宪、庸公王雄等众十万攻洛阳。
现代文：河清三年，北周大司马尉迟回、齐公宇文宪、庸公王雄等人率十万之众进攻洛阳。
English: In the third year of Heqing, the Northern Zhou Daishi, Ma Ye, Qi Gong, U Wen Xian, Yong Gong, Wang Xiong and others led 100,000 people to attack Luoyang.

古文：光率骑五万驰往，战于芒山，迥等大败。
现代文：斛律光率骑兵五万奔驰救援，在邙山展开大战。
English: The Pelican Light Cavalry, with 50,000 gallons of rescue, launched a great battle in Lushan.

古文：光亲射雄杀之，迥、宪仅而获免。
现代文：北周军大败，他亲自将王雄射死。尉迟回、宇文宪仅免于一死。
English: He personally shot Wang Xiong to death after the Northern Zhou Army suffered a crushing defeat. He was late to return, and only saved Wu Wenxian from death.

古文：仍筑京观。
现代文：他便修筑京观。
English: He then built the Kyo-gan.

古文：武成幸洛阳策勋，迁太尉。
现代文：武成帝到洛阳评定功勋，升任他为太尉。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdi went to Luoyang to evaluate his merits, and promoted him to the rank of captain.

古文：初，文宣时，周人常惧齐兵之西度，恆以冬月，守河椎冰。
现代文：开初，文宣帝在位时，北周的军队常害怕北齐的军队西渡黄河，常在冬天凿开河冰，以作防守。
English: At the beginning, when Emperor Wenxuan was on the throne, the northern Zhou army often feared the western crossing of the Yellow River by the northern Qi army, and often chiseled river ice in winter to defend themselves.

古文：及帝即位，朝政渐紊，齐人椎冰，惧周兵之逼。
现代文：武成帝即位后，朝政逐渐混乱，齐兵却在冬天凿开冰，怕周兵进犯。
English: After Emperor Wucheng ascended the throne, the imperial government gradually fell into disarray, but the Qi soldiers cut through the ice in the winter, fearing the Zhou soldiers would attack.

古文：光忧曰： 国家常有吞关、陇之志，今日至此，而唯玩声色！ 
现代文：斛律光忧虑地说 ：国家过去经常有吞并关西陇地的打算，今天到了这种地步，朝廷只知道狗马声色地玩乐！ 
English: Zou Riguang said anxiously, "In the past, the country often had the intention of annexing Kansai Province. Today, it has reached such a stage that the imperial court only knows how to play games!

古文：先是，武成纳光第二女为太子妃，天统元年，拜皇后，光转大将军。
现代文：先是武成帝纳他的第二个女儿为太子妃，天统元年，被封为皇后，他也升任为大将军。
English: First, Wu Cheng Dinah, whose second daughter was crown princess, was crowned empress in the first year of Tian Tong, and he was also promoted to general.

古文：三年六月，父丧去官。
现代文：天统三年六月，他的父亲斛律金去世，他辞官守丧。
English: In June of the third year of Tian Rong, his father, Gong Lujin, passed away, and he resigned from his post to attend the funeral.

古文：其月，诏起光及弟羡，并复位。
现代文：同月，朝廷下诏起用他和他的兄弟斛律羡一起恢复原来的职务。
English: In the same month, the imperial court issued an edict to reinstate him and his brother, Yao Ruxen, to their former positions.

古文：秋，除太保，袭爵咸阳王，迁太傅。
现代文：秋天，被封为太保，继承父亲的爵位为咸阳王，又迁任太傅。
English: In autumn, he was named Taibo, inheriting his father's title of Xianyang Wang, and transferred to Taifu.

古文：十二月，周军围洛阳，壅绝粮道。
现代文：这年十二月，周军又围攻洛阳，堵塞了洛阳的粮道。
English: In December of that year, Zhou's army besieged Luoyang again, blocking Luoyang's grain route.

古文：武平元年正月，诏光率步骑三万御之，锋刃缠交，周将宇文桀众大溃，直到宜阳。
现代文：武平元年元月，朝廷命他率步骑两军三万人抵御敌兵，刚一交战，周将宇文桀的军队就已溃乱，他挥师一直追赶到宜阳。
English: In January of the first year of Wuping, the imperial court ordered him to lead 30,000 people of the two armies to resist the enemy soldiers. As soon as the battle was fought, the army of Zhou general Uwen Yao had already collapsed. He waved his division and chased them all the way to Yiyang.

古文：军还，击周齐王宪等众大溃。
现代文：他又回军洛阳，将周齐王宇文宪等人的军队打败。
English: He returned to Luoyang and defeated the armies of Zhou Qi, Wang Yuwen and others.

古文：诏加右丞相、并州刺史。
现代文：朝廷加封他为右丞相、并州刺史。
English: The Imperial Court appointed him to the post of the Minister of the Right, and he was also appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：其年冬，光又率步骑五万于玉壁筑华谷、龙门二城，与宪相持，宪不敢动。
现代文：这年冬天，他又率步兵和骑兵五万在玉璧修筑华谷、龙门两座城堡，与宇文宪的周军对峙，宇文宪不敢动弹。
English: This winter, he led another 50,000 infantry and cavalry to build two castles, Huaguan and Longmen, in Yubi, and confronted the Zhou army of Yuwen Xian. Yuwen Xian did not dare to move.

古文：二年，率众筑平陇等镇戍十三所。
现代文：武平二年，他又率军士修筑平陇等十三座戍镇。
English: In the second year of Wuping, he led the sergeants to build thirteen towns, including Chikuhei Town.

古文：周柱国枹罕公普屯威、柱国韦孝宽等来逼平陇，光与战于汾水，大破之。
现代文：北周的柱国抱罕公普屯威、柱国韦孝宽等人率兵进逼平陇，斛律光与他们在汾水展开大战，将周军打得大败。
English: Putunwei, the pillar state of the northern Zhou, and Wei Xiaokang, the pillar state, led their armies to force Pingyao, and Bao Riguang fought with them in Surabaya, defeating the Zhou army.

古文：周遣其柱国纥干广略围宜阳，光率步骑五万赴之，战于城下。取周建安等四戍，捕千余人而还。
现代文：北周又派柱国纥干广略围攻宜阳，他又率五万军队赶赴，在宜阳城下展开激战，夺取北周建安等四座戍镇，俘获一千多人归来。
English: North Zhou also sent Zhu Guozhang to besiege Yiyang. He also led fifty thousand troops to rush to Yiyang, launched a fierce battle under the city of Yiyang, captured four towns such as North Zhou Jian'an, and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：军未至鄴，敕令便放兵散。
现代文：军队还未回到邺城，朝廷下令将军队解散。
English: Before the army returned to Handan, the imperial court ordered the army to be disbanded.

古文：光以功勋者未得慰劳，若散，恩泽不施。
现代文：他认为建立功勋的人还没有得到封赏慰劳，如果解散，朝廷的恩泽就无法施予。
English: He believed that those who had built up meritorious deeds had not yet received rewards and consolations, and if they were disbanded, the imperial court would not be able to bestow favors on them.

古文：乃密表，请使宣旨，军仍且进。
现代文：便秘密上表，请求朝廷宣布圣旨，慰劳三军，并仍让军队前进。
English: He secretly petitioned the imperial court to announce the imperial edict, comfort the three armies, and still let the army advance.

古文：朝廷发使迟留，军还将至紫陌，光驻营待使。
现代文：朝廷派使者让他们停下，军队回到紫陌，安营扎寨等待朝廷的使者。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to stop them, and the troops returned to Zimao to set up camp and wait for the imperial envoy.

古文：帝闻光军营已逼，心甚恶之，急令舍人追光入见，然后宣劳散兵。
现代文：后主高纬听说斛律光的军营逼近京城，心里十分厌恶，赶忙派中书舍人召斛律光进宫，然后勉励慰劳，解散军队。
English: Afterward, Gao Wei, the lord, heard that the military camp of Bao Riguang was approaching the capital, and he was very disgusted. He hurriedly sent a scholar to call Bao Riguang into the palace, and then encouraged him to work hard and disband the army.

古文：拜左丞相，别封清河郡公。
现代文：朝廷封他为左丞相，另封为清河郡公。
English: The Imperial Court appointed him as the Minister of the Left, and he was also appointed as the Governor of Qinghe County.

古文：光尝在朝堂，垂帘而坐。祖珽不知，乘马过其前。
现代文：斛律光曾在朝堂上垂下帘子坐着，祖王廷不知道，骑着马从他前面过去。
English: Zhaoluguang had been sitting in the hall with the curtains down, but Zuo Wangting, unbeknownst to him, rode past in front of him.

古文：光怒，谓人曰： 此人乃敢尔！ 
现代文：他因此发怒，对别人说： 这个人胆敢如此！ 
English: He was enraged and said to the others, "How dare this man do this!

古文：后珽在内省，言声高慢，光过闻之，又怒。
现代文：后来，祖王廷在宫内省台大声说话。他正从这里经过听见了，又发怒。
English: Later, Zuo Wangting was speaking loudly in the palace courtyard. He was passing by when he heard it and became angry.

古文：珽知光忿，赂其从奴搕头。
现代文：祖王廷知道斛律光恼怒他，便买通斛律光的随从扌盍头。
English: Ancestor Wang Ting knew that Baoliguang was angry with him, so he bought Baoliguang's follower Shantou.

古文：曰： 自公用事，相王每夜抱膝叹曰： 盲人用权，国必破矣 珽省事褚士达梦人倚户授其诗曰： 九升八合粟，角斗定非真，堰却津中水，将留何处人。 
现代文：扌盍头对他说 ：自从您掌管朝政以来，我家的相王每天晚上都抱膝叹息，说 ：祖王廷这个瞎子掌权，国家一定要灭亡啊！  祖王廷的部属褚士达梦见有人倚在门上授给他诗，说： 九升八合粟，角斗定非真，堰却津中水，将留何处人！ 
English: Shantou said to him, "Since you have been in charge of the imperial government, the king of my family has been holding his knees every night and sighing, saying, "Ancestor Wangting, the blind man, is in power, the country must perish!" The subordinate of the ancestor Wangting, Fusida, dreamed that someone was leaning on the door to give him a poem, saying, "Nine liters and eight ears of millet, the fight is not true, the weir is in the middle of the water, where will people stay!"

古文：以告珽。珽占之曰： 角斗，斛字；津却水，何留人，合成律字；非真者，解斛律于我不实。 
现代文：他将这首诗报告给祖王廷，祖王廷分析说： 角斗，合起来是斛字；津却水，何留人，合起来是一个律字；非真者，应解释为斛律光对我不真诚。 
English: He reported this poem to Zu Wangting, and Zu Wangting analyzed it and said: "Klado, taken together, is a syllable; Tsu, but water, but how many people, taken together, is a rhyming word; if it is not true, it should be interpreted as 律光 is not sincere to me."

古文：士达又言所梦状，乃其父形也。珽由是惧。
现代文：褚士达又叙述他所梦见的那人的状貌，便是祖王廷的父亲的形象，他因此恐惧。
English: Kestad also describes the appearance of the man he dreamed of, the image of Zu Wangting's father, which frightened him.

古文：又穆提婆求娶光庶女，不许。
现代文：另外，穆提婆想娶斛律光庶出的女儿为妻，遭到拒绝。
English: In addition, Mutiwa wanted to marry the daughter of the illegitimate son of Baoliguang, but was refused.

古文：帝赐提婆晋阳之田，光言于朝曰： 此田，神武以来，常种禾饲马，以拟寇难。
现代文：天子将晋阳的田地赐给穆提婆，斛律光在朝廷中说： 这些田地自神武帝以来，常常种庄稼喂军马，以准备对付敌人的进攻。
English: The heavenly son bestowed the fields of Jinyang to Mutiwa, and Bao Riguang said in the imperial court: These fields have often grown crops and fed war horses since Emperor Jinwu, in order to prepare for the enemy's attack.

古文：今赐，无乃阙军务也？ 
现代文：现在赐给穆提婆，难道不使军队的粮草缺少了吗？ 
English: Now that it has been given to Mutaibah, will not the army be short of food and water?

古文：帝又以鄴清风园赐提婆租赁之。
现代文：天子又把邺城的清风园赏赐给穆提婆，让他租赁出去。
English: The Son of Heaven also bestowed the Clear Breeze Garden in Handan to Muti, and let him lease it out.

古文：于是官无菜，赊买于人，负钱三百万，其人诉焉。
现代文：于是官员们没有了菜吃，只好向别人赊买，共欠下三百万钱，这些人向官府诉说。
English: As a result, officials had no food to eat and had to buy it from others, owing a total of three million yuan, these people told the government.

古文：光曰： 此菜园赐提婆，是一家足；若不赐提婆，便百官足 。
现代文：斛律光说： 把菜园赐给穆提婆，是使一家满足；如果不赐给穆提婆，可以使百官满足。 
English: Peliguang said, "If you give the vegetable garden to Mutiwa, it will satisfy the family; if you don't give it to Mutiwa, it will satisfy the officials."

古文：由是祖、穆积怨。
现代文：从此，祖王廷、穆提婆对他积怨甚深。
English: From then on, the ancestors Wangting and Muti were deeply resentful of him.

古文：周将韦孝宽惧光，乃作谣言，令间谍漏之于鄴曰： 百斗飞上天，明月照长安。 
现代文：周将韦孝宽惧怕斛律光，便制造谣言，让间谍到邺城散布，说： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
English: Zhou general Wei Xiaoguang was afraid of the light of the moon, so he created rumors and had spies spread them in Lucheng, saying: "The hundred-pointed star will fly into the sky, and the bright moon will illuminate Chang'an."

古文：又曰： 高山不推自崩，槲树不扶自竖。 
现代文：又说： 高山不摧自崩，槲树不扶自竖。 
English: He also said: "Mountains do not collapse, eucalyptus trees do not stand on their own.

古文：珽读之曰： 盲老公背上下大斧，饶舌老母不得语。 
现代文：祖王廷听说后，又续上说： 盲老公背上下大斧，饶舌老母不得语。 
English: After hearing this, Zu Wangting continued to say: "My blind husband has a big axe on his back, and my mother is speechless.

古文：令小兒歌之于路。
现代文：让小孩子们在路上歌唱。
English: Let the little children sing on the road.

古文：提婆闻，以告其母。
现代文：穆提婆听说后，告诉他的母亲陆令萱。
English: When Muti heard about it, he told his mother about Lu Lingyao.

古文：令萱以饶舌为斥己，盲老公谓祖珽也，遂协谋，以谣言启帝曰： 斛律累世大将，明月声震关西，丰乐威行突厥，女为皇后，男尚公主，谣言可畏 帝以问韩长鸾。
现代文：陆令萱认为饶舌老母是斥责她自己，盲老公是说的祖王廷，便与祖王廷共同密谋，把市井谣言奏报给后主，说： 斛律氏几代为大将，斛律光的名声震动关西，他的弟弟斛律羡的威望行于突厥。斛律光的女儿为皇后，男子娶公主为妻，谣言实在可怕。 
English: Lu Lingyao thought that the rapping mother was reprimanding herself, and the blind husband was talking about Zuo Wangting, so he and Zuo Wangting conspired together to report the rumors to the heir, saying: "For several generations, the Balochi family has been a general, the reputation of Balochi Guang shakes Kansai, and the prestige of his brother Balochi Envy is in Turkey. Balochi Guang's daughter is a queen, a man marries a princess as his wife, the rumors are really terrible.

古文：鸾以为不可，事寝。光又尝谓人曰： 今军人皆无裈袴，后宫内参，一赐数万匹，府藏稍空，此是何理？ 
现代文：后主把这件事征求韩长鸾的意见，长鸾认为不应该对斛律光下手，事情便被放下。斛律光又曾对别人说 ：现在军士们都没有衣服穿，而后宫的太监，一次赏赐就可以得到数万匹布帛丝绢，府库因此空虚，这是什么道理？ 
English: Afterward, the lord asked Han Changtao for his opinion on the matter. Changtao thought that it was not right to attack Gong Liguang, and the matter was dropped. Gong Liguang also said to others: Now the soldiers have no clothes to wear, but the eunuchs of the harem can get tens of thousands of cloth silk cocoons at one time, so the treasury is empty. What is the reason for this?

古文：受赐者闻之，皆曰： 天子自赐我，关相王何事？ 
现代文：受赏赐的太监听说后，都说： 天子赏给我，关你什么事！ 
English: When the rewarded eunuchs heard about it, they all said: "Heaven's gift to me, what does it matter to you!

古文：珽又通启求见，帝使以库车载入，珽因请间，唯何洪珍在侧。帝曰： 前得公启，即欲施行，长鸾以为无此理，未可。 
现代文：祖王廷又求见后主，后主派府库中的车偷偷将他载入宫中。祖王廷请求退下左右的人，只剩下何洪珍在旁边，后主说： 前次得到你的奏报，想立即施行，韩长鸾认为没有这个道理，不可以除去斛律光。 
English: Zowangting also asked to see the Queen Mother. The Queen Mother sent a car from the government treasury to secretly take him to the palace. Zowangting asked the people on the left and right to step back, leaving only He Hongzhen by his side. The Queen Mother said, "The last time I received your report, I wanted to implement it immediately. Han Changyu thought that there was no reason for this, and it was not possible to remove the halo.

古文：珽未对。洪珍进曰： 若本无意，则可；既有此意，不决行，万一事泄，如何！ 
现代文：祖王廷没有对答，何洪珍进言说： 如果斛律光本来没有谋反的意思，还可以；如果有反意，不果决执行，万一事情泄露，怎么办？ 
English: Zu Wangting did not reply, and He Hongzhen said: "If there is no intention to rebel, it is okay; if there is a counter-intention and it is not carried out, what if the matter is leaked?

古文：帝然洪珍言，而犹预未决。
现代文：后主认为何洪珍说得对，而却犹豫不决。
English: The latter thought that He Hongzhen was right, but hesitated.

古文：珽令武都妾兄颜玄，告光谋为不轨；又令曹魏祖奏，言上将星盛，不诛，恐有灾祸。
现代文：祖王廷命斛律武都的妾兄颜玄诬告斛律光图谋造反；又令曹魏祖奏报，说上将的星宿旺盛，不诛杀斛律光，恐怕会有灾祸。
English: The Ancestor King Ting ordered Yan Xuan, the concubine brother of Yan Liguo, to falsely accuse Yan Liguo of plotting a rebellion; he also ordered Cao Wei to report to the Ancestor that the general's star was strong and that if he did not kill Yan Liguo, there would probably be a disaster.

古文：先是天狗西流，占曰秦地。
现代文：先是天狗星向西流动，占算的结果是秦地。
English: First, the Tengu star flows westward, and the result of the calculation is the Qin land.

古文：案秦即咸阳也。
现代文：秦，就是咸阳。
English: Qin is Xianyang.

古文：自太庙及光宅，并见血。
现代文：从太庙到斛律光的家里，都见到血迹。
English: Bloodstains were seen from the Imperial Temple to the home of Bao Riguang.

古文：先是三日，鼠常昼见光寝室，常投食与之，一朝三鼠俱死。
现代文：先是这之前的三天，老鼠常常在斛律光的住室里白天出来活动，斛律光投给它们吃的东西，一天早晨死了三只老鼠。
English: First, in the three days before this, mice often came out to play during the day in the living room of the halo light. The halo light gave them something to eat, and one morning three mice died.

古文：又床下有二物如黑猪，从地出走，其穴腻滑。
现代文：另外，他的床下钻出两只像黑猪一样的动物，从地下走出去，洞穴非常光滑。
English: In addition, two black pig-like creatures emerged from under his bed and walked out of the ground. The cave was very smooth.

古文：大蛇屡见。
现代文：大蛇也屡屡出现。
English: Large snakes have also appeared repeatedly.

古文：屋脊有声，如弹丸落。
现代文：屋顶上发出响声，就像弹丸落在了上面。
English: There was a noise on the roof, as if a projectile had landed on it.

古文：又大门横木自焚。捣衣石自移。
现代文：再则，他家的大门上的横木自己燃烧起来，捣衣的石头会自己移动。
English: In addition, the crossbeam on the gate of his house burns by itself, and the rubble stone moves by itself.

古文：既而丞相府佐封士让密启云： 光前西讨还，敕令便放兵散，光令军逼帝京，将为不轨，不果而止。
现代文：不久，丞相府佐封士让密报朝廷： 斛律光以前西讨归来，朝廷命他解散军队，他却命军队进逼京城，准备图谋不轨，阴谋没有实现才把军队解散。
English: Soon afterwards, the chancellor's office sent a secret message to the imperial court, saying that Zhaofeng would return to the west before Lu Guang, and the court ordered him to disband the army. However, he ordered the army to enter and besiege the capital, preparing to plot an evil course. The army was only disbanded when the plot failed to materialize.

古文：家藏弩甲，奴僮千数，每使丰乐、武都处，阴谋往来。
现代文：他家里藏着弓箭甲胄，蓄养着数千名僮仆。又常派人到他的弟弟斛律羡，长子斛律武都任职的地方，暗中往来联络。
English: He kept a cache of bows and arrows and armor at home, and had thousands of servants. He often sent people to the places where his younger brother and eldest son were in charge, and secretly communicated with them.

古文：若不早图，恐事不可测。 
现代文：如果朝廷不早一天动手，事情的后果恐怕不可预料。 
English: If the imperial court does not take action a day earlier, the consequences of the matter are probably unpredictable.

古文：帝谓何洪珍曰： 人心亦大圣，我前疑其欲反，果然。 
现代文：后主对何洪珍说 ：众人的心是最圣明的，我以前怀疑他想造反，果然如此。 
English: The late master said to He Hongzhen, "The hearts of all people are the most sacred. I once suspected that he wanted to rebel, and indeed he did.

古文：帝性怯，恐即有变，令洪珍驰召祖珽告之。
现代文：后主性情胆怯，害怕事情会立即变化，便命何洪珍赶快召请祖王廷，把封士让的奏议内容告诉他。
English: The latter was timid and afraid that things would change immediately, so he ordered He Hongzhen to quickly summon Zuo Wangting and tell him the content of the petition for the transfer of the seal.

古文：又恐追光不从命。珽因请赐其一骏马，令明日乘至东山游观，须其来谢，因执之。
现代文：后主又害怕逮捕斛律光他会反抗，祖王廷因而请求后主赐给斛律光一匹骏马，让他明天骑着马到东山游玩，他必定来谢恩，乘机将他抓住。
English: The latter was afraid that if he resisted, he would be arrested. Therefore, Zu Wangting asked the latter to give Baliguang a good horse, and let him ride the horse to Dongshan tomorrow. He would surely come to thank him and seize the opportunity.

古文：帝如其言。
现代文：后主按照他说的去做。
English: The postmaster did as he was told.

古文：光将上马，头眩。
现代文：斛律光将要上马进宫，一阵头晕目眩。
English: Zha Li Guang is about to enter the palace on a horse, and he feels dizzy.

古文：及至，引入凉风堂，刘桃枝自后扑之，不倒。
现代文：入宫后，宫人将他领到凉风堂，武士刘桃枝从他身后扑过来，没有将他摔倒。
English: After entering the palace, the courtiers led him to the Cool Breeze Hall, and the samurai Liu Taozhi pounced on him from behind, but did not knock him down.

古文：光曰： 桃枝常作如此事，我不负国家。 
现代文：他对刘桃枝说： 你怎么经常干这种事？我又不背叛国家。 
English: He said to Liu Taoji, "How often do you do this? I'm not betraying the country.

古文：桃枝与力士三人，以弓弦肙其颈，遂拉杀之，年五十八。
现代文：刘桃枝与三个大力士用弓弦勒住他的脖子，用力拉紧，将他杀死，时年五十八岁。
English: At the age of fifty-eight, Liu Taozhi and three strong men strangled his neck with a bowstring, pulled it tight, and killed him.

古文：血流于地，刬之迹终不灭。
现代文：鲜血流在地上，用铲子清除，痕迹仍然存在。
English: Blood streamed onto the ground and was removed with a shovel, but traces remain.

古文：于是下诏称其反，族灭之。
现代文：朝廷于是下诏说他谋反，他的全族都被诛灭。
English: The imperial court then issued an edict saying that he had plotted a rebellion, and his entire family was annihilated.

古文：使二千石郎邢祖信掌簿籍其家。
现代文：朝廷派二千石郎邢祖信拿着簿册去抄检斛律光的家。
English: The imperial court sent the 2,000-koku farmer, Rong Zixin, with a ledger to check the home of Rong Riguang.

古文：珽于都省问所得物，祖信曰： 得弓十五张，宴射箭一百，贝刀七口，赐槊二张。 
现代文：祖王廷在省台问抄出了什么东西，邢祖信说： 共得弓十五张，宴会上用的箭一百支，镶有贝壳的刀七口，朝廷赐给的长矛两支。 
English: Ancestor Wang Ting asked what was copied in the province of Taiwan, and Zou Zuxin said: A total of fifteen bows were obtained, one hundred arrows used at the banquet, seven knives with shells, and two spears given by the court.

古文：珽又厉声曰： 更得何物？ 
现代文：祖王廷又厉声问道 ：还有什么东西吗？ 
English: Zu Wangting again asked sharply, "Is there anything else?"

古文：曰： 得枣子枝二十束，拟奴仆与人斗者，不问曲直，即以杖之一百。 
现代文：邢祖信答 ：还得到枣树枝二十束。他家的奴仆与别人斗殴，他不问是非曲直，用枣枝打一百下。 
English: He also received twenty bunches of jujube branches. When his family's servants fought with others, he did not ask about the rights and wrongs, but hit them a hundred times with jujube branches.

古文：珽大惭，乃下声曰： 朝廷已加重刑，郎中何可分雪？ 
现代文：祖王廷听完十分惭愧，便低声说： 朝廷已将他重刑处死，郎中你怎么能替他申雪？ 
English: After listening to this, Zowangting was very ashamed and said in a low voice, "The imperial court has sentenced him to death. How can you, his son-in-law, intercede for him?"

古文：及出，人尤其抗直。祖信慨然曰： 好宰相尚死，我何惜余生！ 
现代文：邢祖信出宫后，人们都为他的正直敢言担心，他慷慨说道： 好的宰相还被冤屈致死，我何必流连自己的生命！ 
English: After Gong Zuxin left the palace, people were worried about his honesty. He said generously: A good prime minister was wronged to death, why should I waste my life!

古文：祖信少年时，父逊为李庶所卿，因诣庶，谓庶曰： 暂来见卿，还辞卿去。 
现代文：祖信少年时，父亲邢逊被李庶所亲近，因而他到李庶那里去，对李庶说： 我暂来见您一面，还要辞别您而去。 
English: When Zuxin was a boy, his father, Juxon, was approached by Li Zhe, so he went to Li Zhe and said to Li Zhe: "I have come to see you for a while, but I have to say goodbye to you and leave.

古文：庶父谐杖庶而谢焉。
现代文：李庶的父亲李谐杖责李庶而向邢祖信道歉。
English: Li Shizhu's father, Li Hunjie, scolded Li Shizhu and apologized to Zou Zuxin.

古文：光居家严肃，见子弟若君臣。
现代文：斛律光在家里十分严肃，他与子弟就像君臣之间的关系那样。
English: He is very serious at home, and the relationship between him and his son is like that between a prince and a vassal.

古文：虽极贵盛，性节俭，简声色，不营财利，杜绝馈饷。
现代文：虽然官位显赫，家资丰厚，却依然节约省俭。疏于声色玩好，不经营家产，不谋取财利，杜绝一切馈赠贿赂。
English: Although he holds a prominent official position and has a rich family fortune, he is still frugal and thrifty. He avoids ostentatious entertainment, does not manage family assets, does not seek financial gain, and avoids all gifts and bribes.

古文：门无宾客，罕与朝士交言，不肯预政事。
现代文：家中没有宾客，很少与朝臣们交谈，也不肯参与朝廷政事。
English: He had no guests at home, rarely conversed with courtiers, and refused to participate in court politics.

古文：每会议，常独后言，言辄合理。
现代文：每次朝臣们会议，他经常最后发言，说得都合乎情理。
English: At every meeting of courtiers, he was often the last to speak, and he spoke sensibly.

古文：将有表疏，令人执笔，口占之，务从省实。
现代文：将要上表奏事，让旁人执笔，他亲自口授，务必简明实在。
English: He will have to present the matter at the table, let someone else write it down, and he will dictate it himself, so it must be concise and real.

古文：行兵用匈奴卜法，吉凶无不中。
现代文：指挥军队用匈奴人的办法，料定吉凶无不准确。
English: The Huns were used to command the army, and the information about good and evil was not accurate.

古文：军营未定，终不入幕，或竟日不坐。
现代文：军营没有扎好，他不进入大帐，或者成天不坐下来休息。
English: The barracks are not set up properly, he doesn't enter the accounts, or he doesn't sit down and rest all day.

古文：身不脱介胄，常为士卒先。
现代文：身上不离开盔甲，常常为将士们作出表率。
English: He never took off his armor and often set an example for the soldiers.

古文：有罪者，唯大杖挝背，未尝妄杀。众皆争为之死。
现代文：对于犯罪的人，只用棍棒打他们的脊背，没有妄杀过一人，将士们都争先为他效命。
English: As for the criminals, he only clubbed them in the back. He did not kill anyone, and his soldiers all fought for his life.

古文：宜阳之役，谓周人曰： 归我七年人，不然取尔十倍。 周人即归之。
现代文：宜阳战役时，他对周军说 ：把这几年抓住的齐人归还给我，不然的话，我要抓住你们十倍的人来报复。 
English: During the Yiyang Campaign, he said to the Zhou army: "Return to me the Qi people you have captured over the past few years, otherwise, I will catch ten times as many people as you to take revenge."

古文：在西境筑定夸诸城，马上以鞭指画，所取地皆如其言，拓地五百里而未尝伐功。
现代文：周人便把俘虏的齐人放还。他在西部边境修筑定讠夸等城堡，都是坐在马上挥着鞭子指挥，城堡选取的地点都按他说的办。他开疆拓土五百里却不夸耀自己的功劳。
English: Zhou people then released the captive Qi people. He built castles such as Dingyukua and others on the western border, all sitting on a horse and waving a whip. The locations of the castles were selected according to his instructions. He opened up 500 miles of territory but did not boast of his achievements.

古文：板筑之役，鞭挞人士，颇称其严。
现代文：板筑一役，他用鞭抽打有过失的军士，是最严厉的一次。
English: The most severe one was the one in which he lashed the offending sergeant with a whip.

古文：自结发从戎，未尝失律，深为邻敌慑惮。
现代文：他自从结发束冠参军征战，从没有失误过，深为邻国所畏服。
English: He has never made a mistake since he joined the army at the top of his game, and is deeply intimidated by his neighbors.

古文：罪既不彰，一旦屠灭，朝野惜之。
现代文：他的罪行不清楚，一旦被杀害，朝野上下深为痛惜。
English: His crime was not clear, and once he was killed, the entire court deeply regretted it.

古文：光死，遣使于州斩之。
现代文：周武帝宇文邕听说他死去，高兴得大赦全境的罪犯。
English: Upon hearing of his death, Emperor Wu of Zhou was overjoyed and granted amnesty to all criminals throughout the country.

古文：小子钟，年甫数岁，获免。周朝袭封崇国公。
现代文：后来周武帝率兵攻占邺城，追赠斛律光为上柱国、崇国公。
English: Later, Emperor Zhou Wudi led an army to conquer the city of Handan, and posthumously awarded Handan Liguang as Shangju Guo and Chongguo Guo.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于车骑将军。
现代文：他指着赠封的诏书说 ：如果此人还活着，我怎么能到达邺城呢？ 
English: Pointing to the imperial rescript he was presented with, he said: "If this man is still alive, how can I get to Shicheng?"

古文：羡字丰乐，少机警，善骑射。
现代文：斛律羡，字丰乐，从小机警过人，善于骑马射箭。
English: Envious of the law, the word Fengle, from a small police officer, good at riding and archery.

古文：河清三年，为都督、幽州刺史。
现代文：北齐武成帝河清三年，任都督、幽州刺史。
English: In the third year of the Northern Qi Emperor Wu Chengheqing, he was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：其年，突厥十余万寇州境，羡总诸将御之。
现代文：这一年，突厥人十余万兵马进犯幽州，他率领诸将抵御。
English: That year, the Turks invaded Yuzhou with more than a hundred thousand soldiers and horses, and he led the generals to resist.

古文：突厥望见军容齐整，遂不敢战，遣使求款附。
现代文：突厥人看见他军容严整，不敢接战，派使者请求和解归附。
English: The Turks saw that his army was in good shape and did not dare to fight, so they sent an envoy to ask for reconciliation and annexation.

古文：天统元年五月，突厥可汗遣使请朝贡，自是岁时不绝，羡有力焉。
现代文：天统元年五月，突厥的可汗派使者请求向齐进贡，从此年年不断，斛律羡的作用最为有力。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Heaven, the emissary of the Turkic Khans sent a request to pay tribute to Qi. Since then, it has continued year after year, with the most powerful role being played by the law of envy.

古文：诏加行台仆射。
现代文：朝廷下诏加封他为行台仆射。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to add him to the ranks of Gaotai minions.

古文：羡以虏屡犯边塞，自库推戍东拒于海。二千余里，其间凡有险要，或斩山筑城，断谷起障，并置立戍逻五十余所。
现代文：他因为敌人屡次侵犯边塞，在从库推戍起，东至大海的二千多里内，其间凡是险峻要害的地方，或者劈山修筑城堡，或者截断山谷筑起屏障，建立起戍守巡逻的哨卡五十余处。
English: Because of the enemy's repeated encroachment on the border fortress, he set up more than 50 sentry posts to keep patrols in the more than 2,000 miles from Kudu and Shantou to the east to the sea, during which there were always dangerous places, or built castles in the mountains, or cut valleys to build barriers.

古文：又导高梁水，北合易京，东会于潞，因以灌田，公私获利。
现代文：又开渠引来高梁水，北边到达易京，东边与潞水相会，用来浇灌田园，公私都能受益。
English: In addition, a canal was opened to bring in water from Gaoliang, which reached Yijing in the north and met with Surabaya in the east, and was used to irrigate the countryside, benefiting both the public and private sectors.

古文：在州养马二千匹，部曲三千，以备边，突厥谓之南面可汗。
现代文：他在幽州养马两千匹，训练部曲三千人，以备边境战争之需，突厥人都称他为南可汗。
English: He raised two thousand horses in Yuzhou and trained three thousand men to prepare for the border war. The Turks called him the Southern Khan.

古文：四年，遣行台尚书令，别封高城县侯。
现代文：天统四年，迁任行台尚书令，另外封为高城县侯。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was transferred to the post of Gangdai Shangshuling, and was also appointed as the governor of Gaocheng County.

古文：羡历事数帝，以谨直称，虽极荣宠，不自矜尚。
现代文：他经历几个帝王，都以谨慎正直受到称赞，虽然极尽荣耀恩宠，却不骄矜自满。
English: He went through several emperors, all of whom were praised for their prudence and honesty. Although he was extremely honored and favored, he was not arrogant and complacent.

古文：以合门贵盛，深以为忧。
现代文：因全家贵显腾达，深为忧虑。
English: He was deeply worried because his whole family was very wealthy.

古文：武平元年，乃上书推让，乞解所职。诏不许。
现代文：武平元年，便上书天子，请求解去自己的职务，朝廷下诏不允许。
English: In the first year of Wuping, he wrote to the emperor, requesting to be relieved of his duties, which was not allowed by the imperial court.

古文：其年秋，进爵荆山郡王。
现代文：这年秋天，他晋升爵位为荆山郡王。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was promoted to the title of Jingshan County King.

古文：羡虑祸，使人骑快骡迎至鄴，无日不得音问。
现代文：他担心祸患会降临，派人骑上脚力很快的骡子来往于任所与邺城之间，没有一天不了解京城的情况。
English: He was worried that a calamity would befall, so he sent someone to ride a mule, which was very fast, to travel between Renjo and Shicheng. Not a day went by without him learning about the situation in the capital.

古文：后二日鄴使不至，家人乞养忧之。
现代文：如果停两天邺城的使者不来，家里人吃饭都很忧虑。
English: If the envoy does not come after a two-day stay in Lushan, the family members are worried about eating.

古文：又梦著枷锁，劝丰乐速奔突厥，羡不从。
现代文：他又梦见一人身戴枷锁，劝他赶快逃入突厥，他不同意。
English: He also dreamed of a man wearing shackles, and he was advised to flee to Turkey as soon as possible, but he did not agree.

古文：占其梦曰： 枷者加官，锁者锁锁吉利。 
现代文：醒后找人占卜这个梦，说： 枷，是加官的意思；锁者，门上上锁，也是大吉大利。 
English: After he woke up, he asked someone to tell him about the dream, saying, "The yoke means to add to one's position; the lock means to lock the door, which is also good luck.

古文：及光诛，敕中领军贺拔伏恩等十余人驰驿捕之，遣领军大将军鲜于桃枝、洛州行台仆射独孤永业便发定州骑卒续进。
现代文：他的哥哥斛律光被诛杀，朝廷派中领军贺拔伏恩等十多人骑快马赶来逮捕他，派领军大将军鲜于桃枝、洛州行台仆射独孤永业调动定州的骑兵接续进发。
English: His brother, Yao Liguang, was killed in the battle. The imperial court sent more than ten people, including the leader of the army, He Ba Fu En, to ride fast horses to arrest him, and sent the leader of the army, General Xian Yu Tao Zhi, and the general of the Lozhou Campaign, Shuai Duyongye, to mobilize the cavalry of Dingzhou.

古文：伏恩等既至，门者白羡曰： 使人衷甲马汗，宜闭城门。 
现代文：贺拔伏恩等人到后，看守大门的人对斛律羡说 ：朝廷派来的这些使者内披衣甲，骑的马浑身是汗，应把城门关闭，以防万一。 
English: After the arrival of He Ba Fu En and others, the person guarding the gate envied Yao Lu and said: These messengers sent by the court are wearing armor, and the horse they are riding is covered in sweat. The gate should be closed, just in case.

古文：羡曰： 敕使岂可疑拒！ 
现代文：他说 ：朝廷派来的钦使怎么可以怀疑和抗拒？ 
English: He said: "How can an envoy sent by the imperial court doubt and resist?

古文：出迎之，遂见执，死于长史事。
现代文：便出门迎接，被逮捕，在长史办公的地方被处死。
English: He went out to meet them, was arrested, and was executed in the place where he had his office.

古文：谓其妻曰： 启太后，臣兄弟死自当知。 
现代文：死前他对妻子说： 请启奏太后，我们兄弟被处死自己心里清楚。 
English: Before he died, he said to his wife: "Please inform the Empress Dowager that our brothers have been executed. I know it in my heart.

古文：临刑叹曰： 富贵如此，女为皇后，公主满家，常使三百兵，何得不败？ 
现代文：临刑前，他感叹说： 我家如此富贵，女儿为皇后，公主娶了几个，经常役使三百名士兵，怎么能会不败落？ 
English: Before his execution, he sighed and said: My family is so rich, my daughter is the queen, the princess has married several men, and I regularly serve and command three hundred soldiers. How can I not be defeated?

古文：并害五子，年十五已下者宥之。
现代文：五个儿子与他一起遇害，年龄在十五岁以下的被赦免。
English: His five sons who were killed with him, all under the age of 15, were pardoned.

古文：羡未诛前，忽令其在州诸子五六人，锁颈乘驴出城，合家泣送之至阁，日晚而归。吏人莫不惊异。
现代文：他在没有被诛杀之前，忽然令他在州中的五六个儿子锁着脖颈，骑着驴出城，全家哭哭啼啼将他们送到门房前，到天晚他们才回来，官吏百姓无不感到惊异。
English: Before he was beaten to death, he suddenly ordered his five or six sons in the province to leave the city on donkeys with their necks chained. The whole family sent them crying to the gatehouse. They did not return until the evening of the next day. The officials and the people were all astonished.

古文：行燕郡守马嗣明，道术之士也，为羡所钦，窃问之，答云： 须有衤襄厌。 
现代文：燕郡太守马嗣明深于道术，被他所钦敬，私下里问他为什么要这样，他答道 ：需要消除烦恼。 
English: Yan County's grand marshal Ma Ci, who was deeply versed in Taoism and admired by him, asked him privately why he was doing this, and he replied, "I need to get rid of my worries."

古文：数日而有此变。
现代文：数日后便出现了这场事变。
English: The incident occurred a few days later.

古文：羡及光并工骑射。
现代文：斛律羡与哥哥斛律光都善于骑马射箭。
English: Zhaolucheng and his brother Zhaolucheng are both good at horseback archery.

古文：少时猎，父金命子孙会射而观之，泣曰： 明月、丰乐用弓不及我，诸孙又不及明月、丰乐，世衰矣。 
现代文：小时候他们参加围猎，父亲斛律金命子孙们聚集一起看他们射箭，然而却流着眼泪说： 明月、丰乐使用弓箭赶不上我，孙子们又赶不上明月和丰乐，真是一代不如一代啊。 
English: When they were children, they took part in a hunt. Their father, Gong Li, and the grandchildren gathered to watch them shoot arrows. However, they shed tears and said, "Ming Yue and Feng Le cannot catch up with me in the use of bows and arrows, and their grandchildren cannot catch up with Ming Yue and Feng Le. Truly, each generation is not as good as the previous one."

古文：每日令出田，还即效所获。
现代文：每天命他们外出打猎，回来后检查他们的收获。
English: Every day he would send them out to hunt and come back to check on their harvest.

古文：光获少，必丽龟达腋；羡获虽多，非要害之所。
现代文：斛律光的猎物少，但就像击中乌龟的腋下那样都能射中鸟兽的要害处；斛律羡得到的猎物虽然多，却没有射中要害。
English: The halo light has fewer prey, but it can hit the key points of birds and beasts just like hitting the underarm of a turtle; although the halo light has more prey, it does not hit the key points.

古文：光恆蒙赏，羡或被捶。
现代文：斛律光常被父亲奖赏，而斛律羡有时被责打。
English: Gong Liguang was often rewarded by his father, while Gong Liguang was sometimes beaten.

古文：人问其故，云： 明月必背上著箭，丰乐随处即下手，数虽多，去兄远矣。 
现代文：人们问他原因，他说： 明月的箭都射在动物的脊背上，丰乐的箭射在什么地方的都有，猎取的鸟兽虽多，箭法跟他的哥哥差得太远了。 
English: People asked him why, and he said: The bright-moon arrows are all shot on the back of the animal's spine, the joyful arrows are everywhere, although there are many birds and beasts to hunt, the archery is too far from his brother.

古文：闻者服其言。
现代文：听的人都很佩服他的话。
English: His words were admired by all who heard them.

