古文：马殷，字霸图，许州鄢陵人也。
现代文：马殷字霸图，是许州鄢陵人。
English: Ma Yin Zi Ba Tu is a native of Xuzhou and Fuling.

古文：唐中和三年，蔡州秦宗权遣孙儒、刘建峰将兵万人属其弟宗衡，略地淮南，殷初为儒裨将。
现代文：唐中和三年，蔡州秦宗权派孙儒、刘建峰率兵一万人归属他的弟弟秦宗衡，攻取淮南，马殷最初任孙儒的偏将。
English: In the middle and third years of the Tang Dynasty, Caizhou Qin Zongquan sent Sun Ru and Liu Jianfeng with 10,000 soldiers to his brother Qin Zongheng to capture Huainan. Ma Yin was the first general to serve Sun Ru.

古文：宗衡等攻杨行密于扬州，未克，梁兵方急攻宗权，宗权数召儒等，儒不欲还，宗衡屡趋之，儒怒，杀宗衡，自将其兵取高邮，遂逐行密。
现代文：秦宗衡等人在扬州攻打杨行密，役能攻克，梁军正猛攻秦宗权，秦宗权多次召孙儒等人，孙儒不想回来，秦宗衡多次催促他，孙儒发怒，杀掉秦宗衡，亲自率兵攻取高邮，于是驱逐杨行密。
English: Qin Zongheng and others attacked Yang Xingmi in Yangzhou, and were able to defeat him. Liang's army was storming Qin Zongquan. Qin Zongquan repeatedly summoned Sun Ru and others. Sun Ru did not want to return. Qin Zongheng repeatedly urged him. Sun Ru got angry and killed Qin Zongheng. He personally led an army to capture Gaoyou, and then expelled Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密据宣州，儒以兵围之，久不克，遣殷与建峰掠食旁县。
现代文：杨行密占据宣州，孙儒率兵包围他，很久没能攻克，派马殷和刘建峰掠夺附近县的粮食。
English: Yang Xingmi occupied Xuanzhou, and Sun Ru and his soldiers encircled him and could not conquer him for a long time. He sent Ma Yin and Liu Jianfeng to plunder grain from nearby counties.

古文：儒战败死，殷等无所归，乃推建峰为帅，殷为先锋，转攻豫章，略虔、吉，有众数万。
现代文：孙儒战败而死，马殷等人无处可归，于是推举刘建峰做主帅，马殷任先锋，转而攻打豫章，攻取虔、吉二州，有士兵敷万人。
English: Sun Ru was defeated and died, and Ma Yin and others had nowhere to return to. Therefore, Liu Jianfeng was elected as the head coach, and Ma Yin was appointed as the vanguard. Instead, they attacked Yuzhang, captured Qian and Jizhou, and had 10,000 soldiers.

古文：乾宁元年，入湖南，次醴陵。
现代文：干宁元年，进入湖南，驻扎在醴陵。
English: In the first year of the Han Ning Dynasty, he entered Hunan and was stationed in Fuling.

古文：潭州刺史邓处讷发邵州兵戍龙回关，建峰等至关，降其戍将蒋勋。
现代文：潭州刺史邓处讷派邵州兵戍守龙回关，刘建峰等人到关，使守将蒋勋投降。
English: Tang Zhou sent soldiers from Shao Zhou to guard Long Huiguan. Liu Jianfeng and others arrived at the pass and forced Jiang Xun to surrender.

古文：建峰取勋铠甲被先锋兵，张其旗帜，直趋潭州，至东门，东门守者以为关兵戍还，开门内之，遂杀处讷，建峰自称留后。
现代文：刘建峰取来蒋勋的镗甲给先锋兵穿上，打着他的旗帜，直奔潭州，到达东门，把守东门的人认为是关兵戍守回来，打开城门让他们进去，于是杀掉邓处讷，刘建峰自称留后。
English: Liu Jianfeng took Jiang Xun's armor to put on the vanguard soldiers, carrying his flag, went straight to Tanzhou, reached the east gate, the person guarding the east gate thought that it was the soldiers who were guarding the gate, opened the gate to let them in, and then killed Deng Xuanna. Liu Jianfeng claimed to stay behind.

古文：僖宗授建峰湖南节度使、殷为马步军都指挥使。
现代文：唐僖宗任刘建峰焉湖南节度使、马殷为马步军都指挥使。
English: Tang Xizong appointed Liu Jianfeng as the envoy to the Hunan Festival, and Ma Yin as the envoy to command the Horse Guards.

古文：蒋勋求为邵州刺史，建峰不与，勋率兵攻湘乡，建峰遣殷击勋于邵州。
现代文：蒋勋请求任邵州刺史，刘建峰不同意，蒋勋率兵攻打湘乡，刘建峰派马殷到邵州攻打蒋勋。
English: Jiang Xun asked Ren Shaoshou to assassinate him, Liu Jianfeng disagreed, Jiang Xun led the troops to attack Hunan Township, Liu Jianfeng sent Ma Yin to Shaoshou to attack Jiang Xun.

古文：建峰庸人，不能帅其下，常与部曲饮酒欢呼。
现代文：刘建峰是个庸人，不能统率部下，常常和部下饮酒欢呼。
English: Liu Jianfeng is a mediocrity, unable to lead his subordinates, often drinking and cheering with his subordinates.

古文：军卒陈赡妻有色，建峰私之，赡怒，以铁楇击杀建峰。
现代文：军士陈赡的妻子有美色，刘建峰和她私通，陈赡发怒，用铁锤打死刘建峰。
English: Sergeant Chen Yan's wife was beautiful, and Liu Jianfeng had an affair with her. Chen Yan got angry and beat Liu Jianfeng to death with a hammer.

古文：军中推行军司马张佶为帅，佶将入府，乘马辄踶啮，伤佶髀。
现代文：军中推举行军司马张佶做主帅，张佶准备入府，骑上马时马就不停踢咬，伤了张佶的腿骨。
English: In the middle of the army, the secretary of the army, Zhang Jun, was promoted to be the head coach. Zhang Jun was preparing to enter the palace. When he got on the horse, the horse kept kicking and biting, injuring Zhang Jun's leg bone.

古文：佶卧病，语诸将曰： 吾非汝主也，马公英勇，可共立之。 
现代文：张佶卧病不起，对将领们说： 我不是你们的主帅，马公英勇，可以共同拥立他。 
English: Zhang Xuan was lying ill and said to the generals: "I am not your general, Ma Gong is brave, you can support him together."

古文：诸将乃共杀赡，磔其尸，遣姚彦章迎殷于邵州。
现代文：将领们于是一同杀死陈赡，分割他的尸体，派姚彦章去邵州迎接马殷。
English: The generals then killed Chen Yan together, dismembered his body, and sent Yao Yan Zhang to meet Ma Yin in Shaozhou.

古文：殷至，佶乘肩舆入府，殷拜谒于廷中，佶召殷上，乃率将吏下，北面再拜，以位与之，时乾宁三年也。
现代文：马殷到后，张佶坐轿子进府，马殷在廷中拜见张佶，张佶召马殷上廷，于是率领将吏们下廷，向北再拜，让位给他，这时是干宁三年。
English: After Ma Yin arrived, Zhang Ye entered the palace on a palanquin. Ma Yin went to see Zhang Ye in the court, Zhang Ye called Ma Yin to the court, and then led the generals to the court, bowed again to the north, and gave way to him. At this time, it was Gan Ning for three years.

古文：唐拜殷潭州刺史。
现代文：唐封马殷为潭州刺史。
English: Ma Yin of Tang Dynasty was the first to write the history of Tanzhou.

古文：殷遣其将秦彦晖、李琼等攻连、邵、郴、衡、道、永六州，皆下之。
现代文：马殷派他的将领秦彦晖、李琼等人攻打连、邵、郴、衡、道、永六州，都攻克了。
English: Ma Yin sent his generals Qin Yanqi, Li Qiong, and others to attack Lian, Shao, Lu, Heng, Dao, and Yonglu, all of which were conquered.

古文：桂管刘士政惧，遣其将陈可璠、王建武等率兵守全义岭。
现代文：桂管刘士政害怕，派他的将领陈可瑨、王建武等人率兵把守全义岭。
English: Gui Guan Liu Shizheng was afraid and sent his generals Chen Kejun, Wang Jianwu and others to lead the troops to defend Quan Yiling.

古文：殷遣使聘于士政，使者至境上，可璠等不纳。
现代文：马殷派使者出使刘士政，使臣到刘士政境上后，陈可墦不让进。
English: Ma Yin sent an envoy to Liu Shizheng. After the envoy arrived at Liu Shizheng's territory, Chen Kejun refused to let him in.

古文：殷怒，遣琼等以兵七千攻之，擒可璠等及其兵二千余人，悉坑之，遂围桂管，虏士政，尽取其属州。
现代文：马殷发怒，派李琼等人率兵七千人进攻，擒获陈可墦等人和他们的士兵两千多人，把他们全部活埋了，于是包围桂管，俘虏刘士政，把他的属州全部夺取了。
English: Enraged, Ma Yin sent Li Qiong and others to attack with seven thousand soldiers, captured Chen Kegui and others and more than two thousand of their soldiers, buried them all alive, and then surrounded Guizhou, captured Liu Shizheng, and seized all of his provinces.

古文：殷表琼桂管观察使。
现代文：马殷表奏李琼焉桂管观察使。
English: Ma Yin watches Li Qiongyan play the kuei.

古文：四年，拜殷武安军节度使。
现代文：四年，任命马殷焉武安军节度使。
English: In four years, Ma Yinan was appointed as the top military commander of the Wu'an Army.

古文：初，孙儒败于宣州，殷弟賨为杨行密所执，行密收儒余兵为 黑云都 ，以賨为指挥使。
现代文：当初，孙儒在宣州被打败时，马殷的弟弟马责被杨行密抓获，杨行密收罗孙儒的残兵组成 黑云都 ，任命马责为指挥使。
English: At first, when Sun Ru was defeated in Xuanzhou, Ma Yin's younger brother Ma Rong was captured by Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi gathered the remaining soldiers of Luo Sun Ru to form the Black Cloud Capital and appointed Ma Rong as the commander.

古文：賨从行密攻战，数有功，为人质重，未尝自矜，行密爱之，问賨谁家子，賨曰： 马殷弟也。 
现代文：马责随杨行密攻战，多次立功，为人质朴稳重，不曾自耀功劳，杨行密喜爱他，问马宾是哪家的儿子，骂责说： 是马殷的弟弟。 
English: Ma Rongping followed Yang Xingmi into battle, repeatedly made contributions, was a simple and steady person, and never boasted of his achievements. Yang Xingmi loved him, asked which family's son Ma Bin was, and scolded him: He was Ma Yin's younger brother.

古文：行密大惊曰： 汝兄贵矣，吾今归汝可乎？ 
现代文：杨行密大惊失色说： 你的哥哥显贵了，我现在送你回去行吗？ 
English: Yang Xingmi was stunned and said, "Your brother has become prominent. Can I send you back now?"

古文：賨不对。
现代文：马责不回答。
English: Ma Guanzhong did not answer.

古文：他日又问之，賨谢曰： 臣，孙儒败卒也，幸公待以不死，非杀身不足报。
现代文：另一天又问他，马卖推辞说： 我是孙儒的败兵，有幸您不处死我，如不为您而死，不足以报答您。
English: The next day, he asked him again, and Ma Xue replied, "I am a defeated soldier of Sun Ru. I am lucky that you did not execute me. If I did not die for you, it would not be enough to repay you."

古文：湖南邻境，朝夕闻殷动静足矣，不愿去也。 
现代文：湖南是相邻境土，早晚听说马殷的消息就够了，不愿意离开您。 
English: Hunan is a neighboring territory. Sooner or later, hearing the news about Ma Yin will be enough. I don't want to leave you.

古文：行密叹曰： 昔吾爱子之貌，今吾得子之心矣。
现代文：杨行密感叹说： 过去我喜欢你的外貌，现在我懂得你的心了。
English: Yang Xingmi sighed and said: In the past, I liked your appearance, but now I understand your heart.

古文：然勉为吾合二国之欢，通商贾、易有无以相资，亦所以报我也！ 
现代文：既然这样就尽力为我使两国和好，相互通商、交换有无以相互帮助，这也是报答我的方法啊！ 
English: Since this is how I do my best to reconcile the two countries for me, and whether or not mutual trade and exchange can help each other, this is also a way to repay me!

古文：乃厚礼遣賨归。
现代文：于是用厚礼送马责回去。
English: So he sent Ma Rong back with a heavy gift.

古文：殷大喜，表賨节度副使。
现代文：马殷大喜，表奏马责焉节度副使。
English: Ma Yin was overjoyed and played the role of vice-envoy of discipline.

古文：行密遣将刘存等攻杜洪，围鄂州，殷遣秦彦晖、许德勋以舟兵救之，已而杜洪败死，存等遂攻殷。
现代文：杨行密派将领刘存等人攻打杜洪，包围鄂州，马殷派秦彦晖、许德勋率水军救援，不久杜洪战败而死，刘存等人就进攻马殷。
English: Yang Xingmi sent general Liu Cun and others to attack Du Hong and encircle Ezhou. Ma Yin sent Qin Yanjun and Xu Deshun to lead the navy to rescue Du Hong. Du Hong was soon defeated and died. Liu Cun and others attacked Ma Yin.

古文：殷遣彦晖拒于上流，偏将黄璠以舟三百伏浏阳口。
现代文：马殷派秦彦哩在上游抵御，副将黄瑨率领三百艘战船埋伏在浏阳口。
English: Ma Yin sent Qin Yanli upstream to resist, and Vice Admiral Huang Qi led three hundred warships to ambush Liu Yangkou.

古文：存等屡战不胜，乃致书于殷以求和，殷欲许之，彦晖曰： 淮人多诈，将怠我师，不可信。 
现代文：刘存等人多次作战不胜，于是致信马殷求和，马殷想答应，秦彦晖说： 淮人多欺诈，准备让我们松懈，不可信任。 
English: Liu Cun and others fought many times without victory, so they sent a letter to Ma Yin to ask for peace, Ma Yin wanted to agree, Qin Yanqi said: Huai people are more fraudulent, ready to let us slacken, can not be trusted.

古文：急击之，存等退走，黄璠以浏阳舟截江合击，大败之，刘存及陈知新战死，彦晖取岳州。
现代文：便猛攻他们，刘存等人退逃，黄墦率埋伏在浏阳口的战船拦江夹击，大败刘存，刘存和陈知新战死，秦彦晖攻取岳州。
English: He attacked them fiercely, Liu Cun and others fled, Huang Qi led an ambush of warships to block the river at Liuyangkou, defeated Liu Cun, Liu Cun and Chen Zhixin died in battle, and Qin Yanqi captured Yuezhou.

古文：梁太祖即位，殷遣使修贡，太祖拜殷侍中兼中书令，封楚王。
现代文：梁太祖即位，马殷派使臣进贡，梁太祖封马殷焉侍中兼中书令，封为楚王。
English: When Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, Ma Yin sent envoys to pay tribute. Liang Taizu appointed Ma Yin Yan as his attendant and secretary, and he was crowned King of Chu.

古文：荆南高季昌以兵断汉口，邀殷贡使，殷遣许德勋攻其沙头，季昌求和，乃止。
现代文：剂南高季昌率兵截断汉口，拦截马殷进贡的使臣，马殷派许德勋攻打他们的沙头，高季昌求和，纔作罢。
English: Cao Nang Gao Jichang and his soldiers cut off Hankou and intercepted Ma Yin's envoys bringing tribute. Ma Yin sent Xu Dezhun to attack their beachhead. Gao Jichang sued for peace and called off the attack.

古文：杨行密袁州刺史吕师周来奔。
现代文：杨行密的袁州刺史吕师周前来投奔。
English: Yang Xingmi's Yuan Zhou stabbed Shilu, and his master Zhou came to take refuge.

古文：师周，勇健豪侠，颇通纬候、兵书，自言五世将家，惧不能免，常与酒徒聚饮，醉则起舞，悲歌慷慨泣下。
现代文：吕师周，勇健豪侠，粗通谶纬、兵书，自称是五代将家子弟，怕不能幸免，常常和酒徒聚众狂饮，喝醉了就起身跳舞，慷慨悲歌哭泣起来。
English: Lv Shizhou, a brave and heroic man, with a thorough knowledge of military affairs, claimed to be the son of five generations of generals. Afraid that he would not be spared, he often gathered with drunkards to drink wildly. When he was drunk, he got up and danced, and wept a generous lament.

古文：行密闻之，疑其有异志，使人察其动静。
现代文：杨行密听说，怕他有二心，派人侦察他的动静。
English: Yang Xingmi heard that, fearing that he might have second thoughts, he had sent someone to spy on his movements.

古文：师周益惧，谓其裨将綦毋章曰： 吾与楚人为敌境，吾常望其营上云气甚佳，未易败也。
现代文：吕师周更加害怕，对他的偏将綦毋章说： 我和楚人是相邻的敌手，我常常望见他们营寨上的云气很美，不容易打败。
English: Lv Shizhou was even more afraid, and said to his second-in-command, Yan Zhuo, in a casual manner, "I and Chu are neighboring enemies. I often see the beautiful clouds over their camp, and it is not easy to defeat them.

古文：吾闻马公仁者，待士有礼，吾欲逃死于楚可乎？ 
现代文：我听说马公是仁人，对士人有礼，我想逃命到楚行吗？ 
English: I've heard that Magong is a benevolent person and is polite to scholars. Do I want to flee to Chu Xing?

古文：章曰： 公自图之，章舌可断，语不泄也。 
现代文：綦毋章说： 你自己考虑，我綦毋章的舌头可以割断，也不会泄露你的话。 
English: He said casually, "Think about it yourself. My careless tongue can be cut and will not reveal your words."

古文：师周以兵猎境上，乃奔于楚，綦毋章纵其家属随之。
现代文：吕师周率兵到楚境上打猎，于是投奔楚，綦毋章放任其家属跟随。
English: Lv Shi Zhou led his soldiers to hunt in Chu territory, so he rushed to Chu and unceremoniously allowed his family members to follow.

古文：殷闻师周至，大喜曰： 吾方南图岭表而得此人，足矣。 
现代文：马殷听说吕师周到来，大喜说： 我正向南谋取岭南，得到这人就够了。 
English: When Ma Yin heard that Lu Shizhou had arrived, he was overjoyed and said, "I'm heading south to get Lingnan. It's enough to get this man."

古文：以为马步军都指挥使，率兵攻岭南，取昭、贺、梧、蒙、龚、富等州。
现代文：任命焉马步军都指挥使，率兵攻打岭南，攻取昭、贺、梧、蒙、龚、富等州。
English: He appointed Yanma as the commander of the marching army and led the troops to attack Lingnan and capture Zhao, He, Wu, Meng, Yunnan, and Fuzhou.

古文：殷表师周昭州刺史。
现代文：马殷表奏吕师周为昭州刺史。
English: Ma Yin plays the role of Lu Shi Zhou in the history of Zhaozhou.

古文：朗州雷彦恭召吴人攻平江，许德勋击败之。
现代文：朗州雷彦恭召昊人攻扛平江，许德勋打败了他们。
English: Lanzhou Lei Yan respectfully called on Hao people to attack and carry the Pingjiang River, and Xu Dezhun defeated them.

古文：殷遣秦彦晖攻朗州，彦恭奔于吴，执其弟彦雄等七人送于梁。
现代文：马殷派秦彦晖攻打朗州，雷彦恭投奔到昊，抓获他的弟弟彦雄等七人送到梁。
English: Ma Yin sent Qin Yanyan to attack Langzhou, Lei Yanyan went to Hao, captured his brother Yan Xiong, and sent seven others to Liang.

古文：于是澧州向瑰、辰州宋鄴、溆州昌师益等率溪洞诸蛮皆附于殷。
现代文：于是澧州向瓖、辰州宋邺、淑州昌师益等人率领溪洞各蛮夷部族都归附马殷。
English: As a result, the barbarian tribes in Xidong, led by Xiang Yao of Bozhou, Song Yao of Chenzhou, and Chang Shiyi of Shuzhou, all joined Ma Yin.

古文：殷请升朗州为永顺军，表张佶节度使。
现代文：马殷请求升朗州为永顺军，表奏张佶焉节度使。
English: Ma Yin asked Shenglang Prefecture to be Yongshun's army and to play the role of Zhang Xuan's envoy.

古文：殷乃请依唐太宗故事，开天册府，置官属。
现代文：马殷于是请求依照唐太宗旧例，开设天册府，设置属官。
English: Ma Yin then requested to follow the old example of the Tang Taizong, open the Tianzhuang Prefecture, and set up subordinate officials.

古文：太祖拜殷天册上将军，殷以其弟賨为左相，存为右相，廖光图等十八人为学士。
现代文：梁太祖封马殷为天册上将军，马殷任命他的弟弟马责为左相，马存焉右相，廖光图等十八人为学士。
English: Liang Taizu appointed Ma Yin as a general in the heavenly book, and Ma Yin appointed his brother Ma Rong as the left minister, Ma Cunyan as the right minister, and Liao Guangtu and 18 others as bachelors.

古文：末帝时，加殷武昌、静江、宁远等军节度使，洪、鄂四面行营都统。
现代文：梁末帝时，加授马殷为武昌、静江、宁速等军节度使，洪、鄂四面行营都统。
English: During the reign of Emperor Liang Mucu, Ma Yin was appointed as the military envoy to Wuchang, Jingjiang and Ningbo. He went to all four regions of Hong and Hubei.

古文：唐庄宗灭梁，殷遣其子希范修贡京师，上梁所授都统印。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁，马殷派他的儿子马希范到京师进贡，献上梁授给的都统印。
English: Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Liang, and Ma Yin sent his son Ma Xifan to Beijing to pay tribute and present the imperial seal that Liang had bestowed.

古文：庄宗问洞庭广狭，希范对曰： 车驾南巡，才堪饮马尔。 
现代文：唐庄宗询问洞庭的宽广，马希范回答说： 你的车驾去那裹巡枧，洞庭水只够喂马而已。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong inquired about the width of the Dongting, and Ma Xifan replied, "Your car is driving to the watering place. The water in the Dongting is only enough to feed horses."

古文：庄宗嘉之。
现代文：唐庄宗赞赏他。
English: Tang Zhuangzong appreciated him.

古文：庄宗平蜀，殷大惧，表求致仕，庄宗下玺书慰劳之。
现代文：唐庄宗平定蜀，马殷十分害怕，上表请求辞官，唐庄宗下诏书慰劳他。
English: Tangzhuangzong subdued Shu, and Ma Yin was very afraid. He asked for a dictation from the emperor, and Tangzhuangzong consoled him with an imperial edict.

古文：明宗即位，遣使修贡，并贺明年正月，荆南高季昌执其贡使史光宪。
现代文：唐明宗即位，派使臣进贡，并祝贺第二年的正月节，剂南高季昌抓获他的进贡使臣史光宪。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, sent envoys to pay tribute, and congratulated the New Year's Day of the second year, when Jian Nan Gao Jichang captured his tribute envoy Shi Guangxian.

古文：殷遣袁诠、王环等攻之，至其城下，季昌求和，乃止。
现代文：马殷派袁诠、王环等人攻打他，到达城下，高季昌求和，纔作罢。
English: Ma Yin sent Yuan Yan, Wang Huan and others to attack him, and when they reached the outskirts of the city, Gao Jichang sued for peace.

古文：殷初兵力尚寡，与杨行密、成汭、刘等为敌国，殷患之，问策于其将高郁，郁曰： 成汭地狭兵寡，不足为吾患，而刘志在五管而已，杨行密，孙儒之仇，虽以万金交之，不能得其欢心。
现代文：马殷当初兵力还少，和杨行密、成油、刘龚等相对峙，马殷对此担忧，向他的将领高郁询问计策，高郁说： 成油地窄兵少，不值得我们担心，而刘袭的目标在五管而已，杨行密是孙儒的仇敌，即使用万贯钱财交结他，也不能得到他的欢心。
English: At the beginning, Ma Yin's troops were still small, and he was confronted with Yang Xingmi, Chengyu, Liu Hui and others. Ma Yin was worried about this and asked his general Gao Yu about the strategy. Gao Yu said: Chengyu has a small number of soldiers and is not worth worrying about, while Liu's target is only five pipes. Yang Xingmi is the enemy of Sun Ru. Even if you use a lot of money to get him, you can't get his favor.

古文：然尊王仗顺，霸者之业也，今宜内奉朝廷以求封爵而外夸邻敌，然后退修兵农，畜力而有待尔。 
现代文：但尊崇王室主持公正，是称霸的人的事业，如今应当在内尊奉朝廷以求封爵而在外向邻敌夸耀，然后退而治军务农，养精蓄锐等待时机而已。 
English: But honouring the royal family for administering justice is the cause of those who seek hegemony. Now it is time to honour the imperial court at home in order to obtain a knighthood, while boasting about it to the neighbouring enemies, and then retreat to military and agricultural affairs, conserving energy and waiting for the right time.

古文：于是殷始修贡京师，然岁贡不过所产茶茗而已。
现代文：于是马殷纔向京师进贡，但每年进贡的不过是出产的茶叶而已。
English: As a result, Ma Yinxuan paid tribute to the Beijing Division, but the annual tribute was nothing more than the production of tea.

古文：乃自京师至襄、唐、郢、复等州置邸务以卖茶，其利十倍。
现代文：于是从京师到襄、唐、郢、复等州设置茶务卖茶，获利十倍。
English: As a result, he set up a tea business to sell tea from Beijing to Xiang, Tang, Handan, Fuzhou and other provinces, and made ten times the profit.

古文：郁又讽殷铸铅铁钱，以十当铜钱一。
现代文：高郁又劝马殷铸造铅铁钱，以十个当一个铜钱。
English: Gao Yu also advised Ma Yin to mint lead and iron coins, with ten as one copper coin.

古文：又令民自造茶以通商旅，而收其算，岁入万计。
现代文：又命令百姓自己制茶卖给商人旅客，而征收税利，每年收入敷以万计。
English: He also ordered the people to make their own tea and sell it to merchants and travelers, while tax and interest were levied, with annual income reaching tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：由是地大力完，数邀封爵。
现代文：从此土地广大，国力完备，多次要求封爵。
English: Since then, the land is vast, the national strength is complete, and the knighthood has been requested many times.

古文：天成二年，请建行台。
现代文：天成二年，请求建立行台。
English: Tiancheng two years, requested the establishment of a trading platform.

古文：明宗封殷楚国王，有司言无封国王礼，请如三公用竹册，乃遣尚书右丞李序持节以竹册封之。
现代文：唐明宗封马殷为楚国王，有关官府说没有封国王的礼仪，请求依照封三公的礼仪用竹册，于是派肖书右丞李序持符节用竹册封他。
English: Tang Mingzong crowned Ma Yin as the king of Chu. The relevant authorities said that there was no ceremony for crowning the king, and requested that a bamboo scroll be used in accordance with the ceremony for crowning the three princes. Therefore, they sent Xiao Shuyuan and Li Xuanji to crown him with a bamboo scroll.

古文：殷以潭州为长沙府，建国承制，自置官属，以其弟賨为静江军节度使，子希振武顺军节度使，次子希声判内外诸军事，姚彦章为左相，许德勋为右相，李鐸为司徒，崔颖为司空，拓拔常为仆射，马珙为尚书，文武皆进位。
现代文：马殷以潭州为长沙府，建立国家，承受君命，自行设置属官，任命他的弟弟马寅为静江军节度使，儿子马希振为武顺军节度使，次子马希声判内外诸军事，姚彦章为左相，许德勋为右相，李铎为司徒，崔颖为司空，拓拔常为仆射，马珙为尚书，文武官吏都进官位。
English: Ma Yin took Tanzhou as Changsha Prefecture, established the country, received the king's command, set up subordinate officers on his own, appointed his brother Ma Yin as the Jingjiang Army Festival Envoy, his son Ma Xizhen as the Wushun Army Festival Envoy, his second son Ma Xi as the judge of the internal and external military, Yao Yan Zhang as the left minister, Xu Deshun as the right minister, Li Jie as the scholar, Cui Ying as the scholar, Tu Ba Chang as the scholar, Ma Jie as the scholar, and civil and military officials were promoted to official positions.

古文：谥其曾祖筠曰文肃、祖正曰庄穆、父元丰曰景庄，立三庙于长沙。
现代文：赠其曾祖父马筠谧号文肃、祖父马正谧号庄穆、父亲马元丰谧号景庄，在长沙修建三庙。
English: He gave his great-grandfather, Ma Zheng, the name Wenshu, his grandfather, Ma Zheng, the name Zhuangmu, and his father, Ma Yuanfeng, the name Jingzhuang, to build three temples in Changsha.

古文：长兴元年，殷卒，年七十九，诏曰 马殷官爵俱高，无以为赠，谥曰武穆 而已。
现代文：长兴元年，马殷逝世，时年七十九岁，下诏说 马殷官位爵位都很高，没有可以追赠的，谧号武穆 罢了。
English: In the first year of Changxing, Ma Yin died at the age of seventy-nine, and the following edict said that Ma Yin's official ranks and titles were very high, and there was nothing to be posthumously awarded, only the nickname Wu Mu.

古文：子希声立。
现代文：儿子马希声继位。
English: His son Ma Xisheng succeeded to the throne.

古文：希声字若讷，殷次子也。
现代文：马希声字若讷，是马殷的次子。
English: Ma Ying is the second son of Ma Yin.

古文：殷建国，以希声判内外诸军事。
现代文：马殷建国，任命马希声判内外诸军事。
English: Ma Yin founded the country and appointed Ma Xi to be the judge of the military inside and outside the country.

古文：荆南高季昌闻殷将高郁素教殷以计策而楚以强，患之，尝使谍者行间于殷，殷不听。
现代文：剂南高季昌听说马殷的将领高郁历来为马殷献计而楚因此强大，担忧高郁，曾派人向马殷挑拨离间，马殷不听从。
English: Agent Nan Gao Jichang heard that Gao Yu, the general of Ma Yin, was powerful because he had always made plans for Ma Yin, and he was worried about Gao Yu. He had sent someone to sow discord with Ma Yin, but Ma Yin did not listen.

古文：希声用事，谍者语希声曰： 季昌闻楚用高郁，大喜，以为亡马氏者必郁也。 
现代文：马希声专权，挑拨的人对马希声说： 高季昌听说楚重用高郁，十分高兴，认为使马氏灭亡的必定是高郁。 
English: The person who instigated Ma Xisheng's autocracy said to Ma Xisheng: Gao Jichang heard that Chu used Gao Yu heavily and was very happy. He thought that Gao Yu must be the one who caused the demise of the Ma clan.

古文：希声素愚，以为然，遽夺郁兵职，郁怒曰： 吾事君王久矣，亟营西山，将老焉，犬子渐大，能咋人矣！ 
现代文：马希声素来愚蠢，信以为然，急忙削夺高郁的军职，高郁发怒说： 我事奉君王很久了，屡次经营西山，将要老死在那里，犬子逐渐长大，能对人吼叫了！ 
English: Mashi, who had always been stupid, believed it, and hurried to take away Gao Yu's military post. Gao Yu said angrily, "I have been serving the king for a long time, I have run Xishan many times, and I will die of old age there. My son is growing up, and he can yell at people!"

古文：希声闻之，矫殷令杀郁。
现代文：马希声听说后，假托马殷的命令杀了高郁。
English: After hearing of Ma Xisheng, Gao Yu was killed on the orders of the fake Toma Yin.

古文：殷老不复省事，莫知郁死，是日大雾四塞，殷怪之，语左右曰： 吾尝从孙儒，儒每杀不辜，天必大雾，岂马步狱有冤死乎？ 
现代文：马殷年老不再管事，不知道高郁死了，这天大雾弥漫四方，马殷感到奇怪，对手下人说： 我曾跟随孙儒，孙儒每次杀害无辜，天必大雾，难道马步军狱有冤死的人吗？ 
English: In his old age, Ma Yin was no longer in charge of affairs. He did not know that Gao Yu had died. On that day, a heavy fog covered all four directions. Ma Yin felt strange. His opponent said: I used to follow Sun Ru. Every time Sun Ru killed an innocent person, there would be a heavy fog. Did Ma Bu's military prison have people who died unjustly?

古文：明日，吏以状白，殷拊膺大哭曰： 吾荒耄如此，而杀吾勋旧！ 
现代文：第二天，官吏把情况告诉他，马殷拍着胸口大哭说： 我如此昏老，而杀死我的功臣！ 
English: The next day, when the officials told him the situation, Ma Yin beat his chest and cried loudly, "I'm so dizzy, and I killed my hero!"

古文：顾左右曰： 吾亦不久于此矣！ 
现代文：望着手下人说： 我也不久于人世了！ 
English: Look at your subordinates and say: I'm not long for this world either!

古文：明年殷薨。
现代文：第二年马殷死去。
English: The following year, Ma Yin died.

古文：希声立，授武安、静江等军节度使。
现代文：马希声即位，授武安、静江等军节度使。
English: Ma Xisheng was enthroned, and Wu'an, Jingjiang and other military tributary envoys were awarded.

古文：希声尝闻梁太祖好食鸡，慕之，乃日烹五十鸡以供膳。
现代文：马希声曾听说梁太祖喜好吃鹦，羡慕他，于是每天烹制五十只鸡供膳食。
English: Ma Xisheng had heard that Liang Taizu liked to eat cockatoos and envied him, so he cooked fifty chickens for meals every day.

古文：葬殷上潢，希声不哭泣，顿食鸡肉数器而起。其礼部侍郎潘起讥之曰： 昔阮籍居丧而食蒸豚，世岂乏贤邪！ 
现代文：在上潢安葬马殷，马希声不哭泣，每顿吃几碗鸡肉而起，他的礼部侍郎潘起讥诮他说： 过去阮籍守丧吃蒸猪肉，世上难道缺少贤人吗！ 
English: At the funeral of Ma Yin in Shangluo, Ma Xizhen did not cry, he ate several bowls of chicken every meal, and his etiquette attendant Pan Qi mocked him and said: In the past, Ruan's family members and mourners ate steamed pork. Is there a shortage of wise men in the world?

古文：长兴三年，希声卒，追封衡阳王。
现代文：长兴三年，马希声死，追封为衡阳王。
English: In the third year of Changxing, Ma Xisheng died and was posthumously crowned King of Hengyang.

古文：弟希范立。
现代文：弟弟马希范继位。
English: His younger brother, Mahifan, succeeded him.

古文：希范字宝规，殷第四子也。
现代文：马希范字童规，是马殷的第四个儿子。
English: Ma Xifan, also known as Tong Gui, is Ma Yin's fourth son.

古文：殷子十余人，嫡子希振长而贤，其次希声与希范同日生，而希声母袁夫人有美色，希声以母宠得立，而希振弃官为道士，居于家。
现代文：马殷的儿子十多个，嫡子马希振年长而贤明，次子马希声和马希范同天出生，而马希声的母亲袁夫人有美色，马希声因母亲受宠得烈即位，而马希振弃官为道士，住在家中。
English: Ma Yin had more than ten sons. His legitimate son, Ma Xizhen, was older and wiser. His second son, Ma Xisheng and Ma Xifan, were born on the same day. Ma Xisheng's mother, Lady Yuan, was beautiful. Ma Xisheng was favored by his mother and ascended to the throne. Ma Xisheng renounced his official position as a Taoist and lived at home.

古文：希声卒，而希范以次立，袭殷官爵，封楚王。
现代文：马希声死后，马希范依次继位，承袭马殷的官爵，后唐封为楚王。
English: After the death of Ma Xisheng, Ma Xifan succeeded to the throne in turn, inheriting the official title of Ma Yin, and later became the King of Chu in Tang Dynasty.

古文：清泰二年，赐以弓矢冠剑。
现代文：清泰二年，赐给弓箭、冠冕、剑。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, he was given a bow and arrow, a crown and a sword.

古文：天福四年，加希范天册上将军，开府承制如殷故事。
现代文：天福四年，加封马希范为天册上将军，依照马殷的旧例开府承君命处理政务。
English: In the fourth year of Tianfu, Ma Xifan was added as a general in the heavenly book, and in accordance with the old example of Ma Yin, he opened the government to accept the king's order to handle government affairs.

古文：希范好学，善诗，文士廖光图、徐仲雅、李皋、拓拔常等十八人皆故殷时学士，希范性奢侈，光图等皆薄徒，饮博欢呼，独常沉厚长者，上书切谏，光图等恶之。
现代文：马希范好学，善于写诗，文士廖光图、徐仲雅、李皋、拓拔常等十八人都是过去马殷时的学士，马希范好奢侈，廖光图等人都是浅薄之徒，饮酒赌博喧哗，只有拓拔常是深沉厚道的长者，上书急切谏阻，廖光图等人讨厌他。
English: Ma Xifan was studious and good at writing poetry. Eighteen scribes, including Liao Guangtu, Xu Zhongya, Li Xi, and Tuoba Chang, were all academicians in Ma Yin's time. Ma Xifan was extravagant, Liao Guangtu and others were shallow people, drinking and gambling were noisy. Only Tuoba Chang was an elder with a deep and profound way, and he was eagerly opposed to writing. Liao Guangtu and others hated him.

古文：襄州安从进、安州李金全叛，晋高祖诏希范出兵。
现代文：襄州安从进、安州李金全反叛，晋高祖诏令马希范出兵。
English: Xiangzhou An Congjin, Anzhou Li Jinquan rebelled, and Jinguo Zu Zhao ordered Ma Xifan to send troops.

古文：希范遣张少敌以舟兵趋汉阳，漕米五万斛以馈军，金全等败，少敌乃旋。
现代文：马希范派张少敌率水军奔赴汉阳，运米五万斛供给军队，李金全等人战败，张少敌纔回师。
English: Ma Xifan sent Zhang Shaoqi to lead the navy to Hanyang, and transported 50,000 mu of rice to supply the army. Li Jinquan and others were defeated, and Zhang Shaoqi returned to his division.

古文：溪州刺史彭士愁率锦、奖诸蛮攻澧州，希范遣刘勍、刘全明等以步卒五千击之，士愁大败。
现代文：溪州刺史彭士愁率领锦、奖二州各蛮夷部攻打澧州，马希范派刘勃、刘全明等人率步兵五千人攻打他们，彭士愁大败。
English: Peng Shixu, the governor of Xizhou, led the barbarian troops from Jin and Zhaozhou to attack Zhangzhou. Ma Xifan sent Liu Bo, Liu Quanming and others to attack them with 5,000 infantrymen. Peng Shixu was defeated.

古文：勍等攻溪州，士愁走奖州，遣其子师暠率诸蛮酋降于勍。
现代文：刘勃等人进攻溪州，彭士愁逃到奖州，派他的儿子彭师忌率各蛮族酋长向刘勃投降。
English: Liu Bo and others attacked Xizhou. Peng Shixu fled to Zhuozhou and sent his son Peng Shigui to lead the barbarian chieftains to surrender to Liu Bo.

古文：溪州西接牂柯、两林，南通桂林、象郡，希范乃立铜柱以为表，命学士李皋铭之。
现代文：溪州西边与胖柯、两林接壤，南通桂林、象郡，马希范于是修建铜柱表碑，命令学士李皋撰写铭文。
English: On the west side of Xizhou, bordered by Fatty Ke and Duolin, Nantong, Guilin and Xiang County, Ma Xifan then built a bronze column monument and ordered the bachelor Li Jun to write an inscription.

古文：于是，南宁州酋长莫彦殊率其本部十八州、都云酋长尹怀昌率其昆明等十二部、牂柯张万浚率其夷、播等七州皆附于希范。
现代文：到这时，南宁州酋长莫彦殊率领他本部的十八个州、都云酋长尹怀昌率领他的昆明等十二部、烊柯张万浚率领他的夷、播等七州都归附马希范。
English: By this time, the eighteen provinces of Nanning chieftain Mo Yanshu led by his headquarters, the twelve provinces of Duyun chieftain Yin Huichang led by his Kunming, and the seven provinces of Zhai Ke Zhang Wanzhong led by his Yi and Bi were all attached to Ma Xifan.

古文：希范作会春园、嘉宴堂，其费巨万，始加赋于国中，拓拔常切谏以为不可。
现代文：马希范修建会春园、嘉宴堂，花费巨万，开始在国中增加赋税，拓拔常急切谏阻认为不行。
English: Ma Xifan built the Spring Garden and the Banquet Hall of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, spending a huge amount of money. He began to increase taxes in the country, and it was considered that it was not possible to expand.

古文：希范又作九龙殿，以八龙绕柱，自言身一龙也。
现代文：马希范又建九龙殿，用八条龙环绕柱子，自称他自己也是一条龙。
English: Ma Xifan also built the Nine Dragons Hall, surrounding the pillars with eight dragons, claiming that he was also a dragon.

古文：是时，契丹灭晋，中国大乱，希范牙将丁思觐廷谏希范曰： 先王起卒伍，以攻战而得此州，倚朝廷以制邻敌，传国三世，有地数千里，养兵十万人。
现代文：这时，契丹消灭置，中原大乱，马希范的牙将丁思觐在官廷谏阻马希范说： 先王出身于军伍之中，靠攻战得到这个州，倚靠朝廷制服邻敌，传国三代，占地敷千里，养兵十万人。
English: At this time, the Khitan Empire had been eliminated, the Central Plains were in turmoil, and Ma Xifan's aide-de-camp, Ding Siyu, rose in the imperial court to oppose Ma Xifan, saying: The former king was born in the army, won this province by attacking and conquering, relied on the imperial court to subdue the neighboring enemy, passed down the country for three generations, occupied thousands of miles of land, and raised 100,000 soldiers.

古文：今天子囚辱，中国无主，真霸者立功之时。
现代文：如今天子被囚受辱，中原没有主人，这个时候确实是称霸的人立功的时机。
English: If today's children are imprisoned and humiliated, and the Central Plains have no master, this time is indeed an opportunity for those who seek hegemony to make contributions.

古文：诚能悉国之兵出荆、襄以趋京师，倡义于天下，此桓文、之业也。
现代文：如果能举国出兵剂、襄奔赴京师，倡大义于天下，这是齐桓公、置玄公的事业。
English: If we can send troops across the country, rush to Beijing and advocate for the greater good in the world, this is the cause of Qi Huan and Ge Xuan.

古文：奈何耗国用而穷土木，为兒女之乐乎？ 
现代文：怎么耗费国家财用而大兴土木，求儿女之乐呢? 
English: How is it possible to spend the country's financial resources on the construction of large-scale civil engineering projects and seek the happiness of children?

古文：希范谢之，思觐真目视希范曰： 孺子终不可教也！ 
现代文：马希范不接受，丁思觐睁大眼睛看着马希范说： 小子始终不可教啊！ 
English: Ma Xifan did not accept, Ding Siyu looked at Ma Xifan with wide eyes and said: The boy can never be taught!

古文：乃扼喉而死。
现代文：于是卡住喉咙而死。
English: It got stuck in his throat and he died.

古文：开运四年，希范卒，年四十九，谥曰文昭。
现代文：开运四年，马希范死，时年四十九岁，谧号为文昭。
English: After four years of operation, Ma Xifan died at the age of 49, and his nickname was Wen Zhao.

古文：希广立。
现代文：马希广继位。
English: Mashi Hiroshi succeeds.

古文：希广字德丕，希范同母弟也。
现代文：马希广字德丕，是马希范的同母弟弟。
English: Ma Xifan is Ma Xifan's younger brother by the same mother.

古文：希范平生恶拓拔常谏诤，常入谒，希范呼阍者指常曰： 吾不欲见此人，勿复内也。 
现代文：马希范平生讨厌拓拔常直言谏诤，拓拔常进来拜见，马希范叫守门的人指着拓拔常说： 我不想见这个人，不要又让他进来。 
English: Ma Xifan hated that Tuoba was always outspoken. Tuoba often came to see him. Ma Xifan told the gatekeeper to point at Tuoba and say, "I don't want to see this person, don't let him come in again."

古文：乃谢绝之。
现代文：于是禁绝他进宫。
English: So he was barred from entering the palace.

古文：及卧病，始思常言，以为忠，召之托以希广。
现代文：到卧病不起时，纔想起拓拔常的话，认为他忠心，召他来把马希广托付给他。
English: When he was bedridden, Zou recalled the words of Tuoba Chang, thought he was loyal, and called him to entrust Mashi Guang to him.

古文：希范卒，常数劝希广以位奉其兄希萼，希广不从。
现代文：马希范去世，拓拔常多次劝马希广让位给他的哥哥马希萼，马希广不听从。
English: After the death of Ma Xifan, Tuoba Chang repeatedly advised Ma Xiguang to give way to his brother Ma Xicai, but Ma Xiguang did not listen.

古文：希萼为朗州节度使，希范之卒，希萼自朗州来奔丧。
现代文：马希萼任朗州节度使，马希范死时，马希萼从朗州前来奔丧。
English: When Ma Xifan died, Ma Xifan came from Lanzhou to pay his respects.

古文：希广将刘彦瑫谋曰： 武陵之来，其意不善，宜出兵迎之，以备非常，使其解甲释兵而后入。 
现代文：马希广的将领刘彦瑨出谋说： 武陵王这次前来，心意不善，应当出兵迎接他，以防意外，让他脱下镗甲交出武器后纔放他进来。 
English: Liu Yanyan, the general of Mashiguang, came up with a plan and said, "King Wuling has come this time with bad intentions. We should send troops to meet him. In case of an accident, let him take off his armor, hand over his weapons, and then let him in."

古文：张少敌、周廷诲曰： 王能与之则已，不然宜早除之。 
现代文：张少敌、周廷诲说： 王如果能对付他就算了，不然应尽早除掉他。 
English: Zhang Shaoqi and Zhou Tingyi said: "If the king can deal with him, he should be forgiven, otherwise he should be eliminated as soon as possible."

古文：希广泣曰： 吾兄也，焉忍杀之，分国而治可也。 
现代文：马希广哭泣着说： 他是我的哥哥，哪里忍心杀他，分国而治就行了。 
English: Ma Xiguang cried and said, "He is my brother. If you have the heart to kill him, just divide the country and rule."

古文：乃以兵迎希萼于砆石，止之于碧湘宫，厚赂以遣之。
现代文：于是率兵在砍石迎接马希萼，在碧湘宫阻止他们，送重礼让他们回去。
English: So he led his soldiers to meet Ma Xichal at the stone-cutting site, stopped them at Bixiang Palace, and sent a heavy gift to let them go back.

古文：希萼愤然而去，乃遣使诣京师求封爵，请置邸称籓。
现代文：马希萼气愤地离去，于是派使臣到京师请求封爵，请求设置官邸称藩。
English: Ma Xicai left angrily, so he sent an envoy to Beijing to request a knighthood and the establishment of an official residence called a domain.

古文：汉隐帝不许，降玺书慰劳讲解之。
现代文：汉隐帝不准许，下诏书慰劳调解。
English: Emperor Han Yin did not allow it, and issued an imperial edict to mediate.

古文：希萼怒，送款于李景，举兵攻长沙。
现代文：马希萼发怒，送降书给李景，出兵攻打长沙。
English: Ma Xicai got angry, sent a surrender letter to Li Jing, and sent troops to attack Changsha.

古文：希广遣刘彦瑫、许可琼等御之。
现代文：马希广派刘彦瑨、许可琼等人抵抗他。
English: Masih dispatched Liu Yanyan, Zeng Qiong and others to resist him.

古文：彦瑫败希萼于仆射洲。希萼去，诱溪洞诸蛮寇益阳。
现代文：刘彦瑨在仆射洲打败马希萼。马希萼离去，引诱溪洞各部蛮夷侵犯益阳。
English: Liu Yanyan defeated Ma Xicai in Puzhaizhou. Ma Xicai left and lured barbarians from all parts of Xidong to invade Yiyang.

古文：希广遣崔珙琏以步卒七千屯湘乡玉潭以遏诸蛮。
现代文：马希广派崔珙涟率步兵七千人屯驻湘乡玉潭阻止各部蛮夷。
English: Ma Xiguang sent seven thousand infantrymen led by Cui Jun to Yutan, Hunan to stop the barbarians.

古文：刘彦瑫以舟兵趋武陵，攻希萼。
现代文：刘彦瑨率水军奔赴武陵，进攻马希萼。
English: Liu Yanyan led the navy to rush to Wuling and attack Ma Xicai.

古文：彦瑫败于湄洲，希广大惧，遣使请兵于京师，汉隐帝不能出师。
现代文：刘彦瑨在湄州被打败，马希广十分恐惧，派使臣到京师求兵，汉隐帝不能出兵。
English: Liu Yanqi was defeated in Meizhou, Ma Xiguang was very afraid and sent envoys to Beijing to ask for troops. Emperor Han Yin could not send troops.

古文：希萼舟兵沿江而上，自号 顺天将军 ，攻岳州，刺史王赟坚城不战，希萼呼赟曰： 吾昔约君同行，今何异心乎？ 
现代文：马希萼的水军沿江而上，自称 顺天将军 ，进攻岳州，刺史王赞坚守州城不战，马希萼呼唤王赞说： 我过去约你同行，现在为什么变心了呢？ 
English: Ma Hicap's naval forces sailed up the river, calling themselves the Shuntian Generals, attacked Yuezhou, and besieged Wang Zan, who steadfastly defended the state capital without fighting. Ma Hicap called Wang Zan and said, "I asked you to accompany me in the past, why have you changed your mind now?"

古文：赟曰： 君王兄弟不相容，而责将吏异心乎？
现代文：王赞说： 君王兄弟相互不容，反而责备将吏变心吗？
English: Wang Zan said: Are the king and king's brothers mutually intolerant, but instead blame the generals for changing their minds?

古文：愿君王入长沙，不伤同气，臣不敢不尽节。 
现代文：希望君王进入长沙，不要伤兄弟情谊，我不敢不尽臣节。 
English: I hope that the king will enter Changsha and not hurt the brotherhood. I dare not miss the Subordinate Day.

古文：希萼引兵去，下湘乡，止长沙，屯水西。刘彦瑫、许可琼屯水东。
现代文：马希萼率兵离去，攻下湘乡，在长沙停留，屯驻于江西岸，刘彦蹈、许可坛屯驻于江束岸。
English: Ma Xichai led the troops to leave, conquered Hunan Township, stayed in Changsha, stationed on the west bank of the river, and Liu Yintai and Zhaotan stationed on the bank of the river.

古文：彭师暠登城望水西军，入白希广曰： 武陵兵骄，杂以蛮蜑，其势易破。
现代文：彭师嵩登城观望江西的军队，进来告诉马希广说： 武陵的军队骄纵，夹杂有蛮夷士兵，看来容易攻破。
English: Peng Shisong went to the city to watch the Jiangxi army and came in to tell Ma Xiguang: Wuling's army is arrogant, mixed with barbarian soldiers, it seems easy to break through.

古文：请令可琼等阵山前，臣以步兵三千自巴溪渡江趋岳麓，候夜击之。 
现代文：请求命令许可琼等人在山前摆开阵势，我率步兵三干人从巴溪渡江赴岳麓山，等到晚上攻打他们。 
English: Requesting permission from the command, Qiong and others set up a position in front of the mountain. I led three infantrymen from Bachi to Yuelu Mountain, and waited until the evening to attack them.

古文：希广以为可，而可琼已阴送款于希萼，遂沮其议。
现代文：马希广认为行，而许可琼已暗中送降书给马希萼，于是使彭师嵩的建议落空。
English: Ma Xiguang thought it was a good idea, and allowed Qiong to secretly send a surrender letter to Ma Xicai, thus making Peng Shisong's suggestion a failure.

古文：明日，师暠诣可琼计事，真目叱之曰： 视汝反文在面，岂欲投贼乎！ 
现代文：第二天，彭师嚣去许可琼那里商计事情，瞪大眼睛呵叱他说： 我看你脸上有反纹，难道想投奔贼人吗！ 
English: The next day, Peng Shih-hong went to allow Qiong to discuss the matter, stared wide-eyed and scolded him, saying, "I see you have wrinkles on your face, do you want to join the thieves!"

古文：拂衣而出，急白希广，请杀之，希广不听。
现代文：拂袖而去，急忙告诉马希广，请求杀掉许可琼，马希广不听。
English: He hurriedly told Ma Xiguang and asked for permission to kill Qiong, but Ma Xiguang did not listen.

古文：希萼攻长乐门，牙将吴宏、杨涤战于门中，希萼少衄，已而许可琼奔于希萼，宏、涤闻之皆溃。
现代文：马希萼进攻长乐门，牙将昊宏、杨涤在门中作战，马希萼稍受挫败，不久许可琼投奔马希萼，昊宏、杨涤获知后都溃逃了。
English: Ma Xicai attacked the Changle Gate. The generals, Hao Hong and Yang Jia, fought in the gate. Ma Xicai was slightly defeated, and soon allowed Qiong to run to Ma Xicai. After Hao Hong and Yang Jia were informed, they all fled.

古文：希广率妻子匿于慈堂。
现代文：马希广带着妻子儿女藏在慈堂。
English: Ma Xiguang took his wife and children and hid them in Cidang.

古文：明日擒之。
现代文：第二天抓到他们。
English: They were caught the next day.

古文：希萼见之恻然曰： 此钝夫也，岂能为恶？
现代文：马希萼见了他们凄恻地说： 这是个蠢人，怎么能作恶？
English: When Ma Xiqal saw them, he said sadly: This is a stupid person, how can he do evil?

古文：左右惑之尔。 
现代文：不过是受手下人迷惑罢了。 
English: He was just confused by his subordinates.

古文：顾其下曰： 吾欲活之，如何？ 
现代文：望着他的部下说： 我想让他活着，怎么样？ 
English: He looked at his men and said, I want him alive, how about it?

古文：其下皆不对，遂缢死之。
现代文：他的部下都不回答，于是把他吊死。
English: His men did not answer, so they hanged him.

古文：乾祐三年，希萼自立。
现代文：干佑三年，马希萼自行即位。
English: After three years, Ma Xizhe ascended to the throne on his own.

古文：明年，汉隐帝崩，京师大乱，希萼遂臣于李景，景册封希萼楚王，希萼悉以军政事任其弟希崇。
现代文：第二年，汉隐帝驾崩，京城大乱，马希萼就向李景称臣，李景册封马希萼焉楚王，马希萼把他的军政大事都交托给他的弟弟马希崇。
English: The following year, Emperor Han died and the capital city was in turmoil. Ma Xicai declared himself a vassal of Li Jing, Li Jing made Ma Xicai the King of Chu, and Ma Xicai entrusted his military and political affairs to his brother Ma Xitong.

古文：希崇与楚旧将徐威、陆孟俊、鲁绾等谋作乱。
现代文：马希崇和楚王原来的大将徐威、陆孟俊、鲁绾等人谋划作乱。
English: Ma Xizong and the original generals of King Chu, Xu Wei, Lu Mengjun, Lu Yao and others plotted to create chaos.

古文：希萼置酒端阳门，希崇辞以疾，威等纵恶马十余匹，以壮士执楇随之，突入其府，劫库兵，缚希萼，迎希崇以立。
现代文：马希萼在端阳门设酒宴，马希崇以有病推辞，徐威等人放十多匹恶马，让壮士手持木杖跟在马后，突然进入府中，抢劫武库中的兵器，捆绑马希萼，迎立马希崇。
English: Ma Xicheng held a wine banquet at Duanyang Gate. Ma Xichong declined the invitation on the grounds that he was ill. Xu Wei and others released more than ten evil horses, and had a strong man with a cane follow the horse. He suddenly entered the government headquarters, robbed the weapons in the arsenal, tied up Ma Xicheng, and welcomed Ma Xichong.

古文：希崇遣彭师暠、廖偃囚希萼于衡山，师暠奉希萼为衡山王，臣于李景。
现代文：马希崇派彭师属、廖偃把马希萼拘囚在衡山，彭师嵩尊奉马希萼焉衡山王，向李景称臣。
English: Ma Xizong sent Peng Shizhen and Liao Yu to imprison Ma Xizhe in Hengshan. Peng Shizhong worshipped Ma Xizhe as the king of Hengshan and called Li Jing his vassal.

古文：希崇惧，亦请命于景。
现代文：马希崇害怕，也请求李景任命。
English: Ma Xizong was afraid and also asked Li Jing for an appointment.

古文：景遣边镐入楚，尽迁马氏之族于金陵，时周广顺元年也。
现代文：李景派边镐入楚，把马氏族人全部迁到金陵，这时是周广顺元年。
English: It was the first year of Zhou Guangshun when Li Jing sent his troops to invade Chu and moved all the Ma clansmen to Jinling.

古文：封希萼楚王，居洪州；希崇领舒州节度使，居扬州。
现代文：封马希萼为楚王，住在洪州；马希崇领舒州节度使，住在扬州。
English: King Ma Xichal of Chu lived in Hongzhou, and Emperor Ma Xizong of Shuzhou lived in Yangzhou.

古文：显德三年，世宗征淮，下扬州，下诏抚安马氏子孙。
现代文：颢德三年，周世宗征淮，攻克扬州，下诏安抚马氏子孙。
English: In the third year of Xingde, Zhou Zongzheng conquered Yangzhou and issued an edict to pacify the descendants of the Ma clan.

古文：已而扬州复入于景，希崇率其兄弟十七人归京师，拜右羽林统军，希能左屯卫大将军，希贯右千牛卫大将军，希隐、希浚、希知、希朗皆为节度行军司马。
现代文：不久扬州又归李景，马希崇率领他的兄弟十七人回到京师，封为右羽林统军，马希能为左屯卫大将军，马希贯焉右千牛卫大将军，马希隐、马希浚、马希知、马希朗都任节度行军司马。
English: Soon after, Yangzhou was returned to Li Jing. Ma Xizong led his 17 brothers back to the Beijing Division and was named the Right Feather Forest United Army. Ma Xifeng became the General of the Left Tunwei Army, Ma Xizhong became the General of the Right Thousand Cattle Guard, and Ma Xiyin, Ma Xijun, Ma Xizhi, and Ma Xilang all served as marshals for the festival march.

古文：刘言，吉州庐陵人也。
现代文：刘言是吉州庐陵人。
English: Liu Yan is from Fuling, Jizhou.

古文：王进逵，武陵人也。
现代文：王进逵是武陵人。
English: Wang Jinjun is from Wuling.

古文：言，初事刺史彭玕，从玕奔楚，言事希范为长州刺史。
现代文：剀言最初为刺史彭矸效力，随彭开投奔楚，刘言事奉马希范任辰州刺史。
English: Yan Yan initially worked for the assassin Peng Yao, followed by Peng Kai, and Liu Yan served as the assassin of Ma Xi Fan in Chenzhou.

古文：进逵少为静江军卒，事希萼为指挥使。
现代文：王进逵年轻时在静江军当兵，事奉马希萼任指挥使。
English: When Wang Jinjun was young, he was a soldier in the Jingjiang Army and served as a commander.

古文：希萼攻希广，以进逵为先锋，陷长沙。
现代文：马希萼进攻马希广，任命王进逵为先锋，攻陷长沙。
English: Ma Xicai attacked Ma Xiguang, appointed Wang Jinyu as the vanguard, and captured Changsha.

古文：长沙遭乱残毁，希萼使进逵以静江兵营缉之，兵皆愁怨，进逵因拥之，夜以长柯巨斧斫关，奔归武陵。
现代文：长沙受到战乱残毁，马希萼派王进逵率静江军士兵修治长沙，士兵们都愁苦怨恨，王进逵于是聚集他们，晚上用长柄大斧劈开城门奔回武陵。
English: Changsha was devastated by the war, and Ma Xi'an sent Wang Jinjun to lead the soldiers of the Jingjiang Army to repair and govern Changsha. The soldiers were bitter and resentful, so Wang Jinjun gathered them, and in the evening he used a long-handled axe to break open the city gate and ran back to Wuling.

古文：希萼方醉，不能省，明日遣将唐翥追之，及于武陵，翥战大败而还。
现代文：马希萼正喝醉了酒，不能枧事，第二天派将领唐翥追击他们，追到武陵，唐翥交战大败而回。
English: Ma Xichal was too drunk to say anything. The next day, he sent the general Tang Xuan to chase them to Wuling. Tang Xuan was defeated and returned home.

古文：进逵乃逐出留后马光惠，迎言于辰州以为帅，进逵自为副。
现代文：王进逵于是赶走留后马光惠，在辰州迎接刘言做主帅，王进逵自任副帅。
English: Wang Jinyu then drove away Ma Guanghui, who stayed behind, and welcomed Liu Yan as head coach in Chenzhou, with Wang Jinyu as vice-head coach.

古文：已而希萼将徐威等作乱，缚希萼而立希崇，湖南大乱。
现代文：不久马希萼的将领徐威等人作乱，捆缚马希萼，而拥立马希崇，湖南大乱。
English: Soon, Ma Xizhe's general Xu Wei and others made a disturbance, tied up Ma Xizhe, and supported Ma Xizhong, leading to the Hunan Rebellion.

古文：李景遣边镐入楚，迁马氏于金陵，因并召言。
现代文：李景派边镐入楚，迁马氏家族到金陵，趁机一并召刘言。
English: Li Jing sent his envoy to Chu, moved the Ma family to Jinling, and took the opportunity to call Liu Yan.

古文：言不从，遣进逵与行军司马何景真等攻镐于长沙，镐败走。
现代文：刘言不从命，派王进逵和行军司马何景真等人在长沙攻打边镐，边镐败逃。
English: Liu Yan did not comply with the order, and sent Wang Jinjun and marching Sima He Jingzhen and others to attack Bianjun in Changsha. Bianjun was defeated and fled.

古文：周广顺三年，言奉表京师，以邀封爵。
现代文：周广顺三年，刘言奉表到京师，请求封爵。
English: In the third year of Zhou Guangshun, Liu Yan went to Beijing to ask for a knighthood.

古文：又言长沙残破，不可居，请移治所于武陵。
现代文：又说长沙残破，不能居住，请求迁移治所到武陵。
English: He also said that Changsha was in ruins and uninhabitable, and requested that the government office be moved to Wuling.

古文：周太祖皆从之，乃升朗州为武平军，在武安军上，以言为节度使，因以武安授进逵，进逵自以言己所迎立，不为之下。
现代文：周太祖都答应了，于是升朗州为武平军，在武安军之上，任命刘言为节度使，于是将武安军授予王进逵，王进逵自认为刘言是自己迎立的，不愿在刘言之下。
English: Zhou Taizu agreed to this, so he appointed Liu Yan as the commander of the Wu-Ping Army in Shanglang Prefecture and the commander of the Wu-An Army, and then awarded the Wu-An Army to Wang Jinyu. Wang Jinyu thought that Liu Yan was his own, and he did not want to be under Liu Yan.

古文：言患之，二人始有隙，欲相图。
现代文：刘言对他担忧，二人开始产生矛盾，互相想谋取对方。
English: Liu Yan was worried about him, and the two of them began to have conflicts, trying to win each other over.

古文：进逵谋曰： 言将可用者不过何景真、硃全琇尔，召而杀之，言可取也。 
现代文：王进逵寻思： 刘言可以重用的将领不过是何景真、朱全玛罢了，召来杀掉，就可攻取刘言。 
English: Wang Jinqi pondered: Liu Yan could be of great use, but the generals were nothing more than Jingzhen and Zhu Quanma. If they were called to kill him, they could capture Liu Yan.

古文：是时，刘晟取楚梧、桂、宜、蒙等州，进逵因白言召景真等会兵攻晟。
现代文：这时，刘晟攻取楚的梧、桂、宜、蒙等州，王进逵趁机禀告刘言召何景真等人会兵攻打刘晟。
English: At this time, Liu Bei invaded Wuzhong, Gui, Yi and Meng Provinces of Chu, and Wang Jintao took the opportunity to accuse Liu of calling He Jingzhen and other soldiers to attack Liu Bei.

古文：言信之，遣景真、全琇往，至皆见杀，乃举兵袭武陵，执言杀之，奉表京师，周太祖即以进逵为武平军节度使。
现代文：刘言相信了，派何景真、朱全锈前去，到后都被杀死，于是出兵袭击武陵，抓获刘言杀掉，奉表至京师，周太祖就任命王进逵为武平军节度使。
English: Liu Yan believed it, and sent He Jingzhen and Zhu Quanzhu to the front, where they were both killed, so he sent troops to attack Wuling, captured and killed Liu Yan, sent him to Beijing, and Zhou Taizu appointed Wang Jinyu as the festival envoy of the Wuping Army.

古文：世宗征淮南，授进逵南面行营都统。
现代文：周世宗征伐淮南，任命王进逵焉南面行营都统。
English: Zhou Shizong conquered Huainan and appointed Wang Jinlian to march south to the capital.

古文：进逵攻鄂州，过岳州，岳州刺史潘叔嗣，进逵故时同列，待进逵甚谨。
现代文：王进逵攻打鄂州，路经岳州，岳州刺史潘叔嗣，是王进逵旧时同僚，对待王进逵很恭谨。
English: Wang Jinyu attacked Ezhou, passing through Yuezhou, and Yuezhou stabbed Pan Shushi, an old colleague of Wang Jinyu, and treated Wang Jinyu very respectfully.

古文：进逵左右就叔嗣求赂，叔嗣不与，左右谗其短，进逵面骂之，叔嗣惭恨，语其下曰： 进逵战胜而还，吾无遗类矣。 
现代文：王进逵手下的人向潘叔嗣索求贿赂，潘叔嗣不给，手下人就说潘叔嗣的坏话，王进逵当面责骂潘叔嗣，潘叔嗣羞惭愤恨，对他的部下说： 王进逵战胜而回，我们都要被杀捧了。 
English: Wang Jinyu's subordinates asked Pan Shuxi for bribes, but Pan Shuxi refused to give them. His subordinates spoke ill of Pan Shuxi. Wang Jinyu scolded Pan Shuxi in person. Pan Shuxi was ashamed and angry, and said to his subordinates: "If Wang Jinyu returns victorious, we will all be killed."

古文：进逵入鄂州，方攻下长山，叔嗣以兵袭武陵。
现代文：王进逵入鄂州，刚攻克长山，潘叔嗣率兵袭击武陵。
English: Wang Jinjun entered Ezhou, just conquered the Changshan, Pan Shushi led the troops to attack Wuling.

古文：进逵闻之，轻舟而归，与叔嗣战武陵城外，进逵败，见杀。
现代文：王进逵获知后，乘轻舟回军，和潘叔嗣在武陵城外作战，王进逵战败后被杀。
English: After Wang Jinyu learned of this, he returned to the army by light boat and fought with Pan Shushi outside Wuling City. Wang Jinyu was defeated and killed.

古文：周行逢，武陵人也。
现代文：周行逢是武陵人。
English: Zhou Xingfan is from Wuling.

古文：与王进逵俱为静江军卒，事希萼为军校。
现代文：和王进逵都在静江军当兵，事奉马希萼任军校。
English: Both he and Wang Jinyu were soldiers in the Jingjiang Army and served as cadets at the military school.

古文：进逵攻边镐，行逢别破益阳，杀李景兵二千余人，擒其将李建期。
现代文：王进逵攻打边镝，周行逢单独攻破益阳，杀李景的士兵两干多人，擒获将领李建期。
English: Wang Jinyu attacked Bianchi, Zhou Xingfeng alone broke through Yiyang, killed more than two dozen soldiers of Li Jing, and captured the general Li Jianzhi.

古文：进逵为武安军节度使，拜行逢集州刺史，为进逵行军司马。
现代文：王进逵任武安军节度使，封周行逢为集州刺史，任王进逵的行军司马。
English: Wang Jinyao served as the festival envoy of the Wu'an Army, and the closing of the Zhou Campaign was the gathering of the history of the state, and Wang Jinyao was appointed as the marching steward.

古文：进逵与刘言有隙，行逢为画谋策袭杀言。
现代文：王进逵和刘言产生矛盾，周行逢为他出谋划策杀掉刘言。
English: Wang Jinyu and Liu Yan had a conflict, and Zhou Xingxuan always made plans for him to kill Liu Yan.

古文：进逵据武陵，行逢据潭州。
现代文：王进逵占据武陵，周行逢占据潭州。
English: Wang Jinjun occupied Wuling, Zhou Xingfeng occupied Tanzhou.

古文：显德元年，拜行逢武清军节度使，权知潭州军府事。
现代文：颢德元年，封周行逢为武清军节度使，暂代掌管潭州军府事。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Fong Zhou Xingfan was appointed as the special envoy of the Wuqing Army and temporarily took charge of the military affairs of Tanzhou.

古文：潘叔嗣杀进逵，或劝其入武陵，叔嗣曰： 吾杀进逵，救死而已，武陵非吾利也。 
现代文：潘叔嗣杀掉王进逵，有人劝他进入武陵，潘叔嗣说： 我杀掉王进逵，不过为了救命而已，武陵于我并无好处。 
English: Pan Shuxi killed Wang Jinyao. Someone advised him to enter Wuling. Pan Shuxi said, "I killed Wang Jinyao, but only to save my life. Wuling is of no use to me."

古文：乃还岳州，遣其客将李简率武陵人迎行逢于潭州。
现代文：于是回到岳州，派他的客将李简率武陵人到潭州迎接周行逢。
English: So he returned to Yuezhou and sent his guest Li Jian to lead the Wuling people to Tanzhou to meet Zhou Xingfan.

古文：行逢入武陵，或请以潭州与叔嗣，行逢曰： 叔嗣杀主帅，罪当死，以其迎我，未忍杀尔。
现代文：周行逢进入武陵，有人请求把潭州交给潘叔嗣，周行逢说： 潘叔嗣杀死主帅，论罪应当处死，因为是他迎立我，不忍心杀他罢了。
English: Every time Zhou Xingfeng entered Wuling, someone asked him to hand over Tanzhou to Pan Shuxi. Zhou Xingfeng said: "Pan Shuxi killed the coach, and should be sentenced to death, because it was he who challenged me. I just couldn't bear to kill him."

古文：若与武安，是吾使之杀王公也。 
现代文：如果把武安给他，这就是我让他杀的王公了。 
English: If I give him Wu'an, this is the prince I let him kill.

古文：召以为行军司马。
现代文：召任潘叔嗣焉行军司马。
English: Pan Shuji was appointed as the commander of the marching army.

古文：叔嗣怒，称疾不至，行逢怒曰： 是又欲杀我矣！ 
现代文：潘叔嗣发怒，称病不去，周行逢发怒说： 这是又想杀我了！ 
English: Pan Shushi got angry and said that he would not go because of his illness. Zhou Xingfeng got angry and said, "This is another attempt to kill me!"

古文：乃阳以武安与之，召使至府受命，至则杀之。
现代文：于是假意把武安交给他，召他到州府接受任命，到后就杀了他。
English: So he gave Wu An to him under false pretenses, called him to the state capital to accept the appointment, and then killed him.

古文：行逢故武陵农家子，少贫贱无行，多慷慨大言。
现代文：周行逢过去是武陵农家的儿子，年轻时贫贱，没有德行，常常激昂慷慨地说大话。
English: In the past, Zhou Xingfeng was the son of a farmer in Wuling. When he was young, he was poor and had no virtue. He often said impassioned and generous things.

古文：及居武陵，能俭约自勉励，而性勇敢，果于杀戮，麾下将吏素恃功骄慢者，一以法绳之。
现代文：到入主武陵后，能够节俭自励，而性格勇敢，杀人果断，手下素来依仗功劳骄横轻慢的将吏，一概绳之以法。
English: After entering the main Wuling, the generals who were able to be frugal and self-motivated, but who were brave, murderous and decisive, and whose subordinates had always relied on their merits and were arrogant and imprudent, were all brought to justice.

古文：大将十余人谋为乱，行逢召宴诸将，酒半，以壮士擒下斩之，一境皆畏服。
现代文：大将十多人策划作乱，周行逢召集宴请将领们，饮酒过半，让壮士擒下他们杀掉，境内的人都畏惧服从他。
English: There are more than ten generals plotting to start a riot. Zhou Xing would convene a banquet to invite the generals, drink more than half of the wine, and have them killed by a strong man. People in the territory were afraid to obey him.

古文：民过无大小皆死，夫人严氏谏曰： 人情有善恶，安得一概杀之乎！ 
现代文：老百姓有过失无论大小都被处死，夫人严氏谏阻说： 人心有善有恶，怎能一概杀掉呢！ 
English: Ordinary people were put to death regardless of the size of their mistakes, and Mrs. Yan said: There is good and evil in the human heart, how can it all be killed?

古文：行逢怒曰： 此外事，妇人何知！ 
现代文：周行逢发怒说： 这是家外的事，妇人懂什磨！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng angrily said: This is a matter outside the home, women know what to do!

古文：严氏不悦，绐曰： 家田佃户，以公贵，颇不力农，多恃势以侵民，请往视之。 
现代文：严氏不高兴，骗他说： 我们田庄的佃户，因为你显贵了，多仗势侵压百姓，请让我去看看。 
English: Yan wasn't happy and lied to him, saying: "We, the tenants of the grange, because you have become a prominent person, and there are many forces oppressing the people, please let me go and see.

古文：至则营居以老，岁时衣青裙押佃户送租入城。
现代文：严氏到后就建房住下准备养老，交租时节穿上青裙押送佃户进城交租。
English: After Yan arrived, he built a house to live in to prepare for retirement, and during the rent payment season, he put on a blue skirt to escort tenants into the city to pay rent.

古文：行逢往就见之，劳曰： 吾贵矣，夫人何自苦邪！ 
现代文：周衍逢前往看她，慰劳说： 我显贵了，夫人何必使自己这样劳苦呢！ 
English: Every time Zhou Yan went to see her, he consoled her by saying, "I've become a prominent person, why does my wife have to work so hard?"

古文：严氏曰： 公思作户长时乎？
现代文：严氏说： 你想遏你做户长时的情形了吗？
English: Yan said: Do you want to curb the situation when you become the head of the household?

古文：民租后时，常苦鞭扑，今贵矣，宜先期以率众，安得遂忘垅亩间乎！ 
现代文：百姓交租晚了，常常受鞭打之苦，现在你显贵了，应提前交租以给众人作表率，怎能就忘了田间百姓呢！ 
English: How can you forget the people in the fields, when they pay their rent late and are often whipped? Now that you are famous, you should pay your rent in advance to set an example for everyone.

古文：行逢强邀之，以群妾拥升肩舆，严氏卒无留意，因曰： 公用法太严而失人心，所以不欲留者，一旦祸起，田野间易为逃死尔。 
现代文：周行逢强迫要她回去，让众妾拉着她上轿，严氏始终没有留下的打算，于是说： 你执法太严而失去了人心，我之所以不想留下，是因为一旦灾祸发生，田野间容易逃命罢了。 
English: Zhou Xingfeng forced her to go back, and let all the concubines pull her onto the carriage. Yan had no intention of staying, so he said: You are too strict in enforcing the law and have lost the hearts of the people. The reason why I don't want to stay is because in the event of a disaster, it is easy to escape from the fields.

古文：行逢为少损。
现代文：周行逢为此稍微碱损了刑罚。
English: Zhou Xingfeng was slightly punished for this.

古文：建隆三年，行逢病，召其将吏，以其子保权属之曰： 吾起陇亩为团兵，同时十人，皆以诛死，惟衡州刺史张文表独存，然常怏怏不得行军司马。
现代文：建隆三年，周行逢患病，召来他的将吏，把他的儿子周保权嘱托给他们说： 我出身田问做团兵，当时的十个人，都已被诛杀，只有衡州刺史张文表还活着，但他对没能担任行军司马常常闷闷不乐。
English: In the third year of Jianlong, Zhou Xingfeng fell ill, summoned his officers, and entrusted his son Zhou Bao Quan to them, saying: I came from Tianqian to be a regimental soldier, and the ten people at that time have all been killed. Only Zhang Wenbo, the governor of Hengzhou, is still alive, but he was often unhappy about not being able to serve as a marching steward.

古文：吾死，文表必叛，当以杨师璠讨之。
现代文：我死后，张文表必定反叛，应当派杨师墦去讨伐他。
English: After my death, Zhang Wencai will definitely rebel, and Yang Shijie should be sent to fight him.

古文：如其不能，则婴城勿战，自归于朝廷。 
现代文：如不能讨伐，就守城不要打仗，自动归附于朝廷。 
English: If you can't fight, you should defend the city and not fight, and it will automatically be attached to the imperial court.

古文：行逢卒，子保权立。
现代文：周行逢死后，儿子周保权继位。
English: After the death of Zhou Xingfeng, his son Zhou Baoquan succeeded to the throne.

古文：文表闻之，怒曰： 行逢与我起微贱而立功名，今日安能北面事小兒乎！ 
现代文：张文表获知后，发怒说： 周行逢和我都出身微贱而立下功名，今天怎能向北事奉小孩子呢！ 
English: When Zhang Wenbo learned of this, he became angry and said, "Zhou Xingfan and I both came from humble origins and have made great achievements. How can a child serve the North today?"

古文：遂举兵叛，攻下潭州。
现代文：于是举兵反叛，攻克潭州。
English: So they raised an army and rebelled, conquering Tang Prefecture.

古文：保权乞师于朝廷，亦命杨师璠讨文表，告以先人之言，感激涕泣，师璠亦泣，顾其军曰： 汝见郎君乎？
现代文：周保权向朝廷求兵，同时任命杨师墦讨伐张文表，告诉他先父的话，激动慷慨，流泪哭泣，杨师墦也哭了，回望他的军队说： 你们看见郎君了吗？
English: Zhou Baoquan appealed to the imperial court for soldiers. At the same time, he appointed Yang Shijun to fight against Zhang Wencai and told him the words of his father. He was so excited and generous that he shed tears and wept. Yang Shijun also cried and looked back at his army and said, "Have you seen my lord?"

古文：年未成人而贤若此。 
现代文：未成年就如此贤明！ 
English: Minors are so wise!

古文：军士奋然，皆思自效。
现代文：士兵们振奋了，都愿意效力。
English: The soldiers are energized and eager to serve.

古文：师璠至平津亭，文表出战，大败之。
现代文：杨师墦到达平津亭，张文表出来迎战，杨师墦大败张文表。
English: Yang Shisheng arrived at Pingjin Pavilion, Zhang Wenchao came out to fight, Yang Shisheng defeated Zhang Wenchao.

古文：初，保权之乞师也，太祖皇帝遣慕容延钊讨文表，未至而文表为师璠所执。
现代文：当初，周保权求兵时，宋太祖皇帝派慕容延钊讨伐张文表，军队未到而张文表已被杨师墦抓获。
English: At first, when Zhou Bao Quan called for soldiers, Emperor Song Taizu sent Murong Yanqi to fight Zhang Wencai. Zhang Wencai was captured by Yang Shijun before the army arrived.

古文：延钊兵入朗州，保权举族朝于京师，其后事具国史。
现代文：慕容延钊军队进入朗州，周保权全族到京师朝见，后来的事记载在本朝国史中。
English: Murong Yanqi's army entered Langzhou, Zhou Baoquan's whole family went to Beijing to see the emperor, and later events were recorded in the history of this dynasty.

