古文：夫军无习练，百不当一；习而用之，一可当百。
现代文：如果军队士兵得不到应有的教育和训练，那么一百名士兵也抵不上敌人的一个士兵；如果军队士兵受到了应有的教育和训练，那么一名士兵就可抵挡百名敌人的进攻。
English: If the soldiers of an army are not properly educated and trained, then a hundred soldiers are not equal to one enemy soldier; if the soldiers of an army are properly educated and trained, then one soldier can resist the attack of a hundred enemies.

古文：故仲尼曰： 不教而战，是谓弃之。 
现代文：所以孔子说：百姓没有受到教育和训练就去参加战斗，这是让他们去送死。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "If the common people go into battle without education and training, it is to let them die."

古文：又曰： 善人教民七年，亦可以即戎矣。 
现代文： 让贤德的人用七年的时间来教育和训练百姓，他们马上可以投入战斗，并且个个都勇猛善战！ 
English: Let virtuous people spend seven years educating and training the people, they can immediately go into battle, and all of them are brave and good at fighting!

古文：然则即戎之不可不教，教之以礼义，诲之以忠信，诫之以典刑，威之以赏罚，故人知劝，然后习之，或陈而分之，坐而起之，行而止之，走而却之，别而合之，散而聚之。
现代文：这就是说想让百姓投入战斗，在出征之前不能不对他们进行教育和训练，训练时，要使百姓明白什么是礼，什么是义，要训练、教诲他们有忠信的思想，要讲明赏罚的界限，用赏罚来制约督促他们的行为，使他们自觉上进。然后进行基本技能训练：列队与解散，坐下起立，行进立定，前进后退，解散与集合，使他们能整齐划一、井然有序。
English: That is to say, if you want the people to go into battle, you must educate and train them before going to war. When training, you must make the people understand what is etiquette and what is righteousness, train and teach them to have a faithful thought, clarify the boundaries of rewards and punishments, use rewards and punishments to control and urge their behavior, and make them advance consciously. Then carry out basic skills training: line up and disband, sit down and stand up, march and stand firm, advance and retreat, disband and assemble, so that they can be neat and orderly.

古文：一人可教十人，十人可教百人，百人可教千人，千人可教万人，可教三军，然后教练而敌可胜矣。
现代文：象这样一教十，十教百，百教千，千教万，就可以使整个三军受到训练，最后再让将士接受战术训练就可以在战场上打败敌人了。
English: In this way, if one teaches ten, ten teaches a hundred, a hundred teaches a thousand, and a thousand teaches ten thousand, the entire three armies can be trained, and finally, if soldiers receive tactical training, they can defeat the enemy on the battlefield.

