古文：高名衡，字仲平，沂州人。
现代文：高名衡，字仲平，沂州人。
English: Gao Nianheng, alias Zhongping, from Zhangzhou.

古文：崇祯四年进士。
现代文：崇祯四年进士。
English: He was promoted to a priest four years later.

古文：除如皋知县，以才调兴化，征授御史。
现代文：初任如皋知县，因为有才干调到兴化，后来又被召进朝廷做御史。
English: He was initially assigned to Jochi County, but because of his talent, he was transferred to Xinghua. Later, he was called to the imperial court to serve as imperial historian.

古文：十二年出按河南。明年期满，留再巡一年。
现代文：十二年他到河南按察，第二年期满后又留下来当了一年按察御史。
English: In 2012, he went to Henan to be an inspector, and after the expiration of the second year, he stayed to be an inspector for one year.

古文：十四年正月，李自成陷洛阳，乘胜遂围开封。
现代文：十四年正月，李自成打下洛阳，然后乘胜包围了开封。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, Li Zicheng defeated Luoyang, and then took advantage of the victory to surround Kaifeng.

古文：巡抚李仙风时在河北，名衡集众守。
现代文：巡抚李仙风当时在黄河北面，名衡就召集众人守城。
English: At that time, the inspector Li Xianfeng was in the north of the Yellow River, and Nihang summoned everyone to defend the city.

古文：周王恭枵发库金百万两，募死士杀贼，烝米屑麦，执爨以饷军，凡七昼夜。
现代文：周王朱恭枵拿出自己的库存银子一百万两，召募死士杀贼，又蒸米磨麦升起炉灶供应军队伙食，一共进行了七天七夜。
English: Zhou Wang Zhu Gongyi took out one million taels of silver from his inventory, recruited soldiers to kill thieves, and steamed rice and milled barley, set up stoves to supply army meals, and carried out a total of seven days and seven nights.

古文：仙风驰还开封，副将陈永福背城而战，斩首二千。
现代文：仙风才骑马返回开封。副将陈永福背城作战，斩杀贼兵两千人。
English: Emperor Xianfeng returned to Kaifeng on horseback. Vice Admiral Chen Yongfu fought behind the city and killed two thousand thieves.

古文：游击高谦夹击，斩首七百。
现代文：游击高谦出兵夹击，也斩了七百人。
English: The guerrilla Gao Qian sent troops to make a pincer attack, and also beheaded seven hundred people.

古文：贼解去。
现代文：贼兵解围离开了。
English: The bandits broke the siege and left.

古文：仙风既还，与名衡互讦奏。
现代文：仙风回来后，与名衡互相上书攻击。
English: After Xianfeng came back, he and Meiheng attacked each other with letters.

古文：帝以陷福藩罪诏逮仙风，以襄阳兵备副使张克俭代。
现代文：庄烈帝用使福王陷落贼手的罪名下诏将仙风逮捕，让襄阳兵备副使张克俭来接任。
English: Zhuang Rongdei ordered the arrest of Xianfeng on the charge of causing the fall of King Fu into the hands of thieves, and let Zhang Kejian, the deputy commander of the Xiangyang garrison, take over.

古文：克俭已前死难，即擢名衡右佥都御史代之。
现代文：克俭此前已经死于战乱，朝廷就提拔名衡为右佥都御史接替仙风。
English: Since Ke Jian had already died in the war, the imperial court promoted Nihira to the position of the Right Hand of the Emperor to succeed Xianfeng.

古文：以永福充总兵官都督佥事，镇守河南。
现代文：让永福充总兵官、都督佥事，镇守河南。
English: Let Yong Fucheng be the general officer, the governor of Anji, and the town guard of Henan.

古文：当是时，贼连陷南阳、邓、汝十余州县，唐、徽二王遇害，名稀不能救。
现代文：当时贼兵接连打下南阳、邓州、汝宁等十多个州县，唐王、徽王遇害，名衡没能挽救。
English: At that time, the bandits successively attacked more than ten counties and prefectures, including Nanyang, Dengzhou and Runing. Tang Wang and Hui Wang were killed, and Nihang could not be saved.

古文：开封周邸图书文物之盛甲他藩，士大夫垔富，蓄积充牣。
现代文：开封的周王府图书文物比其他王府都多，士大夫家庭殷实，蓄积丰富。
English: There are more books and cultural relics in the Zhou royal palace in Kaifeng than in other royal palaces, and the scholar-officials' families are affluent and rich in accumulation.

古文：自成攻之不能克，然欲得而甘心焉。
现代文：自成攻打开封打不下来，但总想打下来才甘心。
English: It is not possible to open and seal a self-made attack, but it is always willing to fight.

古文：十二月杪，贼再围开封。
现代文：十二月底，贼兵又一次包围开封。
English: At the end of December, the bandits once again besieged Kaifeng.

古文：永福射自成，中其左目，炮殪上天龙等。
现代文：永福用箭射自成，射中了他的左眼，城上又发炮打死了上天龙等。
English: Yongfu shot himself with an arrow, hitting his left eye, and a cannon fired on the castle killed the Heavenly Dragon and others.

古文：自成大怒，急攻之。
现代文：自成大为恼火，猛烈攻打开封城。
English: Zicheng was very angry and attacked the besieged city fiercely.

古文：开封故宋汴都，金帝南迁所重筑也，厚数丈，内坚致而疏外。
现代文：开封原来是宋朝的汴都，金朝皇帝南迁时又曾再建，城墙厚度有几丈，里边坚实，外边疏松。
English: Kaifeng was originally the capital of the Song Dynasty. It was rebuilt again when the emperor of the Jin Dynasty moved south. The city wall is several meters thick, solid on the inside and sparse on the outside.

古文：贼用火药放迸，火发即外击，〈番瓦〉瓳飞鸣，贼骑皆糜烂，自成大惊。
现代文：贼兵用火药来引爆，炸开后就向外辐射，破砖破瓦纷飞作响，贼寇的骑兵给打得焦头烂额，自成十分惊惶。
English: The robber soldiers used gunpowder to detonate, and when it exploded, it radiated outward, and the broken bricks and tiles flew in a flurry. The robber cavalrymen were stunned and very frightened.

古文：会杨文岳援兵亦至，乃解围去。
现代文：正好杨文岳的援兵又赶来，自成就撤围走了。
English: Just as Yang Wenyu's reinforcements arrived, the siege was lifted.

古文：西华、郾、襄、睢、陈、太康、商丘、宁陵、考城俱陷。
现代文：西华、郾城、襄城、睢阳、陈州、太康、商丘、宁陵考城这时都被打下了。
English: At this time, Xihua, Fucheng, Xiangcheng, Fenyang, Chenzhou, Taikang, Shangqiu, and Ningling Kaocheng were all defeated.

古文：十五年四月复至开封，围而不攻，欲坐困之。
现代文：十五年四月，贼兵又到了开封，围而不攻，打算坐困开封城。
English: In April of the fifteenth year, the bandits came to Kaifeng again, intending to besiege Kaifeng instead of attacking it.

古文：六月，帝诏释故尚书侯恂于狱，命督保定、山东、河北、湖北诸军务，并辖平贼等镇援剿官兵。
现代文：六月，庄烈帝下令把原尚书侯恂从狱中释放出来，让他统率保定、山东、河北、湖北等地的军务，并管辖平贼等镇的援剿官兵。
English: In June, Emperor Zhuang ordered to release the former Shang Shuhong from prison, and let him lead the military affairs of Baoding, Shandong, Hebei, Hubei and other places, and supervise the relief officers and soldiers of Pingye and other towns.

古文：拔知县苏京、王汉、王燮为御史。诏苏京监延、宁、甘、固军，趣孙传庭出关；王汉监平贼镇标楚、蜀军，同侯恂等急击；王燮监阳、怀东晋军，刻期渡河。
现代文：又提拔知县苏京、王汉、王燮为御史，命令苏京监督延安、宁夏、甘肃、固原的部队，催促孙传庭出关作战；王汉监督平贼镇标湖北、四川军，同侯恂等立即出击；王燮监督阳城、怀庆等地的晋东部队，刻期渡河。
English: He also promoted Su Jing, Wang Han, and Wang Qi of Zhixian County as imperial historians, and ordered Su Jing to supervise the troops of Yan'an, Ningxia, Gansu, and Guyuan, and urge Sun Chuanting to go out to fight; Wang Han to supervise the Hubei and Sichuan troops of Pingye Town, and Tong Houyi to attack immediately; Wang Qi to supervise the Jindong troops in Yangcheng, Huaiqing, and other places, and cross the river on time.

古文：总兵许定国以晋军次沁水，一夕溃去，宁武兵亦溃于怀庆，诏逮定国。
现代文：总兵许定国带着山西部队住宿在沁水时，一天夜里逃跑了，宁武部队也在怀庆逃散了，朝廷下令逮捕了许定国。
English: When the general Xu Dingguo took the Shanxi troops to stay in Surabaya, he ran away one night. Ningwu troops also fled in Huaiqing. The court ordered the arrest of Xu Dingguo.

古文：七月，河上之兵溃。
现代文：七月，黄河上的驻军逃散。
English: In July, the garrison on the Yellow River fled.

古文：督师丁启睿、保督杨文岳合左良玉、虎大威、杨德政、方国安诸军，次于朱仙镇。
现代文：督师丁启睿、保定总督杨文岳联合左良玉、虎大威、杨德政、方国安等部队，驻扎到朱仙镇。
English: Superintendent Ding Qirui, Governor of Baoding Yang Wengyue and troops including Zuo Liangyu, Hu Dawei, Yang Dezheng and Fang Guoan were stationed in Zhuxian Town.

古文：良玉走还襄阳，诸军皆溃，启睿、文岳奔汝宁。
现代文：良玉逃回襄阳，各军都跟着逃，启睿、文岳逃往汝宁去了。
English: Liang Yu fled back to Xiangyang, and all the troops followed him. Qi Rui and Wen Yue fled to Yuning.

古文：诏山东总兵官刘泽清援开封。
现代文：朝廷又诏令山东总兵官刘泽清增援开封。
English: The imperial court also ordered Liu Zeching, Shandong's military commander-in-chief, to reinforce Kaifeng.

古文：城中食尽，名衡、永福偕监司梁炳、苏壮、吴士讲，同知苏茂灼，通判彭士奇，推官黄澍等守益坚。
现代文：城内粮食吃完了，名衡、永福和监司梁炳、苏壮、吴士讲，同知苏茂灼，通判彭士奇，推官黄澍等一起防守得更加坚强。
English: After eating all the food in the city, Nihang, Yongfu, and the supervisors Liang Jun, Su Zhuang, and Wu Shi, as well as the councillors Su Maoju, Tong Zhan Peng Shiqi, and Huang Qi, defended themselves more strongly.

古文：泽清以兵来援，诸军并集河北朱家寨不敢进。
现代文：泽清带兵过来增援，各部队都在黄河北面的朱家寨聚集，不敢进战。
English: Ze Qing brought reinforcements, and all the troops gathered in Zhujiazhai, north of the Yellow River, and did not dare to go to war.

古文：泽清曰： 朱家寨去开封八里。
现代文：泽清就说 ：朱家寨离开封只有八里。
English: Ze Qing said, "Zhu Jia Zhai is only eight miles away from Feng."

古文：我以兵五千南渡，依河而营，引水环之。
现代文：我带兵五千渡过南岸，靠着黄河扎营，引黄河水来围着兵营。
English: I led five thousand soldiers across the south bank, camped by the Yellow River, and brought the Yellow River water to surround the camp.

古文：以次结八营，直达大堤。
现代文：然后我们依次扎下八个营寨，直通黄河大堤。
English: Then we successively set down eight camp sites, leading straight to the Yellow River embankment.

古文：筑甬道输河北之粟，以饷城中。
现代文：筑起一条甬道把黄河北面的粮食运到城中当粮饷。
English: A canal was built to transport grain from the north side of the Yellow River to the city to be used as grain.

古文：贼兵已老，可一战走也。 诸军皆曰： 善。 
现代文：那时贼兵已经疲惫，我们可以一次就把它给打跑了。 各军将领都说 ：好。 
English: At that time, the robber soldiers were already exhausted, so we could beat them and run away at once. The generals of all the armies said, "Okay."

古文：乃以兵三千人先渡立营。
现代文：于是泽清带了三千人先渡过黄河过来扎营。
English: So Ze Qing took three thousand people and crossed the Yellow River to set up camp.

古文：贼攻之，战三昼夜，诸军无继者，甬道不就，泽清拔营归。
现代文：贼兵过来进攻，打了三天三夜，其他部队没有一个人跟着过来，甬道没筑起来，泽清就拔营回去了。
English: The bandits came to attack, and fought for three days and three nights. No one from the other troops followed them. When the road was not built, Ze Qing withdrew.

古文：日夜望传庭出关，不至。
现代文：城里一天到晚望孙传庭开出潼关来，迟迟看不到他过来。
English: People in the city have been waiting all day for Sun Chuan Court to open its gates, but they have yet to see him come.

古文：贼图开封者三，士马损伤多，积愤，誓必拔之。
现代文：贼兵三次想打下开封，兵马损伤了很多，心中积满了火气，发誓这次一定要打下。
English: The thief-soldier tried to knock down Kaifeng three times, the soldiers and horses suffered a lot of damage, his heart was full of fire, and he swore that he would definitely knock down this time.

古文：围半年，师老粮匮，欲决黄河灌之。以城中子女货宝，犹豫不决。
现代文：围困半年后，部队疲劳了，粮食吃完了，就挖开黄河淹没开封城，只是因为城里边有很多子女、货宝，所以犹豫不决。
English: Half a year after the siege, when the troops were tired and had run out of food, they dug up the Yellow River and flooded Kaifeng City. However, they hesitated because there were many children and valuable goods in the city.

古文：闻秦师已东，恐诸镇兵夹击，欲变计。
现代文：听说陕西部队已经向东来了，害怕各镇官兵一起来夹击，又想改变主意。
English: Hearing that the Shaanxi troops had come to the east, they were afraid that the officers and soldiers from all the towns would attack together, and they wanted to change their minds.

古文：会有献计于巡按御史严云京者，请决河以灌贼。
现代文：恰好这时有人向巡按御史严云京献计，请决开黄河灌贼兵。
English: Just at this time, someone presented a plan to Yan Yunjing, the inspector-general of history, asking him to open the Yellow River to the thief soldiers.

古文：云京语名衡、澍，名衡、澍以为然。
现代文：云京讲给名衡、黄澍，名衡、黄澍同意了。
English: Yunjing told this to Meiheng and Huang Qi, and Meiheng and Huang Qi agreed.

古文：周王恭枵募民筑羊马墙，坚厚如高岸。
现代文：周王恭枵召募民工修建了一道羊马墙，跟高大的黄河岸一样厚实。
English: Zhou Wangqun called for the recruitment of migrant workers to build a wall of sheep and horses, as thick as the high banks of the Yellow River.

古文：贼营直傅大堤，河决贼可尽，城中无虞。
现代文：贼兵的营寨连着黄河岸，黄河决口后贼兵马上就完了，城里却不必担心。
English: The encampment of the bandits is connected to the bank of the Yellow River. After the Yellow River is breached, the bandits will be finished immediately, but the city does not have to worry.

古文：我方凿朱家寨口，贼知，移营高阜，艨艟巨筏以待，而驱掠民夫数万反决马家口以灌城。
现代文：官方正在朱家寨挖黄河口时，贼兵知道了，把营寨转移到了高地上，备了巨船大筏等着，同时驱使几万民工反挖马家口淹开封城。
English: When the authorities were excavating the mouth of the Yellow River in Zhujiazhai, the bandits found out about it, moved the camp to the highlands, prepared a huge ship and waited, and at the same time drove tens of thousands of migrant workers to flood the city.

古文：九月癸未望，夜半，二口并决。天大雨连旬，黄流骤涨，声闻百里。
现代文：九月十五日半夜里，朱家寨、马家口都决水了，当时下过几十天大雨，黄河水猛涨了很多，所以黄河决口处的大水声闻百里。
English: In the middle of the night of September 15th, the water broke at Zhujiazhai and Majiakou. At that time, there had been heavy rain for dozens of days, and the Yellow River water had risen sharply, so the sound of the water breaking at the mouth of the Yellow River could be heard for hundreds of miles.

古文：丁夫荷锸者，随堤漂没十数万，贼亦沉万人。
现代文：背着铁锹开挖河口的民工被漂没了十几万，贼兵也淹死了一万人。
English: More than 100,000 migrant workers who were digging up the estuary with shovels strapped to their backs were swept away, and 10,000 soldiers also drowned.

古文：河入自北门，贯东南门以出，流入于涡水。
现代文：河水从城的北门进来，流向东南门出去，注入涡水。
English: The river water enters from the north gate of the city and flows out to the southeast gate, injecting swirling water.

古文：名衡、永福乘小舟至城头，周王率其宫眷及宁乡诸郡王避水栖城楼，坐雨绝食者七日。
现代文：名衡、永福乘着小船到城头上躲，周王领着他宫廷内的眷属及宁乡等郡王都住在城楼里避水，因为大雨七天都没有吃到东西。
English: Mengheng and Yongfu took a small boat to the top of the castle to hide. King Zhou led his court members and Ningxiang and other county kings to live in the castle tower to avoid the water, because they had not eaten anything for seven days.

古文：王燮以舟迎王，王从城上泛舟出，名衡等皆出。
现代文：王燮用船来迎接周王，周王从城头上乘船出去了，名衡等也都出来了。
English: Wang Yao used a boat to meet Zhou Wang. Zhou Wang took a boat from the top of the castle and went out, and so did Mei Heng and others.

古文：茂灼、士奇久饿不能起，并溺死。
现代文：茂灼、士奇饿久了，不能起身，都淹死在水里。
English: Shigeyaki and Shiki had been hungry for a long time and couldn't get up. They both drowned in the water.

古文：贼浮舰入城，遗民俱尽，拔营而西。
现代文：贼兵驾船进城，活着的百姓都给抢杀净尽，然后拔营西去。
English: The robber soldiers entered the city by boat, robbed and killed all the people who were still alive, and then withdrew to the west.

古文：城初围时百万户，后饥疫死者十二三。
现代文：开封城刚被包围时有一百万户，后来因饥荒、病疫而死去的有十分之二三。
English: When Kaifeng was first besieged, there were one million households. Later, two-thirds of them died of famine and disease.

古文：汴梁佳丽甲中州，群盗心艳之，至是尽没于水。
现代文：开封佳丽甲中州，群盗心里早就艳羡了很久，到这时全都淹没于水中了。
English: Kaifeng Jiali Zhongzhou, the bandits have long been envious for a long time, and by this time they were all submerged in the water.

古文：帝闻，痛悼。
现代文：庄烈帝听说后，极为痛心。
English: After hearing this, Zhuang Reticai was extremely distressed.

古文：犹念诸臣拒守劳，命叙功。
现代文：不过还是想到了大臣们拒敌守城的劳苦，传令给他们评定功劳。
English: However, he still thought of the ministers who refused to do the hard work of defending the city against the enemy, and ordered them to evaluate their efforts.

古文：加名衡兵部右侍郎，名衡辞以疾。
现代文：朝廷给名衡加官为兵部侍郎，名衡用生病推辞掉了。
English: The Imperial Court promoted Nihira to the position of Hyobushirō, but he resigned due to illness.

古文：即擢王汉右佥都御史，代名衡巡抚河南。
现代文：朝廷就提拔王汉为右佥都御史，让他接替名衡巡抚河南。
English: The imperial court promoted Wang Han to the post of the right-hand man of the capital, and let him take over the post of the Nihon governor of Henan.

古文：鹿善继，字伯顺，定兴人。
现代文：名衡还乡后不久，大清部队打下了沂州，名衡夫妇二人都殉难了。鹿善继，字伯顺，定兴人。
English: Not long after Mengheng returned to his hometown, the Qing Dynasty troops laid siege to Zhangzhou, and both Mengheng and his wife were martyred. Deer Zenji, Bo Shun, Ding Xingren.

古文：祖久征，万历中进士，授息县知县。
现代文：他的爷爷久征是万历年间进士，担任息县知县。
English: His grandfather, Jiuzheng, was a scholar in the Wanli era and served as a prefectural magistrate.

古文：时诏天下度田，各署上中下壤，息独以下田报，曰： 度田以纾民，乃病民乎！ 
现代文：当时朝廷传令丈量田地，各地都要把田地分为上中下三等予以登记、汇报，息县却把田地都当作下等汇报，久征说： 丈量田地应该是为了解除百姓的贫困，怎么能反倒用它来损害百姓呢？ 
English: At that time, the imperial court ordered the measurement of fields, and all regions were required to divide the fields into the upper, middle and lower tiers to be registered and reported. However, the counties reported the fields as the lower tiers. Jiuzheng said: The measurement of fields should be to eliminate the poverty of the people, how can it be used to harm the people?

古文：调襄垣，擢御史，以言事谪泽州判官，迁荥泽知县，未任而卒。
现代文：后来他调到襄垣，又升为御史，期间因为提意见被贬为泽州判官。最后调他去当荥泽知县，没有上任就死了。
English: Later, he was transferred to Xiangyuan and promoted to the post of imperial historian, during which time he was demoted to the post of judge of Zhezhou because of his opinions. Finally, he was transferred to the post of Xizhe County magistrate, but he died before taking office.

古文：父正，苦节自砺。
现代文：善继的父亲鹿正，苦行守节，自我砥砺。
English: Zenzhi's father, Shuzheng, was a self-taught ascetic.

古文：县令某欲见之，方粪田，投锸而往。
现代文：有一个县令想见他，他正在给田施粪，扔下铲子就走上前，毫不磨蹭。
English: There was a prefectural governor who wanted to see him. He was shoveling manure on the rice fields. He threw down his shovel and walked forward without hesitation.

古文：急人之难，倾其家不惜，远近称鹿太公。
现代文：他替别人的困难着急，就是倾家荡产也在所不惜，周围一带都把他称为鹿太公。
English: He is anxious about other people's difficulties, even to the point of bankrupting his family, and he is known as Deer King in the surrounding area.

古文：善继端方谨悫。
现代文：善继为人正直谨慎。
English: Good successors are honest and prudent.

古文：由万历四十一年进士，授户部主事。
现代文：由万历四十一年进士起身，担任了户部主事。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 41st year of Wanli and served as the head of the household department.

古文：内艰除，起故官。
现代文：中间为母亲守丧，过后起复原任。
English: In the middle, his mother was in mourning, and later he was reinstated.

古文：辽左饷中绝，廷臣数请发帑，不报。
现代文：辽东部队的军饷中断了，廷臣几次请求拨出国库银，神宗不做答复。
English: The military pay of the Liaodong troops was interrupted. The courtiers made several requests for the allocation of treasury silver, but Shenzong did not reply.

古文：会广东进金花银，善继稽旧制，金花贮库，备各边应用。乃奏记尚书李汝华曰： 与其请不发之帑，何如留未进之金？ 
现代文：正好这时广东运来了金花银，善继查原先的规定，金花银应当收进国库，供各边镇使用，就递一份清单给尚书李汝华说 ：与其奏请皇上不肯拨出的国库银，干什么不留下这些还没入库的银子？ 
English: Just at this time, gold and silver were shipped from Guangdong. As a follow-up to the original regulations, gold and silver should be collected into the national treasury for use by all border towns, he handed a list to Shangshu Li Ruhua and said: "Instead of asking the emperor to allocate the national treasury silver, why not leave these silver that has not yet been stored?"

古文：汝华然之。
现代文：汝华同意了。
English: Ruhua agreed.

古文：帝怒，夺善继俸一年，趣补进。
现代文：神宗恼了，扣下善继一年官俸，催促把金花银补进国库。
English: Annoyed, Shenzong deducted a year's salary from Zenzhi and urged him to replenish the gold and silver into the state treasury.

古文：善继持不可，以死争。乃夺汝华俸二月，降善继一级，调外。
现代文：善继坚持认为不行，以死向神宗争取，神宗就扣了汝华两个月俸禄，把善继贬官一级，调到地方上。
English: Shenzong deducted two months' salary from Ruhua, demoted him to the first grade and transferred him to a local post.

古文：汝华惧，卒补银进。
现代文：汝华怕了，最后还是把金花银补进了国库。
English: Ruhua was afraid, but finally added the gold and silver to the national treasury.

古文：泰昌改元，复原官，典新饷。
现代文：泰昌改元年，朝廷恢复了善继的原职，让他主管薪饷。
English: In the first year of the Taichang Reform, the imperial court restored the original post of Zenji and put him in charge of payroll.

古文：连疏请帑百万，不报。
现代文：中间他接连上书请求拨出一百万国库银，光宗也没有答复。
English: In the middle of this, he sent a series of letters requesting the allocation of one million national treasury silver, but Mitsumune did not reply.

古文：天启元年，辽阳陷，以才改兵部职方主事。
现代文：天启元年，辽阳失守后，善继因为有才干被改任兵部职方主事。
English: At the beginning of the year, after Liaoyang lost its defense, because of his talent, he was transferred to be in charge of the military department.

古文：大学士孙承宗理兵部事，推心任之。
现代文：大学士孙承宗掌管兵部事务，对他推心相待，很信任他。
English: Sun Chengzong, a university scholar, is in charge of the affairs of the military department, treats him with consideration, and trusts him very much.

古文：及阅视关门，以善继从。
现代文：等承宗到关门去检阅时，让善继跟着。
English: When Succession went to close the door to inspect, let Zenki follow.

古文：出督师，复表为赞画。
现代文：承宗出关领兵，又让他当了赞画。
English: Chengzong led the troops out of the customs, and he became a famous painting.

古文：布衣羸马，出入亭障间，延见将卒相劳苦，拓地四百里，收复城堡数十，承宗倚之若左右手。
现代文：善继穿着布衣，骑一匹瘦马，出入于亭障当中，召集将士来加以慰问，开拓了四百里边疆，收复了几十个城堡，承宗把他当成了左右手来用。
English: He dressed in cloth, rode a thin horse, went in and out of pavilions, summoned generals to offer condolences, opened up four hundred miles of frontier, and recovered dozens of castles. He regarded him as his right and left hand.

古文：在关四年，累进员外郎、郎中。
现代文：善继在山海关干了四年，逐渐升到员外郎、郎中。
English: Yoshitsugu worked at the Yamagata Customs for four years, gradually rising to the rank of outside retainer and junior retainer.

古文：承宗谢事，善继亦告归。
现代文：承宗辞职后，善继也请假回乡去了。
English: After Chojong resigned, Sonji also took a leave of absence and went back to his hometown.

古文：先是，杨、左之狱起，魏大中子学洢、左光斗弟光明，先后投鹿太公家。
现代文：在这之前，杨涟、左光斗的案子发生了，魏大中的儿子学氵伊、左光斗的弟弟光明，先后投奔到鹿太公家里。
English: Prior to this, the case of Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou happened, and Wei Daizhong's son Xu Rongyi and Zuo Guangdou's brother Guangming successively rushed to Lu Taigong's home.

古文：太公客之，与所善义士容城举人孙奇逢谋，持书走关门，告其难于承宗。
现代文：太公把他们当成客人，他们跟太公所结交的义士、容城举人孙奇逢商量后，拿着太公的信去山海关门口，把他们的困难告诉了承宗。
English: The great-grandfather treated them as his guests. After discussing the matter with Yongcheng Qifeng, a righteous man who was a friend of the great-grandfather, they took the great-grandfather's letter and went to the gate of Shanhaiguan Customs to tell the great-grandfather about their difficulties.

古文：承宗、善继谋借巡视蓟门，请入觐。
现代文：承宗、善继商议后打算借巡视蓟门的机会，请求入朝觐见熹宗。
English: Following the discussion, Chojong and Sonseong planned to take the opportunity of inspecting the Imperial Palace and request to enter the Imperial Palace to see Chojong.

古文：奄党大哗，谓阁部将提兵清君侧，严旨阻之。
现代文：阉党这下大吵大喊，说阁部打算统兵清君侧来了，熹宗就发出一道严厉的指示阻止承宗入朝。
English: The Kuomintang shouted loudly, saying that the cabinet was planning to bring the general army to the side of the Qing emperor, and Emperor Taizong issued a stern instruction to prevent Chengzong from entering the imperial court.

古文：狱益急，五日一追赃，搒掠甚酷。
现代文：杨涟、左光斗的案子更加抓得紧了，每五日追一回赃，拷打得很残酷。
English: The cases of Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou were even more tightly controlled. They were chased every five days and brutally tortured.

古文：太公急募得数百金输之，而两人者则皆已毙矣。
现代文：太公赶忙凑集了几百两银子送进去，可是他们两个人都已经死掉了。
English: The great-grandfather quickly gathered a few hundred taels of silver and sent them in, but both of them were already dead.

古文：至是，善继归，而周顺昌之狱又起。
现代文：到善继回到家里时，周顺昌的案子又出来了。
English: By the time Ms. Zhou returned home, Mr. Zhou's case had resurfaced.

古文：顺昌，善继同年生，善继又为募得数百金，金入而顺昌又毙。
现代文：顺昌是善继同年的进士，善继又为他凑集了几百两银子，银子送进去顺昌又死掉了。
English: Shunchang was a disciple of Zensui in the same year, and Zensui collected several hundred taels of silver for him. Zensui sent the silver to Shunchang, and Shunchang died.

古文：奄党居近善继家，难家子弟仆从相望于道。太公曰： 吾不惧也。 
现代文：阉党的家乡离善继家很近，难家的子弟、仆从一个接一个地来到他家里，太公却说： 我不怕什么。 
English: The hometown of the Shao faction was very close to the family of the virtuous successor. The sons and servants of the poor family came to his house one after another, but the father-in-law said, "I am not afraid of anything."

古文：崇祯元年，逆榼既诛，善继起尚宝卿，迁太常少卿，管光禄丞事，再请归。
现代文：崇祯元年，谋逆的宦官被诛除后，善继起复为尚宝卿，又升为太常少卿，掌管光禄丞的事务，他又请假回乡去了。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, after the eunuchs who plotted against the emperor were purged, Zensheng was reinstated as Shang Baoqing, and promoted to Taizang Shaoqing, in charge of the affairs of Guanglu Rongzheng. He also took a leave of absence and went back to his hometown.

古文：九年七月，大清兵攻定兴。
现代文：九年七月，大清部队攻打定兴。
English: In July of the ninth year, the Qing Dynasty troops attacked Dingxing.

古文：善继家在江村，白太公请入捍城，太公许之。
现代文：善继家在江村，他对太公讲想过去保卫定兴城，太公答应了。
English: His successor was in Jiangcun. He told the Grand Duke that he wanted to go and defend Dingxing City, and the Grand Duke agreed.

古文：与里居知州薛一鹗等共守。守六日而城破，善继死。
现代文：善继跟在家闲住的知州薛一鹗等一起守城，守了六天城被打下，善继死去了。
English: Yoshitsugu defended the city together with Chishu Xue Ikun, who was idle at home, and so on. After six days of defense, the city was defeated, and Yoshitsugu died.

古文：家人奔告太公，太公曰： 嗟乎，吾儿素以身许国，今果死，吾复何憾！ 
现代文：他的家人跑回来告诉太公，太公说： 唉！我的儿子一向以身许国，现在果然为国而死，我还有什么遗憾的呢！ 
English: His family members ran back to tell the grand duke, and the grand duke said: "Alas! My son has always been loyal to the country, and now he has indeed died for the country. What regrets do I have?

古文：事闻，赠善继大理卿，谥忠节，敕有司建祠。
现代文：事情给朝廷知道后，朝廷追赠善继为大理卿，谥忠节，传令有关部门为他修造了祠庙。
English: After the matter was brought to the attention of the imperial court, the court posthumously bestowed the title of Dariching on Zhenzhong Jie, and ordered relevant departments to build an ancestral temple for him.

古文：子化麟，举天启元年乡试第一，伏阙讼父忠。
现代文：善继的儿子化麟考中天启元年乡试第一名，曾经到朝廷去诉说他父亲的忠诚。
English: Zenji's son, Hualin, who was the first place in the junior high school entrance examination in the first year of the Heian era, once went to the imperial court to appeal for his father's loyalty.

古文：逾年亦卒。
现代文：父亲死后，他过一年也死了。
English: After his father's death, he died a year later.

