古文：◎天文三
现代文：天文三
English: Tianwen III

古文：▲星昼见
现代文：星昼见
English: See you in the morning

古文：恒星洪武十九年七月癸亥，二十年五月丁丑，七月壬寅，二十一年十二月丁卯，俱三辰昼见。
现代文：恒星洪武十九年七月癸亥日，二十年五月丁丑日、七月壬寅日，二十一年十二月丁卯日，日、月、星三辰都在白天出现。
English: In the 19th year of Hongwu, the star appeared on the 7th day of the 7th month, in the 20th year of May, on the 10th day of the 11th month, in the 7th year of July, on the 11th day of the 12th month, and in the 21st year of December, on the 12th day of the 13th month. The sun, moon and stars all appeared in the daytime.

古文：弘治十八年九月甲午申刻，河鼓、北斗见。庚子，星昼见。
现代文：弘治十八年九月甲午申刻，河鼓星、北斗星出现；庚子日，星星白天出现。
English: In September of the 18th year of Hongzhi, at the stroke of midnight, the River Drum Star and the Big Dipper Star appeared; on the Day of the Rooster, the stars appeared during the day.

古文：正德元年二月癸酉，星斗昼见。
现代文：正德元年二月癸酉日，北斗星白天出现。
English: On February 3 of the first year of Zhengde, the Big Dipper appeared in the daytime.

古文：天启二年五月壬寅，有星随日昼见。
现代文：天启二年五月壬寅日，有星宿随着太阳白天出现。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, in May, on the day of Ren Yin, a star appeared in the daytime along with the sun.

古文：崇祯十六年十二月辛酉朔，星昼见。
现代文：崇祯十六年十二月辛酉朔日，星星白天出现。
English: On the morning of December 16th in the year of the Dragon, the stars appeared in the daytime.

古文：岁星景泰二年九月甲辰，昼见。
现代文：景泰二年九月甲辰日，岁星白天出现。
English: On the first hour of September in the second year of King Tae, the year star appeared in the daytime.

古文：三年六月壬戌，四年五月丁丑，六月甲辰，五年七月庚戌、壬子、癸亥，六年七月丁酉，天顺元年五月丙子，五年七月乙卯，六年八月庚午，七年三月乙巳，成化十四年六月庚子，八月丁酉，十六年七月丙申，十八年九月癸亥，二十年八月壬申，弘治元年六月甲寅，二年五月癸亥，六月甲午，五年十月己酉，六年九月癸卯，七年十一月癸卯，九年二月辛亥至甲寅，四月壬午，十年正月甲寅至丙辰，十一年八月甲申，十三年四月庚子至乙巳，十四年六月壬辰至乙未，并如之。
现代文：三年六月壬戌日，四年五月丁丑日，六月甲辰日，五年七月庚戌日、壬子日、癸亥日，六年七月丁酉日，天顺元年五月丙子日，五年七月乙卯日，六年八月庚午日，七年三月乙巳日，成化十四年穴月庚子日，八月丁酉日，十六年七月丙申日，十八年九月癸亥日，二十年八月壬申日，弘治元年六月甲寅日，二年五月癸亥日，六月甲午日，五年十月己酉日，六年九月癸卯日，七年十一月癸卯日，九年二月辛亥日至甲寅日，四月壬午日，十年正月甲寅日至丙辰日，十一年八月甲申日，十三年四月庚子日至乙巳日，十四年六月壬辰日至乙末日，岁星都白天出现。
English: June 3rd, 2003; May 4th, 2004; June 1st, 2004; July 5th, 2005; July 6th, 2006; May 1st, 2005; July 2nd, 2005; August 6th, 2005; March 7th, 2005; October 14th, 2005; August 4th, 2005; July 16th, 2005; September 18th, 2005; August 20th, 2005; June 1st, 2005; May 2nd, 2005; June 1st, 2005; October 5th, 2005; September 6th, 2005; September 1st, 2005; September 1st, 2005; September 1st, 2005; September 1st, 2005; September 1st, 2005; September 1st,

古文：十五年六月，连日昼见。
现代文：十五年六月，岁星连日白天出现。
English: In June 15th, the year star appeared in the daytime day after day.

古文：十六年七月辛卯，十七年七月壬子，十八年五月乙未，八月辛巳至九月癸未，正德元年十一月乙酉，二年十一月辛酉至丁卯，六年三月壬寅至四月壬申，九年八月乙巳至甲寅，十二年十月甲子至乙巳，并如之。
现代文：十六年七月辛卯日，十七年七月壬子日，十八年五月乙未日，八月辛巳日至九月癸末日，正德元年十一月乙酉日，二年十一月辛酉日至丁卯日，六年三月壬寅日至四月壬申日，九年八月乙巳日至甲寅日，十二年十月甲子日至乙巳日，岁星都连日白天出现。
English: In July 16th, July 17th, May 18th, August 19th to the end of September, November 1st, November 2nd to the end of April, March 6th to the end of April, August 9th to the end of October, and October 12th to the end of September, the year star appeared in the daytime.

古文：嘉靖二年三月辛未，二十九年八月戊寅，昼见守井。
现代文：嘉靖二年三月辛末日，二十九年八月戊寅日，岁星白天出现，入守井宿。
English: On the last day of Xin in March of the second year of Jiajing, and on the day of Wu Yin in August of the twenty-ninth year, the year star appeared in the daytime and entered the Shoujing Inn.

古文：崇祯十一年四月壬子，昼见。
现代文：崇祯十一年四月壬子日，岁星白天出现。
English: On April 11th in the year of the Dragon, the year star appeared in the daytime.

古文：荧惑景泰三年八月甲子，昼见于未位。
现代文：荧惑景泰三年八月甲子日，荧惑星在西南方白天出现。
English: Fluorescent planet appeared in the southwest during the day on August 1st, 2003.

古文：太白洪武四年二月戊午，昼见。
现代文：太白洪武四年二月戊午日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the afternoon of February 4th, Taibai Hongwu, the Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：四月戊申，六月壬午朔，五年六月甲申至丁亥，十二月甲申，八年八月丁巳，九年二月乙巳至己酉，三月壬申，十二年闰五月戊戌，十三年七月甲午，十五年四月丁亥，七月戊申、辛酉，九月丁未朔，十六年十月壬辰至乙未，十八年四月己亥至辛丑，六月丙申至辛丑、辛亥，并如之。
现代文：四月戊申日，六月壬午朔日，五年六月甲申日至丁亥日，十二月甲申日，八年八月丁巳日，九年二月乙巳日至己酉日，三月壬申日，十二年闰五月戊戌日，十三年七月甲午日，十五年四月丁亥日，七月戊申日、辛酉日，九月丁未朔日，十六年十月壬辰日至乙末日，十八年四月己亥日至辛丑日，六月丙申日至辛丑日、辛亥日，太白星都白天出现。
English: April wanshen day, June mengwu new year's day, June of the fifth year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year

古文：九月戊寅，经天与荧惑同度。
现代文：九月戊寅日，太白星经天，与荧惑星同度。
English: On September 30, the Taibai Star passed through the sky at the same degree as the fluorescent planet.

古文：乙酉，昼见。
现代文：乙酉日，太白星白天出现。
English: Acetylene day, too white stars appear in the daytime.

古文：丁亥，又见，犯荧惑。
现代文：丁亥日，太白星又白天出现，侵犯荧惑星。
English: On the day of Dinghai, the white star appeared again during the day, encroaching on the fluorescent planet.

古文：十月癸巳至丙申，昼见。
现代文：十月癸巳日至丙申日，太白星白天出现。
English: From October 30th to October 31st, Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：戊戌至辛丑，十九年十月甲申朔至庚寅，并如之。
现代文：戊戌日至辛丑日，十九年十月甲申朔日至庚寅日。
English: from the day of the Dragon Boat Festival to the day of the Ugly Duckling Festival, and from the day of the Spring Festival to the day of the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：二十年六月戊戌，经天。
现代文：太白星都白天出现。二十年六月戊戌日，太白星经天。
English: Too-white stars always appear during the day. On the 20th day of the 6th lunar month, a too-white star passed through the sky.

古文：七月壬寅至甲辰，昼见。
现代文：七月壬寅日至甲辰日，太白星白天出现。
English: From July's Ren Yin Day to Ji Chen Day, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：二十一年四月己巳，七月丙申，二十三年三月丁亥，二十四年八月辛巳，二十五年二月辛酉，二十六年四月甲辰，并如之。
现代文：二十一年四月己巳日，七月丙申日，二十三年三月丁亥日，二十四年八月辛巳，二十五年二月辛酉日，二十六年四月甲辰日，太白星都白天出现。
English: On April 21st, July 4th, March 23rd, August 24th, February 25th, and April 26th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月庚子，与太阴同昼见。
现代文：八月庚子日，太白星与太阴星同时白天出现。
English: August Geng Zi Day, Taibai Star and Taiyin Star appear in the daytime at the same time.

古文：建文四年七月庚子，经天。
现代文：建文四年七月庚子日，太白星经天。
English: In July of the 4th year of Jianwen, the day of Geng Zi, a white star appeared in the sky.

古文：永乐元年五月癸未、癸卯，俱与太阴同昼见。
现代文：永乐元年五月癸未日、癸卯日，太白星都与太阴星同时白天出现。
English: In May of the first year of Yongle, on the day before the new moon and the day of the new moon, the white star appeared in the daytime at the same time as the dark star.

古文：六月壬申，与太阴昼见。
现代文：六月壬申，与太阴星白天出现。
English: In June, Jinshin appears in the daytime along with Taiyin Star.

古文：四年七月壬寅，昼见。
现代文：四年七月壬寅日，太白星白天出现。
English: On July 4th, Renin Day, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：五年八月丙申，六年二月甲辰，八年十月庚戌，十二年九月癸未，十五年七月己酉，八月庚戌，洪熙元年六月戊戌，七月乙巳，八月癸巳，宣德六年十月乙巳，八年九月戊戌至甲寅，九年十二月甲子，十年七月丁亥，正统四年七月壬子，十月丙申，六年五月庚戌，并如之。
现代文：五年八月丙申日，六年二月甲辰日，八年十月庚戌日，十二年九月癸末日，十五年七月己酉日，八月庚戌日，洪熙元年六月戊戌日，七月乙巳日，八月癸巳日，宣德六年十月乙巳日，八年九月戊戌日至甲寅日，九年十二月甲子日，十年七月丁亥日，正统四年七月壬子日，十月丙申日，六年五月庚戌日，太白星都白天出现。
English: August 5th, February 6th, Jia Chen Day, October 8th, Geng Xu Day, September 12th, the last day of the year, July 15th, August Geng Xu Day, June 1st, July 22nd, August 23rd, Xuan De October 22nd, September 8th, Jia Zi Day, December 9th, Jia Zi Day, July 10th, Ding Hai Day, July 4th, Ren Zi Day, October 22nd, May 6th, Geng Xu Day, Taibai Star all appear during the day.

古文：十一年七月甲申，经天。
现代文：十一年七月甲申日，太白星经天。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the year, a white star appeared in the sky.

古文：十三年二月辛酉，昼见。
现代文：十三年二月辛酉，太白星白天出现。
English: In February of the thirteenth year, the sky was overcast, and a white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十四年正月辛亥，八月丙子，景泰元年十月乙酉，二年五月庚子、辛亥，并如之。壬子，经天。
现代文：十四年正月辛亥日，八月丙子日，景泰元年十月乙酉日，二年五月庚子日、辛亥日，太白星都白天出现。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of Xinhai, in August on the day of Cixi, in October of the first year of Jing Tai, in May of the second year on the day of Geng Zi, and on the day of Xinhai, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：三年五月丁巳，昼见。
现代文：壬子日，太白星经天。三年五月丁巳日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the day of Imago, the white star passed through the sky. On the day of May 3rd, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十一月壬戌，五年正月甲戌，二月丙戌，六月癸卯，七年正月戊戌，天顺元年四月甲午，八月壬子，二年十月己未，三年四月癸亥、癸酉，四年十一月庚寅，十二月丙戌，五年正月丁未，十二月癸巳，六年六月己丑，八月庚午，七年闰七月辛酉、癸未，八年正月庚申，成化元年二月癸未，三年四月癸丑，四年六月丙申，六年六月丙戌，七年八月癸卯，并如之。
现代文：十一月壬戌日，五年正月甲戌日，二月丙戌日，六月癸卯日，七年正月戊戌日，天顺元年四月甲午日，八月壬子日，二年十月己末日，三年四月癸亥日、癸酉日，四年十一月庚寅日，十二月丙戌日，五年正月丁末日，十二月癸巳日，六年六月己丑日，八月庚午日，七年闰七月辛酉日、癸末日，八年正月庚申日，成化元年二月癸未日，三年四月癸丑日，四年六月丙申日，六年六月丙戌日，七年八月癸卯日，太白星都白天出现。
English: November

古文：八年正月乙卯，经天，与日争明。
现代文：八年正月乙卯日，太白星经天，与太阳争光明。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 8th year, a white star streaked across the sky, competing with the sun for light.

古文：十一年五月己未，昼见。
现代文：十一年五月己末日，太白星白天出现。
English: On May 11th, the last day of the year, a white star appeared during the day.

古文：十二年十月丙戌，十三年十二月甲午，并如之。
现代文：十二年十月丙戌日，十三年十二月甲午日，太白星都白天出现。
English: The white star appeared in the daytime on October 6th, 2012, and on December 1st, 2013.

古文：十四年六月庚子，与岁星俱昼见。
现代文：十四年六月庚子日，太白垦与岁星都白天出现。
English: On the 14th day of the 6th month, the day of Geng Zi, the great egret and the year star both appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月甲午，昼见。
现代文：八月甲午日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the afternoon of August 1st, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十五年十二月丙子，十七年三月癸未，八月癸亥，十八年九月庚戌，十九年四月癸亥朔，并如之。
现代文：十五年十二月丙子日，十七年三月癸末日，八月癸亥日，十八年九月庚戌日，十九年四月癸亥朔日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In December 15th, the C day, in March 17th, the last day of the month, in August, the Year of the Horse, in September 18th, the Year of the Horse, and in April 19th, the Year of the Horse, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：二十年八月壬申，与岁星俱昼见。
现代文：二十年八月壬申日，太白星与岁星都白天出现。
English: On August 20, Jinshin Day, the Taibai Star and the New Year Star both appeared in the daytime.

古文：二十一年十一月丙辰，昼见。
现代文：二十一年十一月丙辰日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the morning of November 21, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：二十二年六月己丑，二十三年九月丙午，弘治元年五月庚午，二年正月壬戌，三月庚申，五月丙戌，八月癸巳、庚子，四年四月辛未，五年五月乙亥，十月辛酉，六年十二月乙丑，七年五月庚戌，八年七月戊子，九年二月己酉朔，十年正月甲子至丁卯，并如之。
现代文：二十二年六月己丑日，二十三年九月丙午日，弘治元年五月庚午日，二年正月壬戌日，三月庚申日，五月丙戌日，八月癸巳日、庚子日，四年四月辛末日，五年五月乙亥日，十月辛酉日，六年十二月乙丑日，七年五月庚戌日，八年七月戊子日，九年二月己酉朔日，十年正月甲子日至丁卯日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In June, 22nd, September, 23rd, 23rd, 24th, May, 1st, 2nd, March, 3rd, May, 4th, August, 4th, April, 4th, May, 5th, October, 6th, December, 4th, May, 7th, July, 8th, July, 9th, February, 10th, January, 1st, January, 2nd, January, 2nd, February, 3rd, January, 2nd, February, 3rd, February, 2nd, March, 2nd, March, 2nd, March, 2nd, March, 2nd, March, 2nd, March, 2nd, 2nd,

古文：六月丙子未刻，经天。
现代文：六月丙子日未刻，太白星经天。
English: In June, before the sun sets, a white star streaks across the sky.

古文：八月癸未及十一年十月辛巳，昼见。
现代文：八月癸末日以及十一年十月辛巳日，太白星白天出现。
English: At the end of August and on October 11, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十二年三月戊辰至壬申，八月庚寅，并如之。
现代文：十二年三月戊辰日至壬申日，八月庚寅日，太白星都白天出现。
English: From March 12th to Jinshin Day, and from August 12th to Geng Yin Day, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：十三年四月庚子至乙巳，与岁星同昼见。
现代文：十三年四月庚子日至乙巳日，太白星舆岁星同时白天出现。
English: From the 13th day of the 4th month of the Chinese lunar calendar, Geng Zi, to the 21st day of the 4th month of the Chinese lunar calendar, the Taibai Star and the Mei Year Star appeared simultaneously in the daytime.

古文：十月丁未、己酉，十四年十二月庚戌，十五年五月庚寅至癸巳，十六年七月壬辰，十七年二月戊戌及六月癸亥，十八年二月壬戌，并昼见。
现代文：十月丁末日、己酉日，十四年十二月庚戌日，十五年五月庚寅日至癸巳日，十六年七月壬辰日，十七年二月戊戌日以及六月癸亥日，十八年二月壬戌日，太白星都白天出现。
English: The Taibai Star appears in the daytime on the last day of October, the first day of the year, December 14, the first day of the year, May 15, the first day of the year, July 16, the first day of the year, February 17, the first day of the year, and the first day of the year, and February 18, the first day of the year.

古文：五月辛亥，经天。
现代文：五月辛亥日，太白星经天。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in May, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：八月癸亥至戊辰，昼见。
现代文：八月癸亥日至戊辰日，太白星白天出现。
English: From August 21st to 24th, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：正德元年十月己未，如之。
现代文：正德元年十月己末日，太白星白天出现。
English: It was the last day of October in the first year of Zhengde, and a white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：二年正月庚辰，经天。
现代文：二年正月庚辰日，太白星经天。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in the first month of the second year, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：三月戊辰，昼见。
现代文：三月戊辰，太白星白天出现。
English: In March, when the moon is waxing gibbous, Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：三年五月乙巳至丁未，十月己卯、庚辰，四年十月戊戌至乙巳，五年五月丙子，六年七月壬申至八月癸未，八年正月丙戌至己丑，四月壬戌、癸亥，八月庚戌至乙卯，九年十一月甲申至十二月壬辰，十一年六月甲寅至己未，十四年八月丙寅至庚辰，十五年正月己未至二月辛酉，十六年八月丁亥，嘉靖元年九月辛未，并如之。
现代文：三年五月乙巳日至丁末日，十月己卯日、庚辰日，四年十月戊戌日至乙巳日，五年五月丙子日，六年七月壬申日至八月癸末日，八年正月丙戌日至己丑日，四月壬戌日、癸亥日，八月庚戌至乙卯日，九年十一月甲申日至十二月壬辰日，十一年六月甲寅日至己末日，十四年八月丙寅日至庚辰日，十五年正月己未日至二月辛酉日，十六年八月丁亥日，嘉靖元年九月辛末日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In the third year, from May 23rd to the last day of Ding; in October, from Jiwu Day to Geng Chen Day; in the fourth year, from October 30th to the last day of Yin; in the fifth year, from May 3rd to the last day of May; in the sixth year, from July Jinshin Day to the last day of August Jinshin Day; in the eighth year, from the first day of January Jinshin Day to the last day of August Jinshin Day; in April, from the first day of April Jinshin Day to the last day of August Jinshin Day; in the ninth year, from November 1st to December Jinshin

古文：二年三月辛未，与岁星俱昼见。
现代文：二年三月辛末日，太白星舆岁星都白天出现。
English: In March of the second year, at the end of the year, the white star and the new year star both appeared during the day.

古文：三年四月庚戌，昼见。
现代文：三年四月庚戌日，太白星白天出现。
English: On Geng Zi Day, April 3, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：五年五月庚子，十一年四月癸巳，十月辛巳、戊子，十一月甲寅，十三年闰二月庚申，并如之。
现代文：五年五月庚子日，十一年四月癸巳日，十月辛巳日、戊子日，十一月甲寅日，十三年闰二月庚申日，太白星都白天出现。
English: Taibai Star appears in the daytime on the day of the Monkey King in May in the fifth year, on the day of the Snake in April in the eleventh year, on the day of the Snake in October, on the day of the Goat, on the day of the Goat in November, and on the day of the Goat in February in the thirteenth year.

古文：五月癸巳，与月同昼见。
现代文：五月癸巳日，太白星与月亮同时在白天出现。
English: On the third day of May, the white star and the moon appeared at the same time in the daytime.

古文：十七年九月辛卯，昼见。
现代文：十七年九月辛卯日，太白星白天出现。
English: On September 17th, the day of Xinwu, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十八年四月癸亥，十一月壬寅，二十年十一月乙巳至丁未，二十二年七月丙午，二十三年二月辛巳，二十四年闰正月戊寅，二十五年十月辛卯，二十六年四月丙申，二十七年四月丁巳，十一月丙戌至乙未，二十八年十一月乙酉至己丑，二十九年六月戊申、甲寅，三十年六月丙子至辛巳，三十一年正月丙戌至丙申，三十二年二月辛未至甲戌，七月戊辰至辛未，三十五年五月壬午，十月癸卯至丙午，三十六年十二月庚辰朔，三十八年七月癸酉，三十九年正月庚寅至壬辰，并如之。
现代文：十八年四月癸亥日，十一周壬寅日，二十年十一月乙巳日至丁末日，二十二年七月丙午日，二十三年二月辛巳日，二十四年闰正月戊寅日，二十五年十月辛卯日，二十六年四月丙申日，二十七年四月丁巳日，十一月丙戌日至乙未日，二十八年十一月乙酉日至己丑日，二十九年六月戊申日、甲寅日，三十年六月丙子日至辛巳日，三十一年正月丙戌日至丙申日，三十二年二月辛末日至甲戌日，七月戊辰日至辛末日，三十五年五月壬午日，十月癸卯日至丙午日，三十六年十二月庚辰朔日，三十八年七月癸酉日，三十九年正月庚寅日至壬辰日，太白星都白天出现。
English: April 18, the Year of the Boar; November 11, the Year of the Horse; November 20, the Year of the Snake to the last day of the Ding; July 22, the Year of the Horse at noon; February 23, the Year of the Snake; February 24, the Leap Year; October 25, the Year of the Horse; April 26, the Year of the Horse; April 27, the Year of the Horse; November 28, the Year of the Horse to the last day of the Ding; June 29, the Year of the Horse to the last day of the Ding; June 30, the Year of the Horse to the first day of the Ding; January 31, the Year of the Horse to the first day of the Ding; February 32, the Year of the Horse

古文：四十年三月丙子，昼见，历二十四日。
现代文：四十年三月丙子日，太白星白天出现，历时二十四日。
English: On the third day of the third month of the 40th year, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime and lasted for 24 days.

古文：八月辛未，昼见。
现代文：八月辛末日，太白星白天出现。
English: At the end of August, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：四十一年九月乙未，四十二年四月己巳至壬申，四十三年五月甲寅，并如之。
现代文：四十一年九月乙末日，四十二年四月己巳日至壬申日，四十三年五月甲寅日，太白星都白天出现。
English: On the last day of September B in 1941, from April Zi Si to Jinshin Day in 42, and on May Katoin Day in 43, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十月戊子，昼见，历二十二日。
现代文：十月戊子日，太白星白天出现，历时二十二日。
English: On October 30, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime, lasting 22 days.

古文：四十五年正月己亥，昼见。
现代文：四十五年正月己亥日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the day of the first month of the year 455, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：隆庆元年七月辛酉，二年正月甲寅，并如之。
现代文：隆庆元年七月辛酉日，二年正月甲寅日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In July of the first year of the Longqing era, on the day of Xin, and on the day of the first month of the second year, on the day of Jia Yin, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：三年三月甲子，昼见，历二十二日，四年十一月乙丑至丁卯，昼见。
现代文：三年三月甲子日，太白星白天出现，历时二十二日。四年十一月乙丑日至丁卯日，太白星白天出现。
English: In March of the third year, on the day of Kozi, the white star appeared in the daytime, which lasted 22 days. In November of the fourth year, from the day of Yugou to the day of Dingwu, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：万历十一年七月辛丑，十二年七月癸巳，十六年九月丁丑，二十一年八月甲午，二十四年十月丙寅，并如之。
现代文：万历十一年七月辛丑日，十二年七月癸巳日，十六年九月丁丑日，二十一年八月甲午日，二十四年十月丙寅日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In July of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, in July of the twelfth year, in September of the sixteenth year, in August of the twenty-first year, and in October of the twenty-fourth year, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：二十七年九月辛卯，经天。
现代文：二十七年九月辛卯日，太白星经天。
English: In September of the 27th year, on the day of Xinwu, a very white star passed through the sky.

古文：三十七年三月辛丑，昼见。
现代文：三十七年三月辛丑日，太白星白天出现。
English: In March of the year thirty-seven, on the day of the ugly, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：三十八年十月辛巳，四十年五月壬寅，天启二年二月丙戌，三年三月丁巳，十二月乙丑，五年四月癸未，并如之。
现代文：三十八年十月辛巳日，四十年五月壬寅日，天启二年二月丙戌日，三年三月丁巳日，十二月乙丑日，五年四月癸末日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In October of the year thirty-eight, in May of the year forty, in February of the year two, in March of the year three, in December of the year two, and at the end of April of the year five, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：七月癸酉，经天。
现代文：七月癸酉日，太白星经天。
English: On the third day of July, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：崇祯元年七月壬戌，昼见。
现代文：崇桢元年七月壬戌日，太白星白天出现。
English: In July of the first year of Chongzhen, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：三年四月己卯，十二月丙辰，并如之。
现代文：三年四月己卯日，十二月丙辰日，太白星都白天出现。
English: In April of the third year and December of the fourth year, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：▲客星《史记·天官书》有客星之名，而不详其形状。
现代文：《史记·天官书》记载有客星的名称，但是没有详细记载它的形体状貌。
English: The "Histories of Heaven and Earth" recorded the name of the guest star, but did not record its shape in detail.

古文：叙国皇、昭明诸异星甚悉，而无瑞星、妖星之名。
现代文：叙述国皇、昭明等怪异星宿十分详备，但是没有瑞星、妖星的名称。
English: The description of the strange stars such as Guo Guo and Zhaoming is very detailed, but there are no names of the rising star and the evil star.

古文：然则客星者，言其非常有之星，殆诸异星之总名，而非有专属也。
现代文：既然这样，那么所谓客星，是说的那些不常见的星宿，大概是众多的怪异星宿的总名，而不是专门属于某种星宿。
English: In this case, the so-called "guest star" refers to those unusual stars, probably the general name of many strange stars, rather than specifically belonging to a certain star.

古文：李淳风志晋、隋天文，始分景星、含誉之属为瑞星，彗、孛、国皇之类为妖星，又以周伯老子等为客星，自谓本之汉末刘睿《荆州占》。
现代文：李淳风记录晋、隋的天文，纔分出景星、含誉星之类作为瑞星，彗星、孛星、国皇星之类作为妖星，又把周伯星、老子星作为客星，自称其说来自汉末刘椒的《剂州占》。
English: Li Chunfeng recorded the astronomy of the Jin and Sui dynasties. He claimed that the stars such as the star of fortune and the star of fame were the auspicious stars, the stars such as the comet, the shooting star and the emperor's star were the evil stars, and the stars such as the star of Zhou Bo and the star of Laozi were the guest stars. He claimed that they were from the late Han Dynasty's "Jangzhou Conquest."

古文：夫含誉，所谓瑞星也，而光芒则似彗；国皇，所谓妖星也，而形色又类南极老人。
现代文：含誉星，是所谓的瑞星，而光芒却好像彗星；国皇星，是所谓的妖星，而形状光色又类似南极老人星。
English: Huan Rong Xing is a so-called rising star, but the light is like a comet; Guo Guo Xing is a so-called monster star, and the shape and light color are similar to the South Pole old man star.

古文：瑞与妖果有定哉？
现代文：瑞星与妖星果真有确切的界限吗？
English: Is there really a clear boundary between the rising star and the evil star?

古文：且周伯一星也，既属之瑞星，而云其国大昌。又属之客星，而云其国兵起有丧。
现代文：并且周伯这同一颗星宿。既把它归属到瑞星，说见到此星，国家将太平昌盛；又把它归属到客星，说见到此星，国家将起兵祸，有丧乱。
English: Moreover, Zhou Bo is the same star. It is attributed to the rising star, and it is said that if the country sees this star, the country will be peaceful and prosperous; it is also attributed to the guest star, and it is said that if the country sees this star, there will be military disaster and chaos.

古文：其说如此，果可为法乎？
现代文：关于它的解说像这样，果真可以作为法则吗？
English: Can its explanation, such as it is, really be taken as a law?

古文：马迁不复区别，良有以也。
现代文：司马迁不再区别，确实有原因。
English: Sima Qian is no longer different, there is indeed a reason.

古文：今按《实录》，彗、孛变见特甚，皆别书。
现代文：现在考察《实录》，彗星、孛星等变异现象特别多，都另外记载。
English: Now, looking at the "Real Record," there are a particularly large number of variable phenomena such as comets and comets, all of which are recorded separately.

古文：老人星则江以南常见，而燕京必无见理，故不书。
现代文：老人星，长江以南经常出现，燕京却必定没有出现的道理，所以不记载。
English: The old man's star often appears south of the Yangtze River, but Yanjing must not have appeared, so it is not recorded.

古文：余悉属客星而编次之。
现代文：其余的全部属于客星，把它们编排出来。
English: All the rest belong to the guest stars, sort them out.

古文：洪武三年七月，太史奏文星见。
现代文：洪武三年七月，太史上奏，说文星出现。
English: In July of the third year of Hongwu's reign, it was said that a literary star appeared.

古文：九年六月戊子，有星大如弹丸，白色。
现代文：九年六月戊子日，有异星大小如同弹丸，白色。
English: On June 9th, there was a shooting star the size of a marble. It was white.

古文：止天仓，经外屏、卷舌，入紫微垣，扫文昌，指内厨，入于张。
现代文：停留在天仓星，经过外屏、卷舌星，侵入紫微垣，掠过文昌星，指向内厨星，侵入张宿。
English: Stays in the Celestial Storehouse Star, passes through the Outer Screen, the Curling Tongue Star, invades the Purple Weak Wall, passes through the Wenchang Star, points to the Inner Kitchen Star, and invades Zhangshu.

古文：七月乙亥灭。
现代文：七月乙亥隐没不见。
English: In July, Atsuhi was nowhere to be seen.

古文：十一年九月甲戌，有星见于五车东北，发芒丈余。扫内阶，入紫微宫，扫北极五星，犯东垣少宰，入天市垣，犯天市。
现代文：十一年九月甲戌日，有异星在五车星东北出现，发出一丈多长的光芒，掠过内阶星，侵入紫微宫，掠过北极五星，侵犯束垣少宰星，侵入天市垣，侵犯天市星。
English: On September 11th, the Day of the Dragonfly, a strange star appeared in the northeast of the Five-Chariot Star, emitting a long ray of light, passing through the Inner Star, invading the Purple Micro Palace, passing through the North Pole Five-Star, invading the Sokaki Shosai Star, invading the Celestial City Wall, and invading the Celestial City Star.

古文：至十月己未，阴云不见。
现代文：到十月己末日，隐没入云不再出现。
English: By the end of October, it had disappeared into the clouds and did not reappear.

古文：十八年九月戊寅，有星见太微垣，犯右执法，出端门。
现代文：十八年九月戊寅日，有异星出现在太微垣，侵犯右执法星，出端门星。
English: On September 18th, Wu Yin Day, a strange star appeared in Taiwaki, infringing on the right law enforcement star, and the door star.

古文：乙酉，入翼，彗长丈余。
现代文：乙酉日，侵入翼宿，彗光长一丈多。
English: On the day of Acetylene, the intrusion of the pterodactyl, the comet grew much longer.

古文：至十月庚寅，犯军门，彗扫天庙。
现代文：到十月庚寅日，侵犯军门星，彗光掠遇天庙星。
English: In October, on the day of Geng Yin, it encroached on the military gate star, and the comet light encountered the temple star.

古文：二十一年二月丙寅，有星出东壁，占曰 文士效用 。
现代文：二十一年二月丙寅日，有异星出现在东壁宿，占验说 文士效劳 。
English: On February 21st, the day of Yin and Yang, a strange star appeared in the East Wall Lodge, and the fortune-teller said that the scribe would come to help.

古文：帝大喜，以为将策进士兆也。
现代文：皇帝非常高兴，认为是将要策试进士的征兆。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and took it as a sign that he was about to be promoted.

古文：永乐二年十月庚辰，辇道东南有星如盏，黄色，光润而不行。
现代文：永乐二年十月庚辰日，辇道星东南有异星如灯盏，黄色，光芒润泽而不动。
English: In October of the second year of Yongle, on the day of Geng Chen, there was a strange star like a lamp in the southeast of Xingdao Star. It was yellow and its light was moist and did not move.

古文：二十二年九月戊戌，有星见斗宿，大如碗，色黄白，光烛地，有声，如撒沙石。
现代文：二十二年九月戊戌日，有异星出现在斗宿，大如碗，黄白色，光芒烛照地上，有声音，像抛撒沙石。
English: On September 22nd, a strange star appeared in Douju, big as a bowl, yellow and white, shining on the ground like a candle, with a sound like throwing sand and stones.

古文：宣德五年八月庚寅，有星见南河旁，如弹丸大，色青黑，凡二十六日灭。
现代文：宣德五年八月庚寅日，有异星在南河旁出现，如弹丸一样大，色呈青黑，共二十六天纔役灭。
English: In August of the fifth year of Xuan De, on the day of Geng Yin, a strange star appeared next to the Nanhe River. It was as big as a projectile, and its color was blue-black. It lasted for a total of 26 days.

古文：十月丙申，蓬星见外屏南，东南行，经天仓、天庾，八日而灭。
现代文：十月丙申日，蓬星在外屏南出现，向东南运行，经过天仓星、天庾星，八天后没灭。
English: On October 24, the Peng Xing appeared in the south of the Outer Pingtung, moving southeast, passing through the Tiancang Xing and the Tiangong Xing, and did not disappear after eight days.

古文：十二月丁亥，有星如弹丸，见九斿旁，黄白光润，旬有五日而隐。
现代文：十二月丁亥日，有异星如同弹丸，在九脖星旁出现，呈黄白色，光芒润泽，十五天后隐没。
English: On the day of Dinghai in December, a strange star appeared like a projectile next to the Nine-Necked Star. It was yellow-white with a moist glow, and disappeared after 15 days.

古文：六年三月壬午，又见。
现代文：六年三月壬午日，该星又出现。
English: On the morning of March 6th, the star appeared again.

古文：八年闰八月戊午，景星三，见西北方天门，青赤黄各一，大如碗，明朗清润，良久聚半月形。
现代文：八年闰八月戊午日，有景星三颗，在西北方天门出现，青色、赤色、黄色各一颗，大如碗，明朗清爽润泽，许久聚合呈半月形状。
English: On the afternoon of leap August in the eighth year, three stars appeared in the northwest celestial gate, one each of blue, red and yellow, large as a bowl, clear, crisp and moist, and aggregated into a half-moon shape.

古文：丁丑，有黄赤色见东南方，如星非星，如云非云，盖归邪星也。
现代文：丁丑日，在东南方有黄赤色出现，像星星，又不是星星，像云彩，又不是云彩，大概应归属于邪星。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, a yellow-red star appeared in the southeast, like a star, but not a star, like a cloud, but not a cloud. It should probably be attributed to the evil star.

古文：景泰三年十一月癸未，有星见鬼宿积尸气旁，徐徐西行。
现代文：景泰三年十一月癸末日，在鬼宿积尸气旁有异星出现，缓缓向西运行。
English: On the last day of November in the 3rd year of King Tae's reign, a strange star appeared next to the haunted house, slowly moving westward.

古文：天顺二年十一月癸卯，有星见于星宿，色白，西行，至丙午，其体微，状如粉絮，在轩辕旁。
现代文：天顺二年十一月癸卯日，有异星在星宿出现，呈白色，向西运行，至丙午日，它的形体隐微，形状如同粉絮，在轩辕星旁边。
English: On the twelfth day of the eleventh month of the second year of Tianshun, a strange star appeared in the constellation, white in color, moving westward, and by the tenth day of the twelfth month, its shape was faint, shaped like a piece of fluff, next to the bright star.

古文：庚戌，生芒五寸，犯爟位西北星，至十二月壬戌，没于东井。
现代文：庚戌日，发出五寸光芒，侵犯炉星位次的西北星，至十二月壬戌日，在束井宿隐没。
English: On the day of Geng Zi, the northwest star, which emitted a five-inch glow and violated the furnace star level, disappeared in the Soking inn until the day of December Ren Zi.

古文：五年六月壬辰，天市垣宗正旁，有星粉白，至乙未，化为白气而消。
现代文：五年六月壬辰日，天市垣宗正旁，出现粉白的异星，至乙未日，变化成白气而消逝。
English: In June of the fifth year, on the day of Imjin, a pinkish-white star appeared right next to the heavenly city of Kakimune, and on the day of the second day, it changed into white gas and disappeared.

古文：六年六月丙寅，有星见策星旁，色苍白，入紫微垣，犯天牢，至癸未，居中台下，形渐微。
现代文：六年六月丙寅日，有异星在策星旁边出现，呈苍白色，侵入紫微垣，侵犯天牢星，至癸末日，停留在中台下，形体渐渐隐微。
English: In June of the sixth year, on the day of Yin Yin, a strange star appeared next to the guiding star, appeared pale, invaded the purple wall, invaded the celestial prison star, and stayed in the middle of the stage until the end of the year, and its shape gradually faded.

古文：弘治三年十二月丁巳，有星见天市垣，东南行。
现代文：弘治三年十二月丁巳日，有异星在天市垣出现，向东南运行。
English: On the third day of the twelfth month of the 12th year of King He, a strange star appeared in the sky, moving southeast.

古文：戊辰，见天仓下，渐向壁。
现代文：戊辰日，在天仓星下出现，渐渐移向壁宿。
English: On the day of the Pentecost, it appeared under the star of Amakura, and gradually moved towards Kabe-juku.

古文：七年十二月丙寅，有星见天江旁，徐行近斗，至八年正月庚戌，入危。
现代文：七年十二月丙寅日，有异星在天江星旁出现，缓缓运行，靠近斗宿，至八年正月庚戌日，侵入危宿。
English: In December of the seventh year, on the day of Yin Yin, a strange star appeared next to the star of the Tianjiang River, slowly moving, close to the dooshu, and in the first month of the eighth year, on the day of Yin Yin, it invaded the dangerous lodging.

古文：十二年七月戊辰，有星见天市垣宗星旁，入紫微垣东藩，经少宰、尚书，抵太子后宫，出西藩少辅旁，至八月己丑灭。
现代文：十二年七月戊辰日，有异星在天市垣宗星旁出现，侵入紫微垣的束藩，经过少宰星、尚书星，抵达太子后官，从西藩少辅旁出，至八月己丑日役灭。
English: In July of the twelfth year, on the day of Pentecost, a strange star appeared next to the heavenly city of Gakimune, invaded the Saku Domain of Zushi-Ukigaki, passed through the Shozai Star and the Shoshu Star, arrived at the post of crown prince, and went out from the West Domain next to the Shosuke Star, and died in August.

古文：十五年十月戊辰，有星见天庙旁，自张抵翼，复退至张，戊寅灭。
现代文：十五年十月戊辰日，有异星从天庙旁出现，从张宿抵达翼宿，又后移至张宿，戊寅日没灭。
English: On October 15th, the day of Pentecost, a strange star appeared from the side of the temple, from Zhangshu to Yingshu, and then moved to Zhangshu. The day of Pentecost did not end.

古文：正德十六年正月甲寅朔，东南有星如火，变白，长可六七尺，横亘东西，复变勾屈状，良久乃散。
现代文：正德十六年正月甲寅朔日，东南方有异星如火，变成白色，长约六七尺，横互于东西，又变化成勾屈形状，许久纔消散。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 16th year of Zhengde, there was a strange star like fire in the southeast, turning white, about sixty-seven feet long, transverse to the east and west, and changing into a crooked shape. It took a long time to dissipate.

古文：嘉靖八年正月立春日，长星亘天。七月又如之。
现代文：嘉靖八年正月立春日，长星横豆于天，七月又像这样。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of Jiajing, the spring day, the long star bean in the sky, and in July it is like this.

古文：十一年二月壬午，有星见东南，色苍白，有芒，积十九日灭。
现代文：十一年二月壬午日，有异星在东南出现，呈苍白色，有光芒，累计十九日纔役灭。
English: On the morning of February 11, a strange star appeared in the southeast. It was pale and shone brightly, and lasted for a total of nineteen days.

古文：十三年五月丁卯朔，有星见螣蛇，历天厩入阁道，二十四日灭。
现代文：十三年五月丁卯朔日，有异星在媵蛇出现，经过天厩星侵入阁道，二十四日纔役灭。
English: On the 13th day of the 5th month of the year, a strange star appeared in the boa constrictor. After passing through the celestial stable star, it invaded the attic road. On the 24th day, the boa constrictor was destroyed.

古文：十五年三月戊午，有星见天棓旁，东行历天厨，西入天汉，至四月壬辰没。
现代文：十五年三月戊午日，有异星在天桔星旁出现，向东运行，经过天厨星，向西侵入天汉，至四月壬辰日隐没。
English: On the afternoon of March 15th, a strange star appeared in the sky next to the orange star, moved eastward, passed the celestial kitchen star, invaded Tianhan in the west, and disappeared in April.

古文：二十四年十一月壬午，有星出天棓，入箕，转东北行，逾月没。
现代文：二十四年十一月壬午日，有异星在天桔出现，侵入箕宿，转向东北运行，一个多月隐没。
English: On the morning of November 24th, a strange star appeared in Tianju, invading Xizhu, turning to the northeast and disappearing for more than a month.

古文：万历六年正月戊辰，有大星如日，出自西方，众星皆西环。
现代文：万历六年正月戊辰日，有大星如同太阳，从西方出现，众星都向西环绕。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 6th year of Wanli, a great star like the sun appeared from the west, and all the stars revolved around the west.

古文：十二年六月己酉，有星出房。
现代文：十二年六月己酉日，有异星从房宿出现。
English: On the twelfth day of the sixth month of the twelfth year, a strange star appeared from the room.

古文：三十二年九月乙丑，尾分有星如弹丸，色赤黄，见西南方，至十月而隐。
现代文：三十二年九月乙丑日，尾宿的分野有异星如同弹丸，色呈赤黄，在西南方出现，至十月而隐没。
English: In September of the year thirty-two, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, a strange star like a projectile, reddish-yellow in color, appeared in the southwest and disappeared by October.

古文：十二月辛酉，转出东南方，仍尾分。
现代文：十二月辛酉日，从东南方转出，仍在尾分。
English: On the hottest day of December, it moved away from the southeast and is still in the tail.

古文：明年二月渐暗，八月丁卯始灭。
现代文：第二年二月渐渐暗下去，八月丁卯日纔没灭。
English: In February of the following year, it gradually got darker and darker, and in August, the ding-ding-ding did not disappear.

古文：三十七年，有大星见西南，芒刺四射。
现代文：三十七年，有大星在西南出现，光芒四射。
English: In the thirty-seventh year, a great star appeared in the southwest, shining brightly.

古文：四十六年九月乙卯，东南有白气一道，阔尺余，长二丈余，东至轸，西入翼，十九日而灭。
现代文：四十六年九月乙卯日，东南方有一道白气，宽一尺多，长二丈多，向东运行到干宿，向西侵入翼宿，十九天纔没灭。
English: On September 1st, 1946, there was a white gas in the southeast, more than a foot wide and more than two feet long, running eastward to the dry camp, invading the winged camp to the west, and disappearing for nineteen days.

古文：十一月丙寅，旦有花白星见东方。
现代文：十一月丙寅日，早晨，有花白的异星在东方出现。
English: On the morning of November 4th, a strange star with white flowers appeared in the east.

古文：天启元年四月癸酉，赤星见于东方。
现代文：天启元年四月癸酉日，赤星在东方出现。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the first year of the Apocalypse, the red star appeared in the east.

古文：崇祯九年冬，天狗见豫分。
现代文：崇祯九年冬天，天狗星在豫的分野出现。
English: In the winter of the ninth year of Chongzhen, the Tengu star appeared in the field of Henan.

古文：▲彗孛
现代文：彗孛
English: Comet swarm

古文：彗之光芒傅日而生，故夕见者必东指，晨见者必西指。
现代文：彗星的光芒依附于太阳而产生，所以傍晚出现的必定指向东方，清晨出现的必定指向西方。
English: The comet's light is dependent on the sun to produce it, so when it appears in the evening, it must be pointing east, and when it appears in the morning, it must be pointing west.

古文：孛亦彗类，其芒气四出，天文家言其灾更甚于彗。
现代文：孛星也是彗星的同类，它的光芒之气向四方散发，天文家说它预示的灾祸比彗星还严重。
English: Krypton is also a kindred spirit of comets. Its radiant aura radiates in all directions. Astronomers say that it portends even greater disaster than comets.

古文：洪武元年正月庚寅，彗星见于昴、毕。
现代文：洪武元年正月庚寅日，彗星在昴宿、毕宿出现。
English: On the first day of the first month of Hongwu in the first year of Hongwu, the comet appeared in Shishuku and Bi-shuku.

古文：三月辛卯，彗星出昴北大陵、天船间，长八尺余，指文昌，近五车，四月己酉，没于五车北。
现代文：三月辛卯日，彗星出现在昴宿北大陵星、天船星之间，长八尺多，指向文昌星，靠近五车星，四月己酉日，在五车星北隐没。
English: On the day of Xinwu in March, the comet appeared between the Pochu North Star and the Heavenly Ship Star, with a length of more than eight feet, pointing to the Wenchang Star, close to the Five-Chariot Star. On the day of Jiwu in April, it disappeared in the north of the Five-Chariot Star.

古文：六年四月，彗星三入紫微垣。
现代文：六年四月，彗星三次侵入紫微垣。
English: In April of the sixth year, the comet made three incursions into Zi Weigaki.

古文：二十四年四月丙子，彗星二，一入紫微垣阊阖门，犯天床；一犯六甲，扫五帝内座。
现代文：二十四年四月丙子日，彗星二颗，一颗侵入紫微垣闾阖门，侵犯天床星；一颗侵犯六甲，掠过五帝内座。
English: On April 24, Cixi Day, two comets, one intruded into the gate of Zi Weigaki and violated the star of the celestial bed; one intruded into the hexagon and swept through the constellation of the Five Emperors.

古文：永乐五年十一月丙寅，彗星见。
现代文：永乐五年十一月丙寅日，彗星出现。
English: In November of Yongle 5th year, the comet appeared.

古文：宣德六年四月戊戌，有星孛于东井，长五尺余。
现代文：宣德六年四月戊戌日，有彗星在柬井宿光芒四射，长五尺多。
English: On April 30, Xuande's sixth year, a comet shone brightly in Kamjeongju, growing more than five feet long.

古文：七年正月壬戌，彗星出东方，长丈余，尾扫天津，东南行，十月始灭。
现代文：七年正月壬戌日，彗星在东方出现，长一丈多，彗尾扫掠天津，向东南运行，十月纔役灭。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 7th year, the comet appeared in the east, growing more and more, the comet tail swept Tianjin, moving southeast, and it was extinguished in October.

古文：是月戊子，又出西方，十有七日而灭。
现代文：这一月的戊子日，彗星又在西方出现，十七天纔役灭。
English: On Boshi Day of this month, the comet reappeared in the west and faded away after 17 days.

古文：八年闰八月壬子，彗星出天仓旁，长丈许。
现代文：八年闰八月壬子日，彗星在天仓星旁出现，长一丈左右。
English: In leap August of the eighth year, on the day of Reishi, the comet appeared next to the star Amakura and grew about a meter in height.

古文：己巳，入贯索，扫七公。
现代文：己已日，侵入贯索，扫掠七公星。
English: It's already been a day, intruding into the rope, sweeping the seven stars.

古文：己卯，复入天市垣，扫晋星，二十有四日而灭。
现代文：己卯，又侵入天市垣，掠过晋星，二十四天后役灭。
English: He also invaded the Heavenly City Wall, swept past Jinxing, and died in battle twenty-four days later.

古文：正统四年闰二月己丑，彗星见张宿旁，大如弹。
现代文：正统四年闰二月己丑日，彗星在张宿旁出现，大如弹丸。
English: According to tradition, the fourth leap year in February is Ugly Day, when a comet appears next to Zhangshu, as big as a marbles.

古文：丁酉，长五丈余，西行，扫酒旗，迤北，犯鬼宿。
现代文：丁酉日，长五丈多，向西运行，掠迥酒旗星，向北斜行，侵犯鬼宿。
English: Dingqian day, more than five long, running westward, raiding the wine flag star, slanting northward, encroaching on the ghost inn.

古文：六月戊寅，彗星见毕宿旁，长丈余，指西南，计五十有五日乃灭。
现代文：六月戊寅日，彗星在毕宿旁出现，长一丈多，指向西南，总共五十五日纔没灭。
English: On June 30, the comet appeared near Bi's lodgings. It grew longer and longer, pointed to the southwest, and faded away after a total of 55 days.

古文：九年七月庚午，彗星见太微东垣，长丈许，累日渐长，至闰七月己卯，入角没。
现代文：九年七月庚午日，彗星在太微柬垣出现，长一文左右，累日渐渐增长，至闰七月己卯日，侵入角宿而役减。
English: On the afternoon of July 9th, the comet appeared in Taibei-Kamigaki. It was about a kilometer long, and gradually grew over the days. On the day of leap July, it entered Kakunodate and faded away.

古文：十四年十二月壬子，彗星见天市垣市楼旁，历尾度，长二尺余，至乙亥没。
现代文：十四年十二月壬子日，彗星在天市垣市楼星旁出现，经历尾度，长二尺多，至乙亥日没灭。
English: On December 14th, Mizi Day, the comet appeared next to the star in the sky, experienced a tail, more than two feet long, and did not go out until the Eihai Sun.

古文：景泰元年正月壬午，彗星出天市垣外，扫天纪星。
现代文：景泰元年正月壬午日，彗星在天市垣外出现，扫掠天纪星。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Jing Tai, the comet appeared in the sky outside the city walls, sweeping the celestial stars.

古文：三年三月甲午朔，有星孛于毕。
现代文：三年三月甲午朔日，有彗星在毕宿放射光芒。
English: On the first day of the third month of March, a comet radiated light in Biju.

古文：七年四月壬戌，彗星东北见于胃，长二尺，指西南。
现代文：七年四月壬戌日，彗星于东北在胃宿出现，长二尺，指向西南。
English: In April of the seventh year, the comet appeared in the northeast of the stomach, two feet long and pointing to the southwest.

古文：五月癸酉，渐长丈余。
现代文：五月癸酉日，渐渐长达一丈多。
English: On the third day of May, it gradually grew longer and longer.

古文：戊子，西北见于柳，长九尺余，扫犯轩辕星。
现代文：戊子日，彗星于西北在柳宿出现，长九尺多，扫掠侵犯轩辕星。
English: On the day of Bo Zi, a comet appeared in the northwest at Liuzhu, more than nine feet long, sweeping and encroaching on Xuan Zi.

古文：甲午，见于张，长七尺余，扫太微北，西南行。
现代文：甲午日，彗星在张宿出现，长七尺多，扫掠太微垣北，向西南运行。
English: On the afternoon of the 1st, the comet appeared in Zhangshu, more than seven feet long, sweeping north of Taibiao and moving southwest.

古文：六月壬寅，入太微垣，长尺余。
现代文：六月壬寅日，侵入太微垣，畏一尺多。
English: In June, on the day of the rhinoceros, the intrusion was too small, more than a foot.

古文：十二月甲寅，彗星复见于毕，长五寸，东南行，渐长，至癸亥而没。
现代文：十二月甲寅日，彗星又在毕宿出现，长五寸，向东南运行，渐渐变长，至癸亥日役灭。
English: On December 1st, the comet appeared again in Bi-shuku. It was five centimeters long, moving southeast and gradually growing longer. It faded away by the end of the month.

古文：天顺元年五月丙戌，彗星见于危，若动摇者，东行一度，芒长五寸，指西南。
现代文：天顺元年五月丙戌日，彗星在危宿出现，好像动摇的样子，向东运行一度，光芒长五寸，指向西南。
English: In May of the first year of Tianshun, the comet appeared in the dangerous place, as if shaking, moving eastward once, the light was five inches long, pointing to the southwest.

古文：六月癸巳朔，见室，长丈余，由尾至东壁，犯天大将军、卷舌第三星，井宿水位南第二星。
现代文：六月癸巳朔日，在室宿出现彗星，长一丈多，从尾宿至束壁星，侵犯天大将军、卷舌第三星、井宿水位星南第二星。
English: On the first day of June, a comet appeared in Murojuku. It was longer than a joule, and from Ojuku to Sokabe, it encroached on Tendai shogun, the third star of the roll tongue, and the second star of Ijuku water level star south.

古文：十月己亥，彗星见于角，长五寸余，指北，犯角北星及平道东星。
现代文：十月己亥日，彗星在角宿出现，长五寸多，指向北面，侵犯角宿北星以及平道柬星。
English: On October Ji Hai Day, a comet appeared in the Cape, more than five inches long, pointing north, invading the North Star of the Cape and the Cambrian Star of the Plain.

古文：五年六月戊戌，彗见东方，指西南，入井度。
现代文：五年六月戊戌日，彗星出现在东方，指向西南，侵入井度。
English: In June of the fifth year, the comet appeared in the east, pointing to the southwest, invading the well.

古文：七月丙寅始灭。
现代文：七月丙寅日纔汝灭。
English: July, the day of the rooster, is the beginning of the end.

古文：成化元年二月，彗星见。
现代文：成化元年二月，彗星出现。
English: The comet reappeared in February 1861.

古文：三月，又见西北，长三丈余，三阅月而没。
现代文：三月，又出现在西北，长三丈多，经历三月而没灭。
English: In March, it reappeared in the northwest, growing more than three feet in length. It survived the month of March and did not die out.

古文：四年九月己未，有星见星五度，东北行，越五日，芒长三丈余，尾指西南，变为彗星。
现代文：四年九月己末日，有异星在星宿五度出现，向东北运行，过了五天，光芒长三丈多，尾部指向西南，变成彗星。
English: At the end of September of the year four, a strange star appeared in the constellation five times, moving to the northeast. After five days, the light was three times longer and the tail pointed to the southwest, becoming a comet.

古文：其后晨见东方，昏见室，南犯三公、北斗、瑶光、七公，转入天市垣。
现代文：那以后，早晨在东方出现，黄昏在室宿出现，向南侵犯三公、北斗、瑶光、七公等星，转入天市垣。
English: After that, the morning appeared in the east, the dusk appeared in Murojuku, invading the Three Kingdoms, the Big Dipper, the Conjunction, and the Star of the Seven Kingdoms to the south, and turning into the Heavenly City Wall.

古文：出垣渐小，犯天屏西第一星。
现代文：运行出天市垣后，渐渐变小，侵犯天屏西第一星。
English: After running out of the sky, it gradually became smaller and encroached on the first star in the west of Tianping.

古文：十一月庚辰，始灭。
现代文：十一月庚辰日纔役灭。
English: In November, Geng Chen died in battle.

古文：七年十二月甲戌，彗星见天田，西指，寻北行，犯右摄提，扫太微垣上将及幸臣、太子、从官，尾指正西，横扫太微垣郎位。
现代文：七年十二月甲戌日，彗星在天田星出现，指向西方，随即向北运行，侵犯右摄提，掠过太微垣上将星及幸臣、太子、从官星，彗尾指向正西，横掠太微垣郎位。
English: On December 6 of the seventh year, the comet appeared in the constellation of Amida, pointing to the west, and then moved northward, encroaching on the right of the photo, passing through the Taikogaki Admiral Star and the Prince, the Prince, and the Consort Star, and the tail of the comet pointed to the west, passing through the Taikogaki District.

古文：己卯，光芒长大，东西竟天。
现代文：己卯日，光芒长大，东西直至天边。
English: Day after day, the glow grew, stretching to the edge of the sky.

古文：北行二十八度余，犯天枪，扫北斗、三公、太阳，入紫微垣内，正昼犹见。
现代文：向北运行二十八度多，侵犯天枪星，扫掠北斗、三公、太阳，侵入紫微垣内，正午还能见到。
English: It moved northward by more than 28 degrees, encroaching on the shooting star, sweeping the Big Dipper, the Three Kings, and the sun, and invading the purple micro hedge. It could still be seen at noon.

古文：自帝星、北斗、魁、庶子、后宫、勾陈、天枢、三师、天牢、中台、天皇大帝、上卫、阁道、文昌、上台，无所不犯。
现代文：从帝星、北斗、魁、庶子、后官、勾陈、天枢、三师、天牢、中台、天皇大帝、上卫、阁道、文昌、土台等星，没有不侵犯的。
English: From the Emperor, the North Star, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Bastard, the Back Office, the Back Office, the Back Office, the Three Divisions, the Heavenly Prison, the Middle Office, the Emperor, the Upper Guard, the Courtyard, the Palace, and the Base, there is no inviolability.

古文：乙酉，南行犯娄、天河、天阴、外屏、天囷。
现代文：乙酉日，向南运行，侵犯娄、天河、天阴、外屏、天困等星。
English: On the day of Acetylene, it will move southward, invading the stars such as the Dragonfly, the Heavenly River, the Celestial Shade, the Outer Screen, and the Deep Sky.

古文：八年正月丙午，行奎宿外屏，渐微，久之始灭。
现代文：八年正月丙午日，运行于奎宿外屏，渐渐微弱，很久纔没灭。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the first month of the eighth year, it ran in the outer screen of Kuijuku, gradually weakened, and disappeared for a long time.

古文：弘治三年十一月戊戌，彗星见天津南，尾指东北。
现代文：弘治三年十一月戊戌日，彗星在天津南出现，彗尾指向东北。
English: The comet appeared in the south of Tianjin on November 23rd, and its tail pointed to the northeast.

古文：犯人星，历杵臼。
现代文：侵犯人星，经过杵臼。
English: Invade people and planets, pass through the crucible.

古文：十二月戊申朔，入营室。
现代文：十二月戊申朔日，侵入营室星。
English: December Wu Shengshuo day, breaking into the camp room star.

古文：庚申，犯天仓。
现代文：庚申日，侵犯天仓。
English: On the day of Koshin, the encroachment of Tiancang began.

古文：十三年四月甲午，彗星见垒壁阵上，入室壁间，渐长三尺余。
现代文：十三年四月甲午日，彗星在垒壁阵上出现，侵入室壁之间，渐渐变长三尺多。
English: On the afternoon of the 13th of April, the comet appeared on the foundation wall array, entered between the walls of the room, and gradually grew more than three feet long.

古文：指离宫，扫造父，过太微垣，渐微。
现代文：指向离宫，掠过造父，经过太微垣，渐渐微弱。
English: Pointing away from the palace, it swept past the statue, passed through the hedge, and gradually faded away.

古文：入紫微垣，近女史，犯尚书，六月丁酉没。
现代文：侵入紫微垣，靠近女史星，侵犯尚书星，六月丁酉日役灭。
English: Invade Zi Weigaki, close to Ms. Shi Xing, invade Shang Shuxing, in June, Ding Yuxin died.

古文：正德元年七月己丑，有星见紫微西藩外，如弹丸，色苍白。
现代文：正德元年七月己丑日，有异星在紫微垣西藩外出现，大如弹丸，色彩苍白。
English: In July of the first year of Zhengde, on the Ugly Day, a strange star appeared outside the West Zihuigaki Domain. It was as big as a marble and pale in color.

古文：越数日，有微芒见参、井间，渐长二尺，如帚，西北至文昌。
现代文：遇了几天，有微弱光芒出现在参宿、井宿之间，渐渐变长二尺，像扫帚，向西北运行至文昌星。
English: After a few days, a faint light appeared between the camp and the well, and gradually grew two feet long, like a broom, running northwest to Wenchang Star.

古文：庚子，彗星见，有光，流东南，长三尺。
现代文：庚子日，彗星出现，有光芒，流向东南，长三尺。
English: On the day of Geng Zi, a comet appeared, shining, flowing to the southeast, three feet long.

古文：越三日，长五尺许，扫下台上星，入太微垣。
现代文：经过三天，长五尺左右，扫掠下台上星，侵入太微垣。
English: After three days, about five feet long, swept down the stage star, intruded into the too small wall.

古文：十五年正月，彗星见。
现代文：十五年正月，彗星出现。
English: In the first month of the 15th year, a comet appeared.

古文：嘉靖二年六月，有星孛于天市。
现代文：嘉靖二年六月，有彗星在天市放出光芒。
English: In June of the second year of Jiajing, a comet shone in the sky.

古文：十年闰六月乙巳，彗星见于东井，长尺余，扫轩辕第一星。
现代文：十年闰六月乙巳日，彗星在束井出现，长一尺多，扫掠轩辕第一星。
English: On the 10th day of the leap year in June, a comet appeared in Sakui, more than a foot long, sweeping away the first star.

古文：芒渐长，至翼，长七尺余。
现代文：光芒渐渐变长，到翼宿，长七尺多。
English: The light gradually grew longer, until it reached Tsuboyado, more than seven feet long.

古文：东北扫天樽，入太微垣，扫郎位，行角度，东南扫亢北第二星，渐敛，积三十四日而没。
现代文：向东北扫掠天樽星，侵入太微垣，扫掠郎位，行经角度，向东南掠遇亢宿北第二星，渐渐收敛，共计三十四天而没灭。
English: To the northeast, it swept across the Milky Way, invading the Milky Way, sweeping across the Milky Way, passing through the angle, and to the southeast, it encountered the second star of the northern Pleiades, gradually converging, for a total of thirty-four days and did not disappear.

古文：十一年八月己卯，彗星见东井，长尺许。
现代文：十一年八月己卯日，彗星在东井出现，长一尺左右。
English: On August 11th, the comet appeared in Higashii, about a foot long.

古文：后东北行，历天津，渐至丈余。
现代文：后来向东北运行，经过天津，渐渐长到一丈多。
English: Later, it moved to the northeast, passing through Tianjin, and gradually grew to more than one story.

古文：扫太微垣诸星及角宿、天门，至十二月甲戌，凡一百十五日而灭。
现代文：扫掠太微垣等星及角宿、天门星，到十二月甲戌日，共计一百一十五日而没减。
English: The sweeping of the Taibeigaki and other constellations, as well as the Kakunodate and Tianmen constellations, continued unabated for a total of one hundred and fifteen days until the day of the Chinese New Year in December.

古文：十二年六月辛巳，彗星见于五车，长五尺余，扫大陵及天大将军。
现代文：十二年六月辛巳日，彗星在五车星出现，长五尺多，掠遇大陵星及天大将军星。
English: On June 12, Xinshi Day, the comet appeared in the Five Chariot Star, more than five feet long, encountering the Star of the Great Mausoleum and the Star of the Great General.

古文：渐长丈余，扫阁道，犯螣蛇，至八月戊戌而灭。
现代文：渐渐变长到一丈多，扫掠合道，侵犯媵蛇星，到八月戊戌日役灭。
English: Gradually growing to a height of more than one, sweeping the path, encroaching on the python star, and dying in August.

古文：十八年四月庚戌，彗星见，长三尺许，光指东南。扫轩辕北第八星，旬日始灭。
现代文：十八年四月庚戌日，彗星出现，长三尺左右，光芒指向东南，扫掠轩辕北第八星，十日纔没灭。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the year, a comet appeared, about three feet long, the light pointed to the southeast, sweeping the eighth star in the north, and it disappeared on the 10th day.

古文：三十三年五月癸亥，彗星见天权旁，犯文昌，行入近浊，积二十七日而没。
现代文：三十三年五月癸亥日，彗星在天权星旁出现，侵犯文昌星，运行侵入，靠近毕宿，共计二十七天而役减。
English: On May 33rd, the day of the Boar, the comet appeared next to the Celestial Star, invaded the Moon Chang star, entered the orbit, and approached the final destination. It took a total of 27 days to ascend and descend.

古文：三十五年正月庚辰，彗星见进贤旁，长尺许，西南指，渐至三尺余。
现代文：三十五年正月庚辰日，骜星在进贤星旁出现，长一尺左右，指向西南，渐渐长到三尺多。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, the first month of the 35th year, the bright star appeared next to the bright star, about one foot long, pointing to the southwest, gradually growing to more than three feet.

古文：扫太微垣，次相东北，入紫微垣，犯天床，四月二日灭。
现代文：扫掠太微垣，驻留在相星东北，侵入紫微垣，侵犯天床星，四月二日没灭。
English: Swept over the Great Wall, stayed in the northeast of the phase star, invaded the Purple Wall, invaded the Celestial Bed, and did not disappear on April 2.

古文：三十六年九月戊辰，彗星见天市垣列肆旁，东北指，至十月二十三日灭。
现代文：三十六年九月戊辰日，彗星在天市垣列肆旁出现，指向东北，至十月二十三日役灭。
English: On September 36th, the day of Pentecost, the comet appeared next to the Heavenly City Wall, pointing to the northeast, and faded away on October 23rd.

古文：隆庆三年十月辛丑朔，彗星见天市垣，东北指，至庚申灭。
现代文：隆庆三年十月辛丑朔日，彗星在天市垣出现，指向东北，至庚申日没减。
English: In October of the third year of Longqing, the comet appeared in the sky, pointing to the northeast, and did not decrease until the day of the Goat.

古文：万历五年十月戊子，彗星见西南，苍白色，长数丈，气成白虹。
现代文：万历五年十月戊子日，彗星在西南出现，呈苍白色，长敷丈，尾气形成白虹状。
English: On October 5th, the comet appeared in the southwest. It was pale white, with a long tail, and the tail gas formed a white rainbow.

古文：由尾、箕越斗、牛逼女，经月而灭。
现代文：从尾宿、箕宿越过斗宿、牛宿，逼近女宿，整月纔汝灭。
English: From Oyado, Shibuya, past To-juku, Ushi-juku, and close to Onna-juku, the whole month will end.

古文：八年八月庚申，彗星见东南方，每夜渐长，纵横河汉凡七十日有奇。
现代文：八年八月庚申日，彗星在东南方向出现，每夜渐渐变长，任意运行在河汉共七十多天。
English: On August 8th, the day of the Hexin, the comet appeared in the southeast direction, gradually lengthened every night, and ran arbitrarily in He Han for a total of more than 70 days.

古文：十年四月丙辰，彗星见西北，形如匹练，尾指五车，历二十余日灭。
现代文：十年四月丙辰日，彗星在西北出现，形状像白绢，彗尾指向五车星，经过二十多天纔役灭。
English: On the tenth day of April, the comet appeared in the northwest, shaped like an egret, with its tail pointing to the five-chariot star. After more than twenty days, the comet faded away.

古文：十三年九月戊子，彗星出羽林旁，长尺许。
现代文：十三年九月戊子日，彗星在羽林星旁出现，长一尺左右。
English: On September 13th, the comet appeared next to Comet Hale-Bopp, about a foot long.

古文：每夕东行，渐小，至十月癸酉灭。
现代文：每晚向东行，渐渐变小，到十月癸酉日浚灭。
English: It moves eastward every night, gradually shrinking, and will be gone by October.

古文：十九年三月丙辰，西北有星如彗，长尺余。
现代文：十九年三月丙辰日，西北方有异星如像彗星，长一尺多。
English: On the 19th day of the 3rd month of the 19th year, there was a strange star like a comet in the northwest, more than a foot long.

古文：历胃、室、壁，长二尺。
现代文：经过胃、室、壁宿，长二尺。
English: After passing through the stomach, the room, and the alcove, it is two feet long.

古文：闰三月丙寅朔，入娄。
现代文：闰三月丙寅朔日，侵入娄宿。
English: On the first day of the third month of the leap year, they invaded Shishuku.

古文：二十一年七月乙卯，彗星见东井。
现代文：二十一年七月乙卯日，彗星在束井出现。
English: On July 21st, the comet appeared in Sakui.

古文：乙亥，逆行入紫微垣，犯华盖。
现代文：乙亥日，倒行侵入紫微垣，馒犯华盖星。
English: On the second day of the Chinese lunar month of Hai, the retrograde invades Zi Weigaki, and the retrograde invades Huagai Xing.

古文：二十四年七月丁丑，彗星见西北，如弹丸。
现代文：二十四年七月丁丑日，彗星在西北方向出现，大如弹丸。
English: On July 24, Dingushi Day, the comet appeared in the northwest direction, large as a projectile.

古文：入翼，长尺余，西北行。
现代文：侵入翼宿，长一尺多，向西北运行。
English: intruding wing, more than a foot long, traveling northwest.

古文：三十五年八月辛酉朔，彗星见东井，指西南，渐往西北。
现代文：三十五年八月辛酉朔日，彗星在束井出现，指向西南，渐渐行往西北。
English: On August 30, 355, the comet appeared in Sakui, pointing to the southwest and gradually moving to the northwest.

古文：壬午，自房历心灭。
现代文：壬午日，从房宿经过心宿役灭。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, I went from my room to my dormitory.

古文：四十六年十月乙丑，彗星出于氐，长丈余，指东南，渐指西北。
现代文：四十六年十月乙丑日，彗星在氐宿出现，长一丈多，指向东南，渐渐指向西北。
English: In October of 46 B.C., a comet appeared in Pengshu, growing larger and larger, pointing to the southeast and gradually to the northwest.

古文：扫犯太阳守星，入亢度，西北扫北斗、璇玑、文昌、五车，逼紫微垣右，至十一月甲辰灭。
现代文：扫掠侵犯太阳守星，侵入亢度，向西北扫掠北斗星、璇玑星、文昌星、五车星，逼近紫微垣右，到十一月甲辰日役灭。
English: The sweeping invaded the Sun's position, invaded the Zodiac, swept the Big Dipper, the Pleiades, the Moon, and the Five Chariot Stars to the northwest, approached the right side of the Purple Weak Wall, and ended in November.

古文：四十七年正月杪，彗见东南，长数百尺，光芒下射，末曲而锐，未几见于东北，又未几见于西。
现代文：四十七年正月末，彗星在东南出现，长数百尺，光芒向下放射，末端弯曲而尖锐，不久在东北方出现，不久又在西面出现。
English: At the end of the first month of the 47th year, the comet appeared in the southeast, hundreds of feet long, the light radiated downward, the end was curved and sharp, soon appeared in the northeast, and soon appeared in the west.

古文：崇祯十二年秋，彗星见参分。
现代文：崇祯十二年秋天，彗星在参分出现。
English: In the autumn of the twelfth year of Chongzhen, a comet appeared in Shengbu.

古文：十三年十月丙戌，彗星见。
现代文：十三年十月丙戌日，彗星出现。
English: On October 13th, the comet appeared.

古文：▲天变
现代文：天变
English: The sky is changing

古文：洪武二十一年八月壬戌至甲子，天鼓鸣，昼夜不止。
现代文：洪武二十一年八月壬戌日至甲子日，天鼓鸣响，昼夜不停息。
English: From August 21st, Hongwu, to the day of Jiazi, the celestial drum sounded, and it did not stop day and night.

古文：二十八年三月戊午，昏刻天鸣，如风水相搏，至一鼓止。
现代文：二十八年三月戊午日黄昏，天空呜响，如同风与水相搏击，至一更纔停止。
English: At dusk on the afternoon of March 28th, the sky roared, as if the wind and water were fighting, and then stopped.

古文：九月戊戌，初鼓，天鸣如泻水，自东北而南，至二鼓止。
现代文：九月戊戌日，初鼓时分，天空鸣响，如流水倾泻，从东北向南，至二更纔停止。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, at the time of the first drumbeat, the sky rang out, pouring down like running water, from the northeast to the south, and stopped at two o'clock.

古文：宣德元年八月戊辰，昏刻天鸣，如雨阵迭至，自东南而西南，良久乃息。
现代文：宣德元年八月戊辰日黄昏，天空呜响，像来势猛烈的大雨，一次接着一次传来，从东南向西南，很久纔停息。
English: It was dusk on the day of Pentecost in August of the first year of the Xuande Emperor. The sky thundered like a heavy rainstorm, coming one after another, from the southeast to the southwest, and pausing for a long time.

古文：辛未，东南天鸣，声如万鼓。
现代文：辛未日，东南天空鸣响，声音像敲击万鼓。
English: On the eve of Xin Wei, the southeast sky rang out, the sound like the beating of ten thousand drums.

古文：正统十年三月庚寅，西北天鸣，如鸟群飞。
现代文：正统十年三月庚寅日，西北天空鸣响，像乌群集而飞。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month of the traditional year, the northwest sky rang out and flew like a flock of cormorants.

古文：正德元年二月壬子，夜东北天鸣，如风水相搏者五七次。
现代文：正德元年二月壬子日晚上，东北方向天空鸣响像风与水相搏击发出的声音，达五七次。
English: On the evening of Mianzi Day in February of the first year of Zhengde, the sky in the northeast direction resounded with the sound of wind and water fighting, reaching 57 times.

古文：隆庆二年八月甲辰，绛州西北天裂，自丑至寅乃合。
现代文：隆庆二年八月甲辰日，绛州西此天空分裂，从丑时到寅时纔合拢。
English: On the first hour of August in the second year of Longqing, the sky in the west of Luzhou was split, and it was closed from the Ugly Hour to the Tiger Hour.

古文：万历十六年九月乙丑，甘肃石灰沟天鸣，云中如犬状乱吠，有声。
现代文：万历十六年九月乙丑日，甘肃石灰沟天空呜响，云中有像狗状的东西，到处乱叫，有声音。
English: In September of the 16th year of Wanli, on the second day of Ugly, the sky of Gansu Lime Ditch whined, and there was something like a dog in the clouds, shouting everywhere, and there was a sound.

古文：崇祯元年三月辛巳，昧爽，天赤如血，射窗牖皆红。
现代文：崇祯元年三月辛巳日，拂晓，天空赤色像鲜血，映射到窗牖上都变成了红色。
English: At dawn on Xin Si Day in March of the first year of the Chongzhen Emperor, the sky was red like blood, and it turned red when projected onto the curtains.

古文：十年九月，每晨夕天色赤黄。
现代文：十年九月，每天早晨和傍晚，天呈赤黄色。
English: In September, every morning and evening, the sky is red and yellow.

古文：▲日变月变
现代文：日变月变
English: Day by day, month by month

古文：洪武二年十二月甲子，日中有黑子。
现代文：洪武二年十二月甲子日，太阳中有黑色的斑点。
English: In December of the second year of Hongwu, there was a black spot in the sun.

古文：三年九月戊戌，十月丁巳，十一月甲辰，四年三月戊戌，五月壬子至辛巳，九月戊寅，五年正月庚戌，二月丁未，五月甲子，七月辛未，六年十一月戊戌朔，七年二月庚戌至甲寅，八年二月辛亥，九月癸未，十二月癸丑，十四年二月壬午至乙酉，十五年闰二月丙戌，十二月辛巳，并如之。
现代文：三年九月戊戌日，十月丁巳日，十一月甲辰日，四年三月戊戌日，五月壬子日至辛巳日，九月戊寅日，五年正月庚戌日，二月丁末日，五月甲子日，七月辛末日，六年十一月戊戌朔日，七年二月庚戌日至甲寅日，八年二月辛亥日，九月癸未日，十二月癸丑日，十四年二月壬午日至乙酉日，十五年闰二月丙戌日，十二月辛巳日，都出现了那样的天象。
English: Such celestial objects appeared on September 3rd, October 1st, November 1st, March 4th, May 1st to 2nd, September 1st, January 1st to 2nd, February 1st to 2nd, May 1st to 2nd, July 1st to 2nd, November 1st to 2nd, February 7th to 2nd, February 8th to 2nd, September 1st to 2nd, December 1st to 2nd, February 14th to 2nd, February 15th to 2nd, and December 1st to 2nd.

古文：正统元年八月癸酉至己卯，月出入时皆有游气，色赤无光。
现代文：正统元年八月癸酉日至己卯日，月亮出入的时候都有游动的氛气，呈赤色，没有光亮。
English: From August 3rd, the first year of the orthodox calendar, to Jiwu Day, when the moon rises and sets, there is a floating atmosphere, which is red and has no light.

古文：十四年八月辛未，月昼见，与日争明。
现代文：十四年八月辛末日，月亮白天出现，与太阳竞争光明。
English: On August 14th, the last day of Xin, the moon appeared during the day, competing with the sun for light.

古文：十月壬申，日上黑气如烟，寻发红光，散焰如火。
现代文：十月壬申日，太阳上有黑气像烟雾，不久，发射出红光，散布的光焰像火一样。
English: On October Jinshin Day, the sun had a black atmosphere like smoke. Soon, it emitted red light, and the scattered light was like fire.

古文：景泰二年四月己卯，月色如赭。
现代文：景泰二年四月己卯日，月光如赭色。
English: In April of the second year of King Taejo's reign, the moon shone brightly.

古文：七年九月丙子，日色变赤。
现代文：七年九月丙子日，太阳变成赤色。
English: The sun turned red on the third day of the ninth month of the seventh year.

古文：天顺二年闰二月己巳，日无光，旋赤如赭。
现代文：天顺二年闰二月己巳日，太阳没有光泽，不久变成赤色，如同赭色。
English: On the day of the leap second in February in the second year of Tianshun, the sun had no luster, and soon turned red, like amber.

古文：三年八月丁卯，日色如赭。
现代文：三年八月丁卯日，太阳如同赭色。
English: On August 3rd, the sun shone brightly.

古文：六年十月丙子，日赤如血。
现代文：六年十月丙子日，太阳赤红如鲜血。
English: In October of the year six, the sun was as red as blood.

古文：七年四月癸未，如之。
现代文：七年四月癸末日，又像那样。
English: April 7th, the last day of the year, it's like that again.

古文：乙酉，日色变白。
现代文：乙酉日，太阳变成白色。
English: On an acetylene day, the sun turns white.

古文：八年二月己亥，日无光。
现代文：八年二月己亥日，太阳没有光泽。
English: On February 8th, the day of the Chinese New Year, the sun did not shine.

古文：成化五年闰二月己卯，日色变白。
现代文：成化五年闰二月己卯日，太阳变成白色。
English: In the fifth year of leap February, the sun turns white.

古文：十一年二月己亥，日色如赭。
现代文：十一年二月己亥日，太阳像赭色。
English: On February 11th, the day of the Chinese New Year, the sun shines brightly.

古文：四月辛卯，如之。
现代文：四月辛卯日，又像那样。
English: It's that time of the month again.

古文：十三年三月壬申，日白无光。
现代文：十三年三月壬申日，太阳呈白色，没有光泽。
English: On March 13th, Jinshin Day, the sun was white and dull.

古文：十月辛卯，十四年三月庚午，十六年三月丙戌，并如之。
现代文：十月辛卯日，十四年三月庚午日，十六年三月丙戌日，都像那样。
English: October Xinwu Day, March 14 Gengwu Day, March 16 Gengwu Day, are all like that.

古文：十七年三月丁酉，日赤如赭。
现代文：十七年三月丁酉日，太阳呈赤色如同赭色。
English: On the 17th day of the 3rd month, the sun was as red as scarlet.

古文：十八年四月壬寅，日赤无光。
现代文：十八年四月壬寅日，太阳呈赤色，没有先泽。
English: On April 18th, Mingo Day, the sun was red and without a shadow.

古文：十二月癸酉，日赤如赭。
现代文：十二月癸酉日，太阳呈赤色如同赭色。
English: On the third day of December, the sun was as red as crimson.

古文：二十年二月癸酉，如之。
现代文：二十年二月癸酉日，又像那样。
English: On the third day of February, 1920, it was like that again.

古文：弘治元年十一月己卯，月生芒如齿，长三尺余，色苍白。
现代文：弘治元年十一月己卯日，月亮生出光芒，像牙齿，长三尺多，呈苍白色。
English: On the first day of November in the year of Confucius, the moon gave birth to a light, like a tooth, more than three feet long, pale white.

古文：十八年八月癸酉至九月甲午，日无光。
现代文：十八年八月癸酉日至九月甲午日，太阳没有光泽。
English: From the 3rd of August to the 1st of September, the sun did not shine.

古文：嘉靖元年正月丁卯，日惨白，变青，无光。
现代文：嘉靖元年正月丁卯日，太阳惨白，变成青色，没有光泽。
English: On the first day of the month of Dingwu in the first year of Jiajing, the sun was bleak, turned blue, and had no luster.

古文：二十八年三月丙申至庚子，日色惨白。
现代文：二十八年三月丙申日至庚子日，太阳呈惨白色。
English: In March 28th, from the day of Yin Shen to the day of Geng Zi, the sun was miserably white.

古文：三十四年十二月庚申，晦，日忽暗，有青黑紫日影如盘数十相摩，久之千百，飞荡满天，向西北而散。
现代文：三十四年十二月庚申晦日，太阳忽然暗淡下来，有数十个青色、黑色、紫色的日影如同盘子，互相挨挤，很久之后，变成千百个日影，飞扬飘荡于满天，向西北散去。
English: On the eve of the 34th day of the 12th month of the Chinese lunar calendar, the sun suddenly dimmed. Dozens of blue, black, and purple sunshades, like plates, jostled against each other. After a long time, they turned into thousands of sunshades, flying and floating in the sky, and dispersed to the northwest.

古文：万历二十五年三月癸丑，黑日二三十余，回绕日旁，移时云隐不见。
现代文：万历二十五年三月癸丑日，黑色的日影二三十个，回旋环绕在太阳的旁边，不久，被云遮蔽，不再出现。
English: On the fateful day of March in the twenty-fifth year of the Wanli calendar, twenty to thirty black shadows swirled around the sun. Soon, they were covered by clouds and did not reappear.

古文：五月辛卯朔，日光转荡，旋为黑饼。
现代文：五月辛卯朔日，太阳光旋转飘荡，随即变成黑色的饼团。
English: On the day of the new moon in May, the sunlight swirls and drifts, and then turns into a black cake.

古文：三十年三月甲申，日光照地黄赤。
现代文：三十年三月甲申日，太阳光照射地上，呈黄赤色。
English: On the 30th day of the 3rd month of the year, the sun shines on the ground and it turns yellow-red.

古文：三十五年十一月丙午，日赤无光，烛地如血。
现代文：三十五年十一月丙午日，太阳呈赤色，没有光泽，照射到地上，如同鲜血。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of November in the year thirty-five, the sun was red, without luster, and shone on the earth like blood.

古文：四十二年三月庚辰，日赤黄如赭如血者累日。
现代文：四十二年三月庚辰日，太阳赤黄如赭色，像鲜血的现象达好几天。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in March, 42, the sun was red and yellow, like blood, for several days.

古文：四十四年八月戊辰，日中有黑光。
现代文：四十四年八月戊辰日，太阳中有黑色的光。
English: In August, 1944, on the day of Pentecost, there was a black light in the sun.

古文：四十六年闰六月丙戌至戊子，黑气出入日中摩荡。
现代文：四十六年闲六月丙戌日至戊子日，黑气从太阳中出入，互相摩擦振荡。
English: From June of the year 46 to the day of Wu Zi, the black gas enters and exits the sun, causing mutual friction and oscillation.

古文：天启四年正月癸未，日赤无光，有黑子二三荡于旁，渐至百许，凡四日。
现代文：天启四年正月癸末日，太阳呈赤色，没有光泽，宥二三个黑点在旁边飘荡，渐渐达到一百个左右，一共经历四天。
English: At the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Apocalypse and the last day of the first month of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, the sun was red, without luster, and only two or three black dots were floating around, gradually reaching about a hundred, and a total of four days passed.

古文：二月壬子，日淡黄无光。
现代文：二月壬子日，太阳淡黄，没有光泽。
English: On the day of Imago in February, the sun is pale yellow and has no luster.

古文：癸丑，黑日摩荡日旁。
现代文：癸丑日，黑色的日影在太阳旁摩擦振荡。
English: On a gloomy day, the black sunshade rubs against the sun and oscillates.

古文：四月癸酉，日中黑气摩荡。
现代文：四月癸酉日，太阳中有黑气摩擦振荡。
English: On the third day of April, there was a black gas friction oscillation in the sun.

古文：十二月辛巳，午刻，非烟非雾，覆压日上，摩荡如盖如吞，通天皆赤。
现代文：十二月辛巳日，午时，既不是烟，也不是雾的氛气，覆盖在太阳上，摩擦振荡，像覆盖，像吞没，整个天空都变成了赤色。
English: At midday on Xinshi Day in December, the atmosphere, which was neither smoke nor fog, covered the sun, and the friction oscillated, like covering, like engulfing, and the entire sky turned red.

古文：崇祯四年正月戊戌，日色如血，照人物皆赤。
现代文：崇祯四年正月戊戌日，太阳的颜色像鲜血，照着人和物体都呈赤色。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Chongzhen, the color of the sun was like blood, and people and objects were red.

古文：二月乙巳朔，日赤如血，无光。
现代文：二月乙巳朔日，太阳赤红像鲜血，没有光泽。
English: On the first day of the second month of the year, the sun is red like blood, and has no luster.

古文：十月丙午，月昼见。
现代文：十月丙午日，月亮白天出现。
English: On the afternoon of October 3rd, the moon appears in the daytime.

古文：十一年十一月癸亥，日中有黑子及黑青白气。
现代文：十一年十一月癸亥日，太阳中有黑点以及黑色、青色、白色的云气。
English: On November 11th, Chinese New Year's Day, there were black dots in the sun and black, blue and white clouds.

古文：日入时，日光摩荡如两日。
现代文：太阳落山时，光芒摩擦振荡像两个太阳。
English: When the sun sets, the light friction oscillates like two suns.

古文：十二年正月己未朔，日白无光。
现代文：十二年正月己未朔日，太阳呈白色，没有光泽。
English: The first day of the first month of the twelfth year has not yet dawned, the sun is white and has no luster.

古文：辛酉，日光摩荡竟日，有气从日中出，如镜黛喷花。
现代文：辛酉日。太阳摩擦振荡一整天，有氛气从太阳中出来，像镜子里喷发出花朵。
English: The sun's friction oscillates all day long, and an atmosphere comes out of the sun, like flowers erupting from a mirror.

古文：二月庚子，日旁有红白丸，又白芒黑气交掩，日光摩荡。
现代文：二月庚子，太阳的旁边有红色、白色的丸球，又有白色的光芒和黑色的氛气交相掩映，太阳光摩擦振荡。
English: In February, there is a red and white ball next to the sun, and the white light and black atmosphere overlap, and the sun's light oscillates due to friction.

古文：十三年九月己巳，两日并出，辰刻乃合为一，入时又分为二。
现代文：十三年九月己巳日，两颗太阳一起出现，到辰时纔合并成一颗，落山时又分成两颗。
English: On September 13th, two suns appeared together, merged into one at noon, and split into two again at sunset.

古文：十四年正月壬寅，日青无光。
现代文：十四年正月壬寅日，太阳呈青色，没有光泽。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the year, Ren Yin, the sun was blue and had no luster.

古文：后三年正月癸丑，有星入月。
现代文：后三年正月癸丑日，有异星侵入月中。
English: Three years later, on the first day of the first month, the day of the Ugly Goat, a strange star invaded the middle of the month.

古文：三月壬寅，日色无光者两旬。
现代文：三月壬寅日，日色没有光泽的现象长逵二十天。
English: In March, on the Day of the Rooster, the lackluster sunshine lasted for 20 days.

古文：▲晕适
现代文：晕适
English: dizziness

古文：洪武六年三月戊辰，日交晕。
现代文：洪武六年三月戊辰日，太阳交相出现光晕。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, on the day of Pentecost in March, there was a halo around the sun.

古文：十年正月己巳，白虹贯日。
现代文：十年正月己巳日，白包长虹穿日而过。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the long white rainbow passes through the sun.

古文：十二月甲子，白虹贯月。
现代文：十二月甲子日，白虹又穿日而过。
English: On December 1st, the white rainbow passed through the sun again.

古文：十二年四月庚申，日交晕。
现代文：十二年四月庚申日，太阳交相出现光晕。
English: In April of the twelfth year, the day of the Chinese lunar new year, a halo appeared in the sun.

古文：二四年正月壬子，日有珥，白虹贯之。
现代文：十四年正月壬子日，太阳两旁出现光晕，白色长虹穿日而遇。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the year, Mizi Day, a halo appeared on both sides of the sun, and a white rainbow crossed the sun.

古文：九月甲辰，白虹贯日。
现代文：九月甲辰日，白色长虹穿日而遇。
English: On the first hour of September, a long white rainbow appeared across the sky.

古文：十五年正月丁未，十九年三月己巳，二十二年十二月戊午，并如之。
现代文：十五年正月丁末日、十九年三月己巳日、二十二年十二月戊午日，都如此。
English: This is the case for the last day of the first month of the 15th year, the last day of the 19th year, and the last day of the 22nd year.

古文：二十三年正月壬辰，日晕，白虹贯珥。
现代文：二十三年正月壬辰日，太阳出现晕圈，白虹穿遇珥晕。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, the sun appeared to have a halo, and the white rainbow appeared to have a halo.

古文：二十八年十一月乙亥，日上赤气长五丈余，须臾又生直气、背气，皆青赤色。
现代文：二十八年十一月乙亥日，太阳上赤色云气长五丈多，一会儿又产生直气和背气，都是青赤色。
English: On November 28th, the day of the Chinese lunar new year, the red cloud of gas on the sun grew to more than five meters in height, and in a short time it produced straight gas and back gas, both of which were blue-red.

古文：又生半晕，两白虹贯珥，已而弥天贯日。
现代文：又产生半晕，两道白虹穿遇珥晕，不久，满天白虹穿日而遇。
English: Another semi-dizziness occurs, two white rainbows cross and meet the halo, and soon, a full-sky white rainbow crosses and meets the sun.

古文：三十年二月辛亥，白虹亘天贯日。
现代文：三十年二月辛亥日，白虹横豆在天，穿日而过。
English: On February 30th, the day of the Chinese New Year, a rainbow of broad beans appeared in the sky and passed through the day.

古文：永乐十八年闰正月癸未，日生重半晕，上有青赤背气，左右有珥，白虹贯之，随生黄气、璚气。
现代文：永乐十八年闰正月癸末日，太阳产生重迭的半晕，上面有青赤色的背气，左右有珥晕，白虹贯穿而过，随着产生黄气、坝气。
English: On the last day of the leap month of the 18th year of the Yongle Emperor, the sun produced overlapping halos, with a blue-red dorsal aura above, a halo on the left and right, and a white rainbow passing through, along with the production of yellow gas and dam gas.

古文：洪熙元年正月乙未，日生两珥，白虹贯之。
现代文：洪熙元年正月乙末日，太阳产生两道珥晕，白色长虹贯穿它。
English: At the end of the second day of the first month of the first year of Hongxi, the sun produced two halos, and a white rainbow ran through it.

古文：四月丁未，如之，复生交晕。
现代文：四月丁末日，又如同那样，并且又产生交晕。
English: On the last day of April, it was like that again, and I had another fainting spell.

古文：宣德元年正月庚戌，日生青赤璚气，随生交晕，色黄赤。
现代文：宣德元年正月庚戌日，太阳产生青赤色的埔气，随着又产生交晕，颜色黄赤色。
English: On the first day of the first month of Xuande in the first year of Xuande, the sun produced a blue-red pu qi, followed by a halo, and the color was yellow-red.

古文：二月己卯，日两珥，又生交晕，左右有珥，上重半晕及背气。
现代文：二月己卯日，太阳出现两道珥晕，又产生交晕，左右有珥晕，上面重叠了半晕和背气。
English: On the second day of February, the sun appeared to have two halos, and also produced a cross halo, with halos on the left and right, overlapping the semi-halo and the trailing aura.

古文：昏刻，月生两珥，白虹贯之。
现代文：黄昏时，月亮产生两道珥晕，白虹贯穿它。
English: At dusk, the moon produces two halos, and a white rainbow runs through it.

古文：二年十二月甲戌，月生交晕，左右珥，白虹贯之。
现代文：二年十二月甲戌日，月亮产生交晕，左右有珥晕，白色长虹贯穿它。
English: In December of the second year, on the day of the Dragon Boat Festival, the moon produced a halo, with a halo on the left and right, and a white long rainbow ran through it.

古文：三年三月庚寅，日生交晕，色黄赤，两珥及背气、戟气各一，色皆青赤。
现代文：三年三月庚寅日，太阳产生交晕，呈黄赤色，有两珥晕以及背气、戟气各一道，都呈青赤色。
English: In March of the third year, on the day of Geng Yin, the sun produced a halo, which was yellow-red, and two halos, as well as a back gas and a radon gas, were all blue-red.

古文：丁酉，日晕，又交晕及戟气二道。
现代文：丁酉日，出现日晕，又出现交晕以及戟气二道。
English: On a cloudy day, a sun halo will appear, followed by a cross-halo and a double-circle of miasma.

古文：十二月己卯，日生交晕。
现代文：十二月己卯日，太阳产生交晕。
English: In December, the sun is eclipsed.

古文：五年正月癸亥，日晕，随生交晕。
现代文：五年正月癸亥日，太阳产生晕圈，随着又生交晕。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, on the day of the boar, the sun produced a halo, followed by another halo.

古文：二月甲午，日交晕，随生戟气。
现代文：二月甲午日，太阳出现交晕，随后又生戟气。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of February, the sun appeared dizzy and then became angry.

古文：四月庚辰，日生两珥，白虹贯之。
现代文：四月庚辰日，太阳产生两珥晕，白虹贯穿它。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in April, the sun produces two halos, and a white rainbow runs through it.

古文：六年二月甲寅，日晕，随生交晕及重半晕璚气。
现代文：六年二月甲寅日，太阳产生晕圈，随着产生变晕以及重叠半晕和埔气。
English: In February of the sixth year, the sun produced halo, and with the production of halo and overlapping halo and Po qi.

古文：八年九月戊戌，辰刻，日晕，两珥背气，申刻诸气复生。
现代文：八年九月戊戌日，辰时，太阳产生晕圈、两珥晕和背气，申时，各种云气再次产生。
English: In the morning of September 8th, the sun produced halo, double halo and back wind, and in the evening of September 8th, all kinds of clouds were produced again.

古文：十年十二月辛亥，日晕，白虹贯两珥，有璚气，随生重半晕及背气。
现代文：十年十二月辛亥日，太阳产生晕圈，白虹贯穿两珥晕，有坝气，随着产生重叠半晕以及背气。
English: On December 10th, the day of Xinhai, the sun produces halo, the white rainbow penetrates two halos, there is dam gas, with the production of overlapping halo and back gas.

古文：正统元年二月己酉，白虹贯月。
现代文：正统元年二月己酉日，白色长虹穿月而过。
English: On the last day of February in the first year of the Juche system, a long white rainbow streaked across the moon.

古文：九月丁未，如之。
现代文：九月丁未日，又像那样。
English: On the eve of September, it was like that again.

古文：十二月丙戌，月生背气，左右珥，白虹贯之。
现代文：十二月丙戌日，月亮产生背气，左右出现珥晕，白虹贯穿它。
English: On the third day of the third month of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, the moon produced a retrograde motion, and a halo appeared on the left and right, with a white rainbow passing through it.

古文：三年四月庚辰，日生两珥，白虹贯之，随晕。
现代文：三年四月庚辰日，太阳产生两道珥晕，白虹贯穿它，随后又生晕圈。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in April of the third year, the sun produced two halos, a white rainbow ran through it, followed by halo circles.

古文：十二月癸酉，月生两珥，白虹贯之，随生背气。
现代文：十二月癸酉日，月亮产生两珥晕，白虹贯穿它，随着产生背气。
English: On the third day of December, the moon produces two halos, the white rainbow penetrates it, along with the backwash.

古文：七年十二月辛丑，月晕，白虹贯之。
现代文：七年十二月辛丑日，月亮产生晕圈，白虹贯穿它。
English: On the fateful day of December in the seventh year, the moon produced a halo, and a white rainbow ran through it.

古文：十一年正月乙未，日生背气，白虹弥天。
现代文：十一年正月乙末日，太阳产生背气，白虹满天。
English: At the end of the second day of the first month of the eleventh year, the sun produces a back wind, and the white rainbow fills the sky.

古文：十四年八月戊申，日晕，旁有戟气，随生左右珥及戴气，东北虹霓如杵。
现代文：十四年八月戊申日，太阳出现晕圈，旁边有戟气，随着产生左右珥晕和戴气，东北方的虹霓如臼杵。
English: On August 14th, Boshin Day, the sun appeared haloed, with argon gas rising next to it. Along with the production of left and right halos and gas, the rainbow in the northeast was like a millstone.

古文：景泰元年二月壬午，酉刻，日上黑气四道，约长三丈，离地丈许，两头锐而贯日，其状如鱼。
现代文：景泰元年二月壬午日，酉时，太阳上出现四道黑色的云气，大约长三丈，离地一丈左右，两头尖锐，穿日而过，它的形状像鱼。
English: On the morning of the second day of the second month of the first year of King Taejo, at noon, four black clouds appeared on the sun, about three meters long, about one meter above the ground, with sharp ends, passing through the sun. It was shaped like a fish.

古文：十二月甲午，日交晕，上下背气各一道，两旁戟气各一道。
现代文：十二月甲午日，太阳出现交晕，上下的背气各一道，两旁的戟气各一道。
English: On the afternoon of December 1st, the sun appeared to be at cross-purposes, with the upper and lower dorsal gasses coming together, and the radiant gasses on both sides coming together.

古文：二年正月癸卯，日生左右珥，白虹贯之，随生背气。
现代文：二年正月癸卯日，太阳产生左右珥晕，白虹贯穿它，随着产生背气。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 2nd year, the sun produces a halo on the left and right, and a white rainbow runs through it, along with the back wind.

古文：二月丙戌，日交晕。
现代文：二月丙戌日，太阳出现交晕。
English: On the third day of February, the sun appeared dizzy.

古文：三年正月丙辰，日生左右珥及背气、白虹。
现代文：三年正月丙辰日，太阳产生左右珥气以及背气、白虹。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the sun generated the right and left miasma, as well as the back miasma and the white rainbow.

古文：五年十一月壬戌，月晕，左右珥及背气，又生白虹，贯右珥。
现代文：五年十一月壬戌日，月亮产生晕圈、左右珥晕以及背气，又产生白虹，穿过右珥晕。
English: In November of the fifth year, on the day of Yin and Yang, the moon produced a halo, a left and right halo, and a back wind, and also produced a white rainbow, passing through the right halo.

古文：七年六月丁丑，日晕，随生重半晕及左右珥。
现代文：七年六月丁丑日，太阳产生晕圈，随着产生重叠半晕，以及左右珥晕。
English: On the day of the Ugly Duckling in June of the seventh year, the sun produced halos, overlapping semi-halos, and left and right halos.

古文：天顺元年二月庚戌，辰刻，日交晕，左右珥，旋生抱气及左右戟气，白虹贯日。
现代文：天顺元年二月庚戌日，辰时，太阳交相出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕，随着产生抱气和左右戟气，白色长虹穿日而过。
English: In February of the first year of Tianshun, on the day of Geng Zi, at noon, there was a halo around the sun, and a halo appeared on the right and left. With the generation of the wind and the right and left wind, the white rainbow passed through the sun.

古文：未刻，诸气复生。
现代文：未时，众云气又产生。
English: At the same time, there is a general atmosphere of unrest.

古文：辛亥，日交晕，左右珥及戟气，白虹贯日，弥天者竟日。
现代文：辛亥日，太阳交相出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕和戟气，白色长虹贯穿太阳而过，弥漫满天的现象达一整天。
English: On the day of Xinhai, the sun intersected with a halo, halo and miasma appeared on the left and right, a white rainbow passed through the sun, and the phenomenon filled the sky for an entire day.

古文：二年二月乙卯，日交晕，上有背气，白虹贯日。
现代文：二年二月乙卯日，太阳交晕，上面有背气，白色长虹穿日而过。
English: In February of the second year, the sun was eclipsed, there was bad weather above, and a long white rainbow streaked across the sun.

古文：七年正月戊戌，月生连环晕。
现代文：七年正月戊戌日，月亮出现连环晕。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the year, the moon appeared as a cascading halo.

古文：成化二年四月壬寅，日交晕，右有珥。
现代文：成化二年四月壬寅日，太阳交晕，右边有珥晕。
English: In April of the second year of Chenghua's reign, the sun was eclipsed, and there was a halo on the right.

古文：十一年六月己酉，日重晕，左右珥及背气。
现代文：十一年六月己酉日，太阳重晕，左右出现珥晕和背气。
English: On June 11th, the day of the new moon, the sun was faint, and faintness and bad breath appeared on both sides.

古文：十二年正月甲子，日交晕。
现代文：十二年正月甲子日，太阳交晕。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twelfth year, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：二十年二月己未，日生白虹，东北亘天。
现代文：二十年二月己末日，太阳产生白虹，在东北横豆天空。
English: Twenty years of February has come to an end, the sun produces a white rainbow in the northeast sky.

古文：二十一年十月癸巳，巳刻，日晕，左右珥。
现代文：二十一年十月癸巳日，巳时，太阳产生晕圈，友右出现珥晕。
English: On October 21, the day of the snake, at the time of the snake, the sun produced a halo, and a halo appeared on the right.

古文：未刻，复生，又生抱气背气。
现代文：未时，再次出现，又产生抱气、背气。
English: At the same time, it reappears, and it produces an aspiration and a backlash.

古文：二十三年十二月癸巳，日晕，左右珥，又生背气及半晕。
现代文：二十三年十二月癸巳日，太阳出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕，又产生背气和半晕。
English: On the 23rd day of December, the sun appeared to have a halo, with halos appearing on the left and right, as well as backdrafts and semi-halos.

古文：弘治二年正月甲戌，午刻，日晕，白虹弥天。
现代文：弘治二年正月甲戌日，午时，太阳出现晕圈，白色长虹弥漫满天。
English: At noon on Armor Day in the first month of the second year of Hongzhi, the sun appeared dizzy, and a long white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：丙戌，日交晕，左右珥，白虹弥天。
现代文：丙戌日，太阳交晕，左右出现珥晕，白虹弥漫满天。
English: On a clear day, the sun is eclipsed, eclipses appear on both sides, and white rainbows fill the sky.

古文：二月壬寅，日生左右珥及背气，又生交晕、半晕及抱、格二气。
现代文：二月壬寅日，太阳产生左右珥晕和背气，又产生交晕、半晕以及抱、格二云气。
English: On February's Ren Yin Day, the sun produces the left and right halo and the reverse halo, as well as the cross halo, half halo, and the embracing and separating halo.

古文：十一月戊辰，月晕连环，贯左右珥。
现代文：十一月戊辰日，月亮产生连环晕，穿过左右珥晕。
English: In November, on the day of Pentecost, the moon produced a cascading halo, passing through the left and right halos.

古文：四年二月庚戌，午刻，日交晕，左右珥，下生戟气，白虹弥天。
现代文：四年二月庚戌日，午时，太阳交晕，出现左右珥晕，下面产生戟气，白色长虹弥满天空。
English: At noon on the day of Geng Zi in February of the fourth year, the sun intersected the halo, appearing left and right halos, producing argon gas below, and a white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：六年十一月乙巳，月晕，左右珥，连环贯之。
现代文：六年十一月乙巳日，月亮出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕，连环贯穿。
English: In November of the sixth year, on the day of the snake, the moon appeared haloed, haloed on the left and right, and interlaced.

古文：十八年二月己巳，月晕，左右珥，白虹弥天。
现代文：十八年二月己巳日，月亮出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕，白色长虹弥漫天空。
English: On February 18th, the day of the snake, the moon appeared haloed, halos appeared on both sides, and a long white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：正德元年正月乙酉，日晕，上有背气，左右有珥，白虹弥天。
现代文：正德元年正月乙酉日，太阳出现晕圈，上面有背气，左右有珥晕，白虹弥漫天空。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Zhengde, the sun appeared in a halo, with a back wind above, a halo on the left and right, and a white rainbow filling the sky.

古文：十二月辛酉，月晕，白虹弥天，甲子，如之。
现代文：十二月辛酉，月亮出现晕圈，白虹弥漫天空，甲子日，也如此。
English: December is hot, the moon appears dizzy, a white rainbow fills the sky, and so does the day of the Chinese Zodiac.

古文：嘉靖元年四月癸未，月生连环晕。二年正月己酉，月晕，连环左右珥。
现代文：嘉靖元年四月癸末日，月亮产生连环晕，二年正月己酉日，月亮出现晕圈，连环左右珥晕。
English: On the last day of April in the first year of Jiajing, the moon produced a continuous halo. On the first day of the second year, the moon appeared a halo, with a continuous halo around it.

古文：七年正月乙亥，日重晕，两珥及戟气，白虹弥天。
现代文：七年正月乙亥日，太阳重晕，两旁出现珥晕和戟气，白虹弥漫天空。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, the sun was faint, and there was a halo and a mirage on both sides. A white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：十三年二月壬辰，白虹亘天，日晕，左右珥及戟气。
现代文：十三年二月壬辰日，白虹横豆天空，太阳出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕以及戟气。
English: On the 13th day of the second lunar month, the sky was a rainbow of rainbow beans, the sun appeared haloed, halos appeared on the left and right, and the atmosphere was hazy.

古文：十八年十二月壬午，立春，日晕右珥，白虹亘天。
现代文：十八年十二月壬午日，立春，太阳出现晕圈，右旁出现珥晕，白虹横旦天空。
English: On the morning of December 18, the first day of spring, the sun appeared with a halo, a halo appeared on the right side, and a white rainbow stretched across the sky.

古文：二十一年十一月甲子，月晕连环。
现代文：二十一年十一月甲子日，月亮出现晕圈，形成连环。
English: On November 21st, the day of the Chinese Zodiac, the moon appeared in a halo, forming a cascade.

古文：四十一年十一月辛丑，日晕，左右珥，上抱下戟，白虹弥天。
现代文：四十一年十一月辛丑日，太阳出现晕圈，左右出现珥晕，上面出现抱气，下面出现戟气，白虹弥漫天空。
English: On the fateful day of November, 41st, the sun appeared haloed, with halos appearing on the right and left, and a mirage appeared above, and a mirage appeared below, and a white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：隆庆五年三月辛巳，日晕，有珥，白虹亘天。
现代文：隆庆五年三月辛巳日，太阳出现晕圈，有珥晕，白虹横豆天空。
English: On the auspicious day of March in the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, the sun appeared to have a halo, there was a halo, and the sky was a white rainbow.

古文：万历三十五年正月庚午，日晕，黑气蔽天。
现代文：万历三十五年正月庚午日，太阳出现晕圈，黑色云气遮蔽天空。
English: At noon on the first day of the third month of the 35th year of Wanli, the sun appeared dizzy, and black clouds obscured the sky.

古文：四十八年二月癸丑，日连环晕，下有背气，左右戟气，白虹弥天。
现代文：四十八年二月癸丑日，太阳出现连环晕，下面有背气，左右有戟气，白虹弥漫天空。
English: On the day of the Ugly Duckling in February, 48 A.D., the sun appeared in a cascade of halos. There was a back wind below, a side wind to the right and left, and a white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：天启元年二月甲午，日交晕，左右有珥，白虹弥天。
现代文：天启元年二月甲午日，太阳交晕，左右有珥晕，白虹弥漫天空。
English: At the stroke of noon on February 1st, the sun was eclipsed, there was a halo on the right and left, and a white rainbow filled the sky.

古文：三年十月辛巳，日生重半晕，左右珥。
现代文：三年十月辛巳日，太阳产生重迭半晕，左右出现珥晕。
English: On October 3rd, Xin Si Day, the sun produced an overlapping semi-halo, and a halo appeared on the left and right.

古文：崇祯八年二月丙午，白虹贯日。
现代文：崇祯八年二月丙午日，白色长虹穿日而过。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the second month of the eighth year of Chongzhen, a long white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：▲星变
现代文：星变
English: Star Change

古文：洪武二十八年闰九月辛巳，垒壁阵疏拆复聚。
现代文：洪武二十八年闰九月辛巳日，垒壁阵星疏散开，又聚拢。
English: On September 28th, Hongwu's leap year, the star formation of the foundation wall dispersed and gathered again.

古文：二十九年八月戊子，钦天监言，井宿东北第二星，近岁渐暗小，促聚不端列。
现代文：二十九年八月戊子日，钦天监说，井宿东北第二星，接近岁星渐渐变暗变小，急促聚合而不直列。
English: In August 29th, the day of Wu Zi, Qin Tian Jian said that the second star in the northeast of Jingdu, the approaching year star gradually darkened and became smaller, rapidly aggregated and did not line up.

古文：三十一年五月癸亥，垒壁阵疏者就聚。
现代文：三十一年五月癸亥日，垒壁阵疏散的星星聚舍起来。
English: On May 31st, the day of the year of the boar, the stars evacuated from the fortification line gathered.

古文：正统元年九月丁巳，狼星动摇。
现代文：正统元年九月丁巳日，狼星动摇不定。
English: In September of the first year of orthodoxy, the wolf star wavered.

古文：十四年十月辛亥，如之。
现代文：十四年十月辛亥日，又像那样。
English: On October 14th, the day of the Chinese New Year, it was like that again.

古文：成化六年丁巳，荧惑无光。
现代文：成化六年丁已日，荧惑星汝有光亮。
English: It has been six years since the birth of Ding, and the fluorescent planet is shining brightly.

古文：十三年九月乙丑朔，岁星光芒炫耀而有玉色。
现代文：十三年九月乙丑朔日，岁星光芒闪耀，呈玉色。
English: On September 13th, the New Year's Day, the year star shines brightly and is jade-colored.

古文：正德元年八月，大角及心中星动摇，北斗中璇、玑、权三星不明。
现代文：正德元年八月，大角星和心宿中星动摇不定，北斗中的璇、玑、权三星不明亮。
English: In August of the first year of Zhengde, the great horn star and the middle star of the heart lodgement wavered, and the,, and the right three stars in the Big Dipper were not bright.

古文：万历四十四年，权星暗小，辅星沉没。
现代文：万历四十四年，权星暗淡并且小，辅星沉没。
English: After forty-four years, the power star is dim and small, and the auxiliary star has sunk.

古文：四十六年九月，太白光芒四映如月影。
现代文：四十六年九月，太白星光芒四射像月影。
English: In September 1946, the star was so white that it shone like the shadow of the moon.

古文：天启五年七月壬申，荧惑色赤，体大，有芒。
现代文：天启五年七月壬申日，荧惑星呈赤色，形体大，有光芒。
English: On July Jinshin day of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, the fluorescent planet was red, large in shape, and had a glow.

古文：崇祯九年十二月，荧惑如炬，在太微垣东南。
现代文：崇祯九年十二月，荧惑星像火炬，在太微垣的东南方。
English: In December of the ninth year of Chongzhen, the fluorescent planet, like a torch, appeared in the southeast of Taiyuegaki.

古文：十二年十月甲午，填星昏晕。
现代文：十二年十月甲午日，镇星昏暗而有晕圈。
English: On the afternoon of October 12th, the town star was dim and dizzy.

古文：十三年六月，泰阶拆。
现代文：十三年六月，泰阶星拆裂。
English: In June of the thirteenth year, the Taijia Star disintegrated.

古文：九月，五车中三柱隐。
现代文：九月，五车中三柱星隐没。
English: In September, the three-pointed star disappeared from the five-car train.

古文：十月，参足突出玉井。
现代文：十月，参足突出玉井星。
English: In October, Tamai's star rose to prominence.

古文：后四年二月，荧惑怒角。
现代文：后四年二月，荧惑星光芒刺射角宿。
English: In February of the last four years, the fluorescent planet's light pierced the angle of incidence.

古文：三月壬辰，钦天监正戈承科奏，帝星下移。
现代文：三月壬辰日，钦天监正戈承科上奏说，帝星下移。
English: In March, on the day of Imjin, Qin Tianjun Zheng Gochenke reported that the emperor's star had moved downwards.

古文：已，又轩辕星绝续不常，太小失次。
现代文：随后，轩辕星又时绝时绩，没有规则，大小失去位次。
English: Subsequently, Xuan Xingxing also achieved outstanding performance time after time. There was no rule, and the size lost its rank.

古文：文昌星拆，天津拆，瑶光拆，芒角黑青。
现代文：文昌星拆裂，天津星拆裂，瑶光星拆裂，芒角呈黑青色。
English: Wenchang star rupture, Tianjin star rupture, fluorescence star rupture, the corneal angle is dark blue.

古文：▲星流星陨
现代文：星流星陨
English: Shooting stars and meteors

古文：灵台候簿飞流之记，无夜无有，其小而寻常者无关休咎，择其异常者书之。
现代文：灵台记录天文的簿册对流星的记载，没有哪一天晚上不记。那些小而平常的，无关吉凶，故选择那些异常的记录下来。
English: There's not a single night when I don't remember the meteors recorded in the astronomical record book. The small and ordinary ones have nothing to do with fortune or misfortune, so I choose to record the unusual ones.

古文：洪武三年十月庚辰，有赤星如桃，起天桴至垒壁阵，抵羽林军，爆散有声。
现代文：洪武三年十月庚辰日，有赤色的星体像桃子，从天桴星开始，到垒壁阵星，抵达羽林军星，爆炸散落有声。
English: In October of the third year of Hongwu, on the day of Gengchen, there were red stars like peaches. Starting from the star of heaven, to the star of the wall, and arriving at the star of the army of the forest, the explosion was scattered and there was a sound.

古文：五小星随之，至士司空旁，发光烛天，忽大如碗，曳赤尾至天仓没，须臾东南有声。
现代文：五颗小星跟随它，到土司空旁，发出光芒，烛照天空，忽然大如碗，拖着赤色的尾巴到达天仓星而隐没，一会见东南方向有响声。
English: Five small stars followed it to the side of the sky, emitting light. The candle shined in the sky and suddenly became as big as a bowl. It dragged its red tail to reach the star Amakura and disappeared. As soon as it met the southeast direction, there was a sound.

古文：二十一年八月乙巳，赤星如杯，自北斗杓东南行三丈余，分为二，又五丈余，分为三，经昴宿复为二，经天廪合为一，没于天苑。
现代文：二十一年八月乙巳日，赤色星体如酒杯，从北斗杓向东南飞行三丈多，分裂成二颗，又行五丈多，分裂成三颗，经过昴宿，又合成二颗，经过天糜星，合成一颗，在天苑星隐没。
English: On the 21st day of August, the red star, like a wine cup, flew southeast from the Big Dipper, three-tenths of a degree away, split into two, traveled five-tenths of a degree away, split into three, passed through the Pleiades, formed into two, passed through the Pleiades, formed into one, and disappeared in the Celestial Garden.

古文：永乐元年闰十一月丁卯，有星色苍，大如斗，光烛地，出中天云中。
现代文：永乐元年闰十一月丁卯日，有星体呈青苍色，大如量斗，光烛照至地，出现在中天云中。
English: In the intercalary month of November in the first year of the Yongle Emperor, on the day of Dingwu, a celestial body appeared pale blue, as large as a measuring jug, shining to the ground, appearing in the clouds in the middle of the sky.

古文：西南行，隆隆有声，入云中。
现代文：向西南运行，发出隆隆的声音，没入云中。
English: Running southwest, it made a rumbling sound and disappeared into the clouds.

古文：二年五月丙午，有赤星大如斗，光烛地，出中天，西北行入云中。
现代文：二年五月丙午日，有赤色星体，大如量斗，光烛照至地，出现在中天，向西北运行，没入云中。
English: On the afternoon of May 2nd, there was a red star, as big as a measuring jug, with light shining all the way down to the ground. It appeared in the middle of the sky, moving northwest and disappearing into the clouds.

古文：十六年，有星大如斗，色青赤，光烛地，自柳东行至近浊。
现代文：十六年，有星体大如量斗，呈青赤色。光烛照至地，从柳宿向东运行接近浊。
English: Sixteen years ago, there was a star the size of a measuring jug, bluish-red in color. It shone down to the ground and moved eastward from Yanagiyado, coming close to the earth.

古文：二十二年五月己亥，有星如盏，色青白，光烛地，起东南云中。
现代文：二十二年五月己亥日，有星体如小杯，呈青白色，光照至地，出现在东南云中。
English: On May 22nd, the day of Ji Hai, a star-like small cup, bluish-white in color, shone down to the ground and appeared in the southeastern clouds.

古文：西北行，入云中，有声如炮。
现代文：向西北运行，役入云中，有声音如放大炮。
English: Moving northwestward, it plunged into the clouds, producing a sound like a large cannon.

古文：七月庚寅，有星如碗，色赤有光，自奎入参炸散，众星摇动。
现代文：七月庚寅日，有星体如碗，呈赤色，有光芒，从奎宿进入参宿，爆炸散落，众星摇动。
English: On July's Geng Yin Day, a star-like bowl, reddish in color and radiant, moved from Kui to Ganjuku. The explosion scattered the stars, causing them to shake.

古文：宣德元年十二月己巳，有星大如碗，光赤，出卷舌，东行过东井坠地，有声如雷。
现代文：宣德元年十二月己巳日，有星体大如碗，光呈赤色，从卷舌出现，向东运行遇束井宿，坠落至地，有声音如打雷。
English: In December of the first year of Xuande, there was a star as big as a bowl, the light was red, it appeared from the roll of the tongue, it moved eastward, it met a bunch of wells, it fell to the ground, and there was a sound like thunder.

古文：正统元年八月乙酉，昏刻至晓，大小流星百余。
现代文：正统元年八月乙酉日，黄昏时到天亮，大小流星有一百多颗。
English: On August Acetylene Day in the first year of orthodoxy, from dusk to dawn, there were more than a hundred large and small meteors.

古文：四年八月癸卯，大小流星数百。
现代文：四年八月癸卯日，大小流星有数百颗。
English: On August 4th, there were hundreds of small and large meteors.

古文：十四年十月癸丑，有星大如杯，赤光烛地，自三师西北抵少弼，尾迹化苍白气，长五尺余，曲曲西行。
现代文：十四年十月癸丑日，有星体大如杯子，赤色的光照到地上，从三师星西北抵达少弼，尾部的星迹变化成苍白的云气，长五尺多，曲曲折折向西运行。
English: On October 14th, the Ugly Day, there was a star as big as a cup, shining red light on the ground. It arrived in Shao'an from the northwest of the Three Stars, and the star trail at the tail changed into a pale cloud, more than five feet long, running westward in twists and turns.

古文：十二月戊申，有星大如杯，色青白，有声，光烛地。
现代文：十二月戊申日，有星体大如杯子，呈青白色，有声音，光照至地。
English: On Boxing Day in December, a star the size of a cup appeared, bluish-white in colour, emitting a sound and shining down to the ground.

古文：自太乙旁东南行丈余，发光大如斗，至天市西垣没，四小星随之。
现代文：从太乙星旁向东南运行一丈多，发出光芒大如量斗，到天市西垣隐没，四颗小星跟随。
English: From the side of Taiyi star, it moved southeastward by a lot, emitting light as big as a measuring cup, and disappeared to the celestial city of Xigaki, followed by four small stars.

古文：景泰二年六月丙申，太小流星八十余。
现代文：景泰二年六月丙申日，大小流星有八十多颗。
English: In June of the second year of King Tae's reign, there were more than eighty large and small meteors.

古文：八月壬午，有赤星二，一如桃，一如斗，光烛地。
现代文：八月壬午日，有赤色星体二颗：一颗大如桃子，一颗大如量斗，光照至地。
English: On the day of the meridian in August, two red stars appeared: one as big as a peach, the other as big as a measuring cup, shining down to the ground.

古文：一出紫微西藩北行，至阴德，三小星随之；一出天津，东南行至河南，十余小星随之。
现代文：一颗出自紫微西藩向北运行，至阴德，有三颗小星跟随；一颗出白天津星，向东南运行，至河南，十多颗小星跟髓。
English: A star from the west of Ziwei, running north to Yinde, is followed by three small stars; a star from the east of Tianjin, running southeast to Henan, is followed by more than ten small stars.

古文：尾迹炸散，声如雷。
现代文：尾部的轨迹爆炸散开，声响如打雷。
English: Trajectory blasts in the tail spread out, sounding like thunder.

古文：天顺三年四月癸丑，有星大如碗，赤光烛地，自左旗东南行抵女宿，尾迹炸散。
现代文：天顺三年四月癸丑日，有星体大如碗，赤色的光照到地上，从左旗星向东南运行，抵达女宿，尾部轨迹爆炸散开。
English: On April Fool's Day in the third year of Tenshun, there was a star as big as a bowl, shining red light on the ground, traveling southeast from the left flag star, arriving at the girls' hostel, and the tail trajectory exploded.

古文：八年二月壬子，有星如碗，光烛地，自天市至天津，尾化苍白气，如蛇形，长丈余，良久散。
现代文：八年二月壬子日，有星体大如碗，光照至地，从天市垣到天津星，尾部轨迹变化成苍白的云气，像蛇的形状，长一丈多，很久纔散去。
English: In February of the eighth year, on Mizi Day, there was a star as big as a bowl, shining down to the earth, from Tianshi Yaki to Tianjin Star, the tail trajectory changed into a pale cloud, like the shape of a snake, growing more and more, and it took a long time to disperse.

古文：成化十二年十一月乙丑，延绥波罗堡有星二，形如辘轴，一坠樊家沟，一坠本堡，红光烛天。
现代文：成化十二年十一月乙丑日，延绥波罗堡有星二颗，形体如辗轴，一颗在樊家沟坠落，一颗在本堡坠落，红光照耀天空。
English: In the twelfth year of Chenghua, in November, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, there were two stars at the end of the Yancheng Bolo Castle, shaped like an axle, one falling in the Xingjiagou, one falling in the castle, and the red light shining in the sky.

古文：二十年五月丙申，有大星坠番禺县东南，声如雷，散为小星十余。
现代文：二十年五月丙申日，有大星在番禺县东南坠落，声音如同雷响，分散成十多个小星体。
English: On May 20, 2009, a large star fell in the southeast of Panyu County. The sound was like thunder, and it scattered into more than ten small stars.

古文：既而天地皆晦，良久乃复。
现代文：随后天地都晦暗下来，很久纔恢复。
English: After that, the sky and the earth were darkened, and it took a long time to recover.

古文：二十一年正月甲申朔，申刻，有火光自中天少西下坠，化白气，复曲折上腾有声。
现代文：二十一年正月甲申朔日，申时，有火光从中天稍西下坠，变化成白氯，又曲折向上升腾，有响声。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twenty-first year, on the day of the new moon, at the time of the new moon, there was firelight falling slightly westward from the middle of the sky, changing into white chlorine, and rising up with twists and turns, and there was a noise.

古文：逾时，西方有赤星大如碗，自中天西行近浊，尾迹化白气，曲曲如蛇行良久，正西轰轰如雷震。
现代文：过了一个时辰，西方有赤色星体大如碗，从中天向西运行近浊，尾部轨迹变化成白气，曲曲折折如蛇爬行很久，正西方有轰轰声，如雷一样震响。
English: After an hour, in the west, there was a red star as big as a bowl, moving from the middle of the sky to the west near the beak, the tail trajectory changed to white gas, the twists and turns crawled like a snake for a long time, and there was a roar in the west, like thunder.

古文：弘治元年八月戊申，巳刻，南方流星如盏，自南行丈余，大如碗，西南至近浊，尾化白云，屈曲蛇行而散。
现代文：弘治元年八月戊申日，巳时，南方有流星大如小杯，从南方运行一丈多，大如碗，向西南行至近浊，尾部变化成白云，曲折如蛇行而飘散。
English: On the day of Boshin in August of the first year of the Heian period, there was a meteor in the south that was as big as a small cup. It was as big as a bowl and traveled from the south to the southwest until it was close to the South Pole. Its tail changed into a white cloud, and it meandered and drifted away.

古文：四年十月丁巳，有星赤，光如电，自西南往东北，声如鼓。陨光山县，化为石如斗。
现代文：四年十月丁巳日，有星呈赤色，光芒如闪电，从西南往东北运行，声音如擎鼓，坠落在光山县，变成石头，形状如斗。
English: On October 4th, Ding Si Day, a reddish star with a light like lightning, traveling from the southwest to the northeast with a sound like a cymbal, fell in Guangshan County and turned into a stone with a shape like a bucket.

古文：光州商城亦见大星飞空，如光山所见。
现代文：光州商城也出现大星体在空中飞遇，如同光山县所见情形。
English: In Gwangju Shopping Mall, large asteroids were also seen flying through the air, similar to the situation seen in Gwangsan County.

古文：十一月甲戌，星陨真定西北，红光烛天。
现代文：十一月甲戌日，星体在真定西北坠落，红光照耀天空。
English: On November 6th, a star fell in the northwest of Jinding, and a red light shone in the sky.

古文：西南天鸣如鼓，又若奔车。
现代文：西南天空呜声如鼓，又好像是奔驰的车子。
English: The southwestern sky resounded like a drum, and it seemed to be a Mercedes car.

古文：七年五月，宣府、山西、河南有星昼陨。
现代文：七年五月，宣府、山西、河南有星体在白天坠落。
English: In May of the seventh year, a star fell during the day in Xuanfu, Shanxi and Henan.

古文：八年四月辛未，有星如轮，流至西北，陨于铅山县，其声如雷。
现代文：八年四月辛末日，有星体像车轮，流动至西北方，在铅山县坠落，它的声响如打雷。
English: At the end of April of the eighth year, there was a star like a wheel, flowing to the northwest, falling in Lead Mountain County, and its sound was like thunder.

古文：九年闰三月戊午，平凉东南有流星如月，红光烛地，至西北止，既而天鼓鸣。
现代文：九年闰三月戊午日，平凉东南有流星如月亮，红光照耀至地，到西北而停止，不久，天鼓鸣响。
English: In the ninth year of leap March, at noon, there was a meteor like the moon in the southeast of Pingliang. The red light shone down to the earth, and stopped in the northwest. Soon, the celestial drum sounded.

古文：十年正月壬子，有星大如斗，色黄白，光长三十余丈，一小星随之，陨于宁夏西北隅。
现代文：十年正月壬子日，有星体大如量斗，呈黄白色，光长三十多丈，一颗小星星跟随着它，在宁夏西北角坠落。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, there was a star as big as a measuring spoon, yellowish-white, with a light length of more than 30 meters. A small star followed it and fell in the northwest corner of Ningxia.

古文：天鸣如雷者数声。
现代文：天空呜响如打雷的情况有好几声。
English: There were several reports of the sky rumbling like thunder.

古文：九月乙巳，有星如斗，光掩月，流自西北，陨于永平，有声。
现代文：九月乙巳日，有星体大如量斗，光亮超过月亮，从西北流动，在永平坠落，有声响。
English: On September 21st, a star as big as a measuring cup, brighter than the moon, streamed from the northwest, fell in Yongping, and made a sound.

古文：十一年正月癸亥，有流星陨于肃州，大如房，响如雷，良久灭。
现代文：十一年正月癸亥日，有流星在肃州坠落，体大如房，响声如雷，很久纔消失。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the year, a meteor fell in Suizhou. It was as big as a house, sounded like thunder, and then disappeared.

古文：十月壬申，晓，东方赤星如碗，行丈余，光烛地，东南行，小星数十随之。
现代文：十月壬申日，早晨，东方有赤色星体，大如碗，运行一丈多，光照至地，向东南运行，有小星敷十颗跟随它。
English: On the morning of October Jinshin, there was a red star in the east. It was as big as a bowl, and it moved as high as a mountain. It shone down to the ground and moved southeast. It was followed by ten small stars.

古文：十四年闰七月辛巳，山东有星大如车轮，赤光烛天，自东南往西北，陨于寿光。
现代文：十四年闰七月辛巳日，山东有星体大如车轮，赤光照耀天空，从东南往西北运行，在寿光坠落。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the leap year, Shandong had a star as big as a wheel, shining red in the sky, moving from southeast to northwest and falling in Shouguang.

古文：天鼓鸣。
现代文：天鼓岛响。
English: The heavenly drums are beating.

古文：十六年正月己酉，南京有星昼流。
现代文：十六年正月己酉日，南京有星体在白天坠流。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the year, a star fell into the river during the day in Nanjing.

古文：正德元年十二月庚午，有星如碗，陨宁夏中卫，空中有红光大二亩。
现代文：正德元年十二月庚午日，有星大如碗，在宁夏中卫坠落，空中有红光面积大二亩。
English: On the afternoon of December 9th in the first year of Zhengde, a star as big as a bowl fell in the middle of Ningxia, and there was a large area of red light in the sky.

古文：二年八月己亥，宁夏有大星，自正南流西南而坠，后有赤光一道，阔三尺，长五丈。
现代文：二年八月己亥日，宁夏有大星体，从正南流向西南而坠落，后面有赤色的光一道，宽三尺，长五丈。
English: In August of the second year, on the day of Ji Hai, there was a large star in Ningxia, falling from the south to the southwest, with a red light behind it, three feet wide and five feet long.

古文：五年四月丁亥，雷州有大星如月，自东南流西北，分为二，尾如彗，随没，声如雷。
现代文：五年四月丁亥日，雷州有大星体如月，从东南流向西北，分成三颗，尾部如彗星，随之而役，声如雷响。
English: In April of the fifth year, Dinghai Day, there was a large star like the moon in Leizhou, flowing from the southeast to the northwest, divided into three, the tail like a comet, followed by a thunderous sound.

古文：六年八月癸卯，有流星如箕，尾长四五丈，红光烛天。
现代文：六年八月癸卯，有流星像箕，尾部长四五丈。红光照耀天空。
English: In August of the sixth year, there was a meteor like a thunderbolt, with a tail four or five meters long. Red light shone in the sky.

古文：自西北转东南，三首一尾，坠四川崇庆卫。色化为白，复起绿焰，高二丈余，声如雷震。
现代文：从西北转向东南，三颗头一条尾，在四川崇庆卫坠落，变化成白色，又产生绿色光焰，高二丈多，声音如同打雷一样震响。
English: Turning from the northwest to the southeast, the first three and one tail fell in Chongqingwei, Sichuan, changing into white and producing green flames, more than two meters high, and the sound was as loud as thunder.

古文：十五年正月丁未，酉刻，有星陨于山西龙舟谷巡检司厅事，四月丙戌，陕西巩昌府有星如日，色赤，自东方流西南而陨。
现代文：十五年正月丁未日，酉时，有星体坠落在山西龙舟谷巡检司的厅堂上。四月丙戌日，陕西巩昌府有星体如太阳，呈赤色，从东方流动到西南而坠落。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the year, at the stroke of midnight, a star fell on the hall of the Shanxi Longzhou Valley Inspection and Quarantine Bureau. On the 30th day of April, in Gongchang Prefecture, Shaanxi Province, there was a star like the sun, red, flowing from the east to the southwest and falling.

古文：天鼓鸣。
现代文：天鼓鸣响。
English: The heavenly drums are beating.

古文：嘉靖十二年九月丙子，流星如盏，光照地，自中台东北行近浊，尾迹化为白气。
现代文：嘉靖十二年九月丙子日，流星如小杯，光照地上，从中台东北运行近浊，尾部轨迹变化成白气。
English: In September of the twelfth year of Jiajing, on the third day of the ninth month, the meteor was like a small cup, shining on the ground, traveling from the central and northeastern regions to near the cusp, and the tail trajectory changed to white gas.

古文：四更至五更，四方大小流星，纵横交行，不计其数，至明乃息。
现代文：四更至五更，四面八方大大小小的流星，纵横交错运行，不计其敷，到天亮纔停息。
English: From four to five meteors, large and small meteors in all directions, criss-crossing and running, regardless of their size, until dawn.

古文：十四年九月戊子，开封白昼天鼓鸣。有星如碗，东南流，众小星从之如珠。
现代文：十四年九月戊子日，开封在白天天鼓呜响，有星体大如碗，向东南流动；众多的小星体像珠子，跟随着它。
English: On the 14th day of the 9th month, the 14th day of the 9th month, Kaifeng, in the daytime, the celestial drum sounded, and there was a star as big as a bowl, flowing to the southeast; many small stars like beads, followed it.

古文：十九年五月辛丑，星陨枣强，为石四。
现代文：十九年五月辛丑日，星体在枣强坠落，变成四块石头。
English: On the fateful day of May 19th, the star fell on the jujube tree and turned into four stones.

古文：万历三年五月癸亥，昼，景州天鼓鸣。
现代文：万历三年五月癸亥日，白天，景州天鼓鸣响。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in May of the third year of Wanli, during the day, the Jingzhou Heavenly Drum sounded.

古文：陨星二，化为黑石。
现代文：坠落两颗星，变化成黑色的石头。
English: Two stars fall and turn to black stone.

古文：四年十一月甲午，有四星陨费县，火光照地。
现代文：四年十一月甲午日，有四颗星坠落在费县，火光照到地上。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, four stars fell on Feixian County, lighting up the ground.

古文：质明，落赤点于城西北，色如朱砂，长二里，阔一二尺。
现代文：天亮时，在城西北落下赤色的星点，颜色像朱砂，长二里，宽一二尺。
English: At dawn, a red star falls in the northwest of the city, the color of cinnabar, two miles long and twelve feet wide.

古文：是月，临漳有星长尺许，白昼北飞。
现代文：这一个月，临漳有星体长一尺左右，白天向北飞流。
English: This month, there was a shooting star about a foot long in Linyi, flying northward during the day.

古文：十三年七月辛巳，有星如碗，陨于沈丘莲花集。
现代文：十三年七月辛巳日，有星像碗，在沈丘莲花集坠落。
English: On July 13th, the Day of the Snake, a star-shaped bowl fell in the lotus garden of Shenqiu.

古文：天鼓鸣。
现代文：天鼓呜响。
English: The heavenly drums are beating.

古文：十五年六月丙寅，平阳昼陨星。
现代文：十五年六月丙寅日，平阳在白天坠落星体。
English: On the 15th day of the 6th month of the year, Pingyang was hit by a falling star during the day.

古文：丁卯，辰刻，有星如斗，陨于平阴，震响如雷。
现代文：丁卯日辰时，有星体如量斗，在乎阴坠落，震动的响声如打雷。
English: At twilight, the stars are like scales, the shadows fall, and the noise of the shaking is like thunder.

古文：十七年正月庚申，有星陨西宁卫，大如月。
现代文：十七年正月庚申日，有星体在西宁卫坠落，大如月亮。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the year, a star fell in Xiningwei, as big as the moon.

古文：天鼓鸣。
现代文：天鼓鸣响。
English: The heavenly drums are beating.

古文：二十年二月丙辰，有三星陨闽县东南。
现代文：二十年二月丙辰日，有三颗星坠落在闽县东南。
English: On the morning of February 20, three stars fell to the southeast of Jixian County.

古文：二十二年正月戊戌，保定青山口有大飞星，余光若彗，长二十余丈。
现代文：二十二年正月戊戌日，保定青山口有大流星，余光像彗星，长二十多丈。
English: On the twenty-second day of the first month of the year, there was a large meteor in Baoding Qingshankou. The afterglow was like a comet, more than twenty meters long.

古文：二十七年三月庚子，盖州卫天鼓鸣，连陨大星三。
现代文：二十七年三月庚子日，盖州卫天鼓鸣响，一连坠落三颗大星体。
English: On the 27th day of the 3rd month of the year of the Rooster, three large stars fell in a row.

古文：三十年九月己未朔，有大星见东南，赤如血，大如碗，忽化为五，中星更明，久之会为一，大如簏。
现代文：三十年九月己未朔日，有大星体在东南出现，色赤如血，大如碗，忽然变化成五颗，中间那颗星更明亮，很久之后会合成一颗，大如簏。
English: In September of the thirtieth year, just before the new moon, a large star appeared in the southeast, red as blood, big as a bowl, suddenly changed into five, the middle star was brighter, and after a long time it would form one, as big as a cocoon.

古文：辛巳，有大小星数百交错行。
现代文：辛巳，有大小星体数百颗交错运行。
English: Suddenly, there are hundreds of large and small stars interlaced.

古文：十月壬辰，五更，流星起中天，光散七道，有声如雷。
现代文：十月壬辰日，五更时分，流星从中天出现，光分散成七道，有声如打雷。
English: On October's Imjin Day, at the stroke of 5:00 a.m., a meteor appeared from the middle of the sky. The light was scattered into seven paths, and the sound was like thunder.

古文：三十三年九月戊子，有星如碗，坠于南京龙江后营，光如火，至地游走如萤，移时灭。
现代文：三十三年九月戊子日，有星大如碗，坠落在南京龙江后营，光亮像火，到达地上如萤火游走，一会儿，役灭。
English: On September 30, 303, there was a star as big as a bowl. It fell in the back of the Longjiang River in Nanjing, shining like fire. It reached the ground like a firefly and swam away. In a moment, it was extinguished.

古文：明日，复有星如月，从西北流至阅兵台，分为三，坠地有声。
现代文：第二天，又有星像月壳，从西北流动到阅兵台，分成三颗，坠落在地发出声响。
English: The next day, there was another star like a moon shell, flowing from the northwest to the parade ground, splitting into three and falling to the ground to make a sound.

古文：十一月，有星陨南京教场，入地无迹。
现代文：十一月，有星体坠落在南京教场，入地没有痕迹。
English: In November, an asteroid crashed into a classroom in Nanjing, leaving no trace.

古文：三十五年十一月癸巳，有星陨于泾阳、淳化诸县，大如车轮，赤色，尾长丈余，声如轰雷。
现代文：三十五年十一月癸巳日，有流星在泾阳、淳化等县坠落，大如车轮，呈赤色，尾长一丈多，声响如轰隆隆的雷声。
English: On November 30, 355, a meteor fell in the counties of Shenyang and Chunhua. It was as big as a wheel, red in color, with a tail more than a meter long, and sounded like thunder.

古文：三十八年二月癸酉，有星大如斗，坠阳曲西北，碎星不绝。
现代文：三十八年二月癸酉日，有流星大如量斗，坠落在阳曲西北，散碎的星体不断。
English: On the third day of February in the year thirty-eight, a meteor as large as a measuring jug fell in the northwest of Yangqu, and the scattered stars continued to rise.

古文：天鼓齐鸣。
现代文：天鼓一齐鸣响。
English: The heavenly drums are beating in unison.

古文：四十一年正月庚子，真定天鼓鸣。
现代文：四十一年正月庚子日，真定天鼓鸣响。
English: On the 41st day of the first month of the year, Geng Zi Day, the Zhending Heavenly Drum sounded.

古文：流星昼陨有光。
现代文：流星白天坠落，有光亮。
English: Meteors fall during the day and are bright.

古文：四十三年三月戊申，昼，星坠清丰东流邨，声如雷。
现代文：四十三年三月戊申日，白天，流星坠落在清丰束流邨，声音如打雷。
English: On March 43rd, Boshin Day, during the day, a meteor fell on Qingfeng Bundle Stream, and the sound was like thunder.

古文：四十六年十月，辛酉，有星如斗，陨于南京安德门外，声如霹雳，化为石，重二十一斤。
现代文：四十六年十月，辛酉日，有星如量斗，在南京安德门外坠落，声音如霹雳，变化成石头，重二十一斤。
English: In October, 1946, on the day of Xinlu, a star fell like a measuring rod outside the Andes Gate in Nanjing. It sounded like a gong and turned into stone, weighing 21 pounds.

古文：天启三年九月甲寅，固原州星陨如雨。
现代文：天启三年九月甲寅日，固原州流星像雨一样坠落下来。
English: On the third day of the ninth month of the third year of the Apocalypse, the meteor fell like rain.

古文：崇祯十五年夏，星流如织。
现代文：崇祯十五年夏天，流星坠落密集如织布。
English: In the summer of the 15th year of Chongzhen, the meteor falls were as dense as woven cloth.

古文：后二年三月己丑朔，有星陨于御河。
现代文：后二年三月己丑朔日，有流星在御河坠落。
English: In March of the latter two years, a meteor fell in Okawa.

古文：▲云气
现代文：云气
English: The clouds are gathering

古文：洪武四年四月辛丑，五色云见。
现代文：洪武四年四月辛丑日，五彩祥云出现。
English: In April of the 4th year of Hongwu, the five-colored auspicious clouds appeared.

古文：戊申、乙酉，十一月壬戌，五年正月庚午、丙子，六月辛巳，七月己酉、壬子，八月己亥，六年六月丁丑，七月癸卯，七年四月丙午，五月丙戌、癸巳、甲午，六月乙未、乙卯，七月己卯，八月辛酉，八年正月壬申，四月丁未，五月庚午、癸未，六月壬辰、己亥，十月庚戌，九年八月癸巳，十四年九月甲申，十五年正月甲申，五月庚申，九月乙卯、丙寅，十一月辛酉，十八年四月癸巳、乙未，五月辛未、甲申，六月癸丑，十九年九月壬午，二十年十一月丁亥，五月乙酉，二十七年六月乙卯，并如之。
现代文：戊申日、乙酉日，十一月壬戌日，五年正月庚午日、丙子日，六月辛巳日，七月己酉日、壬子日，八月己亥日，六年六月丁丑日，七月癸卯日，七年四月丙午日，五月丙戌日、癸巳日、甲午日，六月乙未日、乙卯日，七月己卯日，八月辛酉日，八年正月壬申日，四月丁末日，五月庚午日、癸末日，六月壬辰日、己亥日，十月庚戌日，九年八月癸巳日，十四年九月甲申日，十五年正月甲申日，五月庚申日，九月乙卯日、丙寅日，十一月辛酉日，十八年四月癸巳日、乙末日，五月辛末日、甲申日，六月癸丑日，十九年九月壬午日，二十年十一月丁亥日，五月乙酉日，二十七年六月乙卯日，都像那样，出现五彩祥云。
English: Boshin's day, Hijiri's day, November Rinzai's day, the first month of the fifth year, Gengmoji's day, Hanzi's day, June Xinmi's day, July Jiwu's day, Jinshi's day, August Jiwu's day, June 6 Dingushi's day, July Jiwu's day, April 7 Gmoji's day, May Hijiri's day, Jinshi's day, Gmoji's day, July Jiwu's day, August Xinmi's day, August Jinshi's day, the first month of

古文：永乐元年六月甲寅，日下五色云见。
现代文：永乐元年六月甲寅日，日下五彩祥云出现。
English: In June of the first year of Yongle, on the day of Kato, five colorful auspicious clouds appeared under the sun.

古文：八月壬申，日珥随五色云见。
现代文：八月壬申日，日旁晕圈随着五彩祥云出现。
English: On Jinshin Day in August, a halo appeared around the sun along with colorful auspicious clouds.

古文：八年二月庚戌，车驾次永安甸，日下五色云见。
现代文：八年二月庚戌日，皇上住永安甸，日下五彩祥云出现。
English: In February of the eighth year, on the day of Geng Zi, the emperor lived in Yong Anding, and the five-colored auspicious clouds appeared under the sun.

古文：十一年六月戊申朔，武当山顶五色云见。
现代文：十一年六月戊申朔日，武当山顶五彩祥云出现。
English: On the New Year's Day of June 11th, the five-colored auspicious clouds appeared at the top of Wudang Mountain.

古文：十七年九月丙辰、十二月癸未，庆云见。
现代文：十七年九月丙辰日、十二月癸末日，吉庆云彩出现。
English: The auspicious clouds appeared on the first day of September and the last day of December in 1917.

古文：二十二年十一月丙戌，月下五色云见。
现代文：二十二年十一月丙戌日，月下五彩祥云出现。
English: On November 22, the first day of the month, five colorful auspicious clouds appeared under the moon.

古文：洪熙元年二月癸酉、庚辰，三月乙未，俱五色云见。
现代文：洪熙元年二月癸酉日、庚辰日，三月乙未日，都有五彩祥云出现。
English: Five-colored auspicious clouds appeared on the third day of February, the day of Geng Chen, and the day of the second day of March in the first year of Hongxi.

古文：宣德元年八月庚辰，白云起东南，状如群羊惊走。
现代文：宣德元年八月庚辰日，白云在东南升起，形状像群羊受惊奔跑。
English: On the day of Gengchen in August of the first year of Xuande, a white cloud rose in the southeast, shaped like a flock of sheep running in fright.

古文：十一月丙辰，北方有苍白云，东西竟天。
现代文：十一月丙辰日，北方有苍白的云层，呈东西向布满整个天空。
English: On the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month, there were pale clouds in the north, covering the entire sky in an east-west direction.

古文：二年十一月乙未，日下五色云见。
现代文：二年十一月乙未日，日下五彩祥云出现。
English: On the second day of November, the five-colored auspicious clouds appeared.

古文：四年六月戊子，夜五色云见。
现代文：四年六月戊子日，晚上，五彩祥云出现。
English: In the evening of June 4th, Wu Zi Day, five-colored auspicious clouds appeared.

古文：六年二月壬子，昏，西方有苍白云，南北竟天。
现代文：六年二月壬子日，黄昏，西方有苍白云层，呈南北向布满整个天空。
English: In February of the sixth year, on Mizi Day, at dusk, there were pale clouds in the west, covering the entire sky in a north-south direction.

古文：十年三月丁亥，月生五色云。
现代文：十年三月丁亥日，月亮生出五彩祥云。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month of Dinghai, the moon gave birth to colorful clouds.

古文：正统二年七月庚子，月生五色云。
现代文：正统二年七月庚子日，月亮生出五彩祥云。
English: On Geng Zi Day in July of the second year of the Juche era, the moon gave birth to five-colored auspicious clouds.

古文：十月己丑，日生五色云。
现代文：十月己丑日，太阳生出五彩祥云。
English: On October's Ugly Day, the sun gives birth to colorful clouds.

古文：十二月癸亥，如之。
现代文：十二月癸亥日，又像那样。
English: December, the day of the pig, it's like that again.

古文：三年七月己亥，夜，中天有苍白云，南北竟天，贯南北斗。
现代文：三年七月己亥日，晚上，天空之中有苍白云层，呈南北向布满整个天空，贯穿南北斗宿。
English: On the day of Ji Hai in July of the third year, in the evening, there were pale clouds in the sky, covering the entire sky in a north-south direction and penetrating the north-south direction.

古文：八年十一月戊辰，夜，东南方有苍白云，东西亘天。
现代文：八年十一月戊辰日，夜晚，东南方有苍白云层，呈东西向横豆天空。
English: On the evening of November 8th, the day of Pentecost, there were pale clouds in the southeast, with an east-west sky.

古文：九年十一月甲午，月生五色云。
现代文：九年十一月甲午日，月亮生出五彩祥云。
English: On the afternoon of November 9th, the moon gave birth to colorful clouds.

古文：十年九月丁酉，日生五色云。
现代文：十年九月丁酉日，太阳生出五彩祥云。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th lunar month, the sun gave birth to colorful auspicious clouds.

古文：十一月甲午，月生五色云。
现代文：十一月甲午日，月亮生出五彩祥云。
English: At noon on November 1, the moon gave birth to colorful clouds.

古文：十四年十月庚申，昼生苍白云，复化为三，东西南北竟天。
现代文：十四年十月庚申日，白天产生苍白的云层，又变化成三片，东西南北布满整个天空。
English: On October 14th, the day of the Chinese lunar new year, a pale layer of clouds formed during the day, and then changed into three pieces, covering the entire sky from east to west, north to south.

古文：景泰元年六月乙酉，赤云四道，两头锐如耕垅状，徐徐东北行而散。
现代文：景泰元年六月乙酉日，赤色的云层四道，两头尖锐，像耕珑的形状，缓缓地向东北运行而消散。
English: On the day of Acetylene in June of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, four red clouds, with sharp ends, like the shape of ploughs, slowly moved to the northeast and dissipated.

古文：八月甲戌，黑云如山，化作龙虎麋鹿状。
现代文：八月甲戌日，天空黑色的云层像大山，变化成龙虎麋鹿的形状。
English: On Armor Day in August, the black clouds in the sky look like mountains and change into the shape of dragon, tiger and elk.

古文：九月丙寅，有苍白云气，南北亘天。
现代文：九月丙寅日，有苍白的云气，南北向横互天空。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, there was a pale, cloudy atmosphere, and the sky stretched from north to south.

古文：二年六月戊寅，日上五色云。
现代文：二年六月戊寅日，日上出现五彩祥云。
English: In June of the second year, on the day of Wu Yin, five-colored auspicious clouds appeared on the sun.

古文：九月辛酉，夜苍白云三，东西竟天。
现代文：九月辛酉曰，夜晚有苍白的云层三道，呈东西向，布满整个天空。
English: In September, Xinlu said, there were three pale clouds in the evening, east to west, covering the entire sky.

古文：三年正月癸亥，东南有黑云，如人戴笠而揖。
现代文：三年正月癸亥日，东南有黑云，像人戴着笠拱着手。
English: In the first month of the third year, on the day of the boar, there was a black cloud in the southeast, like a person wearing a hat.

古文：四年十一月丁卯，月生五色云。
现代文：四年十一月丁卯日，月亮生出五彩祥云。
English: On November 4th, the moon gave birth to five-colored auspicious clouds.

古文：天顺二年十月壬申，四年十月戊午，亦如之。
现代文：天顺二年十月壬申日，四年十月戊午日，也像那样。
English: Tenshun October 2nd, Jinshin day, October 4th, Wu afternoon, also like that.

古文：成化二年三月辛未，白云起南方，东西竟天。
现代文：成化二年三月辛未日，白云在南方升起，东西向布满整个天空。
English: On a cloudless day in March of the second year of Chenghua, white clouds rose in the south, covering the entire sky in an east-west direction.

古文：十一年正月丙寅，月生五色云。
现代文：十一年正月丙寅日，月亮生出五彩祥云。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the year, the moon gave birth to colorful clouds.

古文：十八年十月庚午，五色云见于泰陵。
现代文：十八年十月庚午日，五彩祥云在泰陵出现。
English: On the afternoon of October 18th, the colorful auspicious clouds appeared in Tai Ling.

古文：二十一年闰四月壬辰，开、濮二州，清丰，金乡，未、申时黑云起西北，化为五色，须臾晦如夜。
现代文：二十一年闰四月壬辰日，开、濮二州，清丰、金乡，在未时、申时黑云从西北产生，变化成五彩，一会儿，晦暗如同夜晚。
English: On April 21st, the leap year, on the day of Yin and Yang, there are two states, Qingfeng and Jinxiang, in the morning and evening, at the time of Yin and Yang, dark clouds appear from the northwest, changing into five colors, and for a while, it is dark as night.

古文：弘治二年正月辛巳，日生五色云。
现代文：弘治二年正月辛巳日，太阳产生五彩祥云。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Heian period, the sun produced five-colored auspicious clouds.

古文：十四年三月己酉朔，嘉靖十七年九月戊子，并如之。
现代文：十四年三月己酉朔日，嘉靖十七年九月戊子日，都如那样。
English: March 14 was the New Year's Day, and September 17 was the Children's Day.

古文：十八年二月庚子朔，当午，日下有五色云见，长径二寸余，形如龙凤。
现代文：十八年二月庚子朔日，正午时分，日下有五彩祥云出现，长径二寸多，形状像龙凤。
English: At noon on the day of the Chinese New Year in February 18th, a colorful auspicious cloud appeared under the sun. It was more than two inches in diameter and shaped like a dragon and phoenix.

古文：万历五年六月庚辰，祥云绕月。
现代文：万历五年六月庚辰日，祥云环绕月亮。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in June of the fifth year of Wanli, auspicious clouds surround the moon.

古文：天启四年六月癸巳，午刻，南方五色云见。
现代文：天启四年六月癸巳日，午时，南方五彩祥云出现。
English: At noon on the day of the snake in June in the fourth year of the Apocalypse, the five-colored auspicious clouds in the south appeared.

