古文：起屠维大渊献，尽强圉协洽，凡九年。
现代文：起，止，一共九年。
English: A total of nine years.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下阳朔三年
现代文：汉成帝阳朔三年
English: Hanzhong Emperor Yangshuo three years

古文：春，三月，壬戌，陨石东郡八。
现代文：春季，三月，壬戌，东郡坠落八块陨石。
English: In the spring, in March, eight meteorites fell in Renmin and Dongxun counties.

古文：夏，六月，颍川铁官徙申屠圣等百八十人杀长吏，盗库兵，自称将军，经历九郡。
现代文：夏季，六月，颖川铁官徒申屠圣等一百八十人，杀官员，盗取军械库兵器，自称 将军 ，经历九个郡。
English: In the summer, in June, the Yingchuan railway official and his follower, Shen, slaughtered 180 people, killed officials, stole armory weapons, and called himself a general. He went through nine counties.

古文：遣丞相长史、御史中丞逐捕，以军兴从事，皆伏辜。
现代文：成帝派遣丞相长史、御史中丞追捕，按战时征调军队的有关规定行事。
English: He sent the prime minister, Nagashi, and the vice-premier, Chujo, to hunt them down, surrounded them with troops, and had them all beheaded.

古文：秋，王凤疾，天子数自临问，亲执其手涕泣曰： 将军病，如有不可言，平阿侯谭次将军矣！ 
现代文：申屠圣等全部伏诛。秋季，王凤患病，成帝数次亲临探望，并亲自握着王凤的手流泪说： 将军染病，如有意外，我想让平阿侯王谭接替大将军！ 
English: In the autumn, Wang Feng fell ill, and Emperor Cheng visited him several times in person. He personally held Wang Feng's hand and said with tears: "The general has fallen ill. If there is an accident, I want Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan to succeed the general!"

古文：凤顿首泣曰： 谭等虽与臣至亲，行皆奢僭，无以率导百姓，不如御史大夫音谨敕，臣敢以死保之！ 
现代文：王凤叩头哭泣说： 王谭等虽与我是至亲，但他们行事追求奢侈，超越本份，无法统率百姓，不如御史大夫王音谨慎小心，行事走正道。
English: Wang Feng bowed his head and wept, saying: Although Wang Tan and others are my closest relatives, they pursue luxury, exceed their duties, and are unable to lead the people. It is better for Wang Yin, the chief historian, to be cautious and take the right path.

古文：及凤且死，上疏谢上，复固荐音自代，言谭等五人必不可用；天子然之。
现代文：我敢用生命保举他！ 及至王凤将死时，上书感谢皇恩，再次坚决推荐王音接替自己，说王谭等五人必不可用。成帝同意了。
English: I dare to use my life to save him! And when Wang Feng was about to die, he wrote a letter thanking the emperor for his grace, once again strongly recommending Wang Yin to succeed him, saying that Wang Tan and five others were indispensable. Emperor Cheng agreed.

古文：初，谭倨，不肯事凤，而音敬凤，卑恭如子，故凤荐之。
现代文：早先，王谭倨傲，不肯奉迎王凤。而王音则对王凤礼敬有加，卑恭如子，所以王凤保举他。
English: Earlier, Wang Tan, proud, refused to bow to Wang Feng. Wang Yin, on the other hand, treated Wang Feng with great respect and was as humble as a child, so Wang Feng protected him.

古文：八月，丁巳，凤薨。
现代文：八月，丁巳，王凤去世。
English: In August, Wang Feng passed away.

古文：九月，甲子，以王音为大司马、车骑将军，而王谭位特进，领城门兵。
现代文：九月，甲子，任命王音为大司马、车骑将军。赐王谭为特进，主管城门兵。
English: In September, Ji Zi appointed Wang Yin as the grand steward of horses and chariot and cavalry, and appointed Wang Tan as the special envoy in charge of the city gate soldiers.

古文：冬，十一月，丁卯，光禄勋于永为御史大夫。
现代文：安定太守谷永，因为王谭没有得到大将军的职位，劝他辞让，不接受主管城门的职务。自此王谭、王音互相不满，结下怨恨。
English: Wang Tan and Wang Yin were dissatisfied with each other and had a grudge against each other ever since Wang Tan was not given the position of general and Wang Yan, the governor of Guiyong, persuaded him to resign and not accept the position of the person in charge of the city gate.

古文：永，定国之子也。
现代文：冬季，十一月，丁卯，任命光禄勋于永为御史大夫。
English: In the winter, November, Dingwu, Guanglu Xun appointed Yu Yong as the Imperial Historian.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下阳朔四年
现代文：于永是于定国的儿子。四年
English: Yu Yong is the son of Yu Dingguo.

古文：春，二月，赦天下。
现代文：春季，二月，大赦天下。
English: Spring, February, general amnesty.

古文：夏，四月，雨雪。
现代文：夏季，四月，降雪。
English: Summer, April, snow.

古文：秋，九月，壬申，东平思王宇薨。
现代文：秋季，九月，壬申，东平王刘宇去世。
English: Autumn, September, Jinshin, Dongping King Liu Yu passed away.

古文：少府王骏为京兆尹。
现代文：任命少府王骏为京兆尹。
English: Appointed the minor prefect Wang Xi as the successor of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：骏，吉之子也。
现代文：王骏是王吉的儿子。
English: Wang Yao is Wang Ji's son.

古文：先是，京兆有赵广汉、张敞、王尊、王章、王骏，皆有能名，故京师称曰： 前有赵、张，后有三王。 
现代文：先前，担任过京兆尹的有赵广汉、张敞、王尊、王章，到王骏，全都以才干出名，因而京师人称赞说： 前有赵、张，后有三王。 
English: Previously, Zhao Guanghan, Zhang Zhan, Wang Zun and Wang Zhang had served as the Beijing Zhaoyun, and they were all famous for their talents. Therefore, the Beijing masters praised: "Before, there was Zhao and Zhang, and after, there were three kings."

古文：闰月，壬戌，于永卒。
现代文：闰十二月，壬戌，于永去世。
English: On leap December, Ren Zheng, Yu Yong passed away.

古文：乌孙小昆弥乌就屠死，子拊离代立；为弟日贰所杀。
现代文：乌孙王国小昆弥乌就屠去世，他的儿子拊离接替小昆弥，拊离又被弟弟日贰杀死。
English: The grandson of the king of Wusun, Xiao Kunmi Wu, died in the battle, and his son Xie Li took over from Xiao Kunmi. Xie Li was then killed by his younger brother, Sun Yat-sen.

古文：汉遣使者立拊离子安日为小昆弥。
现代文：汉朝派遣使者扶立拊离的儿子安日为小昆弥。
English: The Han Dynasty sent an emissary to the Ussun Emperor to ask his estranged son, Anri, to marry Kunmi.

古文：日贰亡阻康居；安日使贵人姑莫匿等三人诈亡从日贰，刺杀之。
现代文：日贰逃亡到康居王国，以阻止安日的追杀。安日指使贵族姑莫匿等三人，诈作反叛逃亡，追随日贰，将他刺杀。
English: Nichigo fled to the kingdom of Kangju to stop Ando's pursuit. Ando ordered three nobles, including his aunt Monani, to fake a rebellion and follow Nichigo to assassinate him.

古文：于是西域诸国上书，愿复得前都护段会宗；上从之。
现代文：于是西域诸国纷纷上书，要求仍派原先的都护段会宗担任西域都护。
English: As a result, the countries of the western region submitted a number of letters requesting that the original tutelage section be assigned to serve as tutelage of the western region.

古文：城郭诸国闻之，皆翕然亲附。
现代文：成帝答应了他们的要求。西域诸城邦王国听到消息，都一致亲近归附汉朝。
English: Emperor Cheng agreed to their request. Upon hearing the news, all the city-state kingdoms in the Western Regions unanimously agreed to join the Han Dynasty.

古文：谷永奏言： 圣王不以名誉加于实效；御史大夫任重职大，少府宣达于从政，唯陛下留神考察！ 
现代文：谷永上奏说： 圣明的君王用人时，不仅注意声誉，更重要的是考察办事的实际能力和效果。御史大夫责任重大，我看少府薛宣，处理政事通达干练，请陛下对他留意考察！ 
English: Gu Yong Shangsoo said: When the king of the Ming Dynasty employs people, he not only pays attention to reputation, but more importantly, examines the actual ability and effect of the work. Dr. Goshi has great responsibility. I think that Shofu Xue Xuan is well-versed and skilled in handling political affairs. Please pay attention to and investigate him!

古文：上然之。
现代文：成帝同意了。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下鸿嘉元年春，正月，癸巳，以薛宣为御史大夫。
现代文：鸿嘉元年春季，正月，癸巳，任命薛宣为御史大夫。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the Hongjia era, he appointed Xue Xuan as the chief historian.

古文：二月，壬午，上行幸初陵，赦作徒；以新丰戏乡为昌陵县，奉初陵。
现代文：二月，壬午，成帝前往自己的陵墓初陵，赦免在墓园作工的刑徒。把新丰的戏乡改为昌陵县，以供奉初陵。
English: In February, at noon, Emperor Cheng went to his own mausoleum, the First Mausoleum, and pardoned the prisoners who worked in the cemetery. He changed Xinfeng's opera town to Changling County to enshrine the First Mausoleum.

古文：上始为微行，从期门郎或私奴十馀人，或乘小车，或皆骑，出入市里郊野，远至旁县甘泉、长杨、五柞，斗鸡、走马，常自称富平侯家人。
现代文：成帝开始微服出行，跟随的期门郎或私奴有十余人，或乘小车，或全部骑马，出入市内街巷和郊野，远到邻县的甘泉、长杨、五柞，斗鸡走马，成帝还常自称是富平侯家人。
English: Chengdi began to travel in micro-uniforms. He was accompanied by more than ten servants or slaves, either by car or all on horseback. He went in and out of the city streets and countryside, as far as the neighboring counties of Ganquan, Changyang, Wuzhong, and walked on horseback. Chengdi also often claimed to be a member of the Fuping family.

古文：富平侯者，张安世四世孙放也。
现代文：所谓富平侯，是张安世的四世孙张放。
English: The so-called Fuping Prince is Zhang Fang, the fourth-generation grandson of Zhang An.

古文：放父临，尚敬武公主，生放，放为侍中、中郎将，娶许皇后女弟，当时宠幸无比，故假称之。
现代文：张放的父亲张临，娶敬武公主为妻，生下张放。张放为侍中、中郎将，娶许皇后的妹妹为妻，当时所受荣宠，没有可以比得上的。
English: Zhang Fang's father, Zhang Lin, married Princess Qianwu and had a daughter, Zhang Fang. Zhang Fang was an aide-de-camp and middle steward, and married the sister of Empress Xu. No one could match the honor and favor he received at that time.

古文：三月，庚戌，张禹以老病罢，以列侯朝朔、望，位特进，见礼如丞相，赏赐前后数千万。
现代文：因此成帝假称自己是富平侯家人。三月，庚戌，张禹因年老多病免官，以列侯的身分，在每月一日、十五日朝见皇帝，并加位特进，朝见时的礼节一如丞相，前后赏赐数千万钱。
English: Therefore, Emperor Cheng pretended to be a member of the Fuping family. In March, Geng Hui dismissed Zhang Yu from his post due to old age and illness. As a vassal lord, he met with the emperor on the first and fifteenth day of each month, and was given a special promotion. The etiquette at the meeting was the same as that of the prime minister, and he was rewarded with tens of millions of money.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰，薛宣为丞相，封高阳侯；京兆尹王骏为御史大夫。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚辰，任命薛宣为丞相，封高阳侯。任命京兆尹王骏为御史大夫。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Chen appointed Xue Xuan as chancellor and Gao Yang as marquis, and appointed Jing Zhaoyin Wang Qian as minister of history.

古文：王音既以从舅越亲用事，小心亲职。
现代文：王音既然以堂舅的身份，超过其他亲舅得到重用，因而小心供职。
English: Since Wang Yin, as a cousin, has been used more than other relatives and uncles, he is careful to serve.

古文：上以音自御史大夫入为将军，不获宰相之封，六月，乙巳，封音为安阳侯。
现代文：成帝因王音是从御史大夫直接擢升为将军，没有得到宰相应当封的爵位。六月，乙巳，封王音为安阳侯。
English: Emperor Cheng was enraged that Wangyin had been promoted directly from goshi taifu to shogun, and had not been given the title of nobility that should have been given to the prime minister. In June, at the stroke of midnight, Wangyin was given the title of Anyang marquis.

古文：冬，黄龙见真定。
现代文：冬季，真定发现黄龙。
English: In winter, Huanglong appears in Zhending.

古文：是岁，匈奴复株累单于死，弟且糜胥立，为搜谐若鞮单于；遣子左祝都韩王呴留斯侯入侍，以且莫车为左贤王。
现代文：本年，匈奴复株累单于去世，弟弟且麋胥继位，为搜谐若单于。单于派遣儿子左祝都韩王留斯侯到长安，作为人质侍奉汉皇。单于又任命且莫车为左贤王。
English: This year, Emperor Xiongnu died and was succeeded by his younger brother, Emperor Jianzhong, for the sake of harmony. Emperor Jianzhong sent his son, Emperor Zuozhuang, to Chang'an to serve Emperor Han as a hostage. Emperor Jianzhong also appointed Emperor Jianzhong as Emperor Zuozhong.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下鸿嘉二年
现代文：二年春季，成帝前往云阳、甘泉。
English: In the spring of the second year, Emperor Chengdi went to Yunyang and Ganquan.

古文：春，上行幸云阳、甘泉。三月，博士行大射礼。
现代文：三月，博士举行大射礼时。
English: In March, when the doctor held a mass shooting ceremony.

古文：有飞雉集于庭，历阶登堂而雊；后雉又集太常、宗正、丞相、御史大夫、车骑将军之府，又集未央宫承明殿屋上。
现代文：有野鸡飞来，群集于庭院，经过台阶登上大堂鸣叫。而后，又飞集于太常、宗正、丞相、御史大夫、车骑将军官府，接着，又飞集于未央宫承明殿的屋顶上。
English: A flock of pheasants flew in, gathered in the courtyard, climbed the steps to the lobby and chirped. Then, they gathered in the government offices of Taizhang, Zongzheng, the prime minister, the chief historian, and the chariot and cavalry commander, and then they gathered on the roof of the Chengming Hall of the Summer Palace.

古文：车骑将军音、待诏宠等上言： 天地之气，以类相应；谴告人君，甚微而著。
现代文：车骑将军王音、待诏宠等上奏说： 天地之气，以类别互相呼应验证，向君王示警的变异，虽然甚为微小，但很显著。
English: The chariot and cavalry generals Wang Yin and Zhidao Diao and others recited the following: The atmosphere of heaven and earth, with the category of mutual echo verification, the variation of warning to the king, although very small, is very significant.

古文：雉者听察，先闻雷声，故《月令》以纪气。
现代文：野鸡听觉敏锐，能最先听到雷声，因而《月令》用野鸡的鸣叫来记录节气。
English: The ostrich hears the most clearly and can hear the thunder first, so the "Lunar Calendar" says that the ostrich announces the solar terms.

古文：《经》载高宗雊雉之异，以明转祸为福之验。
现代文：《书经》记载：高宗武丁祭成汤时，曾出现野鸡飞到鼎耳上鸣叫的不祥异象，而高宗坚守正道，从而消弭了灾祸，这是转祸为福的明显验证。
English: "Shu Jing" records: When Gaozong Wuding was making soup at the festival, there was an ominous vision of pheasants flying and chirping in his ears, but Gaozong adhered to the right path, thus eliminating the disaster, which is a clear proof of turning disaster into blessing.

古文：今雉以博士行礼之日大众聚会，飞集于庭，历阶登堂，万众睢睢，惊怪连日，径历三公之府，太常、宗正典宗庙骨肉之官，然后入宫，其宿留告晓人，具备深切；虽人道相戒，何以过是！ 
现代文：而今，野鸡在博士举行典礼之日，经过台阶登堂，在万人瞩目之下，引起连日的惊怪，一直飞过三公之府，飞过太常、宗正等主持宗庙祭典和皇族事务的官署，然后入宫。野鸡的停留所告诫人们的内容，是深刻而切要的。虽然人们之间也常常互相告诫，但哪里能赶上这个呢！ 
English: Now, on the day of the doctor's ceremony, the pheasant climbs the steps to the hall, attracts the attention of thousands of people, causes days of surprise, and flies all the way through the Three Princes' Palace, through the government offices that preside over the ancestral temple festival and royal family affairs, such as Taizhang and Zongzheng, and then enters the palace. The content of the pheasant's stop to warn people is profound and urgent. Although people often warn each other, where can they catch up with this?

古文：后帝使中常侍晁闳诏音曰： 闻捕得雉，毛羽颇摧折，类拘执者，得无人为之？ 
现代文：而后，成帝派中常侍晁闳传诏询问王音说： 听说捕捉到的野鸡，很多羽毛都折断了，好象曾被抓住关过，莫非有人故意制造变异？ 
English: Later, Wang Yin, a frequent attendant of the Emperor Cheng faction, said: It is said that the quail feathers caught are mostly damaged, as if they were caught and tied. It is not as if someone deliberately caught and released them, right?

古文：音复对曰： 陛下安得亡国之语！
现代文：王音回答说： 陛下怎能说这种亡国的话！
English: Wang Yin replied, "How can your majesty say such words of ruining the country!

古文：不知谁主为佞谄之计，诬乱圣德如此者！
现代文：不知谁敢主谋策划这种奸巧的计策，诬蔑扰乱圣德到如此地步！
English: I don't know who concocted this false accusation to slander the sanctity of life!

古文：左右阿谀甚众，不待臣音复谄而足。
现代文：圣上左右善阿谀的大有人在，不必等我王音再逢迎也已足够。
English: There are many flatterers among the courtiers who are close to His Majesty, so there is no need to repeat such nonsense for the sake of the vassal king.

古文：公卿以下，保位自守，莫有正言。
现代文：公卿及以下，为保官位，人人自守，不敢说出一句正直的话。
English: Nowadays, no one below the rank of court noble or minister dares to come out and speak the truth, as they all try to retain their official positions without doing anything.

古文：如令陛下觉寤，惧大祸且至身，深责臣下，绳以圣法，臣音当先诛，岂有以自解哉！
现代文：如果能让陛下觉悟，惧怕大祸就要降到身上，从而深责臣下，绳之以法，我王音会首先伏诛，岂有自我解脱的道理！
English: If I can make His Majesty realize that he should fear a great calamity befalling him, so that he would severely reprimand his vassals and bring them to justice, I would be the first to be arrested. Is there no way to free oneself?

古文：今即位十五年，继嗣不立，日日驾车而出，失行流闻；海内传之，甚于京师。
现代文：陛下即位已十五年，没有继承皇位的嗣子，却天天驾车出游，干些有失德行的不道之举，在社会上流传，海内的传闻，更甚于京师。
English: It has been fifteen years since His Majesty ascended the throne. He has no heir to the throne, but he travels by car every day and does some immoral and unethical things. This has been circulated in the society, and the rumors within the country are even worse than those in Beijing.

古文：外有微行之害，内有疾病之忧，皇天数见灾异，欲人变更，终已不改。
现代文：陛下外有微服出游的毛病，内有疾病缠身的忧愁，上天屡次降下灾异，希望人能改正过失，然而终至不改。
English: Now it is the harmful effects brought about by the micro-traveling of the outside world, the sorrow of the body getting sick inside, and God has repeatedly shown disasters and abnormalities, and you have to correct it, but you finally do not change it.

古文：天尚不能感动陛下，臣子何望！
现代文：上天尚且不能感动陛下，臣子又能企盼什么呢！
English: Even if the heavens cannot move His Majesty, what can a courtier hope for?

古文：独有极言待死，命在朝暮而已。
现代文：只有直言极谏，等候处死，命在旦夕间而已。
English: It's just a matter of waiting for the sentence to be carried out. My life is on the line day and night.

古文：如有不然，老母安得处所，尚何皇太后之有！
现代文：如有不测，我的老母都没有安生的地方，更何况皇太后，就更没有安全的处所了。
English: If your majesty does not listen to God's reprimand and make corrections, how can my mother live in peace and still be the empress dowager?

古文：高祖天下当以谁属乎！
现代文：到那时，高祖的天下该当托嘱给谁呢？
English: Is there still anyone who can belong to the empire that Gaozu founded?

古文：宜谋于贤智，克己复礼，以求天意，继嗣可立，灾变尚可销也。 
现代文：陛下应当与贤能智慧之人磋商，象孔子所说那样，克制个人的俗望，恢复以礼治国的正道，以求天意保佑，太子降生，灾害变异也才会消失。 
English: His Majesty should consult with people of virtue and wisdom, and, as Confucius said, restrain personal desires, restore the right way of governing the country with etiquette, and seek the blessing of heaven. When the prince is born, disasters and changes will disappear.

古文：初，元帝俭约，渭陵不复徙民起邑；帝起初陵，数年后，乐霸陵曲亭南，更营之。
现代文：当初，汉元帝十分俭省节约，他的陵墓渭陵，不再让居民迁来，建立县邑。而成帝建筑他的初陵，经营数年后，又看上霸陵曲亭以南，就更改地点，重新营建。
English: At first, Emperor Hanyuan was very frugal and thrifty. His mausoleum was so lavish that he no longer allowed residents to move in and established a county town. Emperor Cheng built his first mausoleum, and after a few years of operation, he changed the location and rebuilt it to the south of the tyrant's mausoleum.

古文：将作大匠解万年使陈汤为奏，请为初陵徙民起邑，欲自以为功，求重赏。
现代文：将作大匠解万年，让陈汤替他上奏，请求为成帝新建陵墓迁移居民，建立县邑，想以此为自己邀功，求得重赏。
English: He asked Chen Tang to play the melody for him, and requested the relocation of residents for the newly built mausoleum of Emperor Chengdu and the establishment of counties and towns, hoping to use this to solicit merit for himself and win a reward.

古文：汤因自请先徙，冀得美田宅。
现代文：陈汤因而请求准许他最先搬迁，希图分到肥沃的田地和美好的住宅。
English: Chen Tang therefore asked to be allowed to move first, hoping to be allocated fertile fields and a nice house.

古文：上从其言，果起昌陵邑。
现代文：皇上听从他们的建议，果然设立了昌陵邑。
English: The emperor followed their advice and established Changling.

古文：夏，徙郡国豪桀赀五百万以上五千户于昌陵。
现代文：夏季，下令迁移郡国豪族资产在五百万以上的五千户，充实昌陵地区。
English: In the summer, it was ordered to relocate 5,000 households with more than 5 million assets of the county's powerful families to enrich the Changling area.

古文：五月，癸未，陨石于杜邮三。
现代文：五月，癸未，杜邮坠落三颗陨石。
English: In May, just before dawn, three meteorites fell in Du Post.

古文：六月，立中山宪王孙云客为广德王。
现代文：六月，封中山宪王的孙子刘云客为广德王。
English: In June, Sun Liuyunke, the constitutional king of Zhongshan, was proclaimed the King of Guangde.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下鸿嘉三年夏，四月，赦天下。
现代文：本年，城阳王刘云去世，由于没有儿子，封国撤除。三年夏季，四月，大赦天下。
English: This year, Liu Yun, the King of Chengyang, passed away, and since he had no son, the state seal was removed. In the summer of the third year, in April, he was pardoned.

古文：大旱。
现代文：大旱。
English: There was a severe drought.

古文：王氏五侯争以奢侈相尚。
现代文：王氏五侯竞相崇尚奢华。
English: The five competing princes of the Wang family all advocated luxury.

古文：成都侯商尝病，欲避暑，从上借明光宫。
现代文：成都侯王商曾得病，想找个避暑的地方，就向皇上借用明光宫。
English: Once upon a time, a merchant from Chengdu, Lord Wang, fell ill and wanted to find a place to spend the summer, so he borrowed the Mingguang Palace from the emperor.

古文：后又穿长安城，引内沣水，注第中大陂以行船，立羽盖，张周帷，楫棹越歌。
现代文：后来，他又凿穿长安城墙，引来沣水，注入他家宅第中的大水池，使可以行船取乐。游船上树立羽毛华盖，四周全都张挂帷幔，还命令划船的人唱越歌。
English: Later, he chiseled through the Chang'an city wall to bring in fresh water and filled the large pool in the middle of his house so that he could sail for fun. He set up feathered canopies on the cruise ship, hung curtains all around, and ordered the rowers to sing a song.

古文：上幸商第，见穿城引水，意恨，内衔之，未言；后微行出，过曲阳侯第，又见园中土山、渐台，象白虎殿。于是上怒，以让车骑将军音。
现代文：有一次，成帝到王商的府第，看见池水是穿城挖渠引来的，十分恼怒，但只含恨隐忍，没有说话。后来，成帝微服出行时，经过曲阳侯府第，看见园中修筑土山、渐台，模仿白虎殿，于是成帝大怒，用五侯僭越的罪行指责车骑将军王音。
English: Once, when Emperor Chengdi went to Wang Shang's residence and saw that the water of the pond was brought from a canal dug through the city, he was very angry, but he only hated it and did not say anything. Later, when Emperor Chengdi was traveling, he passed Quyang Hou's residence and saw the construction of a hill and a platform in the garden, imitating the White Tiger Hall, so Emperor Chengdi was furious and accused the chariot-riding general Wang Yin of the crime of crossing five provinces.

古文：商、根兄弟欲自黥、劓以谢太后。
现代文：王商、王根兄弟十分恐慌，就想用在自己脸上刺字割鼻的办法，向太后谢罪。
English: Wang Shang and Wang Gen brothers were so panicked that they wanted to apologize to the empress dowager by cutting their noses and tattooing their faces.

古文：上闻之，大怒，乃使尚书责问司隶校尉、京兆尹，知成都侯商等奢僭不轨，藏匿奸猾，皆阿纵，不举奏正法；二人顿首省户下。
现代文：成帝听说后，更加怒不可遏，就派尚书去责问司隶校尉和京兆尹；明知成都侯王商等奢侈、僭越等种种不轨行为，甚至窝藏坏人，却都阿谀纵容，不举奏揭发，将他们绳之以法。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Cheng became even more enraged. He sent Shang Shu to interrogate Lieutenant Sili and Jing Zhaoyun. He knew that the lords and merchants of Chengdu were indulging in extravagant and devious behavior, and even harboring bad people, but he indulged them and did not expose them and bring them to justice.

古文：又赐车骑将军音策书曰： 外家何甘乐祸败！
现代文：司隶校尉和京兆尹两人在禁宫门外叩头请罪。成帝又给车骑将军王音下策书说： 外戚为什么自己甘愿犯罪从而败落呢？
English: Sili school lieutenant and Jing Zhaoyun both kowtowed and pleaded guilty outside the gate of the Forbidden City. Emperor Cheng also wrote a letter to the cavalry general Wang Yin, saying: Why is the maternal relative willing to commit a crime and thus fall?

古文：而欲自黥、劓，相戮辱于太后前，伤慈母之心，以危乱国家！
现代文：竟然打算给自己刺面割鼻，在太后面前摆出一副受戮辱的样子，大伤太后的慈母之心，从而危害搅乱国家。
English: He even planned to cut his own nose and face, and make a show of being humiliated in front of the empress dowager, which would greatly hurt the motherly heart of the empress dowager, thus endangering and disturbing the country.

古文：外家宗族强，上一身浸弱日久，今将一施之，君其召诸侯，令待府舍！ 
现代文：外戚宗族势力过强，朕在他们的包围熏染下，很长一段时间都软弱无所作为，今天我要对他们一一处罚。你立即把王商等人召到你那里，等待处理！ 
English: The influence of my relative's clan is too strong. Under their siege and influence, I have been weak and inactive for a long time. Today, I will punish them one by one. You should immediately summon Wang Shang and others to your place and wait for them to be dealt with!

古文：是日，诏尚书奏文帝时诛将军薄昭故事。
现代文：这天，成帝还诏令尚书，奏报汉文帝诛杀将军薄昭的旧事。
English: On this day, the imperial edict was issued again, ordering Shang to write about the old story of assassinating General Bo Zhao during the reign of Emperor Wen.

古文：车骑将军音藉稿请罪，商、立、根皆负斧质谢，良久乃已。
现代文：车骑将军王音坐在草垫子上，请罪待刑。王商、王立、王根都背负刀斧和砧板，表示谢罪待刑。
English: Wang Yin, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, sat on a grass mat to plead guilty and await punishment. Wang Shang, Wang Li, and Wang Gen all carried swords, axes, and cutting boards on their backs to show their gratitude for the punishment.

古文：上特欲恐之，实无意诛也。
现代文：过了很久，此事才平息。成帝不过是要恐吓他们，实在并没有诛杀他们的意思。
English: It took a long time for the situation to calm down. Cheng Di only wanted to intimidate them, he really didn't mean to kill them.

古文：秋，八月，乙卯，孝景庙北阙灾。
现代文：秋季，八月，乙卯，孝景帝祭庙北门失火。
English: In the autumn, in August, the north gate of the Emperor Xiaoqing's temple caught fire.

古文：初，许皇后与班婕妤皆有宠于上。
现代文：最初，许皇后与班都受成帝宠爱。
English: At first, both Empress Xu and Ban were favored by Emperor Chengdu.

古文：上尝游后庭，欲与婕妤同辇载，婕妤辞曰： 观古图画，贤圣之君皆有名臣在侧，三代末主乃有嬖妾。
现代文：有一次，成帝在后宫庭院游玩，想跟班同乘一辆车，班推辞说： 我观看古代的图画，圣贤的君王身旁，都跟随着名臣，而三代末世的君王身旁，才有宠妾。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Cheng visited the courtyard of the harem and wanted to ride in a carriage with Ban. Ban said, "I was looking at ancient paintings. The kings of the sages were accompanied by their eminent courtiers, while the kings of the last three generations were accompanied by their favorite concubines."

古文：今欲同辇，得无近似之乎！ 
现代文：现在陛下想让我同车，是不是有些相似呢！ 
English: Now His Majesty wants me to ride with him, isn't that somewhat similar?

古文：上善其言而止。
现代文：成帝对她的回答很赞赏，也就不再勉强。
English: Emperor Cheng thought that what she said made a lot of sense, so he gave up.

古文：太后闻之，喜曰： 古有樊姬，今有班婕妤！ 
现代文：太后听说了，高兴地说： 古代有樊姬，今天有班！ 
English: The Empress Dowager heard about it and said happily: "In ancient times, there was Shun Ji, today there is Ban!"

古文：班婕妤进侍者李平得幸，亦为婕妤，赐姓曰卫。
现代文：班把侍者李平进献成帝，李平受到宠幸，也被封为，赐姓 卫 。
English: Ban dedicated the waiter Li Pingjin to the emperor, Li Ping was favored, also named, and given the surname Wei.

古文：其后，上微行过阳阿主家，悦歌舞者赵飞燕，召入宫，大幸；有女弟，复召入，姿性尤醲粹，左右见之，皆啧啧嗟赏。
现代文：此后，成帝微服出行，到阳阿公主的家，喜欢上公主家的歌舞女赵飞燕，把她召入宫中，大加宠爱。赵飞燕有个妹妹，也被召入宫，姿容特别美艳，毫无瑕疵。成帝左右的人看见她，都惊叹赞赏。
English: After that, Emperor Cheng's micro-suit went to Princess Yang's home. Zhao Feiyan, a singer and dancer who liked the princess's family, invited her to the palace and loved her very much. Zhao Feiyan had a younger sister, who was also invited to the palace. Her appearance was particularly beautiful and flawless. People around Emperor Cheng saw her and were amazed and admired.

古文：有宣帝时披香博士淖方成在帝后，唾曰： 此祸水也，灭火必矣！ 
现代文：有位汉宣帝时的披香博士淖方成，当时正站在成帝身后，却唾口水说： 这是祸水呀，定会扑灭汉王朝之火！ 
English: There was a Dr. Fu Fangcheng from the time of Emperor Xuan of Han, who was standing behind Emperor Cheng at the time, but he spat and said: This is a disaster, it will surely extinguish the fire of the Han Dynasty!

古文：姊、弟俱为婕妤，贵倾后宫。
现代文：赵飞燕姐妹俩都被封为，一时尊贵荣宠，压倒后宫。
English: Both of Zhao Feiyan's sisters were crowned, and for a while they were honored and favored, overwhelming the harem.

古文：许皇后、班婕妤皆失宠。
现代文：许皇后、班都失宠了。
English: Both the Queen and Ben have fallen out of favour.

古文：于是赵飞燕谮告许皇后、班婕妤挟媚道，祝诅后宫，詈及主上。
现代文：于是赵飞燕向成帝进谗言说，许皇后，班用妖术诅咒后宫得宠的美人，甚至连皇上都骂到了。
English: So Zhao Feiyan said to Emperor Cheng, "Empress Xu, you have cursed the beloved beauty of the harem with magic, and even the emperor has cursed you.

古文：冬，十一月，甲寅，许后废处昭台宫，后姊谒等皆诛死，亲属归故郡。
现代文：冬季，十一月，甲寅，许后被废，迁居昭台宫。许后的姐姐许谒等人全被诛杀，许后的亲属被逐归原郡。
English: In winter, in November, in Jiaying, Xu Hou was deposed and moved to Zhaotai Palace. Xu Hou's sister Xu Yao and others were all killed, and Xu Hou's relatives were expelled back to the original county.

古文：考问班婕妤，婕妤对曰： 妾闻 死生有命，富贵在天。 
现代文：审讯班崐时，班回答说： 我听说 死生有命，富贵在天 。
English: During his interrogation, Ban replied: "I heard that life and death are intertwined, and that wealth is in the sky.

古文：修正尚未蒙福，为邪欲以何望！
现代文：我修行持正，尚且没有享到幸福，如果做邪的事，就更不用想有好结果了。
English: I have been practicing righteousness, but I have not yet enjoyed happiness. If I do something evil, I don't even have to think about having a good outcome.

古文：使鬼神有知，不受不臣之诉；如其无知，诉之何益！
现代文：假使鬼神有知，不会听取诅咒主上的恶诉；假使鬼神无知，向鬼神诉说又有什么用呢？
English: If the ghosts and gods have knowledge, they will not listen to the evil complaints of the cursing Lord; if the ghosts and gods are ignorant, what is the use of telling the ghosts and gods?

古文：故不为也。 
现代文：所以用妖术诅咒之事，我不会做的。 
English: That's why I don't do it.

古文：上善其对，赦之，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：成帝认为她说的有道理，就赦免了她，并赐黄金百斤。
English: Emperor Cheng thought that what she said was reasonable, so he pardoned her and gave her 100 kilos of gold.

古文：赵氏姊、弟骄妒，婕妤恐久见危，乃求共养太后于长信宫。
现代文：赵氏姐妹骄横妒嫉，班怕时间长了，终为所害，就请求到长信宫侍奉太后。
English: The Zhao sisters were arrogant and jealous. They were afraid that it would take too long, and eventually they were offended and asked to go to Changxin Palace to serve the empress dowager.

古文：上许焉。
现代文：皇上予以批准。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed.

古文：广汉男子郑躬等六十馀人攻官寺，篡囚徒，盗库兵；自称山君。
现代文：广汉男子郑躬等六十余人，攻打官府，劫走囚犯，盗取军械库兵器。郑躬自称山君。
English: Zheng Mu, a man from Guanghan, and more than 60 others attacked government offices, kidnapped prisoners, and stole armory weapons. Zheng Mu called himself the Mountain King.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下鸿嘉四年
现代文：鸿嘉四年
English: Four years of Hong Jia

古文：秋，勃海、清河、信都河水湓溢，灌县、邑三十一，败官亭、民舍四万馀所。
现代文：秋季，黄河在勃海、清河、信都泛滥成灾，淹没三十一个县、邑，冲毁官亭、民房四万余所。
English: In autumn, the Yellow River flooded the cities of Bohai, Qinghe and Xindu, submerging 31 counties and towns, and destroying more than 40,000 government buildings and private houses.

古文：平陵李寻等奏言： 议者常欲求索九河故迹而穿之。
现代文：平陵人李寻上奏说： 讨论治河之策的人，总想寻找九河故道，按照故道挖掘治理。
English: Li Xuan, a Pingling resident, said: People who discuss river management policies always want to find the old ways of the nine rivers and excavate and manage them according to the old ways.

古文：今因其自决，可且勿塞，以观水势；河欲居之，当稍自成川，跳出沙土。
现代文：而今趁着黄河自己决口，可以暂时不堵塞缺口，以观察水的走势，要想让黄河有固定的水道，就应当让它自己逐渐形成河川，再沿河川挑出河床的沙土。
English: Now, taking advantage of the Yellow River's own outflow, we can temporarily unplug the gap to observe the water trend. If we want the Yellow River to have a fixed waterway, we should let it gradually form rivers on its own, and then pick out the sand of the riverbed along the river.

古文：然后顺天心而图之，必有成功，而用财力寡。 
现代文：然后按照上天的意愿加以规划治理，必能取得成功，而且所用财力、人力都可节省。 
English: Then, according to God's will, it will be planned and governed, which will surely be successful, and the financial resources and manpower used can be saved.

古文：于是遂止不塞。
现代文：于是就停下来，不堵塞黄河缺口。
English: It then stopped without jamming.

古文：朝臣数言百姓可哀，上遣使者处业振赡之。
现代文：朝臣屡次提出灾区百姓处境悲惨，成帝派使者安置赈济灾区百姓。
English: The courtier repeatedly raised the tragic situation of the people in the disaster area, and Emperor Chengdi sent an envoy to resettle and help the people in the disaster area.

古文：广汉郑躬等党与浸广，犯历四县，众且万人；州郡不能制。
现代文：广汉郑躬的党羽日益增加，势力范围愈来愈广，曾攻击四个县，人众将近万人，州郡也镇压不住。
English: Guanghan Zheng Mu's party is increasing day by day, and his sphere of influence is getting wider and wider. He once attacked four counties, with a crowd of nearly ten thousand people. He can't suppress counties and prefectures.

古文：冬，以河东都尉赵护为广汉太守，发郡中及蜀郡合三万人击之，或相捕斩除罪；旬月平。
现代文：冬季，朝廷任命河东都尉赵护为广汉太守，征发广汉郡及蜀郡兵共三万人，攻击郑躬。有贼人互相捕捉斩杀，官府赦免其罪。
English: In the winter, the imperial court appointed the captain of Hedong, Zhao Zong, as the governor of Guanghan, and conscripted a total of 30,000 soldiers from Guanghan County and Shu County to attack Zheng Mu. Some thieves caught and killed each other, and the government pardoned their crimes.

古文：迁护为执金吾，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：不到一个月，叛乱平息。擢升赵护为执金吾，赐黄金百斤。
English: In less than a month, the rebellion was quelled. Zhao You was promoted to the position of chief and was awarded 100 kg of gold.

古文：是岁，平阿安侯王谭薨。
现代文：这年，平阿侯王谭去世。
English: This year, Ping Ahou Wang Tan passed away.

古文：上悔废谭使不辅政而薨也，乃复成都侯商以特进领城门兵，置幕府，得举吏如将军。
现代文：成帝后悔弃置王谭，使他没有担任辅政大臣就去世了。于是再次任用成都侯王商，让他以特进身份主管城门兵，设置幕府，使他与将军同样有举荐官吏的权力。
English: Emperor Cheng regretted abandoning Wang Tan, so he died without serving as an assistant minister of state. Therefore, he reappointed the lord of Chengdu, Wang Shang, and put him in charge of the city gate soldiers as a special envoy, set up a shogunate, and gave him the same power as the general to recommend officials.

古文：魏郡杜鄴时为郎，素善车骑将军音，见音前与平阿侯有隙，即说音曰： 夫戚而不见殊，孰能无怨！
现代文：魏郡人杜邺，当时官职为郎，他一向与车骑将军王音要好，见王音从前与平阿侯有嫌隙，就劝王音说： 亲人之间不应该疏远，谁能没有点怨恨呢？
English: Du Qian from Wei County, who was the son of a government official at the time, had always been closer to the chariot and cavalry general Wang Ying. Seeing that Wang Ying had a grudge against Ping A Hou, he persuaded Wang Ying to say: Relatives should not be estranged from each other. Who can do without a bit of resentment?

古文：昔秦伯有千乘之国而不能容其母弟，《春秋》讥焉。
现代文：将国家从陕地划开，分别主持，二人同为天子的左辅右弼。
English: He separated the country from Shaanxi Province and presided over it separately. Both of them were the left assistant and right assistant of the heavenly son.

古文：周、召则不然，忠以相辅，义以相匡，同己之亲，等己之尊，不以圣德独兼国宠，又不为长专受荣任，分职于陕，并为弼疑，故内无感恨之隙，外无侵侮之羞，俱享天祐，两荷高名者，盖以此也。窃见成都侯以特进领城门兵，复有诏得举吏如五府，此明诏所欲宠也。
现代文：因此内无遗憾怨恨的嫌隙，外无遭受抨击侮辱的羞耻，同享上天的福佑，也同时负有高名的原因，就在于此吧。我看成都侯王商，以特进的身份主管城门兵，皇上还下诏，使他一如五府有举荐官吏的职权。诏书的意思十分明显，说明圣上一定要对他格外宠信。
English: Therefore, there is no room for regret or resentment inside, no shame for being criticized or insulted outside, and the reason for enjoying the blessings of heaven and having a high reputation at the same time is this. I think that Chengdu Prince Wang Shang, as a special envoy, was in charge of the gate soldiers. The emperor also issued an edict, so that he, like the five prefectures, had the authority to recommend officials. The meaning of the edict is very clear, indicating that the saint must be particularly fond of him.

古文：将军宜承顺圣意，加异往时，每事凡议，必与及之。
现代文：将军应该禀承顺从圣上的旨意，加倍改变过去的作法，每件政事，凡有建议奏章，都必与王商磋商。
English: The general should be obedient to the holy will, double change the past practice, and consult with Wang Shang on every political matter and every proposal.

古文：发于至诚，则孰不说谕！ 
现代文：只要发自内心的至诚，则谁又会不高兴呢！ 
English: As long as the sincerity comes from the heart, who would not be happy!

古文：音甚嘉其言，由是与成都侯商亲密。
现代文：王音非常赞许他的看法崐，从此与成都侯王商亲密。
English: Wang Yin highly approved of his opinion, and since then, he has been close to Chengdu Lord Wang Shang.

古文：二人皆重鄴。
现代文：两人都很看重杜邺。
English: They both value cuckoo clocks.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下永始元年春，正月，癸丑，太官凌室火。戊午，戾后园南阙火。
现代文：永始元年春季，正月，癸丑，太官冰室发生火灾。戊午，戾后陵园南门发生火灾。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the Yongshi era, a fire broke out in the ice room of the eunuch. At noon, a fire broke out in the south gate of the Gongou Mausoleum.

古文：上欲立赵婕妤为皇后，皇太后嫌其所出微甚，难之。
现代文：成帝想封赵飞燕为皇后，但皇太后嫌她出身太微贱，从中阻拦。
English: Emperor Cheng wanted to crown Zhao Feiyan as empress, but the empress dowager thought her birth was too humble and prevented her from doing so.

古文：太后姊子淳于长为侍中，数往来通语东宫；岁馀，乃得太后指，许之。
现代文：太后姐姐的儿子淳于长任侍中，多次往来于东宫，为成帝传话。经过一年多，才得到太后的旨意，予以允许。
English: The son of the empress dowager's sister, Jun, was one of the long-serving attendants and visited the East Palace many times to deliver a message for Emperor Cheng. It took more than a year before he received the empress dowager's permission.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，上先封婕妤父临为成阳侯。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙亥，成帝先封赵飞燕的父亲赵临为成阳侯。
English: In the summer, in April, Yihai, Zhao Lin, the father of Zhao Feiyan, was appointed as the Prince of Chengyang.

古文：谏大夫河间刘辅上书，言： 昔武王、周公，承顺天地以飨鱼、鸟之瑞，然犹君臣礻氐惧，动色相戒。
现代文：谏大夫、河间人刘辅上书说： 往昔武王、周公承顺天地，因而有白鱼入王舟、火焰变乌鸦的祥瑞，然而君臣仍然心怀恭敬和恐惧，脸为变色，互相戒勉。
English: Liu Fu, a doctor from Handan and a native of Kawama, wrote: "In the past, King Wu and Zhou Gong inherited the heavens and the earth, so there were white fish entering the king's boat and the auspiciousness of the flame turning into a crow. However, monarchs and ministers still hold respect and fear in their hearts, their faces are discolored, and they are wary of each other.

古文：况于季世，不蒙继嗣之福，屡受威怒之异者虖！
现代文：何况现在正处末世，没有太子降生的福气，却屡次遭受上天降威震怒的变异呢！
English: What's more, we are now in the last days, and do not have the blessing of the birth of a prince, but have repeatedly been subjected to the wrath of God!

古文：虽夙夜自责，改过易行，畏天命，念祖业，妙选有德之世，考卜窈窕之女，以承宗庙，顺神祗心，塞天下望，子孙之祥犹恐晚暮！
现代文：虽然日夜自责检讨，改过易行，敬畏天命，思念祖宗大业，精选品德高尚的家族，从中稽考挑选窈窕淑女，以承奉宗庙，顺从神灵之心，满足天下人的希望，然而要想有生子生孙的福气，仍然恐怕太晚！
English: Although the day and night self-condemnation review, change the easy way, fear the fate of heaven, miss the great cause of the ancestors, select the virtuous family, select the beautiful lady from the review, to serve the ancestral temple, obey the heart of the gods, and meet the hopes of the world, however, if you want to have the blessing of having children and grandchildren, it is still too late!

古文：今乃触情纵欲，倾于卑贱之女，欲以母天下，不畏于天，不愧于人，惑莫大焉！
现代文：可是陛下现在却放纵情欲，倾心迷恋卑贱之女，想让这样的女子作天下之母，既不畏于天，又不愧于人，陛下的迷惑，没有比现在更大的了！
English: But Your Majesty is now indulging in lust, infatuated with a lowly woman, and wants to make such a woman the mother of the world, neither afraid of heaven, nor worthy of people. Your Majesty's confusion is no greater than it is now!

古文：里语曰： 腐木不可以为柱；人婢不可以为主。 
现代文：俚语说： 腐木不可用做梁柱，婢女不可成为主人。 
English: As the saying goes: "A rotten tree cannot be used as a pillar, and a maid cannot become a master."

古文：天人之所不予，必有祸而无福，市道皆共知之，朝廷莫肯壹言。臣窃伤心，不敢不尽死！ 
现代文：上天和人民都不赞成的事情，必然有祸而无福，这是街市小民和路人都懂得的道理，朝廷却没有人肯说一句话，我为此痛心，不敢不冒死劝谏。 
English: Things that are disapproved of by both heaven and the people are bound to bring misfortune rather than good fortune. This is a truth that the common people and passers-by understand, but no one in the imperial court is willing to say a word. I am heartbroken about this and dare not risk my life to persuade them.

古文：书奏，上使侍御史收缚辅，系掖庭秘狱，群臣莫知其故。
现代文：奏章上去后，成帝派侍御史逮捕了刘辅，囚禁在宫廷秘密监狱里。群臣都不知道他被捕的原因。
English: After the opening of the musical score, the emperor sent an attendant to arrest Liu Bei and imprison him in a secret prison in the harem. The ministers did not understand the reason for this.

古文：于是左将军辛庆忌、右将军廉褒、光禄勋琅邪师丹、太中大夫谷永俱上书曰： 窃见刘辅前以县令求见，擢为谏大夫，此其言必有卓诡切至当圣心者，故得拔至于此；旬月之间，收下秘狱。
现代文：当时左将军辛庆忌、右将军廉褒、光禄勋琅邪人师丹、太中大夫谷永，都上书说： 我们看到刘辅从前以县令的身份求见陛下，被陛下擢升为谏大夫，这说明他的话必具卓异的见识，正好深合圣心，所以才能够被提拔到这样的地位。
English: At that time, Left General Xin Qingqi, Right General Liang Bo, Guanglu Honored Evil Teacher Dan, and Taizhong Doctor Gu Yong all wrote a letter saying: We saw that Liu Fu had previously asked to see His Majesty as a county magistrate, and was promoted by His Majesty to the position of Shao doctor, which shows that his words must have extraordinary insight, just deep into the sacred heart, so he could be promoted to such a position.

古文：臣等愚以为辅幸得托公族之亲，在谏臣之列，新从下土来，未知朝廷体，独触忌讳，不足深过。
现代文：不到一个月的时间，却突然被逮捕，关押在秘密监狱。我们愚昧地认为，刘辅有幸为皇族宗亲之一，位列谏臣。他新近才从下面的县邑来到，不懂朝廷规矩，独自触犯了陛下的忌讳，不足以深加追究。
English: Less than a month later, he was suddenly arrested and detained in a secret prison. We foolishly believed that Liu Fu was fortunate enough to be one of the royal family's ancestors and ranked as a vassal. He had only recently arrived from the county town below, did not know the rules of the imperial court, and violated His Majesty's taboo on his own, which was not enough to pursue.

古文：小罪宜隐忍而已，如有大恶，宜暴治理官，与众共之。
现代文：若是小罪，陛下还是应该隐忍一下；如有大罪，就应公开揭露，让司法官吏去查办，使大家都知道他的罪恶。
English: Minor crimes should be tolerated, and if there is a major crime, it should be submitted to judicial officials for public trial, so that everyone knows his guilt and punishes him together.

古文：今天心未豫，灾异屡降，水旱迭臻，方当隆宽广问，褒直尽下之时也，而行惨急之诛于谏争之臣，震惊群下，失忠直心。
现代文：现在天心不悦，屡降灾异，水旱迭至。正处在应该施恩宽容，广求建议，褒奖直言，使臣下尽言的时候，却对谏诤之臣施以惨痛激烈的处罚，使群臣震惊，丧失尽忠直言之心。
English: At a time when it is necessary to be gracious and tolerant, to seek advice widely, to reward straightforwardness, and to encourage one's vassals to speak their minds, he inflicted a painful and fierce punishment on his vassal, shocking his vassals and causing them to lose their loyalty and sincerity.

古文：假令辅不坐直言，所坐不著，天下不可户晓。
现代文：假如刘辅不是因直言获罪，罪名又不公布，那么就不能使天下家喻户晓。
English: If Liu Wei did not commit the crime because he was outspoken, then if he did not publicly announce the crime he committed, the whole world would not know about it.

古文：同姓近臣，本以言显，其于治亲养忠之义，诚不宜幽囚于掖庭狱。
现代文：刘辅是同姓近臣，本因直言而获显达，从管理亲族、培养忠良的意义上说，实在不该把他幽禁在宫廷监狱。
English: Liu Zuo was a close retainer with the same surname. He was famous for his outspokenness. In terms of managing relatives and cultivating loyalty, he really should not have been imprisoned in the palace prison.

古文：公卿以下，见陛下进用辅亟而折伤之暴，人有惧心，精锐销耎，莫敢尽节正言，非所以昭有虞之听，广德美之风！
现代文：公卿及以下官员，见陛下很快地擢升任用刘辅，又迅速加以摧折，人人怀有恐惧之心，精气顿销，锐气减弱，不敢为国尽忠直言了。这就不能显示出陛下具有虞舜倾听直谏的贤德，也不能推广美好的道德风范。
English: His Majesty's rapid promotion and appointment of Liu Bei, as well as his swift destruction of Liu Bei, have made everyone fearful, and they have lost their energy and courage to speak out for the country. This does not show that His Majesty has the virtue of listening attentively, nor does it promote a good moral style.

古文：曼寡妇渠供养东宫，子莽幼孤，不及等比，其群兄弟皆将军、五侯子，乘时侈靡，以舆马声色佚游相高。
现代文：最初，太后有兄弟八人，唯独弟弟王曼早死，没有封侯。太后怜惜他，把王曼的遗孀渠供养在东宫。王曼的儿子王莽，从小成孤儿，不能与其他人相比。那些兄弟的父亲都是将军、王侯，可以凭父亲当时的地位恣意奢华，在车马声色放荡游乐方面互相竞赛。
English: In the beginning, the empress dowager had eight brothers, but her younger brother Wang Mangru died early and was not given a title. The empress dowager took pity on him and provided Wang Mangru's widow with a dowry in the East Palace. Wang Mangru's son Wang Mangru, who was orphaned as a child, could not be compared with others. The fathers of those brothers were generals and princes, and they could use their father's status at that time to be arbitrarily extravagant and compete with each other in terms of carriages, horses, and debauchery.

古文：莽因折节为恭俭，勤身博学，被服如儒生；事母及寡嫂，养孤兄子，行甚敕备；又外交英俊，内事诸父，曲有礼意。
现代文：而王莽是屈己下人，态度谦恭，勤学苦修，学识渊博，穿着像儒生。侍奉母亲跟寡嫂，抚养亡兄的孤儿，十分尽心周到。同时，在外结交的都是些俊杰之士，在内对待诸位伯父叔父，能委曲迁就，礼敬有加。
English: Wang Mang, on the other hand, was a humble person, with a courteous attitude, diligent in his studies, knowledgeable, and dressed like a Confucian. He served his mother and his widowed sister-in-law, and raised the orphans of his deceased brother, with great dedication and thoughtfulness. At the same time, he made friends with some outstanding people, and treated his uncles and uncles with deference and courtesy.

古文：大将军凤病，莽侍疾，亲尝药，乱首垢面，不解衣带连月。
现代文：大将军王凤病重时，王莽侍候他，亲口尝药，一连几个月都不能解衣入睡，因而蓬头垢面。
English: When the great general Wang Feng was seriously ill, Wang Mang waited on him and personally tasted the medicine. For months, he was unable to undress and fall asleep, resulting in a disheveled appearance.

古文：凤且死，以托太后及帝，拜为黄门郎，迁射声校尉。
现代文：王凤将死时，把王莽托付给太后及成帝，王莽因此被封为黄门郎，以后又升任射声校尉。
English: At the time of his death, Wang Feng entrusted Wang Mang to the Empress Dowager and Emperor Cheng. He was appointed Huangmen Lang, and later promoted to Lieutenant of Yixing.

古文：久之，叔父成都侯商上书，愿分户邑以封莽。
现代文：很久以后，叔父成都侯王商上书，表示愿分出自己封地上的土地和百姓，请求皇上封给王莽。
English: After a long time, Wang Shang, the uncle of the Lord of Chengdu, wrote a letter, expressing his willingness to separate the land and people on his fief, and requesting the emperor to grant Wang Mang.

古文：长乐少府戴崇、侍中金涉、中郎陈汤等皆当世名士，咸为莽言，上由是贤莽，太后又数以为言。
现代文：长乐少府戴崇、侍中金涉、中郎陈汤等，都是当代名士，也都为王莽美言。成帝因而认为王莽贤能，太后又屡次以此嘱咐成帝。
English: Changle minor prefect Dai Chong, chamberlain Jin Zang, and middle steward Chen Tang are all contemporary celebrities, and they are also good words for Wang Mang. Emperor Cheng therefore considered Wang Mang to be a wise man, and the empress dowager repeatedly ordered Emperor Cheng to do so.

古文：五月，乙未，封莽为新都侯，迁骑都尉、光禄大夫、侍中。
现代文：五月，乙未，封王莽为新都侯，升为骑都尉、光禄大夫、侍中。
English: In May of the same year, Wang Mang was appointed as the new governor of the capital, and was promoted to cavalry captain, doctor of Guanglu, and chamberlain.

古文：宿卫谨敕，爵位益尊，节操愈谦，散舆马、衣裘振施宾客，家无所馀；收赡名士，交结将、相、卿、大夫甚众。
现代文：王莽在宫廷服务谨慎尽心，爵位越尊贵，他的礼节操守越谦恭。他把自己的车马、衣物、皮裘周济给门下宾客，而自己却家无余财。他收罗赡养名士，结交很多将、相、卿、大夫。
English: Wang Mang served the court carefully and conscientiously. The more noble the title, the more courteous his etiquette. He gave his chariots and horses, clothes, and furs to his guests, but his family had no spare money. He supported celebrities and made friends with many generals, princes, lords, and doctors.

古文：故在位更推荐之，游者为之谈说，虚誉隆洽，倾其诸父矣。
现代文：因而在位的官员轮番向皇帝推荐他，善游说的人也为他到处宣传，虚假不实的声誉隆盛无比，压过了他的诸位伯父叔父。
English: Therefore, people in important positions recommended him more, famous people in society preached and preached for him, and his reputation spread throughout the country, surpassing his uncles and uncles.

古文：敢为激发之行，处之不渐恧。
现代文：他敢于做违俗立异的事情，而又安然处之，毫无愧色。
English: He dares to do unconventional and innovative things, and yet he is at peace with it, without shame.

古文：尝私买侍婢，昆弟或颇闻知，莽因曰： 后将军硃子元无子，莽闻此儿种宜子，为买之 。
现代文：王莽曾私下买了一个婢女，兄弟中有人听说了，王莽于是辩解： 后将军朱子元没有儿子，我听说此女有宜男相。 
English: Wang Mang had secretly bought a maid. Some of his brothers heard about it, so Wang Mang defended himself: The later general Zhu Ziyuan did not have a son. I heard that this woman had a man's face.

古文：即日以婢奉硃博。
现代文：当天就把婢女奉送给朱博。
English: On the same day, the maid was given to Zhu Bo.

古文：其匿情求名如此！
现代文：他就是这样隐匿真情博取名声！
English: This is how he hides his true feelings and gains fame!

古文：六月，丙寅，立皇后赵氏，大赦天下。
现代文：六月，丙寅，成帝封赵飞燕为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In June, Emperor Yongle made Zhao Feiyan the empress and pardoned her.

古文：皇后既立，宠少衰。
现代文：赵飞燕当上皇后以后，成帝对她的宠爱稍有衰退。
English: After Zhao Feiyan became empress, Emperor Chengdu's affection for her waned slightly.

古文：而其女弟绝幸，为昭仪，居昭阳舍，其中庭彤硃而殿上髹漆；切皆铜沓，黄金涂；白玉阶；壁带往往为黄金釭，函蓝田璧、明珠、翠羽饰之。
现代文：而她的妹妹却受宠空前，被封为昭仪，赐住昭阳舍，居处中庭全用朱红色，而殿上则漆成黑色。门限全用铜包，再涂以黄金。台阶用白玉雕成。屋内墙壁上带状的横木，处处嵌有黄金环，环内镶上蓝田玉璧、明珠、翠羽来装饰。
English: Her younger sister, on the other hand, was favored like never before. She was given the title of Zhaoyi and given the residence of Zhaoyang House. The atrium of the residence was entirely made of vermilion, while the hall was painted black. The doorway was entirely made of copper cladding, which was then coated with gold. The steps were carved from white jade. The ribbon-like crosspieces on the walls of the house were embedded with gold rings everywhere, and the rings were inlaid with blue jade, pearls, and green feathers to decorate them.

古文：自后宫未尝有焉。
现代文：其奢华是后宫从来没有过的。
English: It's luxurious in a way that the harem never was.

古文：赵后居别馆，多通侍郎、宫奴多子者。
现代文：赵皇后居住在另外一个宫殿，跟侍郎和多子的宫奴屡次私通。
English: Empress Zhao lived in another palace and had multiple affairs with her attendants and retainers.

古文：昭仪尝谓帝曰： 妾姊性刚，有如为人构陷，则赵氏无种矣！ 
现代文：赵昭仪曾对成帝说： 我姐姐性格刚烈，假如被人构陷，则我们赵氏就要绝种了！ 
English: Zhao Zhaoyi once said to Emperor Chengdi: My sister has a strong character. If she were to be framed, the Zhao clan would become extinct!

古文：因泣下忄妻恻。
现代文：趁势哭得十分凄恻。
English: She took advantage of the situation to cry very bitterly.

古文：帝信之，有白后奸状者，帝辄杀之。
现代文：成帝相信了她的话，有报告皇后奸情的人，成帝就把他杀死。
English: Emperor Cheng believed her and killed anyone who reported the queen's adultery.

古文：由是后公为淫恣，无敢言者，然卒无子。
现代文：从此，赵皇后公然恣意宣淫，没有人敢报告了，然而始终不生孩子。
English: From then on, Empress Zhao openly and arbitrarily masturbated, and no one dared to report it. However, she never had any children.

古文：光禄大夫刘向以为王教由内及外，自近者始，于是采取《诗》、《书》所载贤妃、贞妇兴国显家及孽、嬖乱亡者，序次为《列女传》，凡八篇，及采传记行事，著《新序》、《说苑》，凡五十篇，奏之，数上疏言得失，陈法戒。
现代文：光禄大夫刘向认为，国家的道德风化教育，应该由内及外，先从皇帝身边的人开始。于是摘录《诗经》、《书经》所记载的贤妃、贞妇使国家振兴、家崐族显达的事迹，以及君王因宠爱嫔妃，造成天下大乱、国家灭亡的故事，按次序，编成《列女传》，共八篇；并采录传、记、行事，著《新序》、《说苑》共五十篇。书成，奏请成帝阅览。
English: Liu Xiang, the doctor of Guanglu, believed that the moral and ethical education of the country should start from the inside and outside, starting with the people around the emperor. Therefore, he extracted the deeds of the virtuous queens and chaste women who revitalized the country, the achievements of the Jiaqi people, and the stories of the kings who caused the world turmoil and the destruction of the country by favoring the concubines, recorded in the "Book of Songs" and "Book of Songs," and compiled them into "Biographies of Women," a total of eight; and collected biographies, records, and events, with "New Order" and "Telling Garden," a total of

古文：书数十上，以助观览，补遗阙。
现代文：他还屡次上书，谈论国家政治得失，陈述应当效法或鉴戒的史事。
English: Read the book dozens of times to help with reading and make up for lost time.

古文：上虽不能尽用，然内嘉其言，常嗟叹之。
现代文：前后上书数十次，想帮助天子观察政事，补救错误和遗漏。成帝对他的建议，虽不能都采用，但内心却很赞同，常感叹不已。
English: Although the Emperor could not use all of them, he always admired his words.

古文：昌陵制度奢泰，久而不成。
现代文：昌陵工程规划宠大、奢华，历时很久都未能完成。
English: The Changling project was planned to be large and luxurious, and it took a long time to complete.

古文：刘向上疏曰： 臣闻王者必通三统，明天命所授者博，非独一姓也。
现代文：刘向上书说： 我听说君王必须通达天、地、人三统，明白天命可以授与的人，是很多的，并非只一姓。
English: Liu said in his letter to the emperor, "I have heard that a king must have access to heaven, earth, and people. There are many people who understand that the Mandate of Heaven can be bestowed, not just one family name.

古文：自古及今，未有不亡之国。
现代文：自古到今，没有不灭亡的国家。
English: From ancient times to the present, there is no country that will not perish.

古文：孝文皇帝尝美石椁之固，张释之曰： 使其中有可欲，虽锢南山犹有隙。 
现代文：孝文皇帝曾经赞美石棺椁的坚固，张释之说： 假使其中有人们想得到的东西，就是用铜铁浇铸南山，人们仍会凿出隙缝。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen once praised the sturdiness of the sarcophagus, and Zhang Xizhi said: If there is something that people want to get out of it, that is, casting Nanshan with copper and iron, people will still dig a gap.

古文：夫死者无终极，而国家有废兴，故释之之言为无穷计也。
现代文：死亡的事永远不会有完，国家有兴有废，因此张释之的话，是为文帝作长远的打算。
English: The matter of death will never be over, the country has its ups and downs, so Zhang Yizhi's words are a long-term plan for Emperor Wen.

古文：孝文寤焉，遂薄葬。
现代文：孝文帝醒悟，于是采用薄葬。
English: Emperor Xiaowen came to his senses and decided to have a light funeral.

古文：棺椁之作，自黄帝始。
现代文：安葬使用棺椁，自黄帝开始。
English: making coffins, starting with the Yellow Emperor.

古文：黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、周公，丘垅皆小，葬具甚微；其贤臣孝子亦承命顺意而薄葬之。此诚奉安君父忠孝之至也。
现代文：黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、周文王、周武王、周公，坟冢都很小，葬具极简单。他们的贤臣孝子也禀承命令顺从意旨，实行薄葬，这才是令君父平安的至为忠孝的作法。
English: The tombs of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Xuan, Emperor Yao, Emperor Yu, Emperor Tang, King Zhouwen, King Zhouwu and King Zhou Gong are all very small, and the burial equipment is very simple. Their wise ministers and sons also obeyed the order to obey the will and carry out a thin burial. This is the most loyal and filial way to keep your father safe.

古文：孔子葬母于防，坟四尺。
现代文：孔子把母亲安葬在防，坟高四尺。
English: Confucius buried his mother in the fort. The grave is four feet high.

古文：延陵季子葬其子，封坟掩坎，其高可隐。
现代文：延陵人季子埋葬他的儿子，隐蔽坟丘，低矮得几乎看不出来。
English: Yoshiko, a resident of Yanling, buried his son in a secluded grave mound, so low that it is almost invisible.

古文：故仲尼孝子而延陵慈父，舜、禹忠臣，周公弟弟，其葬君、亲、骨肉皆微薄矣。
现代文：所以说，孔子是孝子，而季子是慈父，舜、禹是忠臣，而周公能友爱兄弟。他们安葬君王、父母、骨肉亲人都很简单微薄。
English: Therefore, Confucius is a filial son, while Ji Zi is a loving father, Yu and Yu are loyal vassals, and Zhou Gongneng is a loving brother. They buried kings, parents, and flesh and blood relatives are simple and meager.

古文：非苟为俭，诚便于体也。
现代文：并非草率而实行节俭，实在是为了便于实行。
English: It is not a hasty frugality, but a frugality for the sake of ease.

古文：秦始皇帝葬于骊山之阿，下锢三泉，上崇山坟，水银为江、海，黄金为凫、雁，珍宝之臧，机械之变，棺椁之丽，宫馆之盛，不可胜原。
现代文：秦始皇葬在骊山旁，堵塞了地下深处的三重泉，把坟丘堆得象山一样高，墓室里用水银做成江、海，用黄金做成野鸭、飞雁。珍宝的收藏、机械的巧妙、棺椁的华丽、宫殿的宏伟，后世不能超越、重现。
English: Qin Shihuang was buried next to Lushan Mountain, blocking the underground Triple Spring, piling up the burial mound as high as a mountain, and using mercury to make rivers and seas in the burial chamber, and gold to make wild ducks and flying geese. The collection of treasures, the cleverness of machinery, the magnificence of the coffin, and the grandeur of the palace cannot be surpassed and reproduced in future generations.

古文：天下苦其役而反之，骊山之作未成，而周章百万之师至其下矣。
现代文：天下不堪修陵徭役的困苦，纷纷反叛。骊山坟墓还没修完，周章率领的百万抗秦大军已打到骊山脚下。
English: The world was created by his hard labor, the construction of Lushan was not completed, and Zhou Zhang's million-man army had already arrived below.

古文：项籍燔其宫室、营宇，牧儿持火照求亡羊，失火烧其臧椁。
现代文：项羽烧了宫殿、屋宇，牧童手持火把到墓中寻找丢失的羊，失火烧毁了隐藏其中的棺椁。
English: The fire burned the palace and the house, the shepherd boy went to the grave with a torch to look for the lost sheep, and the fire destroyed the coffin hidden in it.

古文：自古至今，葬未有盛如始皇者也。数年之间，外被项籍之灾，内离牧竖之祸，岂不哀哉！
现代文：自古到今，厚葬还没有超过秦始皇的，然而数年之间，外受项羽纵火之灾，内遭牧童失火之祸，岂不可悲！
English: From ancient times to the present, the number of grand funerals has not exceeded that of the First Emperor of Qin. However, in the space of a few years, suffering from the external calamity of Xiang Yu's arson and the internal calamity of the shepherd boy's misfire, is this not tragic?

古文：是故德弥厚者葬弥薄，知愈深者葬愈微。
现代文：因而恩德越深厚者，安葬越简陋，智慧越高深者，安葬越微薄。
English: Therefore, the more virtuous the person, the thinner the burial, and the more profound the wisdom, the more simple the burial.

古文：无德寡知，其葬愈厚。丘陇弥高，宫庙甚丽，发掘必速。
现代文：反而是无德又无智慧的人，安葬越奢华，坟墓也越高大，宫殿十分宏丽，必然迅速被人发掘。
English: On the contrary, they are people without virtue and wisdom. The more luxurious the burial, the higher the grave. The palace is very magnificent and must be quickly excavated.

古文：由是观之，明暗之效，葬之吉凶，昭然可见矣。
现代文：由此观之，明显与隐蔽的不同效果，安葬的吉祥与凶险，不是昭然可见吗？
English: From this point of view, we can clearly see the pros and cons of conscription, and the fortunes of funerals.

古文：陛下即位，躬亲节俭，始营初陵，其制约小，天下莫不称贤明；及徙昌陵，增庳为高，积土为山，发民坟墓，积以万数，营起邑居，期日迫卒，功费大万百馀，死者恨于下，生者愁于上，臣甚愍焉！
现代文：陛下即位之初，亲自推行节俭，最早营建的陵，规模很小，天下没有不称颂陛下贤明的。然而后来改迁昌陵，把低下的地方增高，堆土成山，挖掘人民的坟墓，累计达到一万多座，而又设立县邑，修建房舍，限期急迫，功时费用超过万百。工程中死去的人在地下含恨，活着的人在地上愁苦，使人无限痛惜！
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, he personally promoted frugality. The first mausoleum to be built was small in scale, and there was no one in the world who did not praise His Majesty's wisdom. However, later he moved the Changling Mausoleum, raised the low places, piled up the soil into mountains, excavated the people's graves, and accumulated more than ten thousand, and set up counties and towns, built houses, the deadline was urgent, and the work time cost exceeded ten thousand. The people who died in the project had hatred underground, and the living people had sorrow on the ground, which made people regret infinitely!

古文：以死者为有知，发人之墓，其害多矣；若其无知，又安用大！
现代文：如果认为死后有知，那么铲除别人坟墓，灾害恐怕无法估计；如果认为死后无知，又何必把坟墓修得如此之大？
English: If it is believed that there is knowledge after death, then the destruction of other people's graves is probably incalculable; if it is believed that there is ignorance after death, why is it necessary to build the grave so large?

古文：谋之贤知则不说，以示众庶则苦之，若苟以说愚夫淫侈之人，又何为哉！
现代文：贤能的人不会喜悦，而小民却怀无边怨恨。假定只为了使愚昧奢侈的人高兴，却又何必？
English: The virtuous do not rejoice, and the little people are full of bitterness. Suppose it is only to make the foolish and extravagant happy, but why?

古文：唯陛下上览明圣之制以为则，下观亡秦之祸以为戒，初陵之模，宜从公卿大臣之议，以息众庶！ 
现代文：请陛下上观圣明的制度，作为效法，下看秦朝灭亡的祸害，作为鉴戒。预定墓地的规模，最好听从公卿大臣的建议，安抚人民！ 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to look at the Shengming system as an example, and the calamity of the downfall of the Qin Dynasty as a warning. It is best to listen to the advice of the Minister of the Kugye and the scale of the planned cemetery to appease the people!

古文：上感其言。
现代文：皇上深为他的话感动。
English: The Emperor was deeply moved by his words.

古文：初，解万年自诡昌陵三年可成，卒不能就；群臣多言其不便者。
现代文：起初，将作大匠解万年自己妄称昌陵工程三年可竣工，结果没能实现。群臣多称这事不妥。
English: At first, he arrogantly claimed that the Changling project could be completed in three years, but the result could not be realized. Many ministers said that this was not appropriate.

古文：下有司议，皆曰： 昌陵因卑为高，度便房犹在平地上；客土之中，不保幽冥之灵，浅外不固。
现代文：下面有关部门议论，都说： 昌陵靠填埋低地起高，积聚土石成为山丘，估计陵园中的别殿还要建在平地之上。从别处搬来的土不能保存幽冥中的灵魂，而外层覆盖得浅了又不牢固。
English: The following comments of the relevant departments all said: Changling is elevated by filling in the lowlands, accumulating earth and stone into hills, and it is estimated that the hall in the cemetery will also be built on flat ground. The soil brought from elsewhere cannot preserve the soul in the dark, and the outer cover is shallow and not strong.

古文：卒徒工庸以巨万数，至然脂火夜作，取土东山，且与谷同贾，作治数年，天下遍被其劳。
现代文：役使好几万士卒、囚徒、工匠、庸夫，加上点着油脂火把夜间施工，如此取得的东山之土，几乎与粮谷同样价钱。陵墓造了好几年，全天下人都遍受劳苦。
English: With the help of tens of thousands of soldiers, prisoners, craftsmen, and maidservants, as well as the nightly construction with grease torches, the land of Dongshan obtained in this way was almost as valuable as grain. The mausoleum took several years to build, and people all over the world worked hard.

古文：故陵因天性，据真土，处势高敞，旁近祖考，前又已有十年功绪，宜还复故陵，勿徙民，便！ 
现代文：先前建的陵墓随顺自然天性，依凭原土，所处地势高阔，靠近祖辈陵墓，此前又已有十年修建的底子，还是以恢复先前的陵墓，不再征调百姓为好。 
English: The previously built mausoleum follows the natural nature, relies on the original soil, is located on a high ground, is close to the ancestral mausoleum, and has been built for ten years. It is better to restore the previous mausoleum and no longer recruit people.

古文：秋，七月，诏曰： 朕执德不固，谋不尽下，过听将作大匠万年言 昌陵三年可成 ，作治五年，中陵、司马殿门内尚未加功。
现代文：秋季，七月，下诏：朕的仁德之心坚守不牢，谋虑上对下情体恤不周，过于听信将作大匠解万年的 昌陵三年可成 的妄言，结果修建了五年，而中陵、司马殿门内仍尚未动工。
English: In the autumn, in July, the following edict was issued: My benevolent heart was not firmly adhered to, my consideration was not considerate to the feelings of others, and I listened too much to the false words of the great master that the Changling Mausoleum could be built in three years. As a result, it took five years to build, but the construction of the middle mausoleum and the door of the Sima Hall had not yet begun.

古文：天下虚耗，百姓罢劳，客土疏恶，终不可成，朕惟其难，怛然伤心。
现代文：天下虚耗，百姓疲劳，它处土壤环境破坏严重，却终还是没有建成；朕思及这一劳民伤财之害，心中感到忧伤。
English: The world is wasted, the people are tired, the soil and environment are seriously damaged, but it is still not built; I think about this harm to the people's work and wealth, and feel sad in my heart.

古文：夫 过而不改，是谓过矣 。
现代文：常言道：有了过错而不改，才是真的过错。
English: The ancients said that if you do not change what you have done, you will become a bigger person.

古文：其罢昌陵，及故陵勿徙吏民，令天下毋有动摇之心。 
现代文：立即停止修建昌陵，重新启用故陵，不可调动官吏和百姓，别再把天下搞得人心不宁。
English: Immediately stop the construction of Changling Mausoleum and reopen the old mausoleum. Officials and people should not be mobilized. Don't make the world restless again.

古文：初，酂侯萧何之子孙嗣为侯者，无子及有罪，凡五绝祀。
现代文：萧何的子孙后代在承袭他的酂侯爵位历程中，因无子或有罪，共五次出现过中断。
English: Xiao He's descendants have been interrupted five times in the course of inheriting his title of marquis due to childlessness or guilt.

古文：高后、文帝、景帝、武帝、宣帝思何之功，辄以其支庶绍封。
现代文：高后、文帝、景帝、武帝、宣帝念及萧何的功劳，则分别封许他的旁系亲属继承酂侯爵位。
English: Gao Guo, Emperor Wen, Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu, Emperor Xuan, and Emperor Xiao He were awarded the title of marquis respectively.

古文：是岁，何七世孙酂侯获坐使奴杀人，减死，完为城旦。
现代文：这一年，承袭酂侯爵位的萧何第七代孙子犯下唆使奴才杀人罪，免除死刑，以原身罚作筑城劳役。
English: In the same year, the seventh-generation grandson of Xiao He Rong, who inherited the title of marquis, committed the crime of inciting slaves to murder, was exempted from the death penalty, and was punished with his own body as a laborer to build the city.

古文：先是，上诏有司访求汉初功臣之后，久未省录。
现代文：之前，皇上诏令有关部门访寻汉朝建国功臣的后代，久久未能登录清楚。
English: Previously, the emperor had ordered the relevant departments to visit the descendants of the founding heroes of the Han Dynasty, but it had not been clearly recorded for a long time.

古文：杜业说上曰： 唐、虞、三代皆封建诸侯，以成太平之美，是以燕、齐之祀与周并传，子继弟及，历载不堕。
现代文：杜邺劝说皇上： 唐尧、虞舜时期以及夏、商、周三个朝代，都分封了诸侯，用以达到天下太平的美好目的，因而燕侯、齐侯的承袭与周朝一并传续，子子相继、兄弟互接，历年不断。
English: Du Qian persuaded the emperor: The Tang and Yu Dynasties, as well as the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties, all divided their princes into separate fiefs to achieve the noble goal of world peace. As a result, the inheritance of Yan and Qi princes continued along with the Zhou Dynasty, with children succeeding each other and brothers succeeding each other.

古文：岂无刑辟、繇祖之竭力，故支庶赖焉。
现代文：然而其中哪能没有涉及刑罪的？考虑到其祖上曾经竭力为国，故而其旁系亲属也借以继承功名。
English: However, which of them could not have been involved in a criminal offence? Considering that their ancestors had worked hard for the country, their collateral relatives also inherited their merits.

古文：迹汉功臣，亦皆割符世爵，受山河之誓；百馀年间，而袭封者尽，朽骨孤于墓，苗裔流于道，生为愍隶，死为转尸。
现代文：索迹汉朝功臣，也都是皇上亲封的世袭官爵，领受过 山河之誓 ；而百余年间，承袭封爵的人没了，他们腐朽的尸骨孤独地沉寂于墓中无人祭祀，后代子孙颠沛流离于途中，活着沦为苦役奴隶，死了却无葬身之地。
English: For more than a hundred years, the inheritors of the title disappeared, their rotting bones lay alone in the grave, with no one to offer a sacrifice. Their descendants wandered aimlessly along the way, living as slave laborers and dying without a place to be buried.

古文：以往况今，甚可悲伤。
现代文：以过去的境况来比照今日，很是令人悲伤。
English: It is very sad to compare the situation of the past with today.

古文：圣朝怜闵，诏求其后，四方忻忻，靡不归心。
现代文：我圣明的今朝怜悯开国功臣的后代，下诏访寻他们的后代，四方闻知后欢欣鼓舞，无不与朝廷同心。
English: This morning, I, the enlightened one, took pity on the descendants of the heroes who founded the country, and issued an edict to visit and search for their descendants. Upon hearing this, the four quarters rejoiced and were all of one mind with the imperial court.

古文：出入数年而不省察，恐议者不思大义，徒设虚言，则厚德掩息，吝简布章，非所以示化劝后也。
现代文：然而来来去去数年未能查询得清楚。恐怕议论者不理解朝廷大义，以为空设虚言，则皇上的厚德就会被遮蔽，吝啬之名被广为传扬，便不能用来达到启发、劝导后人的作用了。
English: However, it has not been possible to make a clear inquiry for several years. I am afraid that the commentators do not understand the imperial justice, thinking that if the words are empty, the emperor's virtue will be obscured, the name of stinginess will be widely spread, and it will not be able to be used to inspire and persuade future generations.

古文：虽难尽继，宜从尤功。 
现代文：虽然不能尽数落实继承之人，但可从功绩卓著的开国功臣的后代做来。 
English: Although it is not possible to carry out the number of successors as much as possible, it can be done from the descendants of the meritorious founding heroes.

古文：上纳其言。
现代文：皇上采纳他的意见。
English: The Emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：癸卯，封萧何六世孙南长喜为酂侯。
现代文：癸卯日，封萧何第六代孙子南䜌长喜为酂侯。
English: On the same day, Xiao He's sixth-generation grandson Nanzhang Changxi was enthroned as prince.

古文：立城阳哀王弟俚为王。
现代文：封城阳哀王刘云的弟弟刘俚承袭其兄的王位。
English: Liu Yun, the younger brother of Liu Xuan, the king of Fucheng Yangye, succeeded to his brother's throne.

古文：八月，丁丑，太皇太后王氏崩。
现代文：八月，丁丑日，太皇太后王氏去世。
English: In August, on Dingwusi Day, the Grand Empress Dowager Wang died.

古文：九月，黑龙见东莱。
现代文：九月，有黑龙见于东莱郡。
English: In September, a black dragon was seen in Donglai County.

古文：丁巳晦，日有食之。
现代文：丁巳晦，出现日食。
English: At dusk, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：是岁，以南阳太守陈咸为少府，侍中淳于长为水衡都尉。
现代文：这一年，任命南阳太守陈咸掌管少府，任命侍中淳于长为水衡都尉。
English: In this year, Nanyang Daju Chen Xian was appointed to be in charge of the minor capital, and the chamberlain Jun Yuchang was appointed to be the captain of the water balance.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下永始二年
现代文：汉成帝永始二年
English: In the second year of Emperor Hancheng's reign

古文：春，正月，己丑，安阳敬侯王音薨。
现代文：春季，正月，己丑日，安阳敬侯王音去世。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, and on the day of the Ugly Duckling, Wang Yin passed away in Anyang.

古文：王氏唯音为修整，数谏正，有忠直节。
现代文：王氏家族唯有王音的品行庄重，多次向皇上进言纠正错误，有忠义耿直气节。
English: Only Wang Yin of the Wang family had a dignified demeanor. He repeatedly advised the emperor to correct his mistakes, and was loyal and upright.

古文：二月，癸未夜，星陨如雨，绎绎，未至地灭。
现代文：二月，癸未日之夜，出现流星雨，接连而下，未等到达地面就自行熄灭。
English: In February, on the night of the full moon, a meteor shower occurs, descending one after another, and extinguishing itself before reaching the ground.

古文：乙酉晦，日有食之。
现代文：乙酉日，出现日食。
English: Acetylene day, solar eclipse.

古文：三月，丁酉，以成都侯王商为大司马、卫将军；红阳侯王立位特进，领城门兵。
现代文：三月，丁酉日，任命成都侯王商为大司马、卫将军；晋升红阳侯王立为特进，统领城门守兵。
English: In March, Ding Xi Day, Wang Shang, the lord of Chengdu, was appointed as the grand steward and general of Wei; Wang Li, the lord of Hongyang, was promoted as the special envoy and led the gate guards.

古文：京兆尹翟方进为御史大夫。
现代文：京兆尹翟方进升为御史大夫。
English: Jingzhao Yin Yifang promoted to goshi taifu.

古文：谷永为凉州刺史，奏事京师，讫，当之部，上使尚书问永，受所欲言。
现代文：谷永为凉州刺史，到京师述职完毕，正欲返回所部，皇上派尚书问谷永，讲出想要说的。
English: Gu Yong is a historian of Liangzhou. After he finished his report in Beijing, he was about to return to the capital. The emperor sent Shang Shu to ask Gu Yong what he wanted to say.

古文：永对曰： 臣闻王天下、有国家者，患在上有危亡之事而危亡之言不得上闻。
现代文：谷永回答道： 臣闻知，身居君王之位的国家统治者，可怕的是，当他有危害国家的行为时，而关于告诫危亡方面的话却不被奏知。
English: Gu Yong replied: It is terrible for a ruler of a country who is in the position of a monarch to be unaware of the words of warning about the danger of death when he acts in a way that endangers the country.

古文：如使危亡之言辄上闻，则商、周不易姓而迭兴，三正不变改而更用。
现代文：若能使告诫危亡方面的话被奏知，则商朝、周朝就不至于改朝换姓，便会持续得以兴旺；夏、商、周三代各自的历法就不至于被改变，便会持续沿用下去。
English: If the warning of danger and death can be made known, the Shang and Zhou dynasties will not change their names and will continue to flourish; the respective calendars of Xia, Shang and San dynasties will not be changed and will continue to be used.

古文：夏、商之将亡也，行道之人皆知之。
现代文：夏朝、商朝将亡国之时，道路上的行人无不知晓；君主却安然地自以为如天上太阳，没有什么可危及到他。
English: When the Xia and Shang dynasties were about to be overthrown, pedestrians on the road knew about it; the monarch, however, calmly thought that he was like the sun in the sky, and nothing could endanger him.

古文：晏然自以若天有日，莫能危，是故恶日广而不自知，大命倾而不自寤。《易》曰： 危者有其安者也，亡者保其存者也。 
现代文：就这样，其恶行日益严重却不自知，天命即将崩塌却仍执迷不悟。《周易》上说： 有危险意识的人则有所平安，有灭亡意识的人则有所生存。 
English: In this way, their evil deeds become more and more serious, but they do not know it, and the fate of the world is about to collapse, but they still do not realize it. "Zhou Yi" said: People with a sense of danger have peace, and people with a sense of destruction have survival.

古文：陛下诚垂宽明之听，无忌讳之诛，使刍荛之臣得尽所闻于前，群臣之上愿，社稷之长福也！元年，九月，黑龙见；其晦，日有食之。
现代文：陛下果真能广泛而圣明地倾听意见，并不因为涉及忌讳而诛杀，使得哪怕是草民之臣也能尽述所知于您的面前，则是群臣最大的心愿，是江山社稷的长远之福！ 永始元年九月，有黑龙出现；其月末，出现日食。
English: If His Majesty can truly listen to opinions widely and sincerely, and not fight and kill them because they involve taboos, so that even grass-roots retainers can fully explain what they know to you, it is the greatest wish of retainers and the long-term blessing of the country and society! In September of the first year of the Yongshi era, a black dragon appeared; at the end of the month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：今年二月己未夜，星陨；乙酉，日有食之。
现代文：今年二月己未日之夜，出现陨星雨，乙酉日又有日食。
English: In February this year, there was a meteor shower on the night before the solstice, and a solar eclipse on the day of the solstice.

古文：六月之间，大异四发，二二而同月。
现代文：六月之间，大怪异之像发生了四次，双双并发于同月。
English: Between June and now, the Big One has occurred four times, all in the same month.

古文：三代之末，春秋之乱，未尝有也。
现代文：即使是夏、商、周三代末年、春秋时代混乱时期，也不曾有过啊。
English: Even during the chaotic times of summer, business, the end of the Joseon Dynasty, and the Spring and Autumn Period, there was no such thing.

古文：臣闻三代所以陨社稷、丧宗庙者，皆由妇人与群恶沉湎于酒；秦所以二世十六年而亡者，养生泰奢，奉终泰厚也。
现代文：臣听说夏、商、周三代之所以毁掉社稷、丧失宗庙，都是因为妇人与一群邪恶小人沉湎于酒乐；秦国之所以传承两代共十六年便亡国，都由于为保养生命太过奢侈，为送终陪葬太过丰厚。
English: The minister heard that the reason why Xia, Shang, and the third generation destroyed the community hall and lost the ancestral temple was because the woman and a group of evil villains indulged in wine and music; the reason why Qin State was inherited by two generations for a total of sixteen years and then lost the country was because it was too extravagant to maintain life and too rich to accompany the funeral.

古文：二者，陛下兼而有之，臣请略陈其效。
现代文：两者，陛下兼而有之，臣请求简略陈述其实际效应。
English: Both, sire, and I beg leave to state briefly their practical effect.

古文： 建始、河平之际，许、班之贵，倾动前朝，熏灼四方，女宠至极，不可上矣；今之后起，什倍于前。
现代文： 建始、河平年间，许皇后、班婕妤二家族之尊贵，盖过前朝，其气焰熏灼四方，女人被娇宠到顶点，已是不可再高了；而今天后起之人，又胜前者十倍。
English: During the Jianzhong and Heping dynasties, the empress Xu and the two families of Ban Rong were more prestigious than the former dynasty, and their fame spread far and wide. Women were pampered to the peak, and it was impossible to get any higher. But today's up-and-comers are ten times better than the former.

古文：废先帝法度，听用其言，官秩不当，纵释王诛，骄其亲属，假之威权，从横乱政，刺举之吏莫敢奉宪。
现代文：废置先帝的法令制度，听信并采用她们的话；官爵等级待遇失当，释放犯了王法当处以死刑的人；骄纵其亲属，依仗权威，恣意扰乱朝政，主管监察的官吏都不敢遵从宪令办事。
English: Abolished the former emperor's legal system, listened to and adopted their words; improper treatment of officials and nobles, released those who violated the royal law and should be sentenced to death; arrogantly indulged his relatives, relied on authority, arbitrarily disrupted the government, and the officials in charge of supervision did not dare to comply with the constitutional order.

古文：又以掖庭狱大为乱阱，榜棰于砲烙，绝灭人命，主为赵、李报德复怨。
现代文：还在后宫私设牢狱、乱挖坑阱，榜棰之刑惨痛于砲烙之刑，绝灭人的性命，主要为赵、李两家报答恩德、报复怨恨。
English: There were also private prisons set up in the harem, pit traps dug indiscriminately, and the punishment of the platform was more painful than the punishment of the cannon, and the lives of people were extinguished, mainly for the two families of Zhao and Li to repay their kindness and revenge their grudges.

古文：反除白罪，建治正吏，多系无辜，掠立迫恐，至为人起责，分利受谢，生入死出者，不可胜数。
现代文：反为罪行昭著的人除去罪名，而那些建言整治朝纲的正直官吏，多是无辜之人，遭到拷打、强加罪名和逼迫恐吓。还替人放债，分享利息与接受答谢。活着进来死着出去的人，无法算得清楚。
English: On the other hand, those whose crimes were notorious were cleared of charges, while those honest officials who proposed to rectify the imperial system, mostly innocent people, were tortured, imposed charges and persecuted and intimidated. They also lent money to others, shared interest and accepted thanks. It is impossible to calculate clearly who came in alive and went out dead.

古文：是以日食再既，以昭其辜。
现代文：正是此等缘故日食再出，以揭示这些罪恶。
English: So there were two eclipses to show their guilt.

古文： 王者必先自绝，然后天绝之。
现代文： 君王必先自己绝灭，然后老天方绝灭他。
English: The emperor must first exterminate himself, and only then can he be exterminated.

古文：今陛下弃万乘之至贵，乐家人之贱事，厌高美之尊号，好匹夫之卑字，崇聚僄轻无义小人以为私客，数离深宫之固，挺身晨夜，与群小相随，乌集杂会，饮醉吏民之家，乱服共坐，流湎枼嫚，溷淆无别，黾勉遁乐，昼夜在路，典门户、奉宿卫之臣执干戈而守空宫，公卿百僚不知陛下所在，积数年矣。
现代文：今陛下抛弃万乘国业的极大尊贵，寄乐于私家轻贱之事；厌恶高尚美好的尊号，喜好庶民匹夫的卑字称呼；热衷于聚集轻薄无义的小人并作为私人之客，多次离开防守严密的深宫，挺身出入于深夜凌晨，与一群小人相跟随，做乌合之众；醉饮于官吏百姓之家，服饰胡乱、尊卑混杂地共坐一起，沉溺轻慢之中，污浊不分。就这样淫纵逸乐，昼夜出行，门卫官兵手执干戈守护着空空的宫廷，公卿百官不知陛下在哪里，累计已有数年之久了。
English: Now His Majesty abandons the great dignity of statecraft, and takes pleasure in the trivialities of private life; detests the noble and beautiful honorifics, and likes the vulgar epithets of the common people; is keen on gathering the frivolous and meaningless villains and as a private guest, leaves the well-guarded Deep Palace many times, enters and exits late at night and early in the morning, follows a group of villains, and becomes a rabble; drunk in the house of officials and commoners, the costumes are chaotic, the high and low are mixed together, indulge in frivolity, and the filth is indiscriminate. In this way,

古文： 王者以民为基，民以财为本，财竭则下畔，下畔则上亡。
现代文： 君王以民为基础，民以财物为根本；财物枯竭则百姓反叛，百姓反叛则国亡。
English: The monarch is based on the people, and the people are based on property; if the property is exhausted, the people will rebel, and if the people rebel, the country will fall.

古文：是以明王爱养基本，不敢穷极，使民如承大祭。
现代文：所以明智的君王善于巩固国之基本，不敢穷奢极欲地挥霍财力，用民如同担承祭祀大典一般谨慎。
English: Therefore, the holy monarchs cherish the fundamental rights of rest and recuperation, and dare not let them be exhausted. They are as cautious in using the people's power as they are in hosting large-scale religious services.

古文：今陛下轻夺民财，不爱民力，听邪臣之计，去高敞初陵，改作昌陵，役百乾溪，费拟骊山，靡敝天下，五年不成而后反故。
现代文：如今陛下轻率地夺取百姓财物，不爱惜民力。听信奸邪之臣的诡计，放弃高大宽敞的初陵，重新起建昌陵，役使之人百倍于楚灵王在乾溪之时，耗费资财与秦始皇的骊山相比拟，使天下衰败穷困；然而昌陵五年未能建成，之后又返修初陵。
English: Now, His Majesty has rashly seized the people's property and does not spare the people's strength. He has listened to the tricks of the treacherous and evil vassals, abandoned the tall and spacious First Mausoleum, rebuilt the Changling Mausoleum, and made it a hundred times more powerful than when King Chuling was in the Dry Creek, and spent money and resources to compare with the Qin Shi Huang Mountain, causing the world to decline and impoverishment; however, the Changling Mausoleum could not be built for five years, and then the First Mausoleum was repaired.

古文：百姓愁恨感天，饥馑仍臻，流散冗食，餧死于道，以百万数。
现代文：百姓的愁苦与怨恨感应上天，饥荒频繁而至，人们四处流散觅食，饿死在路上的人，数以百万计。
English: The grief and resentment of the people are felt to the heavens, famine is frequent, people scatter everywhere in search of food, and millions of people starve to death on the road.

古文：公家无一年之畜，百姓无旬日之储，上下俱匮，无以相救。
现代文：公家没有一年的积蓄，百姓没有十天的储备，上下俱已匮乏，无法赈救。
English: The public sector does not have a year's worth of savings, the people do not have ten days' worth of reserves, and people up and down the country are in need and cannot be rescued.

古文：《诗》云： 殷监不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：《诗》云： 殷商子孙的借鉴并不遥远，就在夏代末期之际。 
English: "Shijing" said: Yin's reference is not far away, in the post-summer world.

古文：愿陛下追观夏、商、周、秦所以失之，以镜考己行，有不合者，臣当伏妄言之诛！
现代文：愿陛下反思夏、商、周、秦为何灭亡，要像照镜子一样考察自己的所作所为，若有不合的地方，臣甘当伏受妄言死罪！
English: May His Majesty reflect on why Xia, Shang, Zhou, and Qin perished, and examine his own actions and deeds as if looking in a mirror. If there are any inconsistencies, his subjects should be willing to submit to the death penalty!

古文： 汉兴九世，百九十馀载，继体之主七，皆承天顺道，遵先祖法度，或以中兴，或以治安；至于陛下，独违道纵欲，轻身妄行，当盛壮之隆，无继嗣之福，有危亡之忧，积失君道，不合天意，亦以多矣。
现代文： 我汉朝兴建以来已历经九代，共一百九十多年，血脉相传的君主有七位，都承顺天道，遵从先祖法度，或得以中道振兴，或得以治国安邦。唯独到了陛下，违背天道，放纵个人欲望，随意妄行；正当盛壮兴旺之年，没有后继有人之福，却有江山社稷危亡之忧，渐渐失掉君王之道。如此不合天意之事，已经很多了。
English: Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, there have been nine generations, a total of more than one hundred and ninety years. There are seven monarchs whose bloodlines have been passed down. All of them have followed the heavenly way and obeyed the laws of their ancestors, and have either been able to revitalize the middle way or have been able to govern the country peacefully. However, when it comes to His Majesty, he has violated the heavenly way, indulged his personal desires, and behaved arbitrarily. In the year of prosperity and prosperity, there is no successor, but the country and society are in danger of dying, and gradually lose the way of the king. There are already many things that are not in

古文：为人后嗣，守人功业如此，岂不负哉！
现代文：作为先祖的后继之人，如此守护祖上功业，岂不有负厚望吗！
English: As the successors of our ancestors, who are thus guarding the work of our ancestors, shouldn't we have high hopes?

古文：方今社稷、宗庙祸福安危之机在于陛下，陛下诚肯昭然远寤，专心反道，旧愆毕改，新德既章，则赫赫大异庶几可销，天命去就庶几可复，社稷、宗庙庶几可保！
现代文：当今社稷、宗庙的祸福安危的关键都在于陛下，陛下若诚心肯于明白事理、悟彻得深远，专心返回正道，彻底改正以往的过错，重新彰显圣德，则巨大的反常天象或许可以消除，天命取舍之运数或许可以恢复正常，社稷、宗庙或许可以得到保全。
English: The key to the safety and prosperity of today's society and ancestral temple lies in His Majesty. If His Majesty is sincerely willing to understand things, understand far and wide, concentrate on returning to the right path, thoroughly correct past mistakes, and re-emphasize holiness, then the huge abnormal celestial phenomenon may be eliminated, the number of operations of fate may be restored to normal, and the society and ancestral temple may be preserved.

古文：唯陛下留神反覆，熟省臣言！ 
现代文：希望陛下留神别重犯过错，深思臣的这些话。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will be careful not to repeat his mistake and will reflect on these words.

古文：帝性宽，好文辞，而溺于燕乐，皆皇太后与诸舅夙夜所常忧；至亲难数言，故推永等使因天变而切谏，劝上纳用之。
现代文：汉成帝性情宽厚，喜好文章辞令，且溺爱于饮宴欢乐，这都是皇太后和各位皇舅早晚经常忧虑的。至亲之人不好多说，故而推出谷永等用天象变化来恳切进言，劝皇上接受劝告。
English: Emperor Hancheng had a generous disposition, liked to write, and indulged in the pleasures of banquets, which the empress dowager and the royal uncles often worried about in the morning and evening. It is not easy to say much about the closest relatives, so Gu Yong and others were introduced to use celestial changes to earnestly make suggestions and advise the emperor to accept advice.

古文：永自知有内应，展意无所依违，每言事辄见答礼。
现代文：谷永原本知道宫中有内应，陈述意见无须犹豫，每次论事都依礼而答。
English: Gu Yong knew that there would be a backlash, and he did not hesitate to express his opinions. Every time he made a report to the imperial court, they responded with courtesy.

古文：至上此对，上大怒。
现代文：当把谷永的应答上报后，皇上大怒。
English: The Emperor was furious when he received the letter.

古文：卫将军商密擿永令发去。
现代文：卫将军王商秘密指使谷永要他离去。
English: Guard General Wang Shang secretly ordered Gu Yong to leave.

古文：上使侍御史收永，敕过交道厩者勿追；御史不及永，还。
现代文：皇上派侍御史拘捕谷永，命令过了交道厩这个地方就不必追了。御史赶不上谷永，回来了。
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Mishi, to arrest Yoshinaga, and ordered that once they had passed the junction, there was no need to chase after him. Mishi could not catch up with Yoshinaga, so he returned.

古文：上意亦解，自悔。
现代文：皇上的怒气也消除了，自己懊悔。
English: The emperor's anger was also eliminated, and he repented.

古文：上尝与张放及赵、李诸侍中共宴饮禁中，皆引满举白，谈笑大噱。
现代文：皇上常与张放及赵、李等各位侍中共同宴饮于宫中，一起举着满满的酒杯，谈笑嬉闹。
English: The Emperor often dined with Zhang Fang, Zhao, Li and other attendants in the palace, holding full wine glasses together, talking and laughing.

古文：时乘舆幄坐张画屏风，画纣醉踞妲己，作长夜之乐。
现代文：有一次乘车，坐于帷帘之中，看屏风上的画，画着商纣王醉后倚靠在妲己身上，作长夜之欢。
English: Once I was riding in a car, sitting among the curtains, looking at a painting on the screen, depicting a drunk merchant, leaning on his own body, for a long night of pleasure.

古文：侍中、光禄大夫班伯久疾新起，上顾指画而问伯曰： 纣为无道，至于是虖？ 
现代文：当时侍中、光禄大夫班伯因为久病而刚刚起用，皇上指着画对班伯问道： 纣王无道，能达到这种程度吗？ 
English: At that time, the aide-de-camp, Dr. Guanglu Bamber, had just been appointed due to his long-term illness. The emperor pointed to the painting and asked Bamber: "The King of Wushu has no morals. Can he reach this level?

古文：对曰： 《书》云： 乃用妇人之言 ，何有踞肆于朝！
现代文：班伯答道： 《书》上说： 他听用妇人的话 。哪有这样恣意放肆于朝内的！
English: Bamber replied: "It says in the book: He listens to women. How dare he behave like that in the palace!

古文：所谓众恶归之，不如是之甚者也！ 
现代文：所说的罪恶都归到一块，没有比这更严重的了。 
English: All the evils mentioned are lumped together, and none is more serious than this.

古文：上曰： 苟不若此，此图何戒？ 
现代文：皇上说： 若不是这样，此图告诫的是什么？ 
English: The emperor said, "If that is not the case, then what is this picture warning about?"

古文：对曰：  沉湎于酒 ，微子所以告去也。 式号式呼 ，《大雅》所以流连也。
现代文：班伯回答道： 商纣沉湎于酒，所以微子离他而去。 式号式謼 ，是《大雅》之所以流连的。
English: Bamber replied: "Merchants go mad for wine, that's why the rest of the world goes mad for it.

古文：《诗》、《书》淫乱之戒，其原皆在于酒！ 
现代文：《诗经》、《尚书》中对淫乱的诫告，其根源都在于酒。 
English: The exhortations against fornication in the "Book of Songs" and the "Song of Songs" have their roots in wine.

古文：上乃喟然叹曰： 吾久不见班生，今日复闻谠言！ 
现代文：皇上于是感叹道： 我好久没有见到班伯先生，今日又听到良言。 
English: The emperor sighed and said, "It's been a long time since I've seen my classmates, but today I once again heard honest words!"

古文：放等不怿，稍自引起更衣，因罢出。
现代文：张放等不高兴，悄悄起身更衣，中止交谈而出。
English: Zhang Fang and the others were very unhappy, and after a while they took the opportunity to leave the palace in the name of going to the toilet.

古文：时长信庭林表适使来，闻见之。
现代文：当时，长信宫中的庭林表正好派人前来，看到听到了这些情况。
English: At that time, the court forest table in the Changxin Palace just sent someone to come and see and hear these conditions.

古文：后上朝东宫，太后泣曰： 帝间颜色瘦黑。
现代文：后来皇上去东宫朝见太后，太后哭着说： 皇上今日面容黑瘦。
English: Later, the Emperor went to the East Palace in the morning to see the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager cried and said, "The Emperor's face is dark and thin today.

古文：班侍中本大将军所举，宜宠异之；益求其比，以辅圣德！
现代文：班伯侍中，本来是大将军所举荐的，你应当特殊地对他好，使得他更加与你亲近，以便辅佐圣上仁德。
English: Among the attendants of Bamber, who was originally recommended by the general, you should be especially kind to him, making him more intimate with you, in order to assist the saint.

古文：宜遣富平侯且就国！ 上曰： 诺。 
现代文：应该把富平侯张放遣送回到他自己的封地去。 皇上答道： 是。 
English: Fuping Marquis Zhang Fang should be sent back to his own fief. The emperor replied: Yes.

古文：上诸舅闻之，以风丞相、御史，求放过失。
现代文：皇上各位舅舅听说后，以此暗示丞相、御史，提供张放的过失证据。
English: After hearing about this, the emperor's uncles suggested that the prime minister and the imperial historian provide evidence of Zhang Fang's negligence.

古文：于是丞相宣、御史大夫方进奏 放骄蹇纵恣，奢淫不制，拒闭使者，贼伤无辜，从者支属并乘权势，为暴虐，请免放就国。 
现代文：于是，丞相薛宣、御史大夫翟方进奏道： 张放傲慢放荡，骄奢淫逸不知节制；闭门拒绝使者，伤害无辜，其随从及旁系亲属都依仗权势，行为暴虐。请求罢免张放，让其回到封地去。 
English: As a result, the chancellor, Xue Xuan, and the chief historian, Yan Fangjin, sang: Zhang Fang is arrogant and debauched, arrogant and immoral, and knows no restraint; he refuses the envoy behind closed doors, harms the innocent, and his attendants and collateral relatives all rely on power and behave tyrannically. Request to recall Zhang Fang and let him return to the fief.

古文：上不得已，左迁放为北地都尉。
现代文：皇上不得已，降职张放，改迁为北地都尉。
English: As a last resort, the emperor demoted Zhang to the rank of lieutenant of the North.

古文：其后比年数有灾变，故放久不得还。玺书劳问不绝。
现代文：此后，连年屡有灾情变故，因而张放很久没有回来，但皇上慰问的诏书却不断。
English: After that, there were frequent disasters year after year, so Zhang Fang did not return for a long time, but the emperor's condolence decree continued.

古文：敬武公主有疾，诏徽放归第视母疾。
现代文：敬武公主有病，皇上下诏书征召张放回家探视母亲病情。
English: Princess Jingwu was ill, and the Emperor issued an imperial edict calling for Zhang to be allowed to return home to visit her sick mother.

古文：数月，主有瘳，后复出放为河东都尉。
现代文：经数月，公主病愈后，继续让张放出任河东都尉。
English: After several months, after the princess had recovered from her illness, Zhang was allowed to continue to serve as the governor of Hedong.

古文：上虽爱放，然上迫太后，下用大臣，故常涕泣而遣之。
现代文：皇上虽然喜爱张放，然而上面受迫于太后，下面受制于大臣，故而常要挥泪遣送他。
English: Although the emperor loved Zhang Pang, he was forced by the empress dowager to listen to the minister, so he often shed tears when Zhang Pang was sent away.

古文：邛成太后之崩也，丧事仓卒，吏赋敛以趋办，上闻之，以过丞相、御史。
现代文：邛成太后去世，丧事很仓促，官吏用收取赋税来赶着办理。皇上得知此事后，责备丞相、御史。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Yancheng, the funeral was very hasty, and the officials hurriedly handled it by collecting taxes. After the emperor learned of this, he blamed the prime minister and the imperial historian.

古文：冬，十一月，己丑，册免丞相宣为庶人，御史大夫方进左迁执金吾。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己丑日，罢免丞相薛宣为平民，御史大夫翟方进被降为执金吾。
English: In the winter, in November, on Ugly Day, the prime minister, Xue Xuan, was dismissed as a commoner, and the chief historian, Yao Fangjin, was demoted to the position of chief magistrate.

古文：二十馀日，丞相官缺，群臣多举方进者；上亦器其能，十一月，壬子，擢方进为丞相，封高陵侯。以诸吏、散骑、光禄勋孔光为御史大夫。
现代文：二十多日，丞相官位缺失，群臣多推举翟方进；皇上器重翟方进的才能，十一月，壬子日，提升翟方进为丞相，封爵为高陵侯；提拔诸吏、散骑、光禄勋孔光为御史大夫。
English: For more than 20 days, there was a lack of the official rank of chancellor, and the vassals were more likely to promote Shifangjin; the emperor valued Shifangjin's talent, and in November, on the day of the emperor's son, promoted Shifangjin to chancellor, knighted to Gaolinghou; promoted Zhuoli, Sanzhong, and Guanglu Honored Kongguang to goshi taifu.

古文：方进以经术进，其为吏，用法刻深，好任势立威；有所忌恶，峻文深诋，中伤甚多。
现代文：翟方进以见长经术得到迁升，其为官，施用法度严刻，好以权势树立威严；凡有所忌恶之人，便用冷峻的弹劾文辞重重地贬毁他，因而被中伤者甚多。
English: Shen Fangjin saw that Changjingjiao was promoted and became an official, and he applied strict laws to establish authority with power; anyone who had an aversion would use cold impeachment words to seriously demean him, so many people were slandered.

古文：有言其挟私诋欺不专平者，上以方进所举应科，不以为非也。
现代文：有人说他裹挟私心诋毁欺人不公平，皇上认为翟方进所弹劾的都是适合律条的，不以为不对。
English: Some people said that it was unfair for him to slander and deceive people with his selfishness. The emperor believed that the impeachment of Yan Fangjin was in accordance with the law, and he did not think it was wrong.

古文：光，褒成君霸之少子也，领尚书，典枢机十馀年，守法度，修故事，上有所问，据经法，以心所安而对，不希指苟合；如或不从，不敢强谏争，以是久而安。
现代文：孔光，褒成君孔霸的小儿子，领尚书一职，掌管朝廷机要部门十余年；遵守法度，修习旧的政例；皇上凡有所问，便引经据法，以问心无愧而答对，不希求皇上的意旨与他勉强附和，如若不获准，不敢强谏力争，故而能够持久地相安无事。
English: Kong Guang, the youngest son of Kong Ba, who was awarded the title of Shang Shu, was in charge of the important departments of the imperial court for more than ten years. He abided by the law and practiced the old political practices. Whenever the emperor asked, he quoted the law and answered with a clear conscience. He did not want to ask for the emperor's will and reluctantly agreed with him. If he was not allowed, he did not dare to fight hard, so he could have lasting peace and quiet.

古文：时有所言，辄削草藁，以为章主之过以奸忠直，人臣大罪也。
现代文：每次说过的话，便销毁草稿。他认为，用揭示君主的过错来表达忠直，是臣子的大罪。
English: Every time he spoke, he destroyed the draft. He believed that it was the cardinal sin of a courtier to express loyalty by revealing the faults of the monarch.

古文：有所荐举，唯恐其人之闻知。
现代文：凡有所举荐，唯恐那个人知晓。
English: When Ziguang recommended someone to become an official, he was also afraid of being heard.

古文：沐日归休，兄弟妻子燕语，终不及朝省政事。
现代文：公休日回家，兄弟妻子宴饮叙谈时，始终不涉及朝廷各部门政务之事。
English: When it was time to go on vacation, I went home to rest, and when I talked with my brothers, wives, and children, I never mentioned the political affairs of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：或问光： 温室省中树，皆何木也？ 
现代文：有人问孔光： 温室殿那个地方种的都是什么树？ 
English: Someone asked Kong Guang: What kind of trees are planted in the greenhouse?

古文：光嘿不应，更答以它语，其不泄如是。
现代文：孔光默然不答，回话变换成其它内容。他为不泄露内情竟然如此谨慎。
English: Kong Guang silently did not answer, and the reply was changed to other content. He was so careful not to reveal the inside story.

古文：上行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：汉成帝驾临雍城，祭祀五帝。
English: Emperor Han Chengde arrived at Yongcheng and offered sacrifices to the Five Emperors.

古文：卫将军王商恶陈汤，奏 汤妄言昌陵且复发徙；又言黑龙冬出，微行数出之应。 
现代文：卫将军王商厌恨陈汤，上奏： 陈汤妄言昌陵工程，又搞宅第迁徙，又称黑龙有悖天时地在冬天出现，是皇上多次微服出行的反应。 
English: Wei general Wang Shang detested Chen Tang, inset: Chen Tang spoke ill of the Changling project, and also engaged in the migration of residences, also known as the black dragon appeared in the winter against the weather, which was the reaction of the emperor's many trips.

古文：廷尉奏 汤非所宣言，大不敬。 
现代文：廷尉奏道： 陈汤说了不该说的话，对皇上大为不敬。 
English: The courtier said, "Chen Tang said something he shouldn't have said, and he was very disrespectful to the emperor.

古文：诏以汤有功，免为庶人，徙边。
现代文：下诏：念在陈汤曾经有功，免为庶人，迁徙到边塞之地。
English: The following edict was issued: "Remembering that you once had merit in Chen Tang, do not be a commoner and migrate to the land of the frontier fortress."

古文：上以赵后之立也，淳于长有力焉，故德之，乃追显其前白罢昌陵之功，下公卿，议封长。
现代文：汉成帝以为立赵飞燕为皇后这件事，淳于长出了不少力，因此对他怀有恩德，于是追溯并表彰他之前建议撤销昌陵工程的功绩，下诏让公卿大臣们商议给淳于长封爵之事。
English: Emperor Hancheng thought that the establishment of Zhao Feiyan as empress was a matter of great strength for Junyurong, and therefore he was grateful to him, so he traced back and commended his previous proposal to revoke the Changling project, and issued a decree to let the noble ministers discuss the matter of giving Junyurong a knighthood.

古文：光禄勋平当以为： 长虽有善言，不应封爵之科。 
现代文：光禄勋平当认为： 淳于长虽有好的建议，但不符合封爵的律条。 
English: Guanglu Xunping believed that: Although Jun Yuchang had good suggestions, they did not conform to the rules of knighting.

古文：当坐左迁巨鹿太守。
现代文：光禄勋平当因此被贬为钜鹿太守。
English: As a result, Guanglu Xunping was demoted to the position of Elk Governor.

古文：上遂下诏，以常侍闳，侍中、卫尉长首建至策，赐长、闳爵关内侯。
现代文：汉成帝于是下诏：因为常侍王闳、卫尉淳于长率先提出至善的建议，赐予淳于长和王闳关内侯。
English: Emperor Han Cheng then issued the following edict: Because the regular attendant Wang Qian and the guard officer Jun Yuchang took the lead in proposing the best proposal, Jun Yuchang and Wang Qian Guan were given the title of Inner Marquis.

古文：将作大匠万年佞邪不忠，毒流众庶，与陈汤俱徒敦煌。
现代文：因为 将作大匠 解万年奸邪不忠，于民众中影响极坏，与陈汤一起迁徙到敦煌。
English: Because he would be a great master to solve the eternal treachery and disloyalty, he had a very bad influence on the people, and migrated to Dunhuang with Chen Tang.

古文：初，少府陈咸，卫尉逢信，官簿皆在翟方进之右；方进晚进，为京兆尹，与咸厚善。
现代文：起初，少府陈咸，卫尉逢信，官籍都在翟方进之上，而翟方进晋升稍晚，任职京兆尹，与陈咸交往深厚。
English: At the beginning, the minor prefect Chen Xian and the guard lieutenant Feng Xin were both ranked higher than Gong Fang Jin, while Gong Fang Jin was promoted a little later, served as Jing Zhaoyun, and had a deep relationship with Chen Xian.

古文：及御史大夫缺，三人皆名卿，俱在选中，而方进得之。
现代文：等到御史大夫职位空缺，三人都是著名公卿，俱在入选之中，而只有翟方进获得这个位置。
English: When the post of imperial historian became vacant, Chen Xian, Fang Jin and Feng Xin, three famous nobles, were all among the candidates, and Fang Jin won the post.

古文：会丞相薛宣得罪，与方进相连，上使五二千石杂问丞相、御史，咸诘责方进，冀得其处，方进心恨。
现代文：恰逢丞相薛宣得罪皇上，牵连到翟方进。皇上派五个食俸禄在两千石的官员会审丞相、御史大夫，结果陈咸究责起翟方进，心下希望得到他的位置，翟方进怀恨在心。
English: The Emperor sent five officials with a salary of two thousand koku to interrogate the prime minister and the chief historian. As a result, Chen Xian investigated and reprimanded Shifangjin, hoping to get his position. Shifangjin held a grudge.

古文：陈汤素以材能得幸于王凤及王音，咸、信皆与汤善，汤数称之于凤、音所，以此得为九卿。
现代文：陈汤一向以才能得到大将军王凤及安阳敬侯王音的赏识，陈咸、逢信都与陈汤交好，陈汤多次于王凤、王音那里称赞他们，由此获得九卿的身份。
English: Chen Tang had always been appreciated by the great generals Wang Feng and Anyang Jing Hou Wang Yin for his talent. Chen Xian and Feng Xin were friends with Chen Tang. Chen Tang praised them many times from Wang Feng and Wang Yin, and thus obtained the status of the Nine Lords.

古文：及王商黜逐汤，方进因奏 咸、信附会汤以求荐举，苟得无耻。 
现代文：及至卫将军王商罢免并贬逐了陈汤，翟方进因而上奏： 陈咸、逢信攀附于陈汤，以谋求举荐，其不正当图取的行为是不知羞耻。 
English: When Wang Shang, the Wei general, dismissed and expelled Chen Tang, Yan Fangjin therefore played: Chen Xian and Feng Xin clung to Chen Tang in order to seek recommendation, and their improper behavior was shameless.

古文：皆免官。
现代文：于是二人都罢了官。
English: So they both resigned.

古文：是岁，琅邪太守硃博为左冯翊。
现代文：这一年，琅琊郡太守朱博任职左冯翊。
English: In this year, Zhu Bo, the governor of Qin County, was appointed as Zuo Fengyao.

古文：博治郡，常令属县各用其豪桀以为大吏，文、武从宜。
现代文：朱博治理郡县，常命令所属各县用本地的豪桀作为大吏，至于文职或武职，根据个人擅长而定。
English: Zhu Bo governed counties and counties, and often ordered the counties to use local heroes as officials. As for civilian or military posts, it depended on personal skills.

古文：县有剧贼及它非常，博辄移书以诡责之，其尽力有效，必加厚赏；怀诈不称，诛罚辄行。
现代文：县区出现严重贼患及其它不正常事件，朱博则致书谴责他；他若尽心尽力做出成效，必加厚赏；若心怀不轨、不称职，则施以或杀或罚。
English: If there are serious thefts and other abnormal incidents in the county, Zhu Bo will write to him to condemn him; if he makes every effort to achieve results, he will be rewarded more; if he is dishonest and incompetent, he will be killed or punished.

古文：以是豪强慑服，事无不集。
现代文：由此一来，地方豪强因受到震慑而服从管理，凡事无不可办。
English: As a result, local strongmen are deterred and submit to management, and everything can be done.

古文：孝成皇帝上之下永始三年
现代文：汉成帝永始三年
English: The Third Year of the Han Dynasty

古文：春，正月，己卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月末，己卯日，出现日食。
English: In spring, at the end of the first month, on the first day of spring, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：初，帝用匡衡议，罢甘泉泰畤，其日，大风坏甘泉竹宫，折拔畤中树木十围以上百馀。
现代文：起初，汉成帝采用丞相匡衡的奏议，不再使用甘泉山的郊祀祭坛。当日，大风吹坏了甘泉山的竹宫，祭坛处被折损、拔了根的十围以上的树木百余棵。
English: At first, Emperor Han Chengdu adopted the suggestion of the Minister of Justice Kuang Heng, and no longer used the suburban worship altar of Ganquan Mountain. On the same day, the strong winds damaged the bamboo palace of Ganquan Mountain, the altar was broken, and more than a hundred trees with more than ten circumferences were uprooted.

古文：帝异之，以问刘向，对曰： 家人尚不欲绝种祠，况于国之神宝旧畤！
现代文：汉成帝为之惊异，便问于刘向，答道： 庶民之家尚不想放弃祖宗祭祀，何况对于国家引以为神宝的老祭坛。
English: Surprised by this, Emperor Hancheng asked Liu Xiang about it, to which he replied: The House of the Common People still does not want to give up ancestor worship, not to mention the old altar, which the country considers a sacred treasure.

古文：且甘泉、汾阴及雍五畤始立，皆有神祇感应，然后营之，非苟而已也。
现代文：再说，甘泉、汾阴及雍地五畤自设立那天起，都有神灵感应，然后才正式营建它，并非是随意而为之。
English: Moreover, the Five Faces of Ganquan, Jinyin, and Yongcheng have just been established, and they all have divine inspiration, and then they are clarified. It is not enough to perfunctorily start.

古文：武、宣之世奉此三神，礼敬敕备，神光尤著。
现代文：武帝、宣帝之代，奉祀此三神，礼敬周到完备，神光尤为显著。
English: In the era of Emperor Wu and Emperor Xuan, these three deities were worshipped, and the reverence was thorough and complete, and the divine light was particularly prominent.

古文：祖宗所立神祗旧位，诚未易动。
现代文：祖宗所设立的神灵旧位，实在是没有变动过。
English: The old position of deities established by our ancestors has never really changed.

古文：前始纳贡禹之议，后人相因，多所动摇。
现代文：之前开始采纳贡禹有关废弃的奏议，后人因循照办，大多都有所动摇。
English: Previously, Gong Yu's report on the scrapping was adopted, and later generations have mostly wavered due to the follow-up.

古文：《易大传》曰： 诬神者殃及三世。 
现代文：《易大传》上说： 诬蔑神灵者，殃及三世。 
English: "I Ching" says: Those who deceive the gods will be cursed for three generations.

古文：恐其咎不独止禹等！ 
现代文：恐怕这一怪罪不独独止于贡禹等人。 
English: I am afraid that this blame is not limited to Gong Yu and others.

古文：上意恨之，又以久无继嗣，冬，十月，庚辰，上白太后，令诏有司复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土如故，及雍五畤、陈宝祠、长安及郡国祠著明者，皆复之。
现代文：皇上有了怨恨贡禹之意，又因久无子女，于冬季十月，庚辰日，上奏给太后，令告知有关部门恢复甘泉山的郊祀祭坛、汾阴后土祭坛如故，以及雍地祭祀青帝、白帝、赤帝、黄帝、黑帝的五个祭坛，还有陈宝祠、长安及郡国中著名的祭祠，一律恢复。
English: The emperor had a grudge to pay tribute to Yu, and because he had no children for a long time, in the winter of October, Gengchen Day, he reported to the empress dowager, ordering the relevant departments to restore the suburban worship altar of Ganquan Mountain, the earth altar after the year of Yin, as before, and the five altars of Yongdi to worship the young emperor, the white emperor, the red emperor, the yellow emperor, and the black emperor, as well as Chen Bao Shrine, Chang'an and the famous shrines in the county, all restored.

古文：是时，上以无继嗣，颇好鬼神、方术之属，上书言祭祀方术得待诏者甚众，祠祭费用颇多。
现代文：当时，汉成帝由于未能生育儿女，而比较拿鬼神、方术之类学说当回事，因给皇帝上书谈祭祀、方术之事而等待诏命的人甚多，祠庙祭祀的费用也相当大。
English: At that time, Emperor Hancheng was unable to have children, so he took doctrines such as ghosts and gods and the art of counting seriously. There were a lot of people waiting for the imperial decree because they had written to the emperor to discuss the matter of sacrifices and the art of counting, and the cost of temple sacrifices was also quite large.

古文：谷永说上曰： 臣闻明于天地之性，不可惑以神怪；知万物之情，不可罔以非类。
现代文：光禄大夫谷永劝皇上说： 臣听说，明白于 天地之性，惟人为贵 的道理，不可受到神怪之说的迷惑；要知道万物之间的情形，不可被异类之说误导。
English: Guanyong, the doctor of Guanglu, advised the emperor, saying: "Your majesty, I have heard that you should understand the nature of heaven and earth, but the principle that human beings are precious. You should not be confused by the words of gods and monsters; you should know the situation between all things, and you should not be misled by the words of different species.

古文：诸背仁义之正道，不遵《五经》之法言，而盛称奇怪鬼神，广崇祭祀之方，求报无福之祠，及言世有仙人，服食不终之药，遥兴轻举、黄治变化之术者，皆奸人惑众，挟左道，怀诈伪，以欺罔世主。
现代文：那些背逆仁义之道的人，不尊从《五经》的法理之言，而盛谈稀奇古怪的鬼神故事；广泛推崇祭祀方术，乞求获报于无福可言的祠庙。至于讲什么世上有仙人，服食长生不老之药，轻身腾远、冶炼化变黄金之术，全都是奸人在迷惑民众！他们挟带着邪门歪道，怀藏欺诈伪善之心，以欺蒙当世君主。
English: Those who rebel against the path of benevolence and righteousness do not respect the words of the Five Classics, but talk a lot about strange and bizarre ghost stories; they widely worship the sacrificial rituals and beg to be reported to the temples that have no luck. As for the stories about the existence of immortals, taking the elixir of life, flying light and smelting gold, they are all deceivers to confuse the people! They carry the evil door and the crooked way, and harbor the heart of deceit and hypocrisy to deceive the current monarch.

古文：听其言，洋洋满耳，若将可遇，求之，荡荡如系风捕景，终不可得。
现代文：听他们说的，滔滔不绝于耳，就好像可遇可求一般；若求真起来，却渺渺茫茫如望风扑影，终究什么也得不到。
English: Listening to what they say, they talk incessantly in my ear, as if they can meet or ask for anything; if they ask for the truth, but they are as vague as the wind, they will get nothing in the end.

古文：是以明王距而不听，圣人绝而不语。
现代文：因而对于神鬼之事，明君拒而不听，圣人绝而不谈。
English: Therefore wise princes are far from them, and they hearken not unto them; and the holy men turn away, and speak not unto them.

古文：昔秦始皇使徐福发男女入海求神采药，因逃不还，天下怨恨。
现代文：昔日，秦始皇派徐福载运童男童女入海求神采药，因而逃去不回，致天下人怨恨。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Qin Shihuang sent Xu Fu to take the children to the sea to ask God for medicine. As a result, they fled and never returned, causing resentment among the people of the world.

古文：汉兴，新垣平、齐人少翁、公孙卿、栾大等皆以术穷诈得，诛夷伏辜。
现代文：汉朝兴建，新垣平、齐人少翁、公孙卿、栾大等人，都因为欺诈牟利的招数用完了，遭到诛杀治罪。
English: During the construction of the Han Dynasty, Aragaki Ping, Qi Ren Shao Weng, Gong Sun Ching, Zou Dai and others all ran out of tricks for fraud and profiteering, and were beaten to death.

古文：唯陛下距绝此类，毋令奸人有以窥朝者！ 
现代文：希望陛下拒绝此类虚妄之说，不使奸邪之人获得借以窥伺朝廷的机会。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will reject such false claims and not allow traitors the opportunity to spy on the Imperial Court.

古文：上善其言。
现代文：皇上赞同谷永的话。
English: The emperor thought that what Tanaga said was reasonable.

古文：十一月，尉氏男子樊并等十三人谋反，杀陈留太守，劫略吏民，自称将军；徒李潭、称忠、锺祖、訾顺共杀并，以闻，皆封为侯。
现代文：十一月，陈留郡尉氏县的男子樊并等十三人谋反，杀陈留太守，劫掠官民，自称将军。役徒李潭、称忠、锺祖、訾顺共同杀死樊并，被朝廷得知后，都封为侯爵。
English: In November, a man from Qiu County, Chenliu County, and thirteen others plotted a rebellion and killed Chenliu the Empress Dowager, plundered officials and civilians, and claimed to be a general. Li Tan, Weizhong, Yao Zu, and Yao Shun, all of whom were military officers, jointly killed Qiu and were made marquesses after the imperial court learned about it.

古文：十二月，山阳铁官徙苏令等二百二十八人攻杀长吏，盗库兵，自称将军；经郡国十九，杀东郡太守及汝南都尉。
现代文：十二月，山阳县铁官役徒苏令等二百二十八人攻杀长吏，盗出军库武器，自称将军，攻掠十九个郡国，杀死东郡太守、汝南都尉。
English: In December, 228 members of the Sanyang County Iron Officer Corps led by Tu Su Ling attacked and killed officials, stole weapons from the military depot, claimed to be generals, attacked and plundered 19 counties, and killed the East County Governor and the Junan Lieutenant.

古文：汝南太守严捕斩令等。
现代文：汝南太守严捕杀了苏令等人。
English: Yan Xuan, the eunuch governor of the south, captured and killed Su Ling and others.

古文：迁为大司农。
现代文：晋升严为大司农。
English: Yan Xuan was promoted to the post of Chief Secretary for Agriculture.

古文：故南昌尉九江梅福上书曰： 昔高祖纳善若不及，从谏如转圜，听言不求其能，举功不考其素，陈平起于亡命而为谋主，韩信拔于行陈而建上将；故天下之士云合归汉，争进奇异，知者竭其策，愚者尽其虑，勇士极其节，怯夫勉其死。
现代文：因而南昌尉九江梅福上书道： 昔日高祖采纳善言唯恐不及，听从进谏像转轮一样。听人讲话不苛求其有多大才能，举任有功之人不考究其平日出身。陈平举任于亡命之徒而成为谋士之首，韩信选拔于士卒阵列之中而立为三军上将。故而天下有志之士云集归汉，争先恐后进献奇思妙想；智慧者竭诚献策，愚钝者尽心思考，勇士敢于献身以尽忠义之节，怯弱者也不再贪生怕死。
English: Therefore, Nanchang Sub-Lieutenant Jiujiang Meifu wrote: In the past, Gao Zu adopted kind words but was too afraid to do so, and obeyed the gong like a spinning wheel. Listening to people's speech did not require how much talent they had, and the appointment of meritorious people did not pay attention to their ordinary origin. Chen Ping was appointed by the outlaws and became the head of the strategist, and Han Xin was selected from the ranks of the soldiers and became the three generals. Therefore, the world's aspirants gathered to return to Han, scrambling to offer fanciful ideas; the wise devoted themselves to devising, the dull ones

古文：合天下之知，并天下之威，是以举秦如鸿毛，取楚若拾遗，此高祖所以无敌于天下也。
现代文：综合天下之智慧，兼并天下之威武，所以拿下强大的秦国如同举一鸿毛，攻取楚人项羽如同路中拾物。
English: Integrating the wisdom of the world and annexing the might of the world, so winning the powerful Qin State is like picking up a feather, and capturing the Chu people's feather is like picking up things on the road.

古文：孝武皇帝好忠谏，说至言，出爵不待廉、茂，庆赐不须显功，是以天下布衣各厉志竭精以赴阙廷，自衒鬻者不可胜数，汉家得贤，于此为盛。
现代文：这就是汉高祖之所以天下无敌。 孝武皇帝善于采纳忠肯的谏言，有能说出至理名言者，赐予官爵不必等到举荐 孝廉  茂才 之后，给予赏赐无须见到最后的成功。所以，天下布衣之士为了奔赴朝廷，各个励志图强、竭尽心思，展示才能而自我举荐的人不可胜数。汉家天下获得贤良之才，于此时最为盛众。
English: This is why Emperor Gaozu was invincible in the world. Emperor Xiaowu was good at accepting the advice of the loyal, and there were those who could say the right words. It was not necessary to wait until after the recommendation of Xiaolian and Shigeru to bestow the title of nobility, and the reward did not need to see the final success. Therefore, in order to rush to the imperial court, the clothed people around the world, there are countless people who are self-recommended by various inspirational, exhausting, and demonstrating talents. The Han family around the world has gained the most talented talent at this time.

古文：使孝武皇帝听用其计，升平可致，于是积尸暴骨，快心胡、越，故淮南王安缘间而起；所以计虑不成而谋议泄者，以众贤聚于本朝，故其大臣势陵，不敢和从也。方今布衣乃窥国家之隙，见间而起者，蜀郡是也。
现代文：假使汉武帝听取这些人的建议，天下平定是可以达到的，却于这个时候积尸暴骨地以攻打北胡和南越图得痛快，以致淮南王刘安乘机叛乱；然而刘安的计划失败、预谋泄露的原因，又在于众多贤能之人聚集于中央朝廷，淮南王手下大臣奈于压力，不敢附从。 时下民间人士窥测国家漏洞，趁机而谋反的，是蜀郡那个地方。
English: If Emperor Hanwu had listened to the advice of these people, world peace could have been achieved. However, at this time, the dead bodies piled up violently to attack North Korea and South Vietnam, so that Liu An, King of Huainan, took advantage of the opportunity to rebel. However, the reason for the failure of Liu An's plan and the leak of the premeditation lies in the fact that many capable people gathered in the central court, and the ministers under the King of Huainan were under pressure and did not dare to follow. Nowadays, it is the place in Shu County where the people spy on the country's loopholes and take advantage of the opportunity to rebel.

古文：及山阳亡徒苏令之群，蹈藉名都、大郡，求党与，索随和，而亡逃匿之意，此皆轻量大臣，无所畏忌，国家之权轻，故匹夫欲与上争衡也。
现代文：及至山阳县逃亡的役徒苏令群伙，践踏名都、大郡，广招党羽、搜罗附和之众，竟无潜逃之意，这都缘于轻蔑朝中没有能臣，所以无所畏惧。正由于国家权势薄弱，才导致匹夫想与朝廷抗衡。
English: As far as Sanyang County, the group of officers and men of Su Ling, who fled, trampled on the famous capital, large counties, recruited a wide range of party members, and gathered followers, but they had no intention of absconding. This was all due to the contempt that there were no able subjects in the court, so they had nothing to fear. It was precisely because of the weak power of the state that Pif wanted to compete with the court.

古文：士者，国之重器。
现代文：有远大志向的士人，是国家贵重的宝器。
English: An ambitious scholar is a precious treasure of the country.

古文：得士则重，失士则轻。
现代文：得到这些士人则国家权重，失掉这些士人则国家权轻。
English: If these statesmen are gained, the weight of the state will increase, and if these statesmen are lost, the weight of the state will decrease.

古文：《诗》云： 济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 人才济济的众多士人，使得文王得以安宁治国。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Talent abounds, so King Zhouwen is at peace.

古文：庙堂之议，非草茅所言也。
现代文：本是朝廷上商议的大事，不是草堂茅舍中可以说的。
English: This was an important matter to be discussed at court, not something that could be discussed in a grass hut.

古文：臣诚恐身涂野草，尸并卒伍，故数上书求见，辄报罢。
现代文：臣实在恐怕弃身于荒草，尸骨与战场的士卒们并在一处，故而数次上书求见，然而都遭到拒绝。
English: I was really worried about dying in the wilderness, dying on the battlefield, so I repeatedly wrote to ask for advice, but it was never accepted.

古文：臣闻齐桓之时，有以九九见者，桓公不逆，欲以致大也。
现代文：臣听说齐桓公之时，有人以简单的 九九算术 学识求见君王，齐桓公没有拒之门外，是想招引有大学问的人前来。
English: When the vassal heard of Prince Qi Huan, someone asked to see the king with a simple knowledge of 99 arithmetic. Prince Qi Huan did not shut the door, but wanted to invite people with university questions to come.

古文：今臣所言，非特九九也，陛下距臣者三矣，此天下士所以不至也。
现代文：如今为臣所要跟皇上谈的，可不是特意为了无关轻重的 九九算术 ，但却三次遭到陛下拒绝，天下仁人志士之所以不来进言了。
English: The subject I want to discuss with the emperor now is not the trivial arithmetic of the number nine, but it has been rejected three times by his majesty. The reason why the world's benevolent people do not come to make suggestions is because of this.

古文：昔秦武王好力，任鄙叩关自鬻；缪公行伯，由余归德。
现代文：昔日秦武王喜欢猛力之士，任鄙敲开函谷关自荐；秦穆公推行霸业，由余归附投诚。
English: In the past, King Qin Wu liked strong men, so he recommended himself to Han Guan; King Qin Mu promoted domineering, and the rest of the clan joined him.

古文：今欲致天下之士，民有上书求见者，辄使诣尚书问其所言，言可采取者，秩以升斗之禄，赐以一束之帛，若此，则天下之士，发愤懑，吐忠言，嘉谋日闻于上，天下条贯，国家表里，烂然可睹矣。
现代文：今天若想招引天下仁人志士，民众有上书求见者，便先叫他到尚书那里，问明所言内容，所言若可采用，给予一升或一斗米的奖励，赏赐一捆织布。这样，则天下仁人志士就会抒发愤懑，倾吐忠言；良谋益策天天都会被皇上听到，天下大事的脉络及国家表里状况就明明白白了。 以天下四海之广大，士民之无数，能够进言的人一定极多。
English: Today, if you want to attract the world's benevolent aspirants, and the public has a petitioner, you should first ask him to go to Shangshu, ask him what he said, and if what he said can be used, give him a reward of one liter or one barrel of rice, and reward him with a bundle of weaving cloth. In this way, the world's benevolent aspirants will express their indignation and speak out their loyal advice; the emperor will hear the good and beneficial policies every day, and the context of the world's major events and the situation in the country will be clear and clear. With the vastness of the world and the countless number of

古文：夫以四海之广，士民之数，能言之类至众多也；然其俊桀指世陈政，言成文章，质之先圣而不缪，施之当世合时务，若此者亦无几人。
现代文：然而其中的俊杰人物，评点世事、叙说政务，论言成文，质证于先贤圣哲不出谬误，施行于当世也与时务相符合，像这样的人就已寥寥无几了。
English: However, among them, there are only a few outstanding people who can comment on world affairs, narrate political affairs, and write down their opinions. There is no fallacy in questioning the sages and sages, and their implementation in the present world is also in line with the current affairs.

古文：故爵禄束帛者，天下之砥石，高祖所以厉世摩钝也。
现代文：因而官爵俸禄及绢帛之物，好比如天下的磨石，高祖就是以此来砥砺世人心志的。
English: Therefore, the official salary and the things of the imperial family are like the millstones of the world, which Gao Zu used to sharpen the world's people's minds.

古文：孔子曰： 工欲善其事，必先利其器。 
现代文：孔子说： 工匠想完成好他的活计，必先让手中的工具锋利。 
English: Confucius said, "A craftsman must first sharpen his tools if he is to do his work well."

古文：至秦则不然，张诽谤之罔以为汉驱除，倒持泰阿，授楚其柄。
现代文：至于秦朝就不是这样，张设诽谤诬陷的罗网，反为我汉朝驱赶人才；倒持太阿宝剑，却授给楚人以剑柄。
English: As for the Qin Dynasty, this was not the case. A slanderous trap was set up, but the Han Dynasty drove out talented people for me. I held the sword, but gave the handle to the Chu people.

古文：故诚能勿失其柄，天下虽有不顺，莫敢触其锋，此孝武皇帝所以辟地建功，为汉世宗也。
现代文：所以，只要不失掉剑柄，天下虽有不顺，没有人敢触其锋芒，这便是汉武帝所以开辟疆土建功立业，成为汉室江山的宗祖。
English: Therefore, as long as the hilt of the sword is not lost, no one dares to touch its edge, even though there are ups and downs in the world. This is why Emperor Wu of Han opened up the territory and made great achievements in civil engineering, becoming the ancestor of the Han Dynasty.

古文： 今陛下既不纳天下之言，又加戮焉。
现代文： 今天陛下不但不听取天下人的谏言，还对他们施加以杀戮啊！
English: Now His Majesty neither accepts the advice of the people of the world nor persecutes them.

古文：夫鸢鹊遭害，则仁鸟增逝，愚者蒙戮，则智士深退。
现代文：若是鹞鹰、乌鹊之类的凡鸟遭到伤害，则鸾凤那样的仁德之鸟也会远走高飞；若是凡夫俗子蒙受杀戮，则仁人智士也会退去并深深地隐藏起来。
English: If a common bird such as an eagle or a blackbird is harmed, a benevolent bird such as a phoenix will fly away; if an ordinary person is killed, a benevolent and wise person will retreat and hide deeply.

古文：间者愚民上疏，多触不急之法，或下廷尉而死者众。
现代文：前段时间有凡夫俗子们上疏，多由于说的是些不急切的事而触犯 不急之法 ，就有很多人被交到廷尉那里入狱而死。
English: Some time ago, there was a riot of ordinary people, mostly because they were talking about things that were not urgent and violated the law of not being in a hurry, so many people were handed over to the court officers and died in prison.

古文：自阳朔以来，天下以言为讳，朝廷尤甚，群臣皆承顺上指，莫有执正。
现代文：从阳朔年间以来，天下人以说话为忌讳，朝廷更为严重，群臣都在顺承皇上的意旨说话，不敢有纠正的意见。
English: Since the Yangshuo era, the whole country has been on the defensive, laws and prohibitions have become stricter, the imperial court has become more serious, and the courtiers have all complied with the emperor's will. No one dares to insist on correct opinions.

古文：何以明其然也？
现代文：如何了解这些实际情况呢？
English: How do you know that?

古文：取民所上书，陛下之所善，试下之廷尉，廷尉必曰 非所宜言，大不敬， 以此卜之，一矣。
现代文：拿一份平民的上书，陛下认为不错的，投到廷尉那里试看一下反映，廷尉必然说 此话不当说，大为不敬！ 用这种做法测试，就一切都明白了。
English: Take a copy of the petition from a commoner, which Your Majesty thinks is good, and send it to the Lieutenant to see what he says. The Lieutenant is bound to say, "That's not right, that's not respectful!" Test it in this way, and everything will become clear.

古文：故京兆尹王章，资质忠直，敢面引廷争，孝元皇帝擢之，以厉具臣而矫曲朝；及至陛下，戮及妻子。
现代文：过去，京兆尹王章，品性忠正耿直，敢于出面当庭争辩，孝元皇帝提拔了他，以激励无所作为的官员以及纠正不正直的朝臣。
English: In the past, Emperor Xiaoyuan promoted Jingzhao Yin Wangzhang, who was loyal and upright and dared to appear in court to argue, to encourage idle officials and correct dishonest courtiers.

古文：且恶恶止其身，王章非有反畔之辜而殃及室家，折直士之节，结谏臣之舌。
现代文：然而到了陛下这里，却将王章及其妻小都给杀了。有句话叫 作恶者恶在一人 ，王章并没有反叛之罪，却殃及其家室，这是摧折了刚直之士的气节，封禁了谏臣之口。
English: However, when they got to His Majesty, they killed Wang Zhang and his wife Xiao. There is a saying that the evil-doer is evil alone. Wang Zhang did not commit the crime of rebellion, but he did harm his family. This broke the spirit of the upright man, and sealed the mouth of the vassal.

古文：群臣皆知其非，然不敢争，天下以言为戒，最国家之大患也！
现代文：群臣都知道是错误，却不敢争辩。天下人以祸从口出为戒，是国家最大的祸患啊！
English: The ministers all know it's a mistake, but they don't dare to argue. People all over the world are warned against speaking evil, it's the country's biggest scourge!

古文：愿陛下循高祖之轨，杜亡秦之路，除不急之法，下无讳之诏，博览兼听，谋及疏贱，令深者不隐，远者不塞，所谓 辟四门，明四目 也。
现代文：愿陛下遵循高祖的轨道，堵塞秦朝亡国之路，去除 不急之法 ，下达不禁言之诏，广泛观察事物，普遍地倾听意见，谋虑到关系疏远、地位低下的人，使得居于深层次的不被埋没，处于僻远的不被阻隔，即所谓 开启四面大门，让四方都看得明亮 。
English: May His Majesty follow the track of Gao Zu, block the road of the Qin Dynasty's downfall, remove the law of no haste, issue the edict of no compulsion, observe things widely, listen to opinions universally, consider the people with distant relations and low status, so that those who live in the deep level will not be buried, and those who live in the distance will not be blocked, that is, the so-called opening of the four-sided gate, so that all four sides can see brightly.

古文：往者不可及，来者犹可追。
现代文：已过去的是来不及了，来日的事还可以补救。
English: What is past is too late, what is to come can still be remedied.

古文：方今君命犯而主威夺，外戚之权，日以益隆。陛下不见其形，愿察其景！
现代文：而今君主的意志和威严遭到侵犯和剥夺，外亲的权势一日比一日重；陛下看不见他们的实际作为，但愿能观察到映射出来的影子。
English: Now, however, the will and majesty of the monarch are being encroached upon and deprived of, and the power of the relatives is getting heavier day by day; His Majesty cannot see their actual actions, but would like to be able to observe the reflected shadow.

古文：建始以来，日食、地震，以率言之，三倍春秋，水灾亡与比数，阴盛阳微，金铁为飞，此何景也？
现代文：建始元年以来，日食、地震，从比率上来说，三倍于春秋时代，而水灾就无法比较了。阴盛阳衰，金铁化星而飞，这是什么景象啊？
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in the first year of the 21st century, the ratio of solar eclipses and earthquakes has been three times that of the Spring and Autumn Period, while floods cannot be compared.

古文：汉兴以来，社稷三危：吕，霍，上官；皆母后之家也。
现代文：汉朝兴建以来，江山社稷出现过三次危机，吕氏、霍氏、上官氏三家，都是母后之家。
English: Since the construction of the Han Dynasty, there have been three crises in Jiangshan society. The three families of Lv, Huo and Shangguan are all the mother's family.

古文：亲亲之道，全之为右，当与之贤师良傅，教以忠孝之道。
现代文：亲爱自己亲人的原则，以保全他们为上，应当给他们安排个贤良的师傅，教授以忠孝之道。
English: According to the principle of loving one's relatives and keeping them safe, one should arrange a virtuous master to teach them the way of filial piety.

古文：今乃尊宠其位，授以魁柄，使之骄逆，至于夷灭，此失亲亲之大者也。
现代文：而今却给他们安排在尊贵娇宠的位置，授予魁首的权柄，使之骄横犯逆，以至于最后被诛灭，这反而成了失掉亲人之爱的大祸殃了。
English: Now, however, they have been placed in a privileged position, given the power of a leader, made arrogant and rebellious, and finally destroyed, which has become a great misfortune of losing the love of relatives.

古文：自霍光之贤，不能为子孙虑，故权臣易世则危。
现代文：虽是霍光那样的贤臣，都不能保证子孙的安全，故而朝廷的权重之臣一旦更换世代就更危险了。
English: Although he is a wise minister like Huo Guang, he cannot guarantee the safety of his children and grandchildren. Therefore, it is more dangerous for an important courtier of the imperial court to change generations.

古文：《书》曰： 毋若火，始庸庸。 
现代文：《尚书》中说： 不要使像火那样，起始于星星点点。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Don't be like a big fire, the beginning is a mediocre small fire.

古文：势陵于君，权隆于主，然后防之，亦无及已！ 上不纳。
现代文：待到权势凌驾于君主之上，然后再加以戒备，已经来不及了。 皇上不予采纳。
English: It is too late to wait until the power is above the monarch, and then guard against it. The emperor will not accept it.

