古文：凡用兵之道，以计为首。
现代文：大凡用兵作战的法则，都是把战略谋划放在首位。
English: The general rule of fighting with soldiers is to put strategic planning first.

古文：未战之时，先料将之贤愚，敌之强弱，兵之众寡，地之险易，粮之虚实。
现代文：没有开战之前，先要判明将帅是贤明还是愚钝，敌人力量是强大还是弱小，兵员数量是众多还是寡少，战区地形是险峻还是平坦，粮草供应是困乏还是充足。
English: Before going to war, it is necessary to find out whether the general is wise or stupid, whether the enemy is strong or weak, whether the number of soldiers is large or small, whether the terrain of the battlefield is steep or flat, and whether the supply of grain and grass is poor or sufficient.

古文：计料已审，然后出兵，无有不胜。
现代文：把敌我双方这些情况都判断清楚了，然后再出兵攻战，便没有不胜利的。
English: If we can clearly judge these situations on both sides of the enemy, and then go to war, we will not fail to win.

古文：法曰： 料敌制胜，计险厄远近，上将之道也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 判断敌情实际，研究制胜计划，考察地形险易，计算道路远近，这是高明将帅指导战争所必须掌握的法则。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: Judging the actual enemy situation, studying the plan for victory, examining the dangerous terrain, and calculating the distance and proximity of the road, these are the rules that must be mastered by a skilled general to guide the war.

古文：汉末，刘先主在襄阳，三往求计于诸葛亮。
现代文：东汉末年，刘备驻兵在襄阳的时候，曾三次亲往诸葛亮处，请教复兴汉室、统一天下的大计。
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, when Liu Bei was stationed in Xiangyang, he personally went to Zhuge Liang three times to ask for advice on the grand plan of reviving the Han Dynasty and unifying the country.

古文：亮曰： 自董卓造逆以来，天下豪杰并起，跨州连郡者不可胜数。
现代文：诸葛亮对他说： 自从董卓专权乱政以来，豪杰之士纷纷乘机起兵称雄一方，而地跨州郡的割据者多得数不胜数。
English: Zhuge Liang said to him: Since Dong Zhuo's despotic and chaotic rule, heroes have taken advantage of the opportunity to take up arms and become the dominant side, and the number of those who have settled across state borders is countless.

古文：曹操比于袁绍，则名微而众寡，然操遂能克绍，以弱为强者，非惟天时，抑亦人谋也。
现代文：曹操同袁绍相比，就显得名望卑微且兵力弱小，然而曹操竟然能够战胜袁绍，由弱者变为强者，这不仅是依靠好时机，也是靠人的计谋。
English: Compared with Yuan Shao, Cao Cao's reputation was humble and his military strength was small. However, Cao Cao was able to defeat Yuan Shao, turning from a weakling into a strongman, not only by relying on good timing, but also by relying on human stratagems.

古文：今操已拥百万之众，挟天子而令诸侯，此诚不可与争锋。
现代文：现在曹操已经拥兵百万，并且挟制皇帝借皇帝的名义号令各诸侯，这实在是不可同他直接较量的。
English: Now that Cao Cao already has a million people, he can't really compete with him in holding the title of "Son of Heaven" and commanding princes.

古文：孙权据有江东，已历三世，国险而民附，贤能为之用，此可以为援而不可图也。
现代文：孙权占据着江东地区，其统治已历三世，那里地势险要，百姓归附，贤能之人都愿意为他出力效命，因此可以与他结为盟援，而不可以图谋他。
English: Sun Quan has occupied the eastern part of the Yangtze River for three generations. The country is in possession of natural hazards, and the people are attached to it. It is possible to appoint capable people, which can be used as assistance but cannot be schemed.

古文：荆州北据汉、沔，利尽南海，东连吴、会，西通巴、蜀，此用武之国，而其主不能守。
现代文：荆州北有汉水、淝水作屏障，南至海边有丰富资源可供利用，东连吴郡、会稽郡，西通巴郡、蜀郡。这里是用兵的战略要地，但现在占据荆州的刘表却守不住它。
English: In the north of Jingzhou, the Han River and Surabaya River act as a barrier, and in the south, there are abundant resources available for use from the coast to the east, including Wu County, Huiqi County, West Tongba County, and Shu County. This is a strategic place for soldiers, but Liu Biao, who now occupies Jingzhou, cannot protect it.

古文：此殆天所以资将军，将军岂有意乎？
现代文：这大概是上天资助给将军的吧，将军可有意于此吗？
English: This is probably heaven's gift to the general. Is the general interested in this?

古文：益州险塞，沃野千里，天府之土，高祖因之以成帝业。
现代文：益州地形险要，土地肥沃广大，是天然富饶之地，汉高祖就是靠这里而成就了帝业。
English: The terrain of Yizhou is perilous, fertile fields stretch for thousands of miles, and it is the country of heaven. In the past, the ancestors of the Han Dynasty used this place to achieve imperial success.

古文：刘璋暗弱，张鲁在北，民殷国富而不知存恤，智能之士思得明君。
现代文：现在，益州牧刘璋昏暗无能，张鲁又在北边和他作对，尽管这里人口众多、资源富庶，但因其不知爱抚民众，致使有才能的人都渴望得到英明的君主。
English: Now, Liu Xuan, the patriarch of Yizhou, is dim and incompetent, and Zhang Lu opposes him in the north. Although there is a large population and abundant resources here, because he does not know how to caress the people, talented people are eager to get a wise monarch.

古文：将军既帝室之冑，信义着于四海，总揽英雄，思贤如渴，若跨有荆、益，保其岩阻，西和诸戎，南抚夷越，外结好孙权，内修政理；天下有变，则命一上将将荆州之军以向宛、洛，将军身帅益州之众出于秦川，百姓孰敢不箪食壶浆以迎将军者乎？
现代文：将军既是汉室的后代，且又信义显扬四海，广交天下英雄，求贤如饥似渴，倘若占领荆、益二州，控扼险要，西与诸族和睦为邻，南面抚绥夷越人民，对外结盟孙权，对内修明政治；天下形势一旦发生变化，就伺机派遣一员大将率领荆州部队向南阳、洛阳地区进军，而将军则亲率益州之兵北出秦川，所过地区的百姓谁还不担着丰盛酒食来迎接将军呢！
English: The general is both a descendant of the Han dynasty, and also a faithful and righteous manifestation of the four seas, a hero of the world, and a thirst for excellence. If the two states of Jing and Yizhou are occupied, control is essential, the West is a neighbor of all ethnic groups, the South is a neighbor of the people, the foreign alliance is Sun Quan, and the domestic policy is clear; once the situation in the world changes, it will take the opportunity to send a general to lead the Jingzhou troops to the Nanyang and Luoyang regions, and the general will personally lead the Yizhou soldiers north out of the Qin River. The people in the regions that have passed

古文：诚如是，霸业可成，汉室可兴矣。 
现代文：确实能做到这样，那么，统一大业就可以成功，汉朝统治就可以复兴了。 
English: If this can really be done, then the great cause of unification can be successful, and Han Dynasty rule can be revived.

古文：先主曰： 善。 
现代文：刘备听后高兴地说： 讲得太好啦！ 
English: After listening, Liu Bei said happily: It was a great speech!

古文：后果如其计。
现代文：后来，形势的发展，果然是像诸葛亮预料的一样。
English: Later, the development of the situation was indeed as Zhuge Liang expected.

