古文：一曰：孟夏之月，日在毕，昏翼中，旦婺女中。
现代文：孟夏孟夏四月，太阳的位置在毕宿，黄昏时刻，翼宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，女宿出现在南方中天。
English: Mengxia Mengxia In April, the position of the sun is at the end of the night, at dusk, the pterodactyl appears in the southern middle sky, and at dawn, the pterodactyl appears in the southern middle sky.

古文：其日丙丁，其帝炎帝，其神祝融，其虫羽，其音徵，律中仲吕，其数七，其性礼，其事视，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀灶，祭先肺。蝼蝈鸣，丘蚓出，王菩生，苦菜秀。
现代文：孟夏于天干属丙丁，它的主宰之帝是炎帝，佐帝之神是祝融，应时的动物是凤鸟之类的羽族，相配的声音是徵音，音律与仲吕相应。这个月的数字是七，情性是礼，修养身心应作的事是视，味道是苦味，气味是焦气，要举行的祭祀是灶祭，祭祀时祭品以肺脏为尊，这个月，蛤蟆开始鸣叫，虹蚓从土里钻出来，栝楼长出来了，苦菜开花了。
English: Mengxia in Tiangan belongs to Pan Ding, its ruling emperor is Yan Di, the god of Zi Di is Zhu Rong, the animal at the time is a feather family such as a phoenix, the matching voice is a call, and the melody is corresponding to Zhong Lu. This month's number is seven, the emotion is courtesy, the cultivation of the body and mind is to see, the taste is bitterness, the smell is burning, the sacrifice to be held is the stove sacrifice, and the sacrifice is honored with the lungs. This month, the crickets began to chirp, the rainbow trout emerged from the soil, the mirage grew out, and the bitter

古文：天子居明堂左个，乘朱辂，驾赤骝，载赤旗，衣赤衣，服赤玉，食菽与鸡，其器高以觕。
现代文：夭子住在南向明堂的左侧室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤红色的马，车上捕着赤色的绘有龙致的旗帜，天子聋着赤色的衣服，佩戴着赤色的饰玉，吃的食物是豆子和鸡，用的器物高而且大。
English: Xiao Zi lived in the left room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rode in a vermilion-colored car with a crimson-colored horse in front of the car. The car had a red flag with a dragon on it. Tian Zi wore red clothes and red ornaments. He ate beans and chicken. The utensils he used were tall and large.

古文：是月也，以立夏。
现代文：这个月有立夏的节气。
English: This month marks the beginning of the summer season.

古文：先立夏三日，太史谒之天子曰： 某日立夏，盛德在火。 
现代文：立夏前三天，太史向天子禀告说； 某日立夏，大德在于火。 
English: Three days before the summer solstice, Emperor Taishi announced to the Son of Heaven, "A certain summer solstice, great virtue lies in fire.

古文：天子乃斋。
现代文：天子于是斋戒，准备迎夏。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven fasted and prepared for the autumn.

古文：立夏之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫，以迎夏於南郊。
现代文：立夏那天，天子亲自率领三公九卿大夫到南郊迎接夏的降临。
English: On the day of the beginning of summer, the heavenly son personally led the three princes and nine noble doctors to the southern suburbs to welcome the arrival of summer.

古文：还，乃行赏，封侯、庆赐，无不欣说。
现代文：礼毕归来，于是赏赐功臣，分封爵位和土地，群臣无不欣喜快乐。
English: After returning from the ceremony, he rewarded the meritorious vassals with titles and lands. The vassals were delighted and happy.

古文：乃命乐师习合礼乐。
现代文：命令乐师练习合演礼、乐。
English: Instruct the musicians to practice the rite and music of the chorus.

古文：命太尉赞杰俊，遂贤良，举长大；行爵出禄。
现代文：命令太尉向天子禀报才能出众的人，举荐德行超群的人，任职时间长的人。
English: He ordered the captain to report to the emperor those with outstanding talent, recommend those with superior virtue, and those who have served for a long time.

古文：必当其位。是月也，继长增高，无有坏隳。
现代文：封爵位，给予俸禄，一定要与他们的地位相当。这个月，万物都在生长壮大，不要使它们有所毁坏。
English: A knighthood, a salary, must be commensurate with their status. This month, all things are growing and growing, do not let them be destroyed.

古文：无起土功，无发大众，无伐大树。
现代文：不许兴动土木工程，不许征发百姓，不许砍伐大树。
English: It is forbidden to carry out civil engineering projects, to conscript people, and to cut down large trees.

古文：是月也，天子始絺。
现代文：这个月，天子开始穿细葛的衣服。
English: This month, Tianzi began to wear a summer dress made of fine cambric cloth.

古文：命野虞出行田原，劳农劝民，无或失时；命司徒循行县鄙，命农勉作，无伏于都。
现代文：命令主管山林田野的官吏出去视察田地原野，鼓励百姓努力耕作，不要失掉农时。命令主管教化民事的官吏巡视天子领地内的各个县邑，命令农夫努力耕作，不要藏伏在国都之中。
English: Order the officials in charge of the mountains, forests and fields to go out and inspect the fields and fields, encourage the people to work hard and not to lose the agricultural time, order the officials in charge of civil education to inspect the counties and towns in the territory of Tianzi, and order the farmers to work hard and not to hide in the national capital.

古文：是月也，驱兽无害五谷，无大田猎，农乃升麦。
现代文：这个月，要驱逐野兽，使它们不要伤害五谷。不要大规模进行狩猎。
English: This month, it is necessary to drive away wild beasts so that they do not harm crops. Do not carry out large-scale hunting.

古文：天子乃以彘尝麦，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，农民献上新麦，天子于是就着猪肉品尝麦子，在品尝之前先进献给祖庙。
English: This month, the farmers presented new wheat, so the heavenly son tasted the wheat with the pork, and first presented it to the ancestral temple before tasting.

古文：是月也，聚蓄百药，糜草死，麦秋至。
现代文：这个月，要积聚蓄藏各种草药。葶苈之类的草药枯死了，麦子成熟的季节来到了。
English: This month, it is necessary to accumulate and store all kinds of herbs. Herbs such as alfalfa have withered, and the season of wheat ripening has come.

古文：断薄刑，决小罪，出轻系。
现代文：对轻刑和罪小的犯人进行判决，释放不够判刑的犯人。
English: For a person who has committed a misdemeanor, the case should be tried in a timely manner, the verdict should be decided in a timely manner, and the release should be released in a timely manner.

古文：蚕事既毕，后妃献茧，乃收茧税，以桑为均，贵贱少长如一，以给郊庙之祭服。
现代文：蚕桑之事已经结束，后妃向天子献上蚕茧，于是向养蚕的人收取茧税，税按照桑树的多少来均分，贵贱长幼一视同仁，用这些税收来供给祭天祭祖时所用的祭服。
English: The matter of the silkworms and mulberry trees was over. The empress dowager presented the silkworm cocoons to the heavenly son, and then collected the tax from the people who raised the silkworms. The tax was divided equally according to the number of mulberry trees. The rich and the poor, old and young alike, used these taxes to supply the sacrificial clothing used in the sacrifice to the ancestors.

古文：是月也，天子饮酎，用礼乐。
现代文：这个月，天子欢宴群臣，饮用酎酒，观看礼乐表演。
English: In this month, the Son of Heaven drinks gourd wine and feasts the courtiers, using both music to entertain and etiquette to elevate the lowly.

古文：行之是令，而甘雨至三旬。
现代文：实行与这个月的时令相应的政令，及时雨就会十天一至。
English: The implementation of the government decree corresponding to the time scale of the leap month, the rain will fall in time, and the rain will fall three times in the third quarter.

古文：孟夏行秋令，则苦雨数来，五谷不滋，四鄙入保；行冬令，则草木早枯，後乃大水，败其城郭；行春令，则虫蝗为败，暴风来格，秀草不实。
现代文：孟夏实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，伤害庄稼的苦雨就会频繁降落，各种谷物就不能生长，四处边境的百姓就会因敌寇侵扰而躲进城堡。如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，草木就会过早地干枯，然后就有大水毁坏城郭。如果实行应在春天实行的改令，那么，虫螟就会成灾，疾风就舍袭来，草术就会只开花不结实。
English: If Mengxia implements the decree to be implemented in autumn, then the bitter rain that harms crops will fall frequently, all kinds of cereals cannot grow, and the people around the border will hide in the castle due to enemy intrusion. If the decree to be implemented in winter is implemented, then the plants will dry out prematurely, and then there will be heavy water to destroy the castle. If the revised order to be implemented in spring is implemented, then the insects will become a disaster, the gale will attack, and the grass will only bloom and not be strong.

古文：二曰：先王之教，莫荣於孝，莫显於忠。
现代文：劝学先王的政教中，没有什么比孝更荣耀的了，没有什么比忠更显达的了。
English: There is nothing more glorious than filial piety, and there is nothing more conspicuous than loyalty in the political and religious teachings of the former king.

古文：忠孝，人君人亲之所甚欲也；显荣，人子人臣之所甚愿也。
现代文：忠孝是作君主、父母的十分希望得到的东西，显荣是作子女、臣下的十分愿意获得的东西。
English: Loyalty and filial piety are things that a monarch and a parent would very much like to obtain, and glory is something that a child and a subject would very much like to obtain.

古文：然而人君人亲不得其所欲，人子人臣不得其所愿，此生於不知理义。不知理义，生於不学。
现代文：然而，作君主、父母的却得不到他们所希望的忠孝，作子女、臣下的却得不到他们所向往的显荣，这是由子不懂得理义造成的不懂得理义，是由于不学习的缘故。
English: However, as monarchs and parents, they do not get the loyalty and filial piety they hope for, and as children and subjects, they do not get the glory they yearn for. This is caused by the child not understanding reason, and is due to not learning.

古文：学者师达而有材，吾未知其不为圣人。
现代文：从师学习的人，如果他的老师通达而自己又有才能，我没听说过这样的人不成为圣人的。
English: I have never heard of a man who did not become a saint if his teacher was able and he was able.

古文：圣人之所在，则天下理焉。
现代文：只要有圣人在，天下就太平安定了。
English: As long as there are saints, the world will be peaceful and stable.

古文：在右则右重，在左则左重，是故古之圣王未有不尊师者也。
现代文：圣人在这个地方，这个地方就受到尊重，圣人在那个地方，那个地方就受到尊重，因此古代的圣王没有不尊重老师的。
English: The saint in this place is respected in this place, the saint in that place is respected in that place, so the ancient saint did not disrespect the teacher.

古文：尊师则不论其贵贱贫富矣。若此则名号显矣，德行彰矣。
现代文：尊重老师就不会计较他们的贵贱、贫富了象这样，名号就显达了，德行就彰明了。
English: If you respect your teachers, you will not care about their rank, wealth or poverty. In this way, your reputation will be revealed, and your virtue will be made clear.

古文：故师之教也，不争轻重尊卑贫富，而争於道。
现代文：所以，老师施行教诲的时候，也不计较学生的轻重、尊卑、贫富，而看重他们是否能接受理义。
English: Therefore, when teachers carry out teachings, they do not care about the students' weight, dignity, wealth, but whether they can accept reason.

古文：其人苟可，其事无不可。
现代文：他们倘若能够接受理义，对他们的教诲就会无不合宜。
English: If they were able to accept reason, their teaching would not be out of place.

古文：所求尽得，所欲尽成，此生於得圣人。
现代文：所追求的完全都能得到，所希望的完全都能实现，这种情况在得到圣人之后才会发生。
English: It is only after attaining sainthood that one can fully obtain what one seeks and fully realize what one hopes for.

古文：圣人生於疾学。不疾学而能为魁士名人者，未之尝有也。
现代文：圣人是在努力学习中产生的，不努力学习而能成为贤士名人的，未曾有过。
English: A saint is born from diligent study. There has never been anyone who could become a sage without hard work.

古文：疾学在於尊师。
现代文：努力学习关键在于尊重老师。
English: The key to studying hard is to respect the teacher.

古文：师尊则言信矣，道论矣。
现代文：老师受到尊重，言语就会被人信从，道义就会被人称述而彰明了。
English: If the teacher is respected, the words will be believed, and the moral will be praised and clarified.

古文：故往教者不化，召师者不化；自卑者不听，卑师者不听。
现代文：因此，应召去教的老师不可能教化他人，呼唤老师来教的人不可能受到教化，自卑的老师不会被人听信，轻视老师的人不会听从教诲。
English: Therefore, a teacher who is called to teach cannot educate others, a person who calls a teacher to teach cannot be educated, a teacher with low self-esteem will not be listened to, and a person who despises a teacher will not listen to teachings.

古文：师操不化不听之术，而以强教之，欲道之行、身之尊也，不亦远乎？
现代文：老师如果采用不可能教化他人、不会被人听信的方法去勉强教育人，尽管想使自己的道义得以施行，使自身得以尊贵，不也差得太远了吗?
English: If a teacher is forced to educate people in a way that is impossible to educate others and will not be listened to, although he wants to implement his own morality and make himself respectable, is he not too far off?

古文：学者处不化不听之势，而以自行，欲名之显、身之安也，是怀腐而欲香也，是入水而恶濡也。
现代文：从师学习的凡处于不可能受到教化、不会听从教诲的地位，自己随意行事，尽管想使自己名声显赫，自身平安，这就如怀揣腐臭的东西却希望芳香，进入水中却厌恶沾湿一样，怎么可能办得到呢?
English: How is it possible for those who learn from a teacher, who are in a position where they cannot be enlightened and will not listen to instruction, to act at their own discretion, even though they want to make their reputation prominent and themselves safe, just as something that carries a foul smell wants to be fragrant and does not want to get wet when it enters the water?

古文：凡说者，兑之也，非说之也。
现代文：凡说教，应该使对方心情舒畅，而不是硬性说教。
English: Anyone who preaches should make the other person feel comfortable, rather than preaching hard.

古文：今世之说者，多弗能兑，而反说之。
现代文：如今世上说教的人，大多不能使对方心情舒畅，却反去硬性说教。
English: Most of the preachers in the world today are not able to make the other person feel comfortable, but they do not preach hard.

古文：夫弗能兑而反说，是拯溺而垂之以石也，是救病而饮之以堇也。
现代文：不能使对方心情舒畅，反去硬性说教，这就如同拯救溺水的人却用石头让他沉下去，如同治病却给病人喝下毒药一样，只会适得其反。
English: You can't make the other person feel comfortable, but you can't preach hard. It's like saving a drowning man but letting him sink with a stone, like curing a disease but giving the patient poison to drink. It will only backfire.

古文：使世益乱、不肖主重惑者，从此生矣。
现代文：社会越发混乱，不肖的君主越发昏乱就都由此产生了。
English: The more chaotic society becomes, the more chaotic the unsavory monarch becomes, and all of this is the result.

古文：故为师之务，在於胜理，在於行义。
现代文：所以，做老师的要务在于依循事理，在于施行道义。
English: Therefore, the most important duty of a teacher is to follow the facts and to implement morality.

古文：理胜义立则位尊矣，王公大人弗敢骄也，上至於天子，朝之而不惭。
现代文：只要事理被依循，道义得以树立，那么老师的地位就尊贵了，王公大人对他们不敢轻慢，即使上至于天子朝拜这样的老师也不会感到羞愧。
English: As long as the principles are followed and morality can be established, then the status of the teacher is noble. Wang Gong adults do not dare to despise them. Even if they worship the Son of Heaven, such teachers will not feel ashamed.

古文：凡遇合也，合不可必。
现代文：大凡师徒相遇而和洽的情况不可能一定实现。
English: The situation where great masters and disciples meet and make peace is impossible to achieve.

古文：遗理释义，以要不可必，而欲人之尊之也，不亦难乎？
现代文：如果有难遗弃事理，抛掉道义，去追求不一定实现的东西，并想要人们尊重他，这不也太难了吗?
English: If it is difficult to abandon reason, to abandon morality, to pursue something that is not necessarily achieved, and to want people to respect him, is it not also too difficult?

古文：故师必胜理行义然後尊。
现代文：所以，老师一定要依循事理，施行道义，然后才能尊显。
English: Therefore, the teacher must follow the rules, implement morality, and then be able to show respect.

古文：曾子曰： 君子行於道路，其有父者可知也，其有师者可知也。
现代文：曾子说。 君子在道路上行走，其中父亲还在的可以看出来，其中有老师的也可以看出来。
English: Zeng Zi said, "When a gentleman walks on the road, you can see if his father is still alive, and you can also see if he has a teacher.

古文：夫无父而无师者，馀若夫何哉！ 
现代文：对那些父亲，老师都不在的，其他人又能怎么样呢？
English: For those whose fathers and teachers are not there, what can the others do?

古文：此言事师之犹事父也。曾点使曾参，过期而不至，人皆见曾点曰： 无乃畏邪？ 
现代文：曾点派他的儿子曾参外出，过了约定的日期却没有回来，人们都来看望曾点说： 怕不是遇难了吧。 
English: Zeng Ding sent his son Zeng Zhan to go out, but he did not return after the agreed date. People came to visit Zeng Ding and said, "I'm afraid we're in trouble."

古文：曾点曰： 彼虽畏，我存，夫安敢畏？ 
现代文：曾点说： 即使他要死，我还活着，他怎么敢自己不小心遭祸而死！ 
English: He once said, "Even if he is about to die, I am still alive. How dare he die by accident!"

古文：孔子畏於匡，颜渊後，孔子曰： 吾以汝为死矣。 
现代文：孔子被囚禁在匡地，颜渊最后才到，孔子说： 我以为你死了。 
English: Confucius was imprisoned in Kuandao. Yan Yuan was the last to arrive. Confucius said, "I thought you were dead."

古文：颜渊曰： 子在，回何敢死？ 
现代文：颜渊说， 您还活着，我怎么敢死。 
English: Yan Yuan said, You are still alive, how dare I die.

古文：颜回之於孔子也，犹曾参之事父也。
现代文：颜回对待孔子如同曾参侍奉父亲一样。
English: Yan Hui treated Confucius as if he had served his father.

古文：古之贤者与，其尊师若此，故师尽智竭道以教。
现代文：古代的贤人，他们尊重老师达到这样的地步，所以老师尽心竭力地教诲他们。
English: The ancient sages, they respected the teacher to such an extent, so the teacher tried his best to teach them.

古文：三曰：神农师悉诸，黄帝师大挠，帝颛顼师伯夷父，帝喾师伯招，帝尧师子州支父，帝舜师许由，禹师大成贽，汤师小臣，文王、武王师吕望、周公旦，齐桓公师管夷吾，晋文公师咎犯、随会，秦穆公师百里奚、公孙枝，楚庄王师孙叔敖、沈尹巫，吴王阖闾师伍子胥、文之仪，越王勾践师范蠡、大夫种。
现代文：尊师神农以悉诸为师，黄帝以大挠为师，帝颛顼以伯夷父为师，帝喾以伯招为师，帝尧以子州生父为师，帝舜以许由为师，禹以大成贽为师，汤以小臣伊尹为师，文王、武王以吕望、周公旦为师，齐桓公以管夷吾为师，晋文公以咎犯、随会为师，秦穆公以百里奚、公孙枝为师，楚庄王以孙叔敖、沈尹巫为师，吴王阖闾以伍子胥、文之倪为师，越王勾践以范蠡、文种为师。
English: The revered teacher Shennong had Shizizhu as his teacher, the Yellow Emperor had Dazhao as his teacher, the Emperor had Bo Yi as his teacher, the Emperor had Bozhao as his teacher, the Emperor had Zizhou as his teacher, the Emperor had Xu Yu as his teacher, the Emperor had Datong as his teacher, the Tang Dynasty had the minor minister Yi Yin as his teacher, the King of Wenzhou and the King of Wu had Lvang and Zhou Gongtan as their teachers, the King of Qi Huan had Guan Yiwu as their teacher, the King of Jin had Gui Gui as their teacher, the King of Qin Mu had Ba

古文：此十圣人、六贤者未有不尊师者也。
现代文：这十位圣人、六位贤者没有不尊重老师的。
English: These ten saints and six sages did not disrespect the teacher.

古文：今尊不至於帝，智不至於圣，而欲无尊师，奚由至哉？
现代文：如今，人们地位没有达到帝那样尊贵，才智没有达到圣明的境界，却想耍不尊奉老师，这怎么能达到帝、达到圣的境地呢？
English: Nowadays, people's status is not as high as that of emperors, and their intelligence has not reached the level of sacredness, but they want to play and do not respect teachers. How can they achieve the status of emperors and saints?

古文：此五帝之所以绝，三代之所以灭。
现代文：这正是五帝之所以废绝，三代之所以不可再现的原因。
English: This is precisely the reason why the Five Emperors were abolished and why three generations of emperors cannot be reproduced.

古文：且天生人也，而使其耳可以闻，不学，其闻不若聋；使其目可以见，不学，其见不若盲；使其口可以言，不学，其言不若爽；使其心可以知，不学，其知不若狂。
现代文：况且，天造就人，使人的耳朵可以听见，如果不学习，耳有所闻反不如耳聋听不见好，使人的眼睛可以看见，如果不学习，目有所见还不如眼瞎看不见好。使人的口可以说话，如果不学习，口有所言反不如口有病说不出话好。使人的心可以认知事物，如果不学习，心有所知反不如狂乱无知好。
English: Moreover, God created man so that man's ears can hear, and if he does not learn, it is better for his ears to hear than for him to be deaf and not able to hear, so that man's eyes can see, and if he does not learn, it is better for his eyes to see than for him to be blind and not able to see, so that man's mouth can speak, and if he does not learn, it is better for his mouth to speak than for his mouth to be diseased and not able to speak, so that man's heart can recognize things, and if he does not learn, it is better for his heart to know than to be mad and not know.

古文：故凡学，非能益也，达天性也。
现代文：因此，凡学习，并不是能给人另增加什么，而是使人通达天性。
English: All learning, therefore, is not that which adds to a man, but that which adds to his nature.

古文：能全天之所生而勿败之，是谓善学。
现代文：只要能够保全天赋予的人性而不使它受到伤害，这就叫作善于学习。
English: As long as we can preserve our God-given humanity without harming it, this is called being good at learning.

古文：子张，鲁之鄙家也；颜涿聚，梁父之大盗也；学於孔子。
现代文：子张本是鲁国的鄙俗小人，颜涿聚本是粱父山上的大盗，他们求学于孔子。
English: Zhang Zibon was a vulgar villain in Lu, and Yan Xizhu Ben was a great thief on Mount Xizhu. They learned from Confucius.

古文：段干木，晋国之大驵也，学於子夏。
现代文：段干木本是晋国市场上的大牙侩，求学于子夏。
English: Duan dry wood is originally a large gums on the market in Jin, studied in Zixia.

古文：高何、县子石，齐国之暴者也，指於乡曲，学於子墨子。
现代文：商何、县子石本是齐国的凶恶残暴的人，被乡里所斥逐，求学于墨子。
English: Shang Ho and Guanzi Ishimoto were vicious and cruel people in Qi. They were banished from the countryside and studied in Mozi.

古文：索卢参，东方之钜狡也，学於禽滑黎。
现代文：索卢参本是东方有名的狡诈之人，求学予禽滑黎。
English: Solusan was originally a famous cunning man in the East, who studied at the University of the West Indies.

古文：此六人者，刑戮死辱之人也。
现代文：这六个人本是该受到刑罚、杀戮，蒙受耻辱的人。
English: These six people should have been punished, killed and humiliated.

古文：今非徒免於刑戮死辱也，由此为天下名士显人，以终其寿，王公大人从而礼之，此得之於学也。
现代文：如今，由于从师学习，他们不仅免予刑罚、杀戮、耻辱，而且成为天下的知名之士、显达之人，得以终其天年，王公大人因此对他们以礼相待，这些都是得力于学习啊。
English: Today, thanks to their apprenticeship, they are not only free from punishment, killing, and disgrace, but have also become world-renowned and prominent people, able to live out the rest of their days. Therefore, the princes treat them with courtesy. All of this is thanks to their studies.

古文：凡学，必务进业，心则无营。
现代文：凡学习，一定务求增进学业，这样心中就没有疑惑了。
English: Whenever you study, you must strive to improve your studies, so that there is no doubt in your mind.

古文：疾讽诵，谨司闻，观欢愉，问书意，顺耳目，不逆志，退思虑，求所谓，时辨说，以论道，不苟辨，必中法，得之无矜，失之无惭，必反其本。
现代文：要努力诵习，小心等侯机会聆听教诲，看到老师欢悦的时候，请教书中的意旨，要顺适老师的耳目，不违背老师的心意，回来认真思考，探求老师所说的道理，要时时研讨分析，以求阐明老师所阐明的道理，不苟且巧辩，一定要合乎法度，有所得不要自夸，有所失不要惭愧，一定要回到自己的本性上来。
English: We must study hard, be careful to wait for the opportunity to listen to the teachings, when you see the teacher's joy, ask for the meaning in the book, adapt to the teacher's eyes and ears, do not go against the teacher's will, come back to think seriously, explore the truth of the teacher, always study and analyze in order to clarify the truth explained by the teacher, be meticulous and skillful, must comply with the law, do not boast, do not be ashamed of the loss, and must return to their own nature.

古文：生则谨养，谨养之道，养心为贵；死则敬祭，敬祭之术，时节为务。此所以尊师也。
现代文：老师活着的时候，要小心奉养，小心奉养的方法以使老师欢娱为贵，老师死了要恭敬祭祀，恭敬祭祀的原则以合于四时之节为要，这是尊重老师的做法。
English: When the teacher is alive, it is necessary to carefully cultivate, and the method of careful cultivation is to make the teacher's joy valuable. When the teacher is dead, it is necessary to respect the sacrifice, and the principle of respecting the sacrifice is to meet the four o'clock festival. This is the practice of respecting the teacher.

古文：治唐圃，疾灌浸，务种树；织葩屦，结罝网，捆蒲苇；之田野，力耕耘，事五谷；如山林，入川泽，取鱼鳖，求鸟兽。此所以尊师也。
现代文：为老师修整园地，努力灌溉，积极种植，织麻鞋，结兽网，编蒲苇，走到田野，努力耕耘，种植五各，走进山林，进人川泽，捕捉鱼鳖，猎取鸟兽，这是尊重老师的做法。
English: It is the practice of respecting the teacher to tidy up the park for the teacher, diligently irrigate, actively plant, weave hemp shoes, tie animal nets, weave cormorants, go to the field, work hard, plant five, go into the mountains, enter the river, catch fish bait, and hunt birds and beasts.

古文：视舆马，慎驾御；适衣服，务轻暖；临饮食，必蠲洁；善调和，务甘肥；必恭敬，和颜色，审辞令；疾趋翔，必严肃。
现代文：为老师察看车马，小心驾驭，使衣服适宜，务求轻暖。备办饮食，一定清洁，好好调和五味，务求甘甜肥美，一定恭恭敬敬，和颜悦色，言辞审慎，力求行步快慢有节，一定恭敬庄重。
English: Inspect the chariot and horse for the teacher, drive carefully, make the clothes suitable, so as to be light and warm. Prepare the diet, be sure to be clean, harmonize the five flavors well, so as to be sweet and fat, be sure to be respectful, have a pleasant color, be careful in speech, strive to walk fast and have discipline, be respectful and dignified.

古文：此所以尊师也。
现代文：这是尊重老师的做法。
English: This is a way of respecting teachers.

古文：君子之学也，说义必称师以论道，听从必尽力以光明。
现代文：君子学习，谈论道理一定称引老师的话来阐明道义，听从教诲一定尽心竭力击发扬光大。
English: A gentleman must study and discuss the truth, must quote the words of the teacher to clarify the moral, and must listen to the teachings and do his best to carry forward the glory.

古文：听从不尽力，命之曰背；说义不称师，命之曰叛。
现代文：听从教诲而不尽心竭力去发扬它，这种行为叫作 背 ，谈论道理而不称引老师的话去阐明它，这种行为叫作 叛 。
English: The act of listening to a teaching and not doing one's best to carry it out is called backsliding; the act of talking about the truth and not using the words of the teacher to clarify it is called rebellion.

古文：背叛之人，贤主弗内之於朝，君子不与交友。
现代文：有背叛行为的人，贤明的君主不接纳他们在朝为臣，君子不跟他们交往为友。
English: Wise monarchs do not accept traitors as subjects in the court, and gentlemen do not associate with them as friends.

古文：故教也者，义之大者也；学也者，知之盛者也。
现代文：因此，教育人是一件非常仁义的事，学习是一件非常聪明的事。
English: Therefore, educating people is a very benevolent thing, and learning is a very clever thing.

古文：义之大者，莫大於利人，利人莫大於教；知之盛者，莫大於成身，成身莫大於学。
现代文：仁义的事没有比给人带来利益更大的了，而给人带来利益最大的，没有什么能超过教育人了。聪明的事没有比修养身心更大的了，而修养身心最重要的，没有什么能超过学习。
English: There is nothing more benevolent and righteous than bringing benefits to people, and there is nothing more beneficial than educating people. There is nothing more intelligent than cultivating the mind and body, and there is nothing more important than cultivating the mind and body than learning.

古文：身成则为人子弗使而孝矣，为人臣弗令而忠矣，为人君弗强而平矣，有大势可以为天下正矣。
现代文：如果自身的修养完成了，那么，作儿子的不用支使就孝顺了，作臣下的不用命令就忠诚了，作君主的不用勉强就公正了，其中形势最有利的就可以作天下的君主了。
English: If one's self-cultivation is complete, then, as a son, one does not need to be an emissary to be filial, as a subject, one does not need to be ordered to be loyal, as a monarch, one does not need to be reluctant to be fair, and in the most favorable situation, one can be the monarch of the world.

古文：故子贡问孔子曰： 後世将何以称夫子？ 
现代文：所以，子贡问孔子说： 后代将用什么话称道您呢? 
English: Therefore, Zigong asked Confucius, "What words will future generations use to praise you?"

古文：孔子曰： 吾何足以称哉？
现代文：孔子说： 我哪里值得称道呢?
English: Confucius said, "What do I deserve praise for?

古文：勿已者，则好学而不厌，好教而不倦，其惟此邪！ 
现代文：如果一定要说的话，那就是喜好学习而不满足，勤于教诲而不疲倦，大概仅此而已！ 
English: If it must be said, it is a preference for learning and not being satisfied, being diligent in teaching and not getting tired, and that's about it!

古文：天子入太庙祭先圣，则齿尝为师者弗臣，所以见敬学与尊师也。
现代文：天子进人明堂祭祀先代圣人，与曾经怍过自己老师的人并排站立，不把他们作臣子看待，这是用以显示敬重学习和尊重老师啊！
English: Tenshi Shinninmyo-do Hall is dedicated to the previous generation of saints, standing side by side with those who once beat up their teachers, not treating them as vassals, this is to show respect for learning and respect for teachers!

古文：四曰：达师之教也，使弟子安焉、乐焉、休焉、游焉、肃焉、严焉。
现代文：诬徒通达事理的老师施行教育，能使学生安心、快乐、安闲、从容、庄重、严肃。
English: Education by teachers who are well-versed in the facts can make students feel safe, happy, relaxed, calm, dignified, and serious.

古文：此六者得於学，则邪辟之道塞矣，理义之术胜矣；此六者不得於学，则君不能令於臣，父不能令於子，师不能令於徒。
现代文：这六方面在教学中实现了，那么邪僻的路就堵死了，正义之道就通行了。这六方面在教学中不能实现，那么君主就不能支使臣下，父亲就不能支使儿子，老师就不能支使学生。
English: If these six aspects are realized in teaching, then the evil way will be blocked and the righteous way will prevail. If these six aspects are not realized in teaching, then the monarch cannot support his subjects, the father cannot support his son, and the teacher cannot support his students.

古文：人之情，不能乐其所不安，不能得於其所不乐。
现代文：人之常情，不能喜欢自己所不安心的事物，不能从自己所不喜欢的事物中有所得。
English: It is human nature not to like what one does not like, and not to benefit from what one does not like.

古文：为之而乐矣，奚待贤者？虽不肖者犹若劝之。
现代文：一件事如果做起来就感到快乐，不用说贤人，即使不肖的人仍然会努力去做。
English: If you do one thing, you will feel happy. Needless to say, wise people, even if they are not handsome, will still try to do it.

古文：为之而苦矣，奚待不肖者？虽贤者犹不能久。
现代文：一件事如果敞起来就感到苦恼，不用说不肖的人，即使贤人同样不能持久。
English: It is needless to say that even a wise man cannot last long if he is distressed by one thing.

古文：反诸人情，则得所以劝学矣。
现代文：从人之常情出发，就会得到勉励人们学习的道理了。
English: If we start from human nature, we will get the reason for encouraging people to study.

古文：子华子曰： 王者乐其所以王，亡者亦乐其所以亡，故烹兽不足以尽兽，嗜其脯则几矣。 
现代文：子华子说； 成就王业的人乐意做那些使自己成就王业的事，国破家亡的人也乐意做那些使自己灭亡的事，所以煮食禽兽不可能把所煮的禽兽吃尽，人们专吃自己爱吃的肉就够了。 
English: Zihua Zi said: Those who have accomplished their kingly career are willing to do those things that make them achieve their kingly career, and those who have ruined their country and family are also willing to do those things that make them perish. Therefore, it is impossible to eat all the boiled animals, and it is enough for people to eat the meat they like.

古文：然则王者有嗜乎理义也，亡者亦有嗜乎暴慢也。
现代文：如此说来，成就王业的人专喜好理义，国破家亡的人专喜好暴慢。
English: In this way, those who have accomplished their kingly career are exclusively fond of reason and justice, and those who have ruined their country and family are exclusively fond of violence and arrogance.

古文：所嗜不同，故其祸福亦不同。
现代文：他们的喜好不同，因此他们所得到的祸福也不周。
English: Their preferences are different, so the blessings and misfortunes they receive are not good.

古文：不能教者：志气不和，取舍数变，固无恒心，若晏阴喜怒无处；言谈日易，以恣自行；失之在己，不肯自非，愎过自用，不可证移；见权亲势及有富厚者，不论其材，不察其行，驱而教之，阿而谄之，若恐弗及；弟子居处修洁，身状出伦，闻识疏达，就学敏疾，本业几终者，则从而抑之，难而悬之，妒而恶之；弟子去则冀终，居则不安，归则愧於父母兄弟，出则惭於知友邑里，此学者之所悲也，此师徒相与异心也。
现代文：不善于教育人的老师心志不和谐，取舍一再变化，根本没有恒心，就象天气的晴阴一样喜怒无常，言谈一天一变，放纵自己的行为，过失在干自己，却不肯自我批评，坚持错误，自以为是，不能接受意见而有所改变，亲近有权有势的人和富有的人，不衡量他们的才能，不考察他们的品行，急忙跑去教他们，迎合奉承他们，唯恐不及；对于学生中平时操守清白兰善，品貌出众、见识广博、勤于向老师请教、接近完成学业的人，却由此压制他们，诘难、疏远他们，妒嫉厌恶他们，学生想要离去却又希望完成学业，而留下来又不安心，回不愧见父母兄弟，出门愧见挚友乡亲，这是求学的人所悲伤的，这是由于老师和学生彼此心志不同的缘故。
English: A teacher who is not good at educating people has a discordant mind, changes his mind again and again, has no perseverance at all, is as moody as the weather, changes his words day by day, indulges in his own behavior, faults himself, but refuses to self-criticize, insists on mistakes, is self-righteous, cannot accept opinions and change, is close to powerful people and rich people, does not measure their talents, does not examine their behavior, rushes to teach them, caters to them, flatter them, and is afraid to fail; but suppresses the students who are usually honest, good-natured, outstanding in appearance, knowledgeable, diligent

古文：人之情，恶异於己者，此师徒相与造怨尤也。
现代文：人之常情，憎恶跟自己心志不合的人，这是老师和学生彼此结下怨恨的原因。
English: It's human nature to hate those who don't agree with you, which is why teachers and students end up hating each other.

古文：人之情，不能亲其所怨，不能誉其所恶，学业之败也，道术之废也，从此生矣。
现代文：人之常情，不能爱自己所怨恨的人，不能称颂自己所憎恶的人，学业的败坏，道术的废弃，就由此产生了。
English: The human condition, the inability to love those whom one resents, the inability to praise those whom one detests, the corruption of academic studies, the abandonment of ethics, all stem from this.

古文：善教者则不然。
现代文：善于教育人的老师就不是这样。
English: This is not the case with teachers who are good at educating people.

古文：视徒如己，反己以教，则得教之情矣。
现代文：他们看待学生如同自己一样，设身处地施行教育，这样就掌握教育的真谛了。
English: They see the students as themselves, put themselves in the place of education, and thus grasp the true meaning of education.

古文：所加於人，必可行於己，若此则师徒同体。
现代文：凡施加给别人的，自己一定能够做到，象这样，就做到师生一体了。
English: Whatever you impose on others, you must be able to do yourself. In this way, you will achieve the unity of teachers and students.

古文：人之情，爱同於己者，誉同於己者，助同於己者，学业之章明也，道术之大行也，从此生矣。
现代文：人之常情，喜爱跟自己心志相同的人，称颂跟自己心志相同的人，帮助跟自己心志相同的人，学业的彰明，道术的普遍推行，就由此产生了。
English: People's common feelings, liking people with the same mind as their own, praising people with the same mind as their own, helping people with the same mind as their own, highlighting their studies, and generally promoting Daoism, all came from this.

古文：不能学者，从师苦而欲学之功也，从师浅而欲学之深也。
现代文：不善于学习的人，跟随老师学习粗心大意，却想学得精通，跟随老师学习浅尝辄止，却想学得深入。
English: People who are not good at learning, follow the teacher to learn carelessly, but want to learn proficiently, follow the teacher to learn shallowly, but want to learn deeply.

古文：草木、鸡狗、牛马，不可谯诟遇之，谯诟遇之，则亦谯诟报人，又况乎达师与道术之言乎？
现代文：草木，鸡狗、牛马，不可粗暴地对待它们，如果粗暴地对待它们，那它们也会粗暴地报复人。
English: Grass, trees, chickens, dogs, cows, and horses should not be treated roughly. If they are treated roughly, they will also retaliate roughly.

古文：故不能学者：遇师则不中，用心则不专，好之则不深，就业则不疾，辩论则不审，教人则不精；於师愠，怀於俗，羁神於世，矜势好尤，故湛於巧智，昏於小利，惑於嗜欲；问事则前後相悖，以章则有异心，以简则有相反；离则不能合，合则弗能离，事至则不能受。
现代文：草木、鸡狗，牛马尚且如此，又何况对待通达事理的老师和道术的传授呢?所以，不善于学习的入：对待老师不忠诚，用心不专一，爱好不深人，求学不努力，辩论不明是非，效法别人不精心，怨恨老师，安于凡庸，精神被时务所束缚，自恃权势，好犯过失，所以沉溺于巧诈，迷恋干小利，惑乱于嗜欲，问事则前后矛盾，言辞详明则又与心相异，言辞简约则与与意相反；分散的事不会综合，复杂的事不会分析，即使再费力气也不能有所成就。
English: Therefore, those who are not good at learning: are not loyal to teachers, are not specific in their intentions, do not have deep hobbies, do not study hard, do not know the rights and wrongs of debates, do not carefully imitate others, resent teachers, are content with mediocrity, their spirit is constrained by current affairs, arrogate power, and are prone to make mistakes, so they indulge in cunning, are obsessed with small profits, and are confused by desires. Questions are contradictory, detailed words are different from the heart, and concise words are contrary to the intention.

古文：此不能学者之患也。
现代文：这是不善于学习的人的害处啊！
English: That's the trouble with people who aren't good at learning!

古文：五曰：善学者，若齐王之食鸡也，必食其跖数千而後足；虽不足，犹若有跖。
现代文：用众善于学习的人象齐王吃鸡一样，一定要吃上几千鸡跖而后才满足，即使不够，仍然有鸡跖可供取食。
English: People who are good at learning are like the king of Qi eating chicken, they must eat thousands of chicken giblets before they are satisfied, even if it is not enough, there are still chicken giblets to eat.

古文：物固莫不有长，莫不有短。
现代文：事物本来无不有长处，无不有短处。
English: All things have their own strengths and weaknesses.

古文：人亦然。
现代文：人也是这样。
English: People are like that, too.

古文：故善学者，假人之长以补其短。
现代文：所以，善于学习的人能取别人的长处来弥补自己的短处。
English: Therefore, people who are good at learning can take the strengths of others to make up for their own shortcomings.

古文：故假人者遂有天下。
现代文：因此，善于吸取众人长处的人使能占有天下。
English: Therefore, those who are good at absorbing the strengths of others can occupy the world.

古文：无丑不能，无恶不知。丑不能，恶不知，病矣。
现代文：不要把不能看作羞耻，不要把不知看作耻辱。
English: Don't look at not being able to as a shame, don't look at not knowing as a disgrace.

古文：不丑不能，不恶不知，尚矣。
现代文：把不能看作羞耻，把不知看作耻辱，就会陷入困境。
English: If you regard not being able to do something as a shame, and not knowing something as a disgrace, you will get into trouble.

古文：虽桀、纣犹有可畏可取者，而况於贤者乎？
现代文：不把不能看作羞耻，不把不知看作耻辱，这是最高的。即使桀、纣那样的暴君尚且有令人敬畏、可取之处，更何况贤人呢?
English: Not to regard not being able to do something as a shame, not to regard not knowing something as a disgrace, this is the highest. Even if tyrants like Yu and Zou still have awe-inspiring and admirable qualities, how much more so do sages?

古文：故学士曰：辩议不可不为。
现代文：所以有学问的人说：求学者不可使用辩议。
English: That is why the learned say, "Let not the learned use arguments."

古文：辩议而苟可为，是教也。
现代文：如果说辩议可以使用的话，这是指施教者而言。
English: If an argument can be used, it is on behalf of the giver.

古文：教，大议也。
现代文：施教才需要大议。
English: It's only when it comes to teaching that we need to have a big discussion.

古文：辩议而不可为，是被褐而出，衣锦而入。
现代文：求学者不使用辩议，就可以由无知变为贤达，这就象穿着破衣服出门，穿着华丽的衣服归来一样。
English: A scholar, without argument, can pass from ignorance to wisdom, just as a man may go out in rags and come back in fine clothes.

古文：戎人生乎戎、长乎戎而戎言，不知其所受之；楚人生乎楚、长乎楚而楚言，不知其所受之。
现代文：戎人生在戎地，长在戎地，而说戎人的语言，自己却不知是从谁那里学来的。楚人生在楚地长往楚地，而说楚人的语言，自己却不知是从谁那里学来的。
English: Rong people live in Rong and grow up in Rong, but they speak the language of Rong people, but they do not know from whom they learned. Chu people live in Chu and grow up in Chu, but they speak the language of Chu people, but they do not know from whom they learned.

古文：今使楚人长乎戎，戎人长乎楚，则楚人戎言，戎人楚言矣。
现代文：假如让楚人在戎地生长，让戎人在楚地生长，那么楚人就说戎人的语盲，戎人就说楚人的语言了。
English: If the Chu people were allowed to grow in Rong and the Rong people were allowed to grow in Chu, then the Chu people would say that the Rong people were illiterate, and the Rong people would speak the language of the Chu people.

古文：由是观之，吾未知亡国之主不可以为贤主也，其所生长者不可耳。
现代文：由此看来，我不相信亡国的君主不可能成为贤明的君主，只不过是他们所生长的环境不允许罢了。
English: From this perspective, I do not believe that the monarch of a fallen country cannot become a wise monarch, it is just that the environment in which they grew up does not allow it.

古文：故所生长不可不察也。
现代文：因此，对于人所生长的环境不可不注意考察啊！
English: Therefore, it is important to pay attention to the environment in which people grow.

古文：天下无粹白之狐，而有粹白之裘，取之众白也。
现代文：天下没有纯白的狐狸，却有纯白的狐裘，这是从许多白狐狸的皮中取来制成的。
English: There is no pure white fox in the world, but there is pure white fox fur, which is made from the skins of many white foxes.

古文：夫取於众，此三皇五帝之所以大立功名也。
现代文：善于从众人中吸取长处，这正是三皇五帝大建功名的原因。
English: He is good at absorbing strengths from many people, which is precisely the reason why the Three Kings and Five Emperors have made great achievements.

古文：凡君之所以立，出乎众也。
现代文：大凡君主的确立，都是凭借着众人的力量。
English: The establishment of a great monarch relies on the power of the people.

古文：立已定而舍其众，是得其末而失其本。
现代文：君位一经确立就舍弃众人，这是得到细枝末节而丧失了根本。
English: To abandon the people as soon as the monarchy is established is to gain the minutiae but lose the essence.

古文：得其末而失其本，不闻安居。
现代文：凡是得到细枝末节而丧失了根本的君主，从未听说过他的统治会安定稳固。
English: It has never been said of any prince, who, having gained a few branches, has lost his root, that his reign will be stable and secure.

古文：故以众勇无畏乎孟贲矣，以众力无畏乎乌获矣，以众视无畏乎离娄矣，以众知无畏乎尧、舜矣。
现代文：所以，依靠众人的勇敢就不惧怕孟贲了，依靠众人的力气就不惧怕乌获了，依靠众人的眼力就不惧怕离娄了，依靠众人的智慧就不惧怕赶不上尧舜了。
English: Therefore, relying on the bravery of all people, they will not be afraid of Meng Xuan; relying on the strength of all people, they will not be afraid of losing what they have gained; relying on the eyesight of all people, they will not be afraid of being left behind; and relying on the wisdom of all people, they will not be afraid of not being able to catch up.

古文：夫以众者，此君人之大宝也。
现代文：依靠众人，这是统治人民的根本大法。
English: Relying on the people is the fundamental law for governing the people.

古文：田骈谓齐王曰： 孟贲庶乎患术，而边境弗患。 
现代文：田骈对齐王说： 即使孟贲对于众人的力量也感到忧虑，无可奈何，因而齐国的边境无须担忧。 
English: Tian Xuan said to King Qi: Even if Meng Xuan is worried about the strength of the people, there is nothing to be done, so there is no need to worry about the border of Qi.

古文：楚、魏之王辞言不说，而境内已修备矣，兵士已修用矣，得之众也。
现代文：楚国，魏国的君主不贵言辞，而国内备战的各种设施已经修整完备了，兵士已经训练有素可以打仗了，这都是得力于众人的力量啊！
English: The monarchs of Chu and Wei do not mince words, but the various domestic facilities for preparing for war have been repaired and completed, and the soldiers have been trained well enough to fight. This is all thanks to the power of the people!

