古文：高力士，潘州人，本姓冯。
现代文：高力士，潘州人，本姓冯。
English: Gao Lixi, a native of Panzhou, surnamed Feng.

古文：少阉，与同类金刚二人，圣历元年岭南讨击使李千里进入宫。
现代文：年幼被阉割，与同类金刚二人，于圣历元年被岭南讨击使李千里进奉入宫。
English: He was castrated at a young age, and in the first year of the lunar calendar, together with two other King Kongs of the same type, he was sent to Lingnan to fight against Li Qianli and was brought into the palace.

古文：则天嘉其黠惠，总角修整，令给事左右。
现代文：则天嘉赏其聪慧机敏，年幼仪美，让他在身边供奉。
English: On the other hand, Tian Jia appreciated his wisdom and astuteness, as well as his youthful beauty, and allowed him to worship at his side.

古文：后因小过，挞而逐之。
现代文：后因小过，被鞭打赶出。
English: Later, he was whipped and kicked out for being too short.

古文：内官高延福收为假子。延福出自武三思家，力士遂往来三思第。
现代文：宦官高延福收为养子，延福出自武三思家，力士于是往来于三思第宅。
English: The eunuch Gao Yanfu was adopted as his son. Yanfu was from the Wu Sansi family, so wrestlers came and went to the Sansi house.

古文：岁余，则天复召入禁中，隶司宫台，廪食之。
现代文：一年后，武则天复召其入宫，隶属司宫台，官府供给粮食。
English: A year later, Emperor Wuzetian recalled him to the imperial court, and he became a member of the Imperial Household Agency, and the government provided him with grain.

古文：长六尺五寸，性谨密，能传诏敕，授宫闱丞。
现代文：力士身长六尺五寸，天性谨慎细密，擅传诏令，授官宫闱丞。
English: The wrestler is six feet five inches tall, has a cautious and meticulous nature, is good at delivering the imperial edict, and has been awarded the title of Imperial Prince.

古文：景龙中，玄宗在籓，力士倾心奉之，接以恩顾。
现代文：景龙年间，玄宗在藩国，力士倾心侍奉之，便获恩宠相待。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinglong, Emperor Xuanzong was favored by wrestlers who devotedly served him in the domain.

古文：及唐隆平内难，升储位，奏力士属内坊，日侍左右，擢授朝散大夫、内给事。
现代文：到唐隆年间平定内难，升为太子太保，玄宗便表奏力士进入太子官署内坊，每日侍奉左右，被提拔为朝散大夫、内给事。
English: In the Tanglong period, after the internal difficulties were settled, he was promoted to the position of the Crown Prince's bodyguard. Xuanzong entered the inner courtyard of the Crown Prince's Office, served every day, and was promoted to the position of the Choshan doctor, and was assigned to internal affairs.

古文：先天中，预诛萧、岑等功，超拜银青光禄大夫，行内侍同正员。
现代文：先天年间，参与诛杀萧至忠、岑羲等人有功，破格授官银青光禄大夫，任内侍同正员。
English: During the year before yesterday, he participated in the assassination of Xiao Zhizhong, Zou and other people, and was awarded the unprecedented title of "Silver Qingguanglu Doctor" and served as a member of the inner circle.

古文：开元初，加右监门卫将军，知内侍省事。
现代文：开元初年，兼任右监门卫将军，执掌内侍省事务。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he also served as the Right Supervisor and Gatekeeper General, and was in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：玄宗尊重宫闱，中官稍称旨，即授三品将军，门施棨戟，故杨思勖、黎敬仁、林招隐、尹凤祥等，贵宠与力士等。
现代文：玄宗推重宫闱局，宦官稍称旨意者，即授三品将军，门列腎戟仪仗，故杨思勖、黎敬仁、林招隐、尹凤祥等人，位尊宠专与高力士相同。
English: Xuanzong stressed the importance of the Imperial Household Agency, and the eunuchs who had the slightest intention were awarded the rank of three generals, and the men were lined up for the ceremonial battle. Therefore, Yang Siyu, Li Jingren, Lin Zhaoyin, Yin Fengxiang and others were the same as the Gao Lixi.

古文：杨则持节讨伐，黎、林则奉使宣传，尹则主书院。
现代文：杨思勖持节讨伐，黎、林奉命出使宣布传达，尹则掌管书院。
English: Yang Sijian is in charge of the festival, Li and Lin are ordered to send envoys to announce and convey, and Yin is in charge of the college.

古文：其余孙六、韩庄、杨八、牛仙童、刘奉廷、王承恩、张道斌、李大宜、硃光辉、郭全、边令诚等，殿头供奉、监军、入蕃、教坊、功德主当，皆为委任之务。
现代文：其余孙六、韩庄、杨八、牛仙童、刘奉廷、王承恩、张道斌、李大宜、朱光辉、郭全、边令诚等人，诸如殿头供奉、监军、入蕃、教坊、功德主当，皆为委任之职。
English: The others, including Sun Li, Han Zhuang, Yang Bata, Niu Xiantong, Liu Bongting, Wang Cheng'en, Zhang Daobin, Li Dayi, Zhu Guanghui, Guo Quan, and Bian Rongcheng, such as the head of the palace, the overseer of the army, the prince, the teacher, and the master of merits, are all appointed positions.

古文：监军则权过节度，出使则列郡辟易。
现代文：监军则权力超过节度使，出使则令各郡惊惧退避。
English: The supervising troops exceeded the powers of the dispatching officers, and the dispatching officers caused the counties to panic and retreat.

古文：其郡县丰赡，中官一至军，则所冀千万计，修功德，市鸟兽，诣一处，则不啻千贯，皆在力士可否。
现代文：其郡县丰饶富赡的，宦官一到军中，则所期望的以千万钱计算，修功德所获捐款，买鸟兽所费资金，每到一处，则不止千贯，都在力士许可与否。
English: When a eunuch enters the army, he expects tens of thousands of money from the rich and well-to-do of his county and county. The donations he receives to cultivate his virtue and the money he spends to buy birds and beasts are more than a thousand yuan in every place he goes, whether he has the wrestler's permission or not.

古文：故帝城中甲第，畿甸上田、果园池沼，中官参半于其间矣。
现代文：故京城中最豪华的宅第，京畿内最好的田产、果园、池苑，宦官竟占其中一半。
English: The most luxurious mansions in the capital, the best fields, orchards, and ponds in Gyeonggi, the eunuchs actually accounted for half of them.

古文：每四方进奏文表，必先呈力士，然后进御，小事便决之。
现代文：每有四方进呈上奏文表，必先送呈力士，然后进奉御前，小事便自行裁决。
English: Every time the four parties submit a petition, they must first submit a rikishi, and then submit to the emperor, and minor matters will be adjudicated by themselves.

古文：玄宗常曰： 力士当上，我寝则稳。 
现代文：玄宗常说： 力士应承于前，我歇息则安稳。 
English: Xuanzong often said: "A wrestler should be committed to the front, while I rest is stable."

古文：故常止于宫中，稀出外宅。
现代文：因而常止息于宫中，很少出外宅。
English: As a result, he often stayed in the palace and rarely left his residence.

古文：若附会者，想望风彩，以冀吹嘘，竭肝胆者多矣。
现代文：至于欲求依附，想一睹其风采，以期其在君王前讲好话，而输诚竭力的人很多。
English: As for the desire to be attached, there are many people who want to see their style, so that they can speak well in front of the king, and they will do their best.

古文：宇文融、李林甫、李适之、盖嘉运、韦坚、杨慎矜、王鉷、杨国忠、安禄山、安思顺、高仙芝因之而取将相高位，其余职不可胜纪。
现代文：宇文融、李林甫、李适之、盖嘉运、韦坚、杨慎矜、王钅共、杨国忠、安禄山、安思顺、高仙芝皆因此而获将相高位，其余职务获得者则不可胜记。
English: As a result, Wu Wenyong, Li Linfu, Li Shizhi, Gai Jiayun, Wei Jian, Yang Shengkun, Wang Qigong, Yang Guozhong, An Lushan, An Sishun, Gao Xianzhi were all awarded the high rank of commander-in-chief, while the other recipients of the post are not worth mentioning.

古文：肃宗在春宫，呼为二兄，诸王公主皆呼 阿翁 ，驸马辈呼为 爷 。
现代文：肃宗在东宫时，称其为二兄，诸王公主皆称呼 阿翁 ，驸马们称其为 爷 。
English: When Su Zong was in the East Palace, he was called the second brother, all the kings and princesses called him Ahong, and the courtiers called him Master.

古文：力士于寝殿侧帘帷中休息，殿侧亦有一院，中有修功德处，雕莹璀璨，穷极精妙。
现代文：力士在寝殿傍帘帷中休息，殿侧有一院落，其中有修炼功德之处，雕饰琢磨得璀璨夺目，极其美观精妙。
English: The wrestlers rested in the curtains at the side of the hall, and there was a courtyard on the side of the hall, where they practiced their virtues. The carvings were eye-catching and extremely beautiful.

古文：力士谨慎无大过，然自宇文融已下，用权相噬，以紊朝纲，皆力士之由。
现代文：力士细心谨慎无大过失，然而宇文融以下诸人，玩弄权术互相嫉害，至扰乱朝廷法纪，都与力士荐引有关。
English: The wrestlers were careful and prudent and did not make any major mistakes. However, people such as Uwen Rong and others, who played power games and were jealous of each other, and even disrupted the imperial court's legal discipline, were all related to the wrestlers' recommendation.

古文：又与时消息，观其势候，虽至亲爱，临覆败皆不之救。
现代文：再者善于随机应变，观察形势气候，虽是最亲近喜爱之人，面临倾覆败亡皆不予救助。
English: Moreover, those who are good at random contingency, observe the situation and climate, although they are the closest loved ones, will not be rescued in the face of overthrow and defeat.

古文：力士义父高延福夫妻，正授供奉。
现代文：力士养父高延福夫妻，按定分享受供奉。
English: The wrestler's adoptive father, Gao Yanfu and his wife, will share the offering according to the schedule.

古文：岭南节度使于潘州求其本母麦氏送长安，令两媪在堂，备于甘脆。
现代文：岭南节度使于潘州找到其生母麦氏送至长安，力士让两位老妇人同处高堂，美食供养。
English: The Lingnan Festival made Panzhou find its birth mother, Mai, and send her to Chang'an, and the wrestlers let the two old women be together in the high school, providing them with delicious food.

古文：金吾大将军程伯献与力士结为兄弟，麦氏亡，伯献于灵筵散发，具缞绖，受宾吊答。
现代文：金吾大将军程伯献与力士结拜为兄弟，麦氏去世，伯献在灵前筵间，披头散发，穿戴孝服，接待来宾吊唁酬答。
English: Kingu's Grand General Cheng Bo Xian and wrestler Ziyi became brothers. When Mr. Mai passed away, Bo Xian was in the antechamber before his death, wearing a headdress, wearing filial piety, and receiving guests for condolences and rewards.

古文：十七年，赠力士父广州大都督，麦氏越国夫人。
现代文：开元十七年，追赠力士父亲广州大都督官职及麦氏越国夫人封号。
English: In the seventeenth year of the first century, he posthumously bestowed upon the wrestler's father the post of governor of Guangzhou and the title of Mrs. Ma Yue Guo.

古文：开元初，瀛州吕玄晤作吏京师，女有姿色，力士娶之为妇，擢玄晤为少卿、刺史，子弟皆为王傅。
现代文：开元初年，瀛州吕玄晤在京城做官，女儿有姿色，力士娶其为妻，提拔玄晤为少卿、刺史，吕氏子弟都做了王傅。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Lu Xuanmei of Bozhou became an official in Beijing. His daughter was beautiful. A wrestler married her and promoted Lu Xuanmei to Shaoqing and Shishi. Lu's sons all became Wangfu.

古文：吕夫人卒，葬城东，葬礼甚盛。
现代文：吕夫人去世，葬于城东，葬礼很隆重。
English: Lady Lu passed away and was buried in the east of the city. The funeral was very grand.

古文：中外争致祭赠，充溢衢路；自第至墓，车马不绝。
现代文：中内地方官员争相赠送祭祀物品的，充溢京城大道，从力士宅第到墓地，车马络绎不绝。
English: Local officials in central and inland regions are competing to give away sacrificial items, filling the Keijo Boulevard, from the wrestler's house to the cemetery, with endless cars and horses.

古文：天宝初，加力士冠军大将军、右监门卫大将军，进封渤海郡公。
现代文：天宝初年，加官冠军大将军、右监门卫大将军，晋爵号渤海郡公。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was promoted to Champion General, Right Supervisor and Gatekeeper General, and received the title of Duke of Bohai County.

古文：七载，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：天宝七载，加官骠骑大将军。
English: For seven years, Tianbao has been promoted to the rank of cavalry general.

古文：力士资产殷厚，非王侯能拟。于来庭坊造宝寿佛寺、兴宁坊造华封道士观，宝殿珍台，侔于国力。
现代文：力士家资殷实丰厚，非一般王侯所能比拟，其于来庭坊建造宝寿佛寺、于兴宁坊修建华封道士观，宝殿珍台之宏富，与国力相当。
English: The wealth of the Rishi family is rich and plentiful, which is not comparable to that of ordinary princes. They came to the courtyard to build the Baoshu Buddhist Temple, and built the Huafeng Taoist Temple in Xingningfang. The wealth of the treasure hall is comparable to the national strength.

古文：于京城西北截澧水作碾，并转五轮，日破麦三百斛。
现代文：其于京城西北截取澧水建造碾房，五轮同转，每日可碾三百斛麦子。
English: It intercepted Surabaya in the northwest of Beijing to build a milling house, with five wheels rotating at the same time, and can grind three hundred buckwheat every day.

古文：初，宝寿寺钟成，力士斋庆之，举朝毕至。
现代文：当初，宝寿寺大钟铸成，力士斋祭以庆祝，举朝人皆至。
English: At the beginning, when the big bell of Hoju-ji Temple was cast, the wrestlers' festival was celebrated, and everyone came to see it.

古文：凡击钟者，一击百千；有规其意者，击至二十杵，少尚十杵。
现代文：凡击钟者，敲一下给百千钱；有顺从其心意的，敲到二十下，少的也有十下。
English: Whoever strikes the bell will receive a hundred thousand rupees; whoever obeys the bell will receive twenty, and whoever disobeys the bell will receive ten.

古文：其后又有华州袁思艺，特承恩顾。
现代文：此后又有华州袁思艺，特别承蒙玄宗恩宠。
English: After that, there was Huazhou Yuan Siyi, who was especially favored by Xuanzong.

古文：然力士巧密，人悦之；思艺骄倨，人士疏惧之。
现代文：然而力士乖巧谨慎，人皆喜欢；思艺骄狂倨傲，人皆疏远惧怕。
English: However, wrestlers are well-behaved and cautious, and everyone likes them; intellectuals are arrogant and proud, and everyone is alienated and afraid.

古文：十四载，置内侍省内侍监两员，秩正三品，以力士、思艺对任之。
现代文：天宝十四载，设立内侍省，有内侍监两名，官阶正三品，由力士、思艺分别担任。
English: In the 14th year of Tianbao, the Ministry of Inner Palace Attendants was established, with two inner palace attendants and three official ranks, respectively held by wrestlers and intellectuals.

古文：玄宗幸蜀，思艺走投禄山，力士从幸成都，进封齐国公。
现代文：玄宗出巡蜀地，思艺跑去投靠安禄山，力士则侍奉玄宗至成都，晋爵为齐国公。
English: Xuanzong went on a tour of Shu, Shiyi went to Anlu Mountain, the wrestlers served Xuanzong in Chengdu, and Jinjie became the prince of Qi.

古文：从上皇还京，加开府仪同三司，赐实封五百户。
现代文：护从太上皇回京后，加官开府仪同三司，赐给五百封户以食租税。
English: After Emperor Go-Daigo's return to Kyoto, he appointed officials to establish the prefectural government and the three departments, and granted 500 households with food tax exemptions.

古文：上元元年八月，上皇移居西内甘露殿，力士与内官王承恩、魏悦等，因侍上皇登长庆楼，为李辅国所构，配流黔中道。
现代文：上元元年八月，太上皇移居太极宫甘露殿，力士与宦官王承恩、魏悦等人，因侍从太上皇登长庆楼，被李辅国设计陷害，流放黔中道。
English: In August of the first year of the Shang Dynasty, the Emperor moved to the Taiji Palace and the Hall of Nectar. The wrestlers and eunuchs Wang Cheng'en, Wei Yue and others were exiled to Shizhong Road after being framed by Li Shuo Guo for serving the Emperor by climbing up to the Chaoqing Tower.

古文：力士至巫州，地多荠而不食，因感伤而咏之曰： 两京作芹卖，五溪无人采。
现代文：力士行至巫州，见其地荠菜多而人不食，感伤不已而歌咏道： 两京作斤卖，五溪无人采。
English: A wrestler went to Wuzhou, saw that there were a lot of local pickles, but no one ate them. He was so sad that he sang: "The two capitals make and sell jars, but there is no one to harvest the five streams."

古文：夷夏虽不同，气味终不改。 
现代文：夷夏虽不同，气味终不改。 
English: Although the summer is different, the smell does not change.

古文：上犹优诏答之。十月十八日夜，盗入辅国第，杀辅国，携首臂而去。
现代文：宝应元年三月，遇大赦回归，到郎州，碰到流放之人谈及京城事，才知太上皇已去世。力士北望号啕痛哭，吐血而死。
English: In March of the first year of Baoying, when the amnesty was returned, he went to Langzhou and met exiles who talked about the capital, only to learn that the emperor had died. The wrestler Beiwang cried bitterly and vomited blood and died.

古文：诏刻木首葬之，仍赠太傅。
现代文：代宗因他是耆宿长辈，曾护卫先朝玄宗皇帝，追赠扬州大都督，陪葬于泰陵。
English: Daizong, because he was the elder of the Xizhong, had escorted Emperor Xuanzong in the previous dynasty, posthumously awarded the Yangzhou Grand Duchy, and was buried with him in Tai Ling.

古文：程元振，以宦者直内侍省，累迁至内射生使。
现代文：程元振以宦官身份在内侍省任职，累功迁升到内射生使。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen served as a eunuch in the Ministry of the Interior, and was promoted to the position of the Minister of the Interior.

古文：宝应末，肃宗晏驾，张皇后与太子有怨，恐不附己，引越王系入宫，欲令监国。
现代文：宝应末，肃宗去世，张皇后与太子有怨恨，恐怕他不依附自己，便召引越王李亻系代为处理国政。
English: At the end of Baoying, Su Zong passed away, and Empress Zhang had a grudge against the prince. Fearing that he would not adhere to her, she called upon the Li Jie lineage of King Yue to handle state affairs on her behalf.

古文：元振知其谋，密告李辅国，乃挟太子，诛越王并其党与。
现代文：元振知道这一谋划后，秘密地告诉了李辅国，于是挟持太子，杀了越王和他的同党。
English: When Yuan Zhen learned of this plan, he secretly told the State of Li Yue, and then took the crown prince hostage and killed King Yue and his party.

古文：代宗即位，以功拜飞龙副使、右监门将军、上柱国，知内侍省事。
现代文：代宗即位，元振以功授官飞龙副使、右监门将军、上柱国，主持内侍省的事务。
English: After the enthronement of the Daimong, Yuan Zhen appointed Feilong, the vice-envoy of the meritorious officer, the general of the right guard gate, and Shangzhu Guo to preside over the affairs of the Ministry of the Inner Palace.

古文：寻代辅国判元帅行军司马，专制禁兵，加镇军大将军、右监门卫大将军，封保定县侯，充宝应军使。
现代文：不久代替李辅国兼任元帅行军司马，专门节制禁兵，加官镇军大将军、右监门卫大将军，封爵保定县侯，充任宝应军使。
English: Soon, he took the place of Li Yuxuo and concurrently served as marshal marching Sima, specially restrained forbidden soldiers, promoted the general of the town army, the general of the right guard, knighted the lord of Baoding County, and served as the military envoy of Baoying.

古文：九月，加骠骑大将军，封邠国公，赠其父元贞司空。母郄氏，赵国夫人。
现代文：九月，加官骠骑大将军，封爵国公，追赠他的父亲程元贞司空官职，追赠他母亲郄氏为赵国夫人。
English: In September, his father, Cheng Yuanzheng, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Admiral of the Cavalry and given the title of Duke of Zhao, and his mother, Zou, was posthumously awarded the title of Lady of Zhao.

古文：是时元振之权，甚于辅国，军中呼为 十郎 。
现代文：这时程元振的权势，超过了李辅国，军队中称他为 十郎 。
English: At this time, the power of Cheng Yuan Zhen exceeded that of Li Yuxuo, and the army called him Juro.

古文：元振常请托于襄阳节度使来瑱，瑱不从。
现代文：程元振曾有事私下嘱托襄阳节度使来王真，来王真没有答应。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen once privately asked Wang Zhen to come to the Xiangyang Festival, but Wang Zhen did not agree.

古文：及元振握权，征瑱入朝。
现代文：到元振大权在握时，便征召来王真进京朝见。
English: When the power was in the hands of Yuan Zhen, Wang Zhen was summoned to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：瑱迁延不至。
现代文：来王真拖延着迟迟未去。
English: Lai Wang Zhen procrastinated and delayed his departure.

古文：广德元年，破裴，遂入朝，拜兵部尚书。
现代文：广德元年，来王真大破裴茂，便进京拜见皇上，授官兵部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Guangde era, after Wang Zhen defeated Pei Mao, he went to Beijing to visit the emperor and was awarded the post of military commander.

古文：元振欲报私憾，诬瑱之罪，竟坐诛。
现代文：程元振想报私怨之仇，诬告来王真有罪，来王真最终被牵累杀头。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen wanted to avenge a personal grudge and falsely accused Lai Wang Zhen of being guilty. Lai Wang Zhen was eventually implicated in the murder.

古文：宰臣裴冕为肃宗山陵使，有事与元振相违，乃发小吏赃私，贬冕施州刺史。
现代文：辅政大臣裴冕为肃宗的山陵使，曾有事与元振违拗过，便告发他属下小官贪污罪行，把裴冕贬为施州刺史。
English: The Vice-Minister of State, Pei Guan, was Su Zong's envoy to the mountains. He had a falling out with Yuan Zhen, and denounced the petty officials under him for corruption. Pei Guan was relegated to a footnote in the history of Shizhou.

古文：来瑱名将，裴冕元勋，二人既被诬陷，天下方镇皆解体。元振犹以骄豪自处，不顾物议。
现代文：来王真为一代名将，裴冕是国家元勋，这两个被诬陷后，天下各掌一方兵权的长官人心离散，程元振仍骄傲放纵，自鸣得意，完全不顾众人的议论。
English: Lai Wang Zhen is a generation of famous generals, Fei Guan is a national hero. After these two were framed, the world's military commanders were scattered. Cheng Yuan Zhen was still proud and self-satisfied, completely disregarding everyone's discussion.

古文：九月，吐蕃、党项入犯京畿，下诏征兵，诸道卒无至者。
现代文：九月，吐蕃、党项侵犯京畿地区，颁布诏书征兵，各道却始终没有人前去应征。
English: In September, Tubo and the party invaded Gyeonggi Province and issued an edict for conscription, but no one from any province came forward to enlist.

古文：十月，蕃军至便桥，代宗苍黄出幸陕州；贼陷京师，府库荡尽。
现代文：十月，吐蕃的军队到达咸阳桥，代宗仓皇出逃巡幸陕州，敌寇攻陷京城，府库被抢劫一空。
English: In October, the army of Tubo arrived at Xianyang Bridge, the acting Emperor Zongcang fled to visit Shaanxi, the enemy invaded the capital, and the government treasury was robbed.

古文：及至行在，太常博士柳伉上疏切谏诛元振以谢天下，代宗顾人情归咎，乃罢元振官，放归田里，家在三原。
现代文：到代宗到达行都时，太常博士柳伉上书直言极谏应当杀程元振以谢天下之人。代宗担忧人心归罪，便罢免了元振的官职，将他放逐归田，他的家乡在三原县。
English: When the Daizong arrived in the capital, Dr. Liu Zhen, the Taizong, wrote a bluntly worded letter saying that Cheng Yuan Zhen should be killed to thank the people of the world. The Daizong, worried about the people's feelings of guilt, dismissed Yuan Zhen's official position and exiled him to Keita. His hometown was in Mihara County.

古文：十二月，车驾还京。元振服缞麻于车中，入京城，以规任用。
现代文：十二月，代宗车驾回到京城，程元振披麻戴孝地坐在车子里，混入京城，以谋划再度任职进用。
English: In December, the acting patriarch drove back to Beijing, and Cheng Yuan Zhen sat in the car, dressed in filial piety, and sneaked into Beijing to plan his reappointment.

古文：与御史大夫王昇饮酒，为御史所弹。
现代文：他与御史大夫王升一块饮酒，被御史台所弹劾。
English: He drank alcohol together with the historian Wang Sheng and was impeached by the Historian's Office.

古文：诏曰：
现代文：所颁诏书写道：
English: The next edict said:

古文：族谈错立，法尚不容；同恶阴谋，议当从重。有一于此，情实难原。
现代文： 杂乱地站在一起聚众交谈，法令尚且不容许，狼狈为奸秘密计谋，比相互交谈处罚更应从重，如此所作所为，情形实难原谅。
English: Standing together in a disorderly manner to gather and converse in a crowd is still not permitted by the law, and the crime of treachery and secret plotting should be punished more severely than conversing with each other. It is really difficult to forgive such behavior.

古文：程元振性惟凶愎，质本庸愚，蕞尔之身，合当万死。
现代文：程元振性情凶残暴戾，秉赋庸俗愚蠢，渺小之人，虽万死不足以塞责。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen's temperament is ferocious and violent, endowed with vulgarity and stupidity, a small person, although death is not enough to stop him.

古文：顷已宽其严典，念其微劳，屈法伸恩，放归田里。
现代文：近来本已对严厉的刑法有所放宽，念他有过功劳，枉法以表示恩顾，将他放逐归田。
English: Recently, the strict criminal law has been relaxed, and he has been exiled back to his farmland as a token of gratitude.

古文：仍乖克己，尚未知非；既忘含煦之仁，别贮觊觎之望。
现代文：却仍不知约束自己的言行、私欲，还不知道自己的过错，既忘了恩顾的仁厚，又另怀非分的冀望。
English: But they still do not know how to restrain their words and deeds, their selfish desires, and they still do not know their own faults. They have forgotten the kindness of their benefactors, and they still harbor unreasonable expectations.

古文：敢为啸聚，仍欲动摇，不令之臣，共为睥睨；妄谈休咎，仍怀怨望。
现代文：竟敢召集众人，还想有所动作。不听令的臣子一道窥伺时机，妄谈善恶吉凶，仍然心怀不满。
English: He dared to gather the people and still wanted to do something. Disobedient courtiers watched the opportunity together, talked about good and evil, and still harbored dissatisfaction.

古文：束兵裹甲，变服潜行，无顾君亲，将图不轨。
现代文：捆绑包裹起兵器铠甲，换了衣服暗中行动，毫不顾及君臣之亲，准备图谋不轨。
English: They bundled and wrapped up their weapons and armor, changed their clothes and secretly acted, without regard for the relatives of the monarchs and ministers, and prepared to plot.

古文：按验皆是，无所逃刑，首足异门，未云塞责。
现代文：经审查检验都是如此，无法逃脱刑罚，首足异门而出，也不能塞责。
English: After examination and inspection, this is the case. It is impossible to escape punishment, and it is impossible to escape responsibility.

古文：朕犹不忘薄效，再舍罪人；特宽斧钺之诛，俾正投荒之典。
现代文：然朕仍不能忘他的微劳，再次饶恕罪人。特免除砍头的刑罚，把他流放到荒远的地方以正法典。
English: However, I still cannot forget his hard work and forgive the sinner again. I especially exempt him from the penalty of beheading and banish him to a desolate place according to the official code.

古文：宜长流榛州百姓，委京兆府差纲递送；路次州县，差人防援，至彼捉拘，勿许东西。纵有非常之赦，不在会恩之限。
现代文：可长期流放溱州为百姓，委托京兆府派人押送递解，所路过的各州县，派人接应援助，一直押抵目的地，不许乱跑，即使有不同寻常的大赦，他也不在集中恩赦之列。
English: He can be exiled to Bozhou for a long time as a commoner, entrust the Beijing and Shandong Provincial Government to send people to escort and deport him, and send people to receive assistance from all the states and counties he has passed through, and escort him all the way to his destination. He is not allowed to run wild. Even if there is an unusual amnesty, he is not included in the list of concentrated amnesty.

古文：凡百僚庶，宜体朕怀。
现代文：一切官吏百姓应体察朕的心意。 
English: All officials and common people should feel my heart.

古文：鱼朝恩，天宝末以宦者入内侍省，初为品官，给事黄门。
现代文：鱼朝恩，天宝末年以宦官身份进入内侍省，始为有品级之官，供职黄门。
English: Thanks to Yu Chaon, Tianbao entered the Ministry of the Inner Palace as a eunuch at the end of the year, and began as an official with a rank, serving the Yellow Gate.

古文：性黠惠，善宣答，通书计。
现代文：生性聪慧，善于宣旨应对，通晓文字筹算。
English: They are intelligent by nature, good at responding to orders, and good at word calculation.

古文：至德中，常令监军事。
现代文：至德年间，常令其监督军事。
English: During his stay in Germany, he often ordered him to supervise military affairs.

古文：九节度讨安庆绪于相州，不立统帅，以朝恩为观军容宣慰处置使。
现代文：九节度于相州讨伐安庆绪，大军不置统帅，以朝恩为观军容宣慰处置使。
English: The nine-day festival was spent in Anqingxu, the capital of Anhui Province. The army did not have a commander-in-chief, and the commander-in-chief was comforted by the appearance of the army with the grace of the emperor.

古文：观军容使名，自朝恩始也。
现代文：观军容使官名，即从朝恩开始。
English: The official name of Guanjun Rongji, that is, from the beginning of the dynasty.

古文：以功累加左监门卫大将军。
现代文：因功加授左监门卫大将军。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Left Guard for his service.

古文：时郭子仪频立大功，当代无出其右；朝恩妒其功高，屡行间谍；子仪悉心奉上，殊不介意。
现代文：当时郭子仪频立大功，当代无人可比，朝恩妒其功高，屡次秘密侦探寻衅。子仪悉心侍奉皇上，毫不介意。
English: At that time, Guo Ziyi frequently performed great feats, unparalleled by anyone in modern times. The imperial court envied her great feats, and the secret detective repeatedly provoked her. Ziyi diligently served the emperor and did not mind.

古文：肃宗英悟，特察其心，故朝恩之间不行。
现代文：幸肃宗英明颖悟，特别明察其心意，故朝恩的离间未能得逞。
English: Since Emperor Gaozong was so enlightened and keenly aware of his intentions, the attempt to separate him from the imperial family did not succeed.

古文：自相州之败，史思明再陷河洛，朝恩常统禁军镇陕，以殿东夏。
现代文：自从相州战败后，史思明再度攻陷河洛地区，朝恩常统领禁军镇守陕州，以殿卫中原。
English: After the defeat in the Battle of Xiangzhou, Shi Siming once again invaded the Ho Lò region, and the Emperor En led the Imperial Army to defend Shaanxi and the Central Plains.

古文：广德元年，西蕃入犯京畿，代宗幸陕。
现代文：广德元年，吐蕃入侵京辅地区，代宗出巡陕州。
English: In the first year of the Guangde era, the Tuoba invaded the Kiev-Auxiliary region, and the Daizong went on a tour of Shaanxi.

古文：时禁军不集，征召离散，比至华阴，朝恩大军遽至迎奉，六师方振。
现代文：当时禁军溃散不集，于是征召离散之众，待到华阴，朝恩大军遽然前来迎接侍奉，六军士气方振。
English: At that time, the forbidden army broke up and did not gather, so the dispersed people were conscripted to stay in Huayin. The imperial army suddenly came to meet the servants, and the morale of the six armies was shaken.

古文：由是深加宠异，改为天下观军容宣慰处置使。
现代文：从此代宗深为宠信，更号天下观军容宣慰处置使。
English: From that time on, he was a favorite of Zong Sheng, and even more so, he became the messenger of the world's opinion on the treatment of the military.

古文：时四方未宁，万务事殷，上方注意勋臣，朝恩专典神策军，出入禁中，赏赐无算。
现代文：当时四方不宁，万事繁乱，皇上留意有功之臣，朝恩掌管神策军，出入宫禁中，赏赐无法计算。
English: At that time, the four quarters were restless, everything was in turmoil, the emperor was on the lookout for meritorious vassals, the imperial family was in charge of the Shinsaka army, and people were prohibited from entering and leaving the palace. The rewards were incalculable.

古文：朝恩性本凡劣，恃勋自伐，靡所忌惮。
现代文：朝恩生性平庸顽劣，依仗功勋自夸，肆无忌惮。
English: Chao En was born mediocre and vicious, boasted of his merits, and was unscrupulous.

古文：时引腐儒及轻薄文士于门下，讲授经籍，作为文章，粗能把笔释义，乃大言于朝士之中，自谓有文武才干，以邀恩宠。
现代文：时常招揽迂腐儒生及轻薄文士至其门下，讲授经书史籍，写作文章，粗能提笔解说其意，就在朝中官吏间说大话，自以为有文武才干，以此博取皇帝恩宠。
English: He often invited pedantic Confucian scholars and light-hearted scribes to come under his tutelage, lecturing on scriptures and historical books, writing articles, being able to take up a pen to explain his meaning, talking big among the government officials of the DPRK and China, and believing himself to have literary and military talent, in order to win the emperor's favor.

古文：上优遇之，加判国子监事，光禄、鸿胪、礼宾、内飞龙、闲厩等使。
现代文：皇上优礼相待，加官兼任国子监事，及光禄、鸿胪、礼宾、内飞龙、闲厩等使。
English: The emperor treated them with courtesy, and the additional officials concurrently served as Kuniko supervisors, and envoys such as Guanglu, Hongyu, Protocol, Neifei Long, and Leisure Stables.

古文：赴国子监视事，特诏宰臣、百僚、六军将军送上，京兆府造食，教坊赐乐。
现代文：赴国子监任职，皇帝特诏宰相、百官、六军将军送其升任，京兆府准备饮食，教坊赏赐舞乐。
English: He went to the country to serve as a son-in-law, and the emperor sent him a special edict to the prime minister, a hundred officials, and a six-army general to be promoted, and the Beijing Zhao Prefecture prepared a meal, and the school rewarded him with dance music.

古文：大臣群官二百余人，皆以本官备章服充附学生，列于监之廊下，侍诏给钱万贯充食本，以供学生厨料。
现代文：大臣群官二百多人，皆着原职礼服充当附学生员，列队立于国子监廊下，待诏给予万贯钱做饮食之本，用以准备附学生员的伙食。
English: More than 200 ministers and officials, all dressed in their formal attire to serve as students, stood in a line under the Kokushi guard corridor, waiting for the edict to give them enough money to prepare meals for the students.

古文：朝恩恣横，求取无厌，凡有奏请，以先允为度，幸臣未有其比。
现代文：朝恩专横跋扈，索取无厌，凡有章奏，期在必允，宠幸大臣中无人可比。
English: There is no one among the favored ministers who can match the imperious arrogance of the dynasty and the insatiable demand for favors.

古文：大历二年，朝恩献通化门外赐庄为寺，以资章敬太后冥福；仍请以章敬为名，复加兴造，穷极壮丽。
现代文：大历二年，朝恩献出通化门外旧赐庄舍建寺庙，以替章敬太后祷祝冥福，于是请求以章敬为寺名，然后动工兴建，穷极壮丽。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, the emperor offered the former imperial villa outside the Tonghua Gate to build a temple, and prayed for the soul of the empress dowager in place of Zhang Jing, and then requested that Zhang Jing be the name of the temple, and then started construction. It was extremely magnificent.

古文：以城中材木不足充费，乃奏坏曲江亭馆、华清宫观楼及百司行廨、将相没官宅给其用，土木之役，仅逾万亿。
现代文：因京城中原料木材不足所需，便奏请拆毁曲江亭馆、华清宫楼观以及百官行署、将相没收入官之宅第以供其用，土木工程所费，几逾万亿。
English: Due to the shortage of raw wood in the capital, it was necessary to demolish the Qujiang Pavilion, the Huaqing Palace and the Hundred Officials' Office, and to destroy the officials' houses for their use. The cost of civil engineering was more than a trillion.

古文：三年，让判国子监事，加韩国公。
现代文：大历三年，攘兼国子监事，晋爵韩国公。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, he was promoted to the post of provincial son supervisor and promoted to the rank of Korean prince.

古文：章敬太后忌日，百僚于兴唐寺行香，朝恩置斋馔于寺外之车坊，延宰臣百僚就食。
现代文：章敬太后忌日，百官在兴唐寺礼佛行香，朝恩在寺外车坊中摆设斋饭，请宰相百官就食。
English: On the day of the death of Empress Dowager Zhang Jing, hundreds of officials went to worship Buddha and offer incense at the Xingtang Temple, while Chaon arranged a meal in a carriage house outside the temple, and invited hundreds of prime ministers to eat.

古文：朝恩恣口谈时政，公卿惕息。
现代文：朝恩恣意谈论时政，公卿大臣皆极惊恐。
English: When the Emperor arbitrarily spoke about current affairs, the nobles and ministers were extremely alarmed.

古文：户部郎中相里造、殿中侍御史李衎以正言折之。朝恩不悦，乃罢会。
现代文：户部郎中相里造、殿中侍御史李絗以正理驳斥之，朝恩不快，便草草散会。
English: The head of the household, the middle-ranking courtier, and the palace chamberlain, Li Xi, refuted it with reason, displeased the emperor, and the meeting was quickly broken up.

古文：后尝释奠于国子监。宰臣百僚皆会，朝恩讲《易》，征《鼎卦》 覆餗 之义，以讥元载。载心衔之，阴图除去之。
现代文：后曾在国子监祭祀先师，宰相百官皆会聚一堂，朝恩讲解《易经》，以阐释鼎卦 覆饣束 之意，讥讽元载，元载心怀怨恨，暗中谋划除掉他。
English: Afterward, he was the sacrificial priest of the Guozijian, and hundreds of officials including the prime minister gathered in one place. He explained the "I Ching" to the emperor, and mocked Yuan Zengo by explaining the meaning of the "Dinggu" and the "Cloak of the Dragon." Yuan Zengo harbored resentment and secretly plotted to get rid of him.

古文：上以朝恩太横，亦恶之。
现代文：代宗因朝恩太专横，也极憎恶。
English: The Daizong was too domineering because of the Choson's favor, and was also extremely hated.

古文：载欲伺其便，巧中伤之；乃用腹心崔昭为京兆尹，伺朝恩出处。
现代文：元载想窥便利之机，巧妙伤害他，便任心腹崔昭为京兆府尹，窥察朝恩出处行踪。
English: Yuan Zhao wanted to spy on a convenient opportunity and cleverly hurt him, so he allowed his confidant, Cui Zhao, to spy on Choen's whereabouts.

古文：昭不吝财赂，潜与朝恩党陕州观察使皇甫温相结，温与昭协。自是朝恩动静，载皆知之，巨细悉以闻。
现代文：崔昭不吝惜财物，暗中与朝恩党羽陕州观察使皇甫温相结交，温与昭和睦相协，从此朝恩一举一动，元载都知道，事无巨细均告知皇上。
English: Cui Zhao was not stingy with his wealth. He secretly made friends with Emperor Fu Wen, the leader of the Chao En faction in Shaanxi Province. Emperor Wen and Showa were on good terms. From then on, every move of the Chao En faction was known to the emperor, and the emperor was informed of every detail.

古文：上益怒，朝恩未之察，日以骄横。
现代文：皇上更加愤怒，朝恩却未觉察，日益骄横。
English: The emperor became more and more angry, but the imperial court did not notice and became increasingly arrogant.

古文：载奏加朝恩实封，又加皇甫温权位，以肆其欲。
现代文：元载奏请增加朝恩食租封户，又提高皇甫温之权势地位，以放纵其私欲。
English: The Yuan Dynasty asked the Emperor to increase the number of food-renting households, and to increase the power of the Emperor Fuwen to indulge his selfish desires.

古文：五年，朝恩所昵武将刘希暹微有过忤，上讽之。诏罢朝恩观军容使，加实封通前一千户。朝恩始疑，然每朝谒，恩顾如常，亦不以载为意。
现代文：大历五年，朝恩所亲近的武将刘希暹稍有过失忤逆，皇上婉言论及，诏免朝恩观军容使，增加食租封户至一千户，朝恩开始疑心，然而每次朝拜谒见，恩宠一如往常，也就不把元载放在心上。
English: In the fifth year of the lunar calendar, Liu Xixia, a military commander who was close to the emperor, made a slight mistake. The emperor said that he would not allow the emperor to visit the troops and increase the number of tenants to one thousand. The emperor began to be suspicious. However, every time he visited the emperor, the grace was as usual, and he did not care about the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：会寒食宴近臣，朝恩入谒。
现代文：适逢寒食节代宗大宴近臣，朝恩入宫谒见。
English: The cold food festival coincided with the grand banquet of close vassals of the Daizong, and the Emperor entered the palace to see them.

古文：累迁至右卫大将军，知内侍省事。
现代文：在此之前，每次宴毕，其必出宫回营，这天却有诏留之。
English: Prior to this, after every banquet, he had to leave the palace and return to the camp, but on this day, there was an imperial edict.

古文：元和八年卒，宪宗思其翊戴之功，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：朝恩开始害怕，出语颇违逆傲慢，代宗仍因旧日恩情不予责备。这天朝恩回到私宅，自缢身亡。
English: Chao En began to be afraid, uttering words quite contrary to arrogance, and Daizong still did not blame him for the old days. On this day, Chao En returned to his private home and hanged himself to death.

古文：吐突承璀，幼以小黄门直东宫，性敏慧，有才干。
现代文：刘希暹也被下狱赐死。吐突承璀，幼年以小黄门侍郎供职东宫，天性聪慧，有才干。
English: Liu Xixia was also sent to prison and died. Tu Tu Chengjun, who served the East Palace as a small yellow-door waiter when he was young, was naturally intelligent and talented.

古文：宪宗即位，授内常侍，知内省事，左监门将军。
现代文：宪宗即位，授官内常侍，掌管内省事务，为左监门将军。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended the throne, he was given the title of Naishi no tsuneishi, in charge of the internal affairs of the province, and was appointed to the position of General of the Left Division.

古文：俄授左军中尉、功德使。
现代文：不久授官左军中尉、功德使。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of lieutenant in the Left Army and made a meritorious envoy.

古文：四年，王承宗叛，诏以承璀为河中、河南、浙西、宣歙等道赴镇州行营兵马招讨等使，内侍省常侍宋惟澄为河南、陕州、河阳已来馆驿使，内官曹淮玉、刘国珍、马江朝等分为河北行营粮料馆驿等使。
现代文：元和四年，王承宗反叛，诏命承璀为河中、河南、浙西、宣歙等道赴镇州行营兵马招讨等使，内侍省常侍宋惟澄为河南、陕州、河阳县以上馆驿使，宦官曹进玉、刘国珍、马江朝等人分任河北行营粮料、馆驿等使。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, Wang Chengzong rebelled, and the imperial edict ordered Chengzong to send envoys to go to Zhenzhou to recruit soldiers and horses for the armies of the Central, Henan, West Zhejiang, and Xuanbei Provinces, and to send envoys to Henan, Shaanxi, and Heyang Provinces and above. The eunuchs Cao Jinyu, Liu Guozhen, and Ma Jiangcha were assigned to go to Hebei to send envoys to collect grain and supplies for the army.

古文：谏官、御史上疏相属，皆言自古无中贵人为兵马统帅者，补阙独孤郁、段平仲尤激切。
现代文：谏官、御史接连上疏，都说自古以来从无宦官担任兵马统帅的，补阙独孤郁、段平仲尤为激烈率直。
English: Both eunuchs and historians have been saying that since ancient times, there has never been a eunuch who served as a commander of soldiers and horses.

古文：宪宗不获已，改为充镇州已来招抚处置等使。
现代文：宪宗不得已，改任其镇州以上招抚处置等使。
English: As a last resort, Kenzong was reappointed as the envoy of the township and prefecture.

古文：及承璀率禁军上路，帝御通化门楼，慰谕遣之。
现代文：待到承璀率领禁军上路，宪宗亲临通化门城楼，好言慰解相送。
English: When it was time for Choe Son to lead the imperial army on the road, Emperor Gensong personally visited Tonghwamun Castle to offer words of consolation.

古文：出师经年无功，乃遣密人告王承宗，令上疏待罪，许以罢兵为解。
现代文：承璀出兵一年毫无战功，于是派遣心腹密告王承宗，让他上疏请罪，答应以撤兵休战解决。
English: The troops dispatched by Cheng Ho had no war achievements for a year, so he sent a confidant to inform Wang Cheng Zong, let him plead guilty, and promised to resolve the issue by withdrawing troops and calling a truce.

古文：仍奏昭义节度使卢从史素与贼通，许为承宗求节钺。
现代文：于是上奏章称昭义节度使卢从史一向通贼，答应为承宗求取符节斧钺作为信物。
English: As a result, the Shouyi Sect, which is mentioned in the last chapter, made Lu, who had been a common thief throughout history, promise to obtain the Fu Jie axe as a token for inheriting the sect.

古文：乃诱潞州牙将乌重胤谋执从史送京师。
现代文：便引诱潞州牙将乌重胤策划捉拿卢从史送往京城。
English: He then lured Bozhou Fang to send Wu Shigetian, who was plotting to capture Lu, to Beijing.

古文：及承宗表至，朝廷议罢兵，承璀班师，仍为禁军中尉。
现代文：等到承宗章表至京，朝廷议决休战，承璀班师回朝，仍任禁军中尉。
English: When the imperial court decided to call a truce after the emperor's envoys arrived in Beijing, he returned to the imperial court as a lieutenant in the imperial army.

古文：段平仲抗疏极论承璀轻谋弊赋，请斩之以谢天下，宪宗不获已，降为军器使。
现代文：段平仲上书直言纵论承璀谋划轻率赋敛败坏，请求斩杀承璀以谢天下民众，宪宗不得已，将承璀降为军器使。
English: Duan Pingzhong's letter bluntly said that although Cheng Ho's plan was thoughtless and corrupt, he requested that Cheng Ho be killed to thank the people of the world. The Constitutionalist had no choice but to reduce Cheng Ho to a military envoy.

古文：俄复为左卫上将军，知内侍省事。
现代文：不久承璀复任左卫上将军，主掌内侍省事务。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated as General of the Left Division, in charge of the internal affairs of the province.

古文：时弓箭库使刘希先取羽林大将军孙璹钱二十万，以求方镇，事发赐死，辞相告讦，事连承璀，乃出为淮南节度监军使。
现代文：当时弓箭库使刘希先取羽林大将军孙王寿二十万钱求取方镇节度官职，事情败露赐死，其口供互相揭发，事情牵连承璀，于是承璀被贬出京城为淮南节度监军使。
English: At that time, the bow and arrow depot made Liu Xi first take two hundred thousand yuan from Sun Wangshou, the general of Yulin, to seek the official post of Fangzhen Festival. The matter was revealed and he was sentenced to death. His confessions were revealed to each other, and the matter implicated Chengyi. As a result, Chengyi was expelled from Beijing as the inspector of Huainan Festival.

古文：太子通事舍人李涉，性狂险，投匭上书，论希先、承璀无罪，不宜贬戮。
现代文：太子通事舍人李涉，性情狂妄奸邪，投状匦院上书君王，论说希先、承璀无罪，不应贬谪杀戮。
English: The crown prince, who was indifferent to Li Wanzhong's affairs, was arrogant and treacherous, and wrote a letter to the emperor, arguing that Xixian and Chengyu were not guilty, and that killing should not be belittled.

古文：谏议大夫、知匭事孔戣，见涉疏之副本，不受其章。
现代文：谏议大夫、知匦事孔癸戈见到李涉上疏的副本，不予受理。
English: The copy of Li Wanzhang's dossier seen by Kang Rongge, a doctor and scholar, is not admissible.

古文：涉持疏于光顺门欲进之，戣上疏论其纤邪，贬涉硖州司仓。
现代文：李涉手持书疏于光顺门前想进呈皇上，孔癸戈上疏指斥李涉悭吝邪恶，贬李涉为硖州司仓。
English: Li Zhan held a book in front of the door of Guangshun and wanted to present it to the emperor. Kong Yingge accused Li Zhan of the evil of miserliness and relegated Li Zhan to the position of the secretary of Zhangzhou.

古文：上待承璀之意未已，而宰相李绛在翰林，时数论承璀之过，故出之。
现代文：皇上宽容承璀之意尚未了，而宰相李绛在翰林院，其时屡次论列承璀之过，故而承璀被贬出京。
English: The emperor was not yet ready to forgive him, and the prime minister, Li Xi, was in the Hanlin Court, where he repeatedly listed his faults. Therefore, he was banished from Beijing.

古文：八年，欲召承璀还，乃罢绛相位。
现代文：元和八年，皇上想召承璀回京，便罢免李绛相位。
English: In the 8th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor wanted to call Chojeong back to Beijing, so he dismissed Ri Jeong.

古文：承璀还，复为神策中尉。
现代文：承璀回京，复任神策中尉。
English: Chojun returned to Kyoto and was reinstated as Lieutenant Shinsaku.

古文：惠昭太子薨，承璀建议请立澧王宽为太子，宪宗不纳，立遂王宥。
现代文：惠昭太子去世，承璀提出主张请求立澧王宽为太子，宪宗没有采纳，而立遂王宥。
English: When Prince Hui Zhao died, Emperor Chengzong put forward a proposal and requested that Wang Guang be made the crown prince. Emperor Xizong did not accept the proposal, but Wang Yu was made the crown prince.

古文：穆宗即位，衔承璀不佑己，诛之。
现代文：穆宗即位，忌恨承璀不辅佐自己，将他杀了。
English: When Mu Zong ascended to the throne, he hated that Cheng Yao did not support him and killed him.

古文：敬宗时，中尉马存亮论承璀之冤，诏雪之，仍令假子士晔以礼收葬。
现代文：敬宗时，中尉马存亮申述承璀之冤，为他诏雪，便令其养子士晔遵礼予以收葬。
English: When he was paying his respects to the emperor, Lieutenant Ma Cunliang came forward to complain about the misfortune that had befallen him, and he ordered his adopted son, Zou Zunliang, to be buried.

