古文：◎忠义三
现代文：伯颜不花的斤字苍崖，畏兀儿族人。
English: Bo Yan does not spend a lot of money, but he is afraid of the Qin people.

古文：伯颜不花的斤，字苍崖，畏吾儿氏，驸马都尉、中书丞相、封高昌王雪雪的斤之孙，驸马都尉、江浙行省丞相、封荆南王朵尔的斤之子也。
现代文：驸马都尉、中书丞相高昌王雪雪的斤的孙子，驸马都尉、江浙行省丞相、荆南王朵尔的斤的儿子。平素洒脱不羁，好学习，通诗文音韵。
English: He is the grandson of Gaochang Wang Xuexue, the grand marshal of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the son of Jingnan Wang Du'er, the grand marshal of the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Academy of Letters. He is usually free and easy-going, good at learning, and has a good command of poetry.

古文：倜傥好学，晓音律。初用父荫，同知信州路事，又移建德路。
现代文：初年因父荫封同知信州路事，后调任建州路。
English: In the first year, he was transferred to Jianzhou Road due to his father's involvement in the Jishinzhou Road incident.

古文：会徽寇犯遂安，伯颜不花的斤将义兵平之，又擒淳安叛贼方清之，以功升本路总管。
现代文：徽州人民起义，攻遂州，伯颜不花的斤带民兵前往镇压，擒淳安起义军方清之，以功升本路总管。
English: Huizhou people's uprising, attack Suizhou, Bo Yan did not spend a lot of money to take the militia to suppress the uprising, the military cleared the uprising, and promoted the general manager of the main road.

古文：至正十六年，授衢州路达鲁花赤。
现代文：至正十六年，授衢州路达鲁花赤。
English: In the 16th year of the Taizhou Dynasty, Ludaruhana rose to prominence.

古文：明年，行枢密院判官阿鲁灰引兵经衢州，军无纪律，所过辄大剽掠。
现代文：次年，行枢密院判官阿鲁灰引兵经衢州，军无纪律，所到之处，抢掠一空。
English: The following year, the army led by Aru Hui, the judge of the Privy Council, marched through Bozhou. The army was undisciplined and plundered everything they came to.

古文：伯颜不花的斤曰： 阿鲁灰以官军而为民患，此国贼也，可纵之乎！ 
现代文：伯颜不花的斤说： 阿鲁灰的官兵为民患，是国贼也，不可任其所为。 
English: He said, "Aluhay's officers and soldiers are a danger to the people, and they are also traitors to the country. They should not be allowed to do whatever they want.

古文：乃帅兵逐之出境，郡赖以宁。
现代文：乃率兵驱之出境，地方赖以得到安宁。
English: However, the troops were driven out of the country, and the region has been able to enjoy peace ever since.

古文：升浙东都元帅，守御衢州。
现代文：又升任浙东都元帅，镇守衢州。
English: He was also promoted to the post of marshal of East Zhejiang and town guard of Bozhou.

古文：顷之，擢江东道廉访副使，阶中大夫。
现代文：不久，又提升为江东道廉访副使、官阶中大夫。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to Vice-Envoy of Jiang Zemin and Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China.

古文：十八年二月，江西陈友谅遣贼党王奉国等，号二十万，寇信州。
现代文：十八年二月，江西陈友谅遣王奉国等率众二十万攻信州。
English: In February 18th, Jiangxi Chen Youjun sent Wang Bonguo and others to lead 200,000 people to attack Xinzhou.

古文：明年正月，伯颜不花的斤自衢引兵援焉。
现代文：次年正月，伯颜不花的斤引衢州兵前往救援，在城东挫败奉国部。
English: In the first month of the next year, Bo Yan did not spend a lot of money to lead the National Guard to the rescue, and defeated Feng Guobu in the east of the city.

古文：及至，遇奉国城东，力战，破走之。时镇南王子大圣奴、枢密院判官席闰等屯兵城中，闻伯颜不花的斤至，争开门出迎，罗拜马前。
现代文：镇南王之子大圣奴、枢密院判官席闰等争开城门出迎。
English: The son of the king of Zhenan, the great saint slave, the judge of the Privy Council, and others rushed to open the city gate to welcome him.

古文：伯颜不花的斤登城四顾，誓以破贼自许。
现代文：伯颜不花的斤入信州城，察看形势，夸口能破义军。
English: Bo Yan entered Shinshu City without spending a penny, inspected the situation, and boasted that he could defeat the rebels.

古文：后数日，贼复来攻城，伯颜不花的斤大飨士卒，约曰： 今日破贼，不用命者斩！ 
现代文：及奉国兵再至，伯颜不花的斤严令： 今日破敌，不听命者斩！ 
English: And when the soldiers of the national service came again, he gave them a strict order: "Defeat the enemy today, and those who disobey orders will be beheaded!"

古文：乃命大都闾将阿速诸军及民义为左翼，出南门；高义、范则忠将信阳一军为右翼，出北门；自与忽都不花将沿海诸军为中军，出西门。
现代文：又命大都闾带阿速诸军及民勇为左翼，出南门；命高义、范则忠带信阳一军为右翼，出北门；自己与忽都不花带领沿海诸军为中军，出西门。
English: He also ordered Dadu to lead the army of Ahau and the people's courage to the left and go out of the south gate; he ordered Gaoyi and Fan Zetong to lead the army of Xinyang to the right and go out of the north gate; and he and Quanzhang to lead the coastal army to the central army and go out of the west gate.

古文：部伍既整，因奋击入贼营，斩首数千级，贼乱，几擒奉国。
现代文：因部队整齐，士卒奋勇，起义军被杀者千余，奉国几乎被擒。
English: Because the troops were neat, the soldiers were brave, more than a thousand insurgents were killed, and almost all of them were captured.

古文：适贼将突至，我军入其营者咸没，其势将殆，忽都不花复勒兵力战，大破之。
现代文：后来又因义军突然发起进攻，尽杀攻入起义军兵营的元兵。因忽都不花勒兵力战，起义军才被击退。
English: Later, because the rebels suddenly launched an attack, they killed all the former soldiers who invaded the rebel battalion. Because they suddenly lost the battle, the rebels were repulsed.

古文：二月，友谅弟友德营于城东，绕城植木栅，攻我益急。
现代文：二月，友谅之弟友德在城东扎营，绕城植木栅，攻打日急。
English: In February, Yude, the younger brother of Tomozane, encamped in the east of the city, encircled the city with wooden palisades, and attacked the Nikkei.

古文：又遣伪万户周伯嘉来说降，高义潜与之通，绐忽都不花等，谓与奉国相见则兵衅可解。
现代文：同时，又遣万户周伯嘉来劝降。高义暗与周伯嘉通好，并骗忽都不花等说： 往见奉国，则可以和平解决纠纷。 
English: At the same time, he also sent ten thousand households to Zhou Bijia to persuade him to abdicate. Gao Yimin and Zhou Bijia were on good terms, and it did not take any trickery to say: If you have served the country in the past, you can resolve disputes peacefully.

古文：忽都不花信之，率则忠等十人往见，奉国囚之不遣。
现代文：忽都不花相信高义的话，率则忠等十余人往见，为奉国所囚禁。
English: Suddenly, it didn't take long for more than a dozen people to believe in the words of high righteousness and loyalty, and they were imprisoned for serving the country.

古文：参谋海鲁丁临城问之曰： 何来？ 曰： 江西来。 
现代文：明日，奉国又令高义计诱伯颜不花的斤。伯颜不花的斤见高义单骑来，乃说： 你诱十帅，无一生还。今又来诱我，罪实不可赦。 
English: Tomorrow, Bongguo ordered Gao Yi to try to lure Bo Yan away. When Bo Yan saw Gao Yi riding alone, he said, "You have lured ten great men, and none of them are still alive. Now you are trying to lure me again, and your crime is unforgivable."

古文：海鲁丁曰： 如此，乃贼耳。吾元朝臣子，可受尔伪诏乎？ 
现代文：乃斩高义，日夜与友德兵战斗，虽矢尽粮绝而士气不衰。夏四月，有人在城下大呼 有诏书 。参谋海鲁丁知诏书来自江西，便说： 我元朝臣子，岂可受你们的伪诏？ 
English: In summer and April, someone shouted "There is an imperial edict" under the castle. Staff officer Hai Luding learned that the imperial edict was from Jiangxi and said, "I am a former courtier, can I accept your fake imperial edict?"

古文：呼者曰： 我主闻信州久不下，知尔忠义，故来诏。
现代文：对方说： 我主闻信州久攻不下，知道是你忠义，故来诏招降。
English: The other side said, "My lord, we have not been able to attack Shinshu for a long time. We know that you are loyal, so we have sent word to invite you to surrender.

古文：尔徒守空城，欲何为耶？ 
现代文：你们仅一空城，困守何益？ 
English: You only have an empty city, what is the benefit of staying in trouble?

古文：海鲁丁曰： 汝闻张睢阳事乎？ 
现代文：海鲁丁说： 你们听说张睢阳之事吗？ 
English: Hayrudin said: Did you hear about Zhang Xiyang?

古文：伪使者不答而去。
现代文：对方不答。
English: There was no answer.

古文：伯颜不花的斤笑曰： 贼欲我降尔。
现代文：伯颜不花的斤笑着说： 你们欲我降，我计已决，城亡与亡。 
English: "You want me to fall, I've made up my mind, the city's doomed and I'm going to die," said Bo Yan with a wry smile.

古文：时军民唯食草苗茶纸，既尽，括靴底煮食之，又尽，掘鼠罗雀，及杀老弱以食。
现代文：时城中军民唯食草苗茶纸。既尽，乃煮食靴底，又尽。乃掘鼠罗雀，杀老弱以为食。
English: At that time, the soldiers and civilians in the city only ate grass seedlings and tea paper. If they were exhausted, they would cook the soles of their shoes, and if they were exhausted, they would dig up mice and sparrows, and kill the old and weak for food.

古文：五月，大破贼兵。
现代文：五月，大破陈友谅兵。
English: In May, he defeated Chen Youzheng.

古文：六月，奉国亲来攻城，昼夜不息者逾旬。
现代文：六月，奉国又亲来攻城，昼夜围攻，逾旬不止。
English: In June, the Mongols attacked the city themselves, besieging it day and night for more than a year.

古文：伯颜不花的斤知受有膂力，募为义兵。
现代文：有的以云梯爬城，有的挖穴潜攻，使伯颜不花的斤的士卒精疲力竭，不能战斗。
English: Some use ladders to climb the city, some dig holes to sneak in, so that ordinary soldiers are exhausted and can't fight.

古文：寻战败，为贼擒，痛骂不屈，贼焚杀之。
现代文：再加上万户顾马儿叛变，城乃陷落。伯颜不花的斤力战失败后，自刎而死。部将蔡诚也战死。
English: Coupled with the mutiny of all the Gu horses, the city fell. After the failure of the fierce battle, he hanged himself and died. The commander Cai Cheng also died in the battle.

古文：先是，伯颜不花的斤之援信州也，尝南望泣下，曰： 我为天子司宪，视彼城之危急，忍坐视乎！
现代文：另一部将蒋广巷战被俘后，因拒降被磔于竿而死。以前，伯颜不花的斤决心援助信州时，曾向南而泣，他说： 我是朝廷的官宪，看到此城危急，焉能坐视？
English: Another general, Jiang Guangxiang, was captured after the war and died after being chained to a pole for refusing to surrender. In the past, when he was determined to aid Shinshu, he cried to the south and said, "I am an official of the imperial court. Seeing this city in danger, how can I sit idly by?

古文：吾知上报天子，下拯生民，余皆无可恤。所念者，太夫人耳。 
现代文：我此去，上当报效天子，下可拯救生民。我的生死不足惜，唯太夫人放心不下耳！ 
English: I'm going there to serve the Son of God, and to save people. My life and death are not regrettable, but my wife can't rest assured!

古文：即日入拜其母鲜于氏曰： 儿今不得事母矣。 
现代文：即日入拜其母鲜于氏，并说： 儿今不得事母矣！ 
English: That very day, he bowed down to his mother, Ms. Shin Yu, and said, "My child, it's all up to my mother now!

古文：母曰： 尔为忠臣，吾即死，复何憾！ 
现代文：其母劝慰他说： 你是忠臣，我死何憾？ 
English: His mother consoled him, saying, "You are a loyal subject, why should I be sorry to die?

古文：鲜于氏，太常典簿枢之女也。
现代文：鲜于氏是太常典簿枢的女儿。
English: Ms. Shengyu is the daughter of Mr. Taizhong's bookkeeper.

古文：伯颜不花的斤因命子也先不花，奉其母间道入福建，以江东廉访司印送行御史台，遂力守孤城而死。
现代文：伯颜不花的斤命儿子由小路送母入福建，又将江东廉访司印送行御史台后，便力守孤城而死。朝廷赐谥曰恒敏。
English: After sending his mother to Fujian via the back roads, and sending Jiangdong Liangzhu Siyin to the historical stage, his son, who did not waste his precious life, died while trying to defend the lonely city. The imperial court gave him the name Hengmin.

古文：朝廷赐谥曰桓敏。樊执敬，字时中，济宁郓城人。
现代文：樊执敬字时中，济宁郓城人。
English: At the time of writing, Jining is a city.

古文：性警敏好学，由国子生擢授经郎。
现代文：性警敏好学，由国子生提升为经郎。
English: Vigilant and eager to learn, he was promoted from Kuniko's son to Shiro.

古文：尝见帝师不拜，或谂之曰： 帝师，天子素崇重，王公大臣见必俯伏作礼，公独不拜，何也？ 
现代文：曾在见帝师时不拜，有人劝问他说： 天子素重帝师，王公大臣必俯伏作礼，你独不拜，何故？ 
English: Once upon a time, when he saw the emperor, he did not bow. Someone persuaded him and said: "Heavenly son, you respect the emperor. The prince and minister must bow down and make a salute. You alone do not bow down. Why?

古文：执敬曰： 吾孔氏之徒，知尊孔氏而已，何拜异教为？ 
现代文：执敬说： 我孔子之徒也，只知尊孔，拜异教做什么？ 
English: Dedication said: I am a follower of Confucius, I only know how to respect Confucius, what do I do with paganism?

古文：历官至侍御史。
现代文：后来，官至侍御史。
English: Later, he became a courtier.

古文：至正七年，擢山南道廉访使，俄移湖北道。
现代文：至元七年，提拔为山南道廉访使。不久，又转任湖北道廉访使。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Shannan Province's Corrupt Officials Envoy. Soon, he was transferred to Hubei Province's Corrupt Officials Envoy.

古文：十年，授江浙行省参知政事。
现代文：十年授江浙行省参知政事。
English: He was awarded the title of Jiangsu and Zhejiang governor for ten years.

古文：十二年二月，督海运于平江，卜日将发，官大宴犒于海口。
现代文：十二年二月，执敬督海运于平江，在海口大摆宴席，择吉开拔。
English: In February of the 12th year, the honorary inspector of shipping in Pingjiang, held a grand banquet in Haikou, and began to choose the best.

古文：俄有客船自外至，验其券信令入，而不虞其为海寇也。
现代文：突然有客船自外来，检查过证件后，令其入港，根本没有担心他们是海寇。
English: Suddenly, there was a passenger ship from outside. After checking the documents, it was allowed to enter the port. There was no concern at all that they were pirates.

古文：既入港，即纵火鼓噪。
现代文：但是，他们的确是海寇。这些海寇一入港，即纵火鼓噪，焚舟劫粮而遁。
English: However, they are indeed sea robbers. As soon as these sea robbers enter the port, they start setting fires and making a lot of noise, burning boats and stealing grain.

古文：时变起仓猝，军民扰乱，贼竟焚舟劫粮以去。
现代文：时因变化仓促，军民混乱一团，无法制止海寇的抢劫行径。
English: Due to the hasty changes at that time, the military and civilians were in chaos, unable to stop the robberies of the pirates.

古文：执敬既走入昆山，自咎于失防，心郁郁不解。
现代文：执敬逃至昆山，自咎失防，心中郁郁不解。
English: Dedication fled to Kunshan, blaming himself for being caught off guard, and his heart was depressed.

古文：及还省，而昱岭关有警，平章政事月鲁帖木儿引军拒之，贼不得进。
现代文：及回省，昱岭关有警，平章政事月鲁帖木儿引军抵御，敌不得进。
English: And back to the province, there are police at the Jialing Pass, and the Pingzhang Political Affairs Month Lu Teter Mule has brought in troops to resist, and the enemy can not enter.

古文：俄报贼已至，执敬遽上马，帅众而出。
现代文：月鲁帖木儿病死，敌方犯余杭，执敬已奉命在海上征讨海寇，不能去昱岭关，便与平章政事定定在行省中主持行省政事，调兵出战，皆不利。
English: Yue Lu and Timur died of illness, the enemy captured Yuhang, Du Jing had been ordered to fight pirates at sea, but he could not go to Qiling Pass, so he and Ping Zhang decided to preside over the provincial government in the province, and sent troops to fight, all of which were unfavorable.

古文：中途与贼遇，乃射死贼四人，贼又逐之，射死三人。
现代文：行省掾史苏友龙向执敬进言 ：敌方将至，城中空虚无备，奈何？ 执敬说 ：我厉兵秣马，歼敌报国，即使不胜，有死而已，何畏惧之有？ 
English: Su Yulong, the governor of the province, said to Xie Jian: The enemy is coming, the city is empty, what can I do? Xie Jian said: I will fight bravely, annihilate the enemy and serve the country, even if I do not win, there is only death, what is there to fear?

古文：已而贼来方盛，填咽街巷，且纵火，众皆溃去。
现代文：忽报敌方已至，执敬上马率众迎战，先后射死七人。后来敌军来势极盛，堵塞街巷且纵火，守军溃散。
English: Suddenly reporting that the enemy had arrived, he mounted his horse and led the crowd into battle, shooting seven people dead in succession. Later, the enemy army came in full force, blocking the streets and setting them on fire, and the defenders dispersed.

古文：贼知其无援，呼执敬降，执敬怒叱之曰： 逆贼！守关吏不谨，汝得至此，恨不碎汝万段，何谓降耶！ 
现代文：敌方知其无援，呼执敬投降，执敬愤怒地说 ：守关之吏不小心谨慎，使你们得以至此，恨不能将你们碎尸万段，怎能要我投降？ 
English: The enemy, knowing that he had no support, shouted at me to surrender, and I angrily said: "The customs officers were careless and cautious, which allowed you to get to this point. I wish I could smash you into a million pieces. How can I surrender?"

古文：乃奋刀斫贼，因中枪而堕。
现代文：乃奋力挥刀砍杀，后因中枪落马。
English: Nao struggled to wield a knife to slash, and later fell from his horse after being shot.

古文：从仆田也先驰救之，亦中枪死。
现代文：虽有侍仆田也先拼死驰救，主仆仍中枪身死。
English: Although there was a servant, Tian, who also rushed to the rescue, the master servant was still shot to death.

古文：事闻，赠翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封鲁国公，谥忠烈。
现代文：朝廷得知执敬以身殉职，赠翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封鲁国公，谥忠烈。
English: When the imperial court learned that Dedication had died in the line of duty, they presented him with the titles of Hanlin Baccalaureate, Honorable Doctor, Column of the State, Crown Prince of the State of Lu, and Loyal Hero.

古文：全普庵撒里，字子仁，高昌人。
现代文：全普庵撒里字子仁，高昌人。
English: The whole of Pu'an is covered with the characters of Zijin and Gaochang.

古文：初为中书省检校，时太师汪家奴擅权用事，台谏无敢言者，普庵撒里独于众中历数其过，谔谔无惧色。
现代文：任中书省检校时，太师汪家奴擅权，台谏无敢言者，唯普庵散里在大庭广众之中历数汪家奴的过错，刚直不阿，毫无惧色。
English: When he was in charge of the inspection of the school by the Ministry of Education and Culture, Wang Jiannu, the grandmaster, had the power, and no one dared to speak, but Pu'an Sanli counted Wang Jiannu's mistakes among the general public. He was upright and fearless.

古文：拜监察御史，即首劾汪家奴十罪，乃见黜。
现代文：及拜监察御史，便首先检举汪家奴十大罪状，结果反被免职。
English: and paid a visit to the inspector general of history, he first reported the ten major crimes of Wang Jianlu, and as a result, he was dismissed.

古文：然而气节益自振，不以摧衄遂阻，历诋权贵，朝臣莫不畏栗。
现代文：然气节益振，不因挫折而中止。多次揭露权贵，朝臣莫不畏惧。
English: He will not be discouraged by setbacks. He will expose the powerful many times, and the courtiers will not be afraid.

古文：出为广东廉访使，寻除兵部尚书。未几，授赣州路达鲁花赤。
现代文：及出任广东廉访使，很快又任兵部尚书，后又被授予赣州达鲁花赤。
English: and served as the Guangdong Corrupt Envoy, and was soon appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and was later awarded the Luzhou Daruhwa Red Star.

古文：至郡，发摘奸恶，一郡肃然。
现代文：及下至郡，发谪奸恶，全郡肃然。
English: And down to the county, the whole county was stunned.

古文：至正十一年，颍州盗起，即修筑城垒，旬月之间，守御之具毕备。
现代文：至正十一年，颍州人民闹事，普庵撒里乃修筑城垒，在十个月间，守御的武器毕备。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taizhou era, when the people of Taizhou were rioting, Pu'an Salin began to build a fortress. Within ten months, the defensive weapons were ready.

古文：于是发公帑，募勇士，得兵三千人，日练习之，皆可用。属邑有为贼所陷者，往往遣兵复之，境内悉安。
现代文：又用公款召募勇士三千，抓紧训练，使能用于实战。当时颍州属邑多被起事民众攻陷，普庵撒里往往派兵前往镇压，以求辖境安定。
English: He also used public funds to recruit three thousand warriors, and paid close attention to training so that they could be used in actual combat. At that time, most of the towns in Zhangzhou were invaded by the people, and Pu'ansari often sent troops to suppress them in order to stabilize the territory.

古文：十六年，以功拜江西行省参政，分省于赣。
现代文：十六年，因功拜江西行省参政，分工在赣视事。
English: In the past 16 years, due to the merits of Jiangxi Province, he has participated in politics, and the division of labor in Jiangxi Province has increased.

古文：十八年，江西下流诸郡皆为陈友谅所据，乃与总管哈海赤戮力同守。
现代文：十八年，江西下游诸郡皆为陈友谅军所据，普庵撒里乃与总管哈海赤共守赣州。
English: In the 18th year, the counties in the lower reaches of Jiangxi Province were the strongholds of Chen Youren's army, and Pu'an Salina and the general manager, Hahei Chia, jointly guarded Zhangzhou.

古文：友谅遣其将幸文才率兵围赣，使人胁之降。
现代文：友谅遣将幸文才率兵围赣，并使人招降。
English: Tomoyasu sent general Yukifumi Tsai and his troops to surround the castle and force it to surrender.

古文：普庵撒里斩其使，日擐甲登城拒之。
现代文：普庵撒里斩友谅使者，擐甲负隅顽抗。
English: Pu'an Sarri cut off friends and forgave envoys, and stubbornly resisted.

古文：力战凡四月，兵少食尽，义兵万户马合某沙欲举城降贼，普庵撒里不从，遂自刭。
现代文：力战凡四月，兵少食尽，民勇万户马合某沙欲举城降友谅，普庵撒里不从，遂自刎殉职。
English: Every April, when there was little food for the soldiers, the brave people of all households, horses and a certain amount of sand wanted to raise the city and surrender to the enemy, but Pu'ansari did not obey, so he hanged himself and died.

古文：周镗，字以声，浏阳州人。
现代文：朝廷得报后，赠谥曰儆哀。周镗字以声，浏阳州人。
English: After receiving the report, the imperial court presented him with the title of mourner. Zhou Yanzhi, a native of Liuyang Prefecture, read the letter aloud.

古文：笃学通《春秋》，登泰定四年进士第，授衡阳县丞，再调大冶县尹。
现代文：学问渊博，精通《春秋》。泰定四年进士及第，授衡阳县丞，再调任大冶县知县。
English: He is well-versed in learning, and is proficient in "Spring and Autumn." Taiding was promoted to the fourth grade in four years, and was awarded the title of Hengyang County Secretary, and then transferred to Daye County Secretary.

古文：县有豪民，持官府短长，号为难治，镗状若尫懦，而毅然有威不可犯，抑豪强，惠穷民，治行遂为诸县最。
现代文：大冶的豪强，掌握吏员的是非优劣，以要挟官府，向称难治。镗虽貌似疾病文弱之人，但毅然有威不可犯之状。他在抑豪强、施恩贫民方面的政绩，为诸县之最。
English: He was very brave and strong, and he knew the merits and demerits of officials, and he used to threaten the government, saying that it was difficult to cure. Although he looked like a weak person with a disease, he had the courage not to commit crimes. His political achievements in suppressing the arrogant and being kind to the poor were the best in the county.

古文：累迁国子助教。会修《功臣列传》，擢翰林国史编修官。
现代文：后迁任国子助教，又逢修《功臣列传》，提升为翰林国史编修官。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to the position of assistant professor of Kuniko, and he also studied "Celebrated Heroes and Heroines" and was promoted to the editor of Hanlin National History.

古文：乃出为四川行省儒学提举，便道还家。
现代文：后又出任四川行省儒学提举，便道回湖南老家。
English: Later, he was promoted to Sichuan Provincial Confucianism, and then returned to his hometown in Hunan.

古文：无何，盗起，湖南、北郡县皆陷。
现代文：不久，湖南、湖北的一些郡县的民众起义，占领许多地区。
English: Soon, the people of some counties in Hunan and Hubei revolted and occupied many areas.

古文：浏阳无城守，盗至，民皆惊窜。镗告其兄弟使远引，自谓 我受国恩，脱不幸，必死，毋为相累也 。
现代文：浏阳无城可守，县人皆惊慌逃散，镗令兄弟远走，自称 我受国恩，若不幸，必死无疑，不要互相连累 。
English: Liuyang had no city to defend, and the people of the county panicked and fled. He ordered his brothers to go far away, saying, "I have been blessed by the country. If I am unlucky, I will surely die. Don't get involved with each other."

古文：一鲁骂贼甚厉，举家咸遇害。
现代文：起义者至，获得镗，准备推戴为头领。
English: The insurgent arrives, receives the scepter, and prepares to assume leadership.

古文：聂炳，字韫夫，江夏人。
现代文：镗瞠目厉声大骂，起义者知其不可屈，乃杀之。聂炳字韫夫，江夏人。
English: The insurgents knew that they could not be defeated, so they killed him. He was a widower from Jiangxia.

古文：元统元年进士，授承事郎、同知平昌州事。
现代文：元统元年进士，授承事郎、同知平昌州事。
English: He entered the priesthood in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was awarded the title of Jianzhongjiro and the title of Tongzhi Pyeongchang Prefecture.

古文：炳蚤孤，其母改适，自平昌还，始知之，即迎其母以归。
现代文：炳早年丧父，其母改嫁。自平昌还乡后才知此情，便将母接回家中。
English: He lost his father at an early age, and his mother remarried. He only learned of this after returning to his hometown in PyeongChang, so he took his mother back home.

古文：久之，转宝庆路推官。
现代文：过了很久，转任宝庆路推官。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to Baoqing Road.

古文：会峒徭寇边，湖广行省右丞秃赤统兵讨之，屯于武冈，以炳摄分省理问官。
现代文：当时有峒瑶起义，湖南行省右丞秃赤带兵前往镇压，屯于武冈，以炳为分省理问官。
English: At that time, there was an uprising in Handan, Hunan Province, and the right-hand man of the provincial government, Zhao Qi, led soldiers to suppress it, and they settled in Wugang, with Handan as the provincial interrogator.

古文：悍卒所至掠民为俘，炳言于秃赤，释其无验者数千人。
现代文：官兵强暴，到处掠民，炳说服秃赤，释放数千没有罪证的人。
English: The officers and soldiers were violent and preyed on the people everywhere. It took a lot of convincing to release thousands of people who had no criminal record.

古文：至正十二年，迁知荆门州，才半岁，淮、汉贼起，荆门不守，炳出，募土兵，得众七万，复荆门。
现代文：至元十二年，调任荆门州知州。半年后，淮、汉之间民众起义。炳离荆门招募士兵，得众七万，收回荆门。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to Jingmen County and Zhizhou. Half a year later, the people revolted between Huai and Han. He recruited soldiers from Jingmen, gained 70,000 people, and recovered Jingmen.

古文：明安达尔，唐兀氏，字士元，炳同年进士，由宿州判官再转为潜江云。刘耕孙，字存吾，茶陵州人。
现代文：又与四川省平章政事咬住一道收复江陵，其功居多。不久，蕲、黄、安陆的义民再起，其将俞君正带兵来攻荆门，炳率孤军昼夜血战，城陷被执，仍骂不绝口，乃被断左臂肢解而死。刘耕孙字存吾，茶陵州人。
English: He also worked with Pingzhang Zhengji of Sichuan Province to recover Gangneung, which contributed much to the success. Soon, the righteous people of Zhai, Huang and Anlu re-emerged, and their leader Zhaojun was leading an army to attack Jingmen. He led a lone army in a bloody day and night battle, and was captured. He still cursed endlessly, but was dismembered and died with a broken left arm. Liu Gongsun, surnamed Zangwu, was from Chaling Prefecture.

古文：至顺元年进士，授承事郎、桂阳路临武县尹。
现代文：至顺元年进士，授承事郎及桂阳路临武县知县。
English: In the first year of the year, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, awarded the title of secretary and Guiyang Road, Linwu County, Ji County.

古文：临武近蛮獠，耕孙至，召父老告之曰： 吾儒士也，今为汝邑尹，尔父老当体吾教，训其子弟，孝弟力田，暇则事《诗》、《书》，毋自弃以干吾政。 
现代文：临武县临近少数民族地区，耕孙至，召集地方父老说： 我是儒生，今为你们的知县，你们当体察我的主张，训诫你们的子弟，要他们讲求孝悌，致力于农业，有暇则读《诗》、《书》，不要自暴自弃，冒犯国法。 
English: In Linwu County, which is close to the ethnic minority areas, Kuo Sun Zi gathered the local elders and said, "I am a Confucian, and now I am your magistrate. You should consider my opinion, and instruct your children to be filial, to be devoted to agriculture, and to read "Poetry" and "Books" when they have time, and not to give up and offend the national law.

古文：乃为建学校，求民间俊秀教之，设俎豆，习礼让，三年文化大兴。
现代文：又物色民间教师，建学校以教育子弟，设祭祀以习礼仪，三年而文化大兴。
English: They also searched for folk teachers, built a school to educate children, set up a ritual to learn etiquette, and the culture flourished for three years.

古文：邑有茶课，岁不过五锭，后增至五十锭，耕孙言于朝，除其额。
现代文：邑有茶税，岁额不过五锭，后增至五十锭。耕孙向朝廷报告此情，乃减免税额。
English: There was a tea tax in the township, but the annual amount was only 5 mon, later increased to 50 mon. Kosun reported this to the imperial court, which was a tax reduction.

古文：历建德、徽州、瑞州三路推官，所至详谳疑狱，其政绩卓然者甚众。
现代文：后历任建德、徽州、瑞州三路推官。所到之处，审判疑案，政绩卓然。
English: Later, he successively served as the three-way judge of Jiande, Huizhou, and Ruizhou. Wherever he went, he judged doubtful cases, and his political achievements were outstanding.

古文：至正十二年春，蕲黄贼攻破湖南。
现代文：至正十二年，蕲、黄民众起义，攻破湖南。
English: In the 12th year of the Zhou Dynasty, the people of Qi and Huang rebelled and invaded Hunan.

古文：耕孙倾家赀募义丁，以援茶陵，贼至辄却，故茶陵久不失守。
现代文：耕孙倾家产招募丁壮，援救茶陵，义军屡次受挫，茶陵亦因而久未失守。
English: Kuo Sun Tuan recruited Ding Zhuang from his family and rescued the tea house. The rebels were repeatedly defeated, and the tea house was not lost for a long time.

古文：十五年，转儒林郎、宁国路推官。
现代文：十五年，转任儒林郎，宁国路推官。
English: Fifteen years later, he was transferred to the post of Julin Lang, Ningguo Road magistrate.

古文：岁饥，劝富民发粟赈之，活者万计。
现代文：时因天灾闹饥荒，耕孙劝富人开仓赈灾，使数以万计的饥民免于死亡。
English: At that time, due to natural disasters, there was a famine, and Koson advised the rich to open storehouses to relieve the disaster, so that tens of thousands of starving people were spared from death.

古文：外援俱绝，死之。长子硕，为武昌江夏县鲁湖大使，起义兵援茶陵，亦死之。
现代文：有军琐南班、程述、谢玺等人进攻宁国，耕孙守城之西南，白天处理府中事务，夜晚便率兵守城。江浙行省遣参知政事吉尼哥儿来援，但到达宁国时，兵卒疲惫，城里守兵以为有援军，也不为备，结果，为琐南班所乘，夜四鼓，引众缘堞而上，城破，耕孙力战身死。
English: Zonan squad, Cheng Shu, Xie Qian and other soldiers attacked Ningguo, while Gongsun defended the southwest of the city. During the day, they dealt with the affairs of the government, and at night they led the soldiers to defend the city. Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces sent the senator, the governor and the statesman, Jinigor, to help, but when they arrived in Ningguo, the soldiers were tired, and the soldiers guarding the city thought that there were reinforcements, but they were not prepared. As a result, the Zonan squad took advantage of the four drums at night, attracted the crowd, broke the city, and Gongsun died in battle.

古文：俞述祖，字绍芳，庆元象山人。
现代文：俞述祖字绍芳，庆元象山人。
English: The ancestral characters of Shaofang and Qingyuan Xiangshan are described.

古文：由翰林书写考满，调广东元帅府都事，入为国史院编修官，已而出为沔阳府推官。
现代文：由翰林书写考满，调广东元帅府都事。又入京为国史编修官，出京为沔阳府推官。
English: Hanlin passed the written examination and was transferred to the capital of the Guangdong Marshal's Office. He also entered Beijing as a national history editor, and left Beijing as an inspector of the Shenyang Prefecture.

古文：至正十二年，蕲黄贼迫州境，述祖领民兵守绿水洪，并力捍御之。
现代文：至正十二年蕲、黄民众起义，迫近州境，述祖领兵守绿水洪，抵御起义民众。
English: When the Yellow People's Uprising broke out in the 12th year of the Taisho era and was approaching the state border, Su Zu led the soldiers to guard against the green flood and resist the uprising people.

古文：述祖为贼所执，械至其伪主徐寿辉所，诱之使降。述祖骂不辍，寿辉怒，支解之。
现代文：因兵力不支，沔阳城陷，述祖被执。起义军领导人徐寿辉欲诱他投降，述祖骂不绝口，寿辉后肢解了他。
English: Due to a shortage of troops, the city of Shenyang fell, and Suzu was captured. The leader of the rebel army, Xu Shouhui, wanted to lure him into surrendering. Suzu cursed him incessantly, and Suhui later dismembered him.

古文：有子方五岁，亦死。
现代文：述祖有子方五岁，亦死。
English: His five-year-old son also died.

古文：因大骂。贼怒，剖二人之腹而死。丑闾，字时中，蒙古氏。
现代文：朝廷得报后，赠奉训大夫、礼部郎中、象山县男。丑闾字时中，蒙古族人。
English: After being reported to the imperial court, he was given the titles of "training doctor," "vice-minister of etiquette," and "the man from Xiangshan County." He was a Mongolian.

古文：登元统元年进士第。
现代文：元统元年登进士第。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Shishi.

古文：累官京畿漕运副使，出知安陆府。
现代文：历任京畿漕运副使，出任安陆知府。
English: Successive deputy envoy of Gyeonggi Sailing, served as governor of Anlu Province.

古文：至正十二年，蕲贼曾法兴犯安陆，时丑闾募兵得数百人，帅以拒贼。
现代文：至正十二年，蕲州人曾法兴起义，袭击安陆。丑闾募兵数百人进行抵御，败义军前队。
English: In the 12th year of the Heian period, the people of Zhangzhou Zengfa rose in revolt and attacked Anlu. Ugushi recruited hundreds of soldiers to resist and defeated the vanguard of the rebel army.

古文：败贼前队，乘胜追之。
现代文：在丑闾出城追击时，法兴军又自他门入城，放火烧城，使军民溃乱。
English: When the Ugly Goat left the city to pursue, the French army entered the city from his gate, set fire to the city, and caused the army and the people to riot.

古文：众初强之，终弗从，怒将杀之，三遂唾骂。贼乃缚诸十字木，舁之以行，而刲其肉，三益骂不止。
现代文：丑闾知已无法控制局势，便回到城内，身穿朝服，出坐公堂。法兴兵以白刃胁迫他投降，丑闾却向他们讲述反对朝廷为不忠的道理。义军首领不忍加害，将他拘留。次日，仍强迫他投降，丑闾说 ：我乃守土之臣，岂能投降你等乱民！ 
English: Knowing that he was no longer able to control the situation, Ugushi returned to the city, dressed in a court uniform, and appeared in court. He was forced to surrender by the Fa Hing soldiers with a white sword, but Ugushi told them the reason for his disloyalty against the imperial court. The leader of the rebel army could not bear to harm him and detained him. The next day, he still forced him to surrender, and Ugushi said: I am a vassal who protects the land, how can I surrender to you and other turbulent people!

古文：抵江上，断其喉，委去。
现代文：法兴兵怒，砍断丑闾左臂致死，还以布袋裹尸抬回丑闾家示众。
English: Enraged, the Faoxing soldiers cut off Ugly's left arm, causing his death. They also carried his body, wrapped in a cloth bag, back to Ugly's home to show it to the public.

古文：其妻随三号泣，俯拾刲肉，纳布裙中。
现代文：丑妻侯氏宴法兴兵以酒肉，使义军不提防她自己，至夜，自缢死。
English: Ugly wife Hou's banquet method of cheering soldiers with wine and meat, so that the rebels do not fear her own, until the night, strangled to death.

古文：伺贼远，收三血骸，脱衣裹之，大泣，投江而死。孛罗帖木儿，字国宾，高昌人。
现代文：朝廷知此情后，赠丑河南行省参知政事，赠侯氏为宁夏郡夫人，并在其门前树立取名 双节 的牌坊，以表彰二人的忠节。孛罗帖木儿字国宾，高昌人。
English: After the imperial court learned of this situation, they presented the Ugly Henan with the title of provincial political advisor, and the Hou family with the title of Ningxia County wife, and set up a plaque in front of their door with the name of Shuangjie, in recognition of the two people's loyalty.

古文：由宿卫补官，十三转而为江东廉访副使。
现代文：开始由宫廷卫士经十三次调动而被任为江东廉访副使。
English: He started as a palace guard and was transferred 13 times before being appointed deputy envoy of the Jiangdong Liangqiao.

古文：以选为襄阳路达鲁花赤。
现代文：后选为襄阳路达鲁花赤。
English: The latter was selected as Yangyang Road Daruhana Red.

古文：至正十一年，盗起汝、颍，均州郧县人田端子等亦聚众杀官吏，孛罗帖木儿将民兵捕斩之。
现代文：至正十一年，河南汝、颍等地爆发农民起义，均州、郧县人田端子也聚众杀官吏，孛罗帖木儿率兵捕斩田端子。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taisho era, peasant uprisings broke out in Ru, Handan, and other places in Henan Province. People from Handan in Junzhou and Handan County also gathered to kill officials, and Luo Timur led soldiers to capture and slaughter Handan.

古文：而谷城、光化以急告，即帅兵趋谷城，而分遣樊城主簿脱因等趋光化，且遣使求粮于襄阳，不应；遣同知也先不花促之，又不应。军乏食，不能行，乃驻于柴店。
现代文：不久，行省和廉访司都令孛罗帖木儿领兵于均、房一带，同当地官军一道镇压起义民众。刚打退这里的起义军，谷城、光化又告急。孛罗帖木儿又带兵去谷城，并遣樊城主簿脱因去光化。军队缺粮，两次派人请求襄阳提供，但都未给。军队没有吃的，不能行动，只好驻扎柴店。
English: Not long after, the provincial government and the Independent Investigation Department ordered Luo Timur to lead troops to suppress the insurgents in the areas of Jun and Fang with the local government troops. The insurgents had just retreated here, and Gucheng and Guanghua were in a hurry. Luo Timur also led troops to Gucheng, and removed the main book of Gucheng from Guanghua. The army was short of grain, and twice sent people to ask Xiangyang to provide it, but it was not given. The army had no food and could not move, so they had to station at the firewood store.

古文：复遣从子马哈失力往告，词甚苦切。廉访分司王佥事、本路总管柴顺礼怒其责望，械之。
现代文：又遣自己的侄儿马哈失力去苦苦请求，廉访分司王佥事、本路总管柴顺礼不仅不发粮支援，反而恼怒孛罗帖木儿责备他们屯军观望，将马哈失力监禁起来。
English: He also sent his nephew, Maha Wanli, to plead for help. Wang Anji, the branch director of the Independent Investigation Department, and Chai Shunli, the head of this road, not only did not provide grain support, but an angry Luo Timur accused them of camping and watching, and imprisoned Maha Wanli.

古文：适纽真来献光化所获首级，且言： 孛罗帖木儿在谷城与贼相持，未知存殁，宜急济其粮，少缓，恐弗及矣。 于是脱二人械，遣还，而命也先不花与万户也先帖木耳率数千人，会孛罗帖木儿以讨贼。
现代文：只因纽真来襄阳说及孛罗帖木儿在各城与起义军相峙，因军中缺粮，存殁不卜，如不急救，恐来不及了。所以，襄阳便释放此前扣留的两人，并命万户也先帖木耳与也先不花率数千人开往谷城支援。
English: It was only because Niu Zhen came to Yangyang to say that Luo Timur was confronting the insurgents in various cities. Due to the shortage of grain in the army, it was inevitable that if there was no first aid, it would be too late. Therefore, Yangyang released the two people previously detained, and ordered thousands of households to go to Gucheng to support Timur first.

古文：明年正月，襄阳失守，也先不花等闻之惊溃。
现代文：至正十一年正月，襄阳被起义军攻下。也先不花溃败。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of the Taisho era, Yangyang was captured by the rebels. It was a crushing defeat.

古文：孛罗帖木儿领义兵二百人，且战且引至监利县，遇沔阳府达鲁花赤咬住、同知三山、安陆府同知燕只不花、荆襄提举相哥失力之师。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿领兵二百人且战且退，至监利，遇沔阳府达鲁花赤咬住、同知三山与安陆府的同知燕只不花、荆襄提举相哥失力等人带的兵队。
English: Luo Timur led two hundred soldiers and fought and retreated to Jianli, where he met the troops led by Daruhana Hongzhao of Fuyang, Tongzhi Sanzhan and Anlu of Tongzhi Yanshan, and Jingxiang of Tongzhi Xiang'er.

古文：时滨江有船千余，乃纠合诸义兵丁壮水工五千余人，畀以军号，给以刀槊，具哨马五十，水陆继进。
现代文：这时，江边还有船千余艘，乃纠合民兵、丁壮、水工五千余人，编军号，给武器，组成水军，与巡逻的马队五十人，水陆继进。
English: At this time, there were still more than a thousand ships on the river, but more than five thousand people from the militia, Ding Zhuang, and waterworks were entangled, forming a military number, giving weapons, forming a navy, and patrolling with a horse team of fifty people.

古文：比至石首县，闻中兴路亦陷，乃议趋岳州就元帅帖桀，而道阻不得前，仍趋襄阳。贼方驻杨湖港，乘其不虞击之，获其船二十七艘，生擒贼党刘咬儿。
现代文：至石首，得知中兴路亦被攻破，便商议去岳州与帖桀元帅靠拢。但道路被阻，只好仍往襄阳，并在杨湖港乘起义队伍不备，获船二十七艘，生擒其首领刘咬儿。
English: When they reached Shishou, they learned that the Zhongxing Road had also been breached, so they negotiated to go to Yuezhou to get closer to Marshal Tsering. However, the road was blocked, so they still had to go to Xiangyang and take the insurgent team at Yanghu Port. They captured 27 ships and captured their leader Liu Qian'er alive.

古文：讯得其情，进次潜江县，又斩贼数百级，获三十余船，枭贼将刘万户、许堂主等。
现代文：又进袭潜江起义军，斩首数百，获船三十余艘，斩起义军将领刘万户、许堂主等人。
English: He also attacked the Qianjiang Uprising rebels, beheaded hundreds of them, captured more than 30 ships, and beheaded rebel generals Liu Wanyu, Xu Dongshu, and others.

古文：是日，甫止兵未食而贼大至，与战抵暮，咬住等军各当一面，不能救。
现代文：此日，战事刚停，将士还来不及进餐，起义军突然来袭。交战至暮，咬住等各当一面，不能互相援救。
English: On this day, the fighting had just stopped, and the soldiers had not yet had time to eat, when the insurgents suddenly attacked. They fought to the bitter end, biting and waiting for each other, unable to help each other.

古文：既而孛罗帖木儿被执，贼请同为逆，孛罗帖木儿怒骂之，遂遇害。
现代文：马哈失力流着眼泪说 ：生死要和叔父在一起。 既而孛罗帖木儿被擒，拒降被杀。
English: Maha broke down in tears and said, "I want to be with my uncle in life and death," even though Miro Timur was captured and killed for refusing to surrender.

古文：马哈失力帅家奴求其尸，复与贼战，俱没于阵。
现代文：马哈失力率家奴来寻其尸，又与起义军交战，都在战斗中死亡。
English: Maha lost his strength and led his slaves to search for his body. They also fought with the insurgents and both died in the battle.

古文：举家死者，凡二十六人。
现代文：这次战争，孛罗帖木儿全家二十六人皆战死。
English: In this war, twenty-six members of Miro Timur's entire family died in battle.

古文：彭庭坚，字允诚，温州瑞安人。
现代文：彭庭坚字允诚，温州端安人。
English: Peng Ting Jian Zi Yun Cheng, Wenzhou Duan An Ren.

古文：擢至正四年进士第，授承事郎、同知沂州事。
现代文：至正四年进士及第，授承事郎、沂州同知。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, he was promoted to the rank of Shinshi and became the second, the bestowal secretary's younger brother, and a confidant of Bozhou.

古文：毁牛皇神祠，驱邻郡上马贼，免民横急征敛，民甚便之。
现代文：任职期间，曾捣毁牛皇神祠、赶走邻郡马贼、免除对民众的横征暴敛，百姓甚以为便。
English: During his term of office, he destroyed the Cow Emperor's Shrine, drove away horse thieves from neighboring counties, and exempted the people from extortion, which was very convenient for the people.

古文：俄以平反狱囚忤上官意，遂弃去。
现代文：不久，因为狱囚平反而得罪了上司，便弃官归里。
English: Soon, because the prisoner Ping offended his boss, he resigned and returned home.

古文：十年，诏选守令，以建宁路崇安县尹起庭坚于家。
现代文：至正十年，朝廷诏选地方官，建宁路崇安县尹从庭坚之家起用庭坚。
English: In the tenth year of the Taisho era, the imperial court selected local officials, and Yin of Chong'an County, Jianning Road, used Ting Jian from Ting Jian's home.

古文：属铅山寇周良窃发，犯闽关，庭坚御之有法，寇不入境。
现代文：这时，铅山周良起义，进攻闽关。庭坚抵御有方，周良等不能入境。
English: At this time, Yuanshan Zhou Liang revolted and attacked Shaoguan. Niujian resisted, and Zhou Liang and others could not enter the country.

古文：十一年，升同知建宁路总管府事。
现代文：十一年，升为同知建宁路总管府事。
English: In the eleventh year, he was promoted to the post of the chief administrator of Tongzhi Jianning Road.

古文：江西寇炽，庭坚率民兵克复建阳，又进兵平浦城。
现代文：江西民众起义，庭坚率民兵前往建阳镇压，还进剿浦城。
English: The people of Jiangxi revolted, and Niujian and his militia went to Jianyang to suppress the uprising, and also entered the city of Zhaopu.

古文：十二年，摄佥都元帅府事，与邵武路总管吴按摊不花夹攻邵武，庭坚设云梯火炮，昼夜攻击，寇遁，追斩渠凶董元帅、铁和尚、童昌，邵武悉平。
现代文：十二年，庭坚兼理佥都元帅府事，与邵武路总管吴按摊不花进攻邵武起义军，庭坚设云梯火炮，昼夜攻击，终于平定邵武，斩起义军将领董元帅、铁和尚、童昌等。
English: In the 12th year, Ting Jian, who was also in charge of the affairs of the capital marshal's office, and Wu Yanzhan, the general manager of Shaowu Road, launched an attack on the Shaowu rebel army. Ting Jian set up a ladder artillery, attacked day and night, and finally pacified Shaowu, and beheaded rebel army generals such as Marshal Dong, Iron Monk, and Tong Chang.

古文：总兵官江浙参政章嘉上功于朝，升同知福建道宣慰使司副都元帅，镇邵武。
现代文：总兵官江浙参政章嘉向朝廷报功，庭坚又升同知福建宣慰使司副都元帅，镇守邵武。
English: The chief military officer of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, Zhang Jia, paid tribute to the imperial court, and Ting Jian was promoted to vice-marshal of Tongzhi, vice-marshal of Fujian, and town guard of Shaowu.

古文：冬，寇陷建宁县。
现代文：冬天，起义军攻陷建宁。
English: In winter, the insurgents captured Jianning.

古文：十三年，庭坚统建阳、崇安、浦城三县民兵，次泰宁。
现代文：十三年，统领建阳、崇安、浦城三县兵民进攻建宁。
English: In the thirteenth year, he led the soldiers and people of Jianyang, Chong'an and Pucheng counties to attack Jianning.

古文：寇惧请降，复建宁县，还师邵武。
现代文：至泰宁，起义军降，收复建宁，还师邵武。
English: To Taining, the rebel army fell, recovered Jianning, and returned to Shaowu.

古文：江浙行省檄庭坚节制建宁、邵武二郡诸军。
现代文：江浙行省令庭坚节制建宁、邵武二郡诸军。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Government ordered the troops of Jianning and Shaowu two counties under the command of Ting Jian.

古文：十四年，盗侵政和、松溪，江南行台中丞吴铎督军建宁，檄庭坚至。
现代文：十四年，起义军进攻政和、松溪，江南行台吴铎督军建宁，召庭坚至。
English: In the 14th year, the insurgents attacked Zhenghe, Songxi, and Jianning in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：时镇抚万户岳焕隶麾下，焕素悍，纵卒为暴，庭坚欲绳以法，焕惧，使部卒乘其不备，诈为贼兵，突入交锋，众皆溃，庭坚独留不去，遂遇害，死年四十三。
现代文：当时镇抚万户岳焕受庭坚指挥，焕一向为人粗暴，放纵士兵做坏事，庭坚拟绳之以法，焕先发制人，乘其不备，冒充起义军突然进攻，庭坚遇害，时年四十二岁。
English: At that time, the governor Wanhu Yue Huan was commanded by Ting Jian. Huan had always been a rough person, indulging soldiers to do bad things. Ting Jian intended to bring him to justice. Huan pre-empted and took advantage of his unpreparedness, pretending to be a rebel sudden attack. Ting Jian was killed at the age of forty-two.

古文：故吏张椿，儒士夏志行、江晃，奉柩还崇安，民哀泣如丧父母，立祠像，岁时祭祷，数降灵响，旁邑立祠亦如之。
现代文：庭坚遇害后，老同事张椿及儒士夏志行、江晃等护柩还崇安。百姓悲痛他的逝世，特建祠立像，岁时祭祷。邻县也同样立祠纪念。
English: After the murder of Niujian, his old colleague Zhang Tsubaki and his disciples such as the Confucian scholars Xia Zhixing and Jiang Xiang were sent to protect him. The people mourned his death, erected a special shrine, and held a memorial service at the time of his death. Neighboring counties also erected a memorial shrine.

古文：南行台监察御史余观行部巡察，获其贼斩之。为上其事，赠中奉大夫、福建道宣慰使都元帅，封忠愍侯。
现代文：南行御史台监察御史余观行巡所部，将岳焕斩首，并上奏庭坚事于朝廷，赠中奉大夫、福建道宣慰使都元帅，封忠愍侯。
English: The inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting division of the inspecting

古文：王伯颜，字伯敬，滨州沾化人。
现代文：王伯颜字伯敬，滨州沾化人。
English: Wang Boyan, also known as Bo Jing, was born and raised in Binzhou.

古文：由湖广省宣使历永州祁阳、湖州乌程县尹，信州推官。
现代文：由湖广省宣使历任永州祁阳县尹、湖州乌程县尹及信州推官。
English: Hubei and Guangxi provinces sent envoys to Yin of Yongzhou's Fenyang County, Yin of Huzhou's Wucheng County, and Shinshu.

古文：至正九年，迁知福宁州。
现代文：至正九年，迁任福宁知州。
English: In the ninth year of the Taisho era, he was transferred to Funen Chizhou.

古文：居三岁，升福建盐运副使，将行，宪府以时方俶扰，留伯颜仍领州事。
现代文：三年后，又升福建盐运副使。将赴任，省府以当时有动乱，乃留伯颜仍领福宁州事。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to vice-envoy of Fujian Salt Transport. When he was about to take office, the provincial government was in turmoil at the time, and Noryu Boyan was still in charge of the state affairs of Funing.

古文：未几，贼自邵武间道逼福宁，乃与监州阿撒都剌募壮兵五万，分扼险阻。
现代文：不久，起义民众自邵武取小路逼近福宁，伯颜与监州阿撒都剌募丁壮五万扼险固守。
English: Soon, the insurgent people approached Fu Ning from Shao Wutori Alley, and Bo Yan and Jianzhou Asa Tudor recruited 50,000 Ding Zhuang to hold fast.

古文：贼至杨梅岭，立栅，伯颜与子相驰破之。
现代文：起义军至杨梅岭立栅为营，伯颜与子王相往破之。
English: The insurgents set up camp at Yangmeiling, and Boyan and Ziwang broke through.

古文：贼帅王善，俄拥众直压州西门，胥隶皆解散，伯颜麾下唯白梃市儿数百人尔。
现代文：忽而起义军首领王善率人直压福宁州西门，吏役皆逃散。伯颜指挥的手持木棍的市民数百人仍在战斗。
English: Suddenly, the leader of the insurgent army, Wang Shan, led his men to directly pressure the west gate of Funing County, and the officials all fled. Hundreds of citizens armed with wooden sticks, commanded by Bo Yan, were still fighting.

古文：伯颜射贼，不复反顾，贼以长枪舂马，马仆，遂见执。善说伯颜曰： 闻公有惠政，此州那可无尹，公为我尹，可乎？ 
现代文：伯颜直冲前阵时，坐骑被义军撞倒，伯颜被擒。王善对伯颜说： 听说你为政清廉，福宁不可无长官，我愿任你为地方官，好吗？ 
English: When Bo Yan rushed to the front, her horse was knocked down by the rebels and she was captured. Wang Shan said to Bo Yan: I heard that you are a clean politician, and that there should be no senior officials in Fu Ning. I am willing to let you be a local official, okay?

古文：伯颜诃善曰： 我天子命官，不幸失守，义当死，肯从汝反乎？ 
现代文：伯颜斥之说： 我是天子命官，不幸失守，按理当以死报国，怎能跟着你们造朝廷的反呢？ 
English: The lady-in-waiting rebuked them, saying, "I am an official appointed by the Son of Heaven, unfortunately I have lost my position, and it is my duty to serve my country with my death. How can I follow you in creating opposition in the imperial court?"

古文：贼杀之。相妻潘氏，挈二女，为贼所获，亦骂贼，母子同死。
现代文：伯颜的话激怒了义军，于是被抓住罚跪，被殴打。伯颜仍不屈，嚼舌以血喷善面，说有大丞相将亲领百万大军征讨起义军，还骂起义军是 小丑 ，说要将起义军 斩尽杀绝 。
English: Bo Yan's words enraged the rebels, so he was caught, made to kneel, and beaten. Bo Yan still refused to give in, chewing his tongue and spitting blood, saying that there was a grand chancellor who would personally lead a million-strong army to fight the rebels, and also called the rebels clowns, saying that the rebels would be exterminated.

古文：伯颜既死，贼时睹其引兵出入。
现代文：起义军执阿撒都剌至，王善厉声责其顽抗，阿撒都剌噤不能对，伯颜说 ，我们镇压造反者，不能说是顽抗。
English: When the rebel army reached Asadudu, Wang Shan blamed it for its stubborn resistance. Asadudu could not be right, Bo Yan said, we suppressed the rebels, it could not be said to be stubborn resistance.

古文：斩其酋江二蛮，福宁遂平。
现代文：我死，当为神来杀尔等 ，乃被斩。
English: When I die, I want to be killed by God, not beheaded.

古文：事闻，赠嘉议大夫、济南路总管、上轻车都尉，追封太原郡侯。
现代文：州人哭之。既而王善欲任伯颜之子相为官，相不从，与其女俱被杀。伯颜之事上奏朝廷后，赠嘉议大夫、河南路总管、上轻车都尉，追封太原郡侯。
English: The people of the prefecture cried. Even though Wang Zhen wanted to appoint the son of Bo Yan as an official, he did not comply, and he and his wife were killed. After the matter of Bo Yan was reported to the court, he was given the titles of Jia Hei Doctor, Henan Road General Manager, Senior Light Truck Captain, and Taiyuan County Marquis.

古文：刘濬，字济川，其先兴州人。
现代文：刘濬字济川，其祖先是兴州人。
English: Liu Xuan, surnamed Jichuan, whose ancestors were from Xingzhou.

古文：曾祖海，金进士第一人，仕至河南府尹，死于国难，子孙遂家河南。
现代文：曾祖刘海是金国进士第一名，官至河南府尹，死于国难，子孙便在河南安家。
English: Zengzu Liu Hai was the first Jin Guo Jin Shi, official to Yin, Henan Province, died in the national tragedy, and his descendants settled in Henan.

古文：濬由廉访司书吏调连江县宁善乡巡检。
现代文：刘濬由廉访司书吏调连江县宁善乡巡检。
English: Liu Wei was transferred from the librarian of the Bureau of Investigation and Inspection to patrol Ningshan Township, Lianjiang County.

古文：至正十三年，江西贼帅王善寇闽，官军守罗源县拒之。罗源与连江接壤，势将迫。
现代文：至正十三年江西起义军主帅王善进攻福建，官军扼守罗源县，罗源与连江交界，形势紧迫。
English: In the 13th year of the Taisho era, Wang Shan, the commander of the Jiangxi Uprising Army, attacked Fujian, and the government army closely guarded Luoyuan County, the border between Luoyuan and Lianjiang. The situation was urgent.

古文：濬妻真定史氏，故相家女也，有才识，谓濬曰： 事急矣，可聚兵以捍一方。 
现代文：濬妻真定史氏说： 事已急，可聚兵保卫一方。 
English: His wife, Ms. Zhending Shi, said: The situation is urgent, we can gather troops to defend one side.

古文：于是尽出奁中物，募壮士百余，命仲子健将之。
现代文：还拿出娘家陪嫁的家私召募勇士，由二儿子刘健率领。
English: He also took out his daughter's bridal entourage to recruit warriors, led by his second son Liu Jian.

古文：浃旬间，众至数万。
现代文：不旬日，数至万众。
English: On an unlucky day, there are as many as ten thousand people.

古文：贼寻破罗源，分两道攻福州。
现代文：王善军不久破罗源，分两路攻福州。
English: Wang Shan's army soon broke through Luoyuan and attacked Fuzhou in two directions.

古文：濬拒之辰山，三战三捷。
现代文：刘濬率兵战于辰山，三战三捷。
English: Liu Bei led the troops to fight in Shenshan, and achieved three victories in three battles.

古文：俄闻福州陷，众多溃去，濬独帅健兵进。遇贼于中麻，突其阵，斩前锋五人，贼兵大至。
现代文：忽闻福州陷落，全军溃散。刘濬乃独率刘健之兵，与王善军战于中麻，斩其前锋五人。
English: He suddenly heard that Fuzhou had fallen, and the whole army was scattered. Liu Xuan alone led Liu Jian's soldiers, and fought with Wang Shan's army in Zhongma, and killed five of his forwards.

古文：鏖战三时顷，濬中箭堕马，健下马掖之，俱被获。
现代文：起义军大批人马至，鏖战三时顷，奈众寡不敌，濬中箭落马，父子俱被俘。
English: A large number of insurgents arrived, the battle lasted for three hours, but they were outnumbered, the arrows fell in the battle, and both father and son were captured.

古文：健尽散家赀，结死士百人，诈为工商流丐，入贼中，夜半，发火大噪，贼惊扰，自相屠戮，健手斩杀其父者张破四，并擒善及寇首陈伯祥来献，磔之。
现代文：刘濬痛骂不止，王善军被激怒，一再砍断其指、其腕、其足、其喉而死。其子亦拒降，王善认为他们有义气，乃释放刘健，使收殓其父的尸体归葬。刘健被释后，向元朝帅府请兵，以报父仇。帅府未准，乃尽散家财，结死士百人，伪装为工商流丐，夜晚混入王善军，放火鼓噪，乘王善军大乱之际，手斩砍杀其父的张破四，擒王善及另一首领陈伯祥，并以极残酷的石桀刑处死。
English: After Liu Jian was released, he invited soldiers to the marshal's office to avenge his father. The marshal's office did not approve, but he squandered his family's wealth, killed hundreds of people, disguised as a business vagabond, mixed with Wang Shan's army at night, set fires and made a lot of noise. On the occasion of the chaos of Wang Shan's army, he hand-chopped and killed his father's Zhang Baxi, stabbed Wang Shan and another leader Chen Buxiang, and killed Chen Buxiang with extreme brutality.

古文：事闻，赠濬福建行省检校官，授健古田县尹。官为濬立祠福州北门外，有司岁时致祭云。
现代文：刘氏父子的事迹向朝廷报告后，朝廷赠刘濬为福建行省检校官，为濬立祠于福州北门外，政府岁时致祭。
English: After Liu's father and son's deeds were reported to the imperial court, the imperial court presented Liu Jun with the title of Fujian Provincial Procurator, erected a shrine for him outside the north gate of Fuzhou, and made a sacrifice to him at the time of the government.

古文：朵里不花，字端甫，蒙古人。
现代文：还任命刘健为古田县尹。朵里不花字端甫，蒙古族人。
English: Liu Jian was also appointed as Gutian County Yin. Dori does not use the word Duanfu, a Mongolian.

古文：始为宿卫官，累历显要，擢辽阳行省右丞，升平章政事。
现代文：开始担任宫廷的警卫官，以后累历显要，提升为辽阳行省右丞、平章政事。
English: He began to serve as a guard officer of the court, and later, after a distinguished career, he was promoted to Liaoyang Provincial U.S.S.R. and Pingzhang Political Affairs.

古文：陈友谅陷江西，诏拜江西行省平章政事，与平章政事阿儿浑沙等分道进讨。
现代文：陈友谅军攻下江西后，朵里不花受诏任江西行省平章政事，与平章政事阿儿浑沙等分道进攻陈军。
English: After Chen Youzheng's army conquered Jiangxi, Du Liwei was appointed as the governor of Pingzhang in Jiangxi Province, and attacked Chen's army separately from Pingzhang's governor, Al Hunsha.

古文：遂泛海南下，趋广东，驻师揭阳，降土寇金元祐，招复循、梅、惠三州之寇。
现代文：他泛海南下广东，进驻揭阳，招降当地反元义军金元，又招降循、梅、惠三州的反元义军。
English: He went south across the sea to Guangdong, stationed in Jieyang, and invited the local anti-Yuan rebel army Jinyuan to surrender, and also invited the anti-Yuan rebel army from Sam, Mei and Hui three states to surrender.

古文：承制官其酋长，俾治贼以给兵食。
现代文：还任命降军首领为官，以便于使他们征收赋税以供士兵粮饷。
English: He also appointed the heads of the retreating troops as officials so that they could collect taxes to feed the soldiers.

古文：又别规粟四千石，输送京师。
现代文：还计划收粟四千石送京师。
English: It is also planned to collect 4,000 koku of millet and send it to the capital.

古文：自是英、肇、钦、连诸郡皆附，且治兵由梅岭以图江西。
现代文：自是，英、肇、钦、连诸郡皆归附，并准备由梅岭进军江西。
English: Zizhe, Ying, Zhao, Qin, and Lian counties were all annexed, and prepared to march from Meiling to Jiangxi.

古文：朵里不花遂被执，拥至太平桥，骂不绝口，遂为贼杀。
现代文：但元有异志，推托说为了地方的安定，要求政府军不开走，从而挽留了朵里不花。
English: However, he originally had a different vision, but he said that for the sake of local stability, he asked the government troops not to leave, thus retaining the flowers.

古文：其妻卜颜氏、妾高丽氏在侧，不去，皆大骂曰： 我平章遇尔父子厚矣，尔父子何暴逆至此！ 
现代文：原来，元帝已发令使刘巨海任广东元帅府佥事，但任命书在发表前被元偷去，并把书中的刘巨海改为瑶族起义军首领刘文远，联络他一道反元。及朝廷发觉后，文远被杀，元及其弟元泰、儿子荣等都逃跑了。不久，金荣率外地起义军突至，到处夺符信，杀官吏。
English: Originally, Emperor Yuan had issued an order to appoint Liu Juhai as the marshal of Guangdong, but the appointment letter was stolen by Yuan before it was published, and the Liu Juhai in the book was changed to Liu Wenyuan, the leader of the Shan rebel army, to contact him to fight against Yuan. After the court found out, Wenyuan was killed, and Yuan, his brother Yuan Tai, and his son Rong all fled. Soon, Jin Rong led the foreign rebel army to rush, seize letters everywhere, and kill officials.

古文：亦皆遇害。其部将哈乞、吴普颜、阿剌不花、歹不花等，俱战死。
现代文：朵里不花与参政杨泰元抵抗，但义军势众，朵里不花中枪被执，其子达兰不花战死。朵里不花及其妻妾被押至太平桥处死，部将哈乞、吴普颜、阿剌不花、歹不花俱战死。
English: Doryfuhua resisted Yang Taiyuan's participation in politics, but the rebels were numerous. Doryfuhua was shot and captured, and his son, Dalanfuhua, died in battle. Doryfuhua and his wife and concubine were taken to Taiping Bridge to be executed, and his subordinates, General Hakian, Wu Puyan, Grandmother Fuhua, and Grandmother Fuhua, all died in battle.

古文：野峻台，其父世延，自有传。由四川行省左右司郎中、西行台监察御史、河西廉访使转黄州路总管。
现代文：野峻台，野世延之子，历任四川行省左右司郎中、西行御史台监察御史、河西廉访使及黄州路总管。
English: Nojundai, the son of Nozheyan, successively served as the middle secretary of the left and right departments of Sichuan Province, the inspector of the west department of Sichuan Province, the inspector of the west department of Sichuan Province, the inspector of the west department of Sichuan Province, the inspector of the west department of Sichuan Province and the inspector of the west department of Sichuan Province.

古文：又明日，贼复来攻，前中兴判官上都统兵出击之。
现代文：时湖广已为反元起义军占领，朝廷知野峻台是个人才，便提升他为四川行省参政，命他和平章咬住征讨反元义军。
English: When Hukang was already occupied by the anti-Yuan rebels, the imperial court promoted Chino Shuntai as an individual talent, promoted him to Sichuan Province to participate in politics, and ordered him to bite the peace sign to conquer the anti-Yuan rebels.

古文：既而东门失守，上都仓黄反斗，力屈，贼执之使降，上都大骂，贼怒，刳其腹、刲其肉而死。
现代文：咬住有兵五千，分给野峻台锐卒八百，破反元军于江上，平定归州、峡州，进拔枝江、松滋，直指江陵，与反元军鏖战于清水门，迫使反元军退入城内。不意在黎明时，反元义军复出，袭击野峻台，而咬住在百步之外按兵不动，野峻台战死。
English: He captured five thousand soldiers and divided them among eight hundred soldiers of the Anti-Yuan Army, defeating the Anti-Yuan Army on the river, pacifying the Guizhou and Xiaozhou, advancing to the Shijiang and Songzhi Rivers, and pointing straight at the Ganges, and fighting the Anti-Yuan Army at the Clear Water Gate, forcing the Anti-Yuan Army to retreat into the city. Unexpectedly, at dawn, the Anti-Yuan Rebel Army returned and attacked the Anti-Yuan Army, while the Anti-Yuan Rebel Army stayed a hundred paces away and did not move, and the Anti-Yuan Army died in battle.

古文：潮海，紥剌台氏，由国子生入官，为靖安县达鲁花赤。
现代文：朝廷赠荣禄大夫、陕西行省平章政事、柱国，追封凉国公，谥忠壮。潮海，扎刺台族人。由国子生开始当官，任靖安县达鲁花赤。
English: The imperial court gave Ronglu the title of doctor, the provinces of Shaanxi and Pingzhang the title of political affairs, and Zhu Guo the title of provincial governor, Yang Zhongzhuang the title of provincial governor, Chaohai the title of provincial governor, and Zasshantai the title of provincial governor. Guo Zisheng became the first official, and he was appointed as the governor of Jing'an County.

古文：至正十二年，蕲黄贼起，潮海与县尹黄绍同集义兵，为御贼计。
现代文：至正十二年，蕲、黄人民起义，潮海与县知事黄绍募民兵抵御。
English: In the 12th year of the Zhou Dynasty, the people of Zhou and Huang rebelled, and Chaohai and the county governor Huang Shao recruited militias to resist.

古文：未几，贼兵数万由武宁来寇，绍赴行省求援，潮海独率众与战于象湖，大破之。
现代文：不久，起义军数万由武宁来攻，绍向行省救援，潮海则率兵迎战，在象湖大破义军。
English: Soon, tens of thousands of insurgents attacked from Wu Ning, Shao Xiang went to the province to rescue, and Chaohai led the troops to fight, and defeated the rebels in Xianghu.

古文：尝为数十人所围，即奋身跃出。至是，身中数十枪，喷血骂贼而死。魏中立，字伯时，济南人。
现代文：潮又起用进士胡斗元、涂渊、舒庆远、甘棠等，与他们共同谋画，以勇士黄云为先锋，从二月至八月，多次打胜仗，擒起义军将领洪元帅。但因起义军势盛，黄云战死，潮海被困，不久，为起义军所执，杀于富州。魏中立字伯时，济南人。
English: From February to August, with the warrior Huang Yun as the vanguard, they fought many victorious battles and defeated the rebel army's general, Marshal Hong. However, because the rebel army was in full swing, Huang Yun died in battle, and Chaohai was trapped. Soon, he was captured by the rebel army and killed in Fuzhou. Wei Zhonglian Zibo Shi, a native of Jinan.

古文：由国子伴读历官至陕西行台御史中丞，迁守饶州。
现代文：由国子伴读官至陕西行台御史中丞，调任饶州太守。
English: He was transferred from Kuniko attendant reading officer to Shaanxi Guotai goshi chujo, and appointed Raozhou governor.

古文：贼既陷湖广，分攻州郡，官军多疲懦不能拒，所在无赖子多乘间窃发，不旬日，众辄数万，皆短衣草屡，齿木为杷，削竹为枪，截绯帛为巾襦，弥野皆赤。
现代文：时起义军已攻下湖广，并向许多州郡进发，官军多疲懦不能抵抗。各处人民响应起义军者数以万计。起义军皆短衣草履，持木耙竹枪，着红衣红帽，使遍野皆赤。
English: At that time, the insurgents had already captured Hukang and advanced to many prefectures and counties. The government army was too exhausted to resist. People everywhere responded to the insurgents by the tens of thousands. The insurgents were all in short sandals, holding wooden and bamboo guns, wearing red clothes and red caps, making the whole countryside red.

古文：中立大骂不已，遂被害。未几，贼又犯信州，信州总管于大本以土兵备御。
现代文：中立率兵守险要，俄而起义军大至，达鲁花赤马来不能敌，中立击退之。其后，起义军合围饶州，中立被俘。起义军欲劝降，以红衣披其身，中立不穿。
English: Neutrality led the troops to defend the vital point, but the rebel army was so large that the Dalu flower red horse could not be the enemy, and Neutrality repulsed it. Later, the rebel army encircled Raozhou, and Neutrality was captured. The rebel army wanted to persuade him to surrender, and draped him in a red coat, but Neutrality did not wear it.

古文：贼首项甲破东门而入，执大本，至蕲水为俘献。
现代文：被押至蕲水后，仍不屈，遂被处死。未几，起义军又攻信州。
English: After being taken to Surabaya, he remained defiant and was executed. Shortly after, the insurgents attacked Shinshu again.

古文：伪主释其缚，畀伪印一纽，且命以官。大本投印于地，而指伪主痛詈之，遂亦遇害。
现代文：信州总管于大本领民兵抵抗，起义军将领项甲破东门而入，大本被擒，俘至蕲水，起义军领袖为之松绑，还给印任官，大本亦不受，亦被处死。
English: The commander-in-chief of Shinshu was in charge of the resistance of the powerful militia. The general of the rebel army, Xiang Jiu, broke through the east gate and entered. Ohmoto was captured and taken to Surabaya. The leader of the rebel army released him and returned him to Injin, but Ohmoto did not accept and was also executed.

古文：大本字德中，密州人，始由儒学教谕入官云。
现代文：大本字德中，密州人，是由儒学教谕而入仕途的。
English: The people of Mishu, one of the main characters of the novel, were educated by the teachings of Confucianism.

