古文：十六日，余暂憩赵寓，作寄衡州金祥甫书，补纪游之未尽者。
现代文：十六日我暂时歇息在赵家寓所，写了寄给衡州金祥甫的信，补记游记未完的部分。
English: On the 16th, I temporarily rested at the Zhao family's apartment and wrote a letter to Hengzhou Jinxiangfu, supplementing the unfinished part of the travelogue.

古文：十七日，雨。
现代文：十七日下雨。
English: It rained on the 17th.

古文：余再憩赵寓，作家报并祥甫书，简点所市石。
现代文：我再歇息在赵家寓所。写家信及给祥甫的信，检点买来的石头。
English: I rest again in Zhao's apartment. I write letters to my family and to Xiangfu, and check the stones I bought.

古文：是日下午，辄闭诸城门，以靖蒲燔灵也。
现代文：这天下午，老是关闭着各道城门，是因为靖江王府祭灵。
English: On this afternoon, all the gates of the city were always closed, because of the Jingjiang King's Palace Festival.

古文：先是，数日前先礼忏、演剧于藩城后，又架三木台于府门前。
现代文：这之前的前几天就先在王城礼佛、演戏，又架了三座木台 在王府门前。
English: Just a few days before this, they had performed a Buddhist ritual and a play in the royal city, and set up three wooden platforms in front of the royal palace.

古文：有父、母及妃三灵，故三台。至是夜二鼓，遍悬白莲灯于台之四旁，置火炮花霰于台上，奉灵主于中，是名 升天台 。
现代文：到这天夜里二更时，在木台的四旁悬挂白色的莲灯，在台上放置了爆竹花炮，供奉灵牌于正中，这名叫 升天台 。
English: At two o'clock in the morning that night, white lotus lamps were hung on the four sides of the wooden platform, and firecrackers and fireworks were placed on the platform. The memorial plaque was placed in the middle of the platform, which is called the roof-raising platform.

古文：司道官吉服奠觞敬酒，王麻冕拜，复易吉服再拜，后乃传火引线发炮，花焰交作，声震城谷。
现代文：司、道一级的官员身穿吉服敬酒祭奠，靖江王穿着麻衣麻帽跪拜，又换了吉服两次祭拜，然后就传火种点燃导火绳引发鞭炮，火花焰火并作，响声震荡城垣山谷。
English: Officials at the department and province level wore kimono to make a toast, and the king of the Jingjiang River knelt down and worshiped while wearing a hemp robe and a hemp cap. He also changed his kimono twice, and then lit a fuse to ignite a firecracker. The spark ignited a firecracker, and the firecracker ignited a firecracker, and the firecracker ignited a firecracker, and the firecracker ignited a firecracker, and the firecracker ignited a firecracker, and the firecracker ignited a firecracker, and the fire

古文：时合城士女喧观，诧为不数见之盛举。
现代文：当时全城男女喧闹着观看，十分诧异认为是不多见的盛大举动。
English: At the time, men and women from all over the city watched in uproar and were very surprised at what they considered to be an unusual grand gesture.

古文：促余往寓目，余僵卧不起，而得之静闻者如此。
现代文：催促我前往观看，我僵睡床上不起，而是从静闻那里听到的情况如此。
English: I was urged to go and watch, I was fast asleep in bed, but from what I heard from the silence, that's how it was.

古文：十八日，托静闻从朝云岩觅融止上人入寓。
现代文：十八日托付静闻从朝云岩找到融止法师来到寓所中。
English: On the 18th day, Jingwen entrusted Asayunyan to find a melting mage to come to the apartment.

古文：饭后，以所寄金祥甫书及家报、石帐付之，托转致于衡，嘱祥甫再寄家中。
现代文：饭后，把寄给金祥甫的信及家信、买石头的帐单交付给融止，托他转送到衡州，再嘱托祥甫寄到家中。
English: After the meal, he handed over the letter sent to Jin Xiangfu, the letter to his family, and the bill for buying the stone to Rongji. He asked him to send it to Hengzhou, and then asked him to send it to Xiangfu's home.

古文：十九日，以行囊简付赵主人时雨。
现代文：十九日把行李点清托付给主人赵时雨。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Shiyu, the owner, was entrusted with clearing the luggage.

古文：余雨中出浮桥，将附舟往阳朔。
现代文：我在雨中走出浮桥，将要搭船前往阳朔。
English: I walked out of the pontoon in the rain and will take a boat to Yangshuo.

古文：时即开之舟，挨挤不堪；姑入空舟避雨，又不即去，乃托静闻守行李于舟，余复入城。
现代文：当时马上要开船，人挨挤不堪；暂且进入空船中避雨，又不马上离开；只好托静闻在船上守行李，我再进城去。
English: At that time, the boat was about to leave, and people were crowded together; I temporarily entered the empty boat to avoid the rain, and did not leave immediately; I had to keep my luggage on the boat, and I went back to the city.

古文：登城楼，欲觅逍遥楼旧迹，已为守城百户置家于中。
现代文：登上城楼，想要寻找逍遥楼旧迹，已经被守城的百户在那安了家。
English: Climbing up the castle tower, I wanted to look for the old ruins of the Shoyo-ro, where hundreds of families who had been guarding the city had made their homes.

古文：遂由城上南行，二里，抵文昌门。
现代文：于是由城墙上往南行，二里，抵达文昌门。
English: So I walked south along the city wall for two miles and arrived at Wenchang Gate.

古文：门外为五胜桥，漓之支流与阳江之分派交通于下。
现代文：门外是五胜桥，漓江的支流与阳江的支流交汇于桥下。
English: Outside the gate is the Wuxian Bridge. The tributary of the Minjiang River and the tributary of the Yangjiang River meet under the bridge.

古文：复循城外西过宁远门，乃南越南门桥，觅摹碑者，已他出。
现代文：再沿着城外向西经过宁远门，便向南越过南门桥，寻找拓碑的人，已出门到其他地方去了。
English: After passing Ningyuan Gate to the west outside the city, they crossed Nanmen Bridge to the south. The people who were looking for the monument had already left for other places.

古文：余初期摹匠同往水月，拓陆务观、范石湖遗刻。
现代文：我当初与拓碑的匠人约好一同前往水月洞，去拓陆务观、范石湖遗留下的碑刻。
English: At the beginning, I made an appointment with the builders of the monument to go to Shuiyue Cave to excavate the monument left by Lu Muxun and Fan Shih Lake.

古文：至是失期，乃赴雉山别郑、杨诸君，以先两日二君托人来招也。
现代文：至此失约，只有赶到雄山辞别郑、杨诸君，因为前两天二位先生托人来招唤。
English: At this point, the appointment was broken, and only Zheng and Yang Zhujun arrived at Xiongshan to say goodbye, because the two gentlemen had asked someone to come two days before.

古文：比至，又晤白益之，名弘谦，真谦谦君子也。
现代文：及来到时，又会见了白益之，真是个谦谦君子。
English: When he arrived, he met with Bai Yuxun again. He was truly a humble gentleman.

古文：时杨君未至，余少待之，雨大至，遂坐雉岩亭，方伸纸欲书补纪游，而杨君、朱君继至，已而郑君书《小序》见投，而朱君之弟涤凡亦以诗贶，余交作诗答之。
现代文：此时杨君未来，我暂时等一等他，雨大降，便坐在锥岩亭中。刚铺开纸想要补写游记，杨君、朱君相继来到，不久郑君写了小序来赠，而朱君的兄弟超涤、超凡也拿诗相赠，我先后作了诗答赠他们。
English: At this time, Yang Jun's future, I waited for him for a while, it rained heavily, and then sat in the cone rock pavilion. I just spread the paper to supplement the travelogue, Yang Jun and Zhu Jun came one after another, and soon Zheng Jun wrote a small sequence to present, and Zhu Jun's brothers, Chaodao and Chaowan, also presented poems to each other, and I made poems to present to them.

古文：暮，抵水月岩西舟中，宿。
现代文：傍晚，来到水月岩西侧的船中，睡下。
English: In the evening, I came to the boat on the west side of the Water Moon Rock and fell asleep.

古文：二十日，舟犹欲待附者乘船的人，因令顾仆再往觅拓工。
现代文：二十日船仍想要等人来搭船，因而命令顾仆再去找拓碑的工匠。
English: On the 20th, the ship still wanted to wait for someone to come on board, so he ordered his servant to go back to the craftsman of the monument.

古文：遂同抵水月观洞，示所欲拓，并以纸价付之，期以阳朔游还索取所拓。
现代文：于是一同来到水月洞观察岩洞，把想拓的碑刻指给他，并拿出纸钱付给他，约定在阳朔游览完返回时索取所拓的拓片。
English: So they came to Shuiyue Cave to observe the cave, pointed out the monument they wanted to excavate to him, and took out paper money to pay him, agreeing to request the excavated rubbings when returning from the Yangshuo tour.

古文：是日补纪游程于舟中。
现代文：这天在船中补记游览的路程。
English: On this day, I wrote down the itinerary of the tour in the boat.

古文：舟泊五胜桥下，晚仍北移浮桥，以就众附也。
现代文：船停泊在五胜桥下，到晚上仍旧往北移到浮桥下，以便大家就便搭乘。
English: The boat was moored under the Wusheng Bridge, and in the evening it was still moved north under the pontoon bridge so that everyone could board.

古文：是日晴丽殊甚，而暑气逼人。当午有王孙五人入舟强丐乞讨焉，与之升米而去。二十一日，候附舟者，日中乃行。南过水月洞，又南，出斗鸡山东麓。
现代文：往南经过水月洞东面，又向南，是难山、穿山、斗鸡山、刘仙岩、崖头诸山，都是陆地所游之处，唯有斗鸡山未到过，今天船经过斗鸡山东麓。崖头有石门、净瓶两处胜景，船隔着小洲行走，不能接近详细观看。
English: Going south past the east side of Shuigetsu Cave, and then south, there are Nanzhu Mountain, Pengshan Mountain, Douquan Mountain, Liuxian Rock, and the mountains at the cliff head, all of which are places where land is traveled. Only Douquan Mountain has not been reached, and today the ship passed the eastern foot of Douquan Mountain. There are two scenic spots at the cliff head, the stone gate and the clean bottle. The ship walks across the small island, and it is not possible to get close enough to see them in detail.

古文：又东南二十里，过龙门塘，江流浩然，南有山嵯峨骈立，其中峰最高处，透明如月挂峰头，南北相透。
现代文：离省城已有十里。又往东南行船二十里，经过龙门塘，江流浩浩荡荡，南面有山巍峨并立，此山中峰最高处有亮光透出，如同明月挂在峰头，南北相通。
English: It is already ten miles from the provincial capital. Another twenty miles to the southeast by boat, passing through Longmentang, the river is vast and turbulent. In the south, there are mountains standing side by side. At the highest point of this mountain peak, there is a bright light, like the bright moon hanging on the peak, and the north and south are connected.

古文：又东五里，则横山岩屼突江右。
现代文：又向东行五里，就见横山岩突兀在江右。
English: After another five miles to the east, I saw the rock of Hengshan jutting out on the right side of the river.

古文：渐转渐东北行，五里，则大墟在江右，后有山自东北迤逦来，中有水口，疑即大涧榕村之流南下至此者。
现代文：渐渐转向东北行，五里，就见大墟在江右，后面有山从东北方透选而来，市中有河口，怀疑就是大涧榕村的水流向南下流至此的河口。
English: Gradually turning to the northeast, after five miles, I saw a large market on the right side of the river. Behind it, there was a mountain coming from the northeast. There was an estuary in the city, and it was suspected that the water flow of Daju village flowed south to this estuary.

古文：于是南转又五里，江右复有削崖屏立。
现代文：于是转向南又行五里，江右又有削崖屏风样矗立。
English: So I turned south for another five miles, and on the right side of the river there was a cliff-like screen.

古文：共隔江为逗日井，亦数百家之市也。
现代文：那隔江之处是逗日井，也是有数百家人的集市。
English: Across the river, there is a bazaar with hundreds of families.

古文：又南五里，为碧崖，崖立江左，亦西向临江，下有庵。
现代文：又向南五里，是碧崖，石崖立在江左，也是向西面临江流，下边有寺庵。
English: Another five miles to the south, there is a green cliff, a stone cliff standing to the left of the river, also facing the river flow to the west, with a temple hermitage below.

古文：横山、碧崖二岩夹江右左立，其势相等，俱不若削崖之崇扩也。
现代文：横山、碧崖两座高峻的山崖，夹立在江流左右，它们的山势相等，都不如削崖那样高大。
English: Hengshan and Bijia are two high mountain cliffs, sandwiched around the river flow. Their mountain potential is equal, neither is as tall as the cliff.

古文：碧崖之南，隔江石峰排列而起，横障南天，上分危岫，几埒巫山，下突轰崖，数逾匡老。
现代文：碧崖的南边隔江处石峰排列而起，横向遮挡住南面的天空，上边分出险峰，几乎与巫山相等，下部突出崩裂的石崖，每每超过庐山。
English: On the south side of the cliff, the stone peaks line up at the estuary, blocking the sky to the south in a horizontal direction. The dangerous peak is separated from the upper side, almost equal to Wushan. The lower part of the protruding and cracked cliff exceeds Lushan.

古文：于是扼江而东，江流啮其北麓，怒涛翻壁，层岚倒影，赤壁、采矶，失其壮丽矣。
现代文：石峰在这里扼住江流往东延去，江流啃咬着它的北麓，怒涛翻卷上石壁，层层雾气倒映着山影，赤壁、采石矶与之相比都失去了壮丽。
English: Here, the stone peaks hold back the eastward flow of the river, the current gnaws at its northern foot, the raging waves roll over the stone walls, the layers of fog reflect the mountain shadows, and the red walls and quarried rocks have lost their grandeur in comparison.

古文：崖间一石纹，黑镂白章，俨若泛海大士，名曰沉香堂。
现代文：崖壁间有一条石纹，黑白花纹相间，俨然似飘洋过海的观音大士，名叫沉香堂。
English: There is a stone stripe between the cliff walls, with black and white patterns interspersed, resembling the ocean-crossing Guanyin Daishi, named Shen Xiangtang.

古文：其处南虽崇渊极致，而北岸犹豁，是为卖柴埠。
现代文：此处南面虽然极其高峻渊深，但北岸仍然平坦开阔，这里是卖柴埠。
English: Here, although the south side is extremely steep and deep, the north shore is still flat and open, here is the firewood port.

古文：共东五里，下寸金滩，转而南入山峡，江左右自是皆石峰藿珮，争奇炫诡，靡不出人意表矣。
现代文：共往东行五里，下了寸金滩，转向南驶入山峡间，江左右两岸从这里起都是突兀的石峰，争奇夸异，无不出人意外。
English: A total of five miles to the east, down the gold beach, turn south into the canyon, from here on both sides of the river are jagged stone peaks, competing with each other, all of which are unexpected.

古文：入峡，又下斗米滩，共南五里，为南田站。
现代文：进入峡中，又下了斗米滩，共向南五里，是南田站。
English: Entering the gorge, and then descending the Doume Beach, a total of five miles to the south, is Nantian Station.

古文：百家之聚，在江东岸，山至是转峡为坞，过南田，山色已暮，舟人夜棹不休。
现代文：是有百户人家的村落，在江东岸，位于临桂县、阳朔县的交界处。山到了这里峡谷变成了山坞，四面层层围住，仅能容纳此村。过了南田站，山色已晚，船夫夜间划船不止。
English: It is a village with a hundred households, on the east bank of the river, located at the junction of Lingui County and Yangshuo County. When the mountain got here, the canyon turned into a dock, surrounded on all sides, and could only accommodate this village. After Nantian Station, the mountain was too late, and the boatman rowed more and more at night.

古文：江为山所托，佹ǐ偶然东佹南，盘峡透崖，二十五里，至画山，月犹未起，而山色空濛，若隐若现。
现代文：江流被山体衬托，忽而往东忽而往南，绕着峡谷穿过山崖，行二十五里，来到画山，月亮还未升起，可山色空壕，若隐若现。
English: The river is set against the mountains, and it suddenly turns to the east and then to the south. It goes around the canyon and through the cliff, traveling twenty-five miles, and comes to the painting mountain. The moon has not yet risen, but it is a mountainous hollow, looming.

古文：又南五里，为兴平。
现代文：又向南五里，是兴平。
English: Another five miles to the south is Xingping.

古文：群峰至是东开一隙，数家缀江左，真山水中窟色也。
现代文：月亮也从东面的缝隙中露出来，船便停泊下来等待天明，因为有乘客打算一早起身赶到恭城去。
English: The moon also appeared from the crevice in the east, and the ship moored to wait for daylight, as some passengers planned to get up early in the morning to rush to the city of Chongqing.

古文：月亦从东隙中出，舟乃泊而候曙，以有客欲早起赴恭城耳。由此东行，有陆路通恭城。
现代文：漓江自桂林往南流来，两岸的山崖石壁森立，峰峦回绕，江中有许多小洲时分时合，没有翻卷江流的岩石和直泻的急流，所以船虽行走在弯弯曲曲的山石洞穴之间，不妨害夜里行船，但是月亮升起得太迟缓，在暗中行船，月明了却停下不走，心中未免怅怅不乐。
English: The Lijiang River flows southward from Guilin. The mountains and cliffs on both sides of the river are steep and rocky, and the peaks are winding around. There are many small islands in the river at different times of the day, and there are no rolling river rocks and rushing rapids. Therefore, although the boat walks between the curving rock caves, it is not harmful to sail at night, but the moon rises too slowly, and the boat sails in the dark. When the moon is bright, it stops and does not go, and the heart is not without joy.

古文：二十二日，鸡鸣，恭城客登陆去，即棹舟南行。
现代文：二十二日鸡鸣时，去恭城的乘客登陆离开了，马上划船往南行。
English: When the rooster crows on the 22nd, the passengers who went to Gongcheng disembarked and left, and immediately rowed south.

古文：晓月漾波，奇峰环棹，觉夜来幽奇之景，又翻出一段空明色相矣。
现代文：晓月荡漾在碧波之中，奇峰环绕着小船，觉得夜里幽奇的景色，又呈现出一片空旷明澈的景象来了。
English: The bright moon rippled in the green waves, the strange peaks surrounded the boat, I felt the strange scenery at night, and an empty and clear scene appeared.

古文：南三里，为螺蛳岩。
现代文：往南三里，是螺蜘岩。
English: Three miles to the south is Spirogyra.

古文：盖兴平水口也。
现代文：一座山峰盘旋而上，转峙在江右，大概是兴平的水口山。
English: A mountain peak spirals upward and turns to the right of the river, probably Xingping's Mount Mizukuchi.

古文：又七里，东南出水绿村，天犹未晓，乃掩篷就寐。
现代文：又行七里，从东南方经过水绿村，山体这才收敛了锋芒。
English: Another seven miles, from the southeast through the water-green village, the mountain body only then converged.

古文：二十里，古祚驿。
现代文：天还未发亮，我就掩下船篷上床睡觉。二十里，到古柞骚。
English: It was not yet dawn, so I pulled down the canopy and went to bed. Twenty miles later, I arrived in Guizhou.

古文：又南十里，则龙头山铮铮露骨，县之四围，攒作碧莲玉笋世界矣。
现代文：又向南十里犷就见龙头山露出铮铮石骨，县城的四周围，山峰攒聚成碧莲玉笋的世界了。
English: Another ten miles to the south, Longtou Mountain's limestone skeleton is exposed, and around the county seat, the peaks are gathered into a world of jasper and jade.

古文：阳朔县北自龙头山，南抵鉴山，二峰巍峙，当漓江上下流，中有掌平之地，乃东面濒江，以岸为城，而南北属于两山，西面叠垣为雉，而南北之属亦如之。
现代文：阳朔县北面起自龙头山，南边抵达鉴山，两座山峰巍峨雄峙，正在漓江的上、下游，当中有块手掌大的平地，却东面濒江，凭借江岸筑城，而南北两面连接着两座山，西面筑墙作为城墙，而且南北两面连接山的地方也如此。
English: Yangshuo County stretches from Longtou Mountain in the north to Jianshan Mountain in the south. The two peaks stand tall and erect, and are in the upper and lower reaches of the Li River. Among them, there is a flat land as large as a palm, but in the east, the city is built on the banks of the river, while the north and south sides are connected by two mountains, and the west side is built as a city wall, and the same is true for the place where the mountains are connected from north to south.

古文：西城之外，最近者为来仙洞山，而石人、牛洞、龙洞诸山森绕焉，通省大路从之，盖陆从西而水从东也。
现代文：城西之外，最近的地方是来仙洞山，而石人、牛洞、龙洞诸山森然环绕着，通往省城的大路经由那里，大概是陆路从西面走而水路从东边走。
English: Outside the west of the city, the closest place is the Laixentong Mountain, while the Shimen, Cattle Cave and Dragon Cave are surrounded by mountains. The road to the provincial capital passes through there, probably by land from the west and by water from the east.

古文：其东南门鉴山之下，则南趋平乐，水陆之路，俱统于此。
现代文：阳朔县城东南门的鉴山之下，是往南通向平乐府的路，水路陆路，全会聚于此。
English: Under the Jianshan Mountain of the Southeast Gate of Yangshuo County, there is a road leading south to Pinglefu, a waterway and a land route, and everyone gathers here.

古文：正南门路亦西北转通省道。
现代文：正南门的道路也是向西北转通到省城。
English: The road from Zhongnanmen is also connected to the northwest to the provincial capital.

古文：直南则为南斗山延寿殿，今从其旁建文昌阁焉，无径他达。
现代文：一直往南就是南斗山延寿殿，今夭在它旁边建起了文昌阁，没有路通到其他地方。
English: All the way to the south is Nandou Mountain Yanshou Hall. Today, Wenchang Pavilion has been built next to it, and there is no road to anywhere else.

古文：正北即阳溯山，层峰屏峙，东接龙头。
现代文：正北就是阳朔山，层层山峰似屏风样耸峙，东边接着龙头山。
English: Directly to the north is Yangshuo Mountain, with layers of peaks jutting out like a screen, followed by Longtou Mountain to the east.

古文：东西城俱属于南隅，北则以山为障，竟无城，亦无门焉。
现代文：•东西两面的城墙都连接到城南隅，北面就以山作为屏障，竟然没有城墙，也无城门。
English: • Both the east and west walls are connected to the southern corner of the city, and the north side uses the mountain as a barrier, but there is no wall and no gate.

古文：而东北一门在北极宫下，仅东通江水，北抵仪安祠与读书岩而已，然俱草塞，无人行也。
现代文：而东北的一道城门在北极宫下，仅往东通到江水，往北抵达仪安祠与读书岩而已，然而全被荒草堵塞了，无人行走。
English: However, a city gate in the northeast is under the Arctic Palace. It only leads to the river in the east and to the Jian'an Shrine and the Reading Rock in the north. However, they are all blocked by weeds, and no one can walk there.

古文：惟东临漓江，开三门以取水。
现代文：唯有在东边濒临漓江处，开了三道城门以便取水。
English: Only in the east, near the Li River, were three gates opened to let in water.

古文：从东南门外渡江而东，濒江之聚有白沙湾、佛力司诸处，颇有人烟云。
现代文：从东南门外渡江往东去，濒江的村落有白沙湾、佛力司各地，有很多人烟。
English: From the southeastern gate to the east, the villages along the river include Baisha Bay and Fo Li Si, and there are a lot of people.

古文：上午抵城，入正东门，即文庙前，从其西入县治，荒寂甚。
现代文：上午到达县城，进入正东门，就是文庙前，从文庙西边走入县衙，十分荒凉寂寥。
English: Arriving at the county seat in the morning, entering the east gate, that is, before the Temple of Literature, and walking from the west side of the Temple of Literature into the county seat, it was very desolate and lonely.

古文：县南半里，有桥曰 市桥双月 ，八景之一也。
现代文：县城南面半里，有座桥叫 市桥双月 ，是八景之一。
English: Half a mile south of the county seat, there is a bridge called City Bridge Double Moon, which is one of the eight scenic spots.

古文：桥之东，飞流注壑。
现代文：桥下的水流自西边龙洞岩流入城中，桥的东面，飞流注入壑谷中。
English: The water flow under the bridge flows into the city from the Longdong Rock on the west side, and the flying stream flows into the valley on the east side of the bridge.

古文：是为龙潭，入而不溢。
现代文：壑谷大四五丈，四面成丛的岩石盘结飞突，这是龙潭，水流进去却不见溢出。
English: Shibuya is four or five stories tall, with clumps of rock on all sides. This is Longtan, where water flows in but does not overflow.

古文：桥之南有峰巍然独耸，询之土人，名曰易山，盖即南借以为城者。
现代文：桥的南边有山峰岿然独耸，向本地人打听它，名叫易山，大概就是南面借以筑城的山。
English: On the south side of the bridge, there is a towering mountain peak. Ask the locals about it. It's called Mount Yi, and it's probably the mountain that the city was built on.

古文：其东麓为鉴山寺，亦八景之一。 鉴寺钟声。 寺南倚山临江，通道置门，是为东南门。
现代文：它的东麓是鉴山寺，也是八景之一。寺南面依山临江，通有道路，设置了城门，这就是东南门。
English: Its eastern foot is Jianshan Temple, which is also one of the eight scenic spots. The south side of the temple is bordered by mountains and rivers, with roads leading to it and a city gate. This is the Southeast Gate.

古文：山之西麓，为正南门。
现代文：山钓西麓，是正南门。
English: At the western foot of the mountain fishing, it is the south gate.

古文：其南崖之侧，间有罅如合掌，即土人所号为雌山者也。
现代文：山南面山崖的侧边，壁间有裂缝如像合起来的手掌，就是当地人号称为雌山的地方了。
English: On the southern side of the mountain, on the side of the cliff, there are cracks between the walls, like the palms of a hand clasped together. This is where the locals call it Meishan.

古文：从东南门外小磴，可至罅傍。
现代文：从东南门外的小石瞪，可走到裂缝旁。
English: From the small rocky outcrop outside the southeast gate, you can walk to the crack.

古文：余初登北麓，即觅道上跻，盖其山南东二面即就崖为城，惟北面在城，有微路级，久为莽棘所蔽。
现代文：我起初登上北麓，马上找路上登，原来此山南东两面便就着山崖筑城，唯有北面在城内，有小路石阶，长期被丛莽荆棘所遮蔽。
English: When I first climbed to the northern foot, I immediately looked for a path to climb. Originally, both sides of this mountain to the southeast were built on cliffs. Only the northern side was inside the city, with small paths and stone steps, long obscured by thorn bushes.

古文：乃攀条扪隙，久之，直造峭壁之下，莽径遂绝。
现代文：只好攀着枝条抓住石缝走，很久，径直到达峭壁之下，丛草杂生的小径便断了。
English: I had to cling to the branches and hold on to the stone crevices for a long time, until the path reached the bottom of the cliff, and the weedy path was broken.

古文：复从其旁蹑巉石，缘飞磴，盘旋半空，终不能达。
现代文：再从峭壁旁踩着高险的岩石，沿着飞空的石瞪，盘旋在半空中，始终不能到达。
English: Then from the cliff next to stepping on the high-risk rock, along the flying stone, hovering in mid-air, always can not be reached.

古文：乃下。已过午矣。
现代文：只好下山，已过了中午了。
English: We had to go down the mountain. It was past noon.

古文：时顾仆守囊于舟，期候于东南门外渡埠旁。
现代文：此时顾仆在船上守行李，约定在东南门外的渡口码头旁等候。
English: At this time, Gu Min attended to the luggage on the ship and agreed to wait by the ferry terminal outside the southeast gate.

古文：于是南经鉴山寺，出东南门，觅舟不得，得便粥就餐于市。
现代文：从这里往南经过鉴山寺，出了东南门，找不到船，在市场上买到些方便稀粥就餐。
English: From here, I went south through Jianshan Temple and out of the southeast gate. I couldn't find the boat, so I bought some convenient thin gruel at the market.

古文：询知渡江而东十里，有状元山，出西门二里，有龙洞岩，为此中名胜，此外更无古迹新奇著人耳目者矣。
现代文：问知渡江后往东走十里，有座状元山，出了西门走二里，有个龙洞岩，是这一带的名胜，此外再无古迹与新奇的景色能吸引人的耳目了。
English: After crossing the river, walk east for ten miles and you will find the seat of Wonsan, walk two miles out of the west gate and you will find Longdong Rock, which is a famous scenic spot in this area. In addition, there are no more ancient monuments and novel scenery that can attract people's eyes and ears.

古文：市桥双月，鉴寺钟声，龙洞仙泉，白沙渔火，碧莲波影，东岭朝霞，状元骑马，马山岚气。
现代文：急于找到船，便再次进城，登上鉴山寺。寺院靠山临江，在一片翠微之中，在城郭中能有此种景色，沈彬的诗所说的 碧莲峰里住人家 ，确实不假呀此时正午的太阳能熔化金属，便解开衣服站在窗前，遇到一位儒生把八景讲笋我听。
English: Anxious to find a boat, I entered the city again and boarded the Jianshan Temple. The temple is backed by the mountains and the river, in a verdant area, in the castle can have this kind of scenery, Shen Bin's poem said, "People live in the blue lotus peak," it is indeed true. At this time of the day, the solar energy melts metal, so I undid my clothes and stood in front of the window, and met a Confucian who told me about the eight views.

古文：复由二门觅舟，至文庙门，终不得舟。
现代文：再向北经过两道城门去找船，走到文庙门，始终找不到船。
English: He then went north through the two city gates to look for a boat, and when he reached the Temple Gate, he still couldn't find a boat.

古文：于是仍出东南门，渡江而东，一里至白沙湾，则舟人之家在焉。
现代文：于是仍出了东南门，渡江后往东走，二里路来到白抄，就是船夫的家在这里。
English: So he still went out of the southeast gate, crossed the river and went east, and came to Baisho two miles away, which is the boatman's home.

古文：而舟泊其南，乃入舟解衣避暑，濯足沽醪，竟不复搜奇而就宿焉。
现代文：但船停泊在他家南边，于是进船脱衣避，洗脚买酒，居然不再去埠寻奇景就上床睡下了。
English: But the boat was anchored south of his house, so he got into the boat, undressed, washed his feet, bought wine, and actually went to bed without going to the dock to look for wonders.

古文：白沙湾在城东南二里，民居颇盛，有河泊所在焉。
现代文：自沙湾在县城东南二里处，居民十分兴盛，有河泊所在这里。
English: Since Sha Wan is two miles southeast of the county seat, residents are very prosperous, and there is a river berth here.

古文：其南有三峰并列，江流南抵其下，曲而东北行，抱此一湾，沙土俱白，故以白沙名。
现代文：它南边有三座山峰并列，最东的一座山峰叫白鹤山。江流向南流抵山下，曲向东北流去，围抱着这一处水湾，沙土都是白色的，所以用白沙来起名。
English: On its southern side, there are three mountains side by side. The easternmost mountain is called White Crane Mountain. The river flows south to the foot of the mountain and curves to the northeast, encircling this bay. The sandy soil is white, so the name comes from the white sand.

