古文：赵存
现代文：赵存
English: Zhao Cun

古文：冯翊之东窟谷，有隐士赵存者，元和十四年，寿逾九十。
现代文：在冯翊的东窟谷，有个叫赵存的隐士，元和十四年时，已年过九十。
English: In Feng Yu's East Grotto Valley, there was a hermit named Zhao Cun. He was over 90 years old when he was 14 years old.

古文：服精术之药，体甚轻健。
现代文：服用黄精白术，身体特别轻捷矫健。
English: Taking Huang Jing Bai Shu, the body is particularly light and agile.

古文：自云：父讳君乘，亦享遐寿。
现代文：自称父亲名叫君乘，也是高寿，曾经事奉兖公陆象先。
English: He claimed that his father's name was Jun Rong, who was also a very old man, and that he had once served the emperor Lu Xiangxian.

古文：尝事兖公陆象先，言兖公之量，固非凡可以测度。
现代文：说兖公的度量，绝对不是寻常人可以推测度量的。
English: It is absolutely not possible for an ordinary person to estimate the measure of a cormorant.

古文：兖公崇信内典，弟景融窃非曰： 家兄溺此教，何利乎？ 
现代文：兖公尊崇信任佛经，他的弟弟景融曾私下责备道： 哥哥您沉湎于佛教，有什么益处呢？ 
English: His younger brother, Jing Rong, once privately scolded him: "Brother, you are immersed in Buddhism, what good is it?

古文：象先曰： 若果无冥道津梁，百岁之后，吾固当与汝等。
现代文：陆象先说： 如果真的没有通往冥府的桥梁，死了之后，我和你当然是相同的。
English: The land elephant said first: If there really is no bridge to the underworld, after death, you and I will certainly be the same.

古文：万一有罪福，吾则分数胜汝。 
现代文：万一有罪福之分，我就理所当然要超过你。 
English: In the unlikely event of a tie, I will, of course, outrank you.

古文：及为冯翊太守，参军等多名族子弟，以象先性仁厚，于是与府僚共约戏赌。
现代文：等到陆象先做了冯翊太守，手下的参军等人大多是贵族子弟，因为象先性情仁慈厚道，他们就和幕僚们共同约定打赌玩。
English: When Lu Xiang first made Feng Rong the empress dowager, most of the soldiers under his command were the sons of aristocrats. Because Lu Xiang had a kind and benevolent disposition, they made a bet with the staff members.

古文：一人曰： 我能旋笏于厅前，硬努眼眶，衡揖使君，唱喏而出，可乎？ 
现代文：有一人说： 我能在大厅前旋转笏板，瞪着眼睛，扬眉举目给使君做揖，叉手行礼，呼叫着出去，信不信？ 
English: One person said: "I can spin the cutting board in front of the hall, stare, raise my eyebrows, make a bow to the envoy, salute with my forked hand, and call out, believe it or not?

古文：众皆曰： 诚如是，甘输酒食一席。 
现代文：众人都说： 你真敢这么办，我们甘愿赔一桌酒席。 
English: Everyone said: How dare you do this, we are willing to lose a table.

古文：其人便为之，象先视之如不见。
现代文：那人便照着自己说的做了。陆象先如同没看见。
English: The man did as he was told. The elephant did not seem to notice.

古文：又一参军曰： 尔所为全易，吾能于使君厅前，墨涂其面，着碧衫子，作神舞一曲，慢趋而出。 
现代文：又一个参军说： 你所做的很容易。我能在使君的办公厅前，涂黑面孔，穿绿布衣服，扮作神跳舞，然后慢慢地走出去。 
English: Another said: "What you have done is very easy. I can blacken my face, dress in green cloth, dance like a god in front of the minister's office and then slowly walk out.

古文：群僚皆曰： 不可，诚敢如此，吾辈当敛俸钱五千，为所输之费。 
现代文：大家都说： 不能。你果然敢这样，我们聚集俸禄五千钱，作为赌注。 
English: Everyone said, "No, you can't. You've really dared to do this. We've pooled our salary of five thousand dollars as a bet.

古文：其二参军便为之，象先亦如不见。
现代文：第二个参军又照样做了，陆象先仍然像没看见。
English: The second man joined the army and did the same, but the elephant still did not seem to see him.

古文：皆赛所赌，以为戏笑。
现代文：大家都打赌比赛，作为玩笑。
English: Everyone bets on the game, as a joke.

古文：其第三参军又曰： 尔之所为绝易，吾能于使君厅前，作女人梳妆，学新嫁女拜舅姑四拜，则如之何？ 
现代文：第三个参军又说： 你们做的都太容易了，我能在使君办公厅前，学女人梳妆，学新嫁娘拜公婆四拜，又怎么样呢？ 
English: The third one, who joined the army, also said, "What you are doing is too easy. What if I learn how to dress up like a woman, and how to bow four times like a bride before her father-in-law in front of the minister's office?

古文：众曰： 如此不可，仁者一怒，必遭叱辱。
现代文：众人都说： 这样可不行，惹正派人生气，会遭到叱责辱骂的。
English: Everyone said: "This is unacceptable. If you make decent people angry, you will be scolded and insulted."

古文：倘敢为之，吾辈愿出俸钱十千，充所输之费。 
现代文：如果你敢这么做，我们甘愿拿出俸禄十千钱，充当输掉的费用。 
English: If you dare to do so, we are willing to offer up to ten thousand dollars in salary as a lost expense.

古文：其第三参军，遂施粉黛，高髻笄钗，女人衣，疾入，深拜四拜。
现代文：这第三个参军就施粉描眉，挽发髻插金钗，穿上女人服装，细步进入大厅，深拜四拜。
English: This third enlisted man powdered his eyebrows, braided his hair, put on women's clothing, walked into the hall, and bowed deeply.

古文：象先又不以为怪。
现代文：陆象先还是不以为怪。
English: It's no surprise that the land-based elephants are the first to go.

古文：景融大怒曰： 家兄为三辅刺史，今乃成天下笑具。 
现代文：景融生气地说： 哥哥身为三辅刺史，现在成了天下的笑具。 
English: Jing Rong said angrily, "My brother, who is a three-assistant chief historian, has now become the laughingstock of the world.

古文：象先徐语景融曰： 是渠参军儿等笑具，我岂为笑哉？ 
现代文：陆象先慢悠悠地对景融说： 是那些青年参军等于笑具，我怎么成了笑具呢？ 
English: Lu Xiang first slowly said to Jing Rong: Those young people joining the army are equal to a laughing stock, how did I become a laughing stock?

古文：初、房琯尝尉冯翊，象先下孔目官党芬，于广衢相遇，避马迟，琯拽芬下，决脊数十下。
现代文：当初，房琯曾做冯翊尉，陆象先手下的孔目官党芬，和他在大街上相遇，党芬没来得及回避，被房琯拽下马来，脊背上挨了几十板子。
English: At the beginning, Fang Yao used to be Feng Yu's lieutenant, Lu Xiang's subordinate Kong Mok's officer, Dafen, met him on the street. Dafen didn't have time to avoid him, he was dragged down by Fang Yao and received dozens of boards on his back.

古文：芬诉之，象先曰： 汝何处人？ 
现代文：党芬告诉陆象先，陆象先说： 你是哪里人？ 
English: Dangfen told Lu Xiangxian, and Lu Xiangxian said: Where are you from?

古文：芬曰： 冯翊人。 
现代文：党芬说： 冯翊人。 
English: The Finns Party said: Feng Xuanren.

古文：又问： 房琯何处官人？ 
现代文：又问： 房琯是哪里的官儿？ 
English: He also asked: Which government official is Fang Yao?

古文：芬曰： 冯翊尉。 
现代文：党芬答： 他是冯翊尉。 
English: The Finno-Finns reply: He is Lieutenant Feng Yu.

古文：象先曰： 冯翊尉决冯翊百姓，告我何也？ 
现代文：陆象先说： 冯翊尉打冯翊百姓，告诉我干什么呢？ 
English: Lu Xiang said first: "Feng Lijian is beating up Feng Lijian's people. Tell me, what are you doing?"

古文：琯又入见，诉其事，请去官。
现代文：房琯来见陆象先，也讲了那件事，请求解去官职。
English: When Fong Yao came to see Lu Xiang first, he also talked about the matter and asked to be relieved of his official duties.

古文：象先曰： 如党芬所犯，打亦得，不打亦得；官人打了，去亦得，不去亦得。 
现代文：陆像先说： 象党芬所犯的过错，打也使得，不打也使得；当官的打了，解去官职可以，不解去官职也可以。 
English: Lu first said, "Like the mistakes committed by the Party and the Finns, if you beat someone, you will also make it, and if you don't beat someone, you will also make it; if you beat an official, you can dismiss him, and if you don't dismiss him, you can also dismiss him."

古文：后数年，琯为弘农湖城令，移摄闵乡。
现代文：过了几年，房琯做了弘农湖城令，改为代管闵乡，赶上陆象先从长江以东调往京城，途中驻在闵乡。
English: A few years later, Fang Yao made the order of Hongnong Lake Town and changed it to the custody of Yao Xiang. When he caught up with Lu Xiang, he was first transferred from the east of the Yangtze River to Beijing, and stationed in Yao Xiang on the way.

古文：值象先自江东征入，次闵乡，日中遇琯，留迨至昏黑，琯不敢言。忽谓琯曰： 携衾绸来，可以霄话。 
现代文：一天中午遇到房琯，一直停留到昏黑，房琯没敢说话。陆象先不经意地对房琯说： 带衾被来，晚上好谈一谈。 
English: One day at noon, he met a female elephant and stayed there until it was dark. The female elephant didn't dare to speak. The male elephant casually said to the female elephant: "Bring me your roe and let's have a good talk in the evening."

古文：琯从之，竟不交一言。
现代文：房琯这么做了，竟然没说一句话。
English: Fusang did this without saying a word.

古文：到阙日，荐琯为监察御史。
现代文：到了京城的时候，陆象先推荐房琯当监察御史。
English: When he arrived in the capital, Lu Xiang first recommended Fang Yao to be the inspector general.

古文：景触又曰： 比年房琯在冯翊，兄全不知之。今别四五年，因途次会，不交一词。到阙荐为监察御史，何哉？ 
现代文：景融又问： 那些年房琯在冯翊，哥哥一点不知遇他，如今分别四五年，因旅途暂住而相遇，没谈一句话，到了京城却推荐他做监察御史，为什么呢？ 
English: Jing Rong also asked: In those years, Fang Ye was in Feng Ye, and his brother did not know him at all. Now, they have been separated for four or five years, and they met each other while traveling. They did not speak a word, but when they arrived in Beijing, they recommended him to be the inspector general of history. Why?

古文：公曰： 汝不自解。房琯为人，百事不欠，只欠不言。今则不言矣，是以为用之。 
现代文：陆象先说： 你不明白，房琯的为人，各种事都没什么缺欠，只是欠缺不说话，现在他不说话了，因此擢用他。 
English: Lu Xiang said first: "Don't you understand, Fang Yao is a person who lacks nothing in all kinds of things. He just lacks and doesn't speak. Now he doesn't speak, so use him."

古文：班行间大伏其量矣。严震
现代文：同僚们非常佩服陆象先的度量。严震严震镇守山南。
English: Colleagues are very impressed with the land elephant's measure. Severe earthquake Severe earthquake Zhengu Shannan.

古文：严震镇山南，有一人乞钱三百千，去就过傲。
现代文：有一个人向他讨要三百千钱。
English: A man asked him for three hundred thousand dollars.

古文：震召子公弼等问之，公弼曰： 此诚不可。
现代文：举止傲慢。严震叫来儿子公弼等人问怎样处理。公弼说： 这实在不行啊，总是这样，就败坏风俗了。
English: He behaved arrogantly. His son Gong Li and others were shocked and asked how to deal with it. Gong Li said: "This is really unacceptable, it's always like this, it's corrupting customs."

古文：旨辄如此，乃患风耳，大人不足应之。 
现代文：您不值得答应他。 严震生气地说： 你一定要毁掉我这门风。
English: You don't deserve to say yes to him, Yan Zhen said angrily, "You must destroy my talent."

古文：震怒曰： 尔必坠吾门，只可劝吾力行善事，奈可劝吾吝惜金帛？且此人不辨，向吾乞三百千，的非凡也。 
现代文：只能够劝我多做好事，怎么能够劝我吝惜金钱呢？况且此人不申辩理由，就向我要三百千钱，确实不一般。 
English: I can only be persuaded to do more good deeds, how can I be persuaded to be stingy with money? Moreover, this person does not argue the reasons, he asks me for three hundred thousand money, which is really unusual.

古文：命左右准数与之。
现代文：于是就命令手下人如数给他。
English: Then he ordered his men to give him the exact number.

古文：于是三川之士，归心恐后，亦无造次过求者。
现代文：因此三川有识之士，争先恐后归附严震，也没有轻易过分要求的。
English: Therefore, the sages of Mikawa, scrambling to join the earthquake, did not easily ask for too much.

古文：卢杞
现代文：卢杞
English: Lu Wei

古文：卢杞为相，令李揆入蕃。
现代文：卢杞做宰相时，让李揆到吐蕃去。
English: When Lu Wei was the prime minister, he asked Li Wei to go to Tuwei.

古文：揆对德宗曰： 臣不惮远，恐死于道路，不达君命。 
现代文：李揆对唐德宗说： 我不怕远，只怕死在道上，不能完成皇上的使命。 
English: Li Yan said to Tang Dezong: I am not afraid of the distance, I am only afraid of dying on the road and not being able to complete the emperor's mission.

古文：帝恻然悯之，谓卢曰： 李揆莫老无？ 
现代文：唐德宗动了恻隐之心很可怜他，对卢杞说： 李揆不老吗？ 
English: Tang Dezong felt pity for him and said to Lu Yao, "Isn't Li Yao old?

古文：杞曰： 和戎之使，且须谙练朝廷事，非揆不可。
现代文：卢杞说： 同少数民族结盟的使者，必须熟悉朝廷事务，非李揆不行。
English: Lu Wei said: Envoys who ally with ethnic minorities must be familiar with the affairs of the imperial court, and it is not possible without Li Wei.

古文：且使揆去，则君臣少于揆年者，不敢辞远使矣。 
现代文：况且派李揆去，那些比他年轻的大臣们，就不敢推辞到远处去的差使了。 
English: Moreover, those ministers who were younger than him did not dare to refuse an envoy sent to a faraway place.

古文：揆既至蕃，蕃长曰： 闻唐家有第一人李揆，公是否？ 
现代文：李揆到了吐蕃，蕃长说： 听说唐朝有个第一人李揆，您是不是？ 
English: When Li Rong arrived in Tubo, the governor said, "I heard that there was a first person Li Rong in the Tang Dynasty, is that true?

古文：揆曰： 非也，他那李揆，争肯到此？ 
现代文：李揆说： 不是，那个李揆，怎么肯到这里呢？ 
English: Li Yao said: No, that Li Yao, how did he get here?

古文：恐为拘留，以谩之也。
现代文：是害怕被拘禁扣留，因此欺骗蕃长。
English: He was afraid of being arrested and detained, so he deceived the magistrate.

古文：揆门地，第一，文学第一，官职第一。
现代文：论门第，李揆第一；论文学，李揆第一；论官职，李揆第一。
English: On the subject of education, Li Jie is the first; on literature, Li Jie is the first; on official duties, Li Jie is the first.

古文：揆致仕归东都，司徒杜佑罢淮海，入洛见之，言及第一之说。揆曰： 若道门户，门户有所自，承余裕也；官职遭遇耳。
现代文：李揆辞官回到东都洛阳。司徒杜佑罢官回淮海，到洛阳拜见李揆，说起 第一 的事，李揆说： 若说门第，门第都是有来源的，可以由前代继承下来；官职是一时的机遇罢了。
English: After returning to the eastern capital of Luoyang, the retired official Li Qiye said: "If you talk about the lineage, the lineage has a source, it can be inherited by the previous generation; the official position is just a temporary opportunity.

古文：今形骸凋悴，看即下世，一切为空，何第一之有？ 韦皋
现代文：我现在身体不好，眼看就要过世，一切都是空的，还有什么第一呢？ 韦皋
English: I'm not in good health now, I'm on the verge of death, everything is empty, what's the first thing?

古文：韦皋在西川，凡军士将吏有婚嫁，则以熟锦衣给其夫氏，以银泥衣给其女氏，各给钱一万。
现代文：韦皋在西川时，凡是军士将吏有嫁娶的，就赠给男方熟锦衣，赠给女方银泥衣，再各给一万钱。
English: When Wei Yan was in Xichuan, whenever a sergeant married a subordinate, he would give the man a well-worn brocade robe, the woman a silver cloth, and then give each of them ten thousand yuan.

古文：死丧称是，训练称是，内附者富赡之，远游者将迎之。
现代文：办丧事和训练兵士也采取这种办法。归附的，待遇优厚；远道而来的，将官出去迎接。
English: This method is also used for funerals and training soldiers. Those who return are treated well; those who come from far away are greeted by generals.

古文：极其赋敛，坐有余力，以故军府盛而黎甿重困。
现代文：极力地聚敛，坐在那里就获得丰足的财力，因此军府满仓而百姓困顿。
English: They collect as much as they can, sit there and get plenty of financial resources, so the military is full and the people are in trouble.

古文：及晚年为月进，终致刘辟之乱，天下讥之。
现代文：到了晚年是按月征税，终于导致刘辟作乱，被天下人讥笑。
English: In his later years, he was taxed on a monthly basis, which finally led Liu Bei to create turmoil and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：陆畅
现代文：陆畅
English: Lu Chang

古文：李白尝为《蜀道难》歌曰： 蜀道难，难于上青天。 
现代文：李白在《蜀道难》中写道： 蜀道艰险，胜过上青天。 
English: Li Bai wrote in "The Difficult Path of Shu": The difficult path of Shu is better than the blue sky.

古文：白以刺严武也。
现代文：李白借此讽刺严武。
English: Li Bai used this to satirize Yan Wu.

古文：后陆畅复为《蜀道易》曰： 蜀道易，易于履平地。 
现代文：后来陆畅写了《蜀道易》，说 蜀道易，胜过走平地。 
English: Later, Lu Chang wrote "Shu Dao Yi," saying that "Shu Dao Yi" is better than walking on flat ground.

古文：畅侫韦皋也。
现代文：陆畅借此谄媚韦皋。
English: Lu Chang took advantage of this to seduce Wei Wei.

古文：初畅受知于皋，乃为《蜀道易》献之。
现代文：当初陆畅受到韦皋的知遇，就写下《蜀道易》献给他。
English: When Lu Chang was first introduced to Wei Wei, he dedicated "Shu Daoyi" to him.

古文：皋大喜，赠罗八百匹。
现代文：韦皋非常高兴，赠给他八百匹罗锦。
English: Wei Yao was very happy and gave him 800 pieces of brocade.

古文：及韦薨，朝廷欲绳其既往之事，复阅先所进兵器，刻 定秦 二字。不相与者，因欲构成罪名。
现代文：等到韦皋死了，朝廷想追究陆畅以往的事，又查到他先前所进的兵器上面刻着 定秦 二字，那些与陆畅关系不好的，想因此给他定罪。
English: When Wei Zheng died, the imperial court wanted to investigate Lu Chang's past affairs, and found that the weapons he had previously used had the word "Jing Qin" engraved on them. Those who had a bad relationship with Lu Chang wanted to convict him.

古文：畅上疏理之云： 臣在蜀日，见造所进兵器， 定秦 者匠名也。 
现代文：陆畅上奏疏辩解说： 我在蜀地时，看到制造那些进献的兵器，知道 定秦 是个工匠的名字。 
English: When I was in Shunde, I saw the weapons that were made for the offering, and I knew that Dingqin was the name of a craftsman.

古文：由是得释。
现代文：陆畅因此获释。
English: As a result, Lu Chang was released.

古文：马畅
现代文：马畅
English: Ma Chang

古文：马燧之子畅，以第中大杏馈窦文场，以进德宗。
现代文：马燧的儿子马畅，把家里的大杏子赠给窦文场，而又进献给了唐德宗。
English: Ma Jun's son, Ma Chang, presented the family's large apricot to Dou Wenfang, and in turn presented it to Tang Dezong.

古文：德宗未尝见，颇怪之，令中使就封杏树。
现代文：唐德宗没见过这么大的杏子，感到很奇怪，就命令中使立刻查封杏树。
English: Tang Dezong had never seen such a big apricot and felt very strange, so he ordered the magistrate to immediately seal the apricot tree.

古文：畅惧进宅，废为奉诚园，屋木皆拆入内。
现代文：马畅害怕进入那宅院，就把宅子作废改成奉诚园。屋木都拆下来放入内院。
English: Ma Chang was afraid to enter the courtyard, so he turned the house into a memorial garden. The roofs were torn down and placed in the courtyard.

古文：吴凑
现代文：吴凑
English: Wu Qiping

古文：德宗非时召拜吴凑为京兆尹，便令赴上。
现代文：唐德宗破格下诏任命吴凑为京兆尹，命令他立即上任。
English: Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty issued an unprecedented edict, appointing Wu Qian as Jing Zhaoyun and ordering him to take office immediately.

古文：凑疾驱，诸客至府，已列筵矣。或问曰： 何速？ 
现代文：吴凑策马疾驰，与各宾客到达官府时，宴席已摆好。有人问： 怎么这么快？ 
English: When Wu and all the guests arrived at the government office, the banquet had already been set up. Some people asked: Why so fast?

古文：吏曰： 两市日有礼席，举铛釜而取之。故三五百人馔，常可立办。 
现代文：小吏答道： 两个市场每天都备有礼席，拿锅去取就行，所以三五百人的饭，常常可以立即办好。 
English: The petty official replied, "There are ceremonial seats prepared every day in the two markets. You only need to take a pan to get them, so the meal for three and a half hundred people can often be prepared immediately.

古文：袁傪
现代文：袁傪
English: Yuan Shao

古文：袁傪之破袁眺，擒其伪公卿数十人。
现代文：袁傪打败袁眺，捉到敌伪公卿几十人。
English: Yuan Shao defeated Yuan Zhan and caught dozens of enemy pseudo-nobles.

古文：州县大具桎梏，谓必生致阙下。傪曰： 此恶百姓，何足烦人？ 
现代文：州县衙门准备了大量脚镣手铐，说一定要把他们活着送到京城。袁傪说： 这些刁民，哪里值得麻烦人。 
English: The prefectural and county governments have prepared a large number of shackles and handcuffs, saying that they must be sent to the capital alive.Yuan Yu said: These shackled people, where is it worth troubling people.

古文：乃遣笞臀逐之。
现代文：就下令杖打屁股然后驱逐他们。
English: He ordered that they be caned and then expelled.

古文：李勉
现代文：李勉
English: Comrade Li Tsuen

古文：故相李勉任江西观察使时，部人有父病盅。乃为木偶人，置勉名位，瘗于其垄。
现代文：已故宰相李勉任江西观察使时，部队里有个人的父亲神志惑乱，这个人就做了一个木偶人，写上李勉的名字职位，埋到坟墓里，被人看见告诉了李勉。
English: When the late Prime Minister Li Qian was appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy, there was a father in the army who was bewitched. This man made a puppet, wrote down Li Qian's name and position, buried it in the grave, and was seen telling Li Qian.

古文：或发以告勉，勉曰： 为父禳灾，是亦可矜也，舍之。 或曰： 李勉失守梁城，亦宜贬黜。 
现代文：李勉说： 替父消灾，值得同情，放了他。 有人说： 李勉没有守住梁城，应贬官罢黜。 
English: Some people said: Li Mian did not defend Liangcheng, he should be demoted and dismissed.

古文：议曰： 不然，当李希烈之怙乱，其锋不可当，天方厚其罪而降之罚也。
现代文：议论说： 不应这样。李希烈作乱之际，势不可挡，上天正先增加他的罪而后再惩罚他。
English: The discussion said: This is not right. When Li Xili made the disturbance, the situation was unstoppable. Heaven was first increasing his sin and then punishing him.

古文：矧应变非长，援军不至，又其时，关辅已俶扰矣，人心摇动矣。
现代文：况且情况变化莫测，援兵不到，加上当时边关京畿已开始动乱，人心开如动摇。
English: Moreover, the situation was unpredictable, reinforcements were not available, and at that time, the border between Gyeonggi Province and Korea had already begun to be in turmoil. People's hearts were shaken.

古文：以文吏之才，当虎狼之隧，乃全师南奔，非量力者能乎？ 
现代文：用文官的才能，阻挡虎狼的行为，为保全军队向南开拔，不能正确估计自己力量的人能办到吗？ 
English: Can a person who cannot correctly estimate his own strength do it with the talent of a civil servant, block the behavior of tigers and wolves, and move south to preserve the army?

古文：于公异
现代文：于公异
English: Yu Gongyi

古文：李晟平朱泚之乱，德宗览收城露布曰： 臣已肃清宫禁，祗谒寝园。钟虡不移，庙貌如故。 
现代文：李晟平定朱泚作乱。唐德宗看到收复城池的捷报上写着：臣已经清除宫室之乱，恭敬地拜谒了陵园，那里钟虡未动，庙堂依旧。 
English: Li Qiye put down Zhu Xi's rebellion. When Tang Dezong saw the victorious report of the recapture of the city, it was written: "The vassal has cleared the palace of the rebellion and respectfully visited the cemetery, where the bell tower has not moved and the temple is still intact."

古文：上感涕失声，左右六宫皆呜咽。
现代文：皇上感动得失声流泪，大臣后妃们也都哭了。
English: The emperor was moved to tears, and the ministers and empresses also cried.

古文：露布乃于公异之辞也。
现代文：这封奏书是于公异写的。
English: This music book was written by Yu Gongye.

古文：议者以朝廷捷书露布，无如此者。
现代文：议论的人们认为，写给朝廷的报捷书，没有比得上这一份的。
English: Commentators believe that there is no other document written for the imperial court that is comparable to this one.

古文：公异后为陆贽所忌，诬以家行不谨，赐《孝经》一，故坎坷而终。
现代文：后来陆贽忌恨于公异，诬告他家风不严，皇帝就赐给他《孝经》一。于公异历经坎坷而逝。
English: Later, Lu Wei hated Yu Gongyi and falsely accused him of not having a strict family tradition, so the emperor gave him the "Book of Filial Piety." Yu Gongyi went through hardships and passed away.

古文：邢君牙
现代文：邢君牙
English: 君牙

古文：贞元初，邢君牙为陇右临洮节度，进士刘师老、许尧佐往谒焉。
现代文：贞元初年，邢君牙担任陇右临洮节度职务的时候，进士刘师老和许尧佐去拜见他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, when Zhai Junya held the post of Zhenyu Linyi Jiedu, Liu Shilao and Xu Xunza went to visit him.

古文：二客方坐，一人仪形甚异，头大足短，衣麻衣而入。
现代文：二位客人刚刚坐下，有一个仪表很奇特的人，头大脚小，穿着粗布衣服走了进来。
English: The two guests had just sat down when a strange-looking man with a large head and small feet, dressed in coarse cloth, walked in.

古文：都不待宾司引报，直入见君牙。拱手于额曰： 进士张汾不敢拜。 
现代文：也不等侍从人员进去通报，一直进去会见邢君牙，把手拱起放在额前说： 进士张汾不敢行大礼。 
English: He didn't even wait for the attendants to go in to inform him. He went all the way in to meet Zhang Junya, put his hand in front of his forehead and said, "Junior Zhang Junya doesn't dare to make a grand salute.

古文：君牙从戎多年，殊不以为怪，乃揖汾坐，曾不顾尧佐、师老。
现代文：邢君牙当了多年的军人，一点也不认为奇怪，就回了礼请张汾坐下，竟不理睬许尧佐和刘师老。
English: Hao Junya, who had been a soldier for many years, did not think it was strange at all, so he returned the courtesy and asked Zhang Ye to sit down, but he ignored Xu Yanzao and Liu Shilao.

古文：俄而有吏过桉，宴设司欠失钱物。
现代文：不一会儿有个官吏送来案，宴设司亏空丢失了钱和物。
English: Not long after, an official sent a case, and the banqueting department lost money and goods.

古文：君牙阅历簿书，有五十余千散落，为所由隐漏。
现代文：邢君牙查看帐册，有五十多千钱没有上帐，被经手的差役隐瞒脱漏了。
English: Zhai Junya checked the account book. There was more than fifty thousand yuan missing from the account, which was concealed and leaked by the police officers.

古文：君牙大怒，方令分折去处。汾乃拂衣而起曰： 且奉辞。 
现代文：君牙非常生气，正要派人去查清楚钱的去向，张汾就拍拍衣服站起来说： 暂且告辞了。 
English: Junya was very angry and was about to send someone to find out where the money had gone, when Zhang Ye patted his clothes, stood up and said, "I'm leaving for the time being."

古文：牙谢曰： 某适有公事，略须决遣，未有所失于君子，不知遽告辞何也？ 
现代文：邢君牙道歉说： 我恰好有点公事，需要略作处理，对你并没有失礼的地方，不知道你急忙地告辞是为什么呢？ 
English: Hao Junya apologized and said, "I just happened to have a little business and needed to take care of it. There is nothing disrespectful about you. I don't know why you left in a hurry.

古文：汾对曰： 汾在京之日，每闻京西有邢君牙上柱天，下柱地。
现代文：张汾回答说： 我在京城的时候，常常听说京西有个邢君牙是个顶天立地的人物。
English: Zhang Ye replied, "When I was in Beijing, I often heard that there was a man in the western part of Beijing who was a towering figure.

古文：今日于汾前，与设吏论牙三五十千钱。
现代文：今天在我的面前，和一个设吏谈论自己的三五十千钱，这种男人怎能符合这样的评价呢？ 
English: Today, in front of me, talking to an accountant about his thirty or fifty thousand dollars, how can such a man meet such an evaluation?

古文：此汉争中？ 君牙甚怪，便放设吏，与汾相亲。
现代文：邢君牙觉得很奇怪，就打发走设吏，和张汾亲近起来。
English: Yu Junya felt very strange, so he sent away the officials and got close to Zhang Ye.

古文：汾谓君牙曰： 某在京应举，每年常用二千贯文，皆出往还。
现代文：张汾对邢君牙说： 我在京城参加考试的时候，每年常常花用二千贯钱，都花在与别人的往来上。
English: Zhang Zhe said to Zhai Junya: When I took the exam in Beijing, I often spent two thousand yuan every year, all of which was spent on dealing with others.

古文：剑南韦二十三，徐州张十三，一日之内，客有数等，上至给舍，即须法味。中至补遗，即须煮鸡豚或生或鲙。 
现代文：剑南的韦二十三，徐州的张十三，一天的时间里，客人有好几等。上等的客人有给舍，就需要讲究味道；中等的客人有补遣，就需要炖上鸡肉和猪肉，还有的是生拌，有的是鱼块。 
English: In Jian'nan's Wei 23rd and Xuzhou's Zhang 13th, there are several kinds of guests in a day's time. If the upper-class guests have food, they need to pay attention to the taste; if the middle-class guests have supplies, they need to dip in chicken and pork, and some are raw mix, and some are fish pieces.

古文：既而指师老、尧佐云： 如举子此公之徒，远相访，君僎胡而已，何不如此耶。 
现代文：接着指着刘师老和许尧佐说： 像这一类参加考试的举子，从远方前来拜访，就像肮脏的胡人而已。你为什么不这么对待呢？ 
English: He then pointed at Liu Shilao and Xu Yanzao and said, "This kind of student who takes the exam and comes to visit from far away is just like a dirty dog. Why don't you treat him like one?

古文：尧佐矍然。
现代文：许尧佐很惊讶。
English: Ms. Xu was surprised.

古文：逡巡，二客告辞而退，君牙各赠五缣。
现代文：过了一会儿，两个客人告辞走了，邢君牙每个人赠给五匹细绢。
English: After a while, the two guests said goodbye and left, and each of them gave five fine horses to Zou Junya.

古文：张汾洒扫内厅安置，留连月余，赠五百缣。
现代文：对张汾却打扫干净内厅安排他住下，呆了一个多月，赠给五百匹细绢。
English: However, they cleaned the inner hall of Zhang Ye and arranged for him to live there. He stayed there for more than a month and was given five hundred fine horses.

古文：汾却至武功，尧佐方卧病在馆，汾都不相揖。
现代文：张汾回到武功，许尧佐病倒在馆舍的床上，张汾也不去看望。
English: Zhang Rong returned to martial arts, Xu Rongza fell ill on the bed of the guesthouse, Zhang Rong did not visit him.

古文：后二年及第，又不肯选，遂患腰脚疾。
现代文：后来过了两年考中了，又不愿意当候选官员，于是得了腰和脚的疾病。
English: Two years later, when I took the middle school entrance examination, I didn't want to be a candidate official, so I got a disease of the lower back and foot.

古文：武元衡镇西川，哀其龙钟，奏充安抚巡官，仍摄广都县令，一年而殂。
现代文：武元衡镇守西川的时候，可怜他年老行动不便，上奏朝廷让他担任安抚巡官，还兼任广都县县令，一年以后就死了。
English: When Wu Yuanheng was in charge of Xichuan, he pitied him for his old age and inconvenient movement, and petitioned the imperial court to let him serve as a pacifying inspector, and also served as the county magistrate of Guangdu County. He died a year later.

古文：张造
现代文：张造
English: Zhang Zuo

古文：贞元中，度支欲取两京道中槐树为薪，更栽小树。先下符牒华阴，华阴尉张造判牒曰： 召伯所憩，尚不翦除；先皇旧游，岂宜斩伐？ 
现代文：贞元年间。度支想砍掉两京沿途的槐树当烧柴，重新栽上小树，先写符牒给华阴尉，华阴尉张造批道： 召穆公休息的地方尚且不砍伐，先皇帝旧游之地，怎么能砍伐？ 
English: In the first year of the reign of Zhengyuan, Doushi wanted to cut down the eucalyptus trees along the road between the two capitals to use as firewood, and replanted the small trees. He first wrote a letter to Hua Yin, and Hua Yin wrote a letter to Zhang Zi: The place where Mu Gong was summoned to rest has not yet been cut down. How can the place where the emperor used to visit be cut down first?

古文：乃止。
现代文：就停止了砍树。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：吕元膺
现代文：吕元膺
English: Lyu Won-soo

古文：吕元膺为鄂岳团练，夜登城，女墙已锁。
现代文：吕元膺是鄂岳团练。一天夜里想要登城，但城墙上的矮墙已经上锁。
English: One night, Lv Yuanqi, a member of the E Mountain team, wanted to go to the city, but the low wall on the city wall was already locked.

古文：守者曰： 军法夜不可开。 
现代文：守门人说： 军法规定夜晚不能开门。 
English: The gatekeeper said: "The military law stipulates that the door cannot be opened at night.

古文：乃告之曰： 中丞自登。 
现代文：就告诉他说： 是中丞亲自登城。 
English: He told him, "It was Chujo himself who went to the city.

古文：守者又曰： 夜中不辨是非，中丞亦不可。 
现代文：守门人又说： 夜晚看不清是，还是不是，中丞也不能登城。 
English: The gatekeeper also said, "In the evening, you can't see clearly whether it's good or bad, and you can't go to the city."

古文：元膺乃归。
现代文：元膺就回去了。
English: Motohiro went back home.

古文：及明，擢为大职。
现代文：天明，元膺就提升守门人任重要职务。
English: At the break of dawn, Geng Yao promoted the gatekeeper to an important post.

古文：李章武
现代文：李章武
English: Li Zhangwu

古文：李章武学识好古，有名于时。
现代文：李章武博学多识喜好古文，在当时非常有名气。
English: Li Zhangwu was an erudite and knowledgeable person who liked ancient literature. He was very famous at that time.

古文：唐太和末，敕僧尼试经若干纸，不通者，勒还俗。
现代文：唐朝太和末年，皇上敕令和尚尼姑要考若干页经文，不能通过考试的，勒令还俗。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor ordered monks and nuns to examine several pages of scriptures. If they could not pass the examination, they were ordered to return to secular life.

古文：章武时为成都少尹，有山僧来谒云： 禅观有年，未尝念经，今被追试，前业弃矣，愿长者念之。 
现代文：李章武当时是成都少尹，有个山里的和尚来拜见他说： 我参禅多年，没念过经，现在被迫考试，前功将尽弃，希望您能帮帮我。 
English: At that time, Li Zhangwu was Shao Yin of Chengdu. A monk from the mountains came to visit him and said, "I have been practicing meditation for many years, but I have never studied the sutras. Now I am forced to take an exam, and I will give up all my previous achievements. I hope you can help me."

古文：章武赠诗曰： 南宗向许通方便，何处心中更有经？
现代文：李章武赠给他一首诗，写道： 南宗向许通方便，何处心中更有经？
English: Li Zhangwu presented him with a poem and wrote: Nan Zongxiang Xu Tong convenient, where in the heart is more scripture?

古文：好去苾蒭云水畔，何山松拍不青青？ 
现代文：好去苾蒭云水畔，何山松柏不青青？ 
English: It's good to go to the waterfront of Jinyun. How many mountains have pines and cypresses?

古文：主者免之。
现代文：主考者就免除了他的考试。
English: The examiner excused him from the exam.

古文：元稹
现代文：元稹
English: Yuanxuan

古文：元稹为御史，奉使东川，于襄城《题黄明府》诗，其序云： 昔年曾于解县饮酒，余恒为觥录事。尝于窦少府厅，有一人后至，频犯语今，连飞十数觥，不胜其困，逃席而去。
现代文：元稹做御史时，奉命出使东川。到襄城写下《题黄明府》一诗。诗序中说： 往年曾在解县喝酒，我常常担当觥录事一角儿，曾在窦少府客厅喝酒，有一个人后到，又频频触犯酒令，连着干了十几杯酒，结果不胜酒力，偷偷逃掉了。
English: When Yuan Zheng was the imperial historian, he was ordered to send Dongchuan to Yangcheng to write a poem entitled "On Huangmingfu." In the preface to the poem, he said: In previous years, I used to drink alcohol in Xie County. I often played the role of a drunkard. I used to drink alcohol in the living room of Dou Shaofu. One person came later and frequently violated the liquor law. He drank more than a dozen glasses of alcohol in a row. As a result, he was drunk and sneaked away.

古文：醒后问人，前虞卿黄丞也，此后绝不复如。
现代文：酒醒后我问别人，才知道他是以前的虞卿黄丞，以后再也不知他的消息。
English: After I sobered up, I asked someone, only to find out that he was the former Yuqing Huang Rong, and I never heard from him again.

古文：元和四年三月，奉使东川，十六日，至裒城。
现代文：元和四年三月我奉命出使东川，十六日，到达裒城。
English: In March of Yuan and four years ago, I was ordered to send an envoy to Dongchuan. On the 16th, I arrived in Handan.

古文：望驿有大池，楼榭甚盛。
现代文：远远望见驿站有个大池子，其间楼台亭榭林立。
English: In the distance, you can see a large pond at the station, with rows and rows of pavilions.

古文：逡巡，有黄明府见迎。
现代文：过了一会儿，有个黄县令出来迎接。
English: After a while, a Huang County magistrate came out to meet them.

古文：瞻其形容，仿佛以识，问其前衔，即曩日之逃席黄丞也。
现代文：我打量他的长相，似曾相识，就问他以前的官职，原来就是从前逃席的黄丞。
English: I took a look at his appearance and, as if I had met him before, I asked him about his previous official position. It turned out to be Huang Rong, who had previously absconded.

古文：说向事，黄生惘然而悟，因馈酒一尊，舣舟邀余同载。
现代文：说起以前的事，黄丞恍然大悟，就赠给我一坛酒，停船靠岸邀请我上船。
English: Speaking of the previous matter, Huang Zheng suddenly realized, gave me a jar of wine, and invited me to board the ship when it docked.

古文：余时在诸葛所征之路次，不胜感今怀古，遂作《赠黄明府》诗云：昔年曾痛饮。
现代文：我当时在诸葛出征的路途中住下，禁不住感今怀古。就写下一首诗赠给黄明府。诗是这样写的：昔年曾痛饮，黄令困飞觥。
English: At that time, I was living in Zhuge on my way to the front, and I couldn't help but feel nostalgic. So I wrote a poem to give to Huangmingfu. The poem was written like this: In the past, I used to drink a lot, and Huangling was exhausted.

古文：黄令困飞觥席上当时走，马前今日迎。
现代文：席上当时走，马前今日迎。
English: I left the table at that time, but I'm coming back today.

古文：依稀迷姓字，即渐识平生。
现代文：依稀迷姓字，即渐识平生。
English: If you are vaguely familiar with the family name, you will gradually know it.

古文：故友身皆远，他乡眼暂明。
现代文：故友身皆远，他乡眼暂明。
English: His friends are all far away, and his hometown is dimly visible.

古文：便邀联榻坐，兼共刺船行。
现代文：便邀联榻坐，兼共刺船行。
English: They were invited to share a bunk bed and go on a boat trip together.

古文：酒思临风乱，霜棱拂地平。
现代文：酒思临风乱，霜棱拂地平。
English: The wind whistles in the breeze, and the frost brushes the horizon.

古文：不堪深浅酌，还怆古今情。
现代文：不堪深浅酌，还怆古今情。
English: It is not suitable for light or heavy drinking, and has a taste for the past and present.

古文：逦迤七盘路，坡陁数丈城。
现代文：逦迤七盘路，坡陁数丈城。
English: It is a seven-lane road, and the slope is steep.

古文：花疑褒女笑，栈想武候征。
现代文：花疑褒女笑，栈想武候征。
English: Doubts are laughed off, and the inn wants to take up arms.

古文：一种埋幽石，老闲千载名。 
现代文：一种埋幽石，老闲千载名。 
English: A kind of buried stone, famous for thousands of years.

古文：于頔
现代文：于頔
English: Yu Zhen

古文：丞相牛僧孺应举时，知于頔奇俊，特诣襄阳求知。
现代文：丞相牛僧孺当年参加考试时，知道于頔奇很杰出，特地到襄阳拜谒求教。
English: When the chancellor Niu Xiangya took the exam that year, he knew that Yu Qiqi was very outstanding and went to Yangyang to ask him for advice.

古文：住数日，两见，以游客遇之，牛怒而去。
现代文：住了几天，两次见面，都把他当游客那样对待，牛僧孺生气地走了。
English: After staying for a few days and meeting him twice, they both treated him like a tourist, and he left angrily.

古文：去后，忽召客将问曰： 累日前有牛秀才发未。 
现代文：他走了以后，于頔叫来客将问道： 几天前来的那个牛秀才走没走？ 
English: After he left, the howling guests would ask: Did the cow genius who came a few days ago leave?

古文：曰： 已去。 
现代文：回答说： 已经走了。 
English: And he answered, He is gone.

古文： 何以赠之？ 
现代文： 赠给他什么？ 
English: Give him what?

古文：曰： 与钱五百。  受乎？ 
现代文： 给他五百钱。  接受了吗？ 
English: Give him five hundred dollars.

古文：曰： 掷于庭而去。 
现代文： 扔到院子里走了。 
English: He threw it into the yard and walked away.

古文：于大恨，谓宾佐曰： 某事繁，总盖有阙遗者。 
现代文：于頔非常遗憾，对宾佐说： 我的事太多了，总会有漏洞。 
English: Yu Yao was very sorry and said to Binzo: I have too many things to do, there will always be loopholes.

古文：立命小将，赍绢五百匹，书一函，追之。曰： 未出界，即领来；如已出界，即以书付。 
现代文：立即命令小将，送五百匹绢绸，书信一封，追赶牛僧孺，并嘱咐小将： 他没出界，就接回来，如已出界，就把信给他。 
English: He immediately ordered the young general to send five hundred yakitori horses and a letter to chase down the bull monk. He also instructed the young general: If he has not left the country, bring him back. If he has already left the country, give him the letter.

古文：小将界外追及，牛不折书，揖回。
现代文：小将到界外追上牛僧孺，牛僧孺并不看信，只是拱拱手走了。
English: The youngster went out of bounds to catch up with the bull monk. The bull monk did not read the letter, but just walked away.

古文：薛尚衍
现代文：薛尚衍
English: Xue Shangyan

