古文：蒋子文者，广陵人也。
现代文：蒋子文，是广陵郡人。
English: Jiang Ziwen is from Guangling County.

古文：嗜酒，好色，挑挞无度。常自谓： 己骨清，死当为神。 
现代文：他喜欢喝酒，爱好女色，轻薄放荡，不拘礼法，常常说自己的骨相清高，死了会成仙。
English: He likes to drink, loves women, is frivolous and debauched, does not care about etiquette, and often says that his bones are clear and high, and he will become immortal when he dies.

古文：汉末，为秣陵尉，逐贼至钟山下，贼击伤额，因解绶缚之，有顷遂死。
现代文：汉朝末年他当了秣陵县县尉，有一次追击强盗来到钟山脚下，强盗打伤了他的前额，他就解下印绶缚住伤口，过了一会儿就死了。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, he became a lieutenant of Fuling County. One day, he led his men to chase a thief to the foot of Zhongshan Mountain. After being wounded in the forehead by the thief, he untied his umbilical cord for emergency bandaging. A moment later, he died.

古文：及吴先主之初，其故吏见文于道，乘白马，执白羽，侍从如平生。
现代文：到孙权刚建立吴国的时候，他生前的同僚在路上碰见了蒋子文，看见他骑着白马，拿着白色羽扇，随从也象他活着的时候那样。
English: When Sun Quan had just founded the State of Wu, his former colleagues met Jiang Ziwen on the road and saw him riding a white horse, holding a white feather fan, and following him as he did when he was alive.

古文：见者惊走。
现代文：他同僚看见后大吃一惊，转身就逃。
English: His colleague was startled by the sight, turned and fled.

古文：文追之，谓曰： 我当为此土地神，以福尔下民。尔可宣告百姓，为我立祠。
现代文：蒋子文紧追不放，对他说： 我就要做这里的土地神，来为你管辖下的百姓造福，你可以告诉百姓，让他们为我建立祠庙。
English: Jiang Ziwen kept chasing him and said to him: I will be the god of the land here to benefit the people under your jurisdiction. You can tell the people to build a temple for me.

古文：不尔，将有大咎。 
现代文：否则，他们就会有严重的灾难。 
English: Otherwise, they will have a serious disaster.

古文：是岁夏，大疫，百姓窃相恐动，颇有窃祠之者矣。
现代文：这年夏天，瘟疫大流行，老百姓都暗自惊惧，有很多人偷偷地祭他。
English: In the summer of that year, when the plague was rampant, the people were secretly terrified, and many secretly worshipped him.

古文：文又下巫祝： 吾将大启佑孙氏，宜为我立祠；不尔，将使虫入人耳为灾。 
现代文：蒋子文又传言巫祝： 我将大大地保佑孙权，所以应该为我建立祠庙。不这样的话，我将让虫子钻进人的耳朵里捣蛋。 
English: Jiang Ziwen also spread the rumor: I will greatly bless Sun Quan, so I should build a temple for me. Otherwise, I will let worms get into people's ears.

古文：俄而小虫如尘虻，入耳，皆死，医不能治。
现代文：不多久，就有象飞蚁那样的小虫，一钻进人的耳朵里人就死，医生也没法治。
English: Before long, there were small insects like flying ants, and if one got into a person's ear, the person would die. Doctors did not have the rule of law.

古文：百姓愈恐。
现代文：老百姓更加恐慌了。
English: The people panicked even more.

古文：孙主未之信也。
现代文：孙权仍然没有相信他。
English: Sun Quan still didn't believe him.

古文：又下巫祝： 吾不祀我，将又以大火为灾。 
现代文：他又传言巫祝说： 如果不祭我，我又要用大火让你们遭殃了。 
English: He also told the sorcerer: "If you don't sacrifice me, I'll burn you with fire."

古文：是岁，火灾大发，一日数十处。火及公宫。议者以为鬼有所归，乃不为厉，宜有以抚之。于是使使者封子文为中都侯，次弟子绪为长水校尉，皆加印绶。为立庙堂。转号钟山为蒋山，今建康东北蒋山是也。
现代文：这一年，火灾严重，一天就有几十个地方被烧掉，火势还蔓延到王官，朝中议事的人认为鬼有了归宿的地方，就不会再制造灾难了，所以应该采取一些措施安抚他，于是孙权便派了使者去封蒋子文为中都侯，封他的弟弟蒋子绪为长水校尉，都加赠印绶，并给他们建立庙宇，把钟山改称为蒋山，现在建康东北的蒋山就是这山。
English: This year, the fire was serious, dozens of places were burned down in a day, and the fire also spread to the royal officials. The negotiators in the middle of the court thought that the ghost had a place to return to, and would not cause any more disasters, so some measures should be taken to appease him. So Sun Quan sent an envoy to appoint Jiang Ziwen as the central governor, and his brother Jiang Zixu as the Changshui lieutenant, and gave them the seal, and built a temple for them, and renamed Zhongshan as Jiangshan. Now Jiangshan in the northeast of Jiankang is this mountain.

古文：自是灾厉止息，百姓遂大事之。
现代文：打这以后，灾难消失了，老百姓于是就隆重地供奉祭祀他。
English: Since then, the disaster has naturally subsided, and the people have made a lot of sacrifices.

古文：刘赤父者，梦蒋侯召为主簿。
现代文：有一个叫刘赤父的人，梦见蒋子文召他当主簿。
English: A man named Liu Chiefu had a dream that Jiang Ziwen called him to be his master.

古文：期日促，乃往庙陈请： 母老，子弱，情事过切。乞蒙放恕。
现代文：约定他上任的日子十分紧迫，于是他就到蒋山庙里向蒋子文倾诉自己的困难，他向蒋子文请求道： 我母亲年迈，儿子幼弱，情况实在很窘迫，求您多多宽恕。
English: The date of his appointment was very urgent, so he went to the Jiangshan Temple to confide his difficulties to Jiang Ziwen. He asked Jiang Ziwen: My mother is old, my son is young and weak, the situation is really distressing, please forgive me.

古文：会稽魏过，多材艺，善事神，请举过自代。 
现代文：会稽郡的魏过，多才多艺，善于供奉神仙，我请求您提拔魏过来替代我。 
English: I request you to promote Wei from the county auditor's office to replace me. He is versatile and adept at offering sacrifices to the gods.

古文：因叩头流血。
现代文：接着他便拼命磕头，把头都磕破了。
English: Then he hit his head so hard he cracked it.

古文：庙祝曰： 特愿相屈，魏过何人，而有斯举？ 
现代文：庙里的巫祝说： 蒋侯特地想委屈你就职。魏过是什么人，却有这种推举？ 
English: The sorcerer in the temple said, "Chiang Hout specifically wanted to wrong you for the post. Who is Wei Guo, but has this kind of nomination?

古文：赤父固请，终不许，寻而赤父死焉。
现代文：刘赤父坚决地请求他照顾，但他始终不同意。不久，刘赤父就死了。
English: Liu Chifu resolutely asked him to take care of him, but he always disagreed. Soon, Liu Chifu died.

古文：咸宁中，太常卿韩伯子某，会稽内史王蕴子某，光禄大夫刘耽子某，同游蒋山庙。庙有数妇人像，甚端正。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁期间，太常卿韩伯的儿子某、会稽内史王蕴的儿子某、光禄大夫刘耽的儿子某，一起游览蒋山庙，庙中有儿个妇女的神像，容貌很端正。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a certain Han Bo, the son of the Tai Changqing, a certain Wang Yun, the son of the Inner Historian of the Jin Dynasty, and a certain Liu Tan, the son of the Guanglu Doctor, visited the Jiangshan Temple together. In the temple, there was a statue of a female deity with a very neat appearance.

古文：某等醉，各指像以戏，自相配匹。
现代文：这三个人喝醉了，各人都指着这些妇女的神像开起玩笑来，任意挑了个和自己配夫妻。
English: The three of them were drunk, and each of them joked about the female deities, choosing his or her partner at random.

古文：即以其夕，三人同梦蒋侯遣传教相闻，曰： 家子女并丑陋，而猥垂荣顾。 
现代文：就在那天晚上，三个人一同梦见蒋侯派人传言说： 我家的闺女都生得很丑，你们却不顾屈辱前来光顾。
English: That very night, the three of them dreamed together that Jiang Hou had sent a messenger to say, "All the girls in my family were born very ugly, but you came to patronize them regardless of the humiliation.

古文：辄刻某日： 悉相奉迎。 
现代文：我就定好某某天，把你们都接了来吧。 
English: I'll set up a day and pick you all up.

古文：某等以其梦指适异常，试往相问，而果各得此梦，符协如一。
现代文：这三个人因为那梦不同平常，所以试探着互相问问，果然各人都做了这个梦，梦见的事一模一样。
English: Well, you immediately set a date, I will send them to you. All three felt that this dream was very strange and abnormal, and when they asked each other, they all had such a dream, and it was exactly the same.

古文：于是大惧。备三牲，诣庙谢罪乞哀。
现代文：于是他们十分恐惧，准备了牛、羊、猪等祭品，到蒋山庙谢罪，乞求蒋侯哀怜。
English: As a result, they were very afraid, prepared sacrifices such as cattle, sheep, and pigs, and went to the Jiangshan Temple to apologize and beg Jiang Hou for mercy.

古文：又俱梦蒋侯亲来降已曰： 君等既已顾之，实贪，会对克期垂及，岂容方更中悔？ 
现代文：接着他们又都梦见蒋侯亲自来对他们说： 你们既然已经眷念我的女儿，我实在想让你们成为夫妻。约定的日期已快到了，哪能中途变卦呢？ 
English: Then they all dreamt that Chiang Kai-shek himself came to them and said, "Since you have already missed my daughter, I really want you to become husband and wife. The agreed date is approaching, how can you change your mind in the middle of it?"

古文：经少时并亡。
现代文：过了不久，这三个人都死了。
English: A short time later, all three were dead.

古文：会稽鄮县东野有女子，姓吴，字望子，年十六，姿容可爱。
现代文：会稽郡县东边的乡村里有个女子，姓吴，字望子，年龄十六岁，体态容貌主得十分可爱。
English: There is a woman in the village on the east side of Huiqi County. Her surname is Wu, her nickname is Wang Zi, she is 16 years old, and her body and face are very lovely.

古文：其乡里有解鼓舞神者，要之，便往。
现代文：有一次，她乡里有个祈神还愿的人邀请她，她就去了。
English: Once, someone in her village who prayed to God and made a wish invited her, and she went.

古文：缘塘行，半路，忽见一贵人，端正非常。
现代文：她沿着河堤走到半路，忽然看见一个贵族老爷，生得非常端正。
English: Halfway along the embankment, she suddenly saw a nobleman, born very neatly.

古文：贵人乘船，挺力十余，整顿令人问望子 欲何之？ 具以事对。
现代文：这老爷坐在船上，服侍他的小吏有十多个，都穿戴得十分整齐。这老爷派人来问望子想到什么地方，望子把事情都告诉了他。
English: The old man was sitting on the boat, and there were more than ten servants serving him, all dressed very neatly. The old man sent someone to ask him what he was thinking about, and he told him everything.

古文：贵人云： 今正欲往彼，便可入船共去。 
现代文：老爷说： 我现在正要到他那里去，你可以到船上来咱们一起去。 
English: The old man said, "I am on my way to him now, you can come on the boat with me."

古文：望子辞不敢。忽然不见。
现代文：望子推辞说不敢，那船却忽然不见了。
English: He did not dare to refuse, but the ship suddenly disappeared.

古文：望子既拜神座，见向船中贵人，俨然端坐，即蒋侯像也。
现代文：望子拜过神座，只见刚才那船里的老爷，庄重端正地坐在那里，原来就是蒋侯的神橡。
English: He bowed before the throne of God, only to see the lord in the boat just now, sitting there solemnly and uprightly. It turned out to be the sacred oak of Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：问望子 来何迟？ 因掷两橘与之。
现代文：他问望子为什么来得这么晚，一边说着一边还扔下两只橘子送给她。
English: He asked her why she had come so late, throwing down two oranges as he spoke.

古文：数数形见，遂隆情好。
现代文：后来蒋子文屡次现出原形见她，两人的感情便渐渐深厚了。
English: He gazed at the very attractive son of hope, and then, feeling affectionate and desirous, he came down from the throne.

古文：心有所欲，辄空中下之。
现代文：望子心里想要什么东西，那东西总会从空中掉下来。
English: If she wants something in her heart, that thing will always fall from the sky.

古文：尝思噉鲤一双，鲜鲤随心而至。
现代文：望子曾经想吃鲤鱼，一对新鲜鲤鱼便如愿而来。
English: Once, when she wanted to eat eel, a pair of fresh eels came to her.

古文：望子芳香，流闻数里，颇有神验。一邑共事奉。经三年，望子忽生外意，神便绝往来。
现代文：望子的好名声，流传到几里以外，非常有灵验，因此全县的人都供奉她，过了三年，望子忽然见异思迁了，蒋子文的神灵就和她断绝了往来。
English: Mochi's good reputation, spread to several miles away, was very effective, so people from all over the county worshiped her. After three years, Mochi suddenly had a change of heart, and the spirit of Jiang Ziwen cut off contact with her.

古文：陈郡谢玉，为琅邪内史，在京城，所在虎暴，杀人甚众。
现代文：陈郡人谢玉任琅邪郡内史，有一次他逗留在京城。那地方老虎横行，吃了很多人。
English: Chen County resident Xie Yuling told the county's internal history that he once stayed in Beijing, where tigers were rampant and ate many people.

古文：有一人，以小船载年少妇，以大刀插着船，挟暮来至逻所，将出语云： 此间顷来甚多草秽，君载细小，作此轻行，大为不易。
现代文：有一个人，用小船装着年轻的妻子，把大刀插在船上，黄昏时候来到巡逻哨所。巡逻的将官出来告诉他说： 这里近来荒草很多，您带着家眷，作这样轻率的旅行，实在太危险了。
English: One man, with his young wife in a skiff and a broadsword in the boat, came to the patrol post at dusk, and the general of the patrol came out and said to him: There has been a lot of weeds here lately, and it is too dangerous for you and your family to make such a rash trip.

古文：可止逻宿也。 
现代文：你可以在巡逻哨所过夜。 
English: You can spend the night at the patrol post.

古文：相问讯既毕，逻将适还去。
现代文：他们互相通问行礼后，巡逻的将官就回去了。
English: After asking each other questions and saluting, the general on patrol left.

古文：其妇上岸，便为虎将去；其夫拔刀大唤，欲逐之。
现代文：他妻子刚上岸，便被老虎衔走了。她丈夫拔刀大喊，想追上去。
English: His wife had just come ashore when she was dragged away by the tiger, and her husband drew his knife and shouted that he wanted to chase it.

古文：先奉事蒋侯，乃唤求助。如此当行十里，忽如有一黑衣为之导，其人随之，当复二十里，见大树，既至一穴，虎子闻行声，谓其母至，皆走出，其人即其所杀之。便拔刀隐树侧，住良久，虎方至，便下妇着地，倒牵入穴。
现代文：再向前走，一会儿便来到一个洞穴口，洞穴里的小老虎听见脚步声，以为是它们的母老虎回来了，就都跑了出来。那人便走上去把它们杀了，接着又拔刀隐蔽在树旁。呆了好长一段时间，那母老虎才到，便把那女人扔在地上，倒拖着拉迸洞中。
English: Further on he came to the mouth of a cave. The little tigers in the cave heard footsteps and thought it was their tigress returning, so they all ran out. The man went up and killed them, then drew his knife and hid by a tree. He stayed there for a long time, and when the tigress arrived, she threw the woman to the ground and dragged her upside down into the hole.

古文：其人以刀当腰斫断之。
现代文：那人用刀把老虎拦腰砍断了。
English: The man used a knife to cut off the tiger's waist.

古文：虎既死，其妇故活。向晓，能语。
现代文：老虎已经死了，他的妻子才活了下来，到拂晓的时候就能讲话了。
English: The tiger was dead, but his wife survived and was able to speak by dawn.

古文：问之，云： 虎初取，便负着背上，临至而后下之。
现代文：他问妻子，妻子回答说： 老虎刚抓住我，便把我背在背上。等到了这儿才又把我放下来。
English: He asked his wife, and she replied, "The tiger just grabbed me and put me on his back, and waited until I was here to put me down again."

古文：四体无他，止为草木伤耳。 
现代文：我的手、脚没什么其它的伤害，只是被草木刮伤了一点罢了。 
English: I didn't have any other injuries on my hands or feet, just some scratches from the grass.

古文：扶归还船，明夜，梦一人语之曰： 蒋侯使助汝，知否？ 
现代文：那人就扶着妻子回到船上。第二天晚上，他梦见一个人对他说： 蒋侯派我帮助你，你知道不知道？ 
English: The next night, he dreamed that a man said to him: "Chiang Hou sent me to help you, do you know?

古文：至家，杀猪祠焉。
现代文：他回到家里，就杀了猪来祭祀蒋子文。
English: When he got home, he slaughtered a pig to sacrifice to Jiang Ziwen.

古文：淮南全椒县有丁新妇者，本丹阳丁氏女，年十六，适全椒谢家。
现代文：淮南郡全椒县有个姓丁的媳妇，本是丹阳县丁家的女儿，十六岁时，嫁给了全椒县谢家。
English: There is a daughter-in-law surnamed Ding in Quanzhe County, Huainan County. Originally, she was the daughter of the Ding family in Danyang County. At the age of 16, she married into the Xie family in Quanzhe County.

古文：其姑严酷，使役有程，不如限者，仍便笞捶不可堪。
现代文：她的婆婆严厉冷酷，让她干活都有定额，不如期完成，就任意鞭打。
English: Her mother-in-law was strict and cold-hearted. She made her work have a quota, and if she didn't complete it on time, she would whip her at will.

古文：九月九日，乃自经死。遂有灵向，闻于民间。
现代文：丁氏不能忍受这样的折磨，就在九月九日上吊自杀了，于是便有种种神灵的应验在民间流传。
English: Unable to bear such torture, Mr. Ding hanged himself on September 9th, and as a result, the fulfillment of various deities has been circulated among the people.

古文：发言于巫祝曰： 念人家妇女，作息不倦，使避九月九日，勿用作事。 
现代文：听说有一次，她借巫祝之口发话说： 我惦念别人家的媳妇，整天劳动，从不休息，所以请让她们避开九月九日这一天，不要再干活。 
English: I heard that she once said through the mouth of Wuzhu: "I miss other people's daughters-in-law, who work all day and never rest, so please let them avoid September 9th and stop working."

古文：见形，着缥衣，戴青盖，从一婢，至牛渚津，求渡。
现代文：听说还有一次，丁氏现出了原形，穿着淡青色的衣服，撑着青黑色的伞，身后跟着一个婢女，到牛渚津求船家摆渡。
English: It is said that another time, Mr. Ding appeared in his original form, wearing light blue clothes, holding a blue-black umbrella, followed by a maid, and went to Ushiazhuangjin to ask a boatman for a ferry.

古文：有两男子，共乘船捕鱼，仍呼求载。
现代文：有两个男人，在同一条船上捕鱼，她就招呼他们，求他们把她渡过河去。
English: Two men were fishing in the same boat, and she called out to them, begging them to take her across the river.

古文：两男子笑共调弄之。言： 听我为妇，当相渡也。 
现代文：这两个男人嘻笑着，一起调戏她，说： 你如果顺从我们做我们的老婆，我们就把你渡过去。 
English: The two men giggled and teased her together, saying: "If you obey us and become our wife, we'll get you across."

古文：丁妪曰： 谓汝是佳人，而无所知。
现代文：丁氏说： 我以为你们是好人，你们却什么道理都不懂。
English: Mr Ding said: "I thought you were good people, but you don't understand anything.

古文：汝是人，当使汝入泥死；是鬼，使汝入水。 
现代文：你们如果是人，应该让你们陷进污泥而死。你们如果是鬼，就让你们葬身水中。 
English: If you are human, you should be allowed to sink into the mud and die; if you are a ghost, you should be buried in the water.

古文：便却入草中。
现代文：说完就退到草丛中去了。
English: Terrified, the two men scurried into the grass.

古文：须臾，有一老翁，乘船，载苇。妪从索渡。
现代文：一会儿，有一个老人划船装运芦苇，丁氏向他求渡。
English: After a while, there was an old man rowing a boat to transport reeds, and Mr. Ding asked him to cross.

古文：翁曰： 船上无装，岂可露渡？
现代文：老人说： 船上没有船篷，哪能让您露天渡过河去呢？
English: The old man said, "There is no canopy on the boat, so how can you cross the river in the open?"

古文：恐不中载耳。 
现代文：我这敞篷船恐怕不适合您乘坐吧。 
English: I'm afraid I can't give you a lift.

古文：妪言无苦。翁因出苇半许，安处不着船中，徐渡之。
现代文：丁氏说不怕受苦，老人就把芦苇卸去了一半左右，把她们安顿在船中，一直把她们渡到南岸。
English: Mr. Ding said he was not afraid of suffering, so the old man unloaded about half of the reeds, placed them in the boat, and sailed them all the way to the south shore.

古文：至南岸，临去，语翁曰： 吾是鬼神，非人也。
现代文：丁氏临别时对老人说： 我是鬼神，不是凡人，我自己也能过河的。
English: At the time of parting, Mr. Ding said to the old man: I am a ghost, not a mortal, I can cross the river by myself.

古文：自能得过，然宜使民间粗相闻知。
现代文：我这样做，是想让民间百姓都对我有所了解。
English: I'm doing this so that the general public can get to know me.

古文：翁之厚意，出苇相渡，深有惭感，当有以相谢者。若翁速还去，必有所见，亦当有所得也。 
现代文：您一番厚意，竟卸去芦苇来渡我过河，我真不好意思，我当然要拿些东西来感谢您，如果您马上回去，必然有所见，也会有所得。 
English: I'm really sorry that you were so kind as to unload the reeds to get me across the river. Of course, I want to take something to thank you for. If you go back right away, you will surely see something and gain something.

古文：翁曰： 恐燥湿不至，何敢蒙谢。 
现代文：老人说： 恐怕对您的冷暖都没照顾好，哪敢接受您的感谢！ 
English: The old man said, "I'm afraid I didn't take good care of your heating and cooling, how dare I accept your thanks!"

古文：翁还西岸，见两男子覆水中。
现代文：老人回到西岸，看见两具男尸伏在水上。
English: The elderly man returned to the west bank and saw two male bodies lying face down in the water.

古文：进前数里，有鱼千数，跳跃水边，风吹至岸上。
现代文：再向前行了几里，便有近千条鱼在水边乱跳，风把它们都吹到了岸上。
English: A few miles further on, there were nearly a thousand fish jumping around the water's edge, and the wind blew them all onto the shore.

古文：翁遂弃苇，载鱼以归。
现代文：老人就扔掉船上的芦苇，装上鱼回家去了。
English: The old man threw away the reeds and went home with the fish.

古文：于是丁妪遂还丹阳。
现代文：于是丁氏就回到丹阳县去了。
English: So Mr. Ding returned to Danyang County.

古文：江南人皆呼为丁姑。
现代文：江南的人都称呼她为丁姑。
English: People in Jiangnan call her Ding Gu.

古文：九月九日，不用作事，咸以为息日也。
现代文：每年九月九日，人们不再干活，大家都把这一天当作休息的日子。
English: On the 9th of September every year, people no longer work, and everyone regards this day as a day of rest.

古文：今所在祠之。
现代文：现在人们还在她出生的地方祭祀她。
English: Now, an ancestral temple has been built there.

古文：散骑侍郎王佑疾困，与母辞诀，既而闻有通宾者，曰： 某郡，某里，某人，尝为别驾。 
现代文：散骑侍郎王佑病得没法治了，便与母亲诀别。过了一会儿，他听见有个通报客人姓名的人传话说： 客人是某某郡某某乡的某某人，曾做过别驾从事史。 
English: After a while, he heard a message from the person who had informed him of the guest's name: "The guest is a certain person from a certain county, a certain township, who once worked as a porter.

古文：佑亦雅闻其姓字，有顷，奄然来至，曰： 与卿士类有自然之分，又州里情，便款然。
现代文：王佑平时也曾听见过他的姓名。过了一会儿，那人忽然来临，对王佑说： 我与您都是读书人，当然有缘分；又与您同乡，感情就更为诚挚融洽了。
English: Wang You had also heard his name in ordinary times. After a while, the man suddenly came and said to Wang You: I am a reader with you, of course, there is a predestined relationship; and with your hometown, the feelings are more sincere and harmonious.

古文：今年国家有大事，出三将军，分布征发吾等十余人为赵公明府参佐，至此仓卒，见卿有高门大屋，故来投，与卿相得，大不可言。 
现代文：今年国家有大事，派出了三位将军，分别到各地征集民间的人力和物资。我们一批十几个人，是赵公明的部下，仓促来到这里，看见您有高门大屋，所以来投奔您。和您结交，好得没话说了。 
English: This year, there are major events in the country, and three generals have been sent out to collect manpower and materials from the people in various regions. A group of more than a dozen of us, who are Zhao Gongming's subordinates, came here in a hurry, saw that you have a large house with a high gate, so we came to you. It's so nice to make friends with you, there's nothing to say.

古文：佑知其鬼神，曰： 不幸疾笃，死在旦夕，遭卿，以性命相托。 
现代文：王佑知道他们是鬼神，就说： 我不幸病重，死日就在眼前。现在碰上您，我就求您救我一命。 
English: Wang You knew that they were ghosts and said, "I am unfortunately seriously ill, and the day of my death is just around the corner. If I met you now, I would beg you to save my life."

古文：答曰： 人生有死，此必然之事。
现代文：那人回答说： 人生有死，这是必然的事。
English: The guest replied, "Life has a death, it's inevitable.

古文：死者不系生时贵贱。
现代文：死人不依靠在世时的贵贱。
English: Those who have died have nothing to do with the nobility of their former lives.

古文：吾今见领兵三千，须卿得度簿相付，如此地难得，不宜辞之。 
现代文：我现在带乓三千，需要您来统帅，如果您答应，我就考虑把档案簿册交给您。象这样的机会实在难得，您不该推辞。 
English: I've got three thousand pengs with me now, and I need you to command them. If you agree, I'll consider giving you the archives. An opportunity like this is really rare, and you shouldn't turn it down.

古文：佑曰： 老母年高，兄弟无有，一旦死亡，前无供养。 
现代文：王佑说： 我老母亲年寿已高，又没有兄弟，一旦我死了，眼前就没人供养我母亲了。 
English: Wang You said: My old mother is very old and has no brothers. Once I die, there will be no one to support my mother.

古文：遂欷歔不能自胜。
现代文：说到这儿便泣不成声了。
English: At this point, I couldn't stop crying.

古文：其人怆然曰： 卿位为常伯，而家无余财，向闻与尊夫人辞诀，言辞哀苦，然则卿国士也，如何可令死。
现代文：那人悲哀地说： 您担任侍中这样的高官，家里却没有积馀。刚才听见您与母亲诀别，说的话十分可怜。这样看来，您是国家的高士，怎么可以让您死呢？
English: The man said sadly, "You hold such a high position as an attendant, but there is no money left in the house. Just now, I heard you say goodbye to your mother, and what you said was very pitiful. From this perspective, you are a dignitary of the country, so how can you die?

古文：吾当相为。 
现代文：我一定为您尽力帮忙。 
English: I should be helping you.

古文：因起去。明日，更来。
现代文：说着便起身要走了，并告诉王佑： 我明天再来。 
English: Saying this, he got up to leave and told Wang You, "I'll come back tomorrow."

古文：其明日，又来。
现代文：到明天，那人又来了。
English: The next day, the man came again.

古文：佑曰： 卿许活吾，当卒恩否？ 
现代文：王佑说： 您答应让我活下去，真的会给我这样的恩惠吗？ 
English: Wang You said: You promised to let me live, will you really give me such a favor?

古文：答曰： 大老子业已许卿，当复相欺耶！ 
现代文：那人回答说： 大老子已经答应了您，难道还会欺骗您？ 
English: He replied: "Grandfather General has already promised you, can I still lie to you?

古文：见其从者数百人，皆长二尺许，乌衣军服，赤油为志。
现代文：只见他的随从儿百个，都只有二尺左右长，穿着黑色的军装，用红色的油漆画上了标志。
English: I saw his entourage of a hundred children, all only two feet or so long, wearing black military uniforms and signs painted with red paint.

古文：佑家击鼓祷祀，诸鬼闻鼓声，皆应节起舞，振袖飒飒有声。
现代文：王佑家里击鼓祈祷，祭享他们。那些鬼听见鼓声，都随着它的节奏翩翩起舞，他们挥动着衣袖，发出飒飒的声响。
English: Wang Yu's family played drums and prayed, and the ghosts heard the drums and danced to the rhythm. They waved their sleeves and made clicking noises.

古文：佑将为设酒食。辞曰： 不须。 
现代文：王佑将给他们置办酒宴，那人拒绝说： 不必了。 
English: Wang You was going to give them a banquet, but the man refused, saying, "That's not necessary.

古文：因复起去。谓佑曰： 病在人体中，如火。当以水解之。 
现代文：便又起身要走，并对王佑说： 你的毛病在身体中，热得象火一样，要用水来消除它。 
English: Then he got up to leave and said to Wang You, "Your disease is in your body, and it is as hot as fire. Use water to eliminate it."

古文：因取一杯水，发被灌之。
现代文：接着他就拿了一杯水，掀开被褥浇在上面。
English: He then took a glass of water, lifted the sheet and poured it over her.

古文：又曰： 为卿留赤笔十余枝，在荐下，可与人使簪之。
现代文：又对王佑说： 给您留下红笔十几枝，放在席子底下，可以送给人，让他们当作簪子用。
English: He also said to Wang You, "Leave a dozen red pens for you, put them under the mat, and you can give them to people to use as tweezers."

古文：出入辟恶灾，举事皆无恙。 
现代文：这样，进进出出就能避过灾祸，做什么事都能顺顺当当。 
English: In this way, you will be able to avoid disasters when you go in and out, and you will be able to do everything smoothly.

古文：因道曰： 王甲、李乙，吾皆与之。 
现代文：接着他又说道。 王甲、李乙，我都与他们结交了。 
English: Wang Jia, Li B, I have made friends with them.

古文：遂执佑手与辞。
现代文：于是就握着王佑的手向王佑告别。
English: So he shook Wang You's hand and said goodbye to Wang You.

古文：时佑得安眠，夜中忽觉，乃呼左右，令开被， 神以水灌我，将大沾濡。 
现代文：当时王佑还能安然睡着，夜里忽然醒来，便招呼身边的人，让他们掀开被头说： 鬼神用水来浇我，我的被头都快湿透了。 
English: At that time, Wang You was still able to sleep peacefully. When he suddenly woke up in the night, he called out to the people around him and asked them to lift up their quilts, saying, "The spirits are pouring water on me. My quilts are almost wet through."

古文：开被。而信有水在上被之下，下被之上，不浸，如露之在荷。
现代文：边上的人掀开被头一看，果真有水，但这水在上面一条被子的底下，在下面一条被子的上面，并没有渗到被头里，就象露水在荷叶上一样。
English: The person on the edge lifted the quilt and at first glance saw that there was indeed water, but this water was under the upper quilt and above the lower quilt, and did not seep into the quilt, just like dew on a lotus leaf.

古文：凡其所道当取者，皆死亡。唯王文英，半年后乃亡。
现代文：量了一下，共三升七合。于是王佑的毛病好了三分之二，又过了几天就痊愈了。凡是那人说过要带走的人，都死了，只有王文英，到半年以后才死去。
English: Wang You's illness improved by two-thirds, and he recovered after a few days. All the people the man said he would take away died, except for Wang Wenying, who died half a year later.

古文：所道与赤笔人，皆经疾病及兵乱，皆亦无恙。
现代文：按他的说法而给了笔的人，虽都经历了疾病和战乱，也都太平无事。
English: According to him, the people who gave him the pen have all experienced illness and war, but they are all safe and sound.

古文：初，有妖书云： 上帝以三将军赵公明、钟士季各督数鬼下取人。 
现代文：起初，曾经有妖书说： 天帝派出赵公明、钟会等三个将军，各人统领几万个鬼下来捉人。 
English: In the beginning, there was a legend that said: The Heavenly Emperor sent three generals, including Zhao Gongming and Zhong Hui, each of whom led tens of thousands of ghosts to capture people.

古文：莫知所在。
现代文：当时没有人知道这些鬼在哪里。
English: At the time, no one knew where the ghosts were.

古文：佑病差，见此书，与所道赵公明合焉。
现代文：王佑病愈后，看见这妖书，与他所碰到的那个人所说的赵公明完全吻合。
English: After Wang You recovered from his illness, he saw this evil book, which completely matched what the man he met, Zhao Gongming, had said.

古文：汉下邳周式尝至东海，道逢一吏，持一卷书，求寄载。
现代文：汉代下邳县的周式，曾经到东海郡去，在路上碰上一个小吏，拿着一卷书，请求搭船。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Zhou Shih of Jiaoxian County once went to Donghai County. On the way, he met a minor official, holding a book, and asked for a boat ride.

古文：行十余里，谓式曰： 吾暂有所过，留书寄君船中，慎勿发之。 去后，式盗发现书，皆诸死人录，下条有式名。
现代文：船行了十多里，他对周式说： 我暂时有个人要去拜访，这书就留下寄存在您的船里，您千万别打开看。 这小吏走了以后，周式偷偷地翻阅那书，都是各个死人的名录。下面的条目中有周式的名字。
English: After sailing more than ten miles, he said to Zhou Shi: I have someone to visit for the time being, I will leave this book in your boat, you must not open it. After the clerk left, Zhou Shi secretly looked through the book, it was a directory of all the dead people. The following entry contains Zhou Shi's name.

古文：须臾，吏还，式犹视书。
现代文：一会儿，这小吏就回来了，周式却还在看书。
English: After a while, the minor official returned, but Zhou Shihong was still reading a book.

古文：吏怒曰： 故以相告，而忽视之？ 
现代文：这小吏生气地说： 刚才我已经告诫你别看书，你却把我的话视同儿戏。 
English: The little clerk said angrily, "Just now I told you not to read, but you treat my words like child's play.

古文：式叩头流血，良久，吏曰： 感卿远相载，此书不可除卿名。
现代文：周式连忙向他磕头求饶，磕得血都流出来了，过了很久，这小吏说： 我虽然感激您老远让我搭船到这儿，但这书上您的名字却不可以除去。
English: Zhou Shi hurriedly bowed to him and begged for mercy. He was so exhausted that his blood was flowing. After a long time, the minor official said, "Although I am grateful to you for letting me come here by boat, your name cannot be removed from this book.

古文：今日已去，还家，三年勿出门，可得度也。
现代文：今天你离开我以后，赶快回家去，三年别出门，这样就可以度过难关了。
English: After you leave me today, hurry home and don't go out for three years, so you can get through this.

古文：勿道见吾书。 
现代文：千万别说您看见了我的书。 
English: But you mustn't say you've read my book.

古文：式还，不出，已二年余，家皆怪之。
现代文：周式回家后一直闭门不出，已经两年多了，家里的人都感到很奇怪。
English: It's been more than two years since Zhou Xi came home and hasn't closed the door. Everyone in the family feels very strange.

古文：邻人卒亡，父怒，使往吊之。式不得已，适出门，便见此吏。
现代文：他的邻居忽然死去，他父亲对他不出门很恼火，就偏偏让他到邻居家去吊丧，周式不得不去，哪知刚出家门，就看到那小吏。
English: His neighbor died suddenly, and his father was very angry that he didn't go out, so he made him go to the neighbor's house to mourn. Zhou Shi had to go, but as soon as he left the house, he saw the petty official.

古文：吏曰： 吾令汝三年勿出，而今出门，知复奈何？
现代文：那小吏说： 我叫你三年别出门，你今天却出门了，我知道了又有什么办法呢？
English: The petty official said: I told you not to go out for three years, but you went out today. What can I do now that I know?

古文：吾求不见，连累为鞭杖，今已见汝，无可奈何。
现代文：我如果向上级请求说没看见你，就会受连累遭到鞭打。今天已经看见你了，我也无可奈何了。
English: If I plead with my superiors that I didn't see you, I'll be tied up and whipped. I saw you today, I can't help it.

古文：后三日，日中，当相取也。 
现代文：到第三天的中午，要来捉你的。 
English: By noon on the third day, they will come to catch you.

古文：式还，涕泣具道如此。
现代文：周式回家，痛哭流涕地把这些话都告诉给了家里人。
English: Zhou Xicheng went home and told his family these words with tears in his eyes.

古文：父故不信。母昼夜与相守。至三日日中时，果见来取，便死。
现代文：他父亲坚决不相信，他母亲日日夜夜守着他，到第三天中午，果然看见有人来捉周式，周式就死了。
English: His father firmly didn't believe it, and his mother kept an eye on him day and night. At noon on the third day, she saw someone come to capture Zhou Shih, and Zhou Shih died.

古文：南顿张助，于田中种禾，见李核，欲持去，顾见空桑，中有土，因植种，以余浆溉灌。
现代文：南顿县的张助在田间种庄稼。看见一颗李子核，想捡了扔掉它。回头看见桑树洞中有泥土，就把它种在里面，并拿喝剩下来的茶水浇灌它。
English: Zhang Zu in Nantong County was planting crops in the field. He saw a plum kernel and wanted to pick it up and throw it away. When he looked back and saw that there was soil in the mulberry hole, he planted it inside and watered it with leftover tea.

古文：后人见桑中反复生李，转相告语，有病目痛者，息阴下，言： 李君令我目愈，谢以一豚。 
现代文：后来有人看见桑树中反而又长出李树来，便互相传开了，有一个患眼痛病的人，在李树荫下歇息，便对李树祈祷说： 李树神，您如果使我的眼病痊愈，我就用一头猪来酬谢您。 
English: Later, someone saw a plum tree growing out of the mulberry tree instead, and they spread the news to each other. A man with an eye disease, resting in the shade of a plum tree, prayed to the plum tree and said: God of the plum tree, if you cure my eye disease, I will reward you with a pig.

古文：目痛小疾，亦行自愈。
现代文：眼痛是小病，也就自行痊愈了。
English: Eye pain is a minor ailment, and it will heal on its own.

古文：众犬吠声，盲者得视，远近翕赫，其下车骑常数千百，酒肉滂沱。
现代文：正是 众犬吠声 ，人们竟道听途说，将眼痛痊愈传成了瞎子恢复了视力。于是远近轰动，李树下的车马常有几千几百，供奉的酒肉多得铺满地。
English: It was the barking of many dogs that people actually heard by word of mouth, passed on the healing of eye pain to the blind and restored their eyesight. As a result, there was a sensation far and wide, there were often thousands and hundreds of chariots and horses under the plum trees, and the sacrificial meat and wine were spread all over the ground.

古文：间一岁余，张助远出来还，见之，惊云：此有何神，乃我所种耳。 
现代文：隔了一年多，张助出远门回来，看见这情景吃惊地说： 这里有什么神明？不过是我种的李树罢了。 
English: After a lapse of more than a year, Zhang Jie returned from a long journey, was surprised to see this scene, and said, "What gods are here? It's just a plum tree I planted."

古文：因就斫之。
现代文：于是他就把李树砍了。
English: So he cut down the plum tree.

古文：王莽居摄，刘京上言： 齐郡临淄县亭长辛当，数梦人谓曰： 吾，天使也。摄皇帝，当为真。
现代文：王莽暂居皇帝之位处理政务，广饶侯刘京进奏说， 齐郡临淄县亭长辛当，几次梦见有个人对他说： 我是天上的使者，天帝让我传旨，摄政皇帝应该做真皇帝。
English: Wang Mang temporarily occupied the position of emperor to deal with government affairs, Guangrao Hou Liu Jingjin said. Xin Dang, the chief of Linyi County, Qi County, dreamed several times that a person said to him: I am the messenger of heaven, the heavenly emperor let me convey the will, the regent emperor should be the real emperor.

古文：即不信我，此亭中当有新井出。 
现代文：你如果不相信我，这亭屋中一定有口新并出现。 
English: If you don't believe me, there must be a new entrance to this pavilion.

古文：亭长起视亭中，因有新井。入地百尺。 
现代文：亭长起床去察看，亭屋中果然有口新井，深一百尺。 
English: The keeper of the pavilion got up to investigate, and sure enough, there was a new well in the pavilion, a hundred feet deep.

