古文：灵王为章华之台，与伍举升焉，曰： 台美夫！ 
现代文：楚灵王建造了章华台，和伍举一起登了上去，说： 这高台真美啊！ 
English: King Chuling built the Zhanghuatai, climbed it together with Wu Qi, and said, "This high platform is really beautiful!"

古文：对曰： 臣闻国君服宠以为美，安民以为乐，听德以为聪，致远以为明。
现代文：伍举回答说： 我听说国君把有德而受到尊崇当作美，把安抚百姓当作快乐，把能听从有德的人当作听觉灵敏，把能招致远方的人归附当作贤明。
English: Wu Qu replied, "I have heard that the sovereign regards it as beauty to be revered for one's virtue, as happiness to pacify the people, as good sense to be able to listen to the virtuous, and as wisdom to be able to win the allegiance of those far away.

古文：不闻其以土木之崇高、彤镂为美，而以金石匏竹之昌大、嚣庶为乐；不闻其以观大、视侈、淫色以为明，而以察清浊为聪。
现代文：没有听说把土木建筑的高大和雕梁画栋当作美，把钟磬笙箫等演奏乐队的盛大和喧哗当作快乐；没有听说把观赏的场面大、看到的东西奢侈、迷乱于姿色当作目光明亮，把能分辨音乐的清浊当作耳朵灵敏。
English: It is unheard of to regard the height of civil engineering buildings and carved beams as beauty, the grandeur and noise of orchestras such as carillons as joy; it is unheard of to regard the spectacle of viewing, the luxury of seeing things, and the bewilderment of appearance as bright eyes, and the clarity of music as sensitive ears.

古文： 先君庄王为匏居之台，高不过望国氛，大不过容宴豆，木不妨守备，用不烦官府，民不废时务，官不易朝常。
现代文： 我们先君楚庄王建造的匏居台，高度不过可以观望国家吉凶的气象，台大不过能够容纳宴会的杯盘，用的木材不占用国家的守备，财用不增加官府的负担，百姓不误农时，官吏不打乱日常的政务。
English: Our forefather, King Chu Zhuang, built a pavilion that was only high enough to watch the auspicious and inauspicious weather of the country. The pavilion was only large enough to hold the cups and plates of the banquet. The wood used did not occupy the country's reserves, the financial expenditure did not increase the burden of the government, the people did not miss the farming time, and the government officials did not disrupt the daily government affairs.

古文：问谁宴焉，则宋公、郑伯；问谁相礼，则华元、驷騑；问谁赞事，则陈侯、蔡侯、许男、顿子，其大夫侍之。
现代文：说到宴请的有谁，是宋公和郑伯；说到有谁导引朝见的礼节，是华元和驷騑；说到有谁辅佐宴会事务，是陈侯、蔡侯、许男和顿国国君，他们的大夫们各自陪侍自己的国君。
English: When it comes to who is in charge of the banquet, it is Song Gong and Zheng Bo; when it comes to who guides the etiquette of the imperial court, it is Hua Yuan and Yao; when it comes to who assists the banquet, it is Chen Hou, Cai Hou, Xu Man and Dong Guo Guo Jun, and their doctors each accompany their own sovereigns.

古文：先君以是除乱克敌，而无恶于诸侯。
现代文：先君就靠这样消除祸乱，战胜敌国，并没有得罪诸侯。
English: In this way, the forefather eliminated the evil and defeated the enemy country, and did not offend the lords.

古文：今君为此台也，国民罢焉，财用尽焉，年谷败焉，百官烦焉，举国留之，数年乃成。
现代文：现在您建造了这高台，使国家和百姓不堪疲惫，钱财都用光了，年成不好，百官繁忙，举国上下都来建造它，用了好几年才建成。
English: Now that you have built this high platform, the country and the people are exhausted, the money and wealth have run out, the year is not good, the officials are busy, the whole country has come to build it, and it has taken several years to build it.

古文：愿得诸侯与始升焉，诸侯皆距无有至者。
现代文：希望有诸侯来庆贺，和他们一起首次登上高台，可是诸侯们都拒绝没有一个愿意来的。
English: It was hoped that some lords would come to celebrate and ascend the dais with them for the first time, but none of the lords were willing to come.

古文：而后使太宰启疆请于鲁侯，惧之以蜀之役，而仅得以来。
现代文：后来派太宰启疆去请鲁侯，并用蜀地之战威胁他，他才勉强前来。
English: Later, he sent Dazai Qijiang to invite Lu Hou, and threatened him with the Battle of Shu, but he reluctantly came.

古文：使富都那竖赞焉，而使长鬣之士相焉，臣不知其美也。
现代文：又叫俊美娴雅的少年辅佐宴会事务，长髯美须的士人导引朝见，我不知道这有什么美。 
English: I don't know what's so beautiful about a handsome, elegant young man helping with the banquet, or a long-haired, mustachioed scholar leading the morning meeting.

古文： 夫美也者，上下、内外、小大、远近皆无害焉，故曰美。
现代文：所谓美，是指对上下、内外、大小、远近都没有妨害，所以才叫美。
English: The so-called beauty refers to the fact that there is no obstruction to the upper and lower, inside and outside, large and small, far and near, so it is called beauty.

古文：若于目观则美，缩于财用则匮，是聚民利以自封而瘠民也，胡美之为？
现代文：如果用眼睛看起来是美的，财用却匮乏，这是收括民财使自己富有却让百姓贫困，有什么美呢？
English: If what you see with your eyes is beautiful, but what you do with your money is poor, that is, if you take people's money and make yourself rich, but make the people poor, what is beautiful?

古文：夫君国者，将民之与处；民实瘠矣，君安得肥？
现代文：当国君的人，要与百姓共处，百姓贫瘦了，国君怎么能够肥胖呢？
English: When you are the ruler of a country, you have to coexist with the people. If the people are poor and thin, how can the ruler be fat?

古文：且夫私欲弘侈，则德义鲜少；德义不行，则迩者骚离而远者距违。
现代文：况且私欲太大太多，就会使德义鲜少；德义不能实行，就会使近处的人忧愁叛离，远方的人抗拒违命。
English: Moreover, if one's selfish desires are too great, it will make virtue and righteousness rare; if virtue and righteousness cannot be practiced, it will make those who are close to one sad and turn away, and those who are far away resist and disobey.

古文：天子之贵也，唯其以公侯为官正，而以伯子男为师旅。
现代文：天子的尊贵，正是因为他把公、侯当作官长，让伯、子、男统率军队。
English: The dignity of the Son of Heaven is precisely because He made princes and lords the heads of government, and allowed nobles, sons, and men to lead the army.

古文：其有美名也，唯其施令德于远近，而小大安之也。
现代文：他享有美名，正是因为他把美德布施给远近的人，使大小国家都得到安定。
English: He earned his reputation precisely because he imparted his virtues to people near and far, bringing stability to countries large and small.

古文：若敛民利以成其私欲，使民蒿焉望其安乐，而有远心，其为恶也甚矣，安用目观？
现代文：如果聚敛民财来满足自己的私欲，使百姓贫耗失去安乐从而产生叛离之心，那作恶就大了，眼睛看上去好看又有什么用呢？
English: If you amass the people's wealth to satisfy your own selfish desires, causing the people to be impoverished and deprived of happiness, thereby creating a rebellious heart, then the evil you do will be great. What is the use of having good-looking eyes?

古文： 故先王之为台榭也，榭不过讲军实，台不过望氛祥。
现代文： 所以先王建造台榭，榭不过是用来讲习军事，台不过是用来观望气象吉凶。
English: Therefore, the first king built the platform, but the platform was only used for military training, and the platform was only used to watch the weather.

古文：故榭度于大卒之居，台度于临观之高。
现代文：因此榭只要能在上面可以检阅士卒，台只要能登临观望气象吉凶的高度就行了。
English: Therefore, as long as it can be above, it can inspect the soldiers, and as long as it can climb to the height to watch the weather, it is fine.

古文：其所不夺穑地，其为不匮财用，其事不烦官业，其日不废时务，瘠硗之地，于是乎为之；城守之木，于是乎用之；官僚之暇，于是乎临之；四时之隙，于是乎成之。故《周诗》曰： 经始灵台，经之营之。
现代文：它所在的地方不侵占农田，它的建造不使国家的财用匮乏，它的工作不烦扰正常的政务，它占用的时间不妨碍农时。要在贫瘠的土地上建造它；以建造城防剩余的木料建造它；要让官吏在闲暇的时候前去指挥；在四季农闲的时候建成它。所以《周诗》上说： 经营建造灵台，经营它，建造它。
English: The place where it is located does not encroach on farmland, its construction does not starve the country of financial resources, its work does not disturb normal government affairs, and the time it occupies does not interfere with agricultural time. It should be built on barren land; it should be built with wood left over from the construction of city defenses; officials should be allowed to command it during their leisure time; it should be built during the four seasons of agricultural idleness. Therefore, the "Weekly Poetry" said: Manage the construction of the spiritual platform, manage it, build it.

古文：庶民攻之，不日成之。
现代文：百姓来营造，没用几天就完成了。
English: It took only a few days for the villagers to build it.

古文：经始勿亟，庶民子来。
现代文：经营建造的时间不急迫，百姓像孝顺儿子一样都来了。
English: The time for management and construction is not urgent, and the people have come like dutiful sons.

古文：王在灵囿，麀鹿攸伏。 
现代文：周王来到了园林，母鹿悠然卧伏。 
English: When King Zhou arrived at the garden, the doe was lying down.

古文：夫为台榭，将以教民利也，不知其以匮之也。
现代文：建造台榭，是为了要让百姓得到利益，没听说是为了使百姓匮乏的。
English: The construction of the platform is to benefit the people, but it is not heard that it is to starve the people.

古文：若君谓此台美而为之正，楚其殆矣！ 
现代文：如果您认为这高台很美，事情做得正确，那么楚国可就危险了！ 
English: If you think this plateau is beautiful and things are done correctly, then Chu is in danger!

