古文：刘怀肃孟怀玉弟龙符刘敬宣檀祗
现代文：刘怀肃，彭城人，是高祖刘裕的姨表兄。
English: Liu Huai Su, a native of Pengcheng, was an aunt and cousin of Gaozu Liu Yu.

古文：刘怀肃，彭城人，高祖从母兄也。家世贫窭，而躬耕好学。
现代文：他家世世代代都很贫穷，但他亲自耕种田地，非常好学。
English: His family had been poor for generations, but he cultivated the land himself and was a good student.

古文：初为刘敬宣宁朔府司马，东征孙恩，有战功，又为龙骧司马、费令。
现代文：怀肃刚开始当刘敬宣的宁朔府司马，刘敬宣东征孙恩，怀肃有战功，便再当龙骧司马，费县县令。
English: As soon as Huai Sui began to serve as Liu Jingxuan's Ningshuo prefectural governor, Liu Jingxuan's eastward conquest of Sun En, and Huai Sui's military exploits, he again served as Longyui's governor and Fei County governor.

古文：闻高祖起义，弃县来奔。
现代文：听说高祖起义，刘怀肃丢下县中事务投奔刘裕。
English: I heard that Gao Zu revolted, and Liu Huai Su left the county middle school to work for Liu Yu.

古文：京邑平定，振武将军道规追桓玄，以怀肃为司马。玄留何澹之、郭铨等戍桑落洲，进击破之。
现代文：京城平定后，振武将军刘道规追击桓玄，又以刘怀肃当司马，桓玄留下何澹之、郭铨等戍守桑落州，刘怀肃前进攻击并打败了他们。
English: After the capital was pacified, the Zhenwu general Liu Daojie pursued Huan Xuan, with Liu Huai Su as his steward. Huan Xuan left He Yanzhi, Guo Wei and others to defend Sanluozhou, and Liu Huai Su advanced to attack and defeat them.

古文：颍川太守刘统平，除高平太守。
现代文：颍川太守刘统被平定后，刘怀肃被用为高平太守。
English: After Liu Tong, the governor of Luochuan, was subdued, Liu Huai Su was used as the governor of Gaoping.

古文：玄既死，从子振大破义军于杨林，义军退寻阳。
现代文：桓玄死后，他侄儿桓振在扬林大败起义军，起义军退守寻阳。
English: After the death of Huan Xuan, his nephew Huan Zhen defeated the rebels in Yanglin, and the rebels retreated to Huan Yang.

古文：怀肃与江夏相张暢之攻澹之于西塞，破之。
现代文：刘怀肃和江夏相张畅之进攻在西塞山的何澹之，打败了何。
English: Liu Huai-Su and Jiang Xia-sang Zhang Chang's attack in the Xisai Mountains defeated He Xizhi.

古文：伪镇东将军冯该戍夏口东岸，孟山图据鲁山城，桓仙客守偃月垒，皆连壁相望。怀肃与道规攻之，躬擐甲胄，陷二城，冯该走石城，生擒仙客。
现代文：伪镇东将军冯该戍守夏口的东岸，孟山图据守鲁山城，桓仙客防守偃月垒，都联营相守，刘怀肃和刘道规攻他们，亲自披坚执锐，攻陷其中两城，冯该逃到石城，活捉桓仙客。
English: The pseudo-Town East General Feng Jiayu guarded the east coast of Xiakou, Meng Shan Tu guarded Lushan City, Huan Xianke defended the Crescent Moon Fort, and they all jointly guarded each other. Liu Huai Su and Liu Daojie attacked them, and personally took the lead and captured two of the cities. Feng Jiayu fled to Shicheng and captured Huan Xianke alive.

古文：义熙元年正月，振败走，道规遣怀肃平石城，斩冯该及其子山靖。
现代文：义熙元年正月，桓振败逃，刘道规派刘怀肃平定石城，杀了冯该和他的儿子冯山靖。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yixi, when Huan Zhen was defeated and fled, Liu Daoyi sent Liu Huai Shu to pacify Dingshi, and killed Feng Kai and his son Feng Shan Jing.

古文：三月，桓振复袭江陵，荆州刺史司马休之出奔，怀肃自云杜驰赴，日夜兼行，七日而至。
现代文：三月，桓振再次袭击江陵，荆州刺史司马休之出逃，刘怀肃从云杜连忙奔驰援救，日夜兼程，七天便到了。
English: In March, Huan Zhen attacked Jiangling again, Jingzhou stabbed Shi Ma Xiu's escape, Liu Huai Su rushed from Yundu to rescue, day and night, and arrived in seven days.

古文：振勒兵三万，旗帜蔽野，跃马横矛，躬自突陈。
现代文：桓振布兵三万，旌旗盖野，跃马横刀，亲自冲击刘怀肃的战阵。
English: Kuan Zhen dispatched thirty thousand soldiers, hoisted the flag, and personally attacked Liu Huai Su's battle line.

古文：流矢伤怀肃额，众惧欲奔，怀肃瞋目奋战，士气益壮。于是士卒争先，临阵斩振首。
现代文：飞箭伤了刘怀肃的额角，众人很害怕，想逃跑。刘怀肃睁大眼睛，更加奋勇冲击，他的部下也随之奋击，于是士卒们纷纷争先，在战斗中将桓振斩首。
English: Liu Huai-Su's forehead was injured by the flying arrow, and everyone was scared and wanted to run away. Liu Huai-Su opened his eyes wide and attacked more bravely, and his subordinates also fought hard, so the soldiers rushed to be the first to behead Huan Zhen in the battle.

古文：江陵既平，休之反镇，执怀肃手曰： 微子之力，吾无所归矣。 
现代文：江陵平定，司马休之再回来镇守，他握着刘怀肃的手说： 不是你的帮助我便无处可归了。 
English: With Gangneung pacified, Sima Xuzhi returned to defend the town. Holding Liu Huai Su's hand, he said, "If it wasn't for your help, I'd have nowhere to go."

古文：伪辅国将军符嗣、马孙、伪龙骧将军金符青、乐志等屯结江夏，怀肃又讨之，枭乐志等。
现代文：伪辅国将军符嗣、马孙、伪龙骧将军金符青、乐志等屯据江夏，刘怀肃又讨伐他们，杀掉了乐志等。
English: The pseudo-assistant generals Fu Zi, Masun, and pseudo-dragon general Jin Fuxing and Le Zhi were stationed in Jiangxia, and Liu Huai Su fought them and killed Le Zhi.

古文：道规加怀肃督江夏九郡，权镇夏口。
现代文：刘道规任命刘怀肃督江夏九郡，暂时镇守夏口。
English: Liu Daojun appointed Liu Huai as the governor of Jiangxi Province's Xiajiu County, and temporarily became the governor of Xiakou.

古文：除通直郎。仍为辅国将军、淮南历阳二郡太守。
现代文：刘怀肃被任命通直郎，同时当辅国将军、淮南历阳二郡太守。
English: Liu Huai Su was appointed Tong Naorong, and at the same time he served as the general of the auxiliary state and the governor of Liyang County, Huainan Province.

古文：二年，又领刘毅抚军司马，军、郡如故。
现代文：二年又兼任刘毅抚军司马，将军、郡守还照旧。
English: In the second year, he also served as Liu Yifu's secretary of the army, and the general and county governor were still the same.

古文：以义功封东兴县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：因为起义功劳，被封为东兴县侯，食邑一千户。
English: For his services in the uprising, he was made the lord of Dongxing County, with a thousand households in his domain.

古文：其冬，桓石绥、司马国璠、陈袭于胡桃山聚众为寇，怀肃率步骑讨破之。
现代文：那年冬天，桓右绥、司马国、陈袭在胡桃山聚兵侵略，怀肃率步兵和骑兵打败敌人。
English: That winter, Huan Yuqi, Sima Guo and Chen Qi gathered troops to invade Hu Taoshan, and Huai Su led the infantry and cavalry to defeat the enemy.

古文：江淮间群蛮及桓氏余党为乱，自请出讨，既行失旨，毅上表免怀肃官。
现代文：江淮间的蛮人和桓氏余党造乱子，刘怀肃亲自请求出外讨击，走后违背了刘毅的意思，刘毅上表免去怀肃的官职。
English: The barbarians between the Jianghuai and the Huans and the rest of the party created chaos. Liu Huai Su personally requested to go out and fight. After leaving, he violated Liu Yi's intention. Liu Yi was exempted from Huai Su's official post.

古文：三年，卒，时年四十一。
现代文：三年去世，当年四十一岁。
English: He died three years later, at the age of 41.

古文：追赠左将军。
现代文：死后被追认为左将军。
English: After his death, he was revered as General Zuo.

古文：无子，弟怀慎以子蔚祖嗣封，官至江夏内史。
现代文：刘怀肃没有儿子，他弟弟刘怀慎让自己的儿子刘蔚祖继承了刘怀肃的爵位，刘蔚祖官至江夏内史。
English: Liu Huai Su did not have a son, but his brother Liu Huai Shen let his son Liu Weizhu inherit Liu Huai Su's title. Liu Weizhu was the first official to enter Jiangxia Inner History.

古文：蔚祖卒，子道存嗣。
现代文：蔚祖去世，他儿子刘道存继承他。
English: Uzu died and his son Liu Daocun succeeded him.

古文：太祖元嘉末，为太尉江夏王义恭咨议参军。
现代文：太祖元嘉末年，当太尉江夏王刘义恭的谘议参军。
English: In the last years of the great-grandfather Yuan Jia, he was advised to join the army by Liu Yigong, the lieutenant of the king of Jiangxia.

古文：方明，河东人，为刘道济振武中兵参军，立功蜀土，历颍川南平昌太守，皆坐赃私免官。孟怀玉，平昌安丘人也。
现代文：世祖讨伐元凶刘邵，起义军到新亭，刘道存出奔，元凶刘邵杀了刘道存的母亲示众。前废帝景和末年，他当义恭的太宰从事中郎，义恭被杀，刘道存作为其党羽也被杀。孟怀玉，平昌安丘人。
English: Liu Shao, the instigator of the Ancestor's Crusade, the rebel army went to Xingting, Liu Daocun fled, and the instigator Liu Shao killed Liu Daocun's mother in public. In the last years of the former Emperor Jinghe, he was the middle man of the Dazai of Yigong, Yigong was killed, and Liu Daocun was also killed as a member of his party. Meng Huaiyu, a resident of Anqiu, Pyeongchang.

古文：高祖珩，晋河南尹。
现代文：他的高祖孟珩，是晋朝的河南尹。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Mencius, was the Henan Yin of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖渊，右光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父孟渊，官至右光禄大夫。
English: His grandfather, Meng Yuan, rose to the rank of doctor of the Right Guanglu.

古文：父绰，义旗后为给事中，光禄勋，追赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲孟绰，在高祖起义后当给事中、光禄勋，死后被追认为金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father, Meng Cuo, was awarded the Medal of Honor after the Gaozu Uprising, and after his death, he was posthumously recognized as the Golden Purple Medal Doctor.

古文：世居京口。
现代文：孟怀玉世世代代住在京口。
English: Meng Huaiyu has lived in Jingkou for generations.

古文：高祖东伐孙恩，以怀玉为建武司马。
现代文：高祖东伐孙恩，用孟怀玉当建武司马。
English: Gao Zu Dongfar Sun En, used Meng Huaiyu to build Wusima.

古文：豫义旗，从平京城，进定京邑。
现代文：孟怀玉参加起义军，跟从高祖平定京城。
English: Meng Huayu took part in the rebel army and followed Gao Zu to subdue the capital.

古文：以功封鄱阳县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：因此功被封为鄱阳县侯，食邑一千户。
English: As a result, Gong was given the title of lord of Poyang County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：高祖镇京口，以怀玉为镇军参军、下邳太守。
现代文：高祖镇守京口以怀玉为镇军参军、下邳太守。
English: Gaozu, the keeper of the town of Kyoguchi, joined the town's army with Waidama as the keeper of the town, and became the governor of Shimotsuma.

古文：义熙三年，出为宁朔将军、西阳太守、新蔡内史，除中书侍郎，转辅国将军，领丹阳府兵，戍石头。
现代文：义熙三年，孟怀玉出外当宁朔将军、西阳太守、新蔡内史，又被任为中书侍郎，转任辅国将军，带丹阳府的部队，戍守石头城。
English: In the third year of Yixi, Meng Huaiyu went abroad to be the general of Ningshuo, the governor of Xiyang, and the new Cai Neishi. He was also appointed as the secretary of the Central Government, transferred to the general of Fu Guo, and led the troops of Danyang Prefecture to defend Stone City.

古文：卢循逼京邑，怀玉于石头岸连战有功，为中军咨议参军。
现代文：卢循进逼京城，孟怀玉在石头城江岸上连续作战，都有功劳，被委任为中军谘议参军。
English: Lu Xun marched into Beijing and Meng Huayu continuously fought on the banks of the Shicheng River, both of which were meritorious, and he was appointed as an advisor to the Chinese army.

古文：贼帅徐道覆屡欲以精锐登岸，畏怀玉不敢上。
现代文：敌将徐道覆多次想以精兵登岸，因怕孟怀玉不敢上岸。
English: The enemy commander, Xu Daohui, repeatedly wanted to go ashore with elite soldiers, but Meng Huaiyu was afraid to go ashore.

古文：及循南走，怀玉与众军追蹑，直至岭表。
现代文：卢循逃向南方，孟怀玉和各军一齐追击，直到五岭江南。
English: Lu Xun fled to the south, while Meng Huaiyu and the other armies pursued him all the way to the south of the Wuling River.

古文：徐道覆屯结始兴，怀玉攻围之，身当矢石，旬月乃陷。
现代文：徐道覆屯据始兴，孟怀玉围攻他，亲自搏击，经几十天终于攻下始兴。
English: Xu Dao retreated to Shixing, Meng Huaiyu besieged him, personally fought, and finally captured Shixing after dozens of days.

古文：仍南追循，循平，又封阳丰县男，食邑二百五十户。复为太尉咨议参军，征虏将军。
现代文：再向南追击卢循，卢循被平定，孟怀玉被封为阳丰县男，增加食邑二百五十户，再当太尉谘议参军、征虏将军。
English: He then chased Lu Xun southwards. Lu Xun was finally subdued, and Meng Huayu was made the man of Yangfeng County, with an additional 250 households to feed. He was then made a captain to advise on joining the army and conscripted as a general.

古文：八年，迁江州刺史，寻督江州豫州之西阳新蔡汝南颍川司州之恆农扬州之松滋六郡诸军事、南中郎将，刺史如故。
现代文：八年，孟怀玉迁任江州刺史，不久又当督江州豫州的西阳新蔡、汝南颍川司州的恒农扬州的松滋六郡诸军事，南中郎将，刺史还照旧。
English: In the eighth year, Meng Huaiyu was transferred to the post of Jiangzhou military governor, and soon after, Xiyang Xin Cai of Yuzhou, Jiangzhou, and Songzhi of Yangzhou, Hengtong of Shigatse, Yunnan, were appointed as military governors of six counties, and Nan Zhong Lang was appointed as military governor of six counties, and the post of military governor remained unchanged.

古文：时荆州刺史司马休之居上流，有异志，故授怀玉此任以防之。
现代文：当时荆州刺史司马休之占据上游，心怀异端，所以授予孟怀玉这个职务，用以防卫休之。
English: At that time, Jingzhou prelate Sima Huizhi occupied the upper reaches, harboring heresy, so he granted Meng Huaiyu this position to defend Huizhi.

古文：十一年，加持节。丁父艰，怀玉有孝性。因抱笃疾，上表陈解，不许。
现代文：十一年，孟怀玉加官持节，因为父亲去世，怀玉孝心很重，于是得了重病，上表请求解除自己的职务，没有被允许。
English: In the eleventh year, Meng Huaiyu was promoted to an official, because his father passed away, Huaiyu was very filial, so he fell seriously ill, and his request to be relieved of his duties was not allowed.

古文：又自陈弟仙客出继，丧主唯己，乃见听。
现代文：他又上书说自己的弟弟孟仙客过继给叔父，父亲丧事只有自己能主持。
English: He also wrote that his brother, Meng Xianke, had been adopted by his uncle, and that only he could preside over his father's funeral.

古文：未去任，其年卒官。时年三十一。
现代文：于是被同意辞职，还未离任，当年便去世了，享年三十一岁。
English: So he was allowed to resign, but before he left office, he died that year, at the age of thirty-one.

古文：追赠平南将军。
现代文：死后被追认为平南将军。
English: After his death, he was revered as General Pingnan.

古文：子元卒，无子，国除。
现代文：他的儿子孟元死了，没有儿子，封爵便被取消。
English: His son Meng Yuan died, and without a son, the knighthood was cancelled.

古文：怀玉别封阳丰男，子慧熙嗣，坐废祭祀夺爵。
现代文：怀玉另外一个封爵是阳丰男，他的儿子孟慧熙继承了这个爵位，孟慧熙因为不祭祀被取消爵位。
English: Another of Huaiyu's knights was Yang Feng'an, whose son Meng Huixi inherited the title. Meng Huixi was stripped of his title for not performing religious rites.

古文：慧熙子宗嗣，竟陵太守，中大夫。
现代文：慧熙的儿子孟宗嗣，官至竟陵太守、中大夫。
English: Meng Zongzhi, the son of Huixi, rose through the ranks to become the governor of the imperial mausoleum and a junior doctor.

