古文：聘礼，上公七介，侯、伯五介，子、男三介，所以明贵贱也。
现代文：聘礼的含义：爵为上公的诸侯，派卿出聘用七个介；爵为侯伯的诸侯，派卿出聘用五个介；爵为子男的诸侯，派卿出聘用三个介。这是为了表明贵贱。
English: The meaning of the investiture ceremony: for princes with peerage, seven deputies are appointed by their lords; for princes with peerage, five deputies are appointed by their lords; for princes with peerage, three deputies are appointed by their lords. This is to indicate nobility.

古文：介绍而传命，君子于其所尊弗敢质，敬之至也。
现代文：聘宾将介一溜儿排开，一个挨着一个地站着，然后才传达聘君的命令，这是君子对于他所尊敬的人极其尊敬，不敢有所简慢的表示。
English: The invited guests are lined up in a row, one next to the other, and then convey the host's order. This is a gentleman's utmost respect for those he respects, and he does not dare to be curt.

古文：三让而后传命，三让而后入庙门，三揖而后至阶，三让而后升，所以致尊让也。
现代文：聘宾辞让三次以后才传达聘君的问候，谦让了三次以后才随着摈者进入庙门，进门之后，主君又互行了三次揖礼才来到堂阶跟前，升堂之前，彼此又互相谦让了三次，然后才主君率先登阶，聘宾接着登阶。这些都是表示尊敬谦让的。
English: It takes three times for the host to convey the host's greetings. It takes three times for the host to enter the temple gate with the guest. After entering the gate, the host reciprocates the host's greetings three times before coming to the front of the steps. Before ascending the steps, they reciprocate the host's greetings three times, and then the host takes the lead in climbing the steps, followed by the guest. These are all expressions of respect and courtesy.

古文：君使士迎于竟，大夫郊劳，君亲拜迎于大门之内而庙受，北面拜贶，拜君命之辱，所以致敬也。
现代文：聘宾到达主国国境，主君派士将聘宾迎入境内；聘宾来至近郊，主君又派大夫前去慰劳；聘宾来至主国庙门之外，主君亲自拜迎于庙门之内，然后在庙中接受聘宾转达聘君派其来访之意；聘宾献上带来的礼物，主君面朝北拜谢厚赐，拜谢聘君的派遣使者光临。
English: When the guest of honor arrives at the border of the host country, the lord sends an officer to welcome the guest of honor into the territory; when the guest of honor comes to the suburbs, the lord also sends a doctor to comfort the guest; when the guest of honor comes outside the temple gate of the host country, the lord himself greets the guest of honor inside the temple gate, and then accepts the guest of honor in the temple to convey the intention of the guest of honor to visit; when the guest of honor presents the gift brought, the lord faces north to thank the gift, and to thank the messenger sent by the guest of honor for coming.

古文：敬让也者，君子之所以相接也。
现代文：这些都是表示主君对聘宾、聘君的尊敬谦让的。尊敬谦让，这是君子之间互相交往应有的态度。
English: All of this is to show that the host is respectful and courteous to his guests and hostesses. This is the proper attitude for gentlemen to have when interacting with each other.

古文：故诸侯相接以敬让，则不相侵陵。
现代文：所以诸侯之间互相尊敬谦让，就不会互相侵略欺凌了。
English: Therefore, princes should respect each other and be humble, and they would not invade and bully each other.

古文：卿为上摈，大夫为承摈，士为绍摈。
现代文：主国接待聘宾，由卿为上摈，大夫为承摈，士为绍摈。
English: The host country receives the invited guests, with the lord as the host, the doctor as the host, and the scholar as the guest.

古文：君亲礼宾，宾私面、私觌、致饔饩、还圭璋、贿赠、飨食燕，所以明宾客君臣之义也。故天子制诸侯，比年小聘，三年大聘，相厉以礼。
现代文：上述种种，都是为了表示宾主之间、君臣之间应有的礼数。所以，天子为诸侯订立制度；每年派大夫互相聘问，每三年派卿互相聘问，以礼来互相勉励。
English: All of the above are intended to indicate the number of courtesies that should exist between guests and between monarchs and ministers. Therefore, the Son of Heaven established a system for lords; every year, he sent doctors to ask each other questions, and every three years, he sent nobles to ask each other questions, encouraging each other with courtesies.

古文：使者聘而误，主君弗亲飨食也。所以愧厉之也。
现代文：如果使者来聘时，礼节上有错误，主国国君就不亲自为使者举行飨礼和食礼，以此来使使者感到羞愧并激发他自我勉励。
English: If there is a mistake in the etiquette when the envoy comes to recruit, the sovereign of the host country will not personally perform the bowing and eating ceremony for the envoy, in order to make the envoy feel ashamed and inspire him to self-encouragement.

古文：诸侯相厉以礼，则外不相侵，内不相陵。
现代文：如果诸侯都能够以礼互相勉励，那就对外不会互相侵犯，对内不会互相欺凌。
English: If the princes can encourage each other with courtesy, then they will not encroach on each other externally, and they will not bully each other internally.

古文：此天子之所以养诸侯，兵不用而诸侯自为正之具也。
现代文：这就是天子为什么能够驾驭诸侯而不必使用武力，而使诸侯自己管理好自己的方法。
English: This is why the Son of Heaven is able to control the states without the use of force, but by letting the states manage themselves.

