古文：凡将，理官也，万物之主也，不私于一人。
现代文：将帅是掌管刑法的官吏，也是一切事务的主宰者，不应偏袒任何人。
English: The marshal is the official in charge of criminal law, and is also the person in charge of all affairs, and should not favor anyone.

古文：夫能无于一人，故万物至而制之，万物至而命之。
现代文：正由于不偏袒任何人，所以任何事情发生，都能公平裁决，任何情况出现，都能正确处理。
English: It is precisely because it does not favor anyone that anything that happens can be adjudicated fairly, and any situation that arises can be handled correctly.

古文：君子不救囚于五步之外，虽钩矢射之，弗追也。
现代文：贤德的人总是亲自询问，详察案情，避免错误，秉公审理，即使犯人与自己有深仇宿怨，也不追究前仇。
English: A virtuous person always inquires in person, examines the case in detail, avoids mistakes, and conducts a fair trial. Even if the criminal has a deep-rooted grudge against himself, he does not pursue his old grudge.

古文：故善审囚之情，不待箠楚，而囚之情可毕矣。
现代文：所以善于审案的人，不必施行拷打，也可以把案情全部掌握。
English: Therefore, those who are good at adjudicating cases do not need to torture, and can also fully grasp the case.

古文：笞人之背，灼人之胁，束人之指，而讯囚之情，虽国士有不胜其酷而自诬矣。
现代文：如果依靠鞭打犯人脊背，烧灼犯人两胁，捆夹犯人手指等办法来审讯，就是豪杰之士，也会因经不起这种酷刑，而被屈打成招了。
English: If you rely on whipping the prisoner's back, scorching the prisoner's cheeks, tying the prisoner's fingers and other methods to interrogate, you are a hero, and you will not be able to withstand this kind of torture, so you will be beaten into submission.

古文：今世谚云： 千金不死，百金不刑。 
现代文：现今的俗话说： 有千金的人，可以免死，有百金的人，可以免刑。 
English: Today's proverb says: "He who has a thousand gold coins is exempt from death, and he who has a hundred gold coins is exempt from punishment."

古文：试听臣之言、行臣之术，虽有尧舜之智，不能一言；虽有万金，不能用一铢。
现代文：如能听取我的意见，采用我的办法，虽有尧舜的智慧，也不能关说一句通融的话，虽有万全的财富，也不能用一 铢 钱行贿。
English: If any man hearken unto my counsel, and receive my reproof, though he were a man of great wisdom, yet would he not lay hold on a bribe, and though he were rich, yet would he not utterly plunder him.

古文：今夫，小圄不下十数，中圄不下百数，大圄不下千数。
现代文：现今审理案件，小案拘禁不下数十人，中等案件拘禁不下数百人，大案拘禁不下数千人。
English: Currently, dozens of people have been detained in small cases, hundreds of people have been detained in medium-sized cases, and thousands of people have been detained in large cases.

古文：十人联百人之事，百人联千人之事，千人联万人之事。
现代文：而且往往是十人的事牵连百人，百人的事牵连千人，千人的事牵连万人。
English: Moreover, it is often a matter of ten people involving a hundred people, a hundred people involving a thousand people, and a thousand people involving ten thousand people.

古文：所联之者，亲戚兄弟也，其次婚姻也，其次知识故人也。
现代文：所牵连的人，首先是父母兄弟，其次是亲属，再次是熟识的朋友。
English: The people implicated were first of all parents and siblings, then relatives, and then acquaintances and friends.

古文：是农无不离田业，贾无不离肆宅，士大夫无不离官府。
现代文：被牵连的农民被迫离开土地，商人被迫离开店铺，士大夫被迫离开官府。
English: Implicated farmers were forced to leave their land, merchants were forced to leave their shops, and officials were forced to leave government offices.

古文：如此关联良民，皆囚之情也。
现代文：象这样众多的良民被牵连而关进监狱，这就是当前拘禁囚犯的实际情况。
English: Such a large number of good people have been implicated and imprisoned, which is the actual situation of the current detention of prisoners.

古文：兵法曰： 十万之师出，日费千金。 
现代文：兵法上说： 十万大军出征，一日托费千金。 
English: According to the law of war, a hundred thousand soldiers go to war, and one day costs a thousand dollars.

古文：今良民十万而联于圄，上不能省，臣以为危也。
现代文：现在十万良民被牵连入狱，而君王不能明察，我认为是很危险的。
English: Now a hundred thousand good people have been implicated in prison, and the king cannot see it, I think it is very dangerous.

