古文：元年春，王正月，公即位。
现代文：元年春季，周历正月，文公继位。
English: In the spring of the first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Wenkong succeeded to the throne.

古文：二月癸亥，日有食之。
现代文：二月癸亥日，有日食。
English: In February, the day of the boar, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：天王使叔服来会葬。
现代文：周王派叔服来鲁国参加僖公的葬礼。
English: King Zhou sent Uncle Fu to Lu Province to attend the funeral of Duke Yan.

古文：夏四月丁巳，葬我君僖公。
现代文：夏季四月丁巳日，安葬僖公。
English: In the summer, on the third day of the fourth month, Shoko was buried.

古文：天王使毛伯来锡公命。
现代文：周王派毛伯卫来鲁国赐给鲁文公写在竹简上的奖状。
English: King Zhou sent Mao Bo Wei to Lu to present Lu Wen with an award certificate written on a piece of bamboo.

古文：晋侯伐卫。
现代文：晋国攻打卫国。
English: Jin attacked and defended the country.

古文：叔孙得臣如京师。
现代文：叔孙得臣到成周答谢。
English: Uncles and grandsons came to Cheng Zhou to thank him.

古文：卫人伐晋。
现代文：卫国攻打晋国。
English: The defense of the country and the attack on Jin.

古文：秋，公孙敖会晋侯于戚。
现代文：秋季，公孙敖在戚地与晋侯会面。
English: In the autumn, Gongsun Yao met with Jin Hou at a relative's place.

古文：冬十月丁未，楚世子商臣弑其君頵。
现代文：冬季十月丁未日，楚国世子商臣逼宫，成王自杀。
English: In the winter of October, on the eve of the New Year, Cheng Wang, the heir to the throne of Chu and the son of a merchant, committed suicide.

古文：公孙敖如齐。
现代文：公孙敖去齐国。
English: Gongsun Ren went to Qi Province.

古文：元年春，王使内史叔服来会葬。
现代文：元年春季，周襄王派遣内史叔服来鲁国参加僖公的葬礼。
English: In the spring of the first year of the year, King Zhou Xiang sent his uncle to Lu to attend the funeral of the Duke.

古文：公孙敖闻其能相人也，见其二子焉。
现代文：公孙敖听说叔服能给人看相，便引出自己两个儿子穀和难来见他。
English: When Gongsun Yao heard that uncle's clothes could tell a person's face, he brought his two sons, Gu and Nan, to see him.

古文：叔服曰： 穀也食子，难也收子。
现代文：叔服说： 穀可以祭祀供养您，难可以安葬您。
English: Uncle said: Grain can be sacrificed to feed you, but it is difficult to bury you.

古文：穀也丰下，必有后于鲁国。 
现代文：穀的下颔丰满，后代在鲁国必然昌大。 
English: The lower jaw of the grain is plump, and future generations will inevitably flourish in the country of Lu.

古文：于是闰三月，非礼也。
现代文：今年闰三月，这是不合传统习惯的。
English: This year, the leap month is March, which is not in line with traditional customs.

古文：先王之正时也，履端于始，举正于中，归馀于终。
现代文：先王端正时令，年历的推算以冬至作为开始，测定春分、秋分、夏至、冬至的月份作为四季的中月，把剩余的日子归在一年的末尾。
English: Senwangdu is the correct time, the calculation of the annual calendar begins with the winter solstice, and the months of the vernal equinox, autumnal equinox, summer solstice and winter solstice are measured as the middle months of the four seasons, and the remaining days are added to the end of the year.

古文：履端于始，序则不愆。举正于中，民则不惑。归馀于终，事则下悖。
现代文：年历的推算以冬至作为开始，四季的次序就不会错乱；以正朔的月份作为标准，百姓就不会迷惑；把剩余的月份归总在一年的终了置闰月，事情就不会差误。
English: The calculation of the calendar begins with the winter solstice, so the order of the four seasons will not be out of order; with the new moon as the standard, the people will not be confused; if the remaining months are summed up in a leap month at the end of the year, things will not go wrong.

古文：夏四月丁巳，葬僖公。
现代文：夏季，四月二十六日，安葬僖公。
English: In the summer, on April 26th, the funeral of Ying Gong took place.

古文：王使毛伯卫来锡公命，叔孙得臣如周拜。
现代文：周襄王派遣毛伯卫来鲁国赐给鲁文公写在竹简上的奖状。叔孙得臣到成周答谢。
English: King Zhou Xiang sent Mao Bo Wei to Lu Province to give Lu Wen a certificate of award written on a piece of bamboo. His uncle and grandson came to Cheng Zhou to thank him.

古文：晋文公之季年，诸侯朝晋。卫成公不朝，使孔达侵郑，伐绵、訾，及匡。
现代文：晋文公的晚年，诸侯朝见晋国，卫成公不去朝见，反而派遣孔达侵袭郑国，攻打绵、訾和匡地。
English: In the later years of the reign of Emperor Wenzong of Jin, the princes went to see the Emperor of Jin, but Emperor Weizong did not go to see the Emperor. Instead, he sent Kunda to invade Zheng, attacking Meng, Ya and Kuang.

古文：晋襄公既祥，使告于诸侯而伐卫，及南阳。
现代文：晋襄公在举行小祥祭祀以后，派人通告诸侯而讨伐卫国，到达南阳。
English: After holding the Xiao Xiang sacrifice, Prince Jinxiang sent someone to inform the princes to fight for the defense of the country and arrived in Nanyang.

古文：先且居曰： 效尤，祸也。
现代文：先且居说： 学坏样子，这是祸害。
English: First of all, I would like to say: it is a scourge to look like a bad student.

古文：请君朝王，臣从师。 
现代文：请您朝觐周天子，下臣跟随军队。 
English: Your Imperial Highness, please go to the Imperial Palace. Your vassals should follow the army.

古文：晋侯朝王于温，先且居、胥臣伐卫。
现代文：晋襄公在温地朝觐了周襄王。先且居、胥臣进攻卫国。
English: Prince Jinxiang made a pilgrimage to King Zhouxiang in Warmi. He stayed there first, and his vassals attacked the defense of the country.

古文：五月辛酉朔，晋师围戚。
现代文：五月初一日，晋军包围戚地。
English: On the first day of May, the Jin army encircled Jinji.

古文：六月戊戌，取之，获孙昭子。
现代文：六月初八日，占取戚地，俘虏了孙昭子。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, they occupied the relatives' land and captured Sun Akiko.

古文：卫人使告于陈。
现代文：卫国人派人报告陈国。
English: The guardian of the country sent someone to report Chen's departure.

古文：陈共公曰： 更伐之，我辞之。 
现代文：陈共公说： 转过去进攻他们。我去对他们说。 
English: Chen said, "Turn around and attack them. I'll go and tell them."

古文：卫孔达帅师伐晋，君子以为古。
现代文：卫国的孔达就率兵进攻晋国。君子认为，这样做属于过于粗心。
English: Konda, the defender of the country, led an army to attack Jin. The gentleman thought that this was too careless.

古文：古者越国而谋。
现代文：粗心，指的是让别国给自己出主意。
English: Careless means letting other countries make their own decisions.

古文：秋，晋侯疆戚田，故公孙敖会之。
现代文：秋季，晋襄公划定戚地田土的疆界，所以公孙敖参加了。
English: In the autumn, the prince of Jin and Xiang set the boundaries of the relatives' land, so Gongsun Yao took part.

古文：初，楚子将以商臣为大子，访诸令尹子上。
现代文：当初，楚成王打算立商臣为太子，征求令尹子上的意见。
English: At first, King Chu Cheng planned to appoint a merchant as the crown prince, and asked Yin Zichang for advice.

古文：子上曰： 君之齿未也，而又多爱，黜乃乱也。
现代文：子上说： 君王的年纪还不算大，而且内宠又多，立了商臣再加以废黜，就会有祸乱。
English: The son said, "The king is not very old, and he has many favorites. If he appoints a merchant minister and then deposes him, there will be a disaster.

古文：楚国之举，恒在少者。
现代文：楚国立太子，常常选择年轻的。
English: Princes of the State of Chu often choose young princes.

古文：且是人也，蠭目而豺声，忍人也，不可立也。 
现代文：而且商臣这个人，眼睛像胡蜂，声音像豺狼，是一个残忍的人，不能立为太子。 
English: Moreover, this merchant minister, with eyes like a wasp and a voice like a jackal, was a cruel man and could not be made crown prince.

古文：弗听。
现代文：楚成王没有听从。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：既又欲立王子职而黜大子商臣。
现代文：立了商臣以后，又想立王子职而废掉太子商臣。
English: After establishing the position of merchant minister, he wanted to establish the position of prince and abolished the position of prince merchant minister.

古文：商臣闻之而未察，告其师潘崇曰： 若之何而察之？ 
现代文：商臣听到消息但还没有弄准确，告诉他老师潘崇说： 怎么样能弄准确？ 
English: When the chamberlain heard the news but had not yet made it accurate, he told his teacher Pan Chong and said: How can I make it accurate?

古文：潘崇曰： 享江芈而勿敬也。 
现代文：潘崇说： 你设宴招待江芈而故意表示不尊敬。 
English: Pan Chong said: You deliberately showed disrespect by holding a banquet for Jiang Chen.

古文：从之。
现代文：商臣这样做了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：江芈怒曰： 呼，役夫！
现代文：江芈发怒说： 啊！贱东西！
English: Jiang Chen said angrily, "Ah! You cheap thing!

古文：宜君王之欲杀女而立职也。 
现代文：难怪君王要杀掉你而立职做太子。 
English: No wonder the king wants to kill you and make you crown prince.

古文：告潘崇曰： 信矣。 
现代文：商臣告诉潘崇说： 事情确实了。 
English: The chamberlain told Pan Chong, "It's true.

古文：潘崇曰： 能事诸乎？ 
现代文：潘崇说： 你能事奉公子职吗？ 
English: Pan Chong said: Can you serve as a public servant?

古文：曰： 不能。 
现代文：商臣说： 不能。 
English: Sudet answered: "Impossible.

古文： 能行乎？ 曰： 不能。 
现代文：潘崇说： 能逃亡出国吗？ 商臣说： 不能。 
English: Pan Chong said, "Can you escape abroad?" The merchant said, "No."

古文： 能行大事乎？ 
现代文：潘崇说： 能够办大事吗？ 
English: Pan Chong said: Can you do big things?

古文：曰： 能。 
现代文：商臣说： 能。 
English: Liu Gen said he could summon him.

古文：冬十月，以宫甲围成王。
现代文：冬季，十月，商臣率领宫中的警卫军包围楚成王，并且逼成王自杀。
English: In the winter, in October, the merchant minister led the guards in the palace to surround Chu Cheng Wang and forced him to commit suicide.

古文：王请食熊蹯而死。
现代文：成王请求吃了熊掌以后去死，商臣不答应。
English: Cheng Wang asked to die after eating the bear's paw, but the merchant did not agree.

古文：弗听。丁未，王缢。
现代文：十八日，楚成王上吊而死。
English: On the 18th, King Chu Cheng hung himself and died.

古文：谥之曰灵，不瞑；曰成，乃瞑。
现代文：给他上谥号称为 灵 ，尸体不闭眼睛；谥为 成 ，才闭上眼睛。
English: Give him a nickname called "Spirit," the corpse does not close his eyes; it is only after death that he closes his eyes.

古文：穆王立，以其为大子之室与潘崇，使为大师，且掌环列之尹。
现代文：楚穆王即位，把他做太子时的房屋财物给了潘崇，让潘崇做太师，而且作为掌管宫中警卫军的长官。
English: When King Chumu ascended to the throne, he gave Pan Chong his house and belongings from when he was crown prince, and let Pan Chong be the Grand Master, as well as the officer in charge of the palace guard.

古文：穆伯如齐，始聘焉，礼也。
现代文：穆伯到齐国去，开始聘问，这是合于礼的。
English: Mu Bo went to Qi Province and began to solicit questions, which was proper.

古文：凡君即位，卿出并聘，践修旧好，要结外援，好事邻国，以卫社稷，忠信卑让之道也。
现代文：凡是国君即位，卿出国普遍聘问，继续重温过去的友好，团结外援，善待邻国，来保卫国家，这是合于忠、信、卑让的。
English: Whenever a sovereign ascends to the throne, it is common for him to visit foreign countries, continue to revisit the past friendship, unite foreign aid, treat neighboring countries well, and defend the country. This is consistent with loyalty, trust, and humbleness.

古文：忠，德之正也；信，德之固也；卑让，德之基也。
现代文：忠，意味政治道德的纯正；信，意味政治道德的巩固；卑让，意味政治道德有基础。
English: Loyalty means the purity of political morality; faith means the consolidation of political morality; and submission means that political morality has a foundation.

古文：殽之役，晋人既归秦帅，秦大夫及左右皆言于秦伯曰： 是败也，孟明之罪也，必杀之。 
现代文：殽地这次战役，晋国放回了秦国的主将，秦国的大夫和左右待臣都对秦穆公说： 这次战败，是孟明的罪过，一定要杀死他。 
English: At the end of this battle, Jin returned the main general of Qin to Qin. The doctors of Qin and the attendants on both sides said to Qin Mukong: This defeat is Meng Ming's fault, we must kill him.

古文：秦伯曰： 是孤之罪也。
现代文：秦穆公说： 这是我的罪过。
English: Qin Mukong said: This is my fault.

古文：周芮良夫之诗曰： 大风有隧，贪人败类。
现代文：周朝芮良夫的诗说： 大风迅猛把一切摧毁，贪婪的人把善良败坏。
English: Zhou Chaoyang's poem said: The strong wind destroys everything, and the greedy person corrupts the good.

古文：听言则对，诵言如醉，匪用其良，覆俾我悖。 
现代文：听到顺从心意的话，就能高高兴兴地相互对答；听到忠告的言语，就装作喝醉酒的样子，不予理睬。忠善之人不任用，反而使人悖道义。 
English: When they hear the law, they answer one another with joy; but when they hear the word of exhortation, they are filled with rage and give no attention to it. They do not appoint a faithful man, but a scoundrel.

古文：是贪故也，孤之谓矣。
现代文：这是由于贪婪的缘故，说的就是我啊。
English: It's because of greed, that's what I'm talking about.

古文：孤实贪以祸夫子，夫子何罪？ 
现代文：我由于贪婪而使孟明受祸，孟明有什么罪？ 
English: I caused Meng Ming to suffer misfortune due to greed. What is Meng Ming guilty of?

古文：复使为政。
现代文：重新让孟明执政。
English: Let Meng Ming govern again.

