古文：皮豹子，渔阳人。
现代文：皮豹子，渔阳人。
English: Leopard skin, fisherman.

古文：少有武略。
现代文：少年时代即有军事才能。
English: As a boy, he showed military talent.

古文：泰常中，为中散，稍迁内侍左右。
现代文：泰常年间，任中散，渐迁内侍左右。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizang, he was appointed as a middle-ranking official and gradually moved to the position of an inner chamberlain.

古文：世祖时，为散骑常侍，赐爵新安侯，加冠军将军。
现代文：魏世祖时，任散骑常侍，赐爵新安侯，加授冠军将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei, he was appointed as a knight's equerry, given the title of Duke of Xin'an, and awarded the title of champion general.

古文：又拜选部尚书，余如故。
现代文：又拜授选部尚书，其余官职照旧。
English: He was also awarded the title of "Selector," and his other official posts remained unchanged.

古文：出除使持节、侍中、都督秦雍荆梁四州诸军事、安西将军、开府仪同三司，进爵淮阳公，镇长安。
现代文：朝廷又派他外任使持节、侍中、都督秦、雍、荆、梁四州诸军事、安西将军、开府仪同三司，晋爵淮阳公，镇守长安。
English: The imperial court also sent him as a foreign envoy to hold the festival, a chamberlain, the military governor of Qin, Yong, Jing, and Liang four states, the Anxi general, the Kaifu ceremony and three departments, the Jin peer Huaiyang Gong, and the town guard Chang'an.

古文：寻加征西将军。
现代文：不久又加授征西将军。
English: Soon he was also awarded the title of General of the Western Expedition.

古文：后坐盗官财，徙于统万。
现代文：后因盗取官家财产，被流放到统万。
English: Later, he was exiled to Tsurumi for stealing government property.

古文：真君三年，刘义隆遣将裴方明等侵南秦王杨难当，遂陷仇池。
现代文：太平真君三年，刘义隆派将领裴方明等人侵犯南秦王杨难当辖地，攻陷仇池。
English: In the third year of the reign of Taiping Zhenjun, Liu Yilong sent general Pei Fangming and others to invade the territory under the jurisdiction of King Yangnan of Southern Qin and capture Quchi.

古文：世祖征豹子，复其爵位。
现代文：魏世祖征召皮豹子，恢复其爵位。
English: Emperor Wei of the Wei Dynasty conscripted a leopard to restore his title.

古文：寻拜使持节、仇池镇将，督关中诸军，与建兴公古弼等分命诸将，十道并进。
现代文：不久，拜授他为使持节、仇池镇将，督领关中诸路军马，与建兴公古弼等人分统诸将，十道并进。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Envoy of the Festival of Envoys, the general of Quchi Town, the commander of the troops and horses of all roads in Guanzhong, and the general of the division with Jianxing Gongguan and others, and advanced in ten directions.

古文：四年正月，豹子进击乐乡，大破之，擒义隆将王奂之、王长卿等六人，斩首二千余级，俘获一千人。
现代文：太平真君四年正月，皮豹子进击乐乡，大破敌军，擒获刘义隆将王奂之、王长卿等六人，杀敌三千多人，俘敌二千人。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the reign of Taiping Zhenjun, the Leather Leopard marched into Le Township, defeated the enemy army, captured Liu Yilong, six generals including Wang Xizhi and Wang Changqing, killed more than 3,000 enemies, and captured 2,000 enemies.

古文：豹子进军下辨，义隆将强玄明、辛伯奋弃城遁走，追斩之，悉获其众。
现代文：皮豹子进军下辨，刘义隆将领强玄明、辛伯奋弃城逃走，皮豹子追上杀死了他们，尽数俘虏其部众。
English: Leather Leopard marched into the battle, Liu Yilong led Qiang Xuanming and Xinbo to abandon the city and flee. Leather Leopard caught up with them and killed them, and captured as many of their subordinates as possible.

古文：义隆使其秦州刺史胡崇之镇仇池，至汉中，闻官军已西，惧不敢进，方明益其兵而遣之。
现代文：刘义隆派其秦州刺史胡崇之镇守仇池，军马到汉中，听说魏军已向西而来，心生恐惧，不敢前进，裴方明增拨兵力让他迎战。
English: Liu Yilong sent his Qin State general Hu Chongzhi to defend Qiuchi, and his troops and horses to Hanzhong. When he heard that the Wei army had come to the west, he was afraid and did not dare to advance. Pei Fangming increased the number of troops and let him fight.

古文：豹子与司马楚之至于浊水，击擒崇之，尽虏其众。
现代文：皮豹子与司马楚之到了浊水，击擒胡崇之，尽俘其部下。
English: Leather Leopard and Sima Chu Zhi arrived in Surabaya, defeated Hu Chong Zhi and captured all of his subordinates.

古文：进至高平，义隆将姜道祖降，仇池平。
现代文：军至高平，刘义隆将姜道祖投降，仇池被平定。
English: The army reached a high level, Liu Yilong surrendered to Jiang Daozhu, and Qiu Chi was pacified.

古文：未几，诸氐复反，推杨文德为主以围仇池。
现代文：没多久，众氐人又反叛了，推举杨文德为首领围攻仇池。
English: It didn't take long before the villagers rebelled again, and elected Yang Wende as their leader to besiege Qiu Chi.

古文：古弼率诸军讨平之。
现代文：古弼率领诸路军马讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: Gu Yao led all the troops and horses to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：时豹子次于下辨，闻围解，欲还。
现代文：当时皮豹子驻扎在下辨，听说围势已解，想回师。
English: At that time, the Leopard was stationed in Shideban, heard that the siege had been lifted, and wanted to return to the division.

古文：弼遣使谓豹子曰： 贼耻其负败，必求报复。后举为难，不如陈兵以待之。 
现代文：古弼派使者对皮豹子说： 敌人以其负败为耻，必定要报复，等到战乱再起时征讨就很艰难了，不如现在就派兵与之对阵。 
English: The emissary of the Guzhen faction said to the leather leopard: The enemy is ashamed of its defeat, and will certainly want to take revenge. It will be very difficult to recruit when the war breaks out again. It is better to send troops to oppose it now.

古文：豹子以为然。
现代文：皮豹子觉得有道理。
English: The leopard feels justified.

古文：寻除都督秦、雍、荆、梁、益五州诸军事，进号征西大将军，开府、仇池镇将、持节、公如故。
现代文：不久朝廷任命他为都督秦、雍、荆、梁、益五州诸军事，进号征西大将军，开府、仇池镇将、持节、公等官爵照旧。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed him as the military governor of Qin, Yong, Jing, Liang, and Yixu Five Provinces. He was given the title of General of the Western Expedition, and continued to serve as the governor of Qin, Yong, Jing, Liang, and Yixu Five Provinces, as well as the general of Qin, the general of Qin, the general of Qin, the general of Qin, the general of Qin, the general of Qin, and the general of Qin.

古文：十一月，义隆复遣杨文德、姜道盛率众二万人寇浊水，别遣将青阳显伯，守斧山以拒豹子。
现代文：十一月，刘义隆又派杨文德、姜道盛率领二万人马侵犯浊水，另派将领青阳显伯据守斧山以迎击皮豹子。
English: In November, Liu Yilong also sent Yang Wende and Jiang Daosheng to invade Surabaya with 20,000 horsemen, and sent another general, Qingyang Xianbo, to defend Axe Mountain against the leopard.

古文：浊水城兵射杀道盛，豹子至斧山，斩显伯，悉俘其众。
现代文：浊水城士兵射死姜道盛，皮豹子到了斧山，斩杀青阳显伯，尽俘其兵。
English: The soldiers of Surabaya shot and killed Jiang Daosheng, and the Leopard arrived at Axe Mountain, killed Qingyang Xianbo, and captured all of his soldiers.

古文：豹子又与河间公元齐俱会于浊水，贼众震恐，弃其兵甲夜遁。
现代文：皮豹子又与河间公元齐相会于浊水，敌人十分害怕恐惧，放弃兵甲在夜晚逃走了。
English: The leopard skin and the river met again in Surabaya. The enemy was so scared that they abandoned their armor and fled in the night.

古文：初，南秦王杨难当归命，诏送杨氏子弟诣京师，文德以行赂得留，亡奔汉中。
现代文：当初，南秦王杨难当归顺朝廷，皇帝下诏令送杨氏子弟到京城，杨文德以行赂得以留下，逃亡汉中。
English: At first, the Southern Qin King Yang Nantang returned to the imperial court, and the emperor issued a decree to send Yang's children to Beijing. Yang Wende was able to bribe his way to stay and escape to Hanzhong.

古文：义隆以文德为武都王，给兵二千人守葭芦城，招诱氐羌，于是武都、阴平五部氐民叛应文德。
现代文：刘义隆封杨文德为武都王，拨给其兵马二千人让他据守葭芦城，招诱氐、羌人入伍，于是武都、阴平五部氐民反叛响应杨文德。
English: Liu Yilong appointed Yang Wende as the King of Wudu, and assigned 2,000 soldiers and horses to him so that he could guard Huludao City, and recruit and recruit soldiers. As a result, the people of Wudu and the five provinces of Yinping rebelled in response to Yang Wende.

古文：诏豹子率诸军讨之，文德阻兵固险拒豹子。
现代文：皇帝下诏让皮豹子率领诸军讨伐，杨文德领兵固守天险以阻挡皮豹子。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let the leather leopard lead the army in the crusade, and Yang Wende led the army to adhere to the natural danger to block the leather leopard.

古文：文德将杨高来降，引诸军向其城，文德弃城南走，收其妻子、僚属、军资，及故武都王保宗妻公主送京师。
现代文：杨文德将领杨高前来投降，引导诸军奔向其城，杨文德弃城向南逃走，皮豹子俘其妻子儿女、僚属、军资以及已故武都王保宗妻公主送往京城。
English: Yang Mende's general, Yang Gao, came to surrender and led the troops to rush to his city. Yang Mende abandoned the city and fled to the south. The Leopard captured his wife and children, his colleagues, his military supplies, and the late Wudu Wang Bozong's wife, the princess, and sent them to the capital.

古文：义隆白水太守郭启玄率众救文德，豹子分军逆击，大破之，启玄、文德走还汉中。
现代文：刘义隆的白水太守郭启玄率部解救杨文德，皮豹子分兵迎击，大破敌军，郭启玄、杨文德败逃汉中。
English: Guo Qixuan, Liu Yilong's chief of the White Water Defense Force, led a detachment to rescue Yang Wende. The Leopard Division counterattacked and defeated the enemy army. Guo Qixuan and Yang Wende were defeated and fled to Han.

古文：兴安二年正月，义隆遣其将萧道成、王虬、马光等入汉中，别令杨文德、杨头等率诸氐羌围武都。
现代文：兴安二年正月，刘义隆派其将萧道成、王虬、马光等人进入汉中，又令杨文德、杨头等率领诸路氐、羌人马围攻武都。
English: In the first month of the second year of Xingan, Liu Yilong sent him to bring Xiao Daocheng, Wang Hui, Ma Guang and others into Hanzhong, and ordered Yang Wende, Yang Tou and others to lead all the way and besiege the capital.

古文：城中拒之，杀贼二百余人。
现代文：城中军马与之作战，杀死敌人二百多人。
English: The city's army of horses fought against it, killing more than two hundred of the enemy.

古文：豹子分兵将救之，至女磊，闻贼停军，豹子遣人于祁山取马，欲往赴援。
现代文：皮豹子分兵准备救援，到了女磊，听说敌人停止进攻，皮豹子派人在祁山取马，想要赴援。
English: The Leather Leopard detachment was preparing for the rescue. When they arrived at Mielei, they heard that the enemy had stopped attacking. The Leather Leopard sent someone to fetch horses from Shaoshan and wanted to go to the rescue.

古文：文德谓豹子欲断其粮运，回军还入覆津，据险自固。
现代文：杨文德以为皮豹子要断其运粮之路，回军到了覆津，凭险自守。
English: Yang Wende thought that the leopard was going to cut off his grain transportation route, so he went back to Fuzin to protect himself.

古文：义隆恐其辄回，又增兵益将，令晋寿、白水送粮覆津，汉川、武兴运粟甘泉，皆置仓储。
现代文：刘义隆担心其回撤，又增派兵将，命令晋寿、白水二郡送粮到覆津，汉川、武兴运粟到甘泉，两地都设粮库。
English: Liu Yilong was worried about his retreat and sent more soldiers, ordering the two counties of Jinzhou and Baishui to send grain to Fuzin, and Hanchuan and Wuxing to Gansu. Grain depots were set up in both places.

古文：豹子表曰： 义隆增兵运粮，克必送死。
现代文：皮豹子上表说： 刘义隆增兵运粮，必会死战。
English: The leather leopard said on the table: Liu Yilong's increase in troop transportation of grain will inevitably lead to a deadly battle.

古文：臣所领之众，本自不多，唯仰民兵，专恃防固。
现代文：为臣所领军马，本来不多，惟凭民兵，专恃防守坚固。
English: There were not many leading horses for the vassals, but with the help of the militia, they were able to mount a strong defense.

古文：其统万、安定二镇之众，从戎以来，经三四岁，长安之兵，役过期月，未有代期，衣粮俱尽，形颜枯悴，窘切恋家，逃亡不已，既临寇难，不任攻战。
现代文：其统万、安定二镇之兵，从戎以来，已经三四年，长安之兵，兵役期限已超过了一个月，仍未有代替之期，他们衣服粮草都已用尽，大家面颜憔悴不堪，十分想家，逃亡事件经常发生，眼下面临来犯之敌，无力应战。
English: It has been three or four years since the soldiers of Tongman and Ding'an two towns have been in the army, and the soldiers of Chang'an have been in military service for more than a month, and there is still no replacement period. Their clothes, grain and grass have all been exhausted. Everyone is embarrassed, very homesick, and escape incidents often occur. They are now facing the invading enemy and are unable to fight.

古文：士民奸通，知臣兵弱，南引文德，共为脣齿。
现代文：当地的奸邪之人与敌勾通，知道为臣兵力少弱，他们南引杨文德，互为表里。
English: The local traitors colluded with the enemy, knowing that the subject's army was small and weak. They led Yang Wende south, and they were two sides of the same coin.

古文：计文德去年八月与义隆梁州刺史刘秀之同征长安，闻台遣大军，势援云集。长安地平，用马为便，畏国骑军，不敢北出。
现代文：去年八月杨文德与刘义隆的梁州刺史刘秀之同征长安，听说朝中派遣大军，声援云集，而长安一带地势平坦，马战方便，杨文德害怕魏国骑兵，不敢北去。
English: Last August, Yang Wende and Liu Yilong's Liangzhou cousin Liu Xiuzhi went to Chang'an together. It was heard that North Korea and China sent a large army to show their solidarity. The terrain around Chang'an is flat, and horse battles are convenient. Yang Wende was afraid of the Wei cavalry and did not dare to go north.

古文：但承仇池局人，称台军不多，戍兵鲜少，诸州杂人，各有还思，军势若及，必自奔逃，进军取城，有易返掌。
现代文：但是仇池局内人通风报信，称朝军不多，戍兵极少，诸州杂集之人，各有还归心思，敌军军势如及，必然会溃奔逃走，进军取城，易如反掌。
English: However, an insider of the Qiuchi Bureau spread the rumor, saying that the Korean army was not numerous, the Chinese soldiers were very few, and the people from various states were all confused. If the enemy's army was too strong, it would inevitably break and run away, and it would be easy for the army to enter and take the city.

古文：承信其语，回趣长安之兵，遣文德、萧道成、王虬等将领，来攻武都、仇池，望连秦陇。
现代文：敌人相信这话，回撤进军长安之兵，派遣杨文德、萧道成、王虬等将领，前来攻打武都、仇池，图谋连结秦陇。
English: The enemy believed this and withdrew the soldiers from Chang'an who had marched into the army, and dispatched generals such as Yang Wende, Xiao Daocheng, and Wang Qi to attack Wudu and Quchi and to try to link up with Qin Yu.

古文：进围武都，已经积日，畏臣截后，断其粮路，关镇少兵，未有大损。
现代文：进围武都，已经有一段时间了，他们担心为臣领兵断截其后，截断其运粮道路，所以我方镇守兵力虽少，还没有大的伤损。
English: It has been some time since they entered Wudu, and they are worried about cutting off the supply route for their vassals, so although our garrison is small, there are no major injuries.

古文：今外寇兵强，臣力寡弱，拒贼备敌，非兵不拟。乞选壮兵，增戍武都，牢城自守，可以无患。
现代文：而今外寇兵力强盛，为臣力弱势寡，而迎敌抗贼，非兵不行，乞请朝廷选择精壮兵士，增守武都，牢城自守，可以无患。
English: But now the foreign invaders have a strong military force, and the subject forces are weak, and it is not possible to meet the enemy and resist the thieves without soldiers. It is safe to ask the court to choose strong soldiers, increase the defense of the capital, and defend the castle.

古文：今事已切急，若不驰闻，损失城镇，恐招深责。
现代文：而今事已切急，如不驰报以闻，损失城镇，为臣必有深责。
English: But now the matter has become urgent, if it is not reported, the loss of the town will be a serious responsibility for the minister.

古文：愿遣高平突骑二千，赍粮一月，速赴仇池。
现代文：恳求陛下派高平突骑二千，带上一个月的粮草，速赴仇池。
English: I implore Your Majesty to send 2,000 horses to Gaoping, take a month's supply of grain and grass with them, and hurry to Qiuchi.

古文：且可抑折逆民，支对贼虏。
现代文：这样可抑制逆民，对付敌人。
English: In this way, the rebels can be restrained and the enemy can be dealt with.

古文：须长阙、上邽、安定戍兵至，可得自全。
现代文：等到长、上絡、安定等地援军一到，便可自保安全。
English: As soon as reinforcements arrive from Chang, Shangluo, and Dingdian, they will be able to protect themselves.

古文：粮者，民之命也；虽有金城汤池，无粮不守。
现代文：粮食，民之生命，即使有金城汤池，无粮不守。
English: Grain, people's lives, even if there is a pot of gold, there is no grain.

古文：仇池本无储积，今岁不收，苦高平骑至，不知云何以得供援。
现代文：仇池本无储粮，今年又无收成，为臣苦于高平骑兵来到，用什么去供给他们。
English: He had no grain reserves and no harvest this year, and his vassals were struggling with what to provide for the arriving Gaoping cavalry.

古文：请遣秦州之民，送军祁山，臣随迎致。 
现代文：臣请速派秦州百姓，送军粮到祁山，臣随即前往迎接。 
English: The minister asked the people of Qinzhou to send military grain to Lushan, and the minister immediately went to meet them.

古文：诏高平镇将苟莫于率突骑二千以赴之，道成等乃退。
现代文：皇帝下诏让高平镇将苟莫于率领突骑二千人前往，萧道成等于是撤退。
English: The emperor issued an edict that Gaoping Town should not lead 2,000 people in a sudden attack, and Xiao Daocheng was forced to retreat.

古文：征豹子为尚书，出为内都大官。
现代文：帝诏征皮豹子为尚书，出任内都大官。
English: He was awarded the title of "Leopard skin" by the emperor, and became a high-ranking official in the Inner Capital.

古文：刘骏遣其将殷孝祖修两当城于清东，以逼南境。天水公封敕文击之，不克。
现代文：刘骏派其将殷孝祖在清水以东修两当城以威胁魏之南境，天水公封敕文攻打他们，不克。
English: Liu Bei sent his general Yin Xiaozu to build two fortresses east of Qingshui in order to threaten Wei's southern border. However, Tianshui's general Xuanwen attacked them.

古文：诏豹子与给事中周丘等助击之。
现代文：帝诏皮豹子与给事中周丘等人助其攻击。
English: The Emperor Leopard and Zhou Qiu, who was in the middle of the action, assisted in the attack.

古文：豹子以南寇城守，攻围费日，遂略地至高平。
现代文：皮豹子觉得攻打城池，耗费时日，于是进军至高平。
English: The Leopard felt that attacking the city was too time-consuming, so he marched to Gaoping.

古文：刘骏瑕丘镇遣步卒五千助戍两当，去城八里，与豹子前锋候骑相遇，即便交战，豹子军继至，大破之。
现代文：刘骏治下的瑕丘镇派步兵五千帮助戍守两当，离城八里，与皮豹子前锋候骑相遇，两军交战，皮豹子军马继到，大破敌军。
English: Under Liu Bei's rule, Keqiu Town sent five thousand infantrymen to help defend the two towns. Eight miles from the city, they met with the leather leopard's forwards waiting to ride, and the two armies fought. The leather leopard's army arrived one after another and defeated the enemy army.

古文：纵骑追击杀之，至于城下，其免者十余人而已。
现代文：纵马追杀敌军，到了城下，免于死难的只有十多个人而已。
English: The horses chased the enemy army, and when they reached the outskirts of the city, only more than ten people were spared from death.

古文：城内恐惧，不敢出救。
现代文：城内敌军恐惧，不敢出城相救。
English: The enemy troops in the city were afraid and did not dare to leave the city to save themselves.

古文：既而班师。
现代文：不久皮豹子班师。
English: Soon, the leather leopard class is formed.

古文：先是，河西诸胡，亡匿避命。
现代文：在此之前，黄河西部诸胡人部落，纷纷逃亡。
English: Prior to this, the Zhuhu tribes in the west of the Yellow River fled.

古文：豹子及前泾州刺史封阿君督河西诸军南趣石楼，与卫大将军、乐安王良以讨群胡。
现代文：皮豹子以及前泾州刺史封阿君督领河西诸军南趋石楼，与卫大将军、乐安王元良一起讨征诸胡。
English: The Leather Leopard and the former Zhangzhou Sashifeng Agundu led the armies of the west of the river south to Shilou, and together with the Wei general and Le'an Wang Yuanliang, they tried to conscript Zhu.

古文：又除镇远将军、河阴令。
现代文：皮豹子与敌人相对侍，没有觉察到胡人的遁逃，无功而还，又因事免官。
English: Leather leopard and the enemy opposite attendants, did not notice the Hu people's escape, in vain, but also because of the dismissal.

古文：卒，赠辅国将军、朔州刺史。
现代文：不久又以前后所立战功，被提拔为内都大官。和平五年六月，逝世。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the position of Inner Capital Grand Officer for his distinguished war service. He passed away in June of the fifth year of peace.

古文：子缵，武定末，颍川太守。
现代文：魏高宗追悼惋惜他，赠封其为淮阳王，谥称襄，赐给命服一套。子道明，袭其爵位。
English: Wei Gaozong mourned and pitied him, bestowed the title of Huaiyang King, called him Xiang, and gave him a set of life clothes. His son Duoming inherited his title.

古文：吕罗汉，本东平寿张人。
现代文：吕罗汉，本是东平寿张人。
English: Lu Luohan is originally from Dongping Shou Zhangren.

古文：其先，石勒时徙居幽州。
现代文：其先祖，在石勒时代迁居幽州。
English: His ancestors moved to Yuzhou during the Shiller era.

古文：祖显，字子明。
现代文：祖吕显，字子明。
English: Zu Lü Xian, Zizi Ming.

古文：少好学，性廉直，乡人有分争者皆就而质焉。
现代文：少年好学，性格廉洁正直，乡里有人发生纠纷都纷纷到他那里评理。
English: The boy is eager to learn, his character is clean and honest. When there are disputes in the village, people come to him for judgment.

古文：慕容垂以为河间太守。
现代文：慕容垂任命他为河间太守。
English: Murong Du appointed him as the governor of Kawama Province.

古文：皇始初，以郡来降，太祖嘉之，赐爵魏昌男，拜钜鹿太守。
现代文：皇始初年，举郡降魏，魏太祖很高兴，赐给他魏昌男的爵位，拜授他为巨鹿太守。
English: In the first year of the reign of the emperor, the county was reduced to Wei. Wei Taizu was very pleased and gave him the title of Wei Chang's son, and bestowed him with the title of Jiu De Taizhou.

古文：清身奉公，务存赡恤，妻子不免饥寒。
现代文：清廉奉公，务存赈恤，他的妻子儿女都忍受饥寒。
English: He is a clean and honest public servant, earns a good salary, and his wife and children suffer from hunger and cold.

古文：民颂之曰： 时惟府君，克己清明。
现代文：老百姓歌颂他说： 时惟府君，克己清明。
English: The common people sang his praises, saying, "When you are the governor of a prefecture, you must be self-disciplined and clear-headed."

古文：缉我荒土，民胥乐生。
现代文：集我荒土，民便乐生。
English: Gather my wasteland, and the people will be happy.

古文：愿寿无疆，以享长龄。 
现代文：愿寿无疆，以享长龄。 
English: May life have no boundaries, so as to enjoy a long life.

古文：卒官。
现代文：卒于官任之上。
English: He later died in office.

古文：父温，字晞阳。
现代文：父亲吕温，字阳。
English: His father was Lü Wen, also known as Yang.

古文：善书，好施，有文武才略。
现代文：擅长书法，喜好施给，有文武才略。
English: He is good at calligraphy, likes to give, and has a talent for literature and martial arts.

古文：世祖伐赫连昌，以温为幢将。
现代文：魏世祖讨伐赫连昌，任吕温为禁卫军将领。
English: The founder of the Wei Dynasty fought against He Lianchang and appointed Lu Wen as the general of the imperial guard.

古文：先登陷陈，每战必捷，以功拜宣威将军、奉车都尉。
现代文：吕温每次作战都身先士卒，冲锋陷阵，每战必捷，因功被朝廷拜授为宣威将军、奉车都尉。
English: In every battle, Lü Wen was always at the forefront, leading the charge and winning every battle. He was awarded the title of General Xuan Wei and Lieutenant Feng Che by the imperial court for his distinguished service.

古文：出为秦州司马，迁上党太守，善劝课，有治名。
现代文：出任秦州司马，迁任上党太守，善于劝民课税，颇有治绩。
English: He served as Qinzhou Sima, and was transferred to the post of Party Governor. He was good at persuading people to levy taxes, and had quite a record.

古文：卒，赠平远将军、豫州刺史、野王侯，谥曰敬。
现代文：死后，朝廷赠其为平远将军、豫州刺史、野王侯，谥称敬。
English: After his death, the imperial court presented him with the titles of General Pingyuan, Prince of Yuzhou and Prince of Yunnan.

古文：罗汉仁笃慎密，弱冠以武干知名。
现代文：吕罗汉仁义笃厚，谨慎细密，少年时代就以武才出名。
English: Luo Han was a benevolent, prudent and meticulous person. He was famous for his military prowess in his youth.

古文：父温之佐秦州，罗汉随侍。
现代文：父亲吕温佐治秦州，吕罗汉随侍其父。
English: His father, Lü Wen, governed Qin State, and Lü Luohan accompanied his father.

古文：陇右氐杨难当率众数万寇上邽，秦民多应之。
现代文：陇右氐人杨难当率领数万兵马侵犯上絡，秦地百姓多有响应。
English: Yang Nantang led tens of thousands of soldiers and horses to invade Shangluo, and the people of Qin mostly responded.

古文：镇将元意头知罗汉善射，共登西城楼，令罗汉射难当队将及兵二十三人，应弦而殪。
现代文：镇将元意头知道吕罗汉善于射击，便与他共登西城楼，让罗汉射杨难当队将以及兵士二十三人，全都应弦而倒。
English: Knowing that Lü Luohan was good at shooting, the town's commander, Yuan Yi, climbed the west tower with him, and asked Luohan to shoot Yang Nan, the team leader, and twenty-three soldiers, all of whom fell to the ground.

古文：贼众转盛，罗汉进计曰： 今若不出战，示敌以弱，众情携贰，大事去矣。 
现代文：敌人势力越来越大，吕罗汉献计说： 如今如不出战，那便是在敌人面前示弱，等到我军众情崩溃，那就大势已去了。 
English: As the enemy's power grew stronger and stronger, Lü Luohan offered a plan: If we don't go to war now, it will be a sign of weakness in front of the enemy, but when our army's morale collapses, then the momentum will be gone.

古文：意头善之，即简千余骑，令罗汉出战。
现代文：意头觉得他的话很对，便拨出千余骑兵让吕罗汉出城迎战。
English: He felt that his words were right, so he sent out more than a thousand cavalry to let Lulohan leave the city to fight.

古文：罗汉与诸骑策马大呼，直冲难当军，众皆披靡。
现代文：罗汉与众骑兵策马大呼，直冲杨难当阵中，敌人纷纷溃退。
English: Luo Han and the cavalry shouted loudly and charged directly at Yang Nan, and the enemy retreated one after another.

古文：杀难当左右队骑八人，难当大惊。
现代文：罗汉杀杨难当左右队骑八人，杨难当大惊失色。
English: Luo Han killed Yang Nan when the left and right teams rode eight people, Yang Nan was shocked and lost his color.

古文：会世祖赐难当玺书，责其跋扈，难当乃引还仇池。
现代文：恰逢魏世祖赐杨难当玺书，责备其跋扈，杨难当于是引兵还归仇池。
English: At the same time, the founder of the Wei Dynasty gave Yang Nantang an imperial edict, reprimanding him for his treachery. Yang Nantang then withdrew his troops and returned to Qiqi.

古文：意头具以状闻，世祖嘉之，征为羽林中郎。
现代文：意头把这个情况具表上闻，魏世祖很是赞赏，征拜他为羽林中郎。
English: He deliberately made this situation known to the world. Emperor Wei was very appreciative and enlisted him as the middle brother of Ulin.

古文：上邽休官吕丰、屠各王飞廉等八千余家，据险为逆，诏罗汉率骑一千讨擒之。
现代文：上絡人休官吕丰、屠各王飞廉等八千多家，据险叛逆，帝诏罗汉率领骑兵一千讨伐擒拿敌人。
English: There were more than 8,000 petitioners, including retired officials Lü Feng and Tu Guo Wang Fei Liang. According to the danger of rebellion, Emperor Rohan led a thousand cavalry to defeat the enemy.

古文：从征悬瓠，罗汉与琅邪王司马楚之驾前招慰，降者九千余户。
现代文：吕罗汉随皇帝征伐悬瓠，与琅笽王司马楚之一起御驾前招慰叛众，降顺的九千多户。
English: Lerohan accompanied the emperor to conquer the Hanging Mountains, and together with one of the kings of the mountains, Sima Chu, he went to comfort the rebels, and more than nine thousand households surrendered.

古文：比至盱眙，频破贼军，擒其将顾俨、李观之等。
现代文：等到了盱眙，频频破灭敌人，擒捉其将领顾俨、李观之等。
English: When the time came, he frequently destroyed the enemy and captured its generals, such as Gu Jun and Li Guan.

古文：以功迁羽林中郎、幢将，赐爵乌程子，加建威将军。
现代文：因功迁升羽林中郎、禁军将领，赐爵乌程子，加授建威将军。
English: For his merits, he was promoted to Ulin Chungro, general of the Forbidden Army, given the title of Duke of Wucheng, and awarded the title of General of Jianwei.

古文：及南安王余立，罗汉犹典宿卫。高宗之立，罗汉有力焉。
现代文：等到南安王元余被立为储君，吕罗汉仍掌禁卫军，高宗得立，吕罗汉出了力。
English: When King Yuan Yu of Nan'an was made crown prince, Lü Luohan was still in charge of the imperial guard. When Gaozong was made emperor, Lü Luohan exerted his strength.

古文：迁少卿，仍幢将，进爵野王侯，加龙骧将军。
现代文：迁任少卿，仍为禁卫将军，晋爵野王侯，加授龙骧将军。
English: He was transferred to the position of junior secretary, but he was still a general of the imperial guard, promoted to the peerage as prince of Yunnan, and awarded the rank of general of the Long March.

古文：拜司卫监，迁散骑常侍、殿中尚书，进爵山阳公，加镇西将军。
现代文：拜授司卫监，迁任散骑常侍、殿中尚书，晋爵山阳公，加授镇西将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Deputy Inspector of the Palace Guards, transferred to the position of Knight-at-Arms and Knight-at-Arms, received the title of Senior Privy Councillor, was awarded the title of Sanyanggong, and was awarded the title of Zhenxi General.

古文：及蠕蠕犯塞，显祖讨之，罗汉与右仆射南平公元目振都督中外军事。
现代文：等到柔然人侵犯边塞，显祖讨伐，吕罗汉与左仆射南平公元目振都督中外军事。
English: By the time Zhu Ranzhong invaded the border fortress, Xian Zu led a crusade, and Luo Han and his left-hand man shot Nanping, he had become the most powerful military leader in China and abroad.

古文：出为镇西将军、秦益二州刺史。
现代文：出任镇西将军，秦、益二州刺史。
English: Appointed as Zhenxi General, Qin and Yixing two states stabbed history.

古文：时仇池氐羌反，攻逼骆谷，镇将吴保元走登百顷，请援于罗汉。
现代文：当时仇池氐羌反叛，攻逼骆谷，镇守将领吴保元逃登百顷，在罗汉那里请求援助。
English: At that time, Qiu Chicheng rebelled and attacked Luogu. The town's commander, Wu Baoyuan, fled hundreds of hectares and went to Luohan to ask for help.

古文：罗汉帅步骑随长孙观掩击氐羌，大破之，斩其渠帅，贼众退散。
现代文：吕罗汉率领骑步兵随长孙观掩击氐羌氏，大破敌军，斩杀其主帅，敌人败退散去。
English: Lv Rohan led the cavalry and infantry to follow the elder Sun Quan to cover the Yu clan, defeated the enemy army, killed its commander, and the enemy was defeated and dispersed.

古文：诏罗汉曰： 卿以劳勤获叙，才能致用，内总禁旅，外临方岳，褒宠之隆，可谓备矣。
现代文：帝诏吕罗汉说： 爱卿以劳勤获叙，才能致用，内总禁旅，外临方岳，褒奖宠幸之隆，可以说全有了。
English: Emperor Lulohan said: "Aiqing was awarded the title through hard work, and it was only through hard work that he was able to use it. He has been banned from traveling within the country, banned from going to Fangyue outside the country, and has been praised and favored by people. It can be said that he has everything.

古文：自非尽节竭诚，将何以垂名竹帛？
现代文：自己如果不尽节竭诚，将何以垂名竹帛？
English: If you don't give your all, what will you be known as?

古文：仇池接近边境，兵革屡兴，既劳士卒，亦动民庶，皆由镇将不明，绥禁不理之所致也。
现代文：仇池接近边境，兵革之事屡屡兴起，既很辛劳士兵，又烦扰黎民百姓，这都是由于镇守将领不明，安抚震慑方法不当所导致。
English: Qiuchi was close to the border, and there were frequent military skirmishes. The soldiers worked very hard, and the people of Li were disturbed. This was all caused by the fact that the commander of the garrison was unknown, and the methods of pacification and deterrence were inappropriate.

古文：卿应机赴击，殄此凶丑。
现代文：卿你应机赴击，灭此凶丑。
English: Sir, you should strike at the right time and destroy this evil.

古文：陇右土险，民亦刚悍，若不导之以德，齐之以刑，寇贼莫由可息，百姓无以得静。
现代文：陇右山水险恶，老百姓也十分强悍，如果不导之以恩德，齐之以刑罚，贼众无法宁息，老百姓无法安宁。
English: The mountains and rivers on the right are treacherous, and the people are also very strong. If they are not guided by grace and punished, the thieves will not be able to rest, and the people will not be able to rest.

古文：朕垂心治道，欲使远近清穆。卿可召集豪右，择其事宜，以利民为先，益国为本，随其风俗，以施威惠。
现代文：朕垂心治道，为的是使远近清穆，卿你可召集豪贵，选择事宜，以利于民为先，有益于国为本，随其当地风俗，以施行威刑恩惠并举的政策。
English: I am anxious to govern the country, in order to make the distant and the near clear, my lord, you can convene the dignitaries, select the matters, take the benefit of the people as the first, the benefit of the country as the basis, follow the local customs, and implement the policy of both punishment and favor.

古文：其有安土乐业、奉公勤私者，善加劝督，无夺时利。
现代文：那里的安居乐业、奉公勤私的人，你要善加劝导监督，不要剥夺他们的农时物利。
English: Those who live and work there in peace and contentment, and serve the public and serve themselves, should be well advised and supervised, and should not be deprived of their agricultural time and material benefits.

古文：明相宣告，称朕意焉。 
现代文：明相宣告，以使朕称心满意。 
English: To declare the truth, to make me satisfied.

古文：泾州民张羌郎扇惑陇东，聚众千余人，州军讨之不能制。
现代文：泾州百姓张羌郎煽动陇东，聚众一千多人，州中军队前去讨伐却制服不了。
English: Zhang Yulang, a citizen of Zhangzhou, instigated Shandong and gathered more than a thousand people. The state army went to fight but could not subdue him.

古文：罗汉率步骑一千击羌郎，擒之。
现代文：吕罗汉率领骑步兵一千人打击张羌郎，抓到了他。
English: Lü Luohan led a thousand cavalry and infantry to attack Zhang Yulang and captured him.

古文：仇池氐羌叛逆遂甚，所在锋起，道路断绝。
现代文：仇池氐、羌人叛逆之风当时也很猖獗，所到之处如蜂起云涌，道路被其断绝。
English: At that time, the rebelliousness of the people of Qi, Chu and Yan was also rampant. Everywhere they went, there were uprisings, and roads were cut off.

古文：其贼帅蛩廉、符祈等皆受刘昱官爵、铁券。
现代文：他们的头领蛩廉、符祈等人都受到刘昱的官爵、铁券的恩赐。
English: Their leaders, such as Gong Lian and Fu Qi, were all given titles of nobility and iron certificates by Liu Bei.

古文：略阳公伏阿奴为都将，与罗汉赴讨，所在破之，生擒廉、祈等。
现代文：略阳公伏阿奴任都将，与吕罗汉一起前去讨伐，所向披靡，生捉廉、祈等人。
English: Liangyang and Anuren, together with Lü Luohan, will go forward to fight, and they will be invincible, and they will catch the corrupt and pray for others.

古文：秦益阻远，南连仇池，西接赤水，诸羌恃险，数为叛逆。
现代文：秦、益二州与京城距离遥远山川阻隔，南边连着仇池，西面接着赤水，诸羌人凭着天险，屡屡叛逆。
English: Qin and Yizhou are separated from Beijing by mountains and rivers, with Qiu Lake to the south and Red Water to the west. The people of Zhoushan have repeatedly rebelled against the government because of natural dangers.

古文：自罗汉莅州，抚以威惠，西戎怀德，土境怗然。
现代文：自从吕罗汉为州长官，他以威势恩惠抚之州民，西部百姓都很驯服，羌地治安大为好转。
English: Since Lv Rohan became the governor, the people in the western part of the state have been very tame, and the public security in Handan has been greatly improved.

古文：高祖诏罗汉曰： 朕总摄万几，统临四海，思隆古道，光显风教。故内委群司，外任方牧，正是志士建节之秋，忠臣立功之会。
现代文：魏高祖下诏吕罗汉说： 朕总摄万机，统治四海，思想着隆盛古时道义，光大显明教化风气，所以内委各个部门，外任州郡长官，眼下正是志士建立名节之秋，忠臣立功之际。
English: Lu Rohan, the second-highest ancestor of the Wei Dynasty, said: "I am the master of all things, ruling the four seas, thinking about the prosperity of ancient morality, and the glory of the enlightened culture. Therefore, all departments of the Internal Affairs Commission, and the out-going state and county governors, now is the autumn of the establishment of famous festivals, and the time for loyal subjects to make contributions.

古文：然赤水诸羌居边土，非卿善诱，何以招辑？
现代文：但赤水羌民，远居边境，如不是卿的循循善诱，怎么能够招顺他们呢？
English: But the people of Chishui, who live far away from the border, how can we win them over if we don't do a good job of enticing them?

古文：卿所得口马，表求贡奉，朕嘉乃诚，便敕领纳。
现代文：卿所得到的人口马匹，你上表以求贡奉朝廷，朕称赞你的忠诚，顺便就把这些赐给你吧。
English: Sir, I commend you for your loyalty in seeking tribute for the imperial court, as well as for the men and horses you obtained. By the way, let me give these to you.

古文：其马印付都牧，口以赐卿。 
现代文：其马交付都牧，人口就赐给你了。 
English: His horses are given to the city pastors, and the people are given to you.

古文：征拜内都大官，听讼察狱，多得其情。
现代文：朝廷征拜他为内都大官，吕罗汉听讼察狱，多得狱情真相。
English: He was recruited by the imperial court to be a high-ranking official of the Inner Capital, and went to Lulohan to listen to the proceedings and inspect the prison. He often learned the truth about the prison conditions.

古文：太和六年，卒于官。
现代文：太和六年，卒于任上。
English: He died six years after taking office.

古文：高祖深悼惜之，赐命服一袭，赠以本官，谥曰庄公。
现代文：魏高祖深为嗟悼叹惜，赐给命服一套，赠予本官，谥称庄公。
English: Wei Gao Zu deeply mourned and lamented, gave him a set of life clothes, presented him to his superior, and nicknamed him Zhuang Gong.

