古文：古者诸侯之射也，必先行燕礼；卿、大夫、士之射也，必先行乡饮酒之礼。
现代文：古代诸侯举行射礼，一定要先举行燕礼；卿、大夫、士举行射礼，一定要先举行乡饮酒之礼。
English: When ancient lords held a shooting ceremony, they must first hold a swallow ceremony; when lords, doctors, and nobles held a shooting ceremony, they must first hold a township drinking ceremony.

古文：故燕礼者，所以明君臣之义也；乡饮酒之礼者，所以明长幼之序也。
现代文：之所以先举行燕礼，是为了明确君臣的名分；之所以先举行乡饮酒之礼，是为了明确长幼的顺序。
English: The reason why the Yan ceremony is held first is to clarify the title of the monarch and the minister; the reason why the township drinking ceremony is held first is to clarify the order of the eldest and youngest.

古文：故射者，进退周还必中礼，内志正，外体直，然后持弓矢审固；持弓矢审固，然后可以言中，此可以观德行矣。
现代文：所以射箭的人，不论前进还是后退，左旋还是右转，动作一定要符合规矩。从内心来说，沉着冷静；从外表来说，身体挺直；然后才可以把弓箭拿得紧瞄得准。把弓箭拿得紧瞄得准，然后才可以指望射中。所以说，从人的外部射箭动作就可以看出他的内在德行。
English: Therefore, whether the archer advances or retreats, whether he turns left or right, his movements must be in accordance with the rules. From the inside, he must be calm and cool; from the outside, his body must be straight; only then can he hold the bow and arrow tightly and aim it. Only then can he hold the bow and arrow tightly and aim it, and only then can he hope to hit it. Therefore, from a person's external archery movements, you can see his inner virtue.

古文：其节：天子以《驺虞》为节；诸侯以《狸首》为节；卿大夫以《采苹》为节；士以《采繁》为节。
现代文：射箭时的节拍：天子射时，以《驺虞》为节拍；诸侯射时，以《狸首》为节拍；卿大夫射时，以《采茹》为节拍；士射时，以《采繁》为节拍。
English: The rhythm of archery: when the heavenly son shoots, the rhythm is "Shan Yu"; when the princes shoot, the rhythm is "Tuxin Shou"; when the noble doctor shoots, the rhythm is "Zhe Ru"; when the scholar shoots, the rhythm is "Zhe Xiang."

古文：《驺虞》者，乐官备也，《狸首》者，乐会时也；《采苹》者，乐循法也；《采繁》者，乐不失职也。
现代文：《驺虞》这首诗，是赞美朝廷百官齐备的；《狸首》这首诗，是赞美诸侯以时勤王而修职贡；《采薪》这首诗，是赞美卿大夫遵循法度；《采繁》这首诗，是赞美士的格尽职守的。
English: The poem "Shuyu" is a poem praising the imperial court's hundred officials; the poem "Tuxuzhu" is a poem praising the princes for being diligent in their duties; the poem "Zhaozhu" is a poem praising the doctors for following the law; the poem "Zhaozhuang" is a poem praising the praisers for doing their duty.

古文：是故天子以备官为节；诸侯以时会天子为节；卿大夫以循法为节；士以不失职为节。
现代文：所以天子用赞美百官齐备的曲子为节拍，诸侯用赞美按时朝王进贡的曲子为节拍，卿大夫用赞美遵循法度的曲子为节拍，士用赞美惜尽职守的曲子为节拍。
English: Therefore, the Heavenly Son uses the music that praises the hundred officials as the beat, the lords use the music that praises the timely payment of tribute to the emperor as the beat, the noble doctors use the music that praises the law as the beat, and the scholars use the music that praises the diligent performance of duties as the beat.

古文：故明乎其节之志，以不失其事，则功成而德行立，德行立则无暴乱之祸矣。功成则国安。
现代文：所以明白了各自伴射歌曲的含义，从而做好各自的工作，才能功业成就和德行树立。德行一旦树立，就不会有杀人越货、为非作歹的不轨行为了；功业成就，国家也就安定了。
English: Therefore, they understood the meaning of their respective accompanying songs, so as to do their respective work well, in order to achieve career achievements and establish virtues. Once virtues are established, there will be no misconduct such as killing people, overloading goods, and committing crimes; career achievements, and the country will be stable.

古文：故曰：射者，所以观盛德也。
现代文：所以说，从射箭这件事上就可以看出人的德行如何。
English: Therefore, one can see how virtuous a person is from archery.

古文：是故古者天子以射选诸侯、卿、大夫、士。
现代文：所以古时候的天子通过射箭比赛来选拔有资格参加助祭的诸侯、卿大夫、大。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, the Son of Heaven used an archery competition to select the princes, nobles, and nobles who were eligible to participate in the ritual.

古文：射者，男子之事也，因而饰之以礼乐也。
现代文：射箭，这是男子的事，所以才用礼乐来修饰它。
English: Archery is a man's game, that's why they use music to decorate it.

古文：故事之尽礼乐，而可数为，以立德行者，莫若射，故圣王务焉。
现代文：所以说，在所有的事情当中，要寻一件既有礼乐的修饰而又可以经常进行并从而树立起德行的，非射箭这件事莫属，所以圣王很重视它。
English: Therefore, of all things, to find one which is adorned with ritual music, and which can be practised regularly, and thereby instilled with virtue, is none other than archery, and therefore the saintly king attaches great importance to it.

古文：是故古者天子之制，诸侯岁献贡士于天子，天子试之于射宫。
现代文：所以古代的天子做出规定：诸侯每年都要向天子报告国计、贡献方物，还要向天子推荐人才，天子便在射宫里考核他们的箭术。
English: Therefore, the ancient emperor made a provision: the lords should report the national budget and contributions to the emperor every year, and also recommend talents to the emperor. The emperor would then examine their archery skills in the palace.

古文：其容体比于礼，其节比于乐，而中多者，得与于祭。
现代文：其仪容体态合乎礼的要求，其射箭节奏合乎乐曲的节拍，而且射中得又多，那就有资格参加天子的祭祀。
English: If his appearance and physique meet the requirements of etiquette, his archery rhythm matches the beat of the music, and he hits a lot, then he will be eligible to participate in the sacrifice of the Son of Heaven.

古文：其容体不比于礼，其节不比于乐，而中少者，不得与于祭。
现代文：其仪容体态不合乎礼的要求，其射箭节奏不合乎乐曲的节拍，就没有资格参加天子的祭祀。
English: If his appearance and posture do not meet the requirements of etiquette, and his archery rhythm does not match the beat of the music, he is not eligible to participate in the sacrifice of the heavenly son.

古文：数与于祭而君有庆；数不与于祭而君有让。
现代文：获准参加祭祀的次数较多，夫子就有奖励；获准参加祭祀的次数较少，天子就要责备。
English: If he is allowed to participate in the sacrificial rites more often, the master will reward him; if he is allowed to participate in the sacrificial rites less often, the son of heaven will rebuke him.

古文：数有庆而益地；数有让而削地。
现代文：奖励的次数多了就增加他的封地，责备的次数多了就削减他的封地。
English: The more he is rewarded, the more his fief increases; the more he is rebuked, the more his fief decreases.

古文：故曰：射者，射为诸侯也。
现代文：所以说，射箭比赛这件事，关系到诸侯的黝险荣辱。
English: Therefore, the archery competition is related to the prestige of the princes.

古文：是以诸侯君臣尽志于射，以习礼乐。
现代文：所以诸侯君臣对箭术都非常用心，对于练习射箭的礼节、练习射箭的乐曲也非常用心。
English: Therefore, lords, princes and ministers are very attentive to archery, and they are also very attentive to the etiquette of practicing archery and the music of practicing archery.

古文：夫君臣习礼乐而以流亡者，未之有也。
现代文：诸侯君臣在练习礼乐上如此尽心而导致被流放、被灭国，那是绝不可能的事。
English: It is absolutely impossible for princes, lords and ministers to be so dedicated to the practice of ceremonial music that they were exiled and destroyed.

古文：故《诗》曰： 曾孙侯氏，四正具举；大夫君子，凡以庶士，小大莫处，御于君所，以燕以射，则燕则誉。 
现代文：所以有篇逸诗说： 身为宗室的诸侯， 当燕礼进行到四度正爵献过之后，有德行的君子，从大夫到众士，不论官大官小，都不要呆坐在官衙内，都到国君那里去侍候。既参加燕礼，又参加射礼。既获得国安，又获得名誉。 
English: Therefore, there is a poem that says: As the ancestral house of the princes, when the Yan ceremony is carried out to four times after the presentation of the first knight, the virtuous gentlemen, from the doctor to the soldiers, regardless of whether the officials are large or small, do not stay in the official residence, they all go to the sovereign to wait. Both participate in the Yan ceremony and participate in the shooting ceremony. Both gain national security and gain honor.

古文：言君臣相与尽志于射，以习礼乐，则安则誉也。是以天子制之，而诸侯务焉。
现代文：诗的意思是说，君臣都对射箭非常尽心，对练习射箭所需的礼乐也非常尽心，所以不但获得国安，而且获得声誉。所以天子制定了射礼，而诸侯认真实行。
English: The meaning of the poem is that the princes and ministers are very dedicated to archery, and they are also very dedicated to the music needed to practice archery, so they not only gain national security, but also gain reputation. Therefore, the heavenly son formulated the archery, and the princes seriously practice.

古文：此天子之所以养诸侯，而兵不用，诸侯自为正之具也。
现代文：这就是天子为什么能够驾驭诸侯而不用武力，而使诸侯自己管理好自己的办法。
English: This is why the Son of Heaven is able to control the princes without the use of force, but by allowing the princes to manage themselves.

古文：孔子射于矍相之圃，盖观者如堵墙。
现代文：孔子在矍相的泽宫演习射礼，围观的人很多，形成了一道人墙。
English: Confucius is practising the salute at the Zaigu Palace in Yixiang. There are a lot of onlookers, forming a human wall.

古文：射至于司马，使子路执弓矢，出延射曰： 贲军之将，亡国之大夫，与为人后者不入，其余皆入。 
现代文：射前先举行饮酒礼，到了该射箭的时候，孔子叫子路手持弓矢出列延请射箭的人说：财而过继给他人作儿子的人都有资格进来参加比赛 败军之将、便国君亡国的大夫、为了贪，没有资格进来参加射箭比赛。其他的。 
English: Before the shooting, a drinking ceremony was held. When it was time for the archery, Confucius called the children to line up with bows and arrows to invite the archer to say: Those who are sons of others for financial reasons are eligible to enter the competition. The general of the defeated army, the doctor of the defeated country, for greed, are not eligible to enter the archery competition. Others.

古文：盖去者半，入者半。
现代文：听到这话之后，有一半人自以为合格而留下，另外的一半人都走开了。
English: After hearing this, half of the people thought they were qualified and stayed, while the other half left.

古文：又使公罔之裘、序点，扬觯而语，公罔之裘扬觯而语曰： 幼壮孝弟，耆耋好礼，不从流俗，修身以俟死者，不，在此位也。 
现代文：一比赛结束，到了旅酬的时候子又叫公周之裘和序点举起酒杯对在场的人讲话。孔公周之裘举杯说： 幼年壮年时能够孝顺父母敬事兄长，到了老年还讲究礼法，不随波逐流，洁身自好而至死不变，有这样的人吗？如果有，就请在宾位落座。 
English: At the end of the game, when it was time for the reward of the journey, the son also asked Gong Zhou Zhi Qiao and the order point to raise a glass and speak to the people present. Gong Zhou Zhi Qiao raised a glass and said: In childhood and adulthood, you can be filial to your parents and respect your brothers and sisters. In old age, you still pay attention to etiquette, do not drift with the tide, keep yourself clean and do not change until death. Is there such a person? If so, please sit in the guest seat.

古文：盖去者半，处者半。
现代文：听到这话之后，人又走了一半。
English: After hearing this, the man walked half way again.

古文：序点又扬觯而语曰： 好学不倦，好礼不变，旄期称道不乱者，不，在此位也。 盖仅有存者。
现代文：序点又举杯说： 爱好学习而不厌倦，爱好礼法而不改变，活到了八十九十乃至一百岁也言行毫不糊涂，有这样的人吗？
English: The preamble also raised a glass and said: Is there anyone who likes to study without getting tired, likes etiquette without changing, and lives to be eighty-nine or even a hundred years old and is not confused in words and deeds?

古文：射之为言者绎也，或曰舍也。
现代文：如果有，就请在宾位落座。 听到这话之后，人差不多就走光了。
English: If there are any, please take a seat in the guest seats.After hearing this, almost everyone left.

古文：绎者，各绎己之志也。
现代文：所谓射，就是寻绎的意思，或者说是释放的意思。
English: The so-called shooting is the meaning of deduction, or the meaning of release.

古文：故心平体正，持弓矢审固；持弓矢审固，则射中矣。
现代文：所谓寻绎，就是寻绎自己志向之所在。所以在射箭的时候，如果心平气和，身体端正，就可以把弓矢拿得紧、瞄得准；把弓矢拿得紧、瞄得准，自然就射中目标了。
English: The so-called deduction is the deduction of one's own aspiration. Therefore, when archery, if the mind is calm and the body is upright, you can hold the bow and arrow tightly and aim it; hold the bow and arrow tightly and aim it, and you will naturally hit the target.

古文：故曰：为人父者，以为父鹄；为人子者，以为子鹄；为人君者，以为君鹄；为人臣者，以为臣鹄。
现代文：所以说：做父亲的在射箭时，就要把远处的目标当作是自己作为父亲应该达到的目标；做儿子的在射箭时，就要把远处的目标当作是自己作为儿子应该达到的目标；做国君的在射箭时，就要把远处的目标当作是自己作为国君应该达到的目标；作臣子的在射箭时，就要把远处的目标当作是自己作为臣子应该达到的目标。
English: Therefore, it is said that: when a father is archery, he should regard the distant target as the target he should achieve as a father; when a son is archery, he should regard the distant target as the target he should achieve as a son; when a prince is archery, he should regard the distant target as the target he should achieve as a prince; when a courtier is archery, he should regard the distant target as the target he should achieve as a courtier.

古文：故射者各射己之鹄。
现代文：这也就是说，各人所瞄准的都是各自应该达到的目标。
English: That is to say, everyone is aiming at the goals that they should achieve.

古文：故天子之大射谓之射侯；射侯者，射为诸侯也。
现代文：所以天子的大射叫做 射侯 。所谓 射侯 ，也就是向诸侯应该达到的目标射去。
English: Therefore, Tenshi's great shot is called "Shohō." The so-called "Shohō," that is, to shoot at the goal that the lords should achieve.

古文：射中则得为诸侯；射不中则不得为诸侯。
现代文：射中目标就配当诸侯，射不中目标就不配当诸侯。
English: If you hit the target, you will be rewarded with lordships. If you miss the target, you will not be rewarded with lordships.

古文：天子将祭，必先习射于泽。
现代文：天子在举行祭祀之前，一定要先在泽宫演习射箭。
English: Before holding a religious service, the Son of Heaven must first practice archery at the Imperial Palace.

古文：泽者，所以择士也。
现代文：泽宫之所以称 泽 ，是因为要在这里选择可以参加祭祀的诸侯。
English: The reason why the palace is called "Ze" is because it was here that the lords who could participate in the sacrificial rites were chosen.

古文：已射于泽，而后射于射宫。
现代文：在泽宫射毕，然后再在射宫中射。
English: He finished shooting in Ze Palace, and then he shot in the middle of the palace.

古文：射中者得与于祭；不中者不得与于祭。
现代文：射中的诸侯可以参加祭祀，没有射中的诸侯不得参加祭祀。
English: The lords in the middle of the shooting can participate in the ritual, and the lords who are not in the middle of the shooting are not allowed to participate in the ritual.

古文：不得与于祭者有让，削以地；得与于祭者有庆，益以地。
现代文：不得参加祭祀的诸侯要受到责备，并削减封地；可以参加祭祀的诸侯，将受到褒奖，并增加封地。
English: Princes who are not allowed to participate in the ritual will be reprimanded and their fiefs will be reduced; princes who can participate in the ritual will be rewarded and their fiefs will be increased.

古文：进爵绌地是也。
现代文：受到褒奖的先进爵，受到责备的先削地。
English: The first to be praised is the first to be praised, and the first to be blamed is the first to be blamed.

古文：故男子生，桑弧蓬矢六，以射天地四方。
现代文：所以男孩子出生以后，要让射人用桑木之弓射出六只蓬草之箭：一箭射天，一箭射地犷四箭分射东南西北，表示敬天敬地，威服四方。
English: Therefore, after a male child is born, shooters should use a mulberry bow to shoot six fluffy grass arrows: one arrow to the sky, one arrow to the ground, and four arrows to the southeast and northwest, to show respect for heaven and earth, and to intimidate the four directions.

古文：天地四方者，男子之所有事也。
现代文：有天地四方的雄心大志，乃是男子分内之事。
English: It's a man's job to be ambitious.

古文：故必先有志于其所有事，然后敢用谷也。
现代文：一所以一定要先立下这样的雄心大志，然后才敢享用谷物，这就像是先干活而后吃饭那样。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to set such an ambitious goal first, and then dare to enjoy the grain, which is like working first and then eating.

古文：饭食之谓也。射者，仁之道也。
现代文：射礼射箭这件事，乃求仁之道。
English: This matter of shooting salutes and arrows is the way to seek benevolence.

古文：射求正诸己，己正然后发，发而不中，则不怨胜己者，反求诸己而已矣。
现代文：射箭时先要做到心正、身正，然后再把箭射出去。如果没有射中，也不要怨胜过自己的人，而应该从自己身上寻找原因。
English: When shooting arrows, you must first be upright in mind and body, and then shoot the arrow. If you don't hit, don't grudge those who beat you, but you should look for the reason from yourself.

古文：孔子曰： 君子无所争，必也射乎！
现代文：孔子说：君子虽然没有什么可以争的，但如果说有，也应该是在射箭射礼这件事情上。
English: Confucius said: Although there is nothing for a gentleman to argue about, if there is, it should be in the matter of archery.

古文：揖让而升，下而饮，其争也君子。 
现代文：所以君子之间即使有所争，也还是君子。
English: Therefore, even if there is a dispute between gentlemen, they are still gentlemen.

古文：孔子曰： 射者何以射？
现代文：孔子又说： 射箭的人怎样使射箭和音乐相配合？
English: Confucius also said: How can an archer combine archery and music?

古文：何以听？
现代文：又使音乐和射箭相配合？
English: And pairing music with archery?

古文：循声而发，发而不失正鹄者，其唯贤者乎！
现代文：这是难做的事。按照音乐的节拍发射，发射出去而正中靶心的，大概只有贤者才能做到吧！
English: It's a difficult thing to do. Firing according to the beat of the music, firing and hitting the bull's-eye, probably only the wise can do it!

古文：若夫不肖之人，则彼将安能以中？ 
现代文：如果是不肖之人，他哪里能够谈得上射中呢？ 
English: If he is not a good-looking person, how can he be a good conversationalist?

古文：《诗》云： 发彼有的，以祈尔爵。 祈，求也；求中以辞爵也。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 射箭时心中默祝一定要射中目标，以求不喝对方的罚酒。 祈，求也。祈求射中目标以免去罚酒。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "When shooting arrows, silently pray in your heart that you must hit the target, so as not to drink the other side's wine. Pray, pray. Pray to hit the target so as not to drink the wine."

古文：酒者，所以养老也，所以养病也；求中以辞爵者，辞养也。
现代文：酒是用来养老的，用来养病的。祈求射中而免去罚酒，实际上就是免去了非老非病而受他人奉养。
English: Alcohol is used to support the elderly and to cure diseases. To pray for a hit and be exempt from alcohol punishment is actually to be exempt from old age and illness and be supported by others.

