古文：楚考烈王无子，春申君患之，求妇人宜子者进之，甚众，卒无子。
现代文：楚考烈王没有儿子，相国春申君为此很是忧虑，寻求宜于生子的妇人进献给考烈王，虽然进献了许多妇人，却始终没有生下儿子来。
English: King Chuko did not have a son, and Chunshen was worried about this, so he looked for a suitable woman to give birth to a son and offered her to King Chu. Although he offered a lot, he still did not have a son.

古文：赵人李园，持其女弟，欲进之楚王，闻其不宜子，恐又无宠。
现代文：赵国人李园，带着自己的妹妹，想要把她进献给楚王，可是又听人说自己的妹妹并无生子之相，又担心将来得不到楚王的宠幸。
English: Li Yuan, a native of Zhao, took his sister with him and wanted to present her to King Chu. However, he heard that his sister did not have any children, and he was worried that he would not be able to win the favor of King Chu in the future.

古文：李园求事春申君为舍人。已而谒归，故失期。
现代文：李园就请求能当春申君的舍人，当上舍人不久，请假回家，又故意晚回来。
English: Li Yuan asked to be Chun Shen Jun's concubine, and soon after he became the concubine, he took a leave of absence to go home and deliberately came back late.

古文：还谒，春申君问状。
现代文：回来见到春申君，春申君问他为什么迟到。
English: He came back to see Chunshenjun. Chunshenjun asked him why he was late.

古文：对曰： 齐王遣使求臣女弟，与其使者饮，故失期。 
现代文：李园回答说： 齐王派使者来娶我的妹妹，我和使者一起喝酒，所以耽误了回来的时间。 
English: Li Yuan replied, "King Qi sent an envoy to marry my sister. I was drinking with the envoy, so I delayed my return.

古文：春申君曰： 聘入乎？ 
现代文：春申君说： 送过聘礼了吗？ 
English: Chunshen said: Have you sent a betrothal gift?

古文：对曰： 未也。 
现代文：李园说： 还没有。 
English: Li Yuan replied, "No."

古文：春申君曰： 可得见乎？ 
现代文：春申君说： 我能见一下你的妹妹吗？ 
English: Chunshen also asked: Can I have a look?

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：李园说： 可以。 
English: A: Yes.

古文：于是园乃进其女弟，即幸于春申君。
现代文：于是李园就把妹妹进献给了春申君，就受到春申君的宠爱。
English: As a result, Li Yuan dedicated his younger sister to Chunshen, and he was loved by Chunshen.

古文：知其有身，园乃与其女弟谋。
现代文：当李园知道妹妹有了身孕，就和妹妹商量了一个计谋。
English: When Li Yuan knew that his sister was pregnant, he discussed a plan with her.

古文：园女弟承间说春申君曰： 楚王之贵幸君，虽兄弟不如。
现代文：李园妹妹向春申君说： 君王宠爱你，就连兄弟也不过如此。
English: Li Yuan's younger sister said to Chunshen, "The king loves you, even your brothers do.

古文：今君相楚王二十余年，而王无子，即百岁后将更立兄弟。
现代文：现在你当楚国相国已经有二十多年了，可是楚王还没有儿子。等到楚王死后，必然拥立兄弟为王。
English: Now you have been the king of Chu for more than twenty years, but King Chu still has no son. When King Chu dies, he will inevitably appoint his brother as king.

古文：即楚王更立，彼亦各贵其故所亲，君又安得长有宠乎？
现代文：楚国王位更换，必然重用自己的亲人，您又怎么能长久的得到宠幸呢？
English: With the replacement of King Chu's throne, it is inevitable to reuse your relatives. How can you get favored for a long time?

古文：非徒然也，君用事久，多失礼于王兄弟，兄弟诚立，祸且及身，奈何以保相印、江东之封乎？
现代文：不仅如此，您出任宰相的时间又长，难免对大王兄弟有许多失礼得罪的地方。将来大王的兄弟如果真的登上王位，您定会身受大祸，又怎能保全相国和江东的封地呢？
English: Not only that, you have served as prime minister for a long time, and there are inevitably many impolites and offenses against the Great King's brothers. If the Great King's brother really ascends to the throne in the future, you will surely suffer great misfortune. How can you protect your country and the fiefdom in the east of the Yangtze River?

古文：今妾自知有身矣，而人莫知。
现代文：现在臣妾已经知道自己怀有身孕，旁人却谁也不知道。
English: Now I know I'm pregnant, but no one else does.

古文：妾之幸君未久，诚以君之重而进妾于楚王，王心幸妾。
现代文：臣妾受你的宠爱还不算久，假如能凭你的高贵身份而把臣妾献给楚王，那楚王必然会宠爱臣妾。
English: It hasn't been long since vassals and concubines have been your favorites. If you can offer your vassals and concubines to King Chu based on your noble status, then King Chu will surely love his vassals and concubines.

古文：妾赖天而有男，则是君之子为王也，楚国封尽可得，孰与其临不测之罪乎? 
现代文：万一臣妾能生下儿子，不就是您的儿子做了楚王，到那时楚国不就尽在你的掌握中了吗，这和面对着不可猜测的罪过相比，哪一个更好呢？ 
English: In the unlikely event that your concubine gives birth to a son, wouldn't your son become the king of Chu, and wouldn't you then have the entire state of Chu under your control? Compared to facing an incalculable sin, which one is better?

古文：春申君大然之。乃出园女弟谨舍，而言之楚王。
现代文：春申君认为这话很对，就把李园的妹妹转移到一个秘密的地方，并向楚王进献李园妹妹。
English: Chun Shenjun thought this was very right, so he transferred Li Yuan's sister to a secret place and presented Li Yuan's sister to King Chu.

古文：楚王召入，幸之。
现代文：楚王把李园妹妹召来后就非常喜欢她。
English: After King Chu summoned Li Yuan's younger sister, he liked her very much.

古文：遂生子男，立为太子，以李园女弟立为王后。
现代文：后来果然生了一个男陔，而且被立为太子，李园的妹妹也被立皇后。
English: Later, a male heir was born, and he was made crown prince. Li Yuan's younger sister was also made empress.

古文：楚王贵李园，李园用事。
现代文：考烈王也很重用李园，李园也因此掌握了朝政。
English: King Koretsu also made heavy use of Li Yuan, and as a result, Li Yuan gained control of the imperial government.

古文：李园既入其女弟为王后，子为太子，恐春申君语泄而益骄，阴养死士，欲死春申君以灭口，而国人颇有知之者。
现代文：李园已经把自己妹妹送入宫做了皇后，所生的孩子又成了太子，深恐春申君越发骄纵或者泄漏内幕，因此就在暗中养着刺客，想杀死春申君灭口，但当时国内已经有很多人知道了这件事。
English: Li Yuan had already sent his sister to the palace to become the empress, and the child he had given birth to became the crown prince. He was deeply afraid that Chunshenjun would become more and more arrogant or divulge the inside story, so he secretly raised an assassin to kill Chunshenjun, but at that time many people in the country already knew about it.

古文：春申君相楚二十五年，考烈王病。
现代文：当春申君作楚相国第二十五年时，考烈王生病了。
English: In the 25th year of Chunshen's reign, King Korai fell ill.

古文：朱英谓春申君曰：世有无妄之福，又有无妄之祸。
现代文：这时朱英对春申君说： 世间有出人意外的鸿福，也有始料不及的横祸。
English: At this time, Zhu Ying said to Chunshenjun: There are unexpected blessings in the world, as well as unexpected disasters.

古文：今君处无妄之世，以事无妄之主，安不有无妄之人乎？ 
现代文：现在您就处于这样的境地，侍奉的是出人意料的君主，又怎能得不到出人意料的人呢？ 
English: Now you are in this situation, serving an unexpected monarch, how can you not get unexpected people?

古文：春申君曰： 何谓无妄之福? 
现代文：春申君说： 什么叫出人意外的福呢？ 
English: Chun Shun said: What is unexpected good fortune?

古文：曰： 君相楚二十余年矣，虽名为相国，实楚王也。
现代文：朱英说： 您当楚国的相国已经多年了，虽然名是楚国的相国，实际上是楚国的国王。
English: Zhu Ying said: You have been the King of Chu for many years. Although you are called the King of Chu, you are actually the King of Chu.

古文：五子皆相诸侯。
现代文：五个儿子都当上了诸侯的辅相。
English: All five sons became the princes' aides-de-camp.

古文：今王疾甚，旦暮且崩，太子衰弱。疾而不起，而君相少主，因而代立当国，如伊尹、周公。王长而反政，不，即遂南面称孤，因而有楚国。
现代文：现在君王病得很重，早晚是会死的，一旦大王彻底病倒了，您就得做少主的相国，太子弱小，你就得代少主掌管国政，就像伊尹和周公一样，等少主长大再让他亲政，要不然，您就可以南面称王，掌握楚国。
English: Now the king is very ill, and will die sooner or later. Once the great king is completely ill, you will have to be the younger lord's partner country. If the prince is weak, you will have to take charge of state affairs on behalf of the younger lord. Just like Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, wait for the younger lord to grow up and then let him take over the government. Otherwise, you can be the king of the south and control the state of Chu.

古文：此所谓无妄之福也。 
现代文：这就是所谓出人意外的福。 
English: This is the so-called unexpected blessing.

古文：春申君曰； 何谓无妄之祸? 
现代文：春申君问： 那什么叫出人意外的祸呢？ 
English: Chunshen asked: What is the reason for the unexpected disaster?

古文：曰： 李园不治国，王之舅也。
现代文：李英说： 李园不是治理国家的相国，而是君王的大舅子。
English: Li Ying said, "Li Yuan is not the brother-in-law who governs the country, but the king's elder brother-in-law.

古文：不为兵将，而阴养死士之日久矣。
现代文：他不领兵大将，却在暗中豢养刺客，这是很久的事情了。
English: It's been a long time since he didn't take generals, but secretly nurtured assassins.

古文：楚王崩，李园必先入。据本议制断君命，秉权而杀君以灭口。此所谓无妄之祸也。 
现代文：楚王死后，李园必定入宫，据本奏议，假传君王命令杀您灭口，这就是所谓意想不到的祸。 
English: After the death of King Chu, Li Yuan will certainly enter the palace. According to this report, the false king ordered to kill you. This is the so-called unexpected disaster.

古文：春申君曰： 何谓无妄之人？ 
现代文：春申君说： 什么叫意想不到的人呢？ 
English: Chunshen said, "What do you call an unexpected person?

古文：曰： 君先仕臣为郎中，君王崩，李园先入，臣请为君其胸杀之。此所谓无妄之人也。 
现代文：朱英说： 阁下先任命臣为郎中卫士官，君王死后，李园一定先入宫，请让臣替您以利剑刺入他的胸膛把他杀死，这就是所谓意想不到的人。 
English: Zhu Ying said, "Your Excellency first appointed your vassal to be the middle guard officer. After the death of the king, Li Yuan must enter the palace first. Please let your vassal stab him in the chest with a sharp sword to kill him. This is the so-called unexpected person."

古文：春申君曰： 先生置之，勿复言已。李园，软弱人也。仆又善之，又何至此？ 
现代文：春申君说： 先生先别提这事，李园为人诚恳老实，我又和他很要好，怎么能用这种毒辣的手段呢？ 
English: Chun Shenjun said, "Sir, don't mention this matter first. Li Yuan is a sincere and honest person, and I am very good friends with him. How can you use such a poisonous means?

古文：朱英恐，乃亡去。
现代文：朱英一看春申君不肯听他的话，心里便害怕起来，就赶紧离开楚国。
English: When Zhu Ying saw that Chunshen was not willing to listen to his words, she was afraid and left Chu.

古文：后十七日，楚考烈王崩，李园果先入，置死士，止于棘门之内。
现代文：十七日后，楚考烈王驾崩，李园果然先入宫中，暗中在棘门内布置刺客。
English: Seventeen days later, after the death of King Chuko, Li Yuan entered the palace first and secretly placed an assassin inside the gate.

古文：春申君后入，止棘门。园死士夹刺春申君，斩其头，投之棘门外。于是使吏尽灭春申君之家。
现代文：当春申君经过棘门时，李园的刺客从门两边跳出杀死他，然后将他的头割下丢到棘门外，同时又派人杀死春申君的全部家族。
English: When Chunshen passed through the thorn gate, the assassins of Li Yuan jumped out from both sides of the gate to kill him, then cut off his head and threw it outside the thorn gate, and at the same time sent someone to kill Chunshen's entire family.

古文：而李园女弟，初幸春申君有身，而入之王新生子者，遂立为楚幽王也。
现代文：李园的妹妹所生的孩子，被立为幽王。
English: The child born to Li Yuan's sister was made the king.

