古文：班超子勇梁慬何熙班超字仲升，扶风平陵人，徐令彪之少子也。
现代文：◆班超传，班超字仲升，扶风平陵县人，是徐县县令班彪的小儿子。
English: ◆Ban Chao Chuan, Ban Chao Zi Zhong Sheng, a native of Fu Feng Pingling County, was the youngest son of Ban Biao, the county magistrate of Xu County.

古文：为人有大志，不修细节。
现代文：他为人有大志，不拘小节。
English: He is a man of great ambitions, no matter how small.

古文：然内孝谨，居家常执勤苦，不耻劳辱。
现代文：可是他孝顺恭谨，居家操持勤苦，不以劳苦受辱为耻。
English: However, he is filial and respectful, works hard at home, and is not ashamed of hard work and humiliation.

古文：有口辩，而涉猎书传。
现代文：他广阅书传，很有口才。
English: He reads widely and is very eloquent.

古文：永平五年，兄固被召诣校书郎，超与母随至洛阳。
现代文：永平五年，他的哥哥班固被征召任校书郎，班超和他的母亲一同到洛阳。
English: In the fifth year of Yongping, his elder brother, Ban Gu, was conscripted as a school teacher, and Ban Chao went to Luoyang with his mother.

古文：家贫，常为官佣书以供养。
现代文：他家里很贫困，常为官家雇用抄书，以其所得来供养母亲。
English: His family was very poor, and he was often employed by the government to copy books, using his income to support his mother.

古文：久劳苦，尝辍业投笔叹曰： 大丈夫无它志略，犹当效傅介子、张骞立功异域，以取封侯，安能久事笔研间乎？ 
现代文：因此长时间工作劳苦，曾放下工作投笔叹道： 大丈夫没有其他壮志大略，还应该效法傅介子、张骞，立功于异域来取得封侯，怎么能长久从事笔砚的工作呢？ 
English: Therefore, he worked hard for a long time, and once put down his work to write and sighed: "It's okay, my husband has no other ambition. He should also follow the example of Fu Kaizi and Zhang Xuan and make a contribution in a foreign country to obtain a title of nobility. How can he be engaged in the work of writing for a long time?"

古文：左右皆笑之。
现代文：同事们都取笑他。
English: Colleagues made fun of him.

古文：超曰： 小子安知壮士志哉！ 
现代文：班超说： 小子们怎么知道壮士的志气呢？ 
English: The team leader said, "How do the kids know what the spirit of a warrior is?

古文：其后行诣相者，曰： 祭酒，布衣诸生耳，而当封侯万里之外。 
现代文：后来，他到看相的那里去看相，看相的说 ：先生，您不过是布衣之士罢了，可是将来必定封侯于万里之外。 
English: Later, he went to the photographer to have his portrait taken, and the photographer said, "Sir, you are only a man of the cloth, but in the future you will surely be a prince thousands of miles away."

古文：超问其状。相者指曰： 生燕颔虎颈，飞而食肉，此万里侯相也。 
现代文：班超询问他的形状，看相的说： 你额头如燕，颈脖如虎，飞翔食肉，这是万里侯的相貌啊。 
English: The superintendent inquired about his shape, and the physiognomist said: Your forehead is like a swallow, your neck is like a tiger, and you fly like a carnivore. This is the appearance of a million li.

古文：久之，显宗问固： 卿弟安在？ 
现代文：过了很久，显宗问班固： 你的弟弟在哪儿？ 
English: After a long time, Hentong asked Banggu: Where is your brother?

古文：固对： 为官写书，受直以养老母。 
现代文：班固对显宗说： 他在给官府抄书，得点钱来供养老母。 
English: He was copying books for the government to earn some money to support his elderly mother.

古文：帝乃除超为兰台令史。
现代文：显宗就任命班超为兰台令史。
English: Emperor Xuanzong appointed Banchao to be the Rantai Rongshi.

古文：后坐事免官。
现代文：后来，班超因有过失而罢了官。
English: Later, the head teacher was dismissed for negligence.

古文：十六年，奉车都尉窦固出击匈奴，以超为假司马，将兵别击伊吾，战于蒲类海，多斩首虏而还。
现代文：永平十六年，奉东都尉窦固出击匈奴，起用班超做假司马，让他率领一支军队攻击伊吾，在蒲类海作战，斩了敌人很多首级回来。
English: In the 16th year of Yongping, Fengdong Captain Dou Gu led an expedition to attack the Xiongnu, appointed the squad leader to be a fake Sima, let him lead an army to attack Igu, fought in the Pudong Sea, and returned with many heads of the enemy.

古文：固以为能，遣与从事郭恂惧使西域。
现代文：窦固认为班超很有才能，派遣他跟从郭恂一道出使西域。
English: Dou Gu thought that Banchao was very talented and sent him to the western region together with Guo Yao.

古文：超到鄯善，鄯善王广奉超礼敬甚备，后忽更疏懈。
现代文：班超到了鄯善国，鄯善国王广很恭敬而有礼貌地接待了他，后来忽然变得冷淡了。
English: When Banchao arrived in the Kingdom of Shanshan, King Guang of Shanshan received him with great respect and courtesy, but then he suddenly became cold.

古文：超谓其官属曰： 宁觉广礼意薄乎？
现代文：班超对他的部属说 ：你们可曾感觉到鄯善国王广对我们的敬意减低了吗？
English: The head of the class said to his subordinates: Don't you think that Gong Shan Wang Guang has become very cold to us?

古文：此必有北虏使来，狐疑未知所从故也。
现代文：这一定是有匈奴使者来，鄯善国王心怀犹豫不知所以的缘故。
English: It must have been due to the arrival of the Huns' envoy that made the benevolent king undecided as to which side to side with.

古文：明者睹未萌，况已著邪。 
现代文：明智的人能够看出还没有露出苗头的事物，何况是明摆着的事实呢？ 
English: How can an intelligent person see things that have not yet appeared, let alone things that are already there?

古文：乃召待胡诈之曰： 匈奴使来数日，今安在乎？ 
现代文：于是叫来侍候的胡人，吓诈他说： 匈奴使者来了好几天了。现在在哪儿？ 
English: Then he called the hu man, who was waiting for him, and scaring him, he said: "The Hun messenger has been coming for several days. Where is he now?

古文：侍胡惶恐，具服其状。
现代文：侍者吓不过，就吐露了全部情况。
English: The bodyguard was startled and had to answer truthfully.

古文：超乃闭侍胡，悉会其吏士三十六人，与共饮，酒酣，因激怒之曰： 卿曹与我俱在绝域，欲立大功，以求富贵。
现代文：班超便把侍者关起来，把他的部属三十六人都召集起来一同喝酒。喝得高兴的时候，班超便用语言激怒他们说 ：你们和我都处在极偏远的地方，想立大功以求富贵。
English: Banchao then locked up the waiter and gathered all thirty-six of his subordinates to drink together. When they were happily drinking, Banchao used words to provoke them, saying, "You and I are in a very remote place and want to do great deeds in order to get rich.

古文：今虏使到裁数日，而王广礼敬即废；如令鄯善收吾属送匈奴，骸骨长为豺狼食矣。
现代文：现在匈奴使者来了才几天，而鄯善王广便取消礼敬，如果他把我们抓起来送给匈奴，那我们的骸骨就会永远喂豺狼了。你们看怎么办呢？ 
English: Now, the Hun envoy has only been here for a few days, and Gong Shan Wang Guang has cancelled the courtesies. If he arrests us and sends us to the Huns, then our skeletons will be fed to the jackals forever. What do you think?

古文：为之奈何？ 官属皆曰： 今在危亡之地，死生从司马。 
现代文：部属都说 ：现在处在危急存亡的地方，死活都听从司马的吩咐。 
English: His subordinates all said, "We are now in a critical situation, and we have to follow Sima's orders."

古文：超曰： 不入虎穴，不得虎子。
现代文：班超说 ：不到老虎洞里，就抓不到小老虎。
English: "If you don't go into the tiger's den, you can't catch the little tiger," Banchao said.

古文：当今之计，独有因夜以火攻虏，使彼不知我多少，必大震怖，可殄尽也。
现代文：现在的上策，只有趁夜晚天黑，用火攻击匈奴人，他们不知道我们有多少人，一定会大为惊恐，我们便可全部消灭他们。
English: The best thing to do now is to take advantage of the darkness of the night and attack the Huns with fire. They don't know how many of us there are, so they'll be terrified, and we'll be able to destroy them all.

古文：灭此虏，则鄯善破胆，功成事立矣。 
现代文：消灭了匈奴人，鄯善王会因此吓破了胆，我们便大功告成，事情办好。 
English: When the Huns were exterminated, the King's Goodness Society was shaken to its core, and we were able to complete our great work and get things done.

古文：众曰： 当与从事议之。 
现代文：部属们说： 应当跟从事商量一下。 
English: The subordinates said, "We should consult with the company."

古文：超怒曰： 吉凶决于今日。
现代文：班超怒曰： 是吉是凶，决定在于今日。
English: Ban Chao Rong said, "Whether it is good or bad, the decision lies in today."

古文：从事文俗吏，闻此必恐而谋泄，死无所名，非壮士也！ 
现代文：从事是庸俗的文官，听了我们的计划必定会因害怕而泄露机密。死了不为人所称道，不是一个豪壮而勇敢的人。 大家说： 好！ 
English: He was a vulgar civil servant, and when he heard of our plans he was sure to betray the secret out of fear. He died without being celebrated, without being a great and brave man. Everyone said: Good!

古文：众曰： 善。 初夜，遂将吏士往奔虏营。
现代文：初更时分，班超便率领部属奔向匈奴使者营地。
English: At dusk, Ban Chao led his subordinates to rush to the Hun envoy camp.

古文：会天大风，超令十人持鼓藏虏舍后，约曰： 见火然，皆当鸣鼓大呼。 
现代文：这时，正刮着大风。班超叫十个人拿着鼓躲在匈奴使者驻地后边，约定说： 你们看到火攻起来了，就都击鼓大声呐喊。 
English: At this time, a strong wind was blowing. The superintendent called ten people to take the drums and hide behind the Hun ambassador's residence. They agreed to say: When you see the fire, you will all beat the drums and shout loudly.

古文：余人悉持兵弩夹门而伏。
现代文：其余的人都拿着弓箭武器，埋伏在匈奴使者驻地的门前两边。
English: The rest, armed with bows and arrows, lay in ambush on both sides in front of the gate of the Hun ambassador's residence.

古文：超乃顺风纵火，前后鼓噪。
现代文：班超顺风放火，前后击鼓喧哗，匈奴人吓得乱作一团。
English: After the deployment was completed, the squad leader took advantage of the wind to set fire to the grove and directed the drummers to beat the drums.

古文：虏众惊乱，超手格杀三人，吏兵斩其使及从士三十余级，余众百许人悉烧死。
现代文：班超亲手杀死三个人，部属杀死了匈奴使者，还杀死了匈奴使者的随从三十多人，全都砍下了他们的脑袋。其余的一百多人全被烧死。
English: Banchao killed three people with his own hands, his subordinates killed the Hun envoy, and also killed more than thirty of the Hun envoy's followers, all of whom had their heads cut off. The remaining more than one hundred people were all burned to death.

古文：明日乃还告郭恂，恂大惊，既而色动。
现代文：第二天，就回去把情况告知郭恂。郭恂开始大吃一惊，一会儿脸色变了。
English: The next day, I went back to tell Guo Yao about the situation. Guo Yao was startled and his face changed.

古文：超知其意，举手曰： 掾虽不行，班超何心独擅之乎？ 
现代文：班超知道他的意思是想要分功，便举着手对郭恂说： 您虽然没有一同去破敌，我怎么会存心独占这份功劳呢？ 
English: Banchao knew that he meant that he wanted to share the credit, so he raised his hand to Guo Yao and said: Although you did not go to defeat the enemy together, how could I deliberately monopolize this credit?

古文：恂乃悦。
现代文：郭恂这才高兴起来。
English: This made Guo Yao happy.

古文：超于是召鄯善王广，以虏使首示之，一国震怖。
现代文：班超便叫来鄯善王广，把匈奴使者的首级给他看。鄯善国举国震惊。
English: The superintendent of the class then called in Gong Son Wang Guang and showed him the head of the Hun envoy. Gong Son shocked the whole country.

古文：超晓告抚慰，遂纳子为质。
现代文：班超便把这个事公开，并加以抚慰。于是鄯善王便把自己的儿子送到汉朝做人质。
English: Ban Chao then made the matter public and consoled him, whereupon King Gong Son sent his son to the Han Dynasty as a hostage.

古文：还奏于窦固，固大喜，具上超功效，并求更选使使西域，帝壮超节，诏固曰： 吏如班超，何故不遣而更选乎？
现代文：班超回来把这件事禀报窦固，窦固大喜，详细地把班超的功劳奏明皇帝，并要求另外选派使者出使西域。汉明帝赞许班超的气节，下令给窦固说： 像班超这样的官吏，为什么不选，却要另选他人呢？
English: When Ban Chao returned, he reported the matter to Dou Gu. Dou Gu was overjoyed. He reported the merits of Ban Chao to the emperor in detail and asked for another envoy to be sent to the Western Regions. Emperor Hanming praised Ban Chao's valor and ordered Dou Gu to say: Why not choose an official like Ban Chao, but choose someone else?

古文：今以超为军司马，令遂前功。 
现代文：现在任命班超为军司马，让他去完成未完成的功业。 
English: Now appoint the squad leader as the military secretary and let him complete the unfinished work.

古文：超复受使，固欲益其兵，超曰： 愿将本所从三十余人足矣。
现代文：班超再次受命出使西域。窦固想要多给些士兵给班超，班超说 ：我只愿把原来的三十多人给我就足够了。
English: Dou Gu wanted to give more soldiers to Ban Chao, but Ban Chao said, "I'm only willing to give you the original thirty or so, and that's enough."

古文：如有不虞，多益为累。 
现代文：如果有什么不测，人多了更是累赘。 
English: If something unexpected happens, it's even more of a burden with more people.

古文：是时，于窴王广德新攻破莎车，遂雄张南道，而匈奴遣使监护其国，超既西，先至于窴。广德礼意甚疏。
现代文：这时候，于宾王广德刚攻破莎东国，便在天山南道称雄。而匈奴派了使者监护他们的国家。班超到西域，先到于蜫国，广德王对他很冷淡，礼仪极不周到。
English: At this time, King Guangde of the Bin Dynasty had just conquered the Eastern Shandong Province, and he was victorious in the Southern Tianshan Province. The Xiongnu sent an envoy to supervise their country. Ban Chao went to the western region, and arrived in Shandong Province first. King Guangde was very cold to him, and his etiquette was extremely careless.

古文：且其俗信巫。
现代文：而且这个国家的风俗信巫。
English: And the country's custom is to believe in witches.

古文：巫言： 神怒何故欲向汉？
现代文：巫师说 ：神人发脾气了，为什么要亲近汉朝？
English: The sorcerer said: The godman lost his temper, why should he get close to the Han Dynasty?

古文：汉使有騧马，急求取以祠我。 
现代文：汉朝使者有一匹靬马，赶快牵来祭我。 
English: The emissary of the Han Dynasty has a fine horse. Please bring me a sacrifice.

古文：广德乃遣使就超请马。
现代文：广德王就派人到班超那里来要那匹马。
English: King Quang De sent someone to Ban Chao to ask for the horse.

古文：超密知其状，报许之，而令巫自来取马。
现代文：班超暗地里了解了这个情况，便答应把马给他，并要那个巫师亲自来牵马。
English: When Ban Chao secretly learned of this, he agreed to give him the horse and asked the sorcerer to lead the horse himself.

古文：有顷，巫至，超即斩其首以送广德，因辞让之。
现代文：一会儿，巫师来了，班超便杀了他，砍下他的脑袋送给广德王，并以言辞责备他。
English: After a while, the sorcerer came, and Ban Chao killed him, cut off his head and gave it to King Quan De, and scolded him verbally.

古文：广德素闻超在鄯善诛灭虏使，大惶恐，即攻杀匈奴使者而降超。
现代文：广德王早听说班超在鄯善国消灭匈奴使者的情况，非常害怕，便击杀匈奴使者向班超投降。
English: King Guangde had heard that Ban Chao had eliminated the Hun envoys in Shan State. He was very afraid, so he killed the Hun envoys and surrendered to Ban Chao.

古文：超重赐其王以下，因镇抚焉。
现代文：班超重赏广德王及其下属，就此把于蜫震慑安抚下来。
English: In order to appease Yu Jun's vassals, Ban Chao rewarded them with many gifts.

古文：时，龟兹王建为匈奴所立，倚恃虏威，据有北道，攻破疏勒，杀其王，而立龟兹人兜题为疏勒王。
现代文：当时，龟兹王逵是匈奴扶植的。他倚仗匈奴的威势，据有天山北道，攻破疏勒，杀死了疏勒王，而立龟兹人兜题做疏勒王。
English: At that time, King Kamezi was supported by the Xiongnu. He relied on the might of the Xiongnu, according to Tianshan North Road, defeated Sule, killed the king of Sule, and set up the Kamezi people as the king of Sule.

古文：明年春，超从间道至疏勒。
现代文：第二年春天，班超抄小路到了疏勒，离兜题所居的橐城九十里路。
English: In the spring of the following year, Ban Chao followed a small road to Sule, which was about 90 miles from the city of Handan, where he lived.

古文：去兜题所居橐城九十里，逆遣吏田虑先往降之。敕虑曰： 兜题本非疏勒种，国人必不用命。若不即降，便可执之。 
现代文：班超预先派遣官吏田虑去橐城叫兜题投降，并嘱咐田虑说： 兜题本不是疏勒种，国人一定不会听他的命令，他若不投降，就逮住他。 
English: In advance, the superintendent sent the official, Tian Xian, to Shicheng to ask Houtai to surrender, and ordered Tian Xian to say: Houtai is not a spy, the Chinese people will not listen to his orders, and if he does not surrender, they will arrest him.

古文：虑既到，兜题见虑轻弱，殊无降意。
现代文：田虑到达橐城，兜题见他力微势弱，根本没有降意。
English: Tian Xian arrived in Lucheng, saw that his power was weak, and did not want to give in at all.

古文：虑因其无备，遂前劫缚兜题。
现代文：田虑趁他没有防备，便上前捆绑了他。
English: Taking advantage of his unpreparedness, Tian Xian stepped forward and tied him up.

古文：左右出其不意，皆惊惧奔走。
现代文：兜题的随从因事出意外，都吓跑了。
English: An attendant who was playing a trick caused an accident, scaring everyone away.

古文：虑驰报超，超即赴之，悉召疏勒将吏，说以龟兹无道之状，因立其故王兄子忠为王，国人大悦。
现代文：田虑飞马告知班超。班超赶到橐城，召集全部疏勒将士官吏，把龟兹倒行逆施的情况告诉他们，并扶植他们故王兄长的儿子名叫忠的做疏勒王，疏勒国人民都非常喜悦。
English: Tian Xian Feima informed Ban Chao. Ban Chao rushed to Lushan, summoned all Shule generals and officers, told them the situation of the tortoise and the hare, and supported the son of their late king's elder brother, named Zhong, to be the king of Shule. The people of Shule were very pleased.

古文：忠及官属皆请杀兜题，超不听，欲示以威信，释而遣之。
现代文：疏勒王忠和他的下属都请求杀掉兜题，班超不同意，想要示以威信，便释放了兜题。
English: Shule Wangzhong and his subordinates all requested to kill Toutiao, but the superintendent disagreed and wanted to show his authority, so he released Toutiao.

古文：疏勒由是与龟兹结怨。
现代文：疏勒从此同龟兹结下了仇怨。
English: From then on, Shule developed a grudge against Kamezi.

古文：十八年，帝崩。焉耆以中国大丧，遂攻没都护陈睦。
现代文：永平十八年，汉明帝死了，马耆因中国有大丧事，就进攻杀死了都护陈睦。
English: In the 18th year of Yongping, Emperor Hanming died. Because there was a great tragedy in China, Ma Jun attacked and killed the tutelary Chen Mutsu.

古文：超孤立无援，而龟兹、姑墨数发兵攻疏勒。
现代文：班超孤立没有外援，而龟兹、姑墨等国多次发兵攻打疏勒。
English: Bancao is isolated and has no foreign aid, while Guez, Guma and other countries have repeatedly sent troops to attack Sule.

古文：超守盘橐城，与忠为首尾，士吏单少，拒守岁余。
现代文：班超镇守城，跟疏勒王忠构成首尾之势，以极少的兵力，坚守了一年多。
English: Banchaozhen defended the city, forming a neck-and-neck situation with Shule Wangzhong, and held out for more than a year with very few troops.

古文：肃宗初即位，以陈睦新没，恐超单危不能自立，下诏征超。
现代文：肃宗初登帝位，因陈睦刚被杀害，恐怕班超兵力单薄，不能保全自己，便下令召班超还朝。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne for the first time. As Chen Mucang had just been killed, he feared that Ban Chao's military strength was too weak to protect himself, so he ordered the summoning of Ban Chao to restore the dynasty.

古文：超发还，疏勒举国忧恐。
现代文：班超准备起程回国，疏勒全国忧愁恐惧。
English: Class superintendent prepares to leave for home, causing nationwide anxiety and fear.

古文：其都尉黎弇曰： 汉使弃我，我必复为龟兹所灭耳。诚不忍见汉使去。 
现代文：都尉黎说 汉朝使者抛弃了我们，我们一定会再次被龟兹所灭，我真不忍心看到汉使离去。 
English: The Han Dynasty envoy abandoned us, we will definitely be destroyed by the tortoise again, I really can't bear to see the Han Dynasty envoy leave.

古文：因以刀自刎。
现代文：于是拔刀自杀了。
English: So he pulled out a knife and killed himself.

古文：超还至于窴，王侯以下皆号泣曰： 依汉使如父母，诚不可去。 
现代文：班超回到于蜫，于蜫国自王侯以下都号哭着说： 我们依靠汉使就像依靠父母一样，真不能离开啊！ 
English: When Banchao returned to Yuyao, everyone in Yuyao from the prince on down cried and said, "We rely on Han envoys just like we rely on our parents. We really can't leave!"

古文：互抱超马脚，不得行。
现代文：于是相互抱着班超的马脚，使班超不能行走。
English: As a result, they held each other's feet so that Banchao could not walk.

古文：超恐于窴终不听其东，又欲遂本志，乃更还疏勒。
现代文：班超恐于蜫始终不会让他东归，又想实现他原来的志愿，便返回疏勒。
English: Pan Chao was afraid that Zou would not let him return to the East, and he wanted to realize his original wish, so he returned to Shule.

古文：疏勒两城自超去后，复降龟兹，而与尉头连兵。
现代文：疏勒有两个城市，自从班超离开后，又降了龟北，而同尉头国连兵一处。
English: There are two cities in Shule. Since the departure of Banchao, Kebei has been downgraded, and there is only one place for the first lieutenant of Guolian soldiers.

古文：超欲因此叵平诸国，乃上疏请兵。
现代文：班超捕杀了谋反的人，打败了尉头，杀死六百多人，疏勒又安定了。
English: Banchao caught and killed the rebels, defeated the lieutenants, killed more than six hundred people, and Shule was stable again.

古文：曰：臣窃见先帝欲开西城，故北击匈奴，西使外国，鄯善、于窴即时向化。
现代文：建初三年，班超率领疏勒、康居、于蜫、拘弥的军队一万人，进攻姑墨石城，攻破了城池，斩首七百颗。班超想乘胜平定诸国，于是上书给皇帝请求增兵，说： 我私自以为先帝想要开辟西域，所以北边派兵进击匈奴，西边派使者出使外国，鄯善、于蜫很快归服我朝。
English: In the first three years of its construction, Ban Chao led an army of ten thousand men from Sule, Kangju, Yu Diao and Zhenmai to attack Gu Mishi City, broke through the city walls, and beheaded seven hundred people. Ban Chao wanted to take advantage of the victory to pacify the countries, so he wrote to the emperor to request an increase in troops, saying: I personally thought that the former emperor wanted to open up the western region, so the north side sent troops to attack the Xiongnu, the west side sent emissaries to foreign countries, and Xian Shan and Yu Diao quickly submitted to my dynasty.

古文：今拘弥、莎车、疏勒、月氏、乌孙、康居复愿归附，欲共并力破灭龟兹，平通汉道。
现代文：现在，拘弥、莎东、疏勒、月代、乌孙、康居等国又都愿意归附，和我们同心协力，击破龟兹，打通汉道。
English: Now, countries such as Zhengyi, Shadong, Shule, Yuedai, Wusun, and Kangju are willing to join us and work together with us to break down barriers and open up the Chinese way.

古文：若得龟兹，则西域未服者百分之一耳。
现代文：如果征服了龟兹，那么西域未归服的不过百分之一罢了。
English: If Kuez is conquered, only one percent of the western region will remain unconquered.

古文：臣伏自惟念，卒伍小吏，实愿从谷吉效命绝域，庶几张骞弃身旷野。
现代文：我常想，我是个小小士吏，着实愿意像谷吉那样效命于绝域，像张骞那样委身于旷野之间。
English: I often think that I am a minor official, and I am truly willing to serve the Jedi as Guji did, and to commit myself to the wilderness as Zhang Ye did.

古文：昔魏绛列国大夫，尚能和辑诸戎，况臣奉大汉之威，而无刀一割之用乎？
现代文：古时，晋国的魏绛，官不过一大夫，尚且能够使夷狄和好。何况我仰仗大汉的神威，而能像铅刀那样连一割的用处也没有吗？
English: In ancient times, Wei Xuan of Jin was only a great official, yet he was able to make peace with the Yidi. Moreover, I rely on the authority of a great man, but can it be as useless as a lead knife?

古文：前世议者皆曰取三十六国，号为断匈奴右臂。
现代文：古代论者都把夺取三十六国，称为割断匈奴的右臂。
English: Ancient historians called the conquest of the Thirty-six Kingdoms the cutting off of the right arm of the Xiongnu.

古文：今西域诸国，自日之所入，莫不向化，大小欣欣，贡奉不绝，惟焉耆，龟兹独未服从。
现代文：现在西域各国，从日之所入的广大地区，莫有不归顺我们的。大小国家，都高高兴兴地不断向我朝进贡，惟独马耆、龟兹没有服从。
English: Now, all the countries in the western region, the vast area from which the sun has entered, have no choice but to submit to us. Countries large and small have been happily paying tribute to me, but only the horse and the tortoise have not obeyed.

古文：臣前与官属三十六人奉使绝域，备遭艰厄。
现代文：我自从跟所属三十六人出使绝域，历尽了艰难险阻。
English: Ever since I went on a mission with my thirty-six people, I have gone through all kinds of hardships.

古文：自孤守疏勒，于今五载，胡夷情数，臣颇识之。问其城郭大小，皆言 倚汉与依天等 。
现代文：从孤军困守疏勒，到现在已经五年了。胡人的情况，我都非常熟悉，问他们城郭的大小，都说 ：依靠汉朝就像依靠天一样。 
English: It has now been five years since a lone army besieged Sule. I am very familiar with the Hu people's situation. When I asked them about the size of their castle, they all said: Relying on the Han Dynasty is like relying on heaven.

古文：以是效之，则葱领可通，葱领通则龟兹可伐。
现代文：以此推测，则葱岭一带可以畅通。葱岭畅通，那么讨伐龟兹便没有什么问题了。
English: According to this assumption, the area around the green onion ridge can be smooth. If the green onion ridge is smooth, then there will be no problem in fighting turtles.

古文：今宜拜龟兹侍子白霸为其国王，以步骑数百送之，与诸国连兵，岁月之间，龟兹可禽。
现代文：现在，应该扶植龟兹侍子白霸做龟兹的国王，以骑兵步兵数百送他，跟其他国家连兵，年或几个月时间，龟兹王便可擒获。
English: Now, it is necessary to foster the turtle's servant Bai Hao as the king of turtles, send him with hundreds of cavalry and infantry, and join forces with other countries. In a year or a few months, the turtle king can be captured.

古文：以夷狄攻夷狄，计之善者也。
现代文：用夷狄来攻打夷狄，这是上好的策略。
English: It is a good strategy to attack and defeat Yidi with Yidi.

古文：臣见莎车、疏勒田地肥广，草牧饶衍，不比敦煌、鄯善间也，兵可不费中国而粮食自足。
现代文：我看到莎东、疏勒土地广阔肥沃，牧草丰茂，不像敦煌、鄯善那样贫瘠。这样，既不需劳师远征，而粮食又自足。
English: I saw that the land of Shadong and Shule was vast and fertile, with abundant pasture, unlike the barren land of Dunhuang and Gushan. In this way, there was no need for a laborious expedition, and the grain was self-sufficient.

古文：且姑墨、温宿二王，特为龟兹所置，既非其种，更相厌苦，其势必有降反。
现代文：况且姑墨、温宿二王，是龟兹扶植的，既不是同种，更互相厌恶恼恨，想必谋反而归降我们。
English: Moreover, the two kings, Gumo and Onjuku, are supported by the turtle, and since they are not the same species, they hate and resent each other, and they will surely try to make us surrender.

古文：若二国来降，则龟兹自破。
现代文：如果姑墨、温宿两国来降，那么龟兹便会不攻自破。
English: If the two countries of Gumo and Onjuku come down, then the tortoise will be defeated.

古文：愿下臣章，参考行事。
现代文：望批下我的奏章，交主管部门参考行事。
English: I hope you will approve my report and refer it to the competent authorities.

古文：诚有万分，死复何恨。
现代文：即使有万分危险，我为国而死，又有什么可遗憾的呢？
English: Even if there is extreme danger, if I die for my country, what is there to regret?

古文：臣超区区，特蒙神灵，窃冀未便僵仆，目见西域平定，陛下举万年之觞，荐勋祖庙，布大喜于天下。
现代文：我班超区区小吏，特蒙受皇上神灵，私心希望我不即死，能亲眼看到西域平定，陛下高举万年之杯，荐功勋于祖庙，向天下宣告大喜的盛况。 
English: As a super-regional minor official in my class, I was specially blessed by the emperor's spirit, and I sincerely hope that I will not die immediately, and I can see the pacification of the Western Regions with my own eyes. Your Majesty will hold high the cup of ten thousand years, recommend merits in the ancestral temple, and announce to the world the grand occasion of great happiness.

古文：书奏，帝知其功可成，议欲给兵。
现代文：奏章送上去后，皇帝知道可以成功，商议想要给班超兵马。
English: After the report was sent up, the emperor knew that he could succeed, and he wanted to give Banchao the horse.

古文：平陵人徐素与超同志，上疏愿奋身佐超，五年，遂以为假司马，将驰刑及义从千人就超。
现代文：平陵人徐干向来与班超是志同道合的好友，上书给皇帝愿意竭力帮助班超。建初五年，朝廷就任命徐干为假司马，拨发减刑的罪人及志愿人员一千人给班超。
English: Xu Gan from Pingling has always been a like-minded friend of Ban Chao. He wrote to the emperor that he was willing to do his best to help Ban Chao. In the first five years of construction, the imperial court appointed Xu Gan as a fake Sima, and sent 1,000 criminals and volunteers with reduced sentences to Ban Chao.

古文：先是，莎车以为汉兵不出，遂降于龟兹，而疏勒都尉番辰亦复反叛。
现代文：以前，莎东以为汉朝不出兵，须向龟兹投降，而疏勒都尉番辰，又反叛汉朝。
English: In the past, Shadong believed that the Han Dynasty would not send troops and had to surrender to Guizi, while Shule Captain Banchen rebelled against the Han Dynasty.

古文：会徐适至，超遂与击番辰，大破之，斩首千余级，多获生口。
现代文：正好徐干领兵来了，班超便和徐干合兵攻击番辰，把番辰打得大败，斩首一千余颗，抓了很多俘虏。
English: Just as Xu Gan arrived to lead the troops, Ban Chao and Xu Gan attacked Bantian together, defeated Bantian, beheaded more than a thousand people, and captured many prisoners.

古文：超既破番辰，欲进攻龟兹。
现代文：班超已击败番辰，便想进兵攻龟兹。
English: Banchao has already defeated Banchen, so he wants to enter the army to attack Kamezi.

古文：以乌孙兵强，宜历其力，乃上言： 乌孙大国，控弦十万，故武帝妻以公主，至孝宣皇帝，卒得其用。
现代文：因为乌孙兵强，应当借助他的力量。于是上书给皇帝说 ：乌孙是个大国，有使用弓箭的兵十万，所以武帝把江都王违之女细君公主，嫁给乌孙王。到孝宣皇帝时，终于得到了它的帮助，大破匈奴。
English: Since Uson was a strong soldier, he should be helped with his strength. Therefore, a letter was sent to the emperor saying, "Uson is a great country, with a hundred thousand soldiers who use bows and arrows. Therefore, Emperor Wu married the princess, the daughter of the ruler of the Yangtze River, to King Uson. When Emperor Xiaoxuan arrived, he finally received its help and defeated the Xiongnu.

古文：今可遣使招慰，与共合力。 
现代文：现在可派遣使者安抚乌孙，与之并力合作。 
English: Now it can send envoys to appease the U.S. and work with it.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了班超的意见。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：八年，拜超为将兵长史，假鼓吹幢麾。
现代文：建初八年，任命班超为将兵长史，借用鼓吹幢麾等旌旗乐器，任命徐干为军司马。
English: In the eighth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Banchao was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army, and Xu Gan was appointed as the commander of the army.

古文：以徐为军司马，别遣卫侯李邑护送乌孙使者，赐大小昆弥以下锦帛。
现代文：另外派遣卫侯李邑护送乌孙使者，大小昆弥以下官吏，都赐以锦帛。
English: In addition, Wei Hou and Li Yip were dispatched to escort Wusun's envoys, and officials from Kunmi the Great and Kunmi the Younger were all given brocade bracelets.

古文：李邑始到于窴，而值龟兹攻疏勒，恐惧不敢前，因上书陈西域之功不可成，又盛毁超拥爱妻，抱爱子，安乐外国，无内顾心。
现代文：李邑刚到于蜫，正碰上龟兹进攻疏勒，他害怕不敢前进。于是上书给皇帝，陈述平定西域不可能成功，又极力毁谤班超，说班超拥抱爱妻，怀抱幼子，在国外享受安乐，没有心思考虑国内的事情。
English: Li Yip had just arrived in Yulin and was facing the Kuez's attack on Shule. He was afraid and did not dare to move forward. So he sent a letter to the emperor, stating that it was impossible to succeed in pacifying the western region, and tried his best to defame Ban Chao, saying that Ban Chao embraced his beloved wife, embraced his young son, enjoyed peace and quiet abroad, and did not have the heart to consider domestic affairs.

古文：超闻之，叹曰： 身非曾参而有三至之谗，恐见疑于当时矣。 
现代文：班超听到了，叹息道： 我非曾参而有三至之谗，恐怕现在会有人怀疑我了。 
English: Superintendent heard this and sighed, "I must have participated, and there are three reasons. I'm afraid someone will suspect me now."

古文：遂去其妻。
现代文：于是离开了妻子。
English: So he left his wife.

古文：帝知超忠，乃切责邑曰： 纵超拥爱妻，抱爱子，思归之士千余人，何能尽与超同心乎？ 
现代文：皇帝知道班超忠心，便狠狠地责备李邑说： 即使班超拥抱爱妻，怀抱幼子，那么思念家乡的士卒一千多人，怎么能够都跟班超同心同德呢？ 
English: The emperor knew that Ban Chao was loyal, so he severely reproached Li Yu and said: Even if Ban Chao embraces his beloved wife and cradles his infant son, how can more than a thousand soldiers who miss their hometown all be of the same mind as Ban Chao?

古文：令邑诣超受节度。诏超： 若邑任在外者，便留与从事。 
现代文：便命令李邑到班超那里接受他的指挥，还说 ：如果李邑在国外任职，那就留他在你那里做从事。 
English: He ordered Li Yiu to go to Ban Chao to accept his command, and said: "If Li Yiu is serving abroad, then let him stay and work with you."

古文：超即遣邑将乌孙侍子还京师。
现代文：班超却派遣李邑带领乌孙侍子回京师。
English: However, the superintendent sent Li Yuping to lead the Uson Samurai back to Beijing.

古文：徐谓超曰： 邑前亲毁君，欲败西域，今何不缘诏书留之，更遣它吏送侍子乎？ 
现代文：徐干对班超说 ：李邑以前毁谤你，企图使你平定西域的功业失败，现在何不遵循皇帝的旨意把他留下来，另派官吏护送侍子呢？ 
English: Xu Gan said to Ban Chao: Li Yu previously slandered you and tried to make your work of pacifying the Western Regions fail. Now, why not follow the emperor's will to keep him and send other officials to escort the attendant?

古文：超曰： 是何言之陋也！
现代文：班超说： 你怎么这样没见识呢？
English: Banchao said, "How come you don't see it that way?

古文：以邑毁超，故今遣之。
现代文：正因为李邑毁谤我，所以我现在才派遣他回国。
English: It is because of Li Yu's slander against me that I am now sending him back to China.

古文：内省不疚，何恤人言！
现代文：我处心无愧，还怕别人讲什么呢？
English: I act with a clear conscience, and I'm still afraid of what others will say?

古文：快意留之，非忠臣也。 
现代文：因泄私愤而图快意把他留下来，不称是忠臣。 
English: He is not called a loyal retainer because he is venting his personal anger and is trying to keep him.

古文：明年，复遣假司马和恭等四人将兵八百谐超，超因发疏勒、于窴兵击莎车。
现代文：第二年，朝廷又派遣假司和恭等四人率领军队八百人到班超驻地，班超便发动疏勒、于蜫的军队攻击莎东。
English: In the following year, the imperial court sent four men, including Fusishi and Kyo, to lead an army of 800 men to Banchao's residence. Banchao then launched Shule's and Yu's armies to attack Shadong.

古文：莎车阴通使疏勒王忠，啖以重利，忠遂反从之，西保乌即城。
现代文：莎东暗地派人到疏勒王忠那里用重利贿赂他。疏勒王忠便反叛班超，听从莎东的指使，西保乌即城。
English: Shadong secretly sent someone to Wangzhong of Shule to bribe him with heavy interest. Wangzhong of Shule rebelled against Banchao and followed Shadong's orders. Xi Baowu is the city.

古文：超乃更立其府丞成大为疏勒王，悉发其不反者以攻忠。
现代文：班超就另立疏勒的府丞成大为疏勒王，调动全部没有反叛的军队来攻击疏勒王忠。
English: The superintendent of the school set up a separate Shule government with Fujo Chengda as the king of Shule, and mobilized all the troops that had not rebelled to attack Shule Wangzhong.

古文：积半岁，而康居遣精兵救之，超不能下。
现代文：过了半年，康居派遣精兵援救疏勒王忠，班超攻打不下。
English: After half a year, Kangju dispatched elite soldiers to rescue Shule Wangzhong, and Panchao was unable to attack.

古文：是时，月氏新与康居婚，相亲，超乃使使多赍锦帛遗月氏王，令晓示康居王，康居王乃罢兵，执忠以归其国，乌即城遂降于超。
现代文：这时候，月氏刚与康居通婚，互相亲善。班超便派遣使者多带锦帛送给月氏王，教化晓示康居王，康居王便罢兵，逮捕了疏勒王忠，把他送回疏勒。
English: At this time, the Yue clan had just married the Kangju clan, and they were friendly with each other. Ban Chao sent an envoy with many brocades to the king of the Yue clan to teach and enlighten the king of the Kangju clan. The king of the Kangju clan then went on a military strike, arrested Wang Zhong of Sule and sent him back to Sule.

古文：后三年，忠说康居王借兵，还据损中，密与龟兹谋，遣使诈降于超。
现代文：乌即城便向班超投降了。其后三年，疏勒王忠游说康居王，向他借兵，回据损中，又暗地里与龟兹密谋，派遣使者向班超诈降。
English: Wuzhicheng then surrendered to Ban Chao. Three years later, Shule Wang Zhong lobbied King Kangju, borrowed soldiers from him, and in return, secretly conspired with Kuez to send emissaries to Ban Chao to defraud him.

古文：超内知其奸而外伪许之。忠大喜，即从轻猗诣超。
现代文：班超知道了他们的阴谋，表面上佯装接受投降。疏勒王忠大喜，随即率领轻骑兵到班超那里去诈降。
English: Banchao learned of their plot and pretended to accept their surrender. Shule Wangzhong was overjoyed and immediately led the light cavalry to Banchao to make a false surrender.

古文：超密勒兵待之，为供张设乐，酒行，乃叱吏缚忠斩之。
现代文：班超暗地埋伏士兵，并设帐安排酒宴乐队，等待疏勒王忠的到来。
English: Ban Chao secretly ambushed the soldiers, and set up a table to arrange a wine banquet band, waiting for the arrival of Shule Wangzhong.

古文：因击破其众，杀七百余人，南道于是遂通。
现代文：疏勒王忠来了，饮酒间，班超令士兵捆了疏勒王忠，把他杀了。于是乘胜攻击他的军队，杀了七百多人，南道就这样打通了。
English: Shule Wangzhong came, and while drinking, Banchao ordered the soldiers to tie up Shule Wangzhong and kill him. So they attacked his army and killed more than seven hundred people, and the South Road was opened.

古文：明年，超发于窴诸国兵二万五千人，复击莎车。而龟兹王遣左将军发温宿、姑墨、尉头合五万人求之。
现代文：第二年班超带领于蜫各国的军队二万五千人，再次进攻莎东，而龟兹王派遣左将军带领温宿、姑墨、尉头等国的军队合计五万人援救莎东。
English: In the second year, Banchao led 25,000 troops from all over the world to attack Shadong again, while King Kamezi sent General Zuo to rescue Shadong with a total of 50,000 troops from the countries of Onjuku, Gumo, and Yotou.

古文：超召将校及于窴王议曰： 今兵少不敌，其计莫若各散去。
现代文：班超召集将校和于蜫王商议说： 现在兵少不能克敌，最好的计策是各自散去。
English: The superintendent summoned the officers and Yu Xuanwang for discussion and said, "We can't defeat the enemy with fewer soldiers now. The best strategy is to disperse separately."

古文：于窴从是而东，长史亦于此西归，可须夜鼓声而发。 
现代文：于蜫从这里往东走，长史也从此西归。等听到夜里的鼓声便可出发。 
English: Yu Yao went east from here, and Chang Shi returned west from here. When they heard the drums in the night, they could set out.

古文：阴缓所得生口。
现代文：暗地放松所抓获的俘虏的监禁。
English: covertly easing the confinement of captured prisoners.

古文：龟兹王闻之大喜，自以万骑于西界遮超，温宿王将八千骑于东界徼于窴。
现代文：龟兹王听到这个消息非常欢喜，自己率领一万骑兵赴西边阻挡班超；温宿王率领八千骑兵往东边拦截于蜫王。
English: Kamezi Wang was very happy to hear this news. He led ten thousand cavalry to the west to block Banchao; Onjuku Wang led eight thousand cavalry to the east to intercept Yu Wang.

古文：超知二虏已出，密召诸部勒兵，鸡鸣驰赴莎车营，胡大惊乱奔走，追斩五千余级，大获其马畜财物。
现代文：班超知道两路敌军已经出发，暗地号令各部率领军队于鸡鸣时奔赴莎东军营。敌人大惊，慌忙逃窜。班超军队追击敌人，杀死敌军五千余人，缴获大批财物、马匹。
English: Panchao knew that the two enemy armies had already set out, and secretly ordered all the departments to lead the troops to rush to the Shadong military camp at the sound of the rooster. The enemy panicked and fled in a hurry. Panchao's army chased the enemy, killed more than 5,000 enemy troops, and seized a large number of property and horses.

古文：莎车遂将，龟兹等因各退散，自是威震西域。
现代文：莎东便投降了。龟兹等国亦各自败退走散。从此班超威振西域。
English: Shadong then surrendered. Kuez and other provinces also retreated in defeat and dispersed. From then on, the group dominated the western region.

古文：初，月氏尝助汉击车师有功，是岁贡奉珍宝、符拔、师子，因求汉公主。
现代文：以前，月氏曾帮助汉朝进攻车师国，立下了功劳。这一年，向汉朝贡献珍珠宝贝、符拔、狮子，并要求汉朝以公主许婚。
English: In the past, Mr. Yue had helped the Han Dynasty attack the Chariots and Horses Kingdom, and made a great contribution. In this year, he contributed a pearl treasure, a banner, and a lion to the Han Dynasty, and asked the Han Dynasty to marry the princess.

古文：超拒还其使，由是怨恨。
现代文：班超拒绝了月氏的要求，遣还他们的使者。从此月氏怨恨汉朝。
English: Ban Chao refused the request of the Yue clan and sent back their envoy. From then on, the Yue clan resented the Han Dynasty.

古文：永元二年，月氏遣其副王谢将兵七万攻超。
现代文：永元二年，月氏派遣他的副王谢，率领七万人马攻击班超。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, the Moon clan sent his deputy Wang Xie to lead 70,000 people to attack the superintendent.

古文：超众少，皆大恐。
现代文：班超兵马少，军士都很惊恐。
English: The squadron was understrength, and the sergeants were terrified.

古文：超譬军士曰： 月氏兵虽多，然数千里逾葱领来，非有运输，何足忧邪？
现代文：班超晓喻军士说： 月氏兵虽然多，可是跋涉数千里，翻越葱岭来犯，交通运输极为不便，有什么可忧虑的呢？
English: Sergeant Ban Chao Xiaoyu said: Although there are many soldiers of the Moon Clan, they have to travel thousands of miles and cross mountains to come here. Transportation is extremely inconvenient. What is there to worry about?

古文：但当收谷坚守，彼饥穷自降，不过数十日决矣。 
现代文：只应当收藏好粮食，坚守不出，敌人便会因饥饿而投降。不过几十天便会击败敌人的。 
English: All you have to do is to collect good grain, and if you can't hold out, the enemy will surrender due to hunger. However, it will take dozens of days to defeat the enemy.

古文：谢遂前攻超，不下，又抄掠无所得。
现代文：月氏副王谢率军攻击班超，不能取胜；又进行掠夺抢劫，也毫无所得。
English: Wang Xie, Vice-Chairman of the Moon Clan, led an army to attack Banchao, but could not win. He also carried out looting and robberies, but did not get anything.

古文：超度其粮将尽，必从龟兹求救，乃遣兵数百于东界要之。
现代文：班超估计敌军粮尽，必定会向龟兹求救。于是派遣军队数百人于东路拦截。
English: The superintendent estimated that the enemy had run out of food and would certainly ask for help from Kuez, so he sent hundreds of troops to intercept them on the east road.

古文：谢果遣骑赍金银珠玉以赂龟兹。
现代文：月氏副王谢果然派遣骑兵赍送金银珠玉去贿赂龟兹。
English: Xie, the Vice-King of the Moon Clan, sent his cavalry to bribe the tortoise with gold, silver and precious stones.

古文：超伏兵庶击，尽杀之，持其使首以示谢。
现代文：班超的伏兵突出截击，杀光敌人，派人持月氏使者的脑袋给副王谢看。
English: Banchao's ambush soldiers made a prominent interception, killed all the enemies, and sent someone to show Vice Wang Xie the head of the Moon's messenger.

古文：谢大惊，即遣使请罪，愿得生归。
现代文：谢大吃一惊，立即派遣使者到班超这里来请罪，只要求让他能活着回去。
English: Taken aback, Xie immediately sent an emissary to Banchao to plead guilty, asking only that he be allowed to return alive.

古文：超纵遣之。月氏由是大震，岁奉贡献。
现代文：班超便放了月氏副王谢，让他回去了。
English: The superintendent then released Wang Xie, the deputy of the Yue clan, and let him go back.

古文：明年，龟兹、姑墨、温宿皆降，乃以超为都护，徐为长史。拜白霸为龟兹王，遣司马姚光送之。
现代文：月氏从此受到极大震动，每年都向汉朝进贡。永元三年，龟兹、姑墨、温宿都投降了，朝廷任命班超为郡护，徐干为长史，立白霸为龟兹王，派遣司马姚光护送他。
English: Since then, the Yue clan has been greatly shaken and has paid tribute to the Han Dynasty every year. In the third year of Yongyuan, Guze, Gumo and Onjuku all surrendered. The imperial court appointed Banchao as the county guard, Xu Gan as Changshi, and Li Baiba as the king of Guze, and sent Sima Yaoguang to escort him.

古文：超与光共胁龟兹废其王尤利多而立白霸，使光将尤利多还诣京师。
现代文：班超与姚光共同胁迫龟兹废除原国王尤利多而立白霸为王，并派遣姚光带着尤利多回到京城。
English: Ban Chao and Yao Guang jointly coerced the tortoise to abolish the former king Yulido and establish Bai Bao as king, and sent Yao Guang back to Beijing with Yulido.

古文：超居龟兹它乾城，徐屯疏勒。
现代文：班超驻扎在龟兹它乾城，徐干屯兵疏勒。
English: The superintendent was stationed in Guizhida Qiancheng, and Xu Gan Tunbing Shule.

古文：西域唯焉耆、危须、尉犁以前没都护，怀二心，其余悉定。
现代文：西域只有焉耆、危须、尉犁以前杀过汉朝都护陈睦，怀有二心，不敢归诚，其余西域各国都平定了。
English: In the western region, only Yan Xun, Gu Xu, and Fei Xun had previously killed the Han dynasty tutelary Chen Mu, harboring double-mindedness and not daring to return to sincerity. The rest of the countries in the western region have been leveled.

古文：六年秋，超遂发龟兹、鄯善等八国兵合七万人，及吏士贾客千四百人讨焉耆。
现代文：永元六年秋天，班超调动龟兹、鄯善等八国军队合共七万人，和吏士贾客一千四百人讨伐焉耆。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of the Yongyuan era, the superintendent mobilized a total of 70,000 troops from eight countries, including Guizi and Shanshan, and 1,400 officials and cadres to fight.

古文：兵到尉犁界，而遣晓说焉耆、尉犁、危须曰： 都护来者，欲镇抚三国。
现代文：军队到达尉犁边界，就派人晓喻焉耆、尉犁、危须说： 都护这次到这里来，只想要安定、抚慰三国。
English: When the troops arrived at the border of Yiwu and Yan'an, they sent people to Xiaoyu, Yan'an, Yiwu and Guisu to say: "This time, the tutelary deity has come here, and he only wants to stabilize and comfort the three countries.

古文：即欲改过向善，宜遣大人来迎，当赏赐王侯已下，事毕即还。
现代文：如果想要改过从善，就应该派首领来迎接我们，那么你们王侯以下都会得到赏赐。
English: If you want to reform and do good, you should send a leader to meet us, then all of you from the prince down will be rewarded.

古文：今赐王彩五百匹。 
现代文：抚慰完毕我们便会回军。现在赏赐你们国王彩色丝绸五百匹。 
English: Now reward your king with five hundred horses of colored silk.

古文：焉耆王广遣其左将北鞬支奉牛、酒迎超。
现代文：焉耆王广派遣他的左将北革健支献上牛酒来迎接班超。
English: Wang Guang sent his left winger Bei Ge Jian Zhao to welcome Banchao with a gift of beef wine.

古文：超诘鞬支曰： 汝虽匈奴侍子，而今秉国之权。都护自来，王不以时迎，皆汝罪也。 
现代文：班超责备革健支说： 你虽然是匈奴侍子，可你掌握了国家大权，我都护亲自来到，你们国王不按时欢迎，都是你的罪过。 
English: Ban Chao reproached Ge Jian Zhi and said: Although you are a servant of the Xiongnu, you have mastered the power of the state. I have come personally to protect you. It is your fault that your king did not welcome you on time.

古文：或谓超可便杀之。
现代文：有人对班超说，可就便杀了他。
English: Someone said that to Banchao, but then they killed him.

古文：超曰： 非汝所及。
现代文：班超说 ：这不是你们能考虑到的。
English: Banchao said: This is not something you can take into consideration.

古文：此人权重于王，今未入其国而杀之，遂令自疑，设备守险，岂得到其城下哉！ 
现代文：这个人的权力比国王还要重。现在我们还没有进入他们的国境便杀了他，会使他们产生疑惧，如果他们加强防备，守住险要，我们怎么能够到得他们的城下呢？ 
English: This man is more powerful than a king. If we kill him now, before entering their territory, we will arouse their suspicions. If they strengthen their defences and guard against danger, how will we be able to get under their city?

古文：于是赐而遣之。
现代文：于是赏给他财物，打发他回去了。
English: So they rewarded him with money and sent him home.

古文：广乃与大人迎超于尉犁，奉献珍物。
现代文：焉耆王广便同其他头领在尉犁迎接班超，献上珍珠宝物。
English: Yan Xuan Wang Guang, together with other leaders, greeted Banchao at Iyi and presented him with a pearl treasure.

古文：焉耆国有苇桥之险，广乃绝桥，不欲令汉军入国。
现代文：焉耆国有苇桥的险阻，国王广便拆毁了苇桥，不想让汉朝的军队进入他们的国境。
English: When the state of Yancheng had the perilous obstacle of the Yingqiao Bridge, the king Guang demolished the Yingqiao Bridge, not wanting the Han Dynasty's army to enter their borders.

古文：超更从它道厉度。
现代文：班超便改道从别处涉过齐衣带以上的深水过河。
English: The superintendent changed his route and crossed the river from a different place, wading through deep water above the clothesline.

古文：七月晦，到焉者，去城二十里，营大泽中。
现代文：七月三十日，到达焉耆，离都城二十里，在大洋中扎营。
English: On July 30, they arrived in Yancheng, 20 miles from the capital, and set up camp in the ocean.

古文：广出不意，大恐，乃欲悉驱其人共入山保。
现代文：王广出其不意，大为惊恐，便想把全国人赶到山林中去躲藏起来。
English: Wang Guang was taken by surprise and was very frightened, so he wanted to drive the whole country into the mountains and forests to hide.

古文：焉耆左侯元孟先尝质京师，密遣使以事告超，超即斩之，示不信用。
现代文：焉耆左侯元孟曾到汉朝都城当过人质，他秘密地派人把这件事告诉了班超，班超把派来的使者杀了，表示不信用。
English: Yuan Meng, the Prince of the Han Dynasty, had once been a hostage in the capital of the Han Dynasty. He secretly sent someone to tell Ban Chao about this. Ban Chao killed the messenger and expressed his distrust.

古文：乃期大会诸国王，因扬声当重加赏赐，于是焉耆王广，尉犁王及北革建支等三十人相率诣超。
现代文：他约会各国国王，并扬言要对他们重加赏赐。于是焉耆王广、尉犁王氵凡和北革健支等三十人一同与班超相会。
English: He met with the kings of various countries and threatened to reward them heavily. Therefore, Yan Xuan Wang Guang, Ye Xuan Wang Xifan and Bei Ge Jian Zhi, along with thirty others, met with Ban Chao.

古文：其国相腹久等十七人惧诛，皆亡入海，而危须王亦不至。
现代文：焉耆的国相腹久等十七人害怕杀头，都入海逃跑了。危须王也没有来。
English: Seventeen people, including a long-suffering statesman, were so afraid of being beheaded that they all fled into the sea. King Gesshu did not come either.

古文：坐定，超怒诘广曰： 危须王何故不到？
现代文：班超坐定，怒气冲冲地诘责王广说： 危须王为什么不来？
English: The superintendent sat down and angrily scolded Wang Guang, saying, "Why didn't King Xu come?

古文：腹久等所缘逃亡？ 
现代文：腹久一班人为什么逃跑？ 
English: Why did the long-suffering group run away?

古文：遂叱吏士收广、等于陈睦故城斩之，传首京师。
现代文：说罢，喝令吏士把王广、王氵凡等抓起来，在陈睦旧城杀了他们，把他们的脑袋送往京城。
English: Go ahead, shout for the magistrates to arrest Wang Guang and Wang Xifan, kill them in the old city of Chenmugu, and send their heads to the capital.

古文：因纵兵抄掠，斩首五千余级，获生口万五千人，马畜牛羊三十余万头，更立元孟为焉耆王。
现代文：于是驱使军队抄劫虏掠，斩首五千余颗，生俘一万五千人，缴获马牛羊等牲畜三十余万头。改立元孟为焉耆王。
English: As a result, he drove the army to plunder and pillage, beheaded more than five thousand people, captured fifteen thousand people alive, and seized more than three hundred thousand heads of livestock such as horses, cattle, and sheep.

古文：超留焉耆半岁，尉抚之。
现代文：班超留在焉耆半年以安抚其国人。
English: Ban Chao stayed in Yancheng for half a year to appease his compatriots.

古文：于是西域五十余国悉皆纳质内属焉。
现代文：于是西域五十余国都交纳人质，表示归服汉朝。
English: As a result, more than fifty countries in the western region all surrendered hostages and expressed their submission to the Han Dynasty.

古文：明年，下诏曰： 往者匈奴独擅西域，寇盗河西，永平之末，城门昼闭。
现代文：第二年，皇帝下诏令说： 过去匈奴独霸西域，侵犯河西，永平末年，白天也要把城门关起来。
English: In the second year, the emperor issued a decree saying: In the past, the Huns dominated the western region and invaded Hexi. At the end of the Yongping era, the city gate should be closed during the day.

古文：先帝深愍边萌婴罗寇害，乃命将帅击右地，破白山，临蒲类，取车师，城郭诸国震慑响应，遂开西域，置都护。
现代文：先帝深深怜悯边疆老百姓遭受盗寇的祸害，就命令将帅出击右地，攻破白山，进军蒲类，攻取车师，其他定居的城郭诸围都震慑响应，于是开辟了西域，设置了都护。
English: The former emperor deeply pitied the people of the frontier who suffered from the scourge of robbers. He ordered the general to attack the right side, break through the White Mountain, march into Putuo, capture the chariot division, and the other settlements around the castle were shocked and responded, so he opened up the western region and set up the capital protection.

古文：而焉耆王舜、舜子忠独谋悖逆，恃其险隘，覆没都护，并及吏士。先帝重元元之命，惮兵役之兴，故使军司马班超安集于窴以西。
现代文：可是惟独焉耆王舜，舜的儿子忠，叛逆不道，倚仗他们国家的险阻，杀死都护和吏士，先帝重视黎民百姓的生命安全，不想大动干戈，所以派遣军司马班超安抚于蜫以西诸国。
English: However, only Yan Xuan Wang Yao and Yao's son Zhong rebelled and relied on their country's obstacles, killing the tutelary and officials. The former emperor valued the lives and safety of the people of Li and did not want to go to war, so he sent the military commander Ma Banchao to pacify the countries west of the Yangtze River.

古文：超遂逾葱领，迄县度，出入二十二年，莫不宾从。
现代文：于是班超越过葱岭，到达县度山，出入二十二年，莫有谁不服从的。
English: As a result, the class went beyond the green onion ridge and reached the county mountain, entering and exiting for 22 years. No one disobeyed.

古文：改立其王，而绥其人。
现代文：班超改立各国国王，安抚其人民。
English: Ban Chao re-established the kings of various countries to pacify their people.

古文：不动中国，不烦戎士，得远夷之和，同异俗之心，而致天诛，蠲宿耻，以报将士之仇。
现代文：不惊动中国，不派遣军队，而使远夷和睦，异族同心，达到了施行讨伐，洗雪旧耻，替将士报仇雪恨的目的。
English: Not to alarm China, not to send troops, but to bring harmony to the Far East and unity to the different ethnic groups, to achieve the purpose of carrying out the crusade, to wash away the old shame, and to avenge the hatred of the soldiers.

古文：《司马法》曰： 赏不逾月，欲人速睹为善之利也。 
现代文：《司马法》记载 ：赏赐不超过一个月，是要让人们看以为善的好处 。
English: "Sima Law" records: Rewarding no more than one month is to let people see the benefits of goodness.

古文：其封超为定远侯，邑千户。 
现代文：现在封班超为定远侯，食邑千户。 
English: Now, Dingyuan is the most prosperous county, and there are thousands of households in the county.

古文：超自以久在绝域，年老思土。
现代文：班超自觉久居偏远的异地，年老了，思念故国。
English: Banchao has consciously lived in a remote place for a long time. He is old and misses his home country.

古文：十二年，上疏曰： 臣闻太公封齐，五世葬周，狐死首丘，代马依风。
现代文：永元十二年，便上书朝廷说 ：我听说，姜太公封于齐国，五世而归葬于周。狐狸死的时候，头总朝着它出生的土丘，代地的马依恋北风。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, he wrote to the imperial court, "I have heard that Jiang Taigong was enthroned in the State of Qi, and was buried in Zhou as the fifth generation. When a fox dies, its head always faces the mound where it was born, but a horse in its place clings to the north wind.

古文：夫周齐同在中土千里之间，况于远处绝域，小臣能无依风首丘之思哉？
现代文：周和齐同在中国，相距不过千里，何况我远居绝域，怎能没有 依风 、 首丘 的思想感情呢？
English: Zhou He and I are both in China, just thousands of miles apart, not to mention that I live in a remote area. How can I not follow the wind, the thoughts and feelings of Shouqiu?

古文：蛮夷之俗，畏壮侮老。
现代文：蛮夷的风俗，害怕年壮的，欺侮年老的。
English: Barbaric customs, fear of the young, bullying of the old.

古文：臣超犬马齿歼，常恐年衰，奄忽僵仆，孤魂弃捐。
现代文：我班超犬马之齿日减，常恐年老体衰，倏忽死亡，孤魂漂泊于异域。
English: The teeth of my class super-dogs and horses are diminishing day by day. I am always afraid of old age, physical decline, sudden death, and lonely souls drifting in a foreign land.

古文：昔苏武留匈奴中尚十九年，今臣幸得奉节带金银护西域，如自以寿终屯部，诚无所恨，然恐后世或名臣为没西域。
现代文：昔者苏武滞留匈奴只不过十九年。现在我持符节，捧印玺以监护西域，如年寿将终，死于驻地，那也没有什么可遗恨的。然而我恐怕后世或许有人把我死于西域的事实记载下来。
English: In the past, Suwu stayed with the Huns for only nineteen years. Now, I hold the rune festival and hold the seal to guard the western region. If I die at the end of my life, there is nothing to regret. However, I am afraid that future generations may record the fact that I died in the western region.

古文：臣不敢望到酒泉郡，但愿生入玉门关。
现代文：我不敢望到酒泉郡，只愿活着进入玉门关。
English: I don't dare to look as far as Jiuquan County, I just want to get into Yumen Pass alive.

古文：臣老病衰困，冒死瞽言，谨遣子勇随献物入塞。及臣生在，令勇目见中土。 
现代文：我老而多病，身体衰弱，冒死上言，谨派遣我的儿子班勇随带进贡的物品入塞，趁我活着的时候，让班勇回来看一看中国。 
English: I am old and sickly, my body is weak, and I am risking my life. I would like to send my son, Ban Yong, to Tibet with the tribute goods. While I am still alive, let Ban Yong come back and see China.

古文：而超妹同郡曹寿妻昭亦上书请超曰：妾同产兄西域都护定远侯超，幸得以微功特蒙重赏，爵列通侯，位二千石。
现代文：班超的妹妹同郡曹寿的妻子班昭也上书朝廷，请求把班超召回国，说 ：我的同父母的兄长西域都护定远侯班超，侥幸因微小的功勋，特蒙皇帝重赏，爵位列居通侯，官同二千石。
English: Ban Chao's sister, Ban Zhao, the wife of the same county's Cao Shou, also wrote to the imperial court, requesting that Ban Chao be recalled to the country, saying: My parents' elder brother, Xi Gui, protected the distant lord, Ban Chao. By chance, because of his small merit, Emperor Temeng rewarded him with a high rank, and he was ranked as the second highest lord, with an official salary of two thousand koku.

古文：天恩殊绝，诚非小臣所当被蒙。
现代文：天恩特殊超绝，真非小臣所应当蒙赏的。
English: Heaven's grace is so special, it's really not something a junior minister should be rewarded for.

古文：超之始出，志捐躯命，冀立微功，以自陈效。
现代文：班超当初出使西域，立志牺牲自己的家身性命，希望能建立微小的功勋，以图报效。
English: At the beginning, Banchao was sent to the western region, determined to sacrifice his own life and body, hoping to establish a small merit in order to return the favor.

古文：会陈睦之变，道路隔绝，超以一身转侧绝域，晓譬诸国，因其兵众，每有攻战，辄为先登，身被金夷，不避死亡。
现代文：不意碰上陈睦事变，道路阻塞，班超孤身转侧挣扎于艰险的异地，以言辞晓喻西域各国，凭借各国的兵力，每有攻野战，总是奋勇向前，虽身受重伤，也不逃避死亡的危险。
English: Unintentionally encountering Chen Mu Incident, road blockage, Ban Chao turned around and struggled alone in a difficult and dangerous foreign land, using words to illustrate the countries in the western region, relying on the strength of the countries, every offensive field battle, always bravely forward, although seriously injured, do not escape the danger of death.

古文：赖蒙陛下神灵，且得延命沙漠，至今积三十年。
现代文：幸蒙陛下的神灵，得以延续生命于沙漠之地，到现在已经三十年了。
English: Fortunately, His Majesty's spirit has been able to continue living in the desert for the past thirty years.

古文：骨肉生离，不复相识。
现代文：兄妹骨肉之亲，长久离别，相见也许会不认识了。
English: Brothers and sisters who are blood relatives may not recognize each other after a long separation.

古文：所与相随时人士众，皆已物故。
现代文：所有同他一道出使的人，都已经不在人世了。
English: All those who went with him are no longer with us.

古文：超年最长，今且七十。
现代文：班超年纪最大，现在将近七十岁了。
English: Ben is the oldest, now nearly 70.

古文：衰老被病，头发无黑，两手不仁，耳目不聪明，扶杖乃能行。
现代文：身体衰老患病，头发也全白了，两手麻木而不灵活，耳不聪，目不明，要拄着拐杖才能走路。
English: The body is aging and diseased, the hair is completely white, the hands are numb and not flexible, the ears are deaf, the eyes are not clear, and it is necessary to walk with a cane.

古文：虽欲竭尽其力，以报塞天恩，迫于岁暮，犬马齿索。
现代文：他虽然想要竭尽他的力量来报答皇上天恩，但迫于年岁迟暮，犬马之齿将尽。
English: Although he wanted to do his best to repay the emperor's kindness, he was forced to do so at the end of the year.

古文：蛮夷之性，悖逆侮老，而超旦暮入地，久不见代，恐开奸宄之源，生逆乱之心。而卿大夫咸怀一切，莫肯远虑。
现代文：蛮夷的本性，违反正道，欺侮老人，而班超早晚即将死去，长久不见有人来代替他，恐怕坏人伺机而动，萌生犯上之心，而卿大夫咸怀一切，不肯作深远的考虑。
English: The barbaric nature, violating the right way, bullying the elderly, while the superintendent is about to die sooner or later, and there is no one to replace him for a long time, I am afraid that the bad people will wait for the opportunity to move, and the heart of the criminal will be born, but the doctor is tolerant of everything and is not willing to make far-reaching considerations.

古文：如有卒暴，超之气力不能从心，便为上损国家累世之功，下弃忠臣竭力之用，诚可痛也。
现代文：如突然发生暴乱，班超力不从心，不能平息，那么上会毁灭国家累世的功勋，下会废弃忠臣所作的一切努力。那真是可悲痛的啊！
English: If a riot suddenly breaks out, and the superpowers are unable to quell it, then the upper echelon will destroy the nation's accumulated merits, and the lower echelon will discard all the efforts made by the loyal vassals. That is really pathetic!

古文：故超万里归诚，自陈苦急，延颈逾望，三年于今，未蒙省录。
现代文：所以班超于万里之外，怀归国之诚，自己陈述痛苦焦急之心，伸颈企望，到现在已经三年了。
English: Therefore, it has been three years since the team has been more than ten thousand miles away, with the sincerity of returning to the country, self-reporting pain and anxiety, and stretching their necks to hope.

古文：妾窃闻古者十五受兵，六十还之，亦有休息不任职也。
现代文：仍未蒙皇上省察。 我听说古代十五岁服役，六十岁免役，也有休息而不任职的。
English: I have heard that in ancient times, people had to serve at the age of fifteen, and were exempted from service at the age of sixty, and that there were also people who took a break and did not serve.

古文：缘陛下以至孝理天下，得万国之欢心，不遣小国之臣，况超得备侯伯之位，故敢触死为超求衰，丐超余年。
现代文：因陛下以至孝来治理天下，博得万国之欢心，不遗忘小国的臣子。何况班超获得侯伯的爵位，所以我敢于冒死为班超哀求，乞让班超因国能安度余年。
English: Because His Majesty governs the world with filial piety, wins the favor of all nations, and does not forget the vassals of small countries. Not to mention that Ban Chao has received the title of Hou Bo, so I dare to risk death for Ban Chao, begging for Ban Chao to be able to spend the rest of the year in peace.

古文：一得生还，复见阙庭，使国永无劳远之虑，西域无仓卒之忧，超得长蒙文王葬骨之恩，子方哀老之惠。
现代文：如果班超能活着回来，再见宫立阙，让国家永远没有劳师远征的忧虑，西域也没有猝然暴发动乱的忧愁，班超得以长久蒙受皇上像文王那样赐予归葬骸骨的恩德，像田子方那样哀怜衰老的惠爱。
English: If Ban Chao can come back alive, it will be goodbye to Gong Lijuan, so that the country will never have the anxiety of the labor expedition, and the western region will not have the sadness of suddenly starting a riot. Ban Chao will be able to receive the grace of the emperor for a long time, like King Wen, who gave him the grace to bury the skeleton, and the grace to mourn the aging like Tian Zifang.

古文：《诗》云： 民亦劳止，汔可小康，惠此中国，以绥四方。 
现代文：《诗经·大雅》说： 老百姓通过劳动，可以得到小康。先施恩惠于中国，然后乃安定四方。 
English: "Shijing · Daya" said: The common people can get well-off through labor. First, grant favors to China, and then stabilize the four directions.

古文：超有书与妾生诀，恐不复相见。
现代文：班超有书信和我作生前的诀别，恐怕真不会见到他了。
English: I'm afraid I won't get to see him again, because he wrote me a letter to say goodbye before he died.

古文：妾诚伤超以壮年竭忠孝于沙漠，疲老则便捐死于旷野，诚可哀怜。
现代文：我确实伤感于班超在壮年时候竭尽忠孝于沙漠之中，衰老的时候则被遗弃而死于荒凉空旷的原野。这真够悲伤可怜啊！
English: I really feel sad for Banchao, who in his prime devoted himself to the desert, and in his old age was abandoned and died in a desolate and empty field. This is really sad and pitiful!

古文：如不蒙救护，超后有一旦之变，冀幸超家得蒙赵母、卫姬先请之贷。
现代文：如果不蒙皇上的救援爱护，班超以后一旦有变，希望班超一家，能蒙受皇上像赵母、卫姬那样，因事先上奏而免于治牵连之罪的宽恕。
English: If they do not receive the emperor's rescue and care, once there is a change after Banchao, I hope that the Banchao family can receive the emperor's forgiveness for the crime of being exempted from punishment and implication, like Zhao Miao and Wei Ji, because they played in advance.

古文：妾愚戆不知大义，触犯忌讳。
现代文：我愚笨不懂得大义，触犯了忌讳。 
English: I'm stupid and don't know what's right, and I've broken the taboo.

古文：书奏，帝感其言，乃征超还。
现代文：奏章送上去了，皇帝被她的语言所感动，便把班超召回来了。
English: The score was sent up, and the emperor, moved by her words, called Ban Chao back.

古文：超在西域三十一岁。
现代文：班超在西域住了三十一年。
English: Banchao has lived in the western region for 31 years.

古文：十四年八月至洛阳，拜为射声校尉。
现代文：永元十四年八月回到洛阳，被任命为射声校尉。
English: He returned to Luoyang in August of the 14th year of the Yongyuan era, and was appointed as a lieutenant of Yingxiang.

古文：超素有胸胁疾，既至，病遂加。帝遣中黄门问疾，赐医药。
现代文：班超胸肋本来有病，回国之后，病情加剧，皇帝派遣中黄门看问，赐给他医药。
English: After returning to China, his condition worsened. The emperor sent Zhonghuangmen to inquire about him and gave him medicine.

古文：其年九月卒，年七十一。
现代文：这一年九月逝世，享年七十一岁。
English: He died in September of that year, aged 71.

古文：朝廷愍惜焉，使者吊祭，赠赗甚厚。
现代文：朝廷怜悯他，派使者吊唁致祭，赏赐极为优厚。
English: The imperial court took pity on him, sent an envoy to offer condolences, and rewarded him very generously.

古文：子雄嗣。
现代文：班超的儿子班雄继承他的爵位。
English: His son Zhang Xiong succeeded to the title.

古文：初，超被征，以戊己校尉任尚为都护。与超交代。尚谓超曰： 君侯在外国三十余年，而小人猥承君后，任重虑浅，宜有以诲之。 
现代文：以前，班超被召还，朝廷用戊己校尉任尚作都护，交代工作的时候，任尚对班超说 ：君侯在外国三十多年，而我惭愧地继您之后，责任重大，智虑浅短，您该有以教我吧。 
English: In the past, when Ban Chao was recalled and the imperial court appointed Wu Zi's lieutenant, Ren Shang, as the capital's protector, when he changed jobs, Ren Shang said to Ban Chao: The prince has been abroad for more than thirty years, and I am ashamed to follow you. The responsibility is great, but the wisdom is shallow. You should have something to teach me.

古文：超曰： 年老失智，任君数当大位，岂班超所能及哉！
现代文：班超说： 我年纪老了，变得愚笨了，您出任大职，我班超怎能比得上呢？
English: The monitor said: I am old and stupid. You are in a high-ranking position. How can my monitor be compared to you?

古文：必不得已，愿进愚言。
现代文：必不得已，愿意说几句不甚高明的话。
English: I am forced to say a few words that are not very clever.

古文：塞外吏士，本非孝子顺孙，皆以罪过徙补边屯。
现代文：塞外官吏士卒，本来就不是孝子顺孙，都是因为有罪过才被迁徙去补充边疆的屯兵。
English: The officials and cadres of the Siberian Foreign Affairs Office were not originally the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters.

古文：而蛮夷怀鸟兽之心，难养易败。
现代文：而蛮夷又怀着禽兽心肠，很难收养而容易坏事。
English: However, he is a savage and has the heart of an animal. It is difficult to adopt him and easy to do bad things.

古文：今君性严急，水清无大鱼，察政不得下和。
现代文：现在您秉性严厉而又有些急躁。水清了就没有大鱼，严于监察则不得下面的欢心。
English: Now you are strict and somewhat impatient. If the water is clear, there will be no big fish, and if you are strict in supervision, you will not be able to win the hearts of those below.

古文：宜荡佚简易，宽小过，总大纲而已。 
现代文：您应该宽容冷静，简易行事，小过失从宽处理，紧紧抓住重要的环节就行了。 
English: You should be tolerant and calm, act simply, treat minor faults with leniency, and firmly grasp the important links.

古文：超去后，尚私谓所亲曰： 我以班君当有奇策，今所言平平耳。 
现代文：班超走后，任尚私下对他的亲信说 ：我以为班君有什么奇策，现在他所说的不过平常言论罢了。 
English: After Ban Chao left, Ren Shang said privately to his cronies: "I thought Ban Jun had some magic plan, but now what he said is just ordinary speech."

古文：尚至数年，而西域反乱，以罪被征，如超所戒。
现代文：任尚到任数年，而西域反叛作乱，任尚因有罪而被召还，就像班超所告诫的那样。
English: Ren Shang was in office for several years, but when the Western Regions rebelled and caused turmoil, Ren Shang was recalled for his guilt, just as Pan Chao had warned.

古文：有三子。长子雄，累迁屯骑校尉。
现代文：班超有三个儿子，长子叫班雄，迁升到屯骑校尉。
English: Banchao has three sons. The eldest son, Banxiong, has been promoted to the rank of cadet.

古文：会叛羌寇三辅，诏雄将五营兵屯长安，就拜京兆尹。
现代文：正碰上羌人侵犯三辅，皇帝命令班雄率领五营兵马驻扎在长安，并任命他为京兆尹。
English: When the Xiongnu invaded Sanfu, the emperor ordered Ban Xiong to lead five battalions of soldiers and horses stationed in Chang'an, and appointed him as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：雄卒，子始嗣，尚清河孝王女阴城公主。
现代文：班雄死了之后，他的儿子班始继承他的职位，高攀上与清河孝王的女儿阴城公主成婚。
English: After Ban Xiong's death, his son Ban Shi inherited his position and married the daughter of King Qinghe Xiao Wang, Princess Yincheng.

古文：主顺帝之姑，贵骄淫乱，与嬖人居帷中，而召始入，使伏床下。
现代文：阴城公主是顺帝的姑母，骄贵而又淫乱。她跟她宠爱的人共同处在帏帐中，而叫班始进去，要他爬在床底下。
English: Princess Hades was Shun's aunt, proud and lewd, and she and her favorite were in bed together, but she called Banzhi in and told him to crawl under the bed.

古文：始积怒，永建五年，遂拔刃杀主。
现代文：班始憋了一肚子气，永建五年，就拔刀把公主杀了。
English: Banshi lost his temper, and five years later, he drew his sword and killed the princess.

古文：帝大怒，腰斩始，同产皆弃市。
现代文：顺帝大怒，把班始腰斩了，班始的同族都被杀害。
English: Enraged, Emperor Shun beheaded Ban Shi, and all of Ban Shi's compatriots were killed.

古文：超少子勇。
现代文：班超的小儿子名叫班勇。
English: Banchao's youngest son is named Ban Yong.

古文：勇字宜僚，少有父风。
现代文：◆班勇传，班勇，字宜僚。年轻时就有父亲班超的大将风度。
English: ◆Ban Yong Chuan, Ban Yong, the word is Yili. When he was young, he had the general demeanor of his father, Ban Chao.

古文：永初元年，西域反叛，以勇为军司马。
现代文：永初元年，西域反叛汉朝，朝廷派班勇作军司马。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, when the Western Regions rebelled against the Han Dynasty, the imperial court sent Banyong to act as military leader.

古文：与兄雄俱出敦煌，迎都护及西域甲卒而还。
现代文：班勇和哥哥班雄都从敦煌出兵，迎都护和西域甲兵回来。
English: Both Ban Yong and his brother Ban Xiong sent troops from Dunhuang to welcome back the capital guard and the West Area A soldiers.

古文：因罢都护。
现代文：于是罢免了都护。
English: As a result, Tsumo was dismissed.

古文：后西域绝无汉吏十余年。
现代文：后来西域有十多年没有汉朝的官吏。
English: Later, there were no Han officials in the western region for more than ten years.

古文：元初六年，敦煌太守曹宗遣长史索班将千余人屯伊吾，车师前王及鄯善王皆来降班。
现代文：元初六年，敦煌太守曹宗派长史索班率领千多人驻在伊吾，车师前王和鄯善王都到索班这里投降。
English: In the first six years of the Yuan Dynasty, Dunhuang's governor, the head of the Cao sect faction, Shi Soban, led more than a thousand people to stay in Igu. The former king of chariots and the good king of horses both surrendered to Soban here.

古文：后数月，北单于与车师后部遂共攻没班，进击走前王，略有北道。
现代文：后来过了几个月，北单于与车师后部一同攻没索班，打跑前王，占领向北的道路。
English: A few months later, Beidan, together with the rear of the drivers, attacked Soban, beat the former king, and occupied the road to the north.

古文：鄯善王急，求救于曹宗，宗因此请出兵五千人击匈奴，报索班之耻，因复取西域。
现代文：鄯善王着急了，向曹宗求救，曹宗因此请求朝廷出兵五千人攻击匈奴，替索班报仇雪耻，于是又收复西域。
English: King Gong Shan was in a hurry and asked Cao Zong for help. Cao Zong therefore requested the imperial court to send five thousand soldiers to attack the Xiongnu to avenge the disgrace of Soban, and then recovered the western region.

古文：邓太后召勇诣朝堂会议。
现代文：邓太后召班勇到朝堂参加会议。
English: Empress Dowager Deng summoned Ban Yong to the Imperial Palace to attend the meeting.

古文：先是，公卿多以为宜闭玉门关，遂弃西域。
现代文：起先各公卿多数主张关闭玉门关，于是就放弃了西域。
English: At first, most of the nobles advocated the closure of the Yumen Pass, so they gave up the western region.

古文：勇上议曰：昔孝武皇帝患匈奴强盛，兼总百蛮，以逼障塞。于是开通西域，离其党与，论者以为夺匈奴府藏，断其右臂。
现代文：班勇上奏议道 ：从前孝武皇帝担心匈奴强盛，将成为百蛮的统帅，逼进我边疆，于是开通西域，分离他们的同党，当时的舆论认为这等于夺到了匈奴的内脏，砍断了他的右臂。
English: "Once upon a time, Emperor Xiaowu was worried that the Xiongnu would become strong and powerful, and that he would become the commander of a hundred barbarians, and he forced them into our borders. So he opened the Western Regions and separated them from their allies. At the time, the public opinion thought that this was tantamount to seizing the internal organs of the Xiongnu and cutting off his right arm.

古文：遭王莽篡盗，征求无，胡夷忿毒，遂以背叛。
现代文：后来王莽篡位，向西域索取东西太多，贪得无厌，胡夷忿恨已极，于是背叛汉朝。
English: Later, Wang Mang usurped the throne, demanded too much from the Western Regions, was insatiably greedy, and was extremely angry, so he betrayed the Han Dynasty.

古文：光武中兴，未遑外事，故匈奴负强，驱率诸国。
现代文：光武帝中兴后，没有工夫考虑外事，所以匈奴仗恃自己强盛，赶走别人并占领别的国家。
English: After the rise of Emperor Guangwu, there was no time to consider foreign affairs, so the Huns fought to make themselves strong, drive others away and occupy other countries.

古文：及至永平，再攻敦煌，河西诸郡，城门昼闭。
现代文：到了永平年间，再进攻敦煌，河西各郡，各郡白天都把城门关上。
English: During the Yongping era, after the attack on Dunhuang, all counties in Hexi closed their gates during the day.

古文：孝明皇帝深惟庙策，乃命虎臣，出征西域，故匈奴远遁，边境得安。
现代文：孝明皇帝考虑国家大计，于是派虎将出征西域，因此匈奴逃向远方，边境得到安宁。
English: Emperor Xiaoming considered the country's grand plan, so he sent the tiger to the western region, so the Xiongnu fled far away, and the border was peaceful.

古文：及至永元，莫不内属。
现代文：到了永元年间，西域地方没有不归附内地的。
English: By the Yongyuan era, there was no place in the Western Regions that did not belong to the inland.

古文：会间者羌乱，西域复绝，北虏遂遣责诸国，备其逋租，高其价值，严以期会。
现代文：后来正逢羌人作乱，西域又断绝往来，北匈奴又派遣督促其他小国。收集逃避的租税，把价值抬得高高的，严格限期集会。
English: Later, when the Xiongnu rebelled, the Western Regions broke off relations with the Xiongnu, and the Northern Xiongnu dispatched envoys to urge other small countries to collect the evaded taxes and raise the value to a high level, the meeting was held with a strict deadline.

古文：鄯善、车师皆怀愤怨，思乐事汉，其路无从。
现代文：鄯善、车师都怀愤怨之心，想亲近汉朝，可惜找不到门路。
English: Hao Shan and the driver were both resentful and wanted to get close to the Han Dynasty, but unfortunately they couldn't find a way.

古文：前所以时有叛者，皆由牧养失宜，还为其害故也。
现代文：可见前段时期有反叛的事发生，都由于统治工作不够恰当，所以出现相反的效果。
English: It can be seen that the rebellions that occurred in the previous period were all due to inadequate governance, so the opposite effect occurred.

古文：今曹宗徒耻于前负，欲报雪匈奴，而不寻出兵故事，未度当时之宜也。
现代文：现在曹宗只是感到前面的耻辱，想报复匈奴洗雪耻辱，而不查一查历史上出兵的先例，没有考虑当时的具体情况。
English: Now, Cao Zong only feels the shame ahead and wants to take revenge on the Huns to wash away the shame, without checking the precedents of sending troops in history and without considering the specific circumstances at that time.

古文：夫要功荒外，万无一成，若兵连祸结，悔无及已。
现代文：凡是想在荒外建功的，万个中没有一个成功的，如果兵连祸结，后悔将不及了。
English: Anyone who wants to make a difference in the wilderness will not succeed in a million years. If the soldiers are linked by misfortune, regret will not be enough.

古文：况今府藏未充，师无后继，是示弱于远夷，暴短于海内，臣愚以为不可许也。
现代文：何况现在府库空虚，军队后无援兵，这是向远方的夷狄暴露自己的弱点，向海内展现自己的短处，愚见认为不能同意。
English: What's more, the treasury is now empty, and there are no reinforcements after the army. This is exposing one's own weaknesses to the far-away Yidi, and showing one's own shortcomings to the mainland.

古文：旧敦煌郡有营兵三百人，今宜复之，复置护西域副校尉，居于敦煌，如永元故事。
现代文：旧敦煌郡有营兵三百人，现在应该恢复，并重新设置护西域的副校尉，住在敦煌，像永元年间那样做。
English: The old Dunhuang County had 300 battalion soldiers. Now it is time to restore and re-establish the vice-captain of the Western Defense Region, living in Dunhuang, as it did in the Yongyuan period.

古文：又宜遣西域长史将五百人屯楼兰，西当焉耆、龟兹径路，南强鄯善、于窴心胆，北匈奴，东近敦煌。
现代文：又应派西域长史统率五百人驻在楼兰，西边挡住焉耆、龟兹的来路，南边给鄯善、于蜫壮壮胆子，北面抵御匈奴，东边连接敦煌。
English: In addition, five hundred people should be stationed in Loulan in the western region under the leadership of the Chief Historian of the Western Region, to block the way of Yan Xuan and Gu Zi in the west, to give courage to Xuan Shan and Yu Xuan Zhuang in the south, to resist the Xiongnu in the north, and to connect Dunhuang in the east.

古文：如此诚便。
现代文：这样才算方便。 
English: That's what makes it convenient.

古文：尚书问勇曰： 今立副校尉，何以为便？
现代文：尚书问班勇道： 现在设立副校尉，派谁合适？
English: Shangshu asked Ban Yong: Now that a vice-captain has been established, who is suitable?

古文：又置长史屯楼兰，利害云何？ 
现代文：又设长史驻楼兰，有什么好处？ 
English: What are the benefits of having Changshi stationed in Loulan?

古文：勇对曰： 昔永平之末，始通西域，初遣中郎将居郭煌，后置副校尉于车师，既为胡虏节度，又禁汉人不得有所侵扰。故外夷归心，匈奴畏威。
现代文：班勇答道： 从前永平末年，刚开通西域，开始派中郎将驻在敦煌，后来设副校尉在车师，一方面管制胡虏，一方面又禁止汉人不得有所侵扰，所以外夷心甘情愿归附，匈奴也害怕我们的威势。
English: Ban Yong replied: In the last years of the Yongping Dynasty, just after the opening of the Western Regions, Zhong Lang was first stationed in Dunhuang, and later a vice-captain was set up in the coach division, on the one hand to control the Huns, and on the other hand to prohibit the Chinese from intruding, so the barbarians were willing to join, and the Huns were also afraid of our power.

古文：今鄯善王尤还，汉人外孙，若匈奴得志，则尤还必死。
现代文：现在鄯善王尤还，是汉人的外孙，如果匈奴得志，尤还首当其冲，非死不可。
English: At present, the grandson of the Han people, especially the Xiongnu, is the grandson of the Xiongnu. If the Xiongnu succeeds, especially the Xiongnu will be the first to bear the brunt, and must die.

古文：此等虽同鸟兽，亦知避害。
现代文：这些人虽然同鸟兽差不多，也知道避害。
English: Although these people are similar to birds and beasts, they also know how to avoid harm.

古文：若出屯楼兰，足以招附其心，愚以为便。 
现代文：如果出兵驻在楼兰，足够让他们归附，我认为这样比较方便。 
English: If the dispatched troops are stationed in Loulan, it is enough for them to be attached, I think this is more convenient.

古文：长乐卫尉镡显、廷尉綦母参、司隶校尉崔据难曰： 朝廷前所以弃西域者，以其无益于中国而费难供也。
现代文：长乐卫尉镡显、廷尉綦毋参、司隶校尉崔据反驳道： 朝廷从前想抛弃西域，因为西域对中国没有好处而经费难得供给。
English: Changle Guard Lieutenant Zou Xian, Imperial Guard Lieutenant Zou Nezhan, and Imperial Guard Lieutenant Cui Jian retorted: The imperial court once wanted to abandon the western region, because the western region is not beneficial to China and funds are rarely provided.

古文：今车师已属匈奴，鄯善不可保信，一旦反复，班将能保北虏不为边害乎？ 
现代文：现在车师已属匈奴，鄯善也不可靠，一旦出现反覆，你能担保北方匈奴不成边疆的后患吗？ 
English: Now that the driver is a Xiongnu, the quality is also unreliable. If there is a recurrence, can you guarantee that the northern Xiongnu will not become a borderline aftereffect?

古文：勇对曰： 今中国置州牧者，以禁郡县奸猾盗贼也。
现代文：班勇答道 ：现在中国设州牧，为的是防止郡县出现狡猾盗贼捣乱，如果州牧能保证不成为边害。
English: Banyong replied, "Nowadays, China has set up state herdsmen in order to prevent cunning thieves from causing trouble in counties and counties. If the state herdsmen can ensure that they do not become a border harm, they will succeed.

古文：若州牧能保盗贼不起者，臣亦愿以要斩保匈奴之不为边害也。
现代文：如果开通了西域，那么盗贼不起来，我也愿意用腰斩来保证匈奴的势力必然减弱，敌势减弱了，那么为害的可能性就缩小了。
English: If the western region is opened, then the thieves will not rise up, and I am also willing to use my influence to ensure that the power of the Xiongnu will inevitably weaken, the enemy's strength will weaken, and the possibility of harm will shrink.

古文：今通西域则虏势必弱，虏势弱则为患微矣。孰与归其府藏，续其断臂哉！
现代文：现在设校尉来保卫西域，设长史来招降诸国，如果放弃不管，岂不等于归还他们的内脏，接续他们的断臂吗！
English: If we now set up a schoolmaster to defend the western region, and set up a chief historian to recruit countries to surrender, if we give up regardless, wouldn't it be tantamount to returning their internal organs and continuing their severed arms!

古文：今置校尉以抚西域，设长史以招怀诸国，若弃而不立，则西域望绝。
现代文：那么西域必然失望，希望断绝后，一定向北匈奴投降，缘边各郡一定受到困害，恐怕河西城门白天又要关上了。
English: Then the western region will inevitably be disappointed. After the hope is cut off, it will definitely surrender to the northern Huns, and the border counties will definitely be in trouble. I am afraid that the Hexi City Gate will be closed again during the day.

古文：望绝之后，屈就北虏，缘边之郡将受困害，恐河西城门必复有昼闭之儆矣。今不廓开朝廷之德，而拘屯戍之费，若北虏遂炽，岂安边久长之策哉！ 太尉属毛轸难曰： 今若置校尉，则西域骆驿遣使，求索无，与之则费难供，不与则失其心。
现代文：现在不广泛宣传朝廷的大德，而只看到驻扎军队要多花几个钱，如果北匈奴更加强大，难道边塞会得到长治久安么！ 太尉属意毛轸反驳道： 如果设置校尉，那么西域不断派使者来，要钱要粮将无止境，给他吧，那么费用难供，不给又失去他们的心愿。
English: Now, instead of widely publicizing the great virtue of the imperial court, they only see that it costs more money to station an army. If the Northern Huns are more powerful, will the border fortress be able to enjoy long-term peace and stability? The captain replied, "If a captain is set up, then the Western Regions will continue to send envoys, and the demand for money and grain will be endless. Give it to him, then the expenses will be difficult to provide, and if they don't give it, they will lose their desire."

古文：一旦为匈奴所迫，当复求救，则为役大矣。 
现代文：一旦被匈奴所迫，当然又来求救，那么事情就闹大了。 
English: Once forced by the Xiongnu, of course, came to seek help, then things got out of hand.

古文：勇对曰： 今设以西域归匈奴，而使其恩德大汉，不为抄盗则可矣。
现代文：班勇答道 ：如果让西域归附匈奴，使他们感戴大汉的恩德，不作侵扰的寇盗就很好了。
English: Banyong replied, "It would be good if the Western Regions were annexed to the Xiongnu, so that they would appreciate the great man's kindness and not be intrusive robbers."

古文：如其不然，则因西域租入之饶，兵马之众，以扰动缘边，是为富仇雠之财，增暴夷之势也。
现代文：如果不是这样，那么因为西域租税收入很多，兵马为数不少，将来在边陲捣乱起来，这等于让敌人富足起来，增添强敌的势力。
English: If this is not the case, then because of the large amount of tax revenue in the western region and the large number of soldiers and horses, there will be trouble in the border areas in the future. This is tantamount to enriching the enemy and increasing the strength of the strong enemy.

古文：置校尉者，宣威布德，以系诸国内向之心，以疑匈奴觊觎之情，而无财费耗国之虑也。
现代文：设校尉的目的，无非是宣传汉朝的威德，维系各国归附内地的心愿，使匈奴的侵略野心有所收敛，而没有耗费国家财力的忧虑。
English: The purpose of appointing a lieutenant was nothing more than to propagate the virtue of the Han Dynasty, maintain the desire of countries to attach to the mainland, and make the Huns' aggressive ambitions somewhat restrained, without worrying about consuming the country's financial resources.

古文：且西域之人无它求索，其来入者，不过禀食而已。
现代文：何况西域的人要求不高，他们之来，不过要点粮食罢了。
English: What's more, people in the western region aren't very demanding, they just want some food.

古文：今若拒绝，势归北属，夷虏并力以寇并、凉，则中国之费不止千亿。
现代文：现在如果一概拒绝，他们一定依附北虏，让他们联合起来进犯并州、凉州，那么中国的耗费决不止千亿而已。
English: Now, if they flatly refuse, they must rely on the North Korean people, let them unite to attack and annex Zhoushou and Liangzhou, then China's expenditure will never exceed 100 billion yuan.

古文：置之诚便。 
现代文：我看还是设置为好。 
English: I think it's better to set it to on.

古文：于是从勇议，复郭煌郡营兵三百人，置西域副校尉居敦煌。
现代文：于是朝廷听从班勇的意见，恢复敦煌郡营兵三百人，设西域副校尉，让他住在敦煌。
English: As a result, the imperial court listened to Ban Yong's opinion and restored the Dunhuang County battalion of three hundred soldiers, set up a West Vice-Colonel, and let him live in Dunhuang.

古文：虽复羁縻西域，然亦未能出屯。
现代文：虽然又使西域得到控制，但是还不能走出屯兵之地。
English: Although the western region has been brought under control, it is still not possible to leave the garrison area.

古文：其后匈奴果数与车师共入寇抄，河西大被其害。
现代文：后来匈奴果然多次与车师共同进犯边地，河西受了大害。
English: Later, the Xiongnu did indeed repeatedly attack the border areas together with the drivers, and Hexi suffered great damage.

古文：延光二年夏，复以勇为西域长史，将兵五百人出屯柳中。
现代文：延光二年夏，朝廷又派班勇作西域长史，率领兵士五百人驻扎在柳中。
English: In the summer of the 2nd year of Yan Guang, the imperial court also sent Pan Yong to the west to make a long history, leading 500 soldiers stationed in Liu Zhong.

古文：明年正月，勇至楼兰，以鄯善归附，特加三绥。
现代文：第二年正月，班勇到了楼兰，因为鄯善归附汉朝，朝廷特加班勇三绶以示奖励。
English: In the first month of the second year, Banyong arrived in Loulan. Because the Han Dynasty had annexed the city, the imperial court rewarded him with three additional years of service as a reward.

古文：而龟兹王白英犹自疑未下，勇开以恩信，白英乃率姑墨、温宿自缚诣勇降。
现代文：可是龟兹王白英还在犹豫不决，班勇用汉室的恩威开导他，白英就率领姑墨、温宿自己绑着自己到班勇这里投降。
English: However, the turtle king Bai Ying was still hesitating. Ban Yong enlightened him with the grace of the Han family, and Bai Ying led his aunt and uncle to bind themselves and surrender to Ban Yong.

古文：勇因发其兵步骑万余人到车师前王庭，击走匈奴伊蠡王于伊和谷，收得前部五千余人，于是前部始复开通。
现代文：班勇于是调集他的步兵骑兵万多人到车师前王那里，从伊和谷把匈奴伊蠡王赶跑了，俘获前部五千余人，于是前部又开通了。
English: Ban Yong then mobilized more than ten thousand of his infantry and cavalry to the former king's chariot division, drove the Hun Yixing away from the Iwate Valley, captured more than five thousand people in the front, and then the front was opened again.

古文：还，屯田柳中。
现代文：回来之后，仍驻柳中，一边防守，一边种田。
English: After returning, he remained in Yuchu, defending and farming at the same time.

古文：四年秋，勇发敦煌、张掖、酒泉六千骑及鄯善、疏勒、车师前部兵击后部王军就，大破之。
现代文：四年秋，班勇调集敦煌、张掖、酒泉六千骑兵和鄯善、疏勒、车师前部兵攻打后部王军就，把他们打得大败。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, Banyong mobilized six thousand cavalrymen from Dunhuang, Zhangye and Jiuquan, as well as soldiers from the front to attack the rear of the king's army, and defeated them.

古文：首虏八千余人，马畜五万余头。
现代文：斩首俘获八千多人，马畜五万多头。
English: More than eight thousand people were captured by beheading, and more than fifty thousand horses and cattle.

古文：捕得军就及匈奴持节使者，将至索班没处斩之，以报其耻，传首京师。
现代文：抓到军就和匈奴持节使者，把他们押到索班死的地方斩了头，替索班报仇雪耻，并将首级传送到京师。
English: When the army caught them, they sent them to the place where Soban died and beheaded him, avenging Soban's death, and sent the head to the capital.

古文：永建元年，更立后部故王子加特奴为王。
现代文：永建元年，另立后部故王子加特奴做王。
English: In the first year of the Yongjian era, the late Prince Gatnu of Houbu was made king.

古文：勇又使别校诛斩东且弥王，亦更立其种人为王，于是车师六国悉平。
现代文：班勇又派另一将校杀了东且弥王，也另立了他的同种人为王，从此车师六国都平定了。
English: Ban Yong also sent another officer to kill King Dong Kiya, and also set up another of his kind as king. From this time, the Six Kingdoms were pacified.

古文：其冬，勇发诸国兵击匈奴呼衍王，呼衍王亡走，其众二万余人皆降。
现代文：同年冬天，班勇调集各国士兵攻打匈奴呼衍王，呼衍王逃走，他的部下二万余人都投降了。
English: In the winter of the same year, Banyong mobilized soldiers from all over the world to attack the Hun, King Huyan. King Huyan fled, and more than twenty thousand of his subordinates surrendered.

古文：捕得单于从兄，勇使加特奴手斩之，以结车师，匈奴之隙。
现代文：抓到了单于的堂兄，班勇叫加特奴亲手杀了，让车师与匈奴加深仇隙。
English: When he caught Zhan Yu's cousin, Ban Yong ordered Gatenu to kill him with his own hands, so that the driver could deepen the feud with the Xiongnu.

古文：北单于自将万余骑入后部，至金且谷，勇使假司马曹俟驰救之。
现代文：北单于自己率领万余骑兵进入后部，到金且谷，班勇派假司马曹俊快马去救援。
English: Beidan led more than 10,000 cavalrymen into the rear, to Jinji Valley, and Ban Yong sent the fake Sima Cao Jun fast horse to rescue.

古文：单于引去，俊追斩其贵人骨都侯，于是呼衍王遂徙居枯梧河上。
现代文：单于退走，曹俊追斩他的贵人骨都侯，呼衍王就迁居在枯梧河上。
English: As soon as he retreated, Cao Jun chased and beheaded his nobles, and King Huyan moved to the Wu River.

古文：是后车师无复虏迹，城郭皆安。
现代文：从此以后车师没有匈奴的踪迹，城郭也很安定。
English: Since then, there has been no trace of the Xiongnu, and the castle is very stable.

古文：惟焉耆王元孟未降。
现代文：只有焉耆王元孟尚未投降。
English: Only Yan Xuan Wang Yuan Meng has not yet surrendered.

古文：二年，勇上请攻元孟，于是遗敦煌太守张朗将河西四郡兵三千人配勇。
现代文：第二年，班勇上书请求攻打元孟，于是朝廷派敦煌太守张朗带领河西郡兵三千人与班勇配合。
English: The following year, Ban Yong sent a letter requesting to attack Yuan Meng, so the imperial court sent Zhang Lang, the governor of Dunhuang, to lead 3,000 soldiers from Hexi County to cooperate with Ban Yong.

古文：因发诸国兵四万余人，分骑为两道击之。
现代文：班勇就调集各国兵四万余人，分骑为两路出击。
English: Pan Yong mobilized more than forty thousand soldiers from all over the world and divided the cavalry into two attacks.

古文：勇从南道，朗从北道，约期俱至焉耆。
现代文：班勇从南道走，张朗从北道走，约定日期到焉耆会师。
English: Ban Yong walked from the South Road, Zhang Lang walked from the North Road, and the appointment date was set.

古文：而朗先有罪，欲徼功自赎，遂先期至爵离关，遣司马将兵前战，首虏二千余人。
现代文：可是张朗先有罪在身，想立功赎罪，就先赶到爵离关。派司马带兵打前站，俘获敌人二千余人。
English: However, Zhang Lang was the first to be guilty, and he wanted to make merit and atone for his sins, so he hurried to the castle and left the pass first. He sent Sima to lead the soldiers to the front and captured more than two thousand enemies.

古文：元孟惧诛，逆遣使乞降，张朗径入焉耆受降而还。
现代文：元孟害怕杀头，派使者请求投降，张朗直接到了焉耆受降回去了。
English: Yuan Meng was afraid of being killed, so he sent an envoy to request surrender. Zhang Lang went directly to Yancheng to accept the surrender.

古文：元孟竟不肯面缚，惟遣子诣阙贡献。
现代文：元孟竟不肯当面被捆绑，只派儿子到朝廷进贡。
English: Yuan Meng actually refused to be tied up in front of his face, and only sent his son to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：朗遂得免诛。
现代文：张朗于是得到赦免死罪。
English: Zhang Lang was therefore pardoned from the death penalty.

古文：勇以后期，征下狱，免。后卒于家。
现代文：班勇因为没有如期赶到，被判罪下狱，不久得到赦免，后来老死在家。
English: Because he did not arrive on time, Ban Yong was sentenced to prison. He was soon pardoned and later died at home.

古文：梁字伯威，北地弋居人也。
现代文：◆梁慬传，梁慬字伯威，北地弋居人。
English: ◆Liang Yu Chuan, Liang Yu Zi Bo Wei, Hokkien 居人.

古文：父讽，历州宰。
现代文：父梁讽，历任州宰。
English: His father, Liang Lili, was a successive provincial governor.

古文：永元元年，车骑将军窦宪出征匈奴，除讽为军司马，令先赍金帛使北单于，宣国威德，其归附者万余人。
现代文：永元元年，车骑将军窦宪出征匈奴，封梁讽为军司马，使他先带上金帛出使北单于，宣扬国家的威德，归附的有万多人。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the chariot and cavalry general Dou Xian went to the Huns as an expeditionary force, and Fong Liang Lian was appointed as the military secretary. He first took the golden scepter to send the envoy Beidanzhang to propagate the country's virtue, and more than ten thousand people joined him.

古文：后坐失宪意，髡输武威，武威太守承旨杀之。
现代文：后来因违背窦宪的旨意，充军到武威，武威太守奉旨杀了他。
English: Later, in violation of Dou Xian's will, he joined the army and went to Wuwei. Wuwei's eunuch had him killed.

古文：窦氏既灭，和帝知其为宪所诬，征，除为郎中。
现代文：窦氏既灭，和帝知道梁讽是被窦宪冤杀的，召訲，作为郎中。
English: After the death of the Dou clan, Emperor He knew that Liang Lili was unjustly killed by Dou Xian, and summoned him as a vassal.

古文：有勇气，常慷慨好功名。
现代文：梁慬有勇气，常慷慨好功名。
English: Liang Kun had courage and was often generous and meritorious.

古文：初为车骑将军邓鸿司马，再迁，延平元年拜西域副校尉。
现代文：起初做车骑将军邓鸿的司马，再次升迁，延平元年拜为西域的副校尉。
English: At first, he served as the second-in-command of the cavalry general Deng Hong. He was promoted again, and in the first year of Yanping, he was promoted to the vice-captain of the western region.

古文：行至河西，会西域诸国反叛，攻都护任尚于疏勒。
现代文：梁慬走到河西，碰上西域各国反叛，攻都护任尚于疏勒。
English: When Liang Jun went to Hexi, he encountered the rebellion of the western countries, and the attack on the capital was still in Shule.

古文：尚上书求救，诏将河西四郡羌胡五千骑驰赴之，未至而尚已得解。
现代文：任尚上书求救，朝廷召梁慬帅领河西四郡羌胡五千骑兵跑去救援，梁慬没有到而任尚已解围。
English: Ren Shang wrote a letter asking for help, and the imperial court summoned Liang Qianshai to lead five thousand cavalrymen from the four counties west of the river to the rescue. Liang Qian did not arrive, but Ren Shang had already lifted the siege.

古文：会征尚还，以骑都尉段禧为都护，西域长史赵博为骑都尉。
现代文：恰好召任尚回来，朝廷用骑都尉段禧做都护，西域长史赵博做骑都尉。
English: He just happened to be called back, and the imperial court used the cavalry captain Duan Xie to guard the capital, and the governor of the western region Shi Zhao Bo to be the cavalry captain.

古文：禧、博守它乾城。
现代文：段、赵二人守住它乾城。
English: Duan, Zhao and two others hold it dry.

古文：它乾城小，以为不可固，乃谲说龟兹王白霸，欲入共保其城，白霸许之。
现代文：它乾城很小，梁慬以为不太坚固，于是狡诈地劝说龟兹王白霸，想进来共保其城，白霸同意了。
English: Its dry city is very small, Liang Yao thought it was not very strong, so he cunningly persuaded the tortoise king Bai Bao to come in and jointly protect his city. Bai Bao agreed.

古文：吏人固谏，白霸不听，懂既入，遣将急迎禧、博，合军八九千人。
现代文：吏人坚决劝阻，白霸不听。梁慬既进城，派将急迎段禧、赵博、合计军士有八九千人。
English: The officials resolutely dissuaded him, but Bai Hao did not listen. Once Liang Jun entered the city, he immediately dispatched generals to welcome Duan Xiyi and Zhao Bo. In total, there were 89,000 soldiers.

古文：龟兹吏人并叛其王，而与温宿、姑墨数万兵反，共围城。
现代文：龟兹吏人都反叛其王，而与温宿、姑墨几万兵士反叛，共包围了城。
English: The officials of Kamez revolted against their king, and together with tens of thousands of soldiers from Onjuku and Gumo, they surrounded the city.

古文：等出战，大破之。
现代文：梁慬等出来迎战，把他们打得大败。
English: Liang Jun waited for them to come out to fight, and defeated them soundly.

古文：连兵数月，胡众败走，乘胜追击，凡斩首万余级，获生口数千人，骆驼畜产数万头，龟兹乃定。
现代文：连续交兵数月，胡兵败走，梁慬乘胜追击，共斩首万余级，获俘虏数千人，骆驼畜产数万头，龟兹才平定。
English: After several months of continuous fighting, Hu's soldiers were defeated and fled, and Liang Jian successfully pursued them. In total, more than 10,000 heads were beheaded, thousands of prisoners were captured, tens of thousands of camels and livestock were produced, and Guizi was finally pacified.

古文：而道路尚隔。檄书不通。
现代文：可是道路遥远，檄书不通。
English: But the road is far away, and there is no way to get there by car.

古文：岁余，朝廷忧之。
现代文：一年多，朝廷很忧虑。
English: For more than a year, the imperial court was very worried.

古文：公卿议者以为西域阻远，数有背叛，吏士屯田，其费无已。
现代文：公卿议论的人认为西域阻隔太远，多次有背叛，吏士屯田，耗费汉有止境。
English: Those who discuss the issue of the court nobles think that the western region is too far away, there have been many betrayals, officials have occupied the land, and there is no end to the expense of Han Dynasty.

古文：永初元年，遂罢都护，遣骑都尉王弘发关中兵迎、禧、博及伊吾卢、柳中屯田吏士。
现代文：永初元年，便罢免都尉，派骑都尉王弘调集关中兵迎接梁慬、段禧、赵博以及伊吾卢、柳中屯田的官吏兵士。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he dismissed the captain and sent the cavalry captain Wang Hong to mobilize the middle-ranking soldiers to meet Liang Jun, Duan Xie, Zhao Bo and the officials and soldiers from Iguru and Liuzhong Tunden.

古文：二年春，还至敦煌。
现代文：二年春，回到敦煌。
English: In the spring of the second year, he returned to Dunhuang.

古文：会众羌反叛，朝廷大发兵西击之，逆诏留为诸军援。
现代文：碰上众羌反叛，朝廷大发兵向西出击，逆诏梁慬留作各军后援。
English: When faced with a popular rebellion, the imperial court sent troops to the west to attack, and Liang Qi stayed behind to support the troops.

古文：至张掖日勒。
现代文：梁慬到了张掖日勒。
English: Liang Zhen arrived at Zhang Zhengrun.

古文：羌诸种万余人攻亭侯，杀略吏人。
现代文：各种羌族万余人攻亭候，杀掠官吏百姓。
English: More than 10,000 people of various Yi ethnic groups attacked the pavilion, killing and looting officials and ordinary people.

古文：进兵击，大破之，乘胜追至昭武，虏遂散走，其能脱者十二三。
现代文：梁慬进兵出击，大破羌兵，乘胜追到昭武，虏便四散逃走，那些能逃脱的十分之二三。
English: Liang Yi marched into the army and attacked. Liang Yi's army was defeated, and Liang Yi chased after the victory to Zhaowu. The captives scattered and fled. Those who could escape were two-thirds to one-tenth.

古文：乃至姑臧，羌大豪三百余人诣降，并慰譬遣还故地，河西四郡复安。
现代文：到了姑藏，羌的大豪三百余人到梁慬那里投降，梁慬慰劳他们同时遣还他们的故地，河西四郡又安定了。
English: When they arrived at Guzang, more than three hundred of Yan's great heroes surrendered to Liang Zang. Liang Zang consoled them and sent them back to their hometowns. The four counties in the west of the river became stable again.

古文：受诏当屯金城，闻羌转寇三辅，迫近园陵，即引兵赴击之，转战武功美阳关。
现代文：梁慬受诏书驻扎金城，听到羌人又入侵三辅，迫近园陵，立即带兵出击，转战于武功美阳关。
English: Liang Kun was stationed in Jincheng according to the imperial edict, and when he heard that the Xiongnu had invaded Sanfu and was approaching the garden, he immediately led his troops to attack and went to war in Wugong Miyangguan.

古文：临阵被创，不顾，连破走之。尽还得所掠生口，获马畜财物甚众，羌遂奔散。朝延嘉之，数玺书劳勉，委以西方事，令为诸军节度。
现代文：梁慬作战时受了伤，奋不顾身，连日追赶，全部放走所掠俘虏，获得马畜财物很多，羌人于是逃散，朝廷嘉奖他，数次用玺书慰勉，并委之以西方事，令他作诸军节度。
English: Liang Jun was wounded during the battle, he was desperate, he chased the enemy for days on end, he released all the prisoners he had captured, he obtained a lot of horses, cattle and property, and the enemy then fled. The imperial court commended him, consoled him several times with a letter of condolence, and entrusted him with Western affairs, making him the commander of the army.

古文：三年冬，南单于与乌桓大人俱反。
现代文：三年冬，南单于与乌桓大人都反叛。
English: In the winter of the third year, both Nan Shan Yu and Wu Huan rebelled.

古文：以大司农何熙行车骑将军事，中郎将宠雄为副，将羽林五校营士，及发缘边十郡兵二万余人，又辽东太守耿夔率将鲜卑种众共击之，诏行度辽将军事。
现代文：朝廷以大司农何熙行车骑将军事，中郎将庞雄作副将，率领羽林五校营士，同时调动缘边十郡兵二万余人，又派辽东太守耿夔率领鲜卑族众共同出击，诏梁慬执行度辽将军的任务。
English: The imperial court appointed the general secretary, farmer He Xi, as the military commander of the cavalry and cavalry, and the middle brother, Pang Xiong, as the vice-commander, leading the camp followers of the five schools in Hualin. At the same time, they mobilized more than 20,000 soldiers from ten counties, and sent the Liaodong Taishu, Geng Yao, to lead the Xinbei people in a joint attack, and Zhao Liang Yao to carry out the mission of General Du Liao.

古文：庞雄与耿夔共击匈奴奥鞬日逐王，破之。
现代文：庞雄与耿夔共击匈奴奥革建日逐王，破了他们。
English: Pang Xiong and Geng Yao jointly fought against the Huns in the Austro-Japanese War of Succession and defeated them.

古文：单于乃自将围中郎将耿种于美稷，连战数月，攻之转急，种移檄求救。
现代文：单于便亲自率领军队包围中郎将耿种于美稷，连战数月，攻之更急，耿种移檄文求救。
English: Alone, he personally led the army to encircle Geng Zeng, the middle-ranking general, in Bifeng. After several months of continuous battle, the attack was more urgent, and Geng Zeng moved to Bifeng to ask for help.

古文：明年正月，将八千余人驰往赴之，至属国故城，与匈奴左将军、乌桓大人战，破斩其渠帅，杀三千余人，虏其妻子，获财物甚众。
现代文：明年正月，梁慬率领八千余人快速救援，到了属国故城，与匈奴左将军、乌桓大人作战，破斩他们的头目，杀三千多人，虏了他们的妻子，获财物很多。
English: In the first month of the next year, Liang Jun led more than eight thousand people in a quick rescue, went to the old city of the country, fought with the Hunzu General and Wuhuan adults, defeated their leader, killed more than three thousand people, captured their wives, and gained a lot of wealth.

古文：单于复自将七八千骑迎攻，围。
现代文：单于又自己率领七八千骑兵迎攻，包围了梁慬。
English: Alone, he led seven or eight thousand cavalry to attack and surrounded Liang Ye.

古文：被甲奔击，所向皆破，虏遂引还虎泽。
现代文：梁慬披甲奔击，所向都被击破，虏就引兵回到虎泽。
English: Liang Kun, wearing armor, rushed to attack, but was defeated in all directions. The captors then led the troops back to Khuze.

古文：三月，何熙军到五原曼柏，暴疾，不能进，遣庞雄与及耿种步骑万六千人攻虎泽。
现代文：三月，何熙军队到了五原曼柏，得了暴疾，不能前进，派庞雄与梁慬及耿种步兵骑兵一万六千人进攻虎泽。
English: In March, when He Xi's army arrived at Wuhuan Mianbei, he got violently ill and could not advance. He sent Pang Xiong, Liang Hui and Geng Zong to attack Khuze with 16,000 infantry and cavalry.

古文：连营稍前，卑于惶怖，遣左奥鞬日逐王诣乞降，乃大陈兵受之。
现代文：连营稍微前进，单于害怕，派左奥革建日逐王到梁慬那里投降，梁慬便大陈兵接受投降。
English: The company battalion advanced a little, but out of fear, they sent the Zuo Revolutionary Army to surrender to Liang Hui one by one, and Liang Hui accepted the surrender.

古文：单于脱帽徒跣，面缚稽颡，纳质。
现代文：单于光头赤足，自绑磕头，缴纳人质。
English: Alone, barefoot, bare-chested, self-tied, a hostage.

古文：会熙卒于师，即拜度辽将军。
现代文：正碰上何熙死于军中，朝廷就拜梁慬为度辽将军。
English: When He Xi died in the army, the imperial court worshiped Liang Kun as General Du Liao.

古文：庞雄还为大鸿胪。
现代文：庞雄便做了大鸿胪。
English: Pang Xiong then made a big splash.

古文：雄，巴郡人，有勇略，称为名将。
现代文：庞雄是巴郡人，有勇有略，称为名将。
English: Pangxiong is a person from Baguir County. He is brave and cunning, and is known as a great player.

古文：明年，安定、北地、上郡皆被羌寇，谷贵人流，不能自立。
现代文：第二年，安定、北地、上郡都被羌人入侵，谷价很贵，百姓流散，不能自立。
English: In the second year, Ding'an, Beidie and Shang County were all invaded by the Yao people. Grain prices were very high, and the people were scattered and unable to support themselves.

古文：诏发边兵迎三郡太守，使将吏人徙扶风界。
现代文：朝廷诏訲发边兵迎接三郡太守，使将吏人迁徙到扶风的边界。
English: The imperial court issued an imperial edict to dispatch frontier soldiers to greet the three county governors, causing the officials to migrate to the border of Fufeng.

古文：即遣南单于兄子优孤涂奴将兵迎之。
现代文：梁慬立即派南单于之兄子优孤奴带兵迎之。
English: Liang Xuan immediately sent Nan Shan Yu's elder brother and son, You Lone Slave, to lead an army to welcome him.

古文：既还，以涂奴接其家属有劳，辄授以羌侯印绶，坐专擅，征下狱，抵罪。
现代文：回来之后，梁慬认为奴接其家属有功劳，便授以羌侯印绶，因犯了专擅之罪，召下狱，抵罪。
English: After returning, Liang Jun thought that it was a great service to collect his family members, so he was awarded the honorary title of "Hangul Houyin" (侯印) and was recalled to prison for committing the crime of "expertise."

古文：明年，校书郎马融上书讼与护羌校尉庞参，有诏原刑。
现代文：第二年，校书郎马融上书控诉梁慬与护羌校尉庞参，有诏原刑。
English: The following year, the school secretary, Lang Ma Rong, filed a complaint against Liang Qi and the school guard, Lieutenant Pang San, resulting in the original sentence.

古文：语在《庞参传》。
现代文：语在《庞参传》。
English: language in "The Legend of Pang San."

古文：会叛羌寇三辅，关中盗贼起，拜谒者，将兵击之。
现代文：碰上叛羌进犯三辅，关中盗贼兴起，朝廷又拜梁慬为谒者，带兵去打。
English: When a renegade general attacked the three subordinate generals, there was a rise of thieves in the Guanzhong, and the imperial court took Liang Jun as the instigator and led soldiers to fight.

古文：至胡县，病卒。
现代文：到了湖县，病死了。
English: When he arrived in Huxian, he fell ill and died.

