古文：郭世道，会稽永兴人也。生而失母，父更娶，世道事父及后母，孝道淳备。
现代文：郭世道，会稽永兴人，出生时便死了母亲，父亲再娶，郭世道伺候父亲和后母，孝顺备至。
English: Guo Shidao, a member of the Yongxing Association, was born after his mother died and his father remarried. Guo Shidao served his father and stepmother with the utmost filial piety.

古文：年十四，又丧父，居丧过礼，殆不胜丧。家贫，无产业，佣力以养继母。
现代文：年到十四时，又死了父亲，在守孝期间超过了礼节，几乎受不了这个打击，家庭贫困没有产业，世道做短工供养继母。
English: When he was 14 years old, his father died again. During the period of filial piety, he overstepped the bounds of propriety. He could hardly bear the blow. The family was poor and had no property. He supported his stepmother by doing odd jobs.

古文：妇生一男，夫妻共议曰： 勤身供养，力犹不足，若养此兒，则所费者大。 
现代文：他妻子生了一个儿子，夫妻二人商量说： 我们勤奋供养母亲也无法做到，如果养了这个儿子，那么费用就更多了。 
English: His wife gave birth to a son, and the two of them discussed, "We can't provide for our mother as diligently as we used to, and if we raise this son, it will cost more."

古文：乃垂泣瘗之。
现代文：于是含泪活埋了他的儿子。
English: With tears, he buried his son alive.

古文：母亡，负土成坟，亲戚咸共赙助，微有所受。葬毕，佣赁倍还先直。
现代文：他母亲去世，世道亲自背土成坟。亲戚们都一齐赠给他物资，世道接受了一批，安葬完毕，做短工加倍偿还先前的赠给他的物品的价值。
English: When his mother died, Shido buried her in his backyard. His relatives all gave him materials, and Shido accepted a batch of them. After the burial, he did odd jobs to double the value of the items previously given to him.

古文：服除后，哀戚思慕，终身如丧者，以为追远之思，无时去心，故未尝释衣。
现代文：守孝满期后，悲哀想念母亲，终身不停。他认为追念父母，无时无刻离开他的心里，所以从未丢下衣帽。
English: After the completion of the period of filial piety, he missed his mother with sorrow and never stopped for the rest of his life. He thought that he missed his parents and left his heart all the time, so he never lost his hat.

古文：仁厚之风，行于乡党，邻村小大，莫有呼其名者。
现代文：他的仁厚的风格，在乡亲中风行，邻村的小孩大人没有叫他的名字的人。
English: His benevolent style is so popular with the locals that children and adults in neighbouring villages do not call him by his name.

古文：尝与人共于山阴市货物，误得一千钱，当时不觉，分背方悟。请其伴求以此钱追还本主，伴大笑不答。
现代文：他曾经和别人共同在山阴买货物，碰巧多得一千文钱，当时没有觉得，转过背来才想起来，请求他的伙伴把这些多余的钱，送还卖主，他的伙伴大笑着，不同意。
English: He once bought goods together with others in the shade of a mountain, and happened to get an extra thousand yuan. He didn't think about it at the time, but when he turned his back, he remembered and asked his partner to return the extra money to the seller. His partner laughed loudly and disagreed.

古文：世道以己钱充数送还之，钱主惊叹，以半直与世道，世道委之而去。
现代文：世道只得用自己的钱交一千文钱的数目送还主人，主人惊叹不已，把其中的一半钱赠给世道，世道丢下它们离开了。
English: The Seido had to use its own money to pay the amount of one thousand coins to be returned to the owner. The owner was amazed and gave half of the money to the Seido. The Seido left them.

古文：元嘉四年，遣大使巡行天下，散骑常侍袁愉表其淳行，太祖嘉之，敕郡榜表闾门，蠲其税调，改所居独枫里为孝行焉。
现代文：元嘉四年，朝廷派特派代表巡视天下，散骑常侍袁愉表荐他的高尚的品行，文帝非常赞赏世道，派郡里表彰他的家庭，捐除他的租税，改他居住的地方名称独枫里为孝行里。
English: In the fourth year of Yuan Jia, the imperial court sent a special representative to tour the world. Yuan Yu, the imperial equestrian, recommended him for his noble conduct. Emperor Wen greatly appreciated the world, sent a county to commend his family, deducted his taxes, and changed the name of the place where he lived from "Dupengli" to "Filial Piety."

古文：经荒饥馑，系以疾疫，父母兄弟嫂及群从小功之亲，男女死者十三人。
现代文：太守孟靑举荐他当孝廉，世道辞让不应征。吴逵，吴兴乌程人，经过荒年的饥荒加上瘟病流行，父母兄弟嫂和堂叔伯小功内的亲戚，男女共死了一十三人。
English: Wu Xi, Wu Xing, a native of Wucheng, after years of famine coupled with a plague epidemic, his parents, brother and sister-in-law, and cousin Xiaogong's relatives, a total of thirteen men and women died.

古文：逵时病困，邻里以苇席裹之，埋于村侧。
现代文：吴逵当时病得很历害，邻人用芦苇席子包裹好了他，准备埋在村子的头边，不久吴逵的病得以痊愈。
English: At that time, Wu Yao was very ill. The neighbors wrapped him in a reed mat and prepared to bury him at the head of the village. Soon, Wu Yao's illness was cured.

古文：既而逵疾得瘳，亲属皆尽，唯逵夫妻获全。
现代文：亲属都死光了，只吴逵夫妻存在。家里只有四壁，一无所有，冬天没有被絮。
English: All my relatives are dead, only Mr. and Mrs. Wu Min are still alive. Our home has only four walls, we have nothing, and there is no snow in the winter.

古文：家徒壁立，冬无被绔，昼则庸赁，夜则伐木烧砖，此诚无有懈倦。逵夜行遇虎，虎辄下道避之。
现代文：他白天便打短工，夜晚便砍树烧砖，一直不懈怠。吴逵夜晚走路碰到老虎，老虎为他让路。
English: He worked short-time jobs during the day and cut trees and fired bricks at night, never slacking off. Walking at night, Wu Gan met a tiger, and the tiger gave way to him.

古文：期年中，成七墓，葬十三棺。
现代文：一年之中，树立七座坟墓，安葬十三口棺材。
English: In one year, seven tombs were built and thirteen coffins were buried.

古文：邻里嘉其志义，葬日悉出赴助，送终之事，亦俭而周礼。
现代文：邻居们私赞他的志气，安葬那天，乡邻主动帮助他，他给亲人送终的事，虽然俭朴但礼节不缺乏。
English: Neighbors praised his spirit. On the day of his burial, his neighbors volunteered to help him. Although he was frugal, he did not lack etiquette when it came to sending his relatives to their deaths.

古文：逵时逆取邻人夫直，葬毕，众悉以施之；逵一无所受，皆佣力报答焉。
现代文：吴逵当时拿下了邻居给他的物品，安葬完毕，邻里人把这些东西都给他，吴逵一件也没有接受，却通过打短工回报别人。
English: At that time, Wu Yao took the items given to him by his neighbor, and after the burial, the neighbor gave him all these things. Wu Yao did not accept anything, but paid back others by doing short-time work.

古文：太守张崇之三加礼命，太守王韶之擢补功曹史，逵以门寒，固辞不就，举为孝廉。
现代文：太守张崇之三次以礼征他出山。太守王韶之选他补功曹史，吴逵因为自己是寒门，坚决辞让不应征，最后被选为孝廉。
English: Zhang Chongzhi, the daimyō, summoned him out of the mountain three times. Wang Xi, the daimyō, chose him to make up for Cao Shi, and Wu Xi, because he was a cold-hearted person, resolutely refused to be conscripted, and was finally selected as a filial son.

古文：孙法宗，吴兴人也。
现代文：孙法宗，吴兴人，父亲遇难被杀，尸骨未被收葬。
English: Sun Fazong, Wu Xingren, his father was killed and his bones were not buried.

古文：父遇乱被害，尸骸不收，母兄并饿死。
现代文：母亲和兄长都饿死了。法宗年龄小逃脱了。
English: His mother and elder brother starved to death, while his younger brother escaped.

古文：法宗年小流迸，至年十六，方得还。
现代文：到十六岁时才得以还家。单身一人，勤奋劳动。
English: He was only able to return home at the age of sixteen. He was single and worked hard.

古文：单身勤苦，霜行草宿，营办棺椁，造立冢墓，葬送母兄，俭而有礼。
现代文：在霜上行走，在草间露宿。经办棺材、建造坟墓、安葬母亲和兄长，俭朴而礼节周到。
English: He walked on the frost, camped in the grass, handled coffins, built tombs, buried his mother and brother, and was frugal and courteous.

古文：以父丧不测，于部境之内，寻求枯骨，刺血以灌之，如此者十余年不获，乃缞绖。终身不娶，馈遗无所受。世祖初，扬州辟为文学从事，不就。
现代文：因为父亲死于非命，在本郡之内寻找枯骨，每每割出身上血去检验那些骨头，这样做十多年一直没有找到，于是穿着丧衣丧服，终身不娶，别人的赠送一无所受，世祖刚即位时，扬州征他当文学从事，他没有应征。
English: Because his father died a violent death, he searched for dead bones in this county, and every time he cut out his blood to test those bones. He did this for more than ten years and never found them. So he wore mourning clothes, never married, and did not accept gifts from others. When the founder of the dynasty had just ascended the throne, Yangzhou enlisted him to engage in literature, but he did not enlist.

