古文：二十有六年春，王正月己未，公会莒子、卫甯速，盟于向。
现代文：二十六年春季，周历正月己未日，僖公与莒子、卫甯速在向地盟会。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar had not yet come, and Shigong, Zizi, and Wei Shihai were at the Xiangji League.

古文：齐人侵我西鄙。
现代文：齐国入侵我国西面边境。
English: Qi invaded the western border of our country.

古文：公追齐师至酅，弗及。
现代文：僖公率军追击齐国军队至酅地。
English: Ying Gong led the army to chase the Qi army to Yandi.

古文：夏，齐人伐我北鄙。
现代文：夏季，齐国入侵我国北面边境。
English: In the summer, Qi invaded the northern border of our country.

古文：卫人伐齐。
现代文：卫国攻打齐国。
English: The defense of the country and the attack on Qi.

古文：公子遂如楚乞师。
现代文：公子遂到楚国去请求出兵救援。
English: So he went to Chu to ask for help.

古文：秋，楚人灭夔，以夔子归。
现代文：秋季，楚国灭掉夔国，抓了夔君回国。
English: In the autumn, Chu wiped out Ying and captured Ying Jun, who returned to China.

古文：冬，楚人伐宋，围缗。
现代文：冬季，楚国攻打宋国，围困缗地。
English: In the winter, Chu attacked Song and besieged Yunnan.

古文：公以楚师伐齐，取穀。
现代文：僖公指挥楚国军队攻打齐国，占领了穀地。
English: Shigong commanded the army of Chu to attack Qi and occupied the grain fields.

古文：公至自伐齐。
现代文：僖公从攻打齐国的战场回来。
English: Shigong returned from the battlefield where he had attacked Qi.

古文：二十六年春，王正月，公会莒兹公、甯庄子，盟于向，寻洮之盟也。
现代文：二十六年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁僖公会见莒兹邳公、甯庄子，在向地结盟。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Lu Yonggong met with Lu Zizonggong and Lu Zhuangzi and formed an alliance with Xiangdi.

古文：齐师侵我西鄙，讨是二盟也。
现代文：重温洮地盟会的旧好。齐国军队进攻我国西部边境，表示对洮、向两次会盟的不满。
English: Revisit the good old days of the Han and Qiang confederations. The Qi army attacked the western border of our country, expressing dissatisfaction with the Han and Qiang confederations.

古文：夏，齐孝公伐我北鄙。卫人伐齐，洮之盟故也。
现代文：夏季，齐孝公进攻我国北部边境，卫军便攻打齐国，这是卫国履行洮地的盟约。
English: In the summer, Qi Xiaogong attacked the northern border of our country, and the guards attacked Qi. This was the first time that the defenders fulfilled the treaty of Shantian.

古文：公使展喜犒师，使受命于展禽。
现代文：僖公派遣展喜犒劳军队，派他向展禽请教如何措辞。
English: Shao Gong dispatched the Zhanmagi labor army and sent him to ask Zhan Ying for advice on how to phrase it.

古文：齐侯未入竟，展喜从之，曰： 寡君闻君亲举玉趾，将辱于敝邑，使下臣犒执事。 
现代文：齐孝公尚未进入我国国境，展喜出境见他，说： 我的君主听说君王亲自出动大驾，将要光临敝邑，所以派遣下臣来慰劳您的左右侍从。 
English: Qi Xiaogong had not yet entered the borders of our country, and Zhan Xi went out to meet him and said: My lord, I heard that the king himself has dispatched a large caravan and will be visiting Zouyi, so I will send a vassal to comfort your right and left attendants.

古文：齐侯曰： 鲁人恐乎？ 
现代文：齐孝公说： 鲁国人害怕吗？ 
English: Qi Xiaogong said: Are the people of Lu afraid?

古文：对曰： 小人恐矣，君子则否。 
现代文：展喜回答说： 小人害怕了，君子不怕。 
English: He answered, "The ruffian is afraid, but the gentleman is not."

古文：齐侯曰： 室如县罄，野无青草，何恃而不恐？ 
现代文：齐孝公说： 房屋中像挂起的磬一样的空，四野里连青草都没有，靠什么不害怕？ 
English: Qi Xiaogong said, "The houses are as empty as a hanging cocoon, and there is not even green grass in the fields. Why are you not afraid?

古文：对曰： 恃先王之命。
现代文：展喜回答说： 靠着先王的命令。
English: "By order of the late king," he replied.

古文：昔周公、大公股肱周室，夹辅成王。
现代文：从前周公、太公辅助周王朝，在左右协助成王。
English: In the past, Zhou Gong and Taigong assisted the Zhou Dynasty, and assisted Wangcheng on the right and left.

古文：成王劳之而赐之盟曰： 世世子孙，无相害也。 
现代文：成王慰劳他们，赐给他们盟约，说： 世世代代的子孙不要互相侵犯。 
English: And the king comforted them, and made a covenant with them, saying, They shall not hurt nor destroy one another, even generation after generation.

古文：载在盟府，大师职之。
现代文：这个盟约藏在盟府之中，由太史掌管。
English: This covenant is hidden in the League Office, which is controlled by Taishi.

古文：桓公是以纠合诸侯而谋其不协，弥缝其阙而匡救其灾，昭旧职也。
现代文：桓公因此联合诸侯，而商讨解决他们之间的纠纷，弥补他们的过失，而救援他们的灾难，这都是显扬过去的职责。
English: As a result, King Kan united the lords, and discussed the resolution of disputes between them, made up for their mistakes, and rescued their disasters, all of which were the responsibilities of the past.

古文：及君即位，诸侯之望曰： 其率桓之功。 
现代文：等君王即位，各国诸侯盼望说： 他会继续桓公的功业吧！ 
English: When the monarch ascended the throne, the princes of various countries said hopefully: He will continue the work of Prince Huan!

古文：我敝邑用不敢保聚，曰： 岂其嗣世九年而弃命废职，其若先君何？ 
现代文：我敝邑因此不敢保护城郭纠聚民众，说： 难道他即位九年，就背弃王命、废弃职责？他怎么对得住先君？
English: As a result, we dared not protect the city walls and gather the people, saying: Did he abandon the king's order and duties after nine years on the throne? How could he stand up to his predecessor?

古文：君必不然。
现代文：他一定不会这样做的。 
English: He would never do that.

古文：恃此以不恐。 
现代文：靠着这个，所以不害怕。 
English: That's why I'm not afraid.

古文：齐侯乃还。
现代文：齐孝公就收兵回国了。
English: Qi Xiaogong withdrew his troops and returned to China.

古文：东门襄仲、臧文仲如楚乞师，臧孙见子玉而道之伐齐、宋，以其不臣也。
现代文：东门襄仲、臧文仲到楚国请求出兵。臧孙进见楚国的大臣子玉而引导他攻打齐、宋两国，因为齐、宋两国不肯尊事楚国。
English: Dongmen Xiangzhong and Gong Wenzhong went to Chu to request the dispatch of troops. Gongsun went to see Zidama, the minister of Chu, and led him to attack Qi and Song, because Qi and Song refused to respect Chu.

古文：夔子不祀祝融与鬻熊，楚人让之，对曰： 我先王熊挚有疾，鬼神弗赦，而自竄于夔。吾是以失楚，又何祀焉？ 
现代文：夔君不祭祀祝融和鬻熊，楚国人责备他。夔君回答说： 我们的先王熊挚有病，鬼神不肯赦免他，使他死去，所以自己流窜到夔，我国因此失去楚国的救助，又祭祀什么？ 
English: The people of Chu reproached him for not sacrificing to the god Jun and the raccoon. Jun replied, "Our ancestor King Xiong Xiong was seriously ill. The gods and spirits refused to forgive him and caused him to die, so he was exiled to Yunnan. As a result, our country lost the help of Chu, so what should we sacrifice?"

古文：秋，楚成得臣、鬥宜申帅师灭夔，以夔子归。
现代文：秋季，楚国的成得臣、鬬宜申领兵灭亡夔国，抓了夔君回国。
English: In the autumn, Chengde, the vassal of Chu, and Changi petitioned to lead an army to destroy the state, and captured and returned to the country.

古文：宋以其善于晋侯也，叛楚即晋。
现代文：宋国因为他们曾经对晋侯表示友善，所以背叛楚国而靠拢晋国。
English: Song, because they had been friendly to Jin, betrayed Chu and moved closer to Jin.

古文：冬，楚令尹子玉、司马子西帅师伐宋，圍缗。
现代文：冬季，楚国的令尹子玉、司马子西领兵攻打宋国，包围缗地。
English: In the winter, Yin Ziyu and Sima Zixi, the commanders of Chu, led the troops to attack Song and encircle Yunnan.

古文：公以楚师伐齐，取穀。
现代文：僖公指挥楚国军队攻打齐国，占领了穀地。
English: Shigong commanded the army of Chu to attack Qi and occupied the grain fields.

古文：凡师能左右之曰 以 。
现代文：凡是出兵，能够随意指挥别国军队叫做 以 。
English: Whenever troops are dispatched, the ability to command the troops of other countries at will is called "I."

古文：寘桓公子雍于穀，易牙奉之以为鲁援。
现代文：把齐桓公的儿子雍安置在穀地，易牙奉事他作为鲁国的后援。
English: He placed Qi Kuan's son, Yong, in the grain fields, and Yiga served him as Lu's backup.

古文：桓公之子七人，为七大夫于楚。
现代文：齐桓公的儿子有七个人，都在楚国做了大夫。
English: There were seven sons of Lord Qi Kuan, all of whom became doctors in the State of Chu.

