古文：二十有八年春，王三月，葬曹悼公。
现代文：二十八年春季，周历三月，安葬曹悼公。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, in March of the lunar calendar, Cao Yigong was buried.

古文：公如晋，次于乾侯。
现代文：昭公去到晋国，住在乾侯。
English: Akihiro also went to Jin Province and lived in Qianhou.

古文：夏四月丙戌，郑伯宁卒。
现代文：夏季四月丙戌日，郑伯宁去世。
English: In the summer of April, Zheng Banning passed away.

古文：六月，葬郑定公。
现代文：六月，安葬郑定公。
English: In June, Zheng Ding Gong was buried.

古文：秋七月癸巳，滕子宁卒。
现代文：秋季七月癸巳日，滕悼公去世。
English: In the autumn, on the seventh day of the seventh month, Teng Yigong passed away.

古文：冬，葬滕悼公。
现代文：冬季，安葬滕悼公。
English: In winter, the funeral of Teng Yigong.

古文：二十八年春，公如晋，将如乾侯。
现代文：二十八年春季，鲁昭公到晋国去，将要到乾侯去。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, Lu Zhaogong went to Jin Province and will go to Qianhou.

古文：子家子曰： 有求于人，而即其安，人孰矜之？
现代文：子家子说： 有求于别人，而又跑去安安稳稳地住着，有谁还来同情您，还是到我国和晋国的边境上等着好。 
English: Zi Jia Zi said: "If you have a request for others, but run away to live safely and stably, who will come to sympathize with you, or wait at the border between our country and Jin."

古文：君亦不使一个辱在寡人，而即安于甥舅，其亦使逆君。 
现代文：昭公不听，派人请求晋国来人迎接。晋国人说： 上天降祸鲁国，君王淹留在外，也不派一个人来问候寡人，而是跑去安安稳稳地住在甥舅的国家里，难道还要派人到齐国迎接君王？ 
English: Shao Gong did not listen and sent someone to ask Jin to come to meet him. The Jin people said, "The heavens have brought disaster to Lu, and the king is stranded abroad. He does not send a single person to greet others, but runs away to live safely and securely in his nephew's country. Is it necessary to send someone to meet the king in Qi?"

古文：使公复于竟而后逆之。
现代文：让昭公回到鲁国的边境上，然后派人迎接。
English: Let Akihiro return to the border of Russia, and then send someone to meet him.

古文：晋祁胜与邬臧通室。
现代文：晋国的祁胜和邬臧互相交换妻子。
English: Jinsheng's Jinsheng and Jinsheng exchange wives with each other.

古文：祁盈将执之，访于司马叔游。
现代文：祁盈准备逮捕他们，去问司马叔游。
English: Hao Ying is preparing to arrest them, go and ask Sima Shuyu.

古文：叔游曰： 《郑书》有之， 恶直丑正，实蕃有徒。 
现代文：叔游说： 《郑书》有这样的话： 嫉害正直，这样的人多的是。 
English: Uncle lobbied: "Zheng Shu" has this saying: Jealousy is honest, and there are many people like that.

古文：无道立矣，子惧不免。
现代文：无道的人在位，您恐怕不能免于祸患。
English: A wicked man is in power, and I'm afraid you won't be able to escape the disaster.

古文：《诗》曰： 民之多辟，无自立辟。 
现代文：《诗》说： 百姓的邪恶很多，自己不要再陷入邪恶。 
English: "Poetry" said: The evil of the people is many, do not fall into evil again.

古文：姑已，若何？ 
现代文：暂时不执行，怎么样？ 
English: How about a stay of execution?

古文：盈曰： 祁氏私有讨，国何有焉。 
现代文：祁盈说： 对祁氏私家的讨伐，和国家有什么关系？ 
English: Hao Ying said: What does the state have to do with the crusade against the Hao family?

古文：遂执之。
现代文：于是就逮捕了他们。
English: So they arrested them.

古文：祁胜赂荀跞，荀跞为之言于晋侯。晋侯执祁盈。
现代文：祁胜贿赂荀跞，荀跞为他在晋顷公面前说话。
English: He was bribed to speak for him in front of the emperor.

古文：祁盈之臣曰： 钧将皆死，慭使吾君闻胜与臧之死也以为快。 
现代文：晋顷公逮捕了祁盈，祁盈的家臣说： 同样是一起被杀，宁可让我们主子听到祁胜和邬臧的死讯，我们也可以痛快一下。 
English: Jin Hao arrested Gong Ying. Gong Ying's vassal said, "They were also killed together. I'd rather let my master hear the news of Gong Sheng and Gong's death. We can also have a good time."

古文：乃杀之。
现代文：就杀了这两个人。
English: Then he killed him.

古文：夏六月，晋杀祁盈及杨食我。食我，祁盈之党也，而助乱，故杀之。遂灭祁氏、羊舌氏。
现代文：夏季，六月，晋顷公杀了祁盈和杨食我，杨食我，是祁盈的党羽，并且帮着祁盈作乱，所以杀了他，于是就灭亡了祁氏、羊舌氏。
English: In the summer, in June, Jin Hao killed Zou Ying and Yang Shiguang, Yang Shiguang was a member of Zou Ying's party and helped Zou Ying to make trouble, so he killed him, and then the Zou clan and the Sheep Tongue clan perished.

古文：初，叔向欲娶于申公巫臣氏，其母欲娶其党。
现代文：起初，叔向想要娶申公巫臣的女儿做妻子，他的母亲要他娶她的亲族。
English: At first, my uncle wanted to marry the daughter of a Shin priest. His mother wanted him to marry a relative of hers.

古文：叔向曰： 吾母多而庶鲜，吾惩舅氏矣。 
现代文：叔向说： 我的母亲多而庶兄弟少，舅家女儿不易生子，我把这作为鉴戒了。 
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Although I have many stepmothers, I have very few stepbrothers. I don't like to have more than one.

古文：其母曰： 子灵之妻杀三夫，一君，一子，而亡一国、两卿矣。
现代文：他的母亲说： 巫臣的妻子杀死三个丈夫，一个国君，一个儿子，灭亡一个国家，使两个卿逃亡了，能够不作为鉴戒吗？
English: His mother said, "Can a sorcerer's wife kill three husbands, a king, and a son, ruin a country, and cause two nobles to flee, and not serve as a warning?"

古文：可无惩乎？
现代文：我听说： 很美丽必然有很丑恶的一面。 
English: I've heard it said that great beauty must have a great ugliness.

古文：吾闻之，甚美必有甚恶，是郑穆少妃姚子之子，子貉之妹也。子貉早死无后，而天钟美于是，将必以是大有败也。
现代文：那个人是郑穆公少妃姚子的女儿，子貉的妹妹，子貉早死，没有后代，而上天把美丽集中在她身上，必然是要用她来大大地败坏事情。
English: That person is the daughter of Zheng Mu Gong's young princess Yao Zi, the sister of Zi Yao, Zi Yao died early and had no descendants, and Heaven concentrated its beauty on her, and it was bound to use her to greatly corrupt things.

古文：昔有仍氏生女，黰黑而甚美，光可以鉴，名曰玄妻。
现代文：从前有仍氏生了一个女儿，头发稠密乌黑而非常美丽，头发的光泽可以照见人影，名叫 玄妻 。
English: Once upon a time, there was a daughter born to the Yodo clan. Her hair was thick, black, and very beautiful. The lustre of her hair could be seen from a distance. Her name was Gensuma.

古文：乐正后夔取之，生伯封，实有豕心，贪惏无餍，忿颣无期，谓之封豕。
现代文：乐官之长后夔娶了她，生下伯封，心地和猪一样，贪婪没有个满足，暴躁乖戾没有限度，人们叫他大猪。
English: The chief music officer, Hou Yi, married her and gave birth to Baofeng. His heart was like that of a pig. His greed was insatiable, and his grumpiness knew no bounds. People called him a big pig.

古文：有穷后羿灭之，夔是以不祀。
现代文：有穷后羿灭了他，夔因此而不能得到祭祀。
English: Later, Hou Yi of a poor country killed Bo Hui, and from then on, the Zou clan was cut off from incense.

古文：且三代之亡，共子之废，皆是物也。
现代文：而且夏、商、周三代的被灭亡，公子申生的被废，都是由于美色为害。
English: Moreover, the demise of Xia, Shang, and the third generation, and the abandonment of Prince Shen Shen, were all due to the harm of beauty.

古文：女何以为哉？
现代文：你娶她做什么呢？
English: What are you doing marrying her?

古文：夫有尤物，足以移人。
现代文：有了特别美丽的女人，就完全可以使人改变。
English: With a particularly beautiful woman, it is entirely possible to change a person.

古文：苟非德义，则必有祸。 
现代文：如果不是极有道德正义的人娶她，就必然有祸。 
English: Unless a very moral and righteous man marries her, there is bound to be disaster.

古文：叔向惧，不敢取。
现代文：叔向害怕，不敢娶了。
English: However, Lord Jinpyeong forced his uncle to marry the daughter of Lord Shin.

古文：平公强使取之，生伯石。
现代文：晋平公强迫叔向娶了她，生了杨食我。
English: Jin Ping Gong forced his uncle to marry her and gave birth to Yang Zhiguo.

古文：伯石始生，子容之母走遏诸姑，曰： 长叔姒生男。 
现代文：杨食我刚生下来，子容的母亲跑去告诉婆婆，说： 大弟媳妇生了个男孩。 
English: When I was just born, Zirong's mother ran to tell her mother-in-law, saying: "My elder brother's wife has given birth to a boy.

古文：姑视之，及堂，闻其声而还，曰： 是豺狼之声也。
现代文：叔向的母亲走去看看，走到堂前，听到孩子的哭声就往回走，说： 这是豺狼的声音。
English: Uncle Xiang's mother went to take a look, walked to the front of the hall, heard the child's cries and walked back, saying: "It's the sound of a wolf howling."

古文：狼子野心，非是，莫丧羊舌氏矣。 
现代文：豺狼似的男子，必然有野心。不是这个人，没有人会毁掉羊舌氏。 
English: Werewolf ambition. If we have him, I'm afraid we sheep-tongue people will perish.

古文：遂弗视。
现代文：于是就不去看他。
English: She therefore refuses to visit her grandson.

古文：秋，晋韩宣子卒，魏献子为政。
现代文：秋季，晋国的韩宣子死了，魏献子执政。
English: In the autumn, Han Xuan Zi of Jin died, and Wei Xian Zi took power.

古文：分祁氏之田以为七县，分羊舌氏之田以为三县。
现代文：把祁氏的土田分割为七个县，把羊舌氏的土田分割为三个县。
English: The Tsukuda clan's land was divided into seven counties, and the Mutsu clan's land was divided into three counties.

古文：司马弥牟为邬大夫，贾辛为祁大夫，司马乌为平陵大夫，魏戊为梗阳大夫，知徐吾为涂水大夫，韩固为马首大夫，孟丙为盂大夫，乐霄为铜鞮大夫，赵朝为平阳大夫，僚安为杨氏大夫。
现代文：司马弥牟做邬大夫，贾辛做祁大夫，司马乌做平陵大夫，魏戊做梗阳大夫，知徐吾做涂水大夫，韩固做马首大夫，孟丙做盂大夫，乐霄做铜鞮大夫，赵朝做平阳大夫，僚安做杨氏大夫。
English: Simayimou will be the doctor of Zou, Jiaxin will be the doctor of Zou, Simau will be the doctor of Pingling, Wei Wu will be the doctor of Yeryang, Zhi Xugu will be the doctor of Tuishui, Han Gu will be the doctor of Mashou, Meng Bi will be the doctor of Zou, Le Xiao will be the doctor of Tonglu, Zhao Chao will be the doctor of Pingyang, and Lian'an will be the doctor of Yang.

古文：谓贾辛、司马乌为有力于王室，故举之。
现代文：认为贾辛、司马乌曾经给王室出过力，所以举拔他们。
English: He thought that Jasin and Sima Wu had made efforts for the royal family, so he promoted them.

古文：谓知徐吾、赵朝、韩固、魏戊，馀子之不失职，能守业者也。
现代文：认为知徐吾、赵朝、韩固、魏戊，是卿的庶子中不失职、能够保守家业的人。
English: He believed that Zhi Xuguo, Zhao Chaozhou, Han Gu and Wei Wu were the most dutiful and capable of protecting the family business among the Lord's illegitimate children.

古文：其四人者，皆受县而后见于魏子，以贤举也。
现代文：另外四个人，都先接受县的职务然后进见魏献子，是由于贤能而加以提拔的。
English: The other four people, all of whom first accepted the county post and then entered Wei Xianzi, were promoted because of their ability.

古文：魏子谓成鱄： 吾与戊也县，人其以我为党乎？ 
现代文：魏献子对成鱄说： 我把一个县给了戊，别人会以为我是偏袒吗？ 
English: Wei Xianzi said to Cheng Yao: I gave a county to Wu, will others think I am partial?

古文：对曰： 何也？
现代文：成鱄回答说： 哪里会呢？
English: Cheng Yao replied, "Where will it come from?

古文：戊之为人也，远不忘君，近不偪同，居利思义，在约思纯，有守心而无淫行。虽与之县，不亦可乎？
现代文：戊的为人，远不忘国君，近不逼同事，处在有利的地位上想到道义，处在困难之中想到保持纯正，有保持礼义之心而没有过度的行动，即使给了他一个县，不也是可以的吗！
English: E is a person, far from forgetting the sovereign, near to not forcing colleagues, in a favorable position to think about morality, in difficulties to think about maintaining purity, to maintain a sense of propriety without excessive action, even if he is given a county, is not it possible!

古文：昔武王克商，光有天下。其兄弟之国者十有五人，姬姓之国者四十人，皆举亲也。
现代文：从前武王战胜商朝，广有天下，他的兄弟领有封国的十五人，姬姓领有封国的四十人，都是举拔自己的亲属。
English: In the past, when King Wu defeated the Shang Dynasty, there were many people in the world. Fifteen of his brothers held fiefdoms, and forty people with the surname of Hime held fiefdoms. All of them were relatives of their own.

古文：夫举无他，唯善所在，亲疏一也。
现代文：举拔没有别的条件，只要是善的所在，亲密、疏远都是一样的。
English: There are no other conditions for promotion. As long as the good is there, intimacy and estrangement are the same.

古文：《诗》曰： 唯此文王，帝度其心。莫其德音，其德克明。克明克类，克长克君。王此大国，克顺克比。
现代文：《诗》说： 只有这位文王，上天审度了他的内心，认定了他的美德名声，他的德行在于是非明辨，是非明辨就能为善，就能为人师长做人君王，成为这个大国的君主，能使四方顺服。
English: "Poetry" said: Only this King Wen, the heavens have judged his heart, determined his virtue and reputation, his virtue is to distinguish right from wrong, to distinguish right from wrong can be good, to be a teacher and a king, to become the monarch of this great country, to make the four directions obey.

古文：比于文王，其德靡悔。
现代文：与文王一样，他的德行，从没有悔恨。
English: Like King Wen, he never regretted his virtue.

古文：既受帝祉，施于孙子。 
现代文：既承受了上天的福佑，还要延及到他的子子孙孙。 
English: He was blessed by the heavens, and he passed it on to his children and grandchildren.

古文：心能制义曰度，德正应和曰莫，照临四方曰明，勤施无私曰类，教诲不倦曰长，赏庆刑威曰君，慈和徧服曰顺，择善而从之曰比，经纬天地曰文。
现代文：内心能制约于道义叫做 度 ，德行端正反应和谐叫做 莫 ，光照四方叫做 明 ，勤于施舍没有私心叫做 类 ，教导别人不知疲倦叫做 长 ，严明赏罚显示威严叫做 君 ，慈祥和顺使别人归服叫做 顺 ，选择好的而跟从叫做 比 ，用天地作经纬叫做 文 。
English: The ability of the heart to restrain morality is called degree, the virtue of correct reaction and harmony is called mo, the light of the four directions is called ming, the diligence of charity without selfishness is called class, the tirelessness of teaching others is called long, the strictness of reward and punishment is called majesty, the kindness and obedience to make others submit is called shun, the choice of good and follow is called comparison, and the use of heaven and earth as the latitude and longitude is called text.

古文：九德不愆，作事无悔，故袭天禄，子孙赖之。
现代文：这九种德行不出过错，做事情就没有悔恨，所以承袭上天的福禄，以利于子子孙孙。
English: These nine virtues can do no wrong, and there is no remorse in doing things, so they inherit the blessings of heaven to benefit their children and grandchildren.

古文：主之举也，近文德矣，所及其远哉。 
现代文：现在您的举拔，已经接近文王的德行了，影响会很深远的啊！ 
English: Now your promotion is already close to King Wen's virtue, and the impact will be far-reaching!

古文：贾辛将適其县，见于魏子。
现代文：贾辛将要到他的县里去，进见魏献子。
English: Jia Xin will go to his county to see Wei Xianzi.

古文：魏子曰： 辛来，昔叔向適郑，鬷蔑恶，欲观叔向，从使之收器者，而往立于堂下。一言而善。
现代文：魏献子说： 辛，过来！从前叔向到郑国去，鬷蔑氏得丑，想要观察叔向，就跟着收拾器皿的人前去，而站在堂下，说了一句话，说得很好。
English: Wei Xianzi said: Xin, come over! Once upon a time, Uncle Xiang went to Zheng Guo. He was very ugly. If he wanted to observe Uncle Xiang, he would follow the person who was packing up the dishes, and then he would stand under the hall and say a few words. He spoke very well.

古文：叔向将饮酒，闻之，曰： 必鬷明也。 
现代文：叔向正要喝酒，听到了鬷蔑的话，说： 一定是鬷蔑。 
English: Uncle Xiang was about to drink when he heard the slanderous words and said, "It must be slander.

古文：下，执其手以上，曰： 昔贾大夫恶，娶妻而美，三年不言不笑。
现代文：走下堂来，拉着他的手上堂，说： 从前贾大夫长得丑，娶了个妻子却很美，三年不说不笑。
English: She walked down the hall, took him by the hand and led him upstairs, saying, "Once upon a time, Dr. Jia was ugly, married a wife who was very beautiful, and didn't speak or smile for three years.

古文：御以如皋，射雉，获之，其妻始笑而言。
现代文：贾大夫为她驾着车子去到沼泽地，射野鸡，射中，她才笑着说话。
English: Dr Jia drove the car to the marshes for her, shot pheasants, shot, and she laughed and spoke.

古文：贾大夫曰，才之不可以已，我不能射，女遂不言不笑夫。
现代文：贾大夫说： 才能是不能没有的，我要是不能射箭，你就不说不笑了啊！ 
English: Dr. Jia said, "Talent is indispensable. If I can't shoot arrows, you can't say I'm not funny!"

古文：今子少不飏，子若无言，吾几失子矣。言之不可以已也如是。 
现代文：现在您的外貌不扬，您如果再不说话，我几乎错过和您见面的机会了。话不能不说，就像这一样。 
English: Now your appearance is not good, if you do not speak again, I almost missed the opportunity to meet you. Words can not be left out, just like this.

古文：遂如故知。
现代文：两个人就像老朋友一样。
English: The two of them are like old friends.

古文：今女有力于王室，吾是以举女。
现代文：现在你为王室出了力，我因此举拔你。
English: Now you've done your bit for the crown, I'm promoting you.

古文：行乎，敬之哉！
现代文：动身吧！保持着恭敬，不要损毁了你的功劳。 
English: Let's go! Stay respectful, don't ruin your credit.

古文：毋堕乃力。 仲尼闻魏子之举也，以为义，曰： 近不失亲，远不失举，可谓义矣。 
现代文：孔子听到魏献子举拔的事，认为合于道义，说： 举拔近的而不失去亲族，举拔远的而不失去应当举拔的人，可以说是合于道义了。 
English: When Confucius heard about Wei's offering of a son to the emperor, he thought it was moral. He said, "It can be said to be moral to offer a son to the emperor who is close to you without losing your relatives, and to offer a son to the emperor who is far away without losing those who should be offered."

古文：又闻其命贾辛也，以为忠： 《诗》曰， 永言配命，自求多福 ，忠也。
现代文：又听说他命令贾辛的话，认为体现了忠诚，说： 《诗》说， 永远符合于天命，自己求取各种福禄 ，这是忠诚。
English: He also heard that the words he ordered Jia Xin to recite reflected his loyalty, saying: "The poem says, "Always conform to the fate of heaven, and seek all kinds of benefits for yourself." This is loyalty.

古文：魏子之举也义，其命也忠，其长有后于晋国乎。 
现代文：魏子举拔合于道义，他的命令又体现了忠城，恐怕他的后代会在晋国长享禄位吧！ 
English: Wei Zi's promotion and promotion is consistent with morality, and his order also reflects the loyalty of the city. I am afraid that his descendants will enjoy a lucrative position as the governor of Jin!

古文：冬，梗阳人有狱，魏戊不能断，以狱上。
现代文：冬季，梗阳人有诉讼，魏戊不能判断，把案件上报给魏献子。
English: In the winter, there was a lawsuit between the two men, but Wei Wu couldn't make a decision, so he reported the case to Wei Xianzong.

古文：其大宗赂以女乐。魏子将受之。
现代文：诉讼一方的大宗把女乐送给魏献子，魏献子准备接受。
English: Most of the litigants gave the female music to Wei Xianzi, and Wei Xianzi was ready to accept it.

古文：魏戊谓阎没、女宽曰： 主以不贿闻于诸侯，若受梗阳人，贿莫甚焉。
现代文：魏戊对阎没、女宽说： 主人以不接受贿赂名闻于诸侯，如果收下梗阳人的女乐，就没有比这再大的贿赂了。
English: Wei Wu said to Yan Miao and Nian Kuan: The master is famous among the princes for not accepting bribes. If he accepts a woman's music from a man who is unfaithful to his wife, there is no greater bribe.

古文：吾子必谏。 
现代文：您二位一定要劝谏。 
English: You two must persuade him.

古文：皆许诺。
现代文：两个人都答应了。
English: All the knights agreed.

古文：退朝，待于庭。
现代文：退朝以后，在庭院里等待。
English: After retiring, they waited in the courtyard.

古文：馈入，召之。
现代文：送饭菜进来，魏献子叫他们二人吃饭。
English: When the meal was brought in, Wei Xianzi ordered the two of them to eat.

古文：比置，三叹。
现代文：等到摆上饭菜，两个人三次叹气。
English: When the food was served, the two men sighed three times.

古文：既食，使坐。
现代文：吃完了，让他们坐下。
English: When they have finished eating, make them sit down.

古文：魏子曰： 吾闻诸伯叔，谚曰， 唯食忘忧 。
现代文：魏献子说： 我从我伯父、叔父那里听说过： 只有吃饭的时候忘记忧愁。 
English: Wei Xianzi said, "I have heard from my uncles and uncles, 'Only when you eat can you forget your sorrow.'

古文：吾子置食之间三叹，何也？ 
现代文：您二位在摆上饭菜的时候三次叹气，为什么？ 
English: You both sighed three times when you put the food on the table. Why?

古文：同辞而对曰： 或赐二小人酒，不夕食。
现代文：两个人异口同声说： 有人把酒赐给我们两个小人，昨天没有吃晚饭。
English: Two people said in unison: Someone has given our two villains wine, we didn't have dinner yesterday.

古文：馈之始至，恐其不足，是以叹。
现代文：饭菜刚送到，恐怕不够吃，所以叹气。
English: The meal has just been delivered, and I'm afraid there won't be enough to eat, so I'm sighing.

古文：中置，自咎曰，岂将军食之而有不足？
现代文：上菜上了一半，就责备自己说： 难道将军让我们吃饭会不够吃？ 
English: Halfway through the meal, he reproached himself, saying: "Is it possible that the general will not let us eat enough?

古文：是以再叹。
现代文：所以再次叹气。
English: So I sigh again.

古文：及馈之毕，愿以小人之腹为君子之心，属厌而已。 
现代文：等到饭菜上完，愿意把小人的肚子作为君子的内心，刚刚满足就行了。 
English: When the meal is over, I'm willing to use the villain's stomach as a gentleman's heart, just to be satisfied.

古文：献子辞梗阳人。
现代文：魏献子辞谢了梗阳人的贿赂。
English: Wei Xianzi refused to accept the bribe from Yangren.

