古文：王昌一名郎，赵国邯郸人也。
现代文：王昌一名王郎，赵国邯郸人。
English: Wang Chang was the son of a king, Zhao Guozhen.

古文：素为卜相工，明星历，常以为河北有天子气。
现代文：本来是个占卜、看相的人，对天文历数有些研究，常以为河北有天子气。
English: Originally a soothsayer and fortune-teller, he did some research on the astronomical calendar, and often thought that Hebei had the spirit of a son of heaven.

古文：时赵缪王子林好奇数，任侠于赵、魏间，多通豪猾，而郎与之亲善。
现代文：这时赵缪王的儿子刘林喜爱术数，任侠行义于赵魏间，与豪强不法之徒多有相通，而王昌与之相亲善。
English: At this time, Liu Lin, the son of Zhao Miu Wang, was fond of magic numbers, and acted as a chivalrous knight between Zhao Wei and Wang Chang. He had a lot in common with the powerful outlaws, and Wang Chang was friendly with him.

古文：初，王莽篡位，长安中或自称成帝子子舆者，莽杀之。
现代文：起初，王莽篡位时，长安中有自称是成帝的儿子刘子舆的人，王莽将他杀了。
English: At first, when Wang Mang usurped the throne, there was a man in Chang'an who claimed to be Emperor Cheng's son Liu Ziyou. Wang Mang killed him.

古文：郎缘是诈称真子舆，云 母故成帝讴者，尝下殿卒僵，须臾有黄气从上下，半日乃解，遂妊身就馆。赵后欲害之，伪易他人子，以故得全。
现代文：王郎缘着这条线索诈称自己是真子舆，说： 我母亲本是成帝的歌女，有次下殿时突然仆倒，很快有一道黄气从上下通过，过了半天才苏醒过来，就这样怀了孕住在馆舍中，生子后赵后想谋害她，就用别人的婴儿将他换了，因而保全了生命。
English: Wang Langyan took advantage of this clue to fraudulently claim that she was the real daughter of Emperor Zhao, saying: My mother was a singer of Emperor Zheng. Once, when she was going down to the palace, she suddenly fell down. Soon, a yellow wind passed from above and below, and it took her half a day to wake up. Thus, she became pregnant and lived in the guesthouse. After giving birth, Zhao wanted to kill her, but she replaced him with someone else's baby, thus saving her life.

古文：子舆年十二，识命者郎中李曼卿，与俱至蜀；十七，到丹阳；二十，还长安；展转中山，来往燕、赵，以须天时 。
现代文：子舆十二岁时，有一个识命的郎中叫李曼卿的将他带到蜀中；十七岁时，到了丹阳；二十岁时，回到长安；辗转往来于中山、燕赵之间，以等待天时的到来。 
English: At the age of twelve, Ziyou was taken to Shuzhong by a fortune-telling servant named Li Manling; at the age of seventeen, he went to Danyang; at the age of twenty, he returned to Chang'an; he went back and forth between Zhongshan and Yanzhao to wait for the right time.

古文：林等愈动疑惑，乃与赵国大豪李育、张参等通谋，规共立郎。
现代文：刘林等更加疑惑，就与赵国的大豪李育、张参等通谋，共同策划拥立王郎。
English: Liu Lin and others were more doubtful, so they conspired with the great heroes of Zhao, Li Yu and Zhang San, to jointly plan to support Wang Lang.

古文：会人间传赤眉将度河，林等因此宣言赤眉当至，立刘子舆以观众心，百姓多信之。
现代文：正好人们传说赤眉将渡黄河，刘林等因此宣言赤眉当至，立刘子舆看众人的反应，百姓多相信了。
English: Just as it was rumored that the Red Eyebrows would cross the Yellow River, Liu Lin and others made the declaration that the Red Eyebrows would be the first to do so. Liu Zi watched the reaction of the crowd, and many people believed it.

古文：更始元年十二月，林等遂率车骑数百，晨入邯郸城，止于王宫，立郎为天子。
现代文：更始元年十二月，刘林等就率车骑数百，一早进入邯郸城，在王宫停下，立王郎为天子。
English: At the beginning of December of the first year of the new year, Liu Lin and others led hundreds of cars and entered Shicheng in the morning, stopped at the royal palace, and established Wang Lang as the son of heaven.

古文：林为丞相，李育为大司马，张参为大将军。
现代文：刘林为丞相，李育为大司马，张参为大将军。
English: Liu Lin is the chancellor, Li Yu is the grand secretary, and Zhang San is the general.

古文：分遣将帅，徇下幽、冀。
现代文：分别派遣将帅，夺取幽州、冀州。
English: Send generals to seize Yuzhou and Jizhou respectively.

古文：移檄州郡曰： 制诏部刺史、郡太守：朕，孝成皇帝子子舆者也。
现代文：移送檄文到州郡说： 诏令各州刺史、郡太守：我是孝成皇帝的儿子刘子舆。
English: Transferring the imperial edict to the prefectural and county governments, he said, "I hereby order the prefectural and county governments to make the following announcement: I am Liu Ziwu, the son of Emperor Xiaocheng.

古文：昔遭赵氏之祸，因以王莽篡杀，赖知命者将护朕躬，解形河滨，削迹赵、魏。
现代文：昔日遭赵氏的祸害，王莽篡汉后杀了假子舆，幸赖有知天命的人保护着我，得以从河滨脱身，销声匿迹于赵魏之间。
English: Once upon a time, I suffered the scourge of the Zhao clan. Wang Mang, after usurping Han, killed the dummy I. Fortunately, someone who knew the fate of heaven protected me, and I was able to escape from the riverbank and disappear between Zhao Wei.

古文：王莽窃位，获罪于天，天命佑汉，故使东郡太守翟义、严乡侯刘信，拥兵征讨，出入胡、汉。
现代文：王莽窃位，得罪于天，天命佑我汉室，所以派东郡太守翟义、严乡侯刘信拥兵证讨，出入于胡人、汉土之间。
English: Wang Mang stole the throne, sinned against heaven, and heaven blessed me with a Han family, so he sent Dong County Daju Xinyi and Yan Township Hou Liu Xin to discuss military certificates, and went in and out between Hu people and Han soil.

古文：普天率土，知朕隐在人间。
现代文：普天之下，率土之滨，知道我隐蔽在人间。
English: For all the world, and all the ends of the earth, know that I am hidden among men.

古文：南岳诸刘，为其先驱。
现代文：南岳的诸刘，都是我的先驱。
English: All the Liu in Nanyue are my forerunners.

古文：朕仰观天文，乃兴于斯，以今月壬辰即位赵宫。
现代文：我仰观天文，知天意要我在这里兴起，于是以今月壬辰即位赵宫。
English: I look up to the heavens and know that it was God's will for me to be born here, so I ascended to the throne of Zhao Palace this month.

古文：休气熏蒸，应时获雨。
现代文：祥气熏蒸，应时雨降。
English: Xiangqi fumigation, should rain down.

古文：盖闻为国，子之袭父，古今不易。
现代文：我听说为国主的，儿子继承父位，这是古今不变的法制。
English: I have heard that the son of the sovereign inherits the father's throne, which is a legal system that has not changed since ancient times.

古文：刘圣公未知朕，故且持帝号。
现代文：刘圣公不知我在，暂时做了皇帝。
English: Liu Sheng Kung didn't know I was there and temporarily became emperor.

古文：诸兴义兵，咸以助朕，皆当裂土享祚子孙。
现代文：他们仗义兴兵，都是帮我，都应当分封土地使他们的子孙都能享福。
English: They are all helping me by fighting for justice and raising an army, and they should all be given land so that their children and grandchildren can enjoy prosperity.

古文：已诏圣公及翟太守，亟与功臣诣行在所。
现代文：我已下令圣公及翟太守，快点与功臣们都到我这里来。
English: I have ordered the holy prince and the empress dowager to hurry up and come to me with the heroes.

古文：疑刺史、二千石皆圣公所置，未睹朕之沉滞，或不识去就，强者负力，弱者惶惑。
现代文：有人怀疑刺史、二千石都是圣公所设置的，没有看到我的沉滞和遭遇，有的不明去就，强壮者自恃其力，衰弱者惶恐疑惑。
English: Some people suspect that the history and the 2,000 koku were all set up by the Anglican Church. They did not see my stagnation and suffering, and some did not know where to go. The strong are self-disciplined, and the weak are afraid and doubtful.

古文：今元元创痍，已过半矣，朕甚悼焉，故遣使者班下诏书。 郎以百姓思汉，既多言翟义不死，故祚称之，以从人望。
现代文：现在平民百姓饱经创痍，死伤恐怕已经过半了，我感到很悲痛，所以派遣使者颁下诏书。 王郎看到百姓思念汉朝，又有很多人说翟义还没有死，所以说了这些假话以顺从民望。
English: Now that the common people have been through so much, and the number of deaths and injuries is probably more than half, I felt very sad, so I sent an envoy to issue an edict. Wang Lang saw that the people were thinking about the Han Dynasty, and many people said that Xing Yi was not dead, so he said these lies to obey the people's wishes.

古文：于是赵国以北，辽东以西，皆从风而靡。
现代文：于是赵国以北，辽东以西都望风披靡。
English: As a result, the north of Zhao Province and the west of Liaodong were overwhelmed by the wind.

古文：明年，光武自蓟得郎檄，南走信都，发兵徇帝县，遂攻柏人，不下。
现代文：第二年，光武从蓟县得到王郎的檄书，连忙赶到信都，发兵攻旁县，又转攻柏人，没攻下。
English: In the second year, Guangwu obtained Wang Lang's imperial edict from Shixian, and hurried to Xindu. He sent troops to attack Binxian County, and then attacked Baotian County, but failed to capture it.

古文：议者以为守柏人不如定巨鹿，光武乃引兵东北围巨鹿。
现代文：议论的人们以为围攻柏人不如平定巨鹿，光武于是引兵到东北围攻巨鹿。
English: The people who were talking about it thought that besieging the Baoshan people was not as good as pacifying the giant deer, so Guangwu led the troops to the northeast to besiege the giant deer.

古文：郎太守王饶据城，数十日连攻不克。
现代文：王郎太守王饶据城坚守，连攻数十日不克。
English: Wang Lang, the dean of the castle, Wang Rao, held fast to the castle and held out against the attack for dozens of days.

古文：耿纯说曰： 久守王饶，士众疲敝，不如及大兵精锐，进攻邯郸。
现代文：耿纯建议说： 久围王饶，士众疲敝，不如以大兵精锐，进攻邯郸。
English: Geng Chun suggested, "It is better to attack the enemy with the best soldiers when the soldiers are tired."

古文：若王郎已诛，王饶不战自服矣。 光武善其计，乃留将军邓满守巨鹿，而进军邯郸，屯其郭北门。
现代文：如杀了王郎，王饶就可以不战而降了。 光武以为此计甚好，就留将军邓满围巨鹿，自率大军进攻邯郸，屯兵于城郭北门。
English: If he killed Wang Lang, Wang Rao would be able to surrender without a fight. Guangwu thought this was a very good plan, so he left General Deng Man to encircle the giant deer, led a large army to attack the roe deer, and stationed troops at the north gate of the castle.

古文：郎数出战不利，乃使其谏议大夫杜威持节请降。
现代文：王郎数次出兵都失利，于是派遣其谏议大夫杜威持着符节向光武请降。
English: Wang Lang failed several times to send troops, so he sent his advisor, Dr. Dewey, to ask Guangwu to surrender, holding a rune.

古文：威雅称郎实成帝遗体。
现代文：杜威假称王郎实在是成帝的亲生子。
English: Dewey pretended that Wang Lang was really the biological son of Emperor Cheng.

古文：光武曰： 设使成帝复生，天下不可得，况诈子舆者乎！ 威请求万户侯。
现代文：光武说： 即使成帝复生，天下也不可得，何况是冒称子舆的人呢！ 杜威请求封其为万户侯。
English: Guangwu said, "Even if Emperor Chengzong is revived, the world cannot have him, let alone someone who pretends to be my son!" Dewey requested that he be made the Prince of 10,000 households.

古文：光武曰： 顾得全身可矣。 威曰： 邯郸虽鄙，并力固守，尚旷日月，终不君臣相率但全身而已。 遂辞而去。
现代文：光武说： 能顾全他的生命就行了。 杜威说： 邯郸虽然鄙小，但尽力固守，还可以坚持相当时日，总不能君臣相率保全生命而已。 于是辞去。
English: Guangwu said, "If you can spare his life, that's enough." Dewey said, "Though he is small, he can try his best to stick to it, and he can stick to it for a considerable period of time, but he can't save his life in the manner of a prince or a minister." So he resigned.

古文：因急攻之，二十余日，郎少傅李立为反间，开门内汉兵，遂拔邯郸。
现代文：光武急攻，二十余日，王郎少傅李立做了反间，打开城门迎接汉兵，于是攻拔邯郸。
English: Guangwu made a sudden attack, and for more than twenty days, Wang Lang Shao Fu Li Li made a counterattack, opened the city gate to meet the Han soldiers, and then attacked and plundered.

古文：郎夜亡走，道死，追斩之。
现代文：王郎乘夜逃亡，走上了绝路，被追兵杀死。
English: Wang Lang fled by night, went on a dead-end road, and was killed by pursuing soldiers.

古文：刘永者，梁郡睢阳人，梁孝王八世孙也。
现代文：刘永，梁郡睢阳人，梁孝王第八代孙。
English: Liu Yong, a native of Fenyang, Liang County, is the eighth-generation grandson of Liang Xiaowang.

古文：传国至父立。
现代文：传封爵到刘永的父亲刘立。
English: Liu Yong's father, Liu Li, was given a title of nobility.

古文：元始中，立与平帝外家卫氏交通，为王莽所诛。
现代文：元始中，刘立与平帝外家卫氏有往来，被王莽杀害。
English: In the early days, Liu Li had dealings with the Ping Emperor Gao Jia Wei, and was killed by Wang Mang.

古文：更始即位，永先诣洛阳，绍封为梁王，都睢阳。永闻更始政乱，遂据国起兵，以弟防为辅国大将军，防弟少公御史大夫，封鲁王。
现代文：更始即位，刘永先到洛阳，被继封为梁王，定都睢阳，刘永听说更始政治混乱，于是据封邑起兵，以弟刘防为辅国大将军，刘防弟刘少公为御史大夫，封鲁王。
English: At the beginning of the reign, Liu Yong went to Luoyang first, and was successively appointed as the King of Liang, and the capital of Luoyang. Liu Yong heard about the political turmoil at the beginning of the reign, so he raised an army in the fief, with his brother Liu Bei as the assistant general of the country, and Liu Bei's brother Liu Shougong as the chief historian and the King of Lu.

古文：遂招诸豪杰沛人周建等，并署为将帅，攻下齐阴、山阴、沛、楚、淮阳、汝南，凡得二十八城。
现代文：于是招集诸豪杰沛人周建等，同时代为将帅，攻下济阴、山阳、沛、楚、淮阳、汝南，共得二十八城。
English: Therefore, Zhou Jian, who was a great general at the same time, and other great generals were summoned, and they captured Jiyin, Sanyang, Pei, Chu, Huaiyang, and Runan, gaining a total of 28 cities.

古文：又遣使拜西防贼帅山阳佼彊为横行将军。
现代文：又派遣使者拜西防贼帅山阳佼强为横行将军。
English: He also dispatched the emissary Bai Xi, the anti-thief commander Shanyang Kiaoqiang, to act as the rampaging general.

古文：是时，东海人董宪起兵据其郡，而张步亦定齐地。
现代文：这时东海人董宪起兵占据了东海郡，而张步也平定了齐地。
English: At this time, Donghai's Donghai County was occupied by Donghai County's Donghai people, and Zhangpu also leveled the ground.

古文：永遣使拜宪翼汉大将军、步辅汉大将军，与共连兵，遂专据东方。
现代文：刘永遣使拜董宪为翼汉大将军，拜张步为辅汉大将军，与他们共同连兵，于是就割据了东方。
English: Liu Yong sent Bai Dongxian as Wing Han Grand General and Bai Zhangbu as Auxiliary Han Grand General to join forces with them, and thus separated the East.

古文：及更始败，永自称天子。
现代文：后来更始失败，刘永就自称为天子。
English: Later, when he failed at the beginning, Liu Yong called himself the son of heaven.

古文：建武二年夏，光武遣虎牙大将军盖延等伐永。
现代文：建武二年夏季，光武派遣虎牙大将军盖延等讨伐刘永。
English: In the summer of the second year of Jianwu, Guangwu sent Huya General Gaien and others to fight Liu Yong.

古文：初，陈留人苏茂为更始讨难将军，与朱鲔等守洛阳。
现代文：起初，陈留人苏茂为更始讨难将军，与朱鲔等守洛阳。
English: At the beginning, Chen's retainer, Su Mao, was the general in charge of starting the resistance, and he and Zhu Xi guarded Luoyang.

古文：鲔既降汉，茂亦归命，光武因使茂与盖延俱攻永。军中不相能，茂遂反，杀淮阳太守，掠得数县。据广乐而臣于永。
现代文：朱鲔既降了汉，苏茂也归命光武，光武就派苏茂与盖延共同攻刘永，军中不和睦，苏茂就造反，杀了淮阳太守，掠得了几个县，占据广乐而向刘永称臣。
English: Not only did Zhu Xi abdicate Han, but also Sumo surrendered to Guangwu. Guangwu then sent Sumo and Gai Yan to jointly attack Liu Yong. There was no harmony in the army, and Sumo rebelled, killed the governor of Huaiyang, plundered several counties, occupied Guangle and praised Liu Yong.

古文：永以茂为大司马、淮阳王。
现代文：刘永以苏茂为大司马、淮阳王。
English: Liu Yong took Sumo as his grand steed and Huaiyang as his king.

古文：盖延遂围睢阳，数月，拔之，永将家属走虞。
现代文：盖延于是围攻睢阳，数月，攻下睢阳，刘永带着家属逃走虞县。
English: Gai Yan then besieged Poyang. After several months, Poyang was conquered, and Liu Yong fled Yu County with his family.

古文：虞人反，杀其母及妻子，永与麾下数十人奔谯。
现代文：虞人造反，杀了刘永的母亲及妻子儿女，刘永与部下数十人逃奔谯县。
English: Gu faked a rebellion and killed Liu Yong's mother, wife and children. Liu Yong and dozens of his subordinates fled to Handan County.

古文：苏茂。佼彊、周建合军救永，为盖延所败，茂奔还广乐，彊、建从永走保湖陵。
现代文：苏茂、佼强、周建合军救刘永，被盖延打败，苏茂奔还广乐，佼强、周建跟从刘永走保湖陵。
English: Su Mao, Qiao Qiang, and Zhou Jian joined forces to rescue Liu Yong, but were defeated by Gai Yan. Su Mao fled to Guangle, while Qiao Qiang and Zhou Jian followed Liu Yong to protect the mausoleum.

古文：三年春，永遣使立张步为齐王，董宪为海西王。
现代文：建武三年春季，刘永遣使立张步为齐王、董宪为海西王。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jianwu, Liu Yong sent Zhang Bu to be the king of Qi, and Dong Xian to be the king of Haxi.

古文：于是遣大司马吴汉等围苏茂于广乐，周建率众救茂，茂、建战败，弃城复还湖陵，而睢阳人反城迎永。
现代文：光武于是派遣大司马吴汉等围苏茂于广乐，周建率部众救苏茂，苏茂、周建都被打败，弃广乐城再返回湖陵，而睢阳人又反过来举城迎接刘永。
English: Guangwu then dispatched the commander Ma Wu Han and others to surround Sumo in Guangle, and Zhou Jian led the crowd to rescue Sumo. Both Sumo and Zhou Jian were defeated, abandoned Guangle City and returned to Huling, while the people of Shenyang, in turn, raised the city to meet Liu Yong.

古文：吴汉与盖延等合军围之，城中食尽，永与茂、建走酂。
现代文：吴汉与盖延等合军围住睢阳，城中粮尽，刘永与苏茂、周建逃到赞阝县。
English: Wu Han, Gai Yan and other allied forces besieged Fenyang and ran out of food in the city. Liu Yong, Sumo and Zhou Jian fled to Zhanlu County.

古文：诸将追急，永将庆吾斩永首降，封吾为列侯。
现代文：诸将追得急，刘永将庆吾斩刘永首级投降，庆吾被封为列侯。
English: The generals were in hot pursuit. Liu Yong ordered Qingwu to be beheaded. Liu Yong surrendered at the first level, and Qingwu was made a vassal.

古文：苏茂、周建奔垂惠，共立永子纡为梁王。
现代文：苏茂、周建逃奔垂惠，共立刘永儿子刘纡为梁王。
English: Su Mao and Zhou Jian fled to Zhuhui and jointly established Liu Yong's son Liu Wei as Liang Wang.

古文：佼彊还保西防。
现代文：佼强逃回西防自保。
English: Kacho fled back to West Defense for self-protection.

古文：四年秋，遣捕虏将军马武、骑都尉王霸围纡、建于垂惠，苏茂将五校兵救之，纡、建亦出兵与武等战，不克，而建兄子诵反，闭城门拒之。
现代文：建武四年秋季，光武派遣捕虏将军马武、骑都尉王霸包围刘纡、周建于垂惠，苏茂率五校兵往救，刘纡、周建也出兵与马武等交战，不胜，而周建的侄子周诵造反，关闭城门抵抗。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Jianwu, Guangwu dispatched the captive general Ma Wu and the cavalry captain Wang Ba to surround Liu Ye, Zhou Jianwu, Su Mao led five school soldiers to rescue, Liu Ye and Zhou Jianwu also sent troops to fight with Ma Wu and others, but failed, and Zhou Jian's nephew Zhou Chiao rebelled and closed the city gate to resist.

古文：建、茂、纡等皆走，建于道死，茂奔下邳与董宪合，纡奔佼彊。
现代文：苏茂、周建、刘纡都逃走，周建在路上死了，苏茂逃奔到下邳与董宪合并，刘纡奔佼强。
English: Su Mao, Zhou Jian and Liu Ye all fled, Zhou Jian died on the way, Su Mao fled to the lower Yunnan to merge with Dong Xian, and Liu Ye was the strongest.

古文：五年，遣骠骑大将军杜茂攻佼彊于西防，彊与刘纡奔董宪。
现代文：建武五年，光武派遣骠骑大将军杜茂攻佼强于西防，佼强与刘纡逃奔董宪。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, Guangwu dispatched the cavalry general Du Mao to attack Jiao Qiang in the west, and Jiao Qiang and Liu Bei fled to Dong Xian.

古文：时，平狄将军庞萌反叛，遂袭破盖延，引兵与董宪连和，自号东平王，屯桃乡之北。
现代文：这时平狄将军庞萌反叛，于是攻破盖延，引兵与董宪联和，自号东平王，屯兵在桃乡的北面。
English: At this time, General Ping Di Pang Meng rebelled, so he broke through Gai Yan, led the troops to join forces with Dong Xian, called himself Dong Ping Wang, and stationed the troops in the north of Taoxiang.

古文：庞萌，山阳人。
现代文：庞萌，山阳人。
English: Pang Meng, from Shanyang.

古文：初亡命在下江兵中。
现代文：起初亡命在下江兵中。
English: At first, the defector was among the soldiers in the lower reaches of the river.

古文：更始立，以为冀州牧，将兵属尚书令谢躬，共破王郎。
现代文：更始即位，以他为冀州牧，令他率军在尚书令谢躬的统帅下，共破王郎。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of the new year, with him as the Jizhou Patriarch, and he led the army under the command of Shang Shuling Xie Mu to defeat Wang Lang.

古文：及躬败，萌乃归降，光武即位，以为侍中。
现代文：谢躬失败后，庞萌归降。光武即位，以他为侍中。
English: After Xie Bei's failure, Pang Meng abdicated. Guangwu ascended to the throne, with him as an attendant.

古文：萌为人逊顺，甚见信爱。
现代文：庞萌为人谦逊和顺，甚得光武信爱。
English: Pang Meng is a humble and obedient person, and is greatly loved by Guangwuxin.

古文：帝常称曰： 可以托六尺之孤，寄百里之命者，庞萌是也。 拜为平狄将军，与盖延共击董宪。
现代文：光武时常称赞说： 可以托未成年的孤儿，寄一方使命的人，就是庞萌啊。 拜他为平狄将军，与盖延共同攻击董宪。
English: Guangwu often praised: "The person who can support underage orphans and send a mission is Pang Meng, who is worshipped as General Ping Di and attacked Dong Xian together with Gai Yan.

古文：时，诏书独下延而不及萌，萌以为延谮己，自疑，遂反。
现代文：这时诏书只下达给了盖延而未下达给庞萌，庞萌以为是盖延说了他的坏话，自己怀疑，于是造反。
English: At this time, the edict was only issued to Gai Yan, but not to Pang Meng. Pang Meng thought that Gai Yan had spoken ill of him, and he was suspicious, so he rebelled.

古文：帝闻之，大怒，乃自将讨萌。
现代文：光武听了，大怒，就亲自率军讨伐庞萌。
English: Hearing this, Guangwu flew into a rage and personally led an army to fight Pang Meng.

古文：与诸将书曰： 吾常以庞萌社稷之臣，将军得无笑其言乎？
现代文：光武写信给诸将说： 我常以为庞萌是可以信赖的忠臣，将军们不会笑我这句话吗？
English: Guangwu wrote to the generals saying, "I have often thought of Pang Meng as a loyal subject who can be trusted. Won't the generals laugh at my words?

古文：老贼当族。
现代文：庞萌这个老贼应当灭族。
English: Pang Meng, the old thief, should be exterminated.

古文：其各厉兵马，会睢阳！ 宪闻帝自讨庞萌，乃与刘纡、苏茂、佼彊去下邳，还兰陵，使茂、彊助萌，合兵三万，急围桃城。
现代文：你们各自秣马厉兵，会师睢阳！ 董宪听说光武自讨庞萌，就与刘纡、苏茂、佼强去下邳，回兰陵，使苏茂、佼强助庞萌，合兵三万，急围桃城。
English: Dong Xian heard that Guangwu had begun to discuss Pang Meng, so he went down to the valley with Liu Xuan, Sumo, and Qiao Qiang, returned to Lanling, and ordered Sumo and Qiao Qiang to help Pang Meng with 30,000 soldiers to quickly surround Taocheng.

古文：帝时幸蒙，闻之，乃留辎重，自将轻骑三千，步卒数万，晨夜驰赴，师次任城，去桃乡六十里。
现代文：帝这时到了蒙，听到消息，就把辎重留下，亲自率领轻骑三千，步兵数万，星夜兼程驰赴，队伍驻在任城，离桃乡六十里。
English: At this time, the emperor arrived in Mongolia, and when he heard the news, he left the burden behind. He personally led three thousand light cavalry, tens of thousands of infantry, and drove to the starry night. The team was stationed in Rencheng, sixty miles from Taoxiang.

古文：旦日，诸将请进，贼亦勒兵挑战，帝不听，乃休士养锐，以挫其锋。
现代文：一早，诸将请求进军，贼也率军挑战，帝不听，于是休养士卒养精蓄锐，以挫敌之锋芒。
English: In the morning, the generals requested to march, the thieves also led the army to challenge, but the emperor did not listen, so the recuperators worked hard to build up their energy and sharpness to frustrate the enemy's edge.

古文：城中闻车驾至，众心益固。
现代文：城中听说帝到了，大家心情更加稳固。
English: When the town heard that the emperor had arrived, everyone's mood became more stable.

古文：时吴汉等在东郡，驰使召之。
现代文：这时吴汉等在东郡，帝派人驰召之。
English: At this time, Wu Han was waiting in Dong County, and the emperor sent someone to summon him.

古文：萌等乃悉兵攻城，二十余日，众疲困而不能下。及吴汉与诸将到，乃率众军进桃战，而帝亲自搏战，大破之。
现代文：庞萌等于是全军攻城，二十多天，部众疲困而不能攻下，等到吴汉与诸将到来，就率众军进桃城，光武帝亲自搏战，大破庞萌军。
English: Pang Meng is equal to the whole army attacking the city. For more than 20 days, the troops were exhausted and could not attack. When Wu Han and the generals arrived, they led the troops into Taocheng. Emperor Guangwu personally fought and defeated the Pang Meng army.

古文：萌、茂、彊夜弃辎重逃奔，董宪乃与刘纡悉其兵数万人屯昌虑，自将锐卒拒新阳。
现代文：庞萌、苏茂、佼强乘夜弃辎重逃奔，董宪就与刘纡将所有的兵数万人驻扎在昌虑，自己率精锐队伍拒守新阳。
English: Pang Meng, Su Mao, and Qiao Qiang fled by night, abandoning their baggage. Dong Xian and Liu Yao stationed all the tens of thousands of soldiers in Changxian, and led the elite team to defend Xinyang.

古文：帝先遣吴汉击破之，宪走还昌虑。
现代文：帝先派遣吴汉将他击破，董宪逃回昌虑。
English: Emperor Qianlong dispatched Wu Han to defeat him, and Dong Xian fled back to Changxian.

古文：汉进守之，宪恐，乃招诱五校余贼步骑数千人屯建阳，去昌虑三十里。
现代文：吴汉进兵追击，董宪恐惧，于是招诱五校余贼步骑数千人驻守建阳，离昌虑三十里。
English: Wu Han marched in pursuit, and Dong Xian was afraid, so he invited more than five thousand people from five schools to stay in Jianyang, 30 miles away from Changxian.

古文：帝王蕃，去宪所百余里。
现代文：帝到蕃，离董宪所在百余里。
English: It is more than a hundred miles from Dong Xian to Xi'an.

古文：诸将请进，帝不听，知五校乏食当退，敕各坚壁以待其敝。
现代文：诸将请求进兵，帝不听，知道五校缺粮当退，命令各部坚壁以待其毙。
English: The generals requested to send in troops, but the emperor did not listen. Knowing that the five schools were short of food, he ordered the ministries to stand firm and wait for his death.

古文：顷之，五校粮尽，果引去。
现代文：不久，五校粮尽，果然退走。
English: Soon, the five schools ran out of food and withdrew.

古文：帝乃亲临，四面攻宪，三日，复大破之，众皆奔散。
现代文：帝亲临，四面进攻董宪，三天，再次大破宪军，众兵都奔散。
English: The emperor himself came and attacked Dong Xian on all sides. After three days, he once again defeated the Xian army, and all the soldiers scattered.

古文：遣吴汉追击之，佼彊将其众降，苏茂奔张步，宪及庞萌走入缯山。
现代文：帝遣吴汉追击，佼强率众投降，苏茂奔张步，董宪及庞萌走入缯山县。
English: The emperor sent Wu and Han to pursue, and the best of them led the crowd to surrender. Sumo ran at full speed, and Dong Xian and Pang Meng entered Lushan County.

古文：数日，吏士闻宪尚在，复往往相聚，得数百骑，迎宪入郯城。
现代文：数日后，董宪的吏士听说宪还在，又逐渐聚合起来，得数百骑，迎董宪进入郯城。
English: A few days later, the officials of Dong Xian heard that Dong Xian was still alive, and gradually gathered again, getting hundreds of horsemen to welcome Dong Xian into Lucheng.

古文：吴汉等复攻拔郯，宪与庞萌走保朐。
现代文：吴汉等再攻下郯城，董宪与庞萌逃到朐县。
English: Wu Han and others re-conquered Lucheng, and Dong Xian and Pang Meng fled to Lixian.

古文：刘纡不知所归，军士高扈斩其首降，梁地悉平。
现代文：刘纡不知逃归何处，军士高扈斩其首投降，梁地全部平定。
English: Liu Yao did not know where to flee to, Sergeant Gao Yao surrendered with his head cut off, and Liang Di was completely subdued.

古文：吴汉进围朐。
现代文：吴汉进围朐县。
English: Wu Han marched into Waiyi County.

古文：明年，城中谷尽，宪、萌潜出，袭取赣榆，琅邪太守陈俊攻之，宪、萌走泽中。
现代文：明年，城中粮尽，董宪、庞萌逃出，袭取赣榆。琅笽太守陈俊进攻，董宪、庞萌逃入水泽之中。
English: The next year, when the grain supply in the city was exhausted, Dong Xian and Pang Meng escaped and attacked Zhou. Zhou's grand marshal Chen Jun attacked, and Dong Xian and Pang Meng fled into the mire.

古文：会吴汉下朐城，进尽获其妻子。
现代文：吴汉攻下朐城，其妻子儿女，尽被俘获。
English: Wu Han captured Lucheng, and his wife and children were all captured.

古文：宪乃流涕谢其将士曰： 妻子皆已得矣。
现代文：董宪于是流涕向其将士们致谢说： 妻子儿女都被俘虏。唉！
English: Dong Xian then thanked his soldiers profusely, saying, "My wife and children have all been captured. Alas!

古文：嗟乎！
现代文：久苦诸卿了。 
English: Oh dear!

古文：久苦诸卿。 乃将数十骑夜去，欲从间道归降，而吴汉校尉韩湛追斩宪于方与，方与人黔陵亦斩萌，皆传首洛阳。
现代文：只率领数十骑乘夜逃走，想从小道归降，而吴汉校尉韩湛追斩董宪于方舆，方舆人黔陵也斩了庞萌，都将首级送到洛阳。
English: He only led dozens of horsemen to escape at night and wanted to return from the trail, while Wu Han Lieutenant Han Zhan chased and beheaded Dong Xian in Fangzhou, and Fangzhou's people also beheaded Pang Meng, and sent their heads to Luoyang.

古文：封韩湛为列侯，黔陵关内侯。
现代文：封韩湛为列侯，黔陵为关内侯。
English: Feng Han Zhan was the vassal lord, and Gong Ling was the vassal lord of Guanai.

古文：张步字文公，琅邪不其人也。
现代文：张步字文公，琅笽郡不其县人。
English: Zhang Bu's surname is Wengong, and he is the most famous person from Handan County.

古文：汉兵之起，步亦聚众数千，转攻傍县，下数城，自为五威将军，遂据本郡。
现代文：汉兵起来后，张步也聚众数千，转攻附近县城，攻下了几个城，自称五威将军，于是占据了琅笽郡。
English: After the Han soldiers rose up, Zhang Bu also gathered thousands of people, turned to attack the nearby county seat, captured several cities, called himself General Wu Wei, and then occupied the county.

古文：更始遣魏郡王闳为琅邪太守，步拒之，不得进。
现代文：更始派遣魏郡王闳为琅笽太守，张步拒之，不得进。
English: At the beginning of the year, Wang Xi of Wei County was dispatched to be the governor of Jiuyuan. Zhang Boru refused and was not allowed to enter.

古文：闳为檄，晓喻吏人降，得赣榆等六县，收兵数千人，与步战，不胜。
现代文：王闳发檄文，晓谕官吏众人投降，得到赣榆等六个县，收了数千士兵，与张步交战，不胜。
English: Wang Qian sent a letter to Zhang Biao, telling all officials to surrender. He gained six counties including Handan, received thousands of soldiers, and fought with Zhang Biao, but was not victorious.

古文：时梁王刘永自以更始所立，贪步兵强，承制拜步辅汉大将军、忠节侯，督青、徐二州，使征不从命者。
现代文：这时梁王刘永自以为是更始所立，贪张步兵强，秉承更始旨意拜张步为辅汉大将军、忠节侯，督察青州、徐州，让他征伐那些不服从命令的人。
English: At this time, Liang Wang Liu Yong thought that he was the founder of the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform and instigated the reform.

古文：步贪其爵号，遂受之。
现代文：张步贪其爵号，就接受了。
English: Zhang Bu coveted the title and accepted it.

古文：乃理兵于剧，以弟弘为卫将军，弘弟蓝玄武大将军，蓝弟寿高密太守。
现代文：就治理军事于剧县，以弟张弘为卫将军，以弘弟张兰为玄武大将军，以兰弟张寿为高密太守。
English: Regarding the administration of military affairs in Yuanshan County, his younger brother Zhang Hong was appointed as the general of Wei, his younger brother Zhang Lan was appointed as the general of Xuanwu, and his younger brother Zhang Shou was appointed as the governor of Gaomi.

古文：遣将徇太山、东莱、城阳、胶东、北海、济南、齐诸郡，皆下之。
现代文：派遣将领攻夺太山、东莱、城阳、胶东、北海、济南、齐各郡，都攻下了。
English: He dispatched generals to conquer Taishan, Donglai, Chengyang, Jiaodong, Beihai, Jinan and Qi counties, and they were all conquered.

古文：步大陈兵引闳，怒曰： 步有何过，君前见攻之甚乎！ 闳按剑曰： 太守奉朝命，而文公拥兵相距，闳攻贼耳，何谓甚邪！ 步嘿然，良久，离席跪谢，乃陈乐献酒，待以上宾之礼，令闳关掌郡事。
现代文：张步陈列大军引见王闳，发怒说： 我张步有什么过错，你以前为什么攻我那么厉害！ 王闳按剑说： 太守奉朝廷命令，而你拥兵相拒，我攻讨贼人而已，有什么厉害呢！ 张步默然良久，离位跪拜谢罪，于是陈上音乐献上美酒，待以上宾礼节。令王闳通掌郡事。
English: Zhangbu displayed a large army and presented it to Wang Qian. He became angry and said, "What's wrong with me Zhangbu, why did you attack me so severely before?" Wang Qian pointed to his sword and said, "You obeyed the order of the imperial court, but you supported the soldiers and opposed each other. I only attacked the thieves, what's so terrible about that?" Zhangbu remained silent for a long time, kneeled down and thanked for his sins before leaving the throne. He then played music, offered fine wine, and waited for the arrival of the guests. He let Wang Qian take charge of the affairs of the county.

古文：建武三年，光武遣光禄大夫伏隆持节使齐，拜步为东莱太守。
现代文：建武三年，光武遣光禄大夫伏隆持符节到齐，拜张步为东莱太守。
English: In the third year of the Jianwu era, Guangwu sent the doctor of the Guanglu school, Fulong, to hold the festival of symbols, and he became the governor of Donglai.

古文：刘永闻隆至剧，乃驰遣立步为齐王，步即杀隆而受永命。
现代文：刘永听说伏隆到了剧县，就从驰道立张步为齐王，张步就杀了伏隆而接受刘永任命。
English: When Liu Yong heard that Fulong had arrived in Yunxian County, he ordered Zhang Bu to kill Fulong and accept Liu Yong's appointment.

古文：是时，帝方北忧渔阳，南事梁、楚，故步得专集齐地，据郡十二，及刘永死，步等欲立永子纡为天子，自为定汉公，置百官。
现代文：这时帝正忧虑北面的渔阳，南与梁、楚从事，所以张步得以专心集中力量于齐地，占据了十二个郡。等到刘永死，张步想立刘永儿子刘纡为天子，自己为定汉公，设置百官。
English: At this time, the emperor was worried about Yuyang in the north and Liang and Chu in the south, so Zhang Bu was able to concentrate his efforts on Qi and occupied twelve counties. When Liu Yong died, Zhang Bu wanted to make Liu Yong's son Liu Zi the son of heaven and himself the ruler of Dinghan, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：王闳谏曰： 梁王以奉本朝之故，是以山东颇能归之。
现代文：王闳劝谏说： 梁王因奉更始，所以山东多能归顺于他。
English: Wang Zhe persuaded Zhe that: Because King Liang was the beginning of a new era, most of Shandong would be able to submit to him.

古文：今尊立其子，将疑众心。且齐人多诈，宜且详之。 步乃止。
现代文：现在立他儿子为帝，大家就会产生怀疑。而且齐人多诈，应当详细计议。 张步才停止。
English: Now that his son is the emperor, everyone will have doubts. Moreover, there are many people who are deceitful, and it should be discussed in detail. Only then will the speculation stop.

古文：五年，步闻帝将攻之，以其将费邑为济南王，屯历下。
现代文：建武五年，张步听说帝将攻他，就以其将费邑为济南王，屯兵历下。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, Zhang Bu heard that the emperor would attack him, so he used it to make Feiyu the king of Jinan and led the troops.

古文：冬，建威大将军耿弇破斩费邑，进拔临淄。
现代文：冬，建威大将军耿攻破并斩了费邑，进军攻拔临淄。
English: In winter, General Geng Jianwei broke through and cut off Feiyu, and marched into Linyi.

古文：步以弇兵少远客，可一举而取，乃悉将其众攻弇于临淄。
现代文：张步以为耿兵少且远道而来，可以一举而取胜，就率领他全部兵力攻耿弇于临淄。
English: Zhang Bu thought that Geng's soldiers were few and came from far away, so he could win in one fell swoop, so he led all his troops to attack Geng Yao in Linyi.

古文：步兵大败，还奔剧。
现代文：张步兵大败，逃奔回剧县。
English: Zhang's infantry suffered a crushing defeat and fled back to Yuanshan County.

古文：帝自幸剧。
现代文：帝亲自到剧县。
English: The emperor himself came to Yunxian County.

古文：步退保平寿，苏茂将万余人来救之。
现代文：张步退保平寿，苏茂率领万余人来救。
English: Zhang Bu retreated to Bao Pingshou, and Su Mao led more than 10,000 people to come to the rescue.

古文：茂让步曰： 以南阳兵精，延岑善战，而耿弇走之。
现代文：苏茂批评张步说： 以南阳那样的兵精，延岑那样善战，而耿弇却将他打败赶走。
English: Su Mao criticized Zhang Bu, saying: With soldiers like Nanyang, and good at fighting like Yan Xun, but Geng Yao defeated him and drove him away.

古文：大王奈何就攻其营？
现代文：大王怎么就攻他的营呢？
English: Why did the great king attack his camp?

古文：既呼茂，不能待邪？ 步曰： 负负，无可言者。 帝乃遣使告步、茂，能相斩降者，封为列侯。
现代文：既呼我来，为什么不等我呢？ 张步说： 对不起，没什么话可说。 帝于是派遣使者告张步、苏茂，谁能斩对方来投降，就封谁为侯。
English: Having summoned me, why didn't you wait for me? Zhang Bu said: I'm sorry, I have nothing to say. The emperor then sent an envoy to inform Zhang Bu and Sumo that whoever could cut off the other side to surrender would be put to death.

古文：步遂斩茂，使使奉其首降。
现代文：张步于是斩苏茂，派使者奉苏茂首级投降。
English: Zhang Bu then beheaded Sumo and sent an envoy to offer Sumo's head in surrender.

古文：步三弟各自系所在狱，皆赦之。
现代文：张步的三个弟弟各自缚到监狱请罪，都受到赦免。
English: Zhang Bu's three younger brothers each went to prison to plead guilty and were all pardoned.

古文：封步为安丘侯，后与家属居洛阳。
现代文：封张步为安丘侯，后来与家属居往洛阳。
English: Feng Zhangbu was the lord of Anqiu and later moved to Luoyang with his family.

古文：王闳亦诣剧降。
现代文：王闳也到剧县投降。
English: Wang Yao also went to Yun County to surrender.

古文：八年夏，步将妻子逃奔临淮，与弟弘、蓝欲招其故众，乘船入海，琅邪太守陈俊追击斩之。
现代文：建武八年夏，张步携妻子逃奔临淮，与弟张弘、张兰想招集他的旧部，乘船入海，琅笽太守陈俊追击并斩了他。
English: In the summer of the eighth year of Jianwu, Zhang Bu and his wife fled to Linhuai, and he and his brother Zhang Hong and Zhang Lan wanted to call up his old unit, and went to sea by boat. Grand Empress Dowager Chen Jun chased and beheaded him.

古文：王闳者，王莽叔父平阿侯谭之子也，哀帝时为中常侍。
现代文：王闳，是王莽叔父平阿侯王谭的儿子，哀帝时为中常侍。
English: Wang Yao, the son of Wang Mang's uncle Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan, was a middle-ranking attendant at the time of the emperor's death.

古文：时幸臣董贤为大司马，宠爱贵盛，闳屡谏，忤旨。
现代文：当时受到宠幸的董贤为大司马，宠爱贵盛，王闳屡次劝谏，违反旨意。
English: At that time, Dong Xian, who was favored, was the chief steward, and he favored Guisheng. Wang Xi repeatedly persuaded him to go against the will.

古文：哀帝临崩，以玺绶付贤曰： 无妄以与人。 时国无嗣主，内外恇惧，闳白元后，请夺之；即带剑至宣德后闼，举手叱贤曰： 宫车晏驾，国嗣未立，公受恩深重，当俯伏号泣，何事久持玺绶以待祸至邪！ 贤知闳必死，不敢拒之，乃跪授玺绶。
现代文：哀帝临死前，以玺绶付给董贤说： 不要随便给人。 当时国家没有嗣主，内外恐惧，王闳向元后说明，请夺董贤玺绶；即带剑至宣德后宫中门，举手叱董贤说： 皇上崩驾，新君未立，你受厚恩，当俯伏悲号哭泣，为什么久持玺绶以等待祸事到来呢！ 董贤知不交玺绶必死，不敢抗拒，于是跪着把玺绶交授给王闳。
English: At that time, the country had no heir, and there was fear both at home and abroad. Wang Xi explained to Empress Yuan, "Please seize Dong Xian's scepter"; that is, he took his sword to the middle gate of the Xuande Palace, raised his hand and scolded Dong Xian, saying, "The emperor has passed away, the new prince has not yet been established, you have been favored, you should prostrate and weep, why hold the scepter for a long time to wait for the disaster to come! Dong Xian knew that he would die if he did not surrender the scepter, and did not dare to resist, so

古文：闳持上太后，朝廷壮之。
现代文：王闳将玺绶呈献太后，朝廷对此甚为赞赏。
English: Wang Yao presented the urn to the empress dowager, which was highly appreciated by the imperial court.

古文：及王莽篡位，僣忌闳，乃出为东郡太守。
现代文：后来王莽篡位，对王闳僭越疑忌，就外出为东郡太守。
English: Later, Wang Mang usurped the throne, and he became more and more suspicious of Wang Xi, so he went out to become the governor of Dong County.

古文：闳惧诛，常系药手内。
现代文：王闳害怕遭杀害，时常手里带着毒药。
English: Wang Yao was afraid of being killed and often carried poison in his hands.

古文：莽败，汉兵起，闳独完全东郡三十余万户，归降更始。
现代文：王莽失败，汉兵兴起，王闳独完完整整以东郡三十余万户，归降更始。
English: Wang Mang failed, the Han soldiers rose up, Wang Xizhong single-handedly completed the complete reorganization of more than 300,000 households in East County, and began to return.

古文：李宪者，颍川许昌人也。
现代文：李宪，颍川许昌人。
English: Starring Li Xian and Lu Chuan Xu Changren.

古文：王莽时为庐江属令。
现代文：王莽时为庐江属令。
English: Wang Mangshi was the governor of the Minjiang River.

古文：莽末，江贼王州公等起众十余万，攻掠郡县，莽以宪为偏将军、庐江连率，击破州公。
现代文：王莽末年，江贼王州公等起兵十余万，攻掠郡县，王莽以李宪为偏将军，庐江连率，击破王州公。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, Wang Zhou Gong, the bandit of the Yangtze River, raised more than one hundred thousand soldiers and attacked and plundered counties and counties. Wang Mang took Li Xian as a partial general and led the Lijiang River Company to defeat Wang Zhou Gong.

古文：莽败，宪据郡自守。
现代文：王莽失败，李宪据郡自守。
English: Wang Mang failed, while Li Xian successfully defended himself.

古文：更始元年，自称淮南王。
现代文：更始元年，李宪自称淮南王。
English: In the first year of the new era, Li Xian claimed to be the king of Huainan.

古文：建武三年，遂自立为天子，置公卿百官，拥九城，众十余万。
现代文：建武三年，李宪更自立为天子，设置公卿百官，拥有九城，众十余万。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Li Xian became more self-reliant as the son of heaven, setting up a hundred officials of nobility, owning nine cities and more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：四年秋，光武幸寿春，遣扬武将军马成等击宪，围舒。至六年正月，拔之。
现代文：建武四年秋，光武到寿春，派遣扬武将军马成等击李宪，围住庐江舒县，到建武六年正月，攻下舒县。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Jianwu, Guangwu went to Shouchun and dispatched Yangwu General Ma Cheng and others to attack Li Xian and encircle Shu County in the Minjiang River. In the first month of the sixth year of Jianwu, he attacked Shu County.

古文：宪亡走，其军士帛意，追斩宪而降，宪妻子皆伏诛。
现代文：李宪逃走，其军士帛意，追斩李宪而降，李宪的妻子都被杀。
English: Li Xian fled, his sergeant was pleased and chased Li Xian down, and Li Xian's wife was killed.

古文：封帛意渔侯。
现代文：封帛意为渔浦侯。
English: The meaning of "封" is "漁浦侯."

古文：后宪余党淳于临等犹聚众数千人，屯灊山，攻杀安风令。
现代文：后来李宪的余党谆于临等还聚众数千人，屯山，攻杀安风县令。
English: Later, Li Xian's remaining party cadres gathered thousands of people in Lin, Tunshan, to attack and kill Anfeng County.

古文：杨州牧欧阳歙遣兵不能克，帝议欲讨之。
现代文：扬州牧欧阳歙派兵攻打不能胜，帝商议准备前去讨伐。
English: Yangzhou Moo Ou Yang Ye sent troops to attack and could not win, the emperor discussed and prepared to go to the crusade.

古文：庐江人陈众为从事，白歙请得喻降临；于是乘单车，驾白马，往说而降之。
现代文：庐江人陈众为从事，告诉欧阳歙请求前去晓喻淳于临来投降；陈众于是乘单车，驾白马，前往说服淳于临终于归降。
English: The people of Minjiang told Ouyang Zhe to ask Xiaoyu Junyulin to come and surrender. Chen Zhe then took a bicycle and rode a white horse to persuade Junyulin to finally surrender.

古文：灊山人共生为立祠，号 白马陈从事 云。
现代文：山人在陈众生前就为他立了祠庙，称呼他为 白马陈从事 。
English: Before Chen's death, the mountain people built a temple for him and called him Bai Ma Chen.

古文：彭宠字伯通，南阳宛人也。
现代文：彭宠字伯通，南阳郡宛县人。
English: Peng Jia is from Bertong, Nanyang County.

古文：父宏，哀帝时为渔阳太守，伟容貌，能饮饭，有威于边。
现代文：父亲彭宏，哀帝时是渔阳太守，容貌英伟，善饮能饭，在边界上有威名。
English: His father, Peng Hong, was the governor of Yuyang at the time of the emperor's death. He had a heroic appearance, was good at drinking rice, and had a prestigious name on the border.

古文：王莽居摄，诛不附己者，宏与何武、鲍宣并遇害。
现代文：王莽居摄时，诛杀不归附于他的人，彭宏与何武、鲍宣一起遇害。
English: When Wang Mangju was taking pictures, he killed people who did not belong to him. Peng Hong was killed together with He Wu and Bao Xuan.

古文：宠少为郡吏，地皇中，为大司空士，从王邑东拒汉军。
现代文：彭宠年少时是郡吏，王莽地皇年间，为大司空士，跟随王邑到东抵拒汉军。
English: When Peng Zhao was young, he was a county official. During Wang Mangdi's reign, he was a grand marshal and followed Wangyi to the east to resist the Chinese army.

古文：到洛阳，闻同产弟在汉兵中，惧诛，即与乡人吴汉亡至渔阳，抵父时吏。
现代文：到了洛阳，听说同母弟在汉军中，害怕要杀他，就与乡人吴汉逃亡到渔阳，归于父亲时的旧吏。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he heard that his mother's younger brother was in the Chinese army, and fearing that he would be killed, he fled to Yuyang with the villager Wu Han and returned to his father.

古文：更始立，使谒者韩鸿持节徇北州，承制得专拜二千石已下。
现代文：更始立，派近侍韩鸿持符节到北州宣示，承帝令可以专行拜封二千石以下官职。
English: At the same time, Han Hong, a close attendant, was sent to Hokkeshu to hold a festival to announce that the imperial edict could be used exclusively for official positions of less than two thousand koku.

古文：鸿至蓟，以宠、汉并乡闾故人，相见欢甚，即拜宠偏将军，行渔阳太守事，汉安乐令。
现代文：韩鸣到蓟，以彭宠、吴汉都是同乡故旧，相见后很欢喜，随即拜彭宠为偏将军。代行渔阳太守职事，汉安乐县县令。
English: When Han Ming arrived in Handan, he was very pleased to meet Peng Jia and Wu Han, both of whom were his old countrymen. He immediately made Peng Jia his general. He acted as Yuyang Taishou and was the county magistrate of Han'anle County.

古文：及光武镇慰河北，至蓟，以书招宠。
现代文：光武镇慰河北，到了蓟，以书信招宠。
English: Guangwu Zhen comforted Hebei, and when he arrived in Handan, he wrote a letter to court favor.

古文：宠具牛、酒，将上谒。
现代文：宠准备好了牛酒，准备上谒。
English: The cow wine is ready, ready to be served.

古文：会王郎诈立，传檄燕、赵，遣将徇渔阳、上谷，急发其兵，北州众多疑惑，欲从之。
现代文：恰好王郎诈立，传檄燕、赵，派遣将领掠取渔阳、上谷，急速发兵，北州的群众多感疑惑，准备从王郎。
English: It just so happened that Wang Lang swindled his way into power, and sent his generals to plunder Yuyang and Shanggu, and rapidly dispatched his troops. Many people in Beizhou felt suspicious and prepared to follow Wang Lang.

古文：吴汉说宠从光武，语在《汉传》。
现代文：吴汉建议彭宠归从光武，语在《吴汉传》。
English: Wu Han suggested that Peng Ji should follow Guangwu, according to "The Biography of Wu Han."

古文：会上谷太守耿况亦使功曹寇恂诣宠，结谋共归光武。
现代文：恰好上谷太守耿况也派功曹寇恂到彭宠处，共同谋划归从光武。
English: It just so happened that Shanggu Taishu Geng also sent Gong Cao Kuo to Peng Ji's place to jointly plan the transfer from Guangwu.

古文：宠乃发步骑三千人，以吴汉行长史，及都尉严宣、护军盖延、狐奴令王梁，与上谷军合而南，及光武于广阿。
现代文：彭宠就发步骑三千人，以吴汉行长史，及都尉严宣、护军盖延、狐奴县令王梁，与上谷军合军向南，跟及光武于广阿。
English: Peng Cai then set out on foot with 3,000 horsemen, led by Wu Han's governor Shi, and captains Yan Xuan, the military escort Gaien, and Wang Liang, the commander of Qunu County, to join forces with Shangguan's army to the south, followed by Guangwu in Guang'a.

古文：光武承制封宠建忠侯，赐号大将军。
现代文：光武承帝令封彭宠为建忠侯，赐号大将军。
English: Emperor Guangwu decreed that Peng Cuo be given the title of Jian Zhong Hou (建忠侯) and the title of General.

古文：遂围邯郸，宠转粮食，前后不绝。
现代文：于是围邯郸，彭宠转运粮食，前后不绝。
English: As a result, there has been a constant flow of grain from Wuhan to Pengcai and vice versa.

古文：及王郎死，光武追铜马，北至蓟。
现代文：王郎死，光武追击铜马，北至蓟。
English: Wang Lang died, and Guangwu chased the bronze horse as far as the north.

古文：宠上谒，自负其功，意望甚高，光武接之不能满，以此怀不平。
现代文：彭宠上谒，自以为功劳大，期望甚高，光武接见他不能满足要求，因此心怀不平。
English: Peng Zhaojing, who thought he had done a great job, had very high expectations. When Guangwu met with him, he could not meet the requirements, so he was not satisfied.

古文：光武知之，以问幽州牧朱浮。
现代文：光武知道后，以此问幽州牧朱浮。
English: After Mitsutake found out, he asked Yuzhou Maki Zhufu about it.

古文：浮对曰： 前吴汉北发兵时，大王遗宠以所服剑，又倚以为北道主人。
现代文：朱浮回答说： 以前吴汉北发兵时，大王赐彭宠以所佩剑，又倚重他为北道主人。
English: Zhu Fu replied: In the past, when Wu Han sent troops to the north, the great king gave Peng Qiao a sword to wear and relied on him as the master of the north.

古文：宠谓至当迎閤握手，交欢并坐。
现代文：彭宠以为他来时你当在小门握手迎他，与他交欢并坐。
English: Peng Zhao thought that when he came, you should greet him with a handshake at the small gate, have sex with him and sit down.

古文：今既不然，所以失望。 浮因曰： 王莽为宰衡时，甄丰旦夕入谋议，时人语曰： 夜半客，甄长伯。
现代文：现在不是这样，所以他失望了。 朱浮因而说： 王莽为宰衡时，甄丰旦夕进府谋议，当时的人说： 夜半客，甄长伯 。
English: This is not the case now, so he is disappointed. Zhu Fu Rong therefore said: When Wang Mang was the viceroy, Zhen Fong entered the palace in the evening to discuss, the people at that time said: Midnight guest, Zhen Chang Bo.

古文：及莽篡位后，丰意不平，卒以诛死。 光武大笑，以为不至于此。
现代文：王莽篡位后，甄丰意不平，终被诛死。 光武大笑，以为不至于到这种地步。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, Zhen Feng was displeased and was eventually strangled to death. Guangwu laughed loudly, thinking that it would not come to this.

古文：及即位，吴汉、王梁，宠之所遣，并为三公，而宠独无所加，愈怏怏不得志。
现代文：光武即位后，吴汉、王梁，都是彭宠派去的人，都位列三公，而彭宠独没有加升，更加怏怏不得志。
English: After Guangwu's accession to the throne, Wu Han and Wang Liang, both of whom were sent by Peng Jia, were ranked as the three princes, but Peng Jia alone was not promoted, and he was even more discouraged.

古文：叹曰： 我功当为王；但尔者，陛下忘我邪？ 
现代文：叹道： 我的功劳应当封王，现在却成这样，陛下忘了我吗？ 
English: He sighed, "My work deserves to be crowned king, but now it has come to this. Has Your Majesty forgotten me?"

古文：是时，北州破散，而渔阳差完，有旧盐铁官，宠转以贸谷，积珍宝，益富强，朱浮与宠不相能，浮数谮构之。
现代文：这时北州破散，而渔阳略为完好，有旧日的盐铁官，彭宠转而从事粮食贸易，积聚了不少珍宝，更加富强了。朱浮与宠不睦，多次诬陷构害于他。
English: At this time, Beizhou was broken up, while Yuyang was slightly intact. There was an old salt and iron official, Peng Cai, who turned to grain trade, accumulated a lot of treasures, and became richer and stronger. Zhu Fu did not get along with Cai, and repeatedly framed him.

古文：建武二年春，诏征宠，宠意浮卖己，上疏愿与浮俱征。
现代文：建武二年春，帝下诏征召彭宠，彭宠意识到朱浮出卖了他，上书愿与朱浮同时受征。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Jianwu era, the emperor issued an edict to conscript Peng Ciao. Peng Ciao realized that Zhu Bu had betrayed him, and sent a letter saying that he was willing to be conscripted at the same time as Zhu Bu.

古文：又与吴汉、盖延等书，盛言浮枉状，固求同征。
现代文：又与吴汉、盖延等书信，极言朱浮怎样诬枉了他，坚决要求同征。
English: He also sent letters to Wu Han, Gai Yan and others, saying how Zhu Fu had misled him, and resolutely demanded to be conscripted.

古文：帝不许，益以自疑。
现代文：帝不许，彭宠更加自疑。
English: The emperor does not allow it, and Peng Jiao is even more self-doubting.

古文：而其妻素刚，不堪抑屈，固劝无受召。
现代文：而他的妻素来刚强，不堪抑制屈服，坚决劝彭宠不接受征召。
English: But his wife has always been strong-willed, unable to suppress her submission, and resolutely advised Peng Jia not to accept the call-up.

古文：宠又与常所亲信吏计议，皆怀怨于浮，莫有劝行者。
现代文：彭宠又与平常所亲信的官吏计议，都怀怨朱浮，没有一个劝他应召而去的。
English: Peng Qiao also discussed with the officials he usually trusted, all of whom harbored grudges against Zhu Fu. None of them advised him to accept the call and leave.

古文：帝遣宠从弟子后兰卿喻之，宠因留子后兰卿，遂发兵反，拜署将帅，自将二万余人攻朱浮于蓟，分兵徇广阳、上谷、右北平。
现代文：帝派遣彭宠堂弟子后兰卿晓喻他，彭宠扣留了子后兰卿，于是发兵造反，拜任了将帅，自己率领了两万人攻朱浮于蓟，分兵掠取广阳、上谷、右北平。
English: The emperor sent Peng Jia Tong's disciple, Hou Lan Xing, to get to know him. Peng Jia detained his son, Hou Lan Xing, and then sent an army to rebel. He was appointed as a general, and led 20,000 men to attack Zhu Fuyu, and the detachment of soldiers plundered Guangyang, Shanggu, and Right Beiping.

古文：又自与耿况俱有重功，而恩赏并薄，数遣使要诱况。况不受，辄斩其使。
现代文：又自以为与耿况都有重功，而恩赏都微薄，几次派遣使者去诱说耿况，耿况不接受，经常斩其使者。
English: He also thought that both he and Geng Quan had made great contributions, but the rewards were meager. He sent messengers several times to entice Geng Quan, but Geng Quan did not accept, and often killed his messengers.

古文：秋，帝使游击将军邓隆救蓟。
现代文：秋天，帝派游击将军邓隆救蓟。
English: In the autumn, the emperor sent the guerrilla general Deng Long to rescue him.

古文：隆军潞南，浮军雍奴，遣吏奏状。
现代文：邓隆屯兵潞南，朱浮屯兵雍奴，派遣官吏奏明情况。
English: Deng Long's garrison in the south, Zhu Fu's garrison in the north, and Yong Niu's garrison in the south sent officials to report the situation.

古文：帝读檄，怒谓使吏曰： 营相去百里，其势岂可得相及？
现代文：帝读檄书，怒对使吏说： 两营相距百里，其势怎么能够来得及救援？
English: When the emperor read the imperial edict, he angrily said to the envoys: The two battalions are a hundred miles apart, how can their forces arrive in time for the rescue?

古文：比若还，北军必败矣。 宠果盛兵临河以拒隆，又别发轻骑三千袭其后，大破隆军。
现代文：等到你回去，北军必然失败了。 彭宠果然以大军临河以拒邓隆，又另发轻骑三千袭击其后，大破邓隆军。
English: By the time you returned, the Northern Army had inevitably failed. Peng Jia had indeed marched a large army to the river to resist Deng Long, and then sent another 3,000 light cavalry to attack and defeat Deng Long's army.

古文：浮远，遂不能救，引而去。
现代文：朱浮离得远，来不及援救，引军退去。
English: Zhu Fu was far away and could not come to the rescue, so he withdrew his army.

古文：明年春，宠遂拔右北平、上谷数县。
现代文：第二年春，彭宠就攻拔右北平、上谷数县。
English: In the spring of the second year, Peng Cai attacked several counties in the right Beiping and Shanggu.

古文：遣使以美女缯彩赂遗匈奴，要结和亲。
现代文：派遣使者以美女和带彩的丝织品贿赂匈奴，要与匈奴结好和亲。
English: Sending an envoy to bribe the Xiongnu with beautiful women and colorful silks, to make peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：单于使左南将军七八千骑，往来为游兵以助宠。
现代文：匈奴单于使左南将军七八千骑，往来为游兵以援助彭宠。
English: The Xiongnu alone brought seven or eight thousand cavalry to the south-left general, and they went back and forth as rangers to assist Pengcai.

古文：又南结张步及富平获索诸豪杰，皆与交质连衡。
现代文：又南结交张步及富平获索各豪杰，都与他们相交为质互相联合。
English: In addition, Zhangbu and Fuping from the south have made contact with each other's heroes, and all of them have made contact with each other as a quality of mutual alliance.

古文：遂攻拔蓟城，自立为燕王。
现代文：于是攻拔蓟城，自立为燕王。
English: As a result, he attacked Lucheng and established himself as the King of Swallows.

古文：其妻数恶梦，又多见怪变，卜筮及望气者皆言兵当从中起。
现代文：彭宠的妻子几次做恶梦，又多见怪变，卜筮及观望气数的人都说兵变当从内部发生。
English: Peng Qiao's wife has had several nightmares and often sees strange changes. Both Boao and onlookers say that the mutiny should occur from within.

古文：宠疑子后兰卿质汉归，故不信之，使将兵居外，无亲于中。
现代文：彭宠怀疑子后兰卿是从汉归来的人质，所以不相信，使他带兵住在外面，不让他与里面的人亲近。
English: Peng Zhaotong suspected that Hou Lanqing was a hostage who had returned from Han, so he didn't believe it and made him and his soldiers live outside and didn't let him get close to the people inside.

古文：五年春，宠斋，独在便室。
现代文：建武五年春，彭宠斋戒，一人独自居住便室。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Jianwu, Peng Ciao fasted, living alone in the toilet room.

古文：苍头子密等三人因宠卧寐，共缚着床，告外吏云： 大王斋禁，皆使吏休。 伪称宠命教，收缚奴婢，各置一处。
现代文：苍头子密等三人因彭宠睡着了，就将他共同缚住在床上，通告外面的官吏说： 大王斋禁，所有官吏都去休息。 又诈称彭宠命令，教把奴婢都收拾绑缚起来，各置一处。
English: The three of them, including the headman Zimi, tied him to the bed together because Peng Jia fell asleep, and announced to the officials outside, "The emperor is fasting, and all the officials are going to rest." They also falsely claimed that Peng Jia had ordered them to gather all the slaves and maidservants, tie them up, and put them in one place.

古文：又以宠命呼其妻。
现代文：又以彭宠之命呼其妻。
English: He also called his wife by the order of Peng Cai.

古文：妻入，大惊。
现代文：妻入见，大惊。
English: My wife was shocked.

古文：宠急呼曰： 趣为诸将军办装。 于是两奴将妻入取宝物，留一奴守宠。
现代文：彭宠急忙呼叫说： 赶快为这几位将军办理装饰宝物。 于是两家奴随宠妻到内室收取宝物，留下一家奴看守彭宠。
English: Peng Ciao hurriedly called out, saying, "Hurry up and handle the decorative treasures for these generals," so the two slaves followed the favorite wife to the inner room to collect the treasures, leaving a slave to guard Peng Ciao.

古文：宠谓守奴曰： 若小儿，我素爱也，今为子密所迫劫耳。
现代文：彭宠对守奴说： 你这个小孩，我向来是很喜爱的，你是被子密所胁迫的。
English: Peng Cossack said to the slave: You child, I've always liked you very much, you're being coerced by the concubine.

古文：解我缚，当以女珠妻汝，家中财物皆与若。 小奴意欲解之，视户外，见子密听其语，遂不敢解。
现代文：你解开我的绳索，我当把女儿彭珠嫁给你为妻，家中财物都给你。 小奴心想解救他，看户外，见子密听到了彭宠的话，就不敢解其绳索。
English: If you untie my ropes, I will give you my daughter, Peng Zhu, as your wife, and all of the family's possessions. The slave boy wanted to free him, so he looked outside and saw that when Zixi heard Peng Zhu's words, he did not dare to untie his ropes.

古文：于是收金玉衣物，至宠所装之，被马六匹，使妻缝两缣囊。
现代文：于是收拾金玉衣物，到彭宠的住所装好，备马六匹，使妻缝两个包裹。
English: So he packed up his golden clothes and went to Peng Jia's residence to get them ready. He prepared six horses and asked his wife to sew two packages.

古文：昏夜后，解宠手，令作记告城门将军云： 今遣子密等至子后兰卿所，速开门出，勿稽留之。 书成，即斩宠及妻头，置囊中，便持记驰出城，因以诣阙。
现代文：昏夜后，解开彭宠的手，命令他用亲笔字条告诉城门将军说： 现派遣子密等到子后兰卿住所，快开门放他们出去，切莫稽留。 写好后即斩彭宠及其妻的头，放置在囊中，立即持字条出城，因而拜谒光武。
English: After nightfall, he untied Peng Qiao's hands and ordered him to use his own handwritten note to tell the general of the city gate, saying: Now send Zi Mi to wait until Zi Hou Lan's residence, quickly open the door and let them go out, do not linger. After writing, he immediately beheaded Peng Qiao and his wife's head, placed it in a bag, and immediately left the city with the note, thus paying homage to Zou Guangwu.

古文：封为不义侯。
现代文：被封为不义侯。
English: He was given the title of "unjust mayor."

古文：明旦，閤门不开，官属逾墙而入，见宠尸，惊怖。
现代文：第二天清晨，门紧闭不开，官属们爬墙而入，看到彭宠尸体，大惊恐怖。
English: In the early morning of the next day, the door was tightly closed and could not be opened. Officials and relatives climbed the wall to enter, and were shocked and horrified to see Peng Cai's body.

古文：其尚书韩立等共立宠子午为王，以子后兰卿为将军。
现代文：其尚书韩立等共立彭宠儿子彭午为王，以子后兰卿为将军。
English: His son Han Li and others jointly established Peng Cao's son Peng Bo as king, and his son Hou Lanqing as general.

古文：国师韩利斩午首，诣征虏将军祭遵降。
现代文：国师韩利斩彭午首携带到征虏将军祭遵处投降。
English: In the afternoon, the head of the national division, Han Li, was beheaded and carried to the Conscript General's Festival to surrender.

古文：夷其宗族。
现代文：彭宠的宗族都被夷灭。
English: Peng Cuo's entire clan was wiped out.

古文：卢芳字君期，安定三水人入，居左谷中。
现代文：卢芳字君期，安定郡三水县人，住在左谷中。
English: Lu Fangzhi Junqi, a resident of Sanshui County, Anding County, lives in Zuoying.

古文：王莽时，天下咸思汉德，芳由是诈自称武帝曾孙刘文伯。
现代文：王莽时，天下都思念汉德，卢芳于是诈称自己是武帝的曾孙刘文伯。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, the whole world missed Hand, so Lu Fang falsely claimed to be Liu Wenbo, the great-grandson of Emperor Wu.

古文：曾祖母匈奴谷蠡浑邪王之姊为武帝皇后，生三子。
现代文：说曾祖母匈奴谷蠡浑邪王之姊为武帝皇后，生了三个儿子。
English: It is said that the great-grandmother, the sister of the evil king of Xiongnu Valley, Gongun, was the empress of Emperor Wu and gave birth to three sons.

古文：遭江充之乱，太子诛，皇后坐死，中子次卿亡之长陵，小子回卿逃于左谷。
现代文：遭了江充之乱，太子被杀，皇后获罪死，中子次卿逃亡到长陵，小子回卿逃到了左谷。
English: During the Jiangcheng Rebellion, the crown prince was killed, the empress was sentenced to death, Vice-Admiral Nakako fled to Changling, and Vice-Admiral Koji fled to Zuoying.

古文：霍将军立次卿，迎回卿。
现代文：霍将军立了次卿，迎回回卿。
English: General Huo appointed Vice-Minister and welcomed back the Minister.

古文：回卿不出，因居左谷，生子孙卿，孙卿生文伯。
现代文：回卿不出，因此住在左谷，生子孙卿，孙卿生子文伯。
English: He did not succeed in becoming emperor, so he lived in the Zuotani valley. His children were Sun Ch'ing and Sun Ch'ing's son was Wen Bo.

古文：常以是言诳惑安定间。
现代文：卢芳常用这些话欺骗迷惑安定之间。
English: Lu Fang often used these words to deceive and confuse the stable.

古文：王莽末，乃与三水属国羌胡起兵。
现代文：王莽末，就与三水属国羌胡起兵。
English: At the end of the reign of Wang Mang, he raised an army with the Sanshui vassal state of Yanhu.

古文：更始至长安，征芳为骑都尉，使镇抚安定以西。
现代文：更始到长安，征卢芳为骑都尉，使他镇定安抚安定以西。
English: He first went to Chang'an and appointed Lu Fang as a cavalry captain to calm and pacify the west of Ding'an.

古文：更始败，三水豪杰共计议，以芳刘氏子孙，宜承宗庙，乃共立芳为上将军、西平王，使使与西羌、匈奴结和亲。
现代文：更始失败后，三水的豪杰们共同计议，以卢芳是刘氏子孙，应当继承宗庙，于是共立卢芳为上将军、西平王，派遣使者与西羌、匈奴结交和亲。
English: After the initial failure, the heroes of Sanshui jointly considered that Lu Fang was the descendant of the Liu clan and should inherit the ancestral temple, so they jointly established Lu Fang as the general and the king of Xiping, and sent envoys to make friends and relatives with Xidi and Xiongnu.

古文：单于曰： 匈怒本与汉约为兄弟。
现代文：单于说： 匈奴本与汉约为兄弟。
English: Just say: The Xiongnu and the Han are brothers.

古文：后匈奴中衰，呼韩邪单于归汉，汉为发兵拥护，世世称臣。
现代文：后来匈奴衰弱了，呼韩邪单于归顺于汉，汉为其发兵加以保护，单于世世称臣。
English: Later, when the Xiongnu became weak, Han Zidan called on Han to surrender to Han, Han sent troops to protect Han, and Han Zidan became famous throughout the world.

古文：今汉亦中绝，刘氏来归我，亦当立之，令尊事我。 乃使句林王将数千骑迎芳，芳与兄禽、弟程俱入匈奴。
现代文：现在汉祚也中绝了，刘氏来归我，我也当立他，让他尊事我。 于是使句林王率领数千骑迎接卢芳，卢芳与兄卢禽、弟卢程都到了匈奴。
English: Now that Han Xuan was also defeated, Liu Shi came to me, and I made him my vassal so that he would respect me. Therefore, King Gu Lin led thousands of horsemen to meet Lu Fang. Lu Fang, his brother Lu Yi, and his brother Lu Cheng all came to the Xiongnu.

古文：单于遂立芳为汉帝。
现代文：单于就立卢芳为汉帝。
English: Lu Fang alone became the Han Emperor.

古文：以程为中郎将，将胡骑还入安定。
现代文：以卢程为中郎将，率领匈奴骑兵回到安定。
English: With Lu Cheng as the middle brother, he led the Xiongnu cavalry back to the stable.

古文：初，五原人李兴、随昱，朔方人田飒，代郡人石鲔、闵堪，各起兵自称将军。
现代文：起初，五原人李兴、随昱，朔方人田飒，代郡人石鲔、闵堪，各起兵自称将军。
English: At the beginning, Li Xing and Zu Ying from Wuhuan, Tian Yao from Shuo Fang, and Shi Yao and Yao Kan from Daigun claimed to be generals.

古文：建武四年，单于遣无楼且渠王入五原塞，与李兴等和亲，告兴欲令芳还汉地为帝。
现代文：建武四年，单于派遣无楼且渠王入五原塞，与李兴等和亲，告李兴想立卢芳回汉地为汉帝。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he was sent alone without a building and entered the Wuhuan Pass, and made peace with Li Xing and other relatives, telling Li Xing that he wanted to return Lu Fang to Han as Han Emperor.

古文：五年，李兴、闵堪引兵至单于庭迎芳，与俱入塞，都九原县。
现代文：建武五年，李兴、闵堪引兵到单于庭院迎接卢芳，一起入塞，定都九原县。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, Li Xing and Yu Kan led soldiers to meet Lu Fang alone in the courtyard, and entered the fortress together, setting the capital in Jiuhara County.

古文：掠有五原、朔方、云中、定襄、雁门五郡，并置守令，与胡通兵，侵苦北边。
现代文：掠取了五原、朔方、云中、定襄、雁门五个郡。都设置了郡守县令，与匈奴通兵，北部边疆受到侵掠和苦难。
English: They plundered the five counties of Wuhuan, Shuofang, Yunzhong, Dingxiang, and Yanmen. They all set up county governors and sent soldiers to fight against the Xiongnu, and the northern border was invaded and plundered and suffered.

古文：六年，芳将军贾览将胡骑击杀代郡太守刘兴。
现代文：建武六年，卢芳的将军贾览率领胡骑击杀代郡太守刘兴。
English: In the sixth year of Jianwu, Lu Fang's general Jia Chan led the Hu horsemen to kill the deputy county governor Liu Xing.

古文：芳后以事诛其五原太守李兴兄弟，而其朔方太守田飒、云中太守桥扈恐惧，叛芳，举郡降，光武令领职如故。
现代文：卢芳后来以事诛杀了五原太守李兴兄弟，这样朔方太守田飒、云中太守桥扈恐惧，叛离卢芳，率全郡归降，光武令他们仍为原郡太守如故。
English: Lu Fang later killed the brothers of the fifth generation governor Li Xing in a quarrel over a matter. As a result, Shuo Fang, the governor of Tianye, and Yunzhong, the governor of Qiaozhuang, were afraid and betrayed Lu Fang, leading the whole county to surrender. Guangwu ordered them to remain the former governor of the county as before.

古文：后大司马吴汉、骠骑大将军杜茂数击芳，并不克。
现代文：后来大司马吴汉、骠骑大将军杜茂几次攻击卢芳，都没有攻克。
English: Later, the commander Ma Wuhan and the cavalry general Du Mao attacked Lu Fang several times, but failed to conquer it.

古文：十二年，芳与贾览共攻云中，久不下，其将随昱留守九原，欲胁芳降。
现代文：建武十二年，卢芳与贾览共攻云中，久攻不下，其将领随昱留守九原，想胁迫卢芳投降。
English: In the twelfth year of Jianwu, Lu Fang and Jia Zhang jointly attacked the clouds, but they could not attack for a long time. Their generals stayed in Jiuhara with Yu, trying to coerce Lu Fang to surrender.

古文：芳知羽翼外附，心膂内离，遂弃辎重，与十余骑亡入匈奴，其众尽归随昱。
现代文：卢芳知道他下面的人外附汉室，心腹从内部离叛，于是抛弃辎重，与十多骑逃亡到匈奴，其部下都归附于随昱。
English: Lu Fang knew that the people under him were externally attached to the Han family, and that his confidants were defecting from within, so he abandoned the imperial family and fled to the Xiongnu with more than ten horsemen. His subordinates were all attached to the imperial family.

古文：昱乃随使者程恂诣阙。拜昱为五原太守，封镌胡侯，昱弟宪武进侯。
现代文：随昱于是与使者程恂入京，光武帝拜随昱为五原太守，封镌胡侯，随弟随宪为武进侯。
English: Therefore, Emperor Guangwu and his emissary Cheng Jun marched into Beijing. Emperor Guangwu made Zhu Jun the governor of the Five Provinces, Zhu Jun the governor of Hu, and his younger brother Zhu Xian the governor of Wujin.

古文：十六年，芳复入居高柳，与闵堪兄林使使请降。
现代文：建武十六年，卢芳再入居高柳县，与闵堪兄闵林遣使请归降。
English: In the 16th year of Jianwu, Lu Fang moved back to live in Gaoliu County, and he and his brother Yan Kan sent an envoy to Yulin to ask him to return.

古文：乃立芳为代王，堪为代相，林为代太傅，赐缯二万匹，因使和集匈奴。
现代文：帝就立卢芳为代王，闵堪为代相，闵林为代太傅，赐缯二万匹，令他与匈奴和平相处。
English: The emperor appointed Lu Fang as acting king, Jian Kan as acting prime minister, and Yulin as acting daifu, and granted him twenty thousand horses, so that he could live in peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：芳上疏谢曰： 臣芳过托先帝遗体，弃在边陲。社稷遭王莽废绝，以是子孙之忧，所宜共诛，故遂西连羌戎，北怀匈奴。
现代文：卢芳上疏谢恩说： 臣卢芳托为先帝遗体，被弃在边陲，汉朝社稷遭到王莽废绝，这是刘氏子孙的忧虑，应当奋起共诛国贼，所以我西连羌戎，北怀匈奴。
English: Lu Fang Shang Suo Xie En said: Lu Fang Tuo was the body of the former emperor and was abandoned at the border. The Han Dynasty was overthrown by Wang Mang. This is the concern of the descendants of the Liu clan. They should rise up and fight against the traitors. Therefore, I am a Westerner and a Northern Hun.

古文：单于不忘旧德，权立救助，是时兵革并起，往往而在。
现代文：单于不忘旧德，权且立我以相救助。那时兵革并起，到处都是。
English: Just because we never forget the old morality, we have the right to help ourselves. At that time, the war broke out simultaneously, and it was everywhere.

古文：臣非敢有所贪觊，期于奉承宗庙，兴立社稷，是以久僣号位，十有余年，罪宜万死。
现代文：臣非敢有所贪婪觊觎，只望能奉承宗庙，兴立社稷，因而十多年来久僭汉帝号位，这是罪该万死。
English: If a vassal dares to be greedy and only hopes to be able to flatter the ancestral temple and establish a shrine, he will live for more than ten years as the emperor of the Han Dynasty. This is a crime worthy of death.

古文：陛下圣德高明，躬率众贤，海内宾服，惠及殊俗。
现代文：陛下圣德高明，亲自统率群贤，海内归服，恩惠及于远方。
English: His majesty is a man of high moral character, who personally leads the group of sages, who is obeyed at home, and whose benevolence extends far and wide.

古文：以胏附之故，赦臣芳罪，加以仁恩，封为代王，使备北藩。
现代文：以亲属之故，赦免我的罪过，加以仁恩，封我为代王，令我守备北部边疆。
English: For the sake of my relatives, forgive my sins, grant me mercy, appoint me as acting king, and let me guard the northern border.

古文：无以报塞重责，冀必欲和辑匈奴，不敢遗余力，负恩贷。
现代文：无以报答重责，希望必定能与匈奴和睦相处，以不辜负圣恩。
English: There is no way to repay the heavy responsibility, and I hope that I will be able to live in harmony with the Xiongnu to live up to the grace.

古文：谨奉天子玉玺，思望阙庭。 诏报芳朝明年正月。
现代文：谨奉献天子玉玺，望到阙庭朝拜。 诏报卢芳于明年正月进朝。
English: I would like to offer my respects to the heavenly child, Jade Dragonfly, and look forward to paying homage at the Summer Palace. It was announced that Lu Fang would enter the country in the first month of next year.

古文：其冬，芳入朝，南及昌平，有诏止，令更朝明岁。
现代文：这年冬天，卢芳入朝，南到昌平县，有诏书止其行，令他明年再来。
English: This winter, Lu Fang entered the North and went south to Changping County. There was an imperial edict stopping his journey, ordering him to come back next year.

古文：芳自道还，忧恐，乃复背叛，遂反，与闵堪、闵林相攻连月。
现代文：卢芳只得就地返回，忧郁恐惧，就再次背叛，与闵堪、闵林相攻连月。
English: Lu Fang had to return to the spot, melancholy and fearful, he betrayed again, and fought with Jikan and Yulin for months.

古文：匈妈遣数百骑迎芳及妻子出塞。
现代文：匈奴遣数百骑迎接卢芳及其妻子出塞。
English: The Xiongnu sent hundreds of horsemen to welcome Lu Fang and his wife.

古文：论曰：传称 盛德必百世祀 ，孔子曰 宽则得众 。夫能得众心，则百世不忘矣。
现代文：卢芳留在匈奴中十多年，病死。史官评论说：传称 有盛德者百代不绝 ，孔子说： 宽仁就得人心 ，能得人心就百世不会被遗忘啊。
English: Lu Fang remained among the Xiongnu for more than ten years and died of illness. The historian commented, "It is rumored that those with virtue will last for a hundred generations. Confucius said, "If you are kind, you will win people's hearts. If you can win people's hearts, you will not be forgotten for a hundred generations."

古文：观更始之际，刘氏之遗恩余烈，英雄岂能抗之哉！
现代文：我们看到在更始的时代，刘氏的遗恩余烈，英雄谁能抗拒得了呢！
English: We can see that in the new era, Mr. Liu's legacy is still strong, and who can resist the hero!

古文：然则知高祖、孝文之宽仁，结于人心深矣。
现代文：这样就可以知道高祖、孝文的宽仁结于人心是何等的深了。
English: In this way, we can know how deeply the benevolence of Gaozu and Xiaowen is rooted in people's hearts.

古文：周人之思邵公，爱其甘棠，又况其子孙哉！
现代文：周朝人思念邵公，因为邵公曾经听论于甘棠之下，对甘棠也不剪不伐，更何况是他的子孙呢？
English: The Zhou Dynasty people miss Shao Gong, because Shao Gong once listened to the teachings of the Amaryllis, and did not cut the Amaryllis, let alone his children and grandchildren?

古文：刘氏之再受命，盖以此乎！
现代文：刘氏的得以中兴，大概就是这个缘故啊。
English: This is probably the reason why Mr. Liu was able to succeed at ZTE.

古文：若数子者，岂有国之远图哉！
现代文：如王、刘、张、李、彭、卢之流，难道有为国者之深谋远虑吗？
English: Such as Wang, Liu, Zhang, Li, Peng, Lu and others, do they have any forethought for the people of the country?

古文：因时扰攘，苟瓷纵而已耳，然犹以附假宗室，能掘强岁月之间。观其智略，固无足以惮汉祖，发其英灵者也。
现代文：他们不过是乘时扰攘，胡乱妄为而已，但正是附假刘氏宗室之名，能够逞强时日，看他们的智略，本不足以使汉高祖生畏而奋发他的英灵啊！
English: They are just taking advantage of the time disturbance and acting in a reckless manner, but it is precisely the name of the fake Liu's ancestral family that can be bold and strong. Looking at their strategy, it is not enough to make Henkel ancestor fearful and arouse his heroic spirit!

