古文：缮性于俗学，以求复其初；滑欲于俗思，以求致其明；谓之蔽蒙之民。
现代文：在世俗的流习范围内修治性情，靠仁义礼智的儒俗学说来期求复归原始的真性；内心欲念早已被习俗所扰乱，还一心希望能达到明彻与通达；这就叫做蔽塞愚昧的人。
English: Those who cultivate their dispositions within the scope of worldly customs and seek to return to their original true natures by relying on the Confucian doctrines of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, and wisdom; those whose inner desires have long been disturbed by customs, and who still hope to achieve clarity and understanding; these are called people who block out ignorance.

古文：古之治道者，以恬养知。知生而无以知为也，谓之以知养恬。
现代文：古时候研究道术的人，总是以恬淡颐养智慧；心智生成却不用智巧行事，可称它为以心智调养恬静。
English: In ancient times, people who studied Daoism always cultivated wisdom with subtlety; however, they did not need to be clever to generate wisdom. It can be called cultivating tranquility with wisdom.

古文：知与恬交相养，而和理出其性。
现代文：心智和恬静互相颐养，因而谐和顺应之情从本性中表露而出。
English: Mind and tranquillity nourish each other, so that harmony and compliance emerge from nature.

古文：夫德，和也；道，理也。
现代文：德，就是和谐；道，就是顺应。
English: "Deh" means harmony; "Dao" means compliance.

古文：德无不容，仁也；道无不理，义也；义明而物亲，忠也；中纯实而反乎情，乐也；信行容体而顺乎文，礼也。
现代文：德无所不容，就是仁；道无所不顺，就是义。义理彰明因而物类相亲，就叫做忠；心中纯厚朴实而且返归本真，就叫做乐；诚信著显、容仪得体而且合于一定礼仪的节度和表征，就叫做礼。
English: Virtue that does not tolerate anything is benevolence; the way that does not tolerate anything is righteousness. The demonstration of righteousness and reason, and therefore the affinity of things, is called loyalty; the heart is pure and simple and returns to the original, is called joy; the sincerity is prominent, the appearance is decent and conforms to a certain degree and representation of etiquette, is called courtesy.

古文：礼乐偏行，则天下乱矣。
现代文：礼乐偏执一方而又多方有失，那么天下定然大乱了。
English: If one side is paranoid and many sides are at fault, then the world is sure to be in chaos.

古文：彼正而蒙己德，德则不冒。冒则物必失其性也。
现代文：各人自我端正而且敛藏自己的德行，德行也就不会冒犯他人，德行冒犯他人那么万物必将失却自己的本性。
English: If every man were to rectify himself and guard his virtue, virtue would not offend others, and if virtue offended others, all things would lose their nature.

古文：古之人，在混芒之中，与一世而得淡漠焉。
现代文：古时候的人，生活在混沌鸿蒙、淳风未散的境况中，跟整个外部世界混为一体而且人们彼此都恬淡无为、互不交往。
English: In ancient times, people lived in a chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic.

古文：当是时也，阴阳和静，鬼神不扰，四时得节，万物不伤，群生不夭，人虽有知，无所用之，此之谓至一。
现代文：正是这个时候，阴与阳谐和而又宁静，鬼神也不会干扰，四季的变化顺应时节，万物全不会受伤害，各种有生命的东西都能尽享天年，人们即使内存心智，也没处可用，这就叫做最为完满的浑一状态。
English: It is precisely at this time that yin and yang are harmonious and tranquil, ghosts and gods will not interfere, the changes of the four seasons conform to the season, all things will not be harmed, all kinds of living things can enjoy the heavenly year, even if people's memory and mind are nowhere to be used, this is called the most complete state of chaos.

古文：当是时也，莫之为而常自然。
现代文：正是这个时候，人们不知道需要去做什么而保持着天然。
English: This is when people don't know what to do and stay natural.

古文：逮德下衰，及燧人、伏羲始为天下，是故顺而不一。
现代文：等到后来道德衰退，到了燧人氏、伏羲氏统治天下，世事随顺却已不能浑然为一。
English: Later, when morals declined and the Hayato and Fuchu clans came to rule the world, it was no longer possible to follow the trend of the times.

古文：德又下衰，及神农、黄帝始为天下，是故安而不顺。
现代文：道德再度衰退，到了神农氏和黄帝统治天下，世道安定却已不能随顺民心与物情。
English: Morality once again declined, and by the time Shennong and the Yellow Emperor came to rule the world, the stability of the world was no longer able to keep up with the people's hearts and circumstances.

古文：德又下衰，及唐、虞始为天下，兴治化之流，浇淳散朴，离道以善，险德以行，然后去性而从于心。
现代文：道德再度衰退，到了唐尧、虞舜统治天下，开启了治理和教化的风气，淳厚质朴之风受到干扰与破坏，背离大道而为，寡有德行而行，这之后也就舍弃了本性而顺从于各自的私心。
English: Morality once again declined, and by the time Tang and Yu ruled the world, a culture of governance and enlightenment had begun. The pure and simple ethos was disturbed and destroyed. People deviated from the path and acted without virtue. After that, they also abandoned their nature and obeyed their own selfishness.

古文：心与心识知，而不足以定天下，然后附之以文，益之以博。
现代文：人们彼此间都相互知道和了解，也就不足以使天下得到安定，然后又贴附上浮华的文饰，增加了众多的俗学。
English: People know and understand each other, which is not enough to make the world stable, and then they attach flashy decorations and add a lot of vulgarities.

古文：文灭质，博溺心，然后民始惑乱，无以反其性情而复其初。
现代文：文饰浮华毁坏了质朴之风，广博的俗学掩没了纯真的心灵，然后人民才开始迷惑和纷乱，没有什么办法返归本真而回复原始的情状。
English: The pomp of literature has destroyed the rustic style, the profusion of vulgarity has covered up the pure soul, and then the people begin to be confused and disorderly, and there is no way to return to the original and restore the original situation.

古文：由是观之，世丧道矣，道丧世矣，世与道交相丧也。
现代文：由此观之，世间丧失了自然之道，自然之道丧失了人世。
English: Seen from this perspective, the world has lost the way of nature, and the way of nature has lost the human world.

古文：道之人何由兴乎世，世亦何由兴乎道哉！
现代文：社会和道交相丧失，有道之人怎么能立脚于人世间，人世间又怎么能从自然之道得到振兴呢？
English: With the loss of social and ethical contacts, how can people with ethics gain a foothold in the human world, and how can the human world be revitalized from the natural way?

古文：道无以兴乎世，世无以兴乎道，虽圣人不在山林之中，其德隐矣。隐故不自隐。
现代文：道没有办法在人世间兴起，人世间没有办法让道得以振兴，即使圣人不生活在少有人烟的山林之中，他的德行也必将隐没而不为人知。
English: There is no way for the Tao to arise in the human world, and there is no way for the Tao to be revitalized in the human world. Even if a sage does not live in a sparsely populated mountain forest, his virtue will surely disappear without being known.

古文：古之所谓隐士者，非伏其身而弗见也，非闭其言而不出也，非藏其知而不发也，时命大谬也。
现代文：谈到隐没于世，时逢昏暗不必韬光便已自隐。古时候的所谓隐士，并不是为了隐伏身形而不愿显现于世，并不是为了缄默不言而不愿吐露真情，也不是为了深藏才智而不愿有所发挥，是因为时遇和命运乖妄、背谬啊。
English: In ancient times, the so-called hermits were not reluctant to appear in the world because of their hidden form, they were not reluctant to reveal their true feelings because of their silence, and they were not reluctant to develop their talents because of their hidden talents, but because of the vagaries of time and fate.

古文：当时命而大行乎天下，则反一无迹；不当时命而大穷乎天下，则深根宁极而待：此存身之道也。
现代文：当时遇和命运顺应自然而通行于天下，就会返归浑沌纯一之境而不显露踪迹。当时遇不顺、命运乖违而穷困于天下，就固守根本、保有宁寂至极之性而静心等待；这就是保存自身的方法。
English: At that time, if fortune and fate follow the course of nature and pass through the world, it will return to the state of chaos and purity without leaving a trace. At that time, if things do not go well, if fate goes against it and it is impoverished in the world, it will adhere to the fundamental, maintain tranquility to the extreme and wait attentively; this is the way to preserve oneself.

古文：古之存身者，不以辩饰知，不以知穷天下，不以知穷德，危然处其所而反其性已，又何为哉！
现代文：古时候保全自身的人，不用诡辩来巧饰智慧，不用智巧使天下人困窘，不用心智使德行受到困扰，秉正地处在自己的位置和回发自己的本性，又何须一定得去做些什么呢！
English: In ancient times, those who preserved themselves did not need sophistry to embellish their wisdom, did not need cleverness to embarrass the people of the world, did not need the mind to disturb their virtue, and were uprightly in their own position and reflected their own nature. Why do they have to do anything?

古文：道固不小行，德固不小识。
现代文：大道广荡本不是小有所成的人能够遵循，大德周遍万物本不是小有所知的人能够鉴识。
English: The broad road is not for the small-minded to follow, the great virtue is not for the small-minded to know.

古文：小识伤德，小行伤道。
现代文：小有所知会伤害德行，小有所成会伤害大道。
English: A little knowledge injures virtue, but a little accomplishment injures the highway.

古文：故曰：正己而已矣。
现代文：所以说，端正自己也就可以了。
English: Therefore, it's okay to straighten it yourself.

古文：乐全之谓得志。
现代文：快意地保持本真就可称作是心意自得而自适。
English: To be cheerfully honest is to be self-satisfied.

古文：古之所谓得志者，非轩冕之谓也，谓其无以益其乐而已矣。
现代文：古时候所说的自得自适的人，不是说得了高官厚禄，说的是出自本然的快意而没有必要再添加什么罢了。
English: The self-satisfied person spoken of in ancient times did not mean that he or she had achieved high rank and rich reward, but that he or she was motivated by an innate desire and there was no need to add anything else.

古文：今之所谓得志者，轩冕之谓也。
现代文：现在人们所说的快意自适，是指高官厚禄地位显赫。
English: What people now call "self-indulgence" refers to a high-ranking official with a prominent position.

古文：轩冕在身，非性命也，物之傥来，寄者也。
现代文：荣华富贵在身，并不出自本然，犹如外物偶然到来，是临时寄托的东西。
English: Glory and wealth are inherent in the body, and do not come from nature, as if they came from outside by chance. They are things that are temporarily deposited.

古文：寄之，其来不可圉，其去不可止。
现代文：外物寄托，它们到来不必加以阻挡，它们离去也不必加以劝止。
English: They do not need to be stopped from coming, and they do not need to be dissuaded from leaving.

古文：故不为轩冕肆志，不为穷约趋俗，其乐彼与此同，故无忧而已矣！
现代文：所以不可为了富贵荣华而恣意放纵，不可因为穷困贫乏而趋附流俗，身处富贵荣华与穷困贫乏，其间的快意相同，因而没有忧愁罢了。
English: Therefore, one should not indulge for the sake of wealth and glory, and one should not be attached to the vulgarity because of poverty and poverty. In wealth and glory and in poverty and poverty, the pleasure is the same, so there is no sorrow.

古文：今寄去则不乐。由是观之，虽乐，未尝不荒也。
现代文：如今寄托之物离去便觉不能快意，由此观之，即使真正有过快意也未尝不是迷乱了真性。
English: Now, when something entrusted to us is taken away, we can't feel happy, and from this we can see that even if we really do feel happy, it doesn't necessarily mean that we have lost our true nature.

古文：故曰：丧己于物，失性于俗者，谓之倒置之民。
现代文：所以说，由于外物而丧失自身，由于流俗而失却本性，就叫做颠倒了本末的人。
English: Therefore, a person who loses himself due to external things and loses his true nature due to customs is called a person who has turned upside down.

