古文：卢质，字子徵，河南人也。
现代文：卢质，字子征，河南人。
English: Lu quality, Zizi Zheng, Henan people.

古文：曾祖偲，唐太原府祁县尉，累赠右仆射。
现代文：曾祖卢偲，曾任唐太原府祁县县尉，追赠为右仆射。
English: He was the ancestor of Lu Xun, and once served as the County Lieutenant of Jixian County, Taiyuan Province, and was posthumously awarded the title of Right Footman.

古文：祖衍，唐刑部侍郎、太子宾客，累赠太保。
现代文：祖父卢衍，唐刑部侍郎、太子宾客，追赠太保。
English: His grandfather Lu Yan, a waiter of the Tang Criminal Investigation Department and a guest of the crown prince, was posthumously awarded the title of grand tutor.

古文：父望，唐尚书司勋郎中，累赠太子少傅。
现代文：父亲卢望，任唐尚书司勋郎中，追赠太子少傅。
English: His father, Lu Wang, was a member of the Tang Dynasty Shang Shushi Honorable Younger Brother, posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Master.

古文：质幼聪慧，善属文。
现代文：卢质小时聪慧过人，善于赋诗做文。
English: Lu Qizhong was extremely intelligent and good at writing poems.

古文：年十六，陕帅王重盈奏授芮城令，能以色养。
现代文：十六岁时，陕州主帅王重盈奏请任命卢质为芮城县令，又任同州澄城县令。
English: At the age of sixteen, the coach of Shaanxi Province, Wang Chungying, requested that Lu Qian be appointed as the county magistrate of Lucheng County, and he was also appointed as the county magistrate of Chengcheng County in the same province.

古文：秩满改秘书郎，丁母忧，归河南故里。
现代文：任期满后改任秘书郎，奔母丧，返回河南故里。
English: After his term of office expired, he was reassigned to the post of secretary, went to his mother's funeral, and returned to his hometown in Henan Province.

古文：天祐三年，北游太原，时李袭吉在武皇幕府，以女妻之。
现代文：天三年，北游太原，当时李袭吉在后唐武皇幕府，把女儿嫁给了他。
English: In the third year of heaven, Beiyou Taiyuan, when Li Weiji was in the post-Tang Emperor Shogunate, married his daughter to him.

古文：武皇怜其才，承制授检校兵部郎中，充河东节度掌书记，赐绯鱼袋。
现代文：武皇爱惜他的才华，诏任他为检校兵部郎中，兼河东节度掌书记，赏赐绯鱼袋。
English: Emperor Wu cherished his talent, and appointed him as a junior member of the inspection of the school's military department, as well as the secretary of the head of the Hedong Festival, and rewarded him with a carp bag.

古文：武皇厌代，其弟克宁握兵柄，有嗣袭之望，质与张承业等密谋，同立庄宗为嗣，有翊赞之功。
现代文：武皇去世，他的弟弟李克宁掌握兵权，有继承帝位的欲望，卢质与张承业等密谋，共同拥立庄宗李存勖为继承人，因而有辅佐皇上的功劳。
English: Emperor Wu died, his brother Li Kening seized military power and had a desire to inherit the imperial throne. Lu Qian conspired with Zhang Chengye and others to jointly establish Zhuangzong Li Cunxu as the heir, and thus had the merit of assisting the emperor.

古文：及庄宗四征，质皆从行。
现代文：当庄宗四面征伐时，卢质都亲随出征。
English: When Zhuangzong went on a four-pronged campaign, Lu Qian went with him.

古文：十六年，转节度判官、检校礼部尚书。
现代文：天十六年，改任节度判官、检校礼部尚书。
English: In the 16th year of heaven, he was reappointed as the judge of the festival and the proctor of the school inspection.

古文：十九年，庄宗将即帝位，命为大礼使，累加至银青光禄大夫、检校右仆射。
现代文：十九年，庄宗将即帝位，任他为大礼使，历迁至银青光禄大夫、检校右仆射。
English: In the 19th year, Zhuangzong was enthroned as emperor, and he was appointed as the grand envoy, and he was transferred to the Silver Qingguanglu doctor, and the inspection of the school to the right.

古文：二十年，授行台礼部尚书。
现代文：二十年，拜为行台礼部尚书。
English: For the past 20 years, he has been a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：庄宗既登极，欲相之，质性疏逸，不喜居高位，固辞获免。
现代文：庄宗称帝后，想任他为宰相，卢质性情疏放飘逸，不爱居于高位，坚决推辞，得免。
English: Zhuangzong called him empress, wanted to make him prime minister, Lu's temperament was loose and flowing, did not like to live in a high position, resolutely refused, and was spared.

古文：寻以本官兼太原尹，充北京留守事，未赴任，改户部尚书、知制诰，充翰林学士承旨。
现代文：不久，以本官兼任太原尹，充北京留守事，未赴任，又改任户部尚书、知制诰，充翰林学士承旨。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed as Taiyuan Yin, acting as Beijing's representative, and before taking office, he was also appointed as the head of the Household Department of Shangshu, Zhisheng Yao, and the head of the Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：同光元年冬，从平大梁，权判租庸事，逾月随驾都洛，旋受诏权知汴州军府事。
现代文：同光元年冬天，跟随庄宗平定大梁，临时主管租庸事务，一个多月后随庄宗建都洛阳，旋即诏令他临时主管汴州军府事务。
English: In the winter of the same year, he followed Zhuangzong in the pacification of Liang and was temporarily in charge of the rent-yong affairs. More than a month later, he followed Zhuangzong in the construction of Luoyang, and immediately ordered him to be temporarily in charge of the affairs of the Zhangzhou Military Government.

古文：时孔谦握利权，志在聚敛，累移文于汴，配民放丝，质坚论之，事虽不行，时论赏之。
现代文：当时孔谦掌握大权，志在聚敛，多次发文到汴州，按民户征收丝绢，卢质坚辞相争，事情虽然没有办成，但当时舆论非常赞赏他。
English: At that time, Kong Qian seized power, aspired to accumulate wealth, repeatedly sent letters to Zhangzhou, levied silk and silk products according to households, and made resolute speeches. Although the matter was not accomplished, the public opinion at that time highly appreciated him.

古文：俄又改金紫光禄大夫、兵部尚书、知制诰、翰林学士承旨，仍赐论思匡佐功臣。
现代文：不久又改任金紫光禄大夫、兵部尚书、知制诰、翰林学士承旨，又赐予论思匡佐功臣名号。
English: Soon, he was also appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the military commander of Shangshu, the military commander of Zhisheng, and the scholar of Hanlin, and he was also given the title of the scholar of the thinker of Sasa.

古文：会覆试进士，质以 后从谏则圣 为赋题，以 尧、舜、禹、汤倾心求过 为韵，旧例赋韵四平四侧，质所出韵乃五平三侧，由是大为识者所诮。
现代文：碰上复试进士，卢质以 后从谏则圣 为文题，以 尧、舜、禹、汤、倾、心、求、过 八字为韵，按旧有赋例用韵当为四平四仄，卢质所出韵字却五平三仄，因此大为有识之士所讥笑。
English: When it came to the candidates for the multiple-choice examination, after Lu Qi, the theme of the text was changed from,, 禹,汤,倾,心,求,過 to eight characters. According to the old example, the rhyme was supposed to be 四平四仄, but the rhyme from Lu Qi was 五平三仄. Therefore, it was ridiculed by people with insight.

古文：天成元年，制授特进、检校司空、同州节度使。
现代文：天成元年，诏任为特进、检校司空、同州节度使。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he was appointed as a special envoy, a school inspection officer, and a delegate to the state festival.

古文：时宰相冯道以诗饯别，其警句云： 视草北来唐学士，拥旄西去汉将军。 
现代文：当时宰相冯道赋诗饯别，诗中有警句说： 视草北来唐学士，拥旄西去汉将军。 
English: At that time, the Prime Minister, Feng Daofu, wrote a poem to bid farewell. In the poem, there is an epigram saying: "Regard the grass as the north to the Tang scholar, and support the west to the Han general."

古文：儒者荣之。
现代文：儒学之士都认为这是卢质的荣耀。
English: Confucian scholars all agree that this is the glory of Lu Qi.

古文：明年，改赐耀忠匡定保节功臣，就加检校司徒。
现代文：第二年，改赐耀忠匡定保节功臣，加封检校司徒。
English: In the second year, Yao Zhongzheng was awarded the title of Hero of the Festival, and he was also awarded the title of Inspector of Schools.

古文：三年，入拜兵部尚书，判太仆卿事。
现代文：三年，入朝任兵部尚书，主管太仆卿事务。
English: Three years later, he entered the imperial court as Hyobu Shosho and was in charge of the affairs of the Taihoku-kyo.

古文：四年，进封开国公。
现代文：四年，进封开国公。
English: Four years later, he became the founding prince of Jinbo.

古文：长兴二年，授检校太保、河阳节度使，未几，移镇沧州，入为右仆射。
现代文：长兴二年，授检校太保、河阳节度使，不久，移镇沧州，又入朝任右仆射。
English: In the second year of Changxing, he was awarded the title of Taibo of the inspection school and Heyang Festival envoy. Soon, he moved to Cangzhou and entered the court as the right-hand man.

古文：及秦王得罪，奉诏权知河南府事。
现代文：当秦王李从荣获罪时，他奉诏临时主管河南府事务。
English: When Qin King Li Cong Rong was convicted, he was appointed as the temporary head of Henan affairs.

古文：应顺初，迁检校太傅，正拜河南尹，后改太子少师。
现代文：应顺初年，升为检校太傅，正式任河南尹，后改任太子少师。
English: According to the first year, he was promoted to the school inspector, officially serving as Henan Yin, and later changed to the prince's junior teacher.

古文：清泰末，复为右仆射。
现代文：清泰末年，任右仆射。
English: At the end of the Qing dynasty, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Zhou.

古文：高祖登极，质以微恙分司洛宅。
现代文：晋高祖登上帝位，卢质因患小病而分管洛阳里宅。
English: Jin Gao's ancestor ascended to the throne, and Lu Qing, suffering from a minor illness, was in charge of Luoyang's residence.

古文：少帝嗣位，拜太子太保。
现代文：少帝即位，任太子太保。
English: The young emperor ascended the throne, and the crown prince was appointed as the guardian of the throne.

古文：崔棁，字子文，博陵安平人。
现代文：天福七年秋天，在洛阳去世，时年七十六岁。追赠太子太师，谥号文忠。崔棁，字子文，博陵安平人。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Tianfu, he died in Luoyang, at the age of seventy-six. He was posthumously given the title of Prince and Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Wenzhong. He was also known as Cui Wei, Zizi Wen, and Boling Anping.

古文：累世冠冕。
现代文：历代为官宦世家。
English: It has been a family of government officials for generations.

古文：曾祖元受，举进士，直史馆。
现代文：曾祖崔元受，进士及第，任职史馆。
English: His great-grandfather, Cui Yuanju, was promoted to the first and second rank, and served in the History Museum.

古文：祖铢，安、濮二州刺史。
现代文：祖父崔铢，曾任安、濮二州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Cui Yao, had served as the governor of An and Shandong Provinces.

古文：父涿，刑部郎中。
现代文：父亲崔涿，做过刑部郎中。
English: His father, Cui Yao, was a middle-ranking official in the Ministry of Justice.

古文：棁少好学，梁贞明三年，举进士甲科，为开封尹王瓚从事。
现代文：崔木兑小时就爱好学习，后梁贞明三年，中进士甲科，任开封尹王瓒的从事。
English: Cui Muxi was fond of studying from an early age, while Liang Zhenming was a junior high school student for three years, and was engaged in the work of Yin Wangyao.

古文：棁性至孝，父涿有疾，谓亲友曰： 死生有命，无医为也。 
现代文：崔木兑生性特别孝顺，父亲崔涿有病时，对亲友说： 死生有命，不要请医生了。 
English: Cui Mudei was born with a particularly filial nature. When his father Cui Yao was ill, he said to his relatives and friends: "Life and death are intertwined. Don't ask for a doctor."

古文：棁侍之衣不解带，有宾至，必拜泣告于门外，请方便劝其进药，涿终莫之从。
现代文：崔木兑服侍父亲衣带不解，有宾客到来，一定在门外哭拜诉告，请求在方便时劝他父亲进药，崔涿最后还是不听从劝说。
English: Cui Mu couldn't figure out how to serve his father. When guests arrived, he would cry and appeal outside the door, requesting that his father be advised to take medicine at a convenient time. In the end, Cui Yao still didn't listen to the persuasion.

古文：及丁忧，哀毁过制。
现代文：父亲去世后，哀毁过度。
English: After his father's death, he grieved excessively.

古文：明宗朝，授监察御史，不应命，逾年诏再下，乃就列焉。累迁都官郎中、翰林学士。
现代文：明宗朝，任他为监察御史，但没应召，一年后诏令再次下达，才就任监察御史，连迁至都官郎中、翰林学士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingzong, he was appointed inspector of imperial history, but he did not respond to the call. A year later, the imperial edict was issued again, and he was appointed inspector of imperial history, and he was successively moved to the capital official's junior high school and Hanlin's bachelor high school.

古文：天福初，以户部侍郎为学士承旨。
现代文：天福初年，以户部侍郎身分任学士承旨。
English: In the first year of Tenfuku, he was appointed as a baccalaureate successor with the status of a household servant.

古文：尝草制，为宰相桑维翰所改，棁以唐故事，学士草制有所改者，当罢职，乃引经据争，维翰不能诘，命权知二年贡举。
现代文：曾草创制诰，被宰相桑维翰改动，依照唐朝旧制，学士草创制诰有所改动的，应当罢免学士官职，崔木兑便引旧制据理力争，桑维翰不能反驳，令他暂时主持天福二年的贡举。
English: In accordance with the old system of the Tang Dynasty, if there is any change in the bachelor's degree, it should be removed from the bachelor's official post. Cui Mu Dui argued that the old system should be applied, and San Weihan could not refute it, so he temporarily presided over the tribute of Tianfu for two years.

古文：时有进士孔英者，素有丑行，为当时所恶，棁受命往见维翰，维翰语素简，谓棁曰： 孔英来矣。 
现代文：当时有个叫孔英的进士，一向有丑恶的行为，被当时人所厌恶。崔木兑受命主持贡举时前往拜见桑维翰，桑维翰言语一向简短，对崔木兑说： 孔英来了。 
English: At that time, there was a Jin warrior named Kong Ying, who had always had ugly behavior and was hated by the people at that time. When Cui Mu Di was ordered to preside over the tribute, he went to visit San Wei Han. San Wei Han always spoke briefly and said to Cui Mu Di: Kong Ying is coming.

古文：棁不谕其意，以谓维翰以孔英为言，乃考英及第，物议大以为非，遂罢学士，拜尚书左丞，迁太常卿。
现代文：崔木兑不明白他的意思，认为桑维翰代孔英说话，便录取孔英及第，舆论都认为崔木兑不对，于是罢免他学士衔，任尚书左丞，又迁任太常卿。
English: Cui Mudei did not understand his meaning, and thought that San Weihan was speaking on behalf of Kong Ying, so he admitted Kong Ying to the first grade. Public opinion thought that Cui Mudei was wrong, so he was dismissed from his bachelor's degree, appointed as Shang Shuzhong, and transferred to the position of Tai Changqing.

古文：后以风痹改太子宾客，分司西京。卒年六十八。
现代文：后因手足麻木改任太子宾客，又派到西京，去世时六十八岁。
English: Later, due to numbness in his hands and feet, he was reassigned as a guest of the crown prince and sent to West Beijing. He was 68 years old at the time of his death.

古文：棁平生所著文章、碑诔、制诏甚多，人有借本传写者，则曰： 有前贤，有来者，奚用此为！ 
现代文：崔木兑平时所著文章、碑诔、制诰很多，有人借他的底本传抄学习，他则说： 前有古贤，后有来俊，哪用得着这样！ 
English: There are many articles, inscriptions, and rules written by Cui Muxi in ordinary times. Some people use his source to copy and study. He said: Before there was Gu Xian, there was Lai Jun, what is the use of this!

古文：凡受托而作者，必亲札致之，即焚其藁，惧泄人之假手也。
现代文：大凡受人之托而撰写的文章，一定亲自把文章送到，之后便用稻草烧掉原稿，担心为人抄袭。
English: If you are commissioned to write an article, you must personally deliver the article, and then burn the original manuscript with straw, fearing plagiarism.

古文：棁笑不至矧，怒不至詈，接新进后生，未尝无诲焉。
现代文：崔木兑笑语不至于讥刺，动怒不至于谩骂，与新进后生交往，没有不加以教诲的。
English: Cui Mu did not laugh at the mockery, did not get angry and did not abuse, and did not interact with the new students without teaching them.

古文：群居公会端坐寡言，尝云非止致人爱憎，且或干人祖祢之讳。
现代文：无论与众人相处，还是与公众集会，都正坐少言，曾说多言不仅会招致别人的憎恶，还会冲犯他人祖先的名讳。
English: Whether you are with a group of people or at a public meeting, you should be careful not to talk too much. Talking too much will not only arouse the hatred of others, but also offend the reputation of others' ancestors.

古文：指命仆役，亦用礼节，盛暑祁寒，不使冒犯。
现代文：平时指使仆从，都有礼节，盛暑严寒，都不违反礼仪。
English: In ordinary times, all servants have etiquette, hot and cold, do not violate etiquette.

古文：尝自话于知友云： 某少时，梦二人前引行路，一人计地里，曰： 一舍矣，可以止。 
现代文：曾亲自对知心朋友说 ：我小时候，梦见二人在我前面带路，一个人计算里程，说： 已走三十里，可以停下来。 
English: I once said to a close friend: When I was a child, I dreamed that two people were leading the way in front of me, and one person was calculating the mileage and said: I have walked thirty miles, I can stop.

古文：一人曰： 此君当更进三十有八里。 
现代文：另一个人说 ：这个人应当再走三十八里。 
English: Another said: This man should walk another thirty-eight miles.

古文：复行如所言，二人皆止之，俄而惊觉。 
现代文：于是又走三十八里，二人才都让他停下来，一会儿惊醒过来。 
English: So he walked another thirty-eight miles, and they both had to ask him to stop and wake up for a moment.

古文：棁常识是梦，以为定命之限，故六十七请退，明年果终焉。
现代文：崔木兑常常记得这个梦，认为是命中注定的极限，所以六十七岁请求退职，第二年果然寿终。
English: Cui Mudei often remembered this dream and considered it to be the limit of his destiny. Therefore, at the age of sixty-seven, he asked to retire, and his life came to an end the following year.

