古文：王简易樊光李彦光侯温沈申法曹吏刘存袁州录事刘璠吴景
现代文：王简易樊光李彦光侯温沈申法曹吏刘存袁州录事刘璠吴景
English: Wang Jianyi, Liguang, Li Yanguang, Hou Wen, Shen Shen, Liu Cun, Liu Cun, Liu Cun, Liu Cun, Wu Jing,

古文：高安村小儿陈勋钟遵韦处士张进郝溥裴垣苏铎赵安
现代文：高安村小儿陈勋钟遵韦处士张进郝溥裴垣苏铎赵安
English: Gao'an village child Chen Xunzhong Zunwei clerk Zhang Jinqi Peiguan Suqi Zhao'an

古文：王简易
现代文：王简易
English: Wang Jianyi

古文：唐洪州司马王简易者，常暴得疾，腹中生物如块大，随气上下，攻击脏腑，伏枕余月。
现代文：唐朝洪州司马王简易，曾得急病，腹中有个块状的东西很大，随着呼吸上下，敲击着内脏。在床上躺了一个多月。
English: Sima Wang Jianyi of Hongzhou, Tang Dynasty, had a sudden illness. There was a large lump in his abdomen that moved up and down as he breathed, beating his internal organs. He lay in bed for more than a month.

古文：一夕，其块逆上筑心，沈然长往，数刻方寤，谓所亲曰： 初梦见一鬼使，自称丁郢，手执符牒云： 奉城隍神命，来追王简易。 
现代文：一天晚上，那个块状物向上捣心，一下子昏迷过去，过了几刻钟王简易才明白过来，就对自己的妻子说：当初我梦见一个鬼使，自称叫丁郢。他手里拿着冥府的公文说： 我奉城隍神的命令来追王简易。 
English: One night, that lump of matter tried to make its way upwards and suddenly fell into a coma. It took several hours for Wang Jianyi to come to his senses, and he said to his wife: At first, I dreamed of a demon messenger who called himself Ding Jian. He held the official document of the Hades in his hand and said: I came to chase Wang Jianyi at the command of the God of the City of Thorns.

古文：某即随使者行，可十余里，方到城隍庙。
现代文：我就随着使者走，大约走了十多里，才到城隍庙。
English: I followed the messenger and walked more than ten miles to get to the Chenghuang Temple.

古文：门前人相谓曰： 王君在世，颇闻修善，未合身亡，何得遽至此耶？ 
现代文：庙门前边的人看看我说： 王君在人世做了很多好事，不应该身亡，为什么竟到这地方来了呢？ 
English: The people in front of the temple gate looked at me and said, "Wang Junlu did a lot of good things in his life, he shouldn't have died, why did he come to this place?

古文：寻得见城隍神，告之曰： 某未合殂落，且乞放归。 
现代文：不一会儿见到城隍神，我告诉他说： 我还不应该死。 并且乞求放我回来。
English: After a while, I saw the god of the castle, and I told him, "I shouldn't have died yet," and begged him to let me come back.

古文：城隍神命左右将簿书来，检毕，谓简易曰： 犹合得五年活，且放去。  
现代文：城隍神命左右的人拿生死簿书来，检看完毕，对简易说： 还应该活五年，暂且放回去。 
English: The people around the City God's command took the book of life and death, and after examining it, said to the simple man: "You should still live for five years. Put it back for the time being."

古文：至五年，腹内物又上筑心，逡巡复醒云： 适到冥司，被小奴所讼，辞气不可解。 
现代文：到了五年以后，腹内的块状物又上去捣心，徘徊一会儿王简易醒了，说： 刚才到冥府，被小奴告了，看言词和脸色是不能解开仇冤了。 
English: After five years had passed, the lump in the abdomen came up again and disturbed Wang Jianyi's mind. After wandering for a while, Wang Jianyi woke up and said, "Just now I went to the Hades and was denounced by a minor slave. Looking at the words and the countenance, I can no longer resolve the enmity.

古文：其妻问小奴何人也，简易曰： 某旧使僮仆，年在妙龄，偶因约束，遂致毙。今腹中块物，乃小奴为祟也。
现代文：简易的妻子问小奴是什么人。简易说： 我过去用的僮仆，正青少年时期，偶尔因为我管教他，就导致死亡，现在我腹中的块状东西，就是小奴作的鬼。
English: The simple wife asked who the little slave was, and the simple one said, "I used to have a slave boy when I was a teenager, and sometimes I disciplined him to death, and now the lump in my stomach is the ghost of the little slave boy.

古文：适见前任吉州牧钟初，荷大铁枷，着黄布衫，手足械系。冥司勘非理杀人事，款问甚急。 
现代文：刚才又看见前任州牧钟初，戴着大铁枷，穿着黄布衫，手脚到戴着刑具，冥司正在审问他无礼杀人的事，每个条款都追问得急迫。 
English: Just now, I saw his predecessor, Zhu Mu Zhongchu, wearing a large iron shackle, a yellow shirt, and torture instruments on his hands and feet. He was being interrogated by Meiji about the disrespectful killing of a person, and every clause was being questioned urgently.

古文：妻遂诘云： 小奴庸下，何敢如是？ 
现代文：妻子又追问他说； 小奴是个庸下的人，怎么敢这样？ 
English: His wife asked him again, "How dare you do this, the little slave is a commoner."

古文：简易曰： 世间即有贵贱，冥司一般也。 
现代文：简易说： 人世间是分贵贱的，冥府里全都一样。 
English: To put it simply: In the human world there is a distinction between the high and the low, but in the underworld everything is the same.

古文：妻又问阴间何罪最重，简易曰： 莫若杀人。 
现代文：妻子又问阴间什么罪最重。简易说： 没有比杀人更重的了。 
English: The wife also asked the underworld what the most serious sin was, saying simply: "There is nothing more serious than murder."

古文：言讫而率。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：樊光
现代文：樊光
English: 光

古文：交趾郡厢虞侯樊光者，在廨宇视事，亭午间，风雷忽作，光及男并所养一黄犬并震死。
现代文：交趾郡厢虞侯樊光正在官署办公。中午时分，忽然间风雷大作，樊光和他的儿子还有他们豢养的一只黄狗都被震死。
English: At noon, there was a sudden thunder and lightning storm, and Juguang, his son, and a yellow dog they were raising were all killed.

古文：其妻于霆击之际，欻见一道士，撮置其身于别所，遂得免。
现代文：樊妻在雷击的时候忽然看见一个道士拎着她的身体把她放到别的屋里，由是免去一死。
English: When the lightning struck, his wife suddenly saw a Taoist monk carry her body and put her in another room, thus avoiding death.

古文：人问其故，妻云： 尝有二百姓相论讼，同系牢狱，无理者讷赂于光，光即出之，有理者大被栲掠，抑令款伏。
现代文：有人问是什么原因，樊光的妻子说： 曾经有两个百姓来打官司，他就把他们一同关在牢里。后来无理的人贿赂了樊光，樊光就使他出了狱；有理的人被严刑拷打，强令他屈服。
English: When asked why, Gongguang's wife said: "Once there were two people who came to sue, and he put them in jail together. Later, the unreasonable person bribed Gongguang, and Gongguang let him out of jail; the reasonable person was severely tortured and forced to submit.

古文：所送饮食。
现代文：所送给他的饮食，都被樊光夺去给他儿子和狗吃了。
English: All the food that was sent to him was taken away by Gongguang and given to his son and dog.

古文：光悉夺与男并犬食之，其囚饥饿将死间，于狱内被发诉天，不数日，光等有此报。
现代文：那个被囚禁的百姓饥饿将死的时候，在狱内披散着头发告到天帝。 不几天，樊光等有这种报应。
English: When the imprisoned people were starving to death, they spread their hair in the prison and reported to the heavenly emperor. Within a few days, there was such a retribution for Gongguang.

古文：李彦光
现代文：李彦光
English: Li Yanguang

古文：李彦光为秦内外都指挥使，主帅中书令李崇委任之，专其生杀，虐酷黩货，遭枉害者甚众。
现代文：李彦光当了秦内外都指挥使，是主帅中书令李崇委任他的。李彦光专事生杀，酷毒暴虐，而贪污贿赂，遭到他屈害的人很多。
English: When Li Yanguang became the commander of both the Qin and the outside world, he was appointed by the coach Li Chong. Li Yanguang specialized in life and death, brutality and violence, and corruption and bribery, and many people were harmed by him.

古文：部将樊某者，有骡一头，甚骏。
现代文：他的部将有个姓樊的，有一匹很骏的骡子，彦光就派人传达他想要那匹骡子的意思。
English: His subordinate had a mule by the name of Yan, and a very lame mule, so Hikaru sent someone to convey his intention to get that mule.

古文：彦光使人达意求之，樊吝之不与，因而蓄憾，以他事构而囚之。
现代文：樊很吝惜不给，因此积蓄了怨恨。李彦光凭别的事陷害囚禁了樊某。
English: Zou was very reluctant to give it, so he accumulated resentment. Li Yanguang imprisoned Zou with other things.

古文：伪通辞款，承主帅醉而呈之，帅不复详察，光即矫命斩之。
现代文：伪造了一些罪状，趁主帅酒醉时呈上，主帅也没有再详细调查。李彦光就假托主帅的命令斩樊。
English: He forged some criminal charges and took advantage of the fact that the head coach was drunk to present them, and the head coach did not investigate in detail. Li Yanguang was executed on the orders of the head coach.

古文：樊临刑曰： 死若无知则已，死若有知，当刻日而报。 
现代文：樊临刑时说： 死了如果没有感觉则算罢了，死了如果还有感觉，我就该马上报复。 
English: When he was about to be sentenced, he said, "If I die and have no feelings, it's all right. If I die and still have feelings, I should take revenge right away."

古文：及死未浃旬，而彦光染疾，樊则形见，昼夜不去。或来自屋上，或出自墙壁间，持杖而前，亲行鞭棰，左右长幼皆散走。
现代文：等他死还未到十多天，李彦光就得病了，樊就现了形，昼夜都不离去，或者从屋上来，或者从墙壁里来，拿着棍子上前，亲自鞭打。左右的人不管长幼都四散奔逃，这时就听到判决罪行的声音，不能忍受。
English: More than ten days before his death, Li Yanguang fell ill, and the scourge appeared. Day and night, he would not leave, either from the roof or from inside the walls, he would come forward with a stick and whip himself. The people around him, whether old or young, scattered and fled. At this time, he heard the voice of the judgment of the crime, and could not bear it.

古文：于是便闻决罪之声，不可胜忍，唯称死罪，如是月余方卒。
现代文：李彦光只是称死罪。
English: Li Yanguang only pleaded guilty to the death penalty.

古文：自尔持权者颇以为戒。
现代文：这样过了一个多月才死。从这以后持权的人很多都以这件事作为警戒。
English: It took more than a month for him to die. Since then, many people with power have used this incident as a warning.

古文：侯温
现代文：侯温
English: Hou Wen

古文：梁朝与河北相持之时，有偏将侯温者，军中号为骁勇。
现代文：梁朝与河北互相对峙的时候，有一个偏将叫侯温，军中号称饶勇将军。
English: When the Liang Dynasty and Hebei Province confronted each other, there was a partial general named Hou Wen, known as General Rao Yong in the army.

古文：贺瑰为统率，专制忌前，以事害之。
现代文：当时贺瑰是统帅，他专断独行而又嫉妒贤能，找事害了侯温。
English: At that time, He Gui was the commander-in-chief. He acted arbitrarily and was jealous of Xian Neng, and sought to harm Hou Wen.

古文：其后瑰寝疾，弥留之际，左右只闻公呼侯九者数日，颇有祈祷之词，深自克责。有侍者见一丈夫自壁间出，瑰环于地，侍者惊呼，左右俱至，瑰已死矣。
现代文：以后贺瑰得病卧床，在要死的时候，他的侍从们只听到他一连几天呼叫侯九，有很多祈祷请求的话，狠狠地克责自己，有一个侍者见到一个男人从墙里出来，把贺瑰拽到地上，侍者惊呼，左右的侍从们都来看，但贺瑰已死了。
English: Later, He Jiu was sick in bed, and when he was about to die, his attendants only heard him call Hou Jiu for several days in a row. There were many prayers and requests, and he severely rebuked himself. A waiter saw a man come out of the wall and pull He Jiu to the ground. The waiter exclaimed, and the attendants on both sides came to see, but He Jiu was dead.

古文：昔汉窦婴、灌夫为武安侯田蚡所构而死，及蚡疾，巫者视鬼，见窦灌夹而笞之，蚡竟卒，事相类耳。
现代文：当年汉朝的窦婴、灌夫都被武安侯田鼢陷害而死，等到鼢得了病，巫师见了鬼，见窦、灌二人夹着打他。鼢竟被打死。事情与此相类似。
English: In the Han Dynasty of that year, both Dou Ying and Guan Fu were framed and killed by Wu'an Hou Tianqi. When Guo became ill, the sorcerer saw a ghost, and Guo and Guan both beat him. Guo was actually beaten to death. The story is similar.

古文：沈申
现代文：沈申
English: Shen Sheng

古文：湖南帅马希声，在位多纵率。
现代文：湖南帅马希声在位多放纵轻率。
English: Hunan ruler Ma Xisheng was more indulgent and imprudent during his reign.

古文：有贾客沈申者，常来往番禺间，广主优待之。令如北中求玉带，申于洛汴间市得玉带一，乃奇货也。
现代文：有个商人叫沈申，经常来往在珠江三角洲北部番禺县之间，广州的主顾都优待他，让他到北方买玉带，沈申在洛汴之间买到一条玉带，是天下珍奇的玉物。
English: There is a merchant named Shen Shen, who often travels between Panyu County in the northern part of the Pearl River Delta. Guangzhou's customers treat him favorably and let him go to the north to buy a jade belt. Shen Shen bought a jade belt between Luoyang, which is a rare jade object in the world.

古文：回由湘潭，希声窃知之，召申诣衙，赐以酒食，抵夜送还店。预戒军巡，以犯夜戮之，湘人俱闻，莫不嗟悯。
现代文：回来经由湘潭，希声暗中了解到他买到玉带，召沈申到衙门来，备下酒食招待他，到了夜晚送他回旅店，预先吩咐巡军把他当作违犯夜禁犯人杀死。湘潭的人都听说了这件事，没有不嗟叹怜悯他的。
English: After returning via Xiangtan, Hisheng secretly learned that he had bought a jade belt, summoned Shen Shen to Shimen, prepared wine and food to invite him, sent him back to the hotel at night, and ordered the patrol in advance to kill him as a prisoner who violated the night ban. People in Xiangtan heard about this matter and did not pity him.

古文：尔后常见此客为祟，或在屋脊，或据栏槛，不常厥处。
现代文：以后常见沈申为鬼作祟，有时在屋脊，有时站在栏槛之间，不常在一个地方。
English: After that, it was common to see Shen Shen as a ghost, sometimes on the roof ridge, sometimes standing between the thresholds, and not often in one place.

古文：未久，希声暴卒。其弟希范嗣立，以玉带还广人。
现代文：不久，希声突然病死，他的弟弟希范嗣立，把玉带还给了广东人。
English: Soon after, Hisheng suddenly died of illness, and his younger brother, Hifan Shili, returned the jade belt to the Guangdong people.

古文：法曹吏
现代文：法曹吏
English: Law Clerk resigns

古文：庐陵有法曹吏，尝劾一僧，曲致其死，具狱上州。
现代文：庐陵有个法曹吏，曾揭发一个僧人，歪曲事实导致他死，备齐了案卷去州府上报。
English: A legal official in Fuling once exposed a monk, distorted the facts and caused his death. He prepared a case file and went to the state capital to report it.

古文：尔日，其妻女在家，方纫缝于西窗下，忽有二青衣卒，手执文书，自厨中出，厉声谓其妻曰： 语尔夫，无枉杀僧。 
现代文：那一天，他的妻子女儿在家中西窗下作缝纫活儿。忽然有两个身上穿青衣的兵手里拿着文书从厨房里出来，大声对他的妻子说： 告诉你丈夫，不要冤屈杀僧。 
English: On that day, his wife's daughter was sewing at home under the west window. Suddenly, two soldiers dressed in blue came out of the kitchen with documents in their hands and shouted to his wife: "Tell your husband not to kill a monk unjustly."

古文：遂出门去。妻女皆惊怪流汗，久之乃走出，视其门，扃闭如故。
现代文：于是走出门去，妻子和女儿都吓出了一身冷汗。过了半天才走出来，看看大门，门锁着同原来一样。
English: So I went out the door, and my wife and daughter were scared out of a cold sweat. After half a day, I went out and looked at the door, and the door was locked as it was before.

古文：吏归，具言之，吏甚恐。
现代文：吏回来了，妻子把当天的事都告诉了他。
English: When the official returned, his wife told him everything that had happened that day.

古文：明日将窃取其案，已不及矣，竟杀其僧。
现代文：吏听后非常害怕，第二天要偷回案卷，但是已经来不及了。最终还是杀了僧。
English: After hearing this, the official was very scared and wanted to steal the case file back the next day, but it was too late. In the end, he killed the monk.

古文：死之日，即遇诸涂。
现代文：僧人死的那天，吏就在路途上遇到了僧。
English: On the day of the monk's death, the officials met the monk on the road.

古文：百计禳谢，旬月竟死。
现代文：后来吏千方百计设祭坛祈祷道歉，满一个月终究还是死了。
English: Later, the officials tried their best to set up an altar to pray and apologize, but after a full month, he still died.

古文：刘存
现代文：刘存
English: Liu Cunming

古文：刘存为舒州刺史，辟儒生霍某为团练判官，甚见信任。
现代文：刘存任舒州刺史，征用了儒生霍某任团练判官，很被信任。
English: Liu Cunren served as Shuzhou's chief historian, and requisitioned a certain post of group training judge from the Confucian scholar Huo. He was highly trusted.

古文：后为左右所谮，因构其罪，下狱，白使府请杀之。
现代文：后来被他的部下说坏话诬陷编造了罪状，把霍某关进监狱，报告使府请求杀了他。
English: Later, he was framed by his subordinates for saying bad words, fabricated charges, put Huo in prison, and the report made the government request to kill him.

古文：吴帅知其冤，使执送杨都，存遂缢之于狱。
现代文：吴帅知道霍某冤枉，派人押送杨都。刘存就把霍某勒死在监狱。
English: Wu Shuai knew that Huo was innocent and sent someone to escort Yang Du. Liu Cun then strangled Huo to death in prison.

古文：既而存迁鄂州节度使，霍友人在舒州，梦霍素服自司命祠中出，抚掌大笑曰： 吾已获雪矣。 
现代文：不久刘存升迁作鄂州节度使，霍某的朋友在舒州，梦到霍某穿着白衣从司命祠中出来，拍手大笑说： 我已经获得昭雪了。 
English: Soon after, Liu Cunxin was promoted to the post of Ezhou Festival Commissioner, and a friend of Huo in Shuzhou dreamed that Huo came out of the mortuary shrine in a white dress, clapped his hands and said with a loud laugh: I have already won Zhaoxue.

古文：俄而存帅师征湖南，霍表兄马邺，为黄州制史。
现代文：很快刘存就挂帅带兵征讨湖南。霍某有个表兄叫马邺，任黄州刺史。
English: Soon, Liu Cun led an army to conquer Hunan. Huo Mou had a cousin named Ma Jun, who was appointed as the governor of Huangzhou.

古文：有夜扣齐安城门者曰： 舒州霍判官将往军前，马病，白使君借马。 
现代文：有一个人夜叩齐安城门说： 舒州霍判官要到军前去，马病了，请告诉刺史大人我要借马。 
English: A man knocked on the city gate of Qian at night and said, "Judge Shuzhou Huo is leaving for the army. His horse is sick. Please tell Lord Zhishi that I need to borrow a horse."

古文：守陴者以告，邺叹曰： 刘公枉杀霍生，今此人往矣，得无祸乎。 
现代文：守城的人把这话报告了马邺。马邺长叹说： 刘存杀霍生太冤枉了，现在这个人去，能没有灾祸吗？ 
English: The man guarding the city reported this to Ma Xuan. Ma Xuan sighed and said: Liu Cunxu's killing of Huo Sheng was too unjust. If this man goes now, will there be no disaster?

古文：因画马数匹，焚之水际。
现代文：接着画了几匹马在水边烧了。
English: Then he drew several horses and burned them at the water's edge.

古文：数日存败绩，死之。
现代文：几天以后刘存大败，死在战场。
English: A few days later, Liu Cun was defeated and died on the battlefield.

古文：袁州录事
现代文：袁州录事
English: Yuanzhou Chronicle

古文：袁州录事参军王某尝劾一盗，狱具而遇赦，王以盗罪不可恕，乃先杀之而后宣赦。
现代文：袁州录事参军王某曾审决一个盗贼，案件审判完毕却遇到大赦。王某认为这个盗贼的罪行不能宽恕，就先杀了他然后宣读赦令。
English: According to the records of Yuanzhou, Wang Mou, a member of the military, once tried a thief, but after the trial was over, he encountered an amnesty. Wang Mou thought that the thief's crime could not be forgiven, so he killed him first and then read out the pardon.

古文：罢归至新喻，邑客冯氏，具酒请王。
现代文：事情结束之后到新喻去，镇里有个姓冯的门客请王某去喝酒，第二天就该走，晚上他住在僧院里。
English: After the matter was over, he went to Xinyu. A concierge in the town, surnamed Feng, invited Wang to go drinking. He was supposed to leave the next day. In the evening, he stayed at a monastery.

古文：明日当往，晚止僧院，乃见盗者曰： 我罪诚合死，然已赦矣，君何敢匿王命而杀我？
现代文：于是看见那个盗贼说： 我的罪行确实应该死，但是已经赦免了。你怎么敢隐瞒皇上的赦令而杀我？
English: Then he saw the thief and said: "My crime really deserved death, but it has been pardoned. How dare you conceal the emperor's pardon and kill me?

古文：我今得请于所司矣，君明日往冯家耶？不往亦可。 
现代文：我现在已经请求冥府得到批准了，你明天将要去冯家吗？不去也行。 
English: I have now asked the Hades to be approved. Will you go to the Feng family tomorrow? You can go.

古文：言讫乃殁，院僧但见其与人言而不见也。
现代文：说完就不见了。院里的僧人只听见他和人说话而见不到他的形体。
English: After he finished speaking, he disappeared. The monks in the monastery only heard him talking to people and could not see his form.

古文：明日方饮，暴卒。
现代文：第二天王某到冯家刚要喝酒，突然死了。
English: The next day, Wang went to Feng's home to have a drink and suddenly died.

古文：刘璠
现代文：刘璠
English: Liu Xuan

古文：军将刘璠性强直勇敢，坐法徙海陵。
现代文：军将刘璠性情倔强耿直勇敢，因犯法被调到海陵。
English: General Liu Wei was stubborn and brave, and was transferred to Hailing for violating the law.

古文：郡守褚仁规嫌之，诬其谋叛，诏杀于海市。
现代文：郡太守褚仁规嫌恶他，诬陷他阴谋反叛，诏令在海陵杀了他。
English: The county grand marshal, Yan Rengui, detested him, framed him for conspiracy and rebellion, and ordered that he be killed in the mausoleum.

古文：璠将死，谓监刑者曰： 为我白诸儿，多置纸笔于棺中，吾必讼之。 
现代文：刘璠将死时对监刑官说： 你替我告诉我的儿子，多准备些纸笔放到我的棺木里，我一定要告他。 
English: When Liu Wei was about to die, he said to the prison officer: Tell my son for me, prepare more paper and pens to put in my coffin, I must sue him.

古文：后数年，仁规入朝，泊舟济滩江口，夜半，闻岸上连呼： 褚仁规，尔知当死否？ 
现代文：过了几年，褚仁规入京上朝，把船停在济滩江口。半夜时分，听到岸上有人连声呼叫： 褚仁规，你知道该死吗？ 
English: A few years later, when Yan Rengui entered Beijing and ascended to the throne, he anchored his ship at the mouth of the Jitang River. At midnight, he heard someone on the shore call out in unison: "Yan Rengui, do you know what the hell is going on?

古文：舟人尽惊起，视岸上无人，仁规谓左右曰： 尔识此声否？
现代文：船上的人都被惊吓起来了，看岸上并没有人。仁规对他的部下说： 你们熟悉这个声音吗？
English: Everyone on the boat was startled, but there was no one on the shore. Renfei said to his men, "Are you familiar with this sound?

古文：刘璠也。 
现代文：这是刘璠。 
English: This is Liu Ye.

古文：立命酒食，祭而谢之。
现代文：立刻命人准备酒饭祭奠他并向刘璠道歉。
English: He immediately ordered people to prepare food and drink to pay tribute to him and apologized to Liu Wei.

古文：仁规至都，以残虐下狱，狱吏夜梦一人，长大黯面，从二十余人，至狱，执仁规而去。
现代文：仁规到了京都，因为残虐罪被押进监狱。狱吏在晚上梦到一个人，长得很高黑色面庞，跟了二十多个人，到监狱就把仁规抓走了。
English: When he arrived in Kyoto, he was sent to prison for the crime of cruelty. At night, the warden had a dream about a man with a very tall, dark face. He was accompanied by more than twenty people. When they arrived at the prison, they took him away.

古文：既寤，为仁规所亲说之，其人抚膺叹曰： 吾君必死，此人即刘璠也。 
现代文：醒了以后就告诉了仁规的亲信。这个人抚胸长叹说： 仁规一定要死了，这个人就是刘璠啊！ 
English: After he woke up, he told a close friend of Renfei. This person stroked his chest and sighed, "Renfei must die, this person is Liu Ye!"

古文：其日中使至，遂缢于狱矣。吴景
现代文：当天中午使臣就来了，于是把仁规缢死在监狱。吴景
English: At noon the same day, the envoy arrived, and then he had Ren Jianxuan killed in prison.

古文：浙西军校吴景者，丁酉岁，设斋于石头城僧院。
现代文：浙西军校吴景，在丁酉年于石头城僧院设斋。
English: Wu Jing, a military school in western Zhejiang, set up a monastery in the Stone Town Monastery in the year of Ding Xi.

古文：其夕既陈设，忽闻妇女哭声甚哀，初远渐近，俄在斋筵中矣。
现代文：当天晚上陈设完毕，忽然听到妇女的哭声，起初远渐渐近，不一会儿已经到了斋筵席中了。
English: On the evening of the same day, after the display was completed, a woman's cry was suddenly heard. At first, it was far away and gradually came closer, and soon it was in the middle of the meal.

古文：景乃告院僧曰： 景顷岁从军克豫章，获一妇人。
现代文：吴景就告诉寺院的僧人说： 我从军不到一年攻克豫章，俘获了一名妇女，她长得很漂亮。
English: Wu Jing told the monks of the temple: "I conquered Yuzhang from the army less than a year ago and captured a woman. She was very beautiful.

古文：殊有姿色。未几，其夫求赎，将军令严肃，不可相容，景即杀之，后甚以为恨。今之设斋，正为是也。 
现代文：不久，她的丈夫来请求赎回去，但将军的军令很严，不能宽容，我就把她杀了。后来我也很恨自己，今天设斋筵正是为了这件事。 
English: Soon after, her husband came to ask for her to be ransomed, but the general's orders were very strict and could not be tolerated, so I killed her. Later, I also hated myself very much, and today's fast is for this very reason.

古文：即与僧俱往，乃见妇人在焉，僧为之祈告。
现代文：然后就和僧人一同赴筵，妇人已经在那里了，僧人就为她祈祷祝告。
English: Then he went with the monk to the coffin. The woman was already there, and the monk prayed for her.

古文：妇人曰： 我从吴景索命，不知其他。 
现代文：妇人说： 我向吴景要命，其他的事我不知道。 
English: The woman said: "I want Wu Jing's life. I don't know anything else."

古文：遽前逐之，景走上佛殿，大呼曰： 还尔命。 
现代文：于是上前追吴景，吴景跑上佛殿大喊： 还你命！ 
English: So he ran after Wu Jing, and Wu Jing ran up to the Buddha hall shouting: "I'll give you your life back!"

古文：于是颠仆而卒。
现代文：然后就倒下死了。
English: And then he just dropped dead.

古文：高安村小儿
现代文：高安村小儿
English: Gao'an village children

古文：高安村人有小儿作田中，为人所杀，不获其贼。
现代文：高安村一百姓有个小孩在田里干活被坏人杀了，没有抓到贼人。
English: A citizen of Gao'an Village had a child working in the fields who was killed by a villain, but the thief was not caught.

古文：至明年死日，家人为设斋。
现代文：到第二年小孩死的那天，家中人给小孩设斋。
English: By the day of the child's death the following year, the family had set up a fast for the child.

古文：尔日，有里中儿方见其一小儿谓之曰： 我某家死儿也，今日家人设斋，吾与尔同往食乎。 
现代文：那天，村里有个小孩正好见一个小孩对他说： 我是某家死的小孩，今天家里人给我设斋，我和你一同去吃好吗？ 
English: That day, a child in the village happened to see a child and said to him, "I am a dead child from a certain family. Today, my family is giving me a meal. Shall I go and eat with you?"

古文：里中儿即随之，至其家，共坐灵床，食至辄餐，家人不见也。
现代文：村里的小孩就跟他去了，到了他家，他们一起坐在灵案上，食物摆上来就吃，家人也看不见。
English: The children from the village went with him, and when they arrived at his house, they sat together at the table, eating the food as it was set out, without their families being able to see them.

古文：久之，其舅后至，望灵床而哭，儿即径指之曰： 此人杀我者也，吾恶见之。 
现代文：过了半天，他的舅舅来了。看到灵案就哭，小孩就直指他舅说： 这个就是杀我的人，我讨厌见他。 
English: Half a day later, his uncle came. Seeing the ghost case, he cried. The child pointed directly at his uncle and said, "This is the man who killed me. I hate seeing him."

古文：遂去。
现代文：于是走了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：儿既去，而家人见里中儿坐灵床上，皆大惊。问其故，儿具言之，且言其舅杀之。
现代文：小孩走了，而家人见村里的小孩坐在灵案上，都大吃一惊，问他是怎么回事，小孩就把经过说了，并且说是死的小孩的舅舅杀了他。
English: The child left, and the family members were shocked to see the village child sitting on the spirit case. When they asked him what had happened, the child told them the story and said that the dead child's uncle had killed him.

古文：因执以送官，遂伏罪。
现代文：因此就把他舅舅抓送到官府，马上就招认了他的罪行。
English: So they arrested his uncle and took him to the government office, where he immediately confessed to his crime.

古文：陈勋
现代文：陈勋
English: Chen Xun

古文：建阳县录事陈勋，性刚狷不容物，为县吏十人共诬其罪，竟坐弃市。
现代文：建阳县录事陈勋性情正直而洁身自好不肯同流合污，被十个县吏共同诬陷说他有罪，竟然处斩了他。
English: Jianyang County Records Chen Xun was honest and self-righteous, and refused to go along with the corruption. He was falsely accused of being guilty by ten county officials, who even executed him.

古文：至明年死日。家为设斋，妻哭毕，独叹于灵前曰： 君平生以刚直称，今枉死逾年，精魄何寂然耶。 
现代文：这天晚上就梦到陈勋说： 我都不知道我死了，白天听到你的话才明白过来，象你说的那样，我应该报仇。
English: That night, Chen Xun said in a dream: "I didn't even know I was dead. I only understood after hearing your words during the day. As you said, I should take revenge."

古文：是夕，即梦勋曰： 吾都不知死，向闻卿言，方大悟尔。
现代文：然而公署并不是我这样的人能进去的，你明天替我到县府里去诉冤，我随你去。 
English: However, the public prosecutor's office is not for someone like me to enter. You will go to the prefectural government to appeal for me tomorrow, and I will follow you.

古文：若尔，吾当报仇，然公署非可卒入者，卿明日为我入县诉枉，吾当随之。 明日，妻如言而往，出门，即见奔至临川，乃得免。
现代文：第二天，陈勋的妻子按他的话前往县城，出了门就看见陈勋提着剑跟着她。到了县城，在桥上遇到一个仇吏，陈勋就用剑刺他的头，府吏立刻倒地而死。等到进了衙门，陈勋直接到府署，挨着刺杀，击中的都死，十个被他杀了八个，有两个府吏逃奔到临川才得到幸免。
English: The next day, Chen Xun's wife went to the county seat according to his words. When she came out of the door, she saw Chen Xun following her with a sword. When she arrived at the county seat, she met an enemy official on the bridge. Chen Xun stabbed him in the head with a sword, and the official immediately fell to the ground and died. When he entered the city gate, Chen Xun went directly to the prefectural government office, was stabbed and killed, and all those he hit died. He killed eight out of ten, and two officials escaped to Linchuan and were spared.

古文：勋家在盖竹，乡人恒见之，因为立祠，号陈府君庙，至今传其灵。
现代文：陈勋家在盖竹，乡里的人经常看见他。因此给他立了一个祠堂，起名叫陈府君庙。到现在还传说它灵验。
English: Chen Xun's family lived in Gaizhu, and people in the countryside often saw him. Therefore, a shrine was built for him, called Chen Fujun Temple. It is still said to be effective.

古文：钟遵
现代文：钟遵
English: Zhong Zun

古文：江南大理评事钟遵南平王傅之孙也，历任贪浊，水部员外郎孙岳，素知其事，密纵于权要，竟坐下狱。
现代文：江南大理评事钟遵是南平王傅的孙子，历次任职其间都有贪污不清的事情。水部员外郎孙岳平常就知道他的事，于是孙岳就秘密向权要告发把他押在监狱。
English: Zhong Zun, the commentator of Jiangnan University, is the grandson of Nanping Wangfu, and there have been unclear cases of corruption during his successive terms of office. Sun Yue, the son-in-law of the Minister of Water Resources, usually knew about him, so Sun Yue secretly reported him to the authorities and put him in prison.

古文：会赦除名，遵既以事在赦前，又其祖尝赐铁券，恕子孙二死，因复诣阙自理。
现代文：正赶上下了赦令免除罪名。钟遵的事是在赦令以前犯下的，又因他的祖父曾经得到皇上恩赐的铁券，可以减罪，饶恕他的子孙可以免死一次。
English: Zhong Zun's crime was committed before the pardon was issued, and because his grandfather had received a gift of iron certificates from the emperor, his crime could be reduced, and forgiving his children and grandchildren could save his life once.

古文：事下所司，大理奏赃状明白，遂弃市。
现代文：但孙岳又从大理寺到宫中把案卷交给所司，所司认为大理所奏钟遵的赃物罪状都很明白，就判在刑场斩首。
English: However, Sun Yue also went from Dali Temple to the palace to hand over the case file to the magistrate. The magistrate thought that Dali's accusation of stolen goods against Zhong Zun was very clear, and sentenced him to be beheaded at the execution site.

古文：临刑，或与之酒，遵不饮，曰： 我当讼于地下，不可令醉也。 
现代文：临刑时，有人给他酒喝，钟遵不喝。说： 我要在地下告他，不能让我醉了。 
English: At the time of his execution, someone gave him wine to drink, but Zhong Zun refused to drink it, saying, "I want to sue him underground, I can't let myself get drunk."

古文：遵死月余，岳方与客坐，有小青蛇出于栋间。
现代文：钟遵死了一个多月，有一天，孙岳正在与客人坐着，就发现有一条小青蛇从柱子间出来。
English: Zhong Zun had been dead for more than a month. One day, Sun Yue was sitting with a guest when he noticed a small blue snake emerge from between the pillars.

古文：岳视之，惊起曰： 钟评事，钟评事。 
现代文：孙岳一看就吓得站起来说： 钟评事！钟评事！ 
English: As soon as Sun Yue saw it, he was so scared that he stood up and said: Clock critic! Clock critic!

古文：变色而入，遂病，翌日死。
现代文：脸色都变了跑进屋内。接着就病了，第二天死了。
English: He turned pale and ran inside. Then he fell ill and died the next day.

古文：韦处士
现代文：韦处士
English: Officer Wei Zeng

古文：韦承皋者，伪蜀时将校也。
现代文：韦承皋是前蜀的将校。
English: Wei Chengjun is a former officer of Shu.

古文：有待诏僧名行真，居蜀州长平山，尝于本州龙兴寺构木塔，凡十三级，费钱银万计，寻为天火所焚。
现代文：有一个待诏僧叫行真，住在罗州长平山，他曾经在本州龙兴寺修建木塔，共十三级，费钱数以万计。不久就被天火烧了。
English: There was a monk named Xingzhen who lived in Pingshan, Luo Province. He once built a 13-level wooden pagoda at Longxing Temple in Honshu, at a cost of tens of thousands of yuan. It was soon destroyed by fire.

古文：第三次营构，方能就，人谓其有黄白之术也。
现代文：第三次营造才落成。人们都说他有烧炼丹药点化金银的法术。
English: The third building was completed. People said that he had the power to burn elixir to turn it into gold and silver.

古文：及承皋典眉州，召行真至郡。
现代文：等到承皋主管眉州，就召行真到眉州去。
English: Wait until Chengyu is in charge of Meizhou, then summon Xingzhen to Meizhou.

古文：郡有卢敬芝司马者，以殖货为业，承皋尝谓之曰： 某顷军中，与行真同火幕，遇一韦处士，授以作金术。
现代文：眉州郡有个司马叫卢敬芝的，以经商为业。承皋曾对他说： 我近来在军中与行真同伙赚钱，我曾遇到一个韦处士，传授给我做金的法术，但近来他老了，所可以吗？ 
English: In Meizhou County, there is a Sima named Lu Jingzhi, who is a businessman. Chengyi once said to him: I recently made money in the army with a colleague named Xingzhen. I once met a Wei official who taught me the magic of making money, but recently he has become old, is that okay?

古文：临行，卢送至蟇颐律，韦牧沈药鼎于江中，谓卢生曰： 吾罪矣！先是授术韦处士者，吾害之而灭口。
现代文：卢恭敬地答应了。药将要成的时候，可是韦承皋却犯了罪被贬到茂州作参军。临走时，卢敬芝送他到蟇颐律，韦承皋把药鼎沉到江中，对卢敬芝说： 我有罪，以前传授我法术的韦处士，我为了灭口把他害死了。
English: Lu respectfully agreed. When the medicine was about to be made, however, Wei Chengtao committed a crime and was demoted to join the army in Muzhou. Before leaving, Lu Jingzhi sent him to Baidu. Wei Chengtao sank the medicine into the river and said to Lu Jingzhi: I am guilty. I killed Wei Chengzhi, who used to teach me magic, in order to silence him.

古文：今日之事，药成而祸及，其有神理乎！ 
现代文：现在的事，药成而祸来了，这不是有神灵吗？ 
English: Is it not the case that there are gods?

古文：蜀国更变，以拒魏王之师，诛死。
现代文：蜀国变故，要抵御魏的军队，韦承皋被杀死。
English: In the Shu Revolt, Wei's army had to be resisted, and Wei Chengyu was killed.

古文：张进
现代文：张进
English: Zhang Jin

古文：伪蜀给事中王允光性严刻，吏民有犯，无贷者。
现代文：前蜀给事中王允光性情严厉苛刻，有犯法的吏民，没有宽恕的。
English: Wang Yunguang of the former Shu Dynasty had a stern and harsh disposition. He punished people who broke the law and did not forgive.

古文：及判刑院，本院杖直官张进，因与宅内小奴子诵火井县令蒋贻恭《咏王给事绝句》云： 厥父元非道郡奴，允光何事太侏儒。可中与个皮裩著，擎得天王左脚无。 
现代文：等到了判刑院，本院的杖直官张进和宅内的奴仆的儿子诵读火井县令蒋贻恭《咏王给事绝句》说： 厥父元非道郡奴，允光何事太诛儒；可中与个皮裩著，擎得天王左脚无。 
English: When they arrived at the Sentencing Court, Zhang Jin, the court's official in charge of the cane, and the son of the mansion's manservant recited the Huai County edict of Jiang Yuqong, "The King's Last Words," saying: "My father was once a villain, but he was too wise to do anything wrong; he was able to wear a thick skin, and the king's left foot was amputated.

古文：奴子记得两句，时念诵之。
现代文：奴仆的儿子只记得两句，时常念诵。
English: The servant's son could remember only two sentences, which he often recited.

古文：允光问谁人教汝，对云： 杖直官张进。 
现代文：允光问他是谁教你的，回答说： 是杖直官张进。 
English: Yunguang asked him who had taught him, and he replied, "It was Zhang Jin, the scepter-wielding official."

古文：允光大怒，寻奏进受罪人钱物，遂置极法。
现代文：允光很生气，不久就上秦说张进接受了罪人的钱物，于是张进被处极刑。
English: Yunguang was very angry, and soon told Shangqin that Zhang Jin had accepted money and goods from the criminal. As a result, Zhang Jin was sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：后允光病寒热，但见张进执火炬烧四体，高声唱 索命 。
现代文：后来允光得病忽冷忽热，只见张进拿着火把烧他的四肢，高声喊着要命。
English: Later, Yan Guang fell ill with cold and fever. Zhang Jin was seen holding a torch and burning his limbs, shouting for his life.

古文：允光连叱不去，痛楚备极，数日而终。郝溥
现代文：允光接连呵叱他也不走。允光受尽了痛苦，几天就死了。郝溥
English: Yungang scolded him one after another and refused to leave. Yungang suffered all the pain and died a few days later.

古文：伪蜀华阳县吏郝溥日追欠税户，街判司勾礼遣婢子阿宜赴县，且嘱溥云： 不用留禁，残税请延期输纳。 
现代文：前罗华阳县吏郝溥每天都追欠税户纳税。街判司勾礼派婢女的儿子阿宜到县府去，并且让他告诉溥：不要留禁阿宜，剩下的税钱请求延期交纳。
English: The former Luo Huayang County official, Zou, pursued the tax-paying households for tax arrears on a daily basis. The street judge, Zou, sent the servant's son, Ai, to the county government, and asked him to tell Zou: Don't detain Ai, and request that the remaining tax money be deferred.

古文：郝溥不允，决阿宜五下，仍纳税了放出。
现代文：郝溥不准许，判定打阿宜五下，留禁在县衙，直到纳完税才放出来。
English: He was not allowed to do so, and was sentenced to five strokes of the cane. He was banned from the county cane until he had paid his taxes.

古文：明年，县司分擘百姓张琼家物业，郝溥取钱二万。
现代文：第二年，县司分划百姓张百琼家的财产，郝溥拿了二万钱。
English: The following year, the county division divided the property of Zhang Baiqiong's family, taking away 20,000 yuan.

古文：张琼具状论诉，街司追勘，勾礼见溥，大笑曰： 你今日来也，莫望活，千万一死。 
现代文：张琼写了状子上去，街司追查。勾礼见到郝溥，大笑说： 你今天来了，不要想活着回去，千万总是一死。 
English: Zhang Qiong wrote up a complaint and the street department investigated. When Gou Li saw Yao, he laughed loudly and said, "You came here today, don't try to go back alive, you're sure to die."

古文：令司吏汝勋构成罪，遂杀之。
现代文：然后就命令司吏汝勋捏造乱凑构成了死罪。于是把郝溥杀了。
English: Then he ordered the magistrate, Rukun, to fabricate a ruckus, which constituted a capital offense. So he killed Zang.

古文：不数日，汝勋见郝溥来索命，翌日暴卒。
现代文：不多日子，汝勋看见郝溥前来要求偿命，第二天得急病死了。
English: Not many days later, Rukun saw Zou coming to ask for his life, and the next day he suddenly fell ill and died.

古文：勾礼晨兴，忽见郝溥升堂，罗拽殴击，因患背疮而死。
现代文：勾礼早晨起来，忽然看见郝溥升堂，对勾礼掠拽殴击，然后得了背疮病死去。
English: He got up in the morning and suddenly saw Gongsheng, dragged him and beat him, and then he died of back sores.

古文：裴垣
现代文：裴垣
English: Baigaki

古文：伪蜀宁江节度使王宗黯生日，部下属县，皆率醵财货，以为贺礼。
现代文：前蜀宁江节度使王宗黯过生日。部下所属各县都率先凑钱收物，给宗黯送贺礼。
English: The former Shuning River Festival made Wang Zongyue's birthday. All the counties under his command were the first to collect money and gifts to send to Zongyue.

古文：巫山令裴垣以编户羁贫，独无庆献。
现代文：巫山县令裴垣因为县中各家各户都很贫穷，只有他没献什么贺礼。
English: Because all the households in Wushan County were poor, only he did not offer any gift.

古文：宗黯大怒，召裴至，诬以他事，生沈滟滪堆水中，三日尸不流。
现代文：宗黯十分生气，召裴垣来，诬陷他有别的事，活沉到滟滪堆水里淹死。
English: Zong Ying was very angry, called Baigaki to come, accused him of something else, and drowned alive in a pile of water.

古文：宗黯遣人命挽而下，经宿逆水复上，卓立波面，正视衙门。
现代文：但尸首三日也不漂走，宗黯就派人让他们把尸体拽沉下去，经一夜尸体逆水又上来，高高地站在水面上正视衙门。
English: However, the corpse did not float away for three days, so Zong Yue sent someone to let them drag the corpse down. After one night, the corpse came up again against the water and stood high above the water to face the gate.

古文：宗黯颇不自安，神识烦挠，竟得疾暴卒。
现代文：宗黯很不自安，神志烦躁，最终得暴病突然死去。
English: Zong Ying was very restless and irritable, and eventually died suddenly of a violent illness.

古文：苏铎
现代文：苏铎
English: Su Shi

古文：伪蜀王宗信，镇凤州。有角觝人苏铎者，委之巡警，尝与宗信左右孙延膺不协。
现代文：前蜀的王宗信镇守凤州，有一个角觝人苏铎被委任为巡警，他曾与宗信的亲信部下孙延膺不合。
English: Wang Zongxin of former Shu guarded Fengzhou, and Su Xi, a native of Jiaohe, was appointed as a patrol officer. He had a falling out with Zongxin's trusted grandson Yan Qi.

古文：宗信因暇日登楼，望见苏铎，锦袍束带，似远行人之状，宗信讶之。
现代文：有一次宗信暇日登上城楼，远远望见苏铎，穿着锦袍紧束腰带，好象要远行的样子，宗信很奇怪：苏铎本是岐人。
English: On one occasion, Zongxin climbed a tower in his spare time and saw Su Shi from a distance, wearing a brocade robe and a tightly tied belt, as if he wanted to go far away. Zongxin was very strange: Su Shi was originally from Qi.

古文：铎本岐人也，延膺因谮曰： 苏铎虽受公蓄养，其如苞藏祸心，久欲逃去。 
现代文：延膺趁机诬陷说： 苏铎虽然受到你的供养，但他好象包藏祸心，很早就想逃走。 
English: Yan Rong took the opportunity to frame him and said: Although Su Rong was supported by you, he seemed to harbor evil intentions and wanted to escape a long time ago.

古文：宗信大怒，立命擒至，先断舌脔肉，然后斩之。
现代文：宗信听后很气愤，立刻下令擒拿过来，先割断舌头，割肉，然后斩首。
English: After hearing this, Zongxin was very angry, and immediately ordered the executioner to come and first cut off the tongue, then the flesh, and then the head.

古文：及延膺作逆，其被法之状，一如铎焉。
现代文：等到后来延膺叛逆被杀的情状和苏铎相同。
English: Later, when Yan Xun rebelled and was killed, he was in the same situation as Su Shi.

古文：赵安
现代文：赵安
English: Zhao An

古文：蜀郭景章，豪民也。
现代文：蜀时有个人叫郭景章，是个强横的人。
English: In Shu, there was a man named Guo Jingzhang, who was a tyrant.

古文：因醉，以酒注子打贫民赵安，注子嘴入脑而死。
现代文：因为喝醉了，用酒壶打贫民赵安，酒壶嘴进入脑袋里而死去。
English: Because he was drunk, he hit the poor man Zhao An with a wine jug, and the spout of the wine jug entered his head and he died.

古文：安有男，景章厚与金帛，随隐其事，人莫知之。
现代文：赵安有一个儿子，郭景章就送给他很多钱，随后隐瞒了这件事，没有人知道。
English: Zhao An has a son, Guo Jingzhang gave him a lot of money, and then concealed the matter, no one knows.

古文：后景章脑上忽生疮，可深三四分，见骨，脓血不绝，或时睹赵安，疮透喉，遂死。
现代文：后来景章脑袋上忽然生了疮，深有三四分，能看见骨头，流脓流血不断，有的时候看见赵安，直到疮透过喉口，就死了。
English: Later, Jingzhang suddenly developed sores on his head that were three or four minutes deep. He could see his bones and was constantly bleeding. Sometimes he would see Zhao An until the sores penetrated his throat, and then he died.

