古文：兴宗一兴宗神圣孝章皇帝，讳宗真，字夷不堇，小字只骨。
现代文：兴宗神圣孝章皇帝，名宗真，字夷不堇，乳名只骨。
English: Emperor Xingzong of sacred filial piety, my name is Zong Zhen, the word is 夷不, the nickname is only bone.

古文：圣宗长子，母曰钦哀皇后萧氏。
现代文：圣宗长子，母为钦哀皇后萧氏。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Shengzong, his mother was Empress Qianmo Xiao.

古文：上始生，齐天皇后取养之。
现代文：皇上出生以后，为齐天皇后领养。
English: After the Emperor was born, he was adopted by Empress Dowager Qi.

古文：幼而聪明，长而魁伟，龙颜日角，豁达大度。
现代文：少年聪慧，成年后体貌魁梧，龙颜日角，豁达大度。
English: Clever as a boy, burly as an adult, with a sunny disposition and a generous spirit.

古文：善骑射，好儒术，通音律。
现代文：擅长骑射，爱好儒家学说，通晓音律。
English: He is good at riding and shooting, likes Confucianism, and is familiar with musical notation.

古文：辛丑，皇太后赐驸马萧鉏不里、萧匹敌死，围场都太师女直著骨里、右祗候郎君详稳萧延留等七人皆弃市，籍其家，迁齐天皇后于上京。秋七月丙午朔，皇太后率皇族大临于太平殿。
现代文：三岁被封为梁王，太平元年被册封为皇太子，十年六月兼任北南院枢密使事。十一年六月初三，圣宗驾崩，皇上即位于圣宗灵柩前。初六，尊称生母元妃萧氏为皇太后。初八，派使者向宋、夏、高丽报哀。十五日，大赦天下，改元景福。十九日，奉大行皇帝梓宫停柩于永安山太平殿以待葬。二十五日，皇太后赐死驸马萧锄不里、萧匹敌，将围场都太师女真著骨里、右祗候郎君详稳萧延留等七人一律弃市，籍没其家产，将齐天皇后迁徙于上京。秋七月初一，皇太后率领皇族在太平殿聚哭告哀。
English: At the age of three, he was named King Liang. In the first year of the Taiping era, he was named crown prince. In June of the 10th year, he also served as a privy councilor of the Bei Nan Academy. On the 3rd day of the 6th month of the 11th year, Emperor Shengzong passed away, and the empress was placed in front of Shengzong's coffin. On the 6th day of the 11th month, she was given the honorary title of empress dowager for her birth mother, Empress Dowager Xiao. On the 8th day of the 11th month, she sent an envoy to pay

古文：高丽遣使吊慰。
现代文：高丽派使前来吊唁安慰。
English: Koryo envoys came to offer condolences and consolation.

古文：上召晋王萧普古等饮博，夜分乃罢。
现代文：皇上召晋王萧普古等饮酒赌博，到夜深才罢。
English: The emperor summoned the Jin king Xiaopu Gu and others to drink and gamble until late at night.

古文：丁未，击鞠。
现代文：初二，击鞠。
English: 2nd year of junior high school, futsal.

古文：戊申，以耶律韩八为左夷离毕，特末里为左祗候郎君详稳，横帐郎君乐古权右祗候郎君祥稳。
现代文：初三，任命耶律韩八为左夷离毕，特末里为左祗候郎君详稳，横帐郎君乐古暂任右祗候郎君详稳。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Yerut Hanpachi was appointed as the left eunuch, in the second year of junior high school, he was appointed as the left eunuch, and in the third year of senior high school, he was appointed as the left eunuch, and in the third year of junior high school, he was appointed as the left eunuch, and in the third year of senior high school, he was appointed as the left eunuch, and in the third year of senior high school, he was appointed as the left eunuch.

古文：己酉，以耶律郑留为于厥迪烈都详稳，高八为右皮室详稳。
现代文：初四，任命耶律郑留为于厥迪烈都详稳，高八为右皮室详稳。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Yerut Zhengru was appointed as a member of the Ju Di Retsu Jiao Sheng, and in the eighth year of senior high school as a member of the Right Division Jiao Sheng.

古文：庚戌，赈蓟州民饥。
现代文：初五，赈济蓟州饥民。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the starving people of Luzhou were given food.

古文：癸丑，诏写大行皇帝御容。
现代文：初八，下诏图画大行皇帝遗容。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the emperor died.

古文：甲寅，录囚。
现代文：初九，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 17th, the inspectors found that the criminal had confessed.

古文：以观察姚居信为上将军。
现代文：任命观察姚居信为上将军。
English: The appointment of Yao Juxin as a senior general was observed.

古文：建庆州于庆陵之南，徙民实之，充奉陵邑。
现代文：在庆陵之南设置庆州，迁百姓居住于此，以担当侍奉陵寝之任。
English: Gyeongju was set up in the south of Gyeongneung, and people were moved to live there to serve and sleep in the mausoleum.

古文：乙卯，以比岁丰稔，罢给东京统军司粮。
现代文：初十，因连年谷物丰收，停止发给东京统军司粮食。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, due to consecutive years of bumper grain harvests, the distribution of grain to the Tokyo unified military department was stopped.

古文：丁巳，上谒大行皇帝御容，哀恸久之。因诏写北府宰相萧孝先、南府宰相萧孝穆像于御容殿。
现代文：二十日，皇上拜谒大行皇帝御容，哀恸不已，于是下诏图画北府宰相萧孝先、南府宰相萧孝穆像挂于御容殿。
English: On the 20th, the emperor paid great homage to Emperor Goryo and mourned for him endlessly. Therefore, he decreed that the statues of Xiao Xiaoxian, the prime minister of the northern prefecture, and Xiao Xiaomu, the prime minister of the southern prefecture, be hung in Goryo-den.

古文：以萧阿姑轸为东京留守。
现代文：任命萧阿姑轸为东京留守。
English: Appointed Xiao Aguxuan as Tokyo absent leader.

古文：丁卯，谒太平殿，焚先帝所御弓矢。
现代文：二十二日，拜谒太平殿，焚烧先帝所用弓箭。
English: On the 22nd, the Taihei-den was stormed and the bows and arrows used by the former emperor were burned.

古文：幸晋王普古第视疾。
现代文：临幸晋王普古第宅探问其疾病。
English: He inquired about his illness at the residence of King Prudence.

古文：辛未，录囚。
现代文：二十六日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 26th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：壬申，上谒神主帐，时奥隈萧氏始入宫，亦命拜之。
现代文：二十七日，皇上拜谒神主帐，此时奥隈萧氏初入宫闱，皇上也命她拜谒神主帐。
English: On the 27th day, the emperor asked Okuma Shou to pray to the god of the main tabernacle. At this time, Okuma Shou entered the palace for the first time. The emperor also ordered her to pray to the god of the main tabernacle.

古文：八月壬午，迁大行皇帝梓宫于菆涂殿。
现代文：八月初七，将大行皇帝梓宫迁到涂殿。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Emperor Da Xing moved the imperial palace to Tu Dian.

古文：九月戊申，躬视庆陵。
现代文：九月初三，皇上亲自去视察庆陵。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, the emperor himself went to inspect the Qingling Mausoleum.

古文：庚戌，问安于皇太后。
现代文：初五，向皇太后请安。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, please give my greetings to the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛亥，宋遣王随、曹仪致祭，王甗、许怀信、梅询、张纶来慰两宫，范讽、孙继业贺即位，孔道辅、魏昭文贺皇太吊后册礼。
现代文：初六，宋派王随、曹仪前来祭奠先皇，王、许怀信、梅询、张纶前来慰问太后和皇上，范讽、孙继业前来庆祝新皇登基，孔道辅、魏昭文前来庆贺皇太后行册封礼。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Song sent Wang Zu and Cao Yi to pay tribute to the former emperor, Wang, Xu Huaxin, Mei Xuan and Zhang Ye to offer condolences to the empress dowager and the emperor, Fan Lian and Sun Jiye to celebrate the new emperor's enthronement, and Kong Daowu and Wei Zhaowen to celebrate the crowning of the empress dowager.

古文：戊午，焚弧矢、鞍勒于菆涂殿。庚申，夏国遣使来慰。
现代文：十三日，在涂殿焚烧弧矢、鞍勒。十五日，夏国派使者前来慰问。
English: On the 13th, arrows and anchors were burned in Tuiden. On the 15th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：庚午，以宋使吊祭，丧服临菆涂殿。
现代文：十六日，因宋使前来吊唁祭祀，皇上身着丧服御临涂殿。
English: On the 16th, because the Song envoys came to offer condolences, the emperor came to the mortuary hall in mourning clothes.

古文：甲戌，遣御史中丞耶律翥、司农卿张确、详稳耶律励、四方馆使高维翰谢宋吊慰。
现代文：二十日，派御史中丞耶律翥、司农卿张确、详稳耶律励、四方馆使高维翰前去感谢宋国的吊唁慰问。
English: On the 20th, the Emperor sent the Grand Historian Ye Lucheng, the Secretary of Agriculture Zhang Ji, the Secretary of State Ye Lucheng, and the Ambassador of the Four Directions Gao Weihan to thank the Song Dynasty for its condolences and condolences.

古文：冬十月戊寅，宰臣吕德懋薨。
现代文：冬十月初四，宰相吕德懋逝世。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Prime Minister Lü Dejun passed away.

古文：癸未，杀鉏不里党弥勒奴、观音奴等。
现代文：初九，杀锄不里党徒弥勒奴、观音奴等。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, the party members of Jianbuli, including Maitreya and Guanyin, were killed.

古文：丙戌，遣工部尚书高德顺、崇禄卿李可封致先帝遗物于宋；以右领军卫上将军耶律逊、少府监马惮充皇太后谢宋使；右监门卫上将军耶律元载、引进使魏永充皇帝谢宋使。
现代文：十二日，派工部尚书高德顺、崇禄卿李可封送先帝遗物给宋国，派右领军卫上将军耶律逊、少府监马惮充任皇太后谢宋使者，右监门卫上将军耶律元载、引进使魏永充任皇帝谢宋使者。
English: On the 12th, the Ministry of Industry sent Shangshu Gao Deshun and Chongluqing Li Kefeng to send the former emperor's relics to Song, sent the right leader of the military guard, General Ye Ruxun, and Shofu Supervisor Ma Shuo to serve as the emissary of Empress Dowager Xie Song, and the right supervisor of the guard, General Ye Ruxuan, and the introduction of Wei Yongzheng to serve as the emissary of Emperor Xie Song.

古文：丁酉，夏国遣使来赙。
现代文：二十三日，夏国派使者前来捐资助葬。
English: On the 23rd, Xia Guo sent an envoy to donate money for the funeral.

古文：戊戌，以萧革、赵为果、耶律郁、马保业充来岁贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：二十四日，命萧革、赵为果、耶律郁、马保业充任来年贺宋正旦正副使者。
English: On the 24th, Xiao Ge, Zhao Weiguo, Ye Lu Yu, and Ma Bao Ye were appointed as He Song Zhengdan's deputy envoys for the next year.

古文：闰月辛亥，谒菆涂殿，阅玄宫閟器。
现代文：闰十月初七，拜谒涂殿，检查玄宫秘器。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the leap year, pay homage to the painting hall and inspect the secret utensils of the Forbidden City.

古文：有司请以生辰为永寿节，皇太后生辰为应圣节，从之。
现代文：有司请求将皇帝的生日作为永寿节，皇太后生日为应圣节，得到皇上允许。
English: Yushi requested that the emperor's birthday be celebrated as the Eternity Festival and the empress dowager's birthday as the Sacred Festival, and obtained the emperor's permission.

古文：辛酉，阅新造铠甲。
现代文：十七日，检查新造铠甲。
English: On the 17th, the newly made armor was inspected.

古文：丁卯，振黄龙府饥民。
现代文：二十三日，赈济黄龙府饥民。
English: On the 23rd, the starving people of Huanglongfu were fed.

古文：十一月壬辰，上率百僚奠于菆涂殿。
现代文：十一月十九日，皇上率领百官在涂殿陈列祭品祭奠先皇。
English: On November 19th, the emperor led hundreds of officials in the Tuiden to display offerings and pay tribute to the first emperor.

古文：出大行皇帝服御、玩好焚之。纵五坊鹰鹘。
现代文：将大行皇帝的服饰车马、奇珍异宝焚化，将五坊鹰鹘放生。
English: Emperor Da Xing's clothing, chariots and horses, and rare treasures will be incinerated, and the Five-Floor Eagle's Nest will be released.

古文：甲午，葬文武大孝宣皇帝于庆陵。
现代文：二十一日，将文武大孝宣皇帝安葬于庆陵。
English: On the 21st, Emperor Wenwu Da Xiaoxuan was buried in Qingling Mausoleum.

古文：乙未，祭天地。
现代文：二十二日，祭祀天地。
English: On the 22nd, the sacrifice to heaven and earth was concluded.

古文：问安皇太后。
现代文：向皇太后请安。
English: Please give my regards to the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙申，谒庆陵，以遗物赐群臣，名其山曰庆云，殿曰望仙。
现代文：二十三日，拜谒庆陵，将先皇遗物赐给群臣，将庆陵所在的山陵命名为庆云，山上的宫殿命名为望仙殿。
English: On the 23rd, he paid homage to Qingling Mausoleum and gave the relics of the former emperor to his retainers. The mountain where Qingling Mausoleum is located was named Qingyun, and the palace on the mountain was named Wangxian Hall.

古文：十二月癸丑，至自庆陵。
现代文：十二月初十，皇上自庆陵回宫。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the emperor returned to the palace from the Qingling Mausoleum.

古文：皇太后听政，帝不亲庶务，群臣表请，不从。
现代文：皇太后听政，皇上不理政务，君臣上表请求皇上亲政，没有得到允许。
English: The empress dowager listened to the government, the emperor did not take care of government affairs, and the monarchs and ministers requested the emperor to personally govern, but were not allowed.

古文：是岁，以兴平公主下嫁夏国王李德昭子元昊，以元昊为夏国公、驸马都尉。
现代文：这一年，将兴平公主下嫁夏国王李德昭之子李元昊，封元昊为夏国公、驸马都尉。
English: In the same year, Princess Xingping married Li Yuanhao, the son of Xia King Li Dezhao, and Yuanhao was given the title of Xia Guogong and Xingma Duifeng.

古文：重熙元年春正月壬申朔，皇太后御正殿，受帝与群臣朝。
现代文：重熙元年春正月初一，皇太后驾临正殿，接受皇帝及群臣朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Chongxi, the Empress Dowager came to the main hall to receive the emperor and his courtiers.

古文：宋遣任布、王遵范、陈琰、王克善来贺。
现代文：宋派任布、王遵范、陈琰、王克善前来祝贺正旦。
English: Song sent Renbu, Wang Zunfan, Chen Yao and Wang Keshen to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：乙亥，宋遣郑向、郭遵范来贺永寿节。
现代文：初四，宋派郑向、郭遵范前来祝贺永寿节。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Songpa Zheng Xiang and Guo Zun Fan came to congratulate the longevity festival.

古文：丁丑，如雪林。
现代文：初六，皇上到雪林。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the Emperor went to the Snow Forest.

古文：二月，大蒐。
现代文：二月，大搜。
English: In February, there was a large-scale search.

古文：三月壬申朔，尚父、漆水郡王敌烈复为惕隐。
现代文：三月初一，尚父漆水郡王敌烈再次担任惕隐。
English: On the first day of March, his father, Wang Jilei of Lingshui County, once again served as the guardian.

古文：是春，皇太后诬齐天皇后以罪，遣人即上京行弑。
现代文：这年春天，皇太后诬称齐天皇后有罪，派人到上京去杀害她。
English: In the spring of that year, the Empress Dowager falsely accused Empress Qi of being guilty and sent someone to go to Kyoto to kill her.

古文：后请具浴以就死，许之。
现代文：齐天皇后请求在沐浴后再就死，得到允许。
English: Empress Dowager Qi's request to die after taking a bath was granted.

古文：有顷，后崩。
现代文：不一会儿，齐天皇后驾崩。
English: Soon after, Empress Qi passed away.

古文：夏四月乙巳，清暑别辇斗。
现代文：夏四月初五，皇上在别辇斗避暑。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, the emperor was in Beppu for the summer.

古文：秋七月，猎平地松林。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于平地松林。
English: In autumn and July, they go hunting in the flat pine forest.

古文：以萧达溥、王英秀、萧麓、张素羽充来岁贺宋正旦生辰使。
现代文：任命萧达溥、王英秀、萧麓、张素羽为来年贺宋正旦、生辰使者。
English: He appointed Xiao Dajuan, Wang Yingxiu, Xiao Lu and Zhang Suyu as the next year's He Song Zhengdan, the birthday messenger.

古文：八月丙午，驻跸剌河源。
现代文：八月初七，皇上歇驾于剌河源。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, the emperor rested at the source of the Li River.

古文：皇子洪基生。
现代文：皇子洪基出生。
English: Prince Hong Kee is born.

古文：冬十月己酉，幸中京。
现代文：冬十月十一日，临幸中京。
English: Winter, October 11th, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：十一月己卯，帝率群臣上皇太后尊号曰法天应运仁德章圣皇太后；群臣上皇帝尊号曰文武仁圣昭孝皇帝。
现代文：十一月十一日，皇上率领群臣给皇太后上尊号为法天应运仁德章圣皇太后；群臣给皇上上尊号为文武仁圣昭孝皇帝。
English: On November 11th, the emperor led his ministers to give the empress dowager the honorific title of Faten Yingyun Renzhong, Holy Empress Dowager; the ministers gave the empress dowager the honorific title of Monmu Renzhong, Holy Emperor.

古文：大赦，改元重熙。
现代文：大赦天下，改元重熙。
English: The country was amnestied, and the era was changed to the Heian period.

古文：癸未，宋遣刘随、王德本来贺应圣节。
现代文：十五日，宋派刘随、王德本前来祝贺应圣节。
English: On the 15th, Song sent Liu Zhe and Wang Deben to come and congratulate Ying Sheng Si.

古文：以杨佶为翰林承旨。
现代文：皇上任命杨佶为翰林承旨。
English: The emperor appointed Yang Jie as Hanlin's successor.

古文：丙戌，夏国遣使来贺。
现代文：十八日，夏国派使者来朝贺。
English: On the 18th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor.

古文：辛卯，五国酋长来贡。
现代文：二十三日，五国酋长前来朝贡。
English: On the 23rd, the chiefs of the five countries came to pay tribute.

古文：夏国王李德昭薨，册其子夏国公元昊为夏国王。
现代文：夏国王李德昭逝世，册封其子夏国公李元昊为夏国王。
English: Xia King Li Dezhao passed away, and his son Xia Guogong Li Yuanhao was crowned King of Xia.

古文：十二月庚戌，宋遣胥偃、王从益、崔暨、张怀志来贺来岁正旦；又遣杨日严、王克纂来贺永寿节。
现代文：十二月十三日，宋派胥偃、王从益、崔暨、张怀志前来祝贺来年正旦，又派杨日严、王克纂前来祝贺永寿节。
English: On December 13th, Song sent Yu, Wang Congyi, Cui Ji, and Zhang Huai Zhi to congratulate the next year's Ching Tan, and also sent Yang Riyan and Wang Keqiao to congratulate the Everlasting Life Day.

古文：以北大王耶律求翰同平章事。
现代文：任命北大王耶律求翰为同平章事。
English: Appointed the Great Northern King Jeruchuhan as Tongping Zhengji.

古文：是年，放进士刘师贞等五十七人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士刘师贞等五十七人及第。
English: In this year, 57 students including Liu Shizhen were admitted to the university.

古文：二年春正月庚辰，东幸。
现代文：二年春正月十三日，东幸。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the second year of spring, Dongxing passed away.

古文：乙酉，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：十八日，夏国派使者来进贡。
English: On the 18th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，女直详稳台押率所部来贡。
现代文：二十五日，女真详稳台押率领部众前来朝贡。
English: On the 25th, Lady Zhengyo led the troops to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：宋遣曹琮来告母后刘氏哀，章得象、安继昌来馈母后遗物。
现代文：宋因皇帝母后刘氏驾崩派曹琮前来告哀，章得象、安继昌前来馈送母后遗物。
English: Song sent Cao Pi to mourn the death of the emperor's mother, Empress Dowager Liu, and Zhang Dexiang and An Jichang came to present relics of the empress dowager.

古文：即遣兴圣宫使耶律寿宁、给事中知制诰李奎充祭奠使；天德军节度使耶律卿宁、大理卿和道亨、河西军节度使耶律嵩、引进使马世卿充两宫吊慰。
现代文：皇上当即派大圣宫使耶律寿宁、给事中知制诰李奎担任祭奠使；天德军节度使耶律卿宁、大理卿和道亨、河西军节度使耶律嵩、引进使马世卿担任两宫吊慰使。
English: The emperor immediately dispatched the Grand Sacred Palace to send Yelu Shuning and the Central Military Command to send Li Kui as the condolence envoy; the Tiande Army to send Yelu Qingning, Dali Qing and Daoheng; the Hexi Army to send Yelu Song; and the introduction to send Ma Shixing as the condolence envoy of the two palaces.

古文：秋七月甲子朔，以耶律楚、高升、耶律迪、王惟允充两宫贺宋生辰使副，以耶律师古、刘五常充贺宋来岁正旦使副。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命耶律萛、高升、耶律迪、王惟允担任皇上及太后贺宋生辰正副使者，耶律师古、刘五常任贺宋来岁正旦正副使者。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, he appointed Ye Lucheng, Gao Sheng, Ye Ludi and Wang Wei Yun as the deputy emissaries of the emperor and the empress dowager He Song Shengcheng, Ye Lugu and Liu Wu as the permanent deputy emissaries of He Song Lai Shengdan.

古文：八月丁酉，幸温泉宫。
现代文：八月初四，临幸温泉宫。
English: On the 4th of August, the Rinzai Onsen Palace was closed.

古文：乙卯，遣使阅诸路禾稼。
现代文：二十二日，派使者查看诸路庄稼长势。
English: On the 22nd, an envoy was sent to check the growth of crops along the roads.

古文：冬十一月甲申，宋遣刘宝、符忠、李昭述、张茂实等来谢慰奠。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，宋派刘宝、符忠、李昭述、张茂实等前来感谢辽的祭奠慰问。
English: On the 22nd day of winter in October, Song sent Liu Bao, Fuzhong, Li Zhaoshu, Zhang Muxi, etc. to thank Liao for the memorial and condolences.

古文：十二月乙未，宋遣丁度、王继凝来贺应圣节。
现代文：十二月初三，宋派丁度、王继凝前来祝贺应圣节。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Song Pai Ting Du and Wang Jigen came to congratulate the holy day.

古文：乙酉，禁夏国使沿路私市金、铁。
现代文：十七日，禁止夏国使者在沿路私自买卖金、铁。
English: On the 17th, Xia's envoys were prohibited from buying and selling gold and iron along the road.

古文：甲寅，宋遣章频、李懿、王冲睦、张纬、李绂、李继一来贺永寿节及来岁正旦。
现代文：二十二日，宋派章频、李懿、王冲睦、张纬、李、李继一前来祝贺永寿节及来年正旦。
English: On the 22nd, Song faction members Zhang Feng, Li Wei, Wang Chongmu, Zhang Wei, Li and Li Jiyi came to congratulate the Yongshou Festival and the next year's Lunar New Year.

古文：庚申，以北府宰相萧孝先为枢密使。
现代文：二十八日，任命北府宰相萧孝先为枢密使。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Xiaoxian, the prime minister of Beifu, was appointed as the envoy.

古文：三年春正月丁卯，宋使章频卒，诏有司赙赠，命近侍护丧以归。
现代文：三年春正月初六，宋国使者宋频去世，下诏令有司赠送助丧钱物，命令近侍护送其灵柩南归。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, the emissary of the Song Dynasty, Song Bin, passed away. The Emperor issued an edict to have officials donate money to help with the funeral expenses, and ordered close attendants to escort his coffin back to the south.

古文：辛卯，如春水。
现代文：三十日，皇上到春水。
English: On the 30th, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：二月壬辰朔，以北院枢密使萧普古为东京留守。
现代文：三月初一，任命北院枢密使萧普古为东京留守。
English: On the first day of March, Shou Pugu was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan to stay in Tokyo.

古文：戊申，耶律大师奴有侍襁褓恩，诏入属籍。
现代文：十七日，耶律大师奴因对皇上曾有襁褓中照顾之恩，皇上下诏让他入宗室谱籍。
English: On the 17th, Master Yerutsu, who had been kind enough to take care of the emperor when he was a pupil, was made a member of the family tree by imperial edict.

古文：夏四月甲寅，振耶迷只部。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，赈济耶迷只部。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, only the fan club of Hezekiah was left.

古文：五月庚申朔，清暑沿柳湖。
现代文：五月初一，皇上在沿柳湖避暑。
English: On the first day of May, the emperor was spending the summer along Liuhe Lake.

古文：是月，皇太后还政于上，躬守庆陵。
现代文：同月，皇太后归政于皇上，自己去守庆陵。
English: In the same month, the empress dowager returned to the emperor and went to guard Qingling Mausoleum herself.

古文：六月己亥，以萧普古为南院枢密使。
现代文：六月十一日，皇上任命萧普古为南院枢密使。
English: On June 11, the emperor appointed Xiao Pugu as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：秋七月戊子朔，上始亲政，以耶律庶徵、刘六符、耶律睦、薄可久充贺宋来岁正旦使副。
现代文：秋七月初一，皇上开始亲政，任命耶律庶征、刘六符、耶律睦、薄可久为祝贺宋来年正旦正副使者。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, the emperor began to govern personally, and appointed Ye Lu Zhaozong, Liu Liufu, Ye Lvmu and Bo Kejiu as the deputy envoys to congratulate Song Zhengdan on the coming year.

古文：壬辰，如秋山。
现代文：初五，皇上到秋山。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：冬十月已未，驻跸中会川。
现代文：冬十月初三，歇驾于中会川。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, it stopped at the Nakakai River.

古文：十二月，宋遣段少连、杜仁赞来贺来岁正旦，杨偕、李守忠来贺永寿节。
现代文：十二月，宋派段少连、杜赞前来祝贺来年正旦，杨偕、李守忠前来祝贺永寿节。
English: In December, Song sent Duan Shao Lian and Du Zan to congratulate the next year's Lunar New Year, and Yang Hui and Li Shou Zhong came to congratulate the Everlasting Life Day.

古文：四年春正月庚寅，如耶迷只里。
现代文：四年春正月初五，皇上到耶迷只里。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the fourth year of the spring, the emperor went to Yame.

古文：三月乙酉朔，立皇后萧氏。夏四月甲寅朔，如凉陉。
现代文：三月初一，立萧氏为皇后。夏四月初一，到凉陉。
English: On the first day of March, Xiao became the empress. In the summer, on the first day of April, she went to Liangyao.

古文：五月庚子，清暑散水源。
现代文：五月十七日，在散水源避暑。
English: On May 17th, they spent the summer at the watering place.

古文：六月癸丑朔，皇子宝信奴生。
现代文：六月初一，皇子宝信奴出生。
English: On the first day of June, Prince Bao Xinwu was born.

古文：以耶律信、吕士宗、萧衮、郭揆充贺宋生辰及来岁正旦使副。
现代文：任命耶律信、吕士宗、萧衮、郭揆担任贺宋生辰及来年正旦正副使者。
English: He appointed Yeluxin, Lu Shizong, Xiao Qi and Guo Qi as the emissaries of He Song Shengchen and Zhengdan Zhengde next year.

古文：秋七月壬午朔，猎于黑岭。
现代文：秋七月初一，出猎于黑岭。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, I went hunting in Heiling.

古文：九月乙酉，驻跸长宁淀。
现代文：九月二十九日，歇驾于长宁淀。
English: On September 29th, it stopped in Changningyodo.

古文：冬十月，如王子城。
现代文：冬十月，到王子城。
English: Winter October, to Oji Castle.

古文：十一月壬午，改南京总管府为元帅府。
现代文：十一月初二，改称南京总管府为元帅府。
English: On the second day of November, the Nanjing Administration Office was renamed the Marshal's Office.

古文：乙酉，行柴册礼于白岭，大赦。
现代文：初五，在白岭举行柴册之礼，大赦天下。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the ceremony of holding the firecracker was held in Bai Ling, and the world was amnestied.

古文：加尚父耶律信宁、政事令耶律求翰耆宿赞翊功臣。
现代文：加给尚父耶律信宁、政事令耶律求翰以耆宿赞翊功臣称号。
English: The title of meritorious vassal was conferred on his father, Ye Lu Xuning, and the title of meritorious vassal was conferred on his father, Ye Lu Xu Han.

古文：十二月癸丑，诏诸军炮、弩、弓、剑手以时阅习。
现代文：十二月初三，诏令诸军的炮、弩、弓、剑手要按时考核演练。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the emperor ordered the artillery, crossbows, bows, and swordsmen of the army to go through the examination and drill on time.

古文：庚申，宋遣郑戩、柴贻范、杨日华、张士禹来贺永寿节及正旦。
现代文：初十，宋派郑戬、柴贻范、杨日华、张士禹前来祝贺永寿节和正旦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Zheng Qi, Chai Qi Fan, Yang Rihua and Zhang Siyu from the Song Dynasty came to congratulate the Yongshou Festival and Zheng Dan.

古文：五年春正月甲申，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：五年春正月初五，到鱼儿泊。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, I went to stay with fish.

古文：枢密使萧延宁请改国舅乙室小功帐敞史为将军，从之。
现代文：答应枢密使萧延宁请求，将国舅乙室、小功帐敞史改为将军。
English: In response to the request of the Privy Councilor Xiao Yanning, Guozhu Bishu and Xiao Gongzhe Zangshi were promoted to the rank of general.

古文：夏四月庚申，以潞王查葛为南府宰相，崇德宫使耶律马六为惕隐。
现代文：夏四月十二日，任命潞王查葛为南府宰相，崇德宫使耶律马六为惕隐。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zha Wang Chag was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu, and the Chongde Palace made Yerushalayim a sacred mountain.

古文：甲子，幸后弟萧无曲第，曲水泛觞赋诗。
现代文：十六日，临幸皇后之弟萧无曲第宅，曲水传觞饮酒赋诗。
English: On the 16th, Xiao Wuzhong, the younger brother of Empress Lin, went to Qu Shui's house to drink and recite poetry.

古文：丁卯，颁新定条制。
现代文：十九日，颁布新定制度条例。
English: On the 19th, the new system regulations were promulgated.

古文：己巳，上与大臣分朋击鞠。
现代文：二十一日，皇上与大臣分组击鞠。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Emperor and his ministers went out to play a game of bowls in groups.

古文：五月甲午，南幸。
现代文：五月十七日，南幸。
English: May 17th, Nanko.

古文：丁未，如胡土白山清暑。
现代文：三十日，到胡土白山避暑。
English: On the 30th, I went to Hutu Baishan Mountain to spend the summer.

古文：庚申，幸北院大王高十行帐拜奥，赐银绢。
现代文：庚申日，临幸北院大王高十行帐行拜奥礼，赐给他银钱绢帛。
English: On the day of the Genghis Khan's death, the king of the Linhong North Academy, Gaozhongzhe, performed the Olympic ceremony and was given a silver money bowl.

古文：壬戌，诏修南京宫阙府署。
现代文：壬戌日，诏令修缮南京宫阙府署。
English: On the same day, the imperial edict ordered the renovation of the Imperial Household Agency in Nanjing.

古文：秋七月辛丑，录囚。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, the inspection of the criminal population began.

古文：耶律把八诬其弟韩哥谋杀己，有司奏当反坐。
现代文：耶律把八诬陷其弟韩哥谋杀自己，有司奏报应当反坐把八治他以谋杀之罪。
English: Yerut framed Hachi for the murder of his brother Han Go, and the Sosei Newspaper should have prosecuted Hachi for murder.

古文：临刑，其弟泣诉： 臣惟一兄，乞贷其死。 
现代文：把八临刑，其弟哭着请求皇上说： 臣只有这一个兄弟，请赦免了他的死罪。 
English: At the end of the eight-year sentence, his brother cried and pleaded with the emperor, saying: "I only have this one brother, please pardon his capital crime.

古文：上悯而从之。
现代文：皇上怜悯，答应了他的请求。
English: The emperor took pity on him and agreed to his request.

古文：九月癸巳，猎黄花山，获熊三十六，赏猎人有差。
现代文：九月十八日，皇上行猎于黄花山，猎得熊三十六头，赏赐猎人财物各若干。
English: On September 18th, the emperor went hunting in Huanghuashan, hunting thirty-six bears, and rewarded the hunters with a number of property.

古文：冬十月丁未，幸南京。
现代文：冬十月初三，临幸南京。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, Nanjing is at its best.

古文：辛亥，曲赦析津府境内囚。
现代文：初七，特赦析津府境内的囚犯。
English: On the first day of the seventh month, amnesty will be granted to prisoners in the prefecture.

古文：壬子，御元和殿，以《日射三十六熊赋》、《幸燕诗》试进士于廷，赐冯立、赵徽四十九人进士第。
现代文：初八，御临元和殿，在殿上以《日射三十六熊》、《幸燕诗》为题对进士进行殿试，赐冯立、赵徽等四十九人进士及第。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the school year, the Imperial Palace held an entrance examination for students with the themes of "Thirty-Six Bears Shooting at the Sun" and "Fortunate Swallow Poem." Forty-nine students, including Feng Li and Zhao Hui, were awarded the first and second place.

古文：以冯立为右补阙，赵徽以下皆为太子中舍，赐绯衣、银鱼，遂大宴。
现代文：任命冯立为右补阙，赵徽以下均为太子中舍，赐给他们绯衣、银鱼，然后大宴群臣。
English: He appointed Feng Li as the right-hand attendant, and Zhao Hui and the following were the prince's junior attendants. He gave them a silk robe, a silver fish, and then a grand banquet for the ministers.

古文：御试进士自此始。
现代文：由皇帝亲自对进士进行殿试从这时开始。
English: From this time on, the emperor personally conducted the imperial examination of the candidates.

古文：宋遣宋郊、王世文来贺永寿节。
现代文：宋派宋郊、王世文前来祝贺永寿节。
English: Songpa Songjiao and Wang Shimen of the Song Dynasty came to congratulate the festival.

古文：甲子，宰臣张俭等请幸礼部贡院，欢饮至暮而罢，赐物有差。
现代文：二十日，宰相张俭等请皇上临幸礼部贡院，欢饮到日暮方罢，皇上赐给臣下财物各若干。
English: On the 20th, the prime minister Zhang Jian and others invited the emperor to pay tribute to the imperial family and drink until nightfall. The emperor gave each of his vassals a certain amount of property.

古文：以耶律祥、张素民、耶律甫、王泽充贺宋生辰正旦使副。
现代文：任命耶律祥、张素民、耶律甫、王泽为贺宋生辰正旦正副使者。
English: He appointed Ye Ruxiang, Zhang Sumin, Ye Lufu, and Wang Ze as the chief and deputy emissaries of He Song Shengchen Zhengdan.

古文：六年春正月丁丑，西幸。
现代文：六年春正月初四，西幸。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of spring, Saiko was born.

古文：三月戊寅，以秦王萧孝穆为北院枢密使，徙封吴王；晋王萧孝先为南京留守。
现代文：三月初五，任命秦王萧孝穆为北院枢密使，改封为吴王，任命晋王萧孝先为南京留守。
English: On the fifth day of the third month, Qin King Xiao Xiaomu was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and his title was changed to King Wu. Jin King Xiao Xiaosen was appointed to stay in Nanjing.

古文：夏四月，猎野狐岭。
现代文：夏四月，皇上出猎于野狐岭。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor went hunting in the wild fox ridge.

古文：闰月，猎龙门县西山。
现代文：闰四月，出猎于龙门县西山。
English: In April, they went hunting in Xishan, Longmen County.

古文：五月己酉，清暑炭山。
现代文：五月初八，在炭山避暑。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, I spent the summer in Suishan.

古文：以耶律韩八为北院大王，萧把哥左夷离毕，王子郎君详稳鼻姑得林牙，签北面事耶律涅哥同签点检司。
现代文：任命耶律韩八为北院大王，萧把哥为左夷离毕，王子郎君详稳鼻姑得为林牙，签北面事耶律涅哥同签点检司。
English: He appointed Ye Lu Han Ba as the Great King of the Northern Court, Xiao Tuo Jiao as the Left Exile, Prince Lang Jun Jiao Jian Nose Gu as Lin Ya, and signed the North Face of Ye Lu Neguo with the signature of the Inspection Division.

古文：甲寅，录囚。
现代文：十三日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 17th, the inspectors found that the criminal had confessed.

古文：以南大王耶律信宁故匿重囚及侍婢赃污，命挞以剑脊而夺其官；都监坐阿附及侍婢罪，皆论死，诏贷之。
现代文：南大王耶律信宁因故意藏匿要犯以及手下侍婢贪赃纳贿，被削夺官职，处以用剑背挞责之刑；其都监以阿谀奉迎获罪以及侍婢所犯罪行，论罪都当被处死，皇上诏令赦免了他们。
English: The king of the south, Jeroen Nobunaga, was stripped of his official position and sentenced to be hanged with a sword for deliberately hiding a high-ranking criminal, and his servants and maidservants were guilty of corruption and bribery. The governor of the capital was sentenced to be hanged with a sword, and his servants and maidservants were sentenced to death for their crimes. The emperor's edict pardoned them.

古文：丙辰，以耶律信宁为西南路招讨使。
现代文：十五日，任命耶律信宁为西南路招讨使。
English: On the 15th, Ye Lu Xuning was appointed as the envoy of Southwest Road.

古文：庚申，出飞龙厩马，赐皇太弟重元及北、南面侍臣有差。
现代文：十九日，取出飞龙厩马匹，分赐给皇太弟重元、南面侍臣各若干匹。
English: On the 19th, the horses from the Fei Long Stable were taken out and given to the Crown Prince's younger brother, Chogen, and a number of courtiers from the Southern Court.

古文：癸亥，以上京留守耶律胡睹衮为南大王，平章事萧查剌宁上京留守，侍中管宁行宫都部署，耶律蒲奴宁乌古迪烈得都详稳。
现代文：二十二日，任命上京留守耶律胡睹衮为南大王，平章事萧查剌宁为上京留守，侍中管宁为行宫都部署，耶律蒲奴宁为乌古迪烈得都详稳。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Yerut Hu Jintao, who stayed in Beijing, as Nandao Wang, Xiao Zhaojuning, who stayed in Beijing, as Pingzhang Zhi, Guan Ning, who stayed in the palace, and Yerut Bununing, who stayed in Ugudi, as Ugudi Li.

古文：甲子，以上京留守耶律洪古为北院大王。
现代文：二十四日，任命上京留守耶律洪古为北院大王。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Yelu Honggu, who had stayed in Beijing, as the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：六月壬申朔，以善宁为殿前都点检，护卫太保耶律合住兼长宁宫使，萧阿剌里、耶律乌鲁斡、耶律和尚、萧韩家奴、萧特里、萧求翰为各宫都部署。
现代文：六月初一，任命善宁为殿前都点检，护卫太保耶律合住兼任长宁宫使，萧阿剌里、耶律乌鲁斡、耶律和尚、萧韩家奴、萧特里、萧求翰为各宫都部署。
English: On the first day of June, the appointment of Shan Ning as the front of the palace was all checked, the escort of the eunuch Ye Rui lived together and also served as the Changning Palace envoy, and Xiao Ah Li, Ye Rui Ulu, Ye Rui Monk, Xiao Han Jianu, Xiao Terry, and Xiao Qianhan were deployed for each palace.

古文：上酒酣赋诗，吴国王萧孝穆、北宰相萧撒八等皆属和，夜中乃罢。
现代文：皇上饮酒酣畅时即兴赋诗，吴国王萧孝穆、北府宰相萧撒八宁等皆唱和，至半夜方罢。
English: When the emperor was drinking well, he improvised a poem, and the king of Wu, Xiao Xiaomu, and the prime minister of Beifu, Xiao Sabanin, all sang together until midnight.

古文：己卯，祀天地。
现代文：初八，祭祀天地。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the heavens and the earth are sacrificed.

古文：癸未，赐南院大王耶律胡睹衮命，上亲为制诰词，并赐诗以宠之。
现代文：十二日，赐给南院大王耶律胡睹衮诰命，皇上亲自拟制诰词，并赐给他御诗以示恩信。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the emperor personally dictated the eulogy and gave him a poem as a token of his gratitude.

古文：丙申，以北院大王侯哂为南京统军使。
现代文：二十五日，任命北院大王侯哂为南京统军使。
English: On the 25th, the Northern Court Grand Prince Hou Yi was appointed as the envoy of the Nanjing United Army.

古文：秋七月辛丑朔，以北、南枢密院狱空，赏赉有差。
现代文：秋七月初一，因北、南枢密院狱中没有犯人，赏赉枢密院官员财物各若干。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, because there were no prisoners in the North and South Privy Council prisons, the officials of the Privy Council were awarded a number of properties.

古文：壬寅，以皇太弟重元生子，赐诗及宝玩器物，曲赦死罪以下。
现代文：初二，因皇太弟重元生子，赐给他御诗及宝物器玩，特赦死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, he was given a poem and a precious object to play with as a result of the birth of the son of the Emperor's younger brother, Chogen, and prisoners with less than capital crimes were pardoned.

古文：癸卯，如秋山。
现代文：初三，皇上到秋山。
English: On the third day of the new year, the emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：八月己卯，北枢密院言越棘部民苦其酋帅坤长不法，多流亡；诏罢越棘等五国酋帅，以契丹节度使一员领之。
现代文：八月初十，北枢密院奏报越棘部百姓苦于其酋帅坤长违法行事，大多流落他乡；皇上下诏罢免越棘等五国酋帅，让契丹节度使一并统领这一区域。
English: At the beginning of August 10, the North Privy Council reported that the people of Yuexian suffered from the illegal actions of their chieftain, Kun Chang, and most of them fled to other villages. The emperor ordered the removal of Yuexian and other chieftains of the five countries, and let the Khitan festival rule the region together.

古文：冬十月癸酉，驻跸石宝冈。
现代文：冬十月初五，皇上歇驾于石宝冈。
English: On the fifth day of the tenth month of winter, the emperor died in Shibaoka.

古文：十一月己亥朔，阻卜酋长来贡。
现代文：十一月初一，阻卜酋长前来朝贡。
English: On the first day of the month of November, the chieftain Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，以契丹行宫都部署萧惠为南院枢密使。
现代文：十三日，任命契丹行宫都部署萧惠为南院枢密使。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Hui was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：壬子，以管宁为南院枢密使，萧扫古诸行宫都部署，耶律褭里知南面行宫副部署，萧阿剌里左祗候郎君详稳，耶律曷主右祗候郎君详稳。
现代文：十四日，任管宁为南院枢密使，萧扫古为诸行宫都部署，耶律袅里为南面行宫副部署，萧阿剌里为左祗候郎君详稳，耶律曷主为右祗候郎君详稳。
English: On the 14th, Guan Ning was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Court, Xiao Saigu was deployed to all the palaces, Ye Rui Li was deployed to the southern palace, Xiao Ah Li was deployed to the left palace, and Ye Rui Shi was deployed to the right palace.

古文：庚申，幸晋国公主行帐视疾。
现代文：二十二日，临幸晋国公主行帐探视疾病。
English: On the 22nd, Princess Linxing of Jin Province went on a sick leave.

古文：封皇子洪基为梁王。
现代文：册封皇子洪基为梁王。
English: and enthroned Prince Hongji as the King of Liang.

古文：十二月，以杨佶为忠顺军节度使。
现代文：十二月，任命杨佶为忠顺军节度使。
English: In December, Yang Jie was appointed as the new envoy of the Zhongshun Army.

古文：遣耶律斡、秦鉴、耶律德、崔继芳贺宋生辰及正旦。
现代文：派耶律斡、秦鉴、耶律德、崔继芳前去祝贺宋生辰及正旦。
English: He sent Ye Rude, Qin Jian, Ye Rude and Cui Jifang to congratulate Song Shengchen and Zhengdan.

古文：七年春正月戊戌朔，宋遣高若讷、夏元正、谢绛、张茂实来贺正旦及永寿节。
现代文：七年春正月初一，宋派高若讷、夏元正、谢绛、张茂实前来祝贺正旦及永寿节。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring Festival, Song sent Gao Ronae, Xia Yuanzheng, Xie Yao and Zhang Muxi to congratulate Zhengdan and the Longevity Festival.

古文：辛丑，如混同江。
现代文：初四，皇上到混同江。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor arrived at the Mudong River.

古文：二月庚午，如春州。
现代文：二月初三，到春州。
English: On the third day of February, I went to Chunzhou.

古文：乙亥，驻跸东川。
现代文：初八，歇驾于东川。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I stopped at Higashikawa.

古文：丁丑，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：初十，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬午，幸五坊阅鹰鹘。
现代文：十五日，临幸五坊察看鹰鹘。
English: On the fifteenth day, Linxing Fifth Avenue inspected the falconry.

古文：乙酉，遣使庆州问安皇太后。
现代文：十八日，派使者到庆州向皇太后请安。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was sent to Gyeongju to greet the empress dowager.

古文：三月戊戌朔，幸皇太弟重元行帐。
现代文：三月初一，临幸皇太弟重元行帐。
English: On the first day of March, Rincheng, the younger brother of the empress dowager, Chongyuan, went to settle accounts.

古文：壬寅，如蒲河淀。
现代文：初五，到蒲河淀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, I went to Kamakawa-Yodo.

古文：辛亥，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：十四日，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 14th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，录囚。
现代文：十七日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 17th, the inspectors found that the criminal had confessed.

古文：夏四月己巳，以兴平公主薨，遣北院承旨耶律庶成持诏问夏国王李元昊，公主生与元昊不睦，没，诘其故。
现代文：夏四月初三，因兴平公主逝世，派北院承旨耶律庶成持诏书责问夏国王李元昊，公主生前与李元昊关系不睦，现在突然死亡，故派使者诘问其原故。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, due to the death of Princess Xingping, the Northern Court sent an imperial decree to interrogate the King of Xia, Li Yuanhao. The princess had a bad relationship with Li Yuanhao during her lifetime, and now she died suddenly, so an envoy was sent to interrogate her.

古文：己卯，猎白马埚。
现代文：十三日，皇上出猎于白马埚。
English: On the 13th, the emperor went hunting in Hakuba.

古文：甲申，射兔新淀井。
现代文：十八日，射兔于新淀井。
English: On the 18th, a hare was shot in Shin-Yodoi.

古文：乙未，猎金山，遣杨家进鹿尾茸于大安宫。
现代文：二十九日，出猎于金山，派杨家向大安宫进献上鹿尾、鹿茸。
English: On the 29th, they went hunting in Jinshan and sent the Yang family to Da'an Palace to present deer tails and deer antler.

古文：戊申，如黑岭。九月丁未，驻跸平淀。冬十月甲子朔，渡辽河。
现代文：六月初十，御临清凉殿考试进士，赐邢彭年以下五十五人进士及第出身。秋七月初九，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month of the year, the Emperor held the examination for the promotion of cadets at the Summer Palace, awarding 55 cadets from the year of the Dragon and the Year of the Horse. On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the inspection of the criminal population was conducted.

古文：丙寅，驻跸白马淀。
现代文：初十，阻卜酋长屯秃古斯前来朝见。十三日，到黑岭。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the chief of the block, Tun Zhengus, came to see the emperor. On the 13th day, he came to Heiling.

古文：壬申，录囚。
现代文：九月十四日，歇驾于平淀。
English: On September 14th, it stopped in Pingyang.

古文：十一月癸巳朔，以耶律元方、张泥、韩至德、萧傅充贺宋生辰正旦使副。
现代文：冬十月初一，任命耶律元方、张泥、韩至德、萧傅充任贺宋生辰正旦正副使者。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Ye Lu Yuan Fang, Zhang Di, Han Zide and Xiao Fu were appointed as the deputy envoys of He Song Sheng Chen Zhengdan.

古文：辛丑，问安皇太后，进珍玩。
现代文：初九，向皇太后请安，献上珍宝珠玩。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, please greet the empress dowager and offer her precious beads to play with.

古文：庚申，录囚。
现代文：二十八日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 28th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：十二月，召善击鞠者数十人于东京，令与近臣角胜，上临观之。
现代文：十二月，召集数十名善于击鞠者到东京，令他们与近臣比赛，皇上亲临观看。
English: In December, he summoned dozens of skilled bowlers to Tokyo to compete against his closest vassals, with the emperor in attendance.

古文：己巳，以皇太弟重元判北南院枢密使事，北府宰相撒八宁再任兼知东京留守事，耶律应稳南府宰相，查割折大内惕隐，乙室已帐萧翰乾州节度使，刘六符参知政事，王子帐冠哥王子郎君详稳，鉏窘大王平州节度使，宰臣张克恭守司空，宰臣韩绍芳加侍中，惕隐耶律马六北院宣徽使，傅父耶律喜孙南府宰相。
现代文：初七，任命皇太弟重元署理北南院枢密使事，北府宰相撒八宁再次连任兼知东京留守事，耶律应稳为南府宰相，查割折为大内惕隐，乙室已帐萧翰为乾州节度使，刘六符为参知政事，王子帐冠哥为王子郎君详稳，锄窘大王为平州节度使，宰臣张克恭为守司空，宰臣韩绍芳升任侍中，惕隐耶律马六为北院宣徽使，傅父耶律喜孙为南府宰相。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the crown prince's younger brother, Chongyuan, was appointed the deputy of the North and South Prefectural Privy Envoy, the North Prefectural Prime Minister, Sabanin, was re-elected for a second term and stayed in Tokyo, Yerut Yerutong was appointed the Prime Minister of the South Prefectural Government, Chaowei was appointed the Minister of the Inner Palace, Yerut Yerutong was appointed the Minister of the North Prefectural Government, Liu Liufu was appointed the Councillor of the Governor of Guizhou, Prince Yerutong was appointed the Minister of the Prince of

古文：癸未，宋遣王举正、张士禹来贺永寿节。
现代文：二十一日，宋派王举正、张士禹前来祝贺永寿节。
English: On the 21st, Song sent Wang Juzheng and Zhang Siyu to congratulate the longevity festival.

古文：甲申，命日进酒于大安宫，致荐庆陵。
现代文：二十二日，下令每天向大安宫进献酒，向庆陵献祭品。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered that wine be brought to the Da'an Palace every day, and that offerings be made to Qingling.

古文：丁亥，录囚，非故杀者减科。
现代文：二十五日，察看犯人口供。对非故意杀人者减刑。
English: On the 25th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions. The sentences of those who committed involuntary homicide were reduced.

古文：南面侍御壮骨里诈取女直贡物，罪死，上以有吏能，黥而流之。
现代文：南面侍御壮骨里诈取女真进贡物品，论罪当处死；因其有为官才能，皇上将他黥面然后流放到边地。
English: Nanmen's attendant, a strong-willed man, defrauded Nyoshin of tribute goods, and was sentenced to death for the crime; because of his ability to serve as an official, the emperor punished him and then exiled him to a remote area.

古文：八年春正月壬辰朔，宋遣韩琦、王从益来贺。
现代文：八年春正月初一，宋派韩琦、王从益前来祝贺正旦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, Song sent Han Xuan and Wang Congyi to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：丙申，如混同江观渔。
现代文：初五，皇上到混同江观看捕鱼。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor went to the Mudong River to watch the cormorants fishing.

古文：戊戌，振品部。
现代文：初七，赈济品部。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of the lunar calendar,

古文：庚戌，叉鱼于率没里河。
现代文：十九日，在率没里河叉鱼。
English: On the 19th, there were no forks in the river.

古文：丁巳，禁朔州鬻羊于宋。
现代文：二十六日，禁止朔州将羊卖给宋国。
English: On the 26th, Shuozhou was prohibited from selling sheep to Song.

古文：二月丙子，驻跸长春河。
现代文：二月十五日，歇驾于长春河。
English: On February 15, it stopped at the Changchun River.

古文：夏六月乙丑，诏括户口。
现代文：夏六月初六，诏令检括户口。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the summer, the imperial edict came to check the accounts.

古文：秋七月丁巳，谒庆陵，致奠于望仙殿。迎皇太后至显州，谒园陵，还京。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，拜谒庆陵，陈设祭品于望仙殿；将皇太后迎接到显州，拜谒园陵，然后回京。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, they paid homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum and set up offerings at the Wangxian Hall; they welcomed the empress dowager to Xianzhou, paid homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum, and then returned to Beijing.

古文：冬十月，驻跸东京。
现代文：冬十月，皇上歇驾于东京。
English: In the winter of October, the Emperor died in Tokyo.

古文：十一月甲午，诏有言北院处事失平，击钟及邀驾告者，悉以奏闻。
现代文：十一月初七，诏令如有人击钟及拦驾状告北院处理事务有失公平，应立即奏明皇上。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, if someone rings a bell and issues a stop-and-go order to complain that the Northern Court's handling of affairs is unfair, it should be immediately reported to the emperor.

古文：戊戌，朝皇太后，召僧论佛法。
现代文：十一日，朝见皇太后，召集僧人讨论佛法。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he met the Empress Dowager in the morning and gathered the monks to discuss Buddhism.

古文：戊申，皇太后行再生礼，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，皇太后举行再生礼，大赦天下。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Empress Dowager held a rebirth ceremony and granted amnesty to the world.

古文：己酉，城长春。
现代文：二十二日，修筑长春城。
English: On the 22nd, the construction of Changchun City began.

古文：闰十二月壬辰，视吴国王萧孝穆疾。
现代文：闰十二月初六，探视吴国王萧孝穆疾病。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th lunar month, the king of Wu visited Xiao Xiaomu, who was ill.

古文：宋遣庞籍、杜赞来贺永寿节。
现代文：宋派庞籍、杜赞前来祝贺永寿节。
English: Song dynasty scholars Pang Zhi and Du Zan came to congratulate the festival.

古文：九年春正月丙辰朔，上进酒于皇太后宫，御正殿。
现代文：九年春正月初一，皇上到皇太后宫中进酒，御临正殿。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, the emperor went to the empress dowager's harem to drink wine, and then came to the main hall.

古文：宋遣王拱辰、彭再思来贺。
现代文：宋派王拱辰、彭再思前来祝贺正旦。
English: The Song Dynasty sent Wang Gongchen and Peng Zaisi to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：庚申，如鸭子河。
现代文：初五，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：二月，驻跸鱼儿泺。
现代文：二月，歇驾于鱼儿泊。
English: In February, he stayed at Fisherman's Rest.

古文：三月辛未，以应圣节，大赦。
现代文：三月十七日，因为是应圣节，大赦天下。
English: On the 17th of March, because it falls on a holy day, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：五月乙卯朔，清暑永安山。
现代文：五月初一，避暑于永安山。
English: On the first day of May, I spent the summer in Yongan Mountain.

古文：六月，射柳祈雨。
现代文：六月，射柳祈雨。
English: In June, people shoot willows to pray for rain.

古文：秋七月癸酉，宋遣郭祯以伐夏来报，遣枢密使杜防报聘。
现代文：秋七月二十日，宋派郭祯前来通报宋征伐夏国消息，皇上派枢密使杜防回访。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Song Dynasty sent Guo Jie to report the news of the Song Dynasty's conquest of Xia, and the emperor sent the confidential envoy Du Fang to pay a return visit.

古文：丁丑，如秋山。
现代文：二十四日，皇上到秋山。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：冬十月癸未朔，驻跸中会川。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于中会川。
English: On the first day of October in winter, it stops at the Nakakai River.

古文：十一月甲子，女直侵边，发黄龙府铁骊军拒之。
现代文：十一月十三日，女真侵扰边境，征发黄龙府铁骊军队拒战。
English: On November 13, Nyanzhen invaded the border and conscripted the Huanglong Iron Curtain Army to resist the war.

古文：宋遣苏伸、向传范来贺应圣节。
现代文：宋派苏伸、向傅范前来祝贺应圣节。
English: Song Dynasty emperors Su Shin and Fu Fan came to congratulate the festival.

古文：十二月庚寅，以北大王府布猥帐郎君自言先世与国联姻，许置敞史，命本帐萧胡睹为之。
现代文：十二月初九，因北大王府布隈帐郎君自己宣称先祖曾与王室联姻，皇上准许该帐设置敞史，由本帐萧胡睹担任该职。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month of the year, because the Bukuma postmaster of the Northern Great King's Palace claimed that his ancestors had married into the royal family, the emperor allowed the post to be opened to the public, and the post was held by the postmaster Xiao Huxian.

古文：辛卯，以所得女直户置肃州。
现代文：初十，将所得女真民户安置于肃州。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the women who received the money were resettled in Suzhou.

古文：以萧迪、刘三嘏、耶律元方、王惟吉、耶律庶忠、孙文昭、萧绍筠、秦德昌充贺宋生辰及来岁正旦使副。
现代文：任命萧迪、刘三嘏、耶律元方、王惟吉、耶律庶忠、孙文昭、萧绍筠、秦德昌为贺宋生辰及来年正旦正副使者。
English: He appointed Xiao Di, Liu Sanjun, Ye Lu Yuan Fang, Wang Wei Ji, Ye Lu Shizhong, Sun Wenzhao, Xiao Shaojun, and Qin Dechang as He Song Shenchen and Zheng Dan Zhengfei Envoy next year.

古文：诏诸犯法者，不得为官吏，诸职官非婚祭，不得沉酗废事。
现代文：诏令犯法之人，不得担任公职。各为官之人，如果不是在婚嫁丧祭之时，不得酗酒误事。
English: Those who violate the edict are not allowed to hold public office. Those who are government officials are not allowed to drink alcohol unless it is at a wedding or funeral.

古文：有治民安边之略者，悉具以闻。
现代文：如果有人具有治民安边之智谋，应该如实奏告皇上。
English: If someone has the wisdom to keep the people safe, they should report to the emperor truthfully.

