古文：荀伯玉崔祖思苏侃虞悰胡谐之虞玩之刘休江祏
现代文：泰始初年，跟随刘子勋起事。等事败回到京城，靠占卜挣钱为生。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Liu Zixun led an uprising, but was defeated and returned to Beijing to earn a living by divination.

古文：齐高帝镇淮阴，伯玉爲高帝冠军刑狱参军。
现代文：齐高帝镇守淮阴，荀伯玉担任高帝的冠军刑狱参军。
English: Qi Gao Di was the warden of Huaiyin, and Zou Bo Yu served as Gao Di's champion to join the army.

古文：高帝爲宋明帝所疑，被征爲黄门郎，深怀忧虑，见平泽有群鹤，仍命笔咏之曰： 八风舞遥翮，九野弄清音，一摧云间志，爲君苑中禽。 
现代文：高帝为宋明帝所怀疑，被征调担任黄门郎，深怀忧虑，一次他看见水泽中有一群鹤，便命笔歌咏道： 八风舞遥翮，九野弄清音，一摧云间志，为君苑中禽。 
English: Emperor Gao was suspected by Emperor Song of Ming and was conscripted to serve as Huangmen Lang. He was deeply worried. Once he saw a group of cranes in the water, he ordered his pen to sing: Eight winds dance far away, nine fields make a clear sound, one destroys the clouds, and is the middle bird of the royal court.

古文：以示伯玉深指，伯玉劝高帝遣数十骑入魏界，安置标榜。
现代文：他把诗拿给荀伯玉深入指点，荀伯玉劝高帝派遣几十个骑兵进入魏朝边界，安顿下来，打出旗号。
English: He took the poem to Zou Bo-yu for in-depth guidance. Zou Bo-yu advised Emperor Gao to send dozens of cavalry into the Wei Dynasty border, settle down, and make a banner.

古文：魏果遣游骑数百履行界上，高帝以闻。
现代文：魏军果然派遣了数百名游动的骑兵在边界上巡逻，高帝把情况上报。
English: The Wei army sent hundreds of cavalrymen to patrol the border, and Emperor Gao reported the situation.

古文：犹惧不得留，令伯玉占。
现代文：还怕不能留下，就让荀伯玉占卜。
English: Afraid of not being able to stay, she asked Zibo Yu to tell her fortune.

古文：伯玉言不成行，而帝卒复本任。
现代文：荀伯玉说不能成行，而高帝终于恢复了本来的职务。
English: Zou Bo-yu said he could not make the trip, and Gao Di finally resumed his original duties.

古文：由是见亲待。
现代文：由此他很受亲待。
English: That's why he's so popular.

古文：高帝有故吏东莞竺景秀尝以过系作部，高帝谓伯玉： 卿比看景秀不？ 
现代文：高帝原来有个旧吏东莞人竺景秀曾因过错被囚禁在作部，高帝对荀伯玉说： 您近来看过竺景秀没有？ 
English: Gao Di originally had an old Dongguan official, Gong Jingxiu, who had been imprisoned in the production department for a mistake. Gao Di said to Gong Boyu: Have you seen Gong Jingxiu recently?

古文：答曰： 数往候之，备加责诮，云 若许某自新，必吞刀刮肠，饮灰洗胃 。 
现代文：回答说： 多次前去看他，对他备加责斥，他说 如果允许我自新，一定要吞刀刮肠，饮灰洗胃 。 
English: He replied: I went to see him many times and scolded him. He said that if I was allowed to reform, I must swallow a knife, scrape my intestines and drink ashes to wash my stomach.

古文：帝善其答，即释之，卒爲忠信士。
现代文：高帝很满意他的答话，便把竺景秀放了，后来终于成为忠信之士。
English: Gao Di was very satisfied with his answer, so he released Gongjing Xiu, and later he finally became a loyal person.

古文：后随高帝还都，除奉朝请。
现代文：后来他跟随高帝回京，被任命为奉朝请。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Gao back to Beijing and was appointed to serve the imperial court.

古文：高帝使主家事。
现代文：高帝让他主持家事。
English: Gao Di let him take charge of the housework.

古文：武帝罢广兴还，立别宅，遣人于大宅掘树数株，伯玉不与，驰以闻。
现代文：武帝免去了广兴的职务回京，建了一座别宅，派人从大宅中去掘几棵树，荀伯玉不给，驰马报告了高帝。
English: Emperor Wu relieved Guangxing of his duties and returned to Beijing. He built a villa and sent someone to dig up a few trees from the mansion. However, he did not give her the gems. He rode his horse to report to Emperor Gao.

古文：高帝善之。
现代文：高帝很称赞他。
English: Emperor Gao highly praised him.

古文：高帝爲南兖州，伯玉从转镇军中兵参军，带广陵令。
现代文：高帝做了南兖州刺史，荀伯玉随从转为镇军中兵参军，兼广陵令。
English: Gao Di made the history of southern Luzhou, and Zou Boyu followed him to become a soldier of the township army and joined the army, and also became the commander of Guangling.

古文：初，高帝在淮阴，伯玉假还广陵，梦上广陵城南楼，上有二青衣小儿语伯玉云： 草中肃，九五相追逐。 
现代文：起初，高帝在淮阴，荀伯玉请假回到广陵，梦中登上了广陵城的南楼，上面有两个青衣小童告诉荀伯玉说： 草中肃，九五相追逐。 
English: At first, Emperor Gao was in Huaiyin, and Zou Boyu asked for leave to return to Guangling. In his dream, he climbed to the south tower of Guangling City. Above him, two young boys in blue told Zou Boyu that: Grass in the middle of the grass, chasing the nine-five phase.

古文：伯玉视城下人头皆有草。
现代文：荀伯玉看城下人头都有草。
English: Zibo Yuping saw that there was grass on people's heads under the city.

古文：泰始七年，又梦高帝乘船在广陵北渚，两腋下有翅不舒。
现代文：泰始七年，又梦见高帝乘船在广陵北面的小洲，两腋下面有翅膀而不能舒展。
English: In the seventh year of Taizhi, he also dreamed that Gao Di was on a boat on a small island north of Guangling. He had wings under his armpits but could not stretch them.

古文：伯玉问何当舒，帝曰： 却后三年。 
现代文：荀伯玉问怎么才能舒展，高帝说： 推后三年。 
English: Zou Boyu asked how to stretch, Gao Di said: three years later.

古文：伯玉梦中自谓是咒师，凡六唾咒之，有六龙出，两腋下翅皆舒，还复敛。
现代文：荀伯玉在梦中自称是咒师，共六次唾咒他，有六条龙出来，两腋下的翅膀都舒展开了，又都合上。
English: In her dream, Zou Bo-yu claimed to be a spell caster. She cursed him a total of six times, and six dragons came out. The wings under her two armpits spread out, and she was able to fly again.

古文：元徽二年，而高帝破桂阳，威名大震，五年而废苍梧，谓伯玉曰： 卿梦今且效矣。 
现代文：元徽二年，高帝攻破了桂阳，威名大震，五年而废掉了苍梧王，他对荀伯玉说： 您的梦现在就要生效了。 
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Gao broke through Guiyang, and the prestige of the Great Earthquake. In the fifth year, he abolished King Cangwu. He said to Zou Boyu: Your dream is about to take effect.

古文：升明初，仍爲高帝骠骑中兵参军，带济阳太守。
现代文：升明初年，他仍然担任高帝的骠骑中兵参军，兼济阳太守。
English: In the first year after ascending the throne, he still served as Gao Di's cavalry soldier to join the army, and was also the governor of Jiyang.

古文：霸业既建，伯玉忠勤尽心，常卫左右，加前将军，大见委信。
现代文：霸业建立以后，荀伯玉忠诚尽心，常常在身边警卫，加任他为前将军，大受信任。
English: After the establishment of hegemony, Zou Bo-yu was loyal and devoted, often guarding his surroundings. He was appointed as a former general and was highly trusted.

古文：齐建元元年，封南丰县子，爲豫章王司空谘议，太守如故。
现代文：齐朝建元元年，被封为南丰县子，担任豫章王司空咨议，太守职务依旧。
English: In the first year of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was named the son of Nanfeng County, and served as the advisor to Emperor Yuanzhang and Empress Dowager Wang.

古文：时武帝在东宫，自以年长，与高帝同创大业，朝事大小悉皆专断，多违制度。
现代文：当时武帝在东宫，自以为年长，与高帝同创大业，朝廷的事情不论大小，全部专断，有很多都违背制度。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was in the East Palace, he thought he was older, and he created a great cause with Emperor Gao. The things of the court, no matter how big or small, were all arbitrary, and many were against the system.

古文：左右张景真偏见任遇，又多僭侈。
现代文：身边人张景真被他偏狭地信任，又非常奢侈。
English: Zhang Jingzhen, a person close to him, was narrowly trusted by him, and was very extravagant.

古文：武帝拜陵还，景真白服乘画舴艋，坐胡床。
现代文：武帝拜陵回来，张景真穿着白衣服乘坐着彩绘的小舟，坐在胡床上。
English: After returning from Emperor Wu's Mausoleum, Zhang Jingzhen dressed in white rode a painted boat and sat on a goose bed.

古文：观者咸疑是太子，内外祗畏，莫敢有言者。
现代文：观看的人都怀疑是太子，内外都很害怕，没有人敢说话。
English: Everyone who watched suspected that it was the crown prince. They were scared inside and out, and no one dared to speak.

古文：骁骑将军陈胤叔先已陈景真及太子前后得失，伯玉因武帝拜陵之后，密啓之，上大怒。
现代文：骁骑将军陈胤叔事先已经陈述了张景真和太子前后的得失，荀伯玉趁着武帝拜陵之后，秘密启奏，皇上大怒。
English: Uncle Chen Yan, the general of the imperial cavalry, had previously stated the gains and losses of Zhang Jingzhen and the crown prince, and Zou Bo-yu took advantage of Emperor Wu's visit to the tomb to secretly open the concert, which enraged the emperor.

古文：豫章王嶷素有宠，政以武帝长嫡，又南郡王兄弟并列，故武帝爲太子，至是有改易之意。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷平素就受到宠幸，正因为武帝是长嫡子，又南郡王兄弟并列，所以以武帝为太子，到现在有了改换的意思。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiao Jian was always favored, and it was precisely because Emperor Wu was the eldest legitimate son, and the brothers of the southern county king were in a row, so Emperor Wu was the prince, and now there is a sense of change.

古文：武帝东还，遣文惠太子、闻喜公子良宣敕诘责，并示以景真罪状，使以太子令收景真杀之。
现代文：武帝东还，派文惠太子、闻喜公萧子良宣读敕令进行诘责，并且把张景真的罪状给他看，让他用太子的命令把张景真抓起来杀掉。
English: Emperor Wu also sent Prince Wen Hui and Prince Wan Xigong Xiao Ziliang to read out the imperial edict to reprimand him, and showed him Zhang Jingzhen's criminal charges, asking him to use the prince's order to arrest and kill Zhang Jingzhen.

古文：胤叔因白武帝，皆言伯玉以闻。
现代文：陈胤叔于是告诉武帝，都说是荀伯玉告诉皇上的。
English: Uncle Chen Yan then told Emperor Wu that it was Zibo Yu who told the emperor.

古文：武帝忧惧，称疾月馀日。
现代文：武帝担忧恐惧，称病一月有余。
English: Emperor Wu was worried and afraid, saying that he had been ill for more than a month.

古文：上怒不解，昼卧太阳殿，王敬则直入叩头，啓请往东宫以慰太子。
现代文：皇上的怒气不消，白天躺在太阳殿，王敬则直接进入叩头，启请前往东宫以安慰太子。
English: The emperor's anger did not dissipate, lying in the sun hall during the day, Wang Jing directly entered the kowtow, and asked to go to the East Palace to comfort the prince.

古文：高帝无言，敬则因大声宣旨往东宫，命装束。
现代文：高帝没有说话，王敬则于是大声宣读圣旨前往东宫，命令人们进行装束。
English: Emperor Gao did not speak, so Wang Jing read aloud the sacred edict, went to the East Palace, and ordered people to dress up.

古文：又敕太官设馔，密遣人报武帝，令奉迎。
现代文：又敕令太官设下肴馔，秘密派人报告了武帝，让他奉迎。
English: He also ordered the eunuch to prepare a banquet, and secretly sent someone to report to Emperor Wu, so that he would be welcomed.

古文：因呼左右索舆，高帝了无动意。
现代文：于是呼左右的人找好车子，高帝一点也没有行动的意思。
English: So he called people around to find a good car, but Gao Di had no intention of taking any action.

古文：敬则索衣以衣高帝，仍牵上舆。
现代文：王敬则找衣服让高帝穿上，便拉着他坐上车子。
English: Wang Jing looked for clothes for Gao Di to wear, and then pulled him into the car.

古文：遂幸东宫，召诸王宴饮，因游玄圃园。
现代文：于是便去了东宫，召见诸王宴饮，接着游了玄圃园。
English: So he went to the East Palace, invited the kings to a banquet, and then swam in the garden.

古文：长沙王晃捉华盖，临川王映执雉尾扇，闻喜公子良持酒枪，南郡王行酒，武帝与豫章王嶷及敬则自捧肴馔。
现代文：长沙王萧晃抓住了华盖，临川王萧映手拿着雉尾扇，闻喜公萧子良拿着酒枪，南郡王行酒，武帝与豫章王萧嶷以及王敬则自己捧着肴馔。
English: Changsha's King Xiao-Kang grabbed the lid, Linchuan's King Xiao-Ying held the fan, Wenqi's King Xiao-Ziliang held the wine gun, Nan-Gun's King made the wine, and Emperor Wu and Yu-Zhang's King Xiao-Hui and King Jing held the dishes themselves.

古文：高帝大饮，赐武帝以下酒，并大醉尽欢，日暮乃去。
现代文：高帝大饮一通，赐给武帝以下的人喝酒，都大醉尽欢，傍晚才离开。
English: Emperor Gao drank a bottle of wine and gave it to the people below Emperor Wu to drink. They were all very drunk and only left in the evening.

古文：是日微敬则，则东宫殆废。
现代文：这天如果没有王敬则，则东宫差不多就要被废除了。
English: On this day, if there is no Wang Jing, then the East Palace will almost be abolished.

古文：高帝重伯玉尽心，愈见信任，使掌军国密事，权动朝右。
现代文：高帝很看重荀伯玉的尽心，越发受到信任，让他掌管军国秘密大事，权力超过了朝中大员。
English: Emperor Gao attached great importance to Zou Bo-yu's dedication and trusted him more and more. He put him in charge of the military's secret affairs, and his power exceeded that of the generals of the dynasty.

古文：每暂休外，轩盖填门。
现代文：每次暂时休假，车马盈门。
English: Every time I take a temporary leave of absence, the wheels come off.

古文：尝遭母忧，成服日，左率萧景先、侍中王晏共载吊之。
现代文：他曾经遭到母亲的丧事，穿上丧服的那天，左率萧景先、侍中王晏同车前往吊唁。
English: He had once suffered the death of his mother. On the day he put on his mourning clothes, the left leader, Xiao Jingsen, and the second-in-command, Wang Yao, went to pay their condolences.

古文：五更便巾车，未到伯玉宅二里许，王侯朝士已盈巷，至下鼓尚未得前，司徒褚彦回、卫军王俭俱进继后方得前，又倚听事久之。
现代文：五更的时候便乘上了有车衣遮盖的巾车，离荀伯玉的宅院还有大约二里地，王侯朝士已经站满了巷子，到了打鼓结束的时候还没有走到跟前，司徒褚彦回、卫军王俭都从后方陆续走到了前面，又倚在厅堂里呆了好久。
English: When it was time for the five drummers to play, they got on a covered wagon. It was still about two miles from Zou Bo-yu's mansion. Prince Asashi had already filled the alley, and when the drumming was over, he had not yet reached the front of the hall. Prince Satoru and Wang Jian, the guards, came to the front one after another from the rear, and they stayed in the hall for a long time.

古文：中诏遣中书舍人徐希秀断哭止客，久方得吊。
现代文：宫中下诏派中书舍人徐希秀断哭止客，过了好久才得以吊唁。
English: Xu Xixiu, a scholar who was sent to the palace, refused to stop crying. It took a long time before he was able to express his condolences.

古文：比出，二人饥乏，气息惙然，切齿形于声貌。
现代文：等出来以后，二人又饥又乏，气息细弱，切齿愤恨流于外表。
English: When they came out, they were hungry and weary, their breath was thin, and their teeth were chattering with resentment.

古文：明日入宫，言便云： 臣等所见二宫门及斋合方荀伯玉宅，政可设雀罗。 
现代文：第二天入宫，便说： 我们所见的二宫门和斋门跟荀伯玉家相比，正可以张罗捕雀。 
English: Entering the palace the next day, he said, "Compared to Zibo Yu Jia, the Ninomiya Gate and the Zaimun Gate that we saw can only be compared to the Zibo Yu Jia.

古文：续复言： 外论云，千敕万令，不如荀公一命。 
现代文：接着又说： 外面议论说，千敕万令，不如荀公一命。 
English: He went on to say, "Outsiders argue that it is better to live a thousand lives than to die a thousand deaths.

古文：武帝深怨伯玉，高帝临崩，指伯玉以属武帝。
现代文：武帝深深怨恨荀伯玉，高帝临死的时候，指着荀伯玉嘱托给武帝。
English: Emperor Wu deeply resented Zibo Jade. When Emperor Gao was about to die, he pointed to Zibo Jade and entrusted it to Emperor Wu.

古文：武帝即位，伯玉忧惧。
现代文：武帝即位，荀伯玉担心害怕。
English: Emperor Wu is enthroned, and Zou Bo-yu is worried and afraid.

古文：上闻之，以其与垣崇祖善，崇祖田业在江西，虑相扇爲乱，加意抚之，伯玉乃安。
现代文：皇上听说了，因为他和垣崇祖要好，垣崇祖的田业在江西，担心他们互相煽动作乱，加意抚慰他们，荀伯玉才安心了。
English: The emperor heard about it, because he was close to his ancestor, and his ancestor's farming was in Jiangxi Province. He was worried that they would stir up trouble between them, so he tried to comfort them, and only then did Zibo Yu feel at ease.

古文：永明元年，与崇祖并见诬伏诛，而胤叔爲太子左率。
现代文：永明元年他与垣崇祖一齐受到诬告而被处死，而陈胤叔为太子左率。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongming, he was falsely accused and executed together with his uncle, Emperor Gaozong, while his uncle, Chen Yan, became the next in line to the throne.

古文：吕文显叹曰： 伯玉能谋太祖而不能自谋，岂非天哉。 
现代文：吕文显慨叹说： 荀伯玉能为太祖谋划而不能自谋，难道不是天意么！ 
English: Lu Wenxian sighed and said, "Isn't it God's will that Zibo Yuping can plan for her great-grandfather but can't do it herself?

古文：初，伯玉微时，有善相墓者谓其父曰： 君墓当出暴贵者，但不得久耳；又出失行女子。 
现代文：起初，荀伯玉微贱的时候，有善于看墓地风水的人对他的父亲说： 您家墓地一定会出暴贵者，只是不能长久罢了；又会出失行的女子。 
English: At first, when Zou Bo-yu was still a minor, a person who was good at looking at the cemetery's feng shui said to his father: There will definitely be a violent person in your family's cemetery, but it won't last long; there will also be a lost woman.

古文：悰性敦实，与人知识，必相存访，亲疏皆有终始，世以此称之。
现代文：荀伯玉听了说： 早晨听了道，晚上死去也可以了。 不久，荀伯玉的姐姐要嫁人，第二天应当出门，头天晚上却随着别人逃去，家里的人寻找不到。
English: Soon, Zou Bo-yu's sister was to be married, and she was supposed to leave the next day, but she ran away with others the night before, and no one at home could find her.

古文：胡谐之，豫章南昌人也。
现代文：后来终于出家为尼。荀伯玉也终于败亡。胡谐之，豫章南昌人。
English: Later, he finally became a Buddhist monk. Zibo Yu was also finally defeated. Hu Junzhi, Yu Zhang Nanchang people.

古文：祖廉之，书侍御史。
现代文：祖父胡廉之，书侍御史。
English: His grandfather, Hu Lianzhi, was a calligrapher and historian.

古文：父翼之，州辟不就。
现代文：父亲胡翼之，受到州府的聘用而没有赴任。
English: His father, Hu Yizhi, was hired by the state government but did not take up the post.

古文：谐之仕宋爲邵陵王左军谘议。
现代文：胡谐之在宋朝做官为邵陵王左军咨议。
English: Hu Junzhi was an official in the Song Dynasty and advised Shao Ling Wang Zuo Jun.

古文：齐武帝爲江州，以谐之爲别驾，委以事任。
现代文：齐武帝为江州刺史，以胡谐之为别驾，委托他主管事务。
English: Emperor Qiwu, who was responsible for the history of Jiangzhou, entrusted him to be in charge of affairs.

古文：建元二年，爲给事中、骁骑将军。
现代文：建元二年，担任给事中、骁骑将军。
English: In the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he served as a middle-ranking official and a cavalry general.

古文：上方欲奖以贵族盛姻，以谐之家人语傒音不正，乃遣宫内四五人往谐之家教子女语。
现代文：上方打算奖赏给他贵族的婚姻，因为胡谐之家的人讲方言，语音不正，便派了宫中的四五个人往胡谐之家去教子女说话。
English: His superiors intended to reward him for marrying a nobleman, and because the people of the House of Humour spoke in a dialect, and their pronunciation was incorrect, they sent four or five people from the court to the House of Humour to teach their children to speak.

古文：二年后，帝问曰： 卿家人语音已正未？ 
现代文：两年后，皇帝问道： 卿家中的人语音已经纯正了吗？ 
English: Two years later, the emperor asked, "Has the pronunciation of people in your family become pure?

古文：谐之答曰： 宫人少，臣家人多，非唯不能得正音，遂使宫人顿成傒语。 
现代文：胡谐之回答说： 宫人少，臣家里的人多，不但不能正音，却使宫人也变成方言。 
English: Hujin replied, "There are few palace people, but there are many people in the vassal's family. Not only can they not pronounce the consonants correctly, but they have also turned the palace people into a dialect.

古文：帝大笑，遍向朝臣说之。
现代文：皇帝大笑，普遍向朝臣说起这件事情。
English: The emperor laughed loudly and told his courtiers all about it.

古文：永明五年，爲左卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：永明五年，他任左卫将军，加给事中。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, he was appointed General of the Left Division, and was added to the case.

古文：谐之风采瑰润，善自居处，兼以旧恩见遇，朝士多与交游。
现代文：胡谐之风采美好，善于自处，兼以旧时的恩德受到优待，朝士多愿意和他交游。
English: His humorous style is beautiful, he is good at being himself, and he receives preferential treatment with the grace of the old days. Asashi is more than willing to mingle with him.

古文：六年，迁都官尚书。
现代文：六年，调为都官尚书。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the post of metropolitan official.

古文：上欲迁谐之，尝从容谓曰： 江州有几侍中邪？ 
现代文：皇上打算要提升胡谐之的时候，曾经从容地对他说： 江州有几个侍中呢？ 
English: When the emperor wanted to elevate Hu Junzhi, he calmly said to him: How many attendants are there in Jiangzhou?

古文：答曰： 近世唯程道惠一人而已。 
现代文：他回答说： 近世只有程道惠一人而已。 
English: He replied: In modern times, there is only one Cheng Dao Hui.

古文：上曰： 当令有二。 
现代文：皇上说： 应当让它有两个。 
English: The emperor said: Let there be two.

古文：后以语尚书令王俭，俭意更异，乃以爲太子中庶子，领左卫率。
现代文：后来他把这话告诉了尚书令王俭，王俭心里更感到诧异，便让他当了太子中庶子，兼左卫率。
English: Later, he told this to Shang Shuling Wang Jian, and Wang Jian was even more surprised, so he made him the prince's middle son, and also the left guard.

古文：谐之有识具，每朝廷官缺及应迁代，密量上所用人，皆如其言。
现代文：胡谐之很有见识，每当朝廷官员出缺以及应该升迁替代，秘密估量皇上所用人选，都和他说的一样。
English: Huniichi was very insightful. Whenever there was a vacancy for a court official and they needed to be promoted or replaced, Huniichi secretly evaluated the candidates for the Emperor, just as he said.

古文：虞悰以此称服之。
现代文：虞因此对他十分佩服。
English: As a result, Yu admires him very much.

古文：既居权要，多所徵求。
现代文：升任权要职位以后，向下面征求物品很多。
English: After being promoted to an important position, there are a lot of requests for items from below.

古文：就梁州刺史范柏年求佳马，柏年患之，谓使曰： 马非狗子，那可得爲应无极之求。 
现代文：他向梁州刺史范伯年求好马，范伯年很为难，对使者说： 马不是狗子，怎么能够满足无穷的搜求！ 
English: He asked Liangzhou's secretary Fan Bertian for a good horse. Fan Bertian was very puzzled and said to the messenger: A horse is not a dog, how can it satisfy the endless search!

古文：接使人薄，使人致恨归，谓谐之曰： 柏年云，胡谐是何傒狗，无厌之求。 
现代文：接待使者很淡薄，使者非常怨恨地回去了，对胡谐之讲： 范伯年说，胡谐之是个什么狗东西，无厌地搜求！ 
English: The reception of the emissary was very poor. The emissary went back very resentfully, and said to Hunny: Fan Birnian said, Hunny is a piece of shit, search tirelessly!

古文：谐之切齿致忿。
现代文：胡谐之切齿愤恨。
English: The gnashing of teeth in mock indignation.

古文：时王玄邈代柏年，柏年称疾推迁不时还。
现代文：当时王玄邈取代范伯年，范伯年称病推延没有及时回京。
English: At that time, Wang Xuanqian replaced Fan Bo Nian. Fan Bo Nian said that she was delayed by illness and did not return to Beijing in time.

古文：谐之言于帝曰： 柏年恃其山川险固，聚衆欲擅一州。 
现代文：胡谐之对皇帝说： 范伯年倚仗山川险固，聚众企图独占一州。 
English: Hu Linzhi said to the emperor: Fan Bo Nian relied on mountains and rivers, and gathered people in an attempt to monopolize one state.

古文：及柏年下，帝欲不问，谐之又言： 见兽格得而放上山。 
现代文：等范伯年回京，皇帝打算不再过问，胡谐之又说： 见到猛兽，捉住了它却又放上山去么？ 
English: When Fan Bo returned to Beijing in the following year, the emperor decided not to ask any more questions. Hu Junzhi also said, "Did you see a ferocious beast, catch it, and then let it go up the mountain?

古文：于是赐死。
现代文：皇帝于是赐他自杀。
English: The emperor then ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：十年，谐之转度支尚书，领卫尉。
现代文：永明十年，胡谐之转任度支尚书，兼卫尉。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, Hu Jingzhi was transferred to the post of Shishi Shangshu, and also became a lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：明年卒，諡肃侯。
现代文：第二年去世，谥号肃侯。
English: He died the following year, and his posthumous name was Soho.

古文：柏年本梓潼人，土断属梁州华阳郡。
现代文：范伯年本来是梓潼人，土地属于梁州华阳郡。
English: Fan Borenian was originally from Zizhou, and the land belonged to Huayang County, Liangzhou.

古文：初爲州将，刘亮使出都谘事，见宋明帝。
现代文：起初担任州将，刘亮派他到京城咨询事情，见到了宋明帝。
English: At first, he served as a prefect, and Liu Liang sent him to Beijing to consult on matters, and he met Song Mingdi.

古文：帝言次及广州贪泉，因问柏年： 卿州复有此水不？ 
现代文：明帝在说话间谈到了广州的贪泉，于是便问范伯年说： 卿的州上也有此水吗？ 
English: In the course of his speech, Emperor Ming talked about the "greedy spring" in Guangzhou, so he asked Fan Borenian: "Sir, does this water also exist in your province?"

古文：答曰： 梁州唯有文川、武乡，廉泉、让水。 
现代文：回答说： 梁州只有文川、武乡、廉泉、让水。 
English: He replied, "In Liangzhou, only Wenchuan, Wuxiang, Lianquan and Zhangshui are famous.

古文：又问： 卿宅在何处？ 
现代文：又问他： 卿的宅院在哪里？ 
English: And he said unto him, Where is the house of the Lord?

古文：俭方盥，投皁荚于地曰： 卿乡俗恶，虞玩之至死烦人。 
现代文：回答说： 臣的住处在廉让之间。 明帝感叹他善于答对，于是受到欣赏。
English: He replied, "The minister's residence is in the middle of the street." Emperor Ming lamented that he was good at answering correctly, so he was appreciated.

古文：刘休字弘明，沛郡相人也。
现代文：历任内外职务，终止于梁州刺史。刘休字弘明，沛郡相县人。
English: Successive positions at home and abroad, terminated in Liangzhou Zhishi. Liu Hui Zi Hongming, Pei County Xiang County people.

古文：初爲驸马都尉，宋明帝居藩，休爲湘东国常侍，不爲帝所知。
现代文：起初做驸马都尉，宋明帝做藩王时，刘休为湘东国常侍，不被明帝赏识。
English: At first, he was the captain of the imperial horse, and when Emperor Song Ming was the king of the Han Dynasty, Liu Xiu was the attendant of the Eastern Hunan Province, and was not appreciated by Emperor Ming.

古文：袭祖封南乡侯。
现代文：承袭祖父的爵位封为南乡侯。
English: He inherited his grandfather's title and was given the title of Nanxianghou.

古文：友人陈郡谢俨同丞相义宣反，休坐匿之，被系尚方。
现代文：他的朋友陈郡人谢俨和丞相刘义宣造反，刘休被牵连办罪，囚禁在尚方监狱。
English: His friend, Chen County resident Xie Jun, and Premier Liu Yixuan declared a rebellion. Liu Xiu was implicated in the crime and imprisoned in Shangfang Prison.

古文：孝武崩乃得出。
现代文：孝武帝去世后，才被放出。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, he was released.

古文：泰始初，诸州反，休素能筮，知明帝当胜，静处不预异谋。
现代文：泰始初年，诸州反叛，刘休平时能占卜，知道明帝要获胜，于是便静处不参与异谋。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Zhuzhou rebelled. Liu Xiu, who could tell fortunes in peacetime, knew that Emperor Ming was going to win, so he did not participate in the conspiracy.

古文：休之系尚方也，尚方令吴喜爱其才，后投吴喜，爲喜辅师府录事参军。
现代文：刘休被关在尚方狱中时，尚方令吴喜很喜爱他的才能，后来他便投靠了吴喜，做吴喜辅师府的录事参军。
English: When Liu Xiu was imprisoned in Shangfang Prison, Shangfang made Wu Xi very fond of his talent. Later, he joined Wu Xi and joined the army as Wu Xisuo's secretary.

古文：喜进之明帝，得在左右，板桂阳王征北参军。
现代文：吴喜把他进献给明帝，得以常在左右，被任命为桂阳王征北参军。
English: Wu Xi dedicated him to the Ming Emperor so that he could always be at his side. He was appointed by the King of Guiyang to join the Northern Expedition.

古文：帝颇有好尚，尤嗜饮食。
现代文：明帝很有些爱好，尤其嗜好饮食。
English: Emperor Ming had quite a few hobbies, especially a penchant for eating.

古文：休多艺能，爰至鼎味，莫不闲解，遂见亲赏，长直殿内。
现代文：刘休有很多手艺，以至于烹调，无不熟知，于是受到亲近和欣赏，常在殿内值勤。
English: Liu Xiu has a lot of skills, so much so that he is familiar with cooking, so he is close and appreciated, and is often on duty in the hall.

古文：后宫孕者，帝使筮其男女，无不如占。
现代文：后宫怀孕的妇人，明帝让他占卜是男是女，无不灵验。
English: For a pregnant woman in the harem, Emperor Ming asked him to divine whether she was a man or a woman, which was a complete failure.

古文：帝憎妇人妒，尚书右丞劳彦远以善棋见亲，妇妒伤其面，帝曰： 我爲卿断之，何如？ 
现代文：明帝憎恨妇人嫉妒，尚书右丞劳彦远因为善于下棋受到亲近，他的妇人因为嫉妒弄伤了他的脸，明帝说： 我来给你处理，怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Ming hated women's jealousy. Shang Shuyuan Lao Yan, who was far away, was approached because he was good at playing chess. His wife hurt his face because of jealousy. Emperor Ming said: I'll deal with you, how about it?

古文：彦远率尔从旨。
现代文：劳彦远很随便地就答应了。
English: Mr. Lau readily agreed.

古文：其夕，遂赐药杀其妻。
现代文：当天晚上，明帝便赐药杀死了他的妻子。
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Ming gave him medicine to kill his wife.

古文：休妻王氏亦妒，帝闻之，赐休妾，敕与王氏二十杖。
现代文：刘休的妻子王氏也好嫉妒，明帝听说后，给刘休赐了一个妾，下令对王氏打二十大棍。
English: Wang, Liu Xiu's wife, was very jealous. After learning of this, Emperor Ming gave Liu Xiu a concubine and ordered that Wang be beaten with twenty large sticks.

古文：令休于宅后开小店，使王氏亲卖皁荚扫帚，以此辱之。
现代文：命令刘休在宅后开一个小店，让王氏亲自去卖皂荚扫帚，以此来羞辱她。
English: He ordered Liu Xiu to open a small shop behind the house and let Mr. Wang go to sell soap brooms in person, in order to humiliate her.

古文：其见亲如此。
现代文：刘休就是这样地受到亲近。
English: You can see how close they are.

古文：寻除员外郎，领辅国司马，中书通事舍人，带南城令。
现代文：不久任命他为员外郎，兼辅国司马，中书通事舍人，带南城令。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, as well as an assistant to the State Secretary of the Republic of China, as well as the Secretary of the General Office of the People's Republic of China, with the title of Nancheng.

古文：后爲都水使者，南康相。
现代文：后来做都水使者，南康相。
English: Later, he became the water envoy of the capital, the South Kangsang.

古文：善谈政体，而在郡无异绩。
现代文：他善于谈论政治问题，而在郡中却没有特殊政绩。
English: He is good at talking about politics, but has no particular track record in the county.

古文：齐建元初，爲御史中丞。
现代文：齐朝建元初年，为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed to the position of "Goshi Chujo."

古文：顷之啓言： 宋世载祀六十，历斯任者五十有三，校其年月，不过盈岁。
现代文：很快他就上奏说： 宋朝历年六十，做过这个职务的有五十三人，计算他们在位的年月，不过一年多点。
English: Soon he began to recite: The Song Dynasty is sixty years old, and there have been fifty-three people who have held this position, counting the years they have been on the throne, but a little more than a year.

古文：于臣叨滥，宜请骸骨。 
现代文：我承恩前去充数，现在想请求退休。 
English: I went to make up for it, and now I'd like to ask for retirement.

古文：四年，出爲豫章内史，卒。
现代文：建元四年，调任豫章内史，去世。
English: In the fourth year of Jianyuan, he was transferred to Yuzhang Inner History, and passed away.

古文：宋末，造指南车，高帝以休有思理，使与王僧虔对共监试。
现代文：宋朝末年，造出了指南车，高帝因为刘休有思维能力，派他与王僧虔共同监督试验。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, a guide car was built, and Emperor Gao, because Liu Xiu had the ability to think, sent him to supervise the experiment together with Wang Sangyan.

古文：又元嘉中，羊欣重王子敬正隶书，世共宗之，右军之体微轻，不复见贵。
现代文：又在元嘉时期，羊欣很重视王子敬的正隶书，世人共同崇尚，王右军的书体受到轻视，不再被看重。
English: In addition, during the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, Yang Xin attached great importance to the Zhengli script, which was revered by princes and revered by the world, while the Wang Yujun script was despised and no longer valued.

古文：及休始好右军法，因此大行云。
现代文：到了刘休才爱好右军技法，因此大大流行起来。
English: It wasn't until Liu Xiu that he developed a liking for the right-arm technique, which is why it became so popular.

