古文：起屠维大渊献，尽重光赤奋若，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年
English: From, to, a total of three years

古文：太祖高皇帝中五年
现代文：汉纪三汉高帝五年
English: Five years after the founding of the Han Dynasty

古文：冬，十月，汉王追项羽至固陵，与齐王信、魏相国越期会击楚；信、越不至，楚击汉军，大破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉王刘邦追击项羽到达固陵，与齐王韩信、魏国的相国彭越约定日期合击楚军。但是韩信、彭越的军队没有来，楚军攻打汉军，大败了汉军。
English: In the winter, in October, Han King Liu Bang chased Xiang Yu and arrived at Guling. He and Qi King Han Xin and Wei's partner country, Peng Yue, agreed on a date to attack the Chu army. However, the armies of Han Xin and Peng Yue did not come. The Chu army attacked the Han army and defeated the Han army.

古文：汉王复坚壁自守，谓张良曰： 诸侯不从，奈何？ 
现代文：汉王于是重又坚固营垒加强防守，并对张良说： 诸侯不遵守信约，怎么办啊？ 
English: Therefore, the Han king strengthened the defense with a heavy and solid camp, and said to Zhang Liang: What should be done if the lords do not abide by the letter of the covenant?

古文：对曰： 楚兵且破，二人未有分地，其不至固宜。
现代文：张良答道： 楚军即将被打败，而韩信、彭越二人没有分得确定的领地，因此他们不应约前来会合，原来是应当的。
English: Zhang Liang replied: The Chu army was about to be defeated, and Han Xin and Peng Yue did not have a definite territory. Therefore, they should not have made an appointment to come to the meeting. Originally, they should have.

古文：君王能与共天下，可立致也。
现代文：君王您如果能与他们一起共分天下，就可以立即把他们召来。
English: If the emperor could share the fruits of his victory with them, they would immediately come to join him.

古文：齐王信之立，非君王意，信亦不自坚；彭越本定梁地，始，君王以魏豹故拜越为相国，今豹死，越亦望王，而君王不早定。
现代文：齐王韩信的封立，并不是您的本意，韩信自己也不放心。彭越本来平定了梁地，当初您为了魏豹的缘故，封彭越为魏国相国。而今魏豹已死，彭越也想自己称王，但您却不早作决定。
English: The sealing of Han Xin, the king of Qi, was not your intention, and Han Xin himself was not at ease. Peng Yue had originally leveled the ground. At the beginning, you sealed Peng Yue as a state of Wei for the sake of the Wei panther. And now the Wei panther is dead, Peng Yue also wants to proclaim himself king, but you did not make a decision earlier.

古文：今能取睢阳以北至穀城皆以王彭越，从陈以东傅海与齐王信。
现代文：现在，您可以把从睢阳以北到城的地区都封给彭越，把从陈县以东到沿海地区的区域划给韩信。
English: Now, you can assign to Peng Yue the area from the north of Shenyang to the city, and assign to Han Xin the area from the east of Chen County to the coastal area.

古文：信家在楚，其意欲复得故邑。
现代文：韩信的家乡在楚地，他的意思也是想要重新得到自己故乡的土地。
English: Han Xin's hometown is in Chudi, and he also wants to regain the land of his hometown.

古文：能出捐此地以许两人，使各自为战，则楚易破也。 
现代文：您如果能拿出以上地区许给他们两人，让他们各自为自己的利益而战，那么楚国就很容易攻破了。 
English: If you can give the above-mentioned regions to the two of them and let them fight for their own interests, then Chu will be easy to break through.

古文：汉王从之。
现代文：汉王听从了这一建议。
English: Han Wang followed their advice.

古文：于是韩信、彭越皆引兵来。
现代文：于是韩信、彭越都率军前来。
English: As a result, Han Xin and Peng Yue both came with their armies.

古文：十一月，刘贾南渡淮，围寿春，遣人诱楚大司马周殷。
现代文：十一月，刘邦的堂兄刘贾南渡淮河，包围了寿春，派人去诱降楚国的大司马周殷。
English: In November, Liu Bang's cousin Liu Jianan crossed the Huai River, encircled Shouchun, and sent people to entice Ma Zhouyin, the Grand Master of Chu, to surrender.

古文：殷畔楚，以舒屠六，举九江兵迎黥布，并行屠城父，随刘贾皆会。
现代文：周殷即反叛楚国，用舒地的兵力屠灭了六地，并调发九江的部队迎接黥布，一同去屠灭了城父，接着便随同刘贾等人一齐会合。
English: Zhou Yin rebelled against Chu, stormed six counties with the soldiers of Shu County, led the soldiers of Jiujiang to cooperate with Yingbu, and jointly attacked Chengchi County. Yingbu and Liu Jia both joined forces with Han Wang.

古文：十二月，项王至垓下，兵少，食尽，与汉战不胜，入壁；汉军及诸侯兵围之数重。
现代文：十二月，项羽到了垓下，兵少粮尽，与汉军交战未能取胜，便退入营垒固守。这时汉军和诸侯的军队将项羽的军营重重包围了起来。
English: In December, when Xiang Yu came under the yoke, his soldiers were short of food, and they could not win the battle with the Chinese army, so they retreated into the camp and held fast. At this time, the Chinese army and the armies of the princes surrounded Xiang Yu's camp.

古文：项王夜闻汉军四面皆楚歌，乃大惊曰： 汉皆已得楚乎？
现代文：项羽在晚上听到汉军四面都唱起楚歌，就大惊道： 汉军已经全部得到楚国的土地了吗？
English: In the evening, when he heard the Chinese army singing the "Chu Song" in all directions, he was shocked: Has the Chinese army gained all the land of Chu?

古文：是何楚人之多也？ 
现代文：是什么原因楚人这么多呀！ 
English: What is the reason why there are so many Chu people?

古文：则夜起，饮帐中，悲歌慷慨，泣数行下；左右皆泣，莫能仰视。
现代文：便连夜起身，在帐中饮酒，慷慨悲歌，泪下数行，侍从人员见状也都纷纷哭泣，全不忍心抬头观看。
English: Then he got up all night, drank alcohol in his account, sang a generous dirge, shed a few tears, and the attendants also cried when they saw the letter, and they all couldn't bear to look up.

古文：于是项王乘其骏马名骓，麾下壮士骑从者八百馀人，直夜，溃围南出驰走。
现代文：项羽于是骑上他的名叫骓的骏马，部下的壮士骑马相随的有八百多人，当夜即突围往南奔驰。
English: Therefore, Xiang Yu rode on his steed named Yao, and more than eight hundred of his brave men rode with him. That night, they broke out of the encirclement and rode south.

古文：平明，汉军乃觉之，令骑将灌婴以五千骑追之。
现代文：天大亮时，汉军才发觉，便命令骑将灌婴率五千名骑士追赶。
English: It was only at dawn that the Chinese army discovered that they had sent a cavalry general with five thousand cavalrymen to chase Xiang Wang.

古文：项王渡淮，骑能属者才百馀人。
现代文：项羽渡过淮河，相随的骑兵能跟得上他的才一百多人。
English: Xiang Yu crossed the Huai River, and only more than a hundred horsemen could keep up with him.

古文：至阴陵，迷失道，问一田父，田父绐曰 左 。
现代文：到达阴陵后，项羽一行人迷了路，就向一个农夫问路，农夫骗他说 往左 。
English: After reaching Yinling, Xiang Yu and his party lost their way and asked a farmer for directions. The farmer lied and told him to go to the left.

古文：左，乃陷大泽中，以故汉追及之。
现代文：但是项羽等往左走，却陷进了大沼泽地中。汉军因此便追上了他们。
English: To the left, it sank into the Everglades, so the Chinese army caught up.

古文：项王乃复引兵而东，至东城，乃有二十八骑。
现代文：项羽于是又领兵向东奔走，到达东城，相随的只有二十八个骑兵了。
English: So the king led his army east again, and when they reached the eastern city, there were only twenty-eight horsemen left.

古文：汉骑追者数千人，项王自度不得脱，谓其骑曰： 吾起兵至今，八岁矣；身七十馀战，未尝败北，遂霸有天下。
现代文：而这时汉军骑兵追逐前来的有好几千人。项羽自己料想是不能脱身了，便对他的骑崐兵们说： 我从起兵到现在，已经八年了，身经七十多次战斗，不曾失败过，这才霸有了天下。
English: At this time, the Chinese cavalry was chasing several thousand people. Xiang Yu thought that he would not be able to escape, so he said to his cavalry soldiers: It has been eight years since I started the army, I have been through more than seventy battles, I have never failed, this is how hegemony came to the world.

古文：然今卒困于此，此天之亡我，非战之罪也。
现代文：但是今天终于被困在这里，这是上天要灭亡我啊，并不是我用兵有什么过错！
English: But today, finally, I'm stuck here, it's God's will to destroy me, it's not my fault I'm a soldier!

古文：今日固决死，愿为诸君快战，必溃围，斩将，刈旗，三胜之，令诸君知天亡我，非战之罪也。 
现代文：今天定要一决生死，愿为你们痛快地打一仗，一定突破重围，斩杀敌将、砍倒汉旗，接连三次取胜，让你们知道是天要亡我，而不是我用兵的过错。 
English: Today, I am determined to fight to the death. I am willing to fight a battle for you cheerfully, break through the encirclement, kill the enemy general, cut down the Chinese flag, and win three times in a row, so that you know that it is heaven that wants to kill me, not my fault for using soldiers.

古文：乃分其骑以为四队，四乡。
现代文：随即把他的人马分为四队，向四个方向冲杀。
English: So he divided his horsemen into four companies, and they set out in four directions.

古文：汉军围之数重。
现代文：但汉军已将他们重重包围。
English: The Chinese army surrounded Xiang Wang for several floors.

古文：项王谓其骑曰： 吾为公取彼一将。 
现代文：项羽便对他的骑兵们说： 看我为你们斩杀他一员将领！ 
English: And the king said unto his horsemen, I will make him a captain over you.

古文：令四面骑驰下，期山东为三处。
现代文：就命令骑士们从四面奔驰而下，约定在山的东边分三处会合。
English: The king ordered the cavalry to gallop down on all sides, and agreed to meet at three places on the east side of the mountain.

古文：于是项王大呼驰下，汉军皆披靡，遂斩汉一将。
现代文：接着项羽便大声呼喝着策马飞奔而下，汉军随即都溃败散乱，项羽就斩杀了一员汉将。
English: Next, Xiang Yu shouted loudly and galloped down on his horse. The Han army was immediately defeated and scattered, and Xiang Yu killed a Han general.

古文：是时，郎中骑杨喜追项王，项王瞋目而叱之，喜人马俱惊，辟易数里。
现代文：这时，郎中骑杨喜追击项羽，项羽瞪着双眼厉声呵叱他，杨喜人马都受到惊吓，退避了好几里地。
English: At this time, Yang Xixi, the second-in-command, chased Xiang Yu. Xiang Yu glared at him and scolded him. Yang Xixi was frightened and retreated several miles.

古文：项王与其骑会为三处，汉军不知项王所在，乃分军为三，复围之。
现代文：项羽便与他的骑兵们分三处相会合，汉军不知道项羽究竟在哪里，于是分兵三路，重又把他们包围了起来。
English: Xiang Yu and his cavalrymen met in three places. The Chinese army did not know where Xiang Yu was, so they surrounded them again in three directions.

古文：项王乃驰，复斩汉一都尉，杀数十百人。复聚其骑，亡其两骑耳。
现代文：项羽随即奔驰冲杀，又斩杀了汉军的一名都尉，杀掉了汉军百十来人，重新聚拢了他的骑兵，至此不过仅损失了两名骑士罢了。
English: Xiang Yu immediately rushed to kill, and killed a captain of the Chinese army, killed a hundred or so people of the Chinese army, and re-gathered his cavalry, but only lost two knights.

古文：乃谓其骑曰： 何如？ 
现代文：项羽就对他的骑兵们说： 怎么样啊？ 
English: So the king said to his horsemen, "What do you think?

古文：骑皆伏曰： 如大王言！ 
现代文：骑兵们都敬服地说： 正像大王您所说的一样！ 
English: The horsemen all said respectfully: Just as the great king said!

古文：于是项王欲东渡乌江，乌江亭长舣船待，谓项王曰： 江东虽小，地方千里，众数十万人，亦足王也。
现代文：这时项羽就想东渡乌江，乌江亭长把船停泊在岸边等着他，并对项羽说： 江东虽然狭小，土地方圆千里，民众几十万人，却也足够用以称王的了。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu wanted to cross the Wujiang River to the east. The captain of the Wujiang Pavilion moored the boat on the shore to wait for him, and said to Xiang Yu: Although the East River is narrow, the land is thousands of miles long, and the population is hundreds of thousands, it is enough to be used to praise the king.

古文：愿大王急渡！
现代文：望大王您火速渡江！
English: Wang Daowang, you cross the river at high speed!

古文：今独臣有船，汉军至，无以渡。 
现代文：现在只有我有船，汉军到来，无船渡江。 
English: Now I'm the only one with boats. The Chinese army has come here, and there are no boats to cross the river.

古文：项王笑曰： 天之亡我，我何渡为！
现代文：项羽笑着说： 上天要灭亡我，我还要渡江做什么呀！
English: Xiao Wang smiled and said, "Heaven wants to destroy me, so why should I cross the river?"

古文：且籍与江东子弟八千人渡江而西，今无一人还；纵江东父兄怜而王我，我何面目见之！
现代文：况且我与江东子弟八千人渡江西征，而今没有一个人归还，纵使江东父老怜爱我，仍然以我为王，我又有什么脸面去见他们啊！
English: Moreover, I and eight thousand of Jiangdong's sons and brothers crossed the Yangtze River for the Western Expedition, and now no one has returned. Even though Jiangdong's father loves me and still regards me as king, what face do I have to meet them!

古文：纵彼不言，籍独不愧于心乎！ 
现代文：即便他们不说什么，难道我就不感到心中有愧吗！ 
English: Even if they don't say it, don't I feel ashamed deep inside?

古文：乃以所乘骓马赐亭长，令骑皆下马步行，持短兵接战。
现代文：于是就把自己所骑的骏马骓送给了亭长，命令他的骑兵都下马步行，手持短兵器与汉军交战。
English: So he gave the stallion he was riding to the chief of the pavilion and ordered his cavalry to dismount and go on foot, armed with short weapons, to engage the Chinese army.

古文：独籍所杀汉军数百人，身亦被十馀创。
现代文：仅项羽一人就杀死了汉军几百人，项羽自己也身受十多处伤。
English: Xiang Yu alone killed hundreds of Han soldiers, and Xiang Yu himself suffered more than ten wounds.

古文：顾见汉骑司马吕马童，曰： 若非吾故人乎？ 
现代文：这时项羽回头看见了汉军骑司马吕马童，就说： 你不是我的老朋友吗？ 
English: He looked back and saw the horseman of the Chinese army, Ma Lüma Tong, and said: Aren't you my old friend?

古文：马童面之，指示中郎骑王翳曰： 此项王也！ 
现代文：吕马童背过脸，指给中郎骑王翳说： 这就是项王！ 
English: Luma Tong turned his back and pointed to Zhong Lang riding Wang Yao and said, "This is Xiang Wang!"

古文：项王乃曰： 吾闻汉购我头千金，邑万户，吾为若德。 
现代文：项羽便说道： 我听说汉王悬赏千金买我的头颅，分给万户的封地，我就留给你一些恩德吧！ 
English: He said, "I have heard that the Han army has offered a reward of one thousand kilos of gold and ten thousand fiefs for my head. Let me do something good for you."

古文：乃刎而死。
现代文：即自刎而死。
English: That is to say, he hanged himself.

古文：王翳取其头，馀骑相蹂践争项王，相杀者数十人。
现代文：王翳随即取下项羽的头颅。其余的骑兵便相互践踏着争抢项羽的躯体，互为残杀的有几十个人。
English: The king castrated Xiang Wang's head, and other cavalrymen trampled on and fought over Xiang Wang's body, killing dozens of people.

古文：最其后，杨喜、吕马童及郎中吕胜、杨武各得其一体；五人共会其体，皆是，故分其户，封五人皆为列侯。
现代文：到了最后，杨喜、吕马童和郎中吕胜、杨武各夺得项羽的一部分肢体。五个人把项羽的肢体会合拼凑到一起，都对得上，因此便分割原来悬赏的万户封地，将五人都封为列侯。
English: In the end, Yang Xi, Lü Ma Tong, and his vassals Lü Sheng and Yang Wu each won a part of Xiang Yu's body. The five of them pieced together Xiang Yu's body parts and got them all right, so they divided the original reward of 10,000 fiefs and made all five of them vassals.

古文：楚地悉定，独鲁不下；汉王引天下兵欲屠之。
现代文：楚地全部平定了，唯独鲁县仍不投降。汉王刘邦率领天下的兵马，打算屠灭它。
English: All of Chu had been pacified, except for Lu County, which still would not surrender. Han King Liu Bang led the world's soldiers and horses, intending to slaughter it.

古文：至其城下，犹闻弦诵之声，为其守礼义之国，为主死节，乃持项王头以示鲁父兄，鲁乃降。
现代文：大军抵达城下，仍然能听到城中礼乐弦诵的声音，由于鲁县是信守礼义的故国，为自己的君主尽忠守节，汉军便拿出项羽的头颅给鲁县的父老看，鲁县这才投降。
English: When the large army arrived at the foot of the city, they could still hear the sound of the strings of the ceremonial music being chanted in the city. Since Lu County was the homeland that adhered to propriety and was loyal to its monarch, the Chinese army took out Xiang Yu's head to show it to Lu County's parents. Lu County then surrendered.

古文：汉王以鲁公礼葬项王于穀城，亲为发哀，哭之而去。
现代文：汉王用葬鲁公的礼仪把项羽葬在城，并亲自为项羽发丧举哀，哭了一阵后离去。
English: Han Wang buried Xiang Yu in the city with the etiquette of burying Lu Gong, and personally mourned for Xiang Yu, cried for a while and left.

古文：诸项氏枝属皆不诛。封项伯等四人皆为列侯，赐姓刘氏；诸民略在楚者皆归之。
现代文：对项羽的家族亲属都不加杀害，还把项伯等四人都封为列侯，赐他们姓刘，将过去被掳掠到楚国来的百姓们仍归他们统治。
English: They did not kill any of Xiang Yu's family and relatives. They also made Xiang Bo and four others princes and gave them the surname Liu. The people who had been abducted to Chu in the past were still under their rule.

古文：太史公曰：羽起陇畮之中，三年，遂将五诸侯灭秦，分裂天下而封王侯，政由羽出；位虽不终，近古以来未尝有也！
现代文：太史公司马迁曰：项羽起于田野民间，才三年就率领着齐、赵、韩、魏、崐燕五诸侯国的军队灭亡了秦朝，分割天下而封授王侯，政令全由项羽发布，他的王位虽然未获终结，却也是近古以来所不曾有过的了！
English: Taishi Company's Ma Qian said: Xiang Yu started from the field folk, and only three years later, he led the armies of Qi, Zhao, Han, Wei, and Yan five principalities to the demise of the Qin Dynasty, divided the world and conferred princes, and all the decrees were issued by Xiang Yu. Although his throne was not completed, it was unprecedented since ancient times!

古文：及羽背关怀楚，放逐义帝而自立；怨王侯叛己，难矣！
现代文：待到项羽背弃关中而怀恋楚国故土，放逐义帝而自立为王，这时怨恨诸侯王们背叛自己，可就很难说得通了！
English: But when Xiang Yu turned his back on Guanzhong and fell in love with his native land of Chu, when he exiled the Righteous Emperor and established himself as king, when he resented the princes and kings for betraying him, it was hard to make sense of it all!

古文：自矜功伐，奋其私智而不师古，谓霸王之业，欲以力征经营天下。
现代文：还自我夸耀战功，一味逞个人小聪明而不效法古人，认为霸王的功业，就是要用武力征伐来经营治理天下。
English: He also boasted of his war exploits, and was always trying to be clever instead of following the example of the ancients. He believed that the work of a tyrant was to conquer and rule the world by force.

古文：五年，卒亡其国，身死东城，尚不觉寤而不自责，乃引 天亡我，非用兵之罪也， 岂不谬哉！
现代文：结果只五年的时间，终于失掉了自己的国家，自身死在东城，却还不觉悟、不责备自己，反倒借口 上天要灭亡我，而并非我用兵的过错 ，这难道不是荒谬之极吗！
English: As a result, it only took me five years to finally lose my country and die in Dongcheng, but I still didn't realize it, didn't blame myself, but instead used the excuse that God was going to destroy me, and it wasn't my fault for using soldiers, isn't that the height of absurdity!

古文：扬子《法言》：或问： 楚败垓下，方死，曰 天也！ 
现代文：扬雄《法言》曰：有人问： 楚王兵败垓下，将要死的时候说道： 是上天亡我！ 
English: Yang Xiong's "Dharma Saying" says: Someone asked: When King Chu's soldiers were defeated and about to die, he said: "It was Heaven that killed me!"

古文：谅乎？ 
现代文：可以相信这种说法吗？ 
English: Can this be believed?

古文：曰： 汉屈群策，群策屈群力；楚憞群策而自屈其力。
现代文：回答说： 汉王刘邦尽量发挥、利用众人的计谋，这些计谋调动了众人的力量。
English: He replied: Han Wang Liu Bang tried his best to play and use the strategies of the masses, and these strategies mobilized the power of the masses.

古文：屈人者克，自屈者负。
现代文：楚王项羽憎恶采用众人的计谋，只发挥个人的作用。
English: King Xiang Yu of Chu abhorred the use of many people's stratagems and only played a personal role.

古文：天曷故焉！ 汉王还，至定陶，驰入齐王信壁，夺其军。
现代文：而善于发挥、利用众人智谋和力量的人就能取得胜利，只凭一己的智谋和力量的人就必定失败，这与上天有什么关系啊！ 汉王回军到达定陶县，奔入齐王韩信的营垒，接管了他的部队。
English: But those who are good at exerting and utilizing the wisdom and strength of the masses can achieve victory, while those who rely only on their own wisdom and strength are bound to fail. What does this have to do with heaven? The Han king Hui's army arrived in Dingtao County, rushed into the camp of the Qi king Han Xin, and took over his troops.

古文：临江王共尉不降，遣卢绾、刘贾击虏之。
现代文：临江王共尉仍不归降，汉王便派卢绾、刘贾攻打并俘获了他。
English: Linjiang Wang's lieutenant still refused to surrender, so Han Wang sent Lu Wei and Liu Jia to attack and capture him.

古文：春，正月，更立齐王信为楚王，王淮北，都下邳。
现代文：春季，正月，汉王改封齐王韩信为楚王，统辖淮河以北地区，都城设在下邳。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Han Wang changed his title from Qi Wang to Han Xin to Chu Wang, and governed the area north of the Huaihe River, with the capital city located in the Lower Yangtze River.

古文：封魏相国建城侯彭越为梁王，王魏故地，都定陶。
现代文：封魏相国建城侯彭越为梁王，统辖魏国故地，都城设在定陶。
English: Peng Yue, the founding vassal of the Wei Dynasty, was crowned King of Liang. He governed the former territory of the Wei Dynasty, and the capital was located in Dingtao.

古文：令曰： 兵不得休八年，万民与苦甚。
现代文：汉王下令说： 军队得不到休整已经八年了，万民饱受战乱之苦。
English: The king of Han ordered: It has been eight years since the army has not been able to rest, and all the people have suffered from the war.

古文：今天下事毕，其赦天下殊死以下。 
现代文：现在夺取天下的大事已经完成，赦免天下判斩刑以下的所有罪犯。 
English: Now that the great task of conquering the world has been completed, all criminals sentenced to death or less will be pardoned.

古文：诸侯王皆上疏请尊汉王为皇帝。
现代文：诸侯王一致上疏，请求推尊汉王为皇帝。
English: The princes and kings unanimously petitioned the emperor to promote Han Wang to emperor.

古文：二月甲午，王即皇帝位于汜水之阳。
现代文：二月甲午，汉王便在水北面登上帝位。
English: On the first afternoon of February, Han Wang ascended to the throne on the north side of the water.

古文：更王后曰皇后，太子曰皇太子；追尊先媪曰昭灵夫人。
现代文：改称王后为皇后，王太子为皇太子；追尊先母为昭灵夫人。
English: The queen was renamed the empress, the crown prince the crown prince, and his late mother the Lady Zhaoling.

古文：诏曰： 故衡山王吴芮，从百粤之兵，佐诸侯，诛暴秦，有大功；诸侯立以为王，项羽侵夺之地，谓之番君。
现代文：颁布诏书说： 原衡山王吴芮，率领百粤部族之兵，协助诸侯军，诛灭残暴的秦王朝，建有大功，诸侯立他为王，但项羽却侵夺了他的封地，称他作番君。
English: The imperial rescript issued said: The original Hengshan King, Wu Xuan, led the soldiers of hundreds of Guangdong tribes, assisted the warlords' army, and destroyed the cruel Qin Dynasty. He did a great service. The warlords made him king, but Xiang Yu invaded his fiefdom and called him a guardian.

古文：其以芮为长沙王。 
现代文：现在改封吴芮为长沙王。 
English: Now, Wu Gan has been renamed the King of Changsha.

古文：又曰： 故粤王无诸，世奉粤祀；秦侵夺其地，使其社稷不得血食。
现代文：又说： 原粤王无诸，世代供奉粤国的祖宗。秦王朝侵夺了他的土地，使粤国的社稷不能再享受祭祀。
English: He also said: Originally, the king of Guangdong was Muzhu, who had offered sacrifices to the ancestors of Guangdong for generations. The Qin Dynasty invaded his land, so that the community in Guangdong could no longer enjoy the sacrifices.

古文：诸侯伐秦，无诸身率闽中兵以佐灭秦，项羽废而弗立。
现代文：诸侯征伐秦朝，无诸亲自率领闽中的军队相协助，攻灭了秦王朝，项羽却将他废黜不予封立。
English: The princes conquered the Qin Dynasty, and Muzhu personally led the troops in the middle of the country to assist, defeated the Qin Dynasty, but Xiang Yu deposed him and refused to be enthroned.

古文：今以为闽粤王，王闽中地。 
现代文：现在封无诸为闽粤王，统辖闽中一带。 
English: Now, Fong Wuzhu is the king of Yunnan-Guangdong, governing the Yunnan-China region.

古文：帝西都洛阳。
现代文：高帝刘邦向西建都洛阳。
English: Emperor Gao and Liu Bang built the capital Luoyang to the west.

古文：夏，五月，兵皆罢归家。
现代文：夏季，五月，士兵们都复员回家。
English: In the summer, in May, the soldiers were demobilized and returned home.

古文：诏： 民前或相聚保山泽，不书名数。
现代文：高帝刘邦颁布诏书： 百姓中以前有的人相聚安守在深山大泽中躲避战乱，未登记入户籍中。
English: Emperor Gao promulgated the edict of Liu Bang: Some people in the people had previously gathered together to stay safe in the deep mountains and lakes to avoid war, and were not registered in the household registration.

古文：今天下已定，令各归其县，复故爵、田宅；吏以文法教训辨告，勿笞辱军吏卒；爵及七大夫以上，皆令食邑，非七大夫已下，皆复其身及户，勿事。 
现代文：如今天下已经平定，诏令这些百姓各自返回他们的所在县，恢复他们过去的爵位和田地住宅；官吏应依据法律义理进行教诲，处理纠纷，不得鞭笞侮辱军中官兵；凡爵位至七大夫以上的，都让他们享用封地民户的赋税收入，非七大夫爵位及其以下的，都免除其个人及一户之内的赋税徭投，不予征收。 
English: As has been settled today, the emperor ordered these people to return to their respective counties and restore their former titles and homesteads; officials should educate and handle disputes in accordance with legal principles, and should not scourge and insult officers and soldiers in the army; all titles up to and including the seven grand dukes should allow them to enjoy the tax income of fiefdom households, and those who are not the seven grand dukes and below should be exempted from personal and intra-household tax and not be levied.

古文：帝置酒洛阳南宫，上曰： 彻侯、诸将毋敢隐朕，皆言其情。吾所以有天下者何？
现代文：高帝刘邦在洛阳南宫举行酒宴，高帝说道： 各位列侯、各位将军，不要对朕隐瞒，都来说说这个道理：我之所以能取得天下的原因是什么？
English: Emperor Gao Liu Bang held a wine banquet at the Southern Palace in Luoyang. Emperor Gao said, "Lords and generals, don't hide it from me, tell everyone this truth: What is the reason why I was able to gain the whole world?

古文：项氏之所以失天下者何？ 
现代文：项羽之所以失掉天下的原因又是什么呀？ 
English: So what is the reason for the loss of the world?

古文：高起、王陵对曰： 陛下使人攻城略地，因以与之，与天下同其利；项羽不然，有功者害之，贤者疑之，此其所以失天下也。 
现代文：高起、王陵回答说： 陛下派人攻城掠地，攻取了城邑、土地就分封给他，与大家同享利益；项羽却不是这样，他对有功的人嫉恨，对贤能的人猜疑，这就是他失去天下的原因。 
English: Standing up, Wang Ling replied, "Your Majesty sent people to attack the city and plunder the land. After capturing the city, the land was assigned to him and he shared the benefits with everyone. However, Xiang Yu was not like that. He was jealous of those who had meritorious deeds and suspicious of those who were capable. This is why he lost the whole world.

古文：上曰： 公知其一，未知其二。
现代文：高帝说： 你们是只知其一，不知其二啊。
English: Gao Zu said: The public only knows one thing, the unknown another.

古文：夫运筹帷幄之中，决胜千里之外，吾不如子房；镇国家，抚百姓，给饷馈，不绝粮道，吾不如萧何；连百万之众，战必胜，攻必取，吾不如韩信。
现代文：谈到运筹帷幄之中，决胜千里之外，我不如张良；镇守国家，安抚百姓，供给粮饷，保持运粮道路畅通无阻，我不如萧何；统率百万大军，战必胜，攻必克，我不如韩信。
English: When it comes to operational planning, I am not as good as Zhang Liang when the decisive victory is thousands of miles away; I am not as good as Xiao He when it comes to guarding the country, appeasing the people, supplying grain and keeping the grain transportation road unimpeded; I am not as good as Han Xin when it comes to leading a million-strong army, winning the war, and overcoming difficulties.

古文：三者皆人杰，吾能用之，此吾所以取天下者也。
现代文：这三位都是人中英杰，而我能够任用他们，这就是我所以能取得天下的原因。
English: These three are all greats, and I can make the most of them, which is why I can conquer the world.

古文：项羽有一范增而不能用，此所以为我禽也。 
现代文：项羽虽然有一个范增，却不能信任使用他，这便是项羽所以被我捕捉打败的原因了。 
English: Xiang Yu originally had a great talent, Fan Zeng, but he couldn't reuse it, so he was defeated by my men.

古文：群臣说服。
现代文：群臣都心悦诚服。
English: The courtiers were all pleased.

古文：韩信至楚，召漂母，赐千金。
现代文：韩信到了楚地，召见曾经分给自己饭吃的那位漂洗丝绵的老妇，赐给她一千金。
English: When Han Xin arrived in Chudi, he summoned the old woman who had washed and rinsed the silk fabric and given her a thousand gold.

古文：召辱己少年令出胯下者，以为中尉，告诸将相曰： 此壮士也。
现代文：又召见曾经羞辱自己、叫自己从胯下爬过去的那个人，任命他为楚国的中尉；并告诉将相们说： 这是位壮士啊。
English: He also summoned the man who had humiliated himself and made himself crawl from under the yoke, and appointed him lieutenant of the state of Chu; and he told the generals: "This is a strong man."

古文：方辱我时，我宁不能杀之邪？
现代文：当他侮辱我时，我难道就不能杀了他吗？
English: Couldn't I have killed him when he insulted me?

古文：杀之无名，故忍而就此。 
现代文：只是杀他没有名义，所以忍了下来，才达到了今天这样的成就。 
English: It's just that I didn't have a name for killing him, so I put up with it until I reached today's achievement.

古文：彭越既受汉封，田横惧诛，与其徒属五百馀人入海，居岛中。
现代文：彭越已受汉封梁王，田横怕被杀掉，与他的部下五百多人进入大海，居住在岛上。
English: Peng Yue had already been awarded the title of Liang Wang by the Han Dynasty. Fearing that he would be killed, Tian Yang and more than five hundred of his subordinates entered the sea and lived on the island.

古文：帝以田横兄弟本定齐地，齐贤者多附焉；今在海中，不取，后恐为乱。
现代文：高帝刘邦认为田横兄弟几人本来曾平定了齐地，齐地贤能的人大都归附了他，今流亡在海岛中，如不加以招抚，以后恐怕会作乱。
English: Emperor Gao Liu Bang believed that several Tian Yang brothers had originally leveled Qi Di, and most of the virtuous people in Qi Di had joined him. Now they are exiled on the island, and if they are not appeased, they will probably cause trouble in the future.

古文：乃使使赦横罪，召之。
现代文：于是就派使者去赦免田横的罪过，召他前来。
English: So they sent a messenger to absolve him of his sin and to summon him.

古文：横谢曰： 臣烹陛下之使郦生，今闻其弟商为汉将；臣恐惧，不敢奉诏，请为庶人，守海岛中。 
现代文：田横推辞说： 我曾煮杀了陛下的使臣郦食其，现在听说他的弟弟郦商是汉的将领，我很害怕，不敢奉诏前往，只请求做个平民百姓，留守在海岛中。 
English: Tian Yang declined, saying, "I once cooked and killed your majesty's envoys and ate them. Now I have heard that his brother, the merchant, is a Han general. I am very afraid and dare not go with the imperial edict. I only ask to be a commoner and stay on the island."

古文：使还报，帝乃诏卫尉郦商曰： 齐王田横即至，人马从者敢动摇者，致族夷！ 
现代文：使者回报，高帝便诏令卫尉郦商说： 齐王田横即将到来，有敢动一动他的随从人马的人，即诛灭家族！ 
English: In response to the envoy, Emperor Gao then issued an edict to the guards and merchants, saying: "Qi Wang Tianyang is about to arrive, and anyone who dares to touch his entourage, that is, destroy the family!

古文：乃复使使持节具告以诏商状，曰： 田横来，大者王，小者乃侯耳；不来，且举兵加诛焉！ 
现代文：随即再派使者拿着符节把高帝诏令郦商的情况对田横一一讲明，并说道： 田横若能前来，高可以封王，低也是个侯哇。如果不来，便要发兵加以诛除了。 
English: He immediately sent another envoy with runes to explain to Tian Yang one by one the situation of Gao Di's edict to ban merchants, and said: If Tian Yang can come, Gao can be crowned king, and Xiao can be a lord. If he does not come, he will send troops to eliminate him.

古文：横乃与其客二人乘传诣洛阳。
现代文：田横便和他的两个宾客乘坐驿站的传车去到洛阳。
English: Tian Yobin and his two guests took a shuttle bus from the station to Luoyang.

古文：未至三十里，至尸乡厩置。
现代文：离洛阳还有三十里，到达尸乡驿站。
English: There are still thirty miles to go from Luoyang to the morgue station.

古文：横谢使者曰： 人臣见天子，当洗沐。 
现代文：田横向使者道歉说： 为人臣子的人觐见天子时，应当沐浴。 
English: Tian Yang apologized to the messenger and said, "When a person who is a human retainer comes to see the Son of Heaven, he should take a bath.

古文：因此留，谓其客曰： 横始与汉王俱南面称孤；今汉王为天子，而横乃为亡虏，北面事之，其耻固已甚矣。
现代文：随即住下来，对他的宾客说： 我起初与汉王一道面朝南称王，而今汉王做了天子，我却是作为败亡的臣虏，面北称臣伺候他，这耻辱本来已非常大了。
English: He immediately settled down and said to his guest: At first, I faced south with the Han king to praise the king, but now the Han king has become the son of heaven, but I, as a defeated subject, face north to serve him as a subject. This disgrace was already very great.

古文：且吾烹人之兄，与其弟并肩而事主，纵彼畏天子之诏不敢动，我独不愧于心乎！
现代文：何况我还煮死了人家的兄长，又同被煮人的弟弟并肩侍奉他们的君主呢。即便这位弟弟畏惧天子的诏令不敢动我，我难道内心就不感到惭愧吗？
English: Moreover, I have boiled a man's elder brother to death, and I have served their sovereign side by side with the brother of the boiled man. Even if this brother, fearing the edict of the emperor, dared not touch me, am I not inwardly ashamed?

古文：且陛下所以欲见我者，不过欲一见吾面貌耳。
现代文：况且陛下想要见我的原因，不过是想看一看我的容貌罢了。
English: Furthermore, the reason why His Majesty the Emperor has called me to come to Kyoto is just to see my face.

古文：今斩吾头，驰三十里间，形容尚未能败，犹可观也。 
现代文：现在斩下我的头颅，奔驰三十里地送去，神态容貌还不会变坏，仍然可以看的。 
English: Now cut off my head and send it thirty miles away in a Mercedes. My appearance will not deteriorate, I can still see.

古文：遂自刭，令客奉其头，从使者驰奏之。帝曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：于是就用刀割自己的脖子崐，并让宾客捧着他的头颅，随同使者疾驰洛阳奏报。高帝说： 唉呀！
English: So he cut his own neck with a knife, and let the guests hold his head, accompanied by the messenger galloping to Luoyang. Gao Di said: Alas!

古文：起自布衣，兄弟三人更王，岂不贤哉！ 
现代文：从平民百姓起家，兄弟三人相继为王，这难道不是很贤能的吗！ 
English: Starting from a family of commoners, three brothers successively became kings. Isn't that very virtuous?

古文：为之流涕，而拜其二客为都尉；发卒二千人，以王者礼葬之。
现代文：为田横流下了眼泪。接着授给田横的两个宾客都尉的官职，调拨士兵二千人，按葬侯王的礼仪安葬了田横。
English: He shed tears for Tian Yang. Next, he appointed two of Tian Yang's guests as captains, dispatched two thousand soldiers, and buried Tian Yang according to the funeral etiquette of the Hou Wang.

古文：既葬，二客穿其冢傍孔，皆自刭，下从之。
现代文：下葬以后，那两位宾客在田横的坟墓旁挖了个坑，都自刎而死，倒进坑里陪葬田横。
English: After the burial, the two guests dug a pit next to Tian Yang's grave. They both hanged themselves and fell into the pit to accompany and bury Tian Yang.

古文：帝闻之，大惊。以横客皆贤，馀五百人尚在海中，使使召之；至，则闻田死，亦皆自杀。
现代文：高帝听说了这件事，大为震惊，认为田横的宾客都很贤能，余下的五百人还在海岛上，便派使者去招抚他们。使者抵达海岛，这五百人听说田横已死，也都自杀了。
English: When Emperor Gao heard about this, he was greatly shocked and thought that Tian Yang's guests were all very capable. The remaining five hundred people were still on the island, so he sent an envoy to appease them. When the envoy arrived at the island, these five hundred people heard that Tian Yang had died, and they all committed suicide.

古文：初，楚人季布为项籍将，数窘辱帝。
现代文：当初，楚地人季布是项羽手下的将领，曾多次窘困羞辱汉王。
English: At first, the Chu man Ji Bu was a general under Xiang Yu, and he embarrassed and humiliated the Han king many times.

古文：项籍灭，帝购求布千金；敢有舍匿，罪三族。
现代文：项羽灭亡后，高帝刘邦悬赏千金捉拿季布，下令说有敢收留窝藏季布的，罪连三族。
English: After the death of Xiang Yu, Emperor Gao and Liu Bang offered a reward of thousands of gold to capture Ji Bu, and ordered that anyone who dared to take in and hide Ji Bu would be punished along with the three clans.

古文：布乃髡钳为奴，自卖于硃家。
现代文：季布于是剃去头发，用铁箍卡住脖子当奴隶，把自己卖给鲁地的大侠朱家。
English: Qibu then shaved off his hair, stuck his neck with a spade as a slave, and sold himself to Zhu Jia, the great hero of Ludi.

古文：硃家心知其季布也，买置田舍，身之洛阳见藤公，说曰； 季布何罪！
现代文：朱家心里明白这个人是季布，就将他买下安置在田庄中。朱家随即到洛阳去进见滕公夏侯婴，劝他道： 季布有什么罪啊！
English: The Zhu family knew in their hearts that this man was Qibu, so they bought him and placed him in the grange. The Zhu family then went to Luoyang to see Tengg Xia Houying and persuade him: What is Qibu's sin?

古文：臣各为其主用，职耳；项氏臣岂可尽诛邪？
现代文：臣僚各为他的君主效力，这是常理。项羽的臣下难道可以全都杀掉吗？
English: It is common sense that each minister serves his sovereign. Can Xiang Yu's ministers all be killed?

古文：今上始得天下，而以私怨求一人，何示不广也！
现代文：如今皇上刚刚取得天下，便借私人的怨恨去寻捕一个人，怎么这样来显露自己胸襟的狭窄呀！
English: Now that the Emperor has just gained control of the world, he is using his personal grudge to hunt down a person. How can he reveal his narrow-mindedness in this way?

古文：且以季布之贤，汉求之急，此不北走胡，南走越耳。
现代文：况且根据季布的贤能，朝廷悬赏寻捕他如此急迫，这是逼他不向北投奔胡人，便往南投靠百越部族啊！
English: Moreover, according to Qibu's ability, the imperial court offered a reward for finding him so urgently. This is to force him not to go north to the Hu people, but to go south to rely on the more than one hundred tribes!

古文：夫忌壮士以资敌国，此伍子胥所以鞭荆平之墓也。
现代文：忌恨壮士而以此资助敌国，这是伍子胥所以要掘墓鞭打楚平王尸体的缘由呀。
English: Envying a strong man and forcing him to go to an enemy country is not a lesson for Wu Zi to help Wu exterminate Chu and dig up the tomb of King Chuping.

古文：君何不从容为上言之！ 
现代文：您为什么不从容地向皇上说说这些道理呢？ 
English: Why don't you calmly tell the emperor these truths?

古文：滕公待间言于上，如硃家指。上乃赦布，召拜郎中，硃家遂不复见之。
现代文：滕公于是就待有机会时，按照朱家的意思向高帝进言，高帝便赦免了季布，并召见他，授任他为郎中。朱家从此也就不再见季布。
English: Tenggong then waited for an opportunity to speak to Emperor Gao in accordance with the wishes of the Zhu family. Emperor Gao then pardoned Qibu, summoned him, and appointed him as a retainer. The Zhu family would no longer see Qibu.

古文：布母弟丁公，亦为项羽将，逐窘帝彭城西。
现代文：季布的舅父丁公，也是项羽手下的将领，曾经在彭城西面追困过高帝刘邦。
English: Qibu's uncle Ding Gong, also a general under Xiang Yu, once chased down Emperor Gao Liu Bang in the west of Pengcheng.

古文：短兵接，帝急，顾谓丁公曰： 两贤岂相厄哉！ 
现代文：短兵相接，高帝感觉事态危急，便回头对丁公说： 两个好汉难道要相互为难困斗吗！ 
English: Gao Di felt that the situation was critical, so he turned back to Ding Gong and said: Do two heroes have to fight each other?

古文：丁公引兵而还。
现代文：丁公于是领兵撤还。
English: Ding Gong then withdrew his troops, and Han Wang was able to escape.

古文：及项王灭，丁公谒见。
现代文：等到项羽灭亡，丁公来谒见高帝。
English: After Xiang Yu's death, Ding Gong came to see Emperor Gao.

古文：帝以丁公徇军中，曰： 丁公为项王臣不忠，使项王失天下者也。 
现代文：高帝随即把丁公拉到军营中示众，说道： 丁公身为项王的臣子却不忠诚，是使项王失掉天下的人啊！ 
English: Emperor Gao then dragged Ding Gong to the military camp to show it to the public, saying: Ding Gong, who is a vassal of King Xiang, is not loyal. He is the one who caused King Xiang to lose the whole world!

古文：遂斩之，曰： 使后为人臣无效丁公也！ 
现代文：就把他杀了，并说： 让后世为人臣子的人不要效法丁公！ 
English: They killed him and said, "Let future generations of courtiers not follow the example of Lord Fa Ding!"

古文：臣光曰：高祖起丰、沛以来，罔罗豪桀，招亡纳叛，亦已多矣。
现代文：臣司马光曰：汉高祖刘邦从丰、沛起事以来，网罗强横有势力的人，招纳逃亡反叛的人，也已经是相当多的了。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: Since the founder of the Han Dynasty, Liu Bang, started the Feng and Pei Uprising, there have been quite a number of people who have captured powerful people and recruited fugitive rebels.

古文：及即帝位，而丁公独以不忠受戮，何哉？
现代文：待到登上帝位，唯独丁公因为不忠诚而遭受杀戮，这是为什么啊？
English: After ascending to the throne, only Ding Gong was killed for his disloyalty. Why was this?

古文：夫进取之与守成，其势不同。
现代文：是由于进取与守成，形势不同的缘故呀。
English: It's because the situation is different between the enterprising and the conservative.

古文：当群雄角逐之际，民无定主，来者受之，固其宜也。
现代文：当群雄并起争相取胜的时候，百姓没有确定的君主，谁来投奔就接受谁，本来就该如此。
English: When a group of strong men fight together to win, the people do not have a definite ruler. Whoever comes to the rescue will be accepted, and that is how it should be.

古文：及贵为天子，四海之内，无不为臣；苟不明礼义以示之，使为臣者，人怀贰心以徼大利，则国家其能久安乎！
现代文：待到贵为天子，四海之内无不臣服时，如果不明确礼义以显示给人，致使身为臣子的人，人人怀有二心以图求取厚利，那么国家还能长治久安吗！
English: When it comes to the time when you are a son of heaven, and there is no insubordination within the four seas, if there is no clear etiquette to show people, so that people who are courtiers, everyone has two minds in order to seek profits, then can the country remain peaceful for a long time!

古文：是故断以大义，使天下晓然皆知为臣不忠者无所自容；而怀私结恩者，虽至于活己，犹以义不与也。
现代文：因此汉高祖据大义作出决断，使天下的人都清楚地知道，身为臣子却不忠诚的人没有自己可以藏身的地方，怀揣个人目的布施恩惠给人的人，尽管他甚至于救过自己的命，依照礼义仍不予宽容。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozong made a decision based on justice, so that people all over the world would clearly know that those who are not loyal as courtiers have no place to hide, and those who have personal goals and give favors to people, even though he even saved his own life, will not be tolerated according to etiquette.

古文：戮一人而千万人惧，其虑事岂不深且远哉！
现代文：似此杀一人而使千万人畏惧，考虑事情难道不是既深刻又远广吗！
English: Isn't it both profound and far-reaching to think about killing one person in this way and making thousands of people afraid!

古文：子孙享有天禄四百馀年，宜矣！
现代文：汉高帝的子孙享有上天赐予的禄位四百多年，应当的啊！
English: The descendants of Emperor Henkel have enjoyed their God-given position for more than four hundred years. It's only right!

古文：齐人娄敬戍陇西，过洛阳，脱輓辂，衣羊裘，因齐人虞将军求见上。
现代文：故齐国人娄敬去防守陇西，经过洛阳，解下绑在车前牵引的横木，穿着羊皮袄，通过齐人虞将军求见高帝刘邦。
English: Therefore, the Qiji people went to defend the west of Shaanxi, passed through Luoyang, untied the crossbar tied to the front of the car, wore sheepskin coats, and asked to see the Emperor Liu Bang through the Qiji general.

古文：虞将军欲与之鲜衣，娄敬曰： 臣衣帛，衣帛见；衣褐，衣褐见，终不敢易衣。 
现代文：虞将军想要给他穿华丽鲜亮的衣服，娄敬说： 我若穿的是丝绸，就身着丝绸去谒见；若穿的是粗毛麻布，就身着粗毛麻布去谒见，终究不敢冒昧地更换衣服。 
English: General Yu wanted to dress him in gorgeous, bright clothes. Yu Jing said, "If I wear silk, I will wear silk to the meeting; if I wear sackcloth, I will wear sackcloth to the meeting. After all, I don't dare to change clothes."

古文：于是虞将军入言上，上召见，问之。
现代文：这时虞将军便进去向高帝报告。高帝即召见娄敬，并询问他。
English: At this time, General Yu went in to report to Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao immediately summoned Zou Jing and questioned him.

古文：娄敬曰： 陛下都洛阳，岂欲与周室比隆哉？ 
现代文：娄敬说： 陛下定都洛阳，难道是想与周王朝一比隆盛威势吗？ 
English: Yu Jing said: Your Majesty has decided to make Luoyang the capital. Is it because you want to match the Zhou Dynasty's prosperity and power?

古文：上曰： 然。 
现代文：高帝道： 是啊。 
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：娄敬曰： 陛下取天下与周异。
现代文：娄敬说： 陛下夺取天下的途径与周朝不同。
English: Yu Jing said: His Majesty's way of conquering the world is different from that of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：周之先，自后稷封邰，积德累善，十有馀世，至于太王、王季、文王、武王而诸侯自归之，遂灭殷为天子。
现代文：周朝的祖先，从后稷被唐尧封在邰地起，积累德政善行十多代，以至于到太王、王季、文王、武王时期，诸侯自行归附，终于灭掉殷商作了天子。
English: The ancestors of the Zhou Dynasty had accumulated more than ten generations of virtuous deeds in politics since Hou Yi was sealed by Tang Xuan in Loudi, so much so that by the time of King Taewon, King Ji, King Wen, and King Wu, the princes had attached themselves, and finally eliminated Yin Shang as the son of heaven.

古文：及成王即位，周公相焉，乃营洛邑，以为此天下之中也，诸侯四方纳贡职，道里均矣。
现代文：到了周成王登位，周公辅佐他，才营建洛邑，因为认为这里是天下的中心，各地诸侯前往交纳土贡和赋税，所走的道路里程相等。
English: It was not until Zhou Cheng Wang ascended the throne and Zhou Gong assisted him that Luoyang was built, because it was considered to be the center of the world, and princes from all over the country went to pay tribute and taxes, and the distance traveled was equal.

古文：有德则易以王，无德则易以亡。
现代文：君主有德行就容易靠此统治天下，没有德行就容易由此而亡国。
English: If a monarch is virtuous, it is easy for him to rule the world; if he is not virtuous, it is easy for him to ruin the country.

古文：故周之盛时，天下和洽，诸侯、四夷莫不宾服，效其贡职。
现代文：所以周王朝强盛的时候，天下和睦，诸侯、四方外族没有不臣服，奉上他们的贡赋的。
English: Therefore, when the Zhou Dynasty was strong, the world was at peace, and the lords and foreign tribes in the four directions did not disobey and offered their tribute.

古文：及其衰也，天下莫朝，周不能制也；非唯其德薄也，形势弱也。
现代文：待到周王朝衰弱时，天下没有谁前来朝贡，周王朝也已无法驾驭制约了。这不仅是由于它的德行微薄，而且是由于形势衰弱了的缘故。
English: By the time of the Zhou Dynasty's decline, no one in the world came to pay tribute, and the Zhou Dynasty was no longer able to control the situation. This was not only due to its meager virtue, but also due to the weakening of the situation.

古文：今陛下起丰、沛，卷蜀、汉，定三秦，与项羽战荥阳、成皋之间，大战七十，小战四十；使天下之民，肝脑涂地，父子暴骨中野，不可胜数，哭泣之声未绝，伤夷者未起；而欲比隆于成、康之时，臣窃以为不侔也。
现代文：如今陛下从丰、沛起兵抗秦，席卷蜀郡、汉中郡，平定秦地雍、塞、翟三国，与项羽在荥阳、成皋之间作战，经过大战七十次，小战四十次，使天下百姓肝脑涂地惨遭杀戮，老老少少的尸骨暴露在荒野之中，数都数不过来，哭泣的悲声还未断绝，伤残的人员还不能行走，就想与周成王康王时代的隆盛威势相比美，我私下里认为这是很不相称的。
English: Today, His Majesty has raised an army to resist the Qin Dynasty from Feng and Pei, swept through Shu County and Hanzhong County, and pacified the three countries of Qin, Yong, Sai, and Qi. He fought with Xiang Yu between Shenyang and Chengdu. After 70 major wars and 40 minor wars, the people of the world have been brutally killed, and the bones of the old and the young have been exposed in the wilderness. There are too many to count. The cries of grief have not yet ceased, and the injured personnel are still unable to walk. I would like to compare it with the grandeur and might of the era of King Zhoucheng and King Kang.

古文：且夫秦地被山带河，四塞以为固，卒然有急，百万之众可立具也。
现代文：况且秦地依靠华山濒临黄河，四面都有险要关隘为屏障，如果突然有紧急情况发生，百万军队可以立即就调动停当。
English: Moreover, Qin relies on Mount Huashan on the edge of the Yellow River, and there are dangerous barriers on all sides. If there is a sudden emergency, a million troops can be mobilized immediately.

古文：因秦之故，资甚美膏腴之地，此所谓天府者也。
现代文：依靠秦地原有的基础，凭借那里富饶肥沃的土地，这即是所谓的天然府库的优势啊。
English: Through the foundation of the original management of Qin, and supported by fertile land, this is the so-called precarious situation, the land of abundant products.

古文：陛下入关而都之，山东虽乱，秦之故地可全而有也。
现代文：陛下入函谷关在那里建都，崤山以东地区就算是乱了，秦国的旧地也仍然可以完整地据有。
English: His Majesty entered the Hanyu Pass and built the capital there. Even if there is calamity in Shandong, the original place of Qin can be preserved and occupied.

古文：夫与人斗，不搤其亢，拊其背，未能全其胜也。
现代文：同别人争斗，不卡住他的咽喉，从后背拍击他，是不能大获全胜的。
English: You can't win a fight with someone without grabbing him by the throat and punching him in the back.

古文：今陛下案秦之故地，此亦扼天下之亢而拊其背也。 
现代文：现在陛下如果能占据秦国的故地，这也即是扼住了天下的咽喉且又攻击它的后背了。 
English: Now, if His Majesty can occupy the ancestral land of Qin, this is also holding the world's throat and attacking its back.

古文：帝问群臣，群臣皆山东人，争言： 周王数百年，秦二世即亡。
现代文：高帝询问群臣。群臣都是崤山以东地区的人，便抢着发言： 周朝统治了几百年，而秦朝经历两代就灭亡了。
English: Gao Di asked the group of courtiers, all of whom were from the area east of Lushan Mountain, and they rushed to speak: The Zhou Dynasty ruled for hundreds of years, while the Qin Dynasty died out after two generations.

古文：洛阳东有成皋，西有殽、渑，倍河，乡伊、洛，其固亦足恃也。 
现代文：洛阳东有成皋，西有崤山、渑池，背靠黄河，面向伊、洛二河，它的坚固也是足可依赖的了。 
English: Luoyang has Chenglu in the east, Lushan and Longchi in the west. It is backed by the Yellow River and faces the Yili and Luo Erhe Rivers. Its solidity can be relied on.

古文：上问张良。
现代文：高帝又问张良。
English: Gao Di asked Zhang Liang again.

古文：良曰： 洛阳虽有此固，其中小不过数百里，田地薄，四面受敌，此非用武之国也。
现代文：张良说： 洛阳虽然有这样稳固的地势，但它的中心地区狭小，方圆不过几百里，田地贫瘠，四面受敌，因此这里不是用武之地。
English: Zhang Liang said: Although Luoyang has such a stable geographical situation, its central area is small, with a radius of only a few hundred miles, the fields are barren, and it is surrounded by enemies, so it is not a place to use force.

古文：关中左殽、函，右陇、蜀，沃野千里。南有巴、蜀之饶，北有胡苑之利。
现代文：而关中地区东有崤山、函谷关，西有陇山、蜀地的岷山，沃野千里，南有巴、蜀的富饶资源，北有胡地草场畜牧的地利。
English: However, in the central Guanzhong area, there are Lushan and Hantan Guanzhong in the east, Lushan in the west, Lushan in Shu, and Wano Qianli in the west, the rich resources of Ba and Shu in the south, and the grazing land of Hudi in the north.

古文：阻三面而守，独以一面东制诸侯；诸侯安定，河、渭漕輓天下，西给京师；诸侯有变，顺流而下，足以委输。
现代文：倚仗三面险要的地形防守，只用东方一面来控制诸侯。倘若诸侯安定，即可通过黄河、渭河水路转运天下的粮食，西上供给京都；如若诸侯发生变故，也可顺流而下，足够用以转运物资。
English: If the vassals were stable, they could transport the world's grain via the Yellow River and Min River waterways and supply Kyoto in the west; if the vassals were to change, they could also go down the river, which was sufficient for transporting goods.

古文：此所谓金城千里，天府之国也。
现代文：这就是所谓的坚固的城墙千里之长，富庶的天然府库之国啊。
English: This is the so-called country of solid city walls thousands of miles long and abundant natural resources.

古文：娄敬说是也。 
现代文：娄敬的建议是对的。 
English: Xie Jing's suggestion is right.

古文：上即日车驾西，都长安。拜娄敬为郎中，号曰奉春君，赐姓刘氏。
现代文：高帝当天就起驾动身向西进发，定都长安，并授任娄敬为郎中，崐称为奉春君，赐姓刘。
English: On the same day, Emperor Gao set off to the west and set the capital at Chang'an. He also appointed Gong Jian as his son-in-law, nicknamed him Feng Chun and gave him the surname Liu.

古文：张良素多病，从上入关，即道引，不食穀，杜门不出，曰： 家世相韩，及韩灭，不爱万金之资，为韩报雠强秦，天下振动。
现代文：张良向来多病，随从高帝进入函谷关，就静居行气，不吃粮食，闭门不出，说道： 我家的人世代做韩国的宰相，及至韩国灭亡，我不吝惜万金资财，为韩国向强大的秦王朝报仇，使天下震动。
English: Zhang Liang had always been sickly. When he followed Emperor Gao to enter Hangu Pass, he lived a quiet and dignified life, did not eat food, and did not go out of doors. He said: My family has been the prime minister of South Korea for generations, and until the demise of South Korea, I do not spare money and resources, and take revenge for South Korea against the powerful Qin Dynasty, causing the world to shake.

古文：今以三寸舌为帝者师，封万户侯，此布衣之极，于良足矣。
现代文：如今凭借三寸之舌成为皇帝的军师，被封为万户侯，这已是一个平民所能享有的最高待遇了，对我来说足够啦。
English: Now, by virtue of my three-inch tongue, I have become the emperor's strategist, and have been made a vassal lord. This is the highest treatment a commoner can enjoy, and it is enough for me.

古文：愿弃人间事，欲从赤松子游耳。 
现代文：我只望抛开人间俗事，将追随仙人赤松子去云游罢了。 
English: He hopes to give up worldly affairs and travel the world with Akamatsu.

古文：臣光曰：夫生之有死，譬犹夜旦之必然；自古及今，固未尝有超然而独存者也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：大凡有生就有死，犹如黑夜过后是白天一样的必然。自古至今，原本就没有超越自然而独立存在的事物。
English: Sima Guang said: "Where there is life, there is death. It is as inevitable as day following night. From ancient times to the present, there has never been anything that exists independently and transcends nature.

古文：以子房之明辨达理，足以知神仙之为虚诡矣；然其欲从赤松子游者，其智可知也。
现代文：按张良的明辨是非通晓事理而论，他是完全知道神仙不过是些虚幻奇异的东西罢了。但他却要随同赤松子远游，他的聪明智慧是可以知道的了。
English: According to Zhang Liang's clear understanding of the difference between right and wrong, he is fully aware that immortals are nothing more than illusory and bizarre things. However, he wants to travel with Red Pine Nut, and his cleverness and wisdom can be known.

古文：夫功名之际，人臣之所难处。
现代文：功勋和名位之间，正是为人臣子的人所难于长久立足之处。
English: Between merit and fame, it is difficult for a person who is a vassal to gain a long-term foothold.

古文：如高帝所称者，三杰而已。
现代文：即如高帝刘邦所称道的，不过只三个才能出众的人罢了。
English: That is, as Emperor Gao and Liu Bang praised, but only three people can be outstanding.

古文：淮阴诛夷，萧何系狱，非以履盛满而不止耶！
现代文：但是淮阴侯韩信被诛除，相国萧何被拘禁到狱中，这不就是由于功名已达到巅峰却还不止步的缘故吗！
English: But Huaiyin Hou Hanxin was eliminated, and his brother-in-law Xiao He was detained in prison. Isn't this because his fame has reached its peak, but he still hasn't stopped?

古文：故子房托于神仙，遗弃人间，等功名于外物，置荣利而不顾，所谓明哲保身者，子房有焉。
现代文：所以张良借与神仙交游相推脱，遗弃人间凡事，视功名如同身外之物，把荣誉利禄抛在脑后，所谓 明哲保身 者，张良即是个榜样。
English: Therefore, Zhang Liang borrowed from the immortals to escape, abandoned the mundane things, regarded the achievement as an external thing, and left the honor of Li Luo behind. Zhang Liang is a role model of the so-called "Mingzhe bodyguard."

古文：六月，壬辰，大赦天下。
现代文：六月，壬辰，高帝大赦天下。
English: In June, Emperor Gao pardoned the world.

古文：秋，七月，燕王臧荼反；上自将征之。
现代文：秋季，七月，燕王臧荼反叛，高帝亲自率军征讨臧荼。
English: In the autumn, in July, Yan Wangcheng rebelled, and Gao Di personally led the army to fight against him.

古文：赵景王耳、长沙文王芮皆薨。
现代文：赵景王张耳、长沙王吴芮都去世了。
English: Zhao Jing Wang Zhang Er and Changsha King Wu Xi both passed away.

古文：九月，虏藏荼。
现代文：九月，高帝俘获了臧荼。
English: In September, Gao Di captured Tong.

古文：壬子，立太尉长安侯卢绾为燕王。
现代文：壬子，封太尉长安侯卢绾为燕王。
English: Ren Zi, the first lieutenant of Chang An Hou, Lu Yao, is the king of swallows.

古文：绾家与上同里闬，绾生又与上同日；上宠幸绾，群臣莫敢望，故特王之。
现代文：卢绾家与高帝是同乡，卢绾又与高帝同一天出生，高帝宠幸卢绾，群臣没有敢埋怨的，因此就特立卢绾为王。
English: Lu Xun's family and Emperor Gao were from the same hometown, and Lu Xun was born on the same day as Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao favored Lu Xun, and the courtiers did not dare to complain. Therefore, Lu Xun became king.

古文：项羽故将利几反，上自击破之。
现代文：项羽过去的将领利几反叛，高帝又亲自带兵击败了他。
English: Cao Yu, the former general, led a few rebels, and Gao Di personally led the troops to defeat him.

古文：后九月，治长乐宫。
现代文：闰九月，高帝改修长乐宫。
English: In September, Emperor Gao began renovating the Changle Palace.

古文：项王将钟离昧，素与楚王信善。
现代文：项羽手下的将领钟离昧，向来跟楚王韩信友好。
English: The generals under Xiang Yu's command, Zhong Zhudao, have always been on friendly terms with King Han of Chu.

古文：项王死后，亡归信。
现代文：项羽死后，他就逃出来归附了韩信。
English: After the death of Xiang Yu, he escaped and joined Han Xin.

古文：汉王怨昧，闻其在楚，诏楚捕昧。
现代文：汉王刘邦很怨恨钟离昧，听说他在楚国，就诏令楚王逮捕他。
English: Han King Liu Bang was very resentful of Zhong Liang, and when he heard that he was in the State of Chu, he ordered the King of Chu to arrest him.

古文：信初之国，行县邑，陈兵出入。
现代文：这时韩信刚到他的封国，巡视所辖县邑，出入都有成队军队护卫。
English: When Han Xin first arrived in Chu, he went on a tour of the counties and towns he belonged to. He was accompanied by armed guards.

古文：太祖高皇帝中六年
现代文：太祖高皇帝中六年
English: Emperor Taizong Gao's Sixth Year of Middle School

古文：冬，十月，人有上书告楚王信反者。
现代文：冬季，十月，有人上书告发楚王韩信谋反。
English: In the winter, in October, someone sent a letter accusing King Han of Chu of plotting a rebellion.

古文：帝以问诸将，皆曰： 亟发兵，坑竖子耳！ 
现代文：高帝便征求将领们的意见，大家都说： 赶快发兵，把这小子活埋罢了！ 
English: Emperor Gao then asked the generals for their opinion, and they all said: "Send troops as soon as possible, let's bury this boy alive!"

古文：帝默然。
现代文：高帝默然不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：又问陈平。陈平曰： 人上书言信反，信知之乎？ 
现代文：接着又询问崐陈平，陈平道： 有人上书告韩信谋反，这事情韩信知道吗？ 
English: Next, he asked Gong Chenping, Chen Ping said: Someone wrote a letter accusing Han Xin of plotting a rebellion, does Han Xin know about this?

古文：曰： 不知。 
现代文：高帝说： 不知道。 
English: A: I don't know.

古文：陈平曰： 陛下精兵孰与楚？ 
现代文：陈平说： 陛下的精锐部队与楚王的相比谁更厉害呢？ 
English: Chen Ping said: Which is stronger, His Majesty's elite troops or the Chu nation?

古文：上曰： 不能过。 
现代文：高帝道： 超不过他的。 
English: The emperor said, "We are no match for them."

古文：平曰： 陛下诸将，用兵有能过韩信者乎？ 
现代文：陈平说： 陛下的将领们，用兵之才有能比过韩信的吗？ 
English: Chen Ping said, "Your majesty's generals, is it possible to use more soldiers than Han Xin?

古文：上曰： 莫及也。 
现代文：高帝道： 没有赶得上他的。 
English: The emperor said, "There is nothing comparable to him."

古文：平曰： 今兵不如楚精而将不及，举兵攻之，是趣之战也，窃为陛下危之。 
现代文：陈平说： 现在军队不如楚国的精锐，将领又比不上韩信，却要举兵攻打他，这是促使他起兵反抗呀。我私下里为陛下感到危险！ 
English: Chen Ping said: Now the army is not as good as the elite of Chu, and the generals are not as good as Han Xin, but they want to raise an army to attack him. This is what prompted him to raise an army to resist. I secretly feel dangerous for His Majesty!

古文：上曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：高帝说： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Gaozu said anxiously, "What should we do?

古文：平曰： 古者天子有巡狩，会诸侯。
现代文：陈平说： 古时候天子有时巡视诸侯镇守的地方，会见诸侯。
English: Chen Ping said, "In ancient times, the Son of Heaven would sometimes visit the towns of the princes and meet with the princes.

古文：陛下第出，伪游云梦，会诸侯于陈。
现代文：陛下只管出来视察，假装巡游云梦，在陈地会见诸侯。
English: His majesty only came out to inspect, pretending to cruise the clouds and meet with princes in Chen Di.

古文：陈，楚之西界；信闻天子以好出游，其势必无事而郊迎谒；谒而陛下因禽之，此特一力士之事耳。 
现代文：而陈地在楚国的西部边界，韩信听说天子怀着友好会见诸侯的心意出游，必定是全国安稳无事，便会到郊外迎接谒见陛下。拜见时陛下就趁机捉拄他，这不过是一个力士即能办到的事罢了。 
English: But Chen was on the western border of Chu, and Han Xin heard that the heavenly son was traveling with the intention of a friendly meeting with the princes, and that the whole country must be safe and sound, so he would go to the suburbs to meet His Majesty. When he visited, His Majesty took the opportunity to catch him, which is just something that a wrestler can do.

古文：帝以为然，乃发使告诸侯会陈， 吾将南游云梦。 
现代文：高帝认为说得不错，便派出使者去通告诸侯到陈地聚会，说： 我将南游云梦 。
English: Gao Di thought that this was true, so he sent an envoy to inform the princes to gather in Chen Di, saying: I will travel to the south like a dream.

古文：上因随以行。
现代文：高帝随即起程南行。
English: The Emperor set off immediately.

古文：楚王信闻之，自疑惧，不知所为。
现代文：楚王韩信闻听这个消息后，自己颇为疑心害怕，不知怎么办才好。
English: After hearing this news, Chu Wang Hanxin was quite suspicious and afraid, and did not know what to do.

古文：或说信曰： 斩钟离昧以谒上，上必喜，无患。 
现代文：这时有人劝韩信说： 杀了钟离昧去谒见皇上，皇上必定欢喜，如此就不会有什么祸患了。 
English: At this time, some people advised Han Xin, saying, "Kill the clock and go to see the emperor, the emperor must be happy, so there will be no disaster."

古文：信从之。
现代文：韩信听从了他的建议。
English: Han Xin followed his advice.

古文：十二月，上会诸侯于陈，信持昧首谒上；上令武士缚信，载后车。
现代文：十二月，高帝在陈地会见诸侯，韩信提着钟离昧的头颅拜见高帝。高帝即命武士将韩信捆绑起来，装载到随皇帝车驾出行的副车上。
English: In December, Gao Di met with the princes in Chen Di, and Han Xin brought the head of the bell to pay homage to Gao Di. Gao Di immediately ordered the samurai to tie up Han Xin and load it onto the second car that was traveling with the emperor.

古文：信曰： 果若人言： 狡兔死，走狗烹；飞鸟尽，良弓藏；敌国破，谋臣亡。 
现代文：韩信说： 果然如同人们所说： 狡猾的兔子死了，奔跑的猎狗就遭煮杀；高飞的鸟儿没了，优良的弓箭就被收藏；敌对的国家攻破了，谋臣就要灭亡。 
English: Han Xin said: It is indeed as people say: the cunning rabbit is dead, the running hound is boiled to death; the high-flying birds are gone, the fine bows and arrows are collected; the hostile country is broken, and the strategist is about to perish.

古文：天下已定，我固当烹！ 
现代文：如今天下已经平定，我本来就应当被煮杀了！ 
English: I should have been boiled to death by now!

古文：上曰： 人告公反。 
现代文：高帝说： 有人告发你谋反。 
English: The emperor said, "Someone has accused you of plotting a rebellion."

古文：遂械系信以归，因赦天下。
现代文：随即用镣铐枷锁锁住韩信而归，接着大赦天下。
English: Han Xin was immediately chained with shackles and returned home, followed by a general amnesty.

古文：田肯贺上曰： 陛下得韩信，又治秦中。
现代文：田肯前来向高帝祝贺说： 陛下拿住了韩信；又在关中建都。
English: Tian Ken came to congratulate Gao Di and said, "Your Majesty seized Han Xin and built the capital in Guanzhong.

古文：秦，形胜之国也，带河阻山，地势便利；其以下兵于诸侯，譬犹居高屋之上建瓴水也。
现代文：秦地是形势险要能够制胜的地方，以河为襟带山为屏障，地势便利，从这里向诸侯用兵，就好像在高屋脊上倾倒瓶中的水那样居高临下而势不可挡了。
English: Qin is a place where the situation is close to being able to win. With the river as a ridge and the mountains as a barrier, the terrain is convenient. From here, the use of soldiers to the lords is like pouring water in a bottle on a high roof ridge. It is high and overwhelming.

古文：夫齐，东有琅邪、即墨之饶，南有泰山之固，西有浊河之限，北有勃海之利；地方二千里，持戟百万，此东西秦也，非亲子弟，莫可使王齐者。 
现代文：若说齐地，东有琅邪、即墨的富饶物产，南有泰山的峭峻坚固，西有浊河的险阻制约，北有渤海的渔盐利益，土地方圆二千里，拥有兵力百万，可以算作是东方的秦国了，因而不是陛下嫡亲的子弟，就没有可以去统治齐地的。 
English: If we say Qiji, the east has the richness of the product of the ink, that is, the richness of the ink, the south has the steepness and solidity of Mount Tai, the west has the danger and restriction of the Bohai River, and the north has the fishing and salt interests of the Bohai Sea. The land is about two thousand miles in circumference and has a million troops. It can be regarded as the Qin country in the east. Therefore, if it is not the son of your majesty's legitimate relative, there is no way to rule Qiji.

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：高帝说： 对啊！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：赐金五百斤。
现代文：随即便赏给田肯五百斤黄金。
English: He also rewarded Tian Ken with five hundred catties of gold.

古文：上还，至洛阳，赦韩信，封为淮阴侯。
现代文：高帝归还，到了洛阳，就赦免了韩信，封他为淮阴侯。
English: Gao Di returned it, and when he arrived in Luoyang, he pardoned Han Xin and made him Huaiyin Hou.

古文：信知汉王畏恶其能，多称病，不朝从；居常鞅鞅，羞与绛、灌等列。
现代文：韩信知道汉王刘邦害怕并厌恶他的才能，于是就多次声称有病，不参加朝见和随侍出行。平日在家总是闷闷不乐，为与绛侯周勃、将军灌婴这样的人处于同等地位感到羞耻。
English: Han Xin knew that Liu Bang, the king of Han, feared and loathed his talent, so he repeatedly claimed to be ill, did not attend court and travel with attendants. He was always sullen at home on weekdays, and was ashamed to be in the same position as people like Gong Hou Zhou Bo and General Han Yu.

古文：尝过樊将军哙，哙跪拜送迎，言称臣，曰： 大王乃肯临臣！ 
现代文：韩信曾去拜访将军樊哙。樊哙用跪拜的礼节送迎，口称臣子，说道： 大王竟肯光临我这里！ 
English: Han Xin once went to visit General Zou. Zou greeted him with kneeling etiquette, called him a courtier, and said: The great king is willing to visit me here!

古文：信出门，笑曰： 生乃与哙等为伍！ 
现代文：韩信出门后，讪笑着说： 我活着竟然要和樊哙等人为伍了！ 
English: Han Xin went out and said with a smile: I've been with such a person all my life.

古文：上尝从容与信言诸将能将兵多少。
现代文：高帝曾与韩信谈闲，议论将领们能带多少兵。
English: Gao Di once had a chat with Han Xin, discussing how many soldiers the generals could bring.

古文：上问曰： 如我能将几何？ 
现代文：高帝问道： 像我这个样能率领多少兵呀？ 
English: The emperor asked Han Xin: How many soldiers can I command with my talent?

古文：信曰： 陛下不过能将十万。 
现代文：韩信说： 陛下不过能带十万兵。 
English: Han Xin said, "Your Majesty is only capable of leading 100,000 people.

古文：上曰： 于君何如？ 
现代文：高帝说： 对您来说怎样呢？ 
English: Gaudi said: What about you?

古文：曰： 臣多多而益善耳。 
现代文：韩信道： 我是越多越好啊。 
English: He replied: "The more I am, the better."

古文：上笑曰： 多多益善，何为为我禽？ 
现代文：高帝笑着说： 越多越好，为什么却被我捉住了呀？ 
English: The Emperor smiled and said: "The more of you the better. Why am I still a prisoner?

古文：信曰： 陛下不能将兵而善将将，此乃信之所以为陛下禽也。
现代文：韩信说： 陛下虽不能带兵却善于驾驭将领，这就是我所以被陛下逮住的原因了。
English: Han Xin said: Although His Majesty cannot lead soldiers, he is good at managing generals, which is why I was caught by His Majesty.

古文：且陛下，所谓天授，非人力也。 
现代文：何况陛下的才能，是人们所说的 此为上天赐予的，而不是人力能够取得的 啊。 
English: What's more, His Majesty's talent is what people call "god-given," not something that can be acquired by human effort.

古文：甲申，始剖符封诸功臣为彻侯。
现代文：甲申，高帝开始用把表示凭证的符信剖分成两半，朝廷与功臣各执一半为证的办法来分封各功臣为彻侯。
English: According to the records, Emperor Gao began to divide the certificates into two halves, with the imperial court and the meritorious person each holding half as proof, in order to designate each meritorious person as a prince.

古文：萧何封酂侯，所食邑独多。
现代文：萧何封为侯，所享用的食邑户数最多。
English: Xiao Hefeng is the village with the largest number of households using the restaurant.

古文：功臣皆曰： 臣等身被坚执锐，多者百馀战，小者数十合。
现代文：功臣们都说： 我们身披坚硬铠甲手持锐利兵器，多的身经百余战，少的也交锋了几十回合。
English: The heroes all said: We are clad in hard armor and armed with sharp weapons, many of us have experienced more than a hundred battles, and a few have also fought dozens of rounds.

古文：今萧何未尝有汗马之劳，徒持文墨议论，顾反居臣等上，何也？ 
现代文：如今萧何不曾有过汗马功劳，只是操持文墨发发议论，封赏却倒在我们之上，这是为什么啊？ 
English: Nowadays, Xiao He did not have any hard-earned merits, but he just used his writing and writing to make a speech, but the award fell on us, why is that?

古文：帝曰： 诸君知猎乎？
现代文：高帝说： 你们知道打猎是怎么回事吗？
English: Gaudi said: Do you know what hunting is all about?

古文：夫猎，追杀兽兔者，狗也；而发纵指示兽处者，人也。
现代文：打猎，追杀野兽兔子的是猎狗，而放开系狗绳指示野兽所在地方的是人。
English: It is the hound that hunts and chases the wild rabbit, but it is the man who lets go of the dog's leash to indicate where the beast is.

古文：今诸君徒能得走兽耳，功狗也；至如萧何，发纵指示，功人也。 
现代文：现在你们只不过是能捕捉到奔逃的野兽罢了，功劳就如猎狗一样；至于萧何，却是放开系狗绳指示猎取的目标，功劳和猎人相同啊。 
English: Now you are only able to catch the fleeing beast, the merit is the same as the hunting dog; as for Xiao He, it is to let go of the dog's leash to indicate the target of the hunt, the merit is the same as the hunter.

古文：群臣皆不敢言。
现代文：群臣于是都不敢说三道四的了。
English: As a result, the ministers did not dare to say anything.

古文：张良为谋臣，亦无战斗功；帝使自择齐三万户。
现代文：张良身为谋臣，也没有什么战功，高帝让他自己选择齐地三万户作为封地。
English: Zhang Liang, as a strategist, did not have any war achievements. Emperor Gao let him choose 30,000 households as fiefdoms.

古文：良曰： 始，臣起下邳，与上会留，此天以臣授陛下。
现代文：张良说： 当初，我在下邳起兵，与陛下在留地相会，这是上天把我授给陛下。
English: Zhang Liang said: At the beginning, I raised an army in the Lower Yangtze River and met with His Majesty on the reservation. This was a gift from Heaven to His Majesty.

古文：陛下用臣计，幸而时中。
现代文：此后陛下采用我的计策，幸好有时能获得成功。
English: Since then, His Majesty has adopted my tactics, which, fortunately, have sometimes been successful.

古文：臣愿封留足矣，不敢当三万户。 
现代文：我希望封得留地就足够了，不敢承受三万户的封地。 
English: I hope that it is enough to retain the fief, I dare not bear the fief of thirty thousand households.

古文：乃封张良为留侯。
现代文：高帝于是便封张良为留侯。
English: Emperor Gao then put Zhang Liang under house arrest.

古文：封陈平为户牖侯。
现代文：封陈平为户牖侯。
English: Chen Ping was given the title of household magistrate.

古文：平辞曰： 此非臣之功也。 
现代文：陈平推辞说： 我没有那么多功劳哇。 
English: Chen Ping said, "This is not my achievement.

古文：上曰： 吾用先生谋计，战胜克敌，非功而何？ 
现代文：高帝道： 我采纳您的计谋，克敌制胜，这不是功劳又是什么呀？ 
English: Gao Di said: I adopted your strategy and defeated the enemy. Isn't this a merit and what is it?

古文：平曰： 非魏无知，臣安得进？ 
现代文：陈平说： 如果没有魏无知的举荐，我哪里能够进见啊？ 
English: Chen Ping said: If there is no recommendation from Wei Shouwen, where can I go?

古文：上曰： 若子，可谓不背本矣！ 
现代文：高帝道： 像您这样，可以说是不忘本了！ 
English: Gao Di: Like you, it can be said that you never forget your books!

古文：乃复赏魏无知。
现代文：随即又赏赐了魏无知。
English: So he rewarded Wei with ignorance.

古文：帝以天下初定，子幼，昆弟少，惩秦孤立而亡，欲大封同姓以填抚天下。
现代文：高帝由于天下刚刚平定，自己的儿子年幼，兄弟又少，便以秦王朝孤立而导致灭亡的教训为鉴戒，想要大肆分封同姓族人，借此镇抚天下。
English: Since the country had just been pacified, and his own son was young and had few brothers, Emperor Gao took the lesson of the Qin Dynasty's isolation, which led to its downfall, as a warning, and wanted to arbitrarily assign fiefs to people with the same surname, and use this to pacify the country.

古文：春，正月，丙午，分楚王信地为二国，以淮东五十三县立从兄将军贾为荆王，以薛郡、东海、彭城三十六县立弟文信君交为楚王。
现代文：春季，正月，丙午，高帝把楚王韩信的封地分为两个王国，将淮河以东五十三个县封给堂兄将军刘贾做荆王，将薛郡、东海、彭城等地三十六个县封给弟弟文信君刘交为楚王。
English: In the spring, on the first day of the first month, on the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Gao divided the fief of King Han Xin of Chu into two kingdoms. He assigned the fiefs of fifty-three counties east of the Huai River to his cousin General Liu Jia as the King of Jing, and the fiefs of thirty-six counties in Xue County, the East China Sea, Pengcheng and other places to his brother Wenxin Liu as the King of Chu.

古文：壬子，以云中、雁门、代郡五十三县立兄宜信侯喜为代王；以胶东、胶西、临淄、济北、博阳、城阳郡七十三县立微时外妇之子肥为齐王，诸民能齐言者皆以与齐。
现代文：壬子，把云中、雁门、代郡等地五十三个县封给哥哥宜信侯刘喜做代王，把胶东、胶西、临淄、济北、博阳、城阳郡等地七十三个县封给自己平民时与同居的妇人所生的儿子刘肥当齐王，百姓中能讲齐国话的人都分给了齐国。
English: In Imzi, he assigned fifty-three counties in Yunzhong, Ganmen, Dai County and other places to his brother Yixin Hou Liu Xi as acting king, and assigned seventy-three counties in Jiaodong, Jiaoxi, Linyi, Jibei, Boyang and Chengyang County to his son Liu Fidang Qi Wang, who was born to a woman who lived with him when he was a commoner, and all the people who could speak Qi were assigned to Qi.

古文：上以韩王信材武，所王北近巩、洛，南迫宛、叶，东有淮阳，皆天下劲兵处；乃以太原郡三十一县为韩国，徙韩王信王太原以北，备御胡，都晋阳。
现代文：高帝由于韩王信颇具雄才武略，所辖地区北面紧靠巩、洛阳，南面迫近宛、叶，东边有淮阳，都是天下可以驻扎重兵之处，令人放心不下的缘故，划出太原郡的三十一个县为韩国，调迁韩王信去管辖太原以北的新地区，防备抵御胡人，建都晋阳。
English: Emperor Gao, because of Han Wangxin's great skill and strategy, the areas under his jurisdiction are close to Gong and Luoyang in the north, close to Wan and Ye in the south, and Huaiyang in the east, which are all places where heavy troops can be stationed in the world. For reasons that are not reassuring, the thirty-one counties of Taiyuan County were designated as South Korea, and Han Wangxin was transferred to govern the new areas north of Taiyuan, to guard against the Hu people, and to build the capital of Jinyang.

古文：信上书曰： 国被边，匈奴数入寇；晋阳去塞远，请治马邑。 
现代文：韩王信上书说： 韩国北靠边界，匈奴人屡次进来骚扰，都城晋阳离边塞遥远，请求改把马邑作为国都。 
English: Han Wang's letter said: South Korea's north is close to the border, the Huns have repeatedly come in to harass, the capital Jinyang is far away from the border fortress, request to change Ma'eup as the national capital.

古文：上许之。
现代文：高帝允准。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：上已封大功臣二十馀人，其馀日夜争功不决，未得行封。
现代文：高帝已经封赏了大功臣二十多人，其余的人日夜争功，一时决定不下来，便没能给予封赏。
English: The emperor has already rewarded more than twenty great heroes, and the rest of the people are competing day and night, unable to decide which is the best, and unable to reward the best.

古文：上在洛阳南宫，从复道望见诸将，往往相与坐沙中语。
现代文：高帝在洛阳南宫，从天桥上望见将领们往往三人一群两人一伙地同坐在沙地中谈论着什么。
English: Gao Di was in the Southern Palace of Luoyang. From the flyover, the generals were often seen in groups of three, sitting together in the sand and talking about something.

古文：上曰： 此何语？ 
现代文：高帝说： 这是在说些什么呀？ 
English: The emperor said, "What are these people talking about?

古文：留侯曰： 陛下不知乎？
现代文：留侯张良道： 陛下不知道吗？
English: Lingering said, "Doesn't Your Majesty know?

古文：此谋反耳！ 
现代文：这是在图谋造反啊！ 
English: This is plotting a rebellion!

古文：上曰： 天下属安定，何故反乎？ 
现代文：高帝说： 天下新近刚刚安定下来，为了什么缘故又要谋反呢？ 
English: The emperor said: The world is close to stability, why should there be a rebellion?

古文：留侯曰： 陛下起布衣，以此属取天下。
现代文：留侯说： 陛下由平民百姓起家，依靠这班人夺取了天下。
English: Liu Hou said: Your Majesty started from the common people and relied on them to conquer the world.

古文：今陛下为天子，而所封皆故人所亲爱，所诛皆平生所仇怨。
现代文：如今陛下做了天子，所封赏的都是自己亲近喜爱的老友，所诛杀的都是自己生平仇视怨恨的人。
English: Now that His Majesty has become the Son of Heaven, the ones he rewards are his close and beloved old friends, and the ones he kills are the people he has hated and resented in his life.

古文：今军吏计功，以天下不足遍封；此属畏陛下不能尽封，恐又见疑平生过失及诛，故即相聚谋反耳。 
现代文：现在军吏们计算功劳，认为即使把天下的土地都划作封国也不够全部封赏的了，于是这帮人就害怕陛下对他们不能全部封赏，又恐怕因往常的过失而被猜疑以至于遭到诛杀，所以就相互聚集到一起图谋造反了。 
English: Now the military officials were calculating their merits, and thought that even if all the lands of the world were classified as fiefs, it would not be enough to reward them all. Therefore, these people were afraid that His Majesty would not be able to reward them all, and they were afraid that they would be suspected and killed because of their usual mistakes, so they gathered together to plot a rebellion.

古文：上乃忧曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：高帝于是担忧地说： 这该怎么办呀？ 
English: Gaudi then said worriedly: What should I do?

古文：留侯曰： 上平生所憎、群臣所共知，谁最甚者？ 
现代文：留侯道： 皇上平素最憎恶、且群臣又都知道的人，是谁啊？ 
English: Liu Hou said, "Who is the person whom the Emperor hates the most, and whom all the courtiers know?

古文：上曰： 雍齿与我有故怨，数尝窘辱我；我欲杀之，为其功多，故不忍。 
现代文：高帝说： 雍齿与我有旧怨，他曾经多次困辱我。我想杀掉他，但由于他功劳很多，所以不忍心下手。 
English: Gao Di said, "Yong Zi has an old grudge against me. He has humiliated me many times. I wanted to kill him, but because of his many merits, I didn't have the heart to do it.

古文：留侯曰： 今急先封雍齿，则群臣人人自坚矣。 
现代文：留侯说： 那么现在就赶快先封赏雍齿，这样一来，群臣也就人人都对自己的能受封赏坚信不疑了。 
English: Liu Hou said, "Then let's hurry up and award Yong Zi first. This way, all the ministers will have no doubt that they can receive the award."

古文：于是上乃置酒，封雍齿为什方侯；而急趋丞相、御史定功行封。
现代文：高帝这时便置备酒宴，封雍齿为什方侯，并急速催促丞相、御史论定功劳进行封赏。
English: At this time, Emperor Gao set up a wine banquet, appointed Yongjian as the host, and quickly urged the prime minister and the minister of history to reward the merits.

古文：群臣罢酒，皆喜，曰： 雍齿尚为侯，我属无患矣！ 
现代文：群臣结束饮宴后，都欢喜异常，说道： 雍齿尚且封为侯，我们这些人也就没有什么可担优的啦！ 
English: After the banquet, the courtiers were all overjoyed, saying, "Even though Yongzhi is enthroned, we have nothing to be proud of!"

古文：臣光曰：张良为高帝谋臣，委以心腹，宜其知无不言；安有闻诸将谋反，必待高帝目见偶语，然后乃言之邪？
现代文：臣司马光曰：张良作为高帝的谋臣，被当做为心腹亲信，应该是知无不言，哪有已听说诸侯将要谋反，却一定要等到高帝眼见有人成双成对地议论，然后才述说这件事的道理啊！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: Zhang Liang, as a strategist of Emperor Gao, was regarded as a close confidant. He should have known everything. No one had heard that the princes were going to rebel, but he must wait until Emperor Gao saw someone arguing in pairs, and then he would explain the truth of the matter!

古文：盖以高帝初得天下，数用爱憎行诛赏，或时害至公，群臣往往有觖望自危之心，故良因事纳忠以变移帝意，使上无阿私之失，下无猜惧之谋，国家无虞，利及后世。
现代文：这是由于高帝刚刚得到天下，屡次依据自己的爱憎来诛杀封赏，有时候就会有损于公平，群臣因此往往怀有抱怨和感到自己有危险的心理。所以张良借着这件事进送忠言，以改变转移高帝的心思，使在上者无偏袒私情的过失，在下者无猜疑恐惧的念头，国家无忧患，利益延及后世。
English: This was due to the fact that Gao Di had just gained the world, and he repeatedly awarded rewards according to his own likes and dislikes, which sometimes undermined fairness. As a result, the courtiers often complained and felt that they were in danger. Therefore, Zhang Liang used this matter to send loyal advice to change and divert Gao Di's mind, so that there would be no mistakes of favoritism and selfishness in the upper class, and no suspicion and fear in the lower class. The country would have no worries, and the benefits would extend to future generations.

古文：若良者，可谓善谏矣。
现代文：像张良这样，可以说是善于劝谏的了。
English: Like Zhang Liang, it can be said that he is good at persuasion.

古文：列侯毕已受封，诏定元功十八人位次。
现代文：列侯都已分封完毕，刘邦又下诏评定十八位首功之臣的排序。
English: The distribution of feudal lordships has been completed, and Liu Bang also issued an edict to evaluate the ranking of the eighteen most meritorious vassals.

古文：皆曰： 平阳侯曹参，身被七十创，攻城略地，功最多，宜第一。 
现代文：群臣皆道： 平阳侯曹参，全身上下有七十多处创伤，攻城略地，功劳最多，应排名第一。 
English: The group of courtiers all said: Pingyang Hou Cao San, there are more than seventy wounds all over his body, the city is under siege, the most merit, should be ranked first.

古文：谒者、关内侯鄂千秋进曰： 群臣议皆误。
现代文：谒者、关内侯鄂千秋进言道： 群臣的说法都是错误的。
English: The eunuch, Guanai chief Eqianqiu Jin said, "What the ministers are saying is all wrong.

古文：夫曹参虽有野战略地之功，此特一时之事耳。
现代文：曹参虽有野战略地的功劳，可这都是一时间的事。
English: Although Cao San has the merit of being strategically placed, this is all a matter of time.

古文：上与楚相距五岁，失军亡众，跳身遁者数矣，然萧何常从关中遣军补其处，非上所诏令召，而数万众会。上之乏绝者数矣。
现代文：皇上与楚军相持五年，其间多次出现军队散失，只身逃亡的情况。可是萧何经常从关中派遣军队以支援前线，这些都不是皇上明下诏令的，却多次出现数万援兵在皇上身处困境时及时赶到的情况。
English: The emperor and the Chu army were at odds for five years, during which there were many times when the army was dispersed and fled alone. However, Xiao He often sent troops from Guanzhong to support the front line. These were not explicitly ordered by the emperor, but there were many times when tens of thousands of reinforcements arrived in time when the emperor was in a difficult situation.

古文：又军无见粮，萧何转漕关中，给食不乏。
现代文：军中没有现粮时，也是靠萧何从关中转运过来，使得前方的粮食补给不致缺乏。
English: When there was no grain available in the army, it was also transported from Guanzhong by Xiao He, so that the grain supply in front would not be lacking.

古文：陛下虽数亡山东，萧何常全关中以待陛下。
现代文：陛下虽然多次丢失山东地区，可萧何却能常保关中之万全，以待陛下归来。
English: Although His Majesty lost the Shandong region many times, Xiao He was always able to keep the customs safe and sound until His Majesty's return.

古文：此万世之功也。
现代文：这是万世的功勋啊！
English: This is a great achievement!

古文：今虽无曹参等百数，何缺于汉；汉得之，不必待以全。
现代文：现在即便没有上百个像曹参这样的人，对于汉室又有什么损失呢？汉室就算有了这些将领，也未必能够得以保全。
English: Now, even if there are not hundreds of people like Cao Zhencu, what is the loss to the Han family? Even if the Han family has these generals, it may not be able to be preserved.

古文：奈何欲以一旦之功而加万世之功哉！
现代文：怎么能够将一时的功勋置于万世的功勋之上呢？
English: How is it possible to place a momentary merit above an eternal merit?

古文：萧何第一，曹参次之。 
现代文：应该将萧何排第一，曹参排第二。 
English: Xiao He should be ranked first, Cao San second.

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：刘邦道： 说得好！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：于是乃赐萧何带剑履上殿，入朝不趋。
现代文：于是赏赐萧何剑履上殿，入朝不趋。
English: As a result, Xiao He was rewarded with a sword and allowed to enter the imperial court.

古文：上曰： 吾闻进贤受上赏。
现代文：刘邦道： 我听说： 推荐贤能的人应该受到上等的奖赏。 
English: Gaozu said, "I have heard that those who recommend a person should receive the highest reward.

古文：萧何功虽高，得鄂君乃益明。 
现代文：萧何的功劳虽高，却也得靠鄂先生的论述才更加明显。 
English: Although Xiao He's merit is very high, it is even more outstanding after Ejun's commendation.

古文：于是因鄂千秋故所食邑，封为安平侯。
现代文：于是，就根据鄂千秋已有的食邑，加封他为安平侯。
English: As a result, based on the food towns already existing in Eqianqiu, he was awarded the title of Anping.

古文：是日，悉封何父子兄弟十馀人，皆有食邑；益封何二千户。
现代文：就在当天，刘邦将萧何父子兄弟十多人全部封赏，都有食邑，又加封萧何两千户。
English: On the very same day, Liu Bang rewarded more than ten brothers of Xiao He's father and son, all of whom had food villages, and additionally sealed another two thousand households of Xiao He.

古文：上归栎阳。
现代文：刘邦返回栎阳。
English: Liu Bang returned to Shenyang.

古文：夏，五月，丙午，尊太公为太上皇。
现代文：夏季，五月，丙午，高帝尊称父亲太公为太上皇。
English: In the summer, in May, on the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Gao called his father the Grand Duke the Grand Emperor.

古文：初，匈奴畏秦，北徙十馀年。
现代文：当初，匈奴畏惧秦朝，迁徙到北方十多年。
English: At first, the Xiongnu feared the Qin Dynasty and migrated to the north for more than ten years.

古文：及秦灭，匈奴复稍南渡河。
现代文：待到秦朝灭亡，匈奴又逐渐往南渡过黄河。
English: After the Qin Dynasty fell, the Xiongnu gradually crossed the Yellow River to the south.

古文：单于头曼有太子曰冒顿。
现代文：匈奴单于头曼有太子叫冒顿。
English: The Xiongnu alone has a crown prince in the first place, named Cao Dong.

古文：后有所爱阏氏，生少子，头曼欲立之。
现代文：后来，头曼续有所宠爱的阏氏，又生了个小儿子，头曼便想把他立为太子。
English: Later, Touman's favorite, the Shun clan, gave birth to another young son, and Touman wanted to make him crown prince.

古文：是时，东胡强而月氏盛，乃使冒顿质于月氏。
现代文：这时东胡部族强大，西域的月氏部族也很强盛。头曼于是派冒顿到月氏去当人质。
English: At this time, the Eastern Hu tribe was powerful, and the Western Zhou tribe was also powerful. The headman then sent the tempter to the Zhou clan to be a hostage.

古文：既而头曼急击月氏，月氏欲杀冒顿。
现代文：不久，头曼加紧攻击月氏，月氏就想杀掉冒顿。
English: Soon, the ringleader stepped up his attack on Mr. Yue, who wanted to kill Mr. Yue.

古文：冒顿盗其善马骑之，亡归；头曼以为壮，令将万骑。
现代文：冒顿即偷盗月氏人的好马骑上，逃回了匈奴。头曼由此认为冒顿强壮勇武，就让他统率万名骑兵。
English: He immediately stole the good horse of the man of the month, mounted it and fled back to the Xiongnu. The headman thought that he was strong and brave, so he put him in charge of 10,000 cavalry.

古文：冒顿乃作鸣镝，习勒其骑射。
现代文：冒顿便制作出响箭，训练部下骑射练习，使他们习惯于听从自己的号令。
English: He immediately produced sounding arrows and trained his men to practice riding and shooting, so that they would get used to following his orders.

古文：令曰： 鸣镝所射而不悉射者，斩之！ 
现代文：下令说： 看到我的响箭射出后不一齐发射的人，斩首！ 
English: The order said: Anyone who sees my ringing arrow shoot out and then fire unevenly, behead!

古文：冒顿乃以鸣镝自射其善马，既又射其爱妻；左右或不敢射者，皆斩之。
现代文：冒顿随即用响箭自射他的好马，接着又射他的爱妻，左右的人凡有不敢跟着发射的，都被斩杀了。
English: He immediately shot his good horse with a loud arrow, then shot his beloved wife, and anyone who did not dare to follow him was killed.

古文：最后以鸣镝射单于善马，左右皆射之。
现代文：最后冒顿又拿响箭射头曼单于的好马，左右的骑兵也都跟着放箭射单于的马。
English: Finally, he suddenly took an arrow and shot a good horse, and the cavalrymen on both sides also followed the horse.

古文：于是冒顿知其可用。从头曼猎，以鸣镝射头曼，其左右亦皆随鸣镝而射。
现代文：由此冒顿知道这些兵士可以使用了，便在随同头曼出猎时，用响箭射头曼，他的部众即跟着响箭同射单于。
English: From this, he suddenly knew that these soldiers could be used, so when he went hunting with his companion, he shot his companion with a ringing arrow, and his followers followed the ringing arrow and shot themselves.

古文：遂杀头曼，尽诛其后母与弟及大臣不听从者。
现代文：最终杀死了头曼，并把他的后母和弟弟以及大臣中不听从调遣的人全部诛杀。
English: In the end, he killed the headman, his stepmother, his brother, and all the ministers who did not follow his orders.

古文：冒顿自立为单于。
现代文：冒顿自立为单于。
English: Take the plunge and set yourself apart.

古文：东胡闻冒顿立，乃使使谓冒顿： 欲得头曼时千里马。 
现代文：东胡听说冒顿弑父自立，便派出使者去告诉冒顿说： 想要得到头曼在位时拥有的千里马。 
English: When Donghu heard that the headman had become independent, he sent an envoy to tell the headman that he wanted to get the horse that the headman had owned when he was in power.

古文：冒顿问群臣，群臣皆曰： 此匈奴宝马也，勿与！ 
现代文：冒顿询问群臣，群臣都说： 那是匈奴的一匹宝马，不能给人！ 
English: He took the liberty of asking the ministers, and they all said: That's a Hun's BMW, you can't give it to anyone!

古文：冒顿日； 奈何与人邻国而爱一马乎！ 
现代文：冒顿道： 怎么能与人家为友好邻国却还要吝惜区区一匹马呀！ 
English: How can you be a friendly neighbor and still begrudge a single horse!

古文：遂与之。
现代文：随即把这匹马送给了东胡。
English: Then pay him.

古文：居顷之，东胡又使使谓冒顿： 欲得单于一阏氏。 
现代文：过了不久，东胡又派使者来对冒顿说： 想要得到单于的一位阏氏。 
English: Not long after, Donghu sent another envoy to say to Mouton: "I want to get hold of a member of the Yi clan in Shan Yu."

古文：冒顿复问左右，左右皆怒曰： 东胡无道，乃求阏氏！
现代文：冒顿再询问左右近侍，侍臣都愤怒地说： 东胡这般无礼，竟然索求阏氏！
English: He suddenly asked the ministers, and the people around him were very angry, saying: "There's no reason for a man with a beard to ask us for Mr. Board!

古文：请击之！ 
现代文：请发兵攻打它！ 
English: Please send troops to attack it!

古文：冒顿曰： 奈何与人邻国爱一女子乎！ 
现代文：冒顿道： 和人家是邻国，怎么能舍不得一个女子呢！ 
English: He suddenly said, "We are neighbors, how can I not want a woman?"

古文：遂取所爱阏氏予东胡。
现代文：就选取自己所宠爱的阏氏送给了东胡。
English: As a result, he gave his favorite horse, Mr. Zou, to Dong Hu.

古文：东胡王愈益骄。
现代文：东胡王于是越来越骄横放纵。
English: King Donghu became more and more arrogant and indulgent.

古文：东胡与匈奴中间有弃地莫居，千馀里，各居其边，为瓯脱。
现代文：东胡与匈奴之间，有被丢弃的土地无人居住，方圆一千多里，双方各居其一边，设立屯戍守望的哨所。
English: Between the Eastern Hu and the Xiongnu, there is abandoned and uninhabited land, more than a thousand miles in circumference. Both sides sit on their side and set up posts to keep watch.

古文：东胡使使谓冒顿： 此弃地，欲有之。 
现代文：东胡再次派使者对冒顿说： 这些无人居住的荒地，我想得到它。 
English: Donghu again sent an envoy to Mouton and said, "These uninhabited wastelands, I want to get it.

古文：冒顿问群臣，群臣或曰： 此弃地，予之亦乎，勿与亦可！ 
现代文：冒顿依旧召问群臣，群臣中有的说： 这是块荒地，给他们也可以，不给也行。 
English: He still called his ministers, and some of them said, "This is a waste land. You can give it to them or not."

古文：于是冒顿大怒曰： 地者，国之本也，奈何予之！ 
现代文：冒顿这时却勃然大怒道： 土地是国家的根本，怎么能够给人呢！ 
English: At this time, he suddenly became very angry and said: Land is the foundation of the country, how can it be given away!

古文：诸言予之者，皆斩之。
现代文：即将那些说可以给予的臣子都杀了。
English: Those who said to give Donghu open space were all killed.

古文：冒顿上马，令： 国中有后出者斩！ 
现代文：冒顿接着一跃上马，下令说： 国中有晚出发的人，斩首！ 
English: Suddenly he leapt onto his horse and gave the order: "Anyone in the country who sets out late should be beheaded!"

古文：遂袭击东胡。
现代文：随即领兵去袭击东胡。
English: He then led his troops to attack Donghu.

古文：东胡初轻冒顿，不为备；冒顿遂灭东胡。
现代文：东胡起初非常轻视冒顿，不设防备，冒顿因此就灭掉了东胡。
English: At first, Donghu was very dismissive of the attack and did not take precautions. As a result, the attack wiped out Donghu.

古文：既归，又西击走月氏，南并楼烦、白羊河南王，遂侵燕、代，悉收蒙恬所夺匈奴故地与汉关故河南塞至朝那、肤施。
现代文：冒顿获胜而归，又向西攻击赶跑了月氏，向南兼并了黄河以南的娄烦、白羊二王，随即侵掠燕、代地区，全部重新收复了当年被蒙恬夺走的匈奴旧地，崐并夺取了汉朝边关原河套以南诸要塞到朝那县、肤施县一带的大片土地。
English: After winning the battle, they returned to the west and attacked and chased away the Yue clan. To the south, they annexed the Southern Yellow River and the Aries two kings, and then invaded and plundered the Yan and Dai regions. They regained all the old Hun lands that were taken away by the Mongols that year. They also conquered and seized the large tracts of land around the Han Dynasty border south of the Guanyuan River to the fortresses in Chaonaxian and Jinshi County.

古文：是时，汉兵方与项羽相距，中国罢于兵革，以故冒顿得自强，控弦之士三十馀万，威服诸国。
现代文：这个时候，汉军正与项羽相持，中原地区被战争拖累得疲惫不堪，因此冒顿得以强大起来，拥有操弓射箭的兵士三十多万，威势镇服各国。
English: At this time, the Chinese army was fighting against Xiang Yu, and the Central Plains region was exhausted by the war, so it was able to become strong, with more than three hundred thousand soldiers who practiced archery and archery, and subdued countries with vigor.

古文：秋，匈奴围韩王信于马邑。
现代文：秋季，匈奴兵在马邑将韩王信重重包围。
English: In the autumn, Hun soldiers encircled Han Wangxin in Mayi.

古文：信数使使胡，求和解。
现代文：韩王信多次派使者出使匈奴，谋求和解。
English: Han Wangxin repeatedly sent envoys to the Xiongnu to seek reconciliation.

古文：汉发兵救之。疑信数间使，有二心，使人责让信。
现代文：汉朝发兵救援，但又猜疑韩王信频繁私派使者是对汉室怀有二心，就派人去指责韩王信。
English: Han Dynasty sent troops to rescue, but suspected that Han Wangxin's frequent private envoys were double-minded to the Han Dynasty, and sent someone to accuse Han Wangxin.

古文：信恐诛，九月，以马邑降匈奴。
现代文：韩王信害怕被杀，便在九月，举马邑城投降了匈奴。
English: Han Wangxin was afraid of being killed, so he surrendered the city of Mayi to the Xiongnu in September.

古文：匈奴冒顿因引兵南逾句注，攻太原，至晋阳。
现代文：匈奴冒顿随即乘势领兵向南越过句注山，进攻太原，抵达晋阳。
English: The Xiongnu immediately took advantage of the situation to lead the troops southward over the Juchu Mountains, attacked Taiyuan, and arrived in Jinyang.

古文：帝悉去秦苛仪法，为简易。群臣饮酒争功，醉，或妄呼，拔剑击柱，帝益厌之。
现代文：高帝全部除去秦朝烦琐的礼仪，力求礼仪规则简单易行，这时群臣们饮酒争功，喝得酩酊大醉，有的人就胡喊狂呼，拔剑乱砍殿柱，高帝渐渐对这种现象产生了反感。
English: Emperor Gao completely eliminated the cumbersome etiquette of the Qin Dynasty and strived to make the etiquette rules simple and easy to follow. At this time, the courtiers were drinking and arguing, and some people shouted and shouted, drew their swords and slashed the pillars of the palace. Emperor Gao gradually became disgusted with this phenomenon.

古文：叔孙通说上曰： 夫儒者难与进取，可与守成。
现代文：叔孙通于是劝高帝说： 那班儒生，很难和他们一道攻打天下，但可以与他们一起保守成业坐天下。
English: His uncle and grandson, Tong, then advised Gao Di, saying: Those Confucian scholars, it is difficult to attack the world with them, but it is possible to be conservative and succeed in the world with them.

古文：臣愿征鲁诸生，与臣弟子共起朝仪。 
现代文：我愿意去征召鲁地的众儒生，来同我的弟子一块儿制定臣子朝见君主的礼仪规则。 
English: I am willing to recruit some students from the State of Lu to work with my disciples to draft the Imperial Court Rite.

古文：帝曰： 得无难乎？ 
现代文：高帝说： 该不会挺烦难的吧？ 
English: Gaudi said: "Wouldn't it be quite difficult?

古文：叔孙通曰： 五帝异乐，三王不同礼，礼者，因时世、人情为之节文者也。
现代文：叔孙通道： 五帝的乐制不一样，三王的礼制不相同。礼制，是根据时代、人情的变化对人们的言行所确定的节制规范。
English: Uncle Sun Chao: The music system of the five emperors is different, and the etiquette of the three kings is different. The etiquette is the standard of moderation determined for people's words and deeds according to the changes of the times and human conditions.

古文：臣愿颇采古礼，与秦仪杂就之。 
现代文：我想稍微采用一些古代礼制，与秦朝的仪法搀糅到一起制定出来。 
English: I would like to slightly adopt some ancient etiquette and work it out together with the Qin Dynasty's etiquette.

古文：上曰： 可试为之，令易知，度吾所能行者为之。 
现代文：高帝说： 可以试着做做，但要使这礼仪容易被人们了解，估计我所能做得到的，据此去制定它。 
English: Gao Di said: I can try to do it, but I must make this etiquette easy for people to understand, estimate what I can do, and formulate it accordingly.

古文：于是叔孙通使征鲁诸生三十馀人。
现代文：于是，叔孙通就奉命作为使者，去征召了鲁地的儒生三十多人。
English: As a result, Uncle Sun Tong was ordered to act as an emissary to recruit more than thirty Confucian students from Ludi.

古文：鲁有两生不肯行，曰： 公所事者且十主，皆面谀以得亲贵。
现代文：鲁地有两个儒生不肯前往，说道： 您所事奉的将近有十个君主了，都是依靠当面阿谀逢迎来赢得亲近、尊贵。
English: In Ludi, two Confucian scholars did not want to leave, saying, "There are nearly ten emperors you have served, all of whom have gained closeness and prominence through in-person flattery.

古文：今天下初定，死者未葬，伤者未起，又欲起礼、乐。
现代文：如今天下刚刚平定，死亡的人尚未安葬，伤残的人还不能行动，又想要制礼作乐。
English: For example, today the country has just been pacified, the dead have not yet been buried, the disabled are still unable to move, and they want to make music.

古文：礼、乐所由起，积德百年而后可兴也。
现代文：而礼乐的产生，是积累德政上百年之后才能制作兴起的。
English: However, the production of ceremonial music was only possible after a hundred years of accumulation of German politics.

古文：吾不忍为公所为。
现代文：我们不能忍心去做您所要做的事情。
English: We can't do this for you against our will.

古文：公去矣，无污我！ 
现代文：您去吧，不要玷污了我们！ 
English: Go ahead, don't tarnish us!

古文：叔孙通笑曰： 若真鄙儒也，不知时变。 
现代文：叔孙通笑着说： 你们真是浅陋迂腐的儒生啊，不懂得时势的发展变化！ 
English: Uncles and grandsons laughed and said: You are really despicable Confucianists, you don't understand the changes of the times at all.

古文：遂与所微三十人西，及上左右为学者与其弟子百馀人，为绵蕞，野外习之。
现代文：随即偕同他所征召的三十人西行入关，又邀请高帝身边有学术修养的近臣和自己的弟子，共一百多人，用绳索拦出演习场所，插立茅草表示出尊卑位次，在野外演习礼仪。
English: He then led the thirty people he had recruited westward into the pass, and invited more than a hundred academically trained courtiers and his own disciples around Gao Di, using ropes to block the training site, interspersed with thatch to indicate the rank of superiority and inferiority, and practicing etiquette in the field.

古文：月馀，言于上曰： 可试观矣。 
现代文：经过一个多月后，叔孙通告诉高帝说： 可以试看了。 
English: After more than a month, Shusun Tong told Gao Di: You can try it.

古文：上使行礼，曰： 吾能为此。 
现代文：高帝于是就让他们举行礼仪演练，看完演练后说道： 我能够做这些。 
English: After performing the rite, the Emperor said, "I can do it."

古文：乃令群臣习肄。
现代文：就命令群臣们进行练习。
English: He ordered his ministers to practice.

古文：太祖高皇帝中七年
现代文：太祖高皇帝中七年
English: Emperor Taizu was seven years old in middle school

古文：冬，十月，长乐宫成，诸侯群臣皆朝贺。
现代文：冬季，十月，长乐宫落成，诸侯、群臣都前来参加朝贺典礼。
English: In winter, in October, the Changle Palace was completed, and princes and ministers came to participate in the morning greeting ceremony.

古文：先平明，谒者治礼，以次引入殿门，陈东、西乡。卫官侠陛及罗立廷中，皆执兵，张旗帜。
现代文：仪式是在天亮之前举行，谒者主持典礼，按次序将所有人员引导入大殿门，排列在东、西两方，侍卫官员有的在殿下台阶两旁站立，有的排列在廷中，都持握兵器，竖立旗帜。
English: The ceremony was held before dawn. The eunuch presided over the ceremony and led all the people into the gate of the main hall in order, lining up on the east and west sides. Some of the guards stood on both sides of the steps of the palace, and some lined up in the court, all holding weapons and erecting flags.

古文：于是皇帝传警，辇出房；引诸侯王以下至吏六百石以次奉贺，莫不振恐肃敬。
现代文：这时皇帝乘坐辇车出房，众官员举旗传呼警戒，引导诸侯王以下至六百石级的官员依次序朝拜皇帝，无不震恐肃敬。
English: At this time, the emperor rode out of the house in a carriage, and all the officials raised their flags to call for vigilance, guiding the officials from the princes and kings down to the six-hundred-stone level to bow to the emperor in order, all of them tremendously reverent.

古文：至礼毕，复置法酒。
现代文：到典礼仪式完毕，又置备正式酒宴。
English: Wait until the ceremony is over, and then throw a big party.

古文：诸侍坐殿上，皆伏，抑首；以尊卑次起上寿。
现代文：众侍臣官员陪坐在殿上的，都俯伏垂首，按官位的高低次序起身给崐皇上敬酒祝福。
English: All the courtiers and officials seated in the hall bowed their heads and rose in order of seniority to give the toast to the Emperor.

古文：觞九行，谒者言 置酒 ，御史执法举不如仪者，辄引去。
现代文：斟酒连敬九次，谒者宣告 结束宴饮 。御史执行礼仪规则，凡遇不遵照仪式规则举手投足的人就将他领出去。
English: After the wine is poured nine times, the host announces the end of the banquet. The master of ceremonies enforces the rules of etiquette, and anyone who does not follow the rules of the ceremony will be led out.

古文：竟朝置酒，无敢讙哗失礼者。
现代文：由此从朝贺典礼和酒宴开始直到结束，没有出现敢大声喧哗、不合礼节的人。
English: Throughout the morning worship and drinking process, no one dared to make noise.

古文：于是帝曰： 吾乃今日知为皇帝之贵也！ 
现代文：这时高帝便说： 我今天才知道身为皇帝的尊贵啊！ 
English: At this time, Emperor Gao said, "I just learned today how important it is to be an emperor!"

古文：乃拜叔孙通为太常，赐金五百斤。
现代文：便授任叔孙通为太常，常赐黄金五百斤。
English: Therefore, he awarded Tong Taizang's official position to his uncle and grandson, and rewarded him with five hundred jin of gold.

古文：初，秦有天下，悉内六国礼仪，采择其尊君、抑臣者存之。
现代文：当初，秦王朝统一了天下，收集六国的全部礼仪，选择出其中尊崇君主、卑抑臣下的规则保留下来。
English: At the beginning, the Qin Dynasty unified the world, collected all the etiquette of the six countries, and selected the rules of respecting the monarch and despising the vassals to be preserved.

古文：及通制礼，颇有所增损，大抵皆袭秦故，自天子称号下至佐僚及宫室、官名，少所变改。
现代文：待到叔孙通制定礼仪规则，稍微作了一些增减，大体上都是沿袭秦朝的旧制，从天子称号以下到大小官吏及宫室、官名，更改变动不多。
English: It was left to his uncles and grandsons to draw up the rules of etiquette, with a few additions and subtractions. For the most part, they followed the old system of the Qin Dynasty. From the title of the son of heaven to the size of officials and the palace, and the names of officials, there was not much change.

古文：其书，后与律、令同录，藏于理官。
现代文：记载此礼仪规章的文本，后来和律、令收录在一起，收藏在司法机关。
English: The text documenting this code of etiquette and etiquette was later collected together with the laws and decrees and kept in the judicial organs.

古文：法家又复不传，民臣莫有言者焉。
现代文：由于法家对此又不再传授，所以百姓臣僚也就没有谈论它的了。
English: Since the lawyers no longer teach about it, the people's ministers no longer talk about it.

古文：臣光曰：礼之为物大矣！
现代文：臣司马光曰：礼的功能太大了！
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The function of the salute is too great!

古文：用之于身，则动静有法而百行备焉；用之于家，则内外有别而九族睦焉；用之于乡，则长幼有伦而俗化美焉；用之于国，则君臣有叙而政治成焉；用之于天下，则诸侯顺服而纪纲正焉；岂直几席之上、户庭之间得之而不乱哉！
现代文：把它用到个人身上，动与静就有了规范，所有的行为就会完备无缺；把它用到家事上，内与外就井然有别，九族之间就会和睦融洽；把它用到乡里，长幼之间就有了伦理，风俗教化就会美好清明；把它用到封国，君主与臣子就尊卑有序，政令统治就会成功稳定；把它用到天下，诸侯就归顺服从，法制纪律就会整肃严正。难道仅仅只是把它用在宴会仪式之上、门户庭院之间维持秩序的吗？
English: If it is applied to individuals, movement and stillness will be standardized, and all behaviors will be complete; if it is applied to family affairs, there will be a clear distinction between inside and outside, and there will be harmony and harmony between the nine ethnic groups; if it is applied to the countryside, there will be ethics between the elders and the children, and the enlightenment of customs will be beautiful and clear; if it is applied to the country, the monarch and the courtiers will be dignified and orderly, and the rule by decree will be successful and stable; if it is applied to the world, the princes will be submissive and obedient, and the legal system and discipline will be rigorous. Is it just

古文：夫以高祖之明达，闻陆贾之言而称善，睹叔孙通之仪而叹息；然所以不能比肩于三代之王者，病于不学而已。
现代文：就高祖刘邦的明智通达说来，他可以聆听陆贾关于以文治巩固政权的进言而称赞极好，目睹叔孙通所定尊崇君主的礼仪而发声慨叹，但是他所以终究不能与夏、商、周三代圣明君王并列，就错在他不肯学习啊。
English: As far as Gaozu Liu Bang's wisdom and wisdom are concerned, he can listen to Lu Jia's speech on consolidating the regime with the rule of literature and praise it very well, and witness the etiquette of respecting the monarch set by his uncle and grandson, but he can't be ranked with Xia, Shang and the third generation of King Shengming. The mistake is that he refuses to learn.

古文：当是之时，得大儒而佐之，与之以礼为天下，其功烈岂若是而止哉！
现代文：在那个时候，如果能得到大儒来辅佐他，与大儒一道用礼制来治理天下，他的功勋业绩又怎么会在这一步便止住了呢！
English: At that time, if he could get a great scholar to assist him, and together with a great scholar to use etiquette to govern the world, how could his meritorious performance stop at this step!

古文：惜夫，叔孙生之为器小也！
现代文：可惜啊，叔孙通的器度太小了！
English: What a pity, Uncle Sun Tong's vessel is too small!

古文：徒窃礼之糠粃，以依世、谐俗、取宠而已，遂使先王之礼沦没而不振，以迄于今，岂不痛甚矣哉！
现代文：他只不过是窃取礼制中糠般微末无用的东西，借以依附时世、迎合风俗、求取宠幸罢了，这样便使先代君王所建立的礼制沦没而不振兴，以至于到了今天这个地步，难道不令人沉痛之极吗！
English: Isn't it sad that he has brought the etiquette established by the previous monarchs to where it is today, by stealing the tiniest and most useless things from the etiquette system in order to cling to the times, pander to customs, and seek favors?

古文：是以扬子讥之曰： 昔者鲁有大臣，史失其名，曰： 何如其大也！ 
现代文：因此扬雄对此指责说： 从前鲁地有大儒，史书中没有记载他们的名字。有人问： 为什么说他们是大儒呀？ 
English: Therefore, Yang Xiong criticized this, saying: There were great Confucians in Ludi in the past, but their names were not recorded in the history books. Some people asked: Why do you say they are great Confucians?

古文：曰： 叔孙通欲制君臣之仪，召先生于鲁，所不能致者二人。 
现代文：回答道： 叔孙通打算制定君臣的礼仪，便到鲁地去征召儒生，请不来的有两个，堪称大儒。 
English: He replied, "Uncle Sun Tong planned to establish the etiquette of a monarch and a minister, so he went to Ludi to recruit Confucianism students. There were two who did not come, and they can be called great Confucians.

古文：曰： 若是，则仲尼之开迹诸侯也非邪？ 
现代文：有人问道： 既然如此，那么孔子应聘的足迹遍及诸侯国也是不对的了？ 
English: Some people asked: Since this is the case, is it wrong for Confucius to have applied for jobs all over the provinces?

古文：曰： 仲尼开迹，将以自用也。
现代文：回答道： 孔子周游列国，是为了要能按照自己的意图行事。
English: He replied, "Confucius traveled around the world so that he could act according to his own intentions.

古文：如委己而从人，虽有规矩、准绳，焉得而用之！  
现代文：倘若放弃自己的立场来顺从迁就他人，那么即便是确定出了规矩、准绳，又怎么能够拿来应用呀！  
English: If you give up your own position to conform to others, then even if you have determined the rules and standards, how can you apply them?

古文：善乎扬子之言也！
现代文：精彩啊，扬雄的评论！
English: Wonderful, Yang Xiong's comment!

古文：夫大儒者，恶肯毁其规矩、准绳以趋一时之功哉！
现代文：大儒，是不肯破坏自己原有的规矩、准绳去追求一时的功利的！
English: Confucius, is not willing to destroy their own original rules, standards to pursue a momentary utilitarian!

古文：上自将击韩王信，破其军于铜鞮，斩其将王喜。
现代文：高帝亲自领兵出征攻打韩王信，在铜县大败韩王信的军队，斩杀了他的部将王喜。
English: Emperor Gao personally led an army to attack Han Wangxin, defeated Han Wangxin's army in Tong County, and killed his commander Wang Xi.

古文：信亡走匈奴；白土人曼丘臣、王黄等立赵苗裔赵利为王，复收信败散兵，与信及匈奴谋攻汉。
现代文：韩王信逃往匈奴，他手下的将领白土县人曼丘臣、王黄等拥立赵王的后代赵利为王，重新收拢韩王信的散兵败卒，与韩王信及匈奴一起合谋攻击汉军。
English: Han Wangxin fled to the Huns, and his generals, including Baidu County natives Manchu Chen and Wang Huang, supported Zhao Li, a descendant of King Zhao, as king, re-gathered Han Wangxin's scattered and defeated soldiers, and conspired with Han Wangxin and the Huns to attack the Chinese army.

古文：匈奴使左、右贤王将万馀骑，与王黄等屯广武以南，至晋阳，汉兵击之，匈奴辄败走，已复屯聚，汉兵乘胜追之。
现代文：匈奴派左、右贤王统率一万多名骑兵，同王黄等驻扎在广武以南，到晋阳作战，汉军攻打他们，匈奴兵立即败逃，随后又聚集起来，汉军乘胜追击他们。
English: The Huns sent more than ten thousand cavalrymen led by the left and right wise kings, with Wang Huang and others stationed in the south of Guangwu, to fight in Jinyang. The Chinese army attacked them, the Huns immediately fled, and then gathered again. The Chinese army chased them with victory.

古文：会天大寒，雨雪，士卒堕指者什二三。
现代文：这时恰好碰上天气酷寒，天下大雪，汉军士兵冻掉了手指的占十分之二三。
English: At this time, the weather happened to be very cold, there was heavy snow all over the world, and two-thirds of the Han soldiers froze their fingers.

古文：上居晋阳，闻冒顿居代谷，欲击之。
现代文：高帝驻居晋阳，听说冒顿单于驻居在代谷，便想要去攻打他，就派人去侦察匈奴。
English: Gao Di resided in Jinyang, and when he heard that Duan Duan resided in Daiya, he wanted to attack him, so he sent someone to spy on the Xiongnu.

古文：使人觇匈奴，冒顿匿其壮士、肥牛马，但见老弱及羸畜。
现代文：这时冒顿把他的精壮士兵、肥壮牛马都藏了起来，只让人看见老弱残兵和瘦小的牲畜。
English: At this time, he suddenly hid his strong soldiers, fat cattle and horses, and only let people see the old and weak soldiers and thin livestock.

古文：使者十辈来，皆言匈奴可击。
现代文：汉军派去的使者相继回来的有十批，都报告说匈奴可以攻打。
English: More than ten batches of envoys sent back all said that the Xiongnu could attack.

古文：上复使刘敬往使匈奴，未还；汉悉兵三十二万北逐之，逾句注。
现代文：高帝于是又派刘敬出使匈奴，尚未返回，汉军就全部出动兵力三十二万向北追击匈奴，越过了句注山。
English: Emperor Gao then sent Liu Jing to dispatch an envoy to the Xiongnu, and before he returned, the Han army sent out a total of 320,000 troops to pursue the Xiongnu to the north, crossing the Juju Mountain.

古文：刘敬还，报曰： 两国相击，此宜夸矜，见所长。
现代文：刘敬回来后报告说： 两国相攻，这本该炫耀显示自己的优势。
English: After returning, Liu Jing reported: "The two countries are attacking each other. This should have been a show of strength.

古文：今臣往，徒见羸瘠、老弱，此必欲见短，伏奇兵以争利。
现代文：但现在我到匈奴方面去，只看见瘦弱的牲畜和老弱的士兵，这必定是想要显露自己虚弱不堪，而埋伏奇兵以争取胜利。
English: But now, when I go to the Huns, I only see emaciated cattle and feeble soldiers. It must be that they want to show their weakness and ambush the strange soldiers in order to win.

古文：愚以为匈奴不可击也。 
现代文：我认为匈奴不能攻打。 
English: I don't think the Huns can be attacked.

古文：是时，汉兵已业行，上怒，骂刘敬曰： 齐虏以口舌得官，今乃妄言沮吾军！ 
现代文：这时候，汉军业已出动，高帝大为恼火，骂刘敬说： 你这个齐国的混蛋伙，不过是靠着耍嘴皮子得到了一官半职，现在竟又来胡言乱语阻挠我的军队前进！ 
English: At this time, the Chinese army had already been dispatched, and Emperor Gao became very angry and scolded Liu Jing, saying: "You bastard of Qi, you only got an official position by playing with words, and now you have come to obstruct the advance of my army with nonsense!

古文：械系敬广武。
现代文：用刑具把刘敬拘禁到广武。
English: They used shackles to detain Liu Jing and held him in Guangwu County.

古文：帝先至平城，兵未尽到；冒顿纵精兵四十万骑，围帝于白登七日，汉兵中外不得相救饷。
现代文：高帝先期抵达平城，军队尚未全部到来。冒顿便发出精兵四十万骑，把高帝围困在白登山达七天之久。
English: Gao Di arrived at Pingcheng ahead of time, and the army had not yet arrived in full. He suddenly sent out 400,000 elite soldiers and besieged Gao Di in Mount Paektu for seven days.

古文：帝用陈平秘计，使使间厚遗阏氏。
现代文：汉军这时内外无法呼应救援，高帝于是就采用陈平的秘计，派使者暗中用重金贿赂冒顿的阏氏。
English: At this time, the Chinese army was unable to respond to the rescue at home and abroad, and Emperor Gao then adopted Chen Ping's secret plan and sent an envoy to secretly bribe the presumptuous Yi clan with heavy money.

古文：阏氏谓冒顿曰： 两主不相困。
现代文：阏氏随即便对冒顿说： 两个君主不应彼此困窘迫害。
English: Mr. Zou then said to Mr. Morton, "Two sovereigns should not torment and persecute each other."

古文：今得汉地，而单于终非能居之也。
现代文：如今即使夺得了汉朝的土地，单于您也终究不能居住在那里。
English: If you get Han Dynasty land, you just can't live there after all.

古文：且汉主亦有神灵，单于察之！ 
现代文：况且汉朝的君主也有神灵保护，望您明察！ 
English: Moreover, the monarchs of the Han Dynasty were also protected by the gods, as you can see!

古文：冒顿与王黄、赵利期，而黄、利兵不来，疑其与汉有谋，乃解围之一角。
现代文：冒顿与王黄、赵利约定好时间会师，但王黄、赵利的军队却迟迟不来，由此就怀疑他们与汉军有什么谋划，这才解开包围圈的一角。
English: He agreed with Wang Huang and Zhao Li to meet at a good time, but the armies of Wang Huang and Zhao Li were late to arrive, which made him suspect that they were plotting with the Chinese army. This was the only way to break out of the encirclement.

古文：会天大雾，汉使人往来，匈奴不觉。
现代文：正好遇到天降大雾，汉军便派人在白登山与平城之间往来走动，匈奴人毫无察觉。
English: Just as the fog descended from the sky, the Han army sent people to move back and forth between Mount Paektu and Pingcheng. The Xiongnu were completely unaware of this.

古文：陈平请令强弩傅两矢，外乡，从解角直出。
现代文：陈平这时请求高帝命令士兵们用强弩搭上两支箭，箭朝外御敌，从解围的一角直冲出去。
English: At this time, Chen Ping asked Emperor Gao to order the soldiers to tie up two arrows with a strong hoe. The arrows faced the enemy outside and rushed straight out from the corner of the relief.

古文：帝出围，欲驱；太仆滕公固徐行。
现代文：高帝脱出包围后，想要策马疾奔，太仆滕公夏侯婴却坚持慢慢地行走。
English: After Emperor Gao escaped the encirclement, he wanted to gallop with his horse, but the eunuch Tenggong Xiaohang insisted on walking slowly.

古文：至平城，汉大军亦到，胡骑遂解去。
现代文：到了平城时，汉的大队人马也赶到了，匈奴的骑兵便解围而去。
English: When they arrived at Pingcheng, the Han army also arrived, and the Hun cavalry broke the siege and left.

古文：汉亦罢兵归，令樊哙止定代地。
现代文：汉军于是也收兵返回，命樊哙留下来平定代地。
English: As a result, the Chinese army also withdrew and returned, leaving the battle to be settled on their behalf.

古文：上至广武，赦刘敬，曰： 吾不用公言，以困平城；吾皆已斩前使十辈矣。 
现代文：高帝回到广武，赦免了刘敬，说道： 我不采用您的意见，因此被围困在平城。我已经把先前十多批使者都杀掉了！ 
English: Emperor Gao returned to Guangwu, pardoned Liu Jing, and said, "I do not accept your opinion, so I am besieged in Pingcheng. I have already killed more than ten groups of emissaries!"

古文：乃封敬二千户为关内侯，号为建信侯。
现代文：接着就封给刘敬二千民户，爵位为关内侯，称作建信侯。
English: Subsequently, 2,000 households were given to Liu Jing, and he was given the title of Guanai Hou, also known as Jianxin Hou.

古文：帝南过曲逆，曰： 壮哉县！
现代文：高帝回师向南经过曲逆县，说道： 好壮观的县啊！
English: Gao Di Huishi passed through Quqiao County to the south and said: What a spectacular county!

古文：吾行天下，独见洛阳与是耳。 
现代文：我走遍天下，只见过洛阳和这里罢了。 
English: I've traveled all over the world, but I've only seen Luoyang and this county like this.

古文：乃更封陈平为曲逆侯，尽食之。
现代文：就改封陈平为曲逆侯，享用全县民户的赋税收入。
English: He changed his name to Chen Ping and enjoyed the tax revenue of all the households in the county.

古文：平从帝征伐，凡六出奇计，辄益封邑焉。
现代文：陈平跟随高帝南征北战，共六次进献妙计，每次都增加了封邑。
English: Chen Ping followed Emperor Gao in the Southern Expedition and the Northern War, and made a total of six brilliant plans, each time increasing the fief.

古文：十二月，上还，过赵。
现代文：十二月，高帝返回长安，途经赵国。
English: In December, Gao Di returned to Chang'an via Zhao.

古文：赵王敖执子婿礼甚卑，上箕倨慢骂之。
现代文：赵王张敖对高帝行作为女婿的礼节，十分谦卑，高帝却叉开两腿坐着，态度轻慢地责骂张敖。
English: Zhao Wang Zhang Rong was very humble to Emperor Gao for his courtesy as a son-in-law, but Emperor Gao sat with his legs apart and scolded Zhang Rong in a light-hearted manner.

古文：赵相贯高、赵午等皆怒，曰： 吾王，孱王也！ 
现代文：赵国相国贯高、赵午等人都怒火中烧，说道： 我们的大王，真是个懦弱的王啊！ 
English: Zhao Guozhong, Zhao Guozhonggao, Zhao Wu and others were all burning with anger, saying: Our great king, what a cowardly king!

古文：乃说王曰： 天下豪桀并起，能者先立。
现代文：随即劝赵王说： 天下豪强并起，贤能的人先称王。
English: Then he advised King Zhao, saying, "The mighty and the powerful rise up all at once, and the man of virtue is the first to be proclaimed king.

古文：今王事帝甚恭，而帝无礼；请为王杀之！ 
现代文：现在您侍奉皇帝非常恭谨，而皇帝却如此无礼，请让我们替您把他杀了！ 
English: Now you serve the emperor very respectfully, but the emperor is so rude, please let us kill him for you!

古文：张敖啮其指出血，曰： 君何言之误！
现代文：张敖咬破自己的手指流出血来，说道： 你们怎么说这种大错特错的话呀！
English: Zhang Ye bit his finger and it bled profusely, saying: "How can you say such a blatantly wrong thing!

古文：先人亡国，赖帝得复，德流子孙；秋豪皆帝力也。
现代文：先父亡国后，依赖皇帝才得以复国，德崐泽能流传给子孙，一丝一毫都是皇帝的力量啊。
English: After my father's death, it was only by relying on the emperor that the country could be restored. The power of Emperor Dezongze can be passed down to our children and grandchildren.

古文：愿君无复出口！ 
现代文：望你们不要再这么说了！ 
English: Don't ever say that again!

古文：贯高、赵午等皆相谓曰： 乃吾等非也。
现代文：贯高、赵午等人都相互说道： 这是我们的不是了。
English: Guan Gao, Zhao Wu and others all said to each other: This is not our fault.

古文：吾王长者，不倍德；且吾等义不辱。
现代文：我们的大王是忠厚的长者，不会背弃恩德。
English: Our great king is a loyal elder, and will not betray our kindness.

古文：今帝辱我王，故欲杀之，何洿王为！
现代文：况且我们的原则是不受人侮辱，而今皇帝侮辱了我王，所以想要杀掉他，又何必连累我王呢！
English: Moreover, our principle is not to be insulted, and now the emperor has insulted my king, so if you want to kill him, why bother my king!

古文：事成归王，事败独身坐耳！ 
现代文：事情干成了，则功归我王，事情失败了，则我们独自承担罪责罢了。 
English: If things work out, then the credit goes to my king, if things fail, then we have only ourselves to blame.

古文：匈奴攻代。
现代文：匈奴攻打代国。
English: The Xiongnu attacked on behalf of the state.

古文：代王喜弃国自归，赦为郃阳侯。
现代文：代王刘喜弃国，自己逃归洛阳。
English: The acting king, Liu Xi, abandoned the country and fled to Luoyang.

古文：辛卯，立皇子如意为代王。
现代文：高帝免了他的罪，改封他为阳侯。辛卯，封皇子刘如意为王。
English: Emperor Gao pardoned him and changed his title to Prince Yang. Emperor Xin appointed Prince Liu Ruyi as king.

古文：春，二月，上至长安。
现代文：春季，二月，高帝抵达长安。
English: In spring, in February, Gao Di arrived in Chang'an.

古文：萧何治未央宫，上见其壮丽，甚怒，谓何曰： 天下匈匈，苦战数岁，成败未可知，是何治宫室过度也！ 
现代文：萧何这时正主持营建未央宫，高帝见到未央宫如此壮丽，十分愤怒，对萧何说： 天下纷乱，连年受战事劳苦，如今成败尚未可知，为什么要把宫室修筑得过分豪华呢！ 
English: At this time, Xiao He was presiding over the construction of the Weiyang Palace. Gao Di saw that the Weiyang Palace was so magnificent and was very angry. He said to Xiao He: The world is in turmoil, we have been suffering from war for years, and now success or failure is not yet known. Why build the palace room too luxurious?

古文：何曰： 天下方未定，故可因以就宫室。
现代文：萧何说： 正是因为天下尚未安定，所以才可趁势营造宫室啊。
English: Xiao He said: It is precisely because the world is not yet stable that we can take advantage of the situation to build a palace.

古文：且夫天子以四海为家，非壮丽无以重威，且无令后世有以加也。 
现代文：何况天子以四海为家，宫殿不壮丽就不足以加重威严，而且也不能让后世宫室的建筑规模超过它呀。 
English: Moreover, the Son of Heaven is home to the four seas, and a palace that is not magnificent is not enough to increase its majesty, and it is not possible for the building scale of the future palace to exceed it.

古文：上说。
现代文：高帝这才高兴起来。
English: The Emperor was delighted.

古文：臣光曰：王者以仁义为丽，道德为威，未闻其以宫室填服天下也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：圣明的君主以仁义为美丽，以道德为威，还不曾听说过有依靠宫室规模来镇服天下的。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: The emperor of Shenming regards benevolence and righteousness as beauty and morality as authority. He has never heard of relying on the size of the palace to subdue the world.

古文：天下未定，当克己节用以趋民之急；而顾以宫室为先，岂可谓之知所务哉！
现代文：天下尚未安定，理当克制自己、节俭用度，前去解救百姓的危难，现却反倒以营建宫室为先任，这怎么可以说是明白自己所应有的职责啊！
English: The world is not yet stable, it is reasonable to restrain oneself, be frugal, and go forward to save the people's peril, but now, on the contrary, building a palace is the first task, how can this be said to understand one's own duties!

古文：昔禹卑宫室而桀为倾宫。
现代文：从前大禹住在简陋的宫室而夏桀仍修建奢华的倾宫。
English: In the past, Dayu lived in a humble palace, while Xia Yao was still building a luxurious palace.

古文：创业垂统之君，躬行节俭以示子孙，其末流犹入于淫靡，况示之以侈乎！
现代文：开创业绩把王位传给后代的君王，尽管身体力行于节俭为子孙作出表率，而他们的末流依旧还是沦落入骄奢淫逸之中，何况向后代子孙显示奢侈呢！
English: The kings who have done great deeds to pass on the throne to their descendants, despite their efforts to practice frugality and set an example for their descendants, their descendants still fall into luxury, let alone show luxury to future generations!

古文：乃云 无令后世有以加 ，岂不谬哉！
现代文：萧何竟谈什么 不要让后世宫室的建筑规模超过它 ，这难道不是荒谬吗！
English: Don't let the scale of the Palace of the Afterlife surpass it, isn't that absurd!

古文：至于孝武，卒以宫室罢敝天下，未必不由酂侯启之也！
现代文：到了汉武帝时，终于因滥建宫室而致天下疲惫衰败，这种局面未必不是由侯萧开的头吧！
English: By the time of Emperor Hanwu, the world was exhausted and in decline due to the excessive construction of palaces. This situation may not have been started by Hou Xiao.

古文：上自栎阳徙都长安。
现代文：高帝从栎阳迁都长安。
English: Emperor Gao moved the capital from Shenyang to Chang'an.

古文：初置宗正官，以序九族。
现代文：始设置宗正官，管理皇族宗室。
English: He was initially appointed as the head of the imperial family and managed the imperial family.

古文：夏，四月，帝行如洛阳。
现代文：夏季，四月，高帝出行到洛阳去。
English: In the summer, in April, Gao Di traveled to Luoyang.

