古文：周起元，字仲先，海澄人。
现代文：周起元，字仲先，海澄人。
English: Zhou Qi Yuan, Zi Zhong Xian, Hai Cheng Ren.

古文：万历二十八年乡试第一，明年成进士。
现代文：万历二十八年乡试考中第一名，第二年成为进士。
English: In the 28th year of Wanli, he won the first place in the township examination, and became a scholar in the second year.

古文：历知浮梁、南昌，以廉惠称。
现代文：历任浮梁、南昌知府，以仁爱廉洁著称。
English: Successive governors of Fu Liang and Nanchang prefectures are known for their benevolence and integrity.

古文：行取入都，注湖广道御史。
现代文：奉旨召见进入北京，授湖广道御史。
English: He was summoned by imperial command to Beijing, where he was given the title of the Grand Historian of Guangdao.

古文：方候命，值京察。
现代文：正在等候命令，赶上考核京官。
English: I'm waiting for the order to catch up with the assessment of the Beijing officials.

古文：御史刘国缙疑郑继芳假书出起元及李邦华、李炳恭、徐缙芳、徐良彦手，遂目为 五鬼 ，继芳且入之疏中。
现代文：御史刘国缙怀疑郑继芳的假信出自周起元、李邦华、李炳恭、徐缙芳、徐良彦的手笔，于是称他们为 五鬼 ，郑继芳也被列入奏疏中。
English: Historian Liu Guozhen suspected that Zheng Jifang's fake letter was written by Zhou Qiyuan, Li Banghua, Li Bingong, Xu Yifang, and Xu Liangyan, so he called them the Five Ghosts. Zheng Jifang was also included in the record.

古文：起元愤，上章自明。
现代文：周起元愤怒了，上疏自我表白。
English: Zhou Qimian was furious, and Shang So confessed.

古文：居二年，御史命始下。
现代文：过了二年，御史的任命才传达下来。
English: It took two years for his appointment to be announced.

古文：会太仆少卿徐兆魁以攻东林为御史钱春所劾，起元亦疏劾之。
现代文：恰巧太仆少卿徐兆魁因为攻击东林党人被钱春弹劾，周起元也上疏弹劾他。
English: It just so happened that Qian Chun impeached his servant Xu Zhaokui for attacking Donglin Party members, and Zhou Qianyuan also impeached him.

古文：奸人刘世学者，诚意伯刘荩臣从祖也，疏诋顾宪成，起元愤，力斥其谬。
现代文：奸诈小人刘世学这人，是诚意伯刘荩臣的堂祖父，上疏诋毁顾宪成。周起元很气愤，极力驳斥他的荒谬。
English: The treacherous villain Liu Shixu, who was the great-grandfather of the sincere uncle Liu Shuncheng, slandered Gu Xiancheng. Zhou Qimuan was very angry and tried his best to refute his absurdity.

古文：荩臣遂讦起元，益诋宪成。
现代文：刘荩臣于是攻击周起元，更加诋毁顾宪成。
English: Liu Shuxin then attacked Zhou Qiyuan and further slandered Gu Xiancheng.

古文：起元再疏极论，其同官翟凤翀、余懋衡、徐良彦、魏云中、李邦华、王时熙、潘之祥亦交章论列。
现代文：周起元再次上疏极力辩论，他的同僚翠凤羽中、余懋衡、徐良彦、魏云中、李邦华、王时熙、潘之祥也轮流逐条辩论。
English: Zhou Qimuan once again vigorously debated with Shang So, and his colleagues Cui Feng Yu Zhong, Yu Yu Heng, Xu Liahong, Wei Yunzhong, Li Banghua, Wang Shixi and Pan Zhixiang also took turns to debate one by one.

古文：且下令捕世学，世学遂遁去。
现代文：皇帝将要下令逮捕刘世学，刘世学于是逃走了。
English: The emperor was about to order the arrest of Liu Shixu, but Liu Shixu escaped.

古文：吏部侍郎方从哲由中旨起官，起元力言不可，并刺给事中亓诗教、周永春，吏部侍郎李养正、郭士望等。
现代文：吏部侍郎方从哲由宫中传旨起用，周起元极力说不行，并指责给事中亓诗教、周永春，吏部侍郎李养正、郭士望等人。
English: Zhou Qimuan said that it was not acceptable, and accused Zou Shi Jiao, Zhou Yongchun, Li Yang Zheng, Guo Shifang and others.

古文：吏部尚书赵焕出云中、时熙于外，起元劾其背旨擅权，坐停俸。
现代文：吏部尚书赵焕出巡云中，王时熙在外地。周起元弹劾他违抗旨令、独揽大权，被定罪停发俸禄。
English: Wang Shixi was out of the country when Zhao Huan, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was on a tour. Zhou Qianyuan impeached him for disobeying orders and monopolizing power, and he was convicted and his salary was suspended.

古文：焕去，郑继之代，又出之祥及张键。
现代文：赵焕离职，郑继之代替，又任用潘之祥和张健。
English: Zhao Huan resigned and was replaced by Zheng Jizhi. Pan Zhixiang and Zhang Jian were also appointed.

古文：起元亦抗疏纠驳，因言张光房等五人不当摈之部曹。
现代文：周起元也上疏检举驳正，于是说张光房等五人不应当摒弃在官衙之外。
English: Zhou Qimuan also went to the provincial procuratorate to refute it, and said that Zhang Guangfang and other five people should not be abandoned outside the government.

古文：与党人牴牾，忌者益众。
现代文：跟党人意见不和，忌恨他的人越来越多。
English: There are more and more people who do not see eye to eye with party members and resent him.

古文：寻巡按陕西，风采甚著。
现代文：不久巡抚陕西，很有风采。
English: He soon became the governor of Shaanxi Province. He was very elegant.

古文：卒以东林故，出为广西参议，分守右江道。
现代文：终于因为东林党的缘故，出任广西参议，分道巡守右江道。
English: Finally, because of the Donglin Party, he was appointed as a Guangxi councillor, and he was assigned to patrol Ujiang Road.

古文：柳州大饥，群盗蜂起，起元单骑招剧贼，而振恤饥民甚至。移四川副使，未上。
现代文：柳州发生大饥荒，各地盗贼纷纷涌现，周起元一个人骑着马去招抚各盗贼，尽最大的努力救济饥民。改官四川副使，未到任。
English: A great famine occurred in Liuzhou, and thieves from all over the country appeared one after another. Zhou Zhiyuan rode a horse to appease the thieves and did his best to help the starving people. He was not in office when he was appointed Vice-Envoy to Sichuan.

古文：会辽阳破，廷议通州重地，宜设监司，乃命起元以参政莅之。
现代文：恰好辽阳失陷，朝廷议论通州是军事要地，应设置监司，于是命令周起元以参政的身份统领它。
English: Just as Liaoyang fell, the imperial court argued that Tongzhou was a military important place and a supervisor should be set up, so it ordered Zhou Qiyuan to lead it as a politician.

古文：天启三年入为太仆少卿。
现代文：天启三年，他进入朝廷担任太仆少卿。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, he entered the imperial court as a servant of the emperor.

古文：旋擢右佥都御史，巡抚苏、松十府。
现代文：不久提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚苏州、松江等十府。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of the Right Deputy Governor of the Capital and the Governor of ten prefectures including Suzhou and Matsue.

古文：公廉爱民，丝粟无所取。
现代文：公正廉洁、爱惜人民，没有拿一根丝、一粒粮。
English: He was fair and honest, cared about the people, and did not take a single piece of silk or grain.

古文：遇大水，百方拯恤，民忘其困。
现代文：遭遇大水灾，千方百计地救济灾民，人民忘记了贫困。
English: Encountering a major flood, they tried their best to help the victims, and the people forgot about poverty.

古文：织造中官李实素贪横，妄增定额，恣诛求。
现代文：织造中官李实一向贪财而横行霸道，任意增加定额，放纵地索取。
English: Weaving Vice-governor Li Si has always been greedy and domineering, arbitrarily increasing quotas and demanding indulgently.

古文：苏州同知杨姜署府事，实恶其不屈，摭他事劾之。
现代文：苏州同知杨姜管理本府事务，李实恨他不屈服，收集其他材料弹劾他。
English: Yang Jiang, a Suzhou confidant, managed the affairs of the prefecture. Li Shih hated him for not giving in and gathered other materials to impeach him.

古文：起元至，即为姜辨冤，且上去蠹七事，语多侵实。
现代文：周起元到任，立即替杨姜伸冤，并且上疏清除蛀虫七件事，言词很多涉及到李实。
English: When Zhou Qimuan took office, he immediately redressed the grievances of Yang Jiang, and cleared the seven things of the tapeworm. Many of the words involved Li Si.

古文：实欲姜行属吏礼，再疏诬逮之。
现代文：李实想要杨姜向他行臣属的礼节，再次上疏诬告并逮捕他。
English: Li Si wanted Yang Jiang to violate the etiquette of his vassal and falsely accuse and arrest him again.

古文：起元再疏雪姜，更切直。
现代文：周起元又一次上疏替杨姜昭雪，更加中肯直率。
English: Zhou Qiyuan once again replaced Yang Jiang Zhaoxue and was more forthright.

古文：魏忠贤庇实，取严旨责起元，令速上姜贪劣状。
现代文：魏忠贤庇护李实，下了道严厉的圣旨谴责周起元，命令赶快上报杨姜贪污的情形。
English: Wei Zhongxian sheltered Li Si and issued a stern edict condemning Zhou Qiyuan, ordering him to quickly report the situation of Yang Jianglu's corruption.

古文：起元益颂姜廉谨，诋实诬毁，因引罪乞罢。
现代文：周起元更加称颂杨姜廉洁谨慎，诋毁李实造谣诽谤，于是承担罪责乞求离职。
English: Zhou Qiyuan praised Yang Jiang's integrity and prudence more, slandered Li Si for slander, and then took the blame and begged for resignation.

古文：忠贤大怒，矫旨斥姜为民。
现代文：魏忠贤大怒，假传圣旨将杨姜贬斥为平民。
English: Wei Zhongxian was furious. He denounced Yang Jiang as a commoner.

古文：起元复劾实贪恣不法数事，而为姜求宽。
现代文：周起元又弹劾李实贪财放纵，不遵守法令的几件事，而请求宽大处理杨姜。
English: Zhou Qimian also impeached Li Si for greed and indulgence, and several cases of non-compliance with laws and regulations, and requested leniency for Yang Jiang.

古文：实以此敛威，而忠贤遂衔起元不置。
现代文：李实因此威风扫地，而魏忠贤也因此将周起元怀恨不已。
English: As a result, Li Si lost his prestige, and Wei Zhongxian held a grudge against Zhou Qi Yuan.

古文：分守参政朱童蒙者，先为兵科都给事中，以攻邹元标讲学外迁，失志狂暴，每行道辄鞭扑数十人，血肉狼籍。
现代文：分守参政的朱童蒙，早先是兵科都给事中，因为攻击邹元标讲学而被调往外地，丧失理智，疯狂残暴，每次外出，都鞭打几十人，血肉狼藉。
English: Zhu Tongmeng, who was assigned to guard and participate in politics, had earlier been involved in military affairs. Because he attacked the lecture of Xuan Yuanbei, he was transferred to another place. He lost his mind and was insanely cruel. Every time he went out, he whipped dozens of people, leaving them in a bloody mess.

古文：起元欲纠之，童蒙遂称病去，起元乃列其贪虐状以闻。
现代文：周起元想检举他，朱童蒙就称病离职，周起元于是列举他贪财暴虐的情形，让别人知道。
English: Zhou Qimian wanted to report him, but Zhu Tongmeng claimed to be ill and resigned. Zhou Qimian then listed the circumstances of his greed and brutality, so that others would know.

古文：忠贤遂矫旨削起元籍，擢童蒙京卿。
现代文：魏忠贤于是假传圣旨剥夺周起元官籍，提拔朱童蒙为京卿。
English: Wei Zhongxian then deprived Zhou Qianyuan of his official status, and promoted Zhu Tongmeng to the position of Beijing Lord.

古文：六年二月，忠贤欲杀高攀龙、周顺昌、缪昌期、黄尊素、李应升、周宗建六人，取实空印疏，令其党李永贞、李朝钦诬起元为巡抚时乾没帑金十余万，日与攀龙辈往来讲学，因行居间。
现代文：天启六年二月，魏忠贤想杀高攀龙、周顺昌、缪昌期、黄尊素、李应升、周宗建等六人，拿李实没有盖印的奏疏，命令他的党徒李永贞、李朝钦诬陷周起元当巡抚贪污国家钱财十多万两银子，每天跟高攀龙等人来往讲学，因而在中间煽动。
English: In February of the sixth year of the Apocalypse, Wei Zhongxian wanted to kill Gao Panglong, Zhou Shunchang, Miao Changdi, Huang Zunsu, Li Yingsheng, Zhou Zongjian and other six people, and ordered his party members Li Yongzhen and Li Chaochun to frame Zhou Qianyuan for embezzling more than 100,000 taels of state money and property, and to go and lecture with Gao Panglong and others every day, thus inciting the middle.

古文：矫旨逮起元，至则顺昌等已毙狱中。
现代文：假传圣旨逮捕周起元，到京时周顺昌等人已在牢里死了。
English: When Zhou Shunchang and others arrived in Beijing, they had already died in prison.

古文：许显纯酷榜掠，竟如实疏，悬赃十万。
现代文：许显纯严刑拷问，竟然招出同李实的奏疏所说，藏赃款十万两。
English: Xu Xianjun was severely tortured and interrogated, to the extent that he summoned Li Si's son, who said that the stolen money was 100,000 taels.

古文：罄赀不足，亲故多破其家。
现代文：卖掉所有值钱的东西都不足此数，亲戚朋友也多由此破产。
English: Selling everything of value is less than this, and many relatives and friends have gone bankrupt as a result.

古文：九月毙之狱中，吴士民及其乡人无不垂涕者。
现代文：九月死于狱中，江苏及其家乡的官民没有不悲伤的。
English: He died in prison in September. Officials and people in Jiangsu and his hometown were saddened.

古文：庄烈帝嗣位，赠兵部右侍郎，官一子。
现代文：庄烈皇帝即位，赠封兵部右侍郎，让他的一个儿子做官。
English: Emperor Solemn ascended the throne, bestowed the title of Right Attendant of the Military Department, and allowed one of his sons to become an official.

古文：福王时，追谥忠惠。
现代文：南明福王时，追加谥号为忠惠。
English: When he was the king of Minamimifuku, his additional posthumous name was Tadahide.

古文：周顺昌，字景文，吴县人。
现代文：周顺昌，字景文，江苏吴县人。
English: Zhou Shunchang, surnamed Jingwen, from Wuxian County, Jiangsu Province.

古文：万历四十一年进士。授福州推官。
现代文：万历四十一年进士，任命福州推官。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 41st year of Wanli and was appointed the magistrate of Fuzhou.

古文：捕治税监高寀爪牙，不少贷。
现代文：逮捕惩处税监高肕的爪牙，一点也不留情。
English: The tax inspector arrested and punished Gao Yao's minions, showing no mercy.

古文：寀激民变，劫辱巡抚袁一骥，质其二子，并质副使吕纯如。
现代文：高肕激发人民发生事变，劫持侮辱巡抚袁一骥，把他的二个儿子作为人质，并将副使吕纯如也抓做人质。
English: Gao Gan incited the people to cause an incident, kidnapped and insulted the procurator Yuan Yixuan, took his two sons as hostages, and also took the vice-envoy Lü Chunru as a hostage.

古文：或议以顺昌代，顺昌不可，纯如以此衔顺昌。
现代文：有人建议让周顺昌去代替他，周顺昌不同意，吕纯如因此怀恨周顺昌。
English: Someone suggested that Zhou Shunchang replace him. Zhou Shunchang disagreed, and Lv Chunru held a grudge against Zhou Shunchang.

古文：擢吏部稽勋主事。
现代文：周顺昌后被提拔为吏部稽勋主事。
English: After Zhou Shunchang, he was promoted to be the head of the personnel department.

古文：天启中，历文选员外郎，署选事。
现代文：天启年间，担任文选员外郎，负责选拔官员事务。
English: During the Taenaki era, he served as a literary selector and was in charge of selecting officials.

古文：力杜请寄，抑侥幸，清操皭然。
现代文：尽力杜绝请托，抑制求利不止，清高的操守一尘不染。
English: Efforts should be made to eliminate favoritism, restrain the pursuit of profits, and maintain a high level of integrity.

古文：乞假归。
现代文：后请假归家。
English: He later took a leave of absence and returned home.

古文：顺昌为人刚方贞介，疾恶如仇。
现代文：周顺昌为人刚强正直，独立而有操守，疾恶如仇。
English: Zhou Shunchang is a strong and honest person, independent and ethical, and he is not afraid of evil.

古文：巡抚周起元忤魏忠贤削籍，顺昌为文送之，指斥无所讳。
现代文：巡抚周起元得罪了魏忠贤被削籍为民，周顺昌写文章欢送他，指责呵斥没有什么忌讳。
English: The governor Zhou Qimuan offended Wei Zhongxian and he was demoted to a commoner. Zhou Shunchang wrote an article to send him off, and there was nothing taboo about criticizing and rebuking him.

古文：魏大中被逮，道吴门，顺昌出饯，与同卧起者三日，许以女聘大中孙。
现代文：魏大中被逮捕，经过吴门，周顺昌设宴款待他，形影不离地跟了他三天，并把女儿许配给魏大中的孙子。
English: He was arrested at Wei University. After passing through Wu Men, Zhou Shunchang hosted a banquet for him, followed him for three days, and betrothed his daughter to his grandson at Wei University.

古文：旂尉屡趣行，顺昌瞋目曰： 若不知世间有不畏死男子耶？
现代文：旗官多次催促他上路，周顺昌怒目而视，说： 你不知道世上还有不怕死的男子汉吗？
English: The flag officer repeatedly urged him to get on the road. Zhou Shunchang glared at him and said, "Don't you know that there are still men in the world who are not afraid to die?

古文：归语忠贤，我故吏部郎周顺昌也。 
现代文：回去告诉魏忠贤，我是原吏部郎中周顺昌。 
English: Go back and tell Wei Zhongxian that I am Zhou Shunchang, the former secretary.

古文：因戟手呼忠贤名，骂不绝口。
现代文：于是用手指着喊魏忠贤的名字，骂不绝口。
English: So he used his fingers to call Wei Zhongxian's name and cursed him incessantly.

古文：旂尉归，以告忠贤。
现代文：旗官回去后，告诉了魏忠贤。
English: After the flag officer returned, he told Wei Zhongxian.

古文：御史倪文焕者，忠贤义子也，诬劾同官夏之令，致之死。
现代文：御史倪文焕是魏忠贤的义子，诬告揭发同事夏之令，夏之令被害死。
English: Ni Wenhuan, Wei Zhongxian's son-in-law, falsely accused and exposed his colleague Xia Zhiling, who was killed.

古文：顺昌尝语人，他日倪御史当偿夏御史命。
现代文：周顺昌曾对别人说，将来倪文焕应当替夏之令偿命。
English: Zhou Shunchang once said to others that in the future, Ni Wenhuan should pay for Xia's death.

古文：文焕大恚，遂承忠贤指，劾顺昌与罪人婚，且诬以赃贿，忠贤即矫旨削夺。
现代文：倪文焕十分愤恨，于是受魏忠贤指使，弹劾周顺昌跟罪犯结亲家，并且诬陷他接受贿赂窝藏赃物，魏忠贤立即假传圣旨剥夺他的官籍。
English: Ni Wenhuan was very indignant, so he was instructed by Wei Zhongxian to impeach Zhou Shunchang for being related to a criminal, and framed him for accepting bribes and hiding stolen goods. Wei Zhongxian immediately deprived him of his official registration.

古文：先所忤副使吕纯如，顺昌同郡人，以京卿家居，挟前恨，数谮于织造中官李实及巡抚毛一鹭。
现代文：先前得罪的副使吕纯如，跟周顺昌是同省人，以京官的身份居在家中，怀着以前的仇恨，多次跟织造中官李实和巡抚毛一鹭讲周顺昌的坏话来诬陷他。
English: The vice-envoy Lv Chunru, who had previously offended, was from the same province as Zhou Shunchang, lived at home as a Beijing official, and, with previous hatred, repeatedly spoke ill of Zhou Shunchang with the Weaving Lieutenant-General Li Si and the Inspector Mao Yijuan to frame him.

古文：已，实追论周起元，遂诬顺昌请嘱，有所乾没，与起元等并逮。
现代文：不久，李实追究周起元，于是诬陷周顺昌私自嘱托，吞没公家财物，与周起元一起被逮捕。
English: Soon after, Li Si investigated Zhou Qiyuan, and then framed Zhou Shunchang and ordered him to devour public property, and he was arrested together with Zhou Qiyuan.

古文：顺昌好为德于乡，有冤抑及郡中大利害，辄为所司陈说，以故士民德顺昌甚。
现代文：周顺昌喜欢在家乡做好事，有人受冤枉压制或者是事关地方利害的大事，他就去跟有关部门陈情说理，所以当地老百姓十分感激周顺昌。
English: Zhou Shunchang likes to do good things in his hometown. If someone is unjustly suppressed or it is a matter of local interest, he will go to the relevant departments to make a case, so the local people are very grateful to Zhou Shunchang.

古文：及闻逮者至，众咸愤怒，号冤者塞道。
现代文：等到听说逮捕他的人来了，大家都很愤怒，喊冤的人堵塞了道路。
English: When they heard that his arresting officers had arrived, everyone was outraged and the road was blocked by people shouting their grievances.

古文：至开读日，不期而集者数万人，咸执香为周吏部乞命。
现代文：等到宣读诏书那天，没有经过约定而汇集在一起的有几万人，都拿着香为周顺昌乞求性命。
English: By the day the edict was read out, tens of thousands of people had gathered without prior agreement, all holding incense and begging for Zhou Shunchang's life.

古文：诸生文震亨、杨廷枢、王节、刘羽翰等前谒一鹭及巡按御史徐吉，请以民情上闻。
现代文：生员文震亨、杨廷枢、王节、刘羽翰等人前去拜见毛一鹭和巡按御史徐吉，请求他们把这里人民的情绪上报给皇帝知道。
English: Residents Wen Zhenheng, Yang Tingzhu, Wang Jie, Liu Yuhan and others went to see Mao Yixuan and Inspector-General Shi Xuji, and asked them to report the mood of the people here to the emperor.

古文：旗尉厉声骂曰： 东厂逮人，鼠辈敢尔！ 
现代文：旗官厉声骂道： 东厂抓人，你们这帮鼠辈敢怎么样！ 
English: The flag officer scolded sharply, "How dare you bunch of rats arrest people at the East Factory!

古文：大呼： 囚安在？ 
现代文：大声叫喊： 囚犯在哪里？ 
English: Shouting loudly: Where are the prisoners?

古文：手掷锒铛于地，声琅然。
现代文：将铁锁链使劲往地下一丢，发出很响的声音。
English: He threw the iron chain into the ground with great force, making a loud noise.

古文：众益愤，曰： 始吾以为天子命，乃东厂耶！ 
现代文：众人更加气愤，说： 开始我们以为是皇帝的命令，原来是东厂啊！ 
English: Everyone was even more angry, saying: At first we thought it was the emperor's order, but it turned out to be the East Factory!

古文：蜂拥大呼，势如山崩。
现代文：大声叫喊着一拥而上，那形势，真像排山倒海一般。
English: Shouting loudly and rushing to the top of the hill, the situation was really like a sea of mountains.

古文：旂尉东西窜，众纵横殴击，毙一人，余负重伤，逾垣走。
现代文：旗官东逃西窜，众人来回痛打，打死一人，其余的身负重伤，翻墙逃跑了。
English: The flag officers fled to the west, and the crowd beat them back and forth. One person was killed, and the rest were seriously injured and fled over the wall.

古文：一鹭、吉不能语。
现代文：毛一鹭、徐吉不能说话。
English: Mao Yixuan and Xu Ji are unable to speak.

古文：知府寇慎、知县陈文瑞素得民，曲为解谕，众始散。
现代文：知府寇镇、知县陈文瑞一向很得人心，多方解释，大家才离去。
English: Chen Wenrui, the prefectural governor of Kou Town and Zhixian County, has always been popular with the people, and it took multiple explanations for everyone to leave.

古文：顺昌乃自诣吏。
现代文：周顺昌于是投案自首。
English: Zhou Shunchang then turned himself in.

古文：又三日北行，一鹭飞章告变，东厂刺事者言吴人尽反，谋断水道，劫漕舟，忠贤大惧。已而一鹭言缚得倡乱者颜佩韦、马杰、沈扬、杨念如、周文元等，乱已定，忠贤乃安。
现代文：又过了三天向北进发，毛一鹭用急报的奏章报告事变，东厂刺探情报的人说整个苏州的人民都造反了，他们计划截断水道，劫持漕运粮食的木船，魏忠贤非常恐慌，不久毛一鹭说逮住了倡导暴乱的颜佩韦、马杰、沈扬、杨念如、周文元等人，叛乱已经平定，魏忠贤这才放下心来。
English: After another three days, he headed north. Mao Yixuan used the dispatch of the express newspaper to report the incident. The East Factory's intelligence person said that the entire people of Suzhou had rebelled. They planned to cut off the waterway and hijack the wooden ship transporting grain. Wei Zhongxian was very panicked. Soon Mao Yixuan said that he had caught Yan Peiwei, Ma Jie, Shen Yang, Yang Nianru, Zhou Wenyuan and others who advocated the rebellion. The rebellion had been quelled. This made Wei Zhongxian lose heart.

古文：然自是缇骑不出国门矣。
现代文：然而从这以后，黄衣使者再也不敢迈出京城城门了。
English: Since then, however, the yellow-clad emissaries no longer dare to set foot outside the gates of the capital.

古文：顺昌至京师，下诏狱。
现代文：周顺昌到达北京，下诏入狱。
English: Zhou Shunchang arrived in Beijing and was sent to prison.

古文：许显纯锻炼，坐赃三千，五日一酷掠，每掠治，必大骂忠贤。
现代文：许显纯拷打逼供罗织罪名，坐赃款三千两，五天严刑拷打一次。每逢拷问，周顺昌一定大骂魏忠贤。
English: Xu Xian was tortured and forced to confess to crimes, fined three thousand taels of silver, and severely tortured once every five days. Whenever he was tortured, Zhou Shunchang must have cursed Wei Zhongxian.

古文：显纯椎落其齿，自起问曰： 复能骂魏上公否？ 
现代文：许显纯敲掉他的牙齿，站起来问道： 看你还能不能骂魏上公？ 
English: Xu Xianchun knocked out his teeth, stood up and asked: See if you can still curse Wei Shanggong?

古文：顺昌噀血唾其面，骂益厉。
现代文：周顺昌把满口的血水吐在他脸上，骂声更加猛烈了。
English: Zhou Shunchang spat a mouthful of blood on his face, and the abuse became even more violent.

古文：遂于夜中潜毙之。
现代文：于是在晚上偷偷地把周顺昌杀害了。
English: So he secretly killed Zhou Shunchang in the evening.

古文：时六年六月十有七日也。
现代文：这时是天启六年六月十七日。
English: At this time it was the 17th of June in the sixth year of the apocalypse.

古文：明年，庄烈帝即位，文焕伏诛，实下吏，一鹭、吉坐建忠贤祠，纯如坐颂珰，并丽逆案。
现代文：第二年，庄烈帝即位，倪文焕伏法被处死，李实下狱，毛一鹭、徐吉因修建魏忠贤祠堂被定罪，吕纯如因颂扬太监被处罪，一起附于 逆案 。
English: The following year, Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, Ni Wenhuanfufu was executed, Li Shizhi was imprisoned, Mao Yixuan and Xu Ji were convicted of building Wei Zhongxian's ancestral hall, and Lü Chunru was punished for praising the eunuch and was also attached to the "reverse case."

古文：吴人感其义，合葬之虎丘傍，题曰： 五人之墓 。其地即一鹭所建忠贤普惠祠址也。周宗建，字季侯，吴江人，尚书用曾孙也。
现代文：追赠周顺昌为太常卿，荫封他的一个儿子做官。给事中瞿式耜上诉各臣的冤情，称赞周顺昌和杨涟、魏大中的清廉忠诚尤其显著，下诏谥号恭介。周宗建，字季侯，吴江人，是尚书周用的曾孙。
English: He posthumously made Zhou Shunchang the grand secretary of the Central Military Commission, and appointed one of his sons as an official. He appealed to the grievances of various ministers in the matter, praising Zhou Shunchang and Yang Xi, a middle school student in Wei Dynasty, for their integrity and loyalty. Zhou Zongjian, surnamed Ji Hou, a native of Wujiang, was the great-grandson of Shangshu Zhouyi.

古文：万历四十一年进士。除武康知县，调繁仁和，有异政，入为御史。
现代文：万历四十一年进士，任命武康知县，调到仁和，有不同凡响的政绩，进入朝中担任御史。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 41st year of Wanli, was appointed to Wu Kangchi County, transferred to Renhe, had extraordinary political achievements, and entered the court to serve as imperial historian.

古文：天启元年，为顾存仁、王世贞、陶望龄、顾宪成请谥，追论万历朝小人，历数钱梦皋、康丕扬、亓诗教、赵兴邦乱政罪，并诋李三才、王图。
现代文：天启元年为顾存仁、王世贞、陶望龄、顾宪成请求谥号，追究万历朝的小人，历数钱梦皋、康丕扬、亓诗教、赵兴邦扰乱朝政的罪行，并且诋毁李三才、王图等人。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, Gu Cunren, Wang Shizhen, Tao Wangling, and Gu Xiancheng requested the court to investigate the villains of the Wanli Dynasty, the crimes of Count Qianmen, Kang Xiangyang, Zhao Xingbong, and Zhao Xingbong in disrupting the government of the dynasty, and slandering Li Sancai, Wang Tu and others.

古文：时辽事方棘，上疏责备辅臣。
现代文：这时辽阳战事危急，上疏谴责辅臣。
English: At this time, Liaoyang's war situation was critical, and Shang So condemned the vassal.

古文：无何，沈阳破，宗建责当事大臣益急，因请破格用人，召还熊廷弼。
现代文：没多久，辽阳失陷，周宗建更加急迫地责备主事大臣，于是请求皇帝破格任用人才，召回熊廷弼。
English: Not long after, Liaoyang fell, Zhou Zongjian more urgently rebuked the minister in charge, and then asked the emperor to make an unprecedented appointment of talent and recall Xiong Tingyao.

古文：已，论兵部尚书崔景荣不当信奸人刘保，辅臣刘一燝不当抑言路，因刺右通政林材、光禄卿李本固。
现代文：不久，议论兵部尚书崔景荣不应该信任奸邪的刘保，辅臣刘一火景不应该抑制言路，于是指责右通政林材、光禄卿李本固。
English: Soon, the discussion was about whether or not to trust the treacherous Liu Bao, the vice-minister Liu Yiguo, and whether or not to restrain the speech of the vice-minister Cui Jing Rong of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and then Li Bengu, the Minister of Forestry and the Minister of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：材、本固移疾去。
现代文：林材、李本固称病离职。
English: Lin Zhai and Li Ben resigned due to illness.

古文：魏大中劾王德完庇杨镐、李如桢，宗建为德完力攻大中，其持论数与东林左。
现代文：魏大中弹劾王德完庇护杨镐、李如桢。周宗建替王德完极力攻击魏大中，他的观点很多与东林党人相对。
English: After Wang Deguan was impeached from Wei University, he sheltered Yang Xuan and Li Rugao. Zhou Zongjian, on behalf of Wang Deguan, vigorously attacked Wei University. Many of his views were contrary to those of Donglin Party members.

古文：会是岁冬，奉圣夫人客氏既出宫复入，宗建首抗疏极谏，中言： 天子成言，有同儿戏。法宫禁地，仅类民家。
现代文：正好这年冬天，奉圣夫人客氏搬出宫城又回到宫中，周宗建首先上疏极力规劝，其中说： 天子说出的话，就如同儿戏一样，法律所在的宫禁之地，几乎跟老百姓的家庭相同。
English: Just this winter, when Lady Bongsan moved out of Miyagi and returned to the palace, Zhou Zongjian first tried to persuade Shangso, saying: The words uttered by the Son of Heaven are like child's play, and the forbidden place where the law is located is almost the same as ordinary people's homes.

古文：圣朝举动有乖，内外防闲尽废。
现代文：朝廷的行为不协调，朝廷内外的防范措施都被废除。
English: The behavior of the imperial court was uncoordinated, and preventive measures both inside and outside the imperial court were abolished.

古文：此辈一叨隆恩，便思逾分，狎溺无纪，渐成骄恣，衅孽日萌，后患难杜。
现代文：这帮人一旦蒙受了皇恩，便有了非份之想，轻侮沉溺目无法纪，慢慢地变得骄横放纵，灾难和罪祸一天天增多，后患将难以杜绝。
English: Once these people have received the royal favor, they will have a sense of injustice, despise and indulge in lawlessness, and slowly become arrogant and indulgent. Disaster and crime are increasing day by day, and it will be difficult to eliminate the consequences.

古文：王圣、朱娥、陆令萱之覆辙，可为殷鉴。 
现代文：王圣、宋娥、陆令萱的覆辙，可以提供很多借鉴。 
English: The mistakes of Wang Sheng, Song E, and Lu Linyi can provide a lot of reference.

古文：忤旨，诘责。
现代文：违背圣旨，受到责备。
English: He was rebuked for going against God's will.

古文：清议由此重之。
现代文：由此公众的舆论很看重他。
English: As a result, public opinion holds him in high regard.

古文：明年，广宁失。
现代文：第二年，广宁失守。
English: The next year, Guangning lost the game.

古文：廷臣多庇王化贞，欲甚熊廷弼罪。
现代文：很多朝臣庇护王化贞，想加重熊廷弼的罪责。
English: Many courtiers protected Wang Huazhen, hoping to aggravate Xiong Tingyao's guilt.

古文：宗建不平，为剖两人罪案，颇右廷弼，诸庇化贞者乃深疾宗建。
现代文：周宗建认为这是阴盛阳衰的征兆，逐次陈述四件事。第一专门非难大学士沈翭。
English: Zhou Zongjian believed that this was a sign of yin and yang, and successively stated four things.

古文：京师久旱，五月雨雹。
现代文：第二请求宽大处理因建议被废黜的诸臣。
English: The second request was for clemency for the ministers who were deposed as a result of the proposal.

古文：宗建谓阴盛阳衰之征，历陈四事：一专讥大学士沈纮；一请宽建言废黜诸臣；一言廷弼已有定案，不当因此罗织朝士，阴刺兵部尚书张鹤鸣、给事中郭巩；一则专攻魏进忠，略言： 近日政事，外廷啧啧，咸谓奥之中，莫可测识，谕旨之下，有物凭焉。
现代文：第三件事是说熊廷弼已有定案，不应该用这事罗织朝臣的罪名，暗地里指责兵部尚书张鹤鸣，给事中郭巩。第四件事是专门攻击魏进忠，大意说： 近来的政府事务，外廷颇有微辞，都说深宫之中，没有办法预料，圣旨诏书，必然有所依据。
English: The third matter is that Xiong Tingtao has already been decided, and the matter should not be used to fabricate charges against the courtiers, secretly accusing the military department of cheating and giving the matter to Guo Gong. The fourth matter is a special attack on Wei Jinzhong, to the effect of saying: In recent government affairs, the Foreign Court has quite a bit of rhetoric, and they all say that in the depths of the palace, there is no way to predict, and the imperial edict must have some basis.

古文：如魏进忠者，目不识一丁，而陛下假之嚬笑，日与相亲。
现代文：像魏进忠这样的人，目不识丁，而陛下与他同忧愁共欢笑，一天天地亲近。
English: People like Wei Jinzhong are illiterate, and Your Majesty is close to him day by day, sharing his sorrow and laughter.

古文：一切用人行政，堕于其说，东西易向而不知，邪正颠倒而不觉。
现代文：一切用人的行政权力，都按他的说法办理，东西改换了方向自己却不知道，邪恶与正直被颠倒了而自己却不觉察。
English: All the executive powers of man are exercised according to his dictum; things are turned about without his knowledge; vice and virtue are perverted without his knowledge.

古文：况内廷之借端，与外廷之投合，互相扶同。
现代文：况且内廷的借口，与外廷的投机者，互相支持。
English: Moreover, the excuses of the Inner Court and the speculators of the Outer Court support each other.

古文：离间之渐将起于蝇营，谗构之衅必生于长舌。
现代文：离间的祸苗将起于钻营之人，谗言陷害必定在到处传话的人中间发端。
English: The seeds of discord will be sown by those who sow discord, and slander and backstabbing will certainly begin among those who spread rumors everywhere.

古文：其为隐祸，可胜言哉！ 
现代文：这些隐祸，无从说起啊！ 
English: There is no way to explain these hidden evils!

古文：进忠者，魏忠贤故名也。
现代文：魏进忠是魏忠贤原来的名字。
English: Wei Jinzhong is the original name of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：时方结客氏为对食，廷臣多阴附之，其势渐炽，见宗建疏，衔次骨，未发也。
现代文：这时正勾结客氏，夫妻相称，很多朝臣都巴结依靠他，他的势力日益昌盛。看到周宗建的上疏，魏忠贤恨他入骨，但没有发作。
English: At this time, he was colluding with Hakka, the husband and wife were compatible, many courtiers were fawning and relying on him, and his power was increasingly prosperous. Seeing Zhou Zongjian's asceticism, Wei Zhongxian hated him to the bone, but did not attack.

古文：邹元标建首善书院，宗建实司其事。
现代文：邹元标创办首善书院，周宗建负实际责任。
English: Yu Yuanbiao founded Shoushen Academy, and Zhou Zongjian bore the actual responsibility.

古文：元标罢，宗建乞与俱罢，不从。
现代文：邹元标被罢官，周宗建乞求跟他一起罢官，没有批准。
English: Xing Yuanbiao was dismissed, Zhou Zongjian begged to be dismissed with him, but was not approved.

古文：巡视光禄，与给事中罗尚忠力剔奸弊，节省为多。
现代文：巡视光禄寺，跟给事中罗尚忠大力剔除奸邪弊端，节省了很多财力物力。
English: During his inspection of Koroku-ji Temple, Luo Shangzhong vigorously eliminated the evil of treachery and saved a lot of financial and material resources.

古文：寻请核上供器物，中官怒，取旨诘责。
现代文：不久请求核查地方上供的各种器物，惹怒了宦官，拿圣旨责问他。
English: Soon, he asked to inspect the various objects provided locally, which angered the eunuch and accused him of violating the sacred edict.

古文：宗建等再疏力持，中人滋不悦。
现代文：周宗建等人再上疏极力坚持，宦官更加不高兴。
English: Zhou Zongjian and others again insisted on going upstream, and the eunuchs were even more unhappy.

古文：给事中郭巩者，先以劾廷弼被谪。
现代文：给事中郭巩，先是因弹劾熊廷弼被贬职。
English: In the affair, Guo Gong was first demoted for impeaching Xiong Tingtao.

古文：廷弼败，复官，遂深结进忠。
现代文：熊廷弼失败，郭巩恢复官职，于是大力巴结魏进忠。
English: Xiong Tingyu failed, Guo Gong resumed his official duties, and then vigorously promoted Wei Jinzhong.

古文：知进忠最恶宗建，乃疏诋廷弼，因诋朝廷之荐廷弼者，而宗建与焉。
现代文：得知魏进忠最恨周宗建，于是上疏诋毁熊廷弼，由此进而诋毁朝廷中举荐熊廷弼的人，周宗建是其中之一。
English: After learning that Wei Jinzhong hated Zhou Zongjian the most, Shang Zuo slandered Xiong Tingtao, thereby slandering those in the imperial court who recommended Xiong Tingtao. Zhou Zongjian was one of them.

古文：其锋锐甚，南京御史涂世业和之，诋宗建误廷弼，且误封疆。
现代文：势头很强劲，南京御史涂世业附和他，诋毁周宗建错举熊廷弼，从而耽误了边防。
English: The momentum was very strong, and the Nanjing Imperial Historian Tu Shiyan followed him and slandered Zhou Zongjian for incorrectly raising the Xiongting Pavilion, thus delaying the border defense.

古文：宗建愤，疏驳世业，语侵巩，抉其结纳忠贤事。
现代文：周宗建很愤怒，上疏驳斥涂世业，语言涉及郭巩，挑出他勾结魏忠贤的事情。
English: Zhou Zongjian was furious, Shang So refuted Tu Shiye, the language involved Guo Gong, and singled out his collusion with Wei Zhongxian.

古文：巩亦愤，上疏数千言，诋宗建益力，并及刘一燝、邹元标、周嘉谟、杨涟、周朝瑞、毛士龙、方震孺、江秉谦、熊德阳辈数十人，悉指为廷弼逆党。
现代文：郭巩也发怒了，上疏数千言，加倍诋毁周宗建，并涉及刘一火景、邹元标、周嘉谟、杨涟、周朝瑞、毛士龙、方震孺、江秉谦、熊德阳等数十人，全部指定为熊廷弼的叛党。
English: Guo Gong also got angry and wrote thousands of words, doubly slandering Zhou Zongjian, and involving dozens of people such as Liu Yiguo, Zou Yuanbiao, Zhou Jia Mu, Yang Qian, Zhou Chaorui, Mao Shilong, Fang Zhenyao, Jiang Bingqian, and Xiong Deyang, all designated as rebels of Xiong Dingyao.

古文：宗建益愤，抗疏力驳其谬，且曰： 李维翰、杨镐、袁应泰、王化贞，皆坏封疆之人也；亓诗教力主催战，赵兴邦贿卖边臣，皆误封疆之人也；其他荐维翰、荐镐、荐应泰、化贞者，亦误封疆之人也。
现代文：周宗建更加愤怒了，上疏极力驳斥他的荒谬，并且说： 李维翰、杨镐、袁应泰、王化贞，都是使国家边防败坏的人。亓诗教极力主张速战，赵兴邦贿赂出卖边防大臣，他们都是耽误边防的人。其他举荐李维翰，举荐杨镐，举荐袁应泰、王化贞的人，也都是耽误国家边防的人。
English: Zhou Zongjian became even angrier, Shang So strenuously refuted his absurdity, and said: Li Weihan, Yang Hui, Yuan Yingtao, Wang Huazhen, are all people who corrupt the national border defense. Zou Shi Jiao strongly advocated a quick war, Zhao Xingbang bribed and betrayed the border defense minister, they are all people who delay the border defense. Other people who recommend Li Weihan, recommend Yang Hui, recommend Yuan Yingtao, Wang Huazhen, are also people who delay the national border defense.

古文：巩胡不一击之，而独苛求廷弼，且诋荐廷弼者为逆党哉？ 
现代文：郭巩为什么不全部攻击，而唯独苛求于熊廷弼，并且诋毁举荐熊廷弼的人为叛党呢？ 
English: Why didn't Guo Gong attack all of them, but only persecute Xiong Tingtao, and slander those who recommended Xiong Tingtao as rebels?

古文：当是时，忠贤势益盛。
现代文：这个时候，魏忠贤势力更加昌盛。
English: At this time, Wei Zhongxian's forces were more prosperous.

古文：宗建虑内外合谋，其祸将大，三年二月遂抗疏直攻忠贤，略言：
现代文：周宗建担心他们内外联合，祸害将更大，天启三年二月上疏直接攻击魏忠贤，大意说：
English: Zhou Zongjian was worried that they would unite at home and abroad, and the disaster would be even greater. In February of the third year of the Apocalypse, Shang So directly attacked Wei Zhongxian, saying:

古文：臣于去岁指名劾奏，进忠无一日忘臣。
现代文： 我在去年指名弹劾上奏，魏进忠没有一天忘记卑臣。
English: As I mentioned in last year's nomination and impeachment, Wei Jinzhong did not forget his vile behavior for a single day.

古文：于是乘私人郭巩入都，嗾以倾臣，并倾诸异己者。
现代文：于是乘他的私党郭巩进入北京时，唆使他排挤我和各意见与他不同的人。
English: Therefore, when Guo Gong, his private party, entered Beijing, I instigated him to expel me and all those who had different opinions from him.

古文：巩乃创为 新幽大幽 之说，把持察典，编廷臣数十人姓名为一册，思一网中之。
现代文：郭巩于是创造 新幽禁大幽禁 的说法，掌握选举法令，将廷臣数十名的姓名编成一个名册，想把他们一网打尽。
English: Guo Gong then coined the phrase "new ban, big ban," seized the election decree, compiled the names of dozens of courtiers into a roster, and wanted to wipe them out.

古文：又为匿名书，罗织五十余人，投之道左，给事中则刘弘化为首，次及周朝瑞、熊德阳辈若而人，御史则方震孺为首，次及江秉谦辈若而人，而臣亦其中一人也。
现代文：又写匿名信，罗织五十多人的罪名，丢在路旁。给事中则以刘弘化为首，其次为周朝瑞、熊德阳等若干人；御史则以方震孺为首，其次为江秉谦等若干人。卑臣也为其中之一人。
English: He also wrote an anonymous letter, accusing more than 50 people, and left it on the side of the road. In the letter, Liu Honghua took the lead, followed by several people such as Zhou Chaorui and Xiong Deyang; in the letter, Fang Zhenya took the lead, followed by several people such as Jiang Bingqian. He was also one of them.

古文：既欲罗诸臣，以快报复之私，更欲独中臣，以释进忠之恨。
现代文：他既想罗织各臣的罪名，来报复发泄私人的仇恨；更想以中臣独断，来替魏进忠解除遗憾。
English: He not only wanted to fabricate the crimes of various ministers to take revenge and vent his personal hatred; he also wanted to use the arbitrariness of the middle ministers to relieve Wei Jinzhong's regret.

古文：是察典不出于朝廷，乃巩及进忠之察典也。
现代文：由此看来，选举法令不是由朝廷掌握的，只不过是郭巩和魏进忠的选举法令。
English: From this perspective, the election decree was not issued by the imperial court, but by Guo Gong and Wei Jinzhong.

古文：幸直道在人，巩说不行，始别借廷弼，欲一阱陷之。
现代文：幸亏正义在于人心，郭巩的说法不能奏效，这才另借熊廷弼的罪名，想设置陷阱一网打尽。
English: Fortunately, justice lies in the hearts of the people, and Guo Gong's argument cannot work. This is why he tried to set a trap by using Xiong Tingyao's crime.

古文：巩又因臣论及王安，笑臣有何瓜葛。
现代文： 郭巩又因为我的议论涉及王安，讥笑我与他有什么牵连。
English: Guo Gong also ridiculed me for having anything to do with Wang An because my discussion involved Wang An.

古文：陛下亦知安之所以死乎？
现代文：陛下知道王安是怎样死的吗？
English: Does Your Majesty know how Wang An died?

古文：身首异处，肉饱乌鸢，骨投黄犬，古今未有之惨也。
现代文：他身首异处，他的肉喂饱了乌鸦，他的骨头丢给了黄狗，真是古今没有的惨状。
English: His head was in a different place, his flesh was fed to crows, and his bones were thrown to the yellow dog. It was a terrible situation that had never been seen before.

古文：巩即心昵进忠，何至背公灭理，且牵连刘一燝、周嘉谟、杨涟、毛士龙辈，谓尽安党。
现代文：郭巩假如有心亲近魏进忠，何至于伤天害理，并且牵连刘一火景、周嘉谟、杨涟、毛士龙等人，说他们都是王安的同党。
English: If Guo Gong had the intention to get close to Wei Jinzhong, what would be the harm to nature and reason, and implicate Liu Yiguo, Zhou Jia Mu, Yang Hui, Mao Shilong and others, saying that they are all Wang An's same party.

古文：请陛下穷究安死果出何人倾害，则此事即进忠一大罪案。
现代文：请求陛下深入调查王安的死究竟是什么人陷害的，那么这件事就是魏进忠的一大罪状。
English: If you ask His Majesty to thoroughly investigate who set up Wang An's death, then this is a major crime of Wei Jinzhong.

古文：巩之媚进忠，即此可为证据矣。
现代文：郭巩讨好魏进忠，这就可以作为证据了。
English: Guo Gong is courting Wei Jinzhong, this can be used as evidence.

古文：先朝汪直、刘瑾，虽皆枭獍，幸言路清明，臣僚隔绝，故非久即败。
现代文： 前朝的汪直、刘瑾，虽然都是恶魔，幸亏言路清明，大臣之间互相不予结交，所以时间不长就失败了。
English: Although Wang Zhi and Liu Xuan of the previous government were both devils, fortunately, their words were clear, and the ministers did not make friends with each other, so it did not take long for them to fail.

古文：今权珰报复，反借言官以伸；言官声势，反借权珰以重。
现代文：现在有权的宦官报复大臣，反而利用言路来实行，言官的声势，反而利用有权的宦官来加强自己。
English: The eunuchs, who now have the power to retaliate against the minister, are instead using words to carry out their actions, and the eunuchs, who now have the power, are using their influence to strengthen themselves.

古文：数月以来，熊德阳、江秉谦、侯震旸、王纪、满朝荐斥矣，邹元标、冯从吾罢矣，文震孟、郑鄤逐矣，近且扼孙慎行、盛以弘，而绝其揆路。摘瓜抱蔓，正人重足。
现代文：几个月以来，熊德阳、江秉谦、侯震阳、王纪、满朝荐被排斥了，邹元标、冯从吾被罢官了。文震孟、郑曼阝被驱逐了。最近又压制孙慎行、盛以弘，不让他们进入内阁，扩大案情，牵连无辜，正直的人战战兢兢。
English: In the past few months, Xiong Deyang, Jiang Bingqian, Hou Zhenyang, Wang Ji, and Man Chaoren have been ostracized, Xuan Yuanbiao and Feng Congwu have been removed from their posts, Wen Zhen Meng and Zheng Mengqi have been expelled, and recently Sun Shengxing and Sheng Yihong have been suppressed, preventing them from entering the cabinet, expanding the case, and implicating innocent and honest people.

古文：举朝各爱一死，无敢明犯其锋者。臣若尚顾微躯，不为入告，将内有进忠为之指挥，旁有客氏为之羽翼，外有刘朝辈为典兵示威，而又有巩辈蚁附蝇集，内外交通，驱除善类，天下事尚忍言哉！
现代文：整个朝廷的大臣都爱惜自己的生命，没有人敢直接与他们抗衡，我假如还贪生怕死，不上疏报告，那么朝廷内将有魏进忠作为指挥，旁边有客氏作为羽翼，朝廷外有刘朝等人举兵示威，而又有郭巩等人巴结攀附，内外勾结，将好人赶尽杀绝，国家的事情还有什么可说的呢！ 
English: All the ministers of the imperial court cherish their own lives, and no one dares to directly compete with them. If I were still greedy for life and afraid of death and did not report, then the imperial court would have Wei Jinzhong as the commander, next to him would be the Hakka clan as the wing, outside the imperial court would be Liu Chao and others who would raise troops and demonstrate, and there would be Guo Gong and others who would cling to each other, collude inside and outside, and drive the good people to extinction. What else is there to say about the affairs of the state!

古文：疏入，进忠益怒。率刘朝等环泣帝前，乞自髡以激帝怒。乃令宗建陈交通实状，将加重谴，宗建回奏益侃直。进忠议廷杖之，阁臣力争，乃止，夺俸。会给事中刘弘化、御史方大任等交章助宗建攻进忠、巩，巩复力诋诸人。
现代文：奏疏递入，魏进忠更加恼火，率领刘朝等人环立在皇帝面前哭诉，乞求自己剃去头发受刑，想用这种刑罚来激发皇帝的愤怒，皇帝于是命令周宗建陈述他们相互勾结的实际情形，将加以严厉的谴责，周宗建回奏更加刚毅正直，魏进忠主张处以廷杖的处罚，内阁大臣极力争论，于是只剥夺了他的俸禄，正好给事中刘弘化、御史方大任等人纷纷上疏帮助周宗建攻击魏进忠、郭巩，郭巩再次极力诋毁各人。
English: When the report was submitted, Wei Jinzhong was even more annoyed. He led Liu Chao and others to stand in front of the emperor and cried, begged to shave his hair and be punished, and wanted to use this punishment to arouse the emperor's anger. The emperor then ordered Zhou Zongjian to state the actual situation of their mutual collusion and would be severely condemned. Zhou Zongjian's response was more courageous and honest. Wei Jinzhong advocated the punishment of the court cane. The cabinet minister argued strenuously, so he only deprived him of his salary. It was just right for Liu Honghua, the chief historian, and others to help Zhou

古文：诏下诸疏平议，廷臣为两解之。
现代文：下诏让廷臣讨论各奏疏，廷臣们的意见分为两派。
English: The following edict ordered the courtiers to discuss the various reports, and the opinions of the courtiers were divided into two groups.

古文：乃严旨切责，夺巩、宗建俸三月。
现代文：于是降旨严厉斥责，剥夺郭巩、周宗建三个月的俸禄。
English: As a result, Guo Gong and Zhou Zongjian were severely reprimanded and deprived of their salaries for three months.

古文：是时，刘朝典内操，遂谋行边。
现代文：这时，刘朝负责操练宫内士兵，于是谋求外任。
English: At this time, the Liu Dynasty was responsible for training soldiers in the palace, so he sought a position outside the palace.

古文：廷臣微闻之，莫敢言。
现代文：廷臣听到一点风声，都不敢站出来说话。
English: The courtiers did not dare to speak out at the slightest rumor.

古文：宗建曰： 巩自谓未尝通内，今诚能出片纸遏朝，吾请为洗交结之名。 
现代文：周宗建说： 郭巩自己说他从没有勾结内廷，现在果真能拿出片言只语制止刘朝，请让我为他洗刷勾结的罪名。 
English: Zhou Zongjian said: Guo Gong himself said that he had never colluded with the Inner Court, and now he can really come up with a few words to stop the Liu Dynasty. Please let me clear him of the crime of collusion.

古文：巩噤不敢发。
现代文：郭巩闭口不说一句话。
English: Guo Gong kept his mouth shut and didn't say a word.

古文：宗建乃抗疏极谏，历陈三不可、九害。
现代文：周宗建于是上疏极力进谏，一一陈述 三不可 、 九害 。
English: Zhou Zongjian, therefore, tried his best to enter the market, stating that there were three impossibilities and nine harms.

古文：会朝与进忠有隙，事亦中寝。
现代文：正好刘朝跟魏进忠有矛盾，事情也就中止了。
English: It just so happened that Liu Chao had a conflict with Wei Jinzhong, and the matter was suspended.

古文：其冬出按湖广，以忧归。
现代文：这年冬天周宗建被派出巡按湖广，因赴父母丧礼回家。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhou Zongjian was sent on a tour of Hunan and returned home after attending his parents' funeral.

古文：五年三月，大学士冯铨衔御史张慎言尝论己，属其门生曹钦程诬劾，而以宗建为首，并及李应升、黄尊素。
现代文：天启五年三月，大学士冯铨怀恨御史张慎言曾议论过他，叫他的门生曹钦程弹劾诬陷张慎言，而以周宗建为首，并且包括了李应升、黄尊素。
English: In March of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, the university scholar Feng Yu, who held a grudge against the historian Zhang Shengyan, had discussed him and ordered his protégé Cao Qincheng to impeach and frame Zhang Shengyan, with Zhou Zongjian at the head, and including Li Yingsheng and Huang Zunsu.

古文：忠贤遂矫诏削籍，下抚按追赃。
现代文：魏忠贤于是假传圣旨削夺周宗建的官籍，交给抚按追查赃物。
English: Wei Zhongxian then stripped Zhou Zongjian of his official status for falsely preaching the holy will, and gave him to Fuzhang to track down the stolen goods.

古文：明年以所司具狱缓，遣缇骑逮治。
现代文：第二年魏忠贤认为有关部门结案太迟缓，派黄衣使者逮捕他治罪。
English: The following year, Wei Zhongxian thought that the relevant departments were too slow in closing the case, and sent a yellow-clad messenger to arrest him and punish him.

古文：俄入之李实疏中，下诏狱毒讯。许显纯厉声骂曰： 复能詈魏上公一丁不识乎！ 
现代文：不久列入李实的奏疏中，下诏投入狱中毒打审讯，许显纯厉声骂道： 还能骂魏上公目不识一丁吗？ 
English: Soon after, he was included in Li Si's report, and was sent to prison for poisoning and interrogation. Xu Xianjun scolded him in a sharp voice: Can you still scold Wei Shangguang for not knowing a single thing?

古文：竟坐纳廷弼贿万三千，毙之狱。
现代文：最终定罪接受熊廷弼贿赂一万三千两，将他在狱中杀死。
English: He was eventually convicted of accepting a bribe of 13,000 taels from Xiong Tingtao and was killed in prison.

古文：宗建既死，征赃益急。
现代文：周宗建死后，追查赃款更加紧迫。
English: After Zhou Zongjian's death, it is even more urgent to track down the stolen money.

古文：兵部尚书梁廷栋论之，下狱坐死。
现代文：跟他亲近的副使蒋英代他交纳，也被定罪削去官籍。魏忠贤失败后，下诏追赠周宗建为太仆寺卿，荫封他的一个儿子做官。
English: After Wei Zhongxian's defeat, Zhou Zongjian was posthumously awarded the title of the Great Servant of the Temple, and one of his sons was made an official in his shadow.

古文：巡抚杨嗣昌为讼冤，得遣戍。
现代文：南明福王时，追赠谥号忠毅。
English: When he was the king of Minamimifuku, he posthumously received the posthumous title of Zhongyi.

古文：黄尊素，字真长，余姚人。
现代文：黄尊素，字真长，浙江余姚人。
English: Huang Zongsu, the character is really long, from Zhejiang Yuyao.

古文：万历四十四年进士。除宁国推官，精敏强执。
现代文：万历四十四年进士，任命为宁国推官，精敏强干。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of forty-four, and was appointed as a magistrate of Ning Province.

古文：天启二年，擢御史，谒假归。
现代文：天启二年提拔御史，请假回家。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, Mishi was promoted and asked for leave to return home.

古文：明年冬还朝，疏请召还余懋衡、曹于汴、刘宗周、周洪谟、王纪、邹元标、冯从吾，而劾尚书赵秉忠、侍郎牛应元、通政丁启睿顽钝。
现代文：第二年冬天回到朝廷，上疏请求召回余懋衡、曹于汴、刘宗周、周洪谟、王纪、邹元标、冯从吾，而弹劾尚书赵秉忠、侍郎牛应元、通政丁启睿愚蠢迟钝。
English: Returning to the imperial court in the winter of the following year, Shang Shou requested the recall of Yu Yu Heng, Cao Yuxuan, Liu Zong Zhou, Zhou Hong Mu, Wang Ji, Xuan Yuan Biao, and Feng Congwu, while the impeachment of Shang Shu Zhao Bingzhong, Zhi Lang Niu Ying Yuan, and Tong Zheng Ding Qirui was stupid and slow.

古文：秉忠、应元俱引去。
现代文：赵秉忠、牛应元都辞职离开了。
English: Zhao Bingzhong and Niu Yingyuan both resigned and left.

古文：山东妖贼既平，余党复煽，巡抚王惟俭不能抚驭，尊素疏论之，因言： 巡抚本内外兼用，今尽用京卿，不若扬历外服者之练习。 
现代文：山东起义被镇压后，起义军余部又煽动起来。巡抚王惟俭无法控制，黄尊素上疏议论。于是说： 巡抚本来是从内外选拔任用的，现在都任用京官，不如推举任用训练有素的地方官员。 
English: After the Shandong Uprising was suppressed, the remnants of the insurgent army were incited again. The governor, Wang Wei Jian, could not be controlled, and Huang Zun was reluctant to discuss it. So he said: The governor was originally selected and appointed from inside and outside, now they are all appointed by Beijing officials, it is better to appoint well-trained local officials.

古文：又数陈边事，力诋大将马世龙，忤枢辅孙承宗意。
现代文：又多次陈述边防事务，极力诋毁大将马世龙，违背了枢辅孙承宗的意图。
English: He also repeatedly stated the border defense affairs, and tried his best to defame General Ma Shilong, which violated the intention of the Grand Prince Sun Zhengzong.

古文：时帝在位数年，未尝一召见大臣。
现代文：这时皇帝即位已有好几个年头了，从没有召见过大臣。
English: By this time the emperor had been on the throne for several years and had never summoned a minister.

古文：尊素请复便殿召对故事，面决大政，否则讲筵之暇，令大臣面商可否。
现代文：黄尊素请求恢复在便殿面对面召见大臣的先例，当面决定国家大事，否则也可利用讲解经史的机会，让大臣们面对面商讨可不可以执行。
English: Huang Zongsu requested to restore the precedent of summoning ministers face-to-face in the hall to decide national affairs in person. Otherwise, he could also use the opportunity to explain the history of the sutras and let the ministers discuss face-to-face whether or not to implement them.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：皇帝没有采纳。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：四年二月，大风扬沙，昼晦，天鼓鸣，如是者十日。
现代文：天启四年二月，大风吹起黄沙，昏天蔽日，还伴有敲鼓一般的响声，一连十天都是如此。
English: In February of the 4th year of the Apocalypse, a gale blew up yellow sand, darkening the sky and blocking the sun, accompanied by the sound of drums. This went on for ten days.

古文：三月朔，京师地震三，乾清宫尤甚。
现代文：三月初一，京师发生三次地震，乾清宫震动得尤其厉害。
English: On the first day of March, three earthquakes occurred in Beijing, and the Qianqing Palace was particularly badly shaken.

古文：适帝体违和，人情惶惧。
现代文：正好皇帝身体欠佳，人心惶惶不可终日。
English: It was just that the emperor was not in good health, and his mind was in turmoil all day long.

古文：尊素力陈时政十失，末言： 陛下厌薄言官，人怀忌讳，遂有剽窃皮毛，莫犯中扃者。
现代文：黄尊素极力陈述时事政策的十大过失。最后说： 陛下压制轻视言官，使人人都有所忌讳，这才有人只提些皮毛小事，不敢冒犯当权者。
English: Huang Zongsu diligently stated the top ten mistakes of current affairs policy. Finally, he said: His Majesty suppressed contempt for officials and made everyone have a taboo, which is why some people only mention some trifles and dare not offend those in power.

古文：今阿保重于赵娆，禁旅近于唐末，萧墙之忧惨于敌国。
现代文：现在近臣重过赵娆，禁旅与唐末相近，萧墙之祸患比敌国还惨。
English: Now, close vassals are more important than Zhao Zheng, the travel ban is similar to the end of the Tang Dynasty, and the disaster of the collapse of the wall is even more disastrous than the enemy country.

古文：廷无谋幄，边无折冲，当国者昧安危之机，误国者护耻败之局。
现代文： 朝廷没有运筹帷幄的大臣，边防没有制敌取胜的将领。掌权的人对国家的安危愚昧无知，捣乱的人对于失败的局面多方掩饰。
English: The imperial court does not have a well-planned minister, the border defense does not have a general who can defeat the enemy and win. The people in power are ignorant of the country's safety, and the troublemakers cover up the failed situation in many ways.

古文：不于此进贤退不肖，而疾刚方正直之士如仇仇，陛下独不为社稷计乎？ 
现代文：不在此时举荐贤才斥退不肖之人，反而厌恶刚毅正直的人，把他看作仇敌，陛下难道就不为国家考虑吗？ 
English: Would Your Majesty not consider the interests of the country if, at this time, instead of recommending the talented and rejecting the unscrupulous, you detested the man of fortitude and honesty and regarded him as an enemy?

古文：疏入，魏忠贤大怒，谋廷杖之。
现代文：奏疏递入，魏忠贤大怒，图谋将他处廷杖刑。
English: Wei Zhongxian was furious and plotted to have him sentenced to the cane.

古文：韩爌力救，乃夺俸一年。
现代文：韩火广大力营救，于是只剥夺一年俸禄。
English: Han Huiguang worked hard to rescue them, so he was only deprived of one year's salary.

古文：既而杨涟劾忠贤，被旨谯让。
现代文：不久杨涟弹劾魏忠贤，被下旨责备。
English: Soon after, Yang Jie impeached Wei Zhongxian and was reprimanded.

古文：尊素愤，抗疏继之，略言： 天下有政归近幸，威福旁移，而世界清明者乎？
现代文：黄尊素很愤怒，接着上疏，大意说： 天下有政权归于近旁宠幸之人，皇帝大权旁落，而国家太平英明的吗？
English: Huang Zongsu was very angry, and then went on a rant, saying something to the effect of: Is there any power in the world that belongs to the favored people nearby, the emperor's power falls aside, and the country is peaceful and wise?

古文：天下有中外汹汹，无不欲食其肉，而可置之左右者乎？
现代文：天下有中外纷扰，没有不想从瓜分国家得到一份好处，而还能将国家交给左右的人吗？
English: There are internal and external disturbances in the world. Isn't there anyone who doesn't want to get a share of the benefits from the division of the country, but can still hand over the country to the right and left?

古文：陛下必以为曲谨可用，不知不小曲谨，不大无忌；必以为惟吾驾驭，不知不可驾驭，则不可收拾矣。
现代文：陛下一定以为曲意奉承，小心谨慎的人可以重用，不知道不远离这些人，就不能使无所畏忌的人得到任用。陛下一定认为只有我才能驾驭，不知道不能驾驭时，则已不可收拾了。
English: His Majesty must have thought that the tone was flattering, that the cautious could be used again and again, and did not know that if he did not stay away from these people, he would not be able to get the fearless person appointed. His Majesty must have thought that I was the only one who could handle it, and when he did not know that he could not handle it, it was too late.

古文：陛下登极以来，公卿台谏累累罢归，致在位者无固志。
现代文：陛下自登基以来，公卿台谏一个接一个地被罢免回家，使得在位的人没有长远打算。
English: Since His Majesty ascended to the throne, Kugyo Taiko has been sent home one after another, leaving those in power without a long-term plan.

古文：不于此称孤立，乃以去一近侍为孤立耶？
现代文：这还不叫孤立，却将一个近侍的离开叫作孤立吗？
English: This is not called isolation, but calling the departure of a close companion isolation?

古文：今忠贤不法状，廷臣已发露无余，陛下若不早断，彼形见势穷，复何顾忌。
现代文：现在魏忠贤违法的情形，廷臣已揭露无疑。陛下如果不早做决断，当他看到前途无望，狗急跳墙，还会有什么顾虑呢？
English: Now that Wei Zhongxian's violation of the law has been revealed beyond doubt by courtiers, if His Majesty does not make a decision early, when he sees the future is hopeless and the dogs are jumping over the wall, what concerns will there be?

古文：忠贤必不肯收其已纵之缰，而净涤其肠胃；忠贤之私人，必不肯回其已往之棹，而默消其冰山。
现代文：魏忠贤是一定不肯收回他那放纵的野心的缰绳来悔过自新的。魏忠贤的私党，一定不肯收回他们那谋取私利的船桨，而任其默默消融的。
English: Wei Zhongxian would certainly not take back the reins of his unbridled ambition to repent and reform. Wei Zhongxian's private party would certainly not take back their self-serving oars and let them quietly melt away.

古文：始犹与士大夫为仇，继将以至尊为注。
现代文：开始还只是与官员为仇，接着将把至尊的皇位作为赌注。
English: At the beginning, it was just an enmity with officials, and then it will be a bet on the supreme throne.

古文：柴栅既固，毒螫谁何？
现代文：基础防护既已牢固，谁还能把他们怎样。
English: With basic defenses already in place, who can stop them?

古文：不惟台谏折之不足，即干戈取之亦难矣。 
现代文：不仅台谏不足以挫败他们，即使是动用武力也难以奏效了。 
English: Not only is Taiwanese pressure not enough to defeat them, but even the use of force has become ineffective.

古文：忠贤得疏愈恨。
现代文：魏忠贤得到奏疏更加不满。
English: Wei Zhongxian was even more dissatisfied with the result.

古文：万燝既廷杖，又欲杖御史林汝翥，诸言官诣阁争之。
现代文：万火景被廷杖后，又想廷杖御史林汝翥，各言官到内阁去争论。
English: After Wan Hu Jie was beheaded by the imperial scepter, he also wanted to be beheaded by the imperial scepter, and each speaker went to the cabinet to argue.

古文：小珰数百人拥入阁中，攘臂肆骂，诸阁臣俯首不敢语。
现代文：数百个小太监拥进内阁中，挥舞着拳头大声叫骂，各内阁大臣都低着头不敢说话。
English: Hundreds of little eunuchs swarmed into the cabinet, waving their fists and shouting abuse. The cabinet ministers kept their heads down and did not dare to speak.

古文：尊素厉声曰： 内阁丝纶地，即司礼非奉诏不敢至，若辈无礼至此！ 
现代文：黄尊素厉声说： 内阁重地，即使是司礼没有接到诏书也不敢到来，你们这帮人竟敢如此无礼！ 
English: Huang Zongsu snapped, "The cabinet is so important that even the ceremonial officials won't dare to come if they haven't received the edict. How dare you people be so rude!"

古文：乃稍稍散去。
现代文：于是众太监慢慢散去。
English: So the eunuchs slowly dispersed.

古文：无何，燝以创重卒。
现代文：没多久，万火景因受重伤死去。
English: Not long after, Wan Huajing died from serious injuries.

古文：尊素上言： 律例，非叛逆十恶无死法。
现代文：黄尊素上奏说： 按照法律，不是叛逆等十大罪状不判处死刑。
English: "According to the law, the death penalty is not imposed for the ten major crimes such as treason.

古文：今以披肝沥胆之忠臣，竟殒于磨牙砺齿之凶竖。
现代文：现在让披肝沥胆的忠臣，竟然死于磨牙咧齿的小人之手。
English: Now let the loyal vassal, who wears his heart on his sleeve, actually die at the hands of the grinning little man.

古文：此辈必欣欣相告，吾侪借天子威柄，可鞭笞百僚。
现代文：这帮小人一定奔走相告，说是可以利用皇帝的特权，来鞭打百官。
English: These villains must have been running around telling each other that they could use the emperor's prerogative to whip officials.

古文：后世有秉董狐笔，继朱子《纲目》者，书曰 某月某日，郎中万燝以言事廷杖死 ，岂不上累圣德哉！
现代文：后代有这样的人，他继承了董狐的笔法和朱熹的《通鉴纲目》，于是写道： 某月某日，郎中万火景因为进谏国事被廷杖打死。 这岂不是连累了皇上的圣德么！
English: There was such a person in later generations, who inherited the penmanship of Dong Foo and the "General Appraisal Outline" of Zhu Xi, and wrote: On a certain day of a certain month, Langzhong Wanhuai was beaten to death with a scepter for interfering in state affairs. Isn't this a drag on the emperor's virtue!

古文：进廷杖之说者，必曰祖制，不知二正之世，王振、刘瑾为之；世祖、神宗之朝，张璁、严嵩、张居正为之。
现代文：进呈廷杖这种说法的人，一定说这是祖宗的制度，殊不知正统、正德年间，王振、刘谨实行它；世祖、神宗年间，张璁、严嵩、张居正执行它。
English: Those who bring up the argument of the imperial scepter must say that this is the system of the ancestors. They do not know that Wang Zhen and Liu Zhen practiced it during the years of orthodoxy and righteousness, and that Zhang Xi, Yan Song, and Zhang Ju practiced it during the years of the ancestors and the gods.

古文：奸人欲有所逞，惮忠臣义士掣其肘，必借廷杖以快其私，使人主蒙拒谏之名，己受乘权之实，而仁贤且有抱蔓之形。
现代文：奸邪小人想放纵自己的私欲，害怕忠臣义士的牵制，一定得用廷杖发泄他们的私愤，使得皇帝蒙受拒绝进谏的罪名，自己掌管实际权力，而仁人志士且有被牵连的危险。
English: Treacherous villains who want to indulge their selfish desires and are afraid of the restraint of loyal subjects and righteous men must use the imperial scepter to vent their private anger, so that the emperor is accused of refusing to enter the imperial palace, he controls the actual power, and the benevolent person is in danger of being implicated.

古文：于是乎为所欲为，莫有顾忌，而祸即移之国家。
现代文：于是乎小人为所欲为，毫无顾忌，而嫁祸于国家。
English: As a result, petty people do whatever they want, without any scruples, and blame the country.

古文：燝今已矣，辱士杀士，渐不可开。
现代文：万火景已经死了。侮辱杀戮正直的人，不能开这个先例。
English: Wanzhongjing is dead. Insulting and killing honest people cannot set this precedent.

古文：乞复故官，破格赐恤，俾遗孤得扶榇还乡，燝死且不朽。 
现代文：乞求恢复万火景原有的官职，破格赐给他照顾，让他的后人亲自护送棺材返回故乡，万火景死而不朽。 
English: He begged for the restoration of Wan Huo Jie's original official position, unprecedentedly gave him care, and let his descendants personally escort the coffin back to his hometown. Wan Huo Jie died immortal.

古文：疏入，益忤忠贤意。
现代文：奏疏递入，更加违背魏忠贤的意图。
English: It is even more contrary to Wei Zhongxian's intention.

古文：八月，河南进玉玺。
现代文：八月，河南进贡玉玺。
English: In August, Henan paid tribute to Jade Dragonfly.

古文：忠贤欲侈其事，命由大明门进，行受玺礼，百僚表贺。
现代文：魏忠贤想夸张这件事，命令从大明门进城，实行接受玉玺的礼仪，百官奏表称贺。
English: Wei Zhongxian wanted to exaggerate the matter and ordered to enter the city from the Daming Gate, implement the etiquette of accepting the jade urn, and have the officials present a congratulatory list.

古文：尊素上言： 昔宋哲宗得玺，蔡确等竞言祥瑞，改年元符，宋祚卒不竞。
现代文：黄尊素上奏说： 过去宋哲宗得到一个宝玺，蔡确等人争着说是好兆头，改年号为元符，宋朝国运最终不能长久。
English: Huang Zongsu said at the beginning: In the past, Song Zhezong won a treasure map, Cai Ji and others argued that it was a good omen, changed the year to the original, and the national movement of the Song Dynasty could not last long.

古文：本朝弘治时，陕西献玉玺，止令取进，给赏五金。
现代文：本朝弘治年间，陕西进献玉玺，只是命令送进朝廷，给赏钱五两。
English: During the reign of Hongzhi this morning, Shaanxi presented jade ingots, but the order was sent to the imperial court and the reward was fifty taels.

古文：此祖宗故事，宜从。 
现代文：这是祖宗的先例，应该依此办理。 
English: This is the ancestral precedent and should be followed.

古文：事获中止。
现代文：这事就这样中止了。
English: And that was the end of the matter.

古文：五年春，遣视陕西茶马。甫出都，逆党曹钦程劾其专击善类，助高攀龙、魏大中虐焰，遂削籍。
现代文：天启五年春天，被派往陕西巡视茶马互市，刚出北京城，叛党曹钦程揭发他专门攻击好人，助长了高攀龙、魏大中的嚣张气焰，于是被削籍为平民。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, he was sent to Shaanxi to inspect the tea and horse market. Just after leaving Beijing, the rebel Cao Qincheng revealed that he specifically attacked good people, promoted the arrogance of Gao Panglong and Wei Daizhong, and was then demoted to a civilian.

古文：尊素謇谔敢言，尤有深识远虑。
现代文：黄尊素忠诚正直敢于说真话，尤其有深谋远虑。
English: Huang Zongsuo is loyal, honest, dares to speak the truth, and especially has foresight.

古文：初入台，邹元标实援之，即进规曰： 都门非讲学地，徐文贞已丛议于前矣。 
现代文：刚进入官府时，邹元标确实帮助过他，黄尊素就进言规劝邹元标说： 都城不是讲学的地方，以前就有徐文贞聚众议论的先例。 
English: When he first entered the government, Xu Yuanbiao really helped him. Huang Zongsu advised Xu Yuanbiao, saying: The capital is not a place for lectures. Previously, there was a precedent for Xu Wenzhen to gather the public for discussion.

古文：元标不能用。
现代文：邹元标没有听取采纳。
English: The original bid was not accepted.

古文：杨涟将击忠贤，魏大中以告，尊素曰： 除君侧者，必有内援。
现代文：杨涟将要攻击魏忠贤，魏大中告诉了他，黄尊素说： 清除皇帝身边的人，一定要有内援。
English: Yang Xuan was going to attack Wei Zhongxian. Wei Dazhong told him that Huang Zongsu said: "To purge the people around the emperor, we must have internal support."

古文：杨公有之乎？
现代文：杨公有这样的人吗？
English: Does Yang Gong have such a person?

古文：一不中，吾侪无噍类矣。 
现代文：一旦攻击不能奏效，我们这些人将无法生存了。 
English: If the attack doesn't work, we won't be able to survive.

古文：万景死，尊素讽涟去，涟不从，卒及于祸。
现代文：万火景死，黄尊素暗示杨涟辞职，杨涟不听，最终惹祸上身。
English: Wan Huojing died, Huang Son Su suggested that Yang Jie resign, Yang Jie did not listen, and eventually got into trouble.

古文：大中将劾魏广微，尊素曰： 广微，小人之包羞者也，攻之急，则挺而走险矣。 
现代文：魏大中将要弹劾魏广微，黄尊素说： 魏广微是小人之中的小人，过快地攻击他，他会铤而走险的。 
English: Wei Guangwei will be impeached by the Wei University. Huang Zongsu said: Wei Guangwei is a villain among villains. If you attack him too quickly, he will be timid and take risks.

古文：大中不从，广微益合于忠贤，以兴大难。
现代文：魏大中不听，魏广微更加投靠魏忠贤，从而酿成了大灾难。
English: Wei Dazhong did not listen, and Wei Guangwei relied more on Wei Zhongxian, which led to a great disaster.

古文：是时，东林盈朝，自以乡里分朋党。
现代文：这时，东林党充满朝廷，东林党自身又以来源地的不同分为几个派系。
English: At this time, the Donglin Party filled the imperial court, and the Donglin Party itself was divided into several factions.

古文：江西章允儒、陈良训与大中有隙，而大中欲驳尚书南师仲恤典，秦人亦多不悦。
现代文：江西章允儒、陈训跟魏大中有过节，而魏大中想驳斥尚书南师仲滥发抚恤，陕西人也不大高兴。
English: Jiangxi Zhang Yunru, Chen Xun and Wei Dazhong had a quarrel, and Wei Dazhong wanted to refute Shang Shunan Shizhong's extravagant pension, and Shaanxi people were not very happy.

古文：尊素急言于大中，止之。
现代文：黄尊素赶忙告诉魏大中，制止了他。
English: Huang Zongsu hurriedly told Wei Daizhong and stopped him.

古文：最后，山西尹同皋、潘云翼欲用其座主郭尚友为山西巡抚，大中以尚友数问遗朝贵，执不可。
现代文：最后，山西尹同皋、潘云翼想推举他们的座主郭尚友为山西巡抚，魏大中因为郭尚友几次追究前朝留下来的大臣，执意不同意。
English: In the end, Shanxi Yin Tonglu and Pan Yunyi wanted to nominate their chairman, Guo Shangyou, as the Shanxi governor. Wei Dazhong, because Guo Shangyou had investigated the ministers left behind by the former government several times, insisted on disagreeing.

古文：尊素引杜征南数遗洛中贵要为言，大中卒不可，议用谢应祥，难端遂作。
现代文：黄尊素引用杜征南多次联系洛阳一带的权贵为例劝告他，魏大中最终没有听取，推举任用谢应祥，灾难由此发生了。
English: Huang Zongsu cited Du Zhenan's repeated contacts with influential people in the Luoyang area as an example to advise him. Wei University did not listen to him in the end and appointed Xie Yingxiang. This led to the disaster.

古文：汪文言初下狱，忠贤即欲罗织诸人。
现代文：汪文言刚下狱时，魏忠贤就想罗织各人的罪名。
English: As soon as Wang Wenyan was released from prison, Wei Zhongxian tried to cover up everyone's crimes.

古文：已，知为尊素所解，恨甚。
现代文：不久，当他得知是黄尊素从中化解时，就更加忌恨了。
English: Soon, when he learned that it was the xanthine that was dissolving from it, he became even more disgusted.

古文：其党亦以尊素多智虑，欲杀之。
现代文：魏忠贤的党羽也因为黄尊素多智谋，想杀死他。
English: Wei Zhongxian's followers also wanted to kill him because of Huang Chongsu's cunning.

古文：会吴中讹言尊素欲效杨一清诛刘瑾，用李实为张永，授以秘计。
现代文：正好苏州一带谣传黄尊素想效法杨一清诛杀刘瑾的榜样，让李实充当张永的角色，传授给他秘密的计谋。
English: It was rumored in the Suzhou area that Huang Chongsu wanted to follow the example of Yang Iqing's assassination of Liu Bei, and let Li Si play the role of Zhang Yong and teach him the secret strategy.

古文：忠贤大惧，遣刺事者至吴中凡四辈。
现代文：魏忠贤非常害怕，派遣四个密探到苏州一带刺探情报。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very scared and sent four spies to the Suzhou area to gather intelligence.

古文：侍郎乌程沈演家居，奏记忠贤曰： 事有迹矣。 
现代文：侍郎乌程人沈演居住在家，报告魏忠贤说： 事情有眉目了！ 
English: Wu Chengren's servant Shen Yuan lived at home and reported to Wei Zhongxian: "Things are looking up!

古文：于是日遣使谯诃实，取其空印白疏，入尊素等七人姓名，遂被逮。
现代文：当天派使者呵斥李实，拿走了盖有图章的空白奏疏，列上黄尊素七个人的姓名，于是逮捕他。
English: On the same day, an envoy was sent to reprimand Li Si, take away the stamped blank record book, list the names of Huang Zunsu's seven people, and then arrest him.

古文：使者至苏州，适城中击杀逮周顺昌旗尉，其城外人并击逮尊素者。
现代文：使者来到苏州，碰到苏州城内围攻逮捕周顺昌的旗官，城外的人攻击逮捕黄尊素的人。
English: The envoy came to Suzhou and met the flag officers who besieged and arrested Zhou Shunchang in Suzhou, and the people outside the city attacked the people who arrested Huang Zun Su.

古文：逮者失驾帖，不敢至。
现代文：负责逮捕的人把逮捕证给丢了，不敢到达。
English: The person in charge of the arrest lost the arrest warrant and did not dare to arrive.

古文：尊素闻，即囚服诣吏，自投诏狱。
现代文：黄尊素听说了，立即穿上囚服到衙门投案自首。
English: Huang Zunsu heard about this and immediately put on his prisoner's uniform and went to the police station to turn himself in.

古文：许显纯、崔应元搒掠备至，勒赃二千八百，五日一追比。
现代文：许显纯、崔应允严刑拷问，勒索赃款二千八百两，五天一次追掠。
English: Xu Xianzhun and Cui Yingyong were severely tortured and interrogated, extorted 2,800 taels of stolen money, and were chased and robbed once every five days.

古文：已，知狱卒将害己，叩首谢君父，赋诗一章，遂死，时六年闰六月朔日也，年四十三。
现代文：不久，得知狱卒将要谋害自己，黄尊素叩头谢皇上、父亲的恩惠，写诗一首，于是自尽。这时是天启六年闰六月初一，终年四十三岁。
English: Soon after, learning that his jailer was planning to kill him, Huang Zongsu bowed his head, thanked the emperor and his father for their kindness, wrote a poem, and then killed himself. At this time, it was the first day of the sixth month of the leap year, and he was 43 years old.

古文：崇祯初，赠太仆卿，任一子。
现代文：崇祯初年，追赠太仆卿，封一个儿子做官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he posthumously bestowed the title of "Grand Servant of the Emperor" and had one of his sons appointed as an official.

古文：福王时，追谥忠端。
现代文：南明福王时，追封谥号忠端。
English: When he was the king of Minamimifuku, he chased after Shigo Tadakata.

