古文：韩滉颜真卿李景略李夷简孟简李德裕裴休崔碣赵和刘崇龟杀妻者许宗裔刘方遇
现代文：韩滉颜真卿李景略李夷简孟简李德裕裴休崔碣赵和刘崇龟杀妻者许宗裔刘方遇
English: Han Xuan, Yan Zhenqing, Li Jingliao, Li Yijian, Meng Jian, Li Deyu, Pei Xiu, Cui Zhao, and Liu Chongke

古文：韩滉
现代文：韩滉
English: Han Zheng

古文：韩滉在润州，夜与从事登万岁楼，方酣，置杯不悦。
现代文：韩滉在润州，夜晚和从事登上万岁楼喝酒。
English: Han Yu was in Rongzhou, drinking at night and engaged in climbing the Long Live Building.

古文：语左右曰：汝听妇人哭乎？
现代文：正喝的畅快的时候，他忽然停下酒杯不喝了，对左右的人说：你们听到女人的哭声了吗？
English: While he was enjoying his drink, he suddenly stopped drinking and said to the people around him: "Do you hear a woman crying?

古文：当近何所？
现代文：就在附近的某一个地方。
English: It's somewhere nearby.

古文：或对在某桥某街。
现代文：有人回答在某桥某街。
English: Someone answered in a certain bridge in a certain street.

古文：诘朝，命吏捕哭者讯之。
现代文：第二天早上，韩滉命令刑事侦察人员把哭的人抓来审问，连续两天，被抓的妇女也没有招供。
English: The next morning, Han Wei ordered criminal investigators to arrest and interrogate the crying person. For two consecutive days, the arrested woman did not confess.

古文：信宿，狱不具。吏惧罪，守于尸侧。
现代文：刑侦人员害怕韩滉怪罪，守在尸体旁边。
English: The detectives were afraid that Han Zheng would blame them, so they stayed next to the body.

古文：忽有大青蝇集其首。因发髻验之，果妇私于邻，醉其夫而钉杀之。
现代文：忽然发现有大绿苍蝇聚集在死者的头顶，拨开头发检查，果然是这个妇女同邻居通奸，将丈夫灌醉以后，用钉子钉入丈夫的头顶，将丈夫害死。
English: Suddenly, it was discovered that large green flies had gathered on the top of the dead woman's head. The hair was pulled out and examined. It was indeed the woman who had committed adultery with her neighbor, got her husband drunk, drove a nail into the top of his head, and killed him.

古文：吏以为神。
现代文：刑侦人员认为韩滉是神仙，询问韩滉。
English: Detectives believe that Han Yu is a god and interrogate him.

古文：因问，晋公云：吾察其哭声，疾而不惮，若强而惧者。
现代文：晋公韩滉说：我听她的哭声急促但不悲伤，像是因为害怕而勉强装出来的。
English: "I heard her cries, which were quick but not sad, as if she was scared and had to fake it," Jin Gong Han Rong said.

古文：王充论衡云：郑子产晨出，闻妇人之哭，拊仆之手而听。
现代文：王充在《论衡》里说，郑子产早晨出门，听到妇女的哭声。
English: Wang Chong said in "On Balance" that Zheng Zibang went out in the morning and heard a woman's cries.

古文：有间，使吏执而问之，即手杀其夫也。异日，其仆问曰：夫子何以知之？
现代文：他抓住仆人的手仔细倾听，过了一会，派人将妇女抓来审问，果然是这个妇女杀死了丈夫，第二天，仆人间郑子产是如何知道的？
English: He grabbed his servant's hand and listened carefully. After a while, he sent someone to arrest the woman and interrogate her. Sure enough, it was the woman who killed her husband. The next day, how did Zheng Zizang know among the servants?

古文：子产曰：死于其所亲爱，知病而忧，临死而惧，已死而哀。
现代文：郑子产说：死了自己所亲爱的人的正常表现是，知道丈夫有病了应该忧愁，丈夫快要死了的时候害怕，死了以后悲痛。
English: Zheng Zisan said, "The normal behavior of a person who has lost a loved one is to be sad when he knows his husband is ill, to be afraid when his husband is about to die, and to be sad after his death.

古文：今哭以死而惧，知其奸也。
现代文：这个女人的丈夫死了以后的哭声里充满恐惧，所以知道她必有奸情。
English: This woman's terrified cries after her husband died told her she must be having an affair.

古文：颜真卿
现代文：颜真卿
English: Yan Zhenqing

古文：颜鲁公真卿为监察御史，充河西陇右军覆屯交兵使。
现代文：鲁公颜真卿以监察御史的身份去充当河西陇右军覆屯交兵使。
English: Lu Gongyan Zhenqing, in his capacity as inspector of imperial history, went to serve as the envoy of the right-wing army of the Western Han Dynasty to overthrow the Tang Dynasty.

古文：五原有冤狱，久不决，真卿立辩之。
现代文：五原那个地方有冤案，一直没能澄清平反，颜真卿极力调查了解。
English: There was a case of injustice in that part of Wuhara, but it has not been able to be clarified and rectified. Yan Zhenqing tried his best to investigate and understand.

古文：天久旱，及狱决乃雨。
现代文：当地久旱无雨，等到冤案得到了平反昭雪，天空立即下起雨来。
English: There had been no rain in the area for a long time. When the unjust case was vindicated, the sky immediately began to rain.

古文：郡人呼御史雨。
现代文：当地人称这场雨为御史雨。
English: Locals call this rain the "historic rain."

古文：李景略
现代文：李景略
English: Li Jingliao

古文：李景略，凉州人，寓居河东，阖门读书。
现代文：李景略是凉州人，居住在河东闭门读书。
English: Li Jingliao is from Liangzhou and lives and studies behind closed doors in Hedong.

古文：李怀光为朔方节度，招在幕府。
现代文：李怀光出任朔方节度使，招聘他到署衙任职。
English: Li Huaiguang was appointed as the Party Secretary of the Party of Shuo, and he was recruited to serve as the Deputy Secretary of the Party.

古文：五原有偏将张光者挟私杀妻，前后不能断。
现代文：五原有一个叫张光的副将把妻子杀了，前后几个办案人员都没能调查清楚。
English: In Wuhuan, a vice-general named Zhang Guang killed his wife, and several investigators failed to investigate the case.

古文：光富于财，货狱吏，不能劾讯得实情。
现代文：张光很有钱，收买办案人员不能秉公调查，所以得不到实情。
English: Zhang Guang has a lot of money, and he can buy off the investigators, so they can't do a fair investigation, so they can't get the truth.

古文：以景略验之，光伏辜。
现代文：派李景略去审理，张光才服罪。
English: Li Jingliao was sent to the trial, and Zhang Guang could only plead guilty.

古文：既而亭午，有女厉被发血身，膝行前谢而去。
现代文：到了正午，有一个女鬼披散头发，浑身是血，跪着来到李景略面前拜谢后离去。
English: At noon, a female ghost, her hair disheveled and covered in blood, kneeled down in front of Li Jingliao and thanked him before leaving.

古文：左右识光妻者。曰：光之妻也。
现代文：左右认识张光妻子的人说，这女鬼正是张光的妻子。
English: People who know Zhang Guang's wife say that this female ghost is Zhang Guang's wife.

古文：李夷简
现代文：李夷简
English: Li Yijian

古文：李相夷简未登第时，为郑县丞。
现代文：宰相李夷简没有考中进士时是郑县县丞。
English: When Prime Minister Li Yijian failed to pass the junior high school entrance examination, he was the county magistrate of Zheng County.

古文：泾军之乱，有使走驴东去甚急。
现代文：泾原兵在京城哗变时，有一个送信的人骑着驴向东走得很急。
English: At the time of the mutiny of the native soldiers in the capital, there was a messenger who rode a donkey and went east very quickly.

古文：夷简入白刺史曰：闻京城有故，此使必非朝命，请执问之。
现代文：李夷简对刺史说：听说京城有变化，这个信使一定不是朝廷派出来的，请把他抓住审问。
English: Li Yijian said to Zhang Shi: "I heard that there are changes in Beijing. This messenger must not have been sent by the imperial court. Please arrest and interrogate him."

古文：果朱泚使于朱滔者。
现代文：果然是叛军推举的首领朱泚派出来给他弟弟朱滔送信的。
English: It was the rebel leader Zhu Xi who sent the letter to his brother Zhu Tao.

古文：孟简
现代文：孟简
English: Meng Jian

古文：故刑部李尚书逊为浙东观察使，性仁恤，抚育百姓，抑挫冠冕。
现代文：刑部尚书李逊曾经担任浙东观察使，他的性格仁慈，保护百姓利益，抑制官僚势力。
English: His character was benevolent, he protected the interests of the people and restrained bureaucratic forces.

古文：有前诸暨县尉包君者，秩满，居于县界，与一土豪百姓来往。
现代文：原诸暨县尉包君的任期满了以后，居住在诸暨县边境附近。
English: After the term of the former Zhuji County Lieutenant Bao Jun expired, he lived near the border of Zhuji County.

古文：其家甚富，每有新味及果实，必送包君。
现代文：他与一个土豪有来往，这个土豪家里非常富有，每当有好吃的或新鲜水果，都送一些给包君。
English: He had dealings with a local dignitary, whose family was very wealthy. Whenever they had delicious or fresh fruit, they would give some to Bao Jun.

古文：忽妻心腹病，暴至困惙。
现代文：有一天，包君的妻子突然心腹发病，十分难受。
English: One day, Bao Jun's wife suddenly had a heart attack, which was very painful.

古文：有人视者，皆曰：此状中盅。
现代文：别人看了以后都说是中了一种叫作盅的毒虫的毒，并问包君这毒是从哪里来的。
English: After others saw it, they all said that they had been poisoned by a poisonous insect called a centipede, and asked Bao Jun where the poison came from.

古文：及问所从何来，乃因土豪献果，妻偶食之，遂得兹病。
现代文：包君回答说是因为土豪送来水果，妻子偶然吃了一点，就得了这种怪病。
English: Bao Jun replied that because the local strongman sent fruit, his wife accidentally ate a little and got this strange disease.

古文：此家养盅，前后杀人已多矣。
现代文：别人告诉包君，这个土豪家里养盅，已经害死过许多人了。
English: Others told Mr. Bao that this local strongman had killed many people by raising egrets in his home.

古文：包君曰：为之奈何？
现代文：包君问如今该怎么办？
English: Bao Jun asked what to do now?

古文：曰：养此毒者，皆能解之。
现代文：人们告诉他说：养这种毒虫的人，都会解毒的方法。
English: People told him: "Anyone who keeps this poisonous insect will know how to detoxify it."

古文：今少府速将夫人诣彼求乞。
现代文：如今你应该迅速把夫人送到土豪家去求救，否则就没有办法了。
English: Now you should quickly send your wife to the local strongman's house for help, otherwise there is no way.

古文：不然，即无计矣。包君乃当时雇船携往。
现代文：包君当时就雇了一条船，带着妻子前往土豪家。
English: At that time, Bao Jun hired a boat and took his wife to the local powerful family.

古文：仅百余里，逾宿方达。
现代文：他们家距离土豪家一百多里，过了一宿才到达。
English: Their home is more than a hundred miles away from the local family, and it took them one night to get there.

古文：其土豪已知，唯恐其毒事露，愤怒彼甚。
现代文：这时土豪已经知道他们要去，害怕自己养毒虫害人的事情泄漏，非常生气。
English: At this time, the local strongmen already knew that they were going, and they were very angry because they were afraid that the fact that they were raising poisonous pests would leak out.

古文：包君船亦到，先登岸，具衫笏，将祈之，其人已潜伏童仆十余，候包君到，靸履柱球杖，领徒而去。
现代文：包君的船到了以后，包君走上岸去，整理衣服正要去求救。土豪已经暗中埋伏了十多个仆人，等候包君的到来。土豪靸拉着，拿着木棍，来到船前。
English: After Bao Jun's boat arrived, Bao Jun went ashore, sorted out his clothes and was about to go for help. Local strongmen had secretly ambushed more than ten servants, waiting for Bao Jun's arrival. Local strongmen pulled, holding a wooden stick, came to the front of the boat.

古文：包未及语，诟骂叫呼，遂令拽之于地，以球杖击之数十，不胜其困。
现代文：没等包君说话，这些人就开始大声叫骂，把包君拽倒在地，用棍子打了几十下。
English: Without waiting for Bao Jun to speak, these people began to shout abuse, dragged Bao Jun to the ground, and beat him with a stick dozens of times.

古文：又令村妇二十余人，就船拽包君妻出，验其病状，以头捽地，备极耻辱。妻素羸疾，兼有娠，至船而殒。
现代文：土豪又叫村里的二十多个妇女，上船把包君的妻子拉出来，查看了中毒的症状，然后揪着她的头发把头往地上碰，百般折磨污辱，包君的妻子本来就瘦弱多病，并且怀有身孕，回到船上就死了。
English: The local tyrants also ordered more than 20 women in the village to go on the boat to pull out Bao Jun's wife, check the symptoms of poisoning, and then touch her head to the ground with her hair, torturing and insulting her in various ways. Bao Jun's wife was already thin and sickly, and was pregnant. When she returned to the boat, she died.

古文：包君聊获余命。及却回，土豪乃疾棹到州，见李公诉之云：县尉包某倚恃前资，领妻至庄，罗织搅扰，以索钱物，不胜冤愤。
现代文：包君侥幸留下一条性命，还没有回到家里，土豪就坐快船赶到州府，向砚察使李逊告状，说包君倚仗从前当过县尉，带着妻子来到他的庄院，虚构罪名，扰乱闹事，诈取钱物，令他非常冤屈气愤。
English: Bao Jun was lucky enough to leave a life behind. Before he returned home, the local strongman took a fast boat to the state capital to sue Li Xiong, saying that Bao Jun had once been a county lieutenant, brought his wife to his manor, fabricated charges, disturbed disturbances, and defrauded money and goods, which made him very angry.

古文：李公大怒，当时令人斋枷锁追。
现代文：李逊非常生气，当时就派人带着枷锁去抓包君。
English: Li Xun was very angry and sent someone with a yoke to catch Baojun at that time.

古文：包君才到，妻尚未殓，方欲待事毕，至州论。
现代文：包君刚刚回到家里。妻子的尸体还没有掩埋，准备办完丧事再去州府讲理。
English: Bao Jun has just returned home. His wife's body has not yet been buried, and he is preparing to go to the state capital after the funeral.

古文：忽使急到，遂被荷枷锁身领去。
现代文：这时州里的差人忽然到了，给他戴上枷锁，将他押走。
English: At this time, the state police suddenly arrived, put him in shackles and drove him away.

古文：其日，观察判官独孤公卧于厅中睡次，梦一妇人，颜色惨沮，若有所诉者。
现代文：这一天，观察判官独孤在厅里打盹儿。梦见一个女人，神色悲伤凄惨，似乎要对他说什么，捧着一个石砚献给他。
English: On this day, I observed the judge dozing alone in the hall. I dreamed of a woman, looking sad and miserable, as if she wanted to say something to him, holding a stone urn dedicated to him.

古文：及觉，因言于同院，皆异之。逡巡，包君到。李公令独孤即推鞠。
现代文：独孤接受了，心里对她很同情。不一会儿，包君被押到了，李逊让独孤来审理。
English: Duolong accepted and felt very sorry for her. Soon, Bao Jun was arrested and Li Xun brought Duolong to trial.

古文：寻甚辩对。包君所居，乃石砚村也。
现代文：独孤一问，包君所居住的地方正是石观村，独孤心中惊奇了很久。
English: To my surprise, the place where Bao Jun lived was Shigu village. I was surprised for a long time.

古文：郎惊异良久，引包君入，问其本末。
现代文：他把包君叫进屋里，仔细询问事情的来龙去脉。
English: He called Bao Jun into the room and carefully inquired about the ins and outs of the matter.

古文：包涕泣具言之。
现代文：包君哭着将事情的经过说了。
English: Bao Jun cried and told the story.

古文：诘其妻形貌年几，乃郎梦中所见。感愤之甚。
现代文：独孤问包君妻子的体形相貌和年龄，正是自己梦中所见到的女人，心中既感慨又愤怒。
English: The shape, appearance and age of Mr. Bao's wife is exactly the woman he saw in his dream, and he is both moved and angry.

古文：不数日，土豪皆款伏。
现代文：数日之后，土豪承认了自己的罪行。
English: A few days later, the local hero confessed to his crime.

古文：具狱过李公。李公以其不直，遂凭土豪之状。包君以倚恃前资，擅至百姓庄搅扰。
现代文：独孤把审理报告拿给李逊看，李逊认为他判的不公正，只凭土豪的原状，改判包君倚仗以前的资历，擅自到老百姓家里闹事，打十棍。
English: Alone, he showed the trial report to Li Xun. Li Xun thought that the unfairness of his sentence was only based on the original status of the local heroes. He changed the sentence to Bao Jun's previous qualifications, went to the homes of ordinary people without authorization to cause trouble, and beat him with ten sticks.

古文：决臂杖十下。土豪以前当县官，罚二十功。
现代文：土豪以前当过县官，罚做二十天工。
English: The local strongman had previously been a county official, and was punished by having to do twenty days of labor.

古文：从事宾客，无不陈说。郎亦力争之，竟不能得。
现代文：从事和幕僚等官员都为包君说话，独孤也极力为包君争辩，然而竟没有效果。
English: Officials such as practitioners and staff members all spoke for Bao Jun, and one person alone also tried his best to argue for Bao Jun, but to no avail.

古文：包君妻兄在扬州闻之，奔波过浙江，见李公。涕泣论列其妹冤死之状。
现代文：包君妻子的哥哥在扬州听到判决结果，从远处赶来浙东求见李逊，哭着述说妹妹冤死的惨状。
English: When Bao Jun's wife's brother heard the verdict in Yangzhou, he came from far away to East Zhejiang to see Li Xun, crying and recounting the tragedy of his sister's wrongful death.

古文：李公大怒，以为客唁，决脊杖二十，递于他界。
现代文：李逊大怒，认为他是来作说客，打了他脊背二十棍，将他赶出州界。
English: Li Xun flew into a rage, thinking that he had come to be a lobbyist. He hit him on the back of the neck with twenty sticks and drove him out of the state.

古文：自淮南无不称其冤异。
现代文：淮南一带没有不认为这个案子断得冤枉奇怪的。
English: There is no one in the Huainan area who does not think that this case is unjustified and strange.

古文：郎自此托疾请罢。
现代文：独孤托病辞职了。
English: He resigned due to illness.

古文：时孟尚书简任常州刺史。常与越近，具熟其事。
现代文：当时尚书孟简任常州刺史，经常到浙东附近，对这件事知道得很清楚。
English: At that time, Shang Shu, Meng Jianren, the historian of Changzhou, often went to the vicinity of East Zhejiang, and knew this matter very well.

古文：明年，替李公为浙东观察使。乃先以帖，令录此土豪一门十余口。
现代文：第二年，他接替李逊担任浙东观察使，便先送出名片，命令逮捕土豪一家十多口人。
English: The following year, he succeeded Li Xun as the Eastern Zhejiang Observer, and he first sent out his business card and ordered the arrest of more than ten members of a local powerful family.

古文：到才数日，李公尚未发，尽毙于州。
现代文：孟简到任以后没过几天，李逊还没有走，就把土豪一家十多口人处死了。
English: A few days after Meng Jian took office, and before Li Xun left, he executed more than ten members of a local powerful family.

古文：厚以资币赠包君。
现代文：他还赠送给包君许多钱物。
English: He also gave Bao Jun a lot of money.

古文：数州之人闻者，莫不庆快矣。
现代文：几个州的人们听到这个消息，没有不庆贺叫好的。
English: People in several states cheered when they heard the news.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕出镇浙右日，有甘露寺主事僧，诉交代得常住什物，被前主事僧隐用却常住金若干两。
现代文：李德裕镇守浙右的时候，有一个甘露寺管事和尚未告状，说庙里的一些物品被前管事和尚隐藏使用了，还贪污了金子若干两。
English: When Li Deyu was in charge of Zhejiang Province, there was a steward of the Kanlu Temple who had not yet filed a complaint, saying that some items in the temple had been hidden and used by the former steward monk, and that he had also embezzled a certain amount of gold.

古文：引证前数辈，皆有递相交割传领，文籍分明。众词皆指以新得替引隐而用之。
现代文：前几任管事和尚，全都有交接文书，记载得十分清楚明白，大家还以为是他这个新的管事给藏起来使用了。
English: The previous stewards and monks all had handover documents, which were recorded very clearly, and everyone thought that the new steward had hidden them for his own use.

古文：且云，初上之时，交领分两既明，及交割之日，不见其金，鞠成具狱，伏罪昭然。
现代文：并且还说：我要管事时，准备接交的东西的种类和数量很明确，等到正式交接那一天，却不见金子。于是立案审查，原来的和尚伏罪。
English: He also said: "When I was in charge, the type and quantity of things to be handed over was very clear. However, when it came to the day of the official handover, there was no gold. Therefore, the case was filed for review, and the original monk was found guilty.

古文：然未穷破用之所。或以僧人不拘僧行而费之，以无理可伸，甘之死地。
现代文：事情很清楚，只是没有查清金子藏在什么地方，只好认定是那个和尚不守戒律花费了。和尚也无法申诉，只好等死。
English: It was very clear, but they couldn't find out where the gold was hidden, so they had to conclude that the monk had spent it without following the precepts. The monk couldn't appeal, so he had to wait until he died.

古文：一旦引宪之际，公疑其未尽，微以意揣之，人乃具实以闻曰：居寺者乐于知事，前后主之者，积年已来，空放分两文书，其实无金矣。群众以某孤立，不杂洽辈流，欲乘此挤排之。
现代文：等到判决这一天，李德裕怀疑这个案子还没有十分清楚，便重新同那个原来的管事和尚谈话。和尚告诉他实情说：庙里的和尚愿意管事，前后那些管事的和尚，多年以来，凭空书写和公布金子的数字和帐目，其实没有金子，大家都孤立我，因为我不和他们同流合污，他们就乘机排挤我。
English: On the day of the verdict, Li Deyu suspected that the case was not completely clear, so he resumed his conversation with the original steward monk. The monk told him the truth: the monk in the temple was willing to be in charge. For many years, those monks in charge had been writing and publishing the numbers and accounts of gold out of thin air. In fact, there was no gold. Everyone isolated me. Because I did not join them, they took the opportunity to push me out.

古文：乃立促召兜子数乘，命关连僧人对事，咸遣坐兜子。下帘子毕，指挥门下不令相见，命取黄泥，各令模前后交付下次金样以凭证据。
现代文：让和尚都坐在轿子，放下帘子，相互无法看见。然后指挥部下拿来黄泥，让每一个和尚捏出各自经手交接过的金子的模型，以便作为证据。
English: Let the monks all sit in the palanquin, let down the curtain, so that they cannot see each other, and then command your subordinates to bring the yellow mud, and let each monk squeeze out a model of the gold that has passed through their hands, so that it can be used as evidence.

古文：僧既不知形段，竟模不成。
现代文：和尚们既然不知道金子的大小和形状，所以也就捏不成。
English: Since the monks did not know the size and shape of the gold, they could not make it.

古文：公怒，令劾前数辈等，皆一一伏罪。
现代文：李德裕很生气，命令起诉前几任管事和尚，这些和尚都一一认了罪。
English: Li Deyu was very angry and ordered the prosecution of the previous officials and monks, who all pleaded guilty.

古文：其所排者，遂获清雪。
现代文：那个受排挤的和尚，得到了澄清昭雪。
English: The ousted monk has been cleared.

古文：裴休裴休尚古好奇，掌纶诰日，有亲表调授邑宰于曲阜者。
现代文：裴休裴休尚古好奇，掌纶诰日，有亲表调授邑宰于曲阜者。
English: Pei Xiu Pei Xiu is curious about ancient times. On the day of the handshake, there was a cousin who was transferred to Qufu.

古文：土人垦田，得古器曰盎，腹容三斗，浅项痹足，规口矩耳，朴素古丑，将蠹土壤者。
现代文：土人垦田，得古器曰盎，腹容三斗，浅项痹足，规口矩耳，朴素古丑，将蠹土壤者。
English: The native people of Putian, who obtained the ancient vessel of one ounce, a stomach capacity of three buckets, shallow shoulders and feet, a straight mouth and ears, simplicity and ancient ugliness, will plow the soil.

古文：既洗涤之后，磨垄之，隐隐有古篆九字带盎之腰。
现代文：既洗涤之后，磨垄之，隐隐有古篆九字带盎之腰。
English: After washing, it is worn with a ridge, and there is a hint of an old-fashioned belt around the waist.

古文：曲阜令不能辩。
现代文：曲阜令不能辩。
English: The Qufu Decree cannot be disputed.

古文：兖州有书生姓鲁，能八体书字者，召致于邑，出盎示之，曰：此大篆也。
现代文：兖州有书生姓鲁，能八体书字者，召致于邑，出盎示之，曰：此大篆也。
English: In Zhangzhou, a scholar surnamed Lu, who was able to write eight characters, was summoned to the town and said, "This is a big mistake.

古文：非今之所行者，虽某颇尝学之。
现代文：非今之所行者，虽某颇尝学之。
English: Those who practice what they don't know, though they may have learned a lot.

古文：是九字曰：齐桓公会于葵丘岁铸。
现代文：是九字曰：齐桓公会于葵丘岁铸。
English: It is a nine-character saying: The Qihuan Guild was founded in the year of Kwai Chung.

古文：邑宰大奇其说。
现代文：邑宰大奇其说。
English: The mayor said with surprise.

古文：及以篆验，则字势存焉。
现代文：及以篆验，则字势存焉。
English: And if it is verified, then the power of the word is still there.

古文：及辇致河东公之门，公以为麟经时物，得以言古矣，宝之犹钟玦郜鼎也。
现代文：及辇致河东公之门，公以为麟经时物，得以言古矣，宝之犹钟玦郜鼎也。
English: and the gate of the public in Hedong, the public thought that it was a time-honored thing, and it could be said that it was ancient, and the treasure of the clock was also high.

古文：视草之暇，辄引亲友之分深者观之。
现代文：视草之暇，辄引亲友之分深者观之。
English: It is regarded by those who regard leisure time as a waste of time, and those who regard it as a distraction from relatives and friends.

古文：以是京华声为至宝。
现代文：以是京华声为至宝。
English: The voice of Beijing Huasheng is the most precious treasure.

古文：公后以小宗伯掌贡举，生徒有以盎宝为请者。
现代文：公后以小宗伯掌贡举，生徒有以盎宝为请者。
English: After the ceremony, tributes were offered in the form of small Buddhist palms, and some students asked for ounces of gold.

古文：裴公一日设食，会门弟子，出器于庭，则离立环观，迭词以质。
现代文：裴公一日设食，会门弟子，出器于庭，则离立环观，迭词以质。
English: Pei Gong set a meal for a day, and the disciples of the association, who presented the utensils in the court, stood apart from the ring view, and repeated the words with quality.

古文：独刘舍人蜕以为非当时之物，近世矫作也。
现代文：独刘舍人蜕以为非当时之物，近世矫作也。
English: In Germany, Liu She thought that it was not something of the time, and it was also a pretentiousness of the modern world.

古文：公不悦曰： 果有说乎？ 
现代文：公不悦曰：果有说乎？
English: Gongfu Rong said, "Do you really want to talk about it?

古文：紫微曰： 某幼专丘明之书，具载小白桓公九合诸侯，取威定霸，葵丘之会第八盟。
现代文：紫微曰：某幼专丘明之书，具载小白桓公九合诸侯，取威定霸，葵丘之会第八盟。
English: Zi Wei said, "A book written by a young scholar named Qiu Ming, contains the stories of the nine concubines of Xiao Baihakun, the capture of Widingba, and the eighth league of the Kwai Chiu Association."

古文：又按礼经，诸侯五月而葬，同盟至，既葬，然后反虞，虞然后卒哭，卒哭然后定谥。
现代文：又按礼经，诸侯五月而葬，同盟至，既葬，然后反虞，虞然后卒哭，卒哭然后定谥。
English: According to the etiquette, the lords were buried in May, the allies arrived, they were buried, and then they rebelled, and then the rebels wept, and then they wept, and then the battle was decided.

古文：则葵丘之役，实在生前，不得以谥称。
现代文：则葵丘之役，实在生前，不得以谥称。
English: On the other hand, the Battle of Kwai Chung, while he was still alive, must not be called a sham.

古文：此乃近世之矫作也。
现代文：此乃近世之矫作也。
English: This is a modern affectation.

古文：裴公恍然而悟，命击碎，然后举爵尽饮而罢。
现代文：裴公恍然而悟，命击碎，然后举爵尽饮而罢。
English: Pei Gong suddenly realized, his life was shattered, and then he drank as much as he could.

古文：崔碣
现代文：裴休
English: Pei Xiu

古文：崔碣任河南尹，惩奸剪暴，为天下吏师。
现代文：裴休崇尚喜爱珍奇的古董。他负责管理皇帝的诏书的时候，他的一个表亲调任曲阜邑宰。
English: When he was in charge of the imperial rescript, one of his cousins was transferred to be the governor of Qufu.

古文：先是有估客王可久者，膏腴之室。
现代文：当地农民开荒耕地的时候，挖出一件古代器物，名字叫做盎。这个盎的容积大约三斗，短脖鸟足，圆口方耳，古朴笨重。
English: When the local farmers ploughed the wasteland, they dug up an ancient artifact called an ounce. This ounce has a volume of about three buckets, a short neck and bird's feet, a round mouth and square ears, and is quaint and bulky.

古文：岁鬻茗于江湖间，常获丰利而归。
现代文：将上面的泥土洗掉以后，磨擦干净，在盎的腰部隐约显现出九个古篆字，曲阜的县令也不认识。
English: After washing off the top soil, the friction is clean, and nine ancient characters are faintly visible in the waist of the ounce, and the county ordinance of Qufu is not known.

古文：是年，又笈贿适楚，始返楫于彭门，值庞勋作乱，阱于寇域，逾期不归。
现代文：兖州有个书生姓鲁，能用八种字体写字。将这个书生找来，拿出盎让他辨认。他说：这是大篆，不是现在仍然使用的字体，我曾经学过。
English: There is a student in Zhangzhou, surnamed Lu, who can write in eight different fonts. Find this student, take out the ounce and let him identify it. He said: This is a large font, not a font that is still in use, I once learned it.

古文：有妻美少，且无伯仲息裔之属。
现代文：这九个字是齐桓公会于葵丘岁铸。
English: These nine characters were cast by the Qihuan Guild in Kwai Chung.

古文：妻常善价募人，访于贼境之四裔，竟无究其迹者。
现代文：邑宰对他说的话感到很惊奇，等到拿来篆体字的书籍来对照检验，觉得字迹的笔画相似。
English: He was surprised by what he heard, but when he compared the handwriting with that of books written in Braille, he found that the strokes were similar.

古文：或曰：已戕于盗，帑其货矣。
现代文：邑宰用车把盎送到河东裴休家里。裴休以为是春秋时代的器物，非常珍爱，视同国宝。
English: Byzai used a cart to deliver the ounce to the home of Pei Xiu of Hedong. Pei Xiu thought it was a Spring and Autumn Period artifact, very precious, and regarded it as a national treasure.

古文：洛城有杨乾夫者善卜称。妻晨持一缣，决疑于彼。
现代文：他在修改皇帝的诏书以后的空闲时间，特意请感情比较深的亲戚朋友前来观赏，从此被人们称为京城里的至宝。
English: In his free time after revising the emperor's edict, he specially invited relatives and friends with deeper feelings to come and watch, and has since been known as the most precious treasure in the capital.

古文：杨生素熟其事，且利其财，思以计中之。
现代文：后来他以礼部侍郎的身份主管科举考试，学生中有人要求观赏他收藏的盎。
English: Later, when he was in charge of the imperial examinations as a chamberlain of the etiquette club, some students asked to see his collection of ounces.

古文：乃为端蓍虔祝，六位既兆，则曰：所忧岂非伉俪耶？
现代文：有一天他摆酒宴，请来学生弟子到家里聚会，将盎拿出来摆在院子，大家围着鉴赏。
English: One day, he held a wine banquet, invited students and disciples to gather at home, took out the ounces and placed them in the yard, and everyone gathered around to appreciate them.

古文：是人绝气久矣。象见坟墓矣。
现代文：只有中书舍人刘蜕认为不是春秋时的器物，而是近代伪造的赝品。
English: Only Liu Wei, a Chinese calligrapher, believes that it is not a spring and autumn utensil, but a modern fake.

古文：遇劫杀与身并矣。
现代文：裴休不高兴地说：有什么根据吗？
English: Pei Xiu said with displeasure: Is there any basis for this?

古文：妻号啕将去，即又勉之曰：阳鸟已晚，幸择良晨，清旭更问，当为再祝。妻诚信之。他日，复往算，宛得前卦。
现代文：刘蜕说：我从前专门学习过历史文献，上面记载齐桓公小白九次召集各路诸侯，树立威信，定下霸主地位。
English: Liu Wei said, "I used to study historical documents. It is recorded in the documents that King Qigong Xiao Bai convened the princes of various provinces nine times to establish prestige and hegemony.

古文：乃曰：神也异也，无复望也。
现代文：葵丘这次聚会是第八次结盟。
English: Kwai Chung This gathering is the eighth alliance.

古文：仍言号恸非所以成礼者，第择日举哀，绘佛饭僧，以资冥福。
现代文：又据《礼经》记载，诸侯五月安葬桓公小白，结成同盟的各路诸侯到了，就开始进行埋葬，然后举行拜祭，拜祭以后是早晨和晚上哭丧，哭丧以后确定追封谥号。
English: According to the "Book of Rites," the princes buried Huan Gong Xiaobai in May, and when the allied princes arrived, they began the burial, and then held a worship service. After the worship service, there was a mourning in the morning and evening. After the mourning, it was decided to seal the imperial seal.

古文：妻且悲且愧，以为诚言，无巨细事，一以托之。
现代文：然而葵丘聚会确是齐桓公小白生前的事情，那时还没有得到谥号，所以这是一件近代伪造的赝品。
English: However, the Kwai Chuk gathering did indeed take place during the lifetime of King Qi Kuanxiao Bai. At that time, it had not yet been given a nickname, so it is a modern forgery.

古文：杨生主办，雅竭其志。
现代文：裴休恍然大悟，命令人把盎打碎，然后举起酒杯一饮而尽。
English: Pei Xiu suddenly realized that he was ordered to break the ounce, and then he lifted the glass and drank it.

古文：则又谓曰：妇人茕独，而衷财贿，寇盗方炽，身之灾也，宜割爱以谋安适。
现代文：崔碣
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：妻初不纳，夕则飞砾以惧之，昼则声寇以危之，次则役媒以饵之。
现代文：崔碣担任河南尹，他惩治坏人和恶霸势力，成为天下官员的榜样。
English: Cui Wei served as the Yin of Henan Province. He punished bad people and bullies and became a role model for officials around the world.

古文：妻多杨之义，遂许嫁焉。杨生既遂志，乃籍所有，雄据厚产。
现代文：有个贩卖货物的商人叫王可久，家庭非常富裕美满，每年在各地贩卖茶叶，经常赚很多钱回家。这一年，他又带了很多茶叶到长江中下游一带销售。
English: There was a merchant named Wang Kejiu who sold goods. His family was very rich and happy. Every year, he sold tea all over the country and often made a lot of money back home. This year, he also brought a lot of tea to sell in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：又逾月，皆货旧业，挈妻卜居乐渠之北。
现代文：这一天，他乘船到了彭门，正赶上庞勋领兵叛乱，于是被阻隔在贼兵控制的地区，超过了预定的日期回家。
English: On this day, he took a boat to Pengmen, just in time to catch the rebellion of Pang Xun's army leader, so he was blocked in the area controlled by the bandits and went home beyond the scheduled date.

古文：明年，徐州平，天下洗兵，诏大憝就擒外，胁从其间者，宥而不问，给篆为信，纵归田里。
现代文：他的妻子年轻貌美，没有兄弟子女和亲属。她几次花钱雇人到贼兵占领的地区四处寻找丈夫，都没有查访到王可久的踪迹。
English: His wife is young and beautiful, with no brothers, children or relatives. She has paid several times to hire people to travel around the area occupied by the bandits to look for her husband, but no trace of Wang Kegui has been found.

古文：可久髡裸而返，瘠瘁疥秽，丐食于路。
现代文：有的人回来说她丈夫已经被强盗杀死了，把钱和货物抢走了。
English: Some came back to say her husband had been killed by robbers who took the money and goods.

古文：至则访其庐舍，已易主矣。曲讯妻室，不知其所。
现代文：第二年，徐州的战乱平息，天下没有了战争。皇帝发布命令，只把发动战乱的贼兵头领抓住法办，其余的胁从者不加追究，并且发给证明，释放回家。
English: In the second year, the war in Xuzhou subsided and there was no war in the world. The emperor issued an order to arrest and bring to justice only the leaders of the bandits who had started the war. The rest of the followers of the bandits would not be investigated, and they would be given a certificate and released to go home.

古文：展转饥寒，循路哀叫。
现代文：王可久空手而返，饥寒贫病，一路要饭，回到家里时，房屋已经换了主人。
English: Wang Ke long returned empty-handed, hungry, cold and poor, asking for food all the way. When he returned home, the house had changed owners.

古文：渐有人知者，因指其新居。见妻及杨，肆目门首，欲为揖认，则诃杖诟辱，仅以身免。
现代文：他询问妻子的下落，人们不知道，他遭受不了奔走饥寒的打击，在路上哭喊，有知道情况的人，告诉他妻子的新住址。他去找妻子和杨乾夫，站在门口，想要和妻子相认，杨乾夫骂他，污辱他，并且用棍子打他，他只好逃走。
English: He inquired about his wife's whereabouts. People didn't know. He couldn't bear the cold and hunger. He cried on the road. Someone who knew the situation told him about his wife's new address. He went to his wife and Yang Qianfu. He stood at the door and wanted to recognize his wife. Yang Qianfu cursed him, insulted him, and beat him with a stick. He had to run away.

古文：妻愕眙以异，复制于杨。
现代文：妻子非常惊奇，制止了杨乾夫的行为。
English: His wife was very surprised and stopped Yang Qianfu's behavior.

古文：可久不堪其冤，诉于公府。
现代文：王可久无法忍受冤屈，去官府告状。
English: Unable to bear the grievance for a long time, Wang Kegui went to the government to file a complaint.

古文：及法司按劾，杨生贿赂已行，取证于妻，遂诬其妄。
现代文：等到官府开始审理时，杨乾夫已经送上了贿赂。办案官员去他妻子那里取了证据，然后诬蔑王可久狂妄。
English: By the time the authorities began the trial, Yang Qianfu had already sent the bribe. The case officer went to his wife to take evidence, and then slandered Wang Kegui as arrogant.

古文：时属尹正长厚不能辨奸，以诬人之罪加之。
现代文：河南尹正长厚不能辨别真伪善恶，给王可久加上了诬陷的罪名，将他打了一顿。
English: Henan Yin Zheng Changhuo could not distinguish between truth and falsehood, good and evil, and he accused Wang Kejiu of frame-up and beat him up.

古文：痛绳其背，肩扶出疆。
现代文：王可久扶着别人的肩膀回去。
English: Wang Kegui held someone else's shoulders as he walked back.

古文：可久冤楚相萦，殆将溘尽，命丝未绝，洛尹改更，则衔血赍冤于新政，亦不能辨。
现代文：他饱受冤屈，就要支持不下去了。也许他命不该绝，来了新任洛尹。王可久又去告状，仍然没有得到正确的判决。
English: He suffered a lot of grievances and could not continue to support him. Perhaps his life was not worth dying for, the new Luo Yin came. Wang Kegui went to sue again, but still did not get the right verdict.

古文：前所鞠吏，得以肆其毒于簧言。且曰：以狱讼旧政者，汉律在焉。则又裂膐，配邑之遐者，隶执重役。
现代文：以前办案的官员对他百般污蔑，说：诬告前任官员，按照汉朝延续下来的法律，要车裂砍脚，发配远地，应该罚作苦役。
English: The officials who handled the case before slandered him in various ways, saying: "According to the laws that were passed down from the Han Dynasty, if you falsely accuse a former official, you should have your feet chopped off, be sent to a distant place, and be punished with hard labor."

古文：可久双眦流血，两目枯焉。
现代文：王可久哭得两眼流血，快要瞎了。
English: Wang Ke cried for a long time and his eyes bled. He was about to go blind.

古文：时博陵公伊人燕居，备聆始卒。
现代文：这时博陵公崔碣退朝闲居在家，对王可久的冤情了解得很清楚。
English: At this time, Boling Gong Cui Yao retired to idle at home, and he clearly understood Wang Ke's long-standing grievances.

古文：天启良便，再领三川。
现代文：上天发了慈悲，行了方便，朝廷又启用崔碣为河南尹，办理案件的官员都很害怕他。
English: Heaven sent mercy, it was convenient, and the court appointed Cui Wei as Henan Yin. The officials handling the case were all afraid of him.

古文：狱吏屏息，覆盆举矣。揽辔观风之三日，潜命就役所，出可久以至。乃敕吏掩乾夫一家，兼素鞠胥，同梏其颈。
现代文：王可久的案件又重新提了出来，崔碣决心澄清吏治，调查了解了三天以后，秘密到监狱里把王可久叫出来，然后命令突然逮捕杨乾夫全家，同原来审理案件的官员一同关进监狱。
English: Wang Keku's case was brought up again, and Cui Rong was determined to clarify the authority. After three days of investigation and understanding, he secretly went to the prison to call Wang Keku out, and then ordered the sudden arrest of Yang Qianfu's entire family and put them in prison together with the officials who originally tried the case.

古文：且命可久暗籍家之服玩，物所存尚夥，而鞠吏贿赂，丑迹昭焉。
现代文：并且暗中命令王可久清点家产，贵重器物还剩下不少。原来审理案件官员收受贿赂的罪行也调查清楚了。
English: Moreover, Wang Kekiu was secretly ordered to liquidate some family assets, and there are still many valuable items left. The crime of accepting bribes by the officials who originally tried the case has also been investigated.

古文：既捶其胁，复血其背，然后擢发折足，同瘗一坎。
现代文：崔碣命令对他们施加重刑，用棍子打前胸和后背，然后揪着头发把腿打断，全都埋在一个坑。
English: Cui Gan ordered to inflict heavy punishment on them, beat them on the chest and back with a stick, then cut off their legs by pulling their hair, and bury them all in a pit.

古文：收录家产，手授可久。
现代文：又把他们的家产没收，送给王可久。
English: He also confiscated their family property and gave it to Wang Kegui.

古文：时离毕作冷，衣云复郁。断狱之日，阳轮洞开，通逵相庆，有出涕者。
现代文：当时天气很冷，阴云覆盖，重新判决这一天，突然日出天晴，满街是欢庆的人们。有的人激动地哭了。
English: It was very cold and overcast, and on the day of the re-sentencing, the sun suddenly came out and the streets were full of people celebrating. Some people cried with excitement.

古文：沉冤积愤，大亨畅于是曰。
现代文：沉积的冤情和愤怒都在这一天得到了澄清和发泄。
English: All the accumulated grievances and anger were clarified and vented on this day.

古文：古之循吏，孰能拟诸。
现代文：人们说：从古到今的官员，有谁能比得上博陵公崔碣！
English: People say: Of all the officials from ancient times to the present, who can be compared to Bolinggong Cui Yong!

古文：赵和
现代文：赵和
English: Zhao and

古文：咸通初，有天水赵和者任江阴令，以片言折狱著声。犹是累宰剧邑，皆以雪冤获优考。
现代文：唐朝咸通初年，天水的赵和担任江阴县令。他平素以用非常简要的程序和语言判明复杂的案件出名，所以多次出任政务繁重的县的县令，全都因澄清了许多冤案而受到高度评价。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhao He of Tianshui served as the county magistrate of Jiangyin County. He was famous for using very simple procedures and language to solve complex cases. Therefore, he repeatedly served as the county magistrate of counties with heavy government affairs. All of them were highly praised for clarifying many unjust cases.

古文：至于疑似晦伪之事，悉能以情理之。
现代文：不论什么复杂曲折的案件，他全能调查处理得清楚明白。
English: No matter what the twists and turns of a case, his all-hands-on-deck investigations are crisp and clear.

古文：时有楚州淮阴农，比庄俱以丰岁而货殖焉。
现代文：当时楚州淮阴有个农民，他们村里的人都因为丰收有钱而去经商。
English: At that time, there was a farmer in Huaiyin, Chuzhou. People in their village went into business because of the rich harvest.

古文：其东邻则拓腴田数百亩。
现代文：他的东邻则购买了数百亩肥沃的田地。
English: His neighbor to the east bought hundreds of acres of fertile farmland.

古文：资镪未满，因以庄券质于西邻，货缗百万，契书显验。
现代文：但是买地的钱不够，他便把庄园房产的契据抵押给西邻，借贷了一百万文钱。
English: However, he did not have enough money to buy the land, so he mortgaged the deed of the manor property to his western neighbor and borrowed one million yuan.

古文：且言来岁赍本利以赎。
现代文：交付检验了契据，说明第二年带上本钱和利息去赎回契据。
English: Delivery checked the deed, indicating that the second year to bring the principal and interest to redeem the deed.

古文：至期，果以腴田获利甚博，备财赎契，先纳八百缗。第检置契书。
现代文：到了约定的日期，东邻果然因为买来的土地肥沃，收获了很高的利润。他带着钱去赎契据，先交纳了八十万文，并且验看了契约，准备第二天把钱交齐，换回契据。
English: On the agreed date, Dongnim really reaped a high profit because the land he bought was fertile. He took the money to redeem the deed, first paid eight hundred thousand yuan, and inspected the contract, ready to pay the money the next day and exchange it for the deed.

古文：期明日以残资换券。所隔信宿，且恃通家，因不征纳缗之籍。
现代文：因为只隔一两宿，又是世交，所以东邻没有向西邻索要已经交纳的八十万文的收据。
English: Because only one or two lodgings separated them, and because they were world friends, the eastern neighbor did not ask the western neighbor for a receipt for the 800,000 mon already paid.

古文：明日，赍余镪至，遂为西邻不认。
现代文：第二天，他拿够了剩余那部分数额的钱去西邻家。
English: The next day, he took the rest of the money and went to his neighbor's house.

古文：且以无保证，又乏簿籍，终为所拒。
现代文：西邻竟不承认他已经交纳了八十万文，因为没有证明，所以西邻一直拒绝交还契据。
English: However, the neighbour did not admit that he had already paid the 800,000 yuan. Since there was no proof, the neighbour has refused to return the deed.

古文：东邻冤诉于县。县为追勘，无以证明。
现代文：东邻去县衙告状，县衙进行调查，但找不到证据。
English: The eastern neighbor went to the county to lodge a complaint, and the county magistrate conducted an investigation, but no evidence was found.

古文：宰邑谓曰：诚疑尔冤，其如官中所赖者券，乏此以证，何术理之？
现代文：宰邑对他说：实在怀疑你是冤枉的，他赖帐不交还契据，但是缺乏证据，有什么办法处理呢？
English: The zaiyu said to him, "I really suspect that you are wrong. He refuses to return the deed because of debts, but there is a lack of evidence. What can be done about it?"

古文：复诉于州。州不能理。
现代文：他又去州府告状，州府也无法审理。
English: He also went to the state to file a complaint, but the state was unable to hear the case.

古文：东邻不胜其愤。远聆江阴善听讼者，乃越江而南诉于赵宰。
现代文：他无法忍受心中的愤怒，听说江阴县衙善于正确断案，便过江向南面的江阴县令赵和起诉。
English: Unable to bear the anger in his heart, he heard that Zou of Jiangyin County was good at correctly adjudicating cases, so he crossed the river to the south of Jiangyin County to prosecute Zhao He.

古文：赵宰谓曰：县政地卑，且复逾境，何计奉雪？
现代文：起和说：县一级的衙门级别低，并且超越了我们管辖地界，有什么办法为你昭雪呢？
English: He said: The county-level gate is low-level, and it exceeds our jurisdictional boundaries. What can we do for you?

古文：东邻则冤泣曰：此地不得理，无由自涤也。
现代文：他哭着说：你们这里如果不给审理，我就没有办法伸冤了。
English: He cried and said, "If you don't give me a trial here, I won't be able to get justice."

古文：赵曰：诚如是言，当为实法。
现代文：赵和说：如果真像你说的，应当为你执法。
English: Zhao He said, "If it is as you say, I should enforce the law for you."

古文：乃召捕贼之干者数辈，赍牒牒至淮壖，曰：有啸聚而寇江者，案劾已具。
现代文：于是赵和召集了几个捕贼办案的能手，带着公文来到淮壖，对西邻说：有一伙聚集在长江常抢劫的土匪，案件已经调查审理结束。
English: So Zhao He gathered a few experts in catching thieves to handle the case, came to Huai'an with official documents, and said to the western neighbors: There is a group of bandits gathered in the Yangtze River to rob, and the investigation and trial of the case has ended.

古文：言有同恶相济者，在某处居，名姓形状，具以西邻指之，请梏送至此。
现代文：其中有人供认有同伙帮助作恶，居住在某地，长相姓名，指的就是你，所以要把你逮捕带走。
English: One of them confessed that he had an accomplice who helped him commit the crime, lived in a certain place, had the same name and appearance as you, so he wanted to arrest you and take you away.

古文：先是邻州条法，唯持刀截江，无得藏匿。追牒至彼，果擒以还。
现代文：我们邻州的法律规定，唯独是对持刀在江上抢劫的，不允许藏匿不究，所以带公文追捕到这，果然抓到了你。
English: According to the laws of our neighboring state, only those who hold a knife and rob on the river are not allowed to hide without investigation, so we chased them here with official documents and finally caught you.

古文：然自恃无迹，未甚知惧。
现代文：西邻倚仗自己并无劣迹，所以不怎么害怕。
English: The western neighbors have no bad record of relying on themselves, so they are not very afraid.

古文：至则旅于庭下。赵厉声谓曰：幸耕织自活，何为寇江？
现代文：等到被带到县衙大堂上，赵和厉声说道：有条件自己耕种织布生活，为什么要作江上的强盗？
English: When he was brought to the hall of the county magistrate's office, Zhao He Liang said in a loud voice: If you have the conditions to cultivate and weave your own life, why do you want to be a robber on the river?

古文：囚则朗叫泪随曰：稼穑之夫，未尝舟楫。
现代文：西邻大声哭叫说：种田的人，没有上过船。
English: The western neighbour cried out in a loud voice: "The farmer has never been on a boat.

古文：赵又曰：证词甚具，姓氏无差，或言伪而坚，则血肤取实。
现代文：赵和又说：供词非常具体明白，姓名也没有差错，你还要狡猾抵赖，则必须使用重刑迫使你招认。
English: Zhao He also said: The confession is very specific and clear, and there is no mistake in the name. If you still want to cunningly deny, you must use heavy punishment to force you to confess.

古文：囚则大恐，叩头见血，如不胜其冤者。
现代文：西邻非常恐惧，把头磕出了血，似乎是非常冤屈的样子。
English: The western neighbour was very frightened and scratched his head until it bled. He seemed to be very aggrieved.

古文：赵又曰：所盗幸多金宝锦彩，非农家所实蓄者，汝宜籍舍之产以辩之。
现代文：赵和又说：所抢劫偷盗的东西幸好大都是金银珠宝和绸缎布匹，不是农家所购买和积存的东西，你可以申报你的财产来进行核实辩护。
English: Zhao He also said: Fortunately, most of the things that were robbed and stolen were gold, silver, jewelry and silk and satin fabrics, not things that farmers bought and accumulated. You can declare your property to verify and defend.

古文：囚意稍解。
现代文：西邻稍微缓解了一点恐惧的心理。
English: West Neighbors has eased some of the fear.

古文：遂详开所贮者，且不虞东邻之越讼也。
现代文：详细开列了自己财产的清单，一点也没有料到东邻越境诉讼这一招。
English: He made a detailed list of his property and did not expect the move of cross-border litigation by the eastern neighbor.

古文：乃言稻若干斛，庄客某甲等纳到者；绢若千匹，家机所出者；钱若士贯，东邻赎契者；银器若干件，匠某锻成者。
现代文：他交待有稻米若干斛，是佃尸某些人交纳的；绸绢若干匹。是自己家用织机织的；有钱若干贯，是东邻交来赎契据的；银器若干件，是某银匠给加工制做的。
English: He reported that he had several bags of rice, which were paid for by some people; several yarns of silk, which were woven by his own home loom; several yarns, which were paid for by his neighbors; and several pieces of silverware, which were made by a silversmith.

古文：赵宰大喜。即再审其实。谓曰：如果非寇江者，何谓讳东邻所赎八百千，遂引诉邻，令其偶证。
现代文：赵和大喜，便进一步核查落实，对他说：如果不是在江上抢劫的强盗，你为什么隐匿东邻所赎契据的八十万文钱？于是把告状的东邻叫出来和他对质。
English: Zhao and Daxi further checked the implementation and said to him: If you are not a robber who robs on the river, why did you hide the 800,000 yuan of the deed of redemption from the eastern neighbor? Then the eastern neighbor of the complaint was called out to confront him.

古文：于是惭惧失色，祈死厅前。
现代文：这下子西邻又惭愧又害怕，脸上变了颜色，在厅上请求恕罪饶命。
English: At this moment, the western neighbor was ashamed and afraid, his face changed color, and he begged for forgiveness in the hall.

古文：赵令梏往本土，检付契书，然后实之于法。
现代文：赵和命令把他押回家去，检查交还契据，然后按刑法罚处。
English: Zhao He ordered him to go home, check and return the deed, and then punish him according to the criminal law.

古文：刘崇龟
现代文：刘崇龟
English: Liu Chongke

古文：刘崇龟镇南海之岁，有富商子少年而白皙，稍殊于稗贩之伍。泊船于江。
现代文：刘崇龟镇守南海那一年，有一个富商的儿子年轻而且长得白晰，不同于一般贱买贵卖的商人，一天他的船停靠在江边，岸上有一座住宅。
English: In the year that Liu Chongke was in charge of the South China Sea, there was a rich merchant's son who was young and white-haired. He was different from the average merchant who bought and sold cheaply. One day, his ship docked on the river and there was a house on the shore.

古文：岸上有门楼，中见一姬年二十余，艳态妖容，非常所睹。
现代文：里面有一个女子，年龄有二十多岁，长得非常美丽妖艳，不是平常所能见到的。
English: There was a woman inside, in her twenties, very beautiful and glamorous, something you don't usually see.

古文：亦不避人，得以纵其目逆。
现代文：这个女子不躲避人。所以富商的儿子得以和她交换目光眉来眼去。
English: The woman doesn't shy away, so the wealthy businessman's son is able to exchange glances with her.

古文：乘便复言，某黄昏当诣宅矣。
现代文：并乘机和她说：我傍晚到你家里去。
English: And he took the opportunity to say to her: I'll come to your house in the evening.

古文：无难色，颔之微哂而已。既昏暝，果启扉伺之。
现代文：女子面无难色，只是点头微笑，到了傍晚，这个女子果然开着门等富商的儿子。
English: The woman's face was serene, she just nodded and smiled. In the evening, the woman opened the door and waited for the rich merchant's son.

古文：比之未及赴约，有盗者径入行窃。
现代文：没等富商的儿子前来赴约，有一个小偷进来偷东西。
English: Before the son of a wealthy businessman arrived for an appointment, a thief came in to steal something.

古文：见一房无烛，即突入之。
现代文：他看到一间屋里没有点灯。
English: He saw a room with no lights on.

古文：姬即欣然而就之。
现代文：便窜了进去。那女子高兴地扑了上去。
English: He dived in and the woman jumped for joy.

古文：盗乃谓其见擒，以疱刀刺之，遗刀而逸。其家亦未之觉。
现代文：小偷以为来人抓他，便用杀猪刀刺了女子一刀，然后扔下刀跑了，女子的家人没有发觉。
English: The thief thought someone was coming to arrest him, so he stabbed the woman with a pig-killing knife, then threw down the knife and ran away. The woman's family did not notice.

古文：商客之子旋至，方入其户，即践其血，汰而仆地。
现代文：富商的儿子随后来到，一进屋就踩到鲜血上，立刻摔倒在地上。
English: The rich merchant's son then came, and as soon as he entered the house, he stepped on the blood and immediately fell to the ground.

古文：初谓其水，以手扪之，闻鲜血之气未已。
现代文：一开始他以为是水，用手一摸，闻到了一股血腥味。
English: At first he thought it was water, but when he touched it, he smelled blood.

古文：又扪着有人卧，遂走出。
现代文：接着又摸到地上躺了一个死人，便赶忙出去。
English: Then he felt a dead man lying on the ground and hurried out.

古文：径登船，一夜解维。比明，已行百余里。
现代文：直接上了船，船开了一夜，到天亮，已经驶出一百多里。
English: I got on the boat directly, the boat sailed all night, and by dawn, it had sailed more than a hundred miles.

古文：其家迹其血至江岸，遂陈状之。
现代文：女子家里的人循着血迹找到江岸。然后便向宫府报了案。
English: A member of the woman's family followed the blood trail to the riverbank and then reported the case to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：主者讼穷诘岸上居人，云：某日夜，有某客船一夜径发。
现代文：主持办案的官员普遍询问了住在江边的人，有人说某月夜晚，有某一条船夜里发出。
English: The officer in charge of handling the case generally asked people living along the river. Some people said that on a certain night, a certain boat was sent out at night.

古文：即差人追及，械于圉室，拷掠备至，具实吐之。唯不招杀人。其家以庖刀纳于府主矣。
现代文：办案官员立刻派人把富商的儿子追回，将他关到狱里严刑拷打。富商的儿子供出实情，只是不承认杀人，女子家里的人把捡到的杀人凶器。
English: The officer in charge of the case immediately sent someone to retrieve the son of the wealthy businessman, put him in prison and tortured him severely. The son and daughter of the wealthy businessman told the truth, but did not admit to the murder. The people in the woman's family took the murder weapon they had found.

古文：府主乃下令曰：某日大设，合境庖丁，宜集于球场。以候宰杀。
现代文：一把杀猪刀交到官府。郡守下命令说：某日召开盛大宴会，全境的屠夫，都要集中到球场上，等着屠宰牲口。
English: A pig-killing knife was handed over to the government. The county governor issued an order: a grand banquet would be held one day, and butchers from all over the country would gather on the field, waiting to slaughter the animals.

古文：屠者既集，乃传令曰：今日既已，可翌日而至。乃各留刀于厨而去。
现代文：屠夫们聚集以后，他又传令说：今天已经晚了，明天再来，现在各自把杀猪刀留到厨房里，空手回去。
English: After the butchers had gathered, he sent another message: "It's late today, come back tomorrow, now each of you leave your pig-killing knives in the kitchen and go back empty-handed."

古文：府主乃命取诸人刀，以杀人之刀，换下一口。
现代文：然后他又叫人把屠夫们的刀取来，用杀人那口刀换下一口。
English: Then he had the butchers' knives taken away and replaced with the murder knife.

古文：来早，各令诣衙请刀，诸人皆认本刀而去。唯一屠最在后，不肯持刀去。
现代文：第二天早晨。命令屠夫们到衙门去取刀，众人都认领了自己的刀走了，只有一个屠夫留在最后，不肯拿刀。
English: The next morning, he ordered the butchers to go to the gate to get their swords. All of them claimed their swords and left. Only one butcher remained at the end and refused to take his sword.

古文：府主乃诘之，对曰：此非某刀。
现代文：郡守问他为什么不取刀，他说：这不是我的刀。
English: The county governor asked him why he didn't take the sword, and he said, "It's not my sword.

古文：乃问其住止之处，即命擒之，则已窜矣。
现代文：又问他是谁的刀。屠夫说应该是某人的刀。
English: He also asked whose knife it was. The butcher said it must be someone's knife.

古文：于是乃以他囚之合处死者，以代商人之子。
现代文：又问清了刀的主人居住的地点。郡守立刻派人去抓，结果杀人者已经逃走了。
English: He also asked where the owner of the knife lived. The county governor immediately sent someone to catch him, but the murderer had already fled.

古文：侵夜毙之于市。窜者之家，旦夕潜令人伺之，既毙其假囚，不一两夕，果归家，即擒之。
现代文：于是郡守又命令将牢狱里应处死的犯人，假装成富商的儿子，傍晚时公开处死在市场上，逃跑的杀人犯的家属，每天早晚都探听官府的消息。既然已经将杀人犯杀了，没过一两天，杀人者就放心地回家了。
English: So the county governor also ordered that the prisoner who should be put to death in the prison, pretending to be the son of a rich merchant, be publicly executed in the evening in the market, and that the family members of the escaped murderer should listen to the news of the government every morning and evening. Since the murderer had already been killed, after a day or two, the murderer went home with confidence.

古文：具首杀人之咎，遂置于法。商人之子，夜入人家，以奸罪杖背而已。
现代文：马上就被官府抓来，他全部招认了杀人的经过，按法律被处以死刑，商人的儿子，夜入民宅，仅以通奸罪论处，打了一顿板子就释放了。
English: He was immediately arrested by the authorities. He confessed everything about the murder and was sentenced to death according to the law. The merchant's son, who entered a private home at night, was only punished for adultery and was released after a beating.

古文：彭城公之察狱，可谓明矣。
现代文：彭城公审理案件可以说是明断的。
English: The Pengcheng public trial case can be said to be conclusive.

古文：杀妻者
现代文：杀妻者
English: The wife-killer

古文：闻诸耆旧云：昔有人因他适回，见其妻为奸盗所杀。但不见其首，支体具在。既悲且惧，遂告于妻族。
现代文：听几位年纪大的朋友讲，当年有一个人出门回家，发现妻子被强盗杀死，脑袋不见了，只剩下身体，他又悲伤又害怕，及时通知了妻子家里的人。
English: According to several elderly friends, there was a man who came home from work that year and found his wife had been killed by a robber. Her head was gone, and only her body remained. He was sad and scared, and promptly informed his wife's family.

古文：妻族闻之，遂执婿而入官丞。行加诬云：尔杀吾爱女。
现代文：妻子家的人听了，把女婿抓到官府，诬陷他杀死了他们的女儿。
English: The members of his wife's family listened and took their son-in-law to the government office, accusing him of killing their daughter.

古文：狱吏严其鞭捶，莫得自明，洎不任其苦，乃自诬杀人，甘其一死。
现代文：办案人员严刑拷打，也没有调察清楚。这个人经受不住拷打，便自己诬陷自己，承认杀了妻子，甘愿被处死。
English: This man could not stand the torture, so he framed himself, confessed to killing his wife, and was willing to be executed.

古文：款案既成，皆以为不缪。郡主委诸从事，从事疑而不断。
现代文：定案以后，大家都认为审理结果没有什么问题，郡守把案件后期的处理交给一位从事办理。从事对这个案件的审理抱有怀疑，不敢决断。
English: After the case was decided, everyone thought that there was no problem with the outcome of the trial, and the county governor handed over the late handling of the case to a manager. The manager had doubts about the trial of this case and dared not make a decision.

古文：谓使君曰：某滥尘幕席，诚宜竭节。
现代文：他对郡守说：我没有多少能力，勉强充当您的幕僚，应当尽职尽责。
English: He said to the county magistrate: I don't have much ability, I can barely serve as your staff, I should do my duty.

古文：奉理人命，一死不可再生，苟或误举典刑，岂能追悔也？必请缓而穷之。
现代文：奉命处理人命案件，而人死不能再生，如果错杀了人，岂不是追悔莫及，必须要慎重处理。
English: Ordered to deal with human life cases, and human death cannot be regenerated, if you kill someone by mistake, is it not beyond remorse, and must be handled carefully.

古文：且为夫之道，孰忍杀妻？
现代文：况且作丈夫的，谁忍心杀害妻子。
English: Moreover, what husband is there that is willing to put away his wife?

古文：况义在齐眉，曷能断颈。
现代文：夫妻相亲相爱，怎么会割下对方的头颅。
English: How could a husband and wife, who loved each other, cut off each other's heads?

古文：纵有隙而害之，盍作脱祸之计也。
现代文：纵然是有矛盾要杀害，为什么不想办法逃脱追查呢？
English: Even if there is a conflict to kill, why not find a way to escape detection?

古文：或推病殒，或托暴亡，必存尸而弃首，其理甚明。
现代文：或者是推说病死了，或者是推托暴死的，何必留着尸体而扔掉脑袋呢？这里的道理很明显。
English: Or it may be inferred that he died of illness, or it may be inferred that he died violently. Why keep the body and throw away the head? The reason is obvious.

古文：使君计其谳义，从事乃别开其第，权作狴牢。
现代文：郡守同意了他的意见。从事另外找了一个地方，当作牢狱。
English: The county governor agreed with him, and set about finding another place to use as a prison.

古文：慎择司存，移此系者，细而劾之，仍给以酒食汤沐，以平人待之。
现代文：慎重选择办案人员。将那个被指控为杀妻的人，转移到这个地点关押，详细审问调察。仍然给这个人供应酒饭和生活用具，向对平常人一样对待他。
English: Carefully select the investigators. Transfer the person accused of killing his wife to this location for detention, detailed interrogation and investigation. Still provide this person with food and drink and daily necessities, and treat him like an ordinary person.

古文：键户棘垣，不使系于外。
现代文：加强防守，不让他逃脱。
English: Tighten up your defenses, don't let him get away.

古文：然后遍勘在城伍作行人，令各供通。近来应与人家安厝坟墓多少去处文状。
现代文：然后找遍全城埋葬死人、办理丧事为职业的人，叫他们讲述近来给别人埋葬死人的情况，并且询问他们有没有觉得可疑的事情。
English: Then they canvassed the entire city for people who buried the dead, people whose job it was to handle funerals, and asked them to tell them about recent funerals for other people, and to ask them if they saw anything suspicious.

古文：既而一面诘之曰：汝等与人家举事，还有可疑者乎？
现代文：有一个人说，他去一个土豪家办理丧事，都说是一个奶妈被杀，凶手跳墙跑了，棺材里好象没装什么，埋到某个地点了。
English: One man said that he went to a local powerful family to arrange a funeral, and they all said that a wet nurse was killed, the murderer jumped the wall and ran away, the coffin didn't seem to contain anything and was buried in a certain place.

古文：有一人曰：某于一豪家举事，具言杀却一奶子，于墙上舁过，凶器中甚似无物，见在某坊。
现代文：从事派人挖出棺材，见里面有一个女人的头，将这个头和当初发现的无头尸体对在一起，让那个在押的人辨认。
English: Deputies dug up the casket and found a woman's head inside. They matched the head to the headless body and asked the inmate to identify it.

古文：遂收豪家鞠之，豪家伏辜而具款。
现代文：那个人说不是。于是将土豪和家里的人抓来，土豪服罪坦白了。
English: The man said no. So he arrested the local strongman and his family, and the local strongman confessed to the crime.

古文：乃是杀一奶子，函首而葬之，以尸易此良家之妇，私室蓄之。
现代文：原来是土豪杀了一个奶妈，将头装到棺材埋了，用她的尸换了那个良家妇女，藏到密室里偷偷霸占。
English: It turned out that the local strongman had killed a wet nurse, buried her head in a coffin, used her corpse to replace the woman from a good family, and hid it in a secret room to secretly occupy it.

古文：豪土乃全家弃市。
现代文：于是土豪一家被在闹市中处以死刑。
English: As a result, a local powerful family was sentenced to death in the middle of the city.

古文：伍辞察狱，得无慎乎？
现代文：审理案件，能不谨慎吗？
English: Is it not prudent to try the case?

古文：许宗裔
现代文：许宗裔
English: Xu Zongyuan

古文：蜀之将帅，鲜不好货。
现代文：蜀郡的官员将领，很少有不贪图钱财的。
English: Few officials and generals in Shu County are not greedy for money.

古文：有许宗裔者，分符仗钺，独守廉隅。
现代文：有个叫许宗裔的官员，虽然手握大权，却品行端正。
English: There was an official by the name of Xu Zongyuan who, although he wielded great power, behaved with integrity.

古文：尝典剑州，民有致寇者，灯下认识暴客，待晓告巡，其贼不禁拷捶，远首其罪，囚而送州。
现代文：他曾经掌管剑州，有个居民家中去了强盗。在灯光下看见了强盗的样子，天亮以后报告了官府的刑事巡察人员。
English: He used to be in charge of Jianzhou, and there was a robber who went to a resident's home. He saw the robber's appearance under the lights, and reported to the government's criminal inspectors after dawn.

古文：宗裔引虑，缧囚纷诉，且言丝钩绔乃是家物，与劫主递有词说。
现代文：巡察人员把他认定的人抓住以后，这个人经受不住拷打，只好违心地承认自己是强盗。被押送到州府，许宗裔慎重处理，将囚徒带上来重新审问。
English: After the inspectors caught the person he identified, this person could not withstand the torture and had to admit to being a robber against his will. He was escorted to the state capital, where Xu Zongyuan handled him carefully and brought the prisoner up for re-examination.

古文：一云杏核，一云瓦子，因令相退下线，见杏核，与囚款同。仍以丝钩安车，量其轻重大小，亦是囚家本物。
现代文：囚徒说，所谓抢劫来的赃物缲丝工具是自己家里原有的东西，说的和被抢劫的人说的正好相反。许宗裔立刻命令两个人当面对质核实，问他们各自家里的缲丝车上卷丝轴心是用的什么东西？一个说是杏核，一个说是瓦片。许宗裔命令退下卷上的蚕丝，拆下轴心，见是杏核，与囚徒说的相同。
English: The prisoner said that the stolen silk reeling tools from the so-called robbery were the original things in his own home, saying exactly the opposite of what the robbed person said. Xu Zongyuan immediately ordered two people to verify in person and ask them what the spindle of the spindle on the silk reeling machine in their respective homes was used for. One said it was an apricot kernel and the other said it was a tile. Xu Zongyuan ordered the silk reel on the spindle to be pulled down and the spindle to be removed. It was an apricot kernel, the same as the prisoner said.

古文：即被劫者有妄认之过，巡捕吏伏拷决之辜，指顾之间，为雪冤枉，乃良吏也。
现代文：然后又把缲丝车安装好，测量其重大小，也说明确实是囚徒家中的用具，因而证明了被抢劫的人认错了人，巡捕官差也有行刑逼供的错误。许宗裔在一指一瞥的短暂时间里。就澄清了一起冤案，真是一个好官啊！
English: After that, the silk reel was installed, and its weight and size were measured, which indicated that it was indeed a tool in the prisoner's home, thus proving that the robbed person identified the wrong person, and the patrol officer also made a mistake in the execution of the confession. Xu Zongyuan clarified a wrongful case in a short time with a single glance. What a good official!

古文：刘方遇
现代文：刘方遇
English: Liu Fangyu

古文：镇州士人刘方遇家财数十万。方遇妻田氏早卒，田之妹为尼，常出入方遇家。方遇使尼发长，为继室。
现代文：镇州的刘方遇有家财数十万贯，他的妻子田氏死得很早，田氏的妹妹是尼姑，经常出入刘方遇家，刘方遇让她把头发留长了，娶她为继室夫人。
English: Liu Fang Rong of Zhenzhou has a family fortune of hundreds of thousands of yuan. His wife Tian died very early. Tian's sister is a nun and often visits Liu Fang Rong's home. Liu Fang Rong let her grow her hair long and married her as a stepmother.

古文：田有令遵者，方遇之妻弟也。
现代文：刘方遇的内弟善于经商，刘方遇便将自己积攒的钱财，交给内弟去经营。
English: Liu Fang Rong's brother-in-law was good at business, so Liu Fang Rong gave the money he had saved to his brother-in-law to run the business.

古文：善货殖，方遇以所积财，令令遵兴殖。方遇有子年幼，二女皆嫁。
现代文：刘方遇有个儿子很幼小，两个女儿已经出嫁。刘方遇病死了，儿子太小，不能管理家业。
English: Liu Fang encountered a very young son, two daughters have been married. Liu Fang encountered illness and died, his son was too young to manage the family business.

古文：方遇疾卒，子幼，不能督家业。
现代文：刘方遇的继室夫人和两个女儿。
English: Liu Fangyu's stepmother and two daughters.

古文：方遇妻及二女，以家财素为令遵兴殖，乃举族合谋，请以令遵姓刘，为方遇继嗣。
现代文：将刘方遇的全部家产交给刘方遇的内弟经商。并且全家在一起商量，决定请刘方遇的内弟改成姓刘，继承刘方遇。找来书写契约文书的安美。
English: He gave all of Liu Fangtui's family property to Liu Fangtui's brother-in-law to do business. And the whole family discussed together and decided to ask Liu Fangtui's brother-in-law to change his surname to Liu and inherit Liu Fangtui. He found Anmei to write the contract documents.

古文：即令鬻券人安美，为亲族请嗣券书。
现代文：为刘方遇家族的人撰写了请刘方遇的内弟继嗣刘方遇的契约文书。
English: For Liu Fangtou's family members, he wrote a contract document to invite Liu Fangtou's brother-in-law, Liu Fangtou's heir, to the role.

古文：即定，乃遣令遵服斩衰居丧。
现代文：确定下来以后，便叫刘方遇的内弟穿丧服按规矩办理丧事。
English: After it was determined, Liu Fang's brother-in-law was told to wear a funeral suit and handle the funeral according to the rules.

古文：而二女初立令遵时，先邀每月供财三万。
现代文：刘方遇的两个女儿一开始把刘方遇的内弟确定为父亲的继承人时，每月向刘方遇的内弟索要两万文钱，后来越要越贪。
English: When Liu Fangmei's two daughters initially identified Liu Fangmei's brother-in-law as their father's heir, they demanded 20,000 yuan per month from Liu Fangmei's brother-in-law. Later, they became more and more greedy.

古文：及后求取无厌，而石李二夫，教二女诣本府论诉云：令遵冒姓，夺父家财。令遵下狱。
现代文：而他们两个姓石和姓李的丈夫，又教唆她们去官府告状，说刘方遇的内弟冒充姓刘，夺取了父亲的家产，刘方遇的弟弟被逮捕入狱。
English: Their two husbands, surnamed Shi and surnamed Li, also instigated them to go to the government to file a complaint, saying that Liu Fang Rong's brother-in-law pretended to be surnamed Liu and seized his father's family property, and Liu Fang Rong's brother was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：石李二夫族与本府要吏亲党上在府帅判官、行军司马，随使都押衙，各受方遇二女赂钱数千缗，而以令遵与姊及书券安美同情共盗，俱弃市。
现代文：刘方遇两个女儿丈夫家里的人和官府的主要官员及其判官、行军司马随军都押衙等官员，分别接受了刘方遇两个女儿数千贯的贿赂。将刘方遇的内弟和刘方遇的继室夫人以及撰写契约文书的安美定为同伙强盗，一同在闹市杀头。
English: The family members of Liu Fangtou's two daughters' husbands, the main officials of the government and its judges, and the officials such as the commander of the army and the marshal of the army, all received thousands of bribes from Liu Fangtou's two daughters. They regarded Liu Fangtou's brother-in-law, Liu Fangtou's step-sister-in-law, and An Mei, who wrote the contract document, as fellow robbers and killed them together in the downtown.

古文：人知其冤。府帅李从敏，令妻来朝，慎事发，令内弟弥缝。
现代文：人们都知道这个案子断得冤枉，府帅李从敏害怕事情败露，派妻子上朝中找内弟弥补漏洞。
English: People all know that this case was unjustly decided. The governor, Li Congmin, was afraid that the matter would be exposed, and sent his wife to the court to find his brother-in-law to close the loophole.

古文：侍御史赵都嫉恶论奏，明宗惊怒，下镇州，委副使符蒙按问。果得事实。
现代文：侍御史赵都憎恨他们的丑恶行径，向皇帝报告。明宗皇帝又惊又怒。巡视镇州，派副使符蒙去调查这个案件，果然弄清实情。
English: Emperor Mingzong was shocked and angry. He inspected the town and county, and sent a deputy envoy to investigate the case, and found out the truth.

古文：自亲吏高知柔，及判官行军司马，并通货僧人、妇人，皆弃市。
现代文：将负责办案的官员高知柔和判官行军司马，以及送受贿赂的刘方遇的两个女儿等，全部在闹市处死。
English: The official in charge of handling the case, Kochi Sohe, the judge, Marching Sima, and the two daughters of Liu Fangdui, who received bribes, were all executed in the downtown area.

古文：唯从敏初削官停任，中宫祈哀，竟罚一季俸。
现代文：只有李从敏一开始被免除官职，王贵妃为他求情，又改为只罚一个月的俸禄。
English: Only Li Congmin was initially relieved of his official duties. Wang Guifei pleaded for him and changed the punishment to only one month's salary.

古文：议者以受赂曲法杀人，而八议之所不及，失刑也。
现代文：人们议论这个案子，一开始破坏法律冤杀人命，而重新审理也没有惩治李从敏，丧失了法律的尊严和尺度。
English: People are talking about this case. At the beginning, they violated the law and killed people unjustly, and the retrial did not punish Li Congmin, losing the dignity and measure of the law.

古文：安重诲诛后，王贵妃用事故也。
现代文：这是仍用女人裙带关系的缘故啊。
English: This is due to the fact that women are still used for nepotism.

