古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：余闻气有逆顺，脉有盛衰，刺有大约，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝问伯高说：我听说气血运行有逆顺之别，脉象有盛衰表现，针刺方法有总的原则，我能知道这些道理吗？
English: Huangdi asked Baogao, "I have heard that there is a difference between the flow of qi and blood, the pulse has a rise and fall, and the acupuncture method has a general principle. Can I know these principles?

古文：伯高曰：气之逆顺者，所以应天地、阴阳、四时、五行也。
现代文：伯高答道：气血运行的逆顺与自然界的阴阳变化、四季的五行规律相对应。
English: He replied, "The reversal of the movement of qi and blood corresponds to the changes of yin and yang in nature and the five elements of the four seasons.

古文：脉之盛衰者，所以候血气之虚实有余不足也。
现代文：脉象的盛衰表现，可以诊察气血的虚实变化。
English: The rise and fall of pulse can be diagnosed by observing the changes in qi and blood.

古文：刺之大约者，必明知病之可刺，与其未可刺，与其已不可刺也。
现代文：针刺方法总的运用原则，必须明了哪些疾病可以运用刺法，哪些不能运用，还有那些本可以运用刺法的但因过了时机已不可再用刺法了。
English: The general principle of using the acupuncture method is that it is necessary to understand which diseases can be used with acupuncture, which cannot be used, and those that can be used with acupuncture but can no longer be used with acupuncture because the time has passed.

古文：黄帝曰：候之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：如何判断疾病是否适宜运用刺法呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to judge whether the disease is suitable to use the pricking method?

古文：伯高曰：兵法曰： 无迎逢逢之气，无击堂堂之阵。 刺法曰： 无刺熇熇之热，无刺漉漉之汗，无刺浑浑之脉，无刺病与脉相逆者。 
现代文：伯高回答说：《兵法》上说： 不可迎战士气非常高涨的敌军，不要出击阵容十分强大壮盛的部队 《刺法》上说： 热势炽盛的不能用刺法，大汗淋漓的不能用刺法，脉象盛大燥疾的急病不能用刺法，脉象和病情相反的也不能用刺法。 
English: He replied, "The Art of War says, 'Do not meet an enemy whose morale is very high, and do not attack a very strong and powerful force.' The Art of Pricking says, 'Do not prick if you are very hot, do not prick if you are very sweaty, do not prick if you have a sudden illness with a large pulse, and do not prick if your pulse is the opposite of your illness.'

古文：黄帝曰：候其可刺奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：怎样确定哪些疾病适宜运用刺法呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to determine which diseases are suitable for the use of acupuncture?

古文：伯高曰：上工刺其未生者也，其次刺其未盛者也，其次刺其已衰者也。
现代文：伯高回答说：好的医生，在疾病尚未表现于外时就施用针治；其次，在疾病初期，邪气尚未亢盛的时候，施用针治；再次，在邪气已经衰减而正气逐渐恢复，因势利导地施用针治。
English: He replied: "Good doctors apply acupuncture when the disease has not yet manifested itself externally; secondly, at the beginning of the disease, when the evil spirit is not yet in full bloom, apply acupuncture; secondly, when the evil spirit has waned and the righteous spirit has gradually recovered, apply acupuncture guided by snobbery.

古文：下工刺其方袭者也，与其形之盛者也，与其病之与脉相逆者也。
现代文：技术低劣的医生，在症状叠发时才予以针治，或是在病势正盛时予以针治，或是在病的外部表现与脉象相反时予以针治。
English: Low-skilled doctors only give acupuncture when the symptoms overlap, or when the disease is at its peak, or when the external manifestation of the disease is contrary to the pulse.

古文：故曰： 方其盛也，勿敢毁伤，刺其已衰，事必大昌。 故曰： 上工治未病，不治已病。 
现代文：所以说： 高明的医生，在疾病尚未表现于外时就予以治疗，而不是等疾病发露于外才予治疗。 
English: Therefore, it is said: A clever doctor treats the disease when it has not yet manifested itself, rather than waiting for the disease to manifest itself.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

