古文：《前汉书》称：杜延年本大将军霍光吏，光持刑罚严，延年辅之以宽，论议持平，合和朝廷；杜钦在王凤幕府，救解冯野王、王尊之罪过，当世善政，多出于钦。
现代文：班固《汉书》称： 杜延年本来是大将军霍光的属吏，霍光主持刑罚很严厉，杜廷年用宽仁态度来辅助他，定罪量刑务求公平，使整个朝廷和睦团结；杜钦是大将军王凤的幕僚，曾经拯救冯野王、王尊之，消释了他们的罪过，当时社会的好的施政措施，大多出自杜钦的筹划。
English: Ban Gu's "Han Shu" said: Du Yan Nian was originally a subordinate of the general Huo Guang. Huo Guang presided over very severe punishments. Du Ting Nian assisted him with a lenient attitude, convicted and sentenced to seek fairness, and made the entire court harmonious and united. Du Qin was an aide of the general Wang Feng. He once saved Feng Ye Wang and Wang Zun Zhi and absolved their sins. At that time, most of the good social governance measures came from Du Qin's planning.

古文：予谓光以侯史吴之事，一朝杀九卿三人，延年不能谏。
现代文：我认为霍光根据侯史吴藏匿桑迁之事，一天就杀掉了位居九卿之列的大臣三人，可是杜延年并没能谏上。
English: I think that Huo Guang killed three ministers who were ranked among the nine nobles on the same day, based on the fact that Hou Shih Wu was hiding Sang Qiang, but Du Yan Nian did not succeed.

古文：王章言王凤之过，天子感悟，欲退凤，钦令凤上疏谢罪。
现代文：王章上言论王凤的罪过，天子受到感动有所省悟，想罢免王凤，杜钦叫王凤上疏谢罪。
English: Wang Zhang commented on Wang Feng's sin, Tianzi was moved to reflect and wanted to dismiss Wang Feng, Du Qin asked Wang Feng to forgive the sin.

古文：上不忍废风，凤欲遂退，钦说之而止。
现代文：后因皇上又不忍心罢免，可王凤却仍想着借机引退，杜钦劝说他打消了这种念头。
English: Later, because the emperor could not bear to dismiss him, Wang Feng still wanted to take the opportunity to retire, but Du Qin persuaded him to give up this idea.

古文：章死，众庶冤之，钦复说凤，以为： 天下不知章实有罪，而以为坐言事，宜因章事举直言极谏，使天下咸知主上圣明，不以言罪下。
现代文：劝说王凤，以为： 天下之人不了解王章真有罪过，就认为他是由于上言国事的缘故，应该借着王章这件事提拔直言极谏之人，使天下人都知道君主至明，不因为陈述意见治臣下之罪。
English: Persuaded Wang Feng, thought: People around the world do not understand Wang Zhangran's true guilt, they think that he is because of the above-mentioned state affairs, should use Wang Zhang this matter to promote the most outspoken person, so that people around the world know that the monarch is clear, not because of the crime of stating the opinions of subordinates.

古文：若此，则流言消释矣。 
现代文：如果这样做了，那么流言就会消释了。 
English: If you do that, then the rumours will die down.

古文：凤白行其策。
现代文：王凤把这些话告诉了皇上，按照他的计策行事。
English: Wang Feng explained Du Qin's stratagem to the emperor.

古文：夫新莽盗国。权舆于凤，凤且退而复止，皆钦之谋。
现代文：新朝的王莽窃国，是从王凤开始的，王凤将要引退却又中止了，都是杜钦在出谋划策。
English: The new dynasty's Wang Mang's theft of the country began with Wang Feng. Wang Feng was about to retire, but stopped. It was all Du Qin's scheming.

古文：若钦者，盖汉之贼也，而谓当世善政出其手，岂不缪哉？
现代文：象杜钦这种人，就是汉朝的国贼，《汉书》却说当时天下善政是出自他的手，这难道不荒谬吗？
English: A person like Duqin was a traitor to the Han Dynasty, but the "Han Shu" said that at that time the world's good governance came from his hand. Isn't this absurd?

