古文：瑰子鸷，字孔雀，孝文末，以军功赐爵晋阳男。
现代文：元瞔的儿子元鸷，字孔雀，孝文帝末年，因军功被赐封为晋阳男爵。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, the son of Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao, known as Peacock, was awarded the title of Baron of Jinyang for his military service.

古文：武泰元年，尔硃荣至河阴，杀戮朝士，时鸷与荣共登高冢，俯而观之。
现代文：武泰元年，尔朱荣到河阴，杀害朝士，当时，元鸷跟尔朱荣一起登上高冢子，俯视这场屠杀。
English: In the first year of the Wutai era, Er Zhu Rong went to Hekin to kill the Imperial soldiers. At that time, Yuan Zheng and Er Zhu Rong climbed onto the stilts to look down on the massacre.

古文：自此后，与荣合。
现代文：从此以后，他跟尔朱荣结合在一起。
English: Since then, he and Le Zhu Rong have been together.

古文：永安初，封华山王。
现代文：永安初年被封为华山王。
English: Yongan was named the King of Huashan in the first year.

古文：庄帝既杀尔硃荣，从子兆为乱。
现代文：庄帝杀了尔朱荣后，他又跟着尔朱荣的侄子尔朱兆作乱。
English: After Zhuangdi killed Er Zhu Rong, he followed Er Zhu Rong's nephew Er Zhu Zhao to make trouble.

古文：帝欲率诸军亲讨，而鸷与兆阴通，乃劝帝曰： 黄河万仞，宁可卒度？ 
现代文：皇帝打算带领众军亲自讨伐，而元鸷跟尔朱兆私通，便劝皇帝说： 黄河万仞之高，哪能那么容易渡过？ 
English: The emperor planned to personally lead the army in the crusade, but Yuan Zheng, who had a personal relationship with Er Zhu Zhao, persuaded the emperor to say: The Yellow River is so high, how can it be crossed so easily?

古文：帝遂自安。
现代文：庄帝因此安居下来。
English: As a result, Zhuang Di settled down.

古文：及兆入殿，鸷又约止卫兵。
现代文：当尔朱兆进殿时，元鸷又制止卫兵们干预。
English: When Er Zhuzhao entered the palace, Yuan Zang stopped the guards from interfering.

古文：帝见逼，京邑破，皆由鸷之谋。
现代文：皇帝受逼迫，京城受破坏，都是元鸷的阴谋导致的。
English: The persecution of the emperor and the destruction of the capital were all caused by Yuan Shao's conspiracy.

古文：孝静初，入为大司马，加侍中。
现代文：孝静帝初年，入朝为大司马，加侍中之职。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, he entered the imperial court as the grand steed, and was given the position of chamberlain.

古文：鸷容貌魁壮，腰带十围，有武艺。
现代文：元鸷容貌魁伟健壮，腰阔十围，有武艺。
English: Geng Yao's appearance was majestic and robust, with a broad waist, and he was skilled in martial arts.

古文：木讷少言，性方厚，每息直省闼，虽暑月不解衣冠。
现代文：平时显得木讷，很少说话，但他本性直率忠厚，每当轮到他在宫中值班时，虽然是大热天里也不解开衣冠。
English: He usually appears dull and rarely speaks, but his nature is straightforward and loyal. Whenever it is his turn to be on duty in the palace, he does not take off his cap, even though it is a very hot day.

古文：曾于侍中高岳之席，咸阳王坦恃力使酒，众皆下之。
现代文：有一次在侍中高岳的宴席上，咸阳王坦恃自己有武力而且带着酒意和人比较，众人都甘拜下风。
English: Once, at a banquet with Gao Yue as a waiter, Xianyang Wang Tianzhu compared himself to other people because of his strength and willingness to drink, and everyone bowed down to him.

古文：坦谓鸷曰： 孔雀老武官，何因得王？ 
现代文：元坦对元鸷说： 孔雀老武官，凭什么得到封王？ 
English: Wontan said to Wontan: Peacock old military officer, how did you get the title of king?

古文：鸷答曰： 斩反人元礻喜首，是以得之。 
现代文：元鸷回答说 ：曾经斩下反叛的咸阳王禧的首级，因此得到王爵。 
English: Yuan Zang replied, "I once cut off the head of the rebel Xianyang Wang Xi, so I received a peerage."

古文：众皆失色，鸷怡然如故。
现代文：众人都大惊失色，而元鸷依然像平时那样乐呵呵的。
English: Everyone was shocked and shocked, but Yuan Xuan was still as happy as usual.

古文：兴和三年，薨，赠假黄钺、尚书令、司徒公。
现代文：兴和三年去世，赠假黄钺、尚书令、司徒公。
English: Xinghe passed away three years later, giving away the fakes Huang Qi, Shang Shuling, and Szeto Gong.

古文：子大器，袭爵。
现代文：他儿子名大器，袭封他的爵位。
English: His son was a great man and succeeded him in the peerage.

古文：子苌，孝文时，袭爵松滋侯，例降侯，赐艾陵伯。
现代文：后来和元谨一起谋害齐文襄帝，被杀。元苌是元平的儿子。孝文帝时，袭父亲的爵位为松滋侯。按照规定降爵，赐封为艾陵伯。
English: Later, he plotted with Yuan Zheng to assassinate Emperor Qibun and was killed. Yuan Zheng was the son of Yuan Ping. During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he succeeded to his father's title of Songzihou. In accordance with regulations, he was demoted to a peerage and given the title of Ailingbo.

古文：苌性刚毅，虽有吉庆事，未尝开口而笑。
现代文：元苌性情刚毅，哪怕遇到吉庆的大喜事，他也从未开口笑过。
English: Geng Yao was a man of strong character. Even when he encountered a great auspicious event, he never opened his mouth to smile.

古文：孝文迁都，苌以代尹留镇，除怀朔镇都大将。
现代文：孝文帝迁都时，元苌为代尹而留守，并被委任为怀朔镇都大将。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen moved the capital, Yuan Zang stayed behind to represent Yin, and was appointed as the general of the capital of Waishuo Town.

古文：因别，赐苌酒，虽拜饮而颜色不泰。
现代文：临别时，孝文帝赐酒给元苌，元苌虽然拜谢后饮下，但面色依然没有一点高兴的样子。
English: At the time of parting, Emperor Xiaowen gave wine to Yuan Shao. Although Yuan Shao drank it after giving thanks, his face still did not look happy at all.

古文：帝曰： 闻公一生不笑，今方隔山，当为朕笑。 
现代文：皇帝说： 听人说您一生都没有笑过，今天准备离别了，应当给我笑一次。 
English: The emperor said, "I have heard that you have never laughed in your life. Today, as you prepare to leave, you should give me a smile.

古文：竟不能得。
现代文：可是，元苌依然不笑。
English: However, Geng Yao still did not smile.

古文：帝曰： 五行之气，偏有所不入；六合之间，亦何事不有！ 
现代文：文帝说： 五行之气，偏偏有的地方不入，六合之间，什么怪事没有！ 
English: Emperor Wendi said: The five elements are not allowed to enter some places, and there is nothing strange between the six elements.

古文：左右见者，无不把腕大笑。
现代文：他身边看到的人，无不把着手大笑。
English: Everyone he saw around him was laughing uproariously.

古文：宣武时，为北中郎将，带河内太守。
现代文：宣武帝时，任北中郎将，兼河内太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, he served as the Northern Vice Admiral and the Governor of Hanoi.

古文：苌以河桥船絙路狭，不便行旅，又秋水泛涨，年常破坏，乃为船路。
现代文：因为黄河上的河桥是由船只连接起来的，路很狭窄，过往行旅很不方便，加上秋水大涨时，每年时常被毁坏，元苌便建造船路。
English: Because the river bridge on the Yellow River is connected by boats, the road is very narrow, and it is very inconvenient to travel past. In addition, when the autumn water rises, it is often destroyed every year. Therefore, the Yuan Dynasty built a boat road.

古文：遂广募空车从京出者，率令输石一双，累以为岸。
现代文：广为招募，凡空车从京城出来的，全部让运载两块石头，累砌起来作为桥岸。
English: It was widely recruited. Whenever an empty carriage came out of the capital, all of them were made to carry two stones, which were piled up as a bridge bank.

古文：桥阔，来往便利。近桥诸郡，无复劳扰，公私赖之。
现代文：这样，桥面宽阔，来往十分方便，近桥的各郡，也不再年年派劳役和受打扰。公家和私人都依赖它。
English: In this way, the bridge deck is wide, it is very convenient to travel, and the counties near the bridge are no longer sent to labor and disturbed every year. Both public and private people rely on it.

古文：历位度支尚书、侍中、雍州刺史。
现代文：后来他历任度支尚书、侍中、雍州刺史。
English: Later, he successively held the posts of Shishangshu, chamberlain, and Yongzhou scribe.

古文：卒，谥曰成。
现代文：死时，谥号为 成 。
English: His posthumous name was Cheng.

古文：苌中年以后，官位微达，乃自尊倨，闺门无礼，昆季不穆，性又贪虐，论者鄙之。
现代文：元苌中年之后，官位比较通显，便自尊自傲，闺房中又没有礼节，兄弟之间不和睦，本性贪婪暴虐，评论者因而鄙视他。
English: After the middle age of Yuan Xuan, the official position was more obvious, he was proud of himself, there was no etiquette in the boudoir, there was no harmony between brothers, his nature was greedy and tyrannical, and commentators despised him.

古文：苌子子华，字伏荣，袭爵。
现代文：元苌的儿子子华，字伏荣，承袭元苌的爵位。
English: Yuan Shao's son Zihua, also known as Fu Rong, inherited Yuan Shao's peerage.

古文：孝庄初，除齐州刺史。
现代文：孝庄初年，任齐州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xiaozhuang, he was appointed as the chief historian of Qizhou.

古文：先是，州境数经反逆，邢杲之乱，人不自保。
现代文：起先，州境内几经反复。邢杲之乱时，人人难以自保。
English: At the beginning, there were repeated incidents in the state, and it was difficult for everyone to protect themselves when there was a riot.

古文：而子华抚集豪右，委之管籥，众皆感悦，境内帖然。
现代文：子华到后，安抚和召集豪门大族，委任他们加以管理，众人都感激和高兴，境内于是安定。
English: After Zihua arrived, he pacified and gathered the great families and appointed them to administer it. Everyone was grateful and happy, and the country was stable.

古文：而性甚褊急，当其急也，口不择言，手自捶击。
现代文：他性格十分急躁，当他焦急时，嘴里什么话都说，手不断捶打自己。
English: He is a very quick-tempered person. When he is anxious, he will say anything with his mouth and keep beating himself with his hands.

古文：长史郑子湛，子华亲友也。见侮骂，遂即去之。
现代文：长史郑子湛，是子华的亲友，被他侮辱和乱骂之后，立即离开了他。
English: Zheng Zizhan, a relative and friend of Zihua, immediately left him after being insulted and abused by him.

古文：子华虽自悔厉，终不能改。
现代文：子华虽然也自觉后悔，可是始终难以改变。
English: Although Zihua also consciously regrets, it is always difficult to change.

古文：在官不为矫洁之行，凡有馈赠者，辞多受少，故人不厌其取。
现代文：他当官也不故作廉洁，凡是有人送礼，他大多辞去，收受的很少，所以人家也不厌恶他收东西。
English: When he was an official, he did not hesitate to be honest. Whenever someone gave him a gift, he mostly resigned and received very little, so people did not dislike him receiving things.

古文：鞫狱讯囚，务加仁恕，齐人树碑颂德。
现代文：审讯囚犯时，非常注意宽大仁恕，齐州人为他树碑颂德。
English: When interrogating prisoners, he paid great attention to clemency and mercy, and the people of Qizhou paid tribute to him.

古文：后除济州刺史。
现代文：后来又被委任为济州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as Jeju chief historian.

古文：尔硃兆之入洛也，齐州城人赵洛周逐刺史，丹杨王萧赞表济南太守房士达摄行州事。
现代文：尔朱兆进入洛阳时，齐州城人赵洛周驱逐齐州刺史，丹杨王萧赞上表让济南太守房士德代管齐州事务。
English: When Er Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang, Zhao Luo Zhou, a citizen of the city of Qizhou, expelled Qizhou Zhishi, and Danyang Wang Xiao Zhan made a table to let Jinan be in charge of the affairs of Qizhou.

古文：洛周子元显先随子华在济州，邀路改表，请子华复为济州刺史。
现代文：赵洛周的儿子元显原先跟随子华在济州，便拦在路上要求修改奏表，请子华重任齐州刺史。
English: Zhao Luozhou's son, Yuan Xian, who was originally following Zihua in Jeju, stopped on the road to request a revision of the report card, asking Zihua to take on the important task of writing the history of Jeju.

古文：子华母房氏曾就亲人饮食，夜还，大吐，人以为中毒，母甚忧惧。
现代文：子华的母亲房氏曾经到亲戚家里吃东西，晚上回家以后大吐不止，别人都认为是中毒，他的母亲也十分害怕。
English: Zihua's mother, Ms. Fang, once went to a relative's house to eat. When she came home in the evening, she vomited profusely. Others thought it was poisoning, and his mother was very scared.

古文：子华遂掬吐尽啖之，其母乃安。
现代文：子华就捧起他母亲吐出来的东西自己全吃光，他的母亲也就不害怕了。
English: Zihua picked up everything his mother spat out and ate it all himself, and his mother was no longer afraid.

古文：寻以母忧还都。
现代文：不久，他因母亲去世而回到京城。
English: Soon after, he returned to Kyoto due to the death of his mother.

古文：孝静初，除南兗州刺史。
现代文：孝静帝初年，任南兖州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, he was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：弟子思通使关西，朝廷使右卫将军郭琼收之。
现代文：他的弟弟子思和西魏私通，朝廷派右卫将军郭琼把他们都抓了起来。
English: His younger brother, disciple Si, had illicit relations with the Western Wei Dynasty, and the imperial court sent the right guard general, Guo Qiong, to arrest them all.

古文：子思谓琼仆曰： 速可见杀，何为久执国士？ 
现代文：子思对郭琼的仆人说 ：赶快杀，为什么把国士久抓不放？ 
English: Zisi said to Guo Qiong's servant, "Hurry up and kill him. Why did you hold the statesman captive for so long?

古文：子华谓子思曰： 由汝粗疏，令我如此！ 
现代文：子华对子思说 ：都是因为你过于疏忽，连累我也这样！ 
English: Zi Hua said to Zi Si, "It's all because you were too careless, and you even got me into trouble like this!"

古文：后卒于尚书左仆射。
现代文：说着，以头撞床，痛哭起来难以自制。
English: As she spoke, she banged her head on the bed and wept uncontrollably.

古文：平弟长生，位游击将军，卒。
现代文：子思用手捋着胡须，望着子华，说道： 你怎么这样没有骨气。 
English: Zisi rubbed his beard with his hand, looked at Zihua, and said, "How can you be so spineless?

古文：孝庄时，以子天穆贵盛，赠司空。
现代文：不久，两人都被赐死在门下外省。元平的弟弟长生，任游击将军，死去以后，到孝庄帝时，因他儿子天穆显贵，被追赠司空。
English: Not long after, both of them were sentenced to death in provinces outside the capital. Yuanping's younger brother Chang Sheng, who was a guerrilla general, was posthumously awarded the title of Siku after his death, when Emperor Xiaozhuang came to the throne, because his son Tianmu was distinguished.

古文：天穆性和厚，美形貌，射有能名。
现代文：天穆性情温和忠厚，仪容俊美，善射而且很有名气。
English: Tianmu is gentle and loyal, good-looking, good at shooting and very famous.

古文：六镇之乱，尚书令李崇、广阳王深北讨，天穆以太尉使劳诸军。路出秀容，见尔硃荣，深相结讬，约为兄弟。
现代文：六镇作乱时，尚书令李崇、广阳王深北上讨伐，天穆为太尉出行慰问各军，路过秀容时，见到了尔朱荣，两人深相结交，相约结为兄弟。
English: When the riots occurred in the six towns, Shang Shu ordered Li Chong and Guangyang Wang Sheng to go to the north to fight. Tian Mu traveled as a captain to offer condolences to the armies. When passing through Xiu Rong, he saw Le Zhu Rong. The two had a deep friendship and agreed to become brothers.

古文：未几，改授别将，赴秀容，为荣腹心，除并州刺史。
现代文：不久，改任别将，他便前往秀容，成为尔朱荣的心腹，任并州刺史。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to be a general, and then he went to Xiurong, became a confidant of Er Zhu Rong, and was appointed to be the governor of the state.

古文：及荣赴洛，天穆参其始谋。
现代文：当尔朱荣前往洛阳时，天穆曾参与起初制定的谋略。
English: When Er Zhu Rong went to Luoyang, Tianmu had participated in the strategy initially formulated.

古文：庄帝践阼，除太尉，封上党王，征赴京师。
现代文：庄帝继位后，任太尉，封为上党王，被召到京城。
English: After Emperor Zhuang succeeded to the throne, he was appointed captain and given the title of the upper party king, and was summoned to the capital.

古文：后增封，通前三万户。
现代文：后来又增加封地，连以前在内共有食邑三万户。
English: Later, fiefdoms were added, bringing the total to 30,000 households.

古文：寻监国史，录尚书事，开府，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：不久又被任命监修国史，录尚书事，开府，世袭并州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to supervise the national history, record the history, open the government, and inherit the history of the state.

古文：初，杜洛周、鲜于修礼为寇，瀛、冀诸州人多避乱南向。
现代文：起初，杜洛周、鲜于修礼当贼寇时，瀛州、冀州人大多避乱南下。
English: At the beginning, when Dulozhou, who rarely performed rituals, was a bandit, most people in Zhangzhou and Jizhou fled to the south.

古文：幽州前北平府主簿河间邢杲拥率部曲，屯据鄚城，以拒洛周、葛荣，垂将三载。
现代文：幽州前平北府主簿河间人邢杲带领一批部众，屯守城，以对抗杜洛周和鲜于修礼，前后近三年时间。
English: It took nearly three years for Yuzhou's former governor of Pingbei Prefecture, Kawama no Hitomaro, to lead a group of subordinates to defend the city against Du Luo Zhou and Shinsui.

古文：及广阳王深等败后，杲南度，居青州北海界。
现代文：当广阳王深等被打败以后，邢杲南渡，住在青州北海界内。
English: After the defeat of Wang Sheng and others in Guangyang, he went to Nandu and lived in the North Sea area of Qingzhou.

古文：灵太后诏流人所在皆置，命属郡县，选豪右为守令以抚镇之。
现代文：灵太后下诏让流人在所居住的地方安置，归属当地郡县，选用豪强当守令加以安抚镇守。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling issued an edict to let the exiles settle in the place where they lived, belong to the local county, and choose a brave and strong person to be the warden to appease the town warden.

古文：时青州刺史元世俊表置新安郡，以杲为太守，未报。
现代文：当时的青州刺史元世亻隽上表请求设置新安郡，由邢杲当太守，朝廷还没有回文。
English: At that time, the Qingzhou Zhishi Yuan Shi Shang table requested the establishment of Xin'an County, with Shi as the governor, but the imperial court did not reply.

古文：会台申休简授郡县，以杲从子子瑶资廕居前，乃授河间太守。
现代文：这时正值台省下文选用人员充当郡县守令，因为邢杲的侄子子瑶的资历和祖荫靠前，便任命他为河间太守。
English: At this time, it was time for Taiwan Province to select a person to serve as the county sheriff, and because of the seniority and ancestral background of Zou Zou, the nephew of Zou, he was appointed as the governor of Hema.

古文：杲深耻恨，于是遂反。
现代文：邢杲深感耻辱和愤怒，于是反叛。
English: Deeply humiliated and angry, Zou rebelled.

古文：所在流人，先为土人陵忽，闻杲起逆，率来从之，旬朔之间，众逾十万。
现代文：当地的流人，原先被本地人欺凌和轻视，一听邢杲造反，便相继来投靠他，不到半月，聚众多达十万人。
English: The local exiles, who had previously been bullied and despised by the locals, rebelled at the slightest provocation and came to his aid one after another. Within half a month, they had gathered as many as one hundred thousand people.

古文：先是，河南人常笑河北人好食榆叶，故齐人号之为 沓榆贼 。
现代文：原先，河南人常常讥笑河北人喜欢吃榆树的叶子，所以齐州人称他们为 吃榆贼 。
English: Originally, the people of Henan often mocked the people of Hebei for their fondness of eating eucalyptus leaves, so the people of Qizhou called them eucalyptus eaters.

古文：杲东掠光州，尽海而还，又破都督李叔仁军。
现代文：邢杲领人马往东抢掠光州，一直抢掠到海边才回兵，接着又打败了都督李叔仁的军队。
English: The leader of the Xiongnu raided Gwangju to the east, raided all the way to the coast before returning to the army, and then defeated the army of the governor Li Shuren.

古文：诏天穆与齐神武讨，大破之。
现代文：朝廷下令让天穆和高欢征讨，大败邢杲军。
English: The imperial court ordered that Tianmu and Gao Huan be conscripted, leading to a crushing defeat for the Han army.

古文：杲乃请降，传送京师斩之。
现代文：邢杲请求投降，被传送到京都后斩首。
English: He asked for surrender, was transported to Kyoto and beheaded.

古文：时元颢乘虚陷荥阳。天穆闻庄帝北巡，自毕公垒北度，会车驾于河内。
现代文：这时，元颢乘虚攻占荥阳，天穆得知庄帝准备北巡，便从毕公垒北渡，在河内见到皇帝的车驾。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao was taking advantage of the situation to occupy Shenyang. When Tianmu learned that Emperor Zhuang was preparing to make a northern tour, he drove north from Bi Gongye and saw the emperor's car in Hanoi.

古文：尔硃荣以天时炎热，欲还师。天穆苦执不可，荣乃从之。
现代文：尔朱荣因为天气炎热，准备回兵，天穆坚持应继续北征，尔朱荣便听从了他的意见。
English: Because of the hot weather, Er Zhu Rong was preparing to return to the army. Tianmu insisted that he should continue the Northern Expedition, and Er Zhu Rong listened to his opinion.

古文：庄帝还宫，加太宰、羽葆鼓吹，增邑通前七万户。
现代文：庄帝回宫后，加封他为太宰，赏赐给羽葆鼓吹，又增加食邑，连以前的共七万户。
English: After Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, he was given the additional title of Dazai, and was rewarded for his efforts in propagating the feathered banner. He was also given more food, bringing the total number of households to 70,000.

古文：天穆以疏属，本无德望，凭藉尔硃，爵位隆极当时。熏灼朝野，王公已下每旦盈门；受纳财货，珍宝充积。
现代文：天穆原是皇室远支，本来没有什么德行和声望，只是依靠尔朱荣，爵位高居一时，权势热极朝野，王公以下官员每天满门，收受的各种财物、珍宝堆满府第。
English: Tianmu was originally a distant branch of the imperial family, and originally had no virtue or reputation, but relied on Er Zhu Rong. His title was high for a while, and his power was extremely popular. Officials from the prince down filled the palace every day, receiving all kinds of wealth and treasures.

古文：而宽柔容物，不甚见忌于时。
现代文：不过他待人宽宏大量，能够容人，所以并不怎么受人忌恨。
English: But he's very generous and accommodating, so he's not really hated.

古文：庄帝以其荣党，外示优宠，诏天穆乘车马出入大司马门。
现代文：庄帝因他是尔朱荣的同党，表面上装作十分优遇和宠爱，下诏让天穆乘坐的车马从大司马门出入。
English: Zhuang Di, because he was a member of the same party as Er Zhu Rong, pretended to be very privileged and favored on the surface, and ordered Tian Mu's horse to enter and exit from the large horse gate.

古文：天穆与荣相倚，荣党以兄礼事之。
现代文：天穆跟尔朱荣相互倚重，尔朱荣经常把他作为兄长礼待。
English: Tianmu and Er Zhu Rong respected each other, and Er Zhu Rong often treated him as an elder brother.

古文：世隆等虽荣子侄，位遇已重，天穆曾言其失，荣即加杖，其相亲任如此。
现代文：尔朱世隆虽然是尔朱荣的侄子，地位和待遇都很高厚，天穆曾经指出他的失误，尔朱荣立即将他杖责，两人亲近和信任达到这种程度。
English: Although Lzhu Shilong is Lzhu Rong's nephew, his status and treatment are very high. Tianmu once pointed out his mistakes, and Lzhu Rong immediately scolded him. The two are close and trust each other to such an extent.

古文：卒，追赠定州刺史、河间公，谥曰宣。
现代文：庄帝内心十分畏惧和厌恶他，因而他和尔朱荣一起被杀。节闵帝时，追赠丞相、柱国大将军、雍州刺史、假黄钺，谥号为 武昭 。
English: Emperor Zhuang greatly feared and loathed him in his heart, so he was killed together with Er Zhu Rong. When Emperor Jie Rong died, he was posthumously given the titles of chancellor, general of Zhiguo, Yongzhou Jishi, False Huang Qi, and his posthumous name was Wu Zhao.

古文：子提，袭公侯爵。
现代文：他的儿子元俨袭爵，才貌俱佳，任都官尚书。
English: His son, Yuan Xuan, inherited the title of peer, was talented and good-looking, and was appointed as a high-ranking official.

古文：提弟丕，太武时从驾临江，赐爵兴平子。
现代文：当齐帝受禅时，听见下诏召见，便装病，因而惊恐死去。拓跋提的弟弟元丕，太武帝时曾跟随皇帝前往江边，赐爵为兴平子。
English: When Emperor Qi was receiving Zen, he pretended to be ill and died of fright when he heard the emperor's summons. Emperor Taibu once followed Emperor Tuoba's younger brother, Yuan Di, to the riverside and gave him the title of Xingpingzi.

古文：献文即位，累迁侍中。
现代文：献文帝即位后，累升到侍中、丞相。
English: After Emperor Kenmon ascended the throne, he was successively promoted to chamberlain and chancellor.

古文：丞相乙浑谋反，丕以奏闻，诏收浑诛之。
现代文：乙浑谋反时，元丕将他的阴谋上奏皇帝，下诏抓了乙浑并把他杀掉。
English: When Yi Hun plotted to rebel, Yuan Shao reported his plot to the emperor, who arrested Yi Hun and killed him.

古文：迁尚书令，改封东阳公。
现代文：丕升任尚书令，改封为东阳公。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shuling and changed his title to Dongyang Gong.

古文：孝文时，封东阳王，拜侍中、司徒公。
现代文：孝文帝时，封为东阳王，任侍中、司徒公。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he was given the title of Dongyang King, and served as a chamberlain and tutor.

古文：丕子超生，车驾亲幸其第。
现代文：丕的儿子超出生时，皇帝亲自到他的府中看望。
English: When Yao's son Chao was born, the emperor himself came to visit him at his residence.

古文：以执心不二，诏赐丕入八议，传示子孙，犯至百，听责数恕之。
现代文：为了表示君臣同心，下诏赐丕入宫享受减刑的八议之法，传给子孙，犯错百次，听责备以后宽恕他。
English: In order to show that the monarch and the minister are of the same mind, the eight-sentence law of the imperial edict was passed down to the children and grandchildren of the emperor, which allowed the emperor to enter the palace to enjoy a reduced sentence, commit a hundred mistakes, listen to reproach and then forgive him.

古文：放其同籍丁口杂使役调，求受复除。
现代文：和他同户的丁口杂使人员的徭役和调赋，永远免除。
English: He and his household staff of Dingkou porters will be exempted from duty and assignment forever.

古文：若有奸邪人方便谗毁者，即加斩戮。
现代文：如果有奸邪人敢于诽谤的，立即斩首。
English: If any traitor dares to slander him, behead him at once.

古文：寻迁太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：不久迁为太尉、录尚书事。
English: He was soon transferred to the rank of Taijo (Lieutenant) and entered the Imperial Academy of Letters.

古文：时淮南王佗、淮阳王尉元、河东王苟颓并以旧老见礼。
现代文：当时淮南王佗、淮阳王尉元、河东王苟颓都因是旧元老而受到皇帝礼遇。
English: At that time, Huainan Wang Yao, Huaiyang Wang Yi Yuan, and Hedong Wang Guo Yao were all treated with courtesy by the emperor because they were former elders.

古文：每有大事，引入禁中，乘步挽杖于朝，进退相随。
现代文：每当有国家大事，便被领入内宫，乘坐人抬的轿子，带手杖朝见，进退时都是跟随左右。
English: Whenever there is a national event, he is ushered into the inner palace, rides in a people-carried palanquin, carries a cane to see the sunrise, and follows the left and right when advancing and retreating.

古文：丕、佗、元三人皆容貌壮伟，腰带十围，大耳秀眉，须鬓斑白，百寮观瞻，莫不祗耸。
现代文：丕、佗、尉元三人都容貌健壮魁伟，腰带十围，大耳秀眉，须鬓斑白，百官们观看之后，无不敬仰。
English: The three generals, Zou, Zou and Gui Yuan, were all robust and handsome, with a girdle ten times around, large ears, beautiful eyebrows, and white whiskers. After watching them, the officials all admired them.

古文：唯苟颓小为短劣，姿望亦不逮之。
现代文：惟独苟颓长得瘦小矮短，面貌和声望也不及他们。
English: However, Goguryeo was too short and too thin, and its appearance and reputation were not as good as theirs.

古文：孝文、文明太后重年敬旧，存问周渥。
现代文：孝文帝、文明太后连年敬重旧臣，慰问照顾得非常周到。
English: Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Fuxing have respected their former ministers for years, and their condolences have been very thoughtful.

古文：丕声气高郎，博记国事；飨宴之际，恆居坐端；必抗音大言，叙列既往成败，帝后敬纳焉。
现代文：丕声音高大响亮，记得许多国家要事，宴饮的时候，总是坐在座位的前面，他必定高声说话，叙述以往的成败，皇帝和太后也总是敬听和采纳他的意见。
English: He has a high-pitched voice, remembers many important national events, and always sits at the front of the table during banquets. He is sure to speak loudly, describing past successes and failures. The emperor and the empress dowager always listen to and adopt his opinions.

古文：然謟事要人，骄侮轻贱，每见王睿、苻承祖，常倾身下之。
现代文：可是他喜欢巴结朝中要人，轻视地位低下的人。每次见到王睿又、苻承祖时，总是降低身份和他们交往。
English: However, he liked to curry favor with important people in the dynasty and despised people of low status. Every time he saw Wang Rui and Zou Chengzu, he always lowered his status and interacted with them.

古文：时文明太后为王睿造宅，故亦为造甲第。
现代文：当时文明皇后给王睿又建造宅院，因此也给丕建造了一所府第。
English: At that time, the Empress of Civilization also built a mansion for Wang Rui, so she also built a mansion for Zou.

古文：第成，帝、后幸之，率百官文武飨宴焉。
现代文：落成后，皇帝、太后都前去祝贺，并领着文武百官在这里宴饮。
English: After the completion, the emperor and the empress dowager went to congratulate, and led hundreds of officials to feast here.

古文：使尚书令王睿宣昭，赐丕金印一纽。
现代文：他们让王睿又宣读诏书，赐丕一方金印。
English: They asked Wang Rui to read out the imperial edict again, and gave the gold seal to the other side.

古文：太后亲造劝戒歌辞以赐群官，丕上疏赞谢。
现代文：太后还亲自创作了劝戒歌赐给百官。丕上疏致谢。
English: The empress dowager also personally composed a song of exhortation to be given to the hundred officials.

古文：太后令曰： 臣哉邻哉！邻哉臣哉！
现代文：太后说： 臣哉邻哉！邻哉臣哉！
English: The empress dowager said, "Submit to your neighbor! Your neighbor is a subject!"

古文：君则亡逸于上，臣则履冰于下。若能如此，太平岂难致乎！ 
现代文：君则无逸于上，臣则履冰于下，如能这样，太平岂难实现？ 
English: The lord is always on top, and the vassal is always on the bottom. If this were possible, would it be difficult to achieve peace?

古文：及丕妻段氏卒，谥曰恭妃，又特赐丕金券。
现代文：当丕的妻子段氏死后，谥号 恭妃 ，又特地赏赐丕金券文书。
English: When his wife, Duan, died, he gave her the title of Gongfei and specially awarded her with a gold certificate.

古文：后例降王爵，封平阳郡公。
现代文：后来按照规定，应当降去王爵，封为平阳郡公。
English: Later, according to the regulations, he should be demoted to the rank of prince and be named the governor of Pingyang County.

古文：求致仕，诏不许。
现代文：他请求退休，但下诏不许。
English: He asked to retire, but was not allowed to.

古文：及车驾南伐，丕与广陵王羽留守京师，并加使持节。
现代文：当皇帝南征时，丕和广陵王羽留守京城，并加使持节。
English: When the emperor went on the Southern Expedition, Zou and Guangling Wang Yu stayed in Beijing, and added the Jizhi Festival.

古文：诏丕、羽曰： 留守非贤莫可。
现代文：皇帝下诏对丕、羽说 ：留守的人非贤士不可。
English: The emperor issued an edict to Shun and Yu, saying, "Those who stay behind must be sages."

古文：太尉年尊德重，位总阿衡。
现代文：太尉年高德重，位居阿衡。
English: The captain is of high moral character and is from Aheng.

古文：羽，朕之懿弟，温柔明断。故使二人留守京邑，授以二节，赏罚在手。
现代文：羽是我的亲弟弟，温柔明断，所以让你们两人留守京城，授予两个符节，赏罚大权在握。
English: Feather is my own brother, gentle and decisive, so let the two of you stay in Beijing, award two symbols, and reward and punishment are in your hands.

古文：其祗允成宪，以称朕心。 
现代文：你们共同敬守宪令，以称我心。 
English: You all respect the Constitution, which is my heart.

古文：丕对曰： 谨以死奉诏。 
现代文：丕回答说： 愿以死来遵从诏令。 
English: The donkey answered, "I will obey the decree of the king even unto death."

古文：羽对曰： 太尉宜专节度，臣但可副贰而已。 
现代文：羽回答说： 太尉应当专管节制，我只可担任副手而已。 
English: The feather replied: The captain should be in charge of temperance, I can only serve as a deputy.

古文：帝曰： 老者之智，少者之决，汝何得辞也？ 
现代文：文帝说： 老年人的智谋，年轻人的决断，你怎么能够推辞责任呢？ 
English: Wen Di said: The wisdom of the elderly, the determination of the young, how can you shirk responsibility?

古文：及帝还代，丕请作歌，诏许之。
现代文：当文帝回到代郡时，丕请求作歌。皇帝诏令许可。
English: When Emperor Wen returned to Dai County, Zou requested to compose a song. The emperor gave his permission.

古文：歌讫，帝曰： 公倾朕还车，故亲歌述志。
现代文：唱歌完毕，皇帝说： 你盼望我回来，所以亲自作歌陈述心意。
English: When the singing was over, the emperor said, "You are looking forward to my return, so write a song to express your feelings.

古文：今经构已有次第，故暂还旧京，愿后时亦同兹适。 
现代文：如今修建新都已有了眉目，所以暂时回到旧都，希望以后也像这里一样舒适。 
English: Now that the construction of the new capital is on the horizon, I have temporarily returned to the old capital, hoping that it will be as comfortable as here in the future.

古文：乃诏丕等以移都之事，使各陈志。
现代文：于是便向丕等官员讲了迁都的事情，让各人发表看法。
English: As a result, he told officials such as Zou about the relocation of the capital, allowing everyone to express their views.

古文：燕州刺史穆罴进曰： 今四方未平，谓可不移。
现代文：燕州刺史穆罴进言说： 如今四方尚未平定，我认为可不必迁都。
English: Yanzhou's top official, Shumuo Jin, said: Now that the four sides have not been pacified, I don't think it's necessary to move the capital.

古文：臣闻黄帝都涿鹿，古昔圣王不必悉居中原。 
现代文：我听说黄帝原都城在涿鹿，古代的圣王不是全部建都中原。 
English: I've heard that the Yellow Emperor's capital was in Elk, and that not all of the ancient holy kings built their capitals in Central Plains.

古文：帝曰： 黄帝以天下未定，故居于涿鹿。
现代文：皇帝说 ：黄帝因天下未定，所以定居涿鹿。
English: The emperor said, "The Yellow Emperor settled in Moji because the country was undecided.

古文：既定，亦迁于河南。 
现代文：既定之后，也迁至河南。 
English: After it was established, it also moved to Henan.

古文：广陵王羽曰： 臣思奉神规，光崇丕业，请决之卜筮。 
现代文：广陵王羽说 ：我想还是依照神的意愿，以光大帝业，请以卜筮来决断。 
English: Guangling Wang Yu said, "I think we should still follow God's will and use the light of the great emperor's cause, and please use divination to make a decision."

古文：帝曰： 昔轩辕请卜兆，龟焦，乃问天老，谓为善，遂从其言，终致昌吉。
现代文：孝文帝说： 以前轩辕氏请用卜兆时，龟甲烧裂了，便问于天老，天老说好，于是听从天老的话，终于昌盛。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "In the past, when the turtle's shell was burned and cracked, Emperor Xuan Zang asked Heaven for help. Heaven said yes, so he listened to Heaven's words and finally prospered.

古文：然则至人之量未然，审于龟矣。 
现代文：然则至人预测未来的事情，又超过神龟了。 
English: However, people's ability to predict future events has surpassed that of the tortoise.

古文：帝又诏群臣曰： 昔平文皇帝弃背，昭成营居盛乐。
现代文：皇帝又对群臣们说： 以前平文皇帝去世，昭成皇帝营建盛乐。
English: The emperor also said to his courtiers: Before the death of Emperor Pingwen, Emperor Zhaoxing built a grand palace.

古文：道武神武应天，迁居平城。
现代文：道武皇帝神武，顺应天意，迁居平城。
English: Emperor Jimmu of the Northern Wei Dynasty moved to Pingcheng in accordance with God's will.

古文：朕幸属胜残之运，故移宅中原。
现代文：我有幸战胜残敌，所以移都中原。
English: I was fortunate enough to defeat the remaining enemies, so I moved the capital to the Central Plains.

古文：北人比及十年，使其徐移。
现代文：北方人可以在十年之内，让他们慢慢迁移。
English: The northerners can let them migrate slowly within ten years.

古文：朕自多积仓储，不令窘乏。 
现代文：我自当多积粮食，不让大家困乏。 
English: I've stocked up on food so that we don't run out.

古文：前怀州刺史青龙、前秦州刺史吕受恩等仍守愚固，帝皆抚而答之，辞屈，退。
现代文：前怀州刺史青龙、前秦州刺史吕受恩等仍冥顽不化，坚持己见，孝文帝都和善地说明道理，他们无言可答，这才退下。
English: The former Qinglong Emperor of Huizhou and the former Qin Emperor of Qin still stubbornly persisted in their own opinions, and Emperor Xiaowen kindly explained the truth. They had nothing to say, so they retreated.

古文：帝又将北巡，丕迁太傅、录尚书事，频表固让。诏断表启，就家拜授。
现代文：皇帝又准备北巡，丕迁任太傅、录尚书事。他多次上表坚决辞谢，皇帝下诏，到丕家中拜授。
English: The emperor also prepared for the northern inspection, the relocation of the Taifu, and the recording of the records. He repeatedly made a resolute resignation, the emperor issued a decree, and went to Zou's home to pay homage.

古文：及车驾发代，丕留守。
现代文：当皇帝出发离开代郡时，丕留守京城，诏令凡代地有关事务，全部委托太傅处置。
English: When the emperor set out to leave the vicinities, he stayed in the capital and ordered all the relevant affairs to be entrusted to the Taifu.

古文：诏在代之事，一委太傅；赐上所乘车马，往来府省。丕雅爱本风，不达新式。至于变俗迁洛，改官制服，禁绝旧言，皆所不愿。
现代文：赐给他皇帝所乘的车马，让他往来于府省之中。丕喜爱原来的风俗，不懂新规矩，至于改变习俗，迁都洛阳，改革官制和所穿衣服，禁用旧语言等，都是他所不情愿的。
English: He was given the carriage and horse used by the emperor and was allowed to travel between provinces and prefectures. He loved the original customs and did not understand the new rules. He was reluctant to change the customs, move the capital to Luoyang, reform the official system and the clothes he wore, and prohibit the use of the old language.

古文：帝亦不逼之，但诱示大理，令其不生同异。
现代文：皇帝也不强迫他，只是不断向他讲明大道理，让他不要产生异议。
English: The emperor didn't force him either, but kept explaining the principle to him so that he wouldn't have any objections.

古文：至于衣冕已行，硃服列位，而丕犹常服，列在坐隅。
现代文：至于衣冠已改，朱服列位，而丕仍身穿以前的服装，排列在座前。
English: As for the clothes, the crowns have been changed, the scarlet robes are lined up, and the cormorants are still wearing the previous clothes and are lined up in front of the audience.

古文：晚乃稍加弁带，而不能修饰容仪。
现代文：后来他也稍用冠带，但不修饰仪表。
English: Later, he also used the crown slightly, but without modifying the instrument.

古文：帝以丕年衰体重，亦不强责。
现代文：皇帝因丕年迈体重，也不强迫。
English: The emperor, due to his advanced age and weight, did not have to do so.

古文：及罢降非道武子孙及异姓王者，虽驳于公爵，而利享封邑，亦不快。
现代文：当对非道武帝子孙和异姓被封为王爵的要罢降的规定推行后，丕虽然降为公爵，但仍享有原来的封邑，他心里也不很高兴。
English: He was not happy when, after the implementation of the regulations requiring the sons and grandsons of Emperor Faduwu and those with different surnames to abdicate, he was reduced to a duke, but still enjoyed the original fiefdom.

古文：帝南征，丕表乞少留，思更图后举。
现代文：皇帝南征时，丕上表请求延缓一些时间，打算另有举措。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he asked for a delay of some time and planned to take other measures.

古文：会司徒冯诞薨，诏六军反旆。
现代文：正好司徒冯诞去世，皇帝下令六军回师。
English: The emperor ordered the Sixth Army to return to the division, just as Stutthof died.

古文：丕又以熙薨于代都，表求銮驾亲临。
现代文：丕又以熙在代郡去世，上表请求皇帝亲临祭奠。
English: He also died in Dai County, and the table above requested the emperor to come and pay his respects.

古文：诏曰： 今洛邑肇构，跂望成劳。
现代文：皇帝说 ：如今洛邑初建，切望早日建成。
English: The emperor said, "Nowadays, Luoyang is in the early stage of construction, and we are eager to complete it as soon as possible."

古文：开辟暨今，岂有以天子之重远赴舅国之丧？
现代文：开辟至今，岂有以皇帝的身份而远奔舅舅封国治丧？
English: Up to now, has there ever been an emperor who traveled far and wide to attend the funeral of his uncle?

古文：朕纵欲为孝，其如大孝何！
现代文：我纵然要行孝，又怎么能和大孝比？
English: Even if I want to be a filial son, how can I compare myself to a great filial son?

古文：纵欲为义，其如大义何！
现代文：纵要行义，又怎能比于大义？
English: Even if you want to practice righteousness, how can it be compared to great righteousness?

古文：天下至重，君臣道悬，岂宜苟相诱引，陷君不德。
现代文：天下重任，君臣道殊，怎么能苟相引诱，陷国君于不德之名？
English: It is a heavy responsibility under heaven, how can a prince and a vassal seduce each other and trap a sovereign in the name of virtue?

古文：令仆已下，可付法官贬之。 
现代文：你的仆从人员，可交法官贬责。 
English: Your minions can be held in contempt by a judge.

古文：又诏以丕为都督、领并州刺史。
现代文：又下诏任丕为都督，兼并州刺史。
English: He also issued an imperial edict appointing him as the city's governor and annexed the prefecture.

古文：后诏以平阳畿甸，改封新兴公。
现代文：后下诏以平阳为京畿之地，改封为新兴公。
English: Later, it was decided that Pingyang would be the capital of Gyeonggi Province, and the name was changed to the new capital.

古文：初，李冲文德望所属，既当时贵要，有杖情，遂与子超娶冲兄女，即伯尚妹也。
现代文：起初，李冲以文学和德行而有名望，身居当朝显贵，丕有倚重于他的想法，便给儿子超娶了李冲哥哥的女儿为妻，也就是伯尚的妹妹。
English: At first, Li Chong was famous for his literature and virtue. He was a prominent person in his time, and no one thought highly of him, so he gave his son Chao the daughter of Li Chong's brother as his wife, that is, Bozhang's sister.

古文：丕前妻子隆，同产数人，皆与别居；后得宫人，所生同宅共产。
现代文：丕的前妻生的儿子隆，和隆同母所生的几个孩子，都住在其他房子里。后来又得到宫女，所生下的孩子就住在同一所宅院。
English: Luo, the son of Luo's ex-wife, and several children born to Luo's same mother, all lived in other houses. Later, Luo got a concubine, and the children she gave birth to lived in the same courtyard.

古文：父子情因此偏。
现代文：父子之间感情因此有所偏向。
English: As a result, the feelings between father and son are somewhat biased.

古文：丕父子大意不乐迁洛。
现代文：丕父子大都不愿迁往洛阳。
English: Most of them are reluctant to move to Luoyang.

古文：帝之发平城，太子恂留于旧京。
现代文：孝文帝从平城出发，让太子恂留守旧都。
English: Emperor Xiaowen departed from Pingcheng, leaving the crown prince to stay in the old capital.

古文：及将还洛，隆与穆泰等密谋留恂，因举兵据陉北。
现代文：当恂准备去洛阳时，隆和穆泰等人密谋将恂留住，因此举兵占领了陉北。
English: When Gong was preparing to go to Luoyang, Long and Mutai and others conspired to keep Gong there, so they raised an army and occupied Gongbei.

古文：丕时以老居并州，虽不预始计，而隆、超咸以告丕。
现代文：丕当时年老住在并州，虽然事先没有参与他们的密谋，但隆、超都把想法告诉了丕。
English: At that time, Zou was an old man living in Bozhou. Although he did not participate in their conspiracy in advance, both Long and Chaozhou told Zou their thoughts.

古文：丕外虑不成，口乃致难，心颇然之。
现代文：丕担心这件事难以成功，所以虽然嘴上说恐怕难办，而内心还是颇以为然的。
English: He was worried that it would be difficult to succeed, so although he said it would be difficult to do, in his heart he thought it would be.

古文：及帝幸平城，推穆泰等首谋，隆兄弟并是党。
现代文：当皇帝来到平城时，推定穆泰等是这件事的主谋，而隆的弟兄们都是同党。
English: When the emperor came to Pingcheng, it was presumed that Mutai and others were the masterminds of the affair, while Rong's brothers were all members of the same party.

古文：丕亦随驾至平城，每于测问，令丕坐观。
现代文：丕当时也随同皇帝到平城，每次审问，都让丕坐在一旁观看。
English: At that time, Zou also accompanied the emperor to Pingcheng, and every time he was interrogated, Zou was allowed to sit by and watch.

古文：与元业等兄弟并以谋逆，有司奏处孥戮。
现代文：隆和元业等兄弟都被判定为谋逆的罪名，有关方面奏请逮捕处死。
English: Brothers such as Rong and Yuanye were both convicted of plotting treason, and the relevant authorities requested that they be arrested and executed.

古文：诏以丕应连坐，但以先许不死之诏，躬非染逆之身，听免死，仍为太原百姓，其后妻二子听随。
现代文：皇帝下诏说，丕依法应当连坐，但因为以前曾经下过免除他死罪的诏书，他又没有亲自参与谋逆，免去死刑，降为太原的百姓，他后妻的两个儿子随在他身边。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying that, according to the law, Yan should be made to serve concurrently, but because he had previously issued an edict exempting him from the death penalty, he did not personally participate in the rebellion, was exempted from the death penalty, and was reduced to the people of Taiyuan. His second wife's two sons followed him.

古文：隆、超母弟及余庶兄弟皆徙敦煌。
现代文：隆、超的同母弟和其他庶出的兄弟都流放到敦煌。
English: Takashi, Chao's younger half-brother and other half-brothers were all exiled to Dunhuang.

古文：丕时年垂八十，犹自平城力载随驾至洛，留洛阳。
现代文：丕当时年近八十，从平城勉力随驾到洛阳，留居洛阳。
English: At that time, he was nearly eighty years old. He drove from Pingcheng to Luoyang and stayed in Luoyang.

古文：帝每遣左右慰勉之，乃还晋阳。
现代文：孝文帝常常派身边人去安慰他，他便回到晋阳。
English: Emperor Xiaowen often sent his entourage to comfort him, and he then returned to Jinyang.

古文：孝文崩，丕自并来赴，宣武引见之，以丕旧老，礼有加焉。
现代文：孝文帝去世时，丕从并州前来奔丧，宣武帝接见了他，因为丕是旧老臣，对他特别礼遇。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen died, Zhai came from Bianzhou to attend the funeral. Emperor Xuanwu received him, because Zhai was an old minister, and treated him with special courtesy.

古文：寻敕留洛阳。
现代文：不久又下诏让他留居洛阳。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to stay in Luoyang.

古文：后宴于华林都亭，特令二子扶侍坐起。
现代文：后来在华林园都亭宴请时，特地下令让他的两个儿子陪同他起坐。
English: Later, when he was invited to a banquet at the Imperial Pavilion in the Warlim Garden, he made a special order for his two sons to accompany him.

古文：丕仕历六世，垂七十年，位极公辅，而还为庶人，然犹心恋京邑，不能自绝人事。
现代文：丕任官历经六世，将近七十年时间，地位高至公卿辅政大臣，最后又被降为庶人，可是他心中仍想念朝廷，不能忘却人事世情。
English: After nearly seventy years and six generations as an official, he rose to the position of court noble and assistant minister of state, and was finally reduced to a commoner, but he still misses the imperial court in his heart and cannot forget the people and the world.

古文：诏以丕为三老。
现代文：皇帝下诏以丕为三老。
English: The emperor decreed that the Three Elders would be the Three Elders.

古文：景明四年，薨，年八十二。
现代文：景明四年去世，年八十二岁。
English: Jingming died four years later, at the age of 82.

古文：诏赠左光禄大夫、冀州刺史，谥曰平。
现代文：下诏赠左光禄大夫、冀州刺史，谥为 平 。
English: The following edict was presented to Dr. Zuo Guanglu and Jizhou Zhishi, and was signed by Ping.

古文：长子隆，先以反诛。
现代文：长子隆，先以谋反罪被杀。
English: The eldest son, Takashi, was first killed for plotting treason.

古文：隆弟乙升、超，亦同诛。
现代文：隆的弟弟超、乙升，也同时被杀。
English: Takashi's younger brothers, Chao and Atsushi, were also killed at the same time.

古文：卒，赠高平公，谥曰烈。
现代文：超的弟弟亻隽、邕，都因立有军功，亻隽被封为新安县男，邕被封为泾县男爵。
English: Chao's younger brothers, Zou and Zou, were both decorated for their military service. Zou was named the man of Xin'an County, and Zou was named the baron of Zou County.

古文：河间公齐，烈帝之玄孙也。
现代文：河间公拓跋齐，是烈帝的五世孙。
English: He is the fifth generation of the Emperor's descendants.

古文：少雄杰魁岸。
现代文：年青时就勇猛魁梧。
English: When he was young, he was very brave and strong.

古文：太武征赫连昌。太武马蹶，贼逼帝。齐以身蔽捍，决死力战，贼乃退，帝得上马。
现代文：太武帝征讨赫连昌时，马失前蹄，贼人逼近皇帝，齐以身掩护遮挡，和敌人拚死决战，才把敌人打退，太武帝得以上马。
English: When Emperor Taowu was conquering Helianchang, the horse lost its front hoof, the thieves approached the emperor, took cover together, and fought a decisive battle with the enemy. Only then did the enemy retreat, and Emperor Taowu won the horse.

古文：是日微齐，帝几至危殆。
现代文：当时要是没有齐的话，太武帝就差点没命。
English: If there had been no Qi at that time, Emperor Taivu would have almost died.

古文：帝以微服入其城，齐固谏不许，乃与数人从帝入。
现代文：太武帝换成常人衣服要进入敌城，齐坚决劝谏不听，便跟几个人一起随皇帝入城。
English: Taiwu Emperor changed into ordinary people's clothes to enter the enemy city, Qi resolutely persuaded him not to listen, and then he entered the city with the emperor together with several people.

古文：城内既觉，诸门悉闭。帝及齐等因入其宫中，得妇人裙，系之槊上。帝乘而上，因此得拔，于齐有力焉。
现代文：城中的人发觉了，把所有城门关闭，太武帝和齐等趁势进入敌人宫中，找到一些妇女穿的裙子，把槊捆扎起来，太武帝沿着槊爬上城去，因而把城攻下了。
English: When the people in the city found out, they closed all the gates, and Emperor Taowu and Qi took advantage of the situation to enter the enemy palace, found some skirts worn by women, tied up the shackles, and Emperor Taowu climbed up the city along the shackles, thus capturing the city.

古文：赐爵浮阳侯。
现代文：齐立了大功，被赐为浮阳侯。
English: He made great achievements and was given the title of Fuyang Marquis.

古文：从征和龙，以功拜尚书，进爵为公。
现代文：他跟从出征和龙，因功又被任命为尚书，晋爵位为公爵。
English: He followed the expedition and the dragon, and because of his merits, he was appointed as a Shangshu and promoted to the rank of Duke.

古文：后与新兴王俊讨秃发保周，坐事免官爵。
现代文：后来他跟新兴王俊讨伐秃发保周，因事被免去官爵。
English: Later, he fought with the emerging Wang Jun against the baldness prevention week, and was removed from the peerage for the incident.

古文：宋将裴方明陷仇池，太武复授齐前将军，与建兴公古弼讨之。
现代文：宋将裴方明攻占了仇池后，太武帝又任命齐为前将军，跟建兴公古弼前往讨伐。
English: After Song general Pei Fangming captured Qiu Chi, Emperor Taowu appointed Qi as a former general, and he went to the crusade with Jian Xinggong Guzheng.

古文：遂克仇池，威振羌、氐。
现代文：于是，攻克仇池，威震羌、氐。
English: As a result, conquering the enemy's pond, it is trembling and trembling.

古文：复赐爵河间公，与武都王杨保宗对镇骆谷。
现代文：重新被赐爵为河间公。他和武都王杨保宗共同镇守骆谷。
English: He was again given the title of Kawama no Kimi. He and the King of Wudu, Yang Baozong, jointly governed Luogu.

古文：时保宗弟文德说保宗闭险自固，有期矣。
现代文：当时，保宗的弟弟文德劝保宗闭险自守，已有些时间了。
English: At that time, Hozon's younger brother, Wende, advised Hozon to keep away from danger. It had been some time.

古文：秦州主簿边因知之，密告齐。
现代文：秦州主簿边因知道以后，暗暗地密报齐。
English: After Qinzhou's chief accountant knew about it, he secretly reported it.

古文：晨诣保宗，呼曰： 古弼至，欲宣诏。 
现代文：齐一大早来找保宗，大声喊叫说： 古弼到，要宣读诏书。 
English: Early in the morning, Qi came to look for Hozong and shouted loudly, "When Gu Xi arrives, he will read out the imperial edict."

古文：保宗出，齐叱左右扶保宗上马，驰驿送台。
现代文：保宗出城，齐立即命令左右扶着保宗上马，飞奔送往京城。
English: When Hojong left the city, Qi immediately gave the order to support Hojong on horseback and send him galloping to the capital.

古文：诸氐遂推文德为主，求授于宋。
现代文：诸氐族人便推举文德当主帅，向宋朝求援。
English: The Yi people then promoted Wen De to be the head coach and appealed to the Song Dynasty for help.

古文：宋遣将房亮之、苻昭、啖龙等率众助文德。
现代文：宋派将军房亮之、苻昭、啖龙等领兵前来帮助文德。
English: Song sent generals Fang Liangzhi, Zou Zhao, and Yao Long to lead the troops to help Wen De.

古文：齐击斩杀龙，禽亮之，氐遂平。
现代文：齐出击，斩了啖龙，活捉房亮之，氐于是被平定了。
English: They all attacked, killed the dragon, captured Fang Liangzhi alive, and then the dragon was subdued.

古文：孝文初，赐爵建阳子，卒于武川镇将。
现代文：他因功被任命为内都大官。死后，谥号为 敬王 。
English: After his death, his posthumous nickname was "King Kei."

古文：子志，字猛略，少清辩强干，历览书传，颇有文才。
现代文：元志是兰的儿子，字猛略。从小就精明强干，善辩，博览书史，颇有文才。
English: Yuan Zhi is the son of Lan, the characters are abbreviated. From an early age, he was shrewd and strong, good at debate, well-versed in the history of books, and quite literate.

古文：为洛阳令，不避强御，与御史中尉李彪争路，俱入见。面陈得失。
现代文：他当洛阳令时，不避强权者，跟御史中尉李彪争路，两人一起见皇帝，当面分清是非。
English: When he was the governor of Luoyang, he did not shy away from the powerful. He argued with the imperial lieutenant Li Biao, and the two of them went to see the emperor together to sort out their differences face-to-face.

古文：彪言： 御史中尉辟承华盖，驻论道剑鼓，安有洛阳令与臣抗衡？ 
现代文：李彪说 ：御史中尉因避太子的车马，停在路边谈论剑鼓的事，岂有洛阳令敢来和我抗衡？ 
English: Li Biao said, "Lieutenant Mishi stopped on the side of the road to avoid the prince's carriage and horse, and talked about the sword and drum. Would Luo Yangling dare to compete with me?"

古文：志言： 神乡县主，普天之下，谁不编户？
现代文：元志说： 我是京都县主，普天之下，谁不是郡县管辖下的编户？
English: Motoshi said, "I am the head of Kyoto prefecture. In the whole world, who is not an accountant under the jurisdiction of the prefecture?"

古文：岂有俯同众官，趋避中尉？ 
现代文：我怎么能够降低身份和众官一样，回避中尉？ 
English: How could I lower myself to the same level as the officers and avoid the lieutenant?

古文：孝文曰： 洛阳，我之丰、沛，自应分路扬镳，自今以后，可分路而行。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 洛阳，就是我的丰、沛，你们应当分道扬镳。从今以后，可以分道而行。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Luoyang is my wealth and power, you should go your separate ways. From now on, you can go your separate ways.

古文：及出，与彪折尺量道，各取其半。
现代文：出门之后，元志就跟李彪拿着尺子丈量道路，各取一半。
English: After going out, Yuan Zhi and Li Biao took a ruler to measure the road, each taking half.

古文：帝谓邢峦曰： 此兒竟可，所谓王孙公子，不镂自雕。 
现代文：孝文帝对邢峦说 ：这个孩子竟能成事。所谓王孙公子，不须雕琢自成。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said to Zou, "This child can actually accomplish things. The so-called Wang Sun Gongzi does not need to be self-made.

古文：峦曰： 露竹霜条，故多劲节；非鸾则凤，其在本枝也。 
现代文：邢峦说： 经露之竹和霜打的枝条，所以多有劲节，不是鸾便是凤，都在本枝上的。 
English: The grasshopper said: The bamboo that has been exposed to the dew and the branch that has been hit by the frost, so there are more knots, whether it is the grasshopper or the phoenix, are all on this branch.

古文：员外郎冯俊，昭仪之弟，恃势恣挝所部里正。志令主吏收系，处刑除官。
现代文：员外郎冯俊，是昭仪的弟弟，他仗势任意殴打所在地方的里正，元志让主管官员把他逮捕收押，判刑，免去官职。
English: Feng Jun, the younger brother of Zhao Yi, who was a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, beat up a local official at will. Yuan Zhi asked the competent officials to arrest and detain him, sentence him, and remove him from his official post.

古文：由此忤旨，左迁太尉主簿。
现代文：因此得罪了皇帝，被降职任太尉主簿。
English: As a result, he offended the emperor and was demoted to the rank of captain.

古文：俄为从事中郎。
现代文：不久又任从事中郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of churo.

古文：车驾南征，帝微服观战所。有箭欲犯帝，志以身鄣之，帝便得免。矢中志目，因此一目丧明。
现代文：皇帝南征时，孝文帝换常服到战场观战，有箭向皇帝射来，元志挺身遮挡，孝文帝因而免于受伤，而箭射中元志眼睛，因此一目失明。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, Emperor Xiaowen changed his ordinary clothes and went to the battlefield to watch the battle. An arrow was shot at the Emperor, and Yuan Zhi stood up to block it. As a result, Emperor Xiaowen was not injured, but the arrow hit Yuan Zhi's eye, causing him to go blind in one eye.

古文：以志行恆州事。
现代文：任命元志为恒州主管官员。
English: He appointed Yuan Zhi as the responsible official of Hengzhou.

古文：宣武时，除荆州刺史。
现代文：宣武帝时，被任命为荆州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, he was appointed as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：还朝，御史中尉王显奏志于在州日抑买良人为婢，兼乘请供朝，会赦免。
现代文：回朝后，御史中尉王显上奏说，元志在荆州时，压低价钱买好人家女子当奴婢，同时他又请求到朝中供职。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Wang Xian, a lieutenant of imperial history, reported that when Yuan Zhi was in Jingzhou, he suppressed prices to buy women from good families to serve as slaves. At the same time, he also requested to serve in the imperial court.

古文：明帝初，兼廷尉卿。
现代文：正好皇帝大赦，免去处分。明帝初年，兼任廷尉卿。
English: The emperor pardoned him, and he was exempted from punishment. In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he also served as a courtier.

古文：后除扬州刺史，赐爵建忠伯。
现代文：后又被任命为扬州刺史，赐爵建忠伯。
English: Later, he was also appointed as Yangzhou chief historian and given the title Jian Zhong Bo.

古文：志在州，威名虽减李崇，亦为荆楚所惮。
现代文：元志在扬州任上时，威名虽然不如李崇，也是荆楚人所害怕的。
English: When Yuan Zhi took office in Yangzhou, although his prestige was not as high as that of Li Chong, he was also feared by the Jingchu people.

古文：寻为雍州刺史。
现代文：不久，又被任命为雍州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：晚年耽好声伎。在扬州日，侍侧将百人，器服珍丽，冠于一时。
现代文：晚年他特别沉缅于歌舞和女伎，在扬州时，身边侍奉的将近百人，各种器玩服饰，十分珍奇华丽，冠于一时。
English: In his later years, he was particularly devoted to song and dance and female comedians. When he was in Yangzhou, there were nearly a hundred people serving around him, all kinds of utensils and costumes, very rare and gorgeous, crowned by a moment.

古文：及在雍州，逾尚华侈，聚敛无极，声名遂损。
现代文：当他到雍州以后，也更加追求华丽奢侈，贪得无厌，声名大受损害。
English: After he came to Yongzhou, he also pursued more luxury and extravagance, and his reputation suffered great damage.

古文：及莫折念生反，诏志为西征都督讨之。
现代文：当莫折念生反叛时，皇帝下诏封元志为西征都督，前去讨伐。
English: When Moreno thought of rebelling, the emperor issued an imperial edict to make Yuan Zhi the governor of the Western Expedition and go to the crusade.

古文：念生遣其弟天生屯龙口，与志相持。为贼所乘，遂弃大众奔还岐州。
现代文：念生派他的弟弟天生驻守在陇口，和元志相互对峙，元志被敌人乘机打败，他便丢下部众，逃回岐州。
English: Nensho sent his younger brother, Ningen, to stand guard at the entrance to the castle, and he and Motoshi confronted each other. Motoshi was defeated by the enemy, and he left his subordinates and fled back to Qizhou.

古文：贼遂攻城，州刺史裴芬之疑城人与贼潜通，将尽出之，志不听。
现代文：敌人进而攻城。岐州刺史裴芬之怀疑城里有人和敌人私通，打算把他们都赶出城去。
English: The enemy then attacked the city. Qizhou assassin Shi Peifen suspected that someone in the city was having an affair with the enemy and planned to drive them all out of the city.

古文：卒。
现代文：元志不采纳他的意见。城里人果然打开城门招引敌人，抓住了元志和裴芬之送到念生那里，因而被杀。节闵帝初年，追赠为尚书仆射、太保。
English: To die.

古文：子屈袭爵。明元时，居门下，出纳诏命。
现代文：拓跋屈是文安公拓跋泥的儿子，他承袭了父亲的爵位。明元帝时，在门下省办事，进出传送诏书命令。
English: Tuoba Qu is the son of Wen'an Gong Tuoba Miao, who inherited his father's title. During the reign of Emperor Mingyuan, he was in charge of the provincial affairs and sent imperial edict orders in and out.

古文：性明敏，善奏事，每合上旨。赐爵元城侯，加功劳将军。与南平公长孙嵩、白马侯崔密等并决狱讼。
现代文：他本性聪明机灵，善于奏事，每次都和皇帝想法相同，被赐爵为元城侯，加功劳将军，和南平公长孙嵩、白马侯崔宏等一起判决案件和诉讼。
English: He was clever and quick-witted by nature, and was good at reporting things. He always had the same idea as the emperor. He was awarded the title of "former city lord" and "general with meritorious service," and judged cases and lawsuits together with Sun Song, the prince of Nanping, and Cui Hong, the prince of Baima.

古文：明元东巡，命屈行右丞相，山阳侯奚斤行左丞相，命掌军国，甚有声誉。
现代文：明元帝东巡时，命拓跋屈为右丞相，山阳侯奚斤为左丞相，共同掌管军国大事，很有声誉。
English: When Emperor Mingyuan was on his eastward tour, Mui Tuoba Qu was the right-hand minister, and Sanyang Hou Rongjin was the left-hand minister, jointly in charge of military affairs, and they had a great reputation.

古文：后吐京胡与离石胡出以兵等叛，置立将校，外引赫连屈丐。
现代文：后来吐京胡和离石胡出以兵等人叛乱，自行设立将校，外则勾结赫连屈丐。
English: Later, Tujing Hu and Lixi Hu revolted with soldiers and others, setting up officers on their own, while others colluded with Heren and Kugye.

古文：屈督会稽刘洁、永安侯魏勤捍之。
现代文：拓跋屈带领会稽公刘洁、永安侯魏勤前往对敌。
English: Tuobao led Liu Jie and Yongan Hou Weiqin to go to the enemy.

古文：勤没于阵，洁坠马，胡执送屈丐，唯屈众犹存。
现代文：魏勤死于战场，刘洁坠下马来，被胡人抓住送给赫连屈丐，只剩下拓跋屈的人马还在。
English: Wei Qin died on the battlefield, Liu Jie fell down from the horse, was caught by the Hu people and sent to Helian Qigai, and only the people of Tuoba Qu were left.

古文：明元以屈没失二将，欲斩之。
现代文：明元帝因屈损失了两员大将，便准备斩他。
English: Emperor Mingyuan lost two generals due to his defeat, so he prepared to behead him.

古文：时并州刺史元六头荒淫怠事，乃赦屈，令摄州事。
现代文：当时并州刺史元六头荒淫不务正事，便赦免了屈，让他代理州事。
English: At that time, he was not in charge of the state affairs, but he pardoned Qu and let him be in charge of the state affairs.

古文：屈嗜酒，颇废政事。
现代文：屈贪酒，使政事荒废。
English: Koga's greed for liquor made politics a waste of time.

古文：帝积其前后失，槛车征还，斩于市。
现代文：明元帝便把他前后的过失一起清算，用槛车送回京城，在市内斩首。
English: Emperor Mingyuan then liquidated his previous and subsequent mistakes together, sent him back to Beijing by sleigh, and beheaded him in the city.

古文：子磨浑，少为明元所知。
现代文：屈的儿子磨浑，从小就和明元帝认识。
English: Qu's son is very smart and has known Emperor Mingyuan since he was a child.

古文：元绍之逆也，明元潜隐于外，磨浑与叔孙诈云明元所在。
现代文：元绍叛乱时，明元帝躲到外面去，磨浑和叔孙俊欺骗说，他们知道明元帝藏身的地方。
English: During the rebellion of Yuan Shao, Emperor Mingyuan went to hide outside, deceiving Ma Hun and his uncle Sun Jun that they knew where Emperor Mingyuan was hiding.

古文：绍使帐下二人随磨浑往，规为逆。
现代文：元绍便派两个人跟磨浑一起去捉，把磨浑看成同伙。
English: Yuan Shao then sent two men to go with Ma Hun to catch him, seeing Ma Hun as an accomplice.

古文：磨浑既得出，便缚帐下，诣明元斩之。
现代文：磨浑外出以后，把两人缚起来，送到明元帝那里斩首。
English: After Ma Hun went out, he tied up the two men and sent them to Emperor Mingyuan to be beheaded.

古文：帝得磨浑，大喜，因为羽翼。
现代文：明元帝见到磨浑，大喜，把他作为自己的心腹。
English: Emperor Mingyuan was overjoyed to see Ma Hun and took him as his confidant.

古文：以勋，赐爵长沙公，拜尚书，出为定州刺史。
现代文：后来因功而被赐爵为长沙公，任尚书，又出任定州刺史。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Lord of Changsha for his merits, and was appointed as a scholar, and also as a historian of Dingzhou.

古文：卒。
现代文：死去。
English: To die.

古文：昭成皇帝九子：庶长曰寔君，次曰献明帝，次曰秦王翰，次曰阏婆，次曰寿鸠，次曰纥根，次曰地干，次曰力真，次曰窟咄。
现代文：昭成皇帝有九个儿子，庶长子是萛君，次为献明帝，其次为秦王翰，其次为阏婆，其次为寿鸠，其次为纥根，其次为地干，其次为力真，其次为窟咄。
English: Emperor Zhaocheng had nine sons. The eldest illegitimate son was Yu Jun, the second was Xian Mingdi, the second was Qin Wanghan, the second was Yu Bao, the second was Shou Yan, the second was He Gen, the second was Jigang, the second was Lizhen, and the second was Guo Wu.

古文：寔君性愚，多不仁。
现代文：萛君性情愚昧，经常干些不仁义的事情。
English: Zou Jun is stupid by nature and often does things that are not benevolent.

古文：昭成季年，苻坚遣其行唐公苻洛等来寇南境，昭成遣刘库仁逆战于石子岭。
现代文：昭成帝晚年，苻坚派他的行唐公苻洛等前来进犯南部边境，昭成皇帝派刘库仁迎战于石子岭。
English: In the later years of the reign of Emperor Zhaocheng, Zou Jian sent his line Tang Gong and Luo to attack the southern border, and Emperor Zhaocheng sent Liu Kuren to fight in Shiziling.

古文：昭成时不胜，不能亲勒众军，乃率诸部避难阴山，度漠北。
现代文：昭成皇帝当时身体不好，不能亲自指挥众军，便带领各部人马到阴山避难，度过漠北。
English: Emperor Akechi was not in good health at the time and could not personally command the troops, so he led the various departments to take refuge in the gloomy mountains and spend the night in the desolate north.

古文：高车四面寇抄，复度漠南。
现代文：因高车在四面进攻包围，又返回漠南。
English: Due to the encirclement of the high-speed train in the four-sided attack, it returned to the south of the desert.

古文：苻洛军退，乃还云中。
现代文：苻洛退军以后，才回到云中。
English: It was only after the withdrawal of the Shiloh troops that they returned to the clouds.

古文：初，昭成以弟孤让国，乃以半部授孤。
现代文：起初，昭成皇帝因为弟弟孤让出国家继承权，他便将一半部众交给孤。
English: At first, Emperor Akechi gave up the right to inherit the state to his brother, Koku, and he then gave half of his subjects to Koku.

古文：孤子斤失职怀怨，欲伺隙为乱。
现代文：孤的儿子斤因为失去职位而怀恨在心，想寻找机会作乱。
English: Haku's son, Jin, is holding a grudge because he lost his job and is looking for an opportunity to cause trouble.

古文：献明皇帝及秦明王翰皆先终，道武年甫五岁，慕容后子阏婆等虽长，而国统未定。
现代文：献明皇帝和秦王翰都已先去世，而道武帝只有五岁。慕容皇后的儿子阏婆等人虽然年纪长大，但没有定下继承人。
English: Emperor Xianming and Qin Wanghan had both died first, while Emperor Daowu was only five years old. Although Queen Murong's son Zi Ba and others were older, they did not decide on an heir.

古文：斤因是说实君曰： 帝将立慕容所生，欲先杀汝，是以顷来诸子戎服，夜以兵仗绕庐舍，伺便将发。 
现代文：斤便对萛君说 ：皇帝准备要立慕容氏所生的儿子为帝，要先把你杀掉。所以近来几位皇子都身穿戎服，夜间带着兵器绕着屋子巡逻，打算找机会把你杀掉。 
English: Jin then said to Zou Jun, "The emperor is preparing to make the son of Murong the emperor, and he wants to kill you first. Therefore, recently several princes have been wearing military uniforms and patrolling around the house at night with weapons, intending to find an opportunity to kill you."

古文：时苻洛等军犹在君子津，夜常警备，诸皇子挟仗彷徨庐舍，寔君以斤言为信，乃尽杀诸皇子，昭成亦暴崩。
现代文：当时，苻洛等军队还留在君子津，夜间时常警戒，几位皇子因此带着兵器在屋外来回巡逻，而萛君却相信斤所说的话，把所有的皇子都杀掉了，昭成帝也因此突然死去。
English: At that time, Shiloh and other troops were still in Junzijin, and they were constantly on guard at night. As a result, several princes patrolled back and forth outside with weapons. However, Shijun believed Jin's words and killed all the princes, and Emperor Zhao suddenly died as a result.

古文：其夜，诸皇子妇及宫人奔告洛军。
现代文：当晚，诸皇子的妻子和宫中人跑去报告苻洛的军队。
English: That night, the wives of the princes and people from the palace ran to report the army of Miro.

古文：坚将李柔、张蚝勒兵内逼，部众离散。
现代文：苻坚的部将李柔、张蚝立即带兵进逼，部众们一时四分五裂，离散而去。
English: Yu Jian's subordinates, Li Rong and Zhang Ye, immediately led their troops to force their way in. The subordinates were immediately split into four groups and dispersed.

古文：建国十五年，卒。
现代文：苻坚得知情况后，召燕凤前来，问他是什么缘故？
English: After Yu Jian learned of the situation, he called Yan Feng to come and asked him why?

古文：道武即位，追赠秦王，谥曰明。
现代文：燕凤如实把情况告诉他。苻坚说 ：天下的大恶都在他们身上了。 
English: Yan Feng truthfully told him the situation. Yu Jian said, "All the great evils of the world are on them."

古文：子仪，长七尺五寸，容貌甚伟，美髯，有算略。
现代文：于是，便抓了萛君和斤，将他们在长安处以车裂的刑罚。秦王翰的儿子名仪，身高七尺五寸，容貌长得很魁伟，美须髯，有谋略。
English: As a result, they arrested Qin Wanghan's son Mengyi, who was seven feet and five inches tall, with a magnificent appearance, a beautiful mustache, and a cunning plan.

古文：少能舞剑，骑射绝人。
现代文：从小就会舞剑，骑马射箭都是常人难及。
English: From a young age, sword dancing, horseback riding and archery are all beyond the reach of ordinary people.

古文：道武幸贺兰部，侍从出入。
现代文：道武帝到贺兰部时，他陪同左右，出入不离。
English: When Emperor Daowu came to Helan, he accompanied him everywhere, never leaving his side.

古文：登国初，赐爵九原公。
现代文：登国初年，赐爵为九原公。
English: In the first year of his ascension to the throne, he was given the title of Lord of Kujihara.

古文：从破诸部，有谋战功。
现代文：跟从道武帝击败各部时，因有谋略和善战而立功。
English: When he followed Emperor Daowu to defeat the various clans, he was praised for his strategy and skill in battle.

古文：及帝将图慕容垂，遣仪观衅。
现代文：当时道武帝打算吞并慕容垂，派仪前去观看有什么机会可趁。
English: At that time, Emperor Daowu planned to annex Murongdeli and sent Yi to see what opportunities could be taken.

古文：垂问仪道武不自来之意。
现代文：慕容垂便问仪，道武帝为什么自己不来？
English: Murong Dui then asked, "Why didn't Emperor Daowu come himself?"

古文：仪曰： 先人以来，世据北土，子孙相承，不失其旧。
现代文：仪说： 先人以来，世代据守北方，子孙相承，不失旧业。
English: Yi said: Since the ancestors, generations have adhered to the north, children and grandchildren have inherited, without losing the old business.

古文：乃祖受晋正朔，爵称代王，东与燕世为兄弟。
现代文：我的祖先受晋朝封号，爵称代王，东与燕国世代为兄弟。
English: My ancestors were titled by the Jin Dynasty and called the acting king. Dong and Yan Guo were brothers for generations.

古文：仪之奉命。理谓非失。 
现代文：我奉命前来，并无失礼。 
English: I was asked to come here and I'm not being disrespectful.

古文：垂壮其对，因戏曰： 吾威加四海，卿主不自见吾，云何非失？ 
现代文：慕容垂觉得他回答得很有气势，便开玩笑地说： 我如今威震四海，你的国君不肯亲来见我，怎么能说没有失礼？ 
English: Murongtie thought his answer was very impressive, and jokingly said, "I am now the most powerful man in the world. Your sovereign did not want to meet me in person. How can I say that I was not rude?"

古文：仪曰： 燕若不修文德，欲以兵威自强，此乃本朝将帅之事，非仪所知也。 
现代文：仪答道： 燕国如果不自修文德，准备用兵威来自强，那就是本朝将帅们应当考虑怎么做的事情了，这就不是我所能知道的。 
English: Yi replied: If Yan's country does not cultivate morality and prepare to use military power to strengthen itself, then the generals of this dynasty should consider what to do. This is not something I can know.

古文：及还，报曰： 垂死乃可图，今则未可。 
现代文：当他回国后，报告说： 慕容垂死后才能谋取，如今还不是时候。 
English: When he returned to China, he reported: "Mulong can only seek after death, now is not the time.

古文：帝作色问之，仪曰： 垂年已暮，其子宝弱而无威，谋不能决。
现代文：道武帝脸色一变，问他是什么原因。仪说： 慕容垂年纪已大，他的儿子宝懦弱又没有威望，谋而不能决断。
English: Emperor Daowu's face changed, and he asked him what the reason was. Yi said: Murong Lian was old, and his son Bao was weak and had no prestige. He was unable to make a decision.

古文：慕容德自负才气，非弱主之臣，衅将内起，是可计之。 
现代文：慕容德自负有才气，不是能够给弱主当臣子的人，祸端将从内部而起，这时才能打算。 
English: Murong De is conceited and talented. He is not a person who can be a vassal to a weak master. The evil will start from within. Only then can you plan.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：道武帝赞同他的意见。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：后改封平原公。
现代文：后来改封仪为平原公。
English: Later, his title was changed to the Prince of the Plain.

古文：道武征卫辰，仪出别道，获卫辰尸，传首行宫。帝大喜，徙封东平公。
现代文：道武帝征伐卫辰时，仪从别道进军，得到卫辰的尸体，把他首级传送到行宫，道武帝大喜，改封他为东平公。
English: When Emperor Daowu was conquering Yichen, Yi marched from another province to get Yichen's corpse and brought his head to the imperial palace. Emperor Daowu was overjoyed and renamed him Dongping.

古文：命督屯田于河北，自五原至棝阳塞外，分农稼，大得人心。
现代文：让他在河北督促屯田，他从五原直到木固阳塞外，分别安排农耕，大得民心。
English: Let him supervise the construction of farmlands in Hebei Province. He arranged farming separately from Wuhara to Muguyang, and won the hearts of the people.

古文：慕容宝之寇五原，仪蹑据朔方，要其还路。
现代文：慕容宝进犯五原时，仪先悄悄地占领朔方，拦截他的退路。
English: When Murong Bao invaded Wuhuan, Ji first quietly occupied the Shuo side and blocked his escape route.

古文：及并州平，仪功多，迁尚书令。
现代文：当并州平定以后，仪的功劳最多，被任命为尚书令。
English: When the unified state was pacified, Yi was given the most credit and was appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：从围中山。
现代文：又跟从皇帝围困中山。
English: He also followed the emperor to besiege Zhongshan.

古文：慕容德败也，帝以普驎妻周氏赐仪，并其僮仆财物。
现代文：当慕容德被打败以后，道武帝将普的妻子周氏赐给仪，连同他的僮仆财物等。
English: When Murongde was defeated, Emperor Daowu gave Pu's wife, Zhou, to Wu Yi, along with his servants and property.

古文：寻迁都督中外诸军事、左丞相，进封卫王。
现代文：不久又升任都督中外诸军事、左丞相，晋封为卫王。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces and the Minister of the Left, and was promoted to the position of the King of Guards.

古文：中山平，复遣仪讨鄴，平之。
现代文：中山平定后，又派仪讨平了邺。
English: After Zhongshan was subdued, he sent Yi to subdue the Liao.

古文：道武将还代都，置中山行台，诏仪守尚书令以镇之，远近怀附。
现代文：道武帝回代都，设置中山行台，命令仪驻守，以尚书令坐镇中山，远近都前来归附。
English: Emperor Daowu returned the capital to the dynasty, set up the Zhongshan marching platform, stationed the command instrument, sat in the town of Zhongshan with Shang Shuling, and came from far and near to annex it.

古文：寻征仪以丞相入辅。又从征高车，仪别从西北破其别部。
现代文：不久，又召仪以丞相入朝辅政，又跟从征讨高车，仪另从西北进军打败高车别部。
English: Soon, he also summoned Yi to enter the imperial auxiliary government as the prime minister, and followed the requisition of high-speed cars. Yi also marched from the northwest to defeat other parts of high-speed cars.

古文：又从讨姚平有功，赐以绢布绵牛马羊等。
现代文：又跟从讨伐姚平有功，皇帝赐给他绢布、丝绵、牛、马、羊等。
English: He also followed Yao Ping's successful crusade, and the emperor gave him silk cloth, silk, cattle, horses, sheep and so on.

古文：仪膂力过人，弓力将十石，陈留公虔槊大称异。时人云： 卫王弓，桓王槊。 
现代文：仪膂力过人，能拉开近十石的强弓。陈留公虔用的槊特别大，人们都感到惊奇，所以当时的人说： 卫王的弓，桓王的槊。 
English: The bow used by Chen Ruigongqian was so large that people were surprised, so people at the time said: "The bow of King Wei, the bow of King Kuan."

古文：太武初育也，道武喜，夜召仪入，曰： 卿闻夜唤，乃不怪惧乎？ 
现代文：太武帝刚出生时，道武帝非常高兴，夜间召仪入宫，问他： 你听到我夜间喊你来，不觉得奇怪和害怕吗？ 
English: When Emperor Taowu was just born, Emperor Daowu was very happy. He summoned Ji to the palace at night and asked him, "Don't you feel strange and scared when you hear me calling you at night?"

古文：仪曰： 怪则有之，惧实无也。 
现代文：仪说： 奇怪是有的，害怕却一点也没有。 
English: Yi said: "There is some strangeness, but there is no fear at all.

古文：帝告以太武生，赐仪御马、御带、缣锦等。
现代文：皇帝告诉他太武帝出生，并赏赐给他御马、御带和缣锦等物。
English: The emperor told him that Emperor Taibu had been born, and gave him a horse, a sash and brocade.

古文：先是，上谷侯岌、张衮、代郡许谦等有名于时，初来入军。
现代文：起先，上谷人侯岌、张兖、代郡人许谦等都是当时有名气的人，初来从军时，听说仪礼待士人，就先去投奔仪。
English: At first, the people of Shanggu, such as Hou Rui, Zhang Ye, and the representative of the county, Xu Qian, were all famous people at that time. When they first came to the army, when they heard that the ceremony was for the soldiers, they went to the ceremony first.

古文：闻仪待士，先就仪，仪并礼之，共谈当世之务。谦等三人曰： 平原公有大才，不世之略，吾等宜附其尾。 
现代文：仪对他们都以礼相待，一起谈论当世大事。许谦等三人说 ：平原公有大才和非凡的谋略，我们正好附从其尾。 
English: They all treated each other with courtesy and talked about current events together. Xu Qian and the other three said: "Plainland has great talent and extraordinary strategy, we just follow its tail."

古文：道武以仪器望，待之尤重，数幸其弟，如家人礼。
现代文：道武帝因为仪很有才干和声望，待他特别优厚，多次到他家去，就像对家人一样礼遇。
English: Emperor Daowu, because of Yi's great talent and reputation, treated him very generously, visiting his home many times and treating him with the same courtesy as his own family.

古文：仪矜功恃宠，遂与宜都公穆崇伏甲谋乱。
现代文：仪居功恃宠，便和宜阳公穆崇一起埋伏兵士谋乱。
English: Yi Ju Gong's favorite, then, together with Yiyang Gong Mu Chong, ambushed soldiers and plotted a riot.

古文：崇子逐留在伏士中，道武召之，将有所使。
现代文：穆崇的儿子逐留也在埋伏的士兵当中，道武帝召他前来，准备有事委派他。
English: Mu Chong's son, Du Rui, was also among the ambushed soldiers, and Emperor Daowu summoned him to come and prepare to assign him to something.

古文：逐留闻召，恐发，逾墙告状，帝秘而恕之。
现代文：逐留听到皇帝召见，害怕阴谋被发现，就越墙告诉皇帝有关情况。
English: When the exiles heard that the emperor had summoned them, they were afraid that the conspiracy would be discovered, so they went over the wall to tell the emperor about the situation.

古文：天赐六年，天文多变，占者云： 当有逆臣，伏尸流血。 
现代文：道武帝保密并宽恕了他们。天赐六年，天文多次发生变化，占卜的人说： 必定有叛臣，伏尸满地和流血之灾。 
English: Emperor Daowu kept the secret and forgave them. For six years, the sky changed many times, soothsayers said: There must be traitors, dead bodies everywhere and bloodshed.

古文：帝恶之，颇杀公卿，欲以厌当天灾。
现代文：皇帝非常厌恶，便杀了一些公卿，准备以此来战胜天灾。
English: The emperor was so disgusted that he killed some nobles in order to overcome the natural disaster.

古文：从太武南巡，进爵新蔡公。
现代文：仪内心恐惧不安，单骑逃跑。
English: With fear and anxiety in her heart, Yi rode away alone.

古文：文成即位，拜都官尚书。
现代文：皇帝派人追赶并抓住他，于是赐死，用百姓的礼节把他埋葬了。
English: The emperor sent men to pursue and capture him, and then gave him death and buried him with the courtesy of the people.

古文：卒，谥曰昭。
现代文：仪生有十五个儿子。
English: Yi Sheng has fifteen sons.

古文：子祯，胆气过人。
现代文：元祯是干的儿子。他胆量过人。
English: Yuan Xuan is Gan's son. He is a man of great courage.

古文：太武时，为司卫监。
现代文：太武帝时，担任司卫监。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taibu, he served as the Superintendent of the Imperial Guard.

古文：从征蠕蠕，忽遇贼别部，多少不敌。
现代文：从征蠕蠕时，突然遇到敌人的别部人马，兵力悬殊。
English: When he was enlisting in the army, he suddenly encountered soldiers from another division of the enemy, and there was a huge disparity in troop strength.

古文：祯乃就山解鞍放马，以示有伏，贼果疑而避之。
现代文：元祯就让部下在山上解鞍放马，以示有伏兵。敌人果然起了疑心而退避。
English: Motohiro asked his men to unsaddle their horses on the mountain to show that there was an ambush. The enemy became suspicious and retreated.

古文：孝文初，赐爵沛郡公，后拜南豫州刺史。
现代文：孝文帝初年，赐爵为沛郡公，后任南豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen, he was given a knighthood for the Pei County, and later served as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：大胡山蛮时钞掠，前后守牧多羁縻而已。
现代文：大胡山的蛮人经常出来抢掠，前任的刺史大多采取笼络的办法而已。
English: The barbarians of Dahushan often come out to loot, and most of the predecessors of the stabbing history have adopted the method of entrapment.

古文：祯乃召新蔡、襄城蛮首，使之观射。
现代文：祯便召来新蔡、襄城的蛮人首领，让他们参观射箭。
English: Yao then summoned the leaders of the barbarians in Xin Cai and Xiangcheng to let them visit the archery range.

古文：先选左右能射者二十余人，祯自发数箭皆中，然后命左右以次而射。
现代文：他先挑选身边善于射箭的二十多人，祯自己先射，连射几箭，箭箭命中目标，然后让左右依次射箭。
English: He first selects more than twenty people around him who are good at archery, and then shoots himself first, shoots several arrows in succession, the arrows hit the target, and then let the left and right arrows shoot in turn.

古文：先出一囚犯死罪者，使参射限，命不中，祯即责而斩之。
现代文：他又预先放出一位犯有死罪的囚徒，让他参加射箭，没能射中，祯当即责骂他然后斩首。
English: He also released a prisoner with a capital crime in advance, let him take part in archery, failed to shoot, immediately scolded him and then beheaded him.

古文：蛮魁等伏伎畏威，相视股忄栗。
现代文：蛮人的头目都非常佩服他的箭术，害怕他的威严，相互看着双腿战栗。
English: The leaders of the barbarians all admired his archery, feared his majesty, and looked at each other with trembling legs.

古文：又预教左右取死囚十人，皆著蛮衣，云是钞贼。
现代文：他又预先让人从牢里取出十名死囚罪犯，让他们都穿上蛮族人的衣裳，说成是出来抢掠的贼徒。
English: He also had ten prisoners on death row taken out of prison in advance, and they were all dressed in the clothes of barbarians, pretending to be thieves who had come out to plunder.

古文：祯乃临坐，伪举目瞻天，微有风动，祯谓蛮曰： 风气少暴，似有钞贼入境，不过十人，当在西南五十里许。 
现代文：祯便坐在那里，假装抬头望天，见略有风吹动时，元祯就对蛮人说： 风气有些暴烈，似乎有抄掠的贼人入境，人数不超过十人，应当是在西南五十多里路的地方。 
English: So Yao sat there, pretending to look up at the sky. When he saw a little wind blowing, Yuan Yao said to the barbarians: The atmosphere is somewhat violent. It seems that there are robbers entering the country. There are no more than ten of them, and they should be more than fifty miles to the southwest.

古文：即命骑追掩，果缚送十人。
现代文：他当即命令骑兵前去追捕，果然缚回来十个人。
English: He immediately ordered the cavalry to go in pursuit, and ten men were bound.

古文：祯告诸蛮曰： 尔乡里作贼如此，合死以不？ 蛮等皆叩头曰： 合万死。 
现代文：元祯便对群蛮们说 ：你们乡里有人这样作贼，是否应该死？ 蛮人等都叩头说 ：合该万死！ 
English: Yuan Shao then said to the bandits, "Someone in your village has committed theft like this, should he die?" The bandits all bowed their heads and said, "He deserves to die!"

古文：祯即斩之。 
现代文：元祯立即将他们斩首。
English: Yuan Shao immediately beheaded them.

古文：因慰喻遣还，自是境无暴掠。
现代文：于是，他又安慰了蛮人一番，送他们回去，从此以后，境内再也没有人敢出来抢劫掠夺了。
English: So he consoled the savages and sent them back, and from then on, no one dared to go out to rob and plunder.

古文：淮南人相率投附者三千余家，置之城东汝水之侧，名曰归义坊。
现代文：淮南人相继前来归附的有三千多家，元祯把他们安置在城东面的汝水旁，把这里命名为归义坊。
English: More than three thousand Huainan people came one after another to return, and the Yuan Dynasty placed them in the east of the city, next to the water, and named it Guiyi Square.

古文：初，豫州城豪胡丘生数与外交通，及祯为刺史，丘生尝有犯怀恨，图为不轨，诈以婚进城人，告云： 刺史欲迁城中大家，送之向代。 
现代文：起初，豫州城里有个豪强名叫胡丘生，他多次和外面的贼人勾结。当元祯任刺史时，胡丘生曾经犯法获罪，因而怀恨在心，图谋不轨。他假称办婚事召集了城里人，告诉他们说： 刺史想把城中大户人家迁走，送到代州去。 
English: At first, there was a powerful man in the city of Yuzhou named Hu Qiusheng, who repeatedly colluded with outside thieves. When Yuan Xuan was assassinated, Hu Qiusheng had committed a crime and was convicted, so he harbored a grudge and plotted. He pretended to organize a marriage and gathered people in the city and told them: "Assassin wants to move the big families in the city and send them to Daizhou."

古文：共谋翻城。
现代文：他们合谋叛乱。
English: They conspired to rebel.

古文：城人石道起以事密告祯，速掩丘生，并诸预谋者。
现代文：城中人石道起把这件事秘密报告了元祯，让他立即逮捕丘生和那些同谋的人。
English: The townspeople secretly reported the matter to Yuan Shao, asking him to immediately arrest Qiu Sheng and those who conspired with him.

古文：祯曰： 吾不负人，人何以叛？
现代文：元祯说： 我不负人，人为什么背叛我？
English: Yuan Zang said: I am not inferior to others, why do others betray me?

古文：但丘生诳误。
现代文：只是因为受胡丘生欺骗而失误。
English: Only because he was deceived by Hu Qiusheng and made a mistake.

古文：若即收掩，众必大惧，吾静以待之，不久自当悔服。 
现代文：如果立即把他们都抓起来，大家一定会大惊。我暂且安静地等待，不久一定有人会自己来表示悔恨和归服的。 
English: If all of them are arrested immediately, everyone will be shocked. I am waiting quietly for the time being, and soon someone will come forward to express remorse and surrender.

古文：语未讫而城中三百人自缚诣州门，陈丘生谲诳之罪。
现代文：话还没有说完，城里有三百人自缚前来州衙门前，陈述胡丘生造谣欺骗的罪状。
English: Before the speech was over, there were three hundred people in the city who tied themselves up and came to the state gate to report Huqiu for the crime of fabricating rumors and deception.

古文：而丘生单骑逃走，祯恕而不问。
现代文：这时胡丘生单骑出逃，元祯放过大家并不追究。
English: At this time, Hu Qiu Sheng fled on horseback, and Yuan Zheng let everyone go and did not investigate.

古文：后征为都牧尚书。
现代文：后来朝廷召他任都牧尚书。
English: Later, the imperial court called him to serve as a tutelary official.

古文：为辞人所重如此。
现代文：死后，追赠侍中、仪同三司，谥为 简公 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain, Ceremonial Secretary and Third Secretary, and was given the title of Jian Gong.

古文：后疾卒。
现代文：他有八个儿子。
English: He has eight sons.

古文：盛弟寿兴，少聪慧好学。
现代文：元盛的弟弟寿兴，从小聪明好学。
English: Motomori's younger brother, Shuxing, was bright and eager to learn from an early age.

古文：宣武初，为徐州刺史。在官贪虐，失于人心。
现代文：宣武帝初年，任徐州刺史，他任官时贪婪暴虐，失去民心。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanwu, he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou. When he was in office, he was greedy and tyrannical and lost the hearts of the people.

古文：其从兄侍中晖深害其能，因谮之于帝，诏尚书崔亮驰驿检核。
现代文：他的堂兄侍中元晖很嫉妒他的才能，便在皇帝面前说他的坏话，诏令尚书崔亮前去检查核实。
English: His cousin, the chamberlain Yuan Xuan, was so jealous of his talent that he spoke ill of him in front of the emperor and ordered Shangshu Cui Liang to go and check and verify.

古文：亮发日，受晖旨，遂鞭挞三寡妇，令其自诬，称寿兴压己为婢。
现代文：崔亮出发时，受元晖指使，便鞭打三个寡妇，让她们出来诬告，说寿兴强迫她们当奴婢。
English: When Cui Liang set out, he was instructed by Yuan Shao to whip three widows to make them make a false accusation that Shuxing forced them to be slaves.

古文：寿兴终恐不免，乃令其外弟中兵参军薛修义将车十乘，运小麦，经其禁之旁。寿兴因逾墙出，修义以大木函盛寿兴，其上加麦，载之而出，遂至河东，匿修义家。
现代文：寿兴觉得自己最终难免受他们中伤，便让他的表弟中兵参军薛修义弄了十辆车送小麦，从关押他地方的旁边经过时，寿兴便越墙而出，薛修义用大木匣把他装起来，上面再盖上麦子，然后把他运出去。于是到了河东，藏在薛修义家里。
English: Shuxing felt that it was difficult to avoid being slandered by them in the end, so he asked his cousin, the soldier-turned-soldier Xue Xiuyi, to get ten cars to deliver wheat. When he passed by the place where he was being held, Shuxing jumped over the wall. Xue Xiuyi put him in a large wooden box, covered it with wheat, and then transported him out. So he went to Hedong and hid in Xue Xiuyi's house.

古文：逢赦乃出，见帝，自陈为晖所谮，帝亦更无所责。
现代文：后来遇到大赦，这才跑出来面见皇帝，他自述被元晖所中伤，皇帝也没有怎么责备他。
English: Later, when he encountered an amnesty, he ran out to meet the emperor. He said that he had been slandered by Yuan Shao, and the emperor did not blame him.

古文：初，寿兴为中庶子时，王显在东宫。贱，因公事，寿兴杖之四十。
现代文：当初，寿兴当中庶子时，王显还在东宫任职，地位低下，有一次因公事，寿兴打了他四十棍。
English: At first, when Shuxing was the middle child, Wang Xian was still working in the East Palace, with a low status. Once, because of business, Shuxing beat him with forty sticks.

古文：及显有宠，为御史中尉，奏寿兴在家每有怨言，诽谤朝廷。
现代文：当王显受宠信以后，任御史中尉，便上奏说，寿兴在家里经常口出怨言，诽谤朝廷。
English: When Wang Xian became a favorite and was appointed lieutenant of imperial history, he reported that Shuxing often complained at home and slandered the imperial court.

古文：因帝极饮，无所觉悟，遂奏其事，命帝注可，直付寿兴赐死。
现代文：他乘皇帝喝了许多酒，脑子不清楚的时候，奏说这件事，让皇帝签名直接将寿兴赐死。
English: He drank a lot of wine with the emperor, and when his mind was not clear, he talked about the matter and asked the emperor to sign the death of Shuxing directly.

古文：帝书半不成字，当时见者亦知非本心，但惧晖等威，不敢申拔。
现代文：皇帝写字写得有一半不像字样，当时看见的人也都知道并不是出于皇帝的本来愿望，只是害怕元晖等人的淫威，不敢申明解救。
English: Half of the emperor's handwriting was illegible, and everyone who saw it at the time knew that it was not because of the emperor's original wish, but because he was afraid of the arrogance of Yuan Shao and others and did not dare to declare his deliverance.

古文：及行刑日，显自往看之。
现代文：当行刑的时候，王显亲自去观看。
English: Wang Xian went to watch the execution in person.

古文：寿兴命笔自作墓志铭曰： 洛阳男子，姓元名景，有道无时，其年不永。 
现代文：寿兴请求给笔，自己写了一个墓志铭： 洛阳男子，姓元名景，有道无时，其年不永。 
English: Shuxing asked for a pen and wrote an epitaph for himself: Luoyang man, surnamed Yuan Mingjing, timeless, eternal.

古文：余文多不载。
现代文：其余文字大多没有记载。
English: Most of the remaining characters are not recorded.

古文：顾谓其子曰： 我棺中可著百张纸，笔两枚，吾欲讼显于地下。
现代文：他又对儿子说 ：在我的棺材里面放上一百层纸，两支笔，我打算到地下告王显。
English: He also said to his son: "Put a hundred layers of paper and two pens inside my coffin. I plan to go underground and tell Wang Xian."

古文：若高祖之灵有知，百日内必取显。
现代文：如果高祖神灵有知，百天之内必定来抓王显。
English: If Gao Zu Shenling has knowledge, he will definitely come to catch Wang Xian within a hundred days.

古文：如遂无知，亦何足恋！ 
现代文：如果竟然一无所知，那又有什么可留恋的呢！ 
English: If you don't know anything, what is there to be nostalgic about?

古文：孝静时，转尚书令，摄选部。
现代文：当宣武帝去世后，王显也很快被杀死。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu died, Wang Xian was also killed soon after.

古文：嶷虽居重任，随时而已。
现代文：寿兴之死，当时议论的人也说是被前任的御史中尉弹劾所致。
English: At the time of Shuxing's death, commentators also said that it was caused by the impeachment of his predecessor, Lieutenant Goshi.

古文：薨于瀛州刺史，赠司徒公，谥曰靖懿。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政时，三公郎中崔鸿上疏替寿兴申理冤屈，灵太后下诏书给以昭雪，追封为豫州刺史，谥号为 庄 。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ling was in the imperial court to listen to the government, Choi Hong, one of the three princes, was sent to replace Shuxing to plead the grievances. The Empress Dowager Ling issued an imperial decree to give him the title of Zhao Xue, the posthumous title of Zhaishi of Yuzhou, and the posthumous title of Zhuang.

古文：悝弟晖，字景袭。
现代文：元悝的弟弟元晖，字景袭。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao, was a poet.

古文：少沉敏，颇涉文史。
现代文：他从小深沉机敏，博读文史典籍。
English: Since childhood, he has been profound and astute, reading literary and historical classics.

古文：宣武即位，为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：宣武帝即位，被任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, and he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：初，孝文迁洛，旧贵皆难移，时欲和众情，遂许冬则居南，夏便居北。
现代文：起初，孝文帝迁都洛阳时，旧权贵们都不想迁移，当时为了缓和大家的情绪，便允许他们冬天住在南面，夏天住在北方。
English: At first, when Emperor Xiaowen moved the capital to Luoyang, the old dignitaries did not want to move. At that time, in order to ease everyone's emotions, they were allowed to live in the south in winter and in the north in summer.

古文：宣武颇惑左右之言，外人遂有还北之问。至乃榜卖田宅，不安其居。
现代文：宣武帝被他身边的人也说得心动，外边便有人询问是不是要搬回北方去，甚至有人已张榜出卖田地房屋，人心惶惶不安。
English: Emperor Xuanwu was also moved by the people around him, and some people outside asked if they wanted to move back to the north, and even some people had already sold their houses in the fields, and they were very worried.

古文：晖乃请间言事，具奏所闻，曰： 先皇移都，以百姓恋土，故发冬夏二居之诏，权宁物意耳。
现代文：元晖便请求给他奏事的时间，详细陈述了自己听到的传闻，并说： 先皇迁都，因为百姓留恋故土，所以才发布了冬夏两地居住的诏书，无非权且安定情绪罢了。
English: Yuan Shao then asked for time to report the matter to him, described in detail the rumors he had heard, and said: The first emperor moved the capital, because the people were nostalgic for their homeland, so they issued an edict to live in two places in winter and summer. It was nothing but authority and a stable mood.

古文：乃是当时之言，实非先皇深意。
现代文：这不过是当时说的话，实在不是先皇真实想法。
English: This is just what he said at the time, and is not what the First Emperor really thought.

古文：且比来迁人，安居岁久，公私计立，无复还情。
现代文：况且从那里迁移来的人，已经在这里安居多年，不论从公家和私人打算，决没有重回北方的道理。
English: Moreover, the people who migrated from there have been living here for many years, and there is no reason for them to return to the north, regardless of public or private intentions.

古文：伏愿陛下终高祖既定之业，勿信邪臣不然之说。 
现代文：恭请陛下最终完成高祖既定大业，不要听信邪臣的不负责的胡言乱语。 
English: I respectfully ask Your Majesty to finally complete the great cause established by Gaozhu, and not to listen to the irresponsible nonsense of evil ministers.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：再迁侍中，领右卫将军。
现代文：他再晋升为侍中，领右卫将军。
English: He was then promoted to the rank of chamberlain, leading the right guard.

古文：虽无补益，深被亲宠。
现代文：虽然并没有做多少有益的事情，却深受皇帝的宠信。
English: Although he did not do many useful things, he was deeply favored by the emperor.

古文：凡在禁中要密之事，晖别奉旨，藏之于櫃。唯晖入乃开，其余侍中、黄门莫有知者。
现代文：凡是宫中重要的机密大事，元晖另外奉旨，收藏在柜里，只有元晖入内才能打开，其余的侍中、黄门没有人能知道。
English: All the important secrets and events in the palace were stored in a cabinet by order of the Yuan Shao. They could only be opened when the Yuan Shao was inside, and no one could know about the rest of the attendants or the Yellow Gate.

古文：侍中卢昶亦蒙恩眄，故时人号曰 饿彪将军，饥鹰侍中。 
现代文：侍中卢昶也是受到恩宠的人，所以当时人们给他们取绰号为 饿彪将军、饥鹰侍中 。
English: Lu Wei, a chamberlain, was also a favored person, so at that time people gave them the nickname "General Hungry Biao" and "Hungry Eagle Chamberlain."

古文：迁吏部尚书。
现代文：又升任吏部尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：纳货用官，皆有定价，大郡二千匹，次郡一千匹，下郡五百匹，其余官职各有差，天下号曰市曹。
现代文：他根据送来的财物多少任用官员，都有定价，大郡帛两千匹，次郡一千匹，下郡五百匹，其余的官职也多少有别，天下号称为市场。
English: He appointed officials according to how much property they brought, and they all had a price, with the highest being two thousand horses, the next county one thousand horses, and the next county five hundred horses. The rest of the official positions were also somewhat different, and the world was called the market.

古文：出为冀州刺史。下州之日，连车载物，发信都至汤阴间，首尾相属，道路不断。
现代文：出任冀州刺史，下州的时候，运送物品的车辆接连不断，从信都出发直到汤阴之间，首尾相连，络绎不绝。
English: When leaving Jizhou for Shishi, when leaving Jizhou, the vehicles transporting goods continue to follow one after another, starting from Shindu to Tangyin, and they are connected end to end.

古文：其车少脂角，即于道上所逢之牛，生截取角，以充其用。
现代文：他的车子上少了脂角，就在路上拦住牛，硬从头上砍断牛角，补充使用。
English: When he ran out of horns on his cart, he stopped a cow on the road and cut off the horns from the cow's head to replenish them.

古文：晖检括丁户，听其归首，出调绢五万匹。
现代文：元晖检括丁户时，听由他们归回原来的地方，查出应交的调绢五万匹。
English: When the Yuan government inspected the small households, they allowed them to return to their original places, and found out that there were 50,000 horses that should be transferred.

古文：然聚敛无极，百姓患之。
现代文：可是他贪得无厌，四处搜括钱财，百姓们都觉得很头痛。
English: But he was insatiably greedy, scrounging around for money, and people found it a headache.

古文：明帝初，征拜尚书左仆射，诏摄吏部选事。
现代文：明帝初年，被召回任尚书左仆射，负责吏部选用官员的事情。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was recalled to the post of Shangshu Zuopu Jia, responsible for the selection of officials in the personnel department.

古文：后昭晖与任城王澄、京兆王愉、东平王匡共决门下大事。
现代文：后来又下诏让元晖和任城王澄、京兆尹愉、东平王匡共同处置门下省的大事。
English: Later, he also issued an edict to let Yuan Xuan, Rencheng Wangcheng, Jingzhao Yunyun and Dongping Wangkuan jointly deal with the important affairs of their provinces.

古文：晖又上书论政要：其一曰：御史之职，务使得贤。
现代文：元晖又上书皇帝，论述为政要务：其一是：御史一职，务用贤人。
English: Yuan Shao also wrote a letter to the emperor, describing it as a political priority: One is: the position of imperial historian must be filled by a wise man.

古文：必得其人，不拘阶秩，久于其事，责其成功。
现代文：必得贤人，不拘品级爵禄，让他长久用事，督责他务必成功。
English: A wise man, regardless of his rank, must be rewarded. Let him work for a long time, and supervise him to be successful.

古文：其二曰：安人宁边，观时而动。
现代文：其二是：稳定人心，安定边疆，观时而动。
English: The second is: stabilizing the people's hearts and minds, stabilizing the borders, and moving with the times.

古文：顷来边将亡远大之略，贪万一之功，楚、梁之好未闻，而蚕妇之怨屡结，斯乃庸人所为，锐于奸利之所致也。平吴之计，自有良图，不在于一城一戍也。
现代文：近来边将胸无大略，贪图侥幸之功，楚梁未能交好，而闺妇屡结愁怨，此乃庸人所为，急功近利所致。平吴之计，自有良谋，不在于一城一戍之得失。
English: Lately, Bian Wu has been reckless and greedy for luck. Chu Liang has not been able to make friends, and the girl has often harbored grudges. This is the work of a mediocre person, and the result of quick success and short-term gain. Pingwu's plan, with its own good strategy, does not lie in the gain and loss of a city and a castle.

古文：又河北数州，国之基本；饥荒多年，户口流散。方今境上，兵复征发，即如此日，何易举动？
现代文：又河北数州，国之根本，饥荒多年，户口流散，如今边境，又再征兵，如同今日，何易有所举动？
English: And Hebei several states, the foundation of the country, famine for many years, Hukou scattered, and now the border, and then conscription, as today, how easy is it to act?

古文：愚谓数年以来，唯宜静边，以息召役，安人劝农，惠此中夏。
现代文：我以为几年之间，惟应力保边境安宁，停止征召服役，安定民心，致力农耕，以利中夏。
English: I thought that in the next few years, we should strive to keep the border peaceful, stop conscription, stabilize the people's hearts, and devote ourselves to agriculture in order to benefit the mid-summer.

古文：请严敕边将，自今在戍贼求内附者，不听辄遣援接，皆须表闻。
现代文：请严令边将，从今以后，如有边塞敌方请求归附的，不得派兵支援，接纳都须上表请示。
English: Please give strict orders to the border generals. From now on, if there is a border fortress that the enemy requests to annex, they are not allowed to send troops to support it. Acceptance must be requested on the above form.

古文：违者虽有功，请以违诏书论。
现代文：违令者即使立功，也应以违背诏令论处。
English: Violators of the edict, even if they make meritorious contributions, should also be punished for violating the edict.

古文：三曰：国之资储，唯籍河北。
现代文：三是：国家资财积累，依赖河北。
English: The third is: the accumulation of national capital and wealth depends on Hebei.

古文：饥馑积年，户口逃散，生长奸诈，因生隐藏。出缩老小，妄注死失，收人租调，割入于己。
现代文：饥荒连年，户口逃散，滋生奸诈，任意隐瞒，生小减老，乱注死失，收人租调，为己私吞。
English: Famine year after year, household registration scattered, breeding treachery, arbitrary concealment, birth and old age, random injection of death and loss, rent collection and transfer, self-absorption.

古文：人困于下，官损于上。
现代文：官员贪损于上，民众困乏于下。
English: Officials are corrupt at the top, and the people are poor at the bottom.

古文：自非更立权制，善加检括，损耗之来，方在未已。
现代文：如不另立制度，善加核实，损耗之途，方兴未艾。
English: If we do not set up a separate system and do a good job of verification, the way of loss is still in the ascendant.

古文：请求其议，明宣条格。
现代文：请求朝议，明宣条例。
English: Request for discussion in the morning, promulgation of regulations.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：晖雅好文学，招集儒士崔鸿等撰录百家要事，以类相从，名为《科录》，凡二百七十卷，上起伏羲，迄于晋，凡十四代。
现代文：元晖爱好文学，招集儒士崔鸿等人撰写和收录了百家要事，以类别相同的收在一起，取名为《科录》，共有二百七十卷，上起自伏羲，下至晋朝，共十四代。
English: Yuan Shao loved literature, and called upon the Confucian scholar Cui Hong and others to write and record hundreds of important matters, grouped together in the same categories and named "Scientific Records." There are 270 volumes in total, from the Fuxi Dynasty to the Jin Dynasty, a total of 14 generations.

古文：晖疾笃，表上之。
现代文：元晖病重时，仍将书表奏皇帝。
English: When Yuan Zang was seriously ill, he still played the emperor.

古文：卒，赐东园秘器，赠使持节、都督中外诸军事、司空公，谥曰文宪。
现代文：去世以后，赐给东园制作的棺材，赠封为使持节、都督中外诸军事、司空公，谥号为 文宪 。
English: After his death, a coffin made by Dongyuan was given to him, and he was awarded the titles of the Envoy, the Military Governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and the Empress Dowager, and his posthumous name was Wen Xian.

古文：德弟赞，颇有名誉，好陈军国事宜。
现代文：临埋葬时，又赐给羽葆班剑鼓吹二十人，羽林军一百二十人送葬。
English: At the time of burial, he also gave twenty people from the Fei Clan to preach, and one hundred and twenty people from the Ulin Army to attend the funeral.

古文：初置司州，以赞为刺史，赐爵上谷侯。
现代文：元赞是元德的弟弟，他颇有声誉，喜欢陈奏有关军国事务的处理意见。刚设置司州时，任命赞为司州刺史，赐爵位为上谷侯。
English: Yuan Zan was the younger brother of Yuan De. He was quite reputable and liked to share his opinions on the handling of military affairs. When Sizhou was first established, he was appointed as the Sizhou governor and given the title of Shangguo.

古文：孝文戒赞化畿甸，可宣孝道，必令风教洽和，文礼大备。
现代文：孝文帝告诫元赞要以教化来改变畿甸的风俗，可以宣扬孝道，一定要使风俗教化相互和谐，礼乐之道大备。
English: Emperor Xiaowen admonished Yuan Zhan that he should change the customs of Kijiang through education, that he could promote filial piety, that he must make the education of customs harmonious with each other, and that the way of ceremonial music should be prepared.

古文：自今有不孝不悌者，比其门，以刻其柱。
现代文：从今以后，如果有不守孝悌之道的人，可以在他家门前设立标志，刻字在屋柱上。
English: From now on, if there are people who do not keep the way of filial piety, they can set up a sign in front of his house and engrave it on the pillar.

古文：又诏曰： 司州刺史，官尊位重，职总京畿，选属懿亲，以允具瞻之望。
现代文：又下诏说 ：司州刺史，官职尊贵，地位重要，总管京畿，应从皇室至亲中选任，以合为众人瞻仰的声望。
English: The imperial edict also said: "The governor of Gyeonggi should be chosen from among the closest relatives of the imperial family, as the governor of Gyeonggi Province has a long history, a high-ranking official post, and an important position. He should be respected by everyone."

古文：但诸王年少，未闲政体，故以授赞，庶能助晖道化。
现代文：但诸王年幼，不熟悉政务。所以授职给赞，希望有助于弘扬教化。
English: However, the kings are young and are not familiar with government affairs. Therefore, the appointment is commended, and it is hoped that it will help promote enlightenment.

古文：今司州始立，郡县初置，公卿已下皆有本属，可人率子弟，用相展敬。 
现代文：如今司州初立，郡县新建，公卿以下都有属官，可各人带好自家子弟，以相敬重。 
English: Nowadays, counties are newly established, counties are newly built, and there are subordinate officials below the nobility, but everyone can bring their own children and respect each other.

古文：于是赐名曰 赞 。
现代文：于是赐名为 赞 。
English: So he was given the name Zan.

古文：诏赞乘步挽入殿门，加太子少师，迁左仆射。
现代文：下诏让赞乘坐步挽进入殿门，加封为太子少师，又升为左仆射。
English: The following edict allowed Janzan to enter the gate of the palace on a horse-drawn carriage, and he was given the title of prince's apprentice and promoted to the rank of second-in-command.

古文：孝文将谋迁洛，诸公多异同，唯赞赞成大策。
现代文：孝文帝打算迁都洛阳，各公卿大多持有不同意见，惟独元赞赞成这一重要决策。
English: Emperor Xiaowen planned to move the capital to Luoyang. Most of the nobles held different opinions, but only Yuan Zhan supported this important decision.

古文：帝每岁南伐，执手寄以后事。
现代文：皇帝每次南征，都握着他的手委托他处置后事。
English: Every time the emperor went to the south, he held his hand and entrusted him to deal with the aftermath.

古文：卒，赠卫将军，仆射如故。
现代文：死后，追赠卫将军，左仆射照旧。
English: After his death, General Wei was posthumously awarded, and his left-hand man remained in the same position.

古文：后以留守赞辅之功，进封晋阳县伯。
现代文：后来又因他有辅助的大功，晋封晋阳县伯。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Jinyang County Grand Vizier for his great contribution.

古文：赞弟淑，字买仁。
现代文：孝文帝时，任河东太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he served as the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：弯弓三百斤，善骑射。孝文时，为河东太守。河东俗多商贾，罕事农桑，人至有年三十不识耒耜。淑下车劝课，躬往教示，二年间，家给人足，为之谣曰： 泰州河东，杼柚代舂。
现代文：河东人习俗大多从事经商，很少有人从事耕田养蚕，有的人直到三十岁还不知道耕地用的耒耜是什么样子。元淑到任以后，劝人农耕，亲自教授耕作技术。二年间，家家自给有余。民众有歌谣说 ：泰州河东，杼柚代舂。
English: According to the customs of the people of Hedong, most of them are engaged in business, few people are engaged in cultivating fields and raising silkworms, and some people do not know what a plough for farming looks like until they are thirty years old. After taking office, Yuan Shuk persuaded people to farm and personally taught farming techniques. In two years, the family had more than enough self-sufficiency. The people have a song saying: Taizhou Hedong, 柚代.

古文：元公至止，田畴始理。 
现代文：元公至止，田畴始理。 
English: Gengong comes to an end, Tianzheng begins.

古文：病薨，谥曰穆。
现代文：死于平城镇将的任上，谥号为 静 。
English: He died in the post of the general of Ping Town, and his nickname was Jing.

古文：子亨，字德良，一名孝才。
现代文：他有七个儿子。元亨是元季海的儿子，字德良，一名叫孝才。
English: He had seven sons. Yuan Heng was the son of Yuan Ji Hai, Zideliang, and one was named Xiaocai.

古文：遇周、齐分隔，时年数岁，与母李氏在洛阳。
现代文：当周和齐分隔成两国时，他只有几岁。他和母亲李氏住在洛阳。
English: He was only a few years old when Zhou and Qi separated into two countries. He lived with his mother, Li, in Luoyang.

古文：齐神武以亨父在关中，禁固之。
现代文：北齐神武帝因为元亨的父亲随孝武帝到关中，就把他们关了起来。
English: Emperor Beiqi Shenwu locked them up because Yuanheng's father had accompanied Emperor Xiaowu to Guanzhong.

古文：其母遂称冻馁，得就食汤阴，托大豪李长寿，携亨及孤侄数人，得至长安。
现代文：他的母亲便说饥寒交迫，因而到汤阴就食。母亲托大豪族李长寿，带着亨和几位失去父母的侄子，到达长安。
English: His mother said that she was hungry and cold, so she went to Tangyin to eat. The mother asked the great hero Li Changshou, with Heng and several nephews who lost their parents, to arrive in Chang'an.

古文：周文以功臣子，甚礼之。
现代文：周文帝因为他是功臣的儿子，对他很敬重。
English: Because Zhou Wendi was the son of a meritorious subject, he was held in high esteem.

古文：大统末，袭爵冯翊王，累迁勋州刺史，改封平凉王。
现代文：大统末年，袭爵为冯翊王，累迁至勋州刺史，改封平凉王。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was given the hereditary title of Feng Xuan Wang, and was successively moved to the county seat of Xiongzhou, and changed his title to Ping Liang Wang.

古文：周受禅，例降为公。
现代文：周受禅以后，依例降为公爵。
English: After Zhou accepted Zen, he was reduced to a duke as usual.

古文：隋文帝受禅，自洛州刺史征拜太常卿。
现代文：隋文帝受禅时，从洛州刺史召回任太常卿。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen accepted Zen, he recalled Ren Taizhongqing from Lozhou Zhishi.

古文：寻出为卫州刺史，在职八年，风化大洽。
现代文：不久又出任卫州刺史。在职八年时间，风俗大为变化，民众和睦相处。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Weshu. During his eight years in office, customs changed dramatically, and the people lived in harmony.

古文：以老病乞骸骨，吏人诣阙上表请留，上嗟叹者久之。
现代文：后来他因年老有病请求退休，官吏和民众到朝廷上表挽留，皇帝赞叹不已。
English: Later, he asked to retire due to old age and illness, and officials and people came to the imperial court to stay at the table. The emperor was full of praise.

古文：其年，亨以笃疾，重请还京，上令使者致医药，问动静，相望于道。
现代文：这一年，元亨病重，再次请求回京，皇帝派使者送医送药，询问病情。去看望的使者在路上连续不断。
English: That year, Yuan Heng fell seriously ill and once again requested to return to Beijing. The emperor sent an envoy to deliver medicine and inquire about his condition. Envoys continued to visit him on the road.

古文：卒于家，谥曰宣。
现代文：他死在家中，谥号为 宣 。
English: He died at home and his nickname was Xuan.

古文：陈留王虔，纥根之子也。
现代文：陈留王拓跋虔，是纥根的儿子。
English: Chen Liu Wang Tuobaoqian is the son of Xuan Geng.

古文：登国初，赐爵陈留公。
现代文：登国初年，赐爵为陈留公。
English: In the first year of his ascension to the throne, Chen Liu Gong was given a knighthood.

古文：与卫王仪破黜弗部，从攻卫辰。
现代文：他和卫王仪打败了黜弗部，又跟皇帝征讨卫辰。
English: He and Wei Wangyi defeated Zou Fube and fought with Emperor Wei Chen.

古文：慕容宝来寇，虔绝其左翼，宝败。
现代文：慕容宝前来进犯时，拓跋虔切断了他的左翼部队，慕容宝因而失败。
English: When Murong Bao came to attack, Tuobagyan cut off his left-wing troops, and Murong Bao was defeated.

古文：垂恚愤来桑乾，虔勇而轻敌，于陈战没。
现代文：慕容垂怀恨前来桑乾讨战，拓跋虔虽然勇猛，但轻敌，死于战场。
English: Murong with a grudge came to Sangqian to fight, while Tuobaqian, though brave, treated the enemy lightly and died on the battlefield.

古文：虔姿貌魁杰，武力绝伦，每以矛细短，大作之，犹患其轻，复缀铃于刃下。
现代文：拓跋虔容貌魁梧雄杰，勇力超群。他总是嫌矛过于细短，便大大地加粗加长，就这样他还觉得太轻，便在刃下缀上铃。
English: He always disliked spears that were too short, so he made them much longer and thicker. He also thought they were too light, so he attached a bell under the blade.

古文：其弓力倍加常人。
现代文：他拉弓的力气也比常人加倍。
English: He can also draw a bow with twice the strength of an ordinary person.

古文：以其殊异，代京武库常存而志之。
现代文：由于他使用的兵器和常人不同，所以代京的武库中一直保存着加以记念。
English: Since the weapons he used were different from those used by ordinary people, they have been preserved in Daikyo's arsenal as a memento.

古文：虔常以槊刺人，遂贯而高举。
现代文：拓跋虔经常用槊刺人，把人穿透后又高高举起。
English: Tuoba Qian often stabbed people with a pickaxe, penetrating them and then lifting them up.

古文：又尝以一手顿槊于地，驰马伪退，敌人争取，引不能出。
现代文：他曾经用一只手把槊扎进土地，然后飞马假装败退。敌人争先恐后来拔槊，谁也拔不出来。
English: He once stuck his shovel into the ground with one hand, and the Pegasus pretended to retreat. The enemy scrambled to pull out the shovel, but no one could pull it out.

古文：虔引弓射之，一箭杀二三人，摇槊之徒，亡魂而散，徐乃令人取槊而去。
现代文：拓跋虔便开弓射敌，一箭射死两三人，那些在摇槊的敌人都惊慌四散而逃，过后拓跋虔才让人把槊取回来。
English: Tuoba Qian then opened his bow and shot the enemy, killing two or three people with one arrow. Those enemies who were shaking the crossbow were all panicked and fled. After that, Tuoba Qian had the crossbow retrieved.

古文：每从征讨，及为偏将，常先登陷阵，勇冠当时，敌无众寡，莫敢抗其前者。
现代文：每次跟从皇帝征讨敌人，以及充当偏将时，总是身先士卒，冲锋陷阵，勇冠当时，敌人无论多少，都没有人敢前来和他对阵的。
English: Every time he followed the emperor to conquer the enemy, and when he served as a general, he was always the first to charge into battle. At that time, no matter how many enemies there were, no one dared to come and fight against him.

古文：及薨。举国悲叹，为之流涕，道武追惜伤恸者数焉。
现代文：当他去世时，全国都替他悲伤和叹息，许多人哭泣着，道武帝多次追念，十分伤心。
English: When he died, the whole country grieved and sighed for him, many people cried, Emperor Daowu pined for him many times and was very sad.

古文：追谥陈留桓王，配飨庙廷，封其子悦为硃提王。
现代文：追谥为 陈留桓王 ，配祀于太庙，封他的儿子悦为朱提王。
English: He was named Chen LiuKuan Wang and enshrined in the Imperial Temple, and his son Yue was named Zhu Ti Wang.

古文：悦外和内狠。
现代文：朱提王拓跋悦，外表温顺，内心凶狠。
English: Zhu Ti Wang Tuoba Yu, outwardly docile, inwardly ferocious.

古文：道武常以桓王死王事，特加亲宠，为左将军，袭封，后为宗师。
现代文：道武帝常常想起陈留桓王死于王事，对他格外亲近和宠爱，任命他为左将军，继承父亲的爵位，后来又被任命为宗师。
English: Emperor Daowu often remembered that King Chen Liukhan died in a royal event, and he was particularly close to and fond of him. He appointed him as the left general to inherit his father's title, and later he was appointed as the grandmaster.

古文：悦恃宠骄矜，每谓所亲王洛生之徒言曰： 一旦宫车晏驾，吾止避卫公。
现代文：拓跋悦恃宠而骄傲，经常和他所亲近的王洛生等人说： 一旦皇帝去世，我只让着卫公。
English: Proud of being favored, Tuoba Yue often said to Wang Lousheng and others who were close to him: Once the emperor dies, I will only let Wei Gong take over.

古文：除此，谁在吾前！ 
现代文：除此之外，谁敢在我前头！ 
English: Besides, who would dare to be ahead of me!

古文：卫王仪美髯，为内外所重，悦故云。
现代文：卫王仪长着美须髯，被朝廷内外所敬重，所以拓跋悦这样说。
English: Wei Wang Yi had a beautiful mustache and was respected both inside and outside the court, so Tuoba Yue said this.

古文：初，姚兴之赎狄伯支，悦送之，路由雁门。悦因背诱奸豪，以取其意。
现代文：起初，姚兴赎回狄伯支时，拓跋悦送他，路过雁门时，拓跋悦背地里诱骗了一批奸滑的豪强，让他们为己所用。
English: At first, when Yao Xing ransomed Diboji, Tuoba Yue escorted him. When passing through the Wild Goose Gate, Tuoba Yue secretly lured a group of treacherous heroes and let them be used for his own purposes.

古文：后遇事谴逃亡，投雁门，规收豪杰，欲为不轨，为土人执送。
现代文：后来因有事被责罪而逃亡在外，他又投奔雁门，打算招收一批豪杰之士，图谋不轨，结果被当地人抓起来送到京城。
English: Later, when he was accused of something and fled abroad, he went to the Wild Goose Gate again, intending to recruit a group of heroes, and plotted to commit crimes. As a result, he was caught by the locals and sent to the capital.

古文：帝恕而不罪。
现代文：皇帝饶恕了他的罪过没有处罚他。
English: The emperor forgave his sins and did not punish him.

古文：明元即位，引悦入侍，仍怀奸计，说帝云： 京师杂人不可保信，宜诛其非类者。 
现代文：明元帝即位，让拓跋悦当朝廷的侍臣，他仍然怀有奸计，对明元帝说： 京城人过于杂乱，难以相信，应当杀掉一些和我们不一类的人。 
English: When Emperor Mingyuan ascended the throne and made Tuoba Yue a courtier of the imperial court, he still harbored treachery. He said to Emperor Mingyuan: The people of Beijing are too chaotic, it is hard to believe, we should kill some people who are different from us.

古文：又云： 雁门人多诈，并可诛之。 
现代文：又说 ：雁门人非常奸诈，应当把他们全杀光。 
English: He also said: The people of the Wild Goose Gate are very treacherous, and they should all be killed.

古文：欲以雪其私忿，帝不从。
现代文：他想以此来泄私愤，皇帝没有听从。
English: He wanted to vent his personal anger in this way, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：悦内自疑惧，怀刃入侍，谋为大逆。
现代文：拓跋悦心怀疑忄瞿，便带着利刃入宫侍候皇帝，准备干大逆不道的事情。
English: Suspicious, Tuoba Yue entered the palace with a sharp blade to wait for the emperor, preparing to do something treacherous.

古文：叔孙俊疑之。窃视其怀有刃，执而赐死。
现代文：叔孙俊对拓跋悦产生怀疑，暗暗注意到他怀中有利刃，就将他抓起来并赐死。
English: Uncle Sun Jun had doubts about Tuoba Yue, and secretly noticed a sharp edge in his chest, so he arrested him and sentenced him to death.

古文：弟崇，太武诏令袭桓王爵。
现代文：拓跋悦的弟弟崇，太武帝让他承袭陈留桓王的爵位。
English: Tuoba Yue's younger brother, Chong, was given the title of Chen Liu Kuan by Emperor Taibu.

古文：崇性沉厚。
现代文：拓跋崇性格深沉稳重。
English: Tuoba Chong's character is deep and steady.

古文：初，卫王死后，道武欲敦宗亲之义，诏引诸王子弟入宴。
现代文：起先，卫王仪死后，道武帝想要和皇室宗亲加深感情，就下诏召见各亲王的子弟进宫饮宴。
English: At first, after the death of Wei Wangyi, Emperor Daowu wanted to deepen his feelings with the imperial family, so he issued a decree to invite the children of the princes to the palace banquet.

古文：常山王素等三十余人咸谓与卫王相坐，疑惧。皆出逃遁，将奔蠕蠕，唯崇独至。
现代文：常山王素等三十多人都以为是要让他们跟卫王仪一起连坐治罪，又惊又疑，准备投奔蠕蠕，只有拓跋崇一人来到内宫。
English: More than thirty people, including Wang Su of Changshan, thought that they were to be punished together with Wei Wang Yi, but they were surprised and suspicious, and prepared to rush to Wurm. Only Tuo Wuzong came to the Inner Palace.

古文：道武见之，甚悦，厚加礼赐，遂宠敬之，素等于是亦安。
现代文：道武帝见他之后，非常高兴，格外厚遇，加赐给许多东西，因而对他宠信和敬重，拓跋素等人知道后也就安心了。
English: After seeing him, Emperor Daowu was very pleased, treated him exceptionally well, and gave him many things. As a result, he was favored and respected. After knowing this, Tuoba Su and others felt at ease.

古文：久之，拜并州刺史，有政绩。
现代文：过了很久，任命他担任并州刺史，很有政绩。
English: After a long time, he was appointed to serve as the governor of the state, with great political achievements.

古文：翌子晖。晖字叔平，须眉如画，进止可观。
现代文：跟从征讨蠕蠕时，他另率各军从大泽出行，越过涿耶山，威震漠北。死后，被谥为 景王 。义宁公元晖字叔平，须眉长得就像画的一样，举止文雅可观。
English: When he followed the expedition to subjugate the Cree, he also led the armies to travel from Osawa, over Mount Joya, to the north of the earthquake-prone desert. After his death, he was exiled as King Jing. In the Yining era, he was nicknamed Shuping. His mustache was as long as a painting, and his manners were elegant.

古文：好涉猎书记，少得美名于京下。
现代文：喜欢阅读书、记，自幼在京城得到赞誉。
English: He likes to read and write, and has been praised in Beijing since he was a child.

古文：周文礼之，命与诸子游处，每同砚席，情契甚厚。
现代文：周文帝以礼相待，让他和儿子们一起游玩相处，经常同用砚台，同坐一席，情谊深厚。
English: Zhou Wendi treated each other with courtesy, letting him and his sons play together, often using the ring together, sitting together, and having a deep friendship.

古文：再迁武伯下大夫。
现代文：被任命为武伯下大夫。
English: He was appointed as Wubo Shimodaibu.

古文：时突厥屡为寇患，朝廷将结和亲，令晖买锦彩十万，使突厥。
现代文：当时突厥经常入侵，朝廷打算结交和亲，让元晖购买十万锦纟采，出使突厥。
English: At that time, the Turks often invaded, and the imperial court planned to make friends and relatives, let Yuan Shao buy 100,000 pieces of brocade, and send an envoy to the Turks.

古文：晖说以利害，可汗大悦，遣其名王随献方物。
现代文：元晖向突厥陈说利害关系，可汗大为高兴，便派手下的名王随元晖进贡地方特产。
English: Yuan Shao told the Turk Chen that there was a conflict of interest, and the Khan was so pleased that he sent his great-great-grandson to follow Yuan Shao and bring tribute of local specialties.

古文：俄拜仪同三司。
现代文：不久，元晖被任命为仪同三司。
English: Soon, Geng Yao was appointed as the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：周武帝之娉突厥后，令晖致礼。
现代文：周武帝聘突厥皇后时，让元晖前去送聘礼。
English: When Emperor Zhou Wu engaged the Turkish empress, he asked Yuan Shao to come to present the engagement gift.

古文：授开府，转司宪大夫。
现代文：又被任命为开府，转司宪大夫。
English: He was also appointed as the head of the prefectural government, and later as the constitutional doctor.

古文：及平关东，使晖安集河北，封义宁子。
现代文：当讨平关东后，让元晖安定河北，封为义宁子。
English: After leveling Kanto, let Yuan Shao stabilize Hebei, and seal it as Yining.

古文：隋文帝总百揆，加上开府，进爵为公。
现代文：隋文帝又任命他总百揆，加封开府，晋为公爵。
English: Sui Emperor Wen also appointed him as the general of Baekje, and promoted him to the rank of duke.

古文：开皇初，拜都官尚书，兼领太仆。
现代文：开皇初年，任都官尚书，兼任太仆。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was appointed as the official of the capital, and concurrently served as the eunuch.

古文：奉诏决杜阳水灌三畤原，溉舄卤之地数千顷，人赖其利。
现代文：他奉诏令去挖杜阳水浇灌三原，灌溉低洼盐碱地几千顷，民众因而得到好处。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to dig the Duyang Reservoir to irrigate the Three Plains, irrigating thousands of hectares of low-lying saline and alkaline land, and the people benefited from it.

古文：再迁兵部尚书，监漕渠之役。
现代文：再升任兵部尚书，监督河渠各种工程。
English: He was then promoted to the post of Hyobusho (Minister of Military) and supervised various river and canal projects.

古文：未几，坐事免。
现代文：不久，因事免官。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties as a result.

古文：顷之，拜魏州刺史，颇有惠政。
现代文：很快又被任命为魏州刺史，很有仁政。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Weizhou, and was very benevolent.

古文：后以疾去职，卒于京师。
现代文：后来因疾病而离职，死在京城。
English: He later resigned due to illness and died in Kyoto.

古文：帝嗟悼久之，敕鸿胪监护丧事，谥曰元。
现代文：皇帝追悼他，叹息了许久，传旨由鸿胪寺处理丧事，谥为 元 。
English: The emperor mourned him, sighed for a long time, and sent an order to Hongye Temple to handle the funeral.

古文：子肃嗣，位光禄少卿。
现代文：他的儿子名肃，继承他爵位，任光禄少卿。
English: His son, Meitsu, inherited his title and became Ren Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：肃弟仁，器性明敏，位日南郡丞。
现代文：肃的弟弟名仁，本性聪明机敏，任日南郡丞。
English: Suh's younger brother, Naehito, was clever and quick-witted by nature, and was appointed as Nichinan County magistrate.

古文：虔兄顗，性严重少言。道武常敬之，雅有谋策。
现代文：陈留王拓跋虔的哥哥拓跋瞝，性情严肃，沉默寡言，道武帝非常敬重他，他也善于进献良策。
English: Chen Liu Wang's elder brother, Tuobao, was serious and taciturn. Emperor Daowu held him in high esteem, and he was also good at coming up with good strategies.

古文：从平中山，以功赐爵蒲城侯。特见宠厚，给鼓吹羽仪，礼同岳牧。
现代文：跟从讨平中山时，因功而赐爵为蒲城侯，特别受宠信和厚遇，给予鼓吹羽仪，如同诸侯州牧的礼节。
English: When he fought against Zhongshan, he was awarded the title of Lord of Pucheng for his service. He was especially favored and treated well, and was given the etiquette of blowing a feather, just like the etiquette of the governors of the states.

古文：莅政以威信著称，居官七年，乃以元易干代顗为郡。
现代文：在职期间，以威信著称。任职七年以后，皇帝任命元易干代替瞭当郡守。
English: During his tenure, he was known for his prestige. After seven years in office, the emperor appointed Yuan Yikang to replace him as county governor.

古文：时易干子万言得宠于道武，易干恃其子，轻忽于顗，不告其状，轻骑卒至，排顗坠床，而据其坐。
现代文：当时，元易干的儿子万言得到道武帝的宠信，他便恃着儿子的关系，轻视拓跋瞝，也不先告诉原因，轻骑突然来到郡中，把拓跋瞝从床上推下来，自己占据瞭的座位。
English: At that time, Yuan Yigang's son Wan Yan was favored by Emperor Daowu. He took advantage of his son's relationship, despised Tuobao, and without first telling the reason, he suddenly came to the county, pushed Tuobao off the bed, and occupied the seat.

古文：顗不知代己，谓以罪见捕。
现代文：拓跋瞝并不知道元易干是来代替自己职务的，还以为是因罪被捕。
English: Tuobao did not know that Yuan Yigang had come to take his place, and thought that he had been arrested for a crime.

古文：既而知之，耻其侮慢，谓易干曰： 我更满被代，常也。汝无礼见辱，岂可容哉！ 
现代文：后来弄清情况，耻于受欺负侮辱，便对元易干说 ：我因更换而被你替职，这是正常的，你毫无礼节来侮辱我，怎么能够容忍！ 
English: Later, after clarifying the situation, ashamed of being bullied and insulted, he said to Yuan Yigang: I was replaced by you because of the replacement, this is normal, you insulted me without courtesy, how can you tolerate it!

古文：文成即位，除秦州刺史，进爵陇西公。
现代文：于是把元易干捆起来杀掉。然后把情况详细报告朝廷，道武帝赞赏他的胆气。
English: So he tied up Yuan Yigang and killed him. He then reported the situation in detail to the imperial court, and Emperor Daowu appreciated his courage.

古文：卒，谥曰定公。
现代文：万言多次陈诉父亲的冤情，道武帝才下诏让拓跋瞝出钱赎罪。
English: Wanyan repeatedly complained about his father's grievances, but Emperor Daowu ordered Tuobao to pay the money to atone for his sins.

古文：子琛袭爵。毗陵王顺，地干之子也。性疏狠。
现代文：拓跋瞝便自己前来请求处置，道武帝赦免了，又连同赎罪钱也免除了。后来病死。毗陵王拓跋顺是地干的儿子，性格粗俗而又凶狠。
English: Emperor Daowu pardoned Tuobasun and exempted him along with the atonement money. He later died of illness. Viling King Tuobasun was the son of a farmer and had a vulgar and fierce character.

古文：登国初，赐爵南安公。
现代文：登国初年，赐爵位为南安公。
English: In the first year after ascending to the throne, he was given the title of Nan'an Gong.

古文：及道武讨中山，留顺守京师。
现代文：当道武帝讨伐中山时，留顺镇守京都。
English: When Emperor Daowu campaigned against Nakayama, the town of Rusun guarded Kyoto.

古文：柏肆之败，军人有亡归者，言大军奔散，不知帝所在。
现代文：道武帝在柏肆初遭失败时，军中有人逃回来报告说，大军已经逃散了，也不知道道武帝在什么地方。
English: When Emperor Daowu suffered his first defeat at Paozhu, someone in the army fled back and reported that the army had dispersed and they didn't know where Emperor Daowu was.

古文：顺闻之，欲自立，纳莫题谏，乃止。
现代文：拓跋顺听说以后，就想自立为帝，后采纳了莫题的劝谏，才停下。
English: After hearing this, Tuoba Shun wanted to become emperor on his own, and only stopped when he was persuaded to do so.

古文：时贺力眷等聚众作乱于阴馆，顺讨之不克。乃从留官自白登南入繁畤故城，阻氵垒水为固，以宁人心。
现代文：这时，贺力眷等人在阴馆聚众作乱，拓跋顺攻打他们但未能打败，便听从留守官员们的意见，从白登的南面进入繁故城，据守飈水防守，以安定人心。
English: At this time, He Lixin and others gathered a crowd in the mortuary to make a disturbance. Tuobashun attacked them but failed to defeat them. They listened to the opinions of the remaining officials and entered the bustling old city from the south of Baidu, and guarded the defense of Surabaya to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：库汗明于断决，每奉使察行州镇，折狱以情，所历皆称之。秦州父老诣阙乞库汗为刺史者，前后千余人。
现代文：道武帝赞赏他的作法，晋封为王爵，任司隶校尉。道武帝喜爱黄、老之术，多次召集各亲王和朝臣们，亲自为他们讲解，在座的人无不十分恭敬严肃，惟独拓跋顺坐着睡觉，看也不看一眼在那里吐口水。
English: Emperor Daowu appreciated his way of doing things and promoted him to the rank of prince and made him a lieutenant of the imperial guard. Emperor Daowu loved the arts of the yellow and the old, and many times he called together princes and courtiers to explain them in person. Everyone present was very respectful and serious, except for Tuo Baozhun, who sat down to sleep and spat without even looking up.

古文：朝廷许之，未及遣，遇病卒。
现代文：道武帝非常恼火，罢免了他的职务，以王爵在家去世。
English: Emperor Daowu was very angry, dismissed him from his post, and he died at home as a prince.

古文：子古辰袭。窟咄，昭成崩后，苻洛以其年长，逼徙长安。
现代文：拓跋窟咄在昭成皇帝去世以后，苻洛因为他年长，逼他迁往长安。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhaocheng, Tuoba Grottoes was forced to move to Chang'an due to his old age.

古文：苻坚礼之，教以书学。
现代文：苻坚以礼相待，教他读书。
English: Yan Jian treated him with courtesy and taught him to read.

古文：因乱，随慕容永东迁。永以为新兴太守。
现代文：因内乱，便跟着慕容永东迁，慕容永委任他当新兴太守。
English: Due to civil unrest, he moved east with Murong Yong, and Murong Yong appointed him as the new governor.

古文：刘显之败，遣弟亢掞等迎窟咄。遂逼南界，于是诸部骚动。
现代文：刘显失败以后，派他的弟弟亢瞛等前来迎接窟咄，进而入侵南部边界，于是各部落发生骚动。
English: After Liu Xian's defeat, he sent his brother Zou and others to meet the enemy, and then invaded the southern border, so the tribes rioted.

古文：道武左右于桓等谋应之，同谋人单马干以告帝。
现代文：道武帝身边的人于桓等准备策应他，同谋人单乌干把这个阴谋报告道武帝。
English: Emperor Daowu's entourage, including Yu Huan, prepared to plot against him, and his co-conspirator Shan Wukan reported the plot to Emperor Daowu.

古文：帝虑骇人心，沉吟未发。
现代文：道武帝担心会引起人心更加惊骇，考虑了很久还没有采取行动。
English: Emperor Daowu, fearing that this would cause even more consternation, thought about it for a long time but did not take any action.

古文：后三日，桓以谋白其舅穆崇。又告之，帝乃诛桓等五人，余莫题等七姓悉原不问。
现代文：过了三天，于桓又将这一阴谋告诉了他的舅舅穆崇，穆崇又来告诉道武帝，道武帝便杀掉了于桓等五人，其余莫题等七姓人一概不追究。
English: Three days later, Yu Huan told the plot to his uncle Mu Chong, who in turn told Emperor Daowu. Emperor Daowu killed five people, including Yu Huan, and did not investigate the other seven people, including Mogi.

古文：帝虑内难，乃北逾阴山，幸贺兰部，遣安同及长孙漫征兵于慕容垂。
现代文：道武帝担心有内乱，便北越阴山，前往贺兰部，同时派安同和长孙漫到慕容垂那里求援兵。
English: Emperor Daowu was worried about civil unrest, so he went to Helanbu in the mountains of North Vietnam. At the same time, he sent Andong and his eldest grandson Man to Murongtang to ask for reinforcements.

古文：贺曼亡奔窟咄，安同间行，遂达中山。
现代文：贺曼逃奔窟咄，安同从小道前行，因而到达中山。
English: Hallman fled to the cave, and together they walked along the path and arrived at Zhongshan.

古文：慕容垂遣子贺驎步骑六千以随之。
现代文：慕容垂派儿子贺带领步骑兵六千人随安同前来。
English: Murong Du sent his son He to lead six thousand infantry and cavalry to accompany An Tong.

古文：安同与垂使人兰纥俱还，达牛川，窟咄兄子意烈捍之。
现代文：安同和慕容垂的使者兰纥同回，到达牛川时，窟咄哥哥的儿子意烈出来阻挡。
English: Andong and Murongdiao's emissary, Lan Xun, returned together, and when they reached Niu River, the elder brother's son bravely came out to stop them.

古文：安同乃隐藏于商贾囊中。至暮，乃入空井得免，仍奔贺驎。
现代文：安同便隐藏在商贩们的行囊中，到天黑时，进空井躲避才免于被杀。
English: Andong was then hidden in the travelling bags of the merchants, and when it got dark, he had to hide in an empty well to avoid being killed.

古文：军既不至，而稍前逼贺染干。贺染干阴怀异端，乃为窟咄来侵北部。
现代文：他依旧去找贺。援军没有到达，而敌人向前进逼。贺染干暗中怀有异心，替窟咄来进犯北部。
English: He still went to look for He. Reinforcements did not arrive, and the enemy pushed forward. He Dyed Dry secretly harbored ill will, and came to attack the northern part of the country.

古文：人皆惊骇，莫有固志。
现代文：人心惶惶，没有坚守的决心。
English: People's hearts are in turmoil, and there is no determination to stick to it.

古文：于是北部大人叔孙普洛节及诸乌丸亡奔卫辰。
现代文：于是，北部大人叔孙普洛节和各乌丸人都逃亡投奔卫辰。
English: As a result, the northern adults, uncles, and grandsons of Purosai and all the Kumars fled to Yechen.

古文：贺驎闻之，遽遣安同、硃谭等来。
现代文：贺得知消息，立即派安同、朱谭等前来。
English: When He learned the news, he immediately sent Andong, Zhu Tan and others to come.

古文：既知贺驎军近，众乃少定。
现代文：当得知贺军队已离这里很近时，众人这才稍微安定下来。
English: When they learned that He's army was very close to here, the crowd calmed down a bit.

古文：道武自弩山幸牛川，窟咄进屯高柳。
现代文：道武帝从弩山到金川，窟咄进驻高柳。
English: Emperor Daowu traveled from Shaoshan to Jinchuan, and finally settled in Gaoliu.

古文：道武复使安同诣贺驎，因克会期。
现代文：道武帝又让安同去见贺，约定会兵的日期。
English: Emperor Daowu also asked Andong to meet with He and set a date for the meeting.

古文：安同还，帝逾参合，出代北，与贺驎会于高柳。
现代文：安同回来以后，道武帝越过参合，出兵代地，和贺兵会高柳。
English: After the return of Andong, Emperor Daowu crossed the Senghe, dispatched troops in place, and congratulated Gaoliu.

古文：窟咄穷迫，望旗奔走，遂为卫辰杀之。
现代文：窟咄势孤力单，望见旗子就逃奔，于是被卫辰杀死。
English: Grotto was all alone, ran away at the sight of the flag, and was killed by Wei Chen.

古文：帝悉收其众，贺驎执帝别归中山。
现代文：道武帝全部接收了他的部众，贺和道武帝告别，回归中山。
English: Emperor Daowu received all of his subordinates. He and Emperor Daowu bid farewell and returned to Zhongshan.

