古文：初四日自驮朴西南行一里，有石垣东起江岸，西属于山，是为左州、崇善分界。
现代文：初四日从驮朴取道到太平府。向西南走一里，有石墙起自东面的江岸向西连接着山，这是左州、崇善县的分界线。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, I walked one mile to the southwest from Xiapu Trail to Taiping Prefecture. A stone wall connected the mountains from the east bank of the river to the west. This is the dividing line between Zuozhou and Chongzhen County.

古文：由垣出，循山溯江南行，三里，越一涸涧，又四里为新铺，数家之聚。
现代文：由石墙出来，沿山溯江往南行，三里，越过一条干涸的山涧，又走四里是新铺，是个几家人的村落。
English: Out of the stone wall, along the mountains and rivers to the south, three miles, over a dry ridge, and four miles away is Xinpu, a village of several families.

古文：江流从正南来，陆路遂西南转。
现代文：江流从正南流来，陆路于是往西南转。
English: The river flowed from due south, so the land route turned to the southwest.

古文：四里，复过一涸涧，涧底多石，上有崩桥，曰冲登桥。
现代文：四里，再次过了一条干涸的山涧，涧底石头很多，涧上有座倒塌了的桥，叫冲登桥。
English: After four miles, I passed a dry mountain ridge again. There were a lot of stones at the bottom of the ridge, and there was a collapsed bridge on the ridge. It was called Chongden Bridge.

古文：其内有堡。从此南上，盘陟冈阜三里，复与江遇。
现代文：从此向南上走，盘旋爬升在冈峦土阜间三里，再次与江流相遇。
English: From here, I walked southward, circling and climbing for three miles between the hills and the soil, and once again encountered the river.

古文：其上有营房数家，曰崩勘。
现代文：江岸上有个几家人的营房，叫崩勘。
English: On the bank of the river, there is a barracks for several families, called "Plunge."

古文：又南五里，转一山嘴，其后山中有村曰驮竺。盘其东垂，乃循山南西向行，于是回崖联蹁，上壁甚峻拔，下石甚玲珑。
现代文：又向南五里，转过一个山嘴，绕过它的东垂，就沿着山南向西行，在这里回绕的山崖连续不断，上面的崖壁非常陡峻挺拔，下边的岩石十分玲珑精巧。
English: Another five miles to the south, turn around a hilltop, bypass its eastern slope, and follow the south of the mountain to the west. Here, the surrounding cliffs are continuous. The cliffs above are very steep and straight, and the rocks below are very delicate.

古文：二里，路南复突一危峰，遂入山夹。
现代文：二里，路南又突起一座险峰，于是走入山中的峡谷。
English: Two miles to the south of the road, another dangerous peak rises, and we enter a canyon in the mountains.

古文：盘之而西又一里，转南二里，登媚娘山。
现代文：回绕在峡谷中又向西走一里，转向南二里，登上媚娘山。
English: Go around the canyon and walk west for another mile, turn south for two miles, and climb Mount Mei Niang.

古文：其处峰峦四合，中悬一土阜为脊。
现代文：此处峰峦四面合拢，中间悬着一座土山形成的山脊。
English: Here, the peaks close in on all four sides, with a ridge formed by an earthen mound hanging in the middle.

古文：越之而南下，东南三里，路侧有窞一圆，名龙井。下坠五六丈，四围大径三丈，俱纯石环壁。
现代文：越过山脊往南下走，向东南三里，路旁有个圆形深坑，向下探坠五六丈，四周直径大三丈，全是纯石环绕成的坑壁。
English: Crossing the ridge to the south, three miles to the southeast, there is a round deep pit by the roadside, plunging down five or six meters, with a diameter of three meters around, all of which are pure stone surrounded by a pit wall.

古文：坠空缀磴而下，下底甚平，东北裂一门，透门以入，其内水声潺潺，路遂昏黑。
现代文：沿悬缀的石瞪往下坠，下面底部十分平坦，东北方裂开一个洞口，穿过洞口进去，洞内水声潺潺，路便昏黑下来。
English: Along the overhanging stones, the gazelle falls down, the bottom is very flat below, a hole is cracked in the northeast, go through the hole, the water in the cave is murky, and the road is darkened.

古文：践崖扪隙，其下忽深不可测。
现代文：踏着山崖摸着石缝走，脚下忽然深不可测。
English: Stepping on the cliff and feeling the cracks in the stone, you suddenly find yourself at the bottom of the abyss.

古文：久之，光渐启，回见所入处，一石柱细若碧笋，中悬其间，上下连属，旁有石板平庋，薄若片云，声若戛击金树。
现代文：很久后，渐渐开始有亮光，回头见进来的地方，一根细石柱好似碧绿的竹笋，耸在洞中间，上下相连，旁边有石板平架着，薄如云片，声音如同敲击铜柱。
English: After a long time, there gradually began to be light. Looking back, where the crane came in, there was a thin stone pillar like a green bamboo pole, towering in the middle of the cave, connected up and down, with a stone slab next to it, thin as a cloud, and the sound was like striking a copper pillar.

古文：至其洞，虽不甚宏而奇妙，得之路旁，亦异也。
现代文：唯有龙井陷下去仍有底，所以得以坠下去观玩。
English: Only Longjing still has a bottom, so you can fall down and watch.

古文：其上有一亭，将就圮。由此西南出山，又四里，而江自壶关东垂北向而至。溯之复南二里，升陟冈阜又二里，抵壶关。
现代文：由此向西南出山，又走四里，而江流自壶关东垂向北流到这里。溯江再向南行二里，升登在山冈土阜间又是二里，抵达壶关。
English: From there, I went out of the mountain to the southwest and walked another four miles, while the river flowed from the east of Kuguan to the north to here. I followed the river for another two miles to the south, climbed another two miles between mountains and hills, and reached Kuguan.

古文：丽江西自龙州来，抵关之西，折而南，绕城南，东转而北，复抵关之东，乃东北流去。
现代文：关内旧时唯有守关的宅院四五间，今天有位菜斋老和尚在左边建了映霞庵，又在后边盖了个施茶的亭子。我下午到了庵里，便留下来歇在庵中。壶关在太平府城北一里多处。丽江从西面自龙州流来，流抵壶关的西边，折向南，绕过城南，在城东转向北流，又抵达壶关的东边，于是向东北流去。
English: In the old days, there were only four or five watchtowers in Kwanai. Today, an old monk has built a hermitage on the left and a tea pavilion on the back. When I arrived at the hermitage in the afternoon, I stayed and rested in the hermitage. Kuguan is more than a mile north of the city of Taiping. The Lijiang River flows from Longzhou in the west, reaches the west of Kuguan, turns south, bypasses the south of the city, turns north in the east of the city, reaches the east of Kuguan, and then flows to the northeast.

古文：关之东西，正当水之束处，若壶之项，相距不及一里。
现代文：关隘的东西两头，正当江水束拢之处，好像茶壶的脖子，相距不到一里。
English: The two ends of the pass, where the river meets, are like the neck of a teapot, less than a mile apart.

古文：属而垣之，设关于中，为北门锁钥。
现代文：筑起城墙把两头连起来，在中间设了关隘，是北门的军事要地。
English: The city wall was built to connect the two ends, and a pass was set up in the middle, which is the military important place of the north gate.

古文：其南江流回曲间，若壶之腹，则郡城倚焉。
现代文：关隘南面江流弯曲回转之间的地方，好像茶壶的腹部，府城就依傍在那里。
English: The place between the bending and turning of the river on the south side of the pass is like the belly of a teapot, and the prefectural capital is right next to it.

古文：城中纵横相距亦各一里，东西南三面俱濒于江。
现代文：城中纵横相距也各有一里，东、西、南三面都濒临江流。
English: The vertical and horizontal distances in the city are also one mile each, and the east, west and south sides are all close to the river.

古文：城中居舍荒落，千户所门俱以茅盖。
现代文：城中居室房屋荒凉冷落，千户所衙门都用茅草盖顶。
English: The houses in the city are desolate and cold, and the gates of thousands of houses are covered with thatch.

古文：城外惟东北有民店阛闠，余俱一望荒茅舍而已。
现代文：城外唯有东北角有民居街市，其余都是一眼望去荒芜的茅屋而已。
English: Outside the city, only the northeast corner has a residential street market, the rest are deserted huts.

古文：青莲山在郡城北二十余里，碧云洞。
现代文：青莲山在府城北面二十多里，重重山峦在北面遮住半边天。
English: Qinglian Mountain is more than twenty miles north of the capital, and the heavy mountains cover half of the sky in the north.

古文：在壶关正西二里，青莲山南下之支也。
现代文：它的支脉向南延伸，往东下延的就是媚娘岭，向西下延成为碧云洞。碧云洞在壶关正西二里处，是青莲山南下的支脉。
English: Its branch extends to the south, extending to the east is Mei Niangling, and extending to the west is Biyun Cave. Biyun Cave is located two miles west of Juguan, and is the southern branch of Qinglian Mountain.

古文：此洞向无其名，万历癸丑参戎顾凤翔开道叠磴，名之曰碧云，为丽江胜第一。
现代文：石峰突兀，山洞穿透山腰，洞口向东。先从北麓登上三折坂，向东钻过石缝，叫天门，有一处平台。
English: The stone peak is abrupt, the cave penetrates the mountainside, and the mouth of the cave is to the east. First, climb Sanreizaka from the northern foot, drill through the stone slit to the east, called Tianmen, and there is a platform.

古文：顾乃华亭人，松江县人。白云岩在壶关正东四里，路由郡城东渡江，是为归龙村峒今作归垅。
现代文：仍从盘龙窟进去，出到东面的平台，仰面眺望山洞南面，山峰迸裂悬崖分岔，环绕成一个峡谷。
English: I still went in from Panlong Grottoes, came out to the platform on the east, and looked up at the south side of the cave. The mountain peaks and cliffs were split and separated, and surrounded by a canyon.

古文：在江东岸，太平隔江即江州属。是村昔有怪出没江谭，为害江州、太平，人俱莫能制，而思明独来时而杀之，其害乃息。
现代文：于是攀着树枝抓住石缝上爬，直到峡谷山峰攒聚会合之中，又有个向东的洞，洞内都是高耸的岩石攒聚在空中，缝隙裂开坠成深渊，陡削不能放脚，俯瞰无法窥见它的底，用石块投下去，声音清清楚楚响个不停，下边就是观音菩萨佛完中承受下射之光的地方了。
English: So he climbed up the branches, grasping the stone cracks, until there was a cave to the east in the middle of the canyon where the peaks gathered. Inside the cave, towering rocks were gathered in the air. The crevices cracked and fell into the abyss. You couldn't set foot on the steep slope, you couldn't see the bottom from the overlook, and you had to throw a stone down. The sound was clear and clear, and it kept ringing. The lower side was the place where Guanyin Bodhisattva Buddha finally received the light.

古文：故江州以此一峒思明，为思明属，今此峒东南北三面俱届江州，而西抵于江，为太平府，近太平城者惟此一村，而又远属思明，亦用异也。石门塘在壶关外东北半里。
现代文：到这里洞外的胜景这才完了。此洞从前没有名字，万历癸丑年参将顾凤翔开修了道路垒砌了石瞪，把它命名为碧云洞，是丽江的第一胜境。白云岩在壶关正东四里处，路由府城向东渡江，这是归龙村炯。石门塘在壶关外东北半里处。
English: This is the end of the spectacular scenery outside the cave. This cave did not have a name before. Gu Fengxiang, the general of the Year of the Monkey, built a road and a stone wall, and named it Biyun Cave. It is the first victory of Lijiang. Baiyun Rock is located four miles east of Kuguan, and the route of the capital city is east to the river. This is Guilong Village. Shimen Tong is located half a mile northeast of Kuguan.

古文：老虎岩在壶关内西南半里。
现代文：老虎岩在壶关内西南半里处。
English: Tiger Rock is located half a mile southwest of Kuguanai.

古文：铜鼓在郡城内城隍庙，为马伏波遗物，声如吼虎，而状甚异。
现代文：铜鼓在府城内的城隆庙中，是伏波将军马援的遗物，鼓声如虎吼，而形状十分奇特。
English: The bronze drum is a relic of General Ma Yuan of Fubo in the Shing Rong Temple in the capital. The drum sounds like a tiger's roar, and its shape is very peculiar.

古文：闻制府各道亦有一二，皆得之地中者。
现代文：听说总督下属各道也有一两个，都是从地下获得的。
English: I heard that each province under the governor also has one or two, all of which were obtained from the underground.

古文：土人甚重之，间有掘得，价易百牛。
现代文：当地人十分看重它，间或有人挖掘到，价值可以换一百头牛。
English: Locals hold it in high esteem. Occasionally, someone digs it up, and its value can be exchanged for a hundred cows.

古文：初五日晨餐后，即独渡归龙，共四里，西循白云岩。
现代文：初五日早餐后，马上独自渡江到归龙村恫，共走四里，向西沿白云岩走。
English: After breakfast on the fifth day of the first lunar month, I immediately crossed the river alone to Guilong Village. I walked a total of four miles and walked west along Baiyun Rock.

古文：荒坡草塞，没顶蒙面，上既不堪眺望，下复有芒草攒入袜裤间，举足针刺，顷刻不可忍，数步除袜解裤，搜刷净尽，甫再举足，复仍前矣。
现代文：荒坡上茅草塞路，没过头顶蒙在脸上，上方既不能眺望，脚下又有草上的刺钻入袜子裤子间，举脚就像针刺，一刻不可忍受，走几步就脱去袜子解下裤子，全部搜寻刷除干净，刚刚再抬脚，又仍像先前一样了。
English: On the wild slope, the thatch blocked the road, the top of the head was covered with the face, the top could not be seen, at the foot, the thorns on the grass drilled into the socks and trousers, the feet were like needles, the moment was unbearable, take a few steps to take off the socks and remove the trousers, remove all the search brushes, just lift the foot again, and it is still the same as before.

古文：已有一小水自东南峡中出，北潆岩前，上覆藤蔓，下踔江泥，揭涉甚艰。
现代文：不久有条小溪从东南的峡谷中流出来，向北潦洞在白云岩前，上边覆盖着藤枝，脚下踩着水中的稀泥，提起衣服涉水非常艰难。
English: Soon, a small stream flowed out of the southeastern canyon, and it was in front of Baiyun Rock in the north of the cave. The upper side was covered with rattan branches, and the thin mud in the water was underfoot. It was very difficult to lift the clothes and wade through the water.

古文：过溪，抵岩下。棘藤蒙密，既不得路，复无可询，往返徘徊，日遂过午，仍西二里，出归龙，南溯江岸三里，抵金柜、将军两山之间，竟金柜山岩洞不得，三周其北东南三面，又两越其巅，下候东关渡舟，已暮不复来，腹馁甚。
现代文：茅草荆棘湮没阻塞，走遍金柜山找不到岩洞，在它的北、东、南三面绕了三圈，又两次越过山顶，注视江流对面的城池，就像在镜中看胡须眉毛一样清晰。东面就是将军山，一片石崖立在峰头迎着江流，有手执盾牌捍卫城池雄赳赳的气势。环眺府城四面，群峰中独自耸立的这是第一峰。下山等候东关的渡船，已因天黑不再来了，肚子饿极了。
English: The thorns and thistles of the thatch did not block the path, and after walking all over Kinjian Mountain, the crane could not find the cave. It circled three times on its north, east, and south sides, and twice crossed the top of the mountain, gazing at the city across the river, as clear as looking at a bearded eyebrow in a mirror. To the east is the General's Mountain, a stone cliff standing at the peak of the river, holding a shield to defend the city's majestic momentum. Looking around the city, this is the first peak that stands alone among the peaks. The ferry waiting to go down the mountain to Dongguan has

古文：已望见北有一舟东渡，乃随江蹑石一里，抵其处，其舟亦西还。
现代文：不久望见北面有一条船向东过来，便顺着江岸踩着岩石走一里，到了那里，那条船也返回到西岸。
English: Soon he saw a ship to the east to the north, and he walked a mile along the river bank, stepping on the rocks. When he got there, the ship also returned to the west bank.

古文：迁延久之，得一渔舟，渡江而西。
现代文：拖延了很长时间，找到一条渔船，渡到江西岸。
English: After a long delay, they found a fishing boat and crossed to the west bank of the river.

古文：见有卖蕉者，不及觅饭，即买蕉十余枚啖之。
现代文：见到有卖香蕉的人，来不及找饭吃，立即买了十多个香蕉吃下。
English: When he saw someone selling bananas, he had no time to look for something to eat, so he immediately bought more than ten bananas to eat.

古文：亟趋壶关，山雨忽来，暮色亦至。
现代文：急忙赶到壶关，山雨忽然来临，暮色也降临了。
English: Rushing to Kuguan, the mountain rain suddenly came, and dusk also fell.

古文：余问其姓字，乃滕肯堂也。
现代文：初六日我因为归顺州、南丹卫两条路没有决定，赶到班氏神庙求签决定走哪条路。求完签，有几个儒生在庙中祭神，我打听去归顺的路。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, I did not decide which way to go because I did not know the two ways to go to Shunzhou and Nan Danwei, so I rushed to the Ban Temple to ask for a signature to decide which way to go. After asking for a signature, there were several Confucians in the temple to worship God, and I asked the way to go to Shun.

古文：名祚昌。其中最年少者，为其子滕宾王。
现代文：一位年长的立即想替我写信，送给相识的土司。我问了他的姓名和表字，是滕肯堂。其中年纪最轻的，是他的儿子滕宾王。
English: An elderly man immediately wanted to write a letter for me, addressed to an acquaintance of mine. I asked him for his name and signature. It was Tengken-tang. The youngest of them was his son, Tengbin Wang.

古文：名佐。居城中千户所前。
现代文：住在城中千户所前边。
English: He lives in the middle of the city, in front of the town hall.

古文：余乃期造其家，遂还饭于映霞庵。
现代文：我于是约定拜访他家，就返回到映霞庵吃饭。
English: So I made an appointment to visit his home, and then returned to Eixiaan for dinner.

古文：携火炬出壶关，西溯江岸，一里抵演武场北，又西一里，探碧云洞，出入回环者数四，还抵映霞。
现代文：带上火把出了壶关，向西溯江而行，一里到达演武场北面，又向西一里，探了碧云洞，出入环绕了四次，回到映霞庵。
English: They took torches and went out of Jugguan. They walked westward along the Yangtze River. They reached the north side of the martial arts arena one mile away, and then went westward one mile. They explored Biyun Cave, went in and out four times, and returned to Yingxia Temple.

古文：见日色甫下午，度滕已归，仍入城叩其堂。
现代文：见天色刚到下午，估计滕肯堂已归回城中，仍然进城在他的厅堂里叩见了他。
English: Seeing the sky just after noon, it was estimated that Tengken Hall had returned to the city, and still entered the city and met him in his hall.

古文：滕君一见倾盖，即为留酌。
现代文：滕君一见倾心如故，立即挽留饮酒。
English: Teng Jun fell in love at first sight and immediately stopped drinking.

古文：其酒颇佳，略似京口，其茶则松萝之下者，皆此中所无也。
现代文：他的酒很美，略似京口酒，他的茶却是松萝茶中的下品，都是这一带所没有的。
English: His wine is very beautiful, a bit like Kyoguchi wine, but his tea is inferior to pineapple tea, which is not found in this area.

古文：坐中滕君为言： 欲从归顺行，须得参戎一马符方妙。
现代文：坐谈中滕君发话说： 想要从归顺走，必须得到参将的一个调马的兵符才好。
English: During the conversation, Teng Jun said: "If you want to go from Guishun, you must get a horse-drawn banner from the general.

古文：明晨何不同小儿一叩之乎？ 余谢不敏。
现代文：明早何不同我儿子去叩拜他一次呢？  我辞谢不敢当。
English: What difference does it make if my son goes to give him a kiss in the morning? I can't say no.

古文：滕曰： 无已，作一书可乎？ 
现代文：滕肯堂说： 不得已，写一封信总可以吧？ 
English: Tengkendang said: I have no choice, but to write a letter, right?

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头同意了他。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：期明日以书往，乃别而返壶关。
现代文：约定明天把信送给我，于是分手返回壶关。
English: They agreed to deliver the letter to me tomorrow, so they parted and returned to Kuguan.

古文：初七日雨色霏霏，酿寒殊甚。
现代文：初七日雨色霏霏，寒气久积冷得特别厉害。
English: The first seven days of the month were rainy, and the cold weather was particularly severe.

古文：菜斋师见余衣单，为解夹衣衣我。
现代文：菜斋禅师见我衣服单薄，就脱下夹衣给我穿，这才可以出门。
English: Seeing that my clothes were too thin, the zazen master took off his jacket and put it on me, so that I could go out.

古文：始可出而见风。
现代文：早餐后，滕君到来。
English: After breakfast, Teng Jun arrived.

古文：晨餐后，滕君来。
现代文：分别之后，我写了递交给参将的信。
English: After the separation, I wrote a letter to be handed over to the general.

古文：既别，余作畀参戎书。饭而抵其家，则滕自壶关别后，即下舟与乃郎他棹，将暮未返，雨色复来，余不能待而返壶关。
现代文：吃饭后来到滕家，滕肯堂却自从在壶关告别后，立即下船与他儿子划船到其他地方去了，天将黑还未返回，雨又下起来，我不能等下去便返回壶关。
English: After the meal, I went to Teng's house, but Tengken-tang, after bidding farewell to Kuguan, immediately got off the boat and rowed with his son to another place. It was still dark when I returned, and it was raining again. I couldn't wait any longer and returned to Kuguan.

古文：雨少止，西觅老虎岩，坠洼穿莽，终不可得。
现代文：雨略停下来，向西去寻找老虎岩，坠下洼地穿越丛莽，始终不能找到。 
English: The rain stopped for a bit, and I went west to look for Tiger Rock. I fell into a depression and walked through the undergrowth, but I still couldn't find it.

古文：且谓余何不暂馆于此，则学宫诸友俱有束脩即读书人的薪奉之奉，可为道路资。
现代文：初八日我再次到滕家，把给参将的信交给他。滕肯堂再次留我吃饭，在池中用网捕来鱼，从树上摘来柑子剖开，因而为我尽吐他的生平。并且说我为何不暂时在此地开馆授徒，这里学宫中的诸位朋友都会有薪金奉送，可作为路上用的旅费。我再次辞谢自己无能。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I went to Teng's house again and handed him the letter to the general. Tengken-tang once again kept me for dinner, caught fish with a net in the pool, picked and cut mandarin oranges from the tree, and thus told me all about his life. And said why I did not temporarily open a museum here to teach students. Here, all friends in the palace of learning would receive a salary, which could be used as travel expenses on the road. I again thanked myself for my incompetence.

古文：余复谢不敏。
现代文：穿出壶关，已是傍晚了。
English: It was already late afternoon when we passed through the pass.

古文：透出壶关，已薄暮矣。有僧自南宁崇善寺来，言静闻以前月廿八子时回首指逝世，是僧亲为下火而来。其死离余别时才五日，云白竟不为置棺，不知所留银钱并衣箧俱何人干没也？
现代文：有僧人自南宁崇善寺前来，说静闻在前个月廿八日子时逝世，这位僧人亲自举行火葬。他死时距我离别时才五天，云白竟然不为他置办棺木，不知留下的银钱及衣箱都被什么人吞没了？
English: A monk came from Chongzen Temple in Nanning and said that Jingwen died on the 28th day of the previous month, and the monk himself held a cremation. When he died, it was only five days after I left. Yun Bai did not even arrange a coffin for him. I do not know who swallowed up the money and suitcases he left behind.

古文：为之哀悼，终夜不寐。
现代文：为了他哀伤悼念，整夜不眠。
English: I couldn't sleep all night because of his sad memory.

古文：初九日午饭后，再入城候所进参戎书。
现代文：初九日午饭后，再次进城等呈给参将的信的回音。
English: After lunch on the 9th day of the first month, I returned to the city and waited for the reply to the letter I had sent to the general.

古文：而滕氏父子犹欲集众留余馆此，故不为即进。
现代文：而滕家父子仍打算邀集众人留我在此开馆，所以不替我立即呈上去。
English: However, Teng Jia and his son still plan to invite everyone to stay here and open a museum for me, so they will not immediately present it to me.

古文：其书立为一初贡方姓者拆。
现代文：那封信立刻被一个刚被选拔为贡生姓方的人拆开。
English: The letter was immediately opened by a man who had just been elected as the new party chairman.

古文：书初录，展转携去，久索而后得之。
现代文：信刚被抄录完，辗转拿了去，要了很久然后才得到它。
English: The letter had just been transcribed, and it took me a long time to get it.

古文：乃复缄之，嘱其速进，必不能留此也。
现代文：于是重新封好信，嘱咐他赶快呈上去，必定不能留在此地。
English: So he resealed the letter and ordered him to submit it as soon as possible. He must not stay here.

古文：初十日晨餐后出游石门。
现代文：初十日早餐后出门游览石门。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, after breakfast, go out to visit the stone gate.

古文：上午抵滕君处，坐甫定，滕宾王持参戎招余柬来，余谢之。
现代文：上午到达滕君那里，刚坐定，滕宾王拿着参将招请我的柬帖来了，我谢过了他。
English: I arrived at Tengjun's place in the morning, and as soon as I was seated, King Tengbin came with a letter of invitation for me, and I thanked him.

古文：已参府中军唐玉屏名尚珠，全州人。
现代文：不久参将府的中军唐玉屏把马牌送给我。
English: Not long after, Tang Yuping, a member of the Chinese army at the General Headquarters, gave me his horse badge.

古文：雨竟不止，是夕遂宿于滕馆。
现代文：我为此登门投递了名帖，回来在滕家吃了饭。雨始终不停，这天夜里便留宿在滕家的客馆里。
English: For this reason, I went to the door to deliver a famous postcard, came back and had dinner at the Teng family. The rain never stopped, and that night I stayed at the Teng family's guest house.

古文：十一日雨。
现代文：十一日下雨。
English: It rained on the 11th.

古文：食息于滕。十二日雨。
现代文：在滕家吃饭休息。十二日下雨。
English: Eating and resting at Teng's house. It rained on the 12th.

古文：食息于滕。
现代文：在滕家吃饭休息。
English: Eat and rest at Teng's house.

古文：迨暮，雨少止，乃别，抵壶关映霞庵。
现代文：到傍晚时，雨渐渐停了，于是告别滕君，抵达壶关映霞庵。
English: In the late afternoon, the rain gradually stopped, so I said goodbye to Teng Jun and arrived at Kuguan Yingxiaan.

古文：是夜夜雨弥甚。
现代文：这天夜里雨更大。
English: It rained harder that night.

古文：十三日阻雨壶关。
现代文：十三日被雨阻在壶关。
English: On the 13th, it was blocked by rain in Kuguan.

古文：十四日仍为雨阻。
现代文：十四日仍被雨所阻。
English: On the 14th, it was still blocked by rain.

古文：余欲往驮朴招顾行，路泞草湿，故栖迟不前。
现代文：我想前去驮朴招唤顾行，道路泥泞荒草湿淋淋的，所以停留不前。
English: I want to go to Zhaopu to invite Gu Xing, but the road is muddy and the grass is wet, so I can't move forward.

古文：十五日雨如故。
现代文：十五日雨依然如故地下着。
English: On the fifteenth day, the rain continued to fall.

古文：有远僧三人自壶关往驮朴，始得寄字顾行，命其倩夫以行李至郡。
现代文：有三个远道而来的僧人自壶关前往驮朴，这才能够寄了字条给顾行，命令他请脚夫带上行李到府城来。
English: It took three monks who had come all the way from Juguan to Lianpu to be able to send a note to Gu Xing, ordering him to ask the porter to bring the luggage to the capital.

古文：十六日夜雨弥甚，达旦不休。
现代文：十六日夜雨更大，通宵达旦不停。
English: On the night of the 16th, the rain became heavier and continued all night.

古文：余引被蒙首而睡，庵僧呼饭乃起。
现代文：我拉被子蒙住头大睡，庵中僧人呼唤吃饭才起床。
English: I pulled the covers over my head and fell into a deep sleep. The monks in the hermitage called me to eat before I could get up.

古文：饭后天色倏开，日中逗影，余乃散步关前，而顾行至矣。
现代文：饭后天色倏地晴开，太阳在中天光影逗人，我便在关前散步，而顾行来到了。
English: After the meal, the sky was bright and clear, and the sun was dazzling in the middle of the sky. I went for a walk in front of the pass, and Gu Xing arrived.

古文：异方两地，又已十余日，见之跃然。
现代文：异乡分在两地，又已有十多天，见到他便十分高兴。
English: It's been more than ten days since he was separated from his hometown, so I'm very happy to see him.

古文：即促站骑觅挑夫，期以十八日行。
现代文：立即催促释站派马找挑夫，约定在十八日动身。
English: Immediately urge the release station to send a horse to find a porter, and agree to leave on the 18th.

古文：十七日早寒甚，起看天光欲曙未曙，而焕赤腾丹，朦胧隐耀，疑为朝华，复恐雨征，以寒甚，仍引被卧。
现代文：十七日早上非常寒冷，起床来看天色要亮又未亮，而明亮鲜红的红日腾空，朦朦胧胧隐隐照耀，怀疑是早晨的日晕，又担心是有雨的征兆，因为十分寒冷，仍拉被子睡下。
English: On the morning of the 17th, it was very cold. When I got up, I saw that the sky was both bright and not bright, but the bright crimson red sun was soaring, shining dimly and faintly. I suspected that it was morning sunstroke, and I was worried that it was a sign of rain. Because it was very cold, I still pulled the quilt down to sleep.

古文：既而碧天如洗，旭日皎洁，乃起而饭。
现代文：不久碧空如洗，旭日皎洁，于是起床吃饭。
English: Soon the sky was clear and the sun was shining brightly, so he got up to eat.

古文：入别滕君，父子俱出，复归饭映霞。
现代文：进城辞别滕君，他父子都出了门，再归映霞庵吃饭。
English: After bidding farewell to Tengjun when he entered the city, his father and son went out of the door, and then returned to Yingxiaan for dinner.

古文：抵晚入候，适滕君归，留余少酌，且为作各土州书，计中夜乃完。
现代文：到晚上进城等候，适好滕君归来，留我小饮，并且为我写了给各土州的信，估计要到半夜才完。
English: I waited until I got into the city in the evening, just in time for Teng Jun to return, leaving me a small drink, and wrote a letter to each of the provinces for me, estimating that it would take until midnight to finish.

古文：余别之，返宿庵中。
现代文：我告别了他，返回庵中住宿。
English: I said goodbye to him and went back to the hermitage to sleep.

