古文：明主之所导制其臣者，二柄而已矣。
现代文：圣明的君主用来控制臣下的工具，不过是两种权柄罢了。
English: These are but two of the powers with which the holy prince controls his subjects.

古文：二柄者，刑德也。
现代文：两种权柄就是刑和德。
English: The two powers are chastity and virtue.

古文：何谓刑德？
现代文：什么叫刑、德？
English: What do you mean by punishment, De?

古文：曰：杀戮之谓刑，庆赏之谓德。
现代文：回答是：杀戮叫做刑，奖赏就叫德。
English: The answer is: killing is called punishment, reward is called virtue.

古文：为人臣者畏诛罚而利庆赏，故人主自用其刑德，则群臣畏其威而归其利矣。
现代文：做臣子的害怕刑罚而贪图奖赏，所以君主亲自掌握刑赏权力，群臣就会畏惧君主的威势而趋向君主奖赏的利诱。
English: As courtiers fear punishment but crave reward, the monarch personally wields the power of punishment and reward, and courtiers will fear the monarch's authority and gravitate toward the lure of the monarch's reward.

古文：故世之奸臣则不然，所恶，则能得之其主而罪之；所爱，则能得之其主而赏之；今人主非使赏罚之威利出于已也，听其臣而行其赏罚，则一国之人皆畏其臣而易其君，归其臣而去其君矣。
现代文：可是真正的奸臣却不是这样。他们对所憎恶的人，能够从君主那里取得权力予以惩罚；对所喜爱的人，能够从君主那里取得权力予奖赏。如果君主不能使赏罚的威严和利益掌握在自己手里，而是听任他的臣下去施行赏罚，那怎整个国家的人就会害怕奸臣而轻视君主，就都会归附权臣而背离君主了。
English: But this is not the case with true traitors, who can obtain from the prince the power to punish those whom he hates, and the power to reward those whom he loves. If the prince does not have the power to reward and punish in his own hands, but leaves it to his vassals to do so, then the whole country will fear the traitors and despise the prince, and all will turn to the vassals and away from the prince.

古文：此人主失刑德之患也。
现代文：这是君主失去刑赏大权的祸害。
English: This is the scourge of the loss of the sovereign's prerogative to punish and reward.

古文：夫虎之所以能服狗者，爪牙也。使虎释其爪牙而使狗用之，则虎反服于狗矣。
现代文：老虎能制服狗，靠的是爪牙；假使老虎去掉它的爪牙而让狗使用，那么老虎反而会被狗所制服。
English: The tiger can subdue the dog, relying on the minions; if the tiger removes its minions and lets the dog use them, then the tiger will be subdued by the dog.

古文：人主者，以刑德制臣者也。今君人者释其刑德而使臣用之，则君反制于臣矣。
现代文：君主是要靠刑德来制服臣下的，如果做君主的丢掉刑赏大权而让臣下使用，那么君主反而会被臣下所控制了。
English: The monarch is to rely on the virtue of punishment to subdue his subjects. If the monarch loses the power of punishment and reward and allows his subjects to use it, then the monarch will be controlled by his subjects.

古文：故田常上请爵禄而行之群臣，下大斗斛而施于百姓，此简公失德而田常用之也，故简公见弑。
现代文：所以田常向君主请求爵禄而赐给群臣，对下用大斗出小斗进的办法把粮食施舍给百姓，这就是齐简公失去奖赏大权而由田常掌握，简公因而遭到杀害。
English: Therefore, Tian Chang asked the monarch for a knighthood and gave it to the courtiers, and used the method of fighting to give food to the people. This meant that Qi Jian Gong lost the power of reward and was controlled by Tian Chang. As a result, Jian Gong was killed.

古文：子罕谓宋君曰： 夫庆赏赐予者，民之所喜也，君自行之；杀戮刑罚者，民之所恶也，臣请当之。 
现代文：子罕告诉宋桓侯说： 奖赏恩赐是百姓喜欢的，君王自己施行；杀戮刑罚是百姓憎恶的，请让我来掌管。 
English: Zi Han told Song Huan Hou, "Rewards and gifts are favored by the people, and the king himself executes them; killing and punishment are abhorred by the people, please let me be in charge."

古文：于是宋君失刑而子罕用之，故宋君见劫。
现代文：于是宋桓侯失去刑罚大权而由于罕掌握。宋桓侯因而遭到挟制。
English: As a result, Song Huan Hou lost the power of punishment due to his lack of control. As a result, Song Huan Hou was blackmailed.

古文：田常徒用德而简公弑，子罕徒用刑而宋君劫。
现代文：田常仅仅掌握了奖赏大权，齐简公就遭到了杀害；子罕仅仅掌握了刑赏大权，宋桓侯就遭到了挟制。
English: Tian Chang only had the power of reward, while Qi Jian Gong was killed; Zi Han only had the power of punishment and reward, while Song Huan Hou was blackmailed.

古文：故今世为人臣者兼刑德而用之，则是世主之危甚于简公、宋君也。
现代文：所以当代做臣下的如果统摄了刑赏大权，那么这代君主将会遭受到比齐简公、宋桓侯更大的危险。
English: Therefore, if the current generation of vassals took away the power of punishment and reward, then this generation of monarchs would be in greater danger than Qi Jian Gong and Song Huan Hou.

古文：故劫杀拥蔽之主非失刑德，而使臣用之而不危亡者，则未尝有也。
现代文：所以被劫杀被蒙蔽的君主，一旦同时失去刑赏大权而由臣下执掌，这样还不导致危亡的情况，是从来没有过的。
English: Therefore, there has never been a situation in which a monarch who was robbed, killed and deceived lost his prerogative of punishment and reward at the same time and was ruled by his vassals, but this did not lead to his death.

古文：人主将欲禁奸，则审合刑名者，言异事也。
现代文：君主要想禁止奸邪，就要仔细去审察形名。形名就是指言论和职事。
English: If a ruler wants to prohibit adultery, he must carefully examine the form name. The form name refers to speech and duties.

古文：为人臣者陈而言，君以其言授之事，专以其事责其功。
现代文：做臣下的发表一定的言论，君主根据他的言论授予相应的职事，专就他的职事责求他的功效。
English: When a subject makes a certain speech, the monarch grants him a corresponding post according to his speech, and demands his performance of his duties.

古文：功当其事，事当其言，则赏；功不当其事，事不当其言，则罚。
现代文：功效与他所作的事情相当，职事和他的言论相当，就奖赏；功效不符合职事，职事和他的言论不想当，就惩罚他。
English: If his performance is commensurate with what he has done, if his work is commensurate with his words, he will be rewarded; if his performance is not commensurate with his work, if his work is not commensurate with his words, he will be punished.

古文：故群臣其言大而功小者则罚，非罚小功也，罚功不当名也；群臣其言小而功大者亦罚，非不说于大功也，以为不当名也。
现代文：所以群臣言大功小的就要处罚；这并不是惩罚他功小，而是要罚他的功与他的言论不相当。群臣言小功大的也要罚；这不是不喜欢建立的大的功效。
English: Therefore, the courtiers said that he should be punished for a small achievement; this is not to punish him for a small achievement, but to punish his achievement for not being commensurate with his words. The courtiers also said that he should be punished for a small achievement; this is not to dislike the establishment of a large achievement.

古文：害甚于有大功，故罚。
现代文：而是他的言行不符的危害比立下大功还要大，所以要罚。
English: On the contrary, the harm caused by his words and deeds not matching is greater than the great contribution he has made, so he should be punished.

古文：昔者韩昭侯醉而寝，典冠者见君之寒也，故加衣于君之上，觉寝而说，问左右曰： 谁加衣者？ 
现代文：从前韩昭侯喝醉酒睡着了，掌帽官见他冷，就给他身上盖了衣服。韩昭侯睡醒后很高兴，问近侍说： 是谁给我盖的衣服？ 
English: Once upon a time, Han Zhaohou was drunk and fell asleep. When the hatter saw that he was cold, he covered his body with clothes. Han Zhaohou was very happy when he woke up. He asked the attendant, "Who covered my clothes?"

古文：左右对曰： 典冠。 
现代文：近侍回答说： 是掌帽官。 
English: The aide-de-camp replied: "He is the cap-bearer."

古文：君因兼罪典衣与典冠。
现代文：昭侯便同时处罚了掌衣官和掌帽官。
English: As a result, Akihiro punished both the officer in charge of clothing and the officer in charge of hats.

古文：其罪典衣，以为失其事也；其罪典冠，以为越其职也。
现代文：他处罚掌衣官，是认为掌衣官失职；他处罚掌帽官，是认为掌帽官越权。
English: If he punishes the cloakroom attendant, it is because he thinks the cloakroom attendant is derelict in his duty; if he punishes the hat office attendant, it is because he thinks the hat office attendant is overstepping his authority.

古文：非不恶寒也，以为侵官之害甚于寒。
现代文：并非不厌恶寒冷，而是认为臣下违反职责的危害比寒冷更大。
English: It wasn't that he didn't like the cold, but that he thought it was more harmful for his vassals to violate their duties than to be cold.

古文：故明主之畜臣，臣不越官而有功，不得陈言而不当。
现代文：所以明君驾驭臣下，臣下不能越权去立功，不能说话不恰当。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming controls his vassals, and his vassals must not exceed their authority to make meritorious contributions, and must not speak improperly.

古文：越官则死，不当则罪。
现代文：超越职权就该处死，言行不一就该治罪。
English: Those who exceed their authority should be put to death, and those who do not act in accordance with their words should be punished.

古文：守业其官，所言者贞也，则群臣不得朋党相为矣。
现代文：臣子恪守职责，那他的言论就要与事实相符，群臣就不可能结党营私了。
English: If a vassal sticks to his duties, then his remarks must be consistent with the facts, and it will be impossible for the vassals to form a party.

古文：人主有二患：任贤，则臣将乘于贤以劫其君；妄举，则事沮不胜。
现代文：君主有两种祸患：任用贤人，臣下就会依仗贤能的名声来威逼君主；随便任用举荐的人才，就会事情就会败坏不成功。
English: There are two evils for a monarch: if he appoints a wise man, his subjects will rely on the reputation of virtue to intimidate the monarch; if he appoints a person recommended by others, things will go wrong and not succeed.

古文：故人主好贤，则群臣饰行以要群欲，则是群臣之情不效；群臣之情不效，则人主无以异其臣矣。
现代文：所以君主喜欢任用贤能的人，群臣就粉饰行为来迎合君主的欲望，这样群臣的实情便不会显露；群臣的实情不显露，君主无法分辨臣下的好坏。
English: Therefore, the monarch likes to appoint people of merit, and the courtiers whitewash their behavior to meet the monarch's desires, so that the true situation of the courtiers will not be revealed; the true situation of the courtiers will not be revealed, and the monarch will not be able to distinguish between good and bad subjects.

古文：故越王好勇而民多轻死；楚灵王好细腰而国中多饿人；齐桓公妒外而好内，故竖刁自宫以治内；桓公好味，易牙蒸其子首而进之；燕子哙好贤，故子之明不受国。故君见恶，则群臣匿端；君见好，则群臣诬能。人主欲见，则群臣之情态得其资矣。
现代文：燕王子哙喜爱贤才准备将王位让贤，所以子之表面上不接受君位。所以君主流露出厌恶情绪的，群臣就会将这方面的事情掩盖起来；君主流露出喜好情绪的，臣下就会假称自己有这方面的才能。君主的欲望表现出来，群臣就会借此表现自己的情态。
English: Prince Yan loved the wise and was ready to give the throne to the wise, so his son did not accept the throne on the surface. Therefore, if the monarch showed disgust, the courtiers would cover up this matter; if the monarch showed a liking, the subjects would pretend to have this talent. If the monarch's desire was shown, the courtiers would use it to show their mood.

古文：故子之托于贤以夺其君者也，竖刁、易牙，因君之欲以侵其君者也。
现代文：所以子之假托贤名来篡夺君位，竖刁易牙借着君主的欲望来侵害君主。
English: Therefore, the son usurped the throne under the false pretense of being a wise man, and the son used the monarch's desire to infringe on the monarch.

古文：其卒，子哙以乱死，桓公虫流出户而不葬。
现代文：其结果，子哙因兵舌而死，齐桓公死后直到蛆虫爬出门外也得不到安葬。
English: As a result, Zi Yao died because of the soldier's tongue, and after the death of Qi Kuan Gong, he was not buried until the maggots crawled out of the door.

古文：此其故何也？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：人君以情借臣之患也。
现代文：是君主把真情流露给了臣下招致的祸害。
English: It was the monarch who revealed his true feelings to his vassals, incurring the scourge.

古文：人臣之情非必能爱其君也，为重利之故也。
现代文：臣下的真情不一定就是爱戴他的君主，而是看重利益的缘故。
English: The true feeling of a subject is not necessarily to love his sovereign, but to value his interests.

古文：今人主不掩其情，不匿其端，而使人臣有缘以侵其主，则群臣为子之、田常不难矣。
现代文：如果君主不掩盖自己的真情，不隐藏自己的意图，而使臣下有机会来侵害自己，那么群臣充当子之、田常这样的角色就不难了。
English: If the monarch does not cover up his true feelings and does not hide his intentions, but gives his vassals the opportunity to infringe upon him, then it is not difficult for the vassals to play the role of son and son-in-law.

古文：故曰： 去好去恶，群臣见素。 群臣见素，则大君不蔽矣。
现代文：所以说：去掉喜好厌恶，群臣暴露本色。群臣暴露本色，国君就不会受蒙蔽了。
English: Therefore, it is said: Remove the likes and dislikes, and the ministers will reveal their true colors. If the ministers reveal their true colors, the sovereign will not be deceived.

