古文：关羽字云长，本字长生，河东解人也。
现代文：关羽字云长，原来的字叫长生，是河东解县人。
English: Guan Yu's character, Yunchang, was originally called Changsheng. He was from He Donglu County.

古文：亡命奔涿郡。先主於乡里合徒众，而羽与张飞为之御侮。
现代文：当时逃奔到涿郡，先主在乡里聚合部众，而关羽和张飞担任他的护卫。
English: At that time, he fled to Jixian County. His master gathered his followers in the countryside, while Guan Yu and Zhang Fei acted as his bodyguards.

古文：先主为平原相，以羽、飞为别部司马，分统部曲。
现代文：先主担任平原相时，以关羽张飞为别部司马，分别统率部队。
English: When the forefather served as the plain phase, he used Guan Yu Zhang Fei as the other divisional secretary to lead the troops separately.

古文：先主与二人寝则同床，恩若兄弟。
现代文：先主和二人连睡觉都同床，像亲兄弟一样。
English: My husband and I even sleep in the same bed, like brothers.

古文：而稠人广坐，侍立终日，随先主周旋，不避艰险。先主之袭杀徐州刺史车胄，使羽守下邳城，行太守事，而身还小沛。
现代文：他们二人在大庭广众之下，也终日侍立在先主左右，跟随先主四处奔波，不畏艰险，先主攻打并杀死徐州刺史车胄后，派关羽守卫下邳城，行使太守职权，而自己返回小沛。
English: The two of them, in the midst of a large audience, also stood around their forefather all day long. They followed their forefather everywhere, braving hardships. After the forefather attacked and killed Xuzhou Zhishi Chariot, he sent Guan Yu to guard Gancheng, exercise the powers of the Emperor, and return to Xiaopei.

古文：建安五年，曹公东征，先主奔袁绍。
现代文：建安五年，曹操率军东征，先主投奔袁绍。
English: In the 5th year of Jianan, Cao Cao led the army to the east, and Yuan Shao followed.

古文：曹公禽羽以归，拜为偏将军，礼之甚厚。
现代文：曹操擒获关羽后回军，授予他偏将军的职位，对他非常礼遇。
English: After Cao Cao received Guan Yu, he returned to the army and was given the post of general. He was treated very politely.

古文：绍遣大将颜良攻东郡太守刘延於白马，曹公使张辽及羽为先锋击之。
现代文：袁绍派大将颜良在白马攻打东郡太守刘延，曹公派张辽和关羽作为先锋部队攻打他。
English: Yuan Shao sent General Yan Liang to attack the East County Governor Liu Yan in Baima, Cao Gong sent Zhang Liao and Guan Yu to attack him as the vanguard force.

古文：羽望见良麾盖，策马刺良於万众之中，斩其首还，绍诸将莫能当者，遂解白马围。
现代文：关羽望见颜良的车盖，就骑马在众目睽睽之下斩杀颜良，将他的首级斩下，然后返回，袁绍的将领们没有能抵挡他的，就解了白马之围。
English: Guan Yu saw the hood of Yan Liang's car, so he rode on horseback to kill Yan Liang in front of everyone, cut off his head, and then returned. Yuan Shao's generals were unable to resist him and broke the White Horse's siege.

古文：曹公即表封羽为汉寿亭侯。
现代文：曹操随即上表请求封关羽为汉寿亭侯。
English: Cao Cao then requested that Guan Yu be given the title of Prince of Hanshuting.

古文：初，曹公壮羽为人，而察其心神无久留之意，谓张辽曰： 卿试以情问之。 
现代文：当初曹操认为关羽很豪迈，而观察他的心志，没有长久要留下的想法，就对张辽说： 您尝试着用情来感化他。 
English: At first, Cao Cao thought that Guan Yu was very heroic, but observing his spirit, he did not have the idea to stay for a long time, and said to Zhang Liao: You try to use feelings to influence him.

古文：既而辽以问羽，羽叹曰： 吾极知曹公待我厚，然吾受刘将军厚恩，誓以共死，不可背之。
现代文：不久，张辽要用这件事问关羽，关羽感叹说： 我知道曹公对我非常深厚，但我深受刘将军的深厚恩德，已经发誓同生共死，不能背叛他。
English: Soon, Zhang Liao wanted to ask Guan Yu about this matter. Guan Yu sighed and said, "I know Cao Gong is very generous to me, but I am deeply indebted to General Liu. I have sworn to live and die with him, and I cannot betray him."

古文：吾终不留，吾要当立效以报曹公乃去。 
现代文：我终究不会留下来，但我会效力回报曹公之后再离开。 
English: I won't stay after all, but I will work hard to repay Cao Gong before I leave.

古文：辽以羽言报曹公，曹公义之。
现代文：张辽将关羽的话回报曹操，曹操认为他很有大义。
English: Zhang Liao returned Guan Yu's words to Cao Cao, who thought he was very righteous.

古文：及羽杀颜良，曹公知其必去，重加赏赐。
现代文：等到关羽杀了颜良，曹操知道他一定要离开，对他他赏赐非常丰厚。
English: When Guan Yu killed Yan Liang, Cao Cao knew that he must leave, and he rewarded him very richly.

古文：羽尽封其所赐，拜书告辞，而奔先主於袁军。左右欲追之，曹公曰： 彼各为其主，勿追也。 
现代文：关羽将所得赏赐都封存起来，留书告辞，随后到袁绍军中投奔先主。曹操的部下想要追赶他，曹操说： 大家各为其主，不要再追了。 
English: Guan Yu sealed all the rewards he received, left a farewell letter, and then joined Yuan Shao's army to flee to his ancestor. Cao Cao's subordinates wanted to chase him, but Cao Cao said, "Everyone is his own master, don't chase him anymore."

古文：从先主就刘表。
现代文：关羽跟随刘备依附刘表。
English: Guan Yu followed Liu Bei and clung to Liu Bei's watch.

古文：表卒，曹公定荆州，先主自樊将南渡江，别遣羽乘船数百艘会江陵。
现代文：刘表去世之后，曹操平定荆州，先主从樊城率军往南渡江而回，另外派关羽乘几百艘船，在江陵会合。
English: After Liu Biao's death, Cao Cao settled Jingzhou, and his predecessor led the army from Lucheng to the south to cross the river and return. In addition, he sent Guan Yu to take hundreds of ships and meet in Gangneung.

古文：曹公追至当阳长阪，先主斜趣汉津，適与羽船相值，共至夏口。
现代文：曹操追赶到当阳县的长阪，先主抄小路直奔汉津，刚好与关羽的船队相会，一同到了夏口。
English: Cao Cao chased him to Nagasaka in Dangyang County, and the latter took a shortcut straight to Hanzin, just in time to meet Guan Yu's fleet, and together they arrived in Xiakou.

古文：孙权遣兵佐先主拒曹公，曹公引军退归。先主收江南诸郡，乃封拜元勋，以羽为襄阳太守、荡寇将军，驻江北。
现代文：孙权派兵辅佐刘备抗击曹操，曹操率军退回，先主占据了江南各郡，封赏任命功臣，任命关羽为襄阳太守、荡寇将军，驻守在江北。
English: Sun Quan sent soldiers to assist Liu Bei to fight against Cao Cao, Cao Cao led the army back, and the former lord occupied the counties in the south of the Yangtze River, rewarded and appointed meritorious soldiers, and appointed Guan Yu as the governor of Xiangyang and a bandit general, stationed in the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：先主西定益州，拜羽董督荆州事。
现代文：先主往西平定了益州，任命关羽处理荆州事宜。
English: His predecessor went west and settled Yizhou, and appointed Guan Yu to deal with Jingzhou.

古文：羽闻马超来降，旧非故人，羽书与诸葛亮，问超人才可谁比类。
现代文：关羽得知马超前来投降，两人过去并不认识，关羽写信给诸葛亮，问马超的才好有谁可以相比。
English: Guan Yu learned that Ma Chao had come to surrender. The two did not know each other in the past. Guan Yu wrote to Zhuge Liang and asked Ma Chao who could be compared to him.

古文：亮知羽护前，乃答之曰： 孟起兼资文武，雄烈过人，一世之杰，黥、彭之徒，当与益德并驱争先，犹未及髯之绝伦逸群也。 
现代文：诸葛亮知道关羽心高气傲，就回答说： 孟起文武兼备，勇猛过人，是当世的豪杰，是英布、彭越一样的人，可以跟张飞并驾齐驱，但是也比不上美髯公的超凡绝伦。 
English: Zhuge Liang knew that Guan Yu's heart was high and proud, so he replied: Meng is both literate and skilled in martial arts, and he is more courageous than others. He is a contemporary hero, the same as Ying Bu and Peng Yue. He can keep pace with Zhang Fei, but he is not as extraordinary as the handsome young man.

古文：羽美须髯，故亮谓之髯。羽省书大悦，以示宾客。
现代文：关羽须发很美，所以诸葛亮叫他美髯公，关羽看到书信非常高兴，将信件展示给宾客看。
English: Guan Yu's mustache is very beautiful, so Zhuge Liang called him Mei Xi Gong. Guan Yu was very happy to see the letter and showed the letter to the guests.

古文：羽尝为流矢所中，贯其左臂，后创虽愈，每至阴雨，骨常疼痛，医曰： 矢镞有毒，毒入于骨，当破臂作创，刮骨去毒，然后此患乃除耳。 
现代文：关羽曾经被流箭射中，贯穿了左臂，后面创伤虽然愈合，但每到阴雨天气，骨头经常疼痛，医师说： 箭矢上有毒，毒已经深入骨髓，应当在手臂上开刀，刮去骨头上的余毒，这个伤患才能痊愈。 
English: Guan Yu had been shot by a stray arrow, which went through his left arm. Although the wound at the back had healed, whenever it was cloudy or rainy, the bone would often ache. The doctor said, "The arrow is poisonous, and the poison has penetrated the bone marrow. You should make an incision in the arm and scrape off the remaining poison from the bone. Only then will this injury be healed."

古文：羽便伸臂令医劈之。时羽適请诸将饮食相对，臂血流离，盈於盘器，而羽割炙引酒，言笑自若。
现代文：关羽就伸出手臂让医生开刀，当时关羽刚好遍请诸将在营中宴饮，手臂流血淋漓，装满了器皿，而关羽割肉喝酒，谈笑自若。
English: Guan Yu held out his arm for the doctor to operate. At that time, Guan Yu had just finished inviting guests to a banquet in the camp. His arm was bleeding profusely and filled with utensils, while Guan Yu was cutting meat, drinking, and laughing.

古文：二十四年，先主为汉中王，拜羽为前将军，假节钺。
现代文：建安二十四年，刘备自立为汉中王，任命关羽为前将军，持符节。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jian'an, Liu Bei established himself as the king of the Han Dynasty, appointed Guan Yu as the former general, and held the festival of symbols.

古文：是岁，羽率众攻曹仁於樊。曹公遣于禁助仁。
现代文：当年，关羽率众到樊城攻打曹仁，曹操派于禁援助曹仁。
English: In that year, Guan Yu led the crowd to Lucheng to attack Cao Ren, and Cao Cao sent Guan Yu to aid Cao Ren.

古文：秋，大霖雨，汉水汎溢，禁所督七军皆没。
现代文：秋天，大雨连绵，汉水暴涨，于禁所率领的七支部队都被淹没。
English: In the autumn, continuous heavy rain and surging floodwaters inundated the seven troops led by Yu.

古文：禁降羽，羽又斩将军庞德。
现代文：于禁投降关羽，关羽又斩杀了魏曹将军庞德。
English: Guan Yu surrendered at the ban, and Guan Yu killed Wei Cao's general Pound.

古文：梁、郏、陆浑群盗或遥受羽印号，为之支党，羽威震华夏。
现代文：梁、郏、陆浑一带的强盗，有的遥受关羽的印信号令，作为关羽的地方部队，关羽威震中原。
English: The bandits in the areas of Liang, Handan and Lukhun, some of whom were ordered by signal from Guan Yu, were the local troops of Guan Yu. Guan Yu was the epicenter of the earthquake.

古文：曹公议徙许都以避其锐，司马宣王、蒋济以为关羽得志，孙权必不愿也。
现代文：曹操商议想要迁离许都，以避开关羽的锋芒，司马懿、蒋济认为关羽得志取胜，孙权一定不愿意看到。
English: Cao Cao wanted to move away from Xu Du to avoid the sharp edge of Guan Yu. Sima Yu and Jiang Ji thought that Guan Yu was determined to win, and Sun Quan would not want to see that.

古文：可遣人劝权蹑其后，许割江南以封权，则樊围自解。
现代文：可以派人前去劝说孙权，让他跟随在关羽的后面，并答应割让江南之地封给孙权，那樊城的围困就能解除了。
English: He could send someone to persuade Sun Quan to follow Guan Yu, and promised to cede the Southern Yangtze territory to Sun Quan, and the siege of Nancheng would be lifted.

古文：曹公从之。
现代文：曹操采纳了这一建议。
English: Cao Cao accepted this suggestion.

古文：先是，权遣使为子索羽女，羽骂辱其使，不许婚，权大怒。
现代文：之前，孙权派使者为自己的儿子向关羽的女儿求婚，关羽辱骂孙权的使者，拒绝合亲，孙权大怒。
English: Previously, Sun Quan had sent an envoy to Guan Yu's daughter to propose marriage for his son. Guan Yu insulted Sun Quan's envoy and refused to marry her. Sun Quan was furious.

古文：又南郡太守麋芳在江陵，将军士仁屯公安，素皆嫌羽轻己。
现代文：再加上南郡太守糜芳在江陵，将军士仁驻扎在公安，都怨恨关羽轻视自己。
English: Coupled with the fact that the governor of Nan County, Yu Fang, was stationed in Gangneung, and the military officer, Ren, was stationed in the public security bureau, they all resented Guan Yu for belittling them.

古文：自羽之出军，芳、仁供给军资，不悉相救。
现代文：当关羽率军出征，糜芳、士仁供应军资，不愿意全力救援关羽。
English: When Guan Yu led the army to go to war, Yu Fang and Shiren supplied military resources, but they were not willing to do their best to rescue Guan Yu.

古文：羽言 还当治之 ，芳、仁咸怀惧不安。
现代文：关羽说 待我返回就惩处他们 ，糜芳、士仁两个人都惶恐不安。
English: Guan Yu said, "I will punish them when I return," and Gong Fang and Shi Ren were both terrified.

古文：於是权阴诱芳、仁，芳、仁使人迎权。
现代文：于是孙权暗中派人引诱糜芳、士仁，他们二人派人迎接孙权。
English: So Sun Quan secretly sent someone to lure Gong Fang and Shiren away, and they both sent someone to meet Sun Quan.

古文：而曹公遣徐晃救曹仁，羽不能克，引军退还。
现代文：而曹操派徐晃援救曹仁，关羽不能攻克，就率军返回。
English: Cao Cao sent Xu Xiao to rescue Cao Ren, but Guan Yu could not be defeated, so he led his army back.

古文：权已据江陵，尽虏羽士众妻子，羽军遂散。
现代文：孙权已经占据了江陵，将关羽的部众和妻子孩子都俘虏了，关羽军队溃散。
English: Sun Quan had already occupied Jiangling, captured Guan Yu's subordinates, his wife and children, and Guan Yu's army was dispersed.

古文：权遣将逆击羽，斩羽及子平于临沮。
现代文：孙权派部将迎击关羽，在临沮斩杀了关羽和他的儿子关平。
English: Sun Quan's faction attacked Guan Yu and killed him and his son Guan Ping.

古文：追谥羽曰壮缪侯。子兴嗣。
现代文：刘备追封关羽的谥号为壮缪侯，他的儿子关兴承袭爵位。
English: Liu Bei's posthumous title of Guan Yu was Zhuang Miu Hou, and his son Guan Xing inherited the peerage.

古文：关兴字安国，少有令问，丞相诸葛亮深器异之。
现代文：关兴字安国，年少时就有很好的名声，丞相诸葛亮也对他十分器重，认为他有奇才。
English: Guan Xing, also known as An Guo, had a good reputation when he was young. The prime minister Zhuge Liang also held him in high esteem, considering him to be a prodigy.

古文：弱冠为侍中、中监军，数岁卒。
现代文：关兴二十岁的时候担任侍中、中监军，几年后就去世了。
English: When Guan Xing was 20 years old, he served as an aide-de-camp and middle-ranking military inspector. He died a few years later.

古文：子统嗣，尚公主，官至虎贲中郎将。
现代文：儿子关统继承爵位，娶公主为妻，做官到虎贲中郎将。
English: His son, Guan Tong, inherited the title, married a princess, and rose to the rank of vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment.

古文：卒，无子，以兴庶子彝续封。
现代文：后来去世，没有子嗣，就有关兴的庶子关彝续封爵位。
English: Later, when he died without an heir, Guan Yu, Guan Xing's illegitimate son, succeeded to the title.

古文：张飞字益德，涿郡人也，少与关羽俱事先主。
现代文：张飞，字翼德，是涿郡人，年少时跟关羽一起侍奉刘备。
English: Zhang Fei, also known as Yingde, is a native of Handan County. When he was young, he served Liu Bei together with Guan Yu.

古文：羽年长数岁，飞兄事之。
现代文：关羽比张飞年长几岁，张飞对待关羽像兄长一样。
English: Guan Yu is a few years older than Zhang Fei, and Zhang Fei treats Guan Yu like an older brother.

古文：先主从曹公破吕布，随还许，曹公拜飞为中郎将。先主背曹公依袁绍、刘表。
现代文：刘备跟随曹操攻破了吕布，并跟随他返回许都，曹操任命张飞为中郎将，刘备背弃曹操，先后依靠袁绍、刘表。
English: Liu Bei followed Cao Cao to break through Lvbu, and followed him back to Xudu. Cao Cao appointed Zhang Fei as the middle man. Liu Bei turned his back on Cao Cao and successively relied on Yuan Shao and Liu Biao.

古文：表卒，曹公入荆州，先主奔江南。曹公追之，一日一夜，及於当阳之长阪。
现代文：刘表去世后，曹操进入荆州，刘备逃奔到江南，曹操追赶他一天一夜，一直到了当阳县的长阪。
English: After Liu Biao's death, Cao Cao entered Jingzhou, Liu Bei fled to the south of the Yangtze River, and Cao Cao pursued him day and night all the way to Nagasaka in Dangyang County.

古文：先主闻曹公卒至，弃妻子走，使飞将二十骑拒后。
现代文：刘备得知曹操突然到来，丢下妻子孩子逃走，派张飞率领二十骑人马断后。
English: Liu Bei learned that Cao Cao had suddenly arrived, left his wife and child to flee, and sent Zhang Fei to lead twenty horsemen.

古文：飞据水断桥，瞋目横矛曰： 身是张益德也，可来共决死！ 
现代文：张飞守住河岸，拆毁河桥，怒目而视，手指长矛，大叫说： 我是张翼德，谁敢前来与我决一死战。 
English: Zhang Fei guarded the riverbank, tore down the river bridge, glared with anger, pointed a spear, and shouted: I am Zhang Yide, who dares to come and fight me to the death.

古文：敌皆无敢近者，故遂得免。
现代文：敌军没有敢靠前的，刘备得以免于一难。
English: As the enemy did not dare to advance, Liu Bei was able to avoid a difficult situation.

古文：先主既定江南，以飞为宜都太守、征虏将军，封新亭侯，后转在南郡。
现代文：刘备平定江南之后，任命张飞为宜都太守、征虏将军，并封为新亭侯，后来又调守南郡。
English: After Liu Bei had pacified the south of the Yangtze River, he appointed Zhang Fei as the governor of Yidu and the general of conscription, and made him the lord of Xinting. Later, he transferred him to guard Nan County.

古文：先主入益州，还攻刘璋，飞与诸葛亮等溯流而上，分定郡县。
现代文：刘备进军益州，又返回攻打刘璋，张飞跟诸葛亮等逆流而上，分别平定沿江各郡县。
English: Liu Bei marched into Yizhou, and then returned to attack Liu Ye, Zhang Fei followed Zhuge Liang and others to go against the current, respectively, and subdued the counties along the river.

古文：至江州，破璋将巴郡太守严颜，生获颜。
现代文：到了江州，击败了刘璋设置的将领巴郡太守严颜，并活捉了他。
English: When he arrived in Jiangzhou, he defeated the general Ba County Taizhu Yan Yan, who was set up by Liu Bei, and captured him alive.

古文：飞呵颜曰： 大军至，何以不降而敢拒战？ 
现代文：张飞呵斥严颜说： 大军已到，为何不及早投降，而胆敢迎战？ 
English: Zhang Fei yelled at Yan Yan, saying: The great army has arrived, why not surrender early and dare to fight?

古文：颜答曰： 卿等无状，侵夺我州，我州但有断头将军，无有降将军也。 
现代文：严颜回答说： 你们出兵无名，侵夺我州，我们益州只有断头将军，没有投降将军。 
English: Yan Yan replied, "You sent your nameless soldiers to invade and seize our prefecture, while we in Yizhou only beheaded generals and did not surrender generals.

古文：飞怒，令左右牵去斫头，颜色不变，曰： 斫头便斫头，何为怒邪！ 
现代文：张飞大怒，令手下将严颜拉出去砍头，严颜面容不变说： 砍头就砍头，为什么生气呢？ 
English: Zhang Fei flew into a rage and ordered his men to drag Yan Yan out and cut off his head. Yan Yan's face did not change and he said, "If you cut off a head, you cut off a head. Why are you angry?

古文：飞壮而释之，引为宾客。
现代文：张飞认为严颜很勇壮，就下令释放，并把他作为客人对待。
English: Zhang Fei thought Yan Yan was very brave, so he ordered his release and treated him as a guest.

古文：飞所过战克，与先主会于成都。益州既平，赐诸葛亮、法正、飞及关羽金各五百斤，银千斤，钱五千万，锦千匹，其馀颁赐各有差，以飞领巴西太守。
现代文：张飞所经过之处战无不胜，跟刘备在成都会合，益州平定之后，刘备赏赐诸葛亮，法正、张飞及关羽各五百斤，一千斤银，五千万钱，一千匹锦帛，其余的赏赐各有差别，并让张飞兼任巴西太守。
English: Zhang Fei was invincible in battle wherever he went. He and Liu Bei met in Chengdu, and after Yizhou was pacified, Liu Bei rewarded Zhuge Liang, Fa Zheng, Zhang Fei and Guan Yu with five hundred catties each, one thousand catties of silver, fifty million yuan, and one thousand brocade horses. The rest of the rewards were different, and Zhang Fei also served as the governor of Brazil.

古文：曹公破张鲁，留夏侯渊、张郃守汉川。
现代文：曹操攻破张鲁之后，派夏侯渊、张颌留下镇守汉川。
English: After Cao Cao defeated Zhang Lu, he sent Xia Houyuan and Zhang Ye to keep Hanchuan.

古文：郃别督诸军下巴西，欲徙其民於汉中，进军宕渠、蒙头、荡石，与飞相拒五十馀日。
现代文：张郃另外率领一支军队进军巴西，想要将这里的百姓迁到汉中，并进军宕渠、蒙头、荡石，跟张飞相持多天。
English: Zhang Rong also led an army to invade Brazil, wanting to move the people here to Hanzhong, and marched into the ditches, headscarves, and boulders, and stayed with Zhang Fei for many days.

古文：飞率精卒万馀人，从他道邀郃军交战，山道迮狭，前后不得相救，飞遂破郃。
现代文：张飞率领精锐士兵万多人，从别的道路和张颌军队交战，山道狭窄，前后无法相互救援，张飞就攻破了张合。
English: Zhang Fei led more than ten thousand elite soldiers to fight against Zhang Ye's army from other roads. The mountain road was narrow, and it was impossible to rescue each other before and after. Zhang Fei defeated Zhang He.

古文：郃弃马缘山，独与麾下十馀人从间道退，引军还南郑，巴土获安。
现代文：张郃丢下坐骑，沿着山路，只带着多名部下从小路逃走，率军返回南郑，巴西得以安定。
English: Zhang Ye left his horse and fled along the mountain road, taking only a number of his subordinates with him. He led the army back to Nan Zheng, and Brazil was stabilized.

古文：先主为汉中王，拜飞为右将军、假节。
现代文：先主自立为汉中王，任命张飞为右将军，代持节钺。
English: The ancestor established himself as the king of the Han Dynasty, appointed Zhang Fei as the right general, and held the ceremonial scepter on his behalf.

古文：章武元年，迁车骑将军，领司隶校尉，进封西乡侯，策曰： 朕承天序，嗣奉洪业，除残靖乱，未烛厥理。
现代文：章武元年，升任为车骑都尉，兼任司隶校尉，晋封为西乡侯，并诏令说： 朕承受天命，延续祖宗基业，铲除逆贼，安定战乱，但还没有大治天下。
English: In the first year of Zhangwu, he was promoted to lieutenant of cavalry and cavalry, concurrently served as lieutenant of division, and was promoted to West Township. He also issued a decree saying: I bear the destiny of heaven, continue the foundation of the ancestors, eradicate the traitors, stabilize the war, but I have not yet ruled the world.

古文：今寇虏作害，民被荼毒，思汉之士，延颈鹤望。
现代文：现在贼寇作乱百姓水深火热，思念汉的士人都在引颈盼望。
English: Now that the thieves and bandits have made a mess of the people, the situation is very serious, and the scholars who miss Han are looking forward to it.

古文：朕用怛然，坐不安席，食不甘味，整军诰誓，将行天罚。
现代文：朕心中忧愁，坐不安席，食不知味，整顿各军，宣布誓词，准备替天行道。
English: My heart is sad, I can't sit still, I don't know what to eat, I have to reorganize the troops, announce the oath, and prepare to walk the path of heaven.

古文：以君忠毅，侔踪召虎，名宣遐迩，故特显命，高墉进爵，兼司于京。
现代文：因为您忠义果敢，有像召穆公那样的品格，威名远扬，所以特地宣布为您升官进爵，授予您兼任京都护卫。
English: Because of your loyalty and courage, you have the same character as Shoko Muko, and your reputation is far-reaching, so I specially announced that you will be promoted to a knight, and you will also be awarded the post of Kyoto escort.

古文：其诞将天威，柔服以德，伐叛以刑，称朕意焉。
现代文：您应该大力奉行天子的威仪，用仁德安抚百姓，用刑罚惩罚叛贼，才符合朕的心意。
English: You should vigorously pursue the dignity of the Son of Heaven, appease the people with benevolence, and punish the traitors with punishment, which is in line with my heart.

古文：诗不云乎， 匪疚匪棘，王国来极。
现代文：诗经也说， 不能侵扰百姓，不能过急冒进，一切都要以王朝的法度为准。
English: The Book of Songs also says, "You must not disturb the people, you must not rush in too quickly, and everything must be in accordance with the laws of the dynasty."

古文：肇敏戎功，用锡尔祉 。
现代文：尽心竭力成就伟大的功业，因此赐给你福祉 。
English: bestow your welfare on you by exerting yourself to accomplish great deeds.

古文：可不勉欤！ 
现代文：不能不勉力啊！ 
English: You have to make an effort!

古文：初，飞雄壮威猛，亚於关羽，魏谋臣程昱等咸称羽、飞万人之敌也。羽善待卒伍而骄於士大夫，飞爱敬君子而不恤小人。先主常戒之曰： 卿刑杀既过差，又日鞭挝健儿，而令在左右，此取祸之道也。 
现代文：当初张飞威猛雄壮，仅次于关羽，魏朝的谋臣程昱等人都称赞关羽、张飞是有万夫不挡之勇，关羽善待士卒，但在士大夫面前很傲慢，张飞则敬爱君子，而不体恤士卒百姓，刘备经常告诫张飞说： 你过度运用刑法，又随意鞭打将士，还把这些人安排在身边，这是招致祸患的啊。 
English: At the beginning, Zhang Fei was powerful and majestic, second only to Guan Yu. The Wei Dynasty's strategist Cheng Qi and others praised Guan Yu and Zhang Fei for their unstoppable courage. Guan Yu was kind to soldiers, but was arrogant in front of officers. Zhang Fei loved gentlemen, but did not feel sorry for soldiers and common people. Liu Bei often admonished Zhang Fei, saying, "Your excessive use of criminal law, whipping soldiers at will, and arranging these people around you, this is inviting disaster."

古文：飞犹不悛。先主伐吴，飞当率兵万人，自阆中会江州。
现代文：张飞依然没有改变，刘备征讨东吴，张飞应当率兵一万多人，从阆中出兵，跟刘备在江州会合。
English: Zhang Fei still did not change. Liu Bei wanted to invade Dongwu. Zhang Fei should have led more than ten thousand soldiers, sent troops from Shanzhong, and met with Liu Bei in Jiangzhou.

古文：临发，其帐下将张达、范强杀飞，持其首，顺流而奔孙权。
现代文：临出发前，张飞的部下将领张达、范强等人杀了张飞，带着他的首级，顺江而下投奔孙权。
English: Before the departure, Zhang Fei's subordinate generals Zhang Daming, Fan Qiang and others killed Zhang Fei and took his head down the river to Sun Quan.

古文：飞营都督表报先主，先主闻飞都督之有表也，曰： 噫！飞死矣。 
现代文：张飞军营中的都督上表，将事情报告刘备，刘备得知张飞都督有表上奏，就说： 啊，张飞死了。 
English: The governor of Zhang Fei's military camp looked up and reported the matter to Liu Bei. When Liu Bei learned that Zhang Fei's governor had looked up, he said: Ah, Zhang Fei is dead.

古文：追谥飞曰桓侯。
现代文：随后追谥张飞为桓侯。
English: Subsequently, Zhang Fei, the chaser, became the lord of the castle.

古文：长子苞，早夭。次子绍嗣，官至侍中尚书仆射。
现代文：他的长子张苞早逝，就由他的次子张绍继承爵位，做官到侍中、尚书仆射。
English: After the early death of his eldest son, Zhang Xuan, his second son, Zhang Shao, succeeded to the title of nobility, and served as an official, a chamberlain, and a clerk.

古文：苞子遵为尚书，随诸葛瞻於绵竹，与邓艾战，死。
现代文：张苞的儿子张遵担任尚书，跟随诸葛瞻在绵竹驻守，后因邓艾交战战死。
English: Zhang Zong's son Zhang Zun served as Shang Shu and followed Zhuge Zhan in Mianzhu, after which he was killed in a battle with Deng Ai.

古文：马超字孟起，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：马超字孟起，扶风郡茂陵人。
English: Ma Chaozhe Mengqi, a resident of Mouling, Fufeng County.

古文：父腾，灵帝末与边章、韩遂等俱起事於西州。
现代文：他的父亲马腾，在汉朝灵帝末年，跟边章、韩遂等人共同从西州起事。
English: His father, Ma Teng, in the last years of the Han Dynasty, together with Bian Zhang, Han Sui and others, rose from Xizhou.

古文：初平三年，遂、腾率众诣长安。
现代文：初平三年，马腾、韩遂等人率众到了长安。
English: In the third year of Hatsuhei, Ma Teng, Han Sui and others led the crowd to Chang'an.

古文：汉朝以遂为镇西将军，遣还金城，腾为征西将军，遣屯郿。
现代文：汉朝就任命韩遂为镇西将军，派他返回京城驻守，马腾为征西将军，驻守在郿县。
English: The Han Dynasty appointed Han Sui as Zhenxi General and sent him back to Beijing to garrison the capital, and Ma Teng as Zhengxi General and garrisoned in Jixian.

古文：后腾袭长安，败走，退还凉州。
现代文：后来马腾攻击长安，战败逃走，退回凉州。
English: Later, Ma Teng attacked Chang'an, was defeated and fled, returning to Liangzhou.

古文：司隶校尉锺繇镇关中，移书遂、腾，为陈祸福。
现代文：司隶校尉钟繇镇守关中，写信给韩遂、马腾，为他们陈述其中的祸福利害。
English: Sili school officer Zhong Yuzhen guarding the gate, wrote to Han Sui, Ma Teng, for them to state the cause of the disaster.

古文：腾遣超随繇讨郭援、高幹於平阳，超将庞德亲斩援首。
现代文：马腾就派马超跟随钟繇到平阳征讨郭援、高幹，马超的部将庞德亲自斩下了郭援的首级。
English: Ma Teng sent Ma Chao to Pingyang with Zhong Xi to recruit Guo Yuan and high-ranking officials. Ma Chao's subordinate, Pound, personally cut off Guo Yuan's head.

古文：后腾与韩遂不和，求还京畿。
现代文：后来马腾跟韩遂不合，请求返回京畿之地。
English: Later, Ma Teng fell out with Han and asked to return to Gyeonggi Province.

古文：於是徵为卫尉，以超为偏将军，封都亭侯，领腾部曲。
现代文：朝廷征召他为校尉，任命马超为偏将军，封为都亭侯，统率马腾的部队。
English: The imperial court conscripted him as a lieutenant, appointed Ma Chao as a partial general, and made him a duke to command Ma Teng's troops.

古文：超既统众，遂与韩遂合从，及杨秋、李堪、成宜等相结，进军至潼关。
现代文：马超统率部队之后，就跟韩遂联合，又跟杨秋、李堪、成宜等人结盟，共同进军到了潼关。
English: After Ma Chao led the troops, he allied with Han Sui, and with Yang Qiu, Li Kan, Cheng Yi and others, and jointly marched to Shaoguan.

古文：曹公与遂、超单马会语，超负其多力，阴欲突前捉曹公，曹公左右将许褚瞋目盻之，超乃不敢动。
现代文：曹操跟韩遂、马超等人，各自自己只身骑马会谈，马超自负身强体壮，想要暗中冲上前捉住曹操，曹操身边的护卫将领许褚怒目而视，马超不敢妄动。
English: Cao Cao and Han Sui, Ma Chao and others, each of them alone on horseback, talk. Ma Chao is conceited and strong, and wants to secretly rush forward to catch Cao Cao. The escort generals around Cao Cao are angry, and Ma Chao does not dare to move.

古文：曹公用贾诩谋，离间超、遂，更相猜疑，军以大败。
现代文：曹操用了贾诩的计谋，离间了马超和韩遂，使他们互相猜疑，导致两军交战时大败。
English: Cao Cao used Jia Yao's stratagem to separate Ma Chao and Han Sui, making them suspicious of each other, leading to a crushing defeat for the two armies.

古文：超走保诸戎，曹公追至安定，会北方有事，引军东还。
现代文：马超逃奔到西戎少数民族部落，曹操追击到了安定，赶上北方有战事，就率军返回。
English: Ma Chao fled to the Xirong ethnic minority tribe, Cao Cao pursued and stabilized, caught up with the north and returned with his army.

古文：杨阜说曹公曰： 超有信、布之勇，甚得羌、胡心。若大军还，不严为其备，陇上诸郡非国家之有也。 
现代文：杨阜劝说曹操说： 马超有韩信、季布的勇猛，又得西北少数民族的拥戴，如果大军返回，不严加守卫，陇西各郡就不是我们能控制的了。 
English: Yang Fu persuaded Cao Cao to say: Ma Chao has the bravery of Han Xin and Qibu, and has won the support of the Northwest ethnic minorities. If the large army returns and does not strictly guard, the counties in Shaanxi will not be under our control.

古文：超果率诸戎以击陇上郡县，陇上郡县皆应之，杀凉州刺史韦康，据冀城，有其众。
现代文：马超果然率领各少数民族部队攻打陇上郡县，各郡县都响应他，马超杀了凉州刺史韦康，占据了冀城，收编了韦康的部队。
English: Ma Chao really led the ethnic minority troops to attack the county of Jiaxiang, and all counties responded to him. Ma Chao killed the Yangzhou chief Wei Kang, occupied Jicheng, and integrated Wei Kang's troops.

古文：超自称征西将军，领并州牧，督凉州军事。
现代文：马超自称征西将军，兼任并州牧，都领凉州的军事事宜。
English: Ma Chao claimed to be the general of the Western Conquest, and also served as the state pastor, leading the military affairs of Liangzhou.

古文：康故吏民杨阜、姜叙、梁宽、赵衢等，合谋击超。
现代文：韦康的旧部和百姓杨阜、姜叙、梁宽、赵衢等人共同合谋攻打马超。
English: Wei Kang's old ministry and the common people Yang Fu, Jiang Xiu, Liang Guang, Zhao Wei and others conspired to attack Ma Chao.

古文：阜、叙起於卤城，超出攻之，不能下；宽、衢闭冀城门，超不得入。
现代文：杨阜、姜叙首先在卤城起事，马超出兵攻打，但没有能攻克，梁宽、赵衢等人关闭冀城城门，马超不能进城。
English: Yang Fu and Jiang Xiu first revolted in Halocheng. Ma Chao outnumbered the soldiers and attacked, but failed to conquer. Liang Guang, Zhao Wei and others closed the gate of Jicheng, and Ma Chao could not enter the city.

古文：进退狼狈，乃奔汉中依张鲁。鲁不足与计事，内怀於邑，闻先主围刘璋於成都，密书请降。
现代文：进退两难之际，就逃往汉中投靠张鲁，张鲁这人不值得马超与他共谋大事，马超心中郁闷，又得知刘备在成都围困刘璋，于是暗中派人送信，请求归降。
English: In the face of the dilemma, he fled to Hanzhong to rely on Zhang Lu. Zhang Lu was not worthy of Ma Chao to conspire with him. Ma Chao was depressed and learned that Liu Bei was besieging Liu Bei in Chengdu, so he secretly sent someone to send a request to surrender.

古文：先主遣人迎超，超将兵径到城下。
现代文：刘备派人迎接马超，马超率兵径直到了成都城下。
English: Liu Bei sent someone to meet Ma Chao, and Ma Chao led an army to the outskirts of Chengdu.

古文：城中震怖，璋即稽首，以超为平西将军，督临沮，因为前都亭侯。
现代文：城中震恐，刘璋随即投降，刘备任命马超为平西将军，督领临沮，依然是都亭侯的封号。
English: The city was in shock, Liu Bei immediately surrendered, Liu Bei appointed Ma Chao as the general of Pingxi, and the governor, Linshi, was still the title of Du Tinghou.

古文：先主为汉中王，拜超为左将军，假节。
现代文：刘备做了汉中王之后，任命马超为左将军，持符节。
English: After Liu Bei became the king of the Han Dynasty, he appointed Ma Chao as the left general, holding the festival of symbols.

古文：章武元年，迁骠骑将军，领凉州牧，进封斄乡侯，策曰： 朕以不德，获继至尊，奉承宗庙。
现代文：章武元年，马超升任为骠骑将军，兼任凉州牧，被晋封为剺乡侯，并诏令说： 朕依靠着微薄的品德，获得了至尊之位，接管汉室，延续汉室宗庙。
English: In the first year of Zhangwu, Ma Chao was promoted to the general of the Horse Cavalry, concurrently served as the pastor of Liangzhou, and was promoted to the village headman of the Horse Cavalry. He also issued a decree saying, "I have gained the supreme position by relying on my meager virtue, taking over the Han family and continuing the Han family ancestral temple."

古文：曹操父子，世载其罪，朕用惨怛，疢如疾首。
现代文：曹操父子罪行布满天下，朕心中担忧悲痛，痛心疾首。
English: Cao Cao's and his son's crimes have spread all over the world. My heart is worried and sad, and my head is aching.

古文：海内怨愤，归正反本，暨于氐、羌率服，獯鬻慕义。
现代文：天下怨愤，希望能恢复汉室，以至于抵、羌等少数民族都仰慕大义并归服。
English: The whole world is resentful and hopes to restore the Han dynasty, so much so that ethnic minorities such as the Zhuang and Qiang admire the Great Righteousness and submit to it.

古文：以君信著北土，威武并昭，是以委任授君，抗飏虓虎，兼董万里，求民之瘼。
现代文：由于您的信誉闻名于北方地区，威望和武力都非常的显著，所以将凉州托付给您，虎踞龙盘，驻守北方之地，消除百姓的疾苦。
English: Since your reputation is well-known in the northern region, and your prestige and military power are very significant, I entrust Liangzhou to you, the Dragon's Tail, to garrison the northern land and eliminate the sufferings of the people.

古文：其明宣朝化，怀保远迩，肃慎赏罚，以笃汉祜，以对于天下。 
现代文：希望您能宣扬朝廷的教化，安定镇抚四方，慎重实行赏赐惩罚，以坚定汉朝的福祉，并回馈给天下百姓。 
English: I hope you can promote the enlightenment of the imperial court, stabilize and pacify the four quarters, and carefully implement rewards and punishments to strengthen the well-being of the Han Dynasty and give back to the people of the world.

古文：二年卒，时年四十七。临没上疏曰： 臣门宗二百馀口，为孟德所诛略尽，惟有从弟岱，当为微宗血食之继，深讬陛下，馀无复言。 
现代文：马超在章武二年去世，享年四十七岁，临去世前他上奏说： 臣家中亲族二百多人，几乎全都被曹操诛杀，只剩下堂弟马岱，应当让他延续臣家中已经衰败的宗庙祭祀，将这事托付给陛下，没有其他的话了。 
English: Ma Chao died in the second year of Zhangwu, at the age of forty-seven. Before his death, he made a report saying: There are more than two hundred relatives in the subject's family, almost all of whom were killed by Cao Cao. Only his cousin Ma Xun is left. He should be allowed to continue the already decayed ancestral temple rituals in the subject's family, and entrust this matter to His Majesty. There is nothing else to say.

古文：追谥超曰威侯，子承嗣。
现代文：刘备追谥马超为威侯，他的儿子马承承袭爵位。
English: Liu Bei made Ma Chao, his son, a prefect, and his son, Ma Cheng, inherited the title of nobility.

古文：岱位至平北将军，进爵陈仓侯。
现代文：马岱做官到平北将军，进爵为陈仓侯。
English: Ma Xuan became an official to the general of Pingbei, and Chen Canghou became a peer.

古文：超女配安平王理。
现代文：马超的女儿许配给了安平王刘理。
English: Ma Chao's daughter Xu Rong married Anping Wang Liu Li.

古文：黄忠字汉升，南阳人也。
现代文：黄忠字汉升，是南阳郡人。
English: Huang Zhongzi Han Sheng is from Nanyang County.

古文：荆州牧刘表以为中郎将，与表从子磐共守长沙攸县。
现代文：荆州牧刘表任命他为中郎将，他跟刘表的侄子刘磐一起镇守长沙郡的攸县。
English: He was appointed as the second-in-command by Liu Biao, the governor of Jingzhou. Together with Liu Biao's nephew Liu Ban, he guarded Yu County in Changsha County.

古文：及曹公克荆州，假行裨将军，仍就故任，统属长沙守韩玄。
现代文：等到曹操攻克荆州，黄忠就代理行禆将军的职位，依然留在原来的任所，管理长沙太守韩玄。
English: When Cao Cao conquered Jingzhou, Huang Zhong assumed the position of acting general of Xingyi and remained in his original post, managing the Changsha governor Han Xuan.

古文：先主南定诸郡，忠遂委质，随从入蜀。
现代文：刘备往南平定各郡后，黄忠归顺刘备，后来又跟随刘备进入蜀地。
English: After Liu Bei went to the south to pacify the counties, Huang Zhong surrendered to Liu Bei, and later followed Liu Bei into Shu.

古文：自葭萌受任，还攻刘璋，忠常先登陷陈，勇毅冠三军。
现代文：黄忠在葭萌受任，返回攻打刘璋。黄忠经常身先士卒，率先冲锋陷阵，勇猛果敢勇冠三军。
English: Huang Zhong was appointed in Qimeng and returned to attack Liu Bei. Huang Zhong often led the way, took the lead in the charge, and bravely and boldly defeated the three armies.

古文：益州既定，拜为讨虏将军。
现代文：益州平定之后，刘备任命他为讨虏将军。
English: After Yizhou was pacified, Liu Bei appointed him as the general to fight against the invaders.

古文：建安二十四年，於汉中定军山击夏侯渊。
现代文：建安二十四年，黄忠在汉中的定军山攻打夏侯渊。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jian'an, Huang Zhong attacked Xia Houyuan from Dingjunshan in Han.

古文：渊众甚精，忠推锋必进，劝率士卒，金鼓振天，欢声动谷，一战斩渊，渊军大败。
现代文：夏侯渊的部队非常精锐，黄忠率领部下奋力向前推进，劝勉士兵，鼓声震天，呐喊声震动山谷，一战就斩杀了夏侯渊，夏侯渊军队大败。
English: Xia Houyuan's troops were very elite. Huang Zhong led his subordinates to push forward, exhorting the soldiers. The sound of drums shook the sky, and the sound of shouts shook the valley. Xia Houyuan was killed in the first battle, and Xia Houyuan's army was defeated.

古文：迁征西将军。
现代文：黄忠被提升为征西将军。
English: Huang Zhong was promoted to General of the Western Expedition.

古文：是岁，先主为汉中王，欲用忠为后将军，诸葛亮说先主曰： 忠之名望，素非关、马之伦也。
现代文：当年刘备自任为汉中王，想要任用黄忠为后将军，诸葛亮劝说刘备说： 黄忠的名望一向不能跟关羽、马超相比。
English: At that time, Liu Bei appointed himself as the king of the Middle Kingdom of Han, and wanted to appoint Huang Zhong as the next general. Zhuge Liang persuaded Liu Bei to say: Huang Zhong's reputation has never been comparable to Guan Yu and Ma Chao.

古文：而今便令同列。
现代文：而现在就让他跟关羽马超等人并列。
English: Now let him be ranked alongside the likes of Guan Yu and Ma Chao.

古文：马、张在近，亲见其功，尚可喻指；关遥闻之，恐必不悦，得无不可乎！ 
现代文：马超、张飞都在附近，都亲眼目睹黄忠的功劳，还能对他们加以解释，而关羽远在荆州，恐怕他得知后会不高兴，能不能先取消任命。 
English: Ma Chao and Zhang Fei are both nearby. They have witnessed Huang Zhong's merits firsthand and can explain to them. Guan Yu is far away in Jingzhou. I am afraid that he will not be happy when he learns about it. Can he cancel the appointment first?

古文：先主曰： 吾自当解之。 
现代文：刘备说： 我会向关羽解释的。 
English: Liu Bei said: I will explain to Guan Yu.

古文：遂与羽等齐位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：于是黄忠就跟关羽等人职位相等，被封为关内侯。
English: As a result, Huang Zhong was given the same position as Guan Yu and others, and was named Guan Inner Marquis.

古文：明年卒，追谥刚侯。
现代文：第二年黄忠去世，谥号为刚侯。
English: Huang Zhong died the following year, and his posthumous name was Gangu.

古文：子叙，早没，无后。
现代文：他的儿子黄叙早逝，所以没有后人。
English: His son Huang Xiu died young, so there were no descendants.

古文：赵云字子龙，常山真定人也。
现代文：赵云字子龙，是常山郡真定人。
English: Zhao Yunzhi Zilong is a native of Zhending, Changshan County.

古文：本属公孙瓒，瓒遣先主为田楷拒袁绍，云遂随从，为先主主骑。
现代文：本来是公孙瓒的部下，公孙瓒派刘备援助田楷抗拒袁绍，赵云也跟随前往，为刘备掌管骑兵。
English: Originally a subordinate of Gongsun Rong, Gongsun Rong sent Liu Bei to assist Tian Kai in resisting Yuan Shao, and Zhao Yun also followed, taking charge of the cavalry for Liu Bei.

古文：及先主为曹公所追於当阳长阪，弃妻子南走，云身抱弱子，即后主也，保护甘夫人，即后主母也，皆得免难。
现代文：等到刘备被曹操追击到了当阳郡的长阪，抛弃妻子往南奔走，赵云亲自抱着幼子，就是后主，保护甘夫人，即后主的母亲，使他们幸免于难。
English: When Liu Bei was chased by Cao Cao to Nagasaka in Dangyang County, abandoning his wife and running south, Zhao Yun personally held the young son, the heir, and protected Mrs. Gan, the mother of the heir, so that they survived.

古文：迁为牙门将军。
现代文：后来被封为牙门将军。
English: He was later given the title of General Zamen.

古文：先主入蜀，云留荆州。
现代文：刘备进入蜀地，赵云就留守荆州。
English: Liu Bei entered Shu and Zhao Yun stayed in Jingzhou.

古文：先主自葭萌还攻刘璋，召诸葛亮。
现代文：刘备从葭萌返回进攻刘璋，征召诸葛亮。
English: Liu Bei returned from Qimeng to attack Liu Bei and conscripted Zhuge Liang.

古文：亮率云与张飞等俱溯江西上，平定郡县。至江州，分遣云从外水上江阳，与亮会于成都。
现代文：诸葛亮率领张赵云跟张飞等人一起逆流而上，平定各郡县，到了江州，分别派遣赵云从岷江直上，进入江阳，跟诸葛亮在成都会合。
English: Zhuge Liang led Zhang Zhaoyun to go upstream with Zhang Fei and others to pacify the counties, and when they reached Jiangzhou, they separately sent Zhaoyun straight up the Li River and into Jiangyang to meet Zhuge Liang in Chengdu.

古文：成都既定，以云为翊军将军。
现代文：成都平定之后，任命赵云为翊军将军。
English: After Chengdu was pacified, Zhao Yun was appointed as the general of the Wei army.

古文：建兴元年，为中护军、征南将军，封永昌亭侯，迁镇东将军。
现代文：建兴元年，他担任中护军、征南将军，被封为永昌亭侯，后又升为镇东将军。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, he served as the general of the Middle Protection Army and the General of the Southern Expedition, was named Yongchang Tinghou, and later was promoted to the General of Zhendong.

古文：五年，随诸葛亮驻汉中。
现代文：建兴五年，跟随诸葛亮驻守汉中。
English: Jianxing five years, followed Zhuge Liang stationed in Hanzhong.

古文：明年，亮出军，扬声由斜谷道，曹真遣大众当之。
现代文：第二年，诸葛亮出兵，宣称从斜谷进军，曹真率大部队抵抗。
English: In the second year, Zhuge Liang sent troops and declared that he would march from the valley. Cao Zhen led a large force to resist.

古文：亮令云与邓芝往拒，而身攻祁山。
现代文：诸葛亮下令赵云跟邓芝前往迎击，而亲自率军攻打祁山。
English: Zhuge Liang ordered Zhao Yun and Deng Zhi to go to meet the attack, and personally led the army to attack Lushan.

古文：云、芝兵弱敌强，失利於箕谷，然敛众固守，不至大败。
现代文：赵云、邓芝等人，兵力较少而敌军强盛，就在箕谷战败失利，但依然聚集部众坚守，不至于一败涂地。
English: Zhao Yun, Deng Zhi and others, with a small number of troops and a strong enemy army, were defeated and defeated in Shibuya, but they still gathered together to hold on, not to be completely defeated.

古文：军退，贬为镇军将军。
现代文：大军退回够，赵云被贬为镇军将军。
English: The retreat of the large army was enough, and Zhao Yun was demoted to the rank of general of the town army.

古文：七年卒，追谥顺平侯。
现代文：建兴七年，赵云去世，朝廷追封谥号为顺平侯。
English: In the seventh year of Jianxing, Zhao Yun passed away, and the imperial court chased after Shunping.

古文：初，先主时，惟法正见谥；后主时，诸葛亮功德盖世，蒋琬、费祎荷国之重，亦见谥；陈祗宠待，特加殊奖，夏侯霸远来归国，故复得谥；於是关羽、张飞、马超、庞统、黄忠及云乃追谥，时论以为荣。
现代文：当初刘备在世时，只有法正被封了谥号，后主时期，因为诸葛亮功德盖世，蒋琬、费祎等担任国之重任，也被封谥号，陈衹受到帝王恩宠，有特殊优待，夏侯霸因为远道而来归附蜀地，所以也被追封谥号，于是关羽、张飞、马超、庞统、黄忠以及赵云被追封谥号，当时的人都以为是荣幸之事。
English: At first, when Liu Bei was alive, only Fa Zheng was given the posthumous name. During the period of emperors, Zhuge was given the posthumous name because of his outstanding contribution to the world, Jiang Zheng and Fei Zheng were also given the posthumous name because of their important roles in the country, Chen Zheng was favored by the emperor and received special preferential treatment, Xia Houba was given the posthumous name because he came all the way to Shu, and Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, Ma Chao, Pang Tong, Huang Zhong and Zhao Yun were given the posthumous name. People at the time thought it was an honor.

古文：云子统嗣，官至虎贲中郎，督行领军。
现代文：赵云的儿子赵统承袭爵位，官至虎贲中郎将，督领行领军。
English: Zhao Yun's son, Zhao Tong, inherited the title of nobility, and served as the vice-commander of the army and the leader of the army.

古文：次子广，牙门将，随姜维沓中，临陈战死。
现代文：赵云的次子赵广是牙门将，追随姜维沓中，后来战死了。
English: Zhao Yun's second son, Zhao Guang, was a goalkeeper. He followed Jiang Weiqi in middle school and later died in the war.

古文：评曰：关羽、张飞皆称万人之敌，为世虎臣。
现代文：评曰：关羽张飞都被称为有万夫不挡之勇，是当世的猛将。
English: Review: Guan Yu Zhang Fei Du is known as a man of unstoppable courage, a modern-day strongman.

古文：羽报效曹公，飞义释严颜，并有国士之风。
现代文：关羽报效曹操，张飞讲求道义释放严颜，都有国士的风范。
English: Guan Yu paid tribute to Cao Cao, Zhang Fei preached morality and released a stern face, all of which had the demeanor of a statesman.

古文：然羽刚而自矜，飞暴而无恩，以短取败，理数之常也。
现代文：但关羽刚强而自骄自傲，张飞粗暴而没有恩德，都因为短处而失败，这也是常理。
English: However, it is common sense that Guan Yu, who is strong and proud, and Zhang Fei, who is rude and has no virtue, both failed because of their shortcomings.

古文：马超阻戎负勇，以覆其族，惜哉！
现代文：马超阻挡少数民族，却导致自己的家族覆灭，可惜呀！
English: Ma Chao blocked ethnic minorities, but it led to the destruction of his own family. What a pity!

古文：能因穷致泰，不犹愈乎！
现代文：能从穷困走向康泰，对家族不也也很好吗？
English: Isn't it also good for the family to be able to go from poverty to prosperity?

古文：黄忠、赵云强挚壮猛，并作爪牙，其灌、滕之徒欤？
现代文：黄忠、赵云，勇猛强壮，做为蜀国的辅助之人，难道不是灌夫、腾公这样的人吗？
English: Huang Zhong, Zhao Yun, brave and strong, as auxiliary people of Shu, aren't they people like Ganfu and Tenggong?

