古文：六年，秦岁定，帅师侵晋，至于韩。
现代文：晋惠公在位的第六年，秦国丰收，民众安定，秦穆公统率军队侵入晋国，一直打到韩原。
English: In the sixth year of Jin Huigong's reign, Qin's harvest was bountiful and the people were stable. Qin Mu Gong led the army to invade Jin and fought all the way to Han Yuan.

古文：公谓庆郑曰： 秦寇深矣，奈何？ 
现代文：晋惠公问庆郑说： 秦军已经深入国土，如何是好？ 
English: Jin Huigong asked Qing Zheng: The Qin army has already penetrated deep into the country, what should we do?

古文：庆郑曰： 君深其怨，能浅其寇乎？
现代文：庆郑回答： 你与秦国结怨很深，能让秦军不深入吗？
English: Qing Zheng replied: You have a deep grudge against the Qin State, can you keep the Qin Army from going deeper?

古文：非郑之所知也，君其讯射也。 
现代文：如何应付这种局面不是我所知道的，国君还是去问虢射吧。 
English: I don't know how to deal with this situation. You should ask the laser.

古文：公曰： 舅所病也？ 
现代文：惠公说： 你这是在责备我吗？ 
English: Huigong said: Are you blaming me?

古文：卜右，庆郑吉。
现代文：占卜车右的人选时，庆郑卜得吉卦。
English: When the person on the right of the fortune-telling car was selected, Qing Zheng got lucky.

古文：公曰： 郑也不逊。 
现代文：惠公说： 庆郑对我不恭敬。 
English: Huigong said: Qing Zheng is disrespectful to me.

古文：以家仆徒为右，步扬御戎；梁由靡御韩简，虢射为右，以承公。
现代文：于是让家仆徒做他的车右，步扬为他驾驭兵车，另外让梁由靡为韩简驾驭兵车，让虢射担任韩简的车右，跟在惠公的兵车后面。
English: So he let the family servant drive his chariot on the right, and Gao Yang drove the chariot for him. In addition, he let Liang Yumai drive the chariot for Han Jian, and let Ya Ya serve as Han Jian's chariot on the right, following behind Huigong's chariot.

古文：公御秦师，令韩简视师，曰： 师少于我，斗士众。 
现代文：惠公迎战秦国军队，派韩简侦察，韩简说： 敌军少于我们，但勇于作战的人却很多。 
English: Huigong met the Qin army and sent Han Jian to reconnoiter. Han Jian said: The enemy army is smaller than ours, but there are many people who are brave enough to fight.

古文：公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：惠公问： 什么原因呢？ 
English: Kan said, "Why is that?

古文：简曰： 以君之出也处己，入也烦己，饥食其籴，三施而无报，故来。
现代文：韩简回答说： 因为你出亡时依靠过秦国，回国继承君位时烦劳过秦国，饥荒时又吃过秦国卖给我们的粮食，秦国三次给我们恩惠而我们都没有报答，所以他们才来侵犯。
English: Han Zhen replied: Because you relied on the Qin State when you went into exile, worked hard for the Qin State when you returned to inherit the throne, and ate the grain sold to us by the Qin State during the famine. The Qin State gave us three favors and we did not repay them, so they came to invade.

古文：今又击之，秦莫不愠，晋莫不怠，斗士是故众。 公曰： 然。
现代文：如今你又出兵迎战他们，秦军没有人不愤怒，晋军没有人不懈怠，所以秦军中勇于作战的人多。 惠公说： 不错。
English: Now you have sent troops to fight them again, no one in the Qin army is not angry, and no one in the Jin army is not slacking, so there are many people in the Qin army who are brave enough to fight.

古文：今我不击，归必狃。
现代文：但我现在不迎击，回去后秦国一定会经常来犯。
English: But if I don't fight back now, I'm sure Qin will come after me often.

古文：一夫不可狃，而况国乎！ 
现代文：匹夫尚且不可受人轻侮，何况国家呢！ 
English: A dog is not to be despised, let alone a country!

古文：公令韩简挑战，曰： 昔君之惠也，寡人未之敢忘。
现代文：惠公命令韩简派使者向秦军挑战，说： 过去秦君的恩惠，我不敢忘记。
English: Huigong ordered Han Jian to send an emissary to challenge the Qin army, saying: "I dare not forget Qin Jun's favor in the past.

古文：寡人有众，能合之弗能离也。
现代文：我有众多的将士，能集合他们作战而不离散。
English: I have a great number of soldiers, and I can assemble them for battle and not scatter them.

古文：君若还，寡人之愿也。君若不还，寡人将无所避。 
现代文：秦君如果退兵回国，正是我所希望的。秦君如果不退兵，我也不会避让。 
English: If Qin Jun retires and returns to China, that is exactly what I hope for. If Qin Jun does not retire, I will not give in.

古文：穆公衡彫戈出见使者，曰： 昔君之未入，寡人之忧也。
现代文：穆公横握着雕花的战戟出来见晋军的使者，说： 过去你们国君不能回国，我曾为他担忧。
English: Mu Gong, holding a carved battle axe, came out to meet the envoy of the Jin army and said: In the past, your sovereign could not return to the country. I was worried about him.

古文：君入而列未成，寡人未敢忘。
现代文：你们国君回国后地位一时还未安定，我牵挂在心。
English: I am concerned that the status of your sovereigns will not be stable for a while after their return to China.

古文：今君既定而列成，君其整列，寡人将亲见。 
现代文：如今他君位已定，军队编练已成，让他整理好阵列，我要亲自见见他。 
English: Now that his position has been established and the army has been trained, let him organize the array, I want to see him in person.

古文：客还，公孙枝进谏曰： 昔君之不纳公子重耳而纳晋君，是君之不置德而置服也。
现代文：晋使回去后，公孙枝劝告穆公说： 过去你不接纳公子重耳却接纳晋君，这是你不愿立有德的人而只是立服从你的人。
English: After the envoy returned, Gongsun Zhi advised Mu Gong, saying, "In the past, you did not accept the prince's heavy ears, but accepted Jin Jun. This is because you do not want to establish a virtuous person, but only a person who obeys you.

古文：置而不遂，击而不胜，其若为诸侯笑何？
现代文：立了却不能如意，打了如果又不能获胜，岂不要遭到诸侯的嘲笑？
English: If you stand up and do not succeed, if you fight and do not win, will you not be ridiculed by the princes?

古文：君盍待之乎？ 穆公曰： 然。
现代文：国君何不等待晋国自己败亡呢？ 穆公说： 是这样。
English: Why didn't the sovereign wait for Jin's own downfall? Mu Gong said: That's right.

古文：昔吾之不纳公子重耳而纳晋君，是吾不置德而置服也。
现代文：过去我不接纳公子重耳却接纳夷吾，确实是我不愿立有德的人而想立服从我的人。
English: In the past, I did not accept nobles with heavy ears, but I accepted barbarians. It is true that I do not want to establish a virtuous person, but I want to establish a person who obeys me.

古文：然公子重耳实不肯，吾又奚言哉？
现代文：可是公子重耳事实上也不肯做国君，我又能说什么呢？
English: However, the prince with the heavy ears actually did not want to be the sovereign, so what can I say?

古文：杀其内主，背其外赂，彼塞我施，若无天乎？若有天，吾必胜之。 
现代文：晋君在国内杀了丕郑和里克，在国外又背弃给我国城邑的许诺，他自私无信而我总是加惠于他，难道没有上天主持公道吗？假如有上天的话，我一定能战胜他。 
English: Jinjun killed Zhen Zheng and Rick at home, and reneged on his promise to the cities of our country abroad. He was selfish and untrustworthy, and I always favored him. Isn't there a God to uphold justice? If there is a God, I will surely be able to defeat him.

古文：君揖大夫就车，君鼓而进之。
现代文：穆公于是集合大夫们登上战车，亲自击鼓指挥进攻。
English: Mu Gong then gathered the doctors to board the chariot and personally beat the drums to lead the attack.

古文：晋师溃，戎马泞而止。
现代文：晋军溃败，战马陷入泥泞之中动弹不得。
English: The Jin army was routed, and the horses were stuck in the mud and could not move.

古文：公号庆郑曰： 载我！ 
现代文：惠公呼叫庆郑说： 快用车来载我逃命！ 
English: Huigong called Qing Zheng and said: Quickly use the car to carry me to escape!

古文：庆郑曰： 忘善而背德，又废吉卜，何我之载？
现代文：庆郑说： 你忘恩负义，又废了吉卜，不用我做车右，为什么又想搭我的车？
English: Qing Zheng said: You are ungrateful, and you have wasted your talents. You don't need me to drive the car. Why do you want to take my car?

古文：郑之车不足以辱君避也！ 
现代文：我庆郑的战车不值得委屈你来避难！ 
English: I Qing Zheng's chariot is not worthy of offending you to take refuge!

古文：梁由靡御韩简，辂秦公，将止之，庆郑曰： 释来救君！ 
现代文：梁由靡为韩简驾驭战车，迎住秦穆公，将要擒获他，庆郑说： 放了他来救国君！ 
English: Liang Yu-mai is driving the chariot for Han Jian, welcoming Qin Mu-gong, about to capture him, Qing Zheng said: Let him go to save the country!

古文：亦不克救，遂止于秦。
现代文：但也未能救出晋君，晋惠公终于被秦军俘获。
English: However, they were not able to rescue Jin Jun, and Jin Huigong was finally captured by the Qin army.

古文：穆公归，至于王城，合大夫而谋曰： 杀晋君与逐出之，与以归之、与复之，孰利？ 
现代文：秦穆公回到王城，召集大夫们商量说： 杀掉晋君，或者放逐他，或者让他回国，或者恢复他的君位，哪个办法对我们有利？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong returned to the royal city, gathered the doctors to discuss and said: Kill Jin Jun, or banish him, or let him return home, or restore his throne, which method is beneficial to us?

古文：公子絷曰： 杀之利。
现代文：公子絷说： 杀了有利。
English: He said, "It is advantageous to kill."

古文：逐之恐搆诸侯，以归则国家多慝，复之则君臣合作，恐为君忧，不若杀之。 
现代文：放逐他恐怕会激怒诸侯；让他回去国家将多祸患；恢复他的君位，晋国君臣一旦合作，恐怕将要成为祸患，不如将其杀死。 
English: Deporting him would probably infuriate the lords; letting him return to the country would be disastrous; restoring him to the throne, if the Jin monarchs and courtiers cooperated, would probably become a disaster, it would be better to kill him.

古文：公孙枝曰： 不可。
现代文：公孙枝说： 不可以。
English: Gongsun Zhi said, "No."

古文：耻大国之士于中原，又杀其君以重之，子思报父之仇，臣思报君之仇。
现代文：我们在韩地的原野上羞辱了晋国的将士，又要杀他们的国君以加重这种羞辱，那么儿子想要报杀父之仇，臣下想报杀君之仇，结怨何时得了。
English: We have humiliated the soldiers of Jin on the fields of Korea, and we want to kill their sovereign to add to this humiliation. So when will the grudge end, when the son wants to avenge the death of his father, and the vassal wants to avenge the death of his sovereign?

古文：虽微秦国，天下孰弗患？ 
现代文：这种事情即便不是秦国干的，天下人谁不憎恨呢？ 
English: Even if this kind of thing was not done by Qin, who in the world would not hate it?

古文：公子絷曰： 吾岂将徒杀之？
现代文：公子絷说： 我岂是只杀晋君就算完了？
English: He said, "Did I just kill Jinjun and call it a day?

古文：吾将以公子重耳代之。
现代文：我将用公子重耳来代替他为君。
English: I'm going to replace him with a gentleman.

古文：晋君之无道莫不闻，公子重耳之仁莫不知。
现代文：晋君的无道谁人不听说，公子重耳的仁德谁人不知道。
English: Who has not heard of Jinjun's ruthlessness, and who does not know the gentleness of the gentleman's heavy ear.

古文：战胜大国，武也。
现代文：我们战胜大国，是威武。
English: Our victory over a big country is a mighty one.

古文：杀无道而立有道，仁也。胜无后害，智也。 
现代文：杀无道之君而立有道，是仁义，胜利后不留后患，是明智。 
English: It is benevolence and righteousness to kill a king who has no way and establish a way, and it is wise not to leave any trouble behind after victory.

古文：公孙枝曰： 耻一国之士，又曰余纳有道以临女，无乃不可乎？
现代文：公孙枝说： 羞辱了一国的将士，又说我立有道的国君来管理你们，恐怕行不通吧？
English: Gongsun Zhi said, "Having humiliated the soldiers of a country, and saying that I have set up a moral ruler to govern you, I'm afraid it won't work, will it?"

古文：若不可，必为诸侯笑。
现代文：倘若行不通，必定会被诸侯嘲笑。
English: If it doesn't work, it will be ridiculed by the lords.

古文：战而取笑诸侯，不可谓武。
现代文：战胜大国却被诸侯嘲笑，不可以说是威武。
English: Defeating a great power, but being laughed at by the lords, cannot be said to be mighty.

古文：杀其弟而立其兄，兄德我而忘其亲，不可谓仁。
现代文：杀掉弟弟而立他的哥哥，哥哥假如感德于我却忘了他的亲人，不可以说是仁义。
English: If a brother kills his brother and sets up his brother, and if the brother feels virtuous towards me but forgets his relatives, it cannot be said to be benevolence.

古文：若弗忘，是再施不遂也，不可谓智。 
现代文：假如不忘亲人，就是再次施恩而不成功，不可以说是明智。 
English: If you do not forget your loved ones, you will be doing a favor again and not succeeding, which cannot be said to be wise.

古文：君曰： 然则若何？ 
现代文：穆公问： 那应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Mu Gong asked: What should we do then?

古文：公孙枝曰： 不若以归，以要晋国之成，复其君而质其适子，使子父代处秦，国可以无害。 
现代文：公孙枝说： 不如让他回去，和晋国缔结和约，恢复他的君位，但把他的太子做人质，让他们父子轮流呆在秦国，国家就可以没有祸害了。 
English: Gongsun Zhi said: It would be better to let him go back, conclude a peace treaty with Jin, and restore his throne, but take his prince as a hostage, let them stay in Qin in turns, and the country can be free of harm.

古文：是故归惠公而质子圉，秦始知河东之政。
现代文：穆公因此就这样做了，让惠公回到晋国，留下子圉做人质，秦国开始管理河东五城的政事。
English: Mu Gong therefore did this, let Huigong return to Jin Province, leaving Zibo as a hostage, and Qin Province began to manage the political affairs of the five cities in the east of the river.

