古文：明一者皇，察道者帝，通德者王，谋得兵胜者霸。
现代文：通晓万物本质的，可成皇业；明察治世之道的，可成帝业；懂得实行德政的，可成王业；深谋远虑取得战争胜利的，可成霸业。
English: Those who are familiar with the essence of all things can become emperors; those who are familiar with the way of ruling the world can become emperors; those who know how to implement moral government can become kings; those who are far-sighted and win the war can become tyrants.

古文：故夫兵，虽非备道至德也，然而所以辅王成霸。
现代文：所以，战争，虽不是什么完备高尚的道德，但可以辅助王业和成就霸业。
English: Therefore, although war is not a complete and noble morality, it can assist the king's cause and achieve hegemony.

古文：今代之用兵者不然，不知兵权者也。
现代文：现代用兵的人却不明此理，不晓得用兵是要权衡得失的。
English: However, people who use soldiers in modern times do not understand this. They do not know that the use of soldiers is a matter of weighing the pros and cons.

古文：故举兵之日而境内贫，战不必胜，胜则多死，得地而国败。
现代文：所以，一发动战争就使国内贫穷，打起仗来没有必胜的把握，打了胜仗则死亡甚多，得了土地而伤了国家元气。
English: Therefore, as soon as a war is started, the country is impoverished. When a war is started, there is no certainty of victory. When a war is won, there are many deaths. When land is gained, the country is weakened.

古文：此四者，用兵之祸者也。
现代文：这四种情况，是用兵的祸害。
English: These four situations are the scourge of soldiers.

古文：四祸其国而无不危矣。
现代文：四者害其国，没有不危亡的。
English: The four of them have harmed their country, and none of them is safe.

古文：大度之书曰：举兵之日而境内不贫，战而必胜，胜而不死，得地而国不败。
现代文：大度的书上说：发动战争而保持国家不贫，打起仗来有必胜把握，打了胜仗没有死亡，得了土地而本国不伤元气，如何做到这四点呢？
English: The great book said: how to achieve these four points: start a war and keep the country from poverty, start a war and have a sure victory, win a war and not die, gain land and the country will not lose its vitality?

古文：举兵之日而境内不贫者，计数得也。
现代文：发动战争而国内不贫，是因为筹算得当。
English: If a war is waged and the country is not impoverished, it is because of proper planning.

古文：战而必胜者，法度审也。
现代文：战而必胜，是因为法度严明。
English: The battle is winnable because the law is strict.

古文：胜而不死者，教器备利，而敌不敢校也。
现代文：打了胜仗而没有死亡，是因为教练和武器都好，敌人不敢抗拒。
English: If a battle is won without loss of life, it is because the trainer and the weapons are good and the enemy does not dare to resist.

古文：得地而国不败者，因其民也。
现代文：得了土地而不伤本国元气，是因为顺应了被征服国的人民。
English: The reason why they got the land without damaging their country is because they obeyed the people of the conquered country.

古文：因其民，则号制有发也。
现代文：顺应其人民，号令、制度就有成法可依。
English: In accordance with its people, orders, and systems, there is a law to follow.

古文：教器备利，则有制也。
现代文：教练和武器都好，就有控制力量。
English: If you have good coaches and weapons, you have control.

古文：法度审，则有守也。
现代文：法度严明，军队就有遵循。
English: The laws are strict, and the military follows them.

古文：计数得，则有明也。
现代文：筹算得当，用兵就有明见。
English: With proper planning, the use of troops will be clear.

古文：治众有数，胜敌有理。察数而知理，审器而识胜，明理而胜敌。
现代文：治兵众要有方法，胜敌国要有正理，审查治兵的方法就可以了解治军水平，审查武器的状况就可以了解战胜原因，明白举兵的正理就可以战胜敌人。
English: There must be a way to lead the troops, and there must be a reason for defeating the enemy country. By examining the method of leading the troops, we can understand the level of leading the troops. By examining the condition of the weapons, we can understand the reasons for victory. By understanding the reason for raising the troops, we can defeat the enemy.

古文：定宗庙，遂男女，官四分，则可以定威德；制法仪，出号令，然后可以一众治民。
现代文：安定宗庙，养育儿女，使四民分业治事，就可以立威立德；制定仪法，发布号令，然后就可以统一百姓行动和治理民众了。
English: Stabilize the ancestral temple, raise children, and make the four people divide the business and manage the affairs, then you can establish a will and morality; establish rituals and laws, issue orders, and then you can unify the people's actions and govern the people.

古文：兵无主，则不蚤知敌。
现代文：军中没有主帅，就不能早知敌情。
English: If there is no commander-in-chief in the army, it is impossible to know the enemy situation in advance.

古文：野无吏，则无蓄积。
现代文：农业没有官吏，就不能充实粮食贮备。
English: Without officials in agriculture, grain reserves cannot be replenished.

古文：官无常，则下怨上，器械不巧。
现代文：官府没有常法，下面就抱怨上级，而使武器不精。
English: The government does not have a standing law, so they complain to their superiors, and the weapons are not refined.

古文：则朝无定，赏罚不明，则民轻其产。
现代文：朝廷没有统一政令而赏罚不明，人民就看轻出产。
English: Since the Imperial Court did not issue a unified decree and the rewards and punishments were unclear, the people regarded production lightly.

古文：故曰：蚤知敌，则独行；有蓄积，则久而不匮；器械巧，则伐而不费：赏罚明，则勇士劝也。
现代文：应该说：早知敌情，才能够所向无敌；有充实的粮食贮备，才能久战而不匮乏；武器精巧，才能征伐顺利；赏罚严明，才能使勇士得到鼓励。
English: It should be said that: knowing the enemy's situation early can make the enemy invincible; having sufficient grain reserves can make the war last longer without shortage; sophisticated weapons can make the conquest go smoothly; and strict rewards and punishments can encourage the warriors.

古文：三官不缪，五教不乱，九章著明，则危危而无害，穷穷而无难。
现代文： 三官 无误， 五教 不乱， 九章 著明，这样，虽处于极危之境也无害，处于极度困乏也不会遇难。
English: The three organs are infallible, the five teachings are not chaotic, and the nine chapters are clear. In this way, although it is in a state of extreme danger, it is not harmful, and it will not die in extreme poverty.

古文：故能致远以数，纵强以制。
现代文：所以有办法进行远征，有规则总领众强。
English: Therefore, there is a way to carry out the expedition, there are rules, and the leader is strong.

古文：三官：一曰鼓棗鼓所以任也，所以起也，所以进也；二曰金棗金所以坐也，所以退也，所以免也；三曰旗棗旗所以立兵也，所以利兵也，所以偃兵也。
现代文：三官：第一是鼓，鼓是为了作战，为了发动，为了进攻而用的；第二是金，金是为了防守，为了退兵，为了停战而用的；第三是旗，旗是为了出动军队，为了节制军队，为了抑止军队而用的。
English: Three functions: the first is the drum, the drum is used for fighting, for launching, for attacking; the second is gold, gold is used for defense, for retreating, for armistice; the third is the flag, the flag is used for dispatching troops, for controlling troops, and for deterring troops.

古文：此之谓三官。
现代文：这就是三官。
English: These are the three organs.

古文：有三令，而兵法治也。五教：一曰教其目以形色之旗，二曰教其身以号令之数，三曰教其足以进退之度，四曰教其手以长短之利，五曰教其心以赏罚之诚。
现代文：有此三令，兵法就起作用了。 五教 ：一是教战士眼看各种形色的旗帜，二是教战士耳听各种号令的数目，三是教战士足走前进后退的步伐，四是教战士手使各种长短的武器，五是教战士心想赏罚制度的必行。
English: With these three precepts, the law of war will work. Five teachings: First, teach the soldiers to look at the flags of various shapes; second, teach the soldiers to listen to the number of orders; third, teach the soldiers to walk forward and backward; fourth, teach the soldiers to use various long and short weapons; fifth, teach the soldiers to follow the reward and punishment system.

古文：五教各习，而士负以勇矣。九章：一曰举日章，则昼行；二曰举月章，则夜行；三曰举龙章，则行水；四曰举虎章，则行林；五曰举鸟章，则行陂；六曰举蛇章，则行泽；七曰举鹊章，则行陆；八曰举狼章，则行山；九曰举韟章，则载食而驾。
现代文：五教熟练，战士就有勇气作战了。 九章 ：一是举日章，白日行军；二是举月章，夜里行军；三是举龙章，水里行军；四是举虎章，林内行军；五是举乌章，丘陵行军；六是举蛇章，沼泽行军；七是举鹊章，陆上行军；八是举狼章，山上行军；九是举弓衣之章，表示要载上粮食驾车而行的意思。
English: Nine chapters: one is the sun-raising chapter, marching during the day; the second is the moon-raising chapter, marching at night; the third is the dragon-raising chapter, marching in the water; the fourth is the tiger-raising chapter, marching in the forest; the fifth is the blackbird-raising chapter, marching in the hills; the sixth is the snake-raising chapter, marching in the swamp; the seventh is the badger-raising chapter, marching on land; the eighth is the wolf-raising chapter, marching in the mountains; the ninth is the bow-and-cloth-raising chapter, indicating the intention to carry grain and drive.

古文：九章既定，而动静不过。
现代文：这九章确定之后，军队的行止就不会越轨了。
English: After these nine chapters are determined, the behavior of the military will not deviate.

古文：三官、五教、九章，始乎无端，卒乎无穷。始乎无端者，道也；卒乎无穷者，德也。
现代文：运用三官、五教和九章，要做到起始于没有开端，结束于没有穷尽。始于无端，好比 道 ；终于无穷，好比 德 。
English: Using the three organs, the five teachings and the nine chapters, we should start with no beginning and end with no end. We should start with no beginning, like the Tao; and end with no end, like virtue.

古文：道不可量，德不可数也。
现代文：因为道是不可量度的，德是不可测算的。
English: Because the Tao is immeasurable, virtue is incalculable.

古文：故不可量，则众强不能图；不可数，则伪诈不敢向。
现代文：不可量度，所以敌众强大也无法图谋我军；不可测算，所以敌军诈伪也不敢对抗我军。
English: It is immeasurable, so the enemy is too powerful to plot against our army; it is immeasurable, so the enemy's deception does not dare to confront our army.

古文：两者备施，则动静有功。
现代文：两者兼而施之，无论动兵或息兵都有成效。
English: A combination of the two is effective, regardless of whether troops are mobilized or disengaged.

古文：径乎不知，发乎不意。
现代文：过境要使人不知，发兵要出敌不意。
English: To cross the border is to make people unaware, and to send troops is to surprise the enemy.

古文：径乎不知，故莫之能御也；发乎不意，故莫之能应也。
现代文：过境使人不知，敌人就无法防御；发兵出敌不意，敌人就无法应付。
English: If one does not know when to cross the border, the enemy will not be able to defend; if one sends troops out unexpectedly, the enemy will not be able to deal with it.

古文：故全胜而无害。
现代文：故能全胜而无所伤害。
English: So they can win without doing any harm.

古文：因便而教，准利而行。
现代文：要根据进军方便而进行教练，要按照作战有利而指挥行动。
English: It is necessary to carry out the training according to the convenience of the advance, and to command the operation according to the advantage of the operation.

古文：教无常，行无常。
现代文：教练不拘常规，行动也不拘常规。
English: The coach is unconventional, the actions are unconventional.

古文：两者备施，动乃有功。
现代文：两者兼而施之，一动兵就有成效。
English: If you combine the two, you'll get results in no time.

古文：器成教施，追亡逐遁若飘风，击刺若雷电。
现代文：兵器完好，教练有素，追逐逃兵遁卒就能像飘风一样迅速，击杀敌军就能像雷电一样猛烈。
English: The weapons are in good condition, the training is good, the pursuit of deserters and pawns can be as swift as the wind, and the killing of enemy troops can be as fierce as lightning.

古文：绝地不守，恃固不拔，中处而无敌，令行而不留。
现代文：敌人虽有绝地也不能守卫，虽侍险固也不能支持。我军则保持主动而无敌，令行而无阻。
English: Although the enemy has Jedi, they cannot guard, and although they have attendants, they cannot support. Our army, on the other hand, remains active and invincible, allowing us to move without hindrance.

古文：器成教施，散之无方，聚之不可计。
现代文：兵器完好，教练有素，分兵则敌人不能防备，聚兵则敌人不能测度。
English: If the weapons are in good condition and the trainer is good, the enemy will not be able to defend when the troops are divided, and the enemy will not be able to measure when the troops are gathered.

古文：教器备利，进退若雷电，而无所疑匮。
现代文：在教练充分武器良好的条件下，兵的进退都会像雷电一样，而没有停滞和溃散。
English: Under the condition that the coach has sufficient and good weapons, the advance and retreat of the soldiers will be like lightning, but without stagnation and dispersion.

古文：一气专定，则傍通而不疑；厉士利械，则涉难而不匮。
现代文：能做到一气专定，则四出无阻；能做到强兵利器，则遇危不乱。
English: If you can achieve a single-minded determination, then you will have no obstacles; if you can achieve a strong army and weapon, then you will not be in danger.

古文：进无所疑，退无所匮，敌乃为用。
现代文：进军无阻碍，退军不溃乱，敌人就为我所用了。
English: March unimpeded, retreat unhindered, the enemy is of use to me.

古文：凌山坑，不待钩梯；历水谷，不须舟辑。径于绝地，攻于恃固，独出独入而莫之能止。
现代文：这样，过山谷不用钩梯，经水沟不用船只，可以通过绝险的地势，可以打下依险固守的敌人，独出独入谁也不能阻止。
English: In this way, there is no need to use a ladder to cross the valley, and there is no need to use a boat to cross the ditch. It is possible to pass through the perilous terrain, and it is possible to defeat the enemy who is clinging to danger. No one can prevent anyone from entering alone.

古文：宝不独入，故莫之能止；宝不独见，故莫之能敛。
现代文：实际上 独入 并不是单人打入，所以不能阻止； 独出 并不是单人杀出，所以不能约束。
English: In fact, solo entry is not a single person entering, so it cannot be prevented; solo exit is not a single person out, so it cannot be restricted.

古文：无名之至，尽尽而不意。
现代文：这种战法不能用言语形容至尽，说尽反而不是原意了。
English: This kind of warfare cannot be fully described in words, and it is the opposite of the original intention.

古文：故不能疑神。
现代文：所以，其伟大可与神灵相比拟。
English: Therefore, his greatness can be compared to that of a god.

古文：畜之以道，则民和；养之以德，则民合。
现代文：养兵以道，则人民和睦；养兵以德，则人民团结。
English: If soldiers are raised with morality, the people will be harmonious; if soldiers are raised with virtue, the people will be united.

古文：和合故能谐，谐故能辑，谐辑以悉，莫之能伤。
现代文：和睦团结就行动协调，协调就能一致，普遍地协调一致，那就谁也不能伤害了。
English: Harmony and unity means coordination of actions, coordination can be consistent, and universal coordination, then no one can be harmed.

古文：定一至，行二要，纵三权，施四教，发五机，设六行，论七数，守八应，审九器，章十号。故能全胜大胜。
现代文：定于 一至 ，实行 两要 ，总揽 三权 ，掌握 四机 ，发 五教 ，设 六行 ，讲 七数 ，守 八应 ，审 九章 ，明 十号 ，这就能获得全胜和大胜了。
English: It is scheduled on the 1st, the implementation of the two points, the total control of the three powers, the mastery of the four machines, the issuance of the five teachings, the establishment of the six lines, the speaking of the seven numbers, the keeping of the eight shoulds, the examination of the nine chapters, and the tenth day of the month of Ming. This will be able to win a complete victory and a great victory.

古文：无守也，故能守胜。
现代文：要固守，所以能以守取胜。
English: You have to defend, so you can win by defending.

古文：数战则士罢，数胜则君骄，夫以骄君使罢民，则国安得无危？
现代文：因为，频繁战斗则士兵疲惫，多次得胜则君主骄傲，以骄傲的君主驱使疲惫的士兵作战，国家怎能不危险？
English: For how can a country not be in danger when soldiers are tired after frequent battles, when the monarch is proud after many victories, and when tired soldiers are driven to fight by a proud monarch?

古文：故至善不战，其次一之。
现代文：所以，用兵最好的是不战而胜，其次是一战而定。
English: Therefore, the best use of troops is to win without a fight, and the second is to win after a fight.

古文：破大胜强，一之至也。
现代文：打破大国，战胜强敌，这是一战而定的典范。
English: To break a big country and defeat a strong enemy, this is a model of war determination.

古文：乱之不以变，乘之不以诡，胜之不以诈，一之实也。
现代文：乱敌不用权变，乘敌不用诡计，胜敌不用诈谋，这是一战而定的实质。
English: The violent enemy does not need to resort to coups, the enemy does not need to use tricks, and the victorious enemy does not need to use deception. This is the essence of war.

古文：近则用实，远则施号；力不可量，强不可度，气不可极，德不可测，一之原也。
现代文：对近敌用实力征伐，对远国用号令威慑，力量不可估计，强盛不可测度，士气永不枯竭，心智无法捉摸，这是一战而定的力量源泉。
English: To conquer the near enemy with strength, to deter the distant country with a signal, the strength is immeasurable, the strength is immeasurable, the morale is never exhausted, and the mind cannot be grasped. This is a war-determined source of strength.

古文：众若时雨，寡若飘风，一之终也。
现代文：增兵像时雨一样密集，减兵像飘风一样迅速，这是一战而定的最终表现。
English: The increase of troops is as dense as the rain, and the reduction of troops is as rapid as the wind, which is the final manifestation of the war.

古文：利適，器之至也；用敌，教之尽也。
现代文：能控制敌人，是武器最精的结果；使敌为我用，是教练最好的结果。
English: To be able to control one's enemy is the best result of a weapon; to be able to use one's enemy to one's own advantage is the best result of a trainer.

古文：不能致器者，不能利適；不能尽教者，不能用敌。
现代文：不能使武器最精的，不能制敌；不能使教练最好的，不能使敌为我用。
English: Can't make the best weapon, can't defeat the enemy; can't make the best coach, can't make the enemy use it for me.

古文：不能用敌者穷，不能致器者困。
现代文：不能使敌为我用，我将陷于被动；不能使武器最精，我将陷于困境。
English: If I can't make the enemy use it for me, I will be trapped in passivity; if I can't make the weapon the best, I will be trapped in a dilemma.

古文：远用兵，则可以必胜。
现代文：用兵神速，可以取得必胜。
English: If you are quick with your troops, you can win a decisive victory.

古文：出入异涂，则伤其敌。
现代文：出入异途，可以劳伤敌军。
English: Entering and exiting by a different route can cause injury to the enemy.

古文：深入危之，则士自修；士自修，则同心同力。
现代文：深入敌境造成危险，战士自然警惕，警惕就同心同力了。
English: Deep into the enemy territory, causing danger, soldiers are naturally vigilant, and vigilance is a concerted effort.

古文：善者之为兵也，使敌若据虚，若搏景。
现代文：善于用兵者指挥作战，总是使敌人像在虚空的地方，像在同影子搏斗。
English: Those who are good at using soldiers to command battles always make the enemy seem to be fighting in an empty place, as if they were fighting with a shadow.

古文：无设无形焉，无不可以成也；无形无为焉，无不可以化也，此之谓道矣。
现代文：保持没有方位、没有形体的样子，因而没有不成功的；保持没有形体、没有作为的样子，因而没有不变化的。这些就叫作 道 。
English: Maintaining the appearance of no position, no form, and therefore no failure; maintaining the appearance of no form, no action, and therefore no change; these are called the Tao.

古文：若亡而存，若后而先，威不足以命之。
现代文：它好像无有而实则存在，好像在后而实则在前。用 威 字，都不足以形容其作用。
English: It seems to be non-existent, but it really exists, it seems to be behind, but it is really in front. It is not enough to describe its role with threatening words.

