古文：张鱼舟申屠澄丁岩王用张逢
现代文：张鱼舟申屠澄丁岩王用张逢
English: Zhang Yu Zhou Shen Tu Cheng Ding Yan Wang with Zhang Feng

古文：张鱼舟
现代文：张鱼舟
English: Zhang Yuzhou

古文：唐建中初，青州北海县北有秦始皇望海台，台之侧有别浕泊，泊边有取鱼人张鱼舟结草庵止其中。
现代文：唐朝建中年初，青州北海县县北有秦始皇的望海台，台的一侧有一个别浕泊，泊边有一个叫张鱼舟的打鱼人盖了栋草房住在里边。
English: At the beginning of the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there was a watchtower of Qin Shi Huang in the north of Beihai County, Qingzhou. On one side of the platform, there was a separate anchorage, and on the other side of the anchorage, there was a fisherman named Zhang Yuzhou who built a grass house and lived there.

古文：常有一虎夜突入庵中，值鱼舟方睡，至欲晓，鱼舟乃觉有人。
现代文：有一回一只老虎突然走进草屋里，赶上张鱼舟正在睡觉，到了天要亮的时候，张鱼舟才觉得屋里有人。
English: Once, a tiger suddenly entered the grass hut and caught up with Zhang Yuzhou while he was sleeping. It was not until dawn that Zhang Yuzhou realized there was someone in the house.

古文：初不知是虎，至明方见之。鱼舟惊惧，伏不敢动。
现代文：一开始不知道是虎，到天亮看见了，张鱼舟吓得趴在那里没敢动。
English: At first, he didn't know it was a tiger, but when he saw it in the morning, he was so scared that he didn't dare to move.

古文：虎徐以足扪鱼舟，鱼舟心疑有故，因起坐。
现代文：那虎用脚慢慢地触摸张鱼舟。张鱼舟想到可能有什么事，就坐了起来。
English: The tiger slowly touched Zhang Yu Zhou with his foot. Zhang Yu Zhou thought about what might have happened and sat up.

古文：虎举前左足示鱼舟，鱼舟视之，见掌有刺可长五六寸，乃为除之。
现代文：老虎把左前脚举起来让张鱼舟看，张鱼舟一看，见虎脚上扎了一根五六寸长的刺，就为它拔下来。
English: The tiger held up its left front foot for Zhang Yuzhou to see. Zhang Yuzhou saw a five-six-inch-long thorn on the tiger's foot and pulled it out.

古文：虎跃然出庵，若拜伏之状，因以身劘鱼舟。良久，回顾而去。
现代文：老虎蹦蹦跳跳地出了草屋，作出好象下拜的样子。于是把身子挨近张鱼舟，好久虎回顾着离去了。
English: The tiger hopped out of the grass hut and made as if to bow down. So he put his body close to the fishing boat. The tiger looked back for a long time and left.

古文：至夜半，忽闻庵前坠一大物。
现代文：到了半夜，忽然听到屋前有挺大一个东西摔到地上。
English: In the middle of the night, I suddenly heard a rather large object fall to the ground in front of the house.

古文：鱼舟走出，见一野豕腯甚，几三百斤。
现代文：张鱼舟出去一看，是一口挺肥的野猪，差不多有三百斤。
English: When Zhang Yuzhou went out to take a look, it was a rather fat wild boar, almost three hundred pounds.

古文：在庵前，见鱼舟，复以身劘之。良久而去。
现代文：虎也在那里见了张鱼舟又身子挨近他表示亲热，好久才去。
English: The tiger also saw Zhang Yuzhou there and approached him to show affection. It took him a long time to leave.

古文：自后每夜送物来，或豕或鹿。
现代文：从此以后，每天夜间老虎都送东西来，或者是猪，或者是鹿。
English: From then on, every night the tiger would bring something, either a pig or a deer.

古文：村人以为妖，送县。
现代文：村里人以为张鱼舟是妖怪，就把他送到县里。
English: The villagers thought Zhang Yuzhou was a monster, so they sent him to the county.

古文：鱼舟陈始末，县使吏随而伺之。
现代文：张鱼舟详细述说了始末。县令派人随张鱼舟偷看。
English: Zhang Yuzhou described in detail the beginning and the end. The county ordered to send someone to spy on Zhang Yuzhou.

古文：至二更，又送麋来，县遂释其罪。
现代文：到了二更，老虎又送来一头麋鹿。县令宣布他无罪。
English: At two o'clock, the tiger brought another elk. The county magistrate acquitted him.

古文：鱼舟为虎设一百一斋功德。
现代文：张鱼舟为老虎设了一百一斋功德。
English: Zhang Yuzhou set up a hundred and one merits for the tiger.

古文：其夜，又衔绢一匹而来。
现代文：那夜，老虎又衔来一匹绢。
English: That night, the tiger brought another roe deer.

古文：一日，其庵忽被虎拆之，意者不欲鱼舟居此。
现代文：一日，他的草房忽然被虎拆了，估摸着是不让张鱼舟在这住了。
English: One day, his grass hut was suddenly torn down by a tiger, and he knew that he could not let Zhang Yuanzhou live here.

古文：鱼舟知意，遂别卜居焉。
现代文：张鱼舟知道这个意思，就搬到别处住了。
English: Zhang Yuzhou knew this and moved to another place.

古文：自后虎亦不复来。
现代文：此后虎也不再来了。
English: After that, the tigers stopped coming.

古文：申屠澄
现代文：申屠澄
English: Shen Tuo-cheng

古文：申屠澄者，贞元九年，自布衣调补濮州什邠尉。
现代文：贞元九年，申屠澄由普通百姓调补濮州什邠尉。
English: In the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, Shen Tuo-cheng was promoted from an ordinary citizen to an officer of the Xizhou Military Region.

古文：之官，至真符县东十里许遇风雪大寒，马不能进。
现代文：到什邠去上任，走到真符县东十里左右的地方遇上大风雪，马不能前进了。
English: He went to Shifu to take office, and when he got to a place about ten miles east of Zhenfu County, he encountered a blizzard, and the horse could not move forward.

古文：路旁茅舍中有烟火甚温煦，澄往就之，有老父妪及处女环火而坐。
现代文：路旁的茅草屋里有烟火，很是温暖，申屠澄就走了进去。屋里有一个老头一个老太太和他们的女儿围着火坐着。
English: There were fireworks in a thatched hut on the side of the road, and it was very warm. Shen Tu Cheng went inside. There was an old man, an old woman and their daughter sitting around the fire.

古文：其女年方十四五，虽蓬发垢衣，而雪肤花脸，举止妍媚。
现代文：那女孩年纪在十四五岁，虽然头发蓬乱衣服不大干净，但是皮肤雪一样白皙，脸色花一样美艳，举止煞是妩媚。
English: The girl was 14 or 15 years old. Although her hair was unkempt and her clothes were not very clean, her skin was as white as snow, her face as beautiful as a flower, and her manners were charming.

古文：父妪见澄来，遽起曰： 客冲雪寒甚，请前就火。 
现代文：老头老太太见申屠澄走进来，忙站起来说： 客人冒风雪走路太冷了，快到前边烤烤火。 
English: When the old man and old woman saw Shen Tuocheng walk in, they quickly stood up and said, "It's too cold for our guests to walk in the snow. Let's go to the front and make a fire."

古文：澄坐良久，天色已晚，风雪不止。
现代文：申屠澄坐了挺长时间，天色已晚，风雪又不止。
English: Shen Tuocheng sat for a long time. It was late in the day, and the wind and snow continued.

古文：澄曰： 西去县尚远，请宿于此。 
现代文：申屠澄说： 往西到县还有挺远的路程，请让我在这住一宿吧？ 
English: Shen Tuocheng said, "It's still quite a long way west to the county. Please let me stay here for one night."

古文：父妪曰： 苟不以蓬室为陋，敢不承命。 
现代文：老头老太太说： 如果你不嫌这草屋简陋，就请住下吧。 
English: The old man said to the old woman, "If you don't like this grass hut, please stay here.

古文：澄遂解鞍，施衾帱焉。
现代文：申屠澄于是就解下马鞍，开始铺被了。
English: Shen TuChen then unbuckled his saddle and began to spread the quilt.

古文：其女见客，更修容靓饰，自帷箔间复出，而闲丽之态，尤倍昔时。
现代文：那女孩见来客人，又打扮了一下自己。她从帐幔中又走出来的时候，娴雅秀丽之态，比刚才更美了不知多少倍。
English: When the girl saw the guests, she dressed herself again, and when she came out of the curtain, she was even more beautiful than before.

古文：有顷，妪自外挈酒壶至，于火前暖饮。
现代文：过了一会儿，老太太从外边拿着酒壶进来，在火前暖酒。
English: After a while, the old lady came in from outside with a wine jug and warmed up the wine in front of the fire.

古文：谓澄曰： 以君冒寒，且进一杯，以御凝冽。 
现代文：她对申屠澄说： 因为你冒了风寒，先喝一杯，暖暖身子。 
English: She said to Shin Tu-cheng, "Since you have braved the wind and cold, have a drink first to warm yourself up."

古文：因揖让曰： 始自主人。 
现代文：申屠澄就揖让说： 从主人开始。
English: Shen Tucheng said: "Start with the owner."

古文：翁即巡行，澄当婪尾。澄因曰： 座上尚欠小娘子。 
现代文：老头就开始行头一巡酒，让申屠澄为末。申屠澄就说： 座上还缺小娘子呢？ 
English: The old man began to make the first round of drinks, letting Shen Tuo-Chen finish. Shen Tuo-Chen then said: "Is there still a shortage of little girls at the table?"

古文：父妪皆笑曰： 田舍家所育，岂可备宾主？ 
现代文：老头老太太都笑了，说： 她是个田舍人家长大的孩子，你何必这么讲究宾主之礼！ 
English: The old man and the old woman both laughed and said, "She is a child of a farmer's parents, why do you have to be so particular about the guest's gift!

古文：女子即回眸斜睨曰： 酒岂足贵？谓人不宜预饮也。 
现代文：女儿就回眸斜视着说： 酒有什么珍贵，人家是说不应该先喝！ 
English: My daughter looked back at me with a squint and said, "What's so precious about wine? People say you shouldn't drink it first!"

古文：母即牵裙，使坐于侧。
现代文：老太太就拉一下女儿的裙子，让她坐在一旁。
English: The old lady tugged at her daughter's skirt and told her to sit down.

古文：澄始欲探其所能，乃举令以观其意。
现代文：申屠澄开始想要试探她的本事。就拿行酒令来观察她。
English: Shen Tuo-Chen began to want to test her ability. He took a bottle of wine to observe her.

古文：澄执盏曰： 请徵书语，意属目前事。 
现代文：申屠澄举起酒杯说： 请引用书中的现成语句，来表达眼前的事物。 
English: Shen Tuocheng raised his glass and said: Please quote the ready-made sentences in the book to express the things in front of you.

古文：澄曰： 厌厌夜饮，不醉无归。 
现代文：申屠澄接着就说： 安安静静地夜间喝酒，不喝醉了不回家。 
English: Shen Tuo-Chen then said, "Drink quietly at night, and don't go home if you're not drunk.

古文：女低鬟微笑曰： 天色如此，归亦何往哉？ 
现代文：女孩低头微笑着说： 这样的天气，就是想回家也没法走呀？ 
English: The girl looked down and said with a smile, "With this weather, even if I wanted to go home, I couldn't."

古文：俄然巡至女，女复令曰： 风雨如晦，鸡鸣不已。 
现代文：不一会儿轮到女孩行酒令了，女孩说： 风雨象黑夜一样昏暗，公鸡不停地打鸣！ 
English: Soon it was the girl's turn to drink, and the girl said: "The wind and rain are as dark as night, the rooster keeps crowing!"

古文：澄愕然叹曰； 小娘子明慧若此，某幸未昏，敢请自媒如何？ 
现代文：申屠澄惊愕地感叹道： 小娘子如此聪慧，幸亏我还没有定婚，我自己做媒求婚怎么样？ 
English: Surprised, Shen Tuocheng exclaimed, "The little maiden is so clever. Fortunately, I haven't been married yet. How about making my own matchmaking proposal?

古文：翁曰： 某虽寒贱，亦尝娇保之。
现代文：老头说： 我虽然贫寒微贱，但是对女儿还是疼爱娇惯的。
English: The old man said: Although I am poor, I still love and pamper my daughter.

古文：颇有过客，以金帛为问。
现代文：有很多来往的客人拿着礼品来求婚，我以前不舍得她离开，全没答应。
English: There were a lot of guests who came and went with gifts to propose marriage, and I couldn't bear to see her leave, so I didn't say yes to any of them.

古文：某先不忍别，未许。
现代文：没想到你也有这个意思，哪敢再留她？ 
English: I didn't think you meant it. How dare you keep her?

古文：不期贵客又欲援拾，岂敢惜？ 
现代文：于是就真答应了。于是申屠澄就尽自己的所有，准备了女婿的礼品，赠给岳父岳母。
English: So he really agreed. So Shen Tuocheng did everything he could to prepare a gift for his son-in-law to give to his father-in-law and mother-in-law.

古文：即以为托。澄遂修子婿之礼，祛囊以遗之。
现代文：老太太什么也没收，说： 只要你不嫌这个家贫寒微贱就行了，哪能要你的东西。 
English: The old lady didn't take anything and said, "As long as you don't mind that this family is poor and lowly, you can have anything you want."

古文：妪悉无所取。曰： 但不弃寒贱，焉事资货？ 
现代文：第二天，老太太又对申屠澄说： 这地方孤僻偏远，没亲没邻，又加上涨水，不可久留。女儿既然已经给了你，你就带着她走吧！ 
English: The next day, the old lady said to Shen Tu-cheng again, "This place is isolated and remote, I have no relatives or neighbors, and with the rising water, I can't stay for long. Since your daughter has already been given to you, you should take her with you!"

古文：其于厚亲族，抚甥侄，洎僮仆厮养，无不欢心。后秩满将归，已生一男一女，亦甚明慧，澄尤加敬焉。
现代文：又过了一天，一家人叹息着告别。申屠澄让妻子骑上自己的马上路了。上任以后，俸禄很少，妻子极力维持这个家，广泛地结交宾客。十天之内，申屠澄便名声在外。
English: Another day passed, and the family said goodbye with a sigh. Shen Tuo-cheng let his wife ride on his horse. After taking office, the salary was small, and his wife did her best to maintain the family and make a wide range of guests. Within ten days, Shen Tuo-cheng became famous.

古文：常作《赠内诗》一篇曰： 一官惭梅福，三年愧孟光。
现代文：夫妻的感情也就更深了。申屠澄曾经作了一道《赠内诗》，说： 一官惭梅福，三年愧孟光。
English: The couple's feelings also deepened. Shen Tuo-Chen once wrote a poem, "A Gift of Poetry," saying: "One official is ashamed of Meifu, three years ashamed of Meng Guang."

古文：此情何所喻？川上有鸳鸯。 
现代文：此情何所喻，川上有鸳鸯。 
English: The situation is so dire that there are ripples in the river.

古文：其妻终日吟讽，似默有和者，然未尝出口。
现代文：妻子一天到晚总是吟诵这首诗，好象默默地和了一首。但她不曾说出。
English: My wife always recited this poem all day long, as if she were humming it silently, but she never said it.

古文：每谓澄曰： 为妇之道，不可不知书。
现代文：她常常对申屠澄说： 做妻子的，不能不知书达理。
English: She often said to Shin Tu-cheng, "If you want to be a wife, you must know how to read and write."

古文：倘更作诗，反似妪妾耳。
现代文：如果还作什么诗，反倒象老太太小媳妇了。 
English: If I write any more poems, I'll sound like an old lady's little daughter-in-law.

古文：澄罢官。 即罄室归秦。
现代文：申屠澄任满罢官，夫妻俩领着孩子带着全部家产回秦地。
English: After Shen Tuo-Chen's term of office was over, the couple took their children and all their household goods back to Qin.

古文：过利州，至嘉陵江畔，临泉藉草憩息。
现代文：过了利州，来到了嘉陵江畔。
English: After Lizhou, we came to the banks of the Jialing River.

古文：其妻忽怅然谓澄曰： 前者见赠一篇，寻即有和，初不拟奉示，今遇此景物，不能终默之。
现代文：在泉边草地上休息，妻子忽然怅惘地对申屠澄说： 以前你赠给我一首诗，我很快就和了一首，起先不打算给你看，现在遇上这样的景物，不能再沉默了。 
English: Resting on the meadow by the spring, his wife suddenly said to Shin Tu-chen, "You gave me a poem before, and I quickly recited it. At first, I didn't plan to show it to you, but now, faced with such a scene, I can no longer remain silent."

古文：乃吟曰： 琴瑟情虽重，山林志自深。
现代文：于是她吟唱道： 琴瑟情虽重，山林志自深。
English: So she sang: Though the feelings of the lyre are heavy, the mountains and forests are deep.

古文：常忧时节变，辜负百年心。 
现代文：常忧时节变，辜负百年心。 
English: Constantly worried about the changing times, live up to the century-old heart.

古文：吟罢，潸然良久，若有慕焉。
现代文：吟完，她久久地流泪，好象在想念谁。
English: After singing, she shed tears for a long time, as if she was missing someone.

古文：澄曰： 诗则丽矣，然山林非弱质所思，倘忆贤尊，今则至矣。何用悲泣乎？ 
现代文：申屠澄说： 诗倒挺美的。
English: Shen Tuocheng said, "The poem is quite beautiful.

古文：人生因缘业相之事，皆由前定。
现代文：人生的姻缘、事业等等，都是前生定下的。
English: Marriages, careers, and so on in life are all predetermined.

古文：后二十余日，复至妻本家。
现代文：二十多天以后，又来到妻子的娘家。
English: More than 20 days later, he returned to his wife's daughter's house.

古文：草舍依然，但不复有人矣。
现代文：草房还是老样子，却不再有人住了。
English: The hayloft is still the same, but no one lives there anymore.

古文：澄与其妻即止其舍。
现代文：申屠澄和妻子就住在这屋里，妻子想念父母，整天哭泣。
English: Shin Tu-cheng and his wife live in this house. His wife misses her parents and cries all day.

古文：妻思慕之深，尽日涕泣，于壁角故衣之下，见一虎皮，尘埃积满。妻见之，忽大笑曰： 不知此物尚在耶。 
现代文：她在墙角下的一堆旧衣服里发现了一张虎皮，虽然虎皮上积满灰尘，她见了却高兴地说： 没想到这东西还在呢！ 
English: She found a tiger skin in a pile of old clothes under a corner of the wall. Although the tiger skin was covered with dust, she was happy to see it and said: I didn't expect this thing to still be there!

古文：披之，即变为虎，哮吼拿撄，突门而去，澄惊走避之，携二子寻其路，望林大哭数日，竟不知所之。
现代文：于是她把虎皮披到自己身上，立即变成一只老虎，咆哮扑跳了几下，冲出门便远去了。申屠澄早就吓得躲到一边去了。他领着两个孩子，寻着她远去的那条路，望着树林哭了多日，到底不知道她哪里去了。
English: So she put the tiger skin on her body and immediately turned into a tiger, roared and jumped a few times, rushed out of the door and went away. Shen Tuo-Cheng was already scared and hid to the side. He led his two children to find the way she had gone, looked at the woods and cried for many days, not knowing where she had gone.

古文：丁岩
现代文：丁岩
English: Dingyan

古文：贞元十四年中，多虎暴，白昼噬人。
现代文：贞元十四年中，多次发生老虎害人的事情，大白天虎就吃人。
English: In the 14 years of Zhenyuan, there were many incidents of tigers harming people, and tigers ate people in broad daylight.

古文：时淮上阻兵，因以武将王徵牧申州焉。
现代文：这时候就要依仗兵力维持淮上的安定。于是就让武将王徵做申州的太守。
English: At this time, it was necessary to rely on military strength to maintain stability in Huai. Therefore, he asked the military commander Wang to be appointed as the governor of Shenzhou.

古文：徵至，则大修擒虎具，兵仗坑阱，靡不备设。
现代文：王徵到任，就大力修造捉老虎的器具，各种兵器，各种坑阱，没有不具备的。
English: When Wang Zheng took office, he worked hard to build tiger-catching equipment, all kinds of weapons, and all kinds of traps.

古文：又重悬购，得一虎而酧十缣焉。
现代文：还重金悬赏，谁捉到一只虎就给他十缣钱的报酬。
English: He also offered a hefty reward. Anyone who caught a tiger would receive ten shekels in reward.

古文：有老卒丁岩者善为陷阱，遂列于太守，请山间至路隅，张设以图之。
现代文：有一个叫丁岩的老兵，他善于挖陷阱。于是他就向太守说明，要求在山间到路边挖个陷阱捉虎。
English: There was a veteran soldier named Ding Yan, who was good at digging traps. So he explained to the governor that he was required to dig a trap on the roadside in the mountains to catch the tiger.

古文：徵既许，不数日，而获一虎焉。
现代文：王徵就答应了他。不几天，丁岩果然捉到一只老虎。
English: Wang Zheng agreed. A few days later, Ding Yan caught a tiger.

古文：虎在深坑，无施勇力。
现代文：老虎被困在一个深坑里，没法施展它的勇力了。
English: The tiger was trapped in a deep pit, unable to exert its strength.

古文：岩遂俯而下视，加以侮诮，虎则跳跃哮吼，怒声如雷。
现代文：丁岩就从坑顶上往下看，说一些讥诮侮辱老虎的话。虎就气得蹦跳，吼叫，怒声如雷。
English: Ding Yan looked down from the top of the pit and said some mocking and insulting words to the tiger. The tiger jumped up and down in anger, roared and roared.

古文：而聚观之徒，千百其众。岩炫其计得，夸喜异常。时方被酒，因为衣襟罥挂树根，而坠阱中。
现代文：而围观的人成百上千，丁岩炫耀自己的功绩，欣喜异常，得意忘形，当时又是刚喝过酒，因为衣襟挂到树根上，就掉到陷阱里去了。
English: However, there were hundreds of thousands of onlookers. Ding Yan was showing off his achievements, was overjoyed and overwhelmed with pride. At that time, he had just drunk wine, and fell into the trap because his clothes were hanging on the tree roots.

古文：众共嗟骇，谓靡粉于暴虎之爪牙矣。
现代文：众人一齐惊叫了一声，说他肯定要丧命于老虎的牙爪之下了。
English: Everyone screamed in shock, saying that he would surely die under the tiger's claws.

古文：及就窥，岩乃端坐，而虎但瞪视耳。
现代文：等到上前往下一看，丁岩竟然在里边端坐着，老虎也只瞪着眼睛瞅他。
English: After waiting until the top to go to the next, Ding Yan actually sat on the inside, and the tiger only stared at him.

古文：岩之亲爱忧岩，乃共设计，以辘轳下巨索。
现代文：丁岩的亲近朋友担心他的性命，就共同想办法救他。
English: Ding Yan's close friends, fearing for his life, worked together to find a way to save him.

古文：伺岩自缚，当遽引上，或希十一之全。
现代文：大家用辘轳放下去一根大绳子，等待丁岩自己捆住身子，迅速把他拽上来，或许能有十分之一的希望。
English: They lowered a large rope with a hoe and waited for Ding Yan to tie up his body and quickly pull him up. Perhaps there was a tenth of a hope.

古文：岩得索。则缠缚腰肢，挥手，外人则共引之。
现代文：丁岩拿到绳子，就把腰肢缠住，向上挥手。
English: Ding Yan took hold of the rope, wrapped his waist around it, and waved his hand upwards.

古文：去地三二尺，其虎则以前足捉其索而留焉。
现代文：阱外的人就一齐用力往上拽，离地二三尺的时候，那老虎就用前爪抓住绳子，不让他走。
English: The people outside the trap all tried to pull him up. When he was two or three feet off the ground, the tiger grabbed the rope with its front paws and wouldn't let him go.

古文：意态极仁。
现代文：老虎的样子很仁慈。
English: The tiger's look is very kind.

古文：如此数四。岩因而谓之曰： 尔辈纵暴，入郭犯人。事须剪除，理宜及此。
现代文：这样反复了几次，丁岩就对老虎说： 你们随便行凶，进到城邑中害人，必须剪除你们，事理本该如此。
English: This was repeated several times, and Ding Yan said to the tiger: "You are free to commit evil, to enter cities and harm people. You must be eliminated. This is how things should be.

古文：顾尔之命，且在顷刻。
现代文：看来你的性命，就在顷刻之间。
English: It seems that your life is over in an instant.

古文：吾因沉醉，误落此中。
现代文：我因为喝醉了，误落到这里边。
English: I fell here by mistake because I was drunk.

古文：众所未便屠者，盖以我故也。
现代文：大伙没有马上就杀死你，是因为我的原因。
English: If they didn't kill you right away, it's because of me.

古文：尔若损我，固激怒众人。我气未绝，即当薪火乱投，尔为灰烬矣。
现代文：你要是害我，必然会激怒众人，不等我死，他们就得把柴火乱投进来，那样你就变成灰烬了。
English: If you harm me, you will certainly provoke the people, and if I don't die, they will have to throw firewood into the fire, and then you will turn into ashes.

古文：尔不若从吾，当启白太守，舍尔之命。冀尔率领群辈，远离此土。斯亦渡河他适，尔所知者矣。
现代文：你不如顺从我，我去向太守说明后，放你一条生路，希望你率领着你的同类们，远远地离开这城，也就是过河到其它地方去了。
English: You'd better obey me. I'll explain to the governor and give you a way out. I hope you'll lead your fellows far away from this city, that is, across the river to other places.

古文：我当质之天日，不渝此约。 
现代文：我向天发誓，我绝不违背约定。 
English: I swear to God, I will never break my promise.

古文：其虎谛听，若有知解，岩则引绳，众共出之。
现代文：那老虎认真地听，好象能听懂。丁岩就拉动一下绳子，让大家把他拽上去。
English: The tiger listened carefully, as if he could understand. Ding Yan pulled the rope and let everyone pull him up.

古文：虎乃弭耳瞩目，不复留。
现代文：老虎静静地看着，没有再留他。
English: The tiger watched quietly and did not leave him again.

古文：岩既得出，遂以其事白于邦伯。曰： 今杀一虎，不足禳群辈之暴，况与试约，乞舍之，冀其率侣四出，管界获宁耳。 
现代文：丁岩上来之后，就去向太守作了说明，说： 现在杀死一只老虎，并不能把所有的虎暴全都禁绝，况且我还和老虎有约，请你把它放了，希望它率领它的伙伴到四处去，我们的管界就安宁了。 
English: After Dingyan came up, he went to explain to the governor, saying, "Killing a tiger now will not stop all tiger violence. Besides, I still have an appointment with the tiger. Please release it. I hope it will lead its partner everywhere, and our administrative boundary will be peaceful."

古文：徵许之。
现代文：王徵同意了。
English: Wang Zheng agreed.

古文：岩遂以太守之意，丁宁告谕。
现代文：丁岩于是就把太守的意思告诉了老虎。
English: Ding Yan then told the tiger what the governor meant.

古文：虎于陷中。踊跃盘旋，如荷恩施。
现代文：老虎在陷阱中又是蹦跳又是撒欢儿，就象感恩戴德似的。
English: In the trap, the tiger is jumping and frolicking, like a grateful child.

古文：岩即积土坑侧，稍益浅，犹深丈许。虎乃跃而出，奋迅踯腾，啸风而逝。
现代文：丁岩就在坑边上堆土，坑渐渐变浅。还有一丈来深的时候，虎就跳了出来，振奋地腾跃几下，吼叫着跑去。
English: Dingyan piled up soil on the edge of the pit, and the pit gradually became shallow. When it got deeper, the tiger jumped out, pranced a few times, and roared as it ran away.

古文：自是旬朔之内，群虎屏迹，而山野晏然矣。
现代文：从此十到十五天左右，老虎们销声匿迹，山野平静了。唉！
English: About ten to fifteen days after that, the tigers disappeared and the mountain became calm. Alas!

古文：吁！保全躯命之计，虽在异类，亦有可观者焉。
现代文：保全躯体和生命的办法，即使是在异类当中，也有如此可观的！
English: The means of preserving the body and life, even among the outcasts, are so considerable!

古文：若暴虎之猛悍，况厄陷阱，得人固当恣其狂怒，决裂噬啮，以豁其情。
现代文：那只老虎是那样猛悍，又是困在陷阱中，得了人本应该放任它的狂怒，把他咬死吃光，来出一口气。
English: The tiger was so ferocious, and trapped in a snare, that the man should have given way to its fury, gnawed him to death, and breathed his last.

古文：斯虎乃因岩以图全，而果谐焉。何其智哉！
现代文：但是这只虎却凭借着丁岩而想办法保全自己，而且果真办到了，多么机智啊！
English: But this tiger, with the help of Dingyan, tried to save himself, and he did it, how clever!

古文：而岩能以言词诱谕，通于强戾，果致族行出境之异。况免挂罥之害，又何智哉！
现代文：而丁岩能用言词开导老虎，与老虎沟通，果真让老虎全部出境到了别处，况且还免除了自己的灾难，又是多么机智啊！
English: But Ding Yan could use words to enlighten the tigers, communicate with the tigers, and really let the tigers all go abroad to other places. Moreover, he also avoided his own disaster. What a wit!

古文：斯乃信诚交感之致耳。
现代文：这真是信诚互相感化的极致啊！
English: This is really the pinnacle of mutual trust and inspiration!

古文：于戏，信诚之为物也，何其神欤！
现代文：呜呼，信诚作为一种事物，它是多么神奇。
English: Wow, sincerity as a thing, how amazing it is.

古文：王用
现代文：王用
English: Wangyong

古文：虢州王成县黑鱼谷，贞元中，百姓王用业炭于谷中。
现代文：贞元年中，虢州王成县百姓王用，在黑鱼谷里烧炭。
English: In the middle of the first year of Zhengyuan, the people of Wangcheng County, Luzhou, used to burn charcoal in the Black Fish Valley.

古文：谷中有水方数步，常见二黑鱼长尺余游水上。
现代文：谷中有一条小河才几米宽，常常看到有两条一尺多长的黑鱼游在水中。
English: There is a small river in the valley that is only a few metres wide, and it is common to see two black fish more than a foot long swimming in the water.

古文：用伐木饥困，遂食一鱼。
现代文：王用砍木头又累又饿，就捉了一条鱼吃。
English: The king was tired and hungry from cutting wood, so he caught a fish to eat.

古文：其弟惊曰： 此鱼或是谷中灵物，兄奈何杀之？ 
现代文：王用的弟弟吃惊地说： 这鱼也许是这谷里的灵物，你怎么杀了它？ 
English: Wang Yu's brother said in surprise, "This fish may be a spirit animal in this valley. How did you kill it?"

古文：有顷，其妻饷之。用运斤不已，久乃转面。
现代文：过了一会儿，王用的妻子来送饭，王用抡着斧子不停地砍树，老半天才转过脸来。
English: After a while, Wang Ying's wife came to bring food. Wang Ying kept chopping trees with an axe. It took the old man half a day to turn around.

古文：妻觉状貌有异，呼其弟视之。
现代文：妻子觉得他的相貌有变化，就喊他弟弟来看。
English: His wife noticed a change in his appearance and called his brother to check on him.

古文：忽脱衣嗥跃，变为虎焉，径入山。
现代文：王用忽然脱掉衣服，吼叫跳跃，变成一只老虎，径直奔山里跑去。
English: Wang Yi suddenly took off his clothes, roared and jumped, turned into a tiger, and ran straight into the mountains.

古文：时时杀獐鹿类以食。
现代文：从此他常常捉些獐鹿之类的小动物为食。
English: Since then, he often catches small animals such as elk for food.

古文：如此三年。
现代文：如此过了三年。
English: This went on for three years.

古文：一日日昏，叩门自名曰： 我用也。 
现代文：一天傍晚，他到自家门前敲门，自报姓名说： 我是王用！ 
English: One evening, he knocked on the front door of his house, gave his name and said: I'm Wang Ying!

古文：弟应曰： 我兄变为虎三年矣，何鬼假其姓名？ 
现代文：他弟弟在屋里说： 我哥哥变成老虎已经三年了，是什么鬼伥用他的姓名？ 
English: His younger brother said in the room, "It's been three years since my brother turned into a tiger. What kind of demon uses his name?"

古文：又曰： 我往年杀黑鱼，冥谪为虎。
现代文：王用又说： 我往年杀死黑鱼，阴间罚我做老虎。
English: Wang Ying also said, "In the past, I killed a black fish, but the underworld punished me by making me a tiger.

古文：又因杀人，冥官笞余一百。
现代文：又因为我杀了人，阴间的官打了我一百棍子，现在把我放回来了。
English: And because I have killed a man, the keeper of the Grave has beaten me with a hundred rods, and now he has let me go.

古文：今放免，伤遍体，汝第视余，无疑也。 
现代文：我现在全身是伤，你只管出来见我，不要怀疑我。 
English: I'm hurt all over, just come out and see me, don't doubt me.

古文：弟喜，遂开门。见一人，头犹是虎，因怖死。
现代文：他弟弟很高兴，就开了门，看到的是一个虎头人身的怪物，当时就吓死了。
English: His brother was so happy that he opened the door and saw a monster with a tiger's head. He was scared to death.

古文：举家叫呼奔避。
现代文：他全家人都吓得大呼小叫四处奔逃。
English: His entire family ran screaming in terror.

古文：竟为村人格杀。
现代文：他到底被村人打死了。
English: In the end, he was killed by the villagers.

古文：验其身有黑，信王用也，但首未变。
现代文：验他的身上，有黑痣，确实是王用，只是头没变回来。
English: When his body was examined, he was found to have a black mole on his body, which was indeed the king's, but his head had not changed back.

古文：元和中，处士赵齐约尝至谷中，见村人说。
现代文：元和年中，处士赵齐约曾经到过黑鱼谷中，听说了这个故事。
English: In the middle of the 19th century, the official Zhao Qiyou once went to the Black Fish Valley and heard this story.

古文：张逢
现代文：张逢
English: Zhang Feng

古文：南阳张逢，贞元末，薄游岭表。行次福州福唐县横山店。
现代文：南阳人张逢，贞元末年，到岭南去游览，走到福唐县，住在横山店中。
English: Zhang Feng, a person from Nanyang, went to Lingnan for a tour at the end of the Zhenyuan era. He went to Futang County and lived in a shop in Hengshan.

古文：时初霁，日将暮，山色鲜媚。烟岚霭然。
现代文：当时是雨后初晴，天色将晚，山水树木鲜艳明媚，烟岚霭霭，景致宜人。
English: At that time, it was the first sunny day after the rain, the sky would be late, the landscape and trees were bright and beautiful, there was smoke, and the scenery was pleasant.

古文：策杖寻胜，不觉极远。
现代文：张逢拿着手杖寻找胜景，不知不觉走出很远。
English: Zhang Feng took a cane to look for scenic spots, and unknowingly walked a long way.

古文：忽有一段细草，纵广百余步，碧蔼可爱。
现代文：忽然有一片细密的草地，长宽各有一百多步，碧绿可爱。
English: Suddenly there was a fine meadow, more than a hundred paces long and wide, green and lovely.

古文：其旁有一小树，遂脱衣挂树，以杖倚之，投身草上，左右翻转。既而酣睡，若兽蹍然。意足而起。
现代文：草地旁边有一棵小树。张逢就把衣服脱下来挂到树上，把手杖靠在树上，自己躺在草地上，左右打滚儿，然后就酣睡了，就象野兽翻转踩踏的样子，满意了才起来。
English: There was a small tree next to the meadow. Zhang Feng took off his clothes and hung them on the tree. He leaned his cane against the tree. He lay down on the grass and rolled around. Then he fell into a deep sleep, just like a wild animal turning and stamping. He only woke up when he was satisfied.

古文：其身已成虎也。文彩烂然。
现代文：起来一看，自己已经变成一只老虎，纹彩灿然。
English: When he got up, he saw that he had turned into a tiger, with brilliant colors.

古文：自视其爪牙之利，胸膊之力，天下无敌。
现代文：自己看看锋利的爪和牙齿，自己试试胸膊的力气，觉得自己天下无敌，于是就腾跃起来，越岭翻山。
English: Look at the sharp claws and teeth for yourself, test the strength of your chest and shoulders for yourself, feel invincible in the world, and then prance up and climb over the ridge.

古文：遂腾跃而起，越山超壑，其疾如电。
现代文：速度象雷电一样迅疾。夜深了，他很饿，就在村边慢慢行走。
English: The speed was lightning fast. It was late at night and he was very hungry, so he walked slowly along the edge of the village.

古文：夜久颇饥，因傍村落徐行，犬彘驹犊之辈，悉无可取。
现代文：狗、猪、马驹、牛犊，什么也没碰上。心里头恍恍惚惚。
English: I didn't come across any dogs, pigs, horses or cows. My mind went into a trance.

古文：意中恍惚，自谓当得福州郑录事，乃旁道潜伏。
现代文：自己说应该把福州的郑录事吃了，于是他就潜伏在道旁。
English: He said he should have eaten Fuzhou's Zheng Luo Ji, so he lurked by the roadside.

古文：未几，有人自南行，乃候吏迎郑者。
现代文：不长时间，有人从南走来，是迎接郑录事的候吏。
English: Not long after, someone came from the south to meet Zheng Luo.

古文：见人问曰： 福州郑录事名璠，计程当宿前店，见说何时发？ 
现代文：候吏见到一个人就问道： 福州郑录事郑璠，按照他的行程估计，应该宿在前边这个店，听说他什么时候出发了吗？ 
English: When the waiter saw a person, he asked: Fuzhou Zheng Luo Zheng, according to his itinerary estimate, should stay in the front of this store. I heard that when did he leave?

古文：来人曰： 吾之主人也。闻其饰装，到亦非久。 
现代文：来人说： 他是我的主人，他正在穿衣打扮，不久就能到。 
English: The visitor said, "He is my master, he is dressing and will be here soon."

古文：候吏曰； 只一人来，且复有同行，吾当迎拜时，虑其误也。 
现代文：候吏问： 只他一个人来，还是还有别人一块来？我迎拜的时候可别弄错了。 
English: The waiter asked: Did he come alone or with others? Don't get me wrong when greeting him.

古文：曰： 三人之中，参绿者是。 
现代文：来人说： 三个人当中，绿色穿戴的就是他。 
English: A passerby said: "He's the only one of the three wearing green."

古文：其时逢方伺之，而彼详问，若为逢而问者。
现代文：当时张逢正趴在那里等候，而那个问得那么详细，就好象替他问话似的。
English: At that time, Zhang Feng was lying there waiting, and the questioner was so detailed, it was as if he was asking for him.

古文：逢既知之，扌替身以俟之。
现代文：张逢既然知道了，缩着身子在那等着。
English: Now that Zhang Feng knew, he cowered and waited there.

古文：俄而郑到，导从甚众，衣参绿，甚肥，昂昂而来。
现代文：不多一会儿郑璠到了，前导随从特别多。他穿绿色衣服，挺胖，昂首挺胸地走来。
English: Not long after, Zheng Rong arrived, accompanied by a large number of foremen. He wore green clothes, was quite fat, and walked with his head held high.

古文：适到，逢衔之，走而上山。
现代文：刚到，张逢就把他叼起来，跑到山上。
English: As soon as he arrived, Zhang Feng picked him up and ran to the mountains.

古文：时天未曙，人虽多，莫敢逐。
现代文：那时候天还没亮，人虽然很多，却没有敢追的。
English: At that time, it was still dark, and although there were a lot of people, they didn't dare to chase them.

古文：得恣食之。
现代文：这样张逢就把他吃了。
English: So Zhang Feng ate him.

古文：唯余肠发。
现代文：只剩下头发和肠子。
English: All that was left was hair and intestines.

古文：既而行于山林，孑然无侣。
现代文：然后张逢就走在山林之中。他孑然一身，没有一个伙伴。
English: Then Zhang Feng walked in the forest. He was all alone, without a partner.

古文：乃忽思曰： 我本人也，何乐为虎？
现代文：于是他忽然想到： 我本来是个人，为什么愿意做个老虎，自己把自己囚禁在深山里呢？
English: Then it suddenly occurred to him: I am originally a human being, why would I want to be a tiger and imprison myself deep in the mountains?

古文：自囚于深山，盍求初化之地而复焉？ 
现代文：何不找到当初把我变成虎的那个地方，再变回去吧？ 
English: Why not find the place that turned me into a tiger in the first place and change back?

古文：乃步步寻求，日暮方到其所。
现代文：于是他就到处去找。天要黑的时候才找到个地方。
English: So he searched everywhere, and only found a place to camp when it was getting dark.

古文：衣服犹挂，杖亦在，细草依然。
现代文：衣服还在树上挂着，手杖也在，细草还是老样子。
English: The clothes are still hanging on the tree, the cane is still there, the grass is still the same.

古文：翻复转身于其上，意足而起，即复人形矣。
现代文：他躺到草地上翻来覆去，满意了才起来。果然又变成人的样子。
English: He lay down on the grass and tossed and turned until he was satisfied. Then he became human again.

古文：于是衣衣策杖而归。
现代文：于是他穿上衣服拿起手杖回来了。
English: So he put on his clothes, picked up his cane and came back.

古文：昨往今来，一复时矣。
现代文：昨天这时候去的，今天这时候回来，正好一个对时。
English: I went there yesterday at this time and came back today at this time. It was just the right time.

古文：初其仆夫惊失乎逢也，访之于邻，或云策杖登山。
现代文：起初他的仆人发现他不见了，很是吃惊，到处打听。有的人说看到他拿着手杖登山去了。
English: At first his servants were surprised to find him missing and asked around, with some saying they had seen him walking up the mountain with a cane.

古文：多岐寻之，杳无形迹。
现代文：仆人们便分几路去找，杳无踪迹。
English: The servants then searched in several directions, but there was no trace of her.

古文：及其来，惊喜问其故。
现代文：等到他回来，仆人们又惊又喜，问他是怎么回事。
English: When he returned, the servants were surprised and delighted, and asked him what had happened.

古文：逢绐之曰： 偶寻山泉，到一山院，共谈释教。不觉移时。 
现代文：他撒谎说： 我偶然去寻找山泉，走到一家寺院，就和老和尚谈论佛理，不知不觉过去这么长时间。 
English: He lied and said: I accidentally went to look for a mountain spring, walked to a temple, and talked to an old monk about Buddhist principles, and before I knew it, so much time had passed.

古文：仆夫曰： 今旦侧近有虎，食福州郑录事，求余不得。 
现代文：仆人说： 今早晨这附近有一只老虎，吃了福州的郑录事，找残骸都没有找到。
English: The servant said, "This morning, there was a tiger near here that ate Fuzhou's Zheng Luo Ji, but we couldn't find any remains.

古文：山林故多猛兽，不易独行，郎之未回，忧负实极。
现代文：山林里因为猛兽很多，很难单独行路，你没回来的时候，可让人担心死了！
English: There are many wild animals in the forest, so it's hard to travel alone. If you don't come back, people will be worried to death!

古文：且喜平安无他。 
现代文：幸亏你没出什么事！ 
English: Thank God nothing happened to you!

古文：逢遂行。
现代文：张逢于是就上路继续前行。
English: Zhang Feng then continued on his way.

古文：元和六年，旅次淮阳，舍于公馆。馆吏宴客，坐有为令者曰： 巡若到，各言己之奇事，事不奇者罚。 
现代文：元和六年，他们走到淮阳，住在公馆里，馆吏设宴招待客人，座间有行酒令的人说： 如果巡到谁那里，谁就应该讲自己的奇事，事不奇的要罚。 
English: Yuan and six years later, they went to Huaiyang and lived in a mansion. The librarian held a banquet to entertain the guests. A bartender said: If you visit someone, you should tell them about your own miracles. Anything unusual will be punished.

古文：巡到逢，逢言横山之事。
现代文：轮到张逢，他就讲了横山的事。
English: When it was Zhang Feng's turn, he talked about Yokoyama.

古文：末坐有进士郑遐者，乃郑乣之子也，怒目而起，持刀将杀逢，言复父仇。
现代文：末座有一个叫郑遐的进士，就是当年福州郑录事的儿子。他怒目而起，拿起刀就要杀张逢，说是报杀父之仇。
English: In the last seat, there was a scholar named Zheng Qi, who was the son of Zheng Luo of Fuzhou at that time. He got angry and picked up a sword to kill Zhang Feng, saying that he wanted to avenge his father's death.

古文：众共隔之。
现代文：众人一起把他们隔开。
English: Everyone worked together to separate them.

古文：遐怒不已，遂入白郡将。
现代文：郑遐怒气不消。
English: Zheng Yao was furious.

古文：于是送遐南行，敕津吏勿复渡。使逢西迈，且劝改名以避之。
现代文：于是就进去禀明郡将，送郑遐往南去，嘱咐渡口的官吏不准把他再渡回来；让张逢往西去，而且劝他改名隐姓躲避才好。
English: So he went to the governor of Juming County, sent Zheng Yao south, and ordered the officials at the ferry port not to allow him to return; let Zhang Feng go west, and advised him to change his name and hide.

古文：或曰： 闻父之仇，不可以不报。
现代文：有人说，听到杀父之仇，不可以不报。
English: Some people say that when you hear of a father's revenge killing, you must report it.

古文：然此仇非故杀，若必死杀逢，遐亦当坐。 
现代文：但是这仇不是故意杀的，如果一定要杀死张逢，那么郑遐也应该连坐。
English: But this vendetta is not a deliberate killing. If Zhang Feng must be killed, then Zheng Hong should also be imprisoned.

古文：遂遁去而不复其仇焉。
现代文：于是张逢逃走之后郑遐没再去复仇。唉，也够奇的了！
English: As a result, after Zhang Feng fled, Zheng Yao did not seek revenge. Alas, what a surprise!

