古文：草花旌节花野悉密花都胜花簇蝶花茙葵金灯花金钱花毗尸沙花
现代文：草花旌节花野悉密花都胜花簇蝶花茙葵金灯花金钱花毗尸沙花
English: Grasses and FlowersLunar FestivalFlowers of the FieldFlowers of the CityFlowers of VictoryFlower ClustersButterfliesFlowers of the AnemoneFlowers of the Golden LampFlowers of MoneyFlowers of the DeadSandflowers

古文：木花叙牡丹白牡丹红紫牡丹正倒晕牡丹合欢牡丹染牡丹花斸牡丹
现代文：木花叙牡丹白牡丹红紫牡丹正倒晕牡丹合欢牡丹染牡丹花斸牡丹
English: Wood flower, blue peony, white peony, red and purple peony, dizzy peony, dizzy peony, happy peony, dyed peony, peony in bloom

古文：月桂花牡桂花桂花海石榴花南海朱槿岭表朱槿红槿花那提槿花
现代文：月桂花牡桂花桂花海石榴花南海朱槿岭表朱槿红槿花那提槿花
English: Laurel, Oyster, Cinnamon, Sea Pomegranate, South Sea Rhododendron, Table Rhododendron, Red Rhododendron, Natty Rhododendron

古文：佛桑花贞桐花栀子花山茶花三色石楠花比闾花木莲花那伽花
现代文：佛桑花贞桐花栀子花山茶花三色石楠花比闾花木莲花那伽花
English: Buddha, mulberry, mulberry, lily of the valley, lily of the valley, camellia, camellia tricolor, heather, honeysuckle, lily of the valley, lily of the valley

古文：木兰花异木花碧玫瑰刺桐花怀风花踯躅花凌霄花分枝荷夜舒荷
现代文：木兰花异木花碧玫瑰刺桐花怀风花踯躅花凌霄花分枝荷夜舒荷
English: magnolia blossom exotic tree blossom azure rose thorny tree blossom wind-swept flower bougainvillea rhododendron branching lotus evening dew

古文：睡莲花碧莲花染青莲花三朵瑞莲藕莲实芰菱
现代文：睡莲花碧莲花染青莲花三朵瑞莲藕莲实芰菱
English: Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies Water lilies

古文：草花
现代文：草花
English: Grass and flowers grow

古文：旌节花
现代文：旌节花
English: Wisteria

古文：黎州汉源县有旌节花，去地三二尺，行行皆如旌节也。
现代文：黎州汉源县有一种花叫 旌节 花，离地二三尺高，一行行全都像朝庭使者所持的旌节。
English: There is a kind of flower in Hanyuan County, Lizhou, which is called the Dragonfly Festival Flower. It is two or three feet high from the ground, and each row looks like a dragonfly festival held by an emissary of the court.

古文：野悉密花
现代文：野悉密花
English: Wild sorrel flowers

古文：野悉密出佛林国，亦出波斯国。苗长七八尺，叶似梅。四时敷荣。
现代文：野悉密花出自拂林、波斯等国，苗高七八尺，叶与梅叶相似，四时常绿。
English: Wild sorrel flowers come from the Middle East, Persia and other countries. The seedlings are seven or eight feet tall, the leaves are similar to plum leaves, and they are always green.

古文：其花五出，白色，不结子。
现代文：它的花五个瓣，白色，不结籽实。
English: Its flowers have five petals, are white, and do not produce seeds.

古文：花开时，遍野皆香。
现代文：花开的时候，遍野芳香。
English: When the flowers bloom, the whole field is fragrant.

古文：与岭南詹糖相类。
现代文：它和岭南的詹糖相类似。
English: It is similar to Lingnan's Zhan sugar.

古文：西域人常采其花，压以为油，涂其香滑。
现代文：西域人常常采它的花压成油。用这种油涂身，既芳香又滑腻。
English: Westerners often pick its flowers and press them into oil. Using this oil to apply to the body, it is both fragrant and smooth.

古文：都胜花
现代文：都胜花
English: Du Shenghua

古文：都胜花，紫色，两重心，数叶卷上，如芦朵，蕊黄叶细。
现代文：都胜花，紫色，两重花瓣，几片叶子往上卷，像芦朵，蕊黄色，叶子纤细。
English: Duosheng flower, purple, double petals, a few leaves rolled up, like aloe vera, yellow stamens, thin leaves.

古文：簇蝶花
现代文：簇蝶花
English: Clusters of butterflies

古文：簇蝶花，花朵簇一蕊，如莲房。
现代文：簇蝶花，花朵簇拥着一个花蕊，有如莲蓬。
English: Clusters of butterflies, flowers clustered around a flower stem, like a lotus.

古文：色浅红。出在温州。
现代文：花是浅红色的，出在温州。
English: The flowers are light red and come from Wenzhou.

古文：茙葵
现代文：茙葵
English: Chrysanthemum

古文：茙葵，本湖中葵也，一名胡葵。
现代文：茙葵，本来是湖中一带的葵，一名叫作 胡葵 。
English: Rhododendron, originally it was the Rhododendron around the lake, one is called the Rhododendron.

古文：似葵。大者红，可缉为布。
现代文：样子像葵，大的色红，可以织成布。
English: Looks like a sunflower, large reddish color, can be woven into cloth.

古文：烧作灰，藏大火，久不灭。
现代文：把它烧成灰，灰中暗藏大火，经久不灭。
English: Burn it to ashes, and in the ashes hide a fire that never goes out.

古文：有重台者。
现代文：有多重花瓣的。
English: Having multiple petals.

古文：金灯花
现代文：金灯花
English: The golden lantern flower

古文：金灯一曰九形，花叶不相见。
现代文：金灯花，一种叫法是 九形花 。有花无叶，有叶无花，花叶从不相见。
English: The golden lantern flower, one name is the nine-shaped flower. There are flowers without leaves, there are leaves without flowers, and the flower leaves never meet.

古文：俗恶人家种之，故一名无义草。
现代文：一般都是恶人家种它，所以还有一名叫 无义草 。
English: Generally, it is evil people who grow it, so there is another one called Muxigusa.

古文：金钱花
现代文：金钱花
English: Money well spent

古文：金钱花。
现代文：金钱花。
English: Money well spent.

古文：梁时荆州掾属，双六赌金钱，钱尽，以金钱花相足。
现代文：梁时荆州的官吏们在一起，玩 双六 博戏赌钱，钱输光了，就用金钱花当钱互相满足。
English: At the time of Liang, the officials of Jingzhou were together, playing double six, gambling and gambling. When they ran out of money, they used money to spend as money to satisfy each other.

古文：鱼弘谓得花胜得钱。
现代文：鱼弘说得花胜似得钱。
English: Uohiro says that winning is like winning money.

古文：毗尸沙花
现代文：毗尸沙花
English: The corpse of a sand flower

古文：毗尸沙，一名曰中金钱花。
现代文：毗尸沙花，一名叫 中金钱花 。
English: The corpse-defying sand flowers, one of which is called the Chinese money flower.

古文：本出外国，梁大同二年来中土。
现代文：它本来出在外国，梁大同二年传到中国。
English: It was originally published abroad, but Liang Datong brought it to China two years later.

古文：木花
现代文：木花
English: Wooden flowers

古文：叙牡丹
现代文：叙牡丹
English: The Syrian peony

古文：牡丹花，世谓近有。
现代文：牡丹花，世人都说近代才有。
English: The peony flower is said to have been created in modern times.

古文：盖以隋末文士集中，无牡丹歌诗。
现代文：大概因为隋末文士们的集子中，没有关于牡丹的歌和诗。
English: Probably because there are no songs and poems about peonies in the collections of the late Sui scribes.

古文：则杨子华有昼牡丹处极分明。
现代文：而杨子华有昼牡丹的地方极为分明。
English: However, Yang Zihua's place with the midday peony is very clear.

古文：子华北齐人，则知牡丹花亦已久矣。
现代文：杨子华是北齐人，这说明人们却知道牡丹花已经很久了。
English: Yang Zihua is from North Qi, which means that people have known about peony flowers for a long time.

古文：又《谢康乐》集，亦言 竹间水际多牡丹 。而隋朝《种植法》七十余卷中，不说牡丹者，则隋朝花药中所无也。
现代文：另外，《谢康乐集》也说 竹音水际多牡丹 ，而隋朝《种植法》七十余卷中不说牡丹，那就说明隋朝花药中没有牡丹。
English: In addition, the "Xie Kang Music Collection" also says that there are more peonies in the bamboo and water, while the more than seventy volumes of the Sui Dynasty "Planting Law" do not mention peonies, which means that there are no peonies in the Sui Dynasty anther.

古文：白牡丹
现代文：白牡丹
English: White peony

古文：唐开元末，裴士淹为郎官，奉使幽冀回，至汾州众香寺，得白牡丹一棵。
现代文：唐开元末年，裴士淹是郎官，奉命出使幽冀，回来的路上，走到汾州众香寺，得到白牡丹一棵。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Bae Shiyuan was a vassal, and he was ordered to send an envoy to Yuji. On his way back, he walked to Zhangzhou Zhexiang Temple and got a white peony.

古文：值于长兴私地。
现代文：他把它栽在长兴自己的私地里。
English: He planted it on his private land in Changxing.

古文：天宝中，为都下奇赏。
现代文：天宝年间，这棵白牡丹成为天下的奇赏。
English: During the Tenpo era, this white peony became a wonder of the world.

古文：当时名士，有《裴给事宅看牡丹》诗。
现代文：当时的名士，有《裴给事宅看牡丹》诗。
English: At that time, there was a famous poet who wrote the poem "Pei Gives a Peony to the House of Affairs."

古文：诗寻访未获。
现代文：这诗没有寻访到。
English: The poem has not been traced.

古文：太常博士张乘，尝见裴祭酒说，又房琯有言： 牡丹之会，琯不与焉。 
现代文：太常博士张乘，曾经见过裴祭酒说： 另外，房琯有话说： 牡丹之会，我就不参加了。  
English: Dr. Zhang Rong, who had once seen the Baisai wine, said: In addition, Fang Yao said: I will not participate in the peony meeting.

古文：红紫牡丹
现代文：红紫牡丹
English: Red purple peony

古文：唐至德中，马仆射总镇太原。得红紫二色牡丹，移于城中。
现代文：唐至德年间，马仆射总镇太原，得到了红紫两色的牡丹，便移栽到城里来。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the red and purple peonies were transplanted to the city from the town of Taiyuan.

古文：元和初犹少，今与茙葵较多少耳。
现代文：元和初年这种牡丹还很少，现在可以和茙葵比较多少了。
English: In the Yuan and the first year, this kind of peony was still rare, and now it can be compared with the anemone.

古文：正倒晕牡丹
现代文：正倒晕牡丹
English: The dizzy peony

古文：长安兴唐寺，有牡丹一棵，唐元和中，著花二千一百朵。
现代文：长安的兴唐寺，有一棵牡丹，唐元和年间，开花两千一百朵。
English: In the Xing Tang Temple in Chang'an, there is a peony, which blossomed 2,100 times during the Tang and Yuan Dynasties.

古文：其色有正晕倒晕，浅红深紫，黄白檀等，独无深红。又无花叶中无抹心者。
现代文：花的颜色，有正晕的，有倒晕的，浅红深紫，什么色都有，唯独没有深红，又没有花叶间没有抹心的。
English: The colors of the flowers, there are halos, halos, light red and dark purple, all colors are available, but there is no deep red, and there is no heart between the leaves.

古文：重台花。
现代文：花是重瓣花。
English: The flowers are double-petalled.

古文：有花面径七八寸者。
现代文：有的花面直径达七八寸。
English: Some flowers have diameters of up to seven or eight inches.

古文：合欢牡丹
现代文：合欢牡丹
English: Gappo Peony

古文：长安兴善寺素师院牡丹，色绝嘉。
现代文：长安兴善寺素师院里的一棵牡丹，开花极美。
English: A peony in Chang'an Xingzen Temple's So Shi Academy is in full bloom.

古文：元和末，一枝花合欢。
现代文：元和末年，一枝花合欢。
English: In the first and last years of the Yuan Dynasty, a flower festival was held.

古文：染牡丹花
现代文：染牡丹花
English: Dyed peony flowers

古文：唐朝韩文公愈，有疏从子侄，自江淮来。
现代文：唐朝的韩文公韩愈，有一个远房的侄子从江淮来。
English: Han Yu, the Han Wen Gong of the Tang Dynasty, had a distant nephew from Jianghuai.

古文：年甚少，韩令学院中伴子弟。
现代文：韩愈见侄子年纪很小，就让他在学院中为子弟们伴读。
English: Han Yu saw that his nephew was very young, so he let him accompany his children in the academy.

古文：子弟悉为凌辱。
现代文：子弟们全都被他凌辱过。
English: All of his children were abused by him.

古文：韩知，遂送街西僧院中，令读书。
现代文：韩愈知道之后，就把他送到街西的僧院中，让他读书。
English: After Han Yu found out, he sent him to a monastery on the west side of the street to study.

古文：经旬，寺主纲复诉其狂率，韩遽令归，且责曰： 市肆贱类，营衣食，尚有一事长处。
现代文：十来天之后，寺主纲又说他轻狂粗率，韩愈便立刻让他回去，并且责备他说： 在市场店铺经营小买卖这类下贱行业，能求得吃穿，还算有一技之长。
English: After about ten days, the head of the temple also said that he was frivolous and rude, Han Yu immediately let him go back, and scolded him: Running a small business in a market store, such a low-grade industry, can earn a lot of money, but it is still a skill.

古文：汝所为如此，竟作何物？ 
现代文：你的所作所为到了这种地步，你到底能干什么呢？ 
English: What can you do when your actions reach this level?

古文：侄拜谢。徐曰： 某有一艺，恨叔不知。 
现代文：侄子向韩愈赔罪，慢慢地说： 我有一种技艺，正恨叔叔不知道呢！ 
English: The nephew apologized to Han Yu and said slowly, "I have a skill that my uncle doesn't know about!

古文：因指阶前牡丹曰： 叔要此花青紫黄赤，唯命也。 
现代文：于是他指着阶前的牡丹说： 叔叔你要这牡丹青紫赤黄开什么样的花，只要你说出来就行！ 
English: So he pointed to the peony in front of him and said, "Uncle, what kind of flower do you want this peony to have? Just tell me!"

古文：韩大奇之，遂给所须试之。
现代文：韩愈很惊奇，就给他弄来所需的东西，让他试验一次。
English: Han Yu was very surprised, so he got him what he needed and let him try it once.

古文：乃竖箔曲，尽遮牡丹丛，不令人窥。掘棵四面，深及其根，宽容人坐。唯赍紫鑛轻粉朱红，旦暮治其根。
现代文：于是他就用帘子之类的东西把牡丹丛全都遮蔽起来，不让人看见，挖掘牡丹的四面，直挖到根，宽窄可以坐下一个人，用一些轻粉朱红之类的东西，一早一晚治那牡丹的根。
English: So he used something like a curtain to cover the peony bushes completely, so that no one could see them. He dug up the four sides of the peony, right down to the roots, so wide and narrow that a person could sit down. He used something like light pink vermilion to treat the roots of the peony morning and night.

古文：凡七日，遂掩坑。
现代文：一共治了七天，就把坑埋上。
English: After a total of seven days of treatment, the pit was filled in.

古文：白其叔曰： 根校迟一月。 
现代文：他向叔叔报告说，最晚一个月就行。
English: He reported to his uncle that it would take a month at the latest.

古文：时冬初也，牡丹本紫，及花发，色黄红历缘。
现代文：当时正是初冬。那棵牡丹本来开紫色花。等到花开时一看，变成黄的红的了，每一朵都有一联诗，字迹分明，是紫色的。
English: It was early winter. The peony originally had purple flowers. When the flowers bloomed, they turned yellow and red. Each flower had a couplet, clearly written in purple.

古文：每朵有一联诗，字色紫分明，乃是韩公出关时诗头一韵，曰： 云横秦岭家何在？雪拥蓝关马不前 十四字。
现代文：那诗就是韩愈出关时所作的诗中的一联： 云横秦岭家何在，雪拥蓝关马不前 十四个字。韩愈非常惊异。
English: That poem is a series of poems composed by Han Yu when he was out of prison: Yun Yok Qin Ling Jia Ho Nao, Xue Ying Lan Guan Ma Nao Fourteen words. Han Yu was very surprised.

古文：韩大惊异。遂乃辞归江淮，竟不愿仕。
现代文：他那侄子便辞归江淮了，一直不愿意当官。
English: His nephew resigned and returned to Jianghuai. He has always been reluctant to become an official.

古文：斸牡丹
现代文：斸牡丹
English: The peony and the peony

古文：长安贵游尚牡丹，三十余年矣。
现代文：长安崇尚游赏牡丹，三十多年了。
English: Chang'an has been advocating peony appreciation for more than 30 years.

古文：每春暮，车马若狂，以不就玩为耻。
现代文：每到春末，游览观赏牡丹的车马就川流不息，人们以不能就近玩赏为耻。
English: At the end of spring, there is a steady stream of caravans coming to see the peonies, and people are ashamed that they can't see them up close.

古文：金吾铺围外寺观，种以求利，一本有数万者。
现代文：金吾铺围外的寺庙和道观，都栽种牡丹以求利，有的一棵牡丹就能赚几万。
English: The temples and Taoist temples around Kingo's shop all grow peonies for profit, and some peonies can earn tens of thousands of rupees.

古文：元和末，韩令侄至长安，私第有之，遽令斸去。曰： 吾岂效儿女子也？ 
现代文：元和年末，韩令才回到长安。他见私第里有牡丹，立即就命人把它砍去，说： 我们哪能效仿那些小孩子呀！ 
English: Han Ling only returned to Chang'an at the end of the Yuan Dynasty and the end of the year. When he saw a peony in his pocket, he immediately ordered someone to cut it down, saying, "How can we follow the example of those children!"

古文：月桂花
现代文：月桂花
English: The Laurel Flower

古文：月桂，叶如桂。
现代文：月桂花，叶如桂叶。
English: Laurel flowers, leaves like cinnamon leaves.

古文：花浅黄色，四瓣。
现代文：花浅黄色，四片瓣。
English: Flowers pale yellow, four petals.

古文：青蕊，花盛发如柿蒂。
现代文：青色蕊，花盛开时像柿子蒂。
English: Blue stamens, looks like a persimmon stem when the flowers are in full bloom.

古文：出蒋山。
现代文：出在蒋山。
English: Appeared in Jiangshan.

古文：牡桂花
现代文：牡桂花
English: Oyster flower

古文：牡桂，叶大如苦竹。
现代文：牡桂花，叶子挺大，样子像苦竹。
English: Oyster flower, leaves quite large, looks like bitter bamboo.

古文：叶中有一脉如笔迹。
现代文：叶子上有一根叶脉很像是谁用笔画出来的。
English: There is a vein on the leaf that looks like someone drew it with a brush.

古文：花蒂叶三瓣，瓣端分为两歧。
现代文：花蒂长出三片叶来，叶尖上分成两歧。
English: Three leaves grow from the flower stem, and the tips of the leaves are divided into two.

古文：其表色浅黄，近歧浅红色。
现代文：这三片叶子基本是浅黄色的，接近两歧的地方是浅红色。
English: These three leaves are basically light yellow, and the areas close to the differences are light red.

古文：花六瓣，色白。
现代文：花是六个瓣，白色。
English: The flower has six petals and is white.

古文：心凸起如荔枝。
现代文：花心凸起像荔枝。
English: The heart of the flower stands out like a lychee.

古文：其枝紫。
现代文：枝条是紫的。
English: The branches are purple.

古文：出婺州山中。
现代文：这花出在婺州山中。
English: This flower grows in the mountains of Zhangzhou.

古文：桂花
现代文：桂花
English: Chrysanthemum

古文：桂花，三月开，黄而不白。
现代文：桂花，每年的三月开花。花黄色但不苍白。
English: Osmanthus, blooms in March every year. The flowers are yellow but not pale.

古文：大庾诗皆称桂花耐日，及张曲江诗 桂华秋皎洁 ，妄矣。
现代文：大庾的诗皆称颂桂花耐日晒，还有张曲江诗中说的 桂花秋皎洁 ，都是荒谬的。
English: Dazhao's poems all praise the sun-tolerant osmanthus, and Zhang Qujiang's poem praises the autumn beauty of the osmanthus, both of which are absurd.

古文：海石榴花
现代文：海石榴花
English: Sea pomegranates

古文：罗多海红并海石榴。
现代文：新罗那地方多出产海红和海石榴。
English: The Sillona region produces mostly sea cucumbers and sea pomegranates.

古文：唐赞皇李德裕言，花中带海者，悉从海东来。
现代文：唐李德裕说： 花中凡是花名带 海 字的，都是从海滨由东传过来的。 
English: Tang Li Deyu said: All the flower names with the character "sea" were transmitted from the east coast.

古文：章川花差类海石榴，五朵簇生，叶狭长，重沓承。
现代文：章川花有一点像海石榴。五朵花簇生在一起，叶狭窄而细长，重叠相承。
English: The five flowers are clustered together, and the leaves are narrow and slender, overlapping each other.

古文：南海朱槿
现代文：南海朱槿
English: Nankai Zhu Xi

古文：南海四时皆有朱槿，花常开。
现代文：南海那地方一年四季都有朱槿，花是常开不败的。
English: In that part of the South China Sea, there are scarlet ibises all year round, and the flowers are always in bloom.

古文：然一本之内，所发不过一二十花。且开不能如图画者，丛发烂熳。
现代文：但是一棵当中，所开的不过一二十朵，而且不能像图画上画的那样一丛一丛开得鲜艳美丽。
English: But in one tree, only a dozen or twenty buds open, and they do not open brightly and beautifully cluster by cluster as they do in the picture.

古文：岭表朱槿
现代文：岭表朱槿
English: Ling table Zhu Xuan

古文：岭表朱槿花，茎叶皆如桑树。
现代文：岭表朱槿花，茎和叶都像桑树。
English: Rhododendron, the stem and leaves look like mulberry trees.

古文：叶光而厚。
现代文：叶片光亮而厚。
English: The leaves are glossy and thick.

古文：树身高者，止于四五尺，而枝叶婆娑。
现代文：树身高的也不过四五尺，但是枝叶婆娑多姿。
English: The tree is only four or five feet tall, but its branches and leaves are multi-faceted.

古文：自二月开花，至于中冬方歇。
现代文：从二月开始开花，直到中冬才肯小歇。
English: Flowering begins in February and does not stop until mid-winter.

古文：其花深红色，五出，如大蜀葵。
现代文：它的花是深红的，五片瓣，很像大蜀葵。
English: Its flowers are crimson, with five petals, much like a large plum blossom.

古文：有蕊一条，长于花叶，上缀金屑，日光所烁，疑有焰生。
现代文：花上有一条蕊，比花叶还长，上面缀有金色碎屑，日光闪烁之下，你会以为花上忽然燃起火焰。
English: There is a stamen on the flower, longer than the petals, decorated with gold shavings. Under the glittering sunlight, you would think that the flower was suddenly on fire.

古文：一丛之上，日开数百朵，虽繁而有艳，且近而无香。
现代文：一丛之上，一天就开数百朵，虽然繁多而艳丽，但凑近一闻并无香味。
English: On top of a cluster, hundreds of flowers bloom in a day. Although they are numerous and showy, they have almost no scent.

古文：暮落朝开。
现代文：晚上落，早晨开。
English: Evening falls, morning rises.

古文：插枝即活，故名之槿。
现代文：插一个枝条就能活，所以叫它 槿 。
English: If you stick a twig in it, it will come to life, so call it a dragonfly.

古文：俚女亦采而鬻，一钱售数十朵。
现代文：乡下女采摘朱槿花出售，一钱能买几十朵。
English: A woman from the countryside is picking and selling vermilion flowers. One dollar can buy dozens of flowers.

古文：若微此花，红梅无以资其色。
现代文：如此贱视此花，红梅也就没有资格卖弄它的姿色了。
English: With such a low opinion of this flower, the red plum has no right to flaunt its appearance.

古文：红槿花
现代文：红槿花
English: Red thistle flower

古文：岭南红槿，自正月迄十二月常开，秋冬差少耳。
现代文：岭南的红槿花，从正月到十二月常开，秋冬之季开得略微少一些罢了。
English: From the first month to December, the red hydrangeas in Lingnan are often in bloom, but the autumn and winter seasons are slightly less blooming.

古文：那提槿花
现代文：那提槿花
English: Nativity scene

古文：那提槿花，紫色，两重叶。
现代文：那提槿花，紫色，有两重叶。
English: Natty bracts, purple, double-leaved.

古文：外重叶卷心，心中抽茎，高寸余。
现代文：外重叶卷着心，心中抽出花茎，一寸多高。
English: The heavy outer leaves curl around the heart, and the flower stem is extracted from the heart. It is more than an inch high.

古文：叶端分五瓣，如蒂。
现代文：叶端分成五瓣，像花蒂。
English: The tip of the leaf is divided into five petals, like a flower bud.

古文：瓣中紫蕊，茎上黄蕊。
现代文：瓣中有紫色蕊，茎上有黄色蕊。
English: There are purple stamens in the petals and yellow stamens on the stem.

古文：佛桑花
现代文：佛桑花
English: St. John's Wort

古文：闽中多佛桑树。
现代文：闽地多佛桑树。
English: The Dover mulberry tree.

古文：枝叶如桑，唯条上勾。
现代文：佛桑树的枝叶像桑树，只是枝条向上勾曲。
English: The branches and leaves of the Foshan mulberry tree look like mulberry trees, but the branches are curved upwards.

古文：花房如桐花，含长一寸余，似重台状。
现代文：花房像桐花，含长一寸多一点，像重瓣的形状。
English: The inflorescence is like a paulownia, a little more than an inch long, shaped like a double petal.

古文：花亦有浅黄者。
现代文：花也有浅黄色的。
English: The flowers are also pale yellow.

古文：南中桐花有深色者。
现代文：南方的桐花有深色的。
English: Southern paulownia has a darker bloom.

古文：贞桐花
现代文：贞桐花
English: St. John's Wort

古文：贞桐，枝端抽赤黄条，条复旁对，分三层。
现代文：贞桐，枝条的顶端抽发出赤黄色的鲜嫩枝条，枝条两两相对而生，共分三层。
English: Zhengtong, the top of the branch shoots out reddish-yellow fresh shoots, the branches are opposite each other, divided into three layers.

古文：花大如落苏花，黄色。
现代文：贞桐花大如落苏花，黄色。
English: The chrysanthemum is as large as the columbine, and yellow.

古文：一茎上有五六十朵。
现代文：它的一根茎上便可开出五六十朵花。
English: It can produce fifty or sixty flowers on a single stem.

古文：栀子花
现代文：栀子花
English: Gardenia

古文：诸花少六出者，唯栀子花六出。
现代文：各种花很少有六瓣的，只有栀子花是六瓣。
English: All kinds of flowers rarely have six petals, only gardenia has six petals.

古文：陶真白言： 栀子剪花六出，刻房七道。 
现代文：陶真白说： 栀子剪出了六片花瓣，在花房上刻下了七道印痕。 
English: Tao Zhenbai said: The pincers cut out six petals and carved seven marks on the flower bed.

古文：其花香甚，相传即西域薝卜也。
现代文：栀子花特别香。相传栀子花就是西域的薝卜。
English: The gardenia is particularly fragrant. Legend has it that the gardenia is the western part of the mugwort.

古文：山茶花
现代文：山茶花
English: Camellia sinensis

古文：山茶，叶如茶树，高者丈余。
现代文：山茶花，叶子像茶树叶，高的有一丈多。
English: Camellia sinensis, leaves like tea leaves, more than a foot tall.

古文：花大盈寸，色如绯。
现代文：它的花大小可满一寸，颜色接近大红。
English: Its flower size can be a full inch, and the color is close to crimson.

古文：十二月开。
现代文：此花十二月开。
English: This flower blooms in December.

古文：三色石楠花
现代文：三色石楠花
English: Three-coloured heather

古文：衡山石楠花，有紫碧白三色。
现代文：衡山的石楠花，有紫色的、碧绿色的、白色的三种。
English: Hengshan's heather comes in three colors: purple, turquoise, and white.

古文：花大如牡丹。
现代文：花大如牡丹。
English: The flower is as big as a peony.

古文：亦有无花者。
现代文：也有不开花的。
English: There are also non-flowering cymes.

古文：比闾花
现代文：比闾花
English: More than a thistle

古文：白州比闾华，其华若羽。
现代文：白州的比闾花，就像飞禽的羽毛那么华丽。
English: The hibiscus flowers of Baizhou are as gorgeous as the feathers of a bird.

古文：伐其木为薪，终日火不败。
现代文：砍伐它的枝干当柴烧，火终日不灭。
English: Its branches are cut down and used for fuel, and the fire is kept burning all day long.

古文：木莲花
现代文：木莲花
English: Wood lotus flower

古文：木莲花，叶似辛夷，花类莲色。出鸣玉溪，卬州亦有。
现代文：木莲花，叶子像辛夷，花色像莲花，出在鸣玉溪，卬州也有。
English: The wood lotus flower, with leaves resembling cinnamon and flowers the color of a lotus, is found in Mingyu Creek, and also in Luzhou.

古文：那伽花
现代文：那伽花
English: Naga Flower

古文：那伽花，状如三春，无叶，华色白，心黄，六瓣。
现代文：那伽花，样子像三春花，没有叶，花色是白的，花心是黄的，六片瓣。
English: Naga flower, looks like a primrose, without leaves, the color is white, the center is yellow, six petals.

古文：出在舶上。
现代文：此花生长在船舶上。
English: This flower grows on ships.

古文：木兰花
现代文：木兰花
English: Magnolia blooms

古文：长安敦化坊百姓家，唐大和中，有木兰一树，花色深红。
现代文：唐大和年间，长安敦化坊的一个普通百姓家，有一棵木兰花。花是深红色的。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, an ordinary people's home in Chang'an Dunhua Square had a magnolia flower. The flower was crimson.

古文：后桂州观察使李勃看宅人，以五千买之。
现代文：后来，桂州观察使李勃的一个看护宅院的人，用五千钱买下这棵木兰花。
English: Later, a caretaker of Li Bo's residential compound was persuaded by Guizhou Observation to buy the magnolia with 5,000 yuan.

古文：宅在水北。
现代文：李勃的宅院在水北。
English: Li Bo's residence is in Shuibei.

古文：经年，花紫色。
现代文：经过一年，花变成紫色的了。
English: After a year, the flowers turn purple.

古文：异木花
现代文：异木花
English: Cymbidium

古文：唐卫公李德裕，尝获异木一株，春花紫。
现代文：唐卫公李德裕，曾经得到一棵奇异的花木，在春季开紫色花。
English: Tang Weigong Li Deyu once received a strange tree that bloomed purple flowers in the spring.

古文：予思木中一岁发花，唯木兰。
现代文：我想花木当中一年开花的，只有木兰。
English: I think that of all the flowers and trees, only the magnolia blooms once a year.

古文：碧玫瑰
现代文：碧玫瑰
English: Blue rose

古文：洛中鬻花木者，言嵩山深处，有碧色玫瑰。
现代文：洛中卖花木的人说，在嵩山深处，有一种碧色的玫瑰。
English: The sellers of flowers and trees in Los Angeles say that in the depths of the Songshan Mountains, there is a kind of blue rose.

古文：而今亡矣。
现代文：但是现在没有了。
English: But now it's gone.

古文：刺桐花
现代文：刺桐花
English: Stinging Paulownia

古文：刺桐花，状如图画者不类。
现代文：刺桐花，样子与画的不大一样。
English: Embroidered paulownia flowers, similar in appearance to the painting.

古文：其木为材。
现代文：刺桐树是一种木材。
English: Sycamore is a kind of wood.

古文：三四月时，布叶繁密，后有赤花。
现代文：三四月的时候，它就长出繁密的叶子，以后便有红色的花。
English: In March and April, it will grow dense leaves, and later it will have red flowers.

古文：间生叶间三五房，不得如画者。红芳满树。
现代文：花是有间隔地生在枝叶间的，稀稀疏疏三五朵，不像画的那样，红红艳艳地满树都是。
English: The flowers are interspersed between the branches and leaves, sparsely scattered three to five, unlike the picture, the trees are full of red and red.

古文：怀风花
现代文：怀风花
English: Kaifeng flower

古文：乐游苑自生玫瑰树。
现代文：乐游苑中自然长出一棵玫瑰树。
English: A rose tree naturally grows in Le Youyuan.

古文：下多苜蓿。
现代文：树下生长着许多苜蓿。
English: Under the tree grows a lot of lettuce.

古文：一名怀风。
现代文：苜蓿一名怀风。
English: a nostalgic song.

古文：时人或谓之光风。
现代文：当时的人们有的叫它光风。
English: Some people at the time called it the light wind.

古文：风在其间常肃然，日照其花有光采，故名曰苜蓿怀风。
现代文：风生苜蓿当中常常是肃然而止的。日照之下，它的花光彩焕然。所以起名叫 苜蓿怀风 。
English: Among the wind-growing ferns, it is often solemn. Under the sunshine, its flowers are radiant. That's why it is called the wind-breathing fern.

古文：茂陵人谓之连枝草。
现代文：茂陵人叫它 连枝草 。
English: The Muring people call it "Lianzi grass."

古文：踯躅花
现代文：踯躅花
English: Wax flower

古文：南中花多红赤，亦彼之方色也，唯踯躅为胜。
现代文：南中一带的花多半都是红色的，红色也就是那地方的代表色，而踯躅花的红色是最突出的。
English: Most of the flowers in the Nanzhong area are red, and red is the representative color of that place, while the red of the camellia is the most prominent.

古文：岭北时有，不如南之繁多也。
现代文：岭北也时或有踯躅花，但是不如南方繁多。
English: In the northern part of the Ling, there are also occasional camellias, but they are not as numerous as in the south.

古文：山谷间悉生。
现代文：南方的山谷之间全都长生着踯躅花。
English: Between the valleys in the south, there are evergreens everywhere.

古文：二月发时，照耀如火。
现代文：一到二月花开时，阳光一照，就像漫山遍野燃着火。
English: When the flowers bloom from January to February, the sun shines, and it's like the whole mountain is on fire.

古文：月余不歇。
现代文：花开一个多月也不停歇。
English: The flowers bloom for more than a month without stopping.

古文：凌霄花
现代文：凌霄花
English: The ling roller coaster

古文：凌霄花中露水，损人目。
现代文：凌霄花中的露水，能损害人的的眼睛。
English: The dew in the ling roller coaster can damage a person's eyes.

古文：分枝荷
现代文：分枝荷
English: Branched load

古文：汉明帝时，池中有分枝荷，一茎四叶，状如骈盖。
现代文：汉明帝时，水池中养有分枝荷，一茎生四叶，样子就像四个并列的车盖。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanming, there was a branching carp in the pond, with four leaves on one stem, looking like four parallel car covers.

古文：实如玄珠，可以饰珮。
现代文：分枝荷的籽实像黑色珍珠，可以做成饰物佩戴。
English: The seeds of the meadow poppy look like black pearls and can be made into ornaments.

古文：夜舒荷
现代文：夜舒荷
English: Night Soho

古文：灵帝时，有夜舒荷，一茎四莲。
现代文：灵帝的时候有夜舒荷，一根茎上生四朵莲花。
English: At the time of Emperor Lingdi, there was a night shower, and four lotuses grew on one stem.

古文：其叶夜舒昼卷。
现代文：它的叶夜间舒展而白天卷缩。
English: Its leaves stretch at night and curl during the day.

古文：睡莲花
现代文：睡莲花
English: Water lily blooms

古文：睡莲。南海有睡莲，夜则花低入水。
现代文：南海有一种叫 睡莲 的花，每到夜晚，花就自己低入水中。
English: In the South China Sea, there is a flower called the water lily. Every night, the flower lowers itself into the water.

古文：碧莲花
现代文：碧莲花
English: Blue lotus blossoms

古文：宣平中太傅相国卢公，应举时，寄居寿州安丰县别墅。
现代文：宣平年间，太傅相国卢公应举时，寄居在寿州安丰县的别墅。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanping, Taifu Xiangguo Lu stayed in a villa in Anfeng County, Shoushou.

古文：尝游芍陂，见里人负薪者，持碧莲花一朵。
现代文：有一次他去游芍陂，看见一个背着柴草的乡下人，手中拿着一朵碧色莲花。
English: Once he went for a walk and saw a villager carrying firewood and carrying a blue lotus in his hand.

古文：公惊问之。
现代文：卢公吃惊地问他是从哪里弄到的。
English: Lu Gong was surprised and asked him where he got it from.

古文：答曰： 陂中得之。 
现代文：他回答说： 是从陂中得到的。 
English: He replied, "From a toad."

古文：卢公后从事浙西。因使淮服。
现代文：卢公后来到浙西提任 从事 这一官职，顺便出使淮水。
English: Later, Lu Gong went to West Zhejiang Province to nominate and engage in this official post, and sent Huai Shui.

古文：话于太尉卫公李德裕。
现代文：他对太尉卫公李德裕说了碧莲花的事。
English: He told First Lieutenant Wei Gong Li Deyu about the lotus flower.

古文：德裕令搜访芍陂，则无有矣。
现代文：李德裕让他到芍陂去搜寻求访，却没有找到碧莲花。
English: Li Deyu asked him to go to Handan to search and visit, but he did not find the lotus flower.

古文：又遍寻于江渚间，亦终不能得。乃知向者一朵，盖神异耳。
现代文：又遍寻于江渚之间，也终究未能得到，这才知道以前的那一朵，大概是神物。
English: They searched everywhere along the river, but in the end they couldn't find it. That's when they knew that the previous flower was probably a sacred object.

古文：染青莲花
现代文：染青莲花
English: Dyed blue lotus flowers

古文：唐韩文公愈之侄，有种花之异。
现代文：唐朝韩文公韩愈的侄子，有种花的奇艺。
English: He was a nephew of Han Yu, the Tang Dynasty's Korean literature guru, and was skilled in the art of flower arrangement.

古文：闻其说于小说。
现代文：这是从琐记杂谈一类的书中知道的。
English: We know this from books like trivia.

古文：杜给事孺休典湖州，有染户家，池生青莲花。
现代文：给事杜孺休主管湖州，那里有一户以染衣为业的人家，池子里生长着青莲花。
English: In Huzhou, where Du Yuxiu is in charge, there is a family that dyes clothes. Blue lotus flowers grow in the pond.

古文：刺史命收莲子归京，种于池沼，或变为红莲，因异之。
现代文：杜刺史让收取了这种青莲花的花种，回到京城种到池子里，有的却变成了红莲花。
English: Du Zhanshi collected the seeds of this blue lotus and returned to Beijing to plant them in the pond, but some of them turned into red lotuses.

古文：乃致书问染工。
现代文：杜给事感到很奇怪，就写信去问那位染工。
English: Du was puzzled and wrote to the dyer.

古文：染工曰： 我家有三世治靛瓮，尝以莲子浸于瓮底，俟经岁年，然后种之。
现代文：染工回信说： 我家有一个用过三代的盛靛青的大瓮，曾经把莲子浸泡在瓮底下，等浸过一年，然后再种上它。
English: The dyer wrote back, "My family has a large maple tree that has been used for three generations. We used to soak the lotus seed under the maple tree, soak it for a year, and then replant it.

古文：若以所种青莲花子为种，即其红矣。
现代文：如果用所种的青莲花子当种子，那它就变红了。
English: If the blue lotus seed is used as a seed, it will turn red.

古文：盖还本质，又何足怪？ 
现代文：这是它恢复了本质，又有什么奇怪！ 
English: This is its restored essence, and what a surprise!

古文：乃以所浸莲子寄之。
现代文：于是又把浸泡的莲花子送给杜给事。
English: So she gave the soaked lotus seed to Du Du.

古文：道士申匡图，又见人以鸡矢和土，培芍药花丛，其淡红者悉成深红。
现代文：道士申匡图又见人用鸡粪和上土，培在芍药花丛下，那些淡红色的花都变成深红色的了。
English: Taoist Shen Kuangtu also saw people use chicken manure and topsoil to cultivate under the thallus flowers. Those pale red flowers have become deep red.

古文：染之所益信矣。
现代文：染色的效果更可信了。
English: The effect of dyeing is more believable.

古文：伪蜀王先主将晏驾，其年，峨眉山娑罗花，悉开白花。
现代文：伪蜀王先主将死的那一年，峨眉山上的娑罗花，全开白花。
English: In the year of the death of the ancestor of the False Shu King, the dandelion flowers on Mount Emei were in full bloom.

古文：又荆文献王未薨前数年，沟港城隍，悉开白莲。
现代文：荆文献王未死前的几年，沟港城隍，开放的全都是白色的莲花。
English: In the years before the death of the Jing Literature King, all the white lotus flowers bloomed in the city of Sogang.

古文：一则染以气类，一则表示凶兆，又何疑哉？
现代文：一则是受气候物类影响，一则是表示凶兆，又有什么可疑呢？
English: One is affected by climatic species, the other is a bad omen, and what is suspicious?

古文：三朵瑞莲
现代文：三朵瑞莲
English: Three Lilies

古文：伪蜀主当僭位，诸勋贵功臣，竞起甲第。独伪中令赵廷隐，起南宅北宅。
现代文：伪蜀主刚刚登位，各位有功显贵之臣，竞相修造甲第，而伪中令赵廷隐建造的南宅北宅尤为显耀。
English: The pseudo-emperor had just ascended to the throne, and all of you meritorious courtiers were competing to build armor, and the South Mansion and the North Mansion built by the pseudo-emperor Zhao Tingyin were particularly splendid.

古文：千梁万拱，其诸奢丽，莫之与俦。
现代文：这宅子盖得千梁万拱，奢华富丽，无以伦比。
English: This mansion is built with thousands of beams and arches, luxury and richness, unparalleled.

古文：后枕江渎，池中有二岛屿。
现代文：宅子后边靠近一条河流。池中有两个小岛子，就用石头砌起来。
English: The back of the house is close to a river. There are two small islands in the pond, which are made of stone.

古文：遂甃石循池，四岸皆种垂杨，或间杂木芙蓉。
现代文：四岸全种上杨柳，或间杂一些木芙蓉。池中种莲花。
English: On all four banks, poplar willows are planted, or mixed with some hibiscus. Lotus flowers are planted in the pond.

古文：池中种藕。每至秋夏，花开鱼跃。
现代文：每到夏秋之季，花开鱼跃，景致很美。
English: Every summer and autumn season, the flowers bloom and the fish jump, the scenery is very beautiful.

古文：柳荫之下，有士子执卷者，垂纶者，执如意者，执塵尾者，谈诗论道者。
现代文：柳荫之下，有捧卷读书的，有垂弦钓鱼的，有手执如意的，有手执拂尘的，有谈诗论道的。
English: Under the willow shade, there are people reading books, fishing with strings, holding hands, brushing off dust, and talking about poetry.

古文：一旦岸之隈，有莲一茎，上分两歧，开二朵。
现代文：一天早晨，池岸拐弯处，有一棵莲花茎上分为两歧，并开两朵。
English: One morning, at the bend of the pond bank, there was a lotus flower with a split stem and two blossoms.

古文：其时谓之太平无事之秋，士女拖香肆艳，看者甚众。
现代文：那时候可谓太平无事之秋，男男女女，拖香肆艳，赶来观看的络绎不绝。
English: At that time, it was a peaceful autumn, and men and women came in droves to watch.

古文：赵廷隐画图以进，蜀主叹赏。
现代文：赵廷隐把它画下来送进宫中，蜀主叹赏不已。
English: Zhao Tingyin drew it down and sent it to the palace, which was greatly appreciated by the emperor.

古文：其时歌者咏者不少。
现代文：那时候咏叹它的不少。
English: There was a lot of lamenting about it at the time.

古文：无何，禁苑中有莲一茎，歧分三朵。
现代文：不久，禁苑中的一棵莲花，一分三歧，并开三朵。
English: Soon, a lotus flower in the Forbidden City was divided into three parts and bloomed into three flowers.

古文：蜀王开筵宴，召群臣赏之。
现代文：蜀主大摆酒宴，召集群臣前来观赏。
English: The Lord of Shu held a grand wine banquet and summoned his courtiers to come and watch.

古文：是时词臣已下，皆贡诗。
现代文：这时候，词臣以下的全都献诗。
English: At this time, everyone from the poet laureate on down contributed a poem.

古文：当时有好事者，图以绘事，至今传之。
现代文：当时有好事的，把这并开的三朵莲花画了下来，一直留传到现在。
English: When something good happened at that time, he drew the three lotuses together and has kept it to this day.

古文：藕
现代文：藕
English: 

古文：苏州进藕，其最上者名伤荷藕。
现代文：苏州献进荷花藕，其中最上等的叫 伤荷藕 。
English: Suzhou presented lotus buds, the best of which is called "wounded lotus bud."

古文：或云，荷名；或云，叶甘为虫所伤；或云，故伤其叶，以长其根。
现代文：有的人说，这是荷的名称；有的说，是荷叶甘甜，被虫咬伤的意思；有的说，是故意弄伤它的叶，让它的根快长。
English: Some people say that this is the name of the lotus; some say that it is the sweet lotus leaf, meaning to be bitten by insects; some say that it is to deliberately injure its leaves to make its roots grow faster.

古文：近多重台荷，实中又生花，亦甚异也。
现代文：近来有许多重瓣的荷花，荷花的籽实上面又生花，这也是非常奇异的事。
English: Recently, there have been a lot of double-petalled lotus flowers, and there are also flowers growing on the seed of the lotus, which is also a very strange thing.

古文：莲实
现代文：莲实
English: Lotus fruit

古文：石莲入水沉，唯煎碱卤能浮之。
现代文：石莲入水就沉底，只有煎碱卤能使它浮起来。
English: When the stone lily enters the water, it sinks to the bottom. Only the caustic soda can make it float.

古文：雁食之，粪落山中，百年不坏。
现代文：雁吃了它，随雁粪落入山中，百年不会朽烂变坏。
English: The geese eat it, and it falls into the mountains with the goose droppings. It will not rot and deteriorate for a hundred years.

古文：相传橡子落水为莲。
现代文：相传是橡子落入水中变成了莲。
English: According to legend, an acorn fell into the water and turned into a lotus.

古文：芰
现代文：芰
English: 

古文：芰一名水菜，一名藓苔。
现代文：芰另有一名叫 水菜 ，还有一名叫 藓苔 。
English: In addition, there is a dragonfly named Mizuna, and another one called Shimei.

古文：汉武昆明池中，有浮根菱，根出水上，叶沦波下，亦曰青水芰。
现代文：汉武帝的昆明池中，有浮根菱，根长出水面，叶长在水中，也叫作 青水芰 。
English: In the Kunming Pool of Emperor Hanwu, there is a floating rhombus. The roots grow out of the water surface, and the leaves grow in the water. It is also called the blue water dragonfly.

古文：玄都有芰，碧色，状如鸡飞，名翻鸡芰。
现代文：玄都有一种芰，碧绿色，样子像鸡飞，名叫 翻鸡芰 。
English: The Xuan all have a kind of grasshopper, bright green, looking like a chicken fly, called the chicken-turning grasshopper.

古文：仙人凫伯子常采之。
现代文：仙人们常采它。
English: It is often picked by hermits.

古文：菱
现代文：菱
English: ryo

古文：菱，今人但言菱芰。
现代文：芰，现在的人只叫它 菱芰 。
English: Nowadays, people just call it "the dragonfly."

古文：诸解草木书，亦不分别。
现代文：各种解说草木的书，也都不作分别。
English: The various books that explain plants and trees also make no distinction.

古文：唯伍安贫《武陵记》，言四角曰芰，两角曰菱。
现代文：只有伍安贫的《武陵记》，说四个角的叫芰，两个角的叫菱。
English: Only Wu Anbao's "Wuling Ji" said that the four horns are called the cormorant, and the two horns are called the cormorant.

古文：今苏州折腰菱多两角。
现代文：现在苏州的折腰菱多半是两个角的。
English: Nowadays, Suzhou's loquat is mostly two-cornered.

古文：荆州有僧，遗段成式一斗郢城菱，三角而无芒，可以挼莎。
现代文：荆州有个和尚，送给段成式一斗郢城菱，三个角而且没有芒刺，可以用它揉搓莎草。
English: There is a monk in Jingzhou. He gave Duan Chengshih a bucket of ginger root with three horns and no thorns. It can be used to grind papyrus.

