古文：惟三月，周公初于新邑洛，用告商王士。
现代文：周成王七年三月，周公初往新都洛邑，用成王的命令告诫殷商的旧臣。
English: In March of the seventh year of King Zhou Chengdu, Zhou Gongchu went to the new capital, Luoyang, and used King Chengdu's order to admonish the former ministers of Yin merchants.

古文：王若曰： 尔殷遗多士弗吊，旻天大降丧于殷，我有周佑命，将天明威，致王罚，敕殷命终于帝。
现代文：王这样说： 你们殷遗士不要再悼亡了，上天对殷降下强大的毁灭。我们周国佑助天命，奉行上天的明威，执行王者的诛罚，宣告殷的国命被上天终绝了。
English: The king said, "You Yin followers, do not mourn the death of Yin any longer. Heaven has brought down a powerful destruction on Yin. We should go around the country to bless the heavenly destiny, follow the clear authority of heaven, carry out the punishment of the king, and declare that Yin's national destiny has been ended by heaven.

古文：肆尔多士！
现代文：现在，你们众位官员啊！
English: Now, all of you officials, move!

古文：非我小国敢弋殷命。惟天不畀允罔固乱，弼我，我其敢求位？
现代文：不是我们小小的周国敢于取代殷命，是上天不把大命给予那信诬怙恶的人，而辅助我们，我们岂敢擅求王位呢？
English: It is not that our small Zhou Guo dared to take the place of He Yunfu, it is that Heaven will not give the great life to those who believe in falsehood and abhor evil, but will help us. Will we dare to claim the throne?

古文：惟帝不畀，惟我下民秉为，惟天明畏。
现代文：正因为上天不把大命给予信诬怙恶的人，我们下民的所作所为，应当敬畏天命。我听说： 上天制止游乐。 
English: It is precisely because Heaven does not give a great destiny to those who believe in falsehood and abhor evil, that the actions of our people should be in awe of Heaven's destiny. I heard: Heaven forbids amusement.

古文：我闻曰：上帝引逸，有夏不适逸；则惟帝降格，向于时夏。
现代文：夏桀不节制游乐，上天就降下教令，劝导复桀。他不能听取上天的教导，大肆游乐，并且怠慢。
English: Xia Yao did not restrain his amusement, so Heaven sent down the edict to persuade him to recant. Unable to listen to Heaven's instruction, Xia Yao indulged in excessive amusement and was negligent.

古文：弗克庸帝，大淫泆有辞。惟时天罔念闻，厥惟废元命，降致罚；乃命尔先祖成汤革夏，俊民甸四方。
现代文：因此，上天也不念不问，而考虑废止夏的大命，降下大罚；上天于是命令你们的先祖成汤代替夏桀，命令杰出的人才治理四方。
English: Therefore, Heaven did not leave it unanswered, but considered abolishing Xia Zhuang's great life and imposing a great punishment; Heaven then ordered your ancestors Cheng Tang to replace Xia Yao, and ordered outstanding talents to govern the four directions.

古文：自成汤至于帝乙，罔不明德恤祀。
现代文：从成汤到帝乙，没有人不力行德政，慎行祭祀。
English: From Cheng Tang to Emperor Wu, no one failed to practice virtuous politics and carefully perform religious rites.

古文：亦惟天丕建，保乂有殷，殷王亦罔敢失帝，罔不配天其泽。
现代文：也因为上天树立了安治殷国的贤人，殷的先王也没有人敢于违背天意，也没有人不配合上天的恩泽。
English: It is also because Heaven has set up sages to administer the state of Yin, and none of the former kings of Yin dared to go against the will of Heaven, nor did any of them fail to cooperate with Heaven's grace.

古文：在今后嗣王，诞罔显于天，矧曰其有听念于先王勤家？
现代文：当今后继的纣王，很不明白上天的意旨，何况说他又能听从、考虑先王勤劳家国的训导呢？
English: When the future king of Qin did not understand the will of heaven, how could he listen to and consider the instructions of the previous king who worked hard for his country?

古文：诞淫厥泆，罔顾于天显民祗，惟时上帝不保，降若兹大丧。
现代文：他大肆淫游泆乐，不顾天意和民困，因此，上天不保佑了，降下这样的大丧乱。
English: He indulged in debauchery and debauchery, disregarding the will of heaven and the plight of the people. Therefore, heaven did not bless him to bring down such a great disaster.

古文：惟天不畀不明厥德，凡四方小大邦丧，罔非有辞于罚。 
现代文：上天不把大命给予不勉行德政的人，凡是四方小国大国的灭亡，无人不是怠慢上天而被惩罚。 
English: Heaven does not give a great destiny to those who do not pursue a virtuous government. Whenever a small country or a big country in the four directions is destroyed, no one is punished for neglecting heaven.

古文：王若曰： 尔殷多士，今惟我周王丕灵承帝事，有命曰： 割殷 告敕于帝。
现代文：王这样说： 你们殷国的众臣，现在只有我们周王善于奉行上天的使命，上天有命令说： 夺取殷国，并报告上天。 
English: The king said, "All of you ministers of the Kingdom of Yin, we, King Zhou, are the only ones who are good at carrying out Heaven's mission. Heaven has ordered us to seize the Kingdom of Yin and report it to Heaven.

古文：惟我事不贰适，惟尔王家我适。
现代文：我们讨伐殷商，不把别人作为敌人，只把你们的王家作为敌人。
English: We do not consider others as our enemies, but only your royal family.

古文：予其曰惟尔洪无度，我不尔动，自乃邑。
现代文：我怎么会料想到你们众官员太不守法，我并没有动你们，动乱是从你们的封邑开始的。
English: How could I have guessed that you officials were so lawless? I didn't move you. The turmoil began in your fiefdoms.

古文：予亦念天，即于殷大戾，肆不正。 王曰： 猷！
现代文：我也考虑到天意仅仅在于夺取殷国，于是在殷乱大定之后，便不治你们的罪了。 王说： 啊！
English: I also considered that the will of heaven was only to conquer Yin, so after the Yin Disturbance was settled, it would not punish you for your sins.

古文：告尔多士，予惟时其迁居西尔，非我一人奉德不康宁，时惟天命。
现代文：告诉你们众官员，我因此将把你们迁居西方，并不是我执行教导不安静，这是天命。
English: Tell your officials that I am moving you to the West for this reason. It is not because I am not carrying out my teachings, but it is the will of Heaven.

古文：无违，朕不敢有后，无我怨。
现代文：不可违背天命，我不敢迟缓执行天命，你们不要怨恨我。
English: Don't go against the Mandate of Heaven. I dare not delay the execution of the Mandate of Heaven. Don't hate me.

古文：惟尔知，惟殷先人有册有典，殷革夏命。
现代文：你们知道，殷人的祖先有书册有典籍，记载着殷国革了夏国的命。
English: As you know, the ancestors of the Yin people have books and classics, recording the life of the Yin country and the Xia country.

古文：今尔又曰： 夏迪简在王庭，有服在百僚。 
现代文：现在你们又说： 当年夏的官员被选在殷的王庭，在百官之中都有职事。 
English: Now you say: The officials of the summer of that year were chosen from the royal court of Yin, and they had duties among the hundreds of officials.

古文：予一人惟听用德，肆予敢求于天邑商，予惟率肆矜尔。
现代文：我只接受、使用有德的人。现在我从大邑商招来你们，我是宽大你们和爱惜你们。
English: I only accept and use virtuous people. Now, I have called you from the merchants of the great cities. I am lenient with you and have compassion on you.

古文：非予罪，时惟天命。 
现代文：这不是我的差错，这是天命。 
English: It's not my fault, it's fate.

古文：王曰： 多士，昔朕来自奄，予大降尔四国民命。
现代文：王说： 殷的众臣，从前我从奄地来，对你们管、蔡、商、奄四国臣民广泛地下达过命令。
English: The king said, "Yin's vassals, I once came from Ama, and I issued a broad order to you officials, chasers, merchants, and the subjects of Ama.

古文：我乃明致天罚，移尔遐逖，比事臣我宗多逊。 
现代文：我然后明行上天的惩罚，把你们从远方迁徙到这里，近来你们服务和臣属我们周族很恭顺。 
English: I then openly carried out heaven's punishment by migrating you here from far away. Recently, you have been very obedient to serve and serve our Zhou people.

古文：王曰： 告尔殷多士，今予惟不尔杀，予惟时命有申。
现代文：王说： 告诉你们殷商的众臣，现在我不杀害你们，我想重申这个命令。
English: And the king said, I say unto you, O princes of the merchants, I will not now kill you: but I will speak unto you according to this word.

古文：今朕作大邑于兹洛，予惟四方罔攸宾，亦惟尔多士攸服奔走臣我多逊。
现代文：现在我在这洛地建成了一座大城市，我是由于四方诸侯没有地方朝贡，也是由于你们服务奔走臣属我们很恭顺的缘故。
English: Now I have built a great city in this land of Lotharingia. I did this because the lords of the four directions had no place to pay tribute, and also because your servants and subjects were very obedient to us.

古文：尔乃尚有尔土，尔用尚宁干止，尔克敬，天惟畀矜尔；尔不克敬，尔不啻不有尔土，予亦致天之罚于尔躬！
现代文：你们还可以保有你们的土地，你们还会安宁下来。你们能够敬慎，上天将会对你们赐给怜爱；你们假如不能敬慎，你们不但不能保有你们的土地，我也将会把老天的惩罚加到你们身上。
English: You can still keep your land, and you will be at peace. If you can be prudent, Heaven will bestow mercy on you; if you cannot be prudent, not only will you not be able to keep your land, but I will also inflict God's punishment on you.

古文：今尔惟时宅尔邑，继尔居；尔厥有干有年于兹洛。尔小子乃兴，从尔迁。 
现代文：现在你们应当好好地住在你们的城里，继续做你们的事业。你们在洛邑会有安乐会有丰年的。从你们迁来洛邑开始，你们的子孙也将兴旺发达。 王说： 顺从我！顺从我！
English: Now therefore dwell in your cities, and go on your journeys: and it shall be well with you, and ye shall prosper in the city, and it shall be well with your children from the day that ye go into it, saith the king.

古文：王曰： 又曰时予，乃或言尔攸居。 
现代文：才能够谈到你们长久安居下来。 
English: Then we can talk about you settling down for a long time.

