古文：吴阖闾伐越，越子勾践御之，陈于携李。
现代文：原文春秋末期吴王阖闾发兵攻打越国，越王勾践亲自率兵抵抗。
English: At the end of the Spring and Autumn Period, King Gou of Wu sent troops to attack Yue. King Gou himself led the troops to resist.

古文：勾践患吴之整也，使死士再禽焉，不动。
现代文：当时越军在槜李严阵以待。勾践对吴军严整的军容感到忧心，就派敢死队一连发动两次攻击，但吴军丝毫没有动摇。
English: At that time, the Vietnamese army was waiting for the Wu army in a tight formation. Concerned about the Wu army's tight formation, he sent a death squad to launch two attacks in succession, but the Wu army did not waver at all.

古文：使罪人三行，属剑于颈，而辞曰： 二君有治，臣奸旗鼓，不敏于君之行前，不敢逃刑，敢归死! 
现代文：于是勾践就想出一个计谋，他把越国的死囚排成三行，然后在每个人的脖子上挂一把剑，一起走向吴军阵地说： 现在吴、越两国兵戎相见，我们触犯军令，但不敢逃避刑罚，现在只有死在阵前。 
English: So, he came up with a stratagem. He lined up the Vietnamese death row prisoners in three rows, then hung a sword around each of their necks, and together they marched to the front of the Wu army and said, "Now that the armies of Wu and Vietnam are facing each other, we have violated military orders, but we dare not evade punishment. Now we can only die before the battle."

古文：遂自刭也。吴师属目，越子因而伐之，大败之。
现代文：说完，拔剑自刎而死，吴军看得目瞪口呆，于是越王勾践乘机发动猛攻，把吴军打得大败。
English: After saying this, he drew his sword and killed himself. The Wu army was dumbfounded. Therefore, Yue Wang Ke Jian took the opportunity to launch a fierce attack and defeated the Wu army.

古文：吐谷浑寇洮、岷二州。遣柴绍救之，为其所围。
现代文：唐朝时吐谷浑入侵洮、泯二州，情势危急，皇帝命柴绍前往救援，没想到反被胡人围困。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Tuyuhun invaded Yunnan and Shandong, and the situation was critical. The emperor ordered Chai Shao to go to the rescue, but was unexpectedly besieged by the Hu people.

古文：虏乘高射之，矢如雨下，绍遣人弹胡琵琶，二女子对舞。虏怪之，相与聚观。
现代文：胡人利用高地的有利形势，发动箭阵，一时箭如雨下。柴绍灵机一动，叫众工弹奏琵琶，又要两名女子随着音乐婆娑起舞，胡人大感惊讶，见两名女子舞姿曼妙，不由聚集围观。
English: The Hu people took advantage of the favorable situation in the highlands and launched an array of arrows. At one point, the arrows rained down. Chai Shao had a stroke of genius and asked the workers to play the lute. He also asked two women to dance to the music. The Hu people were greatly surprised to see the two women dancing so skillfully that they could not help but gather around to watch.

古文：绍察其无备，潜遣精骑，出虏阵后，击之，虏众大溃。
现代文：柴绍察觉胡人已中计而放松警惕，暗中派遣精锐的骑兵，包抄胡人的后方反击，结果胡人大败。
English: Chai Shao noticed that the Hu people had relaxed their vigilance, secretly dispatching elite cavalry to encircle the Hu people's rear counterattack, resulting in the Hu people's defeat.

古文：罪人胜如死士，女子胜如劲卒，是皆创奇设诱，得未曾有。
现代文：敢死的勇士不如列队自杀的罪犯能动摇敌人军心，女子曼妙的舞姿却胜过悍勇善战的士兵。这些都是出奇谋，计诱敌人的招数，在以前可从来没听说过。
English: A death-defying warrior is not as capable of shaking the enemy's morale as a group of suicidal criminals, but a woman's graceful dance is better than a brave and skillful soldier. These are all extraordinary tricks, tricks to lure the enemy, which have never been heard of before.

