古文：大宗伯之职，掌建邦之天神、人鬼、地示之礼，以佐王建保邦国。
现代文：大宗伯的职责，是掌管建立王国对于天神、人鬼、地神的祭祀之礼，以辅佐王建立和安定天下各国。
English: The duties of the grand patriarch were to oversee the establishment of the kingdom and the offering of sacrifices to the gods, spirits, and demigods, and to assist the king in establishing and stabilizing the nations of the world.

古文：以吉礼事邦国之鬼神示，以禋祀祀昊天上帝，以实柴祀日、月、星、辰，以槱祀司中、司命、飌师、雨师。
现代文：用吉礼祭祀天下各国的人鬼、天神和地神。用禋祀来祭祀昊天上帝，用实柴来祭祀日、月、星、辰，用槱燎来祭祀司中、司命、风师、雨师。
English: People from all over the world use auspicious rituals to worship ghosts, gods, and deities. They use yakitori to worship Haotian God, solid wood to worship the sun, moon, stars, and hours, and straw to worship Shizhong, Shimei, Wind Master, and Rain Master.

古文：以血祭祭社稷、五祀、五岳，以貍沈祭山林川泽，以疈辜祭四方百物。
现代文：用血祭来祭祀社稷、五祀、五岳、用埋沉来祭祀山林、川泽，用毁折牲体来祭祀四方和各种小神。
English: The blood sacrifice was used to worship the shrine, the five deities, and the five mountains; the burial was used to worship the mountains, forests, and rivers; and the broken animal was used to worship the four directions and various minor gods.

古文：以肆献祼享先王，以馈食享先王，以祠春享先王，以禴夏享先王，以尝秋享先王，以烝冬享先王。
现代文：用经解割而煮熟的牲肉、牲血和生的牲肉、向地下灌郁鬯来祭祀先王，用黍稷做的饭祭祀先王，以这样的礼节用祠祀在春季祭祀先王，用禴祭在夏季祭祀先王，用尝祭在秋季祭祀先王，用烝祭在冬季祭祀先王。
English: The first king was worshipped with meat, blood and raw meat boiled after being cut, and yakitori poured into the ground. The first king was worshipped with rice made from yakitori. With this kind of etiquette, the first king was worshipped with a shrine in spring, the first king was worshipped with a yakitori in summer, the first king was worshipped with a yakitori in autumn, and the first king was worshipped with a yakitori in winter.

古文：以凶礼哀邦国之忧，以丧礼哀死亡，以荒礼哀凶札，以吊礼哀祸灾，以禬礼哀围败，以恤礼哀寇乱。
现代文：用凶礼哀悼天下各国所遭遇的忧伤，用丧礼哀悼死亡，用荒礼哀悼饥馑和疫病，用吊礼哀悼水遭和火灾，用禬礼哀悼被敌国战败的国家，用恤礼哀悼遭受侵犯或有内乱的邻国。
English: It is used to mourn the sorrow of all countries in the world, to mourn death, to mourn famine and pestilence, to mourn floods and fires, to mourn countries defeated by enemy countries, and to mourn neighboring countries that have been violated or have civil unrest.

古文：以宾礼亲邦国，春见曰朝，夏见曰宗，秋见曰觐，冬见曰遇，时见曰会，殷见曰同，时聘曰问，殷覜曰视。
现代文：用宾礼使天下各国相亲附：春季朝王叫做朝，夏季朝王叫做宗，秋季朝王叫做觐，冬季朝王叫做遇，无定期地会合诸侯叫做会，天下众诸侯国都来朝王叫做同，无定期地派卿慰问王叫做问，每十二年中有三年众诸侯派卿看望王叫做视。
English: Using hospitality to make the countries of the world closer to each other: the king of the spring is called the king, the king of the summer is called the king, the king of the autumn is called the king, the king of the winter is called the meeting, the meeting of the princes is called the meeting, all the princes of the world come to the king is called the same, the king is sent to the king for condolences is called the question, and three years out of every twelve years the princes send their lords to visit the king is called the view.

古文：以军礼同邦国，大师之礼，用众也；大均之礼，恤众也；大田之礼，简众也；大役之礼，任众也；大封之礼，合众也。
现代文：用军礼协同天下各国：大军出征之礼，是利用民众的义勇；大校比以平均赋税之礼，是忧虑民众的赋税不均；举行大田猎之礼，是为了检阅徒众和战车；大兴劳役之礼，是为了任用民众的劳动力；大规模勘定疆界之礼，是为了聚合民众。
English: Using military salutes to cooperate with countries around the world: the salute of a large army to go to war is to take advantage of the people's bravery; the salute of a large school to pay taxes on an average basis is to worry about the uneven taxation of the people; the salute of a large field hunting is to inspect the crowd and the chariot; the salute of a large-scale labor service is to employ the labor force of the people; the salute of a large-scale account of the boundary is to gather the people.

古文：以嘉礼亲万民，以饮食之礼，亲宗族兄弟；以婚冠之礼，亲成男女；以宾射之礼，亲故旧朋友；以飨燕之礼，亲四方之宾客；以脤膰之礼，亲兄弟之国；以贺庆之礼，亲异姓之国。
现代文：用嘉礼使民众相亲和：用饮酒礼和食礼，使宗族兄弟相亲和；用婚礼和冠礼，使男女相亲爱并使行冠礼的男子具有成人的德行；用宾射礼，使故旧和朋友相亲和；用飨礼和燕礼，使四方前来朝聘的宾客相亲和；用赏赐祭祀社稷和宗庙祭肉之礼，使同姓兄弟及异姓之国相亲和；用庆贺之礼，使异姓及同姓之国相亲和。
English: Make the people get along with each other by means of ceremonial gifts: make the clan brothers get along with each other by means of drinking and eating ceremonies; make the men and women love each other by means of wedding ceremonies and coronation ceremonies and make the men who perform the coronation ceremonies have the virtues of adults; make the old and old friends get along with each other by means of guest shooting ceremonies; make the guests who come to the imperial court from four directions get along with each other by means of bowing and curtseying ceremonies; make the brothers with the same surname and the country with the same surname get along with each other by means of the ceremony of awarding the sacrificial rites of the shrine and the

古文：以九仪之命正邦国之位：壹命受职，再命受服，三命受位，四命受器，五命赐则，六命赐官，七命赐国，八命作牧，九命作伯。
现代文：用九等仪命，规正诸侯国的地位。一命可接受国君分派的职务，再命可接受国君所赐的命服，三命可接受王朝的臣位，四命可接受公所赐的祭器，五命可由王赐予一则之地，六命可赐予在采邑中自设官吏的权力，七命可出封为侯伯之国，八命可被任命为州牧，九命可担任方伯。
English: Nine orders were used to regulate the status of the vassal states. One order could accept the post assigned by the sovereign, another order could accept the life jacket given by the sovereign, three orders could accept the throne of the dynasty, four orders could accept the sacrificial offering given by the king, five orders could be given a land by the king, six orders could be given the power to set up officials in the province, seven orders could be given the title of the province of the vassal, eight orders could be appointed as provincial pastors, and nine orders could serve as provincial governors.

古文：以玉作六瑞，以等邦国：王执镇圭，公执桓圭，侯执信圭，伯执躬圭，子执谷璧，男执蒲璧。
现代文：用玉制作六种玉瑞，以区别诸侯的等级。王执镇圭，公执桓圭，侯执信圭，伯执躬圭，子执谷璧，男执蒲璧。
English: Six kinds of jade charms were made with jade to distinguish the ranks of lords: Wang Zhengui, Gong Zhengui, Hou Zhengui, Hou Zhengui, Bo Zhengui, Zi Zhengui, and Meng Zhengui.

古文：以禽作六挚，以等诸臣：孤执皮帛，卿执羔，大夫执雁，士执雉，庶人执鹜，工商执鸡。
现代文：用禽兽作六种见面礼，以区别臣的等级。孤拿兽皮裹饰的束帛，卿拿羔羊，大夫拿鹅，士拿野鸡，庶人拿鸭，工商之人拿鸡。
English: Six kinds of greetings are made with animals and beasts to distinguish the rank of the minister. The lonely take a bundle of animal skins, the lord takes a lamb, the doctor takes a goose, the scholar takes a pheasant, the commoner takes a duck, and the businessman takes a chicken.

古文：以玉作六器，以礼天地四方：以苍璧礼天，以黄琮礼地，以青圭礼东方，以赤璋礼南方，以白琥礼西方，以玄璜礼北方。
现代文：用玉制作六种玉器，祭祀时用以进献天地四方。用苍璧进献天，用黄琮进献地，用青圭进献东方，用赤璋进献南方，用白琥进献西方，用玄璜进献北方。
English: Six kinds of jade vessels are made with jade, and are used to offer heaven and earth at the time of the sacrifice. Use celadon to offer heaven, use yellow agate to offer the earth, use blue agate to offer the east, use red agate to offer the south, use white amber to offer the west, and use black agate to offer the north.

古文：皆有牲币，各放其器之色。
现代文：都有牺牲和束帛，牲、帛之色各依照所用玉器的颜色。
English: There are sacrifices and bundles of yakitori. The color of the sacrifice and yakitori depends on the color of the jade utensils used.

古文：以天产作阴德，以中礼防之；以地产作阳德，以和乐防之。
现代文：用动物性食物促使人体的阴气动起来，用教人适中的礼来防止动得过分；用谷类食物促使人体的阳气静下来，用教人和谐的乐来防止静得过分。
English: Use animal-based foods to stimulate the yin of the human body and teach people proper etiquette to prevent excessive movement; use cereal foods to calm down the yang of the human body and teach people harmonious music to prevent excessive movement.

古文：以礼乐合天地之化，百物之产，以事鬼神，以谐万民，以致百物。
现代文：用礼乐配合天地间化生的无生物，以及各种动植物，来祭祀鬼神，和谐万民。
English: Ritual music is used to worship ghosts and gods in harmony with the living and non-living things in heaven and earth, as well as various animals and plants, for the sake of harmony among all people.

古文：凡祀大神、享大鬼、祭大示，帅执事而卜日，宿□涤濯，莅玉鬯，省牲镬，奉玉齍，诏大号，治其大礼，诏相王之大礼。
现代文：凡祭祀大天神，大人鬼，大地神，事先率领有关官吏占卜祭祀的日期，祭前三日重申对百官的告诫，祭祀的前夕视察祭器是否洗涤干净，临视行裸礼用的圭瓒，察看煮牲体用的镬，奉上盛黍稷用的玉敦，告诉大祝祭祀对象的大名号以便作祝祷辞，预习王所当行的祭祀礼仪，到祭礼时教王并协助王行礼。
English: Those who worship the Great God of Heaven, the Great Spirit, and the Great God of Earth, should lead the relevant officials to predict the date of the sacrifice in advance, reiterate the warning to the centurion three days before the sacrifice, inspect the altar on the eve of the sacrifice to see if it is clean, inspect the gourd for the naked ritual, inspect the yakitori for cooking animals, and the yakitori for presenting the yakitori, tell the great name of the object of the great sacrifice in order to make a congratulatory prayer, prepare the sacrificial ritual that the king should perform, and teach the king and assist the king in performing the ritual.

古文：若王不与祭祀，则摄位。
现代文：如果王因故不参加祭祀，就代王行祭礼。
English: If the king does not participate in the ritual for some reason, he will perform the ritual on behalf of the king.

古文：凡大祭祀，王后不与，则摄而荐豆笾彻。
现代文：凡大祭祀，王后因故不参加，就代王后进献和彻除豆、笾。
English: If the queen is unable to attend a major religious ceremony for any reason, she will make an offering on behalf of the queen and remove the beans and stalks.

古文：大宾客，则摄而载果。
现代文：招待大宾客，就代王向宾客行裸礼。
English: When a great guest is invited, the king performs a nude salute on behalf of the guests.

古文：朝觐、会同，则为上相。
现代文：诸侯朝觐王或王外出会同，就担任上相。
English: When princes, court nobles, or foreign kings met, they would act as shosho.

古文：大丧亦如之。
现代文：有王、王后或太子的丧事，也担任上相。
English: He also served as chief photographer at the funerals of kings, queens, and princes.

古文：王哭诸侯亦如之。
现代文：王哭吊死去的诸侯时也担任上相。
English: Wang Weizhang also served as the chief photographer when the princes died.

古文：王命诸侯，则傧。
现代文：王策命诸侯，就导引被策命者进前受命。
English: When the king gave an order to governors, they were ordered to lead those who had received the order forward.

古文：国有大故，则旅上帝及四望。
现代文：国家有凶灾，就旅祭上天和望祀四方名山大川。
English: When there is a disaster in the country, it is necessary to travel to the festival and worship the famous mountains and rivers in the four directions.

古文：五大封，则先告后土，乃颁祀于邦国、都家、乡邑。
现代文：王大封诸侯，就先告祭后土。向各诸侯国、各采邑、各乡遂和公邑颁布所当遵循的祀典。
English: When the king was enthroned as vassal, he first announced the festival and then the land. He promulgated the rituals to be followed to each vassal state, each mining town, each township and public town.

