古文：赵光逢，字延吉。
现代文：赵光逢，字延吉。
English: Zhao Guangfeng, the character Yanji.

古文：曾祖植，岭南节度使。
现代文：曾祖父赵植，是岭南节度使。
English: His great-grandfather, Zhao Zhi, was an envoy to the Lingnan Festival.

古文：季述废立之后，旅游江表以避患，岭南刘隐深礼之，奏为副使，因家岭外。光逢幼嗜坟典，动守规检，议者目之为 玉界尺 。
现代文：祖父赵存约是兴元府推官。父亲赵隐任右仆射。赵光逢与弟弟赵光裔，都以文学德行知名。赵光逢年幼时爱读经典书籍，一举一动都很守规矩，当时的人把他看作像 玉界尺 那样正直温和的人。
English: His grandfather, Zhao Cunyo, was a magistrate of the Xingyuan government, and his father, Zhao Yingren, was a right-hand man. Zhao Guangfeng and his younger brother, Zhao Guangzhu, were both famous for their literary virtues. Zhao Guangfeng loved to read classic books when he was young, and his every move was very orderly. People at the time regarded him as an honest and gentle person like the ruler of the jade realm.

古文：僖宗朝，登进士第。
现代文：唐僖宗时，进士及第。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, he was promoted to the first and second rank.

古文：逾月，辟度支巡官，历官台省，内外两制，俱有能名，转尚书左丞、翰林承旨。
现代文：过了一个月，任为度支巡官，历任台省官职，在朝廷内外都有能干的名声，转任尚书左丞、翰林承旨。
English: A month later, he was appointed as a provincial inspector and successively served as a provincial official, with a reputation for ability both inside and outside the imperial court. He was transferred to the posts of Shang Shuzhanzheng and Hanlin Chengzhi.

古文：昭宗幸石门，光逢不从，昭宗遣内养戴知权诏赴行在，称疾解官。
现代文：昭宗巡幸石门，赵光逢不随从，昭宗派戴知权带诏书命他前往石门，他称病辞职。
English: Zhao Guangfeng did not accompany Zhao Zongzong on his visit to Shimen. Zhao Zongzong sent Dai Zhiquan with an edict ordering him to go to Shimen. He claimed to be ill and resigned.

古文：驾在华州，拜御史中丞。
现代文：皇帝到华州，拜为御史中丞。
English: The emperor went to Huazhou to pay homage to the Grand Historian Zhongzheng.

古文：时有道士许岩士、瞽者马道殷出入禁庭，骤至列卿宫相，因此以左道求进者众，光逢持宪纪治之，皆伏法，自是其徒颇息。
现代文：这时有道士许岩士、盲人马道殷进出宫廷，很快当上卿相大官，因此用旁门左道求进的人很多，赵光逢依靠宪纪治理此事，都受法纪制服，从此这类人渐渐少了。
English: At this time, there were Taoist Xu Yanshi and blind Ma Daoyin entering and leaving the court, and they soon became high-ranking officials. As a result, there were many people who used side doors to seek advancement. Zhao Guangfeng relied on constitutional discipline to manage this matter, and they were all subject to legal discipline. Since then, there have been fewer and fewer such people.

古文：改礼部侍郎、知贡举。
现代文：后改任礼部侍郎、主管贡举。
English: Later, he was reassigned to the position of the attendant of the ceremonial department and the supervisor of the tribute.

古文：光化中，王道浸衰，南北司为党，光逢素惟慎静，虑祸及己，因挂冠伊洛，屏绝交游，凡五六年。
现代文：光化年中，王道衰退，南北司结党，赵光逢一贯谨慎宁静，担心灾祸殃及自己，因而辞官到伊洛隐居，断绝交往，有五六年之久。
English: In the middle of the Gwanghwa era, when the royal road was in decline and the north and south secretaries formed a party, Zhao Guangfeng was always cautious and calm, fearing that the disaster would befall him. As a result, he went into seclusion in Ilo and cut off contacts for 56 years.

古文：门人柳璨登庸，除吏部侍郎、太常卿。
现代文：他的门人柳璨受重用，任吏部侍郎、太常卿。
English: His protégé, Yanagisawa, was given important posts, such as that of a chamberlain in the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the position of Grand Councilor.

古文：同光初，弟光允为平章事，时谒问于私第，尝语及政事，他日，光逢署其户曰 请不言中书事 ，其清净寡欲端默如此。
现代文：到梁朝时赵光逢任中书侍郎、平章事，转任左仆射兼租庸使，上奏章请求退职，以太子太保身份退休。梁末帝爱他的才能，征召为司空、平章事。没过多久因病辞职，授司徒退休。同光初年，他的弟弟赵光胤为平章事，时常到家中拜访，曾经谈到政事，有一天，赵光逢在门上题字道： 请不要谈论中书省的事。 他就是这样清净寡欲，端正沉默。
English: When he came to the Liang Dynasty, Zhao Guangfeng served as the Secretary of the Central Government and the Secretary of the Provincial Government of Pingzhang. He was transferred to the position of the Left Servant of the Shire and the Secretary of the Yeomanry. He requested to retire from the position of the Secretary of the Central Government and retired as the Taipo of the Ether. Emperor Liangmu loved his talent and conscripted him as the Secretary of the Provincial Government of Siku and the Secretary of the Provincial Government of Pingzhang. He soon resigned due to illness and retired from the position of the Secretary of the Provincial Government of Pingzhang. In the first year of Tongguang,

古文：尝有女冠寄黄金一镒于其室家，时属乱离，女冠委化于他土。
现代文：曾经有女道士寄放二十两黄金在他家里，碰上乱世，女道士死在别处。
English: There was once a female Taoist who deposited twenty-two ounces of gold in his house. When the world was in chaos, the female Taoist died elsewhere.

古文：诏赠尚书左仆射，谥曰恭靖。
现代文：二十年后，金子不好还给谁，便交给河南尹张全义，请转送给道观，金子上的旧封条还在。
English: Twenty years later, if the gold is not returned to the rightful owner, it will be handed over to Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi. Please forward it to Dao Guan. The old seal on the gold is still there.

古文：子颀、颂、寿贞，惟颂仕皇朝，官至左谏议大夫，终于鄜州行军司马。
现代文：他在两个朝代任官，四次退休，遵行伦常，不暗中做坏事，官员绅士都敬仰地把他当作名教主。天成初年，迁太保退休，封齐国公，死在洛阳。
English: He served as an official on behalf of two dynasties, retired four times, adhered to ethics, did not secretly do bad things, and officials and gentlemen all revered him as a great religious leader. In the first year of Tiancheng, he retired from the position of Jiedaobao, and died in Luoyang.

古文：李琪，字台秀。
现代文：下诏赠为太傅。李琪，字台秀。
English: The following imperial edict bestows the title of Taifu. Li Qi, Zettaishu.

古文：五代祖憕，天宝末，礼部尚书、东部留守。
现代文：五代祖李忄登，天宝末年任礼部尚书、东都留守。
English: The fifth-generation ancestor, Li Xi, ascended to the throne, while Shang Shu, who was appointed to the ceremonial department at the end of the Tianbao era, and Dong all stayed behind.

古文：安禄山陷东都，遇害，累赠太尉，谥曰忠懿。
现代文：安禄山攻陷东都时遇害，赠太尉，谥号称忠懿。
English: He was killed at the time of the fall of the eastern capital at Mt. Anlu, and was given the title of captain. His posthumous name was Zhongyuan.

古文：憕孙寀，元和朝，位至给事中。
现代文：李忄登的孙子李肕，在元和朝官至给事中。
English: Li Yu, the grandson of Li Yu-deng, was in the process of being appointed to the Yuan Dynasty and the Imperial Court.

古文：寀子敬方，文宗朝，谏议大夫。敬方子縠，广明中，为晋公王铎都统判官，以收复功为谏议大夫。
现代文：李肕的儿子李敬方在文宗朝任谏议大夫，李敬方的儿子李鄃在广明年间任晋公王铎的都统判官，以收复之功任谏议大夫。
English: Li Yan's son, Li Jingfang, was appointed to the position of the Grand Councilor during the reign of Emperor Wenzong. Li Jingfang's son, Li Yan, was appointed to the position of the Grand Councilor during the reign of Emperor Jingu.

古文：琪即縠之子也，年十三，词赋诗颂，大为王铎所知，然亦疑其假手。
现代文：李琪是李鄃的儿子，十三岁时，所做的词赋诗颂，大为王铎赞赏，但也疑心是有人替他写的。
English: Li Qi is the son of Li Yao. At the age of thirteen, Wang Yao greatly appreciated Li Qi's wu fu poem ode, but he also suspected that someone had written it for him.

古文：一日，铎召縠宴于公署，密遣人以《汉祖得三杰赋》题就其第试之，琪援笔立成。
现代文：一天，王铎召李鄃到公署喝酒，暗地派人以《汉祖得三杰赋》的题目到李家测试他，李琪执笔立刻写成。
English: One day, Wang Xi summoned Li Qian to the public security bureau for a drink. He secretly sent someone to Li's home to test him on the topic of "Han Zu Der San Jie Fu," and Li Qi immediately wrote it down.

古文：然糠照薪，俾夜作画，览书数千卷，间为诗赋。
现代文：赋的结尾说： 得士则昌盛，不贤则无人共事。龙头之友很尊贵，鼎足之臣须倚重，项氏的败亡是很自然的，连一个范增都不能使用。 
English: At the end of the Fu, it says: "The successful man prospers, the unskilled man has no one to work with. The friends of the leader are very honorable, the high-ranking vassal must be respected, the defeat of the Xiang clan is very natural, and even a Fan Zeng cannot be used."

古文：唐僖宗再幸梁、洋，窃赋云： 哀痛不下诏，登封谁上书。 
现代文：王铎看后很惊异，说： 这孩子是会成大器的，将来一定在文坛称雄。 
English: Wang Yao was very surprised after watching it and said, "This child will grow up to be a great writer, and he will surely become a hero in the literary world in the future."

古文：昭宗时，李谿父子以文学知名。
现代文：昭宗时，李溪父子因文学而知名。
English: At the time of Zhaozong, Li Xi and his son were famous for literature.

古文：琪年十八，袖赋一轴谒谿。
现代文：李琪十八岁时，带着一篇赋去拜访李溪。
English: When Li Qi was eighteen years old, she went to visit Li Xi Rong with an article.

古文：谿览赋惊异，倒屣迎门，出琪《调哑钟》、《捧日》等赋，谓琪曰： 余尝患近年文士辞赋，皆数句之后，未见赋题，吾子入句见题，偶属典丽，吁！可畏也。 
现代文：李溪读完后很惊奇，忙不迭地倒穿着鞋子出门迎接，拿出《调哑钟》、《捧日》等赋，对李琪说： 我曾经忧虑近来文人的辞赋，都是在几句之后还不见主题。您入句就见主题，对偶典雅华丽，啊，真可畏呀！ 
English: Li Xi was very surprised after reading it. He hurriedly put on his shoes and went out to meet her. He took out "The Winding of the Dumbbell" and "Holding the Sun" and said to Li Qi, "I was worried about the author's last words, but after a few sentences, I couldn't see the theme. When you enter a sentence, you can see the theme. The couplet is elegant and gorgeous, ah, it's really awesome!

古文：琪由是益知名，举进士第。
现代文：李琪因此更加知名，考上了进士。
English: As a result, Li Qi became more well-known and was awarded the title of "Young Scholar."

古文：天复初，应博学弘词，居第四等，授武功县尉，辟转运巡官，迁左拾遣、殿中侍御史。
现代文：天复初年，应考博学宏词科，在第四等，授任武功县尉，又任转任巡官，升任左拾遗、殿中侍御史。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, he passed the examination of erudition and macro-criticism, and in the fourth grade, he was awarded the title of county lieutenant of martial arts, and he was also transferred to the inspector, and promoted to the left to collect relics, and the palace attendant to history.

古文：累迁户部侍郎、翰林承旨。
现代文：自从李琪当了谏官，凡是时政有不当之处，必定会写奏章评论，文章秀丽，看的人都会忘却疲倦。
English: Since Li Qi became a eunuch, whenever there is anything improper about the current government, he will certainly write a commentary on the music, the article is beautiful, and people who read it will forget their tiredness.

古文：梁祖西抗邠、岐，北攻泽、潞，出师燕、赵，经略四方，暂无宁岁，而琪以学士居帐中，专掌文翰，下笔称旨，宠遇逾伦。
现代文：李琪的哥哥李王廷，也是进士，才华横溢，兄弟齐名，特别被梁太祖赏识，任李王廷为崇政学士。李琪自左补阙入宫为翰林学士，历任户部侍郎、翰林承旨。梁太祖往西抗击州、岐下，往北攻打泽州、潞州，又出兵到燕、赵等地，四面出击，没有安宁的时间，然而李琪以学士身份随军住在军营中，专门掌管文书，下笔起草旨意，受到的优待不比一般。
English: Li Qi's elder brother, Li Wangting, was also a scholar, brilliant, and his brothers were equally famous. Li Wangting was especially appreciated by Liang Taizu, who appointed him as a scholar of politics. Li Qi entered the palace as a scholar of Hanlin, and successively served as a steward of the household department and a scholar of Hanlin. Liang Taizu went west to fight against Zhou and Qizhi, north to fight against Zhezhou and Zhangzhou, and also sent troops to Yan and Zhao. There was no time for peace. However, Li Qi, as a scholar, lived with the army in the military camp, specializing in the management of documents and the drafting

古文：是时，琪之名播于海内。
现代文：这时，李琪的名声传播于海内。
English: At this time, Li Qi's fame spread across the sea.

古文：琪重然诺，怜才奖善，家门雍睦。
现代文：李琪看重承诺，怜惜人才奖赏好人，家中门下都很和谐。
English: Li Qi values commitment, pities talent and rewards good people, and the family is very harmonious.

古文：贞明、龙德中，历兵、礼、吏侍郎，受命与冯锡嘉、张充、郗殷象同撰《梁太祖实录》三十卷，迁御史中丞，累擢尚书左丞、中书门下平章事。
现代文：贞明、龙德年间，历任兵部、礼部、吏部侍郎，受命与冯锡嘉、张充、郄殷象共同撰写《梁太祖实录》三十卷，调任御史中丞，升任尚书左丞、中书门下平章事。
English: During the reigns of Zhenming and Longde, he was assigned to write 30 volumes of the "Record of Liang Taizu" with Feng Xijia, Zhang Chong, and Zou Yinxiang, and was promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of History, Vice-Minister of Literature, and Vice-Minister of Literature.

古文：时琪与萧顷同为宰相，顷性畏慎深密，琪倜傥负气，不拘小节，中书奏覆，多行其志，而顷专掎摭其咎。
现代文：这时李琪和萧顷同为宰相，萧顷性格谨慎细致，李琪倜傥自负，不拘小节，中书的上奏答复，多按他的意志行事，萧顷便专门寻找他的毛病。
English: At this time, Li Qiye and Xiao He were both prime ministers. Xiao He had a cautious and meticulous personality. Li Qiye was conceited and unconcerned with details. He often acted according to his will. Xiao He specifically looked for his faults.

古文：会琪除吏是试摄名衔，改 摄 为 守 ，为顷所奏，梁帝大怒，将投诸荒裔，而为赵岩辈所援，罢相，为太子少保。
现代文：遇上李琪授官吏职位，本应是试摄的官职名称，李琪改 摄 为 守 ，被萧顷上奏告状，梁帝大怒，准备把他流放到荒远之地，得到赵岩等人的救援，免去宰相职务，任太子少保。
English: When Li Qizhu was offered a position as an official, which was supposed to be the official title of the test shot, Li Qizhu changed it to guard, was sued by Xiao He, and Emperor Liang was furious, ready to exile him to a distant land, to be rescued by Zhao Yan and others, to be relieved of the post of prime minister, and to be appointed crown prince.

古文：庄宗入汴，素闻琪名，因欲大任。
现代文：唐庄宗进入汴京，早就听说李琪的名声，多次想委以重任。
English: When Tang Zhuozong entered Beijing, he had already heard of Li Qi's reputation and wanted to entrust her with important tasks.

古文：同光初，历太常卿、吏部尚书。
现代文：同光初年，历任太常卿、吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of Tongguang, the successors of Taizongqing and Liibu Shangshu passed away.

古文：三年秋，天下大水，国计不充，庄宗诏百僚许上封事，陈经国之要。
现代文：三年秋，发大水，国库空虚，庄宗下诏要官员们上书陈述治国的策略。
English: In the autumn of the third year, the floodwaters rose, the treasury was empty, and Zhuangzong issued an edict requiring officials to submit a report on the strategy for governing the country.

古文：琪因上疏曰：
现代文：李琪因而上书说：
English: As a result, Li Qi submitted a letter saying:

古文：臣闻王者富有兆民，深居九重，所重患者，百姓凋耗而不知，四海困穷而莫救，下情不得上达，群臣不敢指言。
现代文： 我听说王者统治万民，深居九重宫殿之中，所忧虑的是百姓穷苦却不知道，天下困难却救不了，下情不能上达，群臣不敢说话。
English: I have heard that the king rules over all the people and lives in a nine-storied palace. What worries him is that the people are poor but do not know it, that the world is in trouble but cannot be saved, that the situation cannot be improved, and that his ministers dare not speak out.

古文：今陛下以水潦之灾，军食乏阙，焦劳罪己，迫切疚怀，避正殿以责躬，访多士而求理，则何思而不获，何议而不臧？止在改而行之，足以择其善者。
现代文：现在陛下因为水涝灾害，军粮缺乏，焦虑而责备自己，十分内疚，避开正殿来承担责任，访求有识之士的指点，这样还有什么要求得不到，有什么建议不是好的呢，只要改正施行，足以选择其中的优良的。
English: Now, His Majesty blames himself for the flood disaster, the shortage of food for the troops, and his anxiety. He feels very guilty, avoids the main hall to take responsibility, and seeks the guidance of people with insight. In this way, what else can he ask for, and what advice is not good? As long as the correction is implemented, it is enough to choose the best one.

古文：臣闻古人有言曰：谷者，人之司命也；地者，谷之所生也；人者，君之所理也。
现代文： 我听古人说：谷子是人赖以生存的东西；土地是谷子所生长的地方；人是君王所治理的。
English: I heard the ancients say: Corn is what people live on; land is where corn grows; people are ruled by kings.

古文：有其谷则国力备，定其地则人食足，察其人则徭役均，知此三者，为国之急务也。
现代文：有了谷子，国力就增强，稳定了土地，人民就能吃饭，查清了人口就能使徭役平均，知道这三样，是治国的急务。
English: With millet, the national strength will be enhanced, the land will be stabilized, and the people will be able to eat. If the population is ascertained, it will be possible to make the labor force average. Knowing these three things is the urgent task of governing the country.

古文：轩黄已前，不可详记。
现代文：轩辕黄帝以前的事不能详细记述。
English: It is not possible to give a detailed account of the events before Emperor Xuanzong came to power.

古文：自尧湮洪水，禹作司空，于时辨九等之田，收什一之税，其时户一千三百余万，定垦地约九百二十万顷，最为太平之盛。
现代文：自从尧堵洪水，禹做司空，那时辨别九等土地，收十分之一的税，当时一千三百多万民户，垦地约九百二十万顷，是最太平的盛世。
English: Since the flood control, Yu has been the secretary of the sky. At that time, the nine-class land was distinguished and one-tenth of the tax was collected. At that time, more than 13 million households and about 9.2 million hectares of floodplain land. It was the most peaceful prosperous era.

古文：及商革夏命，重立田制，每私田十亩，种公田一亩，水旱同之，亦什一之义也。
现代文：到商汤革命时，重新制定田制，每私田十亩，种公田一亩，水田旱地相同，也是什一税的意思。
English: At the time of the Shang-Tang Revolution, the farm system was re-established, with ten mu of private land, one mu of public farmland, and the same for paddy fields and dry land, which also meant a tithe.

古文：洎乎周室，立井田之法，大约百里之国，提封万井，出车百乘，戎马四百匹。
现代文：到了周朝，立井田法，大约方圆百里的国家，四封之内一万井田，出车百乘，战马四百匹。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, the method of setting up rice paddies was introduced. In a country with an approximate radius of 100 miles, there were 10,000 rice paddies within four counties, with 100 chariots and 400 horses.

古文：畿内兵车万乘，马四万匹，以田法论之，亦什一之制也。
现代文：境内兵车万乘，马四万匹，按田法衡量，也是什一税。
English: There are ten thousand chariots and forty thousand horses in the territory, which is also a tithe according to the field method.

古文：故当成、康之世，比尧、舜之朝，户口更增二十余万，非他术也，盖三代以前，皆量入以为出，计农以立军，虽逢水旱之灾，而有凶荒之备。
现代文：所以在成、康时期，和尧、舜时代比，户口增加二十多万，不是有别的法术，是因为三代以前，都是量入为出，根据农业收入来设立军队，虽然碰上水灾旱灾，也有度过荒年的储备。
English: Therefore, in the Cheng and Kang dynasties, the household registration increased by more than two hundred thousand compared to the Zhou and Qian dynasties, not because of any other magic, but because three generations ago, they all lived within their means, set up an army according to agricultural income, and although they encountered floods and droughts, they also had reserves to get through the lean years.

古文：降及秦、汉，重税工商，急关市之征，倍舟车之算，人户既以减耗，古制犹以兼行，按此时户口，尚有千二百余万，垦田亦八百万顷。
现代文： 到秦、汉时，对工商业课重税，对关口市场征收很急迫，加倍建造船车，人口已经减少，古代制度仍然在施行，这时的户口还有一千二百多万，耕地也有八百万顷。
English: By the time of the Qin and Han dynasties, heavy taxes were imposed on industry and commerce, the collection of customs markets was very urgent, the construction of ships doubled, the population had decreased, and the ancient system was still in effect. At that time, there were still more than 12 million hukou and 8 million hectares of cultivated land.

古文：至乎三国并兴，两晋之后，则农夫少于军众，战马多于耕牛，供军须夺于农粮，秣马必侵于牛草，于是天下户口，只有二百四十余万。
现代文：至于三国并起，两晋之后，农民比军人还少，战马比耕牛还多，供应军人必然要从农粮中夺来，喂养战马必然要占掉牛吃的草，于是天下户口只有二百四十多万。
English: As for the simultaneous rise of the three countries, after the two Jin dynasties, there were fewer farmers than soldiers, more war horses than cattle, and the supply of soldiers must be taken from agricultural grain, and the feeding of war horses must account for the grass eaten by cattle. As a result, there were only more than 2.4 million household registrations in the world.

古文：洎隋文之代，两汉比隆，及炀帝之年，又三分之一。
现代文：到隋文帝时，与两汉时差不多兴隆，隋炀帝时，又失去了三分之一的民户。
English: By the time of the Sui and Wen dynasties, it was almost as prosperous as that of the two Han dynasties. By the time of the Sui and Qian dynasties, it had lost a third of its households.

古文：我唐太宗文皇帝，以四夷初定，百姓未丰，延访群臣，各陈所见，惟魏徵独劝文皇力行王道，由是轻徭薄赋，不夺农时，进贤良，悦忠直，天下粟价，斗直两钱。
现代文： 我唐太宗文皇帝，看到四方刚刚平定，百姓没有丰足，便访问群臣，要他们各自陈述见解，只有魏征劝文皇力行王道，于是减轻税收，不耽误农时，引进贤良人才，使忠诚正直的人喜悦，天下的粮价，每斗价值两钱。
English: I, Emperor of Tang Taizongwen, seeing that the four directions had just been pacified and the people were not rich, visited the ministers and asked them to state their opinions. Only Wei Zheng advised Emperor Wen to practice the royal way, thus reducing taxes, not delaying the agricultural time, introducing good talents, and making loyal and honest people happy. The price of grain in the world is worth two yuan per barrel.

古文：自贞观至于开元，将及一千九百万户，五千三百万口，垦田一千四百万顷，比之尧、舜，又极增加，是知救人瘼者，以重敛为病源；料兵食者，以惠农为军政。
现代文：从贞观到开元，将近有一千九百万户，五千三百万人，开垦土地一千四百万顷，比尧、舜时代又有增加。所以说救人疾苦，病根是收敛过重；办理军粮，要使农民得到实惠。
English: From Zhenguan to the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were nearly 19 million households, 53 million people, and 14 million hectares of land reclaimed, which was an increase from the days of Mao Zedong and Chiang Kai-shek. Therefore, to save people's suffering, the root of the disease is excessive austerity; to manage military grain, farmers should get real benefits.

古文：仲尼云： 百姓足，君孰与不足。 
现代文：孔子说： 百姓富足了，君王哪有不富足的呢？ 
English: Confucius said: When the people are rich, what king is not rich?

古文：臣之此言，是魏徵所以劝文皇也，伏惟深留宸鉴。
现代文：我这些话，是魏征用来劝谏文皇的话，请陛下留心。
English: These words of mine were used by Wei to persuade Emperor Xianwen, please pay attention to your majesty.

古文：如以六军方阙，不可轻徭，两税之余，犹须重敛，则但不以折纳为事，一切以本色输官，又不以纽配为名，止以正耗加纳，犹应感悦，未至流亡。
现代文：如果因为六军缺粮，不能减轻徭役，两税之外，还必须加重聚敛，也不要专门折纳，一切用本色缴纳，也不要以纽配为名，只应正耗加税，这样还可以使百姓高兴，不至于流亡在外。
English: If, because of the shortage of grain in the Six Armies, it is not possible to reduce the corvee service, in addition to the two taxes, it is necessary to increase the concentration, and do not specially discount, pay everything with the true color, and do not use the name of the new match, only the positive consumption tax should be raised, so that it can also make the people happy, and will not be exiled.

古文：况今东作是时，羸牛将驾，数州之地，千里运粮，有此差徭，必妨春种，今秋若无粮草，保以赡军。
现代文：况且现在要东征，瘦弱的牛也要用上，数州之地，运粮走动几千里，有了这种差使，必然妨碍春天播种，今天秋天如没有粮草，又拿什么供应军队？
English: Moreover, it is now necessary to march to the East, and the emaciated cattle must also be used, several states of land, transporting grain thousands of miles. With such a task, it will inevitably hinder the spring sowing. If there is no grain and grass this autumn, what will be used to supply the army?

古文：臣伏思汉文帝时，欲人务农，乃募人入粟，得拜爵及赎罪，景帝亦如之。
现代文： 我想汉文帝时，希望有人务农，便招募能贡纳粮食的人，可以授给爵位和赎免罪行，景帝也照这样办。
English: I think that Emperor Hanwen, when he wanted someone to work in agriculture, recruited people who could pay for grain, and could be awarded a title of nobility and absolved of crimes. Emperor Jing also did the same.

古文：后汉安帝时，水旱不足，三公奏请，富人入粟，得关内侯及公卿以下散官。
现代文：后汉安帝时，因水灾旱灾减产，三公上奏说，富人如能提供粮食，可以当关内侯以及公卿以下散官。
English: After the Han Dynasty, when the production of rice was reduced due to floods and droughts, the three princes said that if the rich could provide grain, they could serve as Guan Nei Hou and court nobles and other officials.

古文：本朝乾元中，亦曾如此。
现代文：本朝乾元年间，也曾经这样办过。
English: This morning, during the first year of the Qian dynasty, it was also done in this way.

古文：今陛下纵不欲入粟授官，愿明降制旨下诸道，合差百姓转仓之处，有能出力运官物到京师，五百石以上，白身授一初任州县官，有官者依资迁授，欠选者便与放选。
现代文：现在陛下即使不想采取献粮授官的办法，也希望能公开下旨给各地及百姓转运粮食的地方，有能力运官物到首都，超过五百石，平民授给州县官，原有官者依资历递授，候选的官便授以实职。
English: Now, even if His Majesty does not want to adopt the method of donating grain to award officials, he also hopes to publicly issue orders to various regions and people to transfer grain to places that have the ability to transport official goods to the capital, more than five hundred stones, civilians awarded to state and county officials, former officials awarded according to qualifications, and candidate officials awarded real positions.

古文：千石以上至万石，不拘文武，明示赏酬。
现代文：千石以上到万石的，不论文官武官，明确表示奖赏。
English: If it is more than 1,000 koku but less than 10,000 koku, it will not be reported to the military attaché, and the reward will be clearly indicated.

古文：免令方春农人流散，斯亦救民转仓赡军之一术也。
现代文：以免让春天时农民散失流亡，这也是救民转运供养军队的一个办法。 
English: This is also a way to save the people from being transported to feed the army, so as not to let the farmers go into exile in the spring.

古文：庄宗深重之，寻命为国计使，垂为辅相，俄遇萧墙之难而止。
现代文：庄宗很重视这个建议，立即任命李琪为国计使，又将任他为宰相，不久因内乱而作罢。
English: Zhuangzong attached great importance to this suggestion and immediately appointed Li Qi as the state planner. He would also appoint him as the prime minister, but this was soon cancelled due to civil unrest.

古文：及明宗即位，豆卢革、韦说得罪，任圜陈奏，请命琪为相，为孔循、郑珏排沮，乃相崔协。
现代文：到明宗即位，豆卢革、韦说获罪，任圜上奏，请任命李琪为宰相，被孔循、郑珏阻止，便任崔协为宰相。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, Zhu Ruge and Wei Xian were found guilty, and they petitioned for the appointment of Li Qi as prime minister. However, they were blocked by Kong Xuan and Zheng Qi, and Cui Xie was appointed as prime minister.

古文：琪时为御史大夫，安重诲于台门前专杀殿直马延。虽曾弹奏，而依违词旨，不敢正言其罪，以是托疾，三上章请老；朝旨不允，除授尚书左仆射。
现代文：李琪这时是御史大夫，安重诲在御史台门前擅自杀殿直马延，虽然曾经弹劾过他，但言词模棱两可，不敢直言安重诲的罪行，因为这件事李琪推托有病，三次上书请求退休，朝廷不允许，任命为尚书左仆射。
English: At that time, Li Qi was the imperial historian, and An Chongyun committed suicide in front of the imperial historian's gate. Although he had been impeached, his words were ambiguous, and he did not dare to speak openly about An Chongyun's crime. Because of this, Li Qi put it down to his illness. He wrote three times to request retirement, but the court did not allow it. He was appointed as Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：自是之后，尤为宰执所忌，凡有奏陈，靡不望风横沮。
现代文：从这以后，更受宰相猜忌，凡是上奏言事，无不受到排挤拦阻。
English: Since then, the prime minister has been even more suspicious, and whenever he makes a speech, he is blocked by the crowd.

古文：天成末，明宗自汴州还洛，琪为东都留司官班首，奏请至偃师奉迎。时琪奏中有 败契丹之凶党，破真定之逆贼 之言，诏曰： 契丹即为凶党，真定不是逆贼，李琪罚一月俸。 
现代文：天成末年，明宗从汴州返回洛阳，李琪为东都留司官班首，请求到偃师迎接，他的上奏中有 打败契丹的凶党，攻破真定这个逆城 的句子，诏书说：契丹是凶党，真定不是逆城，李琪罚款一个月的俸禄。
English: At the end of the Tiancheng era, Mingzong returned to Luoyang from Bozhou. Li Qi, as the head of the Eastern Capital Retention Officer, requested to meet with Zou Shi. In his report, there was a sentence of defeating the evil party of Khitan and breaking through the adverse city of Zhending. The edict said: Khitan is an evil party, Zhending is not an adverse city, Li Qi was fined one month's salary.

古文：又尝秦敕撰《霍彦威神道碑》文。
现代文：又曾奉皇帝命令撰写《霍彦威神道碑》一文。
English: He was also ordered by the emperor to write an article entitled "The Rise of the Hohianwei Shinto Monument."

古文：琪，梁之故相也，叙彦威仕梁历任，不言其伪。中书奏曰： 不分真伪，是混功名，望令改撰。 
现代文：李琪是梁朝过去的宰相，叙述霍彦威在梁时历任官职，不说是任伪官，中书上奏说： 不分真伪，混淆功名，请命令他改写。 
English: Li Qi was the prime minister of the Liang Dynasty in the past, describing that Huo Yanwei held various official positions in the Liang Dynasty, not to say that he was a pseudo-official. In the book, he said: It does not matter whether it is true or false, it confuses the name of the function, please order him to rewrite.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇上同意中书的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：多此类也。
现代文：还有不少这类事。
English: There's a lot of that going on.

古文：琪虽博学多才，拙于遵养时晦，知时不可为，然犹多岐取进，动而见排，由己不能镇靖也。
现代文：李琪虽然博学多才，但不懂韬晦养性，明知事情不可办好，还要走各种路子求取功名，动不动受排挤，是他自己不能镇静的缘故。
English: Although Li Qi is well-read and multi-talented, he doesn't know how to nurture himself. He knows that things can't be done well, and he has to take all kinds of paths to seek fame. He is constantly being pushed out because he can't calm down.

古文：以太子太傅致仕。
现代文：以太子太傅退休。
English: He retired as Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：长兴中，卒于福善里第，时年六十。
现代文：长兴年中，死于福善里家中，六十岁。
English: He died at his home in Fu Shanli at the age of 60.

古文：子贞，官至邑宰。
现代文：儿子李贞，当官当到邑宰一类。
English: His son, Li Zhen, was a high-ranking official.

古文：琪以在内署时所为制诏，编为十卷，目曰《金门集》，大行于世。
现代文：李琪把他在内署时所写的制诏编成十卷，取名叫《金门集》，流行于世间。
English: Li Qi compiled the imperial edict he wrote when he was in office into ten volumes, called the "Golden Gate Collection," which became popular in the world.

