古文：张浚张浚，字德远，汉州绵竹人，唐宰相九龄弟九皋之后。
现代文：张浚字德远，汉州绵竹人。唐朝宰相张九龄的弟弟张九皋的后代。
English: Zhang Junzhe Deyuan, from Mianzhu, Hanzhou. He was a descendant of Zhang Jiuyong, the younger brother of Zhang Jiuling, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：父咸，举进士、贤良两科。
现代文：其父张咸，考中进士、贤良两科。
English: His father, Zhang Xian, passed the junior high school entrance examination and excelled in two subjects.

古文：浚四岁而孤，行直视端，无诳言，识者知为大器。
现代文：张浚四岁就成为孤儿，行为端正，没有谎言，认识的人认为他将成大器。
English: Zhang Jun was orphaned at the age of four. He was well-behaved and told no lies. People who knew him thought he would become a great man.

古文：入太学，中进士第。
现代文：进入太学，考中进士。
English: Entered Taigaku and passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：靖康初，为太常簿。
现代文：靖康初年，任太常簿。
English: In the first year of the Yasukuni era, he was appointed to the position of Taijōji.

古文：张邦昌僣立，逃入太学中。
现代文：张邦昌僭立为帝，他逃到太学中。
English: When Zhang Bangchang became emperor, he fled to Taigaku Middle School.

古文：闻高宗即位，驰赴南京，除枢密院编修官，改虞部郎，擢殿中侍御史。
现代文：听说高宗即位，乘马赶到南京，任枢密院编修官，改任虞部郎，升任殿中侍御史。
English: Hearing that Gao Zong had ascended the throne, he rushed to Nanjing on horseback, was appointed editor of the Privy Council, changed his title to Yubero, and was promoted to the position of palace attendant and historian.

古文：驾幸东南，后军统制韩世忠所部逼逐谏臣坠水死，浚奏夺世忠观察使，上下始知有国法。
现代文：皇帝到东南，后军统制韩世忠部队逼逐谏臣坠水而死，张浚上奏夺去韩世忠观察使一职，上下才知有国法。
English: When the emperor went to the southeast, the rear army controlled Han Shizhong's troops and forced his vassals to fall into the water and die. Zhang Jun's report deprived Han Shizhong of his position as an observer, and it was only then that the country's laws were known.

古文：迁侍御史。
现代文：升任侍御史。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：时乘舆在扬州，浚言： 中原天下之根本，愿下诏葺东京、关陕、襄邓以待巡幸。 咈宰相意，除集英殿修撰、知兴元府。
现代文：当时皇帝在扬州，张浚说： 中原是天下的根本，希望修葺东京、关陕、襄邓以待巡幸。 拂逆宰相的意思，授任集英殿修撰、知兴远府。
English: At that time, the emperor was in Yangzhou. Zhang Jun said, "The Central Plains is the foundation of the world. I hope to repair Tokyo, Guanshan, and Xiangdong and wait for the inspection tour. Contrary to the prime minister's intention, I was assigned to Shueyden to revise and write, and to Zhixing Yuanfu.

古文：未行，擢礼部侍郎，高宗召谕曰： 卿知无不言，言无不尽，朕将有为，正如欲一飞冲天而无羽翼，卿勉留辅朕。 除御营使司参赞军事。
现代文：尚未出发，升任礼部侍郎，高宗召见对他说： 你知无不言，言无不尽，我将要有所作为，正如想一飞冲天而无羽翼，你留下来辅助我吧。 授任御营使司参赞军事。
English: Before he set off, he was promoted to the position of etiquette attendant, and Gaozong summoned him and said to him, "You know everything without saying anything, and your words are inexhaustible. I'm going to do something, just like you want to fly into the sky without wings. You should stay and assist me." He was assigned to the post of military adviser to the Imperial General Staff.

古文：浚度金人必来攻，而庙堂晏然，殊不为备，力言之宰相，黄潜善、汪伯彦皆笑其过计。
现代文：张浚料想金人一定会来攻，而朝廷晏然，一点不作准备，极力向宰相建议，黄潜善、汪伯彦都笑他过虑。
English: Zhang Dunyao thought that the Jin people would definitely attack, but the imperial court was stunned, did not make any preparations, and strongly suggested to the prime minister. Huang Qunshan and Wang Bohian both laughed at his excessive concern.

古文：建炎三年春，金人南侵，车驾幸钱塘，留朱胜非于吴门捍御，以浚同节制军马，已而胜非召，浚独留。
现代文：建炎三年春天，金人侵犯南方，皇帝到钱塘，留下朱胜非在吴门抗御，让张浚一同节制军马。后来朱胜非被召回，张浚单独留下来。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jian Yan, the Jin invaded the south, the emperor went to Qiantang, leaving Zhu Shengfei to resist in Wumen and let Zhang Jun restrain the war horses together. Later, Zhu Shengfei was recalled, leaving Zhang Jun alone.

古文：时溃兵数万，所至剽掠，浚招集甫定。
现代文：当时溃兵数万，所至之处剽掠不已，张浚招集平定下来。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of routed soldiers, and looting and pillaging were rampant everywhere, and Zhang Jun called for mobilization to quell the situation.

古文：会苗傅、刘正彦作乱，改元赦书至平江，浚命守臣汤东野秘不宣。
现代文：正好苗傅、刘正彦作乱，改元诏书到了平江，张浚命令守臣汤东野秘而不宣。
English: Just as Miao Fu and Liu Masahiko were making trouble, the edict to change the Yuan Dynasty arrived in Pingjiang, and Zhang Jun ordered his retainer Tang Dongye to keep it secret.

古文：未几，傅等以檄来，浚恸哭，召东野及提点刑狱赵哲谋起兵讨贼。
现代文：不久，苗傅以檄书寄来，张浚痛哭，召东野及提点刑狱赵哲商量起兵讨贼。
English: Soon after, Miao Fu sent a letter to Zhang Jun, who cried bitterly and called Higashino and Zhao Zhe, who was in prison at the time, to discuss raising an army to hunt down the thieves.

古文：时傅等以承宣使张俊为秦凤路总管，俊将万人还，将卸兵而西。
现代文：当时苗傅等人任命承宣使张俊为秦凤路总管，张俊率领一万多人返回，准备解甲而归。
English: At that time, Miao Fu and others appointed Zheng Xuan's envoy Zhang Jun as the general manager of Qinfeng Road. Zhang Jun led more than ten thousand people to return, preparing to disarm and return.

古文：浚知上遇俊厚，而俊纯实可谋大事，急邀俊，握手语故，相持而泣，因告以将起兵问罪。
现代文：张浚知道皇上对张俊很厚道，而张俊纯朴实在可以共谋大事，急忙邀请张俊，握手畅叙旧情，相对而泣，于是告诉他打算起兵问罪。
English: Zhang Jun knew that the emperor was very kind to Zhang Jun, and that Zhang Jun Jun could really conspire with him. He hurriedly invited Zhang Jun, shook hands with him, told him about the old situation, and wept with him. He then told him that he was going to raise an army to investigate the crime.

古文：时吕颐浩节制建业，刘光世领兵镇江，浚遣人赍蜡书，约颐浩、光世以兵来会，而命俊分兵扼吴江。
现代文：当时吕颐浩节制建业，刘光世领兵驻屯镇江，张浚派人带着蜡书，约请颐浩、光世率兵来会，而命张俊分兵扼守吴江。
English: At that time, Lv Yinghao was in charge of the military construction, Liu Guangzhe was leading the troops stationed in Zhenjiang, Zhang Jun sent a person with a wax book to invite Hao Hao and Guangzhe to come to the meeting, and Zhang Jun's detachment guarded the Wujiang River.

古文：上疏请复辟。
现代文：上疏请求复辟。
English: Shangsu requests reinstatement.

古文：傅等谋除浚礼部尚书，命将所部诣行在，浚以大兵未集，未欲诵言讨贼，乃托云张俊骤回，人情震詟，不可不少留以抚其军。
现代文：苗傅等人打算授任张浚为礼部尚书，命他率领所部到行宫，张浚认为大兵未集，不打算宣称讨贼，于是托称张俊骤回，人情震动，不可不滞留以招抚军队。
English: Miao Fu and others planned to appoint Zhang Jun as the ceremonial secretary, and ordered him to lead the department to the palace. Zhang Jun believed that the soldiers had not been gathered and did not intend to declare that he would catch the thief. Therefore, he pretended that Zhang Jun had a sudden relapse, that his feelings were shaken, and that he had to stay to entice the army.

古文：会韩世忠舟师抵常熟，张俊曰： 世忠来，事济矣。 白浚以书招之。
现代文：正好韩世忠水师到达常熟，张俊说： 世忠来了，事情可以成功了。 
English: Just as Han Shizhong arrived in Changshu, Zhang Jun said: Shizhong has come, things can be successful.

古文：世忠至，对浚恸器曰： 世忠与俊请以身任之。 浚因大犒俊、世忠将士，呼诸将校至前，抗声问曰： 今日之举，孰顺孰逆？ 众皆曰： 贼逆我顺。 浚曰： 闻贼以重赏购吾首，若浚此举违天悖人，汝等可取浚头去；不然，一有退缩，悉以军法从事。 众感憾愤。
现代文：告诉张浚用信招他。世忠到后，对张浚痛哭道： 世忠与张俊以身听命。 张浚于是犒劳张俊、韩世忠将士，招呼诸位将校到面前，高声问道： 今日行动，谁顺谁逆？ 人群都说 ：贼逆我顺。 张浚说 ：听说贼人以重赏求购我的头，如果张浚这次行动违天逆人，你们可取去我的头；不然，一有退缩，全部以军法处置。 人们都十分感愤。
English: After Shizhong arrived, he cried bitterly to Zhang Jun: Shizhong and Zhang Jun obeyed orders with their bodies. Zhang Jun then summoned Zhang Jun and Han Shizhong to come to the front and loudly asked the officers: "In today's operation, who will follow and who will go against? The crowd all said, "The thieves are against me." Zhang Jun said, "I heard that the thieves asked for my head with a heavy reward. If Zhang Jun's action is against the people, you can take my head; otherwise, if there is any retreat, it will all be dealt with by military law." People were very angry.

古文：于是，令世忠以兵赴阙，而戒其急趋秀州，据粮道以俟大军之至。
现代文：于是，命令世忠率兵入京，而戒令他赶快奔赴秀州，占据粮道等候大军到来。
English: As a result, he ordered Shizhong to lead the troops into Beijing, and ordered him to rush to Xiuzhou to occupy the grain route and wait for the army to arrive.

古文：世忠至秀，即大治战具。
现代文：世忠到了秀州，立即大修兵器。
English: When Shitada arrived in Shuzhou, he immediately overhauled the weapons.

古文：会傅等以书招浚，浚报云： 自古言涉不顺，谓之指斥乘舆；事涉不逊，谓之震惊宫阙；废立之事，谓之大逆不道，大逆不道者族。
现代文：恰好苗傅等人以书信招浚，浚回信说 ：自古言论不正当，称为指斥乘舆；行动不正当，称为震动宫廷；废立皇帝之事，称为大逆不道，大逆不道者要遭族灭。
English: It just so happened that Miao Fu and others wrote to Zhaozhong, and Zhaozhong wrote back to them, saying: Since ancient times, if one's speech is not legitimate, it is called denunciation; if one's action is not legitimate, it is called shaking the court; if one abrogates the emperor, it is called great treason, and those who commit great treason will be exterminated.

古文：今建炎皇帝不闻失德，一旦逊位，岂所宜闻。 傅等得书恐，乃遣重兵扼临平，亟除俊、世忠节度使，而诬浚欲危社稷，责柳州安置。
现代文：当今建炎皇帝没有听说有失德，一旦逊位，不应当听说。 苗傅等人得到书信大恐，于是派遣重兵扼守临平，急忙任命张俊、韩世忠为节度使，而诬蔑张浚打算危害国家，责令安置他在郴州。
English: Today's Jianyan Emperor did not hear about the loss of virtue, and once he abdicated, he should not have heard about it. Miao Fu and others were very afraid when they received the letter, so they sent heavy troops to guard Linping, hurriedly appointed Zhang Jun and Han Shizhong as the festival envoys, and slandered Zhang Jun as intending to endanger the country, and ordered him to be placed in Zhangzhou.

古文：俊、世忠拒不受。
现代文：张俊、韩世忠拒不受命。
English: Zhang Jun and Han Shizhong refused to accept the order.

古文：会吕颐浩、刘光世兵踵至，浚乃声傅、正彦罪，传檄中外，率诸军继进。
现代文：正好吕颐浩、刘光世军队前后开到，张浚于是声讨苗傅、刘正彦罪行，传檄中外，率领诸军进讨。
English: Just as the armies of Lv Yinghao and Liu Guangshi arrived, Zhang Jun led the troops to investigate the crimes of Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan, spreading the news far and wide.

古文：初，浚遣客冯轓以计策往说傅等，会大军且至，傅、正彦忧恐不知所出。
现代文：当初，张浚派遣门客冯车番以计策前去游说苗傅等人，正遇大军到来，苗傅、刘正彦忧恐不知所出。
English: At first, Zhang Jun sent his concubine Feng Chebang to lobby Miao Fu and others, but Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan were worried about the arrival of a large army.

古文：轓知其可动，即以大义白宰相朱胜非，使率百官请复辟。
现代文：冯车番知道可以行动，就以大义劝说宰相朱胜非，让他率领百官请求皇帝复位。
English: Feng Cheban knew that he could act, so he persuaded the prime minister Zhu Shengfei with great righteousness, and let him lead hundreds of officials to request the emperor's reinstatement.

古文：高宗御笔除浚知枢密院事。
现代文：高宗亲笔授任张浚为知枢密院事。
English: Gaozong personally appointed Zhang Jun as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：浚进次临平，贼兵拒不得前，世忠等搏战，大破之，傅、正彦脱遁。
现代文：张浚进驻临平，贼兵阻拒不能前进，世忠等人与贼兵作战，大败贼兵，苗傅、刘正彦逃脱。
English: Zhang Jun was stationed in Linping, the bandits refused to advance, Shizhong and others fought with the bandits, the bandits were defeated, and Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan escaped.

古文：浚与颐浩等入见，伏地涕泣待罪，高宗问劳再三，曰： 曩在睿圣，两宫隔绝。
现代文：张浚与颐浩等人入宫晋见，伏地涕泣待罪，高宗问劳再三，说： 以往在睿圣，两宫隔绝。
English: Zhang Jun and Hao Hao and others entered the palace to see Jin. Folding his arms and weeping, Gao Zong repeatedly asked, saying, "In the past, in Ruisheng, the two palaces were isolated.

古文：一日啜羹，小黄门忽传太母之命，不得已贬卿郴州。
现代文：一天正在喝汤，小黄门忽然传来太母的命令，不得已贬你到郴州。
English: One day, while drinking soup, Xiao Huangmen suddenly received an order from his great-grandmother to be sent to Zhangzhou.

古文：朕不觉羹覆于手，念卿被谪，此事谁任。 留浚，引入内殿，曰： 皇太后知卿忠义，欲识卿面，适垂帘，见卿过庭矣。 解所服玉带以赐。
现代文：我将汤水泼到手上没有感觉到，想你被贬，这件事谁可胜任。 留住张浚，引进内殿，说 ：皇太后知道你的忠义，打算见你一面，刚才垂帘，看见你走过廊庭。 解下手上的玉带赐给他。
English: I didn't feel the soup water splashed on my hand, I thought you would be demoted, who would be competent in this matter. Retain Zhang Jun, introduce him to the inner hall, and say: The Empress Dowager knows your loyalty and plans to see you one day, just now the curtains were drawn and I saw you walking through the corridor. Untie the jade band on your hand and give it to him.

古文：高宗欲相浚，浚以晚进，不敢当。
现代文：高宗打算用他为相，他辞以晚进，不敢当。
English: Gao Zong planned to use him as a partner, but he did not dare to be late.

古文：傅、正彦走闽中，浚命世忠追缚之以献，与其党皆伏诛。
现代文：苗傅、刘正彦逃到闽中，张浚命令韩世忠追捕献给朝廷，与他们的死党一起伏诛。
English: Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyuan fled to Yuzhong, and Zhang Jun ordered Han Shizhong to hunt them down and present them to the imperial court, and they were executed together with their accomplices.

古文：初，浚次秀州，尝夜坐，警备甚严，忽有客至前，出一纸怀中曰： 此苗傅、刘正彦募贼公赏格也。 浚问欲何如，客曰： 仆河北人，粗读书，知逆顺，岂以身为贼用？
现代文：当初，张浚驻扎在秀州，曾经夜里独坐，警备非常严，忽然有一人到前面，拿出怀中一纸说： 这是苗傅、刘正彦募人刺你的赏格。 张浚问他打算怎样，这人说 ：我是河北人，粗读书，知道顺逆，岂能以身被贼利用？
English: At the beginning, Zhang Jun was stationed in Xiuzhou. He used to sit alone at night, the guard was very strict. Suddenly, a person came to the front, took out a piece of paper in his arms and said: This is the reward for Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan to recruit people to stab you. Zhang Jun asked him what he planned to do, and the man said: I am from Hebei, I am a rough reader, I know what is right and what is wrong, how can I be used by thieves?

古文：特见为备不严，恐有后来者耳。 浚下执其手，问姓名，不告而去。
现代文：因为看见你防备不严，恐怕后来还有行刺者。 张浚拉着他的手，问他姓名，他不说而去。
English: Because he saw that you were not well prepared, he feared that there might be an assassin later.Zhang Jun took his hand, asked him his name, and he left without saying anything.

古文：浚翌日斩死囚徇于众，曰： 此苗、刘刺客也。 私识其状貌物色之，终不遇。
现代文：张浚第二天杀掉一个死囚示众，说： 这人是苗傅、刘正彦派来的刺客。 私下记住那个人的相貌寻找，终于还是未找到。
English: The next day, Zhang Jun killed a death row inmate in public, saying, "This person is an assassin sent by Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan.

古文：巨盗薛庆啸聚淮甸，至数万人。
现代文：巨盗薛庆啸聚淮甸，兵至数万人。
English: Giant thief Xue Qing gathered in Huadian with tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：浚恐其滋蔓，径至高邮，入庆垒，喻以朝廷恩意。
现代文：张浚恐怕蔓延开来，径自跑到高邮，进入薛庆的军营，宣谕朝廷恩意。
English: Zhang Jun ran to Gaoyou and entered Xue Qing's military camp, proclaiming the court's favor.

古文：庆感服下拜，浚留抚其众。
现代文：薛庆感动下拜，张浚留下来招抚他的部队。
English: Moved, Xue Qing bowed down, and Zhang Jun stayed behind to coax his troops.

古文：或传浚为贼所执，吕颐浩等遽罢浚枢筦。
现代文：有人传说张浚被贼兵捉住，吕颐浩等人急忙罢去张浚的枢密职务。
English: Some people said that Zhang Jun was caught by the bandits, and Lv Yinghao and others hurried to remove Zhang Jun from his confidential position.

古文：浚归，高宗惊叹，即日趣就职。
现代文：张浚回来后，高宗惊叹，当天催促就职。
English: After Zhang Jun returned, Gao Zong was amazed and urged him to take office that day.

古文：浚谓中兴当自关陕始，虑金人或先入陕取蜀，则东南不可保，遂慷慨请行。
现代文：张浚认为中兴应当从关陕开始，考虑到金人可能先进入陕西攻取巴蜀，则东南不可保，于是慷慨请行。
English: Zhang Jun believed that ZTE should start from Guanshan. Considering that Jinren may first enter Shaanxi to capture Bashu, Southeast China cannot be guaranteed, so he generously asked to go.

古文：诏以浚为川、陕宣抚处置使，得便宜黜陟。
现代文：诏令任命张浚为川、陕宣抚处置使，得以见机处理官员升降。
English: The imperial edict appointed Zhang Jun as the messenger for the disposition of the Sichuan and Shaanxi proclamation, and he was able to take advantage of the opportunity to deal with the promotion and demotion of officials.

古文：将行，御营平寇将军范琼，拥众自豫章至行在。
现代文：将出发时，御营平寇将军范琼，拥众从豫章到行都。
English: When it was time to leave, Fan Qiong, the general of the Pingkou Battalion, led the crowd from Yuanzhang to Xingdu.

古文：先是，靖康城破，金人逼胁君、后、太子、宗室北行，多琼之谋；又乘势剽掠，左右张邦昌，为之从卫。
现代文：在此之前，京城城破，金人逼胁皇帝、太后、太子、宗室北行，多出自范琼的计谋；又乘势抢劫，控制张邦昌，为他做侍卫。
English: Prior to this, Fan Qiong had masterminded the capture of the capital city, forcing the emperor, the empress dowager, the prince, and his family to travel north. He also took advantage of the situation to rob, control Zhang Bangchang, and serve as his bodyguard.

古文：至是入朝，悖傲无礼，且乞贷逆党傅、正彦等死罪。
现代文：到这时入朝，狂傲无礼，而且请求宽宥逆党苗傅、刘正彦等人死罪。
English: At this time, he entered the court, arrogant and rude, and asked for forgiveness for the death penalty of the traitors Miao Fu and Liu Masahiko.

古文：浚奏琼大逆不道，乞伸典宪。
现代文：张浚奏称范琼大逆不道，请求申明法令。
English: Zhang Junso called Fan Qiong a traitor and asked for a clarification of the decree.

古文：翌日，召琼至都堂，数其罪切责之，送棘寺论死。
现代文：第二天，召范琼到都堂，数落他的罪状严厉责斥他，送到棘寺处死。
English: The next day, Fan Qiong was summoned to the capital hall, where he was severely reprimanded and sent to the Temple of Thorns to be put to death.

古文：分其军隶神武军，然后行。
现代文：把他的军队分隶神武军，然后出发。
English: Divide his army into the divine army, and then set out.

古文：与沿江襄、汉守臣议储蓄，以待临幸。
现代文：与沿江襄、汉守臣商议储蓄，以待皇帝驾临。
English: He discussed savings with his vassals along the Yangtze River and the Han Dynasty to wait for the emperor's arrival.

古文：高宗问浚大计，浚请身任陕、蜀之事，置幕府于秦川，别遣大臣与韩世忠镇淮东，令吕颐浩扈跸来武昌，复以张俊、刘光世与秦川相首尾。
现代文：高宗询问张浚大计，张浚请求亲自担任陕、蜀之事，把幕府安置在秦川，另派大臣与韩世忠镇守淮东，命令吕颐浩护驾皇帝到武昌，又以张浚、刘光世与秦川互相首尾照应。
English: Gao Zong inquired about Zhang Jun's grand plan, Zhang Jun requested to personally take charge of the affairs of Shaanxi and Shu, and placed the shogunate in Qinchuan. In addition, he sent a minister and Han Shizhong to guard Huaidong, ordered Lv Yinghao to escort the emperor to Wuchang, and sent Zhang Jun, Liu Guangze and Qinchuan to look after each other.

古文：议既定，浚行，未及武昌，而颐浩变初议。
现代文：计议已定，张浚出发，还未到武昌，而颐浩改变初议。
English: The plan has been decided, Zhang Jun has not yet arrived in Wuchang, and Hao Hao has changed the initial plan.

古文：浚既抵兴元，金人已取鄜延，骁将娄宿孛堇引大兵渡渭，攻永兴，诸将莫肯相援。
现代文：张浚抵达兴元后，金人已攻取延，骁将娄宿孛堇率领大军渡过渭水，进攻永兴，诸将不肯相援。
English: After Zhang Jun arrived in Xingyuan, the Jin had already captured Yan, and the general Zou Shuxuan led a large army across the Yanshui River to attack Yongxing. The generals refused to help.

古文：浚至，即出行关陕，访问风俗，罢斥奸赃，以搜揽豪杰为先务，诸将惕息听命。
现代文：张浚到后，立即出巡关陕之地，访问风俗，罢斥奸贼，以搜览豪杰为先务，诸将肃然听命。
English: After Zhang Jun arrived, he immediately went on a tour of Shaanxi, visited customs, rebuked thieves, and took the search for heroes as the first task. All generals obeyed his orders.

古文：会谍报金人将攻东南，浚命诸将整军向敌。
现代文：谍报金人将进攻东南，张浚命诸将整顿部队待敌。
English: The spies reported that the Jin people would attack the southeast, and Zhang Jianmei and others would rectify the troops and wait for the enemy.

古文：已而金人大攻江、淮，浚即治军入卫。
现代文：后来金人大举进攻江、淮，张浚即整顿军队入京保卫。
English: Later, the Jin people launched a large-scale attack on Jiang and Huai, and Zhang Jun, that is, the rectification army, entered Beijing to defend.

古文：至房州，知金人北归，复还关陕。
现代文：到房州时，知道金人已经北归，又回到关陕。
English: When he arrived in Fangzhou, he knew that Jinren had already returned to the north and returned to Guanshan.

古文：时金帅兀术犹在淮西，浚惧其复扰东南，谋牵制之，遂决策治兵，合五路之师以复永兴。
现代文：当时金兵元帅兀还在淮西，张浚恐怕他又侵扰东南，设计牵制他，于是决定出兵，合五路军队收复永兴。
English: At that time, Jinhe Field Marshal Zou was still in Huaxi, and Zhang Jun was afraid that he would invade the southeast again, so he decided to send troops to recover Yongxing with the Fifth Route Army.

古文：金人大恐，急调兀术等由京西入援，大战于富平。
现代文：金人大恐，急忙调兀等由京西入援，大战于富平。
English: The goldsmiths were terrified, and hurriedly sent reinforcements from the west of Beijing. The big battle started in Fuping.

古文：泾原帅刘锜身率将士薄敌陈，杀获颇众。
现代文：泾原主将刘钅奇身率将士攻入敌阵，杀获很多。
English: Liu Bingqi, the original commander, led his soldiers into the enemy lines and killed many soldiers.

古文：会环庆帅赵哲擅离所部，哲军将校望见尘起，惊遁，诸军皆溃。
现代文：正好环庆主将赵哲擅自离开部队，赵哲军中将校望见尘土飞起，受惊而逃，诸军都溃败。
English: Just as Huanqing commander Zhao Zhe left the troops without permission, Lieutenant General Zhao Zhe saw the dust fly up, was frightened and fled, and all the troops were routed.

古文：浚斩哲以徇，退保兴州。
现代文：张浚诛斩赵哲示众，退保兴州。
English: Zhang Junyao beheaded Zhao Zhe to demonstrate to the public, and withdrew the guarantee to Xingzhou.

古文：命吴玠聚兵扼险于凤翔之和尚原、大散关，以断敌来路，关师古等聚熙河兵于岷州大潭，孙渥、贾世方等聚泾原、凤翔兵于阶、成、凤三州，以固蜀口。
现代文：命令吴聚结军队扼险固守凤翔的和尚原、大散关，以切断敌人来路；关师古等人聚结熙河兵到岷州大潭，孙渥、贾世方等聚结泾原、凤翔兵于阶、成、凤三州，以固守蜀口。
English: He ordered Wu to gather troops and hold fast to Fengxiang's Monzhan Yuan and Dashan Guan in order to cut off the enemy's way; Guan Shigu and others gathered Heihe soldiers to Datan in Zhangzhou, and Sun Wou and Jia Shifang gathered Xuan Yuan and Fengxiang soldiers in Zhu, Cheng and Feng three states in order to hold fast to Shu.

古文：浚上书待罪，帝手诏慰勉。
现代文：张浚上书请罪，皇帝下手诏慰勉。
English: Zhang Jun wrote a letter to plead guilty, and the emperor issued an edict of consolation.

古文：绍兴元年，金将乌鲁攻和尚原，吴玠乘险击之，金人大败走。
现代文：绍兴元年，金将乌鲁进攻和尚原，吴据险还击。金人大败而逃。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, Jin attacked Ulu and Shangyuan, and Wu counterattacked. Jin was defeated and fled.

古文：兀术复合兵至，玠及其弟璘复邀击，大破之，兀术仅以身免，亟剃其须髯遁归。
现代文：兀又合兵来攻，吴及其弟吴瞞又阻击金兵，大败他们，兀仅以身免死，急忙剪掉胡须逃归。
English: Yao again joined forces to attack, Wu and his brother Wu Xie also blocked the gold soldiers and defeated them. Yao only saved his own life by hastily cutting off his beard and fleeing.

古文：始，粘罕病笃，语诸将曰： 自吾入中国，未尝有敢撄吾锋者，独张枢密与我抗。
现代文：当初，粘罕病重，对诸将说 ：从我进入中国，未尝有人敢抵挡我的兵锋。只有张枢密与我抗衡。
English: At first, Mu Han fell seriously ill and said to the generals: "Since I entered China, no one has dared to resist my soldiers. Only Zhang Shuxin could compete with me.

古文：我在，犹不能取蜀；我死，尔曹宜绝意，但务自保而已。 兀术怒曰： 是谓我不能邪！ 粘罕死，竟入攻，果败。
现代文：我活着，还不能攻取巴蜀；我死后，你们不要抱希望，但求自保而已。 兀怒道： 这不是说我无能吗？ 粘罕死后，兀还是进攻，果然失败。
English: While I am still alive, I cannot conquer Bashu; after my death, you should not hold out hope, but only seek self-preservation. Zou Yu said angrily, "Doesn't this mean that I am incompetent? After the death of Gui Han, Zou still attacked, but failed.

古文：拜浚检校少保、定国军节度使。
现代文：授任张浚为检校少保、定国军节度使。
English: Zhang Jun was appointed as the school inspector, and the commander of the Dingguo Army.

古文：浚在关陕三年，训新集之兵，当方张之敌，以刘子羽为上宾，任赵开为都转运使，擢吴玠为大将守凤翔。子羽慷慨有才略，开善理财，而玠每战辄胜。
现代文：张浚在关陕三年，训练新集之兵，抵挡势狂之敌，以刘子羽为上宾，任命赵开为都转运使，提升吴为大将驻守凤翔，子羽慷慨有谋略，赵开善于理财，而吴每战必胜。
English: Zhang Jun spent three years in Guanshan, training the newly-assembled soldiers, resisting the overwhelming enemy, with Liu Zi Yu as the chief guest, appointed Zhao Kai as the capital transfer envoy, promoted Wu as the general stationed in Fengxiang, Zi Yu was generous and had a strategy, Zhao Kai was good at financial management, and Wu was sure to win every battle.

古文：西北遗民，归附日众。
现代文：西北遗民，归附者日益增多。
English: The number of people who have been left behind in Northwest China is increasing.

古文：故关陕虽失，而全蜀按堵，且以形势牵制东南，江、淮亦赖以安。
现代文：故关陕虽然失陷，但保全蜀地，而且以形势牵制东南，江、淮之间也得以安全。
English: Therefore, although Guanxi and Shaanxi were lost, Shu was preserved, and the southeast was restrained by the situation, and it was safe between Jiang and Huai.

古文：将军曲端者，建炎中，尝迫逐帅臣王庶而夺其印。
现代文：将军曲端，建炎年间，曾经逼逐主将王庶而夺其印。
English: General Qudao, during the Jian Yan years, once forced the expulsion of the main general Wang Shao and captured his seal.

古文：吴玠败于彭原，诉端不整师。
现代文：吴在彭原战败，指诉曲端不整顿军队。
English: Wu was defeated at Pengyuan and accused Qu of failing to reorganize the army.

古文：富平之役，端议不合，其腹心张忠彦等降敌。
现代文：富平之战，曲端意见不合，他的心腹张忠彦等人投降敌人。
English: In the Battle of Bupyeong, the warlords disagreed, and his henchman Zhang Tadahiko and others surrendered to the enemy.

古文：浚初超用端，中坐废，犹欲再用之，后卒下端狱论死。
现代文：张浚当初起用曲端，中间因罪废职，还想再用他，后来终于把曲端下到监狱处死。
English: Zhang Jun initially used Qu Duan, in the middle he was dismissed for a crime, he wanted to use him again, and later he finally sent Qu Duan to prison to be executed.

古文：会有言浚杀赵哲、曲端无辜，而任子羽、开、玠非是，朝廷疑之。
现代文：正好有人指责张浚滥杀赵哲、曲端无辜，而宠任子羽、赵开、吴不正确，朝廷怀疑他。
English: It just so happened that some people accused Zhang Jun of indiscriminately killing Zhao Zhe and Qu Duan, who were innocent, while it was incorrect to favor Zi Yu, Zhao Kai and Wu, and the imperial court suspected him.

古文：三年，遣王似副浚。
现代文：三年，派王似做张浚的副官。
English: For three years, Wang Xi served as Zhang Jun's aide-de-camp.

古文：会金将撒离曷及刘豫叛党聚兵入攻，破金州。子羽为兴元帅，约吴玠同守三泉。
现代文：正好金将撒离曷及刘豫叛党聚兵进攻，攻破金州、刘子羽任兴元主将，约吴同守三泉。
English: It was just at that time that Kim Jong Il and Liu Yu, the traitor, gathered their troops to attack and defeated Jinzhou, Liu Zi Yu, the former commander of Renxing, and Guo Wu, the commander of Sanquan.

古文：金人至金牛，宋师掩击之，斩馘及堕溪谷死者，以数千计。
现代文：金人到金牛时，宋军掩击，斩敌及坠入溪谷而死者有数千人。
English: When Jinren arrived at Taurus, the Song Army covered up, cut off the enemy and fell into the valley, and there were thousands of deaths.

古文：浚闻王似来，求解兵柄，且奏似不可任。
现代文：张浚听说王似到来，请求解去自己的兵权，并且认为王似不可任用。
English: Zhang Jun heard of Wang Lixin's arrival, asked to be relieved of his military powers, and believed that Wang Lixin could not be appointed.

古文：宰相吕颐浩不悦，而朱胜非以宿憾日毁短浚，诏浚赴行在。
现代文：宰相吕颐浩不高兴，而朱胜非以旧怨天天诋毁张浚，诏令张俊到行宫。
English: Prime Minister Lyu Binhao was not happy, and Zhu Sheng, instead of slandering Zhang Jun every day with old grudges, ordered Zhang Jun to go to the palace.

古文：四年初，辛炳知潭州，浚在陕，以檄发兵，炳不遣，浚奏劾之。
现代文：绍兴四年初，辛炳任知潭州，张浚在陕西，以檄文征发他的部队，辛炳不放，张浚上奏弹劾他。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year of Shaoxing, Xin Rong was appointed to Zhitanzhou, and Zhang Jun was appointed to Shaanxi, and he sent his troops to collect money. Xin Rong did not let him go, and Zhang Jun impeached him.

古文：至是，炳为御史中丞，率同列劾浚，以本官提举洞霄宫，居福州。
现代文：到这时，辛炳任御史中丞，率领同僚们弹劾张浚，朝廷任命张浚以本官提举洞霄宫，住在福州。
English: At this time, Xin Rong was appointed as the Vice-President of History and led his colleagues to impeach Zhang Jun. The imperial court appointed Zhang Jun to be the official of Dongxiao Palace, and he lived in Fuzhou.

古文：浚既去国，虑金人释川、陕之兵，必将并力窥东南，而朝廷已议讲解，乃上疏极言其状。
现代文：张浚已经离开朝廷，考虑金人不攻川、陕的部队，必将并力窥伺东南，而朝廷已经商议讲和，于是上疏极陈述这些形势。
English: Zhang Jun had already left the imperial court, thinking that if the Jin did not attack the troops of the Sichuan and Shaanxi provinces, they would also try to spy on the southeast, and the imperial court had already discussed peace, so Shang Xujiu stated these situations.

古文：未几，刘豫之子麟果引金人入攻。
现代文：不久，刘豫的儿子刘麟果然勾引金兵进攻。
English: Soon, Liu Yu's son, Liu Lin, lured the gold soldiers to attack.

古文：高宗思浚前言，策免朱胜非；而参知政事赵鼎请幸平江，乃召浚以资政殿学士提举万寿观兼侍读。
现代文：高宗想起张浚以前的话，罢免朱胜非；而参知政事赵鼎请皇帝到平江，于是召张浚任资政殿学士提举万寿观兼侍读。
English: Gao Zong recalled Zhang Jun's previous words and dismissed Zhu Shengfei; and Zhao Ding, the political advisor, invited the emperor to Pingjiang, and then called Zhang Jun to be appointed as a scholar of the Palace of Councillors to raise the concept of longevity and attend the lecture.

古文：入见，高宗手诏辨浚前诬，除知枢密院事。
现代文：入宫晋见，高宗下手诏辩白张浚所受的诬陷，授任他为知枢密院事。
English: When he entered the palace, Gao Zong issued an edict to refute Zhang Jun's false accusation and appointed him as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：浚既受命，即日赴江上视师。
现代文：张浚受命后，当天赶到长江边巡视军队。
English: After Zhang Jun received the order, he rushed to the Yangtze River to inspect the troops.

古文：时兀术拥兵十万于扬州，约日渡江决战。
现代文：当时兀拥兵十万驻在扬州，约期渡江决战。
English: At that time, one hundred thousand soldiers were stationed in Yangzhou, and the decisive battle of crossing the river was scheduled.

古文：浚长驱临江，召韩世忠、张俊、刘光世议事。
现代文：张浚长驱临江，召韩世忠、张俊、刘光世商议军事。
English: Zhang Junchang drove Linjiang and summoned Han Shizhong, Zhang Jun and Liu Guangxi to discuss military affairs.

古文：将士见浚，勇气十倍。
现代文：将士们见到张浚，勇气十倍。
English: When the generals saw Zhang Jun, their courage increased tenfold.

古文：浚既部分诸将，身留镇江节度之。
现代文：张浚部署完诸将后，自己留在镇江指挥。
English: After Zhang Jun deployed the generals, he stayed in Zhenjiang to command.

古文：世忠遣麾下王愈诣兀术约战，且言张枢密已在镇江。
现代文：韩世忠派部下王愈到兀那里约战，并且说张枢密已在镇江。
English: Han Shizhong sent his subordinate Wang Yu to Zhai to arrange a battle, and said that Zhang Shumi was already in Zhenjiang.

古文：兀术曰： 张枢密贬岭南，何得乃在此？ 愈出浚所下文书示之。
现代文：兀说 ：张枢密已贬到岭南，怎么能够在这里？ 王愈拿出张浚写的文书给他看。
English: Zou said: Zhang Zhiming has been relegated to Lingnan, how can he be here? Wang Yu took out the document written by Zhang Jun to show him.

古文：兀术色变，夕遁。
现代文：兀吓得色变，傍晚逃走了。
English: The baboon changed color in fright and ran away in the evening.

古文：五年，除尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事，都督诸路军马，赵鼎除左仆射。
现代文：五年，任尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事，都督诸路军马，赵鼎任左仆射。
English: In the fifth year, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu and the left-hand man of Zhao Ding.

古文：浚与鼎同志辅治，务在塞幸门，抑近习。
现代文：张浚与赵鼎同心辅治，务在堵塞佞臣，遏抑近习小人。
English: Zhang Jun and Zhao Ding are working together to support the government, and their mission is to block the vassals and curb the petty villains.

古文：时巨寇杨么据洞庭，屡攻不克，浚以建康东南都会，而洞庭据上流，恐滋蔓为害，请因盛夏乘其怠讨之，具奏请行。
现代文：当时巨寇杨么占据洞庭，官军多次进攻不能成功，张浚认为建康是东南的都会，而洞庭处在上流，惟恐滋延为害，请求趁盛夏敌人懈怠时进讨，上奏请行。
English: At that time, the giant cormorant Yang Rong occupied Dongting, and the government army's repeated attacks could not succeed. Zhang Jun believed that Jiankang was the southeastern capital, and Dongting was in the upper stream. However, he feared that it would be detrimental to Zhiyan. He requested to take advantage of the enemy's slackness in the middle of the summer to advance the discussion. Please go.

古文：至醴陵，释邑囚数百，皆杨么谍者，给以文书，俾招谕诸砦，囚欢呼而往。
现代文：到醴陵时，放出囚犯数百人，都是杨么的间谍，给些文书，让他们招谕诸砦，囚犯们欢呼而往。
English: When they arrived at Fuling, they released hundreds of prisoners, all of whom were spies of Yang Ye, and gave them some documents so that they could invite people to the fortresses. The prisoners cheered and went there.

古文：至潭，贼众二十余万相继来降，湖寇尽平。
现代文：到潭州，贼众二十万余相继来投降，洞庭湖的贼寇被荡平。
English: At Tanzhou, more than 200,000 bandits surrendered one after another, and the bandits at Dongting Lake were wiped out.

古文：上赐浚书，谓： 上流既定，则川陕、荆襄形势接连，事力增倍，天其以中兴之功付卿乎。 浚遂奏遣岳飞屯荆、襄以图中原，乃自鄂、岳转淮东，大会诸将，议防秋之宜。
现代文：皇上赐给张浚书信称： 上流既然安定，则川陕、荆襄形势连接，势力倍增，上天是把中兴之功交付给你啊。 张浚于是建议派遣岳飞驻屯荆襄以图夺取中原，于是从鄂、岳到淮东，大会诸将，讨论秋防事宜。
English: The emperor gave a letter to Zhang Jun, saying: Since the upstream is stable, then the situation of Sichuan, Shaanxi and Jingyang is connected, and the power is doubled. Heaven is entrusting you with the work of ZTE. Zhang Jun then suggested sending Yuefei to stay in Jingyang in order to seize the Central Plains, so from E and Yue to Huaidong, the generals will discuss the autumn defense matters.

古文：高宗遣使赐诏趣归，劳问之曰： 卿暑行甚劳，湖湘群寇既就招抚，成朕不杀之仁，卿之功也。 召对便殿，进《中兴备览》四十一篇，高宗嘉叹，置之坐隅。
现代文：高宗派使者赐给他诏书令他急归，劳问他说： 你暑天巡行非常劳苦，湖湘群寇既然接受招抚，成全我不杀之仁，是你的功劳啊。 召到便殿相见，张浚献上《中兴备览》四十一篇，高宗叹赞不已，放在座位边。
English: The emissary of Gao Zong faction gave him an edict to make him return urgently, and asked him: You have worked very hard during the hot parade. Since the Hunan bandits have accepted the invitation, it is your merit to make me not kill them. Invited to the toilet hall to meet, Zhang Jun presented the 41st issue of "ZTE Review," Gao Zong was full of praise and put it on the edge of the seat.

古文：浚以敌势未衰，而叛臣刘豫复据中原，六年，会诸将议事江上，榜豫僣逆之罪。
现代文：张浚认为敌势未衰，而叛臣刘豫又占据中原。六年，集合诸将在长江边商议战事，张榜声讨刘豫的僭逆之罪。
English: Zhang Jun believed that the enemy was not yet defeated, while the traitor Liu Yu occupied the Central Plains. For six years, they gathered on the banks of the Yangtze River to discuss the war and discuss Liu Yu's crime of treason.

古文：命韩世忠据承、楚以图淮阳；命刘光世屯合肥以招北军；命张俊练兵建康，进屯盱眙；命杨沂中领精兵为后翼以佐俊；命岳飞进屯襄阳以窥中原。
现代文：命令韩世忠占据承、楚以图取淮阳；命令刘光世驻兵合肥以招抚北军；命令张俊建康练兵，进驻在盱眙；命令杨沂中率领精兵为后翼辅佐张浚；命令岳飞进驻襄阳以窥伺中原。
English: He ordered Han Shizhong to occupy Zheng and Chu to try to take Huaiyang; ordered Liu Guangzhi to station troops in Hefei to entice the Northern Army; ordered Zhang Junjiankang to train soldiers and station them in Zhe; ordered Yang Qianzhong to lead elite soldiers as a rear wing assistant to Zhang Jun; ordered Yuefei to station in Xiangyang to spy on the Central Plains.

古文：浚渡江，遍抚淮上诸戍。
现代文：张浚渡江，遍抚淮上各部队。
English: Zhang dredged the river, and the troops of Fuzhou and Huaiyang were scattered everywhere.

古文：时张俊军进屯盱眙，岳飞遣兵入至蔡州，浚入觐，力请幸建康。
现代文：当时张俊部队进驻盱眙，岳飞派兵进入蔡州，张浚入宫晋见，极力请求皇上到建康。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun's troops were stationed in Handan, Yuefei sent troops into Caizhou, Zhang Jun went to the palace to meet, and strongly requested the emperor to come to Jiankang.

古文：车驾进发，浚先往江上，谍报刘豫与侄猊挟金人入攻，浚奏： 金人不敢悉众而来，此必豫兵也。 边遽不一，俊、光世皆张大敌势，浚谓： 贼豫以逆犯顺，不剿除何以为国？
现代文：皇帝车驾进发，张浚先到江边，谍报刘豫与侄儿刘猊会合金兵来攻，张浚说 ：金人不敢悉众而来，这一定是刘豫的部队。 边报不一，张俊、刘光世都夸大敌情，张浚说： 刘豫以逆犯顺，不剿除怎么立国？
English: The emperor's carriage drove in, Zhang Jun went to the river first, and the spy reported that Liu Yu and his nephew Liu Shun would attack the alloy soldiers. Zhang Jun said: The Jin people dare not come all together, this must be Liu Yu's troops. The side reports were not consistent, Zhang Jun and Liu Guangshi both exaggerated the enemy situation, Zhang Jun said: Liu Yu violated Shun with the opposite, how to establish a country without eliminating it?

古文：今日之事，有进无退。 且命杨沂中往屯濠州。
现代文：现在的事势，有进无退。 命令杨沂中前往驻扎濠州。
English: In the current situation, there is no turning back. Yang Yizhong was ordered to go to Bozhou.

古文：刘麟逼合肥，张俊请益兵，刘光世欲退师，赵鼎及签书折彦质欲召岳飞兵东下。
现代文：刘麟逼近合肥，张俊请求增兵，刘光世打算撤军，赵鼎及签书折彦质打算召岳飞领兵东下。
English: Liu Lin approached Hefei, Zhang Jun asked for more troops, Liu Guangshi planned to withdraw, Zhao Ding and signed a letter saying that Yue Fei would lead the troops to the east.

古文：御书付浚，令俊、光世、沂中等还保江。
现代文：御书交给张浚，下令张俊、刘光世。杨沂中等人还保长江。
English: Zhang Jun was given the order, Zhang Jun and Liu Guangshi were ordered, and Yang Xi and others were also ordered to protect the Yangtze River.

古文：浚奏： 俊等渡江，则无淮南，而长江之险与敌共矣。
现代文：张浚上奏称 ：张俊等人渡江，就没有淮南，而长江之险与敌人共有。
English: Zhang Jun said in his report: If Zhang Jun and others crossed the Yangtze River, there would be no Huainan, and the Yangtze River would be shared with the enemy.

古文：且岳飞一动，襄、汉有警，复何所恃乎？ 诏书从之。
现代文：况且岳飞一动，襄、汉如有敌情，又依靠什么呢？ 
English: Moreover, if Yuefei makes a move and Xiang and Han have hostile feelings, what will they rely on?

古文：沂中兵抵濠州，光世舍庐州而南，淮西汹动。
现代文：诏书同意他的意见。沂中部队抵达濠州，光世丢下庐州向南移，淮西震动。
English: The imperial edict agreed with his opinion. The Central Yunnan troops arrived in Yanzhou, the Guangxi troops left Yanzhou and moved south, and the Huaixi troops were shaken.

古文：浚闻，疾驰至采石，令其众曰： 有一人渡江者斩！ 光世复驻军，与沂中接。
现代文：张浚听说，急忙乘马赶到县石，下令部队说： 有一个人渡江必斩！ 光世重又驻下军队，与沂中会合。
English: Hearing of this, Zhang Jun hurried to Guanshi by horse and ordered the troops to say: "There is a man crossing the river who must be killed! Guang Shizhong also stationed troops to meet with Yu Zhong.

古文：刘猊攻沂中，沂中大破之，猊、麟皆拔栅遁。
现代文：刘猊进攻沂中，沂中大败敌军，刘猊、刘麟都拔营而逃。
English: Liu Bei attacked Shizhong, defeated the enemy army in Shizhong, and Liu Bei and Liu Lin broke camp and fled.

古文：高宗手书嘉奖，召浚还，劳之。
现代文：高宗手书嘉奖，召张浚回朝。慰劳他。
English: Gao Zong wrote a letter of commendation and called Zhang Jun back to the North. He consoled him.

古文：时赵鼎等议回跸临安，浚奏： 天下之事，不倡则不起，三岁之间，陛下一再临江，士气百倍。
现代文：当时赵鼎等人建议皇上回到临安，张浚说 ：天下之事，不倡则不起，三年之间，陛下一再临江，士气百倍。
English: At that time, Zhao Ding and others suggested that the emperor return to Lin'an. Zhang Jun said, "In the world, if you don't advocate, you can't afford it. In three years, His Majesty will return to Linjiang, and morale will increase a hundredfold."

古文：今六飞一还，人心解体。 高宗幡然从浚计。
现代文：现在六飞一还，人心会解体。 高宗忄番然听从张浚的计策。
English: Now that Liuhei is back, people's hearts will disintegrate. Gao Zongyao has once again listened to Zhang Jun's strategy.

古文：鼎出知绍兴府。
现代文：赵鼎出任知绍兴府。
English: Zhao Ding took up the post of Zhishao Xingfu.

古文：浚以亲民之官，治道所急，条具郡守、监司、省郎、馆阁出入迭补之法；又以灾异奏复贤良方正科。
现代文：张浚认为亲民之官，治道所急，条具郡守、监司、省郎、馆阁出入迭补之法；又因为灾异奏请恢复贤良方正科。
English: Zhang Jun believed that the officials who are close to the people are in urgent need of governance, and the methods of county governors, supervisors, overseers, and pavilion entrances and exits should be iterated. In addition, because of the disaster, please restore the virtuous party discipline.

古文：七年，以浚却敌功，制除特进。
现代文：七年，因为张浚退敌有功，诏令授任特进。
English: In the seventh year, because Zhang Jun did a good job of retreating from the enemy, he was awarded the special promotion by the imperial edict.

古文：未几，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：不久，加任金紫光禄大夫。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：问安使何藓归报徽宗皇帝、宁德皇后相继崩殂，上号恸擗踊，哀不自胜。
现代文：问安使何藓回来报告徽宗皇帝、宁德皇后相继去世，皇上痛哭不止，哀不自胜。
English: Qian'an envoy He Ying returned to report that Emperor Huizong and Empress Ningde had passed away one after another. The emperor was inconsolable, weeping uncontrollably.

古文：浚奏： 天子之孝，不与士庶同，必思所以奉宗庙社稷，今梓宫未返，天下涂炭，愿陛下挥涕而起，敛发而趋，一怒以安天下之民。 上乃命浚草诏告谕中外，辞甚哀切。
现代文：张浚说 ：天子守孝，不与百姓相同，必定考虑怎样继承宗庙社稷，现在灵柩未返，天下涂炭，希望陛下挥泪而起，敛发而行，一怒以安定天下百姓。 皇上命令张浚草拟诏书告谕中外，言辞非常悲切。
English: Zhang Jun said, "The son of Heaven, the son of filial piety, is not the same as the people, and he must consider how to inherit the family temple and shrine, and now the coffin has not returned, and the world is covered with ashes. I hope that His Majesty will shed tears, restrain his anger, and stabilize the people of the world. The emperor ordered Zhang Jun to draft an edict to announce to China and the world, and the words were very sad.

古文：浚又请命诸大将率三军发哀成服，中外感动。
现代文：张浚又请求下令诸大将率领三军穿丧服致哀，中外百姓都很感动。
English: Zhang Jun also requested to order the generals to lead the three armies to wear mourning clothes to mourn, and the Chinese and foreign people were very moved.

古文：浚退上疏曰： 陛下思慕两宫，忧劳百姓。
现代文：张浚上疏说 ：陛下想念两宫，忧虑百姓。
English: Zhang Jun Shang Zuo said: His Majesty misses the two palaces and is worried about the people.

古文：臣之至愚，获遭任用，臣每感慨自期，誓歼敌仇。
现代文：我才能至愚，受到任用，常常感慨自勉，誓杀歼灭仇敌。
English: My talent is so stupid, I was appointed, I often feel sorry for myself, I vow to kill and destroy the enemy.

古文：十年之间，亲养阙然，爰及妻孥，莫之私顾，其意亦欲遂陛下孝养之心，拯生民于涂炭。
现代文：十年之间，对父母赡养不周，至于妻子和孩子，都无法顾及，心下想要成全陛下养孝之心，拯救百姓于水火。
English: During the past ten years, he did not take good care of his parents and could not take care of his wife and children. In his heart, he wanted to fulfill His Majesty's filial piety and save the people from disaster.

古文：昊天不吊，祸变忽生，使陛下抱无穷之痛，罪将谁执。
现代文：苍天不悯，祸变突然而生，使陛下抱无穷之痛，其罪谁来担负。
English: Heaven has no mercy. The calamity occurred suddenly, causing His Majesty to endure endless pain. Who will bear the burden of his guilt?

古文：念昔陕、蜀之行，陛下命臣曰： 我有大隙于北，刷此至耻，惟尔是属。
现代文：想当初陕、蜀之行，陛下下令我说 ：我有大仇在北方，洗刷这个耻辱，只有你可以嘱托。 
English: At the beginning of my trip to Shaanxi and Shu, Your Majesty ordered me to say: I have a great grudge against the North, and only You can erase this disgrace.

古文：而臣终隳成功，使敌无惮，今日之祸，端自臣致，乞赐罢黜。 上诏浚起视事。
现代文：而我最终未能成功，使敌人肆无忌惮，今日之祸，祸端实由我致，请求赐给我罢免。 皇上诏令张浚处理政事。
English: But in the end, I did not succeed, I allowed the enemy to act recklessly, and today's misfortune, the cause of the misfortune, was actually caused by me, and I asked to be dismissed.

古文：浚再疏待罪，不许，乃请乘舆发平江，至建康。
现代文：张浚再次上疏请罪，皇上不同意，于是请求皇上从平江出发，到建康。
English: Zhang Jun again went to the imperial court to plead guilty, but the emperor did not agree, so he asked the emperor to leave Pingjiang and go to Jiankang.

古文：浚总中外之政，几事丛委，以一身任之。
现代文：张浚总理中外政事，政事繁多，一身任之。
English: Premier Zhang Jun is in charge of domestic and foreign affairs. He is in charge of a wide range of affairs.

古文：每奏对，必言仇耻之大，反复再三，上未尝不改容流涕。
现代文：每次与皇上见面，一定说到耻辱之大，反复再三，皇上未尝不变色流涕。
English: Every time he met with the emperor, he must have spoken of the great shame, repeatedly, and the emperor did not taste the same color.

古文：时天子方厉精克己，戒饬宫庭内侍，无敢越度，事无巨细，必以咨浚，赐诸将诏，往往命浚草之。
现代文：当时皇帝正励精克己，戒令宫廷内侍，不要超越法度，事无大小，必定征询张浚，赐给诸将诏书，往往命令张浚草拟。
English: At that time, the emperor was trying his best to restrain himself, and ordered the palace attendants not to exceed the legal limits. No matter how big or small, they must consult Zhang Jun, give the generals an edict, and often order Zhang Jun to draft.

古文：刘光世在淮西，军无纪律，浚奏罢光世，以其兵属督府，命参谋兵部尚书吕祉往庐州节制。
现代文：刘光世在淮西，军队没有纪律，张浚奏请罢免光世，把他的部队隶属于督府，命令参谋兵部尚书吕祉前往庐州节制。
English: Liu Guangshi was in Huaxi, the army was undisciplined, Zhang Junsong requested to dismiss Guangshi, subordinate his troops to the governor's office, and order the staff officer of the military department, Shang Shului, to go to Bozhou for restraint.

古文：而枢密院以督府握兵为嫌，乞置武帅，乃以王德为都统制，即军中取郦琼副之。
现代文：而枢密院认为督府握兵不避嫌，请求设置武将，于是任命王德为都统制，从军队中选择郦琼为副职。
English: The Privy Council, however, thought it was not a bad idea for the governor's office to have a military commander, and requested the establishment of a military commander, so it appointed Wang De as the governor of the capital, and selected Zou Qiong from the military as the deputy.

古文：浚奏其不当，琼亦与德有宿怨，列状诉御史台，乃命张俊为宣抚使，杨沂中、刘锜为制置判官以抚之。
现代文：张浚奏称不适宜，郦琼与王德有旧怨，列状诉到御史台，于是命令张浚为宣抚使，杨沂中、刘钅奇为制置判官进行安抚。
English: Zhang Junzong said that it was not appropriate, and Zou Qiong and Wang De had an old grudge, and filed a complaint to the Imperial History Station. Therefore, Zhang Junzong was ordered to be the envoy, and Yang Xizhong and Liu Bingqi were ordered to be the judges.

古文：未至，琼等举军叛，执吕祉以归刘豫。
现代文：还未到，郦琼举兵反叛，捉住吕祉投降刘豫。
English: Before he arrived, Gong Qiong raised an army to rebel, captured Lv Shi and surrendered to Liu Yu.

古文：祉不行，詈琼等，碎齿折首而死。
现代文：吕祉不走，詈骂郦琼等人，被碎齿斩首而死。
English: Lv Zhi refused to leave, cursed Zi Qiong and others, and was beheaded with broken teeth.

古文：浚引咎求去位，高宗问可代者，且曰： 秦桧何如？ 浚曰： 近与共事，方知其暗。 高宗曰： 然则用赵鼎。 桧由是憾浚。
现代文：张浚引咎求去位，高宗问谁可代替他，并且问 ：秦桧怎么样？ 张浚说： 最近与他共事，才知道他昏暗。 高宗说 ：那么用赵鼎。 秦桧从此怨恨张浚。
English: Zhang Jun asked Gao Zong who could replace him, and asked: What about Qin Jun? Zhang Jun said: I recently worked with him, so I know he's dim. Gao Zong said: Then use Zhao Ding. Qin Jun resented Zhang Jun from then on.

古文：浚以观文殿大学士提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：张浚以观文殿大学士身份提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: Zhang Jun, as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, raised the Jiangsu Taiping Xingguo Palace.

古文：先是，浚遣人持手榜入伪地间刘豫，及郦琼叛去，复遣间持蜡书遗琼，金人果疑豫，寻废之。
现代文：在此之前，张浚派人拿着手书到伪地离间刘豫，到郦琼叛逃，又派间谍拿着蜡书送给郦琼，金人果然怀疑郦琼，不久夺了他的职。
English: Prior to this, Zhang Jun sent a person with a manuscript to falsely entrap Liu Yu, defected to Gong Qiong, and sent a spy with a wax book to give to Gong Qiong. Jinren indeed suspected Gong Qiong and soon took over his post.

古文：台谏交诋，浚落职，以秘书少监分司西京，居永州。
现代文：台谏官员不断诋毁，张浚落职，以秘书少监分司西京，住在永州。
English: The Taiwanese officials continued to denigrate him, and Zhang Jian fell from his post and took up a position as secretary of the sub-division of juvenile supervisors in West Beijing, living in Yongzhou.

古文：九年，以赦复官。提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：九年，因为赦令重新做官，提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: Nine years later, because he was pardoned and reinstated as an official, Lin'an Dongxiao Palace was elevated to the highest rank.

古文：未几，除资政殿大学士、知福州兼福建安抚大使。
现代文：不久，授任资政殿大学士、知福州兼福建安抚大使。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Scholar of the Supreme Court of the Republic of China, as well as the title of Ambassador of the State of Fujian to the Republic of China.

古文：金遣使来，以诏谕为名，浚五上疏争之。
现代文：金人遣使者来，以诏谕为名，张浚五次上疏争论。
English: The goldsmith sent an envoy to Zhang Jun five times to argue with him in the name of the edict.

古文：十年，金败盟，复取河南。
现代文：十年，金人背盟，又攻取河南。
English: Ten years later, the Jin people reneged on their alliance and invaded Henan Province.

古文：浚奏愿因权制变，则大勋可集，因大治海舟千艘，为直指山东之计。
现代文：张浚上奏希望因机应变，就会大功可成，于是大修海船千余艘，为直指山东之计。
English: Zhang Jun hoped that due to the opportunity, great achievements would be made, so the overhaul of more than a thousand ships was a direct reference to Shandong.

古文：十一年，除检校少傅、崇信军节度使，充万寿观使，免奉朝请。
现代文：十一年，授任检校少傅、崇信军节度使，充任万寿观使，免去朝请。
English: In the eleventh year, he was awarded the post of junior inspector of schools and the post of festival envoy of the Chongxin Army, and served as the envoy of the Manchukuo, and was exempted from the invitation to the Imperial Court.

古文：十二年，封和国公。
现代文：十二年，封为和国公。
English: In the twelfth year, he was given the title of Prince of Wakoku.

古文：十六年，彗星出西方，浚将极论时事，恐贻母忧。
现代文：十六年，西方出现彗星，张浚打算极力指责时事，恐怕母亲忧虑。
English: Sixteen years later, a comet appeared in the west, and Zhang Jun planned to vigorously criticize current affairs. I'm afraid my mother was worried.

古文：母讶其瘠，问故，浚以实对。
现代文：母亲惊讶他少言寡语，问他缘故，张浚告诉母亲实际情况。
English: His mother was surprised at his taciturnity, and asked him why, Zhang Jun told his mother the actual situation.

古文：母诵其父对策之语曰： 臣宁言而死于斧钺，不能忍不言以负陛下。 浚意乃决。
现代文：母亲背诵其父亲对策上的话说 ：我宁可说了而死于斧钺，不能忍着不说以辜负陛下。 张浚才下定决心。
English: Zhang Jun finally made up his mind after his mother recited his father's countermeasure: "I would rather die by the axe than fail His Majesty by not telling him."

古文：上疏谓： 当今事势，譬如养成大疽于头目心腹之间，不决不止。
现代文：上疏称 ：当今事势，好像在头目心腹之间长成了个大疽，不切除不能痊愈。
English: Shang Su said: The current situation seems to have grown into a gangrene between the ringleaders and their henchmen, which cannot be healed without excision.

古文：惟陛下谋之于心，谨察情伪，使在我有不可犯之势，庶几社稷安全；不然，后将噬脐。 事下三省，秦桧大怒，令台谏论浚，以特进提举江州太平兴国宫，居连州。
现代文：希望陛下在心里谋划，谨慎观察虚伪，使自己有不可侵犯之势，才有国家安全的希望；不然，后来将会吃下苦果。 事情交付三省审论，秦桧大怒，命令台谏官员论责张浚，贬任他为以特进提举江州太平兴国宫，住在连州。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will plan in his heart, carefully observe the hypocrisy, and make himself inviolable, so that there will be hope for national security; otherwise, he will suffer bitter consequences later. The matter was submitted to the three provinces for review, Qin Yu was furious, ordered the Taiwanese officials to discuss and blame Zhang Jun, and relegated him to be promoted to the Jiangzhou Taiping National Palace with special promotion, and live in Lianzhou.

古文：二十年，徙永州。
现代文：二十年，迁到永州。
English: Twenty years later, he moved to Yongzhou.

古文：浚去国几二十载，天下士无贤不肖，莫不倾心慕之。
现代文：张浚离开朝廷几乎二十年，天下士大夫不论贤者与不肖者，无不倾心敬佩他。
English: Zhang Jun has been away from the imperial court for almost twenty years. The world's scholars, both wise and not, admire him with all their hearts.

古文：武夫健将，言浚者必咨嗟太息，至儿童妇女，亦知有张都督也。
现代文：武夫健将，说到张浚必定嗟嗟叹息，甚至儿童妇女，也知道有个张都督。
English: When it comes to Zhang Jun, even children and women know that there is a Zhang Tudou.

古文：金人惮浚，每使至，必问浚安在，惟恐其复用。
现代文：金人害怕张浚，每次使者来，一定要问张浚在什么地方，唯恐他重新被起用。
English: The goldsmith is afraid of Zhang Jun. Every time a messenger comes, he must ask Zhang Jun where he is, lest he be reassigned.

古文：当是时，秦桧怙宠固位，惧浚为正论以害己，令台臣有所弹劾，论必及浚，反谓浚为国贼，必欲杀之。
现代文：当时，秦桧被宠固位，担心张浚发表公正意见损害自己，命令台臣只要有所弹劾，一定涉及到张浚，反称张浚是国贼，必欲杀掉他。
English: At that time, Qin Yu was favored and entrenched in his position. He was worried that Zhang Jun would harm himself by expressing an impartial opinion. He ordered the Taiwanese minister that as long as there was an impeachment, it must involve Zhang Jun. On the contrary, he said that Zhang Jun was a traitor and he must kill him.

古文：以张柄知潭州，汪召锡使湖南，使图浚。
现代文：秦桧任命张柄为知潭州，汪召锡出使湖南，让他们图谋害死张浚。
English: Qin Hui appointed Zhang Er as the governor of Zhitan Province, and Wang Zhaoxing sent envoys to Hunan, asking them to plot the death of Zhang Jun.

古文：张常先使江西，治张宗元狱，株连及浚，捕赵鼎子汾下大理，令自诬与浚谋大逆，会桧死乃免。
现代文：张常先出使江西，审理张宗元案，株连到张浚，捕捉赵鼎的儿子赵汾交付大理寺，命令他自诬与张浚图谋不道，恰遇秦桧死了才得以幸免。
English: Zhang Chang first sent an envoy to Jiangxi to try Zhang Zongyuan's case. Zhu Lian went to Zhang Jun, captured Zhao Ding's son Zhao Yao and delivered him to Dali Temple. He was ordered to conspire with Zhang Jun, but he was spared when Qin Yao died.

古文：二十五年，复观文殿大学士、判洪州。
现代文：二十五年，朝廷任命张浚为观文殿大学士、判洪州。
English: In the 25th year, the imperial court appointed Zhang Jun as a scholar of the Academy of Confucius, and sentenced Hongzhou.

古文：浚时以母丧将归葬。
现代文：张浚当时因母丧将归葬。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun was going to be buried due to the death of his mother.

古文：念天下事二十年为桧所坏，边备荡驰；又闻金亮篡立，必将举兵，自以大臣，义同休戚，不敢以居丧为嫌，具奏论之。
现代文：考虑到天下政事二十年来被秦桧所坏，边备松弛，又听说金亮篡立，必将兴兵攻宋，自以为大臣，义应与国家同甘共苦，不敢因为居丧嫌碍，上奏陈述。
English: Taking into account that the world's political affairs had been corrupted by Qin Zang for twenty years, and the border preparedness was slack, and hearing that Jin Liang had been usurped, he would certainly raise an army to attack Song. He thought that he was a minister, and that he should share the joys and sorrows with the country. He did not dare to make a statement because of his grief.

古文：会星变求直言，浚谓金人数年间，势决求衅用兵，而国家溺于宴安，荡然无备，乃上疏极言。
现代文：正好星象有变，朝廷征求直言，张浚认为金人数年间，势必兴兵来攻，而国家却溺于宴会，荡然无备，于是上疏极力陈述。
English: Just as the stars were changing, the imperial court solicited candid opinions. Zhang Jun believed that the number of people in the country was bound to increase, and the army was bound to attack. However, the country was addicted to banquets and was completely unprepared. Therefore, Shang So vigorously made a statement.

古文：而大臣沈该、万俟禼、汤思退等见之，谓敌初无衅，笑浚为狂。
现代文：而大臣沈该、万俟、汤思退等人见了，认为敌人不会用兵，耻笑张浚狂妄。
English: However, when the ministers Shen Jia, Wan Xuan, and Tang Sijie saw it, they thought that the enemy would not use soldiers, and they laughed at Zhang Jian's arrogance.

古文：台谏汤鹏举、凌哲论浚归蜀，恐摇动远方，诏复居永州。
现代文：台谏汤鹏举、凌哲指责张浚归蜀，恐怕摇动远方，诏令仍住在永州。
English: Tang Penghu and Ling Zhe of Taiwan accused Zhang Jun of returning to Shuxu, which is likely to shake the distant country, but Dahirong still lives in Yongzhou.

古文：服除落职，以本官奉祠。
现代文：守丧满期后夺去职务，以本官奉祭祠。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he took away his post and served the shrine with his own post.

古文：三十一年春，有旨自便。
现代文：三十一年春天，有旨命他自便。
English: In the spring of 31st year, he was ordered to leave at his own convenience.

古文：浚至潭，闻钦宗崩，号恸不食，上疏请早定守战之策。
现代文：张浚到潭州，听说钦宗去世，痛哭不进食，上疏请求早定守战之策。
English: Zhang Jun went to Tanzhou, heard that Qinzong had died, wept bitterly and did not eat, and asked Shangsu to decide on the strategy of defending the war early.

古文：未几，亮兵大入，中外震动，复浚观文殿大学士、判潭州。
现代文：不久，金亮挥兵大入，中外震动，重用张浚为观文殿大学士、判潭州。
English: Not long after, Jin Liang's troops swept in, causing a shock to both China and the outside world, and Zhang Jun was re-appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucius and a judge of Tan Prefecture.

古文：时金骑充斥，王权兵溃，刘锜退归镇江，遂改命浚判建康府兼行宫留守。
现代文：当时金人骑兵横行，王权军溃败，刘钅奇退到镇江，于是改任张浚为判建康府兼行营留守。
English: At that time, the Jin cavalry was rampant, the royal power army was defeated, and Liu Bingqi retreated to Zhenjiang, so he changed his name to Zhang Jun and stayed in Jiankangfu.

古文：浚至岳阳，买舟冒风雪而行，遇东来者云： 敌兵方焚采石，烟炎涨天，慎无轻进。 浚曰： 吾赴君父之急，知直前求乘舆所在而已。 时长江无一舟敢行北岸者。
现代文：张浚到岳阳，乘船冒风雪而行，遇到朝东边来的人说： 敌兵正焚烧采石，火焰满天，千万不要轻率前进。 张浚说 ：我赴君父的急难，只知一直往前寻找皇帝所在处而已。 当时长江上无一船敢沿北岸而行。
English: Zhang Jun went to Yueyang and traveled by boat in the snow and wind. When he encountered people coming from the east, he said, "The enemy soldiers are burning the quarry, the flames are all over the sky, do not advance rashly." Zhang Jun said, "I went to my father's emergency, I only knew that I had been looking for the emperor's whereabouts. At that time, no boat on the Yangtze River dared to travel along the north bank.

古文：浚乘小舟径进，过池阳，闻亮死，余众犹二万屯和州。
现代文：张浚乘坐小船直往前进，经过池阳时，听说金亮已死，余众还有二万人驻扎在和州。
English: Zhang Jun took a small boat and went straight ahead. When he passed through Chiyang, he heard that Jin Liang had died, and that there were still 20,000 people stationed in Wenzhou.

古文：李显忠兵在沙上，浚往犒之，一军见浚，以为从天而下。
现代文：李显忠的军队驻扎在沙上，张浚前往犒军，全军人见了张浚，以为他是从天而降。
English: Lee Hsien Chung's army was stationed on the sand, Zhang Jun went to the Shan army, and all the soldiers saw Zhang Jun and thought he had fallen from the sky.

古文：浚至建康，即牒通判刘子昂办行宫仪物，请乘舆亟临幸。
现代文：张浚到建康，即通知通判刘子昂置办行宫仪物，请皇帝早日驾临。
English: When Zhang Jun arrived in Jiankang, he immediately notified Liu Zi'ang, the judge, to arrange for the palace's ceremonial objects, and asked the emperor to come as soon as possible.

古文：三十二年，车驾幸建康，浚迎拜道左，卫士见浚，无不以手加额。
现代文：三十二年，皇帝到建康，张浚在路旁迎拜，卫士见了张浚，无不掩面哭泣。
English: Thirty-two years ago, when the emperor arrived in Jiankang, Zhang Jun bowed to him on the side of the road. When the guards saw Zhang Jun, they all hid their faces and cried.

古文：时浚起废复用，风采隐然，军民皆倚以为重。
现代文：当时张浚起废复用，风采隐然，军民都倚重他。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun took up waste reuse, his style was vague, and the military and the people all relied on him.

古文：车驾将还临安，劳浚曰： 卿在此，朕无北顾忧矣。 兼节制建康、镇江府、江州、池州、江阴军军马。
现代文：皇帝准备回到临安，慰劳张浚说： 你在这里，我没有北顾之忧了。 命他兼领节制建康、镇江府、江州、池州、江阴军军马。
English: As the emperor prepared to return to Lin'an, he consoled Zhang Jun and said, "You are here, I don't have to worry about looking north. I have ordered him to lead the Jiankang, Zhenjiang, Jiangzhou, Chizhou, and Jiangyin armies.

古文：金兵十万围海州，浚命镇江都统张子盖往救，大破之。
现代文：金兵十万围攻海州，张浚命令镇江都统张子盖前往援救，大破金兵。
English: A hundred thousand gold soldiers besieged Haizhou. Zhang Zhen ordered Zhang Ziguai, the governor of Zhenjiang, to come to the rescue, and the gold soldiers were defeated.

古文：浚招集忠义，及募淮楚壮勇，以陈敏为统制。
现代文：张浚招集忠义之士，及招募淮楚壮丁，任命陈敏为统制。
English: Zhang Jun called up loyalists and recruited Huai Chu Zongding, and appointed Chen Min as regent.

古文：且谓敌长于骑，我长于步，卫步莫如弩，卫弩莫如车，命敏专制弩治车。
现代文：并且说敌人长于骑兵，我方长于步兵，保卫步兵莫如弓箭，保卫弓箭莫如战车，下令刘敏专门制弓弩修战车。
English: He also said that the enemy is better than the cavalry, our side is better than the infantry, the protection of the infantry is like the bow and arrow, the protection of the bow and arrow is like the chariot, and ordered Liu Min to specially make the bow and arrow to repair the chariot.

古文：孝宗即位，召浚入见，改容曰： 久闻公名，今朝廷所恃唯公。 赐坐降问，浚从容言： 人主之学，以心为本，一心合天，何事不济？
现代文：孝宗即位，召张浚入宫相见，庄重地说 ：听说你的大名很久了，现在朝廷只有依靠你。 赐座并询问他，张浚从容说道 ：人主之学，以心为本，一心合天，哪件事不成功？
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended the throne, he summoned Zhang Jun to the palace to meet him, and said solemnly, "I have heard of your great name for a long time, and now the imperial court can only rely on you." After giving him a seat and questioning him, Zhang Jun calmly said, "In the study of the Lord, with the heart as the foundation, and with one heart for the world, what has not been successful?

古文：所谓天者，天下之公理而已。
现代文：所谓天，是天下的公理而已。
English: The so-called "heaven" is just an axiom of the world.

古文：必兢业自持，使清明在躬，则赏罚举措，无有不当，人心自归，敌仇自服。 孝宗悚然曰： 当不忘公言。 除少傅、江淮东西路宣抚使，进封魏国公。
现代文：必定兢业自持，使自己清明，那么赏罚举行，无有不当，人心自然归向，敌仇自然可报。 孝宗悚然说 ：我应当不忘记你的话。 授任少傅、江淮东西路宣抚使，进封为魏国公。
English: He must be diligent in self-control and make himself clear, then the reward and punishment will be held, there is no injustice, the people's hearts will naturally turn, and the enmity can naturally be reported. Xiaozong said with a shudder: I should not forget your words. He was awarded the title of Shao Fu, the East-West Road Herald of Jianghuai, and was enthroned as the prince of Wei.

古文：翰林学士史浩议欲城瓜州、采石。
现代文：翰林学士史浩打算在瓜洲、采石筑城。
English: Hanlin scholar Shi Hao plans to build a quarry in Guazhou.

古文：浚谓不守两淮而守江干，是示敌以削弱，怠战守之气，不若先城泗州。
现代文：张浚认为不守两淮而守长江干道，是以弱示敌，懈怠战守士气，不如先在泗州筑城。
English: Zhang Jun believed that it would be better to build a city in Zhangzhou first, rather than defending the Yangtze River trunk road by defending the two Huai and Huai rivers.

古文：及浩参知政事，浚所规画，浩必沮之。
现代文：到史浩任参知政事时，张浚的计划，史浩一定阻抑。
English: When Shi Hao assumed the post of governor, Zhang Jun's plan was definitely blocked by Shi Hao.

古文：浚荐陈俊卿为宣抚判官，孝宗召俊卿及浚子栻赴行在。
现代文：张浚推荐陈俊卿为宣抚判官，孝宗召俊卿及张浚的儿子张木式赴行宫。
English: Zhang Jun recommended Chen Junqing as the pronouncement judge, and Xiaozong called on Junqing and Zhang Jun's son Zhang Muxi to go to the palace.

古文：浚附奏请上临幸建康，以动中原之心，用师淮堧，进舟山东，以为吴璘声援。
现代文：张浚附奏请皇帝到建康，以震动中原的民心；用兵淮，进舟山东，作为吴王的声援。
English: Zhang Jun's epilogue invited the emperor to Jiankang to shake the hearts of the people in the Central Plains; with soldiers Huai, into Zhouzhou, Shandong, as a show of support for the king of Wu.

古文：孝宗见俊卿等，问浚动静饮食颜貌，曰： 朕倚魏公如长城，不容浮言摇夺。 金人以十万众屯河南，声言规两淮，移文索海、泗、唐、邓、商州及岁币。
现代文：孝宗见到陈俊卿等人，询问张浚起居饮食颜色，说 ：我倚重魏公如同长城，不容浮言动摇。 金人以十万兵力驻屯河南，声称进攻两淮，传布文书索取海、泗、唐、邓、商诸州及岁币。
English: When Xiaozong saw Chen Junqing and others, he asked Zhang Jun about the color of the living and eating conditions, and said, "I rely on Wei Gong like the Great Wall, and I cannot be swayed by empty words. The Jin people stationed in Henan with a hundred thousand troops, claimed to attack the two Huai, and circulated documents to request the sea, Yunnan, Tang, Deng, Shang, Zhuzhou and New Year's coins.

古文：浚言北敌诡诈，不当为之动，以大兵屯盱眙、濠、庐备之，卒以无事。
现代文：张浚认为北敌诡诈，不应当为之所动，把重兵驻扎在盱眙、濠、庐州备敌，终于无事。
English: Zhang Jun believed that the northern enemy was deceitful and should not be moved by it. He stationed heavy troops in Handan, Handan and Handan to prepare for the enemy, and finally nothing happened.

古文：隆兴元年，除枢密使，都督建康、镇江府、江州、池州、江阴军军马。
现代文：隆兴元年，授任张浚为枢密使，都督建康、镇江府、江州、池州、江阴军军马。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, Zhang Jun was appointed as a privy envoy, and the military horses of the Jiankang, Zhenjiangfu, Jiangzhou, Chizhou and Jiangyin armies were appointed as governors.

古文：时金将蒲察徒穆及知泗州大周仁屯虹县，都统萧琦，屯灵壁，积粮修城，将为南攻计。
现代文：当时金将蒲察徒穆及知泗州大周仁驻扎在虹县，都统萧琦驻扎在灵壁，积蓄粮食修整城池，作为南攻的准备。
English: At that time, Kim stationed Putsatsumu and Zhou Ren in Hongxian, and Tutong Xiaojun in Lingbi, to accumulate grain and repair the city, as a preparation for the southern attack.

古文：浚欲及其未发攻之。会主管殿前司李显忠、建康都统邵宏渊亦献捣二邑之策，浚具以闻。
现代文：张浚打算乘其未发先攻之，正好主管殿前司李显忠、建康都统邵宏渊也提出捣毁敌人二城之策，张浚详细告诉皇上。
English: Zhang Jun intended to take advantage of his failure to attack first, just as Li Xianzhong, the prefect of the palace, and Shao Hongyuan, the director of the construction of the Kangdu, also proposed a plan to destroy the enemy's two cities, Zhang Jun told the emperor in detail.

古文：上报可，召浚赴行在，命先图两城。
现代文：皇上表示同意，召张浚到行宫，命他先图取两城。
English: The emperor agreed, summoned Zhang Jun to the palace, and ordered him to take the two cities first.

古文：乃遣显忠出濠州，趋灵壁；宏渊出泗州，趋虹县，而浚自往临之。
现代文：于是派遣李显忠出兵濠州，直趋灵壁；邵宏渊出兵泗州，直趋虹县，而张浚亲自前去巡视。
English: Therefore, Li Hsien Chung was dispatched from Bozhou to go straight to Lingbi; Shao Hongyuan was dispatched from Bozhou to go straight to Hongxian, and Zhang Jun personally went to inspect.

古文：显忠至灵壁，败萧琦；宏渊围虹县，降徒穆、周仁，乘胜进克宿州，中原震动。孝宗手书劳之曰： 近日边报，中外鼓舞，十年来无此克捷。 
现代文：显忠到了灵壁，打败萧琦；宏渊围攻虹县，逼降徒穆、周仁，乘胜进克宿州，中原震动，孝宗赐给手书慰问说 ：近日边报，中外鼓舞，十年来没有这样的战绩。 
English: Hsien Zhong reached the spiritual wall and defeated Xiao Jie; Hongyuan besieged Hongxian, forced the surrender of Tu Mu and Zhou Ren, and took advantage of the victory to enter Keshu, the Central Plains was shaken, and Xiaozong gave a handwritten condolence saying, "Recently, there has been no such record in ten years.

古文：浚以盛夏人疲，急召李显忠等还师。
现代文：张浚认为盛夏人疲，急召李显忠等人还师。
English: Zhang Jun thought that Li Hsien Chung and others should be urgently summoned to return as instructors.

古文：会金帅纥石烈志宁率兵至宿州，与显忠战。
现代文：正好金兵元帅纥石烈志宁率兵到宿州，与显忠作战。
English: Just at that time, Gold Soldier Marshal Zou Shi Leshining led his troops to Suzhou to fight against Xian Zhong.

古文：连日南军小不利，忽谍报敌兵大至，显忠夜引归。
现代文：连日宋军稍微不利，忽然谍报敌兵大至，显忠连夜还师。
English: Even though the Japanese and Song armies were at a slight disadvantage, they suddenly spied on the enemy soldiers to such an extent that Hsien Chung withdrew his troops overnight.

古文：浚上疏待罪，有旨降授特进，更为江、淮宣抚使。
现代文：张浚上疏请罪，有旨降任特进，改任江、淮宣抚使。
English: Zhang Jun pleaded guilty to sabotage, and was demoted to the position of special envoy, and was reappointed as the envoy of Jiang and Huai.

古文：宿师之还，士大夫主和者皆议浚之非，孝宗复赐浚书曰： 今日边事倚卿为重，卿不可畏人言而怀犹豫。
现代文：宿州部队回师，士大夫主和者都议论张浚的错误，孝宗又赐给张浚手书说： 现在的边事倚重你，你不要害怕人言而犹豫。
English: When the Suzuka troops returned to their division, the master of the academy and all the others discussed Zhang Jun's mistake. Xiaozong also gave Zhang Jun a handbook, saying, "The current border affairs weigh heavily on you. Don't be afraid of what people say and hesitate.

古文：前日举事之初，朕与卿任之，今日亦须与卿终之。 浚乃以魏胜守海州，陈敏守泗州，戚方守濠州，郭振守六合。
现代文：前日举事之初，我与你共任之，今日也须与你完成之。 张浚于是以魏胜守海州，陈敏守泗州，戚方守濠州，郭振守六合。
English: At the beginning of the event the day before yesterday, I shared the responsibility with you, and today I must complete it with you. Therefore, Wei Sheng is in charge of Haizhou, Chen Min is in charge of Luzhou, Qi Fang is in charge of Luzhou, and Guo Zhen is in charge of Liuhe.

古文：治高邮、巢县两城为大势，修滁州关山以扼敌冲，聚水军淮阴、马军寿春，大饬两淮守备。
现代文：修理增扩高邮、巢县两城，修治关山滁州以扼守敌人进攻，在淮阴聚结水军、在寿春聚结骑兵，大大整顿两淮守备。
English: The two cities of Gaoyou and Chaoxian were repaired and expanded, Guanshan and Luzhou were repaired and improved to hold back the enemy's attack, and naval forces were gathered in Huaiyin and cavalry forces were gathered in Shuchun to greatly improve the defense of the two provinces.

古文：孝宗复召栻奏事，浚附奏云： 自古有为之君，腹心之臣相与协谋同志，以成治功。
现代文：孝宗又召张木式奏事，张浚附奏说： 自古有好的皇帝，与心腹之臣相与协谋同心，以完成大功业。
English: Xiaozong also summoned Zhang Mu to make a report, and Zhang Jun added: Since ancient times, there have been good emperors who have worked together with their subordinates to accomplish great feats.

古文：今臣以孤踪，动辄掣肘，陛下将安用之。 因乞骸骨。
现代文：现在我因为孤纵，动辄受到牵制，陛下怎能任用。 因而请求辞职。
English: Now, because of my independence, I am often held back, how can His Majesty appoint me, so I asked to resign.

古文：孝宗览奏，谓栻曰： 朕待魏公有加，不为浮议所惑。 帝眷遇浚犹至，对近臣言，必曰魏公，未尝斥其名。
现代文：孝宗看罢奏章，对张木式说： 我对待魏公之心有增无减，不被浮议所迷惑。 皇帝对待张浚非常恩宠，对近臣谈话，一定称魏公，从不直称其名。
English: Xiaozong read the inscription and said to Zhang Muxi: "I treat the heart of Wei Gong with no reduction, and I am not fooled by vain talk. The emperor treated Zhang Jun very graciously, and when talking to his close vassals, he always called him Wei Gong, but never directly called him by his name.

古文：每遣使来，必令视浚饮食多寡，肥瘠何如。
现代文：每次张浚派使者来，一定询问张浚饮食多寡，肥瘦如何。
English: Every time Zhang Jun sent an envoy, he would ask Zhang Jun how much he ate and how fat and thin he was.

古文：寻诏复浚都督之号。
现代文：不久诏令恢复张浚都督的称号。
English: Soon after, the title of Zhang Junduo was restored by imperial decree.

古文：金帅仆散忠义贻书三省、枢密院，索四郡及岁币，不然，以农隙治兵。
现代文：金兵元帅仆散忠义寄信给三省、枢密院，索求四郡及岁币，不然，将在农闲时进兵。
English: The servant of the Gold Soldier Marshal, San Zhongyi, sent a letter to the heads of the three provinces and the Privy Council, demanding four counties and a year's money, otherwise, he would enter the army during the farmer's idle time.

古文：浚言： 金强则来，弱则止，不在和与不和。 时汤思退为右相。
现代文：张浚说： 金人强盛就来，弱小就止，不在和与不和。 当时汤思退为右相。
English: Zhang Jun said: "When the gold comes, the strong come; when the weak come, the weak stop; when there is no harmony, there is no discord." At that time, Tang Si withdrew to the right.

古文：思退，秦桧党也，急于求和，遂遣卢仲贤持书报金。
现代文：思退，是秦桧一党，急于求和，于是派遣卢仲贤持书出使金营。
English: It was Qin Yu and his party who were in a hurry to sue for peace, so they sent Lu Zhongxian to the capital with a letter.

古文：浚言仲贤小人多妄，不可委信。
现代文：张浚认为仲贤小人多妄，不可信用。
English: Zhang Jun believes that Zhongxian is a delusional villain and cannot be trusted.

古文：已而仲贤果以许四郡辱命。
现代文：后来仲贤果然许可金国四郡有辱使命。
English: Later, Zhongxian finally allowed the four counties of Jin Guo to have a humiliating mission.

古文：朝廷复以王之望为通问使，龙大渊副之，浚争不能得。
现代文：朝廷又任命王之望为通问使，龙大渊为副使，张浚争辩不成功。
English: The imperial court also appointed Wang Zhifang as envoy and Long Dayuan as deputy envoy. Zhang Jun's argument was unsuccessful.

古文：未几，召浚入见，复力陈和议之失。
现代文：不久，召张浚入宫晋见，又力陈和议之失。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jun was summoned to the palace for a meeting, but he failed to make peace.

古文：孝宗为止誓书，留之望、大渊待命，而令通书官胡昉、杨由义往，谕金以四郡不可割；若金人必欲得四郡，当追还使人，罢和议。
现代文：孝宗为此停发誓书，留之望、大渊待命，而令通书官胡日方、杨由义前往，告诉金人四郡不能割；如果金人想得此四郡，应当追还使者，罢和议。
English: For this reason, Xiaozong suspended the oath, kept his eyes open, and put Dayuan on standby, and ordered the courier Hu Yifang and Yang Yiyi to go and tell the Jin people that the four counties could not be cut off; if the Jin people wanted to get these four counties, they should return the envoy and negotiate.

古文：拜浚尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，都督如故；思退为左仆射。
现代文：授任张浚尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，依然都督军事；思退任左仆射。
English: Zhang Jun was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand retainer, the same as Zhongshumen's subordinate Pingzhangji and Privy Envoy, he was still the military governor; he wanted to retire from the left-hand retainer.

古文：胡昉等至宿，金人械系迫胁之，昉等不屈，更礼而归之。
现代文：胡日方等人到宿州，金人械系威胁他们，胡日方等人不屈，后来金人以礼送归他们。
English: Hu Rongfang and others went to Suzhou, Jinren Machinery threatened them, Hu Rongfang and others did not give in, and later Jinren sent them home with a gift.

古文：孝宗谕浚曰： 和议之不成，天也，自此事当归一矣。 二年，议进幸建康，诏之望等还。
现代文：孝宗告诉张浚说： 和议不成，是天意，从此政事归一。 二年，商议皇上到建康，诏令之望等人回来。
English: Xiaozong told Zhang Jun that: It was the will of heaven that the peace talks could not be concluded, and from then on, political affairs would be unified. In the second year, the emperor went to Jiankang to negotiate, and people such as Zhaorong and others came back.

古文：思退闻之大骇，阳为乞祠状，而阴与其党谋为陷浚计。
现代文：思退听说后非常惊恐，假装请求去职，而暗中与其同党谋划陷害张浚之计。
English: After hearing this, Si Wei was very alarmed. He pretended to ask for resignation, but secretly plotted with his party colleagues to frame Zhang Jun.

古文：俄诏浚行视江、淮。
现代文：不久诏令张浚巡视江、淮。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jun was ordered to inspect Jiang and Huai.

古文：时浚所招徕山东、淮北忠义之士，以实建康、镇江两军，凡万二千余人，万弩营所招淮南壮士及江西群盗又万余人，陈敏统之，以守泗州。
现代文：当时张浚招来的山东、淮北忠义之士，以充实建康、镇江两军，共一万二千多人，万弩营所招淮南壮士及江西群盗又有万余人，由陈敏统率，驻守泗州。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun invited loyalists from Shandong and Huaibei to supplement the two armies of Jiankang and Zhenjiang, a total of more than 12,000 people, and more than 10,000 strong men from Huainan and Jiangxi bandits recruited by Wanlu camp, led by Chen Min, stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：凡要害之地，皆筑城堡；其可因水为险者，皆积水为匮；增置江、淮战舰，诸军弓矢器械悉备。
现代文：凡是要害之地，都筑起城堡；可以因水成险处，都积水为潭；增设江、淮战船，各军弓箭兵器完备。
English: Castles have been built in all places where there is danger; places that can be dangerous due to water have all become waterlogged; warships have been added to the Yangtze River and the Huai River, and the bow and arrow weapons of each army are complete.

古文：时金人屯重兵于河南，为虚声胁和，有刻日决战之语。
现代文：当时金人驻扎重兵于河南，虚张声势威胁和议，有克日决战之语。
English: At that time, the Chinese stationed heavy troops in Henan, bluffed and threatened peace talks, and spoke of a decisive battle against Japan.

古文：及闻浚来，亟彻兵归。
现代文：到听说张浚来了，急忙撤兵逃归。
English: When they heard that Zhang Jun was coming, they hastily withdrew and fled.

古文：淮北之来归者日不绝，山东豪杰，悉愿受节度。
现代文：淮河以北来归降者日夜不绝，山东豪杰，都愿意接受指挥。
English: North of the Huaihe River, there is no end of returnees day and night, and Shandong heroes are all willing to accept command.

古文：浚以萧琦契丹望族，沈勇有谋，欲令尽领契丹降众，且以檄谕契丹，约为应援，金人益惧。
现代文：张浚认为萧琦是契丹望族，沉勇有谋，打算让他率领全部契丹降众，而且以檄文传谕契丹，约为应援，金人越是害怕。
English: Zhang Jun thought that Xiao Yao was a prominent member of the Khitan people, brave and resourceful, and planned to let him lead all the Khitan people to surrender. Moreover, he sent an envoy to the Khitan people to ask for assistance, which made the Jin people even more afraid.

古文：思退乃令王之望盛毁守备，以为不可恃；令尹穑论罢督府参议官冯方；又论浚费国不赀，奏留张深守泗不受赵廓之代为拒命。
现代文：思退于是命王之望极力诋毁守备，以为不可依恃；命尹穑指责、罢免督府参议官冯方；又责论张浚浪费国家资财，奏请留任张深守泗州而不同意赵廓取代他是抗拒朝命。
English: Therefore, the king's desire to denigrate the guard and thought that it could not be adhered to; the king accused and dismissed Feng Fang, the councillor of the governor's office; he also accused Zhang Jun of wasting national resources, and asked Zhang Sheng to stay in charge of Bozhou without agreeing to replace him with Zhao Guo.

古文：浚亦请解督府，诏从其请。
现代文：张浚也请求解去都督之职，诏令听从他的请求。
English: Zhang Jun also requested to be relieved of the post of governor, and the imperial edict complied with his request.

古文：左司谏陈良翰、侍御史周操言浚忠勤，人望所属，不当使去国。
现代文：左司谏陈良翰、侍御史周操认为张浚忠诚勤苦，人望所归，不应当让他离开朝廷。
English: Chen Lianghan, the Left Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and Zhou Du, the Attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, believed that Zhang Jun was a loyal and diligent person who was well-respected, and that he should not be allowed to leave the imperial court.

古文：浚留平江，凡八章乞致仕，除少师、保信军节度、判福州。
现代文：张浚留在平江，共八次上章请求退休，授任少师，保信军节度、判福州。
English: Zhang Jun stayed in Pingjiang, and was asked to retire by the previous chapter a total of eight times, and was awarded the title of junior division, the title of the Guanxin Army, and the title of Fuzhou.

古文：浚辞，改醴泉观使。
现代文：张浚辞谢，改任醴泉观使。
English: Zhang Jun resigned and was reassigned as the envoy to Quanquan.

古文：朝廷遂决弃地求和之议。
现代文：朝廷于是决定弃地求和。
English: As a result, the imperial court decided to abandon the country and sue for peace.

古文：浚既去，犹上疏论尹穑奸邪，必误国事，且劝上务学亲贤。
现代文：张浚离职后，还上疏论斥尹穑奸邪，必误国事，并且劝皇上务学亲贤。
English: After Zhang Jun left office, he also went on a rambling rant, denouncing the treachery of Yin Xi and the inevitable mistakes in state affairs, and advised the emperor to learn from the wise and virtuous.

古文：或勉浚勿复以时事为言，浚曰： 君臣之羲，无所逃于天地之间。
现代文：有人劝张浚不要再评论时事，张浚说： 君臣之义，天地之间无法逃避。
English: Some people advised Zhang Jun not to comment on current affairs. Zhang Jun said: The righteousness of kings and ministers cannot escape between heaven and earth.

古文：吾荷两朝厚恩，久尸重任，今虽去国，犹日望上心感悟，苟有所见，安忍弗言。
现代文：我身受两朝厚恩，久担重任，现在虽然离开朝廷，还希望皇上心里感悟，如果有些见解，怎忍不说。
English: I have been favored by two dynasties and have been entrusted with heavy responsibilities for a long time. Although I am leaving the imperial court, I still hope that the emperor will be impressed in his heart. If I have some opinions, I can't help but say them.

古文：上如欲复用浚，浚当即日就道，不敢以老病为辞。
现代文：皇上如果重新起用，我会即日就道，不敢因老病推辞。
English: If the Emperor were to reinstate me, I would resign the same day. I would not dare to refuse because of an old illness.

古文：如若等言，是诚何心哉！ 闻者耸然。
现代文：像你们说的那样，是什么诚心呢？ 听者耸然。
English: What is sincerity, as you say? The listener gasped.

古文：行次余干，得疾，手书付二子曰： 吾尝相国，不能恢复中原，雪祖宗之耻，即死，不当葬我先人墓左，葬我衡山下足矣。 讣闻，孝宗震悼，辍视朝，赠太保，后加赠太师，谥忠献。
现代文：走到余干，生了病，手写书信交付两个儿子说： 我曾任相国，不能恢复中原，雪祖宗之耻，死后，不要把我埋葬在祖宗墓旁，把我埋葬在衡山下就可以了。 讣告传到，孝宗悲悼，停止上朝，追赠太保，后加赠太师，谥号 忠献 。
English: When he got to Yugang, he fell ill and handed a handwritten letter to his two sons, saying: I once served as a foreign minister, I can't restore the Central Plains, the shame of Xue Zu Zong, after death, don't bury me next to the ancestral tomb, just bury me under Heng Mountain. Obituary arrived, Xiaozong mourned, stopped going to the court, posthumously awarded the title of grand tutor, and later awarded the title of grand master, and his posthumous title was dedicated.

古文：浚幼有大志，及为熙河幕官，遍行边垒，览观山川形势，时时与旧戍守将握手饮酒，问祖宗以来守边旧法，及军陈方略之宜。
现代文：张浚年轻时有大志，任熙河幕官时，遍行边垒，观览山川形势，经常与以往的戍卒守将握手对饮，询问祖宗以来守卫边疆之法及军阵战略事宜。
English: When Zhang Jun was young, he had a great ambition. When he was appointed as the shogun of Heihe, he traveled all over the frontier, observed the situation of the mountains and rivers, often shook hands with the former warlords, and inquired about the law of guarding the frontier and the strategy of the military front since his ancestors.

古文：故一旦起自疏远，当枢筦之任，悉能通知边事本末。
现代文：所以一旦从疏远地位提拔起来，担当枢密之任，能全部知道边事本末。
English: Therefore, once promoted from a distant position and assigned to a confidential position, he can know all the ins and outs.

古文：在京城中，亲见二帝北行，皇族系虏，生民涂炭，誓不与敌俱存，故终身不主和议。
现代文：在京城中，亲眼看见二帝北行，皇族被捕系，百姓涂炭，发誓不与敌人共存，所以终身不主张和议。
English: In the capital, I saw with my own eyes the two emperors marching north, the imperial family being arrested, and the common people swearing not to coexist with the enemy, so I never advocated for peace.

古文：每论定都大计，以为东南形势，莫如建康，人主居之，可以北望中原，常怀愤惕。
现代文：每次商议定都大计，认为东南形势，莫如建康，人主居之，可以北望中原，常怀愤惕之意。
English: Each time, the negotiators agreed on a general plan, believing that the situation in the southeast could not be improved, and that people could live independently and look north to the Central Plains, often with indignation.

古文：至如钱塘，僻在一隅，易于安肆，不足以号召北方。
现代文：至于钱塘，偏处一隅，易于安逸，不足以号令北方。
English: As for Qiantang, it is a corner, easy to relax, not enough to call the north.

古文：与赵鼎共政，多所引擢，从臣朝列，皆一时之望，人号 小元祐 。
现代文：与赵鼎共同执政，引荐很多人，从臣朝列，都是当时名望大臣，人们号称 小元 。
English: He co-ruled with Zhao Ding and introduced many people from the ranks of vassals to the imperial court, all of whom were renowned ministers at the time. They were known as Xiao Yuan.

古文：所荐虞允文、汪应辰、王十朋、刘珙等为名臣；拔吴玠、吴璘于行间，谓韩世忠忠勇，可倚以大事，一见刘锜奇之，付以事任，卒皆为名将，有成功，一时称浚为知人。
现代文：所推荐的虞允文、汪应辰、王十朋、刘珙等都是名臣；在军队中提拔吴、吴瞞，认为韩世忠忠诚勇敢，可以托付大事，一见刘钅奇就认为他是奇才，交付他重任，终于都成为名将，立有大功，一时都称赞张浚为知人。
English: The recommended Yu Yunwen, Wang Yingchen, Wang Shihong, Liu Hui, etc. were all famous ministers; Wu and Wu Xie were promoted in the army, and they thought that Han Shizhong was loyal and brave and could be entrusted with great things. At first glance, Liu Bingqi thought that he was a genius and entrusted him with a heavy task. Finally, they all became famous generals and achieved great feats. At one time, they all praised Zhang Jun as an acquaintance.

古文：浚事母以孝称，学邃于《易》，有《易解》及《杂说》十卷，《书》、《诗》、《礼》、《春秋》、《中庸》亦各有解，文集十卷，奏议二十卷。
现代文：张浚侍奉母亲以孝出名。对于《周易》钻研得很精深，著有《易解》及《杂说》十卷，《书》、《诗》、《礼》、《春秋》也都有注解，文集有十卷，奏议二十卷。
English: Zhang Jun served his mother and was known for his filial piety. He studied "Zhou Yi" very deeply, authored "Easily Solved" and "Miscellaneous Sayings" ten volumes, "Books," "Poems," "Rites," and "Spring and Autumn" also have annotations, the anthology has ten volumes, and the report has twenty volumes.

古文：子二人、栻、枃。
现代文：有儿子二人：张木式、张木匀。
English: They have two sons: Zhang Mu Xi and Zhang Mu Yin.

古文：栻自有传。
现代文：张木式有传记。
English: Zhang Mu has a biography.

