古文：燕懿王德昭字日新，母贺皇后。
现代文：燕懿王德昭字日新，其母亲是贺皇后。
English: The mother of Yan Xuan Wang Dezhao, also known as Nisshin, is the Empress He.

古文：乾德二年出阁。
现代文：乾德二年出门合。
English: Qian De has been out of the house for two years.

古文：故事，皇子出阁即封王。
现代文：按惯常做法，皇子一出门合就封为王。
English: According to the usual practice, the prince will be crowned king as soon as he leaves the house.

古文：太祖以德昭冲年，欲其由渐而进，授贵州防御御。
现代文：太祖认为德昭年幼，想让他渐渐进封王，授官德昭为贵州防御使。
English: The great-grandfather thought that Dezhao was young and wanted to gradually make him a vassal king, and appointed Dezhao as the Guizhou defense envoy.

古文：开宝六年，授兴元尹、山南西道节度使、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，终太祖之世，竟不封以王爵。
现代文：开宝六年，任德昭为兴元尹、山南西道节度使、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，在太祖在世之日，一直没有给他封王。
English: In the six years since the discovery of the treasure, De Zhao has been appointed as Xingyuan Yin, the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, the inspector of the school, and the scholar of the same school, but did not give him the title of king when the great-grandfather was alive.

古文：太宗太平兴国元年，改京兆尹，移镇永兴，兼侍中，始封武功郡王。
现代文：太宗太平兴国元年，改任京兆尹，移镇永兴，兼任侍中，才开始封为武功郡王。
English: In the first year of Taizong Taiping Xingguo, he was changed to Jing Zhaoyun, moved to Yongxing Town, and concurrently served as a chamberlain, before he began to be named the county king of Wugong.

古文：诏与齐王廷美自今朝会宜班宰相之上。
现代文：太宗诏令让他与齐王廷美从现在起朝会时班位在宰相之上。
English: Emperor Taizong decreed that from now on, he and Qi Wang Tingmei would be placed above the prime minister at the time of the imperial meeting.

古文：三年二月，娶太子太傅王溥女，封韩国夫人。
现代文：三年二月，德昭娶太子太傅王溥的女儿为妻子，朝廷封为韩国夫人。
English: In February of the third year, De Zhao married the daughter of Prince Taifu Wang Yao, and the court named her the wife of Korea.

古文：是冬郊祀，加检校太尉。
现代文：这年冬天郊祀时，又加封为检校太尉。
English: In the winter of that year, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant inspector.

古文：四年，从征幽州。
现代文：四年，跟随皇帝征伐幽州。
English: In four years, he followed the emperor to conquer Yuzhou.

古文：军中尝夜惊，不知上所在，有谋立德昭者，上闻不悦。
现代文：军中有一次夜里惊乱，不知道皇帝在哪里，有人谋议立德昭为皇帝，皇上听见此事很不高兴。
English: There was once a nighttime panic in the army. They didn't know where the emperor was. Someone was plotting to make Dezhao emperor. The emperor was very unhappy to hear about this.

古文：及归，以北征不利，久不行太原之赏。
现代文：回到京师后，皇帝因为北伐不利，很长时间不给太原之战的功臣行赏。
English: After returning to the capital, the emperor did not reward the heroes of the Taiyuan War for a long time because the Northern Expedition was unfavorable.

古文：德昭以为言，上大怒曰： 待汝自为之，赏未晚也！ 德昭退而自刎。
现代文：德昭跟太宗论说此事，太宗大怒说： 等你自己做了皇帝，再行赏也不迟。 德昭退朝后自刎而死。
English: Dezhao discussed the matter with Emperor Taizong, and Emperor Taizong said angrily, "It won't be too late to reward you after you become emperor." After Emperor Dezhao abdicated, he hanged himself.

古文：上闻惊悔，往抱其尸，大哭曰： 痴儿何至此邪！ 赠中书令，追封魏王，赐谥，后改吴王，又改越王。
现代文：皇上听见此事非常惊悔，跑去抱着德昭的尸体，大哭着说： 痴儿何必这样呢？ 追赠德昭为中书令，追封为魏王，赐给谥号，后又改封为吴王，又改封为越王。
English: When the emperor heard this, he was very surprised and remorseful. He ran to embrace De Zhao's corpse, crying loudly and saying, "You idiot, why do you have to do this? De Zhao was posthumously awarded the title of Zhongshu Rong, posthumously awarded the title of Wei Wang, given the title of Xing, and later changed his title to Wu Wang, and then changed it to Yue Wang.

古文：德昭喜愠不形于色。
现代文：德昭为人喜怒不形于色。
English: De Zhao is a person who is indifferent to emotions.

古文：真宗即位，赠太傅。
现代文：真宗即位后，又追赠德昭为太傅。
English: After the enthronement of Shinso, Tokiaki was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：乾兴初，加赠太师。
现代文：乾兴初，加赠德昭为太师。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qianxing, Grand Master De Zhao was awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：子五人：惟正，惟吉，惟固，惟忠，惟和。
现代文：德昭有儿子五人：惟正，惟吉，惟固，惟忠，惟和。
English: De Zhao had five sons: Yu Zheng, Yu Jie, Yu Guo, Yu Liang, and Yu He.

古文：庆历四年，诏封十王之后，以惟忠子从蔼袭封颍国公，而惟吉子守巽以冀王后最长，与从蔼同封。
现代文：汉恭宪王元佐字惟吉，初名德崇，母亲是元德皇后。年幼时禀性聪警，相貌像太宗，太宗很钟爱他。十三岁时，跟从太宗在近郊打猎，有只兔子在皇帝车马前奔跑，太宗让元佐射杀，元佐一发而中，契丹使者在旁边，深感惊异。跟从太宗征战太原、幽蓟。
English: Han Gongxian Wang Yuan Sa Zi Wei Ji, his first name was De Chong, his mother was the Empress of Yuan De. When he was young, he was a smart and intelligent policeman. He looked like Taizong, and Taizong loved him very much. At the age of thirteen, he went hunting with Taizong in the suburbs. There was a rabbit running in front of the emperor's chariot and horse. Taizong let Yuan Sa shoot it. As soon as Yuan Sa started, he was in the middle, and the Khitan envoy was next to him. He was deeply surprised. He went to war with Taizong in Taiyuan, Yunnan

古文：守巽官至和州防御使，赠武成军节度使、楚国公。
现代文：太平兴国年间，出宫住在内东门别宅，任检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，封为卫王，在中书省办公。
English: During the Taiping Xingguo period, he left the palace and lived in a separate house at the Inner East Gate. He was appointed as a school inspector and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was given the title of the King of Guards and worked at the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：从蔼至齐州防御使，赠武胜军节度观察留后、韩国公。
现代文：后来迁居东宫，改赐现在的名字，加任检校太尉，进封为楚王。
English: Later, he moved to the East Palace, changed his name to his current one, was appointed as a school inspector, and was given the title King of Chu.

古文：守巽、从蔼卒，以惟忠子从信袭封荣国公，官至雄州防御使，赠保宁军节度使、楚国公。
现代文：当初，秦王廷美迁往涪陵，只有元佐申救他。廷美死后，元佐就发狂了，以致因为小错就用尖刀杀伤侍者。雍熙二年，病情略有好转，太宗很高兴，为此而大赦天下。
English: At first, Qin King Tingmei moved to Fuling, and only Yuan Zosen saved him. After Tingmei's death, Yuan Zosen went mad, so much so that he killed a waiter with a sharp knife because of a small mistake. In the second year of Yongxi, his condition improved slightly, and Taizong was very happy, and for this he was pardoned by the world.

古文：从信卒，以惟忠之孙、从恪子世规袭封崇国公，官至右龙武大将军、沂州防御使以卒。
现代文：重阳日宫内宴会，元佐病刚好，不在赴宴之列，诸王宴会后回来，晚上经过元佐的宅第。元佐说 ：你们都侍候皇上宴会，只有我未到，这是抛弃我啊！ 于是发怒，酗酒，晚上纵火烧宫。
English: On the day of the Chōyō, there was a banquet at the Imperial Palace, and the Emperor was ill, so he was not among those who went to the banquet. When he returned after the royal banquet, he passed by the Emperor's residence in the evening. The Emperor said, "You were all waiting for the Emperor's banquet, but I didn't make it. This is abandoning me!" So he got angry, drank too much, and set fire to the Imperial Palace in the evening.

古文：守巽子世清，累官茂州防御使。
现代文：太宗诏令派御史捕捉元佐，送到中书省审问，废为平民，安置在均州。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to send Mi Shi to capture the commander, and he was sent to the Chinese Literature Ministry for interrogation, but he was turned into a commoner and resettled in Junzhou.

古文：以本宫之长，得封申国公。
现代文：宰相宋琪率领百官三次上表，请求留元佐在京师。
English: Prime Minister Song Qi led hundreds of officials to petition three times to ask Yuan Zuo to stay in Beijing.

古文：熙宁中，坐上书请袭曾祖越懿王封不当，夺一官。
现代文：元佐走到黄山，太宗召他回来，废居南宫，使者守护。
English: Genso went to the Yellow Mountain, Taizong called him back, and he stayed in the Southern Palace as an envoy.

古文：既而议者是其说，乃迁越州观察使，袭封越国公，进会稽郡王，至保信军留后。爱诸弟，作棣萼会于邸中。
现代文：咨议赵齐、王，翊善戴元叩头请罪，太宗赦免他们说： 这个儿子我教他还不改，你们怎么能辅导呢？ 
English: He consulted Zhao Qi, Wang, and Shanshan Daiyuan, and asked for their forgiveness. The emperor pardoned them and said, "I have taught this son, but he still does not change. How can you counsel him?

古文：会元丰升祔四后，受命告庙，方属疾，自力就事，未几薨。赠安化军节度使、开府仪同三司、虢王，谥恭安。
现代文：真宗即位后，起任元佐为左金吾卫上将军，重新封为楚王，听任他养病不上朝，再加检校太师、右卫上将军。元佐生日，真宗赐给他宝带。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jimmu, he was appointed to the position of genso (lieutenant-colonel) for General Zuo Kingu Wei, and was re-christened as King Chu. He was allowed to recuperate and not ascend to the throne, and he was also given the title of genso (lieutenant-colonel) and the title of General Ue. Emperor Jimmu gave him a treasure belt for his birthday.

古文：子令廓嗣，元符三年，改今封。
现代文：平常生活不接待人客，但是有时能预先知道要发生的事情。
English: In normal life, we do not receive guests, but sometimes we can know in advance what is going to happen.

古文：先是，熙宁中，诏封楚康惠王之孙从式为安定郡王，奉太祖祀。
现代文：真宗曾经派术士管归真醮斋禳灾，手下人还未告诉他，元佐急忙说： 管归真到了。 真宗听说后说 ：难道不是有物可凭吗？ 封禅泰山后，实拜元佐为太傅；祭祀汾阴，升元佐为太尉兼中书令。
English: Once upon a time, the Shinshu sect sent a sorcerer, Guan Guozhen, to carry out a sacrificial rite, but his subordinates had not yet told him about it, so the genso hurriedly said, "The genso has arrived." Upon hearing this, the Shinshu sect said, "Isn't there something we can rely on? After the enthronement of Mount Taishan, the real worship of the genso was Taifu; after the sacrificial rite of Suyin, the ascension of the genso was Taifu and Chushirei.

古文：及从式薨，乃以懿王曾孙世准袭封安定郡王。
现代文：又加任太师、尚书令兼中书令，于是拜为天策上将军、兴元牧，赐带剑上殿，诏令上书不称名。
English: He was also appointed Grand Master, Grand Secretary and Vice-Grand Secretary, so he worshiped the Heavenly General, Xingyuanmu, and was given the honor of bringing a sword to the palace. He was not famous for his imperial edict.

古文：世准，从蔼子也。
现代文：当时宫中失火，元佐上表停止领俸禄以资助完葺宫殿，真宗不同意。
English: At that time, there was a fire in the palace, and Motosuke Uemote stopped receiving his salary in order to finance the completion of the palace, but Masamune did not agree.

古文：为人内恕外严，无绮罗金玉之好，凡天子郊庙，必从祀。
现代文：加兼雍州牧。仁宗为皇太子，兼任兴元牧。仁宗即位后，元佐兼任江陵牧。
English: He also served as Yongzhou magistrate. Ninsong was crown prince and also served as Xingyuan magistrate. After Ninsong ascended the throne, he also served as Gangneung magistrate.

古文：十六年，薨，赠太傅，追封和王，谥端肃。
现代文：去世时，年已六十二岁，赠河中牧、凤翔牧，追封为齐王，谥号为恭宪。
English: At the time of his death, he was already sixty-two years old. He was presented with the Kawazhong Maki and the Fengxiang Maki. His posthumous name was Qi Wang, and his posthumous name was Gongxian.

