古文：一
现代文：一
English: 1st

古文：景公过晏子，曰： 子宫小，近市，请徙子家豫章之圃。 
现代文：齐景公走访晏子，说： 您的住宅太小，又靠近集市，请把您家搬到豫章的园地去。 
English: Qi Jinggong visited Zizi and said: Your house is too small and close to the market, please move your home to Yuanzhang's park.

古文：晏子再拜而辞曰： 且婴家贫，待市食，而朝暮趋之，不可以远。 
现代文：晏子拜了两拜推辞说： 我家穷，靠上集市买东西吃，早晚都要赶集，不能离得远。 
English: Zou Zi bowed twice and said, "My family is poor, and we rely on going to the market to buy things to eat. Sooner or later, we have to go to the market, so we can't be far away.

古文：景公笑曰： 子家习市，识贵贱乎？ 
现代文：景公笑着说： 您家人熟悉市场行情，知道什么贵什么便宜吗? 
English: Jinggong said with a smile: Are your family members familiar with the market, and do they know what is expensive and what is cheap?

古文：是时景公繁于刑。
现代文：这时景公刑罚繁多。
English: At this time, Jing Gong received many punishments.

古文：晏子对曰： 踊贵而屦贱。 
现代文：晏子回答说： 断脚人穿的踊贵，常人穿的鞋便宜。 
English: The cripple replied, "The shoes worn by amputees are expensive, but the shoes worn by ordinary people are cheap.

古文：景公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：景公说： 什么缘故? 
English: Jing Gong said: For what reason?

古文：对曰： 刑多也。 
现代文：晏子回答说： 刑罚太多。 
English: The executioner replied, "The punishment is too much.

古文：景公造然变色曰： 寡人其暴乎！ 
现代文：景公惊讶得脸色大变，说： 我大概太残暴了吧！ 
English: King Jing was so surprised that his face changed dramatically, and he said, "I must have been too cruel!"

古文：于是损刑五。
现代文：于是减去五种刑罚。
English: As a result, five punishments were reduced.

古文：或曰：晏子之贵踊，非其诚也，欲便辞以止多刑也。
现代文：有人说：晏子说踊贵，不是他的真心话，是想借此来劝说景公不要多用刑罚。
English: Some people said, "What the cripple said about Odoraku was not his true intention, but he wanted to use it to persuade King Jing not to use more punishment.

古文：此不察治之患也。
现代文：这是他不懂治国之道的过错。
English: It's his fault for not knowing how to run the country.

古文：夫刑当无多，不当无少。
现代文：刑罚恰当不嫌多，刑罚不当不在少。
English: Appropriate punishment should not be too much, and inappropriate punishment should not be too little.

古文：无以不当闻，而以太多说，无术之患。
现代文：晏子不以刑罚不当告诉景公，而以用刑太多劝说景公，这是不懂法术的过错。
English: It is the fault of those who do not understand magic that the executioner did not punish Jing Gong properly, but used too much punishment to persuade him.

古文：败军之诛以千百数，犹且不止；即治乱之刑如恐不胜，而奸尚不尽。
现代文：打败仗的军队被杀掉的人虽以千百计算，还是败逃不止；即使治理祸乱的刑罚用得唯恐不够，奸邪还是不能除尽。
English: Even if the number of those killed by the defeated army is counted in the thousands, there will still be more defections and escapes; even if the punishment to control the calamity is used sparingly, the evil of treachery still cannot be eliminated.

古文：今晏子不察其当否，而以太多为说，不亦妄乎？
现代文：现在晏子不去考察景公的刑罚是否用得恰当，却拿刑罚太多劝说景公，不是很荒唐吗？
English: Now, isn't it absurd that Zangzi didn't want to investigate whether the punishment given to King Gyeonggung was appropriate, but used too much punishment to persuade King Gyeonggung?

古文：夫惜草茅者耗禾穗，惠盗贼者伤良民。
现代文：爱惜茅草便会损害庄稼，宽容盗贼便会伤害良民。
English: Love for thatch will damage crops, and tolerance of thieves will harm good people.

古文：今缓刑罚，行宽惠，是利奸邪而害善人也，此非所以为治也。
现代文：现在减轻刑罚，实行宽惠，就是便利奸邪而伤害好人，这不是用来治国的办法。
English: To reduce the punishment and grant clemency now would be to facilitate evil and harm good people. This is not the way to govern the country.

古文：二
现代文：二
English: 2nd

古文：齐桓公饮酒醉，遗其冠，耻之，三日不朝。
现代文：齐桓公喝酒喝醉后，丢了帽子，他觉得丢人，三天不去上朝。
English: After drinking and getting drunk, Prince Qi Huan lost his hat. He felt ashamed and did not go to Shangmao for three days.

古文：管仲曰： 此非有国之耻也，公胡其不雪之以政？ 
现代文：管仲说： 这是做国君的耻辱，您何不用搞好政事来洗刷它呢? 
English: Guanzhong said: This is the disgrace of being a sovereign, why don't you do a good job in politics to wash it off?

古文：公曰： 胡其善！ 
现代文：桓公说： 您的意见多么好啊！ 
English: Prince Kan said, "How good your opinion is!

古文：因发仓囷赐贫穷，论囹圄出薄罪。
现代文：于是开仓贩济贫苦的人，审查囚犯放掉轻罪的人。
English: As a result, people who opened warehouses to help the poor, and people who examined prisoners to release them from minor crimes.

古文：外三日而民歌之曰： 公胡不复遗冠乎！ 
现代文：过了三天，民众就唱道： 桓公为什么不再丢失帽子呢！ 
English: After three days, the people sang: "Why doesn't Huan Gong lose his hat anymore!"

古文：或曰：管仲雪桓公之耻于小人，而生桓公之耻于君子矣。
现代文：有人说：管仲在小人中洗刷了桓公的耻辱，却在君子中滋长了桓公的耻辱。
English: Some people said: Guanzhong washed away the shame of Kuan Gong among the villains, but he fostered the shame of Kuan Gong among the gentlemen.

古文：使桓公发仓囷而赐贫穷，讼囹圄而出薄罪，非义也，不可以雪耻；使之而义也，桓公宿义，须遗冠而后行之，则是桓公行义非为遗冠也？
现代文：假使桓公开仓赈济贫苦的人，审查囚犯放掉轻罪的人，不合乎义的话，就不能洗刷耻辱；假使这样做是合乎义的，桓公不及时去做，而要等到丢了帽子才去做，那么桓公的行义岂不是为的丢了帽子？
English: If it is not righteous for Huan to publicly scold those who are poor, and to examine prisoners and release those who have committed minor offenses, then it is not possible to wash away the shame; if it is righteous to do so, and Huan does not do it in time, but has to wait until he loses his hat, then is Huan's act of righteousness not for the sake of losing his hat?

古文：是虽雪遗冠之耻于小人，而亦遗义之耻于君子矣。
现代文：这样说来，即使在小人中洗刷了丢帽的耻辱，却又在君子中滋长了失义的耻辱。
English: Thus, even if the ignominy of losing one's cap has been washed away among villains, the ignominy of losing one's virtue has grown among gentlemen.

古文：且夫发囷仓而赐贫穷者，是赏无功也；论囹圄而出薄罪者，是不诛过也。
现代文：况且开仓赈济穷人，这是赏赐无功的人；审查囚犯放掉轻罪的人，这不是惩罚有罪的人。
English: Moreover, opening barns to feed the poor is rewarding those who have done nothing; examining prisoners to let them off misdemeanors is not punishing the guilty.

古文：夫赏无功，则民偷幸而望于上；不诛过，则民不惩而易为非。
现代文：赏赐无功的人，民众就会侥幸地希望从君主那里获得意外的赏赐；不惩罚有罪的人，民众不受惩罚就容易为非作歹。
English: If you reward those who do nothing, the people will hope for a windfall reward from the monarch; if you do not punish the guilty, the people will not be punished and it will be easy for them to do wrong.

古文：此乱之本也，安可以雪耻哉？
现代文：这是国家混乱的根源，怎能用来洗刷耻辱呢?
English: This is the root cause of the country's chaos, how can it be used to wash away the shame?

古文：三
现代文：三
English: Third

古文：昔者文王侵孟、克莒、举酆，三举事而纣恶之。
现代文：从前周文王侵占盂地、攻克莒地、夺取酆地，办过三件事后，引起了纣王的厌恶。
English: From the previous time, King Zhouwen invaded, conquered, and conquered Yunnan, after doing three things, he aroused the disgust of the king of Yunnan.

古文：文王乃惧，请入洛西立地、赤壤之国方千里，以请解炮烙之刑。
现代文：文王于是很害怕，要求进献给纣王洛水西边、赤壤地方方圆千里的土地，用来请求废除炮烙这种酷刑。
English: King Wen was very afraid and asked for a thousand-mile radius of land to be donated to King He to the west of Luoshui, in the region of Chekiang, to be used to petition for the abolition of the torture of branding.

古文：天下皆说。
现代文：天下人都很高兴。
English: The whole world is happy.

古文：仲尼闻之，曰： 仁哉，文王！
现代文：孔子听到后说； 文王真仁慈啊！
English: Upon hearing this, Confucius said, "Wen Wang is so kind!"

古文：轻千里之国而请解炮烙之刑。
现代文：不看重方圆千里的土地而请求废除炮烙之刑。
English: They do not care about the land, which is thousands of miles away, and ask for the abolition of the punishment of being branded with a cannon.

古文：智哉，文王！
现代文：文王真聪明啊！
English: King Wen is so clever!

古文：出千里之地而得天下之心。 
现代文：献出方圆千里的土地而得到天下的人心。 
English: Give away a thousand miles of land and win the hearts and minds of the world.

古文：或曰：仲尼以文王为智也，不亦过乎？
现代文：有人说： 孔子认为文王聪明，不也是错的么？
English: Some people say: Confucius thought that King Wen was clever, isn't that also wrong?

古文：夫智者，知祸难之地而辟之者也，是以身不及于患也。
现代文：聪明的人，是能够知道祸难所在从而避开的人，因此自身不会遭到祸患。
English: A wise man is one who knows where evil lurks and avoids it, so that he himself will not be harmed by it.

古文：使文王所以见恶于纣者，以其不得人心耶，则虽索人心以解恶可也。
现代文：假使文王被纣王憎恨的原因，是因为文王不得人心吧，那么文王虽用求得人心的办法来解除纣王的憎恶也是可以的。
English: If the reason why King Wen was hated by King Zhao was because King Wen was unpopular, then King Wen could use the method of winning people's hearts to get rid of King Zhao's hatred.

古文：纣以其大得人心而恶之，己又轻地以收人心，是重见疑也，固其所以桎梏、囚于羑里也。
现代文：纣王因文王大得人心而厌恶他，他自己又轻易放弃土地而争取人心，这就更使纣王怀疑。正因如此，他才被戴上刑具监禁在羑里。
English: King Yao detested King Wen because of his great popularity, and he himself easily gave up land to win people's hearts, which made King Yao even more suspicious. That is why he was put on a torture device and imprisoned in a shackle.

古文：郑长者有言： 体道，无为无见也。 
现代文：郑长者说过： 能领会和实行道的人是无所作为、无所表现的。 
English: Elder Zheng said, "Those who can understand and practice the Way do nothing and show nothing.

古文：此最宜于文王矣，不使人疑之也。
现代文：这话最适用于文王了，这样做就可以不使人怀疑他。
English: This is most applicable to King Wen, so that people do not doubt him.

古文：仲尼以文王为智，未及此论也。
现代文：孔子认为文王聪明，还没有达到郑长者论点的水平。
English: Confucius thought that King Wen was clever and had not yet reached the level of the elder Zheng's argument.

古文：四
现代文：四
English: IV.

古文：晋平公问叔向曰： 昔者齐桓公九合诸侯，一匡天下，不识其臣之力也？其君之力也？ 
现代文：晋平公问叔向说： 从前齐桓公多次会合诸侯，匡正天下，不知靠的是臣子的力量，还是君主的力量？ 
English: Jinping Gong asked his uncle, "Once upon a time, Prince Qi Huan held many gatherings of princes and ruled the world. I don't know whether to rely on the power of the courtiers or the power of the monarch.

古文：叔向对曰： 管仲善制割，宾胥无善削缝，隰朋善纯缘，衣成，君举而服之。
现代文：叔向回答说： 管仲善于裁剪，宾胥无善于缝纫，隰朋善于镶边，衣服做成了，君主拿起来穿上。
English: Uncle Xiang replied: Guanzhong is good at tailoring, Bin Rong is not good at sewing, Zibo is good at edging, the clothes are made, the monarch picks them up and puts them on.

古文：亦臣之力也，君何力之有？ 
现代文：这是臣子的力量，君主出了什么力呢？ 
English: This is the power of a vassal, but what power does the monarch wield?

古文：师旷伏琴而笑之。
现代文：师旷趴在琴上笑起来。
English: Shimei fell on the piano and started to laugh.

古文：公曰： 太师奚笑也？ 
现代文：平公说： 大师笑什么？ 
English: Heiko said: What is the master laughing about?

古文：师旷对曰： 臣笑叔向之对君也。
现代文：师旷回答说： 我笑叔向回答君主的话。
English: Shigeaki replied, "I laughed at my uncle's answer to the monarch's words.

古文：凡为人臣者，犹炮宰和五味而进之君。
现代文：大凡做臣子的，好比厨师调好了五味送给君主吃。
English: A great man who is a courtier is like a chef who has prepared five dishes for the sovereign to eat.

古文：君弗食，孰敢强之也？
现代文：君主不吃，谁敢强迫他呢？
English: If the sovereign will not eat, who will force him?

古文：臣请譬之：君者，壤地也；臣者，草木也。
现代文：让我打个比方：君主好比土地，臣子好比草木。
English: Let me use an analogy: the sovereign is like the land, and the vassals are like the plants.

古文：必壤地美，然后草木硕大。
现代文：一定是土地肥好，然后草木才茂盛。
English: The soil must be well-fertilized before the plants can flourish.

古文：亦君之力，臣何力之有？ 
现代文：这是君主的力量，臣子出了什么力呢？ 
English: This is the power of the sovereign, but what power did the vassal exert?

古文：或曰：叔向、师旷之对，皆偏辞也。
现代文：有人说：叔向、师旷的回答，都是片面的说法。
English: Some people said that the answers given by Shu Xiang and Shi Kuang were one-sided.

古文：夫一匡天下，九合诸侯，美之大者也，非专君之力也，又非专臣之力也。
现代文：匡正天下，多次会合诸侯，是美好事业中最大的了，不独是君主的力量，也不独是臣子的力量。
English: Rectifying the world, and repeatedly convening the princes, is the greatest of good causes. It is not only the power of the monarch, nor is it only the power of the courtiers.

古文：昔者宫之奇在虞，僖负羁在曹，二臣之智，言中事，发中功，虞、曹俱亡者，何也？
现代文：过去宫之奇在虞国，僖负羁在曹国，两位臣子才智之高，能使说的话都合于事实，行动都合于功利，虞、曹终于都灭亡了的原因，是什么呢？
English: In the past, the miracle of the palace was in the state of Yu, and the burden of responsibility was in the state of Cao. The two courtiers were highly intelligent and could make their words conform to the facts and their actions conform to utilitarianism. What was the reason why both Yu and Cao finally perished?

古文：此有其臣而无其君者也。
现代文：这是因为有好的臣子却没有好的君主。
English: This is because there are good courtiers but no good monarchs.

古文：且蹇叔处干而干亡，处秦而秦霸，非蹇叔愚于干而智于秦也，此有臣与无臣也。
现代文：再说蹇叔在虞国时虞国灭亡，到秦国后秦国称霸，并非蹇叔在虞国就笨，到秦国就聪明，而是取决于有没有好的君主。
English: Furthermore, it is not that Uncle Zou was stupid in the State of Yu when the State of Yu was overthrown and became the ruler of the State of Qin after he became the ruler of the State of Qin. It is not that Uncle Zou was stupid in the State of Yu and became the ruler of the State of Qin when he became the ruler of the State of Qin. Rather, it depends on whether there is a good ruler.

古文：向曰 臣之力也， 不然矣。
现代文：叔向说靠臣子的力量，是不对的。
English: My uncle was wrong when he said that we should rely on the power of our vassals.

古文：昔者桓公宫中二市，妇闾二百，被发而御妇人。
现代文：过去桓公宫中有两处集市，妇女住所有二百处，桓公披头散发去玩弄妇女。
English: In the past, there were two bazaars in Prince Kan's palace and 200 residences for women, and Prince Kan used to play with women.

古文：得管仲，为五伯长，失管仲、得竖刁而身死，虫流出尸不葬。
现代文：得到管仲，成为五霸中居于首位的人；失去管仲，得到竖刁而自身死亡，蛆虫爬出门外也得不到安葬。
English: If he gains control, he will be the first among the five tyrants; if he loses control, he will be killed by the boa constrictor, and if the boa constrictor crawls out of the door, he will not be buried.

古文：以为非臣之力也，且不以管仲为霸；以为君之力也，且不以竖刁为乱。
现代文：如果认为不是臣子的力量，就说不上因为管仲而称霸；如果认为是君主的力量，就谈不到因为竖刁而产生祸乱。
English: If it is not the power of the vassal, it cannot be said to dominate because of the intermediary; if it is the power of the monarch, there can be no talk of the calamity caused by the post.

古文：昔者晋文公慕于齐女而亡归，咎犯极谏，故使反晋国。
现代文：过去晋文公爱恋齐女而不想回国，狐偃极力劝谏，结果才使他返回晋国。
English: In the past, Jinwen Gong fell in love with a woman and did not want to return to the country. He was persuaded by the fox to return to the country.

古文：故桓公以管仲合，文公以舅犯霸，而师旷曰 君之力也， 又不然矣。
现代文：所以齐桓公因管仲而会合诸侯，晋文公因狐堰而称霸天下，而师旷说这是靠君主的力量，也是不对的。
English: Therefore, it is not correct to say that Lord Qi Huan gathered together the princes because of Guanzhong, and Lord Jinwen dominated the world because of Jixian, and that Shiguang relied on the power of the monarch.

古文：凡五霸所以能成功名于天下者，必君臣俱有力焉。
现代文：所有春秋五霸能在天下成功扬名的原因，一定是君臣都出力了。
English: All the reasons why the Five Heroes of Spring and Autumn have been able to make a name for themselves around the world must be due to the efforts of the princes and ministers.

古文：故曰：叔向、师旷之对，皆偏辞也。
现代文：所以说：叔向和师旷的回答都是片面的说法。
English: Therefore, he said, the answers given by Shu Xiang and Shiguang are one-sided.

古文：五
现代文：五
English: 5th

古文：齐桓公之时，晋客至，有司请礼。
现代文：齐桓公时，晋国客人到了，负责接待的官吏请问用什么礼仪。
English: When the guests from Jin arrived at the time of Emperor Qianlong, what kind of etiquette did the officials responsible for receiving them use?

古文：桓公曰： 告仲父 者三。
现代文：桓公说了三遍 告诉仲父管仲去 。
English: Kan said three times, "Tell your father to go away."

古文：而优笑曰： 易哉，为君！一曰仲父，二曰仲父。 
现代文：优人笑着说： 做君主真容易啊！一声仲父，二声仲父的。 
English: The gentleman said with a smile, "It's so easy to be a monarch! You can be a stepfather or a stepfather's son.

古文：桓公曰： 吾闻君人者劳于索人，佚于使从。
现代文：桓公说： 我听说做君主的要寻求人才很费力，使用人时就安逸了。
English: Prince Kan said, "I've heard that it takes a lot of effort to find talent to be a monarch, but it's easy to use people.

古文：吾得仲父已难矣，得仲父之后，何为不易乎哉？ 
现代文：我得到仲父已费力过了，得到仲父之后，为什么不能容易呢？ 
English: I went through a lot of trouble to get my matchmaker, so why can't it be easy to get a matchmaker?

古文：或曰：桓公之所应优，非君人者之言也。
现代文：有人说：桓公回答优人的话，不像做君主的人该讲的话。
English: Some people said: "Kang replied to the words of a superior man, unlike the words that a monarch should speak.

古文：桓公以君人为劳于索人，何索人为劳哉？
现代文：桓公认为君主寻求人才费力，寻求人才有什么费力呢？
English: Prince Kan believes that it is difficult for a monarch to seek talent. What is the difficulty in seeking talent?

古文：伊尹自以为宰干汤，百里奚自以为虏干穆公。
现代文：伊尹自己去做厨师向商汤献策求得任用，百里奚自己去做俘虏向秦穆公献策求得任用。
English: Yi Yin himself went to work as a cook to offer suggestions to Shang Tang to get an appointment, Bai Lijun went to work as a prisoner to offer suggestions to Qin Mu Gong to get an appointment.

古文：虏，所辱也；宰，所羞也。
现代文：做俘虏是耻辱的事，做厨师是羞耻的事。
English: To be a prisoner is a disgrace, to be a cook is a disgrace.

古文：蒙羞辱而接君上，贤者之忧世急也。
现代文：蒙受羞辱来接近君主，因为贤人忧虑天下的心情非常急切。
English: Humiliated to approach the monarch, the world's mood is very anxious as wise men fret.

古文：然则君人者无逆贤而已矣，索贤不为人主难。
现代文：那么君主只要不拒绝贤人就足够了，寻求贤人并不是君主的难事。
English: Then it is enough for a prince not to refuse a wise man. It is not difficult for a prince to seek a wise man.

古文：且官职，所以任贤也；爵禄，所以赏功也。
现代文：况且官职是用来任用贤人的，爵禄是用来奖赏功劳的。
English: Moreover, an official post is used to appoint a wise man, and a knighthood is used to reward merit.

古文：设官职，陈爵禄，而士自至，君人者奚其劳哉？
现代文：设置官职，安排爵禄，人才自会到来君主有什么费力呢？
English: What is the difficulty of setting up an official position, arranging a knighthood, and having a monarch come from nowhere?

古文：使人又非所佚也。
现代文：使用人也不是安逸的事。
English: Being an employee isn't easy either.

古文：人主虽使人，必度量准之，以刑名参之；以事遇于法则行，不遇于法则止；功当其言则赏，不当则诛。
现代文：君主虽然是使用人，但必须用法度来衡量他们，用名实是否相符来检验他们；事情合于法就实行，不合于法就禁止；功劳同主张相符就赏，不符就罚。
English: Although the monarch is the servant of the people, he must measure them by the standards of the law, and test them by whether they are consistent with the facts; if the matter is in accordance with the law, it will be implemented, and if it is not in accordance with the law, it will be prohibited; if the merit is consistent with the proposition, it will be rewarded, and if it is not, it will be punished.

古文：以刑名收臣，以度量准下，此不可释也，君人者焉佚哉？
现代文：用名实相符来选用臣子，用法度来衡量臣下，这是不可以放弃的，做君主的哪能安逸呢？
English: It is not permissible to choose a vassal by matching the name with the reality, and to measure a vassal by the legal standard. How can it be comfortable to be a monarch?

古文：索人不劳，使人不佚，而桓公曰： 劳于索人，佚于使人 者，不然。
现代文：寻求人才不费力，使用人才不安逸，桓公说 寻求人才费力，使用人才安逸 ，这话不对。
English: It is not right to say that it is easy to find talent, but it is not easy to use talent.

古文：且桓公得管仲又不难。
现代文：况且桓公得到管仲并不难。
English: Moreover, it was not difficult for Kan-ko to obtain the position of Kan-naka.

古文：管仲不死其君而归桓公，鲍叔轻官让能而任之，桓公得管仲又不难，明矣。
现代文：管仲不为他的主人公子纠殉身而顺帧桓公，鲍叔不看重自己的职位而让给有才能的管仲担任，桓公得到管仲并不难，是很明白了。
English: Guanzhong did not die for his hero son, but for Huan. Uncle Bao did not value his position and gave it to the talented Guanzhong. It is not difficult for Huan to get Guanzhong, it is very clear.

古文：已得管仲之后，奚遽易哉？
现代文：已经得到管仲之后，哪里就能掉以轻心啊？
English: Now that you've got a manager, where can you afford to be careless?

古文：管仲非周公旦。
现代文：管仲并不是周公旦。
English: Guanzhong is not Zhou Gongtan.

古文：周公旦假为天子七年，成王壮，授之以政，非为天下计也，为其职也。
现代文：周公旦代行天子之事七年，成王长大后，他便把政权交给成王，周公旦不是为自己得天下着想，而为了尽他的职责。
English: Zhou Gongdan acted on behalf of the Son of Heaven for seven years. After Chengwang grew up, he handed over the power to Chengwang. Zhou Gongdan did not think of gaining the world for himself, but in order to fulfill his duties.

古文：夫不夺子而行天下者，必不背死君而事其仇；背死君而事其仇者，必不难夺子而行天下；不难夺子而行天下者，必不难夺其君国矣。
现代文：不篡夺幼君的君位而去治理天下的人，必定不肯背叛已死的君主去侍奉先君的仇敌；背叛先君而去侍奉先君仇敌的人，一定不难于夺取幼君的君位而统治天下；不难于夺取幼君君位而统治天下的人，一定不难于夺取他的君主的国家。
English: Those who do not usurp the throne of a young prince to rule the world will certainly not be willing to betray a dead monarch to serve his predecessor's enemies; those who betray a former monarch to serve his predecessor's enemies will certainly not find it difficult to seize the throne of a young prince and rule the world; those who do not find it difficult to seize the throne of a young prince and rule the world will certainly not find it difficult to seize his monarch's country.

古文：管仲，公子纠之臣也，谋杀桓公而不能，其君死而臣桓公，管仲之取舍非周公旦，未可知也。
现代文：管仲是公子纠的臣子，谋杀桓公而没有得逞，他的主人死了，又去做桓公的臣子，管仲的取舍不像周公旦，是可得而知的。
English: Guanzhong was a vassal of Guanzhong. He murdered Huan without success. His master died, and he became a vassal of Huan. The choice of Guanzhong is not like that of Zhou Gongdan, it can be known.

古文：若使管仲大贤也，且为汤武，桀、纣之臣也；桀、纣作乱，汤、武夺之。
现代文：假使管仲是个大贤人，他将成为商汤和周武王。商汤和武王是夏桀和商纣的臣子；夏桀和商纣政治混乱，商汤和武王就夺取了他们的君位。
English: If Guanzhong is a great sage, he will become the king of Shangtang and Zhouwu. Shangtang and King Wu are the vassals of Xiamen and Shangguan; Xiamen and Shangguan are in political turmoil, and Shangtang and King Wu have seized their throne.

古文：今桓公以易居其上，是以桀、纣之行居汤、武之上，桓公危矣。
现代文：现在桓公掉以轻心地处在管仲之上，这就好比有桀、纣一样的行为而处在汤、武之上，恒公是很危险的。
English: Now that Kuan Kung is carelessly on top of Guanzhong, it's like being on top of Tang and Wu with the same behavior. Heng Kung is very dangerous.

古文：若使管仲不肖人也，且为田常。
现代文：假使管仲德行不好，他将成为田常。
English: If Guan Zhongde does not do well, he will become Tian Chang.

古文：田常，简公之臣也，而弑其君。
现代文：田常是齐简公的臣子，结果杀死了君主简公。
English: Tian Chang was a vassal of Qi Jian Gong, and as a result, he killed the monarch Jian Gong.

古文：今桓公以易居其上，是以简公之易居田常之上也，桓公又危矣。
现代文：现在桓公掉以轻心地处在管仲之上，这就好比简公掉以轻心地处在田常之上，桓公又很危险了。
English: Now that Kuan Kung is carelessly on top of Guanzhong, it's like Jian Kung is carelessly on top of Tian Chang, and Kuan Kung is very dangerous.

古文：管仲非周公旦以明矣，然为汤、武与田常，未可知也。
现代文：如果做汤、武，桓公就有桀、纣的危险；如果做田常，桓公就有简公的祸乱。
English: If you make soup and war, Kanko will have the danger of war; if you make rice, Kanko will have the calamity of Jiangong.

古文：为汤、武，有桀、纣之危；为田常，有简公之乱也。已得仲父之后，桓公奚遽易哉？若使桓公之任管仲，必知不欺己也，是知不欺主之臣也。
现代文：已经得到管仲之后，桓公哪里就能掉以轻心呢？假使桓公任用管仲时，确实知道他不会欺骗自己，证明桓公能识别不欺骗君主的臣子。但是虽说桓公能识别不欺骗君主的臣子。
English: Now that he has gained the position of steward, how can King Kan be so careless? If King Kan really knew that he would not deceive himself when he appointed the steward, it proves that King Kan can recognize a vassal who does not deceive the monarch. However, King Kan can recognize a vassal who does not deceive the monarch.

古文：然虽知不欺主之臣，今桓公以任管仲之专借竖刁、易牙，虫流出尸而不葬，桓公不知臣欺主与不欺主已明矣，而任臣如彼其专也，故曰：桓公暗主。
现代文：现在他像信任管仲那样使用竖刁、易牙，以致死后蛆虫爬出门外还不能安葬。桓公不能识别臣子欺主还是不欺主，已是很明白的了，而他任用臣子又是那样专一，所以说：桓公是昏庸糊涂的君主。
English: Now he uses the crossbow and changes his teeth as if he trusted Guanzhong, so much so that when he dies, maggots crawl out of the door and cannot be buried. It is already very clear that King Huan cannot recognize whether a vassal is deceiving the master or not, and he is so particular about appointing a vassal, so he said: King Huan is a confused monarch.

古文：六
现代文：六
English: Sixth

古文：李兑治中山，苦陉令上计而入多。
现代文：李克治理中山，苦陉县令年终上报时钱粮收入多。
English: Li Ke's governance of Zhongshan, Kuqi County ordered the year-end report to report more money grain income.

古文：李兑曰： 语言辨，听之说，不度于义，谓之窕言。
现代文：李克说： 言语动听，听了叫人喜欢，但不符合常理，这种话叫做窕言。
English: Li Ke said: The speech is beautiful, and people like it, but it does not conform to common sense. This kind of speech is called gossip.

古文：无山林泽谷之利而入多者，谓之窕货。
现代文：没有山林川泽等自然资源而收入多的，这种收入叫做窕货。
English: If there is no natural resources such as mountains, forests, rivers and lakes, but there is more income, this income is called hoarding.

古文：君子不听窕言，不受窕货。
现代文：君子不听窕言，不受窕货。
English: A gentleman does not listen to gossip and does not accept stolen goods.

古文：之姑免矣。 
现代文：你就此免除职务吧。 
English: You are hereby relieved of duty.

古文：或曰：李子设辞曰： 夫言语辩，听之说，不度于义者，谓之窕言。 
现代文：有人说：李克提出的论点说： 言语动听，听了使人喜欢，但不符合常理，这种话叫做窕言。 
English: Some people said that the argument put forward by Li Ke is: the speech is beautiful, people like to listen to it, but it does not conform to common sense. This kind of speech is called gossip.

古文：辩，在言者；说，在听者：言非听者也。
现代文：动听不动听在于说话的人，喜欢不喜欢在于听话的人：说话的人不是听话的人。
English: Whether it is pleasant or unpleasant depends on the speaker, whether it is liked or disliked depends on the listener: the speaker is not the listener.

古文：所谓不度于义，非谓听者，必谓所听也。
现代文：所谓说话不符合常理，不是指听话的人，必定指听到的话。
English: The so-called speech that does not conform to common sense does not refer to the person who listens, but must refer to the words that are heard.

古文：听者，非小人，则君子也。
现代文：听话的人不是小人就是君子。
English: An obedient person is either a villain or a gentleman.

古文：小人无义，必不能度之义也；君子度之义，必不肯说也。
现代文：小人不懂得常理，一定不能用常理去度量它；君子用常理去度量它，一定不会喜欢究言的。
English: If a small person does not understand common sense, he must not use common sense to measure it; if a gentleman uses common sense to measure it, he must not like to inquire.

古文：夫曰： 言语辩，听之说，不度于义 者，必不诚之言也。
现代文：所谓 言语动听，听了叫人喜欢，但不符合常理 ，一定是不可靠的话。
English: The so-called beautiful speech, people like to listen to, but it does not conform to common sense, it must be unreliable.

古文：入多之为窕货也，未可远行也。
现代文：收入多叫做窕货，不是到处都行得通的道理。
English: More income is called hoarding goods, which is not a reason that works everywhere.

古文：李子之奸弗蚤禁，使至于计，则遂过也。
现代文：李克对于奸邪的行为不及早禁止，一直等到年终上报，这是李克造成了过错。
English: Li Ke did not prohibit the act of treachery early, and waited until the end of the year to report it, which was Li Ke's fault.

古文：无术以知而入多，入多者，穰也，虽倍入，将奈何？
现代文：李克没有办法去了解情况而只知道收入多了；收入多，是因为庄稼丰收，即使有加倍的收入，又怎么样呢？
English: Li Ke had no way to understand the situation and only knew that his income had increased; his income was higher because of the bumper harvest of crops. Even if his income doubled, what would happen?

古文：举事慎阴阳之和，种树节四时之适，无早晚之失、寒温之灾，则入多。
现代文：农耕顺应自然的变化，种植根据四季作合理的安排，没有种早、种迟的失误和天寒、天热的灾祸，收入就多。
English: Farming conforms to natural changes, planting is reasonably arranged according to the four seasons, there are no early and late planting mistakes and the scourge of cold and hot weather, and the income is more.

古文：不以小功妨大务，不以私欲害人事，丈夫尽于耕农，妇人力于织纴，则入多。
现代文：不用小事妨害要务，不用私欲妨害耕织，男子尽力于农耕，女子致力于纺织，收入就多。
English: Don't let trifles interfere with important tasks, don't let selfishness interfere with farming and weaving. Men should do their best in farming, women should devote themselves to weaving, and the income will be more.

古文：务于畜养之理，察于土地之宜，六畜遂，五谷殖，则入多。
现代文：注意饲养牲畜的道理，按照土地的情况合理种植，六畜兴旺，五谷善殖，收入就多。
English: Pay attention to the principle of raising livestock, plant rationally according to the situation of the land, six livestock thrive, five grains are well bred, and the income is more.

古文：明于权计，审于地形、舟车、机械之利，用力少，致功大，则入多。
现代文：善于权衡计算，周密了解地形、舟车和机械的作用，花的力气少，得到的功效大，收入就多。
English: They are good at weighing and calculating, have a thorough understanding of the terrain, the boat and the role of the machinery. They have less strength, and the resulting effect is greater, and the income is more.

古文：利商市关梁之行，能以所有致所无，客商归之，外货留之，俭于财用，节于衣食，宫室器械周于资用，不事玩好，则入多。
现代文：使商市、关口、桥梁便，利于通行，能用自己已有的东西换取没有的东西，客商闻风而至，外来的货物存放下来，节俭财用，节约衣食，宫室、器具合于实用，不贪图珍贵的玩物，收入就多。
English: Make the markets, gates, and bridges convenient, convenient for traffic, can use what you already have to exchange for what you don't have, merchants come to hear the wind, store foreign goods, be frugal with money, save food and clothing, palace rooms and utensils are practical, don't covet precious toys, and income is more.

古文：入多，皆人为也。
现代文：收入增多，都是人为的结果。
English: The increase in income is an artificial result.

古文：若天事，风雨时，寒温适，土地不加大，而有丰年之功，则入多。
现代文：至于自然界的情况，风雨适时，冷暖适宜，土地不增加，却有丰收的年景，收入就多。
English: As for the situation in the natural world, the wind and rain come at the right time, the cold and heat are appropriate, the land does not increase, but there is a bumper harvest year, and the income is more.

古文：人事、天功二物者皆入多，非山林泽谷之利也。
现代文：人的努力，天时的作用，这两方面都能使收入增多，并不是山林川泽给予的利益。
English: Human effort, the role of time, both of which can increase income, is not a benefit given by the mountains and forests.

古文：夫无山林泽谷之利入多，因谓之窕货者，无术之害也。
现代文：不因为山林川泽给予的利益而收入多，却硬把它们叫做窕货，是不懂法术的言论。
English: It is not because of the benefits given by the mountains and forests that they have more income, but they call them stolen goods, which is a speech that does not understand magic.

古文：七
现代文：七
English: Seven

古文：赵简子围卫之郛郭，犀盾、犀橹，立于矢石之所不及，鼓之而士不起。
现代文：赵简子包围卫国国都的外城，拿着用犀牛皮做的大小盾牌，站在箭和滚石达不到地方，击鼓奋进，然而战士却不响应。
English: Zhao Jianzi encircled the outer city of the national capital, holding a rhinoceros skin shield, standing where arrows and rolling stones could not reach, beating drums, but the soldiers did not respond.

古文：简子投枹曰： 乌乎！
现代文：简子扔了鼓槌说： 哎呀！
English: Jane threw the drumstick and said, "Oh!

古文：吾之士数弊也。 
现代文：我的战士这么快就疲困了。 
English: My soldiers get tired so quickly.

古文：行人烛过免胄而对曰： 臣闻之：亦有君之不能士耳，士无弊者。
现代文：外交官烛过脱下头盔回答说： 我听说：只有君主不会使用战士的，战士没有会疲困的。
English: The diplomat took off his helmet and replied, "I have heard that only the sovereign does not use soldiers, and soldiers do not get tired.

古文：昔者吾先君献公并国十七，服国三十八，战十有二胜，是民之用也。
现代文：过去我们的先君晋献公吞并了十七个国家，迫使三十八个国家顺服，打了十二次胜仗，用的是这些民众。
English: In the past, our forefather Jincheng used these people to annex seventeen countries, force thirty-eight countries to submit, and fight twelve victorious wars.

古文：献公没，惠公即位，淫衍暴乱，身好玉女，秦人恣侵，去绛十七里，亦是人之用也。
现代文：献公死了，惠公即位，他荒淫无度，残暴昏乱，喜欢美女，秦人肆意入侵，离晋都绛城只有十七里，用的也是这些民众。
English: Xian Gong died, and Huigong ascended the throne. He was wild, violent, and promiscuous. He liked beautiful women. The Qin people invaded freely. It was only seventeen miles away from the capital city of Jin. These people were also used.

古文：惠公没，文公授之，围卫，取邺，城濮之战，五败荆人，取尊名于天下，亦此人之用也。
现代文：惠公死，文公继承君位，围攻卫国，得到邺地；城濮之战，五次打败楚军，在天下得到霸主之名，用的也还是这些民众。
English: After Huigong's death, Wengong succeeded to the throne, besieged and defended the country, and obtained the fiefdom; in the Battle of Chenghuang, he defeated the Chu army five times, and gained the name of the overlord in the world. These people were also used.

古文：亦有君不能士耳，士无弊也。 
现代文：只有君主不会使用战士的，战士没有会疲困的。 
English: Only the sovereign does not use soldiers, and soldiers do not get tired.

古文：简子乃去盾、橹，立矢石之所及，鼓之而士乘之，战大胜。
现代文：简子于是拿下大小盾牌，站在箭和滚石够得着的地方，击鼓奋进，战士闻声响应，打了个大胜仗。
English: Therefore, Kenzo took down the large and small shields, stood where the arrows and the rolling stones could reach, beat the drums, and the soldiers heard the sound and responded, and fought a great victory.

古文：简子曰： 与吾得革车千乘，不如闻行人烛过之一言也。 
现代文：简子说： 我与其得到一千辆兵车，还不如听到外交官烛过的一番话。 
English: "Instead of getting a thousand military vehicles, I'd rather hear a few words from a diplomat," he said.

古文：或曰：行人未有以说也，乃道惠公以此人是败，文公以此人是霸，未见所以用人也。
现代文：有人说：外交官烛过没有拿出什么道理来进说，只是说晋惠公用这些人而失败，晋文公用这些人而称霸，没有指出用人的办法。
English: Some people said: Diplomats have not come up with any reason to say this, but only said that Jinhui publicly used these people and failed, Jinwen publicly used these people and dominated, and did not point out the method of employing people.

古文：简子未可以速去盾、橹也。
现代文：简子不该这么快就丢掉大小盾牌。
English: Jane shouldn't have thrown away her shields so quickly.

古文：严亲在围，轻犯矢石，孝子之所爱亲也。孝子爱亲，百数之一也。
现代文：父亲被包围，儿子不怕箭和滚石的危险去救的，是因为孝子爱父。孝子爱父，百人中才有一个。
English: If a father is besieged, and his son does not fear the danger of arrows and stones to save him, it is because a filial son loves his father. A filial son loves his father, but only one in a hundred.

古文：今以为身处危而人尚可战，是以百族之子于上皆若孝子之爱亲也，是行人之诬也。
现代文：现在认为君主处在危险之中而战士尚可打仗，就是认为分属于各个宗族的战士对于君主，都像孝子爱父一样，这是外交官的谎言。
English: It is a diplomat's lie to say that the prince is in danger, but that the soldiers can still fight, that is, that the soldiers belonging to various clans are like filial sons to the prince.

古文：好利恶害，夫人之所有也。
现代文：好利恶害，是人固有的本性。
English: Good and evil are inherent in human nature.

古文：赏厚而信，人轻敌矣；刑重而必，失人不比矣。
现代文：赏赐多而严守信用，人们就不怕敌人；刑罚重而一定实行，人们就不敢败逃了。
English: If rewards are plentiful and trust is strictly kept, people will not be afraid of enemies; if punishments are severe and certain, people will not dare to run away.

古文：长行徇上，数百不一失；喜利畏罪，人莫不然。
现代文：为了君主而义无反顾地牺牲自己，几百人中挑不出一个；喜欢得赏而害怕犯罪，没有一个人不是这样的。
English: Out of hundreds of people, no one can be singled out for selflessly sacrificing himself for the sake of the monarch; no one likes to be rewarded and is afraid of committing a crime.

古文：将众者不出乎莫不然之数，而道乎百无失人之行，人未知众之道也。
现代文：统率士兵的人不采用必要的术数，而根据百人中没有一个能做到的行为，说明外交官并不懂得使用战士的办法。
English: Those who lead soldiers do not apply the necessary skill, and according to the behavior that none of the hundred can do, it shows that diplomats do not know how to use soldiers.

