古文：伍文定，字时泰，松滋人。
现代文：伍文定，字时泰，湖北松滋人。
English: Wu Wending, character Shitai, Hubei Songzhi people.

古文：父琇，贵州参议。
现代文：他的父亲伍当过贵州参议。
English: His father, Wu, was once a Guizhou State Councilor.

古文：文定登弘治十二年进士。
现代文：文定自己考中弘治十二年进士。
English: Wen Ding himself was admitted to the Hongzhi Middle School Examination in the 12th year.

古文：有膂力，便弓马，议论慷慨。
现代文：他臂力过人，擅长骑马、射箭，议论事情慷慨激昂。
English: He was a strong-armed man, good at horseback riding, archery, and talked about things passionately.

古文：授常州推官，精敏善决狱，称强吏。
现代文：当初做常州推官，办事精明、勤快，很会断案，被称为强干的小吏。
English: At the beginning, he was a magistrate in Changzhou. He was shrewd, diligent, and very good at deciding cases. He was known as a hard-working minor official.

古文：魏国公徐俌与民争田，文定勘，归之民。
现代文：魏国公徐亻甫与百姓争抢田地，文定把田判给了百姓。
English: Wei Guogong Xu Shenfu competed with the common people to grab the fields, and Wen Ding finally awarded the fields to the common people.

古文：刘瑾入俌重贿，兴大狱，巡抚艾朴以下十四人悉被逮。
现代文：刘瑾得到徐亻甫送的重礼后，就制造大案，巡抚艾朴以下十四个人都被逮捕了。
English: After Liu Wei received the heavy gift from Xu Xiufu, he created a big case, and the fourteen people below the inspector Ai Pu were all arrested.

古文：文定已迁成都同知，亦下诏狱，斥为民。
现代文：文定已经升调为成都同知，也被抓进京城的大牢中，结果被罢官为民。
English: Wenzing has been promoted to Chengdu Tongzhi, and was also arrested and taken to a large prison in Beijing. As a result, he was dismissed from his post and became a commoner.

古文：瑾败，起补嘉兴。
现代文：刘瑾败亡以后，他重新起用到嘉兴做官。
English: After Liu Bei's defeat, he was reinstated as an official in Jiaxing.

古文：江西姚源贼王浩八等流劫浙江开化，都御史俞谏檄文定与参将李隆、都指挥江洪、佥事储珊讨之，军华埠。
现代文：江西姚源的盗贼王浩八等流窜到浙江开化抢劫，都御史俞谏传令让文定与参将李隆、都指挥江洪、佥事储珊一起讨伐他，驻军华埠。
English: Wang Hao, a thief from Yaoyuan in Jiangxi Province, and eight others went to Zhejiang Province to rob and plunder, and the governor of the capital sent an order to Wending to fight him together with the general Li Long, the governor of the capital Jiang Hong, and the governor of the capital Anji Zhushan, and the troops were stationed in Huabu.

古文：而都指挥白弘与湖州知府黄衷别营马金。
现代文：而都指挥白弘与湖州知府黄衷另外在马金扎营。
English: However, the capital's commander, Bai Hong, and the governor of Huzhou, Huang Zhen, camped separately in Makin.

古文：贼党刘昌三破，执弘，官军大挫。
现代文：盗贼刘昌三攻破营寨，活捉了白弘，官军受到了很大打击。
English: Liu Changsan, a thief, broke into the camp and captured Bai Hong alive. The government army suffered a great blow.

古文：浩八突华埠，洪、文定击败之，追及于孔埠。
现代文：浩八攻打华埠，江洪、文定打败了他，追到孔埠。
English: Hao Ya attacked Huabu, and Jiang Hong and Wen Ding defeated him and chased him to Kongbu.

古文：隆、珊亦追至池淮，破其巢，进攻淫田。
现代文：李隆、储珊也追到池淮，破坏了敌人的巢穴，接着又进攻淫田。
English: Li Long and Zhushan also chased to the pond, destroyed the enemy's lair, and then attacked the field.

古文：洪以奇兵深入，中贼诱，与指挥张琳等皆被执。
现代文：江洪率奇兵深入敌区，中了盗贼的奸计，与指挥张琳等都被俘。
English: Jiang Hong led his soldiers deep into the enemy area, and they were caught in the thieves' treachery. He and his commander Zhang Lin were both captured.

古文：文定等殿后得还，贼亦遁归江西。
现代文：文定等将因为殿后得以生还，盗贼也就此逃回江西去了。
English: Wen Ding and others were able to survive because of the palace, and the thieves also fled back to Jiangxi.

古文：谏等上文定忠勇状，诏所司奖劳。
现代文：俞谏等把文定忠于职责、勇敢作战的事迹上报朝廷后，朝廷诏令主管部门对他加以奖励。
English: After Zou et al. reported to the imperial court the deeds of Wenzing's loyalty to duty and brave battle, the imperial court ordered the competent department to reward him.

古文：擢河南知府，计擒剧贼张勇、李文简。
现代文：后来他升任河南知府，设计擒获了大盗张勇、李文简。
English: Later, he was promoted to Henan prefecture, and his design won the support of grand thieves Zhang Yong and Li Wenjian.

古文：以才任治剧，调吉安。
现代文：因为才干优裕，能干大事，所以调往吉安。
English: He was transferred to Ji'an because he was talented and capable of great things.

古文：计平永丰及大茅山贼。
现代文：期间又定计平定了永丰和大茅山的盗贼。
English: During the period, the thieves of Yongfeng and Dashaoshan were also calmed down.

古文：已，佐巡抚王守仁平桶冈、横水。
现代文：后来，又帮助巡抚王守仁平定了桶冈、横水。
English: Later, he also helped the procurator Wang Shouren to level the dikes and cross-waters.

古文：宸濠反，吉安士民争亡匿。
现代文：宸濠叛乱发生后，吉安的百姓、士绅们争先恐后地逃跑或躲藏。
English: After the rebellion broke out, the people and gentry of Ji'an scrambled to escape or hide.

古文：文定斩亡者一人，众乃定。
现代文：文定把逃亡的斩了一个，群众才安静下来。
English: The crowd calmed down after Wen Ding beheaded one of the fugitives.

古文：乃迎守仁入城。
现代文：然后他把守仁迎入城中。
English: Then he welcomed Morihito into the city.

古文：知府邢珣、徐琏、戴德孺等先后至，共讨贼。文定当大帅。
现代文：知府刑王旬、徐琏、戴德孺等先后到来，一起讨伐宸濠，由文定当大将。
English: Chifu executioner Wang Shun, Xu Yao, Dai De Yao and others arrived successively, and together they fought against Yao, with Wen Ding as the general.

古文：丙辰之战，身犯矢石、火燎须不动。
现代文：在二十五日那天的战斗中，文定亲身冒着箭头和滚石的威胁向前，大火烧着胡须也不退后一步。
English: In the battle on the twenty-fifth day, Wen Ding himself braved the threat of arrows and rolling stones to move forward, and the fire burned his beard and did not take a step back.

古文：贼平，功最，擢江西按察使。
现代文：宸濠之乱被平定，他战功最大，被提升为江西按察使。
English: He was promoted to the post of inspector general of Jiangxi Province.

古文：张忠、许泰至南昌，欲冒其功，而守仁已俘宸濠赴浙江。
现代文：张忠、许泰到南昌，想顶他的战功，而守仁已经拿获宸濠带到浙江去了。
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai went to Nanchang to celebrate his war exploits, while Shou Ren had already taken his prize to Zhejiang.

古文：忠等失望，大恨。
现代文：张忠等失望后非常恼恨。
English: Zhang Zhong was very angry after the disappointment.

古文：文定出谒，遂缚之。
现代文：文定出来拜见，就把他给绑了。
English: When Wen Ding came out to meet him, they tied him up.

古文：文定骂曰： 吾不恤九族，为国家平大贼，何罪？
现代文：文定骂道 ：我不顾诛杀九族为国家平定反贼，有什么罪？
English: Wen Ding scolded: I killed nine ethnic groups for the country to pacify the rebels, what is my crime?

古文：汝天子腹心，屈辱忠义，为逆贼报仇，法当斩。 
现代文：你们是天子的心腹，侮辱国家的忠臣义士，为反贼报仇，依法该斩了你们。 
English: You are the henchmen of the Son of Heaven, you insult the loyal subjects and righteous men of the country, and take revenge for the anti-thieves. According to the law, you should be beheaded.

古文：忠益怒，椎文定仆地。
现代文：张忠更加恼火了，就把文定棰倒在地上。
English: Zhang Zhong became even more angry, and threw Wen Dingyu to the ground.

古文：文定求解任，不报。
现代文：文定后来上书皇帝请求解职，武宗没有回答他。
English: Wenzing later petitioned the emperor for dismissal, but Emperor Wu did not answer him.

古文：寻迁广东右布政使。
现代文：不久他升任广东右布政使。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Guangdong Ubu political envoy.

古文：未赴，而世宗嗣位。
现代文：尚未赴任，世宗皇帝即位。
English: Before taking office, Emperor Shizong ascended to the throne.

古文：上忠等罪状，且曰： 曩忠、泰与刘晖至江西，忠自称天子弟，晖称天子儿，泰称威武副将军，与天子同僚。
现代文：他上书检举张忠等人的罪状，并且说： 过去张忠、许泰与刘晖到江西来，张忠自称是天子的弟弟，刘晖自称天子的儿子，许泰自称威武副将军，与天子是同僚。
English: He issued a written accusation against Zhang Zhong and others, and said: In the past, Zhang Zhong, Xu Tai and Liu Wei came to Jiangxi. Zhang Zhong claimed to be the younger brother of Tianzi, Liu Wei claimed to be the son of Tianzi, and Xu Tai claimed to be the deputy general of Weiwu and a colleague of Tianzi.

古文：折辱命吏，诬害良民。需求万端，渔猎盈百万。致饿殍遍野，盗贼纵横。
现代文：他们侮辱朝廷命官，诬害善良百姓，提出千万般要求，侵夺了百万余资财，致使江西到处是饿死的尸首，盗贼汹汹而起。
English: They insulted the court officials, slandered the good people, made tens of thousands of demands, and plundered more than one million yuan of assets. As a result, Jiangxi is full of starving corpses, and thieves are on the rampage.

古文：虽寸斩三人，不足谢江西百姓。
现代文：现在即使一刀刀割了他们三个，也不足以向江西百姓谢罪。
English: Now, even if they cut three of them with a knife, it is not enough to apologize to the people of Jiangxi.

古文：今大憝江彬、钱宁皆已伏法，三人实其党与。
现代文：现今首恶江彬、钱宁都已经法办了，这三个人实际上是他们的党羽。
English: Today, Jiang Bin and Channing, the ringleaders, have been brought to justice. These three people are actually their henchmen.

古文：乞速正天诛，用章国典。 
现代文：请赶快杀了他们，用以显示法律的威严！ 
English: Please kill them quickly to show the majesty of the law!

古文：又请发宸濠资财，还之江西，以资经费；矜释忠、泰所陷无辜及宁府宗人不预谋者，以清冤狱。
现代文：又请求把没收宸濠的资产，发还给江西，作为建设江西的费用；慎重地清理冤案，释放张忠、许泰所陷害的无罪者，及宁王家族中没参加阴谋反叛的人员。
English: He also requested that the assets of the confiscation be returned to Jiangxi Province as expenses for the construction of Jiangxi Province; that the unjust cases be cleared up carefully, and that the innocent persons framed by Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai be released, as well as the members of the Ning Wang family who did not participate in the conspiracy and rebellion.

古文：帝并嘉纳之。
现代文：世宗一并采纳了他的建议。
English: All the sejong accepted his suggestion.

古文：论功，进右副都御史，提督操江。
现代文：评定功绩，文定升为右副都御史，负责督办操江事务。
English: According to the evaluation of merits, Wen Ding was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, responsible for supervising river management affairs.

古文：嘉靖三年，讨获海贼董效等二百余人，赐敕奖劳。
现代文：嘉靖三年讨伐海盗，拿获了董效等二百多人，世宗颁发敕令奖励了他。
English: Jiajing fought pirates for three years and captured more than 200 people, including Dong Rong. Shizong rewarded him with a royal edict.

古文：寻谢病归。
现代文：不久因病请回家疗养去了。
English: He was soon sent home to recuperate due to illness.

古文：六年召拜兵部右侍郎。其冬擢右都御史，代胡世宁掌院事。
现代文：六年应召入京，做了兵部右侍郎，冬天升为右都御史，代胡世宁主持都察院的事务。
English: Six years later, he was called to Kyoto, where he served as the Right Attendant of the Military Department, and in the winter he was promoted to the Right Metropolitan Historian, where he presided over the affairs of the Metropolitan Inspectorate on behalf of Hu Shining.

古文：云南士酋安铨反，败参政黄昭道，攻陷寻甸、嵩明。
现代文：云南的少数族人首领安铨造反，打败了参政黄昭道，攻占了寻甸、嵩明。
English: The minority leader of Yunnan, Anhui, rebelled, defeated Huang Zhaodou, who had been in politics, and captured Xiangdian and Songming.

古文：明年，武定土酋凤朝文亦反，杀同知以下官，与铨合兵围云南。
现代文：第二年，武定的民族首领凤朝文也起来造反，杀害了同知以下的官吏，与安铨联合起来包围云南。
English: The following year, the ethnic leader of Wuding, Feng Chaowen, also rebelled, killed officials who were less than his acquaintance, and united with Anhui to encircle Yunnan.

古文：诏进文定兵部尚书兼前职，提督云南、四川、贵州、湖广军讨之，以侍郎梁材督饷。
现代文：世宗诏令加封文定为兵部尚书兼前职，让他统辖云南、四川、贵州、湖广的军队讨伐叛乱者，让侍郎梁材督理军饷。
English: King Sejong's edict of adding a seal to the document designated him as the military secretary and ex-officer, giving him control over the armies of Yunnan, Sichuan, Guizhou, and Hukang to fight the rebels, and letting his attendant Liang Zai supervise the army.

古文：会芒部叛酋沙保子普奴为乱，并以属文定。
现代文：正好芒部叛乱酋长沙保的儿子普奴也兴兵作乱，朝廷一并交由文定来镇压。
English: As it happened, the son of the Mangbu rebel chief Shabao, Punu, also rioted, and the imperial court also handed it over to Wenzing to suppress.

古文：文定未至云南，铨等已为巡抚欧阳重所破，遂移师征普奴。
现代文：文定没到云南，安铨等已经被巡抚欧阳重打败，于是文定调头去征伐普奴。
English: When he did not arrive in Yunnan, Anhui and other provinces had already been defeated by the governor Ouyang Shigong, so he turned his attention to conquering Punu.

古文：左都御史李承勋极言川、贵残破，不当用兵，遂召还，命提督京营。
现代文：左都御史李承勋极力说四川、贵州破缺不堪，不应当再动兵，于是召文定回京提督京营。
English: Li Chengxun, the left-wing imperial historian, insisted that Sichuan and Guizhou were too weak and that no more troops should be mobilized, so he summoned Wen Ding to return to Beijing as Admiral of the Beijing Camp.

古文：文定至湖广，疏乞省祭归。
现代文：文定到湖广，上书请假回家祭祖。
English: Wen Ding went to Hukang and wrote a letter asking for leave to go home to worship the ancestors.

古文：已，四川巡按御史戴金复上言： 叛酋称乱之初，势尚可抚。
现代文：过后，四川巡按御史戴金又上书说 ：叛贼作乱开始的时候，大势头还可以招安。
English: Later, Sichuan's inspector-general Dai Jin wrote again, saying: "When the rebels started to riot, there was still a lot of momentum.

古文：而文定决意进兵，一无顾惜。
现代文：可是文定打定主意要进军，完全不珍惜机会。
English: However, Wen Ding made up his mind to march in, and did not value the opportunity at all.

古文：飞刍挽粮，糜数十万。
现代文：大车大马运输粮草，白白浪费了几十万石。
English: Trucks and horses transport grain and grass, wasting hundreds of thousands of kilos.

古文：及有诏罢师，尚不肯已。
现代文：等朝廷诏书命令作罢时，他还不肯停下来。
English: He did not want to stop when the Imperial Rescript ordered him to stop.

古文：又极论土酋阿济等罪。军民讹言，几复生变。
现代文：又尽力述说土酋阿济等的罪过，使得当地军民纷纷传言，差一点又出个乱子。
English: He also tried his best to tell about the sins of the Tu Hui, Azi, and so on, which made the local soldiers and civilians spread rumors one after another, and almost caused a riot.

古文：臣愚以为文定可罪也。 
现代文：我认为文定应当治罪。 
English: I think that the sentence should be a crime.

古文：尚书方献夫、李承勋因诋文定好大喜功，伤财动众，乃令致仕。
现代文：尚书方献夫、李承勋借此诋毁文定好大喜功，劳民伤财，于是命令他退休了。
English: Li Chengxun, the devoted husband of Shang Shufang, denigrated Wen Dinghao's great meritorious service and harmed the people's wealth, so he ordered him to retire.

古文：文定忠义自许，遇事敢为，不与时俯仰。
现代文：文定以忠臣义士自相期许，遇到事情，敢想敢干，不与时俯仰，见风使舵。
English: Wen Ding expected himself to be a loyal subject and a righteous person, and when he encountered things, he dared to think and dare to do, he did not bow down to the times, and he used the wind as a rudder.

古文：芒部之役，愤小丑数乱，欲为国伸威，为议者旁挠。
现代文：芒部叛乱一事，他恨那些小丑们几次造反，反复无定，所以想为国家弘扬威武，却被议事的大臣们从旁给阻挠了。
English: He hated those clowns who rebelled several times and were indecisive about the Mangbe rebellion, so he wanted to promote military prowess for the country, but was blocked from the sidelines by the ministers in charge.

古文：庙堂专务姑息，以故功不克就。
现代文：当时朝廷一心要姑息偷安，因此他没能成就这桩功业。
English: At that time, the imperial court was bent on appeasing and stealing peace, so he was unable to accomplish this feat.

古文：九年七月卒于家。
现代文：九年七月他死在家中。
English: He died at home in July 2009.

古文：久之卒。
现代文：天启初，才被追谥为 忠襄 。
English: He died a long time later.

古文：张岳，字维乔，惠安人。
现代文：张岳，字维乔，福建惠安人。
English: Zhang Yue, also known as Wei Qiao, is a native of Huian, Fujian.

古文：自幼好学，以大儒自期。
现代文：从小好学，想成为一名大儒。
English: Since childhood, he was eager to learn and wanted to become a great scholar.

古文：登正德十一年进士，授行人。
现代文：考中正德十一年进士，初任行人。
English: In the eleventh year of his junior high school entrance examination, Zhengde became a member of the Communist Party of China.

古文：武宗寝疾豹房。请令大臣侍从，台谏轮直起居，视药饵，防意外变。
现代文：武宗在豹房养病时，他上书请让大臣侍从，让台谏官轮流值班，服侍武宗起居休息，检查药饵，以提防意外的事变。
English: When Emperor Wuzong was recuperating in the Leopard Room, he wrote to request that the minister should be his attendant, and that the Taiwanese eunuchs should take turns on duty to serve Emperor Wuzong and rest, and check the medicine bottles, in order to guard against unexpected events.

古文：不报。
现代文：武宗没有作答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：与同官谏南巡，杖阙下，谪南京国子学正。
现代文：后来又和同事一起劝阻武宗南巡，在宫门外被打了一顿大棍，然后贬为南京国子监学正。
English: Later, together with his colleagues, he tried to dissuade Wu Zong from visiting the south, and was beaten with a big stick outside the palace gate. He was then demoted to the position of Nanjing provincial supervisor.

古文：世宗嗣位，复故官，迁右司副。
现代文：世宗即位后，张岳官复原任，又升为右司副。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Zhang Yueguan was restored to his original post and promoted to vice-minister of the right.

古文：母老乞便养，改南京武选员外郎，历主客郎中。
现代文：因为母亲年老他请求就近赡养，改官南京武选司员外郎，又做过主客郎中。
English: Because of his mother's old age, he asked to be supported nearby, changed his post to Nanjing Military Selection Officer, and worked as a host guest.

古文：方议大禘礼。张璁求始祖所自出者实之，礼官皆唯唯。
现代文：当时朝廷正在讨论大礼，张璁主张考证远古时代传下谱系的始祖来填写牌位，礼官都跟着唯唯称是。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing the great gift, Zhang Ye advocated that the ancestors of the lineage passed down in ancient times should fill in the cards, and the etiquette officials followed suit.

古文：岳言于尚书李时曰： 不如为皇初祖位，毋实以人。 
现代文：张岳对尚书李时说： 不如虚设一个皇初祖的牌位，不实写某人为好。 
English: Zhang Yue said to Shang Shul Lisi: It is better to falsely set up a card rank of the emperor's first ancestor, and falsely write someone.

古文：时大喜，告璁。
现代文：李时很高兴，告诉了张璁。
English: Li Shiji was very happy and told Zhang Xuan.

古文：璁不谓然，以初议上。
现代文：张璁不以为然，仍按当初的主张奏上。
English: Zhang Ye did not agree and continued to play according to his original idea.

古文：帝竟令题皇初祖主，如岳言。
现代文：世宗最后让题写了一个皇初祖神主的牌位，和张岳的主张一样。
English: In the end, Sejong had a card of the founder of the imperial family inscribed, which was the same as Zhang Yue's idea.

古文：璁衔之，出为广西提学佥事。
现代文：张璁因此记恨张岳，把他外调去当广西提学佥事。
English: As a result, Zhang Rong hated Zhang Yue and transferred him to Guangxi to work as a tutor.

古文：行部柳州，军缺饷大哗，城闭五日。
现代文：他到柳州巡视时，当地驻军因为缺饷而哗变，城门紧闭了五天不敢打开。
English: When he went on a tour of Liuzhou, the local garrison mutinied because of a lack of ploughs, and the city gates were closed for five days, not daring to open.

古文：岳令守城启门，召诘哗者予饷去。
现代文：张岳命令守城的打开城门，召来哗变的士兵，问话以后给他们粮饷，让他们走了。
English: Zhang Yue ordered the gatekeeper to open the gate, summon the mutinous soldiers, and after questioning them, give them food and let them go.

古文：寻以计擒首恶，置之理。入贺，改提学江西。
现代文：不久设计捉拿了发动哗变的人，把他们关进监狱。后来，他进京庆贺，改任江西提学。
English: Soon after, he caught the people who launched the mutiny and put them in prison. Later, he went to Beijing to celebrate, and was transferred to Jiangxi to study.

古文：不谢璁，璁黜广西选贡七人，谪岳广东盐课提举。
现代文：因为他不登门拜谢张璁，张璁罢黜了七名来自广西的选贡，把张岳贬为广东盐课提举。
English: Because he did not go to the door to thank Zhang Ye, Zhang Ye dismissed seven tributaries from Guangxi and demoted Zhang Yue to the Guangdong salt class.

古文：迁廉州知府。
现代文：以后他又升为廉州知府。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of governor of Lianzhou.

古文：督民垦弃地，教以桔槔运水。
现代文：期间他率领当地人民开垦荒地，教他们用桔木皋运水。
English: During this time, he led the local people to reclaim the wasteland and taught them to carry water with an orange raft.

古文：廉民多盗珠池。
现代文：廉州百姓有很多人从珠池中盗取珠宝。
English: Many people in Lianzhou stole jewelry from the pearl pond.

古文：岳居四年，未尝入一珠。
现代文：张岳在这里做了四年官，未曾拿一颗珠宝为己所有。
English: Zhang Yue has been an official here for four years and has never taken possession of a single piece of jewelry.

古文：帝使使往安南诘莫登庸杀主，岳言于总督张经曰： 莫氏篡黎，可无勘而知也，使往受谩词辱国，请留使者毋前。 
现代文：世宗派遣使臣到安南去质问莫登庸弑君篡位的事，张岳对总督张经说： 莫氏篡夺黎氏的政权，这是不用调查就可以知道的事了。使臣前往受人侮辱的话有损国家尊严，请留下使者不要去了吧。 
English: Shizong sent an envoy to Annan to question the usurpation of the throne by Morden Yongzheng. Zhang Yue said to the governor Zhang Jing: Mo usurped the power of Li, this is something that can be known without investigation. If the envoy goes to be insulted, it will undermine the dignity of the country. Please leave the envoy and do not go.

古文：经不可。
现代文：张经不同意。
English: Zhang Jing disagreed.

古文：知钦州林希元上书请决讨莫氏，岳贻书止之，复条上不可讨六事。
现代文：钦州知州林希元上书请朝廷坚决讨伐莫氏，张岳送信过去加以制止，又列举了不能讨伐他的六条理由呈上。
English: Qinzhou Zhizhou Lin Xi Yuan petitioned the court to resolutely crack down on Mo, Zhang Yue sent a letter to the court to stop him, and also listed six reasons why he could not be cracked down on.

古文：为书贻执政曰： 据边民报，黎赒袭封无嗣，以兄子譓为子。
现代文：他又给执政大臣写信道 ：根据安南边境上的百姓报告说，黎继承封国以后没有儿子，把哥哥的儿子黎讠惠当成自己的儿子。
English: He also wrote a letter to the ruling minister, saying: According to the report of the people on the Annan border, Li did not have a son after inheriting the fief, and regarded his brother's son, Li Yonghui, as his own son.

古文：陈暠作乱，赒遇害，暠篡。
现代文：陈皓作乱时，黎遇害，陈皓就篡了位。
English: When Chen Xuan made a disturbance, Li was killed, and Chen Xuan usurped the position.

古文：未几国人拥立譓，暠奔谅山。
现代文：不久，安南人民又拥立黎讠惠，陈皓逃到了谅山。
English: Soon after, the people of Annan supported Lihong Hui again, and Chen Rong fled to the mountain of Forgiveness.

古文：譓立七年，为莫登庸所逼，出居升华。
现代文：黎讠惠坐了七年又被莫登庸逼迫，外逃住在升华。
English: After sitting for seven years and being persecuted by the moderns, Lih fled and lived in sublimation.

古文：登庸立譓幼弟騑而相之，卒弑騑自立，国分为三。
现代文：登庸立黎讠惠的小弟弟黎为王，自己当丞相，最后杀害黎自立为王，这样安南就一分为三了。
English: Deng Yong set up his younger brother, Lai, as king, and himself as prime minister. Finally, he killed Lai and set himself up as king. Thus Annam was divided into three parts.

古文：黎在南，莫居中，陈在西北。
现代文：黎氏在南部，莫氏在中间，陈氏在西北。
English: Lai in the south, Mo in the middle, and Chen in the northwest.

古文：后谅山亦为登庸有，陈遂绝。
现代文：后来谅山也被登庸占领，陈氏就灭亡了。
English: Later, Yuanshan was also occupied by the Dengyong, and the Chen clan perished.

古文：而黎所居即古日南地，与占城邻，限大海，登庸不能逾之南，故两存。
现代文：而黎氏所占据的也就是古人称为日南的地方，与占城接壤，有大海作为险阻，登庸不能越海南下，所以两边得以共存。
English: On the other hand, the place occupied by the Lai clan, which the ancients called Nichinan, bordered on the city of Champa, and had the sea as a dangerous obstacle. It was impossible to cross the sea to the south, so the two sides could coexist.

古文：近登庸又以交州付其孙福海，而自营海东府地都斋居之。
现代文：近来登庸又把交州给了他的孙子福海，自己营建了海东府一块地方，叫都斋，住在那里。
English: Recently, Deng Yong also gave Jiaozhou to his grandson Fu Hai, and he built a place in Haidong Prefecture, called Dousai, and lived there.

古文：盖安南诸府，惟海东地最大，即所谓王山郡也。
现代文：安南各府，只有海东府地方最大，也就是以前称为王山郡的地区。
English: Of all the prefectures in Annam, only Haidong Prefecture is the largest, that is, the area formerly known as Wangshan County.

古文：此贼负篡逆名，常练兵备我，又时扬言求入贡。
现代文：这个老贼背了篡国的罪名，常常操练兵马防备着我们，又时常要求向我国入贡。
English: This old thief has betrayed the charge of usurping the country, often trains soldiers and horses to guard against us, and often demands tribute from our country.

古文：边人以非故王也，弗敢闻。
现代文：边境上的百姓因为国王不再是过去的国王了，不敢报告给朝廷知道。
English: Because the king is no longer the king of the past, the people on the border do not dare to report to the court.

古文：愚以为彼内乱未尝有所侵犯，可且置之，待其乱定乃贡。
现代文：我认为他们虽然内乱却不曾侵犯过我们，可以暂时把他们放在一边，等他们内乱平定后再要他们来入贡。
English: I think we can put them aside for the time being and wait until their civil war is over before we ask them to pay tribute.

古文：若必用兵，胜负利纯非岳所敢知。 
现代文：如果一定要用兵，我们两边的胜负、强弱可不是我张岳敢肯定的了。 
English: If we have to use troops, I'm not sure Zhang Yue would be able to predict the outcome and the strengths and weaknesses of our two sides.

古文：执政得书不能决。
现代文：执政大臣收到他的信以后也不能决定下来。
English: Even after the ruling minister received his letter, he could not make up his mind.

古文：已，毛伯温来视师，张经一以军事委岳。
现代文：过后，毛伯温来指挥军事，张经完全把自己负责的军事委托给张岳。
English: Later, Mao Bowen came to command the military, and Zhang Jing completely entrusted the military to Zhang Yue.

古文：又以翁万达才，进二人于伯温。
现代文：张经又认为翁万达很有才干，就把他们俩一块推荐给了伯温。
English: Zhang Jing also thought that Onwanda was very talented, so he recommended the two of them to Bowen.

古文：岳与伯温语数日，伯温曰： 交事属君矣。 
现代文：张岳和伯温谈了几天，伯温就说： 交州的事就全交你办了。 
English: Zhang Yue and Bowen talked for a few days, and Bowen said, "I'll let you handle all of the affairs of Jiaozhou.

古文：许登庸如岳议。
现代文：后来又照张岳的意见答应了登庸的求降。
English: Later, according to Zhang Yue's opinion, he agreed to Deng Yong's request for a reduction.

古文：会岳迁浙江提学副使，又迁参政，伯温驰奏留之，乃改广东参政，分守海北。
现代文：当时正好张岳将升任浙江提学副使，又改为升任参政，伯温飞章上奏留下了他，于是张岳改当广东参政，负责分守海北。
English: At that time, Zhang Yue was just about to be promoted to vice-envoy of Zhejiang to promote education, and he was also promoted to participate in politics. He was left behind by Bowen Feizhang, so Zhang Yue changed to participate in politics in Guangdong and was responsible for guarding the northern part of the sea.

古文：登庸降，加岳俸一级，赐银币。
现代文：登庸投降以后，朝廷给张岳加俸一级，并赏赐他银币。
English: After Deng Yong's surrender, the imperial court gave Zhang Yue a one-level salary increase and rewarded him with silver coins.

古文：寻以征琼州叛黎功，加俸及赐如之。
现代文：不久又因为他讨伐琼州的黎民叛乱，又照以前的样子加了俸，赏赐了他银币。
English: Soon, because he fought against the Li Min rebellion in Qiongzhou, he was rewarded with silver coins and his salary was increased as before.

古文：塞上多事，言官荐岳边才。
现代文：边塞上当时经常有战事，言官推荐张岳有担任边帅的才干。
English: At that time, there were often battles on the border, and the speech officer recommended Zhang Yue to serve as a border guard.

古文：伯温言： 岳可南，翁万达可北也。 
现代文：伯温说 ：张岳可以在南方，翁万达适合往北方去。 
English: Berwin said: Zhangyue can be in the south, and Onwanda is suitable for the north.

古文：遂擢岳右佥都御史，抚治郧阳。
现代文：于是提拔张岳做右佥都御史，巡抚郧阳。
English: As a result, Zhang Yue was promoted to the position of the right-hand capital governor and the governor of Shenyang.

古文：旋移抚江西，进右副都御史，总督两广军务兼巡抚。
现代文：不久调到江西做巡抚，又升为右副都御史，总督两广军务兼任巡抚。
English: Soon he was transferred to Jiangxi to be the governor, and then he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and the governor of the two provinces also served as the military governor.

古文：讨破广东封川僮苏公乐等，进兵部右侍郎。
现代文：期间，他征服了广东封川僮民苏公乐等人的造反，升到了兵部右侍郎。
English: During this period, he conquered the rebellion of the people of Guangdong Fongchuan and Su Gongle, and was promoted to the right hand man of the military department.

古文：平广西马平诸县瑶贼，先后俘斩四千，招抚二万余人，诛贼魁韦金田等，增俸一级。
现代文：又平定了广西马平等县的瑶族盗贼，先后俘获、斩首四千多人，招安两万多人，诛杀了盗贼的首领韦金田等人，被增加了一级官俸。
English: He also subdued the Dong thieves in Magong County, Guangxi, captured and beheaded more than 4,000 people, recruited more than 20,000 people, killed the leader of the thieves Wei Jintian and others, and was increased by a first-class official salary.

古文：召为刑部右侍郎，以御史徐南金言命留任。
现代文：朝廷想召他还朝当刑部右侍郎，因为御史徐南金的话又让他继续留任。
English: The imperial court also wanted to call him to the imperial court as the right hand man of the criminal department, but because of the words of the imperial secretary Xu Nankin, he was allowed to remain in office.

古文：连山贼李金与贺县贼倪仲亮等，出没衡、永、郴、桂，积三十年不能平，岳大合兵讨擒之。
现代文：连山的盗贼李金和贺县的盗贼倪仲亮等，出没在衡阳、永州、郴州、桂林之间，积三十年之久没能平定，张岳联合大军加以讨伐，擒住了他们。
English: Li Jin, the thief of Lianshan, and Ni Zhongliang, the thief of He County, haunted Hengyang, Yongzhou, Zhangzhou, and Guilin for thirty years. They could not be subdued, and Zhang Yue's joint army fought them and choked them.

古文：莅镇四年，巨寇悉平，召拜兵部左侍郎。
现代文：他在两广的兵镇坐了四年，区域内的强盗巨寇全被荡平了，朝廷于是召他回朝当了兵部左侍郎。
English: He sat for four years in the soldiers' town of Dangguang, and the robbers in the area were all wiped out, so the court called him back to the court to be the left attendant of the military department.

古文：湖贵间有山曰蜡尔，诸苗居之。
现代文：两湖、贵州之间有座山叫蜡尔山，各部苗民住在那里。
English: Between the two lakes and Guizhou, there is a mountain called Waxer Mountain. Miao people from all parts of the country live there.

古文：东属镇溪千户所筸子坪长官司，隶湖广；西属铜仁、平头二长官司，隶贵州；北接四川酉阳，广袤数百里。
现代文：这个地区东部属镇溪千户所子坪长官司管辖，隶属湖广；西部属铜仁、平头两个长官管辖，隶属贵州；北边接近四川酉阳，整个山区宽广几百里。
English: The eastern part of this region is under the jurisdiction of the chief magistrate of Zhenxi, Qianhu, Zibing and Ping, and belongs to Hunan; the western part is under the jurisdiction of the two chief magistrates of Tongren and Pingdu, and belongs to Guizhou; the northern side is close to Shenyang, Sichuan, and the entire mountainous area is several hundred miles wide.

古文：诸苗数反，官兵不能制。
现代文：各部苗民几度造反，官兵不能打败它。
English: Miao people in various departments rebelled several times, and the officers and soldiers could not defeat it.

古文：侍郎万镗征之，四年不克。
现代文：侍郎万镗讨伐它，四年之久没能成功。
English: For four long years, the retainers of Manchukuo did not succeed in fighting it.

古文：乃授其魁龙许保冠带。
现代文：朝廷于是只好授给他们的头领龙许保一个官职。
English: As a result, the court had no choice but to grant their leader, Long Xu Bao, an official post.

古文：湖苗暂息，而贵苗反如故。
现代文：湖广的苗民叛乱暂时停止了，可是贵州的苗民一如既往地在造反。
English: The rebellion of the Miao people in Hukang has temporarily stopped, but the Miao people in Guizhou are still rebelling as before.

古文：镗班师，龙许保及其党吴黑苗复乱。
现代文：万镗班师后，龙许保和他的党徒吴黑苗又叛乱起来。
English: Long Xu Bao and his party member Wu Heimei rebelled again after the defeat.

古文：贵州巡抚李义壮告警，乃命岳总督湖广、贵州、四川军务，讨之。进右都御史。
现代文：贵州巡抚李义壮报上战警以后，世宗就任命张岳去总督湖广、贵州、四川军务，讨伐苗贼，提升他为右都御史。
English: After Li Yizhong, the governor of Guizhou, reported to the military police, Shizong appointed Zhang Yue to be the military governor of Huguang, Guizhou and Sichuan, to fight against seedlings thieves, and promoted him to the right capital.

古文：义壮持镗议欲抚，岳劾其阻兵，罢之。
现代文：义壮坚持万镗的主张想招安苗贼，张岳弹劾他阻挠用兵，罢了他的官。
English: Yizhong persisted in his claim that he wanted to recruit peace seedlings, Zhang Yue impeached him for obstructing the use of soldiers, and removed him from office.

古文：先义壮抚贵州者，佥都御史王学益与镗附严嵩，主抚议，数从中挠岳。
现代文：过去在义壮之前担任过贵州巡抚，现任佥都御史的王学益和万镗一道依附严嵩，主张收抚苗贼，他们几度从宫廷中间作梗，阻挠张岳。
English: In the past, Wang Xuey, who served as the governor of Guizhou before Yizhong, and Wang Xuey, who is currently the head of the imperial history of the capital, together with Wanlu, adhered to Yansong and advocated the collection of seedlings and thieves. They obstructed Zhangyue from the middle of the court several times.

古文：岳持益坚。
现代文：张岳更加坚持自己的意见。
English: Zhang Yue is more adamant about his opinion.

古文：许保袭执印江知县徐文伯及石阡推官邓本忠以去，岳坐停俸。
现代文：许保通过袭击把印江知县徐文伯及石阡推官邓本忠给抓去了，张岳因此被扣发了俸禄。
English: Xu Bao attacked and arrested Xu Wenbo of Yingjiang County and Deng Benzhong of Shijiazhuang County, and Zhang Yue was deprived of his salary.

古文：乃使总兵官沈希仪、参将石邦宪等分道进，躬入铜仁督之。先后斩贼魁五十三人，独许保、黑苗跳不获。
现代文：于是他派总兵官沈希仪、参将石邦宪等分路进兵，自己入铜仁坐镇指挥，先后斩杀盗贼首领五十三个人，只有许保、黑苗跳出圈套，没能逮住。
English: Therefore, he sent the general officer Shen Xiyi, the general officer Shi Bangxian, and others to march into the army. He himself entered Tongren to take command of the town, and successively killed fifty-three leaders of the thieves. Only Xu Bao and Hei Miao jumped out of the trap and could not be caught.

古文：岳以捷闻，言贵苗渐平，湖苗听抚，请遣土兵归农，朝议许之。
现代文：张岳向朝廷奏上捷报，说贵州的苗贼逐渐平息了，湖广的苗民接受招安，请分遣士兵回家务农，朝廷的意见同意了他。
English: Zhang Yue reported to the imperial court that the seedlings thieves in Guizhou had gradually calmed down, and that the seedlings in Hukang had accepted to be recruited. He asked the soldiers to be sent home to work in agriculture. The imperial court agreed with him.

古文：未几，酉阳宣慰冉元嗾许保、黑苗突思州，劫执知府李允简。
现代文：没多久，酉阳宣慰冉元教唆许保、黑苗突袭思州，劫持了知府李允简。
English: Not long after, Shenyang Xuancheng Ran Yuan instigated Xu Bao and Heimei to raid Shizhou and kidnap the governor Li Yunjian.

古文：邦宪兵邀夺允简还，允简竟死。
现代文：邦宪的部队拦截作战夺回了允简，但他最后还是死了。
English: The troops of the State Constitution intercepted and recaptured Yun Jian, but he eventually died.

古文：嵩父子故憾岳，欲逮治之，徐阶持不可。
现代文：严嵩父子本来就恨张岳，这时就想把他给逮捕治罪，徐阶坚决不同意。
English: Yan Song and his son hated Zhang Yue originally, and wanted to arrest and punish him at that time. Xu Ji resolutely disagreed.

古文：乃夺右都御史，以兵部侍郎督师。
现代文：于是就剥夺了右都御史的官衔，让他以兵部侍郎的名义指挥作战。
English: As a result, he stripped Utsunomiyoshi of his official title, allowing him to command the war under the name of Hyobusajiro.

古文：邦宪等旋破贼。
现代文：邦宪等将领不久就打败了苗贼。
English: The generals such as Bang Xian soon defeated the seedlings.

古文：岳搜山箐，余贼献思州印及许保。
现代文：张岳派人在山林中搜捕，残余的盗贼交出了思州的大印和许保。
English: Zhang Yue sent people to search and arrest in the mountains and forests, and the remaining thieves handed over Shizhou's seal and guarantee.

古文：湖广兵亦破擒首恶李通海等。
现代文：湖广的部队也打败敌人，捉拿了首恶李通海等人。
English: Hukang's troops also defeated the enemy and captured the ringleader Li Tonghai and others.

古文：岳以黑苗未获，不敢报功。
现代文：张岳因为没拿到吴黑苗，不敢往上报功。
English: Because Zhang Yue did not get Wu Heimei, he did not dare to report his achievement.

古文：已而冉元谋露，岳发其奸。
现代文：不久冉元的底细暴露了，张岳揭发了他干的坏事。
English: Soon, Ran Yuan's dirty secrets were exposed, and Zhang Yue exposed the bad things he had done.

古文：元贿严世蕃责岳绝苗党。
现代文：冉元就贿赂严世蕃指责张岳对苗民斩尽杀绝。
English: Ran Yuan accused Zhang Yue of bribing Yan Shiyan to exterminate the Miao people.

古文：邦宪竟得黑苗以献，苗患乃息。
现代文：邦宪最后终于抓到吴黑苗，把他献上来了，苗民的叛乱至此才算告息了。
English: In the end, the State Constitution finally caught Wu Heimei and presented him to the court. The rebellion of the Miao people had only just ended.

古文：岳卒于沅州。
现代文：张岳死在沅州。
English: Zhang Yue died in Zhangzhou.

古文：丧归，沅人迎哭者不绝。
现代文：他的棺木回乡时，沅州百姓一路迎接、哭送的人连续不断。
English: When his coffin returned to his hometown, the people of Zhangzhou continued to greet and send off people crying.

古文：已，叙功，复右都御史，赠太子少保，谥襄惠。
现代文：后来，朝廷给他论功，恢复了他右都御史的官衔，追赠他为太子少保，谥襄惠。
English: Later, the imperial court gave him a commendation, restored his official title of Utsu Imperial Historian, and posthumously awarded him the title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：岳博览，工文章，经术湛深，不喜王守仁学，以程、朱为宗。
现代文：张岳博览群书，文章也做得好，对经学造诣精深，不喜欢王守仁的学说，而是把程、朱看作正宗。
English: Zhang Yue was well-read, his articles were well-written, and he was an accomplished student of the classics. He did not like the teachings of Wang Shuren, but regarded Cheng and Zhu as the authentic ones.

