古文：孙承宗孙承宗，字稚绳，高阳人。
现代文：孙承宗，字稚绳，高阳人。
English: Sun Chengzong, Zhaozhuizhe, Gaoyang people.

古文：貌奇伟，须髯戟张。
现代文：身材高大，相貌奇特，满脸络腮胡，硬邦邦地挺立着。
English: Tall, strange-looking, with a full beard, he stands stiffly upright.

古文：与人言，声殷墙壁。
现代文：跟人说话，声若洪钟，响震屋瓦。
English: Talking to someone is like ringing a bell, or shaking the roof tiles.

古文：始为县学生，授经边郡。往来飞狐、拒马间，直走白登，又从纥干、清波故道南下。
现代文：最初为县学生员在边境省份讲授经文，他来往于飞狐、拒马之间，一直跑到白登，又从纥干、清波故道南下。
English: At first, he taught scriptures for county students in the border provinces. He went back and forth between the flying fox and the horse, all the way to Baidu, and from Shigang and Qingbo to the south.

古文：喜从材官老兵究问险要厄塞，用是晓畅边事。
现代文：喜欢跟随一些低级武官和老兵们探求考察军事险要地形和关隘，因此通晓边防事务。
English: He likes to follow some low-level military attachés and veterans to explore and inspect military dangerous terrain and narrow passes, so he is familiar with border affairs.

古文：万历三十二年，登进士第二人，授编修，进中允。 梃击 变起，大学士吴道南以谘承宗。对曰： 事关东宫，不可不问；事连贵妃，不可深问。
现代文：万历三十二年考中进士第二名，任命为编修，提拔为中允大夫。 梃击 事变发生后，大学士吴道南征求他的意见，孙承宗回答说： 事情涉及到东宫太子，不能不追究；事情牵连到郑贵妃，不能深追究。
English: In the 32nd year of Wanli, he ranked second in the junior high school entrance examination, was appointed as an editor, and was promoted to Dr. Zhong Yun.   After the incident occurred, Wu Daonan, a university scholar, asked for his opinion, and Sun Chengzong replied: The matter involves the Crown Prince of the Eastern Palace and must be investigated; the matter involves Zheng Guifei and cannot be investigated deeply.

古文：庞保、刘成而下，不可不问也；庞保、刘成而上，不可深问也。 
现代文：庞保、刘成以下，不能不追究；庞保、刘成以上，不能深追究。 
English: Those who are lower than Pang Bao and Liu Cheng cannot but be investigated; those who are higher than Pang Bao and Liu Cheng cannot be investigated deeply.

古文：道南如其言，具揭上之，事遂定。
现代文：吴道南按照他说的，将官司结案上报，这事才平定下来。
English: In accordance with what he said, Wu Daonan reported the conclusion of the lawsuit to the court, and only then was the matter settled.

古文：出典应天乡试，发策著其语。撄党人忌，将以大计出诸外，学士刘一景保持，乃得免。
现代文：派出主持应天府乡试，发出的试题中写了他的话，触犯了那些拉帮结派的人的忌讳，准备利用考核外地官员的机会把他派往外地，学士刘一火景保护他，才得以避免。
English: In response to the Tianfu Township Examination, the host of the examination wrote his words in the test questions sent out, violating the taboo of those who pull gangs and factions, and preparing to use the opportunity of assessing foreign officials to send him to other places. It was only because the bachelor Liu Yiguoqing protected him that this could be avoided.

古文：历谕德、洗马。
现代文：历任太子谕德、洗马等职。
English: Successive Princes and Princesses have held positions such as chancellor and horse washer.

古文：熹宗即位，以左庶子充日讲官。
现代文：熹宗皇帝即位，以左庶子的身份充当日讲官。
English: Emperor Shizong ascended to the throne, and he acted as a lecturer on the day of the enthronement in his capacity as an illegitimate son.

古文：帝每听承宗讲，辄曰 心开 ，故眷注特殷。
现代文：皇帝每次听孙承宗讲课，都说： 很受到启发。 
English: Every time the emperor listened to a lecture by Sun Zhengzong, he said: I was very inspired.

古文：天启元年进少詹事。
现代文：所以对他特别看重。天启元年提升少詹事。
English: That's why he's held in such high regard. It's no coincidence that he was promoted in the first year of the Apocalypse.

古文：时沈、辽相继失，举朝汹汹。
现代文：这时沈阳、辽阳相继失守，整个朝廷争论得不可开交。
English: At this time, Shenyang and Liaoyang were lost one after another, and the entire imperial court was unable to settle the dispute.

古文：御史方震孺请罢兵部尚书崔景荣，以承宗代。
现代文：御史方震孺请求罢免兵部尚书崔景荣，让孙承宗代替他。
English: The imperial historian tremblingly requested the dismissal of the military secretary Cui Jing Rong and asked Sun Chengzong to replace him.

古文：廷臣亦皆以承宗知兵，遂推为兵部添设侍郎，主东事。
现代文：朝臣也都以为孙承宗懂军事，于是推举他为兵部新增设的侍郎，主持东边的战局。
English: The courtiers also thought that Sun Chengzong understood military affairs, so they elected him as a newly created attendant of the military department to preside over the war situation in the east.

古文：帝不欲承宗离讲筵，疏再上不许。
现代文：皇帝不想让孙承宗离开讲席，二次上疏都不同意。
English: The emperor did not want to let Sun Chengzong leave the lectern, so he did not agree the second time.

古文：二年擢礼部右侍郎，协理詹事府。
现代文：天启二年提拔为礼部右侍郎，协助管理詹事府。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department and assisted in the management of Zhanji-fu.

古文：未几，大清兵逼广宁，王化贞弃城走，熊廷弼与俱入关。
现代文：不久，大清兵进逼广宁，王化贞弃城逃跑，熊廷弼跟他一起进入关内。
English: Soon, the Qing soldiers invaded Guangning, Wang Huazhen abandoned the city and fled, and Xiong Tingyao entered Guanzhong with him.

古文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣惧罪，出行边。
现代文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣害怕获罪，外出巡视边防。
English: Zhang Zhenming, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was afraid of being found guilty and went out to inspect the border.

古文：帝亦急东事，遂拜承宗兵部尚书兼东阁大学士，入直办事。
现代文：皇帝对东边的战局也很着急，于是任命孙承宗为兵部尚书兼东阁大学士，入朝办事。
English: The emperor was also anxious about the war situation in the east, so he appointed Sun Chengzong to be the secretary of the military department and a scholar of the Dongge University to enter the court.

古文：越数日，命以阁臣掌部务。
现代文：过了几天，命令他以阁臣身份掌管兵部事务。
English: A few days later, he was ordered to take charge of the military affairs as a cabinet minister.

古文：承宗上疏曰： 迩年兵多不练，饷多不核。
现代文：孙承宗上疏说： 近年来部队经常不操练，军饷经常不能核实。
English: Sun Chengzong said: In recent years, troops often do not practice, and military pay often cannot be verified.

古文：以将用兵，而以文官招练；以将临阵，而以文官指发；以武略备边，而日增置文官于幕；以边任经、抚，而日问战守于朝；此极弊也。
现代文：用武将使用部队，却用文官去招募训练。用武将临阵指挥作战，却用文官指挥调遣。用武将防备边疆，却每天在幕僚中增加文官。边防事务由经略、督抚担任，却每天在朝廷询问战守的情况。这是最大的弊病。
English: Using military commanders to use troops, but using civilian officials to recruit and train them; using military commanders to direct operations from the front, but using civilian officials to direct and dispatch them; using military commanders to guard the border, but adding civilian officials to the staff every day; border defense affairs are handled by managers and supervisors, but they inquire about the status of the war every day at the Imperial Court. This is the biggest problem.

古文：今天下当重将权，择一沉雄有气略者，授之节钺，得自辟置偏裨以下，勿使文吏用小见沾沾陵其上。
现代文：现在国家应当加重武将的权力。选择一个沉着杰出而有气量谋略的人，授给他全权，使他能够对副将以下的官兵自行处置，而不受到一些自以为是的文官的管制。
English: Now the state should strengthen the power of military commanders, select a calm, outstanding and energetic strategist, and grant him full power to dispose of officers and soldiers below the rank of vice-general at his own discretion, without being controlled by some self-righteous civil servants.

古文：边疆小胜小败，皆不足问，要使守关无阑入，而徐为恢复计。 
现代文：对于边防战争的小胜小败，都不值得去过问，关键是要守住各关隘，不要让敌人擅自入关，然后想办法慢慢收复失地。 
English: As for the small victories and small defeats of the border defense war, it is not worth asking. The key is to keep every pass, do not let the enemy enter the pass without authorization, and then find a way to slowly recover the lost ground.

古文：因列上抚西部、恤辽民、简京军、增永平大帅、修蓟镇亭障、开京东屯田数策，帝褒纳焉。
现代文：于是分别写上安抚西部、救济辽阳的难民、检查京师部队、增设永平大帅、修筑蓟镇的道路、开辟京东地区的屯田等对策。皇帝高兴地采纳了。
English: Therefore, countermeasures such as pacifying the west, relieving the refugees in Liaoyang, inspecting the troops of the Beijing Division, adding Yongping Dashu, building roads in Handan Town, and opening up military camps in the east of Beijing were written separately. The emperor was pleased to adopt them.

古文：时边警屡告，阁部大臣幸旦暮无事，而言路日益纷呶。
现代文：这时边防多次告急，内阁大臣只希望暂时相安无事，而议论却一天比一天纷扰起来。
English: At this time, the border guards were repeatedly in a hurry, the cabinet minister only hoped for temporary peace, but the discussion became more and more turbulent day by day.

古文：承宗乃请下廷弼于理，与化贞并谳，用正朝士党护。
现代文：孙承宗于是请求将熊廷弼交给法官，跟王化贞一起审判，以纠正朝中结党袒护之风。
English: Sun Chengzong then requested that Xiong Tingtao be handed over to the judge to be tried together with Wang Huazhen, in order to correct the party-protecting style of the dynasty.

古文：又请逮给事中明时举、御史李达，以惩四川之招兵致寇者。
现代文：又请求逮捕给事中明时举、御史李达，以惩戒那些使得四川招致兵灾战乱的人。
English: He also requested the arrest of Ming Shiqiu and Gu Shi Lida, who were involved in the incident, to punish those who caused Sichuan to invite military disaster and war.

古文：又请诘责辽东巡按方震孺、登莱监军梁之垣、蓟州兵备邵可立，以警在位之骫骳者。
现代文：又请求查办辽东巡抚方震孺、登莱监军梁之垣、蓟州兵备邵可立，以警告那些占据官职没有作为的人。
English: He also requested to investigate the Liaodong governor Fang Zhenxuan, the Denglai supervisor Liang Nongqi, and the Zhangzhou soldier Bei Shao Keli, in order to warn those who occupied official positions and did nothing.

古文：诸人以次获谴，朝右耸然，而侧目怨咨者亦众矣。
现代文：各人先后都受到处分，朝廷大官为之动容，而那些仇视他、怨恨他的人也很多。
English: Each person has been punished in turn, the imperial officials are moved by it, and there are many people who hate him and resent him.

古文：兵部尚书王在晋代廷弼经略辽东，与总督王象乾深相倚结。
现代文：兵部尚书王在晋代替熊廷弼巡视治理辽东，与总督王象乾互相依靠勾结，十分亲密。
English: The military commander, Shangshu Wang, took the place of Xiong Tingkun in the inspection and administration of Liaodong in Jin's place. He and the governor, Wang Xiangqian, relied on each other and were very close.

古文：象乾在蓟门久，习知西部种类情性，西部亦爱戴之，然实无他才，惟啖以财物相羁縻，冀得以老解职而已。在晋谋用西部袭广宁，象乾惎之曰： 得广宁，不能守也，获罪滋大。不如重关设险，卫山海以卫京师。 
现代文：王象乾在蓟门的时间很长，熟悉西部各民族的性情，西部人也很爱戴他。然而实际上没有别的才能，只不过靠给一些财物来拉拢他们，希望能够平安地以年纪大了离职罢了，王在晋计划用西部兵袭击广宁，王象乾教导他说： 攻占广宁，不能防守，罪责更大，不如设置险要重兵防守关隘。防守山海关以拱卫北京城。 
English: Wang Xiangqian spent a long time at the imperial court. He was familiar with the temperament of the western peoples, and the westerners loved him very much. However, in fact, he had no other talent, but to give them some property to attract them, hoping to be able to leave office safely at an older age. Wang Zaijin planned to attack Guangning with western soldiers. Wang Xiangqian taught him: To capture Guangning, it is impossible to defend, the guilt is greater, it is better to set up a dangerous heavy army to defend the pass. Defend Shanhaiguan to defend Beijing City.

古文：在晋乃请于山海关外八里铺筑重关，用四万人守之。
现代文：王在晋于是请求在山海关以外的八里铺构筑重重关隘，派四万人防守它。
English: Wang Zaojin then requested that a pass be built at Bailipu outside of Shanhaiguan, and that 40,000 men be sent to defend it.

古文：其僚佐袁崇焕、沈棨、孙元化等力争不能得，奏记于首辅叶向高。
现代文：他的幕僚袁崇焕、沈翭、孙元化等人极力争辩没有结果，报告给首辅叶向高。
English: His staff members Yuan Chonghuan, Shen Qi, Sun Yuanhua and others argued strenuously to no avail, and reported to the chief aide Ye Xianggao.

古文：向高曰： 是未可臆度也。 
现代文：叶向高说： 这事没有办法预料。 
English: Ye Xianggao said: There is no way to predict this.

古文：承宗请身往决之。帝大喜，加太子太保，赐蟒玉、银币。
现代文：孙承宗请求亲自前往裁决，皇帝十分高兴，加封他为太子太保，赐给他蟒玉、银币。
English: Sun Chengzong requested to go to the adjudication in person. The emperor was very pleased and granted him the title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, as well as the imperial jewels and silver coins.

古文：抵关，诘在晋曰： 新城成，即移旧城四万人以守乎？ 
现代文：孙承宗抵达山海关，责问王在晋说： 新城建成后，就调旧城四万人去防守吗？ 
English: When Sun Chengzong arrived at Shanhaiguan Customs, he scolded Wang Caijin and said, "After the new city is built, will you transfer 40,000 people from the old city to defend it?

古文：在晋曰： 否，当更设兵。 
现代文：王在晋说： 不，应当另外增加兵力。 
English: Wang Chae-jin said, "No, we should increase the number of troops."

古文：曰： 如此，则八里内守兵八万矣。
现代文：孙承宗说： 照这样的话，那么八里的范围内就有八万防守部队了。
English: Sun Chengzong said: According to this, there are eighty thousand defensive troops within eight miles.

古文：一片石西北不当设兵乎？
现代文：一片石的西北方不应当布置部队吗？
English: Shouldn't troops be deployed in the rocky northwest?

古文：且筑关在八里内，新城背即旧城趾，旧城之品坑地雷为敌人设，抑为新兵设乎？
现代文：况且在八里之内构筑工事，新城的后背就是旧城的脚底下。旧城周围按品守阵埋下的地雷是为敌人布置的呢，还是为新城兵布置的呢？
English: Moreover, construction work is being carried out within eight miles, and the back of the new city is just under the foot of the old city. Are the mines laid around the old city for the enemy or for the soldiers of the new city?

古文：新城可守，安用旧城？
现代文：新城能够守得住，还要旧城干什么？
English: If the new city can be defended, what is the old city for?

古文：如不可守，则四万新兵倒戈旧城下，将开关延入乎，抑闭关以委敌乎？ 
现代文：如果守不住，那么四万新兵逃奔旧城之下，是准备开关迎接他们进城呢，抑或是闭关把他们交给敌人呢？ 
English: If it cannot be defended, then 40,000 new soldiers will flee under the Old City. Will there be a switch ready to welcome them into the city, or will the gate be closed and they will be handed over to the enemy?

古文：曰： 关外有三道关可入也。 
现代文：王在晋回答说： 关外还有三道关口可以让他们进入。 
English: Wang Zaijin replied, "There are still three gates outside the gate to let them in.

古文：曰： 若此，则敌至而兵逃如故也，安用重关？ 
现代文：孙承宗说： 如果这样的话，那么敌人来了而我军照样逃跑，还要旧关干什么？ 
English: Sun Chengzong said, "If that's the case, then what's the use of the old gate if the enemy comes and our army still runs away?"

古文：曰： 将建三寨于山，以待溃卒。 
现代文：王在晋说： 准备在山上建三座兵营，用来收容逃亡下来的士兵。 
English: Wang Zhaojin said, "Prepare to build three barracks on the mountain to accommodate the soldiers who have fled.

古文：曰： 兵未溃而筑寨以待之，是教之溃也。
现代文：孙承宗说： 士兵还没有败逃却建兵营等着他们，这是教他们逃跑。
English: Sun Chengzong said: The soldiers have not yet been defeated and fled, but a military camp has been built to wait for them. This is to teach them to escape.

古文：且溃兵可入，敌亦可尾之入。
现代文：况且逃亡部队可以进入，敌人尾随追击也可以进入。
English: Moreover, the fleeing troops can enter, and the enemy can also enter after the pursuit.

古文：今不为恢复计，画关而守，将尽撤藩篱，日哄堂奥，畿东其有宁宇乎？ 
现代文：现在不为收复失地打算，却划地为牢困守，将来关隘一旦丧失，敌人每天骚扰京畿内地，京城以东能有一天安宁的日子吗？ 
English: At present, there is no plan to recover the lost territory, but the land is designated as a fortress. In the future, once the pass is lost, the enemy will harass the Gyeonggi inland every day. Can there be a day of peace east of the capital?

古文：在晋无以难。
现代文：王在晋无言以对。
English: Wang Zaijin was speechless.

古文：承宗乃议守关外。
现代文：孙承宗于是主张防守关外。
English: Sun Chengzong then advocated the defense of Guanzhong.

古文：监军阎鸣泰主觉华岛，袁崇焕主宁远卫，在晋持不可，主守中前所。
现代文：监军阎鸣泰负责觉华岛，袁崇焕负责宁远卫。王在晋不同意。主张防守中前所。
English: Supervisor Yan Mingtai was in charge of Jiehua Island, and Yuan Chonghuan was in charge of Ningyuanwei. Wang Zaijin disagreed. He advocated the middle and front of the defense.

古文：旧监司邢慎言、张应吾逃在关，皆附和之。
现代文：原监司邢慎言、张应吾从前线逃跑，此时正在山海关，都附和他。
English: Former superintendent Zou Shenyan and Zhang Yingwu, who had fled from the front line and was at the Shanhaiguan Customs at the time, both joined him.

古文：初，化贞等既逃，自宁远以西五城七十二堡悉为哈喇慎诸部所据，声言助守边。
现代文：当初，王化贞等人逃跑后，从宁远以西的五城七十二堡全部被哈喇慎各部所占领，宣称帮助政府军保卫边防。
English: At first, after Wang Huazhen and others fled, all of the five cities and seventy-two castles west of Ningyuan were occupied by the various departments of Harasin, claiming to help the government army defend the border.

古文：前哨游击左辅名驻中前，实不出八里铺。
现代文：前哨游击左辅名义上驻扎中前所，实际上没有离开八里铺。
English: The left auxiliary guerrilla outpost was nominally stationed in the middle of the front, but in fact did not leave the eight-mile shop.

古文：承宗知诸部不足信，而宁远、觉华之可守，已决计将自在晋发之，推心告语凡七昼夜，终不应。
现代文：孙承宗知道哈喇镇各部不足以信任，而宁远卫、觉华岛是可以守得住的，于是决定把自己的意见告诉王在晋，跟他推心置腹地谈了七天七夜，最终得不到他的响应。
English: Sun Chengzong knew that the ministries of Harar Town were not trustworthy enough, and that Ningyuanwei and Jiehua Island could be defended, so he decided to tell his opinion to Wang Zaijin. He talked with him for seven days and seven nights, and finally did not get his response.

古文：还朝，言： 敌未抵镇武而我自烧宁、前，此前日经、抚罪也；我弃宁、前，敌终不至，而我不敢出关一步，此今日将吏罪也。
现代文：回到朝廷，孙承宗说： 敌人尚未抵达镇武而我军自己焚烧了宁远卫、中前所，这是前日经略、巡抚的罪责；我军放弃了宁远卫、中前所，敌人最终没有到来，而我军不敢出山海关一步，这是今日守城将官的罪责。
English: Returning to the imperial court, Sun Chengzong said: The enemy has not yet reached the town of Zhenwu, and our army itself has burned Ningyuanwei and Zhongzheng, which is the fault of the previous day's strategist and governor; our army abandoned Ningyuanwei and Zhongzheng, the enemy eventually did not arrive, and our army did not dare to step out of the mountain customs, which is the fault of today's castle general.

古文：将吏匿关内，无能转其畏敌之心以畏法，化其谋利之智以谋敌，此臣与经臣罪也。与其以百万金钱浪掷于无用之版筑，曷若筑宁远要害？
现代文：将官躲进关内，没有能力回转他们畏惧敌人的心理来畏惧国法，将他们谋取私利的智慧转化为谋求杀敌的智谋，这是我和经略大臣的罪责，与其拿百万两银子浪费到毫无用处的筑城上，不如加固宁远的要害地带来防守敌人。
English: The generals hid inside the gates, unable to turn their fear of the enemy into fear of the law of the land, and transform their wisdom of seeking personal gain into the wisdom of seeking to kill the enemy. This is the fault of me and the Minister of Economic Affairs and Trade. Instead of wasting one million taels of silver on useless construction of the city, it is better to fortify it and bring the enemy to defend it.

古文：以守八里铺之四万人当宁远冲，与觉华相犄角。
现代文：八里铺的四万人挡住宁远的冲要，与觉华岛互为掎角之势。
English: The forty thousand people of Hachiri-pu block the rush of Ningyuan, and are at loggerheads with Jiehua Island.

古文：敌窥城，令岛上卒旁出三岔，断浮桥，绕其后而横击之。
现代文：敌人窥探城门，命令觉华岛上的士兵从三岔出击。摧毁浮桥，绕到敌后打击敌人。
English: The enemy spied on the city gate and ordered the soldiers on Jeju Island to attack from three sides, destroy the pontoon bridge, and go around behind the enemy to attack the enemy.

古文：即无事，亦且收二百里疆土。
现代文：不但可以保证边防安全，而且还可以收复二百里失地。
English: It can not only ensure border security, but also recover 200 miles of lost ground.

古文：总之，敌人之帐幕必不可近关门，杏山之难民必不可置膜外。不尽破庸人之论，辽事不可为也。 
现代文：总而言之，敌人的军营一定不能让他们靠近山海关，杏山的难民一定不能丢下不管，不全部破除庸人的议论，辽东战局就不可能有作为。 
English: All in all, the enemy's military camp must not let them get close to Shanhaiguan, the refugees in Xianshan must not be left unattended, and the Liaodong Battle Bureau cannot be effective without completely eliminating the mediocrity.

古文：其他制置军事又十余疏。
现代文：其他有关军事建置的上疏又有十多道。
English: There are more than a dozen other reasons for military construction.

古文：帝嘉纳。
现代文：皇帝都高兴地接受了。
English: Xuanzong praised it and adopted it.

古文：无何，御讲筵，承宗面奏在晋不足任，乃改南京兵部尚书，并斥逃臣慎言等，而八里筑城之议遂熄。
现代文：不久，侍奉皇帝讲席，孙承宗面告王在晋不能任用，于是把他改派为南京吏部尚书，并且斥责逃跑的臣子邢慎言等人，而八里铺修筑新城的议论也就停息了。
English: Soon, serving the emperor's lectern, Sun Chengzong told Wang Zaijin face to face that he could not be appointed, so he was reassigned to the Nanjing cadre Shangshu, and rebuked the fleeing vassal Zou Shengyan and others, and the discussion of building a new city eight miles away stopped.

古文：在晋既去，承宗自请督师。诏给关防敕书，以原官督山海关及蓟、辽、天津、登、莱诸处军务，便宜行事，不从中制，而以鸣泰为辽东巡抚。
现代文：王在晋离职后，孙承宗自告奋勇地请求去统帅部队，皇上下诏通知各边防，让孙承宗以原官职统领山海关和蓟、辽、天津、登、莱各地的军事事务，相机行事，不受朝中节制。而任用阎鸣泰为辽东巡抚。
English: After Wang Jin left office, Sun Chengzong volunteered to go and lead the troops, and the emperor issued an edict to inform the border guards to let Sun Chengzong lead the Shanhaiguan Customs and the military affairs of the regions of Liao, Liao, Tianjin, Deng and Lai with his former official position, and act as a camera, not subject to the control of the central government. Yan Mingtai was appointed as the governor of Liaodong.

古文：承宗乃辟职方主事鹿善继、王则古为赞画，请帑金八十万以行。
现代文：孙承宗于是征召职方主事鹿继善、王则古为军中的赞画官，从国库请款八十万两出发。
English: Sun Chengzong then conscripted Lu Jizan, the head of the staff, and Wang Zeguo, the military's commending officer, and requested 800,000 taels from the national treasury.

古文：帝特御门临遣，赐尚方剑、坐蟒，阁臣送之崇文门外。
现代文：皇帝特意为他送行，赐给他尚方宝剑和坐蟒，内阁大臣一直把他送到崇文门外。
English: The emperor specially saw him off, gave him the Shangfang Sword and the Seated Umbrella, and the cabinet minister kept sending him to the outside of the Chongwen Gate.

古文：既至关，令总兵江应诏定军制，佥事崇焕建营舍，废将李秉诚练火器，赞画善继、则古治军储，沈棨、杜应芳缮甲仗，司务孙元化筑炮台，中书舍人宋献、羽林经历程仑主市马，广宁道佥事万有孚主采木，而令游击祖大寿佐金冠于觉华，副将陈谏助赵率教于前屯，游击鲁之甲拯难民，副将李承先练骑卒，参将杨应乾募辽人为军。
现代文：到达山海关后，孙承宗命令总兵江应诏制定规章制度，佥事袁崇焕建造兵营房舍，旧将李秉诚操练火器，赞画鹿继善、王则古治理军备，沈翭、杜应芳修理兵器，司务孙元化兴筑炮台，中书舍人宋献、羽林经历程伦主持购买马匹，广宁道佥事万有孚主持采购木材。而派游击祖大寿在觉华岛辅助金冠，副将孙谏在前屯帮助赵率教，游击鲁之甲拯救难民，副将李承先操练骑兵，参将杨应乾招募辽人当兵。
English: After arriving at the Shanhaiguan Customs, Sun Chengzong ordered the commander-in-chief Jiang Yingzhao to formulate rules and regulations, the anecdote Yuan Chonghuan to build barracks, the former general Li Bingcheng to practice firearms, the praise painting Lu Jishan, Wang Zeguo to manage armaments, Shen Yao and Du Yingfang to repair weapons, the secretary Sun Yuanhua to build a battery, the Chinese scholar Song Xian and the Ulin experience Cheng Lun to preside over the purchase of horses, and the Guangning Road anecdote Wan Youfu to preside over the purchase of wood. And the guerrilla Zudaoshu

古文：是时，关上兵名七万，顾无纪律，冒饷多。
现代文：这个时候，山海关的士兵名义有七万人，但是没有纪律，冒领军饷的很多。
English: At this time, there were seventy thousand soldiers in the name of Shanhaiguan, but there was no discipline, and there were many who dared to take military pay.

古文：承宗大阅，汰逃将数百人，遣还河南、真定疲兵万余，以之甲所救难民七千发前屯为兵。
现代文：孙承宗大规模清查，淘汰逃将几百人，遣返河南、真定疲乏的士兵一万多人，将鲁之甲拯救的七千名难民派往前屯当兵。
English: Sun Chengzong made a large-scale inventory, eliminated hundreds of fugitive generals, repatriated more than 10,000 tired soldiers from Henan and Zhending, and sent 7,000 refugees saved by Luzhang to serve as soldiers.

古文：应乾所募辽卒出戍宁远，咨朝鲜使助声援。
现代文：杨应乾召募的辽兵派出去戍守宁远，和朝鲜商议派兵声援。
English: Yang Yingqian conscripted Liao soldiers and sent them to defend Ningyuan, and negotiated with North Korea to send soldiers in solidarity.

古文：犒毛文龙于东江，令复四卫。
现代文：在东江犒劳毛文龙，命令他收复四卫。
English: Mao Wenlong, who was working in the East River, ordered him to recapture Sifu.

古文：檄登帅沈有容进据广鹿岛。
现代文：发布檄文让登州统帅沈有容前往占领广鹿岛。
English: Issued an imperial edict to let the commander-in-chief of Dengzhou, Shen Yourong, go to occupy Guanglu Island.

古文：欲以春防躬诣登、莱商进取，而中朝意方急辽，弗许也。
现代文：想以春防的名义亲自前往登、莱商量进军收复失地，而朝中的意思是先用兵辽东，所以不允许。
English: He wanted to personally go to Deng and Lai in the name of spring defense to discuss entering and recovering the lost land, but the central government meant to use soldiers in Liaodong first, so it was not allowed.

古文：应诏被劾，承宗请用马世龙代之，以尤世禄、王世钦为南北帅，听世龙节制，且为世龙请尚方剑。帝皆可之。
现代文：江应诏被弹劾，孙承宗请求任用马世龙代替他，以尤世禄、王世钦为南、北统帅，听从马世龙的指挥，还为马世龙请求尚方宝剑，皇帝都同意了。
English: Jiang was impeached in response to the edict, and Sun Chengzong requested that Ma Shilong be appointed to replace him, with You Shilu and Wang Shichin as the south and north commanders, and obeyed the command of Ma Shilong. The emperor also asked Ma Shilong for the sword, and the emperor agreed.

古文：世龙既受事，承宗为筑坛，拜行授钺礼。
现代文：马世龙接受任命后，孙承宗为他筑台，恭敬地实行授权礼仪。
English: After Ma Shilong accepted the appointment, Sun Chengzong built a platform for him and respectfully carried out the authorization ceremony.

古文：率教已守前屯，尽驱哈喇慎诸部，抚场犹在八里铺。
现代文：赵率教已在前屯驻守，将哈喇慎各部全部赶走，办公的大本营还在八里铺。
English: Zhao and his teaching staff have been stationed at the front of the camp, driving away all of Harasin's departments. The base camp for the office is still eight miles away.

古文：象乾议开水关，抚之关内，承宗不可，乃定于高台堡。
现代文：王象乾建议设立水关，在关内镇守，孙承宗不同意，于是将大本营定在高台堡。
English: Wang Xiangqian proposed the establishment of Shui Guan, guarding the town in Guanai, but Sun Chengzong disagreed, so he set the base camp in Gaotai Castle.

古文：时大清兵委广宁去，辽遗民入居之。
现代文：这时，大清兵放弃广宁离去，辽东的流民进城居住。
English: At this time, the Qing soldiers abandoned Guangning and left, and the exiles from Liaodong came to live in the city.

古文：插汉部以告有孚，有孚谋挟西部乘间歼之，冒恢复功。
现代文：插汉的部队把这消息报告了万有孚，万有孚计划挟持西部人乘机歼灭他们，假充收复失地的功劳。
English: The intruding troops reported the news to Wan Youfu, who planned to take the Westerners hostage, annihilate them, and falsely claim credit for the recovery of the lost territory.

古文：承宗下檄曰： 西部杀我人者，致罚如盟言。 
现代文：孙承宗发布檄文说： 西部杀死我军的，按照盟约所说的讨伐他。 
English: Sun Chengzong issued a message saying: "If the West killed our army, fight them according to the treaty.

古文：是役也，全活千余人。
现代文：这一仗，保全活口一千多人。
English: This battle saved the lives of more than a thousand people.

古文：帝好察边情，时令东厂遣人诣关门，具事状奏报，名曰 较事 。
现代文：皇帝喜好考察边防情况，这时命令东厂派人到宫门前，报告这事情的全部情况，称为 澄清事实 。
English: The emperor liked to inspect the situation of border defense, and at that time he ordered the East Factory to send someone to the palace gate to report the whole situation of this matter, which was called "clarifying the facts."

古文：及魏忠贤窃政，遣其党刘朝、胡良辅、纪用等四十五人赍内库神炮、甲仗、弓矢之属数万至关门，为军中用，又以白金十万，蟒、麒麟、狮子、虎、豹诸币颁赉将士，而赐承宗蟒服、白金慰劳之，实觇军也。
现代文：等到魏忠贤专权，派他的党羽刘朝、胡良辅、纪用等四十五人携带内库的神炮、甲仗、弓箭之类武器数万件到达山海关前，资助军队使用，又拿出白金十万两，蟒、麒麟、狮子、虎、豹等各种图案的钱币赏赐给官兵，赐给孙承宗蟒服、白金慰劳他，实际上是来侦察军队的情况。
English: When Wei Zhongxian gained absolute power, he sent forty-five of his followers, including Liu Chaozhou, Hu Liangfu and Ji Ying, to carry tens of thousands of weapons such as sacred cannons, armor, and bows and arrows from the treasury to the Shanhaiguan Customs, to subsidize the use of the army, and to take out 100,000 taels of platinum, and to reward the officers and soldiers with coins of various patterns such as dragon, unicorn, lion, tiger, and leopard, and to give Sun Chengzong uniforms and platinum to comfort him, in fact, to reconnoiter the situation of the army.

古文：承宗方出关巡宁远，中路闻之，立疏言： 中使观兵，自古有戒。 
现代文：孙承宗正好出关巡视宁远，半路上听说了，立即上疏说： 宦官观察部队，自古以来都是被戒除的。 
English: Sun Chengzong happened to be on an inspection tour of Ningyuan. He heard about it on the way and immediately said: Eunuchs observing troops have been banned since ancient times.

古文：帝温旨报之。
现代文：皇帝下旨答复他。
English: The emperor sent a reply to him.

古文：使者至，具杯茗而已。
现代文：使者到来后，聊具一杯清茶而已。
English: After the arrival of the envoy, they only had a cup of tea.

古文：鸣泰之为巡抚也，承宗荐之。后知其无实，军事多不与议。
现代文：阎鸣泰出任巡抚，是孙承宗举荐的，后来知道他没有实际才干，有关军事事情经常不跟他商量。
English: Yan Mingtai was recommended by Sun Chengzong to serve as governor, but it was later found out that he had no practical ability, and military affairs were often not discussed with him.

古文：鸣泰怏怏求去，承宗亦引疾。
现代文：阎鸣泰很不高兴，请求辞职，孙承宗也称病。
English: Yan Mingtai was very unhappy and asked to resign, and Sun Chengzong also called in sick.

古文：言官共留承宗，诋鸣泰，巡关御史潘云翼复论劾之。帝乃罢鸣泰，而以张凤翼代。
现代文：言官们都挽留孙承宗，诋毁阎鸣泰，巡关御史潘云翼再上疏弹劾他，皇帝于是罢免阎鸣泰，而用张凤翼代替他。
English: The magistrates all retained Sun Chengzong, slandered Yan Mingtai, and the inspector of customs, Pan Yunyi, impeached him again. The emperor then dismissed Yan Mingtai and replaced him with Zhang Fengyi.

古文：凤翼怯，复主守关议。
现代文：张凤翼胆小，又主张防守山海关。
English: Zhang Fengyi was timid and advocated the defense of Shanhaiguan.

古文：承宗不悦，乃复出关巡视。
现代文：孙承宗不高兴，于是再次出关巡视。
English: Sun Chengzong was not happy, so he went out to inspect the customs again.

古文：抵宁远，集将吏议所守。众多如凤翼指，独世龙请守中后所，而崇焕、善继及副将茅元仪力请守宁远，承宗然之，议乃定。
现代文：抵达宁远，召集将官讨论防守情况，很多人都赞同张凤翼的意见，唯独只有马世龙请求守卫中后所，而袁崇焕、鹿继善及副将茅元仪极力请求防守宁远，孙承宗认为应该如此，意见才确定下来。
English: Arriving in Ningyuan, he summoned generals to discuss the defense situation. Many people agreed with Zhang Fengyi's opinion, but only Ma Shilong asked to guard the center and rear, while Yuan Chonghuan, Lu Jizan and Vice Admiral Mao Yuanyi strongly requested to defend Ningyuan. Sun Chengzong believed that this should be the case, and the opinion was finalized.

古文：令大寿兴工，崇焕、满桂守之。
现代文：命令祖大寿兴修工事，袁崇焕、满桂防守。
English: He ordered Zu Dashou to carry out the construction work, and Yuan Chonghuan and Man Gui to lead the defense.

古文：先是，虎部窃出盗掠，率教捕斩四人。
现代文：在这之前，虎部偷偷跑出来抢劫，赵率教逮捕杀死四人。
English: Prior to this, Hube sneaked out to rob, Zhao led the arrest and killed four people.

古文：象乾欲斩率教谢虎部，承宗不可。
现代文：王象乾想杀赵率教报答虎部，孙承宗不同意。
English: Wang Xiangqian wanted to kill Zhao and reward him with the leadership of the tiger club, but Sun Chengzong did not agree.

古文：而承宗所遣王楹戍中右，护其兵出采木，为西部朗素所杀。
现代文：而孙承宗派遣的王楹驻守中右，保护士兵外出采集木材，被西部朗素杀害了。
English: However, Wang Qian, who was sent by Sun Chengzong, was stationed in the center-right to protect the soldiers going out to collect wood, and was killed by Western Lan Su.

古文：承宗怒，遣世龙剿之。
现代文：孙承宗愤怒了，派马世龙去围剿。
English: Sun Chengzong was furious and sent Ma Shilong to encircle the Mongols.

古文：象乾恐坏抚局，令郎素缚逃人为杀楹者以献，而增市赏千金。
现代文：王象乾担心破坏安抚的局面，命令朗素捆绑逃亡的平民充当杀死王楹的人献出来，又增加赏金一千两。
English: Wang Xiangqian was worried about disturbing the peaceful situation, and ordered Lang Su to tie up the fleeing civilians and present them as the person who killed Wang Yao, and to increase the reward by one thousand taels.

古文：承宗方疏争，而象乾以忧去。
现代文：孙承宗正准备上疏争论，而王象乾因为父母的丧礼离职了。
English: Sun Chengzong is preparing for the Shangzhu debate, while Wang Xiangqian has left his post because of his parents' funeral.

古文：承宗患主款者挠己权，言督师、总督可勿兼设，请罢己，不可，则弗推总督。
现代文：孙承宗担心掌管钱款的人阻挠自己的权力，说督师、总督可以不兼设，请求罢免自己，如果不行，就不推举总督。
English: Sun Chengzong worried that the person in charge of the money would obstruct his power, saying that he could not have both the supervisor and the governor, and asked to remove himself. If he could not, he would not nominate the governor.

古文：并请以辽抚移驻宁远。
现代文：并且请求把辽东巡抚移到宁远驻扎。
English: He also requested that the Liaodong governor be transferred to Ningyuan.

古文：帝命止总督推，而凤翼谓置己死地也，因大恨。
现代文：皇帝命令停止总督推荐。而张凤翼认为是把自己放到死亡地带，因而十分怀恨孙承宗。
English: The emperor ordered to stop the governor's recommendation, and Zhang Fengyi thought that he had put himself in the death zone, so he held a grudge against Sun Chengzong.

古文：与其乡人云翼、有孚等力毁世龙，以撼承宗。
现代文：跟他的同乡潘云翼、万有孚等人极力诽谤马世龙，来动摇孙承宗。
English: Together with his fellow countrymen Pan Yunyi, Wan Yifu and others, they tried their best to slander Ma Shilong in order to destabilize Sun Zhengzong.

古文：无何，有孚为蓟抚岳和声所劾，益疑世龙与崇焕构陷，乃共为浮言，挠出关计。
现代文：不久，万有孚被蓟州巡抚岳和声弹劾，更加怀疑是袁崇焕和马世龙设下的陷阱。于是一起造谣，阻挠出关的计划。
English: Soon, Wan Youfu was impeached by the governor of Zhangzhou, Yue He Sheng, and was even more suspicious that it was a trap set by Yuan Chonghuan and Ma Shilong. So they fabricated rumors together to obstruct the plan to leave the customs.

古文：给事中解学龙遂极论世龙罪。
现代文：给事中解学龙于是极力议论马世龙的罪行。
English: In the process of explaining the matter, Long Xuexue tried his best to discuss Ma Shilong's crime.

古文：承宗愤，抗疏陈守御策，言： 拒敌门庭之中，与拒诸门庭外，势既辨。
现代文：孙承宗很气愤，上疏陈述防守御敌的对策，说： 在国门之内抵抗敌人，跟在国门之外抵抗敌人，情况是有区别的。
English: Sun Chengzong was very angry. Shang Zuo stated the countermeasures for defending against the enemy, saying: There is a difference between resisting the enemy within the country and resisting the enemy outside the country.

古文：我促敌二百里外，敌促我二百里中，势又辨。
现代文：我军将敌人赶到二百里之外，跟敌人赶我军到二百里之内，情况又是有区别的。
English: There is a difference between our army driving the enemy two hundred miles away and the enemy driving our army within two hundred miles.

古文：盖广宁，我远而敌近；宁远，我近而敌远。
现代文：广宁，离我军远而距敌人近，宁远，离我军近而距敌人远。
English: Guangning, far away from our army but close to the enemy, Ningyuan, far away from our army but close to the enemy.

古文：我不进逼敌，敌将进而逼我。
现代文：我军不向前进逼敌人，敌人将会向前逼迫我军。
English: If our army does not advance to force the enemy, the enemy will advance to force our army.

古文：今日即不能恢辽左，而宁远、觉华终不可弃。
现代文：现在既然不能收复辽东，而宁远、觉华岛终不能够放弃。
English: Now that Liaodong cannot be recovered, Ningyuan and Jiuhua Island cannot be given up.

古文：请敕廷臣杂议主、客之兵可否久戍，本折之饷可否久输，关外之土地人民可否捐弃，屯筑战守可否兴举，再察敌人情形果否坐待可以消灭。臣不敢为百年久计，只计及五年间究竟何如。
现代文：请求皇帝下诏让朝臣讨论以下问题：军队是否能够长期驻守，粮饷是否能够长期输送，关外的土地人民是否可以抛弃，筑城屯田战争防守是否可以建立，再考察敌人的情况是否果真不出击坐守等待就能够消灭，我不敢做百年大计的长远考虑，只考虑到五年之内究竟会出现什么情况。
English: Request the emperor to issue a decree to let the courtiers discuss the following issues: whether the army can be stationed for a long time, whether grain can be transported for a long time, whether the land people outside the pass can be abandoned, whether the war defense of the city can be established, and whether the enemy can be eliminated without waiting for the attack. I dare not make a long-term consideration of a hundred years, only considering what will happen within five years.

古文：倘臣言不当，立斥臣以定大计，无纡回不决，使全躯保妻子之臣附合众喙，以杀臣一身而误天下也。 
现代文：倘若我的话不恰当，立即罢免卑职以确定国家大计，不要老是犹豫不决，让那些贪生怕死、保全自己家人的臣子附合众人之口，用杀死我一人来耽误了国家大事。 
English: If my words are not appropriate, immediately remove me from my lowly position to determine the country's grand plan, and do not hesitate all the time, and let those courtiers who are greedy for life and death and protect their families follow the mouth of the common people and kill me alone to delay the national event.

古文：复为世龙辩，而发有孚等交构状。
现代文：又为马世龙辩解，揭发万有孚等人相互勾结的情形。
English: He also defended Ma Shilong and exposed the collusion between Wan Yifu and others.

古文：有孚者，故侍郎世德子也，为广宁理饷同知。
现代文：万有孚，是原侍郎万世德的儿子，担任广宁理饷同知。
English: Man Yufu, the son of the original chamberlain Man Shide, served as Guangning's right-hand man.

古文：城陷逃归，象乾题为广宁道佥事，专抚插汉，乾没多。
现代文：广宁失陷后逃回家，王象乾命名为广宁道佥事，专门安抚插汉，大量侵吞财物。
English: After the fall of Guangning, Wang Xiangqian fled home and named it Guangning Road Anecdote. He specialized in placating meddling Han and devoured a large amount of property.

古文：至是以承宗言被斥。
现代文：到这时因为孙承宗的言论被罢免。
English: At this time, because of Sun Chengzong's speech, he was dismissed.

古文：凤翼亦以忧归，喻安性代。
现代文：张凤翼也因为父母的丧事回家，喻安性代替他。
English: Zhang Fengyi also went home because of the death of his parents, and Yu Anxiong replaced him.

古文：而廷臣言总督不可裁，命吴用先督蓟、辽，代象乾。
现代文：而朝臣认为总督不能裁并，命令吴用先总督蓟、辽，代替王象乾。
English: However, the courtier believed that the governor could not make the merger, and ordered Wu to replace Wang Xiangqian with the former governors Zou and Liao.

古文：承宗恶本兵越彦多中制，称疾求罢，举彦自代以困之，廷议不可而止。
现代文：孙承宗讨厌本兵赵彦多从朝中制约，称病请求辞职，推举赵彦代替他让赵彦下不了台，朝廷认为不可以。
English: Sun Chengzong disliked the fact that his soldier Zhao Yan had to be restrained by the central government. He said that he was ill and asked to resign. The imperial court thought it was unacceptable to nominate Zhao Yan to replace him so that Zhao Yan could not step down.

古文：时宁远城工竣，关外守具毕备。
现代文：这时宁远城工程竣工，关外一切防守工作都已齐备。
English: At this time, the Ningyuan City project was completed, and all the defense work outside the pass was ready.

古文：承宗图大举，奏言： 前哨已置连山大凌河，速畀臣饷二十四万，则功可立奏。 
现代文：孙承宗图谋大的军事行动，上奏说： 先头部队已抵达连山、大凌河，尽快给我二十四万两军饷，就可以立即取得军事胜利。 
English: Sun Chengzong was planning a large-scale military operation, and said in his report: The vanguard troops have arrived at Lianshan and Dalinghe, give me 240,000 taels of silver as soon as possible, and we can immediately achieve military victory.

古文：帝命所司给之。
现代文：皇帝命令有关部门满足他的要求。
English: The emperor ordered the relevant departments to meet his request.

古文：兵、工二部相与谋曰： 饷足，渠即妄为，不如许而不与，文移往复稽缓之。 
现代文：兵部和工部相互商量说： 军饷给足了，他就可以胡作非为，不如答应他但不给他，文件来回往来就把这事拖延迟缓了。 
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs and the Ministry of Industry and Trade consulted with each other and said: If the military pay is sufficient, he can do anything, it is better to promise him but not give it to him. The back and forth of documents delayed this matter.

古文：承宗再疏促，具以情告。帝为饬诸曹，而师竟不果出。
现代文：孙承宗再次上疏催促，把实情报告给皇帝，皇帝为此整顿各部官员，而部队最终还是没有出发。
English: Sun Chengzong once again urged Shang Shou to report the truth to the emperor, and the emperor reorganized the officials of various ministries for this purpose, but the troops did not set off in the end.

古文：初，方震孺、游士任、李达、明时举之谴，承宗实劾之，后皆为求宥。复称杨镐、熊廷弼、王化贞之劳，请免死遣戍，朝端哗然。
现代文：当初，方震孺、游士任、李达、明时举被贬谪，孙承宗确实弹劾过他们，后都为他们请求宽恕，又称赞杨镐、熊廷弼、王化贞的功劳，请求皇帝免除他们的死刑，把他们发配充边，举朝哗然。
English: At first, Fang Zhenxuan, You Shiren, Li Da, and Ming Shijun were dethroned. Sun Chengzong indeed impeached them, and later they all asked for forgiveness for them. They also praised the merits of Yang Zheng, Xiong Tingtao, and Wang Huazhen, and asked the emperor to exempt them from the death penalty. They were given full sentences, and the court was in an uproar.

古文：给事中顾其仁、许誉卿，御史袁化中交章论驳，帝皆置弗省。
现代文：给事中顾其仁、许誉卿，御史袁化中纷纷上疏辩论驳斥，皇帝都置之不理。
English: In this matter, Gu Qiren, Xu Rongqing, and Yuan Huizhong of the Imperial History Department argued and refuted each other, but the emperor ignored them.

古文：会承宗叙五防效劳诸臣，且引疾乞罢，乃遣中官刘应坤等赍帑金十万犒将士，而赐承宗坐蟒、膝襕，佐以金币。
现代文：正好孙承宗叙论五防的功劳，各臣将要称病乞求罢官，于是派遣宦官刘应坤等人携带十万两国库银犒赏官兵，而赐给孙承宗坐蟒、膝，另佐以金币。
English: Just as Sun Chengzong was describing the merits of the Five Defenses, the ministers were about to call in sick and beg for dismissal, so they sent the eunuch Liu Yingkun and others to carry one hundred thousand rupees to reward the officers and soldiers, and gave Sun Chengzong a seat and a knee, and another gold coin.

古文：当是时，忠贤益盗柄。以承宗功高，欲亲附之，令应坤等申意。
现代文：这个时候，魏忠贤更加擅权，因为孙承宗功劳高，想拉拢他，叫刘应坤等人表明自己的意图。
English: At this time, Wei Zhongxian was more arrogant, because Sun Chengzong's merit was high, he wanted to woo him, and asked Liu Yingkun and others to show their intentions.

古文：承宗不与交一言，忠贤由是大憾。
现代文：孙承宗不跟他说一句话，魏忠贤因此极恨他。
English: Sun Chengzong did not say a word to him, so Wei Zhongxian hated him intensely.

古文：会忠贤逐杨涟、赵南星、高攀龙等，承宗方西巡蓟、昌。念抗疏帝未必亲览，往在讲筵，每奏对辄有入，乃请以贺圣寿入朝面奏机宜，欲因是论其罪。
现代文：正好魏忠贤驱逐杨涟、赵南星、高攀龙等人，孙承宗刚巡视蓟镇、昌平，想到上疏皇帝未必亲自过目，过去在讲席时，每次当面上奏都有效果，孙承宗于是请求以祝贺皇帝寿辰为由，进入朝廷当面向皇帝报告机务事宜，想利用这个机会陈述魏忠贤的罪行。
English: Just as Wei Zhongxian was expelling Yang Hui, Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong and others, Sun Chengzong had just made a tour of Shanzhen and Changping. It occurred to him that the Shang emperor might not have personally inspected the situation. In the past, when giving a lecture, every time he performed in front of the emperor, it had an effect. Sun Chengzong then requested to enter the imperial court to congratulate the emperor on his birthday and report to the emperor on the situation. He wanted to use this opportunity to state Wei Zhongxian's crimes.

古文：魏广微闻之，奔告忠贤： 承宗拥兵数万将清君侧，兵部侍郎李邦华为内主，公立齑粉矣！ 
现代文：魏广微听到这消息，飞快报告魏忠贤： 孙承宗拥兵数万人将要清除皇帝身边的人。兵部侍郎李邦华作为内应，您立刻就有粉身碎骨的危险了。 
English: Wei Guangwei heard the news and quickly reported to Wei Zhongxian: Sun Chengzong's tens of thousands of soldiers are about to purge the emperor's entourage. Li Banghua, the attendant of the military department, as an inner response, you are immediately in danger of being crushed.

古文：忠贤悸甚，绕御床哭。帝亦为心动，令内阁拟旨。次辅顾秉谦奋笔曰： 无旨离信地，非祖宗法，违者不宥。 
现代文：魏忠贤非常害怕，围绕着皇帝的床哭，皇帝被感动了，命令内阁草拟圣旨，次辅顾秉谦举笔写道： 没有皇帝的圣旨离开驻防之地，不是祖宗的法令，违抗的人绝不宽恕。 
English: Wei Zhongxian was very scared and cried around the emperor's bed. The emperor was moved and ordered the cabinet to draft the edict. Tsuyifu Gu Bingqian held up a pen and wrote: "Leaving the garrison without the emperor's edict is not the law of the ancestors. Those who disobey will not be forgiven."

古文：夜启禁门召兵部尚书入，令三道飞骑止之。
现代文：连夜打开禁宫大门召见兵部尚书，下三道命令派快骑兵制止他。
English: He opened the gate of the Forbidden City overnight to summon the military commander Shang Shu, and issued three orders to send the cavalry to stop him.

古文：又矫旨谕九门守阉，承宗若至齐化门，反接以入。
现代文：又假传圣旨告示防守九门的宦官，孙承宗如果到齐化门，将他捆绑送入。
English: The eunuchs guarding the Nine Gates were also falsely told that if Sun Chengzong came to Qihua Gate, he would be tied up and sent in.

古文：承宗抵通州，闻命而返。
现代文：孙承宗到达通州，听到命令就返回了。
English: Sun Chengzong arrived in Tongzhou and returned after hearing the order.

古文：忠贤遣人侦之，一襆被置舆中，后车鹿善继而已，意少解。
现代文：魏忠贤派人侦察，发现车子中放着一床用包裹包着的被子，后面只有鹿继善一辆车子而已，这才稍微减少了怀疑。
English: Wei Zhongxian sent someone to investigate and found that there was a quilt wrapped in a parcel in the car, and there was only one car behind Deer Jisen, which slightly reduced the suspicion.

古文：而其党李蕃、崔呈秀、徐大化连疏诋之，至比之王敦、李怀光。
现代文：而魏忠贤的党徒李蕃、崔呈秀、徐大化接连上疏诋毁孙承宗，竟把他比作王敦、李怀光。
English: However, Wei Zhongxian's party members Li Lan, Cui Chengxiu and Xu Dahua slandered Sun Chengzong one after another, comparing him to Wang Dun and Li Huai Guang.

古文：承宗乃杜门求罢。
现代文：孙承宗于是闭门谢客，请求辞职。
English: Sun Chengzong then thanked the guests behind closed doors and asked to resign.

古文：五年四月，给事中郭兴治请令廷臣议去留，论冒饷者复踵至，遂下廷臣杂议。
现代文：天启五年四月，给事中郭兴治请求朝廷讨论孙承宗的去留，议论冒领军饷的又接踵而至，于是交给朝臣讨论。
English: In April of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, Guo Xingzhi, who was in the middle of the matter, requested the imperial court to discuss Sun Chengzong's departure, and the discussion of the leader of the army followed, so it was handed over to the courtiers for discussion.

古文：吏部尚书崔景荣持之，乃下诏勉留，而以简将、汰兵、清饷三事责承宗。奏报，承宗方遣诸将分戍锦州、大小凌河、松、杏、右屯诸要害，拓地复二百里，罢大将世钦、世禄，副将李秉诚、孙谏，汰军万七千余人，省度支六十八万。
现代文：吏部尚书崔景荣坚持留用他，于是下诏挽留勉励，而以精简将官、淘汰士兵、清理粮饷三件事责令孙承宗的汇报，孙承宗正在派遣各将分别驻守锦州、大小凌河、松、杏、右屯各要害地区，开拓土地又有二百里，罢免大将王世钦、尤世禄，副将李秉诚、孙谏，裁军一万七千多人，节省开支六十八万两。
English: Cui Jingrong, the head of the General Staff, insisted on retaining him, so he issued an edict to stay and encourage him, and ordered Sun Chengzong to report on three things: streamlining generals, eliminating soldiers, and clearing grain stores. Sun Chengzong was sending generals to garrison the key areas of Jinzhou, Linghe, Matsu, Anhui, and Udon separately, opening up another 200 miles of land, dismissing generals Wang Shichin and You Shilu, and vice-generals Li Bingcheng and Sun Qi, disarming more than 17,000 people, and saving expenses of 680,000 taels.

古文：而言官论世龙不已。
现代文：而言官仍在不停地议论马世龙。
English: And the spokesman is still going on and on about Ma Shilong.

古文：至九月，遂有柳河之败，死者四百余人，语详《世龙传》。
现代文：到了九月，才有柳河战役的失败，死亡四百多人，详情参见《马世龙传》。
English: It was not until September that the Battle of Liuhe was lost, with more than four hundred people killed. For details, see "The Horse and Dragon Chronicles."

古文：于是台省劾世龙并及承宗，章疏数十上。
现代文：于是台省弹劾马世龙，并提到孙承宗。送上的有数十道奏疏。
English: As a result, Taiwan Province impeached Ma Shilong and mentioned Sun Chengzong. Dozens of sermons were sent.

古文：承宗求去益力，十月始得请。
现代文：孙承宗请求辞职更加坚决，十月才得到批准。
English: Sun Chengzong's request to resign was more resolute, and was only approved in October.

古文：先已屡加左柱国、少师、太子太师、中极殿大学士，遂加特进光禄大夫，荫子中书舍人，赐蟒服、银币，行人护归。
现代文：先前已多次加封为左柱国、少师、太子太师、中极殿大学士，于是又特别加封光禄大夫，荫庇他的儿子为中书舍人，赐给他蟒服、银币，在行人的保护下回家。
English: In the past, he had been awarded the titles of Zuozhu Guo (Left Pillar of the State), Shao Shi (Junior Teacher), Dazhi Daishi (Prince of Princes), and Zhongji Tien University Scholar many times. Therefore, he was specially awarded the title of Guanglu Daifu (Doctor of Light), and his son was given the title of Zhongshushe Renmin (Teacher of the Middle School), and he was given a silk robe and silver coins. He returned home under the protection of passers-by.

古文：而以兵部尚书高第代为经略。
现代文：而用兵部尚书高第代替他做经略。
English: He was replaced by Hyobu Shosho Koudi as a strategist.

古文：无何，安性亦罢，遂废巡抚不设。
现代文：不久，喻安性也被罢免，于是废除巡抚不再设立。
English: Soon, Yu Ansei was also dismissed, so the abolition of the governor was no longer established.

古文：初，第力扼承宗，请撤关外以守关内。
现代文：当初，高第极力压制孙承宗，请求撤除关外兵来防守关内。
English: At first, Gao Di tried his best to suppress Sun Chengzong and requested the removal of Guan foreign soldiers to defend Guan.

古文：承宗驳之，第深憾。
现代文：孙承宗反驳他，高第很不满意。
English: Sun Chengzong rebutted him, and Gao Di was very dissatisfied.

古文：明年，宁远被围，乃疏言关门兵止存五万，言者益以为承宗罪。
现代文：第二年，宁远被包围，于是上疏说山海关关门只有五万士兵，谈论这事的人更加以为是孙承宗的罪过。
English: The next year, Ningyuan was besieged, so Shangsuo said that only fifty thousand soldiers closed the gate of Shanhaiguan, and people who talked about this matter thought it was Sun Chengzong's fault.

古文：承宗告户部曰： 第初莅关，尝给十一万七千人饷，今但给五万人饷足矣。 
现代文：孙承宗向户部报告说： 高第刚到山海关时，曾发给十一万七千人的粮饷，现在只发给五万人粮饷就足够了。 
English: Sun Chengzong reported to the household department: When Gaudi first arrived at the Shanhaiguan customs, he had distributed grain to 117,000 people, but now it is enough to distribute grain to only 50,000 people.

古文：第果以妄言引罪。
现代文：高第果真因为说话荒谬而被定罪。
English: Gaudi was indeed convicted of talking nonsense.

古文：后忠贤遣其党梁梦环巡关，欲傅致承宗罪，无所得而止。
现代文：后来魏忠贤派他的党羽梁梦环巡视山海关，想罗织孙承宗的罪名，没有得到什么就停止了。
English: Later, Wei Zhongxian sent Liang Menghuan, a member of his faction, to inspect the Shanhaiguan Customs and Excise Bureau to investigate the charges against Luo Weizong, but stopped after receiving nothing.

古文：承宗在关四年，前后修复大城九、堡四十五，练兵十一万，立车营十二、水营五、火营二、前锋后劲营八，造甲胄、器械、弓矢、炮石、渠答、卤楯之具合数百万，拓地四百里，开屯五千顷，岁入十五万。
现代文：孙承宗在山海关四年，前后修复九座大城、四十五个城堡、练兵十一万，建立战车营十一个、水兵营五个、大炮营二个、前锋后劲营八个，制造甲胄、器械、弓箭、炮石、渠答、卤盾等器械一共有数百万之多，开拓土地四百里，开辟屯田五千顷，每年收入十五万两银子。
English: During his four years in Shanhaiguan, Sun Chengzong restored nine large cities, 45 castles, and trained 110,000 soldiers, established 11 chariot battalions, five marine battalions, two artillery battalions, and eight vanguard and rearguard battalions, manufactured a total of millions of armor, instruments, bows and arrows, cannon stones, sluice gates, and halogen shields, developed 400 miles of land, and developed 5,000 hectares of farmland, with an annual income of 150,000 taels of silver.

古文：后叙宁远功，荫子锦衣世千户。
现代文：后追叙宁远战役的功绩，荫封儿子锦衣世袭千户。
English: Afterward, he recounted the exploits of the Ningyuan Campaign, and his son, Jin Yi, inherited a thousand households.

古文：庄烈帝即位，在晋入为兵部尚书，恨承宗不置，极论世龙及元仪荧惑枢辅坏关事，又嗾台省交口诋承宗，以沮其出。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，王在晋进入朝廷担任兵部尚书，对孙承宗痛恨不已，坚持说马世龙和茅元仪迷惑中枢机构，败坏了边关事，又唆使谏官等交口诋毁孙承宗，来阻止他出来做官。
English: When Emperor Zhuge Liang ascended the throne, Wang entered the imperial court in Jin to serve as the secretary of the military department. He hated Sun Chengzong intensely, insisting that Ma Shilong and Mao Yuanyi had confused the central organization, corrupted the border relations, and instigated eunuchs and other contacts to defame Sun Chengzong to prevent him from becoming an official.

古文：二年十月，大清兵入大安口，取遵化，将薄都城，廷臣争请召承宗。
现代文：崇祯二年十月，大清兵进入大安口，攻取遵化，将迫近北京城。朝臣争相请求召回孙承宗。
English: In October of the second year of Chongzhen, the Great Qing soldiers entered Da'ankou, captured Zunhua, and were approaching Beijing City. Courtiers scrambled to request the recall of Sun Chengzong.

古文：诏以原官兼兵部尚书守通州，仍入朝陛见。
现代文：下诏以原官职兼兵部尚书防守通州，仍旧进入朝廷朝见皇帝。
English: Under the imperial edict, he defended Tongzhou with his former official position and military post, and still entered the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：承宗至，召对平台。
现代文：孙承宗到任，皇帝在平台召见他。
English: When Sun Chengzong took office, the emperor summoned him on the platform.

古文：帝慰劳毕，问方略。
现代文：慰劳完毕后，皇帝问他方法谋略。
English: After the work of consolation was over, the emperor asked him how he planned to do it.

古文：承宗奏： 臣闻袁崇焕驻蓟州，满桂驻顺义，侯世禄驻三河，此为得策。
现代文：孙承宗报告说： 臣听说袁崇焕驻守蓟州，满桂驻守顺义，侯世禄驻守三河，这是很正确的。
English: Sun Chengzong reported: The minister heard that Yuan Chonghuan was stationed in Bozhou, Man Gui was stationed in Shunyi, and Hou Shilu was stationed in Sanhe, which is very correct.

古文：又闻尤世威回昌平，世禄驻通州，似未合宜。 
现代文：又听说尤世威回到昌平，尤世禄驻守通州，似乎不大好。 
English: I also heard that You Shih-wei returned to Changping, and You Shilu was stationed in Tongzhou. It does not seem good.

古文：帝问： 卿欲守三河，何意？ 
现代文：皇帝问道： 爱卿想防守三河，是什么意图？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Aiqing wants to defend the Three Rivers, what is his intention?"

古文：对曰： 守三河可以沮西奔，遏南下。 
现代文：孙承宗回答说： 守住三河可以阻止敌人向西逃跑，遏止敌人南下。 
English: Sun Chengzong replied, "Holding the three rivers can prevent the enemy from escaping to the west and stop the enemy from going south.

古文：帝称善，曰： 若何为朕保护京师？ 
现代文：皇帝认为很好，说： 你打算怎样为朕保卫京师？ 
English: The emperor thought it was a good idea and said: How do you plan to defend the capital for me?

古文：承宗言： 当缓急之际，守陴人苦饥寒，非万全策。请整器械，厚犒劳，以固人心。 
现代文：孙承宗说： 当此危难之际，守城的人苦于饥饿和寒冷，不是万全之策，请求皇上整顿守城器械，加倍犒劳士兵，以安定人心。 
English: Sun Chengzong said: At the time of this crisis, the defenders of the city were suffering from hunger and cold. It was not a perfect solution. He asked the emperor to rectify the city's defense equipment and double the soldiers' pay in order to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：所条画俱称旨。
现代文：他所出的计谋都很合皇帝的心意。
English: The schemes he came up with were very much to the emperor's liking.

古文：帝曰： 卿不须往通，其为朕总督京城内外守御事务，仍参帷幄。 
现代文：皇帝说： 爱卿不必前往通州，就为朕总督京城内外的军事事务，仍旧参与军事策划。 
English: The emperor said, "Ai Qing does not need to go to Tongzhou, he is the governor of military affairs in and out of Beijing, and is still involved in military planning.

古文：趣首辅韩爌草敕下所司铸关防。
现代文：催促首辅韩火广草拟诏书下发给有关部门铸造边防器具。
English: Urge the First Assistant Minister Han Huiguang to draft an edict to be issued to the relevant departments for the casting of border defense equipment.

古文：承宗出，漏下二十刻矣，即周阅都城，五鼓而毕，复出阅重城。
现代文：孙承宗出来时，记时的漏刻已经二十下了，立即检阅环卫都城部队，五更时才结束，又出都城检阅外城。
English: When Sun Chengzong came out, the missing time was already twenty minutes. He immediately inspected the capital's sanitation troops, and only finished when the five-hour period was over. He also went out of the capital to inspect the outer city.

古文：明日夜半，忽传旨守通州。
现代文：第二天半夜，忽然传旨孙承宗防守通州。
English: In the middle of the night the next day, an order was suddenly sent to Sun Chengzong to defend Tongzhou.

古文：时烽火遍近郊，承宗从二十七骑出东便门，道亡其三，疾驰抵通，门者几不纳。
现代文：这时战争的烽火已传遍京师近郊，孙承宗率二十七名骑兵从东便门出发，中途逃亡了三人，快马加鞭直抵通州，守城门的人几乎不让他们进城。
English: At this time, the flames of war had spread to the suburbs of Beijing. Sun Chengzong led 27 cavalrymen from Dongbinmen, three of whom fled halfway, and the horses were whipped directly to Tongzhou. The people guarding the city gate almost did not let them enter the city.

古文：既入城，与保定巡抚解经传、御史方大任、总兵杨国栋登陴固守。
现代文：进城之后，跟保定巡抚解经传、御史方大任、总兵杨国栋一起登上城墙加强防守。
English: After entering the city, he climbed the city wall to strengthen the defense together with the governor of Baoding to explain the scriptures, the chief historian, and the general Yang Guodong.

古文：而大清兵已薄都城，乃急遣游击尤岱以骑卒三千赴援。
现代文：而大清兵已迫近都城，于是急忙派遣游击尤岱率步骑三千人前往增援。
English: However, the Great Qing soldiers were already approaching the capital, so they hurriedly dispatched 3,000 guerrillas to reinforce them.

古文：旋遣副将刘国柱督军二千与岱合，而发密云兵三千营东直门，保定兵五千营广宁门。
现代文：片刻之后又派副将刘国柱统帅二千士兵与尤岱汇合，而派遣密云兵三千人驻守东直门，保定兵五千人驻守广宁门。
English: Moments later, he sent Vice Admiral Liu Guozhu with 2,000 soldiers to join Yu Ye, while he sent 3,000 Miyun soldiers to guard Dongzhimen and 5,000 Baoding soldiers to guard Guangningmen.

古文：以其间遣将复马兰、三屯二城。
现代文：这期间派遣将领收复马兰、三屯二座城邑。
English: During this period, generals were dispatched to recover Malan and the two towns of Sandun.

古文：至十二月四日，而有祖大寿之变。大寿，辽东前锋总兵官也，偕崇焕入卫。
现代文：到十二月四日，就发生了祖大寿的兵变，祖大寿是辽东的前锋总兵官，跟袁崇焕一起进入卫所。
English: By December 4th, the mutiny of Zu Dazhou occurred. Zu Dazhou was the vanguard general officer of Liaodong and entered the garrison together with Yuan Chonghuan.

古文：见崇焕下吏，惧诛，遂与副将何可纲等率所部万五千人东溃，远近大震。
现代文：看到袁崇焕下狱，害怕受到惩罚，于是跟副将何可纲等人率领所属的一万五千人向东逃散，远近的人都受到很大的震动。
English: Seeing that Yuan Chonghuan was released from prison and fearing punishment, he, together with Vice Admiral He Kegang and others, led the 15,000 people who belonged to him to flee to the east. People near and far were greatly shaken.

古文：承宗闻，急遣都司贾登科赍手书慰谕大寿，而令游击石柱国驰抚诸军。
现代文：孙承宗听说，急忙派遣都司贾登科携带秘书的亲笔信去劝慰祖大寿，而命令游击石柱国飞马前往安抚各军。
English: According to what Sun Chengzong heard, he hurriedly dispatched the Grand Duke Jia Denko to carry a personal letter from his secretary to comfort Zu Dashou, and ordered the guerrillas of Shizhu Guo Fei Ma to go to pacify the armies.

古文：大寿见登科，言： 麾下卒赴援，连战俱捷，冀得厚赏。
现代文：祖大寿看见贾登科，说： 我部士兵赶往前线支援，接连打胜仗，希望得到丰厚的奖赏。
English: Zu Dashou saw Jadenko and said, "Our soldiers rushed to the front to support and win successive battles, hoping to get a rich reward.

古文：城上人群詈为贼，投石击死数人。
现代文：城上的人都骂我们是强盗，投掷石块打死了几个人。
English: People in the city called us bandits, threw stones and killed several people.

古文：所遣逻卒，指为间谍而杀之。
现代文：派遣出去巡逻的士兵，被指责是间谍而把他们杀死了。
English: Soldiers sent out on patrol were accused of being spies and killed.

古文：劳而见罪，是以奔还。
现代文：立下了功劳却被当作罪过，所以要逃跑回来。
English: He had done his duty, but it was considered a sin, so he had to run away and come back.

古文：当出捣朵颜，然后束身归命。 
现代文：我部应当直捣朵颜，然后回来负荆请罪，等候处罚。 
English: Our department should slap them in the face, then come back and plead guilty and wait for punishment.

古文：柱国追及诸军，其将士持弓刀相向，皆垂涕，言： 督师既戮，又将以大炮击毙我军，故至此。 
现代文：石柱国追上各路部队，将士们手持弓箭、大刀对着他，都流着眼泪说： 督师已被杀死，又将用大炮轰击我军，所以到了这里。 
English: Shizhu Province caught up with the troops on all sides, and the generals, armed with bows and arrows and swords, faced him and said with tears: The inspector has been killed, and he will bombard our army with cannons, so here we are.

古文：柱国复前追，大寿去已远，乃返。
现代文：石柱国还往前追，祖大寿已经很远，于是返回。
English: Ishizuchikuni is still chasing ahead, and Zu Dashu is already far away, so he returns.

古文：承宗奏言： 大寿危疑已甚，又不肯受满桂节制，因讹言激众东奔，非部下尽欲叛也。
现代文：孙承宗报告说： 祖大寿的处境已经非常危险，他又不肯接受满桂的指挥，于是造谣激发众人东逃，并不是他的部下都想叛乱。
English: Sun Chengzong reported: Zu Dashou's situation was already very dangerous. He refused to accept the command of Man Gui, so he spread rumors to inspire everyone to flee east. Not all of his subordinates wanted to rebel.

古文：当大开生路，曲收众心。
现代文：应当免除杀戮，想方设法安抚人心。
English: Killings should be avoided, and every effort should be made to pacify the people.

古文：辽将多马世龙旧部曲，臣谨用便宜，遣世龙驰谕，其将士必解甲归，大寿不足虑也。 
现代文：辽东将领很多是马世龙的老部下，臣小心地见机行事，派遣马世龙快马前往通告，他的将士一定自动归顺，祖大寿不值得担心。 
English: Many of the generals in Liaodong were Ma Shilong's old subordinates. The minister carefully seized the opportunity to send Ma Shilong's fast horse to announce that his soldiers would automatically surrender, and that Zudaoshu was not worth worrying about.

古文：帝喜从之。
现代文：皇帝高兴地听从了。
English: The emperor gladly complied.

古文：承宗密札谕大寿急上章自列，且立功赎督师罪，而己当代为剖白。
现代文：孙承宗写密信告诉祖大寿应立即上奏章陈述错误，并且率领部队立功赎罪，而自己理当代他向皇帝表白。
English: Sun Chengzong wrote a secret letter telling Zu Dashou that he should immediately write a report stating the error, and lead the troops to make meritorious deeds to atone for the sin, and he confessed to the emperor.

古文：大寿诺之，具列东奔之故，悉如将士言。
现代文：祖大寿同意了，一条一条地陈述东逃的原因，全都如同将士们所说的，皇帝很宽厚地答复了他。
English: Zou Dazhou agreed, stating the reasons for fleeing one by one, all as the soldiers had said, and the emperor responded to him very generously.

古文：帝优诏报之，命承宗移镇关门。
现代文：命令孙承宗迁到关门驻守。
English: He ordered Sun Chengzong to move to the closed gate and stay there.

古文：诸将闻承宗、世龙至，多自拔来归者。大寿妻左氏亦以大义责其夫，大寿敛兵待命。
现代文：各将听到孙承宗、马世龙来了，很多人都自动前来归附，祖大寿的妻子左氏也用大道理谴责她的丈夫。祖大寿集合士兵等候命令。
English: Everyone heard that Sun Chengzong and Ma Shilong were coming, and many people came to join them voluntarily. Zu Dashou's wife, Zu Shi, also condemned her husband with great reason. Zu Dashou gathered the soldiers and waited for orders.

古文：当溃兵出关，关城被劫掠，闭门罢市。
现代文：当逃散的士兵出关时，关城遭到抢劫掠夺，关门罢市，人心惶惶。
English: When the scattered soldiers left Guancheng, Guancheng was robbed and plundered, the city was shut down, and people were panicked.

古文：承宗至，人心始定。
现代文：孙承宗到达后，人心才安定下来。
English: After Sun Chengzong's arrival, people's hearts settled down.

古文：关城故十六里，卫城止二里。
现代文：关城原有十六里，卫城只有二里。
English: Guancheng was originally 16 li, while the Acropolis was only 2 li.

古文：今敌在内，关城无可守，卫城连关，可步屟而上也。
现代文：现在敌人在关城内，关城不能够防守，卫城与关城相连，可以步行上去。
English: Now the enemy is in Guancheng, Guancheng can not be defended, the Acropolis is connected to Guancheng, you can walk up.

古文：乃别筑墙，横互于关城，穴之使炮可平出。
现代文：于是另外修筑城墙，挡在关城之间，在城墙上开挖洞口使大炮能够平伸出去。
English: As a result, another city wall was built, blocking the gate between the cities, and a hole was dug in the city wall so that the cannon could protrude.

古文：城中水不足，一昼夜穿凿百井。
现代文：城内的水不充足，一天一夜挖了一百口井。
English: There is not enough water in the city. One hundred wells were dug overnight.

古文：旧汰牙门将侨寓者千人，穷而思乱，皆廪之于官，使巡行街衢，守台护仓，均有所事。
现代文：原来淘汰的小官小吏、流亡寄居本地的共有千余人，无所事事就想惹是生非，都由官府供给粮食，让他们巡察街道，看守炮台，保护仓库，都有事情可做。
English: There were more than a thousand petty officials and minor officials who had been eliminated, as well as exiles living in the local area. They wanted to stir up trouble when they had nothing to do. The government provided them with food, and let them patrol the streets, guard the battery, and protect the warehouse. They all had things to do.

古文：内间不得发，外来者辄为逻骑所得，由是关门守完。
现代文：里面的不能出去，外来人往往被巡逻的骑兵抓获，因此关门能够得以保全。
English: Those inside could not leave, and outsiders were often caught by the patrolling cavalry, so the closed doors could be preserved.

古文：乃遣世龙督步骑兵万五千入援，令游击祖可法等率骑兵四营西戍抚宁。
现代文：于是派遣马世龙率步骑兵一万五千入关增援，命令游击祖可法等率骑兵四营往西驻守抚宁。
English: As a result, Ma Shilong and his 15,000 infantry and cavalry were sent to reinforce the border, and four battalions of cavalry led by the guerrilla Zu Kofa were ordered to garrison Fuxing in the west.

古文：三年正月，大寿入关谒承宗，亲军五百人甲而候于门。
现代文：崇祯三年正月，祖大寿入关拜见孙承宗，孙承宗亲率五百人穿着铠甲在大门迎接。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the great-grandfather's birthday was celebrated at the gate, and he was greeted by 500 people dressed in armor and led by his relatives.

古文：承宗开诚与语，即日列其所统步骑三万于教场，行誓师礼，群疑顿释。
现代文：孙承宗以诚相待，当天在教场上排列步骑兵三万人，举行誓师的礼仪，大家的疑虑一下子都消解了。
English: Sun Chengzong treated each other with sincerity. On the same day, 30,000 infantry and cavalry lined up on the schoolyard to hold the oath ceremony. Everyone's doubts were suddenly resolved.

古文：时我大清已拔遵化而守之。
现代文：这时我大清兵已攻占了遵化，并派兵驻守它。
English: At this time, our Great Qing soldiers had already captured Zunhua and stationed troops there.

古文：是月四日拔永平。八日拔迁安，遂下滦州。
现代文：这月四日攻占永平，八日攻占迁安，于是攻取滦州。
English: Yongping was conquered on the 4th of this month, Qian'an was conquered on the 8th, and then Ganzhou was conquered.

古文：分兵攻抚宁，可法等坚守不下。
现代文：分兵攻击抚宁，祖可法等人坚守，没有攻下。
English: A detachment of soldiers attacked Fuxing, but Zu Kofa and others held out and did not fall.

古文：大清兵遂向山海关，离三十里而营，副将官惟贤等力战。
现代文：大清兵于是向山海关进军，离关三十里安营扎寨。副将官惟贤等人极力请求作战。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty then marched to Shanhaiguan and set up camp 30 miles away from the pass. Vice Admiral Wei Xian and others pleaded with them to fight.

古文：乃还攻抚宁及昌黎，俱不下。
现代文：于是回过头攻击抚宁和昌黎，都没有攻下。
English: As a result, they turned around and attacked Fuxing and Changli, but failed to capture them.

古文：当是时，京师道梗，承宗、大寿军在东，世龙及四方援军在西。
现代文：正在这时，通往京师的道路受阻，孙承宗、祖大寿的军队在东边，马世龙及四方援军在西边。
English: At this time, the road to Beijing Division was blocked, with the armies of Sun Chengzong and Zu Dashou in the east, and Ma Shilong and the reinforcements from four directions in the west.

古文：承宗募死士沿海达京师，始知关城尚无恙。
现代文：孙承宗召募不怕死的人沿海抵达京师，才知道山海关城还在手中。
English: Sun Chengzong called up people who were not afraid of death and arrived in Beijing along the coast, only to find that the Shanhaiguan Customs City was still in their hands.

古文：关西南三县：曰抚宁、昌黎、乐亭，西北三城：曰石门、台头、燕河。
现代文：山海关西南有三县，即抚宁、昌黎、乐亭；西北有三城：即石门、台头、燕河。
English: There are three counties in the southwest of Shanhaiguan Customs, namely Fuxing, Changli and Leting; and three cities in the northwest: namely Shimen, Taitou and Yanhe.

古文：六城东护关门，西绕永平，皆近关要地。
现代文：这六座城池东边保护关门，西边环绕永平，都是近山海关的军事要地。
English: These six castles, protected by gates on the east and surrounded by Yongping on the west, are all important military sites for the Shanhaiguan Customs.

古文：承宗饬诸城严守，而遣将戍开平，复建昌，声援始接。
现代文：孙承宗告诫各城严加防守，又派遣将领驻守开平，收复建昌，声援部队始相连接。
English: Sun Chengzong admonished the cities to strictly defend themselves, and dispatched generals to garrison Kaiping, recover Jianchang, and support troops began to connect.

古文：方京师戒严，天下勤王兵先后至者二十万，皆壁于蓟门及近畿，莫利先进。
现代文：京师正在戒严，全国各地保卫京师的部队先后到来的有二十万。都驻扎在蓟门及京师周围，没有人首先前进。
English: The Beijing Division is under martial law. Two hundred thousand troops have arrived successively from all over the country to defend the Beijing Division. They are all stationed in Shimen and around the Beijing Division, and no one is the first to advance.

古文：诏旨屡督趣，诸将亦时战攻，然莫能克复。
现代文：下诏降旨多次督察催促，各将也时有攻击，但没有人能打败敌人收复失地。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, the inspectors repeatedly urged the generals to attack, but no one was able to defeat the enemy and recover the lost territory.

古文：世龙请先复遵化，承宗曰： 不然，遵在北，易取而难守，不如姑留之，以分其势，而先图滦。
现代文：马世龙请求先收复遵化，孙承宗说： 不行，遵化在北面，容易攻取而难于防守，不如暂且让敌人占领，分散敌人的兵力，我军应先进攻滦州。
English: Ma Shilong requested to recover Zunhua first, and Sun Chengzong said: No, Zunhua is in the north, it is easy to attack but difficult to defend. It is better to temporarily let the enemy occupy and disperse the enemy's troops. Our army should advance to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：今当多为声势，示欲图遵之状以牵之。诸镇赴丰润、开平，联关兵以图滦。
现代文：现在应当多造出声势，暗示将要攻击遵化的形势来牵制敌人，各军开赴丰润、开平，联络山海关的部队攻击滦州。
English: Now it is time to make more noise, hinting that the situation of Zunhua will be attacked to contain the enemy. The troops will go to Fengrun and Kaiping, and the troops of Liaison Mountain Customs will attack Zhangzhou.

古文：得滦则以开平兵守之，而骑兵决战以图永。
现代文：占领了滦州就用开平部队防守，而用骑兵决战以攻占永平。
English: When they occupied Zhangzhou, they used the Kaiping troops to defend, and used the cavalry to fight a decisive battle to capture Yongping.

古文：得滦、永则关、永合，而取遵易易矣。 
现代文：占领了滦州、永平之后，山海关与永平就连成一体，再攻取遵化就容易多了。 
English: After occupying Zhangzhou and Yongping, Shanhaiguan and Yongping became one, and it was much easier to conquer Zunhua.

古文：议既定，乃令东西诸营并进，亲诣抚宁以督之。
现代文：方案确定后，于是命令东西各兵营一同前进，孙承宗亲自到抚宁督战。
English: After the plan was determined, he ordered the east and west battalions to advance together, and Sun Chengzong personally went to Funei to supervise the battle.

古文：五月十日，大寿及张春、邱禾嘉诸军先抵滦城下，世龙及尤世禄、吴自勉、杨麒、王承恩继至，越二日克之，而副将王维城等亦入迁安。
现代文：五月十日，祖大寿及张春、丘禾嘉各军先抵滦州城下，马世龙及龙世禄、吴自勉、杨麒、王承恩随后到达，过了二天攻克了滦州。而副将王维城等人也进入迁安。
English: On May 10, Zu Dashou, Zhang Chun, and Qiu He Jia's armies arrived at the foot of Zhangzhou first, followed by Ma Shilong, Long Shilu, Wu Zimin, Yang Hui, and Wang Cheng'en. Two days later, they conquered Zhangzhou. Vice Admiral Wang Weicheng and others also entered Qian'an.

古文：我大清兵守永平者，尽撤而北还，承宗遂入永平。
现代文：我大清防守永平的部队，全部撤出回到北边，孙承宗于是进入永平。
English: I withdrew all the troops defending Yongping to the north, and Sun Chengzong entered Yongping.

古文：十六日，诸将谢尚政等亦入遵化。
现代文：十六日，各将谢尚政等人也进入遵化。
English: On the 16th, General Xie Shangzheng and others also entered Zunhua.

古文：四城俱复。
现代文：四座城市都收复了。
English: All four cities have been recovered.

古文：帝为告谢郊庙，大行赏赉，加承宗太傅，赐蟒服、白金，世袭锦衣卫指挥佥事。
现代文：皇帝为此在郊庙里告谢，并大加赏赐，加封孙承宗为太傅，赐给蟒服、白金，世代继承锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: For this, the emperor expressed his thanks in the suburban temple, and gave a large reward. He also appointed Sun Zhengzong as the Taifu, and gave him the imperial robe, platinum, and the command of the brocade guard for generations to inherit.

古文：力辞太傅不受，而屡疏称疾乞休，优诏不允。
现代文：孙承宗极力推辞不接受太傅的封号，并多次上疏称病乞求退休，皇上下诏安慰他。
English: Sun Chengzong strenuously refused to accept the title of Tai Fu, and repeatedly pleaded illness and begged to retire. The emperor issued an imperial edict to comfort him.

古文：朵颜束不的反覆，承宗令大将王威击败之，复赉银币。
现代文：不同意他的请求。朵颜束不的反叛，孙承宗命令大将王威打败了他，又赏赐给他银币。
English: Disagreeing with his request, Sun Chengzong ordered General Wang Wei to defeat him and award him silver coins.

古文：先以册立东宫，加太保；及《神宗实录》成，加官亦如之。
现代文：早先因为册立东宫太子，加封为太保。等到《神宗实录》完成，也加官如上述。
English: Earlier, he was given the additional title of Taiho because he was appointed the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court. When the "Shinzō Jitsuroku" was completed, he was also given the additional title as mentioned above.

古文：并辞免，而乞休不已。
现代文：孙承宗推辞不受，并不停地乞求退休。
English: Sun Chengzong did not accept the resignation and kept begging to retire.

古文：帝命阁臣议去留，不能决。
现代文：皇帝命令阁臣讨论他的去留，没有结论。
English: The emperor ordered his ministers to discuss his departure, but there was no conclusion.

古文：特遣中书赍手诏慰问，乃起视事。
现代文：特地派遣中书携带亲笔诏去慰问，于是到任管事。
English: A Chinese envoy was specially dispatched to offer condolences, carrying a handwritten imperial edict, after which the steward arrived.

古文：四年正月出关东巡，抵松山、锦州，还入关，复西巡，遍阅三协十二路而返。
现代文：崇祯四年正月出关东巡，抵达松山、锦州，回到山海关，又西巡，全部检阅了三协十二路然后返回。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Chongzhen went on an eastbound inspection tour, arrived in Matsuyama and Jinzhou, returned to Shanhaiguan Customs, and went on a westbound inspection tour, all of which inspected the 12 roads of the Three Associations and then returned.

古文：条上东西边政八事，帝咸采纳。
现代文：逐条上书陈述东西边防事务八件事，皇帝都采纳了。
English: Eight matters concerning the East-West border affairs were submitted to the emperor in writing, and the emperor accepted all of them.

古文：五月以考满，诏加太傅兼食尚书俸，荫尚宝司丞，赉蟒服、银币、羊酒，复辞太傅不受。
现代文：五月因为考核期满，下诏加封太傅兼领尚书的俸禄，荫封尚宝司丞，赐给蟒服、银币、羊酒，孙承宗再次推辞不接受太傅。
English: In May, due to the expiration of the assessment period, the next edict added the title of Taifu and received the salary of Shang Shu, the shadow of the title of Shang Bao Jie, and gave the imperial robe, silver coins, and sheep wine. Sun Chengzong once again declined to accept the title of Taifu.

古文：初，右屯、大凌河二城，承宗已设兵戍守。后高第来代，尽撤之，二城遂被毁。
现代文：当初，右屯、大凌河二城池，孙承宗已派兵驻守，后来高第来代替他，都撤走了部队，二城池于是被平毁。
English: At first, the troops were withdrawn from Uton and the two castles on the Daling River, which had been garrisoned by Sun Chengzong and later replaced by Gaudi. The two castles were then razed to the ground.

古文：至是，禾嘉巡抚辽东，议复取广宁、义州、右屯三城。
现代文：到这时，丘禾嘉巡抚辽东，建议收复广宁、义州、右屯三城。
English: At this time, Qiu Hejia, the inspector general of Liaodong, proposed to recover the three cities of Guangning, Yizhou and Utun.

古文：承宗言广宁道远，当先据右屯，筑城大凌河，以渐而进。
现代文：孙承宗说广宁路途遥远，应当先占据右屯，在大凌河筑城，逐渐向前推进。
English: Sun Chengzong said that Guangning is a long way away, and it is necessary to occupy Utun first, build a city in Dalinghe, and gradually push forward.

古文：兵部尚书梁廷栋主之，遂以七月兴工，工甫竣，我大清兵大至，围数周。
现代文：兵部尚书梁廷栋支持他，于是在七月动工。工程刚完成，我大清兵大部队到来，将城重重包围。
English: Shang Shuliang Tingdong of the Ministry of Military Affairs supported him, and construction began in July. The project had just been completed when a large force of Qing soldiers arrived and encircled the city.

古文：承宗闻，驰赴锦州，遣吴襄、宋伟往救。
现代文：孙承宗听到后，快马赶到锦州，派遣吴襄、宋伟前往救援。
English: After hearing from Sun Chengzong, the fast horse rushed to Jinzhou and sent Wu Xiang and Song Wei to the rescue.

古文：禾嘉屡易师期，伟与襄又不相能，遂大败于长山。
现代文：丘禾嘉多次改动出兵的日期，宋伟跟吴襄的关系又不和睦，于是在长山被打得大败。
English: Qiu Hejia repeatedly changed the date of dispatching troops, and the relationship between Song Wei and Wu Xiang was not harmonious, so they were defeated in Changshan.

古文：至十月，城中粮尽援绝，守将祖大寿力屈出降，城复被毁。
现代文：到了十月，城中粮食吃完了而援军又毫无希望，守将祖大寿力量用尽出城投降，城池又一次被平毁。
English: By October, the food in the city had run out and there was no hope of reinforcements. The garrison exhausted its strength and surrendered, and the city was once again destroyed.

古文：廷臣追咎筑城非策也，交章论禾嘉及承宗，承宗复连疏引疾。
现代文：廷臣追究修筑城池不是好计谋，纷纷上疏议论丘禾嘉和孙承宗。孙承宗又接连上疏称病。
English: The courtiers inquired whether the construction of the castle was not a good strategy, and they discussed both Qiu Wo Jia and Sun Zhengzong. Sun Zhengzong became ill one after another.

古文：十一月得请，赐银币乘传归。言者追论其丧师辱国，夺官闲住，并夺宁远世荫。
现代文：十一月皇帝批准他的请求，赐给他银币乘驿车回家，议论他的人追论他丧师辱国，剥夺他的官职在家闲居，并且剥夺他在宁远时世代的荫封。
English: In November, the emperor approved his request, gave him silver coins to take a carriage home, talked about his people to pursue him for humiliating the country, deprived him of his official position to idle at home, and deprived him of the shadow of generations when he was far away.

古文：承宗复列上边计十六事，而极言禾嘉军谋牴牾之失，帝报闻而已。
现代文：孙承宗又上书陈述边防计策的十六件事，而极力说丘禾嘉军事谋略自相矛盾的过失。皇帝知道而已。
English: Sun Chengzong also wrote a letter to state 16 things about the border defense strategy, and insisted that Qiuhejia's military strategy was a self-contradictory mistake. The emperor only knew.

古文：家居七年，中外屡请召用，不报。
现代文：在家居住七年，朝廷内外多次请求征召任用他，没有批复。
English: He lived at home for seven years, and there were many requests from inside and outside the Imperial Court to recruit and appoint him, but there was no reply.

古文：十一年，我大清兵深入内地。
现代文：崇祯十一年，我大清兵深入内地。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, I, a soldier of the Great Qing Dynasty, went deep into the inland.

古文：以十一月九日攻高阳，承宗率家人拒守。
现代文：在十一月九日进攻高阳，孙承宗率领家族人抵抗。
English: On November 9, they attacked Goyang. Sun Chengzong led his family to resist.

古文：大兵将引去，绕城纳喊者三，守者亦应之三，曰 此城笑也，于法当破 ，围复合。
现代文：大清兵将要离开，围绕着城墙大声叫喊了三次，守城的人也回答了三次。说： 这是守城的人在嘲笑，按照法令应当攻破它。 又一次包围了高阳城。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty were about to leave, and they shouted loudly three times around the city wall, and the defenders also answered three times, saying, "This is the defenders mocking, according to the law, they should break through it," and once again surrounded Gaoyang City.

古文：明日城陷，被执。
现代文：第二天攻陷，孙承宗被捉。
English: It fell the next day, and Sun Chengzong was captured.

古文：望阙叩头，投缳而死，年七十有六。
现代文：望着朝廷叩头后，上吊自杀，终年七十六岁。
English: After kowtowing to the imperial court, he hanged himself at the age of seventy-six.

古文：子举人鉁，尚宝丞钥，官生铈，生员鋡、镐，从子炼，及孙之沆、之滂、之澋、之洁、之瀗，从孙之澈、之氵美、之泳、之泽、之涣、之瀚，皆战死。
现代文：他的儿子举人孙翶，尚宝丞孙钥，官生孙铈，生员孙钅含、孙镐，侄子谏，以及孙子孙之沆、孙之滂、孙之氵景、孙之洁、孙之氵宪，侄孙孙之澈、孙之氵美、孙之泳、孙之泽、孙之涣、孙之瀚，全都战死了。
English: His sons, including Sun Qian, Shang Baozhen, Sun Ke, Sun Zheng, who was a government official, and his sons, including Sun Yuhan, Sun Zheng, his nephew, Sun Zheng, Sun Zheng, Sun Zhengjing, Sun Zheijie, Sun Zhengxian, his nephew, Sun Zheqing, Sun Zhengmei, Sun Zheilong, Sun Zheng, Sun Zheng, and Sun Han, all died in the war.

古文：督师中官高起潜以闻。
现代文：督师宦官高起潜报告了这事。
English: Superintendent Gao Qizhong reported the matter.

古文：帝嗟悼，命所司优恤。
现代文：皇帝叹息再三并追悼他，命令有关部门从优照顾。
English: The emperor repeatedly sighed and mourned him, and ordered the relevant departments to take good care of him.

古文：当国者杨嗣昌、薛国观辈阴扼之，但复故官，予祭葬而已。福王时，始赠太师，谥文忠。
现代文：掌权的杨嗣昌、薛国观等人暗中压制，只是恢复了他的原官职，给予祭奠下葬而已，福王时，才追赠为太师，谥号文忠。
English: Yang Shichang and Xue Guoguan, who were in power, suppressed him secretly, but he was restored to his former official position and given a memorial service and burial. When he died, he was posthumously given the title of Grand Master and the posthumous title of Wenzhong.

