古文：《易》有圣人之道四焉：以言者尚其辞，以动者尚其变，以制器者尚其象，以卜筮者尚其占。
现代文：《易经》有圣人之道四，即辞变象占。以《易经》来谈论的人则崇尚《易》辞，以动作营为的人则崇尚《易》之变化，以制造器具的人则崇尚《易》象，以筮卦的人则崇尚《易》占。
English: In the I Ching, there is a fourth path for sages, that is, the path of change. People who use the I Ching to talk about things advocate the path of change, people who use the I Ching to act advocate the change of I Ching, people who use the I Ching to make tools advocate the path of change, and people who use the I Ching to meditate advocate the change of I Ching.

古文：是以君子将有为也，将有行也，问焉而以言，其受命也如响。
现代文：所以君子将有作为，将行动的时候，探问于《易》以筮卦，而《易》即以其六十四爻当中的吉辞应答，即筮得吉凶之辞，则受易道之指引，如响之应声。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman is about to act, he will inquire into the Yi with the gonggua, and the Yi will respond with the auspicious words among its sixty-four gongs, that is, the auspicious and inauspicious words will be guided by the Yi way, such as the echo of the response.

古文：无有远近幽深，遂知来物。非天下之至精，其孰能与于此。
现代文：无论远近幽深，吾人藉《易》之占筮，终于知解将来事物的变化，非天下最精深者，谁能如此呢？
English: No matter how far, near or deep, our people, through the divination of Yi, finally understand the changes of things in the future. Who is not the most profound person in the world, who can do so?

古文：参伍以变，错综其数。通其变，遂成天下之文；极其数，遂定天下之象。非天下之至变，其孰能与于此。
现代文：三才五行或阴阳之数参合五位的变化，错综其数字的推演，通达它的变化，终于成就阴阳之数的神妙，而《易》中阴阳卦爻的文辞也由此可以推知了。极尽数字的变化，遂能肇定天下的物象，非天下最神奇变化的，谁能如此呢？
English: The number of three to five elements or yin and yang are related to the changes of five digits, and the intricate deduction of its numbers and the access to its changes have finally achieved the magic of the number of yin and yang, and the words of yin and yang in "Yi" can also be inferred from this. The extreme change of numbers can finally determine the appearance of the world. If it is not the most miraculous change in the world, who can do so?

古文：《易》无思也，无为也，寂然不动，感而遂通天下之故。非天下之至神，其孰能与于此。
现代文：《易经》本身是没有思虑的，是没有作为的，是很安祥寂静不动的，人若能感发兴起而运用之，终能通达天下一切的事故，如非天下最神奇美妙的，谁能如此呢？
English: The "I Ching" itself is thoughtless, without action, very peaceful, silent and immobile. If people can inspire and use it, they will eventually be able to reach all the accidents in the world. If it is not the most magical and wonderful in the world, who can do so?

古文：夫《易》，圣人之所以极深而研几也。唯深也，故能通天下之志；唯几也，故能成天下之务；唯神也，故不疾而速，不行而至。
现代文：《易经》是圣人极尽幽深，研究神机莫测的一门大学问，正唯它的幽深，故能通达天下人的心志，正唯它的神机莫测，故能成就天下的一切事务，正唯它的神妙，所以似不见其急速，而自然快速，似不见其行，而能到达。
English: The I Ching is the profoundest of the sages. It is a university subject to study the inscrutability of the gods. It is precisely because of its profundity that it can reach the hearts of the people of the world. It is precisely because of its inscrutability that it can accomplish all the affairs of the world. It is precisely because of its miraculousness that it does not seem to be fast, but it is naturally fast. It does not seem to move, but it can reach.

古文：子曰： 《易》有圣人之道四焉 者，此之谓也。
现代文：孔子说： 《易》有圣人之道四焉 者，就是指此而言的。
English: Confucius said: "Yi" refers to those who have the path of sages.

