古文：起强圉赤奋若七月，尽屠维单阏九月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起强圉赤奋若七月，尽屠维单阏九月，凡二年有奇。
English: If July is full of vigor and enthusiasm, and September is full of gloom and despondency, every two years will be a strange year.

古文：均王中贞明三年
现代文：后梁均王贞明三年
English: Liang Jun Wang Zhenming three years later

古文：秋，七月，庚戌，蜀主以桑弘志为西北面第一招讨，王宗宏为东北面第二招讨。
现代文：秋季七月，庚戌，前蜀主王建任命桑弘志为西北面第一招讨，王宗宏为东北面第二招讨。
English: In the autumn of July, the former Shu master Wang Jian appointed Kuang Hongzhi as the first leader of the northwest and Wang Zonghong as the second leader of the northeast.

古文：己未，以兼中书令王宗侃为东北面都招讨，武信节度使刘知俊为西北面都招讨。
现代文：己未，任命兼中书令王宗侃为东北面都招讨，武信节度使刘知俊为西北面都招讨。
English: At the same time, Wang Zongkan, who was also appointed as the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was invited to the Northeast, and Liu Zhijun was invited to the Northwest by Wu Xin.

古文：晋王以李嗣源、阎宝兵少，未足以敌契丹，辛未，更命李存审将兵益之。
现代文：晋王李存勖认为李嗣源、阎宝的兵力较少，不足与契丹国抗衡，辛未，又命令李存审率兵去加强他们的兵力。
English: The Jin king, Li Cunxu, thought that the forces of Li Shiyuan and Yan Bao were too small to compete with the Khitan state, and ordered Li Cunxu to lead the troops to strengthen their forces.

古文：蜀飞龙使唐文扆居中用事，张格附之，与司徒、判枢密院事毛文锡争权。
现代文：前蜀飞龙使唐文在朝中掌权，张格依附于他，与司徒、判枢密院事毛文锡争夺权力。
English: Former Shu Feilong made Tang Wen rise to power in the court, Zhang Ge adhered to him, and competed for power with Sito, the judge of the Privy Council, and Mao Wensi.

古文：文锡将以女适左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事庾传素之子，会亲族于枢密院用乐，不先表闻，蜀主闻乐声，怪之，文扆从而谮之。
现代文：毛文锡准备把他的女儿嫁给左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事庾传素的儿子，亲族聚会在枢密院寻欢作乐，没有事先奏明前蜀主，前蜀主听到音乐声，感到很奇怪，唐文趁机说毛文锡的坏话。
English: Mao Wensi was preparing to marry off his daughter to his left-hand man and the attendant of the Central Library, Tongping Zhang Zhicheng, the son of Chuansu. The relatives gathered in the Privy Council to have fun and make music. They did not inform the former Shushi in advance. The former Shushi heard the music and felt very strange. Tang Wen took the opportunity to speak ill of Mao Wensi.

古文：八月，庚寅，贬文锡茂州司马，其子司封员外郎询流维州，籍没其家；贬文锡弟翰林学士文晏为荣经尉；传素罢为工部尚书。以翰林学士承旨庾凝绩权判内枢密院事。
现代文：八月，庚寅，将毛文锡降为茂州司马。把毛文锡的儿子司封员外郎毛询流放到维州，并把他全家的财产没收归公。把毛文锡的弟弟翰林学士毛文晏贬为荣经县尉。把庾传素降为工部尚书，让翰林学士承旨庾凝绩暂管内枢密院的事情。
English: In August, Geng Yin demoted Mao Wensi to Shima of Mochou. He exiled Mao Wensi's son, Sifeng official Wai Lang Mao Xun, to Victoria, and confiscated his entire family's property to the public. He demoted Mao Wensi's brother, Hanlin Scholar Mao Wensu, to Rongjing County Lieutenant. He demoted Yu Chuansu to Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, and let Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi temporarily manage the affairs of the Inner Privy Council.

古文：凝积，传素之再从弟也。
现代文：庾凝绩是庾传素的本家弟弟。
English: 凝绩 is the younger brother of 传素.

古文：癸巳，清海、建武节度使刘岩即皇帝位于番禺，国号大越，大赦，改元乾亨。
现代文：癸巳，清海、建武节度使刘岩在番禺称帝，国号为大越，实行大赦，改年号为乾亨。
English: Suddenly, the Qinghai and Jianwu festivals caused Liu Yan to be proclaimed emperor in Panyu, the country name was Dai Yue, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Qianheng.

古文：以梁使赵光裔为兵部尚书，节度副使杨洞潜为兵部侍郎，节度判官李殷衡为礼部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：任命后梁使者赵光裔为兵部尚书，节度副使杨洞潜为兵部侍郎，节度判官李殷衡为礼部侍郎，三人一并为同平章事。
English: After the appointment, Liang envoy Zhao Guangxu was appointed as the secretary of the military department, Yang Dongxuan, the deputy secretary of the military department, was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and Li Yinheng, the judge of the military department, was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department. All three were appointed to the same level.

古文：建三庙，追尊祖安仁曰太祖文皇帝，父谦曰代祖圣武皇帝，兄隐曰烈宗襄皇帝。以广州为兴王府。
现代文：新修了三座祖庙，追尊祖父刘安仁为太祖文皇帝，父亲刘谦为代祖圣武皇帝，哥哥刘隐为烈宗襄皇帝，并把广州作为兴王府。
English: Three ancestral temples were newly built to commemorate his grandfather Liu Anren as the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Wen, his father Liu Qian as the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Shenwu, his brother Liu Yin as the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Li Zongxiang, and Guangzhou as the Xingwang Palace.

古文：契丹围幽州且二百日，城中危困。
现代文：契丹围困幽州将近二百天，幽州城内十分困难。
English: The Khitan besieged Yuzhou for nearly 200 days, and the situation inside Yuzhou was very difficult.

古文：李嗣源、阎宝、李存审步骑七万会于易州，存审曰： 虏众吾寡，虏多骑，吾多步，若平原相遇，虏以万骑蹂吾陈，吾无遗类矣。 
现代文：晋将李嗣源、阎宝、李存审率领七万名士卒和骑丘在易州会师。李存审说： 敌众我寡，敌人的骑兵多，我们的步兵多，如果在平原上两军相遇，敌人用一万名骑兵践踏我们的阵地，我们的兵士将被他们活活踩死而没有活着回去的。 
English: Jin dispatched Li Siyuan, Yan Bao, and Li Cunxin to lead 70,000 soldiers and cavalry to join the division in Yizhou. Li Cunxin said: The enemy is few and far between, the enemy's cavalry is more, our infantry is more. If the two armies meet on the plain, and the enemy tramples our positions with 10,000 cavalry, our soldiers will be trampled to death by them and will not return alive.

古文：嗣源曰： 虏无辎重，吾行必载粮食自随，若平原相遇，虏抄吾粮，吾不战自溃矣。
现代文：李嗣源说： 敌人没有多少军需，我们行军必须随军拉着粮食，如果在平原上两军相遇，敌人一定会抢我们的粮食，我军将不战自败。
English: Li Siyuan said: The enemy does not have much military supplies, we must march with the army to pull grain. If the two armies meet on the plain, the enemy will certainly rob our grain, and our army will be defeated without a fight.

古文：不若自山中潜行趣幽州，与城中合势，若中道遇虏，则据险拒之。 
现代文：不如从山中偷偷地直抵幽州，形成和幽州城内结合的形势。如果在途中遇上敌人，我们就占据险要的地方来抵御他们。 
English: It would be better to sneak from the mountains straight to Yuzhou and form a situation of integration with the city of Yuzhou. If we encounter enemies on the way, we will occupy a critical place to resist them.

古文：甲午，自易州北行，庚子，逾大房岭，循涧而东。
现代文：甲午，李嗣源、阎宝、李存审率兵从易州向北出发，庚子，翻过大房岭，沿着山涧向东进发。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Li Siyuan, Yan Bao, and Li Cunxin led the soldiers from Yizhou to the north, and Geng Zi crossed the Dafangling and marched eastward along the ridge.

古文：嗣源与养子从珂将三千骑为前锋，距幽州六十里，与契丹遇。
现代文：李嗣源和他的养子李从珂率领三千骑兵为前锋部队，在距离幽州六十里的地方，与契丹军队相遇。
English: Li Siyuan and his adopted son Li Congke led three thousand cavalry as the vanguard force, and met the Khitan army at a distance of sixty miles from Yuzhou.

古文：契丹惊却，晋兵翼而随之。
现代文：契丹军队感到惊恐而退却，晋军从两翼紧随其后。
English: The Khitan army panicked and retreated, and the Jin army followed on both flanks.

古文：契丹行山上，晋兵行涧下，每至谷口，契丹辄邀之，嗣源父子力战，乃得进。
现代文：契丹军在山上走，晋军在山涧走，每到一个谷口，契丹军就拦截晋军，李嗣源父子奋力战斗，才能继续前进。
English: The Khitan army marched in the mountains, the Jin army marched in the foothills. Every time they reached a valley mouth, the Khitan army intercepted the Jin army, and Li Siyuan and his son fought hard to continue moving forward.

古文：至山口，契丹以万馀骑遮其前，将士失色。
现代文：到达山口时，契丹部队用一万多骑兵挡在晋军前面，普军将士吓得脸都变了色。
English: When they reached Yamaguchi, the Khitan troops used more than ten thousand cavalry to block the Jin army, and the Prussian soldiers were so scared that their faces changed color.

古文：嗣源以百馀骑先进，免胄扬鞭，胡语谓契丹曰： 汝无故犯我疆场，晋王命我将百万众直抵西楼，灭汝种族！ 
现代文：李嗣源带领百余骑兵率先前进，他脱掉甲胄，扬鞭上马，并用契丹语对契丹人说： 你们无故侵犯我人的疆土，晋王命令我率兵百万直捣西楼，消灭你们的种族。 
English: Li Siyuan led more than a hundred cavalrymen to advance first. He took off his armor, raised his whip and mounted his horse. He said to the Khitan people in the Khitan language: You have invaded our territory without reason. The Jin king ordered me to lead a million soldiers straight to the West Tower to exterminate your race.

古文：因跃马奋楇，三入其陈，斩契丹酋长一人。
现代文：于是跃马奋击，三次冲入契丹军阵，斩杀契丹酋长一人。
English: As a result, Yue Ma fought hard, rushed into the Khitan army three times, and killed one of the Khitan chiefs.

古文：后军齐进，契丹兵却，晋兵始得出。
现代文：晋军后面的部队也赶了上来，一起向契丹军进攻，契丹军队退却，晋军才得以出了山口。
English: The Jin army's follow-up troops advanced together, and the Khitan soldiers retreated backwards. Only then was the Jin army able to leave the mountain pass and head for Yuzhou.

古文：李存审命步兵伐木为鹿角，人持一枝，止则成寨。
现代文：李存审命令他的士卒伐木，做成防御营寨的鹿角，每人手持一根，部队停下来时，就做成营寨。
English: Li Cunxuan ordered his soldiers to cut down trees and make antlers, one for each man, to form a defensive camp. When the troops stopped, they formed a camp.

古文：契丹骑环寨而过，寨中发万弩射之，流矢蔽日，契丹人马死伤塞路。
现代文：契丹军队绕着晋军的营寨经过，晋军从营寨中万箭齐发，射击契丹军，飞出灵的箭遮天蔽日，契丹死伤的人马几乎把路堵塞。
English: The Khitan army passed around the camp of the Jin army. The Jin army fired thousands of arrows from the camp, shooting the Khitan army. The arrows that flew out of the spirit covered the sky. The dead and wounded people of the Khitan army almost blocked the road.

古文：将至幽州，契丹列陈待之。
现代文：晋军快要到达幽州时，契丹军早已严阵以待。
English: When the Jin army was about to reach Yuzhou, the Khitan army was already waiting.

古文：存审命步兵陈于其后，戒勿动，先令羸兵曳柴然草而进，烟尘蔽天，契丹莫测其多少。
现代文：李存审命令部队在契丹军的后面摆好阵势，告诫他们暂不要动。他先命令疲弱的军队拿着点燃的柴草前进，使烟雾遮天，契丹人不知道晋军到底有多少人马。
English: Li Cunxin ordered the troops to set up a position behind the Khitan army and warned them not to move for the time being. He first ordered the weak army to advance with lit firewood to cover the sky with smoke. The Khitan did not know how many men the Jin army actually had.

古文：因鼓噪合战，存审乃趣后陈起乘之，契丹大败，席卷其众自北山去，委弃车帐铠仗羊马满野，晋兵追之，俘斩万计。
现代文：在这种情况下晋军击鼓喧闹，一起出战，李存审催促后面的军队乘势追击，契丹被打得大败，席卷其全部士卒从北山逃跑，满山遍野都是契丹军丢弃了的战车、帐蓬、铠甲、羊、马等。晋军乘胜追击，俘获和斩杀了的契丹兵数以万计。
English: In this situation, the Jin army played drums noisily and went to war together, Li Cunxu urged the army behind to take advantage of the situation to pursue, the Khitan were defeated, swept all their soldiers to flee from the North Mountain, and all over the mountain were the abandoned chariots, tents, armor, sheep, horses, etc. of the Khitan army. The Jin army chased and captured and killed tens of thousands of Khitan soldiers.

古文：辛丑，嗣源等入幽州，周德威见之，握手流涕。
现代文：辛丑，李嗣源等进入幽州，周德威见到他，握着他的手痛哭流涕。
English: Xin Ugly, Li Siyuan, etc. entered Yuzhou, Zhou Dewei saw him, held his hand and cried bitterly.

古文：契丹以卢文进为幽州留后，其后又以为卢龙节度使，文进常居平州，帅奚骑岁入北边，杀掠吏民。
现代文：契丹任命卢文进为幽州留后，后来又任命他为卢龙节度使。卢文进经常居住在平州，每年都要率领奚人骑兵人侵晋国的北部，杀掠百姓。
English: After Khitan appointed Lu Wenzhin to stay in Yuzhou, he later appointed him as the Lulong Festival envoy. Lu Wenzhin often lived in Pingzhou, and every year he led the Xiongren cavalry to invade the northern part of Jin and plunder the people.

古文：晋人自瓦桥运粮输蓟城，虽以兵援之，不免抄掠。
现代文：晋国人从瓦桥运液到蓟州，虽然有部队护送，但也不免被契丹人所抄掠。
English: The Jin people transported the liquid from the tile bridge to Zhangzhou. Although they were escorted by troops, they were inevitably plundered by the Khitan people.

古文：契丹每入寇，则文进帅汉卒为乡导，卢龙巡属诸州为之残弊。
现代文：每逢契丹人侵略，卢文进就带领汉族士兵作为向导，卢龙巡守所属各州都被抢劫得残破不堪。
English: Whenever the Khitans invaded, Lu Wenjin led the Han soldiers as a guide, and all the states belonging to the Lulong patrol were robbed and destroyed.

古文：刘鄩自滑州入朝，朝议以河朔失守责之。
现代文：刘从滑州回到朝廷，朝廷决定以失守河朔而处罚他。
English: Liu returned to the imperial court from Leshou, and the imperial court decided to punish him for failing to defend Hexuo.

古文：九月，落鄩平章事，左迁亳州团练使。
现代文：九月，解除刘的平章事，贬调他出任亳州团练使。
English: In September, Liu was relieved of his military rank and demoted to the post of Bozhou regimental drill instructor.

古文：冬，十月，己亥，加吴越王镠天下兵马元帅。
现代文：冬季十月，己亥，后梁帝加封吴越王钱为天下兵马元帅。
English: In the winter of October, Ji Hai, after Liang Di, Wu Yue Wang Qian was appointed as the world's military marshal.

古文：晋王还晋阳。
现代文：晋王回到晋阳。
English: Jin Wang returned to Jinyang.

古文：王连岁出征，凡军府政事一委监军使张承业，承业劝课农桑，畜积金谷，收市兵马，征租行法不宽贵戚，由是军城肃清，馈饷不乏。
现代文：由于连的出征，凡军府政事一律委托监军使张承业办理，张承业积极督促农桑生产，储备钱粮，收买兵马，征收赋税，执法严格，从不宽容权贵亲戚，因此晋阳城内平静，军队粮饷不缺。
English: As a result of the company's expedition, all political affairs of the military government were entrusted to the supervising military envoy Zhang Chengye. Zhang Chengye actively supervised the production of agricultural mulberry, stockpiled grain, bought soldiers and horses, levied taxes, strictly enforced the law, and never tolerated powerful relatives. As a result, the city of Jinyang was calm, and the army was not short of grain.

古文：王或时须钱蒱博及给赐伶人，而承业靳之，钱不可得。
现代文：晋王有时候需要钱去博戏或者赏赐给乐官、伶人，张承业吝惜不肯给他，晋王也拿不到钱。
English: Jin Wang sometimes needed money to go to the opera or to reward musicians and musicians. Zhang Chengye grudgingly refused to give it to him, and Jin Wang could not get the money.

古文：王乃置酒钱库，令其子继岌为承业舞，承业以宝带及币马赠之。
现代文：于是晋王在钱库里摆了一桌酒席，让他的儿子李继岌给张承业跳舞，张承业用饰有珍宝的带子和币马赠送给李继岌。
English: So Jin Wang set up a banquet table in the treasury and asked his son Li Jizhe to dance for Zhang Chengye. Zhang Chengye presented Li Jizhe with a belt decorated with treasures and coins.

古文：王指钱积呼继岌小名谓承业曰： 和哥乏钱，七哥宜以钱一积与之，带马未为厚也。 
现代文：晋王指着库里积存的钱物高声叫着李继岌的小名对张承业说： 和哥缺钱，七哥你应当用一堆积钱送给他，宝带、币马不算丰厚。 
English: Pointing to the money and goods accumulated in the storehouse, Jin Wang called out loudly to Li Jizhe's nickname to Zhang Chengye, saying: My brother is short of money, the seventh brother, you should give him a pile of accumulated money, the treasure belt and coins are not rich.

古文：承业曰： 郎君缠头皆出承业俸禄，此钱，大王所以养战士也，承业不敢以公物为私礼。 
现代文：张承业说： 我送给少爷的彩礼，都是从我的俸禄里支出的，钱库里的钱，是大王用来养战士用的，我不敢用公物作为个人的私礼。 
English: Zhang Chengye said, "The bride price I gave to my young master was all spent from my salary. The money in the treasury was used by the king to support his soldiers. I dare not use public property as a personal gift.

古文：王不悦，凭酒以语侵之，承业怒曰： 仆老敕使耳！非为子孙计，惜此库钱，所以佐王成霸业也，不然，王自取用之，何问仆为！
现代文：晋王听了很不高兴，借酒用话讽刺他，张承业生气地说： 我是皇上的老臣，并不是为我的子孙打算，我之所以珍惜这库里的钱，是为了帮助大王成就霸业，不然的话，大王可以自己随便取用，何必还问我呢？
English: Jin Wang was very unhappy to hear this, and he used wine to satirize him. Zhang Chengye said angrily, "I am the emperor's old retainer, and I am not planning for my children and grandchildren. The reason why I cherish the money in this treasury is to help the great king achieve hegemony. Otherwise, the great king can use it as he pleases, so why ask me?

古文：不过财尽民散，一无所成耳。 
现代文：不过钱财用完，百姓也就会远离你，你的事业将一无所成。 
English: But when the money runs out, the people will turn away from you, and your career will come to nothing.

古文：王怒，顾李绍荣索剑，承业起，挽王衣泣曰： 仆受先王顾托之命，誓为国家诛汴贼，若以惜库物死于王手，仆下见先王无愧矣。
现代文：晋王十分生气，回过头向李绍荣要剑，张承业站起来，拉住晋王的衣服，哭着说： 我受先王临终之命，发誓为国家诛灭汴梁朱氏，如果因为吝惜库存的钱物而死于大王手下，我在地下见到先王也就无愧了。
English: Jin Wang was very angry and turned to Li Shaorong to ask for a sword. Zhang Chengye stood up, tugged at Jin Wang's clothes, and cried, "I swear by the last king's dying order to exterminate the Qilian Zhu clan for the sake of the country. If I die at the hands of the great king because I am stingy with the money in the inventory, I will not be ashamed to see the first king underground."

古文：今日就王请死！ 
现代文：今日请大王处死好了！ 
English: Let the great king be put to death today!

古文：阎宝从旁解承业手令退，承业奋拳殴宝踣地，骂曰： 阎宝，硃温之党，受晋大恩，曾不尽忠为报，顾欲以谄媚自容邪！ 
现代文：阎宝从旁拉开张承业的手，让他退下。张承业气愤地使劲用拳把阎宝打倒在地，并且骂他说： 阎宝，你是朱温的同党，降晋后晋国对你有大恩大德，你不尽忠报国，反而想用谄媚的手段来求得安身吗？ 
English: Zhang Chengye angrily knocked Yan Bao to the ground with his fist, and scolded him: Yan Bao, you are Zhu Wen's comrade-in-arms. After the fall of Jin, Jin was very generous to you. You are not loyal to the country, but instead want to use flattering means to seek peace?

古文：曹太夫人闻之，遽令召王，王惶恐叩头，谢承业曰： 吾以酒失忤七哥，必且得罪于太夫人，七哥为吾痛饮以分其过。 
现代文：曹太夫人听说这件事后，急忙让人去召晋王，晋王惊慌地直叩头，向张承业道歉，说： 我因为喝多了酒而顶撞了七哥，这也必然得罪于太夫人，请七哥为了减轻我的过错而痛饮几杯。 
English: After Lady Cao heard about this, she quickly sent someone to summon King Jin. King Jin, in a panic, bowed his head and apologized to Zhang Chengye, saying, "I offended Brother Seven because I drank too much wine. This must have offended Lady Cao, so I asked Brother Seven to drink a few glasses of wine in order to alleviate my fault."

古文：王连饮四卮，承业竟不肯饮。
现代文：于是晋王连饮四杯，而张承业却一杯也不肯喝。
English: As a result, Jin Wang drank four cups in a row, while Zhang Chengye refused to drink a single cup.

古文：王入宫，太夫人使人谢承业曰： 小儿忤特进，适已笞之矣。 
现代文：晋王入宫后，曹太夫人派人去向张承业道歉，并说： 小儿顶撞了特进，刚才已经责打了他。 
English: After Jin Wang entered the palace, Lady Cao sent someone to apologize to Zhang Chengye, and said: Xiao'er head-butted Tejin, and had just beaten him.

古文：明日，太夫人与王俱至承业第谢之。
现代文：第二天，曹太夫人和晋王一起来到张承业的府第向他道歉。
English: The next day, Lady Cao and King Jin came to Zhang Chengye's residence to apologize to him.

古文：未几，承制授承业开府仪同三司、左卫上将军、燕国公。
现代文：不久，按照先帝的遗旨，授予张承业开府仪同三司、左卫上将军、燕国公。
English: Soon, in accordance with the last will of the former emperor, Zhang Chengye was awarded the ceremony of opening the capital, along with the three departments, General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards, and Prince of Yan Province.

古文：承业固辞不受，但称唐官以至终身。
现代文：张承业一再推辞不接受，一直到死都只称唐官。
English: Zhang Chengye repeatedly refused to accept the refusal, and only referred to Tang officials until his death.

古文：掌书记卢质，嗜酒轻傲，尝呼王诸弟为豚犬，王衔之。
现代文：掌书记卢质嗜酒而且轻傲，曾经称呼晋王的弟弟们为猪狗，晋王怀恨在心。
English: Lu Qian, the secretary-in-charge, was fond of drinking and arrogant. He once called Jin Wang's younger brothers "pig dogs," which Jin Wang held a grudge against.

古文：承业恐其及祸，乘间言曰： 卢质数无礼，请为大王杀之。 
现代文：张承业害怕他因此招致祸患，抽空对晋王说： 卢质曾经多次无礼，请代为大王杀掉他。 
English: Zhang Chengye was afraid that he would cause a calamity, so he took the time to say to the Jin king: Lu Qing had been rude many times, please kill him for the king.

古文：王曰： 吾方招纳贤才以就功业，七哥何言之过也！ 
现代文：晋王说： 我正在招贤纳士来完成我的功业，七哥为什么要说这样过份的话？ 
English: Jin Wang said, "I am recruiting scholars to complete my work. Why would the seventh brother say such an excessive thing?"

古文：承业起立贺曰： 王能如此，何忧不得天下！ 
现代文：张承业站起来祝贺他说： 大王能够如此，还怕得不到天下吗？ 
English: Zhang Chengye stood up to congratulate him and said: "If the great king can do this, is he afraid of not being able to rule the world?

古文：质由是获免。
现代文：卢质因此得以免祸。
English: Lu Qing was thus able to avoid disaster.

古文：晋王元妃卫国韩夫人，次燕国伊夫人，次魏国刘夫人。
现代文：晋王的元妃是卫国韩夫人，其次是燕国伊夫人，再次是魏国刘夫人。
English: The Empress Dowager of the Jin Dynasty was Lady Han of Wei, followed by Lady Yan of Yan, and again Lady Liu of Wei.

古文：刘夫人最有宠，其父成安人，以医卜为业。
现代文：刘夫人最受晋王宠爱，她的父亲是成安人，以行医占卜为业。
English: Lady Liu was the most favored of the Jin kings. Her father was from Cheng'an and practiced medicine and divination.

古文：夫人幼时，晋将袁建丰掠得之，入于王宫，性狡悍淫妒，从王在魏。
现代文：刘夫人小的时候，被晋将袁建丰抢了回来，把她送进了王宫。刘夫人性情狡猾泼悍，放荡，好忌妒人。
English: When Mrs. Liu was a child, she was snatched back by the Jin general Yuan Jianfeng and sent to the royal palace. Mrs. Liu was cunning, debauched, and jealous.

古文：父闻其贵，诣魏宫上谒，王召袁建丰示之。
现代文：她跟随晋王在魏，其父听说她已经显贵，就到魏宫拜见晋王，晋王召袁建丰来辨认。
English: She followed the King of Jin in Wei. When her father heard that she had become distinguished, he went to the Wei Palace to meet the King of Jin. The King of Jin called Yuan Jianfeng to identify her.

古文：建丰曰： 始得夫人时，有黄须丈人护之，此是也。 
现代文：袁建丰说： 当初得到刘夫人时，有一个黄须老头保护着她，就是这个老人。 
English: Yuan Jianfeng said: When I first got Mrs. Liu, there was a yellow-bearded old man protecting her. It was this old man.

古文：王以语夫人，夫人方与诸夫人争宠，以门地相高，耻其家寒微，大怒曰： 妾去乡时略可记忆，妾父不幸死乱兵，妾守尸哭之而去，今何物田舍翁敢至此！ 
现代文：晋王把这番话告诉了刘夫人，刘夫人这时正和其他几位夫人争宠，互相比门地高低，对她的出身寒微感到耻辱。她非常生气地说： 我离开家乡时的情景还大概记得，我的父亲不幸死于兵乱，我曾守着他的尸体痛器，然后才离开了他，今天哪里来的什么乡巴佬敢到这里？ 
English: Jin Wang told these words to Mrs. Liu, who at that time was competing for the favor of several other ladies, comparing each other's high and low, and was ashamed of her humble origins. She said very angrily: I can still remember the scene when I left my hometown. My father unfortunately died in a military conflict. I once guarded his corpse with a painkiller before I left him. Where did today's hick dare to come here?

古文：命笞刘叟于宫门。
现代文：于是让人在宫门口把刘老头儿打了一顿。
English: So someone had Old Liu beaten up in front of the palace.

古文：越王岩遣客省使刘瑭使于吴，告即位，且劝吴王称帝。
现代文：越主刘岩派客省使刘瑭出使吴国，告诉吴王他已经即位，并且劝吴王也称帝。
English: The Yue lord Liu Yan sent an envoy from the guest province to Liu Bei to tell the king of Wu that he had already ascended to the throne, and to persuade the king of Wu to also proclaim himself emperor.

古文：闰月，戊申，蜀主以判内枢密院庾凝绩为吏部尚书、内枢密使。
现代文：闰十月，戊申，前蜀主任命判内枢密院庾凝绩为吏部尚书、内枢密使。
English: In leap October, the former Shushan appointed the Inner Privy Council to judge the performance of the Inner Privy Council as the personnel department and the Inner Privy Council.

古文：十一月，丙子朔，日南至，蜀主祀圜丘。
现代文：十一月，丙子朔，正逢冬至，前蜀主去圜丘祭天。
English: In November, at the time of the winter solstice, the former Shu master went to Shaoqiu to hold a festival.

古文：晋王闻河冰合，曰： 用兵数岁，限一水不得渡，今冰自合，天赞我也。 
现代文：晋王听说黄河上的冰已结满河床，说： 打了好几年仗，由于受黄河的限制，不能渡河作战，如今河床自己结满了冰，这是天助我们。 
English: Jin Wang heard that the ice on the Yellow River had covered the riverbed. He said, "We have been fighting for several years. Due to the restrictions of the Yellow River, we cannot cross the river to fight. Now the riverbed itself is covered with ice. This is God's help to us."

古文：亟如魏州。
现代文：于是他很快地赶到魏州。
English: So he quickly arrived in Weizhou.

古文：蜀主以刘知俊为都招讨使，诸将皆旧功臣，多不用其命，且疾之，故无成功。
现代文：前蜀主任用刘知俊为都招讨使，各位将领都是原来的有功之臣，很多人不听从他的命令，而且还嫉妒他，所以他没建立什么战功。
English: The former Shu director used Liu Zhijun to recruit envoys for the capital, and all the generals were the original meritorious vassals. Many people did not obey his orders, and they were also jealous of him, so he did not establish any war exploits.

古文：唐文扆数毁之，蜀主亦忌其才，尝谓所亲曰： 吾老矣，知俊非尔辈所能驭民。 
现代文：唐文经常诋毁他，前蜀主也嫉妒他的才能，曾对亲近的人说： 我已经老了，刘知俊不是你们这些人所能驾驭的。 
English: Tang Wen often slandered him, and the former Shu master was also jealous of his talent. He once said to those close to him: "I am already old, Liu Zhijun is not something you people can control.

古文：十二月，辛亥，收知俊，称其谋叛，斩于炭市。
现代文：十二月，辛亥，拘捕了刘知俊，说他想阴谋叛乱，在炭市把他斩杀。
English: In December, Xinhai arrested Liu Zhijun, saying that he wanted to plot a rebellion and behead him in the city of Yancheng.

古文：癸丑，蜀大赦，改明年元曰光天。
现代文：癸丑，前蜀大赦，改明年的年号为光天。
English: 丑, the former Shu amnesty, changed next year's year name to Guang Tian.

古文：壬戌，以张宗奭为天下兵马副元帅。
现代文：壬戌，后梁帝任命张宗为天下兵马副元帅。
English: Later, Emperor Liang appointed Zhang Zong as the deputy marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：帝论平庆州功，丁卯，以左龙虎统军贺瑰为宣义节度使、同平章事，寻以为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：后梁帝论评平定庆州的战功，丁卯，任命左龙虎统军贺为宣义节度使、同平章事，不久又任命他为北面行营招讨使。
English: After Liang Di's evaluation of the war exploits of Ding Qingzhou, Ding Yu appointed He of the Left Dragon and Tiger United Army as the envoy of the proclamation of the Festival of Righteousness, and soon appointed him as the envoy of the northern campaign.

古文：戊辰，晋王畋于朝城。
现代文：戊辰，晋王在朝城打猎。
English: In the Boshin era, King Jin went hunting in the morning.

古文：是日，大寒，晋王视河冰已坚，引步骑稍度。
现代文：这一天，天气特别冷，晋王看到黄河的冰很坚固，就率领步兵、骑兵过河。
English: On this day, the weather was particularly cold. Seeing that the ice of the Yellow River was very solid, Jin Wang led the infantry and cavalry across the river.

古文：梁甲士三千戍杨刘城，缘河数十里，列栅相望，晋王急攻，皆陷之。
现代文：后梁军三千士卒驻扎在杨刘城，沿河数十里，栅垒相望，晋王迅速发起进攻，全部攻克了这些栅垒。
English: Hou Liang's army of 3,000 soldiers was stationed in Yang Liu City, dozens of miles along the river, facing each other across the barriers. Jin Wang quickly launched an attack and conquered all these barriers.

古文：进攻杨刘城，使步卒斩其鹿角，负葭苇塞堑，四面进攻，即日拔之，获其守将安彦之。
现代文：接着进攻杨刘城，派出步兵先夺取后梁军营寨，然后用芦苇塞满防御的堑壕，从四面发起进攻，当天就攻下了杨刘城，并抓获守将安彦之。
English: Next, they attacked Yang Liu City, sent infantry to first seize the Houliang military camp, and then filled the defensive trenches with reeds and launched an attack from all sides. On the same day, they captured Yang Liu City and captured the guard general An Yan.

古文：先是，租庸使、户部尚书赵岩言于帝曰： 陛下践祚以来，尚未南郊，议者以为无异籓侯，为四方所轻。
现代文：在杨刘城失守以前，后梁租庸使、户部尚书赵岩曾对后梁帝说： 陛下即位以来，还没有去南郊祭天，议论这件事的人认为陛下和诸侯没什么两样，被四方所轻视。
English: Before the loss of Yang Liucheng, Zhao Yan, the chief envoy of the Later Liang Zenyong and the head of the Household Department, once said to the Later Liang Emperor: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has not gone to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven. People who discuss this matter think that His Majesty is no different from the princes and is despised by all sides.

古文：请幸西都行郊礼，遂谒宣陵。 
现代文：请陛下去西都行郊祀礼，并谒拜宣陵。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to go to Xidu to perform a suburb ritual and pay homage to Xuanling Mausoleum.

古文：敬翔谏曰： 自刘镠失利以来，公私困竭，人心惴恐；今展礼圜丘，必行赏赉，是慕虚名而受实弊也。且勍敌近在河上，乘舆岂宜轻动！俟北方既平，报本未晚。 
现代文：况且晋国劲敌近在黄河边上，御驾车马怎么轻易出动？
English: Moreover, Jin's strongest rival was close to the Yellow River, how could the charioteers easily move out?

古文：帝不听，己巳，如洛阳，阅车服，饰宫阙，郊祀有日，闻杨刘失守，道路讹言晋军已入大梁，扼汜水矣，从官皆忧其家，相顾涕泣。
现代文：等到北方平定以后，再去郊祀也不晚。 后梁帝没有听从敬翔的进谏。己巳，后梁帝到了洛阳，视察了御用的车子和章服，装饰了宫阙。去南郊祭祀的日子已定，突然听说杨刘城失守，道路上的人都传说晋军已经到了大梁，并扼住汜水。跟从后梁帝出行的官员们都很担忧自己的家，相互哭泣。
English: After the north had been pacified, it was not too late to go to the suburbs to worship. Emperor Houliang did not listen to the entry of Jingxiang into Luoyang. At this time, Emperor Houliang arrived in Luoyang, inspected the royal chariots and uniforms, and decorated the palace. The day to go to the southern suburbs for sacrifice had been set, and suddenly he heard that Yang Liucheng had been lost, and people on the road said that the Jin army had reached Daliang and strangled Surabaya. The officials who followed Emperor Houliang were worried about their homes and cried with each other.

古文：帝惶骇失图，遂罢郊祀，奔归大梁。
现代文：后梁帝恐慌而失去了主意，于是停止了郊祀，奔回大梁。
English: Emperor Houliang panicked and lost his nerve, so he stopped the suburban worship and rushed back to Daliang.

古文：甲戌，以河南尹张宗奭为西都留守。
现代文：甲戌，后梁帝任命河南尹张宗为西都留守。
English: After Emperor Liang appointed Yin Zhangzong of Henan Province as the Western Capital, he stayed there.

古文：是岁，闽王审知为其子牙内都指挥使延钧娶越主岩之女。
现代文：这一年，闽王王审知给他的儿子牙内都指挥使王延钧娶了越主刘岩的女儿。
English: In the same year, the king of Yue, Wang Xianzhi, ordered his son, Yanai, to marry the daughter of Liu Yan, the lord of Yue.

古文：均王中贞明四年
现代文：贞明四年
English: Zhenming four years old

古文：春，正月，乙亥朔，蜀大赦，复国号曰蜀。
现代文：春季正月，乙亥朔，前蜀大赦，恢复国号为蜀。
English: In the first month of spring, in the second year of the Heian period, the former Shu was amnestied, and the country name was restored to Shu.

古文：帝至大梁，晋兵侵掠至郓、濮而还。
现代文：后梁帝回到大梁。晋军一直侵掠到郓州、濮州以后才率军而还。
English: Later, Emperor Liang returned to Daliang. The Jin army invaded and plundered all the way to Zhangzhou, and only after Zhangzhou did they lead the army and return.

古文：敬翔上疏曰： 国家连年丧师，疆土日蹙。
现代文：敬翔上疏说： 国家连年战事失利，疆土日益缩小。
English: Jingxiang Shangsuo said: The country has been defeated in the war for years, and the territory has been shrinking.

古文：陛下居深宫之中，所与计事者皆左右近习，岂能量敌国之胜负乎！
现代文：陛下深居宫中，和您一起共商大事的人都是您的左右亲幸之人，怎么能估量到敌国的胜负呢？
English: Your Majesty lives deep in the palace, and the people with whom you discuss important matters are your closest and dearest. How can you gauge the enemy's victory or defeat?

古文：先帝之时，奄有河北，亲御豪杰之将，犹不得志。
现代文：先帝在世的时候，拥有河北的全部疆土，亲自驾驭着豪杰将士，仍不得志。
English: When the former emperor was alive, he owned the entire territory of Hebei and personally drove the heroes and heroines, but he still had no ambition.

古文：今敌至郓州，陛下不能留意。
现代文：今天敌人已经到了郓州，还不能引起陛下的注意。
English: Today, the enemy has already arrived in Zhangzhou and has not yet been able to attract Your Majesty's attention.

古文：臣闻李亚子继位以来，于今十年，攻城野战，无不亲当矢石，近者攻杨刘，身负束薪为士卒先，一鼓拔之。
现代文：我听说李存勖继位以来，到今年已经十年了，每当攻城作战，无不亲自冲锋陷阵，最近攻打杨刘时，亲自背着柴束走在士卒的前面，结果一鼓攻下杨刘城。
English: I heard that since Li Cunxu's succession to the throne, it has been ten years this year. Whenever there is a siege of the city, he will personally charge into battle. Recently, when attacking Yang Liu, he personally walked in front of the soldiers with a bundle of firewood on his back. As a result, Yang Liu City was captured in one fell swoop.

古文：陛下儒雅守文，晏安自若，使贺瑰辈敌之，而望攘逐寇仇，非臣所知也。
现代文：陛下温文儒雅自守，安然自若，而派贺之流去抵挡敌人，期望他们驱逐敌寇，我不知道他们能做什么。
English: His majesty is mild, gentle, self-possessed, and at ease, but to send a stream of congratulations to resist the enemy, expecting them to expel the enemy, I don't know what they can do.

古文：陛下宜询访黎老，别求异策。
现代文：陛下应当广泛询访老人，另外寻找一些别的方法。
English: His Majesty should make extensive enquiries of the elderly and find some other means.

古文：不然，忧未艾也。
现代文：如果不能这样，忧患就不能停止。
English: If you can't do that, you can't stop worrying.

古文：臣虽驽怯，受国重恩，陛下必若乏才，乞于边垂自效。 
现代文：我虽然无才，但国家给我的恩情很大，陛下如果一定缺乏人才，我请求到边疆为国效力去。 
English: Although I have no talent, the country has been very kind to me. If your majesty is short of talent, I request you to go to the frontier to serve the country.

古文：疏奏，赵、张之徒言翔怨望，帝遂不用。
现代文：他的奏书送给后梁帝以后，赵岩、张归霸之流说敬翔是在发泄怨恨。后梁帝没有起用他。
English: After his report was sent to Emperor Houliang, Zhao Yan and Zhang Guihaba said that he was venting his resentment. Emperor Houliang did not employ him.

古文：吴以右都押牙王祺为虔州行营都指挥使，将洪、抚、袁、吉之兵击谭全播。
现代文：吴王任命右都押牙王祺为虔州行营都指挥使，并让他率领洪、抚、袁、吉的部队去攻打谭全播。
English: The king of Wu appointed the commander of the right capital, Aba, Wang Qian, as the commander of the Qianzhou encampment, and let him lead the troops of Hong, Fu, Yuan and Ji to attack Tan Quanbang.

古文：严可求以厚利募赣石水工，故吴兵奄至虔州城下，虔人始知之。
现代文：严可求用厚禄招募了一些熟悉赣石之险的水工，所以吴兵全部到达虔州城下时，虔州人才知道。
English: Yan was able to use his generous salary to recruit some watermen who were familiar with the dangers of flint, so when all the Wu soldiers arrived at the foot of the city of Qianzhou, only the people of Qianzhou knew about it.

古文：蜀太子衍好酒色，乐游戏。
现代文：前蜀太子王衍嗜酒好色，喜欢游戏。
English: The former Prince of Shu, Wang Yan, was a drunkard, womanizer, and gambler.

古文：蜀主尝自夹城过，闻太子与诸王斗鸡击球喧呼之声，叹曰： 吾百战以立基业，此辈其能守之乎！ 
现代文：前蜀主曾经从夹城路过，听到太子和诸王斗鸡击球喧闹的声音，叹息地说： 我身经百战建立的大业，这些人能够守得住吗？ 
English: The former Lord of Shu once passed by Jiaocheng and heard the boisterous sound of the prince and princes playing a game of chicken. He sighed and said, "I have built a great cause through hundreds of battles. Will these people be able to defend it?

古文：由是恶张格，而徐贤妃为之内主，竟不能去也。
现代文：因此对当时拥立王衍为太子的张格产生恶感，但因为徐贤妃在内为之作主，所以就没有废除太子。
English: Therefore, there was a bad feeling towards Zhang Ge, who supported Wang Yan as crown prince at that time, but because Xu Xianfei was in charge of it, there was no abolition of the crown prince.

古文：信王宗杰有才略，屡陈时政，蜀主贤之，有废立意。
现代文：信王王宗杰很有才略，经常陈述对时政的意见，前蜀主很器重他，因而产生了废王衍立宗杰的想法。
English: Wang Zongjie, a believer, was very talented, and he often stated his opinions on current politics. The former Shushi valued him very much, which gave rise to the idea of abolishing Wang Yan and elevating Zongjie.

古文：二月，癸亥，宗杰暴卒，蜀主深疑之。
现代文：二月，癸亥，王宗杰突然病死，前蜀主对他的死感到十分怀疑。
English: In February of this year, Wang Zongjie died of a sudden illness. The former shu lord was very suspicious of his death.

古文：河阳节度使、北面行营排陈使谢彦章将兵数万攻杨刘城。
现代文：后梁河阳节度使、北面行营排阵使谢彦章率领好几万兵向杨刘城发起进攻。
English: After Liang Heyang's command, Xie Yanzhang led tens of thousands of soldiers to launch an attack on Yang Liu City.

古文：甲子，晋王自魏州轻骑诣河上。
现代文：甲子，晋王率领轻骑从魏州直达黄河边上。
English: Jia Zi and Jin Wang led the light cavalry from Weizhou to the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：彦章筑垒自固，决河水，瀰浸数里，以限晋兵，晋兵不得进。
现代文：谢彦章修筑起壁垒坚守阵地，并决开黄河，河水弥漫了好几里，用来阻止晋军，晋军不能前进。
English: Xie Yanzhang built a barrier to hold the position, and opened the Yellow River, the river water spread for several miles, used to stop the Jin army, the Jin army could not advance.

古文：彦章，许州人也。
现代文：谢彦章是许州人。
English: Xie Yanzhang is a native of Xuzhou.

古文：安彦之散卒多聚于兗、郓山谷为群盗，以观二国成败，晋王招募之，多降于晋。
现代文：安彦之被打败以后，他的士卒很多人聚集在兖州、郓城一带的山谷之中成为强盗，坐观梁、晋二国的成败。后来晋王招募他们，其中有不少人就投靠了晋王。
English: After the defeat of Yasuhiko, many of his soldiers gathered in the valleys around Zhangzhou and Zhangcheng to become robbers and watch the success or failure of Jin's two kingdoms. Later, Jin recruited them, and many of them sided with Jin.

古文：己亥，蜀主以东面招讨使王宗侃为东、西两路诸军都统。
现代文：己亥，前蜀主任命东面招讨使王宗侃为东、西两路诸军都统。
English: At the same time, the former Shushi appointed Dongmen Zhaotong to persuade Wang Zongkan to unite the armies of the East and West.

古文：三月，吴越王镠初立元帅府，置官属。
现代文：三月，吴越王钱开始设置元帅府，并安排了一些官属。
English: In March, Wu Yue Wang Qian began to set up the marshal's office, and arranged some subordinates.

古文：夏，四月，癸卯朔，蜀主立子宗平为忠王，宗特为资王。
现代文：夏季四月，癸卯朔，前蜀主立子王宗平为忠王，王宗特为资王。
English: In the summer of April, the former prince of Shu, Wang Zongping, became the king of loyalty, and Wang Zongtu became the king of capital.

古文：岐王复遣使求好于蜀。
现代文：岐王派出使者到前蜀，请求互通友好。
English: The king of Qi sent an envoy to Qianshu to request mutual friendship.

古文：己酉，以吏部侍郎萧顷为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：己酉，后梁帝任命吏部侍郎萧顷为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: After Emperor Liang appointed Xiao He, the attendant of the cadre department, as the attendant of the middle secretary, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：保大节度使高万金卒。
现代文：后梁保大节度使高万金去世。
English: After the Liang Bao Festival, Gao Wanjin passed away.

古文：癸亥，以忠义节度使高万兴兼保大节度使，并镇鄜、延。
现代文：癸亥，任命忠义节度使高万兴兼任保大节度使，并让他镇守州和延州。
English: Zou Hai, appointed Gao Wanxing as the Minister of Loyalty and also as the Minister of Great Protection, and let him take charge of Zhou and Yanzhou.

古文：司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事赵光逢告老，己巳，以司徒致仕。
现代文：后梁司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事赵光逢因老辞官，己巳，以司徒的身分回乡归居。
English: Later, Liang Siku, who was also a subordinate waiter, and Tongping Zhangji Zhao Guangfeng, who was a senior officer, returned to their hometown as a scholar.

古文：蜀主自永平末得疾，昏瞀，至是增剧。
现代文：前蜀主王建自从永平末年得病以来，一直视力昏暗不明，到现在更加严重。
English: Wang Jian, the former head of Shu, has had dim and unclear eyesight ever since he fell ill at the end of Yongping's life, and his eyesight is even worse now.

古文：以北面行营招讨使兼中书令王宗弼沉静有谋，五月，召还，以为马步都指挥使。
现代文：因为北面行营招讨使兼中书令王宗弼沉着有谋略，五月，把他召回，任命为马步都指挥使。
English: In May, he was recalled and appointed as the commander of Ma Budu, because Wang Zongya, the envoy and the middle secretary of the north campaign, was calm and had a strategy.

古文：乙亥，召大臣入寝殿，告之曰： 太子仁弱，朕不能违诸公之请，逾次而立之。
现代文：乙亥，王建让大臣们到他的寝殿，告诉他们说： 太子没有什么能耐，但我不能违背诸位的请求，越过次序而立了他。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Wang Jian called his ministers to his bedchamber and told them: "The crown prince is not very capable, but I cannot go against your request and overrule the order and appoint him.

古文：若其不堪大业，可置诸别宫，幸勿杀之。
现代文：如果他担不起大业，可以把他安置在别的宫中，但不要把他杀死。
English: If he can't do it, put him in another palace, but don't kill him.

古文：但王氏子弟，诸公择而辅之。
现代文：只要是王氏子弟，诸位可以选择辅助他们当中有才能的人。
English: As long as they are Wang's sons, you can choose to assist the talented ones among them.

古文：徐妃兄弟，止可优其禄位，慎勿使之掌兵预政，以全其宗族。 
现代文：徐妃的兄弟们，只可以照顾他们的俸禄和官位，一定不要让他们掌握兵权和参与政事，以成全他们的宗族。 
English: The brothers of Xu Fei can only take care of their salaries and official positions, and must not let them seize military power and participate in political affairs in order to perfect their clan.

古文：内飞龙使唐文扆久典禁兵，参预机密，欲去诸大臣，遣人守宫门。
现代文：内飞龙使唐文掌管皇帝的亲兵时间已经很长，经常参预一些机密的事情。他打算除去诸大臣，于是派人把守住宫门。
English: Nefeilong put Tangwen in charge of the emperor's personal soldiers for a long time, and often participated in some confidential matters. He planned to remove the ministers, so he sent someone to guard the palace gate.

古文：王宗弼等三十馀人日至朝堂，不得入见，文扆屡以蜀主之命慰抚之，伺蜀主殂，即作难。
现代文：王宗弼等三十余人到朝堂，但不得入见前蜀主，唐文常以前蜀主的名义来慰抚他们，等前蜀主一死，他就发难。
English: Wang Zonglu and more than thirty others went to the imperial court, but they were not allowed to see the former Shushi. Tang Wen often consoled them in the name of the former Shushi. When the former Shushi died, he was in trouble.

古文：遣其党内皇城使潘在迎侦察外事，在迎以其谋告宗弼等。
现代文：他还派出同党内皇城使潘在迎到外面去侦察，潘在迎把唐文的阴谋告诉了王宗弼等人。
English: He also sent Pan Zheng, a member of the Inner Party, to go outside to investigate. Pan Zheng told Wang Zonglu and others about Tangwen's plot.

古文：宗弼等排闼入，言文扆之罪，以天册府掌书记崔延昌权判六军事，召太子入侍疾。
现代文：于是王宗弼等推开宫门进去，向前蜀主说明了唐文的罪行，前蜀主让天册府掌书记崔延昌暂管六军事，让太子入宫侍候自己的病。
English: As a result, Wang Zonglu and others pushed open the palace door and entered, explaining Tangwen's crimes to the former emperor. The former emperor asked Cui Yanchang, the chief secretary of Tianzhao, to temporarily take charge of the six military, and let the prince enter the palace to wait for his illness.

古文：丙子，贬唐文扆为眉州刺史。
现代文：丙子，把唐文降为眉州刺史。
English: Cun Zi, reduced the Tang Dynasty to the Meizhou Dynasty.

古文：翰林学士承旨王保晦坐附会文扆，削官爵，流泸州。
现代文：翰林学士承旨王保晦因附会唐文，也削了他的官位，把他流放到泸州。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Wang Baoyi, was also stripped of his official rank and exiled to Ganzhou because of his affiliation with Tangwen.

古文：在迎，炕之子也。
现代文：潘在迎是潘炕的儿子。
English: Pan Zhaoying is the son of Pan Yao.

古文：丙申，蜀主诏中外财赋、中书除授、诸司刑狱案牍专委庾凝绩，都城及行营军旅之事委宣徽南院使宋光嗣。
现代文：丙申，前蜀主下诏，将中外财赋、中书除授、诸司刑狱案牍的事情专门委派给庾凝绩管理，将都城以及行营军旅的事情委派宣徽南院使宋光嗣管理。
English: According to the edict issued by Bishin, the former Shushi, the matters of Sino-foreign financial endowment, the removal of Chinese books from the curriculum, and the sentencing of various officials to prison were specifically assigned to the administration of Zou Jing Rong, and the matters of the capital city and the military campaign were assigned to the administration of Song Guangzhi, the envoy of the Southern Xuanhui Academy.

古文：丁酉，削唐文扆官爵，流雅州。
现代文：丁酉，削了唐文的官职爵位，流放到雅州。
English: Ding Xi, Tang Wen's official title was reduced, and he was exiled to Yazhou.

古文：辛丑，以宋光嗣为内枢密使，与兼中书令王宗弼、宗瑶、宗绾、宗夔并受遗诏辅政。
现代文：辛丑，任命宋光嗣为内枢密使，并和兼中书令王宗弼、王宗瑶、王宗绾、王宗夔一同受遗诏辅政。
English: Sin Ug, appointed Song Guangzhi as the Inner Privy Envoy, and together with the concurrently appointed Wang Zongyao, Wang Zongyao, Wang Zongyao, and Wang Zongyao, received the imperial edict to assist the government.

古文：初，蜀主虽因唐制置枢密使，专用士人，及唐文扆得罪，蜀主以诸将多许州故人，恐其不为幼主用，故以光嗣代之。
现代文：当初，前蜀主虽然依照唐制设置了枢密使，专用士人，到唐文犯罪时，前蜀主认为好多将领都是许州的旧友，害怕他们不能听从幼主的使用，所以用宦者宋光嗣取代士人做枢密使。
English: At first, although the former Shushu set up a privy councilor, a special scholar, in accordance with the Tang system, when the Tang Dynasty committed crimes, the former Shushu believed that many generals were old friends of Huzhou, afraid that they could not listen to the young master's use, so he replaced the scholar with the eunuch Song Guangzhi as a privy councilor.

古文：自是宦者始用事。
现代文：从此宦者才掌握权力。
English: Since then, the power has been in the hands of the powerless.

古文：六月，壬寅朔，蜀主殂。
现代文：六月，壬寅，前蜀主去世。
English: In June, Ren Yin, the former Shu master, passed away.

古文：癸卯，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：癸卯，太子王衍即皇帝位。
English: At that time, Prince Wangyan became the emperor.

古文：尊徐贤妃为太后、徐淑妃为太妃。
现代文：尊崇徐贤妃为太后，徐淑妃为太妃。
English: Xu Xianfei is revered as empress dowager, and Xu Shufei is revered as empress dowager.

古文：以宋光嗣判六军诸卫事。
现代文：任命宋光嗣判六军诸卫事。
English: Song Guangzhi appointed six military guards.

古文：乙卯，杀唐文扆、王保晦。
现代文：乙卯，杀了唐文、王保晦。
English: Etu killed Tangwen and Wang Baoqiao.

古文：命西面招讨副使王宗昱杀天雄节度使唐文裔于秦州，免左保胜军使领右街使唐道崇官。
现代文：又命令西面招讨副使王全昱在秦州杀了天雄节度使唐文，免去左保胜军使领右街使唐道崇的官。
English: He also ordered Ximen to summon the deputy envoy Wang Quanzhang, who had killed Tianxiong Jiedu, the envoy of Tang Wen in Qinzhou, and to remove the officials of Zuo Baosheng Army, Zuo Jie, the envoy of Tang Daozong.

古文：吴内外马步都军使、昌化节度使、同平章事徐知训，骄倨淫暴。
现代文：吴国内外马步都军使、昌化节度使、同平章事徐知训傲慢淫暴。
English: Both in and out of Wu, the envoys to the capital city of Ma Bu, the envoys to the festival of Changhua, and the envoys to the capital city of Tongping, Xu Zhixun, were arrogant and violent.

古文：威武节度使、知抚州李德诚有家妓数十，知训求之，德诚遣使谢曰： 家之所有皆长年，或有子，不足以侍贵人，当更为公求少而美者。 知训怒，谓使者曰： 会当杀德诚，并其妻取之！ 
现代文：威武节度使、抚州知州李德诚家里有几十个女艺人，徐知训想要，李德诚派使者前往道歉说： 我家的女艺人年龄都大了，有的已经有了孩子，不足以侍候贵人，应当为您寻找一些年轻美丽的女子。 徐知训十分生气，对使者说： 以后我要杀了李德诚，连同他的妻子也一起要过来。
English: There were dozens of female entertainers in Li Decheng's family in Fuzhou, Fuzhou, Fuzhou, and Li Decheng sent an envoy to apologize, saying, "The female entertainers in my family are all old, and some of them already have children, and they are not good enough to wait for you. You should look for some young and beautiful women." Xu Zhixun was very angry and said to the envoy, "In the future, I will kill Li Decheng, and I will come with my wife."

古文：知训狎侮吴王，无复君臣之礼。
现代文：徐知训对吴王杨隆演戏弄轻慢，没有君臣礼节。
English: Xu Zhixun made fun of Wu Wang Yanglong's acting as he was frivolous and did not have the etiquette of a prince.

古文：尝与王为优，自为参军，使王为苍鹘，总角弊衣执帽以从。
现代文：曾和吴王扮作优伶，他自己当参军，让吴王当僮奴，把头发扎为两个丫角，穿着破旧的衣服，手里拿着帽子，跟在他后面。
English: He and the king of Wu had pretended to be noblemen, he himself had to join the army, let the king of Wu be a slave, tied his hair into two braids, dressed in shabby clothes, holding a hat in his hand, followed him.

古文：又尝泛舟浊河，王先起，知训以弹弹之。
现代文：徐知训又曾和吴王在浊河上划船，吴王先起来，徐知训用弹子儿弹他。
English: Xu Zhixun once rowed a boat with Wu Wang on the Fen River. Wu Wang got up first, and Xu Zhixun played him with marbles.

古文：又尝赏花于禅智寺，知训使酒悖慢，王惧而泣，四座股栗。
现代文：徐知训也曾和吴王在禅智寺一起赏花，徐知训喝酒时很狂悖傲慢，吴王都被他吓哭了，四座的人害怕得两腿发抖。
English: Xu Zhixun had also enjoyed flowers with Wu Wang at the Zenji Temple. Xu Zhixun was very arrogant when he was drinking. He scared Wu Wang to tears. The four people were so scared that their legs were shaking.

古文：左右扶王登舟，知训乘轻舟逐之，不及，以铁挝杀王亲吏。
现代文：吴王的左右侍从扶着他登船，徐知训乘轻便的船追逐，因没有追上吴王，就用铁器打死了吴王亲近的官吏。
English: King Wu's right and left attendants helped him board the ship, and Xu Zhixun chased after him in a light boat. Since he did not catch up with King Wu, he killed the officials close to King Wu with an iron tool.

古文：将佐无敢言者，父温皆不之知。
现代文：将佐们没有敢说话的，徐知训的父亲徐温都不知道这些事。
English: The generals did not dare to speak, and Xu Zhixun's father, Xu Wen, did not know about these things.

古文：知训及弟知询皆不礼于徐知诰，独季弟知谏以兄事礼之。
现代文：徐知训和他的弟弟徐知询都对徐温的养子徐知诰没有礼貌，唯独三弟徐知谏对徐知诰以兄礼相待。
English: Both Xu Zhixun and his brother Xu Zhizhen were rude to Xu Wen's adopted son Xu Zhisheng, but the third brother Xu Zhisheng treated Xu Zhisheng with brotherly courtesy.

古文：知训尝召兄弟饮，知诰不至，知训怒曰： 乞子不欲酒，欲剑乎！ 
现代文：徐知训曾经召集他的兄弟们一起喝酒，徐知诰没有参加，徐知训十分生气地说： 讨饭的家伙不想喝酒，难道想吃剑吗？ 
English: Xu Zhixun once called his brothers together for a drink, but Xu Zhixuan did not attend. Xu Zhixun said angrily, "A beggar does not want to drink, does he want to eat a sword?"

古文：又尝与知诰饮，伏甲欲杀之，知谏蹑知诰足，知诰阳起如厕，遁去，知训以剑授左右刁彦能使追杀之。
现代文：后来徐知训又曾和徐知诰一起喝酒，埋伏了甲兵，准备杀死徐知诰，徐知谏暗踩徐知诰的脚以示意，徐知诰假装起来上厕所而逃走。徐知训把剑交给他的亲信刁彦能，让他去追赶徐知诰把他杀掉。
English: Later, Xu Zhixun had a drink with Xu Zhisheng, ambushed the armored soldiers, prepared to kill Xu Zhixun, Xu Zhixun secretly stepped on Xu Zhixun's foot to signal, Xu Zhixun pretended to go to the toilet and fled. Xu Zhixun gave the sword to his close friend Yan Yaneng, and let him chase Xu Zhixun and kill him.

古文：彦能驰骑及于中涂，举剑示知诰而还，以不及告。
现代文：刁彦能骑马追到半路上，只是举起剑来向徐知诰表示一下就回去了。
English: Yan Yan was able to catch up to halfway on horseback, but he just held up his sword to show Xu Zhixuan and went back.

古文：平卢节度使、同平章事、诸道副都统硃瑾遣家妓通候问于知训，知训强欲私之，瑾已不平。
现代文：回来后告诉徐知训说是没有追上。平卢节度使、同平章事、诸道副都统朱瑾派他家里的女艺人去问候徐知训，徐知训打算强行占为己有，朱瑾已经愤愤不平。
English: After returning, he told Xu Zhixun that he had not caught up with him. Zhu Xi, the envoy of the Pinglu Festival, the Tongping Chapter, and the vice-governor of all provinces, sent female artists from his family to greet Xu Zhixun. Xu Zhixun planned to forcibly occupy it for himself. Zhu Xi was already indignant.

古文：知训恶瑾位加己上，置静淮军于泗州，出瑾为静淮节度使，瑾益恨之，然外事知训愈谨。
现代文：徐知训又恨朱瑾的地位比自己高，于是在泗州设置了静淮军，派朱瑾出任静淮节度使，朱瑾因此更加仇恨徐知训，但从外表上对待徐知训更加谨慎。
English: Xu Zhixun also hated Zhu Xi, whose status was higher than his own, so he set up the Jinghuai Army in Zhangzhou and sent Zhu Xi to serve as Jinghuai's commander. As a result, Zhu Xi hated Xu Zhixun even more, but treated Xu Zhixun more cautiously from the outside.

古文：瑾有所爱马，冬贮于幄，夏贮于帱。
现代文：朱瑾有匹非常喜爱的马，冬天把它圈在用布做的帐篷里，夏天把它圈在用纱做的葛帐里。
English: Zhu Xi had a horse that he loved very much. In winter, he kept it in a cloth tent, and in summer, he kept it in a yarn tent.

古文：宠妓有绝色。
现代文：朱瑾的宠妓很漂亮。
English: Zhu Xi's pet prostitute is very beautiful.

古文：知训过别瑾，瑾置酒，自捧觞，出宠妓使歌，以所爱马为寿，知训大喜。
现代文：徐知训路过朱瑾家时向他告别，朱瑾摆了酒席，自己拿着酒杯，让宠妓出来唱歌，并用自己所喜爱的马送给徐知识为他祝寿，徐知训十分高兴。
English: When Xu Zhixun passed by Zhu Yao's house, he said goodbye to him. Zhu Yao set up a banquet, holding a wine glass himself, let the pet prostitute come out to sing, and gave Xu Zhixun his favorite horse to wish him a happy birthday. Xu Zhixun was very happy.

古文：瑾因延之中堂，伏壮士于户内，出妻陶氏拜之。知训答拜，瑾以笏自后击之踣地，呼壮士出斩之。
现代文：朱瑾领着徐知训进了中堂，让他的勇士们埋伏在户内，然后让他的妻子陶氏出来拜见徐知训，徐知训答拜，朱瑾用笏板从后面把徐知训打倒在地，呼叫出勇士们把他杀死。
English: Zhu Xi led Xu Zhixun into the middle hall, let his warriors lie in ambush in the room, and then let his wife Dow come out to meet Xu Zhixun. Xu Zhixun bowed in return. Zhu Xi knocked Xu Zhixun to the ground with a cutting board from behind and called out the warriors to kill him.

古文：瑾先系二悍马于庑下，将图知训，密令人解纵之，马相蹄啮，声甚厉，以是外人莫之闻。
现代文：在此之前，朱瑾在庑下拴了两匹暴躁的马，在准备杀徐知训时，秘密地让人去把马解开，两匹马相互踢咬，声音很大，所以外面的人没有听见里面的事情。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Xi had two violent horses under his armpits. When he was preparing to kill Xu Zhixun, he secretly asked someone to untie the horses. The two horses kicked and bit each other, and the sound was very loud, so people outside did not hear what was going on inside.

古文：瑾提知训首出，知训从者数百人皆散走。
现代文：朱瑾提着徐知训的脑袋出去时，徐知训的数百随从都已经逃跑了。
English: When Zhu Rong went out with Xu Zhixun's head, hundreds of Xu Zhixun's followers had already fled.

古文：瑾驰入府，以首示吴王曰： 仆已为大王除害！ 
现代文：朱瑾又骑着马直奔王府，把徐知训的头拿出来给吴王看，并对吴王说： 我已经为大王除掉了祸害。 
English: Zhu Xi rode straight to the king's palace, took Xu Zhixun's head out for the king of Wu to see, and said to the king of Wu: I have eliminated the scourge for the great king.

古文：王惧，以衣障面，走入内，曰： 舅自为之，我不敢知！ 
现代文：吴王感到害怕，用衣服遮住了脸不敢看，向里面走，说： 舅舅你自己干的，我也不想知道。 
English: King Wu felt scared and covered his face with his clothes, afraid to look. He went inside and said, "Uncle, you did it yourself, I don't want to know.

古文：瑾曰： 婢子不足与成大事！ 
现代文：朱瑾说： 这小子不足以和他共成大事。 
English: Zhu Xi said, "This boy is not enough to achieve great things with him.

古文：以知训首击柱，挺剑将出，子城使翟虔等已阖府门勒兵讨之，乃自后逾城，坠而折足，顾追者曰： 吾为万人除害，以一身任患。 
现代文：于是用徐知训的头去击柱，然后拔出剑来出了王府。子城使翟虔等已经关上了府门，率兵准备讨伐朱瑾，于是朱瑾从后面翻越城墙，结果摔下去脚骨折断。他回过头对追赶的人们说： 我为万人除害，我一个人来承担大家的忧患。 
English: So he used the head of Xu Zhixun to hit the pillar, and then pulled out his sword to come out of the royal palace. The gate of the palace had been closed by Zicheng's envoys, such as Zou Qian, who led the troops to prepare to fight Zhu Xi, so Zhu Xi climbed over the city wall from behind. As a result, he fell down and broke his foot. He turned around and said to the people chasing him: I will eliminate harm for everyone, I alone will bear everyone's sorrows.

古文：遂自刭。
现代文：说完就自杀了。
English: On the due date, she committed suicide and died.

古文：徐知诰在润州闻难，用宋齐丘策，即日引兵济江。
现代文：徐知诰在润州听说徐知训遇难，就采用了宋齐丘的计策，当天率兵渡过了长江。
English: When Xu Zhisheng heard of Xu Zhixun's death in Rongzhou, he adopted Song Qiqiu's strategy and led his troops across the Yangtze River that day.

古文：瑾已死，因抚定军府。
现代文：朱瑾已死，便安抚了军府。
English: Zhu Xi was already dead, so he appeased the military government.

古文：时徐温诸子皆弱，温乃以知诰代知训执吴政，沉硃瑾尸于雷塘而灭其族。
现代文：这时，徐温的几个儿子都没有什么能耐，徐温于是让徐知诰代徐知训去管理吴国政事，把朱瑾的尸体沉入雷塘，并诛灭了他的家族。
English: At this time, several of Xu Wen's sons had no patience, so Xu Wen asked Xu Zhisheng to manage the political affairs of Wu on behalf of Xu Zhishun, and sank Zhu Xi's body into the Lei Tang, and exterminated his family.

古文：瑾之杀知训也，泰宁节度使米志诚从十馀骑问瑾所向，闻其已死，乃归。宣谕使李俨贫困，寓居海陵。
现代文：朱瑾杀了徐知训以后，泰宁节度使米志诚带着十几个骑兵打听朱瑾的去向，听说他已经死了，才返了回去；宣谕使李俨十分贫困，住在海陵。
English: After Zhu Rong killed Xu Zhixun, the Taining Festival made Mi Zhicheng take a dozen cavalrymen to inquire about Zhu Rong's whereabouts, and only returned when he heard that he was dead; the proclamation made Li Rong very poor and live in Hailing.

古文：温疑其与瑾通谋，皆杀之。
现代文：徐温怀疑他与朱瑾同谋，所以把他也杀掉。
English: Xu Wen suspected him of being a co-conspirator with Zhu Xi, so he also killed him.

古文：严可求恐志诚不受命，诈称袁州大破楚兵，将吏皆入贺，伏壮士于戟门，擒志诚，斩之，并其诸子。
现代文：严可求害怕米志诚不接受命令，谎称袁州兵把楚兵打得大败，所在将吏都入朝祝贺，让勇士们埋伏在戟门口，等米志诚来到，抓获杀死，并把他的几个儿子也杀死。
English: Yan Kegui feared that Mi Zhicheng would not accept the order, and falsely claimed that the Yuan soldiers had defeated the Chu soldiers, and that all the generals had gone to the North to congratulate them. He had the warriors lie in ambush at the gate of the palace, waiting for Mi Zhicheng to come, capture and kill him, and also kill several of his sons.

古文：壬戌，晋王自魏州劳军于杨刘，自泛舟测河水，其深没枪。
现代文：壬戌，晋王从魏州去杨刘慰劳连队，他亲自划船到黄河上测量水的深浅，河水的深度只淹没了枪。
English: Jin Wang from Weizhou went to Yang Liu's relief company. He personally rowed to the Yellow River to measure the depth of the water. The depth of the river only flooded the gun.

古文：王谓诸将曰： 梁军非有战意，但欲阻水以老我师，当涉水攻之。 
现代文：晋王对各将说： 梁军没有作战的真意，只是想用水阻止我军过河，使我军士气衰落，应当涉水过河向梁军发起进攻。 
English: Jin Wang said to the generals: Liang's army has no real intention of fighting, but just wants to use water to prevent our army from crossing the river, so that the morale of our army will decline. It should wade across the river to attack Liang's army.

古文：甲子，王引亲军先涉，诸军随之，褰甲横枪，结陈而进。
现代文：甲子，晋王率亲信部队首先过河，各路军都跟着，士卒们提起衣服，横背着枪，组成军阵向前推进。
English: Ji Zi, Jin Wang and his trusted troops were the first to cross the river, followed by all the armies. The soldiers lifted their clothes, carried their guns on their backs, and pushed forward as an army.

古文：是日水落，深才及膝。
现代文：这一天，河水下落，水深刚到膝盖。
English: On this day, the river had fallen and the water was just knee-deep.

古文：匡国节度使、北面行营排陈使谢彦章帅众临岸拒之，晋兵不得进，乃稍引却，梁兵从之。
现代文：后梁匡国节度使、北面行营排陈使谢彦章率师在河岸边抵卸晋军，晋军不能继续前进，就稍稍向后退却，后梁军紧随着他们。
English: Afterward, Liang Kuangguo, the commander of the national festival, sent Xie Yanzhang and his division to the north side of the river to meet and relieve the Jin army. The Jin army could not continue to advance, so they retreated a little, and the Liang army followed them closely.

古文：及中流，鼓噪复进，彦章不能支，稍退登岸。晋兵因而乘之，梁兵大败，死伤不可胜纪，河水为之赤，彦章仅以身免。
现代文：到了河中间，晋军击鼓呐喊，继续前进，谢彦章顶不住，又退回河岸，晋军乘胜追击，后梁军大败，死伤的士卒不可胜数，黄河水都染成红色，谢彦章只身逃去，免于一死。
English: When they reached the middle of the river, the Jin army played drums and shouted and continued to advance. Xie Yanzhang could not resist and retreated back to the riverbank. The Jin army chased after the victory, and the Liang army was defeated. There were countless dead and wounded soldiers. The water of the Yellow River was dyed red. Xie Yanzhang fled alone and was spared death.

古文：是日，晋人遂陷滨河四寨。
现代文：这一天，晋军攻陷了临河的四个营寨。
English: On this day, the Jin army captured four camps in Linhe.

古文：蜀唐文扆既死，太傅、门下侍郎、同平章事张格内不自安，或劝格称疾俟命，礼部尚书杨玢自恐失势，谓格曰： 公有援立大功，不足忧也。 
现代文：前蜀唐文被杀以后，太傅、门下侍郎、同平章事张格内心感到不安，有人劝张格假装称病，等待命令。礼部尚书杨玢害怕自己失去势力，对张格说： 你有拥立皇帝的大功，不必担忧。 
English: After the former Shu Tangwen was killed, Zhang Ge felt uneasy in his heart about the Taifu, subordinate waiter, and Tongping Zhang. Some people advised Zhang Ge to pretend to be ill and wait for orders. Yang Wei, the ceremonial secretary, was afraid of losing his power and said to Zhang Ge: You have the great merit of supporting the emperor, don't worry.

古文：庚午，贬格为茂州刺史，玢为荣经尉。
现代文：庚午，把张格降为茂州刺史，把杨玢降为荣经县尉。
English: In the afternoon, Zhang Ge was demoted to the rank of Shishi of Moushou, and Yang Ye was demoted to the rank of Rongjing County Lieutenant.

古文：吏部侍郎许寂、户部侍郎潘峤皆坐格党贬官。
现代文：吏部侍郎许寂、户部侍郎潘峤都因与张格同党被降了官位。
English: The secretary of the personnel department, Xu Jak, and the secretary of the household department, Pan Ye, were both demoted because they were members of the same party as Zhang Ge.

古文：格寻再贬维州司户，庾凝绩又奏徙格于合水镇，令茂州刺史顾承郾伺格阴事。
现代文：不久，又把张格降为维州司户，庾凝绩上奏请求把张格适到合水镇，并命令茂州刺史顾承郾侦察张格的隐私。
English: Soon after, he demoted Zhang Ge to the position of the secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and requested that Zhang Ge be sent to the town of He Shui. He also ordered Gu Chengjun, the historian of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, to investigate Zhang Ge's private life.

古文：王宗侃妻以格同姓，欲全之，谓承郾母曰： 戒汝子，勿为人报仇，他日将归罪于汝。 
现代文：王宗侃的妻子和张格是同姓，想保全张格，于是对顾承郾的母亲说： 要告诫你的儿子，不要替别人报仇，否则将来会归罪于你。 
English: Wang Zongkan's wife had the same surname as Zhang Ge. She wanted to protect Zhang Ge, so she said to Gu Chengyao's mother: "Teach your son not to take revenge for others, otherwise you will be blamed in the future."

古文：承郾从之。
现代文：顾承郾听从了他母亲的话。
English: Gu Chengyao obeyed his mother's words.

古文：凝绩怒，因公事抵承郾罪。
现代文：庾凝绩知道以后，十分生气，按公事失职让顾承郾承担了他应负的罪责。
English: After learning of this, Gu Cheng Rong was very angry and let Gu Cheng Rong take the blame for his negligence of duty.

古文：秋，七月，壬申朔，蜀主以兼中书令王宗弼为巨鹿王，宗瑶为临淄王，宗绾为临洮王，宗播为临颍王，宗裔、宗夔及兼侍中宗黯皆为琅邪郡王。
现代文：秋季七月，壬申朔，前蜀主封兼中书令王宗弼为钜鹿王，王宗瑶为临淄王，王宗绾为临洮王，王宗为播临颖王，王宗裔、王宗夔以及兼侍中王宗黯都为琅琊郡王。
English: In the autumn of July, according to the Jinshen Shu, Wang Zongyi, the former Shu lord and the Chinese scribe, became the king of Yangtze River, Wang Zongyi became the king of Linyi, Wang Zongyi became the king of Linyi, Wang Zongyi became the king of Boryeong, Wang Zongyi, Wang Zongyi and Wang Zongyu, who was also an attendant, became the king of Yunnan.

古文：甲戌，以王宗侃为乐安王。
现代文：甲戌，封王宗侃为乐安王。
English: Armor, seal King Zonkan as the king of happiness.

古文：丙子，以兵部尚书庾传素为太子少保兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丙子，任命兵部尚书庾传素为太子少保兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: He appointed Hyobusho Shosho Tsuchimoto as the prince's shoho (junior vice-minister) and chusho (junior secretary) as well as Tongpei Shoji.

古文：蜀主不亲政事，内外迁除皆出于王宗弼。
现代文：前蜀主不亲自处理政事，内外官员的变动都由王宗弼来处理。
English: The former emperor did not personally handle political affairs, and changes in domestic and foreign officials were handled by Wang Zongyao.

古文：宗弼纳贿多私，上下咨怨。
现代文：王宗弼收到的贿赂很多，都归为私有，上上下下都有怨气。
English: Wang Zongyao received a lot of bribes, all of which are classified as private, and there are grudges up and down.

古文：宋光嗣通敏善希合，蜀主宠任之，蜀由是遂衰。
现代文：宋光嗣聪明且善于迎合，前蜀主十分宠爱信赖他，前蜀由此也就逐渐衰弱。
English: Song Guangzhi was clever and good at pandering. The former Shu master was very fond of him and trusted him. As a result, the former Shu gradually weakened.

古文：吴徐温入朝于广陵，疑诸将皆预硃瑾之谋，欲大行诛戮。
现代文：吴国的徐温回到广陵的朝内，他怀疑诸将都参与了朱瑾的谋划，准备大开杀戒。
English: When Xu Wen of Wuxi returned to the imperial court in Guangling, he suspected that the generals were all involved in Zhu Xi's plot to commit mass murder.

古文：徐知诰、严可求具陈徐知训过恶，所以致祸之由，温怒稍解，乃命网瑾骨于雷塘而葬之，责知训将佐不能匡救，皆抵罪；独刁彦能屡有谏书，温赏之。
现代文：徐知诰、严可求一起陈述了徐知训的罪恶和导致被杀的原因之后，徐温的怒气才稍缓解一些。于是让人到雷塘打捞起朱瑾的尸骨埋葬，并谴责徐知训的左右将领不能匡救他的责任，让他们都承担了应有的罪责。唯独刁彦能经常规劝徐知训，徐温很赏识他。
English: After Xu Zhisheng and Yan Keqiu jointly stated the evils of Xu Zhishun and the reasons that led to his death, Xu Wen's anger eased a little. Therefore, people were sent to Letang to salvage Zhu Xi's bones for burial, and condemned Xu Zhishun's left and right generals for not being able to save him, so that they all shouldered their due guilt. Only Yan Yan was able to often persuade Xu Zhishun, and Xu Wen appreciated him very much.

古文：戊戌，以知诰为淮南节度行军副使、内外马步都军副使、通判府事，兼江州团练使。
现代文：戊戌，任命徐知诰为淮南节度行军副使、内外马步都军副使、通判府事，兼江州团练使。
English: At the same time, Xu Zhisheng was appointed as deputy envoy of the Huainan Jiedu March, deputy envoy of the Inner and Outer Maobu Capital Army, Tongzhan prefectural official, and Jiangzhou regimental training envoy.

古文：以徐知谏权润州团练事。
现代文：让徐知谏暂管润州团练的事情。
English: Let Xu Zhisheng take charge of the Runzhou team training for the time being.

古文：温还镇金陵，总吴朝大纲，自馀庶政，皆决于知诰。
现代文：后来徐温又回到金陵镇守，总管吴朝大事，其余的政事，全都由徐知诰决定。
English: Later, Xu Wen returned to the Jinling town guard, the head of the Wu Dynasty, and the rest of the political affairs were all decided by Xu Zhisheng.

古文：知诰悉反知训所为，事吴王尽恭，接士大夫以谦，御众以宽，约身以俭。
现代文：徐知诰和徐知训的所作所为截然相反，侍奉吴王特别恭敬，接见士大夫很谦虚，以宽容驭使众人，以节俭约束自己。
English: The behavior of Xu Zhisheng and Xu Zhixun was completely opposite. He served the King of Wu with special respect. He was very humble when receiving the scholar-doctor. He controlled everyone with tolerance and restrained himself with frugality.

古文：以吴王之命，悉蠲天祐十三年以前逋税，馀俟丰年乃输之。
现代文：用吴王的命令，全部免除天十三年以前所拖欠的税收，其余的等到年景丰收时再交纳。
English: With the order of King Wu, all the taxes that were in arrears before the 13th day of the 13th month were exempted, and the rest would be paid when the harvest was good.

古文：求贤才，纳规谏，除奸猾，杜请托。
现代文：他访求贤才，接受规劝，铲除奸滑，杜绝请托。
English: He visited to solicit talents, accept exhortation, eradicate treachery, and put an end to patronage.

古文：于是士民翕然归心，虽宿将悍夫无不悦服，以宋齐丘为谋主。先是，吴有丁口钱，又计亩输钱，钱重物轻，民甚苦之。
现代文：因此百姓们很自然地归心于他，就连那些耆宿老将和强悍勇夫也无不悦服。在此以前，吴国征收丁口钱，又要按照耕种的田地亩数交钱，以致钱重物轻，百姓们感到十分困苦。
English: As a result, the people naturally gravitated towards him, and even those long-serving residents and strong warriors were impressed. Prior to this, the state of Wu levied dingkou money and paid according to the number of cultivated acres of land, so that money was light and the people felt very poor.

古文：齐丘说知诰，以为 钱非耕桑所得，今使民输钱，是教民弃本逐末也。
现代文：宋齐丘劝说徐知诰，他认为： 钱并不是耕种养桑可以得到的，现在让百姓们交钱，就是让百姓们弃本逐末。
English: Song Qiqiu persuaded Xu Zhisheng, he thought: Money is not something that can be obtained by cultivating and raising mulberry trees. To ask the people to pay money now is to ask the people to abandon everything.

古文：请蠲丁口钱；自馀税悉输谷帛，绢匹直千钱者当税三十。 
现代文：请求免除丁口钱，其余的税钱全部折合谷帛交纳，细绢每匹值一千钱的可以当三千税钱。 
English: Dingkou money is exempted from the request, and the remaining tax money is all equivalent to the payment of the valley, and the fine reed worth one thousand dollars per horse can be used as three thousand tax money.

古文：或曰： 如此，县官岁失钱亿万计。 
现代文：有人说： 这样下去，朝廷每年失掉的钱就有亿万。 
English: Some people say: If this continues, the Imperial Court will lose hundreds of millions of money every year.

古文：齐丘曰： 安有民富而国家贫者邪！ 
现代文：宋齐丘说： 哪里有百姓富足了而国家还贫穷的呢？ 
English: Song Qiqiu said: Where are there people who are rich and the country is still poor?

古文：知诰从之。
现代文：徐知诰听从了他的意见。
English: Xu Zhisheng followed his advice.

古文：由是江、淮间旷土尽辟，桑柘满野，国以富强。
现代文：从此以后，江、淮之间空旷的土地也全部开垦出来，遍野都种植上了桑柘树，国家因此富足起来。
English: Since then, all the open land between the Yangtze River and Huai River has been reclaimed, and mulberry trees have been planted all over the country. As a result, the country has become rich.

古文：知诰欲进用齐丘而徐温恶之，以为殿直、军判官。
现代文：徐知诰打算起用宋齐丘，但遭到徐温的反对，于是提拔他为殿直、军判官。
English: Xu Zhisheng planned to appoint Song Qiqiu, but was opposed by Xu Wen, so he promoted him to the post of courtier and military judge.

古文：知诰每夜引齐丘于水亭屏语，常至夜分，或居高堂，悉去屏障，独置大炉，相向坐，不言，以铁箸画灰为字，随以匙灭去之，故其所谋，人莫得而知也。
现代文：徐知诰每天晚上都领宋齐丘到水亭密谈，经常谈到半夜。有时候在殿堂，把屏障撤去，摆上一个大火炉，相向而坐，都不说话，用铁筋在灰上写字，随即就用勺子把字涂掉，所以，他们所谋划的事情，外面的人们无法得知。
English: Every evening, Xu Zhixuan led Song Qiqiu to the water pavilion for secret talks, and often talked about the middle of the night. Sometimes in the hall of fame, the barrier was removed, a large furnace was set up, they sat opposite each other, did not speak, wrote on the ash with rebar, and then used a spoon to erase the words, so people outside could not know what they were planning.

古文：虔州险固，吴军攻之，久不下，军中大疫，王祺病，吴以镇南节度使刘信为虔州行营招讨使，未几，祺卒。
现代文：虔州非常险要而坚固，吴军久攻不下。后来军中流行瘟疫，王祺也病了，于是吴王任命镇南节度使刘信为虔州行营招讨使。没过多久，王祺病死。
English: Gyeongju was very dangerous and strong, and the Wu army could not attack it for a long time. Later, a plague broke out in the army, and Wang Hui also fell ill, so the King of Wu appointed Zhenan Jiedu to make Liu Xin the envoy for the campaign in Gyeongju. Not long after, Wang Hui died of illness.

古文：谭全播求救于吴越、闽、楚。
现代文：谭全播请求吴越、闽、楚援救。
English: Tan Quan asked Wu Yue, Zou and Chu to come to the rescue.

古文：吴越王镠以统军使传球为西南面行营应援使，将兵二万攻信州；楚将张可求将万人屯古亭，闽兵屯雩都以救之。
现代文：吴越王钱任命统军使钱传球为西南面行应援使，让他率领二万大军前往攻打信州；楚将张可求率领一万余人驻扎在古亭；闽军驻扎在雩都，准备援救谭全播。
English: King Qian of Wu Yue appointed the unified army to send Qian to the southwest to receive reinforcements, and let him lead a 20,000-strong army to attack Shinshu; Chu general Zhang Keqiu led more than 10,000 people stationed in Gu Ting; the Han army was stationed in Xindu, ready to rescue Tan Quan Biao.

古文：信州兵才数百，逆战，不利；吴越兵围其城。
现代文：信州驻军只有数百人，迎战吴越军，不利。吴越军队包围了信州城。
English: The Shinshu garrison had only a few hundred men, which was not good against the Wuyue army. The Wuyue army surrounded Shinshu City.

古文：刺史周本，启关张虚幕于门内，召僚佐登城楼作乐宴饮，飞矢雨集，安坐不动；吴越疑有伏兵，中夜，解围去。
现代文：信州刺史周本打开城门，在城门里面支起空帐篷，叫他手下的官吏登上城楼在音乐声中摆开宴席作乐饮宴。吴越军向城楼上射出的箭如雨一般密集，但信州官吏们安坐不动。吴越人疑有伏兵，到了半夜，他们撤了回去。
English: Zhou Ben, the sheriff of Shinshu, opened the city gate, set up an empty tent inside the city gate, and ordered his officials to go up to the city tower and set up a banquet table to enjoy the music. The arrows shot by the Wu Yue army to the city tower were as dense as rain, but the officials of Shinshu did not move. The Wu Yue people suspected an ambush, and at midnight, they withdrew.

古文：吴以前舒州刺史陈璋为东南面应援招讨使，将兵侵苏、湖，钱传球自信州南屯汀州。
现代文：吴王任命前舒州刺史陈璋为东南面应援招讨使，并让他率兵入侵苏州、湖州，钱传球从信州南下驻扎在汀州。
English: King Wu appointed the former Shuzhou official Chen Qi as the envoy to the southeast to solicit assistance, and let him lead troops to invade Suzhou and Huzhou. Qianfeibao was stationed in Tingzhou from the south of Shinshu.

古文：晋王遣间使持帛书会兵于吴，吴人辞以虔州之难。
现代文：晋王派出秘密使者拿着书信去吴国请求会师，吴人以攻打虔州的艰难而推辞。
English: The king of Jin sent a secret envoy with a letter to the state of Wu to request a meeting, but the Wu people refused, saying that it would be too difficult to attack Kenzhou.

古文：晋王谋大举入寇，周德威将幽州步骑三万，李存审将沧景步骑万人，李嗣源将邢洺步骑万人，王处直遣将将易定步骑万人，及麟、胜、云、蔚、新、武等州诸部落奚、契丹、室韦、吐谷浑，皆以兵会之。
现代文：晋王准备大举进攻后梁，周德威率幽州三万骑兵和步卒，李存审率一万多沧州、景州骑兵、步卒，李嗣源率一万多邢州、州骑兵、步卒，王处直派将率一万多易州、定州骑兵、步卒，以及麟、胜、云、蔚、新、武等州的奚、契丹、室韦、吐谷浑各部落，把兵汇集起来。
English: Jin Wang prepared to launch a large-scale attack on Houliang, Zhou Dewi led 30,000 cavalry and foot soldiers from Yuzhou, Li Cunxi led more than 10,000 cavalry and foot soldiers from Cangzhou and Jingzhou, Li Siyuan led more than 10,000 cavalry and foot soldiers from Zhangzhou and Dingzhou, and Wang Shuzhong sent more than 10,000 cavalry and foot soldiers from Yizhou and Dingzhou, as well as from the Qiang, Khitan, Muxi and Tuyuhun tribes from Lin, Sheng, Yun, Wei, Xin and Wu.

古文：八月，并河东、魏博之兵，大阅于魏州。
现代文：八月，又汇合河东、魏博的部队，在魏州举行盛大的检阅。
English: In August, the troops from Hedong and Weibo also converged and held a grand review in Weizhou.

古文：蜀诸王皆领军使，彭王宗鼎谓其昆弟曰： 亲王典兵，祸乱之本。
现代文：前蜀各位亲王都统率军队，彭王王宗鼎对他的兄弟说： 亲王掌管部队，是祸乱之本。
English: Former Princes of Shu all led their armies. King Peng and King Zonding said to his brother: "A prince in charge of troops is a recipe for disaster."

古文：今主少臣强，谗间将兴，缮甲训士，非吾辈所宜为也。 
现代文：现在主上年轻而大臣们都很强悍，进谗离间的事将要增多，修缮武器，训练士卒，都不是我们所应当做的。 
English: Now that the Lord is young and the ministers are strong, there will be more and more conflicts. Repairing weapons and training soldiers are not what we should be doing.

古文：因固辞军使，蜀主许之，但营书舍、植松竹自娱而已。
现代文：因此他坚决辞去军使职务，前蜀主答应了他的请求，只让他管理书舍、种植松竹来自寻乐趣。
English: Therefore, he resolutely resigned from the post of military envoy. The former Shu master agreed to his request, only letting him manage the library and plant pine and bamboo for fun.

古文：泰宁节度使张万进，轻险好乱。
现代文：后梁泰宁节度使张万进不怕危险，喜欢动乱。
English: Zhang Wanjin is not afraid of danger and likes turmoil.

古文：时嬖幸用事，多求赂于万进，万进闻晋兵将出，己酉，遣使附于晋，且求援。
现代文：当时，皇帝宠爱的人掌权，很多人都向张万进索取贿赂。张万进听说晋国的军队将要出去作战，己酉，张万进派使者归附于晋国，并请求晋国给予援助。
English: At that time, the emperor's favorite person was in power, and many people asked Zhang Wanjin for bribes. Zhang Wanjin heard that Jin's army was going to go out to fight, so he sent an envoy to attach himself to Jin and ask Jin for assistance.

古文：以亳州团练使刘鄩为兗州安抚制置使，将兵讨之。
现代文：后梁帝任命亳州团练使刘为兖州安抚制置使，并让他率兵讨伐张万进。
English: Later, Emperor Liang appointed Liu to be the envoy of the Bozhou Reunification Exercise to pacify Bozhou, and let him lead the troops to fight against Zhang Manjin.

古文：甲子，蜀顺德皇后殂。
现代文：甲子，前蜀顺德皇后去世。
English: The former Empress Shushunde passed away.

古文：乙丑，蜀主以内给事王廷绍、欧阳晃、李周辂、宋光葆、宋承蕴、田鲁俦等为将军及军使，皆干预政事，骄纵贪暴，大为蜀患，周庠切谏，不听。
现代文：乙丑，前蜀主任命内给事王廷绍、欧阳晃、李周辂、宋光葆、宋承、田鲁俦等为将军及军使，这些人都干预政事，骄横贪暴，成为前蜀的大患，周庠曾恳切地劝谏，但前蜀主不听。
English: Second, the former Shu ruler appointed as generals and military envoys Wang Tingshao, Ouyang Ao, Li Zhouyao, Song Guangyao, Song Chenglu, and Tian Lucheng. These people interfered in political affairs, were arrogant and corrupt, and became a big problem for the former Shu ruler. Zhou Yao had earnestly advised him, but the former Shu ruler did not listen.

古文：晃患所居之隘，夜，因风纵火，焚西邻军营数百间，明旦，召匠广其居；蜀主亦不之问。
现代文：欧阳晃对他的住处狭小感到不快，有一个夜晚，他借风放火，把西邻军的营寨烧了几百间，第二天早晨，他就叫一些工匠把他的住处扩大。前蜀主对这件事情也不闻不问。
English: One night, taking advantage of the wind, he set fire to several hundred of the encampments of his western neighbors. The next morning, he ordered some craftsmen to expand his residence. The former Shu lord did not pay any attention to this matter.

古文：光葆，光嗣之从弟也。
现代文：宋光葆是宋光嗣的党弟。
English: Song Guangyao was the younger brother of Song Guangzhi.

古文：晋王自魏州如杨刘，引兵略郓、濮而还，循河而上，军于麻家渡。
现代文：晋王从魏州到了杨刘，率兵抢掠郓、濮以后而回，他尚着黄河而上，驻扎在麻家渡。
English: Jin Wang went from Weizhou to Yang Liu, led troops to loot and plunder, and then returned. He went up the Yellow River and was stationed in Majiadu.

古文：贺瑰、谢彦章将梁兵屯濮州北行台村，相持不战。
现代文：贺、谢彦章率后梁兵驻扎在濮州北面的行台村，两军相持不战。
English: Led by He and Xie Yanzhang, the remaining Liang soldiers were stationed in Xingtai Village in the north of Ganzhou, and the two armies did not fight.

古文：晋王好自引轻骑迫敌营挑战，危窘者数四，赖李绍荣力战翼卫之，得免。
现代文：晋王喜欢新自率领轻骑逼近敌人的营寨去挑战，有好几次处境十分危险窘迫，幸亏依靠李绍荣奋力抗战在两翼保卫，才得免于难。
English: Jin Wang liked to challenge the newly led light cavalry approaching the enemy's camp, and several times he was in a very dangerous predicament. Fortunately, he was able to rely on Li Shaorong to fight hard and defend on both wings.

古文：赵王镕及王处直皆遣使致书曰： 元元之命系于王，本朝中兴系于王，奈何自轻如此！ 
现代文：赵王王熔和王处直都曾派出使者给晋王送信说： 百姓的性命和您连在一起，国家的兴旺也和您联系在一起，怎么能自己轻率到这个地步！ 
English: Zhao, Wang, Wang Rong and Wang Shudao all sent envoys to the King of Jin, saying: "The lives of the people are connected to you, and the prosperity of the country is also connected to you. How can you be so reckless!

古文：王笑谓使者曰： 定天下者，非百战何由得之！
现代文：晋王笑着对使者说： 安定天下，不经百战怎么能办到？
English: The king of Jin smiled and said to the envoy: How can the world be stable without a hundred wars?

古文：安可但深居帷房以自肥乎！ 
现代文：怎么可以深居帷房自己养肥呢？ 
English: How can you live deep in the house and fatten yourself?

古文：一旦，王将出营，都营使李存审扣马泣谏曰： 大王当为天下自重。
现代文：一天早晨，晋王准备出营作战，都营使李存审拉住他的马一边哭一边劝说： 大王应当为了天下多加保重自己。
English: One morning, when the King of Jin was preparing to leave the camp for battle, the camp sent Li Cunxiu to hold his horse while crying and persuading him: The great king should take more care of himself for the sake of the world.

古文：彼先登陷陈，将士之职也，存审辈宜为之，非大王之事也。 
现代文：那些作战率先冲锋陷阵的事是将士们的职责，是我李存审这类人做的，不是大王应做的事情。 
English: It is the duty of the soldiers to be the first to charge into battle. It is what people like me, Li Cunxin, do, not what the emperor should do.

古文：王为之揽辔而还。
现代文：晋王被李存审拉住了马的缰绳才返回。
English: Jin Wang's horse's reins were pulled by Li Cunxin before he returned.

古文：他日，伺存审不在，策马急出，顾谓左右曰： 老子妨人戏！ 
现代文：又一天，晋王乘李存审不在，骑着马迅速跑了出去，回过头对他的左右说： 那老家伙妨碍别人游戏！ 
English: On another day, when Jin Wang Rong Li Cunxuan was not there, he quickly rode out on his horse and turned to his right and left, saying, "That old fellow is interfering with other people's games!"

古文：王以数百骑抵梁营，谢彦章伏精甲五千于堤下；王引十馀骑度堤，伏兵发，围王数十重，王力战于中，后骑继之者攻之于外，仅得出。
现代文：晋王率领好几百骑兵直抵后梁军营寨，后梁将谢彦章在河堤下埋伏了五千余精锐部队。晋王率领十几个骑兵刚过河堤，谢彦章的伏兵冲了出来，把晋王包围了十来层，晋王在包围圈中奋力作战，他的后援骑兵在包围圈外面攻打，晋王才冲出了包围圈。
English: Jin Wang led several hundred cavalrymen straight to Houliang Camp. Houliang General Xie Yanzhang ambushed more than 5,000 elite troops under the river bank. Jin Wang led more than a dozen cavalrymen just across the river bank. Xie Yanzhang's ambush rushed out and surrounded Jin Wang for about ten layers. Jin Wang fought hard in the encirclement. His backup cavalry attacked outside the encirclement, and Jin Wang rushed out of the encirclement.

古文：会李存审救至，梁兵乃退，王始以存审之言为忠。
现代文：这时李存审的援救部队也正好赶到，后梁军才撤了回去。
English: At this time, Li Cunxin's rescue force also arrived just in time, and Liang's army only withdrew after that.

古文：吴刘信遣其将张宣等夜将兵三千袭楚将张可求于古亭，破之；又遣梁诠等将兵击吴越及闽兵，二国闻楚兵败，俱引归。
现代文：晋王到这时才开始认识到李存审原来给他讲的话完全是一片忠心。吴国刘信派他的将领张宣等率领三千士卒在一个晚上于古亭袭击了楚将张可求，并攻下古亭。他又派梁诠等去袭击吴越和闽国的部队，两国部队听说楚军已被打败，也就率兵退却了。
English: It was only then that the Jin king began to realize that Li Cunxuan's original words to him were completely loyal. Wu's Liu Xin sent his general Zhang Xuan and others, led by three thousand soldiers, to attack the Chu general Zhang Kegui in Guting in one night and capture Guting. He also sent Liang Yan and others to attack the troops of Wu Yue and Shandong. When the troops of the two countries heard that the Chu army had been defeated, they retreated with their soldiers.

古文：梅山蛮寇邵州，楚将樊须击走之。
现代文：梅山蛮侵略邵州，楚将樊须率兵把他们击退。
English: Meishan brutally invaded Shaoshou, and Chu led his troops to repel them.

古文：九月，壬午，蜀内枢密使宋光嗣以判六军让兼中书令王宗弼，蜀主许之。
现代文：九月，壬午，前蜀内枢密史宋光嗣把判六军的官位让给了兼中书令王宗弼，前蜀主同意了。
English: In September, at noon, Song Guangzhi, the former Shunai Privy Councilor, ceded the official position of judge of the Six Armies to Wang Zongya, who was also the middle secretary, and the former Shushi agreed.

古文：吴刘信昼夜急攻虔州，斩首数千级，不能克；使人说谭全播，取质纳赂而还。
现代文：吴将刘信昼夜攻虔州，打死了好几千人，但仍没有攻下。于是派人去游说谭全播，领取人质，接收了贿赂就撤兵了。
English: Wu sent Liu Xin to attack Qianzhou day and night, killed several thousand people, but still did not capture it. So he sent someone to lobby Tan Quan Bao, receive hostages, and withdrew troops after receiving bribes.

古文：徐温大怒，杖信使者。
现代文：徐温非常生气，把刘信的使者打了一顿。
English: Xu Wen was very angry and beat up Liu Xin's messenger.

古文：信子英彦典亲兵，温授英彦兵三千，曰： 汝父居上游之地，将十倍之众，不能下一城，是反也！汝可以此兵往，与父同反！ 
现代文：刘信的儿子刘英彦掌管亲兵，徐温交给刘英彦三千士兵，说： 你的父亲处在上游的地方，率领着十倍于虔州的士卒，都不能攻下一个城，这是一种反叛，你可以率领这些军队前往，与你的父亲一起反叛。 
English: Liu Xin's son Liu Yingyan was in charge of his own soldiers, and Xu Wen sent 3,000 soldiers to Liu Yingyan, saying: Your father is in the upstream area, leading ten times more soldiers than Kenzhou, and cannot attack a city. This is a kind of rebellion. You can lead these troops to go and rebel with your father.

古文：又使升州牙内指挥使硃景瑜与之俱，曰： 全播守卒皆农夫，饥窘逾年，妻子在外，重围既解，相贺而去，闻大兵再往，必皆逃遁，全播所守者空城耳，往必克之。 
现代文：同时又派州牙内指挥使朱景瑜同他一起去，说： 谭全播的士卒都是农夫出身，饥寒交迫已经好几年了，妻子又在包围圈的外面，重重包围已经解除，都互相庆贺离去。只要他们听说吴军还要来，一定都会逃跑，谭全播所守的城也就成了空城，只要我们再去，就一定能够攻陷。 
English: At the same time, he also sent the commander of Zhougai to make Zhu Jingyu go with him, saying: "Tan Quanbang's soldiers are all from farmers, they have been starving and cold for several years, and his wife is outside the encirclement circle. The encirclement has been lifted, and they are all celebrating each other's departure. As long as they hear that the Wu Army is still coming, they will definitely escape. The city defended by Tan Quanbang has become an empty city. As long as we go again, we will definitely be able to attack.

古文：冬，十一月，壬申，蜀葬神武圣文孝德明惠皇帝于永陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：冬季十一月，壬申，前蜀在永陵埋葬了神武圣文孝德明惠皇帝王建，庙号为高祖。
English: In the winter of November, in Jinshin, the former Shu buried the Jinwu Shengwen Xiaodong Minghui Emperor Wang Jian in Yongling, and the temple name was Gao Zu.

古文：越主岩祀南郊，大赦，改国号曰汉。
现代文：越主刘岩到南郊去祭祀，实行大赦，改国号叫汉。
English: Liu Yan, the overlord of Yue, went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices, implement an amnesty, and change the country's name to Han.

古文：刘信闻徐温之言，大惧，引兵还击虔州。
现代文：刘信听到徐温所说的话以后，十分害怕，又率兵返回去攻打虔州。
English: After Liu Xin heard what Xu Wen said, he was very scared and led his troops back to attack Kianzhou.

古文：先锋始至，虔兵皆溃，谭全播奔雩都，追执之。
现代文：先头部队刚刚到达，虔州的军队就都溃逃了。谭全播逃到了雩都，刘信的部队追上把他抓获。
English: As soon as the leading troops arrived, the troops in Kianzhou fled. Tan Quanbang fled to Shidu, and Liu Xin's troops caught up with him and captured him.

古文：吴以全播为右威卫将军，领百胜节度使。
现代文：吴国任命谭全播为右威卫将军，承领百胜节度使。
English: The State of Wu appointed Tan Quanbang as the General of the Right Division of Weiwei, and he took over the position of the Minister of the Yixing Festival.

古文：先是，吴越王镠常自虔州入贡，至是道绝，始自海道出登、莱，抵大梁。
现代文：在此以前，吴越王钱经常由虔州到朝廷入贡，现在这条道路断绝，于是开始从海上到达登州、莱州，然后再到大梁。
English: Prior to this, Wu Yue Wang Qian often went from Qianzhou to the imperial court to pay tribute, but now this road was cut off, so he began to travel from the sea to Dengzhou, Laizhou, and then to Dalian.

古文：初，吴徐温自以权重而位卑，说吴王曰： 今大王与诸将皆为节度使，虽有都统之名，不足相临制；请建吴国，称帝而治。 
现代文：起初，吴国的徐温自认为权力虽大，但地位却很低，劝吴王说： 现在大王和各将领都都是节度使，虽然有都统的名义，但不能临事辖制，请建立吴国，称皇帝，来治理这一带。 
English: At first, Xu Wen of the State of Wu thought that although his power was great, his status was very low. He advised the King of Wu, saying, "Nowadays, the great king and all the generals are ceremonial envoys. Although they have the name of unification, they cannot exercise jurisdiction over matters. Please establish the State of Wu, called the emperor, to govern this area.

古文：王不许。
现代文：吴王没有答应。
English: Wu Wang did not agree.

古文：严可求屡劝温以次子知询代徐知诰知吴政，知诰与骆知祥谋，出可求为楚州刺史。
现代文：严可求曾多次劝说徐温用次子徐知询取代徐知诰来管理吴国政事，徐知诰和骆知祥谋划，决定派出严可求任楚州刺史。
English: Yan Kegui had repeatedly persuaded Xu Wen to replace Xu Zhisheng with his second son, Xu Zhisheng, to manage the political affairs of Wuzhou. Xu Zhisheng and Luo Zhishang plotted and decided to send Yan Kegui as the governor of Chuzhou.

古文：可求既受命，至金陵，见温，说之曰： 吾奉唐正朔，常以兴复为辞。
现代文：严可求接受命令，到金陵，见到徐温，劝徐温说： 我秉奉唐朝的年号，一直以使国家复兴为说辞。
English: Yan can ask to receive an order, go to Jinling, see Xu Wen, and persuade Xu Wen to say: I adhere to the era name of the Tang Dynasty, and have always made national rejuvenation a speech.

古文：今硃、李方争，硃氏日衰，李氏日炽。
现代文：现在朱、李争权夺利，朱氏一天天衰落下去，李氏一天天兴旺起来。
English: Now Zhu and Li are competing for power and profit. The Zhu clan is declining day by day, while the Li clan is prospering day by day.

古文：一旦李氏有天下，吾能北面为之臣乎？
现代文：一旦李氏统治了天下，我们能够甘心做他的大臣吗？
English: Once Mr. Li rules the world, can we be content to be his minister?

古文：不若先建吴国以系民望。 
现代文：不如先建立吴国，顺应民心所望。 
English: It would be better to establish the State of Wu first and follow the wishes of the people.

古文：温大悦，复留可求参总庶政，使草具礼仪。
现代文：徐温十分高兴，又把严可求留在身边，让他参理政事，并让他起草准备建立国家的礼仪。
English: Xu Wen was very happy, and kept Yan Keqiu by his side, letting him participate in government affairs, and letting him draft the etiquette for the establishment of the country.

古文：知诰知可求不可去，乃以女妻其子续。
现代文：徐知诰知道严可求不可能去出任楚州刺史，于是就把自己的女儿嫁给了严可求的儿子严续。
English: Xu Zhisheng knew that it was impossible for Yan Keqiu to become Chuzhou governor, so he married his daughter to Yan Keqiu's son, Yan Lian.

古文：晋王欲趣大梁，而梁军扼其前，坚壁不战百馀日。
现代文：晋王打算夺取大梁，后梁军阻挡在前面，一百多天坚守壁垒不出来作战。
English: Jin Wang planned to seize the girders, but the rear-beam army blocked the front and could not come out to fight for more than a hundred days.

古文：十二月，庚子朔，晋王进兵，距梁军十里而舍。
现代文：十二月，庚子朔，晋王率兵推进，在距离后梁军十里的地方停了下来。
English: In December, Geng Zishuo and Jin Wang led the troops to advance and stopped at a distance of ten miles from Houliang's army.

古文：初，北面行营招讨使贺瑰善将步兵，排陈使谢彦章善将骑兵，瑰恶其与己齐名。
现代文：当初，北面行营招讨使贺擅长率领步兵，而排阵使谢彦章擅长率领骑兵，贺对谢彦章与自己齐名耿耿于怀。
English: At the beginning, He was good at leading the infantry in the northern campaign, and Xie Yanzhang was good at leading the cavalry in the formation. He was deeply concerned about Xie Yanzhang and himself.

古文：一日，瑰与彦章治兵于野，瑰指一高地曰： 此可以立栅。 
现代文：一天，贺和谢彦章在野外练兵，贺指着一块高地说： 这里可以立栅垒来防御敌人。 
English: One day, He and Xie Yanzhang were training soldiers in the field. He pointed to a high place and said, "Here you can erect a barrier to defend against the enemy."

古文：至是，晋军适置栅于其上，瑰疑彦章与晋通谋。
现代文：现在，晋军恰恰在这块高地上立起了栅垒，贺怀疑谢彦章与晋军通谋。
English: Now, the Jin army has erected a barrier on this very high ground, and He suspects that Xie Yanzhang is conspiring with the Jin army.

古文：瑰屡欲战，谓彦章曰： 主上悉以国兵授吾二人，社稷是赖。今强寇压吾门，而逗遛不战，可乎！ 
现代文：贺几次想出战，对谢彦章说： 主上把国家的军队全部交给我们两人，江山社稷依靠我们，今天强大的敌人逼压在我们门前，我们却停留不战，这样可以吗？ 
English: He wanted to go to war several times, and said to Xie Yianzhang: "The Lord has entrusted the entire national army to the two of us. The country and society rely on us. Today, a powerful enemy is pressing in front of our door, but we are staying without fighting. Is this acceptable?

古文：彦章曰： 强寇凭陵，利在速战。
现代文：谢彦章说： 强大的敌人前来入侵欺凌，速战速决最有利于他们。
English: Xie Yanzhang said: Powerful enemies come to invade and bully, quick battle and quick decision are most beneficial to them.

古文：今深沟高垒，据其津要，彼安敢深入！
现代文：现在我们深沟高垒，占据着渡口的要害地方，他们怎么敢深入进来！
English: Now we are deep in the ditch, occupying the key place of the ferry, how dare they come in!

古文：若轻与之战，万一蹉跌，则大事去矣。 
现代文：如果我们轻率地和他们作战，万一有什么失误，大事就办不成了。 
English: If we fight them carelessly, if something goes wrong, we won't be able to accomplish much.

古文：瑰益疑之，密谮之于帝，与行营马步都虞候曹州刺史硃珪谋，因享士，伏甲，杀彦章及濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕，以谋叛闻。
现代文：贺更加怀疑谢彦章，就在后梁帝面前说了谢彦章的坏话，并和行营马步都虞候曹州刺史朱谋划，设宴请客，暗藏武士，杀死谢彦章和濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕，然后以谢彦章谋划叛乱上奏于后梁帝。
English: He was even more suspicious of Xie Yanzhang. He spoke ill of Xie Yanzhang in front of Emperor Hou Liang, and plotted with Caozhou Shizhu Zhu, who was the commander of the cavalry and infantry, to hold a banquet, to hide the samurai, to kill Xie Yanzhang and Zhangzhou Shizhu Meng Sencheng, and to capture Hou Wenyu, and then to report to Emperor Hou Liang that Xie Yanzhang was plotting a rebellion.

古文：审澄、温裕，亦骑将之良者也。
现代文：孟审澄、侯温裕，都是骑兵中好的将领。
English: Meng Juncheng and Hou Wenyu were both good cavalry generals.

古文：丁未，以硃珪为匡国留后，癸丑，又以为平卢节度使兼行营马步副指挥使以赏之。
现代文：丁未，后梁帝任命朱为匡国留后。癸丑，又任命他为平卢节度使兼行营马步副指挥使，作为对他的奖赏。
English: After Ding Wei, Emperor Liang appointed Zhu as the governor of Guanzhong. He also appointed him as the deputy commander of Pinglu and the deputy commander of Mabu, as a reward for him.

古文：晋王闻彦章死，喜曰： 彼将帅自相鱼肉，亡无日矣。
现代文：晋王听说谢彦章被杀死，高兴地说： 他们的将帅自相残杀，不要多久就会灭亡。
English: When the king of Jin heard that Xie Yanzhang had been killed, he said happily, "Their generals killed each other, and it won't be long before they perish."

古文：贺瑰残虐，失士卒心，我若引军直指其国都，彼安得坚壁不动！
现代文：贺残暴肆虐，失去了士卒的心，我们如果率兵直捣他的国都大梁，他们怎么能坚守不动呢？
English: He brutally raged, lost the heart of a soldier, if we led the soldiers to directly hit his capital girders, how could they remain motionless?

古文：幸而一与之战，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：有幸和他们打一伏，可以保证战无不胜。 
English: If we are fortunate enough to play a game of one-upmanship with them, we can ensure that we are invincible.

古文：王欲自将万骑直趣大梁，周德威曰： 梁人虽屠上将，其军尚全，轻行徼利，未见其福。 
现代文：晋王打算亲自率领一万骑兵直捣大梁，周德威说： 梁军虽然杀了良将，但他的军队还是很完整的，如果想轻率行动侥幸取胜，未必能有好处。 
English: Jin Wang planned to personally lead ten thousand cavalrymen to smash the girders. Zhou Dewei said: Although the Liang army killed a good general, his army is still very complete. If you want to act rashly and win by chance, it may not be good.

古文：不从。
现代文：晋王没有听从他的意见。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：戊午，下令军中老弱悉归魏州，起师趋汴。
现代文：戊午，下达命令，让军中所有的老弱将士全回魏州，他率兵直奔汴梁。
English: In the afternoon, he issued an order to let all the old and weak soldiers in the army return to Weizhou, and he led the soldiers straight to Jialiang.

古文：庚申，毁营而进，众号十万。
现代文：庚申，把军营毁掉，率兵前进，号称十万大军。
English: Goshun destroyed the military camp and led the soldiers forward, claiming to be a hundred thousand army.

古文：辛酉，蜀改明年元曰乾德。
现代文：辛酉，前蜀改明年年号为乾德。
English: Xinlu, formerly Shu, will change its name to Qiande next year.

古文：贺瑰闻晋王已西，亦弃营而踵之。
现代文：贺听说晋王已率兵向西行动，于是也放弃营垒跟在晋军后面。
English: He heard that Jin Wang had led his troops westward, so he also abandoned his camp and followed the Jin army.

古文：晋王发魏博白丁三万从军，以供营栅之役，所至，营栅立成。
现代文：晋王魏博三万民丁随从部队，让他们为部队修筑栅垒，部队一到，栅垒等工程立即就修好。
English: The Jin king Wei Bo sent 30,000 people to accompany the troops, and asked them to build fences for the troops. As soon as the troops arrived, the fences and other projects were immediately repaired.

古文：壬戌，至胡柳陂。
现代文：壬戌，到达胡柳陂。
English: Rincheng, arrived at Huludao.

古文：癸亥旦，候者言梁兵自后至矣。
现代文：癸亥早晨，探子报告后梁的军队从后面跟了上来。
English: In the morning of the first day of the year, Liang's army came up from behind after the scout reported.

古文：周德威曰： 贼倍道而来，未有所舍，我营栅已固，守备有馀，既深入敌境，动须万全，不可轻发。
现代文：周德威说： 敌人从后面来，没有可以休息的地方，我军栅垒已很坚固，而且守备也有富余，我们既然已经深入敌人境界，一定要考虑周全，不可以轻率行动。
English: Zhou Dewei said: The enemy comes from behind, there is no place to rest, our army's fence is already very strong, and there is plenty of defense. Since we have penetrated deep into the enemy's territory, we must consider everything thoroughly and must not act rashly.

古文：此去大梁至近，梁兵各念其家，内怀愤激，不以方略制之，恐难得志。
现代文：这里离大梁城很近，后梁的士卒们都很思念家人，心中愤怒又激动，如果不用谋略来制服他们，恐怕很难如愿以偿。
English: It is very close to Dalian City, and the soldiers of Houliang are all missing their families, angry and excited in their hearts. If you don't have a strategy to subdue them, I'm afraid it will be difficult to fulfill your wish.

古文：王宜按兵勿战，德威请以骑兵扰之，使彼不得休息，至暮营垒未立，樵爨未具，乘其疲乏，可一举灭也。 
现代文：大王应该按兵不动，我请求用骑兵先去骚扰一下，使他们得不到休息，到晚上营垒还没有修好，柴火锅灶还没准备齐全，乘他们疲乏的时候，可以一举消灭。 
English: The great king should not move his troops, I request that the cavalry be used to harass them first, so that they do not get rest, the camp is not repaired by the evening, the wood-fired cooker is not fully prepared, and when they are tired, they can be eliminated in one fell swoop.

古文：王曰： 前在河上恨不见贼，今贼至不击，尚复何待，公何怯也！ 
现代文：晋王说： 从前在黄河上恨没有看到敌人，现在敌人来了又不打，还等待什么，你为什么胆怯呢！ 
English: Jin Wang said, "In the past, on the Yellow River, you hated to see the enemy, but now the enemy comes and does not fight. What are you waiting for? Why are you so timid?"

古文：顾李存审曰： 敕辎重先发，吾为尔殿后，破贼而去！ 
现代文：回过头对李存审说： 你运送粮草先出发，我为你殿后，快去消灭敌人。 
English: He turned back to Li Cunxin and said, "You go first to deliver grain and grass, and I will follow behind you to destroy the enemy."

古文：即以亲军先出。
现代文：于是把他的亲信部队先派出去。
English: So he sent his trusted troops out first.

古文：德威不得已，引幽州兵从之，谓其子曰： 吾无死所矣。 
现代文：周德威不得已率领幽州的军队跟从着晋王，临行前对他的儿子说： 我不知死在什么地方啊！ 
English: Zhou Dewei had no choice but to lead the Yuzhou army to follow the Jin king. Before leaving, he said to his son: I don't know where to die!

古文：贺瑰结陈而至，横亘数十里。
现代文：贺将军队组织成战阵赶到，横跨数士里。
English: He organized the army into a battle line and rushed to the scene, spanning several li.

古文：王帅银枪都陷其陈，冲荡击斩，往返十馀里。
现代文：晋王率领禁卫军攻打后梁军的战阵，奋勇冲杀，往返十多里。
English: Jin Wang led the Imperial Guard to attack the battle line of the Rear Liang Army, bravely rushed to kill, and traveled more than ten miles.

古文：行营左厢马军都指挥使、郑州防御使王彦章军先败，西走趣濮阳。
现代文：行营左厢马军都指挥使、郑州防御使王彦章的军队先被击败，向西逃到濮阳。
English: Wang Yanzhang's army was defeated first and fled westward to Fenyang.

古文：晋辎重在陈西，望见梁旗帜，惊溃，入幽州陈，幽州兵亦扰乱，自相蹈藉；周德威不能制，父子皆战死。
现代文：晋军的武器、粮草在阵地的西面，他们看见后梁军的旗帜，吓得逃散。散兵进入了周德威率领的幽州阵营，幽州军队的阵营在被扰乱，自相践踏，周德威不能制止，周德威父子都战死。
English: The Jin army's weapons and grain and grass were on the west side of the position. When they saw the banner of the Houliang army, they were scared and fled. The scattered soldiers entered the Yuzhou camp led by Zhou Dewei. The camp of the Yuzhou army was disturbed and trampled on each other. Zhou Dewei could not stop it. Both Zhou Dewei and his son died in the battle.

古文：魏博节度副使王缄与辎重俱行，亦死。
现代文：魏博节度副使王缄和武器、粮草同行，结果也战死。
English: Wei Bo, vice-minister of the festival, sent Wang Qi to accompany the weapons, grain and grass, but he also died in the battle.

古文：晋兵无复部伍。梁兵四集，势甚盛。
现代文：晋国的军队队伍已乱，后梁军从四面集合起来，攻势甚猛。
English: Jin's army was in disarray, and Hebei's army was massing on all sides, mounting a fierce offensive.

古文：晋王据高丘收散兵，至日中，军复振。
现代文：晋王占据在高丘收集散兵，到了中午，军队才又重新振作起来。
English: Jin occupied the high ground to gather the scattered troops, and by noon, the army was re-energized.

古文：陂中有土山，贺瑰引兵据之。
现代文：坡中有一座土山，贺率兵占据了它。
English: There was a hill in the slope, and He and his soldiers occupied it.

古文：晋王谓将士曰： 今日得此山者胜，吾与汝曹夺之。 
现代文：晋王对他的将士们说： 今天得这座山的人就可以取得胜利，我和你们一起夺取。 
English: Jin Wang said to his soldiers: Whoever wins this mountain today will be victorious, and I will win it with you.

古文：即引骑兵先登，李从珂与银枪大将王建及以步卒继之，梁兵纷纷而下，遂夺其山。
现代文：于是他率兵首先登上了山，李从珂和禁卫军大将李建及率领步兵跟在他的后面，后梁珍见势纷纷下山，于是晋军夺取了这座山。
English: So he led his soldiers to the top of the mountain first, followed by Li Zongke and the general of the Imperial Guard, Li Jianyi, who led the infantry. After Liang Zhen saw the situation, they went down the mountain one after another, and the Jin army captured the mountain.

古文：日向晡，贺瑰陈于山西，晋兵望之有惧色。
现代文：倒了傍晚，贺的军队在山的西面列阵，晋军望见面带惧色。
English: In the late afternoon, He's army lined up on the west side of the mountain, and Jin's army looked forward to the encounter with trepidation.

古文：诸将以为诸军未尽集，不若敛兵还营，诘朝复战。
现代文：晋军有些将领认为部队的散兵还没有全部集合起来，不如先收兵回营，明早再继续战斗。
English: Some generals of the Jin army thought that the scattered soldiers of the army had not yet been fully assembled, so it would be better to gather the soldiers back to the camp first and continue the battle tomorrow morning.

古文：天平节度使、东南面招讨使阎宝曰： 王彦章骑兵已入濮阳，山下惟步卒，向晚皆有归志，我乘高趣下击之，破之必矣。
现代文：天平节度使、东南面招讨使阎宝说： 王彦章的骑兵已经到了濮阳，山下只有步卒，傍晚时都想回家，我们居高临下攻打，一定会打败他们。
English: Yan Bao, the envoy of the Tianping Festival and the Southeast Invitation, said: Wang Yanzhang's cavalry has arrived in Fenyang, there are only foot soldiers at the foot of the mountain, and they all want to go home in the evening. We will attack from a high position and will surely defeat them.

古文：今王深入敌境，偏师不利，若复引退，必为所乘。
现代文：如今大王已经深入敌境，配合部队又出师不利，如果再率兵撤退，一定会被打败。
English: Now that the great king has penetrated deep into the enemy territory, it is disadvantageous for him to cooperate with the troops, and if he retreats with his troops, he will certainly be defeated.

古文：诸军未集者闻梁再克，必不战自溃。
现代文：一些尚未集合全的部队听说又被梁军打败，一定会不战自败。
English: Some troops that have not yet assembled are said to have been defeated by Liang's army, and they will certainly defeat themselves without a fight.

古文：凡决胜料敌，惟观情势，情势已得，断在不疑。
现代文：凡与敌人决战一争胜负，只有认真观察形势，形势已搞清楚，就要果断，不能疑惑。
English: In a decisive battle with the enemy, the only way to win is to carefully observe the situation. Once the situation has been clarified, it is necessary to be decisive and not have any doubts.

古文：王之成败，在此一战；若不决力取胜，纵收馀众北归，河朔非王有也。 
现代文：大王的成功与失败，在此一举。如果不能决一死战，夺取胜利，即使收复散兵回到北面，河朔一带也就不归大王所有了。 
English: The success and failure of the great king, in one fell swoop. If you can't fight a war to the death and win victory, even if you recover the scattered soldiers and return to the north, the area around Hexuo will not be owned by the great king.

古文：昭义节度使李嗣昭曰： 贼无营垒，日晚思归，但以精骑扰之，使不得夕食，俟其引退，追击可破也。
现代文：昭义节度使李嗣昭说： 敌人没有营垒，日夜都想回家，只要用精锐的骑兵去骚扰，使他们不能吃晚饭，等他们退却时，我们就追击，这样就可以打败他们。
English: The Zhao Yi Festival made Li Shizhao say: The enemy has no camp, and they want to go home day and night. Just harass them with elite cavalry so that they can't have dinner. When they retreat, we will chase them so that we can defeat them.

古文：我若敛兵还营，彼归整众复来，胜负未可知也。 
现代文：我们如果收兵回营，他们就会整理好部队卷土重来，胜负就不可知了。 
English: If we pull our troops back to camp, they will reorganize their forces and come back. Victory or defeat is uncertain.

古文：王建及擐甲横槊而进曰： 贼大将已遁，王之骑军一无所失，今击此疲乏之众，如拉朽耳。
现代文：李建及穿起战衣横执武器就出发，说： 敌人的大将已经逃跑，大王的骑兵一无所失，现在攻打这些疲乏的士卒，就像摧毁腐朽之物一样轻而易举。
English: "The enemy general has fled, the great king's cavalry has lost everything, and now attacking these tired soldiers is as easy as destroying rotten things," Li Jian said as he put on his battle clothes and took up his weapons.

古文：王但登山，观臣为王破贼。 
现代文：大王只管登山，观看臣下为王破敌。 
English: The great king only climbed the mountain to watch his vassals defeat the enemy for him.

古文：王愕然曰： 非公等言，吾几误计。 
现代文：晋王惊讶地说： 如果不是你们这么说，我几乎耽误大计。 
English: Surprised, Jin Wang said, "If it wasn't for you saying so, I would have almost delayed the grand plan.

古文：嗣昭、建及以骑兵大呼陷陈，诸军继之，梁兵大败。
现代文：李嗣昭、李建及率骑兵高声呼喊着冲向后梁军的阵营，其他部队在后面紧跟，后梁军大败。
English: Li Shizhao, Li Jian and his cavalry shouted loudly and rushed to the camp of Houliang's army. Other troops followed closely behind, and Houliang's army was defeated.

古文：元城令吴琼、贵乡令胡装，各帅白丁万人，于山下曳柴扬尘，鼓噪以助其势。
现代文：元城令吴琼、贵乡令胡装，各率一万多平民百姓在山下拉着柴，弄得灰尘弥温，击鼓呼喊助威。
English: Dressed as Wu Qiong from Yuancheng and Hu from Guixiang, more than ten thousand common people each pulled firewood under the mountain, making the dust warm, beating drums and shouting encouragement.

古文：梁兵自相腾藉，弃甲山积，死亡者几三万人。
现代文：后梁军士卒自相踩踏，山上到处都堆着后梁军丢弃的兵甲，后梁军被打死的人几乎达三万。
English: The soldiers of the Houliang Army trampled on each other, and the abandoned armor of the Houliang Army was piled up everywhere on the mountain. The number of people killed in the Houliang Army was almost thirty thousand.

古文：装，证之曾孙也。
现代文：胡装是胡证的曾孙。
English: Hu So is the great-grandson of Hu Sheng.

古文：是日，两军所丧士卒各三之二，皆不能振。
现代文：在这一天，两军损失的士卒各有三分之二，都不能重新振兴起来。
English: On this day, two-thirds of the soldiers lost by both armies could not be revived.

古文：晋王还营，闻周德威父子死，哭之恸，曰： 丧吾良将，是吾罪也！ 
现代文：晋王回到军营，听说周德威父子都已战死，哭得十分悲痛，说： 丧失了我的好将领，这是我的罪过。 
English: When Jin Wang returned to the military camp, he heard that Zhou Dewei and his son had both died in battle. He cried with great sorrow and said, "I have lost my good general. This is my fault."

古文：以其子幽州中军兵马使光辅为岚州刺史。
现代文：于是把他的儿子幽州中军兵马使周光辅升任为岚州刺史。
English: Therefore, he promoted his son, Zhou Guangfu, to the post of Zhangzhou Military Historian.

古文：李嗣源与李从珂相失，见晋军挠败，不知王所之，或曰： 王已北渡河矣。 
现代文：李嗣源和李从珂失去联系，李嗣源看到晋军被挫败，也不知道晋王去了哪里，有人说： 晋王民经向北渡过了黄河。 
English: Li Siyuan and Li Congke lost contact. Li Siyuan saw the defeat of the Jin army and did not know where the Jin king had gone. Some people said: "The Jin king and his people crossed the Yellow River to the north."

古文：嗣源遂乘冰北渡，将之相州。
现代文：于是李嗣源也踏着冰向北渡过黄河，准备到相州去。
English: So Li Siyuan also crossed the Yellow River northward on the ice, preparing to go to Xiangzhou.

古文：是日，从珂从王夺山，晚战皆有功。
现代文：这一天，李从珂跟着晋王夺下了土山，晚上战斗中也有功劳。
English: On this day, Li Congke followed the Jin king to seize the soil mountain, and in the evening there was also merit in the battle.

古文：甲子，晋王进攻濮阳，拔之。
现代文：甲子，晋王进攻濮阳，予以攻克。
English: Jia Zi and Jin Wang attacked and conquered Fenyang.

古文：李嗣源知晋军之捷，复来见王于濮阳，王不悦，曰： 公以吾为死邪？
现代文：李嗣源听到晋军胜利的消息，又到濮阳来见晋王，晋王很不高兴，说： 你以为我死了吗？
English: When Li Sigen heard the news of the victory of the Jin army, he went to Shenyang to see the Jin king. The Jin king was very unhappy and said, "Do you think I'm dead?

古文：渡河安之！ 
现代文：过了黄河准备去哪里？ 
English: Where do you plan to go after crossing the Yellow River?

古文：嗣源顿首谢罪。
现代文：李嗣源叩头谢罪。
English: Li Sigen bowed his head in thanks.

古文：王以从珂有功，但赐大钟酒以罚之，然自是待嗣源稍薄。
现代文：晋王认为李从珂战斗有功，但只赐给他一大钟酒来罚他喝。从此以后晋王对待李嗣源冷淡了一些。
English: The king of Jin thought that Li Congke was meritorious in battle, but he only gave him a bottle of wine to punish him. From then on, the king of Jin treated Li Sigen a little coldly.

古文：初，契丹主之弟撒剌阿拨号北大王，谋作乱于其国。
现代文：起初，契丹主的弟弟撒刺阿拨号称北大王，打算在国内阴谋作乱。
English: At first, the brother of the Khitan lord, Sajid Adil, called the North King, intended to conspire in the country.

古文：事觉，契丹主数之曰： 汝与吾如手足，而汝兴此心，我若杀汝，则与汝何异！ 
现代文：事情被发觉后，契丹主责备他说： 我和你亲如手足，而你却起了这种心，我如果杀了你，这和你有何差别？ 
English: After the affair was discovered, the Khitan lord reproached him: I am as close to you as brother and sister, but you have developed this kind of heart. If I kill you, what difference does it make to you?

古文：乃囚之期年而释之。
现代文：于是把他关了一年监狱就又释放了他。
English: So they put him in prison for a year and then released him.

古文：撒剌阿拨帅其众奔晋，晋王厚遇之，养为假子，任为刺史；胡柳之战，以其妻子来奔。
现代文：后来撒刺阿拨率众投奔到晋国，晋王给他的待遇非常丰厚，并把他作为养子，任命他为刺史。在胡柳作战的时候，他的妻子也投奔来晋国。
English: Later, the king of Jin treated him very generously and appointed him as his adopted son. When Hu Liu was fighting, his wife also came to Jin.

古文：晋军至德胜渡，王彦章败卒有走至大梁者，曰： 晋人战胜，将至矣。 
现代文：晋军到了德胜渡，王彦章败散的士卒有走到大梁的，他们说： 晋军取得胜利，将要来到这里。 
English: The Jin army arrived in Deshengdu. Some of the defeated soldiers of Wang Yanzhang went to Daliang. They said: "The Jin army has won the victory and will come here."

古文：顷之，晋兵有先至大梁问次舍者，京城大恐。
现代文：不一会儿，晋国的散兵也有先到大梁询问住处的，大梁人误认为晋军已到，于是京城大惊。
English: In a short while, the scattered soldiers of Jin also went to Dailang first to inquire about the residence. Dailang people mistakenly believed that Jin troops had arrived, so the capital was shocked.

古文：帝驱市人登城，又欲奔洛阳，遇夜而止。
现代文：后梁帝赶快驱赶京城的人登上城的高处，又打算逃到洛阳，只因已是夜晚才作罢。
English: Later, Emperor Liang hurriedly drove the people who chased the capital to climb the heights of the city, and also planned to escape to Luoyang, but only because it was already night.

古文：败卒至者不满千人，伤夷逃散，各归乡里，月馀仅能成军。
现代文：后梁军被击败的散卒回到大梁的不到千人，被打伤逃散的人各自都回到了家乡，一个月以后才整顿成军。
English: After Liang's army was defeated, less than a thousand scattered soldiers returned to Liang, and those who were wounded and fled each returned to their hometowns, only to be reorganized into an army a month later.

古文：均王中贞明五年
现代文：贞明五年
English: Zhenming five years old

古文：春，正月，辛巳，蜀主祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，辛巳，前蜀主到南郊去祭祀，实行大赦。
English: In the first month of spring, the former shoshu went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices and implement an amnesty.

古文：晋李存审于德胜南北夹河筑两城而守之。
现代文：晋将李存审在德胜南北修筑了两城坚守阵地。
English: Jin general Li Cunxuan built two fortresses in the north and south of Desheng.

古文：晋王以存审代周德威为内外番汉马步总管。
现代文：晋王任命李存审代周德威为内外蕃汉马步总管。
English: Jin Wang appointed Li Cunxin's deputy Zhou Dewi as the general manager of the internal and external affairs of the Han Dynasty.

古文：晋王还魏州，遣李嗣昭权知幽州军府事。
现代文：晋王回到魏州以后，派李嗣昭到幽州暂时管理军府事。
English: After Jin Wang returned to Weizhou, he sent Li Shizhao to Yuzhou to temporarily manage the military affairs.

古文：汉主岩立越国夫人马氏为皇后，殷之女也。
现代文：汉主刘岩立越国夫人马氏为皇后，马氏皇后是楚王马殷的女儿。
English: The Empress Ma, the wife of Liu Yanli Yue Guo, the lord of the Han Dynasty, was the Empress. The Empress Ma was the daughter of King Ma Yin of Chu.

古文：三月，丙戌，蜀北路行营都招讨、武德节度使王宗播等自散关击岐，渡渭水，破岐将孟铁山。
现代文：三月，丙戌，前蜀北路行营都招讨、武德节度使王宗播等从散关进攻岐国，他们渡过渭水，打败岐将孟铁山。
English: In March, the pro-Qing and pro-Shu Northern Road marches were all invited, and the Martial Arts Festival made Wang Zonghan and others attack Qigong from Sankuan. They crossed the Surabaya River and defeated the Qigong general Meng Tieshan.

古文：会大雨而还，分兵戍兴元、凤州及威武城。
现代文：后来赶上大雨才撤回部队，分兵驻扎在兴元、凤州和威武城三地。
English: Later, it took a heavy rain to withdraw the troops, and the detachment was stationed in Xingyuan, Fengzhou and Weiwu City.

古文：戊子，天雄节度使、同平章事王宗昱攻陇州，不克。
现代文：戊子，天雄节度使、同平章事王宗昱进攻陇州，没有攻下。
English: Wuzi, Tianxiong, and Tongping, led by Wang Zongyi, attacked Zhangzhou, but failed to capture it.

古文：蜀主奢纵无度，日与太后、太妃游宴于贵臣之家，及游近郡名山，饮酒赋诗，所费不可胜纪。
现代文：前蜀主奔侈放纵没有节制，每天和太后、太妃在显贵的大臣家里游玩饮宴，以及到附近郡县的名山去玩，饮酒赋诗，花费不可胜数。
English: The former emperor of Shu indulged in extravagance without restraint. Every day, he and the empress dowager and the empress dowager would attend banquets at the homes of prominent ministers, as well as go to famous mountains in nearby counties and counties to have fun, drink alcohol, and spend countless amounts of money.

古文：仗内教坊使严旭强取士民女子内宫中，或得厚赂而免之，以是累迁至蓬州刺史。
现代文：依仗内教坊使严旭强行把平民百姓的女孩子抢回送入宫中，有些百姓为了保全女子，向严旭送上厚礼而得免。严旭的官一直升到蓬州刺史。
English: According to the war, Yan Xu forcibly took the girls of the common people back and sent them to the palace. In order to protect the girls, some people sent Yan Xu a gift and were spared. Yan Xu's officials have been promoted to Pengzhou Shishi.

古文：太后、太妃各出教令卖刺史、令、录等官，每一官阙，数人争纳赂，赂多者得之。
现代文：太后、太妃都各自发出教唆的命令去卖刺史、县令、录事参军等官职，每一官位，都有好多人争抢着送礼，礼送得多的人就可以买上。
English: Both the empress dowager and the empress dowager have issued their own orders to sell official posts such as history, county magistrate, record and join the army. For each official post, there are many people competing to send gifts, and those who send more gifts can buy them.

古文：晋王自领卢龙节度使，以中门使李绍宏提举军府事，代李嗣昭。
现代文：晋王亲自为卢龙节度使，任命中门使李绍宏管理军府事，以代替李嗣昭。
English: The king of Jin personally appointed the middle gate envoy Li Shaohong as the envoy of the Lulong Festival to manage the affairs of the military government to replace Li Shizhao.

古文：昭宏，宦者也，本姓马，晋王赐姓名，使与知岚州事孟知祥俱为河东、魏博中门使。
现代文：李绍宏是个宦官，本姓马，晋王赏赐给他姓名，让他和主持岚州事务的孟知祥都任中门使。
English: Li Shaohong was a eunuch whose real surname was Ma. The king of Jin bestowed his name on him, and he and Meng Zhixiang, who presided over the affairs of Zhangzhou, were both appointed as middle gate envoys.

古文：孟知祥又荐教练使雁门郭崇韬能治剧，王以为中门副使。
现代文：孟知祥又推荐教练使雁门人郭崇韬，说他能够管理难度大的事，晋王任命郭为中门副使。
English: Meng Zhixiang also recommended the coach to Guo Chongyao, the man of the Wild Goose Gate, saying that he could manage difficult things. Jin Wang appointed Guo as the vice-envoy of the Middle Gate.

古文：崇韬倜傥有智略，临事敢决，王宠待日隆。
现代文：郭崇韬很洒脱倜傥，有才智谋略，临事果断，晋王宠信他，一天比一天尊崇。
English: Guo Chongyao is very smart, resourceful, and decisive. Jin Wang trusts him and respects him more and more every day.

古文：先是，中门使吴珪、张虔厚相继获罪，及绍宏出幽州，知祥惧祸，称疾辞位，王乃以知祥为河东马步都虞候，自是崇韬专典机密。
现代文：在此之前，中门使吴、张虔厚相继犯罪，到李绍宏出镇幽州以后，孟知祥害怕引起祸端，就装病辞官。晋王便任命孟知祥为河东马步都虞候。从此以后，郭崇韬专门典管国家机密。
English: Prior to this, Zhongmen sent Wu and Zhang Qianhou to commit crimes one after another. After Li Shaohong left the town of Yuzhou, Meng Zhixiang, afraid of causing a disaster, pretended to be a doctor. Jin Wang then appointed Meng Zhixiang as the governor of Magubo in Hedong. Since then, Guo Chongyi has been in charge of state secrets.

古文：诏吴越王镠大举讨淮南。
现代文：后梁帝下诏，命令吴越王钱大举讨伐淮南。
English: Emperor Houliang issued an edict, ordering King Qian of Wuyue to make a large-scale attack on Huainan.

古文：镠以节度副大使传瓘为诸军都指挥使，帅战舰五百艘，自东洲击吴。
现代文：钱任命节度副大使钱传为诸军都指挥使，率领五百艘战船，从东洲攻打吴国。
English: Qian appointed Qian Chuan, vice-ambassador of the Qing Dynasty, as the commander of all the armies, and led five hundred warships to attack Wu from Dongzhou.

古文：吴遣舒州刺史彭彦章及裨将陈汾拒之。
现代文：吴国派遣舒州刺史彭彦章及副将陈汾抵御后梁军。
English: The State of Wu dispatched Shuzhou admiral Peng Yanzhang and vice admiral Chen Qi to resist Hou Liang's army.

古文：吴徐温帅将吏籓镇请吴王称帝，吴王不许。
现代文：吴国徐温带领将帅以及藩镇官吏请求吴王杨隆演称帝，吴王没有答应。
English: Xu Wen of the State of Wu, leading the generals and officials of the state and town, asked Wang Yanglong of the State of Wu to play the emperor, but the King of Wu did not agree.

古文：夏，四月，戊戌朔，即吴国王位。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊戌朔，吴王登王位。
English: In the summer, in April, Wu Wang ascended the throne.

古文：大赦，改元武义。
现代文：实行大赦，改年号为武义。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the name of the year was changed to Wuyi.

古文：建宗庙社稷，置百官，宫殿文物皆用天子礼。
现代文：修建宗庙和社稷坛台，设置朝廷百官，宫殿的礼乐典章全用天子的礼制。
English: The ancestral temple and the altar of the shrine were built, hundreds of officials of the imperial court were set up, and the ceremonial music of the palace was entirely based on the etiquette of the emperor.

古文：以金继土，腊用丑。
现代文：以金行继承唐的土行，腊月用丑。
English: Jin Xing inherits Tang's earth and earth, and Lazy Moon inherits ugliness.

古文：改谥武忠王曰孝武王，庙号太祖，威王曰景王，尊母为太妃；以徐温为大丞相、都督中外诸军事、诸道都统、镇海、宁国节度使、守太尉兼中书令、东海郡王，以徐知诰为左仆射、参政事兼知内外诸军事，仍领江州团练使，以扬府左司马王令谋为内枢密使，营田副使严可求为门下侍郎，盐铁判官骆知祥为中书侍郎，前中书舍人卢择为吏部尚书兼太常卿，掌书记殷文圭为翰林学士，馆驿巡宫游恭为知制诰，前驾部员外郎杨迢为给事中。
现代文：改谥武忠王杨行密为孝武王，庙号为太祖；改谥威王杨渥为景王；尊他的母亲为太妃。任命徐温为大丞相，都督中外诸军事，诸道都统，镇海、宁国节度使，守太尉兼中书令、东海郡王。任命徐知诰为左仆射、参政事兼知内外诸军事，仍然领管江州团练使。任命扬府左司马王令谋为内枢密使，营田副使严可求为门下侍郎，盐铁判官骆知祥为中书侍郎，前中书舍人卢择为吏部尚书兼太常卿，掌书记殷文主为翰林学士，馆驿巡官游恭为知制诰，前驾部员外郎杨迢为给事中。
English: He changed Wu Zhong Wang Yang Xingmi to Xiaowu Wang, and the temple name to Taizu; he changed Wei Wang Yang Wo to King Jing; and his mother to Taifei. He appointed Xu Wen as the grand secretary of the emperor, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the military governor of the various provinces, the chief of the Zhenhai and Ning provinces, the captain of the guard and the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and the king of the Donghai County. He appointed Xu Zhisheng as the left-hand servant of the emperor, the counselor of politics and the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and still in charge of the Jiangsu regimental drill.

古文：择，醴泉人；迢，敬之之孙也。
现代文：卢择是醴泉人。杨迢是杨敬之的孙子。
English: Lu Zheng is a native of Jiuquan. Yang Zheng is the grandson of Yang Jingzhi.

古文：钱传瓘与彭彦章遇；传瓘命每船皆载灰、豆及沙，乙巳，战于狼山江。
现代文：钱传和彭彦章两军相遇，钱传命令每只船上都要装载上灰土、豆子以及沙子。乙巳，两军在长江边狼山交战。
English: When the two armies of Qian Chuan and Peng Yanzhang met, Qian Chuan ordered each boat to be loaded with grey soil, beans and sand. At this time, the two armies clashed at Wolf Mountain on the Yangtze River.

古文：吴船乘风而进，传瓘引舟避之，既过，自后随之。
现代文：吴国的船乘风而进，钱传率领船只躲避开吴船，等吴国的船只过去之后，钱传又从吴船的后面紧跟着。
English: The ship of the State of Wu sailed into the wind. Qian Chuan led the ship to avoid the ship of the State of Wu. After the ship of the State of Wu passed, Qian Chuan followed closely behind the ship of the State of Wu.

古文：吴回船与战，传瓘使顺风扬灰，吴人不能开目；及船舷相接，传瓘使散沙于己船而散豆于吴船，豆为战血所渍，吴人践之皆僵仆。
现代文：吴国的船回过头来与钱传交战，钱传让士卒们顺风扬灰，弄得吴国士卒睁不开眼。等到两军船舷相靠近的时候，钱传让士卒们在自己的船上撒沙子，向吴国的船上撒豆子，这些豆子上沾满了战斗中流的血，吴国士卒踩上这些沾满血的豆子，一动就都摔倒在地。
English: The ships of the State of Wu turned around to fight with Qian Cuan. Qian Cuan's soldiers let the wind blow the ashes, making the soldiers of the State of Wu unable to open their eyes. When the ships of the two armies approached each other, Qian Cuan's soldiers scattered sand on their own ships and beans on the ships of the State of Wu. These beans were stained with blood from the battle. When the soldiers of the State of Wu stepped on these blood-stained beans, they all fell to the ground.

古文：传瓘因纵火焚吴船，吴兵大败。
现代文：钱传因此放火烧了吴军的船只，结果吴军大败。
English: As a result, Qian Chuan set fire to the ships of the Wu army, resulting in a crushing defeat for the Wu army.

古文：彦章战甚力，兵尽，继之以木，身被数十创，陈汾按兵不救；彦章知不免，遂自杀。
现代文：彭彦章抵抗十分努力，武器用完后他又拿着木头继续作战，结果身上被打伤数十处，陈汾按兵不敢，彭彦章知道免不了一死，于是就自杀了。
English: Peng Yanzhang resisted very hard. After he ran out of weapons, he picked up a piece of wood and continued to fight. As a result, he was injured in dozens of places. Chen Yanzhang did not dare to fight. Peng Yanzhang knew that he could not avoid death, so he committed suicide.

古文：传瓘俘吴裨将七十人，斩首千馀级，焚战舰四百艘。
现代文：钱传俘获了吴军将领七十多人，斩杀了一千多人。
English: Qian Chuan captured more than seventy Wu generals and killed more than a thousand of them.

古文：吴人诛汾，籍没家赀，以其半赐彦章家，禀其妻子终身。
现代文：吴国人斩杀了陈汾，把他的家产集中起来全部没收，将陈汾一半家赏赐给彭彦章家，供养他的妻子终身。
English: The people of Wu killed Chen Yao, confiscated all of his family assets, and gave half of Chen Yao's family to the Peng Yan Zhang family to support his wife for life.

古文：贺瑰攻德胜南城，百道俱进，以竹笮联艨艟十馀艘，蒙以牛革，设睥睨、战格如城状，横于河流，以断晋之救兵，使不得渡。
现代文：后梁将贺攻打德胜南城，四面八方一起推进，用竹片作索将十余艘战船连在一起，蒙上牛皮，并像城墙一样做了一些短墙和支架等，横摆在黄河上，以断绝晋军的援兵，使他们不能渡河。
English: Hou Liang led He to attack Desheng South City, and they pushed forward together in all directions. They tied more than ten warships together with bamboo strips as ropes, covered them with cowhide, and made some short walls and brackets like city walls, and placed them on the Yellow River to cut off the Jin reinforcements and prevent them from crossing the river.

古文：晋王自引兵驰往救之，陈于北岸，不能进；遣善游者马破龙入南城，见守将氏延赏，延赏言矢石将尽，陷在顷刻。
现代文：晋王亲自率兵前往援救，在黄河北岸摆开阵势，但不能前进。他派善于游泳的马破龙进入南城，见守将氏延赏，氏延赏对他说这里的弓箭石头都快用完了，不用多久就会被攻克。
English: Jin Wang personally led the troops to the rescue, set up a position on the north bank of the Yellow River, but could not advance. He sent the good swimmer Ma Bolong into Nancheng, and saw the guard, Mr. Yan Bao. Mr. Yan Bao told him that the bows and arrows and stones here were running out, and it would not take long to be conquered.

古文：晋王积金帛于军门，募能破艨童者；众莫知为计，亲将李建及曰： 贺瑰悉众而来，冀此一举；若我军不渡，则彼为得计。
现代文：晋王在军营门口堆了不少金钱丝帛，招募能够击破战船的人。大家都不知道怎么办好。晋王的随身护卫将领李建及说： 贺率领他的全部军队来，希望在此一举。如果我军不渡过黄河，正好让他们得志。
English: Jin Wang piled up a lot of money and silk cocoons at the gate of the military camp to recruit people who could break the warship. Everyone did not know what to do. Jin Wang's bodyguard, General Li Jianji, said: He led his entire army to come, hoping to do it in one fell swoop. If our army does not cross the Yellow River, it is just right for them to succeed.

古文：今日之事，建及请以死决之。 
现代文：今天的事情，我李建及请求和他们决一死战。 
English: Today's matter, I Li Jian and request them to fight to the death.

古文：乃选效节敢死士得三百人，被铠操斧，帅之乘舟而进。
现代文：于是他选拔了敢死效节亲兵三百人，穿上铠甲，拿上刀斧，他领着勇士们乘船出发。
English: So he selected three hundred of his own soldiers who were willing to die, put on armor, took a sword and axe, and led the warriors on a boat.

古文：将至艨童，流矢雨集，建及使操斧者入艨艟间，斧其竹笮，又以木罂载薪，沃油然火，于上流纵之，随以巨舰实甲士，鼓噪攻之。
现代文：快接近战船的时候，像雨一样密集的简向他们身来，李建及让拿刀斧的人冲上战船，砍断竹索，又用木装上柴草，浇上油点燃，从上游顺水放下，随后又用大的战船载满士卒，一边击鼓，一边大声呼叫；向后梁军发起进攻。
English: When they were close to the warship, dense clouds came towards them like rain. Li Jianyi had people with knives and axes rush onto the warship, cut the bamboo ropes, loaded the wood with firewood, poured oil on it, lit it, and lowered it from the upstream, and then used a large warship to load the soldiers, while beating drums and shouting loudly; launched an attack on the rear Liang army.

古文：艨艟既断，随流而下，梁兵焚溺者殆半，晋兵乃得渡。
现代文：后梁军战船的竹笮被割断，便都随流漂了下去，士卒被烧死淹死的将近一半，晋军便渡过了黄河。
English: After the bamboo rafts of the warships of Liang's army were cut, they all floated down with the current. Nearly half of the soldiers were burned to death and drowned, and the Jin army crossed the Yellow River.

古文：瑰解围走，晋兵追之，至濮州而还。
现代文：贺突围逃跑，晋军在后面追赶，一直追到濮州才返回去。
English: He broke through the encirclement and fled, and the Jin army chased after him and did not return until they had chased him all the way to Zhangzhou.

古文：瑰退屯行台村。
现代文：贺退扎在行台村。
English: Heraizawa is in Gyodaimura.

古文：蜀主命天策府诸将无得擅离屯戍。
现代文：前蜀主命令天策府的各位将领不得擅自离开自己驻守的防地。
English: The former Shu ordered the generals of Tianzefu not to leave their garrisons without permission.

古文：五月，丁卯朔，左散旗军使王承谔、承勋、承会违命，蜀主皆原之。
现代文：五月，丁卯朔，左散旗军使王承谔、王承勋、王承会违犯了命令，前蜀主免了他们的罪。
English: In May, Ding Ushuo, the leader of the Left Scattered Banner Army, ordered Wang Chengtao, Wang Chengxun, and Wang Chenghui to violate the order, and the former Shu lord pardoned them.

古文：自是禁令不行。
现代文：从此以后，前蜀主颁布的禁令就行不通了。
English: From now on, the ban issued by the former shu shu will not work.

古文：楚人攻荆南，高季昌求救于吴，吴命镇南节度使刘信等帅洪、吉、抚、信步兵自浏阳趣潭州，武昌节度使李简等帅水军攻复州。
现代文：楚军向荆南发起进攻，高季昌请求吴国援救，吴王命令镇南节度使刘信等率领洪、吉、抚、信四州的步兵从浏阳直奔潭州，命令武昌节度使李简等率领水国进攻复州。
English: The Chu army launched an attack on Jingnan, Gao Jichang asked the State of Wu for help, and the King of Wu ordered the Zhenan Sect to send Liu Xin and other leaders of the infantry of the four states of Hong, Ji, Fuzhou, and Xin straight from Liuyang to Tanzhou, and ordered the Wuchang Sect to send Li Jian and other leaders of the Water Sect to attack Fuzhou.

古文：信等至潭州东境，楚兵释荆南引归。
现代文：刘信等到了潭州的东边时，楚军放弃了进攻荆南而率兵回营。
English: When Liu Xin reached the eastern edge of Tanzhou, the Chu army gave up attacking Jingnan and led the soldiers back to the camp.

古文：简等入复州，执其知州鲍唐。
现代文：李简等进入复州，抓获了复州知州鲍唐。
English: Li Jian and others entered Fuzhou and captured Fuzhou Chizhou Baotang.

古文：六月，吴人败吴越兵于沙山。
现代文：六月，吴国军队在沙山把吴越军打败。
English: In June, the Wu army defeated the Wu Yue army in Shashan.

古文：秋，七月，吴越王镠遣钱传瓘将兵三万攻吴常州，徐温帅诸将拒之，右雄武统军陈璋以水军下海门出其后。
现代文：秋季，七月，吴越王钱派钱传率领三万多士卒向吴国的常州进攻，徐温率各军将领抵御，右雄武统军陈璋率领水军从下面的海门跟在吴越军的后面。
English: In the autumn, in July, the king of Wu Yue, Qian Qian, sent Qian Chuan and more than thirty thousand soldiers to attack Changzhou in the State of Wu. Xu Wen led the generals of the various armies to resist, and Chen Yu, the right-hand man of the unified army, led the navy to follow the Wu Yue army from the lower sea gate.

古文：壬申，战于无锡。
现代文：壬申，两军在无锡交战。
English: Jinshin, the two armies clashed in Wuxi.

古文：会温病热，不能治军，吴越攻中军，飞矢雨集，镇海节度判官陈彦谦迁中军旗鼓于左，取貌类温者，擐甲胄，号令军事，温得少息。
现代文：这时恰好徐温生病发烧，不能统率军队。吴越军攻打吴军主力，射出的箭就像雨一样密集，镇海节度判官陈彦谱把主力部队的战旗战鼓迁在左边，找了一个长相和徐温一样的人，穿上铠甲，指挥作战，这样徐温才得以休息一阵。
English: At this time, Xu Wen fell ill with a fever and was unable to lead the army. The Wu Yue Army attacked the main force of the Wu Army, and the arrows shot out were as dense as rain. Chen Yanpu, the judge of the Zhenhai Festival, moved the battle flag and drums of the main force to the left, found a person who looked like Xu Wen, put on armor, and commanded the battle, so that Xu Wen could rest for a while.

古文：俄顷，疾稍间，出拒之。
现代文：一会儿，徐温的病稍的好转，就出去抵御吴越兵。
English: After a while, when Xu Wen's illness improved slightly, he went out to resist Wu Yuefeng.

古文：时久旱草枯，吴人乘风纵火，吴越兵乱，遂大败，杀其将何逢、吴建，斩首万级。
现代文：这个时候，由于久旱草枯，吴军乘风放火，吴越的军队乱成一团，被吴军打败。吴军杀死了吴越军的将领何逢、吴建，斩杀了一万人。
English: At this time, due to the long dry grass, the Wu army took advantage of the wind to set fire, and the Wu Yue army was defeated by the Wu army. The Wu army killed the general of the Wu Yue army, Wu Jian, and killed 10,000 people.

古文：传瓘遁去，追至山南，复败之。
现代文：钱传逃跑，吴军追到山的南面，又把吴越军打败。
English: Qian Chuan fled, pursued the Wu army to the south of the mountain, and defeated the Wu Yue army.

古文：陈璋败吴越于香弯。
现代文：陈璋在香弯也击败了吴越军。
English: Chen Yu also defeated Wu Yue's army in Xiangbian.

古文：温募生获叛将陈绍者赏钱百万，指挥使崔彦章获之。
现代文：徐温招募能够活捉叛将陈绍的人，给赏赐百万。指挥使崔彦章抓获了陈绍。
English: Xu Wen recruited people who could capture the traitor Chen Shao alive and rewarded them with millions. The commander ordered Cui Yanzhang to capture Chen Shao.

古文：绍勇而多谋，温复使之典兵。
现代文：由于陈绍作战勇敢而又多计谋，徐温重新让他统率部队。
English: As Chen Shao fought bravely and with many stratagems, Xu Wen let him lead the troops again.

古文：初，锦衣之役，吴马军指挥曹筠叛奔吴越，徐温赦其妻子，厚遇之，遣间使告之曰： 使汝不得志而去，吾之过也，汝无以妻子为念。 
现代文：当初在衣锦作战时，吴军的马军指挥曹筠背叛投奔到吴越，徐温没有治他妻子的罪，反而对她很好。后来派出秘使去告诉曹筠说： 你因为不得志而离开吴军，这是我的过错。你不必挂念你的妻子。 
English: At the beginning of the battle in Shijin, Cao Jun, the commander of the horse army of the Wu army, betrayed and rushed to Wu Yue. Xu Wen did not punish his wife's crime, but treated her well. Later, he sent a secret envoy to tell Cao Jun: "It is my fault that you left the Wu army because you were discouraged. You do not have to worry about your wife."

古文：及是役，筠复奔吴。
现代文：在这次战争中，曹筠又回到了吴军。
English: In this war, Cao Pi returned to the Wu army.

古文：温自数昔日不用筠言者三，而不问筠去来之罪，归其田宅，复其军职，筠内愧而卒。
现代文：徐温自己列举了过去没有任用曹筠的三点过错，却没有过问曹筠来去之罪，并把他的田地和住宅归还给他，恢复了他的军职。曹筠因内心深感惭愧而死。
English: Xu Wen himself listed three points of fault for not appointing Cao Pi in the past, but did not question Cao Pi's crime of coming and going, and returned his fields and residences to him and resumed his military post. Cao Pi died of deep shame.

古文：知诰请帅步卒二千，易吴越旗帜铠仗，蹑败卒而东，袭取苏州。
现代文：徐知诰请求率领二千名步卒，换上吴越军队的铠甲、旗帜，跟在吴越败兵的后边，向东面出发，袭取苏州。
English: Xu Zhisheng requested to lead two thousand foot soldiers, put on the armor and flag of the Wu Yue army, follow the defeated soldiers of Wu Yue, and set off to the east to attack Suzhou.

古文：温曰： 尔策固善；然吾且求息兵，未暇如汝言也。 
现代文：徐温说： 你的计策是好的，然而我想让士卒休息一下，没有时间按你讲的去办。 
English: Xu Wen said, "Your strategy is good, but I want to give the soldiers a break. I don't have time to do as you said."

古文：诸将皆以为： 吴越所恃者舟楫，今大旱，水道涸，此天亡之时也，宜尽步骑之势，一举灭之。 
现代文：各将领都认为： 吴越的军队主要依靠的是船只，现在天气大旱，水路干涸，这是老天亡他们的时候，应当将我们的步兵和骑兵全部调动起来，一举消灭他们。 
English: All the generals thought: Wu Yue's army mainly relies on boats. Now the weather is very dry and the waterways are dry. This is the time for God to destroy them. We should mobilize all of our infantry and cavalry and wipe them out at one stroke.

古文：温叹曰： 天下离乱久矣，民困已甚，钱公亦未易可轻；若连兵不解，方为诸君之忧。
现代文：徐温感叹地说： 天下战乱很长时间了，百姓的困苦已非常严重，钱公也不可以轻易小看他。如果连续不断地作战，不肯松懈，才正是诸位所担忧的。
English: Xu Wen said with a sigh: The world has been at war for a long time, the hardships of the people have become very serious, Qian Gong should not easily underestimate him. If you continuously fight and refuse to relax, that is exactly what you are worried about.

古文：今战胜以惧之，戢兵以怀之，使两地之民各安其业，君臣高枕，岂不乐哉！
现代文：现在战胜了他们，应该让他们害怕，我们息兵不战以怀柔，使得两地的百姓们各安其业，君臣们都高枕无忧，难道这不是好事吗？
English: Now that we have defeated them, we should make them afraid. We should not fight, but make peace, so that the people of the two countries can settle their affairs, and the princes and ministers can rest easy. Isn't this a good thing?

古文：多杀何为！ 
现代文：打杖多杀百姓又为了什么呢？ 
English: What's the point of killing more people with sticks?

古文：遂引还。
现代文：于是领兵回去。
English: So he led the soldiers back.

古文：吴越王镠见何逢马，悲不自胜，故将士心附之。
现代文：吴越王钱看到了何逢的战马，悲痛得不能控制自己，所以将士们的心能归服他。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian saw the horse of war, he was so sad that he could not control himself, so the soldiers' hearts could not but submit to him.

古文：宠姬郑氏父犯法当死，左右为之请，镠曰： 岂可以一妇人乱我法。 
现代文：钱宠姬郑氏的父亲犯了国法应当处死，左右大臣都为他请求免死，钱说： 怎么能因为一个妇人家乱了我的国法。 
English: Qian Zhengyi Zheng's father violated the law of the country and should be put to death. Both left and right ministers asked for him to be spared death. Qian said: How can my country's law be disrupted because of a woman's family?

古文：出其女而斩之。
现代文：休郑氏将其父斩首。
English: Hu Zheng decapitated his father.

古文：镠自少在军中，夜未尝寐，倦极则就圆木小枕，或枕大铃，寐熟辄欹而寤，名曰： 警枕 。
现代文：钱从小就在军队中，黑夜从未上床睡过，实在困倦的时候就枕上一个圆木，或枕上一个大铃休息一下，睡着后小木枕或大铃一斜，他就醒了，他把这种枕头叫做 警枕 。
English: Qian had been in the army since he was a child. He never went to bed at night. When he was really sleepy, he would put a log on his pillow or a large bell on his pillow to take a break. After falling asleep, he would wake up when the small wooden pillow or the large bell was tilted. He called this pillow the "alarm pillow."

古文：置粉盘于卧内，有所记则书盘中，比老不倦。
现代文：此外，他还在卧室内放一个粉盘，如有什么需要记下来的就写在粉盘中，一直到老也是这样孜孜不倦。
English: In addition, he also kept a chalkboard in his bedroom. If there was anything that needed to be written down, he would write it down in the chalkboard, and he continued to do so until old age.

古文：或寝方酣，外有白事者，令侍女振纸即寤。
现代文：有时睡得正香甜的时候，如果外面有人来报告事情，他让侍女振动纸张就能醒来。
English: Sometimes, when he was sound asleep, if someone from outside came to report something, he would ask the maid to shake the paper to wake him up.

古文：时弹铜丸于楼墙之外，以警直更者。
现代文：有时他把铜丸弹到楼墙的外面，用这种办法来提醒打更的人。
English: Sometimes he would bounce a copper ball off the outside of the building's walls as a way of alerting the strikers.

古文：尝微行，夜叩北城门，吏不肯启关，曰： 虽大王来亦不可启。 
现代文：有一次他悄悄出去，半夜里敲北城门，守门官不肯开门，说： 即使是大王来也不能给开。 
English: Once he sneaked out and knocked on the north gate of the city in the middle of the night. The gatekeeper refused to open the door, saying: "Even the great king can't open it."

古文：乃自他门入。
现代文：于是他从别的门进去。
English: So he went in by another door.

古文：明日，召北门吏，厚赐之。
现代文：第二天，召见北城门官，很丰厚地赏赐了他。
English: The next day, he summoned the gatekeeper of Beicheng and rewarded him handsomely.

古文：丙戌，吴王立其弟濛为庐江郡公，溥为丹杨郡公，浔为新安郡公，澈为鄱阳郡公，子继明为庐陵郡公。
现代文：丙戌，吴王立他的弟弟杨为庐江郡公，杨溥为丹阳郡公，杨浔为新安郡公，杨澈为鄱阳郡公，立他的儿子杨继明为庐陵郡公。
English: He and Wu Wang appointed his brother Yang to be the county magistrate of Minjiang County, Yang Hui to be the county magistrate of Danyang County, Yang Hui to be the county magistrate of Xin'an County, Yang Che to be the county magistrate of Shenyang County, and appointed his son Yang Jiming to be the county magistrate of Fuling County.

古文：晋王归晋阳，以巡官冯道为掌书记。
现代文：晋王回到晋阳以后，任命巡官冯道为掌书记。
English: After Jin Wang returned to Jinyang, he appointed the inspector Feng Dao as the secretary.

古文：中门使郭崇韬以诸将陪食者众，请省其数。
现代文：中门使郭崇韬认为陪晋王吃饭的人太多，请求减少一些人数。
English: Guo Chongyao, the middle gatekeeper, thought that there were too many people to accompany the king to dinner, and requested that the number of people be reduced.

古文：王怒曰： 孤为效死者设食，亦不得专，可令军中别择河北帅，孤自归太原。 
现代文：晋王很生气地说： 我为保卫国家而不怕牺牲的人准备了饭菜，也不能自做主张，可以让军中另外选择河北的领帅，我自己回太原去。 
English: Jin Wang said angrily, "I have prepared meals for those who are not afraid to sacrifice themselves to defend the country. I can't make up my own mind, I can let the army choose another commander from Hebei, and I will go back to Taiyuan myself."

古文：即召冯道令草词以示众。
现代文：于是马上召见冯道，让他起草告示来告诉大家。
English: So he immediately summoned Feng Dao and asked him to draft a notice to tell everyone.

古文：道执笔逡巡不为，曰： 大王方平河南，定天下，崇韬所请未至大过；大王不从可矣，何必以此惊动远近，使敌国闻之，谓大王君臣不和，非所以隆威望也。 
现代文：冯道拿起笔迟疑徘徊，一直不写，说： 大王刚刚平定河南，安定了天下，郭崇韬所请求的也不是什么大的过错，大王不听从就算了，何必以此惊动远近，如果让敌国知道，就会说大王君臣不和，这不是扩大威望的好办法。 
English: Feng Dao picked up his pen and hesitated, not writing for a long time, saying, "The great king has just pacified Henan and stabilized the world. What Guo Chongzhen asked for is not a big mistake. If the great king does not obey, it is not a big deal. Why should this alarm people near and far? If the enemy country knew about it, they would say that the great king and his ministers are at odds. This is not a good way to expand prestige."

古文：会崇韬入谢，王乃止。
现代文：正好郭崇韬进来谢罪，晋王才停止让冯道写告示。
English: Just as Guo Chongyi came in to apologize, Jin Wang stopped letting Feng Daoxuan write the notice.

古文：初，唐灭高丽，天祐初，高丽石窟寺眇僧躬乂，聚众据开州称王，号大封国，至是，遣佐良尉金立奇入贡于吴。
现代文：当初，唐朝消灭了高丽。天初年，高丽石窟寺的瞎眼和尚躬又聚众占据了开州，并在那里自称为王，号大封国，到这时，派佐良尉金立奇向吴国纳贡。
English: At first, the Tang Dynasty annihilated Goryeo. In the first year of heaven, the blind monk of the Goryeo Grottoes Temple invaded and occupied Kaizhou, where he claimed to be the king and called himself a great vassal state. At this time, he sent Lieutenant Jin Liqi to pay tribute to the State of Wu.

古文：八月，乙未朔，宣义节度使贺瑰卒。
现代文：八月，乙未朔，宣义节度使贺去世。
English: In August, shortly after the proclamation of the Righteous Among the Nations, He died.

古文：以开封尹王瓚为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：任命开封尹王瓒为北面行营招讨使。
English: Kaifeng Yin Wangyao was appointed as the envoy to the north.

古文：瓚将兵五万，自黎阳渡河掩击澶、魏，至顿丘，遇晋兵而旋，瓚为治严，令行禁止，据晋人上游十八里杨村，夹河筑垒，运洛阳竹木造浮梁，自滑州馈运相继。
现代文：王瓒率领五万士卒从黎阳渡过黄河，乘其不备而袭击了澶州、魏州，一直到了顿丘，遇到晋军才退回来。
English: Wang Hui led fifty thousand soldiers to cross the Yellow River from Liyang and took advantage of their unpreparedness to attack Zhangzhou and Weizhou, all the way to Dongqiu, and only retreated when they encountered the Jin army.

古文：晋蕃汉马步副总管、振武节度使李存进亦造浮梁于德胜，或曰： 浮梁须竹笮、铁牛、石囷，我皆无之，何以能成！ 
现代文：王瓒管理军队非常严格，令行禁止。他占据了在晋军上游十八里处的杨村，在黄河两岸修筑营垒，从洛阳运来竹木制造浮桥，从滑州接连不断地运来粮食。晋军蕃汉马步副总管、振武节度使在李存进也在德胜制造浮桥，有人说： 制造浮桥需要竹索、铁牛、石，这些东西我们都没有，怎么能成功？ 
English: He occupied Yangcun, 18 miles upstream of the Jin army, and built fortifications on both sides of the Yellow River. Bamboo and wood were transported from Luoyang to make pontoons, and grain was continuously transported from Luzhou. The Jin army's deputy commander-in-chief, Zhenwu Jiedu, made Li Cunjin also make pontoons in Desheng. Some people said: Making pontoons requires bamboo ropes, iron oxen, and stones. We don't have these things. How can we succeed?

古文：存进不听，以苇笮维巨舰，系于土山巨木，逾月而成，人服其智。
现代文：李存进不听这些人的话，他用苇绳拴住大的战船，再拴在土山上的大树上，一个多月就修成了浮桥，人们都佩服他的聪明。
English: Li Cunxin did not listen to these people's words. He tied the reins to a large warship, then tied it to a large tree on a dirt hill, and built a pontoon bridge in more than a month. People all admired his cleverness.

古文：吴徐温遣使以吴王书归无锡之俘于吴越；吴越王镠亦遣使请和于吴。
现代文：吴国徐温派遣使者拿着吴王的信到吴越，归还在无锡作战时的俘虏，吴越王钱也派遣使者请求和吴国友好往来。
English: Xu Wen of the State of Wu sent an envoy to Wu Yue with a letter from King Wu to return the captives who were still fighting in Wuxi. King Qian of the State of Wu Yue also sent an envoy to request friendly relations with the State of Wu.

古文：自是吴国休兵息民，三十馀州民乐业者二十馀年。
现代文：从此以后，吴国停止了作战，让百姓得到了休息，三十几个州的百姓安居乐业了二十多年。
English: Since then, the state of Wu has stopped fighting, allowing the people to rest. The people of more than 30 states have been living and working in peace for more than 20 years.

古文：吴王及徐温屡遗吴越王镠书，劝镠自王其国；镠不从。
现代文：吴王和徐温曾多次给吴越王钱去信，劝说钱在国内称王，钱没有听从他们的话。
English: Wu Wang and Xu Wen had repeatedly sent letters to Wu Yue Wang Qian, persuading Qian to proclaim himself king in the country. Qian did not listen to them.

古文：九月，丙寅，诏削刘岩官爵，命吴越王镠讨之。
现代文：九月，丙寅，后梁帝下诏书解除刘岩的官职，并命令吴越王钱去讨伐他。
English: In September, Emperor Qianlong issued an edict to dismiss Liu Yan from his official post and ordered Wu Yue Wang Qian to go after him.

古文：镠虽受命，竟不行。
现代文：钱虽然接受了命令，但没有去执行。
English: Although Qian accepted the order, he did not carry it out.

古文：吴庐江公濛有材气，常叹曰： 我国家而为它人所有，可乎！ 
现代文：吴国庐江公杨很有才气，常叹息地说： 我们的国家为他人所有，这样可以吗？ 
English: King Yang of the Lijiang River in the State of Wu was very talented. He often said with a sigh, "Our country is owned by others. Is that okay?

古文：徐温闻而恶之。
现代文：徐温听了杨的话后，对他产生了恶感。
English: After listening to Yang's words, Xu Wen had a bad feeling about him.

