古文：古之圣王，所以取明名广誉，厚功大业，显于天下，不忘于后世，非得人者，未之尝闻。
现代文：古代圣明的君王，之所以能够获得盛名美誉，建立丰功伟业，显赫于天下，为后世所不忘，不是得到民心而受到人们拥护，还从来没有听说过。
English: It has never been heard that the reason why the kings of the ancient holy men were able to gain fame and reputation, establish great achievements and great undertakings, and become prominent in the world, which would not be forgotten by future generations, was not because they won the people's hearts and were supported by people.

古文：暴王之所以失国家，危社稷，覆宗庙，灭于天下，非失人者，未之尝闻。
现代文：暴君之所以丧失国家，危及社稷，宗庙颠覆，湮没无闻，不是由于失掉人们拥护的，也从来没有听说过。
English: The reason why a tyrant loses his country, endangers society, subverts his ancestral temple, and fades into obscurity is not because he has lost the support of the people, nor has it ever been heard of.

古文：今有士之君，皆处欲安，动欲威，战欲胜，守欲固，大者欲王天下，小者欲霸诸侯。而不务得人，是以小者兵挫而地削，大者身死而国亡，故曰：人不可不务也。此天下之极也。
现代文：现今拥有国土的君主，都希望生活安定，办事有威信，战争胜利，防务巩固，大的想统一天下，小的要称霸诸侯，却不重视争取人，所以，弄得小则兵败而地削，大则身死而国灭。所以说： 人 是不可不非常注重的，这是天下顶重要的问题。
English: Nowadays, the monarchs who own the land all hope for a stable life, prestige in their work, victory in war, and consolidation of defense. The big ones want to unify the country, and the small ones want to dominate the princes, but they do not attach importance to winning people. Therefore, if the small ones are defeated, they will be defeated, and the big ones will die and the country will be destroyed. Therefore, it is said: People must be very important. This is the most important issue in the world.

古文：曰：然则得人之道，莫如利之。
现代文：说：争取民心的方法，莫过于让百姓获得利益；而让民众获得利益的方法，莫过于教导民众。
English: "There is no better way to win the hearts and minds of the people than to give them benefits, and there is no better way to give them benefits than to educate them," he said.

古文：利之之道，莫如教之以政，故善为政者，田畴垦而国邑实，朝廷闲而官府治，公法行而私曲止，仓廪实而囹圄空，贤人进而奸民退，其君子上中正而下谄谀。
现代文：所以，善于为政的，总是使得田野得到开垦而且城邑殷实，朝廷安闲而官府清治，国家公法通行而徇私袒护的行径被禁止，粮仓充实而监狱空虚，贤士得到进用而奸邪遭到排斥。
English: Therefore, those who are good at politics always make the fields more cultivated and the cities more prosperous, the imperial court more peaceful and the government more clean, the public law of the country more popular and the act of protecting one's own interests more forbidden, the granaries more abundant and the prisons more empty, the wise men more useful and the evil men repulsed.

古文：其士民贵武勇而贱得利。其庶人好耕农而恶饮食。于是财用足，而饮食薪菜饶。
现代文：国中有德有权的君子人物崇尚公平正直而鄙视谄媚阿谀行为；国中上上下下重视勇毅英武之义举而鄙视贪财逐利之气；国中百姓热爱耕种而痛恨大吃大喝，因而财源用度富足而食用物品如柴粮蔬果等充足。
English: There are virtuous and powerful gentlemen in the country who advocate fairness and honesty and despise flattery and flattery; the middle and upper classes of the country attach importance to the courageous and heroic act of righteousness and despise the greed for profit; the people in the country love to cultivate and hate to eat and drink, so the financial resources are rich and edible goods such as firewood, vegetables and fruits are sufficient.

古文：是故上必宽裕，而有解舍。下必听从，而不疾怨。上下和同，而有礼义，故处安而动威，战胜而守固，是以一战而正诸侯。
现代文：所以，君主要宽厚而有所减免，人民要从而无所怨恨，上下协调而有礼仪，这才会活安定而办事有威信，战争胜利而防务巩固，而一战而征服诸侯。
English: Therefore, the ruler should be generous and have some exemptions, and the people should have no resentment, coordination and etiquette. This will lead to stability and prestige, victory in war and defense consolidation, and conquest of warlords.

古文：不能为政者，田畴荒而国邑虚，朝廷兇而官府乱。
现代文：不善于为政的，总是田荒芜而城邑空虚，朝廷惊扰而官府混乱，公废弃而邪道风行，仓库空虚而监狱人满，贤罢退而奸臣得用。
English: If you are not good at politics, the fields will always be barren and the towns empty, the court will be disturbed and the government will be in chaos, the public will be abandoned and evil will prevail, the warehouses will be empty and the prisons will be full, the wise will retreat and the treacherous will be used.

古文：公法废而私曲行，仓廪虚而囹圄实，贤人退而奸民进，其君子上谄谀而下中正，其士民贵得利而贱武勇，其庶人好饮食而恶耕农，于是财用匮而食饮薪菜乏，上弥残茍，而无解舍，下愈覆鸷而不听从，上下交引而不和同，故处不安而动不威，战不胜而守不固，是以小者兵挫而地削，大者身死而国亡，故以此观之，则政不可不慎也。德有六兴，义有七体，礼有八经，法有五务，权有三度，所谓六兴者何？
现代文：上层人士，总是阿谀成风鄙视公正；士民，总是重视财利而轻视勇武；民，总是喜好吃喝而厌恶耕作，于是财用缺而日常生活困难。君主非常残暴苛刻而无减免，人民特别固执凶顽而不肯服从，上下互相争利而不协调，所以生活不安定而办事无威信，战争不胜而防守不固，于是小则兵败而地削，大则身死而国灭。由此看来，为政就不可不谨慎对待这些问题了。德有 六兴 ，义有 七体 ，礼有 八经 ，法有 五务 ，权有 三度 。什么叫六兴呢？
English: The people at the top have always despised justice; the scholars and commoners have always valued financial gain and despised bravery; the people have always liked to eat and drink, but detested farming, so they have a lack of financial resources and daily life is difficult. The monarch is very cruel and harsh without relief, the people are particularly stubborn and stubborn and refuse to obey, and they compete for profits with each other without coordination, so life is unstable and there is no prestige, the war is not victorious and the defense is not solid, so the small ones are defeated and cut down, and the big ones are killed and the country is destroyed. From this point of view, it is necessary to treat these problems with caution

古文：曰：辟田畴，利坛宅。修树艺，劝士民，勉稼穑，修墙屋，此谓厚其生。
现代文：回答是：开辟田野，建造住宅，讲求种植，劝勉士民，鼓励耕作，修缮房屋，这叫作改善人们生活。
English: The answer is: open up fields, build houses, pay attention to planting, encourage the people, encourage farming, and repair houses. This is called improving people's lives.

古文：发伏利，输墆积修道途，便关市，慎将宿，此谓输之以财。
现代文：开发潜在的财源，疏通积滞的物产，修筑道路，便利贸易，注意送往迎来，这叫给人们输送财货。
English: Developing potential financial resources, clearing the backlog of property, building roads, facilitating trade, and paying attention to sending to usher in, this is called conveying wealth to people.

古文：导水潦，利陂沟，决潘渚，溃泥滞，通郁闭，慎津梁，此谓遗之以利，薄征敛，轻征赋，弛刑罚，赦罪戾，宥小过，此谓宽其政。
现代文：疏浚积水，修通水沟，挖通回流浅滩，清除泥沙淤滞，打通河道堵塞，注意渡口桥梁，这叫作给人们提供便利。薄收租税，轻征捐赋，宽减刑罚，赦免罪犯，宽恕小过，这叫作实施宽大的政治。
English: To dredge the stagnant waters, to repair the ditches, to excavate the returning shoals, to remove the silt, to clear the blockage of the river channels, to pay attention to the ferry bridges, this is called providing convenience to the people. To collect taxes sparingly, to collect donations sparingly, to commute sentences, to pardon criminals, and to forgive minor offenses, this is called implementing a lenient policy.

古文：养长老，慈幼孤，恤鳏寡，问疾病，吊祸丧，此谓匡其急。
现代文：敬养老人，慈恤幼孤，救济鳏寡，关心疾病，吊慰祸丧，这叫作救人之危急。
English: Respect for the elderly, compassion for orphans, relief for widows and widowers, concern for illness, condolences for misfortune, this is called saving people in a critical situation.

古文：衣冻寒。食饥渴，匡贫窭，振罢露。资乏绝，此谓振其穷。
现代文：给寒冷的人以衣服，给饥渴的人以饮食，救助贫陋，赈济破败人家，资助赤贫，这叫作救人之穷困。
English: To clothe the cold, to feed the hungry, to succour the wretched, to comfort the afflicted, to succour the destitute, to succour the wretched, to succour the wretched, to succour the wretched, to succour the wretched, to succour the wretched.

古文：凡此六者，德之兴也。
现代文：这六个方面；都属于兴举德政。
English: These six aspects all belong to the promotion of good governance.

古文：六者既布，则民之所欲，无不得矣。
现代文：这六项能见之实行，人民所要求的，就没有得不到的了。
English: If the people demand the implementation of these six points visibly, there is nothing that cannot be achieved.

古文：夫民必得其所欲，然后听上，听上，然后政可善为也，故曰德不可不兴也。
现代文：人民的欲望必须得到满足，然后才能够听从上面；听从上面，然后政事才能办好。所以说：德政是不可不兴的。
English: The desires of the people must be satisfied before they can listen to the higher authorities, and only after they have listened to the higher authorities can political affairs be carried out well. Therefore, it is said that German politics cannot fail to please.

古文：曰：民知德矣，而未知义，然后明行以导之义，义有七体，七体者何？
现代文：我们说：人民知道了 德 ，而未必懂得 义 ，然后就应该以身作则以教民行义。 义 有七体。什么叫七体呢？
English: We say: the people know virtue, but they may not know righteousness, so they should set an example by teaching the people to practice righteousness. There are seven bodies of righteousness. What are the seven bodies?

古文：敦懞纯固，以备祸乱。和协辑睦，以备寇戎。凡此七者，义之体也。
现代文：回答是：用孝悌慈惠来奉养亲属，用恭敬忠信来事奉君上，用公正友爱来推行礼节，用端正克制来避免犯罪，用节约省用来防备饥荒，用敦厚朴实来戒备祸乱，用和睦协调来防止敌寇。这七个方面，都是义的实体。
English: The answer is: to use filial piety and benevolence to support relatives, to use respect and loyalty to serve the emperor, to use fairness and fraternity to promote etiquette, to use proper restraint to avoid crime, to use thrift and economy to prevent famine, to use courage and simplicity to guard against calamity, and to use harmony and coordination to prevent enemy piracy. These seven aspects are all entities of righteousness.

古文：夫民必知义然后中正，中正然后和调，和调乃能处安，处安然后动威，动威乃可以战胜而守固，故曰义不可不行也。
现代文：人民必须知义然后才能中正，中正然后和睦团结，和睦团结才能生活安定，生活安定然后办事才有威信，有威信才可以战争胜利而防务巩固。所以说： 义 是不可不行的。
English: The people must know righteousness before they can be righteous, and they must be righteous before they can be harmonious and united, and they must be harmonious and united before they can live a stable life, and they must live a stable life before they can act with authority, and they must have authority before they can win the war and consolidate their defense. Therefore, it is said: Righteousness is indispensable.

古文：曰：民知义矣，而未知礼，然后饰八经以导之礼。
现代文：我们说：人民知道 义 ，而未必懂得 礼 。然后就应该整顿 八经 以教民行礼。
English: We said: The people know righteousness, but they may not know propriety. Then we should rectify the Eight Classics and teach the people how to proffer propriety.

古文：所谓八经者何？
现代文：什么是八经呢？
English: What are the eight sutras?

古文：曰：上下有义，贵贱有分，长幼有等贫富有度，凡此八者，礼之经也。
现代文：回答是：上与下都有礼仪，贵与贱都有本分，长与幼都守次序，贫与富都守法度。这八个方面是礼的纲领。
English: The answer is: There is etiquette for both the upper and the lower classes, there are duties for both the high and the low, the elder and the younger keep the order, and the poor and the rich keep the law. These eight aspects are the program of etiquette.

古文：故上下无义则乱，贵贱无分则争，长幼无等则倍，贫富无度则失。
现代文：所以，上与下没有礼仪就要乱，贵与贱不守本分就要争，长与幼没有等次就要叛离，贫与富不依法度就失其节制。
English: Therefore, if there is no etiquette between the upper and lower classes, there will be chaos; if the high and the low do not keep their duties, there will be conflict; if there is no hierarchy between the old and the young, there will be defection; if there is no rule of law between the rich and the poor, there will be no restraint.

古文：上下乱，贵贱争，长幼倍，贫富失，而国不乱者，未之尝闻也。
现代文：上下乱，贵贱争，长幼叛离，贫富失其节制，而国家还不陷于混乱，是没有听说过的。
English: It is unheard of for a country not to be in a state of chaos, with upheavals between the upper and lower classes, struggles between the rich and the poor, children and elders defecting, and the rich and the poor losing their self-control.

古文：是故圣王饬此八礼，以导其民；八者各得其义，则为人君者，中正而无私。
现代文：因此，圣明君主总是整顿这八礼以教导人民。
English: Therefore, the Sage Monarch always rectifies these eight rites to teach the people.

古文：为人臣者，忠信而不党。为人父者，慈惠以教。为人子者，孝悌以肃。为人兄者，宽裕以诲。为人弟者，比顺以敬。为人夫者，敦懞以固。
现代文：八方面都各得其宜，作君主的就公正而不偏私，作臣子的就忠信而不结党，作父母的以教育实现慈惠，作子女的以严肃实现孝悌，作兄长的以教诲实现宽厚，作人弟的以恭敬实现和顺，作丈夫的以专一实现敦厚；作人妻的以贞节进行劝勉。
English: The eight aspects are all appropriate. As a monarch, one should be fair and not partial. As a subject, one should be loyal and not partisan. As a parent, one should achieve benevolence through education. As a child, one should achieve filial piety through seriousness. As an elder brother, one should achieve generosity through education. As a younger brother, one should achieve harmony through respect. As a husband, one should achieve generosity through single-mindedness. As a wife, one should exhort with chastity.

古文：为人妻者，劝勉以贞。夫然则下不倍上，臣不杀君，贱不踰贵，少不陵长，远不闲亲，新不闲旧，小不加大，淫不破义，凡此八者，礼之经也。
现代文：能这样，就可以做到：下不叛上，臣不杀君，贱不越贵，少不欺长，疏不间亲，新不间旧，小不越大，放荡不破毁正义。这八项是礼的常规。
English: If this can be done, it can be done: the lower does not rebel, the vassal does not kill the prince, the lower does not become more expensive, the lesser does not deceive the greater, the estranged does not intermarry, the new does not intermarry with the old, the small does not become greater, and debauchery does not destroy justice. These eight items are the rules of etiquette.

古文：夫人必知礼然后恭敬，恭敬然后尊让，尊让然后少长贵贱不相踰越，少长贵贱不相踰越，故乱不生而患不作，故曰礼不可不谨也。
现代文：所以，人必知礼然后才能恭敬，恭敬然后才能尊让，尊让然后才能做到少长贵贱不相逾越，少长贵贱不相逾越，乱事就不会产生而祸患也不会发作了。因此说： 礼 是不可不重视的。
English: Therefore, people must know the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect, respect the etiquette before they can respect.

古文：曰：民知礼矣，而未知务，然后布法以任力，任力有五务，五务者何？
现代文：我们说：人民知道礼，而未必懂得 务 ，然后就该依法令安排人力。安排人力有 五务 。什么是五务呢？
English: We say: the people know etiquette, but they do not necessarily know duties, then it is necessary to arrange manpower according to the law. There are five duties to arrange manpower. What are the five duties?

古文：曰：君择臣而任官，大夫任官辩事，官长任事守职，士修身功材，庶人耕农树艺。
现代文：回答说：君主择臣任官，大夫任官治事，官长负责其事而严守职责，士人修养品德而攻治才艺，平民则从事农耕种植。
English: He replied: The monarch selects and appoints officials, the doctor is responsible for the administration of the government, the officials are responsible for their affairs and strictly abide by their duties, the scholars cultivate moral character and cultivate talent, and the commoners are engaged in farming and planting.

古文：君择臣而任官，则事不烦乱。大夫任官辩事，则举措时。官长任事守职，则动作和。士修身功材，则贤良发。庶人耕农树艺，则财用足。
现代文：君主能够择臣而任官，政事就不紊乱；大夫任官办事，措施就可以及时；官长分工任事而严守职责，行动就可以协调；士人能够修身学艺，贤良人材就可以出现；平民从事农耕种植，财用就可以充足了。
English: If the monarch can choose his vassals and appoint officials, the political affairs will not be disorderly; if the doctor is appointed as an official, the measures can be timely; if the officials are assigned to duties and strictly observe their duties, the actions can be coordinated; if the scholars can improve themselves and study, then good talents can appear; if the commoners are engaged in farming and planting, the financial expenses can be sufficient.

古文：故曰：凡此五者，力之务也。
现代文：所以说：这五方面，就是人力的各有专务。
English: Therefore, it is said that these five aspects are the special tasks of human resources.

古文：夫民必知务，然后心一，心一然后意专，心一而意专，然后功足观也。
现代文：人民必须认识这些专务，然后才能思想统一，思想统一然后才能专心致志，思想统一而专心致志，然后功业就可观了。
English: The people must know these special tasks before they can unify their thoughts, unify their thoughts before they can concentrate their efforts, unify their thoughts while concentrating their efforts, and then their achievements can be appreciated.

古文：故曰：力不可不务也。
现代文：所以说：安排人力是不可不有所专务的。
English: Therefore, it is said that it is essential to allocate manpower to specific tasks.

古文：曰：民知务矣，而未知权，然后考三度以动之；所谓三度者何？
现代文：我们说：人民知道务，还未必懂得 权 ，然后就该考究 三度 来行动。什么是三度呢？
English: We say: the people know their duties, but they do not necessarily know their rights, and then they should study and act three times. What is three times?

古文：曰：上度之天祥，下度之地宜，中度之人顺，此所谓三度。故曰：天时不祥，则有水旱。地道不宜，则有饥馑。
现代文：回答说：上考度天时，下考度地利，中考度人和，这就是所谓三度，所以说：天时不祥，则有水旱；地利不宜，则有饥荒；人道不和，则有祸患。
English: He replied, "When the weather is bad, there will be droughts; when the weather is unfavorable, there will be famines; and when there is discord among people, there will be disasters.

古文：人道不顺，则有祸乱；此三者之来也，政召之。曰：审时以举事，以事动民，以民动国，以国动天下。
现代文：三者的到来，都是政事不好招致的。所以说：要审度时机来举办大事，用举事发动人民，用人民发动国力，用一国发动天下。
English: The arrival of all three was caused by bad political affairs. Therefore, it was said: it is necessary to assess the opportunity to hold major events, use the event to mobilize the people, use the people to mobilize national strength, and use a country to mobilize the world.

古文：天下动，然后功名可成也，故民必知权然后举错得。举错得则民和辑，民和辑则功名立矣，故曰：权不可不度也。
现代文：天下动员起来了，然后功业就可以有成。所以，人民必须懂得权衡轻重，然后才举措得当；举措得当，则人民和睦；人民和睦，则功业建立起来了。因此说：权衡轻重这一点，不可不善加考度。
English: The whole world is mobilized, and then the cause can be accomplished. Therefore, the people must know how to weigh the weight and then take the right measures; if the measures are appropriate, then the people are harmonious; if the people are harmonious, then the cause is established. Therefore, it is said that the weight and importance of this must be well considered.

古文：故曰五经既布，然后逐奸民，诘轴伪，屏谗慝，而毋听淫辞，毋作淫巧。
现代文：五项纲领措施既已施行，然后就要驱逐奸民，查究伪诈，排除谗言邪恶之徒，而且不准听淫乱言词，不准造淫奢物品。
English: After the implementation of the five measures of the program, it is necessary to expel the traitors, investigate the frauds, eliminate the evil doers, and do not listen to the obscene words and do not make luxury goods.

古文：若民有淫行邪性，树为淫辞，作为淫巧，以上谄君上，而下惑百姓，移国动众，以害民务者，其刑死流，故曰：凡人君之所以内失百姓，外失诸侯，兵挫而地削，名卑而国亏，社稷灭覆，身体危殆，非生于谄淫者未之尝闻也。
现代文：如果人们有淫行邪性，传播淫乱言词，制造淫奢物品，用以取悦君主，惑乱百姓，移国动众，以扰害人民务正业的，要处以死刑或流刑。所以说：凡人君内失百姓，外失诸侯，兵败而国土被削，名卑而国家受害，社稷覆灭，自身危殆的，没有不是由于对淫乱的喜悦而引起的。
English: Therefore, it is said that there is nothing in the life of an ordinary person that is not caused by the joy of fornication, such as losing the people at home, losing the provinces abroad, being defeated in war and losing the land, being humiliated and losing the country, destroying the society, and being in danger.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：曰：淫声谄耳，淫观谄目，耳目之所好谄心，心之所好伤民，民伤而身不危者，未之尝闻也。
现代文：回答是：淫乱的声音悦其耳，淫乱的观赏悦其目。耳目之所好，悦其心；放任内心之所好，就伤害人民。伤害了人民而自身不危亡的事，是从来没有听到过的。
English: The answer is: the sound of lewdness pleases the ear, the sight of lewdness pleases the eye, what pleases the eye pleases the ear, what pleases the heart pleases the heart, and what pleases the heart injures the people, but what injures the people without injuring oneself is unheard of.

古文：曰：实圹虚，垦田畴，修墙屋，则国家富。节饮食，撙衣服，则财用足。举贤良，务功劳，布德惠，则贤人进。逐奸人，诘轴伪，去谗慝，则奸人止。修饥馑，救灾害，振罢露，则国家定。
现代文：我们说：移民垦荒，开垦农田，修筑房屋，国家就能富裕；节约饮食，撙节衣服，财用就会充足；推举贤良，注重功绩，广布德惠，贤人就得到进用；驱逐奸人，查究伪诈，排除谗言邪恶之徒，奸人就消声匿迹；防备饥荒，救助灾害，贩济破败人家，国家就会安定。
English: We said: Immigrants will reclaim the wasteland, reclaim farmland, build houses, and the country will be able to become rich; save food, save clothes, and the financial use will be sufficient; promote the virtuous, pay attention to merit, spread virtue and benefit, and the wise will be used; expel the traitors, investigate the fraud, eliminate the evil-doers, and the traitors will disappear; prevent famine, rescue disasters, and ruin people's homes, and the country will be stable.

古文：明王之务，在于强本事，去无用，然后民可使富。论贤人，用有能，而民可使治。薄税敛，毋茍于民，待以忠爱，而民可使亲；三者，霸王之事也。
现代文：英明君主的急务，在于加强农业，废除无用之物的生产，然后人民可以富裕；选拔贤才，任用能臣，人民就可以得到治理；减轻赋税，不苛求于民，并以忠爱相待，就可以使人民亲近。这三项都是成就王、霸之业的大事。
English: The urgent task of a wise monarch is to strengthen agriculture and abolish the production of useless things, so that the people can become rich; to select talents and appoint capable ministers, so that the people can be governed; to reduce taxes, not to be demanding of the people, and to treat them with loyalty, so that the people can be close.

古文：事有本而仁义其要也，今工以巧矣，而民不足于备用者，其悦在玩好。
现代文：事物都有根本，而仁义是其关键。
English: All things have a root, and benevolence is the key to it.

古文：农以劳矣，而天下饥者，其悦在珍怪，方丈陈于前。女以巧矣，而天下寒者，其悦在文绣。
现代文：现在，工匠是够巧的了，然而人民需用的东西得不到满足，就是因为君主过于喜欢玩好的器物；农民是够劳苦的了，然而天下还无粮挨饿，就是因为君主过于喜欢珍奇的食品；妇女也是够巧妙的了，然而人们却在无衣挨冻，就是因为君主过份喜欢华丽的服饰。
English: Now, the craftsmen are clever enough, but the people's needs are not satisfied, because the monarch is too fond of playing with good utensils; the peasants are hardworking enough, but the world is starving, because the monarch is too fond of rare foods; women are also clever enough, but people are freezing without clothes, because the monarch is too fond of gorgeous clothes.

古文：是故博带梨，大袂列，文绣染，刻镂削，雕琢采。
现代文：所以，这就需要把宽大的带子裁成窄小的，把肥大的袖子变成窄瘦的，把华丽的服饰染成单色，把刻楼的图案削掉，把雕琢的花纹磨平。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to cut the wide straps into narrow ones, turn the fat sleeves into thin ones, dye the gorgeous clothes into monochrome, cut off the carved patterns, and smooth the carved patterns.

古文：关几而不征，市鄽而不税。
现代文：关卡上只稽查而不征捐，市场上只存放货物而不收税。
English: At checkpoints, only inspections are carried out and no taxes are collected, and only goods are stored on the market and no taxes are collected.

古文：是故古之良工，不劳其知巧以为玩好，无用之物，守法者不失。
现代文：古代的优良工匠，不运用他的智巧来做玩好的东西。所以，无用之物，守法者从不生产。
English: The good craftsmen of old did not use their ingenuity to make playful things, so the law-abiding never produce useless things.

