古文：黄帝问曰：春脉如弦，何如而弦？
现代文：黄帝问道：春时的脉象如弦，怎样才算弦？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "In spring, the pulse is like a string. How do you count the strings?"

古文：岐伯对曰：春脉者，肝也，东方木也，万物之所以始生也，故其气来，软弱轻虚而滑，端直以长，故曰弦，反此者病。
现代文：岐伯回答说：春脉主应肝脏，属东方之木。在这个季节里，万物开始生长，因此脉气来时，软弱轻虚而滑，端直而长，所以叫做弦，假如违反了这种现象，就是病脉。
English: Qibo replied, "The vernal vein belongs to the liver, which is a tree of the East. In this season, all things begin to grow, so when the pulse comes, it is weak, light and slippery, and straight and long, so it is called the string. If it violates this phenomenon, it is the diseased vein.

古文：帝曰：何如而反？
现代文：黄帝道：怎样才称反呢？
English: Huang Di said: How can it be called rebellion?

古文：岐伯曰：其气来实而强，此谓太过，病在外。其气来不实而微，此谓不及，病在中。
现代文：岐伯说：其脉气来，应指实而有力，这叫做太过，主病在外；如脉来不实而微弱，这叫做不及，主病在里。
English: Qibo said, "If the pulse comes from the real and powerful, it is called too much, and the main disease is outside; if the pulse comes from the unreal and weak, it is called insufficient, and the main disease is inside.

古文：帝曰：春脉太过与不及，其病皆何如？
现代文：黄帝道：春脉太过与不及，发生的病变怎样？
English: Huang Di said: the vernal vein is too much and too little, what about the lesions?

古文：岐伯曰：太过则令人善怒，忽忽眩冒而巅疾；其不及则令人胸痛引背，下则两胁胠满。
现代文：岐伯说：太过会使人记忆力衰退，精神恍惚，头昏而两目视物眩转，而发生巅顶疾病；其不及会使人胸部作痛，牵连背部，往下则两侧胁胠部位胀满。
English: Qi Bo said: too much will cause people's memory to decline, mental trance, dizziness and blurred vision, and peak disease will occur; too little will cause people's chest to ache, involving the back, and both sides of the neck will be swollen.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：夏脉如钩，何如而钩？
现代文：夏时的脉象如钩，怎样才算钩？
English: The pulse of summer is like a hook, how can it be considered a hook?

古文：岐伯曰：夏脉者，心也，南方火也，万物之所以盛长也，故其气来盛去衰，故曰钩，反此者病。
现代文：岐伯说：夏脉主应心脏，属南方之火，在这个季节里，万物生长茂盛，因此脉气来时充盛，去时轻微，犹如鱼钩之形象，所以叫做钩脉，假如违反了这种现象，就是病脉。
English: Qi Bo said: "The summer vein is mainly related to the heart, which belongs to the fire of the south. In this season, everything grows luxuriantly. Therefore, the pulse is full when it comes and light when it goes. It is like the image of a fish hook, so it is called the hook vein. If it violates this phenomenon, it is the diseased vein.

古文：岐伯曰：其气来盛去亦盛，此谓太过，病在外。其气来不盛，去反盛，此谓不及，病在中。
现代文：岐伯说：其脉气来盛去亦盛，这叫做太过，主病在外；如脉气来时不盛，去时反充盛有余，这叫做不及，主病在里。
English: Qi Bo said, "If the pulse qi is in and out of balance, it is called too much, and the main disease is outside. If the pulse qi is not in balance when it comes in, but is in balance when it goes out, it is called insufficient, and the main disease is inside.

古文：帝曰：夏脉太过与不及，其病皆何如？
现代文：黄帝道：夏脉太过与不及，发生的病变怎样？
English: Huang Di said: The summer veins are too much and too little, what about the lesions?

古文：岐伯曰：太过则令人身热而肤痛，为浸淫；其不及则令人烦心，上见咳唾，下为气泄。
现代文：岐伯说：太过会使人身体发热，皮肤痛，热邪侵淫成疮；不及会使人心虚作烦，上部出现咳嗽唾沫，下部出现矢气下泄。
English: Qi Bo said: too much will make people's body feverish, skin pain, fever will invade into sores; too little will make people's heart empty, the upper part will appear coughing spittle, and the lower part will appear diarrhea.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：秋脉如浮，何如而浮？
现代文：秋天的脉象如浮，怎样才算浮？
English: The pulse of autumn is buoyant, how can it be considered buoyant?

古文：岐伯曰：秋脉者，肺也，西方金也，万物之所以收成也，故其气来轻虚以浮，来急去散，故曰浮，反此者病。
现代文：岐伯说：秋脉主应肺脏，属西方之金，在这个季节里，万物收成，因此脉气来时轻虚以浮，来急去散，所以叫做浮。
English: Qibo said: "The autumn vein should be the lung, which is the gold of the West. In this season, everything is harvested. Therefore, when the pulse comes, it is light and floating, and when it comes and goes, it is called floating.

古文：岐伯曰：其气来，毛而中央坚，两旁虚，此谓太过，病在外。其气来，毛而微，此谓不及，病在中。
现代文：假如违反了这种现象，就是病脉。岐伯说：其脉气来浮软而中央坚，两旁虚，这叫做太过，主病在外；其脉气来浮软而微，这叫做不及，主病在里。
English: If this phenomenon is violated, it is a disease vein. Qi Bo said: the pulse gas comes from the soft and the central core, and the two sides are empty, which is called too much, the main disease is outside; the pulse gas comes from the soft and weak, which is called not enough, the main disease is inside.

古文：帝曰：秋脉太过与不及，其病皆何如？
现代文：黄帝道：秋脉太过与不及，发生的病变怎样？
English: Huang Di said: the autumn vein is too much and too little, how is the lesion?

古文：岐伯曰：太过则令人逆气而背痛。愠愠然，其不及则令人喘，呼吸少气而咳，上气见血，下闻病音。
现代文：岐伯说：太过会使人气逆，背部作痛，愠愠然郁闷而不舒畅；其不及会使人呼吸短气，咳嗽气喘，其上逆而出血，喉间有喘息声音。
English: Qi Bo said: too much will make people irritable, back pain, depressed and uncomfortable; too little will cause shortness of breath, coughing and wheezing, and on the contrary, bleeding, and wheezing sound between the larynx.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：冬脉如营，何如而营？
现代文：冬时的脉象如营，怎样才算营？
English: The pulse of winter is like a camp, how can it be considered a camp?

古文：岐伯曰：冬脉者，肾也，北方水也，万物之所以合藏也，故其气来沉以搏，故曰营，反此者病。
现代文：岐伯说：冬脉主应肾脏，属北方之水，在这个季节里，万物闭藏，因此脉气来时沉而搏手，所以叫做营。
English: Qibo said: "The winter pulse is mainly due to the kidney, which belongs to the water of the north. In this season, all things are closed, so the pulse comes when it is heavy and fights, so it is called camp.

古文：岐伯曰：其气来如弹石者，此谓太过，病在外。其去如数者，此谓不及，病在中。
现代文：假如违反了这种现象，就是病脉。岐伯说：其脉来如弹石一般坚硬，这叫做太过，主病在外；如脉去虚数，这叫做不及，主病在里。
English: If this phenomenon is violated, it is a disease vein. Qi Bo said: the vein is as hard as a pebble, which is called too much, the main disease is outside; if the vein is out of the imaginary number, it is called not enough, the main disease is inside.

古文：帝曰：冬脉太过与不及，其病皆何如？
现代文：黄帝道：冬脉太过与不及，发生的病变怎样？
English: Huang Di Dao: Winter veins are too much and too little, what about the lesions that occur?

古文：岐伯曰：太过则令人解㑊，脊脉痛，而少气不欲言；其不及则令人心悬，如病饥，䏚中清，脊中痛，少腹满，小便变。
现代文：岐伯说：太过会使人精神不振，身体懈怠，背部的经脉疼痛，气短，懒于说话；不及则使人心如悬，如同腹中饥饿之状，季胁下空软部位清冷，脊骨作痛，少腹胀满，小便变长。
English: Qi Bo said: too much will make people feel depressed, body slackness, pain in the meridians of the back, shortness of breath, and laziness to speak; too little will make people feel hungover, like hunger in the abdomen, coldness in the empty soft parts under the seasonal cold, pain in the spine, less fullness in the abdomen, and longer urination.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得对！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：帝曰：四时之序，逆从之变异也，然脾脉独，何主？
现代文：黄帝道：春夏秋冬四时的脉象，有逆有从，其变化各异，但独未论及脾脉，究竟脾脉主何时令？
English: Huangdi Dao: The pulse in the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter has its ups and downs, and its changes vary. However, the splenic pulse is not discussed. When is the splenic pulse dominant?

古文：岐伯曰：脾脉者土也，孤脏，以灌四旁者也。
现代文：岐伯说：脾脉属土，脾位居中央为独尊之脏，灌溉滋养其它四脏以同时发挥作用。
English: Qi Bo said: the splenic vein belongs to the soil, the spleen is located in the center as the most important organ, and the irrigation nourishes the other four organs to play a role at the same time.

古文：帝曰：然则脾善恶可得见之乎？
现代文：黄帝道：脾脉的正常与异常可以得见吗？
English: Huang Di: Can the normal and abnormal splenic veins be seen?

古文：岐伯曰：善者不可得见，恶者可见。
现代文：岐伯说：正常的脾脉不可能见到，有病的脾脉是可以见到的。
English: Qi Bo said: It is impossible to see a normal splenic artery, but it is possible to see a diseased splenic artery.

古文：帝曰：恶者何如可见？
现代文：黄帝道：有病的脾脉怎样？
English: Huangdi Dao: What about the diseased spleen?

古文：岐伯曰：其来如水之流者，此谓太过，病在外。如乌之喙者，此谓不及，病在中。
现代文：岐伯说：其来如水之流散，这叫做太过，主病在外；其来尖锐如乌鸦之喙，这叫做不及，主病在中。
English: Qibo said, "If it comes like a stream of water, it is called too much, the main disease is outside; if it comes sharply like a crow's beak, it is called not enough, the main disease is in the middle.

古文：帝曰：夫子言脾为孤藏，中央土，以灌四旁，其太过与不及，其病皆何如？
现代文：黄帝道：先生说脾为孤脏，位居中央属土，以灌溉四旁，它的太过和不及各发生什么病变？
English: Huang Di said: Mr. said that the spleen is a solitary organ, located in the central part of the body, surrounded by irrigation, it is too much and not enough, what lesions occur?

古文：岐伯曰：太过则令人四肢不举，其不及则令人九窍不通，名曰重强。
现代文：岐伯说：太过会使人四肢不能举动，不及则使人九窍不通，名叫重强。
English: Qibo said: Too much will make people unable to move their limbs, and too little will make people unable to understand anything. It is called heavy and strong.

古文：帝瞿然而起，再拜而稽首曰：善。
现代文：黄帝惊悟肃然起立，敬个礼道：很好！
English: Surprised, the Yellow Emperor stood up solemnly and saluted: "Very good!

古文：吾得脉之大要，天下至数，《五色》、《脉变》、《揆度》、《奇恒》，道在于一，神转不回，回则不转，乃失其机，至数之要，迫近以微，著之玉版，藏之藏府，每旦读之，名曰《玉机》。
现代文：我懂得诊脉的要领了，这是天下极其重要的道理。《五色》、《脉变》、《揆度》、《奇恒》等书，阐述的道理都是一致的，就在于一个 神 字，神应按四时的规律运转不息，向前而不能逆转，逆行则不能回转，也就失去了生机，这是极其重要的道理，接近天机，十分微妙，要把这些道理著录在玉版上面，藏于枢要内府，每天早上诵读，取名为《玉机》。
English: I understand the essentials of diagnosing the pulse, which is an extremely important principle in the world. Books such as "Five Colors," "Pulse Change," "Temperature" and "Peculiarity" all expound the same principle, which lies in a divine word. The divine word should operate continuously according to the four-hour rule, moving forward but not reversing, and moving backward but not rotating, thus losing vitality. This is an extremely important principle, close to the heavenly machine, very subtle. These principles should be recorded on a jade plate, hidden in the inner palace, and read every morning. It is called "Jade Machine."

古文：五脏受气于其所生，传之于其所胜，气舍于其所生，死于其所不胜。
现代文：五脏疾病的传变，是受病气于其所生之脏，传于其所胜之脏，病气留舍于生我之脏，死于我所不胜之脏。
English: The transmission of the disease of the five viscera is transmitted by the disease to the born dirt, transmitted to the defeated dirt, the disease left in the born dirt, and died in the defeated dirt.

古文：心受气于脾，传之于肺，气舍于肝，至肾而死。脾受气于肺，传之于肾，气舍于心，至肝而死。
现代文：当病到将要死的时候，必先传行于相克之脏，病者乃死。这是病气的逆传，所以会死亡。例如，肝受病气于心脏，而又传行于脾脏，其病气留舍于肾脏，传到肺脏而死。
English: For example, if the liver is affected by a disease in the heart, and the disease is transmitted to the spleen, and the disease is left in the kidneys, and the disease is transmitted to the lungs, and the patient dies.

古文：肺受气于肾，传之于肝，气舍于脾，至心而死。
现代文：心受病气于脾脏，其病气留舍于肝脏，传到肾脏而死。
English: The heart is affected by the disease in the spleen, and the disease is left in the liver and spreads to the kidneys and dies.

古文：肾受气于肝，传之于心，气舍于肺，至脾而死。
现代文：肺受病气于肾脏，传行于肝脏，病气留舍于脾脏，传到心脏而死。
English: The lung is affected by the kidney, transmitted to the liver, the disease is left in the spleen, transmitted to the heart and dies.

古文：此皆逆死也，一日一夜，五分之，此所以占死生之早暮也。
现代文：以一日一夜划分为五个阶段，分属五脏，就可以推测死亡的早晚时间。
English: By dividing one day and one night into five stages, which belong to the five viscera, it is possible to estimate the time of death.

古文：黄帝曰：五脏相通，移皆有次。
现代文：黄帝道：五脏是相通连的，病气的转移，都有一定的次序。
English: Huang Di said: The five viscera are interconnected, and the transfer of illness has a certain order.

古文：五脏有病，则各传其所胜。不治，法三月，若六月，若三日，若六日，传五脏而当死，是顺传所胜之次。
现代文：假如五脏有病，则各传其所胜；若不能掌握治病的时机，那么三个月或六个月，或三天，或六天，传遍五脏就当死了，这是相克的顺传次序。
English: If there is a disease in the five internal organs, then each organ will pass on its victory; if it is not possible to grasp the opportunity to cure the disease, then three months or six months, or three days, or six days, spread throughout the five internal organs and die, this is the order of succession.

古文：故曰： 别于阳者，知病从来；别于阴者，知死生之期。 
现代文：所以说： 能辨别三阳的，可以知道病从何经而来；能辨别三阴的，可以知道病的死生日期。 
English: Therefore, he said, "If you can distinguish the three yang, you can know where the disease comes from; if you can distinguish the three yin, you can know the date of death and birth of the disease."

古文：言知至其所困而死。
现代文：这就是说，知道病气至其所不克的脏而死。
English: That is to say, they die knowing that they are as filthy as they can get.

古文：是故风者，百病之长也。
现代文：风为六淫之首，所以风邪是百病之长。
English: The wind is the first of the six diseases, so colds are the longest of all diseases.

古文：今风寒客于人，使人毫毛毕直，皮肤闭而为热。当是之时，可汗而发也。或痹不仁肿痛，当是之时，可汤熨及火灸刺而去之。
现代文：风寒中人，使人毫毛直竖，皮肤闭而发热，在这个时候，可用发汗的方法治疗；至风寒入于经络，发生麻痹不仁或肿痛等症状，此时可用汤熨及针刺上加火艾的方法来祛散。
English: For people with wind chill, it makes the hair stand up, the skin closes and becomes hot. At this time, it can be treated by sweating; when the wind chill enters the meridians, symptoms such as numbness or swelling occur. At this time, it can be dissipated by soup ironing and acupuncture with the method of adding fire wormwood.

古文：弗治，病入舍于肺，名曰肺痹，发咳上气。弗治，肺即传而行之肝，病名曰肝痹，一名曰厥，胁痛出食，当是之时，可按若刺耳。弗治，肝传之脾，病名曰脾风，发瘅，腹中热，烦心，出黄，当此之时，可按、可药、可浴。弗治，脾传之肾，病名曰疝瘕，少腹冤热而痛，出白，一名曰蛊，当此之时，可按、可药。弗治，肾传之心，病筋脉相引而急，病名曰瘈，当此之时，可灸、可药。弗治，满十日，法当死。
现代文：如果不及时治疗，病气内传于肺，叫做肺痹，又叫做肝厥，发生胁痛、呕吐的症状，在这个时候，可用按摩、药物或热汤沐浴等方法；如不及时治疗，就会传行于脾，叫做脾风，发生黄疸，腹中热，烦心，小便黄色等症状，在这个时候，可用按摩、药物或热汤沐浴等方法；如再不治，就会传行于肾，叫做疝瘕，小腹烦热疼痛，小便色白而混浊，又叫做蛊病，在这个时候，可用按摩、或用药物；如再不治，病就由肾传心，发生筋脉牵引拘挛，叫做抽风，在这个时候，可用灸法，或用药物；如再不治，十日之后，当要死亡。
English: If it is not treated in time, the disease gas will be transmitted to the lungs, which is called pneumonia, also known as hepatorenal syndrome, and the symptoms of pain and vomiting will occur. At this time, massage, drugs or hot soup bathing can be used. If it is not treated in time, it will be transmitted to the spleen, which is called splenic wind, and symptoms such as jaundice, abdominal fever, irritability, and yellow urine will occur. At this time, massage, drugs or hot soup bathing can be used. If it is not cured, it will be transmitted to the kidney, which is called spasm, abdominal pain, hot pain, white and cloudy urine

古文：肾因传之心，心即复反传而行之肺，发寒热，法当三岁死，此病之次也。
现代文：倘若病邪由肾传心，心又复反传于肺脏，发为寒热，法当三日即死，这是疾病传行的一般次序。
English: If the disease is transmitted from the kidneys to the heart, and then from the heart to the lungs, causing cold and fever, the patient will die within three days, which is the general order of disease transmission.

古文：然其卒发者，不必治于传，或其传化有不以次，不以次入者，忧恐悲喜怒，令不得以其次，故令人有大病矣。
现代文：假如骤然爆发的病，就不必根据这个相传的次序而治。有些病不依这个次序传变的，如忧、恐、悲、喜、怒情志之病，病邪不依照这个次序相传，就会使人生大病了。
English: If a disease suddenly breaks out, it does not have to be treated according to this order of transmission. Some diseases are not transmitted according to this order, such as the diseases of worry, fear, sorrow, joy, and anger. If the disease is not transmitted according to this order, it will make people seriously ill.

古文：因而喜大虚则肾气乘矣，怒则肝气乘矣，悲则肺气乘矣，恐则脾气乘矣，忧则心气乘矣，此其道也。
现代文：如因喜极伤心，心虚则肾气相乘；或因大怒，则肝气乘脾；或因悲伤，则肺气乘肝；或因惊恐，则肾气虚，脾气乘肾；或因大忧，则肺气内虚，心气乘肺。
English: If you are extremely sad due to joy, the deficiency of the heart is multiplied by the kidney qi; or due to great anger, the liver qi is multiplied by the spleen; or due to sadness, the lung qi is multiplied by the liver; or due to fright, the kidney qi is deficient, the spleen qi is multiplied by the kidney; or due to great anxiety, the lung qi is deficient, the heart qi is multiplied by the lung.

古文：故病有五，五五二十五变，及其传化。传，乘之名也。
现代文：这是五志激变，使病邪不依次序传变的道理。所以病虽有五，及其传化，就有五五二十五变。所谓传化，就是相乘的名称。
English: This is the principle of the radical change of the five aspirations, so that diseases and evils are not transmitted in order. Therefore, although there are five diseases and their transmutation, there are 5525 mutations. The so-called transmutation is the name of the multiplication.

古文：大骨枯槁，大肉陷下，胸中气满，喘息不便，其气动形，期六月死，真脏脉见，乃予之期日。
现代文：大骨软弱，大肉瘦削，胸中气满，呼吸困难，呼吸时身体振动，为期六个月就要死亡，见了真脏脉，就是预测死期的起点。
English: Large bones are weak, large flesh is thin, the chest is full of gas, breathing is difficult, the body vibrates when breathing, the period of six months is about to die, and seeing the artery is the starting point for predicting the period of death.

古文：大骨枯槁，大肉陷下，胸中气满，喘息不便，内痛引肩项，期一月死，真脏见，乃予之期日。
现代文：大骨软弱，大肉瘦削，胸中气满，呼吸困难，内痛牵引肩项，为期一个月就要死亡，见了真脏脉，就是预测死期的起点。
English: Large bones are weak, large flesh is thin, the chest is full of gas, breathing is difficult, internal pain pulls the shoulder, the period is one month to die, and if you see the artery, it is the starting point for predicting the period of death.

古文：大骨枯槁，大肉陷下，胸中气满，喘息不便，内痛引肩项，身热脱肉破䐃，真脏见，十日之内死。
现代文：大骨软弱，大肉瘦削，胸中气满，呼吸困难，内痛牵引肩项，全身发热，脱肉破䐃，见了真脏脉，十日之内就要死亡。
English: The large bones are weak, the large flesh is thin, the chest is full of gas, breathing is difficult, internal pain pulls the shoulders, the whole body is hot, the flesh is torn, the jugular vein is seen, and death will occur within ten days.

古文：大骨枯槁，大肉陷下，肩髓内消，动作益衰，真脏来见，期一岁死，见其真脏，乃予之期日。
现代文：大骨软弱，大肉瘦削，两肩下垂，骨髓内消，动作衰颓，真脏脉出现，为期一年死亡，见了真脏脉，就是预测死期的起点。
English: The large bones are weak, the large flesh is thin, the shoulders are sagging, the bone marrow is disappearing, the movement is decaying, the coronary artery appears, and the period of death is one year. Seeing the coronary artery is the starting point for predicting the death period.

古文：大骨枯槁，大肉陷下，胸中气满，腹内痛，心中不便，肩项身热，破䐃脱肉，目眶陷，真脏见，目不见人，立死；其见人者，至其所不胜之时则死。
现代文：大骨软弱，大肉瘦削，胸中气满，腹中痛，心中气郁不舒，肩项身上俱热，破䐃脱肉，目眶下陷，真脏脉出现，精脱目不见人，立即死亡；如尚能见人，是精未全脱，到了它所不克之时，便死亡了。
English: The large bones are weak, the large flesh is thin, the chest is full of gas, the abdomen is painful, the heart is depressed, the shoulders are hot, the jaws are broken, the eyelids are sunken, the veins appear, the eyes are blinded, and the person dies immediately; if the person can still be seen, it is not completely removed, and when it is not, it dies.

古文：急虚身中卒至，五脏绝闭，脉道不通，气不往来，譬于堕溺，不可为期。
现代文：如果正气暴虚，外邪陡然中人，仓卒获病，五脏气机闭塞，周身脉道不通，气不往来，如从高处堕落或落水淹溺一样，则就无法预测死期了。
English: If the righteous spirit is violent, the evil spirit suddenly enters the person, the person gets sick in a hurry, the five internal organs are blocked, the blood vessels around the body are blocked, and the breath does not circulate, such as falling from a high place or falling into the water and drowning, it is impossible to predict the time of death.

古文：其脉绝不来，若人一息五六至，其形肉不脱，真脏虽不见，犹死也。
现代文：其脉息绝而不至，或跳动异常快速一呼脉来五、六至，虽然形肉不脱，真脏脉不见，仍然要死亡的。
English: Its pulse is short and does not come, or it beats unusually fast, with one pulse coming every five or six minutes. Although the body does not detach, and there are no real veins, it still has to die.

古文：真肝脉至，中外急，如循刀刃，责责然如按琴瑟弦，色青白不泽，毛折乃死。
现代文：肝脏之真脏脉至，中外劲急，如按在刀口上一样的锋利，或如按在琴弦上一样端直而长，面部显青白颜色而不润泽，毫毛枯焦乃死。
English: The true vein of the liver is at the end of it, and it is vigorous both inside and out. If pressed, it is as sharp as the tip of a knife, or as long and straight as the strings of a lute. The face is pale and not shiny, and if it is burned to a crisp, it is dead.

古文：真心脉至，坚而搏，如循薏苡子，累累然，色赤黑不泽，毛折乃死。
现代文：心脏的真脏脉至，坚硬而搏手，如循薏苡子那样短而圆实，面部显赤黑颜色而不润泽，毫毛枯焦乃死。
English: The heart's lifeblood, hard and throbbing, as short and round as a pair of pigtails, the face reddish-black but not shiny, the hair withered and dead.

古文：真肺脉至，大而虚，如以毛羽中人肤，色白赤不泽，毛折乃死。
现代文：肺脏的真脏脉至，大而空虚，好像毛羽抚摸人的皮肤一般地轻虚，面部显白赤颜色而不润泽，毫毛枯焦，就要死亡。
English: The pulmonary jugular vein is large and empty, as if a feather were caressing the skin of a person, generally light, the face is white-red in color but not moist, and the hair is scorched, and it will die.

古文：真肾脉至，搏而绝，如指弹石，辟辟然，色黑黄不泽，毛折乃死。
现代文：肾脏的真脏脉至，搏手若转索欲断，或如以指弹石一样坚实，面部显黑黄颜色而不润泽，毫毛枯焦，就要死亡。
English: The true veins of the kidneys are present, and if the wrestler tries to sever the cord, or if it is as solid as fingered flint, and the face is dark and yellow and not moist, and the hair is scorched, he will die.

古文：真脾脉至，弱而乍数乍疏，色黄青不泽，毛折乃死。
现代文：脾脏的真脏脉至，软弱无力，快慢不匀，面部显黄青颜色而不润泽，毫毛枯焦，就要死亡。
English: The spleen's jugular vein is weak and feeble, the speed is uneven, the face is yellowish-blue but not moist, and the hair is scorched, and it is time to die.

古文：诸真脏脉见者，皆死不治也。
现代文：凡是见到五脏真脏脉，皆为不治的死候。
English: Anyone who sees the five viscera and the true viscera is doomed to incurable death.

古文：黄帝曰：见真脏曰死，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：见到真脏脉象，就要死亡，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said, "If you see the appearance of the viscera, you will die. What is the reason for this?"

古文：岐伯曰：五脏者，皆禀气于胃，胃者五脏之本也。
现代文：岐伯道：五脏的营养，都有赖于胃腑的水谷精微，因此胃是五脏的根本。
English: Qibao Dao: The nutrition of the five internal organs all depends on the water trough of the stomach, so the stomach is the root of the five internal organs.

古文：藏气者，不能自致于手太阴，必因于胃气，乃至于手太阴也。
现代文：故五脏的脉气，不能自行到达于手太阴寸口，必须依赖胃气的敷布，才能达于手太阴。
English: Therefore, the pulse qi of the five viscera cannot reach the palms of the hands by itself, and must rely on the stomach qi pad to reach the palms of the hands.

古文：故五脏各以其时，自为而至于手太阴也。
现代文：所以五脏之气能够在其所主之时，出现于手太阴寸口，就是有胃气。
English: Therefore, the qi of the five internal organs can arise at the time of its owner, appearing at the crotch of the hand, that is, there is gastric qi.

古文：故邪气胜者，精气衰也。
现代文：如果邪气胜，必定使精气衰。
English: If the evil spirit prevails, it will surely weaken the spirit.

古文：故病甚者，胃气不能与之俱至于手太阴，故真脏之气独见。独见者，病胜脏也，故曰死。
现代文：所以病气严重时，胃气就不能与五脏之气一起到达手太阴，而为某一脏真脏脉的脉象单独出现，真脏独见，是邪气胜而脏气伤，所以说是要死亡的。
English: Therefore, when the illness is serious, the gastric qi cannot reach the palms together with the five visceral qi, but the pulse of a certain dirty true visceral vein appears alone, the true visceral vein is unique, it is the evil qi that wins and the dirty visceral vein is injured, so it is said to die.

古文：黄帝曰：凡治病察其形气色泽，脉之盛衰，病之新故，乃治之，无后其时。
现代文：黄帝道：大凡治病，必先诊察形体盛衰，气之强弱，色之润枯，脉之虚实，病之新久，然后及时治疗，不能错过时机。
English: Huang Di said: In order to cure a disease, it is necessary to first diagnose the body's rise and fall, the strength and weakness of the qi, the color of the moist and dry, the pulse of the virtual and real, and the disease for a long time, and then timely treatment, can not miss the opportunity.

古文：形气相得，谓之可治；色泽以浮，谓之易已；脉从四时，谓之可治；脉弱以滑，是有胃气，命曰易治，取之以时。
现代文：病人形气相称，是可治之症；面色光润鲜明，病亦易愈；脉搏与四时相适应，亦为可治；脉来弱而流利，是有胃气的现象，病亦易治，必须抓紧时间，进行治疗。
English: The shape of the patient is proportionate to the qi, which is a curable disease; the complexion is smooth and bright, and the disease is easy to heal; the pulse is compatible with four o'clock, which is also curable; the pulse is weak and fluent, which is a phenomenon of gastric qi, the disease is also easy to cure, and it is necessary to seize the time and carry out treatment.

古文：形气相失，谓之难治；色夭不泽，谓之难已；脉实以坚，谓之益甚；脉逆四时，为不可治。
现代文：形气不相称，此谓难治；面色枯槁，没有光泽，病亦难愈；脉实而坚，病必加重；脉与四时相逆，为不可治。
English: Disproportionately shaped, this is said to be difficult to cure; the complexion is withered, without luster, and the disease is difficult to heal; the pulse is solid and firm, and the disease must be aggravated; the pulse is opposite to the four o'clock, and it is incurable.

古文：必察四难，而明告之。
现代文：必须审察这四种难治之证，清楚地告诉病家。
English: It is necessary to examine these four incurable diseases and clearly inform the patients.

古文：所谓逆四时者，春得肺脉，夏得肾脉，秋得心脉，冬得脾脉，其至皆悬绝沉涩者，命曰逆四时。
现代文：所谓脉与四时相逆，是春见到肺脉，夏见到肾脉，秋见到心脉，冬见到脾脉，其脉皆悬绝无根，或沉涩不起，这就叫做逆四时。
English: The so-called veins are opposite to the four o'clock. In spring, the pulmonary vein is seen, in summer, the renal vein is seen, in autumn, the cardiac vein is seen, and in winter, the splenic vein is seen. The veins are all hanging without roots, or heavy and heavy. This is called the reverse four o'clock.

古文：未有藏形，于春夏而脉沉涩，秋冬而脉浮大，名曰逆四时也。
现代文：如五脏脉气不能随着时令表现于外，在春夏的时令，反见沉涩的脉象，秋冬的时令，反见浮大的脉象，这也叫做逆四时。
English: If the five viscera's pulse cannot be expressed externally according to the season, in the spring and summer seasons, on the contrary, a heavy pulse will be seen, and in the autumn and winter seasons, on the contrary, a large pulse will be seen. This is also called the reverse four o'clock.

古文：病热脉静；泄而脉大；脱血而脉实；病在中，脉实坚；病在外，脉不实坚者，皆难治。
现代文：热病脉宜洪大而反静；泄泻脉应小而反大；脱血脉应虚而反实；病在中而脉不实坚；病在外而脉反坚实，这些都是症脉相反，皆为难治。
English: The fever vein should be large and calm; the diarrhea vein should be small and calm; the bleeding vein should be false and false; the disease is in the middle and the vein is not solid; the disease is outside and the vein is not solid. These are all opposite symptoms and are difficult to cure.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻虚实以决死生，愿闻其情。
现代文：黄帝道：我听说根据虚实的病情可以预决死生，希望告诉我其中道理！
English: Huang Di said, "I heard that according to the actual condition of the disease, one's life and death can be predetermined. I hope you can tell me the reason for this!"

古文：岐伯曰：五实死，五虚死。
现代文：岐伯说：五实死，五虚亦死。
English: Qi Bo said, "Five real things are dead, and five imaginary things are also dead."

古文：帝曰：愿闻五实五虚。
现代文：黄帝道：请问什么叫做五实、五虚？
English: Huang Di said: What are the five real and five imaginary things?

古文：岐伯曰：脉盛，皮热，腹胀，前后不通，闷瞀，此谓五实。
现代文：岐伯说：脉象洪盛是心受邪盛，皮肤灼热是肺受邪盛，腹满胀是脾受邪盛，二便不通是肾受邪盛，昏闷而不明是肝受邪盛，这叫做五实。
English: Qi Bo said: the pulse is like the heart, the skin is hot, the lungs are hot, the stomach is full, the spleen is hot, the kidneys are hot, and the liver is hot, which is called the five elements.

古文：脉细，皮寒，气少，泄利前后，饮食不入，此谓五虚。
现代文：脉象细弱是心气不足，皮肤寒冷是肺气不足，气少是肝气不足，泄利前后是肾气不足，饮食不入是脾气不足，这叫做五虚。
English: A weak pulse is a lack of qi, cold skin is a lack of lung qi, a lack of qi is a lack of liver qi, before and after losing weight is a lack of kidney qi, and not eating is a lack of temper, which is called five deficiencies.

古文：帝曰：其时有生者何也？
现代文：黄帝道：五实、五虚，有时亦有痊愈的，又是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said, "There are five real and five unreal, and sometimes there are healed ones. What is the reason for this?"

古文：岐伯曰：浆粥入胃，泄注止，则虚者活；身汗得后利，则实者活。
现代文：岐伯说：能够吃些粥浆，慢慢地胃气恢复，大便泄泻停止，则虚者也可以痊愈。如若原来身热无汗的，而现在得汗；原来二便不通的，而现在大小便通利了，则实者也可以痊愈。
English: Qi Bo said: If you can eat some porridge, slowly restore your stomach gas, and stop the leakage of feces, then you can also recover. For example, if you originally had no sweat, but now you sweat; if you were unable to pass stool, but now you have a good bowel movement, then you can also recover.

古文：此其候也。
现代文：这就是五虚、五实能够痊愈的转机。
English: This is a turning point for the five elements and five elements to be able to heal.

