古文：凡人遇偶及遭累害，皆由命也。
现代文：凡是人碰巧迎合了君主或上司而受到赏识重用，与受到来自乡里和朝廷的损害，都是由于命。
English: Any man who chanced to ingratiate himself with the sovereign or his superiors, and to be appreciated and used, and to suffer injury from the country and the court, was due his life.

古文：有死生寿夭之命，亦有贵贱贫富之命。
现代文：有死亡、出生、长寿、夭折的命，也有尊贵、卑贱、贫穷、富裕的命。
English: There is death, birth, longevity, and premature death, as well as noble, lowly, poor, and rich life.

古文：自王公逮庶人，圣贤及下愚，凡有首目之类，含血之属，莫不有命。
现代文：从王公大臣到普通老百姓，圣人贤人到广大劳动人民，凡是有头脑、眼睛以及体内含着血液的动物，没有谁没有命。
English: From princes and ministers to ordinary people, saints and sages to the broad masses of working people, all animals with brains, eyes and blood in their bodies have no life.

古文：命当贫贱，虽富贵之，犹涉祸患矣。命当富贵，虽贫贱之，犹逢福善矣。故命贵从贱地自达，命贱从富位自危。
现代文：命应当贫贱的，即使现在富贵了，也还会遭受祸患，失去富贵；命应当富贵的，即使现在贫贱了，也还会遇上福善，脱离贫贱，所以，命该尊贵，也会从卑贱的地位自然得到富贵；命该贫贱，也会从富裕的地位自然地衰败。
English: If one's life should be poor, even if one is now rich, one will still suffer misfortune and lose wealth; if one's life should be rich, even if one is now poor, one will still encounter blessings and escape poverty. Therefore, if one's life should be noble, one will naturally become rich from a lowly position; if one's life should be poor, one will naturally decline from a wealthy position.

古文：故夫富贵若有神助，贫贱若有鬼祸。
现代文：所以，富贵好像有神灵来辅助，贫贱好像有鬼魂来祸害。
English: Therefore, the rich seem to have gods to help them, and the poor seem to have ghosts to harm them.

古文：命贵之人，俱学独达，并仕独迁；命富之人，俱求独得，并为独成。
现代文：命贵的人，大家一起学习，只有他能当官；大家一起做官，只有他得到提拔。命富的人，大家一起寻求财富，只有他能得到；大家一起做生意，只有他得到成功。
English: The man who is precious in life, we all study together, only he can become an official; we all work together as an official, only he gets promoted; the man who is rich in life, we all seek wealth together, only he can get it; we all do business together, only he gets success.

古文：贫贱反此，难达，难迁，难得，难成；获过受罪，疾病亡遗，失其富贵，贫贱矣。
现代文：命贫、命贱的人，则与这种情况相反，很难发达做官，很难升迁提拔，很难求得财富，很难做成生意。要么有过错受到惩罚，要么得疾病意外丧失财富。失去其富贵，当然就贫贱了。
English: On the other hand, those who are extremely poor or extremely low-born are, contrary to this situation, difficult to be promoted, difficult to be promoted, difficult to obtain wealth, and difficult to do business. Either the fault is punished, or the disease causes accidental loss of wealth. If they lose their wealth, of course they will be poor.

古文：是故才高行厚，未必保其必富贵；智寡德薄，未可信其必贫贱。
现代文：这样，才能高超品行端庄，未必能保证就一定会富贵；智力低下品德恶劣，未必能断定就一定会贫贱。
English: In this way, if one's talent is superior, if one's conduct is dignified, it may not be possible to guarantee that one will be rich; if one's intelligence is low and one's moral is bad, it may not be possible to determine that one will be poor.

古文：或时才高行厚，命恶，废而不进；知寡德薄，命善，兴而超逾。
现代文：有时才能高超品行端庄的，因为命不好，被斥退而得不到提拔；但智力低下品德恶劣的，却因为命好，被任用而越级晋升。
English: Sometimes, those with superior ability and good moral character are rejected and do not get promoted because their life is not good; but those with low intelligence and bad moral character are appointed and promoted because their life is good.

古文：故夫临事知愚，操行清浊，性与才也；仕宦贵贱，治产贫富，命与时也。
现代文：所以，处理事情的聪明与愚笨，操行的清白与污浊，是道德属性与才能的问题；做官，地位的高低，经营产业，财富的多寡，是命与时运的问题。
English: Therefore, the balance between the cleverness and stupidity of handling things, and the innocence and corruption of operations, is a question of moral attributes and talents; being an official, the level of status, the management of industry, and the amount of wealth are a question of life and fortune.

古文：命则不可勉，时则不可力，知者归之於天，故坦荡恬忽。
现代文：命，不能强求改变，时运，也不能靠努力得到，明白的知道这一切的归宿在天，所以心地安然毫不在乎。
English: Life, you can't force it to change, fortune, you can't get it by working hard, you know that all of this is up to heaven, so you don't care at all.

古文：虽其贫贱。使富贵若凿沟伐薪，加勉力之趋，致强健之势，凿不休则沟深，斧不止则薪多，无命之人，皆得所愿，安得贫贱凶危之患哉？
现代文：要是现在很贫贱，如果要得到富贵就像挖沟砍柴那样，施加努力的趋势，加强强壮健康的势头，挖沟不停止则沟深，斧砍不停止则柴多，这样，没有富贵之命的人，都能得到自己所向往的富贵，那怎么会有贫贱、凶祸、危险的灾难呢？
English: If you are very poor now, if you want to get rich like digging ditches and chopping wood, exert the tendency to work hard, strengthen the momentum of strong and healthy, if you do not stop digging ditches, the ditch will be deep, and if you do not stop chopping axes, there will be more wood. In this way, people who do not have a rich life can get the richness they yearn for. How can there be poverty, evil, and dangerous disaster?

古文：然则，或时沟未通而遇湛，薪未多而遇虎。
现代文：然而，有时沟还没有挖通，却遇到了大水，柴砍得不多却碰上了老虎。
English: However, sometimes the ditch has not been dug yet, but has encountered large water, and the wood has not been cut much, but has encountered a tiger.

古文：仕宦不贵，治产之富，凿沟遇湛、伐薪逢虎之类也。
现代文：做官不显贵，经营产业不发财，挖沟遇到大水，砍柴碰上老虎，这都属于命不好一类。
English: To be an official is not conspicuous, to run an industry is not to make a fortune, to dig a ditch and encounter high water, to chop firewood and encounter a tiger, all of these belong to the category of bad luck.

古文：有才不得施，有智不得行，或施而功不立，或行而事不成，虽才智如孔子，犹无成立之功。
现代文：有才能得不到施展，有智慧得不到实施。或者是施展了却没有成功，或者是实施过却事不成，即使才能智慧都像孔子一样，还是没有办好事情，立下功劳。
English: Talent can't be developed, wisdom can't be implemented. Either the implementation is not successful, or the implementation is not successful. Even if the talent and wisdom are like Confucius, they still can't do a good job and make a contribution.

古文：世俗见人节行高，则曰： 贤哲如此，何不贵？ 
现代文：一般人见别人节操、品行高尚，就说： 这样贤良聪明，怎么不当大官？ 
English: When ordinary people see others who are virtuous and have high moral standards, they say, "How can such a virtuous and intelligent person not become a high-ranking official?"

古文：见人谋虑深，则曰： 辩慧如此，何不富？ 
现代文：见别人智谋深邃，就说： 这样会说机智，怎么没有发大财？ 
English: And when he sees that the wit of others is profound, he says, "How is it that they have so much wit and yet have not become rich?"

古文：贵富有命禄，不在贤哲与辩慧。
现代文：其实，做大官发大财是有禄命的，不在乎是否贤良聪明与会说机智。
English: In fact, making a fortune as a high-ranking official is a lucrative career, regardless of whether you are virtuous, clever or witty.

古文：故曰：富不可以筹策得，贵不可以才能成。
现代文：所以说：财富不能靠计谋得到，显贵不能凭才能实现。
English: Therefore, it is said that wealth cannot be obtained by cunning, and nobility cannot be achieved by talent.

古文：智虑深而无财，才能高而无官。
现代文：智谋再深邃发不了大财，才能再高超也当不了大官。
English: No matter how profound the wit, no matter how great the fortune, no matter how great the talent, no matter how great the rank.

古文：怀银纾紫，未必稷、契之才；积金累玉，未必陶硃之智。
现代文：纵然身怀银印金印，当了相国、丞相，也未必有稷、契的才能；纵然堆金如山，积玉如海，也未必有陶朱公的智力。
English: Even if you are born with a silver seal and a gold seal, you may not have the talent to be a statesman or a prime minister; even if you have a mountain of gold and a sea of jade, you may not have the intelligence of a great scholar.

古文：或时下愚而千金，顽鲁而典城。
现代文：有时反而很愚蠢的人却拥有千金，质劣愚钝的人却统辖城池。
English: Sometimes, on the contrary, very stupid people have a lot of money, and inferior stupid people rule the city.

古文：故官御同才，其贵殊命；治生钧知，其富异禄。
现代文：可见，做官的才能相同，但命不一样官就会有大小，经营生计的智慧一样，但禄命不同就会有贫富。
English: It can be seen that the ability to be an official is the same, but the life is different, the official will have the size, the wisdom of managing livelihood is the same, but the fate is different, there will be rich and poor.

古文：禄命有贫富，知不能丰杀；命有贵贱，才不能进退。
现代文：禄命有贫富，人的智慧不能使它增加或减少；人命有贵贱，人的才能不能使它升迁或斥退。
English: Fortune has riches and poverty, which human wisdom cannot increase or diminish; human life has dignity and inferiority, which human ability cannot elevate or degrade.

古文：成王之才不如周公，桓公之知不若管仲，然成、桓受尊命，而周、管禀卑秩也。
现代文：成王的才能不如周公，桓公的智慧不如管仲，然而成王，桓公接受的是尊贵的命，而周公、管仲承受的是卑贱的命。
English: Cheng Wang's talent is not as good as Zhou Gong, and Kuan Gong's wisdom is not as good as Guanzhong. However, Cheng Wang and Guanzhong received a noble life, while Zhou Gong and Guanzhong suffered a lowly life.

古文：案古人君希有不学於人臣，知博希有不为父师。
现代文：根据考察，古代的君主很少有不向臣子学习的，学识渊博的人很少不被封为 父师 的。
English: According to the investigation, there were very few ancient monarchs who did not learn from their vassals, and very few learned people who were not given the title of father and teacher.

古文：然而人君犹以无能处主位，人臣犹以鸿才为厮役。
现代文：虽然这样，君主还是以无能处于一国之长，臣子还是以大才被使唤。
English: In spite of this, the monarch is still the head of a country by virtue of his incompetence, and the vassals are still called upon by virtue of their talent.

古文：故贵贱在命，不在智愚；贫富在禄，不在顽慧。
现代文：所以贵贱在命，不在聪明与愚蠢；贫富在禄，不在质劣与智慧。
English: Therefore, nobility is in life, not in cleverness and stupidity; rich and poor are in wealth, not in inferiority and wisdom.

古文：世之论事者以才高当为将相，能下者宜为农商，见智能之士官位不至，怪而訾之曰： 是必毁於行操。 
现代文：社会上的议论者，都认为才高的应该做将相，才低的只宜事农商。见到智慧才高的人没有得官做，就责怪并且非议他说： 这一定是在操行方面有问题。 
English: Commentators in the society all think that a person with high intelligence should be a future prime minister, while a person with low intelligence should be an agrarian merchant. When they see that a person with high intelligence did not get the post, they blame and reproach him, saying, "This must be a problem in terms of conduct."

古文：行操之士亦怪毁之曰： 是必乏於才知。 
现代文：见到操行高尚的人，也责怪诋毁他说： 这一定是在才智方面有所不足。 
English: When he sees a man of noble conduct, and accuses him of calumny, he says, "This man must be deficient in intelligence."

古文：殊不知才知行操虽高，官位富禄有命。
现代文：殊不知，他们的才能、智慧、品行、节操虽然都很高，但是官位的高低，财富、俸禄的多少，都是由命决定的。
English: As everyone knows, although their talent, wisdom, moral conduct, and self-discipline are all very high, the level of official rank, wealth, and salary are all determined by fate.

古文：才智之人，以吉盛时举事而福至，人谓才智明审；凶哀祸来，谓愚暗。
现代文：有才能智慧的人，在命吉、禄盛的时候办事就会得福，人们就会说他才智高明；在命凶、禄衰的时候办事就会遭受灾祸，人们就会说他愚昧。
English: Talented and wise people will be blessed if they act when their fortunes are good, and people will say that they are clever; if they act when their fortunes are bad, and people will say that they are stupid.

古文：不知吉凶之命，盛衰之禄也。
现代文：这是人们不知道命有吉、凶，禄有盛、衰的缘故。
English: This is because people do not know that life has good luck and bad luck, and fortune has prosperity and decline.

古文：白圭、子贡，转货致富，积累金玉，人谓术善学明。
现代文：白圭、子贡做买卖致富，积累了不少金银、宝玉，人们就说他们办法好，做买卖的诀窍高明，其实不对。
English: Bai Gui and Zigong became rich through trading and accumulated a lot of gold, silver and precious stones. People said that they had good methods and good trading skills, but this was not true.

古文：主父偃辱贱於齐，排摈不用；赴阙举疏，遂用於汉，官至齐相。
现代文：主父偃在齐国地位低贱，被排斥靠边不用，于是到宫前呈献奏章，终于被汉室任用，官做到齐国的相。
English: His father, Zou, had a lowly status in Qi and was ostracized and sidelined, so he went to the imperial court to present a musical composition, and was finally appointed by the Han family to be the official representative of Qi.

古文：赵人徐乐亦上书，与偃章会，上善其言，征拜为郎。
现代文：赵国人徐乐也上奏章，与主父偃的恰巧碰在一起，皇上赞赏他们的意见，征召任命为郎。
English: Xu Le, a native of Zhao, also played the sheng and happened to bump into the main father, Zou. The emperor appreciated their opinions and summoned and appointed Zou as his son.

古文：人谓偃之才，乐之慧，非也。
现代文：人们就说主父偃有才能，徐乐有智慧，这话不对。
English: People say that Master Zou has talent and Xu Le has wisdom, which is not true.

古文：儒者明说一经，习之京师，明如匡稚圭，深如赵子都，初阶甲乙之科，迁转至郎博士，人谓经明才高所得，非也。
现代文：一般读书人要熟悉而且能解释一种经书，然后到京城去学习，像匡稚圭那样精通经学，如鲍子都那样深明儒道，开初经过甲乙科的考试，就升转到郎、博士，人们就说他们是由于经学高明才能高超所获得，这话也不对。
English: Ordinary readers need to be familiar with and able to interpret a kind of scripture, and then go to Beijing to study. They should be proficient in scripture study like Kuang Zhi Gui, and have a deep understanding of Confucianism like Bao Zidu. After passing the examination of A and B subjects at the beginning, they will be promoted to Lang and Doctor. People say that they are obtained because of their ability to excel in scripture study, which is not true.

古文：而说若范雎之干秦明，封为应侯；蔡泽之说范雎，拜为客卿，人谓雎、泽美善所致，非也。
现代文：如说到游说，像范雎去求见秦昭王，被封为应侯，蔡泽去游说范雎，被任用为客卿，人们就说这是范雎、蔡泽操行完美贤良所得到的，这话还是不对。
English: When it comes to lobbying, it is wrong to say that Fan Zhe went to meet with Qin Zhao Wang and was appointed as a guest of honor, while Cai Ze went to lobby Fan Zhe and was appointed as a guest of honor. People say that this is what Fan Zhe and Cai Ze got by being perfect and virtuous.

古文：皆命禄贵富善至之时也。
现代文：其实，这都是因为他们命禄贵富都好，而且遇上了极好的时机。
English: In fact, this is all because they are both rich and famous, and they have found an excellent opportunity.

古文：孔子曰： 死生有命，富贵在天。 
现代文：孔子说： 人的死生由命来决定，富贵由天来安排。 
English: Confucius said: "Life and death are decided by fate, and wealth is arranged by heaven.

古文：鲁平公欲见孟子，嬖人臧仓毁孟子而止。
现代文：鲁平公想见孟子，由于宠臣臧仓在他面前诽谤孟子而没有见成。
English: Lu Ping Gong wanted to see Mencius, but he did not succeed because his favorite vassal, Huan Cang, slandered Mencius in front of him.

古文：孟子曰： 天也！ 
现代文：孟子说： 这是天命啊！ 
English: Mencius said, "This is the will of Heaven!

古文：孔子圣人，孟子贤者，诲人安道，不失是非，称言命者，有命审也。
现代文：孔子是圣人，孟子是贤人，教导人们要遵守儒道，不能违背是非标准，连他们都声称有命，可见命的存在是明摆着的。
English: Confucius is a saint, Mencius is a wise man, teaching people to abide by Confucianism and not to violate the standards of right and wrong. Even they all claim to have life, so the existence of life is obvious.

古文：《淮南书》曰： 仁鄙在时不在行，利害在命黥不在智。 
现代文：《淮南书》上说： 尊贵与低贱在于时运不在于操行，利益与祸害在于命而不在于智慧。 
English: "The Book of Huainan" said: "Honor and lowliness lie in fortune, not in conduct; benefit and harm lie in life, not in wisdom."

古文：贾生曰： 天不可与期，道不可与谋，迟速有命，焉识其时？ 
现代文：贾生说： 天是不可预测的，天道也是不可事前谋划的。生命的长短由命来支配，怎么能知道具体的时间呢？ 
English: Jia Sheng said: The sky is unpredictable, and the course of the sky cannot be planned in advance. The length of life is controlled by life, so how can we know the specific time?

古文：高祖击布，为流矢所中，疾甚。吕后迎良医，医曰： 可治。 
现代文：汉高祖追击黥布，被飞来的箭射中，病得很历害，吕后请来良医，医生诊后说： 可以治好。 
English: Han Gao Zu chased the sable and was shot by flying arrows. He was very ill. Lv Hou invited a good doctor. After the doctor's examination, he said, "It can be cured."

古文：高祖骂之曰： 吾以布衣提三尺剑取天下，此非天命乎！
现代文：高祖则骂道： 我以老百姓身份，提着三尺长的剑取得天下，这不是天命吗！
English: Gao Zu scolded: I, as a commoner, won the world with a three-foot-long sword. Isn't this the fate of heaven!

古文：命乃在天，虽扁鹊何益？ 
现代文：命决定于天，即使扁鹊来治又有什么好处！ 
English: Life is determined by the heavens, even if the grasshopper comes to rule, what good will it do!

古文：韩信与帝论兵，谓高祖曰： 陛下所谓天授，非智力所得。 
现代文：韩信与汉高祖议论打仗，对高祖说： 陛下的军事才能正像一般人所说的那样，是天给的，不是靠智慧能力取得的。 
English: Han Xin talked with Han Gaozu about going to war, and said to Gaozu, "Your Majesty's military ability is just as ordinary people say, it is given by heaven, not obtained by wisdom and ability.

古文：扬子云曰： 遇不遇，命也。 
现代文：扬子云说： 被不被赏识重用，命中注定。 
English: Yang Ziyun said: It is destined to be reused and not appreciated.

古文：太史公曰： 富贵不违贫贱，贫贱不违富贵。 
现代文：太史公说： 现在富贵不排斥今后会贫贱，现在贫贱也不排斥今后会富贵。 
English: Taishikong said: Being rich now does not preclude being poor in the future, and being poor now does not preclude being rich in the future.

古文：是谓从富贵为贫贱，从贫贱为富贵也。
现代文：这就是说，从富贵可以变成贫贱，从贫贱也可以变成富贵。
English: That is to say, one can go from being rich to being poor, and from being poor to being rich.

古文：夫富贵不欲为贫贱，贫贱自至；贫贱不求为富贵，富贵自得也。
现代文：失去富贵的人不希望贫贱，贫贱会自然到来；贫贱的人不追求变成富贵，富贵会自然得到。
English: Those who have lost wealth do not want to be poor, and poverty will come naturally; those who are poor do not pursue wealth, and wealth will come naturally.

古文：春夏囚死，秋冬王相，非能为之也；日朝出而暮入，非求之也，天道自然。
现代文：春天、夏天生命力极弱和丧失生命力的东西，到秋天、冬天就会旺盛、强壮起来，这不是能力所做得到的；太阳早晨升起，傍晚落下，这也不是能力寻求得来的，而是天道自然如此。
English: That which in spring and summer is weak and lifeless, in autumn and winter becomes vigorous and strong, is not due to ability; that the sun rises in the morning and sets in the evening is not due to ability, but to nature.

古文：代王自代入为文帝，周亚夫以庶子为条侯，此时代王非太子，亚夫非适嗣，逢时遇会，卓然卒至。
现代文：代王从代地入京城称文帝，周亚夫以庶子被封为条侯。当时代王并非是太子，周亚夫也并非是嫡系继承人，而是他们正巧碰上时机，好事便异乎寻常地突然降临。
English: The acting king entered the capital from another place and was called Emperor Wen, and Zhou Yafu's illegitimate son was given the title of steward. At that time, the acting king was not the crown prince, and Zhou Yafu was not the legitimate heir, but they just happened to meet the opportunity, and good things came unexpectedly.

古文：命贫以力勤致富，富至而死；命贱以才能取贵，贵至而免。
现代文：命贫的想靠力气勤劳来致富，等财富到手人却死了；命贱的想凭才能超群取得尊贵地位，等刚当上大官却又被罢免了。
English: The poor man wants to get rich by his strength and hard work, but when he gets rich, he dies; the poor man wants to get a noble position by his talent, but when he becomes a high official, he is dismissed.

古文：才力而致富贵，命禄不能奉持，犹器之盈量，手之持重也。器受一升，以一升则平，受之如过一升，则满溢也；手举一钧，以一钧则平，举之过一钧，则踬仆矣。
现代文：这就是说，靠才智和力量得到的富贵，因为命禄已定是保不住的，就好比器皿装得过量，手里拿的东西过重一样，器皿能容纳一升，倒入一升则刚好与器皿口平齐，容量如果超过一升，就会溢满外流；手能举起三十斤，举三十斤则刚好与上举的能力相等，举的东西如果超过三十斤，就会摔倒。
English: That is to say, the wealth gained by talent and strength, because the fate has already been determined, cannot be preserved, just as the vessel is overloaded and the thing held in the hand is too heavy. The vessel can hold one liter, the pouring of one liter is just level with the mouth of the vessel, if the capacity is more than one liter, it will overflow the outflow; the hand can lift thirty pounds, the lifting of thirty pounds is just equal to the ability to lift, and if the thing lifted is more than thirty pounds, it will fall.

古文：前世明是非归之於命也，命审然也。
现代文：前世的人是明辨是非的，把人生的一切都归之于命，可见命显然是这样的。
English: People in past lives are very discerning and attribute everything in life to life, so life is obviously like this.

古文：信命者，则可幽居俟时，不须劳精苦形求索之也。犹珠玉之在山泽，天命难知，人不耐审，虽有厚命，犹不自信，故必求之也。
现代文：相信命的，就可以隐居等待时机，不须劳神劳体去苦苦追求，好像珍珠宝玉藏在深山大泽，不需向人们求取高价，人们自然会出高价购买它一样。天命难以知道，人不可能明白，即使有非常好的命，还自己不知道，反而一定要去追求它。
English: If you believe in fate, you can live in seclusion and wait for the right time. You don't have to work hard to pursue it. It's like a pearl hidden in the depths of a mountain. You don't have to ask people for a high price, people will naturally pay a high price to buy it. It's hard to know the fate of the world, it's impossible for people to understand. Even if you have a very good life, you don't know it yourself, but you must pursue it.

古文：如自知，虽逃富避贵，终不得离。
现代文：如果自己知道命非常好，即使想逃避富贵，也始终摆脱不了。
English: If you know that life is very good, even if you want to escape wealth, you will never be able to get rid of it.

古文：故曰：力胜贫，慎胜祸。勉力勤事以致富，砥才明操以取贵；废时失务，欲望富贵，不可得也。
现代文：所以说： 勤劳能够克服贫贱，谨慎能够防止灾祸 ，努力干事业以求致富，磨炼才能培养德操以求取得功名，浪费时间不务正业，想望富贵，是不可能得到的。
English: Therefore, it is said that: hard work can overcome poverty, prudence can prevent disasters, hard work can be done to get rich, hard work can cultivate morality to get fame, wasting time is not a serious business, and if you want to be rich, it is impossible to get it.

古文：虽云有命，当须索之。
现代文：虽说有命，还是应当，而且必须去追求它。
English: Even though there is life, we should and must pursue it.

古文：如信命不求，谓当自至，可不假而自得，不作而自成，不行而自至？
现代文：如果只相信命而不去追求，说它会自动到来，难道可以不借助外力就能自然得到，不干就能自然成功，不行动就能自然达到？
English: If you only believe in life and do not pursue it, saying that it will come automatically, can you naturally get it without external help, naturally succeed without doing anything, and naturally achieve without action?

古文：夫命富之人，筋力自强；命贵之人，才智自高，若千里之马，头目蹄足自相副也。
现代文：其实，命富的人，筋力自然强健；命贵的人，才智自然高超，像千里马，它的气力与力量，头、眼和蹄子都与本身的美名相称。
English: In fact, those who are rich in life are naturally strong in muscle; those who are valuable in life are naturally superior in intelligence, like a thousand-mile horse. Its strength and power, head, eyes and hooves are commensurate with its own reputation.

古文：有求而不得者矣，未必不求而得之者也。
现代文：有追求而得不到的，未必是不去追求就能得到的人。
English: Those who pursue and do not obtain are not necessarily those who can obtain without pursuing.

古文：精学不求贵，贵自至矣：力作不求富，富自到矣。
现代文：所以，专心学习不去追求尊贵，尊贵会自然得到。努力劳作不去寻求财富，财富会也自然到来。
English: Therefore, if you concentrate on learning and do not pursue fame, fame will come naturally. If you work hard and do not seek wealth, wealth will come naturally.

古文：富贵之福，不可求致；贫贱之祸，不可苟除也。
现代文：富贵之命决定的福，是不能追求得到的；贫贱之命决定的祸，是不能随意除掉的。
English: The blessings determined by the life of the rich cannot be pursued; the evils determined by the life of the poor cannot be eliminated at will.

古文：由此言之，有富贵之命，不求自得。
现代文：这样说来，有富贵的命，不求能自得。
English: In this way, there is a rich life, do not seek to be self-sufficient.

古文：信命者曰： 自知吉，不待求也。
现代文：相信命的人说： 自己知道命是吉利的，就不需要去追求了。
English: People who believe in life say: If you know that life is lucky, you don't need to pursue it.

古文：天命吉厚，不求自得；天命凶厚，求之无益。 
现代文：天命非常吉利，不求能自得；要是天命非常凶险，求之也无益。 
English: If the destiny is very auspicious, it is useless to ask for it. If the destiny is very dangerous, it is useless to ask for it.

古文：夫物不求而自生，则人亦有不求贵而贵者矣。
现代文：作物，人不贪图它却能自己发芽生长，而人也有不追求显贵却显贵的。
English: Crops, people do not covet it, but they can sprout and grow on their own, and people do not pursue the noble, but the noble.

古文：人情有不教而自善者，有教而终不善者矣，天性，犹命也。
现代文：人的性情有不教而能自我完善的，有教了而始终完美不了的。天性，就是命。
English: Human nature is capable of self-improvement without instruction, but it cannot be perfected without instruction. Nature is life.

古文：越王翳逃山中，至诚不愿。自冀得代。
现代文：越王翳逃入山中，极诚心地不愿当王，自己希望能有人代替他。
English: Yue Wangtao fled into the mountains. He sincerely did not want to be king and hoped that someone would replace him.

古文：越人熏其穴，遂不得免，强立为君。
现代文：越人用火熏他躲避的山洞，终于不能避免，被迫强立为国君。
English: The Viets set fire to the cave he was hiding in, and finally, inevitably, he was forced to become the country's ruler.

古文：而天命当然，虽逃避之，终不得离。
现代文：如果天命注定应当如此，即使一时逃避了，最终还是不能摆脱。
English: If it's meant to be, even if you escape it for a while, you can't escape it in the end.

古文：故夫不求自得之贵欤！
现代文：所以，这是不去追求而自然得到的尊贵啊！
English: So, this is the nobility of not pursuing and getting it naturally!

