古文：特牲馈食之礼。不诹日。
现代文：特牲馈食之礼：不商谋卜筮之日。
English: Special thanks for the gift of food: the day of non-negotiation.

古文：及筮日，主人冠端玄，即位于门外，西面。
现代文：俟至卜筮之日，主人服玄冠玄端，于庙门外就位，面朝西。
English: On the day of  to 卜, the master wears the crown and crown, and takes his place outside the temple gate, facing west.

古文：子姓兄弟如主人之服，立于主人之南，西面北上。
现代文：所祭者之子孙、兄弟亦玄冠玄端，立于主人的南边，面朝西，以北为上。
English: The sons, grandsons, and brothers of the person who made the offering also stand on the south side of the owner, facing west, with the north at the top.

古文：有司群执事，如兄弟服，东面北上。
现代文：专职司祭者及临时来助祭者亦玄冠玄端，面朝东，以北为上。
English: Full-time priests and temporary deacons also wear the crown, facing east, with the north at the top.

古文：席于门中，闑西阈外。
现代文：于庙门中央短柱的西边、门槛的外边铺席。
English: Seats are located on the west side of the short central pillar of the temple gate, outside the threshold.

古文：筮人取筮于西塾，执之，东面受命主人。
现代文：筮人于西塾取蓍草拿在手中，面朝东接受主人之命。
English: The eunuch took the eelgrass from the west school, held it in his hands, and faced east to accept his master's order.

古文：宰自主人之左赞命，命曰： 孝孙某，筮来日某，诹此某事，适其皇祖某子。
现代文：群吏之长宰站在主人的左边传达主人之命，说： 孝孙某卜筮来日某之吉凶，往祭于其皇祖之庙，请皇祖某子享祭。 
English: The leader of the group of officials stood on the left side of the master to convey the master's order, saying: The filial grandson of a certain Bu Xun came to the day of a certain auspicious and inauspicious, went to the temple of his imperial ancestor, and invited the imperial ancestor of a certain son to enjoy the festival.

古文：筮者许诺，还，即席，西面坐。
现代文：筮者应诺，转身就席而坐，面朝西。
English: The eunuch agreed, turned around and sat down, facing west.

古文：卦者在左。
现代文：执卦之人在左边。
English: At this time, the sorcerer is on the left of the eunuch.

古文：卒筮，写卦。
现代文：卜筮完毕，将卦爻写于方版上。
English: When the divination is complete, write the hexagram on the board.

古文：筮者执以示主人。
现代文：筮者执方版给主人看。
English: The deaf-mute showed his master the manuscript.

古文：主人受视，反之，筮者还，东面。
现代文：主人接过来看后，还给筮者。筮者又还给执卦者，面朝东。
English: After the master took over, he gave it back to the eavesdropper. The eavesdropper then gave it back to the teller, facing east.

古文：长占，卒，告于主人： 占曰迹攥则筮远日，如初仪。
现代文：接着按年龄之长幼次第占卜，完毕，告于主人： 占卜的结果是 吉 。 倘若不吉，则要筮旬外之日，卜筮之礼仪和前面一样。
English: Then, according to the age of the eldest and youngest, the divination is completed, and it is announced to the owner: The result of the divination is auspicious. If it is not auspicious, it should be done on a day outside the season. The etiquette of divination is the same as before.

古文：宗人告事毕。
现代文：宗人诰告卜筮之事结束。
English: The ceremony is over.

古文：前期三日之朝，筮尸，如求日之仪。
现代文：祭前三日之早上，以卜筮选择代死者受祭之人一一尸，礼仪与以卜筮择日相同。
English: On the morning of the third day before the festival, Ibuki selects one corpse after another to be sacrificed in place of the deceased. The ceremony is the same as the one on the day of Ibuki's selection.

古文：命筮曰： 孝孙某，诹此某事，适其皇祖某子，筮某之某为尸。
现代文：群吏之长传达主人之命说： 孝孙某往祭于皇祖之庙，筮某之某为 尸 。
English: The head of the group of officials conveyed the master's order, saying: "His son and grandson are enshrined in the temple of the emperor's ancestors, and his son and grandson are dead.

古文：尚飨！ 
现代文：请享祭。 
English: It's the Feast of Invitations.

古文：乃宿尸。
现代文：于是告 尸 祭日使其按时而来。
English: So he called the funeral home to make sure it would come on time.

古文：主人立于尸外门外。
现代文：丧主立于 尸 的外门之外。
English: The mourners stand outside the outer gate of the cemetery.

古文：子姓兄弟立主人之后，北面东上。尸如主人服，出门左，西面。
现代文：所祭者之子孙、兄弟立于主人之后，面朝北，以东为上。 尸 服和主人一样的衣服，出门立于左边，面朝西。
English: The sons, grandsons, and brothers of the deceased stood behind the master, facing north, with the east facing up, and the corpse, dressed in the same clothes as the master, stood on the left, facing west.

古文：主人辟，皆东面，北上。
现代文：主人避位，与众人面朝东，以北为上。
English: The host is reclining, facing the crowd to the east, with the north at the top.

古文：主人再拜。尸答拜。
现代文：主人两次向 尸 行拜， 尸 答拜。
English: The owner bowed to the corpse twice, and the corpse bowed back.

古文：宗人摈辞如初，卒曰： 筮子为某尸，占曰吉，敢宿！ 
现代文：宗人傧者所致之辞和前面筮尸之辞一样，唯最后两句则为： 筮子为某 尸 ，占卜的结果是 吉 ，敢请祝告之 尸 。 
English: The words uttered by the deceased are the same as the ones uttered by the corpse, except for the last two sentences: The corpse is a certain corpse, the result of the divination is auspicious, and I dare you to congratulate the corpse.

古文：祝许诺，致命。尸许诺，主人再拜稽首。尸入主人退。
现代文：祝应诺，转告于 尸 。 尸 应诺，主人向 尸 两次行拜并叩首。 尸 入门的同时，主人退下。
English: The corpse obeyed, and the master bowed twice to the corpse and patted its head.The corpse entered the door, and the master stepped back.

古文：宿宾。
现代文：告宾祭日使其及时来到。
English: The Guest Day made it come just in time.

古文：宾如主人服，出门左，西面再拜。主人东面，答再拜。
现代文：宾客服和主人同样的衣服，出门立于左边，面朝西，向主人两次行拜。
English: The guest, dressed in the same clothes as the host, goes out and stands on the left, facing west, and bows twice to the host.

古文：宗人摈，曰： 某荐岁事，吾子将莅之，敢宿！ 
现代文：主人面朝东，答拜亦两次。宗人傧者致辞说： 某行岁祭之事，敬请贵宾莅临，请及时参加。 
English: The host faced east and bowed twice. The founder of the sect gave a speech and said, "On the occasion of a certain New Year's festival, I would like to invite distinguished guests to come and participate in good time.

古文：宾曰： 某敢不敬从！ 
现代文：宾回答说： 某怎敢不敬而从命。 
English: Bin replied: "How dare someone disobey and follow orders.

古文：主人再拜，宾答拜，主人退，宾拜送。
现代文：随之主人向宾行拜两次，宾答拜。主人退下，宾拜送之。
English: Then the host bowed twice to the guest, and the guest bowed back. The host stepped back, and the guest bowed to him.

古文：厥明夕，陈鼎于门外，北面北上，有鼏。
现代文：请宾之次日晚上，将鼎陈设于门外，正面朝北，以北为上。
English: In the evening of the next day, the guest will be displayed outside the door, facing north, with north facing up.

古文：棜在其南，南顺实兽于其上，东首。
现代文：有覆巾盖于鼎上。长方形无足的木承盘一一棜置放在鼎的南边，南北放，亦以北为上，棜上再放兽，兽的头朝东。
English: A rectangular footless wooden tray was placed one by one on the south side of the lid, placed north-south and north-up, and then the beast was placed on the lid, with the beast's head facing east.

古文：牲在其西，北首，东足。
现代文：祭牲豕放在棜的西边，牲头朝北，足朝东。
English: The sacrificial yoke is placed on the west side of the yoke, with the head of the animal facing north and the feet facing east.

古文：设洗于降阶东南，壶、禁在东序，豆、笾、鉶在东房，南上。
现代文：设洗于东阶东南，设壶、禁于东序，设豆、笾、铏于东房，以南为上。
English: Set the washing in the southeast of the east row, set the pot and the ban in the east row, set the beans, the bowl and the ladle in the east room, and the south is up.

古文：几、席、两敦在西堂。
现代文：设几、席、两只敦于西堂。
English: A few seats are set up, and two are set up in the West Hall.

古文：主人及子姓兄弟即位于门东，如初。
现代文：主人和所祭者之子孙、兄弟即位于庙门外的东边，和初筮位相同。
English: The grandchildren and brothers of the owner and the son of the person who was sacrificed are located on the east side outside the temple gate, and are the same as the first rank.

古文：宾及众宾即位于门西，东面北上。
现代文：宾和众宾即位于庙门外的西边，面朝东，以北为上。
English: The guests and the guests are located on the west side outside the temple gate, facing east, with north facing up.

古文：宗人、祝立于宾西北，东面南上。
现代文：宗人、祝立于宾的西北边，面朝东，以南为上。
English: Sojin and Zhu stand on the northwest side of Bin, facing east, with south on top.

古文：主人再拜，宾答再拜。
现代文：主人向宾行拜两次，宾答拜亦两次。
English: The host bows twice to the guest, and the guest bows twice to the host.

古文：三拜众宾，众宾答再拜。
现代文：主人又向众宾行拜三次，众宾答拜两次。
English: The host also bowed three times to the guests, and the guests bowed twice in return.

古文：主人揖入，兄弟从，宾及众宾从，即位于堂下，如外位。
现代文：主人进而拱手而入，兄弟从主人而入，宾及众宾又从兄弟而入，皆即位于堂下，所就之位与庙门外相同。
English: The host then steps in, the brother steps in from the host, and the guests and all the guests step in from the brothers, all of whom are immediately below the priest, occupying the same position as outside the temple gate.

古文：宗人升自西阶，视壶濯及豆笾，反降，东北面告濯、具。宾出，主人出，皆复外位。
现代文：宗人从西阶登堂，审视壶等是否洗净及豆、笾等是否设好，然后返身下堂，面朝东北，告主人及宾客祭器已洗净备妥。于是宾客出庙门，主人也出庙门，皆返回庙门外原位。
English: The father-in-law entered the hall from the west steps, inspected whether the pots and other utensils had been washed and whether the beans and ladles had been set up, and then returned to the hall, facing northeast, to inform the host and guests that the sacrificial vessels had been washed and prepared. So the guests left the temple gate, the host also left the temple gate, and everyone returned to their original positions outside the temple gate.

古文：宗人视牲，告充。
现代文：接着宗人审查祭牲，诏告祭牲肥壮。
English: Next, the patriarch examines the sacrificial animal and announces that the animal is fat.

古文：雍正作豕。宗人举兽尾，告备；举鼎鼏。
现代文：雍人之长则以策触豕而视其声气，以知豕是否有病。宗人又举起兽尾，诏告兽完整无残缺；掀开覆鼎之巾，诏告鼎确洁净。
English: The chief of the temple attendants would touch the yakitori to see if it was diseased. The priest would then lift up the tail of the animal and declare that it was complete and without defect. He would then lift up the cloth covering the yakitori and declare that the yakitori was indeed clean.

古文：请期，曰 羹饪 。告事毕，宾出，主人拜送。
现代文：宗人进而向主人请示祭祀的时间，主人回答： 次日天明肉熟时行祭。 宗人诏告祭器、祭牲等检视完毕，宾客辞出，主人拜送。
English: Sojin then asked the host for the time of the sacrifice, to which the host replied, "The next day, when the meat is cooked, the sacrifice will be held." Sojin then announced that the sacrificial vessels and sacrificial animals had been inspected, the guests had left, and the host bid them farewell.

古文：夙兴，主人服如初，立于门外东方，南面，视侧杀。
现代文：祭日一早起来，主人服玄冠玄端如前，立于门外东边，面朝南，察视杀祭豕。
English: On the morning of the festival, the master of the house, dressed in the same robes as before, stood outside the gate on the east side, facing south, inspecting the sacrificial urns.

古文：主妇视饎爨于西堂下。
现代文：主妇则于西堂下观看炊黍稷。
English: The housewife is watching the cooking under the West Hall.

古文：亨于门外东方，西面北上。
现代文：于门外东边烹煮豕、鱼、兽，面朝西，以北为上。
English: On the east side outside the gate, cook trout, fish, and animals, facing west, with north facing up.

古文：羹饪，实鼎，陈于门外，如初。
现代文：烹煮完毕，盛于鼎中，陈设于门外，其位和先前相同。
English: After cooking, it is placed in the middle of the ring and displayed outside the door, in the same position as before.

古文：尊于户东，玄酒在西。
现代文：酒壶设于室户之东，玄酒之壶在西边。
English: The wine jug is located in the east of Muroto, and the black wine jug is in the west.

古文：实豆、笾、鉶，陈于房中，如初。
现代文：将干肉、肉酱、菜羹等盛于豆、笾、铏中，陈设在房中，其位也和先前相同。
English: The dried meat, meat sauce, vegetable soup, etc. are placed in the beans, bean paste, bean paste, and displayed in the room, and their position is the same as before.

古文：执事之俎，陈于阶间，二列，北上。
现代文：诸执事之俎陈设在东西两阶之间，自北而南分为两排，以北为上。
English: The coffins of the deacons are displayed between the east and west two tiers, divided into two rows from north to south, with north at the top.

古文：盛两敦，陈于西堂，藉用萑，几席陈于西堂，如初。尸盥匜水，实于槃中，箪巾，在门内之右。
现代文：盛黍稷于两只敦中，陈设在西堂，敦下垫以细苇。几和席亦陈设在西堂，其位和先前相同。 尸 盥洗之水盛于匜中，匜又置于盥盘之中； 尸 拭手之巾放在箪中，凡此皆设在门内右边。
English: The coffin is displayed in the West Hall, with the coffin's lower cushion made of fine straw. The pews and seats are also displayed in the West Hall, in the same positions as before. The water for washing the corpse is placed in the coffin, and the coffin is placed in the coffin dish; the hand towel for wiping the corpse is placed in the coffin, all of which are located on the right side of the door.

古文：祝筵几于室中，东面。
现代文：祝设祭祀用席、几于室中西南隅，正面朝东。
English: A ceremonial table is set up, several in the south-west corner of the room, facing east.

古文：主妇纚笄，宵衣，立于房中，南面。
现代文：主妇包发插笄，着布制常服黑色缯衣，立于房中，面朝南。
English: The housewife, with her hair in a bun and wearing a black pleated dress, stands in the middle of the room, facing south.

古文：主人及宾、兄弟、群执事，即位于门外，如初。
现代文：主人和宾客、兄弟、诸执事于门外就位，其位和先前一样。
English: And the master and the guests and the brethren and the officers stood without at the door in the same place where they were before.

古文：宗人告有司具。
现代文：宗人告主人准备就绪。
English: My father-in-law told my master that everything was ready.

古文：主人拜宾如初，揖入，即位，如初，佐食北面立于中庭。
现代文：主人拜宾，拱手而入，就位，其礼仪皆和先前视祭器是否洗净时相同。佐食则面朝北，立于中庭。
English: The host greets the guests, makes a hasty entrance, and takes his place. The etiquette is the same as before, depending on whether the sacrificial vessels have been washed or not. Sashimi stands in the atrium, facing north.

古文：主人及祝升，祝先入，主人从，西面于户内。
现代文：主人和祝登堂，祝先入室，主人从祝而入，面朝西，立于室内。
English: The host and the celebrant enter the hall, the celebrant enters the room first, the host enters from the celebrant, faces west, and stands in the room.

古文：主妇盥于房中，荐两豆，葵菹、蜗醢，醢在北。
现代文：主妇在房中洗手，继献两豆，一豆盛葵菹，一豆盛蜗酱，盛蜗酱之豆放在北边。
English: The housewife washes her hands in the room, and then offers two beans, one bean with sunflower seeds, one bean with dipping sauce, and the bean with dipping sauce is placed on the north side.

古文：宗人遣佐食及执事盥，出。
现代文：宗人遣派佐食和执事洗手，出门，以俟抬鼎。
English: The patriarch sent Sakaki and the deacon to wash their hands, go out, and carry the tablecloth.

古文：主人降，及宾盥，出。
现代文：主人下堂，和宾客之长洗手，出门。
English: The host went downstairs, washed his hands with the head of the guests, and went out.

古文：主人在右，及佐食举牲鼎。
现代文：主人在右边，佐食在左边，抬起牲鼎。
English: The owner is on the right, Sasaki is on the left, lifting the stepladder.

古文：宾长在右，及执事举鱼腊鼎。
现代文：宾客之长在右边，执事在左边，抬起鱼鼎和兽鼎。
English: The head of the guests is on the right, the steward on the left, holding up the fish and animal rings.

古文：除鼏。
现代文：除去覆鼎之幂巾。
English: Remove the cover from the dinghy.

古文：宗人执毕先入，当作阶，南面。
现代文：宗人执桑木制成的叉子一一毕先鼎而入，正对着东阶而立，面朝南。
English: The forks made of mulberry wood held by the patriarch entered first, one by one, and stood directly opposite the eastern steps, facing south.

古文：鼎西面错，右人抽扃，委于鼎北。
现代文：鼎抬入后正面朝西放下，右边抬鼎者抽出杠子，置放在鼎的北边。
English: After the tripod is lifted in, the front faces west and is put down. The person lifting the tripod on the right pulls out a bar and places it on the north side of the tripod.

古文：赞者错俎，加匕，乃朼。
现代文：祝劝 尸 接着吃，主人向 尸 行拜。
English: The host bowed to the corpse.

古文：佐食升肵俎，鼏之，设于阼阶西。卒载，加匕于鼎。
现代文：继而佐食献上牲助于 尸 ， 尸 接过来振祭，尝过后还于佐食。
English: Next, the sashimi is offered as an offering to the corpse, and the corpse is then offered up as a ritual offering, and after tasting it, it is served with the sashimi.

古文：主人升，入复位。俎入，设于豆东。鱼次，腊特于俎北。主妇设两敦黍稷于俎南，西上，及两鉶芼设于豆南，南陈。祝洗，酌奠，奠于鉶南，遂命佐食启会，佐食启会，却于敦南，出，立于户西，南面。主人再拜稽首。
现代文：佐食接过来放在肵俎上面；佐食又依次献上兽助和鱼一条，其献其受之礼仪也和前面一样。 尸 将先前左手所执食而未尽之肺脊置放在菹豆上面。佐食献上盛有豕肉等供品的四豆于 尸 ，放在左边，以南为上，内有盛肉酱一豆。 尸 又取饭三次，诏告主人已吃饱。祝劝 尸 再吃，和先前一样；佐食献上豕之后胫骨、兽之后胫骨、鱼一条于 尸 ，礼仪和前面一样。 尸 又取饭三次，诏告主人已吃饱。祝又劝 尸 再吃，和前面一样；佐食献上豕之肩、兽之肩、鱼一条于 尸 ，礼仪仍如前。
English: Sashimi is then placed on top of the yakitori; the yakitori is then presented in turn with a helping animal and a fish, and the etiquette for its presentation is the same as before. corpse The lung ridge, which was previously eaten with the left hand, is placed on top of the peas. sashimi is presented with four beans containing offerings such as yakitori on the corpse, placed on the left, south is on top, containing one bean of meat sauce. corpse Three times more rice is taken, to announce that the owner has eaten enough. I wish to persuade the corpse to eat again, as before; sashimi is presented with

古文：主人洗角，升酌，酳尸。尸拜受，主人拜送。尸祭酒，啐酒，宾长以肝从。尸左执角右取肝手耎于盐，振祭，哜之，加于菹豆，卒角。
现代文：接着佐食取牲、鱼、干肉之余盛于肵俎，祭豕和祭兽分别留下正脊一块、正肋一块和臑，鱼则留下三条；然后从菹豆上取下肺脊改放于肵俎之上，又将黍、稷返回原处。主人清洗角杯，登堂，斟酒，献于 尸 。 尸 拜谢后接过来，主人拜送。 尸 祭酒，尝酒，宾客之专以肝献 尸 。 尸 左手执角杯。右手从宾客之长那里接过肝，蘸盐后振祭，尝过后加于菹豆上面，接着饮尽角杯中酒。
English: Next, the remaining portion of the sacrificial animal, fish, and dried meat is placed in the yakitori. The yakitori and sacrificial animal are left with a backbone, a rib, and a gill, respectively, and the fish is left with three; then the pulmonary ridge is removed from the pea and placed on the gill, and the gill and gill are returned to their original places. The host cleans the horn cup, enters the hall, pours the wine, and offers it to the corpse. The corpse is received after the thanksgiving, and the host sends it off. The corpse is offered wine, and the guests offer the liver. The cor

古文：祝受尸角，曰： 送爵！皇尸卒爵。 
现代文：祝接过 尸 的空角杯，诏告主人说： 送爵，尸已饮尽酒爵中酒。 
English: He greeted the empty horn cup that had received the corpse, and announced to his host: "Goodbye, the corpse has drunk all the wine in the jar.

古文：主人拜，尸答拜。
现代文：主人向 尸 行拜， 尸 答拜。
English: The master bows to the corpse, the corpse bows back.

古文：祝酌授尸，尸以醋主人。
现代文：祝进而斟酒授给 尸 ， 尸 以之回敬主人。
English: He then pours the wine and gives it to the corpse, and the corpse returns the compliment.

古文：主人拜受角，尸拜送。
现代文：主人行拜后接过角杯， 尸 拜送。
English: After bowing, the host took the horn cup, and the corpse was sent off.

古文：主人退，佐食授挼祭。
现代文：主人退而返位，佐食取 尸 所食黍、稷、切肺之余授于主人使祭。
English: The host retreated and returned to his seat. After taking the corpse and eating the sausage, giblets, and lungs, he gave the remains of the meal to the officiating priest.

古文：主人坐，左执角，受祭祭之，祭酒，啐酒，进听嘏。佐食抟黍授祝，祝授尸。
现代文：主人坐下，左手执角杯，右手取佐食所献祭品而祭之；接着祭酒，尝酒，又进至 尸 前静受 尸 的祝福之辞。
English: The host sits down, holding a horned cup in his left hand, and in his right hand he takes the sacrificial offering offered by Sasaki; then he offers the sacrificial wine, tastes the wine, and goes to the corpse to quietly receive the corpse's words of blessing.

古文：尸受以菹豆，执以亲嘏主人。
现代文：佐食捏黍饭成团状授给祝，祝又授于 尸 。 尸 以菹豆接着，执菹豆亲授丧主，并祝福于主人。
English: Sashimi and kneaded glutinous rice were given in a group to the mourners, and the mourners were then given to the corpse.The corpse was then given peas.

古文：主人左执角，再拜稽首受，复位，诗怀之，实于左袂，挂于季指，卒角，拜。尸答拜。
现代文：主人左手执角杯，行拜两次并叩首后接过菹豆，返回原位；进而奉纳于杯中，又放入左袖之中，并以右手挂左袖于左手小指；然后饮尽角杯中酒，拜谢 尸 。 尸 答拜。
English: The host holds the horn cup in his left hand, bows twice and bows his head, then takes the peas and returns to his original position; he then offers them in the cup, puts them in his left sleeve, and hangs the left sleeve on the little finger of his left hand with his right hand; then he drinks the wine in the horn cup, thanks the corpse. The corpse says goodbye.

古文：主人出，写啬于房，祝以笾受。
现代文：主人出室入房，将左袖中之饭团倒出。祝用笾接着。
English: The host enters the room and pours out the rice ball in his left sleeve.

古文：筵祝，南面。
现代文：主人自房还入室，为祝铺竹席，席正面向南。
English: I wish you to sit at the fine table, facing south.

古文：主人酌献祝，祝拜受角，主人拜送。
现代文：主人斟酒献于祝，祝行拜后接过酒角，主人拜送。
English: The host pours the wine and offers it as a blessing. After the blessing, the host receives the horn of wine and the host gives it away.

古文：设菹醢、俎。
现代文：接着主妇设好菹和肉酱，佐食设好俎。
English: Next, the hostess set out the clams and meat sauce, and the sausage set out the clams.

古文：祝左执角，祭豆，兴取肺，坐祭，哜之，兴加于俎，坐祭酒，啐酒，以肝从。
现代文：祝左手执角杯，坐下以右手祭豆，起来取肺，坐下祭肺，尝肺后起来，加肺于俎上，然后坐下祭酒，尝酒，这时主人献肝于祝。
English: Hold the horn cup with the left hand, sit down and offer beans with the right hand, stand up and take the lungs, sit down and offer the lungs, taste the lungs and stand up, add the lungs to the bowl, then sit down and taste the wine, at this time the host will offer the liver to the blessing.

古文：祝左执角，右取肝手耎于盐，振祭，哜之，加于俎，卒角，拜。
现代文：祝左手执角杯，右手取肝蘸上盐后振祭，尝过后放肝于俎上，饮尽角杯中酒，拜谢主人。
English: Wish the left hand to hold the horn cup, the right hand to take the liver and sprinkle it with salt after shaking the offering, after tasting it, put the liver on the bowl, drink the wine in the horn cup, and thank the host.

古文：主人答拜，受角，酌献佐食。
现代文：主人答拜，接过角杯，斟上酒后又献给佐食。
English: The host bowed, took the horn cup, poured the wine and then offered it to Sasaki.

古文：佐食北面拜受角，主人拜送。
现代文：佐食面朝北行拜后接过角杯，主人行拜相送。
English: After bowing to the north, the sausage noodle received the horn cup, and the host bowed and sent it off.

古文：佐食坐祭，卒角，拜。
现代文：佐食坐下行祭，饮尽角杯中酒，拜谢主人。
English: Sashiki sits down and performs the ritual, drinks all the wine in the horn cup, and thanks the host.

古文：主人答拜，受角，降，反于篚，升，入复位。
现代文：主人答拜，接过角杯；下堂，置空角杯于篚中；然后登堂，入室，返回原位。
English: The host bowed, took the horn cup; went down the hall, placed the empty horn cup in the urn; then went up the hall, entered the room, and returned to his original position.

古文：主妇洗爵于房，酌，亚献尸。尸拜受，主妇北面拜送。
现代文：主妇在房中清洗酒爵，斟上酒，二次献 尸 。 尸 行拜后接过酒爵，主妇面朝北行拜相送。
English: The housewife cleaned the wine in the room, poured the wine, and offered the corpse twice. After the corpse was worshiped, she received the wine, and the housewife went to the north to worship and send it away.

古文：宗妇执两笾，户外坐。主妇受，设于敦南。祝赞笾祭。
现代文：同宗之妇执一盛枣、一盛栗的两只笾坐在户外呈给主妇；主妇接过来设在敦的南边，盛枣之笾在西，盛栗之笾在东。
English: The woman of the same family, holding a handful of dates and a handful of chestnuts, sat outside and presented the housewife with two jars; the housewife took over and placed them on the south side of the town, the jars of dates on the west, and the jars of chestnuts on the east.

古文：尸受，祭之，祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：祝从笾中取枣、栗献于 尸 。 尸 接过来以之行祭，又祭酒、尝酒。
English: I wish that dates and chestnuts will be taken from the urn and offered to the corpse, which will then be followed by a procession, a wine offering, and a wine tasting.

古文：兄弟长以燔从。尸受，振祭，哜之，反之。
现代文：兄弟中之长者接着献上炙肉。 尸 接过来振祭，尝过后还于兄弟中之长者。
English: The elder of the brothers then offered the roasted meat, and the corpse was brought to the priest, who tasted it and then offered it to the elder of the brothers.

古文：羞燔者受，加于肵，出。尸卒爵，祝受爵，命送如初。酢，如主人仪。主妇适房，南面。
现代文：献炙肉者接过来，加于肵俎之上，退出。 尸 饮尽酒爵中酒，祝接过空爵，命主妇拜送爵，和主人一样。 尸 换酒爵斟酒回敬主妇，也和回敬主人一样。主妇返回房中，面朝南。
English: The one who offered the roasted meat took over, added it to the stew, and left. The corpse drank up the wine in the wine jar, congratulated the empty jar, and ordered the housewife to send the jar away, just like the master. The corpse changed the wine jar and poured the wine back to the housewife, just like the host. The housewife returned to the room, facing south.

古文：佐食挼祭。
现代文：佐食将祭物置于地上命主妇行祭。
English: Sasaki placed the offering on the ground and ordered the matron to perform the ritual.

古文：主妇左执爵，右抚祭，祭酒，啐酒，入，卒爵，如主人仪。
现代文：主妇左手执酒爵，右手抚按地上之祭物而祭，祭酒，尝酒：进而入室，饮尽酒爵中酒，皆如主人之仪。
English: The housewife holds the chalice in her left hand, and with her right hand she caresses and offers the sacrifice according to the offerings on the ground, the sacrificial wine, and tastes the wine: then she enters the house and drinks the wine from the chalice, all of which are like the master's rites.

古文：献祝，笾燔从，如初仪。
现代文：接着主妇依次献笾于祝，献炙肉于祝，皆和先前之仪相同。
English: Next, the hostesses in turn offer a bowl of rice and a piece of roasted meat, all of which are the same as the previous ceremony.

古文：及佐食，如初。
现代文：至献佐食，其礼仪也和先前相同。
English: The etiquette is the same as before when it comes to offering sauces and condiments.

古文：卒，以爵入于房。
现代文：完毕，执空爵入于房中。
English: When it was over, the air marshal entered the room.

古文：宾三献，如初。
现代文：宾客三次献尸，其礼仪和主妇二次献 尸 相同。
English: The guests offer the corpse three times, and the etiquette is the same as the housewife's second offering.

古文：燔从如初。爵止。席于户内。主妇洗爵，酌，致爵于主人。
现代文：进而献炙肉，其礼仪也和主妇献时相同。 尸 于是放下酒爵。
English: Then the roasted meat is offered, with the same etiquette as when it is offered by a housewife.

古文：主人拜受爵，主妇拜送爵。
现代文：从房中取席为主人铺于室内，席的正面朝西。主妇清洗酒爵，斟酒后献于主人。
English: A seat is taken from the room and placed indoors for the host, the front of the seat facing west. The hostess cleans the wine rack, pours the wine and then offers it to the host.

古文：宗妇赞豆如初，主妇受，设两豆两笾。
现代文：主人行拜后接过酒爵，主妇行拜送爵。同宗之妇献上笾、豆，和先前一样，主妇接过，设两豆、两笾。
English: After bowing, the master received the wine baron, and the housewife bowed and presented the baron. The woman of the same family offered a bean and a bean, and as before, the housewife received it, setting two beans and two beans.

古文：俎入设。
现代文：佐食入室设好俎。
English: Sashiki enters the room and sets up a table.

古文：主人左执爵，祭荐，宗人赞祭。
现代文：主人左手执爵，右手取所送之祭品行祭；宗人献上笾、豆中之祭品以助祭。
English: The host presides over the ceremony with his left hand, and with his right hand he takes the offerings and performs the sacrifice; the founder offers the straw and bean offerings to assist in the sacrifice.

古文：奠爵，兴取肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴加于俎，坐兑手，祭酒，啐酒，肝从。
现代文：主人接着放下酒爵，起来取肺，坐下用右手将肺撕开而祭之，并尝左手中肺；起来加肺于俎上，坐下拭手后祭酒，尝酒，接着献肝于主人。
English: The host then puts down the wine goblet, stands up to take the lungs, sits down, rips the lungs apart with his right hand and offers them, and tastes the lungs in his left hand; stands up, adds the lungs to the yoke, sits down, wipes his hands after the offering, tastes the wine, and then offers the liver to the host.

古文：左执爵，取肝手耎于盐，坐振祭，哜之。
现代文：主人左手执爵，右手取肝蘸盐后，坐下振祭，并尝肝。
English: The host presides over the ceremony with his left hand, takes the liver and salt with his right hand, sits down, and tastes the liver.

古文：宗人受，加于俎。
现代文：尝过后交于宗人，宗人接过，加于俎上。
English: After tasting it, he handed it to his father-in-law, who took it and added it to the urn.

古文：燔亦如之。
现代文：献炙肉之礼仪，亦和先前相同。
English: The etiquette for offering roasted meat is also the same as before.

古文：兴，席末坐卒爵，拜。
现代文：丧主起来，就席之末端而坐，饮尽酒爵中酒，向主妇行拜。
English: The mourner got up, sat down at the end of the table, drank all the wine and bowed to the hostess.

古文：主妇答拜，受爵，酌醋，左执爵，拜，主人答拜。
现代文：主妇答拜，接过空爵，斟酒自酬，然后左手执爵，向主人行拜；主人答拜。
English: The hostess bowed, took the gong, poured herself a drink, then bowed with her left hand to the host; the host bowed back.

古文：坐祭，立饮，卒爵，拜，主人答拜。
现代文：主妇坐下祭酒，起来饮尽酒爵中酒，向主人行拜；主人答拜。
English: The housewife sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, gets up and drinks all the wine in the jar, and bows to the master; the master bows back.

古文：主妇出，反于房。
现代文：主妇出室至堂，并由堂返回房中。
English: The housewife goes out of the room to the hall, and the hall returns to the room.

古文：主人降，洗，酌，致爵于主妇，席于房中，南面。
现代文：主人下堂，清洗酒爵，登堂斟酒后献给主妇，主妇之席在房中，正面朝南。
English: The host goes down the hall, cleans the goblet, goes up the hall, pours the wine and then offers it to the hostess. The hostess's table is in the middle of the room, facing south.

古文：主妇拜受爵，主人西面答拜。
现代文：主妇行拜后接过酒爵，主人面朝西答拜。
English: After bowing, the hostess received the baron, and the host bowed his head to the west.

古文：宗妇荐豆、俎，从献皆如主人。
现代文：同宗之妇献上豆、俎，进而献上肝、炙肉，其礼仪皆和献主人时相同。
English: The women of the same clan offer beans and bean stew, followed by liver and roasted meat. The etiquette is the same as when offering the host.

古文：主人更爵酌醋，卒爵，降，实爵于篚，入复位。
现代文：丧主更换酒爵，斟酒自酬，饮尽酒爵中酒，下堂；将空爵放于篚中，然后入室返回原位。
English: After the death of the host, the host will replace the bottle, pour the wine for himself, drink up the wine in the bottle, and leave the hall. The empty bottle will be placed in the urn, and then returned to its original place.

古文：三献作止爵。尸卒爵，酢。
现代文：宾客请 尸 饮三献时放下之酒爵。 尸 饮尽此爵中酒，宾客斟酒自酬。
English: Guests are invited to drink from a goblet of wine that was set aside for the corpse when it was sacrificed. When the corpse has finished drinking from the goblet, guests pour the wine for themselves.

古文：酌献祝及佐食。
现代文：继而斟酒献祝和佐食。
English: Afterwards, wine is poured to celebrate the occasion and sausages are served.

古文：洗爵，酌致于主人、主妇、燔从皆如初。
现代文：接着清洗酒爵，又斟酒献丧主和主妇，又献上炙肉，其礼仪皆和先前相同。
English: Then the wine is washed, the host and hostess are poured, and the roast meat is served, all with the same etiquette as before.

古文：更爵，酢于主人，卒，复位。
现代文：宾客更换酒爵，斟酒代主人自酬；完毕，返回堂下原位，面朝东。
English: The guests change the wine glasses, pour the wine on behalf of the host at their own expense; when finished, they return to the original position under the hall, facing east.

古文：主人降阼阶，西面拜宾，如初。洗，宾辞洗。
现代文：主人从东阶下堂，面朝西拜宾，其礼仪和先前一样；接着清洗酒爵。
English: The host descends from the east steps, faces west to greet his guests, with the same etiquette as before; he then cleans the wine glasses.

古文：卒洗，揖让升，酌，西阶上献宾。
现代文：宾客谦让，主人继续洗爵。洗爵完毕，主人行拱手礼，让宾客先登阶，然后斟酒，于西阶上献给宾客。
English: The guest humbly concedes, and the host continues with the christening. When the christening is over, the host makes a bow and lets the guest ascend the steps first, then pours the wine and offers it to the guest on the west steps.

古文：宾北面拜受爵。主人在右，答拜。
现代文：宾客面朝北行拜后接过酒爵，主人在右边答拜。
English: After the guests bowed to the north, the host bowed to the right.

古文：荐脯醢。设折俎。宾左执爵，祭豆，奠爵，兴，取肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴，加于俎，坐兑手，祭酒，卒爵，拜。
现代文：主人献盛干肉之笾和盛肉酱之豆于宾客，又陈设盛放已体解之牲的折俎。宾客左手执爵，右手祭豆，放下酒爵。起来取肺，坐下用右手将肺撕开而祭之，尝左手中肺；起来将肺放回俎上，坐下拭手后，祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，向主人行拜。
English: The host offers dried meat and beans with meat sauce to the guests, and sets up a folding screen to display the slaughtered animal. The guests hold the knife in their left hand, the beans in their right hand, and put down the wine. Get up and take the lungs, sit down and tear the lungs with the right hand and sacrifice them, taste the lungs in the left hand; get up and put the lungs back on the knife, sit down and wipe your hands, drink the wine, drink the wine in the wine, and worship the host.

古文：主人答拜，受爵，酌酢，奠爵，拜。宾答拜。
现代文：主人答拜，接过空爵，斟酒自酬，然后放下酒爵，向宾行拜。宾客答拜。
English: The host bows, takes the goblet, pours himself a drink, then puts down the goblet and bows to the guests. The guests bow.

古文：主人坐祭，卒爵，拜。
现代文：主人坐下，取于肉和肺行祭，饮尽酒爵中酒，向宾客行拜。
English: The host sits down, takes the meat and the lungs, performs the ritual, drinks the wine from the bottle, and bows to the guests.

古文：宾答拜，揖，执祭以降，西面奠于其位；位如初。
现代文：宾客答拜。主人向宾客行拱手礼后，执祭品而下堂，面朝西将其放回原位。
English: The guests respond. After bowing to the guests, the host goes down the hall holding the sacrificial offering and returns it to its original place, facing west.

古文：荐、俎从设。
现代文：执事执笾、豆、折俎下堂设于其旁。
English: The lower hall of the deacon's office is located next to it.

古文：众宾升，拜受爵，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：众宾登上西阶，行拜后接过酒爵，坐下祭酒，起来饮酒。
English: The guests ascended the west steps, bowed and received the wine, sat down to drink the sacrificial wine, and got up to drink.

古文：荐、俎设于其位，辩。主人备答拜焉，降，实爵于篚。
现代文：众宾之位皆设有俎。主人一答拜，下堂，将众宾之空爵放入篚中。
English: The seats of all the guests are provided with cushions. The host responds with a bow, goes down the hall, and places the empty chairs of the guests into the cushions.

古文：尊两壶阼阶东，加勺，南枋，西方亦如之。
现代文：设两酒尊于东阶之东，加勺于酒尊上面，勺柄向南，西阶之西也照此陈设。
English: Two wine goblets are placed at the east end of the east step, and a spoon is placed on top of the wine goblet. The spoon handle faces south, and the west end of the west step is also arranged accordingly.

古文：主人洗觯，酌于西方之尊，西阶前北面酬宾，宾在左。
现代文：主人清洗酒觯，从西阶之西的酒尊中倒酒于酒觯，于西阶的前面面朝北酬宾；宾客在左侧。
English: The host cleans the goblet, pours wine into the goblet from the goblet west of the west steps, and greets the guests facing north in front of the west steps; the guests are on the left.

古文：主人奠觯拜，宾答拜。
现代文：主人将酒觯放下，向宾客行拜，宾客答拜。
English: The host puts down the wine goblet, bows to the guests, and the guests bow back.

古文：主人坐祭，卒觯，拜。宾答拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，饮尽酒觯中酒，向宾客行拜。宾客答拜。
English: The host sits down, drinks the sacrificial wine, and bows to the guests. The guests bow back.

古文：主人洗觯，宾辞，主人对。卒洗，酌，西面。宾北面拜。
现代文：主人洗酒觯，宾客谦让；主人坚持洗净，俟洗毕，斟酒面朝西而立；宾客面朝北拜谢。
English: The host washes the wine goblet, the guest humbly concedes; the host insists on washing, rinsing, pouring the wine and standing facing west; the guest faces north and thanks.

古文：主人奠觯于荐北。
现代文：主人将酒觯放于祭物的北边。
English: The host places the chalice on the north side of the offering.

古文：宾坐取觯，还，东面，拜。主人答拜。
现代文：宾客坐下拿起酒觯，转身向东，向主人行拜；主人答拜。
English: The guest sits down, picks up the goblet, turns to the east, bows to the host; the host bows back.

古文：宾奠觯于荐南。揖复位。
现代文：宾客饮尽酒觯中酒后，将空觯放于祭物的南边，拱手而返回原位。
English: After the guests have drunk all the wine in the goblet, they place the empty goblet on the south side of the offering and return to the original place.

古文：主人洗爵，献长兄弟于阼阶上。如宾仪。
现代文：主人清洗酒爵，斟酒于东阶上献给兄弟中之长者，其礼仪和献宾时相同。
English: The host cleans the goblet and pours the wine on the east step for the eldest brother. The etiquette is the same as when serving guests.

古文：洗，献众兄弟，如众宾仪。
现代文：主人清洗酒爵，斟酒后的酒尊中斟上酒，面朝西献于众宾之长。
English: The host cleans the goblet, pours the wine into the goblet after pouring the wine, and presents it to the head of the guests, facing west.

古文：洗，献内兄弟于房中，如献众兄弟之仪。
现代文：众宾之长行拜后接过酒觯；兄弟中之长者面朝北答拜，拱手后返回东阶下原位，面朝西。
English: After bowing, the eldest of the guests received the wine goblets; the eldest brother bowed in response, facing north, and then returned to his original position at the bottom of the east step, facing west.

古文：主人西面答拜，更爵酢，卒爵，降，实爵于篚，入复位。长兄弟洗觚为加爵，如初仪，不及佐食，洗致如初，无从。众宾长为加爵，如初，爵止。
现代文：众宾客和众兄弟相互酬献，其礼仪都和前面宾客酬献兄弟中之长者、兄弟中之长者酬献众宾之长相同。众宾之长请 尸 举加献时奠而未饮之酒爵饮之，其礼仪和兄弟中之长者所行加献礼相同。
English: The guests and the brothers give gifts to each other, and the etiquette is the same as that of the previous guests: the guests give gifts to the elders of the brothers, and the elders of the brothers give gifts to the elders of the guests.

古文：嗣举奠，盥入，北面再拜稽首。
现代文：兄弟中之长者一一酬献宾客，其礼仪和宾客酬献众兄弟时相同。
English: The elders of the brothers offer the guests one by one, and their etiquette is the same as when the guests offer all the brothers.

古文：尸执奠，进受，复位，祭酒，啐洒。
现代文：最后一个接受献酬的宾客饮尽酒觯中酒后，将空觯放入篚中。
English: After the last guest to accept the offering has drunk all the wine in the goblet, the empty goblet is placed in the urn.

古文：尸举肝。举奠左执觯，再拜稽首，进受肝，复位，坐食肝，卒觯，拜。尸备答拜焉。举奠洗酌入，尸拜受，举奠答拜。
现代文：宾客中之幼者和兄弟中之幼者清洗酒觯，分别从西阶之西和东阶之东的酒尊中斟上酒，立于中庭，面朝北，以西为上；然后各自献于己方之长者，各把酒觯放下，向长者行拜；长者都答拜。幼者各自举酒觯行祭，饮尽酒觯中酒，向长者行拜；长者都答拜。
English: The youngest of the guests and the youngest of the brothers washed the wine jars, poured the wine from the west side of the west staircase and the east side of the east staircase, respectively, and stood in the courtyard, facing north, facing west; then they each dedicated to the elders of their own side, each put down the wine jars, and worshiped the elders; the elders all responded. The young people each raised the wine jars and performed the sacrifice, drank the wine in the wine jars, and worshiped the elders; the elders all responded.

古文：尸祭酒，啐酒，奠之。举奠出，复位。
现代文：幼者各自清洗酒觯，各从西阶之西和东阶之东的酒尊中斟上酒，返回原位；长者都行拜礼。
English: The younger ones clean the wine jars individually, pour wine from the west-facing west and east-facing east jars, and return to their original positions; the elders all pray.

古文：举觯者皆奠觯于荐右。
现代文：幼者分别将酒觯放于祭品的右侧。
English: The little ones place the wine goblets separately on the right side of the offering.

古文：长皆执以兴，举觯者皆复位答拜。
现代文：长者分别执取酒觯起来，幼者都返回中庭原位，面朝北答拜。
English: The elders separately took hold of the wine and drank it, and the young people all returned to their original positions in the atrium, facing north and bowing.

古文：长皆奠觯于其所，皆揖其弟子，弟子皆复其位。
现代文：长者都将酒觯放于原处，都向幼者行拱手礼，幼者各自返回西阶前面朝东和东阶前面朝西的原位。
English: The elders all placed the wine goblets in their original places and bowed to the youngsters, who each returned to their original positions, facing east in front of the west steps and west in front of the east steps.

古文：爵皆无算。利洗散，献于尸，酢，及祝，如初仪。
现代文：接着众宾客和众兄弟唯己所欲相互酬献，不计次第。佐食洗散后，斟上酒献于尸和祝，其礼仪和兄弟中之长者、众宾之长加献时相同。
English: Then all the guests and the brothers give gifts to each other as they wish, without regard to the order. After the sausage is washed, the wine is poured and offered to the corpse and the toast, and the etiquette is the same as the elder brother and the eldest guest.

古文：降，实散于篚。
现代文：下堂，将空散放入篚中。
English: Down the hall, scatter the empties into the urn.

古文：主人出，立于户外，西南面。
现代文：主人出室，立于户外，面朝西。
English: The owner comes out of the room and stands outside, facing west.

古文：祝东面告利成。尸谡，祝前，主人降。
现代文：祝面朝东，向主人诏告 礼成 。 尸 起立，祝于 尸 前引导，主人下堂。
English: Wishing the face to face with the east, and announcing to the host that the ceremony is over, the corpse stands up, and the host leads the corpse out of the hall.

古文：祝反，及主人入，复位。
现代文：祝俟尸出门后返回，和主人各复室中之位。
English: I wish the corpse to return after going out, and the owner to take his place in the recovery room.

古文：命佐食彻尸俎，俎出于庙门。彻庶羞，设于西序下。
现代文：祝命佐食撤去盛有心、舌之肵俎，并送出庙门之外；撤去各种馔肴，改设于西序之下。
English: Wish Sashimi to remove the heart-shaped and tongue-shaped dishes, and send them outside the temple gate; remove all kinds of dishes, and relocate them under the west row.

古文：筵对席，佐食分簋鉶。
现代文：正对 尸 席又设一席，佐食分敦中之黍于敦盖，分铏中之羹于另一铏中。
English: There is another seat directly opposite the dead man's seat, and the stew in the middle of the sausage is in the lid, and the soup in the middle of the soup is in another bowl.

古文：宗人遣举奠及长兄弟盥，立于西阶下，东面北上。
现代文：宗人诏告嗣子和兄弟中之长者洗手，立于西阶下，面朝东，以北为上。
English: The ancestor told the heir and the elder of the brothers to wash their hands and stand at the bottom of the west steps, facing east, with the north facing up.

古文：祝命尝食。
现代文：祝命嗣子和兄弟中之长者尝食。
English: May the heir and the elder of the brothers taste it.

古文：餕者，举奠许诺，升，入，东面。
现代文：嗣子和兄弟中之长者应诺，进而升堂，入室，嗣子面朝东。
English: The eldest of the brothers and the son-in-law promised, and then ascended the altar and entered the house, with the son-in-law facing east.

古文：长兄弟对之，皆坐。
现代文：兄弟中之长者在嗣子对面，二人皆坐下。
English: The elder of the brothers stood opposite the younger, and they both sat down.

古文：佐食授举，各一肤。
现代文：佐食授给二人豕肉各一块。
English: Sashiki gives the two of them a piece of eel each.

古文：主人西面再拜，祝曰： 餕，有以也。 
现代文：主人面朝西行拜两次，祝诏告道： 诸位享飱于此，乃因先祖有德的缘故。 
English: The master bowed twice, facing west, and gave a congratulatory speech, saying, "You all enjoy your stay here because of the virtue of your ancestors.

古文：两餕奠举于俎，许诺，皆答拜。
现代文：两位食者将豕肉放于俎上，应 诺 ，并答拜。
English: The two diners place the stew on the table, agree, and bow.

古文：若是者三。
现代文：祝如上叮咛凡三次。
English: Repeat like this three times.

古文：皆取举，祭食，祭举乃食，祭鉶，食举。
现代文：祝叮嘱之时，嗣子和兄弟中之长者皆将豕肉举起，祭食，祭肉；然后吃饭，祭羹，食肉。
English: At the time of the blessing, the heirs and the elders of the brothers all lift the stew, sacrifice, sacrificial meat; then eat, sacrifice soup, meat.

古文：卒食。主人降洗爵，宰赞一爵。
现代文：食毕，主人下堂清洗酒爵，家吏之长帮洗一只酒爵。
English: After the meal, the host went down to the hall to wash the wine goblets, and the head of the household staff helped wash one wine goblet.

古文：主人升酌，酳上餕，上餕拜受爵，主人答拜；酳下餕，亦如之。
现代文：主人登堂，斟酒献给嗣子，嗣子行拜后接过酒爵，主人答拜；主人又斟酒献给兄弟中之长者，其礼仪和献嗣子一样。
English: The host enters the hall, pours the wine and offers it to the heir, the heir bows and receives the wine, the host bows again, and the host pours the wine and offers it to the eldest of the brothers, with the same etiquette as the offering of the heir.

古文：主人拜，祝曰： 酳，有与也。 
现代文：主人向祝行拜，祝又叮嘱说： 诸位饮酒须想到，务必与众兄弟和族亲好好相处。 
English: The host paid homage to Zhu, who also admonished him: "You who drink alcohol must remember to get along well with your brothers and relatives.

古文：如初仪。两餕执爵拜，祭酒，卒爵，拜。主人答拜。
现代文：嗣子、兄弟中之长者应 诺 ，祝如是叮嘱凡三遍，和前面一样。两位食者执爵拜谢祝，接着祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，向主人行拜。主人答拜。
English: The heir and the elder of the brothers should promise and make a wish if it is said three times, as before. The two eaters lead the blessing, followed by the offering of wine, drink the wine in the wine jar, and bow to the master. The master bows.

古文：两餕皆降，实爵于篚，上餕洗爵，升酌，酢主人，主人拜受爵。
现代文：两位食者下堂，将空爵放入篚中。嗣子又取一酒爵洗净，升堂，斟酒后酬谢主人；主人行拜后接过酒爵。
English: The two diners went down to the hall and placed the empty sake bottle in the urn. The heir also took a sake bottle, washed it, went up to the hall, and thanked the host after pouring the wine; the host received the sake bottle after bowing.

古文：上餕即位，坐答拜。
现代文：嗣子即位，跪坐答拜。
English: The heir ascends the throne, kneels down and worships.

古文：主人答拜。主人坐祭，卒爵，拜。
现代文：主人亦跪坐，然后祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，向嗣子行拜。
English: The host also kneels down, and then offers up the wine, drinks all the wine in the jar, and bows to the heir.

古文：上餕答拜，受爵，降，实于篚。
现代文：嗣子答拜，接过空爵，下堂，放入篚中。
English: The heir answered the prayer, took over the empty jar, went down the hall, and put it in the urn.

古文：主人出，立于户外，西面。
现代文：主人出室，于户外而立，面朝西。
English: The master left the room and stood outside, facing west.

古文：祝命彻阼俎、豆、笾，设于东序下。
现代文：祝命佐食撤下主人之俎、豆、笾，改设于东序之下。
English: Wish Sashimi removed the owner's bean paste, bean paste, bean paste, and replaced it under the east row.

古文：祝执其俎以出，东面于户西。
现代文：祝执拿自己的俎出室，面朝东立于户西。
English: Zhu Xian took his own shovel out of the room and stood facing east on the west side of the house.

古文：宗妇彻祝豆、笾入于房，彻主妇荐、俎。
现代文：同宗之妇撤下祝的豆、笾，又入于房中撤下主妇的荐俎。
English: The woman of the same family removed the beans and bean sprouts, and went into the house to remove the housewife's recommendation sprouts.

古文：佐食彻尸荐、俎、敦，设于西北隅，几在南，厞用筵，纳一尊。
现代文：佐食进而撤下 尸 的荐俎和敦，改设于西北隅，几放在南边，又用席子遮挡光线入室，并于室中陈设一只酒尊。
English: Sasaki then removed the corpse's recommending bowl and spoon, and placed them in the northwest corner, a few in the south, and used a mat to block the light from entering the room, and set up a sake statue in the room.

古文：佐食阖牖户，降。
现代文：佐食关好门窗，下堂。
English: Sasaki closed the doors and windows and left the hall.

古文：祝告利成，降，出。主人降，即位。
现代文：祝诏告主人： 礼成 ，然后下堂，出室，主人下堂，就位于东阶下，面朝西。
English: Wish to tell the master: Li Cheng, then down the hall, out of the room, the master down the hall, is located at the bottom of the east steps, facing west.

古文：宗人告事毕。
现代文：宗人诏告： 事毕。 
English: The ceremony is over.

古文：宾出，主人送于门外，再拜。
现代文：宾客辞出，主人送于大门之外，并行拜两次。
English: The guests leave, the host sends them outside the gate, and they bow twice in parallel.

古文：佐食彻阼俎。
现代文：佐食撤下主人之俎。
English: Sasaki removes his master's shovel.

古文：堂下俎毕出。
现代文：堂下各宾俎亦皆撤去，并赠于各位尊宾。
English: All the benches in the hall were also removed and given to the distinguished guests.

古文：记。特牲馈食，其服皆朝服，玄冠、缁带、缁□。
现代文：行特牲馈食之礼，各位宾客、兄弟都服十五升缁布衣而素裳，头戴玄冠，腰系缁布带，腿饰以缁布蔽膝。
English: To make a special offering of food, all the guests and brothers were dressed in plain clothes, wearing a black crown on their heads, a black cloth belt around their waists, and their legs were covered with a black cloth.

古文：唯尸、祝、佐食玄端，玄裳、黄裳、杂裳可也，皆爵□。
现代文：只有 尸 、祝和佐食上服玄端，下则玄裳、黄裳、杂裳皆可，但其蔽膝与下裳颜色要相同。
English: Only corpse, congratulation and sashimi are allowed on the upper part of the dress, while the lower part of the dress, yellow dress and miscellaneous dress are all allowed, but the color of the knee cover should be the same as that of the lower dress.

古文：设洗，南北以堂深，东西当东荣。
现代文：设洗于堂之深处，南北放，其东西与东边屋翼齐。
English: It is located in the depths of the hall, facing north and south, and its east and west are aligned with the east wing.

古文：水在洗东。
现代文：水放在洗的东边。
English: Place the water on the east side of the sink.

古文：篚在洗西，南顺，实二爵、二觚、四觯、一角、一散。
现代文：篚放在洗的西边，南北陈设，以北为上，篚中盛两只酒爵，两只酒觚，四只酒觯，一只角杯，一只散。
English: The gourd is placed on the west side of the basin. It is arranged from north to south, with the north at the top. In the gourd, there are two wine goblets, two wine jars, four wine jars, a horn cup, and a spoon.

古文：壶、棜禁，馔于东序，南顺。
现代文：酒壶和棜禁陈设在东序，亦南北陈设，以北为上。
English: The wine jug and the gong are displayed in an east-to-west order, and also in a north-to-south order, with north at the top.

古文：覆两壶焉，盖在南；明日卒奠，幂用谷；即位而彻之，加勺。
现代文：两壶之口皆倒置，其盖子放在南边；第二天祭日则陈设于户东，用粗葛布盖在壶上；主人入室就位后，撤下盖子，放酒勺于其上。
English: The openings of both jars are inverted, and their lids are placed on the south side. On the second day of the festival, the jars are placed on the east side of the house and covered with coarse camphor cloth. After the host enters the room and takes his seat, he removes the lids and places a wine spoon on them.

古文：笾，巾以谷也，纁里，枣，栗择。
现代文：笾要垫以粗葛布制作的巾，巾之里为浅黄色；笾中盛放蒸熟的好枣和拣择过的好栗。
English: The cocoon should be covered with a cloth made of coarse camphor cloth. The inside of the cloth should be light yellow; the cocoon should contain steamed good dates and selected good chestnuts.

古文：鉶芼，用苦，若薇，皆有滑，夏葵，冬荁。
现代文：盛羹之器中的菜羹用苦荼制成，如同薇菜一样爽滑；如果是夏天，则用葵菜，如果是在冬天，就用荁菜。
English: The yakitori in the yakitori bowl is made with yakitori, which is as smooth as seaweed; if it's summer, it's sunflower, if it's winter, it's amaranth.

古文：棘心匕，刻。
现代文：匕饭之匕用红心之棘木制成，刻为龙头形。
English: The gong of the rice bowl is carved in the shape of a dragon's head and is made of red heart thorn wood.

古文：牲爨在庙门外东南，鱼腊爨在其南，皆西面，饎爨在西壁。
现代文：烹豕之灶设在庙门外东南，烹鱼及干肉之灶设在它的南边，三灶都正面向西；炊黍稷之灶设在西壁之下。
English: The cooking pot is located in the southeast outside the temple gate, the cooking pot for fish and dried meat is located on its south side, and the three cooking pots are facing west; the cooking pot is located under the west wall.

古文：肵俎心舌皆去本末，午割之，实于牲鼎，载心立、舌缩俎。
现代文：肵俎上之心、舌都去其首尾两端，横割之，中间相连不切断；皆盛于牲鼎之中，心立于俎内，舌则顺俎而放。
English: The heart and tongue at the top of the yakitori are removed from both ends of the yakitori, and are cut horizontally, but the middle is connected and not cut; they are all placed in the middle of the yakitori, the heart is placed in the yakitori, and the tongue is placed along the yakitori.

古文：宾与长兄弟之荐，自东房，其馀在东堂。
现代文：宾客之长和兄弟中之长者的荐俎设在东房，众宾和众兄弟之荐俎设在东堂。
English: The guest's and elder brother's recommendation boxes are located in the East Room, and the guest's and elder brother's recommendation boxes are located in the East Hall.

古文：沃尸盥者一人，奉槃者东面，执匜者西面淳沃，执巾者在匜北。
现代文：一人浇水使 尸 洗手，此时捧拿盥盘之人面朝东，执匜之人面朝西，浇水之人缓缓地将水倒下；执巾之人在执匜之人的北边。
English: One person pours water on the corpse and washes his hands. At this time, the person holding the bowl faces east, the person holding the spoon faces west, the person pouring the water slowly pours the water down; the person holding the scarf is on the north side of the person holding the spoon.

古文：宗人东面取巾，振之三，南面授尸；卒，执巾者受。尸入，主人及宾皆辟位，出亦如之。
现代文：宗人面朝东取巾，抖三下，然后面朝南授于 尸 ； 尸 拭手完毕，执巾之人接过巾。 尸 入大门，主人和宾客均要退让； 尸 出大门，也一样。
English: The deceased, facing east, takes the handkerchief, shakes it three times, and then, facing south, gives it to the corpse; when the corpse has finished wiping his hands, the person holding the handkerchief takes the handkerchief; when the corpse enters the gate, the host and guests must give way; when the corpse leaves the gate, the same applies.

古文：嗣举奠，佐食设豆盐。
现代文：嗣子食肝之时，佐食要设一盛盐之豆。
English: When the heir eats liver, the sashimi should be set with a serving of salted beans.

古文：佐食当事，则户外南面，无事，则中庭北面。
现代文：佐食将有事时，要站在户外，面朝南；无事时，则立于中庭，面朝北。
English: When Sasho is in trouble, he should stand outside, facing south; when he is not in trouble, he should stand in the courtyard, facing north.

古文：凡祝呼，佐食许诺。
现代文：凡是祝有所命，佐食皆应 诺 。
English: Whenever there is a death wish, sashimi should be included.

古文：宗人，献与旅齿于从宾。
现代文：宗人在丧主献酒和旅酬时，依长幼之序要排在众宾之前。
English: When offering wine and travel rewards in the wake of the death of a loved one, family members should line up in front of the guests in order of oldest to youngest.

古文：佐食，于旅齿于兄弟。
现代文：佐食在旅酬时则要先于众兄弟。
English: When it comes to travel rewards, Sashiki is ahead of all his brothers.

古文：尊两壶于房中西墉下，南上。
现代文：设两只酒壶于房中西墙下，以南为上。
English: Two wine jugs are placed in the middle of the room under the west wall, with the south jug on top.

古文：内宾立于其北，东面南上。
现代文：内宾姑姊妹立于酒壶的北边，面朝东，以南为上。
English: Sister Nebinggu stands on the north side of the wine jug, facing east, with south facing up.

古文：宗妇北堂东面，北上。
现代文：同宗之妇立于北堂，面朝东，以北为上。
English: The women of the same family stand in the north hall, facing east, with north at the top.

古文：主妇及内宾、宗妇亦旅，西面。
现代文：主妇、姑姊妹和同宗之妇亦相旅酬，面朝西。
English: The housewife, the sister-in-law and the woman of the same family also travel together, facing west.

古文：宗妇赞荐者，执以坐于户外，授主妇。尸卒食，而祭饎爨、雍爨。
现代文：同宗之妇之助祭者执拿笾、豆，跪坐于户外，授给主妇。 尸 食完毕，同宗之妇之助祭者祭炊黍稷之灶，雍人祭烹煮牲、鱼、腊之灶。
English: The deaconess of the woman of the same family holds the stew and beans, kneels and sits outdoors, and gives them to the housewife.After the corpse is eaten, the deaconess of the woman of the same family offers the stove for cooking the stew, and the Yong people offer the stove for cooking the animal, fish, and wax.

古文：宾从尸，俎出庙门，乃反位。
现代文：宾客送尸出庙门，俟尸俎撤出庙门后，转身入门，返回原位。
English: The guests escorted the corpse out of the temple gate, and after the corpse was taken out of the temple gate, it turned around and went back to its original place.

古文：尸俎，左肩、臂、臑、肫、胳，正脊二骨，横脊，长胁二骨，短胁。
现代文：尸俎所载：祭牲之右肩、前右臂和臑、后右肫和胳，前脊二块，后脊一块，中肋二块，后肋一块。
English: Carried in the coffin: the right shoulder of the sacrificial animal, the front right arm and shin, the back right shin and arm, two pieces of the front spine, one piece of the back spine, two pieces of the middle rib, and one piece of the back rib.

古文：肤三，离肺一，刌肺三，鱼十有五。
现代文：颈上肉皮三块，整肺一块，切肺三块，鱼十五条。
English: There are three pieces of neck skin, one whole lung, three cut lungs, and 15 fish.

古文：腊如牲骨。
现代文：兽体和牲体一样。
English: The body of a beast is like that of an animal.

古文：祝俎，髀、脡脊二骨，胁二骨。
现代文：祝俎所载：股肉一块，中脊二块，前肋两块。
English: The blessing contained: one piece of thigh meat, two pieces of backbone, and two pieces of front ribs.

古文：肤一，离肺一。
现代文：颈上肉皮一块，整肺一块。
English: A piece of flesh on the neck, a whole lung.

古文：阼俎：臂，正脊二骨，横脊，长胁二骨，短胁。
现代文：主人之俎所载：左前臂一块，前脊两块，后脊一块，中肋两块，后肋一块。
English: In his master's bag: one left forearm, two front ribs, one back rib, two middle ribs, one back rib.

古文：肤一，离肺一。
现代文：颈上肉皮一块，整肺一块。
English: A piece of flesh on the neck, a whole lung.

古文：主妇俎，觳折，其馀如阼俎。
现代文：主妇之俎所载：后右足，其他的和丧主之俎相同。
English: The widow's sceptre bears: the hind right foot, the others are the same as those of the bereaved.

古文：佐食俎，觳折，脊，胁。肤一，离肺一。
现代文：佐食之俎所载：后足，脊，肋，颈上肉皮一块，整肺一块。
English: Sasaki's bowl contained: hind leg, ridge, ribs, a piece of flesh from the neck, and a whole lung.

古文：宾，骼。长兄弟及宗人，折：其馀如佐食俎。
现代文：宾客之俎所载：左后肢，他如佐食俎。兄弟中之长者和宗人之俎所载：后足，其他的和佐食之俎相同。
English: Worn on the guest's shin: the left hind limb, he's like a sashimi eel. Worn on the elder brother's and father's shin: the hind leg, the rest are the same as the sashimi eel.

古文：众宾及众兄弟、内宾、宗妇，若有公有司、私臣，皆殽脀，肤一，离肺一。
现代文：众宾客、众兄弟、姑姊妹、同宗之妇中若有死者僚友或家臣的，其俎上皆放有骨之肉一块，颈上肉皮一块，整肺一块。
English: Among the guests, brothers, sisters-in-law, and women of the same clan, if there is a deceased colleague or vassal, they all have a piece of bone meat on their shins, a piece of flesh on the neck, and a whole lung.

古文：公有司门西，北面东上，献次众宾。
现代文：死者之僚友立于门西，面朝北，以东为上，属于众宾之列。
English: The deceased's colleagues and friends stood on the west side of the gate, facing north, with the east to the top, and were among the guests.

古文：私臣门东，北面西上，献次兄弟。
现代文：死者之私臣立于门东，面朝北，以西为上，属于众兄弟之列。
English: The dead man's vassal stands to the east of the gate, facing north, with the west at the top. He is one of the brothers.

古文：升受，降饮。
现代文：其僚友登阶而接过酒爵，下阶而饮酒。
English: His colleague climbed the ladder and took over the liquor baron, while the lower rung drank.

