古文：一曰：季冬之月，日在婺女，昏娄中，旦氐中。
现代文：季冬季冬之月，太阳的位置在婺女宿，黄昏时刻，娄宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，氐宿出现在南方中天。
English: During the winter months, the position of the sun is at the top of the constellation of Virgo. At dusk, Virgo appears in the southern sky, and at dawn, Virgo appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日壬癸，其帝颛顼，其神玄冥，其虫介，其音羽，律中大吕，其数六，其味咸，其臭朽，其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：季冬于天干属壬癸，它的主宰之帝是颛顼，佐帝之神是玄冥，应时的动物是龟鳖之娄的甲族，相配的声音是羽音，音律与大吕相应。这个月的数字是六，味道是咸味，气味是朽味，要举行的祭祀是行祭，祭袒时祭品以肾肚为尊。
English: The season of winter in the heavenly stem belongs to Rinchen, the ruler of which is the Dragon, the god of the Zodiac is the Underworld, the animal of the season is the Crab, the corresponding sound is the feather sound, and the rhythm corresponds to the large Lu. The number of this month is six, the taste is salty, the smell is rotten, the sacrifice to be held is the procession, and the sacrificial offering is the kidney belly.

古文：雁北乡，鹊始巢，雉雊鸡乳，天子居玄堂右个，乘玄骆，驾铁骊，载玄旗，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘，其器宏以弇。
现代文：这个月，大雁将要北来，喜鹊开始搭窝，山鸡鸣叫，家鸡孵卵。天子住在北向明堂的右侧室，乘坐黑色的车，车前驾着黑色的马，车上插着黑色的绘有龙纹的旗帜，天子穿着黑色的衣服，佩戴着黑色的饰玉，吃的食物是黍米和猪肉，使用的器物宏大而口敛。
English: This month, the wild geese will come north, the magpies will begin to build nests, the mountain chickens will chirp, and the chickens will hatch eggs. The heavenly son lives in the right side room of the North-facing Ming Hall, riding in a black car, driving a black horse in front of the car, with a black dragon-patterned flag on the car, the heavenly son wearing black clothes, wearing black ornaments, eating glutinous rice and pork, and using large and mouth-watering utensils.

古文：命有司大傩，旁磔，出土牛，以送寒气。
现代文：这个月，天子命令主管官吏大规模举行傩祭，四方城门都割裂牺牲，并制作土牛，以此送阴冬之气。
English: This month, the heavenly son ordered the officials in charge to hold a large-scale burnt offering, the four sides of the city gate were sacrificed, and earthen cattle were made to send the gloomy winter spirit.

古文：征鸟厉疾，乃毕行山川之祀，及帝之大臣、天地之神祇。
现代文：远飞的鸟飞得高而且快。这个月，普遍地举行对山川之神的祭祀以及对有功于民的先世公卿大臣，天地神祗的祭祀。
English: The far-flying bird flies high and fast. This month, the worship of the gods of mountains and rivers, as well as the worship of the gods of heaven and earth, the past noblemen and ministers who have contributed to the people, are generally held.

古文：是月也，命渔师始渔，天子亲往，乃尝鱼，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，命令负责捕鱼的官吏开始捕鱼。天子亲自前往观看。于是品尝刚捕到的鲜鱼，品尝之前，要先进献给祖庙。
English: This month, the fisherman was ordered to start fishing, and the son of heaven went to watch. So the son of heaven tasted the newly caught fish, and before tasting it, he first offered it to the family temple.

古文：冰方盛，水泽复，命取冰。
现代文：这时候，冰冻得正结实，积水的池泽层层冻结。于是命令凿取冰块。
English: By this time, the ice was solid and the pools of stagnant water had frozen over, so the order was given to chisel away the ice.

古文：冰已入，令告民出五种。
现代文：冰块藏入冰窖之后，命令有司告诉百姓从谷仓中拿出五谷，选择种子。
English: After the ice was hidden in the ice cellar, a steward was ordered to tell the people to take out the grain from the barn and select the seeds.

古文：命司农计耦耕事，修耒耜，具田器。
现代文：命令负责农业的官吏，谋划耕作的事情，修缮犁铧，准备耕田的农具。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of agriculture to plan for farming, repair ploughs and prepare farm tools for the fields.

古文：命乐师大合吹而罢。
现代文：命令乐官举行吹奏乐的大合奏，结束一年的训练。
English: Ordered the musicians to organize the students to play a large ensemble of wind music, and then announced the end of the school year.

古文：乃命四监收秩薪柴，以供寝庙及百祀之薪燎。
现代文：命令王畿内的郡县大夫收缴按常规应该交纳的木柴，来供给祖庙及各种祭祀举行燔燎之用。
English: ordered the county and prefectural doctors in Wangji to collect the firewood that should be paid according to the rules, to supply the ancestral temple and various rituals for the use of firewood.

古文：是月也，日穷于次，月穷于纪，星回于天。数将几终，岁将更始。
现代文：这个月，日月星辰绕天一周，又都回到原来的位置，一年的天数接近终了，新的一年将要重新开始。
English: This month, the sun, the moon and the stars revolve around the sky, and all return to their original positions. The days of the year are nearing their end, and the new year will begin anew.

古文：专於农民，无有所使。
现代文：要让农民专心筹备农事，不要差遣他们干别的劳役。
English: Farmers should be allowed to concentrate on preparing farm work, and should not be sent to do other labor work.

古文：天子乃与卿大夫饬国典，论时令，以待来岁之宜。
现代文：无子与公卿大夫整饬国家的法典，讨论接季节月份制定的政令，以此来准备明年应作之事。
English: Muzo and Kugyo Doku tidy up the country's legal code and discuss the ordinances made in the following months to prepare for what needs to be done next year.

古文：乃命太史次诸侯之列，赋之牺牲，以供皇天上帝社稷之享。
现代文：命令太史排列各异姓诸侯的次序，使他们按国家大小贡赋牺牲，以供给对上天及社稷之神的禁祀。
English: He ordered Taishi to arrange the princes with different surnames in order, and make them sacrifice according to the size of the country, in order to supply the forbidden worship of the gods of heaven and society.

古文：乃命同姓之国，供寝庙之刍豢；令宰历卿大夫至于庶民土田之数，而赋之牺牲，以供山林名川之祀。
现代文：命令同姓诸侯供给祭祖祖庙所用的牛羊犬冢。命令小宰依次列出从卿大夫到一般老百姓所有土地的数目，使他们贡赋牺牲，以供给条祀山林河流之神使用。
English: He ordered the lords of the same name to provide the oxen, sheep and dogs used for the temple of the ancestors. He ordered the small farmer to list the number of lands owned by everyone from the noble doctor to the common people in order to make them sacrifice their tribute and use it to supply the gods of the mountains, forests and rivers.

古文：凡在天下九州之民者，无不咸献其力，以供皇天上帝社稷寝庙山林名川之祀。
现代文：凡是在天下九州的老百姓，必须全部献出他们的力量，以供给对皇天上帝，社稷之神、先祖神主以及山林河流之神的祭祀。
English: All the people in Kyushu, all over the world, must devote all their strength to offer sacrifices to the God of the Emperor, the God of the Society, the God of the Ancestors, and the God of the Mountains, Forests and Rivers.

古文：行之是令，此谓一终，三旬二日。
现代文：实行这些政令，这述就算一年终了了。在三旬中有二日。
English: If these decrees are implemented, this will be the end of the year. There are two days in Lent.

古文：季冬行秋令，则白露蚤降，介虫为妖，四邻入保；行春令，则胎夭多伤，国多固疾，命之曰逆；行夏令，则水潦败国，时雪不降，冰冻消释。
现代文：季冬实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，白露就会过早降落，有甲壳的动物就会成灾，四方边邑的百姓就会为躲避来犯之敌而藏入城堡。如果实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，幼小的动物就会遭到损伤，国家就会流行久治不愈的疾病，给这种情况命名叫做 逆 。如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，大水将为害国家，冬雪将不能按时降落，冰珠将会融化。
English: If, in the winter season, a decree is issued that should have been issued in the autumn, the white dew will fall prematurely, crustaceans will be plagued, and the people of the four corners of the country will hide in the castle to avoid the invaders. If a decree is issued that should have been issued in the spring, young animals will be injured, and the country will be plagued by incurable diseases, which is called inversion. If a decree is issued that should have been issued in the summer, heavy water will harm the country, winter snow will not fall on time, and ice beads will melt.

古文：二曰：士之为人，当理不避其难，临患忘利，遗生行义，视死如归。
现代文：士节士的为人，主持正义不避危难，面临祸患忘却私利，舍生行义，视死如归。
English: A judge is a person who presides over justice without avoiding danger, forgets self-interest in the face of calamity, sacrifices his life for righteousness, and regards death as a homecoming.

古文：有如此者，国君不得而友，天子不得而臣。
现代文：有如此行为的人，国君无法与他交友，天子无法让他称臣。
English: A person who behaves in such a way cannot be befriended by the sovereign, and cannot be praised by the Son of Heaven.

古文：大者定天下，其次定一国，必由如此人者也。
现代文：大至安定天下，其次安定一国，一定要用这样的人。
English: In order to have a stable world, and secondly, a stable country, we must use such people.

古文：故人主之欲大立功名者，不可不务求此人也。
现代文：所以君主想要大立功名的，不可不致力于访求选样的人。
English: Therefore, if the monarch wants to make a name for himself, he must be committed to visiting the people who select the samples.

古文：贤主劳於求人，而佚於治事。
现代文：贤明的君主把精力花费在仿求贤士上，而对治理政事则采取超脱的态度。
English: Wise monarchs spend their energy on emulating wise men, but take a detached approach to governance.

古文：齐有北郭骚者，结罘罔，捆蒲苇，织萉屦，以养其母，犹不足，踵门见晏子曰： 愿乞所以养母。 
现代文：齐国有个叫北郭骚的，靠结兽网、编蒲苇，织麻鞋来奉养他的母亲，但仍不足以维持生活，于是他到晏子门上求见晏子说； 希望能得到粮食以奉养母亲。 
English: There was a man in the State of Qi named Bei Guoshao. He supported his mother by making animal nets, spinning reeds, and weaving flax shoes, but it still wasn't enough to sustain his life. So he went to the mule gate to see the mule and said, "I hope I can get grain to support my mother."

古文：晏子之仆谓晏子曰： 此齐国之贤者也。
现代文：晏子的仆从对晏子说； 这个人是齐国的贤人。
English: His servant said to him, "This man is a wise man from the land of Ch'i.

古文：其义不臣乎天子，不友乎诸侯，於利不苟取，於害不苟免。
现代文：他志节高尚，不向天子称臣，不与诸侯交友，对于利不苟且取用，对于祸不苟且求免。
English: His aspirations are noble, he does not claim to be a vassal of the Son of Heaven, he does not make friends with princes, he is not scrupulous about taking advantage of advantages, and he is not scrupulous about asking for forgiveness for misfortunes.

古文：今乞所以养母，是说夫子之义也，必与之。 
现代文：现在他到您这儿来寻求粮食以奉养母亲，这是悦服您的道义，您一定要给他。 
English: Now that he has come to you seeking food to support his mother, it is your moral duty to give it to him.

古文：晏子使人分仓粟、分府金而遗之，辞金而受粟。
现代文：晏子派人把仓中的粮食、府库中的金钱拿出来分给他，他谢绝了金钱而收下了粮食。
English: The mule sent someone to take the grain from the storehouse and the money from the treasury and distribute it to him. He declined the money and accepted the grain.

古文：有间，晏子见疑於齐君，出奔，过北郭骚之门而辞。
现代文：过了不久，晏子被齐君猜忌，逃往国外，经过北郭骚的门前向他告别。
English: Soon after, Zizi was suspected by Qi Jun and fled abroad, bidding him farewell in front of the gate of North Guoxao.

古文：北郭骚沐浴而出，见晏子曰： 夫子将焉适？ 
现代文：北郭骚洗发浴身，恭敬地迎出来，见到晏于说： 您将要到哪儿去? 
English: Bei Guoshao washed his hair and took a bath. He came out respectfully. When he saw Zou Yu, he said, "Where are you going?

古文：晏子曰： 见疑於齐君，将出奔。 
现代文：晏子说： 我受到齐君的猜忌，将要逃往国外。 
English: Zou Zi said: I am suspected by Qi Jun and will flee abroad.

古文：北郭子曰： 夫子勉之矣。 
现代文：北郭子说： 您好自为之吧。 
English: Kitakuko said: You are welcome to do it yourself.

古文：晏子上车，太息而叹曰： 婴之亡岂不宜哉？
现代文：晏子上了车，长叹一声说： 我逃亡国外难道不正应该吗?
English: The mule got into the car and said with a long sigh: "Wasn't I supposed to flee abroad?

古文：亦不知士甚矣。 
现代文：我也太不了解士了。 
English: I don't know much about it either.

古文：晏子行。
现代文：于是晏子走了。
English: So the mule went away.

古文：北郭子召其友而告之曰： 说晏子之义，而尝乞所以养母焉。
现代文：北郭子召来他的朋友，告诉他说。 我悦服晏子的道义，曾向他求得粮食奉养母亲。
English: Bei Guo Zi called his friend and told him, "I am pleased with Xun Zi's morality. I once asked him for food to support my mother.

古文：吾闻之曰： 养及亲者，身伉其难，今晏子见疑，吾将以身死白之。 
现代文：我听说； 奉养过自己父母的人，自己要承担他的危难。 如今晏子受到猜忌，我将用自己的死为他洗清冤诬。 
English: I have heard it said that a man who has supported his parents must himself bear his peril; now that the mule is suspected, I will use my own death to clear his name.

古文：著衣冠，令其友操剑奉笥而从，造於君庭，求复者曰： 晏子，天下之贤者也，去则齐国必侵矣。
现代文：北郭子穿戴好衣冠，让他的朋友拿着宝剑捧着竹匣跟随在后。走到国君朝廷门前，找到负责通禀的官吏说， 晏子是名闻天下的贤人，他若出亡，齐国必定遭受侵犯。
English: North Guo Zi put on his crown and asked his friend to follow behind, holding a sword and carrying a bamboo box. He walked to the front of the sovereign's court and found the official in charge of the search and said, "Han Zi is a famous sage. If he were to leave the country, Qi would certainly be invaded."

古文：必见国之侵也，不若先死。
现代文：与其看到国家必定遭受侵犯，不如先死。
English: It is better to die than to see the country invaded.

古文：请以头托白晏子也。 
现代文：我愿把头托付给您来为晏子洗清冤诬。 
English: I would like to entrust the head to you to clear up the wrongs for the mule.

古文：因谓其友曰： 盛吾头於笥中，奉以托。 
现代文：于是对他的朋友说： 把我的头盛在竹匣中，捧去托付给那个官吏。 
English: So he said to his friend, "Put my head in a bamboo basket and take it to the official."

古文：退而自刎也。
现代文：说罢，退下几步自刎而死。
English: Just say it, take a few steps back and die of shame.

古文：其友因奉以托。其友谓观者曰： 北郭子为国故死，吾将为北郭子死也。 
现代文：他的朋友于是捧着盛了头的竹匣托付给了那个官吏，然后对旁观的人说： 北郭子为国难而死，我将为北郭子而死。 
English: His friend then took the bamboo box with the head in it and entrusted it to the official, and then said to the onlookers: Beiguo Zi died for the national tragedy, I will die for Beiguo Zi.

古文：又退而自刎。
现代文：说罢，又退下几步自刎而死。
English: Just say it, take a few steps back and die of shame.

古文：齐君闻之，大骇，乘驲而自追晏子，及之国郊，请而反之。
现代文：齐君听说这件事，犬为震惊，乘着驿车亲自击追赶晏子，在离国都不到百里的地方赶上了晏子，请求晏子回去。
English: When Qi Jun heard about this, the dog was shocked and chased the mule himself in a mule cart. He caught up with the mule less than a hundred miles from the capital and asked the mule to go back.

古文：晏子不得已而反，闻北郭骚之以死白己也，曰： 婴之亡岂不宜哉？
现代文：晏子不得已而返，听说北郭骚用死来替自己洗清冤诬，他感慨地说： 我逃亡国外难道不正应该吗?
English: The mule had no choice but to return, and when he heard that Northern Guoxao had used his death to clear his name, he said with emotion: Wasn't it right for me to flee abroad?

古文：亦愈不知士甚矣。 
现代文：北郭骚之死说明我越发地不了解士了。 介立
English: The death of Bei Guoshuo shows that I increasingly do not understand the scholar.

古文：三曰：以贵富有人易，以贫贱有人难。
现代文：靠富贵受人拥戴容易，靠贫贱受人拥戴很难。
English: It is easy to be supported by the rich, but it is difficult to be supported by the poor.

古文：今晋文公出亡，周流天下，穷矣，贱矣，而介子推不去，有以有之也。
现代文：从前晋文公逃亡在外，遍行天下，困窘极丁，贫贱极了，然而介子挂一直不离开他，这是由于晋文公具有受他拥戴的德行。
English: Once upon a time, Prince Jinwen fled abroad and traveled all over the world. He was extremely poor and destitute. However, Emperor Jiezi never left him. This was because Prince Jinwen had virtues that he admired.

古文：反国有万乘，而介子推去之，无以有之也。
现代文：晋文公退回晋国后，拥有万辆兵车，然而介子推却离开了他，这是由于当时文公已经有受他拥戴的德行了。
English: After he returned to Jin Province, Emperor Wenguang owned 10,000 chariots. However, Emperor Jiezong pushed him out of the way, because by that time Emperor Wenguang already had the virtues he cherished.

古文：能其难，不能其易，此文公之所以不王也。
现代文：困难的事情能做到，而容易的事情却做不到，这正是文公不能成就王业的原因啊！
English: Difficult things can be done, but easy things can't be done. This is exactly the reason why Wenguang can't achieve the king's career!

古文：晋文公反国，介子推不肯受赏，自为赋诗曰： 有龙于飞，周遍天下。
现代文：晋文公返回晋国后，介子推不肯接受封赏，他为自己赋诗道： 有龙飞翔，遍行天下。
English: After Jinwen Gong returned to Jin Province, Jie Zi Tu refused to accept the award. He wrote a poem for himself: If a dragon flies, it will travel all over the world.

古文：五蛇从之，为之丞辅。
现代文：五蛇追随，甘当辅佐。
English: Five snakes follow, and Gantang is an assistant.

古文：龙反其乡，得其处所。
现代文：龙返敌乡，得其归所。
English: If a dragon returns to its enemy's hometown, it will return to its home.

古文：四蛇从之，得其露雨。
现代文：四蛇追随，享其恩泽。
English: The four serpents follow and enjoy his grace.

古文：一蛇羞之，桥死於中野。 悬书公门，而伏於山下。
现代文：一蛇羞惭，枯死荒野， 他把这首诗悬挂在文公门前，自己隐居山下。
English: A snake, ashamed, withers and dies in the wilderness. He hangs this poem in front of the Wenguang Gate and secludes himself under the mountain.

古文：文公闻之曰： 嘻！
现代文：文公闻知这件事说： 啊！
English: Wen Gongwen heard about this and said: Ah!

古文：此必介子推也。 
现代文：这一定是介子推。 
English: It must be a meson nudge.

古文：避舍变服，令士庶人曰： 有能得介子推者，爵上卿，田百万。 
现代文：于是文公离开宫室居住，改穿凶丧之服，以示自责，并向士民百姓下令说； 有能找到介子推的，赏赐上卿爵位，田百万亩。 
English: As a result, Wenguang left the palace to live, changed into mourning clothes to show his remorse, and ordered the scholars, the people and the people to say: If anyone can find the son, he will be rewarded with the title of lord and a million mu of land.

古文：或遇之山中，负釜盖簦，问焉，曰： 请问介子推安在？ 
现代文：有人在山中遇到介子推，见他背着釜，上插一把长柄笠作为伞盖，就问他说。 请问介子推住在哪儿? 
English: When someone met him in the mountains and saw him carrying a kettle on his back and wearing a long-handled hat as an umbrella cover, they asked him, "Where does he live?

古文：应之曰： 夫介子推苟不欲见而欲隐，吾独焉知之？ 
现代文：介子推回答说。 那介子推如果不想出仕而想要隐居，我怎么会单单知道他? 
English: "If he doesn't want to serve and wants to live in seclusion, how can I get to know him?

古文：遂背而行，终身不见。
现代文：说罢就转过身走了，终生不做官。
English: As soon as he said that, he turned around and left, never to hold public office again.

古文：人心之不同，岂不甚哉？
现代文：人心不同难道不是十分悬殊吗?
English: Isn't it enough that people's hearts are different?

古文：今世之逐利者，早朝晏退，焦唇干嗌，日夜思之，犹未之能得；今得之而务疾逃之，介子推之离俗远矣。
现代文：如今世上追逐私利的人，尽管早早就上朝，很晚才退朝回来，口干舌燥，日夜思虑，仍然未能得以满足。而今介子推可以得到名利却务求赶快避开它，介子推的节操超离世俗太远了。
English: Nowadays, people in the world who pursue self-interest are still unable to be satisfied, even though they go to the imperial court early in the morning and return to it late at night, with dry mouths and thoughts day and night. But now that fame and fortune can be gained from the imperial court, they try to avoid it as soon as possible. The self-restraint of the imperial court is too far from the world.

古文：东方有士焉，曰爰旌目，将有适也，而饿於道。
现代文：东方有个士名叫爱旌目，将要到某地去，却饿晕在路上。
English: In the East, there was a man named Ai Shime. He was about to go somewhere, but fainted from hunger on the way.

古文：狐父之盗曰丘，见而下壶餐以餔之。
现代文：狐父那个地方一个名叫丘的强盗看见了，摘下盛有水饭的壶去喂他。
English: The robber in Foxtel City's name is Yau. When he saw him, he poured out the rice from his pot to feed him.

古文：爰旌目三餔之而後能视，曰： 子何为者也？ 
现代文：爱旌目咽下三口之后眼睛才能看见，他问； 你是干什幺的? 
English: After swallowing three mouthfuls of love gourd, before his eyes could open, he asked: What are you?

古文：曰： 我狐父之人丘也。 
现代文：回答说： 我是狐父那个地方的人，名叫丘。 
English: The robber said, "I'm from Foxtel's Man Hill.

古文：爰旌目曰： 嘻！汝非盗邪？
现代文：爰旌目说。 你不是强盗吗?
English: Is it not true that you are a robber?

古文：胡为而食我？
现代文：为什么给我吃东西?
English: Why are you feeding me rice?

古文：吾义不食子之食也。 
现代文：我信守节义决不吃你的食物！ 
English: I'd rather die than eat your food.

古文：两手据地而吐之，不出，喀喀然遂伏地而死。
现代文：说罢，两手抓地往外吐那咽下去的饭，吐不出来，喀喀一阵就趴在地上死了。
English: Having said that, he threw up the swallowed rice with both hands, but he couldn't spit it out. In a moment, Kakaka lay down on the ground and died.

古文：郑人之下麟也，庄跷之暴郢也，秦人之围长平也，韩、荆、赵，此三国者之将帅贵人皆多骄矣，其士卒众庶皆多壮矣，因相暴以相杀，脆弱者拜请以避死，其卒递而相食，不辨其义，冀幸以得活。
现代文：郑人攻陷麟邑的时候，庄劫掠郢都的时候，秦人围困长平的时侯，韩、荆、赵这三个国家的将帅贵族都很骄傲自恣，三国的士卒百姓都很强壮有力，于是他们相互欺凌，自相残杀，而怯弱的人跪拜乞求免死，到最后，人们交替相食，根本不分辨正义与否，只希望侥幸得以括命。
English: When the Zheng people attacked and captured Lin's village, when the Zhuang people looted and plundered the Yunnan capital, and when the Qin people besieged Changping, the generals and nobles of the three countries of Han, Jing and Zhao were proud and self-willed, and the soldiers and civilians of the three countries were strong and powerful. Therefore, they bullied each other and killed each other, while the weak kneeled and begged to be spared from death. In the end, people alternately ate each other, and did not distinguish between justice and injustice at all, but only hoped to be lucky enough to be spared.

古文：如爰旌目已食而不死矣，恶其义而不肯不死。
现代文：至于爰旌目，已经吃了食物，不会死了，但他憎恶狐父之盗的不义，因而不肯不死。
English: As for the roe deer, it has already eaten the food and will not die, but it hates the injustice of the fox father's theft, so it does not want to die.

古文：今此相为谋，岂不远哉？
现代文：若让三国的将士和受旌目一起商议事情，他们之间相差得岂不是太远了吗！
English: If the soldiers of the three countries were to discuss matters together with those who are in the limelight, wouldn't the difference between them be too great?

古文：四曰：石可破也，而不可夺坚；丹可磨也，而不可夺赤。
现代文：诚廉石头可以破开，然而不可改变它坚硬的性质，朱砂可以磨碎，然而不可改变它朱红的颜色。
English: Honest stone can be broken, but its hardness cannot be changed; cinnabar can be ground, but its red color cannot be changed.

古文：坚与赤，性之有也。
现代文：坚硬和朱红分别是石头、朱砂的本性所具有的。
English: Hardness and vermilion are inherent to the nature of stone and cinnabar respectively.

古文：性也者，所受於天也，非择取而为之也。豪士之自好者，其不可漫以污也，亦犹此也。
现代文：本性这个东西是从上天那里承受下来的，不是可以任意择取制造的。洁身自好的豪杰之士，他们的名节不可玷污也象这一样。
English: Nature, this thing, was inherited from the heavens, and cannot be arbitrarily selected and manufactured. Just like the self-righteous heroes, their names should not be tarnished.

古文：昔周之将兴也，有士二人，处於孤竹，曰伯夷、叔齐。
现代文：从前周朝将要兴起的时候，有两位贤士住在孤竹国，名叫伯夷、叔齐。
English: Once upon a time, when the Zhou Dynasty was about to rise, there were two sages living in the country of Lone Bamboo. Their names were Bo Yi and Uncle Qi.

古文：二人相谓曰： 吾闻西方有偏伯焉，似将有道者，今吾奚为处乎此哉？ 
现代文：两人一起商量说： 我听说西方有个西伯，好象是个仁德之君，现在我们还呆在这儿干什么呢? 
English: The two of them discussed it together and said, "I heard that there is a Xibe in the west, who seems to be a benevolent ruler, so why are we still staying here?

古文：二子西行如周，至於岐阳，则文王已殁矣。
现代文：于是两人向西行到周国去，走到岐山之南，文王却已经死了。
English: So the two of them traveled westward to Zhou Province, to the south of Qishan, but King Wen was already dead.

古文：武王即位，观周德，则王使叔旦就胶鬲於次四内，而与之盟曰： 加富三等，就官一列。 
现代文：武王即位，宣扬周德，派叔旦到四内去找胶鬲，跟他盟誓说； 让你俸禄增加三级，官居一等。 
English: King Wu ascended to the throne, preached Zhou De, sent his uncle to the four quarters to find the rubber raft, and swore to him; let your salary increase by three levels, official residence by one level.

古文：为三书，同辞，血之以牲，埋一於四内，皆以一归。
现代文：准备三份盟书，文辞相同，把牲血涂在盟书上，一份埋在四内，两人各持一份而归。
English: Prepare three copies of the covenant, the wording is the same, the blood of the animal is painted on the covenant, one is buried in four, and the two return with one each.

古文：又使保召公就微子开於共头之下，而与之盟曰： 世为长侯，守殷常祀，相奉桑林，宜私孟诸。 
现代文：武王又派保召公到共头山下去找微子启，跟他盟誓说： 让你世世代代作诸侯之长，奉守殷的各种正常祭祀，允许你供奉桑林之乐，把孟诸作为你的私人封地。 
English: King Wu also sent Bao Zhao Gong down the mountain to look for Mu Ziqi, and swore to him: Let you be the head of the princes for generations to come, observe the various normal rituals of Yin, allow you to offer the music of the mulberry forest, and make Mengzhu your private fiefdom.

古文：为三书，同辞，血之以牲，埋一於共头之下，皆以一归。
现代文：准备三份盟书，文辞相同，把牲血涂在盟书上，一份埋在共头山下，两人各持一份而归。
English: Prepare three copies of the covenant, the wording is the same, the blood of the animal is painted on the covenant, one is buried under the mountain, and the two return with one each.

古文：伯夷、叔齐闻之，相视而笑曰： 嘻！
现代文：伯夷、担齐闻知这些，互相望着笑道： 跟我们原来听说的不一样啊！
English: Hearing this, Bo Yi and Dang Qi looked at each other and smiled, "It's different from what we heard before!"

古文：异乎哉！
现代文：这不是我们所说的 道 。
English: This is not what we call the Way.

古文：此非吾所谓道也。昔者神农氏之有天下也，时祀尽敬而不祈福也；其於人也，忠信尽治而无求焉；乐正与为正，乐治与为治；不以人之坏自成也，不以人之庳自高也。
现代文：从前神农氏治理天下的时候，四时祭祀毕恭毕敬，但是不为求福，对于百姓，忠信为怀尽心治理，而无所求；百姓乐于公正，就帮助他们实现公正，百姓乐于太平，就帮助他们实现太平，不利用别人的失败使自己成功，不利用别人的卑微使自己高尚。
English: In the past, when the Shennong clan ruled the world, the four-hour sacrifice was respectful, but not for the sake of seeking blessings. For the people, loyalty was to govern wholeheartedly, but not to seek anything; if the people were willing to be fair, they would help them achieve fairness, if the people were willing to be peaceful, they would help them achieve peace, and they would not use the failure of others to make themselves successful, and they would not use the humiliation of others to make themselves noble.

古文：今周见殷之僻乱也，而遽为之正与治，上谋而行货，阻丘而保威也。
现代文：如今周看到殷邪僻淫乱，便急急忙忙地替它纠正，替它治理，这是崇尚计谋，借助贿赂，倚仗武力，炫耀威势。
English: Now that Zhou has seen the wickedness and debauchery of Yin, he is in a hurry to correct it and govern it. This is advocating trickery, using bribery, relying on force, and showing off.

古文：割牲而盟以为信，因四内与共头以明行，扬梦以说众，杀伐以要利，以此绍殷，是以乱易暴也。
现代文：把杀牲盟誓当作诚信，依靠四内和共头之盟来宣扬德行，宣扬吉梦取悦众人，靠屠杀攻伐攫取利益，用这些做法承继殷，这是用悖乱代替暴虐。
English: To regard the oath to kill animals as good faith, to rely on the alliance of the four quarters and the common front to propagate virtue, to propagate the auspicious dream to please the people, and to make profit by slaughtering and conquering, and to use these practices to succeed Yin, this is to replace tyranny with rebellion.

古文：吾闻古之士，遭乎治世，不避其任；遭乎乱世，不为苟在。
现代文：我们听说古代的贤土，遭逢太平之世，不回避自己的责任，遭逢动乱之世，不苟且偷生。
English: We have heard that the virtuous land of ancient times, when confronted with a peaceful world, did not shirk its responsibilities, and when confronted with a turbulent world, it was meticulous and stealthy.

古文：今天下暗，周德衰矣。
现代文：如今天下黑暗，周德已经衰微了。
English: If it is dark today, Zhou De has waned.

古文：与其并乎周以漫吾身也，不若避之以洁吾行。 
现代文：与其依附周使我们的名节遭到玷污，不如避开它使我们的德行清白高洁。 
English: Rather than clinging to Zhou to tarnish our name, it is better to avoid it to make our virtue pure and noble.

古文：二子北行，至首阳之下而饿焉。
现代文：于是两人向北走，走到首阳山下饿死在那里。
English: So the two of them walked north to the foot of Shouyang Mountain, where they starved to death.

古文：人之情，莫不有重，莫不有轻。
现代文：人之常情。无不有所重，无不有所轻。
English: It's human nature. Everything is heavy and everything is light.

古文：有所重则欲全之，有所轻则以养所重。
现代文：有所重就会保全它，有所轻就会拿来保养自己所珍视的东西。
English: If something is heavy, they will preserve it, and if it is light, they will use it to maintain what they value.

古文：伯夷、叔齐，此二士者，皆出身弃生以立其意，轻重先定也。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐这两位贤士，都舍弃生命以坚守白己的节操，这是由于他们心目中的轻重早就确定了。
English: The two sages, Bo Yi and Shu Qi, both gave up their lives in order to adhere to the principle of self-sacrifice. This was because the importance in their minds had already been determined.

古文：五曰：天下轻於身，而士以身为人。
现代文：不侵天下比自身轻贱，而士却甘愿为他人献身。
English: They do not encroach on the world, which is inferior to themselves, but they are willing to sacrifice themselves for others.

古文：以身为人者，如此其重也，而人不知，以奚道相得？
现代文：为他人献身的人是如此地难能可贵，如果人们不了解他们，那怎么能与他们情投意合?
English: People who give their lives for others are so precious. If people don't know them, how can they relate to them?

古文：贤主必自知士，故士尽力竭智，直言交争，而不辞其患。
现代文：贤明的君主一定是亲自了解士，所以士能竭尽心力，直言相谏，而不避其祸。
English: A wise ruler must know the scholar personally, so the scholar can make every effort to speak frankly with each other without avoiding his misfortune.

古文：豫让、公孙弘是矣。
现代文：豫让、公孙弘就是这样的士。
English: Yu Zhan and Gongsun Hong are just such people.

古文：当是时也，智伯、孟尝君知之矣。
现代文：在当时，智伯、孟尝君可称得上是了解他们了。
English: At that time, Zhi Bo and Meng Yijun could be said to understand them.

古文：世之人主，得地百里则喜，四境皆贺；得士则不喜，不知相贺：不通乎轻重也。
现代文：世上的君主得到百里的土地就满心欢喜，四境之内全都庆贺，而得到贤士却无动于衷，不知相互庆贺；这是不晓得轻重啊。
English: The monarchs of the world are full of joy when they get a hundred miles of land, and they all celebrate within the four borders, but when they get a sage, they are indifferent and do not know how to celebrate each other; this is not important.

古文：汤、武，千乘也，而士皆归之。
现代文：商汤、周武王起初只是拥有兵车千辆的诸侯，然而士都归附他们。
English: Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu were originally only lords who owned a thousand chariots, but the soldiers all belonged to them.

古文：桀、纣，天子也，而士皆去之。孔、墨，布衣之士也，万乘之主、千乘之君不能与之争士也。
现代文：夏桀、殷纣是天子，然而士都离开了他们，孔子、墨子是身穿布衣的庶人，然而拥有兵车万辆、千辆的君主却无法与他们争夺士。
English: Confucius and Mozi were commoners dressed in cloth, but a monarch with ten thousand or a thousand chariots could not compete with them.

古文：自此观之，尊贵富大不足以来士矣，必自知之然後可。
现代文：由此看来，尊贵富有不足以招徕士，君主一定要亲自了解士，然后才行。
English: From this point of view, it is not enough to be noble and rich to recruit scholars, the monarch must personally understand the scholars, and then it is possible.

古文：豫让之友谓豫让曰： 子之行何其惑也？
现代文：豫让的朋友对豫让说。 你的行为怎么那么让人不解啊?
English: Yu Zhen's friend said to Yu Zhen, "Why is your behavior so puzzling?

古文：子尝事范氏、中行氏，诸侯尽灭之，而子不为报；至於智氏，而子必为之报，何故？ 
现代文：你曾经侍奉过范氏、中行氏，诸侯把他们都灭掉了，而你并不曾替他们报仇；至于智氏，被灭之后你却一定要替他报仇，这是什么缘故? 
English: You once served the Fan clan and the Zhong Xing clan, and the lords destroyed them all, but you did not avenge them; as for the Zhi clan, after being destroyed, you must avenge him, what is the reason for this?

古文：豫让曰： 我将告子其故。
现代文：豫让说： 让我告诉你其中的缘故。
English: "Let me tell you why," Yu said.

古文：范氏、中行氏，我寒而不我衣，我饥而不我食，而时使我与千人共其养，是众人畜我也。
现代文：范氏、中行氏，在我受冻的时候却不给我衣穿，在我饥饿的时候却不给我饭吃，并时常让我跟上千的门客一起接受相同的衣食，这是象养活众人一样地养活我。
English: Mr. Fan and Mr. Zhong Xing did not give me clothes to wear when I was cold, did not give me food to eat when I was hungry, and often let me receive the same clothes and food with thousands of customers. This is to feed me like feeding everyone.

古文：夫众人畜我者，我亦众人事之。
现代文：凡象对待众人一样地对待我的，我也象众人一样地回报他。
English: If anyone treats me as he does others, I will treat him as I do others.

古文：至於智氏则不然，出则乘我以车，入则足我以养，众人广朝，而必加礼於吾所，是国士畜我也。夫国士畜我者，我亦国士事之。 
现代文：至于智氏就不是这样，出门就给我车坐，在家就供给我充足的衣食，在大庭广众之中，一定对我给予特殊的礼遇，这是象奉养国士那样地奉养我，凡象对待国士那样对待我的，我也象国士那样地报答他。 
English: As for Mr. Zhi, this is not the case. When I go out, he gives me a car to ride in. At home, he provides me with plenty of food and clothing. In public, he will certainly give me special courtesy. This is to treat me like a statesman. Anyone who treats me like a statesman, I will repay him like a statesman.

古文：豫让，国士也，而犹以人之於己也为念，又况於中人乎？
现代文：豫让是国士，尚且还念念不忘别人对待自己的态度，又何况一般人呢?
English: Yu Zhen is a statesman, yet he still remembers the attitude of others towards him, and what about ordinary people?

古文：孟尝君为从，公孙弘谓孟尝君曰： 君不若使人西观秦王。
现代文：孟尝君合纵抗秦，公孙弘对孟尝君说， 您不如派人到西方观察一下秦王。
English: When Meng Yakun joined the war against Qin, Gongsun Hong said to Meng Yakun, "You might as well send someone to the west to observe Qin."

古文：意者秦王帝王之主也，君恐不得为臣，何暇从以难之？
现代文：抑或秦王是个个有帝王之资的君主，您恐怕连作臣都不可得，哪里顾得上跟秦国作对呢?
English: Or, King Qin is a monarch with the resources of an emperor. I'm afraid you can't even get a position as a vassal. How could you possibly go against the Qin state?

古文：意者秦王不肖主也，君从以难之未晚也。 孟尝君曰： 善。
现代文：抑或秦王是个不肖的君主，那时您再合纵跟秦作对也不算晚。 孟尝君说。 好。
English: Or maybe King Qin is an unsightly monarch, and then it's not too late for you to confront Qin. Meng Yu said. Good.

古文：愿因请公往矣。 
现代文：那就请您去一趟。 
English: Then I invite you to take a trip.

古文：公孙弘敬诺，以车十乘之秦。
现代文：公孙弘答应了，于是带着十辆车前往秦国。
English: After Gongsunhong agreed, he led ten chariots to Qin.

古文：秦昭王闻之，而欲丑之以辞，以观公孙弘。
现代文：秦昭王听说此事，想用言辞羞辱公孙弘，借以观察他。
English: When Qin Zhao Wang heard about this, he wanted to humiliate Gongsun Hong with words so that he could observe him.

古文：公孙弘见昭王，昭王曰： 薛之地小大几何？ 
现代文：公孙弘拜见昭王，昭王问： 薛这个地方面积有多大? 
English: His great-grandson Hongbai met King Zhao, and King Zhao asked: How big is the area of Xue?

古文：公孙弘对曰： 百里。 
现代文：公孙弘回答说； 方百里。 
English: Gongsunhiro replied, "A hundred miles."

古文：昭王笑曰： 寡人之国，地数千里，犹未敢以有难也。
现代文：昭王笑道； 我的国家土地纵横数千里，还不敢据以跟谁作对。
English: Zhao Wang smiled. My country's land is thousands of miles long and wide, and I don't dare to use it against anyone.

古文：今孟尝君之地方百里，而因欲以难寡人犹可乎？ 
现代文：如今孟尝君土地才百里见方，就想据以跟我作对，能行吗? 
English: Now that Meng Yu's land is only a hundred miles away, he wants to use it to oppose me, is it possible?

古文：公孙弘对曰： 孟尝君好士，大王不好士。 
现代文：公孙弘回答说； 孟尝君喜好士，大王您不喜好士。 
English: Gongsunhong replied, "Meng Yaojun likes people, but you, the king, do not like people.

古文：昭王曰： 孟尝君之好士何如？ 
现代文：昭王说； 孟尝君喜好士又怎么样？ 
English: Zhao Wang said; What about Meng Yaojun's fans?

古文：公孙弘对曰： 义不臣乎天子，不友乎诸侯，得意则不惭为人君，不得意则不肯为人臣，如此者三人。
现代文：公孙弘回答说： 信守节义，不向天子称臣，不与诸侯交友，如果得志，作人君毫不惭愧，不得志，就连人臣也不肯怍，象这样的士，孟尝君那里有三人。
English: Gongsunhong replied, "Faithful to the faith, not a subject to the Son of Heaven, not a friend to the lords, if you have the will, you are not ashamed to be a person, if you do not have the will, even a person will not want to be a subject. There are three such people in Mengyakun.

古文：能治可为管、商之师，说义听行，其能致主霸王，如此者五人。
现代文：善于治国，可以作管仲、商鞅的老师，其主张如果被听从施行，就能使君主成就王、霸之业，象这样的士，孟尝君那里有五人。
English: Good at governing the country, he can be a teacher of management and negotiation. If his advice is listened to and implemented, he can make the monarch a king and a tyrant. There are five such people in Meng Yijun.

古文：万乘之严主辱其使者，退而自刎也，必以其血污其衣，有如臣者七人。 
现代文：充任使者，遭到拥有万辆兵车的威重的君主的侮辱，退下自刎，但一定用自己己的血染污对方的衣服，有如我这样的，孟尝君那里有七人。 
English: Acting as a messenger, insulted by a dignified monarch with ten thousand chariots, he retreated and killed himself, but he must have stained the other's clothes with his own blood. Like me, there are seven people in Meng Yijun.

古文：昭王笑而谢焉，曰： 客胡为若此？
现代文：昭王笑着道歉说： 您何必如此?
English: Zhao Wang smiled and apologized, saying, "Why did you have to do that?

古文：寡人善孟尝君，欲客之必谨谕寡人之意也。 公孙弘敬诺。
现代文：我对孟尝君是很友好的，希望您一定要向他说明我的心意。 公孙弘答应了。
English: I'm very friendly with Meng Yuqun, and I hope you'll be sure to explain my intentions to him. Gongsunhong agreed.

古文：公孙弘可谓不侵矣。
现代文：公孙弘可称得上凛然不可侵犯了。
English: Gongsunhiro can be called an inviolable person.

古文：昭王，大王也；孟尝君，千乘也。立千乘之义而不克凌，可谓士矣。
现代文：昭王是秦国国君，孟尝君只是齐国之臣，公孙弘能在昭王面前为孟尝君仗义持正，不可凌辱，真可称得上士了。
English: Zhao Wang was the sovereign of Qin, while Meng Yaojun was only a vassal of Qi. If Gongsun Hong could fight and uphold justice for Meng Yaojun in front of Zhao Wang, and not be humiliated, he could truly be called a staff sergeant.

古文：维秦八年，岁在涒滩，秋甲子朔。
现代文：序意秦王政八年，太岁在涒滩，秋天，初一为甲子。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Qin, the emperor was too old to go to Fengtan. In the autumn, his first son was born.

古文：朔之日，良人请问十二纪。
现代文：初一这天，君子请问十二纪的事。
English: On the first day of the new year, gentlemen, please ask me about the 12th century.

古文：文信侯曰：尝得学黄帝之所以诲颛顼矣， 爰有大圜在上，大矩在下，汝能法之，为民父母。 
现代文：文信侯吕不韦说：曾经学到黄帝教诲颛顼的话， 有皇天在上，大地在下，你能够效法它们，可以做人民的父母了 。
English: Wenxin Hou Lvubei said: Once you have learned the teachings of the Yellow Emperor, there is a heaven above and an earth below, you can imitate them and become the parents of the people.

古文：盖闻古之清世，是法天地。
现代文：听说古代的清平盛世，都是效法天地。
English: It is said that the ancient times of prosperity and peace were modeled after heaven and earth.

古文：凡十二纪者，所以纪治乱存亡也，所以知寿夭吉凶也。
现代文：大凡十二纪，是用来记载国家的治乱存亡的，是用来了解人事的寿夭吉凶的。
English: The twelve great ages are used to record the existence and death of the country, and are used to understand the longevity of human affairs.

古文：上揆之天，下验之地，中审之人，若此则是非可不可无所遁矣。
现代文：向上度量于天，向下检验于地，中间审察于人。能这样，那么对与不对、可与不可都没有失误了。
English: Measure upward to the heavens, test downward to the earth, and examine in the middle to the people. If you can do this, then there will be no mistakes about right and wrong, and what can and cannot be done.

古文：天曰顺，顺维生；地曰固，固维宁；人曰信，信维听。
现代文：天要顺行，顺行才能生万物；地要牢固，牢固万物才得安宁；人要诚信，诚信才能被听用。
English: Heaven must be in order for all things to come into being; earth must be firm for all things to be at peace; man must be honest for all things to be used.

古文：三者咸当，无为而行。
现代文：天地人三者都各得其所，就可以无为而行了。
English: Heaven, earth, and man all three have their place, and they can do nothing.

古文：行也者，行其理也，行数，循其理，平其私。
现代文：行的意思，就是行天之道。行天之道，顺地之理，人就可以去掉私心了。
English: To walk in the way of heaven means to walk in the way of heaven. To walk in the way of heaven means to walk in the way of earth. Then, one can get rid of selfishness.

古文：夫私视使目盲，私听使耳聋，私虑使心狂。
现代文：带着私心去看，就会使眼睛什么也看不见；带着私心去听，就会使耳朵什么也听不见；带着私心去考虑问题，就会使心狂乱没有准则。
English: If you look with selfishness, your eyes will not see anything; if you listen with selfishness, your ears will not hear anything; if you think about problems with selfishness, your mind will be in a frenzy without a standard.

古文：三者皆私设，精则智无由公。
现代文：眼睛、耳朵和心都为私而施用，严重了就会使思想不能公正。
English: Eyes, ears, and heart are all employed in my behalf, which, if serious, renders the mind incapable of justice.

古文：智不公，则福日衰，灾日隆。
现代文：思想不公正，那么福就会一天天衰减，灾就会一天天兴盛。
English: If one's thoughts are unjust, then one's fortune will decline day by day, and one's misfortune will flourish day by day.

古文：以日倪而西望知之。
现代文：这个道理，从太阳偏斜必定西落的现象中可以看出来。
English: This principle can be seen from the fact that the sun's obliquity causes it to set in the west.

古文：赵襄子游於囿中，至於梁，马却不肯进。
现代文：赵襄子在园囿中游玩，走到桥边，马停下来，不肯前进。
English: Zhao Xiangzi played in the middle of the garden, walked to the edge of the bridge, the horse stopped and refused to move forward.

古文：青荓为参乘。
现代文：这时青荓做参乘。
English: At this time, the young men did the chorus.

古文：襄子曰： 进视梁下，类有人。 
现代文：襄子说： 到前边看看桥底下，像是有人。 
English: Xiangzi said, "Go to the front and look under the bridge. It looks like someone is there."

古文：青荓进视梁下，豫让却寝，佯为死人。
现代文：青荓到前边看看桥下，豫让正仰面躺着，装作死人。
English: Qing Yao went to the front to look under the bridge. Yu Zhang was lying on his back, pretending to be dead.

古文：叱青荆曰： 去，长者吾且有事。 
现代文：他叱退青荓说： 离开，我将要行大事。 
English: He rebuked the young man, saying, "Go away, for I am about to do something very important."

古文：青荓曰 少而与子友，子且为大事，而我言之，是失相与友之道；子将贼吾君，而我不言之，是失为人臣之道。
现代文：青荓说： 年轻时和你很要好，你现在将要行大事，我说出这件事，这是失掉了交友之道；你要杀死我的君主，我不说出这件事，这是失掉了为臣之义。
English: The young stork said, "I was very friendly with you when we were young, but now you are about to do a great deed. If I speak out about it, I will lose my friendship. If you want to kill my lord, I will not speak out about it. I will lose my position as a vassal."

古文：如我者惟死为可。 
现代文：像我这样，只可以一死了。 
English: Like me, you can only die once.

古文：乃退而自杀。
现代文：于是退下去自杀了。
English: So he retreated and committed suicide.

古文：青荆非乐死也，重失人臣之节，恶废交友之道也。
现代文：青荓不是喜欢死，而是看重人臣的节操，厌恶废弃交友的准则。
English: Qing Xuan did not like to die, but valued the discipline of his subordinates and abhorred the abandonment of the principle of making friends.

古文：青荆豫让，可谓之友也。
现代文：青荓、豫让，可以算作朋友了。
English: Qingyao and Yuyao can be counted as friends.

