古文：李文忠，字思本，小字保儿，盱眙人，太祖姊子也。
现代文：李文忠，字思本，小名保儿，盱眙人，太祖姐姐之子。
English: Li Wenzhong, also known as Si Ben, was the son of a minor tutor, a deaf person, and a great-grandmother's sister.

古文：年十二而母死，父贞携之转侧乱军中，濒死者数矣。
现代文：十二岁时便死去母亲，父亲李贞带着他辗转乱军之中，多次濒临死亡。
English: His mother died when he was twelve, and his father, Li Zhen, took him with him to fight in the rebel army, where he came close to death several times.

古文：逾二年乃谒太祖于滁阳。
现代文：二年之后才在滁阳谒见太祖。
English: Two years later, he finally met his grandfather in Shiyang.

古文：太祖见保儿，喜甚，抚以为子，令从己姓。
现代文：太祖见到李保儿，十分喜爱，便将他收为养子，跟随己姓。
English: When the great-grandfather saw Li Bao'er, he was very fond of him, so he adopted him as his adopted son and followed his surname.

古文：读书颖敏如素习。
现代文：李文忠读书聪颖、敏悟，所学东西就好像以前学过一样。
English: Li Wenzhong is an intelligent and perceptive student. What he has learned is just like what he has learned before.

古文：年十九，以舍人将亲军，从援池州，破天完军，骁勇冠诸将。
现代文：十九岁时，李文忠以舍人的身份率领亲军，随军支援池州，击败天完军，骁勇善战为诸将之首。
English: At the age of nineteen, Li Wenzhong led his family's army as a pacifist, followed the army to support Chizhou, defeated the Tianhan army, and was the first to be brave and good at war.

古文：别攻青阳、石埭、太平、旌德，皆下之。
现代文：另又进攻青阳、石埭、太平、旌德，都将其攻下。
English: In addition, it attacked Qingyang, Shijiazhuang, Taiping and Shunde, capturing them all.

古文：败元院判阿鲁灰于万年街，复败苗军于于潜、昌化。
现代文：于万年街击败元朝院判阿鲁灰，又于于潜、昌化击败苗军。
English: They defeated the Yuan Dynasty's imperial court's army, the Aru army, in Wanyan Street, and the Miao army in Qian and Changhua.

古文：进攻淳安，夜袭洪元帅，降其众千余，授帐前左副都指挥兼领元帅府事。
现代文：进攻淳安，夜袭洪元帅，降服其部众千余人，李文忠被授为帐前左副都指挥兼领元帅府事。
English: He attacked Chun'an, attacked Marshal Hong at night, subdued more than a thousand people in his division, and Li Wenzhong was awarded the title of the first left deputy commander and head of the marshal's office.

古文：寻会邓愈、胡大海之师，取建德，以为严州府，守之。
现代文：随即会合邓愈、胡大海之军，攻取建德，改为严州府，率军驻守。
English: Then, the armies of Deng Yu and Hu Haihai immediately gathered to capture Jiande, which was changed to Yanzhou Prefecture, and the army was stationed there.

古文：苗帅杨完者以苗、僚数万水陆奄至。文忠将轻兵破其陆军，取所馘首，浮巨筏上。水军见之亦遁。
现代文：苗帅杨完者率苗、僚数万军队水陆并进，李文忠率轻兵击败其陆军，将所斩杀首级，浮在巨筏之上，水军见此情形也争相逃跑。
English: Miao commander Yang Wan marched tens of thousands of troops on land and sea with Miao and his colleagues. Li Wenzhong led light soldiers to defeat his army, beheaded them and floated on a giant raft. When the navy saw this situation, they also scrambled to escape.

古文：完者复来犯，与邓愈击却之。
现代文：杨完者又来犯，李文忠与邓愈一起率军将其击退。
English: Yang Guanzhong attacked again, and Li Wenzhong and Deng Yu together led the army to repel him.

古文：进克浦江，禁焚掠，示恩信。
现代文：进而攻克浦江，严禁军队焚火打劫，以示恩惠、信用。
English: He then conquered the Pujiang River, and strictly prohibited the army from setting fire and looting in order to show his favor and trust.

古文：义门郑氏避兵山谷，招之还，以兵护之。
现代文：义门郑氏避军于山谷，李文忠将其招回，并派兵保护。
English: When the virtuous Zheng Clan was hiding in the valley, Li Wenzhong called them back and sent soldiers to protect them.

古文：民大悦。
现代文：民心大悦。
English: The people are delighted.

古文：完者死，其部将乞降，抚之，得三万余人。
现代文：杨完者死后，其部将乞降，李文忠予以招抚，获得三万余人。
English: After the death of Yang Guanzhong, his subordinates would beg for surrender, and Li Wenzhong would appease them, gaining more than thirty thousand people.

古文：与胡大海拔诸暨。
现代文：李文忠与胡大海攻占诸暨。
English: Li Wenzhong and Hu Haihai captured Zhuji.

古文：张士诚寇严州，御之东门，使别将出小北门，间道袭其后，夹击大破之。
现代文：张士诚侵扰严州，李文忠率军于东门抵御，另派将领出小北门，抄小路袭击敌人后路，两军夹击，大破张士诚。
English: Zhang Shicheng invaded Yanzhou, Li Wenzhong led the army to resist at the east gate, and another general was sent to lead out the small north gate, cut a path and attacked the enemy's back road. The two armies clashed and defeated Zhang Shicheng.

古文：逾月，复来攻，又破之大浪滩，乘胜克分水。
现代文：过了一月，张士诚再次进攻，李文忠又在大浪滩打败敌军，乘胜攻克分水。
English: After one month, Zhang Shicheng attacked again, and Li Wenzhong defeated the enemy army on the Great Wave Beach and took advantage of the victory to conquer the watershed.

古文：士诚遣将据三溪，复击败之，斩陆元帅，焚其垒。
现代文：张士诚派遣将领占据三溪，李文忠又率军将其击败。斩首陆元帅，焚烧敌垒。
English: Zhang Shicheng dispatched generals to occupy Sanxi, and Li Wenzhong led the army to defeat them. He beheaded the field marshal and burned the enemy fortifications.

古文：士诚自是不敢窥严州。
现代文：张士诚从此不敢再窥视严州。
English: Zhang Shicheng never dared to look at Yanzhou again.

古文：进同佥行枢密院事。
现代文：李文忠晋升为同佥行枢密院事。
English: Li Wenzhong was promoted to the same rank of Privy Councillor.

古文：胡大海得汉将李明道、王汉二，送文忠所，释而礼之，使招建昌守将王溥。溥降。
现代文：胡大海俘获汉将李明道、王汉二，送往李文忠处，李文忠释放他俩，并以礼相待，命他俩前去招降建昌守将王溥，王溥投降。
English: Hu Hai captured Han generals Li Mingdao and Wang Han Er and sent them to Li Wenzhong's place. Li Wenzhong released them both and treated them with courtesy. He ordered them both to go to recruit the surrender of Jianchang's commander, Wang Qi, and Wang Qi surrendered.

古文：苗将蒋英、刘震杀大海，以金华叛。
现代文：苗将蒋英、刘震杀害胡大海，以金华反叛。
English: Miao ordered Jiang Ying and Liu Zhen to kill Hu Hai, and Jinhua rebelled.

古文：文忠遣将击走之，亲抚定其众。
现代文：李文忠派遣将领将其击走，并亲自安抚其部众。
English: Li Wenzhong dispatched generals to drive them away and personally pacified his subordinates.

古文：处州苗军亦杀耿再成叛。
现代文：处州苗军也发动叛乱，杀害耿再成。
English: The Wenzhou Miao Army also launched a rebellion and killed Geng Jiancheng.

古文：文忠遣将屯缙云以图之。
现代文：李文忠派遣将领驻屯缙云，谋取处州。
English: Li Wenzhong dispatched generals to be stationed in Suiyun to seek a place of refuge.

古文：拜浙东行省左丞，总制严、衢、信、处、诸全军事。
现代文：李文忠被授为浙东行省左丞，总摄严、衢、信、处、诸全等地军事。
English: Li Wenzhong was awarded the title of Zhe Dong Xing Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe Zhe.

古文：吴兵十万方急攻诸全，守将谢再兴告急，遣同佥胡德济往援。
现代文：当时十万吴军正猛攻诸全，守将谢再兴告急，李文忠派遣同佥胡德济前去救援。
English: At that time, a hundred thousand Wu troops were storming Zhuquan. The guard general Xie Zhaoxing was in a hurry, and Li Wenzhong sent his comrade Hu Deji to the rescue.

古文：再兴复请益兵，文忠兵少无以应。
现代文：谢再兴再次请求增兵，李文忠却因兵少派不出援兵。
English: Xie Zaixing once again asked for more troops, but Li Wenzhong did not send reinforcements because of the small number of soldiers.

古文：会太祖使邵荣讨处州乱卒，文忠乃扬言徐右丞、邵平章将大军刻日进。
现代文：正巧此时太祖命邵荣讨伐处州乱军，李文忠便扬言徐右丞、邵平章将率大军即日进攻。
English: It was just at this time that the great-great-grandfather ordered Shao Rong to fight against the state chaos army, and Li Wenzhong threatened that Xu Yuzheng and Shao Pingzhang would lead the army to attack on the same day.

古文：吴军闻之惧，谋夜遁。
现代文：吴军获悉，十分恐惧，企图趁夜逃跑。
English: The Wu army was informed that they were very afraid and tried to escape during the night.

古文：德济与再兴帅死士夜半开门突击，大破之，诸全遂完。
现代文：夜半时分，胡德济与谢再兴率领敢死队开门突袭，大败吴军，从而保全了诸全。
English: At midnight, Hu Deji and Xie Zaixing led the death squads to open the door and raid, defeating the Wu army, thus preserving Zhuquan.

古文：明年，再兴叛降于吴，以吴军犯东阳。
现代文：第二年，谢再兴叛降于吴，率吴军进犯东阳。
English: In the second year, Xie Zaixing rebelled against Wu and led the Wu army to invade Dongyang.

古文：文忠与胡深迎战于义乌，将千骑横突其阵，大败之。
现代文：李文忠与胡深在义乌迎战，率领千名骑兵横突敌阵，大败吴军。
English: Li Wenzhong and Hu Sheng fought in Yiwu, led a thousand cavalry across the enemy lines, and defeated the Wu army.

古文：已，用深策去诸全五十里别筑一城，以相掎角。
现代文：不久，李文忠采纳胡深之计，在离诸全五十里处另筑一城，与诸全互为掎角。
English: Soon, Li Wenzhong adopted Hu Sheng's plan and built another city 50 miles away from Zhuquan, which was at loggerheads with Zhuquan.

古文：士诚遣司徒李伯升以十六万众来攻，不克。
现代文：张士诚派遣司徒李伯升率十六万大军前来进攻，未能攻克。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent the 160,000-strong army led by Szeto Li Bo Sheng to attack, but failed to conquer.

古文：逾年，复以二十万众攻新城。
现代文：一年后，又派二十万大军进攻新城。
English: A year later, he sent another 200,000 troops to attack Xincheng.

古文：文忠帅朱亮祖等驰救，去新城十里而军。
现代文：李文忠率朱亮祖等迅速救援，在离新城十里之处扎营。
English: Li Wenzhong led Zhu Liangzu and others in a swift rescue, setting up camp ten miles from Xincheng.

古文：德济使人告贼势盛，宜少驻以俟大军。
现代文：胡德济派人告知李文忠说贼军势头极盛，应当驻扎以待大军。
English: Hu Deji sent a person to inform Li Wenzhong that the Kleptocratic Army was in full swing and should be stationed to await the arrival of the great army.

古文：文忠曰： 兵在谋不在众。 
现代文：李文忠却说 ：用兵在于谋略，而不在于人数众多。 
English: However, Li Wenzhong said: the use of troops is based on strategy, not on the number of people.

古文：乃下令曰： 彼众而骄，我少而锐，以锐遇骄，必克之矣。
现代文：于是下令道： 敌军多而骄，我军少而锐，以锐遇骄，必能克敌制胜。
English: He then ordered: "The enemy's army is large and arrogant, but our army is small and sharp. If pride is met with sharpness, we will surely be able to defeat the enemy and win."

古文：彼军辎重山积，此天以富汝曹也。
现代文：敌军辎重堆积如山，这是上天要使你们富裕起来，你们要努力啊！ 
English: The enemy's army is piled up like a mountain. It is God's will to make you rich. You must work hard!

古文：勉之。 会有白气自东北来覆军上，占之曰 必胜 。
现代文：当时有股自东北而来的白气覆盖军队上空，李文忠占卜 必胜 。
English: At that time, there was a white gas coming from the northeast to cover the sky over the army, and Li Wenzhong divined that he would win.

古文：诘朝会战，天大雾晦冥，文忠集诸将仰天誓曰： 国家之事在此一举，文忠不敢爱死以后三军。 
现代文：决定次日早晨与敌军会战，大雾笼罩，天空昏暗，李文忠召集诸将仰天发誓道 ：国家之事在此一举，我李文忠不敢贪生而死于三军之后。 
English: In the morning of the next day, he decided to fight with the enemy. The fog was thick and the sky was dark. Li Wenzhong gathered all the generals and swore to the heavens, "This is a matter of state. I, Li Wenzhong, dare not be greedy for life and die after leading three armies."

古文：乃使元帅徐大兴、汤克明等将左军，严德、王德等将右军，而自以中军当敌冲。
现代文：于是命元帅徐大兴、汤克明等统率左军，严德、王德等统率右军，而自己亲率中军首当其冲。
English: Therefore, he ordered Marshal Xu Daxing, Tong Keming, etc. to lead the left army, Yan De, Wang De, etc. to lead the right army, and he himself led the Chinese army to bear the brunt.

古文：会处州援兵亦至，奋前搏击。
现代文：处州援兵这时也已赶到，奋勇搏击。
English: At this time, the reinforcements from Zhenshu also arrived and fought bravely.

古文：雾稍开，文忠横槊引铁骑数十，乘高驰下，冲其中坚。
现代文：浓雾稍散，李文忠横握长矛率领数十名精锐骑兵，从高处奔驰而下，冲往敌军中坚之中。
English: When the thick fog dissipated slightly, Li Wenzhong, holding a spear, led dozens of elite cavalry, galloped down from a high place and rushed to the core of the enemy army.

古文：敌以精骑围文忠数重。
现代文：敌军精锐骑兵将李文忠重重包围。
English: The enemy's elite cavalry surrounded Li Wenzhong.

古文：文忠手所格杀甚众，纵骑驰突，所向皆披靡。
现代文：李文忠亲手杀敌甚多，引骑向外猛冲，所向披靡。
English: Li Wenzhong killed a lot of enemies with his own hands, and led the cavalry to rush out, which was overwhelming.

古文：大军乘之，城中兵亦鼓噪出，敌遂大溃。
现代文：大军乘机进攻，城中军队也擂鼓呐喊着猛冲出城，敌军大溃。
English: The large army took the opportunity to attack, and the troops in the city also rushed out of the city, beating drums and shouting, and the enemy army was routed.

古文：逐北数十里，斩首数万级，溪水尽赤，获将校六百，甲士三千，铠仗刍粟收数日不尽，伯升仅以身免。
现代文：李文忠军追击败兵数十里，斩首数万，溪水尽成血色，俘获将领六百，士兵三千，收缴兵器、粮草，数日不尽，李伯升仅只自身幸免逃脱。
English: Li Wenzhong's army chased the defeated soldiers for dozens of miles, beheaded tens of thousands of them, the streams ran red with blood, captured six hundred generals and three thousand soldiers, seized weapons, grain and grass, for days on end. Li Boxing was the only one to escape.

古文：捷闻，太祖大喜，召归，宴劳弥日，赐御衣名马，遣还镇。
现代文：捷报传来，太祖大喜，将李文忠召回，整日设宴慰劳，赏赐御衣名马，然后命其返回军中。
English: When news of the victory came, the great-grandfather was overjoyed and called Li Wenzhong back. He held a banquet all day to console him, presented him with a famous horse, and then ordered him to return to the army.

古文：明年秋，大军伐吴，令攻杭州以牵制之。
现代文：次年秋天，大军伐吴，李文忠受命进攻杭州以牵制敌军。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Li Wenzhong was ordered to attack Hangzhou in order to contain the enemy.

古文：文忠帅亮祖等克桐庐、新城、富阳，遂攻余杭。
现代文：李文忠率朱亮祖等攻克桐庐、新城、富阳，然后进攻余杭。
English: Li Wenzhong led Zhu Liangzu and others to conquer Tonglu, Xincheng, and Fuyang, and then attacked Yuhang.

古文：守将谢五，再兴弟也，谕之降，许以不死。
现代文：余杭守将谢五，是谢再兴之弟，李文忠以信招降，许他不死。
English: The governor of Yuhang will be Xie Wu, the younger brother of Xie Zaixing, and Li Wenzhong will surrender by letter, and he may not die.

古文：五与再兴子五人出降。
现代文：谢五与谢再兴之子五人出城投降。
English: The five sons of Xie Wu and Xie Zaoxing marched out of the city and surrendered.

古文：诸将请僇之，文忠不可。
现代文：诸将请求处以死刑，李文忠不同意。
English: They all requested the death penalty, but Li Wenzhong did not agree.

古文：遂趋杭州，守将潘元明亦降，整军入。
现代文：然后直趋杭州，守将潘元明也降，李文忠整军而入。
English: Then they headed straight for Hangzhou. The guard Pan Yuanming also fell, and Li Wenzhong entered the army.

古文：元明以女乐迎，麾去之。营于丽谯，下令曰： 擅入民居者死。 
现代文：潘元明以歌妓相迎，李文忠便挥军离去，驻扎丽谯，并下令 ：擅入民居者死。 
English: Pan Yuanming greeted him with a prostitute, and Li Wenzhong waved his troops away, stationed them in Lijiang, and gave the order: Those who trespassed into people's homes were to be killed.

古文：一卒借民釜，斩以徇，城中帖然。
现代文：一名士兵借用百姓炊锅，被斩首示众，城中因而井然有序。
English: A soldier borrowed a cooking pot from the common people and was beheaded in public, causing a riot in the city.

古文：得兵三万，粮二十万。就加荣禄大夫、浙江行省平章事，复姓李氏。
现代文：李文忠获军三万，粮食二十万，被就地加封为荣禄大夫、浙江行省平章事，恢复李氏之姓。
English: Li Wenzhong received 30,000 soldiers and 200,000 grain, and was awarded the title of "Doctor of Honor and Glory" and the title of "Minister of Zhejiang Province" on the spot, restoring the surname of Li.

古文：大军征闽，文忠别引军屯浦城以逼之。
现代文：大军征闽，李文忠另外率军驻扎浦城，进逼闽地。
English: Li Wenzhong led another army to besiege Pucheng and force it to surrender.

古文：师还，余寇金子隆等聚众剽掠，文忠复讨擒之，遂定建、延、汀三州。
现代文：返师之后，余寇金子隆等聚众抢劫，李文忠再次讨伐，将其擒获，于是平定建、延、汀三州。
English: After the return of the division, the remnants of Jin Zilong and others gathered to rob, Li Wenzhong fought again, captured it, and then pacified Jian, Yan and Ting three states.

古文：命军中收养道上弃儿，所全活无算。
现代文：下令军中收养途中弃儿，被养活者无数。
English: He ordered soldiers to adopt abandoned children on the way, and countless people were supported.

古文：洪武二年春，以偏将军从右副将军常遇春出塞，薄上都，走元帝，语具《遇春传》。
现代文：洪武二年春，李文忠以偏将军的身份跟随副将军常遇春出塞，逼近上都，赶走元帝，此事载于《常遇春传》中。
English: In the spring of the second year of Hongwu's reign, Li Wenzhong, as a partial general, followed the vice-general, often encountered obstacles in the spring, approached Shangdu, and drove away the Yuan Emperor. This event is recorded in "Often Encountered Spring."

古文：遇春卒，命文忠代将其军，奉诏会大将军徐达攻庆阳。
现代文：常遇春死后，李文忠受命代替统率其军，奉诏会合大将军徐达进攻庆阳。
English: After the death of Changyu Chun, Li Wenzhong was ordered to lead his army instead, and General Xu Da attacked Qingyang.

古文：行次太原，闻大同围急，谓左丞赵庸曰： 我等受命而来，阃外之事苟利于国，专之可也。
现代文：行至太原时，获悉太原被围告急，便对左丞赵庸说： 我等受命而来，如果是有利于国家的军务，我们可以自己决定。
English: When he went to Taiyuan, he learned that Taiyuan was urgently summoned, so he said to Zuo Zhao Yong: We have been ordered to come, if it is conducive to the country's military affairs, we can decide for ourselves.

古文：今大同甚急，援之便。 
现代文：而今大同情况紧急，我们可以顺路前去救援。 
English: But now Datong is in an emergency situation, we can go to the rescue along the way.

古文：遂出雁门，次马邑，败元游兵，擒平章刘帖木，进至白杨门。
现代文：于是率军出雁门，驻扎马邑，打败元游兵，擒获平章刘帖木，进至白杨门。
English: As a result, he led the army out of the Wild Goose Gate, stationed in Ma'i, defeated the former guerrillas, captured the Ping Zhang Liu Jiemu, and entered the Poplar Gate.

古文：天雨雪，已驻营，文忠令移前五里，阻水自固。
现代文：当时雨雪交加，军队已经驻扎，李文忠却下令向前移动五里，依水为险阻自固。
English: At that time, it was raining and snowing, the army was already stationed, but Li Wenzhong ordered to move forward five miles, relying on water as a barrier.

古文：元兵乘夜来劫，文忠坚壁不动。
现代文：元兵乘夜来劫，李文忠军坚壁清野，岿然不动。
English: The Yuan soldiers came at night, and Li Wenzhong's army marched into the clear field, but did not move.

古文：质明，敌大至。以二营委之，殊死战，度敌疲，乃出精兵左右击，大破之，擒其将脱列伯，俘斩万余人，穷追至莽哥仓而还。
现代文：天亮时，敌军大至，李文忠委派二营将士，殊死作战，估计敌军已经疲惫，才派出精兵，左右夹击，大破敌军，擒获敌将脱列伯，俘斩万余人，穷追至莽哥仓而返。
English: At dawn, when the enemy army was at its largest, Li Wenzhong appointed two battalions of soldiers to fight to the death. Estimating that the enemy army was already exhausted, he sent out elite soldiers, clamped down on the left and right, broke the enemy army, captured the enemy general Delibe, captured and killed more than 10,000 people, and chased them back to Mangcang.

古文：明年拜征虏左副将军。与大将军分道北征，以十万人出野狐岭，至兴和，降其守将。
现代文：第二年，李文忠被授为征虏左副将军，与大将军徐达分道北征，率领十万人出野狐岭，到达兴和，降服兴和守将。
English: In the following year, Li Wenzhong was awarded the title of Vice-Commander of the Left Division of the General Staff for the Northern Expedition. He led 100,000 men out of the Fox Mountains, reached Xinghe, and subdued the Xinghe garrison.

古文：进兵察罕脑儿，擒平章竹真。
现代文：进兵察罕脑儿，擒获平章竹真。
English: The young man who went into the army was not very bright, but he won the prize of Pingzhang Bamboo Realm.

古文：次骆驼山，走平章沙不丁。
现代文：驻军骆驼山，赶走平章沙不丁。
English: Garrison Camel Mountain, drive away Pingzhang Shabiting.

古文：次开平，降平章上都罕等。
现代文：驻军开平，降服平章上都罕等。
English: It is rare for garrisons to be leveled, and it is rare for capitulation orders to be issued.

古文：时元帝已崩，太子爱猷识里达腊新立。
现代文：当时元帝已死，太子爱猷识里达腊新立。
English: At that time, Emperor Yuan was already dead, and Prince Aizhong was newly established.

古文：文忠谍知之，兼程趋应昌。
现代文：李文忠派人探知此情，率军兼程奔往应昌。
English: Li Wenzhong sent someone to investigate the situation and led an army to Yingchang.

古文：元嗣君北走，获其嫡子买的立八剌暨后妃宫人诸王将相官属数百人，及宋、元玉玺金宝十五，玉册二，镇圭、大圭、玉带、玉斧各一。
现代文：元嗣君北逃，李文忠俘获其嫡长子买的立八剌及后妃、宫女、诸王、将相官属数百人，及宋、元玉玺金宝十五件，玉册二件，镇圭、大圭、玉带、玉斧各一件。
English: After Yuan Shikun fled to the north, Li Wenzhong captured hundreds of eight jade figurines and hundreds of consorts, princesses, kings, and generals that were bought by his eldest son, as well as 15 Song and Yuan jade figurines, two jade scrolls, and one jade belt, one jade axe, and one jade belt.

古文：出精骑穷追至北庆州而还。
现代文：并派出精锐骑兵穷追至北庆州而返。
English: and sent elite cavalry to chase them all the way to North Gyeongju and back.

古文：道兴州，擒国公江文清等，降三万七千人。
现代文：经过兴州时，擒获国公江文清等，降服三万七千人。
English: When he passed through Xingzhou, he conquered Guogangjiang, Wenzhong and other provinces, and subjugated 37,000 people.

古文：至红罗山，又降杨思祖之众万六千余人。
现代文：到达红罗山时，又降服杨思祖的部众一万六千余人。
English: When they arrived at Hongluo Mountain, they subjugated more than 16,000 of Yang Sizu's followers.

古文：献捷京师，帝御奉天门受朝贺。
现代文：李文忠到京城奉献捷报，太祖御临奉天门接受朝贺。
English: Li Wenzhong went to Beijing to dedicate the victory report, and the great-grandfather visited the Gate of Heaven to receive morning greetings.

古文：大封功臣，文忠功最，授开国辅运推诚宣力武臣，特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、大都督府左都督，封曹国公，同知军国事，食禄三千石，予世券。
现代文：大封功臣，李文忠功劳最大，被授为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣，特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、大都督府左都督，封为曹国公，同知军国事，食禄三千石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: Li Wenzhong was awarded the title of great meritorious vassal, Li Wenzhong was awarded the title of greatest meritorious vassal, he was awarded the title of outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, outstanding meritorious vassal, and outstanding meritorious vassal.

古文：四年秋，傅友德等平蜀，令文忠往拊循之。
现代文：四年秋，傅友德等平定蜀地，李文忠受命前去安抚。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, Fu Youde and others pacified Shu, and Li Wenzhong was ordered to go to pacify.

古文：筑成都新城，发军戍诸郡要害，乃还。
现代文：李文忠下令建筑成都新城，派军戍守诸郡要害之地，然后才返回。
English: Li Wenzhong ordered the construction of Chengdu New City and sent troops to guard the key areas of counties before returning.

古文：明年复以左副将军由东道北征，出居庸，趋和林，至口温，元人遁。
现代文：第二年又以左副将军的身份由东路北征，出居庸关，直趋和林，到达口温，元人逃遁。
English: In the second year, as the left vice-general, he went on the Northern Expedition from the East Road, leaving Yongguan and going straight to Warim, and arrived at Kuching. Yuanren fled.

古文：进至胪朐河，令部将韩政等守辎重，而自帅大军，人赍二十日粮，疾驰至土剌河。
现代文：军队进至胪朐河时，李文忠命部将韩政等保护辎重，而自率大军，每人携带二十日粮食，迅速赶至土剌河。
English: When the army entered the Tuo River, Li Wen's loyal life department placed great importance on the protection of Han Zheng and others, while the self-led army, each carrying twenty days of grain, quickly rushed to the Tuo River.

古文：元太师蛮子哈剌章悉众渡河，列骑以待。
现代文：元太师蛮子哈剌章率领部众全部渡河，列阵以待。
English: The former grandmaster barbarian, Haruko, led all the members to cross the river and waited in line.

古文：文忠引军薄之，敌稍却。
现代文：李文忠率军进逼，敌军才稍微退却。
English: Li Wenzhong led the army to push forward, and the enemy army retreated slightly.

古文：至阿鲁浑河，敌来益众。
现代文：到达阿鲁浑河时，敌军逐渐增多。
English: By the time they reached the Arughun River, the enemy forces had gradually increased.

古文：文忠马中流矢，下马持短兵斗。
现代文：李文忠马中飞箭，他下马之后，手持短器，继续战斗。
English: After dismounting from his horse, Li Wenzhong continued to fight, holding a short weapon.

古文：指挥李荣以所乘马授文忠，而自夺敌马乘之。
现代文：指挥李荣将自己的战马交给李文忠，而自己则夺乘敌军战马。
English: The commander Li Rong gave his horse to Li Wenzhong, while he took the enemy's horse.

古文：文忠得马，益殊死战，遂破敌，虏获万计。
现代文：李文忠重获战马，更加殊死作战，终于将敌军打败，俘获敌兵数以万计。
English: Li Wenzhong regained his war horse and fought even more desperately, finally defeating the enemy army and capturing tens of thousands of enemy soldiers.

古文：追奔至称海，敌兵复大集。
现代文：追奔至称海时，敌军重新聚集。
English: By the time they reached the coast, the enemy had regrouped.

古文：文忠乃敛兵据险，椎牛飨士，纵所获马畜于野。
现代文：李文忠便收兵据险，杀牛犒劳士兵，将所获马匹释放野外。
English: Li Wenzhong then gathered his soldiers, killed the bulls of the overworked soldiers, and released the captured horses into the field.

古文：敌疑有伏，稍稍引去。
现代文：敌军怀疑有伏，慢慢引军而去。
English: Suspecting an ambush, the enemy slowly withdrew.

古文：文忠亦引还，失故道。
现代文：李文忠也率军返回，错过了旧路。
English: Li Wenzhong also returned with his army and missed the old road.

古文：至桑哥儿麻，乏水，渴甚，祷于天。
现代文：到达桑哥儿麻时，缺乏饮水，军中将士十分口渴，于是向天祈祷。
English: When they arrived in Sanggore Ma, there was a lack of drinking water, and the lieutenant generals were very thirsty, so they prayed to the heavens.

古文：所乘马跑地，泉涌出，三军皆给，乃刑牲以祭。
现代文：所乘战马跑过之地，泉水涌出，三军都得以解渴，于是杀牲以祭上天。
English: In the land where the horses ran, a spring gushed forth, and the three armies were able to quench their thirst, so they sacrificed animals to the heavens.

古文：遂还。
现代文：然后班师回朝。
English: I just came back.

古文：是役也，两军胜负相当，而宣宁侯曹良臣，指挥使周显、常荣、张耀俱战死，以故赏不行。
现代文：这一战役，两军胜负相当，而宣宁侯曹良臣，指挥使周显、常荣、张耀都已战死，因此太祖未予赏赐。
English: In this battle, the two armies won and lost equally, but Xuanning Hou Cao Liangchen, commanding officers Zhou Xian, Chang Rong and Zhang Yao had all died in the battle, so the great-grandfather did not give a reward.

古文：六年行北平、山西边，败敌于三角村。
现代文：六年，李文忠率军前往北平、山西边境，在三角村击败敌军。
English: In the sixth year, Li Wenzhong led the army to the border of Beiping and Shanxi, and defeated the enemy army in the triangle village.

古文：七年遣部将分道出塞。
现代文：七年，派遣部将分道出塞。
English: In seven years, the dispatching department will branch out.

古文：至三不剌川，俘平章陈安礼。
现代文：到达三不剌川，俘获平章陈安礼。
English: Arrived at Sanbuyu River, captured Pingzhang Chen Anli.

古文：至顺宁、杨门，斩真珠驴。
现代文：到达顺宁、杨门，斩首真珠驴。
English: Arrived in Shuning and Yangmen, beheaded a pearl donkey.

古文：至白登，擒太尉不花。
现代文：到达白登，擒获太尉不花。
English: Arriving in Baden, it costs nothing to capture a captain.

古文：其秋帅师攻大宁、高州，克之，斩宗王朵朵失里，擒承旨百家奴。
现代文：这年秋天，李文忠率军进攻大宁、高州，攻克两地，斩杀宗王朵朵失里，擒获承旨百家奴。
English: In the autumn of that year, Li Wenzhong led the army to attack Danying and Gaozhou, conquered the two places, killed Zongwang Duoduo, and won 100 slaves.

古文：追奔至毡帽山，击斩鲁王，获其妃及司徒答海等。
现代文：追奔至毡帽山，击斩鲁王，俘获其妃及司徒答海等。
English: He chased them to Shau Ke Shan, killed King Lu, and captured his wife and his son-in-law.

古文：进师丰州，擒元故官十二人，马驼牛羊甚众，穷追至百干儿乃还。
现代文：然后进军丰州，擒获元朝旧官十二人，马驼牛羊甚多，穷追至百干儿才返。
English: Then he marched into Fengzhou, captured twelve former officials of the Yuan Dynasty, and a large number of horses, camels, cattle, and sheep. He chased them until they were all dead.

古文：是后屡出备边。
现代文：此后，李文忠屡次率军防备边境。
English: Since then, Li Wenzhong has repeatedly led the army to guard the border.

古文：十年命与韩国公李善长议军国重事。
现代文：十年，李文忠受命与韩国公李善长一起商议军国要事。
English: Ten years later, Li Wenzhong was ordered to discuss important matters of the military state with the South Korean official, Ri Son Gung.

古文：十二年，洮州十八番族叛，与西平侯沐英合兵讨平之，筑城东笼山南川，置洮州卫。
现代文：十二年，洮州十八番族反叛，李文忠与西平侯沐英合兵将其讨平，并筑城于东笼山南川，设置洮州卫。
English: In the twelfth year, the eighteen tribes of Zhangzhou rebelled, Li Wenzhong and Xiping Hou Muying joined forces to settle the matter, and built a city in the South River of Dongye Mountain, setting up Zhangzhou Wei.

古文：还言西安城中水碱卤不可饮，请凿地引龙首渠入城以便汲，从之。
现代文：还朝之后，李文忠报告说西安城里的水含有咸卤，不能饮用，请求凿地引龙首渠水入城，以便汲取，太祖采纳了他的建议。
English: Later in the morning, Li Wenzhong reported that the water in Xi'an City contained salt and brine and was not drinkable. He requested that the first canal be dug to bring water into the city so that it could be drawn. The great-grandfather accepted his suggestion.

古文：还掌大都督府兼领国子监事。
现代文：李文忠返回之后掌管大都督府兼领国子监事。
English: After Li Wenzhong's return, he was in charge of the Grand Governor's Office as well as the supervisor of the leading provincial son.

古文：文忠器量沉宏，人莫测其际。
现代文：李文忠器量深沉而宏大，人莫能测。
English: Li Wenzhong's talent is deep and vast, and there is no way to measure it.

古文：临阵踔厉历风发，遇大敌益壮。
现代文：临阵踔厉风发，大敌当前而更显壮志。
English: A fierce battle is raging, and the great enemy is now more ambitious.

古文：颇好学问，常师事金华范祖干、胡翰，通晓经义，为诗歌雄骏可观。
现代文：李文忠颇好学问，经常因事就教于金华范祖干、胡翰，通晓经义，所写诗歌雄浑可观。
English: Li Wenzhong was quite well-educated. He often learned from Jinhua Fan Zuqan and Hu Han due to various reasons. He was well-versed in the sutras, and his poetry was impressive.

古文：初，太祖定应天，以军兴不给，增民田租，文忠请之，得减额。
现代文：当初，太祖平定应天，因军队兴盛，粮饷不足，而增加百姓田租，李文忠为此请求，百姓得以减低税额。
English: At first, Emperor Taizong Pingding, responding to heaven, increased the land rent of the people due to the prosperity of the army and the shortage of grain. Li Wenzhong requested this, and the people were able to reduce the amount of tax.

古文：其释兵家居，恂恂若儒者，帝雅爱重之。
现代文：他解除兵权，闲居家中后，为人恭敬谨慎，宛如一位儒者，太祖十分偏爱看重他。
English: After he was released from military service and stayed at home, he was respectful and cautious, like a Confucian, and his great-grandfather was very fond of him.

古文：家故多客，尝以客言，劝帝少诛戮，又谏帝征日本，及言宦者过盛，非天子不近刑人之义。
现代文：家中因此宾客很多，李文忠曾以宾客之言，劝说太祖少杀戮，又劝谏太祖征伐日本，甚至说宦官过多，并非天子不近刑人之义。
English: As a result, there are many guests at home. Li Wenzhong once used the words of his guests to persuade his great-grandfather to kill less, and also advised his great-great-grandfather to conquer Japan. He even said that there were too many eunuchs, and it was not that the Son of Heaven was not close to the justice of the executioner.

古文：以是积忤旨，不免谴责。
现代文：因此屡屡触犯圣旨，不免遭受谴责。
English: As a result, it has repeatedly violated the will of God and has been condemned.

古文：十六年冬遂得疾。
现代文：十六年冬，李文忠得病。
English: In the winter of 166, Li Wenzhong fell ill.

古文：帝亲临视，使淮安侯华中护医药。
现代文：太祖亲临探视，并命淮安侯华中负责医治。
English: The great-grandfather came to visit, and ordered Huai'an Houhua Middle School to be responsible for the treatment.

古文：明年三月卒，年四十六。
现代文：第二年三月，李文忠去世，终年四十六岁。
English: In March of the following year, Li Wenzhong died at the age of 46.

古文：帝疑中毒之，贬中爵，放其家属于建昌卫，诸医并妻子皆斩。
现代文：太祖怀疑华中下毒，便降低华中的爵位，将其家属逐至建昌卫，其他医生及妻子儿女都被斩首。
English: The great-grandfather suspected Huazhong of poisoning, so he reduced Huazhong's title and banished his family members to Jianchangwei. Other doctors and their wives and children were beheaded.

古文：亲为文致祭，追封岐阳王，谥武靖。
现代文：太祖亲自写文致祭，追封李文忠为岐阳王，谥号武靖。
English: The great-grandfather personally wrote a poem to offer a sacrifice, posthumously crowning Li Wenzhong as the King of Qiyang, with the posthumous name of Wu Jing.

古文：配享太庙，肖像功臣庙，位皆第三。
现代文：配享太庙，肖像功臣庙，均位列第三。
English: The Temple of the Imperial Family and the Temple of the Portraits of Heroes and Heroines both ranked third.

古文：父贞前卒，赠陇西王，谥恭献。
现代文：李文忠之父李贞已先死，追赠为陇西王，谥号恭献。
English: Li Wenzhong's father, Li Zhen, died first, and was posthumously awarded the title of King of Shaanxi, with the posthumous name of Gongxian.

古文：文忠三子，长景隆，次增枝、芳英，皆帝赐名。
现代文：李文忠有三子，长子李景隆，次子李增枝，三子李芳英，均是太祖赐名。
English: Li Wenzhong had three sons, the eldest son Li Jinglong, the second son Li Zengzhi, and the third son Li Fangying, all of whom were named after the great-grandfather.

古文：明亡，爵绝。
现代文：李增枝开始授为勋卫，后提升为前军左都督。
English: Li Zengzhi was initially awarded the title of honor guard, and later promoted to the former military left-wing governor.

古文：邓愈，虹人。
现代文：李芳英官至中都正留守。邓愈，虹人。
English: Li Fangying, a high-ranking official, is absent from the meeting. Deng Yu, a Hongren, is absent.

古文：初名友德，太祖为赐名。
现代文：初名邓友德，太祖为其赐名。
English: His first name was Deng Youde, which was given to him by his great-grandfather.

古文：父顺兴，据临濠，与元兵战死，兄友隆代之，复病死，众推愈领军事。
现代文：其父邓顺兴占据临濠，与元兵作战而死，其兄邓友隆代替父亲，又病死，部众共推邓愈统领军中事务。
English: His father, Deng Shunxing, occupied Linyi and died fighting against Yuan soldiers. His brother, Deng Youlong, took his father's place and died of illness. The general public supported Deng Yu to lead the military affairs.

古文：愈年甫十六，每战必先登陷阵，军中咸服其勇。
现代文：邓愈年方十六，每次作战必定率先冲锋陷阵，军中将士全都佩服他的勇敢。
English: Deng Yulin was 16 years old, and he was always the first to charge into battle in every battle. The lieutenant generals all admired his bravery.

古文：太祖起滁阳，愈自盱眙来归，授管军总管。
现代文：朱元璋起兵滁阳，邓愈从盱眙前来归附，授为管军总管。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang took up arms in Shiyang, and Deng Yuanzhang came from Shiyang and was appointed as the commander-in-chief.

古文：从渡江。
现代文：跟随朱元璋渡江。
English: Follow Zhu Yuanzhang to cross the river.

古文：克太平，破擒陈野先，略定溧阳、溧水，下集庆，取镇江，皆有功。
现代文：攻克太平，击败并擒获陈野先，平定溧阳、溧水，攻下集庆、镇江，邓愈都有功劳。
English: Conquering Taiping, defeating and capturing Chen Yansian, pacifying Fenyang and Lishui, capturing Jieqing and Zhenjiang, and Deng Yu all have merits.

古文：进广兴翼元帅，出守广德州，破长枪帅谢国玺于城下，俘其总管武世荣，获甲士千人。
现代文：晋升为广兴翼元帅，出守广德州，在城下击败长枪帅谢国玺，俘其总管武世荣，获得士卒千人。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Guangxing wing marshal, and went to fight in Guangdezhou, defeating the long gun marshal Xie Guozhang outside the city, capturing his general manager Wu Shirong, and gaining a thousand soldiers.

古文：移镇宣州，以其兵取绩溪，与胡大海克徽州，迁行枢密院判官守之。
现代文：邓愈移军镇守宣州，率领其军攻取绩溪，又与胡大海一起攻克徽州，迁升为行枢密院判官，驻守徽州。
English: Deng Yu moved his army to guard Xuanzhou, led his army to conquer Jiexi, and together with Hu Haiya conquered Huizhou. He was promoted to the judge of the Privy Council and stationed in Huizhou.

古文：苗帅杨完者以十万众来攻，守御单弱，愈激励将士，与大海合击，破走之。
现代文：苗帅杨完者率十万大军前来进攻，徽州防守薄弱，邓愈激励将士，与胡大海合力进攻，将杨完者军击走。
English: Miao field marshal Yang Wanli led a hundred thousand army to attack, Huizhou defense was weak, Deng Yu encouraged the soldiers, and attacked together with Hu Hai, and drove Yang Wanli's army away.

古文：进拔休宁、婺源，获卒三千，徇下高河垒。
现代文：进而攻取休宁、婺源，俘获士卒三千，又巡行攻下高河垒。
English: He went on to capture Xuning and Yuyuan, captured 3,000 soldiers, and went on a patrol to capture Gaohe.

古文：与李文忠、胡大海攻建德，道遂安，破长枪帅余子贞，逐北至淳安，又破其援兵，遂克建德。
现代文：邓愈与李文忠、胡大海进攻建德，途经遂安，击败长枪帅余子贞，向北追击至淳安，又败其援兵，于是攻克建德。
English: Deng Yu together with Li Wenzhong and Hu Haihai attacked Jiande, passed through Sui'an, defeated the long gun commander Yu Zizhen, pursued north to Jun'an, defeated his reinforcements, and then conquered Jiande.

古文：杨完者来攻，破擒其将李副枢，降溪洞兵三万。
现代文：杨完者率军来攻，邓愈击败并擒获其将李副枢，降服溪洞三万军队。
English: Yang Guanzhong led the army to attack, Deng Yu defeated and captured his general Li Zuozhu, and subdued the 30,000 troops in Xidong.

古文：逾月，复破完者于乌龙岭。
现代文：一月过后，在乌龙镇再败杨完者。
English: After January, he was defeated again in Wulong Town by Yang Gan.

古文：再迁佥行枢密院事。
现代文：邓愈又升为佥行枢密院事。
English: Deng Yu was also promoted to the post of Minhang Privy Councillor.

古文：略临安，李伯升来援，败之闲林寨。
现代文：邓愈率军攻取临安，李伯升率军前来救援，邓愈在闲林寨将其击败。
English: Deng Yu led the army to conquer Lin'an, Li Bo Sheng led the army to come to the rescue, and Deng Yu defeated him in Zhulin Village.

古文：遣使说降饶州守将于光，遂移守饶。
现代文：又派遣使者劝降了饶州守将于光，邓愈于是移军驻守饶州。
English: He also sent an envoy to persuade the governor of Raozhou to surrender, and Deng Yu then moved his army to garrison Raozhou.

古文：饶滨彭蠡湖，与友谅接境，数来侵，辄击却之。
现代文：饶州在彭蠡湖畔，与陈友谅相邻，陈友谅军屡次前来侵犯，邓愈每次都将其击退。
English: Raozhou is on the shore of Penghu Lake, adjacent to Chen Youyuan. Chen Youyuan's army repeatedly came to encroach, and Deng Yu always repulsed it.

古文：进江南行省参政，总制各翼军马。
现代文：进升为江南行省参政，总领各路兵马。
English: Jin Sheng participated in politics in the south of the Yangtze River and led the troops and horses.

古文：取浮梁，徇乐平，余干、建昌皆下。
现代文：又攻取浮梁，攻战于乐平，余干、建昌都被攻下。
English: They also captured the floating girders and fought in Leping. Yugang and Jianchang were all captured.

古文：友谅抚州守将邓克明为吴宏所攻，遣使伪降以缓师。
现代文：陈友谅抚州守将邓克明被吴宏所攻，便派遣使者假装投降以作缓兵之计。
English: Chen Youxiong thought that the Fuzhou garrison commander, Deng Keming, was being attacked by Wu Hong, so he sent an envoy to pretend to surrender as a delaying tactic.

古文：愈知其情，卷甲夜驰二百里，比明入其城。
现代文：邓愈得知此情，率军夜奔二百里，天明时进入其城。
English: When Deng Yu learned of this, he led his army on a two-hundred-mile march through the night and entered the city at dawn.

古文：克明出不意，单骑走。
现代文：邓克明未曾料到，只得独自骑马逃走。
English: Unexpectedly, Deng Kemin had to ride away alone.

古文：愈号令严肃，秋毫不犯，遂定抚州。
现代文：邓愈号令严明，秋毫无犯，于是平定抚州。
English: Deng Yu's orders were strict, and there was no crime committed in the autumn, so Fuzhou was pacified.

古文：克明不得已降。
现代文：邓克明不得已而降。
English: Deng Keming had no choice but to abdicate.

古文：会友谅丞相胡廷瑞献龙兴路，改洪都府，以愈为江西行省参政守之，而命降将祝宗、康泰以所部从。
现代文：正巧当时陈友谅丞相胡廷瑞进献龙兴路，太祖将它改为洪都府，命邓愈为江西行省参政驻守此地，而命降将祝宗、康泰率所部跟随邓愈。
English: It just so happened that at that time, Chen Youzheng's minister, Hu Tingrui, presented Longxing Road, and the great-grandfather changed it to Hongdu Prefecture. He ordered Deng Yu to stay here as a member of the Jiangxi Provincial Government, and Zhu Zong and Kangtai led the headquarters to follow Deng Yu.

古文：二人初不欲降，及奉命从徐达攻武昌，遂反。
现代文：祝、康二人当初并不想投降，等到奉命跟随徐达进攻武昌时，于是反叛。
English: Zhu and Kang initially did not want to surrender, but when they were ordered to follow Xu Da to attack Wuchang, they rebelled.

古文：舟次女儿港，趋还，乘夜破新城门而入。
现代文：战船停泊女儿港，两人率军迅速赶回，乘夜攻破新城门而入。
English: The warship anchored at the port of Jiudi, and the two men led the army back quickly, breaking through the new city gate at night.

古文：愈仓卒闻变，以数十骑走，数与贼遇。
现代文：邓愈仓促之间获悉兵变，率领数十人骑马逃走，多次与贼军遭遇。
English: Deng Yu hurriedly learned of the mutiny, led dozens of people to flee on horseback, and repeatedly encountered the bandits.

古文：从骑死且尽，窘甚。
现代文：随从骑兵几乎全部死去，邓愈处境十分困迫。
English: Almost all of his cavalry died, and Deng Yu was in a very difficult situation.

古文：连易三马，马辄踣。
现代文：连换三匹战马，却全部倒毙。
English: He changed three horses in a row, but all of them died.

古文：最后得养子马乘之，始得夺抚州门以出，奔还应天。
现代文：最后乘上其养子之马，才得以夺抚州门而出，奔返应天。
English: Finally, he rode his adopted son's horse and was able to ride out of the state gate, rushing back to Yingtian.

古文：太祖弗之罪也。
现代文：太祖没有将他治罪。
English: His great-grandfather did not punish him.

古文：既而徐达还师复洪都，复命愈佐大都督朱文正镇之。
现代文：不久徐达回师恢复洪都，太祖又命邓愈辅佐大都督朱文正镇守洪都。
English: Soon after, Xu Dahui's division restored Hongdu, and Emperor Taizu ordered Deng Yu's assistant, Zhu Wenzheng, to guard Hongdu.

古文：其明年，友谅众六十万入寇，楼船高与城等，乘涨直抵城下，围数百重。
现代文：第二年，陈友谅率领六十万部众入侵，其楼船高至与城相等，乘水涨之时直抵城下，包围数百层。
English: In the second year, Chen Youzhen led 600,000 troops to invade the city. His mansion was as high as the city, and when the water rose, it reached the bottom of the city, encircling hundreds of floors.

古文：愈分守抚州门，当要冲。
现代文：邓愈分守抚州门，正当要冲。
English: Deng Yuyuan was guarding the Fuzhou Gate, and it was time to rush.

古文：友谅亲督众来攻，城坏且三十余丈，愈且筑且战。
现代文：陈友谅亲督部众来攻，城墙坏达三十余丈，邓愈且筑且战。
English: Chen Youxian's pro-governor troops came to attack, the city wall was more than 30 meters high, and Deng Yu continued to build and fight.

古文：敌攻益急，昼夜不解甲者三月。
现代文：敌军进攻日益猛烈，邓愈军衣不解带，昼夜防守达三月之久。
English: The enemy's attack became more and more fierce. Deng Yu's military uniform could not be untied, and he defended day and night for as long as three months.

古文：太祖自将来援，围始解，论功与克敌等。
现代文：太祖亲自率军来援，城围才得以解除，论功之时，邓愈之功与克敌相等。
English: The great-grandfather personally led the army to come to the rescue, and the siege was lifted. At the time of the award, Deng Yu's achievement was equal to that of defeating the enemy.

古文：太祖已平武昌，使愈帅兵徇江西未附州县。
现代文：太祖平定武昌后，命邓愈率军攻战于江西还未归附的州县。
English: After the great ancestor conquered Wuchang, he ordered Deng Yu to lead the army to fight in the states and counties that had not yet been annexed to Jiangxi.

古文：邓克明之弟志清据永丰，有卒二万。
现代文：邓克明之弟邓志清占据永丰，有兵二万。
English: Deng Kemin's brother, Deng Zhiqing, occupied Yongfeng with 20,000 soldiers.

古文：愈击破之，擒其大帅五十余人。
现代文：邓愈将其击败，擒获其大帅五十余人。
English: Deng Yu defeated him and captured more than fifty of his generals.

古文：从常遇春平沙坑、麻岭诸寨，进兵取吉安，围赣州，五月乃克之。
现代文：又随常遇春平定沙坑、麻岭诸寨，进兵攻取吉安，包围赣州，五个月后将其攻克。
English: In addition, as often happens in spring, the army entered and conquered Ji'an, besieged Luzhou, and conquered it five months later.

古文：进江西行省右丞，时年二十八。
现代文：邓愈晋升为江西行省右丞，时年二十八。
English: Deng Yu was promoted to Jiangxi Provincial U.S.A. at the age of 28.

古文：兵兴，诸将早贵未有如愈与李文忠者。
现代文：自从起兵以来，被迅速提升者，诸将中无人能比得上邓愈和李文忠。
English: Among the generals who have been promoted rapidly since the start of the war, no one can match Deng Yu and Li Wenzhong.

古文：愈为人简重慎密，不惮危苦，将军严，善抚降附。
现代文：邓愈为人简练而稳重、谨慎而细致，不惮危苦，治军严格，善于安抚投降、归附者。
English: Deng Yu was concise and steady, prudent and meticulous, not afraid of danger, strict in governing the army, and good at appeasing those who surrendered or joined the enemy.

古文：其徇安福也，部卒有虏掠者。
现代文：他攻战于安福时，部卒中出现掳掠百姓者。
English: When he was fighting in Anfu, there was a bandit among his subordinates.

古文：判官潘枢入谒，面责之。
现代文：判官潘枢前来谒见，当面指责邓愈。
English: The judge, Pan Zu, came to see him and accused Deng Yu in person.

古文：愈惊起谢，趣下令掠民者斩，索军中所得子女尽出之。
现代文：邓愈惊起谢罪，急忙下令抢掠百姓者斩，并将军中部卒所掠百姓子女搜索交出。
English: Deng Yu was startled by Xie Sin, and hurriedly ordered the execution of those who robbed the people, and handed over the results of the search for the children of the people who were robbed from the Central Military Outpost.

古文：枢因闭置空舍中，自坐舍外，作糜食之。
现代文：潘枢于是将他们安置在空屋当中，自己坐在屋外煮粥给他们吃。
English: Pan Zu then placed them in the middle of an empty house and sat outside cooking porridge for them to eat.

古文：卒有谋乘夜劫取者，愈鞭之以徇。
现代文：士卒中有人企图乘夜劫取，邓愈便将这些士兵鞭打示众。
English: An attempt was made to kidnap some of the soldiers at night, and Deng Yu whipped these soldiers in public.

古文：枢悉护遣还其家，民大悦。
现代文：潘枢将被掠百姓子女全部护送回家，百姓十分高兴。
English: Pan Zu will be escorted home by all the children of the abducted people, and the people are very happy.

古文：已而遇春克襄阳，以愈为湖广行省平章镇其地，赐以书曰： 尔戍襄阳，宜谨守法度。山寨来归者，兵民悉仍故籍，小校以下悉令屯种，且耕且战。
现代文：不久，常遇春攻克襄阳，朱元璋命邓愈为湖广行省平章镇守此地，并赐信说： 你戍守襄阳，应当谨守法度，山寨中前来归附者，兵民全部仍属旧籍，小校以下全部命令他们屯种田地，边耕边战。
English: Not long after, when the Spring Offensive was launched against Xiangyang, Zhu Yuan sent a letter to Deng Yu, who was in charge of the defense of Pingzhang Town, Hubei Province, saying: "If you defend Xiangyang, you should abide by the law. If you come to annex the town, all the soldiers and civilians are still of the old nationality. All of them from elementary school and below are ordered to cultivate fields and fight while cultivating.

古文：尔所戍地邻扩廓，若尔爱加于民，法行于军，则彼所部皆将慕义来归，如脱虎口就慈母。
现代文：你所戍之地与扩廓相邻，如果你对百姓仁爱有加，在军中严于执法，则扩廓所部将士都将慕义来归，就如挣脱虎口，投靠慈母一样。
English: If you are kind to the people and strict in enforcing the law in the army, then the soldiers in your army will all return to you, just as if they had escaped from a tiger's mouth and turned to their mother.

古文：我赖尔如长城，尔其勉之！ 
现代文：我把你当长城一般地依靠，你要尽力啊。 
English: I rely on you like the Great Wall. You have to do your best.

古文：愈披荆棘，立军府营屯，拊循招徕，威惠甚著。
现代文：邓愈披荆斩棘，设立军府营屯，招徕、安抚归附者，恩威并重。
English: Deng Yu overcame all difficulties and set up a military camp, inviting and appeasing the adherents, giving equal importance to grace and dignity.

古文：吴元年建御史台，召为右御史大夫，领台事。
现代文：吴元年，朱元璋建立御史台，召邓愈为右御史大夫，统领御史台事务。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Zhu Yuanzhang established the Imperial Historian's Office and called Deng Yu to be the Right Imperial Historian's Officer to oversee the affairs of the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：洪武元年兼太子谕德。
现代文：洪武元年，邓愈兼任太子谕德。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Deng Yu also served as the crown prince.

古文：大军经略中原，愈为征戍将军，帅襄、汉兵取南阳以北未附州郡。
现代文：大军经略中原，邓愈为征戍将军，率领襄、汉军队攻取南阳以北还未归附的州郡。
English: A large army was dispatched to the Central Plains, and Deng Yu, as the general of the Conquest of Yunnan, led the Xiang and Han armies to conquer the states and counties north of Nanyang that had not yet been annexed.

古文：遂克唐州，进攻南阳，败元兵于瓦店，逐北抵城下，遂克之，擒史国公等二十六人。
现代文：于是攻克唐州，进攻南阳，在瓦店击败元兵，向北追击，直抵城下，攻克南阳，擒获史国公等二十六人。
English: As a result, he conquered Tangzhou, attacked Nanyang, defeated the Yuan soldiers at the tile shop, pursued them to the north, reached the bottom of the city, conquered Nanyang, and captured 26 people such as Shi Guogong.

古文：隋、叶、舞阳、鲁山诸州县相继降。
现代文：随、叶、舞阳、鲁山各州县相继投降。
English: As a result, the prefectures of Ye, Maiyang and Lushan surrendered one after another.

古文：攻下牛心、光石、洪山诸山寨，均、房、金、商之地悉定。
现代文：邓愈又率军攻下牛心、光石、洪山诸山寨，均、房、金、商之地全部平定。
English: Deng Yu also led the army to conquer the villages of Niu Xin, Guangshi and Hongshan, and the provinces of Rong, Fang, Jin and Shang were all pacified.

古文：三年，以征虏左副副将军从大将军出定西。
现代文：三年，邓愈以征虏左副将军跟随大将军兵出定西。
English: Three years later, Deng Yu followed the general's soldiers out of Dingxi by recruiting the left vice-general.

古文：扩廓屯车道岘，愈直抵其垒，立栅逼之，扩廓败走。
现代文：扩廓军驻扎车道岘，邓愈直抵其堡垒，设立栅栏进行威逼，扩廓败逃。
English: The expansion army stationed in the lane, Deng Yu arrived directly at its fortress, set up a fence to intimidate, and the expansion army fled.

古文：分兵自临洮进克河州，招谕吐蕃诸酋长，宣慰何锁南普等皆纳印请降。
现代文：明军分兵自临洮进克河州，谕降吐蕃诸酋长，宣慰何锁南普等都交出印章，请求投降。
English: A detachment of the Ming army from Linyi entered Kehe Prefecture, ordered the chiefs to surrender, and consoled He Lock Nampu and others to surrender their seals and request surrender.

古文：追豫王至西黄河，抵黑松林，破斩其大将。
现代文：明军追击豫王至西黄河，直抵黑松林，击斩敌军大将。
English: The Ming army chased Yu Wang to the West Yellow River, straight to the black pine forest, and defeated the enemy general.

古文：河州以西朵甘、乌斯藏诸部悉归附。
现代文：河州以西朵甘、乌斯藏各部全部归附。
English: The provinces of Hezhou, Xidogan and Wuzang were all annexed.

古文：出甘肃西北数千里而还。
现代文：明军兵出甘肃西北数千里而返。
English: The Ming soldiers went thousands of miles northwest of Gansu and returned.

古文：论功授开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国，封卫国公，同参军国事，岁禄三千石，予世券。
现代文：论功之时，邓愈被授为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国，封为卫国公，参与军国要事，年禄三千石，给予世袭凭证。
English: At the time of the commendation, Deng Yu was awarded the title of the founding of the country, the title of the auxiliary movement, the promotion of sincerity and propaganda, the title of the warrior, the special promotion of the honorary doctor, the right pillar of the country, the title of the defender of the country, the participation in the important events of the military state, the annual salary of 3,000 koku, and the hereditary certificate.

古文：四年伐蜀，命愈赴襄阳练军马，运粮给军士。
现代文：四年，明军伐蜀，太祖命邓愈前往襄阳操练兵马，为军队运送粮食。
English: In the fourth year, the Ming army besieged Shuxu, and Emperor Taizu ordered Deng Yu to go to Xiangyang to train soldiers and horses and transport grain for the army.

古文：五年，辰、澧诸蛮作乱，以愈为征南将军，江夏侯周德兴、江阴侯吴良为副。
现代文：五年，辰、澧诸蛮作乱，太祖命邓愈为征南将军，江夏侯周德兴、江阴侯吴良为副将军，率军征讨。
English: In the fifth year, when the states of Shenshu and Shanshu wreaked havoc, the great-grandfather ordered Deng Yu to be the general of the Southern Expedition, and the governors of Jiangxia, Zhou Dexing, and Jiangyin, Wu Liang, to be the vice-generals and lead the army of the Southern Expedition.

古文：讨之。愈帅杨璟、黄彬出澧州，克四十八洞，又捕斩房州反者。
现代文：邓愈率杨王景、黄彬兵出澧州，攻克十八洞，又捕斩房州反叛者。
English: Deng Yu led Yang Wangjing and Huang Bin soldiers out of Bozhou, conquered the 18th cave, and captured the rebels in Fangzhou.

古文：六年，以右副将军从徐达巡西北边。
现代文：六年，邓愈以副将军身份跟随徐达巡察西北边境。
English: In the sixth year, Deng Yu, as vice-general, accompanied Xu Da to inspect the northwest border.

古文：十年，吐番川藏为梗，剽贡使，愈以征西将军偕副将军沐英讨之。
现代文：十年，吐蕃川藏阻塞道路，抢劫贡使，邓愈为征西将军偕同副将军沐英前往征讨。
English: Ten years later, when the Tibetans in Tubo blocked the road and robbed the tributaries, Deng Yu, the general of the Western Expedition, and his deputy general Mu Ying went to the Western Expedition.

古文：分兵为三道，穷追至昆仑山，俘斩万计，获马牛羊十余万，留兵戍诸要害乃还。
现代文：分兵三路，穷追至昆仑山，俘斩数以万计，俘获马牛羊十余万头，留军戍守各处要害，然后才班师回朝。
English: Dividing the troops into three groups, they chased them all the way to Mount Kunlun, captured and killed tens of thousands of camels, captured more than a hundred thousand horses, cattle and sheep, and left the troops to guard all the key points, before returning to the imperial court.

古文：道病，至寿春卒，年四十一。
现代文：邓愈在归途中生病，在寿春病逝，终年四十一岁。
English: Deng Yu fell ill on his way home and died of illness in Shouchun, at the age of forty-one.

古文：追封宁河王，谥武顺。
现代文：追封为宁河王，谥号武顺。
English: His posthumous name was Ninghe Wang, and his posthumous name was Wushun.

古文：长子镇嗣，改封申国公，以征南副将军平永新龙泉山寇。
现代文：邓愈长子邓镇继嗣，改封为申国公，以征南副将军的身份讨平永新龙泉山贼寇。
English: Deng Yu's eldest son, Deng Zhen's successor, changed his title to Shen Guogong and fought the Yongxin Longquan Mountain bandits as the vice-general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：再出塞，有功。
现代文：后又出塞，立有功劳。
English: After that, we got out of the jam, which was a great achievement.

古文：其妻，李善长外孙也，善长败，坐奸党诛。
现代文：其妻是李善长的外孙女，李善长失败，他以奸党罪被诛。
English: His wife is the granddaughter of Li Shanchang, who failed and was arrested for the crime of sedition.

古文：弟铭锦衣卫指挥佥事，征蛮，卒于军。
现代文：其弟邓铭为锦衣卫指挥佥事，前往征蛮，死于军中。
English: His younger brother, Deng Ming, commanded the Jin and Wei armies, went to fight in the war, and died in the army.

古文：有子源为镇后。
现代文：有一子邓源作为邓镇的后代。
English: There is a son, Deng Yuan, who is the descendant of Deng Zhen.

古文：弘治中，授源孙炳为南京锦衣卫世指挥使。
现代文：弘治年中，邓源之孙邓炳授为南京锦衣卫世指挥使。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, Deng Yuanzhu, the grandson of Deng Yuan, became the conductor of the Nanjing Jin Yi Wei Sect.

古文：嘉靖十一年诏封炳子继坤定远侯。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，皇帝下诏封邓炳之子邓继坤为定远侯。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor issued an imperial edict naming Deng Jikun, the son of Deng Yao, as the Prince of Dingyuan.

古文：五传至文明，崇祯末，死流贼之难。
现代文：下传五代至邓文明，崇祯末年，邓文明死于流贼之难。
English: Passed down five generations to Deng Wenzhong, in the last years of the Song Dynasty, Deng Wenzhong died in a robbery.

古文：汤和，字鼎臣，濠人，与太祖同里闬。
现代文：汤和，字鼎臣，濠州人，与太祖朱元璋是同乡。
English: Tang He, also known as Ding Chen, a native of Zhangzhou, was a fellow villager of the great-grandfather Zhu Yuanzhang.

古文：幼有奇志，嬉戏尝习骑射，部勒群儿。
现代文：他幼年便有远大志向，嬉戏玩耍时，曾练习骑马射箭，统率群童。
English: As a child, he had lofty ambitions. When he was playing, he used to practice riding a horse, shooting arrows and leading a group of children.

古文：及长，身长七尺，倜傥多计略。
现代文：长大之后，身高七尺，举止洒脱，善于谋略。
English: When he grew up, he was seven feet tall, had a relaxed demeanor, and was good at scheming.

古文：郭子兴初起，和帅壮士十余人归之，以功授千户。
现代文：郭子兴起兵时，汤和带领壮士十余人前去归附，因功被授予千户之职。
English: When Guo Zi raised an army, Tang He led more than ten strong men to join him, and was awarded the post of the leader of a thousand households for his service.

古文：从太祖攻大洪山，克滁州，授管军总管。
现代文：后随朱元璋进攻大洪山，攻克滁州，授为管军总管。
English: After that, he followed Zhu Yuanzhang to attack Dahong Mountain, conquered Zhangzhou, and was awarded the title of the commander-in-chief.

古文：从取和州。
现代文：又随朱元璋攻取和州。
English: He also followed Zhu Yuanzhang in conquering He Prefecture.

古文：时诸将多太祖等夷，莫肯为下。和长太祖三岁，独奉约束甚谨，太祖甚悦之。
现代文：当时诸将大多是朱元璋的同辈，都不肯居于他人之下，汤和比朱元璋大三岁，唯独他认真谨慎听从指挥，朱元璋为此非常高兴。
English: At that time, most of the generals were Zhu Yuanzhang's peers, and they did not want to be inferior to others. Tang He was three years older than Zhu Yuanzhang, but he carefully and cautiously obeyed the command. Zhu Yuanzhang was very happy about this.

古文：从定太平，获马三百。
现代文：后随军平定太平，缴获三百匹战马。
English: After that, the following army pacified Taiping and captured three hundred horses.

古文：从击陈野先，流矢中左股，拔矢复斗，卒与诸将破擒野先。
现代文：在攻击陈野先时，汤和被飞箭射中左大腿，他将箭拔出后继续投入战斗，最后与诸将破擒陈野先。
English: While attacking Chen Yuxian, Tang He was shot in the left thigh by a flying arrow. After pulling out the arrow, he continued to fight, and finally defeated Chen Yuxian with the generals.

古文：别下溧水、句容，从定集庆。
现代文：另外攻下溧水、句容，随军平定集庆。
English: In addition, they captured Surabaya and Surabaya, and celebrated with the army.

古文：从徐达取镇江，进统军元师。
现代文：汤和跟随徐达攻取镇江后，晋升为统军元帅。
English: After Tang He followed Xu Da to capture Zhenjiang, he was promoted to Marshal of the United Army.

古文：徇奔牛、吕城，降陈保二。取金坛、常州，以和为枢密院同佥守之。
现代文：又率军巡行奔牛、品城，降服陈保二，攻取金坛、常州，然后汤和以枢密院同佥的身份驻守常州。
English: He also led the army on a parade to Ban Niu and Pincheng, surrendered to Chen Bao Er, captured Jintan and Changzhou, and then Tang He stationed in Changzhou as a peer of the Privy Council.

古文：常与吴接境，张士诚间谍百出，和防御严密，敌莫能窥。
现代文：常州与吴地域相连，张士诚经常派间谍出来侦察，汤和防守十分严密，使敌人探听不到任何消息。
English: Changzhou is connected to the Wu region. Zhang Shicheng often sent spies out to reconnoiter. Tanghe was very tightly defended, so that the enemy could not detect any news.

古文：再寇，再击却之，俘斩千计。
现代文：敌人屡次出兵侵犯，汤和全都将他们击退，并斩俘敌人数以千计。
English: The enemy repeatedly sent troops to invade, and Tang He Quan repulsed them, and killed and captured thousands of enemies.

古文：进攻无锡，大破吴军于锡山，走莫天祐，获其妻子，进中书左丞。
现代文：然后进取无锡，大破吴军于锡山，赶走莫天，俘获其妻子儿女，晋升为中书左丞。
English: Then he advanced to Wuxi, defeated the Wu army in Mount Xishan, drove away Mottian, captured his wife and children, and was promoted to the middle secretary.

古文：以舟师徇黄杨山，败吴水军，获千户四十九人，拜平章政事。
现代文：又以水师巡行黄杨山，将吴水军打败，俘获千户四十九人，被授以平章政事。
English: He also marched on Huangyang Mountain as a sailor, defeated the Wu Water Army, captured forty-nine people from a thousand households, and was awarded the Pinzhang for political affairs.

古文：援长兴，与张士信战城下。城中兵出夹击，大败之，俘卒八千，解围而还。讨平江西诸山寨。
现代文：汤和率军援救长兴，与张士信战于城下，城中出兵，与汤和一起夹击，大败敌军，俘获士兵八千人；解围之后，汤和率军返回，讨平江西诸山寨。
English: Tang He led the army to rescue Changxing, fought with Zhang Shixin at the foot of the city, sent troops into the city, and clamped down with Tang He, defeating the enemy army and capturing eight thousand soldiers; after the siege was lifted, Tang He led the army to return and level the villages in the west of the river.

古文：永新守将周安叛，进击败之，连破其十七寨，围城三月，克之，执安以献，还守常州。
现代文：永新守将周安反叛，汤和率军进攻，将其打败，连破其十七寨，然后围城三月，攻克永新，捉拿周安，并将他献给朱元璋，然后还守常州。
English: Yongxin led Zhouan to rebel, and Tang He led the army to attack, defeated it, broke its seventeen wards, and then besieged the city in March, defeated Yongxin, captured Zhouan, and dedicated him to Zhu Yuanzhang, and then defended Changzhou.

古文：从大军伐士诚，克太湖水寨，下吴江州，围平江，战于阊门，飞礮伤左臂，召还应天，创愈复往，攻克之，论功赐金帛。
现代文：后随大军讨伐张士诚，攻克太湖水寨，攻下吴江州，围攻平江，在与敌人战于阊门时，汤和被飞炮击伤左臂，应诏返回应天。伤好之后，汤和重返战场，攻克平江，因功被赐黄金和布帛。
English: Later, he followed the large army to fight against Zhang Shicheng, conquered Taihu Water Town, conquered Wujiang County, and besieged Pingjiang. When fighting with the enemy at Zhimen, Tang He was injured by a flying cannon and returned to Heaven. After the injury, Tang He returned to the battlefield and conquered Pingjiang. He was awarded gold and cloth for his service.

古文：初建御史台，以和为左御史大夫兼太子谕德。
现代文：最初设立御史台时，汤和为左御史大夫兼太子谕德。
English: When the Imperial Historian's Office was first established, Tang He was the Left Imperial Historian and the Crown Prince.

古文：寻拜征南将军，与副将军吴祯帅常州、长兴、江阴诸军，讨方国珍。
现代文：随即又被授以征南将军，与副将军吴祯率领常州、长兴、江阴诸路人马，前去征讨方国珍。
English: He was immediately given the title of General of the Southern Expedition, and he and Vice-General Wu Xi led the troops from Changzhou, Changxing and Jiangyin to conquer Fang Guozhen.

古文：渡曹娥江，下余姚、上虞，取庆元。
现代文：渡过曹娥江，攻下余姚、上虞，攻取庆元。
English: They crossed the Cao E River, captured Yuyao, Shangyu, and Qingyuan.

古文：国珍走入海，追击败之，获其大帅二人、海舟二十五艘，斩馘无算，还定诸属城。
现代文：方国珍逃亡入海，汤和率军追击，将其打败，俘获大帅二人，海船二十五艘，斩首无数，然后回军平定各属城。
English: Fang Guozhen fled into the sea, and Tang He led his army to chase and defeat him, capturing two generals, twenty-five ships, beheading countless people, and then returning to subdue each city.

古文：遣使招国珍，国珍诣军门降，得卒二万四千，海舟四百余艘。浙东悉定。
现代文：派使者招降方国珍，方国珍到军门投降，汤和获得士兵二万四千人，海船四百多艘，浙东全部平定。
English: He sent an envoy to invite Fang Guozhen to surrender, and Fang Guozhen surrendered at the military gate, gaining 24,000 soldiers, more than 400 ships, and all of eastern Zhejiang.

古文：遂与副将军廖永忠伐陈友定，自明州由海道乘风抵福州之五虎门，驻师南台，使人谕降。
现代文：汤和于是与副将军廖永忠一起前去讨伐陈友定，从明州出发，由海路顺风抵达福州的五虎门，驻军南台。
English: Therefore, Tang He and Vice-General Liao Yongzhong marched together to fight against Chen Youding. They set out from Mingshou and arrived at Wuhumen in Fuzhou by sea, and garrisoned in Nantai.

古文：不应，遂围之。败平章曲出于城下。参政袁仁请降，遂乘城入。
现代文：汤和首先派人前去招降，陈友定不予答复，于是将其包围，在城下将平章曲出打败，参政袁仁请求投降，汤和军乘机入城。
English: Tang He first sent men forward to invite surrender, but Chen Youding did not reply, so they surrounded him, defeated Ping Zhang Qu under the city, asked Yuan Ren to surrender, and Tang He's army took the opportunity to enter the city.

古文：分兵徇兴化、漳、泉及福宁诸州县。
现代文：然后分兵巡行兴化、漳、泉及福宁诸州县。
English: Then, the detachment marched through Xinghua, Handan, Quan and Funing Zhouzhou counties.

古文：进拔延平，执友定送京师。
现代文：攻占延平，捉拿陈友定，将其押送京城。
English: Conquer Yanping, capture Chen Youding, and escort him to Beijing.

古文：时洪武元年正月也。
现代文：当时是洪武元年正月。
English: It was the first month of the first year of Hongwu.

古文：大军方北伐，命造舟明州，运粮输直沽。海多飓风，输镇江而还。
现代文：明军北伐，汤和受命在明州造船，将粮食运往直沽，因受海上飓风袭击，将粮食运到镇江后返回。
English: During the Northern Expedition of the Ming Army, Tang He was ordered to build a ship in Mingzhou to transport grain to Naosu, but due to a hurricane at sea, the grain was transported to Zhenjiang and then returned.

古文：拜偏将军。从大将军西征，与右副将军冯胜自怀庆逾太行，取泽、潞、晋、绛诸州郡。
现代文：汤和被授以偏将军，跟随大将军西征，与右副将军冯胜一起从怀庆越过太行山，攻取泽、潞、晋、绛诸州郡。
English: Tang He was awarded the title of general, followed the general westward, and together with the right vice-general Feng Sheng, crossed the Taihang Mountains from Huaiqing to capture the Zhouzhou counties of Za, Handan, Jin and Handan.

古文：从大将军拔河中。
现代文：跟随大将军攻占河中。
English: Follow the general to capture the middle of the river.

古文：明年，渡河入潼关，分兵趋泾州，使部将招降张良臣，既而叛去。
现代文：第二年，汤和率军渡河入潼关，分兵直趋泾州，派部将招降张良臣，张良臣不久又反叛离去。
English: In the second year, Tang He led the army across the river into Shaoguan, and the detachment of soldiers headed straight for Shanzhou. Zhang Liangchen was recruited by the faction, but he soon rebelled and left.

古文：会大军围庆阳，执斩之。
现代文：汤和会合大军围攻庆阳，将其俘获斩首。
English: The Tang and Hui armies besieged Qingyang, captured it and beheaded it.

古文：又明年，复以右副副将军从大将军败扩廓于定西，遂定宁夏，逐北至察罕脑儿，擒猛将虎陈，获马牛羊十余万。
现代文：又过了一年，汤和以右副将军的身份跟随大将军在定西将扩廓打败，平定宁夏，向北追击至察罕脑儿，擒获猛将虎陈，获马、牛、羊十多万头。
English: After another year, Tang He, as the right vice-general, followed the general in Dingxi to defeat the expansion of the silhouette, pacify Ningxia, pursue the north to Cahan, capture the fierce tiger Chen, and obtain more than 100,000 horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：徇东胜、大同、宣府皆有功。
现代文：攻战于东胜、大同、宣府，汤和都立有战功。
English: He fought in Dongsheng, Datong, Xuanfu, and Tanghe.

古文：还，授开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、荣禄大夫、柱国，封中山侯，岁禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：返回京城后，授为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、荣禄大夫、柱国，封为中山侯，年禄一千五百石，并授与子孙世袭的凭证。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the title of vassal, honorary doctor, and pillar of the country for the founding of the country, and was awarded the title of Zhongshan Hou, with an annual salary of 1,500 koku, and was awarded a certificate of inheritance for his descendants.

古文：四年拜征西将军，与副将军廖永忠帅舟师溯江伐夏。夏人以兵扼险，攻不克。
现代文：四年，汤和被授以征西将军，与副将军廖永忠一起率水师溯江伐夏，夏兵扼住险要地段，汤和进攻没能成功。
English: In four years, Tang He was awarded the title of General of the Western Conquest. Together with Vice-General Liao Yongzhong, he led the water division to cross the Yangtze River in the summer. The summer soldiers seized the critical area, and Tang He's attack was not successful.

古文：江水暴涨，驻师大溪口，久不进，而傅友德已自秦、陇深入，取汉中。
现代文：又遇江水暴涨，驻军大溪口，军队长久不能前进，而傅友德已率军从秦、陇深入，攻取汉中。
English: When the river water surged again, the troops stationed at the mouth of the Daxi River were unable to advance for a long time. Fu Youde, however, led the army from Qin and Shandong to invade Hanzhong.

古文：永忠先驱破瞿塘关，入夔州。
现代文：廖永忠已在其前攻克瞿塘关，进入夔州。
English: Liao Yongzhong had already conquered Shantang Pass and entered Zhangzhou before him.

古文：和乃引军继之，入重庆，降明升。
现代文：汤和这才率军跟随其后，进入重庆，降服明升。
English: Tang He only then led the army to follow, entered Chongqing, and surrendered to Ming Sheng.

古文：师还，友德、永忠受上赏，而和不及。
现代文：还军之后，傅友德、廖永忠受到皇帝的赏赐，而汤和不及他们。
English: After returning to the army, Fu Youde and Liao Yongzhong were rewarded by the emperor, but Tang was not as good as them.

古文：明年从大将军北伐，遇敌于断头山，战败，亡一指挥，帝不问。
现代文：第二年，汤和随大将军徐达北伐，遇敌于断头山，战败，一名指挥阵亡，皇帝对此未予追究。
English: The following year, Tang He followed the great general Xu Da to the Northern Expedition, encountered the enemy at the Broken Head Mountain, was defeated, and one commander was killed. The emperor did not investigate this.

古文：寻与李善长营中都宫阙。
现代文：汤和随即与李善长一起驻扎中都宫阙。
English: Tang He was then stationed at Zhongdu Palace together with Li Shanchang.

古文：镇北平，甓彰德城。征察罕脑儿，大捷。
现代文：又镇守北平，修筑彰德城，征讨察罕脑儿，取得大捷。
English: He also garrisoned Peiping, built Changde City, and won a great victory in the battle against Qian Han.

古文：九年，伯颜帖木儿为边患，以征西将军防延安。伯颜乞和，乃还。
现代文：洪武九年，伯颜帖木儿成为边患，汤和以征西将军的身份驻防延安，伯颜乞和，汤和率军返回。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, Boyan Timur became a border disease, and Tang He stationed in Yan'an as a general to conquer the West. Boyan begged for peace, and Tang He led the army back.

古文：十一年春，进封信国公，岁禄三千石，议军国事。
现代文：十一年春，晋封为信国公，年禄三千石，参加商议军国大事。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, he was promoted to Shinkokuko, with a salary of 3,000 koku, and participated in the deliberation of military affairs.

古文：数出中都、临清、北平练军伍，完城郭。
现代文：汤和屡次出中都、临清、北平操练军伍，修缮城廓。
English: Tang He repeatedly went to Zhongdu, Linqing and Beiping to train the army and repair the city walls.

古文：十四年以左副将军出塞，征乃儿不花，破敌灰山营，获平章别里哥、枢密使久通而还。
现代文：十四年，汤和以左副将军的身份率军出塞，征讨乃儿不花，攻占敌人的灰山营，俘获平章别里哥、枢密使久通而归。
English: In the 14th year, Tang He led the army out of the fortress as the left vice-general, conquered the enemy's Haishan camp, captured Pingzhang Bailigo, and returned the confidential envoy Jiutong.

古文：十八年，思州蛮叛，以征虏将军从楚王讨平之，俘获四万，擒其酋以归。
现代文：十八年，思州蛮族叛乱，汤和以征虏将军的身份跟随楚王征讨，俘获四万人，擒获其首领而归。
English: In the 18th year, when the Sizhou barbarians rebelled, Tang He followed the King of Chu as a conscript general, captured forty thousand people, and returned with their leaders.

古文：和沉敏多智数，颇有酒过。
现代文：汤和沉着、敏捷、有智谋，却经常因酒醉犯错。
English: He is calm, quick-witted and resourceful, but he often makes mistakes when he is drunk.

古文：守常州时，尝请事于太祖，不得，醉出怨言曰： 吾镇此城，如坐屋脊，左顾则左，右顾则右。 
现代文：驻守常州时，他曾请示朱元璋，没有得到满意的答复，便酒醉埋怨说 ：我镇守此城，就像坐在屋脊之上，左顾则左，右顾则右。 
English: When he was stationed in Changzhou, he had asked Zhu Yuanzhang for advice, but did not get a satisfactory answer, so he got drunk and complained: I am guarding this city, just like sitting on the roof, looking left and looking right.

古文：太祖闻而衔之。
现代文：太祖听说之后便怀恨在心。
English: When the great-grandfather heard about it, he harbored a grudge.

古文：平中原师还论功，以和征闽时放遣陈友定余孽，八郡复扰，师还，为秀兰山贼所袭，失二指挥，故不得封公。
现代文：平定中原后还师论功时，朱元璋以汤和征闽时释放陈友定的余孽，使八郡重受骚扰，还军途中，又被秀兰山贼寇袭击，失去二名指挥为由，不予封公。
English: After the pacification of the Central Plains, when he returned to his division to discuss the merits, Zhu Yuanzhang released the remaining evils of Chen Youding with soup and the collection of plunder, so that the eight counties were seriously harassed. On the way back to the army, he was attacked by the Xulan Mountain bandits and lost two commanders. On the grounds of this, he was not awarded the title of prince.

古文：伐蜀还，面数其逗挠罪。顿首谢，乃已。
现代文：汤和伐蜀回来后，朱元璋又当面数落其逗留之罪，汤和顿首谢罪，此事才作罢。
English: After Tang He Huashu came back, Zhu Yuanzhang again accused him in person of the crime of staying, and Tang He Tongshou of the crime of thanking him, and the matter was finally put to rest.

古文：其封信国公也，犹数其常州时过失，镌之券。
现代文：在封他为信国公时，朱元璋仍列举他在常州时的过失，并命人刻在世袭凭证之上。
English: When he was appointed as a believer, Zhu Yuanzhang still listed his mistakes in Changzhou, and ordered someone to engrave it on the hereditary certificate.

古文：于时，帝春秋浸高，天下无事，魏国、曹国皆前卒，意不欲诸将久典兵，未有以发也。
现代文：当时，皇帝年事已高，天下平定无事，魏国、曹国二公都已死。皇帝心中不愿诸将长期统领军队，只是还没有公开采取措施。
English: At that time, the emperor was very old, there was no peace in the world, and the two princes of Wei and Cao had both died. The emperor did not want the generals to lead the army for a long time, but he had not taken any public measures.

古文：和以间从容言： 臣犬马齿长，不堪复任驱策，愿得归故乡，为容棺之墟，以待骸骨。 
现代文：汤和因此寻找机会对皇帝说道 ：臣年事已高，不能再指挥军队驰骋战场了，希望能返回故乡，为将来死去找一片容身之处。 
English: Therefore, looking for an opportunity, Tang He said to the emperor: "The vassal is old and can no longer command the army to gallop on the battlefield. I hope to return to my hometown and find a place to die in the future."

古文：帝大悦，立赐钞治第中都，并为诸公、侯治第。
现代文：皇帝听后大为高兴，立即赐钱让他在中都修建府宅，并且为诸公、侯修建府宅。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this, and immediately gave him money to build a mansion in Zhongdu, and to build mansions for princes and lords.

古文：既而倭寇上海，帝患之，顾谓和曰： 卿虽老，强为朕一行。 
现代文：不久，倭寇侵犯上海，太祖心中忧虑，便探访汤和，对他说： 卿虽已年老，但仍请尽力为朕做此一行吧。 
English: Not long after, Japanese pirates invaded Shanghai, and the great-grandfather, worried, visited Towa and said to him, "Sir, although you are old, please do your best to do this for me.

古文：和请与方鸣谦俱。
现代文：汤和请求与方鸣谦一起前去。
English: The soup and the request go forward together with Fang Mingqian.

古文：鸣谦，国珍从子也，习海事，常访以御倭策。
现代文：方鸣谦是方国珍的堂侄，熟悉海防，汤和常常探访他，以求抵御倭寇之策。
English: Fang Mingqian was a cousin of Fang Guozhen, familiar with coastal defense, and Tang He often visited him in order to resist the Wokou's strategy.

古文：鸣谦曰： 倭海上来，则海上御之耳。
现代文：方鸣谦说 ：倭寇自海上来，就必须从海上打击他们。
English: Fang Mingqian said: If the Japanese invaders come from the sea, we must fight them from the sea.

古文：请量地远近，置卫所，陆聚步兵，水具战舰，则倭不得入，入亦不得傅岸。
现代文：可以请求丈量土地，设置防卫基地，在陆地聚集步兵，在水上准备战舰。这样，倭寇便不能侵入，即便他们进入也不能上岸。
English: You can ask for a survey of the land, set up a defense base, gather infantry on the land, and prepare warships on the water. In this way, the Japanese invaders cannot invade, and even if they enter, they cannot land.

古文：近海民四丁籍一以为军，戍守之，可无烦客兵也。 
现代文：近海百姓家有四口者抽一为兵，组成军队戍守海边，便不必烦劳军队。 
English: If four members of a coastal household enlist as soldiers and form an army to defend the coast, there will be no need to bother with an army.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：太祖觉得他的提议正确。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：和乃度地浙西东，并海设卫所城五十有九，选丁壮三万五千人筑之，尽发州县钱及籍罪人赀给役。
现代文：汤和于是丈量浙西、浙东之地，在沿海设卫所城五十九处，挑选壮士三千五百人修筑，将州县的资金全部拿出，并迫使罪犯提供劳役。
English: Tang He then measured the land of West Zhejiang and East Zhejiang, set up fifty-nine sanitarium cities along the coast, selected thirty-five hundred strong men to build, took out all the funds of the state and county, and forced the criminals to provide labor service.

古文：役夫往往过望，而民不能无扰，浙人颇苦之。
现代文：役夫数量往往需要太多，对老百姓就不能不有所侵扰，浙人颇为此所苦。
English: The number of servants is often too much, and it is necessary to disturb the people. The people of Zhejiang have suffered a lot because of this.

古文：或谓和曰： 民讟矣，奈何？ 
现代文：有人便对汤和说 ：百姓已有怨言，怎么办？ 
English: Someone then said to Tang He, "The people have already complained, what should we do?"

古文：和曰： 成远算者不恤近怨，任大事者不顾细谨，复有讟者，齿吾剑。 
现代文：汤和回答说 ：要实现远大计划，就不要去担忧近怨，担负大事的人，就不要去考虑细微之事，如果再有人发出怨言，小心我的剑不留情。 
English: Tang He replied, "To achieve a great plan, do not worry about the near grudge. Those who bear great responsibilities should not think about the small things. If someone else complains, be careful. My sword does not spare."

古文：逾年而城成。
现代文：一年之后，卫所城完工。
English: A year later, the castle was completed.

古文：稽军次，定考格，立赏令。
现代文：汤和于是考稽军次，定考格，立赏令。
English: Tang He then examined military ranks, set examination standards, and set reward orders.

古文：浙东民四丁以上者，户取一丁戍之，凡得五万八千七百余人。
现代文：浙东百姓每家有四口以上者，抽一人为兵，共得五万八千七百多人。
English: People in eastern Zhejiang who have more than four members in each family can draft one person as a soldier, for a total of more than 58,700 people.

古文：明年，闽中并海城工竣，和还报命，中都新第亦成。
现代文：第二年，闽中沿海修城竣工，汤和返京复命，中都新宅也已建成。
English: In the second year, the construction of the central coastal city of Handan was completed, Tanghe was ordered to return to Beijing, and the new house of Zhongdu was also completed.

古文：和帅妻子陛辞，赐黄金三百两、白金二千两、钞三千锭、彩币四十有副，夫人胡氏赐亦称是。
现代文：汤和便带领妻子儿女去向陛下辞行，陛下赐他黄金三百两、白金二千两、纸纱三千锭、彩帛四十多套，赐给其夫人胡氏的物品也一样多。
English: Tang He then led his wife and children to resign to His Majesty. His Majesty gave him more than three hundred taels of gold, two thousand taels of platinum, three thousand yarns, and forty sets of colored yarns, as well as the same number of items given to his wife Hu.

古文：并降玺书褒谕，诸功臣莫得比焉。
现代文：并且下诏褒奖，诸功臣无人能与他相比。
English: In addition, he was awarded the Imperial Decoration of Merit, and no other meritorious person could be compared to him.

古文：自是和岁一朝京师。
现代文：从这以后，汤和每年一次上京朝见。
English: From then on, Tang He went to Beijing once a year to see the emperor.

古文：二十三年朝正旦，感疾失音。帝即日临视，惋叹久之，遣还里。
现代文：二十三年元旦，汤和因病失声，太祖即日亲临探视，长久叹息之后，让他返回故乡。
English: On the 23rd New Year's Day, Tang He lost his voice due to illness. Grandfather came to visit him that day. After a long sigh, he let him return to his hometown.

古文：疾小间，复命其子迎至都，俾以安车入内殿，宴劳备至，赐金帛御膳法酒相属。
现代文：待他病稍好一点时，又命其子将他接至京城，让他坐车进入内殿，设宴慰劳，关怀备至，并赐黄金、布帛、御膳、法酒等等。
English: When his illness was a little better, he also ordered his son to take him to the capital, let him enter the inner hall by car, set up a banquet to comfort and care for him, and give him gold, cloth, meal, wine, and so on.

古文：二十七年，病浸笃不能兴。
现代文：二十七年，汤和病渐加重，不能站立。
English: In the 27th year, Tanghe's illness gradually worsened, and he was unable to stand.

古文：帝思见之，诏以安车入觐，手拊摩之，与叙里闬故旧及兵兴艰难事甚悉。和不能对，稽首而已。
现代文：太祖想见他，便命他坐车前往觐见，太祖用手抚摸着他，与他详细叙谈家乡故旧以及这些年来兴兵之艰难。汤和已不能对答，只是不停地叩首。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to see him, so he ordered him to take a car to see him. The great-grandfather stroked him with his hand and spoke to him in detail about his hometown and the difficulties of raising an army over the years. Tang He could no longer answer, but kept nodding his head.

古文：帝为流涕，厚赐金帛为葬费。
现代文：太祖见此情形，泪流不已，厚赠黄金、布帛作为丧葬费用。
English: Seeing this, the great-grandfather burst into tears and generously donated gold and cloth as funeral expenses.

古文：明年八月卒，年七十，追封东瓯王，谥襄武。
现代文：第二年八月，汤和病逝，终年七十岁，追封为东瓯王，谥号襄武。
English: In August of the following year, Tang He died of illness, at the age of seventy, and was posthumously crowned the King of Eastern Wei, with the posthumous name of Xiangwu.

古文：和晚年益为恭慎，入闻国论，一语不敢外泄。
现代文：汤和晚年为人更加恭敬谨慎，入朝所听关于国事的议论，不敢向外泄露一句。
English: In his later years, Tang He was more respectful and cautious. He did not dare to divulge a word of the discussions on state affairs that he heard when he entered the imperial court.

古文：媵妾百余，病后悉资遣之。
现代文：有妾百余，他生病之后便全部用钱将她们打发走。
English: He had more than a hundred concubines. After he fell ill, he sent them all away with money.

古文：所得赏赐，多分遗乡曲，见布衣时故交遗老，欢如也。
现代文：所得的赏赐，汤和大多分给了乡亲，每当见到布衣时的故交遗老，总是显得非常高兴。
English: Most of the soup and gifts were given to the villagers. Whenever they saw the cloth, the old friends and relatives were always very happy.

古文：当时公、侯诸宿将坐奸党，先后丽法，稀得免者，而和独享寿考，以功名终。
现代文：当时公、侯等老将都因奸党罪，先后伏法，很少有人幸免，而汤和独享老年之福，并以功名而终。
English: At that time, all the elders, such as princes and lords, were punished for the crime of treason against the party, and they were punished successively. Very few people were spared, but Tang He enjoyed the blessings of old age, and he died with a reputation.

古文：嘉靖间，东南苦倭患，和所筑沿海城戍，皆坚緻，久且不〈土己〉，浙人赖以自保，多歌思之。
现代文：嘉靖年间，东南方被倭寇所苦，汤和所筑的沿海戍城，都很坚固，历久不坍，浙人赖以自保，因此许多人以歌来表达对他的思念之情。
English: During the Jiajing period, the southeast was plagued by Japanese pirates. Both Tang and the coastal Yucheng built by Tang were very strong and durable, and the people of Zhejiang relied on them for self-preservation. Therefore, many people expressed their feelings for him with songs.

古文：巡按御史请于朝，立庙以祀。
现代文：巡按御史请命于朝廷，为汤和立庙祭祀。
English: He asked the Imperial Court for permission to hold a memorial service for the soup and the establishment of the temple.

古文：和五子。
现代文：汤和有五子。
English: Tang and You have five sons.

古文：长子鼎为前军都督佥事，从征云南，道卒。
现代文：长子汤鼎为前军都佥事，随征云南，中途去世。
English: The eldest son, Tang Ding, was ex-army and died en route to Yunnan.

古文：少子醴，积功至左军都督同知，征五开，卒于军。
现代文：末子汤醴，积功升至左军都督同知，征讨五开，死于军中。
English: The youngest son, Tang Xuan, rose to the position of the left-wing military governor, and died in the army.

古文：鼎子晟，晟子文瑜，皆早世，不得嗣。
现代文：汤鼎之子汤晟，汤晟之子汤文瑜，都早逝，没能继承爵位。
English: Tang Ding's son, Tang Jun, and Tang Jun's son, Tang Wenyu, both died young and were not able to inherit the title.

古文：英宗时，文瑜子杰乞嗣爵，竟以历四十余年未袭，罢之。
现代文：英宗时，汤文瑜之子汤杰请求继承爵位，英宗竟以四十年之久没人继承为由，将爵位罢免。
English: At the time of Emperor Yingzong, Tang Jie, the son of Emperor Tang Wenyu, requested to inherit the title, but Emperor Yingzong dismissed the title on the grounds that there had been no successor for forty years.

古文：杰无子，以弟伦之子绍宗为后。
现代文：汤杰无子，以其弟汤伦之子汤绍宗为后。
English: Tang Jie had no son, and was succeeded by Tang Shaosong, the son of his brother Tang Lun.

古文：孝宗录功臣后，授绍宗南京锦衣卫世指挥使。
现代文：孝宗任用功臣之后，授汤绍宗为南京锦衣卫世指挥使。
English: After Xiaozong was appointed as a meritorious subject, Tang Shaosong was given the post of Nanjing Jin Yi Wei Shi commander.

古文：未报，寇大至。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，封为灵璧侯，食禄千石。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was given the title of Ling Bi Hou, with a stipend of one thousand koku.

古文：胤勣病，力疾上马，陷伏死。事闻，赠祭如例。
现代文：汤绍宗传子至孙汤世隆，隆庆年间汤世隆协守南京，兼领后府，改提督漕运，历任四十余年，因功加封太子太保，进升少保。死后，谥号僖敏。爵位传至明朝灭亡而终。
English: Tang Shao Zong passed down to his son Tang Shilong. During the Longqing Dynasty, Tang Shilong co-ruled Nanjing, concurrently led Houfu, and was promoted to Admiral Cao Yun. He served for more than forty years. Due to his achievements, he was awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibo and promoted to Junior General. After his death, his posthumous name was Jimin. His title was passed down until the end of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：沐英，字文英，定远人。
现代文：沐英，字文英，定远人。
English: Mu Ying, Zhi Wen Ying, Ding Yuan Ren.

古文：少孤，从母避兵，母又死。
现代文：幼年时便死去父亲，跟随母亲躲避战乱，母亲又死。
English: His father died when he was a child, he followed his mother to escape the war, and his mother died again.

古文：太祖与孝慈皇后怜之，抚为子，从朱姓。
现代文：太祖与孝慈皇后怜惜他，收为养子，让他跟随朱姓。
English: The great-grandfather and the queen of filial piety took pity on him and adopted him as their son, allowing him to take the surname Zhu.

古文：年十八，授帐前都尉，守镇江。
现代文：十八岁时，授为帐前都尉，驻守镇江。
English: At the age of eighteen, he was awarded the post of captain in charge of accounting and stationed in Zhenjiang.

古文：稍迁指挥使，守广信。
现代文：后升为指挥使，驻守广信。
English: He was later promoted to commander and stationed in Guangzhou.

古文：已，从大军征福建，破分水关，略崇安，别破闵溪十八寨，缚冯谷保。
现代文：不久，跟随大军征讨福建，攻克分水关，夺取崇安，另外又攻克闵溪十八寨，捕获冯谷保。
English: Soon, he followed the large army to conquer Fujian, conquer the watershed, and capture Chong'an. In addition, he conquered the eighteen villages of Lixi and captured Fenggu Bao.

古文：始命复姓。
现代文：太祖这时命他恢复己姓。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather ordered him to restore his surname.

古文：移镇建宁，节制邵武、延平、汀州三卫。
现代文：沐英移军镇守建宁，节制邵武、延平、汀州三卫。
English: Mu Ying moved his army to the town of Jianning, and restrained Shao Wu, Yanping, and Tingzhou Sanwei.

古文：寻迁大都督府佥事，进同知。
现代文：不久升为大都督府佥事，晋升为同知。
English: He was soon promoted to Dadu Fu Anji and Tongzhi.

古文：府中机务繁积，英年少明敏，剖决无滞。
现代文：府中机务繁杂堆积，沐英年纪虽轻，却聪明敏悟，剖决事务，毫无遗漏。
English: Muxing is young, but she is smart and perceptive. She makes decisions and leaves nothing to be desired.

古文：后数称其才，帝亦器重之。
现代文：孝慈皇后多次称赞他的才干，太祖也十分器重他。
English: Empress Xiao Ci praised his talent many times, and his great-grandfather also held him in high esteem.

古文：洪武九年命乘传诣关、陕，抵熙河，问民疾苦，事有不便，更置以闻。
现代文：洪武九年，沐英受命乘坐驿站的传车前往关、陕，抵达熙河，询问民间疾苦，发现有不利百姓之事，便加以更置，然后上奏。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, Mu Ying was ordered to take a train from the railway station to Guan and Shaanxi, and arrived at Xihe. He inquired about the hardships of the people, and found that there were things that were unfavorable to the people, so he changed it, and then played it.

古文：明年充征西副将军，从卫国公邓愈讨吐番，西略川、藏，耀兵昆仑。
现代文：第二年，沐英担任征西副将军，跟随卫国公邓愈征讨吐番，西攻川、藏，耀兵昆仑。
English: In the second year, Mu Ying served as the vice-general of the Western Expedition, and followed the Emperor Deng Yu's expedition to conquer Tibet, invade Sichuan and Tibet, and conquer Kunlun.

古文：功多，封开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、荣禄大夫、柱国、西平侯，食禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：因功劳颇多，被封为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、荣禄大夫、柱国、西平侯，年禄二千五百石，并被授世袭凭证。
English: Due to his many merits, he was named a vassal, honorary doctor, pillar state, and Xipinghou of the founding of the country, and was awarded a hereditary certificate. His annual salary was 2,500 koku.

古文：明年拜征西将军，讨西番，败之土门峡。
现代文：第二年，沐英被授为征西将军，征讨西番，在土门峡将其击败。
English: The following year, Mu Ying was awarded the title of General of the Western Conquest, and defeated the Western Conquest in the Tu Men Gorge.

古文：径洮州，获其长阿昌失纳，筑城东笼山，击擒酋长三副使癭嗉子等，平朵甘纳儿七站，拓地数千里，俘男女二万、杂畜二十余万，乃班师。
现代文：然后取道洮州，俘获其首领阿昌失纳，又在东笼山筑城，击擒酋长三副使瘿嗉子等，平定朵甘纳儿七站，拓地数千里，俘获男女二万、各种牲畜二十余万，这才班师回朝。
English: Then, they took the road to Bozhou, captured its leader Achang Bozhong, and built a city in Dongjue Mountain. They killed the three deputy chiefs of Bozhong, subdued seven stations of Bozhong, expanded thousands of miles, captured twenty thousand men and women, and more than two hundred thousand livestock of all kinds. Only then did the group return to the North.

古文：元国公脱火赤等屯和林，数扰边。
现代文：元朝国公脱火赤等驻扎和林，屡次骚扰明朝边境。
English: The Red Guards of the Yuan Dynasty stationed in He Lin, and repeatedly harassed the Ming Dynasty border.

古文：十三年命英总陕西兵出塞，略亦集乃路，渡黄河，登贺兰山，涉流沙，七日至其境。
现代文：十三年，沐英受命总领陕西军队出塞，攻取亦集乃路，横渡黄河，攀越贺兰山，涉过流沙，七天之后到达和林境内。
English: In the thirteenth year, Mu Ying was ordered to lead the Shaanxi army out of the fortress, capture Yixin Road, cross the Yellow River, climb Mount Helan, wade through quicksand, and arrive in the territory of Warim seven days later.

古文：分四翼夜击之，而自以骁骑冲其中坚。
现代文：兵分四路夜间进击，沐英亲自率领骁勇骑兵直冲敌军中坚。
English: The soldiers were divided into four groups to attack at night, and Mu Ying personally led the brave cavalry to charge straight into the enemy's core.

古文：擒脱火赤及知院爱足等，获其全部以归。
现代文：擒拿脱火赤及知院爱足等，俘获全部敌军而返。
English: He took the fire-escape red and the love foot of Zhiyin, captured all the enemy troops and returned.

古文：明年，又从大将军北征，异道出塞，略公主山长寨，克全宁四部，度胪朐河，执知院李宣，尽俘其众。
现代文：第二年，沐英又随大将军北征，分道出塞，攻取公主山长寨，攻克全宁四部，然后渡过胪朐河，捉拿住知院李宣，并尽俘其部众。
English: In the second year, Mu Ying followed the general to the Northern Expedition, and went out of the fortress on a separate route, captured the Princess Mountain Changzhai, conquered the four parts of Quan Ning, and then crossed the Wei River, captured the Zhiyin Li Xuan, and captured all his subordinates.

古文：寻拜征南右副将军，同永昌侯蓝玉从将军傅友德取云南。
现代文：沐英随即被授为征南右副将军，与永昌侯蓝玉一起跟随将军傅友德攻取云南。
English: Mu Ying was immediately awarded the title of Vice-General of the Right to Conquer the South, and together with Yongchang Hou Lan Yu followed General Fu Youde to conquer Yunnan.

古文：元梁王遣平章达里麻以兵十余万拒于曲靖。
现代文：元梁王派遣平章达里麻率军十余万在曲靖抵御。
English: Yuan Liang Wang dispatched Ping Zang Darima to lead an army of more than one hundred thousand to resist in Qujing.

古文：英乘雾趋白石江。
现代文：沐英乘着大雾率军直趋白石江。
English: Taking advantage of the fog, Mu Ying led the army straight to the Shiraishi River.

古文：雾霁，两军相望，达里麻大惊。
现代文：雾散之后，两军相望，达里麻大惊。
English: After the fog dissipated, the two armies looked at each other, and Dari Ma was shocked.

古文：友德欲渡江，英曰： 我兵罢，惧为所扼。 
现代文：傅友德想马上渡江，沐英则说： 我军应停止前进，因为我担心会被敌军所扼。 
English: Fu Youde wanted to cross the river immediately, while Mu Ying said, "Our army should stop advancing, because I'm afraid we'll be caught by the enemy."

古文：乃帅诸军严陈，若将渡者。
现代文：于是率领诸军严阵江边，就好像即将渡江一样。
English: So he led the army to the edge of the river, as if he was about to cross the river.

古文：而奇兵从下流济，出其陈后，张疑帜山谷间，人吹一铜角。
现代文：另外却派遣奇兵从下游渡江，出现在敌军之后，在山谷中张开迷惑敌人的旗帜，并且每人吹一铜角。
English: On the other hand, they sent a strange soldier from downstream to cross the river, appeared after the enemy army, and opened a flag to confuse the enemy in the valley, and each person blew a brass horn.

古文：元兵惊扰。
现代文：元军大受惊扰。
English: The Yuan army was greatly alarmed.

古文：英急麾军渡江，以善泅者先之，长刀斫其军。
现代文：沐英迅速指挥军队渡江，命令善于潜水者先行，用长刀直砍敌军。
English: Mu Ying quickly commanded the army to cross the river, ordered good divers to go ahead and cut the enemy army with a long knife.

古文：军却，师毕济。
现代文：敌军退却，明军全部渡江。
English: The enemy troops retreated, and all the Ming troops crossed the river.

古文：鏖战良久，复纵铁骑，遂大败之，生擒达里麻，僵尸十余里。
现代文：鏖战良久，明军又派出铁骑，于是大败敌军，生擒达里麻，僵尸遍布十余里。
English: After fighting for a long time, the Ming army also sent iron cavalry, so they defeated the enemy army, and the zombies spread over more than ten miles.

古文：长驱入云南，梁王走死，右丞观音保以城降，属郡皆下。
现代文：明军长驱直入云南，梁王逃亡途中死去，右丞观音保以城投降，属郡全被攻下。
English: The commander of the Ming army drove straight into Yunnan, Liang Wang died on the way to escape, the right-hand man Guan Yin Bao surrendered in the city, and the whole county was captured.

古文：独大理倚点苍山、洱海，扼龙首、龙尾二关。
现代文：独大理凭借点苍山、洱海，扼住龙首、龙尾两关。
English: With the help of the points of Cangshan and Bohai Sea, Doudali was able to capture the dragon's head and tail.

古文：关故南诏筑，土酋段世守之。
现代文：两关为以前南诏所筑，由土酋段世驻守。
English: The two gates were built by Nanzhao in the past, and have been guarded by the local chiefs for generations.

古文：英自将抵下关，遣王弼由洱水东趋上关，胡海由石门间道渡河，扳点苍山而上，立旗帜。
现代文：沐英自己率军直抵下关，派遣王弼由洱水东趋上关，胡海由石门抄小路渡河，攀上点苍山，树立旗帜。
English: Mu Ying himself led the army straight to Shimonoseki, dispatched Wang Qian from Surabaya to the east to Shangguan, and sent Hu Hai to cross the river from Shimen by following a small road, climb up the mountain of Dangcang, and set up a flag.

古文：英乱流斩关进，山上军亦驰下，夹击，擒段世，遂拔大理。
现代文：沐英率军横渡河流、闯关而进，山上军队也奔驰而下，夹击敌军，擒获段世，于是攻克大理。
English: Mu Ying led the army across the river, broke through the pass, and the mountain army also raced down, clamped down on the enemy army, captured the passage, and then conquered Dali.

古文：分兵收未附诸蛮，设官立卫守之。
现代文：然后分兵收取还未归附的诸蛮，设官立卫驻守。
English: Then the detachment of soldiers collected the still-unattached barbarians and stationed guards.

古文：回军，与友德会滇池，分道平乌撒、东川、建昌、芒部诸蛮，立乌撒、毕节二卫。
现代文：这才率军返回，与傅友德在滇池会合，分道平定乌撒、东川、建昌、芒部诸蛮，设立乌撒、毕节二卫。
English: It was only then that he returned with his army and met Fu Youde in Dianchi. They went their separate ways and subdued the barbarians of Wusa, Dongchuan, Jianchang, and Mangbe, and established Wusa and Bijie.

古文：土酋杨苴等复煽诸蛮二十余万围云南城。
现代文：土酋杨苴等又煽动诸蛮二十余万人包围云南城。
English: The Tu chief Yang Xuan and others incited more than 200,000 people to encircle Yunnan City.

古文：英驰救，蛮溃窜山谷中，分兵捕灭之，斩级六万。
现代文：沐英奔赴援救，蛮军溃窜山谷之中，沐英分兵将其捕灭，斩首六万。
English: Mu Ying rushed to the rescue, the barbarians were routed in the valley, Mu Ying's detachment of soldiers killed them and beheaded sixty thousand.

古文：明年诏友德及玉班师，而留英镇滇中。
现代文：第二年，太祖下诏命傅友德及蓝玉班师回朝，而留下沐英镇守滇中。
English: In the second year, Emperor Taizu ordered Fu Youde and Lan Yu Ban Shi to return to the North, leaving Mu Ying Zhen to guard Yunnan.

古文：十七年，曲靖亦佐酋作乱，讨降之。
现代文：十七年，曲靖亦佐酋长作乱，沐英将其征讨降服。
English: In the seventeenth year, Chief Qujing Yisa led a rebellion, and Mu Ying subdued him.

古文：因定普定、广南诸蛮，通田州粮道。
现代文：并趁机平定普定、广南诸蛮，打通田州粮道。
English: He also took advantage of the opportunity to pacify the barbarians in Puting and Guangnan and open up the grain route in Tianzhou.

古文：二十年平浪穹蛮，奉诏自永宁至大理，六十里设一堡，留军屯田。
现代文：二十年，平定浪穹蛮族，并奉诏自永宁至大理，每六十里设一堡垒，留下军队屯田。
English: For twenty years, he subdued the barbarians of Langyuan, and ordered a fortress to be set up every sixty miles from Yongning to Dali, leaving troops to occupy the land.

古文：明年，百夷思伦发叛，诱群蛮入寇摩沙勒寨，遣都督甯正击破之。
现代文：第二年，百夷思伦发反叛，诱使群蛮入侵摩沙勒寨，沐英派遣都督宁正率军将其击败。
English: In the second year, Bei Yis Lun rebelled and induced a group of barbarians to invade Moshalezhai, and Mu Ying dispatched the army led by the governor Ning Zheng to defeat them.

古文：二十二年，思伦发复寇定边，众号三十万。
现代文：二十二年，思伦发再次侵犯定边，军队号称三十万。
English: Twenty-two years later, Xilongfa again invaded Dingbian, with an army of 300,000 troops.

古文：英选骑三万驰救，置火炮劲弩为三行。
现代文：沐英挑选骑兵三万奔往援救，设置三行火炮劲弩。
English: Mu Ying selected thirty thousand cavalrymen to rush to the rescue and set up three lines of artillery.

古文：蛮驱百象，被甲荷栏楯，左右挟大竹为筒，筒置标枪，锐甚。
现代文：蛮军驱赶百象，身披甲衣，肩扛栏盾，左右挟着大竹筒，筒中装设标枪，锐气十足。
English: The barbarian army chased away hundreds of elephants, wearing armor, shoulder boards and shields, with a large bamboo tube between their right and left hands, with a javelin in the tube, and full of spirit.

古文：英分军为三，都督冯诚将前军，甯正将左，都指挥同知汤昭将右。
现代文：沐英将军队分成三路，都督冯诚率领前军，宁正率领左军，都指挥同知汤昭率领右军。
English: Mu Ying divided the army into three parts, with the governor Feng Cheng leading the front army, Ning Zheng leading the left army, and Tong Zhao leading the right army.

古文：将战，令曰： 今日之事，有进无退。 
现代文：即将开战，沐英下令道： 今日之战，有进无退。 
English: About to go to war, Mu Ying ordered: Today's battle, there is no retreat.

古文：因乘风大呼，炮弩并发，象皆反走。
现代文：于是乘风大呼，炮弩齐发，象都掉头而跑。
English: As a result, the wind howled loudly, the cannons were fired in unison, and the elephants all turned around and ran.

古文：昔剌亦者，寇枭将也，殊死斗，左军小却。
现代文：昔剌亦是蛮寇枭将，他殊死而战，左军稍有退却。
English: In the past, he was also a savage bandit commander. He fought to the death, and the left army retreated slightly.

古文：英登高望之，取佩刀，命左右斩帅首来。
现代文：沐英登高望见此情形，抽出佩刀，命令左右将左帅首级砍来。
English: Mu Ying Deng Gao Wang saw this situation, took out his saber, and ordered the left and right sides to cut off the left wing commander's head.

古文：左帅见一人握刀驰下，恐，奋呼突阵。
现代文：左帅见一人握刀奔下，心中恐惧，奋力大呼而突入阵中。
English: Zuoshuai saw a man holding a knife and ran down, fear in his heart, shouted with all his might and rushed into the battle.

古文：大军乘之，斩馘四万余人，生获三十七象，余象尽殪。
现代文：大军乘机冲杀，斩首四万余人，生获三十七头象，其余的象全被射死。
English: The large army took advantage of the opportunity to kill and behead more than 40,000 people. Thirty-seven elephants were born, and the remaining elephants were all shot to death.

古文：贼渠帅各被百余矢，伏象背以死。
现代文：蛮贼将帅各遭百余箭，伏在象背死去。
English: Each of the bandits shot Shuai with more than a hundred arrows, and he died on the elephant's back.

古文：思伦发遁去，诸蛮震惧，麓川始不复梗。
现代文：思伦发逃走，诸蛮深受震慑，麓川从此不再被阻塞。
English: Siren started to run away, Zhuan was deeply shocked, and the foot of the river was no longer blocked.

古文：已，会颖国公傅友德讨平东川蛮，又平越州酋阿资及广西阿赤部。
现代文：不久，沐英会合颍国公傅友德讨平东川蛮，又平息越州酋长阿资及广西阿赤部。
English: Soon after, Mu Ying met with Gu Gu Fu Youde to quell the Dongchuan Rebellion and subdue the Yuezhou chieftain Azhi and the Guangxi chieftain Akabe.

古文：是年冬，入朝，赐宴奉天殿，赉黄金二百两、白金五千两、钞五百锭、彩币百疋，遣还。
现代文：这年冬天，沐英入朝觐见，太祖在奉天殿赐宴招待，赏赐黄金二百两、白金五千两、钞五百锭、彩帛百匹，然后派其返回。
English: This winter, when Mu Ying entered the imperial court, Taizu gave a banquet and invited him to the heavenly palace. He rewarded him with 200 taels of gold, 5000 taels of platinum, 500 taels of banknotes, and 100 colored horseshoes, and then sent him back.

古文：陛辞，帝亲拊之曰： 使我高枕无南顾忧者，汝英也。 
现代文：辞行之时，太祖亲切地抚摸着沐英说道： 使我对南方能高枕无忧的人，是你沐英啊。 
English: At the time of his departure, the great-grandfather fondled Mu Ying and said: You, Mu Ying, are the one who makes me feel secure in the south.

古文：还镇，再败百夷于景东。思伦发乞降，贡方物。
现代文：沐英返回滇中后，在景东再败百夷。思伦发乞降，进贡土产。
English: After Mu Ying returned to Handan Middle School, he defeated Baiyi again in Jingdong. Xilun sent a begging letter, and the tribute of local products began.

古文：阿资又叛，击降之。
现代文：阿资又反叛，沐英率军将其击败。
English: Azhi rebelled again, and Mu Ying led an army to defeat it.

古文：南中悉定。
现代文：南中全部平定。
English: All of South Middle School has been pacified.

古文：使使以兵威谕降诸番，番部有重译入贡者。
现代文：又派遣使者以兵威谕降诸番，番部有通过翻译辗转前来进贡者。
English: They also sent an envoy with a military order to the guards, and some guards came to pay tribute through an interpreter.

古文：二十五年六月，闻皇太子薨，哭极哀。
现代文：二十五年六月，沐英获悉皇太子去世，哭得十分伤心。
English: In June 2005, Mu Ying learned that the crown prince had passed away, and she cried with great sadness.

古文：初，高皇后崩，英哭至呕血。
现代文：当初，高皇后去世，沐英哭得吐血。
English: At first, when Empress Gao died, Mu Ying cried until she vomited blood.

古文：至是感疾，卒于镇，年四十八。
现代文：到了现在身染疾病，死于滇中，终年四十八岁。
English: Until now, he contracted the disease and died in infancy at the age of forty-eight.

古文：军民巷哭，远夷皆为流涕。
现代文：军民在里巷间相聚号哭，远处夷族也都为之流涕。
English: Soldiers and civilians gathered in the streets and alleys to cry, and the distant barbarians also shed tears.

古文：归葬京师，追封黔宁王，谥昭靖，侑享太庙。
现代文：沐英归葬京城，追封为黔宁王，谥号昭靖，配享太庙。
English: Mu Ying was buried in Beijing, posthumously crowned as the King of Huning, given the posthumous name of Zhao Jing, and given the title of Grand Priest.

古文：英沉毅寡言笑，好贤礼士，抚卒伍有恩，未尝妄杀。
现代文：沐英深稳刚毅，寡言少笑，喜欢礼贤下士，安抚部卒，恩惠有加，从不妄杀无辜。
English: Mu Ying is deeply stable and strong-willed. He rarely speaks or laughs. He likes to reward virtuous corporals and pacify subordinates. He is generous and never kills innocents.

古文：在滇，百务具举，简守令，课农桑，岁较屯田增损以为赏罚，垦田至百万余亩。
现代文：沐英在滇之时，百事并举，选拔地方官，督促农桑，每年以屯田增减进行赏罚，因而垦田达到百万余亩。
English: At the time of Mu Ying's death, Pepsi was held concurrently, local officials were selected, and farmers were urged to reward and punish each year with the increase and decrease of farmland. As a result, farmland reached more than one million mu.

古文：滇池隘，浚而广之，无复水患。
现代文：滇池狭小，沐英下令将其疏通拓广，使它不再造成水灾。
English: Dianchi Lake is narrow, and Mu Ying ordered that it be dredged and widened so that it would no longer cause flooding.

古文：通盐井之利以来商旅，辨方物以定贡税，视民数以均力役。
现代文：又以盐井之利招来商队，辨别土产以确定贡税，视百姓人数多寡以均摊劳役。
English: They also recruited caravans at the expense of salt mines to identify local produce to determine tribute, and distributed labor equally according to the number of people.

古文：疏节阔目，民以便安。
现代文：凡事井井有条，治理有方，百姓得以安居乐业。
English: Everything is in good order, the governance is good, and the people can live and work in peace.

古文：居常读书不释卷，暇则延诸儒生讲说经史。
现代文：沐英在家经常读书，手不释卷，闲暇之时则邀请诸儒生讲解经史。
English: Mu Ying often read books at home, never letting go of the volumes. In her spare time, she would invite Confucian scholars to give lectures on the history of scripture.

古文：太祖初起时，数养他姓为子，攻下郡邑，辄遣之出守，多至二十余人，惟英在西南勋最大。
现代文：太祖起兵之初，将许多他姓小孩收为养子，攻下郡邑，总是派他们前去驻守，多达二十余人，惟独沐英在西南功勋最大。
English: At the beginning of the war, the great-grandfather adopted many children with his surname, conquered counties and towns, and always sent them to garrison, up to more than twenty people, but Mu Ying was the most meritorious in the southwest.

古文：子春、晟、昂皆镇云南。
现代文：其子沐春、沐晟、沐昂都镇守云南。
English: His sons Muxun, Muxun, and Muxong are all in charge of Yunnan.

古文：昕驸马都尉，尚成祖女常宁公主。
现代文：沐昕为驸马都尉，娶成祖之女常宁公主为妻。
English: Mu Xun was a lieutenant of the Horse Guards and married the daughter of the founder, Princess Changning.

