古文：耶律庶成杨皙耶律韩留杨佶耶律和尚
现代文：耶律庶成，字喜隐，乳名陈六，季父房之后。
English: Her maiden name was Ye Lu, her married name was Xi Ying, her maiden name was Chen Li, and she was named after her father's house.

古文：耶律庶成，字喜隐，小字陈六，季父房之后。父吴九，检校太师。
现代文：父吴九，检校太师。
English: His father, Wu Jiu, was a school inspector.

古文：庶成幼好学，书过目不忘。
现代文：庶成幼时好学，读书过目不忘。
English: Shosei was eager to learn when he was young, and he never forgets what he has read.

古文：善辽、汉文字，于诗尤工。
现代文：善用辽、汉两种文字，诗尤其做得精妙。
English: He makes good use of both Liao and Chinese characters, and his poems are especially well done.

古文：重熙初，补牌印郎君，累迁枢密直学士。
现代文：重熙初，补为牌印郎君，累迁枢密直学士。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he became a card-carrying member of the imperial family, and graduated from the Imperial Academy of Sciences.

古文：与萧韩家奴各进《四时逸乐赋》，帝嗟赏。
现代文：与萧韩家奴各自呈进《四时逸乐赋》，兴宗皇上叹赏。
English: He and Xiao Han Jia Nu each presented a performance of "Four-Hour Music," which was highly appreciated by Emperor Xingzong.

古文：初，契丹医人鲜知切脉审药，上命庶成译方脉书行之，自是人皆通习，虽诸部族亦知医事。
现代文：起初，契丹医人很少知道如何切脉辨药，皇上命庶成译出方脉书籍传布之，此后人人都普遍地研习，即使是各部族也知道医疗之事。
English: At first, Khitan doctors rarely knew how to cut the veins to distinguish the medicine. The emperor ordered to translate the books and spread them. Since then, everyone has been studying widely. Even the tribes know about medical treatment.

古文：时入禁中，参决疑议。
现代文：庶成时常进入禁宫中，参与决断疑难议案。
English: Shosei often entered the Forbidden Palace to participate in deciding difficult motions.

古文：偕林牙萧韩家奴等撰《实录》及《礼书》。
现代文：偕同林牙萧韩家奴等人撰写实录及《礼书》。
English: Together with Lin Ya Xiao, Han Jia Rong and others, he wrote a true story and "The Book of Rites."

古文：与枢密副使萧德修定法令，上诏庶成曰： 方今法令轻重不伦。
现代文：与枢密副使萧德修定法令，皇上下诏给庶成说 ：现在法令之轻与重不相当。
English: With the Privy Vice-Minister Xiao De revising the decree, the emperor issued an edict to Shicheng saying: "Nowadays, the lightness of the decree is not equivalent to its weight."

古文：法令者，为政所先，人命所系，不可不慎。
现代文：法令乃是理政之先，与人性命攸关，不可不慎。
English: Laws and ordinances precede the administration of justice. They are vital to human life and should not be disregarded.

古文：卿其审度轻重，从宜修定。 
现代文：你要估量好轻重，觉得怎么合宜就怎么加以修定。 
English: You have to weigh the pros and cons and modify it as you see fit.

古文：庶成参酌古今，刊正讹谬，成书以进。
现代文：庶成参照古今成法，订正删除错误的部分，写成文本呈进。
English: Referring to the ancient and modern law of composition, the erroneous part was revised and deleted, and a written text was presented.

古文：帝览而善之。
现代文：皇上看了之后称善。
English: The emperor praised the performance after watching it.

古文：庶成方进用，为妻胡笃所诬，以罪夺官，绌为 庶耶律 。
现代文：庶成正要被选拔任用之时，被妻子胡笃所诬陷，因为有罪褫夺了官职，贬退为 庶耶律 。
English: At the time when he was about to be selected and appointed, he was framed by his wife, Hu Du, because he was guilty of usurping an official post, and was relegated to the status of a commoner.

古文：使吐蕃凡十二年，清宁间始归。
现代文：出使吐蕃计十二年，清宁年间才得以回国。
English: He was sent to Tibet for 12 years, and was only able to return to China during the Qing Dynasty.

古文：帝知其诬，诏复本族，仍迁所夺官，卒。
现代文：皇上得知前事乃是诬陷，诏令回归本族，又迁任原来所夺之官，不久去世。
English: When the emperor learned that the previous incident was a frame-up, he issued a decree to return to his own people, and was transferred to the post he had originally seized. He died soon after.

古文：庶成尝为林牙，梦善卜者胡吕古卜曰： 官止林牙，因妻得罪。 
现代文：庶成曾任林牙，梦见善于卜卦者胡吕古占卜称： 为官止于林牙，因妻得罪。 
English: Shosei was once a ringer for Lin Ya, and had a dream that Hu Lugu, who was good at divination, said in his divination: "I stopped being an official in Lin Ya, because of my wife.

古文：及置于理，法当离婚。
现代文：等到被送到刑狱官处，依法应当离婚。
English: If they wait until they are taken to a prison official's office, they should get a divorce according to the law.

古文：胡笃适有娠，至期不产而死。
现代文：胡笃正好身怀有孕，到产期难产而死。
English: Hu Duc was pregnant at the time and died in childbirth.

古文：剖视之，其子以手抱心，识者谓诬夫之报。
现代文：剖腹视之，孩子以手抱心，有见识者认为这乃是她诬陷丈夫之报应。
English: According to the autopsy report, the child clutched her heart with her hand. Some experts believe that this was her retaliation for framing her husband.

古文：有诗文行于世。
现代文：庶成有诗文流传于世。
English: Shosei's poems have been passed down to the world.

古文：弟庶箴。
现代文：弟庶箴。
English: My younger brother-in-law.

古文：庶箴，字陈甫，善属文。
现代文：耶律庶箴，字陈甫，擅长做文。
English: Ye Ruizhu Zhen, the character Chen Fu, is good at writing.

古文：重熙中，为本族将军。
现代文：重熙年间，任本族将军。
English: During the reign of Chongxi, he was appointed as a general of his own tribe.

古文：咸雍元年，同知东京留守事，俄徙乌衍突厥部节度使。
现代文：咸雍元年，同知东京留守事，不久迁为乌衍突厥部节度使。
English: In the first year of the Heian and Joseon dynasties, Tongzhi stayed in Tokyo, and soon moved to become the chief of the Uyun Turkic Department.

古文：九年，知蓟州事。
现代文：九年，知蓟州事。
English: Nine years later, the Chiba Prefecture incident occurred.

古文：明年，迁都林牙。
现代文：次年，迁为都林牙。
English: The following year, it was moved to Turin.

古文：上表乞广本国姓氏曰： 我朝创业以来，法制修明；惟姓氏止分为二，耶律与萧而已。
现代文：上表请求扩充本国姓氏，说： 我朝自从创业以来，法制整饬昭明；只有姓氏只分为两种，耶律与萧而已。
English: The above table requests the expansion of the surname of the country, saying: Since I started my business, the legal system has been clear; only the surname is divided into only two types, Ye Lu and Xiao.

古文：始太祖制契丹大字，取诸部乡里之名，续作一篇，著于卷末。
现代文：起先太祖创制契丹大字，取用诸部乡里之名，续作一篇，放在卷末。
English: At first, the great-great-grandfather created the word "Qidan" and used the names of various townships to create a sequel, which is placed at the end of the volume.

古文：臣请推广之，使诸部各立姓氏，庶男女婚媾有合典礼。 
现代文：我请求能将这些名称推衍扩大，使得各部能够各立姓氏，使得男女婚配合乎礼法。 
English: I request that these names be expanded, so that all ministries can have their own surnames, and so that marriage between men and women conforms to etiquette.

古文：帝以旧制不可遽厘，不听。
现代文：道宗皇上认为旧制不可于骤然之间就加以更改，未采纳他的建议。
English: Emperor Daozong thought that the old system could not be changed suddenly, and did not accept his suggestion.

古文：大康二年，出耶律乙辛为中京留守，庶箴与耶律孟简表贺。
现代文：大康二年，出贬耶律乙辛为中京留守，庶箴与耶律孟简上表庆贺。
English: In the second year of the Taikang era, Yelu Yixin was banished to stay behind in Beijing, and Shoshen and Yelu Mengjian went to the table to celebrate.

古文：顷之，乙辛复为枢密使，专权恣虐。
现代文：不久，乙辛又担任枢密使，专擅政权，恣意横行。
English: Not long after, Yixin also served as a privy envoy, monopolizing power and acting arbitrarily.

古文：庶箴私见乙辛泣曰： 前抗表，非庶箴之愿也。 
现代文：庶箴私下见到乙辛哭着说 ：前次上表，并非出自庶箴的本心。 
English: Shosetsu saw Atsuhito crying in private and said, "The previous performance did not come from Shosetsu's heart.

古文：乙辛信其言，乃得自安。
现代文：乙辛相信了他的话，庶箴这才安心。
English: Etsuko believed his words, and that's reassuring.

古文：闻者鄙之。
现代文：知道此事的人都很鄙视他。
English: He was despised by all who knew him.

古文：八年，致仕，卒。
现代文：八年，辞官，不久去世。
English: Eight years as a magistrate, he died soon after.

古文：子蒲鲁。
现代文：子蒲鲁。
English: Zi Pulu.

古文：蒲鲁，字乃展。
现代文：耶律蒲鲁，字乃展。
English: Yerudopulu, the character is the exhibition.

古文：幼聪悟好学，甫七岁，能诵契丹大字。
现代文：幼时聪慧过人，好读书，年方七岁，便能记诵契丹大字。
English: At a young age, he was extremely intelligent and good at reading. At the age of seven, he was able to memorize the Khitan characters.

古文：习汉文，未十年，博通经籍。
现代文：学习汉文，不到十年，博通经书典籍。
English: It takes less than ten years to learn Chinese and become well-versed in the classics.

古文：重熙中，举进士第。
现代文：重熙年间，举进士第。
English: He was promoted to the first rank of scholar during the reign of Emperor Chongxi.

古文：主文以国制无契丹试进士之条，闻于上，以庶箴擅令子就科目，鞭之二百。
现代文：主考官因为国制没有契丹人参加进士考试的条文，上奏于皇上，因为庶箴擅自让儿子参加科举考试，鞭打二百。
English: The chief examiner reported to the emperor that because of the country's system, there was no provision for Khitan people to participate in the entrance examination, and because the chief examiner allowed his son to participate in the imperial examination without permission, he was whipped 200 times.

古文：寻命莆鲁为牌印郎君。
现代文：不久让蒲鲁担任牌印郎君。
English: Soon after, he made Prawu a card-carrying member of his family.

古文：应诏赋诗，立成以进。
现代文：应诏赋诗，当下写成呈进。
English: In response to the edict, a poem was written and submitted.

古文：咸雍初，徙封齐，召赐同德功臣、尚书左仆射，兼中书令，拜枢密使，改封晋，给宰相、枢密使两厅傔从，封赵王。
现代文：兴宗赞赏，回头对左右说： 文才如此优秀，必定不能习武事。 蒲鲁奏称： 臣自幼承蒙家教，同时也熟悉骑射，在同辈人中也可用来应酬应酬。 皇上不信。适逢随从田猎，三箭射中三只兔子，皇上惊奇，转任他为通进。
English: Emperor Xingzong appreciated this and turned to the left and right and said, "Such an excellent man of letters, he must not be able to practice martial arts." Prauso said, "Since I was a child, I have been taught at home, and I am also familiar with riding and shooting, which can also be used for entertainment among my contemporaries. Emperor Xingzong did not believe me. When I was out hunting, I shot three rabbits with three arrows. Emperor Xingzong was surprised and transferred me to Tongjin.

古文：屡请归政，益赐保节功臣，致仕。
现代文：这时节，父亲庶箴曾寄给他《戒谕诗》，蒲鲁以赋酬答，众人称赞他写得高雅不俗。
English: At this time of the year, his father's son-in-law had sent him the "Chastisement Poem," to which Plu replied with a reward, and people praised him for writing it so elegantly.

古文：大康五年，例改辽西郡王，薨。耶律韩留，字速宁，仲父隋国王之后。
现代文：宠爱恩遇日益隆盛。清宁初去世。耶律韩留，字速宁，仲父隋国王之后。
English: Favors and favors became more and more prosperous. Ching Ning died at the beginning of the year. Jeru Han Liu, also known as Suining, succeeded his stepfather, the King of Sui.

古文：有明识，笃行义，举止严重，工为诗。
现代文：富于明睿的识见，坚持躬行仁义，行为举止严肃稳重，擅长做诗。
English: Rich in wisdom and insight, adhering to the practice of benevolence and righteousness, serious and steady behavior, and good at making poetry.

古文：统和间，召摄御院通进。
现代文：统和年间，被征召暂摄御院通进。
English: During the Unification Era, he was called up for temporary duty at the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：开泰三年，稍迁乌古敌烈部都监，俄知详稳事。
现代文：开泰三年，渐升为乌古敌烈部都监，不久知详稳事。
English: After three years in Keitai, he gradually rose to become the inspector of the ancient enemy's stronghold, and soon became well known.

古文：敌烈部叛，将宫分军，从枢密使耶律世良讨平之，加千牛卫大将军。
现代文：敌烈部反叛，韩留率宫分军，随从枢密使耶律世良讨伐平定之，升为千牛卫大将军。
English: Han Rui led a detachment of troops from the imperial court to quell a rebellion by the enemy's elite troops, and was promoted to the rank of General Qian Niu Wei.

古文：重熙元年，累迁至同知上京留守，改奚六部秃里太尉。
现代文：重熙元年，累迁至同知上京留守，改任奚六部秃里太尉。
English: In the first year of the Heisei era, he moved to stay with an acquaintance in Kyoto, and was reassigned to the 6th Division of the Edo Shogunate.

古文：性不苟合，为枢密使萧解里所忌。
现代文：生性不好迎合人，为枢密使萧解里所妒忌。
English: His nature is not good at pandering to people, and he is envied by the Privy Council.

古文：上欲召用韩留，解里言目病不能视，议前寝。
现代文：兴宗皇上想征召任用韩留，解里说他生了眼病不能视物，议案便作罢。
English: Emperor Heungjong wanted to conscript Han Ryoo, but it turned out that he had an eye disease and couldn't see, so the motion was dropped.

古文：四年，召为北面林牙。
现代文：四年，征召为北面林牙。
English: Four years later, he was called up to play for Hokumen no Ringa.

古文：帝曰： 朕早欲用卿，闻有疾，故待之至今。 
现代文：皇上说 ：朕早就想起用你，听说你有病，所以一直等到今天。 
English: The emperor said, "I have been thinking of employing you for a long time. I heard that you were ill, so I waited until today.

古文：韩留对曰： 臣昔有目疾，才数月耳；然料不至于昏。
现代文：韩留回答说： 我从前是有眼疾，不过几个月罢了；然而也不至于看不见。
English: Han Liu replied, "I used to have an eye disease, but only for a few months; however, it did not cause me to lose my sight.

古文：第臣驽拙，不能事权贵，是以不获早睹天颜。
现代文：只不过臣过于笨拙，不能够事奉权贵，所以没有能够早点与皇上见面。
English: However, the vassal was too clumsy to be able to serve the powerful, so he was not able to meet the emperor earlier.

古文：非陛下圣察，则愚臣岂有今日耶！ 
现代文：若非皇上明察，那么臣又哪里会有今日呢？ 
English: If it were not for the Emperor's watchful eye, where would the vassal be today?

古文：诏进《述怀诗》，上嘉叹。
现代文：诏令进呈《述怀诗》，皇上嘉许叹赏。
English: The Emperor's edict was issued to present the "Poem of Contemplation," and the Emperor expressed his appreciation.

古文：方将大用，卒。
现代文：正想重用他，韩留却去世了。
English: They were thinking of reusing him, but Hanryu passed away.

古文：杨佶，字正叔，南京人。
现代文：杨佶，字正叔，南京人。
English: Yang Hui, Zhaozheng Uncle, from Nanjing.

古文：幼颖悟异常，读书自能成句，识者奇之。
现代文：幼年时聪慧过人，读书能自己断句，有见识者认为他是个奇才。
English: When he was a child, he was extremely intelligent. He could read and write his own sentences. People with insight thought he was a prodigy.

古文：弱冠，声名籍甚。
现代文：成年之后，声名远扬。
English: After he became an adult, his fame spread far and wide.

古文：统和二十四年，举进士第一，历校书郎、大理正。
现代文：统和二十四年，举进士第一，历任校书郎、大理正。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of unification, he was the first to be promoted to the position of scholar, followed by successive school scribes and Dali Zheng.

古文：开泰六年，转仪曹郎，典掌书命，加谏议大夫。
现代文：开泰六年，转任仪曹郎，典掌书命，加谏议大夫。
English: After six years of service, he was transferred to the position of Yi Cao Lang, Peng Shao Shu Min, and Gao Rong Zong Daifu.

古文：出知易州，治尚清简，征发期会必信。
现代文：出为易州知州，治理政事崇尚清廉简约，对于征发的指定期限从来信守不误。
English: Issued as Yizhou Zhizhou, the governance of government affairs advocates cleanliness and simplicity, and has always adhered to the designated deadline for requisition.

古文：入为大理少卿。
现代文：入京任为大理少卿。
English: Entered the capital and was appointed as Dali Shokei.

古文：累迁翰林学士，文章号得体。
现代文：累迁至翰林学士，文章号称无愧翰林身份。
English: Gradually moved to Hanlin College, the article is well-deserved Hanlin status.

古文：八年，燕地饥疫，民多流殍，以佶同知南京留守事，发仓廪，振乏绝，贫民鬻子者计佣而出之。
现代文：八年，燕地闹饥荒和瘟疫，百姓中很多人沦为流亡他乡的饥民。以杨佶同知南京留守事，打开粮仓，赈济缺粮或断粮之人，贫民卖了子女的计算其受雇做工的报酬赎出之。
English: In the eighth year, famine and pestilence raged in Yan, and many of the people were reduced to starving people exiled from their hometowns. The poor sold their children to pay for the wages of their hired labor, with Yang Xing Tongzhi remaining in Nanjing to open grain silos and help those who were short of grain or had no grain.

古文：宋遣梅询贺千龄节，诏佶迎送，多唱酬，询每见称赏。
现代文：宋派遣梅询来贺千龄节，诏令杨佶迎送，多有唱和之作，每每受到梅询的赞赏。
English: Song dispatched Mei Xun to congratulate the Millennium Festival, and ordered Yang Jie to welcome him. There were many songs and compositions, which were highly appreciated by Mei Xun.

古文：复为翰林学士。
现代文：又为翰林学士。
English: He is also a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：重熙元年，升翰林学士承旨。
现代文：重熙元年，升为翰林学士承旨。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, he was promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：丁母忧，起复工部尚书。
现代文：因遭逢母丧离职，又起复为工部尚书。
English: He resigned due to his mother's death, but was reinstated as a member of the Ministry of Works.

古文：历忠顺军节度使，朔武等州观察处置使，天德军节度使，加特进检校太师、同中书门下平章事，复拜参知政事，兼知南院枢密使。
现代文：历任忠顺军节度使，朔、武等州观察、处置使，天德军节度使，加特进检校太师、同中书门下平章事，又拜为参知政事，兼掌南院枢密使。
English: He served as the envoy of the festival of the Zhongshun Army, the envoy of the observation and disposition of the states such as Shuo and Wuzhu, the envoy of the festival of the Heavenly German Army, the envoy of the inspection of the school, the envoy of the book of the same school, the envoy of the political affairs, and the envoy of the Southern Academy.

古文：十五年，出为武定军节度使。
现代文：十五年，出为武定军节度使。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed as the military attaché to the Wuding Army.

古文：境内亢旱，苗稼将槁。
现代文：境内大旱，庄稼都快要枯死了。
English: There is a severe drought in the territory, and the crops are dying.

古文：视事之夕，雨泽沾足。
现代文：任职的当晚，天降霖雨，润泽万物。
English: On the evening of my appointment, the sky rained and everything was moist.

古文：百姓歌曰： 何以苏我？
现代文：百姓做歌说 ：何以让我再生？
English: The people chant: Why should I be reborn?

古文：上天降雨。
现代文：上天降下霖雨。
English: Rain and hail fell from the sky.

古文：谁其抚我？
现代文：谁能够爱抚我们？
English: Who can caress us?

古文：杨公为主。 
现代文：杨公做我们主人的时候。 
English: When Yang Gong was our master.

古文：漯阳水失故道，岁为民害，乃以己俸创长桥，人不病涉。
现代文：礢阳河水改道，每年成为百姓的患害，便以自己的俸禄造起长桥，人们再也不以渡河为苦事了。
English: The water of the Poyang River was rerouted, which became a problem for the people every year, so he used his salary to build a long bridge. People no longer had to cross the river.

古文：及被召，郡民攀辕泣送。
现代文：及至被召，郡中百姓手扶车辕哭着送行。
English: When he was summoned, the people in the county wailed as they escorted him by hand.

古文：上御清凉殿宴劳之，即日除吏部尚书，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：皇上亲临清凉殿设宴慰问他，当日除为吏部尚书，兼任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The Emperor himself came to the Seiryo-den to hold a banquet to console him, and on that day, in addition to being Shosho, he also served as Shosho's chamberlain and Shosho's subordinate Taira no Shoji.

古文：上曰： 卿今日何减吕望之遇文王！ 
现代文：皇上说： 卿今日比之吕望遇文王，有什么逊色的呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Sir, today you have met King Wen, who is better than King Lvang. What is inferior about him?

古文：佶对曰： 吕望比臣遭际有十年之晚。 
现代文：杨佶回答说 ：吕望比臣之遭遇明主晚了十年。 皇上大喜。
English: Yang Xuan replied, "What happened to Lü Wang is ten years later than what happened to Emperor Ming. The Emperor is overjoyed."

古文：上悦。其居相位，以进贤为己任，事总大纲，责成百司，人人乐为之用。
现代文：当其居相位时，以进用贤能为己任，凡事由自己统管大纲，责成百司去做，人人乐于为之任用。
English: When he is in office, he is the best at using his talents to his advantage. He is in charge of the overall plan and assigns tasks to his subordinates. Everyone is happy to be assigned to him.

古文：三请致政，许之，月给钱粟傔隶，四时遣使存问。卒。
现代文：三次请求辞官回乡，许之，每月拨给钱粮、侍从奴仆，四季派使者问候。卒。
English: He asked the dictionary to return to his hometown three times, and it was granted. He allocated money and grain, servants and servants every month, and sent messengers to greet him in all four seasons.

古文：有《登瀛集》行于世。
现代文：有《登瀛集》行于世。
English: There is "Dengyu Collection" in the world.

古文：耶律和尚，字特抹，系出季父房。
现代文：耶律和尚，字特末，世系出于季父房。
English: Yelu Monk, the last character of the word, descended from Ji's paternal line.

古文：善滑稽。
现代文：生性滑稽。
English: It's inherently funny.

古文：重熙初，补祗候郎君。
现代文：重熙初，补为祗候郎君。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he was appointed to the post of Shoko-rokun.

古文：时帝笃于亲亲，凡三父之后，皆序父兄行第，于和尚尤狎爱。
现代文：当时兴宗皇上正沉迷于笃爱亲属之中，凡是三父房之后，都列于父兄之列，对耶律和尚尤其宠爱。
English: At that time, Emperor Xingzong was obsessed with his beloved relatives. After the three fathers, all of them were listed among his brothers and sisters, and he was especially fond of Yeluo Monk.

古文：然每侍宴饮，虽诙谐，未尝有一言之过，由是上益重之。
现代文：然而每次侍奉皇上宴饮，尽管诙谐之语不断，不曾有一句话的过失，因此皇上更加看重他。
English: However, every time he served the emperor at a banquet, despite his constant wit, there was never a word of fault, so the emperor valued him more.

古文：历积庆、永兴宫使，累迁至同知南院宣徽使事、南面林牙。
现代文：历任积庆、永兴宫使，累迁至同知南院宣徽使事、南面林牙。
English: Successive Jieqing and Yongxing palace envoys have been relocated to the South Court of Tongzhi, the South Court of Xuanhu, and the South Court of Linya.

古文：十六年，出为怀化军节度使，俄召为御史大夫。
现代文：十六年，出京任怀化军节度使，不久征召为御史大夫。
English: Sixteen years later, he went to Beijing to serve as an envoy of the Huaihua Army, and was soon called up as a goshi taifu.

古文：二十三年，因大册，加天平军节度使、检校太师，徙中京路按问使，卒。
现代文：二十三年，因逢大册礼，升为天平军节度使、检校太师，改任中京路按问使，不久去世。
English: In 233, due to a large-scale ceremony, he was promoted to the Tianping Army's festival envoy and school inspector, and was reassigned to the Zhongjing Road envoy, and died soon after.

古文：和尚雅有美行，数以财恤亲友，人皆爱重。然嗜酒不事事，以故不获柄用。
现代文：和尚又颇有高尚之德行，多次用财物来存恤亲友。然而嗜酒不治事，因此未能因信任而掌权。
English: The monk was also quite virtuous, and many times used his wealth to save for relatives and friends. However, he was an alcoholic, so he was not able to take power because of his trust.

古文：或以为言，答曰： 吾非不知，顾人生如风灯石火，不饮将何为？ 
现代文：有人提到此事，他回答说 ：我并非不知道，只是人生犹如风中之灯、石迸之火，不饮酒取乐又将去干些什么呢？ 
English: When this was pointed out to him, he replied: "It is not that I do not know, it is just that life is like a lamp in the wind, or a fire in the flint. Without drinking, what would I do for fun?

古文：晚年沈湎尤甚，人称为 酒仙 云。
现代文：晚年尤其沉溺于酒中，人称 酒仙 。
English: In his later years, he was particularly addicted to alcohol and was known as the "Wine Immortal."

