古文：圣人为政一国，一国可倍也；大之为政天下，天下可倍也。
现代文：圣人在一国施政，一国的财利可以加倍增长。大到施政于天下，天下的财利可以加倍增长。
English: When a sage governs a country, the country's wealth can double. When a sage governs the world, the world's wealth can double.

古文：其倍之，非外取地也，因其国家去其无用之费，足以倍之。
现代文：这种财利的加倍，并不是向外掠夺土地；而是根据国家情况而省去无用之费，因而足以加倍。
English: This doubling of profits is not an outward land grab; it is a saving of unnecessary costs according to national circumstances, and is therefore sufficient to double profits.

古文：圣王为政，其发令、兴事、使民、用财也，无不加用而为者。
现代文：圣王施政，他发布命令、举办事业、使用民力和财物，没有不是有益于实用才去做的。
English: The saintly king administers the government. He issues orders, conducts business, and uses people's power and property. He does nothing that is not beneficial and practical.

古文：是故用财不费，民德不劳，其兴利多矣。
现代文：所以使用财物不浪费，民众能不劳苦，他兴起的利益就多了。
English: Therefore, the use of property is not wasteful, the people are not tired, and the benefits of their rise are more.

古文：其为衣裘何？
现代文：他们制造衣裘是为了什么呢？
English: What are they making clothes for?

古文：以为冬以圉寒，夏以圉暑。
现代文：冬天用以御寒，夏天用以防暑。
English: In winter, it is used to keep out the cold, and in summer, it is used to keep out the heat.

古文：凡为衣裳之道，冬加温、夏加凊者芊，不加者，去之。
现代文：凡是缝制衣服的原则，冬天能增加温暖、夏天能增加凉爽，就增益它；不能增加的，就去掉。
English: According to the principle of sewing clothes, if you can increase the warmth in winter and the coolness in summer, you should increase it; if you can't increase it, you should remove it.

古文：其为宫室何以为？
现代文：他们建造房子是为了什么呢？
English: What did they build the house for?

古文：冬以圉风寒，夏以圉暑雨。
现代文：冬天用以抵御风寒，夏天用以防御炎热和下雨。
English: It is used in winter to protect against wind and cold, and in summer to protect against heat and rain.

古文：有盗贼加固者，芊；不加者，去之。
现代文：有盗贼能够增加防守之坚固的，就增益它；不能增加的，就去掉。
English: If a thief can add to the strength of a defense, add to it; if he can't, remove it.

古文：其为甲盾五兵何以为？
现代文：他们制造铠甲、盾牌和戈矛等五种兵器是为了什么呢？
English: Why did they make five kinds of weapons such as armor, shields and spears?

古文：以圉寇乱盗贼，若有寇乱盗贼，有甲盾五兵者胜，无者不胜。
现代文：用以抵御外寇和盗贼。如果有外寇盗贼，拥有铠甲、盾牌和五兵的就胜利，没有的就失败。
English: Used to defend against foreign invaders and thieves. If there are foreign invaders and thieves, those with armor, shields and five soldiers will win, and those without will lose.

古文：是故圣人作为甲盾五兵。
现代文：所以圣人制造铠甲、盾牌和五兵。
English: So the sage made armor, shields, and five soldiers.

古文：凡为甲届五兵，加轻以利，坚而难折者，芊；不加者，去之。
现代文：凡是制造铠甲、盾牌和五兵，能增加轻便锋利、坚而难折的，就增益它；不能增加的，就去掉。
English: If any man make coats of mail, or shields, or bucklers, and shall add to them, and make them light, and sharp, and durable, and hard to be broken; he shall add to them, and take away from them, that which he could not add.

古文：其为舟车何以为？
现代文：他们制造车、船是为了什么呢？
English: What are they building cars and boats for?

古文：车以行陵陆，舟以行川谷，以通四方之利。
现代文：车用来行陆地，船用来行水道，以此沟通四方的利益。
English: The car is used to travel on land, the boat is used to travel on water, in order to communicate the interests of the four parties.

古文：凡为舟车之道，加轻以利者，芊；不加者，去之。
现代文：凡是制造车、船的原则，能增加轻快便利的，就增益它；不能增加的，就去掉。
English: According to the principle of making cars and boats, if you can increase the lightness and convenience, you can increase it; if you can't increase it, you can remove it.

古文：凡其为此物也，无不加用而为者。
现代文：凡是他们制造这些东西，无一不是有益于实用才去做的。
English: When they make these things, they do it for practical reasons.

古文：是故用财不费，民德不劳，其兴利多矣。
现代文：所以用财物不浪费，民众不劳乏，他们兴起的利益就多了。
English: Therefore, the use of property is not wasteful, the people are not tired, and the benefits of their rise are more.

古文：有去大人之好聚珠玉、鸟兽、犬马，以益衣裳、宫室、甲盾、五兵、舟车之数，于数倍乎，若则不难。
现代文：又去掉王公大人所爱好搜集的珠玉、鸟兽、狗马，用来增加衣服、房屋、兵器、车船的数量，使之增加一倍，这也是不难的。
English: It would also not be difficult to remove the jewels, birds, beasts, dogs and horses that princes like to collect, and use them to double the number of clothes, houses, weapons, cars and ships.

古文：故孰为难倍？
现代文：什么是难以倍增的呢？
English: What is difficult to multiply?

古文：唯人为难倍；然人有可倍也。
现代文：只有人是难以倍增的。然而人也有可以倍增的办法。
English: Only human beings are difficult to multiply. However, there are ways to multiply human beings.

古文：昔者圣王为法，曰： 丈夫年二十，毋敢不处家，女子年十五，毋敢不事人。 
现代文：古代圣王制订法则，说道： 男子年到二十，不许不成家，女子年到十五，不许不嫁人。 
English: The ancient sage-kings laid down the law, saying: A man may not marry before the age of twenty, and a woman may not marry before the age of fifteen.

古文：此圣王之法也。
现代文：这是圣王的法规。
English: This is the law of the Holy King.

古文：圣王既没，于民次也，其欲蚤处家者，有所二十年处家；其欲晚处家者，有所四十年处家。
现代文：圣王既已去世，听任百姓放纵自己，那些想早点成家的，有时二十岁就成家，那些想迟点成家的，有时四十岁才成家。
English: Since the saintly king has passed away, he has allowed the people to indulge themselves. Those who want to start a family early sometimes start a family at the age of twenty, and those who want to start a family later sometimes start a family at the age of forty.

古文：以其蚤与其晚相践，后圣王之法十年。
现代文：拿早的与晚的相减，与圣王的法则差了十年。
English: Taking the earlier and the later and subtracting them, there is a difference of ten years from the holy king's law.

古文：若纯三年而字，子生可以二三年矣。
现代文：如果婚后都三年生一个孩子，就可多生两、三个孩子了。
English: If you have a child every three years after marriage, you can have two or three more children.

古文：此不惟使民蚤处家，而可以倍与？
现代文：这不是使百姓早成家可使人口倍增吗？
English: Isn't it to make the people grow up early and multiply the population?

古文：且不然已！
现代文：然而不这样做罢了。
English: However, this is not the case.

古文：今天下为政者，其所以寡人之道多。
现代文：现在执政的人，他们使人口减少的缘故很多。
English: The people who are in power now have a lot to answer for in the way they have reduced the population.

古文：其使民劳，其籍敛厚，民财不足，冻饿死者，不可胜数也。
现代文：他们使百姓劳乏，他们收重的税收。百姓因财用不足而冻饿死的，不可胜数。
English: They have exhausted the people, they have collected heavy taxes, and countless people have died of cold and hunger for lack of money.

古文：且大人惟毋兴师，以攻伐邻国，久者终年，速者数月，男女久不相见，此所以寡人之道也。
现代文：而且大人们兴师动众去攻打邻国，时间久的要一年，快的要数月，男女夫妇很久不相见，这就是减少人口的根源。
English: Moreover, it takes a year for a large number of people to mobilize to attack a neighboring country, and a few months for a short time, and men and women do not see each other for a long time, which is the root cause of population reduction.

古文：与居处不安，饮食不时，作疾病死者，有与侵就援橐，攻城野战死者，不可胜数。
现代文：再加上居住不安定，饮食不按时，生病而死的，以及被掳掠俘虏。攻城野战而死的，也不可胜数。
English: In addition to living in precarious conditions, eating and drinking irregularly, dying from illness, and being captured and taken prisoner, the number of those who died in the battle for the city is also incalculable.

古文：此不令为政者所以寡人之道、数术而起与？
现代文：这是不善于治政的人使人口减少的缘故，采取多种手段而造成的吧！
English: This is due to the fact that people who are not good at governing have reduced the population, using a variety of means.

古文：圣人为政特无此，不圣人为政，其所以众人之道，亦数术而起与？故子墨子曰: 去无用之费，圣王之道，天下之大利也。 
现代文：圣人施政绝对没有这种情况，圣人施政，他使人口众多的方法，也是多种手段造成的。所以墨子说： 除去无用的费用，是圣王之道，天下的大利呀。 
English: This is absolutely not the case with the administration of a saint. The administration of a saint, the way in which he increased the population, is also the result of a variety of means. Therefore, Mozi said: Eliminating useless expenses is the way of a holy king, the great benefit of the world.

