古文：黄帝在明堂，雷公请曰：臣授业，传之行教以经论，从容形法，阴阳刺灸，汤药所滋，行治有贤不肖，未必能十全。
现代文：黄帝在明堂里，雷公请教说：我接受了您传给我的医道，再教给我的学生，教的内容是经典所论，从容形法，阴阳刺灸，汤药所滋。然而他们在临症上，因有贤愚之别，所以未必能十全。
English: Huangdi in the Ming Hall, Lei Gong asked for advice and said: I accepted the medical way you passed on to me, and then taught it to my students. The content of the teaching is based on the classics, from the shape method, yin and yang moxibustion, and herbal medicine. However, they may not be perfect in the case of illness, because there is a difference between the wise and the foolish.

古文：若先言悲哀喜怒，燥湿寒暑，阴阳妇女，请问其所以然者，卑贱富贵，人之形体，所从群下，通使临事以适道术，谨闻命矣。
现代文：至于教的方法，是先告诉他们悲哀喜怒，燥湿寒暑，阴阳妇女等方面的问题，再叫他们回答所以然的道理，并向他们讲述贱富贵及人之形体的适从等，使他们通晓这些理论，再通过临症适当地运用，这些在过去我已经听您讲过了。
English: As for the method of teaching, it is to first tell them the problems of sadness, anger, dampness, cold and heat, yin and yang women, etc., and then ask them to answer the reason why, and tell them about the nobility and wealth and the adaptability of the human body, etc., so that they are familiar with these theories, and then apply them appropriately through critical illness, which I have heard you talk about in the past.

古文：请问有毚愚仆漏之问，不在经者，欲闻其状。
现代文：现在我还有一些愚陋的问题，在经典中找不到，想要请您解释一下。
English: Now I still have some stupid questions that I can't find in the classics, so I'd like you to explain.

古文：帝曰：大矣。
现代文：黄帝说：你钻研的问题真是精深博大啊！
English: Huang Di said: The problems you have studied are really profound and extensive!

古文：公请问：哭泣而泪不出者，若出而少涕，其故何也？
现代文：雷公请问说：有哭泣而泪涕皆出，或泪出而很少有鼻涕的，这是什么原因呢？
English: Lei Gong, please say: If there is crying and tears come out, or tears come out and there is little snot, what is the reason for this?

古文：帝曰：在经有也。
现代文：黄帝说：在医经中有记载。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "It is recorded in the Medicine Sutra.

古文：复问：不知水所从生，涕所出也。
现代文：雷公又问：眼泪是怎样产生的？鼻涕是从哪里来的呢？
English: Lei Gong also asked: How are tears produced? Where does snot come from?

古文：帝曰：若问此者，无益于治也，工之所知，道之所生也。
现代文：黄帝说：你问这些问题，对治疗上没有多大帮助，但也是医生应该知道的，因为他是医学中的基本知识。
English: Huang Di said: If you ask these questions, it is not very helpful for treatment, but it is also something a doctor should know, because he is the basic knowledge in medicine.

古文：夫心者，五藏之专精也，目者，其窍也，华色者，其荣也，是以人有德也，则气和于目，有亡，忧知于色。
现代文：心为五脏之专精，两目是它的外窍，光华色泽是它的外荣。所以一个人在心里有得意的事，则神气和悦于两目；假如心有所失意，则表现忧愁之色。
English: The heart is the quintessence of the five viscera, the two eyes are its external outlet, and the brilliance and luster are its external glory. Therefore, if a person has something to be proud of in his heart, he will be dignified and pleased with his two eyes; if he is disappointed in his heart, he will show the color of sorrow.

古文：夫水之精为志，火之精为神，水火相感，神志俱悲，是以目之水生也。
现代文：因此悲哀就会哭泣，泣下的泪水所产生的。水的来源，是体内积聚的水液；积聚的水液，是至阴；所谓至阴，就是肾藏之精。来源于肾精的水液，平时所以不出，是受着精的约制，是神，水火相互交感，神志俱悲，因而泪水就出来了。
English: The source of water is the fluid that accumulates in the body; the fluid that accumulates is yin; the so-called yin is the essence of the kidney. The fluid that originates from the kidney essence, which is why it does not come out in normal times, is the result of fertilization, it is God, water and fire are sympathetic to each other, and both are sad, so the tears come out.

古文：故谚言曰：心悲名曰志悲，志与心精共凑于目也。是以俱悲则神气传于心，精上不传于志，而志独悲，故泣出也。
现代文：所以俗语说：心悲叫做志悲，因为肾志与心精，同时上凑于目，所以心肾俱悲，则神气传于心精，而不传于肾志，肾志独悲，水失去了精的约制，故而泪水就出来了。
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: "Heartfelt sorrow is called aspiration sorrow, because the kidney and the heart essence are at the same time in the eye, so the heart and the kidney are both sad, then the spirit is transmitted to the heart essence, but not to the kidney, the kidney is only sad, the water has lost the regulation of the essence, so the tears come out.

古文：泣涕者，脑也，脑者，阴也，髓者，骨之充也，故脑渗为涕。
现代文：哭泣而涕出的，其故在脑，脑属阴，贿充于骨并且藏于脑，而鼻窍通于脑，所以脑髓渗漏而成涕。
English: Crying and blowing out, it is therefore in the brain, the brain is yin, filled with bone and hidden in the brain, and the nostrils are connected to the brain, so the cerebral plexus leaks and becomes dry.

古文：志者骨之主也，是以水流而涕从之者，其行类也。
现代文：肾志是骨之主，所以泪水出而鼻涕也随之而出，是因为鼻涕泪是同类的关系。
English: The kidneys are the masters of the bones, so the tears come out and the snot also comes out, because the snot tears are the same kind of relationship.

古文：夫涕之与泣者，譬如人之兄弟，急则俱死，生则俱生，其志以神悲，是以涕泣俱出而横行也。
现代文：涕之与泪，譬如兄弟，危急则同死，安乐则共存，肾志先悲而脑髓随之，所以涕随泣出而涕泪横流。
English: Sorrow and tears are like brothers; when there is a crisis, they die together; when there is peace, they coexist; when there is sorrow, the kidneys go first, and the brain follows; when there is sorrow, the kidneys go first, and the brain follows.

古文：夫人涕泣俱出而相从者，所属之类也。
现代文：涕泪所以俱出而相随，是由于涕泪同属水类的缘故。
English: The reason why tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears of tears.

古文：雷公曰：大矣。
现代文：雷公说：你讲的道理真博大！
English: Lei Gong said, "What you are saying is really profound!

古文：请问人哭泣而泪不出者，若出而少，涕不从之何也？
现代文：请问有人哭泣而眼泪不出的，或虽出而量少，且涕不随出的，这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for someone to cry but not shed tears, or to shed only a small amount but not shed tears?

古文：帝曰：夫泣不出者，哭不悲也。
现代文：黄帝说：哭而没有眼泪，是内心上并不悲伤。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "To cry without tears is to not be sad at heart."

古文：不泣者，神不慈也。神不慈则志不悲，阴阳相持，泣安能独来。
现代文：不出眼泪，是心神没有被感动；心神不感动，志亦不悲，心神与肾志相持而不能相互交感，眼泪怎么会出来呢？
English: If there are no tears, it is because the spirit has not been moved; if the spirit is not moved, the aspiration is not sad, and the spirit and the kidney are in sympathy but cannot sympathize with each other, how can tears come out?

古文：夫志悲者惋，惋则冲阴，冲阴则志去目，志去则神不守精，精神去目，涕泣出也。
现代文：大凡志悲就会有凄惨之意。凄惨之意冲动于脑，则肾志去目凄；肾志去目，则神不守精；精和神都离开了眼睛，眼泪和鼻涕才能出来。
English: If one's great ambition is to be pitiful, one will have a sense of desolation. If a sense of desolation is stimulated in the brain, then the kidneys will be despondent; if the kidneys are despondent, then the spirit will not be maintained; the spirit and the god have left the eyes, and only tears and snot can come out.

古文：且子独不诵不念夫经言乎，厥则目无所见。
现代文：你难道没有读过或没有想到医经上所说的话吗？厥则眼睛一无所见。
English: Haven't you read or thought about what the medical texts say?

古文：夫人厥则阳气并于上，阴气并于下。阳并于上，则火独光也；阴并于下则足寒，足寒则胀也。
现代文：当一个人在厥的时候，阳气并走于上部，阴气并走于下部，阳并于上，则上部亢热，阴并与下则足冷，足冷则发胀。
English: When a person is sick, the yang and qi go to the upper part, the yin and qi go to the lower part, the yang and qi go to the upper part, the upper part is hot, the yin and qi go to the lower part, the feet are cold, and the feet are swollen.

古文：夫一水不胜五火，故目盲。
现代文：因为一水不胜五火，所以眼目就看不见了。
English: Because one water is not better than five fire, so the eyes can not see.

古文：是以冲风，泣下而不止。夫风之中目也，阳气内守于精，是火气燔目，故见风则泣下也。
现代文：所以迎风就会流泪不止的，因风邪中于目而流泪，是由于阳气内守于精，也就是火气燔目的关系，所以遇到风吹就会流泪了。
English: Therefore, tears will not stop flowing when facing the wind, tears will flow because of the wind in the eyes, and tears will flow when the wind blows because of the relationship between yang and yin, that is, the relationship between fire and gas.

古文：有以比之，夫火疾风生乃能雨，此之类也。
现代文：举一个比喻来说：火热之气炽甚而风生，风生而有雨，与这个情况是相类同的。
English: To use an analogy: a fiery atmosphere is hot and windy, windy and rainy, and the situation is similar.

