古文：子墨子言曰：古者民始生，未有刑政之时，盖其语，人异义。
现代文：墨子说：古时人类刚刚诞生，还没有刑法政治的时候，人们用言语表达的意见，也因人而异。
English: Mozi said: In ancient times, when human beings were just born and there was no criminal law or politics, the opinions expressed by people in words also varied from person to person.

古文：是以一人则一义，二人则二义，十人则十义。
现代文：所以一人就有一种意见，两人就有两种意见，十人就有十种意见。
English: Therefore, one person has one opinion, two people have two opinions, and ten people have ten opinions.

古文：其人兹众，其所谓义者亦兹众。
现代文：人越多，他们不同的意见也就越多。
English: The more people there are, the more they disagree.

古文：是以人是其义，以非人之义，故交相非也。
现代文：每个人都以为自己的意见对而别人的意见错，因而相互攻击。
English: Everyone thinks their opinion is right and everyone else's is wrong, so they attack each other.

古文：是以内者父子兄弟作，离散不能相和合；天下之百姓，皆以水火毒药相亏害。
现代文：所以在家庭内父子兄弟常因意见不同而相互怨恨，使得家人离散而不能和睦相处。
English: Therefore, in the family, father and son brothers often resent each other because of their different opinions, causing the family to be separated and unable to live in harmony.

古文：至有余力，不能以相劳；腐朽余财，不以相分；隐匿良道，不以相教。天下之乱，若禽兽然。
现代文：天下的百姓，都用水火毒药相互残害，以致有余力的人不能帮助别人；有余财者宁愿让它腐烂，也不分给别人；有好的道理也自己隐藏起来，不肯教给别人，以致天下混乱，有如禽兽一般。
English: All the people of the world are destroying each other with fire and poison, so that those who have extra strength cannot help others; those who have extra wealth would rather let it rot than give it to others; those who have good reason hide it themselves and refuse to teach it to others, so that the world is in chaos, just like animals.

古文：夫明乎天下之所以乱者，生于无政长。是故选天下之贤可者，立以为天子。
现代文：明白了天下产生混乱的原因，是没有行政长官，所以就要选择天下的贤良且可任以政务的人来，拥立其为天子。
English: Having understood that the reason for the chaos in the world is that there is no chief executive, it is necessary to choose a virtuous person in the world who can be entrusted with government affairs, and establish him as the son of heaven.

古文：天子立，以其力为未足，又选天下之贤可者，置立之以为三公。
现代文：天子确立了，因为他的力量还不够，又选择天下的贤良且可任以政务的人来，立为三公。
English: The divine son established, because his power was not enough, and selected the world's virtuous people who could be entrusted with government affairs, and established them as the three princes.

古文：天子、三公既以立，以天下为博大，远国异土之民，是非利害之辩，不可一二而明知，故画分万国，立诸侯国君。
现代文：天子和三公都已经确立了,又因为天下广大，远方异国的人民，对于是非利害的区别,不可能一一明白，所以再划分许多国家，设立诸侯与国君。
English: The emperor and the three princes have already been established, and because the world is vast and the people of distant foreign countries cannot understand the difference between right and wrong, it is impossible to divide many countries and establish princes and sovereigns.

古文：诸侯国君既已立，以其力为未足，又选择其国之贤可者，置立之以为正长。
现代文：诸侯、国君确立后，因为他的力量还不够，又选择诸侯国里的贤良且可任以政务的人来，设立为行政长官。
English: After the establishment of lords and sovereigns, because his power was not enough, he also chose the wise and capable people in the lords and sovereigns who could be appointed to political affairs, and established him as the chief executive.

古文：正长既已具，天子发政于天下之百姓，言曰： 闻善而不善，皆以告其上。
现代文：行政长官具备后，天子就向天下百姓发布政令，说：不论听到好的和不好的意见，都要报告给自己的上级。
English: After the chief executive was in place, the emperor issued a decree to the people of the world, saying: Regardless of whether you hear good or bad opinions, you must report to your superiors.

古文：上之所是，必皆是之，所非，必皆非之。
现代文：上级认为对的，大家都一定也要认为对：上级认为不对的，大家也都必须认为不对。
English: What superiors think is right, everyone must also think is right: what superiors think is wrong, everyone must also think is wrong.

古文：上有过则规谏之，下有善则傍荐之。
现代文：上级有过失就要规谏，下面的人有好的言行就要访求并举荐。
English: Supervisors who make mistakes should be disciplined, and those below who have good words and deeds should be visited and recommended.

古文：上同而不下比者，此上之所赏而下之所誉也。
现代文：与上级一致而不在下面结党营私，这是上级所称赏而下面所赞誉的做法。
English: Aligning with superiors, rather than partying with subordinates, is a practice that is appreciated by superiors and praised by subordinates.

古文：意若闻善而不善，不以告其上；上之所是弗能是，上之所非弗能非；上有过弗规谏，下有善弗傍荐；下比不能上同者，此上之所罚而百姓所毁也。 
现代文：假如听到好的和不好的意见，却不报告给上级，上级所认为对的却认为不对，上级所认为错的却认为没错，上级有过失不能规谏，下面的人有好的言行却不能访求举荐，下面结党而不能与上级一致的，这是上级所要责罚，而且百姓也要非议的做法。
English: If you hear good and bad opinions, but do not report them to your superiors; if what your superiors think is right, you think is wrong; if what your superiors think is wrong, you think is right; if your superiors cannot be held accountable for their mistakes; if your subordinates have good words and deeds, but you cannot ask them to recommend you; if your subordinates form a party, but you cannot be in agreement with your superiors; this is a practice that your superiors should punish, and the people should also criticize.

古文：上以此为赏罚，甚明察以审信。
现代文：上级用这个原则来进行赏罚，就能明察秋毫而且符合实际。
English: If superiors use this principle to reward and punish, they will be able to see clearly and in line with reality.

古文：是故里长者，里之仁人也。
现代文：所以，里长是一里内的仁人。
English: Therefore, the village chief is a benevolent person within a mile.

古文：里长发政里之百姓，言曰： 闻善而不善，必以告其乡长。乡长之所是，必皆是之；乡长之所非，必皆非之。去若不善言，学乡长之善言；去若不善行，学乡长之善行。 
现代文：里长向一里的百姓发布政今说：不论听到好的和不好的意见，一定要报告给乡长，乡长认为对的，大家都一定也要认为对：乡长认为不对的，太家也都必须认为不对，去掉你们不正确的言论，学习乡长正确的言论;去掉你们不正确的行为，学习乡长正确的行为。
English: Li Chang issued a political statement to the people in the village: "Whether you hear good or bad opinions, you must report them to the village chief. If the village chief thinks it is right, everyone must also think it is right. If the village chief thinks it is wrong, the parents must also think it is wrong. Eliminate your incorrect speech and learn the correct speech of the village chief; eliminate your incorrect behavior and learn the correct behavior of the village chief."

古文：则乡何说以乱哉。
现代文：那么一个乡还有什么理由混乱呢？
English: So what other reason is there for chaos in a township?

古文：察乡之所治者何也？
现代文：考察一个乡之所以治理得好是什么原因呢？
English: What are the reasons why a township is well governed?

古文：乡长唯能壹同乡之义，是以乡治也。
现代文：唯有乡长能统一全乡人的意愿，所以一乡就得到治理了。 
English: Only the head of the township can unify the will of all the villagers, so one township is governed.

古文：乡长者，乡之仁人也。
现代文：乡长是一乡内的仁人。
English: The head of the township is a benevolent person in the township.

古文：乡长发政乡之百姓，言曰： 闻善而不善者，必以告国君。
现代文：乡长向一乡的百姓发布政令，说：不论听到好的和不好的意见，一定要报告给国君。
English: The head of the township issued a decree to the people of the township, saying: Regardless of whether you hear good or bad opinions, you must report them to the sovereign.

古文：国君之所是，必皆是之；国君之所非，必皆非之。
现代文：国君认为对的，大家都一定也要认为对;国君认为不对的，大家也都必须认为不对。
English: What the sovereign thinks is right, everyone must also think is right; what the sovereign thinks is wrong, everyone must also think is wrong.

古文：去若不善言，学国君之善言；去若不善行，学国君之善行。 
现代文：去掉你们不正确的言论，学习国君正确的言论;去掉你们不正确的行为，学习国君正确的行为。
English: Eliminate your incorrect speech and learn the correct speech of the sovereign; eliminate your incorrect behavior and learn the correct behavior of the sovereign.

古文：则国何说以乱哉？
现代文：那么一个国还有什么理由混乱呢？
English: So what other reason is there for a country to be in chaos?

古文：察国之所以治者何也？
现代文：考察一个国之所以治理得好是什么原因呢？
English: What are the reasons why a country is well governed?

古文：国君唯能壹同国之义，是以国治也。
现代文：唯有国君能统一全国人的意愿，所以一国就得到治理了。
English: Only the sovereign can unify the will of all the people of the country, so one country is governed.

古文：国君者，国之仁人也。
现代文：国君是一国内的仁人。
English: The Emperor is the most benevolent person in the country.

古文：国君发政国之百姓，言曰: 闻善而不善，必以告天子。
现代文：国君向一国的百姓发布政令，说：不论听到好的和不好的意见，一定要报告给天子。
English: The sovereign issues a decree to the people of a country, saying: "Whether you hear good or bad opinions, you must report them to the emperor."

古文：天子之所是，皆是之；天子之所非，皆非之。
现代文：天子认为对的，大家都一定也要认为对；天子认为不对的，大家也都必须认为不对。
English: What Tianzi thinks is right, everyone must also think is right; what Tianzi thinks is wrong, everyone must also think is wrong.

古文：去若不善言，学天子之善言；去若不善行，学天子之善行。 
现代文：去掉你们不正确的言论，学习天子正确的言论：去掉你们不正确的行为，学习天子正确的行为。
English: Eliminate your incorrect speech and learn the correct speech of the Son of Heaven; eliminate your incorrect behavior and learn the correct behavior of the Son of Heaven.

古文：则天下何说以乱哉？
现代文：那么天下还有什么理由混乱呢？
English: So what other reason is there for confusion in the world?

古文：察天下之所以治者何也？
现代文：考察天下之所以治理得好是什么原因呢？
English: What are the reasons for the world's good governance?

古文：天子唯能壹同天下之义，是以天下治也。
现代文：唯有天子能统一全天下人的意愿，所以全天下就得到治理了。
English: Only the Son of Heaven can unify the will of the people of the whole world, so the whole world will be governed.

古文：天下之百姓皆上同于天子，而不上同于天，则灾犹未去也。
现代文：天下的老百姓如果都向上统一于天子，而不向上统一于天的意志，那么灾祸就还没有完全离去。
English: If the common people of the world are upwardly unified with the Son of God, but not upwardly unified with the will of God, then the disaster has not completely gone away.

古文：今若天飘风苦雨，溱溱而至者，此天之所以罚百姓之不上同于天者也。是故子墨子言曰： 古者圣王为五刑，请以治其民。
现代文：现在如果上天让大风与暴雨频频到来，这就是上天对于不向上统一于天的意志的百姓的惩罚。所以墨子说:古代圣王制定了五种刑罚，诚然是用来治理人民的。
English: Now, if Heaven sends frequent gales and torrential rains, this is Heaven's punishment for the people who do not unite their will with Heaven. Therefore, Mozi said, the ancient sages formulated five kinds of punishments, which were indeed used to govern the people.

古文：譬若丝缕之有纪，罔罟之有纲，所以连收天下之百姓，不尚同其上者也。 
现代文：就好像丝线有头绪，渔猎的网有纲，是用来收束那些不向上统一于上级的百姓一样。 
English: It is as if the silk thread has a clue, and the fishing and hunting net has an outline, and is used to entangle those people who do not unite upwards with their superiors.

