古文：公输般为楚设机，将以攻宋。
现代文：公输般为楚国制造攻城云梯，准备用来攻打宋国。
English: It was common practice for the state of Chu to manufacture siege ladders in preparation for attacking Song.

古文：墨子闻之，百舍重茧，往见公输般，谓之曰： 吾自宋闻子。
现代文：墨子听到这件事，步行万里，脚底磨起了厚茧，赶着去见公输般，对他说道： 我在宋国就听说了先生的大名。
English: When Mozi heard about this, he walked for ten thousand miles with thick calluses on the soles of his feet. He hurried to see the emperor and said to him, "I heard about my great-grandfather's name in Song.

古文：吾欲藉子杀王。 
现代文：我想借助您的力量去杀一个人。 
English: I want to use your power to kill someone.

古文：公输般曰： 吾义固不杀王。 
现代文：公输般说： 我是讲道义的，决不杀人。 
English: He said publicly, "I am a moral person and will never kill anyone."

古文：墨子曰： 闻公为云梯，将以攻宋。宋何罪之有?
现代文：墨子说： 听说您在造云梯，用来攻打宋国，宋国有什么罪？
English: Mozi said: I heard that you are building a ladder to attack Song. What is Song guilty of?

古文：义不杀王而攻国，是不杀少而杀众。
现代文：你口口声声说讲道义，不杀人，如今攻打宋国，这分明是不杀少数人而杀多数人呀！
English: You are always talking about morality and not killing people, but now you are attacking Song, which is clearly not killing a few people, but killing the majority!

古文：敢问攻宋何义也? 
现代文：请问你攻打宋国是什么道义呢？ 
English: Excuse me, what is your moral justification for attacking Song?

古文：公输般服焉，请见之王。
现代文：公输般被说服了，墨子请他为自己引见楚王。
English: Publicly defeated, he was convinced, and Mozi asked him to introduce him to King Chu.

古文：墨子见楚王曰： 今有人于此，舍其文轩，邻有弊舆而欲窃之；舍其锦绣，邻有短褐而欲窃之；舍其梁肉，邻有糟糠而欲窃之。此为何若人也? 王曰： 必为有窃疾矣。 
现代文：墨子见到楚王，说道： 假如现在有一个人，放着自己华美的彩车不坐，却想去偷邻居家的一辆破车；放着自己锦绣织成的衣服不穿，却想去偷邻居的粗布短衫；放着自己家里的好饭好菜不吃，却去偷邻居的酒糟和糠皮。这是个什么样的人呢？ 楚王说： 有偷东西癖好的人。 
English: When Mozi saw King Chu, he said, "If there is a person who does not ride in his ornate colorful carriage, but wants to steal a neighbor's broken car; who does not wear his embroidered clothes, but wants to steal his neighbor's coarse cloth shirt; who does not eat the good food in his home, but wants to steal his neighbor's lees and bran. What kind of person is this? King Chu said, "A person with a penchant for stealing things."

古文：墨子曰： 荆之地方五千里，宋方五百里，此犹文轩之与弊舆也。
现代文：墨子接着说： 楚国土地方圆五千里，而宋国才不过五百里，这就如同用华美的彩车和破车相比。
English: Mozi went on to say, "The territory of Chu is five thousand li in circumference, while that of Song is only five hundred li. This is like comparing a beautiful car with a broken car.

古文：荆有云梦，犀兕麋鹿盈之，江、汉鱼鳖鼋鼍，为天下饶，宋所谓无雉兔鲋鱼者也，此犹梁肉之与糟糠也。
现代文：楚国有云梦泽，犀牛和麋鹿充斥其中，长江和汉水的鱼鳖、大鼋和鳄鱼，为天下最多，而宋国却是连野鸡、兔子、鲫鱼都不产的地方，这就如同用精美的饭菜和糟糠相比。
English: Chuzhou is a dreamland, rhinoceros and elk abound in it, the Yangtze River and the Han River have the largest number of fish eels, big eels and crocodiles in the world, while Song Province is a place where even pheasants, rabbits and eels are not produced, which is like comparing exquisite meals with dross.

古文：荆有长松、文梓、楩、柟、豫樟，宋无长木，此犹锦绣之与短褐也。
现代文：楚国有高大的松树，带花纹的梓树，以及树、楠树、豫樟树等名贵树种，而在宋国大树找不到一棵，这就如同用锦绣和粗布短衫相比。
English: In the state of Chu, there are tall pine trees, flowering camphor trees, as well as valuable tree species such as trees, camphor trees, and yakitori trees, but there is not a single large tree in the state of Song, which is like using brocade and coarse cloth shorts.

古文：恶以王吏之攻宋，为与此同类也。 王曰： 善哉！
现代文：因此我认为大王去攻打宋国，与有盗窃癖差不多。 楚王说： 说得好！
English: Therefore, I think that for the great king to attack the Song Dynasty is almost the same as having a theft habit. King Chu said: Well said!

古文：请无攻宋。 
现代文：我不去攻打宋国了。 
English: I'm not going to attack Song.

