古文：张辅，字文弼，河间王玉长子也。
现代文：张辅字文弼，河间王张玉的长子。
English: Zhang Fuxi, the eldest son of King Zhang Yu of Kawama.

古文：燕师起，从父力战，为指挥同知。
现代文：燕王起兵时，他随从父亲力战，任指挥同知。
English: When Yan Wang raised an army, he followed his father to fight and appointed a comrade as commander.

古文：玉殁东昌，辅嗣职。
现代文：张玉在东昌战死，张辅继承父亲职位。
English: Zhang Yu died in battle in Dongchang, and Zhang Fu inherited his father's position.

古文：从战夹河、藁城、彰德、灵璧，皆有功。
现代文：他随从燕王战夹河、藁城、彰德、灵璧，都有功。
English: He followed Yan Wang in the battles of Jianhe, Shicheng, Changde and Lingbi, and made great contributions.

古文：从入京师，封信安伯，禄千石，予世券。
现代文：随从入京师后，被封为信安伯，食禄千石，给予世袭诰券。
English: After he followed his master to Beijing, he was given the title of Shinyanbo, a stipend of 1,000 koku, and a hereditary ticket.

古文：妹为帝妃。
现代文：妹妹是皇妃。
English: Her younger sister is the Empress Dowager.

古文：邱福、朱能言辅父子功俱高，不可以私亲故薄其赏。
现代文：丘福、朱能说张辅父子功勋俱高，不可因为是私亲就薄给赏赐。
English: Qufu and Zhu Neng said that Zhang Fu's father and son were highly decorated, and they should not be rewarded because they were relatives.

古文：永乐三年进封新城侯，加禄三百石。
现代文：永乐三年，他进封为新城侯，加禄米三百石。
English: In the third year of Yongle, he was appointed as the new mayor of the city, with a salary of 300 koku.

古文：是时安南黎季犛弑其主，自称太上皇，立子苍为帝。
现代文：这时安南的黎季嫠杀其国王，自称太上皇，立儿子黎苍为帝。
English: At this time, Annan's son, Li Qiye, assassinated his king, declared himself emperor, and made his son, Li Qiang, emperor.

古文：其故王之孙陈天平自老挝来奔，季犛佯请归国。
现代文：共原国王之孙陈天平从老挝来投奔朝廷，黎季嫠假装请他回国。
English: Chen Tianping, the grandson of the former king, came to the imperial court from Laos, and Lê Thiệu pretended to invite him to return to the country.

古文：帝遣都督黄中以兵五千送之，前大理卿薛为辅。季犛伏兵芹站，杀天平，亦死。
现代文：皇上派都督黄中率五千名士卒送他回去，前大理寺卿薛岩做他的副手，黎季嫠在芹站埋伏兵，杀死陈天平，薛岩也死了。
English: The emperor sent the governor Huang Zhong and five thousand dignitaries to escort him back, the former Dali Temple Lord Xue Yan as his deputy, Li Jizhe ambushed soldiers at the Seri Station and killed Chen Tianping, Xue Yan also died.

古文：帝大怒，命成国公朱能为征夷将军，辅为右副将军，帅丰城侯李彬等十八将军，兵八十万，会左副将军西平侯沐晟，分道进讨。
现代文：皇上大怒，命成国公朱能为征夷将军，张辅为右副将军，率领丰城侯李彬等十八位将军，士兵八十万，会同左副将军西平侯沐晟，分道进讨。
English: The emperor was so angry that he ordered 18 generals and 800,000 soldiers, including 18 generals and 800,000 soldiers, such as Zhu Can, the general of conquering the barbarians, and Zhang Fu, the vice-general of the right, led by Li Bin, the lord of Fengcheng, together with the vice-general of the left, Xi Ping, the lord of Muxi, to go their separate ways.

古文：兵部尚书刘俊赞军事，行部尚书黄福、大理寺卿陈洽给馈饷。
现代文：兵部尚书刘俊赞佐军事，行部尚书黄福、大理寺卿陈洽供应粮饷。
English: Liu Jun Zanzo, secretary of the Military Department, Huang Fu, secretary of the Administration Department, and Chen Cai, secretary of the Dali Temple, supplied grain.

古文：四年十月，能卒于军，辅代领其众。
现代文：四年十月，朱能死于军中，张辅取代他统领部众。
English: In October of the fourth year, Zhu Neng died in the army, and Zhang Fu replaced him to lead the troops.

古文：自凭祥进师，度坡垒关，望祭安南境内山川，檄季犛二十罪。
现代文：从凭祥进军，越过坡垒关，望祭安南境内山川，发檄历数黎季嫠二十条罪状。
English: From marching with banners, crossing ramps and barriers, and praying at shrines and temples in the mountains and rivers in Annan Province, there are more than 20 criminal charges.

古文：进破隘留、鸡陵二关，道芹站，走其伏兵，抵新福。
现代文：进军攻破隘益、鸡陵二关，取道芹站，击走其伏兵，抵达新福。
English: The army marched to break through Jiayu and Qiling Second Pass, took Dojer Station, drove away its ambush, and arrived at Xinfu.

古文：晟军亦自云南至，营于白鹤。
现代文：沐晟的部队也从云南到来，扎营于白鹤。
English: Mu Xi's troops also came from Yunnan and camped in Bai He.

古文：安南有东、西二都，依宣、洮、沲、富良四江为险，贼缘江南北岸立栅，聚舟其中，筑城于多邦隘，城栅桥舰相连九百余里，兵众七百万，欲据险以老辅师。
现代文：安南有东、西两都，依宣、洮、沲、富良四江为险，贼人沿着江南北两岸立栅，把船集中在江中，在多邦隘筑城，城栅桥舰相连九百余里，兵众七百万，想据险固守，疲劳张辅的部队。
English: Annan has two capitals in the east and west, and the four rivers of Xuan, Yao, Shao and Fuliang are dangerous. Thieves set up barricades along the north and south banks of the river, concentrated the ships in the river, and built a city in the multi-national narrow strait. The city gates and bridge ships are connected by more than 900 miles, and the number of soldiers is 7 million. If they want to stick to the danger, Zhang Shuo's troops will be tired.

古文：辅自新福移军三带州，造船图进取。
现代文：张辅从新福移驻三带州，制造船舰，准备攻隘。
English: Zhang Fu moved from Xinfu to Sanzhu, built ships, and prepared to attack the strait.

古文：会帝闻朱能卒，敕拜辅为将军，制词以李文忠代开平王常遇春为比，且言乘冬月瘴疠未兴，宜及时灭贼。
现代文：正好皇上得知朱能去世，敕令任张辅为将军，敕令中以李文忠取代开平王常遇春作比喻，并说趁冬季瘴疠未兴，应及时灭贼。
English: Just as the emperor learned of Zhu Neng's death, the imperial command appointed Zhang Fu as a general. In the imperial command, Li Wenzhong replaced Kaiping Wang, a frequent spring metaphor, and said that taking advantage of the winter lull, it was necessary to eliminate the thieves in time.

古文：十二月，辅军次富良江北，遣骠骑将军朱荣破贼嘉林江，遂与晟合军进攻多邦城。
现代文：十二月张辅推进到富良江北扎营，派骠骑将军朱荣在嘉林江击破贼兵，遂与沐晟合军进攻多邦城。
English: In December, Zhang Fu advanced to the north of the Fuliang River to set up camp. He sent the cavalry general Zhu Rong to break the thief soldiers in the Jialing River, and then attacked the multi-national city with the Mu Yinghe army.

古文：佯欲他攻以懈贼，令都督黄中等将死士，人持炬火铜角，夜四鼓，越重濠，云梯傅其城。
现代文：他装作要进攻他处，以麻痹贼人，令都督黄中等人率敢死士，每人都持火炬和铜角，在夜间四鼓时分，越过重壕，用云梯登城。
English: He pretended to attack elsewhere, in order to paralyze the thieves, and ordered the governor Huang Zhong to lead the daredevils, each holding a torch and a brass horn, at the time of the four drums at night, to cross the heavy trenches and ascend the city with a ladder.

古文：都指挥蔡福先登，士蚁附而上，角鸣，万炬齐举，城下兵鼓噪继进，遂入城。
现代文：都指挥蔡福先登，士卒们也纷纷蚁附而上，然后吹响号角，万炬齐举，城下之兵呐喊而进，遂攻进城中。
English: Cai Fook, the commander of both armies, entered the city first, and the soldiers also followed him, and then blew the trumpet, raised the torches, and the soldiers under the city shouted and marched into the city.

古文：贼驱象迎战。
现代文：贼人驱象迎战。
English: Thieves drive elephants into battle.

古文：辅以画狮蒙马冲之，翼以神机火器。
现代文：张辅用画成的狮子蒙在马上冲击，再补以神机火器。
English: Zhang Fu's drawing of a lion being attacked by a horse is then supplemented with a magical firearm.

古文：象皆反走，贼大溃。
现代文：大象都返身退走，贼人大溃。
English: The elephants all turned and retreated, and the thieves were routed.

古文：斩其帅二人，追至伞圆山，尽焚缘江木栅，俘斩无算。
现代文：官军斩其两名首领，追到伴圆山，全部焚烧了其沿江木栅，俘虏和斩杀无数。
English: The government army beheaded two of their leaders, chased them to Ban Yuan Mountain, burned all their wooden palisades along the river, and took countless prisoners and beheaded them.

古文：进克东都，辑吏民，抚降附，来归者日以万计。
现代文：官军进而攻克东都，安抚官民和归附者，来归顺的人每天以万计。
English: The government army went on to conquer the eastern capital, pacify the officials and people and those who had surrendered, with tens of thousands of people coming to surrender every day.

古文：遣别将李彬、陈旭取西都，又分军破贼援兵。
现代文：张辅派别将李彬、陈旭攻取西都，又分兵击破贼人的援军。
English: Zhang Yu dispatched Li Bin and Chen Xu to capture the western capital, and another detachment of soldiers defeated the thief's reinforcements.

古文：季犛焚宫室仓库逃入海，三江州县皆望风降。
现代文：黎季嫠焚烧宫室仓库后逃到海上，三江州县都望风而降。
English: After Li Jizhe burned the storehouse in the palace, he fled to the sea, and all the counties in Sanjiang County followed the wind.

古文：明年春，辅遣清远伯王友等济自注江，悉破筹江、困枚、万劫、普赖诸寨，斩首三万七千余级。
现代文：第二年春，张辅派清远伯王友等人渡过注江，攻破筹江、困枚、万劫、普赖等寨，斩首三万七千余级。
English: In the spring of the second year, Zhang Fu sent Qingyuan Bo Wangyou and others to cross the Jiu River, break through the villages of Choe River, Suimei, Wanhu, and Pray, and behead more than 37,000 people.

古文：贼将胡杜聚舟盘滩江。辅使降将陈封袭走之，尽得其舟。
现代文：贼将胡杜聚船在盘滩江上，张辅派降将陈封袭击赶走了他，全部夺取了他的船只。
English: Thieves gathered Hudu's ships on the Pantan River, and Zhang Fu sent troops to attack Chen Feng and drive him away, seizing all of his ships.

古文：遂定东潮、谅江诸府州。
现代文：于是平定了东潮、谅江等府州。
English: As a result, prefectures such as Dongchao and Lezhe River were pacified.

古文：寻击破季犛舟师于木丸江，斩首万级，擒其将校百余人，溺死者无算。
现代文：不久在木丸江击破黎季嫠的舟师，斩首万级，擒获将校一百余人，贼人溺死无数。
English: Soon after, Li Jizhe's boatswain was defeated in the Maru River, his head was chopped off, more than a hundred officers were captured, and countless thieves drowned.

古文：追至胶水县闷海口，还军。
现代文：官军追到胶水县闷海口而还。
English: The government army chased them to Mugu Haikou, Glue County, but turned them back.

古文：筑城咸子关，令都督柳升守之。
现代文：在咸子关筑城，令都督柳开守卫。
English: In the construction of the city of Hanziguan, he ordered the governor, Liu Kai, to stand guard.

古文：已，贼由富良江入。
现代文：过后，贼人由富良江进兵。
English: After that, the thieves marched from the Fura River.

古文：辅与晟夹岸迎战。升等以舟师横击，大破之，馘斩数万，江水为赤，乘胜穷追。
现代文：张辅和沐晟夹岸迎战，柳升等人率领舟师横击，大破贼兵，斩杀数万人，江水为之赤红，官军乘胜穷追。
English: Zhang Fu and Muxun came ashore to meet the battle, and Liu Sheng and others led the boat division to attack the side, smashed the thief soldiers, killed tens of thousands of people, the river was red, and the government army chased after the victory.

古文：时天旱水浅，贼弃舟陆走。
现代文：当时天旱，江水浅，贼人弃船上岸逃走。
English: At that time, the weather was dry, the river was shallow, and the thieves abandoned the boat and fled.

古文：官军至，忽大雨水涨，遂毕渡。
现代文：官军到时，突降大雨，江水上涨，官军遂得全部渡江。
English: When the government army arrived, it suddenly rained heavily and the river water rose. The government army was able to cross the river in its entirety.

古文：五月至奇罗海口，获季犛及其子苍，并伪太子诸王将相大臣等，槛送京师。安南平。
现代文：五月到达奇罗海口，抓获黎季嫠和他的儿子黎苍，以及伪太子诸王将相大臣等人。槛车送入京师，安南平定。
English: In May, they arrived at the Chiloe estuary and captured Li Jizhe and his son Li Qiang, as well as the pseudo-princelings Zhuwang and Zi Min, and others. The barge was sent to Beijing Division, and Annan was pacified.

古文：得府州四十八，县一百八十，户三百十二万。
现代文：计算府州四十八个，县一百八十个，户三百一十二万。
English: There are 48 prefectures, 180 counties, and 3.12 million households.

古文：求陈氏后不得，遂设交阯布政司，以其地内属。
现代文：访求陈民的后代，但找不到，便设交趾布政司，将其土地内属于朝廷。
English: He visited the descendants of Chen Min, but could not find them, so he set up the Kojibu Political Secretary, and his land belonged to the imperial court.

古文：自唐之亡，交阯沦于蛮服者四百余年，至是复入版图。
现代文：自从唐代灭亡后，交趾沦为蛮服达四百余年，至此又收入版图。
English: Since the fall of the Tang Dynasty, more than four hundred years have passed since Koji was reduced to barbaric clothing, and now it has become part of the territory.

古文：帝为诏告天下，诸王百官奉表称贺。
现代文：皇上为此诏告天下，诸王和百官都奉表祝贺。
English: The emperor announced this to the world, and all the kings and officials sent their congratulations.

古文：六年夏，辅振旅还京师。
现代文：六年夏，张辅整军回到京师。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, Zhang Yu returned to Beijing to reorganize the army.

古文：再赐宴奉天殿，帝为赋《平安南歌》，进封英国公，岁禄三千石，予世券。
现代文：皇上再在奉天殿赐宴招待他，并赋写了《平安南歌》，进封他为英国公，岁禄三千石，给予世袭诰券。
English: The emperor again invited him to a banquet given by heaven, and wrote the "Heian Nanka" (Southern Song), made him an English prince, granted him a stipend of three thousand koku, and gave him hereditary vouchers.

古文：其年冬，陈氏故臣简定复叛。命沐晟讨之，败绩于生厥江。
现代文：这一年冬，陈氏的旧臣简定又叛乱，皇上命沐晟征讨，结果败于生厥江。
English: In the winter of the same year, Chen's former vassal Jian Ding rebelled again, and the emperor ordered him to be conscripted. As a result, he was defeated at Sheng Juejiang.

古文：明年春，复命辅佩征虏将军印，帅师往讨。
现代文：第二年春，又命张辅佩征虏将军印，率军前往征讨。
English: In the spring of the second year, Zhang Fu was also ordered to wear the seal of the conscript general and lead the army to the conquest.

古文：时简定已僣称越上皇，别立陈季扩为皇，势张甚。
现代文：当时简定已经僭称越上皇，另立陈季扩为皇，势力很大。
English: At that time, Jianzhen had already pretended to be the emperor of Yue, and Chen Jian was established as the emperor, with great power.

古文：辅就叱览山伐木造舟，招谅江北诸避寇者复业。
现代文：张辅就叱览山伐木造船，招来谅江以北那些躲避贼寇的人复业。
English: Zhang Zifu reprimanded the mountain logging and shipbuilding, and invited those north of the Lianjiang River who had evaded the bandits to resume their work.

古文：遂进至慈廉州，破喝门江，克广威州孔目栅。
现代文：遂推进到慈廉州，攻破喝门江，攻克广威州孔目栅。
English: They then advanced to Cillianzhou, broke through the Yamen River, and conquered Kongmeji, Guangwu.

古文：遇贼咸子关。贼舟六百余，保江东南岸。
现代文：在咸子关遇上贼人，贼人有船六百余艘，保卫江东南岸。
English: In Hanziguan, he encountered thieves. The thieves had more than six hundred ships to defend the southeastern coast of the river.

古文：辅帅陈旭等以划船战，乘风纵火，擒贼帅二百余人，尽得其舟。
现代文：张辅率陈旭等人用划船迎战，乘风纵火，擒获贼人首领二百余人，全部夺过了他们的船只。
English: Zhang Fu led by Chen Xu and others rode out to meet the battle in rowing boats, set fire to the wind, captured more than two hundred leaders of thieves, and seized all of their ships.

古文：追至太平海口。
现代文：官军追到太平海口。
English: The government army chased them to Taiping Haikou.

古文：贼将阮景异以三百艘迎敌，复大破之。
现代文：贼将阮景异以三百艘船迎战，官军又大破敌兵。
English: The thieves challenged Nguyen Quynh Anh with three hundred ships, and the government army defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：于是季扩自言陈氏后，遣使求绍封。
现代文：于是陈季扩自称是陈氏的后代，派使者袭封王位。
English: As a result, Chen Jizan claimed to be a descendant of the Chen clan and sent an envoy to seize the throne.

古文：辅曰： 向者遍索陈王后不应，今诈也。
现代文：张辅说 ：先前遍找陈王的后人，他都不响应，现在是在欺骗我们。
English: Zhang Yu said: "Previously, we searched for Chen Wang's descendants, but he did not respond. Now he is deceiving us."

古文：吾奉命讨贼，不知其他。 
现代文：我奉命讨贼，不知其他。 
English: I was ordered to find the thief, I don't know what else.

古文：遂遣朱荣、蔡福等以步骑先进，辅帅舟师继之。
现代文：遂派朱荣、蔡福等人以步骑兵先出发，张辅率领舟师随后进军。
English: He then sent Zhu Rong, Cai Fu and others to set off first with infantry and cavalry, followed by Zhang Shuo leading the boat division.

古文：自黄江至神投海，会师清化，分道入磊江，获简定于美良山中，及其党送京帅。
现代文：以黄江到神投海，会师于清化，再分路进入磊江，在美良山中抓获了简定，把他和他的党羽一起送到京师。
English: He used the Yellow River to go to Shentouhai, and joined the division at Qinghua, and then went to the Lei River, and captured Janding in the Milao Mountains, and sent him to the Beijing division together with his followers.

古文：八年正月进击贼余党，斩数千人，筑京观，惟季扩未获。
现代文：八年正月，进而攻击贼人余党，斩杀数千人，把尸体堆成一堆掩埋，只有陈季扩没有抓获。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, he then attacked the thief Yu Party, killed thousands of people, and buried the bodies in a pile. Only Chen Jizan was not captured.

古文：帝留沐晟讨之，召辅班师。
现代文：皇上留下沐晟讨伐，召张辅班师。
English: The emperor left Mu Xi to fight and summoned Zhang Suibanshi.

古文：谒帝于兴和，命练兵宣府、万全，督运北征。
现代文：张辅在兴和拜见皇上，受命到宣府、万全练兵，督运北征。
English: Zhang Fu met the emperor in Xinghe and was ordered to go to Xuanfu to train soldiers and supervise the Northern Expedition.

古文：时陈季扩虽请降，实无悛心。乘辅归，攻剽如故，晟不能制。
现代文：当时陈季扩虽然请求投降，但实没有悔改之心，乘张辅一回去，又攻掠如故，沐晟无法控制。
English: At that time, although Chen Jihan asked for surrender, he did not have a repentant heart. He took Zhang Fu back and attacked and plundered as before, unable to control himself.

古文：交人苦中国约束，又数为吏卒侵扰，往往起附贼，乍服乍叛，将帅益玩寇。
现代文：交趾人苦于中国的约束，又多次遭官吏士卒的侵扰，往往起来依附贼人，乍服乍叛，将帅更加不认真剿寇。
English: Comrades who suffer from the constraints of China, and have been repeatedly harassed by officials, often become dependent on thieves, and rebel at the drop of a hat, and generals are even less serious about defeating the invaders.

古文：九年正月，仍命辅与沐晟协力进讨。
现代文：九年正月，皇上仍命张辅和沐晟协同进讨。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, the emperor still ordered Zhang Fu and Muxun to jointly advance the discussion.

古文：辅至，申军令。
现代文：张辅到后，申明军令。
English: After Zhang Fu arrived, he declared martial law.

古文：都督黄中素骄，违节度。
现代文：都督黄中素来骄纵，违抗命令。
English: Governor Huang Zhong has always been arrogant and disobeyed orders.

古文：诘之不逊，斩以徇。
现代文：张辅责备他，黄中态度不恭，便把他斩首以服众。
English: Zhang Fu rebuked him, Huang Zhong was not respectful, so he beheaded him to serve the public.

古文：将士惕息，无敢不用命者。
现代文：将士们都提心吊胆，再没人敢不执行命令了。
English: The generals were all worried, and no one dared not to carry out the order.

古文：其年七月破贼帅阮景异于月常江，获船百余，生擒伪元帅邓宗稷等，又捕斩别部贼首数人。
现代文：这一年七月，在月常江击破贼帅阮景异，缴获船只一百余艘，生擒伪元帅邓宗稷等人，还捕杀别部贼人首领数人。
English: In July of the same year, in the Yuejiang River, they defeated the thief-commander Nguyen Quynh, seized more than a hundred ships, captured the pseudo-marshal Deng Zongyao and others, and also captured and killed several leaders of other thieves.

古文：以瘴疠息兵。
现代文：因有瘴疠收兵。
English: The troops were called back due to bad weather.

古文：明年八月击贼于神投海。
现代文：第二年八月在神投海攻击贼人。
English: In August of the following year, he attacked thieves in Shentouhai.

古文：贼舟四百余，分三队，锐甚。
现代文：贼人有船只四百余艘，分为三队，很精锐。
English: Thieves have more than four hundred ships, divided into three teams, very elite.

古文：辅冲其中坚，贼却，左右队迭进，官军与相钩连，殊死战。
现代文：张辅冲击其中坚，贼人退却，贼人左右队齐进，官军与他们相击杀，殊死力战。
English: Zhang Fu attacked the central stronghold, the bandits retreated, the bandits advanced left and right, the government army fought with them and fought to the death.

古文：自卯至巳，大破贼，擒渠帅七十五人。
现代文：从早上六七点战到十一点，大破贼兵，擒获首领七十五人。
English: From six or seven o'clock in the morning to eleven o'clock in the morning, they defeated the bandits and captured seventy-five leaders.

古文：进军乂安府，贼将降者相继。
现代文：官军进到安府扎营，贼将来降者不断。
English: The government army entered Anfu and set up camp, and the rebels continued to surrender.

古文：十一年冬，与晟会顺州，战爱子江。
现代文：十一年冬，张辅与沐晟会师顺州，战于爱子江。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, Zhang Yu fought with Shun Zhou, a disciple of Mu Xi Hui, in the Aizi River.

古文：贼驱象前行。
现代文：贼人驱象在前而进。
English: The elephant-thief stepped forward.

古文：辅戒士卒，一矢落象奴，二矢射象鼻。
现代文：张辅告诫士卒，第一箭射落象奴，第二箭射象鼻。
English: Zhang Fu admonished the soldiers, the first arrow shot down the elephant, the second arrow shot down the elephant's trunk.

古文：象奔还，自蹂其众。
现代文：大象因此回头奔走，践踏自己的部队。
English: So the elephant ran back, trampling his troops.

古文：裨将杨鸿、韩广、薛聚等乘势继进，矢落如雨，贼大败。
现代文：裨将杨鸿、韩广、薛聚等人乘势进兵，矢落如雨，贼人大败。
English: Yang Hong, Han Guang, Xue Ju and others took advantage of the situation to enter the army, and the arrows fell like rain, and the thieves were defeated.

古文：擒其帅五十六人。追至爱母江，尽降其众。
现代文：擒获首领五十六人，追到爱母江，全部降服了敌众。
English: He captured fifty-six leaders and chased them to the Aimo River. All of them surrendered to the enemy.

古文：明年正月进至政平州。
现代文：第二年正月进到政平州。
English: In the first month of the second year, he entered the Zhengping State.

古文：闻贼屯暹蛮、昆蒲诸栅，遂引兵往。
现代文：听说贼人屯聚在暹蛮、昆蒲等地栏栅中，遂引兵前往。
English: It was heard that thieves had gathered in the stockades in Siem Reap, Khon Phu and other places, so the soldiers were brought in.

古文：悬崖侧径，骑不得进。辅与将校徒步行山箐中。夜四鼓抵其巢，悉擒阮景异、邓容等。
现代文：途中要经过悬崖之侧的小径，骑马无法前进，张辅与将校徒步行走在山箐间，到夜间四鼓时抵达了贼人巢穴，全部擒获了阮景异、邓容等人。
English: On the way, they had to go through the path on the side of the cliff. They could not go on horseback. Zhang Fu and the officers walked on foot between the mountains. They arrived at the thief's lair at four o'clock in the evening, and all of them were captured by Ruan Jingyan, Deng Rong and others.

古文：季扩走老挝，遣指挥师祐以兵索之，破其三关。遂缚季扩及其孥送京师。
现代文：陈季扩逃到老挝，张辅派指挥师佑率兵索要，攻破其国三个关口，终于将陈季扩及其妻子儿女抓住，绑送京师。
English: Chen Jizan fled to Laos, and Zhang Fu sent commander Yu Rong and his soldiers to claim him. They broke through three gates in his country, and finally captured Chen Jizan and his wife and children, and took them to the Beijing division.

古文：贼平。
现代文：贼乱平息。
English: The banditry calmed down.

古文：承制，以贼所取占城地，设升、华、思、义四州，增置卫所，官其降人，留军守之而还。
现代文：张辅依照国家制度，将贼人所夺取的占城国的土地，分设升、华、思、义四州，增设卫所，授予投降者官职，留下部队驻守而还。
English: In accordance with the state system, Zhang Fu divided the land seized by the thieves from the occupied city-state into four states: Sheng, Hua, Si, and Yi, added a guardhouse, granted official positions to those who surrendered, and left troops stationed and returned.

古文：十三年春至京。
现代文：十三年春张辅到京。
English: In the spring of 1913, Zhang Fu arrived in Beijing.

古文：旋命为交阯总兵官往镇。
现代文：旋即命他为交趾总兵官前往镇守。
English: He immediately went to the town guard as the commander-in-chief.

古文：而余寇陈月湖等复作乱，辅悉讨平之。
现代文：而余寇陈月湖等人又作乱，张辅都讨平了他们。
English: Chen Yuehu and other remaining rebels started another riot, but Zhang Fu fought them off.

古文：十四年冬召还。
现代文：十四年冬他被召回。
English: In the winter of 1914 he was recalled.

古文：辅凡四至交阯，前后建置郡邑及增设驿传递运，规画甚备。
现代文：张辅共四次去交趾，前后建置州县以及增设驿传递运，规划得很全面。
English: Zhang Fu went to Jiaozuo a total of four times, building prefectures and counties before and after, as well as increasing the transportation of goods. The planning was very comprehensive.

古文：交人所畏惟辅。
现代文：交趾人所怕的只有张辅。
English: Only Zhang Zuo is feared by those who have close ties with him.

古文：辅还一年而黎利反，累遣将讨之，无功。
现代文：张辅回来一年而黎利又反，朝廷多次遣将征讨，都无功。
English: Zhang Fu returned a year later, but Lili did the opposite, and the imperial court repeatedly sent generals to collect taxes, all to no avail.

古文：至宣德时，柳升败没，王通与贼盟，仓卒引还。
现代文：到宣德时，柳升败死，王通与贼人订下盟约，仓促引兵而还。
English: At the time of Xuande, Liu Sheng was defeated and died. Wang Tong made a pact with the thieves, hastily brought in troops and returned.

古文：廷议弃交阯，辅争之不能得也。
现代文：朝廷意见放弃交趾，张辅力争但没能成功。
English: The imperial court advised him to give up the relationship, but Zhang Yuxu fought hard but was not successful.

古文：仁宗即位，掌中军都督府事，进太师，并支二俸。
现代文：仁宗即位后，张辅掌中军都督府事务，进封为太师，并支给二职俸禄。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Zhang Fu was put in charge of the affairs of the Central Military Government, promoted to the position of Grand Master, and was paid a second-class salary.

古文：寻命辅所受太师俸于北京仓支给。
现代文：不久命张辅所受的太师俸禄到北京仓支给。
English: Zhang Fu was soon ordered to send his salary to Beijing.

古文：时百官俸米皆给于南京，此盖特恩云。
现代文：当时百官的俸米都到南京支取，此举是给张辅的特恩。
English: At that time, the salary rice of the centurion went to Nanjing for payment, which was a great favor to Zhang Yu.

古文：成祖丧满二十七日，帝素冠麻衣以朝。而群臣皆已从吉，惟辅与学士杨士奇服如帝。
现代文：成祖丧期满二十七日时，皇上戴素冠穿麻衣临朝，而群臣都已改为吉服，只有张辅和大学士杨士奇穿戴与皇上一样。
English: When the twenty-seventh day of the ancestor's mourning period was over, the emperor Dai Su Guan wore a linen robe to the imperial court, and the courtiers had all changed to auspicious clothes. Only Zhang Fu and Yang Shichi, a university scholar, wore the same clothes as the emperor.

古文：帝叹曰： 辅，武臣也，而知礼过六卿。 
现代文：皇上叹道 ：张辅是员武臣，而他知礼则超过了六卿。 
English: The emperor sighed, "Zhang Fu was a military officer, but he was wiser than the six nobles."

古文：益见亲重。
现代文：从此更加敬重他。
English: I respect him even more now.

古文：寻命知经筵事，监修《实录》。
现代文：不久命他掌管经筵事务，监修实录。
English: Soon after his death, he was put in charge of economic and financial affairs, supervising the actual record.

古文：宣德元年，汉王高煦谋反，诱诸功臣为内应，潜遣人夜至辅所。
现代文：宣德元年，汉王朱高煦造反，引诱功臣们做内应，暗中派人夜间去张辅的住所。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, the Han King Zhu Gaozhen rebelled, lured his meritorious vassals to do his bidding, and secretly sent people to Zhang Fu's residence at night.

古文：辅执之以闻，尽得其反状，因请将兵击之。
现代文：张辅抓住他报告了皇上，查清了汉王造反的证据，便请率兵去攻打他。
English: Zhang Fu caught him and reported to the emperor. After ascertaining the evidence of Han Wang's rebellion, he asked his soldiers to attack him.

古文：帝决策亲征，命辅扈行。
现代文：皇上决定亲征，命张辅扈从。
English: The emperor decided to enlist personally, and ordered Zhang Shuo to follow.

古文：事平，加禄三百石。
现代文：事平之后，给张辅加禄米三百石。
English: After the matter was settled, Zhang Fu was given an additional 300 koku of rice.

古文：辅威名益盛，而久握兵。
现代文：张辅威名更高，而久握兵权。
English: Zhang Yu's prestige was higher, and he held military power for a long time.

古文：四年，都御史顾佐请保全功臣。
现代文：四年，都御史顾佐请保全功臣。
English: In four years, Metropolitan Guza, please preserve this meritorious subject.

古文：诏辅解府务，朝夕侍左右，谋画军国重事，进阶光禄大夫左柱国，朝朔望。
现代文：皇上下诏解除张辅都督府的职务，朝夕在左右侍奉，谋划军国重事，进升为光禄大夫左柱国，逢初一和十五上朝。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to relieve Zhang Fu of his duties at the governor's office, and he served on the left and right in the morning and evening, planned important matters for the military state, and was promoted to the left pillar state of the doctor of Guanglu, and ascended to the imperial court on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：英宗即位，加号翊连佐理，知经筵、监修《实录》如故。
现代文：英宗即位后，张辅加称号翊运佐理，仍掌经筵、监修实录。
English: After Emperor Yingzong's accession to the throne, Zhang Fu added the title of "Minjun Sari" to his title, and continued to be in charge of the administration and supervision of the records.

古文：辅雄毅方严，治军整肃，屹如山岳。
现代文：张辅刚毅威严，治军整肃，屹立如山。
English: Zhang Fu was a man of great courage and dignity. He led the army to rectify the situation and stood tall as a mountain.

古文：三定交南，威名闻海外。
现代文：他三次平定交趾，威名远传海外。
English: He subdued Koji three times, and his reputation spread far and wide overseas.

古文：历事四朝，连姻帝室，而小心敬慎，与蹇、夏、三杨，同心辅政。
现代文：他历事四朝，连姻帝室，但仍小心谨慎，与蹇义、夏原吉和三杨同心辅政。
English: He lived through four dynasties and married into the imperial family, but he was still careful and prudent, and supported politics with the same heart as Shunyi, Xia Yuanji and Sanyang.

古文：二十余年，海内宴然，辅有力焉。
现代文：二十余年间，国家太平无事，张辅是有功劳的。
English: For more than 20 years, the country has been peaceful, and Zhang Fu is credited with this.

古文：王振擅权，文武大臣望尘顿首，惟辅与抗礼。
现代文：王振专权时，文武大臣都对他望风叩拜，只有张辅与他抗礼。
English: When Wang Zhen was in absolute power, the ministers of literature and armed forces all bowed down to him, and only Zhang Yu rebelled against him.

古文：也先入犯，振导英宗亲征，辅从行，不使预军政。
现代文：也先入侵时，王振唆使英宗亲征，张辅随行，但不让他参预军政。
English: During the first invasion, Wang Zhenyu ordered Yingzong to go to the front and Zhang Fu to accompany him, but did not allow him to participate in the pre-war military government.

古文：七年八月，贼党阮景异来攻，与战，飞枪贯胁，犹督兵力战，竟败贼。
现代文：张辅老了，默默不敢作声。土木堡事变时，他殉身兵难，时年七十五岁。
English: Zhang Fu is old, silent and afraid to speak out. He was seventy-five years old when he died in the Civil Fort Incident.

古文：贼退，腹溃而死。黄福，字如锡，昌邑人。
现代文：追封为定兴王，谥忠烈。黄福，字如锡，昌邑人。
English: His posthumous titles are Ding Xing Wang, Zou Zhong Rong. Huang Fu, Zi Ruxi, Changyi.

古文：洪武中，由太学生历金吾前卫经历。
现代文：洪武年间，由太学生历任金吾前卫经历。
English: During the Hongwu era, the Taishou Dynasty had successively appointed Kingu avant-garde experience.

古文：上书论国家大计。
现代文：曾上书论国家大计。
English: He once wrote a book on the country's grand plan.

古文：太祖奇之，超拜工部右侍郎。
现代文：太祖很赏识他，把他越级升为工部右侍郎。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated him very much and promoted him to the right hand man of the engineering department.

古文：建文时，深见倚任。
现代文：建文时期，他深受信任和倚重。
English: During the Jianwen period, he was deeply trusted and relied on.

古文：成祖列奸党二十九人，福与焉。
现代文：成祖列出奸党二十九人，黄福是其中之一。
English: Cheng Zu listed 29 traitors, and Huang Fu was one of them.

古文：成祖入京师，福迎附。
现代文：成祖入京师后，黄福迎接并归附。
English: After Cheng Zu entered the Beijing division, Huang Fu welcomed and attached.

古文：李景隆指福奸党，福曰： 臣固应死，但目为奸党，则臣心未服。 
现代文：李景隆指责黄福是奸党，黄福说 ：臣固然应该死，但被看为奸党，则臣心中不服。 
English: Li Jinglong accused Huang Fu of being a traitor. Huang Fu said, "Of course, the minister should die, but if he is seen as a traitor, the minister will not be satisfied."

古文：帝置不问，复其官。
现代文：皇上置之不问，给他恢复了官职。
English: The emperor did not question this and restored him to his official position.

古文：未几，拜工部尚书。
现代文：不久，他任为工部尚书。
English: Soon, he was appointed to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：永乐三年，陈瑛劾福不恤工匠，改北京行部尚书。
现代文：永乐三年，陈瑛弹劾黄福不体恤工匠，他被改为北京行部的尚书。
English: In the third year of Yongle, Chen Ying impeached Huang Fu for not sympathizing with artisans, and he was replaced by Shang Shu from Beijing.

古文：明年坐事，逮下诏狱，谪充为事官。
现代文：第二年他因犯法，被逮入诏狱，贬任为事官。
English: The following year, he was arrested for breaking the law, sent to the imperial prison, and demoted to the rank of official.

古文：已，复职，督安南军饷。
现代文：不久，他得复职，督运安南军饷。
English: Soon, he had to return to duty, supervising Annan's military parade.

古文：安南既平，郡县其地，命福以尚书掌布政、按察二司事。
现代文：安南平定后，在其地设置郡县，命黄福以尚书衔掌交趾布政司、按察司事务。
English: After the pacification of Annan, counties were set up in the area, and Huang Fu was appointed to the post of political secretary and inspector general.

古文：时远方初定，军旅未息，庶务繁剧。福随事制宜，咸有条理。
现代文：当时远方初定，军旅未息，百务繁杂，黄福因事制宜，都有条理。
English: At that time, the distance was initially determined, the military journey was not over, the tasks were complicated, and Huang Fu was due to the circumstances, all of which were organized.

古文：上疏言： 交阯赋税轻重不一，请酌定，务从轻省。 
现代文：他上疏说： 交趾赋税轻重不一，请斟酌制定标准，务必从轻省考虑。 
English: He went on to say: There is a difference in the importance of paying taxes, please consider setting standards, and be sure to consider it from a light perspective.

古文：又请： 循泸江北岸至钦州，设卫所，置驿站，以便往来。
现代文：他又请求道 ：沿泸江北岸到钦州，设立卫所和驿站，以方便往来。
English: He also requested that a sanatorium and a post station be set up along the northern bank of the Li River to Qinzhou to facilitate traffic.

古文：开中积盐，使商贾输粟，以广军储。
现代文：实行开中法，让商人输运粮食到交趾，再给予他们运销食盐的权利，通过这样来充实军粮储备。
English: The opening-up policy was implemented, allowing merchants to transport grain to Jiaozuo, and then giving them the right to transport and sell salt, thereby enriching the military grain reserves.

古文：官吏俸廪，仓粟不足则给以公田。 
现代文：官吏的俸禄，仓库储粮不足则给以公田。 
English: Government officials were paid a salary, while public land was used to make up for the shortage of grain stored in warehouses.

古文：又言： 广西民馈运，陆路艰险，宜令广东海运二十万石以给。 
现代文：他又说 ：广西百姓输运粮饷，陆路艰险，宜令广东海运二十万石去供给。 
English: He also said: The people of Guangxi are transporting grain and straw, and the land route is arduous and dangerous. It is appropriate to have Guangdong Ocean Transport supply 200,000 koku.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：这些建议都被批准了。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：于是编氓籍，定赋税，兴学校，置官师。数召父老宣谕德意，戒属吏毋苛扰。
现代文：于是他编制户籍、制定赋税、兴办学校、设置驻军，多次召见当地父老宣谕德治之意，告诫属吏不要侵扰人民。
English: As a result, he compiled a household register, set up a tax system, established a school, set up a garrison, and repeatedly summoned local elders to proclaim the meaning of moral governance and to admonish officials not to disturb the people.

古文：一切镇之以静，上下帖然。
现代文：一切治之以静，上下安然。
English: Everything calmed down and everyone was safe.

古文：时群臣以细故谪交阯者众，福咸加拯恤，甄其贤者与共事，由是至者如归。
现代文：当时群臣中因犯小过被贬到交趾的很多，黄福都加以拯救和周济，选出贤明者与他们共事。因此贬谪者有至者如归之感。
English: At that time, many of the courtiers were demoted to the lowest ranks for minor offenses, and Huang Fu saved them and gave them money, and selected wise people to work with them. Therefore, those who were demoted felt at home.

古文：镇守中官马骐怙宠虐民，福数裁抑之。
现代文：镇守宦官马骐恃宠害民，黄福多次压制他。
English: The town guard eunuch Ma Jun favored harming the people, and Huang Fu suppressed him many times.

古文：骐诬福有异志。
现代文：马骐诬陷黄福有异志。
English: Ma Wei has ulterior motives in framing Huang Fu.

古文：帝察其妄，不问。
现代文：皇上察出这并不真实，不问。
English: The Emperor sensed that this was not true and did not question it.

古文：仁宗即位，召还，命兼詹事，辅太子。
现代文：仁宗即位后，黄福被召回，命他兼任詹事，辅导太子。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Huang Fu was recalled, and he was also appointed as Zhanji, the tutor of the crown prince.

古文：福在交阯凡十九年。及还，交人扶携走送，号泣不忍别。
现代文：黄福在交趾共十九年，到他回来时，交趾人民搀扶着他一路相送，号泣不忍分别。
English: Huang Fu spent a total of nineteen years in Kota Kinabalu. When he returned, the people of Kota Kinabalu supported him all the way to see him off, and they couldn't bear to part.

古文：福还，交阯贼遂剧，讫不能靖。
现代文：他回来后，交趾人的反叛加剧，终于无法平定。
English: After his return, the rebellion of his kinsmen intensified and could not be quelled.

古文：仁宗崩，督献陵工。
现代文：仁宗逝世后，他总督献陵工程。
English: After the death of Rinzong, he became the governor of the tomb dedication project.

古文：宣德元年，马骐激交阯复叛。
现代文：宣德元年，马骐激交趾反叛。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Ma Wei rebelled violently.

古文：时陈洽以兵部尚书代福，累奏乞福还抚交阯。
现代文：当时陈洽以兵部尚书衔取代黄福，他多次上奏请黄福回来安抚交趾。
English: At that time, Chen Ciao replaced Huang Fu with the title of the military department Shang Shu, and he repeatedly appealed to Huang Fu to come back to appease his friends.

古文：会福奉使南京，召赴阙，敕曰： 卿惠爱交人久，交人思卿，其为朕再行。 
现代文：正值黄福奉命出使南京，便召他回京上朝，敕令他说 ：卿惠受交趾人已久，交趾人想念您，您就为朕再去一趟吧！ 
English: Just as Huang Fu was ordered to send an envoy to Nanjing, he called him back to Beijing for the morning, and ordered him to say: Sir, you have been benefiting from your friends for a long time, your friends miss you, you should make another trip for me!

古文：仍以工部尚书兼詹事，领二司事。
现代文：黄福仍以工部尚书兼詹事，负责两部门的事务。
English: Huang Fu is still in the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, responsible for the affairs of two departments.

古文：比至，柳升败死，福走还。
现代文：他到达交趾时，柳升已败死，黄福跑回。
English: When he arrived at the junction, Liu Sheng had been defeated and died, and Huang Fu ran back.

古文：至鸡陵关，为贼所执，欲自杀。
现代文：到鸡陵关时，被贼人抓住，想自杀。
English: When he arrived at Qiling Pass, he was caught by thieves and tried to commit suicide.

古文：贼罗拜下泣曰： 公，交民父母也，公不去，我曹不至此。 
现代文：贼人对他罗拜哭泣道： 公是交趾人民的父母，公如果不走，我们也不至于这样。 
English: The thief bowed to him and wept, saying, "The government is the parent of the people. If the government didn't leave, we wouldn't be like this."

古文：力持之。
现代文：他们坚决止住了他。
English: They stopped him cold.

古文：黎利闻之曰： 中国遣官吏治交阯，使人人如黄尚书，我岂得反哉！ 
现代文：黎利听说后说道 ：中国遣官吏统治交趾，如果人人都像黄尚书那样，我又怎得造反呢？ 
English: After hearing this, Lili said, "China sends officials to rule over each other. If everyone is like Huang Shangshu, how can I rebel?"

古文：遣人驰往守护，馈白金、餱粮，肩舆送出境。
现代文：他派人赶去守护黄福，赠给白金、干粮，用肩舆送他出境。
English: He sent someone to rush to guard Huang Fu, presented him with platinum and dry grain, and sent him out of the country on a donkey.

古文：至龙州，尽取所遗归之官。还，为行在工部尚书。
现代文：到龙州时，黄福把他们赠送的东西全部交给国家。回来后任行在工部尚书。
English: When they arrived in Longzhou, Huang Fu handed over everything they had given to the state. After returning, he worked as a clerk in the Ministry of Industry.

古文：四年与平江伯董漕事，议令江西、湖广、浙江及江南北诸郡民，量地远近，转粟于淮、徐、临清，而令军士接运至北京，民大称便。
现代文：四年，黄福与平江伯总管漕运事务，他建议令江西、湖广、浙江以及长江南北各府的百姓，根据路程远近，输运粮食到淮安、徐州、临清，然后令军士接运到北京，人民都说很方便。
English: In the fourth year, Huang Fu and Pingjiang Bo were in charge of transportation affairs. He suggested that the people of Jiangxi, Hubei, Zhejiang and the Yangtze River provinces in the north and south should transport grain to Huai'an, Xuzhou and Linqing according to the distance, and then let the sergeant transport it to Beijing. The people said it was very convenient.

古文：五年陈足兵食省役之要。
现代文：五年，他上书陈述足军饷省劳役的关键办法。
English: In the fifth year, he submitted a letter to state the key measures for the military labor service in Shandong Province.

古文：其言足食，谓： 永乐间虽营建北京，南讨交阯，北征沙漠，资用未尝乏。
现代文：他所说的足军饷，是这样说的： 永乐年间号然营建北京，南征交趾，北征沙漠，但物资不曾缺乏。
English: What he meant by foot soldiers is as follows: In the Yongle years, Beijing was built with great fanfare, the Southern Expedition was at the crossroads, and the Northern Expedition was in the desert, but there was no shortage of materials.

古文：比国无大费，而岁用仅给。
现代文：现在国家没有大的开支，而每年收入却仅够供给。
English: Now the state does not have large expenses, but the annual income is only enough to supply.

古文：即不幸有水旱，征调将何以济？
现代文：如果不幸有水旱灾害，将怎么供给征调之师？
English: If, unfortunately, there is a flood or drought, how will we supply teachers?

古文：请役操备营缮军士十万人，于济宁以北，卫辉、真定以东，缘河屯种。
现代文：请调出操备营缮军士十万人，于济宁以北，卫辉、真定以东，沿河屯田种植。
English: Please call out 100,000 soldiers and sergeants of the operation battalion to cultivate the fields along the river in the north of Jining, and in the east of Weihui and Zhending.

古文：初年自食，次年人收五石，三年收倍之。
现代文：第一年让他们自己供应自己，第二年每人收五石，第三年加倍征收。
English: In the first year, let them provide for themselves. In the second year, collect five koku per person. In the third year, double the amount.

古文：既省京仓口粮六十万石，又省本卫月粮百二十万石，岁可得二百八十万石。 
现代文：这样既可省下京仓口粮六十万石，又可节省本卫的月粮一百二十万石，每年可得二百八十万石。 
English: In this way, it is possible not only to save 600,000 koku of rations for the capital warehouse, but also to save 1.2 million koku of monthly rations for the capital warehouse, and to obtain 2.8 million koku annually.

古文：帝善之，下行在户、兵二部议。
现代文：皇上称善，交行在户、兵二部讨论。
English: The emperor commended the good deed, and the exchange of greetings took place in the house, and the two soldiers discussed the matter.

古文：郭资、张本言： 缘河屯田实便，请先以五万顷为率，发附近居民五万人垦之。
现代文：郭资、张本说： 沿河屯田确实方便，请先拨出五万顷，征发附近居民五万人来开垦。
English: Guo Zi and Zhang Ben said: It is indeed convenient to cultivate the land along the river. Please allocate 50,000 hectares first, and conscript 50,000 nearby residents to cultivate the land.

古文：但山东近年旱饥，流徙初复，卫卒多力役，宜先遣官行视田以俟开垦。 
现代文：但山东近年旱灾饥荒，人民流离，刚刚复业，卫卒力役很多，应先派官员去巡视土田，以待开垦。 
English: However, Shandong has suffered from drought and famine in recent years, people have been displaced, it has just resumed production, and there are a lot of laborers. Officials should first be sent to inspect the soil to wait for reclamation.

古文：帝从之。命吏部郎中赵新等经理屯田，福总其事。
现代文：皇上听从了，命吏部郎中赵新等人经理屯田，黄福总管其事。
English: The emperor obeyed, and Zhao Xin, the vice-minister of the Ministry of the Imperial Household, and others were the managers of Tonden, and Huang Fu was in charge of it.

古文：既而有言军民各有常业，若复分田，役益劳扰，事竟不行。
现代文：过后有人说军民各有常业，如果又要分田，劳役会更加烦扰，此事最后竟没有实行。
English: Later, it was said that the military and the people each had a regular job, and if they wanted to divide the fields again, the labor union would be even more annoying, but the matter was not implemented in the end.

古文：改户部尚书。
现代文：黄福改任户部尚书。
English: He was soon reassigned to the household of Shosho.

古文：七年，帝于宫中览福《漕事便宜疏》，出以示杨士奇曰： 福言智虑深远，六卿中谁伦比者？ 
现代文：七年，皇上在宫中看黄福的《漕事便宜疏》，把它出示给杨士奇，说： 黄福的意见考虑深远，六卿中谁能与他比？ 
English: In the seventh year, the emperor saw Huang Fu's "Boating is Cheap and Easy" in the palace, showed it to Yang Shiqi, and said: Huang Fu's opinions are far-reaching, who among the six lords can compare with him?

古文：对曰： 福受知太祖，正直明果，一志国家。
现代文：杨士奇说： 黄福受知于太祖，正直明果，一心为国。
English: Yang Shichi said: Huang Fu was known by his great-grandfather, he was honest and devoted to the country.

古文：永乐初，建北京行部，绥辑凋瘵，及使交阯，总藩宪，具有成绩，诚六卿所不及。
现代文：永乐初年，建北京行部，安抚疮痍之地，于是黄福出使交趾，总管布政和按察二司，具有成绩，诚六卿所不及。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the Beijing branch was built to pacify the devastated land, so Huang Fu sent an envoy, the head of Bu Zheng and the second division of Bao Zha, with achievements that were beyond the reach of Lord Chenglu.

古文：福年七十矣，诸后进少年高坐公堂理政事，福四朝旧人，乃朝暮奔走劳悴，殊非国家优老敬贤之道。 
现代文：黄福现已七十岁了，那些后进少年高坐公堂处理政事，而黄福四朝旧人，却还朝夕奔走劳瘁，殊不是国家优老敬贤之道。 
English: Huang Fu is now seventy years old. Those backward youngsters sit in the high court to deal with political affairs, while Huang Fu, the old man of the four dynasties, is still running from morning to evening. This is not the way for the country to respect the elders.

古文：帝曰： 非汝不闻此言。 
现代文：皇上说： 不是你，朕也听不到这样的话。 
English: The emperor said, "It wasn't you, I didn't hear it either.

古文：士奇又曰： 南京根本重地，先帝以储宫监国。
现代文：杨士奇又说 ：南京是根本重地，先帝曾以储君监国。
English: Yang Shichi also said, "Nanjing is a fundamentally important place. The former emperor used to supervise the country with his regent.

古文：福老成忠直，缓急可倚。 
现代文：黄福老成忠直，国家有缓急之事，他可以倚重。 
English: Huang Fu has always been loyal and upright. The country has urgent matters, and he can be relied on.

古文：帝曰： 然。 
现代文：皇上说 ：是的。 
English: Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：明日改福官南京。
现代文：第二天改黄福到南京任官。
English: The next day, Huang Fu was transferred to Nanjing.

古文：明年兼掌南京兵部。
现代文：第二年黄福兼掌南京兵部。
English: In the second year, Huang Fu was also in charge of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：英宗即位，加少保，参赞南京守备襄城伯李隆机务。
现代文：英宗即位后，加封他为少保，参赞南京守备襄城伯李隆机务。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Yingzong, he was given the additional title of Minor Protector, and the post of Counsellor of the Nanjing garrison was taken over by Li Longji, the mayor of Xiangcheng.

古文：留都文臣参机务，自福始。
现代文：留都的文臣参预机务，即从黄福开始。
English: Wencheng, who stayed in the capital, participated in the preparatory work, starting with Huang Fu.

古文：隆用福言，政肃民安。
现代文：李隆采纳黄福的意见，政肃民安。
English: Li Long adopted Huang Fu's opinion, and the political situation and people's safety improved.

古文：正统五年正月卒，年七十八。
现代文：正统五年正月去世，终年七十八岁。
English: He died in the first month of the fifth year of his reign, at the age of 78.

古文：福丰仪修整，不妄言笑。
现代文：黄福丰姿修整，不苟言笑。
English: Huang Fufeng is well-groomed and smiling.

古文：历事六朝，多所建白。公正廉恕，素孚于人。
现代文：历事六朝，提出过不少建议，他公正廉恕，素孚众望。
English: Throughout six dynasties, he has made a lot of suggestions. He is fair and honest, and Su Fo is popular.

古文：当官不为赫赫名，事微细无不谨。
现代文：他当官不图赫赫之名，办事无论大小都很谨慎。
English: He does not make a fuss when he is in office, and is very careful in his dealings, no matter how big or small.

古文：忧国忘家，老而弥笃。
现代文：忧国忘家，老而弥笃。
English: Worry about the country and forget about home.

古文：自奉甚约，妻子仅给衣食，所得俸禄，惟待宾客周匮乏而已。
现代文：他自己的生活非常俭约，妻子儿女仅够衣食，所得的俸禄，只用于待宾客和周济贫困而已。
English: His own life is very frugal, his wife and children only have enough food and clothing, and the salary he earns is only used for waiting for guests and helping the poor.

古文：初，成祖手疏大臣十人，命解缙评之，惟于福曰： 秉心易直，确乎有守。 
现代文：当初，成祖写下十位大臣命解缙品评，解缙只有对黄福下这样的评语 ：秉性率直，为人确有原则。 
English: At first, Cheng Zu ordered ten ministers to write a review of Huang Fuxiong's performance, but only Huang Fuxiong was given the following review: He is honest and principled.

古文：无少贬。
现代文：没有丝毫贬抑他。
English: There was nothing derogatory about him.

古文：福参赞南京时，尝坐李隆侧。
现代文：黄福参赞南京时，曾坐在李隆旁边。
English: When Huang Fu was a counselor in Nanjing, he once sat next to Li Long.

古文：士奇寄声曰： 岂有孤卿而旁坐者？ 
现代文：杨士奇寄信去说 ：岂有孤卿而还有旁坐者的！ 
English: Yang Shichi sent a letter saying, "How can there be a lonely lord and a bystander!

古文：福曰： 焉有少保而赞守备者邪？ 
现代文：黄福说 ：哪有少保而赞佐守备官的？ 
English: Huang Fu said: "Where are the minor guards and the deputy guards?

古文：卒不变。
现代文：他还是不改变。
English: He still won't change.

古文：然隆待福甚恭。
现代文：但李隆待黄福非常恭敬。
English: But Li Long treated Huang Fu very respectfully.

古文：公退，即推福上坐，福亦不辞。
现代文：办完公事退下后，李隆即推黄福上坐，而黄福也不推辞。
English: After finishing his business, Li Long pushed Huang Fu to sit up, and Huang Fu did not refuse.

古文：士奇之省墓也，道南京，闻福疾，往候之。
现代文：杨士奇回家扫墓时，途经南京，听说黄福有病，便前往问候。
English: When Yang Shiqi went home to sweep the grave, he passed through Nanjing, heard that Huang Fu was ill, and went to greet him.

古文：福惊曰： 公辅幼主，一日不可去左右，奈何远出？ 
现代文：黄福惊道： 公辅佐幼主，一日不可离开左右，为什么要远出？ 
English: Huang Fu was surprised and said, "The deputy public security minister and the leader of the youth cannot leave the left and right side for a day. Why go far away?

古文：士奇深服其言。
现代文：杨士奇深深服从他的意见。
English: Yang Shiqui deeply obeyed his advice.

古文：兵部侍郎徐琦使安南回，福与相见石城门外。
现代文：兵部侍郎徐琦出使安南回来，黄福与他相见在石城门外。
English: The attendant of the military department, Xu Hao, sent Annan back, and Huang Fu met him outside the Shicheng Gate.

古文：或指福问安南来者曰： 汝识此大人否？ 
现代文：有人指着黄福问从安南来的人道 ：你认识这位大人吗？ 
English: Someone pointed at Huang Fu and asked the humanitarian coming from Annan: Do you know this adult?

古文：对曰： 南交草木，亦知公名，安得不识？ 
现代文：那人回答 ：安南的草木，也知道公的名字，我怎能不认识？ 
English: The man replied: How can I not recognize Annan's plants and trees, which also know the king's name?

古文：福卒，赠谥不及，士论颇不平。
现代文：黄福去世后，朝廷却没有给他赠和谥，士大夫的舆论颇为不平。
English: After Huang Fu's death, the imperial court did not give him a gift of peace, and the public opinion of the scholar was quite dissatisfied.

古文：成化初，始赠太保，谥忠宣。
现代文：成化初年，才给他赠太保，谥忠宣。
English: It was not until the first year of Chenghua that he was given the title of Taibao, 忠宣.

古文：刘俊，字子士，江陵人。
现代文：刘俊，字子士，江陵人。
English: Liu Jun, a man of letters, from Jiangling.

古文：洪武十八年进士。除兵部主事，历郎中。
现代文：洪武十八年，中进士，被授予兵部主事，历任郎中。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, he was promoted to the rank of junior high school student, was awarded the post of the head of the military department, and successively served as a junior high school student.

古文：遇事善剖决，为帝所器。
现代文：他遇事善于剖析，为皇上所器重。
English: He is good at analyzing things and is of great importance to the emperor.

古文：二十八年擢右侍郎。
现代文：二十八年，升为右侍郎。
English: In 1928, he was promoted to Ujijiro.

古文：建文时，为侍中。
现代文：建文时期，任侍中。
English: During the Kenmon period, he served as a junior samurai.

古文：成祖即位，进尚书。
现代文：成祖即位后，他进升为尚书。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, he was promoted to Shang Shu.

古文：永乐四年大征安南，以俊参赞军务。
现代文：永乐四年大征安南，以刘俊参赞军务。
English: Yongle in the fourth year of the Great Expedition to Annan, with Liu Jun as military affairs counselor.

古文：俊为人缜密勤敏，在军佐画筹策有功，还受厚赉。
现代文：刘俊为人缜密，勤劳而机智，在军中出谋划策有功，回来后受到丰厚的赏赐。
English: Liu Jun was a meticulous, hard-working and resourceful person. He made a great contribution to the military and received a rich reward after his return.

古文：未几，简定复叛，俊再出参赞沐晟军务。
现代文：不久，简定又反叛，刘俊再出参赞沐晟军务。
English: Soon after, Jianding rebelled again, and Liu Jun was reappointed as the military affairs counselor.

古文：六年冬，晟与简定战生厥江，败绩。
现代文：六年冬，沐晟与简定在生厥江交战，遭到失败。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, Mu Xi and Jian Ding fought in the Sheng Jue River and were defeated.

古文：俊行至大安海口，飓风作，扬沙昼晦，且战且行，为贼所围，自经死。
现代文：刘俊走到大安海口时，飓风大作，扬起的尘沙使白天变暗，刘俊且战且走，被贼人所围，自刎而死。
English: When Liu Jun walked to Da'an Haikou, a hurricane was raging, the raised dust made the day dark, Liu Jun fought and walked, surrounded by thieves, and hanged himself to death.

古文：洪熙元年三月，帝以俊陷贼不屈，有司不言，未加褒恤，敕责礼官。
现代文：洪熙元年三月，皇上以刘俊身陷贼人包围仍不屈，而有关官员却不上报，致使朝廷没有给他褒奖和抚恤，颁敕令责备礼官。
English: In March of the first year of Hongxi, the emperor was still adamant that Liu Jun was surrounded by thieves, but the relevant officials did not report it. As a result, the court did not give him a commendation and a pension, and issued an order to reprimand the etiquette officer.

古文：严肃有治材，吏民畏惮。
现代文：于是给他赐祭，赠太子少傅，谥节愍。
English: So they offered a sacrifice to him and gave him the title of prince and the title of sous-chef.

古文：军败，亦死之。陈洽，字叔远，武进人。
现代文：授予他的儿子刘奎为给事中。陈洽，字叔远，武进人。
English: Awarded to his son Liu Kui as a gift. Chen Ciao, Zhe Shuyuan, Wu Jinren.

古文：好古力学，与兄济、弟浚并有名。
现代文：他好古勤学，与兄陈济、弟陈浚都有名。
English: He is a diligent student and is famous with his elder brother Chen Ji and younger brother Chen Jun.

古文：洪武中，以善书荐授兵科给事中。
现代文：洪武年间，他因擅长书法被推荐授予兵科给事中。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was recommended to be awarded the prize for military science because he was good at calligraphy.

古文：尝奉命阅军，一过辄识之。
现代文：他曾奉命阅军，只要从他眼前一过，他便能记下来。
English: He had been ordered to march in the army, and as soon as the march passed in front of his eyes, he could write it down.

古文：有再至者，辄叱去。
现代文：有的人再来一次，总是被他斥退。
English: Some come back for a second time, only to be rebuffed.

古文：帝嘉其能，赐金织衣。
现代文：皇上嘉奖他有才能，赐给他金织衣。
English: The emperor commended him for his talent and gave him a golden loincloth.

古文：父戍五开殁，洽奔丧。
现代文：父亲戍守五开亡故，陈洽奔丧。
English: After the death of his father, Zizhu Wukai, Chen Chaozhou went into mourning.

古文：会蛮叛道梗，冒险间行，负父骨以归。
现代文：正值蛮人反叛，道路阻塞，陈洽冒险间道而行，终于背着父亲遗骨回来。
English: It was the time when the barbarians rebelled, the road was blocked, Chen Cai ventured his way, and finally returned with his father's remains.

古文：建文中以茹瑺荐，起文选郎中。
现代文：建文年间因茹王常的推荐，被召回任文选司郎中。
English: During the Jianwen era, he was recalled to the post of secretary of the Selection Committee of Literature on the recommendation of Ru Wangcheng.

古文：成祖即位，擢吏部右侍郎，改大理卿。
现代文：太祖即位后，他被升为吏部右侍郎，又改为大理寺卿。
English: After the enthronement of the great-grandfather, he was promoted to the right attendant of the cadre department, and was also changed to the Lord of Dali Temple.

古文：安南兵起，命洽赴广西，与韩观选士卒从征。
现代文：安南战事开始时，朝廷命陈洽赴广西，与韩观挑选士卒从征。
English: At the beginning of the Annan War, the imperial court ordered Chen Ciao to go to Guangxi, and Han Guan selected soldiers to join the army.

古文：及大军出，遂命赞军务，主馈饷。
现代文：到大军出发时，遂命他参赞军务，主管粮饷。
English: When the great army set out, he was ordered to be the military counselor, in charge of grain supply.

古文：安南平，转吏部左侍郎。
现代文：安南平定后，陈洽转为吏部左侍郎。
English: After Annan was subdued, Chen Cai became the left-hand man of the cadre department.

古文：是时黄福掌布、按二司事，专务宽大，拊循其民。
现代文：当时黄福掌管布政、按察二司事务，政策上专务宽大，安抚安南人民。
English: At that time, Huang Fu was in charge of the administration and inspection of the Second Division, and was dedicated to a lenient policy to appease the people of Annam.

古文：洽甄拔才能，振以风纪。核将士功罪，建置土官，经理兵食，剖决如流。
现代文：陈洽选拔有才能的人，振肃风纪，核实将士功罪，设置土官，处理军队粮饷，都办得有条不紊。
English: Chen Cai selected talented people, strengthened discipline, verified the merits and demerits of generals, set up local officials, and handled the army's rations, all of which were done in an orderly manner.

古文：还朝，命兼署礼部、工部事。
现代文：回到朝廷后，皇上命他兼代礼部、工部事务。
English: After returning to the Imperial Court, the Emperor ordered him to also represent the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Works.

古文：七年复参张辅军讨简定，平之。
现代文：永乐七年，他又参佐张辅的部队讨伐简定，将其平定。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongle Emperor, he went on a crusade against Zhang Fu's troops and subdued them.

古文：还，从帝北征，与辅练兵塞外。
现代文：回来后，随从皇上北征，与张辅在塞外练兵。
English: After returning, he followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition and trained soldiers with Zhang Fu outside of Tibet.

古文：九年复与辅往交阯，讨陈季扩。
现代文：九年，他又与张辅前往交趾，讨伐陈季扩。
English: In the ninth year, he and Zhang Fu went to Jiaozuo to fight Chen Ji Zhan.

古文：居五年，进兵部尚书，复留赞李彬军事。
现代文：五年之后，他升为兵部尚书，又留下赞佐李彬军事。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and he also left Zanzo Li Bin Military.

古文：仁宗召黄福还，以洽掌布、按二司，仍参军务。
现代文：仁宗将黄福召回，以陈洽掌管布政、按察二司，仍参佐军务。
English: Renzong recalled Huang Fu, and put Chen Cai in charge of Bu Zheng, and Azecha II, still in charge of military affairs.

古文：中官马骐贪暴，洽不能制，反者四起，黎利尤桀黠。
现代文：宦官马骐贪婪残暴，陈洽无法控制，致使安南反叛者四起，而黎利尤为凶狠狡猾。
English: The eunuch Ma Jun is greedy and cruel, and Chen Ci cannot be controlled, causing Annan rebels to rise up, and Lili is particularly vicious and cunning.

古文：而荣昌伯陈智、都督方政不相能，寇势日张。
现代文：而荣昌伯陈智、都督方政无能为力，贼寇的势力越来越大。
English: But Rongchang Mayor Chen Zhi and Governor Fang Zheng are powerless, and the influence of the bandits is growing.

古文：洽上疏言： 贼虽乞降，内怀诡诈，党羽渐盛，将不可制。
现代文：陈洽上疏说： 贼人虽然请求投降，但他们内怀诡诈，到党羽逐渐壮大后，将不可控制。
English: Chen Ciao Shangsuo said: Although the thieves asked for surrender, they harbored treachery, and after the party gradually grew, they would be uncontrollable.

古文：乞谕诸将速灭贼，毋为所饵。 
现代文：乞请传谕诸将从速灭贼，不要为贼人所收买。 
English: Please preach to them that they should quickly destroy the thieves and not be bribed by the thieves.

古文：宣宗降敕切责智等，令进兵，复败于茶笼州，帝乃削智、政官爵。命成山侯王通佩征夷将军印往讨，洽仍赞其军。
现代文：宣宗颁敕严厉责备陈智等人，令他们进兵，他们又败于茶笼州，皇上于是削去陈智、方政的官职和爵位，命成山侯王通佩征夷将军印前往征讨，陈洽仍赞佐其军事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict severely reprimanding Chen Zhi and others, ordering them to enter the army, and they were defeated in Chaozhou. The emperor then removed Chen Zhi and Fang Zheng's official posts and peerages, and ordered the mountain warlord Wang Tongpei to go to collect the imperial seal. Chen Ciao still supported his military.

古文：宣德元年九月，通至交阯。
现代文：宣德元年九月，王通到达交趾。
English: In September of the first year of Xuande, Wang Tong arrived in Jiaozuo.

古文：十一月进师应平，次宁桥。
现代文：十一月进军应平，到达宁桥。
English: In November, they marched to Yingping and reached Ningqiao.

古文：洽与诸将言地险恶，恐有伏，宜驻师觇贼。
现代文：陈洽与将领们说地形险恶，恐怕有伏兵，应该驻扎下来察看贼人动静。
English: Chen Ciao and the generals said that the terrain was dangerous and that there might be an ambush. They should stay and watch the movement of the thieves.

古文：通不听，麾兵径渡，陷泥淖中。
现代文：王通不听，指挥部队径直渡江，结果陷在泥淖中。
English: Wang Tong did not listen and led his troops straight across the river, only to get stuck in the mud.

古文：伏发，官军大败。
现代文：贼人伏兵齐起，官军大败。
English: Thieves and ambushes rose in unison, and the government army was soundly defeated.

古文：洽跃马入贼阵，创甚坠马。
现代文：陈洽跃马冲入敌阵，因受伤过重而坠下马。
English: Chen Cai's vaulting horse rushed into the enemy lines, and he fell off the horse because he was too badly injured.

古文：左右欲扶还，洽张目叱曰： 吾为国大臣，食禄四十年，报国在今日，义不苟生。 
现代文：左右想把他扶回去，陈洽瞪眼呵叱道： 我作为国家大臣，食禄四十年，报国就在今日，义不苟且而生还！ 
English: When people around him tried to hold him back, Chen Gao stared and scolded: "I have been serving as the Minister of State for forty years, and I am reporting to the country today. I have been scrupulous and survived!

古文：已而黎利称臣，归蔡福、朱广等六人，尽弃市，籍其家。
现代文：挥刀杀死数名贼人后，自刎而死。事情报到朝廷后，皇上叹道： 大臣以身殉国，一代能有几人？ 赠少保，谥节愍。
English: After killing several thieves with his sword, he hanged himself and died. After the information was reported to the imperial court, the emperor lamented: How many ministers can be martyred for the country in one generation?

古文：李彬，字质文，凤阳人。
现代文：授予他的儿子陈枢为刑科给事中。李彬，字质文，凤阳人。
English: Awarded to his son Chen Zu for the Criminal Investigation Department. Li Bin, word quality, Fengyang people.

古文：父信，从太祖渡江，积功为济川卫指挥佥事。
现代文：父李信，随从太祖渡江，积功任为济川卫指挥佥事。
English: His father, Li Xin, was a follower of the great ancestor, Wujiang, and was appointed as the commander of the Jichuan Garrison.

古文：彬嗣职。从颍国公傅友德出塞，斩获多。
现代文：李彬承袭父职，随从颍国公傅友德出塞，斩杀和缴获很多。
English: Li Bin inherited his father's position, and followed Guo Guo Fu You De out of the fortress, killing and capturing many.

古文：还，与筑诸边城。
现代文：回来后，参与修筑各个边城。
English: After returning, he participated in the construction of various border towns.

古文：成祖起兵，彬归附，为前锋，转战有功。累迁右军都督佥事。
现代文：成祖起兵时，李彬归附，做前锋，转战有功，累升为右军都督佥事。
English: When Cheng Zu raised an army, Li Bin was attached to it, he was a forward, he had distinguished himself in battle, and he was promoted to be the right-wing military governor.

古文：永乐元年四月，以邱福议，封丰城侯，禄千石，予世券。
现代文：永乐元年四月，以丘福的建议，封他为丰城侯，食禄一千石，给予世袭诰券。
English: In April of the first year of Yongle, at the suggestion of Qufu, he was made the lord of Fengcheng, given a stipend of one thousand koku, and given a hereditary ticket.

古文：明年，襄城伯李濬讨永新叛寇，命彬帅师策应。
现代文：第二年，襄城伯李浚征讨永新叛寇，命李彬率兵策应。
English: In the second year, Xiangcheng Count Li Jun was conscripted to fight against the Yongxin rebels, and Li Bin led the troops to deal with the situation.

古文：未至，寇平，命以所统镇广东。
现代文：李彬没到，贼寇已被平定，命他以所率的军队镇守广东。
English: Li Bin did not arrive, the bandits had been subdued, and he was ordered to defend Guangdong with the army at his disposal.

古文：四年召还，捕南阳皂君山寇。
现代文：四年，把他召回，捉拿南阳秔君山贼寇。
English: Four years later, he was recalled to capture the bandits in Nanyang's Qijun Mountain.

古文：其年七月，以左参将赍征夷副将军印授沐晟，进讨安南。
现代文：这一年七月，他以左参将的身份携征夷副将军印授予沐晟，进兵讨伐安南。
English: In July of the same year, he was awarded the Seal of the Vice-Commander-in-Chief of the Expeditionary Force with the rank of General of the Left Division, and entered the army to fight against Annan.

古文：十二月，彬及云阳伯陈旭破安南西都，又大败贼于木丸江。
现代文：十二月，李彬和云阳伯陈旭攻破安南西都，又在木丸江大败贼兵。
English: In December, Li Bin and Yunyang Bo Chen Xu broke through Annan's western capital, and defeated the bandits in the Maru River.

古文：安南平，论功，与旭皆以临敌稽缓，不益封，加禄五百石。
现代文：安南平定后，论功，他与陈旭都因临敌迟缓，不给加封，加禄米五百石。
English: After Annan was subdued, he and Chen Xu were both praised for their slowness in confronting the enemy, and were not given additional seals.

古文：寻充总兵官，备倭海上。移兵讨擒长沙贼李法良，又帅浙、闽兵捕海寇。
现代文：不久他充任总兵官，防备倭寇于海上，后移师征伐并擒获了长沙贼人李法良，又率浙江、福建之兵捕拿海寇。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the chief military officer to guard against Japanese pirates at sea. He later moved his division to conquer and capture the Changsha thief Li Faryang, and led the soldiers from Zhejiang and Fujian to capture sea pirates.

古文：十年命往甘肃与西宁侯宋琥经略降酋。
现代文：十年命李彬前往甘肃，与西宁侯宋琥安置投降的酋长。
English: After ten years of life, Li Bin went to Gansu to resettle the surrendered chiefs with Xining Hou Song Amber.

古文：彬与柳升严兵境上，而令土官李英防野马川。
现代文：李彬与柳升严兵布在边境上，而令土官李英防守野马川。
English: Li Bin and Liu Shengyan were posted on the border, while the local official Li Ying was sent to defend the Mustang River.

古文：凉州酋老的罕叛，都指挥何铭战死，英追蹑，尽俘其众。老的罕走赤斤蒙古。
现代文：凉州酋长老的罕反叛，都指挥何铭战死，李英追踪，全部俘获了老的罕的部众，老的罕逃到赤斤蒙古。
English: Liangzhou chieftain Lao Han rebelled, commanded Ho Ming died in battle, Li Ying pursued, captured all of Lao Han's subordinates, and Lao Han fled to Mongolia.

古文：帝欲发兵，彬言道远饷难继，宜缓图之。
现代文：皇上想发兵，李彬说道路遥远，粮饷难继，应慢慢谋取他。
English: When the emperor wanted to send an army, Li Bin said that the road was far away, the grain supply was unsustainable, and he should be obtained slowly.

古文：明年代琥镇甘肃，赤斤蒙古缚老的罕以献。
现代文：第二年李彬取代宋琥镇守甘肃，赤斤蒙古捆老的罕来献给他。
English: The following year, Li Bin replaced Song Yanzhen as the governor of Gansu, and the old Mongolian bundles of red jars were dedicated to him.

古文：帝嘉彬功，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：皇上嘉奖李彬的功劳，给他的赏赐很丰厚。
English: The emperor commended Li Bin's merits and gave him a very rich reward.

古文：十二年从北征，领右哨，破敌于忽失温，追奔至土剌河。
现代文：十二年他随从北征，指挥右哨，在忽失温击破敌人，追击到土剌河。
English: In the twelfth year, he followed the Northern Expedition, commanded the right post, defeated the enemy in the sudden loss of temperature, and pursued to the Tuyun River.

古文：师还，受上赏，移镇陕西。
现代文：回师后，他受到上赏，移镇陕西。
English: After returning to his teacher, he was rewarded and moved to Shaanxi.

古文：十五年二月命佩征夷将军印，镇交阯。
现代文：十五年二月，李彬受命佩征夷将军印，镇守交趾。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, Li Bin was ordered to wear the seal of the general of the conquest of the barbarians.

古文：至则破擒陆那县贼阮贞，遣都督朱广等平顺州及北昼诸寨。
现代文：他到达后即击破并擒获了陆那县贼人阮贞，派都督朱广等人平定顺州和北昼等寨。
English: After his arrival, he immediately defeated and captured the thief of Lu Na County, Ruan Zhen, and sent Governor Zhu Guang and others to pacify Shunzhou and Beilong.

古文：明年，清化府土巡检黎利反，彬遣广讨破之。利遁去。
现代文：第二年，清化府土巡检黎利反叛，李彬派朱广攻破了他，黎利逃走。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Li Li rebelled against the provincial inspection of the Qing Dynasty. Li Bin sent Zhu Guang to defeat him, and Li Li fled.

古文：十七年遣都督同知方政袭利于可蓝栅，获其将军阮个立等。
现代文：十七年他派都督同知方政在可蓝栅袭击黎利，抓获其将军阮个立等人。
English: In the seventeenth year, he sent the governor and the governor Fang Zheng to attack Lili in Kelangzha, and captured its general Ruan Jili and others.

古文：利走老挝。
现代文：黎利逃到老挝。
English: Lili fled to Laos.

古文：师还，复出为寇。
现代文：部队回来后，他又出来为寇。
English: After the troops returned, he came out again as a thief.

古文：都指挥黄诚击走之，以暑雨旋师。
现代文：都指挥黄诚将他击退，因有暴雨而回师。
English: Commander Huang Cheng repulsed him and returned to his division due to a rainstorm.

古文：当是时，交人反者四起，彬遣诸将分道往讨：方政讨车绵子等于嘉兴，郑公证于南策，丁宗老于大湾；朱广讨谭兴邦等于别部；都指挥徐謜讨范软于俄乐；指挥陈原瑰讨陈直诚于恶江；都指挥王忠讨杨恭于峡山。
现代文：当时，交趾人到处起来反抗，李彬派遣将领分道前往征讨：方政讨伐嘉兴的车绵子等人，以及南策的郑公证、大湾的丁宗老；朱广讨伐谭兴邦等别部；都指挥徐讠原讨伐俄乐的范钦；指挥陈原瑰讨伐恶江的陈直诚；都指挥王忠讨伐峡山的杨恭。
English: At that time, comrades-in-arms rose up everywhere to resist, and Li Bin dispatched generals to go to different directions to fight: Fang Zheng to fight Che Mianzi and others in Jiaxing, as well as Zheng Gongzheng in Nan Zhe, Ding Zonglao in Dayan; Zhu Guang to fight Tan Xingbang and other departments; Fan Qin in command of Xu Yingyuan to fight Russian music; Chen Zhucheng in command of Chen Yuanji to fight evil rivers; Yang Qiong in command of Wang Zhong to fight canyons.

古文：皆先后报捷。
现代文：他们都先后报捷。
English: They all reported success successively.

古文：而贼势尤剧者，彬辄自将往击。
现代文：而贼人势力最大的，李彬便亲自率兵前往攻打。
English: As the thieves had the greatest power, Li Bin personally led an army to attack them.

古文：潘僚者，乂安土知府也。为中官马骐所虐，反衙仪。
现代文：潘僚是安土知府，遭宦官马骐的欺凌，在衙仪造反。
English: Pan's colleague was from the Ando prefecture. Bullied by eunuch Ma Jun, he rebelled in Puyi.

古文：彬击败之，追至玉麻州，擒其酋，进焚贼栅。
现代文：李彬将他击败，追到玉麻州，擒获了其首领，再推进焚烧了他的寨栅。
English: Li Bin defeated him, chased him to Yama Prefecture, captured his leader, and then burned his stockade.

古文：僚窜老挝，彬遣都指挥师祐帅师往。
现代文：潘僚窜到老挝，李彬派都指挥师佑率师前往。
English: Pan Liang went to Laos, and Li Bin sent Du Du commander You Zuo to lead the division.

古文：僚以老挝兵迎战，破之农巴林，悉降其众。
现代文：潘僚以老挝兵迎战，师佑在农巴林将其击败，全部降服了他的部众。
English: Pan Liang took on the Laotian soldiers, and Shi You defeated them in Nongbalin, and all of his subordinates were subdued.

古文：范玉者，涂山寺僧也，反东潮州。
现代文：范玉是涂山寺僧人，在东潮州造反。
English: Fan Yu was a monk of Tuishan Temple who rebelled in East Chaozhou.

古文：彬往讨，败之江中。
现代文：李彬前往征讨，将他击败在江中。
English: Li Bin went to fight and defeated him in the middle of the river.

古文：玉脱走，追获之东潮。
现代文：范玉逃脱，官军追到东潮抓住了他。
English: Fan Yu escaped, and the government army chased him to Dongchao and caught him.

古文：而郑公证之党黎侄复起，都指挥陈忠等累败之于小黄江。彬自将追捕，至镇蛮，尽缚其众。
现代文：而郑公证的党羽黎侄又作乱，都指挥陈忠等多次在小黄江将其击败，李彬亲自率兵追捕，将其部众全部抓获。
English: However, Zheng Gongzheng's henchman, Li Jiu, once again started a riot, and both commander Chen Zhong and others repeatedly defeated him in the Xiao Huangjiang River. Li Bin personally led the troops in pursuit and captured all of his subordinates.

古文：于是诸贼略平，惟黎利数出没，聚众磊江，屡为徐謜、方政所败，复遁去。
现代文：于是各支贼人全被平定，只有黎利一再出没，聚众于磊江，屡次被徐讠原、方政击败后，又逃走。
English: As a result, all the supporting thieves were subdued, only Lili repeatedly visited and gathered people in Leijiang. After being repeatedly defeated by Xu Bingyuan and Fang Zheng, he fled again.

古文：十九年，彬以馈运不继，请令官军与土军参错屯田，并酌屯守征行多寡之数以闻。
现代文：十九年，李彬因粮饷供应不上，请令官军与土军参错屯田，并将拟定的屯田军、驻守军和征战军的数量报告朝廷。
English: In 19th year, Li Bin was unable to supply grain because of the shortage of grain, so he asked the government army and the Turkish army to come to the wrong garrison, and reported the number of the proposed garrison army, garrison army and conscript army to the imperial court.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上批准了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：将发兵入老挝索黎利。
现代文：他将要发兵入老挝索取黎利。
English: He's going to send troops into Laos to get the money.

古文：老挝惧，请自捕以献，会彬疾作而罢。
现代文：老挝害怕了，请自捕黎利献上，正好李彬疾病发作，只好罢兵。
English: Lao was afraid, so he asked Li Li to present himself. Just as Li Bin fell ill, he had to leave the army.

古文：从子儒嗣，传至孙承祚，天启时附魏忠贤，请设海外督理内臣，又请予忠贤九锡。崇祯初，夺爵戍边。子开先嗣为伯，都城陷。遇害。柳升，怀宁人。
现代文：李彬去世后，赠茂国公，谥刚毅。柳升，怀宁人。
English: After the death of Li Bin, Maoguo Guogong, Zou Gangyi, Liu Sheng, Huaining people were presented.

古文：袭父职为燕山护卫百户。
现代文：承袭父职任燕山护卫百户。
English: He inherited his father's position as the guardian of Yanshan Mountain.

古文：大小二十余战，累迁左军都督佥事。
现代文：他经历大小二十余战，累升为左军都督佥事。
English: He experienced more than 20 battles, both large and small, and was promoted to the position of the left-wing military governor.

古文：永乐初，从张辅征交阯，破贼鲁江，斩其帅阮子仁等。
现代文：永乐初年，随从张辅征交趾，破贼于鲁江，斩杀其首领阮子仁等。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he followed Zhang Fuzheng, broke the bandits in Lujiang, and killed their leader Ruan Ziren.

古文：守咸子关。
现代文：守卫咸子关。
English: Guarding Hamagoe Pass.

古文：贼入富良江，舟亘十余里，截江立寨，陆兵亦数万人。
现代文：贼人进入富良江，船只连绵十余里，横截江面，构建营寨，陆军也有数万人。
English: Thieves entered the Fura River, boats stretched for more than ten miles, cut across the river, built camps, and the army also had tens of thousands of people.

古文：辅将步骑，升将水军，夹攻，大败之，获伪尚书阮希周等。
现代文：张辅率领步骑兵，柳升率领水师，夹攻，大败贼兵，俘获伪尚书阮希周等人。
English: Zhang Fu led the infantry and cavalry, and Liu Sheng led the sailors. They made a pincer attack, defeated the bandits, and captured the fake Shangshu Ruan Xizhou and others.

古文：又败贼于奇罗海口，得舟三百。
现代文：又在奇罗海口击败贼人，夺得船只三百艘。
English: He also defeated the thieves at the mouth of the Chiro Sea and captured three hundred ships.

古文：部卒得季犛及其子澄。
现代文：他的部下抓获了黎季嫠和他的儿子黎澄。
English: His men captured Li Jizhe and his son, Li Cheng.

古文：升赍露布献俘，被赏赉。
现代文：柳升带着露布向朝廷奏捷献俘，受到赏赐。
English: Liu Sheng, wearing a robe, played a song of victory and sacrifice to the imperial court, and was rewarded.

古文：师还，封安远伯，禄千石，予世券。
现代文：部队回来后，他被封为安远伯，食禄一千石，给予世袭诰券。
English: After the troops returned, he was given the title of Anyongbo, a stipend of one thousand koku, and hereditary vouchers.

古文：七年同陈瑄帅舟师巡海，至青州海中，大破倭，追至金州白山岛而还。
现代文：七年，他同陈蠧率舟师巡海，到青州附近海面，大破倭寇，追到金州白山岛而还。
English: In the seventh year, he went to the sea near Qingzhou with Chen Yu and his boat division, defeated the wokou, and chased it to Baishan Island in Jinzhou.

古文：明年从北征，至回曲津，将神机火器为前锋，大败阿鲁台。
现代文：第二年随从北征，到达回曲津，率神机火器为前锋，大败阿鲁台。
English: In the second year, he followed the Northern Expedition and arrived back in Qujing. He led the advance with a powerful firearm and defeated Alutai.

古文：进封侯，加禄五百石，仍世伯爵。
现代文：进封为侯爵，加禄米五百石，仍世袭伯爵。
English: He was raised to the rank of marquis, garnered five hundred koku, and remained a hereditary count.

古文：出镇宁夏，讨斩叛将冯答兰帖木儿等。
现代文：出去镇守宁夏，讨伐并斩杀叛将冯答兰帖木儿等人。
English: He went out to guard Ningxia, and fought and killed the traitor Feng Dalan Timur and others.

古文：召还，总京营兵。
现代文：被召回，总领京营兵。
English: He was recalled and became the commander of the Beijing battalion.

古文：十二年复从北征，将大营兵战忽兰、忽失温，以火器破敌。
现代文：第二年又随从北征，率大营部队战忽兰、忽失温，以火器击破敌人。
English: The next year, he followed the Northern Expedition, led a large battalion to fight against the Lan, lost his temper, and defeated the enemy with firearms.

古文：十八年，蒲台妖妇唐赛儿反。
现代文：十八年，蒲台妖妇唐赛儿造反。
English: In the 18th year, the Pudai fairy godmother, Tang Xie Er, rebelled.

古文：命升与都指挥刘忠将京军往剿，围其寨。
现代文：皇上命柳升与都指挥刘忠率京军前往剿灭，包围了她的营寨。
English: The emperor ordered Liu Sheng and the capital commander Liu Zhong to lead the Beijing army to annihilate and encircle her camp.

古文：升自以大将，意轻贼。
现代文：柳升自以为是大将，心中轻敌。
English: Liu Sheng thought of himself as a great general and despised his enemies.

古文：贼乞降，信之。
现代文：贼人请求投降，柳升相信了。
English: The thief asked to surrender, and Liu Sheng believed him.

古文：夜为所袭，忠中流矢死，赛儿遁去。
现代文：晚上被贼人偷袭，刘忠中流矢而死，唐赛儿逃走。
English: In the evening, he was attacked by thieves, Liu Zhong died in the crossfire, and Tang Xiel fled.

古文：及明始觉，追获其党百余人。
现代文：到天明时才发现，柳升追击，抓获了其百余名党羽。
English: It was only discovered at dawn that Liu Sheng had pursued and captured more than a hundred of his party members.

古文：都指挥卫青力战解安邱围。
现代文：都指挥卫青力战解除了安丘之围。
English: The capital's commanding officer, Wei Qingli, lifted the siege of Anqiu.

古文：升忌其功，摧辱之。征下狱，已，得释。
现代文：柳升妒嫉他的功劳，折辱他，结果被逮入狱中，后来获释。
English: Liu Sheng was jealous of his achievements and insulted him. As a result, he was arrested and imprisoned, and later released.

古文：二十年复从北征，将中军破兀良哈于屈裂儿河，予世侯。
现代文：二十年，他又随从皇上北征，率领中军在屈裂儿河击破兀良哈，给予他世袭侯爵。
English: Twenty years later, he followed the emperor on the Northern Expedition, and led the Chinese army to defeat Ailiangha in the Qu Riel River, giving him a hereditary marquis.

古文：帝五出塞，升皆从，数有功，宠待在列侯右。
现代文：皇上五次出塞，柳升都跟随，多次有功，所受的宠爱在各侯爵之上。
English: The emperor went out of the country five times, and Liu Sheng followed him. He was honored many times, and was favored above all other marquesses.

古文：仁宗即位，命掌右府，加太子太傅。
现代文：仁宗即位后，命他掌管右军都督府，加封为太子太傅。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he ordered him to take charge of the right-wing military governor's office, and he was given the title of Prince Taifu.

古文：宣德元年冬，成山侯王通征黎利，败闻。
现代文：宣德元年冬，成山侯王通征讨黎利，败报传到朝廷。
English: In the winter of Xuande in the first year of the Republic of China, Chengshan marquis Wang Tong went to the imperial court to ask for compensation.

古文：命升为征虏副将军，充总兵官，保定伯梁铭为左副总兵，都督崔聚为参将，尚书李庆赞军务，帅步骑七万，会黔国公沐晟往讨。
现代文：皇上命柳升为征虏副将军，充任总兵官，保定伯梁铭为左副总兵，都督崔聚为参将，尚书李庆赞佐军务，率领马步兵七万，会同黔国公沐晟前往讨伐。
English: The emperor ordered Liu Sheng to be the vice-general of conscription and to serve as the chief military officer, Baoding Bo Liangming to be the left vice-general of conscription, the governor of the capital, Cui Ju, to be a general officer, and Li Qing Zanzo to be in charge of military affairs and to lead 70,000 horse infantrymen, and to go to the crusade together with the prince of Qi, Mu Xi.

古文：时贼势已盛，道路梗绝，朝廷久不得交阯奏报。
现代文：当时贼势已盛，道路阻塞，朝廷久不得交趾的奏报。
English: At that time, the banditry was already in full swing, the roads were blocked, and the imperial court had not been able to make contact for a long time.

古文：二年六月，有军丁李茂先者三人，间道走京师，言昌江被围急。
现代文：二年六月，有军丁李茂先等三人，抄近路来到京师，说昌江被围，形势危急。
English: In June of the second year, there were three soldiers, including Ding Limao, who took a shortcut to Beijing Division and said that the Changjiang River was surrounded and the situation was critical.

古文：帝授三人百户。敕升急进援，而昌江已于四月陷。
现代文：皇上授予三人为百户，敕令柳升急速进兵援救，而昌江已在四月被攻陷。
English: The emperor granted three people for one hundred households, and ordered Liu Sheng to quickly enter the army to rescue, and Changjiang had been captured in April.

古文：九月，升始入隘留关。
现代文：九月，柳升才进入隘留关。
English: In September, Liu Sheng only entered the narrow pass.

古文：利伪为国人上书，请立陈氏后，升不启封以闻。
现代文：黎利假托为国人上书，请立陈氏的后代为国王，柳升不启封即上报朝廷。
English: Lili pretended to write a letter for the Chinese people, asking them to make Chen's descendants the king. Liu Sheng immediately reported to the court without opening the envelope.

古文：贼缘途据险列栅，官军连破之，抵镇夷关。
现代文：贼人沿途据险列栅，官军接连将其击破，抵达镇夷关。
English: Along the way, the bandits relied on the perilous grid, and the government army successively broke it, arriving at the town of Yiguan.

古文：升以贼屡败，易之。
现代文：柳升见贼人屡被击败，颇为轻敌。
English: When Liu Sheng saw that the thieves were repeatedly defeated, he regarded them as a rather insignificant enemy.

古文：时李庆、梁铭皆病甚。郎中史安、主事陈镛言于庆曰： 柳将军辞色皆骄。
现代文：当时李庆、梁铭都病得很重，郎中史安、主事陈镛对李庆说： 柳将军言辞和脸色都显得很骄傲。
English: At that time, Li Qing and Liang Ming were both seriously ill. Their son-in-law, Shi An, and the leader, Chen Yao, said to Li Qing: General Liu's words and face were very proud.

古文：骄者，兵家所忌。
现代文：骄傲乃是兵家所忌。
English: Pride is anathema to soldiers.

古文：贼或示弱以诱我，未可知也。
现代文：贼人说不定是示弱来引诱我们。
English: The thief may have tempted us with a sign of weakness.

古文：防贼设伏，玺书告诫甚切，公宜力言之。 
现代文：防范贼人设有埋伏，皇上玺书中已恳切告诫我们，公应努力提醒他。 
English: There are ambushes to prevent thieves. The emperor has earnestly warned us in his imperial edict, and we should try to remind him.

古文：庆强起告升，升不为意。
现代文：李庆勉强起来告诉柳升，柳升不在意。
English: Li Qing reluctantly stood up and told Liu Sheng that Liu Sheng didn't care about him.

古文：至倒马坡，与百余骑先驰度桥，桥遽坏，后队不得进。贼伏四起，升陷泥淖中，中镖死。
现代文：到倒马坡时，他与一百余名骑兵先飞驰过桥，后队无法跟进，贼人伏兵四起，柳升陷在泥淖中，中镖而死。
English: When he reached the downhill slope, he and more than a hundred cavalrymen sped across the bridge first, the rearguard could not follow, thieves ambushed the soldiers, Liu Sheng fell into the mud, and died in the dart.

古文：其日，铭病卒。
现代文：这一天，梁铭病死。
English: On this day, Liang Ming died of illness.

古文：明日，庆亦卒。
现代文：第二天，李庆也死了。
English: The next day, Li Qing also died.

古文：又明日，崔聚帅军至昌江。
现代文：又过了一天，崔聚率兵来到昌江。
English: A day later, Cui Ju led his troops to the Changjiang River.

古文：贼来益众，官军殊死斗。贼驱象大战。
现代文：贼人来得更多，官军殊死搏斗，贼人驱象大战。
English: The bandits came more, the government army fought to the death, the bandits drove the elephants into battle.

古文：阵乱，贼大呼： 降者不死。 
现代文：官军阵势乱了，贼人大喊： 降者不死！ 
English: The position of the government army was in disarray, and the thieves shouted: "Those who surrender will not die!"

古文：官军或死或走，无降者，全军尽没。
现代文：官军或死或逃，没有人投降，全军尽没。
English: The government army either died or fled, no one surrendered, the whole army was wiped out.

古文：史安、陈镛及李宗昉、潘禋皆死之。
现代文：史安、陈镛和李宗窻、潘都战死。
English: Shi An, Chen Yao, Li Zongyao and Pan all died in the battle.

古文：崔聚，怀远人。从成祖起兵。
现代文：崔聚是怀远人，当初跟从成祖起兵。
English: Cui Ju is a nostalgic person. At the beginning, he followed Cheng Zu to raise an army.

古文：八年从北征，败敌于广漠戍。
现代文：八年随从成祖北征，在广漠戍击败贼人。
English: For eight years, he followed Cheng Zu on the Northern Expedition and defeated the bandits in the vast desert.

古文：洪熙元年累迁左军都督佥事。
现代文：洪熙元年累升为左军都督佥事。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was promoted to the position of the left-wing military governor.

古文：至是力战被执，贼百计降之，终不屈死。
现代文：这时他力战被擒，贼人百计劝降他，他终不屈而死。
English: At this time, he fought hard to be arrested. The thieves tried their best to persuade him to surrender, but in the end, he refused and died.

古文：升质直宽和，善抚士卒，勇而寡谋，遂及于败。
现代文：柳升朴实正直而且宽和，善于安抚士卒，但勇而寡谋，终于导致了失败。
English: Liu Sheng was simple, honest and broad-minded. He was good at placating his subordinates, but he was courageous and weak-willed, which eventually led to his downfall.

古文：升败，沐晟师不得进，亦引还。
现代文：柳升失败后，沐晟的部队无法前进，也引兵退回。
English: After Liu Sheng's defeat, Mu Xi's troops were unable to advance and withdrew.

古文：王通孤军援绝，遂弃交阯。
现代文：王通孤军作战，后援断绝，便放弃了交趾。
English: Wang Tong fought as a lone soldier, cut off support, and then gave up the fight.

古文：子弟从征，以功授官，辄辞不受，人以为贤。传爵至世勋，崇祯初提督京营。
现代文：朝廷意见认为柳升丧师，不让他的儿子柳溥承袭爵位，过了很久才让他承袭。
English: According to the opinion of the Imperial Court, Liu Shengzhu did not allow his son Liu Hui to inherit the title, and it took a long time for him to succeed.

古文：京师陷，遇害。
现代文：正统十二年赠柳升为融国公，谥襄愍。
English: In the 12th year of orthodoxy, Liu Sheng was given the title of Rong Guogong.

古文：王通，咸宁人，金乡侯真子也。
现代文：王通，咸宁人，金乡侯王真的儿子。
English: Wang Tong, a native of Xianning, the son of Jinxiang marquis Wang Zhen.

古文：嗣父官为都指挥使，将父兵，转战有功，累进都督佥事。
现代文：承袭父职任都指挥使，率领父亲之兵，转战有功，累升为都督佥事。
English: Inheriting his father's position, he commanded and led his father's soldiers, distinguished himself in battle, and was promoted to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：复以父死事故，封武义伯，禄千石，予世券。
现代文：后来因父亲之死这一件事，他被封为武义伯，食禄一千石，给予世袭诰券。
English: Later, as a result of his father's death, he was given the title of Wuyi Bo, a stipend of one thousand koku, and a hereditary certificate.

古文：永乐七年董营长陵。
现代文：永乐七年，他总管营建长陵工程。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, he was in charge of the construction of the Changling project.

古文：十一年进封成山侯，加禄二百石。
现代文：十一年，进封为成山侯，加禄米二百石。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was given the title of Chengshan Hou (成山侯) with a stipend of 200 koku.

古文：明年从北征，领左掖。
现代文：第二年随从皇上北征，领左掖军。
English: The following year, he followed the emperor on the Northern Expedition, leading the Zuoying Army.

古文：二十年从出塞，以大军殿，连出塞，并领右掖。仁宗即位，命掌后府，加太子太保。
现代文：二十年，随从皇上出塞，兼领右掖军。仁宗即位后，命他掌管后军都督府，加封太子太保。
English: For twenty years, he accompanied the emperor out of Tibet, and also led the right wing army. After the enthronement of Emperor Nizong, he was ordered to take charge of the post-army governor's office, and he was also given the title of crown prince.

古文：时交阯总兵官丰城侯李彬已前卒，荣昌伯陈智、都督方政以参将代镇，不协。
现代文：当时交趾总兵官丰城侯李彬已先去世，荣昌伯陈智、都督方政以参将之职代为镇守，两人不和。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief of Fengcheng, Hou Li Bin, had already passed away, and Rongchang Bo Chen Zhi and Governor Fang Zheng took the post of the general as the town guard. The two did not get along.

古文：黎利益张，数破郡邑，杀将吏。
现代文：黎利势力更盛，连破州县，杀将吏，陈智出兵，多次被打败。
English: Lili's forces were more prosperous, and they were defeated many times, including in Bazhou County, killing generals, and Chen Zhi sent troops.

古文：智出兵数败，宣宗削智爵，而命通佩征夷将军印，帅师往讨。
现代文：宣宗削去陈智的爵位而命王通佩征夷将军印，率军前往征讨。
English: Emperor Xuanzong cut Chen Zhi's title and ordered Wang Tongpei to collect the seal of the General of the North and lead the army to conquer.

古文：黎利弟善攻交州城，都督陈濬等击却之。
现代文：黎利的弟弟黎善攻打交州城，都督陈浚等人将他击退。
English: Lili's brother, Lishan, attacked Zhouzhuang, but was repulsed by the governor Chen Jun and others.

古文：会通至，分道出击。
现代文：正好王通来到，便分路出击。
English: Just as Wang Tong arrived, they split up to attack.

古文：参将马瑛破贼于石室县。
现代文：参将马瑛在石室县破贼。
English: General Ma Ying breaks up a gang of thieves in Ishimuro County.

古文：通引军与瑛合，至应平之宁桥中伏，军大溃，死者二三万人，尚书陈洽与焉。
现代文：王通领兵与马瑛会合，到应平的宁桥时中了埋伏，官军大溃，死亡二三万人，其中有尚书陈洽。
English: Wang Tong, the leader of the army, met with Ma Ying, and when they arrived at the Ning Bridge in Yingping, they were ambushed, the government army was routed, and twenty-three thousand people died, including Shang Shuxu Chen Cai.

古文：通中伤还交州，利在乂安闻之，自将精卒围东关。
现代文：王通受伤回到交州，黎利在安听说后，自率精兵包围东关。
English: Wang Tong was injured and returned to Jiaozhou. After hearing this from An, Lili led his elite soldiers to encircle Dongguan.

古文：通气沮，阴遣人许为利乞封，而檄清化迤南地归利。
现代文：王通气势沮丧，暗中派人许诺为黎利乞求封号，而传檄将清化以南之地划归黎利。
English: Wang Tong, frustrated with the momentum, secretly sent someone to promise to beg for a seal name for Lili, while Chuan Wei assigned the land south of Qinghua to Lili.

古文：按察使杨时习执不可，通厉声叱之。
现代文：按察使杨时习反对，王通厉声呵叱他。
English: According to the inspector, Yang Shixi objected, and Wang Tong sternly scolded him.

古文：清化守罗通亦不肯弃城，与指挥打忠坚守。
现代文：清化长官罗通也不肯弃城，与指挥打忠坚守。
English: The governor of Qinghua, Rotong, also refused to abandon the city, and remained loyal to the commander.

古文：朝廷遣柳升等助通，未至。
现代文：朝廷派柳升等援助王通，但还没到达。
English: The imperial court sent Liu Sheng and others to assist Wang Tong, but they have not yet arrived.

古文：二年二月，利攻城。
现代文：二年二月黎利攻城。
English: In February of the following year, Lili attacked the city.

古文：通以劲兵五千出不意捣贼营，破之，斩其司空丁礼以下万余级。
现代文：王通以劲兵五千名出其不意直捣贼营，将其击破，斩杀其司空丁礼以下一万余人。
English: Wang Tong surprised the bandit camp with five thousand strong soldiers, smashed it, and killed more than ten thousand people including its commander, Kuo Dingli.

古文：利惶惧欲走，诸将请乘胜急击。
现代文：黎利惶惧想走。将领们请乘胜急击。
English: Lili panics and wants to leave. Generals, please take advantage of the victory and make a quick attack.

古文：通犹豫三日不出，贼势复振。
现代文：王通犹豫三日不出，贼势重新又振作起来。
English: After hesitating for three days, Wang Tong did not give up, and the bandits were reinvigorated.

古文：树栅掘濠堑，四出攻掠，分兵陷昌江、谅江，而围交益急。
现代文：他们树栏栅掘壕堑，四出攻掠，分兵攻陷昌江、谅江，而包围交州城更急。
English: They dug trenches with tree fences, attacked and plundered in all directions, and their detachments invaded the Changjiang River and the Letou River, while the encirclement of Jiaozhou City was more urgent.

古文：通敛兵不出。
现代文：王通敛兵不出。
English: Wang Tong did not withdraw his troops.

古文：利乞和，通以闻。
现代文：黎利求和，王通报告了朝廷。
English: Lili sued for peace, and Wang Tong reported this to the imperial court.

古文：会柳升战殁，沐晟师至水尾县不得进。
现代文：正值柳升战死，沐晟的部队进到水尾县时无法前进。
English: As Liu Sheng was killed in battle, Mu Xi's troops were unable to advance when they entered Shuiwei County.

古文：通益惧，更啗利和，为利驰上谢罪表。
现代文：王通更害怕了，便利诱黎利求和，为黎利驰传上呈谢罪表。
English: Wang Tong was even more afraid, so he lured Lili to make peace, and handed over a thank-you note for Lili.

古文：其年十月，大集官吏军民出城，立坛与利盟，约退师。因宴利，遗利锦绮，利亦以重宝为谢。
现代文：这一年十月，王通大集官吏军民出城，立坛与黎利结盟，相约退兵，并宴请黎利，赠给黎利锦绮，黎利也回赠重宝为谢。
English: In October of the same year, Wang Tongda gathered officials, soldiers and civilians out of the city, established an alliance with Lili, agreed to withdraw from the army, and invited Lili to a banquet, presented Lili with brocade, and Lili also returned the treasure as a thank you.

古文：十二月，通令太监山寿与陈智等由水路还钦州，而自帅步骑还广西。至南宁，始以闻。
现代文：十二日，王通令太监山寿与陈智等人由水路回钦州，而他自率步骑兵回广西，到达南宁后，他才将经过报告皇上。
English: On the 12th, Wang Tong ordered the eunuchs Shan Shou and Chen Zhi and others to return to Qinzhou by water, while he returned to Guangxi with his own infantry and cavalry. After arriving in Nanning, he would report to the emperor.

古文：会廷议厌兵，遂弃交阯。
现代文：正好廷臣的意见也厌兵，遂放弃交趾。
English: The opinion of the courtiers was also disgusted with the soldiers, so they gave up their friendship.

古文：交阯内属者二十余年，前后用兵数十万，馈饷至百余万，转输之费不与焉，至是弃去。
现代文：交趾内属二十余年，前后用兵数十万，粮饷达一百余万，还不包括转输的费用，至此终于放弃了。
English: After more than 20 years of friendship, hundreds of thousands of soldiers have been used, and grain reserves have reached more than one million, not including the cost of transfer, it has finally been abandoned.

古文：官吏军民还者八万六千余人，其陷于贼及为贼所戮者不可胜计。
现代文：官吏军民归国有八万六千余人，陷入贼人和被贼人杀戮的不可胜数。
English: More than 86,000 officials, soldiers and citizens returned to the country, and countless people fell into the hands of thieves and were killed by thieves.

古文：而土官向义者陶季容、陈汀之属，乃往往自拔来归。
现代文：而向义归附的土官，像陶季容、陈汀等人，往往自拔未归。
English: But the local officials attached to Xiangyi, such as Tao Jirong, Chen Ting and others, are often reluctant to return.

古文：明年，通还京，群臣交劾，论死系狱，夺券，籍其家。
现代文：第二年，王通回到京师。群臣纷纷弹劾他，他被判了死罪，关进狱中，夺去诰券，并被抄了家。
English: The following year, Wang Tong returned to Beijing. The courtiers impeached him one after another. He was sentenced to death, imprisoned, had his money confiscated, and his house was plundered.

古文：正统四年特释为民。
现代文：正统四年，他被特释为民。
English: After four years of orthodoxy, he was specially released as a citizen.

古文：景帝立，起都督佥事，守京城。
现代文：景帝即位后，起用他为都督佥事，守卫京城。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing, he was appointed as the governor of the capital to guard the capital.

古文：御也先有功，进同知，守天寿山，还其家产。
现代文：他抵御也先有功，进升为同知，守天寿山，归还他的家产。
English: He resisted and gained merit first. He was promoted to the same rank, guarded Tianshou Mountain, and returned his family property.

古文：景泰三年卒。
现代文：景泰三年王通去世。
English: Wang Tong passed away three years after Jing Tai.

古文：天顺元年诏通子琮嗣成山伯。
现代文：天顺元年，诏令他的儿子王琮承袭成山伯。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the emperor ordered his son Wang Hui to succeed him as a mountain monk.

