古文：李宗闵，字损之，宗室郑王元懿之后。
现代文：李宗闵字损之，是皇族郑王李元懿的后代。
English: Li Zongxuan Zizhi is a descendant of the royal family Zheng Wang Li Yuanxuan.

古文：祖自仙，楚州别驾。
现代文：祖父李自仙，是楚州别驾。
English: His grandfather, Li Zixian, was a star in Chuzhou.

古文：父，宗正卿，出为华州刺史、镇国军潼关防御等使。
现代文：父亲李曾羽，曾任宗正卿，后调出宫廷任华州刺史、镇国军潼关防御等使臣。
English: His father, Li Zengyu, once served as Zong Zhengqing, and was later transferred out of the court to serve as an envoy for the history of Huazhou and the defense of Shaoguan by the Zhenguo Army.

古文：兄夷简，元和中宰相。
现代文：李曾羽的兄长李夷简，是宪宗元和年间的宰相。
English: Li Zengyu's elder brother, Li Yijian, was the prime minister during the reign of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：宗闵，贞元二十一年进士擢第，元和四年，复登制举贤良方正科。
现代文：李宗闵于德宗贞元二十一年中进士，元和四年又考中贤良方正制科。
English: Li Zongya entered the middle school of Dezongzheng in the 21st year of the 19th century, and passed the examination of the middle school in the 4th year of the 19th century.

古文：初，宗闵与牛僧孺同年登进士第，又与僧孺同年登制科。
现代文：起初，李宗闵与牛僧孺同年中进士，又与僧孺同年考中制科。
English: At first, Li Zongyao entered the same year as Niu Zangyao, and he passed the middle school examination in the same year as Zangyao.

古文：应制之岁，李吉甫为宰相当国，宗闵、僧孺对策，指切时政之失，言甚鲠直，无所回避。
现代文：应考制科这年，李吉甫任宰相执政，李宗闵、牛僧孺在对答政事、经义的设问考题时，指摘施政失当，言辞十分刚直，毫无避忌。
English: In the year of the examination of system science, Li Jifu was the prime minister in power, and Li Zongyao and Niu Sangyao pointed out the misconduct of governance when they set the questions for the examination of government affairs and the meaning of the Constitution. The words were very straightforward and there was no avoidance.

古文：考策官杨于陵、韦贯之、李益等又第其策为中等，又为不中第者注解牛、李策语，同为唱诽。
现代文：主考对策的考官杨於陵、韦贯之、李益还将他们的策对成绩列中等；牛、李二人对答策问的话，又被落第的学士子加以注解，与他们一同指摘朝政。
English: The examiners Yang Yuling, Wei Gangzhi, and Li Yixuan, who were the main examiners of the countermeasures, also ranked their countermeasures as medium; Niu and Li were also annotated by the failed bachelor to answer the questions, and pointed out the government together with them.

古文：又言翰林学士王涯甥皇甫湜中选，考核之际，不先上言。
现代文：还说翰林学士王涯的外甥皇甫氵是中选，考核时王涯没有事先禀报朝廷请求回避。
English: It was also said that the nephew of Hanlin Scholar Wang Lai, Wang Fuxi, was selected. During the assessment, Wang Lai did not inform the court in advance to request withdrawal.

古文：裴垍时为学士，居中覆视，无所异同。
现代文：裴土自是学士，在考中复查，责任相同。
English: Pei Tu is a bachelor himself, and he has the same responsibilities in reviewing the mid-term examination.

古文：吉甫泣诉于上前，宪宗不获已，罢王涯、裴垍学士。垍守户部侍郎，涯守都官员外郎，吏部尚书杨于陵出为岭南节度使，吏部员外郎韦贯之出为果州刺史。
现代文：李吉甫向宪宗哭诉，宪宗不得已，免去了王涯、裴土自的学士职务，改任裴土自暂时代理户部侍郎，王涯暂代都官员外郎；吏部尚书杨於陵调出朝廷任岭南节度使，吏部员外郎韦贯之调任果州刺史。
English: Li Jifu complained bitterly to Emperor Xianzong. As a last resort, Emperor Xianzong relieved Wang Lai and Pei Tu Zi of their positions as academicians and appointed Pei Tu Zi temporarily as the steward of the household department, and Wang Lai temporarily as the steward of the capital official; Shang Shu Yang of the personnel department was transferred from the imperial court to serve as the Lingnan Festival envoy, and the personnel department member Wai Quan of the personnel department was transferred to serve as the governor of Gansu.

古文：王涯再贬虢州司马，贯之再贬巴州刺史；僧孺、宗闵亦久之不调，随牒诸侯府。
现代文：王涯后又贬为虢州司马，韦贯之再贬为巴州刺史；牛僧孺、李宗闵也长时间没有提升，随选官的文牒置于地方官府。
English: After Wang Ya, he was relegated to the position of Bozhou Sima, and after Wei Gangzhi, he was relegated to the position of Bozhou Zhishi; Niu Xiangyao and Li Zongyao were also not promoted for a long time, and they were placed in the local government office with the notice of election.

古文：七年，吉甫卒，方入朝为监察御史，累迁礼部员外郎。
现代文：元和七年，李吉甫去世，李宗闵才调入朝廷任监察御史，递升至礼部员外郎。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan and the death of Li Jifu, Li Zonglu was transferred to the imperial court to serve as the inspector of history, and was promoted to the member of the ceremonial department.

古文：元和十二年，宰相裴度出征吴元济，奏宗闵为彰义军观察判官。
现代文：元和十二年，宰相裴度征讨吴元济，奏请朝廷委任李宗闵为彰义军观察判官。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Prime Minister Baidu solicited Wu Yuanji and petitioned the imperial court to appoint Li Zongyao as the observation judge of the Zhangyi Army.

古文：贼平，迁驾部郎中，又以本官知制诰。
现代文：吴元济被平定后，李宗闵升官为驾部郎中，并以本官职掌管朝廷诏令文书。
English: After Wu Yuanji was subdued, Li Zongji was promoted to the position of the second-in-command of the cavalry, and in his official capacity, he was in charge of the Imperial Court's imperial rescript.

古文：穆宗即位，拜中书舍人。时自宗正卿出刺华州，父子同时承恩制，人士荣之。
现代文：穆宗登基，委任他为中书舍人；这时李曾羽由宗正卿出任华州史，父子同时接受皇帝的委任诏令，上流人士认为这是荣耀的事。
English: When Emperor Muzong ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the person in charge of Chinese history. At that time, Li Zengyu was appointed as the governor of Huazhou by Emperor Muzong, and both father and son accepted the emperor's appointment decree, which was considered a matter of honor by the upper class.

古文：长庆元年，子婿苏巢于钱徽下进士及第，其年，巢覆落。
现代文：长庆元年，李宗闵的女婿苏巢在钱徽手下中进士，同年，苏巢复试落选。
English: In the first year of the Changqing era, Su Xue, the son-in-law of Li Zongyao, was promoted to junior high school under Qian Hui. In the same year, Su Xue failed the re-examination.

古文：宗闵涉请托，贬剑州刺史。
现代文：李宗闵涉嫌托情走门路，被贬为剑州刺史。
English: Li Zongyao was suspected of using his position to curry favor and was relegated to a footnote in the history of Jianzhou.

古文：时李吉甫子德裕为翰林学士，钱徽榜出，德裕与同职李绅、元稹连衡言于上前，云徽受请托，所试不公，故致重覆。
现代文：这时李吉甫之子李德裕任翰林学士，钱徽发榜后，李德裕与同职的李绅、元稹多次对穆宗讲：钱徽接受李宗闵的托情，考试不公正，因而致使进行复试。
English: At this time, Li Jifu's son, Li Deyu, was a scholar of Hanlin, and after Qianhui was promoted, Li Deyu and his colleagues, Li Sheng and Yuan Qi, repeatedly told Mu Zong: Qianhui accepted Li Zongyao's request, the examination was unfair, which led to a retest.

古文：比相嫌恶，因是列为朋党，皆挟邪取权，两相倾轧。
现代文：两家先后互生怨憎，由此各结党羽，各都怀藏私心争权，彼此倾轧。
English: The two families successively bore grudges against each other, as a result of which each formed a faction, each harboring selfishness and competing for power, and tearing each other apart.

古文：自是纷纭排陷，垂四十年。
现代文：从此双方排挤构陷不断，近四十年。
English: Since then, the two sides have been squeezed and trapped for nearly forty years.

古文：复入为中书舍人。
现代文：李宗闵再次进入朝廷任中书舍人。
English: Li Zongyao once again entered the imperial court to serve as the Chinese scholar.

古文：三年冬，权知礼部侍郎。
现代文：长庆三年冬，暂代礼部侍郎。
English: In the winter of the third year of the Nagakatsu era, he became the provisional Reibu waiter.

古文：四年，贡举事毕，权知兵部侍郎。
现代文：次年，科举考试结束后，暂代兵部侍郎。
English: The following year, after the entrance examination was over, he became the provisional attendant of the military department.

古文：宝历元年，正拜兵部侍郎，父忧免。
现代文：敬宗宝历元年，刚任兵部侍郎，因守父丧而免职。
English: In the first year of the Horyaku era, Keizong, who had just been appointed as the attendant of the military department, was dismissed from his post due to the death of his father.

古文：太和二年，起为吏部侍郎，赐金紫之服。
现代文：文宗太和二年，起用为吏部侍郎，皇帝赐予金符紫服。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wenzong's reign, he was appointed as an attendant of the cadre department, and the emperor gave him a golden purple robe.

古文：三年八月，以本官同平章事。
现代文：太和三年八月，以本官职任同平章事。
English: In August of the following year, she was promoted to the same rank as her husband.

古文：时裴度荐李德裕，将大用。
现代文：这时裴度举荐李德裕，打算重用。
English: At this time, Pei Du recommended Li Deyu, intending to reuse it.

古文：德裕自浙西入朝，为中人助宗闵者所沮，复出镇。
现代文：李德裕从浙江调入朝廷，被帮助李宗闵的宦官阻止，又调出朝廷任镇守。
English: Li Deyu was transferred from Zhejiang to the imperial court, but was stopped by eunuchs who helped Li Zongyao. He was then transferred out of the imperial court to serve as a town guard.

古文：寻引牛僧孺同知政事，二人唱和，凡德裕之党皆逐之。
现代文：接着李宗闵引荐牛僧孺与自己一同主持政事，二人相互呼应，凡是李德裕一党的人一概逐出朝廷。
English: Then Li Zongyao recommended that Niu Zangyao preside over the government together with him. The two men agreed with each other, and all the members of Li Deyu's party were expelled from the imperial court.

古文：累转中书侍郎、集贤大学士。
现代文：后李宗闵递升为中书侍郎、集贤大学士。
English: Later, Li Zonglu was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters and became a scholar of Jixian University.

古文：七年，德裕作相。
现代文：太和七年，李德裕任宰相。
English: In the seventh year of the Taihe era, Li Deyu was appointed prime minister.

古文：六月，罢宗闵知政事，检校礼部尚书、同平章事、兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：六月，免除李宗闵掌管朝廷政务，任其为检校礼部尚书、同平章事、兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: In June, Li Zonglu was exempted from taking charge of the government affairs of the imperial court, and he was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department of the school, Tongping Zhangji, Xingyuan Yin, and the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：宗闵为吏部侍郎时，因驸马都尉沈结托女学士宋若宪及知枢密杨承和，二人数称之于上前，故获征用。
现代文：李宗闵任吏部侍郎时，因驸马都尉沈立羲交结托请女学士宋若宪和知枢密杨承和，宋、杨二人屡次向文宗称道他，因而得到征用。
English: When Li Zongxuan served as a steward of the cadre department, he asked Song Ruoxian, a female scholar, and Yang Chenghe, a close confidant of the emperor, to serve as his steward because of their friendship. Both Song and Yang repeatedly praised him to Wen Zong, and thus they were expropriated.

古文：及德裕秉政，群邪不悦，而郑注、李训深恶之。文宗乃复召宗闵于兴元，为中书侍郎、平章事，命德裕代宗闵为兴元尹。
现代文：到李德裕执政，众奸邪之徒不高兴，而郑注、李训又痛恶他，文宗便又从兴元召回李宗闵任中书侍郎、平章事，调李德裕接替李宗闵任兴元尹。
English: When Li Deyu came to power, all the traitors and evil-doers were not happy, and Zheng Zhu and Li Xun detested him. Wenzong then recalled Li Zonglu from Xingyuan to serve as the secretary and secretary of the Central Committee, and transferred Li Deyu to succeed Li Zonglu to serve as Xingyuan Yin.

古文：既再得权位，辅之以训、注，尤恣所欲，进封襄武侯，食邑千户。
现代文：李宗闵再次获得权位后，使用李训、郑注协助自己，更为所欲为；被进封为襄武侯，食邑三千户。
English: After Li Zongyao regained power, he used Li Xun and Zheng Zhu to help him, and did whatever he wanted; he was given the title of Xiangwu Hou, with 3,000 households.

古文：九年六月，京兆尹杨虞卿得罪，宗闵极言救解，文宗怒叱之曰： 尔尝谓郑覃是妖气，今作妖，覃耶、尔耶？ 
现代文：太和九年六月，京兆尹杨虞卿获罪，李宗闵为他极力解救，文宗愤怒地喝斥他说： 你曾说郑覃是不祥的妖气，今天作妖的，是郑覃呢，还是你呢？ 
English: In June of the ninth year of Tahei, Jing Zhao, Yin, and Yang Yu were found guilty, and Li Zongyao tried his best to save him. Wen Zong angrily rebuked him, saying, "You once said that Zheng Yao was an ominous evil spirit. Is it Zheng Yao who is the evil spirit today, or is it you?"

古文：翌日，贬明州刺史，寻再贬处州长史。
现代文：第二天，将他贬为明州刺史，不久又贬他为处州长史。
English: The next day, he was relegated to the history of Mingzhou, and soon he was relegated to the history of the governor's office.

古文：七月，郑注发沈、宋若宪事，内官杨承和、韦元素、沈及若宪姻党坐贬者十余人，又贬宗闵潮州司户。
现代文：七月，郑注揭发沈立羲、宋若宪的事，近臣杨承和、韦元素、沈立羲及宋若宪的姻亲、宗族受株连被贬官的有十余人，李宗闵再被贬为潮州司户。
English: In July, Zheng Zhu exposed the affair of Shen Lijuan and Song Ruoqian. More than ten of his close vassals, including Yang Chenghe, Wei Ye, Shen Lijuan and Song Ruoqian's in-laws and family members, were demoted. Li Zonglu was then demoted to the position of Chaozhou Sifu.

古文：时训、注窃弄威权，凡不附己者，目为宗闵、德裕之党，贬逐无虚日，中外震骇，连月阴晦，人情不安。
现代文：这时李训、郑注窃取权柄玩弄威权势力，凡属不依附自己的人，尽视为李宗闵、李德裕的党羽，贬斥朝官不空一日，朝廷内外震动惊骇，连月阴霾，人心不安。
English: At this time, Li Xun and Zheng Zh stole power and toyed with authoritarian forces. All those who did not cling to themselves were regarded as the party members of Li Zongtao and Li Deyu. They denounced the imperial officials for more than one day. The shock inside and outside the imperial court was shocking, and the atmosphere was gloomy for months, and people were uneasy.

古文：九月诏曰：朕承天缵历，烛理不明，劳虚襟以求贤，励宽德以容众。
现代文：九月，文宗颁诏说： 朕承受天命继承国祚，洞察事理未能分明，但劳神虚怀以求贤士，励志宽惠以容众才。
English: In September, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict, saying, "I have been chosen to succeed to the throne of the country. I have not been able to discern the reason for this, but I have tried my best to be a wise man, and I have been encouraged by God's grace to be tolerant of all talents.

古文：顷者，或台辅乖弼违之道，而具僚扇朋附之风；翕然相从，实篸彝宪。
现代文：近来，有的宰辅大臣违背纠正过失之道，而与僚臣煽扬阿附结党之风，上下一致言行协同，实为败坏典章大法。
English: Recently, some vice-ministers have violated the way of correcting mistakes, and instigated the party's style of affiliation with their colleagues, and coordinated their words and deeds with each other, which is actually a corruption of the grand law.

古文：致使薰莸共器，贤不肖并驰；退迹者成后时之夫，登门者有迎吠之客。
现代文：致使良莠不分同置一处，德才兼备者与无德无才者一并进用，离开正道者反成日后官长，登门求见者多有附和之宾客。
English: As a result, the good and the bad were placed in the same place without distinction, the virtuous and the unvirtuous and the untalented were used together, those who left the righteous path became the future officials, and those who came to see him had many guests.

古文：缪戾之气，堙郁和平，而望阴阳顺时，疵疠不作；朝廷清肃，班列和安，自古及今，未尝有也。
现代文：反常的气焰，埋灭了和顺之风，而指望日月顺应时序，灾害疫病不发，朝廷清明整肃，朝官和睦安定，从古到今，从未有过。
English: Unusual arrogance has buried the wind of harmony, and the hope that the sun and moon will follow the time sequence, disasters and epidemics will not occur, the imperial court will be clear and clean, and the imperial officials will be harmonious and stable, has never existed from ancient times to the present.

古文：今既再申朝典，一变浇风，扫清朋比之徒，匡饬贞廉之俗。凡百卿士，惟新令猷。
现代文：现已重申朝廷典章，一改浮薄风气，扫清趋附结党之徒，扶正忠贞廉明之风，所有执政宰辅，实施新政善道。
English: It has now been reaffirmed that the imperial court ceremony, change the superficial atmosphere, sweep away those who are inclined to join the party, promote the spirit of loyalty, honesty and probity, all governors and deputies, and implement the New Deal and the virtuous path.

古文：如闻周行之中，尚蓄疑惧，或有妄相指目，令不自安，今斯旷然，明喻朕意。
现代文：如若听说仕宦之中，还有人心存疑惧，或者有人非分观望，致使自己不得安宁，现今情况业已明朗，明白昭示朕的心意。
English: If you have heard that there are still people who have doubts in their hearts, or if there are people who can't wait and can't be at peace, now the situation has become clear, it clearly shows my intention.

古文：应与宗闵、德裕或亲或故及门生旧吏等，除今日已前黜远之外，一切不问。
现代文：应和亲附李宗闵、李德裕的亲朋故交门生旧吏，除今日以前罢官流放者外，一概不予追究。
English: The relatives and friends of Li Zongyao and Li Deyu, as well as the old officials and disciples, will not be investigated, except for those who were dismissed and exiled before today.

古文：各安职业，勿复为嫌。
现代文：各安本职之业，不要再生仇怨。 
English: Let each of you settle down to your own work, and don't rekindle old grudges.

古文：文宗以二李朋党，绳之不能去，尝谓侍臣曰： 去河北贼非难，去此朋党实难。 
现代文：文宗因二李朋党相争，虽屡经禁止仍不能清除，曾对身边的侍臣说： 除掉河北的贼寇不难，消除这班朋党实在是难。 
English: Because of the conflict between the two Li Peng parties, which could not be eliminated despite repeated prohibitions, Wenzong once said to the attendants around him: It is not difficult to get rid of the thieves and robbers in Hebei, but it is really difficult to eliminate this group of friends.

古文：宗闵虽骤放黜，竟免李训之祸。
现代文：李宗闵这次虽骤然被罢免，但竟因此而避免了卷入李训叛逆的灾祸。
English: Although Li Zongyao was suddenly deposed this time, he actually avoided the disaster of being involved in Li Xun's rebellion.

古文：开成元年，量移衢州司马。
现代文：文宗开成元年，李宗闵调至邻近的衢州任司马。
English: In the first year of the founding of Wenzong, Li Zongyu was transferred to the neighboring Bozhou Province to serve as the head of the provincial government.

古文：三年，杨嗣复辅政，与宗闵厚善，欲拔用之，而畏郑覃沮议，乃托中人密讽于上。
现代文：开成三年，杨嗣复辅助执政，他与李宗闵友情深厚，想提拔任用他，但怕郑覃阻止非议，便托宦官向文宗缜密地委婉进言。
English: Three years into his reign, Yang Sifu returned to assist in governing. He had a deep friendship with Li Zonglu and wanted to promote and appoint him. However, fearing that Zheng Rong would prevent the criticism, he asked the eunuch to carefully and tactfully advise Wen Zonglu.

古文：上以嗣复故，因紫宸对，谓宰相曰： 宗闵在外四五年，宜别授一官。 
现代文：文宗因杨嗣复托请之故，于是在紫宸殿召见大臣奏对时，对宰相说： 宗闵在地方任职四、五年，该另授一官职。 
English: As a result of Yang Xi's request for reassignment, Wenzong was summoned to meet with the minister at Shijiazhuang Palace, where he said to the prime minister, "Since Wenzong has served in the local government for four or five years, he should be given another official post."

古文：郑覃曰： 陛下怜其地远，宜移近内地三五百里，不可再用奸邪。
现代文：郑覃说： 陛下怜悯他所处的地方太远，可调他靠近内地三、五百里，不可再重用奸邪的人。
English: Zheng Yao said, "Your Majesty may have mercy on him if he is too far away, and may transfer him three or five hundred miles closer to the mainland, and may no longer make heavy use of traitors."

古文：陛下若欲用宗闵，臣请先退。 
现代文：陛下若想任用李宗闵，臣请陛下让我先辞职。 
English: If Your Majesty wants to appoint Ri Jong Un, I would ask Your Majesty to let me resign first.

古文：陈夷行曰： 比者，宗闵得罪，以朋党之故，恕死为幸。
现代文：陈夷行说： 近年，李宗闵获罪，因结成朋党，宽恕不死已是幸运。
English: Chen Yixing said: In recent years, Li Zongyao was found guilty of forming a crony party, so it is fortunate that he was pardoned.

古文：宝历初，李续之、张又新、苏景胤等，朋比奸险，几倾朝廷，时号 八关十六子 。 
现代文：宝历初年，李续之、张又新、苏景胤等人，相互勾结奸诈阴险，几乎使朝廷倾覆，当时号称 八关十六子 。 
English: In the first year of the Baoli calendar, Li Cui Zhi, Zhang Yuxin, Su Jingyin and others colluded with each other in treachery and insidiousness, almost overthrowing the imperial court. At that time, they were known as the Sixteen Sons of the Eight Gates.

古文：李珏曰： 主此事者，罪在逢吉。
现代文：李王玉说： 主谋这件事，罪过在李逢吉。
English: Li Wangyu said: The mastermind of this matter, the crime is in Li Fengji.

古文：李续之居丧服阕，不可不与一官，臣恐中外衣冠，交兴议论，非为续之辈也。 
现代文：李续之守丧三年已满，不能不授予他一个官职，我担心朝廷内外的士大夫，一起大肆议论，并不是为了李续之这班人。 
English: Now that the three-year mourning period has ended, he must be given an official post. I'm worried that the officials inside and outside the imperial court are not for Li Cui Zhi's group.

古文：夷行曰： 昔舜逐四凶天下治。朝廷求理，何惜此十数纤人？ 
现代文：陈夷行说： 往古舜帝放逐四大恶人而天下太平，朝廷要求得政局太平，怎能怜惜这十几个小人？ 
English: Chen Yixing said, "In ancient times, Emperor Qianlong banished the four villains and the world was peaceful. The imperial court demanded that the political situation should be peaceful. How can we pity these dozen villains?"

古文：嗣复曰： 事贵得中，不可但徇憎爱。 
现代文：杨嗣复说： 论事以求得不偏不倚为贵，不能只偏从爱憎。 
English: Yang Shifu said: It is important to be impartial in discussing matters, and one should not be biased by love or hate.

古文：上曰： 与一郡可也。 
现代文：文宗说： 给他管一个郡好了。 
English: Empress Dowager: Just give him a county.

古文：郑覃曰： 与郡太优，止可洪州司马耳。 
现代文：郑覃说： 给他管一个郡太优待，只可任洪州司马而已。 
English: Zheng Yao said: To give him a county is too preferential treatment, he can only be appointed as Hongzhou Sima.

古文：夷行曰： 宗闵养成郑注之恶，几覆邦家，国之巨蠹也。 
现代文：陈夷行说： 李宗闵助成了郑注的罪恶，几乎使国家倾覆，他是国家的大蛀虫。 
English: Chen Yixing said: Li Zongyao helped Zhengzhu commit the crime and almost toppled the country. He is a big worm in the country.

古文：嗣复曰： 比者，陛下欲加郑注官，宗闵不肯，陛下亦当记忆。 
现代文：杨嗣复说： 先前，陛下想给郑注加官，李宗闵不肯，陛下该还记得。 
English: Yang Shifu said, "Previously, Your Majesty wanted to give Zheng Zhu a promotion, but Li Zongyao refused. Your Majesty should remember that."

古文：覃曰： 嗣复党庇宗闵。
现代文：郑覃说： 杨嗣复偏袒李宗闵。
English: Zheng Yao said: Yang Shifu favored Li Zongyao.

古文：臣观宗闵之恶，甚于李林甫。 
现代文：臣看李宗闵的罪恶，超过李林甫。 
English: The vassals thought that Li Zongyao's evil exceeded that of Li Linfu.

古文：嗣复曰： 覃语大过。
现代文：杨嗣复说： 郑覃的话大错特错。
English: Yang Shifu said: Zheng Yao's words are very wrong.

古文：昔玄宗季年，委用林甫，妒贤害能，破人家族。
现代文：以往玄宗末年，委用李林甫，李林甫妒贤害能，毁害别人的家族。
English: In the past, in the last years of Xuanzong, Li Linfu was appointed. Li Linfu was jealous of Xian Xian and destroyed other people's families.

古文：宗闵在位，固无此事。
现代文：宗闵在位时，绝无这类事。
English: When Zonglu was in power, there was no such thing.

古文：况太和末，宗闵、德裕同时得罪。
现代文：况且太和末年，李宗闵、李德裕同时获罪。
English: Moreover, in the last years of the Taihe era, Li Zongyao and Li Deyu were convicted at the same time.

古文：二年之间，德裕再领重镇，而宗闵未离贬所。
现代文：两年之间，德裕再度统领重镇，而宗闵却没有离开被贬去的地方。
English: Between the two years, Deyu once again ruled Chongzhen, while Zonglu did not leave the place where he was demoted.

古文：陛下惩恶劝善，进退之理宜均，非臣独敢党庇。
现代文：陛下惩恶奖善，进用与斥退的准则应当均等，并非臣下胆敢偏袒。
English: Your Majesty rewards good and punishes evil. The criteria for promotion and relegation should be equal, and it is not up to your subjects to show favoritism.

古文：昨殷侑与韩益奏官及章服，臣以益前年犯赃，未可其奏；郑覃托臣云 幸且勿论。 
现代文：日前殷侑给韩益奏请官职及礼服，臣因韩益犯贪赃罪，未准他的奏请，郑覃托情对臣说： 望勿虑及其罪。 
English: A few days ago, Zheng Yi sent Han Yi a request for an official post and ceremonial dress, but the minister did not allow him to submit the request because Han Yi had committed the crime of corruption. Zheng Yi said to the minister: Do not worry about his crime.

古文：孰为党庇？ 
现代文：谁在偏袒？ 
English: Who is taking sides?

古文：翌日，以宗闵为杭州刺史。
现代文：次日，委任李宗闵为杭州刺史。
English: The next day, Li Zongyao was appointed to write the history of Hangzhou.

古文：四年冬，迁太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：开成四年冬，李宗闵升为太子宾客，分管东都。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, Li Zonglu was promoted to the prince's guest, in charge of the eastern capital.

古文：时郑覃、陈夷行罢相，嗣复方再拔用宗闵知政事，俄而文宗崩。
现代文：这时郑覃、陈夷行被免除宰相职务，杨嗣复才再次提拔任用李宗闵掌管政事，不久文宗逝世。
English: At this time, Zheng Yao and Chen Yixing were relieved of their duties as prime minister, and Yang Shifu was promoted again and appointed Li Zongyao to be in charge of government affairs. Shortly after, Wenzong died.

古文：会昌初，李德裕秉政，嗣复、李珏皆窜岭表。
现代文：武宗会昌初年，李德裕执政，杨嗣复、李珏都被放逐到岭表。
English: In the first year of Wuzong Huichang, Li Deyu was in power, and Yang Shifu and Li Xi were exiled to Lingbo.

古文：累迁检校尚书右仆射，俄拜中书侍郎，同平章事。宣宗即位罢相，以太子宾客分司卒。魏抃，字申之，钜鹿人。
现代文：会昌三年，刘稹占据泽潞反叛。李德裕以李宗闵素来与刘稹的叔父刘从谏交情深厚，上党靠近东都，李宗闵分管东都不合适，将他调出东都任封州刺史。又揭发了他的旧事，将他贬为郴州司马，他死在被贬的处所。魏抃字申之，巨鹿人。
English: Three years after Huichang, Liu Bei occupied Zhejiang and rebelled. Li Deyu took the name of Li Zongyu, who had always had a deep friendship with Liu Bei's uncle Liu Congyou. The upper party was close to Dongdu, and Li Zongyu was not suitable to be in charge of Dongdu. He was transferred out of Dongdu to be in charge of sealing the history of the state. He also revealed his past, and he was relegated to the position of Zhangzhou Sima. He died in the place where he was relegated. Wei Zongzhi Shenzhi, a giant deer.

古文：五代祖文贞公征，贞观朝名相。
现代文：他的前五代祖文贞公魏征，是太宗贞观朝的名相。
English: His first five-generation ancestor, Wen Zhenggong Wei Zheng, is the famous face of the Taizong Zhenguan Dynasty.

古文：曾祖殷，汝阳令。
现代文：曾祖父魏殷，曾任汝阳县令。
English: His great-grandfather, Wei Yin, was once the county magistrate of Ruyang County.

古文：祖明，亦为县令。
现代文：祖父魏明，也是县令。
English: His grandfather Wei Ming was also a county magistrate.

古文：父冯，献陵台令。
现代文：父亲魏冯，是献陵台令。
English: His father, Wei Feng, was in charge of dedicating the mausoleum.

古文：抃，太和七年登进士第。
现代文：魏抃在文宗太和七年考中进士。
English: Wei Wei was promoted to a scholar in the seventh year of the Wenzong Taihe examination.

古文：杨汝士牧同州，辟为防御判官，得秘书省校书郎。
现代文：杨汝士主管同州时，征召魏抃任防御判官，获得秘书省校书郎职位。
English: When Yang Rushi was in charge of Tongzhou, he conscripted Wei Wei as a defense judge and obtained the position of secretary and provincial school librarian.

古文：汝士入朝，荐为右拾遗。
现代文：杨汝士入朝任职举荐魏抃为右拾遗。
English: When Yang Rushi entered the imperial court, he recommended Wei Wei as the rightful heir.

古文：文宗以抃魏徵之裔，颇奇待之。
现代文：文宗因为魏抃是魏征的后代，对待他很特殊。
English: Because Wei Zong was a descendant of Wei Zheng, Wenzong treated him very special.

古文：前邕管经略使董昌龄枉杀录事参军衡方厚，坐贬溆州司户。
现代文：在此之前邕管经略使董昌龄冤杀了录事参军衡方厚，因而贬官为溆州司户。
English: Prior to this, Dong Changling had been unjustly killed by a corrupt official, Heng Fanghou, who had joined the army. As a result, he was demoted to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：至是量移硖州刺史，抃上疏论之曰： 王者施涣汗之恩以赦有罪，唯故意杀人无赦。
现代文：这时移近安置任硖州刺史，魏抃上疏评论说： 帝王发布号令施恩，赦免有罪的人，只有故意杀人的不赦。
English: At this time, when he moved closer to the resettlement of Ren Yanzhou, Wei Wei Shang Soo commented: The emperor issued an order to grant grace and pardon the guilty, but only the intentional killing was not pardoned.

古文：昌龄比者录以微效，授之方隅，不能祗慎宠光，恣其狂暴，无辜专杀，事迹显彰。
现代文：董昌龄近来因朝廷记载了他的微小功劳，授予他掌管一方边镇重任，他不能恭敬谨慎地对待恩宠荣耀，却恣意滥施狂暴，擅自杀戮无辜，事实彰明较著。
English: Dong Changling has recently been recorded by the imperial court for his small merit, awarding him the important task of controlling one side of the border town. He can not respectfully and cautiously treat the grace and glory, but arbitrarily and indiscriminately commit violence and kill innocent people. The facts are quite clear.

古文：妻孥衔冤，万里披诉。
现代文：受害人妻儿含冤负屈，远行万里投诉。
English: The victim's wife and children have grievances and have traveled thousands of miles to file a complaint.

古文：及按鞫伏罪，贷以微生，中外议论，以为屈法。
现代文：到审问时董昌龄承认罪过，却未被判决处死，朝廷内外纷纷议论，认为这是违法曲断。
English: At the time of the interrogation, Dong Changling admitted his guilt, but was not sentenced to death. There was a lot of discussion inside and outside the imperial court, which considered this to be an illegal act.

古文：今若授之牧守，以理疲人，则杀人者拔擢，而冤苦者何伸？
现代文：现今如若授予董昌龄州郡长官职务，让他去治理受害忧伤的人，那么，杀人者被提拔，遭冤的苦情怎么洗雪？
English: Today, if Dong Changling is given the post of county magistrate to administer justice to the grief-stricken victims, how will the grievances of the victims be resolved if the murderer is promoted?

古文：交紊宪章，有乘至理。 
现代文：一再违乱典章制度，有背最根本的道理。 
English: Repeatedly violating the disciplinary code system is the most fundamental reason.

古文：疏奏，乃改为洪州别驾。
现代文：上疏奏效，于是将董昌龄改任为洪州别驾。
English: The top-down approach worked, so Dong Changling was reappointed as the Hongzhou special envoy.

古文：御史中丞李孝本，皇族也，坐李训诛，有女没人掖廷。
现代文：御史中丞李孝本，是皇族，因牵涉李训谋逆叛处死罪，他有个女儿被没收进后宫。
English: Li Xiaobeng, a member of the imperial family, was sentenced to death for his involvement in the rebellion, and one of his daughters was confiscated into the harem.

古文：抃谏曰：
现代文：魏抃上疏劝谏说：
English: Wei Wei said:

古文：臣闻治国家者，先资于德义；德义不修，家邦必坏。
现代文： 臣听说：治理国家，首先靠施恩德行仁义，不遵循施德行义之道，家族、邦国必然败坏。
English: The minister heard that: to govern the country, first of all rely on charity to do benevolence and righteousness, do not follow the way of charity to do righteousness, the family and the state will inevitably be corrupted.

古文：故王者以德服人，以义使人。
现代文：因此能成就大业的帝王以德服人心，以义使用人。
English: Therefore, emperors who can accomplish great things serve the people with virtue and use people with righteousness.

古文：服使之术，要在修身；修身之道，在于孜孜。
现代文：服人心、使用人的方法，关键在修身；修身之道，在于勤勉不怠。
English: The key to winning people's hearts and using people lies in cultivating oneself; the way to cultivate oneself lies in diligence.

古文：夫一失百亏之戒，存乎久要之源。
现代文：一失而百亏的自警，来源于平时的自约。
English: The self-policing of one loss and a hundred losses comes from the usual self-agreement.

古文：前志曰： 勿以小恶而为之，勿以小善而不为。 
现代文：前人的记述说： 不要认为是小恶就去作恶，不要认为是小善就不行善。 
English: The record of the ancients says: Do not think that it is a small evil to do evil, and do not think that it is a small good to do good.

古文：斯则惧於渐也！
现代文：这就是警惕、担心逐步发展呀！
English: This is vigilance and fear of gradual development!

古文：臣又闻，君如日焉，显晦之微，人皆瞻仰；照临之大，何以掩藏？
现代文：臣又听说：人君如同太阳，明暗微有变化，人人都会瞻望；太阳的光照如此之大，明暗的变化怎能掩藏？
English: The minister also heard: People are like the sun, there are slight changes in brightness and darkness, everyone will look forward; the sun's light is so great, how can the changes in brightness and darkness be hidden?

古文：前代设敢谏之鼓，立诽谤之木，贵闻其过也。
现代文：前代的圣君明主，在朝堂上设置鼓励大胆进言的谏鼓，在宫门外树立提倡非议朝政的谤木，是珍重听到别人指出自己的过失。
English: The previous generation's saint, Emperor Mingzhu, set up a gong to encourage bold speech in the imperial court, and set up a slanderous tree outside the palace gate to advocate criticism of the imperial government. It is precious to hear others point out their mistakes.

古文：陛下即位以来，诞敷文德，不悦声色，出后宫之怨妇，配在外之鳏夫。
现代文：陛下登位以来，大力布行礼乐教化，从不爱好声色之娱，放出后宫失偶的妇人，匹配在外无妻的男子。
English: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has vigorously promoted the education of ceremonial music, never liked the entertainment of voice and color, and released the women who lost their husbands from the harem to match the men without wives.

古文：洎今十年，未尝采择。
现代文：至今十年以来，从未采选宫人。
English: For the past ten years, the palace has never selected a successor.

古文：自数月已来，天睠稍回，留神妓乐，教坊百人、二百人，选试未已；庄宅司收市，亹癖有闻。
现代文：自近数月以来，皇上慕恋渐改，关注女伎乐舞，教坊一百人、二百人选用不止，庄宅司没收、采买的事，略有所闻。
English: Since the past few months, the emperor has been gradually reforming, paying attention to the female comedian's music and dance, selecting more than one hundred and two hundred people for the classroom, and confiscating and purchasing the manor house.

古文：昨又宣取李孝本之女入内。
现代文：日前又召取李孝本女儿进宫。
English: A few days ago, Li Xiaobong's daughter was summoned to the palace.

古文：宗姓不异，宠幸何名？
现代文：陛下与她同宗一姓，恩宠于她算什么名份？
English: Your Majesty shares the same last name with her, so what is the name of your favor to her?

古文：此事深累慎修，有亏一篑。
现代文：这件事情极其有损陛下谨慎持重的美名，使陛下陷于功亏一篑的境地。
English: This matter is extremely damaging to His Majesty's reputation for prudence, and has put His Majesty in a lose-lose situation.

古文：陛下九重之内，不得闻知。
现代文：陛下在深宫之内，听不到种种议论。
English: His Majesty is in the depths of the palace and cannot hear the various discussions.

古文：凡此之流，大生物议，实伤理道之本，未免尘秽之嫌。
现代文：凡是这类事情，极遭众人议论，实在有伤事理道义的根本，难免产生名声污秽的嫌疑。
English: All of these kinds of things, which are the subject of much public discussion, really offend the fundamental principles of reason and morality, and inevitably give rise to the suspicion of tarnishing one's reputation.

古文：夫欲人不知，莫若勿为。
现代文：要想别人不知道，不如自己不去做。
English: If you don't want others to know, it's better not to do it yourself.

古文：谚曰： 止寒莫若重裘，止谤莫若自修。 
现代文：谚语说： 止住寒冷不如多着皮裘，平息谤议不如加强修身。 
English: A proverb says: It is better to wear more fur to stop the cold, and it is better to strengthen self-cultivation to quell slander.

古文：伏希陛下照鉴不惑；崇千载之盛德，去一旦之玩好。
现代文：敬望陛下明察不惑，崇尚名传千载的大德，抛弃一时的嗜好。
English: Admire His Majesty's clear-sightedness, advocate the time-honored virtues, and abandon one-time hobbies.

古文：教坊停息，宗女遣还，则大正人伦之风，深弘王者之体。
现代文：停止教坊的活动，放还同宗的女儿，就能大正人伦风气，弘扬帝王体统。 
English: Stopping the activities of the seminary and returning the daughter of the same family will be able to uphold the moral ethos and promote the imperial system.

古文：疏奏，帝即日出孝本女，迁抃右补阙。
现代文：上疏见效，文宗当日就放出了李孝本的女儿，提升魏抃为右补阙。
English: On the same day, Wenzong released Li Xiaobeng's daughter and promoted Wei Yao to right assistant coach.

古文：诏曰： 昔乃先祖贞观中谏书十上，指事直言，无所避讳。
现代文：提升他的诏书说： 当年你的先祖魏征在贞观年间十次奏谏，指明事理直言不讳，没有任何回避顾忌。
English: The imperial edict elevating him said: In those days, your ancestor Wei Zheng played the gong ten times during the Zhenguan era, pointing out the facts and speaking frankly, without any avoidance scruples.

古文：每览国史，未尝不沉吟伸卷，嘉尚久之。
现代文：朕每每阅览本朝史书，没有一次不是深思再三，久久嘉许的。
English: Every time I read this morning's history book, there is not a single time that I have not thought about it and appreciated it for a long time.

古文：尔为拾遗，其风不坠，屡献章疏，必道其所以。
现代文：你任拾遗职务，作风不减先祖，屡屡进献奏疏，必定说明事理。
English: Your dedication to the duty of collecting relics, your work style that does not diminish that of your ancestors, and the fact that you have repeatedly contributed to the study of the classics must explain the matter.

古文：至于备洒扫于诸王，非自广其声妓也；恤髫龀之宗女，固无嫌于征取也。
现代文：至于我从诸藩王家中选取洒扫庭院的宫女备用，不是出于扩充歌舞艺妓的考虑；而是体恤尚在童年的同宗女儿，确实没有征召嫔妃的疑惑。
English: As for the spare palace maids whom I chose from the families of the kings of various domains to sweep the courtyards, it was not out of consideration for expanding the number of singing and dancing geishas; rather, it was out of consideration for the daughters of the same family who were still in their childhood, and there was indeed no suspicion of conscripting concubines.

古文：虽然，疑似之间，不可家至而户晓。
现代文：尽管如此，是非难辨的事情，终不能家传户晓。
English: Nevertheless, things that are difficult to distinguish between right and wrong cannot be passed down from family to family.

古文：尔能词旨深切，是博我之意多也。
现代文：你能意深词切地论理，这就比我想的广阔多了。
English: You are able to argue meaningfully, which is much broader than I thought.

古文：噫！人能匪躬謇谔，似其先祖；吾岂不能虚怀延纳，仰希贞观之理欤？
现代文：噫，你能不顾身家正直尽忠，酷似你的先祖魏征；我岂能不虚怀采纳忠言，敬取太宗贞观之治呢？
English: Now, can you be honest and loyal regardless of your family status, just like your ancestor Wei Zheng; can I not take the advice of loyalty and respect the rule of Taizong Zhenguan?

古文：而抃居官日浅，未当叙进，吾岂限以常典，以待直臣！
现代文：虽然魏抃做官时间短浅，不在按级提升之列，我怎么能循守常规，对待忠贞正直之臣？
English: Although Wei Wei has only been in office for a short time and is not in line for promotion, how can I follow the rules and treat a loyal and honest vassal?

古文：可右补阙。 
现代文：他可以担任右补阙。 
English: He can play as a right-back.

古文：帝谓宰臣曰： 昔太宗皇帝得魏徵，裨补阙失，弼成圣政。
现代文：文宗对宰辅大臣说： 当年太宗皇帝得到魏征，让他补正自己的不足与过失，辅佐成就圣明国政。
English: Wen Zong said to the Vice-Minister: At that time, Emperor Taizong received Wei Zheng, let him make up for his own shortcomings and mistakes, and assist in the achievement of Shengming's national policy.

古文：我得魏抃，于疑似之间，必能极谏。
现代文：我得到魏抃，在是非难辨之际，他必定能尽心劝谏。
English: I got Wei Wei, when it is difficult to distinguish between right and wrong, he will certainly be able to do his best to persuade.

古文：不敢希贞观之政，庶几处无过之地矣。 
现代文：我不敢希求达到贞观之治的境地，或许也可以处于不犯过失的地步了。 
English: I don't dare to hope to reach the state of chastity, and perhaps I can also be at the point of not committing mistakes.

古文：教坊副使云朝霞善吹笛，新声变律，深惬上旨。自左骁卫将军宣授兼扬府司马。
现代文：教坊副使云朝霞擅长吹笛，创制新声变革音律，使文宗深感满意，宣旨授予他以左骁卫将军职位兼扬府司马。
English: Yun Chaoxia, the vice-teacher of the school, was good at playing the flute and created a new sound to change the melody, which made Wenzong deeply satisfied, and he was awarded the post of Zuoying General and Yangfu Sima.

古文：宰臣奏曰： 扬府司马品高，郎官刺史迭处，不可授伶官。 
现代文：宰辅大臣进奏说： 扬府司马官品很高，历来由郎官、刺史交替担任，不适合授予乐官。 
English: Vice-Minister Jinso said: Yangfu Sima is a high-ranking official, and has always been held alternately by a vassal and a vassal, and is not suitable to be awarded to a music official.

古文：上意欲授之，因宰臣对，亟称朝霞之善。
现代文：文宗执意想授任云朝霞为扬府司马，趁召见宰辅大臣应对策问之时，竭力称赞云朝霞的长处。
English: Wenzong was determined to appoint Yun Chaoxia as Yangfu's Sima, and took the opportunity to praise Yun Chaoxia's strengths when he was summoned to meet with the Vice-Minister to answer questions.

古文：抃闻之，累疏陈论，乃改授润州司马。
现代文：魏抃听说这件事后，接连上疏陈述见解，于是文宗将云朝霞改授为润州司马。
English: After Wei Wei heard about this, he made a series of statements, so Wenzong changed Yun Chaoxia to Renzhou Sima.

古文：荆南监军使吕令琮从人，擅入江陵县，毁骂县令韩忠，观察使韦长申状与枢密使诉之。
现代文：荆南监军使吕令琮的随从人员擅自闯进江陵县衙署，诽谤辱骂县令韩忠，观察使韦长呈送公文给枢密使投诉。
English: An entourage of the Jingnan Supervisor of the Military, Lu Lingyao, trespassed into the Gangneung County Government, slandered and abused the county governor, Han Zhong, and observed Wei Chang to submit a complaint to the Privy Council.

古文：抃上疏曰： 伏以州县侵屈，只合上闻。中外关连，须存旧制。
现代文：魏抃上疏说： 臣窃以为：州县长官遭受欺凌，只该报告朝廷知道，宫廷内外相互联系，必须保持原有制度。
English: Wei Xuan Shangsuo said: The courtier thought that the prefect of the prefecture was bullied, but the report was only known to the court. The court and the outside world are interconnected, and the original system must be maintained.

古文：韦长任膺廉使，体合精详，公事都不奏闻，私情擅为逾越。
现代文：韦长受任观察处置使，办事规矩应当精熟，公务竟都不禀报朝廷知道，却营私徇情擅自违章。
English: Wei Chang was put in charge of observation and disposition, the rules of procedure should be well-versed, the official duties were not reported to the imperial court, but he violated the rules without permission.

古文：况事无巨细，不可将迎。
现代文：况且政事无论大小，该办就办，不应往返行文。
English: Moreover, no matter how big or small a political matter is, the office should handle it, and there should be no back-and-forth writing.

古文：县令官业有乖，便宜理罪；监军职司侵越，即合闻天。
现代文：县令处理公务有错，应该依据条律治罪；监军办事越职侵权，就该禀报皇上知道。
English: If a county magistrate makes a mistake in handling official duties, he should be punished according to the law; if a military supervisor infringes on his duties, the emperor will know about it.

古文：或以虑烦圣听，何不但申门下？
现代文：如果因为担心烦劳圣上听闻，为什么不就只呈文给门下省？
English: If you are worried about being overworked, why not just submit a document to the next province?

古文：今则首紊常典，理合纠绳。伏望圣慈，速加惩戒！ 
现代文：现在却率先扰乱正常法度，论理应当列罪惩处。敬望圣上，速加惩诫！ 
English: Now, however, they are taking the lead in disturbing the normal legal system, which should be punished as a crime.

古文：疏奏不出，时论惜之。
现代文：魏抃奏疏呈上后，文宗扣留不批示下达，当时的舆论为之惋惜。
English: Public opinion at the time deplored the fact that, after Wei Xuan's resignation was submitted, Wenzong was detained without a formal order being issued.

古文：三年，转起居舍人。
现代文：开成三年，魏抃转任起居舍人。
English: After three years of opening, Wei Wei was transferred to the post of chief resident.

古文：紫宸中谢，帝谓之曰： 以卿论事忠切，有文贞之风，故不循月限，授卿此官。 
现代文：他到紫宸殿向皇帝谢恩，文宗对他说： 因为你奏论政事忠贞直切，有你先祖文贞公魏征风度，因此不让你受每月见面次数的限制，授给你这一官职。 
English: He went to the Palace of the Empress Dowager Cixi to express his gratitude to the emperor. Emperor Wenzong said to him, "Because you have been loyal and forthright in political affairs and have the manners of your ancestor, Emperor Wenzheng of the Wei dynasty, I will not allow you to be limited by the number of times you meet each month and will give you this official post."

古文：又谓之曰： 卿家有何旧书诏？ 
现代文：又对他说： 你家里有什么以往的奏疏、诏令？ 
English: And he said unto him, What have you in your house for old time's sake?

古文：对曰： 比多失坠，惟簪笏见存。 
现代文：魏抃回答说： 以往多已失落，仅有簪笔、笏板尚存。 
English: Wei Wei replied, "Most of them have been lost in the past, only the pencil and the chopping board remain.

古文：上令进来。
现代文：文宗让他进献入宫。
English: Wenzong had him presented to the imperial court.

古文：郑覃曰： 在人不在笏。 
现代文：郑覃说： 怀念在人不在笏。 
English: Zheng Yao said, "I miss you when you are not here."

古文：上曰： 郑覃不会我意，此即《甘棠》之义，非在笏而已。 
现代文：文宗说： 郑覃不理解我的心意，献笏，这就是《诗·甘棠》所表达的怀念德政之义，不仅仅是笏本身而已。 
English: Wen Zong said, "Zheng Yao did not understand my heart. This is the meaning of nostalgia for German politics expressed in "Poem · Sweet Pea," not just Yao himself.

古文：抃将退，又召诫之曰： 事有不当，即须奏论。 
现代文：魏抃正要退去，文宗又叫住他，告诉他说： 我行事如有不当，你要立即进呈奏论。 
English: As Wei Wei was about to leave, Wen Zong called him back and told him, "If I have acted improperly, you must immediately submit a report."

古文：抃曰： 臣顷为谏官，合伸规讽。
现代文：魏抃说： 臣往时担任谏官，理当正言进行规劝。
English: Wei Wei said: In the past, the minister served as a eunuch, and it is reasonable to make a persuasive speech.

古文：今居史职，职在记言，臣不敢辄逾职分。 
现代文：现今官居史臣，职责仅在记载君主言行，臣不敢超越职分。 
English: Nowadays, officials live in the position of historian-minister, and their duties are limited to recording the monarch's words and deeds. Ministers dare not exceed their duties.

古文：帝曰： 凡两省官并合论事，勿拘此言。 
现代文：宗说： 凡属门下、中书两省官员合并议政，你尽管陈奏，不要受你刚才讲的话拘束。 
English: Zong said, "If any of your subordinates, officials of the two provinces of Zhongshu, want to discuss the merger of politics, please do not be constrained by what you just said.

古文：寻以本官直弘文馆。
现代文：不久，魏抃以起居舍人官职在弘文馆兼代职务。
English: Soon after, Wei Wei took up a position as an official at the Hongwen Museum.

古文：四年，拜谏议大夫，仍兼起居舍人，判弘文馆事。
现代文：开成四年，魏抃担任谏议大夫，仍兼起居舍人，并兼任弘文馆职务。
English: In the fourth year of opening, Wei Wei served as the doctor of consultation, still concurrently lived in the house, and also served as the secretary of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：紫宸入阁，遣中使取抃起居注，欲视之。
现代文：一次，在群臣随文宗到紫宸殿升朝时，文宗派宦官向魏抃取要他录写的帝王起居注，想看一看。
English: On one occasion, when a group of courtiers followed Wenzong to the Zijian Palace to ascend to the throne, Wenzong sent a eunuch to Wei Xi to get the emperor's residence notice, which he was asked to write down, and wanted to take a look.

古文：抃执奏曰： 自古置史官，书事以明鉴诫。
现代文：魏抃坚定地进言说： 自古以来设置史官，其职责在于记事彰明鉴诫。
English: Wei Wei said firmly: Since ancient times, historians have been set up, and their duties are to record, clarify and admonish.

古文：陛下但为善事，勿畏臣不书。
现代文：陛下只要是行事正确，就不要担心微臣不记载。
English: Your Majesty, as long as you do the right thing, don't worry about not being recorded.

古文：如陛下所行错忤，臣纵不书，天下之人书之。
现代文：如果陛下所做的事有错误，即使我不记载，天下的人会记载下来。
English: If there is a mistake in what His Majesty has done, even if I do not record it, people around the world will record it.

古文：臣以陛下为文皇帝，陛下比臣如褚遂良。 
现代文：臣把陛下视为太宗皇帝，陛下应把臣视同褚遂良。 
English: The vassal regards His Majesty as the Emperor Taizong, and His Majesty should regard the vassal as his equal.

古文：帝又曰： 我尝取观之。 
现代文：文宗又说： 我曾经取起居注看过。 
English: Wenzong also said, "I once saw how to take up residence."

古文：抃曰： 由史官不守职分，臣岂敢陷陛下为非法？
现代文：魏抃说： 陛下要史官不守职分，臣岂敢使陛下陷于非法的境地？
English: Wei Wei said, "If Your Majesty wants the historian to neglect his duty, how dare the minister put Your Majesty in an illegal situation?"

古文：陛下一览之后，自此书事须有回避。
现代文：陛下一看之后，从此记事就必须有所回护避忌。
English: After His Majesty's inspection, from now on, the record must be protected and avoided.

古文：如此，善恶不直，非史也。
现代文：这样一来，不能直书善恶，就不是历史了。
English: In this way, if you can't write the good and evil directly, it's not history.

古文：遗后代，何以取信？ 
现代文：传给后代，怎么让人信从？ 
English: Passed down to future generations, how can people believe in it?

古文：乃止。
现代文：文宗这才停止索看起居注。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：初立朝，为李固言、李珏、杨嗣复所引，数年之内，至谏议大夫。
现代文：魏抃刚进入朝廷时，由李固言、李珏、杨嗣复所引荐，数年之间，官职已至谏议大夫。
English: When Wei Wei had just entered the imperial court, he was recommended by Li Guyan, Li Yu, and Yang Shifu. In a few years, his official position had risen to the position of doctor of debate.

古文：武宗即位，李德裕用事，抃坐杨、李之党，出为汾州刺史。
现代文：武宗登位，李德裕当政，魏抃因系杨嗣复、李珏一党而获罪，被调出朝廷任汾州刺史。
English: Wu Zong ascended to the throne, Li Deyu was in power, Wei Wei was found guilty of being a member of the same party as Yang Shifu and Li Xi, and was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：杨、李贬官，抃亦贬信州长史。
现代文：杨、李被贬官，魏抃又被贬为信州长史。
English: Yang and Li were demoted, and Wei Wei was also demoted to the rank of trusted prefect.

古文：宣宗即位，白敏中当国，量移郢州刺史，寻换商州。
现代文：宣宗就位，白敏中当权，将魏抃向近处安置担任郢州刺史，不久改任商州刺史。
English: Xuan Zong took office, Bai Minzhong was in power, and Wei Xuan was placed nearby to serve as the secretary of Zhangzhou, and soon became the secretary of Shangzhou.

古文：二年，内征为给事中，迁御史中丞。
现代文：宣宗大中二年，将魏抃征召入宫任给事中，后升为御史中丞。
English: In the second year of the middle school of Xuan Zong University, Wei Wei was conscripted into the palace to be assigned to the middle school, and later he was promoted to the middle school of history.

古文：谢日，面赐金紫之服。
现代文：进宫谢恩时，宣宗当面赐给他标示三品以上官阶的金鱼袋、紫官服。
English: When he entered the palace to express his gratitude, Emperor Xuanzong personally gave him a goldfish bag and a purple official uniform, each of which was marked with three or more official ranks.

古文：弹驸马都尉杜中立赃罪，贵戚惮之。
现代文：魏抃因弹劾驸马都尉杜中立犯贪赃罪，使得君主的内外亲族都畏惧他。
English: Wei Wei was impeached for the crime of embezzlement, which made the monarch's relatives both at home and abroad fear him.

古文：兼户部侍郎，判本司事。
现代文：让他兼任户部侍郎，代理户部府署事务。
English: Let him concurrently serve as the steward of the household, acting on behalf of the household department.

古文：抃奏曰： 御史台纪纲之地，不宜与泉货吏杂处，乞罢中司，专综户部公事。 
现代文：魏抃进奏说： 御史台是维护朝纲法纪的地方，不适合与管理钱财的官职交叉兼任，请求免去御史中丞职务，专一治理户部公务。 
English: Wei Yujinso said: the Imperial Historian's Office is a place to maintain the legal discipline of the Imperial Curriculum, and it is not suitable to serve concurrently with the official position of managing money and resources. He requested to be relieved of the position of the Imperial Historian's Junior Secretary, and focus on the management of the household's official duties.

古文：从之。
现代文：宣宗采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：寻以本官同平章事，判使如故。
现代文：不久，魏抃以户部侍郎职务任同平章事，兼管的代理职务照旧。
English: Soon after, Wei Wei was appointed to the position of the head of the household department, and the acting position remained the same.

古文：谢日，奏曰： 臣无夔、契之才，骤叨夔、契之任，将何以仰报鸿私？
现代文：进宫谢恩时，魏抃向宣宗进言说： 微臣没有舜帝名臣夔、契的才能，却在骤然之间不称职地承提了夔、契那样的重任，将如何报答浩荡皇恩？
English: When he went to the palace to express his gratitude, Wei Wei said to Xuan Zong: We have no talent to be the emperor's famous vassals, but we have suddenly and incompetently taken on the heavy responsibilities of Xuan and Qi. How will we repay the enormous grace of the emperor?

古文：今边戍粗安，海内宁息，臣愚所切者，陛下未立东宫，俾正人传导，以存副贰之重。 
现代文：现今边塞防务初步安定，国内动荡已经平息，微臣心里关切的事，是陛下尚未册立皇太子，让正直人士给予辅佐教导，以保证日后太子继承皇位。 
English: At present, the border defense is initially stable, the domestic turmoil has calmed down, and the matter of concern in the hearts of our ministers is that His Majesty has not yet appointed a crown prince, so that honest people can give assistance and guidance to ensure that the crown prince will inherit the throne in the future.

古文：因泣下。
现代文：说着，流下了泪水。
English: And cry.

古文：上感而听之。
现代文：宣宗受到感动并听从了他的建议。
English: Xuanzong was moved and heeded his advice.

古文：先是，累朝人君不欲人言立储贰，若非人主己欲，臣下不敢献言。
现代文：在此之前，历朝皇帝都不希望他人议论立皇太子的事，如果不是君主自己想听听别人的意见，臣下无人敢进言议论此事。
English: Prior to this, emperors throughout the ages did not want others to discuss the matter of appointing a crown prince. If the monarch himself did not want to hear the opinions of others, no subject would dare to discuss the matter.

古文：宣宗春秋高，嫡嗣未辨，抃作相之日，率先启奏，人士重之。
现代文：宣宗年事已高，皇太子尚未明确，魏抃担任宰相时，率先向皇帝进言，上层人士很推重他。
English: Xuanzong was already old and the crown prince was not yet clear. When Wei Wei served as prime minister, he took the lead in advising the emperor, and the upper class people put a lot of emphasis on him.

古文：寻兼集贤大学士。
现代文：不久，魏抃兼任集贤大学士。
English: Soon, Wei Wei also served as a scholar of Jixian University.

古文：詹毗国献象，抃以其性不安中土，请还其使，从之。
现代文：詹毗国献来大象，魏抃认为象的习性不适应中国的水土，奏请归还献象的使臣，宣宗同意他的奏请。
English: Zhanbei offered an elephant, Wei Wei thought that the elephant's habits were not suitable for China's soil and water, and asked the envoy to return the offered elephant. Xuan Zong agreed to his request.

古文：太原节度使李业杀降虏，北边大扰。
现代文：太原节度使李业滥杀投降的俘虏，引起北方边庭极大骚乱。
English: The Taiyuan Festival made Li Ye indiscriminately kill prisoners who surrendered, causing great turmoil in the Northern Border Court.

古文：业有所恃，人不敢非。
现代文：李业有所倚恃，人们不敢非议。
English: People do not dare to criticize Li Ye.

古文：抃即奏其事，乃移业滑州。
现代文：魏抃立即禀奏此事，于是将李业移任滑州节度使。
English: Wei Wei immediately dismissed the matter, and Li Ye was transferred to the post of the governor of Slanting.

古文：加中书侍郎。
现代文：魏抃加官任中书侍郎。
English: Wei Wei was promoted to the post of junior secretary.

古文：大理卿马曙从人王庆告曙家藏兵甲。曙坐贬官，而庆无罪。
现代文：大理寺卿马曙的随从王庆告发马曙家中私藏武器，马曙因此获罪被贬官，而王庆没有判罪。
English: Wang Qing, a follower of Dali Temple Lord Ma Shou, denounced Ma Shou for hiding weapons in his home. As a result, Ma Shou was convicted and demoted, while Wang Qing was not convicted.

古文：抃引法律论之，竟杖杀庆。
现代文：魏抃援引法令条律论罪，最后用杖刑杀了王庆。
English: Wei Wei invoked the laws and regulations to discuss the crime, and finally used a cane to kill Wang Qing.

古文：进阶银青光禄大夫，兼礼部尚书、监修国史。
现代文：后魏抃晋升官阶为银青光禄大夫，兼任礼部尚书、监修国史。
English: After Wei Wei was promoted to the official rank of silver Qingguanglu doctor, he also served as the ceremonial secretary and the supervisor of the national history.

古文：修成《文宗实录》四十卷，上之。
现代文：撰成《文宗实录》四十卷，进献朝廷。
English: He compiled forty volumes of "Wen Zong Shih Lu" and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：其修史官给事中卢耽、太常少卿蒋偕、司勋员外郎王讽、右补阙卢告、膳部员外郎牛丛，皆颁赐锦彩、银器，序迁职秩。
现代文：参与修撰的史官给事中卢耽、太常少卿蒋偕、司勋员外郎王氵风、右补阙卢告、膳部员外郎牛丛，都被赐予锦彩、银器，按官级次序升职加俸。
English: The historians who took part in the revision, Lu Tan, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Jiang Yu, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Wang Shifeng, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Lu Gui, a member of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and Wu Cong, a member of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, were all given gold and silverware, and were promoted and paid according to their ranks.

古文：抃转门下侍郎，兼户部尚书。
现代文：魏抃迁转担任门下侍郎，兼户部尚书。
English: Wei Xuanqian was transferred to serve as a footman, as well as the head of the household.

古文：大中十年，以本官平章事、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使知节度事。
现代文：大中十年，魏抃以本官职任平章事、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使主持节度使事务。
English: In the 10th year of high school, Wei Wei, with his official title of Pingzhangji, Chengdu Yin, and Jianan Nishikawa, deputy ambassador of the festival, presided over the festival affairs.

古文：十一年，以疾求代，征拜吏部尚书。
现代文：十一年，他因病请求朝廷派官替代自己，被征召担任吏部尚书。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, due to illness, he asked the imperial court to send an official to replace him, and was conscripted to serve as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：以疾未痊，乞授散秩，改检校右仆射，守太子少保。
现代文：由于病未痊愈，魏抃又奏请授予无固定职务的闲散官职，于是改任检校右仆射，代理太子少保。
English: As his illness had not yet recovered, Wei Wei also requested that the idle official position without a fixed position be granted, so he was reassigned to the school inspector, acting as the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：十二年十二月卒，时年六十六，赠司徒。
现代文：大中十二年十二月，魏抃去世，时年六十六岁，追赠他司徒职衔。
English: In December of his 12th year of junior high school, Wei Wei passed away at the age of 66. He was posthumously awarded the title of scholar.

古文：抃仪容魁伟，言论切直，与同列上前言事，他宰相必委曲规讽，唯抃谠言无所畏避。
现代文：魏抃仪容魁伟，论事言语直切，与同僚在皇帝面前奏论政事，其他宰相总是委婉曲折进行规谏，惟独魏抃正直敢言无所畏惧、回避。
English: Wei Xunyi had a majestic appearance and was forthright in his speech. He and his colleagues discussed political affairs in front of the emperor. Other prime ministers always used euphemisms to make rules, but Wei Xun was the only one who dared to speak honestly without fear or evasion.

古文：宣宗每曰： 魏谟绰有祖风，名公子孙，我心重之。 
现代文：宣宗常常说： 魏抃多有其先祖魏征的风范，诸名公的子孙中，我心里最推重他。 
English: Xuanzong often said: Wei Zheng mostly has the style of his ancestor Wei Zheng. Among the descendants of famous princes, I cherish him the most.

古文：然竟以语辞太刚，为令狐綯所忌，罢之。
现代文：然而，他终于因为言语过于刚直，遭到令狐腍的忌恨，被罢免相位。
English: However, he was finally ousted from his position because his words were too forthright, which made the foxes hate him.

古文：抃尝钞撮子书要言，以类相从，二十卷，号曰《魏氏手略》。
现代文：魏抃曾抄录撮取诸子著述中的精要言论，按类别编排，共二十卷，题名《魏氏手略》。
English: Wei Wei once copied and photographed the most important sayings in the writings of various sons, arranged by category, a total of twenty volumes, entitled "Wei's Handbook."

古文：有文集十卷。
现代文：撰有文集十卷。
English: He has written ten volumes of anthologies.

