古文：二十年春，王正月。
现代文：二十年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: Twenty years of spring, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing.

古文：夏，曹公孙会自鄸出奔宋。
现代文：夏季，曹公从鄸地逃到宋国。
English: In the summer, Cao Gong fled from Handan to Song.

古文：秋，盗杀卫侯之兄絷。
现代文：秋季，杀死了卫侯卫侯的兄长絷。
English: In the autumn, he killed Wei Hou's older brother Wei Hou.

古文：冬十月，宋华亥、向宁、华定出奔陈。
现代文：冬季十月，宋国的华亥、向宁、华定逃到陈国。
English: In the winter of October, Hua Hai, Xiang Ning, and Huading of Song fled to Chen.

古文：十有一月辛卯，蔡侯庐卒。
现代文：十一月辛卯日，蔡侯去世。
English: In November, Cai Hou passed away.

古文：二十年春，王二月己丑，日南至。
现代文：二十年春季，周王朝历法的二月初一日，冬至。
English: In the spring of the 20th year, the first day of February of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, the winter solstice.

古文：梓慎望氛曰： 今兹宋有乱，国几亡，三年而后弭。
现代文：梓慎观察云气，说： 今年宋国有动乱，国家几乎灭亡，三年以后才平定。
English: Observing the turbulent atmosphere, Zi Shen said: This year, the State of Song was in turmoil, the country was almost destroyed, and it took three years to pacify it.

古文：蔡有大丧。 
现代文：蔡国有大的丧事。 
English: Cai Guoda's funeral.

古文：叔孙昭子曰： 然则戴、桓也！汰侈无礼已甚，乱所在也。 
现代文：叔孙昭子说： 这就是戴、桓两族了，他们奢侈、无礼到了极点，动乱会发生在他们那里。 
English: My great-uncle Akiko said, "This is the Dai and Huan clans. They are extravagant and impolite to the extreme. Unrest will occur there."

古文：费无极言于楚子曰： 建与伍奢将以方城之外叛。自以为犹宋、郑也，齐、晋又交辅之，将以害楚。其事集矣。 
现代文：费无极对楚平王说： 太子建和伍奢将要领着方城山外的人背叛，自以为如同宋国、郑国一样，齐国、晋国又一起辅助他们，将会危害楚国，这事情快成功了。 
English: It was extremely difficult to say to King Chuping: Prince Jianhe Wushuang will lead the people outside Fangcheng Mountain to betray, thinking that, like Song and Zheng, Qi and Jin will support them together and harm Chu. This thing is about to succeed.

古文：王信之，问伍奢。
现代文：楚平王相信了这些话，质问伍奢。
English: King Chu Ping believed these words and questioned Wu Shuo.

古文：伍奢对曰： 君一过多矣，何信于谗？ 
现代文：伍奢回答说： 君王有一次过错已经很严重了，为什么还听信谗言？ 
English: Wu Xia replied: The king has already made a serious mistake once, why should he listen to advice?

古文：王执伍奢。使城父司马奋扬杀大子，未至，而使遣之。
现代文：楚平王逮捕了伍奢，派城父司马奋扬去杀太子。奋扬没有到达，派人通知太子逃走。
English: King Chu Ping arrested Wu Shu and sent the city father Sima Fenyang to kill the prince. Fenyang did not arrive and sent someone to inform the prince to flee.

古文：三月，大子建奔宋。
现代文：三月，太子建逃亡到宋国。
English: In March, Prince Jian fled to Song.

古文：王召奋扬。奋扬使城父人执己以至。
现代文：楚平王召回奋扬，奋扬让城父大夫逮捕自己回到郢都。
English: King Chu Ping recalled Fen Yang, and Fen Yang let the city doctor arrest him and return to the capital.

古文：王曰： 言出于余口，入于尔耳，谁告建也？ 
现代文：楚平王说： 话从我的嘴里说出去，进到你的耳朵里，是谁告诉建的？ 
English: King Chuping said, "Words come out of my mouth and into your ear. Who told Jian?

古文：对曰： 臣告之。
现代文：奋扬回答说： 是下臣告诉他的。
English: Tenyang replied that it was his subordinate who told him.

古文：君王命臣曰： 事建如事余。 
现代文：君王命令我说： 事奉建要像事奉我一样。 
English: The king said to me, "Serve me as you have served me."

古文：臣不佞，不能苟贰。
现代文：下臣不才，不能或有二心。
English: The vassal is incompetent, incapable, or double-minded.

古文：奉初以还，不忍后命，故遣之。
现代文：奉了起初的命令去对待太子，就不忍心执行您后来的命令。
English: Having received the initial order to treat the crown prince, I cannot bear to carry out your later order.

古文：既而悔之，亦无及已。 
现代文：所以要他逃走了。不久我后悔，也来不及了。 
English: So I asked him to run away. I soon regretted it, but it was too late.

古文：王曰： 而敢来，何也？ 
现代文：楚平王说： 你敢回来，为什么？ 
English: King Chu Ping said: You dare to come back, why?

古文：对曰： 使而失命，召而不来，是再奸也。
现代文：奋扬回答说： 被派遣而没有完成使命，召见我又不回来，这是再次违背命令，逃走也没有地方可去。 
English: Tenyang replied: "To be sent without accomplishing the mission, to be summoned and not to return, this is another violation of orders, and there is no place to escape to."

古文：逃无所入。 
现代文：楚平王说： 回城父去吧！ 
English: King Chu Ping said: Go back to your father!

古文：王曰： 归。 
现代文：奋扬还像过去一样做官。
English: Dengyan is still working as an official as in the past.

古文：从政如他日。无极曰： 奢之子材，若在吴，必忧楚国，盍以免其父召之。
现代文：费无极说： 伍奢的儿子有才能，如果在吴国，一定要使楚国担忧，何不用赦免他们父亲的办法召回他们。
English: Fufu said: Wu Shuang's sons are talented. If they are in Wu, they must worry Chu. Why not pardon their father and recall them?

古文：彼仁，必来。
现代文：他们仁爱，一定回来。
English: They are benevolent and will definitely come back.

古文：不然，将为患。 
现代文：不这样，将要成为祸患。 
English: Otherwise, it will be a disaster.

古文：王使召之，曰： 来，吾免而父。 
现代文：楚平王派人召回他们，说： 回来，我赦免你们的父亲。 
English: King Chupin sent someone to call them back, saying: Come back, I forgive your father.

古文：棠君尚谓其弟员曰： 尔適吴，我将归死。
现代文：棠邑大夫伍尚对他的兄弟员说： 你去到吴国，我准备回去死。
English: Tangyur's doctor Wu Shang said to his brother: "You go to Wu, I'm ready to go back and die."

古文：吾知不逮，我能死，尔能报。
现代文：我的才智不如你，我能够死，你能够报仇。
English: I am not as clever as you, I can die, you can take revenge.

古文：闻免父之命，不可以莫之奔也。
现代文：听到赦免父亲的命令，不能不奔走回去。
English: Hearing the order to pardon her father, she couldn't help but run back.

古文：亲戚为戮，不可以莫之报也。奔死免父，孝也。
现代文：亲人被杀戮，不能不报仇。奔走回去使父亲赦免，这是孝。
English: When one's relatives are killed, one cannot help but take revenge. It is filial piety to run back and ask one's father for forgiveness.

古文：度功而行，仁也。择任而往，知也。
现代文：估计功效而后行动，这是选择任务而前去，这是智。
English: Estimating the effect and then acting, this is choosing the task and moving forward, this is wisdom.

古文：知死不辟，勇也。
现代文：明知要死而不躲避，这是勇。
English: It's brave to know you're going to die and not hide.

古文：父不可弃，名不可废，尔其勉之，相从为愈。 
现代文：父亲不能丢掉，名誉不能废弃，你还是努力吧！各人不必勉强为好。 
English: A father can't be thrown away, a reputation can't be discarded, you should still work hard! Everyone doesn't have to do it reluctantly.

古文：伍尚归。
现代文：伍尚回去。
English: Wu Shang went back.

古文：奢闻员不来，曰： 楚君大夫其旰食乎！ 
现代文：伍奢听说伍员不来，说： 楚国的国君、大夫恐怕不能准时吃饭了。 
English: When Wu Shuo heard that the soldiers were not coming, he said, "I'm afraid that the king of Chu and the doctor can't eat on time."

古文：楚人皆杀之。
现代文：楚国人把他们都杀了。
English: The people of Chu killed them all.

古文：员如吴，言伐楚之利于州于。公子光曰： 是宗为戮而欲反其仇，不可从也。 
现代文：伍员去到吴国，向州于说明进攻楚国的利益。公子光说： 是这个家族被杀戮而想要报私仇，不能听他的。 
English: The soldier went to Wu to explain to the state the benefits of attacking Chu. Gongziguang said, "This family was killed and wants to take revenge. I can't listen to him."

古文：员曰： 彼将有他志。余姑为之求士，而鄙以待之。 
现代文：伍员说： 他将要有别的志向，我姑且为他寻求勇士，而在郊外等着他。 
English: The soldier said, "He will have other aspirations. I will look for a warrior for him and wait for him in the countryside."

古文：乃见鱄设诸焉，而耕于鄙。
现代文：于是就推荐了鱄设诸，自己在边境上种地。
English: So he recommended Shichizhu, and started farming on the border himself.

古文：宋元公无信多私，而恶华、向。
现代文：宋元公不讲信用、私心很多，而讨厌华氏、向氏。
English: Song Yuan Gong did not care about trust and had a lot of selfishness, but he hated Hua and Xiang.

古文：华定、华亥与向宁谋曰： 亡愈于死，先诸。 
现代文：华定、华亥和向宁策划说： 逃亡比死强，先下手吗？ 
English: Hua Ding, Hua Hai and Xiang Ning planned to say: Escape is better than death, do you start first?

古文：华亥伪有疾，以诱群公子。
现代文：华亥假装有病，以引诱公子们。
English: Hua Hai pretended to be ill in order to lure the young men.

古文：公子问之，则执之。
现代文：凡是公子去探病，就扣押起来。
English: Whenever a nobleman went to see a patient, he was detained.

古文：夏六月丙申，杀公子寅、公子御戎、公子朱、公子固、公孙援、公孙丁，拘向胜、向行于其廪。
现代文：夏季，六月初九，杀死公子寅、公子御戎、公子朱、公子固、公孙援、公孙丁，把向胜、向行囚禁在谷仓里。
English: In the summer, on the 9th day of the 6th month, he killed Gong Zi Yin, Gong Zi Mi Rong, Gong Zi Zhu, Gong Zi Gu, Gong Sun Yuan, Gong Sun Ding, and imprisoned Xiang Sheng and Xiang Xing in a barn.

古文：公如华氏请焉，弗许，遂劫之。
现代文：宋元公到华亥氏那里去请求，华氏不答应，反而要乘机劫持元公。
English: Song Yuan Gong went to Mr. Hua Hai to make a request. Mr. Hua Hai did not agree, but instead wanted to take the opportunity to kidnap Mr. Yuan Gong.

古文：癸卯，取大子栾与母弟辰、公子地以为质。
现代文：十六日，将太子栾和他的同母兄弟辰、公子地作为人质。
English: On the 16th, they took the Crown Prince Min and his half-brothers, Chen and Gongzidi, hostage.

古文：公亦取华亥之子无慼、向宁之子罗、华定之子启，与华氏盟以为质。
现代文：元公也取得了华亥的儿子无慼，向宁的儿子罗、华定的儿子启，和华氏结盟，把他们作为人质。
English: Yuan Gong also obtained Hua Hai's son Wuzhong, Xiang Ning's son Luo, and Huading's son Qi, and allied with the Hua Clan, taking them as hostages.

古文：卫公孟絷狎齐豹，夺之司寇与鄄，有役则反之，无则取之。
现代文：卫国的公孟絷轻慢齐豹，剥夺了他的司寇官职和鄄地。有战事就让他回去，没事就占取过来。
English: Meng Yao, the public defender of the country, was so careless that he deprived him of the position of scout officer and the land of Xing. If there was a war, he would let him go back, and if there was no war, he would take it over.

古文：公孟恶北宫喜、褚师圃，欲去之。
现代文：公孟絷讨厌北宫喜、褚师圃，想要去掉他们。
English: Gong Mengyao hated Bei Gongxi and Zou Shipuo and wanted to get rid of them.

古文：公子朝通于襄夫人宣姜，惧而欲以作乱。
现代文：公子朝和襄夫人宣姜私通，害怕，想乘机发动祸乱。
English: Xuan Jiang fornicated with her husband in the morning, was afraid, and wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to start a disaster.

古文：故齐豹、北宫喜、褚师圃、公子朝作乱。
现代文：所以齐豹、北宫喜、褚师圃、公子朝发动了叛乱。
English: Therefore, Qi Bao, Bei Gongxi, Zou Shipuo, and Guozhichang launched a rebellion.

古文：初，齐豹见宗鲁于公孟，为骖乘焉。
现代文：当初，齐豹把宗鲁推荐给公孟絷，做了骖乘。
English: At first, Qipao recommended Zonglu to Gong Mengyao and made the trip.

古文：将作乱，而谓之曰： 公孟之不善，子所知也。勿与乘，吾将杀之。 
现代文：齐豹将要发动叛乱，对宗鲁说： 公孟这个人不好，这是您所知道的，不要和他一起乘车，我将要杀死他。 
English: Qipao is going to rebel and say to Zonglu, "This man Gong Meng is no good, you know that, don't ride with him, I'm going to kill him."

古文：对曰： 吾由子事公孟，子假吾名焉，故不吾远也。
现代文：宗鲁回答说： 我由于您而事奉公孟絷，您说我有好名声，所以公孟絷才亲近我。
English: Zonglu replied, "Because of you, I served King Mengye. You said I had a good reputation, so King Mengye approached me.

古文：虽其不善，吾亦知之。抑以利故，不能去，是吾过也。
现代文：虽然他不好，我也知道，但是由于对自己有利，不能离去，这是我的过错。
English: Even though I know he's not good, it's my fault that I couldn't leave for my own good.

古文：今闻难而逃，是僭子也。
现代文：现在听到祸难而逃走，这是使您的话不可相信了。
English: Now that you have fled at the cry of distress, your words are not to be believed.

古文：子行事乎，吾将死之，以周事子，而归死于公孟，其可也。 
现代文：您办您的事吧！我将为此而死，用保密事奉您，回去死在公孟絷那里，也许是可以的。 
English: I will die for this, I will serve you in secret, I may go back and die in public.

古文：丙辰，卫侯在平寿，公孟有事于盖获之门外，齐子氏帷于门外而伏甲焉。
现代文：六月二十九日，卫灵公正在平寿，公孟絷在盖获之门外祭祀，齐子氏在门外设置帷帐，在里边埋伏甲士。
English: On June 29th, Wei Ling Gong was in the middle of celebrating his birthday. Gong Meng Yao held a religious service outside the gate of Gaiguo. The Qi Zi clan set up a curtain outside the gate and ambushed the knights inside.

古文：使祝鼃寘戈于车薪以当门，使一乘从公孟以出。
现代文：派祝蛙把戈藏在车上的柴禾里挡着城门，派一辆车跟着公孟絷出来。
English: He sent Zhu Rong to hide Go in the firewood on his car to block the gate, and sent a car to follow Gong Meng Rong out.

古文：使华齐御公孟，宗鲁骖乘。
现代文：派华齐驾御公孟的坐车，宗鲁做骖乘。
English: Pai Hua Qi drove the car of Emperor Meng, and Zong Lu did the carriage ride.

古文：及闳中，齐氏用戈击公孟，宗鲁以背蔽之，断肱，以中公孟之肩，皆杀之。
现代文：到达曲门中，齐氏用戈敲击公孟，宗鲁用背部遮护他，折断了胳臂，戈击中公孟的肩膀。
English: When they reached the gate, Qi struck Gong Meng with a club. Zonglu protected him with his back and broke his arm. The club hit Gong Meng's shoulder.

古文：公闻乱，乘驱自阅门入，庆比御公，公南楚骖乘，使华寅乘贰车。
现代文：齐氏把他们一起杀死了。卫灵公听到动乱的消息，坐上车子，驱车从阅门进入国都。庆比驾车，公南楚做骖乘。派华寅乘坐副车。
English: Mr. Qi killed them together. When Wei Ling Gong heard the news of the turmoil, he got into the car and drove from the Reading Gate into the capital. Qing Bi drove, Gong Nan Chu was a passenger. He sent Hua Yin to take a second car.

古文：及公宫，鸿魋驷乘于公，公载宝以出。
现代文：到达灵公的宫室，鸿駵魋又坐上卫灵公的车子。
English: When he arrived at Linggong's palace, Hongtao again rode in the chariot of Wei Linggong.

古文：褚师子申遇公于马路之衢，遂从。
现代文：灵公装载了宝物而出来，褚师子申在马路的十字路口遇到灵公，就跟上去。
English: Ling Gong came out with a load of treasures. Zou Shizi Shen met Ling Gong at the crossroads of the road and followed him.

古文：过齐氏，使华寅肉袒执盖，以当其阙。
现代文：经过齐氏那里，让华寅光着上身，拿着车盖遮蔽空处。
English: After passing Mr. Qi's place, let Hua Yin bare his upper body, holding the car cover to cover the space.

古文：齐氏射公，中南楚之背。公遂出。
现代文：齐氏用箭射卫灵公，射中公南楚的脊背，卫灵公就逃出国都。
English: Qi shot Ling Gong with an arrow and hit him in the back of the spine. Wei Ling Gong fled the capital.

古文：寅闭郭门，踰而从公。
现代文：华寅关闭城门，跳出城墙跟随卫侯。
English: Hua Yin closed the gate and jumped out of the city wall to follow Wei Hou.

古文：公如死鸟，析朱鉏宵从窦出，徒行从公。
现代文：卫灵公去到死鸟。析朱鉏夜里从城墙的排水沟里逃出，徒步跟随卫灵公。
English: Wei Ling Gong went to the dead bird. At night, he escaped from the drainage ditch of the city wall and followed Wei Ling Gong on foot.

古文：齐侯使公孙青聘于卫。
现代文：齐景公派公孙青到卫国聘问。
English: Qi Jing sent Gongsun Qing to defend the country.

古文：既出，闻卫乱，使请所聘。
现代文：已经走出国境，听说卫国发生了动乱，派人请示关于聘问的事情。
English: He had stepped out of the country, heard that there was turmoil in the homeland, and sent someone to inquire about the matter.

古文：公曰： 犹在竟内，则卫君也。 
现代文：齐景公说： 卫侯还在国境之内，就还是卫国的国君。 
English: Lord Qi Jing said, "If the prince of Wei is still within the borders, he is still the prince of the defender of the country."

古文：乃将事焉。
现代文：于是就奉命行事，跟着到了死鸟。
English: So he did as he was told and followed the dead bird.

古文：遂从诸死鸟，请将事。
现代文：公孙青请求按照命令行聘礼。
English: Gongsun Qing requested that the bride price be paid in accordance with the order.

古文：辞曰： 亡人不佞，失守社稷，越在草莽。吾子无所辱君命。 
现代文：卫灵公辞谢说： 逃亡的人没有才能，失守了国家，流亡在杂草丛中，没有地方可以让您执行君王的命令。 
English: Wei Ling said: "The fugitive has no talent, lost the country, exiled in the weeds, there is no place for you to carry out the king's orders.

古文：宾曰： 寡君命下臣于朝，曰，阿下执事。
现代文：客人说： 寡君在朝廷上命令下臣说： 卑微地亲附执事。 
English: The guest said, "In the imperial court, the monarch ordered his vassal to say, 'Humbly attend the steward.'

古文：臣不敢贰。 
现代文：下臣不敢违命。 
English: A vassal dare not disobey orders.

古文：主人曰： 君若惠顾先君之好，照临敝邑，镇抚其社稷，则有宗祧在。 
现代文：主人说： 君王如果照顾到先君的友好，光照敝邑，镇定安抚我们的国家，那么有宗庙在那里。 
English: The master said: "If the monarch takes care of the friendship of the former emperor, shines light on the county, and calmly pacifies our country, then there will be a family temple there."

古文：乃止。
现代文：公孙青就停止了聘问。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：卫侯固请见之，不获命，以其良马见，为未致使故也。
现代文：卫灵公坚决请求见他。公孙青不得已，只好用他的好马作为进见的礼物，这是由于没有行聘礼的缘故。
English: Wei Ling Gong firmly requested to see him. Gongsun Qing had no choice but to use his good horse as a gift to the prince, this was due to the absence of a betrothal gift.

古文：卫侯以为乘马。
现代文：卫灵公把公孙青馈送的马作为驾车的马。
English: Wei Ling Gong took the horse fed by Gongsun Qing as the driving horse.

古文：宾将掫，主人辞曰： 亡人之忧，不可以及吾子。草莽之中，不足以辱从者。
现代文：客人准备在夜里设置警戒，主人辞谢说： 逃亡人的忧虑，不能落到您身上，杂草丛中的人，不足以劳动您。
English: The guest prepared to set up a watch in the night, but the host declined, saying: "The worries of a fugitive cannot fall on you, and a person in the weeds is not enough to work for you.

古文：敢辞。 
现代文：谨敢辞谢。 
English: I'd like to take this opportunity to thank you.

古文：宾曰： 寡君之下臣，君之牧圉也。
现代文：客人说： 寡君的下臣，就是君王牧牛放马的人。
English: The guest said, "A vassal of a monarch is a person who herds cattle and rides horses for the monarch."

古文：若不获扞外役，是不有寡君也。
现代文：如果得不到在外面警戒的差役，就是心目中没有寡君了。
English: If you can't get a watchman to stand guard outside, then you don't have an oligarch in mind.

古文：臣惧不免于戾，请以除死。 
现代文：下臣害怕不能免于罪过，请求以此免死。 
English: The vassal, fearing that he could not be absolved of his sins, begged to be spared death.

古文：亲执铎，终夕与于燎。
现代文：就亲自拿着大铃，整晚和卫国的夜巡人在一起。
English: He personally took the large bell and stayed up all night with the night watchmen guarding the country.

古文：齐氏之宰渠子召北宫子。
现代文：齐氏的家臣头子渠子召则北宫喜。
English: The head vassal of the Qi clan, Qu Zi Zhao, was called Hokugongxi.

古文：北宫氏之宰不与闻谋，杀渠子，遂伐齐氏，灭之。
现代文：北宫喜的家臣头子不让他知道密谋的事，策划杀死了渠子，并乘机攻打齐氏，消灭了他们。
English: The headman of Bei Gongxi's vassals did not let him know about the conspiracy, planned to kill Duzu, and took the opportunity to attack the Qi clan and eliminate them.

古文：丁巳晦，公入。与北宫喜盟于彭水之上。
现代文：六月三十日，卫灵公进入国都，和北宫喜在彭水盟誓。
English: On June 30, the Duke of Wei Ling entered the national capital and swore an oath with Bei Gongxi in Pengshui.

古文：秋七月戊午朔，遂盟国人。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，就和国内的人们盟誓。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, I swore an oath to the people of my country.

古文：八月辛亥，公子朝、褚师圃、子玉霄、子高鲂出奔晋。
现代文：八月二十五日，公子朝、褚师圃、子玉霄、子高鲂逃亡到晋国。
English: On August 25th, Gongzichou, Zou Shipu, Zi Yuxiao, and Zi Gaojun fled to Jin Province.

古文：闰月戊辰，杀宣姜。
现代文：闰八月十二日，杀死宣姜。
English: On the 12th day of the 8th month, he killed Xuan Jiang.

古文：卫侯赐北宫喜谥曰贞子，赐析朱鉏谥曰成子，而以齐氏之墓予之。
现代文：卫灵公赐给北宫喜的谥号叫贞子，赐给析朱鉏的谥号叫成子，而且把齐氏的墓地给了他们。
English: The posthumous name given to Bei Gong Xi by the Duke of Wei Ling was called Sadako, and the posthumous name given to Jing Zhu Xi was called Cheng Zi, and the cemetery of the Qi clan was given to them.

古文：卫侯告宁于齐，且言子石。
现代文：卫灵公向齐国报告国内安定，同时述说公孙青的有礼。
English: Wei Ling Gong reported domestic stability to Qi Guo, and at the same time described Gong Sun Qing's courtesy.

古文：齐侯将饮酒，徧赐大夫曰： 二三子之教也。 
现代文：齐景公将要喝酒，把酒普遍赏赐给大夫们，说： 这是诸位的教导。 
English: Lord Qi Jing will drink wine, and he will give wine generously to the doctors, saying, "This is your teaching.

古文：苑何忌辞曰： 与于青之赏，必及于其罚。
现代文：苑何忌辞谢不喝，说： 参与了对公孙青的赏赐，必然涉及对他的责罚。
English: Yuan He Boi refused to drink and said, "Participating in the reward of Gongsun Qing will inevitably involve his punishment."

古文：在《康诰》曰： 父子兄弟，罪不相及。 况在群臣。
现代文：在《康诰》上说， 父子兄弟，罪过互不相干，何况在群臣之间？
English: In "Kang Ye" it is said, "Father and son are brothers, and their sins have nothing to do with each other, let alone between ministers."

古文：臣敢贪君赐，以干先王？ 
现代文：下臣岂敢贪受君王的赏赐来干犯先王？ 
English: Would a vassal dare to covet the king's reward and offend the former king?

古文：琴张闻宗鲁死，将往吊之。
现代文：琴张听说宗鲁死了，准备去吊唁。
English: When Qin Zhang heard that Zonglu had died, he planned to go to pay his respects.

古文：仲尼曰： 齐豹之盗，而孟絷之贼，女何吊焉？
现代文：孔子说： 齐豹所以成为坏人，孟絷所以被害，都是由于他的缘故，你为什么要去吊唁呢？
English: Confucius said, "The reason why Qipao became a villain and Meng Rong was killed was because of him. Why do you want to offer condolences?

古文：君子不食奸，不受乱，不为利疚于回，不以回待人，不盖不义，不犯非礼。 
现代文：君子不吃坏人的俸禄，不接受动乱，不为了利而受到邪恶的侵扰，不用邪恶对待别人，不袒护不义的事情，不做出非礼的事情。 
English: A gentleman does not eat the salary of a bad person, does not accept turmoil, is not disturbed by evil for the sake of profit, does not treat others with evil, does not defend injustice, and does not do improper things.

古文：宋华、向之乱，公子城、公孙忌、乐舍、司马彊、向宜、向郑、楚建、郳申出奔郑。
现代文：宋国华氏、向氏的作乱，公子城、公孙忌、乐舍、司马彊、向宜、向郑、楚建郳申逃亡到郑国。
English: Due to the disturbance caused by the Hua clan and the Xiang clan in Song Province, Gongzicheng, Gongsunbei, Leshie, Sima Yi, Xiang Yi, Xiang Zheng, and Chu Jian Yuxin fled to Zheng Province.

古文：其徒与华氏战于鬼阎，败子城。
现代文：他们的党羽和华氏在鬼阎作战，子城被打败。
English: Their partisans fought against the Huas in the Inferno, and Zicheng was defeated.

古文：子城適晋。
现代文：子城去到晋国。
English: Zicheng went to Jin Province.

古文：华亥与其妻必盥而食所质公子者而后食。
现代文：华亥和他的妻子，一定要盥洗干净、伺候作为人质的公子吃完饭以后才吃饭。
English: Hua Hai and his wife must wash their hands and wait for the hostage to finish his meal before eating.

古文：公与夫人每日必適华氏，食公子而后归。华亥患之，欲归公子。
现代文：宋元公和夫人每天一定到华氏那里，让公子吃完以后才回去，华亥担心这种情况，想要让公子回去。
English: Song Yuan Gong and his wife would go to Mr. Hua's place every day to make sure that Mr. Hua did not return until after he had finished eating. Mr. Hua was worried about this situation and wanted to let Mr. Hua return.

古文：向宁曰： 唯不信，故质其子。
现代文：向宁说： 正因为元公没有信用，所以把他的儿子作为人质。
English: Xiangning said, "It is precisely because Yuan Gong has no trust that he took his son as a hostage.

古文：若又归之，死无日矣。 
现代文：如果又让他回去，死就很快来到了。 
English: If he is allowed to return, death will come quickly.

古文：公请于华费遂，将攻华氏。
现代文：宋元公向华费遂请求，准备攻打华氏。
English: Song Yuan Gong then asked Hua Fei to prepare to attack the Hua clan.

古文：对曰： 臣不敢爱死，无乃求去忧而滋长乎？
现代文：华费遂回答说： 下臣不敢爱惜一死，恐怕是想要去掉忧虑反而滋长忧虑吧！
English: Hua Fei then replied: "A subordinate does not dare to spare one's life. I'm afraid that if you want to get rid of worries, you will only breed more worries!"

古文：臣是以惧，敢不听命。 
现代文：下臣因此害怕，怎敢不听命令？ 
English: As a result, subordinates are afraid, how dare they disobey orders?

古文：公曰： 子死亡有命，余不忍其訽。 
现代文：宋元公说： 孩子们死了是命中注定，我不能忍受他们受耻辱。 
English: Song Yuan Gong said, "It is my fate that my children are dead. I can't bear to see them humiliated.

古文：冬十月，公杀华、向之质而攻之。
现代文：冬季，十月，宋元公杀了华氏、向氏的人质而攻打这两家。
English: In the winter, in October, Song Yuan Gong killed the hostages of Mr. Hua and Mr. Xiang and attacked the two families.

古文：戊辰，华、向奔陈，华登奔吴。
现代文：十三日，华氏、向氏逃亡到陈国，华登逃亡到吴国。
English: On the 13th, Mr. Hua and Mr. Xiang fled to Chen Province, and Mr. Huaden fled to Wu Province.

古文：向宁欲杀大子。
现代文：向宁想要杀死太子。
English: Xiangning wants to kill the crown prince.

古文：华亥曰： 干君而出，又杀其子，其谁纳我？
现代文：华亥说： 触犯了国君而出逃，又杀死他的儿子，还有谁接纳我们？
English: Hua Hai said, "If we have offended the sovereign and fled, and killed his son, who else will accept us?"

古文：且归之有庸。 
现代文：而且放他们回去有功劳。 
English: And they deserve credit for letting them back in.

古文：使少司寇牼以归，曰： 子之齿长矣，不能事人，以三公子为质，必免。 
现代文：派少司寇牼带着公子们回去，说： 您的年岁大了，不能再事奉别人。用三个公子作为证明，一定可以免罪。 
English: He sent Scrooge the Younger back with the young men and said, "You are too old to serve others. If you can prove that you have three young men, you will certainly be acquitted."

古文：公子既入，华牼将自门行。
现代文：公子们进入国都，华牼将要从公门出去。
English: The princes have entered the capital, and Hua Tuo is about to leave through the main gate.

古文：公遽见之，执其手曰： 余知而无罪也，入复而所。 
现代文：宋元公急忙接见他，拉着他的手，说： 我知道你没有罪，进来，恢复你的官职。 
English: Song Yuan Gong hurried to meet him, took his hand and said: I know you are not guilty, come in and resume your official duties.

古文：齐侯疥，遂痁。期而不瘳，诸侯之宾问疾者多在。
现代文：齐景公患了两日一发的疟疾，后来又恶化成每天发一次，一年没有痊愈。诸侯派来问候的客人，大多在齐国。
English: Prince Qi Jing suffered from malaria every two days, which later worsened to once a day, and did not recover for a year. Most of the guests sent by the princes were from Qi.

古文：粱丘據与裔款言于公曰： 吾事鬼神丰，于先君有加矣。
现代文：梁丘据和裔款对齐景公说： 我们事奉鬼神很丰厚，比先君已经有所增加了。
English: Liang Qiu said to Qi Jing Gong: "We have a rich supply of ghosts and gods, which has increased compared to the previous generation.

古文：今君疾病，为诸侯忧，是祝史之罪也。
现代文：现在君王病得很厉害，成为诸侯的忧虑，这是祝、史的罪过。
English: Now that the king is very ill, it has become the concern of the princes. This is the sin of history.

古文：诸侯不知，其谓我不敬。君盍诛于祝固、史嚚以辞宾？ 
现代文：诸侯不了解，恐怕要认为我们不敬鬼神，君王何不诛戮祝固、史嚚以辞谢客人？ 
English: Princes do not understand, I am afraid to think that we do not revere ghosts and gods. Why does the king not make a speech of thanks to the guests?

古文：公说，告晏子。
现代文：齐景公很高兴，告诉晏子。
English: Lord Qi Jing was very pleased and told the mule to go.

古文：晏子曰： 日宋之盟，屈建问范会之德于赵武。
现代文：晏子说： 从前在宋国的盟会，屈建向赵武询问范会的德行。
English: Zou Zi said: Once upon a time, in the League of Song, Qu Jian asked Zhao Wu about the virtues of the Fan Club.

古文：赵武曰： 夫子之家事治，言于晋国，竭情无私。
现代文：赵武说： 他老人家家族中的事务井然有序，在晋国说话，竭尽自己的心意而没有个人打算。
English: Zhao Wu said: The affairs of his old man's family are well-ordered, speaking in Jin, and doing their best without personal plans.

古文：其祝史祭祀，陈信不愧。
现代文：他的祝、史祭祀，向鬼神陈说实际情况不内愧。
English: He is not ashamed to tell ghosts and gods about the actual situation of his wishes and historical sacrifices.

古文：其家事无猜，其祝史不祈。 
现代文：他的家族中没有可猜疑的事情，所以他的祝、史也不向鬼神祈求。 
English: There is nothing suspicious in his family, so he does not pray to ghosts and gods for his wishes and history.

古文：建以语康王。
现代文：屈建把这些话告诉康王。
English: Qu Jian told these words to King Kang.

古文：康王曰： 神人无怨，宜夫子之光辅五君，以为诸侯主也。  
现代文：康王说： 神和人都没有怨恨，他老人家所以能够辅助五位国君而作为诸侯的主人就是很相宜的了。  
English: King Kang said, "God and man do not hold grudges, so it is very appropriate for him to be able to assist the five sovereigns as the lord of the lords.

古文：公曰： 據与款谓寡人能事鬼神，故欲诛于祝史。子称是语，何故？ 
现代文：齐景公说： 据和款认为寡人能够事奉鬼神，所以要诛戮祝、史，您提出这些话，是什么缘故？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong said, "According to the Taoist text, few people can serve ghosts and gods, so you should make a wish, Shi, why are you saying these things?

古文：对曰： 若有德之君，外内不废，上下无怨，动无违事，其祝史荐信，无愧心矣。
现代文：晏子回答说： 如果是有德行的君主，国家和宫里的事情都没有荒废，上下没有怨恨，举动没有违背礼仪的事，他的祝、史向鬼神陈述实际情况，就没有惭愧的心了。
English: The cripple replied: "If there is a virtuous monarch, the affairs of the country and the palace are not wasted, there is no resentment, there is no violation of etiquette, and his wishes and history report the actual situation to the gods, there is no shame.

古文：是以鬼神用飨，国受其福，祝史与焉。
现代文：所以鬼神享用祭品，国家受到鬼神所降的福禄，祝、史也有一份。
English: Therefore, the ghosts and gods enjoy the offerings, and the country receives the blessings from the ghosts and gods, as well as the congratulations and history.

古文：其所以蕃祉老寿者，为信君使也，其言忠信于鬼神。
现代文：他们所以繁衍有福、健康长寿，由于是诚实的国君的使者，他们的话忠诚信实。
English: For this cause they shall multiply and be blessed, and live long and healthy, because they are the messengers of an honest prince, and their words are true and faithful.

古文：其適遇淫君，外内颇邪，上下怨疾，动作辟违，从欲厌私。高台深池，撞钟舞女，斩刈民力，输掠其聚，以成其违，不恤后人。暴虐淫从，肆行非度，无所还忌，不思谤讟，不惮鬼神，神怒民痛，无悛于心。
现代文：他们如果恰好碰上放纵的国君，里外偏颇邪恶，上下怨恨嫉妒，举动邪僻背理，放纵欲望满足私心，高台深池，奏乐歌舞，砍伐民力，掠夺百姓的积蓄，以这些行为铸成过错，而不体恤后代，暴虐放纵，随意行动没有法度，无所顾忌，不考虑怨谤，不害怕鬼神。天怒人怨，在心里还不肯改悔。
English: If they happen to meet an indulgent sovereign, they are evil inside and out, resentful and envious, perverse and treacherous in their actions, indulge their desires to satisfy their selfishness, high and deep, play music, sing and dance, cut down people's power, plunder people's savings, and use these actions to make mistakes, without compassion for future generations, tyrannical indulgence, free action without law, no scruples, no consideration for slander, no fear of ghosts and gods.

古文：其祝史荐信，是言罪也。
现代文：他的祝、史陈说实际情况，这是报告国君的罪过。
English: His wish, history, and the actual situation, this is the crime of reporting the sovereign.

古文：其盖失数美，是矫诬也。进退无辞，则虚以求媚。是以鬼神不飨其国以祸之，祝史与焉。
现代文：他们掩盖过错、专谈好事，这是虚诈欺骗，真假都不能陈述，只好陈述不相干的空话来向鬼神讨好，所以鬼神不享用他们国家的祭品，还让它发生祸难，祝、史也有一份。
English: They cover up their faults and only talk about the good things. This is deception and deceit. They can't present the truth or falsehood, so they have to present irrelevant empty words to please the ghosts and gods. Therefore, the ghosts and gods don't enjoy the sacrifices of their country, but also let it have disasters. There is also a history.

古文：所以夭昏孤疾者，为暴君使也，其言僭嫚于鬼神。 
现代文：他们所以夭折患病，由于是暴虐的国君的使者，他们的话对鬼神欺诈轻侮。 
English: They died young and were sick because they were messengers of a tyrannical king, and their words were blasphemous.

古文：公曰： 然则若之何？ 
现代文：齐景公说： 那末怎么办？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong said: Then what should we do?

古文：对曰： 不可为也。
现代文：晏子回答说： 没法办了。
English: The cripple replied, "I can't do it.

古文：山林之木，衡鹿守之。
现代文：山林中的树木，由守山林的人看守它。
English: The trees of the mountain forest are guarded by the guardians of the mountain forest.

古文：泽之萑蒲，舟鲛守之。
现代文：洼地里的芦苇，舟鲛看守它。
English: The reed of the valley, and the stork that stirs it.

古文：薮之薪蒸，虞候守之。
现代文：草野中的柴禾，虞侯看守它。
English: Firewood in the meadow, the lord of the manor guards it.

古文：海之盐蜃，祈望守之。
现代文：大海中的盐蛤，祈望看守它。
English: The salt pond in the sea, hope springs up to guard it.

古文：县鄙之人，入从其政。
现代文：偏僻地方的人，进来管理政事。
English: People from remote areas came in to run the government.

古文：偪介之关，暴征其私。承嗣大夫，强易其贿。
现代文：邻近国都的关卡，横征暴敛，世袭的大夫，强买货物。
English: Checkpoints near the national capital, exorbitant levies, hereditary doctors, forced purchase of goods.

古文：布常无艺，征敛无度，宫室日更，淫乐不违。
现代文：发布政令没有准则，征收赋税没有节制，宫室每天轮换着住，荒淫作乐不肯离开。
English: There is no standard for issuing decrees, there is no restraint in tax collection, the palace is rotated every day, and the lewd entertainers refuse to leave.

古文：内宠之妾，肆夺于市。外宠之臣，僭令于鄙。
现代文：宫内的宠妾，在市场上肆意掠夺，外边的宠臣，在边境上假传圣旨。
English: The favorite concubines within the court plundered the market, while the favorite subjects outside the court falsely preached the gospel on the frontier.

古文：私欲养求，不给则应。
现代文：奉养自己、追求玩好这些私欲，下边不能满足就立即治罪。
English: If you pursue these selfish desires, such as nurturing yourself and playing well, and cannot satisfy them, you will be punished immediately.

古文：民人苦病，夫妇皆诅。
现代文：百姓痛苦困乏，丈夫妻子都在诅咒。
English: The people are wretched and weary. Husbands and wives are cursing.

古文：祝有益也，诅亦有损。
现代文：祝祷有好处，诅咒也有害处。
English: Blessing is good, cursing is bad.

古文：聊、摄以东，姑、尤以西，其为人也多矣！
现代文：聊地、摄地以东，姑水、尤水以西，人口多得很呢。
English: To the east of Chatochi and Zhetchi, and to the west of Gushu and Yushu, the population is very large.

古文：虽其善祝，岂能胜亿兆人之诅？
现代文：虽然祝史善于祝祷，难道能胜过亿兆人的诅咒？
English: Although Zhu Xi is good at praying, can he overcome the curse of billions of people?

古文：君若欲诛于祝史，修德而后可。 
现代文：君王如果要诛戮祝，史，只有修养德行然后才可以。 
English: If you want to be a king, you have to cultivate virtue.

古文：公说，使有司宽政，毁关，去禁，薄敛，已责。
现代文：齐景公很高兴，让官吏放宽政令，毁掉关卡，废除禁令，减轻赋税，免除对官府所欠的债务。
English: Qi Jinggong was very pleased and let the officials relax the decree, destroy the checkpoints, abolish the ban, reduce taxes, and forgive the debts owed to the government.

古文：十二月，齐侯田于沛，招虞人以弓，不进。
现代文：十二月，齐景公在沛地打猎，用弓招唤虞人，虞人没有来。
English: In December, the Duke of Qi Jing was hunting in Paidi, and he used his bow to summon a fortune-teller. However, the fortune-teller did not come.

古文：公使执之，辞曰： 昔我先君之田也，旃以招大夫，弓以招士，皮冠以招虞人。
现代文：齐景公派人扣押了他，虞人辩解说： 从前我们先君打猎的时候，用红旗招唤大夫，用弓招唤士，用皮冠招唤虞人。
English: Qi Jing sent his men to arrest him, and the rich man defended himself by saying: "In the past, when our ancestors were hunting, they used the red flag to call for a doctor, a bow to call for a scholar, and a leather cap to call for a rich man.

古文：臣不见皮冠，故不敢进。 
现代文：下臣没有见到皮冠，所以不敢进见。 
English: I didn't see the hat, so I didn't dare to look.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：齐景公于是就释放了虞人。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：子犹驰而造焉。
现代文：孔子说： 遵守道义，不如遵守官制。 君子认为说得对。
English: Confucius said, "It is better to abide by the official system than to abide by morality."

古文：公曰： 唯據与我和夫。 
现代文：齐景公从打猎的地方回来，晏子在遄台侍候，梁丘据驱车来到。齐景公说： 惟有据与我和谐啊！ 
English: When Lord Qi Jing returned from hunting, the mule was waiting for him in Xingtai, and Liang Qiu was driven there. Lord Qi Jing said, "Only the mule is in harmony with me!"

古文：晏子对曰： 據亦同也，焉得为和？ 
现代文：晏子回答说： 据也只不过相同而已，哪里说得上和谐？ 
English: The cripple answered, "It's just the same, so how can it be called harmony?"

古文：公曰： 和与同异乎？ 
现代文：齐景公说： 和谐跟相同不一样吗？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong said: Is harmony different from sameness?

古文：对曰： 异。
现代文：晏子回答说： 不一样。
English: The cripple replied, "It's different.

古文：和如羹焉，水火醯醢盐梅以烹鱼肉，燀之以薪。宰夫和之，齐之以味，济其不及，以洩其过。
现代文：和协好像做羹汤，用水、火、醋、酱、盐、梅来烹调鱼和肉，用柴禾烧煮，厨工加以调和，使味道适中，味道太淡就增加调料，味道太浓就加水冲淡。
English: Harmony is like making soup stock. Fish and meat are cooked with water, fire, vinegar, sauce, salt, and plums. They are boiled with firewood, and the chef adjusts them to make the taste moderate. If the taste is too light, seasoning is added, and if the taste is too strong, water is added to dilute it.

古文：君子食之，以平其心。
现代文：君子喝汤，内心平静。
English: A gentleman drinks soup, and his heart is at peace.

古文：君臣亦然。
现代文：君臣之间也是这样。
English: This is also the case between princes and ministers.

古文：君所谓可而有否焉，臣献其否以成其可。
现代文：国君所认为行而其中有不行的，臣下指出它的不行的而使行的部分更加完备。
English: What the sovereign considers to be good and not good, the vassal points out what is not good and makes the good part more complete.

古文：君所谓否而有可焉，臣献其可以去其否。是以政平而不干，民无争心。
现代文：国君所认为不行而其中有行的，臣下指出它的行的部分而去掉它的不行，因此政事平和而不肯违背礼仪，百姓没有争夺之心。
English: What the sovereign considers to be bad is good, and the vassal points out the good part of it and removes the bad part. Therefore, the government is peaceful and does not want to violate the etiquette, and the people do not have the spirit of competition.

古文：故《诗》曰： 亦有和羹，既戒既平。
现代文：所以《诗》说： 有着调和的羹汤，已经告诫厨工把味道调得匀净。
English: Therefore, the "Poem" says: There is a mixed soup, and the cook has been warned to adjust the taste evenly.

古文：鬷嘏无言，时靡有争。 
现代文：神灵来享而无所指责，上下也都没有争竞。 
English: The gods enjoy it without reproach, and there is no competition between the top and bottom.

古文：先王之济五味，和五声也，以平其心，成其政也。
现代文：先王调匀五味、谐和五声，是用来平静他的内心，完成政事的。
English: The former king adjusted the five tastes, harmonized the five voices, and used it to calm his heart and accomplish political affairs.

古文：声亦如味，一气，二体，三类，四物，五声，六律，七音，八风，九歌，以相成也。
现代文：声音也像味道一样，是由一气、二体、三类、四物、五声、六律、七音、八风、九歌互相组成的。
English: Sound, like taste, is made up of one air, two bodies, three kinds, four things, five voices, six laws, seven tones, eight winds, and nine songs.

古文：清浊，小大，短长，疾徐，哀乐，刚柔，迟速，高下，出入，周疏，以相济也。
现代文：是由清浊、大小、短长、缓急、哀乐、刚柔、快慢、高低、出入、疏密互相调节的。
English: It is mutually regulated by clearness, smallness, shortness, urgency, melancholy, hardness, softness, swiftness, high and low, entrance and exit, and density.

古文：君子听之，以平其心。
现代文：君子听了，内心平静。
English: The gentleman listened, his heart at peace.

古文：心平德和。
现代文：内心平静，德行就和协。
English: When the heart is calm, virtue is harmonious.

古文：故《诗》曰： 德音不瑕。 
现代文：所以《诗》说 德音没有缺失 。
English: Therefore, "Poetry" says that there is no lack of tone.

古文：今據不然。
现代文：现在据不是这样。
English: That does not seem to be the case now.

古文：君所谓可，據亦曰可。
现代文：国君认为行的，据也认为行。
English: If the sovereign thinks it's okay, then it's okay.

古文：君所谓否，據亦曰否。
现代文：国君认为不行的，据也认为不行。
English: If the sovereign does not think it can be done, the people also think it cannot be done.

古文：若以水济水，谁能食之？
现代文：如同用清水去调剂清水，谁能吃它呢？
English: Who can eat it, but he who mixes it with water?

古文：若琴瑟之专壹，谁能听之？
现代文：如同琴瑟老弹一个音调，谁去听它呢？
English: Like a lyre that fiddles for a tune, who will hear it?

古文：同之不可也如是。 
现代文：不应该相同的道理就像这样。 
English: It shouldn't be the same story like this.

古文：饮酒乐。
现代文：喝酒喝得很高兴。
English: Everyone was drinking and drinking happily.

古文：公曰： 古而无死，其乐若何？ 
现代文：齐景公说： 从古以来如果没有死，它的欢乐会怎么样啊！ 
English: Qi Jing Gong said: If there had been no death since ancient times, what would have happened to its joy!

古文：晏子对曰： 古而无死，则古之乐也，君何得焉？
现代文：晏子回答说： 从古以来如果没有死，现在的欢乐就是古代人的欢乐了，君王能得到什么呢？
English: The cripple answered: "If there has been no death since ancient times, the joy of the present is the joy of the ancients.

古文：昔爽鸠氏始居此地，季荝因之，有逢伯陵因之，蒲姑氏因之，而后大公因之。
现代文：从前爽鸠氏开始居住在这里，季萴沿袭下来，有逢伯陵沿袭下来，蒲姑氏因袭下来，然后太公沿袭下来。
English: Once upon a time, the Shuangliu clan began to live here, followed by the Ji family, followed by the Fengbo family, followed by the Pugu family, followed by the Taigong family.

古文：古若无死，爽鸠氏之乐，非君所愿也。 
现代文：从古以来如果没有死，那是爽鸠氏的欢乐，并不是君王所希望的啊。 
English: Since ancient times, if there is no death, it is the joy of Shuangtao, and it is not what kings hope for.

古文：郑子产有疾，谓子大叔曰： 我死，子必为政。
现代文：郑国的子产有病，对子太叔说： 我死以后，您必定执政。
English: Zheng Guo's son-in-law was ill, and he said to his great-uncle: "After my death, you will certainly rule."

古文：唯有德者能以宽服民，其次莫如猛。
现代文：只有有德行的人能够用宽大来使百姓服从，其次就莫如严厉。
English: Only a virtuous man can use clemency to make the people obey, followed by severity.

古文：夫火烈，民望而畏之，故鲜死焉。
现代文：火势猛烈，百姓看着就害怕，所以很少有人死于火。
English: The fire was so fierce that people were afraid to look at it, so very few people died in the fire.

古文：水懦弱，民狎而玩之，则多死焉。
现代文：水性懦弱，百姓轻视并玩弄它，很多人就死在水中。
English: Water-based cowardice, the people despise and play with it, many people die in the water.

古文：故宽难。 
现代文：所以宽大不容易。 
English: So it's not easy to be lenient.

古文：疾数月而卒。
现代文：子产病了几个月就死去了。
English: The child died after a few months of illness.

古文：大叔为政，不忍猛而宽。
现代文：子太叔执政，不忍心严厉却奉行宽大政策。
English: His great-uncle was in power, and although he could not bear to be strict, he pursued a policy of leniency.

古文：郑国多盗，取人于萑苻之泽。
现代文：郑国盗贼很多，聚集在芦苇塘里。
English: There are many thieves in Zheng Guo, gathered in the reed pond.

古文：大叔悔之曰： 吾早从夫子，不及此。 
现代文：太叔后悔，说： 我早点听从他老人家的话，就不至于到这一步。 
English: Uncle regretted and said: If I had listened to his old man earlier, I wouldn't have come to this point.

古文：兴徒兵以攻萑苻之盗，尽杀之。盗少止。
现代文：发动徒兵攻打藏在芦苇丛生的湖泽里的盗贼，全部杀死他们，盗贼稍稍收敛了一些。孔子说： 好啊！
English: He sent his soldiers to attack the thieves, who were hiding in the reed-filled lake, and killed them all. The thieves then retreated a little. Confucius said, "Good!

古文：仲尼曰： 善哉，政宽则民慢，慢则纠之以猛。
现代文：政事宽大百姓就怠慢，怠慢就用严厉来纠正。
English: If the government is lenient, the people will be negligent, and the negligence will be corrected with severity.

古文：猛则民残，残则施之以宽。
现代文：严厉百姓就受到伤害，伤害就实施宽大。
English: If the people are severely punished, they will be harmed, and if they are harmed, they will be treated leniently.

古文：宽以济猛，猛以济宽，政是以和。
现代文：用宽大调节严厉，用严厉调节宽大，因此政事调和。
English: Use leniency to adjust the severity, use severity to adjust the leniency, so the political affairs are reconciled.

古文：《诗》曰： 民亦劳止，汔可小康。
现代文：《诗》说， 百姓已经很辛劳，差不多可以稍稍安康。
English: "Poetry" said, the people have been very hard work, almost can be a little bit of well-being.

古文：惠此中国，以绥四方。 施之以宽也。 毋从诡随，以谨无良。
现代文：赐恩给中原各国，用以安定四方 ，这是实施宽大。 不要放纵随声附和的人，以约束不良之人。
English: Granting grace to the Central Plains countries to stabilize the four directions is the implementation of generosity. Do not indulge those who follow the voice, and restrain those who are not good.

古文：式遏寇虐，惨不畏明。 纠之以猛也。 柔远能迩，以定我王。 平之以和也。
现代文：应当制止侵夺残暴的人，他们从来不怕法度 ，这是用严厉来纠正。 安抚边远，柔服近邦，用来安定我国王 ，这是用和平来安定国家。
English: It is necessary to stop the violent aggressors, who have never feared the law, and to correct them with severity; to pacify the outlying areas, to subdue the neighboring countries, to stabilize my king, and to stabilize the country with peace.

古文：又曰： 不竞不絿，不刚不柔。
现代文：又说， 不争强不急躁，不刚猛不柔弱。
English: He also said, "Don't be competitive, don't be impatient, don't be stubborn, don't be weak."

古文：布政优优，百禄是遒。 
现代文：施政平和宽裕，各种福禄都聚集 ，这是和谐的顶点。 
English: The administration is peaceful and affluent, and all kinds of benefits are gathered, which is the pinnacle of harmony.

古文：和之至也。 及子产卒，仲尼闻之，出涕曰： 古之遗爱也。 
现代文：等到子产死去，孔子听到这消息，流着眼泪，说： 他的仁爱，是古人流传下来的遗风啊。 
English: When Zibo died, Confucius heard the news and shed tears, saying: His benevolence is a legacy of the ancients.

