古文：凡战，若以寡敌众，必以日暮，或伏于深草，或邀于隘路，战则必胜。
现代文：凡是作战，如果是用较少的兵力抗击较多兵力的敌人，一定要选在日落黄昏时候，或者于草木深处暗设伏兵，或者在隘口险路截击敌人，这样作战必能取胜。
English: In any battle, if you use fewer troops to fight against a larger enemy, you must choose sunset and dusk, or set up an ambush deep in the grass, or intercept the enemy on a narrow and dangerous road, so that the battle will be able to win.

古文：法曰： 用少者务隘。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 使用小部队对敌作战时，一定要选择险隘的地形条件。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: When using small units to fight against the enemy, it is necessary to choose narrow terrain conditions.

古文：《北史》：西魏大统三年，东魏将高欢渡河，逼华州，刺史王罴严守。乃涉洛，军于许原西。
现代文：《北史》记载：西魏大统三年，东魏将领高欢率军西渡渭河后，直逼西魏华州，因华州刺史王罴防守严密难克，不得不转兵渡过洛水，而驻扎在许原以西。
English: "Northern History" records: In the third year of the Great Reunification of the Western Wei Dynasty, after the Eastern Wei general Gao Huan led the army westward across the Li River, he drove straight into West Wei Huazhou. Due to the tight defense of Huazhou Zhishi Wangye, he had to transfer troops across Luoshui and stationed in the west of Xuyuan.

古文：西魏遣将宇文泰拒之。
现代文：西魏大丞相宇文泰奉命率军抗击高欢军。
English: Western Wei Minister of the Great Emperor Wu Wentei was ordered to lead the army to resist the Gaohuan army.

古文：泰至渭南，集诸州兵来会。诸将以众寡不敌，请且待欢更西以观之。
现代文：宇文泰率军到达渭南，各州的援军也陆续集中于此，都以为敌众我寡，难以打胜，应当等高欢继续西进，再看时机。
English: When the army led by Uwentai arrived in southern Shandong, reinforcements from various states were also successively concentrated here. They all thought that the enemy was few and far between, and it would be difficult to win. They should wait for Gaohuan to continue westward, and then see the opportunity.

古文：泰曰： 欢若至咸阳，人情转搔扰。
现代文：宇文泰则反驳说： 高欢倘若进至咸阳，民心将会动荡不安。
English: On the other hand, Uwentai countered, "If Gao Huan comes to Xianyang, the people's hearts will be unsettled.

古文：今其新至，便可击之。 
现代文：现在乘其刚到立足未稳，正好可以攻击它。 
English: Now that it's just getting off the ground, it's the right time to attack it.

古文：即遣人造浮桥于渭南，军士赉三日粮，轻骑渡渭，辎重自渭南夹渭而西。
现代文：于是，立即造浮桥于渭水之上，命部队携带三天口粮，以轻装骑兵迅速渡过渭水，而以运输部队自渭水南岸沿河向西运动。
English: As a result, a pontoon bridge was immediately built over Surabaya, the relief force carried three days of rations, the light cavalry quickly crossed Surabaya, and the transport force moved westward along the river from the south bank of Surabaya.

古文：十月壬辰，至沙苑，距齐军六十余里。
现代文：十月初一，宇文泰率军进至沙苑，距高欢军仅六十余里。
English: On the first day of October, Wu Wentai led his army into Sha Yuan, only sixty miles away from Gaohuan's army.

古文：高欢率兵来会。
现代文：高欢闻讯立即率军赶来。
English: When Gao Huan heard the news, he immediately led an army to come.

古文：候骑告齐兵至，泰召诸将议。
现代文：骑兵侦察员报告说高欢军即将到来，宇文泰马上召集众将商议对策。
English: Cavalry scouts reported that Gaohuan's army was about to arrive, and Uwentai immediately summoned generals to discuss countermeasures.

古文：李弼曰： 彼众我寡，不可争也。
现代文：骠骑大将军李弼说： 因为敌众我寡，我们不可以在平坦开阔之地设阵同敌交战。
English: "Because we have few enemies, we can't set up a camp in a flat, open area to engage the enemy," said General Li Junmao, commander of the cavalry.

古文：宜至此东十里，有渭曲，可据以待之。 
现代文：从这里向东十里，有渭水一弯曲处，可以抢先占领该地以等待敌军。 
English: From here, ten miles to the east, there is a bend in the Surabaya River, which can be occupied ahead of time to wait for the enemy.

古文：遂进至渭曲，背水东西为阵，李弼为右拒，赵贵为左拒。令将士皆偃戈于葭芦之中，闻鼓声而起。
现代文：宇文泰遂率军进至那里，且背靠渭水自东向西列阵，以李弼所部为右翼，以赵贵所部为左翼，命令士兵都把武器放倒在芦苇之中，听到鼓声立即奋起出击。
English: Yu Wentai then led the army there, and lined up from east to west with his back to Surabaya, with the Li Ye Department on the right and the Zhao Gui Department on the left. He ordered the soldiers to put down their weapons in the reeds, and when they heard the drums, they immediately rose up to attack.

古文：日晡，齐军至，望见军少，争进，卒乱而不成列。
现代文：黄昏时分，高欢率军到达这里，看到西魏军少，所部争相前进，致使部队混乱而不成战斗队形。
English: At dusk, Gao Huan led the army to arrive here, and saw that the West Wei army was small, and all units were scrambling to advance, causing the troops to be confused and not form a battle formation.

古文：兵将交，泰鸣鼓，士卒皆起。
现代文：当两军即将交战之际，宇文泰突然擂响战鼓，其部众闻声都骤然奋起出击。
English: When the two armies were about to engage in battle, Uwentai suddenly sounded the war drums, and all of his subordinates suddenly rose up to attack.

古文：于谨等以大军与之合战，李弼等率铁骑横击之，绝其军为二，遂大破之。
现代文：骠骑大将军于谨等将率主力直扑高欢军正面，李弼、赵贵率部从左、右两翼出击，将敌军分割为两段，以正面突击与两翼横击相结合的战术，一举打败高欢军。
English: General Yu Zhengyi led the main force to directly attack the front of the Gaohan army, Li Xi and Zhao Gui led the attack from the left and right wings, divided the enemy army into two sections, and defeated the Gaohan army in one fell swoop with the tactic of combining the frontal assault and the two-wing side attack.

