古文：徐佐卿拓跋大郎魏方进弟李清
现代文：徐佐卿拓跋大郎魏方进弟李清
English: Xu Zuqing's great-grandson Wei Fangjin's younger brother Li Qing

古文：徐佐卿
现代文：徐佐卿
English: Xu Zuoqing

古文：唐玄宗天宝十三载重阳日猎于沙苑。时云间有孤鹤徊翔。
现代文：唐玄宗在天宝十三年重阳节那天到沙苑打猎，当时云间有一只孤鹤在来回飞翔。
English: Tang Xuan Zong went hunting in Shayuan on the day of the Chungyang Festival in the 13th year of Tianbao. At that time, there was a lone crane flying back and forth between the clouds.

古文：玄宗亲御弧矢中之。其鹤即带箭徐坠，将及地丈许，欻然矫翼，西南而逝。
现代文：唐玄宗亲自拉弓放箭把鹤射中了，那鹤就带着箭慢慢地往下降落，离地还有一丈来高的时候，它突然一振翅膀，向西南飞去了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong personally shot the crane with a bow and arrow, and the crane slowly descended with the arrow. When it was still a few feet above the ground, it suddenly flapped its wings and flew to the southwest.

古文：万众极目，良久乃灭。
现代文：千万人都一直望着它，很久才消逝。
English: Tens of thousands of people have been watching it for a long time before it disappears.

古文：益州城西十五里，有道观焉。
现代文：益州城西十五里，有一个道观。
English: Fifteen miles west of the city of Yizhou, there is a Taoist temple.

古文：依山临水，松桂深寂，道流非修习精悫者莫得而居之。
现代文：这道观依山傍水，松树桂树成片，山深林静。道流之中，如果不是精心谨慎地进行修炼的人是不能住到这里的。
English: This is a path that follows the side of the mountain by the water, with pine trees and laurel trees forming a piece, and the mountain is deep and quiet. In the middle of the path, people who are not carefully cultivating cannot live here.

古文：观之东廊第一院，尤为幽寂。
现代文：这个观的东廊第一院，尤其幽静。
English: The first courtyard of the east corridor of this view is particularly quiet.

古文：有自称青城山道士徐佐卿者，清粹高古，一岁率三四至焉。
现代文：有一个自称是青城山道士名字叫作徐佐卿的，样子清纯高古，一年大概能来好几趟。
English: There is one who claims to be a Taoist monk from Qingcheng Mountain named Xu Zuoqing. His appearance is pure and ancient, and he probably comes here several times a year.

古文：观之耆旧，因虚其院之正堂，以俟其来。
现代文：观中的老年人，因此总是空着那院的正堂，等着徐佐卿来。
English: Therefore, the main hall of the hospital is always empty, waiting for Xu Zuoqing to come.

古文：而佐卿至则栖焉，或三五日，或旬朔，言归青城。
现代文：而徐佐卿一来就住在这里，或三五日，或十天半月就走。他说回青城。
English: But Xu Zuoxing lives here as soon as he arrives, and leaves after three to five days, or ten days and a half months. He says he will go back to Qingcheng.

古文：甚为道流所倾仰。
现代文：道流中人都很仰慕他。
English: People from all walks of life look up to him.

古文：一日忽自外至，神彩不怡，谓院中人曰： 吾行山中，偶为飞矢所加，寻已无恙矣；然此箭非人间所有，吾留之于壁，后年箭主到此，即宜付之，慎无坠失。 
现代文：有一天他忽然从外面走进来，神色不怎么高兴。
English: One day he suddenly walked in from outside, looking not very happy.

古文：乃援毫记壁云： 留箭之时，则十三载九月九日也。 
现代文：他还拿笔在墙壁上记道： 留箭的时候，是天宝十三年九月九日。 
English: He also took a pen and wrote on the wall: When I left the arrow, it was September 9th, Tianbao 13.

古文：及玄宗避乱幸蜀，暇日命驾行游，偶至斯观，乐其嘉境，因遍幸道室。
现代文：等到唐玄宗避难来到四川，闲暇之日坐着车游玩，偶然来到这个观，很喜欢这里的佳境，就遍游所有的道室。
English: He waited until Tang Xuan Zong took refuge in Sichuan. On his day off, he took a ride in his car. He came across this monastery by chance, loved the beautiful scenery, and visited all the Buddhist temples.

古文：既入此堂，忽睹其箭，命侍臣取而玩之，盖御箭也。深异之，因询观之道士。具以实对。
现代文：走进这个院的正堂之后，忽然看到了那支箭，让侍臣拿过来赏玩。他一看这是一支御用的箭，非常惊奇，于是就询问观里的道士，道士全都如实地回答了。
English: After walking into the main hall of this temple, he suddenly saw the arrow and asked his attendant to bring it over for him to enjoy. When he saw that it was a royal arrow, he was very surprised, so he asked the Taoist monks at the monastery. The Taoist monks all answered truthfully.

古文：则视佐卿所题，乃前岁沙苑从田之箭也，佐卿盖中箭孤鹤耳。
现代文：唐玄宗就去看徐佐卿题的字，原来是前年在沙苑打猎射出的那支箭。徐佐卿大概是中箭的那只孤鹤。
English: Tang Xuan Zong went to read the inscription of Xu Zuoqing, which turned out to be the arrow shot the previous year while hunting in Sha Yuan. Xu Zuoqing was probably the lone crane in the arrow.

古文：究其题，乃沙苑翻飞，当日而集于斯欤。
现代文：细究那题字，是它在沙苑中箭之后翩翻飞翔，当日就飞到这里了。
English: If you look closely at the inscription, it was flipped and flown after the arrow hit the sand garden, and flew here on the same day.

古文：玄宗大奇之，因收其箭而宝焉。
现代文：唐玄宗非常惊奇，就收藏了那支箭，作为一件宝物。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very surprised and collected the arrow as a treasure.

古文：自后蜀人亦无复有遇佐卿者。
现代文：以后蜀地人也没有再遇到过徐佐卿的。
English: The people of Shu did not encounter Xu Zuoqing again.

古文：拓跋大郎
现代文：拓跋大郎
English: Takubadaira

古文：天宝中，有扶风令者，家本权贵，恃势轻物，宾客寒素者无因趋谒。
现代文：天宝年间，有一个扶风县的县令，他出身于权贵家庭，依仗权势轻视他人，贫寒的宾客就没有机会去拜访他，因此人们对他有许多抨击和议论。
English: During the Tenpo era, there was a county magistrate of Fufeng County. He was born into a powerful family and despised others because of his power. Poor guests did not have the opportunity to visit him, so there was a lot of criticism and discussion about him.

古文：由是谤议盈路。时主簿李、尉裴者，好宾客。
现代文：当时有一个姓李的主簿和一个姓裴的县尉，这两个人都喜欢宾客。
English: At that time, there was a host surnamed Li and a county lieutenant surnamed Pei, both of whom liked guests.

古文：裴颇好道，亦常隐于名山，又好施与，时亦补令之阙。
现代文：裴县尉还喜欢道教，也曾经在名山里隐居过，还好施舍，有时也弥补县令的缺点。
English: Pei County Lieutenant also likes Taoism, and once lived in seclusion in a famous mountain. He is also good at giving alms, and sometimes makes up for the shortcomings of the county magistrate.

古文：常因暇日，会宴邑中，客皆通贵，裴尉疾不赴。
现代文：县令曾经趁闲暇在城里举办宴会，前来赴宴的宾客都与权贵有交往，裴县尉因病没有出席。
English: The county magistrate once held a banquet in the city in his spare time, and the guests who came to the banquet had dealings with dignitaries. County Lieutenant Pei did not attend due to illness.

古文：宾客方集，忽有一客，广颡，长七尺余，策杖携帽，神色高古，谓谒者曰： 拓拔大郎要见府君。 
现代文：宾客们刚到齐，忽然又来了一位客人。这位客人额头挺宽，身高七尺有余，拄着拐杖，托着帽子，神色清高古朴。他对负责通报的官吏说： 我是拓跋大郎，要见府君。 
English: The guests had just arrived, when suddenly another guest arrived. This guest had a broad forehead, was more than seven feet tall, walked with a cane, wore a hat, and had a clear and simple appearance. He said to the official in charge of the notification: I am Tuoba Dairo, and I want to see the governor.

古文：谒者曰： 长官方食，不可通谒。请俟罢宴。 
现代文：负责通报的官吏说： 长官们正在吃饭，不能通报，请等到宴会结束再通报。 
English: The official in charge of the announcement said, "The officials are eating, so we can't announce it. Please wait until the banquet is over before announcing it."

古文：令不得已，命邀之升阶。令意不悦，而客亦不平。
现代文：来客生气地说： 你是干什么的小子，竟敢如此拒绝客人？不通报我就自己闯进去！ 
English: The visitor said angrily: "What kind of a brat are you, how dare you refuse a guest like that? I'll break in myself without notifying anyone!"

古文：既而宴会，率不谦让。
现代文：负责通报的兴，来客也不满意。接着开始宴会，却不礼让来客。
English: In charge of the announcement, the guests were not satisfied. Then the banquet began, but it was rude to let the guests go.

古文：及终宴，皆不乐。
现代文：等到宴会结束，大家全都不乐。
English: By the time the party is over, everyone is unhappy.

古文：客不揖去。令亦长揖而已。
现代文：那客人不告辞就走了，县令也仅仅作了一个长揖而已。
English: The guest left without saying goodbye, and the prefect only made a long bow.

古文：客色怒甚，流言而出。
现代文：客人的脸色非常愤怒，说着难听的话走出去。
English: The guest's face was very angry, and he went out saying nasty things.

古文：时李主簿疑为异人。
现代文：当时李主簿怀疑这个人是个神异的人。
English: At that time, Li Muzhou suspected that this person was a supernatural person.

古文：李归，召裴尉而告之云： 宴不乐，为此客耳。
现代文：李主簿回到家里，把裴县尉叫来对他说道： 宴会不欢而散，是因为这个客人。
English: When Master Li returned home, he called Lieutenant Pei to him and said, "The party broke up because of this guest.

古文：观其状，恐是侠者，惧且为害。
现代文：看他那样子，恐怕是个侠客。我担心他将成为一种危害，我们应该把他找来向他认错。 
English: To look at him like that, I'm afraid he's a knight. I'm afraid he's going to be a danger, and we should find him and tell him he's wrong.

古文：吾当召而谢之。 
现代文：于是李主簿和裴县尉一起等候，派人去找那客人。
English: So Master Li and Lieutenant Pei waited together and sent someone to find the guest.

古文：遂与裴共俟，命吏邀客，客亦不让而至。
现代文：那客人也不谦让，就来了。当时已经是傍晚。
English: The guest was not to be dissuaded and came. It was late in the evening.

古文：时已向夜，李见甚敬。
现代文：李主簿见了他，非常尊敬。
English: Li Zhanbo met him and had great respect for him.

古文：裴尉见之，忽趋避他室。
现代文：而裴县尉见了他，急忙躲到其他的屋子里去了。
English: But Lieutenant Pei County saw him and hurried to hide in another room.

古文：李揖客坐定，复起问裴。
现代文：李主簿揖请客人坐定之后，又去问裴县尉。
English: After asking the guests to sit down, Master Li went to ask Lieutenant Pei again.

古文：裴色兢惧甚，谓李曰： 此果异人，是峨嵋山人，道术至高者。
现代文：裴县尉非常惊惧，对李主簿说： 这个人果然是神异之人。他是峨嵋山人，道术极高超。
English: Pei County Lieutenant was very alarmed and said to Li Muzhuo: "This man is really a supernatural person. He is a native of Mount Emei and is highly skilled in Taoism.

古文：曾师事数年，中路舍之而逃。今惧不可见。 
现代文：我曾拜他为师多年，中途离开他逃跑，现在只怕他不会见我。 
English: For years I had worshipped him as a teacher. I left him halfway and ran away. Now I'm just afraid he won't see me.

古文：李子因先为裴请。裴即衣公服趋入，鞠躬载拜而谢罪。
现代文：于是李主簿先替裴县尉向客人求情，裴县尉就穿上官服走进去，鞠躬参拜而谢罪。
English: So Li Muzhou first interceded on behalf of Lieutenant Pei County to the guests. Lieutenant Pei County put on his official uniform and walked in, bowed and thanked the guests.

古文：客顾之良久。
现代文：那客人对着裴县尉看了许久。
English: The guest looked at Lieutenant Bae for a long time.

古文：李又为言。方命坐。
现代文：李主簿又为裴县尉求情，客人这才让裴县尉坐下。
English: Li Hongzhi also pleaded for Lieutenant Pei County, the guests only then let Lieutenant Pei County sit down.

古文：言议皆不相及。裴益敬肃，而李益加敬焉，兼言令之过。李为辞谢再三。
现代文：言谈谈论过程中，客人根本没提及裴县尉逃跑的事，裴县尉就更加肃然起敬。李主簿也更加尊敬他。又谈到了县令的过错，李主簿再三替县令认错。
English: In the course of the conversation, the guest did not mention the escape of Lieutenant Pei at all, which made Lieutenant Pei even more reverent. Master Li also respected him more. He also talked about the fault of the county magistrate, and Master Li repeatedly acknowledged the fault of the county magistrate.

古文：仍宿于李厅。
现代文：客人宿在李主簿的厅堂里。
English: The guest house is in the hall of the Lee main book.

古文：李夙夜省问，已失所在，而门户扃闭如故。
现代文：李主簿连夜去探望客人。客人已不外哪儿去了，但是门窗仍然是关着的。
English: Li Muzhou went to visit the guests overnight. The guests had already left, but the doors and windows were still closed.

古文：益以奇之。
现代文：李主簿更加奇怪。
English: Lee's ledger is even more bizarre.

古文：比旦，吏人奔走报云： 令忽中恶，气将绝而心微暖。 
现代文：到了早晨，有个官吏跑来报告说： 县令忽然间得了恶病，气要断了而心还稍暖。
English: In the morning, an official came running to report: "The county magistrate has suddenly come down with a bad illness. His breath is short and his heart is still a little warm.

古文：诸寮相与省之，至食时而苏。
现代文：僚属们一块去看望他。到了吃早饭的时候他苏醒了，就叫李主簿去见。
English: Colleagues and relatives went to visit him together. When it was time for breakfast, he woke up and asked Li Muzhuo to see him.

古文：令乃召李主簿入见，叩头谢之曰： 赖君免死耳。 
现代文：李主簿去了。县令向他叩头致谢说： 全靠你救了我一命啊！ 
English: The county magistrate bowed to him and thanked him, saying, "You saved my life!

古文：李问故。云： 昨晚客，盖是神人。
现代文：李主簿问原因，县令说： 昨天那位客人，大概是一位神人。
English: When Master Li asked the reason, the county magistrate said, "That guest yesterday was probably a divine being.

古文：吾昨被录去，见拓拔据胡床坐，责吾之不接宾客。
现代文：我昨晚被拘去，看见拓跋大郎坐在一把交椅上。
English: I was taken into custody last night and saw Takubadairo sitting on a bench.

古文：遂命折桑条鞭之，杖虽小而痛甚。
现代文：他责备我不交接宾客，就让人折桑树枝打我，树棍虽小却非常疼痛。我无话可说。
English: He reproached me for not handing over the guests, so he had someone break a mulberry branch and beat me with it. Although the stick was small, it was very painful. I have nothing to say.

古文：吾无辞谢之，约鞭至数百。
现代文：大约打到几百下，才说： 靠李主簿为你讲情，不然就打死你！ 
English: After about a few hundred blows, he said, "Depend on Master Li to intercede for you, otherwise I will beat you to death!"

古文：乃云： 赖主簿言之，不然死矣，敕左右送归，方得苏耳。 举示杖痕犹在也。
现代文：于是让人把我送回来，我这才醒了。 县令抬起身子让大家看，被抽打的伤痕还在呢。
English: So they sent me back, and that's when I woke up. The county magistrate lifted up his body for everyone to see, and the scars from the beating were still there.

古文：命驾往县北寻之。行三十里，果见大桑林，下有人马迹甚多，地有折桑条十余茎，血犹在地焉。
现代文：他让人骑马到县北去寻找，走了三十里，果然看见一片大桑林，林下有很多人马的足迹，地上有十几根桑树枝条，血迹也还留在地上。
English: He sent someone on horseback to the north of the county to look for it, and after a journey of thirty miles, they actually saw a large mulberry forest. Under the forest, there were many footprints of people and horses. There were more than a dozen mulberry branches on the ground, and bloodstains also remained on the ground.

古文：令自是知惧。
现代文：县令从此知道害怕了。
English: From then on, the county magistrate was afraid.

古文：而拓拔从此不知所之。
现代文：而拓跋从此不知哪儿去了。
English: Since then, Tuoba has disappeared.

古文：盖神仙也。
现代文：他大概是个神仙。
English: He's probably a god.

古文：魏方进弟
现代文：魏方进弟
English: Wei Fang Jin Di

古文：唐御史大夫魏方进，有弟年十五余，不能言，涕沫满身。兄弟亲戚皆目为痴人，无为恤养者。唯一姊悯怜之，给与衣食，令仆者与洗沐，略无倦色。
现代文：唐朝御史大夫魏方进，有一个十五岁多一点的弟弟，不会说话，鼻涕唾沫满身，兄弟亲戚把他视为傻子，没有抚养他的，只有他的一个姐姐可怜他，供他吃穿，让仆人给他洗衣服洗头洗脚什么的，一点没有厌倦的表现。
English: Wei Fangjin, the imperial historian of the Tang Dynasty, had a younger brother who was a little more than fifteen years old. He could not speak, and his nose was full of spittle. His brothers and relatives regarded him as a fool and did not raise him. Only one of his sisters pitied him, provided him with food and clothing, and had servants wash his clothes, wash his hair, and wash his feet. There was no sign of weariness at all.

古文：一旦于门外曝日搔痒。其邻里见朱衣使者，领数十骑至。问曰： 仙师何在。 
现代文：一天早晨，他在门外晒日头搔痒痒，他的邻居看见一个红衣使者，领着好几十骑马的到来，问道： 仙师在哪？ 
English: One morning, when he was sunning himself outside his door, his neighbor saw a messenger in a red coat leading dozens of horsemen and asked: Where is the genie?

古文：遂走到见搔痒者，鞠躬趋前，俯伏称谢。
现代文：于是红衣使者走到他面前鞠躬，俯下身去称谢。
English: So the messenger in red came up to him, bowed, and bent down to thank him.

古文：良久，忽高声叱曰： 来何迟！
现代文：许久，他忽然高声叱道： 为什么来晚了？
English: After a long time, he suddenly loudly scolded: Why are you late?

古文：勾当事了未？ 
现代文：事情办完了吗？ 
English: Is it done?

古文：曰： 有次第。 
现代文：红衣使者说： 还有一些未完。 
English: The messenger in red said, "There are still some unfinished tasks.

古文：又曰： 何不速了却？
现代文：他又说： 为什么不赶快了却？
English: He also said: Why don't you hurry up and get out?

古文：且去！ 
现代文：去吧！ 
English: Let's go!

古文：神彩洞彻，声韵朗畅，都无痴疾之状。
现代文：他神彩奕奕，通达事理，声音爽朗通畅，完全没有痴病的症状。
English: He is bright and lively, knowledgeable and rational, his voice is hearty and smooth, and he has no symptoms of mental illness at all.

古文：朱衣辈既去，依前涕下至口，搔痒不已。
现代文：红衣使者们走后，他又像先前那样，鼻涕流到口边，不停地搔痒了。
English: After the red-clothed messengers left, he had the same runny nose and itchy mouth as before.

古文：其夜遂卒。
现代文：那天夜里他就死了。
English: That night, Wang passed away peacefully.

古文：后魏公从驾至马嵬，其姊亦随去，禁兵乱，诛杨国忠，魏公亲也，与其族悉预祸焉。
现代文：杨国忠是魏方进的亲戚。
English: Yang Guozhong is a relative of Wei Fangjin.

古文：时其姊偶出在店外，闻难走，遗其男女三人，皆五六岁，已分为俎醢矣，及明早军发，试往店内寻之，僵尸相接，东北稍深一床上，若有衣服，就视之，儿女三人，悉在其中，所覆乃是葬痴弟黄绣袄子也。
现代文：魏方进和他的家族全都遭到大祸。当时他的姐姐偶然走出店来，听说发生了灾难就逃跑了，丢下了三个儿女，都五六岁，估计是已被砍成肉酱了。等到第二天早晨军队出发了，她到店里去寻找，见死尸满地，东北角稍远的一张床上，好像有衣服，走近一看，她的那三个儿女全在床上，盖的竟是葬痴弟时装进去的黄色绣花披袄子。
English: Wei Fangjin and his family all suffered a great disaster. At that time, his sister accidentally came out of the store, heard that a disaster had occurred and fled, leaving behind three children, all five or six years old, estimated to have been chopped into meat sauce. When the army set off the next morning, she went to the store to search, saw dead bodies all over the floor, a bed a little further away in the northeast corner, as if there were clothes. When she approached, she saw that her three children were all in bed, covered with yellow embroidered flowers and satin that were put in when she buried her younger brother.

古文：悲感恸哭。
现代文：她感动得放声恸哭。
English: She was moved to tears.

古文：母子相与入山，俱免于难。
现代文：于是母子四人一块逃入深山，免除了灾难。
English: As a result, the mother and four children fled into the mountains together, avoiding disaster.

古文：李清
现代文：李清
English: Li Qing

古文：李清，北海人也。
现代文：李清是北海人。
English: Li Qing is from the North Sea.

古文：代传染业。
现代文：他家世代相传以染布为业。
English: His family has been dyeing cloth for generations.

古文：清少学道，多延齐鲁之术士道流，必诚敬接奉之，终无所遇，而勤求之意弥切。
现代文：李清小时候喜欢学习道术，经常迎请齐鲁一带的术士道流，而且一定虔诚地接待。但是他始终没有遇上真正的仙人。他勤苦求道的意志就更加坚定迫切。
English: When Li Qing was a child, he liked to study Taoism. He often welcomed the sorcerer Taoists from the Qilu area and received them religiously. However, he never met a true sage. His will to diligently seek the Tao was even more determined and urgent.

古文：家富于财，素为州里之豪甿。
现代文：他家里很有钱，一向是州里的豪富之家。
English: His family is wealthy and has always been one of the richest in the state.

古文：子孙及内外姻族，近百数家，皆能游手射利于益都。
现代文：他的子孙及内外亲戚，将近一百多家，都能往来益都。
English: His children and grandchildren, as well as nearly a hundred relatives at home and abroad, can travel to and from Yixing.

古文：每清生日，则争先馈遗，凡积百余万。
现代文：经商赚钱。每当李清过生日，亲戚们便争先恐后地送礼。他共积累了一百多万家当。
English: Every time Li Qing has a birthday, his relatives scramble to give him gifts. He has accumulated more than one million treasures.

古文：清性仁俭，来则不拒，纳亦不散。
现代文：李清性情仁厚俭朴，凡送礼来的全都不拒绝，收了礼也不轻易用掉。
English: Li Qing has a benevolent and frugal nature. He does not refuse any gifts, and he does not easily spend the gifts he receives.

古文：如此相因，填累藏舍。
现代文：如此只进不出积累起来的东西把库房装得满满的。
English: In this way, only the things that have been accumulated can be brought in to fill the warehouse.

古文：年六十九，生日前一旬，忽召姻族，大陈酒食，已而谓曰： 吾赖尔辈勤力无过，各能生活，以是吾获优赡；然吾布衣蔬食，逾三十年矣，宁复有意于华侈哉！
现代文：六十九岁生日的前十天，他忽然叫来所有亲属，大摆酒宴，然后对大家说： 我靠你们勤奋努力没有过错，各自都能生活，因此我得到了优厚的供给。然而我穿布衣，吃菜食，已经三十多年了，难道我还能对豪华奢侈感兴趣吗？
English: Ten days before his 69th birthday, he suddenly summoned all his relatives, held a grand wine banquet, and then said to everyone: I rely on your diligent efforts without fault, each of you can live, so I have received a generous supply. However, I have been wearing cloth clothes and eating vegetarian food for more than 30 years, can I still be interested in luxury?

古文：尔辈以吾老长行，每馈吾生日衣装玩具，侈亦至矣；然吾自以久所得，缄之一室，曾未阅视，徒损尔之给用，资吾之粪土，竟何为哉！
现代文：你们因为我年纪大，是长辈，每当我过生日都送给我一些衣服玩物，已经十分奢侈了。但是我把长期以来得到的，封存在一个屋子里，一直没有仔细看，白白损耗了你们的资财，在我这里有如粪土，究竟是为什么呢？
English: Because I am older, you are the elders, every time I have a birthday, you give me some clothes and toys, which is already very luxurious. But I have kept what I got for a long time, sealed in a room, I have not looked carefully, I have wasted your wealth in vain, it is like excrement here, why is that?

古文：幸天未录吾魂气，行将又及吾之生辰，吾固知尔辈又营续寿之礼，吾所以先期而会，盖止尔之常态耳。 
现代文：有幸上天没有把我的魂捉去，行将又来到我的生日了，我本来知道你们还得置办为我祝寿的礼物。我之所以提前把你们集合起来，就是要制止你们经常的作法而已。 
English: Fortunately, the heavens did not take my soul. My birthday is coming up again, and I knew that you would have to buy me a gift to celebrate my birthday. The reason why I gathered you in advance was to stop you from doing what you always do.

古文：子孙皆曰： 续寿自远有之，非此将何以展卑下孝敬之心？
现代文：子孙们都说： 祝寿的事自古就有，不这样怎么能展示儿孙们的孝敬之心？
English: Their children and grandchildren all said, "We have been celebrating birthdays since ancient times. Otherwise, how can we show our children and grandchildren our filial piety?"

古文：愿无止绝，俾姻故之不安也。 
现代文：请不要禁止，杜绝，让亲属们感到不安。 
English: Please don't forbid it, don't stop it, don't make the relatives feel uneasy.

古文：清曰： 苟尔辈志不可夺，则从吾所欲而致之，可乎？ 
现代文：李清说： 如果你们的意志不可改变，那就按照我的想法去做，可以吗？ 
English: Li Qing said: If your will is unchangeable, then do as I think, okay?

古文：皆曰： 愿闻尊旨。 
现代文：儿孙们都说： 愿意聆听老人家的意旨。 
English: His children and grandchildren all said they were willing to listen to the old man's wishes.

古文：清曰： 各能遗吾洪纤麻縻百尺，总而计之，是吾获数千百丈矣，以此为绍续吾寿，岂不延长哉！ 
现代文：李清说： 你们各自送给我一百尺大纤麻绳子，总的计算，这样我就可以得到几千几百丈绳子了，用它来继续我的寿命，难道不延长吗？ 
English: Li Qing said, "You each gave me a hundred feet of big flax rope, total calculation, so that I can get thousands and hundreds of feet of rope, and use it to continue my life, isn't it to extend it?

古文：皆曰： 谨奉教。
现代文：儿孙们都说： 我们一定照办。
English: Our children and grandchildren all said, "We will definitely do it."

古文：然尊旨必有所以，卑小敢问。 
现代文：但是您老的这种意思一定有原因，可以问吗？ 
English: But there must be a reason for your old way of thinking, may I ask?

古文：清笑谓曰： 终亦须令尔辈知之。吾下界俗人，妄意求道，精神心力，夙夜勤劳，于今六十载矣，而曾无影响。
现代文：李清对儿孙们说： 到底也要让你们知道，我是下界的俗人，胡乱地追求道术，费尽精神心力，日夜地勤劳，到如今已经六十年了，却没有一点成就。
English: Li Qing said to his children and grandchildren: After all, I want to let you know that I am a low-level layman, wildly pursuing Taoism, exhausting my mental energy, working hard day and night, and now it has been sixty years, but I have not achieved a single bit.

古文：吾年已老耄，朽蠹殆尽，自期筋骸不过三二年耳，欲乘视听步履之尚能，将行早志。
现代文：我已经到了老年，朽坏损耗将尽，自己预想筋骨用不上二三年了。我想趁着眼睛、耳朵、腿脚还好使，实现我早年的愿意。
English: I have reached old age, decay and wear and tear will be exhausted, and I foresee that I will not be able to use my bones for two or three years. I want to take advantage of my eyes, ears, legs and feet, and realize my early years.

古文：尔辈幸无吾阻。 
现代文：希望你们不要阻止我。 
English: I hope you don't stop me.

古文：先是，青州南十里有高山，俯压郡城，峰顶中裂，豁为关崖。
现代文：在这以前，青州南十里有一座高山。这山俯压着郡城，峰顶从中间裂开，豁口成为关崖。
English: Before this, there was a high mountain about ten miles south of Qingzhou. This mountain pressed down on the county seat, the peak cracked in the middle, and the gap became a cliff.

古文：州人家家坐对岚岫，归云过鸟，历历尽见。
现代文：州里人家家坐对着峰峦雾气、来往的云和鸟，全都看得清清楚楚。
English: Everyone in the state sits opposite the peak and can see the mist, the passing clouds and the birds very clearly.

古文：按图经云云门山，俗亦谓之劈山，而清蓄意多时。
现代文：察看《图经》，叫它 云门山 ，一般人又叫它 劈山 。
English: Look at the "Tu Jing" and call it Yunmen Mountain, and ordinary people call it Heping Mountain.

古文：及是谓姻族曰： 云门山神仙之窟宅也，吾将往焉。
现代文：李清对此山很早就有想法，到这时他才对亲属们讲： 云门山是神仙的洞府，我要到那儿去。
English: Li Qing had an idea about this mountain for a long time, and only then did he say to his relatives: Yunmen Mountain is the cave capital of the gods, I want to go there.

古文：吾生日坐大竹蒉，以辘轳自缒而下，以纤縻为媒焉；脱不可前，吾当急引其媒，而则出吾于媒末。
现代文：我过生日那天，我坐在一个大竹筐里，你们用辘轳把我放下去，就用那根大麻绳子作媒介。如果不能靠前，我就赶紧拉那绳子，你们就把我拽出来。
English: On the day of my birthday, I was sitting in a large bamboo basket. If you put me down with a shovel, use the hemp rope as a medium. If I can't move forward, I'll quickly pull the rope and you'll pull me out.

古文：设有所遇而能肆吾志，亦当复来归。 
现代文：假如能遇上仙人，能了却我的心愿，我也能再回来。 
English: If I could meet a fairy godmother, I would be able to come back again.

古文：子孙姻族泣谏曰： 冥寞深远，不测纪极；况山精木魅，蛇虺怪物，何类不储。
现代文：子孙亲戚们哭着劝他说： 冥间寂寞而又深远，极难预测，况且山精树怪、牛鬼蛇神，什么东西没有？
English: The children and grandchildren of his relatives cried and advised him: "The netherworld is lonely and far-reaching, extremely difficult to predict, and what's more, there are no mountain spirits, tree spirits, cow ghosts, snake gods, or anything else?

古文：忍以千金之身，自投于斯，岂久视永年之阶乎！ 
现代文：你怎么忍心把千金的身子，自动投到那里边？这哪是长寿的办法呢？ 
English: How can you bear to throw your precious body out there on your own? What kind of longevity is that?

古文：清曰： 吾志也。
现代文：李清说：这是我的心愿。
English: Li Qing said: This is my heart's desire.

古文：汝辈必阻，则吾私行矣。
现代文：如果你们一定要阻拦，那我就偷着走。
English: If you have to stop me, I'll just sneak away.

古文：是不获行竹蒉洪縻之安也。 
现代文：这就不如用竹筐和大绳子那样安全。 
English: This is not as safe as using bamboo baskets and large ropes.

古文：众知不可回，则共治其事。
现代文：众人知道他不能再回心转意，就共同筹办了这件事。
English: Everyone knew that he would not change his mind, so they planned the whole thing together.

古文：及期而姻族乡里，凡千百人，竞赍酒馔。
现代文：到了他生日的那天，亲属邻居千百人，争抢着送来酒饭。
English: On the day of his birthday, hundreds of relatives and neighbors scrambled to bring him food and drink.

古文：迟明，大会于山椒。清乃挥手辞谢而入焉。
现代文：天要亮的时候，大家全都汇聚在山陵上，李清就挥手走进竹筐。
English: When it was about to dawn, everyone gathered on the mountain, and Li Qing waved his hand and walked into the bamboo basket.

古文：良久及地，其中极暗，仰视天才如手掌。
现代文：好久他才到了地面上，那里面很暗。抬头看天，天只有手掌那么大。
English: It took him a long time to reach the ground, where it was very dark. He looked up at the sky, which was only the size of his hand.

古文：扪四壁，止容两席许。
现代文：用手摸一下四面的墙壁，大约只能容下两张席子。
English: If you touch the walls on all four sides with your hand, you can only hold about two mats.

古文：东南有穴，可俯偻而入。
现代文：东南方向有一个洞，可以弯着腰走进去。
English: There is a hole to the south-east that you can walk into by bending over.

古文：乃弃蒉游焉。
现代文：于是李清扔掉竹筐走了进去。
English: So Li Qing threw away the bamboo basket and went inside.

古文：初甚狭细，前往则可伸腰。
现代文：刚进去的时候挺狭窄，再往前走就可以直起腰来。
English: When you first enter, it's quite narrow, but if you walk further, you can stand up straight.

古文：如此约行三十里，晃朗微明。
现代文：如此走了大约三十里，他望见了微弱的亮光。
English: After walking for about thirty miles, he saw a faint light.

古文：俄及洞口，山川景象，云烟草树，宛非人世。
现代文：一会儿来到洞口，山川景像，云烟草树，好像不是人世间的风光。
English: After a while, I came to the mouth of the cave. The scenery of mountains, rivers, clouds, and tobacco trees seemed to be out of this world.

古文：旷望久之。惟东南十数里，隐映若有居人焉。
现代文：他眺望了好久，只有东南方向十几里的地方，隐隐约约好像有人居住。
English: He looked around for a long time, and only the area a dozen miles to the southeast seemed vaguely inhabited.

古文：因徐步诣之，至则陡绝一台，基阶极峻，而南向可以登陟。遂虔诚而上，颇怀恐惧。
现代文：于是他就慢慢走过去。到那一看，却是一个陡绝的台子，台阶极险峻。从南面可以登上去，他就虔诚地一步一步走上去，心里非常害怕。
English: So he walked slowly over to it. At that moment, he saw that it was a very steep platform, with very steep steps. He could climb it from the south, so he walked up religiously, step by step. He was very scared.

古文：及至，窥其堂宇甚严，中有道士四五人。清于是扣门。
现代文：等到走到地方，见这里的殿堂屋宇很整齐，其中有四五个道士。于是李清就敲门。
English: When he got to the place, he saw that the temple building here was very neat, and there were four or five Taoists among them. So Li Qing knocked on the door.

古文：俄有青童应门问焉。答曰： 青州染工李清。 
现代文：不一会儿有一个青衣童子在门里问是谁叫门，李清回答说： 我是青州的染工李清。 
English: A short while later, a boy in Tsing Yi asked who was at the door, and Li Qing replied: I am Li Qing, a dyer from Tsing Yi.

古文：青童如词以报。
现代文：青衣童子就像他说的这样回去禀报。
English: The boy in blue went back to get the newspaper, just like he said.

古文：清闻中堂曰： 李清伊来也？ 
现代文：李清听到中堂有人说： 李清他来了？ 
English: Li Qing heard someone in the hall say: Li Qing, is he coming?

古文：乃令前。
现代文：于是就让他上前去。
English: So they let him go.

古文：清惶怖趋拜。
现代文：李清惶恐地小步走上去参拜。
English: With trepidation, Li Qing walked up the steps to pay his respects.

古文：当轩一人遥语曰： 未宜来，何即遽至。 
现代文：当窗的一个人远远地说： 还不该来，为什么就急急忙忙地来了？ 
English: When a person at the window said from a distance: "You shouldn't have come, why did you come in such a hurry?"

古文：因令遍拜诸贤。
现代文：于是让他逐个拜见仙人们。
English: So he let him visit the fairies one by one.

古文：其时日已午，忽有白发翁自门而入，礼谒，启曰： 蓬莱霞明观丁尊师新到。众圣令邀诸真登上清赴会。 
现代文：当时已经是正午，忽然有一个白发老头从门外走进来，见礼之后开始说： 蓬莱霞明观丁尊师新来到这里，众上仙邀请大家到上清去赴会。 
English: At that time, it was already noon. Suddenly, a white-haired old man walked in from outside the door. After the ceremony, he began to say: "Peng Lai Xia Ming Guan Ding Zun Shi has just arrived here. All the immortals have invited everyone to go to Shangqing to attend the meeting."

古文：于是列真偕行，谓清曰： 汝且居此。 
现代文：于是仙人们一块往外走。有人对李清说： 你暂且住在这里。 
English: So the immortals went out together. Someone said to Li Qing: You stay here for the time being.

古文：临出顾曰： 慎无开北扉。 
现代文：要出门的时候又回头说： 千万不要开北门。 
English: When he was about to leave, he looked back and said, "Don't open the north gate."

古文：清巡视院宇，兼启东西门，情意飘飘然，自谓永栖真境。
现代文：李清在院里屋里巡视，又打开了东西门，心情很清爽，自以为永远住进了仙境。
English: Li Qing inspected the courtyard and opened the east and west doors. He felt very refreshed and thought that he had lived in a fairyland forever.

古文：因至堂北，见北户斜掩，偶出顾望。
现代文：于是来到堂北，见北门斜掩着，偶然出去一望，见下面是青州，好像就在眼前。
English: So I came to Dongbei, saw the north gate obliquely hidden, happened to look out, and saw Qingzhou below, as if it were right in front of me.

古文：下为青州，宛然在目，离思归心，良久方已。悔恨思返，诸真则已还矣。
现代文：思念家乡的心情，好久才平静下来。他悔恨自己不该有想回家的念头。
English: The feeling of missing his hometown took a long time to calm down. He regrets that he shouldn't have thought about going home.

古文：其中相谓曰： 令其勿犯北门，竟尔自惑，信知仙界不可妄至也。
现代文：这时候众仙人已经回来了。其中有人互相说： 让他不要开北门，他却如此糊涂！可见仙界是不可随便来的。 
English: By this time, all the immortals had returned. Some of them said to each other, "Let him not open the north gate, he's so confused! It's obvious that the fairy world can't be entered casually."

古文：因与瓶中酒一瓯，其色浓白。
现代文：于是就把一个瓶子里的酒倒一碗给他，酒的颜色很白。
English: So I poured him a bowl of wine from a bottle. The wine was very white.

古文：既而谓曰： 汝可且归。 
现代文：他喝完酒，人家对他说： 你可以暂且回去。 
English: After he finished his drink, he was told: You can go back for now.

古文：清则叩头求哀，又云： 无路却返。 
现代文：李清就叩头哀求，还说： 没有回去的路。 
English: Li Qing bowed his head in supplication and said, "There is no way back."

古文：众谓清曰： 会当至此，但时限未耳。
现代文：众仙对他说： 你该当到这来，只是时限没到而已。
English: The deities said to him, "You should come here, but the time has not come yet."

古文：汝无苦无途，但闭目，足至地则到乡也。 
现代文：你不要怕没有路，只要闭上眼睛，脚一落地就到家乡了。 
English: Don't be afraid that there is no way, just close your eyes and you will be back home as soon as your feet touch the ground.

古文：清不得已，流涕辞行。
现代文：李清不得已，只好洒泪告别。
English: Li Qing had no choice but to shed tears and say goodbye.

古文：或相谓曰： 既遣其归，须令有以为生。 
现代文：有仙人互相说： 既然打发他回去，应该让他有生活的办法。 
English: Some sages said to each other, "Since we are sending him back, we should give him a way to make a living."

古文：清心恃豪富，讶此语为不知己，一人顾清曰： 汝于堂内阁上，取一轴书去。
现代文：李清心里依仗自己家里有钱，惊讶这话是不了解自己。一人看着李清说： 你到堂内的阁子上，拿一轴书带走吧。 
English: In his heart, Li Qing relied on the fact that his family had money. To be surprised by this is to misunderstand oneself. One person looked at Li Qing and said, "Go to the attic in the hall and take a book with you."

古文：清既得。谓清曰： 脱归无倚，可以此书自给。 
现代文：李清拿到书之后，那人又对他说： 如果回去生活上没有依靠，可以凭这轴书谋生。 
English: After Li Qing got the book, the man also said to him: If you go back to life without reliance, you can make a living with this book.

古文：清遂闭目，觉身如飞鸟，但闻风水之声相激。须臾履地。
现代文：李清于是闭上眼睛，觉得身子像鸟在飞，只听到风声水声激荡，不一会儿就踩到了地面。
English: Li Qing then closed his eyes and felt like he was flying like a bird. He only heard the wind and water stirring, and soon he stepped on the ground.

古文：开目即青州之南门，其时才申末。
现代文：睁眼一看，是青州的南门。当时只是申时的末了。
English: When I opened my eyes, it was the south gate of Qingzhou. At that time, it was just the end of the Spring Festival.

古文：城隍阡陌，彷佛如旧，至于屋室树木，人民服用，已尽变改。
现代文：城壕道路，仿佛和原来一样。至于房屋树木、人民的服用，已经完全改变了。
English: The trench and the road seem to be the same as before, but the houses, the trees and the people's habits have completely changed.

古文：独行尽日，更无一人相识者。
现代文：他独自走了一整天，还没有一个认识的人。
English: He had been walking alone all day and didn't know a single person.

古文：即诣故居，朝来之大宅宏门，改张新旧，曾无仿像。
现代文：于是他就回到故屋去。早晨出来时的大宅院大门楼，完全变了样子。
English: So he went back to the old house. When he came out in the morning, the main gate of the courtyard had completely changed.

古文：左侧有业染者，因投诣与之语。其人称姓李。
现代文：左侧有做染布生意的，他就过去和人家说话。
English: There was a dyer on the left, and he went over to talk to him.

古文：自云： 我本北海富家。 
现代文：那人自称姓李，说： 我家本来是北海的一个富户。 
English: The man, who gave his surname as Li, said: "My family was originally a wealthy family in the North Sea.

古文：因指前筱涕， 此皆我祖先之故业。
现代文：他指了指前后的街道， 这都是我祖先的旧业。
English: He pointed to the streets in front and behind, all the old business of my ancestors.

古文：曾闻先祖于隋开皇四年生日自缒南山，不知所终，因是家道沦破。 
现代文：听说我爷爷在隋朝开皇四年过生日那天，自己用绳子下到南山下，不知到底哪儿去了。因此家境衰败了。 
English: I heard that on the day of my grandfather's birthday in the fourth year of the Sui Dynasty, he used a rope to go down to the south of the mountain, and I don't know where he went. As a result, the family fell into decline.

古文：清悒怏久之。
现代文：李清闷闷不乐好长时间。
English: Li Qing sulked for a long time.

古文：乃换姓氏。寓游城邑。
现代文：于是他改换了姓名，流落在城中。
English: So he changed his name and went into exile in the city.

古文：因取所得书阅之，则疗小儿诸疾方也。
现代文：他拿出那轴书来看，原来是治疗小孩疾病的药方。
English: He took out the book and looked at it. It turned out to be a prescription for a child's illness.

古文：其年青州小儿疠疫，清之所医，无不立愈。
现代文：那一年青州的小孩长恶病，李清医治的，没有不立即就好的。
English: That year, a child in Qingzhou fell ill. Li Qing treated him, and he got better immediately.

古文：不旬月，财产复振。
现代文：不到十天半月，他的财产又兴旺起来。
English: In less than ten and a half days, his wealth began to flourish again.

古文：时高宗永徽元年，天下富庶，而北海往往有知清者，因是齐鲁人从而学道术者凡百千辈。
现代文：当时是唐高宗永徽元年，天下富足。北海常常有认识李清的，因此齐鲁一带跟着李清学道术的有上百上千人。
English: At that time, it was the first year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty in Yonghui, and the country was rich. There were often people in the North Sea who knew Li Qing, so there were hundreds of thousands of people in the Qilu area who followed Li Qing to study Taoism.

古文：至五年，乃谢门徒云： 吾往泰山观封禅。 
现代文：到了永徽五年，李清和门徒们告别说： 我要到泰山去看封禅。 
English: When he arrived in Yonghui five years later, Li Qing said goodbye to his disciples and said, "I want to go to Mount Tai to see the Fuzan."

古文：自此莫知所往。
现代文：从此就不知他到哪儿去了。
English: After that, I don't know where he went.

