古文：洪昉禅师相卫间僧道林净满法通
现代文：洪昉禅师相卫间僧道林净满法通
English: The Buddhist monk, Dorin Ching Manhong, between the Hongwu Zen master and the guards

古文：洪昉禅师
现代文：洪昉禅师
English: Hongyu Zen Master

古文：陕州洪昉，本京兆人。
现代文：陕州洪昉禅师本是京兆人。
English: The Shaanxi Hongyu Zen master was originally from Beijing.

古文：幼而出家，遂证道果。
现代文：自幼出家。后来证果得道。
English: He became a monk at a young age. Later, he attained enlightenment.

古文：志在禅寂，而亦以讲经为事，门人常数百。
现代文：志在静坐参禅，也以讲经为业，门人弟子常常多达几百人。
English: He aspired to meditate and practice Zen, and also lectured on the sutras as his profession. He often had up to several hundred disciples.

古文：一日，昉夜初独坐，有四人来前曰： 鬼王今为小女疾止造斋，请师临赴。 
现代文：一天晚上，洪昉正在独坐，有四个人来到他面前说： 鬼王的女儿久病初愈，如今为此设斋，特请法师赴会。 
English: One evening, when Hong Yao was sitting alone, four people came up to him and said, "The Demon King's daughter has been ill for a long time and is just beginning to recover. Today, we are having a meal to celebrate this, and we would like to invite a sorcerer to the meeting."

古文：昉曰： 吾人汝鬼，何以能至？ 
现代文：洪昉说： 我是人你们是鬼，怎样才能到那里呢？ 
English: Hong Qi said: I am a human, you are ghosts, how can I get there?

古文：四人曰： 阇梨但行，弟子能致之。 
现代文：四个人说： 无论何地只管走，弟子自能让你到达那里。 
English: The four people said, "No matter where you go, your disciple can get you there."

古文：昉从之。
现代文：洪昉答应子。
English: Hung Ho's promised child.

古文：四人乘马，人持绳床一足，遂北行。可数百里，至一山，山腹有小朱门。
现代文：这四个人骑着马，每人扯着绳床的一角，便往北走，走了能有几百里，到了一座大山，山腰有个红漆小门。
English: These four men rode on horseback, each pulling a corner of the rope bed, and they went north, walking for several hundred miles, to a large mountain, with a small red-painted gate on the mountainside.

古文：四人请昉闭目，未食顷，人曰： 开之。 已到王庭矣。
现代文：四人请洪昉闭上眼睛，不到吃一顿饭的功夫，四人让把眼睁开，这时已到了鬼王的庭院。
English: The four of them asked Hong Yao to close his eyes. It didn't take much effort to eat a meal. The four of them asked him to open his eyes. By this time, they had arrived at the ghost king's courtyard.

古文：其宫阙室屋，崇峻非常，侍卫严饰，颇侔人主。
现代文：只见宫阙房舍都非常高大，鬼王身边的侍从们排列得整整齐齐，跟人间的国主很相近。
English: You can see that the palace buildings are very tall, and the attendants around the ghost king are neatly lined up, very similar to the earthly sovereign.

古文：鬼王具冠衣，降阶迎礼。
现代文：鬼王衣冠楚楚，降阶施礼迎接。
English: The king of ghosts is dressed smartly, bowing down to greet him.

古文：王曰： 小女久疾，今幸而痊。欲造小福，修一斋，是以请师临顾。
现代文：鬼王说： 小女久病今幸好痊愈，我想作件小小的祝福，设了一个斋场，因此请法师前来光顾。
English: The demon king said, "The little girl has been ill for a long time and has now fortunately recovered. I want to make a small blessing and set up a place of worship. Therefore, I would like to invite the sorcerer to come and visit.

古文：斋毕，自令侍送无虑。 
现代文：斋事结束后，自会令侍从送你回去，请不要担心。 
English: Don't worry, we'll have a waiter take you home after the ceremony.

古文：于是请入宫中。
现代文：说完便请洪昉进入宫中。
English: Having said this, he invited Hong Qi to enter the palace.

古文：其斋场严饰华丽，僧且万人，佛像至多，一如人间事。
现代文：斋场布置得很华丽，有上万名僧人，佛像也很多，全跟人间的事一样。
English: The place of worship is very ornately decorated, with tens of thousands of monks and many statues of Buddha. Everything is just as it would be on earth.

古文：昉仰视空中，不见白日，如人间重阴状。
现代文：洪昉仰视空中，看不见明亮的太阳，就像人间阴天一样。
English: Hongyao looked up at the sky, unable to see the bright sun, just like a cloudy day on earth.

古文：须臾，王夫人后宫数百人，皆出礼谒。
现代文：不一会，鬼王夫人领着后宫几百人，都出来施礼谒见。
English: After a while, the ghost king's wife led hundreds of people from the harem to come out and pay their respects.

古文：王女年十四五，貌独病色，昉为赞礼愿毕。
现代文：鬼王的女儿有十四五岁，脸带病色，相貌独特，洪昉为她主持了赞礼祝愿仪式。
English: The daughter of the ghost king is fourteen or fifteen years old, her face is sickly, her appearance is unique, and Hong Hao presided over the praise and wish ceremony for her.

古文：见诸人持千余牙盘食到，以次布于僧前。
现代文：仪式结束后，只见许多人端着千余盘食品上来，依次排在僧人面前。
English: After the ceremony, many people came up with more than a thousand plates of food and lined up in front of the monks.

古文：坐昉于大床，别置名馔，馔甚香洁。昉且欲食之，鬼王白曰： 师若常住此，当餐鬼食；不敢留师，请不食。 
现代文：洪昉坐在一张大床上，另外为他准备了美味佳馔，这些食物散发着阵阵清香，洪昉正要食用时，鬼王告诉他说： 法师如若长时间住在这里，就当吃鬼的食物；因为不敢久留法师，所以请不要吃这些东西。 
English: Hong Juan was sitting on a large bed. In addition, delicious dishes were prepared for him. These foods were fragrant. When Hong Juan was about to eat, the ghost king told him: "If the mage lives here for a long time, it should be eaten as ghost food; because you dare not stay a mage for a long time, so please do not eat these things."

古文：昉惧而止。
现代文：洪昉害怕，于是没有吃。
English: Hung Ho was scared, so he didn't eat.

古文：斋毕，余食犹数百盘。昉见侍卫臣吏向千人，皆有欲食之色，昉请王赐之余食。
现代文：吃完斋饭后，剩下的食物仍有几百盘，洪昉看到侍卫的臣吏有近千人，个个都有想吃这些东西的神情，便请求鬼王把这些吃剩的食物赐给他们。
English: After eating the meal, there were still hundreds of plates of food left over. Seeing that there were nearly a thousand courtiers on guard duty, all of whom had the appearance of wanting to eat these things, Hong Juan asked the demon king to give them the leftover food.

古文：王曰： 促持去，赐之。 
现代文：鬼王说道： 快拿过去，赐给他们！ 
English: The demon king said: Quickly take it and give it to them!

古文：诸官拜谢，相顾喜笑，口开达于两耳。
现代文：官吏们个个礼拜致谢，相视大笑起来，嘴巴裂到了耳朵。
English: Each week, the officials thanked him, and he burst out laughing, his mouth split open to his ears.

古文：王因跪曰： 师既惠顾，无他供养，有绢五百匹奉师，请为受八关斋戒。 
现代文：鬼王跪在洪昉面前道： 法师既然光顾，别无他物孝敬，会有丝绢五百匹奉上，请法师为我受八关斋戒。 
English: The demon king kneeled in front of Hong Lu and said, "Since the mage is paying me a visit, I have nothing but respect for him. I will have five hundred silkworms served to me. Please ask the mage to fast for me for eight days."

古文：师曰： 鬼绢纸也，吾不用之。 
现代文：洪昉禅师说： 鬼的丝绢就是纸，我没有用处。 
English: Hongyu Zen Master said: "The ghost's silk is paper, I have no use for it."

古文：王曰： 自有人绢奉师。 
现代文：鬼王说： 自当有人间的丝绢奉送禅师。 
English: The demon king said, "It is proper for a human silk cocoon to be given to a Zen master."

古文：因为受八关斋戒。
现代文：洪昉给他受了八关斋戒。
English: Hong Hao gave him eight days of fasting.

古文：戒毕，王又令前四人者，依前送之。昉忽开目，已到所居，天犹未曙。
现代文：斋戒结束后，鬼王又令原是那四个人，依照原先的方式送回洪昉，洪昉突然睁开眼睛时，已经回到了自己的住处。
English: After the fasting ended, the ghost king sent the four people back to Hongyao according to the original way. When Hongyao suddenly opened his eyes, he had already returned to his home.

古文：门人但为入禅，不觉所适。
现代文：此时天还未亮，门人们只顾参禅入定，没有发觉禅师上哪里去了。
English: At this time, it was still dark, and the monks were just meditating, not noticing where the Zen master had gone.

古文：昉忽开目，命火照床前，五百绢在焉。
现代文：洪昉坐在那里，突然睁开眼睛，命人用火照照床前，有五百匹丝绢放在那里。
English: Hung Ho sat there, suddenly opened his eyes and ordered someone to light the bed with fire. Five hundred silkworms were placed there.

古文：弟子问之，乃言其故。
现代文：弟子问他是怎么回事，他便讲述了事情的原委。
English: When the disciple asked him what had happened, he told him the whole story.

古文：昉既禅行素高，声价日盛，顷到鬼所，但神往耳，其形不动。
现代文：洪昉在参禅悟道方面，道行一向很高，名声日益传扬，刚才鬼的世界，只是精神去了那里，身体并未动地方。
English: When it comes to attaining enlightenment through meditation, Hong Qi's level of practice has always been very high, and his reputation is spreading day by day. Just now, in the world of ghosts, his spirit went there, but his body did not move.

古文：未几晨坐，有一天人，其质殊丽，拜谒请曰： 南天王提头赖吒，请师至天供养。 
现代文：不久，他正在晨坐的时候，有一位天人姿质特别美丽，前来拜谒请求道： 南天王提头赖吒请禅师到天宫去奉善。 
English: Not long after, while he was having his morning meditation, a particularly beautiful celestial being came to pay homage to him and requested, "Nan Tian Wang, please ask the Zen master to go to the Heavenly Palace to perform good deeds."

古文：昉许之。
现代文：洪昉答应了他的请求。
English: Hong Hao agreed to his request.

古文：因敷天衣坐昉，二人执衣，举而腾空，斯须已到。
现代文：于是铺下一件天衣让洪昉坐在上面，两人扯着天衣腾空而起，不一会儿就到了。
English: So they laid down a canopy for Hong Hao to sit on, and the two of them pulled the canopy up and took off, arriving shortly after.

古文：南天王领侍从，曲躬礼拜曰： 师道行高远，诸天愿睹师讲诵，是以辄请师。 
现代文：南天王率领着侍从们迎了上来，弯腰行礼参拜道： 禅师道行高远，天人们都愿亲眼看看师父讲诵经文的情况，因此就把师父请来了。 
English: Nan Tianwang led the attendants to welcome them, and they bowed down and worshipped, saying, "Zen masters travel far and wide, and the gods would like to see with their own eyes how the masters recite the scriptures, so they invited the masters here."

古文：因置高座坐肪。
现代文：于是在高处设置了座位，请洪昉坐在上面。
English: So a seat was set up on a high place, and Hong Qi was asked to sit on it.

古文：其道场崇丽，殆非人间，过百千倍。
现代文：只见道场高大壮丽，绝非人间的道场可比，超过人间的百倍千倍。
English: The height and magnificence of the dojo is incomparable to that of the human world, and exceeds that of the human world by a hundred thousand times.

古文：天人皆长大，身有光明。
现代文：天人个个又长又大，身上闪闪放光。
English: Each of the celestial beings is long and tall, and shines brightly.

古文：其殿堂树木，皆是七宝，尽有光彩，夺人目睛。
现代文：殿堂的房木也都镶嵌着金银玛瑙等七宝，道法闪烁着光彩，辉煌灿烂耀眼夺目。
English: The rooms of the hall of fame are also inlaid with seven treasures such as gold, silver and agate. Taoism shines with brilliance, and the splendor is dazzling.

古文：昉初到天，形质犹人也，见天王之后，身自长大，与天人等。
现代文：洪昉初到天宫时，形体还与人一样，见过天王之后，身体便自行长大，与天人一样了。
English: When Hong Lei first arrived at the Heavenly Palace, his body was still the same as a human. After seeing the Heavenly King, his body grew up on its own and became the same as a celestial being.

古文：设诸珍馔，皆自然味，甘美非常。食毕，王因请入宫，更设供具，谈话款至，其侍卫天官兼鬼神甚众。
现代文：这里陈列的珍奇宝物都是天然产品，味道甘美，不同寻常，吃罢饭后，天王请洪昉入宫，另外又准备了食品，两人边吃边谈，十分融洽，旁边有很多侍卫天官兼鬼神。
English: The rare treasures on display here are all natural products, with a sweet and unusual taste. After the meal, the king invited Hong Hao to enter the palace. In addition, food was prepared. The two talked while eating and were very harmonious. Next to them were many attendants and gods.

古文：后忽言曰： 弟子欲至三十三天议事，请师且少留。 
现代文：后来天王忽然记起了什么似地，对洪昉说： 弟子要去三十三重天议事，请师父在此稍候。 
English: Later, the Heavenly King suddenly remembered something similar and said to Hong Qi: "The disciple is going to discuss the Thirty-three Heavens, please wait here for the master."

古文：又戒左右曰： 师欲游览，所在听之，但莫使到后园。 再三言而去。
现代文：又叮嘱身边的人说： 禅师想出去游览的话所有地方都可以去，只有后园切莫让他去。 
English: He also told the people around him, "If the Zen master wants to go out for a tour, he can go anywhere, just don't let him go to the backyard."

古文：去后，昉念曰： 后园有何利，而不欲吾到之。 
现代文：再三叮咛之后去了。天王走后，洪昉心里想道： 后园里有什么利害，怎么不要我去呢？ 
English: After the Heavenly King left, Hong Xuan thought to himself: What's the interest in the back garden, why don't they want me to go?

古文：伺无人之际，窃至后园。
现代文：他乘身边没有人的时候，偷偷地来到了后园。
English: He sneaked into the backyard when no one was around.

古文：其园甚大，泉流池沼，树林花药，处处皆有，非人间所见。
现代文：后园的面积特别大，随处都有流泉、池塘、花木、药材与树林之类，是人间所见不到的。
English: The area of the back garden is particularly large, and everywhere there are flowing springs, ponds, flowers and trees, medicinal materials and woods, which are not seen in the human world.

古文：渐渐深入，遥闻大声呻叫，不可忍听。
现代文：洪昉渐渐走进园的深处，听见远处有很大的呻吟声，声音凄厉，令人不忍。
English: Hong Hao gradually walked into the depths of the garden, and heard a great moaning sound in the distance. The sound was terrible and unbearable.

古文：遂到其旁，见大铜柱，径数百尺，高千丈，柱有穿孔，左右傍达。
现代文：见有一根巨大的铜柱矗立在那里，柱的直经有几百尺，柱高有一千丈，上面有许多孔眼，左右贯通。
English: He saw a huge copper pillar standing there. The straight line of the pillar was several hundred feet long, the pillar was a thousand feet high, and there were many holes on it, penetrating to the left and right.

古文：或有银铛锁其项，或穿其胸骨者，至有数万头，皆夜叉也。
现代文：有的用铁锁锁着脖子，有的用铁锁栓着胸骨，能有几万头，都是夜叉。
English: Some use iron locks to lock the neck, some use iron locks to fasten the sternum, can have tens of thousands of heads, are night forks.

古文：锯牙钩爪，身倍于天人。
现代文：个个长有钩爪锯牙，身高有天人的两倍。
English: They all have hooked claws and saw teeth, and are twice as tall as a human.

古文：见禅师至，叩头言曰： 我以食人故，为天王所锁。
现代文：看那禅师走到面前，便向他叩头乞求道： 我因为吃人的缘故，被天王锁在这里。
English: Look at that Zen master who came forward, bowed down to him and begged, "I've been locked up here by the king of heaven for eating people."

古文：今乞免我。
现代文：如果乞求赦免我。
English: If you beg for my forgiveness.

古文：我若得脱，但人间求他食，必不敢食人为害。 
现代文：我若能够被释放出去，只在人间寻求别的食物，绝不敢再去吃人为害。 
English: If I could be released, I would only seek other food in the human world, and I would never dare to eat human beings again.

古文：为饥渴所逼，发此言时，口中火出。
现代文：因为受到饥渴的逼迫，说这些话的时候，嘴里直冒火焰。
English: For he was tormented with hunger and thirst, and his mouth was burning with fire as he spoke.

古文：问其锁早晚，或云毗婆师尸佛出世时，动则数千万年。
现代文：问他们什么时候被锁在这里的时，有的说是毗婆师尸佛出世的时候，差不多都有几千万年了。
English: When asked when they were locked up here, some said it was tens of millions of years ago, when Viharasiddhanta was born.

古文：亦有三五辈老者，志诚恳。
现代文：也有三五个老者，态度十分诚恳。
English: There are also three or five elderly people, and their attitude is very sincere.

古文：僧许解其缚而遽还。
现代文：洪盼禅师答应帮他们解脱束缚，然后就急忙回去了。
English: Hong Pan promised to help them free themselves from their shackles, and then hurried back.

古文：斯须王至，先问： 师颇游后园乎？ 左右曰： 否。 
现代文：刚回到原处不一会儿，天王就来到了，天王先向左右道： 禅师是不是到后园游览了一番？ 左右答道： 没有！ 
English: Shortly after returning to the original place, the heavenly king arrived. The heavenly king first said to the right and left: Did the Zen master visit the backyard? The right and left replied: No!

古文：王乃喜，坐定。昉曰： 适到后园，见锁众生数万，彼何过乎？ 
现代文：天王十分满意地坐下了，洪盼说： 刚才到了后园，看见锁着几万条生命，他们有什么罪过呢？ 
English: The emperor sat down with great satisfaction, and Hong Pan said, "Just now, when you came to the backyard and saw tens of thousands of lives locked up, what were they guilty of?

古文：王曰： 师果游后园。
现代文：天王说： 禅师果然游览了后园。
English: The emperor said, "The Zen master has indeed visited the back garden.

古文：然小慈是大慈之贼，师不须问。 
现代文：然而，小慈悲是大慈悲的贼患。师父不用多问。 
English: However, small compassion is the thief of great compassion. Master does not need to ask more.

古文：昉又固问，王曰： 此诸恶鬼，常害于人，唯食人肉。
现代文：洪盼偏又非问不可，天王便说： 这是一群恶鬼，常常伤害人类，他们专门吃人肉。
English: Hong Pan had no choice but to ask, so the Heavenly King said, "This is a group of evil spirits who often harm humans. They specialize in eating human flesh.

古文：非诸天防护，世人已为此鬼食尽。
现代文：如果不是各位天神严加防护，世上的人早被这群恶鬼吃光了。
English: If it were not for the strict protection of the gods, the people of the world would have been eaten up by this group of evil spirits.

古文：此皆大恶鬼，不可以礼待，故锁之。 
现代文：这些东西都是大大的恶鬼，不能对他们讲礼貌讲仁慈，所以把他们锁了起来。 
English: These things are big evil spirits, and you can't be polite or kind to them, so you lock them up.

古文：昉曰： 适见三五辈老者，发言颇诚，言但于人间求他食。
现代文：洪昉说： 刚才见到三五个老者，说话很诚恳。他们说今后只在人间寻求别的东西吃。
English: Hong Hao said, "Just now, I saw three or five old people, and they spoke very sincerely. They said that from now on, they would only seek something else to eat in the world.

古文：请免之。
现代文：请天王赦免他们几个。
English: Ask the Heavenly King to pardon a few of them.

古文：若此曾不食人，余者亦可舍也？ 
现代文：如果这几个不再吃人了，其余的也可以释放。 
English: If these few are no longer cannibals, the rest can be released.

古文：王曰： 此鬼言不可信。 
现代文：天王说： 这些鬼说的话，根本不能相信！ 
English: The heavenly king said, "What these ghosts are saying cannot be believed at all!

古文：昉固请。王目左右，命解老者三五人来。
现代文：洪昉一再请求，天王看了看左右，命他们把那三五个老者带来。
English: The king looked around and ordered them to bring the three or five old men.

古文：俄而解至，叩头言曰： 蒙恩释放，年已老矣。
现代文：不一会儿就带到了，这几个老者连忙叩头发誓道： 蒙恩释放，年已老矣。
English: After a short while, they brought it to me. The old men quickly tapped their heads and swore: "I've been released by grace, I'm too old."

古文：今得去，必不敢扰人。 
现代文：如今能够回到人间去，绝对不敢侵害人类。 
English: Now that he can return to the human world, he absolutely does not dare to infringe upon humanity.

古文：王曰： 以禅师故，放汝到人间。
现代文：天王说： 因为禅师相求的缘故，现在放你们回到人间。
English: The heavenly king said, "Because of the Zen master's request, I am now releasing you back to the human world."

古文：若更食人，此度重来，当令若死。 
现代文：如若再吃人，下次被抓来，就该让你们死！ 
English: If you eat people again and are caught next time, you should be put to death!

古文：皆曰： 不敢。 于是释去。
现代文：他们都说： 不敢，于是放了出去。
English: They all said they didn't dare, so they were let out.

古文：未久，忽见王庭前有神至，自称山岳川渎之神。
现代文：不久，忽见天王院里来了一位神仙，自称是山岳川流之神。
English: Soon after, a fairy godmother suddenly appeared in Tenno-in Temple, claiming to be the god of mountain streams.

古文：被甲，面金色，奔波而言曰： 不知何处，忽有四五夜叉到人间，杀人食甚众。
现代文：他身披盔甲，面色金黄，风尘仆仆地说道： 不知是什么地方，突然有四五个夜叉到了人间，杀死许多人吃了。
English: He was dressed in armor, his face was golden, and he said, "Somewhere, I don't know where, suddenly four or five Yasha came to the world, killed many people and ate them.

古文：不可制，故白之。 
现代文：没法制服他们，所以特来报告。 
English: Couldn't subdue them, so I'm here to report.

古文：王谓昉曰： 弟子言何如？
现代文：天王对洪昉说： 我说的那些话怎么样？
English: Tianwang said to Hongyao: What about those words I said?

古文：适语师，小慈是大慈之贼。
现代文：适才我对师父说，小慈悲是大慈悲的贼。
English: Just then I said to Master, "Small mercy is the thief of great mercy."

古文：此等恶鬼，言宁可保。 
现代文：这些恶鬼的誓言，怎么能靠得住呢！ 
English: How can these vile oaths be trusted!

古文：王语诸神曰： 促擒之。 
现代文：天王对诸位神仙说： 快去捉住他们！ 
English: The King of Heaven said to the immortals: Go and catch them!

古文：俄而诸神执夜叉到。
现代文：不一会儿，诸位神仙抓着夜叉来到了。
English: In a short while, all of you immortals arrived clutching your nightsticks.

古文：王怒： 何违所请？ 
现代文：天王愤怒地吼道： 为何违背你们的誓言？
English: The King of Heaven shouted angrily, "Why are you breaking your oaths?

古文：命斩其手足，以铁锁贯脑，曳去而锁之。
现代文：命人砍掉他们的手脚，用铁链子穿透他们的脑袋，拖下去锁了起来。
English: They were ordered to have their hands and feet chopped off, chains put through their heads, dragged down and locked up.

古文：昉乃请还，又令前二人送至寺。
现代文：洪昉请求返回自己的住处，天王又命令先前那两位天人送他到了寺庙。
English: Hong Juan asked to return to his place of residence, and the Heavenly King ordered the two heavenly beings to take him to the temple.

古文：寺已失昉二七日，而在天犹如少顷。昉于陕城中，选空旷地造龙光寺，又建病坊，常养病者数百人。
现代文：寺里已失去洪昉十四天了，但在天上好像不大一会儿，洪昉在陕州城内选择空旷地方建造了龙光寺，又建了病房，常常有几百个病人在这生活。
English: The temple has been lost to the flood for fourteen days, but in the sky it seems to have been only a short while. The flood chose an open area in the city of Shaanxi to build Longguang Temple, and also built a ward, where hundreds of patients often live.

古文：寺极崇丽，远近道俗，归者如云。
现代文：寺庙建造得高大壮丽，四处的僧人与俗众象云涌一船聚集到这里。
English: The temple was built tall and magnificent, and monks and lay people from all over gathered here like clouds.

古文：则为释提柏国所请矣。
现代文：洪昉又受到释提柏国的邀请。
English: Hong Hao was also invited to visit Tibet.

古文：昉晨方漱，有夜叉至其前，左肩头负五色毯而言曰： 帝释天王，请师讲大涅槃径。 
现代文：那天早晨，洪昉正在洗漱时，有个夜叉来到面前，左肩上披着五色的毛毯，他说： 皇帝释天王请禅师去讲《大涅槃经》。 
English: That morning, when Hong Jun was taking a bath, a nightingale appeared before him, with a five-colored blanket draped over his left shoulder. He said, "The Emperor Shih Tian Wang has asked a Zen master to teach the Great Nirvana Sutra."

古文：昉默然还座，夜叉遂挈绳床，置于左膊曰： 请师合目。 
现代文：洪昉静静地回到座位，夜叉提起绳床放在左胳膊上，说了声： 请禅师闭上眼睛。 
English: Hong Hao quietly returned to his seat. Yasha lifted the rope bed and placed it on his left arm. He said, "Please close your eyes, Zen master."

古文：因举其左手，而伸其右足，曰： 请师开目。 
现代文：然后举起了左手，又伸了伸右脚，便道： 请禅师睁开眼睛。 
English: Then he raised his left hand, stretched out his right foot, and said, "Please, Zen master, open your eyes."

古文：视之，已到善法堂。
现代文：洪昉睁开眼一看，已经到了善法堂。
English: When Hong Hao opened his eyes, he saw that he had arrived at the Zen Buddhism Hall.

古文：禅师既到天堂，天光眩目，开不能得。天帝曰： 师念弥勒佛。 
现代文：只因天光耀眼夺目，眼睛睁不开。天帝说： 请禅师诵弥勒佛。 
English: Only because of the dazzling light of the sky, his eyes could not open. The heavenly emperor said: Ask the Zen master to chant Maitreya Buddha.

古文：昉遽念之，于是目开不眩。
现代文：洪急忙念叼了两遍，于是再睁眼睛时就不觉得眩耀了。
English: Hong hurriedly recited the poem twice, and when he opened his eyes again, he no longer felt dazzled.

古文：而人身卑小，仰视天形，不见其际。
现代文：但他长的是人的体形，所以很矮小，仰视天的形状时，看不到天的顶端。
English: But he is human-shaped, so he is very short, and when he looks up at the shape of the sky, he cannot see the top of the sky.

古文：天帝又曰： 禅师又念弥勒佛，身形当大。 
现代文：天帝又说道： 禅师再念弥勒佛，体形就会变大。 
English: The Heavenly Emperor also said, "If a Zen master recites Maitreya Buddha, his body will become bigger."

古文：如言念之，三念而身三长，遂与天等。
现代文：洪昉照他的话念了三遍，身体长了三下，便与天人一样高了。
English: Hong Yao read his words three times, and his body grew three times, and he became as tall as a celestial being.

古文：天帝与诸天礼敬言曰： 弟子闻师善讲大涅槃经，为日久矣。
现代文：天帝与诸位天人向他施礼致敬，说道： 弟子听说禅师擅长讲说《大涅磐经》，为时已经很长了。
English: The heavenly emperor and all the heavenly beings bowed to him and said, "The disciple heard that the Zen master is good at reciting the "Great Nirvana Sutra," and it has been a long time.

古文：今诸死钦仰，敬设道场，故请大师讲经听受。 
现代文：各位天人对你非常钦敬仰慕，今天特为你设了道场，无论如何也要请大师讲经给我们听。 
English: Dear heavenly beings, we have great respect and admiration for you. Today, we have set up a dojo especially for you. In any case, please ask the master to give us a lecture.

古文：昉曰： 此事诚不为劳，然病坊之中，病者数百，待昉为命。
现代文：洪昉说： 这件事情算不了什么。然而在病房里有几百个病人，等着我去救命呢。
English: "This incident is nothing, but there are hundreds of patients in the ward waiting for me to save their lives," said Hong Hao.

古文：常行乞以给之，今若流连讲经，人间动涉年月，恐病人馁死。
现代文：我常常讨饭供他们吃，现在如果就在这里讲经，在人间动辄跨年过月，恐怕病人会饿死的。
English: I often begged for food for them to eat. Now, if I were to give a sermon here, when the New Year is fast approaching, I'm afraid the patients would starve to death.

古文：今也固辞。 
现代文：所以，讲经的事，今天断断不能。 
English: Therefore, we cannot break off the sermon today.

古文：天帝曰： 道场已成，斯愿已久，固请大师勿为辞也。 
现代文：天帝说： 道场已经准备好了，这是我们长期以来的愿望，请大师千万不要推辞。 
English: Tian Di said, "The dojo is ready. This is our long-cherished wish. Please do not refuse the master's request."

古文：昉不可。
现代文：洪昉没有答应。
English: Hong Hao did not agree.

古文：忽空中有大天人，身又数倍于释，天帝敬起迎之。
现代文：空中忽然出现一个大天人，身体又几倍于释天王，天帝恭恭敬敬地迎接他。
English: Suddenly, a great celestial being appeared in the sky, whose body was several times larger than that of Shih Tianwang, and the celestial emperor greeted him respectfully.

古文：大天人言曰： 大梵天王有敕。 
现代文：大天人说道： 大梵天王有令。 
English: The great man of heaven said: The great Brahma king has an order.

古文：天帝怃然曰： 本欲留师讲经，今梵天有敕不许。
现代文：天帝不高兴地说： 本想留下禅师讲经，现在梵天王有令不许。
English: The Heavenly Emperor was displeased and said: Originally, I wanted to leave the Zen master to teach the sutras, but now King Brahma has ordered me not to do so.

古文：然师已至，岂不能暂开经卷，少讲经旨，令天人信受。 
现代文：然而禅师已经到了这里，难道就不能暂时打开经卷，给我少讲一会儿经义，让各位天人信奉贵教吗？ 
English: But now that the Zen master is here, can't he open the sutras for a while and teach me a little about the sutras, so that you heavenly beings can believe in his teachings?

古文：昉许之。
现代文：洪昉答应了他的请求。
English: Hong Hao agreed to his request.

古文：于是置食，食器皆七宝，饮食香美，精妙倍常。
现代文：于是摆上了饭食，食器全是金银玛瑙等七宝制成，各种饭食也都味香色美，比通常的东西精妙几倍。
English: So they set out the food. The tableware is all made of precious metals such as gold, silver and agate. All kinds of food are also delicious and fragrant, several times more exquisite than ordinary things.

古文：禅师食已，身诸毛孔，皆出异光，毛孔之中，尽能观见诸物。
现代文：禅师吃完之后，身上的各个毛孔都放射出奇异的光彩，从毛孔里面都能看见各样物件。
English: After the Zen master finished eating, every pore on his body radiated a strange radiance, and various objects could be seen through the pores.

古文：方悟天身腾妙也。既登高座，敷以天衣，昉遂登座。
现代文：他这才领悟天人的身体所以能够腾空的奥妙，有人登上高座，在上面铺了件天衣，洪昉于是坐了上去。
English: Only then did he understand the mystery of how the body of a celestial being can be vacated. Someone ascended to a high seat, spread a heavenly garment on it, and Hong Qi sat on it.

古文：其善法堂中，诸天数百千万，兼四天王，各领徒众，同会听法。
现代文：在善法堂里有成百上千万天人，还有四大天王都率领自己的徒众一起赴会聆听讲法。
English: There are millions upon millions of heavenly beings in the Dharma Hall of Goodness, and the four heavenly kings all lead their disciples to the assembly to listen to the teachings.

古文：阶下左右，则有龙王夜叉诸鬼神非人等，皆合掌而听。
现代文：门外左右两侧，则有龙王、夜叉等各类鬼神非人之辈，也都双手合什静静地听讲。
English: On the left and right sides of the door, there are dragons, night forks and other types of ghosts and gods, all of whom are listening quietly with folded hands.

古文：昉因开涅槃经首，讲一纸余。
现代文：洪昉打开《涅槃经》的卷首，讲了一页多点儿。
English: Hong Hao opened the first volume of the "Nirvana Sutra" and spoke for more than a page.

古文：言辞典畅，备宣宗旨。
现代文：他言辞典雅流畅，深入细致地宣讲了经文的义理宗旨。
English: His words were elegant and fluent, and he preached the doctrinal purpose of the scriptures in depth and in detail.

古文：天帝大称赞功德。
现代文：天帝极力称赞他的功德。
English: Heavenly Emperor highly praised his merits.

古文：开经毕，又令前夜叉送至本寺。
现代文：讲经结束后，天王又令先前那个夜叉把他送回原来的寺院。
English: After the sermon was over, the heavenly king ordered the nightingale to take him back to the original temple.

古文：弟子失昉，已二十七日矣。
现代文：寺院里弟子，已经二十七天不见洪昉了。
English: The disciples in the temple have not seen the flood for 27 days.

古文：按佛经，善法堂在欢喜园，天帝都会。天王之正殿也。
现代文：据佛教经书的记载，善法堂座落在欢喜园里，这是天王的正殿。
English: According to the Buddhist scriptures, Zenpo-do Hall is located in the Garden of Delight, which is the main hall of the heavenly king.

古文：其堂七宝所作，四壁皆白银。
现代文：殿堂为金银玛瑙等七宝所建成，四面墙壁全是白银。
English: The hall of fame was built with seven treasures such as gold, silver and agate, and all four walls are made of silver.

古文：阶下泉池交注，流渠映带。其果木皆与树行相直，宝树花果，亦皆奇异。
现代文：殿堂门外，泉水与池塘交相灌注，溪流象一条条闪光的丝带，果树与一排排其他的树木互相并列在一起，这些宝树的花与果也都非常奇异。
English: Outside the palace gate, springs and ponds intermingle, streams flow like glittering ribbons, fruit trees stand side by side with rows of other trees, and the flowers and fruits of these precious trees are also very strange.

古文：所有物类，皆非世人所识。
现代文：这里所有的东西，都是世人所不认识的。
English: Everything here is unknown to the world.

古文：昉略言其梗概，阶下宝树，行必相直，每相表里，必有一泉。夤缘枝间，自叶流下，水如乳色，味佳于乳，下注树根，洒入渠中。
现代文：洪昉向人们简略地讲述了所见所闻的梗概，他说，在殿堂门外的宝树，一行行的都很整齐，高处的一行与低处的一行互为表里每行中间必有一条泉水，泉水沿着树枝从树叶上流下来，其水呈乳白色，味道胜过乳汁；从树叶流下的泉水浇注到树根，然后溅洒在下面的水渠里面。
English: He said that in the treasure tree outside the gate of the hall, each row is very neat, the row at the top and the row at the bottom are the same. In the middle of each row, there must be a spring. The spring water flows down from the leaves along the branches. The water is milky white and tastes better than milk. The spring water flowing down from the leaves is poured into the roots of the tree and then splashed into the canal below.

古文：诸天人饮树本中泉，其溜下者。众鸟同饮。
现代文：天人们喝的是高处树林里的泉水，流到下面的水供给众鸟同饮。
English: The sky people drink spring water from high up in the forest, and the water that flows down feeds the birds and they drink it.

古文：以黄金为地，地生软草，其软如绵。天人足履之，没至足，举后其地自平。
现代文：这里以黄金铺地，地上生长柔软的细草，草坪柔如海绵，天人走路时，脚踏下去能没到脚背，抬起脚时又自动恢复了原先的平坦。
English: Here, the ground is paved with gold, soft grass grows on the ground, and the lawn is soft like a sponge. When a heavenly person walks, he can not reach the instep when he steps down, and when he lifts his foot, he automatically restores the original flatness.

古文：其鸟数百千，色各无定相。入七宝林，即同其树色。
现代文：这里有各种禽几百几千，鸟的颜色不固定，飞过七宝林时就呈现跟那里的树木相同的颜色。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of birds of all kinds here, and the color of the birds is not fixed. When they fly over the Qibao Forest, they appear the same color as the trees there.

古文：其天中物皆自然化生，若念食时，七宝器盛食即至。若念衣时，宝衣亦至。
现代文：这里的各种事物，都是顺其自然而或者化灭或者发生，心里想吃什么时，七宝器具盛着食品就来到面前；心里想穿衣服时，各种宝衣也会出现在面前。
English: All kinds of things here either disappear or occur naturally. When you want to eat something, the Seven Treasures come in front of you with food; when you want to wear clothes, all kinds of precious clothes will appear in front of you.

古文：无日月光，一天人身光，逾于日月。
现代文：这里没有日月之光只有天人身上发出的光，这种光比日月之光还亮。
English: There is no light of the sun and moon here, only the light emitted by the heavenly bodies, this light is brighter than the light of the sun and moon.

古文：须至远处，飞空而行，如念即到。
现代文：需要到远处去时候，腾空而行，想到哪里就立即来到哪里。
English: When you need to go somewhere far away, you just take off and go. Wherever you want, you can get there immediately.

古文：肪既睹其异，备言其见，乃请画图为屏风，凡二十四扇。
现代文：总而言之，这里的一切，都与人间大不相同。洪昉既然亲眼目睹了这些奇异现象，他便详细描述了自己的见闻，请人画成图画，制作了屏风，共制屏风二十四扇。
English: All in all, everything here is very different from the human world. Since Hong Yu witnessed these strange phenomena with his own eyes, he described his experience in detail, asked people to draw pictures, and made a screen. He made 24 screens altogether.

古文：观者惊骇。
现代文：看到图画的人，都非常惊讶。
English: People who saw the drawings were very surprised.

古文：昉初到寺，毛孔之中，尽能见物。既而弟子进食，食讫，毛孔皆闭如初。
现代文：洪昉刚回到寺院时，从毛孔里面能看到的所有物件，原来弟子端来饭菜让他吃，吃完之后，毛孔都关闭了，跟原先一样。
English: When Hong Hong had just returned to the temple, all the objects that could be seen through the pores were originally the disciples who had brought food for him to eat. After eating, the pores were closed, as before.

古文：乃知人食天食，精粗之分如此。
现代文：他这才知道，人吃的东西与天人的东西，精粗之分竟然如此之大。
English: It was only then that he knew that the difference between what people eat and what gods and mortals eat is so great.

古文：昉即尽出天中之相，人以为妖。
现代文：洪昉把天上的种种情况都传扬出去之后，许多人以为他是妖怪。
English: Many people thought he was a monster after he spread all kinds of information about the sky.

古文：时则天在位，为人告之。
现代文：当时武则天在位，被人告到她那里。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu Zetian was in power, and someone reported to her.

古文：则天命取其屏，兼征昉。
现代文：武则天命人收取了他的屏风，并要把洪昉带到朝廷。
English: Wu Ze, the man of destiny, received his screen and wanted to take Hong Yao to the imperial court.

古文：昉既至，则天问之而不罪也，留昉宫中。
现代文：洪昉进宫后，武则天询问了事情的真相，没有怪罪他，还把他留在了宫里。
English: After Hong Hao entered the palace, Wu Zetian inquired about the truth of the matter, did not blame him, and left him in the palace.

古文：则天手自造食，大申供养。
现代文：武则天亲手给他做吃的，极力表白供养他的诚意。
English: Wu Zetian made food for him with his own hands and tried his best to show his sincerity in providing for him.

古文：留数月。则天谓昉曰： 禅师遂无一言教弟子乎？ 
现代文：一连留了几个月，武则天对洪昉说： 禅师就这样不说一句话来教诲弟子吗？ 
English: After staying for several months, Wu Zetian said to Hong Qi, "Is this how a Zen master teaches his disciples without saying a word?"

古文：昉不得已，言曰： 贫道唯愿陛下无多杀戮，大损果报。
现代文：洪昉不得已，便说道： 贫道但愿陛下不要多所杀戮，大肆杀戮则必得报应。
English: As a last resort, Hong Lei said, "I hope your majesty will not kill too many people, otherwise you will be punished for killing so many people."

古文：其言唯此。 
现代文：我要说的就是这一点。 
English: That's what I'm trying to say.

古文：则天信受之，因赐墨敕： 昉所行之处，修造功德，无得遏止。 
现代文：武则天承认了他说的话，于是赐给他一道敕令，上面写道： 洪昉所到之处，要好好修造寺庙任何人不能阻止。 
English: Wu Zetian acknowledged his words and gave him a royal edict, which read: "Wherever there is a flood, it is necessary to build a good temple. No one can stop you."

古文：昉年过下寿，如入禅定，遂卒于陕中焉。
现代文：洪昉的年龄太大了，就像入禅定一般，于是死在陕州。
English: Hong Qi was too old, and he died in Shaanxi, as if he had entered into a state of meditation.

古文：相卫间僧
现代文：相卫间僧
English: Aioi monk

古文：相卫间有僧，自少博习经论，善讲说。
现代文：相卫间有个僧人，自小广习经论，善于讲经说道。
English: There is a monk in Aiwei who has been studying the sutras since he was a child and is good at chanting, he said.

古文：每有讲筵，自谓超绝，然而听者稀少，财利寡薄。
现代文：每次登堂讲说经论时，自以为学识高超，然而听者廖廖无几，收入十分微薄。
English: Every time he goes to the lecture hall, he thinks that he is highly educated, but there are very few listeners and his income is very meager.

古文：如此积年，其僧不愤。
现代文：这种状况有好几年了，此僧心里很为不平，于是带着经论遍游各处名山，以图访求知音。
English: This situation has been going on for several years, and the monk was very unhappy about it, so he took the sutra and traveled to famous mountains everywhere, seeking knowledge through pictures and visits.

古文：遂将经论，遍历名山，以访知者，后至衡岳寺，憩泊月余，常于寺闲斋独坐，寻绎经论。又自咎曰： 所晓义理，无乃乖于圣意乎？ 
现代文：后来到了衡岳寺，在那里住了一个多月，这段时间他常在寺内一间空闲的屋子里独坐，通过校注经论，他自责道： 自己所掌握的义理，莫不是有背于佛经的本意吗？ 
English: Later, he went to Hengyue Temple, where he stayed for more than a month. During this time, he often sat alone in an empty room in the temple. After reading and commenting on the sutras, he reproached himself: Isn't the doctrine he has mastered contrary to the original intention of the Buddhist scriptures?

古文：沉思之次，忽举头见一老僧，杖锡而入曰： 师习读何经论？
现代文：沉思之余，忽然抬头看见一位老僧，拄着锡杖走了进来。老僧问道： 师父所习读的是什么经论？
English: After pondering, he suddenly looked up and saw an old monk with a pewter cane walking in. The old monk asked, "What sutra is Master studying?"

古文：穷究何义理？ 
现代文：探究的是什么义理？
English: What is the meaning of inquiry?

古文：僧疑是异人，乃述其由，兼自咎曰： 傥遇知者，分别此事，即钳口结舌，不复开演耳。 
现代文：他怀疑老僧是位异人，便对他讲述了事情的原委，同时自责道： 倘若遇上个明白人，告诉我这件事情的是非，宁可钳口结舌，不再讲说了，自己也心甘心服。 
English: He suspected that the old monk was a stranger, so he told him the facts of the matter, and at the same time reproached himself: If I meet a wise man and tell me the rights and wrongs of this matter, I would rather hold my tongue and not talk about it, and I am willing to accept it.

古文：老僧笑曰： 师识至广，岂不知此义， 大圣犹不能度无缘之人。 
现代文：老僧笑着说： 师父的知识非常渊博，难道不知，大圣犹不能超度无缘之人 这一道理吗？
English: The old monk smiled and said, "Master's knowledge is very profound. Don't you know that a great saint cannot surpass a person who has no chance?

古文：况其初心乎？ 
现代文：何况那些刚开始参悟的人呢。
English: Not to mention those who are just beginning to understand.

古文：师只是与众僧无缘耳。 
现代文：师父只是与众僧没有缘分罢了。 
English: Master just doesn't have a predestined relationship with the monks.

古文：僧曰： 若然者，岂终世如此乎？ 
现代文：相卫间的僧人说： 如果像你说的这样，我岂不是终生都这个样子吗？ 
English: The monk between the guards said, "If it's like you say, won't I always be like this?"

古文：老僧曰： 吾试为尔结缘。 
现代文：老僧说： 我试着为你结结因缘看看。 
English: The old monk said, "I'll try to connect the dots for you.

古文：因问师今有几许赀粮，僧曰： 自徂南县，历行万里，粮食所费，皆以竭矣。今惟大衣七条而已。 
现代文：于是又问他眼下还有多少钱粮，这位僧人说： 我从徂南县出发以来，历行一万里路，粮食与费用都消耗完了，眼下只有大褂七件而已。 
English: Then he asked him how much grain was left at the moment. The monk said, "Since I set out from Yinan County, I have traveled ten thousand miles. I have used up all my grain and expenses. Right now, I only have seven large bags.

古文：老僧曰： 只此可矣。
现代文：老僧说： 只要这些就可以了。
English: The old monk said, "That's all you need."

古文：可卖之，以所得直皆作麋饼油食之物。 
现代文：你可把它卖了。把得到的钱都用来做成米面饼子以及油食之类。 
English: You can sell it and use the money to make rice noodles and oily foods.

古文：僧如言作之，约数千人食。
现代文：僧人照他说的办了，置办了约够几千个人吃的食物。
English: The monk did as he was told, procuring enough food to feed several thousand people.

古文：遂相与携至平野之中，散掇，梵香长跪，咒曰： 今日食我施者，愿当来之世，与我为弟子。
现代文：两人把这些食物带到田野里去，撒在了地上，然后，这位僧人焚香长跪，嘴里祈愿道： 今日吃我施舍的食物的，愿你们来世给我当弟子。
English: The two of them took the food to the field and scattered it on the ground. Then, the monk burned incense, knelt down, and made a wish with his mouth: "Those who eat my alms food today, may you be my disciples in the next life."

古文：我当教之，得至善提。 
现代文：我会好好教化你们，使你们个个得道，能够达到豁然开悟的彻悟境界。 
English: I will educate you well, so that each of you can attain the path, and be able to reach the state of sudden enlightenment.

古文：言讫，鸟雀乱下啄食，地上蝼蚁，复不知数。
现代文：祝颂完毕后，鸟雀纷纷飞下来啄食，地上的蝼蚁更不知其数。
English: After the celebration was over, birds and finches flew down to peck at the food, and there were countless ants on the ground.

古文：老僧谓曰： 尔后二十年，方可归开法席。
现代文：老僧对他说： 再过二十年后，你才可以回去开席讲法。
English: The old monk said to him, "It will be another twenty years before you can return to give a lecture."

古文：今且周游，未用讲说也。 
现代文：如今暂且到各处周游，不用讲说佛经。 
English: Now, for the time being, I travel around everywhere, and I don't have to talk about Buddhist scriptures.

古文：言讫而此僧如言，后二十年，却归河北开讲。
现代文：说完之后，这位僧人遵照老僧的话先去周游各地，二十年之后，才又回到河北开席讲说经论。
English: After saying this, the monk followed the old monk's words and traveled around the country. Twenty years later, he returned to Hebei to give a sermon.

古文：听徒动千万人，皆年二十已下，老壮者十无一二。
现代文：前来听讲的门徒，动则成千上万，年龄大都在二十岁以下，老年与壮年不到十分之一二。
English: The disciples who came to listen to the lecture numbered in the tens of thousands, most of whom were under the age of twenty, and less than two-tenths of one percent were old or middle-aged.

古文：道林
现代文：道林
English: Dowling

古文：唐调露年中，桂州人薛甲常供一僧。
现代文：唐高宗调露年间，桂州人薛甲经常供养着一个僧人。
English: During the Tang Gaozong era, Xue Jia, a Guizhou native, often supported a monk.

古文：法号道林，道德甚高，瞻敬尤切。
现代文：这个僧人法号道林，道业与德行都很高，薛甲对他倍加奉敬。
English: This monk's dharma name was Dorin, and he was very high in virtue and virtue. Xue Jia paid more respect to him.

古文：如是供给，十有余年。忽一旦辞去，云： 贫道在此挠渎多年，更无所酬。
现代文：就这样供养了十多年，忽然有一天他要告辞，说： 贫道在此叨扰多年，我又无所酬谢。
English: For more than ten years he had provided for them in this way, but suddenly one day he had to say goodbye, saying: "Poverty has been bothering me for many years, and I have nothing to thank it for.

古文：今有旧经一函，且寄宅中。一周年不回，即可开展。 
现代文：现有旧经书一匣，暂且寄放在你家里，如果我一周年不回来，就可以把它打开。 
English: If I don't return by the first anniversary, you can open it.

古文：经岁余，开锁，见有金数千两。
现代文：过了一年多，薛甲打开经书匣一看，见有黄金千两。
English: After more than a year, Xue Jia opened the bookcase and saw a thousand ounces of gold.

古文：后卖一半，买地造菩提寺，并建道林真身。
现代文：后来卖掉了一半，买地建造一座菩提寺，并且建造了道林的真身塑像，就在寺庙里供养。
English: Later, he sold half of it, bought land to build a family temple, and built a statue of Dorin's real body, which he kept in the temple.

古文：供养至今，像仪见存。
现代文：时至今日，这尊塑像的风仪依然存在。
English: To this day, the image of this statue still exists.

古文：薛甲今见有孙禹宾，在桂林效职。
现代文：薛甲现在有一个孙子薛禹宾，正在桂林供职。
English: Xue Jia now has a grandson, Xue Yubin, who is working in Guilin.

古文：净满
现代文：净满
English: Net full

古文：则天朝，恒州鹿泉寺僧净满有高行，众僧嫉之。
现代文：武则天临朝执政时，恒州鹿泉寺有个僧人叫净满，他有很高的道行，受到其他僧人的嫉妒。
English: When the Wu Zetian Lin Dynasty was in power, there was a monk at the Luquan Temple in Hengzhou named Ching Man. He had a high level of virtue and was envied by other monks.

古文：乃密画女人居高楼，而净满引弓射之状，藏于经笥。
现代文：有人偷偷地画了张画，藏在他的经书夹里，画的内容是有个女人坐在高楼上，而净满则在一旁弯弓搭箭要射这个女人。
English: Someone had secretly drawn a picture, hidden in his prayer book, depicting a woman sitting on a tall building, while Ching Man was bending his bow and arrows to shoot the woman.

古文：令其弟诣阙告之。
现代文：然后又让他弟弟到皇宫里去告发。
English: Then he sent his brother to the palace to denounce him.

古文：则天大怒，命御史裴怀古推案，便行诛戮。
现代文：则天女皇得知之后大为恼怒，命令御史斐怀古审办此案，要对净满施行杀戮。
English: However, after learning of this, the Heavenly Empress became very angry and ordered the Imperial Historian Fei Huai Gu to investigate the case, and to kill Neiman.

古文：怀古执之不屈，李昭德进曰： 怀古推事疏略，请令重推。 
现代文：裴怀古坚持明断，没有屈从女皇的意旨，李昭德则进言说： 怀古审理得太粗率，请令人重新审办此案。 
English: Pei Huai Gu insisted that he had made a clear decision and had not yielded to the will of the empress, while Li Zhaode said: Huai Gu's trial was too rough, please have the case re-examined.

古文：怀古厉声而言曰： 陛下法无亲疏，当与天下画一，奈何使臣诛无辜之人，以希圣旨。
现代文：怀古厉声说道： 陛下执法不论亲疏，应当对天下人一视同仁，为什么让我诛杀无辜之人，以迎合圣上的旨意？
English: Why should I kill an innocent man to satisfy the will of the Almighty?

古文：向使净满有不臣之状，臣复何颜能宽之乎？
现代文：倘使净满有犯上之罪状，我又怎么好意思宽恕他呢？
English: How can I forgive him if he is guilty of the crime?

古文：臣守平典，庶无冤滥，死不恨矣！ 
现代文：臣愿坚持公平判决，尽量减少冤案，为此宁死不悔！ 
English: The vassal is willing to adhere to a fair judgment and minimize the unjust case, and would rather die than regret it!

古文：则天意乃解。
现代文：则天女皇于是解除了原先的旨意。
English: The Queen of Heaven then revoked the original decree.

古文：怀古后副阎知微和亲于突厥。突厥立知微为南面可汗，而入寇赵定，怀古因得逃归。
现代文：裴怀古后来以副职陪同阎知微去突厥和亲，突厥封阎知微为南面可汗，让他带兵入侵赵国，战事平定后，裴怀古才伺机逃了回来。
English: Pei Huigu later accompanied Yan Zhiwei to Turkey to make peace with the Turks, and the Turks made Yan Zhiwei the southern khan and let him invade Zhao. After the war was settled, Pei Huigu took the opportunity to escape and return.

古文：素羸弱，不堪奔驰，乃恳诚告天，愿投死南土，力倦而寝。
现代文：在往回逃的途中，由于他平日身体虚弱，经不住奔驰颠波，便向苍天诚恳祷告，誓愿投死在大唐国土。
English: On the way back, he prayed earnestly to the heavens and vowed to die in the land of Datang because he was too weak to withstand the bumpy ride.

古文：梦一僧如净满者，引之曰： 可从此路出。 
现代文：在他精疲力尽朦胧入睡的时候，梦见一个像净满的僧人，指引他说： 可以从这条路逃出去。 
English: When he was exhausted and drowsily falling asleep, he dreamed of a monk who looked like a pure man, guiding him and saying, "You can escape from this path."

古文：觉而从之，果获全。
现代文：怀古睡醒之后，按照僧人指引的路走，果然安全逃了回来。
English: After waking up from a long sleep, he followed the path guided by the monk and safely returned home.

古文：人以为忠恕之报。
现代文：人们认为这是忠恕所得的报应。
English: It is believed to be a reward for loyalty.

古文：法通
现代文：法通
English: Hōtō

古文：长安懿德禅院者，唐中宗为懿德太子追福，改名加饰焉。
现代文：长安的懿德禅院，是唐中宗为给懿德太子追祀天福，改名装饰而成。
English: Chang'an's Zhengde Zen Temple was renamed and decorated by the Tang Dynasty to pay homage to Prince Zhengde.

古文：禅院内有大石臼，重五百斤。隋末，雩县沙门法通自南庄致于此寺。
现代文：禅院内有个大石臼，有五百斤重，是隋末雩县沙门法通，从南庄运到这座寺庙的。
English: There is a large stone mill in the Zen monastery, weighing five hundred catties, which was transported from Nanzhuang to this temple by Shamen Fangtong of Sui and Min counties.

古文：法通自少出家，初极尪劣，同侣轻之，乃发愤乞愿壮健。
现代文：法通从年轻时就出了家。当初，他长得极瘦弱，同伴们都瞧不起他，于是他就发愤祈求，盼望自己壮健起来。
English: He left home when he was young. At first, he was very thin and weak, and his companions looked down on him. So he prayed furiously, hoping that he would get stronger.

古文：昼寝树下，忽口中涎沫流出三升，其母惊遽呼觉。
现代文：一天，他大白天睡在树下，忽然从嘴里流出了三升涎沫。
English: One day, he was sleeping under a tree in broad daylight, when three litres of foam came out of his mouth.

古文：法通云： 忽梦有人遗三驮筋，使我啖之，适啖一驮筋，遽觉，便壮健。 
现代文：他母亲吃惊地慌忙把他喊醒，法通说： 我刚才忽然梦见有人给我三块骆驼筋肉让我吃，刚刚吃了一块，马上就醒了，醒后便感到壮健了。 
English: His mother woke him up in a hurry, saying, "I just had a sudden dream that someone gave me three pieces of camel muscle to eat. I just ate one piece and immediately woke up feeling strong."

古文：试举大石臼，不以为困。
现代文：他试着举起了大石臼，一点儿也不困难。
English: He tried to lift a large millstone, with no difficulty at all.

古文：有寺僧行戡，本称有力。
现代文：寺庙里有个僧人叫行戡，自称很有力气。
English: In the temple, there is a monk named Xingyu, who claims to be very strong.

古文：通于是遂乃窃其所服之袈裟，举堂柱而压之。行戡见而惊异，尽力莫能取。
现代文：法通这时便偷了他穿的袈裟，举起殿堂上的柱子压在了下面，行戡见了十分惊异，用尽全身力量也取不出来。
English: At this time, Fatong stole the yoke he was wearing, lifted the pillar on the hall and pressed it under. When he saw the yoke, he was very surprised and could not get it out with all his strength.

古文：通徐举柱而取，众大骇之。
现代文：法通轻轻举起柱子就取出来了，众人见了大为震惊。
English: Fatong gently lifted the pillar and took it out. Everyone was shocked.

古文：通力兼百人，时咸服之，以为神助焉。
现代文：法通的力气抵得上一百个人，当时人们都很佩服他，认为是神灵在帮助他。
English: His strength was equal to that of a hundred men. At that time, people admired him greatly and believed that the gods were helping him.

