古文：《易》曰： 亢之为言也，知进而不知退，知存而不知亡。
现代文：《易》说：  亢龙有悔 的 亢，字的意义，是指衹知道仕进，却不知道退隐；祇知道存，却不知道亡。
English: "Yi" said: "The meaning of the word "" of "龙有悔" is that the dragon knows how to advance, but does not know how to retreat; it only knows how to exist, but does not know how to die.

古文：知进退存亡而不失其正者，其唯圣人乎！ 
现代文：知道进退存亡的道理而能不失正道，恐怕衹有圣人吧! 
English: I'm afraid there are no saints who can know the principles of advance and retreat and survive without losing the right path.

古文：《传》曰： 知足不辱，知止不殆。 
现代文：《传》中说： 知足就不会受辱，知止就不会有危险。 
English: "Zhu" said: "If you are content, you will not be humiliated, and if you are not content, you will not be in danger."

古文：然则不知夫进退，不达乎止足，殆辱之累，期月而至矣。
现代文：按这样说，不知道进退，不通达知止知足的道理，受辱的困窘，危险的处境，很快就会来临了。
English: According to this, if you do not know how to advance and retreat, if you do not know how to know when to stop and how to be content, you will soon be in a humiliating predicament and a dangerous situation.

古文：古人之进也，以康世济务也，以弘道厉俗也。
现代文：古人的仕进，是为了济助世人治理天下，古人的退隐，是为了弘扬正道激励民俗。
English: The advancement of the ancients was to help the world govern the world, and the retreat of the ancients was to promote the righteous path and encourage folk customs.

古文：然其进也，光宠夷易，故愚夫之所干没；其退也，苦节艰贞，故庸曹之所忌惮。
现代文：但是人的仕进，荣耀而且轻易，所以是愚昧之人尽力追求的目标；人的退隐，要苦守节操，遭逢艰危仍坚守不移，所以是平庸之辈忌惮的事情。
English: However, a person's advancement is glorious and easy, so it is a goal that a foolish person strives to pursue; a person's retreat must be painstakingly disciplined, and it must be adhered to in times of hardship, so it is a thing that mediocre people are afraid of.

古文：虽祸败危亡，陈乎耳目，而轻举高蹈，寡乎前史。
现代文：虽然图取仕进的人遭逢祸患或是败亡的事例，常为人们见到听到，但是避世隐居的人，在以前的史书中却很少见到。
English: Although examples of the misfortune or downfall of those who sought advancement are often seen and heard, those who live in seclusion are rarely seen in previous history books.

古文：汉世张良功成身退，病卧却粒，比于乐毅、范蠡至乎颠狈，斯为优矣。
现代文：漠伎退皇功成身退，卧病家中，修习辟谷的长生之道，这和銮堑、茎垄功成之后颠沛流离相比，是更胜一筹了。
English: It is better for a mugwump to retire after achieving great success, lie down in his sickbed, and learn the way of longevity in the valley, than to wander aimlessly after achieving great success in the valley.

古文：其后薛广德及二疏等，去就以礼，有可称焉。
现代文：以后整广德和疏广、疏受等人，按朝廷之礼退休，离职家居，也有值得称道的地方。
English: In the future, people such as the rectification of Guangde and the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution of the dilution.

古文：鱼豢《魏略·知足传》，方田、徐于管、胡，则其道本异。
现代文：鱼鲞《魏略知足传》把田、徐和管、胡相比，其实他们的处世准则本来就不同。
English: Yu Yao's "Wei Liao Zhi Fu Zhen" compares Tian, Xu with Guan and Hu. In fact, their principles of life are different.

古文：谢灵运《晋书·止足传》，先论晋世文士之避乱者，殆非其人；唯阮思旷遗荣好遁，远殆辱矣。
现代文：谢灵运《晋书止足传》，先评论那些逃避动乱的晋代文人，他们大概不是属于止足退隐一类的人；衹有阮思旷喜欢逃离尘世，抛弃荣华富贵，算是远离受辱的困窘、危险的处境了。《宋书。
English: Xie Lingyun's "History of the Jin Dynasty," first commented on those Jin Dynasty writers who escaped the turmoil. They probably did not belong to the category of people who stopped and retreated; if Ruan Siyuan liked to escape from the world and abandon glory and wealth, it was far from the embarrassing and dangerous situation of humiliation. "Song Shu."

古文：《宋书·止足传》有羊欣、王微，咸其流亚。
现代文：止足传》中有差毖、王霉的传，这两人都和前面几人是同类人物。
English: In "Zhifu Zhen," there is a biography of Zhaojun and Wang Mici, both of whom are the same kind of characters as the previous ones.

古文：齐时沛国刘献，字子珪，辞禄怀道，栖迟养志，不戚戚于贫贱，不耽耽于富贵，儒行之高者也。
现代文：变伐时迹周塑幽，字王壁，他拒绝为官，坚持操守，游息山林，蓄养心志，在贫贱之中不忧伤哀戚，对富贵荣华不贪婪追求，他是儒者之中志行高洁的人。
English: He refused to be an official, adhered to ethics, traveled in the mountains and forests, cultivated his mind, did not grieve and mourn among the poor, and did not pursue wealth and glory greedily. He was a noble person among the Confucians.

古文：梁有天下，小人道消，贤士大夫相招在位，其量力守志，则当世罔闻，时或有致事告老，或有寡志少欲，国史书之，亦以为《止足传》云。
现代文：梁据有天下之后，小人之道衰败，贤士大夫互相邀致，聚集朝中，衡量自己的力量，坚守自己退隐志向的人，那在当代还没听说，偶尔有人因年老退休，有人心志不大，欲望不强，国史记下了这些人的事迹，也把它编为《止足传》。
English: According to Liang, after the world was established, the villain's way decayed, the sages and doctors invited each other, gathered the court and the middle, measured their strength, and adhered to their desire to retire, which has not been heard of in the present day. Occasionally, some people retired due to old age, some people have little ambition, and their desire is not strong. National history recorded the deeds of these people, and also compiled it as "Stop Foot Biography."

古文：顾宪之，字士思，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：顾宪之字士思，吴郡吴人。
English: Gu Xian's character Shi Si, Wu County's Wu people.

古文：祖抃之，宋镇军将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父顾觊之，宋时任镇军将军、湘州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Gu Xizhi, was a general of the town army during the Song Dynasty, and was the ruler of Hunan Province.

古文：宪之未弱冠，州辟议曹从事，举秀才，累迁太子舍人、尚书比部郎、抚军主簿。
现代文：还未满二十岁，顾宪之就被本州辟为议曹从事，举秀才，积功迁为太子舍人，尚书比部郎，抚军主簿。
English: Before he was twenty years old, Gu Xizhi was appointed by the state to be a councillor, promote talents, accumulate merits, and become a prince, a scholar, and a military leader.

古文：元徽中，为建康令。
现代文：元霉年间，顾宪之任建康令。
English: During the Yuanming years, Gu Xianzhi was appointed to establish Kangxing.

古文：时有盗牛者，被主所认，盗者亦称己牛，二家辞证等，前后令莫能决。
现代文：当时有人偷牛，偷的牛被牛主认出，偷牛的人也说牛是自己的，两方面的言辞证据都差不多，前任的县令没有谁能断决这个案子。
English: At that time, someone stole a cow. The stolen cow was recognized by the owner of the cow. The person who stole the cow also said that the cow was his own. The verbal evidence on both sides is similar. The former county magistrate had no one who could decide this case.

古文：宪之至，覆其状，谓二家曰： 无为多言，吾得之矣。 
现代文：顾宪之到任之后，审核案件的材料，然后对双方说： 用不着多讲，我想到解决的办法了。 
English: After Gu Xianzhi took office, he reviewed the materials of the case, and then said to the two sides: There is no need to say more, I have come up with a solution.

古文：乃令解牛，任其所去，牛径还本主宅，盗者始伏其辜。
现代文：于是顾宪之命人把系牛的绳索解开，随任牛去什么地方。牛径直回到原来主人的宅院，偷牛的人才供认自己的罪行。
English: Therefore, Gu Xian ordered someone to untie the ropes of the tethered cow and let the cow go somewhere. The cow went straight back to the original owner's house, and the person who stole the cow confessed to his crime.

古文：发奸擿伏，多如此类，时人号曰神明。
现代文：顾塞主揭露隐藏在暗处的奸人坏事，很多像这类事那样聪明果断，当时人称他为神明。
English: Lord Kusser, who was known as a god at that time, was clever and decisive in exposing the evil and treachery that lurked in the shadows, many of which were just like this.

古文：至于权要请托，长吏贪残，据法直绳，无所阿纵。
现代文：至于对待朝廷权贵显要的私下请托，他毫不阿谀顺从，对于手下官员的贪脏残暴，他毫不放纵姑息，全都根据法律公正判决。
English: As for dealing with the dignitaries of the imperial court in private, he was not at all subservient, and he did not tolerate the corruption and brutality of his subordinate officials. All of them were judged fairly according to the law.

古文：性又清俭，强力为政，甚得民和。故京师饮酒者得醇旨，辄号为 顾建康 ，言醑清且美焉。
现代文：顾宪之生性又清廉俭朴，努力处理政事，因此深得民心，所以京城饮酒的人得到醇厚味美的好酒，往往称遣酒为 顾建康 ，这是说顾宪之清淳和美如同好酒。
English: Gu Jiankang was born with a clean and frugal nature. He worked hard to deal with political affairs, and therefore won the hearts of the people. Therefore, people who drink alcohol in Beijing get a mellow and delicious wine. They often call it Gu Jiankang, which means that Gu Jiankang's purity and beauty are like a good wine.

古文：迁车骑功曹、晋熙王友。
现代文：顾宪之迁任车骑功曹，晋熙王友。
English: Gu Xianzhi's transfer to the post of chariot and cavalry meritorious serviceman, Jinxi Wangyou.

古文：齐高帝执政，以为骠骑录事参军，迁太尉西曹掾。
现代文：齐高帝执掌朝廷大权，命顾宪之任骠骑绿事参军，迁任太尉西曹掾。
English: Emperor Qigong held the supreme power of the imperial court. He was ordered by the Constitution to join the army, and was transferred to the position of the first lieutenant of the Western Cao Pi.

古文：齐台建，为中书侍郎。
现代文：齐王台府建立之后，顾宪之任中书侍郎。
English: After the establishment of King Qi's Taifu, Gu Xian was appointed as the secretary.

古文：齐高帝即位，除衡阳内史。
现代文：齐高帝登上帝位，顾宪之被除授为衡阳内史。
English: Emperor Qigong ascended to the throne, and Gu Xizhi was removed as the head of Hengyang's internal history.

古文：先是，郡境连岁疾疫，死者太半，棺木尤贵，悉裹以苇席，弃之路傍。
现代文：顾宪之到任以前，衡阳境内连年发生瘟疫，染病死去的人有一大半，棺木价格特别昂贵，于是百姓全都用苇席卷裹死人，丢弃在路旁。
English: Prior to Gu Xianzhi's appointment, plague had occurred in Hengyang for several years in a row. Most of the people who died from the disease were coffins, which were particularly expensive. Therefore, all the people wrapped the dead in cocoons and left them on the side of the road.

古文：宪之下车，分告属县，求其亲党，悉令殡葬。
现代文：顾宪之刚一到任，就分别通告所属各县，要寻找死人的亲属，命令他们把死人埋葬。
English: As soon as Gu Xianzhi took office, he separately notified the counties he belonged to to search for the relatives of the dead and ordered them to bury the dead.

古文：其家人绝灭者，宪之为出公禄，使纲纪营护之。
现代文：对于那些已经全无亲属的死人，顾宪之就拿出自己的俸禄，命公府的主簿营办埋葬事宜。
English: For those dead people who have no relatives, Gu Xizhi will take out his own salary and manage the burial affairs from the main book of the government.

古文：又土俗，山民有病，辄云先人为祸，皆开冢剖棺，水洗枯骨，名为除祟。
现代文：又衡阳当地的民俗，山中百姓患了病，往往说是先人带来的祸害，就都挖开坟墓，打开棺材，用水冲洗死人的骨头，把遣种举动称为 除祟 。
English: According to the local folk customs of Hengyang, when the people in the mountains fell ill, it was often said that it was a scourge brought by the ancestors, so they all dug up the graves, opened the coffins, and rinsed the bones of the dead with water, calling the act of planting seeds to remove the curse.

古文：宪之晓喻，为陈生死之别，事不相由，风俗遂改。
现代文：顾宪之用道理晓谕百姓，为他们陈述活人死人的区别，指出疾病并非由死人引起，当地的陋俗也因此得以改变。
English: He explained to the people the difference between the living and the dead, pointing out that the disease was not caused by the dead, and the local customs were thus changed.

古文：时刺史王奂新至，唯衡阳独无讼者，乃叹曰： 顾衡阳之化至矣。
现代文：当时刺史王奂刚刚到任，祇有衡阳一郡没有到刺史府来告状的人，于是王奂感叹地说： 顾衡阳的教化算是达到很好的境界了。
English: At that time, Gu Hengyang had just arrived, and there was only one person in Hengyang County who had not come to Gu Hengyang to sue, so Wang Wei said with regret: Gu Hengyang's enlightenment has reached a very good state.

古文：若九郡率然，吾将何事！ 
现代文：假如本州所属的九个郡全都这样。那么我还有什么麻烦事! 
English: If all nine counties in my home state are like this, I'm in trouble!

古文：还为太尉从事中郎。
现代文：顾宪之回京任太尉从事中郎。
English: Gu Xianzhi returned to Beijing and was appointed as a lieutenant and worked as a middle-ranking official.

古文：出为东中郎长史、行会稽郡事。
现代文：又出京任束中郎长史、行会稽郡事。
English: He also went to Kyoto to be appointed as Sokuchuro Choshi, a guild inspector.

古文：山阴人吕文度有宠于齐武帝，于余姚立邸，颇纵横。
现代文：山阴人吕文度受到齐武帝宠幸，于是在余姚建立府邸，在当地任意横行，肆无忌惮。
English: Emperor Qiwu favored Lu Wentu, a man from the mountains and valleys, so he built a mansion in Yuyao and roamed freely in the area.

古文：宪之至郡，即表除之。
现代文：顾宪之到会稽郡上任，立即就上表启奏，拆除吕文度的府邸。
English: When Gu Xianzhi took office in Huijian County, he immediately initiated the demolition of Lu Wentu's mansion.

古文：文度后还葬母，郡县争赴吊，宪之不与相闻。
现代文：吕文度后来回家乡埋葬母亲，郡县的官员争着赶去吊唁，顾宪之却不舆他交往。
English: Afterward, Lü Wendu returned to his hometown to bury his mother. County officials scrambled to rush to offer condolences, but Gu Xianzhi refused to have any contact with him.

古文：文度深衔之，卒不能伤也。
现代文：吕文度心中对顾宪之深深怀恨，但最终也不能中伤顾宪之。
English: Lu Wentu harbored a deep grudge against Gu Xianzhong in his heart, but ultimately he could not defame Gu Xianzhong.

古文：迁南中郎巴陵王长史，加建威将军、行婺州事。
现代文：顾宪之迁任南中郎巴陵王长史，加建威将军、行南豫、南兖二州事。
English: Gu Xianzhi was transferred to the posts of the Southern Zhonglang, Baling Wang Changshi, Jia Jianwei General, Xing Nanyu, and Nanzhang of the two states.

古文：时司徒、竟陵王于宣城、临成、定陵三县界立屯，封山泽数百里，禁民樵采，宪之固陈不可，言甚切直。
现代文：当时司徒竟陵王在宣城、临成、定陵三县交界处建立兵营，划定敷百里山泽，禁止百姓进入其中打柴，顾宪之坚决地陈说不能这样干，言辞恳切而直率。
English: At that time, King Sittu of Lingling actually built a military camp at the junction of Xuancheng, Lincheng and Dingling counties, delineated a hundred miles of mountains and lakes, and forbade the people to enter it to make firewood. Gu Xizhi resolutely said that this could not be done, and his words were earnest and straightforward.

古文：王答之曰： 非君无以闻此德音。 
现代文：竟陵王回答他说： 如果不是你，我就无法听到这么恳切的好话。 
English: In fact, the mausoleum king replied to him, "If it weren't for you, I wouldn't have been able to hear such sincere and kind words."

古文：即命无禁。
现代文：当即竟陵王就下令解除禁令。
English: The mausoleum king immediately ordered the ban to be lifted.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎，兼尚书吏部郎中。
现代文：顾宪之迁任给事黄门侍郎，兼尚书吏部郎中。
English: Gu Xianzhi was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, and he was also a junior member of the bookkeeping department.

古文：宋世，其祖觊之尝为吏部，于庭植嘉树，谓人曰： 吾为宪之种耳。 
现代文：还在宋代的时候，顾宪之的祖父顾觊之曾任吏部尚书，他任职时在官府庭院中种下一排橘树，并且对人说： 这树是我为宪之种的。 
English: Back in the Song Dynasty, Gu Xianzhi's grandfather, Gu Yanzhi, had been an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. When he was in office, he planted a row of orange trees in the courtyard of the government office, and told people: "I planted this tree for Xianzhi."

古文：至是，宪之果为此职。
现代文：到这时候，顾宪之果然在吏部任职。
English: By this time, Gu Xizhi had indeed taken up a post in the personnel department.

古文：出为征虏长史、行南兗州事，遭母忧。
现代文：顾宪之又出京任征虏长史、行南兖州事。
English: Gu Xianzhi also went to Beijing to recruit soldiers for Changshi, and went to the south of Zhangzhou.

古文：服阕，建武中，复除给事黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉。未拜，仍迁太子中庶子，领吴邑中正。
现代文：因母亲去世而离职守丧。守丧期满之后，建武年间，他又被任命为给事黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉，还未行拜授之礼，接着就迁任太子中庶子，领吴邑中正。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, during the Jianwu era, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate and the captain of the infantry, but he did not perform the ceremony of conferment, and then he was transferred to the prince's middle son, the leader Wuyi Zhongzheng.

古文：出为宁朔将军、临川内史；未赴，改授辅国将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：又出京任宁朔将军、临川内史，还未去赴任，又改授辅国将军、晋陵太守。
English: He also went to Beijing to be appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the historian of Linchuan, and before he took office, he was awarded the title of the general of Fu Guo and the governor of Jinling.

古文：顷之遇疾，陈解还乡里。
现代文：不久，顾宪之患病，他陈奏有病，解职回到家乡。
English: Soon after, Gu Xianzhi fell ill. He was relieved of his duties and returned to his hometown.

古文：永元初，征为廷尉，不拜，除豫章太守。
现代文：永元初年，顾宪之被征为廷尉，他未接受造一职务，又被任命为豫章内史。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan Dynasty, Gu Xianzhi was enlisted as a court lieutenant. He did not accept the position, but was appointed as a member of the Inner History of the Henan Dynasty.

古文：有贞妇万晞者，少孀居无子，事舅姑尤孝，父母欲夺而嫁之，誓死不许，宪之赐以束帛，表其节义。
现代文：豫章有个名叫万晞的贞节妇人，年轻时就失去丈夫孀居，没有子女，她事奉公婆特别孝敬，但父母想逼迫她改变志向使她改嫁，她誓死不肯答应。顾宪之赐给万晞五匹帛，以表彰她坚守节义的品德。
English: There was a chaste woman in Yuanzhang named Wanlu. She lost her husband at a young age and lived alone without children. She served her in-laws with particular filial piety, but her parents wanted to force her to change her aspirations and make her remarry, but she refused to do so. Gu Xizhi gave Wanlu five horses to commend her for her adherence to the principles of morality.

古文：中兴二年，义师平建康，高祖为扬州牧，征宪之为别驾从事史。
现代文：中兴二年，讨伐齐东昏侯的义军平定了建康，高祖任扬州牧，征召顾宪之任别驾从事史。
English: In the second year of Zhongxing, Jiankang was pacified by the rebels who fought against the dowager of Qidong, Gao Zu served as Yangzhou herdsman, and Gu Xian was conscripted to make history.

古文：比至，高祖已受禅，宪之风疾渐笃，固求还吴。
现代文：等到顾宪之赶到京城，高祖已经接受齐的挥让，登上帝位。顾宪之因为中风，病情渐渐严重，因此坚决请求返回家乡吴县。
English: By the time Gu Xianzhi arrived in Beijing, Gao Zu had already accepted Qi's concession and ascended to the throne. Gu Xianzhi's condition was getting serious due to a stroke, so he firmly requested to return to his hometown of Wuxian.

古文：天监二年，就家授太中大夫。
现代文：天监二年，朝廷派人就在顾宪之家中拜授他为太中大夫。
English: In the second year of Tianjun, the imperial court sent someone to visit Gu Xian's home to offer him the title of Taizhong Doctor.

古文：宪之虽累经宰郡，资无担石。及归，环堵，不免饥寒。
现代文：顾宪之虽多次担任郡的长官，但连一点积蓄都没有，到他回到家乡，家徒四壁，因此免不了遭受饥寒。
English: Although Gu Xianzhi served as a county magistrate many times, he did not have any savings at all. When he returned to his hometown, his family was scattered all over, so he inevitably suffered from hunger and cold.

古文：八年，卒于家，年七十四。
现代文：天监八年，顾宪之在家中去世，死时七十四岁。
English: In the eighth year of Tianjing, Gu Xianzhi died at home, at the age of seventy-four.

古文：临终为制，以敕其子曰：
现代文：临终的时候，顾宪之预先写好对丧葬礼制的嘱咐，告诫自己的儿子说：
English: On his deathbed, Gu Xizhi wrote a pre-arranged instruction on funeral etiquette, admonishing his son:

古文：夫出生入死，理均昼夜。
现代文：从出生到死去，逭道理如同昼夜的变化。
English: From birth to death, it's like night and day.

古文：生既不知所从来，死亦安识所往。
现代文：既然不知道生命是从什么地方来，又哪能知道死后往什么地方去。
English: Since we do not know where life comes from, how can we know where to go after death?

古文：延陵所云 精气上归于天，骨肉下归于地，魂气则无所不之 ，良有以也。
现代文：延陵说的 人死之后，精气上升回归上天，骨肉向下回归大地，魂气就什么地方都能去 ，实在是有原因的。
English: According to Yanling, after death, the spirit ascends to heaven, the flesh descends to the earth, and the spirit can go anywhere. There is a reason for this.

古文：虽复茫昧难征，要若非妄。
现代文：虽然这种说法茫昧难以理解，很难得到验证，但应当不是虚妄的。
English: Although this statement is vague and difficult to understand, it is difficult to verify, but it should not be false.

古文：百年之期，迅若驰隙。
现代文：人的一生飞快地就会逝去，如同白驹过隙。
English: A man's life flies by like a daydream.

古文：吾今豫为终制，瞑目之后，念并遵行，勿违吾志也。
现代文：我现在预先写好对丧葬礼仪的嘱咐，我瞑目之后，希望你们全都遵照我的嘱咐办事，不要违背我的意愿。
English: I am now writing down the instructions for the funeral ceremony in advance, and after I meditate, I hope that you will all follow my instructions and not go against my wishes.

古文：庄周、澹台，达生者也；王孙、士安，矫俗者也。
现代文：庄周、澹台灭明，是参透人生、不为世事牵累的人；杨王孙、皇甫士安，是以自己的行为矫正世风的人。
English: Zhuang Zhou and Xingtai Zhiming are people who understand life and are not affected by the world; Yang Wangsun and Huang Fu Shian are people who correct the world style with their own behavior.

古文：吾进不及达，退无所矫。
现代文：我进不能达到不为世事牵累的境界，退则对世风没有什么矫正。
English: I can not reach the realm of not being involved in the world, and there is no correction for the world.

古文：常谓中都之制，允理惬情。
现代文：我常常说，孔子在中都制定的丧葬礼仪，既合乎天理，又能满足人们思亲敬亲之情。
English: I often say that the funeral rites developed by Confucius in Zhongdu are both in accordance with the principles of nature and can satisfy people's feelings of respect for relatives.

古文：衣周于身，示不违礼；棺周于衣，足以蔽臭。
现代文：死后，衣服可以包住身体，以示不违背礼法；棺木能够盛下尸身衣物，足以遮蔽臭气就可以了。
English: After death, clothes can be wrapped around the body to show that it does not violate the etiquette; the coffin can hold the dead body clothing, enough to cover the stench.

古文：入棺之物，一无所须。
现代文：放进棺木的其他东西，一样也不需要。
English: You don't need anything else in the coffin.

古文：载以輴车，覆以粗布，为使人勿恶也。
现代文：下葬时用椭车装运棺木，用粗布覆盖棺木，为的是不要使人厌恶。
English: At the time of burial, the coffin is transported on an elliptical cart, and the coffin is covered with a coarse cloth so as not to offend people.

古文：汉明帝天子之尊，犹祭以杅水脯糗；范史云烈士之高，亦奠以寒水干饭。
现代文：汉明帝是尊贵的天子，还提出衹要杯水干肉干粮祭奠；范史垩是名声很高的有操守的士人，也留下遣言衹要用凉水和干饭来祭奠。
English: Han Mingdi was a noble heavenly son, and he also proposed that the emperor should have a cup of water, dry meat and dry grain for the sacrifice; Fan Shizhen was a scholar with a high reputation for integrity, and he also left a message saying that the emperor should use cold water and dry rice for the sacrifice.

古文：况吾卑庸之人，其可不节衷也？
现代文：何况我衹是卑下平庸之人，怎么能不节制自己的欲念呢?
English: Besides, I am a humble and mediocre person, how can I not control my desires?

古文：丧易宁戚，自是亲亲之情；礼奢宁俭，差可得由吾意。
现代文：丧事与其仪文周到，宁可内心哀戚，这是思念亲人的深情；礼仪与其奢侈浪费，宁可朴素俭约，才能符合我的心意。
English: Funeral and its ceremony are thoughtful, rather than heartfelt grief, which is a deep feeling of missing relatives; etiquette and its extravagant waste, rather than simple and frugal, to meet my heart.

古文：不须常施灵筵，可止设香灯，使致哀者有凭耳。
现代文：用不着在灵前常设奠筵，可以衹点一盏油灯，使致哀的人有所依据罢了。
English: There is no need to always lay a wreath in front of the soul, you can just light an oil lamp to make the mourners have a basis.

古文：朔望祥忌，可权安小床，暂设几席，唯下素馔，勿用牲牢。
现代文：遇上初一、十五、大祥小祥的祭日，或是忌日，可以临时设置一张小小坐榻，安放几案和坐席，衹要置办几样素食，不要用牛羊猪祭奠。
English: On the first day of the New Year, the fifteenth day of the New Year, major and minor festivals, or the day of death, you can temporarily set up a small seat, place a few cases and seats, and order several vegetarian foods. Do not use cattle, sheep and pigs to pay tribute.

古文：蒸尝之祠，贵贱罔替。
现代文：祭祀祖宗的熏尝之祭，无论贵贱都不能废弃。
English: No matter how noble or lowly, the ritual of offering incense to the ancestors cannot be abandoned.

古文：备物难办，多致疏怠。
现代文：礼仪齐全的器物难于备办，常常因此而导致疏忽懈怠。
English: Objects with complete etiquette are difficult to prepare, which often leads to carelessness and laxity.

古文：祠先人自有旧典，不可有阙。
现代文：祭祀祖先的礼以前原有规定，不能疏漏。
English: The original regulations for the rite of ancestor worship have been revised and cannot be omitted.

古文：自吾以下，祠止用蔬食时果，勿同于上世也。
现代文：从我开始，死后祭祀衹要用蔬食和时鲜果品，不要和祭祀上代祖先一样。
English: From me onward, after death, we should use vegetables and fresh fruits for sacrifices, not the same as the sacrifices of our ancestors.

古文：示令子孙，四时不忘其亲耳。
现代文：衹要明白地教导子孙，一年四季不要忘记自己的父母亲人而已。
English: We should clearly teach our children and grandchildren not to forget their parents and relatives all year round.

古文：孔子云： 虽菜羹瓜祭，必齐如也。 本贵诚敬，岂求备物哉？
现代文：孔子说： 即使是用菜羹蔬食来祭祀，也一定要恭恭敬敬，好像斋戒了一样。 
English: Confucius said: Even if you use vegetable soup to make a sacrifice, you must be respectful, as if you were fasting.

古文：所著诗、赋、铭、赞并《衡阳郡记》数十篇。
现代文：重要的在于心诚和恭敬，哪裹是一定要求礼仪器物齐全呢?顾宪之着的诗、赋、铭、赞以及《衡阳郡记》共数十篇。
English: What is important is sincerity and respect, so why do they require complete ceremonial instruments? Gu Xian wrote dozens of poems, fus, inscriptions, praise, and "Hengyang County Chronicle."

古文：陶季直，丹阳秣陵人也。
现代文：陶季直，丹阳秣陵人。
English: Tao Qizhi, a native of Danyang.

古文：祖愍祖，宋广州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父陶愍祖，宋时任广州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Tao Yanzhu, was the governor of Guangzhou during the Song Dynasty.

古文：父景仁，中散大夫。
现代文：父亲陶景仁，任中散大夫。
English: His father, Tao Jingren, was a doctor in Zhongshan.

古文：季直早慧，愍祖甚爱异之。
现代文：陶季直年少时聪明出众，陶愍祖很喜爱他，认为他有异于常人的气质。
English: When he was young, Tao Jizhi was very clever and outstanding. Tao Zhezu loved him very much and thought that he had a temperament that was different from that of ordinary people.

古文：愍祖尝以四函银列置于前，令诸孙各取，季直时甫四岁，独不取。
现代文：陶愍祖曾经拿四封银子陈放在自己面前，命孙子们各人去取。当时陶季直刚刚四岁，衹他一个人不取银子。
English: Tao Qianzu once took four pieces of silver and placed them in front of him, ordering his grandchildren to take them. At that time, Tao Qianzu was just four years old, and he did not take any silver.

古文：人问其故，季直曰： 若有赐，当先父伯，不应度及诸孙，是故不取。 
现代文：有人间他不取银子的原因，陶季直说： 假如祖父有赏赐，应当先给父亲和叔伯，不应当直接给予孙辈，因此我不拿取银子。 
English: When asked why he didn't take the money, Tao Jizhong said, "If my grandfather has a reward, it should first be given to my father and uncle, not directly to my grandchildren. Therefore, I don't take the money."

古文：愍祖益奇之。
现代文：陶愍祖听到这话，更对他的气质和聪慧感到惊奇。
English: Upon hearing this, Tao Yanzhu was even more surprised by his temperament and intelligence.

古文：五岁丧母，哀若成人。
现代文：陶季直五岁时母亲去世，他如同成人那样哀痛伤心。
English: When Tao Jizhi was five years old, his mother died, and he was as sad and heartbroken as an adult.

古文：初，母未病，令于外染衣；卒后，家人始赎，季直抱之号恸，闻者莫不酸感。
现代文：起初，他母亲还未生病的时候，就命他出家为僧，母亲死后，家人才把他赎回来，陶季直抱着母亲的尸体哀恸号哭，听到的人没有一个不悲伤感动。
English: At first, when his mother was not yet ill, he was ordered to become a monk. After his mother's death, his family bought him back. Tao Ji held his mother's corpse in his arms and wailed and cried. No one who heard this was not moved by sadness.

古文：及长，好学，淡于荣利。
现代文：长大成人之后，陶季直爱好学习，追求荣华名利之心淡薄。
English: After he became an adult, Tao Jizhi loved to study, and his pursuit of glory, fame and profit was weak.

古文：起家桂阳王国侍郎、北中郎镇西行参军，并不起，时人号曰 聘君 。
现代文：他初出仕被任命为桂阳王国侍郎，北中郎镇西行参军，他都没有上任，当时人称他为 聘君 。
English: When he first entered the service, he was appointed as a steward of the Guiyang Kingdom. When he went west to join the army, he did not take up the post. At that time, he was known as "Hai Jun."

古文：父忧服阕，尚书令刘秉领丹阳尹，引为后军主簿、领郡功曹。
现代文：陶季直因父亲去世而守丧，守丧期满之后，领丹阳尹的尚书令刘秉，把陶季直提拔为后军主簿，领郡功曹。
English: Tao Qizhi was in mourning for the death of his father. After the mourning period was over, Liu Bing, the commander of Danyang Yin, promoted Tao Qizhi to the post of military chief, leading the county.

古文：出为望蔡令，顷之以病免。
现代文：陶季直又出京任望蔡令，不久因病而免职。
English: Tao Jizhi went to Beijing again to serve as Wang Cai Ling, but was soon relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：时刘秉、袁粲以齐高帝权势日盛，将图之，秉素重季直，欲与之定策。
现代文：当时刘秉、袁粲因为齐高帝权势一天天显赫，于是想要图谋推倒齐高帝。
English: At that time, Liu Bing and Yuan Shao wanted to conspire to overthrow Qigong Emperor because he was becoming more and more powerful.

古文：季直以袁、刘儒者，必致颠殒，固辞不赴。
现代文：刘秉一向敬重陶季直，他想约陶季直一起研究对付齐高帝的策略。陶季直认为袁、刘二人都是儒生，他们的圆谋一定会导致灭亡，因此坚决拒绝不肯赴约。
English: Liu Bing had always respected Tao Jizhi, and he wanted to make an appointment with Tao Jizhi to study the strategy to deal with Qigong Emperor. Tao Jizhi believed that Yuan and Liu were both Confucianists, and their strategy would surely lead to their demise, so he resolutely refused to go to the appointment.

古文：俄而秉等伏诛。
现代文：不久刘秉等人就因罪被诛。
English: Liu Bing and others were soon arrested for their crimes.

古文：齐初，为尚书比部郎，时褚渊为尚书令，与季直素善，频以为司空司徒主簿，委以府事。
现代文：齐代初年，陶季直任尚书比部郎，当时褚渊任尚书令，与陶季直一向交情很好，于是连连命陶季直任司空、司徒主簿，把府中事务交给陶季直处理。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, Tao Qizhi was appointed as Shang Shuhiburo. At that time, Gong Yuan was appointed as Shang Shuling, and he and Tao Qizhi always had a good relationship. Therefore, Tao Qizhi was successively appointed as Siku and Sito, and the affairs of the government were handled by Tao Qizhi.

古文：渊卒，尚书令王俭以渊有至行，欲谥为文孝公，季直请曰： 文孝是司马道子谥，恐其人非具美，不如文简。 
现代文：褚渊去世，尚书令王俭认为褚渊有高尚的德行，想要确定褚渊的谧号为 文孝公 。陶季直提出请求说：  文孝 是司马道子的谧号，他这个人恐怕不能算是十全十美，褚渊不应当和他用同样的谧号，不如赠谧为 文简 。 
English: After Gongyuan's death, Wang Jian thought that Gongyuan had noble virtues and wanted to confirm that Gongyuan's nickname was Wen Xiaogong. Tao Jizhi made a request saying: "Wen Xiaogong is the nickname of Sima Daozi, he may not be perfect, Gongyuan should not use the same nickname as him, it is better to give him the nickname of Wen Jian."

古文：俭从之。
现代文：王俭听从了陶季直的意见。
English: Wang Jian followed Tao Qizhi's advice.

古文：季直又请俭为渊立碑，终始营护，甚有吏节，时人美之。
现代文：陶季直又请求王俭为褚渊立碑。碑立好之后，陶季直自始至终很好地保护这碑，保持了属吏的操守，当时人都赞扬陶季直的这种美行。
English: Tao Jizhi also asked Wang Jian to erect a monument for Zouyuan. After the monument was erected, Tao Jizhi well protected the monument from beginning to end and maintained the integrity of the officials. At that time, everyone praised Tao Jizhi's good deeds.

古文：迁太尉记室参军。
现代文：陶季直迁任太尉记室参军。
English: Tao Jizhong was transferred to the office of the captain and joined the army.

古文：出为冠军司马、东莞太守，在郡号为清和。
现代文：又出京任冠军司马、东莞太守，他任职期间东莞郡被称为清静安定。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as the champion of Sima and the governor of Dongguan. During his tenure, Dongguan County was known as a quiet and stable county.

古文：还除散骑侍郎，领左卫司马，转镇西谘议参军。
现代文：陶季直回京被任命为散骑侍郎，领左卫司马，转任镇西谘议参军。
English: Tao Ji went straight back to Beijing and was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, leading the left guard Sima, and was transferred to the west of the town for consultation on joining the army.

古文：齐武帝崩，明帝作相，诛锄异己，季直不能阿意，明帝颇忌之，乃出为辅国长史、北海太守。
现代文：齐武帝崩，齐明帝任宰相，他诛除异己，陶季直不肯曲意奉承，齐明帝很是忌惮他，于是让他出京任辅国长史、北海太守。
English: When Emperor Qiwu died, Emperor Qiming appointed him as prime minister. He was the first to eliminate dissidents, and Tao Ji refused to be flattered. Emperor Qiming was very afraid of him, so he let him go to Beijing to serve as Vice-Governor and Governor of the North Sea.

古文：边职上佐，素士罕为之者。
现代文：朝中属官担任边城职务，读书人为官很少有这样的任命。
English: It was rare for a government official to be appointed to a post in a border town.

古文：或劝季直造门致谢，明帝既见，便留之，以为骠骑谘议参军，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：有人劝陶季直到齐明帝那儿上门道歉。齐明帝接见陶季直之后，就把他留在京城，任命他为骠骑谘议参军，兼尚书左丞。
English: Some people urged Tao Ji to go to Emperor Qiming to apologize. Immediately after Emperor Qiming received Tao Ji, he left him in the capital and appointed him as a cavalryman to advise on joining the army, as well as a senior clerk.

古文：仍迁建安太守，政尚清静，百姓便之。
现代文：接着迁任建安太守。陶季直施政崇尚清静，百姓感到安适。
English: Then, he was transferred to the position of Jian'an governor. The direct administration of Tao Ji advocated tranquility, and the people felt at ease.

古文：还为中书侍郎，迁游击将军、兼廷尉。
现代文：陶季直又回京任中书侍郎，迁任游击将军、兼廷尉。
English: Tao Jizhi returned to Beijing to serve as chushushijiro (chamberlain) and was transferred to the post of guerrilla general and court lieutenant.

古文：梁台建，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：梁王台府建立，陶季直迁任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Liang Wangtaifu was established, and Tao Ji Zhijian was appointed to the position of Huangmen Chamberlain.

古文：常称仕至二千石，始愿毕矣，无为务人间之事，乃辞疾还乡里。
现代文：陶季直常常说，当官到了有二千石俸禄的职务，一生的愿望算是全实现了，不要再去追求人世的荣华富贵，于是以有病为由辞职回乡。
English: Tao Jizhi often said that when an official reached a position with a salary of two thousand koku, his lifelong wish was fully realized, and he should no longer pursue worldly glory and wealth, so he resigned on the grounds of illness and returned to his hometown.

古文：天监初，就家拜太中大夫。
现代文：天监初年，朝廷派人就在他家拜授他为太中大夫。
English: In the first year of the celestial inspector, the court sent someone to his home to recommend him as a junior doctor.

古文：高祖曰： 梁有天下，遂不见此人。 
现代文：高祖说： 梁据有天下，可是却见不到这个人。 
English: Gao Zu said: Liang Zhe has the whole world, but he can't see this person.

古文：十年，卒于家，时年七十五。
现代文：天监十年，陶季直在家中去世，死时七十五岁。
English: Ten years into his tenure as overseer of heaven, Tao Jizhi died at home, at the age of seventy-five.

古文：季直素清苦绝伦，又屏居十余载，及死，家徒四壁，子孙无以殡敛，闻者莫不伤其志焉。萧视素，兰陵人也。
现代文：陶季直一向生活清苦，无人能和他相比，又离官隐居十多年，到他死的时候，家徒四壁，子孙没有钱财殡殓他，听到逭事的人没有一个不为他的操守而感叹悲伤。萧视素，兰陵人。
English: Tao Ji has always lived a clean and hard life, no one can compare with him, and he lived in seclusion for more than ten years. By the time of his death, his family had four walls, his children and grandchildren had no money to bury him, and no one who heard the anecdote was not saddened by his conduct. Xiao Xiusu, Lanling people.

古文：祖思话，宋征西仪同三司；父惠明，吴兴太守；皆有盛名。
现代文：他的祖父萧思话，宋时追赠为征西将军、开府仪同三司。父亲萧惠明，任吴兴太守。他祖父、父亲都有很大的名声。
English: His grandfather, Xiao Siwei, was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Western Conquest and the title of Grand Marshal of the Northern and Western Provinces by the Song Dynasty. His father, Xiao Huiming, was appointed as the Governor of Wu Xing. Both his grandfather and his father had a great reputation.

古文：视素早孤贫，为叔父惠休所收恤。
现代文：萧视素很早就失去父亲，家中贫苦，被叔父萧惠休收养。
English: Xiao Xingsu lost his father very early, his family was poor, and he was adopted by his uncle Xiao Huixiu.

古文：起家为齐司徒法曹行参军，迁著作佐郎、太子舍人、尚书三公郎。
现代文：他初出仕任齐司徒法曹行参军，迁任著作佐郎，太子舍人，尚书三公郎。
English: He joined the army for the first time when he was appointed as the legal officer of Qi Szu, and was transferred to the posts of Shosho Saro, Taishi Shonin, and Shosho Sangongoro.

古文：永元末，为太子洗马。
现代文：永元末年，萧视素任太子洗马。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Xiao Si Su was appointed as the prince to wash horses.

古文：梁台建，高祖引为中尉骠骑记室参军。
现代文：梁王台府建立，高祖选拔他为中尉骠骑记室参军。
English: Liangwang Taifu was established, and Gao Zu selected him as a lieutenant to join the army.

古文：天监初，为临川王友，复为太子中舍人、丹阳尹丞。
现代文：天监初年，萧视素任临川王友，又再任太子中舍人，丹阳尹丞。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervisor, Xiao Si Su was appointed as the King's Friend of Linchuan, and then he was reappointed as the Prince's Junior Assistant, Danyang Yinrong.

古文：初拜，高祖赐钱八万，视素一朝散之亲友。
现代文：刚拜授官职的时候，高祖赐给萧视素八万钱，萧视素一下子把钱全送给亲友。
English: When he was just appointed to the post, Gao Zu gave Xiao Xiusu 80,000 yuan. Xiao Xiusu immediately gave all the money to his relatives and friends.

古文：又迁司徒左西属、南徐州治中。
现代文：萧视素又迁任司徒左西属，南徐州治中。
English: Xiao Shixu was transferred to the Southern Xuzhou Government Middle School of the Western Xuzhou Government Middle School.

古文：性静退，少嗜欲，好学，能清言，荣利不关于口，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：萧视素性情安静谦让，清心寡欲，爱好学习，能够谈论老、庄的玄理，口中从不谈论荣华利禄，喜怒不形于色。
English: Xiao Xingsu's disposition is quiet and humble, with a pure heart and little desire, loves to learn, can talk about the old and solemn metaphysics, and never talks about Ronghua Liluo, and his happiness and anger are invisible.

古文：在人间及居职，并任情通率，不自矜高，天然简素，士人以此咸敬之。
现代文：无论是无官家居或是担任官职，他都随任自己秉性行事，旷达坦率，从不骄矜自大，表露了简约朴素的天性，士人因此都很敬重他。
English: Whether in an unofficial household or holding an official position, he always acted according to his own nature, was open and frank, never arrogant, and showed a simple and simple nature, so the scholars respected him.

古文：及在京口，便有终焉之志，乃于摄山筑室。
现代文：到他在京口任职的时候，就萌生了在京口安身终老的想法，于是就在摄山造丁座房宅。
English: By the time he took up his post in Kyoguchi, the idea of settling down in Kyoguchi for the rest of his life had sprung up, so he built a three-story house in Teruyama.

古文：会征为中书侍郎，遂辞不就，因还山宅，独居屏事，非亲戚不得至其篱门。
现代文：适逢这时候朝廷征召他为中书侍郎，于是他拒绝做官，不去上任，回到摄山的住宅裹，不问世事，一人独居，如果不是亲戚就到不了他住宅的院门。
English: It was at this time that the court called him to serve as a chancellery attendant, so he refused to be an official, did not take up the post, returned to his house in the mountains, did not care about the world, lived alone, and if he was not a relative, he could not reach the courtyard gate of his house.

古文：妻，太尉王俭女，久与别居，遂无子。
现代文：萧视素的妻子是太尉王俭之女，萧视素很久以前就舆她分居，于是没有生养子女。
English: Xiao Xingsu's wife is the daughter of the captain Wang Jian. Xiao Xingsu separated from her a long time ago, so she did not have any children.

古文：八年，卒。
现代文：天监八年，萧视素去世。
English: In the eighth year of Tianjing, Xiao Xiusu passed away.

古文：亲故迹其事行，谥曰贞文先生。
现代文：他的亲戚朋友考察他的事迹，给他赠谧为贞文先生。
English: His relatives and friends examined his deeds and presented him with a gong as Mr. Zhenwen.

古文：史臣曰：顾宪之、陶季直，引年者也，萧视素则宦情鲜焉。比夫怀禄耽宠，婆娑人世，则殊间矣。
现代文：史臣曰：顾宪之、陶季直算是以退隐来延年益寿的人，萧视素却是对做官缺少热情的入，和那些怀念俸禄，沉溺在恩宠之中，在人世间奔忙劳碌的人相比，确实有很大的差别。
English: Shi Zhen said: According to the Constitution, Tao Zi is a person who prolongs his life by retreating, but he lacks enthusiasm for being an official. Compared with those who miss the salary, indulge in grace, and work hard in the world, there is indeed a big difference.

