古文：高祖，沛丰邑中阳里人，姓刘氏，字季。
现代文：高祖，沛县丰邑中阳里人。姓刘，字季。
English: Gao Zu, a native of Zhongyangli, Fengyi County, Pei County, surnamed Liu and surnamed Ji.

古文：父曰太公，母曰刘媪。
现代文：父亲叫太公，母亲叫刘媪。
English: His father's name is Taigong, and his mother's name is Liu Yong.

古文：其先刘媪尝息大泽之陂，梦与神遇。
现代文：先前刘媪曾经在大湖岸边休息，睡梦中与神相遇。
English: Previously, Liu Ye had rested on the shore of the Great Lake and encountered God in his sleep.

古文：是时雷电晦冥，太公往视，则见蛟龙於其上。已而有身，遂产高祖。
现代文：这时雷电交作，天昏地暗。太公去看刘媪，见到一条蛟龙在她身上，后来刘媪怀了孕，就生了高祖。
English: At this time, thunder and lightning occurred, and the sky was dark. The Grand Duke went to see Liu Yao and saw a dragon on her body. Later, Liu Yao became pregnant and gave birth to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖为人，隆准而龙颜，美须髯，左股有七十二黑子。
现代文：高祖这个人，高鼻梁，像龙一样丰满的额角，漂亮的须髯，左腿上有七十二颗黑痣。
English: This man, Gaozhu, had a high nose, a full forehead like a dragon, beautiful whiskers, and seventy-two black moles on his left leg.

古文：仁而爱人，喜施，意豁如也。
现代文：仁厚爱人，喜欢施舍，胸襟开阔。
English: Benevolent lover, likes to give alms, broad-minded.

古文：常有大度，不事家人生产作业。
现代文：常有远大的志向，不从事一般百姓的生产作业。
English: They often have lofty ambitions and do not engage in the production work of ordinary people.

古文：及壮，试为吏，为泗水亭长，廷中吏无所不狎侮。
现代文：到了壮年，试做官吏，当了泗水亭亭长，公廷中的官吏，没有一个不混得很熟，受他戏弄。
English: When he came of age, he tried his hand at being a government official, and when he became the chief of Suishuitei Pavilion, there was not a government official in the court who was not very familiar with him and was teased by him.

古文：好酒及色。
现代文：他爱好喝酒，喜欢女色。
English: He likes to drink and he likes women.

古文：常从王媪、武负贳酒，醉卧，武负、王媪见其上常有龙，怪之。
现代文：常常向王媪、武负赊酒，喝醉了卧睡，武负、王媪看见他上面常有一条龙，感到很奇怪。
English: He would often drink wine with Wang Hui and Wu Zhe and fall asleep drunk. When Wu Zhe and Wang Hui saw that there was often a dragon on top of him, they felt very strange.

古文：高祖每酤留饮，酒雠数倍。
现代文：高祖每次来买酒，留在酒店中饮酒，酒店的酒比平常多卖几倍。
English: Every time Gaozu comes to buy wine, he stays in the hotel to drink, and the hotel sells several times more wine than usual.

古文：及见怪，岁竟，此两家常折券弃责。
现代文：等到发现了奇怪的现象，年终时，这两家酒店常将高祖所赊债务一笔勾销。
English: By the end of the year, the two hotels had often written off the debts incurred by Gao Zuo, until the strange phenomenon was discovered.

古文：高祖常繇咸阳，纵观，观秦皇帝，喟然太息曰： 嗟乎，大丈夫当如此也！ 
现代文：高祖曾经到咸阳服徭役，允许人们观看，他看到了秦始皇，喟然长叹说： 啊，大丈夫应当像这个样子！ 
English: Gao Zu once went to Xianyang to serve as an envoy and allowed people to watch. He saw Qin Shihuang and said with a long sigh: Ah, everything should be like this!

古文：单父人吕公善沛令，避仇从之客，因家沛焉。
现代文：单父人吕公与沛县县令相友好，为了躲避仇人到县令家做客，因而迁家到沛县。
English: Lu Gong, a single father, was on friendly terms with the county magistrate of Peixian County. In order to avoid enemies visiting the county magistrate's house, he moved to Peixian County.

古文：沛中豪桀吏闻令有重客，皆往贺。
现代文：沛县中的豪杰官吏听说县令有贵客，都去送礼祝贺。
English: The heroic officials in Peixian County heard that there were distinguished guests in the county, and they all went to send gifts and congratulations.

古文：萧何为主吏，主进，令诸大夫曰： 进不满千钱，坐之堂下。 
现代文：萧何为县里的主吏，主管收礼物，对各位贵客说： 礼物不满一千钱的，坐在堂下。 
English: Xiao He, the chief official of the county and the person in charge of receiving gifts, said to the distinguished guests: If the gift is less than one thousand yuan, sit under the hall.

古文：高祖为亭长，素易诸吏，乃绐为谒曰 贺钱万 ，实不持一钱。
现代文：高祖做亭长，向来轻视那些官吏。于是欺骗地在名刺上说 贺万钱 ，其实没有拿出一个钱。
English: Gaozu, as the head of the pavilion, has always despised those officials. So he deceitfully said "He Wan Qian" on his business card, but in fact he did not take out a single coin.

古文：谒入，吕公大惊，起，迎之门。
现代文：名刺递了进去，吕公大惊，站起来，到门口迎接高祖。
English: After the business card was handed in, Lv Gong was shocked, stood up, and went to the door to greet Gao Zu.

古文：吕公者，好相人，见高祖状貌，因重敬之，引入坐。
现代文：吕公这个人，好给人相面，看到高祖的状貌，就特别敬重他，领他到堂上入座。
English: Seeing Gaozu's appearance, Luguang, who was eager to meet Gaozu, showed him special respect and led him into the hall to take his seat.

古文：萧何曰： 刘季固多大言，少成事。 
现代文：萧何说： 刘季本来大话很多，很少成事。 
English: Xiao He said: Liu Ji originally said a lot of big words, but rarely accomplished anything.

古文：高祖因狎侮诸客，遂坐上坐，无所诎。
现代文：高祖便戏辱堂上的客人，自己坐在上座，毫不谦让。
English: Gao Zu then mocked the guests in the hall and sat in the upper seat himself, showing no modesty.

古文：酒阑，吕公因目固留高祖。
现代文：酒席就要散尽，吕公以目示意高祖不要走。
English: The banquet was about to run out of wine, and Lvong signaled Gao Zu not to leave.

古文：高祖竟酒，後。
现代文：高祖喝完了酒，留在后面。
English: Gaozu finished his drink and stayed behind.

古文：吕公曰： 臣少好相人，相人多矣，无如季相，原季自爱。
现代文：吕公说： 我从年少时就好给人相面，相过的人多了，没有一个像你刘季这样的贵相，希望你刘季保重。
English: Lu Gong said: I have been good at giving people facials since I was young, and I have met many people. There is no one with a noble face like you, Liu Ji. I hope you, Liu Ji, stay safe.

古文：臣有息女，原为季箕帚妾。 
现代文：我有一亲生女儿，愿意做为你刘季执帚洒扫的妻子。 
English: I have a biological daughter who is willing to be your wife, Liu Ji.

古文：酒罢，吕媪怒吕公曰： 公始常欲奇此女，与贵人。
现代文：酒席结束后，吕媪生吕公的气，说： 你最初常想使这个女儿与众不同，把她嫁给贵人。
English: After the banquet was over, Lv Ying got angry with Lv Gong and said, "In the beginning, you often wanted to make this daughter special and marry her off to a nobleman.

古文：沛令善公，求之不与，何自妄许与刘季？ 
现代文：沛令与你相友好，求娶女儿，你不答应，为什么自己妄作主张许配给了刘季？ 
English: Pei Ling befriended you and asked for your daughter's hand in marriage, but you did not agree. Why did you make such a pretentious proposal to marry Liu Ji Huang?

古文：吕公曰： 此非兒女子所知也。 
现代文：吕公说： 这不是你们这些妇孺之辈所能懂得的。 
English: Lu Gong said, "This is not something that you women and children can understand.

古文：卒与刘季。
现代文：于是把女儿嫁给了刘季。
English: So she married her daughter to Liu Ji.

古文：吕公女乃吕后也，生孝惠帝、鲁元公主。
现代文：吕公的女儿就是吕后，她生了孝惠帝、鲁元公主。
English: The daughter of Prince Lv is Queen Lv. She gave birth to Prince Xiao Hui and Princess Lu Yuan.

古文：高祖为亭长时，常告归之田。
现代文：高祖作亭长时，曾经请假回家。
English: When Gao Zu was a pavilion manager, he once asked for leave to go home.

古文：吕后与两子居田中耨，有一老父过请饮，吕后因餔之。
现代文：吕后与两个孩子在田间除草，有一老人路过，要些水喝，吕后还给他一些食物吃。
English: Lvhou and her two children were weeding in the fields. An old man passed by and asked for some water to drink. Lvhou gave him some food to eat.

古文：老父相吕后曰： 夫人天下贵人。 
现代文：老人给吕后相面，说： 夫人是天下的贵人。 
English: The old man gave Lv Hou a face-to-face meeting and said, "My wife is a noblewoman of the world.

古文：令相两子，见孝惠，曰： 夫人所以贵者，乃此男也。 
现代文：吕后让他给两个孩子看相。老人看了孝惠，说： 夫人所以显贵，就是这个孩子的缘故。 
English: The old man looked at Xiao Hui and said, "The reason why my wife is so distinguished is because of this child.

古文：相鲁元，亦皆贵。
现代文：看了鲁元，也是贵相。
English: If you look at Lu Yuan, he is also a noble.

古文：老父已去，高祖適从旁舍来，吕后具言客有过，相我子母皆大贵。高祖问，曰： 未远。 
现代文：老人已经走了，高祖正好从别人家来到田间，吕后告诉他一位客人从这里经过，给我们母子看相，说将来都是大贵人，高祖问老父在哪儿吕后说： 走出不远。 
English: The old man had already left. Gaozu had just come to the field from someone else's house. Lvougou told him that a guest had passed by and had met our mother and son. He said that they would both be great nobles in the future. Gaozu asked Lvougou where his father was. Lvougou said, "It's not far to walk out."

古文：乃追及，问老父。
现代文：高祖追上了老人，向他询问。
English: Gaozu caught up with the old man and questioned him.

古文：老父曰： 乡者夫人婴兒皆似君，君相贵不可言。 
现代文：老人说： 刚才相过夫人和孩子，他们都跟你相似，你的相貌，贵不可言。 
English: The old man said, "I have just met your wife and child. They are all similar to you. Your appearance is precious beyond words.

古文：高祖乃谢曰： 诚如父言，不敢忘德。 
现代文：高祖便道谢说： 如果真像老父所说，决不忘记您对我的恩德。 
English: Gaozu then thanked him and said, "If it is as my father said, I will never forget your kindness to me.

古文：及高祖贵，遂不知老父处。
现代文：等到高祖显贵，竟然不知道老人的去处了。
English: Wait until Gao Zu is eminent, and he doesn't even know where the old man is.

古文：高祖为亭长，乃以竹皮为冠，令求盗之薛治之，时时冠之，及贵常冠，所谓 刘氏冠 乃是也。
现代文：高祖做亭长，以竹皮为帽，这帽子是他派求盗到薛县制做的，经常戴着它。等到显贵时，仍然常常戴着，所谓 刘氏冠 ，就是指这种帽子。
English: Gao Zu was a pavilion keeper and wore a hat made of bamboo skin, which he sent to Xue County to steal, and he often wore it. When he became a dignitary, he still often wore it. The so-called Liu's crown refers to this kind of hat.

古文：高祖以亭长为县送徒郦山，徒多道亡。
现代文：高祖因身任亭长，为县里送役徒去郦山，役徒多在途中逃亡。
English: Gao Zu, due to his position as pavilion chief, sent the yakitori to Shaoshan for the county, and many of the yakitori fled on the way.

古文：自度比至皆亡之，到丰西泽中，止饮，夜乃解纵所送徒。
现代文：他估计，等走到郦山，大概都逃光了。到丰邑西面的沼泽地带，停下来喝酒，夜间高祖就释放了所押送的役徒。
English: He estimated that by the time they reached Lushan, they had probably all fled. When they reached the swampy area west of Fengyi, they stopped to drink. At night, Gaozu released the servants he had been escorting.

古文：曰： 公等皆去，吾亦从此逝矣！ 
现代文：高祖说： 各位都走吧，我也从此逃命去了！ 
English: Gaozu said, "Everyone, let's go. I've been running for my life!"

古文：徒中壮士原从者十馀人。
现代文：役徒中有十多个年轻力壮的愿意跟随高祖。
English: There are more than ten young and strong apprentices who are willing to follow Gao Zu.

古文：高祖被酒，夜径泽中，令一人行前。
现代文：高祖带着酒意，当夜抄小路通过这片沼泽，派一人前行探路。
English: Gaozhu, with a desire to drink, went that night to cut a path through the swamp and sent a man ahead to find a way.

古文：行前者还报曰： 前有大蛇当径，原还。 
现代文：前行探路的人回来报告说： 前面有条大蛇横在路当中，请回去吧。 
English: The explorer who went ahead came back and reported: There is a big snake lying in the middle of the road ahead, please go back.

古文：高祖醉，曰： 壮士行，何畏！ 
现代文：高祖醉醺醺的，说： 好汉走路，何所畏惧！ 
English: Gao Zu drunkenly said, "When a brave man walks, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：乃前，拔剑击斩蛇。
现代文：于是，就走上前去，拔剑击蛇，斩为两段，道路打通了。
English: So he stepped forward, drew his sword and struck the snake, cutting it in two, and the road was opened.

古文：蛇遂分为两，径开。
现代文：走了几里地，酒性发作，便躺下睡觉。
English: After walking for several miles, he had an alcoholic seizure and lay down to sleep.

古文：行数里，醉，因卧。後人来至蛇所，有一老妪夜哭。
现代文：后面的人来到斩蛇的地方，见有一个老太太夜里哭泣。
English: The people behind came to the place where the snake was cut and saw an old lady crying in the night.

古文：人问何哭，妪曰： 人杀吾子，故哭之。 
现代文：人们问为什么啼哭，老太太说： 有人杀了我的儿子，所以我哭。 
English: Asked why she was crying, she said: "Someone killed my son, that's why I'm crying.

古文：人曰： 妪子何为见杀？ 
现代文：人们又说： 老太太，你的儿子为什么被杀了？ 
English: People also said: "Old lady, why was your son killed?

古文：妪曰： 吾，白帝子也，化为蛇，当道，今为赤帝子斩之，故哭。 
现代文：老太太说： 我儿子，是白帝的儿子，变为蛇，横在路当中，现在被赤帝的儿子杀了，所以我才哭。 
English: The old lady said, "My son, the son of the White Emperor, turned into a snake, lying in the middle of the road, has now been killed by the son of the Red Emperor, that is why I am crying."

古文：人乃以妪为不诚，欲告之，妪因忽不见。
现代文：人们以为老太太不诚实，想要给她点苦头吃老太太忽然不见了。
English: People thought the old lady was dishonest and wanted to give her a hard time because she had suddenly disappeared.

古文：後人至，高祖觉。
现代文：落在后面的人到了高祖休息的地方，高祖已经醒了。
English: Those left behind went to Gao Zu's resting place. Gao Zu had already woken up.

古文：後人告高祖，高祖乃心独喜，自负。
现代文：他们把刚才发生的事告诉了高祖，高祖听了暗自高兴，觉得自命不凡。
English: They told Gaozu what had just happened. Gaozu was secretly pleased to hear this and felt arrogant.

古文：诸从者日益畏之。
现代文：那些跟随他的人对他日益敬畏。
English: Those who followed him were increasingly in awe of him.

古文：秦始皇帝常曰 东南有天子气 ，於是因东游以厌之。
现代文：秦始皇帝常说 东南有天子气 ，因而巡游东方，借以镇伏东南的天子气。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang often said that the southeast has the spirit of the son of heaven, so he cruised the east and borrowed the spirit of the son of heaven from the southeast.

古文：高祖即自疑，亡匿，隐於芒、砀山泽岩石之间。
现代文：高祖怀疑这件事与自己有关，就逃跑藏了起来，隐身在芒山、砀山一带的山泽岩石之间。
English: Gaozu suspected that the incident had something to do with him, so he ran away and hid, hiding in the mountains and rocks around Mangshan and Lushan.

古文：吕后与人俱求，常得之。
现代文：吕后和别人一块儿寻找，常常一去就找到了高祖。
English: Lü Guo searched with others and often found Gao Zu as soon as he left.

古文：高祖怪问之。吕后曰： 季所居上常有云气，故从往常得季。 
现代文：高祖感到奇怪，就问吕后，吕后说： 你所处的地方上面常有云气，向着有云气的地方去找，常常可以找到你。 
English: Gaozu felt strange, so he asked Lü Biao. Lü Biao said, "Where you are, there are often clouds. If you go to a place where there are clouds, you can often be found.

古文：高祖心喜。
现代文：高祖心里非常高兴。
English: Gao Zu was very happy.

古文：沛中子弟或闻之，多欲附者矣。
现代文：沛县子弟有的听到这件事很多人都想归附他。
English: When some children in Peixian County heard about this, many people wanted to join him.

古文：秦二世元年秋，陈胜等起蕲，至陈而王，号为 张楚 。
现代文：秦二世元年秋天，陈胜等在蕲县起义，到了陈县自立为王，号称 张楚 。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the reign of Qin II, Chen Sheng and others revolted in Jixian County. When he arrived in Chen County, he declared himself king and became known as Zhang Chu.

古文：诸郡县皆多杀其长吏以应陈涉。
现代文：各郡县都大多杀死长官，响应陈胜。
English: Most counties have killed their chiefs in response to Chen Sheng.

古文：沛令恐，欲以沛应涉。掾、主吏萧何、曹参乃曰： 君为秦吏，今欲背之，率沛子弟，恐不听。
现代文：沛县县令恐惧，想要以沛具响应陈胜，主吏萧何、狱掾曹参对他说： 您身为秦朝的官吏，如今要叛秦起事，率领沛县子弟，恐怕他们不愿听命。
English: Peixian County was afraid and wanted to respond to Chen Sheng with Peigu, and the chief officials Xiao He and Jiefang Cao San said to him: You are an official of the Qin Dynasty, and now you want to rebel against the Qin Dynasty and lead the children of Peixian County. I'm afraid they won't listen to your orders.

古文：原君召诸亡在外者，可得数百人，因劫众，众不敢不听。 
现代文：希望您召集逃亡在外面的人,可以得到几百人。利用这股力量胁持群众，群众不敢不听您的命令。 
English: I hope that you can gather a few hundred people from those who have fled outside, and use this force to coerce the masses. The masses dare not disobey your orders.

古文：乃令樊哙召刘季。刘季之众已数十百人矣。
现代文：县令就派樊哙去召唤刘季，刘季的队伍已经近百人了。
English: The county magistrate sent a messenger to summon Liu Ji, and Liu Ji's team has grown to nearly 100 people.

古文：於是樊哙从刘季来。
现代文：于是樊哙跟着刘季来到沛县。
English: So Hao followed Liu Ji to Peixian.

古文：沛令後悔，恐其有变，乃闭城城守，欲诛萧、曹。
现代文：沛县县令又后悔了，恐怕刘季发生变故，就关闭城门，派人防守，打算杀掉萧何、曹参。
English: The county magistrate of Peixian County regretted it again, fearing that Liu Ji might have a change of fortune, so he closed the city gate and sent people to defend it, intending to kill Xiao He and Cao San.

古文：萧、曹恐，逾城保刘季。
现代文：萧何、曹参恐惧，翻过城墙依附刘季。
English: Xiao He and Cao San were afraid and climbed over the city wall to cling to Liu Ji.

古文：刘季乃书帛射城上，谓沛父老曰： 天下苦秦久矣。
现代文：刘季用帛写了一封信，射到城上，告诉沛县父老说： 天下苦于秦朝的暴政已经很久了。
English: Liu Ji wrote a letter with a crossbow and shot it over the city, telling the elders of Pei County: The world has been suffering from the tyranny of the Qin Dynasty for a long time.

古文：今父老虽为沛令守，诸侯并起，今屠沛。
现代文：现在父老为沛令守城，但各国诸侯都已起事，就要屠戮沛县。
English: Now my father has ordered me to defend the city, but the lords of all countries have risen up, and it is necessary to slaughter Pei County.

古文：沛今共诛令，择子弟可立者立之，以应诸侯，则家室完。
现代文：如果沛县父老共同起来杀死沛令，选择子弟中可以立为首领的做领导，以响应诸侯军，那就能保全身家性命。
English: If the parents of Peixian County get together to kill Pei Ling, and choose a leader among their children who can be appointed as the leader, in response to the vassal army, then they can save their own lives.

古文：不然，父子俱屠，无为也。 
现代文：不然的话，父子全遭杀害，死得毫无意义。 
English: Otherwise, both father and son would have been killed, and their deaths would have been meaningless.

古文：父老乃率子弟共杀沛令，开城门迎刘季，欲以为沛令。
现代文：父老们就率领子弟共同杀了沛令，打开城门，迎接刘季，想让他做沛县县令。
English: The fathers and grandfathers led their sons and brothers to jointly kill Pei Ling, open the city gate, welcome Liu Ji, and want him to become the county magistrate of Pei County.

古文：刘季曰： 天下方扰，诸侯并起，今置将不善，壹败涂地。
现代文：刘季说： 天下正在混乱当中，诸侯都已起事，如果推选的将领不胜任，就会一败涂地。
English: Liu Ji said: The world is in turmoil, the princes have all risen up, and if the elected generals are not competent, they will be completely defeated.

古文：吾非敢自爱，恐能薄，不能完父兄子弟。
现代文：我不是吝惜自己的生命，只怕才劣力薄，不能保全父兄子弟。
English: I don't begrudge my own life, I'm just afraid that I'm not strong enough to protect my parents and siblings.

古文：此大事，原更相推择可者。 
现代文：这是件大事，希望另外共同推选一位能够胜任的人。 
English: This is an important matter, and we hope to jointly select another competent person.

古文：萧、曹等皆文吏，自爱，恐事不就，後秦种族其家，尽让刘季。
现代文：萧何、曹参等都是文官，看重身家性命，怕事情不成，秦朝会诛灭他们的全族，所以都推让刘季。
English: Xiao He, Cao San, and others were all civil servants who valued their own lives and were afraid that if things didn't work out, the Qin Dynasty would exterminate their entire family, so they all gave way to Liu Ji.

古文：诸父老皆曰： 平生所闻刘季诸珍怪，当贵，且卜筮之，莫如刘季最吉。 
现代文：父老们都说： 我们平时听到刘季许多奇异的事情，看来刘季是该显贵的。而且又经过占卜，没有比刘季更吉利的。 
English: Fathers and grandfathers all said: We usually hear many strange things about Liu Ji, it seems that Liu Ji should be prominent. And after divination, there is nothing more auspicious than Liu Ji.

古文：於是刘季数让。众莫敢为，乃立季为沛公。
现代文：这时刘季再三谦让，大家都不敢担任，最后还是立刘季为沛公。
English: At this time, Liu Ji repeatedly conceded, everyone did not dare to serve, and finally Liu Ji was appointed as Pei Gong.

古文：祠黄帝，祭蚩尤於沛庭，而衅鼓旗，帜皆赤。
现代文：在沛县衙门的庭院里祭祀黄帝和蚩尤，又用牲血衅鼓旗。
English: In the courtyard of Qimen, Pei County, sacrifices were made to the Yellow Emperor and Qiu You, and drums and banners were raised with the blood of animals.

古文：由所杀蛇白帝子，杀者赤帝子，故上赤。
现代文：旗子一律红色，因为刘季所杀蛇是白帝的儿子，杀蛇的是赤帝的儿子，所以崇尚赤色。
English: The flags are all red, because the snake killed by Liu Ji is the son of the White Emperor, and the snake killer is the son of the Red Emperor, so he advocates red.

古文：於是少年豪吏如萧、曹、樊哙等皆为收沛子弟二三千人，攻胡陵、方与，还守丰。
现代文：于是少年子弟和有势的官吏，如萧何、曹参、樊哙等人，都为沛公征集兵员，集合了两三千人，攻打胡陵、方与，回军固守丰邑。
English: As a result, young boys and boys and powerful officials, such as Xiao He, Cao San, Zou and others, all recruited soldiers for Pei Gong, gathered two to three thousand people, attacked Huling and Fangyo, and returned to Fengyi.

古文：秦二世二年，陈涉之将周章军西至戏而还。
现代文：秦二世二年，陈胜将领周章的军队西至戏水而还。
English: In the second year of Qin II, Chen Sheng led Zhou Zhang's army west to Zhishui and returned.

古文：燕、赵、齐、魏皆自立为王。
现代文：燕、赵、齐、魏都自立为王。
English: Yan, Zhao, Qi and Wei all established themselves as kings.

古文：项氏起吴。
现代文：项梁、项羽起兵于吴。
English: Xiang Liang and Xiang Yu raised an army in Wu.

古文：秦泗川监平将兵围丰，二日，出与战，破之。
现代文：秦泗水郡郡监平率兵围丰，两天后，沛公出兵应战，打败了秦军。
English: The county supervisor of Qin Lishui County led the troops to surround Feng. Two days later, Pei Gong sent troops to fight and defeated the Qin army.

古文：命雍齿守丰，引兵之薛。
现代文：沛公命令雍齿守卫丰邑，自己引兵赴薛。
English: Pei Gong ordered Yong Zi to guard Fengyi, and he himself led the troops to Xue.

古文：泗州守壮败於薛，走至戚，沛公左司马得泗川守壮，杀之。
现代文：泗水郡郡守壮在薛战败，逃到戚。沛公左司马擒获泗水郡郡守壮，杀死了他。
English: The county magistrate of Surabaya County was defeated in Xue and fled to a relative. Peigong Zuo Maqi captured the county magistrate of Surabaya County and killed him.

古文：沛公还军亢父，至方与，未战。
现代文：沛公回军亢父，到了方与，没有交战。
English: When Pei Gong returned to his father's army and arrived at Fang, there was no war.

古文：陈王使魏人周市略地。
现代文：陈王陈胜派魏人周市攻城略地。
English: Chen Wang Chen Sheng sent Wei people to Zhou City to attack the city.

古文：周市使人谓雍齿曰： 丰，故梁徙也。
现代文：周市使人对雍齿说： 丰，原来梁王曾迁徙到这里。
English: Zhou Shi made people say to Yong Zi: Feng, originally King Liang migrated here.

古文：今魏地已定者数十城。齿今下魏，魏以齿为侯守丰。
现代文：如今魏地已经攻占的有数十城，你雍齿如果投降魏国，魏国封你雍齿为侯，仍然驻守丰邑。
English: Today, dozens of cities have been captured by the Wei Dynasty. If you surrender to the Wei Dynasty, the Wei Dynasty will make you a vassal, and you will still be stationed in Fengyi.

古文：不下，且屠丰。 
现代文：不投降的话，就要血洗丰邑。 
English: If we don't surrender, we'll wash Fengyi in blood.

古文：雍齿雅不欲属沛公，及魏招之，即反为魏守丰。
现代文：雍齿本来就很不愿意隶属沛公，等到魏国招降他，就背叛沛公，为魏国防守丰邑。
English: Originally, Yong Zi was very reluctant to be subordinate to Pei Gong. When Wei invited him to surrender, he betrayed Pei Gong and defended Fengyi for Wei.

古文：沛公引兵攻丰，不能取。
现代文：沛公引兵攻丰，没有攻下。
English: Pei Gong led an army to attack Feng, but failed to capture it.

古文：沛公病，还之沛。
现代文：沛公病了，回到沛县。
English: Pei Gong fell ill and returned to Pei County.

古文：沛公怨雍齿与丰子弟叛之，闻东阳甯君、秦嘉立景驹为假王，在留，乃往从之，欲请兵以攻丰。
现代文：沛公怨恨雍齿和丰邑子弟都背叛他，听说东阳宁君、秦嘉立景驹为假王，住在留县，就去依附他们，想借兵攻打丰邑。
English: Pei Gong resented the fact that the sons of Yong Zi and Feng Yu had betrayed him. When he heard that Dongyang Ningjun and Qin Jia Li Jingjian were false kings and were living in Luxian, he went to join them and wanted to use soldiers to attack Feng Yu.

古文：是时秦将章邯从陈，别将司马枿将兵北定楚地，屠相，至砀。
现代文：这时，秦将章邯在追击陈王的部队，别将司马夷率军北向，攻占楚地，在相屠城，到了砀县。
English: At this time, Qin general Zhang Ye was pursuing Chen Wang's troops, and ordered Sima Yi to lead the army northward to capture Chudi, in the city of Xiangtu, and to the county of Zou.

古文：东阳甯君、沛公引兵西，与战萧西，不利。
现代文：东阳宁君、沛公引兵西进，与司马夷在萧县西面交战，没有占着便宜。
English: Dongyang Ningjun and Peigong led their troops westward, and fought with Sima Yi in the west of Xiao County, without taking advantage.

古文：还收兵聚留，引兵攻砀，三日乃取砀。
现代文：退回来收集散兵，屯聚留县，引兵攻砀，三天就攻下了砀县。
English: He returned to collect the scattered soldiers, stayed in the county, and led the troops to attack Handan. He conquered Handan County in three days.

古文：因收砀兵，得五六千人。攻下邑，拔之。
现代文：收编砀县降兵，得到五六千人，进攻下邑，打了下来。
English: He collected and compiled the troops who had fallen in Min County, got five or six thousand men, attacked the lower towns, and beat them down.

古文：还军丰。
现代文：回军丰邑。
English: Returned to Fengyi.

古文：闻项梁在薛，从骑百馀往见之。
现代文：听说项梁在薛县，带了随从骑兵一百多人去见项梁。
English: Hearing that Xiang Liang was in Xue County, he took more than a hundred horsemen to see him.

古文：项梁益沛公卒五千人，五大夫将十人。
现代文：项梁给沛公增拨士兵五千人，五大夫一级的将领十人。
English: Cao Liang allocated an additional five thousand soldiers to Pei Gong, and ten generals at the level of the five great masters.

古文：沛公还，引兵攻丰。
现代文：沛公回来，引兵攻丰。
English: When Pei Gong returned, he led an army to attack Feng.

古文：从项梁月馀，项羽已拔襄城还。
现代文：沛公跟随项梁一个多月，项羽已经攻克襄城回来。
English: Pei Gong has been following Xiang Liang for more than a month. Xiang Yu has already conquered Xiangcheng and returned.

古文：项梁尽召别将居薛。闻陈王定死，因立楚後怀王孙心为楚王，治盱台。
现代文：项梁把各路将领都召集到薛县，听说陈王确实死了，就立楚国后人、楚怀王的孙子心为楚王，建都盱台。
English: Cao Liang summoned all generals to Xue County, and when he heard that King Chen had indeed died, he set up the king of Chu, the grandson of King Chu Huai, as the king of Chu, and built the capital Xingtai.

古文：项梁号武信君。
现代文：项梁号为武信君。
English: His posthumous name is Takenobu.

古文：居数月，北攻亢父，救东阿，破秦军。
现代文：停了几个月，向北攻打亢父，救援东阿，打败了秦军。
English: He stopped for a few months, and went north to attack Xianfu and rescue Dong'a, defeating the Qin Army.

古文：齐军归，楚独追北，使沛公、项羽别攻城阳，屠之。
现代文：齐军回齐，楚军单独追击败兵。派沛公、项羽另率军队攻打城阳，大肆杀戮城中军民。
English: The Qi army returned in full force, and the Chu army pursued the defeated soldiers alone. They sent Pei Gong and Xiang Yu to attack Chengyang at the head of another army, killing soldiers and civilians in the city.

古文：军濮阳之东，与秦军战，破之。
现代文：沛公、项羽驻军濮阳东面，与秦军接战，击破了秦军。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu garrisoned in the east of Fenyang, and fought with the Qin army, and defeated the Qin army.

古文：秦军复振，守濮阳，环水。
现代文：秦军又振作起来，固守濮阳，决水自环。
English: The Qin army rallied again, held fast to Fenyang, and broke through the water ring.

古文：楚军去而攻定陶，定陶未下。
现代文：楚军离去，转攻定陶，定陶没有攻下。
English: The Chu army left and turned to attack Dingtao, but failed to capture it.

古文：沛公与项羽西略地至雍丘之下，与秦军战，大破之，斩李由。
现代文：沛公和项羽向西攻城略地，到了雍丘城下，与秦军交战，大破秦军，杀了李由。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu attacked the city slightly to the west, came to the foot of Yongqiu Castle, fought with the Qin Army, defeated the Qin Army, and killed Li Yu.

古文：还攻外黄，外黄未下。
现代文：回军攻打外黄，外黄没有攻克。
English: The Hui attacked Waihuang, but failed to take it.

古文：项梁再破秦军，有骄色。
现代文：项梁又一次打败了秦军，有骄傲的神色。
English: Cao Liang once again defeated the Qin army, with a proud look.

古文：宋义谏，不听。
现代文：宋义劝诫他，他不听。
English: Song Yi admonished him, but he did not listen.

古文：秦益章邯兵，夜衔枚击项梁，大破之定陶，项梁死。
现代文：秦派兵增援章邯，夜间衔枚偷袭项梁，大破项梁于定陶，项梁战死。
English: Qin sent reinforcements to Zhang Ye, and at night, he attacked Xiang Liang. Xiang Liang was defeated at Dingtao, and Xiang Liang was killed.

古文：沛公与项羽方攻陈留，闻项梁死，引兵与吕将军俱东。
现代文：沛公和项羽正在攻打陈留，听说项梁死了，带兵和吕将军一起向东进发。
English: Pei Gong and Xiang Yu were attacking Chen Liu. When they heard that Xiang Liang had died, they marched east together with General Lu.

古文：吕臣军彭城东，项羽军彭城西，沛公军砀。
现代文：吕臣驻扎在彭城东面，项羽驻扎在彭城西面，沛公驻扎在砀。
English: Lv Chen was stationed in the east of Pengcheng, Xiang Yu was stationed in the west of Pengcheng, and Pei Gong was stationed in Zhuo.

古文：章邯已破项梁军，则以为楚地兵不足忧，乃渡河，北击赵，大破之。
现代文：章邯已经打垮了项梁的军队，以为楚地的敌人不用担心了，就渡过黄河，北进攻打赵地，大破赵军。
English: Zhang Ye had already defeated Xiang Liang's army. Thinking that the enemy in Chu had nothing to worry about, he crossed the Yellow River, attacked Zhao in the north, and defeated Zhao's army.

古文：当是之时，赵歇为王，秦将王离围之钜鹿城，此所谓河北之军也。
现代文：这个时候，赵歇为赵王，秦将王离围困赵歇于巨鹿城。这就是所谓的 河北之军 。
English: At this time, Zhao Xie was the king of Zhao, and the Qin besieged Zhao Xie in Julu City. This is the so-called army of Hebei.

古文：秦二世三年，楚怀王见项梁军破，恐，徙盱台都彭城，并吕臣、项羽军自将之。
现代文：秦二世三年，楚怀王看到项梁的军队被打垮了，心里恐惧，迁离盱台，建都彭城，合并吕臣、项羽的军队，亲自统率。
English: In the third year of Qin II, King Chu Huai saw that Xiang Liang's army had been defeated, and in fear, he moved away from Xingtai, built the capital Pengcheng, merged the armies of Lvshen and Xiang Yu, and personally led them.

古文：以沛公为砀郡长，封为武安侯，将砀郡兵。
现代文：以沛公任砀郡长，封为武安侯，统领砀郡的军队。
English: With Pei Gong as the governor of Handan County and Wu An Hou as the vassal, he led the army of Handan County.

古文：封项羽为长安侯，号为鲁公。
现代文：封项羽为长安侯，号为鲁公。
English: He was given the title of Chang'an Hou (長安侯) and the name Lu Gong (鲁公).

古文：吕臣为司徒，其父吕青为令尹。
现代文：吕臣任司徒，他的父亲吕青作令尹。
English: Lv Chen was appointed as the leading disciple, and his father Lv Qing as the second-in-command.

古文：赵数请救，怀王乃以宋义为上将军，项羽为次将，范增为末将，北救赵。
现代文：赵多次请求救援，楚怀王就以宋义为上将军，项羽为次将，范增为未将，北上救赵。
English: Zhao repeatedly requested rescue, and King Chu Huai sent Song Yi as the senior general, Xiang Yu as the second general, and Fan Zeng as the junior general to the north to rescue Zhao.

古文：令沛公西略地入关。
现代文：命令沛公西出略地，打入关中。
English: He ordered Pei Gongxi to make a detour and enter the middle of the pass.

古文：与诸将约，先入定关中者王之。
现代文：同将领们约定：先攻入关中的，就封在关中做王。
English: He made an agreement with the generals: the first to attack Guanzhong would be crowned king of Guanzhong.

古文：当是时，秦兵彊，常乘胜逐北，诸将莫利先入关。
现代文：这时候，秦军强盛，常常乘胜追击，众将领没有认为先入关的是有利的。
English: At this time, the Qin army was strong and often took advantage of the pursuit. The generals did not think that it was advantageous to enter the pass first.

古文：独项羽怨秦破项梁军，奋，原与沛公西入关。
现代文：唯独项羽痛恨秦打垮了项梁的军队，心中愤激，愿和沛公西进入关。
English: However, Xiang Yu hated Qin for defeating Xiang Liang's army, and was so angry that he was willing to go to Guanxi with Xiang Yu.

古文：怀王诸老将皆曰： 项羽为人僄悍猾贼。
现代文：怀王的老将都说： 项羽为人轻捷而凶猛，狡诈而残忍。
English: The veterans of the king's pregnancy all said: the feather is light and fierce, cunning and cruel.

古文：项羽尝攻襄城，襄城无遗类，皆阬之，诸所过无不残灭。
现代文：项羽曾经攻打襄城，襄城没有留下一个活人，全都活埋了。所经过的地方，无不残杀毁灭。
English: Cao Yu once attacked Xiangcheng. Not a single person was left alive in Xiangcheng. They were all buried alive. Everywhere they went, they killed and destroyed.

古文：且楚数进取，前陈王、项梁皆败。
现代文：况且楚军多次进兵攻取，以前陈王、项梁都失败了。
English: Moreover, the Chu army invaded and conquered many times. Previously, Chen Wang and Xiang Liang had failed.

古文：不如更遣长者扶义而西，告谕秦父兄。
现代文：不如另派宽厚长者，以正义为号召，向西进发，把道理向秦父老兄弟讲清楚。
English: It would be better to send another generous elder, with justice as a rallying cry, to head west and explain the truth to Qin's father and brothers.

古文：秦父兄苦其主久矣，今诚得长者往，毋侵暴，宜可下。
现代文：秦父老兄弟苦于他们君主的统治很久了，现在如果真能得到宽厚长者去关中，不加欺凌暴虐，应该能够拿下关中。
English: The Qin patriarchs and brothers have suffered from their monarch's rule for a long time. Now, if they can really get the generous elders to go to Guanzhong, without bullying and tyranny, they should be able to win Guanzhong.

古文：今项羽僄悍，今不可遣。
现代文：而今项羽剽悍，不可派遣。
English: However, now that Xiang Yu is so powerful, he can't be dispatched.

古文：独沛公素宽大长者，可遣。 
现代文：只有沛公向来是宽大长者，可以派遣。 
English: Only Pei Gong, who has always been a generous elder, can be dispatched.

古文：卒不许项羽，而遣沛公西略地，收陈王、项梁散卒。乃道砀至成阳，与杠里秦军夹壁，破二军。
现代文：怀王最终没有答应项羽，而派遣沛公西进攻取秦地。收集陈王、项梁的散兵，路经砀，到达成阳，与杠里的秦军对垒，打败了秦军的两支部队。
English: In the end, King Huai did not agree to Xiang Yu, but sent Pei Gong to the west to attack and take Qin territory. He collected the scattered soldiers of King Chen and Xiang Liang, passed through the Yunnan Province, and reached the Yang Province, where he confronted the Qin army in Li Li, and defeated the two Qin army units.

古文：楚军出兵击王离，大破之。
现代文：楚军出兵攻击王离，把他的军队打得大败。
English: The Chu army attacked Wang Li and defeated his army.

古文：沛公引兵西，遇彭越昌邑，因与俱攻秦军，战不利。
现代文：沛公引兵西进，在昌邑遇见彭越，就和他一起攻打秦军，这一仗没有打赢。
English: Pei Gong led his troops westward, met Peng Yue in Changyi, and together they attacked the Qin army. This battle was not won.

古文：还至栗，遇刚武侯，夺其军，可四千馀人，并之。
现代文：回到栗县，遇到刚武侯，夺了他的军队，大约四千多人，合并在一起。
English: Returning to Li County, he met Gangwu, captured his army, about four thousand people, and merged them together.

古文：与魏将皇欣、魏申徒武蒲之军并攻昌邑，昌邑未拔。
现代文：沛公与魏将皇欣、魏申徒武蒲的军队联合攻打昌邑，昌邑没有攻下。
English: Pei Gong and the armies of Emperor Xin of Wei and Wu Pu of Wei Shentu jointly attacked Changyi, but Changyi was not conquered.

古文：西过高阳。
现代文：西进路过高阳。
English: The road to the west passes through Goyang.

古文：郦食其监门，曰： 诸将过此者多，吾视沛公大人长者。 
现代文：郦食其为里监门，说： 将领们路过这里的很多，我看沛公是一个大人物，有仁厚长者的风度。 
English: He said: Generals passed by here a lot. I think Pei Gong is a great man, with the demeanor of a benevolent elder.

古文：乃求见说沛公。
现代文：就去求见游说沛公。
English: He went to see the lobbyist.

古文：沛公方踞床，使两女子洗足。
现代文：沛公正坐在床上，伸着两腿，让两个女子给他洗脚。
English: Pei Zhengyi sat on the bed, stretched out his legs, and let the two women wash his feet.

古文：郦生不拜，长揖，曰： 足下必欲诛无道秦，不宜踞见长者。 
现代文：郦生不下拜，深深地作了个揖，说： 足下一定要消灭残暴无道的秦朝，就不应该坐着伸着两脚接见长者。 
English: Xing Sheng couldn't help but bow and made a deep bow, saying: We must eliminate the cruel and ruthless Qin Dynasty, so we shouldn't sit with our legs stretched out to meet the elders.

古文：於是沛公起，摄衣谢之，延上坐。
现代文：于是沛公站了起来，整理好衣服，向他道歉，请入上座。
English: So Pei Gong stood up, arranged his clothes, apologized to him, and invited him to take the upper seat.

古文：食其说沛公袭陈留，得秦积粟。
现代文：郦食其劝沛公袭击陈留，获得陈留积聚的粮米。
English: Nibble the grain and rice accumulated by Chen Rui, and attack Chen Rui.

古文：乃以郦食其为广野君，郦商为将，将陈留兵，与偕攻开封，开封未拔。
现代文：沛公就以郦食其为广野君，郦商为将领，统率陈留的军队，和沛公一起攻打开封，开封没有攻下。
English: Pei Gong took Hirono Jun, a merchant, as his general, and led the remaining troops. Together with Pei Gong, they attacked Kaifeng, but failed to capture it.

古文：西与秦将杨熊战白马，又战曲遇东，大破之。
现代文：向西与秦将杨熊在白马打了一仗，又接战于曲遇的东面，大破杨熊军。
English: Xiangxi and Qin general Yang Xiong fought a battle in Baima, and then fought in the east of the encounter, defeating Yang Xiong's army.

古文：杨熊走之荥阳，二世使使者斩以徇。
现代文：杨熊逃往荣阳，秦二世派使者斩首示众。
English: Yang Xiong fled to Rongyang, and Qin II sent an envoy to behead him.

古文：南攻颍阳，屠之。
现代文：沛公向南攻打颍阳，屠了颍阳城。
English: Pei Gong attacked Fenyang to the south and slaughtered Fenyang City.

古文：因张良遂略韩地轘辕。
现代文：依靠张良攻占了韩国的轘辕。
English: He relied on Zhang Liang to capture the South Korean urn.

古文：当是时，赵别将司马卬方欲渡河入关，沛公乃北攻平阴，绝河津。
现代文：这时，赵将司马印正要渡过黄河进入函谷关，沛公就向北进攻打平阴，切断黄河渡口。
English: At this time, Zhao general Sima Ying was about to cross the Yellow River into the Hanyu Pass, and Pei Gong attacked Pingyin to the north, cutting off the Yellow River ferry.

古文：南，战雒阳东，军不利，还至阳城，收军中马骑，与南阳守齮战犨东，破之。
现代文：向南进发，在雒阳东面交战，战斗不利，回到阳城，集中军中的骑兵，与南阳郡郡守齮战于犨东，打败了秦军。
English: He marched to the south, fought in the east of Fenyang, the battle was unfavorable, returned to Yangcheng, concentrated the cavalry in the army, and fought with Nanyang County Shouyi in the east of Fenyang, and defeated the Qin Army.

古文：略南阳郡，南阳守齮走，保城守宛。
现代文：攻取南阳郡的城邑，南阳郡郡守逃走，退守宛县。
English: They captured the towns of Nanyang County, and the county governor of Nanyang County fled and retreated to Wan County.

古文：沛公引兵过而西。
现代文：沛公引兵绕过宛城西进。
English: Pei Gong led his army westward, bypassing Wancheng.

古文：张良谏曰： 沛公虽欲急入关，秦兵尚众，距险。
现代文：张良进谏说： 沛公你虽然急于打入函谷关，但秦兵还很多，又据守险要。
English: Zhang Liang Jinjun said, "Pei Gong, although you are eager to enter the Huan Valley Pass, there are still a lot of Qin soldiers, and it is necessary to guard against danger.

古文：今不下宛，宛从後击，彊秦在前，此危道也。 
现代文：如今不拿下宛城，宛城守军从背后攻击，强大的秦军在前面阻挡，这是一种危险的战术。 
English: Now, instead of taking Wancheng, the defenders of Wancheng attack from behind, and the powerful Qin Army blocks in front, which is a dangerous tactic.

古文：於是沛公乃夜引兵从他道还，更旗帜，黎明，围宛城三匝。
现代文：于是沛公就在夜间率兵从另外一条道路返回，更换了旗帜，天亮时，把宛城包围了三层。
English: Therefore, Pei Gong led his soldiers to return from another road at night, changed the flag, and surrounded Wancheng with three layers at dawn.

古文：南阳守欲自刭。其舍人陈恢曰： 死未晚也。 
现代文：南阳郡郡守想要自杀，他的舍人陈恢说： 还不到死的时候呢。 
English: The county magistrate of Nanyang County wanted to commit suicide, but his concubine Chen Huan said, "It's not time to die yet."

古文：乃逾城见沛公，曰： 臣闻足下约，先入咸阳者王之。
现代文：他就翻过城墙去见沛公，说： 我听说足下接受楚怀王的约定，先攻入咸阳的称王关中。
English: He climbed over the city wall to meet Pei Gong and said, "I heard that you accepted the agreement of King Chu Hui and entered the King's Pass in Xianyang first.

古文：今足下留守宛。
现代文：现在足下停留守在宛城。
English: Now the foot of the halting guard is in the destination city.

古文：宛，大郡之都也，连城数十，人民众，积蓄多，吏人自以为降必死，故皆坚守乘城。
现代文：宛城是大郡的治所，连城数十，人多粮足，官吏和民众认为投降肯定被处死，所以都登城固守。
English: Wancheng was the county seat of a large county, with dozens of townships and a large population. Officials and citizens believed that surrender would certainly be punished by death, so they all went to the city to hold on.

古文：今足下尽日止攻，士死伤者必多；引兵去宛，宛必随足下後：足下前则失咸阳之约，後又有彊宛之患。
现代文：如果足下整天的留在这里攻城，士卒死伤的一定很多，如果引兵离开宛城，宛城守军必然跟踪追击。足下向前则失去先入咸阳的约定，后退又有强大的宛城守军为患。
English: If the foot stays here all day to attack the city, there will be a lot of dead and wounded soldiers. If the soldiers leave the city, the city's defenders will inevitably follow the pursuit. If they go forward, they will lose the agreement to enter Xianyang first, and if they retreat, the strong city's defenders will suffer.

古文：为足下计，莫若约降，封其守，因使止守，引其甲卒与之西。
现代文：为足下设想，不如明约招降，封南阳郡守官爵，让他留守，足下带领宛城士卒一道西进。
English: As an idea for the future, it would be better to invite him to abdicate by mutual agreement, make him the governor of Nanyang County, let him stay, and then lead Wancheng's soldiers to the west.

古文：诸城未下者，闻声争开门而待，足下通行无所累。 沛公曰： 善。 
现代文：许多没有攻下的城邑，听到这个消息，争先打开城门，等待足下，足下可以通行无阻。 沛公说： 好。 
English: Upon hearing this news, many cities and towns that had not yet been conquered rushed to open their gates and wait for the footfall, so that the footfall could pass unhindered.

古文：乃以宛守为殷侯，封陈恢千户。
现代文：就以南阳郡守为殷侯，封给陈恢一千户。
English: Nanyang County was ruled by Yin Hou, and a thousand households were given to Chen Wei.

古文：引兵西，无不下者。
现代文：引兵西进，没有不降服的。
English: There is no way to lead the troops westward without surrendering.

古文：至丹水，高武侯鰓、襄侯王陵降西陵。
现代文：到达丹水，高武侯鳃、襄侯王陵在西陵投降。
English: After reaching Danshui, the tombs of Gaowu Houyi and Xianghou Wang surrendered at Xiling.

古文：还攻胡阳，遇番君别将梅鋗，与皆，降析、郦。
现代文：回军攻打胡阳，遇到番君的别将梅鋗，与他一起，迫使析县、郦县投降。
English: Huiyang was attacked by the Hui army, and when they encountered Banjun, they did not want to fight against Mei Yao. Together with him, they forced Jing County and Jixian County to surrender.

古文：遣魏人甯昌使秦，使者未来。
现代文：派遣魏人宁昌出使秦关中，使者没有回来。
English: Qin Guanzhong sent a Wei envoy to Ningchang, but the envoy did not return.

古文：是时章邯已以军降项羽於赵矣。
现代文：这时章邯已经带领全军在赵地投降项羽了。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye had already led the whole army to surrender to Xiang Yu in Zhao.

古文：初，项羽与宋义北救赵，及项羽杀宋义，代为上将军，诸将黥布皆属，破秦将王离军，降章邯，诸侯皆附。
现代文：起初，项羽和宋义北进援救赵，等到项羽杀死宋义，代替他为上将军，许多将领比如黥布都从属项羽。打垮了秦将王离的军队，使章邯投降，诸侯都归附了他。
English: At first, Xiang Yu and Song Yi marched north to rescue Zhao, until Xiang Yu killed Song Yi and replaced him as the supreme general. Many generals, such as Zibo, were subordinate to Xiang Yu. He defeated the army of Qin General Wang Rui, forced Zhang Ye to surrender, and the princes all joined him.

古文：及赵高已杀二世，使人来，欲约分王关中。沛公以为诈，乃用张良计，使郦生、陆贾往说秦将，啗以利，因袭攻武关，破之。
现代文：等到赵高已经杀了秦二世，派人来见沛公，想要定约瓜分关中称王，沛公以为是诈骗，就采用张良的计策，派郦生、陆贾去游说秦军将领，用私利相诱，趁机袭击武关，攻破了关口。
English: When Zhao Gao had already killed Qin II, he sent someone to see Pei Gong. He wanted to make an agreement to carve up Guanzhong and make Guanzhong the king. Pei Gong thought it was a fraud, so he used Zhang Liang's strategy, sent Xinsheng and Lu Jia to lobby the generals of the Qin Army, used self-interest to entice each other, and took the opportunity to attack Wu Guanzhong and break through the gate.

古文：又与秦军战於蓝田南，益张疑兵旗帜，诸所过毋得掠卤，秦人憙，秦军解，因大破之。
现代文：又和秦军在蓝田南面交战，增设疑兵，多树旗帜，所经过的地方不许掳掠。秦地的群众很高兴，秦军瓦解了，因此大破秦军。
English: They also clashed with the Qin army in the south of Lantian, adding suspicious soldiers, planting many flags, and forbidding the pillage of the places they passed. The people of Qin were very happy, the Qin army disintegrated, and thus the Qin army was defeated.

古文：又战其北，大破之。
现代文：又在蓝田北面接战，再次打败秦军。
English: They also fought in the north of Lantian and defeated the Qin army once again.

古文：乘胜，遂破之。
现代文：乘胜追击，彻底打垮了秦军。
English: He took advantage of the victory to pursue and completely defeated the Qin Army.

古文：汉元年十月，沛公兵遂先诸侯至霸上。
现代文：汉元年十月，沛公的军队先于各路诸侯到达霸上。
English: In October of the 1st year of the Han Dynasty, Pei Gong's army reached the hegemony ahead of all the princes.

古文：秦王子婴素车白马，系颈以组，封皇帝玺符节，降轵道旁。
现代文：秦王子婴素车白马，用丝带系着脖子，封了皇帝的印玺和符节，在轵道旁投降。
English: Prince Qin, a white horse, tied his neck with a ribbon, sealed the emperor's seal and seal, and surrendered on the side of the road.

古文：诸将或言诛秦王。
现代文：将领们有的主张杀死秦王。
English: Some generals advocated killing King Qin.

古文：沛公曰： 始怀王遣我，固以能宽容；且人已服降，又杀之，不祥。 
现代文：沛公说： 当初楚怀王派遣我，本来是因为我能宽大容人。况且人家已经降服，又杀死人家，不吉利。 
English: Pei Gong said, "In the beginning, King Chu Huai sent me because I can be generous with people. Moreover, people have already surrendered and killed others, which is unlucky.

古文：乃以秦王属吏，遂西入咸阳。
现代文：于是就把秦王交给了官吏，向西进入咸阳。
English: So he handed King Qin over to the officials and rode west to Xianyang.

古文：欲止宫休舍，樊哙、张良谏，乃封秦重宝财物府库，还军霸上。
现代文：沛公想要留在宫殿中休息，樊哙、张良劝说后，才封闭了秦宫的贵重珍宝、财物和库房，回军霸上。
English: Pei Gong wanted to stay in the palace to rest, but after persuasion from Zhai and Zhang Liang, he closed the precious treasures, property and storeroom of the Qin Palace and returned to the military hegemony.

古文：召诸县父老豪桀曰： 父老苦秦苛法久矣，诽谤者族，偶语者弃巿。
现代文：召集各县的父老、豪杰说： 父老们苦于秦朝的严刑峻法已经很久了，诽谤朝政的要灭族，相聚议论的要在街市上处斩。
English: He called together the elders and heroes of each county and said: It has been a long time since the elders suffered from the harsh laws of the Qin Dynasty. Those who slander the government should be exterminated, and those who gather to discuss should be beheaded in the market.

古文：吾与诸侯约，先入关者王之，吾当王关中。
现代文：我和诸侯们约定，先入关的在关中称王，我应当称王关中。
English: I agreed with the lords that whoever entered the gate first would be crowned king, and I should be crowned king of the gate.

古文：与父老约，法三章耳：杀人者死，伤人及盗抵罪。
现代文：同父老们约定，法律只有三章：杀人的处死，伤人和抢劫的处以与所犯罪相当的刑罚。
English: The patriarchs agreed that the law would have only three chapters: the death penalty for murder, the punishment of wounding and robbery with a penalty equal to the crime.

古文：馀悉除去秦法。
现代文：其余的秦朝法律全部废除。
English: All remaining Qin laws were abolished.

古文：诸吏人皆案堵如故。
现代文：官吏和百姓都要安居如故。
English: Government officials and ordinary people should live in peace as before.

古文：凡吾所以来，为父老除害，非有所侵暴，无恐！
现代文：我所以到这里来，是为父老们除害，不会有欺凌暴虐的行为，不要害怕。
English: That's why I'm here, to take care of my parents. There will be no bullying or violence. Don't be afraid.

古文：且吾所以还军霸上，待诸侯至而定约束耳。 
现代文：我所以回军霸上，是等待诸侯们到来制定共同的规约。 
English: The reason why I returned to the military hegemony was to wait for the arrival of the princes to formulate a common statute.

古文：乃使人与秦吏行县乡邑，告谕之。
现代文：沛公派人与秦朝官吏巡行县城乡间，告谕百姓。
English: Pei Gong sent people and Qin Dynasty officials to patrol between the county's cities and villages to tell the people.

古文：秦人大喜，争持牛羊酒食献飨军士。
现代文：秦地的百姓大为高兴，争先恐后地拿出牛羊酒食款待士兵。
English: The people of Qin were overjoyed and scrambled to offer food and wine to the soldiers.

古文：沛公又让不受，曰： 仓粟多，非乏，不欲费人。 
现代文：沛公又推让不肯接受，说： 仓库的谷子很多，不缺乏，不愿破费百姓。 
English: Pei Gong also refused to accept the offer, saying: There is a lot of grain in the warehouse, there is no shortage, I don't want to waste the people's money.

古文：人又益喜，唯恐沛公不为秦王。
现代文：百姓更加高兴，唯恐沛公不做秦王。
English: The people are even happier, except for the fear that Pei Gong will not become the Qin King.

古文：或说沛公曰： 秦富十倍天下，地形彊。
现代文：有人劝沛公说： 秦地比天下富足十倍，地势好。
English: Some people advised Pei Gong to say: Qin is ten times richer than the rest of the world, and the land is good.

古文：今闻章邯降项羽，项羽乃号为雍王，王关中。
现代文：如今听说章邯投降了项羽，项羽就给了雍王的封号，称王于关中。
English: Now I heard that Zhang Ye surrendered to Xiang Yu, and Xiang Yu gave him the title of Yong Wang, calling him Wang Yu Guanzhong.

古文：今则来，沛公恐不得有此。
现代文：现在他即将来到关中就国，你沛公恐怕不能占有这个地方了。
English: Now that he is about to take up residence in Guanzhong, I'm afraid that you, Pei Gong, can no longer occupy this place.

古文：可急使兵守函谷关，无内诸侯军，稍徵关中兵以自益，距之。 
现代文：应赶快派兵把守函谷关，不让诸侯军进来，逐渐征集关中兵，以加强实力，抵抗诸侯兵。 
English: It is necessary to quickly send soldiers to guard the Hakodate pass, not to let the vassal army come in, and gradually recruit soldiers from the pass to strengthen their strength and resist the vassal soldiers.

古文：沛公然其计，从之。
现代文：沛公赞成他的计策，照着做了。
English: Pei Gong agreed with his plan and did as he was told.

古文：十一月中，项羽果率诸侯兵西，欲入关，关门闭。
现代文：十一月间，项羽果然率领诸侯军西进，想要入关，而关门闭着。
English: In November, Xiang Yu led the vassal army westward and tried to enter the pass, but the gate was closed.

古文：闻沛公已定关中，大怒，使黥布等攻破函谷关。
现代文：听说沛公已经平定关中，大怒，派黥布等攻破了函谷关。
English: It is said that Pei Gong has already defeated Guanzhong, and he was so angry that he sent his followers to break through Hantou Guanzhong.

古文：十二月中，遂至戏。
现代文：十二月间，就到了戏水。
English: In December, I went to Surabaya.

古文：沛公左司马曹无伤闻项王怒，欲攻沛公，使人言项羽曰： 沛公欲王关中，令子婴为相，珍宝尽有之。 
现代文：沛公左司马曹无伤听说项王发怒，要攻打沛公，派人告诉项羽说： 沛公想要称王关中，令子婴为相，珍宝被他全部占有了。 
English: After hearing that King Xiang was angry and wanted to attack King Pei, King Pei's left-hand man Ma Cao sent someone to tell King Xiang that: "King Pei wants to be called King Guanzhong and have a baby as his consort. He has taken possession of all the precious treasures."

古文：欲以求封。
现代文：打算以此求得封赏。
English: He's trying to get a reward for this.

古文：亚父劝项羽击沛公。
现代文：亚父劝项羽进攻沛公。
English: Father Ah persuaded Xiang Yu to attack Pei Gong.

古文：方飨士，旦日合战。
现代文：当时项羽饱餐士卒，准备明日会战。
English: At that time, Xiang Yu was full of food and ready to fight tomorrow.

古文：是时项羽兵四十万，号百万。
现代文：这时项羽兵四十万，号称百万。
English: At this time, there were four hundred thousand feathered soldiers, known as a million.

古文：沛公兵十万，号二十万，力不敌。
现代文：沛公兵十万，号称二十万，兵力敌不过项羽。
English: The number of public soldiers was 100,000, but it was claimed to be 200,000. The enemy's forces were no more than a feather.

古文：会项伯欲活张良，夜往见良，因以文谕项羽，项羽乃止。
现代文：恰巧项伯要救张良，夜间去见他。用道理劝说项羽，项羽取消了进攻沛公的计划。
English: It just so happened that Xiang Bo wanted to save Zhang Liang and went to see him at night. He used reason to persuade Xiang Yu, and Xiang Yu cancelled his plan to attack Pei Gong.

古文：沛公从百馀骑，驱之鸿门，见谢项羽。
现代文：沛公带来了一百多骑兵，驰至鸿门，来见项羽，表示歉意。
English: Pei Gong brought more than a hundred cavalrymen and rode to Hongmen to meet Xiang Yu and apologize.

古文：项羽曰： 此沛公左司马曹无伤言之。
现代文：项羽说： 这是你沛公左司马曹无伤向我说的。
English: Xiang Yu said, "This is what your brother-in-law Ma Cao told me.

古文：不然，籍何以生此！ 
现代文：不然，我项羽何至于做这样的事。 
English: Otherwise, why would I do such a thing.

古文：沛公以樊哙、张良故，得解归。
现代文：沛公因为樊哙、张良的缘故，得以脱身返回。
English: Pei Gong was able to escape and return because of Yao and Zhang Liang.

古文：归，立诛曹无伤。
现代文：回来后，立刻杀了曹无伤。
English: After returning, he immediately killed Cao Wuzhong.

古文：项羽遂西，屠烧咸阳秦宫室，所过无不残破。
现代文：项羽向西进军，屠杀无辜，焚毁咸阳秦宫室，所过之处，无不遭到摧残破坏。
English: Xiang Yu marched to the west, slaughtered innocent people, burned down the Qin palace in Xianyang, and devastated everywhere he went.

古文：秦人大失望，然恐，不敢不服耳。
现代文：秦地的百姓大失所望，然而心里恐惧，不敢不服从。
English: The people of Qin were greatly disappointed, but they were afraid and did not dare to disobey.

古文：项羽使人还报怀王。
现代文：项羽派人回去报告楚怀王。
English: Cao Yu sent someone back to report to King Chu Huai.

古文：怀王曰： 如约。 
现代文：楚怀王说： 按照原来的约定办。 
English: King Chu Huai said, "It will be done according to the agreement."

古文：项羽怨怀王不肯令与沛公俱西入关，而北救赵，後天下约。乃曰： 怀王者，吾家项梁所立耳，非有功伐，何以得主约！
现代文：项羽怨恨楚怀王不肯让他与沛公一起西进入关，而派他北上救赵，在天下诸侯争夺称王关中的约定中落在后面，他就说： 怀王这个人，我家项梁所立，没有什么功劳，凭什么主持约定。
English: Xiang Yu resented that King Huai of Chu refused to let him and Pei Gong enter the West Gate together, but sent him to the north to save Zhao. He was left behind in the agreement between the princes of the world vying for the title of King of the West Gate. He said: This man, King Huai, who was established by Xiang Liang of my family, has no merit, so how can he preside over the agreement?

古文：本定天下，诸将及籍也。 
现代文：本来安定天下的，是诸位将领和我项籍。 
English: Originally, it was you generals and I who brought stability to the world.

古文：乃详尊怀王为义帝，实不用其命。
现代文：就假意推尊楚怀王为义帝，实际上不听从他的命令。
English: They pretended to honor King Chu Huai as a righteous emperor, but in fact they did not obey his orders.

古文：正月，项羽自立为西楚霸王，王梁、楚地九郡，都彭城。
现代文：正月，项羽自立为西楚霸王，在梁、楚地区的九个郡称王，建都彭城。
English: In the first month of the year, Xiang Yu became the self-proclaimed king of West Chu, and became the king of nine counties in Liang and Chu regions, and built the capital Pengcheng.

古文：负约，更立沛公为汉王，王巴、蜀、汉中，都南郑。
现代文：背弃原来的约定，改立沛公为汉王，在巴、蜀、汉中称王，建都南郑。
English: He reneged on the original agreement and changed it to establish Pei Gong as the king of Han, proclaim him king in Ba, Shu, and Han, and build the capital of Nan Zheng.

古文：三分关中，立秦三将：章邯为雍王，都废丘；司马欣为塞王，都栎阳；董翳为翟王，都高奴。
现代文：把关中瓜分为三，封立秦朝的三个将领：章邯为雍王，建都废丘：司马欣为塞王，建都栎阳；董翳为翟王，建都高奴。
English: Guan Zhonggua is divided into three, the three generals who established the Qin Dynasty: Zhang Qian as the king of Yong, built the capital Wast Hill: Sima Xin as the king of Sai, built the capital Shenyang; Dong Qian as the king of Zhai, built the capital Gaon.

古文：楚将瑕丘申阳为河南王，都洛阳。
现代文：封楚将瑕丘申阳为河南王，建都洛阳。
English: He made Shenyang the king of Henan Province and built Luoyang as the capital.

古文：赵将司马卬为殷王，都朝歌。
现代文：封赵将司马印为殷王，建都朝歌。
English: Fong Zhao made Sima Ying the king of Yin and built the capital of morning song.

古文：赵王歇徙王代。
现代文：赵王歇迁徙代地称王。
English: Zhao Wangxie migrated and became king.

古文：赵相张耳为常山王，都襄国。
现代文：封赵将张耳为常山王，建都襄国。
English: Zhao designated Zhang Er as the king of Changshan and built the capital of Xiangzhou.

古文：当阳君黥布为九江王，都六。
现代文：封当阳君黥布为九江王，建都六县。
English: Yangjun Zengbu was crowned King of Jiujiang and the capital was built in six counties.

古文：怀王柱国共敖为临江王，都江陵。
现代文：封楚怀王柱国共敖为临江王，建都江陵。
English: He made Chuhuai Wangzhu the king of Linjiang and built the capital at Gangneung.

古文：番君吴芮为衡山王，都邾。
现代文：封番郡吴芮为衡山王，建都邾县。
English: Wuzhen, Fangban County, is the king of Hengshan, and the capital of Jianye County.

古文：燕将臧荼为燕王，都蓟。
现代文：封燕将臧荼为燕王，建都蓟县。
English: Fong Yan made Zou the king of Yan and built the capital of Zou County.

古文：故燕王韩广徙王辽东。
现代文：原来的燕王韩广迁徙辽东称王。
English: The original king of swallows, Han Guang, migrated to Liaodong and became king.

古文：广不听，臧荼攻杀之无终。
现代文：韩广不服从，臧荼攻杀韩广于无终。
English: Han Guang disobeyed, and there was no end to the attempts to kill Han Guang.

古文：封成安君陈馀河间三县，居南皮。
现代文：封成安君陈余河间三县，住在南皮。
English: Fengcheng Anjun Chen Yuhe three counties, living in Nanpi.

古文：封梅鋗十万户。
现代文：封给梅鋗十万户。
English: It was given to 100,000 households in Meizhou.

古文：四月，兵罢戏下，诸侯各就国。
现代文：四月，在项羽旌麾之下罢兵散归，诸侯各自回到封国。
English: In April, under the banner of Xiang Yu, the soldiers were dispersed, and the lords returned to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：汉王之国，项王使卒三万人从，楚与诸侯之慕从者数万人，从杜南入蚀中。
现代文：汉王回国，项王派兵三万跟随，楚国和其他诸侯国的士卒仰慕汉王而追从的有几万人。
English: When King Han returned to China, King Xiang sent thirty thousand soldiers to follow him. Tens of thousands of soldiers from the State of Chu and other principalities followed King Han because they admired him.

古文：去辄烧绝栈道，以备诸侯盗兵袭之，亦示项羽无东意。
现代文：他们从杜县南面进入蚀中，离开后就烧断栈道，以防备诸侯军和匪徒的袭击，也向项羽表示没有东进的意图。
English: They entered the middle of the eclipse from the south of Du County, and after leaving, they burned the footpath to prevent the attack of the vassal army and bandits. They also expressed to Xiang Yu that they had no intention of going east.

古文：至南郑，诸将及士卒多道亡归，士卒皆歌思东归。
现代文：到达南郑，那些将领和士卒很多在中途逃亡回去，士卒都唱着歌，想要回到东方。
English: When they reached Nan Zheng, many of those generals and soldiers fled back halfway. The soldiers were singing songs and wanted to return to the East.

古文：韩信说汉王曰： 项羽王诸将之有功者，而王独居南郑，是迁也。
现代文：韩信劝汉王说： 项羽封诸将有功的为王，而大王独自被封在南郑，这实际上是贬徒。
English: Han Xin advised the king of Han: "Xiang Yu has made all the meritorious men into kings, but the great king alone has been made into Nan Zheng, which is actually derogatory.

古文：军吏士卒皆山东之人也，日夜跂而望归，及其锋而用之，可以有大功。
现代文：军中官吏和士卒都是崤山以东的人，日夜跂踵盼望回家乡。乘他们气势旺盛时加以利用，可以建立大的功业。
English: The officers and soldiers in the army are all from the east of Lushan, and they hope to return to their hometowns day and night. Taking advantage of their momentum, they can build a great cause.

古文：天下已定，人皆自宁，不可复用。
现代文：等到天下已经平定，人人都自然安下心来，就不能再利用了。
English: By the time the world has been pacified and everyone has naturally calmed down, it can no longer be used.

古文：不如决策东乡，争权天下。 
现代文：不如决策向东进军，争夺天下大权。 
English: It would be better to make a decision to march eastward and compete for world power.

古文：项羽出关，使人徙义帝。
现代文：项羽出了函谷关，派人迁徙义帝。
English: Xiang Yu left Hantian Pass and sent people to migrate to Yidi.

古文：曰： 古之帝者地方千里，必居上游。 
现代文：说： 古代做帝王的统辖千里见方的土地，必须居住上游。 
English: He said, "In ancient times, emperors had to live in the upper reaches of a thousand-kilometer-square land.

古文：乃使使徙义帝长沙郴县，趣义帝行，群臣稍倍叛之，乃阴令衡山王、临江王击之，杀义帝江南。
现代文：就派使者把义帝迁徙到长沙郴县，催促义帝快走。群臣渐渐地背叛了义帝，项羽就暗地里让衡山王、临江王袭击他，把义帝杀死在江南。
English: He sent an envoy to relocate Yidi to Min County, Changsha, and urged Yidi to leave quickly. The courtiers gradually betrayed Yidi, and Xiang Yu secretly let Hengshan King and Linjiang King attack him and kill Yidi in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：项羽怨田荣，立齐将田都为齐王。田荣怒，因自立为齐王，杀田都而反楚；予彭越将军印，令反梁地。
现代文：项羽怨恨田荣，封齐将田都为齐王，田荣恼怒，自立为齐王，杀死田都，反叛项楚，把将军印给予彭越，让他在梁地起兵反楚。
English: Xiang Yu resented Tian Rong, he sealed Tian Du as the king of Qi, Tian Rong was angry, he became the king of Qi, killed Tian Du, rebelled against Xiang Chu, gave the seal of generalship to Peng Yue, and let him raise an army against Chu in Liangdi.

古文：楚令萧公角击彭越，彭越大破之。
现代文：楚派萧公角攻打彭越，彭越大败萧公角。
English: Chu sent Xiao Gongjiao to attack Peng Yue, and Peng Yue defeated Xiao Gongjiao.

古文：陈馀怨项羽之弗王己也，令夏说说田荣，请兵击张耳。
现代文：陈馀怨恨项羽不封自己为王，派夏说游说田荣，借兵攻打张耳。
English: Chen Yu held a grudge against Xiang Yu for not making himself king, and sent Xia to lobby Tian Rong and borrowed soldiers to attack Zhang Er.

古文：齐予陈馀兵，击破常山王张耳，张耳亡归汉。
现代文：齐借兵给陈馀，击败了常山王张耳，张耳逃跑归附了汉王。
English: Qi lent soldiers to Chen Yu, defeated Zhang Er, the King of Changshan, and Zhang Er fled to the Han King.

古文：迎赵王歇於代，复立为赵王。赵王因立陈馀为代王。
现代文：陈馀从代接回赵王歇，又立为赵王，赵王就封陈馀为代王。
English: Chen Yu succeeded Zhao Wang Xie and was appointed Zhao King. Zhao King then made Chen Yu the acting king.

古文：项羽大怒，北击齐。
现代文：项羽大怒，出兵北向击齐。
English: Xiang Yu was furious and dispatched troops to the north.

古文：八月，汉王用韩信之计，从故道还，袭雍王章邯。
现代文：八月，汉王用韩信的计策，从故道回军，袭击雍王章邯。
English: In August, Han Wang used the strategy of Han Xin to attack Yong Wang Zhangye by returning to the army from the old way.

古文：邯迎击汉陈仓，雍兵败，还走；止战好畤，又复败，走废丘。
现代文：章邯在陈仓迎击汉军，雍王兵败退走，在好畤停下来接战，又失败了，逃到废丘。
English: Zhang Ye met the Chinese army at Chen Cang, the Yong Wang soldiers retreated in defeat, stopped to fight at Ho Ye, failed again, and fled to the waste hill.

古文：汉王遂定雍地。
现代文：汉王随即平定了雍地。
English: The Han king then leveled the highlands.

古文：东至咸阳，引兵围雍王废丘，而遣诸将略定陇西、北地、上郡。
现代文：向东到达咸阳，率军围困雍王于废丘，而派遣将领攻占了陇西、北地、上郡。
English: He reached Xianyang in the east and led the army to besiege Yongwang in Wasteland Hill, and dispatched generals to occupy Shaanxi, Hebei and Shang County.

古文：令将军薛欧、王吸出武关，因王陵兵南阳，以迎太公、吕后於沛。
现代文：派将军薛欧、王吸出武关，借助王陵驻扎在南阳的兵力，迎接太公、吕后于沛县。
English: He sent generals Xue Ou and Wang to suck out of Wuguan, and with the help of the troops stationed in the royal tomb in Nanyang, to meet the Taigong and Luguo in Pei County.

古文：楚闻之，发兵距之阳夏，不得前。
现代文：楚听到这一消息，出兵在阳夏阻挡，汉军不能前进。
English: When Chu heard this news, he sent troops to block Yangxia, and the Han army could not advance.

古文：令故吴令郑昌为韩王，距汉兵。
现代文：楚让原吴县县令郑昌为韩王，抵抗汉军。
English: Chu made Zheng Chang, the former county magistrate of Wuxian County, the king of Han, and he resisted the Han army.

古文：二年，汉王东略地，塞王欣、翟王翳、河南王申阳皆降。
现代文：二年，汉王东出略取城邑，塞王司马欣、翟王董翳、河南王申阳都投降了。
English: In the second year of the Han Dynasty, the king of the East went out to capture cities and towns. The king of the North, Sima Xin, the king of the South, Dong Xi, and the king of the South, Shenyang, all surrendered.

古文：韩王昌不听，使韩信击破之。
现代文：韩王郑昌不愿归附，汉王派韩信打败了他。
English: Han Wang Zheng Chang did not want to join, Han Wang sent Han Xin to defeat him.

古文：於是置陇西、北地、上郡、渭南、河上、中地郡；关外置河南郡。
现代文：于是设置了陇西、北地、上郡、渭南、河上、中地各郡，关外设置了河南郡。
English: As a result, the counties of Shaanxi, Hubei, Shangxian, Hunan, Hegang and Zhongdi were set up, and Henan County was set up outside Guanzhou.

古文：更立韩太尉信为韩王。
现代文：改立韩太尉信为韩王。
English: Han Taifengxin was reinstated as King Han.

古文：诸将以万人若以一郡降者，封万户。缮治河上塞。
现代文：将领中以一万人或一郡投降的，封给一万户，整修河上郡内的长城。
English: The general who surrenders with 10,000 men or one county will be given 10,000 households to renovate the Great Wall in He Shang County.

古文：诸故秦苑囿园池，皆令人得田之，正月，虏雍王弟章平。
现代文：各处原来的秦朝苑囿园池，都让百姓开垦耕种。正月，俘虏了雍王的弟弟章平。
English: Everywhere in the original Qin Dynasty garden, people were allowed to cultivate. In the first month, Yong Wang's younger brother, Zhang Ping, was captured.

古文：大赦罪人。
现代文：大赦有罪的人。
English: Amnesty for the guilty.

古文：汉王之出关至陕，抚关外父老，还，张耳来见，汉王厚遇之。
现代文：汉王出函谷关到达陕县，抚慰关外父老，回来后，张耳来见，汉王给了他优厚的待遇。
English: Han Wang went from Hanzhongguan to Shaanxi to comfort Guan's elderly parents. After returning, Zhang Er came to see him, and Han Wang gave him generous treatment.

古文：二月，令除秦社稷，更立汉社稷。
现代文：二月，下令废掉秦社稷，改立汉社稷。
English: In February, he ordered the abolition of the Qin Society and the establishment of the Han Society.

古文：三月，汉王从临晋渡，魏王豹将兵从。下河内，虏殷王，置河内郡。
现代文：三月，汉王从临晋关渡过黄河，魏王豹率兵随从，攻下河内，俘虏了殷王，设置河内郡。
English: In March, the Han King crossed the Yellow River from Linjin Pass, and the Wei King, accompanied by the Leopard, captured Hanoi, captured the Yin King, and set up Hanoi County.

古文：南渡平阴津，至雒阳。
现代文：向南渡过平阴津，到达雒阳。
English: Crossed Pingyinjin to the south and arrived at Fenyang.

古文：新城三老董公遮说汉王以义帝死故。
现代文：新城三老董公拦住汉王，向他说了义帝被杀的情况。
English: The three elders of Xincheng, Dong Gong, stopped Han Wang and told him about the circumstances of Yidi's murder.

古文：汉王闻之，袒而大哭。
现代文：汉王听了，袒露左臂大哭。
English: When Han Wang heard this, he wept profusely.

古文：遂为义帝发丧，临三日。
现代文：于是为义帝发丧，哭吊三天。
English: So they mourned for the emperor and wept for three days.

古文：发使者告诸侯曰： 天下共立义帝，北面事之。
现代文：派遣使者通告诸侯说： 天下共同拥立义帝，对他北面称臣。
English: He dispatched an envoy to inform the lords and said: The whole world will jointly support the Yidai Emperor, and praise him to the north.

古文：今项羽放杀义帝於江南，大逆无道。
现代文：现在项羽把义帝放逐、击杀于江南，大逆无道。
English: Now Xiang Yu has exiled and killed Yidi in the south of the Yangtze River, and there is no way back.

古文：寡人亲为发丧，诸侯皆缟素。
现代文：我亲自为他发丧，诸侯都要穿白色丧服。
English: I myself will mourn for him, and all the lords will wear white mourning clothes.

古文：悉发关内兵，收三河士，南浮江汉以下，原从诸侯王击楚之杀义帝者。 
现代文：调发全部关内的兵力，征集河南、河东、河内三郡的士卒，向南沿长江、汉水而下，愿意跟随各诸侯王讨伐楚国杀害义帝的人。 
English: He dispatched all the troops in Guanzhong, recruited soldiers from Henan, Hedong and Hanoi counties, and marched south along the Yangtze River and the Han River, willing to follow the princes and kings to fight against the people of Chu who killed the Righteous Emperor.

古文：是时项王北击齐，田荣与战城阳。
现代文：当时项王向北进攻打齐国，田荣和他战于城阳。
English: At that time, Xiang Wang attacked Qi Province to the north, and Tian Rong fought with him in Chengyang.

古文：田荣败，走平原，平原民杀之。齐皆降楚。
现代文：田荣兵败，逃到平原，平原的百姓杀了他，齐地都投降了楚国。
English: Tian Rong was defeated and fled to the plains. The people of the plains killed him, and all of Chu surrendered.

古文：楚因焚烧其城郭，系虏其子女。齐人叛之。
现代文：楚兵焚烧齐人的城郭，掳掠他们的子女，齐人又反叛楚国。
English: The soldiers of Chu burned the citadel of the Qi people, abducted their children, and the Qi people rebelled against the state of Chu.

古文：田荣弟横立荣子广为齐王，齐王反楚城阳。
现代文：田荣的弟弟田横立田荣的儿子田广为齐王，齐王在城阳反楚。
English: Tian Rong's younger brother, Tian Yokorit, and Tian Rong's son, Tian Guang, became the kings of Qi. The kings of Qi rebelled in Chengyang.

古文：项羽虽闻汉东，既已连齐兵，欲遂破之而击汉。
现代文：项羽虽然闻知汉军东进，但既然已经与齐军交战，就想打垮齐军之后迎击汉军。
English: Although Xiang Yu knew that the Chinese army was advancing eastward, since he was already at war with the Qi army, he wanted to defeat the Qi army and then meet the Chinese army.

古文：汉王以故得劫五诸侯兵，遂入彭城。
现代文：汉王利用这个机会劫取了五诸侯的兵力，进入彭城。
English: Han Wang took advantage of this opportunity to kidnap the troops of the Five Princes and enter Pengcheng.

古文：项羽闻之，乃引兵去齐，从鲁出胡陵，至萧，与汉大战彭城灵壁东睢水上，大破汉军，多杀士卒，睢水为之不流。
现代文：项羽听到这一消息，就带兵离开齐，由鲁地出胡陵，抵达萧县，与汉军在彭城灵壁东面的睢水上激战，大败汉军，杀死了很多士卒，睢水都不能流通了。
English: When Xiang Yu heard this news, he led his soldiers to leave Qi. They marched from Ludi to Huling and arrived at Xiao County. They fought a fierce battle with the Chinese army on the Lishui River east of Pengcheng Lingbi. They defeated the Chinese army, killed many soldiers, and the Lishui River could no longer circulate.

古文：乃取汉王父母妻子於沛，置之军中以为质。
现代文：楚军从沛县掳取了汉王的父母妻子，扣在军中作为人质。
English: The Chu army captured Han Wang's parents and wife from Pei County and held them hostage in the army.

古文：当是时，诸侯见楚彊汉败，还皆去汉复为楚。塞王欣亡入楚。
现代文：这个时候，诸侯看到楚军强盛，汉军败退，又都离汉归楚，塞王司马欣也逃到楚国。
English: At this time, the princes saw that the Chu army was strong and the Han army was defeated and retreated, and they all returned to Chu from Han. King Sima Xin also fled to Chu.

古文：吕后兄周吕侯为汉将兵，居下邑。
现代文：吕后的哥哥周吕侯为汉带领一支军队，驻扎在下邑。
English: Luguo's brother, Zhou Luhou, led an army for Han and was stationed in Xiamei.

古文：汉王从之，稍收士卒，军砀。
现代文：汉王到他那里，渐渐收集士卒，在砀县驻军。
English: Han Wang went to him, gradually gathered soldiers, and stationed troops in Jixian.

古文：汉王乃西过梁地，至虞。使谒者随何之九江王布所，曰： 公能令布举兵叛楚，项羽必留击之。
现代文：汉王西行经过梁地，到了虞县，派使者随何到九江王黥布那里，汉王说： 你能让黥布举兵叛楚，项羽必定留下来攻打他。
English: The Han king traveled west through Liangdi and arrived at Yu County. He sent an envoy to the Jiujiang king Xibu. The Han king said: If you can make Xibu raise an army to rebel, Xiang Yu will certainly stay and fight him.

古文：得留数月，吾取天下必矣。 
现代文：如果能够滞留几个月，我一定可以取得天下。 
English: If I can stay for a few months, I'll definitely be able to conquer the world.

古文：随何往说九江王布，布果背楚。楚使龙且往击之。
现代文：随何去说服九江王黥布，黥布果然背叛了楚国，楚国派龙且去攻打他。
English: No matter where he went to persuade the King of Jiujiang, Zibo, Zibo betrayed the State of Chu, and the State of Chu sent a dragon to attack him.

古文：汉王之败彭城而西，行使人求家室，家室亦亡，不相得。
现代文：汉王兵败彭城后向西撤退，行军中派人寻找家属，家属也逃走了，没有互相碰见。
English: After the defeat of Pengcheng, the Han soldiers retreated to the west. During the march, they sent people to look for their families. The families also fled and did not meet each other.

古文：败後乃独得孝惠，六月，立为太子，大赦罪人。
现代文：战败后就只找到了孝惠帝，六月，立他为太子，大赦罪人。
English: After the defeat, only Emperor Xiao Hui could be found, and in June, he was made crown prince and granted amnesty to criminals.

古文：令太子守栎阳，诸侯子在关中者皆集栎阳为卫。
现代文：命令太子驻守栎阳，诸侯国人在关中的都集中在栎阳守卫。
English: He ordered the prince to be stationed in Shenyang, and the people of all the states in Guanzhong concentrated on guarding Shenyang.

古文：引水灌废丘，废丘降，章邯自杀。
现代文：引水灌废丘，废丘投降，章邯自杀。
English: The waste mound was flooded, the waste mound surrendered, and Zhang Ye committed suicide.

古文：更名废丘为槐里。
现代文：把废丘改名为槐里。
English: Change the name of the waste mound to Tsutsumo.

古文：於是令祠官祀天地四方上帝山川，以时祀之。
现代文：于是命令祠官祭祀天、地、四方、上帝、山川，以后按时致祭。
English: So he ordered the ancestral priest to offer sacrifices to heaven, earth, the four directions, God, and mountains and rivers, and thereafter to offer sacrifices on time.

古文：兴关内卒乘塞。
现代文：征发关内士卒登城守卫边塞。
English: The conscripted Guanai soldiers went to the city to guard the border fortress.

古文：是时九江王布与龙且战，不胜，与随何间行归汉。
现代文：这时九江王黥布与龙且作战，没有取胜，和随何潜行归汉。
English: At this time, the King of Jiujiang, Zibo, fought against the dragon and did not win, and sneaked back to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉王稍收士卒，与诸将及关中卒益出，是以兵大振荥阳，破楚京、索间。
现代文：汉王渐渐地征集了一些士卒，加上各路将领和关中兵的增援，因此军势大振于荥阳，在京、索之间击破了楚军。
English: Han Wang gradually recruited some soldiers, plus reinforcements from generals and Guanzhong soldiers from all directions, so the army was greatly strengthened in Shenyang and defeated the Chu army between Beijing and So.

古文：三年，魏王豹谒归视亲疾，至即绝河津，反为楚。
现代文：三年，魏王豹请假回去省视父母的疾病，到了魏地就断绝了黄河渡口，叛汉归楚。
English: In the third year, Wei Wangpan took a leave of absence to go back and take care of his parents' illness. When he arrived in Wei, he cut off the Yellow River ferry and returned to Han.

古文：汉王使郦生说豹，豹不听。
现代文：汉王使郦生劝说魏豹，魏豹不听。
English: Han Wang sent his son to persuade Wei Pan, but Wei Pan did not listen.

古文：汉王遣将军韩信击，大破之，虏豹。遂定魏地，置三郡，曰河东、太原、上党。
现代文：汉王派遣将军韩信进攻魏豹，大破魏军，俘虏了魏豹，于是平定了魏地，设置了三个郡，名叫河东、太原、上党。
English: The Han king sent the general Han Xin to attack the Wei panther, defeated the Wei army, captured the Wei panther, and then leveled the Wei territory and set up three counties, named Hedong, Taiyuan and Shangdang.

古文：汉王乃令张耳与韩信遂东下井陉击赵，斩陈馀、赵王歇。
现代文：汉王命令张耳和韩信向东攻下井陉，进击赵地，杀了陈余、赵王歇。
English: The king of Han ordered Zhang Er and Han Xin to attack eastward to Jingyi and Zhao Di, killing Chen Yu and Zhao Wang Xie.

古文：其明年，立张耳为赵王。
现代文：第二年，封张耳为赵王。
English: The following year, Zhang Er was crowned King of Zhao.

古文：汉王军荥阳南，筑甬道属之河，以取敖仓。
现代文：汉王驻军在荥阳南面，修筑甬道与黄河相连，以便取用敖仓的粮食。
English: Han Wang stationed troops in the south of Fenyang and built a causeway to connect with the Yellow River in order to obtain grain from Kamakura.

古文：与项羽相距岁馀。
现代文：与项羽对峙了一年多。
English: He confronted Xiang Yu for more than a year.

古文：项羽数侵夺汉甬道，汉军乏食，遂围汉王。
现代文：项羽多次夺取了汉军的甬道，汉军缺少粮食，项羽于是围攻汉王。
English: Xiang Yu repeatedly captured the Chinese army's supply routes, the Chinese army was short of grain, and Xiang Yu then besieged the Han king.

古文：汉王请和，割荥阳以西者为汉。
现代文：汉王请求讲和，划分荥阳以西的土地归汉。
English: The Han king asked for peace and the division of the land to the west of Shenyang to the Han.

古文：项王不听。
现代文：项王没有同意。
English: The king did not agree.

古文：汉王患之，乃用陈平之计，予陈平金四万斤，以间疏楚君臣。
现代文：汉王忧虑，就采取陈平的计策，给陈平黄金四万斤，用来离间楚国君臣。
English: The Han king was worried, so he adopted Chen Ping's strategy and gave Chen Ping forty thousand catties of gold, which was used to separate the princes and ministers of Chu.

古文：於是项羽乃疑亚父。
现代文：于是项羽对亚父产生了怀疑。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu became suspicious of his stepfather.

古文：亚父是时劝项羽遂下荥阳，及其见疑，乃怒，辞老，原赐骸骨归卒伍，未至彭城而死。
现代文：亚父这时劝项羽乘势攻下荥阳，等到他知道已被怀疑，就很生气，推托自己年老，要求乞身引退，回家乡当老百姓。
English: At this time, his father advised Xiang Yu to take advantage of the situation to attack Fenyang. When he knew that he had been suspected, he was very angry, put off his old age, and asked to retire and return to his hometown as an ordinary citizen.

古文：汉军绝食，乃夜出女子东门二千馀人，被甲，楚因四面击之。
现代文：亚父没有到达彭城就死了。汉军断绝了粮食，就在夜间从东门放出女子二千多人，披戴铠甲，楚军便四面围击。
English: My father died before reaching Pengcheng. The Han army ran out of food, and at night they released more than two thousand women from the east gate, wearing armor, and the Chu army besieged them on all sides.

古文：将军纪信乃乘王驾，诈为汉王，诳楚，楚皆呼万岁，之城东观，以故汉王得与数十骑出西门遁。
现代文：将军纪信乘坐汉王的车驾，伪装成汉王，欺骗楚军。楚军都高呼万岁，争赴城东观看，因此汉王能够与几十骑兵出西门潜逃。
English: General Jixin rode in Han Wang's chariot, disguised himself as Han Wang, and deceived the Chu army. The Chu army all shouted "long live" and scrambled to the east of the city to watch, so Han Wang was able to escape with dozens of cavalry from the west gate.

古文：令御史大夫周苛、魏豹、枞公守荥阳。诸将卒不能从者，尽在城中。
现代文：汉王命令御史大夫周苛、魏豹、枞公留守荥阳，将领和士卒不能随从的，都留在城中。
English: The king of Han ordered the imperial historians Zhou Cao, Wei Piao, and Xing Gong to stay in Fenyang, and the generals and soldiers who could not follow remained in the city.

古文：周苛、枞公相谓曰： 反国之王，难与守城。 
现代文：周苛、枞公商量说： 魏豹这个叛国之王，很难和他共守城池。 
English: Zhou Cao and Zou Gong discussed and said: Wei Pan, the king of treason, is difficult to defend the castle with him.

古文：因杀魏豹。
现代文：因此就杀死了魏豹。
English: So he killed the leopard.

古文：汉王之出荥阳入关，收兵欲复东。
现代文：汉王逃出荥阳进入函谷关，收集士卒，想再次东进。
English: Han Wang escaped from Shenyang and entered the Huan Valley Pass to collect soldiers and wanted to go east again.

古文：袁生说汉王曰： 汉与楚相距荥阳数岁，汉常困。
现代文：袁生劝汉王说： 汉与楚在荥阳相持了几年，汉军常处境困难。
English: Yuan Sheng advised the Han king: Han and Chu had been at loggerheads for several years in Fenyang, and the Han army was often in a difficult situation.

古文：原君王出武关，项羽必引兵南走，王深壁，令荥阳成皋间且得休。
现代文：希望君王从武关出去，项羽肯定引兵向南行进，君王深沟高垒，让荥阳、成皋之间得到休息。
English: It is hoped that the king will go out from Wuguan, Xiang Yu will definitely lead the troops to march south, and the king will dig a high wall to rest between Shenyang and Chengdu.

古文：使韩信等辑河北赵地，连燕齐，君王乃复走荥阳，未晚也。
现代文：派韩信等安辑黄河以北的赵地，联合燕、齐，君王再赴荥阳，也为时不晚。
English: It is not too late to send Han Xin and others to Anji, Zhao, north of the Yellow River, to unite with Yan and Qi, and then go to Fenyang.

古文：如此，则楚所备者多，力分，汉得休，复与之战，破楚必矣。 
现代文：这样，楚军多方设防，军力分散，汉军得到休整，再与楚军作战，肯定可以打破楚军了。 
English: In this way, the Chu army set up defenses in multiple directions, the military forces were dispersed, the Chinese army got a rest, and then fought with the Chu army, it can definitely break the Chu army.

古文：汉王从其计，出军宛叶间，与黥布行收兵。
现代文：汉王采纳了他的计策，出兵宛县、叶县之间，与黥布在进军中收集兵马。
English: The Han king adopted his strategy, dispatching troops to Wan County and Ye County, and collecting soldiers and horses with Xie Bu during the march.

古文：项羽闻汉王在宛，果引兵南。
现代文：项羽听说汉王在宛县，果然带兵南下。
English: Xiang Yu heard that Han Wang was in Wan County, and he went south with his soldiers.

古文：汉王坚壁不与战。
现代文：汉王坚壁固守，不和他交战。
English: Han Wang held fast to the wall and refused to fight him.

古文：是时彭越渡睢水，与项声、薛公战下邳，彭越大破楚军。
现代文：这时彭越渡过睢水，与项声、薛公战于下邳，彭越大败楚军。
English: At this time, Peng Yue crossed the Surabaya River and fought with Xiang Sheng and Xue Gong in the lower Surabaya River. Peng Yue defeated the Chu army.

古文：项羽乃引兵东击彭越。汉王亦引兵北军成皋。
现代文：于是项羽率军向东攻打彭越，汉王也引兵向北驻军成皋。
English: As a result, Xiang Yu led the army to the east to attack Peng Yue, and the Han king also led the army to the north to garrison Chengyu.

古文：项羽已破走彭越，闻汉王复军成皋，乃复引兵西，拔荥阳，诛周苛、枞公，而虏韩王信，遂围成皋。
现代文：项羽已经取胜，赶走了彭越，得知汉军又驻扎在成皋，就又领兵西进，攻克荥阳，杀了周苛、枞公，俘虏了韩王信，于是进围成皋。
English: Xiang Yu had already won and driven away Peng Yue. When he learned that the Chinese army was stationed in Chengdu, he led the troops westward, conquered Fenyang, killed Zhou Cao and Zeng Gong, captured Han Wangxin, and then entered Chengdu.

古文：汉王跳，独与滕公共车出成皋玉门，北渡河，驰宿脩武。
现代文：汉王逃走了，单身一人与滕公同乘一辆车出了成皋的玉门，向北渡过黄河，驰至修武住了一夜。
English: Han Wang fled, and he and Teng Gong, both single, took a car out of Chengguan's Jade Gate, crossed the Yellow River to the north, and drove to Xiuwu, where they stayed for one night.

古文：自称使者，晨驰入张耳、韩信壁，而夺之军。乃使张耳北益收兵赵地，使韩信东击齐。
现代文：自称为使者，早晨驰入张耳、韩信的营中，夺取他们的军队，就派张耳去北边赵地更多的收集兵力，派韩信东进攻齐。
English: Calling himself an envoy, he rushed into Zhang Er and Han Xin's camp in the morning to capture their army, then sent Zhang Er to the north to gather more troops in Zhao Di, and sent Han Xin to the east to attack Qi.

古文：汉王得韩信军，则复振。
现代文：汉王得到韩信的军队，军威又振作起来。
English: Han Wang received Han Xin's army, and his military power was reinvigorated.

古文：引兵临河，南飨军小脩武南，欲复战。
现代文：率军来到黄河岸边，向南进发，在小修武南面让士卒吃饱喝足，打算与项羽再一次交战。
English: He led his army to the bank of the Yellow River and marched southward, giving his soldiers plenty to eat and drink in the south of Xiaoshuwu, intending to fight with Xiang Yu again.

古文：郎中郑忠乃说止汉王，使高垒深堑，勿与战。
现代文：郎中郑忠劝阻汉王，让他深沟高垒，不要和项羽交锋。
English: His brother-in-law, Zheng Zhong, dissuaded Han Wang, telling him not to fight Xiang Yu.

古文：汉王听其计，使卢绾、刘贾将卒二万人，骑数百，渡白马津，入楚地，与彭越复击破楚军燕郭西，遂复下梁地十馀城。
现代文：汉王采用了郑忠的计策，派卢绾、刘贾率兵两万人，几百个骑士，渡过白马津，进入楚地，与彭越在燕县城西又打败了楚军，随后又攻下梁地十多座城邑。
English: The Han king adopted the strategy of Zheng Zhong, sent Lu Wei and Liu Jia to lead 20,000 soldiers and hundreds of knights, crossed Baima Jin, entered Chu, and together with Peng Yue defeated the Chu army in the west of Yan County, and then captured more than ten cities in Liangdi.

古文：淮阴已受命东，未渡平原。
现代文：淮阴侯已经接受命令向东进军，在平原没有渡过黄河。
English: Huaiyin Hou had already received orders to march eastward and did not cross the Yellow River on the plain.

古文：汉王使郦生往说齐王田广，广叛楚，与汉和，共击项羽。
现代文：汉王派郦生去说服齐王田广，田广背叛了楚，与汉讲和，一起攻打项羽。
English: The Han king sent his son to persuade the Qi king Tian Guang. Tian Guang betrayed Chu, made peace with Han, and attacked Xiang Yu together.

古文：韩信用蒯通计，遂袭破齐。
现代文：韩信采用蒯通的计策，突然袭击，打败了齐国。
English: Han Xin used the strategy of surprise attack to defeat Qi.

古文：齐王烹郦生，东走高密。
现代文：齐王烹杀了郦生，向东逃到高密。
English: King Qi killed his son and fled eastward to Gaomi.

古文：项羽闻韩信已举河北兵破齐、赵，且欲击楚，则使龙且、周兰往击之。
现代文：项羽听到韩信已经全部利用黄河以北的兵力打垮了齐、赵，而且要攻打楚军，就派龙且、周兰前去阻击。
English: When Xiang Yu heard that Han Xin had defeated Qi and Zhao using all the troops north of the Yellow River, and that he wanted to attack the Chu army, he sent Long Jie and Zhou Lan to block the attack.

古文：韩信与战，骑将灌婴击，大破楚军，杀龙且。
现代文：韩信与楚交战，骑兵将领灌婴配合出击，大败楚军，杀了龙且。
English: Han Xin fought with Chu, and the cavalry general led the cavalry to attack, defeated the Chu army, and killed Long Yu.

古文：齐王广奔彭越。
现代文：齐王田广投奔彭越。
English: Qi Wang Tian Guangtou rushed to Peng Yue.

古文：当此时，彭越将兵居梁地，往来苦楚兵，绝其粮食。
现代文：在这个时候，彭越领兵驻扎梁地，往来骚扰楚军，断绝它的粮食。
English: At that time, Peng Yue stationed troops in Liangdi, coming and going to harass the Chu army and cut off its food supply.

古文：四年，项羽乃谓海春侯大司马曹咎曰： 谨守成皋。
现代文：四年，项羽对海春侯大司马曹咎说： 谨慎防守成皋。
English: In four years, Xiang Yu said to Ma Cao Gui, the grand secretary of the Prince of Hai Chun, "Be cautious in defense.

古文：若汉挑战，慎勿与战，无令得东而已。
现代文：如果汉军挑战，千万小心。不要应战，不让汉军东进就行了。
English: If the Han army challenges, be careful. Don't fight, just don't let the Han army march east.

古文：我十五日必定梁地，复从将军。 
现代文：我十五天一定平定梁地，再与将军会合。 
English: In fifteen days, I will definitely settle the Liang Di and then meet with the general.

古文：乃行击陈留、外黄、睢阳，下之。
现代文：于是就进军攻打陈留、外黄、睢阳，都攻了下来。
English: So they marched to attack Chenliu, Waigang, and Shenyang, and conquered them all.

古文：汉果数挑楚军，楚军不出，使人辱之五六日，大司马怒，度兵汜水。
现代文：汉军果然屡次向楚军挑战，楚军不肯出战。汉军派人辱骂了五六天楚军，大司马十分气愤，让士卒渡过汜水。
English: The Han army did indeed repeatedly challenge the Chu army, but the Chu army refused to go to war. The Han army sent people to abuse the Chu army for five or six days, and the great Sima was very angry and let the soldiers cross the Surabaya.

古文：士卒半渡，汉击之，大破楚军，尽得楚国金玉货赂。
现代文：士卒渡过一半，汉军出击，大败楚军，全部缴获了楚国的金玉财宝。
English: Halfway through the war, the Han army attacked, defeated the Chu army, and captured all the gold and jade treasures of Chu.

古文：大司马咎、长史欣皆自刭汜水上。
现代文：大司马曹咎、长史司马欣都自刎在汜水上。
English: The superintendent, Ma Cao-yin, and the head of the history department, Ma Xin, are all self-proclaimed in Surabaya.

古文：项羽至睢阳，闻海春侯破，乃引兵还。
现代文：项羽到达睢阳，听到海春侯兵败，就带兵返回。
English: When Xiang Yu arrived in Fenyang and heard that Hai Chun Hou had been defeated, he returned with his soldiers.

古文：汉军方围锺离眜於荥阳东，项羽至，尽走险阻。
现代文：汉军正在荥阳东面围攻钟离眜，项羽一到，全部撤走到险阻地带。
English: The Chinese army was besieging Zhongli in the east of Fenyang. As soon as Xiang Yu arrived, they all withdrew to the danger zone.

古文：韩信已破齐，使人言曰： 齐边楚，权轻，不为假王，恐不能安齐。 
现代文：韩信已经打垮了齐国，派人对汉王说： 齐国靠近楚国，如果权力太小，不立为暂时代理的国王，恐怕不能安定齐地。 
English: Han Xin had already defeated Qi and sent a messenger to the Han king to say: Qi is close to Chu, and if the power is too small and you don't appoint a temporary acting king, I'm afraid it won't be stable.

古文：汉王欲攻之。
现代文：汉王想要攻打韩信。
English: Han Wang wants to attack Han Xin.

古文：留侯曰： 不如因而立之，使自为守。 
现代文：留侯说： 不如就此封他为王，让他自己防守齐地。 
English: Rui Hou said, "It would be better to make him the king and let him defend himself.

古文：乃遣张良操印绶立韩信为齐王。
现代文：汉王便派遣张良带着印绶立韩信为齐王。
English: King Han then dispatched Zhang Liang with the seal to establish Han Xin as the king of Qi.

古文：项羽闻龙且军破，则恐，使盱台人武涉往说韩信。
现代文：项羽听到龙且的军队战败了，心里很恐惧，派盱台人武涉前去游说韩信。
English: When Xiang Yu heard that Long Qi's army had been defeated, he was very frightened and sent Xingtai soldiers to lobby Han Xin.

古文：韩信不听。
现代文：韩信不肯听从。
English: Han Xin refused to obey.

古文：楚汉久相持未决，丁壮苦军旅，老弱罢转饟。
现代文：楚、汉长期相持，胜负未决，年青力壮的苦于当兵打仗，年老体弱的疲于转运粮食。
English: Chu and Han have long been at loggerheads, with the outcome still undecided. The young and strong suffer from being soldiers and fighting, while the old and weak are exhausted from transporting grain.

古文：汉王项羽相与临广武之间而语。
现代文：汉王、项羽一同站在广武涧两边对话。
English: Han Wang and Xiang Yu stood together on both sides of Guangwu Yao and had a dialogue.

古文：项羽欲与汉王独身挑战。
现代文：项羽想跟汉王单身挑战。
English: Xiang Yu wants to challenge Han Wang's single status.

古文：汉王数项羽曰： 始与项羽俱受命怀王，曰先入定关中者王之，项羽负约，王我於蜀汉，罪一。
现代文：汉王历数项羽的罪过说： 最初我和你项羽都受命于怀王，说是先入关平定关中的，就在关中做王。你项羽违背约定，让我在蜀、汉做王，这是第一罪。
English: The Han king recounted the sins of several emperors, saying: At first, both I and you emperors were ordered by King Huai, saying that the first to enter the pass and conquer the pass was to become king in the pass. Your emperors violated the agreement and let me become king in Shu and Han, which was the first sin.

古文：秦项羽矫杀卿子冠军而自尊，罪二。
现代文：你项羽假借怀王的命令，杀了卿子冠军，而自尊为上将军，这是第二罪。
English: The second crime is that you pretended to take orders from King Huai, killed the champion, and thought of yourself as a superior general.

古文：项羽已救赵，当还报，而擅劫诸侯兵入关，罪三。
现代文：你项羽已经援救了赵地，应当返回复命，而你擅自胁迫诸侯的军队进入函谷关，这是第三罪。
English: You Xiang Yu have already rescued Zhaodi and should return to answer the call, and you have arbitrarily coerced the armies of the lords into entering Huanku Pass, which is the third crime.

古文：怀王约入秦无暴掠，项羽烧秦宫室，掘始皇帝冢，私收其财物，罪四。
现代文：怀王约定到秦地不要残暴掠夺，你项羽火烧秦朝宫室，挖了始皇帝的坟墓，私自聚敛秦朝财物，这是第四罪。
English: King Huai agreed not to plunder brutally in Qin. You set fire to the palace of the Qin Dynasty, dug up the tomb of the First Emperor, and collected the Qin Dynasty's property. This is the fourth crime.

古文：又彊杀秦降王子婴，罪五。
现代文：又硬是杀掉了秦朝投降的国王子婴，这是第五罪。
English: He also killed the king's infant son who surrendered to the Qin Dynasty, which is the fifth crime.

古文：诈阬秦子弟新安二十万，王其将，罪六。
现代文：在新安，用欺骗的手段坑杀了秦朝子弟二十万，而封他们的将领做王，这是第六罪。
English: In Xin'an, the sixth crime was to use deception to kill 200,000 sons and daughters of the Qin Dynasty and make their general the king.

古文：项羽皆王诸将善地，而徙逐故主，令臣下争叛逆，罪七。
现代文：你项羽让自己的将领都在好地方做王，而迁走原来的诸侯王，使臣下争为叛逆，这是第七罪。
English: It is the seventh sin to allow your generals to become kings in a good place, and to move away the original princes and kings, and to make your vassals rebel.

古文：项羽出逐义帝彭城，自都之，夺韩王地，并王梁楚，多自予，罪八。
现代文：你项羽把义帝驱逐出彭城，自己建都彭城，夺取韩王的土地，合并梁、楚称王，多划给自己土地，这是第八罪。
English: You Xiang Yu expelled the Righteous Emperor from Pengcheng, built the capital Pengcheng by yourself, seized the land of King Han, combined Liang and Chu to become king, and allocated more land to yourself. This is the eighth crime.

古文：项羽使人阴弑义帝江南，罪九。
现代文：你项羽派人在江南暗杀义帝，这是第九罪。
English: You Xiang Yu sent people south of the Yangtze River to assassinate the Righteous Emperor. This is the ninth crime.

古文：夫为人臣而弑其主，杀已降，为政不平，主约不信，天下所不容，大逆无道，罪十也。
现代文：为人臣下而杀害了他的君主，屠杀已经投降的人，执政不公允，主持约定不守信用，为天下人所不容，大逆无道，这是第十罪。
English: To kill one's sovereign for the sake of his vassals, to slaughter those who have already surrendered, to rule unfairly, to preside over an agreement without keeping one's word, to be unacceptable to the people of the world, to commit high treason, this is the tenth crime.

古文：吾以义兵从诸侯诛残贼，使刑馀罪人击杀项羽，何苦乃与公挑战！ 
现代文：我带领正义之师随从诸侯来诛除残暴的贼人，派受过刑的罪人杀死你项羽，我何苦与你挑战！ 
English: I lead the Teacher of Justice to follow the princes to eradicate the cruel thieves, and send the criminals who have been punished to kill you, how can I challenge you!

古文：项羽大怒，伏弩射中汉王。
现代文：项羽大怒，埋伏的弓弩射中了汉王。
English: Xiang Yu flew into a rage, and the ambushed bow and arrow hit Han Wang.

古文：汉王伤匈，乃扪足曰： 虏中吾指！ 
现代文：汉王伤了胸部，却摸着脚说： 这个贼人射中了我的脚趾！ 
English: Han Wang injured his chest, but he touched his foot and said, "This thief shot my toe!"

古文：汉王病创卧，张良彊请汉王起行劳军，以安士卒，毋令楚乘胜於汉。
现代文：汉王身受创伤，卧床不起，张良请汉王勉强起来巡行慰劳士卒，以安定军心，不让楚军乘机取胜于汉。
English: Han Wang was traumatized and bedridden, Zhang Liang asked Han Wang to reluctantly get up and parade to comfort the laborers, in order to stabilize the military spirit and prevent the Chu army from taking advantage of the opportunity to win over Han.

古文：汉王出行军，病甚，因驰入成皋。
现代文：汉王出来巡视军队，伤势加重，就驱车进入成皋休养。
English: Han Wang came out to inspect the troops. As his injuries worsened, he drove to Chengdu to recuperate.

古文：病愈，西入关，至栎阳，存问父老，置酒，枭故塞王欣头栎阳市。
现代文：汉王病好了，向西进入函谷关，来到栋阳，慰问父老，设酒招待。砍了塞王司马欣的脑袋，挂在栎阳街市上示众。
English: When Han Wang recovered from his illness, he went west into the Hanyang Pass and came to Dongyang to offer condolences to his parents and to serve wine. He cut off Wang Simasin's head and displayed it in the Poyang Street Market.

古文：留四日，复如军，军广武。
现代文：停了四天，又回到军中，驻扎在广武。
English: After stopping for four days, he returned to the army and was stationed in Guangwu.

古文：关中兵益出。
现代文：关中的兵力大举出动。
English: Guanzhong's forces moved out in force.

古文：当此时，彭越将兵居梁地，往来苦楚兵，绝其粮食。
现代文：当时，彭越带兵驻扎梁地，来来往往地骚扰楚军，断绝它的粮食。
English: At that time, Peng Yue stationed troops in Liangdi, coming and going to harass the Chu army and cut off its food supply.

古文：田横往从之。
现代文：田横前往依附彭越。
English: Tian Yang went to Peng Yue.

古文：项羽数击彭越等，齐王信又进击楚。
现代文：项羽多次攻打彭越等人，齐王韩信又进攻楚军。
English: Xiang Yu repeatedly attacked Peng Yue and others, and the king of Qi, Han Xin, attacked the Chu army.

古文：项羽恐，乃与汉王约，中分天下，割鸿沟而西者为汉，鸿沟而东者为楚。
现代文：项羽恐惧，就与汉王约定，平分天下，割鸿沟以西归汉，鸿沟以东归楚。
English: He was so afraid that he agreed with the king of Han to divide the world equally, with the west of the divide going to Han and the east of the divide going to Chu.

古文：项王归汉王父母妻子，军中皆呼万岁，乃归而别去。
现代文：项王送回了汉王的父母妻子，汉军全部高呼万岁，楚军告别汉军回到了驻地。
English: He sent back the parents and wife of the Han king, the Han army all shouted "long live," and the Chu army bid farewell to the Han army and returned to the garrison.

古文：项羽解而东归。
现代文：项羽解兵东归。
English: Xiang Yu discharged his soldiers and returned to the East.

古文：汉王欲引而西归，用留侯、陈平计，乃进兵追项羽，至阳夏南止军，与齐王信、建成侯彭越期会而击楚军。
现代文：汉王想要领兵西还，后来采用留侯、陈平的计策，进兵追击项羽，到达阳夏南面收兵驻扎，与齐王韩信、建成侯彭越约定时间会合攻打楚军。
English: Han Wang wanted to lead the troops to the west, and later adopted the strategy of staying in Hou and Chen Ping, the soldiers pursued Xiang Yu, arrived in the south of Yangxia, gathered the troops and stationed them, and met with Qi King Han Xin and Jiancheng Hou Peng Yue at the agreed time to attack the Chu army.

古文：至固陵，不会。
现代文：到了固陵，韩信、彭越不来会合。
English: When they arrived at Guling, Han Xin and Peng Yue did not come to the meeting.

古文：楚击汉军，大破之。
现代文：楚军出击汉军，大败汉军。
English: The Chu army attacked the Chinese army and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：汉王复入壁，深堑而守之。
现代文：汉王又进入营垒，挖深了壕沟进行防守。
English: Han Wang entered the camp again and dug a deep trench for defense.

古文：用张良计，於是韩信、彭越皆往。
现代文：使用了张良的计策，于是韩信、彭越都前来会合。
English: Using Zhang Liang's strategy, Han Xin and Peng Yue both came to the meeting.

古文：及刘贾入楚地，围寿春，汉王败固陵，乃使使者召大司马周殷举九江兵而迎武王，行屠城父，随刘贾、齐梁诸侯皆大会垓下。
现代文：又有刘贾进入楚地，围攻寿春。汉王在固陵战败，就派使者去召大司马周殷，用全部的九江士卒迎接武王黥布，黥布、周殷在进军中攻下城父，大肆屠杀。他们随从刘贾和齐、梁的诸侯大会垓下。
English: Liu Jia also entered Chu and besieged Shuchun. When the Han king was defeated at Gouring, he sent an envoy to summon the grand steward Ma Rong and Zhou Yin, and used all of Jiujiang's soldiers to greet King Wu Zengbu. Zengbu and Zhou Yin captured the city during their march and massacred a large number of people. They followed Liu Jia and Qi and Liang's General Assembly of Princes.

古文：立武王布为淮南王。
现代文：汉王封武王黥布为淮南王。
English: The Han king designated King Wu of Zibo as the king of Huainan.

古文：五年，高祖与诸侯兵共击楚军，与项羽决胜垓下。
现代文：五年，高祖和诸侯军一起攻打楚军，与项羽在垓下决一胜负。
English: In the fifth year, Gaozu and the vassal army attacked the Chu army together, and won a victory against Xiang Yu.

古文：淮阴侯将三十万自当之，孔将军居左，费将军居右，皇帝在後，绛侯、柴将军在皇帝後。
现代文：淮阴侯率兵三十万独当正面，孔将军布兵在左面，费将军布兵在右面，皇帝居后，绛侯、柴将军跟随在皇帝后面。
English: Huai Yin Hou led 300,000 soldiers and stood alone at the front, with General Kong Bu on the left, General Fei Bu on the right, the emperor behind, and Gong Hou and General Chai following behind the emperor.

古文：项羽之卒可十万。
现代文：项羽的士卒大约十万。
English: The number of taxi drivers in Shanghai is about 100,000.

古文：淮阴先合，不利，卻。
现代文：淮阴侯首先会战，没有取胜，向后退却。
English: Huaiyin Hou fought first, did not win, and retreated.

古文：孔将军、费将军纵，楚兵不利，淮阴侯复乘之，大败垓下。
现代文：孔将军、费将军纵兵出击，楚军不利，淮阴侯又乘势反攻，大败项羽于垓下。
English: General Kong and General Fei launched a long-range attack, the Chu army was unfavorable, Huaiyin Hou took advantage of the situation to counterattack, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：项羽卒闻汉军之楚歌，以为汉尽得楚地，项羽乃败而走，是以兵大败。
现代文：项羽的士兵听到汉军中的楚国歌声，以为汉军全部占领了楚地，项羽就败退逃跑，因此楚兵全军溃败。
English: The soldiers of Xiang Yu heard the singing of the national anthem of Chu in the Chinese army and thought that the Chinese army had occupied all of Chu. Xiang Yu retreated and fled, and the entire Chu army was defeated.

古文：使骑将灌婴追杀项羽东城，斩首八万，遂略定楚地。
现代文：汉王派骑兵将领灌婴追击项羽，一直追到东城，杀了八万楚兵，于是平定了楚地。
English: The Han king sent the cavalry general Guan Ying to pursue Xiang Yu all the way to Dongcheng, killed eighty thousand Chu soldiers, and thus pacified the Chu region.

古文：鲁为楚坚守不下。汉王引诸侯兵北，示鲁父老项羽头，鲁乃降。
现代文：鲁县为楚国坚守城池，汉军没有攻下，汉王带领诸侯军北上，把项羽的头给鲁县父老们看，鲁县才投降了。
English: Lu County defended the city for the State of Chu, and the Chinese army did not capture it. The Han king led the warlord army to the north, and showed the heads of the feathers to the parents of Lu County. Only then did Lu County surrender.

古文：遂以鲁公号葬项羽穀城。
现代文：于是就用鲁公的封号在谷城埋葬了项羽。
English: So he buried Xiang Yu in Gu Cheng with the seal of Lu Gong.

古文：还至定陶，驰入齐王壁，夺其军。
现代文：汉王回到定陶，驰入齐王营垒，夺了他的军队。
English: Han Wang returned to Dingtao, rushed into Qi Wang's camp, and captured his army.

古文：正月，诸侯及将相相与共请尊汉王为皇帝。
现代文：正月，诸侯和将相互相一起请求尊崇汉王为皇帝。
English: In the first month of the year, the lords and princes will jointly request that the king of Han be revered as emperor.

古文：汉王曰： 吾闻帝贤者有也，空言虚语，非所守也，吾不敢当帝位。 
现代文：汉王说： 我听说皇帝这一尊号，属于有贤德的人，徒有虚名而无其实，不足以守帝位。我不敢承受皇帝之位。 
English: Han Wang said: I have heard that the title of emperor belongs to a virtuous person, but it is only a false name and not true, and it is not enough to keep the imperial throne. I do not dare to take the throne of the emperor.

古文：群臣皆曰： 大王起微细，诛暴逆，平定四海，有功者辄裂地而封为王侯。
现代文：群臣都说： 大王起于贫寒，诛暴讨逆，平定四海，有功的就割地封为王侯。
English: The group of courtiers all said: The great king arose from poverty and cold, fought against the rebels with violence, and pacified the four seas. Those who were meritorious were given lands and made princes.

古文：大王不尊号，皆疑不信。
现代文：大王不尊崇名号，大家对自己的封号都要疑虑，不敢信以为真。
English: The great king does not respect the name, everyone has doubts about their own name, and they dare not believe it is true.

古文：臣等以死守之。 
现代文：臣等誓死坚持大王尊称皇帝。 
English: His vassals insisted on calling him Emperor.

古文：汉王三让，不得已，曰： 诸君必以为便，便国家。 
现代文：汉王再三谦让，迫不得已地说： 大家一定以为这样有利于国家。
English: Han Wang repeatedly made concessions and said reluctantly: Everyone must think that this is good for the country.

古文：甲午，乃即皇帝位氾水之阳。
现代文：为了对国家有利， 甲午，在汜水北面即皇帝位。皇帝说义帝没有后代。
English: In order to be beneficial to the country, Jiawu, in the north of Surabaya, became the emperor. The emperor said that the Emperor had no descendants.

古文：皇帝曰义帝无後。齐王韩信习楚风俗，徙为楚王，都下邳。立建成侯彭越为梁王，都定陶。故韩王信为韩王，都阳翟。
现代文：齐王韩信熟悉楚地风俗，迁徙为楚王，建都下邳。封建成侯彭越为梁王，建都定陶。原来的韩王信仍为韩王，建都阳翟。
English: Han Xin, the king of Qi, was familiar with the customs of Chu. He migrated to become the king of Chu and built the capital city of Xi'an. He made Hou Pengyue the king of Liang and built the capital city of Dingtao. The original Han Xin was still the king of Han and built the capital city of Yangshuo.

古文：徙衡山王吴芮为长沙王，都临湘。
现代文：迁徙衡山王吴芮为长沙王，建都临湘。
English: The migratory Hengshan king, Wu Xi, became the king of Changsha and built the capital near Hunan.

古文：番君之将梅鋗有功，从入武关，故德番君。
现代文：番君的将领梅鋗立有战功，跟随进入武关，皇帝感谢番君的恩德。
English: The guard's general, Mei Jianli, who had distinguished himself in battle, followed him into Wuguan, and the emperor thanked the guard for his kindness.

古文：淮南王布、燕王臧荼、赵王敖皆如故。
现代文：淮南王黥布、燕王臧荼、赵王张敖都保持过去的封号。
English: Huainan Wang Qibu, Yan Wang Qibu and Zhao Wang Zhang Qibu have all kept their old seal names.

古文：天下大定。
现代文：天下基本平定。
English: The country is basically pacified.

古文：高祖都雒阳，诸侯皆臣属。
现代文：高祖建都雒阳，诸侯都成为高祖的属臣。
English: Gao Zu built the capital Shenyang, and all the lords became Gao Zu's vassals.

古文：故临江王驩为项羽叛汉，令卢绾、刘贾围之，不下。
现代文：原来的临江王共驩为了项羽起兵叛汉，命令卢绾、刘贾围攻共驩，没有攻克。
English: The original King of Linjiang, Confucius, ordered Lu Xun and Liu Jia to besiege Confucius in order to force Xiang Yu to rebel against Han. However, Confucius was never defeated.

古文：数月而降，杀之雒阳。
现代文：几个月后共驩投降了，在雒阳杀了他。
English: A few months later, they surrendered and killed him in Shenyang.

古文：五月，兵皆罢归家。
现代文：五月，士卒都解甲回家。
English: In May, all the soldiers were discharged and went home.

古文：诸侯子在关中者复之十二岁，其归者复之六岁，食之一岁。
现代文：诸侯国的士卒留在关中的免除徭役十二年，那些回家乡的免除徭役六年，发给粮食供养一年。
English: The vassals of the vassal states who remained in Guanzhong were exempt from corvee service for twelve years, while those who returned to their hometowns were exempt from corvee service for six years and provided with grain for one year.

古文：高祖置酒雒阳南宫。
现代文：高祖在雒阳南宫摆设酒席。
English: Gao Zu set up a banquet table at the Southern Palace in Fenyang.

古文：高祖曰： 列侯诸将无敢隐朕，皆言其情。
现代文：高祖说： 各位诸侯和将领不要隐瞒我，都要说心里话。
English: Gaozu said, "Lords and generals, do not conceal anything from me, but speak your minds.

古文：吾所以有天下者何？
现代文：我所以能够得到天下是什么原因？
English: What is the reason why I am able to reach the world?

古文：项氏之所以失天下者何？ 
现代文：项氏所以失去天下是什么原因？ 
English: So what is the reason for the loss of the world?

古文：高起、王陵对曰： 陛下慢而侮人，项羽仁而爱人。
现代文：高起、王陵回答说： 陛下傲慢而侮辱人，项羽仁慈而爱护人。
English: Standing up, Wang Ling replied: "Your Majesty is arrogant and insults people, Xiang Yu is kind and loves people.

古文：然陛下使人攻城略地，所降下者因以予之，与天下同利也。
现代文：然而陛下派人攻城略地，所招降攻占的地方就封给他，与天下人利益相共。
English: However, His Majesty sent someone to attack the city, and the place he conquered was given to him, which was in the interests of the people of the world.

古文：项羽妒贤嫉能，有功者害之，贤者疑之，战胜而不予人功，得地而不予人利，此所以失天下也。 
现代文：项羽嫉贤妒能，有功的人加以陷害，贤能的人受到怀疑，打了胜仗而不论功行赏，取得了土地而不与分利，这就是他所以失去天下的原因。 
English: He lost the world because he was jealous of success, because he framed those who were meritorious, because he was suspicious of those who were virtuous, because he won the war regardless of merit, and because he acquired land without sharing the profits.

古文：高祖曰： 公知其一，未知其二。
现代文：高祖说： 你们知其一，不知其二。
English: Gaozu said: You know one thing, but you don't know another.

古文：夫运筹策帷帐之中，决胜於千里之外，吾不如子房。
现代文：说到那在帷帐中运筹划策，决胜于千里之外，我不如子房。
English: When it comes to making plans in the middle of the curtain, I'm not as good as Zifu.

古文：镇国家，抚百姓，给餽饟，不绝粮道，吾不如萧何。
现代文：镇守国家，安抚百姓，供给军粮，畅通粮道，我不如萧何。
English: I am no better than Xiao He in defending the country, pacifying the people, supplying grain for the army, and keeping the grain route open.

古文：连百万之军，战必胜，攻必取，吾不如韩信。
现代文：连兵百万，战必胜，攻必克，我不如韩信。
English: A company of a million soldiers, the battle is sure to be won, I am not as good as Han Xin.

古文：此三者，皆人杰也，吾能用之，此吾所以取天下也。
现代文：这三个人，都是人中俊杰，我能任用他们，这是我所以取得天下的原因。
English: These three people are all the best in the world, I can appoint them, this is why I have won the world.

古文：项羽有一范增而不能用，此其所以为我擒也。 
现代文：项羽有一个范增而不能任用，这是他所以被我擒杀的原因。 
English: Xiang Yu has a Fan Zeng and cannot be appointed, which is why he was killed by me.

古文：高祖欲长都雒阳，齐人刘敬说，乃留侯劝上入都关中，高祖是日驾，入都关中。
现代文：高祖想长期建都雒阳，齐人刘敬劝阻高祖，留侯张良也劝说高祖入都关中，当天高祖命驾起身，进入关中建都。
English: Gao Zu wanted to build the capital Shenyang for a long time. Liu Jing, a member of Qi, dissuaded Gao Zu, and Zhang Liang, a member of Ruhu, also persuaded Gao Zu to enter Guanzhong. On that day, Gao Zu rose to his feet and entered Guanzhong to build the capital.

古文：六月，大赦天下。
现代文：六月，大赦天下。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty.

古文：十月，燕王臧荼反，攻下代地。
现代文：十月，燕王臧荼反叛，攻下代地。
English: In October, Yan Wangtao rebelled and seized the territory.

古文：高祖自将击之，得燕王臧荼。即立太尉卢绾为燕王。
现代文：高祖亲自统率军队攻打他，擒获了燕王臧荼，随即立太尉卢绾为燕王。
English: Gaozhu personally led the army to attack him, captured the King of Swans, and then set up the Taifu Lu as the King of Swans.

古文：使丞相哙将兵攻代。
现代文：派丞相樊哙领兵攻代。
English: He sent his prime minister, Shun, to lead the attack.

古文：其秋，利几反，高祖自将兵击之，利几走。
现代文：这年秋天，利几反叛，高祖亲自带兵攻打他，利几逃走了。
English: In the autumn of that year, Li Jia rebelled, Gaozu personally led an army to attack him, and Li Jia fled.

古文：利几者，项氏之将。
现代文：利几这个人，是项氏的将领。
English: This man, Rekia, was a general of the Xiang clan.

古文：项氏败，利几为陈公，不随项羽，亡降高祖，高祖侯之颍川。
现代文：项氏失败时，利几为陈县县令，没有跟随项羽，逃走投降了高祖，高祖封他在颖川为侯。
English: When the Xiang clan failed, Rikai was the county magistrate of Chen County. He did not follow Xiang Yu, but ran away and surrendered to Gaozu. Gaozu made him the marquis of Yingchuan.

古文：高祖至雒阳，举通侯籍召之，而利几恐，故反。
现代文：高祖到达雒阳，根据全部通侯名籍遍召通侯，利几也被召。
English: Gao Zu arrived in Fenyang. According to all the surnames of Tonghou, Tonghou was summoned everywhere, and Liguo was also summoned.

古文：六年，高祖五日一朝太公，如家人父子礼。
现代文：利几很慌惧，因此起兵反叛。六年，高祖五天朝见一次太公，如同一般百姓的父子礼节。
English: Rikki was panicked, so he raised an army and rebelled. For six years, Gaozu saw the Grand Duke once every five days, just like the father-son etiquette of ordinary people.

古文：太公家令说太公曰： 天无二日，土无二王。
现代文：太公家令劝诫太公说： 天无二日，地无二主。
English: The Taikong ordered and exhorted the Taikong, saying, "There is no second day, and there is no second lord of the land."

古文：今高祖虽子，人主也；太公虽父，人臣也。
现代文：如今高祖虽然是你的儿子，但他是万民的君主；太公虽然是高祖的父亲，但属于臣下。
English: Today, although Gaozu is your son, he is the ruler of all the people; although Taigong is Gaozu's father, he is a vassal.

古文：柰何令人主拜人臣！
现代文：怎么能让君主拜见臣下！
English: How can you make a monarch bow to his subjects!

古文：如此，则威重不行。 
现代文：这样，就使君主失去了威严和尊贵。 
English: In this way, the monarch lost his majesty and dignity.

古文：後高祖朝，太公拥篲，迎门卻行。
现代文：后来高祖朝拜太公，太公抱着扫帚，在门口迎接，倒退着行走。
English: Later, Gao Zu bowed to the Grand Duke. The Grand Duke held a broom and greeted him at the door, walking backwards.

古文：高祖大惊，下扶太公。
现代文：高祖大惊，下车搀扶太公。
English: Gao Zu was shocked and got out of the car to help Tai Gong.

古文：太公曰： 帝，人主也，柰何以我乱天下法！ 
现代文：太公说： 皇帝是万民的君主，怎么能因为我的缘故破坏了天下的法纪！ 
English: The grand duke said, "The emperor is the ruler of all the people, how can he destroy the law and order of the world because of me!

古文：於是高祖乃尊太公为太上皇。
现代文：于是高祖就尊奉大公为太上皇。
English: As a result, Gao Zu revered the grand duke as the emperor.

古文：心善家令言，赐金五百斤。
现代文：高祖内心赞美家令的话，赏赐给他黄金五百斤。
English: Gao Zu gave him five hundred catties of gold for praising the family order.

古文：十二月，人有上变事告楚王信谋反，上问左右，左右争欲击之。
现代文：十二月，有人上书告发楚王韩信谋反。高祖询问左右大臣，大臣们争着要去攻打韩信。
English: In December, someone sent a letter accusing the King of Chu, Han Xin, of plotting a rebellion. Gaozu inquired about the left and right ministers, and the ministers scrambled to attack Han Xin.

古文：用陈平计，乃伪游云梦，会诸侯於陈，楚王信迎，即因执之。
现代文：高祖采用陈平的计策，假装巡游云梦泽，在陈县会见诸侯，楚王韩信去迎接，就乘机逮捕了他。
English: Gaozu used Chen Ping's strategy, pretending to cruise Yunmenze, meeting with princes in Chen County, and King Han Xin of Chu went to meet him, and took the opportunity to arrest him.

古文：是日，大赦天下。
现代文：这一天，大赦天下。
English: On this day, amnesty is granted to the whole world.

古文：田肯贺，因说高祖曰： 陛下得韩信，又治秦中。
现代文：田肯来祝贺，就劝高祖说： 陛下抓到韩信，又建都秦中。
English: When Tian Ken came to congratulate Gao Zu, he advised Gao Zu to say, "Your Majesty caught Han Xin and built the capital Qinzhong.

古文：秦，形胜之国，带河山之险，县隔千里，持戟百万，秦得百二焉。
现代文：秦地是地理形势优越的地方，有阻山带河之险，与诸侯国悬隔千里，持戟武士一百万，秦比其他地方好上一百倍。
English: Qin is a place with a superior geographical situation, with the risk of obstructed mountains and rivers, separated from the vassal states by thousands of miles, with a million samurai warriors, Qin is a hundred times better than other places.

古文：地埶便利，其以下兵於诸侯，譬犹居高屋之上建瓴水也。
现代文：地势便利，从这里出兵诸侯，犹如高屋建瓴。
English: The location is convenient. From here, the feudal lords dispatched troops, just like a high-rise building.

古文：夫齐，东有琅邪、即墨之饶，南有泰山之固，西有浊河之限，北有勃海之利。地方二千里，持戟百万，县隔千里之外，齐得十二焉。
现代文：要说那齐地，东有琅邪、即墨的富饶，南有泰山的险固，西有浊河这一天然界限，北有渤海鱼盐之利，地方二千里，持戟武士一百万，与各诸侯国悬隔千里之外，齐比其他地方好上十倍。
English: To say that Natchitocho, the east has the wealth of ink, the south has the perilous Mount Tai, the west has the natural boundary of the Erhai River, the north has the benefit of Erhai fish and salt, the place is two thousand miles away, and there are one million samurai with ink, and it is a thousand miles away from the vassal states, it is ten times better than other places.

古文：故此东西秦也。
现代文：所以这两个地方是东秦和西秦。
English: Therefore, these two places are East Qin and West Qin.

古文：非亲子弟，莫可使王齐矣。 高祖曰： 善。 
现代文：不是陛下的亲子弟，不要派他在齐地做王。 高祖说： 好。 
English: If he is not your majesty's own son, do not send him to be king in Qi. Gaozu said, "Good."

古文：赐黄金五百斤。
现代文：赏赐黄金五百斤。
English: He was awarded 500 jin of gold.

古文：後十馀日，封韩信为淮阴侯，分其地为二国。
现代文：后来十多天，封韩信为淮阴侯，把他的封地分作两个国。
English: More than ten days later, Han Xin was given the title of Huaiyin, and his fief was divided into two countries.

古文：高祖曰将军刘贾数有功，以为荆王，王淮东。
现代文：高祖说将军刘贾屡建战功，封为荆王，称工淮东。
English: Gao Zu said that General Liu Jia was awarded the title of "King of Jing" for his repeated military exploits, and was known as the "engineer of Huadong."

古文：弟交为楚王，王淮西。
现代文：弟弟刘交为楚王，称王淮西。
English: His younger brother Liu Jiao was the King of Chu, called Wang Huaxi.

古文：子肥为齐王，王七十馀城，民能齐言者皆属齐。
现代文：儿子刘肥为齐王，封给七十余城，百姓中能讲齐地语言的都归属齐国。
English: His son Liu Fei was the king of Qi, and more than seventy cities were given to him. All the people who could speak the Qi language belonged to Qi.

古文：乃论功，与诸列侯剖符行封。
现代文：高祖论定功劳大小，与列侯剖符为信，封侯食邑。
English: Gao Zu discussed the size of the merit, and wrote letters to the feudal lords, sealing the feudal lordships.

古文：徙韩王信太原。
现代文：把韩王信迁徙到太原。
English: Han Wangxin was moved to Taiyuan.

古文：七年，匈奴攻韩王信马邑，信因与谋反太原。
现代文：七年，匈奴在马邑攻打韩王信，韩王信就与匈奴在太原谋反。
English: In the seventh year, the Xiongnu attacked Han Wangxin in Mayi, and Han Wangxin plotted against the Xiongnu in Taiyuan.

古文：白土曼丘臣、王黄立故赵将赵利为王以反，高祖自往击之。
现代文：白土曼丘臣、王黄立原来的赵国将领赵利为王，反叛汉朝，高祖亲自前往讨伐。
English: Baidu Manchu Chen and Wang Huang made Zhao Li, the former general of Zhao, the king, and rebelled against the Han Dynasty. Gaozu personally went to the crusade.

古文：会天寒，士卒堕指者什二三，遂至平城。
现代文：正遇上天气寒冷，士卒十人中有两三个都冻掉了手指头，终于到达了平城。
English: The weather was getting cold, and two or three of the ten soldiers froze their fingers off before finally reaching Pingcheng.

古文：匈奴围我平城，七日而後罢去。
现代文：匈奴在平城围困高祖，七天之后才撤兵离去。
English: The Xiongnu besieged Gaozu in Pingcheng and withdrew after seven days.

古文：令樊哙止定代地。
现代文：命令樊哙留下来平定代地。
English: Order the baboons to stay and pacify the area instead.

古文：立兄刘仲为代王。
现代文：立哥哥刘仲为代王。
English: He appointed his brother Liu Zhong as acting king.

古文：二月，高祖自平城过赵、雒阳，至长安。
现代文：二月，高祖从平城经过赵地、雒阳，到了长安。
English: In February, Gao Zu traveled from Pingcheng via Zhaodi and Fenyang to Chang'an.

古文：长乐宫成，丞相已下徙治长安。
现代文：长乐宫已经建成，丞相以下的官员都迁到长安办公。
English: The Changle Palace has been completed, and officials from the prime minister on down have moved to Chang'an to work.

古文：八年，高祖东击韩王信馀反寇於东垣。
现代文：八月，高祖率军东去，在东垣攻打韩王信的残余叛贼。
English: In August, Gao Zu led the army to the east and attacked the remaining traitors of Han Wangxin in Donggaki.

古文：萧丞相营作未央宫，立东阙、北阙、前殿、武库、太仓。
现代文：萧丞相修筑未央宫，建立东阙、北阙、前殿、武库、太仓。
English: Xiao Chengxian built the Miang Palace, established the East Courtyard, the North Courtyard, the Front Hall, the Arsenal and the Taicang.

古文：高祖还，见宫阙壮甚，怒，谓萧何曰： 天下匈匈苦战数岁，成败未可知，是何治宫室过度也？ 
现代文：高祖回来，看见宫阙极为壮丽，非常生气，对萧何说： 天下喧扰不安，苦战数年，成败尚未可知，现在为什么要修建宫室豪华过度呢？ 
English: When Gaozu returned, he saw that the palace was extremely magnificent and was very angry. He said to Xiao He, "The world is noisy and restless, the war has been going on for several years, and success or failure is not yet known. Why build a luxurious palace now?

古文：萧何曰： 天下方未定，故可因遂就宫室。
现代文：萧何说： 正是因为天下没有安定，所以才乘这个时机建成宫室。
English: Xiao He said: It is precisely because there is no stability in the world that the palace was built at this time.

古文：且夫天子四海为家，非壮丽无以重威，且无令後世有以加也。 
现代文：况且天子以四海为家，宫室不壮观华丽，就不足以显示天子的尊贵和威严，并且也是为了不让后世的宫室有所超过。 
English: Moreover, the heavenly son takes the four seas as his home. If the palace is not spectacular and gorgeous, it is not enough to show the dignity and majesty of the heavenly son, and it is also in order to prevent the palace of future generations from exceeding.

古文：高祖乃说。
现代文：高祖这才高兴了。
English: This made Gaozu happy.

古文：高祖之东垣，过柏人，赵相贯高等谋弑高祖，高祖心动，因不留。
现代文：高祖去东垣，经过柏人，赵相贯高等谋杀高祖，高祖心动异常，因而没有在柏人停留。
English: Gao Zu went to Donggaki, passed through Baiyun, Zhao Xiangran advanced to murder Gao Zu, Gao Zu's heart was abnormal, so he did not stay in Baiyun.

古文：代王刘仲弃国亡，自归雒阳，废以为合阳侯。
现代文：代王刘仲弃国逃跑，自己回到雒阳，被废为合阳侯。
English: The acting king, Liu Zhong, abandoned the country and fled. He returned to Fenyang and was deposed as the Marquis of Heyang.

古文：九年，赵相贯高等事发觉，夷三族。
现代文：九年，赵相贯高等策划谋杀高祖的事被发觉了，他们的三族都被处死。
English: Nine years later, Zhao Xiangrun's high-level plot to murder Gao Zu was discovered, and all three of their families were executed.

古文：废赵王敖为宣平侯。
现代文：废赵王张敖为宣平侯。
English: The deposed Zhao Wang Zhangye became the Prince of Xuanping.

古文：是岁，徙贵族楚昭、屈、景、怀、齐田氏关中。
现代文：这一年，把楚国贵族昭氏、屈氏、景氏、怀氏和齐国贵族田氏迁徙到关中。
English: In that year, the aristocrats of Chu, the Akira clan, the Qu clan, the Jing clan, the Huai clan, and the aristocrats of Qi, the Tian clan, were moved to Guanzhong.

古文：未央宫成。
现代文：未央宫建成了。
English: The Miang Palace was completed.

古文：高祖大朝诸侯群臣，置酒未央前殿。
现代文：高祖大会诸侯和群臣，在未央宫前殿摆设酒宴。
English: The princes and courtiers of the Great Progenitor Assembly held a wine banquet in the front hall of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：高祖奉玉卮，起为太上皇寿，曰： 始大人常以臣无赖，不能治产业，不如仲力。
现代文：高祖手捧玉制酒杯，起身给太上皇祝寿，说： 当初大人常常认为我是无以谋生的无赖，不能料理产业，不如仲勤劳。
English: Holding a jade wine glass in his hand, Gao Zu stood up to wish the Empress Dowager a happy birthday, saying: At the beginning, adults often thought that I was a scoundrel who had nothing to do for a living, that I couldn't make it in the culinary industry, and that it would be better to be a hard worker.

古文：今某之业所就孰与仲多？ 
现代文：如今我成就的事业与仲相比，谁的多呢？ 
English: Now, compared to my peers, who has accomplished more?

古文：殿上群臣皆呼万岁，大笑为乐。
现代文：殿上群臣都高呼万岁，大笑作乐。
English: The courtiers in the palace shouted "Long live!" and laughed heartily.

古文：十年十月，淮南王黥布、梁王彭越、燕王卢绾、荆王刘贾、楚王刘交、齐王刘肥、长沙王吴芮皆来朝长乐宫。
现代文：十年十月，淮南王黥布、梁王彭越、燕王卢绾、荆王刘贾、楚王刘交、齐王刘肥、长沙王吴芮都来长乐宫朝见。
English: In October of the 10th year, Huainan King Zibo, Liang King Peng Yue, Yan King Lu Wei, Jing King Liu Jia, Chu King Liu Jia, Qi King Liu Hui, and Changsha King Wu Wei all came to Changle Palace for a morning meeting.

古文：春夏无事。
现代文：春夏无事。
English: Spring and summer were uneventful.

古文：七月，太上皇崩栎阳宫。楚王、梁王皆来送葬。
现代文：七月，太上皇崩于栎阳宫，楚王、梁王都来送葬。
English: In July, Emperor Taizong passed away at Shenyang Palace. King Chu and King Liang both came to attend the funeral.

古文：赦栎阳囚。
现代文：赦免栎阳的囚犯。
English: Pardoned the prisoners in Fenyang.

古文：更命郦邑曰新丰。
现代文：郦邑改名新丰。
English: Handan was renamed Xinfeng.

古文：八月，赵相国陈豨反代地。
现代文：八月，赵相国陈豨在代地反叛。
English: In August, Zhao Xianguo and Chen Qi rebelled on his behalf.

古文：上曰： 豨尝为吾使，甚有信。
现代文：高祖说： 陈豨曾经给我做事，很遵守信用。
English: Gao Zu said: Chen Yao used to do things for me, and he was very trustworthy.

古文：代地吾所急也，故封豨为列侯，以相国守代，今乃与王黄等劫掠代地！
现代文：代地是我所看重的地方，因此封陈豨为列侯，以相国名义守卫代地，如今竟和王黄等劫掠代地。
English: Substitute land is a place I value, so I made Chen Xi a vassal lord and guarded it in the name of my country, but now he and Wang Huang and others are plundering it.

古文：代地吏民非有罪也。其赦代吏民。 
现代文：代地的官吏和百姓并非有罪，赦免代地的吏民。 
English: The local officials and people were not guilty, and the local officials and people were pardoned.

古文：九月，上自东往击之。
现代文：九月，高祖亲自东去攻打陈豨。
English: In September, Gaozu himself went east to attack Chen Xi.

古文：至邯郸，上喜曰： 豨不南据邯郸而阻漳水，吾知其无能为也。 
现代文：到达邯郸，高祖高兴地说： 陈豨不南去据守邯郸，而凭借漳水为阵，我知道他是没有本事的。 
English: Arriving in Handan, Gao Zu said happily: Chen Xuan did not go south to guard Handan, but relied on Handan to take the lead, I know he has no ability.

古文：闻豨将皆故贾人也，上曰： 吾知所以与之。 
现代文：听说陈豨的将领都是过去的商人，高祖说： 我知道该怎样对付他们了。 
English: Hearing that Chen Tuo's generals were all former merchants, Gaozu said, "I know what to do with them now.

古文：乃多以金啗豨将，豨将多降者。
现代文：于是就多用黄金引诱陈豨的将领，陈豨的将领有很多投降的。
English: As a result, they used gold to lure Chen Xi's generals, and many of Chen Xi's generals surrendered.

古文：十一年，高祖在邯郸诛豨等未毕，豨将侯敞将万馀人游行，王黄军曲逆，张春渡河击聊城。
现代文：十一年，高祖在邯郸讨伐陈豨等人还没有结束，陈豨的将领侯敞带领一万多人流动作战，王黄驻军曲逆，张春渡过黄河进攻聊城。
English: In the eleventh year, Gao Zu's campaign against Chen Xi and others in Luoyang had not yet ended. Chen Xi's general Hou Zhan led more than ten thousand people in mobile combat, Wang Huang's garrison was in the opposite direction, and Zhang Chun crossed the Yellow River to attack Liaocheng.

古文：汉使将军郭蒙与齐将击，大破之。
现代文：汉派将军郭蒙与齐国的将领出击，把他们打得大败。
English: The Han general Guo Meng and the general of Qi attacked and defeated them.

古文：太尉周勃道太原入，定代地。
现代文：太尉周勃从太原进军，平定代地。
English: Second Lieutenant Zhou Bo marched from Taiyuan to pacify the area.

古文：至马邑，马邑不下，即攻残之。
现代文：到了马邑，一时没有攻克，后来就把它攻打得城破人亡。
English: When they arrived at Ma'eup, they did not conquer it for a while, but later they attacked it and destroyed the city.

古文：豨将赵利守东垣，高祖攻之，不下。
现代文：陈豨的将领赵利防守东垣，高祖攻打东垣，没有攻下。
English: Chen Xi's general Zhao Li defended Donggaki, Gaozu attacked Donggaki, but failed to capture it.

古文：月馀，卒骂高祖，高祖怒。
现代文：一个多月后，赵利的士卒辱骂高祖，高祖十分气愤。
English: More than a month later, Zhao Li's soldiers insulted Gao Zu, and Gao Zu was very angry.

古文：城降，令出骂者斩之，不骂者原之。
现代文：东垣投降了，命令交出辱骂高祖的人斩首处死，没有辱骂高祖的就宽恕了他们。
English: Higashigaki surrendered and ordered those who had insulted Gaozu to be beheaded. Those who had not insulted Gaozu were pardoned.

古文：於是乃分赵山北，立子恆以为代王，都晋阳。
现代文：于是划出赵国常山以北的地方，封儿子刘恒为代王，建都晋阳。
English: As a result, he designated the area north of Changshan in Zhao Province, made his son Liu Heng the acting king, and built the capital city of Jinyang.

古文：春，淮阴侯韩信谋反关中，夷三族。
现代文：春天，淮阴侯韩信谋反关中，处死了韩信的三族。
English: In the spring, the Huaiyin vassal Han Xin conspired against Guan, and executed three of Han Xin's clans.

古文：夏，梁王彭越谋反，废迁蜀；复欲反，遂夷三族。
现代文：夏天，梁王彭越谋反，废除他的封号，迁徙蜀地。
English: In the summer, Liang Wang Peng Yue plotted a rebellion, abolished his title and moved to Shu.

古文：立子恢为梁王，子友为淮阳王。
现代文：他又要反叛，于是就处死了他的三族。封儿子刘恢为梁王，儿子刘友为淮阳王。
English: He wanted to rebel again, so he executed his three clans. Fong's son Liu Huai became the King of Liang, and his son Liu You became the King of Huaiyang.

古文：秋七月，淮南王黥布反，东并荆王刘贾地，北渡淮，楚王交走入薛。
现代文：秋天七月，淮南王黥布反叛，向东兼并了荆王刘贾的土地，北进渡过淮水，楚王刘交跑到薛县。
English: In the autumn of July, Huainan Wang Zibo rebelled, annexed the land of Jing Wang Liu Jia to the east, crossed Huai Shui to the north, and Chu King Liu Jia ran to Xue County.

古文：高祖自往击之。立子长为淮南王。
现代文：高祖亲自前往讨伐他，封儿子刘长为淮南王。
English: Gao Zu personally went to fight against him and crowned his son Liu Chang as the King of Huainan.

古文：十二年，十月，高祖已击布军会甀，布走，令别将追之。
现代文：十二年十月，高祖在会甄已经击败黥布的军队，黥布逃走。高祖命令别将追击他。
English: In October of the twelfth year, Gaozu had already defeated Zengbu's army in the battle, and Zengbu fled. Gaozu ordered Zengbu not to pursue him.

古文：高祖还归，过沛，留。
现代文：高祖率军归还，路过沛县，停留下来。
English: Gao Zu led the army to return, passed through Peixian, and stopped.

古文：置酒沛宫，悉召故人父老子弟纵酒，发沛中兒得百二十人，教之歌。
现代文：在沛宫摆设酒宴，把过去的朋友和父老子弟全部召集来纵情畅饮。挑选沛中儿童，得到了一百二十人，教他们唱歌。
English: A banquet was held at the Pei Palace, and all the old friends and parents and children were called together to drink and enjoy themselves. One hundred and twenty children from the Pei Middle School were selected and taught to sing.

古文：酒酣，高祖击筑，自为歌诗曰： 大风起兮云飞扬，威加海内兮归故乡，安得猛士兮守四方！ 
现代文：酒喝到酣畅，高祖击着筑，自己作了一首诗，唱起来： 大风起兮云飞扬，威加海内兮归故乡，安得猛士兮守四方！ 
English: After drinking the wine until it was clear, Gao Zu knocked on the wall, made a poem of his own, and began to sing: The wind rises and the clouds fly, Weiga returns to his hometown in the sea, and the brave men of Ande guard the four directions!

古文：令兒皆和习之。
现代文：让儿童都跟着学唱。
English: Let the children learn to sing along.

古文：高祖乃起舞，慷慨伤怀，泣数行下。谓沛父兄曰： 游子悲故乡。
现代文：高祖又跳起舞，感慨伤怀，泪下数行，对沛县父兄们说： 远游的人思念故乡。
English: Gao Zu danced again, moved with emotion and sorrow, shed a few tears, and said to the parents and brothers of Peixian County: People who travel far miss their hometown.

古文：吾虽都关中，万岁後吾魂魄犹乐思沛。
现代文：我虽然建都关中，千秋万岁后，我的魂魄还是会怀思沛县。
English: Although I built the capital of Guanzhong, my soul will still be nostalgic for Peixian after the millennium.

古文：且朕自沛公以诛暴逆，遂有天下，其以沛为朕汤沐邑，复其民，世世无有所与。 
现代文：我从做沛公开始，诛暴讨逆，终于取得了天下。我把沛县作为我的汤沐邑，免除沛县百姓的徭役，世世代代不用服徭役。 
English: I started out as a Pei Gong, fought against the tyranny, and finally gained the world. I took Pei County as my hometown, exempted the people of Pei County from the forced labor, and did not have to serve the forced labor for generations.

古文：沛父兄诸母故人日乐饮极驩，道旧故为笑乐。
现代文：沛县父老兄弟、长辈妇女、旧日朋友，天天开怀畅饮，极为欢欣，说旧道故，取笑作乐。
English: Peixian's fathers and brothers, elderly women, and old friends drink freely every day, are extremely joyful, talk about old customs, and make fun.

古文：十馀日，高祖欲去，沛父兄固请留高祖。
现代文：过了十多天，高祖想要离去，沛县父老兄弟执意挽留高祖。
English: After more than ten days, Gaozu wanted to leave, but Peixian's parents and brothers insisted on keeping Gaozu.

古文：高祖曰： 吾人众多，父兄不能给。 
现代文：高祖说： 我的随从人员众多，父兄们供养不起。 
English: Gao Zu said: My entourage is large, and my parents and brothers cannot afford to support me.

古文：乃去。
现代文：于是高祖就动身了。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：沛中空县皆之邑西献。
现代文：沛县百姓倾城而出，都到城西贡献牛酒。
English: The people of Pei County poured out of the city and all went to the west of the city to contribute cow wine.

古文：高祖复留止，张饮三日。
现代文：高祖又停留下来，搭起帐篷，饮宴三天。
English: Gaozu stopped again, set up a tent, and feasted for three days.

古文：沛父兄皆顿首曰： 沛幸得复，丰未复，唯陛下哀怜之。 
现代文：沛县父兄们都叩头请求说： 沛县幸运地得到免除徭役，丰邑还没有获准免除，请陛下哀怜丰邑。 
English: Peixian's parents and brothers all bowed their heads and begged: "Peixian was lucky enough to be exempted from serving as an eunuch, but Fengyi has not been allowed to be exempted. Please have mercy on Fengyi."

古文：高祖曰： 丰吾所生长，极不忘耳，吾特为其以雍齿故反我为魏。 沛父兄固请，乃并复丰，比沛。於是拜沛侯刘濞为吴王。
现代文：高祖说： 丰邑是我生长的地方，绝不会忘记，我只是因为丰邑以雍齿的缘故反叛我而去帮助魏国， 沛县父兄们坚持请求，这才一并免除了丰邑的徭役，和沛县相同，封沛侯刘濞为吴王。
English: Gao Zu said: Fengyi is the place where I grew up, I will never forget, I only went to help Wei because Fengyi rebelled against me for the sake of Yongzhi, the parents and brothers of Peixian insisted on the request, which was the only way to exempt Fengyi from the bailiff, and the same as Peixian, the feudal lord Liu Ye was the king of Wu.

古文：汉将别击布军洮水南北，皆大破之，追得斩布鄱阳。
现代文：汉军将领在洮水南北两路追击黥布的军队，都大破黥布军，在鄱阳追获杀死了黥布。
English: The Chinese generals chased Zibo's army from the north to the south of Surabaya. They destroyed Zibo's army and chased and killed Zibo in Poyang.

古文：樊哙别将兵定代，斩陈豨当城。
现代文：樊哙另带一支部队平定代地，在当城杀死了陈豨。
English: He brought another force to subdue Dingde instead, and killed Chen Xuan in Dangcheng.

古文：十一月，高祖自布军至长安。
现代文：十一月，高祖从征讨黥布的军队中回到长安。
English: In November, Gao Zu returned to Chang'an from the army that had been sent to conquer Nanpu.

古文：十二月，高祖曰： 秦始皇帝、楚隐王陈涉、魏安釐王、齐缗王、赵悼襄王皆绝无後，予守冢各十家，秦皇帝二十家，魏公子无忌五家。 
现代文：十二月，高祖说： 秦始皇帝、楚隐王陈涉、魏安釐王、齐缗王、赵悼襄王都绝嗣无后，分别给予十户人家看守坟墓，秦始皇帝二十家，魏公子无忌五家。 
English: In December, Gao Zu said: Emperor Qin Shi Huang, King Chu Yin Chen Zhan, King Wei An Zi, King Qi Zi, and King Zhao Lai Xiang all died without heirs. Ten families were assigned to guard the tombs, Emperor Qin Shi Huang twenty families, and Wei Gong Zi Wu five families.

古文：赦代地吏民为陈豨、赵利所劫掠者，皆赦之。
现代文：代地官吏和百姓被陈豨、赵利所胁迫的，全部赦免。
English: The local officials and people who were coerced by Chen Qi and Zhao Li were all pardoned.

古文：陈豨降将言豨反时，燕王卢绾使人之豨所，与阴谋。
现代文：陈豨的降将说陈豨反叛时，燕王卢绾派人去陈豨那里参预了阴谋策划。
English: Chen Xuan's surrender will say that when Chen Xuan rebelled, Yan Wang Luhong sent people to Chen Xuan to participate in the conspiracy planning.

古文：上使辟阳侯迎绾，绾称病。
现代文：高祖派辟阳侯去接卢绾，卢绾称病不来。
English: Gao Zu sent Yang Hou to pick up Lu Yao, but Lu Yao said he was too sick to come.

古文：辟阳侯归，具言绾反有端矣。
现代文：辟阳侯回来，详细说明了卢绾反叛已有征兆。
English: After Yang Hou returned, he elaborated that there were already signs of rebellion in Luoyang.

古文：二月，使樊哙、周勃将兵击燕王绾，赦燕吏民与反者。
现代文：二月，派樊哙、周勃率军出击燕王卢绾。赦免燕地官吏和百姓参加反叛的人。
English: In February, he sent troops led by Fan and Zhou Bo to attack Yan's king, Lu Xun, and pardoned Yan's officials and people who had participated in the rebellion.

古文：立皇子建为燕王。
现代文：封皇子刘建为燕王。
English: Liu Jian, the prince of Fong, became the king of Yan.

古文：高祖击布时，为流矢所中，行道病。
现代文：高祖攻打黥布时，被流矢射中，行进途中得了病。
English: When Gao Zu was attacking Zong Bu, he was shot by a stream of arrows and fell ill on the way.

古文：病甚，吕后迎良医，医入见，高祖问医，医曰： 病可治。 
现代文：病情严重，吕后请来好医生。医生进去见高祖，高祖询问医生，医生说： 病可以治好。 
English: The illness was serious, and Lü Hou called for a good doctor. The doctor went in to see Gao Zu. Gao Zu asked the doctor, and the doctor said, "The illness can be cured."

古文：於是高祖嫚骂之曰： 吾以布衣提三尺剑取天下，此非天命乎？
现代文：于是高祖谩骂医生说： 我以一个布衣平民，手提三尺剑取得天下，这不是天命吗？
English: So Gao Zu cursed the doctor and said, "I won the world as a commoner wearing a cloth and carrying a three-foot sword. Isn't this the fate of the world?

古文：命乃在天，虽扁鹊何益！ 
现代文：命运在天，虽有扁鹊，又有什么用处！ 
English: Fate is in the sky, even if there is a squint, it is of no use!

古文：遂不使治病，赐金五十斤罢之。
现代文：高祖不让医生治病，赏赐黄金五十斤，叫他离去。
English: Gaozhu did not allow the doctor to treat him, but rewarded him with 50 jin of gold and told him to leave.

古文：已而吕后问： 陛下百岁後，萧相国即死，令谁代之？ 
现代文：不久吕后问高祖： 陛下百年以后，萧相国如果死了，让谁接替他？ 
English: Not long after, Lü Hou asked Gao Zu: If, after one hundred years of his reign, Xiao Xianguo dies, who will succeed him?

古文：上曰： 曹参可。 
现代文：高祖说： 曹参可以。 
English: Gao Zu said: Cao San can do it.

古文：问其次，上曰： 王陵可。
现代文：又问其次，高祖说： 王陵可以。
English: Asked a second time, Gao Zu said, "The royal tomb is fine."

古文：然陵少戆，陈平可以助之。
现代文：然而王陵稍为憨直，陈平可以帮助他。
English: However, Wang Ling is a bit stiff, and Chen Ping can help him.

古文：陈平智有馀，然难以独任。
现代文：陈平智慧有余，然而难以独任。
English: Chen Ping has more than enough wisdom, but it is difficult to do it alone.

古文：周勃重厚少文，然安刘氏者必勃也，可令为太尉。 
现代文：周勃稳重厚道，缺少文才，但能安定刘氏天下的一定是周勃，可以让他做太尉。 
English: Zhou Bo is steady and kind, lacking literary talent, but it must be Zhou Bo who can stabilize Liu's world, and he can make him a captain.

古文：吕后复问其次，上曰： 此後亦非而所知也。 
现代文：吕后又问其次，高祖说： 这以后也不是我所能知道的。 
English: Lu Huan asked a second time. Gao Zu said, "I can't know anything after this.

古文：卢绾与数千骑居塞下候伺，幸上病愈自入谢。
现代文：卢缩和数千名骑兵停留在边塞等待着，希望高祖病好了，自己去向高祖请罪。
English: Lu Zhijun and thousands of cavalrymen stayed at the frontier fortress and waited, hoping that Gao Zu would recover from his illness and go to Gao Zu to ask for forgiveness.

古文：四月甲辰，高祖崩长乐宫。
现代文：四月甲辰，高祖崩于长乐宫。
English: April Jia Chen, Gao Zu passed away in Changle Palace.

古文：四日不发丧。
现代文：过了四天不发丧。
English: After four days, there was no mourning.

古文：吕后与审食其谋曰： 诸将与帝为编户民，今北面为臣，此常怏怏，今乃事少主，非尽族是，天下不安。 
现代文：吕后和审食其商量说： 将领们和皇帝同为编户平民，如今北面称臣，为此常常怏怏不乐，现在事奉年轻的皇帝，不全部族灭这些人，天下不会安定。 
English: The generals and emperors were once commoners, but now they are called courtiers in the north, for which reason they are often unhappy. Now they serve the young emperor. If the whole nation does not exterminate these people, the world will not be stable.

古文：人或闻之，语郦将军。
现代文：有人听到了这个消息，告诉了郦将军。
English: Someone heard the news and told General Zou.

古文：郦将军往见审食其，曰： 吾闻帝已崩，四日不发丧，欲诛诸将。
现代文：郦将军去见审食其，说： 我听说皇帝已经驾崩，四天不发丧，想要诛杀将领们。
English: General Zou went to see the judge and said, "I heard that the emperor has passed away and has not mourned for four days. He wants to kill the generals."

古文：诚如此，天下危矣。
现代文：如果真是这样，天下就危险了。
English: If so, the world is in danger.

古文：陈平、灌婴将十万守荥阳，樊哙、周勃将二十万定燕、代，此闻帝崩，诸将皆诛，必连兵还乡以攻关中。
现代文：陈平、灌婴统率十万士卒驻守荥阳，樊哙、周勃统率二十万士卒平定燕、代，这时他们听到皇帝驾崩，将领们全部被杀，必定连兵回来向关中进攻。
English: At that time, they heard that the emperor had passed away and that all the generals had been killed. The company of soldiers must have returned to attack Guanzhong.

古文：大臣内叛，诸侯外反，亡可翘足而待也。 
现代文：大臣叛乱于内，诸侯造反于外，天下覆灭可以翘足而待了。 
English: The ministers rebel within, the princes rebel without, and the end of the world can wait.

古文：审食其入言之，乃以丁未发丧，大赦天下。
现代文：审食其进宫把这些话告诉了吕后，于是在丁未发丧，大赦天下。
English: The emperor told these words to Empress Lyu when he was about to enter the palace, so Ding did not mourn, and he was pardoned.

古文：卢绾闻高祖崩，遂亡入匈奴。
现代文：卢绾听说高祖驾崩，就逃入匈奴。
English: When Lu Wei heard that Gao Zu had died, he fled to the Xiongnu.

古文：丙寅，葬。
现代文：丙寅，安葬了高祖。
English: Cui Yin buried Gao Zu.

古文：己巳，立太子，至太上皇庙。
现代文：己已，立太子为皇帝，来到太上皇庙。
English: The crown prince has already been enthroned as emperor and has arrived at the Imperial Palace.

古文：群臣皆曰： 高祖起微细，拨乱世反之正，平定天下，为汉太祖，功最高。 
现代文：群臣都说： 高祖起于细微平民，拨乱反正，平定天下，是汉朝的开国始祖，功劳最高。 
English: The courtiers all said: Gao Zu started from the petty commoners, stirred up chaos and rectified the situation, and pacified the world. He was the founding father of the Han Dynasty, and he deserves the highest praise.

古文：上尊号为高皇帝。
现代文：上尊号为高皇帝。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Gao.

古文：太子袭号为皇帝，孝惠帝也。
现代文：太子袭号为皇帝，这就是孝惠帝。
English: The crown prince takes the title of emperor. This is the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui.

古文：令郡国诸侯各立高祖庙，以岁时祠。
现代文：命令各郡和各国诸侯建立高祖庙，按照每年的时节祭祀。
English: He ordered all counties and lords of various countries to establish high ancestor temples and to hold annual festivals.

古文：及孝惠五年，思高祖之悲乐沛，以沛宫为高祖原庙。
现代文：到了孝惠帝五年，孝惠帝想到高祖思念牵挂沛县，就把沛宫作为高祖原庙。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiao Hui's reign, Emperor Xiao Hui thought of Gao Zu's fondness for Peixian, and designated Peigu as Gao Zu's original temple.

古文：高祖所教歌兒百二十人，皆令为吹乐，後有缺，辄补之。
现代文：高祖所教唱歌的儿童一百二十人，都让他们做高祖原庙中演奏音乐的人员，以后有缺额，就立刻补上。
English: The one hundred and twenty children who were taught to sing by Gao Zu have all been asked to be music performers in Gao Zu's original temple. If there are any vacancies in the future, they will be filled immediately.

古文：高帝八男：长庶齐悼惠王肥；次孝惠，吕后子；次戚夫人子赵隐王如意；次代王恆，已立为孝文帝，薄太后子；次梁王恢，吕太后时徙为赵共王；次淮阳王友，吕太后时徙为赵幽王；次淮南厉王长；次燕王建。
现代文：高皇帝八个儿子：长子是庶出的齐悼惠王肥；其次是孝惠帝，吕后所生；再次是戚夫人生的赵隐王如意；再次是代王恒，已立为孝文帝，薄太后所生；再次是梁王恢，吕太后时被改封为赵并王；再次是淮阳王友，吕太后时被改封为赵幽王；再次是淮南厉王长；再次是燕王建。
English: Emperor Gao had eight sons: the eldest son was the illegitimate Prince Qiming Hui Wangfei; the second son was Prince Xiao Hui, born to Empress Lu; the third son was Prince Zhao Yin Rongyi, born to a relative; the fourth son was King Heng, born to Empress Dowager Bo, who had already been established as Emperor Xiaowen; the fifth son was King Liang Wanghuai, who was renamed King Zhao Bei when Empress Lu was still alive; the fifth son was King Huaiyang Wangyou, who was renamed King Zhao You when Empress Lu was still alive; the fifth son was King Liang of Huainan; and

古文：太史公曰：夏之政忠。忠之敝，小人以野，故殷人承之以敬。
现代文：太史公说：夏朝的政治质朴厚道，质朴厚道的弊病在于使细民百姓粗野少礼，所以殷朝的人以恭敬而讲究威仪来承替它。
English: Tai Shikong said: The politics of the Xia Dynasty was simple and dignified. The drawback of the simple and dignified was that it made the common people rude and impolite. Therefore, the people of the Yin Dynasty succeeded it with respect and dignity.

古文：敬之敝，小人以鬼，故周人承之以文。
现代文：恭敬而讲究威仪的弊病在于使细民百姓相信鬼神，所以周朝人用讲究尊卑等级来承替它。
English: The drawback of respectful and dignified etiquette is that it makes the common people believe in ghosts and gods, so the Zhou Dynasty replaced it with a hierarchy of superiority and inferiority.

古文：文之敝，小人以僿，故救僿莫若以忠。
现代文：讲究尊卑等级的弊病在于使细民百姓不能以诚相见，而补救不能以诚相见的办法没有比以质朴厚道为政更好的了。
English: The evil of stressing the hierarchy of superiority and inferiority is to make the common people unable to see eye to eye with sincerity, and there is no better way to remedy the inability to see eye to eye with sincerity than to govern with simplicity and kindness.

古文：三王之道若循环，终而复始。
现代文：夏、商、周三王的治国法则好像循环往复，终而复始。
English: The rules of governance of Xia, Shang, and Sui Wang seem to cycle back and forth, beginning and ending.

古文：周秦之间，可谓文敝矣。
现代文：周朝和秦朝之间，可以说是讲究尊卑等级的弊病都暴露出来了。
English: Between the Zhou Dynasty and the Qin Dynasty, it can be said that the ills of stressing superiority and inferiority were exposed.

古文：秦政不改，反酷刑法，岂不缪乎？
现代文：秦始皇赢政不加以改变，反而使刑法残酷，难道不是荒谬的吗？
English: Isn't it absurd that Qin Shihuang made the criminal law cruel without changing the political system?

古文：故汉兴，承敝易变，使人不倦，得天统矣。
现代文：所以汉朝兴起，面对过去的弊病，改变了治国法则，使百姓不倦怠，得到天道的规律了。
English: Therefore, the rise of the Han Dynasty, in the face of past ills, changed the rules of governing the country, so that the people do not get tired and get the law of heaven.

古文：朝以十月。车服黄屋左纛。
现代文：车服有定制，皇帝的车子用黄缯做盖的里子，车衡左边竖立毛羽制成的幢。
English: The driver's uniform is custom-made, the emperor's chariot is covered with yellow satin, and the left side of the balance is made of feathers.

古文：葬长陵。
现代文：高祖安葬在长陵。
English: Gao Zu was buried in Changling.

