古文：陆慧晓字叔明，吴郡吴人，晋太尉玩之玄孙也。
现代文：陆慧晓字叔明，吴郡吴县人，是晋朝太尉陆玩的玄孙。
English: Lu Hui Xiao Zi Shu Ming, a native of Wu County, Wuxian County, is the great-great-grandson of the Jin Dynasty Tai Lian Lu Cang.

古文：自玩至慧晓祖万载，世爲侍中，皆有名行。慧晓伯父仲元，又爲侍中，时人方之金、张二族。
现代文：从陆玩到陆慧晓的祖父陆万载，世代为侍中，都有著名的行事，陆慧晓的伯父陆仲元，又做侍中，当时的人们把他们比作金、张二族。
English: From Lu Xuan to Lu Huixiao's grandfather, Lu Wanchu, generations of attendants have all performed famous deeds. Lu Huixiao's uncle, Lu Zhongyuan, also served as an attendant. At that time, people compared them to Jin and Zhang.

古文：父子真，仕宋爲海陵太守。
现代文：他的父亲陆子真，在宋朝做官为海陵太守。
English: His father, Lu Zizhen, was an official in the Song Dynasty and the governor of Hailing.

古文：时中书舍人秋当见幸，家在海陵，假还葬父，子真不与相闻。
现代文：当时中书舍人秋当被宠幸，他的家在海陵，请假回家埋葬父亲，陆子真并不去他家拜望。
English: At that time, the middle school teacher, Qiu Dang, was favored. His home was in Hailing. He asked for leave to go home and bury his father. Lu Zizhen did not visit his home.

古文：当请发人修桥，又以妨农不许。
现代文：秋当请派人修桥，又因为妨碍农活而不答应。
English: Akitane asked to send someone to repair the bridge, but they did not agree because it would interfere with farm work.

古文：彭城王义康闻而赏之。
现代文：彭城王刘义康听到后非常欣赏他。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, admired him very much after hearing the story.

古文：王僧达贵公子孙，以才傲物，爲吴郡太守，入昌门曰： 彼有人焉。
现代文：王僧达是贵公的子孙，恃才骄傲，做吴郡太守，进入昌门时说： 那里有人才啊！
English: Wang Sonta is the descendant of a nobleman. He is proud of his talent. When he entered Changmen as the governor of Wu County, he said, "There are talented people there!"

古文：顾琛一公两掾，英英门户；陆子真五世内侍，我之流亚。 
现代文：顾琛一公两掾，英才门第；陆子真五世做内侍，和我是同一类人物。 
English: Gu Yao was a prince with two concubines, and he belonged to an elite family. Lu Zizhen V, who was a chambermaid, was the same type of person as me.

古文：子真自临海太守眼疾归，爲中散大夫，卒。
现代文：陆子真因为眼病而由临海太守辞归，为中散大夫，去世。
English: Due to an eye disease, Lu Zizhen resigned from the position of Linhai Taishou and became a doctor of Zhongshan, and passed away.

古文：慧晓清介正立，不杂交游，同郡张绪称之曰： 江东裴、乐也。 
现代文：陆慧晓清正耿直，不交杂乱人员，同郡的张绪称赞说： 这是江东的裴、乐啊！ 
English: Lu Hui Xiaoqing was upright and did not associate with disorderly people. He praised Zhang Xu from the same county, saying, "This is the joy of the East River!

古文：初应州郡辟，举秀才，历诸府行参军，以母老还家侍养，十馀年不仕。
现代文：最初应州郡的聘请，举为秀才，经历过各府行参军，因为母亲年老回家奉养，十余年没有做官。
English: At the beginning, he was hired by the state and county, promoted as an outstanding talent, and experienced the march to join the army in various prefectures. Because his mother was too old to go home to take care of him, he did not work as an official for more than ten years.

古文：齐高帝辅政，除爲尚书殿中郎。
现代文：齐高帝辅政，任命他为殿中郎。
English: Qi Gao, the emperor's aide-de-camp, appointed him as the palace middle-ranking official.

古文：邻族来相贺，慧晓举酒曰： 陆慧晓年踰三十，妇父领选，始作尚书郎，卿辈乃复以爲庆邪？ 
现代文：邻族都来庆贺，陆慧晓举起酒杯说： 陆慧晓年龄已过了三十，妻子的父亲主管选任，才做了个尚书郎，你们还认为值得再来庆贺么？ 
English: Neighbors came to celebrate, and Lu Huixiao raised his glass and said: Lu Huixiao is over thirty years old, his wife's father was an elected official, and he became a scholar. Do you still think it is worth celebrating again?

古文：高帝表禁奢侈，慧晓撰答诏草，爲帝所赏，引爲太傅东合祭酒。
现代文：高帝上表禁止奢侈，陆慧晓撰写答诏的草稿，为高帝所欣赏，引他担任太傅东阁祭酒。
English: Emperor Gao forbade extravagance on the table, and Lu Huixiao wrote the draft of the reply, which was appreciated by Emperor Gao and led him to serve as the Taifu of the Dongge Festival.

古文：齐建元初，迁太子洗马。
现代文：齐朝建元初年，调为太子洗马。
English: In the first year of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was transferred to the prince's washing horse.

古文：庐江何点常称 慧晓心如照镜，遇形触物，无不朗然。
现代文：庐江何点常常说： 陆慧晓心如明镜，遇形触物，无不清清楚楚。
English: Lu Huiqiao often said: Lu Huiqiao's mind is like a clear mirror, and when it is touched by objects, it is always clear and clear.

古文：王思远恒如怀冰，暑月亦有霜气 。
现代文：王思远心像怀冰，暑月也有霜气。 
English: Wang Siyuan's heart is like ice, and there is frost in the summer.

古文：当时以爲实录。
现代文：当时人们认为是实录。
English: At the time, people thought it was a true story.

古文：慧晓与张融并宅，其间有池，池上有二株杨柳。
现代文：陆慧晓与张融宅院相连，中间有一个水池，池上有两棵柳树。
English: Lu Huixiao is connected to Zhang Rong House, with a pool in the middle and two willow trees on the pool.

古文：点叹曰： 此池便是醴泉，此木便是交让。 
现代文：何点叹息说： 这池子便是醴泉，这树便是交让。 
English: How many sigh and say, "This pool is the spring, and this tree is the cedar."

古文：及武陵王晔守会稽，上爲精选僚吏，以慧晓爲征虏功曹，与府参军沛国刘璡同从述职。
现代文：到了武陵王萧晔做会稽太守，皇上为他精选官吏，以陆慧晓为征虏功曹，与府参军沛国的刘一同跟随前往就职。
English: When King Xiaohui of Wuling arrived, he was appointed as the auditor of the imperial court. The emperor selected officials for him, with Lu Huixiao as the recruiter, and Liu, who had joined the imperial army, followed him to take office.

古文：璡清介士也，行至吴，谓人曰： 吾闻张融与慧晓并宅，其间有水，此必有异味。 
现代文：刘是个清正的士人，行到吴地，对别人说： 我听说张融与陆慧晓连宅，中间有水，这里必定有奇异的味道。 
English: Liu was an upright scholar. When he went to Wudi, he said to others, "I heard that Zhang Rong and Lu Huixiao live in the same house, and there is water in the middle. There must be a strange taste here."

古文：故命驾往酌而饮之。
现代文：所以命令车驾前往舀水来喝。
English: So he ordered the driver to go to Surabaya to drink.

古文：曰： 饮此水，则鄙吝之萌尽矣。 
现代文：他说： 喝了这里的水，则卑鄙吝啬的念头都会消尽。 
English: He said, "If you drink the water here, all your mean and stingy thoughts will disappear."

古文：何点荐慧晓于豫章王嶷，补司空掾，加以恩礼。
现代文：何点向豫章王萧嶷推荐陆慧晓，补任司空掾，加以礼遇。
English: How to recommend Lu Huixiao to Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui, fill the post of Secretary of the Air Force, and give him a courtesy.

古文：累迁安西谘议、领冠军录事参军。
现代文：逐步升迁为安西咨议、兼任冠军录事参军。
English: Gradually promoted to the Anxi Counseling Center, also served as the champion of the record to join the army.

古文：武帝第三子庐陵王子卿爲南豫州刺史，帝称其小名谓司徒竟陵王子良曰： 乌熊痴如熊，不得天下第一人爲行事，无以压一州。 
现代文：武帝的第三个儿子庐陵王萧子卿为南豫州刺史，武帝叫着他的小名对司徒竟陵王萧子良说： 乌熊这个孩子痴呆如熊，不能得到天下第一人作为行事，就无法压住一州。 
English: Emperor Wu's third son, Gongling Wang Xiao Ziqing, became the first ruler of South Henan Province. Emperor Wu called him by his nickname and said to the tutor, Gongling Wang Xiao Ziliang: "Wu Xiong, this child is as dumb as a bear. If you can't get the first person in the world to act as you, you can't hold down a province."

古文：既而曰： 吾思得人矣。 
现代文：随后又说： 我想到了一个人。 
English: Then he added: I have someone in mind.

古文：乃使慧晓爲长史、行事。
现代文：于是就让陆慧晓为长史、行事。
English: So he let Lu Huixiao act as the long-term leader.

古文：别帝，问曰： 卿何以辅持庐陵？ 
现代文：告别武帝的时候，武帝问他说： 卿怎样辅持庐陵王呢？ 
English: When he was bidding farewell to Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu asked him, "How can you support King Fuling?"

古文：答曰： 静以修身，俭以养性。
现代文：回答说： 安静以便修身，俭朴以便养性。
English: He replied, "Be quiet in order to improve yourself, and be frugal in order to nourish your nature."

古文：静则人不扰，俭则人不烦。 
现代文：安静则世人不扰乱，俭朴则世人不忧烦。 
English: Quiet is not disturbed by the world, and frugal is not troubled by the world.

古文：上大悦。
现代文：皇上非常高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：后爲司徒右长史。
现代文：后来担任司徒右长史。
English: Later, he served as the Chief Historian of the Stuto U.

古文：时陈郡谢朏爲左长史，府公竟陵王子良谓王融曰： 我府前世谁比？ 
现代文：当时陈郡的谢籫为左长史，府公竟陵王萧子良对王融说： 我府中的佐官，以前的人谁能相比？ 
English: At that time, Xie Yao of Chen County was the left long history, and the prefectural governor, King Xiao Ziliang, said to Wang Rong: The adjutant in my prefecture, who can compare with the previous people?

古文：融曰： 明公二上佐，天下英奇，古来少见其比。 
现代文：王融说： 明公的两个上佐，是天下的英奇，古来很少有人能比。 
English: Wang Rong said: Ming Gong's two senior lieutenants are a wonder of the world, and few people can match them.

古文：子良西邸抄书，令慧晓参知其事。
现代文：萧子良在西院抄书，让陆慧晓参与此事。
English: Xiao Ziliang copied the book in the West Academy, and let Lu Huixiao participate in the matter.

古文：寻迁西阳王征虏、巴陵王后军、临汝公辅国三府长史，行府州事。
现代文：不久调任西阳王征虏、巴陵王后军、临汝公辅国三府长史，行府州事。
English: He was soon transferred to be the governor of the three prefectures of Xiyang, Baling, and Linru, where he was in charge of prefectural affairs.

古文：复爲西阳王左军长史，领会稽郡丞，行郡事。
现代文：又担任西阳王左军长史，兼会稽郡丞，行郡事。
English: He also served as the chief historian of the Xiyang Wangza Army, concurrently serving as the county magistrate and conducting county affairs.

古文：隆昌元年，徙爲晋熙王冠军长史、江夏内史，行郢州事。
现代文：隆昌元年，调任晋熙王冠军长史、江夏内史，行郢州事。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was transferred to Jinxi King Champion Changshi and Jiangxia Inner History to carry out the state affairs.

古文：慧晓历辅五政，立身清肃，僚佐以下造诣，必起送之。
现代文：陆慧晓先后共做了五次辅政，立身清正，僚佐以下的人来访，必定起身相送。
English: Lu Huixiao has made a total of five times of auxiliary politics, standing upright and upright, and people below the rank of assistant minister who visit will certainly get up to see each other off.

古文：或谓慧晓曰： 长史贵重，不宜妄自谦屈。 
现代文：有人对陆慧晓说： 长史身份贵重，不应妄自谦让。 
English: Some people said to Lu Huixiao: Long-term historical identity is precious, and one should not be too modest.

古文：答曰： 我性恶人无礼，不容不以礼处人。 
现代文：他回答说： 我生性讨厌别人无礼，不容不以礼待人。 
English: He replied, "I have a natural aversion to rudeness, and I can't help being polite.

古文：未尝卿士大夫，或问其故，慧晓曰： 贵人不可卿，而贱者乃可卿，人生何容立轻重于怀抱。 
现代文：他不曾称士大夫为卿，有人问他是什么缘故，陆慧晓说： 贵人不可以称卿，而贱者才可以称卿，人一生中怎么能在心里老是想着轻重呢！ 
English: He had never called the scholar a lord. When someone asked him why, Lu Huixiao said: A noble person cannot be called a lord, but a lowly person can be called a lord. How can a person always think about the importance in his heart in his life?

古文：终身常呼人位。
现代文：他终身经常都是称呼人的职位。
English: Throughout his life, he was often in the position of addressing people.

古文：建武初，除西中郎长史，行事、内史如故。
现代文：建武初年，他被任命为西中郎长史，行事、内史职务依旧。
English: In the first year of the Kenmu era, he was appointed to the position of Nishinakuro Choshi, and his duties of acting and internal history remained the same.

古文：俄征黄门郎，未拜，迁吏部郎。
现代文：不久征为黄门郎，还没有上任，调为吏部郎。
English: Soon he was conscripted as Huangmen Lang, and before he took office, he was transferred to the position of Liibu Lang.

古文：尚书令王晏选门生补内外要局，慧晓爲用数人而止。
现代文：尚书令王晏挑选自己的学生补任朝内外的要职，陆慧晓只为他任用了几个人就停止了。
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Yao to choose his own students to fill important positions inside and outside the DPRK. Lu Huixiao only appointed a few people for him and then stopped.

古文：晏恨之。
现代文：王晏十分恼恨他。
English: Wang Yao was very angry with him.

古文：送女妓一人，欲与申好，慧晓不纳。
现代文：他把一个女妓送给陆慧晓，想和他搞好关系，陆慧晓不接受。
English: He gave a female prostitute to Lu Huixiao and wanted to establish a good relationship with him, but Lu Huixiao did not accept it.

古文：吏曹都令史历政来谘执选事，慧晓任己独行，未尝与语。
现代文：吏曹都令史被派来做选拔人才的顾问，陆慧晓一意独行，不曾和他商量。
English: The official Cao Du Ling Shi was sent to serve as a consultant for the selection of talents. Lu Huixiao decided to go it alone and did not consult with him.

古文：帝遣主书单景隽谓曰： 都令史谙悉旧贯，可共参怀。 
现代文：明帝派主书单景俊对他说： 都令史熟悉旧的人事情况，可以一齐商议。 
English: Emperor Ming sent the chief scribe, Shan Jingjun, to tell him: Let Du Lingshi be familiar with the old personnel situation, and we can discuss it together.

古文：慧晓谓景隽曰： 六十之年，不复能谘都令史爲吏部郎也。
现代文：陆慧晓对单景俊说： 六十的年龄，不能再靠咨询都令史来做吏部郎了。
English: Lu Huixiao said to Shan Jingjun: At the age of sixty, I can no longer rely on consulting Du Ling Shi to be a bureaucrat.

古文：上若谓身不堪，便当拂衣而退。 
现代文：皇上如果认为我不能胜任，我便应当拂衣而退。 
English: If the Emperor thinks I am not up to the job, I should resign.

古文：帝甚惮之。
现代文：明帝很怕他。
English: Emperor Ming was very afraid of him.

古文：后欲用爲侍中，以形短小乃止。
现代文：后来想用他为侍中，因为他身材矮小而作罢。
English: Later, they wanted to use him as a waiter, but gave up because of his short stature.

古文：出爲晋安王镇北司马、征北长史、东海太守，行府州事。
现代文：后来调出京城担任晋安王镇北司马、征北长史、东海太守，负责府州事务。
English: Later, he was transferred out of Beijing to serve as Jinan Wangzhen North Sima, Zhengbei Changshi, and Donghai Dazhong, and was responsible for prefectural affairs.

古文：入爲五兵尚书，行扬州事。
现代文：又入京担任五兵尚书，负责扬州事务。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as the leader of the Five Soldiers and was in charge of Yangzhou affairs.

古文：崔慧景事平，领右军将军。
现代文：崔惠景事件平息，他兼任右军将军。
English: The Cui Huijing incident subsided, and he also served as the general of the right army.

古文：出监南徐州。
现代文：出京监管南徐州。
English: Out of Beijing to supervise southern Xuzhou.

古文：朝议又欲以爲侍中，王亮曰： 济、河须人，今且就朝廷借之，以镇南兖州。 
现代文：朝中舆论又打算以他为侍中，王亮说： 济水、黄河需要人，现在暂且从朝廷借用，让他去镇守南兖州。 
English: The public opinion in the DPRK and China also planned to make him an aide-de-camp. Wang Liang said, "Jishui and the Yellow River need people. I will borrow him from the imperial court for the time being, and let him go to guard Nanluozhou.

古文：王莹、王志皆曰： 侍中弥须英华，方镇犹应有选者。 
现代文：王荧、王志都说： 侍中尤其需要英华，方镇应该还有其他人选。 
English: Wang Huu and Wang Zhidu said: Yinghua is especially needed as a chamberlain, and Fangzhen should have other candidates.

古文：闲四子：厥、绛、完、襄也。
现代文：王亮说： 衡量二者，还是担当侍中比较缓和，拒敌贼寇比较急切。
English: Wang Liang said: Judging by the two, the person in charge of the waiter is more relaxed, but the enemy thief is more eager.

古文：绛字魏卿，时随闲，抱颈求代死，不获，遂以身蔽刀刃，行刑者俱害之。
现代文：当今朝廷很弱，应该服从急切者。 于是让他为辅国将军、南兖州刺史，加任都督。
English: Today's imperial court is very weak, and should obey those who are eager, so he made him the general of the auxiliary province, the governor of southern Luzhou, and the governor of the capital.

古文：厥字韩卿，少有风概，好属文。
现代文：到镇以后，不久因为有病归京。后来去世，赠他为太常。陆厥字韩卿，少年时期就很有风度气概，好写文章。
English: After arriving in the town, he soon returned to Beijing due to illness. He later died and was given the title of Taejong. Lu Jue, also known as Han Ching, was very personable and good at writing articles when he was a boy.

古文：齐永明九年，诏百官举士，同郡司徒左西曹掾顾暠之表荐厥，州举秀才。
现代文：齐朝永明九年，诏令百官举荐士人，同郡的司徒左西曹掾顾詗之上表推荐陆厥，州中举他为秀才。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yongming of the Qi Dynasty, the imperial edict ordered hundreds of officials to recommend scholars. Lu Jue was recommended in the above table by the county's scholar Zuo Xi Cao Guo, and he was selected as an outstanding scholar in the middle of the state.

古文：时盛爲文章，吴兴沈约、陈郡谢朓、琅邪王融以气类相推毂，汝南周顒善识声韵。
现代文：当时文章十分盛兴，吴兴的沈约、陈郡的谢緿、琅琊的王融因为气质相似而互相推举，汝南的周善于识别声韵。
English: At that time, the essay was very popular. Wu Xing's Shen Yao, Chen County's Xie Yao, and Handan's Wang Rong were mutually recommended because of their similar temperament. Runan's Zhou was good at recognizing phonetic rhymes.

古文：约等文皆用宫商，将平上去入四声，以此制韵，有平头、上尾、蜂腰、鹤膝。
现代文：沈约等人的文章都使用宫商乐调，安排平上去入四声，以此来制定韵律，有平头、上尾、蜂腰、鹤膝。
English: Shen Yu's and other people's articles all use the Gong Shang melody, arranged flatly into four voices, in order to establish the rhythm, with flat head, upper tail, bee waist, crane knee.

古文：五字之中，音韵悉异，两句之内，角征不同，不可增减。
现代文：五字之中，音韵全异，两句之内，乐调不同，不可以增减。
English: Among the five characters, the rhyme is completely different, within two sentences, the music is different, and cannot be added or subtracted.

古文：世呼爲 永明体 。
现代文：世人称它为 永明体 。
English: The world calls it the Yongming body.

古文：沈约宋书谢灵运传后又论其事，厥与约书曰：
现代文：沈约的《宋书谢灵运传》后面又论述这个问题，陆厥给沈约的信中说：
English: Lu Jue said in a letter to Shen You, who discussed this issue later in Shen You's "Song Shu Xie Ling Yun Biographies":

古文：范詹事自序： 性别宫商，识清浊，特能适轻重，济艰难。
现代文： 范詹事的《自序》中说： 字音区别宫商，识别清浊，特别能够适应轻重，渡过艰难。
English: Fan Zhanmen's "Self-order" said: The phonetic distinction of the palace merchants, the recognition of the Qing Dynasty, and especially the ability to adapt to the weight and the difficulty.

古文：古今文人多不全了斯处，纵有会此者，不必从根本中来。 
现代文：古今的文人大多不完全了解这一点，纵然有领会这一点的，也不一定是从根本上弄懂了。 
English: Most writers, ancient and modern, do not fully understand this, and even if they do, they do not necessarily understand it fundamentally.

古文：尚书亦云： 自灵均以来，此秘未睹。
现代文：尚书也说： 自从灵均以来，这个秘密没有发现。
English: Shangshu also said: Since Lingjun, this secret has not been discovered.

古文：或暗与理合，匪由思至。
现代文：有的暗中与事理相合，也不是由思考得来。
English: Some coincide with the facts secretly, and are not derived from thinking.

古文：张、蔡、曹、王曾无先觉，潘、陆、顔、谢去之弥远。 
现代文：张、蔡、曹、王，并没有先觉，潘、陆、颜、谢，离这些更远。 
English: Zhang, Cai, Cao and Wang did not have precognition, while Pan, Lu, Yan and Xie were even further away.

古文：大旨欲 宫商相变，低昂舛节，若前有浮声，则后须切响，一简之内，音韵尽殊，两句之中，轻重悉异 。
现代文：大概意旨是要 宫商相变，高低穿插，如果前面有了浮声，则后面要有切响，一篇之内，音韵尽然不同，两句之中，轻重完全两样 。
English: Presumably, the intention is to create a palatial phase change, interspersing highs and lows. If there is a floating sound in the front, there must be a keening sound in the back. Within one piece, the rhyme is completely different, and in two sentences, the weight is completely different.

古文：辞既美矣,理又善焉；但观历代衆贤似不都闇此处，而云 此秘未睹 ，近于诬乎。
现代文：辞藻很优美，道理也很对；但是观看历代的贤人们，似乎并非都不了解这一点，而说是 这个秘密没有发现 ，恐怕近于诬枉吧。
English: The words are very beautiful, and the reason is very right; but looking at the sages of all ages, it seems that they do not all understand this, but that this secret has not been discovered, I am afraid it is close to falsehood.

古文：案范云 不从根本中来 ，尚书云 匪由思至 ，斯则揣情谬于玄黄，擿句着其音律也。
现代文：按范氏说 不是从根本上弄懂了 ，尚书说 不是由思考得来 ，这则是揣摩情理不合乎五彩，摘录文句显示其音律。
English: According to Mr. Fan, it is not fundamentally understood, Shang Shuxu said that it is not derived from thinking, this is speculation that does not conform to the five colors, excerpts show its rhythm.

古文：范又云 时有会此者 ，尚书云 或闇与理合 。
现代文：范氏又说 偶尔有符合这一条件的 ，尚书说 有的暗中与这一道理相符合 。
English: Fan also said that "occasionally, there are works that meet this condition, and some of them are said to secretly comply with this principle."

古文：则美咏清讴，有辞章调韵者，虽有差谬，亦有会合。
现代文：于是美妙的吟咏，有辞章韵调的，虽然有差错，但也有巧合。
English: As a result, the wonderful chanting, with its rhyming phrases, has errors, but also coincidences.

古文：推此以往，可得而言。
现代文：由此推论以往，可以大致不差。
English: From this, it can be deduced that in the past, it was roughly the same.

古文：夫思有合离，前哲同所不免，文有开塞，即事不得无之。
现代文：思考有契合和偏离，前代的贤人一样不可避免，文章有开朗和塞滞，所有的事情都有这种现象。
English: There are fits and departures in thinking, as inevitable as the sages of the previous generation, there are cheerful and stagnant articles, and all things have this phenomenon.

古文：子建所以好人讥弹，士衡所以遗恨终篇。
现代文：曹子建因此而常受到人们的讥讽，陆士衡因此而遗憾于自己的文章。
English: As a result, Cao Zijian was often ridiculed by people, and Lu Shiheng regretted his article.

古文：既曰遗恨，非尽美之作。
现代文：既然感到遗憾，便不是尽善尽美的作品。
English: Since it is regrettable, it is not a perfect work.

古文：理可诋诃，君子执其诋诃，便谓合理爲闇，岂如指其合理，而寄诋诃爲遗恨邪。
现代文：道理上可以毁谤，君子就抓住进行毁谤，便说合理为暗合，哪如指明它确是合理，而把那些毁谤者视为遗憾呢！
English: A gentleman seizes upon a slander which is logically justifiable, and says that it is justifiable by implication, rather than pointing out that it is indeed justifiable and deploring the slanderers.

古文：自魏文属论，深以清浊爲言，刘桢奏书，大明体势之致。
现代文： 自从魏文帝论文，很强调把文章的清浊作为重要标准，刘桢奏表，努力标榜体势的风貌。
English: Since Wei Wendi's thesis, it is very important to regard the clarity of the article as an important standard, and Liu Xuan played the table and tried to flaunt the style of the posture.

古文：龃龉妥怗之谈，操末续巅之说，兴玄黄于律吕，比五色之相宣。
现代文：龃龉妥帖之谈，操末续巅之说，运用乐律指导声韵，好比五色相映生辉。
English: The use of melody to guide the rhyme is like the reflection of the five colors.

古文：苟此秘未睹，兹论爲何所指邪？
现代文：如果这一秘密没被发现，这些理论是指什么而说的呢？
English: If this secret has not been discovered, what do these theories refer to?

古文：愚谓前英已早识宫征，但未屈曲指的，若今论所申。
现代文：我认为前代的英贤早已识破宫商，只是没有详细阐明，像今天的理论所论述的那样。
English: I think that the previous generation of sages had already seen through the palace merchants, but did not elaborate, as today's theory discusses.

古文：至于掩瑕藏疾，合少谬多，则临淄所云 人之着述，不能无病 者也。
现代文：至于掩藏缺陷，契合的少、违背的多，则是如临淄所说的那样： 人们的著述，不可能没有毛病。 
English: As for concealing defects, there are fewer coincidences and more violations, as Linyi said: People's writings cannot be free of defects.

古文：非知之而不改，谓不改则不知，斯曹、陆又称 竭情多悔，不可力强 者也。
现代文：不是知道而不改正，认为不改就是不知道，这就是曹、陆又说的 尽情多有后悔，不可用力强求 。
English: It is not knowing but not correcting, thinking that not changing is not knowing, which is what Cao and Lu also said.

古文：今许以有病有悔爲言，则必自知无悔无病之地。
现代文：现在称许他们有毛病有后悔的话，则必然自己知道没有后悔没有毛病的样式。
English: Now, if you praise them for having problems and regrets, then you must know that there are no regrets and no problems.

古文：引其不了不合爲闇，何独诬其一合一了之明乎？
现代文：引用他们不明了不符合的例子说他们是不懂，为什么独独抹杀他们的一些符合以及明了、可以证明他们懂得的事例呢？
English: Why single out some of their corroboration and clear, demonstrable examples of what they know, when they can cite examples of what they don't know that don't fit?

古文：意者亦质文时异，今古好殊，将急在情物，而缓于章句。
现代文：可以推测也是质朴和文雅因时而异，当今和古代爱好不同，他们重在情感事物，而较轻于章法文句。
English: It can be surmised that simplicity and gentleness also vary from time to time. Today's hobbies are different from those of ancient times. They focus on emotional things, and are lighter than formal phrases.

古文：情物，文之所急，美恶犹且相半；章句，意之所缓，故合少而谬多。
现代文：情物，是文章急切的追求，美丑尚且对半；章句，是思虑松缓的方面，所以相合的少、违背的多。
English: The love object is the eager pursuit of the article, and the beauty and ugliness are still half and half; the chapter is the aspect of relaxation, so there are fewer coincidences and more violations.

古文：义兼于斯，必非不知明矣。
现代文：事情兼有两个方面的情况，必定并非不懂是很明显的。
English: The fact that there are two aspects to the matter is not necessarily incomprehensible, it is obvious.

古文：长门、上林，殆非一家之赋，洛神、池雁，便成二体之作。
现代文：《长门》、《上林》，几乎不是一家的辞赋，《洛神》、《池雁》，更是两种体式的作品。
English: "Nagato" and "Kamibayashi" are hardly the work of a single family, while "Rakushin" and "Ikegane" are works of two different styles.

古文：孟坚精正，咏史无亏于东主，平子恢富，羽猎不累于凭虚。
现代文：班孟坚纯正，《咏史》无亏于东都主人，张平子弘富，《羽猎》并没有虚飘缺陷。
English: Ben Mengjian is pure, "The History of the Dragonfly" is not inferior to the master of Dongdu, Zhang Pingzi Hongfu, and "Hunting" does not have any flaws.

古文：王粲初征，他文未能称是，杨修敏捷，暑赋弥日不献。
现代文：王粲《初征》，其他文章不能相比，杨敏捷，《暑赋》很久没有献上。
English: Wang Qian's "First Expedition" and other articles cannot be compared, Yang Qianli's "Summer Feeding" has not been presented for a long time.

古文：率意寡尤，则事促乎一日，翳翳愈伏，而理赊于七步。
现代文：随心所欲，很少责怪，则一天办成也很紧张，深晦不明，尽量潜入，则七步完成也很松缓。
English: Do whatever you want, rarely blame, then the day is also very tense, obscure and unclear, try to sneak in, then the seven steps are also very loose.

古文：一人之思，迟速天悬，一家之文，工拙壤隔，何独宫商律吕必责其如一邪？
现代文：一个人的思路，快慢相差甚远，一家的文章，好坏区别极大，为什么宫商律吕一定要求它完全一样呢？
English: A person's way of thinking, the speed is very far apart, a family's article, the difference between good and bad is great, why does Gong Shangrui Lu necessarily require it to be exactly the same?

古文：论者乃可言未穷其致，不得言曾无先觉也。
现代文：谈论的人可以说他们是没有穷尽它的奥妙，而不能说他们没有预先觉察到这一规律。 
English: Those who talk about it can say that they have not exhausted its mystery, but they cannot say that they did not notice this law in advance.

古文：约答曰：
现代文：沈约答复说：
English: Shen Youyou replied:

古文：宫商之声有五，文字之别累万。
现代文： 宫商的乐声有五个，文字的差别有数万。
English: There are five parts to the music of "Palace Merchant," and there are tens of thousands of differences in the text.

古文：以累万之繁，配五声之约，高下低昂，非思力所学，又非止若斯而已。
现代文：以数万的繁多，配五声的约简，高下低昂，不是思力所能学会的，又不是只有这些。
English: With tens of thousands of complexities, with five-voice contractions, highs and lows, it is not possible to learn with the mind, and it is not only these.

古文：十字之文，颠倒相配，字不过十，巧历已不能尽，何况复过于此者乎？
现代文：十个字的文句，颠倒相配，字不过十个，巧妙已经不能穷尽，何况比这更多的呢！
English: A ten-character sentence, reversed, matches, the characters are only ten, the cleverness is already inexhaustible, how much more than this!

古文：灵均以来，未经用之于怀抱，固无从得其髣佛矣。
现代文：从灵均以来，没有在心里留意过，当然无从得到它的大略。
English: Since Lingjun, I haven't paid attention to it in my heart, and of course I can't get a general idea of it.

古文：若斯之妙，而圣人不尚，何耶？
现代文：这样的奥妙，而圣人并不推尚，为什么呢？
English: Such a mystery, and the sage does not promote it, why?

古文：此盖曲折声韵之巧，无当于训义，非圣哲玄言之所急也，是以子云譬之 雕虫篆刻 ，云 壮夫不爲 。
现代文：这大概是因为声韵曲折的巧妙，和意义没有多大关系，不是圣哲玄言所急于解决的，所以扬子云比喻为 雕虫篆刻 ，说是 壮夫不为 。
English: This is probably because the subtlety of the twists and turns of the rhyme has little to do with the meaning, and it is not something that the sages and gurus are eager to solve. Therefore, Yang Ziyun likened it to the carving of insects, saying that it was not done by a strong man.

古文：自古辞人岂不知宫羽之殊、商征之别。
现代文：自古以来的文人难道不知道宫羽的差异、商徵的不同。
English: Haven't writers since ancient times known the difference between the imperial feathers and the imperial crest?

古文：虽知五音之异，而其中参差变动，所昧实多，故鄙意所谓 此秘未睹 者也。
现代文：虽然知道五音的区别，而其中的参差变动，所不明白的实在很多，所以我认为就是所谓 这个秘密没有发现 。
English: Although I know the differences between the five tones, and the variations in them, there is a lot that I don't understand, so I think it's the so-called secret that I haven't discovered.

古文：以此而推，则知前世文士，便未悟此处。
现代文：以此类推，则知道前代的文士，便没有悟出这一点。
English: By analogy, we know that the previous generation of scribes did not realize this.

古文：若以文章之音韵，同弦管之声曲，美恶妍蚩，不得顿相乖反，譬犹子野操曲，安得忽有阐缓失调之声。
现代文：如果以文章的音韵，同于乐器的声曲，美恶妍丑，不能互相违背，譬如子野奏曲，怎么会忽然出现和缓失调的声音。
English: If the music of an article is the same as the vocal music of a musical instrument, and beauty, evil, and ugliness cannot contradict each other, for example, the sonata, how can the sound of detunement suddenly appear?

古文：以洛神比陈思他赋，有似异手之作，故知天机啓，则律吕自调，六情滞，则音律顿舛也。
现代文：以《洛神》对比陈思王其他的赋，好像是不同的人的作品，所以知道天机开启，则律吕自然协调，六情涩滞，则音律顿然乖谬。
English: Comparing "Luo Shen" with Chen Si Wang's other works, it seems to be the work of different people, so I know that when the celestial machine is turned on, the rhythm is naturally coordinated, the six emotions are stagnant, and the musical rhythm is suddenly perverse.

古文：士衡虽云焕若缛锦，宁有濯色江波，其中复有一片是卫文之服。
现代文：陆士衡虽说像锦绣一般灿烂，难道在江波中洗涤色彩，其中还有一片是卫文公的衣服。
English: Although Lu Shiheng is as resplendent as brocade, the colors are washed in the waves of the river, and one of them is the clothes of Prince Wei Wen.

古文：此则陆生之言，即复不尽者矣。
现代文：这样看来陆生所说的话，就又有没有完全包括的地方。
English: In this way, it seems that there is no place completely included in the words spoken by terrestrials.

古文：韵与不韵，复有精粗，轮扁不能言之，老夫亦不尽辩此。
现代文：韵与不韵，还有精粗，轮扁不能说清他的奥妙，老夫我也不能完全辩明这个问题。 
English: Rhyme and non-rhyme, as well as refinement and coarseness, Rong Bian can't explain his mystery, and I can't fully clarify this issue.

古文：约论四声，妙有诠辩，而诸赋亦往往与声韵乖。
现代文：沈约论述四声，有很精妙的诠释和辩解，而他写的几篇赋也往往与声韵不合。
English: Shen Yu's four-part exposition is full of subtle interpretations and justifications, and several of the poems he wrote are often incongruous with the rhyme scheme.

古文：时有王斌者，不知何许人。着四声论行于时。
现代文：当时有个人叫王斌，不知道是什么人，著有《四声论》在当时流行。
English: At that time, there was a man called Wang Bin, I don't know who he was, the author of "The Four Tone Theory," which was popular at the time.

古文：斌初爲道人，博涉经籍，雅有才辩，善属文，能唱导而不修容仪。
现代文：王斌起初是个道人，广博地涉猎各种经书典籍，很有辩才，善于写文章，能宣唱开导而不修容仪。
English: At first, Wang Bin was a Taoist. He was well versed in all kinds of scriptures and classics, very talented in debate, good at writing articles, and able to preach enlightenment without preening.

古文：尝弊衣于瓦官寺听云法师讲成实论，无复坐处，唯僧正慧超尚空席，斌直坐其侧。
现代文：曾经穿着破旧的衣服在瓦官寺听云法师讲《成实论》，不再有坐的地方，只有僧正慧超那里还有空席，王斌就直接坐在了他的旁边。
English: Wang Bin used to wear shabby clothes to listen to Yun Mage's lecture on "Theory of Becoming a Reality" at the Wakan Temple. There was no longer a place to sit. Only the monk Zheng Huichao had an empty seat, and Wang Bin sat directly next to him.

古文：慧超不能平，乃骂曰： 那得此道人，禄蔌似队父唐突人。 
现代文：慧超十分不满，便骂道： 哪里来了这么个道人，像个莽撞乞丐一样唐突人。 
English: Hui Chao was very dissatisfied and scolded: Where did such a Taoist come from? He is as abrupt as a reckless beggar.

古文：因命驱之。
现代文：于是命人把他赶出去。
English: So they ordered him to be thrown out.

古文：斌笑曰： 既有叙勋僧正，何爲无队父道人。 
现代文：王斌笑着说： 既然有叙勋僧正，怎么就没有乞丐道人。 
English: Wang Bin said with a smile, "Since there are ordained monks, how come there are no beggars?"

古文：不爲动。
现代文：不因为他而移动。
English: Don't move because of him.

古文：而抚机问难，辞理清举，四座皆属目。
现代文：而对他进行质问辩难，他理辞清晰有力，四座都为之瞩目。
English: When he was challenged, his arguments were clear and forceful, attracting attention from all four parties.

古文：后还俗，以诗乐自乐，人莫能名之。
现代文：后来他还俗了，以诗和音乐来自取快乐，人们都难以言说。
English: Later, he became a layman, using poetry and music to derive pleasure from himself, which is hard for people to explain.

古文：永元元年，始安王遥光反，厥父闲被诛，厥坐系尚方。
现代文：永元元年，始安王萧遥光反叛，陆厥的父亲陆闲被处死，陆厥牵连被囚禁在尚方狱中。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, King of Shi'an, Xiao Yaoguang, rebelled. Lu Jue's father, Lu Xun, was executed, and Lu Jue was implicated and imprisoned in Shangfang Prison.

古文：寻有赦，厥感恸而卒，年二十八。
现代文：不久有了赦免令，陆厥感动悲伤而死，年龄二十八岁。
English: Shortly after receiving the pardon, Lu Jue died of grief at the age of twenty-eight.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：他的文集流行在世上。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：时有会稽虞炎以文学与沈约俱爲文惠太子所遇，意眄殊常，官至骁骑将军。
现代文：当时有个会稽人虞炎以文学和沈约都为文惠太子所厚待，心意不同寻常，官至骁骑将军。
English: At that time, there was an accountant named Gu Yan, who was well-received by Prince Wen Hui for his literature and sham engagements. He had an unusual mind, and rose to the rank of cavalry general.

