古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余尝上于清冷之台，中阶而顾，匍匐而前，则惑。
现代文：黄帝说：我曾经攀登那高高的清冷之台，上到一半地方，回头下视，而后又伏身尽力攀登，就觉得心神惑乱。
English: Huang Di said: I once climbed that high and cold platform, halfway up, looked back down, and then tried my best to climb, I felt confused.

古文：余私异之，窃内怪之，独瞑独视，安心定气，久而不解。
现代文：这种异常的感觉，我暗自感到奇怪，于是我就时而闭上眼睛，时而睁眼观望，想使心神镇定下来，但是这种感觉长久不能消除。
English: This unusual feeling, I secretly feel strange, so I sometimes close my eyes, sometimes open my eyes to watch, want to calm down, but this feeling can not be eliminated for a long time.

古文：独博独眩，披发长跪，俛而视之，后久之不已也。
现代文：这种感到头晕目眩的情况，即使是披散开头发，赤脚而跪在台阶上，力求形体舒缓，使精神轻松，但当向下俯视时，眩晕仍长久不止。
English: In this case of feeling dizzy and dizzy, even if you wear your hair loose, barefoot and kneel on the steps, try to soothe the body and ease the spirit, but when you look down, the dizziness still lasts for a long time.

古文：卒然自上，何气使然？
现代文：这种登高而突然之间头部眩晕的症状，是什么气造成的呢？
English: What is the cause of this symptom of climbing high and suddenly feeling dizzy in the head?

古文：岐伯对曰：五脏六腑之精气，皆上注于目而为之精。
现代文：岐伯回答说：五脏六腑的精气，都向上输注于目而形成为睛。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The essence of the five viscera and six glands are all infused upward into the eyes to form the eyes.

古文：精之窠为眼，骨之精为瞳子，筋之精为黑眼，血之精为络，其窠气之精为白眼，肌肉之精为约束，裹撷筋骨血气之精而与脉并为系。
现代文：睛的窝穴是眼，骨之精形成为瞳子，筋之精形成为黑睛，血之精形成为眼睛的赤络，气之精形成为白睛，肌肉之精形成为眼胞，包裹收拢筋、骨、血、气的精气而与眼的脉络合并，形成为目系。
English: The socket of the eye is the eye, the shape of the bone is the pupil, the shape of the muscle is the black eye, the shape of the blood is the red eye, the shape of the qi is the white eye, and the shape of the muscle is the eye socket. The essence of the muscle, bone, blood, and qi is wrapped and merged with the veins of the eye to form the eye system.

古文：上属于脑，后出于项中。
现代文：目系向上连属于脑，向后出于项中。
English: The eye system belongs to the brain from the top to the bottom.

古文：故邪中于项，因逢其身之虚，其入深，则随眼系以入于脑。
现代文：所以如有邪气侵入项部，又遇上身体虚弱，邪气侵入得深，就会随目系进入脑中。
English: Therefore, if the evil spirit invades the neck, and the body is weak, and the evil spirit invades deeply, it will enter the brain along with the eyes.

古文：入于脑则脑转，脑转则引目系急，目系急则目眩以转矣。
现代文：邪气入脑，则头脑晕转，头脑晕转则牵引目系，使目系紧张，目系紧张就会两眼眩晕而有天旋地转之感。
English: If evil spirits enter the brain, the mind will be dizzy, and if the mind is dizzy, it will pull the eye system and make the eye system tense. If the eye system is tense, both eyes will be dizzy and feel dizzy.

古文：邪其精，其精所中，不相比也，则精散。精散则视歧，视歧见两物。
现代文：如果邪气伤害了眼部精气，受到损伤的精气彼此间不能相互并合、协调，则眼部精气散乱；眼部精气散乱，就会造成视歧，视歧即看一件东西好像有两件一样。
English: If the evil spirit has harmed the eye spirit, and the damaged spirits cannot merge and coordinate with each other, then the eye spirit will be scattered; if the eye spirit is scattered, it will cause discrimination, that is, seeing one thing as if there were two.

古文：目者，五脏六腑之精也，营卫魂魄之所常营也，神气之所生也。
现代文：人的眼睛，既是脏腑的精气所形成，也是营、卫、气、血、精、神、魂、魄各神气通行和寓藏的所在，眼睛视物的功能，是以神气为基础的。
English: The human eye, as well as being formed by the essence of the viscera, is also the place where the ying, wei, qi, blood, essence, god, soul, and spirit pass through and reside. The function of the eye to see things is based on the essence.

古文：故神劳则魂魄散，志意乱。
现代文：所以人在精神过度疲劳的时候，就会出现魂魄失守，意志散乱，眼睛迷离而无神气。
English: Therefore, when a person is mentally overfatigued, the soul will be lost, the will will be scattered, the eyes will be confused and there will be no spirit.

古文：是故瞳子黑眼法于阴，白眼赤脉法于阳也，故阴阳合传而精明也。
现代文：眼的瞳子部分属于肾，黑睛属于肝，二者为阴脏的精气所滋养；白睛属肺，眼球的赤脉属于心，二者依赖阳脏的精气所滋养，因此，阴脏的精气和阳脏的精气相互结合而协调，才能使眼睛具有视物清晰的功能。
English: The pupil part of the eye belongs to the kidney, the black eye belongs to the liver, both are nourished by the essence of the vulva; the white eye belongs to the lung, the red vein of the eyeball belongs to the heart, both are nourished by the essence of the male organ. Therefore, the essence of the vulva and the essence of the male organ are combined and coordinated to make the eyes have a clear visual function.

古文：目者，心使也。心者，神之舍也，故神精乱而不转，卒然见非常处，精神魂魄，散不相得，故曰：惑也。
现代文：眼睛的视觉功能，主要受心的支配，这是因为心主藏神的缘故，如果精神散乱，阴脏的精气和阳脏的精气不能相互协调，突然看到异常的景物，就会引起心神不安，精失神迷，魂飘魄散，所以发生迷惑眩晕。
English: The visual function of the eyes is mainly controlled by the heart. This is because the heart is the seat of the gods. If the spirit is scattered, the essence of the yin and the essence of the yang cannot be coordinated with each other, and abnormal scenes are suddenly seen, it will cause the mind to be disturbed, the spirit to be lost, and the soul to be scattered, so confusion and dizziness will occur.

古文：黄帝曰：余疑其然。
现代文：黄帝说：我有些怀疑你所说的道理。
English: Huang Di said, "I have some doubts about what you are saying.

古文：余每之东苑，未曾不惑，去之则复，余唯独为东苑劳神乎？
现代文：我每次去东苑步登清泠高台，没有一次不发生眩晕迷惑的，离开那里，就恢复正常，难道说我惟独在东苑那个地方才会劳神吗？
English: Every time I go to Dongyuan and walk up the Qingyao Hill, I never get dizzy and confused, and when I leave there, I return to normal. Is it true that I only get tired in that part of Dongyuan?

古文：何其异也！
现代文：这是多么奇怪呀！
English: How strange this is!

古文：岐伯曰：不然也。
现代文：岐伯说：不是这样。
English: Qi Bo said, "That's not true.

古文：心有所喜，神有所恶，卒然相惑，则精气乱，视误，故惑，神移乃复。
现代文：心有所喜好，神有所厌恶，喜、恶两情猝然并行相感，就会使精神紊乱，导致视觉错误，因而产生迷惑之感，待精神欲念转移之后，就又恢复正常。
English: If the mind has a liking for something or a dislike for something, and the two emotions of liking and disliking suddenly occur in parallel, it will cause mental disorder, lead to visual errors, and thus produce a sense of confusion. After the mental desire is transferred, it will return to normal.

古文：是故，间者为迷，甚者为惑。
现代文：以上所说的现象，轻微的叫做迷，严重的叫做惑。
English: The above-mentioned phenomenon, mild is called obsession, severe is called delusion.

古文：黄帝曰：人之善忘者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人出现健忘，是什么原因引起的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What causes people to be forgetful?

古文：岐伯曰：上气不足，下气有余，肠胃实而心肺虚。
现代文：岐伯说：这是由于心肺两脏气不足，而使得人体上部气虚，肠胃充实而使得人体下部气盛有余。
English: Qi Bo said: This is due to the lack of qi in the heart and lungs, which makes the upper part of the human body qi deficient, and the lower part of the human body qi abundant because the intestines and stomach are full.

古文：虚则营卫留于下，久之不以时上，故善忘也。
现代文：心肺气虚，就会使得营卫之气长时间留滞在下部肠胃，不能及时向上流注以输布心肺，导致神气失养，所以发生健忘。
English: If the heart and lung qi are deficient, it will cause the yingwei qi to stay in the lower intestine and stomach for a long time, and it will not be able to flow up to the heart and lungs in time, resulting in qi loss, so forgetfulness will occur.

古文：黄帝曰：人之善饥而不嗜食者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人如果容易饥饿，但没有食欲，是什么原因造成的呢？
English: Huangdi said: If a person is easily hungry but has no appetite, what is the cause?

古文：岐伯曰：精气并于脾，热气留于胃，胃热则消谷，谷消故善饥。
现代文：岐伯说：饮食入胃后化生的精气输送于脾，阳热之气则留在胃中，胃热则谷物就消化得快，谷物消化得快就易觉饥饿。
English: Qi Bo said: After the meal enters the stomach, the essence of the transformation is transported to the spleen, and the yang fever gas remains in the stomach. If the stomach is hot, the grain will be digested quickly, and if the grain is digested quickly, it will be easy to feel hungry.

古文：胃气逆上，则胃脘寒，故不嗜食也。
现代文：如果胃气逆而上行，就会导致胃脘虚寒，所以不喜进食。
English: If the stomach gas goes up, it will cause the stomach to feel cold, so it does not like to eat.

古文：黄帝曰：病而不得卧者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：患了不能入睡的病，是什么原因引起的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "If you suffer from a disease that prevents you from falling asleep, what is the cause?

古文：岐伯曰：卫气不得入于阴，常留于阳。
现代文：岐伯说：是卫气不能入于阴分，经常留滞于阳分的结果。
English: Qi Bo said: It is a result of the fact that the Weiqi cannot enter the negative point and often stays in the positive point.

古文：留于阳则阳气满，阳气满则阳蹻盛，不得入于阴则阴气虚，故目不瞑矣。
现代文：卫气留滞于阳分，就会使阳气充满，阳气充满则阳蹻脉气就盛实，使得卫气不能入于阴分，就形成阴气虚，阴虚不能敛阳，所以不能闭目入睡。
English: If the qi remains in the yang point, it will make the yang full, and if the yang is full, the yang qi will be full, so that the qi can not enter the yin point, it will form a yin qi deficiency, and the yin deficiency can not restrain the yang, so you can not close your eyes and fall asleep.

古文：黄帝曰：病目而不得视者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：患了两目闭合不能视物的眼病，是什么原因引起的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "What is the cause of the eye disease that can't see things when the eyes are closed?

古文：岐伯曰：卫气留于阴，不得行于阳。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为卫气滞留于阴分，不能外行于阳分所造成的。
English: Qibo said: This was caused by the fact that the virtue remained in the negative and could not be practiced in the positive.

古文：留于阴则阴气盛，阴气盛则阴蹻满，不得入于阳则阳气虚，故目闭也。
现代文：卫气留滞在阴分使阴气偏盛，阴跷脉随之而盛满，卫气既然不得行于阳分，便形成阳虚，所以愿意闭目而不欲视物。
English: Weiqi stays in the yin component to make yin predominate, and the yin-yang vein is filled with it. Since Weiqi cannot be performed in the yang component, it forms a yang deficiency, so it is willing to close its eyes and does not want to look at things.

古文：黄帝曰：人之多卧者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：喜欢嗜睡的人，是什么原因引起的呢？
English: Huangdi said: People who like sleepiness, what causes it?

古文：岐伯曰：此人肠胃大而皮肤湿，而分肉不解焉。
现代文：岐伯说：这一类人的特点是肠胃较大而皮肤滞涩，肌肉之间又不滑利。
English: Qi Bo said: This type of person is characterized by a large intestine and stomach, while the skin is astringent, and the muscles are not smooth.

古文：肠胃大则卫气留久；皮肤湿则分肉不解，其行迟。
现代文：由于肠胃较大，卫气在人体内部滞留的时间就比较长；皮肤滞涩，分肉之间不滑利，卫气在体表的运行因受到阻止而迟缓。
English: Due to the large intestine and stomach, the residence time of Weiqi in the human body is relatively long; the skin is astringent, the meat is not smooth, and the operation of Weiqi on the body surface is delayed due to obstruction.

古文：夫卫气者，昼日常行于阳，夜行于阴，故阳气尽则卧，阴气尽则寤。
现代文：卫气在人体循行的常规是白天行在阳分，夜间行于阴分，当卫气随昼夜交替在人体阳分运行已尽，由阳入阴时，人就入睡；卫气在人体阴分运行已尽，由阴出阳，人便醒来。
English: The regularity of the flow of qi in the human body is that it flows during the day at the yang point and at night at the yin point. When the flow of qi in the human body at the yang point has been exhausted, alternating with day and night, and when it goes from yang to yin, people fall asleep; when the flow of qi in the human body at the yin point has been exhausted, and when it goes from yin to yang, people wake up.

古文：故肠胃大，则卫气行留久；皮肤湿，分肉不解，则行迟。
现代文：既然这类人的肠胃较大，卫气在内滞留的时间比较长；再兼皮肤滞涩，分肉组织不滑利，因此卫气运行于体表就较迟缓。
English: Since the intestines and stomachs of this type of person are larger, the internal retention time of the qi is relatively long; in addition, the skin is astringent, and the meat tissue is not smooth, so the qi runs more slowly on the body surface.

古文：留于阴也久，其气不清，则欲瞑，故多卧矣。
现代文：这样卫气停留于阴分的时间长，其气不纯净，使得精神不能振作，所以困倦而嗜睡。
English: In this way, the qi stays in the yin for a long time, and its qi is not pure, which makes the spirit unable to cheer up, so it is sleepy and drowsy.

古文：其肠胃小，皮肤滑以缓，分肉解利，卫气之留于阳也久，故少瞑焉。
现代文：那些肠胃较小，皮肤滑润弛缓，分肉组织之间又通畅滑利的人，卫气行于阳分的时间比较长，所以睡眠较少。
English: Those who have a small intestine and stomach, smooth and relaxed skin, and smooth passage between the meat tissues, have a longer time for the qi to travel to the yang point, so they sleep less.

古文：黄帝曰：其非常经也，卒然多卧者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人不是经常嗜睡，而是突然间出现多卧嗜睡现象，这是什么原因引起的呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people are not often sleepy, but suddenly appear multi-bed sleepiness. What is the cause of this?

古文：岐伯曰：邪气留于上焦，上焦闭而不通，已食若饮汤，卫气留久于阴而不行，故卒然多卧焉。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为邪气滞留于上焦，使得上焦气机闭阻不通，以及饱食之后又暴饮热汤，都会使卫气滞留在胃肠中，致使卫气久留于阴分，而不能外行于阳分，所以出现突然多卧嗜睡的症状。
English: Qi Bo said: This is because the evil qi lingers in the upper coke, making the upper coke machine closed and blocked, and overeating hot soup after a full meal will cause the qi to remain in the gastrointestinal tract, causing the qi to remain in the negative for a long time, but can not travel to the positive, so the symptoms of sudden multi-bed sleepiness appear.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得很好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：治此诸邪，奈何？
现代文：对于上述疾病如何进行治疗呢？
English: How can the above-mentioned diseases be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：先其脏腑，诛其小过，后调其气，盛者泻之，虚者补之，必先明知其形志之苦乐，定乃取之。
现代文：岐伯说：首先要观察脏腑的虚实，辨明病变的部位，治除那些轻微的邪气，然后再调理营卫之气。邪气盛的采用泻法，正气虚的采用补法。一定要先了解形体与心志的或苦或乐，还须候察四时八节的风气，待风气静定，方可取穴刺治。
English: Qi Bo said: First of all, it is necessary to observe the falsity and reality of the viscera, identify the parts of the lesion, and cure those minor evil spirits, and then adjust the yingwei spirit. The evil spirit is used by the method of laxity, and the positive spirit is used by the method of supplementation. It is necessary to first understand the shape of the body and the mind or pain or pleasure. It is also necessary to observe the atmosphere of the four o'clock eight day, and wait for the atmosphere to settle, before taking a puncture.

