古文：州郡二○南豫州豫州江州青州冀州司州
现代文：○南豫州豫州江州青州冀州司州
English: ○ South Yuzhou, Yuzhou, Jiangzhou, Qingzhou, Jizhou, Shizhou

古文：南豫州刺史，晋江左胡寇强盛，豫部歼覆，元帝永昌元年，刺史祖约始自谯城退还寿春。
现代文：南豫州刺史，晋伐自江左南渡以来胡寇强盛，豫出地区沦陷，元帝永昌元年，刺史祖约才从谯城退还寿春。
English: In the history of Southern Yuzhou, since the southward crossing of the Yangtze River in the Jin Dynasty, Huko has been strong and prosperous, and the Yuyue area has fallen. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Yongchang returned Shouchun from Shicheng.

古文：成帝咸和四年，侨立豫州，庾亮为刺史，治芜湖。
现代文：成帝咸和四年，暂借地重置豫州，庾亮任刺史，州治在芜湖。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, he temporarily leased the land to resettle Yuzhou, and appointed Liang Liang as the governor of the province. The provincial government was located in Wuhu.

古文：咸康四年，毛宝为刺史，治邾城。
现代文：咸康四年，毛宝任刺史，州治在邾城。
English: In the four years of Xiankang, Mao Bao was appointed as the history, and the state government was in Lucheng.

古文：六年，荆州刺史庾翼镇武昌，领豫州。
现代文：六年，荆州刺史座翼镇守武昌，兼领豫州。
English: In the sixth year, Jingzhou stabbed Wuchang, the seat of history, and also led Yuzhou.

古文：八年，庾怿为刺史，又镇芜湖。
现代文：八年，庾怿任刺史，又驻镇芜湖。
English: Eight years later, he was appointed to the post of historian and stationed in the town of Wuhu.

古文：穆帝永和元年，刺史赵胤镇牛渚。
现代文：穆帝永和元年，刺史赵胤驻镇牛渚。
English: In the first year of Mu Di Yonghe, Zhao Yan was stationed in the town of Niu Nagisa.

古文：二年，刺史谢尚镇芜湖；四年，进寿春；九年，尚又镇历阳；十一年，进马头。
现代文：二年，刺史谢尚驻镇芜湖；四年，进驻寿春；九年，谢尚又驻镇历阳；十一年，进驻马头。
English: In the second year, he was stationed in the town of Wuhu; in the fourth year, he was stationed in Shuchun; in the ninth year, he was stationed in the town of Liyang; and in the eleventh year, he was stationed in Madu.

古文：升平元年，刺史谢奕戍谯。
现代文：升平元年，刺史谢奕戍守谯。
English: In the first year of the rise and fall of the Ming Dynasty, Zhi Shi Xie Yi Shou Zang.

古文：哀帝隆和元年，刺史袁真自谯退守寿春。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年，刺史袁真从谯退守寿春。
English: In the year of mourning Emperor Longjing and the first year of the year, the scholar Yuan Zhen retreated from the capital to guard Shuchun.

古文：简文咸安元年，刺史桓冲戍姑孰。
现代文：简文咸安元年，刺史桓熙戍守历阳。
English: In the first year of Xian'an, Emperor Jianwen sent Emperor Shishi to govern Liyang.

古文：太元十年，刺史硃序戍马头。
现代文：孝武宁康元年，刺史桓冲戍守姑孰。立五十年，刺史硃序戍守马头。
English: In the first year of Xiaowu Ningkang, Zishi Kuanchong was appointed to guard Guzheng, and in the fiftieth year of his reign, Zishi Xuxiong was appointed to guard Ma Tou.

古文：十二年，刺史桓石虔戍历阳。
现代文：十二年，刺史桓石虔戍守历阳。
English: In the twelfth year of the Tang Dynasty, Kuanseki Qianqian became the governor of Liyang.

古文：安帝义熙二年，刺史刘毅戍姑孰。
现代文：安帝义熙二年，刺史刘毅戍守姑孰。
English: In the second year of Emperor Andei Yixi, Liu Yi, a scholar, was sent to guard Guzheng.

古文：宋武帝欲开拓河南，绥定豫土，九年，割扬州大江以西、大雷以北，悉属豫州，豫基址因此而立。
现代文：宋武帝想开拓河南，平定豫土地区，九年，分割扬州的大江以西、大雷以北地区，都划属豫州，豫辖境的基址就这样奠定了。
English: Emperor Song Wudi wanted to open up Henan and pacify the Yutian region. In the ninth year, the areas west of the Dajiang River and north of the Dalai River, which divided Yangzhou, were all assigned to Yuzhou. The foundation of the Yuzhou jurisdiction was thus laid.

古文：十三年，刺史刘义庆镇寿阳。
现代文：十三年，刺史刘义庆驻镇寿阳。
English: In the thirteenth year, Liu Yiqing was stationed in the town of Shouyang.

古文：永初三年，分淮东为南豫州，治历阳；淮西为豫州。
现代文：永初三年，分割淮所辖以东地区为南豫州，治所在历阳；淮西以西地区便为豫州。
English: In the third year of the Yongzheng era, the eastern region under the jurisdiction of Huaihe was divided into South Henan and Liyang; the western region under Huaihe was divided into West Henan.

古文：文帝元嘉七年，又分。五年，割扬州之淮南、宣城又属焉。徙治姑孰。
现代文：文帝元嘉七年，将二豫州合并，十六年又分，二十二年又合，宋孝武帝大明三年又分。五年，分割扬州所属的淮南、宣城归南豫州管辖，将治所迁至姑孰。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Wen, Emperor Yuan and Empress Jia merged the two Hen states, divided them again in the 16th year, merged them again in the 22nd year, and divided them again in the third year of Emperor Song Xiaowu. In the fifth year, Huainan and Xuancheng, which belonged to Yangzhou, were divided and put under the jurisdiction of South Henzhou, and the administrative center was moved to Gushan.

古文：明帝泰始二年又合，而以淮南、宣城还扬州。
现代文：明帝泰始二年又合并，而将淮南、宣城还归扬州管辖。
English: In the first two years of the Ming Dynasty, they merged again, and Huainan and Xuancheng were returned to the jurisdiction of Yangzhou.

古文：九月又分，还治历阳。
现代文：当年九月又将二豫州分开，治所仍在历阳。
English: In September of the same year, the two states of Henan were separated, and the capital remained in Liyang.

古文：三年五月，又合。
现代文：三年五月又合。
English: In May of the following year, they got together again.

古文：四年，以扬州之淮南、宣城为南豫州，治宣城，五年罢。
现代文：四年，以扬州的淮南、宣城为南豫州，治所在宣城，五年，撤销南豫州建置。
English: In four years, Huainan and Xuancheng in Yangzhou were designated as South Yuzhou, with Xuancheng as the administrative center, and in five years, the construction of South Yuzhou was revoked.

古文：时自淮以西，悉没寇矣。
现代文：当时淮河以西的地区，都已经被敌寇占领了。
English: At that time, the areas west of the Huai River had all been occupied by the enemy.

古文：七年，复分历阳、淮阴、南谯、南兗州之临江立南豫州。
现代文：七年，又分历阳、淮阴、南谯和南兖州的临江建立南豫州。
English: In the seventh year, Liyang, Huaiyin, Nanxun and Linjiang of Nanxun were also divided to establish South Yuzhou.

古文：泰豫元年，以南汝阴度属豫州，豫州之庐江度属南豫州。
现代文：泰豫元年，以南汝阴划属豫州，将豫少的庐江划归南豫州。
English: In the first year of Taiyuan, Nanruiyin was assigned to Yuzhou, and the Lijiang River, which was less than a kilometer away from Yuzhou, was assigned to South Yuzhou.

古文：按淮东自永初至于大明，便为南豫，虽乍有离合，而分立居多。
现代文：按淮束从宋武帝永初年间至孝武帝大明年间，便属于南豫州，虽然南豫州和豫州常有分合，而分开的时间居多。
English: According to Huai Zhou, from the early years of Emperor Yong of Song to the early years of Emperor Xiaowu, it belonged to South Henan, although South Henan and Henan were often divided, but most of the time they were separated.

古文：爰自泰始甫失淮西，复于淮东分立两豫。
现代文：自从明帝泰始年间丧失淮西之后，便又于淮东分立两个豫州。
English: Since the loss of Huaixi in the early years of the Ming Dynasty, two Yuzhou were separated from Huaidong.

古文：今南豫以淮东为境，不复于此更列二州，览者按此以淮东为境，推寻便自得泰始两豫分域也。
现代文：现在的南豫州以淮束为辖境，不再分两个豫州，读者按照这个原则推寻淮束地域，便能找到泰始年间两个豫州的分域了。
English: Nowadays, South Yuzhou is under the jurisdiction of Huai Zhou, and is no longer divided into two Yuzhou. If the reader searches for the Huai Zhou region according to this principle, he will be able to find the division of the two Yuzhou during the Taizhi period.

古文：徐志领郡十三，县六十一，户三万七千六百二，口二十一万九千五百。
现代文：徐氏的《州郡志》记载南豫州领有十三郡，六十一县。三万七千六百零二户，二十一万九千五百口。
English: Xu's "History of the Southern Henan Province" records that Southern Henan Province had 13 counties and 61 counties, with 37,602 households and 219,500 households.

古文：今领郡十九，县九十一。
现代文：现在的南豫州领有十九郡，九十一县。
English: Present-day South Henan has nineteen counties and ninety-one counties.

古文：去京都水一百六十。
现代文：距离京都水路有一百六十里。
English: It is a hundred and sixty miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：历阳太守，晋惠帝永兴元年，分淮南立，属扬州，安帝割属豫州。
现代文：历阳太守，晋惠帝永兴元年，从淮南分出设置，属扬州管辖，安帝时划归豫州。
English: In the first year of the Yongxing Emperor's reign, Liyang was separated from Huainan and placed under the jurisdiction of Yangzhou, while Andean was placed under the jurisdiction of Yuzhou.

古文：《永初郡国》唯有历阳、乌江、龙亢三县，何、徐又有酂、雍丘二县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》衹载历阳、乌江、龙亢三县，何、徐的《州郡志》又有酆、雍丘二县。
English: "Yongchu County National History" recorded Liyang, Wujiang, Longyan three counties, and He and Xu's "Zhou County History" also recorded Liyang and Yongqiu two counties.

古文：今领县五，户三千一百五十六，口一万九千四百七十。
现代文：现在领五县。有三千一百五十六户，一万九千四百七十口。
English: He is now in charge of five counties, with 3,156 households and 19,470 households.

古文：历阳令，汉旧县，属九江。
现代文：历阳令，汉代设置的县，属于九江。
English: Liyangling, a county established in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Jiujiang.

古文：乌江令，二汉无，《晋书》有乌江，《太康地志》属准南。
现代文：乌江令，两汉无此建置，《晋书》记载有乌江，《太康地志》上乌江属淮南。
English: According to the Wujiang Decree, there was no such construction in the two Han dynasties. "Jin Shu" recorded Wujiang, and "Taikang History" listed Wujiang as belonging to Huainan.

古文：龙亢令，汉旧名，属沛郡，《晋太康地志》属谯。
现代文：龙亢令，汉代的旧名，属于沛郡，《晋太康地志》上属于谯。
English: Longhuiling, the old name of the Han Dynasty, belongs to Pei County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Zhou.

古文：江左流寓立。
现代文：束晋渡江后设立。
English: It was established after Sokujin's crossing of the river.

古文：雍丘令，汉旧名，属陈留。
现代文：雍丘令，汉代的旧名，属于陈留。
English: Yongqiu Ling, the old name of the Han Dynasty, belongs to Chen Liu.

古文：流寓立，先属泰山郡，文帝元嘉八年度。
现代文：束晋南渡后立，先归属秦郡，宋文帝元嘉八年改属历阳。
English: It belonged to Qin County at first, but was transferred to Liyang in the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yuanjia.

古文：酂令，汉属沛，《晋太康地志》属谯。
现代文：郑令，汉代属于沛郡，《晋太康地志》上归属谯。
English: According to Zheng Ling, it belonged to Pei County during the Han Dynasty. According to the "History of Jin Taikang," it belonged to Min.

古文：流寓立，文帝元嘉八年度。
现代文：东晋时设立，宋文帝元嘉八年改属历阳。
English: It was established in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and was transferred to Liyang in the eighth year of the Song Dynasty.

古文：南谯太守，晋孝武太元中，于淮南侨立郡县，后割地志咸实土。
现代文：南谯太守，谯郡另见。晋孝武帝太元年间，于淮南用北方郡县旧名借地重置郡县，后来又分割淮南郡县的部分地区使借地重置的郡县都有了实际管辖的土地。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu in the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu, counties and counties were replaced in Huainan with the old leased land of the northern counties and counties. Later, parts of Huainan County were divided so that the counties and counties that had their leased land replaced had actual jurisdiction over the land.

古文：《郡国》又有酂县，何、徐无。
现代文：《太康地志》、《永初郡国志》载南谯太守管辖地又有郑县，但何氏、徐氏的《州郡志》都没有记载。
English: "Taikang History" and "Yongchu County History" also list Zheng County under the jurisdiction of Nanxun Empress Dowager, but there is no record of the "Zhou County History" of He and Xu.

古文：今领县六，户四千四百三十二，口二万二千三百五十八。
现代文：现在领有六县。四千四百三十二户，二万二千三百五十八口。
English: At present, there are six counties, 4,432 households, and 22,358 households.

古文：去州水五百四十，陆一百七十；去京都水七百，陆五百。
现代文：距离州城水路有五百四十里，陆路有一百七十里。距离京都水路七百里。陆路五百里。
English: It is 540 miles from Suzhou by water and 170 miles by land. It is 700 miles from Kyoto by water and 500 miles by land.

古文：山桑令，前汉属沛，后汉属汝南，《晋太康地志》属谯。
现代文：山桑令，西汉时属沛郡，束汉时属汝南，《晋太康地志》属谯郡。
English: Shan Sang Ling, in the Western Han Dynasty, belonged to Pei County, in the Eastern Han Dynasty, belonged to Runan, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Min County.

古文：谯令，汉属沛，《晋太康地志》属谯。
现代文：谯令，汉代属沛郡，《晋太康地志》上属谯邓。
English: Shuling belonged to Pei County during the Han Dynasty, and the top of the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Shandong.

古文：铚令，汉属沛，《晋太康地志》属谯。
现代文：铚令，汉代隶属沛郡，《晋太康地志》上隶属谯郡。
English: According to the imperial edict, the Han Dynasty was subordinate to Pei County, and according to the "History of Jin Taikang," it was subordinate to Min County.

古文：扶阳令，前汉属沛，后汉、《晋太康地志》并无。
现代文：扶阳令，前汉时隶属沛郡，后汉及《晋太康地志》均无此县。
English: Fuyang County was subordinate to Pei County during the Former Han Dynasty, but it was not mentioned in the Later Han Dynasty and the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：蕲令。
现代文：蕲令。
English: That's an order.

古文：城父令，前汉属沛，后汉属汝南，《晋太康地志》属谯。
现代文：另见。城父令，前漠时属沛郡，后汉属汝南郡，《晋太康地志》上属谯郡。
English: See also: By order of the city's founding father, Qianmen belonged to Pei County in the pre-Mao period, to Runan County in the Han period, and to Min County in the Jin Taikang History.

古文：庐江太守，汉文帝十六年，分淮南国立。
现代文：庐江太守，汉文帝十六年，分割淮南国而设置。
English: The governor-general of the Minjiang River, he was established in the 16th year of the Han Dynasty after the division of Huainan Province.

古文：光武建武十三年，又省六安国以并焉。
现代文：光武帝建武十三年，又撤销六安国将它并入庐江。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Guangwu's Jianwu reign, it was revoked by the State of Lu'an and merged into the Li River.

古文：领县三，户一千九百九，口一万一千九百九十七。
现代文：领有三县。户一千九百零九，人口一万一千九百九十七。
English: It is divided into three counties. The number of households is 1909, and the population is 11,997.

古文：去州水二千七百二十，陆四百七十；去京都水一千一百，陆六百三十一。
现代文：距州治水路有二千七百二十里，陆路有四百七十里。距京都水路有一千一百里，陆路有六百三十一里。
English: It is 2,720 miles away from the prefectural waterway and 470 miles away by land. It is 1,100 miles away from the Kyoto waterway and 631 miles away by land.

古文：灊令，汉旧县。
现代文：潜令，汉代旧县。
English: Sublime, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：舒令，汉旧县。
现代文：舒令，汉代旧县。
English: Shuling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：始新令，《永初郡国》、何并无，徐有始新左县，明帝泰始三年立。
现代文：始新令，《永初郡国志》及何志都无记载，途氏的《州郡志》上有始新左县，明帝泰始三年设置。
English: There is no record of the beginning of the new order, the "Yongchu County National History" and the beginning of any history. The "State County History" of Mr. Tu has the beginning of the new left county and the beginning of the new three years in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：南汝阴太守，江左立。
现代文：南汝阴太守，汝阴郡另见。
English: See also Southern Ruyin Daju and Ruyin County.

古文：领县五，户二千七百一，口一万九千五百八十五。
现代文：束晋设立。领有五县。户二千七百零一，人口一万九干五百八十五。
English: It is located in Sokjin and has five counties, with 2,701 households and a population of 19,585.

古文：去州陆三百；去京都水一千，陆五百三十。
现代文：距州治陆路有三百里。距京都水路有一千里，陆路五百三十里。
English: It is three hundred miles by road from Shuzhu, one thousand miles by water and five hundred and thirty miles by land from Kyoto.

古文：汝阴令，所治即二汉、晋合肥县，后省。
现代文：汝阴令，另见。所治理的地方就是二汉、晋代的合肥县，后来撤销。
English: See also Ruyin Ruling. The governed place was Hefei County in the Second Han Dynasty and Jin Dynasty, which was later revoked.

古文：慎令，汉属汝南，《晋太康地志》属汝阴。
现代文：慎令，汉代隶属这汝南，《太康地志》上属汝阴郡。
English: Shen Ling, Han Dynasty belongs to this south of Ryu, "Taikang History" belongs to Ryuyin County.

古文：宋令。
现代文：宋令。
English: See also: Song dynasty.

古文：阳夏令，前汉属淮阳，后汉属陈。
现代文：另见。阳夏令，前汉时属进淮阳，后汉时属陈。
English: See also: Yang Xia Ling, the former Han Dynasty belongs to Jin Huaiyang, the later Han Dynasty belongs to Chen.

古文：《晋太康地志》陈令属梁，无复此县。
现代文：《晋太康地志》记载陈县隶属梁郡，并无阳夏县。
English: "Jin Taikang Geography" records that Chen County belongs to Liang County, and there is no Yangxia County.

古文：又晋地志，惠帝永康中复立。
现代文：另外《晋太康地志》上说，惠帝永康年间恢复设置屋夏。
English: In addition, the "History of Jin Taikang" said that Hui Di Yongkang restored the summer house.

古文：《永初郡国》、何并属南梁，徐志属此。
现代文：《永初郡国志》、包压《州郡志》都说屋夏隶属南梁郡，徐志记载阳夏属南汝阴。
English: "Yongchu County National History" and "Zhou County History" both said that Yaxia belonged to Nanliang County, and Xu Zhi recorded that Yangxia belonged to Nanruyin.

古文：安阳令，《永初郡国》、何并属南梁，徐属此。
现代文：安阳令，另见。《永初郡国志》、何志上都属南梁，徐志记载属南汝阴。
English: "Yongchu County National History" and "He Shi Shang" both belong to Nan Liang, and Xu Zhi's records belong to Nan Ruyin.

古文：南梁太守，晋孝武太元中，侨立于淮南，安帝始有淮南故地，属徐州。
现代文：南粱太守，梁郡另见。晋孝武帝太元年间，于淮南暂借地重置南梁郡，晋安帝时才实际领有淮南旧地，隶属徐州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, he temporarily leased land in Huainan to re-establish Nanliang County, but it was not until the reign of Emperor Jin An that he actually possessed the old land of Huainan, which belonged to Xuzhou.

古文：武帝永初二年，还南豫，孝武大明六年废属西豫，改名淮南，八年复旧。
现代文：宋武帝永初二年，仍旧归属南豫州，宋孝武帝大明六年废置而改属西豫州，改名为淮南，大明八年，恢复隶属南豫州。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Songwu Yongzheng, it still belonged to South Henan Province. In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Song Xiaowu Daming, it was abolished and transferred to West Henan Province and renamed Huainan Province. In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Songwu Yongzheng, it was restored to South Henan Province.

古文：《永初郡国》又有虞、阳夏、安丰三县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》又有虞、阳夏、安丰三县，都另见。
English: "Yongchu County National History" also has the three counties of Yu, Yangxia, and Anfeng, all of which are listed separately.

古文：去州水一千八百，陆五百；去京都水一千七百，陆七百。
现代文：何氏志、徐氏志无安丰县，又有义昌县而都没有宁陵县。现在领有九县。户六千二百一十二，人口四万二千七百五十四距州治水路有一千八百里，陆路五百里。距京都水路有一千七百里，陆路七百里。
English: He Shi Zhi and Xu Shi Zhi did not have Anfeng County and Yichang County, but they did not have Ningling County. Now they have nine counties. There are 62,212 households, with a population of 42,754. They are 1,800 miles away from the state waterway and 500 miles away by land. They are 1,700 miles away from the Kyoto waterway and 700 miles away by land.

古文：睢阳令，汉旧名。
现代文：睢阳令，汉代旧名。
English: Shanyangling, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：孝武大明六年，改名寿春，八年复旧。
现代文：孝武帝大明六年，改名为寿春，八年恢复旧名。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the name was changed to Shuchun, and the old name was restored in the eighth year.

古文：前废帝永光有义宁、宁昌二县并睢阳。
现代文：前废帝永光年问曾将义宁、宁昌二县并入睢阳县。
English: The former emperor Yong Guangnian once merged Yining County and Ningchang County into Shenyang County.

古文：所治即二汉、晋寿春县，后省。
现代文：所治理的地区就是两汉、晋代的寿春县，后来被撤销。
English: The area governed was Shuchun County in the Han and Jin dynasties, which was later revoked.

古文：蒙令。
现代文：蒙令。
English: You've been ordered.

古文：虞令，汉旧名。
现代文：另见。虞令，漠代旧名。
English: See also: Gurei, the old name of the Mushroom Kingdom.

古文：谷熟令，汉旧名。
现代文：谷熟令，汉代旧名。
English: Gu Rongling, the old name in Han Dynasty.

古文：陈令，前汉属淮阳，后汉属陈，《晋太康地志》属梁。
现代文：陈令，前汉时属淮阳郡，后汉时属陈郡，《晋太康地志》上属梁郡。
English: Chen Ling, belonged to Huaiyang County in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Chen County in the later Han Dynasty, and belonged to Liang County in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：义宁长，何无，徐有，宋末又立。
现代文：义宁长，何氏志无，徐氏志有，宋末又设置。
English: Yi Ning Chang, He Zhiwu, Xu Zhiwu, at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：新汲令，汉旧名，属颍川。
现代文：新汲令，漠代旧名，隶属颖川郡。
English: Shinkiryo, formerly known as Mushiro, belongs to Yingkawa County.

古文：崇义令，《永初郡国》羌人始立。
现代文：崇义令，《永初郡国志》载由羌人开始设置。
English: According to the order of Emperor Chongyi, the "Yongchu County National History" was first set up.

古文：宁陵，徐志后所立。
现代文：宁陵，另见。徐氏志成书后所设立。
English: Ningling, see also. It was established after Xu Zhicheng became famous.

古文：晋熙太守，晋安帝分庐江立。
现代文：晋熙太守，晋安帝时分割庐江郡而设立。
English: It was established by dividing Minjiang County during the reigns of Emperor Jinxi and Emperor An.

古文：领县五，户一千五百二十一，口七千四百九十七。
现代文：领有五县。户一千五百二十一，人口七千四百九十七。
English: It is divided into five counties, with a total of 1,521 households and a population of 7,497.

古文：去州陆八百，无水；去京都水一千二百，无陆。
现代文：距州治陆路有八百里，无水路可通。距京都水路有一千二百里，无陆路可通。
English: It is eight hundred miles from the Shuzhi land route, and there is no water route. It is twelve hundred miles from the Kyoto water route, and there is no land route.

古文：怀宁令，晋安帝立。
现代文：怀宁令，晋安帝时设立。
English: It was established at the time of Emperor Huaining and Emperor Jian of An.

古文：新冶令，晋安帝立。
现代文：新冶令，晋安帝时设立。
English: It was established during the reign of Emperor Jian of An.

古文：阴安令，汉旧名，属魏郡，《晋太康地志》属顿丘。
现代文：阴安令，汉代旧名，隶属魏郡，《晋太康地志》上属顿丘。
English: Yin'anling, the old name in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Wei County, and "Jin Taikang Geography" belongs to Dongqiu.

古文：南楼烦令，《永初郡国》、何、徐志无。
现代文：南楼烦令，《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志都未记载。
English: The south tower was troublesome, and "Yongchu County National History," "He's History" and "Xu's History" were not recorded.

古文：太湖左县长，文帝元嘉二十五年，以豫部蛮民立太湖、吕亭二县，属晋熙，后省，明帝太始二年复立。
现代文：太湖左县长，文帝元嘉二十五年，因为豫部的蛮民设立左面、吕亭二县，隶属晋熙郡，后来撤销，明帝泰始二年恢复设立。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of the governor of Zuo County of Taihu Lake, Wen Di Yuan Jia, because of the barbarians of Yu Department, Zuo County and Luting County, which belonged to Jinxi County, were established. Later, they were revoked, and the establishment was resumed in the first two years of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：弋阳太守，本县名，属汝南，魏文帝分立。
现代文：弋阳太守，弋阳原本是县名，隶属汝南郡，魏文帝时分割出来设置弋阳郡。
English: Shanyang Daju, Shanyang was originally the name of the county, subordinate to Runan County, Wei Wendi was divided to set up Shanyang County.

古文：领县六，户三千二百七十五，口二万四千二百六十二。
现代文：领有六县。户三千二百七十五，人口二万四千二百六十二。
English: There are six counties, with a total of 3,275 households and a population of 24,262.

古文：去州陆一千一百，去京都水。
现代文：距州治陆路有一千一百里，距京都水路阙文。
English: It is 1,100 miles away from Shuzhu by land, and 1,100 miles away from Kyoto by water.

古文：期思令，汉旧县。
现代文：期思令，汉代旧县。
English: It was an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：弋阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：弋阳令，汉代旧县。
English: Shanyangling, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：安丰令，旧郡，晋安帝并为县。
现代文：安丰令，旧为郡，晋安帝时合并为县。
English: Anfeng, formerly a county, was merged into a county at the time of Emperor An of Jin.

古文：乐安令，新立。
现代文：乐安令，新设置。
English: Le An Ruling, new setting.

古文：茹由令，新立。
现代文：茹由令，新设置。
English: Boiling order, new setting.

古文：安丰太守，魏文帝分庐江立。
现代文：安丰太守，魏文帝时分割庐江郡而设立。
English: It was established by dividing Minjiang County during the reign of Emperor Anfeng.

古文：江左侨立，晋安帝省为县，属弋阳，宋末复立。
现代文：江左置立为借地设置的郡，晋安帝时撤郡并为县，隶属弋阳郡，宋末恢复为安丰郡。
English: Jiangzuo County was set up as a county of leased land, Jin and An County was set up as a county when Emperor An retreated, it was subordinate to Fenyang County, and it was restored to Anfeng County at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：安丰令，《前汉地理志》无，后汉属庐江。
现代文：安丰令，《前汉地理志》无记载，后汉时属庐江郡。
English: There is no record of it in the Anfeng edict or the Geography of the Former Han Dynasty, but it belonged to Minjiang County in the Later Han Dynasty.

古文：松滋令。
现代文：松滋令。
English: The order to cut down pine trees.

古文：汝南太守。
现代文：另见。汝南太守。
English: See also: Junan Taishu.

古文：上蔡侯相。
现代文：另见。上蔡侯相。
English: See also: On Cai Hou Xiang.

古文：平舆令。
现代文：另见。平舆令。
English: For Runan County, see Pingwu County.

古文：北新息令。
现代文：另见。北新息令。
English: North new settlement order.

古文：真阳令。
现代文：另见。真阳令。
English: The sun is shining.

古文：安城令。
现代文：另见。安城令。
English: Ancheng order.

古文：南新息令。
现代文：另见。南新息令。
English: Minami Shin-shikirei.

古文：临汝令，汉旧名。
现代文：另见。临汝令，汉代旧名。
English: See also: Lin Ruling, old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：阳安令。
现代文：阳安令。
English: Yangan Order.

古文：西平令。
现代文：另见。西平令。
English: See also: Xiping Ruling.

古文：瞿阳令。
现代文：另见。瞿阳令。
English: See also: Shanyang Ruling.

古文：安阳令。
现代文：另见。安阳令。
English: Anyang order.

古文：新蔡太守。
现代文：另见。新蔡太守。
English: See also: The new Tsai dynasties.

古文：鲖阳令。
现代文：另见。鲷阳令。
English: See also: Shanyang Ruling.

古文：固始令。
现代文：另见。固始令。
English: See also: Goshi Order.

古文：新蔡令。
现代文：另见。新蔡令。
English: See also: New Tsai Decree.

古文：东苞信令。
现代文：另见。东苞信令。
English: See also: Donglu Signaling.

古文：西苞信令，徐志南豫唯一苞信，疑是后侨立所分。
现代文：另见。西苞信令，徐氏志上南豫衹有一个苞信，可能是后来借地立县时分成东西。
English: See also: Xidi Letter, Xu Shi Shang Nan Yu Zi had a Xidi Letter, which may have been later divided into things when the county was established.

古文：东郡太守，《永初郡国》无苌平、父阳而有扶沟；何无阳夏、扶沟，徐无阳夏。
现代文：东郡太守，另见。《永初郡国志》无苌平县、父阳而有扶沟，另见。何氏志无阳夏、扶沟，徐氏志无阳夏。
English: Dong County Taishu, see also. "Yongchu County Guo Zhi" has no Suiping County, but has Fuchang and Fuguo, see also. He Shi has no Yang Xia, no Fuguo, and Xu Shi has no Yang Xia.

古文：项城令。
现代文：项城令。
English: a city ordinance.

古文：西华令。
现代文：另见。西华令。
English: See also: Western Han Dynasty.

古文：阳夏令。
现代文：另见。阳夏令。
English: See also: Yang Xia Rong.

古文：苌平令。
现代文：另见。苌平令。
English: See also: 平令.

古文：谷阳令。
现代文：另见。谷阳令。
English: See also: Guyang Ruling.

古文：南顿太守，帖治陈郡。
现代文：另见。南顿太守，另见。兼治理陈郡。
English: See also: Governor of Nantong, See also: Governor of Chen County.

古文：南顿令。
现代文：南顿令。
English: Nantong order.

古文：和城令。
现代文：另见。和城令。
English: See also. and the city ordinance.

古文：颍川太守。
现代文：另见。颖川太守。
English: See also: Yingkawa Taishu.

古文：邵陵令。
现代文：另见。邵陵令。
English: See also: Shao Ling Ling.

古文：临颍令。
现代文：另见。临颖令。
English: See also: Lin Ying Rong.

古文：曲阳令。
现代文：另见。曲阳令。
English: See also: Quyang Order.

古文：西汝阴太守，《永初郡国》、何、徐并无此郡。汝阴令。
现代文：另见。西汝阴太守，《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志上都没有西汝阴郡。汝阴令。
English: See also: Xi Ruyin Daju, "Yongchu County National History," "He Shi Shi," and "Xu Shi Shi" do not list Xi Ruyin County. Ruyin Ruling.

古文：安城令。
现代文：另见。安城令。
English: Ancheng order.

古文：楼烦令。
现代文：另见。楼烦令。
English: See also: Building nuisance order.

古文：宋令。
现代文：另见。宋令。
English: See also: Song dynasty.

古文：汝阳太守。
现代文：另见。汝阳太守。
English: See also: Ruyang Daju.

古文：汝阳令。
现代文：另见。汝阳令。
English: See also: Ruyang Rong.

古文：武津令。
现代文：另见。武津令。
English: See also: Mutsu edict.

古文：陈留太守，《永初郡国》无浚仪、封丘，而有酸枣，何、徐无封丘、尉氏。
现代文：陈留太守，另见。《永初郡国志》无浚仪、封丘县而有酸枣县，何氏志、徐氏志无封丘、尉氏县。
English: Chen Ruotai Shou, see also. "Yongchu County National History" has no dredge, Fenyu County but has acid jujube county, He Shi Zhi, Xu Shi Zhi no fenyu hill, Joi County.

古文：浚仪令。
现代文：浚仪令。
English: The ceremony is over.

古文：小黄令。
现代文：另见。小黄令。
English: See also: Xiao Huangling.

古文：雍丘令。
现代文：另见。雍丘令。
English: See also: Yongqiu Ruling.

古文：白马令。
现代文：另见。白马令。
English: See also: The White Horse Inn.

古文：襄邑令。
现代文：另见。襄邑令。
English: The order of Xiangyue.

古文：封丘令，汉旧名。
现代文：另见。封丘令，汉代旧名。
English: See also: Fengqiu Ling, the old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：尉氏令。
现代文：尉氏令。
English: Lieutenant's order.

古文：南陈左郡太守，少帝景平中省此郡，以宋民度属南梁、汝阴郡，而《永初郡国》无，未详。
现代文：另见。南陈左郡太守，宋少帝景平年间撤销此郡，将宋百姓分别隶属南梁、汝阴郡，而《永初郡国志》无记载，不知是何原因。
English: See also: The governor-general of South Chenzoh County abolished the county during the reign of the Song Emperor Jingping, and placed the Song people under Nanliang County and Ruyin County, respectively. However, there is no record of this in the "Yongchu County National History," and it is not known why.

古文：孝建二年以蛮户复立。
现代文：孝建二年因为蛮户的原因恢复设置。
English: In the second year of Xiao Jian, the setting was restored because of the barbarians.

古文：分赤官左县为蓼城左县。
现代文：分割赤官左县设蓼城左题。
English: The division of Chikan-zaso County into two districts is now complete.

古文：领县二。
现代文：领有二县。
English: There are two counties under its jurisdiction.

古文：乐大明八年，省郡，即名为县，属陈左县。
现代文：乐疑有误大明八年，撤销郡的建制，就将郡名用于县名，为南陈左县，隶属直达阴郡。
English: Eight years after the establishment of the county was revoked, the name of the county was used as the name of the county, which was Nanchenzao County, subordinate to Zhoudaiyin County.

古文：边城左郡太守，文帝元嘉二十五年，以豫部蛮民立茹由、乐安、光城、雩娄、史水、开化、边城七县，属弋阳郡。
现代文：边城左郡太守，文帝元嘉二十五年，因为豫置酗部蛮民设置茹由、乐安、光城、雩娄、史水、开化、边城七县，隶属弋阳郡。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Wen Di Yuan Jia, the governor of Zuo County of Biancheng, because the barbarians of the Yu Department were set up, seven counties including Ruyu, Le'an, Guangcheng, Handan, Shishui, Kaifeng and Biancheng were subordinated to Bianyang County.

古文：徐志有边城郡，领雩娄、史水、开化、边城两县。
现代文：徐氏志有边城郡，领有雩娄、史水、开化、边城四县。
English: Xu's territory included Fencheng County and four counties, namely, Fen, Shishui, Kaifeng and Fencheng.

古文：大明八年，复省为县，属弋阳，后复立。
现代文：大明八年撤边城郡为县，属弋阳郡，后来又恢复设边城郡。
English: In the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty, Biancheng County was withdrawn as a county and belonged to Fenyang County. Later, it was reinstated as Biancheng County.

古文：领县四，户四百一十七，口二千四百七十九。
现代文：领有四县。户四百一十七，人口二千四百七十九。
English: It is divided into four counties, with 417 households and a population of 2,479.

古文：雩娄令，二汉属庐江，《晋太康地志》云属安丰。
现代文：雩娄令，两汉时属庐江郡，《晋太康地志》说属安丰。
English: During the Han Dynasty, it belonged to Minjiang County. According to the "History of Jin Taikang," it belonged to Anfeng.

古文：开化令。
现代文：开化令。
English: An evacuation order was issued.

古文：史水令。
现代文：史水令。
English: Shi Shui ordered.

古文：边城令。
现代文：边城令。
English: Boundary city ordinance.

古文：光城左郡太守，《永初郡国》、何、徐并无。
现代文：光城左郡太守，《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志都无记载。
English: Guangcheng Zuo County Governor, "Yongchu County National History," Ho's History, and Xu's History are not recorded.

古文：按《起居注》，大明八年，省光城左郡为县，属弋阳，疑是大明中分弋阳所立。
现代文：按《起居注》，大明八年，撤销光城左郡，将它改为县，隶属土压幽，可能是去塱年间分割主垦幽所设置的。
English: According to the "Residential Notes," in the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty, Gwangseongsao County was abolished and changed to a county under the jurisdiction of Geobyeong, which may have been set up by the division of the main Geobyeong in the years before the leap year.

古文：八年复省，后复立。
现代文：主塱八年又撤销，后来又恢复设立。
English: It was revoked again eight years later, and later reinstated.

古文：乐安令。
现代文：乐安令。
English: Le An Ruling.

古文：茹由令。
现代文：茹由令。
English: It's time to cook.

古文：光城令。
现代文：光城令。
English: Order of the City of Light.

古文：此三县，徐志属弋阳。
现代文：这三县，徐氏志上都属弋阳。
English: These three counties all belonged to Fenyang in Xu's family tree.

古文：豫州刺史，后汉治谯，魏治汝南安成，晋平吴后治陈国，晋江左所治，已列于前。
现代文：豫州刺史，后汉时治所在谯，魏时治所在边南安成，晋平定吴后治所在陈国，晋江左时的治所已列于上文。
English: In the history of Yuzhou, the capital of the Later Han Dynasty was in Jiuquan, the capital of the Wei Dynasty was in Biannan Ancheng, the capital of the Jin Dynasty was in Dingwu, the capital of the Later Jin Dynasty was in Chen, and the capital of the Jin Dynasty was in Zuojiang.

古文：《永初郡国》、何、徐寄治睢阳，而郡县在淮西。
现代文：《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志上都说治所寄设在睢阳，而管辖的郡县在淮河以西。
English: "Yongchu County National History," "He's History" and "Xu's History" all say that the government office is located in Fenyang, while the county under its jurisdiction is west of the Huai River.

古文：徐又有边城，别见南豫州。
现代文：徐氏志上又有边城，另见南豫州。
English: There is also a border town on the Xu family's record, and see also South Yuzhou.

古文：何又有初安、绥城二郡，初安领新怀、怀德二县，绥城领安昌、招远二县，并云新立。
现代文：何氏志上又有初安、绥城二郡。初安领有新怀、怀德二县，绥城领有安昌、招远二县，都说足新设立的。
English: In Ho's biography, there are also two counties of Chouan and Lucheng. Chouan has two counties of Xinhuai and Huai De, and Lucheng has two counties of Anchang and Zhaoyuan, all of which are said to have been newly established.

古文：徐无，则是徐志前省也。
现代文：金区志上没有记载，那就是在徐氏志成书前已撤销了。
English: There is no record in the gold record that it was revoked before Xu's will was made into a book.

古文：领郡十，县四十三，户二万二千九百一十九，口一十五万八百三十九。
现代文：逸州领有十郡，四十三县。户二万二千九百一十九，人口一十五万零八百三十九。
English: Yizhou has 10 counties and 43 counties, with 22,919 households and a population of 1,508,839.

古文：汝南太守，汉高帝立。
现代文：汝南太守，汉高帝时设立。
English: It was established during the reign of Emperor Han Gao.

古文：领县十一，户一万一千二百九十一，口八万九千三百四十九。
现代文：领有十一县。户一万一千二百九十一，人口八万九千三百四十九。
English: It is divided into 11 counties, with a total of 11,291 households and a population of 89,349.

古文：去州水一千，陆七百；去京都水三千，陆一千五百。
现代文：距州治水路有一千里，陆路七百里。距京都水路有三千里，陆路一千五百里。
English: It is one thousand miles from the prefectural waterway and seven hundred miles by land. It is three thousand miles from the Kyoto waterway and fifteen hundred miles by land.

古文：上蔡令，汉旧县。
现代文：上蔡令，漠代旧县。
English: Shang Cai Ling, the last of the old counties in the desert era.

古文：平乐令，汉旧县。
现代文：平乐令，汉代旧县。
English: Pingle Reign, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：北新息令，汉旧县。
现代文：北新息令，汉代旧县。
English: Northern Xinxi County, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：慎阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：慎阳令，汉代旧县。
English: Shenyangling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：《永初郡国》及徐并作真阳。
现代文：《永初郡国志》及徐氏志都作真阳。
English: "Yongchu County National History" and Xu Shi Zhi were both written by Zhenyang.

古文：安成令，汉旧县。
现代文：安成令，汉代旧县。
English: An Chengling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：南新息令，汉旧县。
现代文：南新息令，汉代旧县。
English: Minamishinshikirei, a former county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：朗陵令，汉旧县。
现代文：朗陵令，汉代旧县。
English: Langlingling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：阳安令，汉旧县。
现代文：阳安令，漠代旧县。
English: Yanganling, a former county in the desert era.

古文：西平令，汉旧县。
现代文：西乎令，汉代旧县。
English: Xihuling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：瞿阳令，汉旧县，作灈阳。
现代文：瞿阳令，汉代旧县作濯阳。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the old county was called Zhouzhuang.

古文：安阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：安阳令，汉代旧县。
English: Anyang County, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：晋武太康元年，改为南安阳。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年改为南安阳。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed it to Nan'anyang.

古文：新蔡太守，晋惠帝分汝阴立，今帖治汝南。领县四，户二千七百七十四，口一万九千八百八十。
现代文：新蔡太守，晋惠帝时分割汝阴郡而设置，现在兼领汝南郡领四县户二千七百七十四，人口一万九千八百八十。
English: The new Empress Dowager Cai, installed when Emperor Jin Hui divided Ruyin County, now also leads Runan County and leads four counties with 2,774 households and a population of 19,880.

古文：去州陆六百；去京都水二千五百，陆一千四百。
现代文：距州治陆路有六百里。距京都水路二千五百里，陆路一千四百里。
English: It is 600 miles from Shuzhu by land, 2,500 miles from Kyoto by water, and 1,400 miles by land.

古文：鲖阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：鲖阳令，汉代旧县。
English: Shanyangling, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：晋成帝咸康二年，省并新蔡，后又立。
现代文：晋成帝咸康二年并入新蔡，后来又设立。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, Hamkang was merged into New Cai and later re-established.

古文：固始令，故名寝丘之地也。
现代文：固始令，足原名寝丘的地方。
English: Gushiryo, the site of Ashihara's famous sleeping hill.

古文：汉光武更名。
现代文：汉光武帝时改名。
English: He changed his name to Han Guangwu when he became emperor.

古文：晋成帝咸康二年，并新蔡，后又立。
现代文：晋成帝咸康二年并入新蔡，后来又设立。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, Hamkang was merged into New Cai and later re-established.

古文：新蔡令，汉旧县。
现代文：新蔡令，汉代旧县。
English: New Cai Ling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：苞信令，前汉无，后汉属汝南，《晋太康地志》属汝阴。
现代文：苞信令，前汉无此县，后汉时隶属汝南郡，《晋太康地志》上属汝阴。
English: Signaling, there was no such county in the former Han Dynasty, but it was part of Runan County in the later Han Dynasty, and it was part of Runan County in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：后汉《郡国》、《晋太康地志》并作 褒 。
现代文：后漠《郡国志》、《晋太康地志》上都作 褒 。
English: Houba was praised in "County History" and "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：谯郡太守，何志故属沛，魏明帝分立。
现代文：谯郡太守，何氏志记载原属沛郡，魏明帝时分割沛郡而设立。
English: He Shizhi records that it was originally part of Pei County, but was divided and established as Pei County during the reign of Emperor Ming.

古文：按王粲诗： 既入谯郡界，旷然消人忧。 
现代文：按王粲诗说： 已经进入谯郡的地界，辽阔开朗使人消除了忧愁。 
English: According to Wang Qian's poem: I have entered the territory of Qian County. The vastness and cheerfulness have made me eliminate sadness.

古文：粲是建安中亡，非明帝时立明矣。《永初郡国》无长垣县。
现代文：王粲是建室年间死去的，姜逊不是魏旦随时设置的造件事就很清楚了。《永初郡国志》无长垣县。
English: Wang Qian died during the founding of the dynasty, and it is clear that Jiang Song was not a fabrication set up by Wei Dan at any time. "Yongchu County National History" does not include Nagagaki County.

古文：今领县六，户一千四百二十四，口七千四百四。
现代文：现在领六县。户一千四百二十四，人口七千四百零四。
English: He now leads six counties, with 1,424 households and a population of 7,404.

古文：去州陆道三百五十；去京都水二千，陆一千二百。
现代文：距州治陆路有三百五十里。距京都水路有二千里，陆路一千二百里。
English: It is 350 miles by road from Shuzhu, 2,000 miles by water and 1,200 miles by land from Kyoto.

古文：蒙令，汉旧县，属沛。
现代文：蒙令，汉代旧县，属梁郡。
English: Mengling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Liang County.

古文：蕲令，汉旧县，属沛。
现代文：蕲令，漠代旧县，属沛郡。
English: Goryeong, a former county in the Joseon Dynasty, belongs to Pei County.

古文：宁陵令，前汉属陈留，后汉、《晋太康地志》属梁。
现代文：宁陵令，前汉时隶属陈留，后汉及《晋太康地志》隶属梁郡。
English: Ningling County was subordinate to Chenliu County during the former Han Dynasty, and subordinate to Liang County during the latter Han Dynasty and the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：魏令，故魏郡，流寓配属。
现代文：魏令，原先的魏郡，安置流落到此居住的人户而设立。
English: Wei County, formerly Wei County, was established to resettle the displaced people living here.

古文：襄邑令。
现代文：襄邑令。
English: The order of Xiangyue.

古文：长垣令，汉旧县，属陈留。
现代文：长垣令，汉代旧县，隶属陈留。
English: Nagagaki-Ryo, an old prefecture during the Han Dynasty, subordinated to Chenzuo.

古文：《永初郡国》无。
现代文：《永初郡国志》无记载。
English: There is no record of it in the "Yongchu County National History."

古文：何故属陈留，徐新配。
现代文：何氏志说原属陈留，徐氏志说是新设置的。
English: He Shizhi said that it originally belonged to Chen Rui, and Xu Shizhi said that it was newly set up.

古文：梁郡太守，秦砀郡，汉高更名。
现代文：盈郡太守，豢伐为砠郡，选直壹时改名。
English: The governor of Ying County changed his name to Zheng County when he was elected.

古文：孝武大明元年度徐州，二年还豫。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年割属徐州，大明二年又还属豫州。
English: Xiaowu Daming was assigned to Xuzhou in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, and in the second year of the Ming Dynasty it also belonged to Yuzhou.

古文：领县二，户九百六十八，口五千五百。
现代文：领有二县。户九百六十八，人口五千五百。
English: It is divided into two counties, with 968 households and a population of 5,500.

古文：去州陆一百六十；去京都水九百。
现代文：距州治陆路有一百六十里。距京都水路有九百里。
English: It is one hundred and sixty miles away from the Shuzhi land route and nine hundred miles away from the Kyoto water route.

古文：下邑令，汉旧县。
现代文：下邑令，汉代旧县。
English: It was under the jurisdiction of a township, and was an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：何云魏立，非也。
现代文：何氏志上说魏国时设立是不对的。
English: According to Ho's biography, it is not correct to say that it was established during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：砀令，汉旧县。
现代文：碣令，漠代旧县。
English: 令,漠代旧县.

古文：陈郡太守，汉高立为淮阳国，章帝元和三年更名。晋初并，梁王肜薨，还为陈。《永初郡国》有扶沟、阳夏，而无谷阳、长平。
现代文：阳夏县，另见。而无谷阳县和长平县。
English: Yangxia County, see also. And Muguyang County and Changping County.

古文：领县四，户六百九十三，口四千一百一十三。
现代文：领有四县。户六百九十三，人口四千一百一十三。
English: It is divided into four counties, with 693 households and a population of 4,113.

古文：去州陆七百六十；去京都水一千四百五十。
现代文：距州治陆路有七百六十里。距京都水路有一千四百五十里。
English: It is seven hundred and sixty miles away from the prefectural road and one thousand four hundred and fifty miles away from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：项城令，汉旧县，属汝南，《晋太康地志》属陈郡。
现代文：项城令，汉代旧县，隶属汝南郡，《晋太康地志》属陈郡。
English: Xiangcheng County, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Runan County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Chen County.

古文：西华令，汉旧县，属汝南，晋初省，惠帝永康元年复立，属颍川。
现代文：西华令，汉代旧县，隶属汝南郡，晋初撤销，惠帝永康元年恢复设置，属颖川。
English: Xihualing, an old county in the Han Dynasty, subordinate to Runan County, revoked at the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, restored in the first year of Hui Di Yongkang, belongs to Yingchuan.

古文：江左度此。
现代文：江左度此。
English: Jiang Zuo turned around.

古文：谷阳令，本苦县，前汉旧淮阳，后汉属陈，《晋太康地志》属梁，成帝咸康三年更名长平令，前汉属汝南，后汉属陈，《晋太康地志》属颍川。
现代文：谷阳令，原本是苦县，前汉时隶属淮阳，后汉属陈，《晋太康地志》隶属梁，成帝咸康三年改名。长平令，前汉时隶属汝南，后汉时属陈郡，《晋太康地志》上属颖川郡。
English: Guyangling, originally Ku County, belonged to Huaiyang during the former Han Dynasty, Chen during the latter Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" belonged to Liang, and changed its name to Chengdi Hamkang three years later. Changpingling, belonged to Runan during the former Han Dynasty, Chen County during the latter Han Dynasty, and Yingchuan County during the former "Jin Taikang Di Zi."

古文：南颍太守，故属汝南，晋惠帝分立。
现代文：南颍太守，过去隶属汝南郡，晋惠帝时从迪亩邮中分出设置。
English: Nanlu Daju, formerly part of Runan County, was separated from Di Mu Post during the reign of Emperor Jinhui.

古文：领县二，户五百二十六，口二千三百六十五。
现代文：领有二县。户五百二十六，人口二千三百六十五。
English: It is divided into two counties, with 526 households and a population of 2,365.

古文：去州七百六十；去京都陆一千四百五十。
现代文：距州治七百六十里。距京都陆路有一千四百五十里。
English: It is 760 miles from Shuzhu and 1450 miles from Kyoto by land.

古文：南顿令，汉旧县，何故属汝阳，晋武帝改属汝南。
现代文：南顿令，汉代旧县，何氏志上说过去属汝阳，晋武帝时改属汝南。
English: According to the Nantong edict, the old county in the Han Dynasty, Ho Shizhi said that it used to belong to Ryuyang, and when Emperor Jinwu came, it belonged to RyuNan.

古文：按《晋太康地志》、王隐《地道》无汝阳郡。
现代文：按晋太康地志》、王疆所著《地道》都无汝阳郡。
English: According to "Jin Taikang's Geography" and "The Real Road" written by Wang Jiang, there is no Ruyang County.

古文：和城令，何江左立。
现代文：和城令，何氏志记载江左时设立。
English: It was established at the time of Jiang Zuo, according to the records of He Shi Zhi.

古文：《永初郡国》又有许昌、新汲、焉陵、长社、颍阴、阳翟六县，而无曲阳。
现代文：阳翟，魏、晋时隶属河南。六县，而没有曲阳县。
English: Yangshuo, Wei and Jinxi belong to Henan. Six counties, but no Quyang County.

古文：领县三，户六百四十九，口三千五百七十九。
现代文：领有三县。户六百四十九，人口二千五百七十九。
English: It is divided into three counties, with a total of 649 households and a population of 2,579.

古文：去州一千；去京都陆一千八百。
现代文：距州治一千里。距京都陆路有一千八百里。
English: It is a thousand miles from Shuzhu, and 1,800 miles from Kyoto by land.

古文：邵陵令，汉旧县，属汝南，《晋太康地志》属颍川。
现代文：邵陵令，汉代旧县，隶属汝南郡，《晋太康地志》属题川。
English: Shao Ling Ling, Han Dynasty old county, subordinate to Runan County, "Jin Taikang Geography" belongs to Tiechuan.

古文：临颍令，汉旧县。
现代文：临颖令，汉代旧县。
English: Lin Ying Ling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：曲阳令，前汉属东海，后汉属下邳，《晋太康地志》无。
现代文：曲阳令，前汉时属塞东海，后汉时属下邳郡，《晋太康地志》无曲阳县。
English: According to the Quyang Ruling, the former Han Dynasty belonged to the Eastern Sea, the later Han Dynasty belonged to the Lower Han Dynasty, and the "History of Jin Taikang" does not include Quyang County.

古文：汝阳太守，《晋太康地志》、王隐《地道》无此郡，应是江左分汝南立。
现代文：汝阳太守，《晋太康地志》、王隐的《地道》都无此郡，应当是江左时期分割汝南而设置的。
English: Ruyang Daju, "Jin Taikang Ji Ji Zhi" and Wang Yin's "Ji Dao" do not have this county, which should have been set up by dividing the south of Ruyang during the Jiang Zuo period.

古文：晋成帝咸康三年，省并汝南，后又立。
现代文：晋成帝咸康三年撤销，将它并入汝南，后又从这直分出而设立。
English: Emperor Jiancheng revoked Hamkang for three years, merged it into Runan, and then established it directly from Runan.

古文：领县二，户九百四十一，口四千四百九十五。
现代文：领有二县。户有九百四十一，人口四千四百九十五。
English: It is divided into two counties, with 941 households and a population of 4,495.

古文：去州二百；去京都陆一千四百，水三千五百。
现代文：距州治二百里。距京都陆路有一千四百里，水路有三千五百里。
English: It is 200 miles from the prefecture, 1,400 miles from Kyoto by land, and 3,500 miles by water.

古文：汝阳令，汉旧县，属汝南。
现代文：汝阳令，汉代旧县，隶属汝南郡。
English: Ruyang County, an old county in the Han Dynasty, subordinate to Runan County.

古文：何故属汝阴，晋武改属汝南。
现代文：何氏志说从前属汝阴，晋武时改属汝南。
English: Ho Shizhi said that he was formerly from Ruyin, but when he was promoted to Jinwu, he was transferred to South Ruyin.

古文：按晋武分汝南为汝阴，何所言非也。
现代文：按晋武时分割汝南设汝阴，何氏志所说是错误的。
English: According to the division of Ru Nan and Ru Yin at the time of the Jin and Wu Dynasties, what He Shi Zhi said was wrong.

古文：武津令，何不注置立。
现代文：武津令，坦压志上没有注明置立情况。
English: According to the order of Emperor Mutsu, there was no indication of the status of the establishment in the imperial edict.

古文：汝阴太守，晋武帝分汝南立，成帝咸康二年，省并新蔡，后复立。
现代文：汝阴太守，晋武帝时分割汝南而设立，成帝咸康二年，将它撤销并入新蔡，后来又恢复设置。
English: Ruyin Daju, established when Emperor Jinwu divided the southern part of the country, revoked and merged into Xin Cai two years after Emperor Xiankang became emperor, and later reinstated.

古文：领县四，户二千七百四十九，口一万四千三百三十五。
现代文：领四县。户二千七百四十九，人口一万四千三百三十五。
English: He led four counties, with 2,749 households and a population of 14,335.

古文：汝阴令，汉旧县。
现代文：汝阴令，汉代旧县。
English: Ruyinling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：宋令，前汉名新郪。章帝建初四年，徙宋公国于此，改曰宋。
现代文：宋令，前汉时名新郪，章帝建初四年，将宋公的封国迁徙到这里，改称宋。
English: Song Ling, formerly known as Xinyi in the Han Dynasty, moved the Song Dynasty's fief to this place in the first four years of the reign of Emperor Zhang Jian, renaming it Song.

古文：宋城令，汉旧县。
现代文：宋城令，汉代旧县。
English: Song Chengling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：楼烦令，汉旧县，属雁门。
现代文：楼烦令，汉代旧县，属雁门。
English: Lou Duiling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：流寓配属。
现代文：后为流亡寓居这裹的人设置，配属汝阴郡。
English: Later, it was set up for people living in exile here, and assigned to Ruyin County.

古文：陈留太守，汉武帝元狩元年立，属兗州，中原乱废。
现代文：陈留太守，汉武帝元狩元年设立，隶属兗州，中原战乱时废置。
English: Chen Liu Taishu, established in the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, subordinate to Zhangzhou, abandoned during the Central Plains War.

古文：晋成帝咸康四年复立，《永初郡国》属兗州，何、徐属豫州。
现代文：晋成帝咸康四年恢复设置，《永初郡国志》属兗州，何氏志、徐氏志上说属豫州。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Jiankang's reign, the system was restored. "Yongchu County National History" belongs to Zhangzhou, while "He's History" and "Xu's History" belong to Henan.

古文：《永初郡国》无浚仪，有酸枣。
现代文：《永初郡国志》上无浚仪县，有酸枣。
English: According to "Yongchu County National History," there is no Dredge County, but there are sour jujube.

古文：今领县四，户百九十六，口二千四百一十三。
现代文：另见。现在领有四县。户一百九十六人口二千四百一十三。
English: See also. There are now four counties. There are 196 households with a total population of 2,413 people.

古文：寄治谯郡长垣县界。
现代文：郡治寄设在谯郡的长垣县境内。
English: The county magistrate's office is located in Nagagaki prefecture, which is also part of Atsugi prefecture.

古文：浚仪令，汉旧名。
现代文：浚仪令，汉代旧名。
English: 浚儀令, the old name from the Han Dynasty.

古文：小黄令，汉旧名。
现代文：小黄令，汉代旧名。
English: Xiao Huangling, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：白马令，汉属东郡，《晋太康地志》属濮阳。
现代文：白马令，汉属东郡，《晋太康地志》上说属濮阳。
English: Baima Ling, the Han-owned Dong County, the "Jin Taikang Geography" said that it belonged to Fenyang.

古文：雍丘令，汉旧名。
现代文：雍丘令，汉代旧名。
English: Yongqiu Ling, the old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：江州刺史，晋惠帝元康元年，分扬州之豫章、鄱阳、庐陵、临川、南康、建安、晋安，荆州之武昌、桂阳、安成十郡为江州。
现代文：江州刺史，晋惠帝元康元年，划分出扬州的豫章、鄱阳、庐陵、临川、南康、建安、晋安，荆州的武昌、桂阳、安成十郡设置江州。
English: According to the history of Jiangzhou, in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Yangzhou was divided into Yuzhang, Fenyang, Fuling, Linchuan, Nankang, Jian'an, Jin'an, and Wuchang, Guiyang, and Ancheng in Jingzhou.

古文：初治豫章，成帝咸康六年，移治寻阳；庾翼又治豫章，寻还寻阳。
现代文：起初治所在豫章，成帝咸康六年，将治所移到寻阳，庾翼时又迁回豫章，不久又将治所迁回寻阳。
English: At first, the seat of government was in Yuzhang, but in the sixth year of Emperor Xiankang's reign, the seat of government was moved to Xuanyang. When he died, the seat of government was moved back to Yuzhang, and soon the seat of government was moved back to Xuanyang.

古文：领郡九，县六十五，户五万二千三十三，口二十七万七千一百四十七。
现代文：现在领有九郡，六十五县。户五万二千零三十三，人口三十七万七千一百四十七。
English: At present, there are nine counties and sixty-five counties, with 52,033 households and a population of 377,147.

古文：去京都水一千四百。
现代文：距京都水路有一千四百里。
English: It is 1,400 miles away from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：寻阳太守，寻阳本县名，因水名县，水南注江。
现代文：寻阳太守，寻阳本来是县名，根据水名确立了县名，寻阳水向南流入长江。
English: It was originally the name of the county, and the name of the county was established based on the name of the water. The water of the Yangyang River flows southward into the Yangtze River.

古文：二汉属庐江，吴立蕲春郡，寻阳县属焉。
现代文：两汉时期寻阳县隶属庐江，吴国设立蕲春郡，寻阳县隶属于它。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Huan Yang County belonged to the Min River, and the State of Wu established Hunchun County, and Huan Yang County belonged to it.

古文：晋武帝太康元年，省蕲春郡，以寻阳属武昌，改蕲春之安丰为高陵及邾县，皆属武昌。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年，撤销蕲春郡，将寻阳县隶属武昌郡，将蕲春的安丰县改为高陵县和邾县，都隶属于武昌。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the county of Hunchun was revoked, Huan Yang County was subordinated to Wuchang County, and Anfeng County of Hunchun was changed to Gaoling County and Ya County, all of which were subordinated to Wuchang.

古文：二年，以武昌之寻阳复属庐江郡。
现代文：二年，将武昌郡的寻阳县恢复隶属于庐江郡。
English: Two years later, he restored Xiangyang County of Wuchang County to Minjiang County.

古文：惠帝永兴元年，分庐江、武昌立寻阳郡。
现代文：惠帝永兴元年，分割庐江郡和武昌郡设立寻阳郡。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, Huidi divided Minjiang County and Wuchang County to establish Xuanyang County.

古文：寻阳县后省。
现代文：寻阳县后来撤销。
English: Xuanyang County was later revoked.

古文：领县三，户二千七百二十，口一万六千八。
现代文：现在领有三县。户二千七百二十，人口一万六千零八。
English: At present, there are three counties, with a total of 2,720 households and a population of 16,008.

古文：柴桑男相，二汉属豫章，晋属武昌。
现代文：柴桑男相，两汉时属豫章郡，晋代属武昌郡。
English: Chaisang Nanzo belonged to Yuzhang County during the Han Dynasty and to Wuchang County during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：郡既立，治此。
现代文：寻阳郡设置后，治所设在这裹。
English: After the establishment of Xuanyang County, the government office was set up here.

古文：鼓泽子相，汉、《晋太康地志》属豫章，立寻阳郡后，割度。
现代文：彭泽子相，漠代、《晋太康地志》属豫章，设立寻阳郡后，分割改属寻阳郡。
English: Peng Ze Zi Xiang, Mu Dynasty, "Jin Taikang History" belongs to Yuzhang, after the establishment of Xuanyang County, it was divided and transferred to Xuanyang County.

古文：松滋伯相，前汉属庐江，后汉无，《晋太康地志》属安丰。
现代文：松滋伯相，前汉时属庐江，后汉未设立，《晋太康地志》属安丰。
English: Song Zhi Bo Xiang belonged to Minjiang in the former Han Dynasty, but was not established in the later Han Dynasty. "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Anfeng.

古文：安丰县名，前汉无，后汉属庐江，晋武帝立为安丰郡。
现代文：安丰是县名，前汉无，后汉时属庐汀，晋武帝时立为安丰郡。
English: Anfeng is the name of the county. Before the Han Dynasty, there was no Anfeng County. After the Han Dynasty, Anfeng County belonged to Shanting County. During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, Anfeng County was established.

古文：江左流民寓寻阳，侨立安丰、松滋二郡，遥隶扬州，安帝省为松滋县。
现代文：东晋流民寄寓寻阳，借此地重置安丰、松滋二郡，远属扬州管辖，安帝撤销二郡设置松滋县。
English: The East Jin refugees resettled in Xingyang, and used this place to resettle the two counties of Anfeng and Songzhi, which were under the jurisdiction of Yangzhou, and the two counties were revoked by Andi and set up Songzhi County.

古文：寻阳又有弘农县流寓。
现代文：寻阳郡又有借此地重置的弘农县。
English: In Hoyang County, there is also Hongnong County, which used this place to relocate.

古文：文帝元嘉十八年，省并松滋。
现代文：文帝元嘉十八年，撤销并入查继。
English: In the 18th year of Emperor Wen's reign, it was revoked and put under investigation.

古文：豫章太守，汉高帝立，本属扬州。
现代文：豫章太守，汉高帝时设立，原本隶属扰州。
English: Yuzhang Dazhong, established during the reign of Emperor Gao, originally belonged to Zhizhou.

古文：《永初郡国》有海昏，何志无。
现代文：《永初郡国志》有海昏县，汉代旧县。何氏志无。
English: "Yongchu County National History" has Haikou County and Han Dynasty Old County. There is no record of Ho clan.

古文：今领县十二，户一万六千一百三十九，口一十二万二千五百七十三。
现代文：现在领十二县。户一万六千一百三十九人一十二万二千五百七十三。
English: He is now in charge of 12 counties, with 16,139 households, up from 1,122,573.

古文：去州水六百，陆三百五十；去京都水一千九百，陆二千一百。
现代文：距州治水路六百里。陆路三百五十里。距京都水路一千九百里，陆路二千一百里。
English: It is 600 miles from the prefectural waterway, 350 miles by land, 1900 miles from the Kyoto waterway, and 2100 miles by land.

古文：南昌侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：南昌侯相，汉代旧县。
English: Prince of Nanchang, leader of the old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：新淦侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：新淦侯相，汉代旧县。
English: Prince of Xincheng, the leader of the old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：丰城侯相，吴立曰富城，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：丰城侯相，吴国设置时称富城，晋武帝太康元年改名丰城。
English: Fengcheng Houxiang, called Fucheng when it was set up by the State of Wu, was renamed Fengcheng in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：建城侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：建城侯相，漠代旧县。
English: Jiancheng Houxiang, the leader of the old county in the desert era.

古文：望蔡子相，汉灵帝中平中，汝南上蔡民分徙此地，立县名曰上蔡；晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：望蔡子相，漠灵帝中平年间，汝南郡上蔡县百姓徙居此地，设立县名称上蔡，晋武帝太康元年改名望蔡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhongping, the people of Shangcai County, Yunnan County, migrated to this place and established the county name Shangcai. In the first year of Emperor Taikang, the name was changed to Wangcai.

古文：吴平侯相，汉灵帝中平中立汉平，吴更名。
现代文：吴平侯相，汉灵帝中平年间设立，县名汉平，吴国时改名吴平。
English: Wuping Houxiang, established during the reign of Hanling Emperor Zhongping, the county name is Hanping, and the name was changed to Wuping during the reign of Wu.

古文：永修男相，汉灵帝中平中立。
现代文：永脩男相，漠灵帝中平年间设立。
English: Yongzheng Nanzo, founded during the reign of Emperor Zhongping.

古文：建昌公相，汉和帝永元十六年，分海昏立。
现代文：建吕公相，漠和帝永元十六年，分割海昏县而设立。
English: It was established in 16th year of the first year of the reign of Jian Lvong, Emperor of China, by dividing Haikou County.

古文：豫宁侯相，汉献帝建安中立，吴曰西安，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：豫宁侯相，漠献帝建安年间设立，吴国时称西安，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: It was founded during the reign of Emperor Jianan of the Yu-Ning Dynasty, and was called Xi'an during the reign of Emperor Wu. It was renamed Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：康乐侯相，吴孙权黄武中立，曰阳乐，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：康乐侯相，吴孙权黄武年间设立名阳乐，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Kang Le Houxiang, Wu Sun Quan Huang Wu years set up the famous Yang Le, Jinwu Emperor Taikang changed his name in the first year.

古文：新吴令，汉灵帝中平中立。
现代文：新吴令，汉灵帝中平年间设立。
English: It was established during the reign of Emperor Wu and Emperor Hanling.

古文：艾侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：艾侯相，汉代旧县。
English: Ai Houxiang, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：鄱阳太守，汉献帝建安十五年，孙权分豫章立，治鄱阳县；赤乌八年，徙治吴芮故城。
现代文：鄱阳太守，汉献帝建安十五年，孙权分割豫章而设立，治所在鄱阳县，赤乌八年，治所迁至吴芮旧城。
English: In the 15th year of the reign of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, Emperor Han Xian Jian'an, and the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Sun Quan, the Yuzhang was established. The administrative center was located in Yang County, and in the 8th year of the reign of Emperor Wu Wu, the administrative center was moved to the old city of Wuxi.

古文：《永初郡国》有历陵县，何志无。
现代文：《永初郡国志》有历陵县，汉代旧县。何氏志无。
English: "Yongchu County National History" has Liling County, Han Dynasty old county. There is no record of Ho clan.

古文：领县六，户三千二百四十二，口一万九百五十。
现代文：领有六县。户三千二百四十二，人口一万零九百五十。
English: There are six counties, with a total of 3,242 households and a population of 10,950.

古文：去州水四百四十；去京都水一千八百四十，陆二千六十。
现代文：距州治水路有四百四十里。距京都水路有一千八百四十里，陆路有二千零六十里。
English: It is 440 miles from the prefectural waterway, 1,840 miles from the Kyoto waterway, and 2,060 miles from the land route.

古文：广晋令，吴立曰广昌，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：广晋令，吴国设置时名广昌，晋武帝太康元年改名广晋。
English: When the State of Wu was established, it was named Guangchang, but in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed the name to Guangjin.

古文：鄱阳侯相，汉旧县。
现代文：鄱阳侯相，汉代旧县。
English: Fenyang Houxiang, the leader of the old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：余干令，汉旧县。
现代文：余干令，汉代旧县。
English: Yu Ganling, the leader of the old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：上饶男相，吴立。
现代文：上饶男相，吴国时设立。
English: It was established when Shangrao was the minister of men and Wu was the minister of state.

古文：《太康地志》有，王隐《地道》无。
现代文：《太康地志》有记载，王隐着《地道》上无。
English: There is a record in "Taikang Geographical History," but there is no record of Wang Yingzhuang in "Jinduo."

古文：葛阳令，吴立。
现代文：葛阳令，吴国设立。
English: GeYangRen, Wu State was established.

古文：乐安男相，吴立。
现代文：乐安男相，吴国设立。
English: Le An, the male pharaoh, was established by the State of Wu.

古文：临川内史，吴孙亮太平二年，分豫章东部都尉立。
现代文：临川内史，吴国孙亮太平二年，分出豫章郡的东部都尉辖地而设立。
English: According to the history of Linchuan, it was established in the second year of the Taiping Dynasty by Sun Liang of the State of Wu from the eastern capitals of Yuzhang County.

古文：领县九，户八千九百八十三，口六万四千八百五。
现代文：领九县。户八千九百八十三，人门六万四千八百零五。
English: He was in charge of nine counties, with 8,983 households and 64,805 people.

古文：去州水一千一百，陆一千二十；去京都水二千八百三十，陆三千。
现代文：距州治水路有一千一百里，陆路有一千零二十里。距京都水路有二干八百三十里，陆路三千里。
English: It is 1,100 miles away from the prefectural waterway and 1,020 miles away by land. It is 230-830 miles away from the Kyoto waterway and 3,000 miles away by land.

古文：临汝侯相，汉和帝永元八年立。
现代文：临汝侯相，汉和帝永元八年设置。
English: It was set up in the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng.

古文：西丰侯相，吴立曰西平，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：西丰侯相，吴国设置时称西平，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Xifeng Houxiang, called Xiping when the State of Wu was established, changed its name in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：新建侯相，吴立。
现代文：新建侯相，吴国设置。
English: A new prince and minister of state was established, and the state of Wu was established.

古文：永城男相，吴立。
现代文：永城男相，吴国设置。
English: Yongcheng male aspect, Wu country setting.

古文：宜黄侯相，吴立。
现代文：宜黄侯相，吴国设置。
English: Yi Huang Hou Xiang and Wu Guo were set up.

古文：南城男相，汉旧县，晋武帝太康元年，更曰新南城，江左复旧。
现代文：南城男相，漠代旧县，晋武帝太康元年，改名新南城，束晋时恢复旧名。
English: Nancheng Nanzo, a former county in the Mud Dynasty, was renamed New Nancheng in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, and the old name was restored in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：南丰令，吴立。
现代文：南丰令，吴国设置。
English: Nanfeng ordered, Wu set up.

古文：东兴侯相，吴立。
现代文：东兴侯相，吴国设置。
English: Dongxing Houxiang, set up in Wu.

古文：安浦男相，吴立。
现代文：安浦男相，吴国设置。
English: Anpu male phase, Wu state set up.

古文：庐陵太守，庐陵本县名，属豫章，汉献帝兴平元年，孙策分豫章立。
现代文：庐陵太守，庐陵本来是县名，隶属豫章，汉献帝兴平元年，孙策分割豫章郡而设置。
English: Fuling Taishu, Fuling was originally the name of the county, subordinate to Yuzhang, Han Emperor Xingping in the first year of the year, Sun Ce divided Yuzhang County and set it up.

古文：领县九，户四千四百五十五，口三万一千二百七十一。
现代文：领九县。户四千四百五十五，人口三万一千二百七十一。
English: Nine counties, 4,455 households, and a population of 31,271.

古文：去州水二千，陆一千六百；去京都水三千六百。
现代文：距州治水路有二千里，陆路一千六百里。距京都水路三千六百里。
English: It is 2,000 miles from the prefectural waterway, 1,600 miles by land, and 3,600 miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：石阳子相，前汉无，后汉有。
现代文：石阳子相，前汉时未设置，后汉设立。
English: Shi Yang Zifang, not established in the former Han Dynasty, established in the later Han Dynasty.

古文：西昌侯相，吴立。
现代文：西昌侯相，吴国设立。
English: Prince of Xichang, founded the State of Wu.

古文：东昌子相，吴立。
现代文：东昌子相，吴国设立。
English: Dongchang Zifang, established in Wu.

古文：吉阳男相，吴立。
现代文：吉阳男相，吴国设立。
English: Jiyang male phase, Wu State established.

古文：己丘男相，吴立。
现代文：巴丘男相，吴国设立。
English: Bachu male phase, established in Wu.

古文：兴平侯相，吴立。
现代文：兴平侯相，吴国设立。
English: Xingping, the prince and minister, established the State of Wu.

古文：阳丰男相，吴曰阳城，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：阳丰男相，吴国时名阳城，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Yangfeng male phase, known as Yangcheng in the time of the State of Wu, changed its name in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：高昌男相，吴立。
现代文：高昌男相，吴国设立。
English: Gaochang male minister, Wu established.

古文：遂兴男相，吴立曰新兴，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：遂兴男相，吴国设立时称新兴，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Sui Xing, the male empress, was called Xinxing when the State of Wu was established, and changed his name to Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：《永初郡国》无比县，何、徐并有。
现代文：《永初郡国志》无此县，何氏志、徐氏志上都有遂兴。
English: "Yongchu County National History" does not have this county, and both He's and Xu's histories have Suixing.

古文：安成太守，孙皓宝鼎二年，分豫章、庐陵、长沙立。
现代文：安成太守，孙皓宝鼎二年，分割豫章、庐陵、长沙三郡而设立。
English: It was established by splitting Yuzhang, Fuling and Changsha into three counties in the second year of the reign of Emperor Ancheng and Emperor Sun Yat-sen.

古文：《晋太康地志》属荆州。
现代文：《晋太康地志》上属荆州。
English: "Jin Taikang Geography" belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：领县七，户六千一百一十六，口五万三百二十三。
现代文：领七县。户六干一百一十六，人口五万零三百二十三。
English: It controls seven counties, with 116 households in six counties and a population of 50,323 people.

古文：去州水三千三百，陆三千六百；去京都水三千七百，无陆。
现代文：距州治水路有三千三百里，陆路三千六百里。距京都水路三千七百里，陆路不通。
English: It is 3,300 miles from the prefectural waterway, and 3,600 miles by land. It is 3,700 miles from the Kyoto waterway, and there is no road access.

古文：平都子相，前汉曰安平，后汉更名，属豫章。
现代文：平都子相，前汉置安平，后汉更名，属豫章郡。
English: Pingdu Zifang, formerly Anping in the Han Dynasty and renamed in the Later Han Dynasty, belongs to Yuzhang County.

古文：新喻侯相，吴立。
现代文：新喻侯相，吴国设立。
English: Xin Yu Hou Xiang established the State of Wu.

古文：宜阳子相，汉旧县，本名宜春，属豫章，晋孝武改名。
现代文：宜阳子相。汉代旧县，本名宜春，属豫章，晋孝武帝改名。
English: Yiyang Ziso. Han Dynasty old county, real name Yichun, belongs to Yuzhang, Emperor Jinxiao Wu changed his name.

古文：永新男相，吴立。
现代文：永新男相，吴国设立。
English: Yongxin male minister, Wu State established.

古文：安复侯相，汉旧县，本名安成，晋武帝太康元年更名，属长沙。
现代文：安复侯相，汉代旧县，本名安成，晋武帝太康元年更名，属于长沙。
English: An Fu Hou Xiang, a former county in the Han Dynasty, whose real name was An Cheng, but was renamed by Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, belongs to Changsha.

古文：萍乡侯相，吴立。
现代文：萍乡侯相，吴国设立。
English: Pingxiang Houxiang, established by the State of Wu.

古文：广兴侯相，《晋太康地志》有此县，何云江左立，非也。
现代文：广兴侯相，《晋太康地志》上有此县，何氏志说是东晋设立，错了。
English: Guang Xing Hou Xiang, "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" has this county, He Shi Zhi said that it was set up in the East Jin, but it was wrong.

古文：南康公相，晋武帝太康三年，以庐陵南部都尉立。
现代文：南康公相，晋武帝太康三年，以庐陵南部都尉管辖区设置。
English: Nankang Minister of Public Security, Jinwu Emperor Taikang for three years, set up in the southern governor's jurisdiction area of Fuling.

古文：领县七，户四千四百九十三，口三万四千六百八十四。
现代文：领八县。户四千四百九十三，人口三万四千六百八十四。
English: eight counties, with 4,493 households and a population of 34,684.

古文：去州水三千七百四十；去京都水三千八十。
现代文：距州治水路有三千七百四十里。距京都水路三千零八十里。
English: It is 3,740 miles from the prefectural waterway and 3,080 miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：赣侯相，汉旧县，属豫章。
现代文：赣侯相，汉代旧县，属豫章。
English: Gong Hou Xiang, Han Dynasty old county, belongs to Yuzhang.

古文：宁都子相，吴立曰杨都，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：宁都子相，吴国设置时名杨都，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Ningdu Zifang, named Yangdu when it was set up by the State of Wu, was renamed by Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：雩都侯相，汉旧县，属豫章。
现代文：雩都侯相，汉代旧县，属豫章。
English: He was a prince of a county in the Han Dynasty and belonged to Yuanzhang.

古文：平固侯相，吴立曰平阳，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：平固侯相，吴国设置时名平阳，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Pinggu Houxiang, the name of Pingyang when the State of Wu was established, and the name of Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：南康公相，吴立曰安南，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：南康公相，吴国设置时名安南，晋武帝太康元年改名。
English: Nankang minister of public affairs, named Annan when the State of Wu was established, changed his name to Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：陂阳男相，吴立曰揭阳，晋武帝太康五年，以西康揭阳移治故陂阳县，改曰陂县，然则陂阳先已为县矣。
现代文：陂阳男相，吴国设置时名揭阳，晋武帝太康五年，将西康县和揭阳县的治所迁到旧陂阳县，改名胜题，那就是说陂阳原先已经是县了。
English: Shenyang was formerly known as Jieyang when it was set up by the State of Wu. In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the government offices of Xikang County and Jieyang County were moved to the old Shenyang County and renamed Shengqi, which meant that Shenyang was already a county.

古文：后汉《郡国》无，疑是吴所立而改曰揭阳也。
现代文：后汉《郡国志》无记载，可能是后来吴国设置时将县名改为遏屋了。
English: There is no record in the "County History" of the Later Han Dynasty. It is possible that the name of the county was changed to Henan when the State of Wu was established.

古文：南野伯相，汉旧县，属豫章。
现代文：南野伯相，汉代旧县，属豫章。
English: Minamino Hokusho, a former county in the Han Dynasty, was a member of the Yuanzhang.

古文：虔化男相，孝武大明五年，以虔化屯立。
现代文：虔化男相，孝武帝大明五年，将虔化改立。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Emperor Qianhua was enthroned.

古文：南新蔡太守，江左立。
现代文：南新蔡太守，江左设置。
English: Nanxin Cai Taishu, Jiang Zuo set up.

古文：领县四，户一千七百三十，口八千八百四十八。
现代文：领四县。户一千七百三十，人口八千八百四十八。
English: He led four counties, with 1,730 households and a population of 8,848.

古文：去州水二百；去京都水一千三百七十，陆一千八百八十。
现代文：距州治水路有二百里。距京都水路有一千三百七十里，陆路一千八百八十里。
English: It is two hundred miles away from the prefectural waterway, thirteen hundred and seventy miles away from the Kyoto waterway, and eighteen hundred and eighty miles away by land.

古文：苞信令，本作褒信，《永初郡国》作苞信。
现代文：苞信令，另见。原本称作褒信，《永初郡国志》写作苞信。
English: Originally, it was called a letter of commendation, and "Yongchu County National History" was written as a letter of commendation.

古文：慎令，汉旧名，本属汝南。
现代文：慎令，汉代旧名，原本属汝南郡。
English: Shenling, the old name during the Han Dynasty, originally belonged to Runan County.

古文：宋令，徐志云宋乐，后复旧。
现代文：宋令，另见。徐志说是塞乐，后来恢复旧名。
English: Song Ling, see also. Xu Zhi said it was Xie Le, and later the old name was restored.

古文：阳唐左县令，孝武大明八年立。
现代文：阳唐左县令，孝武大明八年设置。
English: Yang Tang Zuo County, Xiaowu Daming set up in eight years.

古文：建安太守，本闽越，秦立为闽中郡。
现代文：建安太守，原本是闽越地区，秦代设立为闽中郡。
English: Jian'an Taishou was originally located in the Yueyue area, and was established as Yuzhong County during the Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉武帝世，闽越反，灭之，徙其民于江、淮间，虚其地。
现代文：汉武帝时区闽越反叛，武壶平定叛乱后将该地区的百姓迁徙到江、淮之间，使阐越一带空旷无人。
English: Emperor Hanwu rebelled against Yue Yue in the Han Dynasty time zone, and after suppressing the rebellion, he moved the people in the area to the area between the Yangtze River and Huai River, leaving the Yue Yue area empty.

古文：后有遁逃山谷者颇出，立为冶县，属会稽。
现代文：后来有逃避到山谷中的人纷纷出来，就设置了迨逊，隶属会稽郡。
English: Later, people who had fled to the valley came out in droves, and a post office was set up, affiliated with the county auditor.

古文：司马彪云，章安是故冶，然则临海亦冶地也。
现代文：司马彪说，章安就是原先的迨昼，那么盐悔也是原先冶县的地区了。
English: Sima Biao said that Zhang'an is the original Yixing, then Yancheng is also the original area of Yixian.

古文：张勃《吴录》云： 闽越王冶铸地，故曰安闽王冶。
现代文：张勃着的《吴录》说： 闽越王铸造钢铁器的地方，所以称为安闽王冶。
English: Zhang Bure's "Wu Lu" said: The place where the King of Anhui casts iron and steel is called Anhui Wangye.

古文：此不应偏以受名，盖句践冶铸之所，故谓之冶乎？
现代文：但道不应是普遍的名称，大盖是句践铸造铜铁器的地方，所以称为冶吧?
English: However, "Dao" should not be a common name. Dagai is a place where copper and ironware were cast, so it should be called Ye?

古文：闽中有山名湛，疑湛山之炉铸剑为湛炉也。 
现代文：闽地有座山名湛，可能是湛山之炉铸造的剑便是 湛炉 剑了。 
English: There is a mountain named Zhan in Shandong Province. The sword that may have been forged in the furnace of Zhan Mountain is the Zhan Furnace Sword.

古文：后分冶地为会稽东、南二部都尉。
现代文：后来分割冶地为会稽郡的东、南二部都尉。
English: Later, the metallurgical land was divided into the eastern and southern two parts of Heji County.

古文：东部，临海是也；南部，建安是也。
现代文：东部，就是临海；南部，就是建安。
English: The eastern part is the coastal area; the southern part is Jian'an.

古文：吴孙休永安三年，分南部立为建安郡。
现代文：吴国孙休永安三年，分出会稽南部设置建安郡。
English: In the third year of Wu Guosun's reign in Yong'an, Jian'an County was set up in the southern part of the county.

古文：领县七。
现代文：领七县。
English: He is in charge of seven counties.

古文：户三千四十二，口一万七千六百八十六。
现代文：户三千零四十二，人口一万七千六百八十六。
English: Households: 3,042, population: 17,686.

古文：去州水二千三百八十；去京都水三千四十，并无陆。
现代文：距州治水路有二千三百八十里。距京都水路三千零四十里，无陆路可通。
English: It is 2,380 miles away from the prefectural waterway and 3,040 miles away from the Kyoto waterway. There is no land route.

古文：吴兴子相，汉末立曰汉兴，吴更名。
现代文：吴兴子相，汉末设置时名汉兴，吴时改名汉兴。
English: Wu Xingzixiang, the name of Han Xing at the end of Han Dynasty, changed his name to Han Xing at the beginning of Wu Dynasty.

古文：将乐子相，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：将乐子相，《晋太康地志》有。
English: "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" (History of Jin Taikang) has it.

古文：邵武子相，吴立曰昭武，晋武帝更名。
现代文：邵武子相，吴国设置时名昭武，晋武帝时改。
English: Shao Wuzixiang, Shouwu at the time of the establishment of the State of Wu, and Emperor Jinwu at the time of the reform.

古文：建阳男相，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：建阳男相，《晋太康地志》有。
English: Jianyang male phase, "Jin Taikang History" has.

古文：绥成男相，《永初郡国》、何、徐并有；何、徐不注置立。
现代文：绥成男相，《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志都有，何氏志、徐氏志未注明设立情况。
English: "Yongchu County National History," "Ho's History" and "Xu's History" all have a male minister, but the establishment of "Ho's History" and "Xu's History" is not specified.

古文：沙村长，《永初郡国》、何、徐并有；何、徐不注置立。
现代文：边挝长，《永初郡国志》、坦压志、巡志都有些挝。包压志、途旦志未注设立情况。
English: "Yongchu County National History," "Tanpu History" and "Tour History" are all written in Lao, but there is no information on the establishment of "Baopu History" and "Tudan History."

古文：晋安太守，晋武帝太康三年，分建安立。
现代文：晋安太守，晋武帝太康三年，分割建安郡而设立。
English: It was established by dividing Jian'an County into three parts in the third year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：领县五，户二千八百四十三，口一万九千八百三十八。
现代文：领五县。尸二千八百四十三，人口一万九干八百三十八。
English: There were 2,843 corpses, and the population was between 19,000 and 838.

古文：去州水三千九百九十；去京都水三千五百八十。
现代文：距州治水路有三千九百九十里。距京都水路三千五百八十里。
English: It is 3,990 miles from the prefectural waterway and 3,580 miles from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：侯官囗相，前汉无，后汉曰东侯官，属会稽。
现代文：侯官口相，前汉时无，后汉称东侯官，属会稽。
English: Houkan Kucho, called Eastern Houkan during the Former Han Dynasty, but not during the Later Han Dynasty, was a member of a guild.

古文：原丰令，晋武帝太康三年，省建安典船校尉立。
现代文：原丰令，晋武帝太康三年，撤销建安典船校尉而设置。
English: According to the original Feng Ruling, Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty revoked the position of the captain of the Jianan Ship after three years.

古文：晋安男相，吴立曰东安，晋武帝更名。
现代文：晋安男相，吴设置时名东安，晋武帝改名。
English: Jinan male phase, Wu set up the name Dongan, Jinwu Emperor changed his name.

古文：罗江男相，吴立，属临海。
现代文：罗江男相，吴设置，隶属临海。
English: Luo River male phase, Wu set up, affiliated to Linhai.

古文：晋武帝立晋安郡，度属。
现代文：晋武帝设置晋安郡，改属。
English: Emperor Jinwu set up Jinan County, which was transferred to Chongqing.

古文：温麻令，晋武帝太康四年，以温麻船屯立。
现代文：温麻令，晋武帝太康四年，将温麻船屯立为县。
English: Emperor Wengjia and Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty established Wengjia Shipbuilding Town as a county four years later.

古文：《永初郡国》无，何、徐并有。
现代文：《永初郡国志》无，包压志、徐氏志都有。
English: There is no "Yongchu County National History," but there is a history of Baoxu and a history of the Xu family.

古文：青州刺史，治临淄。
现代文：青州刺史，治所在临淄。
English: Qingzhou engraved history, Linyi is the seat of governance.

古文：江左侨立，治广陵。
现代文：束晋借地重设青州时，治所在广陵。
English: When Sokjin leased land to re-establish Qingzhou, Guangling was in charge.

古文：安帝义熙五年，平广固，北青州刺史治东阳城，而侨立南青州如故。
现代文：晋安帝义熙五年，平定了广固，北青州刺史的治所在束阳城，而侨立的南青州刺史治所仍旧在广陵。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor An of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Yixi of the Jin Dynasty, Guanggu was pacified. The seat of the Northern Qingzhou History Research Institute was located in Shuyang City, while the Overseas Chinese South Qingzhou History Research Institute was still located in Guangling.

古文：后省南青州，而北青州直曰青州。
现代文：后来撤销南青州，而北青州直接称为青州。
English: Later, South Qingzhou was revoked, and North Qingzhou was directly called Qingzhou.

古文：孝武孝建二年，移治历城。大明八年，还治东阳。
现代文：宋孝武帝孝建二年，将治所迁到历城，大明八年，治所仍还迁东阳。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowu of the Song Dynasty, the government office was moved to Licheng, and in the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty, the government office was still moved to Dongyang.

古文：明帝失淮北，于郁洲侨立青州，立齐、北海、西海郡。
现代文：明帝丢失了淮北，在郁洲借地设置青州，设立齐郡、北海、西海郡。
English: Emperor Ming lost Huaibei, and set up Qingzhou in the leased land of Yuzhou, and set up Qi County, Beihai County, and Xihai County.

古文：旧州领郡九，县四十六，户四万五百四，口四十万二千七百二十九。
现代文：旧青州领九郡，四十六县。户四万零五百零四，人口四十万二千七百二十九。
English: The former Qingzhou had nine counties and 46 counties, with 40,504 households and a population of 422,729.

古文：去京都陆二千。
现代文：距京都陆路有二千里。
English: It is 2,000 miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：齐郡太守，秦立。
现代文：齐郡太守，秦代设立。
English: The governor of Qi County, established in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：领县七，户七千三百四十六，口万四千八百八十九。
现代文：领七县。户七千三百四十六，人口一万四千八百八十九。
English: There were 7,346 households, with a population of 14,889.

古文：临淄令，汉旧县。
现代文：临淄令，汉代旧县。
English: Linyi, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：西安令，汉旧县。
现代文：西安令，汉代旧县。
English: Xianling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：安平令，六国时其地曰安平，二汉、魏、晋曰东安平。
现代文：安平令，六国时那地方名安平，二汉、魏、晋时期名东安平。
English: According to the Anping edict, the place was called Anping during the Six Kingdoms period, and Donganping during the Han, Wei, and Jin dynasties.

古文：前汉属淄川，后汉属北海，魏度属齐。
现代文：前汉时属淄川，后汉时属北海，魏改属齐。
English: During the former Han Dynasty, it belonged to the Min River, during the latter Han Dynasty, it belonged to the North Sea, and during the Wei Dynasty, it belonged to Qi.

古文：般阳令，前汉属济南，后汉、《晋太康地志》属齐。
现代文：般阳令，前汉时属济南，后汉、《晋太康地志》属齐郡。
English: Banyangling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Jinan, in the latter Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang History" belonged to Qi County.

古文：广饶令，汉旧县。
现代文：广饶令，汉代旧县。
English: Guangrao County, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：昌国令，汉旧县。
现代文：昌国令，汉代旧县。
English: Chang Guoling, the leader of the old county in Han Dynasty.

古文：益都令，魏立。
现代文：益都令，魏代设置。
English: It was established during the reign of Emperor Yizong in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：济南太守，汉文帝十六年，分齐立。
现代文：济南太守，汉文帝十六年，分割齐而设立。
English: The governor of Jinan, founded in the 16th year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：案《晋太康地志》无济岷郡。
现代文：《永初郡国志》上济南郡又有迅四、二选时属越，《晋太康地志》无此县。
English: According to the "Yongchu County National History," Jinan County was ranked 4th and 2nd respectively, while the "Jin Taikang Local History" did not include this county.

古文：《永初郡国》济南又有祝阿、于陵县，而无朝阳、平陵二县。
现代文：于陵县，汉代旧县。而无朝腾、平陆二县。
English: Yuling County, an old county during the Han Dynasty, but no Chaoteng County or Pinglu County.

古文：领县六，户五千五十六，口三万八千一百七十五。
现代文：现领六县。户五千零五十六，人口三万八千一百七十五。
English: It now controls six counties, with 5,056 households and a population of 38,175.

古文：去州陆四百；去京都二千四百。
现代文：距州治陆路四百里。距京都二千四百里。
English: It is four hundred miles by road from Shuzhi and two thousand four hundred miles from Kyoto.

古文：历城令，汉旧县。
现代文：历城令，莲优旧县。
English: Licheng County, Lianyou County.

古文：朝阳令，前汉曰朝阳，后汉、晋曰东朝阳。
现代文：朝阳令，前汉时名朝阳，后汉、晋代名东朝阳。
English: Chaoyang-Ren, formerly known as Chaoyang during the Han Dynasty and Dong Chaoyang during the Later Han and Jin Dynasties.

古文：二汉属济南，《晋太康地志》属乐安。
现代文：二汉时属济南邓《晋太康地志》属乐安郡。
English: Deng's "History of Jin Taikang," which belonged to Jinan in the Second Han Dynasty, belongs to Le'an County.

古文：著令，汉旧县。
现代文：著令，汉代旧县。
English: By order, the old counties in the Han Dynasty.

古文：土鼓令，汉旧县，晋无。
现代文：土鼓令，汉代旧县，晋无此县。
English: According to the local drumming tradition, this county was the oldest county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：逢陵令，二汉、晋无，《永初郡国》、何、徐有。
现代文：逢陵令，二汉、晋代无此县，《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志有此县。
English: Feng Ling Ling, the Second Han Dynasty, and the Jin Dynasty did not have this county, but "Yongchu County National History," "He Shi Shi," and "Xu Shi Shi" have this county.

古文：平陵令，汉旧县，至晋并曰东平陵。
现代文：平陵令，汉代旧县，到了晋代都称为束平陵。
English: Pinglinglingling, the old county in the Han Dynasty, became known as Sokpingling in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：乐安太守，汉高立，名千乘，和帝永元七年更名。
现代文：乐安太守，汉高帝设立，原名千乘，和帝永元七年改名。
English: Le An Taishu, established by Emperor Han Gao, was originally named Qian Rong, and changed its name to Imperial Yong Yuan in the seventh year.

古文：领县三，户二千二百五十九，口一万四千九百九十一。
现代文：领三县。户二千二百五十九，人口一万四千九百九十一。
English: There were 2,259 households in the three counties, with a population of 14,991.

古文：去州陆一百八十；去京都陆一千八百。
现代文：距州治陆路一百八十里。距京都陆路一千八百里。
English: It is 180 miles from Shuzhi by road and 1,800 miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：千乘令，汉旧县。
现代文：千乘令，汉代旧县。
English: Senjo-Ryo, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：临济令，前汉曰狄，安帝永初二年更名。
现代文：临济令，前汉时名狄县，后汉安帝永初二年改名。
English: Linji County, formerly known as Di County during the Han Dynasty, changed its name to Andean County in the first two years of the Han Dynasty.

古文：博昌令，汉旧名。
现代文：博昌令，漠代旧名。
English: Bochangling, the old name of the desert.

古文：高密太守，汉文帝分齐为胶西，宣帝本始元年，更名高密。
现代文：高密太守，汉文帝分割齐郡设胶西郡，宣帝本始元年，改名高密。
English: Gaomi was the de facto ruler. Emperor Hanwen divided Qi County and established Jiaoxi County. In the first year of Emperor Xuan's reign, Gaomi changed its name.

古文：光武建武十三年，并北海，晋惠帝又分城阳立；宋孝武并北海。
现代文：光武帝建武十三年，并入北海郡，晋惠帝又分割城阳郡设立，城阳郡，前汉时有，后汉时无，魏时又分割北海设立。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Guangwu's Jianwu, it was merged into Beihai County, and Emperor Jinhui divided it to establish Chengyang County. Chengyang County existed in the former Han Dynasty, but did not exist in the later Han Dynasty, and was divided into Beihai County during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：领县六，户二千三百四，口一万三千八百二。
现代文：领六县。户二千三百零四，人口一万三千八百零二。
English: It is divided into six counties, with 2,304 households and a population of 13,802.

古文：去州陆二百；去京都陆一千六百。
现代文：距州治陆路有二百里。距京都陆路有一千六百里。
English: It is two hundred miles from Shuzhi by road, and sixteen hundred miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：黔陬令，前汉属琅邪，后汉属东莱，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：黔陬令，前汉时属琅邪，后汉时属东莱，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: During the Han Dynasty, it belonged to the Eastern Lai Dynasty, and during the Later Han Dynasty, it belonged to the Eastern Lai Dynasty. "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" belongs to the Western Lai Dynasty.

古文：淳于令，二汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：淳于令，二汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: "Jun Yu Ling" belonged to Beihai in the Second Han Dynasty, and "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" belonged to Chengyang.

古文：高密令，前汉属高密，后汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：高密令，前汉时属高密，后汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: Gaomi Ruling, Gaomi during the former Han Dynasty, Beihai during the latter Han Dynasty, "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Chengyang.

古文：夷安令，前汉属高密，后汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：夷安令，前汉时属高密，后汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: The former Han Dynasty was Gaomi, the later Han Dynasty was Beihai, and the Jin Dynasty was Chengyang.

古文：营陵令，二汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：营陵令，二汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: Ying Ling Ling, in the Second Han Dynasty, belonged to the North Sea, and "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" belonged to Chengyang.

古文：昌安令，汉安帝延光元年立，属高密，后汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：昌安令，汉安帝延光元年设置，属高密郡，后汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳郡。
English: It was set up in the first year of the Han Dynasty in accordance with the Chang'an edict, and belonged to Gaomi County. In the late Han Dynasty, it belonged to Beihai County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Chengyang County.

古文：平昌太守，故属城阳，魏文帝分城阳立，后省，晋惠帝又立。
现代文：平昌太守，原先属城阳，魏文帝分割城阳郡而设置，后来撤销，晋惠帝时又设立。
English: PyeongChang Daju, originally belonging to Seongyang, was set up by Emperor Weiwen to divide Seongyang County. It was later revoked and re-established by Emperor Jinhui.

古文：领县五，户二千二百七十，口一万五千五十。
现代文：领五县。户二千二百七十，人口一万五千零五十。
English: He was in charge of five counties, with 2,270 households and a population of 15,050.

古文：去州陆二百；去京都陆千七百。
现代文：距州治陆路有二百里。距京都陆路有一千七百里。
English: It is two hundred miles from Shuzhi by road, and seventeen hundred miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：安丘令，二汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属琅邪。
现代文：安丘令，二汉时属北海郡，《晋太康地志》属琅邪郡。
English: Anqiu County was part of Beihai County during the Second Han Dynasty, and Jin Taikang County was part of Suye County.

古文：平昌令，前汉属琅邪，后汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：平昌令，前汉时属琅邪，后汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: According to the PyeongChang edict, the former Han Dynasty belonged to the evil, the later Han Dynasty belonged to the North Sea, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to the city of Yang.

古文：东武令，二汉属琅邪，《晋太康地志》属东莞。
现代文：东武令，二汉时属琅邪，《晋太康地志》属东莞。
English: Dongwuling, in the Second Han Dynasty, belonged to Shiyan, and "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Dongguan.

古文：琅邪令，二汉属琅邪，《晋太康地志》无。
现代文：琅邪令，二漠时属琅邪郡，《晋太康地志》无。
English: "Jin Taikang History" does not have a leader.

古文：硃虚令，前汉属琅邪，安帝永初元年属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：朱虚令，前汉时属琅邪，安帝永初元年属北海，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
English: Zhu Quling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Shiyan, in the early 1st century, Andi Yong belonged to the North Sea, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Chengyang.

古文：北海太守，汉景帝中二年立。
现代文：北海太守，汉景帝中元二年设立。
English: The governor of the North Sea, established in the second year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：领县六，户三千九百六十八，口三万五千九百九十五。
现代文：领六县。户三千九百六十八，人口三万五千九百九十五。
English: 6 counties, 3,968 households, and a population of 35,995.

古文：寄治州下。
现代文：郡治寄设在州治。
English: The county government is hosted by the state government.

古文：都昌令，汉旧县。
现代文：都昌令，汉代旧县。
English: Du Changling, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：寄治州下，余依本治。
现代文：治所寄设在州治，其余各县治所都在本县。
English: The government office is located in Shuzhu, and the other county government offices are all in this county.

古文：胶东令，本胶东国，后汉、《晋太康地志》属北海。
现代文：胶东令，原本是胶东国，后汉、《晋太康地志》隶属北海郡。
English: Jiaodongling, originally Jiaodongguo, Later Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang History" belongs to Beihai County.

古文：剧令，二汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属琅邪。
现代文：剧令，二汉时属北海，《晋太康地志》属琅邪郡。
English: According to the drama, it belonged to the North Sea in the Second Han Dynasty, and the "History of the Jin Taikang" belonged to Suye County.

古文：即墨令，前汉属胶东，后汉、《晋太康地志》属北海。
现代文：即墨令，前汉时属胶东国，后汉、《晋太康地志》属北海郡。
English: Namo-Ren, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Jiaodong Province, and in the latter Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang History" belonged to Beihai County.

古文：下密令，前汉属胶东，后汉、《晋太康地志》属北海。
现代文：下密令，前汉时属胶东国，后汉、《晋太康地志》属北海郡。
English: According to the secret order, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Jiaodong Province, and the Later Han Dynasty and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Beihai County.

古文：平寿令，汉旧县。
现代文：平寿令，汉代旧县。
English: Ping Shou Ling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：东莱太守，汉高帝立。
现代文：东莱太守，汉高帝设置。
English: Donglai governor-general, Emperor Hango set up.

古文：领县七，户一万一百三十一，口七万五千一百四十九。
现代文：领七县。户一万零一百三十一，人口七万五千一百四十九。
English: The leader of seven counties, with 10,131 households and a population of 75,149.

古文：去州陆五百；去京都二千一百。
现代文：距州治陆路有五百里。距京都二千一百里。
English: It is five hundred miles from Shuzhi by road, and two thousand one hundred miles from Kyoto.

古文：曲城令，汉旧县。
现代文：曲城令，汉代旧县。
English: Qu Chengling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：掖令，汉旧县。
现代文：掖令，汉代旧县。
English: 令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：扌弦令，汉旧县。
现代文：摆令，汉代旧县。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the old counties ruled the roost.

古文：卢乡令，汉旧县。
现代文：卢乡令，汉代旧县。
English: Lu Township, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：牟平令，汉旧县。
现代文：牟平令，汉代旧县。
English: Muping order, Han Dynasty old counties.

古文：当利令，汉旧县。
现代文：当利令，汉代旧县。
English: Dang Liling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：黄令，汉旧县。
现代文：黄令，汉代旧县。
English: Huangling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：太原太守，秦立，属并州。
现代文：太原太守，秦伐设置，隶属并州。
English: Governor of Taiyuan, set up by the Qin Dynasty, subordinate to the state.

古文：文帝元嘉十年，割济南、太山立。
现代文：文帝元嘉十年，分割济南郡、太山郡各一部分设立。
English: In the tenth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, Jinan County and Taishan County were divided and each part was established.

古文：领县三，户二千七百五十七，口二万四千六百九十四。
现代文：领三县。户二千七百五十七，人口二万四千六百九十四。
English: There were 2,757 households, with a population of 24,694.

古文：去州陆五百；去京都一千八百。
现代文：距州治陆路有五百里。距京都一千八百里。
English: It is five hundred miles from Shuzhi by road, and eighteen hundred miles from Kyoto.

古文：山茌令，汉旧县，属泰山。
现代文：山茌令，汉代旧县，属泰山郡。
English: Shanzhuling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Taishan County.

古文：孝武孝建元年，度济北。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年，改属济北郡。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, it was transferred to Jibei County.

古文：太原令，晋安帝义熙中土断立，属泰山。
现代文：太原令，晋安帝义熙年间将原先借地重设的郡县士民并入当地时设立，属泰山郡。
English: It belonged to Taishan County and was established by the Taiyuan edict when the county and county magistrates, who had originally leased the land and re-established it during the reign of Emperor Jinnan and Emperor Yixi, were merged into the area.

古文：祝阿令。
现代文：祝阿令。
English: Good luck.

古文：长广太守，本长广县，前汉属琅邪，后汉属东莱，《晋太康地志》云故属东莱。
现代文：另见。长广太守，原本是长广县，前汉时属琅邪郡，后汉时属东莱，《晋太康地志》说旧属束莱郡。
English: See also: Changguang Taizhou, originally Changguang County, before the Han Dynasty, it was Shiyan County, after the Han Dynasty, it was Donglai County, "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" said that it was formerly Suclai County.

古文：《起居注》，咸宁三年，以齐东部县为长广郡。
现代文：《起居注》记载，咸宁三年，将齐郡的东部县设置为长广郡。
English: "Residential Note" records that Xianning set up the eastern county of Qi County as Changguang County three years ago.

古文：领县四，户二千九百六十六，口二万二十三。
现代文：领四县。户二千九百六十六，人口二万零二十三。
English: It is the leader of four counties, with 2,966 households and a population of 20,023.

古文：去州五百；去京都一千九百五十。
现代文：距州治五百里。距京都一千九百五十里。
English: It is 500 miles from Shuzhu and 1950 miles from Kyoto.

古文：不其令，前汉属琅邪，后汉属东莱，《晋太康地志》属长广。
现代文：不其令，前汉时属琅邪郡，后汉属东莱郡，《晋太康地志》属长广郡。
English: According to his order, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Suye County, the later Han Dynasty belonged to Donglai County, and the "History of the Jin and Taikang Dynasties" belonged to Changguang County.

古文：长广令，前汉属琅邪，后汉属东莱，《晋太康地志》属长广。
现代文：长广令，前汉时属琅邪，后汉时属东莱郡，《晋太康地志》属长广郡。
English: Changguangling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Shiji, in the later Han Dynasty, belonged to Donglai County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Changguang County.

古文：昌阳令，晋惠帝元康八年，分长广县立。
现代文：昌阳令，晋惠帝元康八年，分割长广县而设立。
English: It was established by splitting Changguang County in the eighth year of Emperor Qianlong's reign.

古文：挺令，前汉属胶东，后汉属北海，《晋太康地志》属长广。
现代文：挺令，前汉时属胶东，后汉时属北海郡，《晋太康地志》属长广郡。
English: Tingling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Jiaodong, in the later Han Dynasty, to Beihai County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Changguang County.

古文：冀州刺史，江左立南冀州，后省。
现代文：冀州刺史，江左设立南冀州，后来撤销。
English: Jizhou made history, Jiang Zuo established South Jizhou, which was later revoked.

古文：义熙中更立，治青州，又省。
现代文：义熙年间又设置，治所在青州，又撤销。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, it was set up again, with the seat of government in Qingzhou, but it was revoked again.

古文：文帝元嘉九年，又分青州立，治历城，割土置郡县。
现代文：文帝元嘉九年，又分割青州的一部分设冀州，治所在历撼，划分土地置郡县。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, a part of Qingzhou was divided into Jizhou, and the administrative center was moved, and the land was divided into counties.

古文：领郡九，县五十，户三万八千七十六，口一十八万一千一。
现代文：领九郡，五十县。户三万八千零七十六，人口十八万一千零一。
English: It has nine counties and 50 counties, with 38,076 households and a population of 181,001.

古文：去京都陆二千四百。
现代文：距京都陆路有二千四百里。
English: It is 2,400 miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：广川太守，本县名，属信都，《地理志》不言始立。
现代文：广川太守，原本是县名，属信都郡，《地理志》没有说开始设置的时间。
English: Hirokawa Taishu, originally a prefectural name, belongs to Shinto County. "Geography" does not say when it was first established.

古文：景帝二年，以为广川国，宣帝甘露三年复。
现代文：漠景帝二年，立为广川国，宣帝甘露三年恢复。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Muqing, it was established as Guangchuan Province, and in the third year of the reign of Emperor Xuan, it was restored.

古文：明帝更名乐安，安帝延光中，改曰安平；晋武帝太康五年，又改为长乐。
现代文：明帝时改县名乐安，安帝延光年间改名安平，晋武帝太康五年，又改为长乐县。
English: In the Ming Dynasty, the county was renamed Le'an, in the Andean Dynasty, it was renamed Anping, and in the Jin Dynasty, it was renamed Changle County.

古文：广川县，前汉属信都，后汉属清河，魏属勃海，晋还清河。
现代文：广川县，前汉时属信都郡，后汉属清河郡，魏时属勃海郡，晋伐还属清河。
English: Guangchuan County, formerly Xindu County during the Han Dynasty, Qinghe County during the Han Dynasty, Bohai County during the Wei Dynasty, and Qinghe County during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：何志，广川江左所立。
现代文：何压志说，广川是江左所立。
English: He Presshi said that Guangchuan was established by Jiang Zuo.

古文：又有蓚县，而无广川。
现代文：又有蓚县前汉属信都，后汉、晋置勃海。而无广川县。
English: In addition, there was a former Han-affiliated Shintō in Min County, and a former Han-affiliated Shintō in Jin County. However, there was no Shintō in Guangchuan County.

古文：孝武大明元年，省广川之枣强、勃海之浮阳、高城，立广川县，非旧广川县也。
现代文：孝武大明元年，撤销广川郡的枣强、前汉属清河，后汉、晋和江左都没有枣强。勃海郡的浮阳、高城都是汉代旧县。用来设立广川县，这已不是旧的广川县了。
English: In the first year of Xiaowu Daming, the Zaoqiang of Guangchuan County was revoked. The former Han Dynasty belonged to Qinghe, and the later Han Dynasty, Jin Dynasty, and Jiangzu Dynasty did not have Zaoqiang. The Fuyang and Gaocheng of Bohai County were all old counties in the Han Dynasty. This is no longer the old Guangchuan County that was used to establish Guangchuan County.

古文：属广川郡。
现代文：隶属广川郡。
English: It is part of Hirokawa County.

古文：领县四，户三千二百五十，口二万三千六百一十四。
现代文：领四县。户三干二日五十，人口二万三千六百一十四。
English: He was in charge of four counties. The number of households was from three to two and from two to fifty, with a population of 23,614.

古文：去州陆一百六十；去京都陆一千九百八十。
现代文：距州治陆路有一百六十里。距京都陆路有一千九百八十里。
English: It is one hundred and sixty miles away from Shuzhi by road, and nineteen hundred and eighty miles away from Kyoto by road.

古文：广川令。
现代文：广川令。
English: Hirokawa's order.

古文：中水令，前汉属涿，后汉、《晋太康地志》属河间。
现代文：已见前。中水令，前汉时属涿，后汉、《晋太康地志》属河间郡。
English: It was formerly known as Zhongshui County, and during the former Han Dynasty, it belonged to Shandong Province, and during the latter Han Dynasty, it belonged to Kawama County according to the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：孝武大明七年，自河间割度。
现代文：孝武大明七年，从河间划出改属广川郡。
English: In the seventh year of Xiaowu Daming, it was transferred from Kawama to Guangchuan County.

古文：武强令，何江左立。
现代文：武强令，何氏志说是江左设置的。
English: Wu Qiang ordered, He Shizhi said that Jiang Zuo set up.

古文：索卢令，何江左立。
现代文：索卢令，何氏志说是江左设置的。
English: According to Solu, He Shizhi was set up by Jiang Zuo.

古文：平原太守，汉高帝立。
现代文：平原太守，汉高帝设置。
English: Plains governor, Henkel set up.

古文：旧属青州，魏、晋属冀州。
现代文：原先隶属青州，魏、晋时属墓业。
English: Originally subordinated to Qingzhou, it was a cemetery in the Wei and Jin dynasties.

古文：领县八，户五千九百一十三，口二万九千二百六十七。
现代文：领八县。户五千九百一十三，人口二万九千二百六十七。
English: eight counties, with 5,913 households and a population of 29,267.

古文：广宗令，前汉无，后汉属钜鹿；《晋太康地志》属安平；《永初郡国》、何无；孝武大明元年复立。
现代文：广宗令，前汉时未设置，后汉属钜鹿郡，《晋太康地志》属安平，《永初郡国志》、何氏志无，孝武大明元年恢复设置。
English: "Guangzongling" was not set up in the former Han Dynasty, but it was set up in Elu County in the later Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang Di Zhi" was set up in Anping, "Yongchu County Guo Zhi" and "He Shi Zhi" were not set up, and it was restored in the first year of Xiaowu Daming.

古文：平原令，汉旧县。
现代文：平原令，汉代旧县。
English: Pingyuan County, an old county in Han Dynasty.

古文：鬲令，汉旧县。
现代文：鬲令，漠代旧县。
English: 令,漠代旧县.

古文：安德令，汉旧县。
现代文：安德令，汉代旧县。
English: Andeling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：平昌令，汉旧县。
现代文：平昌令，汉代旧县。
English: Pyeongchang-ryeong, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：后汉无。
现代文：后汉无。
English: There are no descendants of Han.

古文：《晋太康地志》曰西平昌。
现代文：《晋太康地志》名西平昌。
English: "Jin Tai Kang Ji Ji" is famous for West Pyeongchang.

古文：般县令，汉旧县。
现代文：般县令，汉代旧县。
English: The old prefectures were abolished in the Han Dynasty.

古文：茌平令，前汉属东郡，后汉属济北，《晋太康地志》属平原。
现代文：茌平令，前汉时属东郡，后汉属济北郡，《晋太康地志》属平原郡。
English: The former Han Dynasty belonged to Dong County, the latter Han Dynasty belonged to Jibei County, and the Jin Taikang History belonged to Pingyuan County.

古文：高唐令，汉旧县。
现代文：高唐令，汉代旧县。
English: High Tang Dynasty, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：清河太守，汉立，桓帝建和二年，改曰甘陵，魏复旧。
现代文：清河太守，汉代设置，桓帝建和二年，改称甘陵，魏国时恢复旧称。
English: Kiyokawa Taishu, established in the Han Dynasty, renamed Ganling in the second year of Emperor Huan's reign, and the old name was restored in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：何有重合县。
现代文：何氏志有重合县。
English: He Shizhi is from Chonghe County.

古文：领县七，户三千七百九十四，口二万九千二百七十四。
现代文：另见。领七县。户三千七百九十四，人口二万九千二百七十四。
English: See also. Leading seven counties. Households: 3,794, population: 29,274.

古文：去州一百一十；去京都陆一千八百。
现代文：距州治一百一十里。距京都陆路有一千八白。
English: It is one hundred and ten miles from Shuzhu, and one thousand eight hundred and fifty miles from Kyoto by land.

古文：清河令，二汉无，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：里。清河令，二汉时无，《晋太康地志》有。
English: In the Qing Dynasty, there was no second Han Dynasty, but there was a Jin Taikang History.

古文：武城令，汉旧县，并曰东武城。
现代文：武城令，汉代旧县，又称东武城。
English: Wucheng, an old county in the Han Dynasty, also known as Dongwucheng.

古文：绎幕令，汉旧县。
现代文：绎幕令，汉代旧县。
English: The old prefectures in the Han Dynasty were ruled by the shogunate.

古文：贝丘令，汉旧县。
现代文：贝丘令，汉代旧县。
English: Beiqiu County, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：零令，汉旧县，作灵。
现代文：零令，汉代旧县称作灵县。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the old county was called Ling County.

古文：鄃令，汉旧县。
现代文：鄃令，汉代旧县。
English: 令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：安次令，前汉旧县，属勃海，后汉属广阳，《晋太康地志》属燕国。
现代文：安次令，前汉旧县，隶属勃海郡，后汉时属广阳郡，《晋太康地志》属燕国。
English: An Zirong, the former Han Dynasty old county, belongs to Bohai County, the later Han Dynasty belongs to Guangyang County, and the Jin Taikang Geography belongs to Yan Province.

古文：乐陵太守，晋武帝分平原立。
现代文：乐陵太守，晋武帝分割平原郡而设置。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Le-ling, which was established by Emperor Jinwu by dividing the plain counties.

古文：旧属青州，今来属。
现代文：原先属青州，现在划属冀州。
English: Originally part of Qingzhou, it is now part of Jizhou.

古文：领县五，户三千一百三，口一万六千六百六十一。
现代文：领五县。户三千一百零三，人口一万六千六百六十一。
English: The leader of five counties, with 3,103 households and a population of 16,661.

古文：去州一百四十；去京都陆一千八百。
现代文：距州治一百四十里。距京都陆路有一千八百里。
English: It is 140 miles from Shuzhu, and 1,800 miles from Kyoto by land.

古文：乐陵令，汉旧县，故属平原。
现代文：乐陵令，汉代旧县，原先属平原郡。
English: Le Ling Ling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, formerly belonged to Pingyuan County.

古文：阳信令，二汉属勃海，《晋太康地志》属乐陵。
现代文：阳信令，二汉时属勃海郡，《晋太康地志》属乐陵郡。
English: Yang Xunling, in the Second Han Dynasty, belonged to Bohai County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Le Ling County.

古文：新乐令。
现代文：新乐令。
English: New music order.

古文：厌次令，前汉曰富平，明帝更名，属平原，《晋太康地志》属乐陵。
现代文：另见。厌次令，前漠时名富平，明帝时改名，属平原郡，《晋太康地志》属乐陵郡。
English: See also: Yan Zi Rong, formerly known as Fuping, changed his name during the Ming Dynasty, belongs to Pingyuan County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Leling County.

古文：泾沃令，前汉属千乘，后汉无。
现代文：泾沃令，前汉属千乘，后汉时无此县。
English: The former Han Dynasty belonged to Qianxian, and there was no such county during the later Han Dynasty.

古文：何云魏立，当是魏复立也。
现代文：包志说是魏国时设置的，应当是魏时重新设立的。
English: Baozhi said that it was set up in the Wei Dynasty, and it should be re-established in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：《晋太康地志》属乐陵。
现代文：《晋太康地志》属乐陵郡。
English: The "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Le Ling County.

古文：魏郡太守，汉高帝立。
现代文：魏郡太守，汉高帝设置。
English: Wei County Governor, set up by Emperor Han.

古文：二汉属冀州，魏、晋属司隶，江左屡省置；宋孝武又侨立，何无。
现代文：二汉时属冀州，魏、晋时期属司隶校尉，江左时屡次撤销，宋孝武时又侨置魏，鱼压志无魏塑。
English: In the Second Han Dynasty, it belonged to Jizhou, in the Wei and Jin Dynasties, it belonged to Sili, and was revoked many times in the time of Jiang Zuo, and in the time of Song Xiaowu, it was placed in Wei.

古文：领县八，户六千四百五，口三万三千六百八十二。
现代文：领八县。产六千四百零五，人口三万三千六百八十二。
English: It leads eight counties, with an output of 64,050 and a population of 33,682.

古文：魏令，汉旧县。
现代文：魏令，汉代旧县。
English: Wei dynasty, Han dynasty old county.

古文：安阳令，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：安阳令，《晋太康地志》有。
English: "Jin Tai Kang Di Zhi" (History of Jintai Kang Di) was published by Anyang Ruling.

古文：聊城令，汉属东郡，晋属平原。
现代文：蛆越令，汉代属东郡，晋属平原。
English: During the Han Dynasty, it belonged to Dong County and Jin Plain.

古文：博平安，汉属东郡，晋属平原。
现代文：博平令，汉代属东郡，晋属平原。
English: According to the Baoping Ruling, it belonged to Dong County and Jin Plain during the Han Dynasty.

古文：肥乡令，《晋太康地志》属广平。
现代文：肥乡令，《晋太康地志》属广平郡。
English: According to the regulation of Feixiang, the "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Guangping County.

古文：蠡吾令，前汉属涿，后汉属中山，《晋太康地志》属高阳。
现代文：蠡吾令，前汉时属涿，后汉属中山郡，《晋太康地志》属高阳郡。
English: Xingwoling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Yao, in the later Han Dynasty to Zhongshan County, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Gaoyang County.

古文：孝武始立，属高阳，大明七年度此。
现代文：孝武帝开始设置时，属高阳，大明七年改属。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu began to establish it, it belonged to Goyang, but was transferred to Daming seven years later.

古文：顿丘令，文帝元嘉二十八年，流民归顺，孝武孝建二年立。
现代文：顿丘令，另见。文帝元嘉二十八年，流民归顺朝廷，孝武帝孝建二年设立顿丘县。
English: In the 28th year of Emperor Wen's reign, the exiles returned to the imperial court, and in the 2nd year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Dongqiu County was established.

古文：临邑令，汉属东郡，晋属济北。
现代文：临邑令，汉属东郡，晋属济北。
English: Lin-yurim, Han-owned Dong-gun, Jin-owned Jibei.

古文：孝武孝建二年，与顿丘同立。
现代文：孝武孝建二年，与顿丘同时设置。
English: It was built in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, at the same time as Dongqiu.

古文：河间太守，汉文帝二年，分赵立。
现代文：河间太守，汉文帝二年，分割赵国而设置。
English: It was established in the second year of the reign of Emperor Hanwen by dividing Zhao Province.

古文：江左屡省置，宋孝武又侨立，何无。
现代文：江左时屡次撤销，宋孝武帝又借地重置回间郡，何旦志无。
English: It was repeatedly revoked when Jiang Zuo was in power, and Emperor Song Xiaowu leased land and resettled it in Huima County.

古文：领县六，户二千七百八十一，口一万七千七百七。
现代文：领六县。户有二千七百八十一，人口一万七千七百零七。
English: There are 2,781 households, with a population of 17,707.

古文：乐城令，汉旧县。
现代文：乐城令，漠代旧县。
English: Lecheng County, the old county of the desert era.

古文：城平令，前汉属勃海，后汉、《晋太康地志》属河间。
现代文：城平令，前汉时属勃海，后汉、《晋太康地志》属河间郡。
English: Chengping County belonged to Bohai County in the former Han Dynasty, and Jin Taikang County in the latter Han Dynasty.

古文：武垣令，前汉属涿，后汉、《晋太康地志》属河间。
现代文：武垣令，前汉时属涿，后汉、《晋太康地志》属河间郡。
English: Bukaki-Ryo, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Shizuku, in the latter Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang Ji Ji" belonged to Kawama-gun.

古文：章武令，二汉属勃海，《晋太康地志》属章武。
现代文：章武令，二汉时属勃海，《晋太康地志》属章武郡。
English: Zhangwuling belonged to Bohai in the Second Han Dynasty, and the "History of Jin Taikang" belonged to Zhangwu County.

古文：江左立，属广川，孝武大明七年度此。
现代文：东晋建国，属广川郡，孝武帝大明七年改属回厘郡。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty founded the country and belonged to Guangchuan County. In the seventh year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, it was transferred to Huili County.

古文：南皮令，汉旧县，属勃海。
现代文：南皮令，汉代旧县，属勃海翅。
English: Nanpi Ling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to the Bo sea wing.

古文：孝武始立，属勃海，大明七年度此。
现代文：孝武帝开始设置时属勃海郡，大明七年改属河间郡。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu began to establish it, it belonged to Bohai County, but in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, it was transferred to Kawama County.

古文：阜城令，前汉勃海有阜城县，《续汉》安平有阜城县，注云 故昌城 。
现代文：阜城令，前汉时勃海郡有阜城县，《续汉书》安平有阜城县，注云 原先的故昌 。
English: According to the edict of Fucheng, there was a Fucheng County in Bohai County in the former Han Dynasty. According to the "Continuation of the Han Dynasty," there was a Fucheng County in Anping, which was the original Gochang.

古文：汉信都有昌城，未详孰是。
现代文：汉信值都郡有昌成县，不知道哪种说法对。
English: Hanshin Shidozu County has Changcheng County, I don't know which one is right.

古文：顿丘太守，江左屡省置，孝武又侨立，何无。
现代文：顿丘太守，另见。江左时屡次撤销，孝武帝时又借地重置顿丘郡，何氏志无顿丘。
English: Dongqiu Daju, see also. Repeatedly revoked by Jiang Zuo, and leased again by Emperor Xiaowu to resettle Dongqiu County, He Zhi has no Dongqiu.

古文：领县四，户一千二百三十八，口三千八百五十一。
现代文：领四县。户一千二百三十八，人口三千八百五十一。
English: He was in charge of four counties, with 1,238 households and a population of 3,851.

古文：顿丘令。
现代文：顿丘令。
English: Dongqiu order.

古文：卫国令，《晋太康地志》有。
现代文：卫国令，《晋太康地志》有。
English: "Jintai Kangdi Zhi" (History of Jintai Kangdi) has.

古文：肥阳令，何志以前无。
现代文：肥阳令，何氏志以前无记载。
English: There was no previous record of the Hiyang Ruling in the He Shi Zhi.

古文：阴安令，二汉属魏。魏属阳平，晋属顿丘。
现代文：阴安令，二汉时属魏，魏属腥阳平，晋属堕顿丘。
English: Yin and An, the Second Han Dynasty was Wei, Wei was Guiyangping, Jin was Kuidongqiu.

古文：高阳太守，高阳，前汉县名，属涿，后汉属河间。
现代文：高阳太守，高阳，前汉的县名，属涿，后汉时属河间。
English: Goyang Taishu, Goyang, the name of the county in the former Han Dynasty, is, and in the later Han Dynasty, it was 河間.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年，分涿为范阳，又属焉。
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年，分涿设范阳，又属。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, Fanyang was established as the capital.

古文：后又分范阳为高阳。
现代文：后来又分割范阳设高阳。
English: Later, Fanyang was divided into Gaoyang.

古文：江左屡省置，孝武又侨立，何无。
现代文：江左时屡次撤销，孝武时又借地重置，何志无直盐。
English: At the time of Jiang Zuo, it was repeatedly revoked, and at the time of Xiaowu, the land was leased and resettled.

古文：领县五，户二千二百九十七，口一万四千七百二十五。
现代文：领五县。户二千二百九十七，人口一万四千七百二十五。
English: He was in charge of five counties, with 2,297 households and 14,725 residents.

古文：安平令，前汉属涿，后汉属安平，《晋太康地志》属博陵。
现代文：安平令令，前汉属涿，后汉属安平，《晋太康地志》属博陵。
English: Anping Ruling, the former Han Dynasty belongs to Xing, the later Han Dynasty belongs to Anping, and the "History of the Jin and Taikang Dynasties" belongs to Boling.

古文：饶阳令，前汉属涿，《续汉》安平有饶阳县，注云 故名饶，属涿。 
现代文：饶阳令，前汉时属涿，《续汉书》安平郡有饶阳县，注云 旧名垄县，属逐郦 。
English: Raoyang County, in the former Han Dynasty, was part of Shandong Province. According to the "Continuation of the Han Dynasty," Anping County included Raoyang County, and Zhiyun County, formerly Meiluan County, was part of Shandong Province.

古文：按《地理》，涿唯有饶阳县，无饶县。
现代文：按《地理》；涿有饶阳县，无饶县。
English: According to the "Geography"; there are Raoyang County and Murao County.

古文：鄴令，汉旧县，属魏郡。
现代文：鄴令，汉代旧县，隶属魏郡。
English: Shuling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, subordinate to Wei County.

古文：江左避愍帝讳，改曰临漳。
现代文：江左避鉴愍帝讳，改称临漳。
English: Jiang Zuo avoided the imperial taboo and changed his name to Linyi.

古文：孝武始立，属魏郡，大明七年度此。
现代文：孝武帝开始设置，属魏郡，大明七年改属。
English: Emperor Xiaowu began to set up, belonging to Wei County, Daming seven years later.

古文：高阳令。
现代文：高阳令。
English: Gaoyang Order.

古文：新城令，前汉属中山，后汉属涿，《晋太康地志》属高阳，并曰北新城。
现代文：已见前。新城令，前汉时属中山郡，后汉属逐郡，《晋太康地志》属高阳郡，又称北新城。
English: Xincheng Ruling, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Zhongshan County, the later Han Dynasty belonged to county-by-county, "Jin Taikang Geography" belongs to Goyang County, also known as North Xincheng.

古文：勃海太守，汉高帝立，属幽州；后汉、晋属冀州。
现代文：勃海太守，汉高帝设置，隶属幽州，后汉、晋伐属冀州。
English: Bokei Taishu, set up by Emperor Gao of Han, belonged to Yuzhou, while Houhan and Jinba belonged to Jizhou.

古文：江左省置，孝武又侨立，何无。
现代文：江左未设置，孝武帝时又借地重置，何志无。
English: Jiang Zuo was not set up, and the land was leased and reset when Emperor Xiaowu was in power.

古文：领县三，户一千九百五，口万二千一百六十六。
现代文：领三县。户一千九百零五，人口一万二干一百六十六。
English: He was in charge of three counties. The number of households was 1905, and the population increased from 12,000 to 166.

古文：长乐令，晋之长乐郡也。
现代文：长乐令，是晋代的长乐郡。
English: Changle County in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：疑是江左省为县，至是又立。
现代文：可能是东晋时撤郡为县，到此时又恢复设置。
English: It may be that when the Eastern Jin Dynasty withdrew, the county became a county, and at this time it was restored.

古文：蓚令。
现代文：蓚令。
English: That's an order.

古文：重合令，汉旧县。
现代文：重合令，汉代旧县。
English: Reunification edict, Han Dynasty old counties.

古文：司州刺史，汉之司隶校尉也。
现代文：司州刺史，是汉代的司隶校尉所管辖的地区。
English: Sizhou Zhishi is the area under the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty's Lieutenant Sisli.

古文：晋江左以来，沦没戎寇，虽永和、太元王化暂及，太和、隆安还复湮陷。
现代文：自从东晋偏安江束以来，司州就沦陷在胡寇手中，虽然在永和、太元年间曾短暂地收复，晋的政权又及于司州，但分别在太和、隆安年间又相继陷没。
English: Since the Eastern Jin Dynasty diverted the Yangtze River, Sizhou fell into the hands of the Huko. Although it was briefly recovered in the years of Yonghe and Taiyuan, and the Jin Dynasty's regime reached Sizhou, it fell successively in the years of Taiyuan and Longan.

古文：牧司之任，示举大纲而已。
现代文：刺史、郡守等官员的责任，也就仅仅具有象征罢了。
English: The responsibility of officials such as the chief historian and the county governor is merely symbolic.

古文：县邑户口，不可具知。
现代文：县邑户口的具体数目都不得而知。
English: The exact number of county and township hukou is not known.

古文：武帝北平关、洛，河南底定，置司州刺史，治虎牢，领河南、荥阳、弘农实土三郡。
现代文：武帝北伐乎定了虎牢关、洛阳，河南一带终于得到安定，设置司州刺史，治所在虎牢关，领河南、汉代旧郡。荥阳、晋武帝泰始元年，分割河南设立。弘农汉代旧郡。
English: Emperor Wu's Northern Expedition determined Tigress Pass and Luoyang, and the Henan area was finally stabilized, setting up the Shizhou Shishi, governed by Tigress Pass, leading Henan and the old counties of the Han Dynasty. In the first year of the Tai Dynasty, Emperor Wu and Emperor Jinwu divided Henan and established Hongnong, the old counties of the Han Dynasty.

古文：河南领洛阳、河南、巩、缑氏、新城、梁、河阴、陆浑、东垣、新安、西东垣凡十一县。荥阳领京、密、荥阳、卷、阳武、苑陵、中牟、开封、成皋凡九县。
现代文：三个掌管有实际土地的郡。河南郡领有洛阳、河南、巩、缑氏、新城、梁是汉代旧县。河阴、陆浑、东垣、新安、西东垣凡十一县荥阳领有京、密、荥阳、卷、阳武、苑陵、中牟、开封、成皋都是汉代旧县。
English: There are three counties in charge of the actual land. Henan County is in charge of Luoyang, Henan, Gong, Shanshi, Xincheng, and Liangze Han Dynasty old counties. Heyin, Lukun, Donggaki, Xin'an, and West Donggaki all 11 counties of Shenyang are in charge of Beijing, Miyang, Shenyang, Zhuan, Yangwu, Yuanling, Zhongmou, Kaifeng, and Chengdu are all Han Dynasty old counties.

古文：弘农领弘农、陕、宜阳、黾池、卢氏、曲阳凡七县。
现代文：曲阳前汉时属东海，后汉时属下邳，《太康地志》无曲阳。一共七县。
English: Quyang was part of the East Sea in the former Han Dynasty, and part of Hebei Province in the latter Han Dynasty. There is no mention of Quyang in the History of Taikang. There are a total of seven counties.

古文：三郡合二十七县，一万六千三百六户。
现代文：三郡合计二十七县，一万六千三百零六户。
English: The three counties total 27 counties, with a total of 16,306 households.

古文：又有河内、东京兆二侨郡。
现代文：又有河内、汉代旧郡。东京兆京兆另见雍州，东京兆是新设置的。
English: There is also Hanoi and the old counties of the Han Dynasty. Tokyo Zhaojiao is also located in Yongzhou, and Tokyo Zhaojiao is newly established.

古文：河内寄治河南，领温、野王、轵、河阳、沁水、山阳、怀、平皋？
现代文：两个暂借地重置的郡。河内郡的治所寄设在河南，领有温、野王、轵、河阳、沁水、山阳、怀、平皋、都是汉代旧名。
English: The two counties where the land was temporarily leased and resettled. The administrative center of Hanoi County is located in Henan Province. The counties include Wen, Yowang, Nian, Heyang, Lishui, Sanyang, Huai and Pingyao, all of which are old names from the Han Dynasty.

古文：朝歌凡十县。
现代文：朝歌二汉时属河内，《晋太康地志》属汲郡。
English: The Morning Song of the Second Han Dynasty belongs to Hanoi, and the History of the Jin and Taikang Dynasties belongs to Qu County.

古文：东京兆寄治荥阳，领长安、万年、新丰、蓝田、蒲阪凡六县。
现代文：晋武太康元年开始设置。一共十县。东京兆的治所寄设在荥阳，领有长安、汉代旧县。万年、另见。新丰、另见。蓝田、另见。蒲阪二汉、《晋太康地志》属河东郡。一共六县。
English: It was set up in the first year of Jinmu Taikang. A total of ten counties. Tokyo Zhaocang's legal office is located in Shenyang, with Chang'an and Han Dynasty old counties. For 10,000 years, see also. Xinfeng, see also. Lantian, see also. Busan Erhan, "History of Jinmu Taikang," belongs to Hedong County. A total of six counties.

古文：合十六县，一千九百九十二户。
现代文：合计十六县，一千九百九十二户。
English: A total of 16 counties, 1,992 households.

古文：少帝景平初，司州复没北虏。
现代文：少帝景平初年，司州又陷落在北虏手中。
English: In the first year of the young emperor Jingping, Sizhou fell into the hands of the Northern Ruthenians.

古文：文帝元嘉末，侨立于汝南，寻亦省废。
现代文：文帝元嘉末年，暂借地重置汝南，不久也撤销。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Wen Yuanjia, a temporary lease of land was set up in the south of the country, but it was soon revoked.

古文：明帝复于南豫州之义阳郡立司州，渐成实土焉。
现代文：明帝又在南豫州的义阳郡设置司州，渐渐成为实际管领土地的州。
English: The Ming emperor also set up a prefecture in Yiyang County of South Yu Prefecture, which gradually became the prefecture that actually controlled the land.

古文：领郡四，县二十，去京都水二千七百，陆一千七百。
现代文：领四郡，二十县。距京都水路二千七百里，陆路一千七百里。
English: It is bordered by four counties and 20 counties. It is 2,700 miles from Kyoto by water and 1,700 miles by land.

古文：义阳太守，魏文帝立，后省，晋武帝又立。
现代文：义阳太守，魏文帝设置，后撤销，晋武帝又设置。
English: Yiyang Daju, Wei Wendi set up, later revoked, Jinwu Emperor also set up.

古文：《太康地志》、《永初郡国》、何志并属荆州，徐则南豫也。
现代文：《晋太康地志》、《永初郡国志》、何氏志都说隶属荆州，徐氏志则说属南豫州。
English: "Jin Taikang History," "Yongchu County National History" and He's History all say that it belongs to Jingzhou, while Xu's History says that it belongs to South Yuzhou.

古文：明帝泰始五年，度郢州，后废帝元徽四年，属司州。
现代文：明帝泰始五年，改属郢州，后废帝元徽四年，隶属司州。
English: In the first five years of the Ming Dynasty, Taizhou belonged to Zhangzhou, and four years after the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui, it belonged to Shizhou.

古文：领县七。户八千三十二，口四万一千五百九十七。
现代文：领七县户八千零三十一，人口四万一千五百九十七。
English: There were 8,031 households in seven prefectures, with a population of 41,597.

古文：平阳侯相，前汉无，后汉属江夏曰平春，《晋太康地志》属义阳，晋孝武改。
现代文：平阳侯相，前汉时无，后汉时属江夏郡，称作平春，《晋太康地志》属义阳郡，县名是晋孝武帝时改。
English: Pingyang Houxiang, formerly known as Jiangxia County during the Han Dynasty, was called Pingchun during the Later Han Dynasty. The "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Yiyang County, and the county name was changed during the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu.

古文：鄳令，二汉属江夏，《晋太康地志》属义阳，并作鄳，音盲。
现代文：鄳令，二汉时属江夏郡，《晋太康地志》属盏厘，都称作垫，音盲。
English: Shuling, which belonged to Jiangxia County in the Second Han Dynasty, and Jin Taikang Diji, which belonged to Qinli, were both called Mat, tone-deaf.

古文：《永初郡国》、何并作鄳。
现代文：《永初郡国志》、何氏志都作郾。
English: "Yongchu County National History" and He's History were both written by him.

古文：钟武令，前汉属江夏，后汉、《晋太康地志》无，《永初郡国》属义阳。
现代文：钟武令，前汉时属江夏郡，后汉、《晋太康地志》无，《永初郡国志》属义阳郡。
English: According to Zhongwuling, Jiangxia County belonged to the former Han Dynasty, but there was no "History of Jin Taikang" in the later Han Dynasty, and "History of Yongchu County" belonged to Yiyang County.

古文：宝城令，孝武孝建三年，分鄳立。
现代文：宝城令，孝武孝建三年，分割鄳县而设置。
English: According to the Treasure City Ordinance, Xiao Wu Xiao Jian was established three years after the division of Min County.

古文：义阳令，《晋太康地志》有，后省。
现代文：义阳令，《晋太康地志》有，后撤销。
English: According to the order of Yiyang, the "History of Jin Taikang" was approved, but was later revoked.

古文：孝武孝建三年，分平阳立。
现代文：孝武孝建三年，分割平阳县而设置。
English: Xiao Wu Xiao Jian was set up three years after the division of Pingyang County.

古文：平春令，孝武孝建三年，分平阳立。
现代文：平春令，孝武孝建三年，分割平阳垂而设置。
English: By the order of Ping Chun, Xiao Wu Xiao Jian lasted for three years, and was set up by dividing the Ping Yang Dang.

古文：环水长，《永初郡国》、何、徐并无。明帝泰始三年，度属宋安郡，后省宋安，还此。
现代文：环水长，《永初郡国志》、何氏志、徐氏志均无，明帝泰始三年，改属宋安郡，后来撤销宋安，还属宋安郡。
English: Huan water chief, "Yongchu County National History," Ho's history, and Xu's history are all absent. In the first three years of the Ming Dynasty, it was transferred to Song'an County, and later Song'an was revoked, and it still belongs to Song'an County.

古文：宋安，本县名，孝武大明八年，省义阳郡所统东随二左郡立为宋安县，属义阳。
现代文：宋安，本来是县名，孝武大明八年，撤销义阳郡所统辖的东随二左郡设置宋安县，隶属义阳。
English: Song'an was originally the name of the county, but in the eighth year of Xiaowu Daming, Dongsui Erzu County, which was under the jurisdiction of Yiyang County, was revoked, and Song'an County, which belonged to Yiyang, was established.

古文：明帝立为郡。
现代文：明帝设置为郡。
English: Ming Emperor set it up as a county.

古文：随阳太守，晋武帝分南阳义阳立义阳国，太康年，又分义阳为随国，属荆州。
现代文：随阳太守，晋武帝分割南阳、义阳设置义阳国，太康年间，又分割义阳设置随国，属荆州。
English: During the Suiyang Dynasties, Emperor Jinwu divided Nanyang and Yiyang and set up Yiyang Province. During the Taikang Dynasties, he also divided Yiyang and set up Suiyang Province, which belonged to Jing Province.

古文：孝武孝建元年度属郢，前废帝永光元年度属雍；明帝泰始五年还属郢，改为随阳；后废帝元徽四年，度属司州。
现代文：孝武孝建元年改属郢州，前废帝永光元年改属雍州，明帝泰始五年还归郢州，改称随阳，后废帝元徽四年，改属司州。
English: In the first year of Xiaowu Xiaojian, it was transferred to Bozhou; in the first year of the former Emperor Yongguang, it was transferred to Yongzhou; in the first five years of the Ming Dynasty, it was transferred to Bozhou and renamed Suiyang; and in the fourth year of the former Emperor Yuanhui, it was transferred to Shizhou.

古文：徐志又有革音县，今无。
现代文：徐志又有革音艳，现已不设置。
English: Xu Zhi also has a leather voice, but it is no longer set up.

古文：领县四，户四千六百。
现代文：领四县。户四千六百。
English: He is in charge of four counties and has 4,600 households.

古文：去京都三千四百八十。
现代文：距京都三千四百八十里。
English: It is 3,480 miles from Kyoto.

古文：随阳子相，汉随县属南阳，《晋太康地志》属义阳。
现代文：随阳子相，汉伐随县属南阳，《晋太康地志》属义阳郡。
English: Suiyang Zi Xiang, Hanwa Sui County belongs to Nanyang, and Jin Taikang Di Zhi belongs to Yiyang County.

古文：后随国与郡俱改。
现代文：后来随国舆都改属。
English: Later, it was attached to the national capital.

古文：永阳男相，徐志有。
现代文：永阳男相，徐医志有。
English: Yongyang's male counterpart, Xu Yizhi.

古文：关西令，宋末新立。
现代文：关西令，另见荆州，作厥西。宋末新设置。
English: Kansai ryo, see also Jingzhou, for Juexi. It was newly set up at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：西平林令，宋末新立。
现代文：西平林令，宋末新设置。
English: Xiping Forestry Regulation, newly established at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：安陆太守，孝武孝建元年，分江夏立，属郢州；后废帝元徽四年度司州。
现代文：安陆太守，孝武帝孝建元年，分割江夏郡而设立，隶属郢州，后废帝元徽四年改属司州。
English: Anlu Daju, Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian split Jiangxia County and established it in the first year of the year. It belonged to Zhangzhou, and was transferred to Shizhou four years after Emperor Yuanhui was deposed.

古文：徐志有安蛮县，《永初郡国》、何并无，当是何志后所立。
现代文：徐氏志上有安蛮县，《永初郡国志》、何氏志上却都没有，应当是何氏志编成以后设置的。
English: There is no mention of Amman County in Xu's biography, nor in "Yongchu County's National Biography" or He's biography, but it must have been established after He's biography was compiled.

古文：寻为郡，孝武大明八年，省为县，属安陆；明帝泰始初，又立为左郡，宋末又省。
现代文：不久改安蛮县为郡，孝武帝大明八年，又降为县，隶属安陆郡，明帝泰始初年，又设置为左郡，宋末又撤销。
English: It was soon changed to Amman County. In the eighth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, it was downgraded to a county and subordinated to Anlu County. In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, it was set up as Zuo County. At the end of the Song Dynasty, it was revoked.

古文：领县二，户六千四十三，口二万五千八十四。
现代文：领二县。有户六千零四十三，人口二万五千零八十四。
English: There are 6,043 households, with a population of 25,084.

古文：去京都水二千三百。
现代文：距京都水路有二千三百里。
English: It is 2,300 miles away from the Kyoto waterway.

古文：安陆公相，汉旧县，属江夏。
现代文：安陆公相，汉代旧县，属江夏郡。
English: An Lu Gongsang, Han Dynasty old county, belongs to Jiangxia County.

古文：江夏又有曲陵县，本名石阳，吴立。
现代文：江夏郡又有曲陵县，原本称石阳，东吴时设立。
English: In Jiangxia County, there is also Quling County, which was originally called Shiyang and was established in the Eastern Wu Dynasty.

古文：《晋起居注》，太康元年，改江夏石阳曰曲陵；明帝泰始六年，并安陆。
现代文：《晋起居注》记载，太康元年，改江夏郡的石阳为曲陵县，明帝泰始六年，并入安陆。
English: According to the "Jinqi Residence Note," in the first year of Taikang, Shiyang of Jiangxia County was changed to Quling County, and in the first six years of Ming Dynasty, it was merged into Anlu.

古文：南汝南太守。
现代文：南汝南太守。
English: Nanru Nanda no kami.

古文：平舆令。
现代文：汝南郡另见。平舆令。
English: For Runan County, see Pingwu County.

古文：北新息令。
现代文：北新息令。
English: North new settlement order.

古文：真阳令。
现代文：真阳令。
English: The sun is shining.

古文：安城令。
现代文：安城令。
English: Ancheng order.

古文：南新息令。
现代文：南新息令。
English: Minami Shin-shikirei.

古文：安阳令。
现代文：安阳令。
English: Anyang order.

古文：临汝令，新立。
现代文：临汝令，新设置。
English: Lin Ruling, a new setting.

