古文：侯元功德山襄阳老叟青城道士蜀都妇人
现代文：侯元功德山襄阳老叟青城道士蜀都妇人
English: Houyuan Gongde Mountain Yangyang Laojiao Qingcheng Taoist Shu Du Woman

古文：侯元
现代文：侯元
English: Hou Yuan

古文：侯元者，上党郡铜鞮县山村之樵夫也。家道贫窭，唯以鬻薪为事。
现代文：侯元这个人，是上党郡铜鞮县山村里的一个樵夫，家境十分贫寒，只能靠卖柴过半饥半饱的日子。
English: This man, Hou Yuan, was a widower from a mountain village in Tonglu County, Shangdang County. His family was very poor and could only survive by selling firewood.

古文：唐乾符己亥岁，于县西北山中伐薪。
现代文：唐代乾符己亥年，他在县城西北面的山里砍柴。
English: In the year of the boar in the Tang Dynasty, he was cutting firewood in the mountains northwest of the county seat.

古文：回憩谷口，傍有巨石，嶷然若厦屋。元对之太息，恨己之劳也。
现代文：回到谷口休息的时候，见旁边有一块巨石，像楼房一样高大，侯元便对着巨石叹息，说自己整年劳碌而不得温饱，命太苦了云云。
English: When he returned to Taniguchi to rest, he saw a huge rock next to him, as tall as a building. Hou Yuan sighed at the rock, saying that he had worked hard all year and could not get enough food and clothing, and his life was too hard.

古文：声未绝，石砉然豁开若洞。
现代文：话音未落，那巨石豁然开了，闪出一个洞来。
English: Before the words were out, the boulder suddenly opened, revealing a hole.

古文：中有一叟，羽服乌帽，髯发如霜，曳杖而出。
现代文：洞内有个老头儿，穿着用鸟羽制成的衣服，戴着黑帽子，头发胡子全白了，拄着拐杖走了出来。
English: There was an old man in the cave, dressed in clothes made of bird feathers, wearing a black hat, his hair and mustache were completely white, and he walked out on crutches.

古文：元惊愕，遽起前拜。
现代文：侯元吃了一惊，颇感愕然。随即，他起身朝前一拜再拜。
English: Hou Yuan was taken aback, quite shocked. Then, he got up in the morning and prayed again.

古文：叟曰：我神君也，汝何多歉？
现代文：老头儿说：我是神君呵，你何必如此不好意思呢？
English: The old man said, "I am a god, why should you be so ashamed?

古文：自可于吾法中取富，但随吾来。
现代文：从今往后，你可以从我教你的法术中求得富贵。好吧，你先随我来。
English: From now on, you can seek riches from the spells I teach you. Well, you come with me first.

古文：叟复入洞中，元从之。
现代文：老头儿说完又进入洞中，侯元也跟了进去。
English: After the old man finished speaking, he went back into the cave, and Hou Yuan followed him.

古文：行数十步，廓然清朗。田畴砥平，时多异花芳草。
现代文：走了几十步，前方顿时清朗起来，平展展的田野上，种的多是奇花异草。
English: After walking a few dozen steps, the front suddenly becomes clear. On the flat fields, there are many strange flowers and grasses.

古文：数里，过横溪。碧湍流苔，鸳鹢溯洄。
现代文：走了几里地横着一条小溪，溪流湍急，冲击着碧绿色的苔藓，有一对对鸳鸯和鹢鸟在游动。
English: After walking for several miles, I came across a small stream. The stream was rushing and the cranes were hitting the turquoise moss. A pair of storks and ostriches were swimming.

古文：其上长梁夭矫。如晴虹焉。
现代文：溪上的桥梁屈曲而有气势，宛若晴天后的彩虹。
English: The bridge over the stream is curved and imposing, like a rainbow after a sunny day.

古文：过溪北，左右皆乔松修篁。高门渥丹，台榭重复。
现代文：到了溪的北面，只见左右全是松柏树和长竹子，一道道红色的大门，台榭重叠，甚为壮观。
English: When I got to the north side of the stream, I saw pine and cypress trees and long bamboo on the left and right, a red gate, and overlapping platforms. It was very spectacular.

古文：引元之别院，坐小亭上，檐楹阶砌，皆奇宝焕然。
现代文：神君领侯元来在另一个院子里，坐在小亭子上。这时，只见房檐、柱子和台阶，全都焕然一新且十分新奇。
English: The lord of the manor was originally in another courtyard, sitting on a small pavilion. At this time, only the eaves, pillars and steps could be seen, all of which were new and very strange.

古文：及进食行觞。复目所未睹也。
现代文：等到吃饭喝酒时，那些菜肴尽是他所没有见到过的。
English: By the time he was eating and drinking, the dishes were like nothing he had ever seen.

古文：食毕叟退。
现代文：饭后老头儿便下去了。
English: After dinner, the old man went downstairs.

古文：少顷。二童揖元诣便室，具汤沐，进新衣一袭。
现代文：有顷，两个童子向侯元作了个揖，请他去洗澡间。洗完了热水澡，换了一身新衣服，腰带帽子全有。
English: Suddenly, two boys made a sign to Hou Yuan, asking him to go to the bathroom. After taking a hot bath, he changed into a new outfit, complete with belt and hat.

古文：冠带竟，复导至亭上。叟出，命仆设净席于地，令元跪席上。
现代文：两个童子又把他带回小亭子，刚坐下，那老头儿便走出来，让仆人把一张干净席子铺在地上，令侯元跪到席上去。
English: The two boys took him back to the small pavilion, and as soon as he sat down, the old man came out and asked the servant to spread a clean mat on the ground and make Houyuan kneel down on it.

古文：叟授以秘诀数万言，皆变化隐显之术。
现代文：老头儿教给侯元几万句的秘诀，全是变化隐身之术。
English: The secret of the tens of thousands of sentences that the old man taught to Hou Yuan was all the art of change and invisibility.

古文：元素蠢憨，至是一听不忘。
现代文：侯元向来又蠢又憨，但是这些口诀他一听就记住了。
English: Hou Yuan had always been stupid and lazy, but he remembered these sayings as soon as he heard them.

古文：叟诫曰：汝虽有少福，合于至法进身，然面有败气未除，亦宜谨密自固，若图谋不轨，祸必丧生！
现代文：老头儿告诫他道：虽然说你年轻时有福，合乎进门学法的条件，但你脸上的晦气尚未除尽，应该注意谨慎和保密，好自为之。倘若你图谋不轨，必遭杀身之祸。
English: The old man admonished him, "Although you were blessed when you were young and met the requirements for entering the Fa study, the bad luck on your face has not yet been eliminated. You should be careful and keep secrets, and be good at what you do. If you try to do something wrong, you will be killed.

古文：且归存思。
现代文：回去之后千万记住这一点。
English: Make sure you remember that when you get back.

古文：如欲谒吾，但至心扣石，当有应门声。
现代文：如果你还想见我，到这块巨石中间敲几下，我就会答应的。
English: If you still want to see me, knock a few times in the middle of this boulder, and I'll say yes.

古文：元因拜谢而出，仍令一童送之。
现代文：侯元谢别老头儿欲走，老头儿派一小童送他走出洞穴。
English: Hou Yuan Xie waved goodbye to the old man who wanted to leave, and the old man sent a small child to escort him out of the cave.

古文：即出洞穴，遂泯然如故，视其樵苏已失。
现代文：随即，那块巨石又恢复了原来的样子，没有一点痕迹。侯生见他的柴草已经丢失，便回到家中。
English: Immediately, the huge rock was restored to its original appearance, without a trace. Hou Sheng saw that his firewood had been lost and returned home.

古文：至家，其父母兄弟惊喜曰：去一旬，谓已碎于虎狼之吻。
现代文：见了他，其父母兄弟都惊喜地说：你已经走十天了，还以为你被虎狼吃掉了呢！
English: When they saw him, his parents and brothers were all surprised and said, "You've been gone for ten days, and you thought you were eaten by tigers and wolves!"

古文：元在洞中，如一日耳。
现代文：侯元在石洞里，好像才过了一天。
English: Hou Yuan is in a stone cave. It seems like it's only been a day.

古文：又讶其服装华洁，神气激扬。
现代文：对于他整洁华美的服装和激扬的神气，大家都颇为惊讶。
English: Everyone was quite surprised by his neat and beautiful attire and spirited demeanor.

古文：元知不可隐，乃谓其家人言已，遂入静室中，习熟其术。
现代文：侯元知道瞒不住，便把实情对家人说了。然后，他便进入一个安静的房间，练习老头儿传授的法术。
English: Unable to hide what he knew, Hou Yuan told his family the truth, and then went into a quiet room to practice the spells taught by the old man.

古文：期月而术成，能变化百物，役使鬼魅，草木土石，皆可为步骑甲兵。
现代文：一个月之后，他的法术终于练成了，能够变化百物，役使鬼神，就连草木土石等，也能使之变成千军万马。
English: A month later, his magic was finally perfected, and he was able to change hundreds of things and use them to serve ghosts and gods. Even plants, rocks, and stones could be transformed into an army of thousands of horses.

古文：于是悉收乡里少年勇悍者为将卒，出入陈旌旗幢盖，鸣鼓吹，仪比列国焉。
现代文：于是，他把村子里一些勇猛强悍的小伙子招为兵，有的还封为将，走动时吹吹打打，鸣锣开道，举着旗帜，那阵势赶上列国诸侯出巡了。
English: As a result, he recruited some brave and strong young men in the village as soldiers, and some were also appointed as generals, blowing and beating as they walked around, chanting and holding flags. The situation caught up with the princes of the nations and they went on a tour.

古文：自称曰：贤圣。官有三老、左右弼、左右将军等号。
现代文：侯元自称圣贤，并设了三老、左右弼、左右将军等官职。
English: Hou Yuan claimed to be a sage, and set up the positions of the three elders, the left and right eunuchs, and the left and right generals.

古文：每朔望，必盛饰往谒神君。
现代文：每当初一和十五，他都要穿上盛装去拜谒神君老头儿。
English: On the first day of every month and on the fifteenth day of every month, he would put on his best clothes and go to worship the old man.

古文：神必戒以无称兵，若固欲举事，宜待天应。
现代文：神君每次都要告诫他不要举兵，如果你一定要举事的话，那也要等到上天答应才行。
English: God always warned him not to raise an army. If you must do something, wait for God's permission.

古文：至庚子岁，聚兵数千人。县邑恐其变，乃列上。
现代文：到了庚子年，侯元聚集了几千人马，县里担心他要造反，便把这件事向上报告了。
English: In the year of Geng Zi, Hou Yuan gathered several thousand horses. The county was worried that he would rebel, so they reported the matter to the higher-ups.

古文：上党帅高公，寻命都将以旅讨之，元驰谒神君请命。
现代文：上党元帅高公寻命令都将带兵讨伐他。侯元急忙谒见神君老头儿请他想办法，神君说道：我已经说过了。
English: The superior marshal Gao Gonghong ordered his soldiers to fight against him. Hou Yuan hurried to see the old man and asked him to think of a way. The old man said, "I have already said it.

古文：神君曰：既言之矣，但当偃旗卧鼓以应之。
现代文：看来，你只能用偃旗息鼓的办法来对付他们。
English: It seems that you can only deal with them by waving the white flag.

古文：彼见兵威若是，必不敢内薄而攻我，志之，慎勿轻接战。
现代文：他们看见我们如此，必定不敢轻易攻击。记住呵，你一定要慎重，千万不要轻易应战。
English: When they see us like this, they will not dare to attack us easily. Remember, you must be cautious and never take the battle lightly.

古文：元虽唯诺，心计以为我奇术制之有余，且小者不能抗，后其大者若之何？
现代文：侯元虽然点头称是，心里却想：凭我的这身道术制他们是绰绰有余的，这么一小股敌人都不敢抵抗，再来大批人马那又该怎么样？
English: Although Hou Yuan nodded in the affirmative, he thought to himself: With my physical and tactical system, they are more than enough. Such a small group of enemies would not dare to resist, so what about a large number of people?

古文：复示众以不武也。既归，令其党戒严。
现代文：又在部下面前表现出自己不勇武。从神君处回来，他令其同党戒严。
English: He also showed his lack of courage in front of his subordinates. When he returned from Shinkun, he put him and his party under martial law.

古文：是夜，潞兵去元所据险三十里，见步骑戈甲蔽山泽，甚难之，明方阵以前。
现代文：当天晚上，潞州的兵马赶来了，在距离侯元占据的天险还有三十里的地方，只见漫山遍野全是骑戈兵士，颇难攻打，便等到天亮之后，在阵前摆下方阵。
English: In the evening of the same day, the soldiers and horses of Zhangzhou arrived. In a place thirty miles away from the natural hazard occupied by Hou Yuan, I saw that the whole mountain was full of soldiers on horseback. It was quite difficult to attack, so I waited until after dawn and set up a square formation in front of the battle.

古文：元领千余人直突之，先胜后败，酒酣被擒。
现代文：侯元领一千多人突围，先胜后败，最终因酒后睡着了被擒住。
English: Hou Yuan led more than a thousand people to break through the encirclement, first winning and then losing, and finally fell asleep after drinking and was caught.

古文：至上党，絷之府狱，严兵围守。
现代文：先押到上党，用绳子捆住投入监狱，重兵看守。
English: Pushed to the top of the party first, tied with a rope and thrown into prison, heavily guarded.

古文：旦视枷穿中，唯灯台耳，失元所在。夜分已达铜鍉，经诣神君谢罪。
现代文：但天亮一看，枷锁已被打开，侯元已经没影了，只剩下一个灯台。半夜时分，侯元又回到铜鞮县，径直奔往神君处谢罪。
English: But at dawn, the shackles had been opened, and Hou Yuan was no longer in sight, with only a lighthouse remaining. At midnight, Hou Yuan returned to Tonglu County and went straight to God to atone for his sins.

古文：君怒曰：庸奴终违我教，今日虽幸而免，斧鑕亦行将及矣，非吾徒也！
现代文：神君大怒道：你这愚蠢的奴才，到底没有听我的话呀！今天你虽幸免一死，但腰斩你的时候也马上到了。
English: Shinkun said angrily, "You stupid minion, you didn't listen to my words after all! Although you escaped death today, the time to behead you is coming soon.

古文：不顾而入。
现代文：你不是我的徒弟，你走吧。说罢，拂袖而去。
English: You're not my apprentice, you can go. Just say it and walk away.

古文：郁悒趋出。后复谒神君，虔心扣石，石不为开矣！
现代文：侯元抑郁地走出山洞，后来再想同神君见上一面，可无论他怎么虔诚地敲石门，那石门也不开。
English: Hou Yuan walked out of the cave dejectedly, and later wanted to meet with the god, but no matter how devoutly he knocked on the stone door, the stone door would not open.

古文：而其术渐歇，犹为其党所说。
现代文：从此，他的道术渐渐地失去了，但还受到同党的喜欢、拥护。
English: Since then, he has gradually lost his virtue, but he is still liked and supported by his fellow party members.

古文：是秋，率徒掠并州之大谷，而并骑适至，围之数重。
现代文：当年秋天，他率同党羽到并州的大谷掠夺，并州的兵骑疾速赶到，围了好几重。
English: In the autumn of that year, he and his followers went to plunder the valley of Bozhou, and the soldiers and horsemen of Bozhou rushed to the valley and surrounded it several times.

古文：术既不神，遂斩之于阵，其党与散归田里焉。
现代文：而侯元的道术也不灵了，当即被斩于阵前。他的那些同党们作鸟兽散，都回家种田去了。
English: However, Hou Yuan's tactics did not work, and he was immediately beheaded in front of the battle. Those of his fellow party members scattered like birds and animals, and all went home to farm.

古文：功德山
现代文：功德山
English: The Mountain of Merit

古文：唐巢寇将乱中原。
现代文：唐代末年，黄巢率兵准备向中原进军。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Huang Chao and his soldiers were preparing to march to the Central Plains.

古文：汴中有妖僧功德山，远近桑门皆归之。
现代文：汴州有个妖僧叫功德山，远远近近的佛教徒都归心于他。
English: There is a demon monk in Luzhou called Gongde Mountain, and Buddhists from near and far have all fallen in love with him.

古文：至于士庶，无不降附者。
现代文：至于普通百姓，也没有不信服于他的。
English: As for the common people, there was no reason not to believe him.

古文：能于纸上画神寇，放入人家，令作祸祟，幻惑居人。
现代文：他能够在纸上画神神怪怪的强盗，然后把他放入人家，令他作祟惹祸，迷惑百姓。
English: He could draw a grotesque bandit on a piece of paper and then put him in a house to cause trouble and confuse the people.

古文：通宵继画，不能安寝，或致人疾苦。
现代文：他通宵不停地画着，连觉也不睡，不知给百姓带来多少痛苦。
English: He kept painting all night long, not even sleeping, not knowing how much pain he brought to the people.

古文：及命功德山赠金作法，则患立除之。
现代文：等到有人用重金请功德山作法，那么灾祸立刻就会消除。
English: As soon as someone pays a lot of money to have the merits mountain practice, then the disaster will be eliminated immediately.

古文：又画纸作甲兵，夜夜与街坊嘶鸣，腾践城郭，天明即无所见。
现代文：功德山还用纸画甲兵，天天晚上在街道上嚎叫，践踏城墙，可等到天亮之后什么都看不见了。
English: Gongde Mountain also used paper to draw armored soldiers, howling in the streets every night, trampling the city walls, but nothing could be seen until after dawn.

古文：又多画其犬，焚祝之，夜则鸣吠，相咬啮于街衢，居人不得安眠。
现代文：他还画了不少狗，一边焚烧一边祈祷，晚上就会听见狗叫，在大街上互相咬架，吵得人们不得安睡。
English: He also painted a lot of dogs, burning and praying at the same time, and at night you would hear the dogs barking, biting each other on the street, and making people unable to sleep peacefully.

古文：命而赠之，即悄无影响。
现代文：当有人赠给他钱财，那些狗便都无声无影了。
English: When someone gives him money, the dogs are silent.

古文：人即异其术，趋术者愈众。
现代文：他的道术使人们感到惊异，越来越多的人向他求教。
English: People were amazed by his Taoism, and more and more people asked him for advice.

古文：又滑州有一僧，颇善妖术，与功德山无异，公私颇患之。
现代文：另外，滑州也有一个僧人，很擅长妖术，与功德山没什么两样，官家和百姓都深受其害。
English: In addition, there is also a monk in Slanting, who is very good at magic, and is no different from Gongde Mountain. Officials and ordinary people are deeply affected by it.

古文：时中书令王铎镇滑台，遂下令曰：南燕地分有灾，宜善禳之。
现代文：当时，中书令王铎正镇守滑州，他下令说；南燕部分地区有天灾，可以好好设坛祈祷一番。
English: At that time, the Chinese book ordered Wang Qizhenzhen to guard the city of Nanyan. He ordered that if there was a natural disaster in some areas of Nanyan, it would be good to set up an altar to pray.

古文：遂自公衙，至于诸军营，开启道场，延僧数千人。
现代文：随即，从衙门到各个军营，都开设道场，拟邀请僧人数千。
English: As a result, dojo were opened from Shimen to various military camps, and thousands of monks were invited.

古文：僧数不足，遂牒汴州，请功德山一行徒众悉赴之。
现代文：僧人数量不够，便向汴州发信求援，请功德山及其弟子全部赶来。
English: The number of monks was not enough, so they sent a letter to Zhangzhou to ask for help, and asked Gongde Mountain and all of his disciples to come.

古文：遂以幡花螺钹迎至卫。
现代文：就这样，功德山一行被用佛教的礼节迎接到滑州军营。
English: In this way, Gongde Mountain and his party were greeted with Buddhist etiquette at the military camp in Nanzhou.

古文：赴道场之夕，分选近上名德，入于公衙，其余并令散赴诸营礼忏。
现代文：赴道场那天晚上，选了功德山及其靠近他的几个人进了衙门，其余的都分散到各个军营念经拜祷。
English: On the evening of the day he went to the dojo, Gongde Shan, who had been chosen, and a few people close to him entered the main gate, while the rest dispersed to various military camps to recite the sutras and pray.

古文：洎入营，悉键门而坑之，方袍而死者数千人。
现代文：他们一进军营，便关上大门全被活埋，光穿着道袍的和尚就死了好几千人，衙门里只留下了功德山及其手下的几个小头目。
English: As soon as they entered the military camp, they closed the gate and were all buried alive. Thousands of monks wearing only robes died, leaving only Gongde Mountain and a few of his subordinates at the gate.

古文：衙中只留功德山已下奠长，讯之，并是巢贼之党，将欲自二州相应而起，咸命诛之。
现代文：经过审讯，才知道他们全是黄巢的同党，想在汴、滑二州响应黄巢的起义，准备造反。
English: After the trial, it was learned that they were all Yellow Nest members who wanted to respond to Yellow Nest's uprising in the two prefectures of Handan and Nanning and prepare for a rebellion.

古文：襄阳老叟
现代文：王铎下令把他们全杀了。襄阳老叟
English: Wang Yao ordered that they all be killed.

古文：唐并华者，襄阳鼓刀之徒也。
现代文：唐代，有个叫并华的人，本是襄阳的一个木工。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Nianhua, who was originally a carpenter in Xiangyang.

古文：尝因游春，醉卧汉水滨。
现代文：有一次春游，他醉倒在汉水边上。
English: During a spring outing, he fell down drunk on the edge of the Han River.

古文：有一老叟叱起，谓曰：观君之貌，不是徒博耳。
现代文：有一个老头儿将他喊起来，对他说道：看你这相貌，不是只会玩乐之人。
English: An old man called him up and said to him: "You don't look like someone who just wants to have fun.

古文：我有一斧与君，君但持此造作，必巧妙通神，他日慎勿以女子为累。
现代文：我有一把斧子送给你，只要你用它做出东西来，一定是巧妙通神的。不过，你要小心，将来不要因为女人而吃亏。
English: I have given you an axe, and if you make something with it, it must be a clever trick, but you must be careful not to lose out in the future because of a woman.

古文：华因拜受之。
现代文：华某接过斧子，谢了又谢。
English: Hua took the axe and thanked him again and again.

古文：华得此斧后，造飞物即飞，造行物即行。
现代文：他从得到这把斧子之后，造出小鸟就能飞翔，造出小兽便能奔跑。
English: From the time he got the axe, he made birds that could fly and beasts that could run.

古文：至于上栋下宇，危楼高阁，固不烦余刃。
现代文：至于修造楼阁上栋下梁之类，则不用第二斧子就很牢固。
English: As for repairing things such as beams on the upper and lower floors of buildings, they are very strong without a second axe.

古文：后因游安陆间，止一富人王枚家。
现代文：后来，他来到安陆郡，住在富人王枚的家里。
English: Later, he came to Anlu County and lived in the home of the wealthy Wang Mai.

古文：枚知华机巧，乃请华临水造一独柱亭。
现代文：王枚知道华某的本事，就请他临水建造一个独柱亭。
English: Wang Hui knew Hua Mou's ability, so he asked him to build a one-column pavilion on the waterfront.

古文：工毕，枚尽出家人以观之。
现代文：完工之后，王枚喊出全家所有的人观看。
English: After completion, Wang Mei called out the whole family to watch.

古文：枚有一女，已丧夫而还家，容色殊丽，罕有比伦。
现代文：王枚有一个女儿，因为丧夫而回到家中。她长得美若天仙，很少有人敢与她相比。
English: Wangmai had a daughter who returned home after losing her husband. She was as beautiful as a fairy godmother, and few dared to compare her to her.

古文：既见深慕之，其夜乃逾垣窃入女之室。其女甚惊。
现代文：华某一见面，就深深地喜欢上她了。当天晚上，他翻墙而过，偷偷钻进王枚女儿的房间，那女子大惊。
English: When Hua met someone, he fell deeply in love with her. That evening, he climbed over the wall and sneaked into Wangmai's daughter's room. The woman was shocked.

古文：华谓女曰：不从，我必杀汝。
现代文：华某对女子说：你不从，我就会马上杀了你。
English: Hua told the woman: "If you don't comply, I will kill you immediately."

古文：女荏苒同心焉。
现代文：随着时光的流逝，王枚之女渐渐便同他一心。
English: With the passage of time, Wangmai's daughter gradually became one with him.

古文：其后每至夜，窃入女室中。
现代文：后来，每天夜晚，华某都偷偷钻进她的房间，行夫妻之事。
English: Later, every night, Hua sneaked into her room to have marital affairs.

古文：他日枚潜知之，即厚以赂遗遣华。
现代文：有一天，王枚在暗中知道了这件事，当即用优厚的钱物打发他走。
English: One day, Wang Hailu secretly learned about this and immediately sent him away with a generous sum of money.

古文：华察其意，谓枚曰：我寄君之家，受君之惠已多矣，而复厚赂我，我异日无以为答。
现代文：华某明白了其中的意思，对王枚说：我住在你家，受你的恩惠已经够多的了，而你还要送我这么多钱物，将来我没什么报答你的呀。
English: Hua Mou understood the meaning of this and said to Wang Miao: I live in your home, I have received enough favors from you, and you still have to send me so much money and goods, I have nothing to repay you in the future.

古文：我有一巧妙之事，当作一物以奉君。
现代文：我手中有一套巧妙的技术，就做一样东西送给你吧。
English: I have a set of ingenious techniques in my hands, let's make one thing and give it to you.

古文：枚曰：何物也？
现代文：王枚说：什么东西？
English: Wangfai said, "What's that?"

古文：我无用，必不敢留。
现代文：我用不着的话，必不敢留。
English: I wouldn't stay if I didn't have to.

古文：华曰：我能作木鹤，令飞之。
现代文：华某说：我能作木鹤，并且能让它飞起来。
English: Hua said, "I can make a crane and make it fly."

古文：或有急，但乘其鹤，即千里之外也。
现代文：如果一旦有什么急事，就可以骑上它，顷刻便到千里之外。
English: If there is something urgent, you can ride on it and be thousands of miles away in an instant.

古文：枚既尝闻，因许之。
现代文：王枚头一回听说，想试试，便点头答应了。
English: The first time Wang Hui heard about it, he wanted to try it, so he nodded and agreed.

古文：华即出斧斤，以木造飞鹤一双，唯未成其目。
现代文：华某拿出那把神斧，用木头做了一只飞鹤，只是眼睛尚未完成。
English: Hua took out the divine axe and made a flying crane out of wood, but the eyes were not yet finished.

古文：枚怪问之。华曰：必须君斋戒，始成之能飞。
现代文：王枚觉得奇怪，便问华某，华某说：你必须斋戒数日，然后它才能飞。
English: Wang Hui felt strange and asked Hua Mou. Hua Mou said: You have to fast for a few days before it can fly.

古文：若不斋戒，必不尔飞。
现代文：如果不斋戒，它决不会飞。
English: If it doesn't fast, it will never fly.

古文：枚遂斋戒。
现代文：王枚遂斋戒。
English: So Wang Hui went on a fast.

古文：其夜，华盗其女，俱乘鹤而归襄阳。
现代文：当天晚上，华某将王枚的女儿偷偷背出来，两个人乘鹤飞归襄阳。
English: In the evening of the same day, Hua secretly took Wangmai's daughter out and the two of them flew back to Xiangyang on a crane.

古文：至曙，枚失女，求之不获，因潜行入襄阳，以事告州牧。
现代文：到天亮的时候，王枚才发现女儿不见了，四处去找也没有找到，便偷偷地进了襄阳，把这件事告诉了州牧大人。
English: It was not until dawn that Wang Mai discovered that his daughter was missing. After searching everywhere and failing to find her, he secretly entered Xiangyang and reported the matter to Zhu Mu.

古文：州牧密令搜求，果擒华。
现代文：州牧密令搜寻，果然将华某擒获。
English: A search was ordered by the State Pastoral Office, and Hua Mou was indeed captured.

古文：州牧怒，杖杀之，所乘鹤亦不能身飞。
现代文：州牧大怒，华某被杖笞而死，他所乘的木鹤亦不能自己飞起来了。
English: The state herdsman was furious, Hua Mou was beaten to death with a cane, and the wooden crane he was riding couldn't fly by itself.

古文：青城道士
现代文：青城道士
English: Qingcheng Taoist Temple

古文：伪蜀青城山道士能幻术，往往入锦城，施其法，有所获，即潜挈归洞穴。
现代文：五代时，后蜀的青城山道士会幻术，常常去成都施展一番，有了收获，便偷偷提着回到洞穴。
English: In the fifth generation, after Shu, the Qingcheng Mountain Taoist Association often went to Chengdu to perform illusionism, and when there was a harvest, they secretly carried it back to the cave.

古文：或闻其行甚秽，官吏中有识者，颇恶之。
现代文：官吏当中有认识青城道士的，对之深恶痛绝。
English: Among the government officials, those who knew the Qingcheng Daoist were deeply disgusted with him.

古文：后于成都诱引富室及勋贵子弟，皆潜而随之。或于幽僻宅院中，洒扫焚香设榻，张陈帷幌。
现代文：后来，他在成都引诱富豪的妻妾及功臣贵族的后代，悄悄将她们引入山中，或者让他们在幽静的宅院中洒水扫地焚香设榻，或者让他们支张帷帐和幌子等。
English: Later, in Chengdu, he lured the wives and concubines of the rich and the descendants of the noble heroes, and quietly led them into the mountains, or let them stay in the secluded courtyard with sprinkling water, sweeping the ground and burning incense, or let them set up curtains and curtains.

古文：则独于室内作法，或召西王母、或巫山神女、或麻姑、鲍姑神仙，皆应召而至，与之杯馔寝处，生人无异。
现代文：而他自己则单独在室内作法，有时召西王母，有时召巫山神女，有时召麻姑或鲍姑等神仙，她们都能应召而为，与他同杯共饮同床共枕。
English: On the other hand, he practised alone in the room, sometimes calling the Queen Mother of the West, sometimes calling the Goddess of Wushan, and sometimes calling the Immortals such as Magu or Baogu. They could all respond to his call and drink with him and sleep with him.

古文：则令学者隙而窥之。
现代文：生人没有觉察出什么反常。
English: The stranger did not notice anything unusual.

古文：欢笑罢，则自帘帷之前蹑而去。
现代文：青城道士则让跟自己学法的人，通过缝隙向室内窥视。他享乐一番之后，那些神女们便在帘帷之前悄然消逝。
English: Qingcheng Taoist priest let his students peep into the room through a crack. After he had enjoyed himself, the goddesses quietly disappeared before the curtain.

古文：又忽城中化出金楼，众皆睹之，惑众颇甚。
现代文：忽然，他在城中变幻出金楼来，人们都前来围观，被他迷惑的人越来越多。
English: Suddenly, he appeared in the city as a golden tower. People came to watch, and more and more people were confused by him.

古文：其民间少年，膏梁子弟，满城如狂。
现代文：其中，那些民间少年，富家子弟，更是被迷得如醉如狂，满城不得安宁。
English: Among them, those folk youths, the children of the rich, are even more deluded and intoxicated, and the whole city is restless.

古文：少主知其妖，密使人擒之，累月不获。
现代文：后蜀少主知道这是青城道士作妖之后，便令人秘密捉拿他，一个多月一无所获。
English: After Shu Shoshu knew that it was the Qingcheng Daoist who had cast a spell, he had someone secretly capture him, but nothing was found for more than a month.

古文：后有人报云：已出笮桥门去。因使人逐之，乃以猪狗血赍行。
现代文：后来有人报告说，他已经从后门的索桥上逃走了，少主便派人去追，并用猪狗的血送行。
English: Later, someone reported that he had escaped from the rope bridge at the back door, and the young master sent someone to chase him and send him away with the blood of a pig dog.

古文：至青城路上三十余里，及之，遂倾血沃之。
现代文：在距青城还有三十多里的路上，终于把他追上，当即把猪狗的血全浇在他的身上。
English: On the road that was still more than thirty miles away from Qingcheng, he finally caught up with him and immediately poured the pig's blood all over his body.

古文：不能施其术，及下狱讯之，云：年年采民家处子住山中，行黄帝之道。死于岩穴者不知其数。
现代文：于是，青城道士便再也不能施展法术，就把他关进监狱进行审讯。他供认说：我每年都要掳一些民间处女带进山里，以行黄帝之道到那里一勘查，只见岩洞里遇难的少女不计其数。
English: As a result, the Qingcheng Taoist was no longer able to perform spells, so they put him in prison for interrogation. He confessed: Every year, I kidnap some folk virgins and take them into the mountains. When I went there on the path of the Yellow Emperor to investigate, I saw countless girls who had died in the cave.

古文：豪贵之家，颇遭秽淫。
现代文：富贵之家的女孩子，不少都被他奸污了。
English: Many girls from wealthy families were raped by him.

古文：所通辞款，指贵达之门甚多。
现代文：所交待的罪状，大多与显达富贵人家有关系。
English: Most of the reported crimes are related to prominent and wealthy people.

古文：少主不欲彰其恶，潜杀之。
现代文：少主不想张扬他的恶行，便将他秘密处决了。
English: The young master did not want to publicize his evil deed, so he had him secretly executed.

古文：蜀都妇人
现代文：蜀都妇人
English: Woman from Shudu

古文：元和子尝因暇日，出蜀都东郭门，见二人踞坐江岸，排治舟艦，方怒篙棹者，且呼且叫。
现代文：唐代元和年间，有个人曾经由于闲暇无事，从蜀都东城门走了出来，看见两个人蹲在江边，修理大船，正向撑篙的人发脾气，又吼又叫。
English: In the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, a man who had nothing to do in his spare time came out of the East Gate of Shu and saw two men crouching by the river, repairing a large boat, and getting angry with the people who were propping up the raft, shouting and yelling.

古文：忽有妇人衣布襦拜于前，有所乞焉。
现代文：忽然，有个穿着布衣短袄的女人跪在他们面前，像在乞求什么。
English: Suddenly, a woman in a short dress kneels in front of them, as if begging for something.

古文：其人盛怒，且叱之。
现代文：那两个人大怒，并且叱责她。
English: The two men were furious and scolded her.

古文：久而不去，将加殴击，妇人乃去。
现代文：那女人好长时间没有动，他们便要动手打，女人终于离去。
English: The woman didn't move for a long time, so they started to beat her, and she finally left.

古文：傍江岸伫立，四顾久之，以手推腰引步，直视二客船。其船即似有物牵拽，飘然而逝，直抵大岸，应时粉碎，财货悉皆溺于水。二人大骇，疑妇人所为，欲擒之，已亡去矣。
现代文：她在江边默然伫立，向四周看了好久，然后用手托腰而行，直视那两只客船，那两只船就像被什么牵拽着似的，飘然而动，径直撞在对岸，立刻被撞得粉碎，财物全落进了水里，那两个人大惊失色，怀疑是那女人干的，想去捉她，可她早已没影了。
English: She stood by the river in silence, looked around her for a long time, then walked with her hands on her hips, looking straight at the two passenger boats. The two boats floated and moved as if they were being pulled by something. They ran straight into the opposite bank and were immediately smashed to pieces. All their belongings fell into the water. The two men were shocked, suspected that the woman had done it, and wanted to catch her, but she was long gone.

