古文：买粉儿崔护武延嗣开元制衣女韦皋欧阳詹薛宜僚戎昱
现代文：买粉儿崔护武延嗣开元制衣女韦皋欧阳詹薛宜僚戎昱
English: Buy powder child Cui Zhouwu Yan Zhi Ka Yuan clothing production woman Wei Wei Ouyang Zhan Xue Yi Liang Rong Zi

古文：买粉儿
现代文：买粉儿
English: Buy the powder.

古文：有人家甚富，止有一男，宠恣过常。
现代文：有一户人家，十分富裕，家里有个独生儿子，平日非常地娇生惯养。
English: There was a very wealthy family with an only son who was very spoiled.

古文：游市，见一女子美丽，卖胡粉，爱之。无由自达，乃讬买粉，日往市。得粉便去。
现代文：孩子长大了，常到市场游逛，看到有个卖粉的女子长得非常美，一眼便爱上了他，因为无法向对方表达，便假讬买粉，天天去市场，买完粉就走。
English: When the child grew up, he often wandered to the market, saw a woman selling powder who was very beautiful, and fell in love with him at first sight. Because he could not express it to the other party, he pretended to buy powder, went to the market every day, and left after buying the powder.

古文：初无所言，积渐久，女深疑之。
现代文：开头谁也不说什么，时间久了，女子感到很疑惑。
English: At the beginning, no one says anything. After a long time, the woman feels very doubtful.

古文：明日复来，问曰：君买此粉，将欲何施？
现代文：等到他第二天再来时，她便问道： 先生买了这粉，要往什么地方用？ 
English: When he came back the next day, she asked, "Sir, you bought this powder, where are you going to use it?"

古文：答曰：意相爱乐，不敢自达，然恒欲相见，故假此以观姿耳。
现代文：答道： 心里喜爱你，自己不敢说；但又总想见到你，所以借着买粉的机会天天来看你的好模样儿而已。 
English: Answer: I love you in my heart, I dare not say it; but I always want to see you, so I take the opportunity to buy powder every day to see your good looks.

古文：女怅然有感，遂相许以私，尅以明夕。
现代文：女子听了很不好意思，但心里很感动，于是私下相许，说定第二晚相会。
English: The woman was very embarrassed to hear this, but she was very moved, so they made a private promise to meet on the second night.

古文：其夜，安寝堂屋，以俟女来。
现代文：那天夜晚，男的睡在正屋，耐心等待女子的到来。
English: That night, the man slept in the main house, patiently waiting for the woman to arrive.

古文：薄暮果到，男不胜其悦，把臂曰：宿愿始伸于此！
现代文：女子的果然到了，男子不胜欢悦，他抓住对方的胳臂说： 多日的愿望如今终于实现了！ 
English: When the woman's turn finally came, the man was overjoyed. He grabbed her arm and said, "My long-cherished wish has finally come true!

古文：欢踊遂死。
现代文：狂欢，激动，死了过去。
English: The revelry, the excitement, died down.

古文：女惶惧不知所以，固遁去，明还粉店。
现代文：女的极为惶恐，不知所措，便跑了，天亮时回到了粉店。
English: Terrified and at a loss for what to do, the woman ran away and returned to the bakery at dawn.

古文：至食时，父母怪男不起，往视，已死矣。
现代文：吃早饭的时候，父母见儿子还没起来，感到奇怪，过去一看，已经死了。
English: While eating breakfast, the parents were surprised to see that their son was not up yet. When they looked over, he was already dead.

古文：当就殡敛，发箧笥中，见百余裹胡粉，大小一积。其母曰：杀我儿者，必此粉也。
现代文：入敛的时候，在儿子的一只箱子里发现一百余包粉，每包的大小都一样，母亲便说： 一定是这些粉杀死了我儿子！ 
English: When they arrived, they found more than a hundred packets of powder, each the same size, in one of his son's suitcases. His mother said: "It must have been these powders that killed my son!"

古文：入市遍买胡粉，次此女，比之，手迹如先。遂执问女曰：何杀我儿？
现代文：于是到市场上逐个店铺地买粉，买到这个女儿家时，拿来一比照，与儿子的粉完全一样，于是抓着她问道： 你为什么杀了我儿子？ 
English: So he went to the market to buy powder, one shop at a time, and when he got to his daughter's house, he compared it with his son's powder and asked her: "Why did you kill my son?"

古文：女闻呜咽，具以实陈。
现代文：女儿听了，呜呜咽咽地哭起来，并把真实经过叙说了一遍。
English: When her daughter heard this, she began to sob and cry, and recounted the true story.

古文：父母不信，遂以诉官。
现代文：父母不相信她的话，便把此事告到了官府。
English: When her parents didn't believe her, they reported the matter to the government.

古文：女曰：妾岂复吝死！
现代文：公堂对审时，女儿说：他既然已经死了，我难道还舍不得一死吗？
English: During the court hearing, her daughter said: "Since he is dead, do I still not want to die?

古文：乞一临尸尽哀。
现代文：只求让我到尸首前而尽尽哀悼之情。
English: All I ask is that I be allowed to come to the body and mourn.

古文：县令许焉。
现代文：县令答应了她的请求。
English: The prefectural government agreed to her request.

古文：径往，抚之恸哭曰：不幸致此！
现代文：女儿来到死者面前，抚摸着尸体放声恸哭道：想不到竟有如此的不幸！
English: Her daughter came to the dead man, stroked his body and wailed: "I had no idea there was such a tragedy!

古文：若死魂而灵，复何恨哉！
现代文：如果死魂有灵，知道我不曾害你，我死了有什么遗憾呢！
English: If the dead soul has a spirit, knowing that I have not harmed you, how can I regret my death?

古文：男豁然更生，具说情状。
现代文：男子突然苏醒过来，叙说了事情的原委。
English: The man suddenly woke up and recounted the original commission of the matter.

古文：遂为夫妇，子孙繁茂。
现代文：两人便结为恩爱夫妻，后来子孙满堂。
English: The two married as a loving couple, and later their children and grandchildren filled the hall.

古文：崔护
现代文：崔护
English: Choe Son-woo

古文：博陵崔护，资质甚美，而孤洁寡合，举进士第。
现代文：博陵人崔护，资质甚美，性情孤洁寡合，应举进士及第。
English: Choe Soo, a resident of Boling, has excellent qualifications and a solitary character. He should be promoted to the first and second rank.

古文：清明日，独游都城南，得居人庄。一亩之宫，花木丛草，寂若无人。
现代文：清明节这天，他一个人去都城南门外郊游，遇到一户庄园，房舍占地一亩左右，园内花木丛生，静若无人。
English: On the day of the Tomb-Sweeping Day, he went to the outskirts of the south gate of the capital alone, and encountered a manor house. The house covers an area of about one mu, the garden is full of flowers and trees, and it is quiet.

古文：扣门久之，有女子自门隙窥之，问曰：谁耶？
现代文：崔护走上前去扣门，过了一会儿，有位女子从门缝里瞧了瞧他，问道：谁呀？
English: Cui Rong stepped forward to close the door. After a while, a woman looked at him through the crack in the door and asked, "Who is it?"

古文：护以姓字对，曰：寻春独行，酒渴求饮。
现代文：崔护告诉了自己的姓名，说：我一人出城春游，酒后干渴，特来求点水喝。
English: Cui You told them her name and said, "I was out of town on a spring trip by myself. I was thirsty after drinking, so I came to ask for some water.

古文：女入，以杯水至。开门，设床命坐。
现代文：女儿进去端了一杯水来，打开门，让他进去坐下。
English: Her daughter came in with a glass of water and opened the door for him to sit down.

古文：独倚小桃斜柯伫立，而意属殊厚，妖姿媚态，绰有余妍。
现代文：她一个人靠着小桃树静静地立在那里，对客人有着极为深厚的情意。她姿色艳丽，神态妩媚，极有风韵。
English: She stood quietly by herself, leaning against a small peach tree, and had a very deep feeling for the guests. She was beautiful, charming, and very graceful.

古文：崔以言挑之，不对，彼此目注者久之。
现代文：崔护用话引逗她，只是默默不语。两人相互注视了许久，崔护起身告辞。
English: Cui You teased her with words, but did not speak. The two stared at each other for a long time, and Cui You got up to leave.

古文：崔辞去，送至门，如不胜情而入。崔亦睠盻而归，尔后绝不复至。
现代文：送到门口后，她似有不胜之情地默默回到屋里，崔护也不往地顾盼，然后怅然而归。此后，崔护决心不再去见她。
English: After she was brought to the door, she silently returned to the room with a sense of triumph. Cui You also looked at her expectantly, and then left. After that, Cui You decided not to see her again.

古文：及来岁清明日，忽思之，情不可抑，径往寻之。
现代文：到了第二年清明节，忽然思念起她来，思念之情无法控制，于是直奔城南去找她。
English: On the next year's Ching Ming Festival, he suddenly missed her and couldn't control the feeling of missing her, so he went straight to the south of the city to find her.

古文：门院如故，而已扃锁之。
现代文：到那里一看，门庭庄园一如既往，但是大门已上了锁。
English: When I got there, I saw that the courtyard manor was as it had always been, but the gate was locked.

古文：崔因题诗于左扉曰：去年今日此门中，人面桃花相映红。
现代文：崔护便在左边一扇门上题诗道：去年今日此门中，人面桃花相映红。
English: Cui Guo then inscribed a poem on a door on the left: "Last year, today, in this door, people's faces are red with peach blossoms."

古文：人面不知何处去，桃花依旧笑春风。
现代文：人面不知何处去，桃花依旧笑春风。
English: People don't know where to go, the peach blossoms are still smiling in the spring breeze.

古文：后数日，偶至都城南，复往寻之。
现代文：过了几天，他突然来到城南，又去寻找那位女子。
English: A few days later, he suddenly came to the south of the city and went to look for the woman.

古文：闻其中有哭声，扣门问之。有老父出曰：君非崔护耶？
现代文：听到门内有哭的声音，扣门询问时，有位老父走出来说：你不是崔护吗？
English: When he heard the sound of crying inside the door and closed the door to inquire, an old man came out and said, "Aren't you Cui You?

古文：曰：是也。
现代文：答道：正是。
English: He replied: "Exactly."

古文：又哭曰：君杀吾女！
现代文：老父又哭着说：是您杀了我的女儿。
English: The old man cried again and said, "You killed my daughter."

古文：崔惊怛，莫知所答。
现代文：崔护又惊又怕，不知该怎样回答。
English: Shocked and afraid, Cui Guo didn't know how to answer.

古文：父曰：吾女笄年知书，未适人。
现代文：老父说：我女儿已经成年，能知书达理，尚未嫁人。
English: The old man said, "My daughter is of age, can read and write, and has not yet married.

古文：自去年已来，常恍惚若有所失。
现代文：自从去年以来，经常神情恍惚若有所失。
English: Since last year, he has often looked dazed and lost.

古文：比日与之出，及归，见在左扉有字。读之，入门而病，遂绝食数日而死。
现代文：那天陪她出去散心，回家时，见在左边门扇上有题字，读完之后，进门她便病了，于是绝食数日便死了。
English: That day, I accompanied her to go out for a walk. When I came home, I saw an inscription on the left door leaf. After reading it, she got sick when she entered the door, so she went on a hunger strike for a few days and died.

古文：吾老矣，惟此一女，所以不嫁者，将求君子，以托吾身。
现代文：我老了，只有这么个女儿，迟迟不嫁的原因，就是想找个可靠的君子，借以寄托我的终身。
English: I am an old man, I have only one daughter, and the reason why I am delaying marriage is that I want to find a reliable gentleman to entrust my life to.

古文：今不幸而殒，得非君杀之耶？
现代文：如今她竟不幸去世。这不是您害死她的吗？
English: Now she has tragically passed away. Was it not you who killed her?

古文：又持崔大哭。
现代文：说完又扶着崔护大哭。
English: After saying this, he again helped Cui You to cry.

古文：崔亦感恸，请入哭之，尚俨然在床。
现代文：崔护也十分悲痛，请求进去一哭亡灵。
English: Cui You was also very sad and asked the dead to come in and cry.

古文：崔举其首枕其股，哭而祝曰：某在斯！须臾开目。
现代文：死者仍安然躺在床上，崔护抬起她的头让其枕着自己的腿，哭着祷告道： 我在这里，我在这里不一会儿，女子睁开了眼睛。 
English: The deceased was still lying peacefully on the bed. Cui You lifted her head and let it rest on her leg, crying and praying: I'm here, I'm here. Soon, the woman opened her eyes.

古文：半日复活，老父大喜，遂以女归之。
现代文：过了半天，便复活了。老父大为惊喜，便将女儿许给了崔护。
English: After half a day, she came back to life. The old man was very surprised and promised his daughter to Cui You.

古文：武延嗣
现代文：武延嗣
English: Takenotsugu

古文：唐武后载初中，左司郎中乔知之，有婢名窈娘，艺色为当时第一。
现代文：唐代，武则天载初年间。左司郎中乔知之有个婢妾叫窈娘，歌舞之技艺与姿色之艳丽皆为当时第一。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, during the first year of the reign of Emperor Wuzetian, the left-hand retainer of Emperor Qiao Zhizhi had a concubine named Zou Niang, whose singing and dancing skills, as well as the beauty of her appearance, were the best at the time.

古文：知之宠待，为之不婚，武延嗣闻之，求一见，势不可抑。既见即留，无复还理。
现代文：见到之后武延嗣便将窈娘据为己有，以他的为人，那是根本没有退还的道理。
English: After seeing her, Wu Yanji took her as his own, and as he was, there was no way to return her.

古文：知之痛愤成疾，因为诗，写以缣素。厚赂阍守，以达窈娘。
现代文：乔知之又心疼又气愤，便病倒了，于是作诗写在细绢上，以重金收买守门人，将此诗送给了窈娘。
English: Distressed and angry, Qiao Zhizhi fell ill, so he wrote a poem on a thin reed, bribed the gatekeeper with a large sum of money, and gave the poem to his daughter.

古文：窈娘得诗悲咽，结三章于裙带，赴井而死。
现代文：窈娘得到诗后，悲痛哭泣不已，便把这三章诗结在裙带上，投井而死。
English: After she received the poem, she wept bitterly, tied the three chapters of the poem to her skirts, threw herself into a well, and died.

古文：延嗣见诗，遣酷吏诬陷知之，破其家。
现代文：武延嗣看到此诗后，打发酷吏去诬陷乔知之，抄了他的家。
English: After Wu Yanzhi saw this poem, he sent cruel officials to frame Qiao Zhi and ransacked his home.

古文：知之诗曰：石家金谷重新声，明珠十斛买娉婷。
现代文：乔知之在诗中写道：石家金谷重新声，明珠十斛买娉婷。
English: Qiao Zhizhi wrote in his poem: Shijiazhuang Jintan has a new voice, and the pearl is ten times better than the pearl.

古文：昔日可怜君自许。此时歌舞得人情。
现代文：昔日可怜君自许，此时歌舞得人情。
English: Once upon a time, poor Mr. Self-Condemnation, now he sings and dances for the crowd.

古文：君家楼阁不曾观，好将歌舞借人看。
现代文：君家楼阁不曾难，好将歌舞借人看。
English: It wasn't hard to get into the castle, so you could watch the song and dance.

古文：富贵雄豪非分理，骄奢势力横相干。
现代文：富贵雄豪非分理，骄奢势力横相干。
English: The rich and powerful are inseparable, and the forces of arrogance are interrelated.

古文：别君去君终不忍。徒劳掩袂伤红粉。
现代文：别君去君终不忍，徒劳掩袂伤红粉。
English: The others couldn't bear to see him go, and tried in vain to cover up the bruises.

古文：百年离别在高楼，一代红颜为君尽。
现代文：百年离别在高楼，一代红颜为君尽。
English: A hundred years of parting in a high-rise building, a generation of beauty for you to do.

古文：开元制衣女
现代文：开元制衣女
English: A woman making clothes at the turn of the millennium

古文：开元中，颁边军纩衣，制于宫中。
现代文：唐玄宗开元中年，有一批发给边防守军的棉衣，在皇宫里由宫女们制作。
English: In the middle of the first century of Tang Xuan Zong, there was a batch of cotton coats issued to the border defense army, which were made by the palace maids in the imperial palace.

古文：有兵士于短袍中得诗曰：沙场征戍客，寒苦若为眠。
现代文：有个边防兵士在棉衣里面得到一首诗，诗中写道：沙场征戍客，寒苦若为眠。
English: A border guard received a poem in his cotton jacket, which read: "Seeking guests in the battlefield is like sleeping in the cold."

古文：战袍经手作，知落阿谁边。
现代文：战袍经手作，知落阿谁边？
English: The battle robes were made by hand. Who knows where they came from?

古文：蓄意多添线，含情更着绵。
现代文：蓄意多添线，含情更着绵。
English: Deliberately adding more lines, the meaning is more mellow.

古文：今生已过也，结取后身缘。
现代文：今生已过也。结取后身缘。
English: This life is over. After marriage, there is no next life.

古文：兵士以诗白于帅，帅进之。
现代文：兵士把此诗告诉了统帅，统帅又将此诗进呈给朝廷。
English: The soldier told the poem to the commander-in-chief, who in turn presented it to the imperial court.

古文：玄宗命以诗遍示六宫，曰：有作者勿隐，吾不罪汝。
现代文：玄宗命人将此诗在后宫之内普遍传示，并对宫女们说：谁作的此诗不要隐瞒，我不怪罪你。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered this poem to be widely disseminated within the imperial court, and said to the court ladies: "Whoever composed this poem, do not conceal it. I do not blame you."

古文：有一宫人自言万死。
现代文：有个宫女便主动承认，并连声称罪道：万死、万死。
English: One lady-in-waiting took the initiative to confess, and even claimed to have committed a crime: "Death, death, death."

古文：玄宗深悯之，遂以嫁得诗人。
现代文：唐玄宗对她深表同情，便把她嫁给了那个得到诗的人。
English: Tang Xuan Zong took pity on her and married her off to the man who received the poem.

古文：仍谓之曰：我与汝结今身缘。
现代文：宫女对那个兵士说；我已与你结成了 今身缘 。
English: The lady-in-waiting said to the soldier, I have become one with you.

古文：边人皆感泣。
现代文：边防守军们都被这件事感动得热泪横流。
English: The border guards were all moved to tears by this.

古文：韦皋
现代文：韦皋
English: Wei Xuan

古文：唐西川节度使韦皋少游江夏，止于姜使君之馆。
现代文：唐朝西川节度使韦皋，年轻时到江夏旅游，住在姜郡守家的塾馆里。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Xichuan Festival made Wei Yao travel to Jiangxia when he was young, and he lived in the Juku Hall of Jiang County Shoujia.

古文：姜氏孺子曰荆宝，已习二经，虽兄呼于韦，而恭事之礼，如父也。
现代文：姜家有个儿子叫荆宝，已经读过两种经书，虽对韦皋以兄相称，但是恭敬侍奉的礼数，就像对待父辈。
English: The Jiang family has a son named Jing Bao, who has read two kinds of scriptures. Although he is a brother to Wei Wei, he respects and serves his parents.

古文：荆宝有小青衣曰玉箫，年才十岁，常令只侍韦兄。
现代文：荆宝有个小丫环叫玉箫，才十岁，常常让她只去侍奉韦皋兄。
English: Jing Bao had a ten-year-old maidservant named Yulun, and she often only let her serve Wei Yao's brother.

古文：玉箫亦勤于应奉。
现代文：玉箫对韦皋也乐于殷勤侍奉。
English: Tamakazura is also happy to serve Wei Zheng diligently.

古文：后二载，姜使入关求官，家累不行。韦乃易居止头陀寺。
现代文：两年之后，姜郡守让韦皋进京求官，但因家里负担太重未能成行，韦皋便迁居到头陀寺中。
English: Two years later, the governor of Jiang County asked Wei Wei to go to Beijing to apply for a post, but because of the heavy burden on his family, he was unable to go. Wei Wei then moved to Tunduo Temple.

古文：荆宝亦时遣玉箫往彼应奉。
现代文：荆宝仍然时常打发玉箫到寺里去听他使唤。
English: Jing Bao still often sent Tamakazura to the temple to listen to him preach.

古文：玉箫年稍长大，因而有情。
现代文：日久天长，加上玉箫的年龄也稍稍大了，两人之间便产生爱慕之情。
English: As time goes by, and Tamakazura's age gets a little older, they fall in love with each other.

古文：时廉使陈常侍得韦季父书云：侄皋久客贵州，切望发遣归觐。
现代文：这时，廉使陈常侍接到韦皋叔父的来信说：侄儿韦皋长期客居贵郡，恳切盼望打发他回家省亲。
English: At this time, Liang Zi Chen Chang Zhi received a letter from Wei Wei's uncle, saying: Wei Wei's nephew has been staying in Guizhou for a long time, and sincerely hopes to send him home to visit relatives.

古文：廉使启缄，遗以舟楫服用，仍恐淹留，请不相见。
现代文：廉使看过信后，给韦皋准备了沿途的盘费和用品，打发他乘船回家。怕他迟迟不肯启程，便请荆宝与玉箫不要与他相见。
English: After the envoy read the letter, he prepared the fare and supplies for Wei Wei and sent him home by boat. If he was not willing to leave, he asked Jing Bao and Yuxuan not to meet him.

古文：洎舟江濑，俾篙工促行。
现代文：等到舟船停在江岸时，又催促船夫快快起航。
English: When the boat stopped at the riverbank, he urged the boatman to set sail quickly.

古文：韦昏瞑拭泪。乃裁书以别荆宝。
现代文：韦皋依依不舍，泪眼模糊，于是写信以别荆宝。
English: Wei Wei reluctantly, teary eyes blurred, so he wrote a letter to Bei Jing Bao.

古文：宝顷刻与玉箫俱来，既悲且喜。
现代文：顷刻之间，荆宝即与玉箫一块来了，韦皋见了，悲喜交加。
English: All of a sudden, Jing Bao and Yuxuan came together. Wei Yao saw them, and was both sad and happy.

古文：宝命青衣往从侍之。韦以违觐日久。不敢俱行，乃固辞之。
现代文：荆宝让丫环玉箫随船前往，沿途侍奉韦皋，韦皋因这样会使玉箫长时间见不到荆宝，所以不敢带她一起去，于是一再推辞。
English: Jing Bao asked the maiden, Jade Dragonfly, to go with the ship and serve Wei Yao along the way. Because of this, Wei Yao would not let Jade Dragonfly see Jing Bao for a long time, so he did not dare to take her with him, so he repeatedly declined.

古文：遂与言约：少则五载，多则七年，取玉箫。
现代文：他们相互约定，少则五载，多则七年，韦皋即来娶玉箫。
English: They mutually agreed, at least five years, at most seven years, that Wei Xuan would come to marry Yuxuan.

古文：因留玉指环一枚，并诗一首遗之。
现代文：韦皋留下玉指环一枚，又写了一首诗，一起赠给了玉箫。
English: Wei Wei left a jade ring, wrote a poem, and gave the jade bracelet as a gift.

古文：既五年不至，玉箫乃静祷于鹦鹉洲。
现代文：过了五年后，韦皋没有来，玉箫便于鹦鹉洲默默祈祷。
English: After five years, Wei Yao did not come, and Yu Yao was forced to pray silently in Cockatoo Island.

古文：又逾二年，至八年春，玉箫叹曰：韦家郎君，一别七年，是不来矣！
现代文：又过了两年，到第八年春天，玉箫叹道：韦皋郎君走了七年多了，肯定不能回来了。
English: Two more years passed, and in the spring of the eighth year, Tamakazura sighed, "Wei Lan Rong has been gone for more than seven years, and he definitely can't come back."

古文：遂绝食而殒。
现代文：于是绝食而死。
English: He went on a hunger strike and died.

古文：姜氏悯其节操。以玉环著于中指而同殡焉。
现代文：姜家可怜她死于节操，将那只玉指环载在她中指上一同殡葬了。
English: The Jiang family took pity on her and buried her with the ring on her middle finger.

古文：后韦镇蜀，到府三日，询鞠狱囚，涤其冤滥，轻重之系，近三百余人。
现代文：后来韦皋封官加爵，朝廷派他镇守西蜀，到任三天即将关在监狱里的囚犯重新审理，为其冤案错案平反昭雪，轻罪重罪近三百人。
English: Later, Wei Xuanfeng was given a title of nobility, and the imperial court sent him to guard the town of West Shu. When he arrived, the prisoners who had been in prison for three days were re-tried, and their unjust cases and wrong cases were vindicated, and nearly three hundred people were convicted of misdemeanors and felonies.

古文：其中一辈，五器所拘，偷视厅事，私语云：仆射是当时韦兄也。
现代文：其中有一个人，身载重枷上堂审理时，偷偷看了看审判官，悄悄自语道：仆射是我当年的韦兄。
English: One of them, carrying a heavy yoke into the courtroom, peeked at the judge and quietly said to himself: "The shooter was my brother Wei back then.

古文：乃厉声曰：仆射仆射，忆姜家荆宝否？
现代文：于是高声吁道：仆射！仆射！还记得当年姜家的荆宝吗？
English: Then he cried out in a loud voice: "Pu Xie! Pu Xie! Do you still remember the Jing Bao of the Jiang family?

古文：韦曰：深忆之。
现代文：韦皋说：记忆犹新。
English: Wei Wei said: My memory is still fresh.

古文：即某是也！
现代文：我就是荆宝！
English: I am Jing Bao!

古文：公曰：犯何罪而重系。
现代文：韦公道：犯了什么罪受此重刑？
English: Wei Gongdao: What crime did you commit to receive such a heavy sentence?

古文：答曰：某辞韦之后，寻以明经及第，再选青城县令，家人误爇廨舍库牌印等。
现代文：答道：我与韦兄分别之后，很快便以明经科应举及第，又被选为青城县令。家人不慎，误将公署房舍及仓库牌印等烧毁，于是定罪入狱。
English: Answer: After my separation from Brother Wei, I was quickly promoted to the second-highest rank in Mingjing Science and was elected as the Qingcheng County magistrate. My family members were careless and burned down the public office building and the warehouse sign, and were convicted and sentenced to prison.

古文：韦曰：家人之犯，固非己尤。
现代文：韦公道：家人犯罪，并非你的过错。
English: Wei Gongdao: It is not your fault that your family member committed a crime.

古文：即与雪冤，仍归墨绶，乃奏眉州牧。
现代文：当即给他平反雪冤，仍然交给县令的官印，并将处理意见呈报眉州刺史。
English: He was immediately given the opportunity to redress the grievance, but still handed over the official seal of the county magistrate, and submitted the handling opinion to the Meizhou Provincial History.

古文：敕下，未令赴任，遣人监守。朱绂其荣，且留宾幕。
现代文：刺史发下命令，暂不让其赴任，派人看守起来，可以穿戴荣耀的官服，而且留作韦皋的宾客幕僚。
English: Thich Nhat Hanh issued an order not to allow him to take up his post for the time being, and sent someone to guard him. He was allowed to wear the glorious official uniform, and he was kept on as Weizun's guest and aide.

古文：时属大军之后，草创事繁，凡经数月，方向玉箫何在。姜曰：仆射维舟之夕，与伊留约。
现代文：时值战乱刚刚结束，百废待兴，公务繁忙，一直过了几个月，韦皋才问起玉箫的下落，姜荆宝说：仆射上船的那天，跟她留下契约，七年为限，必来娶她。
English: When the war had just ended, there was a lot of waste and work to be done. It took several months for Wei Wei to ask about the whereabouts of Yuxuan. Jiang Jingbao said, "On the day I boarded the ship, I left a contract with her for seven years, and I will come to marry her."

古文：七载是期，既逾时不至，乃绝食而终。因吟《留赠玉环诗》云：黄雀衔来已数春，别时留解赠佳人。
现代文：既然过期没来，她便绝食而终了。临终之前，玉箫留下一首《留赠玉环》诗道： 黄雀衔来已数春，别时留解赠佳人。
English: Since the deadline did not come, she ended up going on a hunger strike. Before dying, Yuxuan left a poem, "Leaving the Jade Ring," saying: "The title of Yellow Sparrow has been given to me for several years. At other times, I leave it for the lady."

古文：长江不见鱼书至，为遣相思梦入秦。
现代文：长江不见鱼书至，为遣相思梦入秦。
English: The Yangtze River does not see fish until the book, in order to send the dream of love into Qin.

古文：韦闻之，益增凄叹。
现代文：韦皋听罢，无比痛心，哀叹不已。
English: Wei Yao listened to it with great sorrow and lamentation.

古文：广修经像，以报夙心，且想念之怀，无由再会。
现代文：从此之后，他刻苦抄写经书，大事修造佛像，借以报答玉箫的一片诚心。他时刻思念玉箫，只恨无缘与她再见一面。
English: From then on, he diligently copied scriptures and built a Buddha statue to repay Tamakazura's sincerity. He missed Tamakazura all the time and longed to see her again.

古文：时有祖山人者，有少翁之术，能令逝者相亲。
现代文：当时有个祖山人，有少君的招魂之术，能让死者与亲人见面。
English: At that time, there was an ancestor of the mountain people, who had Shoujun's soul-winning skills, and could make the dead meet with their relatives.

古文：但令府公斋戒七日。清夜，玉箫乃至。
现代文：他让韦公斋戒七天，在一个月光朦胧的深夜，玉箫便飘然而至。
English: He asked Wei Gong to fast for seven days, and in the dim moonlight of a late night, the Jade Dragonfly arrived.

古文：谢曰：承仆射写经造像之力，旬日便当托生。
现代文：见到韦皋后，她施礼致谢道：承蒙仆射军经造像的帮助，十天之后我就会托生降世。
English: After seeing Wei Wei, she bowed and thanked him, saying, "Thanks to the help of the soldiers, I will be reborn in ten days."

古文：却后十三年，再为侍妾，以谢鸿恩。
现代文：再过十三年，便可再次成为您的侍妾，以谢大恩。
English: In another thirteen years, I will be able to become your concubine again, thank you very much.

古文：临去微笑曰：丈夫薄情，令人死生隔矣！
现代文：临去这前，她又微笑着说道：都怪丈夫薄情，让我与您死生相隔呵！
English: Just before she left, she smiled again and said, "It's all my husband's fault for not being affectionate. Let me be separated from you for life and death!"

古文：后韦以陇右之功，终德宗之代，理蜀不替。
现代文：后来，韦皋因在治理陇右地区有功，在唐德宗执政的二十几年间，一直让他治理西蜀。
English: Later, Wei Kun, due to his achievements in governing the Shiyu region, allowed Tang Dezong to govern Western Shu during the twenty years that he was in power.

古文：是故年深累迁中书令，天下响附，泸僰归心。
现代文：因此，由于年久资深，官职连连进升，直至中书令。在他治理西蜀期间，各地无不服从依顺，西南各族也都人心归附。
English: Therefore, due to his long seniority, he was promoted to higher official posts in succession, until he was appointed to the position of the Central Government. During his administration of West Shuxi, there was no disobedience and obedience in all regions, and all the people in the southwest were attached to him.

古文：因作生日，节镇所贺，皆贡珍奇。独东川卢八座送一歌姬，未当破瓜之年，亦以玉箫为号。观之，乃真姜氏之玉箫也。而中指有肉环隐出，不异留别之玉环也。韦叹曰：吾乃知存殁之分，一往一来。玉箫之言，斯可验矣。
现代文：这名歌女不到十六岁，名字也叫玉箫。韦皋仔细一看，乃是姜荆宝家那个真的玉箫，而她的中指上长着一个肉质的指环，隐隐约约地能够看得出来，与当年分别时所赠的指环形状相同。韦皋慨然叹道：我终于懂得了生与死的区分就是一 来 一 往 。玉箫当年所说的话，现在可以验证了。
English: The singer was less than sixteen years old, and her name was also Yulong. Wei Wei took a closer look and saw that it was the real Yulong of the Jiang Jingbao family, and she had a fleshy ring on her middle finger, which was vaguely recognizable, and was the same shape as the ring she had been given at the time of their separation. Wei Wei sighed: I finally understood that the difference between life and death is one coming and one going. What Yulong said that year can now be verified.

古文：欧阳詹
现代文：欧阳詹
English: Ouyang Zhan

古文：欧阳詹字行周，泉州晋江人。
现代文：欧阳詹，字行周，泉州晋江人。
English: Ouyang Zhan, Zhi Xing Zhou, Quanzhou Jinjiang people.

古文：弱冠能属文，天纵浩汗。
现代文：二十岁时就能写一手好文章，文章是大气磅礴，汪洋恣肆。
English: At the age of twenty, you can write a good article, the article is magnificent, extravagant.

古文：贞元年，登进士第，毕关试，薄游太原。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，欧阳詹进士及第，吏部主持的关试结束之后，到太原去旅游。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, Ouyang Zhan Jinshi and Dai, after the completion of the examination presided over by the cadre department, went to Taiyuan to travel.

古文：于乐籍中，因有所悦，情甚相得。
现代文：乐妓中有个他所喜欢的人，两人相处得十分亲热。
English: He likes one of the courtesans, and the two of them get along very well.

古文：及归，乃与之盟曰：至都，当相迎耳。
现代文：等他要回京城时，便与她订立盟约道：回到京城后，我会来迎接你的。
English: When he wanted to return to the capital, he made a covenant with her: "When I return to the capital, I will come to greet you."

古文：即泪泣而别，仍赠之诗曰：驱马渐觉远，回头长路尘。
现代文：说完洒泪而别，并赠给她一首诗道：驱马渐觉远，回头长路尘。
English: After saying good-bye with tears, he gave her a poem: "Driving a horse, gradually becoming aware of the distance, it's a long way back."

古文：高城已不见，況复城中人。
现代文：高城已不见，况复城中人。
English: Gaocheng is no longer there, and the people in the city have disappeared.

古文：去意既未甘，居情谅多辛。
现代文：去意既未甘，居情谅多辛。
English: It's not easy to please, but it's much harder to please.

古文：五原东北晋，千里西南秦。
现代文：五原东北晋，千里西南秦。
English: Wuhara in the northeast of Jin, thousands of miles southwest of Qin.

古文：一屦不出门，一车无停输。
现代文：一屐不出门，一车无停轮。
English: If you don't go out, the bus won't stop.

古文：流萍与系瓠，早晚期相亲。
现代文：流萍与系瓠，早晚期相亲。
English: Rapunzel and the dragonfly, early and late blind date.

古文：寻除国子四门助教，住京。
现代文：不久，欧阳詹担任了国子四门助教，居住在京城里。
English: Soon, Ouyang Zhan served as an assistant professor of the four provinces and lived in Beijing.

古文：籍中者思之不已，经年得疾且甚，乃危妆引髻，刃而匣之，顾谓女弟曰：吾其死矣。苟欧阳生使至，可以是为信。
现代文：太原相遇的那个乐妓，分手之后时刻思念着欧阳詹，过了一年便病倒了，而且病得很严重。她便将自己的发髻对着镜剪了下来，装在小匣里，然后对身边的丫环说：我就要死了，如果欧阳公子的使者能到这里来，你可将此小匣交给他作为信物。
English: After the break-up, the courtesan whom Taihara had met was thinking about Ouyang Zhan all the time. A year later, she fell seriously ill. She cut off her hair in front of the mirror, put it in a small box, and said to the maids around her: "I'm going to die. If Ouyang's messenger can come here, you can give him this small box as a token."

古文：又遗之诗曰：自从别后减容光，半是思郎半恨郎。
现代文：同时又留下了一首诗，诗中写道：自从别后减容光，半是思郎半恨郎。
English: At the same time, he also left behind a poem, in which he wrote: Since parting, I've lost my light, I'm half a thinker and half a hater.

古文：欲识旧时云髻样，为奴开取缕金箱。
现代文：欲识旧时云髻样，为奴开取缕金箱。
English: Wanting to know the past, he opened a gold box for him.

古文：绝笔而逝。
现代文：写完这首诗后，她便去世了。
English: After writing this poem, she died.

古文：及詹使至，女弟如言，径持归京，具白其事。
现代文：等欧阳詹的使者来到时，那位丫环便如实告诉了来使，使者带着小匣回到京城，讲述了事情的经过。
English: When Ouyang Zhan's envoy arrived, the servant girl told the envoy the truth. The envoy returned to Beijing with a small box and recounted the events.

古文：詹启函阅文，又见其诗，一恸而卒。
现代文：欧阳詹打开小匣子看过，又见了那首遗诗，顿觉五雷轰顶，一声长嚎便死去了。
English: Ouyang Zhan opened the small box and read it, and then saw the last poem. Suddenly, he felt a thunderbolt, and died with a long cry.

古文：故孟简赋诗哭之，序曰，闽越之英，惟欧阳生。以能文擢第，爰始一命。
现代文：旧友孟简写诗表示对友人欧阳詹的哀悼痛哭，诗的序言写道：欧阳公子乃闽越之精英，因为卓有文才而及第，从此开始为朝廷效命。
English: Meng Jian, an old friend, wrote a short poem expressing his sorrow and tears for his friend Ouyang Zhan. The preface of the poem reads: Ouyang is the elite of Xuan Yue. Because of his literary talent, he reached the first place. From then on, he began to serve the imperial court.

古文：食太学之禄，助成均之教，有庸绩矣。
现代文：受着太学之奉禄，襄助成均之数化，在任期间，卓有劳绩。
English: He received the honor of Taigaku, and the number of grants was equalized. During his tenure, he had outstanding achievements.

古文：我唐贞元年已卯岁，曾献书相府，论大事，风韻清雅，词旨切直。
现代文：在我唐朝贞元巳卯那年，欧阳詹经上书相府，议论国政大事，文风清正雅浩，辞旨恳切质直。
English: In the year of Zhen Yuan Mi in my Tang Dynasty, Ouyang Zhanqin went to the prime minister's office to discuss national affairs. His writing style was clear and elegant, and his words were earnest and honest.

古文：会东方军兴，府县未暇慰荐。
现代文：时置东方战事只起，所以府县未能及时对他进勉励和保举。
English: At that time, the war in the East had just begun, so the prefectures and counties were unable to give him timely encouragement and promotion.

古文：久之，倦游太原，还来帝京，卒官灵台。
现代文：时日既久，他有些倦了去太原宴游。回到京城不久，便逝世于官位上了。
English: After a long time, he was a little tired to go to Taiyuan banquet. Shortly after returning to Beijing, he died in his official position.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：回想起来，实在令人悲哀呵！
English: How sad!

古文：生于单贫，以狥名故，心专勤俭，不识声色。及兹筮仕，未知洞房纤腰之为盅惑。
现代文：欧阳出身贫寒，为求功名而刻苦攻读，生活极为勤俭，从不染身于声色，直到出仕为官，也不知洞房娇妻之为盅惑。
English: Ouyang was born poor, studied hard in order to seek fame, and lived an extremely frugal life. He never dyed his hair until he became an official, and he did not know that his wife was a concubine.

古文：初抵太原，居大将军宴，席上有妓，北方之尤者，屡目于生，生感悦之。
现代文：刚到太原之时，在大将军的宴席之上，有位北方出名的乐妓频频注目于欧阳，欧阳为情所动，留在太原与她朝处数月。
English: When she first arrived in Taiyuan, at the general's banquet, a famous prostitute from the north paid frequent attention to Ouyang. Ouyang was so moved that he stayed in Taiyuan with her for several months.

古文：留赏累月，以为燕婉之乐，尽在是矣。既而南辕，妓请同行。生曰：十目所视，不可不畏。
现代文：作为燕婉之乐，平生只有这一次。后来两人分手，歌妓请求同行，欧阳说道：众目睽睽，不可不畏。
English: As Yan Wan's music, this is the only time in my life. Later, the two broke up, the geisha asked to go along, Ouyang said: everyone's eyes are on you, you must not be afraid.

古文：辞焉，请待至都而来迎。
现代文：于是告辞，请她等待回到京城后再来迎接。
English: So I said goodbye and asked her to wait until I got back to the capital before I greeted her.

古文：许之，乃去。生竟以蹇连，不克如约。过期，命甲遣乘，密往迎妓。
现代文：分别之后，欧阳终因有事缠身而延误，不能如期践约，过了约定期限方才派人快马前往，秘密迎接歌妓。
English: After their separation, Ouyang was eventually delayed due to his busy schedule and was unable to fulfill the contract as scheduled. Only after the agreed time limit had passed, did he send someone to hurry to meet the singer in secret.

古文：妓因积望成疾，不可为也。先夭之夕，剪其云髻，谓侍儿曰：所欢应访我，当以发为贶。
现代文：歌妓因为长期思念而酿成疾病，临死之前剪掉自己的云髻，告诉侍儿道：心上的人儿会来看望我，届时可将发髻相赠作为信物。
English: As a result of her long-term yearning, the singer developed an illness. Before she died, she cut off her hair and told a waiter, "Someone dear to my heart will come to visit me. At that time, I can give them my hair as a token."

古文：甲至得之，以乘空归，授髻于生。
现代文：使者得到发髻之后，带着一匹空马返了回来，将发髻交给欧阳。
English: After the messenger received the hairpin, he returned with an empty horse and handed the hairpin to Ouyang.

古文：生为之恸怨，涉旬而生亦殁。
现代文：欧阳追悔不及，伤心恸哭，过了十天便与世长辞。
English: Ouyang was too remorseful and cried bitterly, and passed away ten days later.

古文：其效死，夫亦不蔽也。
现代文：则韩愈作何蕃书，所谓欧阳詹生者也，河南穆玄道访问我，常叹息其事，呜呼！
English: Then Han Yu wrote a book, the so-called Ouyang Zhanzhong people also visited me in Muxuan Road, Henan Province, and often sighed about it, alas!

古文：大凡以时。断割，不为丽色所汨，岂若是乎？
现代文：男女之间互相钟爱，往往导致为爱情献出生命，这也不是什么荒谬的事情。大凡能够及时割断爱情，不为对方的姿色所诱惑，怎么会出现这类结局呢？
English: There is nothing absurd about the fact that the mutual love between a man and a woman often leads to giving one's life for the sake of love. How can such an outcome occur if one is able to cut off love in time and is not tempted by the other person's appearance?

古文：古乐府诗有《华山畿》，《玉台新詠》有《庐江小吏》，更相死，或类于此。
现代文：古乐府诗有《华山畿》。《玉台新咏》中有《庐江小吏》，更是男女双方都死于相爱，与欧阳詹的经历有些类似。
English: In ancient Chinese poetry, there is "Huashan Gui" (华山畿), "Yutai Xinluo" (玉台新), there is "Lijiang Xiaoli" (江小吏), and both men and women died of love, which is somewhat similar to Ouyang Zhan's experience.

古文：暇日，偶作诗以继之云：有客非北逐，驱马次太原。
现代文：闲暇之日，笔者有感于此事，也曾偶尔作诗，借以将这段故事连贯起来：有客非北逐，驱马次太原。
English: On a day of leisure, the author was moved by this event, and occasionally wrote a poem to connect this story: There is a guest who is driven north, and the horse is driven to the Taiyuan.

古文：太原有佳人，神艳照行云。
现代文：太原有佳人，神艳照行云。
English: There is a beautiful woman in Taiyuan, and she is radiant.

古文：座上转横波，流光注夫君。
现代文：座上转横波，流光注夫君。
English: The top of the seat turns sideways, and the stream of light flows.

古文：夫君意荡漾，即日相交欢。
现代文：夫君意荡漾，即日相交欢。
English: Husband's mood swings and they have sex the same day.

古文：定情非一词，结念誓青山。
现代文：定情非一词，结念誓青山。
English: When all is said and done, it's time to swear allegiance to the mountains.

古文：生死不变易，中诚无间言。
现代文：生死不变易，中诚无间言。
English: In life and death, there is no middle ground.

古文：此为太学徒，彼属北府官。
现代文：此为太学徒，彼属北府官。
English: This is an apprentice, he belongs to the North Prefectural Government.

古文：中夜欲相从，严城限军门。
现代文：中夜欲相从，严城限军门。
English: In the middle of the night, the desire to follow each other, strictly limited the military gate.

古文：白日欲同居，君畏仁人闻。
现代文：白日欲同居，君畏仁人闻。
English: You want to live together during the day, but you're afraid of people.

古文：忽如陇头水，坐作东。
现代文：忽如陇头水，坐作东西分。
English: All of a sudden, it's like rushing water, and things are separated.

古文：惊离肠千结，滴泪眼双昏。
现代文：惊离肠千结，滴泪眼双昏。
English: Shocked to the pit of my stomach, tears in my eyes.

古文：本达京师回，驾期相追攀。
现代文：本达京师回，驾期相追攀。
English: Honda returns to the capital to catch up with schedule.

