古文：晋唐叔虞者，周武王子而成王弟。
现代文：晋国的唐叔虞是周武王的儿子，周成王的弟弟。
English: Tang Shugu of Jin was the son of King Zhouwu and the younger brother of King Zhoucheng.

古文：初，武王与叔虞母会时，梦天谓武王曰： 余命女生子，名虞，余与之唐。 
现代文：起初，周武王与叔虞母亲在一起时，叔虞的母亲梦见上天对周武王说： 我让你生个儿子，名叫虞，我把唐地赐给他。 
English: At first, when King Zhou Wu was with Uncle Yu's mother, Uncle Yu's mother dreamed that God said to King Zhou Wu, "I will let you have a son named Yu, and I will give him the land of Tang."

古文：及生子，文在其手曰 虞 ，故遂因命之曰虞。
现代文：等到武王夫人生下婴儿后一看，手掌心上果然写着 虞 字，所以就给儿子取名为虞。
English: After Mrs. Wu Wang gave birth to a baby, she saw that the palm of her hand had the character "虞" written on it, so she named her son "虞."

古文：武王崩，成王立，唐有乱，周公诛灭唐。
现代文：周武王逝世后，周成王继位，唐发生内乱，周公灭了唐。
English: After the death of King Zhou Wu, Zhou Cheng Wang succeeded to the throne, civil unrest occurred in Tang, and Zhou Gong destroyed Tang.

古文：成王与叔虞戏，削桐叶为圭以与叔虞，曰： 以此封若。 
现代文：一天，周成王和叔虞一起玩耍，成王把一片桐树叶削成圭璧的形状送给叔虞，说： 用这个分封你。 
English: One day, Zhou Chengwang and Shuguang were playing together. Chengwang gave Shuguang a piece of paulownia leaf cut into the shape of Gui Bi, saying, "Use this to seal you."

古文：史佚因请择日立叔虞。
现代文：史佚于是请求选择一个吉日封叔虞为诸侯。
English: Shi Yan then requested to choose a auspicious feudal uncle to be the vassal.

古文：成王曰： 吾与之戏耳。 
现代文：周成王说： 我和他开玩笑呢！ 
English: Zhou Chengwang said: I was just joking with him!

古文：史佚曰： 天子无戏言。
现代文：史佚说： 天子无戏言。
English: Shi Yan said, "The Son of Heaven has nothing to say."

古文：言则史书之，礼成之，乐歌之。 
现代文：只要说了，史官都要如实记录下来，按礼节完成它，并奏乐章歌颂它。 
English: As long as it is said, historians should record it truthfully, complete it according to etiquette, and play music to praise it.

古文：于是遂封叔虞于唐。
现代文：于是周成王把唐地封给叔虞。
English: As a result, Zhou Chengwang gave the Tang Dynasty to Shuyu.

古文：唐在河、汾之东，方百里，故曰唐叔虞。姓姬氏，字子于。
现代文：唐地在黄河、汾河的东边，方圆百里，所以叔虞又被叫做唐叔虞，他姓姬，字子于。
English: Tang is located on the east side of the Yellow River and the Min River, with a radius of 100 miles, so Shugu is also called Tang Shugu. His surname is Ji, and his Chinese character is Yu.

古文：唐叔子燮，是为晋侯。
现代文：唐叔的儿子燮就是晋侯。
English: Uncle Tang's son, Zou, was a prince of Jin.

古文：晋侯子宁族，是为武侯。
现代文：晋侯的儿子宁族就是武侯。
English: The son of Jin Hou, Ning Zong, is Wu Hou.

古文：武侯之子服人，是为成侯。
现代文：武侯的儿子服人就是成侯。
English: Wuhou's son, Fuman, is Chenghou.

古文：成侯子福，是为厉侯。
现代文：成侯的儿子福就是厉侯。
English: Chenghou's son, Fu, is also known as Righou.

古文：厉侯之子宜臼，是为靖侯。
现代文：厉侯的儿子宜臼就是靖侯。
English: Yi Hou's son Yi Mu is Jing Hou.

古文：靖侯已来，年纪可推。
现代文：靖侯以后，晋国的年代都能够推算出来了。
English: After Jinghou, the years of the Jin Dynasty can all be calculated.

古文：自唐叔至靖侯五世，无其年数。
现代文：从唐叔虞到靖侯五代，没有记录他们在位的年数。
English: From Tang Shugu to Jinghou five generations, there is no record of how many years they reigned.

古文：靖侯十七年，周厉王迷惑暴虐，国人作乱，厉王出奔于彘，大臣行政，故曰 共和 。
现代文：靖侯十七年，周厉王残暴狂虐，国人动乱，厉王逃到彘，大臣主持政务，所以叫 共和 。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jinghou, Zhou Li Wang became violent and the people of the country were in turmoil. Li Wang fled to Handan, and the minister presided over government affairs. This is why it was called a republic.

古文：十八年，靖侯卒，子厘侯司徒立。
现代文：十八年，靖侯逝世，他的儿子厘侯司徒继位。
English: In the eighteenth year, Jing Hou died, and his son Ri Hou Sittu succeeded to the throne.

古文：厘侯十四年，周宣王初立。
现代文：厘侯十四年，周宣王刚刚即位。
English: In the fourteenth year of Li Hou, King Zhou Xuan had just ascended to the throne.

古文：十八年，厘侯卒，子献侯籍立。
现代文：十八年，厘侯逝世，他的儿子献侯籍即位。
English: In 18 years, Ri Hou died, and his son ascended the throne.

古文：献侯十一年卒，子穆侯费王立。
现代文：献侯于十一年逝世，他的儿子穆侯费王即位。
English: He died in the eleventh year of his reign, and his son, King Muhofey, came to the throne.

古文：穆侯四年，取齐女姜氏为夫人。
现代文：穆侯即位的第四年，娶了齐女姜氏作夫人。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Mu Hou, he married the Qi woman Jiang as his wife.

古文：七年，伐条。
现代文：七年，穆侯讨伐条地。
English: In the seventh year, Mu Hou went on a crusade.

古文：生太子仇。
现代文：夫人生下太子仇。
English: The wife bore the prince a grudge.

古文：十年，伐千亩，有功。
现代文：十年，讨伐千亩，建立了功劳。
English: Ten years, a thousand mu of crusade, established the merit.

古文：生少子，名曰成师。
现代文：穆侯又得了小儿子，取名成师。
English: Mu Hou had another little son, who was named Cheng Shi.

古文：晋人师服曰： 异哉，君之命子也！
现代文：晋人师服说： 君王给孩子取的名，真奇怪呀！
English: Jin's tutor said: What a strange name for a child to be given by the king!

古文：太子曰仇，仇者雠也。
现代文：太子叫仇，仇是仇恨的意思。
English: The crown prince calls for enmity, and enmity means hatred.

古文：少子曰成师，成师大号，成之者也。
现代文：小儿子却叫成师，成师是大名号，是成就他的意思。
English: The youngest son, however, is called Cheng Shi, and Cheng Shi is a great name, which means achievement for him.

古文：名，自命也；物，自定也。
现代文：名字是自己命名的，然而，事物却自有规定。
English: Names are self-named, but things have their own rules.

古文：今适庶名反逆，此后晋其能毋乱乎？ 
现代文：现在，嫡长子与庶子取的名字正相返，这以后晋难道能不乱吗？ 
English: Now, the names of the legitimate eldest son and the illegitimate son are reversing, can Jin not be disturbed after this?

古文：二十七年，穆侯卒，弟殇叔自立，太子仇出奔。
现代文：二十七年，穆侯去世，他的弟弟殇叔自己立为君王，太子仇被迫逃亡。
English: In the 27th year, Mu Hou died, and his younger brother, Zou Jie, set himself up as king. The crown prince was forced to flee.

古文：殇叔三年，周宣王崩。
现代文：殇叔三年，周宣王逝世。
English: Three years after Uncle Zou's death, King Zhou Xuan passed away.

古文：四年，穆侯太子仇率其徒袭殇叔而立，是为文侯。
现代文：四年，穆侯的太子仇率领自己的党徒袭击殇叔自立为国君，这就是文侯。
English: In the fourth year, the prince of Muh, Qiu, led his own party members to attack Uncle Zou and became the sovereign himself. This was the beginning of Wenhu.

古文：文侯十年，周幽王无道，犬戎杀幽王，周东徙。
现代文：文侯十年，周幽王昏庸无道，犬戎杀死周幽王，周王室东迁。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Wen Hou, Zhou Yu Wang lost his way, Injun Rong killed Zhou Yu Wang, and the Zhou royal family moved to the east.

古文：昭侯元年，封文侯弟成师于曲沃。
现代文：秦襄公开始被列为诸侯。三十五年，文侯仇逝世，他的儿子昭侯伯即位。昭侯于元年把曲沃封给文侯弟弟成师。
English: Qin Xiang Gong began to be listed as a vassal. Thirty-five years ago, Wen Houchu passed away, and his son Zhaohubo ascended to the throne. Zhaohubo made Qu Wo Feng a teacher for Wen Hou's younger brother in the first year of the year.

古文：曲沃邑大于翼。
现代文：曲沃城比翼城大。
English: Quwo City is larger than Wing City.

古文：翼，晋君都邑也。
现代文：翼城是晋君的都城。
English: Yingcheng is the capital of Jinjun.

古文：成师封曲沃，号为桓叔。
现代文：成师被封在曲沃，称为桓叔。
English: Cheng Shi was exiled to Quwo and was known as Uncle Huan.

古文：靖侯庶孙栾宾相桓叔。
现代文：靖侯的庶孙栾宾辅佐桓叔。
English: The great-great-grandson of Yasuko, Shobinsuke Sakan.

古文：桓叔是时年五十八矣，好德，晋国之众皆附焉。
现代文：当时桓叔已岁，崇尚德行，晋国百姓都归附他。
English: At that time, Uncle Huan was already old, advocating virtue, and the people of Jin were all attached to him.

古文：君子曰： 晋之乱其在曲沃矣。
现代文：君子说： 晋国的动乱就在曲沃了。
English: The gentleman said, "The turmoil in Jin is just around the corner.

古文：末大于本而得民心，不乱何待！ 
现代文：末大于本并且深得民心，不乱还等什么！ 
English: After all, it is bigger than the book and has won the hearts of the people, what are you waiting for!

古文：七年，晋大臣潘父弑其君昭侯而迎曲沃桓叔。
现代文：昭侯七年，晋国大臣潘父杀死国君昭侯，要去迎接曲沃桓叔。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Prince Zhaohou, the Minister of the State of Jin, Pan Piao, killed the sovereign Prince Zhaohou and went to meet Uncle Qu Wo Huan.

古文：桓叔欲入晋，晋人发兵攻桓叔。
现代文：桓叔也想去晋都，但晋人发兵攻打桓叔。
English: Uncle Huan also wanted to go to Jin, but the Jin people sent troops to attack Uncle Huan.

古文：桓叔败，还归曲沃。
现代文：桓叔被打败了，又回到曲沃。
English: Uncle Huan was defeated and returned to Quwo.

古文：晋人共立昭侯子平为君，是为孝侯。
现代文：晋人共同立昭侯的儿子平为国君，这就是孝侯。
English: Jin people jointly established the son of Zhao Hou, Ping, as the sovereign. This is the beginning of filial piety.

古文：诛潘父。
现代文：孝侯杀了潘父。
English: Takaharu killed Pan's father.

古文：孝侯八年，曲沃桓叔卒，子鳝代桓叔，是为曲沃庄伯。
现代文：孝侯八年，曲沃桓叔逝世，他的儿子鱓继承桓叔的爵位，这就是曲沃庄伯。
English: In the eighth year of Xiao Hou, Uncle Qu Wo Huan passed away, and his son Zou inherited the title of Uncle Huan, which is Qu Wo Zhuangbo.

古文：孝侯十五年，曲沃庄伯弑其君晋孝侯于翼。
现代文：孝侯十五年，曲沃庄伯在翼城杀死国君晋孝侯。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaohou, Qu Wo Zhuangbo killed Emperor Xiaohou in Yingcheng.

古文：晋人攻曲沃庄伯，庄伯复入曲沃。
现代文：晋人攻打曲沃庄伯，庄伯再次回到曲沃。
English: Jin attacked Quwo Zhuangbo, and Zhuangbo returned to Quwo.

古文：晋人复立孝侯子郄为君，是为鄂侯。
现代文：晋人又立孝侯儿子郄为国君，这就是鄂侯。
English: The Jin people also set up the son of a filial son as the ruler of the country, which is the E Hou.

古文：鄂侯二年，鲁隐公初立。
现代文：鄂侯二年，鲁隐公刚即位。
English: In the second year of E Hou, Lu Ying Gong had just ascended to the throne.

古文：鄂侯六年卒。
现代文：鄂侯在位六年逝世。
English: E Hou died after six years on the throne.

古文：曲沃庄伯闻晋鄂侯卒，乃兴兵伐晋。
现代文：曲沃庄伯听说晋鄂侯去世了，便兴兵讨伐晋国国都。
English: When Quwo Zhuangbo heard that Jin E Hou had died, he sent his soldiers to attack the capital of Jin.

古文：周平王使虢公将兵伐曲沃庄伯，庄伯走保曲沃。
现代文：周平王派虢公率领军队讨伐曲沃庄伯，庄伯逃回曲沃防守。
English: King Zhou Ping sent Gong Gong to lead the army to fight Zhuangbo, Zhuangbo fled back to Zhuangbo to defend.

古文：晋人共立鄂侯子光，是为哀侯。
现代文：晋人共同立鄂侯的儿子光为国君，这就是哀侯。
English: Jin people jointly established Guang, the son of E Hou, as the ruler of the country. This is called mourning.

古文：哀侯二年，曲沃庄伯卒，子称代庄伯立，是为曲沃武公。
现代文：哀侯二年，曲沃庄伯逝世，他的儿子称接替庄伯即位，这就是曲沃武公。
English: In the second year of mourning, Qu Wo Zhuangbo died, and his son claimed to succeed him to the throne. This is Qu Wo Wu Tong.

古文：哀侯六年，鲁弑其君隐公。
现代文：哀侯六年，鲁国人杀死自己的国君鲁隐公。
English: After six years of mourning, the people of Lu killed their own sovereign, Lu Yinggong.

古文：哀侯八年，晋侵陉廷。
现代文：哀侯八年，晋国侵伐陉廷。
English: After eight years of mourning, Jin invaded and sacked the Yongding.

古文：陉廷与曲沃武公谋，九年，伐晋于汾旁，虏哀侯。
现代文：陉廷人和曲沃武公共同策划，在九年，到达汾河畔讨伐晋国，俘虏了晋哀侯。
English: The Qingting people and Qu Wo Wukong planned together, and in nine years, they arrived at the bank of the Wei River to fight in Jin Province and captured Jin Aibo.

古文：晋人乃立哀侯子小子为君，是为小子侯。
现代文：于是晋人就立哀侯的儿子小子为国君，这就是小子侯。
English: As a result, the Jin people made Koji, the son of Maho, the ruler of the country. This is Koji Hou.

古文：小子元年，曲沃武公使韩万杀所虏晋哀侯。
现代文：小子元年，曲沃武公指使韩万杀死了被俘的晋哀侯。
English: In the first year of Koji, Qu Wo Wukong ordered Han Wan to kill the captured Jin Yehou.

古文：曲沃益强，晋无如之何。
现代文：曲沃越发强大，晋国对它无可奈何。
English: Quwo is becoming more and more powerful, and Jin is helpless against it.

古文：晋小子之四年，曲沃武公诱召晋小子杀之。
现代文：晋小子四年，曲沃武公骗来晋小子杀死了他。
English: In the fourth year of Jinxiao's reign, Qu Wo Wukong tricked Jinxiao into killing him.

古文：周桓王使虢仲伐曲沃武公，武公入于曲沃，乃立晋哀侯弟缗为晋侯。
现代文：周桓王派虢仲讨伐曲沃武公，武公逃回曲沃，晋哀侯的弟弟缗被立为晋侯。
English: King Zhou Kuan sent Jianzhong to fight Quwo Wukong, Wukong fled back to Quwo, and Jinnai Hou's younger brother Jinnai was made Jinnai Hou.

古文：晋侯缗四年，宋执郑祭仲而立突为郑君。
现代文：晋侯缗四年，宋逮捕了郑国的祭仲，胁迫他立突为郑国国君。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Emperor Song arrested Zheng Guozhong and forced him to become the ruler of Zheng Guozhong.

古文：晋侯十九年，齐人管至父弑其君襄公。
现代文：晋侯十九年，齐人管至父杀死自己的国君齐襄公。
English: In the 19th year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Qi Rongguan's father killed his own sovereign, Prince Qi Xiang.

古文：晋侯二十八年，齐桓公始霸。
现代文：晋侯二十八年，齐桓公开始称霸。
English: In the 28th year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Prince Qi Huan began to dominate.

古文：曲沃武公伐晋侯缗，灭之，尽以其宝器赂献于周厘王。厘王命曲沃武公为晋君，列为诸侯，于是尽并晋地而有之。
现代文：曲沃武公讨伐晋侯缗，灭亡了晋，把晋国的宝器全部献给了周厘王，厘王任命曲沃武公为晋国国君，并列为诸侯，于是武公把整个晋国土地全部吞并，据为己有。
English: Qu Wo Wukong fought against Jin Hou Yi, defeated Jin, and presented all the treasures of Jin to King Zhou Li. King Li appointed Qu Wo Wukong as the sovereign of Jin and listed him as a vassal, so King Wukong annexed the entire land of Jin and claimed it as his own.

古文：曲沃武公已即位三十七年矣，更号曰晋武公。
现代文：曲沃武公已经即位三十七年了，才改号叫晋武公。
English: Qu Wo Wu Gong has been on the throne for thirty-seven years, before he changed his name to Jin Wu Gong.

古文：晋武公始都晋国，前即位曲沃，通年三十八年。
现代文：晋武公开始迁到晋国都城，加上以前在曲沃的即位，总共三十八年。
English: It has been a total of thirty-eight years since Jinwukong began to move to the capital city of Jin, plus the previous enthronement in Quwo.

古文：武公称者，先晋穆侯曾孙也，曲沃桓叔孙也。
现代文：武公称是先君晋穆侯的曾孙、曲沃桓叔的孙子。
English: Bukong is said to be the great-grandson of the previous ruler Jinmu, and the grandson of Uncle Qu Wo Huan.

古文：桓叔者，始封曲沃。
现代文：桓叔是首先被封于曲沃的。
English: Uncle Huan was the first to be exiled to Quwo.

古文：武公，庄伯子也。
现代文：武公是庄伯的儿子。
English: Wu Gong is the son of Zhuang Bo.

古文：自桓叔初封曲沃以至武公灭晋也，凡六十七岁，而卒代晋为诸侯。
现代文：从桓叔最初封于曲沃到武公灭亡晋国，一共六十七年，武公最终代替晋国成为诸侯。
English: It took a total of sixty-seven years from the time Uncle Kan was first appointed to Quwo to the death of Wukong in Jin, when Wukong finally replaced Jin as vassal lord.

古文：武公代晋二岁，卒。与曲沃通年，即位凡三十九年而卒。
现代文：武公在取代晋国国君的第二年去世，加上他在曲沃的在位时间，在位共三十九年去世。
English: Wu Gong died in the second year of replacing Jin Guo Guojun, and together with his reign in Quwo, he died after a total of thirty-nine years.

古文：乃使尽杀诸公子，而城聚都之，命曰绛，始都绛。
现代文：他的儿子献公诡诸即位。献公元年，周惠王的弟弟颓攻击惠王，惠王逃跑，住在郑国的栎邑。
English: In the year of the dedication of the year, Zhou Hui Wang's younger brother Zou attacked Hui Wang, and Hui Wang fled and lived in Zheng's Yaoyu.

古文：九年，晋群公子既亡奔虢，虢以其故再伐晋，弗克。
现代文：五年，晋献公讨伐骊戎，得到骊姬及骊姬妹妹，对她们十分宠爱。八年，晋大夫士蒍，晋国的许多公子已经逃奔到虢国，虢公因此再一次讨伐晋国，但是未能得胜。
English: In the fifth year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jianzhong led a crusade to subjugate the Jurchens, and gained the favor of Empress Dowager Cixi and Empress Dowager Cixi's younger sister. In the eighth year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jianzhong once again led a crusade to subjugate the Jurchens, but failed to win.

古文：十年，晋欲伐虢，士蒍曰： 且待其乱。 
现代文：献公十年，晋想讨伐虢，士蒍说： 姑且等它自己发生内乱！ 
English: After ten years of dedication to public service, Jin wanted to fight the Shih Tzu, but the Shih Tzu said: Let it have its own civil war!

古文：十二年，骊姬生傒齐。
现代文：十二年，骊姬生下奚齐。
English: In the twelfth year, Zou Ji gave birth to Zou Qi.

古文：献公有意废太子，乃曰： 曲沃吾先祖宗庙所在，而蒲边秦，屈边翟，不使诸子居之，我惧焉。 
现代文：献公打算废掉太子，就说： 曲沃是我们先祖宗庙所在之地，而蒲靠近秦国，屈靠近翟，如果不让公子们在那些地方镇守，我将忧心忡忡。 
English: When Xiangguo planned to depose the prince, he said: Quwo is the place where the ancestral temple of our ancestors is located, while Pu is close to Qin, and Qu is close to Yao. If I don't let the nobles hold sway in those places, I will be worried.

古文：于是使太子申生居曲沃，公子重耳居蒲，公子夷吾居屈。
现代文：于是，献公让太子申生去驻守曲沃，公子重耳去驻守蒲，公子夷吾去驻守屈。
English: As a result, the court ordered Prince Shinsho to stay in Chuwo, Prince Shigeishi to stay in Pu, and Prince Shigo to stay in Kue.

古文：献公与骊姬子傒齐居绛。
现代文：献公与骊姬儿子奚齐就居住在国都绛。
English: Xian Gong and Zou Qi, Zou Ji's son, both lived in the provincial capital.

古文：晋国以此知太子不立也。
现代文：晋国人因此知道太子将不能即位了。
English: The people of Jin therefore knew that the crown prince would not be able to ascend the throne.

古文：太子申生，其母齐桓公女也，曰齐姜，早死。
现代文：太子申生的母亲是齐桓公的女儿，叫齐姜，早就去世。
English: Prince Shen Shen's mother was the daughter of Prince Qi Huan, called Qi Jiang, who died a long time ago.

古文：申生同母女弟为秦穆公夫人。
现代文：申生同母的妹妹是秦穆公夫人。
English: Shen Sheng's younger sister by the same mother is Qin Mu Gong's wife.

古文：重耳母，翟之狐氏女也。
现代文：重耳的母亲的翟人狐氏女子。
English: The heavy-eared mother of a deaf fox girl.

古文：夷吾母，重耳母女弟也。
现代文：夷吾的母亲是重耳母亲的妹妹。
English: Yigo's mother is the younger sister of Shigeuchi's mother.

古文：献公子八人，而太子申生、重耳、夷吾皆有贤行。
现代文：献公一共有八个儿子，太子申生、重耳、夷吾都很有贤能，品德高尚。
English: There were a total of eight sons who dedicated themselves to the service of the state. Princes Shen Sheng, Chong Er and Yigou were all very capable and virtuous.

古文：及得骊姬，乃远此三子。
现代文：等献公有了骊姬后，献公就疏远了这三个儿子。
English: After Xianguo had Xuanji, Xianguo alienated these three sons.

古文：十六年，晋献公作二军。
现代文：十六年，晋献公建立两军。
English: In the 16th year of the Jinkang Emperor's reign, two armies were established.

古文：公将上军，太子申生将下军，赵夙御戎，毕万为右，伐灭霍，灭魏，灭耿。
现代文：献公统帅上军，太子申生统帅下军，赵夙驾战车，毕万担任护右，相继讨伐灭亡了霍国、魏国、耿国。
English: Xian Gong became the commander-in-chief of the army, Prince Shen Sheng became the commander-in-chief of the army, Zhao Qi drove the chariot, Bi Wan served as the right guard, and successively defeated and destroyed Huo, Wei and Geng.

古文：还，为太子城曲沃，赐赵夙耿，赐毕万魏，以为大夫。
现代文：等全军回到晋后，献公给太子在曲沃筑城，把耿地赐予赵夙，把魏国的土地赐予毕万，让他们成为大夫。
English: After the whole army returned to Jin, they dedicated the city of Quwo to the prince, gave the land of Geng to Zhao Yan, and the land of Wei to Bi Wan, so that they could become doctors.

古文：士蒍曰： 太子不得立矣。
现代文：士蒍说： 太子您已经不能立为国君了。
English: The scholar said, "Prince, you can no longer be the ruler of the country.

古文：分之都城，而位以卿，先为之极，又安得立！
现代文：献公把先君的都城都分给了您，并授予了您卿的爵位，预先把您的禄位提高到极点，又怎么能再立您为国君呢！
English: I gave you the capital city of your predecessor in dedication, and granted you the title of lord, and raised your position to the extreme in advance. How can I make you the king again?

古文：不如逃之，无使罪至。
现代文：太子不如逃走，免得大祸临头。
English: The prince might as well run away, lest a great disaster befall him.

古文：为吴太伯，不亦可乎，犹有令名。 
现代文：太子仿效吴太伯，不也可以吗？这样，还能落得个好名声。 
English: Isn't it possible for the prince to emulate Wu Taibo? In this way, he can still gain a good reputation.

古文：太子不从。
现代文：太子没有听从。
English: The prince did not listen.

古文：卜偃曰： 毕万之后必大。
现代文：掌卜的大夫郭偃说： 毕万的后代一定有大发展。
English: Guo Jun, the doctor in charge of the project, said: Bi Wan's offspring will surely have great development.

古文：万，盈数也；魏，大名也。
现代文：万，是个满数；魏，有广大的意思。
English: Wan, is a perfect number; Wei, has a broad meaning.

古文：以是始赏，天开之矣。
现代文：把魏赏赐给毕万，是上天保佑毕万呢。
English: It is Heaven's blessing to Bi Wan that Wei rewards Bi Wan.

古文：天子曰兆民，诸侯曰万民，今命之大，以从盈数，其必有众。 
现代文：天子有兆民，诸侯有万民，现在封毕万于意为广大的魏地，用来匹配他名字里的满数，他一定会得到很多臣民。 
English: The Son of Heaven has trillions of people, the princes have millions of people, and now he is sealed as the vast Wei land, which is used to match the full number in his name, he will certainly get many subjects.

古文：初，毕万卜仕于晋国，遇《屯》之《比》。
现代文：当初，毕万在晋国占卜自己的官运，遇到《屯卦》演成《比卦》。
English: At first, Bi Wan divined his own official career in Jin Province, and encountered "Tun Gua," which was performed as "Bigua."

古文：辛廖占之曰： 吉。《屯》固《比》入，吉孰大焉。
现代文：辛廖占卜说： 这是吉利，《屯》卦预示坚固，比预示深入，没有比这更吉利的了。
English: Xin Liao divination said: This is auspicious, "Tun" gua foreshadowing solid, deeper than foreshadowing, there is nothing more auspicious than this.

古文：其后必蕃昌。 
现代文：他的后代一定会繁荣昌盛。 
English: His descendants will certainly prosper.

古文：十七年，晋侯使太子申生伐东山。
现代文：十七年，晋侯让太子申生讨伐东山的皋落氏。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Jin dynasty, the prince of Jin let the prince Shen Sheng fight against the Jiaolou clan in Dongshan.

古文：里克谏献公曰： 太子奉冢祀社稷之粢盛，以朝夕视君膳者也，故曰冢子。
现代文：里克进谏献公说： 太子是奉献祭祀宗庙、社稷的祭品、早晚检查国君膳食的人，所以叫冢子。
English: Rick said: "The prince is the one who dedicates the sacrificial offering to the ancestral temple, the sacrificial offering to the community, and the one who checks the meal of the sovereign in the morning and evening. That is why he is called the prince."

古文：君行则守，有守则从。从曰抚军，守曰监国，古之制也。
现代文：国君要出行，太子就应该留守，如果有人代为留守，太子就应该跟从，随从国君外出叫抚军，留守都城内叫监国，这是古代的制度。
English: If the sovereign wants to travel, the prince should stay behind. If someone else stays behind on his behalf, the prince should follow. The prince should go out with the sovereign to call for reinforcements, and stay in the capital to supervise the country. This is an ancient system.

古文：夫率师，专行谋也；誓军旅，君与国政之所图也：非太子之事也。
现代文：军队的统帅必定专心谋划；向军队发号施令，是国君与正卿的专职，这不是太子的事情。
English: The commander-in-chief of the army must concentrate on planning; giving orders to the army is the full-time job of the sovereign and the emperor, this is not a matter for the prince.

古文：师在制命而已，禀命则不威，专命则不孝，故君之嗣适不可以帅师。
现代文：军队的统帅在于服从将军的命令，太子遇到事情都要请示国君，则没有威严；如独断专行，又是不孝。所以国君的继位嫡子不可以统帅军队。
English: The commander-in-chief of the army is to obey the orders of the general. If the prince has to ask the sovereign for instructions in any situation, then there is no dignity; if he acts arbitrarily, it is also unfilial. Therefore, the heir to the throne of the sovereign may not command the army.

古文：君失其官，率师不威，将安用之？ 
现代文：国君以太子为军队统帅是错命官职，统帅军队会使太子丧失威严，将来怎么重用他呢？ 
English: It is a misguided official position for the sovereign to become the commander of the army. The commander of the army will cause the prince to lose his dignity. How will he be reused in the future?

古文：公曰： 寡人有子，未知其太子谁立。 
现代文：献公说： 我有几个儿子，还没有确定立谁为太子。 
English: "I have several sons, but I haven't decided who will be crown prince yet," said the prince.

古文：里克不对而退，见太子。
现代文：里克没有回答就退了出来，去见太子。
English: Rick didn't answer and walked out to meet the crown prince.

古文：太子曰： 吾其废乎？ 
现代文：太子问： 我将要被废掉了吧！ 
English: The prince asked: Am I about to be abolished?

古文：里克曰： 太子勉之！教以军旅，不共是惧，何故废乎？
现代文：里克说： 太子努力吧，让您统帅下军，怕的应该是不能完成任务，有什么原因要废掉您呢？
English: Rick said: Prince, do your best, let your commander go down, you should be afraid of not being able to complete the task, what reason is there to abolish you?

古文：且子惧不孝，毋惧不得立。
现代文：况且您为人子应该害怕自己不能尽孝，不应担心自己不能被立为国君。
English: Moreover, as a human being, you should not be afraid of not being able to show filial piety, and you should not be worried that you cannot be appointed as the sovereign.

古文：修己而不责人，则免于难。 
现代文：自己注意修身养性，不去责难别人，就可以免除灾难。 
English: If you pay attention to self-cultivation and do not blame others, you can avoid disaster.

古文：太子帅师，公衣之偏衣，佩之金玦。
现代文：太子统率军队，献公让他穿上左右异色的偏衣，佩戴上金玦。
English: The prince led the army, and for his dedication, he was made to wear different-colored robes on his right and left sides and a golden scepter.

古文：里克谢病，不从太子。
现代文：里克推说有病，没有跟从太子。
English: Rick did not follow the crown prince, saying he was ill.

古文：太子遂伐东山。
现代文：太子于是就去讨伐东山。
English: So the prince went to fight against Dongshan.

古文：十九年，献公曰： 始吾先君庄伯、武公之诛晋乱，而虢常助晋伐我，又匿晋亡公子，果为乱。弗诛，后遗子孙忧。 
现代文：十九年，献公说： 当初我们的先君庄伯、武公平息晋国动乱时，虢国常常帮助晋国讨伐我们，又藏匿了晋国逃跑的公子，如果果真作乱，不去讨伐，将给子孙留下后患。 
English: In 19th year, Xie Gong said: At the beginning, when our forefathers Zhuangbo and Wu Jianzhong fought against the turmoil in Jin Province, Yan Guo often helped Jin Province to fight against us, and also hid the princes who fled from Jin Province. If they really did fight against the turmoil and did not fight, they would leave a legacy for their children and grandchildren.

古文：乃使荀息以屈产之乘假道于虞。
现代文：于是，献公就让荀息驾着屈产的驷马向虞国借路。
English: As a result, the king's offering was to let Hao Xiyu drive his horse, which was in poor condition, to the State of Yu.

古文：虞假道，遂伐虢，取其下阳以归。
现代文：虞国同意借路，晋就去讨伐虢国，攻下下阳后回国了。
English: The State of Yu agreed to take the road, and Jin went to fight the State of Yao, and returned to China after conquering the State of Xiaoyang.

古文：献公私谓骊姬曰： 吾欲废太子，以傒齐代之。 
现代文：献公私下对骊姬说： 我想废掉太子，让奚齐代替他。 
English: Dedication privately said to Zou Ji: I want to abolish the crown prince and let Zou Qi replace him.

古文：骊姬泣曰： 太子之立，诸侯皆已知之，而数将兵，百姓附之，奈何以贱妾之故废适立庶？君必行之，妾自杀也。 
现代文：骊姬听后哭着说： 太子已经立好，诸侯们都已经知道了，而且太子多次统帅军队，百姓都归附他，怎么可以因为我就废掉嫡长子而立庶子，如果您一定要这样做，我只能自杀了。 
English: After listening to this, Yan Ji cried and said: The crown prince has already been established, the lords have already known, and the crown prince has commanded the army many times, and the people have all joined him. How can I abolish the eldest son and establish an illegitimate son? If you must do this, I can only commit suicide.

古文：骊姬详誉太子，而阴令人谮恶太子，而欲立其子。
现代文：骊姬假装赞扬太子，但暗中却让人中伤太子，想立自己的儿子为太子。
English: Yan Ji pretended to praise the prince, but secretly had people slander the prince and wanted to make her son the prince.

古文：二十一年，骊姬谓太子曰： 君梦见齐姜，太子速祭曲沃，归厘于君。 
现代文：二十一年，骊姬对太子说： 君王曾梦见齐姜，太子您应立即去曲沃祭祀母亲，回来后把胙肉献给君王。 
English: In the twenty-first year, Yan Ji said to the prince: The king had a dream about Qi Jiang, prince, you should immediately go to Quwo to sacrifice your mother, and when you return, you should offer the stew to the king.

古文：太子于是祭其母齐姜于曲沃，上其荐胙于献公。
现代文：于是太子赶到曲沃去祭祀母亲，回晋都后，把胙肉奉送给献公。
English: So the prince rushed to Quwo to sacrifice his mother, and after returning to the capital, he presented the stew to the emperor.

古文：献公时出猎，置胙于宫中。
现代文：献公当时出去打猎了，太子便把胙肉放在宫中。
English: At the time of the dedication, the prince went out hunting, and the prince put the stew in the palace.

古文：骊姬使人置毒药胙中。
现代文：骊姬派人在胙肉上放了毒药。
English: Yan Ji sent someone to put poison on the stew.

古文：居二日，献公从猎来还，宰人上胙献公，献公欲飨之。骊姬从旁止之，曰： 胙所从来远，宜试之。 
现代文：过了两天，献公打猎回宫，厨师把胙肉献给献公，献公正想享用，骊姬从旁阻止说： 胙肉来自远方，应尝尝它。 
English: After two days, Xian Gong went hunting and returned to the palace. The chef offered the stew to Xian Gong, but Xian Gong just wanted to enjoy it. She stopped him and said, "The stew comes from far away, you should try it."

古文：祭地，地坟；与犬，犬死；与小臣，小臣死。
现代文：厨师把胙肉倒在地上，地面突起；厨师把胙肉扔给狗，狗吃后立即死了；厨师把胙肉给宦臣吃，宦臣也死了。
English: The cook poured the stew on the ground, and the ground rose up; the cook threw the stew to the dog, and the dog died immediately after eating it; the cook gave the stew to the eunuch to eat, and the eunuch also died.

古文：骊姬泣曰： 太子何忍也！
现代文：骊姬哭着说： 太子怎么这么残忍呢！
English: Hao Ji cried and said, "How could the prince be so cruel!"

古文：其父而欲弑代之，况他人乎？
现代文：连自己的父亲都想杀死去接替其位，何况其他人呢？
English: He even wanted to kill his own father and take his place, what about the others?

古文：且君老矣，旦暮之人，曾不能待而欲弑之！ 
现代文：况且您已经年老了，还能在世几天呢，太子竟迫不及待地想杀死您！ 
English: Moreover, you are already old, and you have only a few days to live, and the prince can't wait to kill you!

古文：谓献公曰： 太子所以然者，不过以妾及傒齐之故。
现代文：骊姬接着又对献公说： 太子之所以这样做，不过是因为我和奚齐的缘故。
English: Yan Ji then said to Xiang Gong: The reason why the prince did this is because of me and Yan Qi.

古文：妾愿子母辟之他国，若早自杀，毋徒使母子为太子所鱼肉也。
现代文：我们母子宁愿躲到别国，或早早自杀，不要白白让我母子俩被太子残害。
English: Our mother and son would rather hide in another country, or commit suicide early. Don't let my mother and son be killed by the crown prince for nothing.

古文：始君欲废之，妾犹恨之；至于今，妾殊自失于此。 
现代文：当初您想废掉他，我还反对您；到了今天，我才知道我大错特错了。 
English: At first you wanted to abolish it, and I opposed you; today I know that I was very wrong.

古文：太子闻之，奔新城。献公怒，乃诛其傅杜原款。
现代文：太子听到这事后，逃到新城，献公非常生气，就杀死了太子的老师杜原款。
English: After the prince heard this, he fled to the new city. He was very angry and killed the prince's teacher, Du Yuanqi.

古文：或谓太子曰： 为此药者乃骊姬也，太子何不自辞明之？ 
现代文：有人对太子说： 把毒药放到胙肉里的就是骊姬，太子为什么不自己去说清楚呢？ 
English: Someone said to the prince, "It was the concubine who put the poison in the stew, so why doesn't the prince explain it himself?"

古文：太子曰： 吾君老矣，非骊姬，寝不安，食不甘。
现代文：太子说： 我父亲年老了，没有骊姬将睡不稳、食无味。
English: The prince said, "My father is old, and without my mother, he cannot sleep well, and his food is tasteless."

古文：即辞之，君且怒之。不可。 
现代文：假使我说出真相，父亲一定会对骊姬很生气。这不行。 
English: If I had told the truth, my father would have been very angry with her. That's not acceptable.

古文：或谓太子曰： 可奔他国。 
现代文：有人又对太子说： 那你赶快逃到别的国家去吧。 
English: Someone else said to the prince: Then you should quickly flee to another country.

古文：太子曰： 被此恶名以出，人谁内我？
现代文：太子说： 带着这个罪名逃跑，谁能接纳我呢？
English: The prince said: "If I run away with this accusation, who will accept me?

古文：我自杀耳。 
现代文：我只好自杀了。 
English: I had to kill myself.

古文：十二月戊申，申生自杀于新城。
现代文：十二月戊申日，申生便在新城自杀身亡。
English: On December 30, Shen Sheng committed suicide in Xincheng.

古文：此时重耳、夷吾来朝。
现代文：这时重耳、夷吾来朝见国君。
English: At this time, I came to the Imperial Palace to see the Emperor.

古文：人或告骊姬曰： 二公子怨骊姬谮è杀太子。 
现代文：有人告诉骊姬说： 这两位公子恨你诬陷杀死了太子。 
English: Someone told Zou Ji: "These two princes hated you and framed you to kill the crown prince."

古文：骊姬恐，因谮二公子： 申生之药胙，二公子知之。 
现代文：骊姬十分害怕，因此又向献公造谣说： 申生把毒药放到胙肉中，两位公子事先都知道。 
English: Yan Ji was very afraid, so she also spread a rumor to Xuan Gong: Shen Sheng had put poison in the stew, and the two princes knew about it in advance.

古文：二子闻之，恐，重耳走蒲，夷吾走屈，保其城，自备守。
现代文：重耳、夷吾听到骊姬的谣言，也很害怕，于是重耳跑到蒲，夷吾跑到屈，戒备森严地亲自保护着自己的城市。
English: Jie Er and Yiwu heard the rumor of Zou Ji and were also very afraid, so Jie Er ran to Pu, Yiwu ran to Qu, and guarded their own city with strict vigilance.

古文：初，献公使士蒍为二公子筑蒲、屈城，弗就。
现代文：当初，献公让士蒍给两位公子修筑蒲、屈城墙，现在还未修筑成功。
English: At the beginning, the two princes were given money to build the Pu and Qu city walls, but they have not yet been successfully built.

古文：夷吾以告公，公怒士蒍。
现代文：夷吾把这事报告了献公，献公对士蒍很生气。
English: I reported this to the chief priest, and the chief priest was very angry with me.

古文：士蒍谢曰： 边城少寇，安用之？ 
现代文：士蒍谢罪说： 边城寇贼少，何必非要修城墙呢？ 
English: Judge Zeng Xie Sin said: There are few robbers on the outskirts of the city, so why do we have to rebuild the city wall?

古文：退而歌曰： 狐裘蒙茸，一国三公，吾谁适从！ 
现代文：士蒍退下后作歌道： 狐皮袄的毛散乱了，一个国家有三个主，我将服从谁呢！ 
English: The scholar retreated and composed a song: The fox's fur is scattered, there are three masters in one country, who will I obey?

古文：卒就城。
现代文：士蒍终于修好城。
English: Shifang finally repaired the city.

古文：及申生死，二子亦归保其城。
现代文：等到申生死后，两位公子也就各自回去防守着自己的城池了。
English: After Shen Sheng's death, the two princes went back to defend their own castles.

古文：二十二年，献公怒二子不辞而去，果有谋矣，乃使兵伐蒲。
现代文：二十二年，献公对两位公子不辞而别十分不满，认为他们果真有阴谋，就派军队讨伐蒲城。
English: In the 22nd year, Xiangguo was very dissatisfied with the fact that the two princes had parted ways, and thought that they really had a plot, so he sent an army to fight against Putuo.

古文：蒲人之宦者勃鞮ī命重耳促自杀。
现代文：蒲城有个叫勃鞮的宦者让重耳赶快自杀。
English: In Putuo, there was a deaf-mute named Burgundy who was urged to commit suicide.

古文：重耳逾垣，宦者追斩其衣祛。
现代文：重耳爬墙逃走，勃鞮追赶，割下重耳的衣袖。
English: He escaped by climbing over a wall. Burgundy chased him and cut off his sleeve.

古文：重耳遂奔翟。
现代文：重耳得以逃跑，到了翟。
English: He was able to escape and made it to the raft.

古文：使人伐屈，屈城守，不可下。
现代文：献公又派人攻打屈，屈城人全力防守未被攻下。
English: Dedication also sent people to attack and fight, and the people of Kuching did their best to defend and were not attacked.

古文：是岁也，晋复假道于虞以伐虢。
现代文：这年，晋国又向虞借路讨伐虢。
English: In the same year, Jin Province again borrowed a road from Yu to fight against the Mongols.

古文：虞之大夫宫之奇谏虞君曰： 晋不可假道也，是且灭虞。 
现代文：虞国大夫宫之奇劝谏虞君说： 不能把路借给晋国，否则晋国会灭亡虞国。 
English: Yu Guo's doctor, Gong Ziqi, advised Yan Yu Jun, saying, "You can't lend the road to Jin, otherwise Jin will destroy Yu Guo."

古文：虞君曰： 晋我同姓，不宜伐我。 
现代文：虞君说： 晋国与我同姓，它不应该攻打我国。 
English: Yu Jun said: Jin Province has the same surname as me, it should not attack our country.

古文：宫之奇曰： 太伯、虞仲，太王之子也，太伯亡去，是以不嗣。
现代文：宫之奇说： 太伯、虞仲都是太王的儿子，太伯逃走，因而未能继承王位。
English: Miya no Kiki said, "The great-uncle and Yu Zhong were both sons of the great-king. The great-uncle ran away, so he couldn't succeed to the throne.

古文：虢仲、虢叔，王季之子也，为文王卿士，其记勋在王室，藏于盟府。
现代文：虢仲、虢叔都是王季的儿子，是文王的卿士，他们的功勋都在王室中有记载，收藏在掌管盟约的官员手中。
English: Both Xizhong and Xizhu were sons of Wang Ji and nobles of King Wen. Their merits were recorded in the royal family and collected by the officials in charge of the covenant.

古文：将虢是灭，何爱于虞？
现代文：定要将虢国灭掉，又怎么会爱惜虞国？
English: How can they cherish the State of Yu when they are determined to wipe out the State of Yao?

古文：且虞之亲能亲于桓、庄之族乎？
现代文：况且，晋亲近虞国能胜过亲近桓叔、庄伯家族吗？
English: Moreover, is it better for Jin to be close to Yu Guo than to be close to Uncle Huan and the Zhuangbo family?

古文：桓、庄之族何罪，尽灭之。
现代文：桓叔、庄伯家族有何罪过，晋君竟然全部杀死了他们。
English: Uncle Huan and the Zhuangbo family were guilty of something, but Jinjun killed them all.

古文：虞之与虢，唇之与齿，唇亡则齿寒。 
现代文：虞国与虢国关系，就如同唇与齿的关系，唇亡齿寒。 
English: The relationship between the two countries is like the relationship between the lips and the teeth.

古文：虞公不听，遂许晋。
现代文：虞君不听宫之奇的劝告，便答应了晋国。
English: Yu Jun did not listen to the advice of Gong Ziqi and agreed to go to Jin.

古文：宫之奇以其族去虞。
现代文：宫之奇带着整个家族离开了虞国。
English: Miyanokichi took his entire family and left Yugakuni.

古文：其冬，晋灭虢，虢公丑奔周。
现代文：这年冬天，晋国灭亡了虢国，虢公丑逃到周京。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin Dynasty was overthrown by the Qiang Dynasty, and the Qiang Emperor fled to Zhoujing.

古文：还，袭灭虞，虏虞公及其大夫井伯百里傒以媵秦穆姬，而修虞祀。
现代文：晋军返回时，袭击灭亡了虞国，俘虏了虞公及他的大夫井伯、百里奚作为献公女儿秦穆姬的陪嫁人，并派人办理虞国的祭祀。
English: When the Jin army returned, they attacked and destroyed the State of Yu, captured Yu Gong and his doctor, Jing Bo, and Bai Lijun as the attendant of the daughter of Qin Mu Ji, and sent someone to handle the sacrificial rituals of the State of Yu.

古文：荀息牵曩所遗虞屈产之乘马奉之献公，献公笑曰： 马则吾马，齿亦老矣！ 
现代文：荀息把献公过去送给虞君的屈产的名马又献给了献公，献公笑道： 马还是我的马，可惜也老了！ 
English: Hao Xixi dedicated the famous horse of inferior production that he had given to Yu Jun in the past to the devotee, and the devotee laughed: The horse is still my horse, but unfortunately it is also old!

古文：二十三年，献公遂发贾华等伐屈，屈溃。
现代文：二十三年，献公派贾华等人攻打屈城，屈城的百姓都逃跑了。
English: In 233, Jia Hua and others, who were dedicated to the public, attacked Qu, and the people of Qu fled.

古文：夷吾将奔翟。
现代文：夷吾打算逃奔到翟。
English: Yigo plans to escape to Shiso.

古文：冀芮曰： 不可，重耳已在矣，今往，晋必移兵伐翟，翟畏晋，祸且及。
现代文：冀芮说： 不行，重耳已经在那里了，今天你如果也去，晋国肯定会调军攻打翟，翟国畏惧晋国，灾祸就要危及你了。
English: Hebei said, "No, the heavy ears are already there. If you go there today, Jin will definitely send troops to attack Hebei. Shandong is afraid of Jin, and the disaster will endanger you."

古文：不如走梁，梁近于秦，秦强，吾君百岁后可以求入焉。 
现代文：你不如逃到梁国，梁国靠近秦国，秦国强大，等我们国君去世后，你就可以请求秦国送你回国了。 
English: You might as well flee to Liang's country. Liang's country is close to Qin's country. Qin's country is powerful. After our sovereign's death, you can ask Qin to send you back home.

古文：遂奔梁。
现代文：于是，夷吾跑到了梁国。
English: As a result, I ran away to Liang Province.

古文：二十五年，晋伐翟，翟以重耳故，亦击晋于啮桑，晋兵解而去。
现代文：二十五年，晋国攻打翟国，翟国为重耳的缘故，也从啮桑攻打晋国，结果晋国退了兵。
English: Twenty-five years ago, Jin attacked Shandong, and Shandong attacked Jin from Yuxang, because of Shandong's heavy ears. As a result, Jin retreated.

古文：当此时，晋强，西有河西，与秦接境，北边翟，东至河内。
现代文：就在这个时期，晋国强大了起来，西占有河西，与秦国接壤，北到翟国，东到河内。
English: It was during this period that the state of Jin became powerful, occupying the west of Hexi and bordering on the state of Qin to the north, the state of Min to the north, and Hanoi to the east.

古文：骊姬弟生悼子。
现代文：骊姬的妹妹生下悼子。
English: Yan Ji's younger sister gave birth to a son.

古文：二十六年夏，齐桓公大会诸侯于葵丘。
现代文：二十六年夏天，齐桓公在葵丘与诸侯举行盛大盟会。
English: In the summer of the twenty-sixth year, Prince Qi Kuan held a grand alliance with the princes in Kwai Chung.

古文：晋献公病，行后，未至，逢周之宰孔。
现代文：晋献公因病去的晚，还没到达葵丘，就遇见周朝的宰孔。
English: On the evening when Jin Xian Gong had to leave due to illness, he had not yet arrived in Kwai Chung when he met Zhou Dynasty's Zai Kong.

古文：宰孔曰： 齐桓公益骄，不务德而务远略，诸侯弗平。
现代文：宰孔说： 齐桓公越发骄横跋扈了，不尽力修行德政而想方设法向远方侵略，诸侯们不满意。
English: Zai Kong said: Prince Qi Huan has become more and more arrogant. He does not try his best to practice moral government, but tries his best to invade far away. The princes are not satisfied.

古文：君弟毋会，毋如晋何。 
现代文：您还是不去的好，齐桓公不能对晋国怎么样。 
English: You'd better not go. Qi Kuan Gong can't do anything to Jin Province.

古文：献公亦病，复还归。
现代文：加之献公有病，就返回晋国了。
English: In addition, due to illness, he returned to Jin.

古文：病甚，乃谓荀息曰： 吾以傒齐为后，年少，诸大臣不服，恐乱起，子能立之乎？ 荀息曰： 能。 
现代文：不久，献公病重，就对荀息说： 我让奚齐继承王位，可是他还年幼，大臣们都不服，恐怕要起乱子，你能拥立他吗？ 荀息说： 能。 
English: Soon after, Xiang Gong fell seriously ill and said to Xixi: "I let Xuan Qi inherit the throne, but he is still young, the ministers are not satisfied, I'm afraid there will be a riot, can you support him?" Xixi said: "Yes."

古文：献公曰： 何以为验？ 
现代文：献公说： 你拿什么做凭证？ 
English: The devotee said: What do you take as evidence?

古文：对曰： 使死者复生，生者不惭，为之验。 
现代文：荀息回答说： 假使您死后再生还，活着的我仍然不感到惭愧，这就是凭证。 
English: He replied, "If you were to die and come back to life, I would still not be ashamed to be alive. This is the proof."

古文：于是遂属傒齐于荀息。
现代文：于是，献公把奚齐托付给荀息。
English: As a result, he entrusted the dedication of qi to 息.

古文：荀息为相，主国政。
现代文：荀息做国相，主持国家政务。
English: He will continue to serve as minister of state and preside over state affairs.

古文：秋九月，献公卒。
现代文：秋季九月时，献公逝世。
English: In September of the autumn, he passed away.

古文：里克、邳郑欲内重耳，以三公子之徒作乱，谓荀息曰： 三怨将起，秦、晋辅之，子将何如？ 
现代文：里克、邳郑想接回重耳，利用三位公子的党徒作乱，便对荀息说： 三个怨家将要作乱了，外有秦、内有晋国百姓帮助他们，你打算怎么办？ 
English: Li Ke and Yao Zheng wanted to win back the heavy ears and use the party members of the three princes to create a disturbance, so they said to Yao Xiu: The three villains are going to create a disturbance, with Qin on the outside and the people of Jin on the inside to help them, what are you going to do?

古文：荀息曰： 吾不可负先君言。 
现代文：荀息说： 我不能违背对先君的承诺。 
English: "I can't break my promise to my late husband," he said.

古文：十月，里克杀傒齐于丧次，献公未葬也。
现代文：十月，里克在守丧的地方杀死奚齐，当时，献公还未被安葬。
English: In October, Rick killed Ritchie in the place of the funeral. At that time, the dedication had not yet been buried.

古文：荀息将死之，或曰不如立傒齐弟悼子而傅之，荀息立悼子而葬献公。
现代文：荀息打算一死了之，有人建议不如立奚齐的弟弟悼子并辅佐他。荀息便立了悼子安葬了献公。
English: He was about to die, but someone suggested that it would be better to appoint his younger brother, Uroko, to assist him. So he appointed Uroko and buried him.

古文：十一月，里克弑悼子于朝，荀息死之。
现代文：十一月，里克在朝堂上杀死了悼子，荀息为此也自杀了。
English: In November, Rick killed a mourner in the vestibule, and the mourner committed suicide.

古文：君子曰： 《诗》所谓 白圭之玷，犹可磨也，斯言之玷，不可为也 ，其荀息之谓乎！
现代文：君子说： 《诗经》所说的 白珪有了斑点，还可以磨亮，话要是说错，就不能挽救了。 这就是说的荀息呀！
English: The gentleman said, "The egret mentioned in the "Song of Songs" has spots and can be polished, but if the words are wrong, they cannot be saved.

古文：不负其言。 
现代文：荀息没有违背自己的诺言。 
English: He did not break his promise.

古文：初，献公将伐骊戎，卜曰 齿牙为祸 。
现代文：当初，献公将要讨伐骊戎时，龟卜说过 谗言为害 。
English: At the beginning, when the dedication was about to fight against Gong Rong, the turtle said, "Speaking ill of others is harmful."

古文：及破骊戎，获骊姬，爱之，竟以乱晋。
现代文：等到打败了骊戎，得到了骊姬，献公十分宠爱她，竟因此搞乱了晋国。
English: He waited until he had defeated Gong Rong and gained Gong Ji. He loved her very much, and as a result, he messed up Jin Province.

古文：里克等已杀傒齐、悼子，使人迎公子重耳于翟，欲立之。
现代文：里克等人已杀死了奚齐、悼子，派人到翟国迎接公子重耳，打算拥立他。
English: Rick and the others have already killed Qi and Yuezi, and have sent someone to Yunnan to greet the young man with a heavy ear, intending to support him.

古文：重耳谢曰： 负父之命出奔，父死不得修人子之礼侍丧，重耳何敢入！大夫其更立他子。 
现代文：重耳辞谢道： 违背父亲的命令逃出晋国，父亲逝世后又不能按儿子的礼仪侍候丧事，我怎么敢回国即位，请大夫还是改立别人吧。 
English: He turned a deaf ear and said, "I violated my father's order to escape from Jin Province, and after my father's death, I can't attend the funeral according to my son's etiquette. How dare I return to China to take the throne? Please ask the doctor to appoint someone else."

古文：还报里克，里克使迎夷吾于梁。
现代文：派去的人回来报告里克，里克让人到梁国去迎接夷吾。
English: The person who sent it came back to report to Rick, and Rick sent someone to Liang to meet Igo.

古文：夷吾欲往，吕省、郄芮曰： 内犹有公子可立者而外求，难信。
现代文：夷吾想回晋，吕省、郤芮说： 国内还有公子可以即位却到国外来找，难以让人相信。
English: If we want to return to Jin, Liushou and Zou said: It is hard to believe that there are nobles in China who can ascend to the throne but come abroad to look for it.

古文：计非之秦，辅强国之威以入，恐危。 
现代文：估计不去秦国，以便借强国的威力回晋国，恐怕很危险。 
English: It is probably very dangerous not to go to Qin in order to borrow the power of a powerful country to return to Jin.

古文：乃使郄芮厚赂秦，约曰： 即得入，请以晋河西之地与秦。 
现代文：于是，夷吾让郤芮用厚礼贿赂秦国，并约定： 假使我能回到晋国，愿把晋国河西奉献给秦国。 
English: As a result, Yiwu asked Yan to bribe Qin with a heavy gift, and agreed: If I can return to Jin, I would like to dedicate the west of Jin to Qin.

古文：及遗里克书曰： 诚得立，请遂封子于汾阳之邑。 
现代文：夷吾还给里克一封信说： 假使我真能即位，愿把汾阳之城封给您。 
English: I also wrote a letter to Rick saying, "If I really succeed to the throne, I would like to give you the city of Shenyang.

古文：秦缪公乃发兵送夷吾于晋。
现代文：秦缪公就派军队护送夷吾回晋国了。
English: Qin Miao sent an army to escort Igo back to Jin.

古文：齐桓公闻晋内乱，亦率诸侯如晋。
现代文：齐桓公听说晋国内乱，也率领诸侯到达晋国。
English: Lord Qi Kuan heard about the civil war in Jin and led the lords to Jin.

古文：秦兵与夷吾亦至晋，齐乃使隰朋会秦俱入夷吾，立为晋君，是为惠公。
现代文：秦军和夷吾这时也到达了晋国，齐国就让朋会同秦国一起把夷吾送回晋国，立他为晋君，这就是惠公。
English: At this time, the Qin army and Igo also arrived in Jin, and the State of Qi asked the League of Friends to send Igo back to Jin together with the State of Qin, and set him up as Jinjun, which is Huigong.

古文：齐桓公至晋之高梁而还归。
现代文：齐桓公到了晋国的高梁就返回齐国了。
English: When Prince Qi Kuan arrived at Gaoliang in Jin, he returned to Qi.

古文：惠公夷吾元年，使邳郑谢秦曰： 始夷吾以河西地许君，今幸得入立。
现代文：惠公夷吾于元年，派邳郑向秦君道歉说： 当初我把河西地许给您，今有幸回国立为国君。
English: In the first year of the year, Huigong sent Yu Zheng to apologize to Qin Jun, saying: At first, I promised you the land west of the river, but now I have the honor of returning to the country as the sovereign.

古文：大臣曰： 地者先君之地，君亡在外，何以得擅许秦者？ 
现代文：大臣说： 土地是先君留下来的，你逃亡在外，凭什么擅自许给秦国呢？ 
English: The minister said: The land was left behind by the previous ruler, you fled abroad, why did you give it to Qin without permission?

古文：寡人争之弗能得，故谢秦。 
现代文：我力争也无用，所以向秦道歉。 
English: My efforts were in vain, so I apologized to Qin.

古文：亦不与里克汾阳邑，而夺之权。
现代文：同时，夷吾也不把汾阳城封给里克，反而夺了他的大权。
English: At the same time, Yiguo did not give Shenyang City to Rick, but instead seized his great power.

古文：四月，周襄王使周公忌父会齐、秦大夫共礼晋惠公。
现代文：四月，周襄王派周公忌父与齐、秦大夫相会共同拜访晋惠公。
English: In April, Zhou Xiangwang sent Zhou Gong's late father to meet with Qi and Qin Daifu to jointly visit Jin Huigong.

古文：惠公以重耳在外，畏里克为变，赐里克死。谓曰： 微里子寡人不得立。
现代文：惠公因重耳逃亡在外，怕里克发动政变，便赐里克死，并对他说： 没有你里克我不能即位。
English: Hui Gong fled abroad because of his heavy ears, fearing that Rick would launch a coup, he gave Rick his death, and said to him: Without you, Rick, I can't take the throne.

古文：虽然，子亦杀二君一大夫，为子君者不亦难乎？ 
现代文：虽然如此，你也杀死了两位国君和一位大夫，作你的国君不也太难了吗？ 
English: Even so, you have killed two kings and a doctor. Isn't it hard to be your own king?

古文：里克对曰： 不有所废，君何以兴？
现代文：里克回答说： 不废掉前边的，你怎么能兴起呢？
English: Rick replied, "How can you rise up if you don't throw the first stone away?"

古文：欲诛之，其无辞乎？
现代文：想杀死我，难道还找不到借口吗？
English: If you want to kill me, can't you find an excuse?

古文：乃言为此！
现代文：你竟说这种话！
English: How dare you say such a thing!

古文：臣闻命矣。 
现代文：我遵命就是了。 
English: I'm just following orders.

古文：遂伏剑而死。
现代文：说完，里克就伏剑自杀了。
English: With that, Rick killed himself with a sword.

古文：于是邳郑使谢秦未还，故不及难。
现代文：而邳郑却由于去秦国道歉没回来，才免于此难。
English: However, Zhai Zheng was only spared from this difficulty because he went to Qin to apologize and did not return.

古文：晋君改葬恭太子申生。
现代文：晋君重新按礼仪改葬太子申生。
English: Jinjun was reburied according to the etiquette of Prince Shosho.

古文：秋，狐突之下国，遇申生，申生与载而告之曰： 夷吾无礼，余得请于帝，将以晋与秦，秦将祀余。 
现代文：秋季，狐突到了曲沃，遇到申生的鬼魂，申生让他一起乘车并告诉他说： 夷吾无礼，我要向天帝请求，将把整个晋送给秦国，秦国将祭祀我。 
English: In autumn, the fox ran into Quwo and met the ghost of Shen Sheng. Shen Sheng let him ride with him and told him: "Don't disrespect me, I want to ask the Heavenly Emperor, I will give the whole of Jin to Qin, and Qin will worship me."

古文：狐突对曰： 臣闻神不食非其宗，君其祀毋乃绝乎？
现代文：狐突回答说： 我听说神是不享用不是自己宗族祭祀的，如此，您的祭祀不是断绝了吗？
English: Foxtrot replied, "I have heard that God does not enjoy the sacrifices of those who are not of his own tribe, so has your sacrifice not been cut off?

古文：君其图之。 
现代文：您仔细考虑考虑吧！ 
English: Think about it carefully!

古文：申生曰： 诺，吾将复请帝。
现代文：申生说： 好吧，我要再一次向天帝请求。
English: Shen Sheng said, "All right, I'll make a request to the Heavenly Emperor once again.

古文：后十日，新城西偏将有巫者见我焉。 
现代文：十天后，在新城西边将有巫者显现我。 
English: Ten days later, on the west side of the new city, a sorcerer will appear to me.

古文：许之，遂不见。
现代文：狐突答应了申生，申生就不见了。
English: Foxtrot consented to Shen Sheng, and Shen Sheng disappeared.

古文：及期而往，复见，申生告之曰： 帝许罚有罪矣，弊于韩。 
现代文：等到狐突按期前往新城西，果然见到了申生，申生告诉他说： 天帝已答应惩罚罪人了，他将在韩原大败。 
English: When Foxtrot went to the west of Xincheng as scheduled, he met Shen Sheng. Shen Sheng told him: The Heavenly Emperor has promised to punish sinners. He will be defeated in Hanwon.

古文：儿乃谣曰： 恭太子更葬矣，后十四年，晋亦不昌，昌乃在兄。 
现代文：于是儿童唱起了歌谣： 恭太子改葬了，以后十四年，晋国不会繁荣昌盛了，昌盛是他兄长。 
English: So the children sang a ballad: Prince Gong has been reburied, and in the next fourteen years, Jin will not prosper. Changsheng is his older brother.

古文：邳郑使秦，闻里克诛，乃说秦缪公曰： 吕省、郄称、冀芮实为不从。
现代文：邳郑出使秦国，听说里克被杀，就对秦缪公说： 吕省、郤称、冀芮确实不愿意以河西贿赂秦国。
English: When Emperor Zheng sent an envoy to Qin, he heard that Rick had been killed, and he said to Emperor Qin Miao, "It is true that the governors of the provinces of Lv, Su, and Ji are not willing to bribe Qin with Hexi.

古文：若重赂与谋，出晋君，入重耳，事必就。 
现代文：如果能够贿赂他们一些财物，与他们商量，赶走晋君，送重耳回晋，事情就一定成功。 
English: If you can bribe them with some property, discuss with them, drive away Jinjun, and send them back to Jinjun, things will definitely be successful.

古文：秦缪公许之，使人与归报晋，厚赂三子。
现代文：秦缪公答应了他，派人和邳郑一起归报晋国，用厚财贿赂了三人。
English: Qin Miao promised him, sent people to report back to Jin together with Zou Zheng, and bribed three people with a lot of money.

古文：三子曰： 币厚言甘，此必邳郑卖我于秦。 
现代文：三人说： 财多话甜，一定是邳郑向秦国出卖了我们。 
English: The three men said, "Money talks, but it's sweet talk. It must have been Yu Zheng who sold us out to Qin."

古文：遂杀邳郑及里克、邳郑之党七舆大夫。
现代文：于是三人杀死了邳郑及里克、邳郑的党徒七舆大夫。
English: As a result, the three of them killed Zhai Zheng and Li Ke, and Zhai Zheng's party member Qi Miao Dafu.

古文：邳郑子豹奔秦，言伐晋，缪公弗听。
现代文：邳郑的儿子豹逃到秦，要求秦攻打晋国，缪公没有听从。
English: Yao Zheng's son, Leopard, fled to Qin and demanded that Qin attack Jin. Miao Gong did not listen.

古文：惠公之立，倍秦地及里克，诛七舆大夫，国人不附。
现代文：惠公即位后，违背了给秦土地及封里克的约定，又杀死了七舆大夫，晋国人都不顺服。
English: After Huigong ascended the throne, he violated the agreement to give Qin land and fiefs, and killed seven doctors. The people of Jin did not obey.

古文：二年，周使召公过礼晋惠公，惠公礼倨，召公讥之。
现代文：二年，周派召公过拜访晋惠公，惠公礼节傲慢，召公讥笑了他。
English: In the second year, Zhou sent Zhao Gong to visit Jin Huigong. Huigong was arrogant and Zhao Gong mocked him.

古文：四年，晋饥，乞籴í于秦。
现代文：四年，晋国发生饥荒，向秦乞求购买粮食。
English: In four years, famine occurred in Jin Province, and he begged Qin to buy grain.

古文：缪公问百里傒，百里傒曰： 天灾流行，国家代有，救灾恤邻，国之道也。
现代文：秦缪公询问百里奚，百里奚说： 天灾频发，各国都可能发生，救灾助邻是国家的道义。
English: Qin Miao inquired about Bai Lijuan, and Bai Lijuan said: Natural disasters are frequent, all countries may occur, disaster relief and helping neighbors is the country's morality.

古文：与之。 
现代文：应该帮助晋国。 
English: We should help Jin Province.

古文：邳郑子豹曰： 伐之。 
现代文：邳郑的儿子豹却说： 应该趁此机会攻打晋国。 
English: But Leopard, the son of Yu Zheng, said, "We should take this opportunity to attack Jin Province."

古文：缪公曰： 其君是恶，其民何罪！ 
现代文：秦缪公说： 晋君确实有罪，可晋国的百姓有什么罪！ 
English: Qin Miao Gong said: Jinjun is indeed guilty, but what is the guilt of the people of Jin!

古文：卒与粟，自雍属绛。
现代文：秦国最终将粮食卖给了晋国，粮食自雍城源源不断运到晋国的绛城。
English: Qin eventually sold the grain to Jin, and the grain was continuously transported from Yongcheng to Lucheng in Jin.

古文：五年，秦饥，请籴于晋。
现代文：五年，秦国又发生饥荒，请求购买晋国粮食。
English: In the fifth year, famine occurred again in Qin, and they requested to buy grain from Jin.

古文：晋君谋之，庆郑曰： 以秦得立，已而倍其地约。
现代文：晋君与大臣们商量这件事，庆郑说： 君王凭借秦国的力量才即位，后来您即位后却违背了给秦国河西土地的誓约。
English: Jinjun discussed the matter with the ministers, and Qing Zheng said: The king ascended the throne by virtue of the strength of Qin. Later, after you ascended the throne, you violated the oath to give the land west of the river to Qin.

古文：晋饥而秦贷我，今秦饥请籴，与之何疑？
现代文：晋国发生饥荒，秦国卖给了我们粮食，今天，秦国饥荒，请求买晋国的粮食，我们给他们，还有什么疑问的呢？
English: When there was a famine in Jin, Qin sold us grain. Today, when there is a famine in Qin, we are asking to buy grain from Jin. Is there any doubt?

古文：而谋之！ 
现代文：何必还商量呢？ 
English: Why do we even need to discuss it?

古文：虢射曰： 往年天以晋赐秦，秦弗知取而贷我。
现代文：虢射说： 去年上天把晋国赐给了秦国，秦国竟不知道夺取晋国反而卖给了我们粮食。
English: Li Ya said: Last year, God gave Jin Province to Qin Province. Qin Province did not know that they had conquered Jin Province, but instead sold grain to us.

古文：今天以秦赐晋，晋其可以逆天乎？
现代文：今天，上天把秦国赐给了晋国，晋难道应该违背天意吗？
English: Today, God has given Qin to Jin. Should Jin go against God's will?

古文：遂伐之。 
现代文：应该攻打秦国。 
English: We should attack Qin.

古文：惠公用虢射谋，不与秦粟，而发兵且伐秦。
现代文：惠公便采纳了虢射的计谋，未给秦国粮食，反而派军攻打秦国。
English: Huigong then adopted the stratagem of Lasha, did not give grain to Qin, but sent troops to attack Qin.

古文：秦大怒，亦发兵伐晋。
现代文：秦缪公非常生气，也派军攻打晋国。
English: Qin Miao was very angry and sent troops to attack Jin.

古文：六年春，秦缪公将兵伐晋。
现代文：六年的春天，秦缪公率领军队讨伐晋国。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Qin Miao led an army to attack Jin.

古文：晋惠公谓庆郑曰： 秦师深矣，奈何？ 
现代文：晋惠公对庆郑说： 秦军深入到我国境内，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Jin Huigong said to Qing Zheng: The Qin army has penetrated deep into our territory, what should we do?

古文：郑曰： 秦内君，君倍其赂；晋饥秦输粟，秦饥而晋倍之，乃欲因其饥伐之：其深不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：庆郑说： 秦国护送您回国，您却违背约定不给秦地；晋国闹饥荒时，秦国立即运来粮食援助我们，秦国闹饥荒，晋国不仅不给予援助，反而想借机攻打人家，今天秦军深入国境不也应该吗？ 
English: Qing Zheng said: Qin escorted you back to China, but you violated the agreement not to give land to Qin; when Jin suffered from famine, Qin immediately sent grain to help us, Qin suffered from famine, Jin not only did not give assistance, but wanted to take the opportunity to attack others. Shouldn't the Qin army go deep into the border today?

古文：晋卜御右，庆郑皆吉。
现代文：晋国对驾车和担任护卫的人进行了占卜，二者都是庆郑吉。
English: Jin Guo divined the driver and the escort, both of whom were Qing Zhengji.

古文：公曰： 郑不孙。 
现代文：惠公说： 庆郑有些无礼。 
English: Huigong said: Qing Zheng is a bit rude.

古文：乃更令步阳御戎，家仆徒为右，进兵。
现代文：就改让步阳驾车，家仆徒做护卫进军秦。
English: He changed his mind and allowed Buyang to drive the car and his servants to escort him into Qin.

古文：九月壬戌，秦缪公、晋惠公合战韩原。
现代文：九月壬戌日，秦缪公、晋惠公在韩原交战。
English: On September 30, Qin Miao and Jin Hui clashed in Hanwon.

古文：惠公马騺不行，秦兵至，公窘，召庆郑为御。
现代文：惠公的重马深陷在泥里跑不动了，秦军赶来，惠公十分窘迫，叫庆郑驾车。
English: Huigong's heavy horse was stuck in the mud and could not run. The Qin army arrived. Huigong was very distressed and asked Qing Zheng to drive.

古文：郑曰： 不用卜，败不亦当乎！ 
现代文：庆郑说： 不照占卜的去做，失败不也应该吗？ 
English: Qing Zheng said: If you don't follow the divination, shouldn't you fail?

古文：遂去。
现代文：说完，庆郑就走了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：更令梁繇靡御，虢射为右，辂秦缪公。
现代文：惠公改让梁繇靡驾车，虢射担任护卫迎击秦缪公。
English: Hui Gong changed to let Liang Yimai drive the car, and Zai Ya served as an escort to meet Qin Miao.

古文：缪公壮士冒败晋军，晋军败，遂失秦缪公，反获晋公以归。
现代文：缪公的勇武士兵打败了晋军，晋军败退，让秦缪公跑走了，秦军反而俘获了晋惠公带回秦国。
English: Miao Gong's brave soldiers defeated the Jin army, the Jin army retreated, and let Qin Miao Gong run away. Instead, the Qin army captured Jin Huigong and brought him back to Qin.

古文：秦将以祀上帝。
现代文：秦国将要杀死他祭祀上天。
English: Qin will kill him and sacrifice him to heaven.

古文：晋君姊为缪公夫人，衰绖涕泣。
现代文：晋君的姐姐是缪公夫人，她身穿丧服哭泣不止。
English: Jinjun's sister is Lady Miao Gong, and she is weeping profusely in her mourning clothes.

古文：公曰： 得晋侯将以为乐，今乃如此。
现代文：缪公说： 俘获了晋侯应该庆贺高兴啊，现在你竟悲痛起来。
English: Miao Gong said: You should have been happy to celebrate the capture of Jin Hou, but now you are sad.

古文：且吾闻箕子见唐叔之初封，曰 其后必当大矣 ，晋庸可灭乎！ 
现代文：况且我听说箕子看到唐叔刚刚被分封时说过 他的后代一定繁荣昌盛 ，晋怎么能灭亡呢？ 
English: Moreover, I heard that Zou Zi said when he saw that Uncle Tang had just been awarded the title, "His descendants will surely prosper, how can Jin perish?"

古文：乃与晋侯盟王城而许之归。
现代文：于是，秦缪公就和晋侯在王城结盟并允许他返回晋国。
English: As a result, Qin Miao allied himself with the prince of Jin in Wangcheng and allowed him to return to Jin.

古文：晋侯亦使吕省等报国人曰： 孤虽得归，毋面目见社稷，卜日立子圉。 
现代文：晋侯也派吕省等人回报国人说： 我虽然能回晋，但也没有脸面见社稷，选个吉日让子圉即位吧！ 
English: The prince of Jin also sent Lu Province and others to reply to the Chinese people, saying, "Although I can return to Jin, I haven't seen Shifu face-to-face. Let's choose a good day for Shifu to ascend the throne!"

古文：晋人闻之，皆哭。
现代文：晋人听到这话都伤心地哭了。
English: Jinren cried bitterly when he heard this.

古文：秦缪公问吕省： 晋国和乎？ 
现代文：秦缪公问吕省： 晋国人和睦吗？ 
English: Qin Muxigong asked Lv Province: Are the people of Jin in harmony?

古文：对曰： 不和。
现代文：吕省回答说： 不和睦。
English: Lv Guo replied, "No reconciliation."

古文：小人惧失君亡亲，不惮立子圉，曰 必报仇，宁事戎、狄 。
现代文：百姓怕失去国君出现内乱、牺牲父母，不怕子圉即位，都说： 一定报此仇，宁可侍奉戎、狄。 
English: The people were afraid of losing their sovereign, of civil unrest, of sacrificing their parents, and they were not afraid of their son succeeding to the throne. They all said, "We must avenge this, we would rather serve Rong and Di."

古文：其君子则爱君而知罪，以待秦命，曰 必报德 。
现代文：可是那些贵族们却很爱护自己的国君，知道有罪，他们正等待秦送回国君的命令，他们说： 一定报答秦国对晋国的恩惠 。
English: However, those nobles were very protective of their sovereign and knew that they were guilty. They were waiting for Qin's order to send back the sovereign. They said, "We must repay Qin's favor to Jin."

古文：有此二故，不和。 
现代文：因为这两种情况，所以晋国不和睦。 
English: Because of these two situations, Jin was not at peace.

古文：于是秦缪公更舍晋惠公，馈之七牢。
现代文：于是秦缪公改换晋惠公的住处，馈赠晋惠公七牢牺牲。
English: As a result, Qin Miao changed the residence of Jin Huigong and gave him seven dungeons as a gift.

古文：十一月，归晋侯。
现代文：十一月，秦国送回晋公。
English: In November, Qin was sent back to Jingu.

古文：晋侯至国，诛庆郑，修政教。
现代文：晋侯返回晋国后，杀了庆郑，重新修整政务。
English: After the prince of Jin returned to Jin, he killed Qing Zheng and reorganized the government.

古文：谋曰： 重耳在外，诸侯多利内之。 
现代文：与大臣们商议说： 重耳在外，诸侯大多认为他有利而接待他。 
English: He consulted with his ministers and said, "The most important ear is outside, and most of the lords think he is beneficial and receive him."

古文：欲使人杀重耳于狄。
现代文：晋君想派人到狄杀死重耳。
English: Jinjun wants to send someone to Di to kill Jielu.

古文：重耳闻之，如齐。
现代文：重耳听到风声，跑到齐国去了。
English: When he heard the news, he ran away to Qi Province.

古文：八年，使太子圉质秦。
现代文：八年，晋惠公让太子圉到秦国当人质。
English: Eight years later, Jin Huigong sent the crown prince to Qin as a hostage.

古文：初，惠公亡在梁，梁伯以其女妻之，生一男一女。
现代文：当初，惠公逃到梁国时，梁伯把自己的女儿嫁给了惠公，生下一男一女。
English: At first, when Huigong fled to Liangguo, Liang Bo married his daughter to Huigong and gave birth to a boy and a girl.

古文：梁伯卜之，男为人臣，女为人妾，故名男为圉，女为妾。
现代文：梁伯为他们占卜，男孩是做臣的，女孩是做妾的，所以男孩取名为圉，女孩取名为妾。
English: Liang Bo divined for them, the boy was a vassal, the girl was a concubine, so the boy was named Zou, and the girl was named Concubine.

古文：十年，秦灭梁。
现代文：十年，秦国灭亡了梁国。
English: In ten years, Qin fell and Liang fell with it.

古文：梁伯好土功，治城沟，民力罢，怨，其众数相惊，曰 秦寇至 ，民恐惑，秦竟灭之。
现代文：梁伯喜好大兴土木、修筑城池沟堑，百姓疲惫不堪怨声载道，多次互相惊吓道 秦军来了 ，百姓过分恐惧，秦终于灭亡了梁。
English: Liang Bo was fond of large-scale civil engineering and the construction of cities, ponds and ravines. The people were tired and complained loudly, repeatedly scaring each other. The Qin army came, the people were too afraid, and the Qin finally perished.

古文：十三年，晋惠公病，内有数子。
现代文：十三年，晋惠公生病了，他有好几个儿子。
English: In the thirteenth year, Jin Huigong fell ill. He had several sons.

古文：太子圉曰： 吾母家在梁，梁今秦灭之，我外轻于秦而内无援于国。
现代文：太子圉说： 我母亲的娘家在梁国，今天梁被秦国灭亡，我在国外被秦轻视，在国内又无援助。
English: Prince Yao said: My mother's daughter's family is in Liang's country. Today, Liang has been destroyed by Qin. I am despised by Qin abroad and have no support at home.

古文：君即不起，病大夫轻，更立他公子。 
现代文：我的父亲病重卧床不起，我担心晋国大夫看不起我，请改立其他公子为太子。 
English: My father is seriously ill and bedridden. I'm worried that the doctors in Jin Province will look down on me. Please appoint another prince as crown prince.

古文：乃谋与其妻俱亡归。
现代文：于是太子圉与妻子商量一起逃回去。
English: So the crown prince and his wife discussed running away together.

古文：秦女曰： 子一国太子，辱在此。
现代文：服侍太子圉的秦国女子说： 您是一国的太子，在此受辱。
English: The Qin woman who served the crown prince said, "You are the crown prince of a country, and you are being insulted here.

古文：秦使婢子侍，以固子之心。
现代文：秦国国君让我服侍您，为的是稳住您的心。
English: Qin Guo Guo let me serve you, in order to stabilize your heart.

古文：子亡矣，我不从子，亦不敢言。 
现代文：您逃跑吧，我不拖累你，也不会声张出去。 
English: You can run away, I won't bother you, and I won't say anything.

古文：子圉遂亡归晋。
现代文：太子圉于是跑回晋国。
English: So the prince ran back to Jin.

古文：十四年九月，惠公卒，太子圉立，是为怀公。
现代文：十四年九月，晋惠公去世，太子圉即位，这就是怀公。
English: In September 14th, Prince Jin Hui passed away, and the crown prince ascended to the throne. This is the pregnancy of the prince.

古文：子圉之亡，秦怨之，乃求公子重耳，欲内之。
现代文：太子圉逃走，秦穆公十分生气，就找公子重耳，想护送他回去当国君。
English: When the prince ran away, Qin Mu Gong was very angry. He wanted to escort him back to be the ruler of the country.

古文：子圉之立，畏秦之伐也。乃令国中诸从重耳亡者与期，期尽不到者尽灭其家。
现代文：公子圉即位后，担忧秦国回来攻打晋国，于是下令晋国跟从重耳逃亡在外的人必须按期归晋，逾期未归者将会诛灭他的整个家族。
English: After his accession to the throne, he was worried that Qin would return to attack Jin, so he ordered that Jin and those who had fled from Chonglu must return to Jin on schedule. Those who did not return on time would destroy his entire family.

古文：狐突之子毛及偃从重耳在秦，弗肯召。
现代文：狐突的儿子毛和偃都跟从重耳在秦国，狐突不肯叫他们回来。
English: Foxtrot's sons, Mao and Zou, both followed Chonglu in Qin. Foxtrot refused to call them back.

古文：怀公怒，囚狐突。
现代文：怀公很不高兴，囚禁了狐突。
English: Huai Gong was very unhappy and imprisoned Foxtrot.

古文：突曰： 臣子事重耳有年数矣，今召之，是教之反君也。何以教之？ 
现代文：狐突说： 我的儿子侍奉重耳也已经很多年了，今天您下令叫回他，这是让他们反对自己的君主，以后我还用什么教育他们呢？ 
English: Foxtrot said, "My son has been serving the Heavy Ears for many years. Today, you ordered him to be recalled. This is turning them against their sovereign. What will I use to educate them in the future?"

古文：怀公卒杀狐突。
现代文：怀公终于杀死狐突。
English: Huai Gong finally killed Foxtrot.

古文：秦缪公乃发兵送内重耳，使人告栾、郄之党为内应，杀怀公于高梁，入重耳。
现代文：秦缪公于是派军队护送重耳回晋国，派人先通知栾枝、郤穀的党徒作内应，在高梁杀死了晋怀公，送回了重耳。
English: Qin Miao then sent an army to escort Jie Er back to Jin Province, and sent someone to inform the party members of Gan Zhi and Gan Gu that they should kill Jin Huai in Gaoliang and send Jie Er back.

古文：重耳立，是为文公。
现代文：重耳即位，这就是文公。
English: The enthronement of the heavy ear, this is the rise of Wengong.

古文：晋文公重耳，晋献公之子也。
现代文：晋文公重耳是晋献公的儿子。
English: Jinwen Gong Chonglu is the son of Jinxian Gong.

古文：自少好士，年十七，有贤士五人：曰赵衰；狐偃咎犯，文公舅也；贾佗；先轸；魏武子。
现代文：从小就喜好结交贤德的士人，十七岁时就有五个品德高尚、才能出众的朋友：赵衰；狐偃咎犯，这是文公的舅父；贾佗；先轸；魏武子。
English: From an early age, he liked to make friends with virtuous scholars. At the age of seventeen, he had five friends with high moral character and outstanding talent: Zhao Zhen; Gui Gui Guo, this is Wenguo's uncle; Jia Yao; Xian Yao; Wei Wu Zi.

古文：自献公为太子时，重耳固已成人矣。
现代文：从献公做太子时，重耳就已长大成人。
English: From the time of his investiture as crown prince, Chong Er has grown into an adult.

古文：献公即位，重耳年二十一。
现代文：献公即位时，重耳二十一岁。
English: He was 21 years old when he ascended the throne.

古文：献公十三年，以骊姬故，重耳备蒲城守秦。
现代文：献公十三年，因为骊姬的缘故，重耳就住在了蒲城防守秦国。
English: In the thirteenth year of dedication to the emperor, because of Hao Ji, Chong Er lived in Putian to defend Qin.

古文：献公二十一年，献公杀太子申生，骊姬谗之，恐，不辞献公而守蒲城。
现代文：献公于二十一年时，献公杀死了太子申生，骊姬进谗言陷害重耳，重耳害怕，与献公不辞而别就跑回蒲城据守。
English: In the twenty-first year of the dedication, the dedication killed the prince Shensheng, and the imperial concubine Jin Yanyan framed the heavy ear, and the heavy ear was afraid, and ran back to Pucheng to defend the dedication.

古文：献公二十二年，献公使宦者履鞮趣杀重耳。
现代文：献公二十二年，献公让宦者履鞮赶快杀死重耳。
English: After 22 years of dedication to the public, the devotees of the public should let the deaf walk and quickly kill the deaf.

古文：重耳逾垣，宦者逐斩其衣祛。重耳遂奔狄。
现代文：重耳爬墙逃跑，宦者追赶，砍掉重耳的袖子。
English: Jie Er climbed the wall to escape, and the eunuch chased after him and cut off Jie Er's sleeve.

古文：狄，其母国也。是时重耳年四十三。
现代文：重耳就逃到狄国。狄是重耳母亲的祖国。这时重耳四十三岁。
English: Chong Er fled to Di, the motherland of Chong Er's mother, when he was forty-three.

古文：从此五士，其余不名者数十人，至狄。
现代文：从那以后，他的五位朋友，还有不知名的数十人，与他一起到了狄。
English: Since then, five of his friends, along with dozens of unnamed others, have joined him in Di.

古文：狄伐咎如，得二女：以长女妻重耳，生伯鯈、叔刘；以少女妻赵衰，生盾。
现代文：狄讨伐咎如，俘获咎如的两位女子，把年长的女子嫁给重耳，生下伯鯈、叔刘；把年少的女子嫁给赵衰，生下了盾。
English: The two women who fought against and captured Gui Rong married the older woman to Chong Er, and gave birth to Bo Xuan and Uncle Liu; they married the younger woman to Zhao Zhen, and gave birth to Dun.

古文：居狄五岁而晋献公卒，里克已杀傒齐、悼子，乃使人迎，欲立重耳。
现代文：重耳在狄住了五年，晋献公就逝世了，里克已杀死奚齐、悼子，让人迎接重耳，想拥立重耳为国君。
English: Chong Er lived in Di for five years, and Jian Xian Gong passed away. Rick had already killed Zi Qi and Weishi, so people welcomed Chong Er and wanted to make Chong Er the king.

古文：重耳畏杀，因固谢，不敢入。
现代文：重耳担心自己被杀，因此坚决辞谢，不敢回晋。
English: Chong Er was worried that he would be killed, so he resolutely declined and did not dare to return to Jin.

古文：已而晋更迎其弟夷吾立之，是为惠公。
现代文：后来，晋国又迎接重耳的弟弟夷吾并拥立了他，这就是惠公。
English: Later, Jin Province also welcomed the younger brother of the heavy ear, Yigu, and supported him. This is Huigong.

古文：惠公七年，畏重耳，乃使宦者履鞮与壮士欲杀重耳。
现代文：惠公七年，惠公因害怕重耳强度君位，就让宦者履鞮带着勇士去谋杀重耳。
English: In the seventh year of King Huigong's reign, King Huigong, fearing the strength of King He, had the eunuchs carry the warriors to murder King He.

古文：重耳闻之，乃谋赵衰等曰： 始吾奔狄，非以为可用与，以近易通，故且休足。
现代文：重耳知道情况后，就与赵衰等人商量说： 我当初逃到狄，不是因为它可以给我帮助，而是因为路途近容易达到，所以暂时停留在这里。
English: After learning the situation, Chong Er consulted with Zhao Zhen and others and said: I initially fled to Di, not because it could help me, but because the road was close and easy to reach, so I temporarily stayed here.

古文：休足久矣，固愿徙之大国。
现代文：在这里歇得久了，就希望迁到大国去。
English: After resting here for a long time, I hope to move to a big country.

古文：夫齐桓公好善，志在霸王，收恤诸侯。
现代文：齐桓公喜好善行，有志称霸，体恤诸侯。
English: Prince Qi Huan likes to do good deeds, has the will to dominate, and is sympathetic to the princes.

古文：今闻管仲、隰朋死，此亦欲得贤佐，盍往乎？ 
现代文：现在听说管仲、隰朋去世，齐桓公也渴望得到贤能的人来辅佐他的霸业，我们为何不前往那里呢？ 
English: Now that we have heard that Guanzhong and Zou Peng have passed away, and that King Qi Huan is also eager to get capable people to assist him in his tyranny, why don't we go there?

古文：于是遂行。
现代文：于是，重耳又踏上了去齐国的路途。
English: As a result, Chong Er again set out on the road to Qi.

古文：重耳谓其妻曰： 待我二十五年不来，乃嫁。 
现代文：离开狄时，重耳对妻子说： 等我二十五年不回来，你就改嫁给别人吧。 
English: When he left Di, he said to his wife, "If I don't come back for 25 years, you should marry someone else."

古文：其妻笑曰： 犁二十五年，吾冢上柏大矣。
现代文：妻子笑着回答： 等到二十五年，我坟上的柏都长大了。
English: My wife replied with a smile, "Wait until twenty-five years have passed, and the cypresses on my grave will have grown.

古文：虽然，妾待子。 
现代文：虽然如此，我还是等着你的。 
English: Nevertheless, I'm still waiting for you.

古文：重耳居狄凡十二年而去。
现代文：重耳在狄共居住十二年才离开。
English: Chong Er lived with the Communist Party for 12 years before leaving.

古文：过卫，卫文公不礼。
现代文：重耳经过卫国的时候，卫文公没有以礼相待。
English: When the heavy ears passed through the defense of the country, Weiwen did not treat each other with courtesy.

古文：去，过五鹿，饥而从野人乞食，野人盛土器中进之。
现代文：离开卫国后，经过五鹿时，饿了，向村民讨饭，村民把土放在容器中献给他。
English: After leaving the defense of the country, when passing through Wulu, he was hungry and begged for food from the villagers. The villagers put the soil in a container and gave it to him.

古文：重耳怒。赵衰曰： 土者，有土也，君其拜受之。 
现代文：重耳很不高兴，赵衰说： 土象征着将来你会拥有土地，你应该行礼接受它。 
English: Heavy ears are very unhappy, Zhao Zhen said: Soil symbolizes that you will have land in the future, you should salute to accept it.

古文：至齐，齐桓公厚礼，而以宗女妻之，有马二十乘，重耳安之。
现代文：重耳到了齐国，齐桓公厚礼招待他，并把宗室之女嫁给重耳，陪送二十辆驷马车，重耳在此感到很满足。
English: When Chong Er arrived in Qi Province, Qi Kuan generously invited him, and married the daughter of the family to Chong Er, accompanied by twenty horse-drawn carriages. Chong Er felt very satisfied here.

古文：重耳至齐二岁而桓公卒，会竖刀等为内乱，齐孝公之立，诸侯兵数至。
现代文：重耳在齐住了两年，桓公去世，正赶上竖刀等人发起内乱，齐孝公即位，各国诸侯的军队多次来侵犯。
English: Chong'er lived in Qi for two years. When Emperor Kan died, he was just in time to see the rise of civil unrest caused by the sword-wielding nobles, the enthronement of Emperor Qi Xiaogong, and repeated invasions by the armies of princes from various countries.

古文：留齐凡五岁。
现代文：重耳在齐总共住了五年。
English: Chong Er lived in Qi for a total of five years.

古文：重耳爱齐女，毋去心。
现代文：重耳爱恋在齐国娶的妻子，没有离开齐国的意思。
English: He loves his wife, whom he married in Qi, and has no intention of leaving Qi.

古文：赵衰、咎犯乃于桑下谋行。
现代文：赵衰、咎犯有一天就在一棵桑树下商量离齐之事。
English: One day, Zhao Zhen and the culprit discussed the separation under a mulberry tree.

古文：齐女侍者在桑上闻之，以告其主。
现代文：重耳妻子的侍女在桑树上听到他们的密谈，回屋后偷偷告诉了主人。
English: The maid of the heavy-eared wife heard their secret talk on the mulberry tree, and secretly told the master after returning home.

古文：其主乃杀侍者，劝重耳趣行。
现代文：重耳的妻子竟把侍女杀死，劝告重耳赶快走。
English: The wife of Chong Er actually killed the maid and advised Chong Er to leave immediately.

古文：重耳曰： 人生安乐，孰知其他！必死于此，不能去。 
现代文：重耳说： 人生来就是寻求安逸享乐的，何必管其他事，我一定老死在齐，不能走。 
English: Heavy ears said: Life is to seek comfort and enjoyment, why bother with other things, I must always die, can not go.

古文：齐女曰： 子一国公子，穷而来此，数士者以子为命。
现代文：妻子说： 您是一国的公子，走投无路才来到这里，您的这些随从把您当作他们的生命。
English: His wife said: "You are the son of a country, you came here in a desperate situation, and these followers of yours treat you as their life.

古文：子不疾反国，报劳臣，而怀女德，窃为子羞之。
现代文：您不赶快回国，报答劳苦的臣子，却贪恋女色，我为你感到羞耻。
English: I am ashamed of you for not hurrying back to your country, for rewarding your hard-working vassals, but for lusting after women.

古文：且不求，何时得功？ 
现代文：况且，现在你不去追求，什么时候才能成功呢？ 
English: Besides, if you don't pursue it now, when will you succeed?

古文：乃与赵衰等谋，醉重耳，载以行。
现代文：她就和赵衰等人用计灌醉了重耳，用车载着他离开了齐国。
English: She got drunk with Zhao Zhen and others and left Qi Province with him in the car.

古文：行远而觉，重耳大怒，引戈欲杀咎犯。
现代文：走了一段很长的路，重耳才醒来，一弄清事情的真相，他就大怒，拿起戈来要杀咎犯。
English: He walked a long way before he woke up, and as soon as he found out the truth of the matter, he flew into a rage and picked up his axe to kill the culprit.

古文：咎犯曰： 杀臣成子，偃之愿也。 
现代文：咎犯说： 杀死我就能成就您的事业，是我的心愿。 
English: The culprit said, "It is my wish to kill you so that I can accomplish your cause."

古文：重耳曰： 事不成，我食舅氏之肉。 
现代文：重耳说： 事情要是不成功，我就吃您的肉。 
English: He said, "If things don't work out, I'll eat your flesh."

古文：咎犯曰： 事不成，犯肉腥臊，何足食！ 
现代文：咎犯说： 就算事情不能成功，我的肉又腥又臊，怎么值得您吃！ 
English: The culprit said, "Even if things don't work out, my meat is so salty and disgusting, it's not worth eating!"

古文：乃止，遂行。
现代文：于是重耳平息了怒气，继续前行。
English: So he calmed his anger and continued on his way.

古文：过曹，曹共公不礼，欲观重耳骈胁。
现代文：重耳路过曹国，曹共公没有以礼相待，想偷看重耳的骈胁。
English: Chong Er passed by Cao Guo, Cao Gong didn't treat him with courtesy, he wanted to peek at Chong Er's threat.

古文：曹大夫厘负羁曰： 晋公子贤，又同姓，穷来过我，奈何不礼！ 
现代文：曹国大夫厘负羁说： 晋公子贤明能干，与我们又是同姓，穷困中路过我国，为什么无礼？ 
English: Cao Guo's doctor Li Zhiguo said: "Jin Gongzi is wise and capable, and he has the same surname as us. He passed through our country in poverty. Why is he so rude?

古文：共公不从其谋。
现代文：共公不听劝告。
English: The Communist Party does not listen to advice.

古文：负羁乃私遗重耳食，置璧其下。
现代文：负羁就私下给重耳食物，并把一块璧玉放在食物下面。
English: Neglected to privately give heavy ear food, and put a piece of jade under the food.

古文：重耳受其食，还其璧。
现代文：重耳接受了食物，把璧玉还给负羁。
English: The heavy ear accepted the food and returned the gem to the prisoner.

古文：去，过宋。宋襄公新困兵于楚，伤于泓，闻重耳贤，乃以国礼礼于重耳。
现代文：重耳离开曹国，来到宋国，宋襄公刚刚被楚军打败，在泓水之战中负伤，听到重耳贤明，就用对待诸侯的礼节接待了重耳。
English: Chong Er left Cao and came to Song. Song Xianggong had just been defeated by the Chu army and wounded in the Battle of Surabaya. Hearing Chong Er's wisdom, he received Chong Er with the etiquette of princes.

古文：宋司马公孙固善于咎犯，曰： 宋小国新困，不足以求入，更之大国。 
现代文：宋国司马公孙固与咎犯关系很好，说： 宋国是小国，又刚吃败仗，不足以帮助你们回国，还是到大国去吧。 
English: Song State Secretary Magong Sun Gu, who had a good relationship with the culprits, said, "Song State is a small country, and it has just suffered a defeat. It is not enough to help you return to your home country. You should go to a big country."

古文：乃去。
现代文：重耳一行人于是又离开宋国。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：过郑，郑文公弗礼。
现代文：重耳路过郑国，郑文公没有以礼相待。
English: Zheng passed by Zheng Guo with a heavy ear, and Zheng Wengong did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：郑叔瞻谏其君曰： 晋公子贤，而其从者皆国相，且又同姓。
现代文：郑大夫叔瞻劝告国君说： 晋公子贤明，他的随从都是国家的栋梁之才，又与我们同姓。
English: Uncle Zheng advised the king: "Jin Gongzi is wise, his followers are the pillars of the country, and they have the same surname as us.

古文：郑之出自厉王，而晋之出自武王。 
现代文：郑国从厉王分出，晋国从武王分出。 
English: Zheng was separated from Li, and Jin was separated from Wu.

古文：郑君曰： 诸侯亡公子过此者众，安可尽礼！ 
现代文：郑国国君说： 从诸侯国中逃出的公子经过我国的太多了，怎么可以完全按礼仪去接待呢！ 
English: Zheng Guo Guojun said: There are too many nobles who have escaped from the princely states passing through our country, how can they be received completely according to etiquette!

古文：叔瞻曰： 君不礼，不如杀之，且后为国患。 
现代文：叔瞻说： 您若不以礼相待，就不如杀掉他，免得成为咱们的后患。 
English: Uncle Zhan said, "If you don't treat him with courtesy, you might as well kill him, lest you become our posterity."

古文：郑君不听。
现代文：郑国君没有听从。
English: Zheng Guojun did not listen.

古文：重耳去之楚，楚成王以适诸侯礼待之，重耳谢不敢当。
现代文：重耳离开郑国到了楚国，楚成王用对待诸侯的礼节招待他，重耳辞谢不敢接受。
English: Chong Er left Zheng and came to Chu. King Chu Cheng used the etiquette of princes to invite him. Chong Er did not dare to accept.

古文：赵衰曰： 子亡在外十余年，小国轻子，况大国乎？
现代文：赵衰说： 你在外流亡十多年了，小国都轻视你，何况大国呢？
English: Zhao Zhen said: You have been in exile for more than ten years. Small countries despise you, let alone big countries.

古文：今楚大国而固遇子，子其毋让，此天开子也。 
现代文：今天，楚是大国坚持厚待你，你就不要辞让，这是上天在护佑您啊。 
English: Today, Chu is a big country that insists on treating you well, so don't give up. This is God protecting you.

古文：遂以客礼见之。
现代文：重耳于是按诸侯的礼节会见了楚成王。
English: Chong Er then met with King Chu Cheng according to the etiquette of the princes.

古文：成王厚遇重耳，重耳甚卑。
现代文：成王很好地接待了重耳，重耳十分谦恭。
English: Cheng Wang received Chong Er well, and Chong Er was very courteous.

古文：成王曰： 子即反国，何以报寡人？ 
现代文：成王说： 您将来回国后，您将会怎样报答我呢？ 
English: Cheng Wang said: When you return to China in the future, how will you repay me?

古文：重耳曰： 羽毛齿角玉帛，君王所余，未知所以报。 
现代文：重耳说： 珍禽异兽、珠玉绸绢，国君您都有很多了，不知改用什么礼物报答。 
English: Heavy ears said: You have a lot of rare birds and animals, precious silk cocoons, and sovereigns, I don't know what gift to use to repay.

古文：王曰： 虽然，何以报不谷？ 
现代文：成王说： 即便如此，你总得拿什么报答我吧？ 
English: Cheng Wang said: Even so, what do you have to repay me with?

古文：重耳曰： 即不得已，与君王以兵车会平原广泽，请辟王三舍。 
现代文：重耳说： 假使不得已，万一在平原、湖沼地带与您兵戎相遇，请为王退避三舍。 
English: Chonglu said, "If you have no choice, if you happen to meet your army on the plains or in the lake area, please retreat for the sake of the king.

古文：楚将子玉怒曰： 王遇晋公子至厚，今重耳言不孙，请杀之。 
现代文：楚国大将子玉生气地说： 君王对待晋公子太好了，今天重耳出言不逊，请杀了他。 
English: Zi Yutu, the General of Chu, said angrily, "The king has treated Prince Jin very well. Today, he has spoken harshly to me. Please kill him."

古文：成王曰： 晋公子贤而困于外久，从者皆国器，此天所置，庸可杀乎？
现代文：成王说： 晋公子品行高尚，但流亡在外太久了，随从都是国家的贤才，这是上天安置的，怎么可以杀了呢？
English: Cheng Wang said, "Jin Gongzi is a man of noble character, but he has been in exile for too long. His followers are the country's sages. He was placed here by heaven. How could he be killed?

古文：且言何以易之！ 
现代文：况且又能让他改说什么呢？ 
English: What's more, can you make him change what he says?

古文：居楚数月，而晋太子圉亡秦，秦怨之；闻重耳在楚，乃召之。
现代文：重耳在楚住了几个月，晋国太子圉从秦国逃跑了，秦国怨恨他，听说重耳住在楚国，就要把重耳邀请到秦国。
English: Chong Er lived in Chu for a few months. The prince of Jin, Yu Ran, had fled from Qin. Qin resented him. When they heard that Chong Er lived in Chu, they had to invite him to Qin.

古文：成王曰： 楚远，更数国乃至晋。
现代文：成王说： 楚国距离晋国很远，要经过好几个国家才能到达晋国。
English: Cheng Wang said: Chu Province is very far from Jin Province, and it takes several countries to reach Jin Province.

古文：秦晋接境，秦君贤，子其勉行！ 
现代文：秦国与晋国交界，秦国国君又很贤明，你去秦国吧！ 
English: Qin and Jin are on the border. Qin Guo Guo Jun is very wise. Go to Qin!

古文：厚送重耳。
现代文：成王赠送很多礼物给重耳送行。
English: Cheng Wang presented a lot of gifts to the heavy ears to see them off.

古文：重耳至秦，缪公以宗女五人妻重耳，故子圉妻与往。
现代文：重耳到了秦国，秦缪公把同宗的五个女子嫁给重耳，原公子圉的妻子也在其中。
English: When Chong Er arrived in Qin, Qin Miao married five women from the same clan to Chong Er, including the wife of the original Prince Zi Yao.

古文：重耳不欲受，司空季子曰： 其国且伐，况其故妻乎！
现代文：重耳不打算接受公子圉妻，司空季子说： 他的国家都将去攻打了，何况他的妻子呢！
English: Shigeya did not intend to accept the prince's wife-beating, Siku said: His country will go to fight, not to mention his wife!

古文：且受以结秦亲而求入，子乃拘小礼，忘大丑乎！ 
现代文：而且，您接受此女为的是与秦国结成姻亲以便返回晋国，您竟拘泥于小礼节，忘了大的羞耻！ 
English: Moreover, you accepted this woman in order to form a marriage alliance with Qin in order to return to Jin. You are so obsessed with petty propriety that you have forgotten great shame!

古文：遂受。
现代文：重耳于是接受了公子圉妻。
English: Chong Er then accepted the boy's wife.

古文：缪公大欢，与重耳饮。
现代文：秦缪公十分高兴，亲自与重耳宴饮。
English: Qin Miao Gong was very happy, and he personally had a banquet with Chong Er.

古文：赵衰歌《黍苗》诗。
现代文：赵衰吟了《黍苗》诗。
English: Zhao Xueyin recited the poem "Seedling."

古文：缪公曰： 知子欲急反国矣。 
现代文：秦缪公说： 知道你想尽快返回晋国。 
English: Qin Miao said: I know you want to return to Jin as soon as possible.

古文：赵衰与重耳下，再拜曰： 孤臣之仰君，如百谷之望时雨。 
现代文：赵衰与重耳离开了座位，再次拜谢说： 我们这些孤立无援的臣子仰仗您，就如同百谷盼望知时节的好雨。 
English: Zhao Zhen and Jie Er left their seats and bowed again, saying, "We, these helpless courtiers, rely on you, just like the hundred grains of rice hope for good rain in every season.

古文：是时晋惠公十四年秋。
现代文：当时是晋惠公十四年秋季。
English: It was the autumn of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jinhui.

古文：惠公以九月卒，子圉立。
现代文：惠公于九月逝世，子圉即位。
English: Emperor Huigong died in September, and Emperor Zi Rong ascended the throne.

古文：十一月，葬惠公。
现代文：十一月，晋安葬了惠公。
English: In November, Jin An buried Hui Gong.

古文：十二月，晋国大夫栾、郄等闻重耳在秦，皆阴来劝重耳、赵衰等反国，为内应甚众。
现代文：十二月，晋国大夫栾枝、郤穀等人听说重耳在秦国，都暗中来劝重耳、赵衰等人回晋国，作内应的人很多。
English: In December, the doctors of Jin Province, such as Gan Zhi and Gan Gu, heard that Chong Er was in Qin Province, and secretly came to persuade Chong Er, Zhao Zhen and others to return to Jin Province. There were many people who did the same.

古文：于是秦缪公乃发兵与重耳归晋。
现代文：于是秦缪公就派军队护送重耳回晋国。
English: As a result, Qin Miao sent an army to escort him back to Jin.

古文：晋闻秦兵来，亦发兵拒之。
现代文：晋君听说秦军来了，也派出军队抵拒。
English: When Jinjun heard that the Qin army was coming, he also sent troops to resist.

古文：然皆阴知公子重耳入也。
现代文：可是民众都暗中知道了公子重耳要回来。
English: However, the public secretly knew that he was planning to return.

古文：唯惠公之故贵臣吕、郄之属不欲立重耳。
现代文：只有惠公的旧大臣吕甥、郤芮之流不愿让重耳即位。
English: Only Huigong's former ministers, Lü Neifen and Zou Zhili, were unwilling to allow Chung Eun to ascend the throne.

古文：重耳出亡凡十九岁而得入，时年六十二矣，晋人多附焉。
现代文：重耳在外逃亡十九年最终返回晋国，这时已六十二岁了，晋人大多都归向他。
English: After nineteen years of exile, Chong Er finally returned to Jin, by which time he was sixty-two years old, and most of the Jin people returned to him.

古文：文公元年春，秦送重耳至河。
现代文：文公元年春天，秦国护送重耳到达黄河岸边。
English: In the spring of the year of Wen, the Qin State escorted the heavy ears to the shore of the Yellow River.

古文：咎犯曰： 臣从君周旋天下，过亦多矣。
现代文：咎犯说： 我跟随您周游天下，过错也太多了。
English: The culprit said: I have followed you around the world, and I have made too many mistakes.

古文：臣犹知之，况于君乎？
现代文：我自己都知道，何况您呢？
English: I know it myself, how much more do you?

古文：请从此去矣。 
现代文：我请求从这时离去吧。 
English: I ask you to leave at this time.

古文：重耳曰： 若反国，所不与子犯共者，河伯视之！ 
现代文：重耳说： 如果我回到晋后，有不与您同心的，请河伯作证！ 
English: Chong Er said, "If I return to Jin Province, whether I agree with you or not, please ask Hebo to testify!"

古文：乃投璧河中，以与子犯盟。
现代文：于是，重耳就把璧玉扔到黄河中，与子犯明誓。
English: As a result, he threw the gem into the Yellow River and swore an oath to his son.

古文：是时介子推从，在船中，乃笑曰： 天实开公子，而子犯以为己功而要市于君，固足羞也。
现代文：那时介子推也是随从，正在船中，就笑道： 确实上天在支持公子兴起，可子犯却认为是自己的功劳并以此向君王索取，太耻辱了。
English: At that time, Jie Zi Tu was also a follower, and when he was in the boat, he laughed and said: It is true that the heavens are supporting the rise of the prince, but the son-criminal thinks it is his own merit and asks the king for it. It is too shameful.

古文：吾不忍与同位。 
现代文：我不愿和他同列。 
English: I don't want to go down with him.

古文：乃自隐渡河。
现代文：说完就隐蔽起来渡过黄河。
English: After that, he hid and crossed the Yellow River.

古文：秦兵围令狐，晋军于庐柳。
现代文：秦军包围了令狐，晋军驻扎在庐柳。
English: The Qin army encircled Linghu, and the Jin army was stationed in Qiliu.

古文：二月辛丑，咎犯与秦晋大夫盟于郇。
现代文：二月辛丑日，咎犯与秦晋大夫在郇结盟。
English: On the fateful day in February, the culprit and Dr. Qin Jin formed an alliance in Handan.

古文：壬寅，重耳入于晋师。
现代文：壬寅日，重耳进入晋军中。
English: On the day of Ren Yin, Jie Er entered the Jin army.

古文：丙午，入于曲沃。
现代文：丙午日，重耳到达曲沃。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the heavy ears reached Quwo.

古文：丁未，朝于武宫，即位为晋君，是为文公。
现代文：丁未日，重耳到武宫朝拜，即位做了晋国国君，这就是文公。
English: On the day of Ding Wei, Chong Er went to the Imperial Palace to pay homage, and was enthroned as the ruler of Jin Province. This is Wengong.

古文：群臣皆往。
现代文：大臣们都前往曲沃。
English: The ministers are all heading to Covo.

古文：怀公圉奔高梁。
现代文：怀公圉逃到高梁。
English: Huai Gongya fled to Gaoliang.

古文：戊申，使人杀怀公。
现代文：戊申日，重耳派人杀死了怀公。
English: On the day of Wushen, Chonglu sent someone to kill Huai Gong.

古文：怀公故大臣吕省、郄芮本不附文公，文公立，恐诛，乃欲与其徒谋烧公宫，杀文公。
现代文：怀公旧大臣吕省、郤芮本来就不归附文公，恐怕被杀，就和自己的党徒阴谋放火烧掉文公居住的宫殿，杀死文公。
English: The old minister of Lv Province, Zou, who cherished the memory of Wengong, originally did not want to attach himself to Wengong, fearing that he would be killed, so he and his party members plotted to set fire to the palace where Wengong lived and killed Wengong.

古文：文公不知。
现代文：文公对此毫无察觉。
English: Wengong was completely unaware of this.

古文：始尝欲杀文公宦者履鞮知其谋，欲以告文公，解前罪，求见文公。
现代文：而早先曾经想杀死文公的宦者履鞮却知道这个阴谋，想把这个阴谋告诉文公，以便解脱早先的罪过，便要求谒见文公。
English: However, Lulu, who had wanted to kill Wengong earlier, knew about the plot and wanted to tell Wengong about it in order to absolve himself of his earlier sins, so he asked to see Wengong.

古文：文公不见，使人让曰： 蒲城之事，女斩予祛。
现代文：文公拒绝见他，派人谴责他说： 蒲城的事，你砍掉了我的衣袖。
English: Wenguang refused to see him and sent someone to reprimand him, saying, "You cut off my sleeve in the matter of Putuo.

古文：其后我从狄君猎，女为惠公来求杀我。
现代文：后来，我跟着狄君去狩猎，你替惠公追踪杀我。
English: Later, I followed Di Jun to go hunting, and you followed and killed me for Hui Gong.

古文：惠公与女期三日至，而女一日至，何速也？
现代文：惠公与你约定三天到达，而你竟一天就赶到，何其快也？
English: Hui Gong agreed with you to arrive in three days, but you arrived in one day, how fast is that?

古文：女其念之。 
现代文：你仔细想想吧。 
English: Think about it.

古文：宦者曰： 臣刀锯之余，不敢以二心事君倍主，故得罪于君。
现代文：宦者说： 我是受过宫刑的人，不敢用二心侍奉国君，背叛主人，所以得罪了您。
English: The eunuch said, "I am a person who has been punished by the palace. I dare not serve the sovereign with a double heart and betray my master, so I have offended you.

古文：君已反国，其毋蒲、翟乎？
现代文：您已经回国，难道就汉有蒲、翟这种事了吗？
English: You have already returned to your home country. Has this kind of thing happened to you?

古文：且管仲射钩，桓公以霸。
现代文：况且，管仲射中齐桓公的带钩，桓公仍靠着管仲得以称霸。
English: In addition, Guanzhong shot Qi Kuan Gong's belt hook, and Kuan Gong was still able to dominate thanks to Guanzhong.

古文：今刑余之人以事告而君不见，祸又且及矣。 
现代文：今天我这个罪人想告诉您一件要事，您却不见，灾祸又将降临到您头上了。 
English: Today, I, a sinner, want to tell you something important, but you are not here, and disaster will befall you again.

古文：于是见之，遂以吕、郄等告文公。
现代文：于是文公接见了他，他便把吕甥、郤芮等人的阴谋一五一十地告诉了文公。
English: As a result, Wen Gong received him, and he told Wen Gong the details of the conspiracy of Lu Nephew, Zou and others.

古文：文公欲召吕、郄，吕、郄等党多，文公恐初入国，国人卖己，乃为微行，会秦缪公于王城，国人莫知。
现代文：文公想召见吕、郤，但吕、郤等党徒众多，文公担心刚刚回国，国人可能出卖自己，就隐藏起自己的身份改装到了王城会见了秦缪公，国人全然不知道他的行动。
English: Wenguang wanted to summon Lv and Yao, but Lv and Yao and other party members were numerous. Wenguang was worried that just after returning to China, the Chinese people might betray themselves, so he hid his identity and went to Wangcheng to meet with Qin Miao. The Chinese people did not know his actions at all.

古文：三月己丑，吕、郄等果反，焚公宫，不得文公。
现代文：三月己丑日，吕、郤等人果真造反，烧毁了文公居住的宫殿，却未找到文公。
English: On March Fool's Day, Lu, Zou and others really rebelled and burned down the palace where Wengong lived, but they did not find Wengong.

古文：文公之卫徒与战，吕、郄等引兵欲奔，秦缪公诱吕、郄等，杀之河上，晋国复而文公得归。
现代文：文公的卫兵与他们交战，吕、郤等想率军逃跑，秦缪公引诱吕、郤等人，在黄河畔杀死他们，晋国恢复平静，文公得以返回晋。
English: The guards of King Wengong fought with them. Lv, Yao, and others wanted to lead the army to escape. King Qin Miao lured Lv, Yao, and others and killed them on the banks of the Yellow River. Tranquility was restored in Jin, and King Wengong was able to return to Jin.

古文：夏，迎夫人于秦，秦所与文公妻者卒为夫人。
现代文：夏季，文公从秦国接回夫人，秦国所给文公的妻子终于成为夫人。
English: In the summer, Wengong received his wife back from Qin. The wife given to Wengong by Qin finally became his wife.

古文：秦送三千人为卫，以备晋乱。
现代文：秦国还送了三千人做卫士，以便防备晋国内乱。
English: Qin also sent three thousand people to serve as guards in order to prevent the Jin civil war.

古文：文公修政，施惠百姓。赏从亡者及功臣，大者封邑，小者尊爵。
现代文：文公修明政务，对百姓布施恩惠，赏赐随从逃亡的人员和各位有功之臣，功大的封给城邑，功小的授与爵位。
English: Wenkong clarified the government affairs, bestowed favors on the people, rewarded the escorted fugitives and the meritorious vassals, awarded the townships with great merits, and awarded the knighthoods with small merits.

古文：未尽行赏，周襄王以弟带难出居郑地，来告急晋。
现代文：文公还未来得及赏赐完毕，周襄王因弟弟王子带发难逃到郑国居住，于是来向晋国告急。
English: Wengong did not have time to complete the reward, Zhou Xiang Wang had to flee to Zheng with his brother Prince to live in Zheng, so he came to Jin in a hurry.

古文：晋初定，欲发兵，恐他乱起，是以赏从亡未至隐者介子推。
现代文：晋国刚刚安定，想派军队去，又担心国内发生动乱，因此，文公赏赐随从的逃亡者还未轮到隐藏起来的介子推。
English: Jin had just been stabilized, and he wanted to send troops there, but he was also worried about domestic turmoil. Therefore, the fugitive who was rewarded by Wengong was not yet able to hide.

古文：推亦不言禄，禄亦不及。
现代文：介子推也不要求俸禄，俸禄也没轮到他。
English: Nor did he ask for a salary, nor did he receive one.

古文：推曰： 献公子九人，唯君在矣。
现代文：介子推说： 献公有九个儿子，只有国君还健在。
English: "There are nine sons of Kengo, but only the sovereign is still alive," said Kaeko.

古文：惠、怀无亲，外内弃之；天未绝晋，必将有主，主晋祀者，非君而谁？
现代文：惠公、怀公没有亲信，国内外都唾弃他们；上天还没让晋国灭亡，必定要有君主，主持晋国祭祀的，除了国君还有谁呢？
English: Huigong and Huai Gong had no close relatives, and they were despised both at home and abroad. Heaven had not yet allowed Jin to perish, so there must be a monarch to preside over the sacrifices of Jin. Who else but the sovereign?

古文：天实开之，二三子以为己力，不亦诬乎？
现代文：上天确实在助您兴起，可是有两、三个人以为是自己的功劳，不也很荒谬吗？
English: It is true that God is helping you to rise, but isn't it absurd that two or three people think it is their own doing?

古文：窃人之财，犹曰是盗，况贪天之功以为己力乎？
现代文：偷了别人的财物，还说可以是盗贼，何况贪天之功以为己功的人呢？
English: Who steals someone else's property and says that they may be a thief, let alone a greedy person who thinks that they have earned it?

古文：下冒其罪，上赏其奸，上下相蒙，难与处矣！ 
现代文：臣下遮盖罪过，主上赏赐奸佞，上下互相欺骗，我难以与他们相处了！ 
English: It is difficult for me to get along with my subordinates, who cover up their sins, while the Lord rewards their treachery and deceit.

古文：其母曰： 盍亦求之，以死谁怼ì？ 
现代文：介了推的母亲说： 你为什么不也去请求赏赐呢，死了怨谁？ 
English: Interjecting, the mother said, "Why don't you ask for a reward, too?

古文：推曰： 尤而效之，罪有甚焉。
现代文：介子推说： 我怨恨那些人，再去仿效他们的行为，罪过就更大了。
English: I resent those people, and if I imitate their behavior, my sin will be even greater.

古文：且出怨言，不食其禄。 
现代文：况且我已经说出了怨言，绝不吃他的俸禄。 
English: Besides, I have already voiced my complaints and will never take his salary.

古文：母曰： 亦使知之，若何？ 
现代文：母亲说： 也让文公知道一下你的情况，怎么样？ 
English: His mother said, "How about letting Wengong know about your condition, too?"

古文：对曰： 言，身之文也；身欲隐，安用文之？
现代文：介子推回答说： 话是每人身上的花饰，身体都想隐藏起来了，何必再使用花饰呢？
English: "Words are ornaments on everyone's body, and the body wants to hide them. Why do we need to use ornaments?

古文：文之，是求显也。 
现代文：装上花饰是为了显露自己。 
English: To put on the finery is to reveal oneself.

古文：其母曰： 能如此乎？
现代文：介子推的母亲说： 能象你说的这样做吗？
English: "Can you do it like you said?" said his mother.

古文：与女偕隐。 
现代文：那我和你一起隐藏起来吧。 
English: Then I'll hide with you.

古文：至死不复见。
现代文：母子俩至死没有再露面。
English: The mother and son did not reappear until their deaths.

古文：介子推从者怜之，乃悬书宫门曰： 龙欲上天，五蛇为辅。
现代文：介子推的随从们很怜悯他，就在宫门口挂上一张牌子，上面写道： 龙想上天，需五条蛇辅佐。
English: The attendants took pity on him and put up a sign at the entrance to the palace that read: "If a dragon wants to go to heaven, it needs the help of five snakes."

古文：龙已升云，四蛇各入其宇，一蛇独怨，终不见处所。 
现代文：龙已深入云霄，四条蛇各自进了自己的殿堂，只有一条蛇独自悲怨，最终没有找到自己的去处。 
English: The dragon has gone deep into the clouds, the four snakes have each entered their own hall of fame, and only one snake is lonely and sad, and finally has not found its own place.

古文：文公出，见其书，曰： 此介子推也。
现代文：文公出宫时，看见了这几句话，说： 这是介子推。
English: When Wen Gong left the palace, he saw these few words and said, "This is meson pushing."

古文：吾方忧王室，未图其功。 
现代文：我正为王室之事担忧，还没能考虑他的功劳。 
English: I'm worrying about the royal family and haven't been able to think about his work.

古文：使人召之，则亡。
现代文：于是，文公派人去叫介子推，但介子推已逃走。
English: As a result, Wenkong sent someone to call for Yezo, but Yezo had already fled.

古文：遂求所在，闻其入绵上山中，于是文公环绵上山中而封之，以为介推田，号曰介山， 以记吾过，且旌善人 。
现代文：文公就打听介子推的住所，听说他进了绵上山。于是，文公把整座绵上山封给介子推，作为他的封地称之为介推田，又起名叫介山， 以此来记载我的罪过，而且表彰能人。 
English: Wengong inquired about the residence of Kezi, and heard that he had entered Mianyang Mountain. Therefore, Wengong gave the entire Mianyang Mountain to Kezi, as his fiefdom, it was called Kezi Field, and it was also called Keizan, in order to record my sins, and to commend talented people.

古文：从亡贱臣壶叔曰： 君三行赏，赏不及臣，敢请罪。 
现代文：随从文公逃亡的无能之辈壶叔说： 国君您三次赏赐功臣都没有轮到我，请问我有什么罪过。 
English: Uncle Jug, an incompetent follower of Wengong's escape, said: "Your Majesty, it was not my turn to reward the meritorious three times. Please ask me what I did wrong.

古文：文公报曰： 夫导我以仁义，防我以德惠，此受上赏。
现代文：文公回报说： 用仁义教导我，用道德、恩惠规劝我，这应受到上等赏赐。
English: Wenguang replied, "Teach me with kindness and justice, and instruct me with morality and benevolence. This deserves the highest reward."

古文：辅我以行，卒以成立，此受次赏。
现代文：用行动辅佐我，终于使我获得成功，这应受到次等赏赐。
English: The second-class reward is for helping me with my actions and finally making me a success.

古文：矢石之难，汗马之劳，此复受次赏。
现代文：承担弓箭的危难，给我立下汗马功劳，这应受到再次等赏赐。
English: To bear the peril of the bow and arrow, to do me great service, this should be rewarded again and again.

古文：若以力事我而无补吾缺者，此复受次赏。
现代文：假如只是用劳力侍奉我，而没有弥补我的错误，这也应受到再次等赏赐。
English: If you only serve me with labor and do not make up for my mistakes, this should also be rewarded again and again.

古文：三赏之后，故且及子。 
现代文：这三次赏赐完了，就会轮到你。 
English: Once you have completed these three rewards, it will be your turn.

古文：晋人闻之，皆说。
现代文：晋国人听到文公的话，都很高兴。
English: The people of Jin were very happy to hear what Wengong had to say.

古文：二年春，秦军河上，将入王。
现代文：二年的春天，秦国军队驻扎在黄河边，将要护送周王回京。
English: In the spring of the second year, the Qin army was stationed by the Yellow River and was about to escort King Zhou back to Beijing.

古文：赵衰曰： 求霸莫如入王尊周。
现代文：赵衰说： 要想成为霸主，不如护送周王回京、尊敬周王。
English: Zhao Zhen said: If you want to become a hegemon, it is better to escort Zhou Wang back to Beijing and respect Zhou Wang.

古文：周晋同姓，晋不先入王，后秦入之，毋以令于天下。
现代文：周、晋同一个姓，晋国不抢先护送周王回京，而落在秦国后边，就无法在天下发号施令。
English: Zhou and Jin have the same surname, and if Jin does not escort King Zhou back to Beijing first, and falls behind Qin, it will not be able to issue orders in the world.

古文：方今尊王，晋之资也。 
现代文：今天尊敬周王是晋称霸的资本。 
English: Today, respect for King Zhou is the capital of Jin's hegemony.

古文：三月甲辰，晋乃发兵至阳樊，围温，入襄王于周。
现代文：三月甲辰日，晋国就派兵到了阳樊，包围了温，护送周襄王到了周都。
English: On the first hour of March, Jin sent soldiers to Impotence, surrounded Wen, and escorted Zhou Xiangwang to Zhou capital.

古文：四月，杀王弟带。
现代文：四月，晋杀死了襄王的弟弟王子带。
English: In April, Jin killed Prince Xiangwang's younger brother, Prince Cao.

古文：周襄王赐晋河内阳樊之地。
现代文：周襄王把河内、阳樊地赐给了晋国。
English: King Zhou Xiang gave Hanoi and Impotence to Jin.

古文：四年，楚成王及诸侯围宋，宋公孙固如晋告急。
现代文：四年，楚成王和其他诸侯包围了宋国，宋国的公孙固赶到晋国请求援助。
English: In the fourth year, King Chu Cheng and other princes besieged Song, and Song's grandson Gu rushed to Jin to ask for help.

古文：先轸曰： 报施定霸，于今在矣。 
现代文：先轸说： 报答宋襄公的赠马厚恩并使晋国称霸于诸侯，就在如今的这场战役了。 
English: Senju said, "Today's battle is to repay Song Xianggong's generous gift of horses and make Jin dominate the provinces."

古文：狐偃曰： 楚新得曹而初婚于卫，若伐曹、卫，楚必救之，则宋免矣。 
现代文：狐偃说： 楚国刚刚占有曹国，而且初次与卫国联姻，如果我们攻打曹国、卫国，楚国一定会救援，那么宋国就可以免于灾难了。 
English: Foxtrot said: Chu just occupied Cao, and for the first time allied with Wei. If we attack Cao and Wei, Chu will definitely come to the rescue, and Song will be spared from disaster.

古文：于是晋作三军。赵衰举郄縠将中军，郄臻佐之；使狐偃将上军，狐毛佐之，命赵衰为卿；栾枝将下军，先轸佐之；荀林父御戎，魏犫为右：往伐。
现代文：于是晋国编制了三军，赵衰推荐郤穀统帅中军，郤臻辅佐他；派狐偃统帅上军，狐毛协助他，赵衰被命为卿；栾枝统帅下军，先轸协助他；荀林父驾车，魏犨做护卫：三军去讨伐曹、卫。
English: As a result, the State of Jin organized three armies. Zhao Zhen recommended the commander of the Central Army of the Xinggu, and Zou Zhen assisted him. He sent the commander of the Xinggu to the upper army, and the fox helped him, and Zhao Zhen was appointed as the lord. The commander of the lower army of the Xingzhi, and the first to help him; the father of the Yulin drove, and Wei Zhen was the escort. The three armies went to fight Cao and Wei.

古文：冬十二月，晋兵先下山东，而以原封赵衰。
现代文：冬季十二月时，晋军首先攻下太行山以东，把原邑封给赵衰。
English: In the winter of December, the Jin army first captured the east of Taihang Mountain and gave the original town to Zhao Zhen.

古文：五年春，晋文公欲伐曹，假道于卫，卫人弗许。
现代文：五年的春季，晋文公想讨伐曹国，向卫国借路，卫国人不答应。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Jinwen Gong wanted to fight against Cao Guo and borrow a road from Wei Guo, but Wei Guo did not agree.

古文：还自河南度，侵曹，伐卫。
现代文：晋军只好迂回从南渡过黄河攻打曹国，讨伐卫国。
English: The Jin army had to take a detour to cross the Yellow River from the south to attack Cao and defend the country.

古文：正月，取五鹿。
现代文：正月，晋军攻下五鹿。
English: In the first month of the year, the Jin army captured Goka.

古文：二月，晋侯、齐侯盟于敛盂。
现代文：二月，晋侯、齐侯在敛盂结盟。
English: In February, Jin and Qi allied with each other in Henan.

古文：卫侯请盟晋，晋人不许。
现代文：卫侯请求与晋结盟，晋人不答应。
English: Wei Hou asked Jin for an alliance, but Jin refused.

古文：卫侯欲与楚，国人不欲，故出其君以说晋。
现代文：卫侯想与楚国结盟，国人反对，结果赶出卫侯讨好晋国。
English: Wei wanted to ally with Chu, but the local people objected. As a result, they drove Wei out to please Jin.

古文：卫侯居襄牛，公子买守卫。楚救卫，不卒。
现代文：卫侯住在襄牛，公子买在卫国防守，楚国救援卫国，未能取胜。
English: Wei Hou lived in Xiangniu, and his son Bui was in charge of national defense and defense, and Chu rescued and defended the country, but failed to win.

古文：晋侯围曹。
现代文：晋侯包围了曹国。
English: Jin surrounded Cao.

古文：三月丙午，晋师入曹，数之以其不用厘负羁言，而用美女乘轩者三百人也。
现代文：三月丙午日，晋军侵入曹都，列举了曹君的罪状，因为曹君不听厘负羁的话，却用乘坐华丽的车子的三百个美女。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of March, the Jin army invaded Cao Du and listed Cao Jun's crimes, because Cao Jun did not listen to the words of discipline, but used three hundred beautiful women who rode in a gorgeous car.

古文：令军毋入僖负羁宗家以报德。
现代文：文公下令军队不许进入厘负羁同宗族的家内，以报答他的恩德。
English: In order to repay his kindness, Wenguang ordered the army not to enter the home of Li Shouyu and his clan.

古文：楚围宋，宋复告急晋。
现代文：楚包围宋国，宋又向晋国求援。
English: Chu encircled Song, and Song turned to Jin for help.

古文：文公欲救则攻楚，为楚尝有德，不欲伐也；欲释宋，宋又尝有德于晋：患之。
现代文：文公想救援宋国就应攻打楚国，因为楚国曾对文公有恩，文公便不想攻打楚国；想放弃对宋国的救援，可宋国又曾经对晋国有恩，文公为此举棋不定。
English: If Wengong wanted to rescue Song, he should attack Chu, because Chu had been kind to Wengong, and Wengong did not want to attack Chu; if he wanted to give up the rescue of Song, Song had been kind to Jin, and Wengong was uncertain.

古文：先轸曰： 执曹伯，分曹、卫地以与宋，楚急曹、卫，其势宜释宋。 
现代文：先轸劝说： 抓住曹伯，把曹、卫的土地分给宋国，楚为此肯定着急，那楚国势必要放弃宋国了。 
English: Xianqi advised: "Seize Cao Bo and give the land of Cao and Wei to Song. Chu must be anxious about this, otherwise, Chu is bound to give up Song."

古文：于是文公从之，而楚成王乃引兵归。
现代文：于是文公听取了先轸的意见，楚成王真的率军离开了宋国。
English: As a result, Wengong listened to Xian Ye's opinion, and Chu Cheng Wang really led the army to leave Song.

古文：楚将子玉曰： 王遇晋至厚，今知楚急曹、卫而故伐之，是轻王。 
现代文：楚国大将子玉对楚成王说： 国君您对晋国太好了，如今文公知道楚国与曹国、卫国关系密切却故意攻打它们，这是轻视君王。 
English: Zidama, the General of the State of Chu, said to Chu Chengwang, "Your Majesty, you have been so kind to Jin. Now that Wengong knows that the State of Chu is closely related to Cao and the defense of the country, he has deliberately attacked them. This is despising the king."

古文：王曰： 晋侯亡在外十九年，困日久矣，果得反国，险厄尽知之，能用其民，天之所开，不可当。 
现代文：成王说： 晋侯在外逃亡十九年，受困的时间太久了，终于返回晋国。他因尝尽了艰难险阻，因此能善待他的百姓，上天庇佑他，他不可阻挡。 
English: Cheng Wang said, "Jin Hou has been on the run for nineteen years. He has been trapped for too long and has finally returned to Jin. Because he has experienced all the hardships and obstacles, he is able to treat his people well. Heaven protects him. He is unstoppable."

古文：子玉请曰： 非敢必有功，愿以间执谗慝之口也。 
现代文：子玉仍请兵说： 不敢一定建功立业，只求堵塞中伤诽谤的言论。 
English: Kodama still pleaded with the soldiers, saying, "I don't dare to make achievements, I only want to block the slanderous speech."

古文：楚王怒，少与之兵。
现代文：楚王很生气，只给他很少的军队。
English: King Chu was very angry and only gave him a small army.

古文：于是子玉使宛春告晋： 请复卫侯而封曹，臣亦释宋。 
现代文：于是子玉让宛春告诉晋国： 请求恢复卫侯地位，保存曹国，我也会解除对宋国的包围。 
English: As a result, Ziyu asked Wanchun to tell Jin: "Ask for the restoration of the status of Wei and the preservation of Cao, and I will also lift the siege of Song."

古文：咎犯曰： 子玉无礼矣，君取一，臣取二，勿许。 
现代文：咎犯说： 子玉太无礼了，我的国君只得到一份，他们的臣子却得到两份，不能答应这个条件。 
English: The culprit said, "Zodama is too rude. My sovereign only gets one share, but their vassals get two shares. I can't agree to this condition."

古文：先轸曰： 定人之谓礼。
现代文：先轸说： 能是人心安定就称为有礼。
English: Senko said, "If one's heart is stable, one is polite."

古文：楚一言定三国，子一言而亡之，我则毋礼。
现代文：楚国一句话能使三个国家安定，可您一句话却能使这三个国家灭亡，我们才是无礼了。
English: Chu's one sentence can make three countries stable, but your one sentence can make these three countries perish. We are just being rude.

古文：不许楚，是弃宋也。
现代文：不答应楚国，就是放弃宋国。
English: If you don't accept Chu, you're giving up Song.

古文：不如私许曹、卫以诱之，执宛春以怒楚，既战而后图之。 
现代文：不如私下里答应恢复曹国、卫国以便引诱楚国，扣留宛春来激怒楚国，视战争胜负的情况再来计谋。 
English: It would be better to privately promise to restore Cao and defend the country in order to lure Chu, detain Wanchun to infuriate Chu, and then make plans depending on the outcome of the war.

古文：晋侯乃囚宛春于卫，且私许复曹、卫。
现代文：晋侯就把宛春囚禁在卫国，并私下答应恢复曹国、卫国。
English: The prince of Jin then imprisoned Wanchun in Wei, and privately promised to restore Cao and Wei.

古文：曹、卫告绝于楚。
现代文：曹卫两国派使者通知与楚国断交。
English: Cao Wei sent envoys to both countries to inform them of the severance of diplomatic relations with Chu.

古文：楚得臣怒，击晋师，晋师退。军吏曰： 为何退？ 
现代文：楚国的子玉很生气，攻打晋军，晋军不断后退，军吏问道： 为什么退兵？ 
English: Zidama of Chu was very angry. He attacked the Jin army, and the Jin army kept retreating. The military officer asked: Why did you retreat?

古文：文公曰： 昔在楚，约退三舍，可倍乎！ 
现代文：文公说： 过去在楚国时已立约说交战时退避三舍，可以违约吗？ 
English: Wengong said, "In the past, when we were in Chu, we had made a pact to retreat at the time of war. Can we break the pact?

古文：楚师欲去，得臣不肯。
现代文：楚军也想撤退，得臣不同意。
English: The Chu army also wanted to retreat, but the vassal did not agree.

古文：四月戊辰，宋公、齐将、秦将与晋侯次城濮。
现代文：四月戊辰日，宋公、齐将、秦将与晋侯驻扎在城濮。
English: In April, on the day of Pentecost, Song Gong, Qi Zheng, Qin Zheng and Jin Hou were stationed in Chengdu.

古文：己巳，与楚兵合战，楚兵败，得臣收余兵去。
现代文：己巳日，他们与楚军交战，楚军战败，得臣带着残兵败将逃走。
English: On the same day, they fought with the Chu army, the Chu army was defeated, and the vassal fled with the defeated soldiers.

古文：甲午，晋师还至衡雍，作王宫于践土。
现代文：甲午日，晋军返回衡雍，在践土为周襄王修筑王宫。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the Jin army returned to Hengyong and began to build a palace for King Zhou Xiang.

古文：初，郑助楚，楚败，惧，使人请盟晋侯。
现代文：当初，郑国曾援助楚国，现在楚国失败，郑国很害怕，派人请求与晋侯结盟。
English: At first, Zheng Guo had helped Chu Guo, but now that Chu Guo has failed, Zheng Guo is very scared and sends someone to request an alliance with Jin Hou.

古文：晋侯与郑伯盟。
现代文：于是，晋侯与郑伯结盟。
English: As a result, Jin Hou allied with Zheng Bo.

古文：五月丁未，献楚俘于周，驷介百乘，徒兵千。
现代文：五月丁未日，晋文公把楚国俘虏奉献给周王，共有一百辆披甲的驷马车、一千多名步兵。
English: On the eve of the 5th day of the 5th month, Jinwen Gong dedicated the prisoners of Chu to King Zhou, with a total of one hundred armored stagecoaches and more than one thousand infantrymen.

古文：天子使王子虎命晋侯为伯，赐大辂ù，彤弓矢百，玈ú弓矢千，秬鬯一卣，圭瓒，虎贲三百人。
现代文：周襄王让王子虎宣布晋侯为霸主，赏赐给晋侯黄金装饰的大车，一副红色弓，百支红色箭，十副黑色弓，千支黑色箭，一卣香酒，还有玉勺和三百名勇士。
English: King Zhou Xiang let Prince Tiger declare Jin Hou as the overlord, and rewarded Jin Hou with a gold-decorated cart, a pair of red bows, a hundred red arrows, ten black bows, a thousand black arrows, a bunch of incense, a jade spoon and three hundred warriors.

古文：晋侯三辞，然后稽首受之。
现代文：晋侯多次辞谢，最后才行礼接受了。
English: The prince resigned several times, but finally accepted with a bow.

古文：周作《晋文侯命》： 王若曰：父义和，丕显文、武，能慎明德，昭登于上，布闻在下，维时上帝集厥命于文、武。
现代文：周王写了《晋文侯命》： 王说：您用道义使诸侯和睦，大显文王、武王的功业。文王、武王能够谨慎地修养美好的德行，感动了上天，在人民中间传播。
English: King Zhou wrote "The Lives of the Princes of the Jin Dynasty": The king said, "You have used morality to bring harmony to the princes, showing the great achievements of King Wen and King Wu. King Wen and King Wu were able to carefully cultivate good virtues, moved heaven, and spread among the people.

古文：恤朕身、继予一人永其在位。 
现代文：因此，上天把帝王的事业赐给文王、武王，恩泽流传到子孙后代。
English: Therefore, God gave the emperor's career to King Wen and King Wu, and the grace was passed down to future generations.

古文：于是晋文公称伯。癸亥，王子虎盟诸侯于王庭。
现代文：长辈关怀我，让我继承祖先的事业，永远保存王位。 于是晋文公称霸，癸亥日，王子虎在王宫与诸侯结盟。
English: The elders took care of me, let me inherit the cause of my ancestors, and preserve the throne forever. Therefore, Jinwen publicly claimed hegemony, and on the day of the Boar, Prince Tiger allied with the princes in the royal palace.

古文：晋焚楚军，火数日不息，文公叹。
现代文：晋国焚烧了楚军阵地，熊熊大火几天都未熄灭，文公叹息。
English: Jin burned the positions of the Chu army, and the raging fire did not go out for several days. Wenkong sighed.

古文：左右曰： 胜楚而君犹忧，何？ 
现代文：左右大臣们说： 战胜了楚国，您还忧虑，为什么？ 
English: The left and right ministers said: After defeating Chu, you are still worried, why?

古文：文公曰： 吾闻能战胜安者唯圣人，是以惧。
现代文：文公说： 我听说打了胜仗而能心情安定的，只有圣人，我因此恐惧。
English: Wenguang said, "I have heard that only a saint can be at peace after winning a battle, so I am afraid.

古文：且子玉犹在，庸可喜乎！ 
现代文：况且子玉还在，我怎么高兴得起来呢？ 
English: Besides, the eggs are still there, how can I be happy?

古文：子玉之败而归，楚成王怒其不用其言，贪与晋战，让责子玉，子玉自杀。
现代文：子玉大败而回，楚成王怨他不听自己的话，只顾与晋交战，于是责备子玉，子玉自杀身亡。
English: Zidama was defeated and returned, and King Chu Cheng complained that he did not listen to his own words and only fought with Jin, so he blamed Zidama, and Zidama committed suicide.

古文：晋文公曰： 我击其外，楚诛其内，内外相应。 
现代文：晋文公说： 我在外部打击楚，楚在内部诛杀大将，内外呼应。 
English: Jin Wengong said: I attack Chu externally, Chu fights the general internally, and this is echoed both internally and externally.

古文：于是乃喜。
现代文：于是文公才面露喜色。
English: As a result, Wengongcai's face lit up with joy.

古文：六月，晋人复入卫侯。
现代文：六月，晋人又恢复卫侯地位。
English: In June, Jinren was reinstated as a military garrison.

古文：壬午，晋侯度河北归国。
现代文：壬午日，晋侯渡过黄河向北边回国。
English: On the day of Renpo, Jin Hou crossed the Yellow River and returned to the north.

古文：行赏，狐偃为首。
现代文：晋文公论功行赏，狐偃属头功。
English: According to Jin Wenkong's theory of the reward for meritorious deeds, the foxglove belongs to the first meritorious deed.

古文：或曰： 城濮之事，先轸之谋。 
现代文：有人说： 城濮的战争，是先轸的计谋。 
English: Some people say: "The war in the city is a premeditated plot."

古文：文公曰： 城濮之事，偃说我毋失信。
现代文：文公说： 城濮的战争，狐偃劝我不要失去信用。
English: Wenguang said, "It's a city war, and the foxes are urging me not to lose my trust."

古文：先轸曰 军事胜为右 ，吾用之以胜。
现代文：先轸说： 打仗以战胜为重。 我听了先轸的话取胜了。
English: Xian Qi said, "In war, the most important thing is to win." I listened to Xian Qi's words and won.

古文：然此一时之说，偃言万世之功，奈何以一时之利而加万世功乎？
现代文：然而这只是有利于一时的说法，狐偃说的是千秋万代的功业，怎么能使一时的利益超过万代的功业呢？
English: However, this is only a temporary benefit. The fox and the baboon are talking about the work of thousands of generations. How can a temporary benefit exceed the work of thousands of generations?

古文：是以先之。 
现代文：因此，狐偃应得首功。 
English: Therefore, the fox warbler deserves the first place.

古文：冬，晋侯会诸侯于温，欲率之朝周。
现代文：冬季，晋侯在温地会见诸侯，想率领诸侯朝见周襄王。
English: In winter, Jin Hou met with the princes in Warmi and wanted to lead the princes to meet King Zhou Xiang.

古文：力未能，恐其有畔者，乃使人言周襄王狩于河阳。
现代文：晋侯担心自己的力量达不到，恐怕诸侯中有背叛的人，就派人告诉周襄王到河阳打猎。
English: The Jin princes were worried that their strength would not be enough, and feared that there might be traitors among the princes, so they sent someone to tell King Zhou Xiang to go hunting in the river Yang.

古文：壬申，遂率诸侯朝王于践土。
现代文：壬申日，晋侯便率领诸侯到践土朝拜襄王。
English: On the day of Jinshin, Jin Hau led the vassals to trample the soil to pay homage to King Xiang.

古文：孔子读史记至文公，曰： 诸侯无召王， 王狩河阳 者，《春秋》讳之也。 
现代文：孔子读史看到关于文公的这段记载，说： 诸侯无权召见周王。 我之所以要在《春秋》上将这件事写成 周天子在河阳打猎 ，是对此事隐讳的说法。 
English: When Confucius was reading history and saw this passage about Wengong, he said: Princes do not have the right to summon King Zhou, and the reason why I wanted to write about this in Spring and Autumn, that Zhou Tianzi was hunting in the river Yang, was to conceal this fact.

古文：丁丑，诸侯围许。
现代文：丁丑日，诸侯包围了许。
English: On the day of Dingushi, the lords besieged Xu.

古文：曹伯臣或说晋侯曰： 齐桓公合诸侯而国异姓，今君为会而灭同姓。
现代文：曹伯大臣中有人劝告晋侯说： 齐桓公会盟各诸侯国，是为了扶植异性国家，如今国君您会盟诸侯却是为了灭亡同姓国家。
English: One of Cao Bo's ministers advised Jin Hou, saying: "The reason why the Qin and Han dynasties allied with each other was to establish a country of the opposite sex, but now the reason why you, the sovereign, are allied with the princes is to destroy a country of the same name.

古文：曹，叔振铎之后；晋，唐叔之后。
现代文：曹国的叔振铎的后代，晋国是唐叔的后代。
English: Cao's uncle was a descendant of Zhen Rong, and Jin was a descendant of Tang.

古文：合诸侯而灭兄弟，非礼。 
现代文：会合诸侯国却消灭史弟国。不合礼仪。 
English: It is not proper etiquette to meet with a vassal state and annihilate a brother state.

古文：晋侯说，复曹伯。
现代文：晋侯高兴了，恢复了曹伯地位。
English: Jin Hou was pleased and restored Cao Bo's status.

古文：于是晋始作三行。
现代文：于是晋国开始建立三行军制。
English: As a result, Jin began to establish a three-line military system.

古文：荀林父将中行，先縠将右行，先蔑将左行。
现代文：荀林父统率中行军，先穀统帅右行军，先蔑统帅左行军。
English: Yulin's father led the middle march, the forefather led the right march, and the forefather led the left march.

古文：七年，晋文公、秦缪公共围郑，以其无礼于文公亡过时，及城濮时郑助楚也。
现代文：七年，晋文公、秦缪公共同包围郑国，原因是在文公逃亡路过郑国时郑国对文公不礼貌，以及在城濮之战中郑国援助了楚国。
English: In the seventh year, Jin Wengong and Qin Miaoong jointly besieged Zheng Guo. The reason was that Zheng Guo was rude to Wengong when Wengong was fleeing and passing through Zheng Guo, and Zheng Guo assisted Chu Guo in the Battle of Chenghuang.

古文：围郑，欲得叔瞻。
现代文：晋国包围郑国，想得到叔瞻。
English: Jin surrounded Zheng and wanted to get Uncle Zhan.

古文：叔瞻闻之，自杀。
现代文：叔瞻听说后自杀了。
English: Uncle Zhan committed suicide after hearing the news.

古文：郑持叔瞻告晋。
现代文：郑国人带叔瞻尸体告诉晋君。
English: The Zheng people took Uncle Zhan's body to tell Jin.

古文：晋曰： 必得郑君而甘心焉。 
现代文：晋君却说： 一定得到郑君才甘心。 
English: Jinjun, however, said, "I'm only willing if I get Zhengjun."

古文：郑恐，乃间令使谓秦缪公曰： 亡郑厚晋，于晋得矣，而秦未为利。
现代文：郑国害怕了，就暗中派使者对秦缪公说： 灭亡了郑国，增强了晋国，晋有所收获，秦国却得不到什么好处。
English: Zheng Guo was afraid, so he secretly sent an envoy to Qin Miao Gong to say: Zheng Guo was destroyed, Jin Guo was strengthened, Jin gained something, but Qin Guo did not get any benefit.

古文：君何不解郑，得为东道交？ 
现代文：您为什么不放弃郑国，与郑结为友好？ 
English: Why don't you give up Zheng Guo and be friends with Zheng Jie?

古文：秦伯说，罢兵。晋亦罢兵。
现代文：秦伯同意了，撤走了军队，晋国也随后撤了军。
English: Qin Bo agreed and withdrew his troops. Jin subsequently withdrew his troops as well.

古文：九年冬，晋文公卒，子襄公欢立。
现代文：九年的冬季，晋文公逝世，他的儿子襄公欢即位。
English: In the winter of the ninth year, Prince Jinwen died, and his son Prince Xiang Huan ascended to the throne.

古文：是岁郑伯亦卒。
现代文：当年郑伯也逝世。
English: Zheng Bo also passed away that year.

古文：郑人或卖其国于秦，秦缪公发兵往袭郑。
现代文：郑国有人向秦国出卖自己的国家，秦缪公率军去偷袭郑国。
English: Someone in Zheng betrayed his country to Qin. Qin Miao Gong led his army to attack Zheng.

古文：十二月，秦兵过我郊。
现代文：十二月，秦军路过晋都郊处。
English: In December, the Qin army passed through the outskirts of Jindu.

古文：襄公元年春，秦师过周，无礼，王孙满讥之。
现代文：襄公元年的春季，秦军路过周都，十分无礼，王孙满讥讽秦国不懂礼法。
English: In the spring of the year of Xiang, the Qin army passed by the Zhou capital, very rude, Wang Sunman ridiculed Qin for not knowing the etiquette.

古文：兵至滑，郑贾人弦高将市于周，遇之，以十二牛劳秦师。
现代文：秦军开到滑国，郑国大商人弦高将要去周京做买卖，路遇秦军，用十二头牛犒劳秦军。
English: The Qin army drove to the State of Nian. Zheng Guoda merchant Zheng Gao was about to go to Zhoujing to do business. When he met the Qin army, he used twelve oxen to work for the Qin army.

古文：秦师惊而还，灭滑而去。
现代文：秦军大吃一惊以为郑国已经知道偷袭之事，赶快回国，在顺便灭掉滑国后才班师返回。
English: The Qin army was taken aback, thinking that Zheng had already known about the sneak attack, and hurriedly returned to the country. The division returned only after eliminating the enemy.

古文：晋先轸曰： 秦伯不用蹇叔，反其众心，此可击。 
现代文：晋国的先轸说： 秦伯不听蹇叔的计谋，违背了民心，我们可以在这个时候攻打它。 
English: The forerunner of Jin said, "Qin Bo did not listen to Uncle Zou's stratagem and violated the people's will. We can attack it at this time."

古文：栾枝曰： 未报先君施于秦，击之，不可。 
现代文：栾枝说： 还没有报答秦对先君的恩惠就攻打它，是不行的。 
English: Hao Zhi said, "It is not right to attack Qin without repaying the favors Qin did for the former emperor."

古文：先轸曰： 秦侮吾孤，伐吾同姓，何德之报？ 
现代文：先轸说： 秦国欺侮刚刚失去父亲的我君，讨伐与我们同姓的国家，有什么恩惠需要报答？ 
English: Senju said, "Qin State bullied my husband, who had just lost his father, and fought against a country with the same name as ours. What kind of favor do you need to repay?"

古文：遂击之。
现代文：于是晋国就攻打了秦国。
English: As a result, Jin attacked Qin.

古文：襄公墨衰绖。
现代文：襄公穿着黑色的丧服从戎。
English: Prince Xiang is dressed in a black mourning uniform.

古文：四月，败秦师于殽，虏秦三将孟明视、西乞秫、白乙丙以归。
现代文：四月，晋在殽打败了秦军，俘虏了秦国的三员大将孟明视、西乞秫、白乙丙后回到晋国。
English: In April, Jin defeated the Qin army at the Battle of Jiuyuan and captured the three generals of Qin State, Meng Mingzhi, Xi Qian and Bai Yiping, who then returned to Jin State.

古文：遂墨以葬文公。
现代文：于是晋襄公穿着黑色丧服埋葬了文公。
English: So Jin Xianggong dressed in black funeral clothes and buried Wenguang.

古文：文公夫人秦女，谓襄公曰： 秦欲得其三将戮之。 
现代文：文公的夫人是秦国的女子，对襄公说： 秦国想得到这三员大将从而杀掉他们。 
English: Wengong's wife, a woman from Qin, said to Xiangong: "Qin wants to get these three generals and kill them.

古文：公许，遣之。
现代文：襄公同意了，便送回了三员大将。
English: Prince Xiang agreed and sent back the three generals.

古文：先轸闻之，谓襄公曰： 患生矣。 
现代文：先轸听说后，对襄公说： 祸患将要产生了。 
English: After hearing this, Xian Qi said to Xiang Gong, "A calamity is about to occur.

古文：轸乃追秦将。
现代文：先轸就去追赶三员大将。
English: He ran ahead to catch up with the three generals.

古文：秦将渡河，已在船中，顿首谢，卒不反。
现代文：三员大将为渡黄河，已经到了船上，看到先轸便磕头道谢，终于一去不返。
English: The three generals will cross the Yellow River, have arrived at the ship, see the first boat, thank the boatman, and finally never return.

古文：后三年，秦果使孟明伐晋，报殽之败，取晋汪以归。
现代文：三年以后，秦国果然派孟明讨伐晋国，为在殽的失败复仇，攻下晋国汪地后撤兵。
English: Three years later, Qin successfully sent Meng Ming to invade Jin, to avenge the defeat at Zhai, and withdrew after capturing Wangdi in Jin.

古文：四年，秦缪公大兴兵伐我，度河，取王官，封殽尸而去。
现代文：四年，秦缪公派大军攻打晋国，渡过黄河，拿下王官，在殽山修筑了阵亡将士的坟墓才离去。
English: In the fourth year, Qin Miao sent a large army to attack Jin Province, crossed the Yellow River, captured the royal officials, and built the graves of the fallen soldiers in Lushan before leaving.

古文：晋恐，不敢出，遂城守。
现代文：晋国十分慌恐，不敢再出来，只好坚守城池。
English: Jin was panicked and did not dare to come out again, so he had to hold on to the castle.

古文：五年，晋伐秦，取新城，报王官役也。
现代文：五年，晋国攻打秦国，拿下了新城，为王官失败报了仇。
English: Five years later, Jin attacked Qin, took Xincheng, and avenged Wang Guan's defeat.

古文：六年，赵衰成子、栾贞子、咎季子犯、霍伯皆卒。
现代文：六年，赵衰成子、栾贞子、咎季、子犯、霍伯都死去。
English: In six years, Zhao Shengchengzi, Zou Zhenzi, Gui Ji, Zi Guan, and Hobo all died.

古文：赵盾代赵衰执政。
现代文：赵盾代替赵衰主持政务。
English: Zhao Dun replaced Zhao Zhen to preside over government affairs.

古文：七年八月，襄公卒。
现代文：七年八月，襄公逝世。
English: In August of the seventh year, Prince Xiang passed away.

古文：太子夷皋少。
现代文：太子夷皋还年幼。
English: Prince Yixuan is still young.

古文：晋人以难故，欲立长君。
现代文：晋人因为多次遇难，相立年纪长些的君王。
English: The Jin people, because of the many times they were killed, had an older king.

古文：赵盾曰： 立襄公弟雍。
现代文：赵盾说： 立襄公弟弟雍。
English: Zhao Dun said: Lixianggong's younger brother, Yong.

古文：好善而长，先君爱之；且近于秦，秦故好也。
现代文：雍温和善良年纪大，先君又喜受他，而且他亲近秦国，秦本来是友好邻国。
English: Yong Yong was gentle and kind, he was old, and the emperor liked him. Moreover, he was close to Qin. Qin was originally a friendly neighboring country.

古文：立善则固，事长则顺，奉爱则孝，结旧好则安。 
现代文：立善良的人国家就稳固，侍奉年长的人国家就顺利，侍奉先君喜欢的人就孝顺，与旧日的朋友结交就安定。 
English: If you are kind, the country will be stable. If you serve the elderly, the country will be smooth. If you serve the people you like, you will be dutiful. If you make friends with your old friends, you will be stable.

古文：贾季曰： 不如其弟乐。
现代文：贾季说： 雍不如他弟弟乐。
English: Jia Ji said: Yong is not as happy as his brother.

古文：辰嬴嬖于二君，立其子，民必安之。 
现代文：辰嬴被两位国君宠爱，立她的儿子，百姓一定安心。 
English: Tatsuko was favored by two sovereigns and raised her son, so the people must be at ease.

古文：赵盾曰： 辰嬴贱，班在九人下，其子何震之有！
现代文：赵盾说： 辰嬴卑贱，地位在九个妃妾的下边，他的儿子能有什么威望。
English: Zhao Dun said, "Chen Xuan is lowly, his status is below that of nine concubines. What prestige can his son have?

古文：且为二君嬖，淫也。
现代文：况且她被两位国君宠爱，这是乱。
English: On top of that, she was favored by two sovereigns. It's a mess.

古文：为先君子，不能求大而出在小国，僻也。
现代文：乐作为先君的儿子，不能投靠大国而出居小国，这是孤立。
English: Le, as the son of the former emperor, cannot rely on the big country and live in a small country. This is isolation.

古文：母淫子僻，无威；陈小而远，无援：将何可乎！ 
现代文：母亲乱，儿子孤立，没有威严；陈国既小又远离晋国，得不到援助，怎么可以为君呢？ 
English: The mother is in turmoil, the son is isolated and has no dignity; Chen is a small country, far away from Jin, and receives no aid, so how can he be a prince?

古文：使士会如秦迎公子雍。
现代文：于是晋国派士公到秦迎接公子雍。
English: As a result, Jin sent a general to Qin to welcome Prince Yong.

古文：贾季亦使人召公子乐于陈。
现代文：贾季也派人到陈国召回公子乐。
English: Jia Ji also sent someone to Chen Guo to call back the nobles.

古文：赵盾废贾季，以其杀阳处父。
现代文：赵盾废掉贾季，因为贾季杀死了阳处父。
English: Zhao Dun deposed Jia Ji, because Jia Ji had killed Yang Defu.

古文：十月，葬襄公。
现代文：十月，晋国埋葬了襄公。
English: In October, the State of Jin buried Prince Xiang.

古文：十一月，贾季奔翟。
现代文：十一月，贾季逃到了翟。
English: In November, Jia Ji fled to Handan.

古文：是岁，秦缪公亦卒。
现代文：当年，秦缪公也逝世了。
English: That year, Qin Miao also passed away.

古文：灵公元年四月，秦康公曰： 昔文公之入也无卫，故有吕、郄之患。 
现代文：灵公元年四月，秦康公说： 先前文公刚刚回到晋国时，晋国没有卫士护卫，所以发生了吕省、郄芮的祸患。 
English: In April of the year of Ling, Qin Kangong said: When Wen Gong had just returned to Jin, there was no guardian escort in Jin, so the calamity of Lv Province and Handan occurred.

古文：乃多与公子雍卫。
现代文：于是，秦国送给公子雍很多卫士。
English: As a result, the State of Qin sent many guards to Prince Yong.

古文：太子母缪嬴日夜抱太子以号泣于朝，曰： 先君何罪？
现代文：太子夷皋的母亲缪嬴日夜怀抱太子到朝廷号叫哭泣说： 先君有什么罪？
English: Prince Yixuan's mother, Muyao, carried him in her arms day and night to the imperial court, crying and saying, "What is your ancestor's sin?

古文：其嗣亦何罪？
现代文：他的后嗣又有什么罪？
English: What is the sin of his heir?

古文：舍适而外求君，将安置此？ 
现代文：你们丢弃嫡子却到外边找君主，打算把太子放在什么位置上？ 
English: You abandoned your legitimate son and went out to look for a monarch. Where do you plan to place the crown prince?

古文：出朝，则抱以适赵盾所，顿首曰： 先君奉此子而属之子，曰 此子材，吾受其赐；不材，吾怨子 。
现代文：缪嬴出了朝廷，就抱着太子跑到赵盾的住所，磕头说： 先君把这个孩子嘱托给您，曾说过 这孩子成了材，我就是受了您的赐予，不成材，我就怨恨你 。
English: When Miao Wei left the court, she ran to Zhao Dun's residence with the prince in her arms. Shantou said, "The forefather entrusted this child to you. He once said that this child has become a talent. I was given to me by you. If I don't become a talent, I will resent you."

古文：今君卒，言犹在耳，而弃之，若何？ 
现代文：现在先君去世了，话还响在耳边，如今您却要舍弃太子，怎么行？ 
English: Now that your father-in-law has passed away, the words are still ringing in your ears, but now you want to give up the crown prince. How can you do that?

古文：赵盾与诸大夫皆患缪嬴，且畏诛，乃背所迎而立太子夷皋，是为灵公。
现代文：赵盾和各位大臣都害怕缪嬴，又怕被逼迫，于是背弃了迎接的雍，而立了太子夷皋，这就是灵公。
English: Zhao Dun and all the ministers were afraid of Miao Xuan and were afraid of being persecuted, so they turned their backs on the welcoming Yong and set up the prince Yixuan, this is Ling Gong.

古文：发兵以距秦送公子雍者。
现代文：同时派军队抵御秦国护送公子雍的军队。
English: At the same time, he sent troops to resist the Qin troops escorting Prince Yong.

古文：赵盾为将，往击秦，败之令狐。
现代文：赵盾为将军，率军攻打秦，在令狐打败秦军。
English: Zhao Dun, as a general, led the army to attack Qin, and defeated the Qin army at Linghu.

古文：先蔑、随会亡奔秦。
现代文：先蔑、随会逃到秦。
English: Preemptively, he fled to Qin.

古文：秋，齐、宋、卫、郑、曹、许君皆会赵盾，盟于扈，以灵公初立故也。
现代文：秋季，齐、宋、卫、郑、曹、许国的国君都拜会了赵盾，并在扈订立盟约，这是因为灵公刚刚即位。
English: In the autumn, the sovereigns of Qi, Song, Wei, Zheng, Cao, and Xu all visited Zhao Dun and signed a covenant in Handan, because Ling Gong had just ascended to the throne.

古文：四年，伐秦，取少梁。秦亦取晋之郩。
现代文：四年，晋国攻打秦国，夺取了少梁，秦也夺走了晋国的殽。
English: In four years, Jin attacked Qin and took Shao Liang, and Qin also took Jin's Ying.

古文：六年，秦康公伐晋，取羁马。
现代文：六年，秦康公讨伐晋国，夺取了羁马。
English: In the sixth year, Qin Kangong invaded Jin Province and captured Guima.

古文：晋侯怒，使赵盾、赵穿、郄缺击秦，大战河曲，赵穿最有功。
现代文：晋侯很生气，派赵盾、赵穿、郤缺攻打秦国，在河曲展开大战，赵穿立了大功。
English: The prince of Jin was very angry and sent Zhao Dun, Zhao Peng and Zeng Ke to attack Qin. The war started in Hequ, and Zhao Peng made a great contribution.

古文：七年，晋六卿患随会之在秦，常为晋乱，乃详令魏寿余反晋降秦。
现代文：七年，晋国的六卿担心在秦国的随会常常造成晋国内乱，于是假让魏寿余反对晋国投降秦国。
English: In the seventh year, the six nobles of Jin feared that the attendant associations in Qin would often cause civil unrest in Jin, so they pretended to let Wei Shouyu oppose the surrender of Jin to Qin.

古文：秦使随会之魏，因执会以归晋。
现代文：秦国让随会到魏，因而捉住随会带回晋国。
English: Qin let the attendants go to Wei, so they caught the attendants and brought them back to Jin.

古文：八年，周顷王崩，公卿争权，故不赴。
现代文：八年，周顷王逝世，由于公卿争权夺利，所以没有向各诸侯国发讣告。
English: In the eighth year, King Zhou He passed away. Due to nobles competing for power and profit, no obituary notice was sent to the various principalities.

古文：晋使赵盾以车八百乘平周乱而立匡王。
现代文：晋国派赵盾率八百辆战车平息了周王朝的动乱，拥立了匡王。
English: Jin sent 800 chariots led by Zhao Dun to quell the unrest in the Zhou Dynasty and support King Kuang.

古文：是年，楚庄王初即位。
现代文：这一年，楚庄王刚即位。
English: In this year, the king of Chu Zhuang just ascended to the throne.

古文：十二年，齐人弑其君懿公。
现代文：十年，齐人杀死自己的国君懿公。
English: Ten years later, the Qi people killed their own sovereign, Zeng Gong.

古文：十四年，灵公壮，侈，厚敛以雕墙。
现代文：十四年，灵公长成人了，非常奢侈，搜刮民脂民膏用彩画装饰宫墙。
English: In the 14th year, Ling Gong became an adult. He was very extravagant and decorated the palace wall with colorful paintings.

古文：从台上弹人，观其避丸也。
现代文：从高台上弹人，以观赏人们避开弹丸而取乐。
English: He shoots people from a high platform and enjoys watching them dodge the bullets.

古文：宰夫胹熊蹯不熟，灵公怒，杀宰夫，使妇人持其尸出弃之，过朝。
现代文：厨师没把熊掌煮烂，灵公就发怒，竟杀死厨师，让妇女抬着厨师的尸体扔出去，路过朝廷。
English: When the cook did not cook the bear's paw thoroughly, the spirit lord became angry and actually killed the cook and had the woman carry the cook's corpse and throw it out, passing by the imperial court.

古文：赵盾、随会前数谏，不听；已又见死人手，二人前谏。
现代文：赵盾、随会前去多次劝告，灵公根本不听；后来，他们又看见死人的手，于是又前去劝告。
English: Zhao Dun and the other members of the group went to advise him many times, but Ling Gong did not listen at all. Later, they saw the dead man's hand, so they went to advise him again.

古文：随会先谏，不听。
现代文：随会先去劝，灵公不听。
English: The attendants went to persuade him first, but he did not listen.

古文：灵公患之，使锄ú麑í刺赵盾。
现代文：灵公感到十分担忧，竟让锄麑刺杀赵盾。
English: Ling Gong was so worried that he actually let Zou stab Zhao Dun.

古文：盾闺门开，居处节，锄麑退，叹曰： 杀忠臣，弃君命，罪一也。 
现代文：赵盾内室的门敞开着，鉏麑看见赵盾的住处极其简朴，便退出来叹息道： 杀死忠臣，违背君王的命令，这罪都是一样的。 
English: The door of Zhao Dun's inner room was wide open. Seeing that Zhao Dun's living quarters were extremely simple, the dragonfly withdrew and sighed, "Killing a loyal retainer and disobeying the king's order are all the same crime."

古文：遂触树而死。
现代文：说完，头撞树身亡。
English: After saying this, he hit his head on a tree and died.

古文：初，盾常田首山，见桑下有饿人。
现代文：当初，赵盾常在首山打猎，曾看到桑树下有个饿极了的人。
English: At first, Zhao Dun often hunted in Shoushan. He once saw a starving man under a mulberry tree.

古文：饿人，眯明也。
现代文：这个人叫示眯明。
English: This man's name is Shi Zhiming.

古文：盾与之食，食其半。
现代文：赵盾给了他一些食物，他只吃了一半。
English: Zhao Dun gave him some food, but he only ate half of it.

古文：问其故，曰： 宦三年，未知母之存不，愿遗母。 
现代文：赵盾问他为什么不吃完，示眯明回答： 我已经为人臣隶三年了，不知道母亲是否还健在，想把剩下的一半留给母亲。 
English: Zhao Dun asked him why he didn't finish his meal, and he replied clearly: I have been a vassal for three years, I don't know if my mother is still alive, I want to leave the remaining half to my mother.

古文：盾义之，益与之饭肉。
现代文：赵盾认为他很孝敬，又给他一些饭、肉。
English: Zhao Dun thought he was very filial and gave him some rice and meat.

古文：已而为晋宰夫，赵盾弗复知也。
现代文：不久，示眯明做了晋灵公的厨师。但赵盾不知道示眯明做晋君厨师一事。
English: Soon after, Shi Yiming became the chef of Jin Ling Gong. However, Zhao Dun did not know that Shi Yiming was the chef of Jin Jun.

古文：九月，晋灵公饮赵盾酒，伏甲将攻盾。公宰眯明知之，恐盾醉不能起，而进曰： 君赐臣，觞三行可以罢。 
现代文：九月，晋灵公宴请赵盾，埋伏好士兵准备杀死他，示眯明知道后，担心赵盾酒醉无法站立起来逃跑，于是上前劝说赵盾： 君王赏赐您酒，只喝三杯就可以了。 
English: In September, Jinling invited Zhao Dun to a public banquet, and soldiers prepared to ambush and kill him. After knowing this, Shijie Ming was worried that Zhao Dun was too drunk to stand up and escape, so he went forward to persuade Zhao Dun: The king will reward you with wine, and you can only drink three glasses.

古文：欲以去赵盾，令先，毋及难。
现代文：想让赵盾赶在前面离开免于遭难。
English: He wanted Zhao Dun to leave ahead of him to avoid any trouble.

古文：盾既去，灵公伏士未会，先纵啮狗名敖。
现代文：赵盾已经离去了，灵公埋伏的士兵还未集合好就先放出一条叫敖的恶狗。
English: Zhao Dun had already left, and before the soldiers who were waiting for Ling Gong could assemble, they let out a vicious dog called Gong.

古文：明为盾搏杀狗。
现代文：示眯明替赵盾徒手杀死了狗。
English: Shi Hao Ming killed the dog for Zhao Dunrong with his bare hands.

古文：盾曰： 弃人用狗，虽勐何为。 
现代文：赵盾说： 抛弃人，使用狗，虽然凶猛，但是又有什么用呢！ 
English: Zhao Dun said: Abandoning people and using dogs, although ferocious, is of no use!

古文：然不知明之为阴德也。
现代文：可是，赵盾并不知道示眯明是在暗中保护他呢。
English: However, Zhao Dun didn't know that Shi Xuanming was secretly protecting him.

古文：已而灵公纵伏士出逐赵盾，眯明反击灵公之伏士，伏士不能进，而竟脱盾。
现代文：一会儿，灵公指挥埋伏的士兵追赶赵盾，示眯明反击灵公的士兵，士兵不能前进，赵盾终于逃脱。
English: After a while, Linggong led the ambushed soldiers to chase Zhao Dun, and Shijie counterattacked Linggong's soldiers. The soldiers could not advance, and Zhao Dun finally escaped.

古文：盾问其故，曰： 我桑下饿人。 
现代文：赵盾问示眯明为什么救自己，示眯明说： 我就是当年桑树下那个饥饿的人。 
English: Zhao Dun asked Shi Yiming why he saved himself. Shi Yiming said: I am the hungry man under the mulberry tree.

古文：问其名，弗告。
现代文：赵盾询部他的姓名，他没有告诉。
English: Zhao Dun did not tell the inquiry department his name.

古文：明亦因亡去。
现代文：示眯明因此隐遁而去。
English: As a result, Shi Junming went into seclusion.

古文：盾遂奔，未出晋境。
现代文：赵盾逃脱了，但还没有逃出晋国国境。
English: Zhao Dun has escaped, but has not yet escaped from the border of Jin.

古文：乙丑，盾昆弟将军赵穿袭杀灵公于桃园而迎赵盾。
现代文：乙丑日，赵盾的弟弟赵穿将军在桃园杀死灵公迎回了赵盾。
English: On the second day of the Ugly, Zhao Dun's brother Zhao Pengzheng killed Ling Gong in Taoyuan and welcomed back Zhao Dun.

古文：赵盾素贵，得民和；灵公少，侈，民不附，故为弑易。
现代文：赵盾一向受人敬重，很得民心。灵公年纪不大，又奢移，百姓不归向他，所以很容易就将他杀死了。
English: Zhao Dun has always been respected and popular. Ling Gong was young and extravagant, and the people did not return to him, so it was easy to kill him.

古文：盾复位。
现代文：赵盾又恢复了先前的地位。
English: Zhao Dun has regained his previous position.

古文：晋太史董狐书曰 赵盾弑其君 ，以视于朝。
现代文：晋国的太史董狐写道： 赵盾杀死了自己的国君。 
English: Jin's Grand Historian Dong Jux wrote: Zhao Dun killed his own sovereign.

古文：盾曰： 弑者赵穿，我无罪。 
现代文：并把这个记载拿到朝廷上传给大家看。赵盾说： 杀国君的是赵穿，我没罪。 
English: And he took this record to the imperial court and uploaded it for everyone to see. Zhao Dun said: It was Zhao Guo who killed the sovereign, I am not guilty.

古文：太史曰： 子为正卿，而亡不出境，反不诛国乱，非子而谁？ 
现代文：太史说： 你是正卿，你逃跑了但没有逃出晋国国境，你回来也没有杀死作乱的人，不是你是谁呢？ 
English: Taishi said, "You are Zhengqing. You ran away, but you didn't escape from the border of Jin. You didn't come back and kill the rioters. Who are you?

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 董狐，古之良史也，书法不隐。
现代文：后来孔子听到这件事说： 董狐是古代优秀的史官，据法直书而毫不隐瞒。
English: Later, Confucius heard about this and said: "Dong Juxu was an excellent historian in ancient times. He wrote directly according to the law and did not conceal anything.

古文：宣子，良大夫也，为法受恶。惜也，出疆乃免。 
现代文：宣子是优秀的大夫，为遵守法制甘愿承受坏名声，可惜呀，如果赵盾逃出国境，也就免除罪名了。 
English: Xuanzi is an excellent doctor, and is willing to bear the bad reputation in order to comply with the legal system. Unfortunately, if Zhao Dun escapes from the country, he will be exonerated.

古文：赵盾使赵穿迎襄公弟黑臀于周而立之，是为成公。
现代文：赵盾让赵穿从周京迎来襄公的弟弟黑臀，让他即位，这就是成公。
English: Zhao Dun let Zhao Zhan from Zhoujing usher in Xianggong's younger brother, Black Buttocks, and let him ascend to the throne. This is how he became a prince.

古文：成公者，文公少子，其母周女也。
现代文：成公是文公的小儿子，他的母亲是周王室女子。
English: Chenggong is the youngest son of Wengong, and his mother is a Zhou royal woman.

古文：壬申，朝于武宫。
现代文：壬申日，成公去武宫朝拜祖宗。
English: On Jinshin Day, Chenggong went to the Imperial Palace to pay homage to his ancestors.

古文：成公元年，赐赵氏为公族。
现代文：成公于元年，赐封赵氏为公族大夫。
English: He became a prince in the first year of the year, and the Zhao clan was given the title of public doctor.

古文：伐郑，郑倍晋故也。
现代文：晋国讨伐郑国，因为郑国背叛了晋国。
English: Jin attacked Zheng, because Zheng betrayed Jin.

古文：三年，郑伯初立，附晋而弃楚。
现代文：三年，郑伯刚刚即位，郑国归附晋国却背弃了楚国。
English: Three years later, Zheng Bo had just ascended to the throne, but he turned his back on Chu after Zheng was annexed to Jin.

古文：楚怒，伐郑，晋往救之。
现代文：楚王生气了，讨伐郑国，晋国前往援救。
English: King Chu got angry, attacked Zheng, and Jin went to the rescue.

古文：六年，伐秦，虏秦将赤。
现代文：六年，晋国攻打秦国，俘虏了秦国将军赤。
English: In the sixth year, Jin attacked Qin and captured the Qin general Zhou.

古文：七年，成公与楚庄王争强，会诸侯于扈。
现代文：七年，晋成公与楚庄王争压霸权，在扈邑会见诸侯。
English: In the seventh year, Prince Jincheng competed with the king of Chuzhuang for hegemony, and met with the princes in Zouyi.

古文：陈畏楚，不会。
现代文：陈国畏惧楚国，未去赴会。
English: Chen Guo was afraid of Chu Guo and did not go to the meeting.

古文：晋使中行桓子伐陈，因救郑，与楚战，败楚师。
现代文：晋国派中行桓了讨伐陈国，因而救援郑国，与楚国交战，打败了楚军。
English: The Jin faction went to the aid of Zheng and fought with Chu, defeating the Chu army.

古文：是年，成公卒，子景公据立。
现代文：那一年，成公逝世，儿子景公据即位。
English: That year, Chenggong died and his son Jinggong ascended to the throne.

古文：景公元年春，陈大夫夏征舒弑其君灵公。
现代文：景公元年的春季，陈国大夫夏征舒杀死了自己的国君灵公。
English: In the spring of the year of Jing, Xia Zhengshu, the doctor of Chen Guodong, killed his own sovereign Linggong.

古文：二年，楚庄王伐陈，诛征舒。
现代文：二年，楚庄王讨伐陈国，杀死了征舒。
English: Two years later, the king of Chu Zhuang invaded Chen Province and killed Zhe Shu.

古文：三年，楚庄王围郑，郑告急晋。
现代文：三年，楚庄王包围郑国，郑国向晋国求救。
English: Three years later, the king of Chuzhuang besieged Zheng, and Zheng appealed to Jin for help.

古文：晋使荀林父将中军，随会将上军，赵朔将下军，郄克、栾书、先縠、韩厥、巩朔佐之。
现代文：晋国派荀林父统帅中军，随会统帅上军，赵朔统帅下军，郤克、栾书、先穀、韩厥、巩朔辅佐他们。
English: Jin sent Yulin's father as commander of the Central Army, the attendant commander of the upper army, Zhao Shuo as commander of the lower army, and Zou Ke, Zou Shu, Xiang Gu, Han Jue and Gong Shuo to assist them.

古文：六月，至河。
现代文：六月，晋军赶到黄河。
English: In June, the Jin army arrived at the Yellow River.

古文：闻楚已服郑，郑伯肉袒与盟而去，荀林父欲还。
现代文：听说楚国已降服郑国，郑伯脱去上衣露出胳膊与楚国结盟，楚军就回去了，荀林父想班师回晋。
English: Hearing that the State of Chu had surrendered to the State of Zheng, Zheng Bo took off his shirt to reveal his arm and allied with the State of Chu. The Chu army then went back. Yulin's father wanted to return to Jin.

古文：先縠曰： 凡来救郑，不至不可，将率离心。 
现代文：先穀说： 总算是来救郑国的，不到达不可以，否则将帅将要离心离德。 
English: Sankoku said, "I have finally come to save Zheng. If I don't make it, I won't be able to. Otherwise, I will be separated from Germany."

古文：卒度河。
现代文：晋军终于渡过黄河。
English: The Jin army finally crossed the Yellow River.

古文：楚已服郑，欲饮马于河为名而去。
现代文：楚国已经降服郑国，想在黄河饮马扬名就离开郑国。
English: Chu has already surrendered to Zheng. If he wants to be famous in the Yellow River, he should leave Zheng.

古文：楚与晋军大战。郑新附楚，畏之，反助楚攻晋。
现代文：楚晋两军大战，郑国刚刚归附楚国，惧怕楚国，反而帮助楚军进攻晋军。
English: In the great war between the two armies of Chu and Jin, Zheng had just annexed Chu and was afraid of Chu. Instead, he helped the Chu army attack the Jin army.

古文：晋军败，走河，争度，船中人指甚众。
现代文：晋军大败，退到黄河边，士兵争船渡河，船中有很多被砍掉的手指。
English: The Jin army suffered a crushing defeat and retreated to the Yellow River. Soldiers fought to cross the river in boats, and many of them had their fingers chopped off.

古文：楚虏我将智罃。
现代文：楚国俘虏了晋军大将智。
English: Chu captured the general of the Jin army, Zhisheng.

古文：归而林父曰： 臣为督将，军败当诛，请死。 
现代文：晋军返回晋国后，林父说： 我是大将，晋军失败我应该被杀，请求死罪。 
English: After the Jin army returned to Jin, Lin father said: I am a general, if the Jin army fails, I should be killed, and asked for the death penalty.

古文：景公欲许之。
现代文：晋景公想答应他。
English: Jin Jing Gong wanted to agree with him.

古文：随会曰： 昔文公之与楚战城濮，成王归杀子玉，而文公乃喜。
现代文：随会说： 过去文公与楚国在城濮作战，楚成王回到楚国后杀死了大将子玉，文公才高兴。
English: He said casually: In the past, Wengong fought with the State of Chu in Chenghuang. After King Chu Cheng returned to the State of Chu, he killed the general Zi Yuping. Wengong was very happy.

古文：今楚已败我师，又诛其将，是助楚杀仇也。 
现代文：今天，楚国已经打败了我军，我们又杀死自己的将军，这是帮助楚国杀死楚国的仇人。 
English: Today, the State of Chu has defeated our army, and we have killed our own general. This is helping the State of Chu to kill the enemies of the State of Chu.

古文：乃止。
现代文：晋景公听了这番话才罢手。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：四年，先縠以首计而败晋军河上，恐诛，乃奔翟，与翟谋伐晋。
现代文：四年，先穀因为首先建议而使晋军在黄河畔吃了败仗，害怕被杀，于是逃亡到翟，与翟国商量讨伐晋国。
English: In the fourth year, Xianggu's first suggestion led to the defeat of the Jin army on the banks of the Yellow River, and he was afraid of being killed, so he fled to Shandong and discussed with Shandong to fight against Jin.

古文：晋觉，乃族縠。縠，先轸子也。
现代文：晋国发觉后就杀死了先穀整个家族。先穀是先轸的儿子。
English: When the Jin discovered this, they killed Sengoku's entire family. Sengoku was Sengoku's son.

古文：五年，伐郑，为助楚故也。
现代文：五年，晋国讨伐郑国，因为它援助楚国。
English: In the fifth year, Jin attacked Zheng for helping Chu.

古文：是时楚庄王强，以挫晋兵河上也。
现代文：当时楚庄王很强大，结果在黄河边挫败了晋军。
English: At that time, the king of Chu Zhuang was very powerful, and as a result, he defeated the Jin army at the Yellow River.

古文：六年，楚伐宋，宋来告急晋，晋欲救之，伯宗谋曰： 楚，天方开之，不可当。 
现代文：六年，楚国讨伐宋国，宋国便向晋国求援，晋国想去援救。伯宗献计说： 楚国，上天正兴发它，不能阻挡。 
English: In the sixth year, Chu attacked Song, and Song asked Jin for help, and Jin wanted to come to the rescue. Bozong Xianke said, "Chu, the heavens are sending it, it cannot be stopped."

古文：乃使解扬绐为救宋。
现代文：于是晋国派解扬谎称救援宋国。
English: As a result, the Jin faction falsely claimed that they were rescuing Song.

古文：郑人执与楚，楚厚赐，使反其言，令宋急下。
现代文：郑国人抓住解扬把他交给了楚国，楚国赏赐了他很多财物，让他说反话，以使宋国赶快败下阵来。
English: The people of Zheng grabbed Xie Yang and handed him over to the State of Chu. The State of Chu rewarded him with a lot of wealth, and asked him to say something negative, so that the State of Song would quickly be defeated.

古文：解扬绐许之，卒致晋君言。
现代文：解扬假装许诺，终于将晋君的话告诉了宋国。
English: Xie Yang pretended to promise, and finally told Jin Jun's words to Song Guo.

古文：楚欲杀之，或谏，乃归解扬。
现代文：楚国想杀死他，有人观谏，楚国便放回了解扬。
English: The state of Chu wanted to kill him, some people watched, and then the state of Chu released him.

古文：七年，晋使随会灭赤狄。
现代文：七年，晋国派随会灭亡了赤狄。
English: In the seventh year, the Jin Guo faction's attendant organization, the Red Di, was destroyed.

古文：八年，使郄克于齐。
现代文：八年，晋国派郤克出使齐国。
English: In the eighth year, Jin sent an envoy to Qi.

古文：齐顷公母从楼上观而笑之。
现代文：齐顷公的母亲从楼上观看而发笑。
English: Father Qi's mother laughed as she watched from upstairs.

古文：所以然者，郄克偻，而鲁使蹇，卫使眇，故齐亦令人如之以导客。
现代文：之所以如此，是因为郤克驼背，而鲁国使者跛足，卫国使者一只眼瞎，这样，齐君也派同样的残疾人去引导宾客。
English: The reason for this is that he is a hunchback, while the envoy of Lu is lame, and the envoy of the motherland is blind, so Qi Jun also sent the same disabled people to guide the guests.

古文：郄克怒，归至河上，曰： 不报齐者，河伯视之！ 
现代文：郤克很生气，回到黄河畔发誓说： 不报复齐国，河伯来见证！ 
English: Yan Ke was very angry and returned to the bank of the Yellow River and swore: I will not take revenge on Qi Guo, Hebei to witness!

古文：至国，请君，欲伐齐。
现代文：郤克返回晋国，向晋君请求攻打齐国。
English: Yan Ke returned to Jin and asked Jin to attack Qi.

古文：景公问知其故，曰： 子之怨，安足以烦国！ 
现代文：晋景公询问进攻的原因后，说： 你有怨气，怎么能够烦扰国家呢？ 
English: After inquiring about the reason for the attack, Jin Jing Gong said: You have a grudge, how can you bother the country?

古文：弗听。
现代文：晋君没有听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：魏文子请老休，辟郄克，克执政。
现代文：魏文子因年迈请求辞职，推荐了郤克，郤克执掌国家政权。
English: Wei Wenzi requested to resign due to his old age, and recommended Zheng Ke, who took charge of the state power.

古文：九年，楚庄王卒。
现代文：九年，楚庄王逝世。
English: Nine years later, King Chu Zhuang passed away.

古文：晋伐齐，齐使太子强为质于晋，晋兵罢。
现代文：晋国讨伐齐国，齐国派太子强到晋国做人质，晋军才停止进攻。
English: Jin fought against Qi, and Qi sent a powerful prince to Jin as a hostage, but the Jin army did not stop attacking.

古文：十一年春，齐伐鲁，取隆。
现代文：十一年的春季，齐国讨伐鲁国，夺取了隆。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the State of Qi invaded the State of Lu and captured Long.

古文：鲁告急卫，卫与鲁皆因郄克告急于晋。
现代文：鲁国向卫国告急。卫国和鲁国都通过郤克赂晋国求救。
English: Lu was in a hurry to get to Wei, and both Wei and Lu asked Jin for help through bribery.

古文：晋乃使郄克、栾书、韩厥以兵车八百乘与鲁、卫共伐齐。
现代文：晋国就派郤克、栾书、韩厥用八百辆战车和鲁国、卫国共同讨伐齐国。
English: Jin dispatched eight hundred chariots to Lu, Ying, and Han to jointly fight against Qi.

古文：夏，与顷公战于鞍，伤困顷公。顷公乃与其右易位，下取饮，以得脱去。
现代文：夏天，晋国与齐顷公在鞍交战，顷公受伤被困，于是便与他的护右交换了座位，下车去找水喝，从而逃脱而去。
English: In the summer, Jin Guo and Qi Hao fought in the saddle. He was injured and trapped, so he exchanged seats with his bodyguard, got out of the car to find water to drink, and escaped.

古文：齐师败走，晋追北至齐。
现代文：齐军大败而逃，晋国追赶败兵一直达到齐都。
English: The Qi army was defeated and fled, and Jin chased the defeated soldiers all the way to Qi.

古文：顷公献宝器以求平，不听。
现代文：顷公献上宝器求和，晋国不同意。
English: Jin did not agree to a public offering of treasure to seek a compromise.

古文：郄克曰： 必得萧桐侄子为质。 
现代文：郤克说： 一定要得到萧桐姪子作人质。 
English: Yan Ke said: We must get Xiao Tong's nephew as a hostage.

古文：齐使曰： 萧桐侄子，顷公母；顷公母犹晋君母，奈何必得之？
现代文：齐国使者说： 萧桐姪子是顷公的母亲，顷公的母亲如同晋君的母亲，怎么一定要得到她呢？
English: The envoy of Qi said: Xiao Tong's niece is the mother of Hao Gong, and Hao Gong's mother is like Jin Jun's mother, how can you be sure to get her?

古文：不义，请复战。 
现代文：你们太不讲信义了，请求再一次交战。 
English: You are being very disloyal, asking for another war.

古文：晋乃许与平而去。
现代文：结果晋才答应与齐讲和而离去。
English: As a result, Jin finally agreed to make peace with Qi and left.

古文：楚申公巫臣盗夏姬以奔晋，晋以巫臣为邢大夫。
现代文：楚申公巫臣偷娶了夏姬逃到晋国，晋君拜巫臣做邢邑大夫。
English: The prince of Chushun, the sorcerer, secretly married the princess, and fled to Jin. The prince of Jin asked the sorcerer to be the magistrate of Jin.

古文：十二年冬，齐顷公如晋，欲上尊晋景公为王，景公让不敢。
现代文：十二年的冬季，齐顷公到了晋国，想尊王奉晋景公为，景公辞谢不敢当。
English: In the winter of the twelfth year, Prince Qi He arrived in Jin Province. He wanted to worship King Jing of Jin, but King Jing did not dare to do so.

古文：晋始作六军，韩厥、巩朔、赵穿、荀骓、赵括、赵旃皆为卿，智自楚归。
现代文：晋国开始设置六军，韩厥、巩朔、赵穿、荀骓、赵括、赵旃都被封为卿。
English: Jin Province began to set up six armies, and Han Jue, Gong Shuo, Zhao Zorong, Yao, Zhao Kuo, and Zhao Yao were all given titles of nobility.

古文：十三年，鲁成公朝晋，晋弗敬，鲁怒去，倍晋。
现代文：智罃也从楚国返回晋国。十三年，鲁成公朝拜晋国国君，晋君很不礼貌，鲁君生气地走了，背叛了晋国。
English: Zhisheng also returned to Jin from Chu. In the thirteenth year, Lu Chenggong bowed to the ruler of Jin. Jin was very impolite, and Lu went away angry, betraying Jin.

古文：晋伐郑，取汜。
现代文：晋国讨伐了郑国，攻下了汜。
English: Jin fought against Zheng and conquered Quzhou.

古文：十四年，梁山崩。
现代文：十四年，梁山发生山崩。
English: Fourteen years ago, a landslide occurred in Liangshan.

古文：问伯宗，伯宗以为不足怪也。
现代文：晋君询部伯宗，伯宗认为不值得大惊小怪。
English: Jinjun inquired with his superior, Bozong, who didn't think it was worth making a fuss.

古文：十六年，楚将子反怨巫臣，灭其族。
现代文：十六年，楚国大将子反怨恨巫臣，杀死了巫臣整个家族。
English: In the 16th year, the general of the State of Chu harbored a grudge against the sorcerer and killed his entire family.

古文：巫臣怒，遗子反书曰： 必令子罢于奔命！ 
现代文：巫臣十分气恼，给子反一封信说： 一定会让你这一辈子都疲于奔命！ 
English: The sorcerer was very angry and wrote a letter to his son saying, "This will surely make you tired of running for your life!"

古文：乃请使吴，令其子为吴行人，教吴乘车用兵。
现代文：于是巫臣请求出使吴国，让自己的儿子作吴国的行人，教吴国士兵乘车用兵的方法。
English: Therefore, the Wushen requested the envoy of the State of Wu to let his son be a pedestrian of the State of Wu and teach the soldiers of the State of Wu how to use the army by car.

古文：吴晋始通，约伐楚。
现代文：吴、晋两国开始有交往，约定一起攻打楚国。
English: The two countries of Wu and Jin began to have contacts and agreed to attack Chu together.

古文：十七年，诛赵同、赵括，族灭之。
现代文：十七年，晋景公杀死了赵同、赵括，并灭亡了他们的家族。
English: In the seventeenth year, King Jinjing killed Zhaotong and Zhaobai and destroyed their family.

古文：韩厥曰： 赵衰、赵盾之功岂可忘乎？
现代文：韩厥说： 怎么能忘记赵衰、赵盾的功劳呢？
English: Han Jue said, "How can we forget the merits of Zhao Zhen and Zhao Dun?"

古文：奈何绝祀！ 
现代文：怎么能断绝他们的香火呢？ 
English: How can their incense be cut off?

古文：乃复令赵庶子武为赵后，复与之邑。
现代文：于是，晋景公又让赵氏庶子赵武作为赵氏后代，又赐给他城池。
English: As a result, Prince Jinjing also made Zhao Wu, the illegitimate son of the Zhao clan, a descendant of the Zhao clan, and gave him the castle.

古文：十九年夏，景公病，立其太子寿曼为君，是为厉公。
现代文：十九年的夏季，景公病重，立太子寿曼做国君，这就是厉公。
English: In the summer of nineteen years, Jing Gong was seriously ill, and Crown Prince Shuman was appointed as the head of state. This is Liguo.

古文：后月余，景公卒。
现代文：一个月后，景公逝世。
English: A month later, Jing Gong passed away.

古文：厉公元年，初立，欲和诸侯，与秦桓公夹河而盟。
现代文：厉公元年，因为刚刚即位，厉公想与诸侯会盟，便与秦桓公隔着黄河订立盟约。
English: In the year of Li, because he had just ascended to the throne, Li Gong wanted to make an alliance with the princes, so he made an alliance with Qin Huan Gong across the Yellow River.

古文：归而秦倍盟，与翟谋伐晋。
现代文：回国后秦国就违背盟约，和翟商量攻打晋国。
English: After returning to China, Qin broke the treaty and attacked Jin after consulting with Yan.

古文：三年，使吕相让秦，因与诸侯伐秦。
现代文：三年，晋国派吕相谴责秦国，借机和诸侯讨伐秦国。
English: In the third year, the Jin sent Lv Xiang to denounce Qin, and the lords took the opportunity to invade Qin.

古文：至泾，败秦于麻隧，虏其将成差。
现代文：兵至泾水，在麻隧打败秦军，俘虏了秦国大将成差。
English: The soldiers went as far as Surabaya, defeated the Qin army at Ma Tunnel, and captured the general of Qin.

古文：五年，三郄谗伯宗，杀之。
现代文：五年，郤锜、郤犨、郤至中伤伯宗，晋君杀死他。
English: In the fifth year,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

古文：伯宗以好直谏得此祸，国人以是不附厉公。
现代文：伯宗是因为喜好直言劝谏才召来这个灾祸，百姓因此不再信任厉公。
English: This calamity was brought about by Bozong's penchant for blunt persuasion. As a result, the people no longer trusted Li Gong.

古文：六年春，郑倍晋与楚盟，晋怒。
现代文：六年的春季，郑国背叛了晋国与楚国结盟，晋厉公大怒。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Zheng betrayed the alliance between Jin and Chu, and Jin Liguo was furious.

古文：栾书曰： 不可以当吾世而失诸侯。 
现代文：栾书说： 不可以在我们这一代失去诸侯。 
English: The imperial rescript said: It is not possible to lose princes in our generation.

古文：乃发兵。
现代文：于是，晋国派军队攻打郑国。
English: As a result, Jin sent troops to attack Zheng.

古文：厉公自将，五月度河。
现代文：厉公亲自统帅军队，五月渡过黄河。
English: Li Gong personally commanded the army and crossed the Yellow River in May.

古文：闻楚兵来救，范文子请公欲还。
现代文：听说楚军来援救，范文子请求厉公撤兵。
English: Hearing that the Chu army was coming to the rescue, Fan Wenzi asked Li Gong to withdraw the troops.

古文：郄至曰： 发兵诛逆，见强辟之，无以令诸侯。 
现代文：郤至说： 派军讨伐逆贼，遇到了强敌就躲避，以后将无法再对诸侯发号施令。 
English: Zou Zi said, "I sent troops to fight against the traitors, but when I encountered a strong enemy, I hid. From now on, I will no longer be able to give orders to the lords."

古文：遂与战。
现代文：于是，晋国与楚国交战。
English: As a result, Jin and Chu went to war.

古文：癸巳，射中楚共王目，楚兵败于鄢陵。
现代文：癸巳日，晋军射伤了楚共王的眼睛，楚军在鄢陵失败。
English: On the same day, the Jin army shot and wounded the eyes of the King of Chu, and the Chu army failed in Fuling.

古文：子反收余兵，拊循欲复战，晋患之。
现代文：子反聚集残兵，安抚好楚军，想再一次与晋交战，晋国为此十分忧虑。
English: The Zi rebels gathered the remaining soldiers, pacified the Chu army, and wanted to fight Jin again. Jin was very worried about this.

古文：共王召子反，其侍者竖阳谷进酒，子反醉，不能见。
现代文：共王召唤子反，子反的侍者竖阳谷向他敬酒，子反喝醉了，不能去拜见共王。
English: The king summons the traitor, and the traitor's waiter, Zhayanggu, toasts him. The traitor is drunk and cannot go to see the king.

古文：王怒，让子反，子反死。
现代文：共王很生气，责备子反，子反被射杀。
English: The king of the Communists was very angry, he blamed the rebels, and the rebels were shot.

古文：王遂引兵归。
现代文：共王于是带兵返回楚国。
English: The king then led his troops back to Chu.

古文：晋由此威诸侯，欲以令天下求霸。
现代文：晋国因此威振诸侯，晋厉公想趁这个机会号令天下，求得霸权。
English: As a result, Jin was able to intimidate the princes. Jin Liguo wanted to take advantage of this opportunity to dominate the world and seek hegemony.

古文：厉公多外嬖姬，归，欲尽去群大夫而立诸姬兄弟。
现代文：厉公有很多宠姬，回国后，想免除所有大臣的职务，任用宠姬的兄弟。
English: Liguo had many favorites. After returning to China, he wanted to remove all ministers from their posts and appoint the brother of the favorite.

古文：宠姬兄曰胥童，尝与郄至有怨，及栾书又怨郄至不用其计而遂败楚，乃使人间谢楚。
现代文：有个宠姬的哥哥叫胥童，曾与郤至有矛盾，再加上栾书又怨恨郤至不使用自己的计谋竟打败了楚军，就派人暗中向楚国道歉。
English: There was a beloved elder brother called Xing Tong, who once had a conflict with Zou Zu, and together with Zou Shu and the resentment of Zou Zu, he defeated the Chu army without using his own strategy, and sent someone to secretly apologize to the state of Chu.

古文：楚来诈厉公曰： 鄢陵之战，实至召楚，欲作乱，内子周立之。
现代文：楚国派人欺骗厉公说： 鄢陵一战，实际是郤至召来楚国参与的，郤至想作乱，迎接公子周到晋国即位。
English: The State of Chu sent someone to deceive Li Gong and say: "The First Battle of Huling actually started when I summoned the State of Chu to participate, when I wanted to create a disturbance to welcome Prince Zhou to ascend to the throne of Jin."

古文：会与国不具，是以事不成。 
现代文：恰好盟国没有准备好，所以事情才没有成功。 
English: It just so happened that the allies weren't ready, so it didn't work out.

古文：厉公告栾书。栾书曰： 其殆有矣！愿公试使人之周微考之。 
现代文：厉公把引话告诉给栾书，栾书说： 大概有这种情况，国君您不妨试着派他到周都，然后暗中调查一下。 
English: Li Gong told the quotation to Ren Shu, and Ren Shu said: This is probably the case. Your Majesty, you may try to send him to Zhou and then secretly investigate.

古文：果使郄至于周。
现代文：厉公果然派郤至到周京。
English: Rigong successfully sent the urn to Zhoujing.

古文：栾书又使公子周见郄至，郄至不知见卖也。
现代文：栾书又让公子周会见郤至，郤至却不知道自己已被出卖。
English: Zou Shu also let Gongzi Zhou meet Zou Zu, but Zou Zu did not know that he had been betrayed.

古文：厉公验之，信然，遂怨郄至，欲杀之。
现代文：厉公验证这件事，认为郤至确实想谋反，于是很痛恨郤至，想杀死他。
English: Li Gong verified this matter and thought that Zou Zi really wanted to rebel, so he hated Zou Zi very much and wanted to kill him.

古文：八年，厉公猎，与姬饮，郄至杀豕奉进，宦者夺之。郄至射杀宦者。
现代文：八年，厉公去打猎，之后与宠姬饮酒，郤至杀猪奉献给厉公，被宦者夺去，郤至射死了宦者。
English: In the eighth year, Liguang went hunting, after which he drank alcohol with Zhaojie. Liguang killed a pig and dedicated it to Liguang. The pig was taken away by Liguang, and Liguang shot and killed Liguang.

古文：公怒，曰： 季子欺予！ 
现代文：厉公很生气说： 季子欺侮我！ 
English: Li Gong was very angry and said, "Qizi bullied me!

古文：将诛三郄，未发也。
现代文：打算杀掉三郤，还未动手。
English: He intends to kill the three baboons, but has not yet done so.

古文：郄钩欲攻公，曰： 我虽死，公亦病矣。 
现代文：郤锜想先下手为强，进攻厉公，说： 我虽然也许会死，国君也会遭难。 
English: He thought it would be better to strike first, so he attacked Liguo and said, "Although I may die, the sovereign will also suffer."

古文：郄至曰： 信不反君，智不害民，勇不作乱。
现代文：郤至说： 讲忠诚，就不能背叛君主；追求名字，就不能祸害百姓；将勇猛，就不能挑起乱子。
English: Zou Zi said: If you are loyal, you cannot betray the monarch; if you seek fame, you cannot harm the people; if you are brave, you cannot stir up trouble.

古文：失此三者，谁与我？
现代文：失去这三种美德，谁肯帮助我？
English: Without these three virtues, who will help me?

古文：我死耳！ 
现代文：我还是死了吧。 
English: I might as well be dead.

古文：十二月壬午，公令胥童以兵八百人袭攻杀三郄。
现代文：十二月壬午日，厉公让胥童带领八百名士兵袭击攻杀三郤。
English: On the afternoon of December 12th, Liguang let Xing Tong lead eight hundred soldiers to attack and kill Sanqi.

古文：胥童因以劫栾书、中行偃于朝，曰： 不杀二子，患必及公。 
现代文：胥童借机在朝廷上劫持了栾书、中行偃，说： 不杀死这两个人，灾祸一定落到国君您头上。 
English: Xing Tong took the opportunity to kidnap Zou Shu and Zhong Xing Zou at the imperial court, saying: "If you don't kill these two people, the calamity will surely fall on the head of the sovereign."

古文：公曰： 一旦杀三卿，寡人不忍益也。 
现代文：厉公说： 一个早上就杀死了三位卿士，我不忍心再多杀人了。 
English: Li Gong said, "I killed three nobles in one morning. I can't bear to kill any more people."

古文：对曰： 人将忍君。 
现代文：胥童回答说： 可是别人会忍心杀了您。 
English: The boy replied, "But others will have the heart to kill you."

古文：公弗听，谢栾书等以诛郄氏罪： 大夫复位。 
现代文：厉公不听，并对栾书道歉说明只是惩治郤氏的罪过： 大夫们都恢复职位。 
English: Liguang did not listen, and apologized for the letter, explaining that he was only punishing Mr. Zou's sins: The doctors all resumed their positions.

古文：二子顿首曰： 幸甚幸甚！ 
现代文：两人磕头拜谢说： 实在太幸运了，太幸运了！ 
English: The two bowed their heads and said, "We are so lucky, so lucky!"

古文：公使胥童为卿。
现代文：厉公让胥童担任卿。
English: Rigong let Xing Tong assume the post of chancellor.

古文：闰月乙卯，厉公游匠骊氏，栾书、中行偃以其党袭捕厉公，囚之，杀胥童，而使人迎公子周于周而立之，是为悼公。
现代文：闰月乙卯日，厉公到匠骊氏家去游玩，栾书、中行偃派他们的党羽袭击逮捕了厉公，囚禁起来，杀死了胥童，并派人从周都迎接回公子周，立他为君王，这就是晋悼公。
English: On the second day of the leap month, Liguo went to visit the house of the craftsman Zhou, and Zenshu and Zhongxing sent their party members to attack and arrest Liguo, imprison him, kill the boy, and send people from Zhou to welcome back the boy Zhou and make him the king. This is the Jinyi Gong.

古文：悼公元年正月庚申，栾书、中行偃弑厉公，葬之以一乘车。
现代文：悼公元年，正月庚申日，栾书、中行偃杀死了厉公，只用一辆车陪葬了他。
English: In the year of mourning, in the first month of the year of mourning, in the first day of the month of mourning, Yishu and Zhongxing killed Li Gong and buried him with only one car.

古文：厉公囚六日死，死十日庚午，智罃迎公子周来，至绛，刑鸡与大夫盟而立之，是为悼公。
现代文：厉公是在被囚禁了六天后死去的，死去十天后的庚午日，智迎接公子周来晋，到了绛，杀鸡和大夫结盟拥立公子周，这就是悼公。
English: Li Gong died six days after he was imprisoned. On the afternoon of the 10th day after his death, Zhou Lai Jin was greeted by Zhisheng, and on the day of his death, Zhou Kui and Du Fu allied to support Zhou Lai Jin. This was the mourning for the deceased.

古文：辛巳，朝武宫。
现代文：辛巳日，到武宫朝拜。
English: On the day of Shinshi, they went to the Imperial Palace to pay homage.

古文：二月乙酉，即位。
现代文：二月乙酉日，公子周即位。
English: On February 2nd, Prince Zhou ascended to the throne.

古文：悼公周者，其大父捷，晋襄公少子也，不得立，号为桓叔，桓叔最爱。
现代文：悼公周的祖父捷是晋襄公的儿子，没能继位，号称桓叔，桓叔最受襄公的喜爱。
English: Zhou's grandfather Jie was the son of Prince Jinxiang, who did not succeed to the throne, and was known as Uncle Huan. Uncle Huan was the most beloved of Prince Xiang.

古文：桓叔生惠伯谈，谈生悼公周。
现代文：桓叔生下惠伯谈，谈生下悼公周。
English: Uncle Huan talks about the birth of Hui Bo, and talks about the birth of mourning Zhou.

古文：周之立，年十四矣。
现代文：悼公周即位的时候只有十四岁。
English: He was only fourteen years old when he ascended to the throne.

古文：悼公曰： 大父、父皆不得立而辟难于周，客死焉。
现代文：悼公说： 祖父、父亲都未能继位而到周避难，客死在周。
English: The mourners said: Both grandfather and father were unable to succeed to the throne and took refuge in Zhou. The guest died in Zhou.

古文：寡人自以疏远，毋几为君。
现代文：我认为自己已经疏远了，从未盼望当晋君。
English: I think I've drifted away and I've never aspired to be king.

古文：今大夫不忘文、襄之意而惠立桓叔之后，赖宗庙大夫之灵，得奉晋祀，岂敢不战战乎？
现代文：今天，大夫们不忘文公、襄公的意愿而拥立我这个桓叔的后代，全仰仗祖宗和先大夫们的威灵，得以继承晋国的祭祀，怎么敢不兢兢业业啊！
English: Today, the doctors do not forget the wishes of King Wen and King Xiang and support me, the descendant of Uncle Huan. They all rely on the spirit of their ancestors and previous doctors to inherit the sacrificial rites of Jin. How dare they not be diligent!

古文：大夫其亦佐寡人！ 
现代文：希望大夫们好好辅佐我！ 
English: I hope the doctors will support me well!

古文：于是逐不臣者七人，修旧功，施德惠，收文公入时功臣后。
现代文：于是驱逐了不忠于国君的七个大臣，修整旧的功业，向百姓布施恩惠，抚恤文公回晋时各位功臣的后代。
English: As a result, he expelled seven ministers who were not loyal to the sovereign, rectified the old exploits, gave favors to the people, and brought back the descendants of the heroes of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：秋，伐郑。
现代文：秋天，晋国讨伐郑国。
English: In autumn, Jin attacked Zheng.

古文：郑师败，遂至陈。
现代文：郑军大败，晋军于是又侵犯陈国。
English: Zheng's army was soundly defeated, and the Jin army invaded Chen again.

古文：三年，晋会诸侯。
现代文：三年，晋国会见诸侯。
English: Three years later, the Jin Dynasty saw the rise of the lords.

古文：悼公问群臣可用者，祁傒举解狐。
现代文：悼公向大臣们询问可以任用的人，祁傒推荐解狐。
English: Miao Gong asked the ministers who could be appointed and recommended Xie Juxu.

古文：解狐，傒之仇。
现代文：解狐是祁傒的仇人。
English: The fox is the enemy of the badger.

古文：复问，举其子祁午。
现代文：悼公又问还有谁，祁傒又推荐自己的儿子祁午。
English: The mourner also asked who else, and the donkey recommended his own son, the donkey.

古文：君子曰： 祁傒可谓不党矣！
现代文：君子说： 祁傒可以算作不偏私了。
English: The gentleman said, "You can count me as impartial.

古文：外举不隐仇，内举不隐子。 
现代文：在外举荐不避仇人，在内荐不避儿子。 
English: Do not shun your enemies when making recommendations to others, and do not shun your sons when making recommendations to others.

古文：方会诸侯，悼公弟杨干乱行，魏绛戮其仆。
现代文：正在会见诸侯时，悼公的弟弟杨干乱了军阵，魏绛杀死了他的驾车人。
English: While he was meeting with the princes, his younger brother Yang Gan disrupted the military formation, and Wei Xuan killed his driver.

古文：悼公怒，或谏公，公卒贤绛，任之政，使和戎，戎大亲附。
现代文：悼公很生气，有人劝谏悼公，悼公终于认识到绛很有贤德，任用他主持政务，派他与戎讲和，戎终于非常亲近晋国。
English: Yue Gong was very angry, someone advised him to consult Yue Gong. Yue Gong finally realized that Yue Rong was very virtuous, appointed him to preside over government affairs, and sent him to make peace with Rong. Rong finally became very close to Jin.

古文：十一年，悼公曰： 自吾用魏绛，九合诸侯，和戎、翟，魏子之力也。 
现代文：十一年，悼公说： 从我任用魏绛以来，九次会合诸侯，与戎翟和解了，这全是魏子的功劳。 
English: In the eleventh year, Lai Gong said, "Since I appointed Wei Zuo, there have been nine meetings of the lords, and they have reconciled with Wu Zuo. This is all the merit of Wei Zi."

古文：赐之乐，三让乃受之。
现代文：悼公赐给他乐队，他三次辞让才接受下来。
English: He was given the band by the king of mourning, and he had to turn it down three times before he accepted it.

古文：冬，秦取我栎。
现代文：冬天，秦国攻取了晋国的栎。
English: In the winter, the Qin conquered the Shan of the Jin.

古文：十四年，晋使六卿率诸侯伐秦，度泾，大败秦军，至棫林而去。
现代文：十四年，晋国派六卿率领诸侯们讨伐秦国，渡过泾河，把秦军打得大败，直到棫林才离去。
English: In the 14th year of the Jin Dynasty, the six princes of the State of Jin led the princes in a crusade against the State of Qin. They crossed the Li River and defeated the Qin army. They did not leave until they reached Yulin.

古文：十五年，悼公问治国于师旷。
现代文：十五年，悼公向师旷询问治国的道理。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, Mui Gong asked Shiguang about the principles of governing the country.

古文：师旷曰： 惟仁义为本。 
现代文：师旷说： 只有仁义是根本。 
English: Shigeaki said: Only benevolence and righteousness are fundamental.

古文：冬，悼公卒，子平公彪立。
现代文：冬季，悼公逝世，儿子平公彪即位。
English: In the winter, King Mui died, and his son, King Ping Biao, ascended to the throne.

古文：平公元年，伐齐，齐灵公与战靡下，齐师败走。
现代文：平公元年，晋国讨伐齐国，齐灵公与晋国在靡下交战。齐军战败逃走。
English: In the year of the Heian era, Jin Province fought against Qi Province, and Qi Ling Gong fought against Jin Province. Qi Army was defeated and fled.

古文：晏婴曰： 君亦毋勇，何不止战？ 
现代文：晏婴说： 国君既然没有勇气继续作战，为何不停止打仗？ 
English: The infant said, "Since the sovereign has no courage to continue the war, why doesn't he stop fighting?"

古文：遂去。
现代文：齐军于是离去了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：晋追，遂围临菑，尽烧屠其郭中。
现代文：晋国穷追不舍，包围了临菑，烧光了外城的房屋，杀光了外城的百姓。
English: The State of Jin pursued relentlessly, encircled Linyi, burned down all the houses in the outer city, and killed all the people in the outer city.

古文：东至胶，南至沂，齐皆城守，晋乃引兵归。
现代文：晋军东到胶水，南到沂水，齐军据城坚守，晋国于是就退兵返回了。
English: The Jin army went east to Glue, south to Surabaya, the Qi army held on to the city, and the Jin country then withdrew and returned.

古文：六年，鲁襄公朝晋。
现代文：六年，鲁襄公朝拜晋君。
English: In the sixth year, Lu Xianggong paid homage to Jinjun.

古文：晋栾逞有罪，奔齐。
现代文：晋栾逞犯了罪，逃到齐国。
English: Jin Xuan committed a crime and fled to Qi Province.

古文：八年，齐庄公微遣栾逞于曲沃，以兵随之。
现代文：八年，齐庄公暗中派栾逞到曲沃，又派军跟随他。
English: In the eighth year, the lord of Qizhuang secretly sent Zeng Gang to Quwo, and also sent troops to follow him.

古文：齐兵上太行，栾逞从曲沃中反，袭入绛。
现代文：齐军上了太行山，栾逞从曲沃内造反，袭击了绛。
English: The Qi army went up the Taihang Mountain, and the Jurchens rebelled from Quvonei and attacked the Jurchens.

古文：绛不戒，平公欲自杀，范献子止公，以其徒击逞，逞败走曲沃。
现代文：绛毫无警戒，平公想自杀，范献子阻止了平公，派自己的家兵袭击栾逞，栾逞被打败逃到了曲沃。
English: Without any warning, Ping Gong wanted to commit suicide. Fan Xianzi stopped Ping Gong and sent his own soldiers to attack Gong Gang. Gong Gang was defeated and fled to Quwo.

古文：曲沃攻逞，逞死，遂灭栾氏宗。
现代文：曲沃人攻打栾逞，栾逞被杀死，曲沃人还消灭了栾逞的族党。
English: The Quwos attacked and killed the Gan Gan, and the Quwos also wiped out the Gan Gan's clan party.

古文：逞者，栾书孙也。
现代文：栾逞的栾书的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of the great-great-grandson of the great-great-grandson.

古文：其入绛，与魏氏谋。
现代文：他进入绛时，与魏氏商量过。
English: He consulted with Mr. Wei when he entered the cocoon.

古文：齐庄公闻逞败，乃还，取晋之朝歌去，以报临菑之役也。
现代文：齐庄公听说栾逞失败，就返回了，攻取了晋国的朝歌离去，为的是报复临菑一战之仇。
English: When Lord Qizhuang heard of the defeat of the Xiang Gang, he returned, captured the morning song of Jin, and left in order to avenge the first battle of Linyi.

古文：十年，齐崔杼弑其君庄公。
现代文：十年，齐国的崔抒杀死自己的国君庄公。
English: Ten years later, Cui Lili of Qi killed his own sovereign, Zhuang Gong.

古文：晋因齐乱，伐败齐于高唐去，报太行之役也。
现代文：晋国趁齐国动乱，高唐打败齐军离去，为的是报复太行一战之仇。
English: Jin took advantage of the turmoil in Qi, Gaotang defeated the Qi army and left, in order to take revenge for Taihang's revenge.

古文：十四年，吴延陵季子来使，与赵文子、韩宣子、魏献子语，曰： 晋国之政，卒归此三家矣。 
现代文：十四年，吴国延陵季子出使来到晋国，曾与赵文子、韩宣子、魏献子谈话，事后说： 晋国的政权，终于要落在这三家手中。 
English: In the 14th year, Wu Guo Yanling Ji Zi sent an envoy to Jin. He had a conversation with Zhao Wenzi, Han Xuan Zi and Wei Xian Zi, and said afterwards: The political power of Jin will finally fall into the hands of these three families.

古文：十九年，齐使晏婴如晋，与叔向语。
现代文：十九年，齐国派晏婴出使晋国，晏婴与叔向谈话。
English: In the 19th year of the Qin Dynasty, Qin sent an envoy to Jin, and Qin had a conversation with his uncle.

古文：叔向曰： 晋，季世也。
现代文：叔向说： 晋国现在已经处于末世了。
English: Uncle Xiang said: Jin is now in the last days.

古文：公厚赋为台池而不恤政，政在私门，其可久乎！ 
现代文：平公向百姓征收重税修建池台楼阁却不务政事，国家大权已经落入私家门下，这样下去晋国难道可以长久吗？ 
English: Ping Gong levied heavy taxes on the people and built a palace, but he did not engage in politics. State power has fallen under private hands. Can Jin Guo really continue like this for a long time?

古文：晏子然之。
现代文：晏子表示同意。
English: Sadako agreed.

古文：二十二年，伐燕。
现代文：二十二年，晋国讨伐燕国。
English: Twenty-two years ago, the Jin State fought against the Yan State.

古文：二十六年，平公卒，子昭公夷立。
现代文：二十六年，平公逝世，他的儿子昭公夷即位。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, Emperor Ping died, and his son Emperor Zhaogongyi ascended to the throne.

古文：昭公六年卒。
现代文：昭公于六年逝世。
English: Shoko died six years later.

古文：六卿强，公室卑。
现代文：晋国六卿强大，公室却弱小了。
English: The six nobles of the Jin Dynasty were powerful, but the imperial court was weak.

古文：子顷公去疾立。
现代文：他的儿子顷公去疾即位。
English: His son ascended the throne after his father-in-law died of illness.

古文：顷公六年，周景王崩，王子争立。
现代文：顷公六年，周景王逝世，各公子们争夺王位。
English: Just six years later, King Zhou Jing died, and the princes fought for the throne.

古文：晋六卿平王室乱，立敬王。
现代文：晋国的六卿平息了周王室的乱子，拥立敬王。
English: The six nobles of Jin quelled the chaos of the Zhou royal family and supported and respected the king.

古文：九年，鲁季氏逐其君昭公，昭公居干侯。
现代文：九年，鲁季氏驱逐了自己的国君昭公，昭公被迫住在乾侯。
English: In the ninth year, the Ludi clan expelled their own sovereign, Akihiro, who was forced to live in the Dry Port.

古文：十一年，卫、宋使使请晋纳鲁君。
现代文：十一年，卫国、宋国派使者请求晋国送鲁君回国。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Wei, the State of Song sent an envoy to request the State of Jin to send Lu back to China.

古文：季平子私赂范献子，献子受之，乃谓晋君曰： 季氏无罪。 
现代文：季平子私下贿赂了范献子，献子接受贿赂后，就对晋君说： 季氏没有罪。 
English: Ji Ping Zi privately bribed Fan Xian Zi. After Xian Zi accepted the bribe, he said to Jin Jun: Ji is not guilty.

古文：不果入鲁君。
现代文：最终晋国没有送鲁昭公回国。
English: In the end, Jin did not send Lu Zhaogong back to China.

古文：十二年，晋之宗家祁傒孙，叔向子，相恶于君。
现代文：十二年，晋国公族祁傒的孙子，叔向的儿子，在晋君面前互相诋毁。
English: In the twelfth year of the Jin dynasty, the grandson of the Jin statesman Zou, the son of the uncle Xiang, slandered each other in front of the Jin prince.

古文：六卿欲弱公室，乃遂以法尽灭其族，而分其邑为十县，各令其子为大夫。
现代文：六卿想削弱国君的力量，便依照刑法杀死了这两个家族的所有人，并把他们的封邑划分为十个县，各自让自己的儿子去做大夫。
English: In order to weaken the power of the sovereign, the six lords killed all the members of the two families in accordance with the criminal law, and divided their fiefs into ten counties, each of which allowed their sons to become doctors.

古文：晋益弱，六卿皆大。
现代文：晋公室的力量更加弱小，六卿都强大起来。
English: The power of Jin Gongshu was even weaker, and the six nobles became more powerful.

古文：十四年，顷公卒，子定公午立。
现代文：十四年，顷公逝世，他的儿子定公午即位。
English: Fourteen years later, Emperor He died, and his son Emperor Ding ascended to the throne.

古文：定公十一年，鲁阳虎奔晋，赵鞅简子舍之。
现代文：定公十一年，鲁国的阳虎逃到晋国，赵鞅简子留宿了他。
English: In the eleventh year of King Ding's reign, Lu's Yanghu fled to Jin, and Zhao Zhen Jianzi stayed with him.

古文：十二年，孔子相鲁。
现代文：十二年，孔子做了鲁国的宰相。
English: In the twelfth year, Confucius became the prime minister of Lu.

古文：十五年，赵鞅使邯郸大夫午，不信，欲杀午，午与中行寅、范吉射亲攻赵鞅，鞅走保晋阳。
现代文：十五年，赵鞅与邯郸大夫午约定，要将卫贡五面家迁徙到晋阳，邯郸父兄不答应，赵鞅认为他不讲信义，想杀死午，午和中行寅、范吉射一起攻打赵鞅，赵鞅逃到晋阳防守。
English: In the fifteenth year, Zhao Yu and Dr. Yu agreed to move Wei Gong Wumen's family to Jinyang. Yu's father and brother did not agree, and Zhao Yu thought that he was not trustworthy and wanted to kill Wu. At noon, Zhong Xingyin and Fan Jizhe attacked Zhao Yu together, and Zhao Yu fled to Jinyang for defense.

古文：定公围晋阳。
现代文：晋定公包围了晋阳。
English: Jin Dingong besieged Jinyang.

古文：荀栎、韩不信、魏侈与范、中行为仇，乃移兵伐范、中行。
现代文：荀栎、韩不信、魏侈与范去射、中行寅有仇，就调军队攻打范去射、中行寅。
English: Zhai, Han Kui, Wei Luxi and Fan DeShi, Zhong Xingyin had a grudge, so they sent troops to attack Fan DeShi, Zhong Xingyin.

古文：范、中行反，晋君击之，败范、中行。
现代文：范去射、中行寅反叛，晋军攻打他们，打败了范去射、中行寅。
English: Fan Dosa and Zhong Xingying rebelled, and the Jin army attacked them and defeated Fan Dosa and Zhong Xingying.

古文：范、中行走朝歌，保之。
现代文：范去射、中行寅逃到朝歌，据城固守。
English: Fan went to attack, and Zhong Xingying fled to Chaoga, where he firmly defended the city.

古文：韩、魏为赵鞅谢晋君，乃赦赵鞅，复位。
现代文：韩不信、魏侈替赵鞅向晋君道歉，于是晋君赦免了赵鞅，恢复了他的职位。
English: Han Wei and Wei Liang apologized to Jin Jun on behalf of Zhao Jun, so Jin Jun pardoned Zhao Jun and restored his position.

古文：二十二年，晋败范、中行氏，二子奔齐。
现代文：二十二年，晋国打败了范吉射、中行氏，这两个人逃到了齐国。
English: In 1922, Jin defeated Fan Jisha and Zhong Xing, and the two fled to Qi.

古文：三十年，定公与吴王夫差会黄池，争长，赵鞅时从，卒长吴。
现代文：三十年，定公与吴王夫差在黄池相会，争当首领，赵鞅当时从行，终于让吴王做了首领。
English: For thirty years, Ding Gong and Wu Wangfuchai met in Huangchi, vying to be the leader. Zhao Wei followed suit at the time, and finally made Wu Wang the leader.

古文：三十一年，齐田常弑其君简公，而立简公弟骜为平公。
现代文：三十一年，齐国田常杀死了自己的国君简公，立简公的弟弟骜做平公。
English: In 31 A.D., Qi Guotian killed his own sovereign, Jian Gong, and appointed Jian Gong's younger brother, Zou, as Ping Gong.

古文：三十三年，孔子卒。
现代文：晋定公三十三年，孔子去世。
English: Confucius passed away in the 33rd year of his reign.

古文：三十七年，定公卒，子出公凿立。
现代文：三十七年，定公逝世，他的儿子出公凿即位。
English: Thirty-seven years later, Dingong died, and his son came to the throne.

古文：出公十七年，知伯与赵、韩、魏共分范、中行地以为邑。
现代文：出公十七年，知伯与赵鞅、韩不信、魏侈共同瓜分子范吉射、中行寅的领地归入自己的采邑。
English: In the seventeenth year of his public service, the territories of Zhi Bo, Zhao Zhen, Han Kui, Wei Li, Fan Jishe, and Zhong Xingyin were incorporated into his own county.

古文：出公怒，告齐、鲁，欲以伐四卿。四卿恐，遂反攻出公。
现代文：晋出公大怒，求告齐国、鲁国，想借机讨伐四卿，四卿很慌恐，于是反击攻打出公。
English: The prince was furious and appealed to Qi and Lu for help. He wanted to take the opportunity to fight the four nobles. The four nobles panicked, so they fought back against the prince.

古文：出公奔齐，道死。
现代文：出公被迫逃到齐国，在中途去世。
English: He ran away from his job to Qi Province and died on the way.

古文：故知伯乃立昭公曾孙骄为晋君，是为哀公。
现代文：所以知伯就立晋昭公的曾孙骄做了晋君，这就是哀公。
English: Therefore, Zhibo was proud to be the great-grandson of Jin Zhaogong and became Jin Zhaogong. This is the lamentation.

古文：哀公大父雍，晋昭公少子也，号为戴子。
现代文：哀公的祖父雍，是晋昭公的小儿子，号叫戴子。
English: Aigong's grandfather, Yong, was the youngest son of Jin Zhaogong, called Daizi.

古文：戴子生忌。
现代文：戴子生下了忌。
English: Daishi gave birth to tabi.

古文：忌善知伯，蚤死，故知伯欲尽并晋，未敢，乃立忌子骄为君。
现代文：忌与知伯关系密切，但很早就去世了，所以知伯想吞并晋国，没敢动，就立了忌的儿子骄做晋君。
English: Bogey was closely related to Zhi Bo, but Zhou died very early, so Zhi Bo wanted to annex Jin Province, and did not dare to move, so he set up Zhi Bo's son as the proud ruler of Jin.

古文：当是时，晋国政皆决知伯，晋哀公不得有所制。
现代文：当时，晋国的政务全部由知伯决定，晋哀公不能控制朝政。
English: At that time, all the government affairs of Jin were decided by Zhi Bo, and Jin Aigong could not control the imperial government.

古文：知伯遂有范、中行地，最强。
现代文：于是，知伯占有了范吉射，中行寅的领地，在六卿中最强大。
English: As a result, Zhibo occupied the territory of Fan Jishao and Zhong Xingyin, the most powerful of the six lords.

古文：哀公四年，赵襄子、韩康子、魏桓子共杀知伯，尽并其地。
现代文：哀公四年，赵襄子、韩康子、魏桓子共同杀死了知伯，全部吞并了他的土地。
English: In the four years of mourning, Zhao Xiangzi, Han Kangzi, and Wei Huanzi jointly killed Zhi Bo and annexed all of his land.

古文：十八年，哀公卒，子幽公柳立。
现代文：十八年，哀公逝世，他的儿子幽公柳即位。
English: In the eighteenth year, Aiko died, and his son Yugoyanagi ascended to the throne.

古文：幽公之时，晋畏，反朝韩、赵、魏之君。
现代文：幽公当政时，晋君由于衰弱而畏惧卿大夫，反而朝拜韩、赵、魏的君王。
English: When Yugong was in power, Jinjun was afraid of Jingdafu due to his weakness, but worshiped the kings of Han, Zhao, and Wei.

古文：独有绛、曲沃，余皆入三晋。
现代文：晋君只占有绛、曲沃，余下的都并入三晋。
English: Jinjun only owned Zou and Quwo, and the rest were merged into Sanjin.

古文：十五年，魏文侯初立。
现代文：十五年，魏文侯初即位。
English: Fifteen years later, Wei Wenhou ascended the throne for the first time.

古文：十八年，幽公淫妇人，夜窃出邑中，盗杀幽公。
现代文：十八年，幽公奸污妇女，夜间私自出城，被强盗杀死。
English: In 18 years, Yu Gongzhu raped a woman, went out of the city at night, and was killed by robbers.

古文：魏文侯以兵诛晋乱，立幽公子止，是为烈公。
现代文：魏文侯派兵平定了晋国的内乱，立幽公的儿子止，这就是烈公。
English: Wei Wenhou sent soldiers to quell the civil unrest in Jin Province, and only the son of Liyu Gong was killed, which is the hero.

古文：烈公十九年，周威烈王赐赵、韩、魏皆命为诸侯。
现代文：烈公十九年，周威烈王赐封赵国、韩国、魏国，都命他们为诸侯。
English: In the 19th year of the Reign of King Li, King Zhou Weili bestowed fiefs to the states of Zhao, Korea, and Wei, and ordered them to be princes.

古文：二十七年，烈公卒，子孝公颀立。
现代文：二十七年，烈公逝世，他的儿子孝公颀即位。
English: Twenty-seven years later, the prince died and his son, Takakuni, ascended to the throne.

古文：孝公九年，魏武侯初立，袭邯郸，不胜而去。
现代文：孝公九年，魏武侯刚刚即位，袭击了邯郸，未能取胜就离去了。
English: In the ninth year of Xiaogong, Wei Wuhou, who had just ascended to the throne, attacked Yao, failed to win and left.

古文：十七年，孝公卒，子静公俱酒立。
现代文：十七年，孝公逝世，儿子静公俱酒即位。
English: In the seventeenth year, Prince Takakuni died, and his son Shizuko ascended the throne.

古文：是岁，齐威王元年也。
现代文：这一年是齐威王元年。
English: This year is the first year of King Qiwei.

古文：静公二年，魏武侯、韩哀侯、赵敬侯灭晋后而三分其地。
现代文：静公二年，魏武侯、韩哀侯、赵敬侯灭亡晋国后把晋地分割为三份。
English: In the second year of Jing Gong, after the death of Wei Wuhou, Han Ai Hou and Zhao Jing Hou, Jin divided Jin into three parts.

古文：静公迁为家人，晋绝不祀。
现代文：静公成为平民，晋国断绝祭祀。
English: Shizuko became a commoner, and the state of Jin discontinued the ritual.

古文：太史公曰：晋文公，古所谓明君也，亡居外十九年，至困约，及即位而行赏，尚忘介子推，况骄主乎？
现代文：太史公说：晋文公是古代所说的贤明的君主，在外流亡十九年，生活极为困顿贫苦，到即位时施行赏赐，还忘记了介子推，何况那些骄奢的君主呢？
English: Taishi Gong said: Jinwen Gong was a wise monarch in ancient times. He lived in exile for nineteen years, and his life was extremely difficult and poor. When he ascended to the throne, he gave rewards and forgot to promote the children of the emperor. What about those arrogant monarchs?

古文：灵公既弑，其后成、景致严，至厉大刻，大夫惧诛，祸作。
现代文：灵公被杀后，成公、景公极为严厉，到了厉公更加苛刻，大夫惧怕诛杀，因此祸乱频发。
English: After Ling Gong was killed, Cheng Gong and Jing Gong became extremely strict, and Li Gong became even stricter. The doctor was afraid of fighting and killing, so the calamity occurred frequently.

古文：悼公以后日衰，六卿专权。
现代文：悼公之后晋国一天天衰弱下去，六卿专掌政权。
English: After the mourning period, the state of Jin weakened day by day, and the six nobles took control of the government.

古文：故君道之御其臣下，固不易哉！
现代文：所以国君驾驭自己的臣民，本来就不容易啊！
English: That is why it is not easy for a sovereign to control his subjects!

