古文： 须眉男子 。
现代文：人们常说 须眉男子 ，这就是将须眉作为男子的代名词。
English: It is often said that a mustache makes a man, which is a synonym for a mustache as a man.

古文：未有须眉不具可称男子者。 少年两道眉，临老一付须。 
现代文：事实上也的确如此，因为还没有见过既无胡须又无眉毛的人而称为是男子。人们还常说： 少年两道眉，临老一付须 。
English: In fact, this is also true, because no one has ever seen a man without a beard and eyebrows and called him a man. People also often say: Two eyebrows for a boy, one mustache for an old man.

古文：此言眉主早成，须主晚运也。
现代文：这两句话则是说，一个人少年时的命运如何，是要看眉毛的相，而晚年运气怎么样，则以看胡须为主。
English: These two sentences are saying that the fate of a person when he is a teenager depends on the shape of his eyebrows, and the luck of his later years depends on his beard.

古文：然而紫面无须自贵，暴腮缺须亦荣：郭令公半部不全，霍膘骁一副寡脸。
现代文：但是也有例外，脸面呈紫气，即使没有胡须，地位也会高贵；两腮突露者，就算胡须稀少，也能够声名显达；郭子仪虽然胡须稀疏，却位极人臣，富甲天下；霍去病虽然没有胡须，只是一副寡脸相，却功高盖世。
English: However, there are exceptions. The face is purple, and even if there is no beard, the status will be noble; those with prominent cheeks, even if there are few beards, can make a name for themselves; Guo Ziyi, although his beard is sparse, is an extremely high-ranking person, and he is rich; Huo Dexia, although he has no beard, is just a poor-looking person, but he has made great achievements.

古文：此等间逢，毕竟有须眉者，十之九也。
现代文：但这种情况，不过只是偶然碰到，毕竟有胡须有眉毛的人，占百分之九十以上。
English: But this situation, but only by chance, after all, people with beards and eyebrows, accounting for more than ninety percent.

古文：眉尚彩，彩者，杪处反光也。
现代文：眉崇尚光彩，而所谓的光彩，就是眉毛梢部闪现出的亮光。
English: Eyebrows worship brilliance, and the so-called brilliance is the light that flashes from the tip of the eyebrow.

古文：贵人有三层彩，有一二层者。所谓 文明气象 ，宜疏爽不宜凝滞。
现代文：富贵的人，他眉毛的根处、中处、梢处共有三层光彩，当然有的只有两层，有的只有一层，通常所说的 文明之象 指的就是眉毛要疏密有致、清秀润朗，不要厚重呆板，又浓又密。
English: Wealthy people have a total of three layers of luster at the base, middle, and tip of their eyebrows. Of course, some only have two layers, while others only have one. What is commonly referred to as the "image of civilization" refers to the fact that the eyebrows should be dense, beautiful, and smooth, not thick and stiff, but thick and dense.

古文：一望有乘风翔舞之势，上也；如泼墨者，最下。
现代文：远远望去，像两只凤在乘风翱翔，如一对龙在乘风飞舞，这就是上佳的眉相。如果像一团散浸的墨汁，则是最下等的眉相。
English: Seen from afar, like two phoenixes soaring on the wind, like a pair of dragons flying on the wind, this is the best eyebrow. If it looks like a mass of ink, it is the lowest eyebrow.

古文：倒竖者，上也；下垂者，最下。
现代文：双眉倒竖，呈倒八字形，是好的眉相。
English: Double eyebrows inverted, inverted figure of eight, is a good eyebrow.

古文：长有起伏，短有神气；浓忌浮光，淡忌枯索。如剑者掌兵权，如帚者赴法场。
现代文：又眉下垂，呈八字形，是下等的相，眉毛如果比较长，就得要有起伏，如果比较短，就应该昂然有神，眉毛如果浓，不应该有虚浮的光，眉毛如果淡，切忌形状像一条干枯的绳子。
English: If the eyebrows are relatively long, they should have undulations, if they are relatively short, they should be proud, if the eyebrows are thick, there should be no false light, if the eyebrows are light, they should not be shaped like a dry rope.

古文：个中亦有征范，不可不辨。但如压眼不利，散乱多忧，细而带媚，粗而无文，是最下乘。须有多寡，取其与眉相称。
现代文：双眉如果像两把锋利的宝剑，必将成为统领三军的将帅，而双眉如果像两把破旧的扫帚，则会有杀身之祸。另外，这里面，还有各种其他的迹象和征兆，不可不认真地加以辨识。但是，如果眉毛过长并压迫着双眼，使目光显得迟滞不利，眉毛散乱无序，使目光显得忧劳无神，眉形过于纤细并带有媚态，眉形过于粗阔，使其没有文秀之气，这些都是属于最下等的眉相。
English: If the eyebrows are like two sharp swords, they will surely become the commander of the three armies, and if the eyebrows are like two worn-out brooms, there will be death. In addition, there are various other signs and symptoms that must be carefully identified. However, if the eyebrows are too long and oppress the eyes, making the eyes look sluggish and unfavorable, the eyebrows are scattered and disordered, making the eyes look depressed, the eyebrows are too thin and have a flattering shape, and the eyebrows are too coarse, making them not elegant, these are the lowest eyebrows.

古文：多者，宜清、宜疏、宜缩、宜参差不齐；少者，宜光、宜健、宜圆、宜有情照顾。
现代文：胡须，有的人多，有的人少，无论是多还是少，都要与眉毛相和谐，相匹配。胡须多的应该清秀流畅，疏爽明朗，不直不硬，并且长短分明有致。胡须少的，就要润泽光亮，刚健挺直，气韵十足，并与其他部位相互照应。
English: Beards, some people have more, some people have less, whether more or less, must be in harmony with the eyebrows and match them. Beards with more should be clean and smooth, clean and clear, not straight or hard, and have a distinct length. Beards with less must be moist and shiny, strong and straight, full of charm, and correspond with other parts.

古文：卷如螺纹，聪明豁达；长如解索，风流荣显；劲如张戟，位高权重；亮若银条，早登廊庙，皆宦途大器。
现代文：胡须如果像螺丝一样的弯曲，这人一定聪明，目光高远，豁然大度。胡须细长的，像磨损的绳子一样到处是细弯小曲，这种人生性风流倜傥，却没有淫乱之心，将来一定能名高位显。胡须刚劲有力，如一把张开的利戟，这种人将来一定当大官，掌重权。胡须清新明朗，像闪闪发光的银条，这种人年纪轻轻就为朝中大臣。
English: If the beard is curved like a screw, the man must be intelligent, far-sighted and generous. If the beard is long and thin, it is like a frayed rope with small bends everywhere. This kind of person is amorous but has no lustful heart, and will surely be famous in the future. If the beard is strong and vigorous, like a splayed reed, this kind of person will definitely be a high official and hold power in the future. If the beard is fresh and bright, like a glittering silver bar, this kind of person will be a junior minister at a young age.

古文：紫须剑眉，声音洪壮；蓬然虬乱，尝见耳后，配以神骨清奇，不千里封侯，亦十年拜相。
现代文：以上这些都是仕途官场上的大材大器的人物。如果人的胡须是紫色，眉毛如利剑，声音洪亮粗壮。胡须像虬那样蓬松劲挺散乱，而且有对还长到耳朵后边去，这样的胡须，再有一副清爽和英俊的骨骼与精神。即使封不了千里之候，也能当十年的宰相。
English: If a person's beard is purple, his eyebrows are like sharp swords, his voice is loud and strong, and his beard is as fluffy and straggly as a baboon's, and sometimes even grows behind his ears, then such a beard has a fresh and handsome bone and spirit. Even if he can't seal a thousand miles, he can be a prime minister for ten years.

古文：他如 辅须先长终不利 、 人中不见一世穷 、 鼻毛接须多滞晦 、 短毙遮口饿终身 ，此其显而可见者耳。
现代文：短髭长大了而遮住了嘴，一辈子忍饥挨饿等等。这些胡须的凶象，是显而易见的，这里，就用不着详细论述了。
English: Short beards that grow up to cover the mouth, a lifetime of starvation, etc. The sinister nature of these beards is obvious and does not need to be discussed in detail here.

