古文：晋既克楚于鄢，使郤至告庆于周。
现代文：晋在鄢陵打败楚国后，派郤至向周王告捷。
English: After Jin defeated Chu in Fuling, he sent Yu to Zhou for victory.

古文：未将事，王叔简公饮之酒，交酬好货皆厚，饮酒宴语相说也。
现代文：在朝见周王之前，王叔简公设酒宴招待郤至，宾主互赠了厚礼，席间谈笑甚欢。
English: Before meeting King Zhou for the first time, Wang Shujian invited him to a public banquet. The guests gave each other gifts, and the banquet was full of laughter.

古文：明日，王叔子誉诸朝。
现代文：第二天，王叔简公在朝堂上称赞郤至。
English: The next day, Wang Shujiangong praised him in the court.

古文：郤至见邵桓公，与之语。
现代文：郤至会见了邵桓公，与他交谈。
English: He met with Shao Huan and had a conversation with him.

古文：邵公以告单襄公曰： 王叔子誉温季，以为必相晋国，相晋国必大得诸侯，劝二三君子必先导焉，可以树。
现代文：邵桓公把谈话的内容告诉单襄公说： 王叔简公称赞郤至，认为他一定能够在晋国掌权，而且掌权后定能得到诸侯的拥护，因此王叔简公劝我们各位大臣为郤至多说好话，以便今后在晋国能有所照应。
English: Shao Huan Gong told the content of the conversation to Shan Xiang Gong and said: Wang Shujian Gong praised Zou Zu and believed that he would definitely be able to take power in Jin, and after taking power, he would definitely be able to get the support of the princes. Therefore, Wang Shujian Gong advised our ministers to say good words for Zou at most, so that they could take care of him in Jin in the future.

古文：今夫子见我，以晋国之克也，为己实谋之，曰： 微我，晋不战矣！
现代文：现在郤至来见我，认为晋国这次打败楚国，实际是由于他的谋划，他说： 如果不是我，晋国就不会打这场战争了。
English: Now he has come to see me and thinks that Jin's defeat of Chu was actually due to his planning. He said: "If it wasn't for me, Jin wouldn't have fought this war."

古文：楚有五败，晋不知乘，我则强之。
现代文：楚有五个失败的因素，晋却不知道利用它，是我坚持主张开战的。
English: Chu has five factors of failure, but Jin does not know how to use it. It is I who insist on going to war.

古文：背宋之盟，一也；德薄而以地赂诸侯，二也；弃壮之良而用幼弱，三也；建立卿士而不用其言，四也；夷、郑从之，三陈而不整，五也。
现代文：楚国违背与宋的盟约，这是一；楚王德行欠缺却以土地贿赂诸侯，这是二，抛弃强壮优秀的将领而用司马子反那样幼稚懦弱的人，这是三；设置了辅臣谋士却不采纳他们的意见，这是四；纠集了蛮夷、郑国参战，三方面的军阵却又不整肃，这是五。
English: Chu broke the treaty with Song, this is one; Chu lacked virtue but bribed the princes with land, this is two; abandoned the strong and excellent generals and used the childish and cowardly people like Sima Zihan, this is three; set up aide-de-camp advisers but did not accept their opinions, this is four; gathered barbarians and Zheng into the war, but did not tidy up the three military fronts, this is five.

古文：罪不由晋，晋得其民，四军之帅，旅力方刚，卒伍治整，诸侯与之。
现代文：首开战端的责任不在晋国，晋得到民众拥护，四支军队的将帅气盛势强，军容严整，诸侯都站在晋国这一边。
English: The responsibility of starting the war is not in Jin, Jin is supported by the people, the generals of the four armies are handsome and powerful, the army is well-trained, and the princes are on the side of Jin.

古文：是有五胜也：有辞，一也，得民，二也；军帅强御，三也；行列治整，四也；诸侯辑睦，五也。
现代文：因此，晋有五个取胜的因素：与楚开战有正当的理由，这是一；得民心，这是二；将帅精悍，这是三；部队号令严明，这是四；与诸侯关系和睦，这是五。
English: Therefore, Jin had five factors to win: to have a legitimate reason to go to war with Chu, this is one; to win the hearts and minds of the people, this is two; to be a skillful commander, this is three; to have a clear command of troops, this is four; and to have a harmonious relationship with the princes, this is five.

古文：有一胜犹足用也，有五胜以伐五败，而避之者，非人也。不可以不战。
现代文：晋有一个取胜因素就足以胜楚，以五胜去攻伐五败却还要躲躲闪闪，那不是有作为的人。
English: If you have one winning factor, it is enough to win. If you use five victories to attack five defeats, but still have to dodge and dodge, then you are not a person with achievements.

古文：栾、范不欲，我则强之。
现代文：这一仗非打不可。栾书、士燮不愿开战，是我强使他们下达作战命令的。
English: This battle had to be fought. It was I who forced them to give the order to fight, since the scribes and the Pharisees did not want to go to war.

古文：战而胜，是吾力也。
现代文：结果打胜了，这是我的功劳啊！
English: As a result, we won, which is to my credit!

古文：且夫战也微谋，吾有三伐；勇而有礼，反之以仁。
现代文：他们在战斗中没有谋略，我有三大功劳：勇而有礼，并以仁爱为本。
English: They have no strategy in battle. I have three great merits: courage, courtesy, and benevolence.

古文：吾三逐楚军之卒，勇也；见其君必下而趋，礼也；能获郑伯而赦之，仁也。
现代文：我三次追逐楚军，这是勇；遇上楚君必定下车快步上前，这是礼；俘获了郑伯又放了他，这是仁。
English: I chased the Chu army three times, which is courage; when I met the Chu prince, I must get off the car and walk forward quickly, which is courtesy; I captured Zheng Bo and released him, which is benevolence.

古文：若是而知晋国之政，楚、越必朝。 
现代文：如果让我主持晋国政事的话，楚、越等国一定会称臣来朝。 
English: If I were to preside over the political affairs of Jin, Chu, Yue and other countries would certainly invite their vassals to come to Korea.

古文： 吾曰： 子则贤矣。
现代文： 我对郤至说： 你确实很有才干。
English: I said to Zou Zi: "You are indeed very talented."

古文：抑晋国之举也，不失其次，吾惧政之未及子也。 谓我曰： 夫何次之有？
现代文：然而晋国提拔官员不会不论位次，所以我以为晋国的政务恐怕还轮不到你来主持。 他对我说： 有什么位次？
English: However, officials in Jin Province are not promoted regardless of their rank, so I thought it might not be your turn to preside over the government affairs of Jin Province.He said to me: What is the rank?

古文：昔先大夫荀伯自下军之佐以政，赵宣子未有军行而以政，今栾伯自下军往。
现代文：已经去世的荀伯是从下军之佐升任主政的，赵宣子没有军功也主持了政事，如今栾伯又从下军之佐升为中军主帅。
English: Zou Bo, who has passed away, was promoted from a junior military officer to the post of chief political officer. Zhao Xuanzi also presided over political affairs without military merit. Now Zou Bo has been promoted from a junior military officer to the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：是三子也，吾又过于四之无不及。
现代文：就这三个人来说，我的才能只有超过他们而没有不及的。
English: As far as these three are concerned, my talent is only superior to theirs, not inferior.

古文：若佐新军而升为政，不亦可乎？
现代文：我以新军之副将升为正卿而主持政事，有什么不行的呢？
English: I presided over the government with the vice-general of the new army being promoted to the position of chancellor. What could go wrong?

古文：将必求之。 
现代文：我一定想法达到目的。 
English: I'm sure I'll get there.

古文：是其言也，君以为奚若？ 
现代文：这里他说的话，您以为如何？ 
English: What do you think he's saying here?

古文：襄公曰： 人有言曰 兵在其颈 ，其郤至之谓乎！
现代文：单襄公说： 俗话说 刀架在脖子上， 恐怕就是指郤至这种人吧。
English: Shan Xianggong said: As the saying goes, "The sword hangs around the neck," I'm afraid that refers to this kind of person.

古文：君子不自称也，非以让也，恶其盖人也。
现代文：君子不自我吹嘘，并非为了谦让，而是厌恶这种行为凌驾于他人之上。
English: A gentleman does not boast, not for the sake of modesty, but because he abhors the act of being superior to others.

古文：夫人性，陵上者也，不可盖也。
现代文：人的本性，都想超过在己之上的人，所以是无法凌驾的。
English: It's human nature to want to outdo those above you, so you can't.

古文：求盖人，其抑下滋甚，故圣人贵让。
现代文：要想凌驾他人，反而会被排斥得更厉害，所以圣人崇尚礼让。
English: If you want to dominate others, you will be ostracized even more, so the sage advocates courtesy.

古文：且谚曰： 兽恶其网，民恶其上。 
现代文：谚语说： 野兽厌恶捕捉它们的罗网，百姓仇视高高在上的官员。 
English: A proverb says: Beasts abhor the net that ensnares them, and the people detest the ruler.

古文：《书》曰： 民可近也，而不可上也。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 百姓可以亲近，却不能凌驾于他们之上。 
English: "Shangshu" said: People can be close to them, but they cannot be above them.

古文：《诗》曰： 恺悌君子，求福不回。 
现代文：《诗》说： 温文尔雅的君子，以礼求得万福。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: An approachable gentleman, the pursuit of happiness does not violate the right path.

古文：在礼，敌必三让，是则圣人知民之不可加也。
现代文：按照礼仪，地位相等应再三谦让，这正因为圣人知道百姓是不可凌驾其上。
English: According to the etiquette, equal status should be conceded again and again, precisely because the saint knows that the people are not above him.

古文：故王天下者必先诸民，然后庇焉，则能长利。
现代文：所以统治天下的人必须先得到民心，然后方能安稳，因而能长保福禄。
English: Therefore, those who rule the world must first win the hearts and minds of the people, and only then can they be stable, and thus be able to enjoy prosperity.

古文：今郤至在七人之下而欲上之，是求盖七人也，其亦有七怨。
现代文：如今郤至位在七人之下而想超过他们，这是要凌驾于七人之上，那也就会有七人的怨恨。
English: Now that you are below the seven, if you want to surpass them, that is to be above the seven, then there will be the resentment of the seven.

古文：怨在小丑，犹不可堪，而况在侈卿乎？
现代文：被小百姓所怨恨，已经难以忍受，更何况那都是有地位的大臣呢？
English: It has become unbearable to be hated by the common people, let alone by high-ranking ministers.

古文：其何以待之？
现代文：郤至将凭什么来应付呢？
English: How will they cope?

古文： 晋之克也，天有恶于楚也，故儆之以晋。
现代文： 晋国的这次胜利，是上天憎恶楚国，因此让晋国来警诫他。
English: Jin's victory this time is God's hatred of Chu, so let Jin warn him.

古文：而郤至佻天之功以为已力，不亦难乎？
现代文：然而部至却贪天之功据为已有，这不是太危险了吗？
English: But isn't it too dangerous to be greedy when you already have the evidence?

古文：佻天不祥，乘人不义，不祥则天弃之，不义则民叛之。
现代文：贪天之功不祥，凌驾他人不义，不祥将被上天遗弃，不义会遭百姓叛离。
English: To covet heaven's merits is ominous, to lord it over others is unrighteous, to be ominous is to be abandoned by heaven, and to be unrighteous is to be abandoned by the people.

古文：且郤至何三伐之有？
现代文：况且郤至哪里有三件功劳呢？
English: Moreover, where are the three meritorious deeds?

古文：夫仁、礼、勇，皆民之为也。
现代文：他所说的仁、礼、勇，都是百姓所为。
English: What he said about benevolence, courtesy and bravery were all done by the people.

古文：以义死用谓之勇，奉义顺则谓之礼，畜义丰功谓之仁。
现代文：为正义而舍身称为勇，遵奉道义而守法称为礼，积累义举而立功称为仁。
English: Sacrificing oneself for the sake of justice is called courage, following morality and abiding by the law is called etiquette, and accumulating virtuous deeds and meritorious service is called benevolence.

古文：奸仁为佻，奸礼为羞，奸勇为贼。
现代文：玷污了仁是佻，玷污了礼是羞，玷污了勇是贼。
English: To tarnish benevolence is to slander, to tarnish courtesy is to shame, to tarnish courage is to be a thief.

古文：夫战，尽敌为上，守和同顺义为上。
现代文：作战以消灭敌人为准则，以不战而使敌人顺从正义为上策。
English: The principle of war is to annihilate the enemy, and the best policy is to make the enemy obey justice without fighting.

古文：故制戎以果毅，制朝以序成。
现代文：所以要用刚毅勇敢来治军，要用位爵尊卑来治政。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to govern the army with courage and bravery, and to govern the government with dignity and humility.

古文：叛战而擅舍郑君，贼也；弃毅行容，羞也；叛国即仇，佻也。
现代文：违背作战的准则而擅自释放郑君，这是贼；放弃奋勇的机会而去对楚君行礼，这是羞；背叛了国家的利益而去亲近仇敌，这是佻。
English: It is a thief to release Zheng Jun without authorization in violation of the rules of war; it is a shame to give up the opportunity to fight and salute Chu Jun; it is a disgrace to betray the interests of the country and get close to the enemy.

古文：有三奸以求替其上，远于得政矣。
现代文：郤至有这三种耻辱的行为却想替代在他之上的大臣，离掌权还远着呢。
English: A man who has committed these three ignominies and who wants to replace the minister above him is far from being in power.

古文：以吾观之，兵在其颈，不可久也，虽吾王叔未能违难。在《太誓》曰： 民之所欲，天必从之。 
现代文：据我看来，刀已经架在了他的脖子上，他不会长久了，恐怕我们的王叔简公也难以免难。《泰誓》上说： 百姓所希求的，上天必定依从。 
English: In my opinion, the sword is already around his neck, and he won't last long, and I'm afraid that our uncle Wang Jiangong is also unavoidable. "Thai oath" said: "What the people desire, the heavens must obey."

古文：王叔欲郤至，能勿从乎？ 
现代文：王叔简公要连结郤至，能不跟着遭难吗？ 
English: Uncle Wang and Uncle Jian want to get married, can they not follow the calamity?

古文：郤至归，明年死难。
现代文：郤至回国后，第二年就被晋厉公杀掉了。
English: After he returned to China, he was killed by Jin Liguo the following year.

古文：及伯舆之狱，王叔陈生奔晋。
现代文：后来王叔简公与伯舆争权夺利，因失败而逃奔晋国。
English: Later, Wang Shujian fought for power and profit with Bo Myou, and fled to Jin due to defeat.

