古文：薛公以齐为韩魏攻楚。薛公以齐为韩、魏攻楚，又与韩、魏攻秦，而籍兵乞食于西周。
现代文：齐国孟尝君田文，又称薛公，利用齐国来为韩、魏攻打楚，又联合韩、魏攻打秦，并且向西周借兵求粮。
English: Meng Ya Jun Tianwen of Qi, also known as Xue Gong, used Qi to attack Chu for Han and Wei, and also jointly attacked Qin with Han and Wei, and borrowed soldiers from West Zhou to ask for grain.

古文：韩庆为西周谓薛公曰： 君以齐为韩、魏攻楚，九年而取宛、叶以北以强韩、魏，今又攻秦以益之。
现代文：韩庆代表西周的利益对薛公说： 你利用齐国为韩国和魏国攻打楚国，打了九年才攻取了宛和叶以北的地区，从而增强了韩国和魏国的力量，如今又攻打秦国来使它更加强大。
English: Han Qing said to Xue Gong on behalf of the interests of Xi Zhou: You used Qi to attack Chu for Korea and Wei, and fought for nine years to capture the area north of Wan and Ye, thereby strengthening the strength of Korea and Wei, and now you are attacking Qin to make it more powerful.

古文：韩、魏南无楚忧，西无秦患，则地广而益重，齐必轻矣。
现代文：韩国和魏国南面没有楚国侵扰的忧虑，西面没有秦国入侵的忧患，这样一来地域辽阔的两个国家就更加显得重要，因此齐国必然就受到轻视了。
English: South Korea and Wei did not have to worry about the invasion of Chu in the south, and Qin did not have to worry about the invasion of Qin in the west. As a result, the two countries with a vast territory became even more important, so Qi was inevitably despised.

古文：夫本末更盛，虚实有时，窃为君危之。
现代文：就像树木的树根和枝梢更迭盛衰，事物的强弱也会因时而变化，臣私下替你齐国感到不安。
English: Just as the roots and branches of trees change and grow, the strength and weakness of things will also change over time. Privately, I feel uneasy for you, Qi Guo.

古文：君不如令弊邑阴合于秦而君无攻，又无籍兵乞食。
现代文：您莫如使敝国西周暗中与秦合好，而您不要真的攻秦，也不必要向敝国借兵求粮。
English: You can't make Xi Zhou of Qin secretly make peace with Qin, and you don't really attack Qin, and you don't need to borrow soldiers from Qin to ask for grain.

古文：君临函谷而无攻，令弊邑以君之情谓秦王曰： 薛公必不破秦以张韩、魏，所以进兵者，欲王令楚割东国以与齐也。 
现代文：您兵临函谷关而不要进攻，让敝国把您的意图对秦王说： 薛公肯定不会破秦来扩大韩、魏，他之所以进兵，是企图让楚国割让东国给齐。 
English: Your soldiers should not attack near the Hanzhong Pass, but let the State of Min tell your intention to the King of Qin: Xue Gong will certainly not break Qin to expand Han and Wei. The reason why he marched into the army was to attempt to make Chu cede the East to Qi.

古文：秦王出楚王以为和，君令弊邑以此忠秦，秦得无破，而以楚之东国自免也，必欲之。
现代文：这样，秦王将会放回楚怀王来与齐保持和好关系，秦国得以不被攻击，而拿楚的东国使自己免除灾难，肯定会愿意去做。
English: In this way, the King of Qin will return the King of Chu to maintain a good relationship with Qi, the Qin State will not be attacked, and the East Country of Chu will save itself from disaster and will certainly be willing to do so.

古文：楚王出，必德齐，齐得东国而益强，而薛世世无患。
现代文：楚王得以归国，必定感激齐国，齐得到楚国的东国而愈发强大，而薛公地盘也就世世代代没有忧患了。
English: When King Chu was able to return to his country, he must have been grateful to Qi. Qi gained the eastern part of Chu and became more and more powerful, and Xue Gong's territory was not troubled for generations.

古文：秦不大弱，而处之三晋之西，三晋必重齐。 
现代文：秦国解除三国兵患，处于三晋的西邻，三晋也必来尊事齐国。 
English: Qin relieved the suffering of soldiers from the three countries and is located in the western neighborhood of the Three Kingdoms. The Three Kingdoms will also come to honor Qi.

古文：薛公曰： 善。 
现代文：薛公说： 很好。 
English: After listening, Meng Yijun immediately said: Good.

古文：因令韩庆入秦，而使三国无攻秦，而使不籍兵乞食于西周。
现代文：因而派遣韩庆入秦，使三国停止攻秦，从而让齐国不向西周来借兵求粮。
English: Therefore, Han Qing was sent to Qin to stop the three countries from attacking Qin, so that Qi would not borrow soldiers from Western Zhou to ask for grain.

