古文：《书》曰： 唐虞稽古，建官惟百。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 唐尧、虞舜考察古事，设置官职数衹有一百。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan investigated ancient things, and the number of official positions was set at one hundred.

古文：所以奖导民萌，裁成庶政。
现代文：以此来勉励引导民众，管理各种政务。
English: It is used to encourage and guide the people, and to manage various government affairs.

古文：《易》曰： 天垂象，圣人则之。 
现代文：《易经》说： 上天垂示形象，圣人效仿它。 
English: The "I Ching" says: Heaven reveals the image, and sages imitate it.

古文：执法在南宫之右，上相处端门之外，而鸟龙居位，云火垂名，前史详之，其以尚矣。
现代文：执法的在南宫的右面，上相在端门的外面，以及鸟师龙师等定下官位，云师火师等作为官名，以前的史书记载得很详细，都已经非常久远了。
English: The enforcement of the law is on the right side of the South Palace, the upper phase is on the outside of the end door, and the bird division, dragon division, etc. set the official rank, the cloud division, fire division, etc. as the official name, the previous historical record is very detailed, and it has been very long.

古文：黄帝置三公之秩，以亲黎元，少昊配九扈之名，以为农正，命重黎于天地，诏融冥于水火，则可得而言焉。
现代文：黄帝设置三公的官职，来管理黎民；少昊分设九扈的官职，作为农官；命重黎为掌管天地的官员，令祝融和玄冥为掌管水火的官员，就能够有基础了。
English: The Yellow Emperor set up the official posts of the Three Princes to manage the people of Lai; the Emperor Xiao Hao set up the official posts of the Nine Princes as agricultural officials; the Emperor ordered the officials of the Three Princes to be in charge of heaven and earth, and the officials of Zhu Rong and Xuan Miao to be in charge of water and fire, so that there could be a foundation.

古文：伊尹曰： 三公调阴阳，九卿通寒暑，大夫知人事，列士去其私。 
现代文：伊尹说： 三公协调各个方面，九卿沟通各种关系，大夫掌握人世的事务，列士消除各自的私心。 
English: Yi Yin said: The three kings coordinate all aspects, the nine lords communicate all kinds of relationships, the doctors grasp the affairs of the world, and the nobles eliminate their selfishness.

古文：而成汤居亳，初置二相，以伊尹、仲虺为之，凡厥枢会，仰承君命。
现代文：成汤住在亳，起初设置两个相，让伊尹、仲虺担任，总理调度各项事务，对上秉承国君的诏命。
English: Cheng Tang lived in Handan. At first, he set up two positions, letting Yi Yin and Zhong Xuan take charge, and the prime minister dispatched various affairs, adhering to the emperor's edict.

古文：总及周武下车，成康垂则，六卿分职，二公弘化，咸树司存，各题标准，苟非其道，人弗虚荣。
现代文：到周武王克殷之后分封，成王康王留下法则，分设六卿职位，太公召公弘扬教化，建立各种机构，分别制定标准，如果没有相应的本领，人就不能光得空名而荣耀自己。
English: After King Zhou Wu and King Ke Yin, there was a division of titles, King Chengwang and King Kang left a law, set up six posts, called for the public to promote enlightenment, established various institutions, and set standards separately. If there is no corresponding ability, people can not get empty fame and glorify themselves.

古文：贻厥孙谋，其固本也如此。
现代文：留给子孙的大计，是像这样地稳固根本的做法。
English: The grand plan to bequeath to our children and grandchildren is a solid and fundamental approach like this.

古文：及秦变周官，汉遵嬴旧，或随时适用，或因务迁革，霸王之典，义在于斯，既获厥安，所谓得其时制者也。
现代文：到秦改变了周的官制，汉遵行羸氏的旧制，有的顺应时势而采用，有的根据现实而变革，霸主的典章，道理就在逭裹，一切为了获得安定，就是常说的符合时代的制度。
English: The Qin Dynasty changed the official system of Zhou, the Han Dynasty followed the old system of the Shun Dynasty, some adopted it in accordance with the current situation, some changed it according to reality, the overlord's ordinance, the reason is wrapped in it, all in order to obtain stability, is often said to be a system that is in line with the times.

古文：四征兴于汉代，四安起于魏初，四镇通于柔远，四平止于丧乱，其渡辽、凌江，轻车、强弩，式扬遐外，用表攻伐，兴而复毁，厥号弥繁。
现代文：四征将军职务是在汉代设立的，四安将军职务是在魏的初期开始有的，四镇将军职务是为了安抚远方的人，四平将军职务在丧乱之后就没有了，至于渡辽将军、凌江将军、轻车将军、强弩将军等，是为了扬威四方，表彰攻伐，设置了又废除，称号更加繁多。
English: The posts of the four generals were established in the Han Dynasty, the posts of the four generals of An were established in the early Wei Dynasty, the posts of the four generals of Zhen were established to appease people in distant places, and the posts of the four generals of Ping were no longer in existence after the turmoil. As for the posts of the generals of Wuliao, Lingjiang, Liangcha, and Qiangtao, they were established and abolished in order to promote the prestige of the four directions and to commend the offensive. There are many more titles.

古文：及当涂得志，克平诸夏，初有军师祭酒，参掌戎律。
现代文：到当道的人得志，平定了中原，开始设立军师祭酒，参与掌管军纪军法。
English: Those who came to power gained the will, pacified the Central Plains, began to set up the military master's festival wine, and participated in the management of military discipline and military law.

古文：建安十三年，罢汉台司，更置丞相，而以曹公居之，用兼端揆。
现代文：建安十三年，废置了汉的台司部门，另外设置丞相，而让曹公担任，用来代替尚书省长官。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jian'an, the Han's Taishi department was abolished, and a chancellor was set up in addition, and Cao Gong was appointed to replace the governor of Shangshu Province.

古文：孙吴、刘蜀，多依汉制，虽复临时命氏，而无忝旧章。
现代文：孙吴、刘蜀，基本依从汉代官制，虽然有时临时设置一些官职，却不影响旧的典章。
English: Sun Wu and Liu Shu basically followed the official system of the Han Dynasty. Although they sometimes temporarily set up some official positions, they did not affect the old regulations.

古文：世祖武皇帝即位之初，以安平王孚为太宰，郑冲为太傅，王祥为太保，司马望为太尉，何曾为司徒，荀顗为司空，石苞为大司马，陈骞为大将军，世所谓八公同辰，攀云附翼者也。
现代文：世祖武皇帝即位初期，任命安平王司马孚为太宰，郑冲为太傅，王祥为太保，司马望为太尉，何曾为司徒，荀觊为司空，石苞为大司马，陈骞为大将军，正是世人所说的八公同时，攀云附翼而升官。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Shih Tzu-wu, he appointed Anping King Sima Fu as Dazai, Zheng Chong as Taifu, Wang Xiang as Taibo, Sima Wang as Taifu, He Zeng as Sitoru, Zou as Sikuo, Shi Zou as Daisima, and Chen Zou as Daizheng. It is what the world calls the eight kings at the same time, climbing the clouds and rising to the ranks.

古文：若乃成乎栋宇，非一枝之势；处乎经纶，称万夫之敌。
现代文：至于房屋则不是一木所能支撑的；身居高位，则当将才。
English: As for the house, it is not supported by a single tree; if you are in a high position, you should be a general.

古文：或牵羊以叶于梦，或垂钓以申其道，或空桑以献其术，或操版以启其心。
现代文：有的像力牧那样放羊而和黄帝的梦境一致便任命为将军，有的像姜子牙那样垂钓而获得机会发挥自己的才能，有的藉空桑之瑟来献上他的本领，有的像傅说操筑打墙而被发现并得到重用。
English: Some, like Li Mu, herded sheep and were appointed as generals in accordance with the dream of the Yellow Emperor; some, like Jiang Zi Ya, fished and were given the opportunity to develop their talents; some, like Kuang Zi Si, presented his skills; and some, like Fu Xi, built walls and were discovered and put to good use.

古文：卧龙飞鸿，方金拟璧，秦奚、郑产，楚材晋用，斯亦曩时之良具，其又昭彰者焉。
现代文：卧龙孔明和飞鸿管仲，好比是黄金美玉；秦国的百里奚、郑国的子产，不拘一格任用人才，遣也是从前的贤士，并且又功名卓著的。
English: Wolong Kongming and Feihong Guanzhong are like precious jewels; Bailiye of Qin and Zheng of Zheng have appointed talents from all walks of life. They are also former sages, and their achievements are outstanding.

古文：宣王既诛曹爽，政由己出，网罗英俊，以备天官。
现代文：宣王诛杀了曹爽，政令由自己发布，纲罗英才俊杰，来担任各项官职。
English: Emperor Xuanzong killed Cao Shuang, and issued a decree to appoint a number of talented people to various government posts.

古文：及兰卿受羁，贵公显戮，虽复策名魏氏，而乃心皇晋。
现代文：到了兰卿被囚禁，岂公被处死的时候，虽然还是称作堕厘，可是心裹想的是建立晋朝。
English: When Lan Xing was imprisoned and Zeng Gong was executed, although it was still called "falling," it was the establishment of the Jin Dynasty that was in his heart.

古文：及文王纂业，初启晋台，始置二卫，有前驱养由之弩；及设三部，有熊渠佽飞之众。
现代文：到文王继承大业，首次建立晋的机构，开始设置左右二卫，有了前驱、养由等弓箭手部队；到后来设置三部，有熊渠、做飞等部的勇士。
English: When King Wen inherited the great cause, he established the Jin organization for the first time, and began to set up the left and right two guards, with the bowman troops such as the forerunner and the support; and later set up three departments, with the warriors of the bear canal and the flying department.

古文：是以武帝龙飞，乘兹奋翼，犹武王以周之十乱而理殷民者也。
现代文：因此武帝即位，凭藉这些来施展，好比武王用周的十位贤臣来治理殷的百姓一样。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu ascended the throne, using these to exert himself, just as King Wu used Zhou's ten wise men to govern Yin's people.

古文：是以泰始尽于太康，乔柯茂叶，来居斯位；自太兴讫于建元，南金北铣，用处兹秩。
现代文：因此从泰始年间直到太康年间，有如大树枝繁叶茂，很多贤人来担任官职；从太兴年问直到纽年间，南北各地的杰出人才，处于相应的官位上。
English: Therefore, from the Taizhi period to the Taikang period, many sages came to hold official positions like branches of a tree. From the Taichung period to the New Year period, outstanding talents from all over the north and south were in the corresponding official positions.

古文：虽未拟乎夔拊龙言，天工人代，亦庶几乎任官惟贤，莅事惟能者也。
现代文：虽然还没有能够比得上夔和龙辅佐虞舜那样，以人的努力来代替天工，也差不多可以说是任官惟贤，处理事务惟用有才能的人了。
English: Although they have not yet been able to match the human efforts of Yu and Long Fu Sa Yu to replace the work of heaven, they can almost be said to be appointed officials, and only talented people are used to deal with affairs.

古文：丞相、相国，并秦官也。
现代文：丞相、相国，都是秦代的职官。
English: The chancellor and the minister of state were both officials in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：晋受魏禅，并不置，自惠帝之后，省置无恆。
现代文：晋接受魏的禅让，都不设置，自从惠帝以后，撤销或设置都没有常规。
English: Since Emperor Jin accepted Emperor Wei's concessions, there has been no set-up, and since Emperor Hui, there has been no set-up or cancellation.

古文：为之者，赵王伦、梁王肜、成都王颖、南阳王保、王敦、王导之徒，皆非复寻常人臣之职。
现代文：担任遣一官职的，是赵王司马伦、梁王司马肜、成都王司马颖、亩垦旺司皱、王錾、王遵一类人，都不再是普通的人臣的职位。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lun, Liang Wang Sima Qian, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, Mu Qian Wang Sifu, Wang Qian, Wang Zun and other people who held the post of seconded official are no longer ordinary vassals.

古文：太宰、太傅、太保，周之三公官也。
现代文：太宰、太傅、太保，是周代的三公官职。
English: Dazai, Taifu, and Taibo were the three highest-ranking public officials in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：魏初唯置太傅，以钟繇为之，末年又置太保，以郑冲为之。
现代文：魏的初期祇设太傅，由钟繇担任，末年又设太保，由郑冲担任。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, there was only the position of Taifu, which was held by Zhong Xi, and at the end of the Wei Dynasty, there was the position of Taibo, which was held by Zheng Chong.

古文：晋初以景帝讳故，又采《周官》官名，置太宰以代太师之任，秩增三司，与太傅太保皆为上公，论道经邦，燮理阴阳，无其人则阙。
现代文：晋的初期由于景帝名讳的原故，又采纳《周官》中的官名，设置太宰来代替太师的职务，官职增为三司，和太傅太保都作为上公，讲论道义而治理邦国，协调管理各方面事务，没有合适的人就暂缺。
English: In the early days of Jin, due to the reason of Emperor Jing's reputation, the official name in "Zhou Guan" was adopted, and Dazai was set up to replace the position of Daishi. The official position was increased to three departments, and both Taifu and Taibao served as Shangguo. They lectured on morality and governed the state, and coordinated the management of all aspects of affairs. If there was no suitable person, there would be a temporary shortage.

古文：以安平献王孚居之。
现代文：由安平献王司马孚担任。
English: Held by Anping Xian Wang Sima Fu.

古文：自渡江以后，其名不替，而居之者甚寡。
现代文：自从渡江以后，它的名称没有更改，但是担任的人非常少。
English: Since crossing the river, its name has not changed, but very few people work there.

古文：太尉、司徒、司空，并古官也。
现代文：太尉、司徒、司空，都是古代的官职。
English: "Captain," "Captain" and "Captain" are all ancient official positions.

古文：自汉历魏，置以为三公。
现代文：从汉到魏，设置它们作为三公。
English: From the Han Dynasty to the Wei Dynasty, they were set up as the Three Kingdoms.

古文：及晋受命，迄江左，其官相承不替。
现代文：到晋承受天命，直至江左时期，这些官职传承下来而没有更替。
English: From the time of Jin, who received the Mandate of Heaven, until the time of Jiang Zuo, these official positions were passed down without replacement.

古文：大司马，古官也。
现代文：大司马，是古代的官职。
English: Daishima is an ancient official post.

古文：汉制以冠大将军、骠骑、车骑之上，以代太尉之职，故恆与太尉迭置，不并列。
现代文：汉代的官制把它放在大将军、骠骑将军、车骑将军的前面，来代替太尉的职务，所以常常和太尉轮番设置，但不同时设置。
English: The official system of the Han Dynasty put it in front of the general, the cavalry general and the cavalry general to replace the position of the captain, so it was often set in rotation with the captain, but not at the same time.

古文：及魏有太尉，而大司马、大将军各自为官，位在三司上。
现代文：到魏才有太尉，而且大司马、大将军各自作为官职，地位在三司之上。
English: It was not until the Wei Dynasty that there were first lieutenants, and the grand secretary and general were each official positions, with a status above the three divisions.

古文：晋受魏禅，因其制，以安平王孚为太宰，郑冲为太傅。王祥为太保，义阳王望为太尉，何曾为司徒，荀顗为司空，石苞为大司马，陈骞为大将军，凡八公同时并置，唯无丞相焉。
现代文：晋接受魏的禅让，因袭它的制度，由安乎王司马孚任太宰，郑冲任太傅，王祥任太保，义阳王司马望任太尉，何曾任司徒，荀颉任司空，石苞任大司马，陈骞任大将军，共有八公同时设置，衹是没有丞相。
English: Jin accepted Wei's transfer of power, and because he followed its system, he appointed Anhu Wang Sima Fu as Dazai, Zheng Chong as Taifu, Wang Xiang as Taibo, Yiyang Wang Sima Wang as Taifu, He Zeng as Sittu, He Zeng as Sikuo, Shi Zheng as Daisima, and Chen Zheng as General. A total of eight ministers were appointed at the same time, but there was no chancellor.

古文：自义阳王望为大司马之后，定令如旧，在三司上。
现代文：自从义阳王司马望任大司马以后，规定如同旧制，其位在三司之上。
English: Since the appointment of Yiyang Wang Sima Wang as the chief secretary, the provisions are the same as the old system, and his position is above the three departments.

古文：大将军，古官也。
现代文：大将军，是古代的官职。
English: Grand General is an ancient official position.

古文：汉武帝置，冠以大司马名，为崇重之职。
现代文：漠武帝设置，前面冠上大司马的名，为的是推崇加重它的职权。
English: It was set up by Emperor Mokwu, with the name of Daesima on the front, in order to promote and strengthen its authority.

古文：及汉东京，大将军不常置，为之者皆擅朝权。
现代文：到束汉时期，大将军不经常设置，担任的人全都执掌朝政大权。
English: During the Han Dynasty, grand generals were not often appointed, and those who held the post all held supreme political power.

古文：至景帝为大将军，亦受非常之任。
现代文：到景帝担任大将军，也承当了不同寻常的重任。
English: When Emperor Jing served as a general, he also took on an unusually heavy task.

古文：后以叔父孚为太尉，奏改大将军在太尉下。
现代文：后来任命叔父司马孚为太尉，上奏将大将军的职位改到太尉的下面。
English: Later, he appointed his uncle Sima Fu as the first lieutenant, and the commander changed the position of the general to the second lieutenant.

古文：及晋受命，犹依其制，位次三司下，后复旧，在三司上。
现代文：到晋承受天命，仍然遵循那一制度，地位列在三司的下面，后来恢复旧制，在三司的上面。
English: When Jin received the Mandate of Heaven, he still followed that system, ranking below the three divisions, and later restored the old system, above the three divisions.

古文：太康元年，琅邪王伷迁大将军，复制在三司下，伷薨后如旧。
现代文：太康元年，琅邪王司马佃升任大将军，又改为在三司的下面，司马佃去世以后恢复旧制。
English: In the first year of the Taikang era, the evil king Sima Yi was promoted to the rank of general, and was changed to be under the three divisions. After Sima Yi's death, the old system was restored.

古文：开府仪同三司，汉官也。
现代文：开府仪同三司，是汉代的官职。
English: Kaifu Yi and Sanji were official positions in the Han Dynasty.

古文：殇帝延平元年，郑骘为车骑将军，仪同三司；仪同之名，始自此也。
现代文：殇帝延平元年，邓鹭任车骑将军，仪同三司；仪同的名称，是从这时开始有的。
English: In the first year of Yanping Emperor Yanping, Deng Xuan was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette; the name of ceremony and etiquette has existed since then.

古文：及魏黄权以车骑将军开府仪同三司；开府之名，起于此也。
现代文：到魏的黄权任车骑将军开府仪同三司；开府的名称，从逭时起就有了。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Huang Quan was appointed as the chariot and cavalry general of Kaifu, with the same three divisions; the name of Kaifu has existed since ancient times.

古文：骠骑、车骑、卫将军、伏波、抚军、都护、镇军、中军、四征、四镇、龙骧、典军、上军、辅国等大将军，左右光禄、光禄三大夫，开府者皆为位从公。
现代文：骠骑、车骑、卫将军、伏波、抚军、都护、镇军、中军、四征、四镇、龙骧、典军、上军、辅国等大将军，左右光禄、光禄三大夫，凡是开府的都是地位等同于公。
English: The generals of the cavalry, chariots and cavalry, Wei generals, Fubo, Fuzhu army, Dugong, Zhen army, Chinese army, four expeditions, four towns, Longjing, Ting army, Shang army, and Fu Guo, and the three great generals of the left and right Guanglu and Guanglu, are all equal to the position of the general.

古文：太宰、太傅、太保、司徒、司空、左右光禄大夫、光禄大夫，开府位从公者为文官公，冠进贤三梁，黑介帻。
现代文：太宰、太傅、太保、司徒、司空、左右光禄大夫、光禄大夫，凡是开府而地位等同于公的都是文官公，戴三梁的进贤冠，黑色介帧。
English: Dazai, Taifu, Taibo, Sito, Siku, left and right Kōroku-daifu, Kōroku-daifu, those who founded the government and whose status is equal to that of the public are civil servants, wearing the crown of three beams, black intermediate frame.

古文：大司马、大将军、太尉、骠骑、车骑、卫将军、诸大将军，开府位从公者为武官公，皆著武冠，平上黑帻。
现代文：大司马、大将军、太尉、骠骑、车骑、卫将军、各大将军，凡是开府而地位等同于公的都是武官公，都戴武冠，用平上黑帧。
English: The grand steward, the general, the lieutenant, the equestrian, the charioteer, the general of the guards, and the generals, all of whom held the same rank as the emperor, were military officers. They all wore military crowns, with flat-top black frames.

古文：文武官公，皆假金章紫绶，著五时服。
现代文：文官公和武官公，都假金章紫绶，穿五时服。
English: Civilian officials and military attaches wear fake gold badges and purple ribbons, and wear five-hour uniforms.

古文：其相国、丞相，皆衮冕，绿盭绶，所以殊于常公也。
现代文：如果是相国、丞相，都穿衮衣戴冕冠，用绿色绶带，以此区别于普通的公。
English: In the case of the father-in-law and the prime minister, they both wear a ceremonial robe and crown, with a green ribbon to distinguish them from ordinary officials.

古文：诸公及开府位从公者，品秩第一，食奉日五斛。
现代文：各位公和开府而地位等同公的，品级为第一，享受的俸禄是每天五斛粮食。
English: Ladies and gentlemen, you are the founders of the government, and your status is equal to that of the public, your grade is the first, and you enjoy a salary of five shekels of grain per day.

古文：太康二年，又给绢，春百匹，秋绢二百匹，绵二百斤。
现代文：太康二年，又发给绢，春季给一百匹，秋季给绢二百匹，丝绵二百斤。
English: In the second year of Taikang, it will be given to the yakitori, in the spring to one hundred yakitori, in the autumn to two hundred yakitori, and in the spring to two hundred yakitori.

古文：元康元年，给菜田十顷，田驺十人，立夏后不及田者，食奉一年。
现代文：元康元年，给予采地十顷，专事农业的役隶十名，立夏后未赐封地的，享受全年的俸禄。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, ten hectares of mined land were given to the chiefs, ten officials were appointed to specialise in agriculture, and no fiefdoms were granted after the beginning of the summer, and they enjoyed a salary for the whole year.

古文：置长史一人，秩一千石；西东阁祭酒、西东曹掾、户仓贼曹令史属各一人；御属阁下令史、西东曹仓户贼曹令史、门令史、记室省事令史、阁下记室书令史、西东曹学事各一人。
现代文：设置一名长史，品级为一千石；西束合祭酒、西束曹掾、户仓贼曹令史属等各一名；御属合下令史、西束曹仓户贼曹令史、门令史、记室省事令史、合下记室书令史、西束曹学事各一名。
English: A long history was set up, with a grade of 1,000 koku; there was one for each of the following: the history of the Nishitakago festival wine, the history of the Nishitakago tea ceremony, the history of the Nishitakago thief, the history of the Nishitakago thief, the history of the Nishitakago thief, the history of the gatekeeper, the history of the record office, the history of the record office, the history of the record office, and the history of the Nishitakago thief.

古文：给武贲二十人，持班剑。
现代文：配给二十名武贲，持班剑。
English: Rationed to 20 warriors, armed with sabers.

古文：给朝车驾驷、安车黑耳驾三各一乘，祭酒掾属白盖小车七乘，轺车施耳后户、皁轮犊车各一乘。
现代文：配给四马朝车、三马黑耳安车各一套，给祭酒掾属白盖的小车七套，施耳后开门式轺车、黑漆轮的犊车各一套。
English: A set of four-horse chariot and three-horse black-eared chariot will be distributed, seven sets of white-covered chariot for offering wine, one set of door-opening chariot and one set of black-painted chariot.

古文：自祭酒已下，令史已上，皆皁零辟朝服。
现代文：从祭酒往下，到令史以上的官员，都穿戴黑色零辟朝服。
English: From the sacrificial wine all the way down to the officials at the top of the hierarchy, they all wear black Zippi imperial robes.

古文：太尉虽不加兵者，吏属皆绛服。
现代文：太尉即使不统兵，吏属都穿绛色官服。
English: Even if the captain does not lead the soldiers, the officers all wear navy blue uniforms.

古文：司徒加置左右长史各一人，秩千石；主簿、左西曹掾属各一人，西曹称右西曹，其左西曹令史已下人数如旧令。
现代文：司徒加设左右长史各一名，品级为千石；设主簿、左西曹掾属各一名，西曹称为右西曹，他的左西曹的令史以下的官员人数和旧制一样。
English: In addition, a left and right long-term official was set up, with a rank of 1,000 koku; a general ledger was set up, and a left and west high-ranking official was set up, with the left high-ranking official being called the right high-ranking official, and the number of officials below the rank of his left high-ranking official being the same as the old system.

古文：司空加置导桥掾一人。
现代文：司空加设导桥掾一名。
English: JAXA added one navigator to the bridge.

古文：诸公及开府位从公加兵者，增置司马一人，秩千石；从事中郎二人，秩比千石；主簿、记室督各一人；舍人四人；兵铠、士曹，营军、刺奸、帐下都督，外都督，令史各一人。
现代文：各位公和开府而地位等同公又统兵的，增设司马一名，品级为千石；从事中郎两名，品级与千石相等；主簿、记室督各一名；舍人四名；兵、鑪、士曹，营军、刺奸、帐下都督，外都督，令史各一名。
English: All you officials and governors who have the same status as the public and command the troops, add one Sima, with a rank of 1,000 koku; two middle managers, with a rank equal to 1,000 koku; one head clerk, one chief clerk; four subordinates; one soldier, one sergeant, one courtier, one camp soldier, one assassin, one under-secretary, one governor, and one historian.

古文：主簿已下，令史已上，皆绛服。
现代文：主簿以下，令史以上的官员，都穿绛色官服。
English: Officials below the chief clerk and above the president wear navy blue uniforms.

古文：司马给吏卒如长史，从事中郎给侍二人，主簿、记室督各给侍一人。
现代文：给司马配吏卒按长史的标准，给从事中郎配侍从两名，给主簿、记室督各配侍从一名。
English: According to the standard of long history, two attendants were assigned to the steward, two attendants were assigned to the middle steward, and one attendant was assigned to the chief clerk and the chief clerk.

古文：其余临时增崇者，则褒加各因其时为节文，不为定制。
现代文：其他临时增设优待的情况，就各随褒奖增设时的情况来定条文，不作为定制。
English: In the case of other temporary addition of preferential treatment, the provisions shall be determined according to the situation when each is added with the reward, and shall not be regarded as customization.

古文：诸公及开府位从公为持节都督，增参车为六人，长史、司马、从事中郎、主簿、记室督、祭酒、掾属、舍人如常加兵公制。
现代文：各位公和开府而地位等同公的去担任持节都督时，参军增设到六名，长史、司马、从事中郎、主簿、记室督、祭酒、掾属、舍人完全按照通常统兵的公的规格配置。
English: When an official with the same status as the governor of the capital goes to serve as the governor of the festival, the number of soldiers is increased to six, and the chief historian, the steward, the middle steward, the chief bookkeeper, the chief clerk, the sacrificial wine, the attendants, and the attendants are completely arranged according to the official specifications of the ordinary soldiers.

古文：特进，汉官也。
现代文：特进，是漠代的官职。
English: "Special promotion" was an official post in the monsoon era.

古文：二汉及魏晋以加官从本官车服。无吏卒。
现代文：两漠和魏晋作为加官而仍用原有官职的车服规格，不配置吏卒。
English: As an additional official, Liangmo and Wei Jin still use the original official's uniform specifications, and do not assign officials.

古文：太仆羊琇逊位，拜特进，加散骑常侍，无余官，故给吏卒车服。
现代文：太仆羊玛退职，拜为特进，加为散骑常侍，没有其他官职，所以配给吏卒和车服。
English: The maid, Yangma, resigned from her post, and was promoted to the rank of special enlistment. She was also assigned to be a regular attendant of horseback riding. As she had no other official position, she was assigned to be an officer and to wear a uniform.

古文：其余加特进者，唯食其禄赐，位其班位而已，不别给特进吏卒车服，后定令。
现代文：其他的加为特进的人，祇享受他原有的俸禄，在他原有的品级地位上罢了，不另外配给特进的吏卒和车服，后来就成为定制。
English: Other people who were promoted to special promotion, only enjoyed his original salary, in his original grade status, without the additional allocation of special promotion officers and uniforms, and later became custom-made.

古文：特进品秩第二，位次诸公，在开府骠骑上，冠进贤两梁，黑介帻，五时朝服，佩水苍玉，无章绶，食奉日四斛。
现代文：特进的品级是第二，地位次于各个公，而在开府骠骑将军上面，戴两梁的进贤冠，黑色介帧，穿五时朝服，佩水苍玉，没有章绶，享受的俸禄是每天四斛。
English: The rank of special promotion is the second, the status is inferior to the public, and above the cavalry general in Kaifu, wearing a two-beam promotion crown, black intermediate frame, wearing a five-time imperial robe, wearing water jade, no badge, enjoying a salary of four baht per day.

古文：太康二年，始赐春服绢五十匹，秋绢百五十匹，绵一百五十斤。
现代文：太康二年，开始赐给春服绢五十匹，秋绢一百五十匹，丝绵一百五十斤。
English: In the second year of Taikang, he began to give fifty horses to the spring uniform, one hundred and fifty horses to the autumn uniform, and one hundred and fifty pounds of silk.

古文：元康元年，给菜田八顷，田驺八人，立夏后不及田者，食奉一年。
现代文：元康元年，予以采地八顷，专事农业的役隶八名，立夏以后未赐封地的，享受全年的俸禄。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, eight hectares of land were reclaimed, eight officials were appointed to specialise in agriculture, no fiefs were granted after the beginning of the summer, and they enjoyed a full year's salary.

古文：置主簿、功曹史、门亭长、门下书佐各一人，给安车黑耳驾御一人，轺车施耳后户一乘。
现代文：设主簿、功曹史、门亭长、门下书佐各一名，配黑耳安车的车夫一名，施耳后开门式朝车一套。
English: There is a master book, a record of achievements, a doorman, and a doorman's assistant, a coachman with a black-eared carriage, and a door-opening carriage with a black-eared carriage.

古文：左右光禄大夫，假金章紫绶。
现代文：左右光禄大夫，假金章紫绶。
English: Doctor Guanglu on the left and right, with fake gold and purple badges.

古文：光禄大夫加金章紫绶者，品秩第二，禄赐、班位、冠帻、车服、佩玉，置吏卒羽林及卒，诸所赐给皆与特进同。
现代文：光禄大夫加授金章紫绶的，品级为第二，禄赐、班位、冠帧、车服、佩玉，配置的吏卒羽林和卒，各种待遇都和特进相同。
English: For those who are awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon by the Guanglu Doctor, the grade is the second, the reward, the class, the crown frame, the car, the jade, the officials, the cadres and the cadres are all the same as the special advance.

古文：其以为加官者，唯假章绶、禄赐班位而已，不别给车服吏卒也。
现代文：把它作为加官的话，衹假章绶、禄赐班位，不另外配给车服吏卒。
English: If it is regarded as an additional post, it will be awarded with a fake badge and a bonus, and will not be allocated separately to the driver.

古文：又卒赠此位，本已有卿官者，不复重给吏卒，其余皆给。
现代文：另外死后追赠这一官位时，对本来已经具有卿一级官位的人，不再重复配置吏卒，其他的都照给。
English: In addition, when posthumously awarding this official rank, for those who already have the first-class official rank of Sir, there will be no repeated allocation of officials, and the rest will be given.

古文：光禄大夫假银章青绶者，品秩第三，位在金紫将军下，诸卿上。
现代文：光禄大夫假银章青绶的，品级为第三，位在金紫将军之下，各位卿的上面。
English: Doctor Guanglu's fake silver badge of honor is third in rank, below General Jin Zi and above your lordships.

古文：汉时所置无定员，多以为拜假赗赠之使，及监护丧事。
现代文：漠代没有固定的人数，多半赋予执行用赠使命的使者或是监护丧事的人。
English: There is no fixed number of people in the desert generation, most of whom are given to carry out the mission of the messenger or the person who oversees the funeral.

古文：魏氏已来，转复优重，不复以为使命之官。
现代文：魏以后，渐渐变得重要起来，不再用作出使的官员。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, it gradually became more important, and it was no longer necessary to send officials.

古文：其诸公告老者，皆家拜此位；及在朝显职，复用加之，及晋受命，仍旧不改，复以为优崇之制。
现代文：凡是各位公告老退休后，都在家拜受造一官位；就是在朝中担任显要职务的，也用这个官位加授给他。到晋承受天命，沿用旧制没有改变，又作为优礼器重的制度。
English: All of you announced that after you retire, you are at home to worship the creation of an official position; even if you hold a prominent position in the government, you will also use this official position to award him. To Jin to inherit the fate of heaven, the old system has not changed, and it is also a system of etiquette.

古文：而诸公逊位，不复加之，或更拜上公，或以本封食公禄。
现代文：不过诸公退休后不再加授给他们，或是另外拜为上公，或是靠原有的封号享受公的俸禄。
English: However, after the retirement of the princes, they will no longer be awarded to them, or they will be worshiped as the upper prince, or they will enjoy the public salary by relying on the original title.

古文：其诸卿尹中朝大官年老致仕者，及内外之职加此者，前后甚众。
现代文：凡是各个卿尹在朝中担任大官而告老退休的，以及在朝中或地方担任官职而被加授这一官位的，前后有很多人。
English: There are a lot of people who have retired after serving as a high-ranking official in the central government, as well as those who have served as an official in the central government or local government and have been awarded this official rank.

古文：由是或因得开府，或进加金章紫绶，又复以为礼赠之位。
现代文：有人因此得以开府，有人进而被加授金章紫绶，又再次作为优礼追赠的官位。
English: As a result, some people were able to open a government, some were awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon, and some were given a posthumous official rank as a reward.

古文：泰始中，唯太子詹事杨珧加给事中光禄大夫。
现代文：泰始中期，祇有太子詹事杨珧被加授为给事中光禄大夫。
English: In the middle of the Taizhi period, Prince Zhan Zhi Yang Jie was awarded the additional title of Zhen Zhi Zhong Guanglu Doctor.

古文：加兵之制，诸所供给依三品将军。
现代文：加授给统兵的人，各种待遇和三品将军一样。
English: Those who were promoted to the general staff received the same treatment as the three-star generals.

古文：其余自如旧制，终武、惠、孝怀三世。
现代文：其余的方面都按照旧制，直到武、惠、孝怀三世结束。
English: The rest of the aspects are in accordance with the old system, until the third generation of Wu, Hui and Xiaohui.

古文：光禄大夫与卿同秩中二千石，著进贤两梁冠，黑介帻，五时朝服，佩水苍玉，食奉日三斛。
现代文：光禄大夫和卿的品级同为中二千石，穿着是两梁的进贤冠，黑色介帧，五时朝服，佩水苍玉，享受的俸禄是每天三斛。
English: Dr. and Sir Kōroku are both ranked in the middle of the 2,000 koku class, wear the two-beam crown of merit, black medallions, five-pointed imperial robes, wear aquamarine, and enjoy a salary of three monme a day.

古文：太康二年，始给春赐绢五十匹，秋绢百匹，绵百斤。
现代文：太康二年，开始配给春赐绢五十匹，秋绢一百匹，丝绵一百斤。
English: In the second year of Taikang, he began to give fifty horses to the spring egrets, one hundred horses to the autumn egrets, and one hundred pounds of silk.

古文：惠帝元康元年，始给菜田六顷，田驺六人，置主簿、功曹史、门亭长、门下书佐各一人。
现代文：惠童丞康元年，开始给予六顷封地，六名农业役隶，设主簿、功曹史、门亭长、门下书佐各一名。
English: In the first year of Keidojo Kang, he began to grant six hectares of fiefs, six agricultural officials, and set up a main book, a history of merit, a gate keeper, and a subordinate assistant.

古文：骠骑已下及诸大将军不开府非持节都督者，品秩第二，其禄与特进同。
现代文：骠骑将军以下到各个不开府又不是持节都督的大将军，品级为第二，其俸禄和特进相同。
English: The second-highest rank is that of grand general, whose salary is the same as that of the special enlistment.

古文：置长史、司马各一人，秩千石；主簿，功曹史，门下督，录事，兵铠士贼曹，营军、刺奸、帐下都督，功曹书佐门吏，门下书吏各一人。
现代文：设长史、司马各一名，品级为千石；主簿、功曹史、门下督、录事、兵鉴士贼曹、营军、刺奸、帐下都督、功曹书佐门吏、门下书吏各一名。
English: There shall be one chief historian and one secretary each, with a rank of 1,000 koku; one chief record keeper, one meritorious record keeper, one subordinate governor, one record keeper, one military inspector, one brigadier, one assassin, one subordinate governor, one meritorious record keeper, one subordinate clerk, and one subordinate clerk.

古文：其假节为都督者，所置与四征镇加大将军不开府为都督者同。
现代文：凡假节而为都督的人，官员的配置和四征、镇加大将军而不开府却担任都督的人相同。
English: For those who are prefectural governors on holidays, the officials are arranged in the same way as those who serve as prefectural governors but do not head the prefectural government.

古文：四征镇安平加大将军不开府、持节都督者，品秩第二，置参佐吏卒，幕府兵骑如常都督制，唯朝会禄赐从二品将军之例。
现代文：四征、镇、安、平加大将军而不开府、任持节都督的人，品级为第二，设参佐吏卒、幕府兵骑和一般的都督一样，衹是朝会的班位和禄赐待遇按照二品将军的规格。
English: Those who became generals of the four armies, towns, An, and Ping, but did not set up a government, and were appointed as the governor of the festival, had the second grade, and were set up as staff officers, shogunate cavalrymen, and ordinary governors. They were given the rank of the morning meeting and the bonus treatment according to the specifications of the second grade general.

古文：然则持节、都督无定员，前汉遣使始有持节。
现代文：然而持节、都督没有定员，前汉派遣使者开始有持节。
English: However, there was no fixed number of retainers and governors, and the former Han dynasty began to send emissaries to retainers.

古文：光武建武初，征伐四方，始权时置督军御史，事竟罢。
现代文：光武帝建武初期，征讨攻伐四方，开始设置督军御史，事情结束其职亦随之撤销。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Guangwu's Jianwu period, he began to set up a military governor, and his post was terminated and subsequently revoked.

古文：建安中，魏武为相，始遣大将军督之。
现代文：建安中期，魏武帝当时是相，开始派遣大将军督率军队。
English: In the mid-Jianan period, Emperor Wu of Wei, who was the prime minister at the time, began to dispatch generals to lead the army.

古文：二十一年，征孙权还，夏侯惇督二十六军是也。
现代文：二十一年，征讨瑟擅回来，夏堡堕督二十六军就是例子。
English: In the twenty-first year, the 26th Corps of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army of the 26th Army.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，始置都督诸州军事，或领刺史。
现代文：魏塞童董翅三年，开始设置都督诸州军事，有的兼任刺史。
English: In the third year of Wei Seidong's reign, he began to set up military governors of various states, some of whom also served as military historians.

古文：又上军大将军曹真都督中外诸军事、假黄钺，则总统内外诸军矣。
现代文：另外上军大将军曹真都督中外诸军事、假黄铁，就是总的统掌内外各军了。
English: In addition, the general Cao Zhen, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, is the general in charge of all the armies at home and abroad.

古文：魏明帝太和四年秋，宣帝征蜀，加号大都督。
现代文：魏明帝太和四年秋，宣童征讨蜀，加号为大都督。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, Xuan Tong was enlisted to fight against Shu, and was given the additional title of Grand Governor.

古文：高贵乡公正元二年，文帝都督中外诸军，寻加大都督。
现代文：高贵乡公正元二年，塞童都督中外各军，不久加为大都督。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Gao Gui Xiang Jiuquan, Saido became the governor of all the armies at home and abroad, and was soon promoted to the grand governor.

古文：及晋受禅，都督诸军为上，临诸军次之，督诸军为下；使持节为上，持节次之，假节为下。
现代文：到置接受禅让以后，都督诸军为上，监诸军次于它，督诸军为下；使持节为上，持节次于它，假节为下。
English: After the arrival of the acceptance of the zen concession, the governor of the army is up, the supervision of the army is next to it, and the command of the army is down; the celebration of the festival is up, the celebration of the festival is next to it, and the false festival is down.

古文：使持节得杀二千石以下；持节杀无官位人，若军事，得与使持节同；假节唯军事得杀犯军令者。
现代文：使持节可以处死二千石以下的官员；持节可以处死没有官位的人，如果涉及军事方面的事，可以和使持节一样；假节衹在涉及军事方面的事情上可以处死违反军令的人。
English: Officials with less than 2,000 koku can be executed; those with no official rank can be executed, and if military affairs are involved, they can be executed in the same way; those who violate military orders can be executed in military affairs.

古文：江左以来，都督中外尤重，唯王导等权重者乃居之。
现代文：江左以后，都督之职尤为重要，衹有王导等权势很重的人才担任它。
English: After Jiang Zuo, the post of governor-general was particularly important, and only very powerful people, such as Wang Du, held it.

古文：三品将军秩中二千石者，著武冠，平上黑帻，五时朝服，佩水苍玉，食奉、春秋赐绵绢、菜田、田驺如光禄大夫诸卿制。
现代文：三品将军品级为中二千石的，穿着是武冠，乎上黑色帧巾。五时朝服，佩水苍玉，享受的俸禄、春秋赐的丝绵和绢、采地、农业役隶等按照光禄大夫和诸卿的规格。
English: Third-rank generals were ranked in the middle at 2,000 koku, wore a military crown and almost a black scarf. Fifth-rank court attire, wore aquamarine, enjoyed a stipend, silk and silk brocade given in spring and autumn, mining land, agricultural service, etc. according to the specifications of Dr. Guanglu and the lords.

古文：置长史、司马各一人，秩千石；主簿，功曹，门下都督，录事，兵铠士贼曹，营军、刺奸吏、帐下都督，功曹书佐门吏，门下书吏各一人。
现代文：设长史、司马各一名，品级为千石；主簿、功曹、门下都督、录事、兵皑士贼曹、营军、刺奸、帐下都督、功曹书佐门吏、门下书吏各一名。
English: There was a chief historian and a secretary, each with a rank of 1,000 koku; a chief bookkeeper, a meritorious scholar, a subordinate governor, a record keeper, a soldier, a thief, a battalion commander, an assassin, a subordinate governor, a meritorious scholar, a gatekeeper, and a subordinate scribe.

古文：录尚书，案汉武时，左右曹诸吏分平尚书奏事，知枢要者始领尚书事。
现代文：录尚书，考漠武时期，左右曹的各个官员分别处理尚书的表奏事务，掌握机要的才兼任尚书事。
English: During the examination period of Cao Mengwu, the officials around Cao dealt with the performance of Shangshu separately, and only those who grasped the opportunity could also serve as Shangshu.

古文：张安世以车骑将军，霍光以大将军，王凤以大司马，师丹以左将军并领尚书事。
现代文：张安世作为车骑将军，霍光作为大将军，王凤作为大司马，师丹作为左将军都兼任尚书事。
English: Zhang Anshi as the general of chariot and cavalry, Huo Guang as the general, Wang Feng as the grand steward, and Shi Dan as the left general all concurrently served as the secretary.

古文：后汉章帝以太傅赵憙、太尉牟融并录尚书事。
现代文：壁汉童帝任命太傅赵憙、太尉牟融并录尚书事。
English: Emperor Qiankhandong appointed Taifu Zhao Zhen and Taifu Murong and recorded their records.

古文：尚书有录名，盖自憙、融始，亦西京领尚书之任，犹唐虞大麓之职也。
现代文：尚书有录的名称，是从赵憙、牟融开始的，也就是堕塞时兼尚书的官职，好比卢虞时的大麓遣一官职。
English: The name "Shangshu Yurong" originated from Zhao Zhen and Mu Rong, that is, the official position of Shangshu when it fell into stagnation, just like the official position of Dalou when it fell into a state of chaos.

古文：和帝时，太尉邓彪为太傅，录尚书事，位上公，在三公上，汉制遂以为常，每少帝立则置太傅录尚书事，犹古冢宰总己之义，薨辄罢之。
现代文：和帝时，太尉邓彪任太傅，录尚书事，位居上公，在三公地位之上，汉代的官制中就将此作为常规，每当年少的皇帝即位就设置太傅绿尚书事，好比古代的冢宰约束自己的道理，直到官员去世才撤销它。
English: When Emperor Wu was enthroned, the first lieutenant Deng Biao was appointed to the position of Taifu, responsible for record-keeping, and was ranked as Shangguo, above the status of the three princes. This was the norm in the official system of the Han Dynasty. Every year when a new emperor ascended to the throne, Taifu would set up a green record-keeping system. It was like the ancient principle of the eunuch restricting himself, and it was not revoked until the official died.

古文：自魏晋以后，亦公卿权重者为之。
现代文：从魏晋以来，也都是由公卿中权势大的人担任它。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, it has also been held by powerful nobles.

古文：尚书令，秩千石，假铜印墨绶，冠进贤两梁冠，纳言帻，五时朝服，佩水苍玉，食奉月五十斛。
现代文：尚书令，品级为千石，假铜印墨绶，戴两梁的进贤冠，纳言帧，穿五时朝服，佩水苍玉，享受的俸禄是每月五十斛。
English: Shang Shuling, the grade is a thousand stones, fake copper printing inkstone, wearing two beams of Jinxian crown, Najan frame, wearing five-time court dress, wearing water and jade, enjoying a monthly salary of fifty baht.

古文：受拜则策命之，以在端右故也。
现代文：一旦委任就给予策命文书，因为是位于端右的原故。
English: Once appointed, a mission statement is issued, which is why it is on the far right.

古文：太康二年，始给赐绢，春三十匹，秋七十匹。绵七十斤。
现代文：太康二年，开始配给赐绢，春季三十匹，秋季七十匹，丝绵七十斤。
English: In the second year of Taikang, the distribution of jujube began, with 30 jujube in the spring, 70 jujube in the autumn, and 70 jin of silk.

古文：元康元年，始给菜田六顷，田驺六人，立夏后不及田者，食奉一年。
现代文：元康元年，开始配给六顷采地，六名农业役隶，立夏后还未赐封地的，发给全年的俸禄。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, the allocation of six hectares of mining land and six agricultural laborers began. After the summer, the fief was not granted, and the annual salary was paid.

古文：始贾充为尚书令，以目疾表置省事吏四人，省事盖自此始。
现代文：当初亘充任尚书令，因为眼睛有病而上表请求设置省事吏四名，省事这一官职就是从遣时开始的。
English: At first, Watanchin was appointed as Shang Shuling, because he had an eye disease and the above table requested the establishment of four provincial officials. This official position of provincial affairs began with the appointment of time.

古文：仆射，服秩印绶与令同。
现代文：仆射，官服品级印章绶带都和令一样。
English: The insignia, the official dress grade seal and the ribbon are the same as the order.

古文：案汉本置一人，至汉献帝建安四年，以执金吾荣郃为尚书左仆射，仆射分置左右，盖自此始。
现代文：考汉伐原本设置一人，到濩麸帝建安四年，任命执金吾荣郃为尚书左仆射，卫臻任右仆射，仆射分设左右，就从遣时开始。
English: Originally, there was only one person in charge of the examination of Han Dynasty, but four years after Emperor Jian'an of the Han Dynasty, he appointed the executor Jinwu Rongjie as the left assistant of Shangshu, Wei Zhen as the right assistant, and the assistants were divided into left and right, starting from the time of sending.

古文：经魏至晋，迄于江左，省置无恆，置二，则为左右仆射，或不两置，但曰尚书仆射。
现代文：经魏到晋，至于江左，撤销或设置没有常规，设置二人，就任命为左右仆射，有时不设两人，衹称尚书仆射。
English: From Wei to Jin, as for Jiang Zuo, there is no general rule for revoking or setting up. If two people are set up, they will be appointed as left and right shooters. Sometimes two people are not set up, and they are falsely called Shang Shu shooters.

古文：令阙，则左为省主；若左右并阙，则置尚书仆射以主左事。
现代文：没有尚书令的时候，左仆射就是尚书省首长；如果左右仆射都没有，就设置尚书仆射来主持左仆射的工作。
English: When there is no Shang Shuling, Zuo Buyeo is the head of Shang Shuling Province; if there is no Zuo Buyeo, then Shang Shuling is set up to preside over Zuo Buyeo's work.

古文：列曹尚书，案尚书本汉承秦置，及武帝游宴后庭，始用宦者主中书，以司马迁为之，中间遂罢其官，以为中书之职。
现代文：列曹尚书，考尚书本是汉代继承秦的官制设置的，到武帝在后庭游宴，才用宦官主持中书部门，让司马迁担任，其间就撤销了尚书的官职，用来作为中书的职务。
English: According to Cao Shangshu, the examination of Shangshu books was set up in the Han Dynasty to succeed the official system of the Qin Dynasty. It was not until Emperor Wu held a banquet in the backyard that he used a eunuch to preside over the Chinese book department and let Sima Qian serve. In the meantime, the official position of Shangshu was revoked and used as the position of Chinese book.

古文：至成帝建始四年，罢中书宦者，又置尚书五人，一人为仆射，而四人分为四曹，通掌图书秘记章奏之事，各有其任。
现代文：到成帝建始四年，撤去掌管中书的宦官，又设五名尚书，其中一人为仆射，四人分别担任四曹，统一掌管图书秘记章奏等事务，各自有自己的责任范围。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chengdu, the eunuch in charge of Chinese books was removed, and five officials in charge of Chinese books were set up, one of whom was a clerk, and four of whom served as four sergeants respectively, uniformly in charge of books, secret records, chapters, and other affairs, each with their own scope of responsibility.

古文：其一曰常侍曹，主丞相御史公卿事。
现代文：一个叫常侍曹，主管丞相御史公卿方面的事务。
English: One was called the Tsuneishi-so, who was in charge of the affairs of the chancellor, the prime minister, and the court nobles.

古文：其二曰二千石曹，主刺史郡国事。
现代文：第二个千石曹，主管刺史郡国方面的事务。
English: The second Sengoku Cao, in charge of the affairs of Sashih County.

古文：其三曰民曹，主吏民上书事。
现代文：第三个叫民曹，主管吏民上书的事务。
English: The third is called Minsao, who is in charge of the affairs of the people's petition.

古文：其四曰主客曹，主外国夷狄事。
现代文：第四个叫主客曹，主管外国夷狄方面的事务。
English: The fourth is called the host, who is in charge of foreign affairs.

古文：后成帝又置三公曹，主断狱，是为五曹。
现代文：后来成帝又设置三公曹，主管断狱，造就是五曹。
English: Later, Emperor Chengdi also set up three public officials, the head of which was released from prison, creating five public officials.

古文：后汉光武以三公曹主岁尽考课诸州郡事，改常侍曹为吏部曹，主选举祠祀事，民曹主缮修功作盐池园苑事，客曹主护驾羌胡朝贺事，二千石曹主辞讼事，中都官曹主水火盗贼事，合为六曹。
现代文：后汉光武让三公曹主管岁末考核各州郡的事务，将常侍曹改为吏部曹，主管挑选举荐和祠祀方面的事务，民曹主管修缮制造以及盐池园苑方面的事务，客曹主管护驾以及羌胡朝贺方面的事务，二千石曹主管诉讼方面的事务，中都官曹主管防水防火防盗安全方面的事务，一共是六曹。
English: Later, Han Guangwu put San Gong Cao in charge of the end-of-year assessment of the affairs of each state and county, changed the regular attendant Cao to the personnel department Cao, in charge of the election recommendation and the affairs of the ancestral shrine, the people Cao in charge of the repair and manufacturing and the affairs of the salt pond garden, the guest Cao in charge of the escort and the ceremony, the two thousand stone Cao in charge of the litigation affairs, the central government Cao in charge of the waterproof, fireproof and anti-theft security affairs, a total of six Cao.

古文：并令仆二人，谓之八座。
现代文：加上令和仆射两人，称为八座。
English: In addition, there are two people, the commander and the second-in-command, which is called the eight-seat ring.

古文：尚书虽有曹名，不以为号。
现代文：尚书虽然有曹的名称，但不作为官号。
English: Although Shangshu has Cao's name, it is not used as an official title.

古文：灵帝以侍中梁鹄为选部尚书，于此始见曹名。
现代文：玺童任命侍中凿鳇为选部尚书，在这时才开始见到曹的名称。
English: It was at this time that he began to see Cao's name.

古文：及魏改选部为吏部，主选部事，又有左民、客曹、五兵、度支、凡五曹尚书、二仆射、一令为八座。
现代文：到魏将选部改为吏部，主管选部的事务，又有左民、客曹、五兵、度支，共有五曹尚书、两仆射、一令为八座。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, the selection department was changed to the personnel department, and the departments in charge of the selection department included the left min, guest sergeant, five soldiers, and guard, with a total of five sergeant majors, two sergeant majors, and one sergeant major.

古文：及晋置吏部、三公、客曹、驾部、屯田、度支六曹、而无五兵。
现代文：到晋设置吏部、三公、客曹、驾部、屯田、度支六个曹，而没有五兵曹。
English: In Jin, six posts were set up, including the officers' section, the three generals, the guest sergeants, the drivers' section, the garrison, and the guards, but there were no five sergeants.

古文：咸宁二年，省驾部尚书。
现代文：咸宁二年，撤销驾部尚书。
English: In the second year of Xianning, the driver's license was revoked.

古文：四年，省一仆射，又置驾部尚书。
现代文：四年，减去一个仆射，又设置驾部尚书。
English: Four years, minus one, and a driving ban.

古文：太康中，有吏部、殿中及五兵、田曹、度支、左民为六曹尚书，又无驾部、三公、客曹。
现代文：太康年间，有吏部、殿中和五兵、田曹、度支、左民等六曹尚书，又没有驾部、三公、客曹。
English: During the Taikang era, there were six high-ranking officials, including the officials, the palace officials, the five soldiers, the field officials, the magistrates, and the commoners, but there was no driver, the three officials, or the guest officials.

古文：惠帝世又有右民尚书，止于六曹，不知此时省何曹也。
现代文：惠帝时代又有右民尚书，衹有六个曹，不知道遣时期撤销了哪个曹。
English: In the era of Hui Di, there was also the Right People's Shangshu, and there were six Cao. It is not known which Cao was revoked during the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：及渡江，有吏部、祠部、五兵、左民、度支五尚书。
现代文：到渡辽以后，有吏部、祠部、五兵、左民、度支五个尚书。
English: After arriving in Liao, there were five Shangshu, namely, the cadre department, the ancestral hall department, the five soldiers, the left-handers, and the guards.

古文：祠部尚书常与右仆射通职，不恆置，以右仆射摄之，若右仆射阙，则以祠部尚书摄知右事。
现代文：祠部尚书常和右仆射职务相通，不常设置，让右仆射代管，如果没有右仆射，就让祠部尚书代理右仆射的事务。
English: The duties of the ancestral hall of Shang Shuxu are often the same as those of the right-hand servant, and they are not often set up, so that the right-hand servant is in charge, and if there is no right-hand servant, let the ancestral hall of Shang Shuxu be the agent of the right-hand servant.

古文：左右丞，自汉武帝建始四年置尚书，而便置丞四人。
现代文：左右丞，从漠武帝建始四年设置尚书，就同时设置四名丞。
English: In the four years since the establishment of the Shoshu system by Emperor Momotake, there have been four so-called so-jo.

古文：及光武始减其二，唯置左右丞，左右丞盖自此始也。
现代文：到光武开始减去两名，衹设左右丞，左右丞就是从这时开始有的。
English: When Guangwu began to subtract two people, he set up a left and right yo-yo, and the left and right yo-yo began to exist from that time.

古文：自此至晋不改。
现代文：从此直到晋代都没有更改。
English: From then until the Jin Dynasty, there were no changes.

古文：晋左丞主台内禁令，宗庙祠祀，朝仪礼制，选用署吏，急假；右丞掌台内库藏庐舍，凡诸器用之物，及廪振人租布，刑狱兵器，督录远道文书章表奏事。
现代文：晋代左丞主管台内禁令，宗庙祠祀，朝仪礼制，选用署吏，批准请假等事务；右丞掌管台内的库藏庐舍，各种器用物品，以及开仓赈济百姓租调，刑狱兵器，督管登录远道的文书章表奏事。
English: On the throne of Jin, Zu Rong was in charge of prohibitions in Taichung, ancestral temples and shrines, imperial rites and etiquette, selection of officials, approval of leave of absence, and other affairs; Zu Rong was in charge of warehouses and storehouses in Taichung, various utensils, as well as the opening of warehouses to help the people with rent and transfer, prison weapons, supervision of the registration of long-distance routes, and paperwork.

古文：八座郎初拜，皆沿汉旧制，并集都座交礼，迁职又解交焉。
现代文：八座的郎官刚上任时，都沿用漠代旧制，一起集中到座前行结交礼，离职升迁又行解交礼。
English: When the eight-seat steward just took office, they all followed the old system of the desert era, and gathered together to go to the front of the seat to make a greeting, and to leave the promotion and demotion.

古文：尚书郎，西汉旧置四人，以分掌尚书。
现代文：尚书郎，西汉原设置四人，用来分别执掌尚书方面的事务。
English: Shang Shuro, four people were originally set up in the Western Han Dynasty to handle the affairs of Shang Shuro separately.

古文：其一人主匈奴单于营部，一人主羌夷吏民，一人主户口垦田，一人主财帛委输。
现代文：其中一入主管匈奴单于营部的事务，一入主管羌夷的吏民事务，一入主管户口垦田的事务，一人主管财帛运送事务。
English: One of them was put in charge of the affairs of the Xiongnu in the camp, one was put in charge of the affairs of the officials and the people of Qi, one was put in charge of the affairs of the Hukou and Putian, and one was in charge of the transportation of money and goods.

古文：及光武分尚书为六曹之后，合置三十四人，秩四百石，并左右丞为三十六人。
现代文：到光武将尚书分为六个曹以后，共设三十四人，品级为四百石，连左右丞为三十六人。
English: After Guangwu divided Shangshu into six Cao, a total of thirty-four people were set up, with a grade of four hundred stone, and thirty-six people were left and right.

古文：郎主作文书起草，更直五日于建礼门内。
现代文：郎主管起草文书，在建礼门内轮流值班五天。
English: The superintendent drafted the document and took turns to be on duty for five days at Jianli Gate.

古文：尚书郎初从三署诣台试，守尚书郎，中岁满称尚书郎，三年称侍郎，选有吏能者为之。
现代文：尚书郎刚从三署调到尚书台试用时是守尚书郎，满一年后称尚书郎，第三年称侍郎，挑选有做官才能的人担任。
English: Shang Shulang was just transferred from the Third Precinct to Shang Shudai, and when he was on probation, he was called Shou Shulang. After one year, he was called Shang Shulang, and in the third year, he was called Jiro. People with the ability to be an official were selected to serve.

古文：至魏，尚书郎有殿中、吏部、驾部、金部、虞曹、比部、南主客、祠部、度支、库部、农部、水部、仪曹、三公、仓部、民曹、二千石、中兵、外兵、都兵、别兵、考功、定课，凡二十三郎。
现代文：到了魏，尚书郎有殿中、吏部、驾部、金部、虞曹、比部、南主客、祠部、度支、库部、农部、水部、仪曹、三公、仓部、民曹、二千石、中兵、外兵、都兵、别兵、考功、定课等，共二十三郎。
English: By the Wei Dynasty, Shang Shulang had the following departments: the middle of the palace, the staff department, the driver department, the gold department, the yu department, the hebe department, the southern host and guest department, the ancestral hall department, the dowry department, the treasury department, the agriculture department, the water department, the instrumentation department, the civil service department, the warehouse department, the people department, two thousand koku, the middle soldiers, the foreign soldiers, the capital soldiers, the other soldiers, the performance appraisal department, the fixed course, etc., a total of twenty-three hundred yuan.

古文：青龙二年，尚书陈矫奏置都官、骑兵，合凡二十五郎。
现代文：青龙二年，尚书陈矫奏请设置都官、骑兵，合起来共二十五郎。
English: In the 2nd year of Qinglong, Shangshu Chen Jiao Zong set up a capital officer and a cavalryman, a total of twenty-five.

古文：每一郎缺，白试诸孝廉能结文案者五人，谨封奏其姓名以补之。
现代文：每当一个郎的职位空缺，就详细考察出五名能够处理文书案卷的孝廉，慎重地密封上报他们的姓名以作递补。
English: Whenever there is a vacancy for a post, five filial sons who are capable of handling the paperwork are carefully examined and their names are carefully sealed and submitted as a supplement.

古文：及晋受命，武帝罢农部、定课，置直事、殿中、祠部、仪曹、吏部、三公、比部、金部、仓部、度支、都官、二千石、左民、右民、虞曹、屯田、起部、水部、左右主客、驾部、车部、库部、左右中兵、左右外兵、别兵、都兵、骑兵、左右士、北主客、南主客，为三十四曹郎。
现代文：到晋承受天命，武帝撤销农部、定课，设置直事、殿中、祠部、仪曹、吏部、三公、比部、金部、仓部、度支、都官、二千石、左民、右民、虞曹、屯田、起部、水部、左右主客、驾部、车部、库部、左右中兵、左右外兵、别兵、都兵、骑兵、左右士、北主客、南主客，共为三十四个曹郎。
English: When Emperor Wu received the Mandate of Heaven in the Jin Dynasty, he abolished the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Education, and set up the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of the Imperial Household, the Ministry of the Ancestral Shrines, the Ministry of Ceremonies, the Ministry of Personnel, the Ministry of the Three Princes, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of

古文：后又置运曹，凡三十五曹，置郎二十三人，更相统摄。
现代文：后来又设置运曹，共三十五曹，设二十三名郎，兼相统管。
English: Later, there were thirty-five assistants and twenty-three lords, who were also in charge of the administration.

古文：及江左，无直事、右民、屯田、车部、别兵、都兵、骑兵、左右士、运曹十曹郎。
现代文：到江左时，没有直事、右民、屯田、车部、别兵、都兵、骑兵、左右士、运曹等十个曹郎。
English: When they arrived at the left side of the river, there were ten sergeants, including naotie, u-min, tonden, chariot division, non-commissioned officers, capital soldiers, cavalry, left and right sergeants, and transport sergeants.

古文：康穆以后，又无虞曹、二千石二郎，但有殿中、祠部、吏部、仪曹、三公、比部、金部、仓部、度支、都官、左民、起部、水部、主客、驾部、库部、中兵、外兵十八曹郎。
现代文：康穆以后，又没有虞曹、二千石两个郎，衹有殿中、祠部、吏部、仪曹、三公、比部、金部、仓部、度支、都官、左民、起部、水部、主客、驾部、库部、中兵、外兵等十八个曹郎。
English: After Kangmu, there was no Yu Cao, two lords of 2,000 koku, but there were eighteen lords of the palace, the ancestral hall, the cadre department, the honor department, the three princes, the finance department, the warehouse department, the customs department, the city government, the left people, the starting department, the water department, the host, the driver, the warehouse department, the middle soldiers, the foreign soldiers, and so on.

古文：后又省主客、起部、水部，余十五曹云。
现代文：后来又取消主客、起部、水部，剩十五个曹。
English: Later, the roles of host, hostess, head waiter, and waiter were eliminated, leaving fifteen sous chefs.

古文：侍中，案黄帝时风后为侍中，于周为常伯之任，秦取古名置侍中，汉因之。
现代文：侍中，考黄帝时代风后任侍中，在周代叫常伯，秦代取古代的名称设置侍中，汉代因袭沿用。
English: He was a chamberlain during the reign of the Yellow Emperor. In the Zhou Dynasty, he was called Changbo. In the Qin Dynasty, he was given the ancient title of chamberlain. In the Han Dynasty, he continued to be called Changbo.

古文：秦汉俱无定员，以功高者一人为仆射。
现代文：秦汉时都没有定员，由功高的一人任仆射。
English: During the Qin and Han dynasties, there was no fixed number of shooters, and the best shooters were chosen by merit.

古文：魏晋以来置四人，别加官者则非数。
现代文：魏晋以来设置四人，另外作为加官的就不在数内。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, four people have been appointed to this post, and there are not many other people who have been promoted.

古文：掌傧赞威仪，大驾出则次直侍中护驾，正直侍中负玺陪乘，不带剑，余皆骑从。
现代文：掌管傧赞威仪，大驾出行时就由次直侍中护驾，正直侍中抱着玉玺在车上陪乘，不带佩剑，其余的都骑马侍从。
English: He is in charge of 赞威儀, and when he travels by carriage, he is escorted by the second-ranked attendant, and the first-ranked attendant accompanies him in the carriage holding the jade scepter, without a sword, and the rest are attendants on horseback.

古文：御登殿，与散骑常侍对扶，侍中居左，常侍居右。
现代文：皇上登殿，和散骑常侍相对夹辅，侍中在左侧，常侍在右侧。
English: The emperor ascends the throne, flanked by equestrian attendants, with the equerry on the left and the attendant on the right.

古文：备切问近对，拾遗补阙。
现代文：以备在身边询问答对，拾遣补阙。
English: So be prepared to ask around for the right answer, and pick up the correct answer.

古文：及江左哀帝兴宁四年，桓温奏省二人，后复旧。
现代文：到束晋哀帝兴宁四年，桓温奏请减省二人，后来恢复旧制。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xingning's reign, Emperor Guanwen asked the provincial government to reduce the number of officials by two. Later, the old system was restored.

古文：给事黄门侍郎，秦官也。
现代文：给事黄门侍郎，是秦代的职官。
English: The attendant of the Yellow Gate is a Qin Dynasty official.

古文：汉已后并因之，与侍中俱管门下众事，无员。
现代文：漠代以后都沿用了，和侍中一起掌管门下的各种事务，没有定员。
English: It has been used since the Musashi era. Together with the chamberlains, they are in charge of the various affairs under the door. There is no fixed number of members.

古文：及晋，置员四人。
现代文：到晋代，设置定员四人。
English: By the Jindai era, the number of members was set at four.

古文：散骑常侍，本秦官也。
现代文：散骑常侍，本是秦代职官。
English: A knight errant, he was originally a Qin Dynasty official.

古文：秦置散骑，又置中常侍，散骑骑从乘舆车后，中常侍得入禁中，皆无员，亦以为加官。
现代文：秦代设置散骑，又设置中常侍，散骑在乘舆车后骑马随从，中常侍可以进入禁中，都没有定员，也作为加官。
English: The Qin Dynasty set up the free riders, and also set up the middle attendants. The free riders rode on a horse after taking a public carriage, and the middle attendants could enter the forbidden middle. There was no fixed number, and they also served as additional officers.

古文：汉东京初，省散骑，而中常侍用宦者。
现代文：东选初期，撤销散骑，而用宦官任中常侍。
English: In the early days of the Eastern Election, horseback riding was abolished, and eunuchs were appointed as middle and regular attendants.

古文：魏文帝黄初初，置散骑，合之于中常侍，同掌规谏，不典事，貂榼插右，骑而散从，至晋不改。
现代文：魏文帝董翅初年，设置散骑，和中常侍合并，共同负责规谏事宜，不管具体事务，冠上的貂瑺饰品插在右面，骑马散行跟随作侍从，到晋代不更改。
English: In the first year of Emperor Weiwen's reign, the imperial cavalry was set up, and it merged with the Chinese regular attendants, jointly responsible for regulating matters. Regardless of specific matters, the crown's enamel decoration was inserted on the right side, and the horse rode along as an attendant. It did not change until the Jin Dynasty.

古文：及元康中，惠帝始以宦者董猛为中常侍，后遂止。
现代文：到了五尘中期，塞童首先用宦官董猛任中常侍，后来就停止了。
English: In the middle of the Five Dynasties and Eight Dynasties period, Saido first appointed the eunuch Dong Meng as the middle attendant, and then stopped.

古文：常为显职。
现代文：常常作为显要的职位。
English: Often as a prominent position.

古文：给事中，秦官也。
现代文：给事中，是秦代职官。
English: In the middle of the scene is a Qin Dynasty official.

古文：所加或大夫、博士、议郎，掌顾问应对，位次中常侍。
现代文：加授的对象是大夫、博士、议郎，负责顾问应对，地位次于中常侍。
English: The object of the additional award is the doctor, the doctor, and the adviser, who is responsible for the advisory response, and whose position is second only to the junior attendant.

古文：汉因之。
现代文：莲伐沿用。
English: Lotus cutting continues to be used.

古文：及汉东京省，魏世复置，至晋不改。
现代文：到塞汉时期撤销，垩绁又设置，到置伐没有更改。
English: It was revoked during the Saikhan period, and the yakitori was set up again, but it was not changed until the felling.

古文：在散骑常侍下，给事黄门侍郎上，无员。
现代文：级别在散骑常侍下，给事黄门侍郎上，没有定员。
English: There is no limit to the number of people who can be served, ranging from horseback riding attendants to yellow-door waiters.

古文：通直散骑常侍，案魏末散骑常侍又有在员外者。
现代文：通直散骑常侍，考魏末的散骑常侍还有在定员以外的。
English: There are regular attendants for horseback riding all the way to the end of the year, and there are also regular attendants for horseback riding at the end of the year who are not part of the fixed number.

古文：泰始十年，武帝使二人与散骑常侍通员直，故谓之通直散骑常侍。
现代文：壶丝十年，亘造派两人和散骑常侍通员直，所以叫做通直散骑常侍。
English: After ten years of kettling, Wuzhong sent two people and a straggler to the straggler, so it was called the straggler to the straggler.

古文：江左置四人。
现代文：辽左时期设置四名。
English: During Liao Zuo's time, there were four members of the troupe.

古文：员外散骑常侍，魏末置，无员。
现代文：员外散骑常侍，塾末设置，没有定员。
English: Non-member strolling attendants, set up at the end of the school year, there is no quota.

古文：散骑侍郎四人，魏初与散骑常侍同置。
现代文：散骑侍郎四名，垫初和散骑常侍一同设置。
English: There are four horseback riding attendants, and the mats are set up together with horseback riding regular attendants.

古文：自魏至晋，散骑常侍、侍郎与侍中、黄门侍郎共平尚书奏事，江左乃罢。
现代文：从麸到置，散骑常侍、侍郎和侍中、黄门侍郎共同处理尚书部门的奏章事务，辽左时期才撤销。
English: From the shogunate to the shogunate, the sanzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhiz

古文：通直散骑侍郎四人。
现代文：通直散骑侍郎四名。
English: Four horsemen ride in a straight line.

古文：初，武帝置员外散骑侍郎，及太兴元年，元帝使二人与散骑侍郎通员直，故谓之通直散骑侍郎，后增为四人。
现代文：当初，武帝设置员外散骑侍郎，到太兴元年，元帝派两人和散骑侍郎通员直，所以叫做通直散骑侍郎，后来增加成四人。
English: At first, Emperor Wu set up a number of non-official horseback riding attendants, and by the first year of the Taixing Dynasty, the former emperor sent two horseback riding attendants and a direct attendant, so it was called a direct horseback riding attendant, and later increased to four.

古文：员外散骑侍郎，武帝置，无员。
现代文：员外散骑侍郎，武帝设置，没有定员。
English: There is no limit to the number of horsemen and attendants, but Emperor Wu has set a limit.

古文：奉朝请，本不为官，无员。
现代文：奉朝请，本来不是官职，没有定员。
English: It is not an official post, and there is no quota.

古文：汉东京罢三公、外戚、宗室、诸侯多奉朝请。
现代文：汉代东京时期不任官职的三公、外戚、宗室、诸侯多做奉朝请。
English: During the Tokyo period of the Han Dynasty, the three princes, maternal relatives, paternal uncles, and lords who did not hold official positions mostly served the Emperor.

古文：奉朝请者，奉朝会请召而已。
现代文：奉朝请，就是奉朝会时的请召罢了。
English: If you are invited by the Emperor, it is just an invitation at the Emperor's meeting.

古文：武帝亦以宗室、外戚为奉车、驸马、骑三都尉而奉朝请焉。
现代文：武帝也让宗室、外戚任奉车、驸马、骑三种都尉而做奉朝请。
English: Emperor Wu also asked his father's family and maternal relatives to serve as captains of three kinds of chariots, horses and cavalry to serve the imperial court.

古文：元帝为晋王，以参军为奉车都尉，掾属为驸马都尉，行参军舍人为骑都尉，皆奉朝请。
现代文：元帝当晋王时，让参军任奉车都尉，掾属任驸马都尉，行参军舍人任骑都尉，都是奉朝请。
English: When the Yuan Emperor was the King of Jin, he made those who wanted to join the army serve as chariot captains, those who wanted to join the army as horse captains, and those who wanted to join the army as cavalry captains, all at the request of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：后罢奉车、骑二都尉，唯留驸马都尉奉朝请。
现代文：后来撤销奉车、骑两种都尉，祇保留驸马都尉奉朝请。
English: Later, the two kinds of captains, driving and riding, were revoked, and only the horse-drawn horse captains were retained.

古文：诸尚公主者刘惔、桓温皆为之。
现代文：各位娶了公主的像刘恢、桓温都担任过。
English: Those of you who have married princesses, such as Liu Hui and Huan Wen, have all served.

古文：中书监及令，案汉武帝游宴后庭，始使宦者典事尚书，谓之中书谒者，置令、仆射。
现代文：中书监以及中书令，考汉武帝在后庭游宴时，才首先让宦官主持尚书事务，叫做中书谒者，设置令、仆射。
English: When Emperor Hanwu held a banquet in the backyard, he first asked the eunuch to preside over the book affairs, which is called the Chinese Book Supervisor and the Chinese Book Order.

古文：成帝改中书谒者令曰中谒者令，罢仆射。
现代文：成帝将中书谒者令改称为中谒者令，取消仆射。
English: Emperor Cheng changed the name of the order to the Order of the People's Deputies of the People's Republic of China to the Order of the People's Deputies of the People's Republic of China.

古文：汉东京省中谒者令，而有中官谒者令，非其职也。
现代文：汉代束京时期取消中谒者令，却有中官谒者令，不是中谒者令的职务。
English: During the period of the Han Dynasty in Beijing, the middle eunuch order was abolished, but there was a middle official eunuch order, not a middle eunuch order.

古文：魏武帝为魏王，置秘书令，典尚书奏事。
现代文：魏远童任魏王时，设秘书令，掌管尚书方面的奏章事务。
English: When Wei Yuan Tong was the king of Wei, he set up a secretarial order to be in charge of the music chapter affairs.

古文：文帝黄初初改为中书，置监、令，以秘书左丞刘放为中书监，右丞孙资为中书令；监、令盖自此始也。
现代文：文帝黄初初年改为中书，设置监、令，任命秘书左丞刘放为中书监，右丞孙资为中书令；监、令就从逭时开始有。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wenhuang's reign, it was changed to Zhongshu, with the establishment of inspectors and orders, and the appointment of secretary Zu Rong Liu Fang as the inspector of Zhongshu, and Zu Rong Sun Zi as the inspector of Zhongshu; inspectors and orders have been in existence since the Heian period.

古文：及晋因之，并置员一人。
现代文：到晋代沿用，都设置一名官员。
English: It was used until the Jin Dynasty, and an official was always assigned to it.

古文：中书侍郎，魏黄初初，中书既置监、令，又置通事郎，次黄门郎。
现代文：中书侍郎，魏黄初初年，中书部门已经设置监、令，又设置通事郎，次于黄门郎。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Weihuang, the Chinese Calligraphy Department had already set up a supervisor, a secretary, and a secretary, second only to Huangmenro.

古文：黄门郎已署事过，通事乃署名。
现代文：黄门郎已经签署的文书，经过通事之后才签名。
English: Huangmenlang has signed the instrument, only signed after going through the process.

古文：已署，奏以入，为帝省读，书可。
现代文：签名以后，上报给皇上，由皇帝审阅，批准。
English: After signing, it is reported to the emperor, who reviews and approves it.

古文：及晋，改曰中书侍郎，员四人。
现代文：到晋代，改称为中书侍郎，定员四人。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, it was renamed the Chinese Calligraphy Attendant, with a capacity of four.

古文：中书侍郎盖此始也。
现代文：中书侍郎就从遣时开始有。
English: Chusho-ziroro have been around since the time of yakitori.

古文：及江左初，改中书侍郎曰通事郎，寻复为中书侍郎。
现代文：到江左初期，改称中书侍郎为通事郎，不久又称为中书侍郎。
English: In the early days of Jiang Zuo, he changed his name from Zhongshu Jiro to Tsujiro, and was soon called Zhongshu Jiro again.

古文：中书舍人，案晋初初置舍人、通事各一人，江左合舍人通事谓之通事舍人，掌呈奏案章。
现代文：中书舍人，考晋代初年开始设置舍人、通事各一名，江左时期合并舍人和通事而称为通事舍人，掌管呈递奏章案卷。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, a secretary and a clerk were set up for each of the clerk and clerk. In the Jiangzu period, the clerk and the clerk were combined and called the clerk and clerk, and they were in charge of submitting the record of the case.

古文：后省，而以中书侍郎一人直西省，又掌诏命。
现代文：后来撤销，而用一名中书侍郎在西省负责，又掌管韶命文书。
English: Later, it was revoked, and a Chinese clerk was put in charge in the western province, and in charge of the death-defying documents.

古文：秘书监，案汉桓帝延熹二年置秘书监，后省。
现代文：秘书监，考汉桓帝延熹二年设置秘书监，后来撤销。
English: Secretary Supervisor, set up by Emperor Han in the second year of Emperor Yan's reign, but later revoked.

古文：魏武为魏王，置秘书令、丞。
现代文：魏武帝任魏王时，置秘书令、秘书丞。
English: When Emperor Weiwu was the king of Wei, he appointed a secretary and a secretary.

古文：及文帝黄初初，置中书令，典尚书奏事，而秘书改令为监。
现代文：到文帝黄初初年，设置中书令，典掌尚书奏章事务，而将秘书令改为秘书监。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wenhuang's reign, the Chinese Calligraphy Order was set up, and the Secretary Order was changed to the Secretary Supervision.

古文：后以何祯为秘书丞，而秘书先自有丞，乃以祯为秘书右丞。
现代文：后来任命何祯为秘书丞，可是事先已经有了秘书丞，就任命何祯为秘书右丞。
English: He was later appointed secretary-general, but since there was already a secretary-general, he was appointed secretary-general.

古文：及晋受命，武帝以秘书并中书省，其秘书著作之局不废。
现代文：到晋承受天命，武帝将秘书并入中书省，没有废除其中的秘书著作局。
English: By the time Jin received the Mandate of Heaven, Emperor Wu had merged the Secretariat into the Ministry of Literature, but did not abolish the Secretarial and Literary Bureau.

古文：惠帝永平中，复置秘书监，其属官有丞，有郎，并统著作省。
现代文：惠帝永平年间，又设置秘书监，其中的属官有丞，有郎，都由秘书省统管。
English: During the Yongping era of Emperor Hui, a secretarial supervisor was also set up, among which the subordinate officials, such as the vice-premiers and vice-premiers, were under the overall control of the secretarial department.

古文：著作郎，周左史之任也。
现代文：著作郎，是周代左史的职务。
English: He was a writer, which was the job of Zhou Dynasty's leftist historians.

古文：汉东京图籍在东观，故使名儒著作东观，有其名，尚未有官。
现代文：汉代束京时期图书典籍存放在束观，所以让著名的儒者在束观撰写著作，有了 著作 这样的名称，还没有相应的官职。
English: During the Han Dynasty, books and classics were stored in Sokun, so the famous Confucianist was allowed to write books in Sokun. With such a name, there is no corresponding official position.

古文：魏明帝太和中，诏置著作郎，于此始有其官，隶中书省。
现代文：魏明帝太和年间，下诏设置著作郎，从这时候开始有这种官职，隶属于中书省。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the emperor issued an edict establishing the position of Shosho-ro, and from that time on, this official position has been attached to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：及晋受命，武帝以缪徵为中书著作郎。
现代文：到晋承受天命，武帝任命缪征为中书著作郎。
English: When Jin received the Mandate of Heaven, Emperor Wu appointed Mu Zheng as the author of Chinese books.

古文：元康二年，诏曰： 著作旧属中书，而秘书既典文籍，今改中书著作为秘书著作。 
现代文：元康二年，韶令说： 著作原来隶属中书，可是既然有秘书典掌文献典籍，现在改中书著作为秘书著作。 
English: In the second year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, the imperial edict said: "Writings were originally under the jurisdiction of Zhongshu, but since there are secretarial classics, they are now changed to Zhongshu as secretarial works.

古文：于是改隶秘书省。
现代文：从此改为隶属秘书省。
English: Since then, it has been subordinated to the Ministry of Secretaries.

古文：后别自置省而犹隶秘书。
现代文：后来另外自行设置成为省却仍然隶属于秘书。
English: It was later made a separate ministry in its own right, but still reports to the secretary.

古文：著作郎一人，谓之大著作郎，专掌史任，又置佐著作郎八人。
现代文：著作郎一名，称为大著作郎，专门掌管历史方面的事务，又设置八名佐著作郎。
English: There is one Shoseki-ro, called Dai Shoseki-ro, who is specifically in charge of historical affairs, and there are also eight Sa Shoseki-ro.

古文：著作郎始到职，必撰名臣传一人。
现代文：著作郎上任之后，必定要撰写一位名臣的传记。
English: After the author takes office, he must write a biography of a famous minister.

古文：太常、光禄勋、卫尉、太仆、廷尉、大鸿胪、宗正、大司农、少府、将作大匠、太后三卿、大长秋，皆为列卿，各置丞、功曹、主簿、五官等员。
现代文：太常、光禄勋、卫尉、太仆、廷尉、大鸿胪、宗正、大司农、少府、将作大匠、太后三卿、大长秋，都属于列卿，各自下面设置丞、功曹、主簿、五官等属员。
English: Taizhang, Guanglu Xun, Wei Wei, Taifu, Tingwei, Dahongjun, Zong Zheng, Daisho Nong, Shofu, Zeng Daisho, Dowager Three Lords, and Daichang Qiu all belonged to the nobility, and each of them had subordinate members such as Jo, Gong Cao, Master of the Rolls, and five officials.

古文：太常，有博士、协律校尉员，又统太学诸博士、祭酒及太史、太庙、太乐、鼓吹、陵等令，太史又别置灵台丞。
现代文：太常，有博士、协律校尉等属员，又统管太学的各博士、祭酒以及太史令、太庙令、太乐令、鼓吹令、陵令等。太史又另外设置灵台丞。
English: In the Taijo, there are subordinate members such as doctors and vice principals, as well as the doctors who supervise the study of Taiji, the sacrificial wine, and the Taiji Order, the Taiji Temple Order, the Taiji Music Order, the Drumming Order, the Mausoleum Order, etc. In addition, the Taiji also has the Ling Taijo.

古文：太常博士，魏官也。
现代文：太常博士，是堕伐的职官。
English: Dr. Taejong is a corrupt official.

古文：魏文帝初置，晋因之。
现代文：魏文帝开始设置，置伐沿用了它。
English: Emperor Weiwen began to set it up, and the felling followed it.

古文：掌引导乘舆。
现代文：掌管引导皇帝的车驾。
English: In charge of guiding the emperor's carriage.

古文：王公已下应追谥者，则博士议定之。
现代文：王公以下应追加谧号的，就是由博士商议确定的。
English: Wang Gong and below should be given additional surnames, which will be determined by the doctorate.

古文：协律校尉，汉协律都尉之职也，魏杜夔为之。
现代文：协律校尉，是汉代的协律都尉的官职，魏时杜夔担任它。
English: The lieutenant of the chorus is the official position of the lieutenant of the chorus in the Han Dynasty, and Du Xi held it in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：及晋，改为协律校尉。
现代文：到晋代，改成协律校尉。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：晋初承魏制，置博士十九人。
现代文：晋初承袭魏制，设置十九名博士。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, it inherited the Wei system and set up nineteen doctorates.

古文：及咸宁四年，武帝初立国子学，定置国子祭酒、博士各一人，助教十五人，以教生徒。
现代文：到咸宁四年，武帝开始设立国子学，规定设置国子祭酒、博士各一名，助教十五名，来教育学生。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xianning, Emperor Wu began to set up Guozhixue, stipulating the establishment of Guozhixue, one doctor each, and fifteen teaching assistants to educate students.

古文：博士皆取履行清淳，通明典义者，若散骑常侍、中书侍郎、太子中庶子以上，乃得召试。
现代文：博士都是选自品德高尚，通晓经书义理的人，像散骑常侍、中书侍郎、太子中庶子以上的人，才能被召来参加考核。
English: The doctors are all chosen from people with high moral character and knowledge of the principles of the scriptures, such as the horseback riding attendant, the Chinese book attendant, the prince's illegitimate son and above, in order to be called to participate in the assessment.

古文：及江左初，减为九人。
现代文：到江左初期，减到九人。
English: At the beginning of Jiang Zuo's tenure, the number was reduced to nine.

古文：元帝末，增《仪礼》、《春秋公羊》博士各一人，合为十一人。
现代文：元帝末年，增设《仪礼》、《春秋公羊》博士各一名，共为十一名。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, one doctorate each in "Rites" and "Spring and Autumn Ram" was added, making a total of eleven.

古文：后又增为十六人，不复分掌《五经》，而谓之太学博士也。
现代文：后来又增加到十六名，不再分别执掌《五经》，而都称作太学博士。
English: Later, the number was increased to sixteen, and they were no longer in charge of the "Five Classics" separately, but were all called Doctor of Theology.

古文：孝武太元十年，损国子助教员为十人。
现代文：孝武太元十年，将国子助教减到十名。
English: In the tenth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Kuniko's number of assistant teachers was reduced to ten.

古文：光禄勋，统武贲中郎将、羽林郎将、冗从仆射、羽林左监、五官左右中郎将、东园匠、太官，御府、守宫、黄门、掖庭、清商、华林园、暴室等令。
现代文：光禄勋，统管虎贲中郎将、羽林郎将、冗从仆射、羽林左监、五官左右中郎将、东园匠、太官、御府、守宫、黄门、掖庭、清商、华林园、暴室等令。
English: He was awarded the Order of the Radiant Glory, the Commander-in-Chief of the Tiger Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eagle Clan, the Commander-in-

古文：哀帝兴宁二年，省光禄勋，并司徒。
现代文：塞童星空二年，撤销光禄勋，并入司徒。
English: In the second year of the starry sky of Seto, the honor of Guanglu was revoked, and it was merged into Sito.

古文：孝武宁康元年复置。
现代文：元年又设置。
English: It was set up again in the first year of the year.

古文：卫尉，统武库、公车、卫士、诸冶等令，左右都候，南北东西督冶掾。
现代文：卫尉，统管武库、公车、卫士、诸冶等令，以及左右都候、南北东西督冶掾。
English: Guard lieutenant, in charge of the arsenal, buses, guards, and other orders, as well as the left and right capitals, and the north and south capitals.

古文：及渡江，省卫尉。
现代文：到渡江以后，撤销卫尉。
English: After arriving in Watarie, the captain of the guards was dismissed.

古文：太仆，统典农、典虞都尉，典虞丞，左右中典牧都尉，车府典牧，乘黄厩、骅骝厩、龙马厩等令。
现代文：太仆，统管典农、典虞都尉，典虞丞，左右中典牧都尉，车府典牧，以及乘黄厩、骅骝厩、龙马厩等令。
English: Daju, in overall charge of Tien Nong, Tien Yu Duifu, Tien Yu Zheng, Tien Mu Duifu, Chefu Tien Mu, as well as the Yellow Mews, Dragon Mews, Long Horse Mews and other orders.

古文：典牧又别置羊牧丞。
现代文：典牧下又另设置羊牧丞。
English: Under the tutelage of Tenki Maki, another position, Yomaki Jo, was created.

古文：太仆，自元帝渡江之后或省或置。
现代文：太仆，从五壹渡江以后有时撤销有时设置。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River on the 5th day of the 5th month, it was sometimes revoked and sometimes set up.

古文：太仆省，故骅骝为门下之职。
现代文：太仆撤销，所以驿骝厩令成为门下省的官职。
English: The official position of the eunuch was revoked, so the eunuch became the official position of the province under the eunuch.

古文：廷尉，主刑法狱讼，属官有正、监、评，并有律博士员。
现代文：廷尉，主管刑法狱讼，属官有正、监、评，并且有律博士这样的属员。
English: The court lieutenant is in charge of criminal law and prison litigation, and subordinate officers include the chief, inspector, and assessor, as well as subordinate members such as the doctor of law.

古文：大鸿胪，统大行、典客、园池、华林园、钩盾等令，又有青宫列丞、鄴玄武苑丞。
现代文：大鸿胪，统管大行、典客、园池、茎并迩、钩盾等令，又有青宫列丞、邺的宝亘述丞。
English: Da Hongjun, in charge of the grand procession, guests, garden pond, stalks and stalks, hooks and shields, as well as the Qing Palace and the treasure of the dragonfly.

古文：及江左，有事则权置，无事则省。
现代文：到丝左时期，有事就临时设置，没事就撤销。
English: During the period of the Silk Road, if something happened, it would be temporarily set up, and if nothing happened, it would be canceled.

古文：宗正，统皇族宗人图谍，又统太医令史，又有司牧掾员。
现代文：宗正，统管皇族宗人图谍，又统管太臀令史，又有司牧掾这样的属员。
English: Zongzheng, in charge of the imperial family, Zongren Tuxing, and in charge of the history of Taiping, as well as such subordinate members as Simaojuan.

古文：及渡江，哀帝省并太常，太医以给门下省。
现代文：到渡辽以后，塞童将太常撤销，将太医合并给门下省。
English: After he arrived in Liao, he revoked the title of Taiji and merged Taiji with his subordinate province.

古文：大司农，统太仓、籍田、导官三令，襄国都水长，东西南北部护漕掾。
现代文：大司农，统管太仓、籍田、导官三令，以及襄国都水长，东西南北部护漕掾。
English: He was the chief farmer, in charge of Taicang, Jiaotan, and the three administrative posts, as well as the governor of Xiang Province, and he guarded the canal from east to west, south to north.

古文：及渡江，哀帝省并都水，孝武复置。
现代文：到渡江以后，哀帝撤并都水，孝武再次设置。
English: After crossing the river, Emperor Ai withdrew and annexed the capital, and Emperor Xiaowu set up the capital again.

古文：少府，统材官校尉、中左右三尚方、中黄左右藏、左校、甄官、平准、奚官等令，左校坊、鄴中黄左右藏、油官等丞。
现代文：少府，统管材官校尉、中左右三尚方、中黄左右藏、左校、甄官、平准、奚官等令，左校坊、邺的中黄左右藏、油官等丞。
English: Xiaofu, the first lieutenant of the general pipe material officer, the middle and left three shangfang, the middle and yellow shangfang, the left school, the screening officer, the level officer, the eunuch and other orders, the left school, the middle and left yellow shangfang, the oil officer and so on.

古文：及渡江，哀帝省并丹阳尹，孝武复置。
现代文：到渡红以后，哀帝撤并丹杨尹，孝武又设置。
English: After arriving in Douhong, Emperor Aye withdrew and was joined by Emperor Tang, Emperor Yang, and Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：自渡江唯置一尚方，又省御府。
现代文：渡江以后衹设置一名尚方，又撤销御府。
English: After crossing the river, he set up a courtier and abolished the imperial court.

古文：将作大匠，有事则置，无事则罢。
现代文：将作大匠，有事就设置，没事就撤销。
English: He will be a master craftsman, setting things up when necessary and undoing them when not.

古文：太后三卿，卫尉、少府、太仆，汉置，皆随太后宫为官号，在同名卿上，无太后则阙。
现代文：太后三卿，卫尉、少府、太仆，漠代设置，都随着太后宫殿名作为官号，在同名的卿之上，没有太后就不设置。
English: The three titles of the Empress Dowager, vizier, shofu, and taifu, were all set up during the reign of the Empress Dowager, with the palace name of the Empress Dowager as the official title. Above the title of the same name, there would be no title without the Empress Dowager.

古文：魏改汉制，在九卿下。
现代文：魏改变汉的制度，地位放在九卿的下面。
English: Wei changed the Han system and placed the position below that of the nine nobles.

古文：及晋复旧，在同号卿上。
现代文：到晋代恢复旧的制度，地位在同官号的卿的上面。
English: By the Jin Dynasty, the old system was restored, and the position was above the peerage of the peerage.

古文：大长秋，皇后卿也，有后则置，无后则省。
现代文：大长秋，是皇后的卿，有皇后就设置，没有皇后就撤销。
English: The Great Changqiu is the queen's highness. If there is a queen, it will be set up, and if there is no queen, it will be canceled.

古文：御史中丞，本秦官也，秦时，御史大夫有二丞，其一御史丞，其一为中丞。
现代文：御史中丞，本是秦代职官。秦代，御史大夫有两名丞，一名是御史丞，一名是中丞。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, there were two officials in the position of goshi chujo, one was goshi chujo and the other was chujo.

古文：中丞外督部刺史，内领侍御史，受公卿奏事，举劾案章。
现代文：中丞对外督察部刺史，对内统领侍御史，接受公卿上奏的事务，以及检举弹劾一类的案卷表章。
English: The chujo wrote the history of the external inspectorate, the history of the leader of the inner council, the business of accepting the appeal of the nobles, and the case records such as the prosecution and impeachment.

古文：汉因之，及成帝绥和元年，更名御史大夫为大司空，置长史，而中丞官职如故。
现代文：汉代沿用，到成帝绥和元年，将御史大夫改名为大司空，设置长史，而中丞的官职照旧。
English: It continued to be used in the Han Dynasty, and in the first year after the enthronement of Emperor Chengdu, the title of goshi daifu was changed to daishi ku, meaning long history, while the official position of chujo remained the same.

古文：哀帝建平二年，复为御史大夫。
现代文：哀帝建平二年，恢复为御史大夫。
English: In the second year of Jianping, Emperor Ai was restored to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：元寿二年，又为大司空，而中丞出外为御史台主。
现代文：元寿二年，又改为大司空，而中丞出外担任御史台主。
English: In the second year of Yuan Shou's life, the position was changed to the vacant position of Daishi, and Chujo went abroad to serve as the director of the Imperial History Museum.

古文：历汉东京至晋因其制，以中丞为台主。
现代文：经汉的柬京时期到置都沿用遣一制度，由中丞担任台主。
English: During the Han Dynasty, when the capital of Cambodia was moved to Beijing, the system of sending one person to the capital was used, and the chujo served as the chief of the capital.

古文：治书侍御史，案汉宣帝幸宣室斋居而决事，令侍御史二人治书侍侧，后因别置，谓之治书侍御史，盖其始也。
现代文：治书侍御史，考汉宣帝在宣室，斋沐起居而决断政事，让两名侍御史侍奉在身边负责书写，后来因此而特别设置官职，称作治书侍御史，大概就是它的开始了。
English: Jishu-servant-of-history, Emperor Han Xuan was in Xuanwu's study, and the emperor would get up and decide on political affairs, leaving two attendants-servants-of-history around him to be responsible for writing. Later, for this reason, an official position was specially created, called Jishu-servant-of-history, and this is probably how it all began.

古文：及魏，又置治书执法，掌奏劾，而治书侍御史掌律令，二官俱置。
现代文：到了魏，又设置治书执法，掌管奏章弹劾，而治书侍御史掌管律令，两个官职一起设置。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there was also the position of Zhi Shu Law Enforcement, who was in charge of the impeachment of Song Zheng, and the position of Zhi Shu Attendant of History, who was in charge of the Ritsuryo, both of which were established at the same time.

古文：及晋，唯置治书侍御史，员四人。
现代文：到晋代，祇设置治书侍御史，定员四人。
English: By the Jin Dynasty, only the Jisho-zamurai-goshi was set up, with a capacity of four.

古文：泰始四年，又置黄沙狱治书侍御史一人，秩与中丞同，掌诏狱及廷尉不当者皆治之。
现代文：泰始四年，又设置黄沙狱治书侍御史一名，品级和中丞相同，负责对诏狱和廷尉处置不当者的审理。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Huangsha Prison also set up an official to administer justice, with the same rank as Zhongzheng, to be responsible for the trial of those who had been improperly dealt with by the prison warden and the imperial lieutenant.

古文：后并河南，遂省黄沙治书侍御史。
现代文：后来占领河南，就撤销了黄沙治书侍御史。
English: Later, after the occupation of Henan Province, the Huangsha Jishu Attendant of History was revoked.

古文：及太康中，又省治书侍御史二员。
现代文：到塞尘年间，又撤销两名治书侍御史。
English: In the years leading up to the end of the Tokugawa shogunate, two more chancellors were removed.

古文：侍御史，案二汉所掌凡有五曹：一曰令曹，掌律令；二曰印曹，掌刻印；三曰供曹，掌斋祠；四曰尉马曹，掌厩马；五曰乘曹，掌护驾。
现代文：侍御史，考两汉时期所掌管的共有五曹：一是令曹，掌管律令；二是印曹，掌管刻印；三是供曹，掌管斋祠；四是尉马曹，掌管厩马；五是乘曹，掌管护驾。
English: According to the history of attendants, there were a total of five Cao who were in charge during the Han Dynasty: First, Ling Cao, in charge of laws and regulations; Second, In Cao, in charge of engraving; Third, Fu Cao, in charge of temples; Fourth, Fei Ma Cao, in charge of stables and horses; Fifth, Ren Cao, in charge of escort.

古文：魏置八人。
现代文：魏时设置八人。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there were eight choirs.

古文：及晋，置员九人，品同治书，而有十三曹：吏曹、课第曹、直事曹、印曹、中都督曹、外都督曹、媒曹、符节曹、水曹、中垒曹、营军曹、法曹、算曹。
现代文：到了晋代，设置定员九名，品级和治书相同，而且有十三曹：吏曹、课第曹、直事曹、印曹、中都督曹、外都督曹、媒曹、符节曹、水曹、中垒曹、营军曹、法曹、算曹。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, nine constables were set up, with the same rank as the magistrates, and there were thirteen Cao: Li Cao, Kuo Cao, Zhi Cao, Ying Cao, Zhongdu Cao, Gao Cao Cao, Miao Cao, Fu Jie Cao, Shui Cao, Zhongbao Cao, Battalion Cao, Law Cao, and Accounting Cao.

古文：及江左初，省课第曹，置库曹，掌厩牧牛马市租，后分曹，置外左库、内左库云。
现代文：到江左初期，撤销课第曹，设置库曹，掌管厩牧牛马市租，后来分开这个曹，设置外左库、内左库等。
English: At the beginning of the Yangtze River, the first Cao of the class was revoked, the second Cao of the library was set up, and the second Cao of the stable was in charge of the cattle and horse market rent. Later, this Cao was separated, and the second Cao of the external library and the second Cao of the internal library were set up.

古文：殿中侍御史，案魏兰台遣二御史居殿中，伺察非法，即其始也。
现代文：殿中侍御史，考魏时由兰台派两个御史住在殿中，巡察非法行为，就是遣一官职的开始。
English: At the time of the imperial examinations in the middle of the hall, two imperial historians were sent by the State Council to live in the hall to inspect illegal activities, which was the beginning of the appointment of an official.

古文：及晋，置四人，江左置二人。
现代文：到置伐，设置四名，时期设置两名。
English: To the felling, four people are set, and two people are set during the period.

古文：又案魏晋官品令又有禁防御史第七品，孝武太元中有检校御史吴琨，则此二职亦兰台之职也。
现代文：又考魏置官品的文件中有禁防御史为第七品，孝武太五年间有检校御史县璺，那么这两种官职也是兰台的官职了。
English: In addition, in the official documents of Wei and Wu, the forbidden defense history was the seventh item, and Xiaowutai had the inspection of the school and the history of the county in five years, so these two official positions were also the official positions of the Lantai.

古文：符节御史，秦符玺令之职也。
现代文：符节御史，是秦代的符玺令的官职。
English: Fu Jie Mi Shi, is the official post of the Qin Dynasty's Fu Xi Ling.

古文：汉因之，位次御史中丞。
现代文：汉代沿用，品位次于御史中丞。
English: It has been used since the Han Dynasty, and its quality is second only to that of goshi chujo.

古文：至魏，别为一台，位次御史中丞，掌授节、铜武符、竹使符。
现代文：到了魏，另外成为一个台，品位次于御史中丞，掌管授节、铜武符、竹使符。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, it also became a table, ranking second only to the goshi chujo, in charge of conferring the jujie, the bronze military emblem and the bamboo envoy emblem.

古文：及泰始九年，武帝省并兰台，置符节御史掌其事焉。
现代文：到泰始九年，武帝裁并兰台，设置符节御史掌管有关事务。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Emperor Wu unified Lantai and appointed Fu Jie Mi Shi to be in charge of related affairs.

古文：司隶校尉，案汉武初置十三州，刺史各一人，又置司隶校尉，察三辅、三河、弘农七郡，历汉东京及魏晋，其官不替。
现代文：司隶校尉，考漠武帝开始设置，各一名刺史，又设置司隶校尉，督察三辅、三河、弘皇共七个郡，经选的塞塞时期到垄置，遣一官职没有变更。
English: The post of Sili school lieutenant and the post of examination of Emperor Mengwu were set up, each with a post of history, and the post of Sili school lieutenant and the post of inspector of Sanfu, Sanhe and Hongwang were set up in a total of seven counties, and the post was set up in Rongjie during the election period, and there was no change in the post.

古文：属官有功曹、都官从事、诸曹从事、部郡从事、主簿、录事、门下书佐、省事、记室书佐、诸曹书佐守从事、武猛从事等员，凡吏一百人，卒三十二人。
现代文：属官有功曹、都官从事、诸曹从事、部郡从事、主簿、录事、门下书佐、省事、记室书佐、诸曹书佐守从事、武猛从事等官员，共有一百名吏，三十二名卒。
English: There were one hundred officials, thirty-two of them, including subordinate officials, meritorious officials, officials in charge of the capital, officials in charge of various departments, officials in charge of departments and counties, officials in charge of the general ledger, recorders, subordinates, provincial officials, office recorders, officials in charge of various departments, officials in charge of military affairs, and so on.

古文：及渡江，乃罢司隶校尉官，其职乃扬州刺史也。
现代文：到了渡江以后，才取消司隶校尉官职，负责它的职务的就是扬州刺史。
English: It was only after crossing the river that the post of Sili captain was abolished, and Yangzhou Sisi was put in charge of it.

古文：谒者仆射，秦官也，自汉至魏因之。
现代文：谒者仆射，是秦代职官，从汉到魏沿用。
English: He who shoots arrows is an official of the Qin Dynasty. It was used from the Han Dynasty to the Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏置仆射，掌大拜授及百官班次，统谒者十人。
现代文：魏设置仆射，掌管大拜授时的礼仪和百官的排班位次，统管十名谒者。
English: Wei set up minions, in charge of the etiquette of the great worship and the order of the hundred officials, in charge of the top ten eunuchs.

古文：及武帝省仆射，以谒者并兰台。
现代文：到武帝时减去仆射，将谒者并入兰台。
English: When Emperor Wu came to power, he subtracted the courtiers and incorporated the nobles into the imperial court.

古文：江左复置仆射，后又省。
现代文：江左时又设置仆射，后来又撤销了。
English: At the time of Jiang Zuo, it also set up a shooting range, which was later revoked.

古文：都水使者，汉水衡之职也。
现代文：都水使者，是龇的水衡这一职官。
English: The water envoy of the capital is the official of water balance.

古文：汉又有都水长丞，主陂池灌溉，保守河渠，属太常。
现代文：汉又有都水长丞，主管陂池灌溉，保护看守河渠，隶属于太常。
English: Han and Du have a water chief, in charge of irrigation of Dianchi Lake, protection and guard of canals, subordinate to Taizhang.

古文：汉东京省都水，置河堤谒者，魏因之。
现代文：还的塞直时期撤销都水，设置河堤谒者，垫沿用。到!
English: In addition, during the period of blockage, the capital water was revoked, the river dike was set up, and the cushion was used. To!

古文：及武帝省水衡，置都水使者一人，以河堤谒者为都水官属。及江左，省河堤谒者，置谒者六人。
现代文：适时设置都水使者一人，将河堤谒者作为都水的属官。时期，撤销河堤谒者，设置六名谒者。
English: At the right time, an emissary of the Metropolitan Waterworks Authority was set up, and the person in charge of damming the river embankment was appointed as a subordinate official of the Metropolitan Waterworks Authority.

古文：中领军将军，魏官也。
现代文：中领军将军，是垫时的官职。
English: The general leading the middle army is a temporary post.

古文：汉建安四年，魏武丞相府自置，及拔汉中，以曹休为中领军。
现代文：漠代建安四年，苏茎在丞相府自行设置，到攻下漠中，任曹体为中领军。
English: In the fourth year of the Jian'an period, Su Zi set up his own army in the Prime Minister's Office, and went to the middle of the desert to attack, appointing Cao Tie as the leader.

古文：文帝践阼，始置领军将军，以曹休为之，主五校、中垒、武卫等三营。
现代文：塞童登基，开始设置领军将军，任命萱体担任它，主管五校、中垒、武卫等三营。
English: Setong ascended to the throne and began to set up a general leading the army, appointing Xingtai to serve as it, in charge of the five schools, the middle base, and the three battalions of Wuwei.

古文：武帝初省，使中军将军羊祜统二卫、前、后、左、右、骁卫等营，即领军之任也。
现代文：鱼适初期撤销，派中军将军羊祜统管二卫、前、后、左、右、骁卫等营，就是领军将军的职务。
English: At the beginning of the year, Yu Shi revoked the order and sent the Chinese general Yang Jizhe to take charge of the Second Division, the front, the rear, the left, the right, and the rear guard battalions, which is the position of the leading general.

古文：怀帝永嘉中，改中军曰中领军。
现代文：堡童丞台年间，改称中军为中领军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, the Chinese Army was renamed the Central Leading Army.

古文：永昌元年，改曰北军中候，寻复为领军。
现代文：永昌元年，改称北军中候，不久又恢复为领军。
English: In the first year of the Yongchang era, it was renamed the Northern Army Middle Guard, and soon it was restored as the leading army.

古文：成帝世，复为中候，寻复为领军。
现代文：成帝时。又叫中候，不久又恢复为领军。
English: When he became emperor, he was also called Zhongwu, and soon he was restored as the leader of the army.

古文：护军将军，案本秦护军都尉官也。
现代文：护军将军，考它本是秦代的护军都尉这一官职。
English: General of the escort, it was originally the official position of the lieutenant of the escort in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉因之，高祖以陈平为护军中尉，武帝复以为护军都尉，属大司马。
现代文：沿用，产担任命速垩为护军中尉，武帝又把它作为护军都尉，隶属大司马。
English: It was used for a long time, and the production served as the life raft for the lieutenant of the escort, and Emperor Wu also used it as the captain of the escort, subordinate to the great Sima.

古文：魏武为相，以韩浩为护军，史涣为领军，非汉官也。
现代文：魏武任丞相时，让整造担任护军，史逸担任领军，不是汉代的官职。
English: When Wei Wu was appointed chancellor, he had Zhezong serve as a military escort and Shi Yat as a military leader, which was not an official position in the Han Dynasty.

古文：建安十二年，改护军为中护军，领军为中领军，置长史、司马。
现代文：十二年，改称护军为中护军，领军为中领军，设置长史、司马。
English: In 1912, the name of the escort was changed to the middle escort, and the leader to the middle leader, and Long History and Sima were set up.

古文：魏初，因置护军将军，主武官选，隶领军，晋世则不隶也。
现代文：魏的初期，沿用设置护军将军，主管武官选拔，隶属领军，晋代就不隶属了。
English: In the early days of the Wei Dynasty, it was customary to appoint a general in charge of escorting the army and selecting the military attaché in charge, who was subordinate to the leader of the army. In the Jin Dynasty, the general was not subordinate to the leader.

古文：元帝永昌元年，省护军，并领军。
现代文：亘壶丞旦元年，撤销护军，并入领军。
English: In the first year of Watanabe's reign, he revoked the escort and became the leader of the army.

古文：明帝太宁二年，复置领、护，各领营兵。
现代文：塱壹左空二年，又设置领、护，分别统管营兵。
English: Two years later, a leader and a bodyguard were also set up to supervise the battalion.

古文：江左以来，领军不复别领营，总统二卫、骁骑、材官诸营，护军犹别有营也。
现代文：以来，领军不再另外统领营兵，总管二卫、骁骑、材官各营，护军还是另外有营兵。
English: Since then, the leader of the army no longer leads the battalion separately, the commander-in-chief of the two guards, the cavalry, and the material officers of each battalion, and the escort still has another battalion.

古文：资重者为领军、护军，资轻者为中领军、中护军。
现代文：资格老的人任领军、护军，资历浅的人任中领军、中护军。
English: Those with senior qualifications are appointed as leaders and guards, while those with less seniority are appointed as middle leaders and middle guards.

古文：属官有长史、司马、功曹、主簿、五官，受命出征则置参军。
现代文：属官有长史、司马、功曹、主簿、五官，接受诏命出兵征伐的时候就设置参军。
English: The subordinate officials had a long history, Sima, Gong Cao, the main book, and the five officials, and they were set up to join the army when they received the imperial command to go to war.

古文：左右卫将军，案文帝初置中卫。及武帝受命，分为左右卫，以羊琇为左、赵序为右。
现代文：左右卫将军，考塞童首先设置中卫和卫，武童承受天命后，分为左右卫，任命羊璘为左卫将军，趟庄为右卫将军。
English: For the left and right guard generals, Kausetong first set up the middle guard and the guard, and Wudong was divided into the left and right guards after he received the fate of heaven. He appointed Yang Xuan as the left guard general and Wanzhuang as the right guard general.

古文：并置长史、司马、功曹、主薄员，江左罢长史。
现代文：都设置长史、司马、功曹、主簿等人员，江左时期撤销长史。
English: Changshi, Sima, Gong Cao, the chief secretary and other personnel were all set up, and Changshi was revoked during the Jiang Zuo period.

古文：骁骑将军、游击将军，并汉杂号将军也。
现代文：骁骑将军、游击将军，都是汉代的杂号将军。
English: The general of cavalry and the general of guerrilla were all miscellaneous generals in the Han Dynasty.

古文：魏置为中军。
现代文：魏设置为中军。
English: Wei set up for the Chinese army.

古文：及晋，以领、护、左右卫、骁骑、游击为六军。
现代文：到了置，将领、护、左右卫、骁骑、游击作为六军。
English: When they arrived, the generals, guards, left and right guards, cavalry, and guerrillas formed the six armies.

古文：左右前后军将军，案魏明帝时有左军，则左军魏官也，至晋不改。
现代文：左右前后军将军，考蕴旦旦童时有左军，那么左军是魏的职官，到了晋没有改变。
English: For the generals of the left and right armies, if there was a left army when he was a child, then the left army was the official of Wei, and it did not change to Jin.

古文：武帝初又置前军、右军，泰始八年又置后军，是为四军。
现代文：武帝初期又设置前军、右军，泰始八年又设置后军，造就成了四军。
English: In the early days of Emperor Wu, the front army and the right army were set up, and the rear army was set up in the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, creating the four armies.

古文：屯骑、步兵、越骑、长水、射声等校尉，是为五校，并汉官也。
现代文：屯骑、步兵、越骑、长水、射声等校尉，这是五校，都是漠代的官职。
English: Colonels of the garrison cavalry, infantry, Yue cavalry, Changshui, Yixing and so on, these are the five schools, all of which are official positions of the desert era.

古文：魏晋逮于江左，犹领营兵，并置司马、功曹、主簿。
现代文：魏晋直到江左，还统领营兵，都设置司马、功曹、主簿。
English: From the Wei and Jin Dynasties to the time of Jiang Zuo, he also led the battalion and set up Sima, Gong Cao, and the master book.

古文：后省左军、右军、前军、后军为镇卫军，其左右营校尉自如旧，皆中领军统之。
现代文：后来撤销左军、右军、前军、后军而改为镇卫军，他们的左右营校尉依然照旧，都是中领军统管。
English: Later, the Left Army, the Right Army, the Front Army, and the Rear Army were abolished and replaced by the Town Guard Army, and their left and right battalion lieutenants remained as before, all of which were under the command of the middle leader.

古文：二卫始制前驱、由基、强弩为三部司马，各置督史。
现代文：二卫开始设前驱、由基、强弩为三部司马，各自设置督史。
English: At the beginning of the second watch, the forerunner, the base, and the strong anchor were set as the three divisions of the steward, and the superintendents were set respectively.

古文：左卫，熊渠武贲；右卫，佽飞武贲。
现代文：左卫，是熊渠虎贲；右卫，是做飞虎贲。
English: The left guard is the bear canal vise; the right guard is the flying vise.

古文：二卫各五部督。
现代文：二卫各有五部督。
English: Each of the two guards has five captains.

古文：其命中武贲，骁骑、游击各领之。
现代文：其中的命中虎贲，由骁骑将军、游击将军分别统领。
English: Among them, the hit tiger cub was led by the cavalry general and the guerrilla general respectively.

古文：又置武贲、羽林、上骑、异力四部，并命中为五督。
现代文：又设置虎贲、羽林、上骑、异力四个部，连同命中虎贲为五督。
English: In addition, there are four parts: tiger's beak, feather forest, riding up, and force of nature. Together with the hit tiger's beak, they are the five governors.

古文：其卫、镇四军如五校，各置千人。
现代文：其中的卫、镇四军和五校一样，各设置一千人。
English: Among them, the guards, the town's four armies and the five schools, each set up a thousand people.

古文：更制殿中将军，中郎、校尉、司马比骁骑。
现代文：又设殿中将军，中郎、校尉、司马的设置和骁骑将军一样。
English: In addition, there was a general in the palace, and the positions of churo, lieutenant, and shima were the same as those of the general on horseback.

古文：持椎斧武贲，分属二卫。
现代文：持椎持斧虎贲，分别隶属左右卫。
English: Holding a spine, holding an axe, holding a vise, they belong to the left and right guards respectively.

古文：尉中武贲、持鈒冗从、羽林司马，常从人数各有差。
现代文：殿中虎贲、持钣冗从、羽林司马，平常的随从人数各有增减。
English: The usual number of attendants has increased or decreased, such as the tiger cub in the hall, the long-legged attendant holding a scepter, and the feathered woodpecker.

古文：武帝甚重兵官，故军校多选朝廷清望之士居之。
现代文：武帝很重视军队的官职，所以将军校尉等多半挑选朝廷中有清望的人士担任。
English: Emperor Wu attached great importance to military posts, so generals, lieutenants, and the like were mostly chosen by the imperial court to be persons of good repute.

古文：先是，陈勰为文帝所待，特有才用，明解军令。
现代文：在那之前，陈勰受文帝任用，卓越有才干，通晓军中律令。
English: Prior to that, Chen Qi was appointed by Emperor Wen. He was extremely talented and well-versed in military regulations.

古文：帝为晋王，委任使典兵事。
现代文：帝当晋王时，委任他典掌兵马事务。
English: When Emperor Jin ascended to the throne, he appointed him to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：及蜀破后，令勰受诸葛亮围阵用兵倚伏之法，又甲乙校标帜之制，勰悉暗练之，遂以勰为殿中典兵中郎将，迁将军。
现代文：到蜀被攻破之后，让陈勰学习诸葛亮的围阵用兵倚伏的方法，以及甲乙校标帜的规制，陈勰全部掌握了，于是任命陈勰为殿中典兵中郎将，升为将军。
English: After Shu was defeated, Chen Xi was asked to learn Zhuge Liang's method of encircling and using soldiers to lie down, as well as the regulation of the banners of Class A and Class B. Chen Xi mastered all of them, so he appointed Chen Xi as the general of the palace and was promoted to general.

古文：久之，武帝每出入，勰持白兽幡在乘舆左右，卤簿陈列齐肃。
现代文：过了很长时间，每当武帝出入，陈勰手持白虎幡随从在车驾左右，仪仗队排列整齐肃穆。
English: After a long time, whenever Emperor Wu went out and came in, Chen Yao drove around with a retinue holding a white tiger banner, and the honor guard lined up neatly and solemnly.

古文：太康末，武帝尝出射雉，勰时已为都水使者，散从。
现代文：太康末年，武帝曾经出猎射雉，当时陈勰已经是都水使者，散骑随从。
English: At the end of Taikang's reign, Emperor Wu once went out to hunt and shoot dragonflies. At that time, Chen Xi was already an emissary of the capital, and he was accompanied by horsemen.

古文：车驾逼暗乃还，漏已尽，当合函，停乘舆，良久不得合，乃诏勰合之。
现代文：车驾临近天黑才返回，夜已深，应当布置警戒，车驾停下来，警戒却迟迟不能完成，于是韶令陈勰去安排警戒。
English: The driver did not return until it was nearly dark. It was already late at night, so a warning should have been issued. The driver stopped, but the warning could not be completed, so the king ordered Chen Yao to arrange a warning.

古文：勰举白兽幡指麾，须臾之间而函成。
现代文：陈勰举着白虎幡指挥，一会儿就部署完毕。
English: Chen Yao held up a white tiger flag and gave the command, and the deployment was completed in a moment.

古文：皆谢勰闲解，甚为武帝所任。
现代文：众人都自愧弗如，很受武帝信任。
English: Everyone was very self-confident and trusted by Emperor Wu.

古文：太子太傅、少傅，皆古官也。
现代文：太子太傅、少傅，都是古代的官职。
English: Prince, Daifu, and Shofu were all ancient official positions.

古文：泰始三年，武帝始建官，各置一人，尚未置詹事，官事无大小，皆由二傅，并有功曹、主簿、五官。
现代文：壶盘三年，亘游开始设立东宫时，各设置一名，还没有设置詹事，束宫中事情不论大小，都由二傅处理，都有功曹、主簿、五官。
English: Three years later, when Wanyu began to establish the East Palace, he set up one person each, but had not yet set up a secretary. In the palace, all matters, no matter how big or small, were handled by the two masters, and all had a gong cao, a master book, and five officials.

古文：太傅中二千石，少傅二千石。
现代文：太傅是中二千石，少傅是二千石。
English: Taifu is 2,000 koku, and shofu is 2,000 koku.

古文：其训导者，太傅在前，少傅在后。
现代文：有训导方面的事，太傅在前，少傅在后。
English: When it comes to training and guidance, the master is in the front and the apprentice is in the back.

古文：皇太子先拜，诸傅然后答之。
现代文：皇太子先行拜礼，然后各傅还礼。
English: The Crown Prince bowed first, and then the chefs bowed back.

古文：武帝后以储副体尊，遂命诸公居之；以本位重，故或行或领。
现代文：武帝以后因为太子是储君而地位尊崇，于是任命各个公来担任傅；由于原本官阶地位很高，所以有的称 行 有的称 领 。
English: After Emperor Wu, because the status of the prince was revered because he was the crown prince, he appointed various officials to serve as fu; because the official status was originally high, some were called acting leaders.

古文：时侍中任恺，武帝所亲敬，复使领之，盖一时之制也。
现代文：当时的侍中鱼樘，是尽帝亲近敬重的人，又让他兼任，也是一时的制度罢了。
English: At that time, Fushun, the chamberlain, was a person who was close to and respected the emperor, and he was allowed to serve concurrently, which was just a temporary system.

古文：咸宁元年，以给事黄门侍郎杨珧为詹事，掌宫事，二傅不复领官属。
现代文：元年，任命给事黄门侍郎握逃为詹事，掌管东宫中的事务，二傅不再统辖属官。
English: In the first year of the year, Huangmen's chamberlain, Jifu, was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of the East Palace, and the two officials no longer controlled the subordinate officials.

古文：及杨珧为卫将军，领少傅，省詹事，遂崇广傅训，命太尉贾充领太保，司空齐王攸领太傅，所置吏属复如旧。
现代文：到杨珧任卫将军，兼任少傅，撤销詹事，于是推崇弘扬以傅训导的制度，任命太尉贾充兼太保，司空齐王司马攸兼太傅，设置的吏员属官都和原先一样。
English: When Yang Hui was appointed as Wei general and concurrently served as minor Fu, he revoked Zhan Zhi and promoted the promotion of the system of training and guidance with Fu, and appointed Tai Li Jia Chong and Tai Bao, and Sikuo Qi Wang Sima You and Tai Fu. The officials and subordinate officials were all the same as before.

古文：二傅进贤两梁冠，黑介帻，五时朝服，佩水苍玉，食奉日三斛。
现代文：二傅戴两梁的进贤冠，黑色介愤，穿五时朝服，佩水苍玉，享受的俸禄是每天三斛。
English: The two foremen wear two-tiered crowns of merit, black medallions, wear five-tiered imperial robes, and are adorned with emeralds. They enjoy a salary of three monme a day.

古文：太康二年，始给春赐绢五十匹，秋绢百匹，绵百斤。
现代文：太康二年，开始赐给春绢五十匹，秋绢一百匹，丝绵一百斤。
English: In the second year of Taikang, he began to give fifty horses to the spring egrets, one hundred horses to the autumn egrets, and one hundred pounds of silk.

古文：其后太尉汝南王亮、车骑将军杨骏、司空卫瓘、石鉴皆领傅保，犹不置詹事，以终武帝之世。
现代文：以后太尉汝南王司马亮、车骑将军杨骏、司空卫璀、石鉴都兼任过傅保，还是不设置詹事，直到武帝时代结束。
English: Later, Prince Sima Liang, the first lieutenant of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and the cavalry generals Yang Jue, Siku Wei and Shi Jian all served as Fu Bao, but they did not set up any special affairs until the end of Emperor Wu's era.

古文：惠帝元康元年，复置詹事，二傅给菜田六顷，田驺六人，立夏后不及田者，食奉一年。
现代文：惠帝元康元年，又设置詹事，给二傅各六顷采地，六名农业役隶，立夏以后未赐封地的，享受一年的俸禄。
English: In the first year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, Zhan Zhi was also set up, giving the two Fu six hectares of mining land each, six agricultural servants, no fiefs after the beginning of the summer, and enjoying a year's salary.

古文：置丞一人，秩千石；主簿、五官掾、功曹史、主记门下史、录事、户曹法曹仓曹贼曹功曹书佐、门下亭长、门下书佐、省事各一人，给赤耳安车一乘。
现代文：设置丞一名，品级为千石；主簿、五官掾、功曹史、主记门下史、绿事、户曹法曹仓曹贼曹功曹书佐、门下亭长、门下书佐、省事各一名，给赤色耳的安车一套。
English: Set up a joe, the grade is a thousand stones; the main book, the five official books, the gong cao history, the main record of the next history, the green thing, the household cao, the legal cao, the storehouse cao, the thief cao, the gong cao, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, and the provincial affairs, one each, and give a set of safe cars to the red ears.

古文：及愍怀建官，乃置六傅，三太、三少，以景帝讳师，故改太师为太保，通省尚书事，詹事文书关由六傅。
现代文：到愍怀设束宫时，才设置六傅，三太、三少，因为景帝名师，所以将太师改为太帅，都处理尚书方面的事务，詹事的文书事务都经过六傅。
English: It was not until the time of the establishment of the Sok Palace by Emperor Gonghuai that the Six Grand Masters were set up, the Third Grand Master and the Third Junior Grand Master. Because Emperor Jing was a famous teacher, the Grand Master was changed to the Grand Master. They all dealt with matters related to books, and all clerical matters were handled by the Six Grand Masters.

古文：然自元康之后，诸傅或二或三，或四或六，及永康中复不置詹事也。
现代文：但自从元康以后，各傅有时二人有时三人，有时四人有时六人，到永康年间又不设置詹事。
English: But since the Yuan Kang, each Fu sometimes has two, sometimes three, sometimes four, sometimes six, and during the Yongkang period, there is no Zhanji.

古文：自太安已来置詹事，终孝怀之世。
现代文：从太安以后设置詹事，直到孝怀帝时代结束。
English: After Taian, Zhanji was set up until the end of the era of Emperor Xiaohui.

古文：渡江之后，有太傅少傅，不立师保。
现代文：渡江以后，有太傅和少傅，不设立师和保。
English: After crossing the river, there are too-fu and too-little-fu, but there is no division or guarantee.

古文：中庶子四人，职如侍中。
现代文：中庶子四名，职务和侍中一样。
English: There were four illegitimate children, and they had the same duties as the chamberlains.

古文：中舍人四人，咸宁四年置，以舍人才学美者为之，与中庶子共掌文翰，职如黄门侍郎，在中庶子下，洗马上。
现代文：中舍人四名，咸宁四年设置，让舍人中才干学问很好的人担任，和中庶子共同掌管文翰事务，职务和黄门侍郎一样，地位在中庶子下面，洗马上面。
English: There were four middle attendants, and Xianning was set up in four years, so that talented and well-educated people from the middle attendants could serve, and the middle son and son-in-law jointly controlled the literary and cultural affairs. The position was the same as that of Huangmen waiter, with the position below the middle son and above the horse washer.

古文：食官令一人，职如太官令。
现代文：食官令一名，职务和太官令一样。
English: There is only one food official, and his duties are the same as those of the Grand Official.

古文：庶子四人，职比散骑常侍、中书监令。
现代文：庶子四名，职务相当于散骑常侍、中书监令。
English: He had four illegitimate children, and his duties were equivalent to that of a horseback-riding attendant and the chief librarian.

古文：舍人十六人，职比散骑、中书等侍郎。
现代文：舍人十六名，职务相当于散骑、中书等侍郎。
English: There were sixteen attendants, and their duties were equivalent to those of attendants of horseback riding, Chinese calligraphy and so on.

古文：洗马八人，职如谒者秘书，掌图籍。
现代文：洗马八人，职务和谒者秘书一样，掌管图书典籍。
English: There are eight horse-washers, who have the same duties as the secretary, and they are in charge of the library.

古文：释奠讲经则掌其事，出则直者前驱，导威仪。
现代文：释奠讲经的时候就主持有关事宜，出行时就充当前驱，引导仪仗。
English: He presides over the relevant matters when the explanatory sermon is delivered, and acts as the forerunner and guides the ceremony when traveling.

古文：率更令，主宫殿门户及赏罚事，职如光禄勋、卫尉。
现代文：率更令，主管宫殿的门户安全和赏罚方面的事务，职务和光禄勋、卫尉一样。
English: In charge of the palace's gate security and reward and punishment affairs, his duties are the same as those of the Commander of the Order of the Star and the Guard.

古文：家令，主刑狱、谷货、饮食，职比司农、少府。
现代文：家令，主管刑狱、谷物财货、饮食方面的事务，职务相当于司农、少府。
English: He was the head of the family and was in charge of the prison, grain, goods, and food. His position was equivalent to that of a farmer or a minor prefect.

古文：汉东京主食官令，食官令及晋自为官，不复属家令。
现代文：漠代的束京时期统管食官令，食官令到了晋就另立为官，不再隶属家令。
English: During the Sokkyo period of the Musashi era, the Shokanrei was in charge of food. When the Shokanrei came to Jin, it was set up as a separate official and was no longer subordinate to the Karo.

古文：仆，主车马、亲族，职如太仆、宗正。
现代文：仆，主管车马、亲族，职务和太仆、宗正一样。
English: Servants, in charge of chariots and horses, relatives, duties and maidservants, live in the same way.

古文：左右卫率，案武帝建东宫，置卫率，初曰中卫率。
现代文：左右卫率，考武帝设束宫时，设置卫率，起初叫中卫率。
English: Left and right guard rate, when Emperor Kōmu set up the palace, the guard rate was set, initially called the middle guard rate.

古文：泰始五年，分为左右，各领一军。
现代文：泰始五年，分成左和右，各自统领一军。
English: In the first five years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, they were divided into left and right, each leading an army.

古文：惠帝时，愍怀太子在东宫，又加前后二率。
现代文：惠帝时，愍怀太子在东宫，又增加前后两个率。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hui, Prince Gong Huai was in the East Palace, and the two rates were increased.

古文：及江左，省前后二率，孝武太元中又置。
现代文：到江左时期，撤销前后二率，孝武帝太元年间又设置。
English: During the time of Jiang Zuo, there were two rates before and after the revocation, and it was set up again during the reign of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：王置师、友、文学各一人，景帝讳，故改师为傅。
现代文：王设置师、友、文学各一名，避景帝的名讳，所以将师改成傅。
English: Wang set up a teacher, a friend, and a literary one, to avoid the reputation of the emperor, so he changed the teacher to Fu.

古文：友者因文王、仲尼四友之名号。
现代文：称作友是根据文王、仲尼四友的名号。
English: The name "Friends" is based on the names of the four friends, King Wen and Zhong Ni.

古文：改太守为内史，省相及仆。
现代文：将太守改成内史，撤销相和仆。
English: He changed the title of Taishu to Naishi and revoked the titles of Sohei and Haku.

古文：有郎中令、中尉、大农为三卿。
现代文：有郎中令、中尉、大农作为三卿。
English: There was a vice-commander, a lieutenant, and a great farmer as the three nobles.

古文：大国置左右常侍各一人，省郎中，置侍郎二人，典书、典祠、典卫、学官令、典书丞各一人，治书四人，中尉司马、世子庶子、陵庙牧长各一人，谒者四人，中大夫六人，舍人十人，典府各一人。
现代文：大的王国设置左右常侍各一名，撤销郎中，设置两名侍郎，典书、典祠、典卫、学官令、典书丞各一名，治书四名，中尉司马、世子庶子、陵庙牧长各一名，谒者四名，中大夫六名，舍人十名，典府各一名。
English: In the great kingdom, there will be one regular attendant on each side, two attendants will be set up, one attendant on the left and one attendant on the right, one attendant on the left and one attendant on the right, one attendant on the right and one attendant on the left, one attendant on the right and one attendant on the left, one attendant on the right and one attendant on the left, one attendant on the left and one attendant on the right, one attendant on the right and one attendant on the left, one attendant on the right and one attendant on the left, one attendant on the right and one attendant on the

古文：咸宁三年，卫将军杨珧与中书监荀勖以齐王攸有时望，惧惠帝有后难，因追故司空裴秀立五等封建之旨，从容共陈时宜于武帝，以为 古者建侯，所以籓卫王室。
现代文：咸宁三年，卫将军杨珧和中书监荀勖由于齐王司马攸有声望，担心惠帝以后会有祸难，所以重申已故司空裴秀要建立五等封建制的思想。不慌不忙地共同向武帝陈述时下应当做的事，认为 古时候设立侯，是为了保护王室。
English: In the third year of Xianning, the Wei general Yang Jie and the Chinese book inspector Gao, because of the reputation of the king of Qi, Sima You, and the fear that there would be a disaster after Hui, reiterated the idea of the late Siku Peixiu to establish a five-tiered feudal system. Without haste, they jointly stated to Emperor Wu what should be done at that time, and believed that the establishment of Hou in ancient times was to protect the royal family.

古文：今吴寇未殄，方岳任大，而诸王为帅，都督封国，既各不臣其统内，于事重非宜。
现代文：如今吴地的贼寇还没有消灭干净，方岳太守的责任重大，可是各位王作为帅，都督所封的王国，已经是各自都不再管理他们的封地内的事务，遣在事理上是双重的不合适。
English: Today, the banditry in Wu has not been completely eradicated, and the responsibility of Fangyue Taishou is great. However, the kings, as marshals, have no longer managed the affairs of their fiefdoms, and it is doubly inappropriate to send them.

古文：又异姓诸将居边，宜参以亲戚，而诸王公皆在京都，非扞城之义，万世之固 。
现代文：此外异姓的将领们居守边地，也应该参用王室亲戚，而各位王公都在京都，遣不是捍城保护王室的道理，不利于江山万代的稳固 。
English: In addition, generals with different surnames should also use royal relatives, while all princes are in Kyoto. This is not a reason to defend the city and protect the royal family, and is not conducive to the stability of the country for generations.

古文：帝初未之察，于是下诏议其制。
现代文：帝当初还没有察觉，到这时下韶让商议有关制度。
English: At the beginning, the emperor was not aware of it, but at that time, he allowed the relevant system to be discussed.

古文：有司奏，从诸王公更制户邑，皆中尉领兵。
现代文：有司奏报，对各位王公重新规定封地的户邑，都由中尉统领兵马。
English: There was a report that the lords and princes had re-determined the fiefs of the households, all of which were led by lieutenants.

古文：其平原、汝南、琅邪、扶风、齐为大国，梁、赵、乐安、燕、安平、义阳为次国，其余为小国，皆制所近县益满万户。
现代文：其中的平原、汝南、琅邪、扶风、齐是大的王国，梁、赵、乐安、燕、安平、义阳是次一等的王国，其余的是小的王国，都规定王国附近的县增加到万户。
English: Among them, the plain, the south of the Ryukyus, the Yunnan, the Fujian, the Fujian and the Qi are large kingdoms, the Liang, the Zhao, the Le'an, the Yan, the Anping and the Yiyang are second-class kingdoms, and the rest are small kingdoms. It is stipulated that the counties near the kingdoms should be increased to 10,000 households.

古文：又为郡公制度如小国王，亦中尉领兵。
现代文：又制定郡公的待遇和小国的王一样，也是由中尉统领兵马。
English: In addition, the treatment of county officials and the king of a small country was established, and it was also the lieutenant who led the soldiers.

古文：郡侯如不满五千户王，置一军一千一百人，亦中尉领之。
现代文：郡侯和不满五千户的王一样，设置一个军共一千一百人，也由中尉统领。
English: The county magistrate, like the king of the five thousand dissatisfied households, set up an army of eleven hundred men, also led by a lieutenant.

古文：于时，唯特增鲁公国户邑，追进封故司空博陵公王沈为郡公，钜平侯羊祜为南城郡侯。
现代文：在当时，衹是特别增加了鲁公国的户邑，追加进封已故司空博陵公王沈为郡公，钜平侯羊枯为南城郡侯。
English: At that time, he specially increased the number of counties in the Lu Duchy, adding the late Siku Boling Prince Shen as the county governor, and Yu Ping Hou Yang Kue as the county governor of Nancheng.

古文：又南宫王承、随王万各于泰始中封为县王，邑千户，至是改正县王增邑为三千户。制度如郡侯，亦置一军。
现代文：此外南宫王司马承、随王司马万分别在泰始年间封为县王，邑中有一千户，到遣时改正县王增加邑中户敷到三千户，各种待遇和郡侯一样，也设置一个军。
English: In addition, King Sima Cheng of the Southern Palace and King Sima Wan of the Southern Palace were respectively appointed as county kings in the first year of the reign of King Taizong. There were one thousand households in the county, and when they were sent to the capital, the county king increased the number of households in the county to three thousand. All kinds of treatment were the same as that of county lords, and an army was also set up.

古文：自此非皇子不得为王，而诸王之支庶，皆皇家之近属至亲，亦各以土推恩受封。
现代文：从这以后不是皇子不能封为王，而各个王的支系庶子，都是皇家的近属至亲，也分别用土地推恩封给他们。
English: From then on, it was not the prince who could not be crowned king, but the branch line illegitimate children of each king, who were close relatives of the royal family, were also granted land by way of grace.

古文：其大国次国始封王之支子为公，承封王之支子为侯，继承封王之支子为伯。
现代文：其中大国次国始封王的支子封为公，承封王的支子封为侯，继承封王的支子封为伯。
English: Among them, the vassal of the first vassal of a great power in the next country is the prince, the vassal of the successor is the marquis, and the successor of the vassal is the count.

古文：小国五千户已上，始封王之支子为子，不满五千户始封王之支子及始封公侯之支子皆为男，非此皆不得封。
现代文：小国有五千户以上的，始封王的支子封为子，不满五千户的始封王的支子和始封公侯的支子都封为男，不是这类情况的都不能封。
English: If there are more than 5,000 households in a small state, the prince's heir will be a son, and if there are less than 5,000 households, the prince's heir and the prince's heir will be a male. If there is no such situation, they can not be sealed.

古文：其公之制度如五千户国，侯之制度如不满五千户国，亦置一军千人，中尉领之，伯子男以下各有差而不置军。
现代文：公的待遇和五千户的王一样，侯的待遇和不满五千户的王国一样，也设置一个军共一千人，由中尉统领，伯子男以下的分别有不同但不设置军队。
English: The public treatment is the same as that of the king of five thousand households, the treatment of the lord of the manor is the same as that of the kingdom of five thousand dissatisfied households, and an army of a total of one thousand people is also set up, led by a lieutenant.

古文：大国始封之孙罢下军，曾孙又罢上军，次国始封子孙亦罢下军，其余皆以一军为常。
现代文：大的王国到始封王的孙子时撤销下军，到曾孙时又撤销上军，次一等的王国始封王的子孙届时也撤销下军，其余的都以一个军作为常规。
English: In the case of a large kingdom, the descending army is cancelled when it is the grandson of the first-crowned king, and the ascending army is cancelled when it is the great-grandson. In the case of a second-class kingdom, the descendant of the first-crowned king will also cancel the descending army, and the rest will all use one army as a rule.

古文：大国中军二千人，上下军各千五百人，次国上军二千人，下军千人。
现代文：大的王国中军为二千人，上下军各一千五百人；次一等的王国上军为二千人，下军为一千人。
English: In a great kingdom two thousand are to go up; and a thousand and five hundred are to go down: and in a second kingdom two thousand are to go up, and a thousand are to go down.

古文：其未之国者，大国置守土百人，次国八十人，小国六十人，郡侯县公亦如小国制度。
现代文：其中没有到王国去的，大的王国设置守土的士兵一百人，次一等的王国是八十人，小的王国是六十人，郡侯县公也和小的王国的待遇一样。
English: Of those who did not go to the kingdom, the large kingdom set a hundred soldiers to guard the land, the second-class kingdom was eighty, the small kingdom was sixty, and the county magistrate was treated the same as the small kingdom.

古文：既行，所增徙各如本奏遣就国，而诸公皆恋京师，涕泣而去。
现代文：实施的时候，增加或迁徙的分别按照原来奏报的情况安排前往各自的封国，然而各个公都留恋京师，是流着眼泪离开的。
English: At the time of implementation, those who increased or migrated went to their respective vassal states according to the original report. However, each prince remained in love with Beijing and left in tears.

古文：及吴平后，齐王攸遂之国。
现代文：到吴被平定以后，齐王司马攸才前往自己的封国。
English: After Wu was subdued, the king of Qi, Sima You, went to his own fief.

古文：中朝制，典书令在常侍下，侍郎上。
现代文：中原时期朝廷的制度，典书令位在常侍下面，侍郎上面。
English: According to the system of the Imperial Court in the Central Plains period, the position of Tensho Rei was below that of a regular attendant and above that of a chamberlain.

古文：及渡江，则侍郎次常侍，而典书令居三军下。
现代文：到渡江后，就是侍郎次于常侍，而典书令位居三军的下面。
English: After crossing the river, it was the attendant who was second to the regular attendant, and the written order ranked below the three armies.

古文：公国则无中尉、常侍、三军，侯国又无大农、侍郎，伯子男唯典书以下，又无学官、令史职，皆以次损焉。
现代文：公国就没有中尉、常侍、三军，侯国又没有大农、侍郎，伯子男衹有典书以下的官职，又没有学官、令史的职务，都是根据等级减损的。
English: The principality does not have lieutenants, regular attendants, or the three armies, and the vassal state does not have large farmers, attendants, or nobles; there are no official positions below that of a classic, and there are no academic or historical positions, all of which are reduced according to rank.

古文：公侯以下置官属，随国大小无定制，其余官司各有差。
现代文：公侯以下的设置属官，随着封国的大小而没有一定的制度，其余的官职分别有不同。
English: The establishment of subordinate officials below the rank of prince does not have a certain system according to the size of the feudal state, and the remaining official positions are different.

古文：名山大泽不以封，盐铁金银铜锡，始平之竹园，别都宫室园囿，皆不为属国。
现代文：名山大泽不用来分封，盐铁金银铜锡的产地，始平的竹园，别都宫室园圃的所在地，都不作为属国。
English: Famous mountains and lakes are not used to divide the country, the source of salt, iron, gold, silver, copper, and tin, the bamboo garden in Shihping, and the location of the garden in Beidou Palace are not regarded as belonging to the country.

古文：其仕在天朝者，与之国同，皆自选其文武官。
现代文：他们在天朝任职的，和前往封国的一样，都可以自己挑选文武属官。
English: They can choose their own civil and military officials, both those who serve in the imperial court and those who go to the vassal states.

古文：诸入作卿士而其世子年已壮者，皆遣莅国。
现代文：各位入朝担任卿士而他的世子已是壮年的。都派遣前往管理封国。
English: You all entered the imperial court as nobles, and his heir was already in his prime. You were all dispatched to administer the fiefdom.

古文：其王公已下，茅社符玺，车旗命服，一如泰始初故事。
现代文：其中王公以下的，茅社符玺，车旗命服，完全和泰始初期的旧例一样。
English: Among them, those below the prince, the Maoshefu and the Cheqianmeifu, are completely the same as the old cases in the early days of Taixi.

古文：州置刺史，别驾、治中从事、诸曹从事等员。
现代文：州设置刺史，还有别驾、治中从事、诸曹从事等属员。
English: The state has set up a history department, and there are other subordinate members such as Zhuye, Zhizhong, and Zhu Cao.

古文：所领中郡以上及江阳、硃提郡，郡各置部从事一人，小郡亦置一人。
现代文：所统管的是中等以上的郡以及江阳、朱提郡，每郡各设置部从事一名，小郡也设置一名。
English: It is the counties above the middle level as well as Jiangyang and Juti counties that are in charge of the overall administration. One person is engaged in each establishment department of each county, and one person is also set up in small counties.

古文：又有主簿，门亭长、录事、记室书佐、诸曹佐、守从事、武猛从事等。
现代文：又有主簿、门亭长、录事、记室书佐、诸曹佐、守从事、武猛从事等。
English: There are also the chief bookkeeper, the gate keeper, the recorder, the secretary of the office, the assistants, the guards, the warriors, and so on.

古文：凡吏四十一人，卒二十人。
现代文：共有四十一名吏，二十名卒。
English: A total of forty-one officers and twenty enlisted men.

古文：诸州边远，或有山险，滨近寇贼羌夷者，又置弓马从事五十余人。
现代文：各州边远的地方，有的有山林险地，临近寇贼羌夷的，又设置弓马从事五十多名。
English: In the outlying areas of each state, some of which are mountainous and dangerous, and some of which are close to areas where bandits are active, more than fifty horses and bows have been set up.

古文：徐州又置淮海，凉州置河津，诸州置都水从事各一人。
现代文：徐州又设置淮海从事，凉州设置河津从事，各州设置都水从事各一名。
English: Xuzhou also set up Huaihai to engage, Liangzhou set up Hejin to engage, and each state set up capital water to engage one person.

古文：凉、益州置吏八十五人，卒二十人。
现代文：凉州、益州设置八十五名吏，二十名卒。
English: In Liangzhou and Yizhou, 85 officials and 20 cadres were set up.

古文：荆州又置监佃督一人。
现代文：荆州又设置监佃督一名。
English: Jingzhou has also set up a prison governor.

古文：郡皆置太守，河南郡京师所在，则曰尹。
现代文：郡都设置太守，河南郡是京师所在地，就叫尹。
English: The county seat is set up as the governor, and Henan County is the location of the Beijing Division, so it is called Yin.

古文：诸王国以内史掌太守之任，又置主簿、主记室、门下贼曹、议生、门下史、记室史、录事史、书佐、循行、干、小史、五官掾、功曹史、功曹书佐、循行小史、五官掾等员。
现代文：各王国用内史执掌太守的职责，又设置主簿、主记室、门下贼曹、议生、门下史、记室史、录事史、书佐、循行、干、小史、五官掾、功曹史、功曹书佐、循行小史等属员。
English: Each kingdom used the internal history to carry out the duties of the dean, and also set up the main book, the main record office, the subordinate thief, the student, the subordinate history, the record office history, the record history, the assistant, the follower, the stem, the small history, the five officials, the history, the assistant, the follower and the small history.

古文：郡国户不满五千者，置职吏五十人，散吏十三人；五千户以上，则职吏六十三人，散吏二十一人；万户以上，职吏六十九人，散吏三十九人。
现代文：郡国的产敷不满五千的，设置五十名职吏，十三名散吏；五千户以上的，就设置六十三名职吏，二十一名散吏；万户以上的，有六十九名职吏，三十九名散吏。
English: For counties with less than 5,000 households, there are 50 officials and 13 non-officials; for more than 5,000 households, there are 63 officials and 21 non-officials; and for more than 10,000 households, there are 69 officials and 39 non-officials.

古文：郡国皆置文学掾一人。
现代文：郡国都设置一名文学掾。
English: The county and the country all set up a literary award.

古文：县大者置令，小者置长。
现代文：大的县设置令，小的设置长。
English: Large counties set the order, small counties set the length.

古文：有主簿、录事史、主记室史、门下书佐、干、游徼、议生、循行功曹史、小史、廷掾、功曹史、小史书佐干、户曹掾史干、法曹门干、金仓贼曹掾史、兵曹史、吏曹史、狱小史、狱门亭长、都亭长、贼捕掾等员。
现代文：有主簿、录事史、主记室史、门下书佐、干、游徼、议生、循行功曹史、小史、廷掾、功曹史、小史书佐干、户曹掾史干、法曹门干、金仓贼曹掾史、兵曹史、吏曹史、狱小史、狱门亭长、都亭长、贼捕掾等属员。
English: There is a main book, a record history, a chief record office history, a subordinate assistant secretary, a stem, a wanderer, a student, a follower history, a minor history, a courtier, a meritorious history, a minor history assistant secretary, a household assistant secretary, a legal assistant, a warehouse thief, a soldier, an official, a prison assistant secretary, a prison gate keeper, a governor of the capital, a thief and a thief, and so on.

古文：户不满三百以下，职吏十八人，散吏四人；三百以上，职吏二十八人，散吏六人；五百以上，职吏四十人，散吏八人；千以上，职吏五十三人，散吏十二人；千五百以上，职吏六十八人，散吏一十八人；三千以上，职吏八十八人，散吏二十六人。
现代文：户敷不满三百的，设十八名职吏，四名散吏；户敷在三百以上的，有二十八名职吏，六名散吏；五百户以上的，有四十名职吏，八名散吏；千户以上的，有五十三名职吏，十二名散吏；一千五百户以上的，有六十八名职吏，十八名散吏；三千户以上的，有八十八名职吏，二十六名散吏。
English: For households with less than 300, there are 18 officials and 4 non-officials; for households with more than 300, there are 28 officials and 6 non-officials; for households with more than 500, there are 40 officials and 8 non-officials; for households with more than 1,000, there are 53 officials and 12 non-officials; for households with more than 1,500, there are 68 officials and 18 non-officials; for households with more than 3,000, there are 88 officials and 26 non-officials.

古文：郡国及县，农月皆随所领户多少为差，散吏为劝农。
现代文：郡国和县，农忙的月份都根据所统管的户数多少，让散吏充当劝农。
English: In counties and prefectures, according to the number of households under the supervision of the prefectural government, the number of farmers in the busy months depends on the number of households under the supervision of the prefecture.

古文：又县五百以上皆置乡，三千以上置二乡，五千以上置三乡，万以上置四乡，乡置啬夫一人。
现代文：此外五百户以上的县都设置乡，三千户以上的设置两个乡，五千户以上的设置三个乡，万户以上的设置四个乡，每个乡设置一名啬夫。
English: In addition, counties with more than 500 households are set up as townships, counties with more than 3,000 households are set up as two townships, counties with more than 5,000 households are set up as three townships, counties with more than 10,000 households are set up as four townships, and each township is set up as one miser.

古文：乡户不满千以下，置治书史一人；千以上置史、佐各一人，正一人；五千五百以上，置史一人，佐二人。
现代文：每乡户数不满一千的，设置治书史一名；千户以上的设置史、佐各一名，正一名；五千五百户以上的，设置史一名，佐两名。
English: If the number of households in each township is less than one thousand, there will be one person in charge of setting the bookkeeping history; if the number of households is more than one thousand, there will be one person in charge of setting the bookkeeping history, one person in charge of setting the bookkeeping history, one person in charge of setting the bookkeeping history, and one person in charge of setting the bookkeeping history; if the number of households is more than five thousand and five hundred, there will be one person in charge of setting the bookkeeping history, and two persons in charge of setting the bookkeeping history.

古文：县率百户置里吏一人，其土广人稀，听随宜置里吏，限不得减五十户。
现代文：每县通常每百户设置里吏一名；如果是地广人稀，允许根据情况设置里吏，限定不能少于五十户。
English: Each county usually sets up one village clerk for every hundred households; if the area is large and sparsely populated, it is allowed to set up village clerks according to the situation, with a limit of not less than fifty households.

古文：户千以上，置校官掾一人。
现代文：千户以上的，设置校官掾一名。
English: If there are more than a thousand households, there shall be one school official.

古文：县皆置方略吏四人。
现代文：每县都设置四名方略吏。
English: In each county, there will be four district officials.

古文：洛阳县置六部尉。
现代文：洛阳县设置六部尉。
English: Luoyang County has set up six sub-officers.

古文：江左以后，建康亦置六部尉，余大县置二人，次县、小县各一人。
现代文：以后，建尘也设置六部尉，其余的大的县设置二名，次县、小县各一名。
English: Later, Jiancheng also set up six lieutenants, the rest of the large counties set up two, and the sub-counties and small counties one each.

古文：鄴、长安置吏如三千户以上之制。
现代文：邺、长安设置吏员和三千户以上的制度一样。
English: In Handan and Chang'an, the system is the same as that for more than 3,000 households.

古文：四中郎将，并后汉置，历魏及晋，并有其职，江左弥重。
现代文：四中郎将，都是后漠设置的，经魏到晋，都有遣一官职，江左时期更加被看重。
English: The four middle ranks were all set up in the back of the desert. From Wei to Jin, they were all sent to a government post. The middle ranks were more valued in the Jiangza period.

古文：护羌、夷、蛮等校尉，案武帝置南蛮校尉于襄阳，西戎校尉于长安，南夷校尉于宁州。
现代文：护羌、夷、蛮等校尉，考武帝时在襄阳设置南蛮校尉，在垦室设西戎校尉，在空业设置南夷校尉。
English: In the reign of Emperor Gao, there was a Nanban school captain in Xiangyang, a Xi Rong school captain in Shishu, and a Nanyi school captain in Kuye.

古文：元康中，护羌校尉为凉州刺史，西戎校尉为雍州刺史，南蛮校尉为荆州刺史。
现代文：元康年间，护羌校尉是凉州刺史，西戎校尉是雍州刺史，南蛮校尉是荆州刺史。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Captain Fong Yao was the leader of Liangzhou, Captain Xi Rong was the leader of Yongzhou, and Captain Nan Man was the leader of Jingzhou.

古文：及江左初，省南蛮校尉，寻又置于江陵，改南夷校尉曰镇蛮校尉。
现代文：到江左初期，撤销南蛮校尉，不久又在江陵设置，将南夷校尉改为镇蛮校尉。
English: In the early days of Jiangzuo, Captain Nanban was revoked, and soon he was set up in Jiangling, and Captain Nanyi was changed to Captain Zhenban.

古文：及安帝时，于襄阳置宁蛮校尉。
现代文：到安帝时期，在襄阳设置宁蛮校尉。
English: By the time of Emperor An, the post of Ningban Lieutenant was established in Xiangyang.

古文：护匈奴、羌、戎、蛮、夷、越中郎将，案武帝置四中郎将，或领刺史，或持节为之。
现代文：护匈奴、羌、戎、蛮、夷、越中郎将，案武帝时设置四中郎将，有的兼任刺史，有的持节担任。
English: Guarding the Xiongnu, Yao, Rong, Man, Yi, and Yue middle lords, four middle lords were set up at the time of Emperor Wu, some also served as sashimi, and some served as festivals.

古文：武帝又置平越中郎将，居广州，主护南越。
现代文：武帝又设置平越中郎将，居守在广州，主管守护南越。
English: Emperor Wu also set up the Pingyue Zhongro General, who stayed in Guangzhou and was in charge of guarding South Vietnam.

