古文：康王既尸天子，遂诰诸侯，作《康王之诰》。
现代文：康王既祭神主天子，于是诰命诸侯，作《康王之诰》。
English: Since King Kang offered sacrifices to the Lord God, he risked the lives of his princes to write "King Kang's Oath."

古文：王出，在应门之内，太保率西方诸侯入应门左，毕公率东方诸侯入应门右，皆布乘黄朱。
现代文：王走出祖庙，来到应门内。太保召公率领西方的诸侯进入应门，站立在左侧，毕公率领东方的诸侯进入应门，站立在右侧，他们都穿着绣有花纹的礼服和黄朱色的韨。
English: The king walked out of the ancestral temple and came to the entrance. Taibo summoned the prince to lead the western princes to enter the entrance and stood on the left side, Bi Gong led the eastern princes to enter the entrance and stood on the right side, they were all wearing embroidered dresses and yellow vermillion coats.

古文：宾称奉圭兼币，曰： 一二臣卫，敢执壤奠。 
现代文：赞礼的官员传呼进献命圭和贡物，诸侯走上前，说： 我们这些四方的守护之臣，各自将封底上的土产献给君王。 
English: The praising officials called in the votive offerings and tributes, and the lords stepped forward and said, "We, the guardians of the four quarters, will each offer the local produce on the bottom of the cover to the king.

古文：皆再拜稽首。
现代文：诸侯都再拜叩头。
English: The lords all bowed again.

古文：王义嗣，德答拜。
现代文：王一一答谢。
English: Wang Yi Yi replied with thanks.

古文：太保暨芮伯咸进，相揖。
现代文：太保召公和芮伯同走向前，互相作揖后，再一同向王跪拜叩头。
English: Tai Bao called for the prince and the eunuch to walk forward together, bow to each other, and then kneel and bow to the king together.

古文：皆再拜稽首曰： 敢敬告天子，皇天改大邦殷之命，惟周文武诞受羑若，克恤西土。
现代文：他们说： 恭敬地禀告天子，上天已经更改了大国殷的命运，我们周国的文王、武王大受福祥，能够安定西方。
English: They said: "Respectfully report to the Son of Heaven, Heaven has changed the fate of the great country Yin, and our King Wen and King Wu of Zhou are greatly blessed and can stabilize the West.

古文：惟新陟王毕协赏罚，戡定厥功，用敷遗后人休。
现代文：刚刚升入天庭的成王，赏罚完全合宜，能够成就文、武的功业，因此把幸福留给了后代子孙。
English: King Cheng, who has just ascended to heaven, is fully deserving of rewards and punishments, and is able to achieve literary and military achievements. Therefore, he has left happiness to future generations.

古文：今王敬之哉！
现代文：如今我王要敬慎啊！
English: Now, my lord, be careful!

古文：张惶六师，无坏我高祖寡命。 
现代文：要加强王朝的六军，不要败坏我们高祖的大命。 
English: It is necessary to strengthen the six armies of the dynasty, and do not ruin the great life of our Gaozu.

古文：王若曰： 庶邦侯、甸、男、卫，惟予一人钊报诰。
现代文：王这样说： 侯、甸、男、卫的各位诸侯！现在我姬钊答复你们的教导。
English: And the king said, Princes, captains, menservants, and officers, I have heard the voice of your words.

古文：昔君文武丕平，富不务咎，厎至齐信，用昭明于天下。
现代文：先君文王、武王很公平，仁厚慈爱，不滥施刑罚，致力实行中信，因而他们的光辉普照天下。
English: The previous emperors, King Wen and King Wu, were very fair, benevolent and merciful, did not impose excessive punishment, and were committed to the implementation of the Chinese Constitution, so their brilliance shone all over the world.

古文：则亦有熊罴之士，不二心之臣，保乂王家，用端命于上帝。
现代文：还有像熊罴一样勇武的将士和忠心耿耿的臣子，一起安定治理我们的国家，因此，我们才被上天委以重任。
English: There are also brave soldiers and loyal courtiers like Xiong Yao, who together govern our country in a stable manner. Therefore, we have been entrusted with an important task by Heaven.

古文：皇天用训厥道，付畀四方。
现代文：上天以德政之美教诲先王奉行天道，并将天下赐予他们。
English: The heavenly kings followed the heavenly way with the teachings of the beauty of virtue and politics, and gave them the kingdom of heaven.

古文：乃命建侯树屏，在我后之人。
现代文：于是，文王、武王施行政令、建立诸侯，设置番属以屏卫国家，我们这些后辈子孙方得以安居乐业。
English: As a result, King Wen and King Wu issued administrative decrees, established princes, set up vassals to defend the country, and our grandchildren were able to live and work in peace.

古文：今予一二伯父尚胥暨顾，绥尔先公之臣服于先王。虽尔身在外，乃心罔不在王室，用奉恤厥若，无遗鞠子羞！ 
现代文：今天，我同姓的伯父们会聚于此，希望大家能够彼此惠顾先王之好，安置好你们前辈中那些全心全意服从于先王的老臣，虽然你们身在王畿之外，但你们的心随时随地都要向着王室，以赤子之心拥戴天子、体恤百姓而安顺其道，不可让我这个幼小的君主蒙羞！ 
English: Today, my uncles with the same surname are gathered here. I hope that everyone can take advantage of the kindness of the former king, and place those of your predecessors who wholeheartedly obeyed the former king. Although you are outside the kingdom, your hearts should always and everywhere be towards the royal family, embrace the heavenly son with a child's heart, sympathize with the people and follow their path. Do not let me disgrace this young monarch!

古文：群公既皆听命，相楫，趋出。
现代文：诸侯们共同领受王命之后，彼此作揖施礼，带着向往走出宫殿。
English: After receiving the king's order together, the princes bowed to each other and walked out of the palace with longing.

古文：王释冕，反丧服。
现代文：康王也解下冠冕，重新着丧服居忧守制。
English: King Kang also took off his crown and put on mourning clothes again.

