古文： 溪回松风长，苍鼠窜古瓦。
现代文： 溪回松风长，苍鼠窜古瓦。
English: The wind is blowing in the pine forest, and the grasshopper is eating the old roof tiles.

古文：不知何王殿，遣缔绝壁下。
现代文：不知何王殿，遣缔绝壁下。
English: I don't know how many princes have been banished to the bottom of a cliff.

古文：阴房鬼火青，坏道哀湍泻。
现代文：阴房鬼火青，坏道哀湍泻。
English: The netherworld is dark and gloomy, the evil path is sad and sickening.

古文：万籁真笙竽，秋色正萧洒。
现代文：万籁真笙竽，秋色正萧洒。
English: The autumn is in full swing.

古文：美人为黄土，况乃粉黛假。
现代文：美人为黄土，况乃粉黛假。
English: Beauty is loess, moreover, it is pink and fake.

古文：当时侍金舆，故物独石马。
现代文：当时侍金舆，故物独石马。
English: At that time, the attendant was Kin-myo, the former Dokuseki horse.

古文：忧来藉草坐，浩歌泪盈把。
现代文：忧来藉草坐，浩歌泪盈把。
English: Sorrow sits by the grass, vast song tears away.

古文：冉冉征途间，谁是长年者？ 
现代文：冉冉征途间，谁是长年者？ 
English: On the road, who is the oldest?

古文：此老杜《玉华宫》诗也。
现代文：这是老杜的《玉华宫》诗。
English: This is Lao Du's "Jade Palace" poem.

古文：张文潜暮年在宛丘，何大圭方弱冠，往谒之，凡三日，见其吟哦此诗不绝口。
现代文：张文潜晚年住在宛丘时，何大圭正当二十来岁，前去拜见他，在文潜处共盘桓了几天，看见他老是吟哦这首诗，不绝于口。
English: When Zhang Wenqian lived in Wanqiu in his later years, He Dagui, who was in his twenties, went to visit him. He lingered for a few days at Wenqian's place and saw that he was always chanting this poem and never stopped saying it.

古文：大圭请其故，曰： 此章乃《风》、《雅》鼓吹，未易为子言。 
现代文：大圭请问其中缘故，文潜道： 这首诗是象《诗经》的《风》诗、《雅》诗那样的妙欣雅致，不容易对您说消楚。 
English: Daegui, please ask the reason for this, Wenqiu said: This poem is like the "Wind" poem and the "Beauty" poem of the "Book of Songs," it is wonderful and elegant, and it is not easy to tell you.

古文：大圭曰： 先生所赋，何必减此？ 
现代文：大圭说： 先生所创作的诗篇，哪儿会一定比这首差呢？ 
English: Daegui said, "Of all the poems that you have composed, which one is worse than this one?"

古文：曰： 平生极力模写，仅有一篇稍似之，然未可同日语。 
现代文：文潜称： 一辈子极力地模仿它，只有一篇略微与它相似，可是优劣未可同日而语。 
English: Wen Xun said: I have tried my best to imitate it all my life, only one article is slightly similar to it, but the advantages and disadvantages are not the same.

古文：遂诵其《离黄州》诗，偶同此韵，曰： 扁舟发孤城，挥手谢送者。
现代文：接着就背诵他的《离黄州》诗，与这首诗的韵律偶然相同，道： 扁舟发孤城，挥手谢送者。
English: Then he recited his "Leaving Huangzhou" poem, which coincidentally has the same rhyme as this poem, saying: "If you leave Huangzhou by boat, wave goodbye."

古文：山回地势卷，天豁江面泻。
现代文：山回地势卷，天豁江面泻。
English: Yamahai geomagnetic wave, Tianhaku River tidal wave.

古文：中流望赤壁，石脚插水下。
现代文：中流望赤壁，石脚插水下。
English: In the middle of the stream, looking at the red wall, the stone foot is inserted under the water.

古文：昏昏烟雾岭，历历渔樵舍。
现代文：昏昏烟雾岭，历历渔樵舍。
English: Smoggy Smoggy Smoggy Smoggy Smoggy Smoggy Smoggy Smoggy

古文：居夷实三载，邻里通借假。
现代文：居夷实三载，邻里通借假。
English: He's been in residence for three years, and his neighbors are on vacation.

古文：别之岂无情，老泪为一洒。
现代文：别之岂无情，老泪为一洒。
English: Otherwise it would be merciless, and tears would be shed.

古文：篙工起鸣鼓，轻橹健于马。
现代文：篙工起鸣鼓，轻橹健于马。
English: The cymbals begin to beat, and the light cymbals are more vigorous than the horses.

古文：聊为过江宿，寂寂樊山夜。 
现代文：聊为过江宿，寂寂樊山夜。 
English: Chat for the river inn, the silence of the mountain night.

古文：此其音响节奏，固似之矣，读之可默喻也。
现代文：此诗，它的平仄节奏，与杜诗很相似，一读就可知道所言何事。
English: This poem, with its flat rhythm, is very similar to Du's poem, and you can tell what is being said from the first reading.

古文：又好诵东坡《梨花》绝句，所谓 梨花谈白柳深青，柳絮飞时花满城，惆怅东栏一株雪，人生看得几清明 者，每吟一过，必击节赏叹不能已，文潜盖有省于此云。
现代文：文潜又喜欢吟诵苏东坡的《梨花》绝句，即所谓 梨花谈白柳深青，柳絮飞时花满城，惆怅东栏一株雪，人生看得几清明 的那一首，每当吟哦一遍，一定击节叹赏，不能自已，他大概对于此诗有非常之深的理解吧。
English: Wenqian also likes to recite the last sentence of Su Dongpo's "Pear Flower," that is, the so-called "pear flower talks about white willow deep blue, willow catkins fly when the flowers are all over the city, the east column of the dragonfly is a snow, the one that sees life more clearly," every time he recites it, he must hit the beat and sigh, he can't help himself, he probably has a very deep understanding of this poem.

