古文：变复之家，以久雨为湛，久旸为旱。
现代文：专门祈祷消除变异的人认为，雨下久了就成涝灾，天晴久了就成旱灾。
English: Those who pray specifically for the elimination of mutations believe that if it rains for a long time, it will become a flood, and if it is sunny for a long time, it will become a drought.

古文：旱应亢阳，湛应沈溺。
现代文：旱灾是上天对君主骄横的谴告，涝灾是上天对君主迷恋酒色的谴告。
English: Drought is heaven's rebuke to the monarch's arrogance, and drought is heaven's rebuke to the monarch's infatuation with wine.

古文：或难曰：夫一岁之中，十日者一雨，五日者一风。
现代文：有人诘难说： 一年之中，或十天下一次雨，或五天刮一次风。
English: Some people find it difficult to say: In a year, it rains once in ten days, or the wind blows once in five days.

古文：雨颇留，湛之兆也。旸颇久，旱之渐也。
现代文：雨稍微下久一点，就是涝灾的预兆；天晴久一点，就是旱灾的苗头。
English: If it rains a little longer, it is a harbinger of floods; if it is sunny for a little longer, it is the beginning of a drought.

古文：湛之时，人君未必沈溺也；旱之时，未必亢阳也。
现代文：发生涝灾的时候，君主未必就迷恋于酒色；发生旱灾的时候君主未必就骄横。
English: When there is a drought, the monarch is not necessarily infatuated with wine; when there is a drought, the monarch is not necessarily arrogant.

古文：人君为政，前後若一。然而一湛一早，时气也。
现代文：君主施政，前后一致，然而无论涝灾旱灾，都是因为碰上了当时的灾害之气。 
English: The monarch's administration is consistent, but whether it is a flood or a drought, it is because it has encountered the disaster of the time.

古文：范蠡计然曰： 太岁在水，毁；金，穰；木，饥；火，旱。 
现代文：《范蠡·计然》上说： 太岁运行到北方，庄稼被毁坏；运行到西方，五谷丰登；运行到东方，发生饥荒；运行到南方，发生旱灾。 
English: "Fan Ye Zhen" said: "If the sun runs to the north, crops will be destroyed; if it runs to the west, crops will be abundant; if it runs to the east, famine will occur; if it runs to the south, drought will occur.

古文：夫如是，水旱饥穰，有岁运也。
现代文：这样说来，水旱灾害饥荒丰收是和太岁运转相关联的。
English: In this way, floods, droughts, famines, and bumper harvests are all related to the lunar cycle.

古文：岁直其运，气当其世，变复之家，指而名之。
现代文：太岁恰好运行到某一方位，灾害之气正好在世上出现，变复之家就针对这种情况编造出一套说法。
English: When the sun happens to move to a certain place, and the air of disaster happens to appear in the world, the House of Transmutation has made up a set of sayings for this situation.

古文：人君用其言，求过自改。
现代文：君主采用他们的说法，找出自己的过错加以改正。
English: The monarch, in their parlance, finds fault with himself and corrects it.

古文：旸久自雨，雨久自旸，变复之家，遂名其功；人君然之，遂信其术。
现代文：晴久了自然会下雨，雨下久了自然会天晴，变复之家于是就把晴雨的变化说成是他们的功劳，君主认为正确，于是就相信了他们的占术。
English: After a long period of fine weather, it would naturally rain, and after a long period of rainy weather, it would naturally become fine. Therefore, the House of Chang Fu said that the change of fine weather and rain was their achievement. The monarch thought it was correct, so he believed in their divination.

古文：试使人君恬居安处不求己过，天犹自雨，雨犹自旸。
现代文：假如让君主安安静静地呆在那里，不寻求自己过错，上天仍然会下雨，雨后仍然会天晴。
English: If you let the monarch stay there quietly, not seeking his own fault, the sky will still rain, and the sky will still be clear after the rain.

古文：旸济雨济之时，人君无事，变复之家，犹名其术。
现代文：晴止雨止之时，君主并没有做什么特殊的事情，变复之家，仍然要自吹他们的占术。
English: When it stopped raining, the monarch did not do anything special, but the Zifu family still boasted of their divination.

古文：是则阴阳之气，以人为主，不於天也。
现代文：这样说来，阴阳之气的变化是以人决定的，而不是统属于天的了。
English: In this way, the changes in yin and yang qi are determined by people, not by heaven.

古文：夫人不能以行感天，天亦不随行而应人。
现代文：人不能用道德行为感动天，天也不会随从人的道德行为来谴告人。
English: Man cannot move heaven with his moral behavior, and heaven will not follow man's moral behavior to condemn man.

古文：《春秋》鲁大雩，旱求雨之祭也。
现代文：《春秋》记载鲁国举行雩祭，是天旱祈求下雨的祭祀。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Lu held a lotus festival, a ritual to pray for rain during a drought.

古文：旱久不雨，祷祭求福，若人之疾病祭神解祸矣。此变复也。
现代文：天旱了好长时间不下雨，祷告祭祀求天福佑，就像人生了疾病，祭祀神灵解除灾祸一样，这就是所谓的变复之道。
English: If it does not rain for a long time due to drought, praying and worshiping to ask for heaven's blessing is like giving birth to a disease and worshiping the gods to relieve the disaster. This is the so-called path to recovery.

古文：《诗》云： 月离於毕，比滂沲矣。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 月亮靠近毕宿，马上就有滂沱大雨。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: When the moon is close to setting, there will be heavy rain.

古文：《书》曰： 月之从星，则以风雨。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 月亮靠近箕宿和毕宿，就会多风多雨。 
English: "Shoshu" says: When the moon is close to the equinox and the solstice, there will be a lot of wind and rain.

古文：然则风雨随月所离从也。
现代文：如此说来，风和雨是随着月亮靠近箕宿和毕宿而来的了。
English: Thus, the wind and rain came with the moon's close approach to the equinox and the solstice.

古文：房星四表三道，日月之行，出入三道。
现代文：房星以四颗星为标志构成三条通道，日月的运行，出入于此三道之间。
English: The house star, marked by four stars, forms three channels, and the movement of the sun and the moon passes between these three channels.

古文：出北则湛，出南则旱。
现代文：出于北道就有雨，出于南道就有旱。
English: Rain comes from the north, and drought comes from the south.

古文：或言出北则旱，南则湛。案月为天下占，房为九州候。月之南北，非独为鲁也。
现代文：或者说出于北道就有旱，出于南道就有雨，按照月亮靠近箕宿或毕宿这种自然现象被天下人用来预测风雨，月亮运行经过房宿北道或南道这种自然现象，被天下人用作观测涝旱的事实，月亮经过房宿的南道或北道不光是为了鲁国啊。
English: Or to put it another way, from the north there is drought, from the south there is rain, according to whether the moon is close to or far from Poyang, this natural phenomenon is used by people around the world to predict wind and rain, and the fact that the moon passes through the north or south is used by people around the world to observe drought. The fact that the moon passes through the south or north of Poyang is not just for Lu.

古文：孔子出，使子路赍雨具。有顷，天果大雨。
现代文：孔子外出，让子路携带雨具，一会儿，天果然下了大雨。
English: Confucius went out, let Zi Lu carry rain gear, and for a while, the day did indeed rain heavily.

古文：子路问其故，孔子曰： 昨暮月离於毕。 
现代文：子路问这又是什么缘故，孔子说： 因为昨天晚上月亮靠近毕宿。 
English: Zi Lu asked what was the reason for this, and Confucius said: Because the moon was close to setting last night.

古文：後日，月复离毕。
现代文：后来有一天，月亮又靠近毕宿。
English: Then one day, the moon was close to setting again.

古文：孔子出，子路请赍雨具，孔子不听，出果无雨。
现代文：孔子外出，子路请求带雨具，孔子不听从，出去果然没有下雨。
English: When Confucius went out, Zi Lu asked him to bring rain gear. Confucius did not listen, and it did not rain when he went out.

古文：子路问其故，孔子曰： 昔日，月离其阴，故雨。昨暮，月离其阳，故不雨。 
现代文：子路问这是什么缘故，孔子说： 那天，月亮靠近毕宿的北面，所以下雨；昨天晚上，月亮靠近毕宿的南面，所以不下雨。 
English: Zilu asked what was the reason for this, and Confucius said: That day, the moon was close to the north of the mansion, so it rained; last night, the moon was close to the south of the mansion, so it did not rain.

古文：夫如是，鲁雨自以月离，岂以政哉？
现代文：这样看来，鲁国下雨本来是因为月亮靠近了毕宿，哪里是由于政治的缘故呢？
English: From this perspective, the rain in Russia was originally due to the moon being closer to the end of its journey, but where is it due to politics?

古文：如审以政令月，离於毕为雨占，天下共之。
现代文：如果确实是由于政令的缘故，那么月亮靠近毕宿预示天要下雨，这是天下所共同的。
English: If it is indeed due to a government decree, then the fact that the moon is close to setting indicates that it is going to rain, which is common all over the world.

古文：鲁雨，天下亦宜皆雨。
现代文：鲁国下雨，天下也都应该下雨。
English: If it rains in Russia, it should rain everywhere.

古文：六国之时，政治不同，人君所行赏罚异时，必以雨为应政令月，离六七毕星，然後足也。
现代文：战国时期，各国政冶不同，君主施政，赏罚不在一个时间，一定要把下雨说成是上天应和六国的政令，那么上天就要使月亮靠近毕宿六七次，然后才能满足这种情况。
English: During the Warring States period, the political systems of various countries were different, the monarchs were in power, and the rewards and punishments were not at the same time. It must be said that the rain was the decree of the heavens and the six countries. Then the heavens would have to make the moon close to the end of the night six or seven times before they could meet this situation.

古文：鲁缪公之时，岁旱。
现代文：鲁穆公在位的时候，有一年大旱。
English: When Lord Rumu was on the throne, there was a year of drought.

古文：缪公问县子： 天旱不雨，寡人欲暴巫，奚如？ 
现代文：穆公问县子： 天旱不下雨，我打算晒巫求雨，怎么样？ 
English: Mu Gong asked the county magistrate: If it doesn't rain because of the drought, I'm going to pray for rain, how about it?

古文：县子不听。 欲徙市，奚如？ 
现代文：县子不赞成他的做法。穆公又说： 我打算迁移集市，怎么样？ 
English: The prefectural people disapproved of his actions. Mu Gong also said: I plan to relocate the bazaar, how about that?

古文：对曰： 天子崩，巷市七日；诸公薨，巷市五日。
现代文：县子回答说： 天子死，要在小巷里集市七天；诸侯死，要在小巷里集市五天。
English: The county magistrate replied, "When the emperor dies, there will be a market in the alley for seven days; when the lords die, there will be a market in the alley for five days.

古文：为之徙市，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：为了天旱而迁移集市，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Using the strike method to ask for rain is also a feasible method.

古文：案县子之言，徙市得雨也。
现代文：考察县子的这种说法，是为迁移集市而求雨。
English: This way of looking at prefectures is like looking for rain in order to move the market.

古文：案《诗》、书之文，月离星得雨。
现代文：考察《诗经》、《尚书》上的记载，月亮靠近毕宿就会下雨。
English: According to the records in the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs," when the moon is close to setting, it will rain.

古文：日月之行，有常节度，肯为徙市故，离毕之阴乎？夫月毕，天下占。
现代文：日月的运行，有一定的规律，能因为迁移集市的缘故，靠近毕宿的北面而使天下雨吗？
English: The movement of the sun and the moon has a certain pattern. Can it rain due to the relocation of the market, close to the north of the accommodation?

古文：徙鲁之市，安耐移月？月之行天，三十日而周。
现代文：月亮靠近毕宿天下人用来预测涝旱，迁移鲁国的集市，怎么能改变月亮运行的轨道呢？月亮在天空运行，三十日一个周天。
English: The moon is close to the end of its life. People around the world use it to predict droughts, and to move the fairs of Lu. How can the orbit of the moon be changed? The moon moves in the sky every 30 days.

古文：一月之中，一过毕星，离阳则旸。
现代文：一个月之中，有一次经过毕宿，靠近毕宿的南边就天晴。
English: In the course of a month, there is one time when I pass Bi-juku, and it is sunny on the south side near Bi-juku.

古文：假令徙市之感，能令月离毕，其时徙市而得雨乎。
现代文：假使以迁移集市的行为去感动天，能使月亮靠近毕宿的北面，那么在月亮已经靠近毕宿南面的时候迁移集市，能够让月亮再靠近毕宿的北面而求得下雨吗？
English: If the act of moving the bazaar to move the sky can bring the moon closer to the north side of the afterlife, then moving the bazaar when the moon is already close to the south side of the afterlife can bring the moon closer to the north side of the afterlife and get rain?

古文：夫如县子言，未可用也。
现代文：像县子的这种说法，是不可采用的。
English: Such an argument, like that of the prefectural son, is inapplicable.

古文：董仲舒求雨，申《春秋》之义，设虚立祀，父不食於枝庶，天不食於下地。
现代文：董仲舒向天求雨，是为了发挥《春秋》的大义，所以设立土坛进行祭祀。死去的父亲不享用庶子所供的祭品，上天也不享用各诸侯国的祭品。
English: Dong Zhongshu asked the heavens for rain, and in order to give play to the great righteousness of "Spring and Autumn," he set up an earthen altar for sacrifice. The dead father did not enjoy the sacrifices offered by the bastard, and the heavens did not enjoy the sacrifices of the various provinces.

古文：诸侯雩礼所祀，未知何神。
现代文：诸侯各国雩礼所祭祀的，不知道是什么神灵。
English: It is not known what deities are worshipped in the ceremonial halls of the princes of various countries.

古文：如天神也，唯王者天乃歆，诸侯及今长吏，天不享也。
现代文：如果说是祭祀天神，只有天子的祭品天神才肯享用。诸侯各国以及现在的地方长官的祭品，天神是不享用的。
English: If we are talking about the worship of Tenjin, only Tenjin would be willing to enjoy the offerings of the Son of Heaven. Tenjin would not enjoy the offerings of the princes of various countries and the current local governors.

古文：神不歆享，安耐得神？
现代文：天神不享用他们的祭供，他们怎么能得到天神的恩惠呢？
English: If the angels do not partake of their offerings, how can they receive the bounty of the angels?

古文：如云雨者气也，云雨之气，何用歆享？
现代文：如果说是祭祀云雨之气的话，云雨之气用什么来享用祭品呢？
English: If it is to worship the rain clouds, what will the rain clouds use to enjoy the offerings?

古文：触石而出，肤寸而合，不崇朝而辨雨天下，泰山也。
现代文：云雨之气沿着石缝蒸发出来，紧密地接合在一起，不到一早上的时间，普天下都下了雨，这是泰山上的云雨之气。
English: The rain clouds evaporated along the cracks of the stone, and they were tightly joined together. Less than one morning, it rained all over the world. This is the rain clouds on Mount Tai.

古文：泰山雨天下，小山雨国邑。
现代文：泰山的云雨之气形成的雨，能够遍及天下；小山形成的雨，只局限于一个地区。
English: The rain formed by the cloud and rain of Mount Tai can spread all over the world; the rain formed by the hill is limited to one area.

古文：然则大雩所祭，岂祭山乎？
现代文：如此说来，大雩礼所祭祀的，岂不是祭泰山吗？
English: So, is it not Mount Tai that the Grand Priory is dedicated to?

古文：假令审然，而不得也。
现代文：假使真的如此，也还是得不到雨的。
English: Even if that were true, we still wouldn't get any rain.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来检验呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：水异川而居，相高分寸，不决不流，不凿不合。
现代文：水聚集在不同的河道里，高低相差在分寸之间，不挖开堤岸，水不会流出来，不开通河道，两条河的水就不会汇合在一起。
English: Water gathers in different channels, the difference between high and low is only a few centimeters. Without digging up the embankment, the water will not flow out, without opening the channel, the water of the two rivers will not come together.

古文：诚令人君祷祭水旁，能令高分寸之水流而合乎？
现代文：如果让君主在河水旁边祷告祭祀，能使相差分寸的水流汇合吗？
English: If the monarch were to pray and offer sacrifices next to the river, would it be possible to bring the two very different streams of water together?

古文：夫见在之水，相差无几，人君请之，终不耐行。
现代文：呈现在眼前的河水，高低相差不多，君主祈求它，终究不能流出。
English: Presented in front of the river, the highs and lows are almost the same, the monarch begged it, after all, can not flow out.

古文：况雨无形兆，深藏高山，人君雩祭，安耐得之？
现代文：何况雨在降落之前无形无踪，深藏在高山上，君主举行雩祭，怎么能够求得它呢？
English: Besides, the rain is invisible before it falls. It is hidden deep in the mountains. The monarch holds a burnt offering. How can it be found?

古文：夫雨水在天地之间也，犹夫涕泣在人形中也。
现代文：雨水在天地之间，好比眼泪在人体中一样。
English: The rain falls between heaven and earth, just as tears fall on the human body.

古文：或赍酒食，请於惠人之前，出其泣，惠人终不为之陨涕。
现代文：有人把酒食送到一个仁慈的人面前并提出请求，请求他哭出泪来，那位仁慈的人终究不会为他的请求而流泪的。
English: If one brings food and drink to a merciful man and asks him to weep, the merciful man will not weep at his request.

古文：夫泣不可请而出，雨安可求而得？
现代文：眼泪不可以因请求而流出，雨怎么又可以因请求而得到呢？
English: Tears cannot be requested to flow, and how can rain be requested to fall?

古文：雍门子悲哭，孟尝君为之流涕。
现代文：雍门子悲痛地哭泣，孟尝君被感动得也哭了起来。
English: Yongmenzi cried with grief, and Meng Yuqun was moved to tears.

古文：苏秦、张仪悲说坑中，鬼谷先生泣下沾襟。
现代文：苏秦、张仪在深谷中悲哀地诉说，鬼谷先生眼泪流下沾湿了衣襟。
English: Su Qin and Zhang Yi mournfully told in the deep valley that Mr. Ghost Valley's collar was wet with tears.

古文：或者傥可为雍门之声，出苏、张之说以感天乎！
现代文：有人如果能发出雍门子那样的哭声，说出苏秦、张仪那样的话来，也许因此就能感动上天了吧？
English: If someone can cry out like Yongmenzi, say things like Su Qin and Zhang Yi, perhaps they can move heaven because of this?

古文：天又耳目高远，音气不通。
现代文：再说天的耳目又高又远，声音气息与人不相通。
English: Besides, the sky's ears and eyes are high and far away, and the sound and breath are incommunicado.

古文：杞梁之妻，又已悲哭，天不雨而城反崩。夫如是，竟当何以致雨？
现代文：杞梁的妻子已经又悲哀地痛哭，天不下雨城墙反而倒塌，如果是这样，究竟应当用什么才能招来下雨呢？
English: Yan Liang's wife had begun to weep bitterly again. If it doesn't rain, the city wall will collapse. If so, what should be used to bring rain?

古文：雩祭之家，何用感天？
现代文：鼓吹雩祭的人，以什么办法来感动上天呢？
English: By what means do those who preach the burnt offering move heaven?

古文：案月出北道，离毕之阴，希有不雨。
现代文：考察月亮出入于房宿北道，靠近毕宿的北面，很少有不下雨的。
English: The moon rises and sets in Fangsheng North Road, close to the north side of Bi-sheng, and it rarely does not rain.

古文：由此言之，北道，毕星之所在也。
现代文：因此说来，北道是毕宿所在的位置。
English: Therefore, Hokudo is the location where Bijuku is located.

古文：北道星肯为雩祭之故下其雨乎？
现代文：北道毕宿肯因为雩祭的缘故而下雨吗？
English: Is it going to rain in Bi-juku, Hokudo, because of the Bon Festival?

古文：孔子出，使子路赍雨具之时，鲁未必雩祭也。
现代文：孔子外出，让子路带雨具的时候。鲁国未必举行雩祭。
English: When Confucius goes out, let his son bring rain gear. Lu may not hold a wreath-laying ceremony.

古文：不祭，沛然自雨；不求，旷然自旸。
现代文：没有举行雩祭，雨自己仍然下得很大；没有祈求，天自己仍然很晴朗。
English: Without the burnt offering, the rain itself is still very heavy; without prayer, the sky itself is still very clear.

古文：夫如是，天之旸雨，自有时也。
现代文：如果是这样，天的晴雨，自有一定的时候。
English: If this is the case, the weather will be fine or rainy for a certain period of time.

古文：一岁之中，旸雨连属。
现代文：一年之中，晴天雨天交替出现。
English: Throughout the year, sunny and rainy days alternate.

古文：当其雨也，谁求之者？
现代文：当天下雨的时候，是谁求它下的呢？
English: When it rains, who will ask it to rain?

古文：当其旸也，谁止之者？
现代文：当天晴朗的时候，是谁禁止它不下雨的呢？
English: When it was sunny that day, who forbade it not to rain?

古文：人君听请，以安民施恩，必非贤也。
现代文：君主听从别人的请求，举行雩祭来安抚人民施以恩惠，必定不是贤良的君主。
English: A monarch who listens to the requests of others, holds a burnt offering to appease the people and bestows favors is certainly not a virtuous monarch.

古文：天至贤矣，时未当雨，伪请求之，故妄下其雨，人君听请之类也。
现代文：天是极为贤良的了，这时不应当下雨，人为地请求它下雨，因此就随便下起雨来，好比君主听从别人的请求是同样的。
English: The sky is extremely virtuous, so it should not rain at this time, artificially asking it to rain, so it will rain casually, just as the monarch obeys the request of others.

古文：变复之家，不推类验之，空张法术，惑人君。
现代文：鼓吹变复之道的人，不用类推的办法去验证它，凭空吹嘘法术，迷惑君主。
English: Those who advocate the Way of Transmutation do not need to prove it by analogy, but boast of magic out of thin air to confuse the monarch.

古文：或未当雨，而贤君求之而不得；或适当自雨，恶君求之，遭遇其时。是使贤君受空责，而恶君蒙虚名也。
现代文：或者这时不应当下雨，而贤良的君主祈求也不会下雨；或恰好上天正要下雨，凶恶的君主祈求它，正好碰上这个时候，这就使得贤良的君主受到枉然的责备，而凶恶的君主则获得虚假的名声。
English: Either it ought not to rain, and the good lord prayeth for it, and it doth not rain; or the heaven is ripe for rain, and the wicked lord prayeth for it, and it cometh to pass, and the good lord is reproved in vain, and the wicked lord hath a false name.

古文：世称圣人纯而贤者驳，纯则行操无非，无非则政治无失。
现代文：世人都声称圣人纯正而贤者不纯正。纯正则行为品德没有过失，没有过失则政治就不会失误。
English: The world claims that saints are pure and sages are impure. Pure means that there is no fault in behavior and character, and no fault means that there is no mistake in politics.

古文：然而世之圣君，莫有如尧、汤。
现代文：然而世间上的圣明君主，没有一个比得上唐尧和成汤的。
English: However, there is no saintly monarch in the world comparable to Tang Xuan and Cheng Tang.

古文：尧遭洪水，汤遭大旱。
现代文：唐尧执政时国家遭受洪水，成汤执政时国家遭受大旱。
English: When Tang Jun was in power, the country suffered from floods, and when Cheng Tang was in power, the country suffered from droughts.

古文：如谓政治所致，尧、汤恶君也；如非政治，是运气也。
现代文：如果说是由于政治所带来的，那么唐尧、成汤都是凶恶的君主了；如果不是政治带来的，那就是运行的阴阳之气引起的。
English: If it is brought about by politics, then Tang Jun and Cheng Tang are evil monarchs; if it is not brought about by politics, then it is caused by the yin and yang of operation.

古文：运气有时，安可请求？
现代文：运行的阴阳之气出现有一定的时机，怎么可以由于祭祀祷告而出现呢？
English: There is a certain time for the appearance of the operating yin and yang qi. How can it appear as a result of a ritual prayer?

古文：世之论者，犹谓尧、汤水旱。
现代文：世上论说此事的人，仍然说唐尧、成汤时的洪水和大旱。
English: The people in the world who discuss this matter still talk about the floods and droughts of Tang Dynasty and Tang Dynasty.

古文：水旱者，时也；其小旱湛，皆政也。假令审然，何用致湛。
现代文：洪水和大旱出现，是时节问题。那些小的旱涝灾害，都是政治造成的，假如果真如此，那么究竟是什么原因导致旱涝灾害的呢？
English: Floods and droughts are seasonal phenomena. Those minor droughts and floods are caused by politics. If this is true, then what causes droughts and floods?

古文：审以政致之，不修所以失之，而从请求，安耐复之？
现代文：确实是由于政治的原因导致了灾害，不去修正政治上造成的失误，而只是举行祭祀祷告，怎么能消除灾害而恢复常态呢？
English: It is true that disasters are caused by political reasons. Instead of correcting the mistakes caused by politics, how can we eliminate disasters and restore normalcy?

古文：世审称尧、汤水旱，天之运气，非政所致。
现代文：世人确实认为唐尧、成汤时的洪水和大旱，是由于上天运行的阴阳之气引起的，并不是由于政治失误导致的。
English: The world really believes that the floods and droughts of Tang Dynasty and Tang Dynasty were caused by the yin and yang of the heavens, and not by political mistakes.

古文：夫天之运气，时当自然，虽雩祭请求，终无补益。
现代文：天上运行的阴阳之气时机适当就自己形成，即使举行雩礼祭祀祷告，终究毫无补益。
English: The yin and yang qi that circulates in the heavens forms itself when the time is right. Even if you hold a puja, there is no benefit in the end.

古文：而世又称汤以五过祷於桑林，时立得雨。
现代文：世人又说成汤遭大旱时，他曾经找出自己的六种过错在桑林祈祷，当时立即就获得了雨。
English: The world also said that when Cheng Tang suffered a severe drought, he once found his six faults and prayed in the mulberry forest, and immediately received rain.

古文：夫言运气，则桑林之说绌；称桑林，则运气之论消。
现代文：如果说旱涝是自然运行的阴阳之气造成的，那么祈祷于桑林的说法就得排除；肯定祈祷于桑林的说法，那么自然运行的阴阳之气造成旱涝的看法就得取消。
English: If it is said that droughts and floods are caused by the naturally operating yin and yang, then the argument of praying in the mulberry grove must be excluded; if the argument of praying in the mulberry grove is affirmed, then the view that the naturally operating yin and yang causes droughts and floods must be canceled.

古文：世之说称者，竟当何由？
现代文：世上论说这件事的人，究竟应当遵循哪一种说法呢？
English: Who in the world is to say which version of events should be followed?

古文：救水旱之术，审当何用？
现代文：而救水旱灾害的办法，到底应当采用哪一种呢？
English: But which method should be used to save water and drought disasters?

古文：夫灾变大抵有二：有政治之灾，有无妄之变。
现代文：灾变大致有两种，有由于政治导致的灾害，有意料不到的自然灾害。
English: There are roughly two types of cataclysms: disasters caused by politics, and unexpected natural disasters.

古文：政治之灾，须耐求之，求之虽不耐得，而惠愍恻隐之恩，不得已之意也。
现代文：政治导致的灾害，应该进行祈祷。祈祷即使不能得到天的保佑，然而表示了君主对百姓的一种仁慈怜悯的恩典，不由得不那样做的意思。
English: In the calamities of politics, there should be prayer, which, though it may not obtain the blessing of heaven, yet expresses the gracious and compassionate will of the sovereign to his people.

古文：慈父之於子，孝子之於亲，知病不祀神，疾痛不和药。
现代文：慈父对于儿子，孝子对于双亲，知道有病必然祭祀神灵保佑，知道疾痛必然配药医治。
English: A loving father to his son, a filial son to his parents, knows that if there is illness, it is inevitable to offer sacrifices to the gods for blessing, and knows that if there is pain, it is inevitable to apply medicine to cure it.

古文：又知病之必不可治，治之无益，然终不肯安坐待绝，犹卜筮求崇、召医和药者，恻痛殷勤，冀有验也。
现代文：即使知道是根本无法可治的病，治疗也没有什么好处，然而终究不肯让病人安坐家中等待死亡，还是要占卜求问是什么鬼神在作怪，请来医生配药，忧伤悲痛情意恳切，希望医治能有效果。
English: Even if you know that it is an incurable disease, there is no benefit in treatment, but after all, you do not want to let the patient sit at home and wait for death. You still have to ask for divination and ask what ghosts and gods are doing. Please come to the doctor to dispense medicine. Sadness and sorrow are sincere. I hope the treatment can be effective.

古文：既死气绝，不可如何，升屋之危，以衣招复，悲恨思慕，冀其悟也。
现代文：亲人已经死亡气绝，无可奈何，还要爬上屋脊，摇动衣服招魂，悲哀悔恨思念不已，希望死者复活过来。
English: Relatives have died of exhaustion, helpless, but also climb to the roof, shake the clothes to attract the soul, sad remorse and longing, hope that the dead come back to life.

古文：雩祭者之用心，慈父孝子之用意也。
现代文：雩祭者的用心，如同慈父孝子的用意一样。
English: The intention of the officiant is the same as the intention of a loving father and son.

古文：无妄之灾，百民不知，必归於主。为政治者慰民之望，故亦必雩。
现代文：意料不到的自然灾害，老百姓不知道，必然怪罪于君主，执政的君主为了安抚民心，所以也心须举行雩祭。
English: Unexpected natural disasters, the common people do not know, must blame the monarch, the ruling monarch in order to appease the people's hearts, so also the heart must hold a burnt offering.

古文：问： 政治之灾，无妄之变，何以别之？ 
现代文：问： 政治失误引起的灾祸和意料不到的自然灾害，用什么来区别它们呢？ 
English: Q: What is the difference between disasters caused by political mistakes and unexpected natural disasters?

古文：曰：德酆政得，灾犹至者，无妄也；德衰政失，变应来者，政治也。
现代文：答：君主德行纯厚政治得当，灾害仍然出现，就是意料不到的自然灾害；君主德行衰微政治失误，灾害应和这种状况出现，就是政治引起的灾害。
English: Answer: If the monarch's moral conduct is pure and the politics is proper, and disasters still occur, it is an unexpected natural disaster; if the monarch's moral conduct is weak and the politics is faulty, and disasters should occur in such a situation, it is a disaster caused by politics.

古文：夫政治则外雩而内改，以复其亏；无妄则内守旧政，外修雩礼，以慰民心。
现代文：如果是政治引起的灾害，那就在外举行雩祭而在内修改政治，用这种办法来挽回它造成的亏损；如果是意料不到的自然灾害，那就在内坚持原有的政治，在外举行雩礼，用这种办法来安抚民心。
English: If it is a disaster caused by politics, then hold a wreath-laying ceremony outside and modify politics inside, and use this method to recover the losses caused by it; if it is an unexpected natural disaster, then adhere to the original politics inside and hold a wreath-laying ceremony outside, and use this method to appease the people's hearts.

古文：故夫无妄之气，厉世时至，当固自一，不宜改政。
现代文：意料不到的自然灾害，历代不时出现，应当坚持本身一贯的做法，不应该改变政治。
English: Unexpected natural disasters have occurred from time to time throughout history. We should stick to our own consistent practices and should not change politics.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来验证这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：周公为成王陈《立政》之言曰： 时则物有间之。自一话一言，我则末，维成德之彦，以乂我受民。 
现代文：周公为周成王陈述治理国家的道理，说： 有时灾祸会干扰政事，即使在一句话一个字上，我都没有错误，只是用有才德的人，治理好我承天命所得的百姓。 
English: Zhou Gong stated the principle of governing the country for Zhou Cheng Wang, saying: Sometimes disasters can interfere with political affairs. Even if I am not mistaken in a word, I only use talented people to govern the people I have received from heaven.

古文：周公立政，可谓得矣。
现代文：周公在用人理政方面，可算是很得体的了。
English: Zhou Gong in terms of employment management, can be considered very decent.

古文：知非常之物，不赈不至，故敕成王自一话一言，政事无非，毋敢变易。
现代文：知道异常的灾祸，不对百姓进行救济就不会消除。因此告诫周成王从一句话一个字开始，政事上没有过失，就不要轻易改变。
English: Knowing the unusual disaster, it will not be eliminated without providing relief to the people. Therefore, he cautioned Zhou Cheng Wang to start with a word by word, and if there is no fault in political affairs, do not change easily.

古文：然则非常之变，无妄之气间而至也。
现代文：然而异常的灾祸，由于意料不到的阴阳之气的干扰而出现。
English: However, an unusual calamity occurred due to the unexpected interference of yin and yang qi.

古文：水气间尧，旱气间汤。
现代文：造成水灾的阴阳之气干扰唐尧，造成旱灾的阴阳之气干扰成汤。
English: The yin and yang qi that caused the flood interfered with the Tang Dynasty, and the yin and yang qi that caused the drought interfered with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：周宣以贤，遭遇久旱。
现代文：周宣王作为一位贤君，却遭遇长时间的旱灾。
English: Zhou Xuan Wang, as a wise ruler, suffered a long drought.

古文：建初孟，北州连旱，牛死民乏，放流就贱。
现代文：汉章帝建初元年，北面三州接连大旱，耕牛死亡人民贫乏，开放流民到谷价便宜的地方求生。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the reign of Emperor Han Zang, the three northern prefectures suffered consecutive droughts, the people who died from cattle farming were poor, and the open migrants went to places where grain prices were cheap to survive.

古文：圣主宽明於上，百官共职於下，太平之明时也。
现代文：圣主在朝廷宽厚英明，百官在地方忠于职守，就是太平盛世。
English: The Holy Lord is generous and wise in the imperial court, and the officials are loyal to their duties in the localities, which is a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：政无细非，旱犹有，气间之也。
现代文：政治上没有细小的过失，旱灾还有发生，是阴阳之气干扰造成的。
English: There are no minor mistakes in politics. Droughts still occur, caused by the interference of yin and yang.

古文：圣主知之，不改政行，转谷赈赡，损酆济耗。
现代文：圣主知道这种情况，不改变政治德行，调运谷物救济百姓，运送丰收地区的粮食去救济灾区。
English: Knowing this situation, the Lord did not change His political morality, and sent grain to relieve the people, and sent grain from the harvest areas to the disaster areas.

古文：斯见之审明，所以救赴之者得宜也。
现代文：这种见解确实高明，救灾的方法是非常得当的。
English: This is indeed a wise view, and the method of disaster relief is very appropriate.

古文：鲁文公间岁大旱，臧文仲曰： 修城郭，贬食省用，务啬劝分。 
现代文：鲁文公在位时隔年一次大旱，臧文仲对鲁文公建议： 修理外城城墙，减少吃食节省费用，致力农业，奖励各人搞好本职工作。 
English: When Lu Wenzhong was on the throne, there was a big drought every other year. Zou Wenzhong suggested to Lu Wenzhong: repair the outer city wall, reduce the cost of eating, save money, commit to agriculture, and reward everyone for doing their job well.

古文：文仲知非政，故徒修备，不改政治。
现代文：臧文仲知道灾祸不是由于政治失误引起的，所以仅仅是加强预防措施，不改变政治。
English: Yu Wenzhong knew that the disaster was not caused by political mistakes, so he only strengthened preventive measures without changing politics.

古文：变复之家，见变辄归於政，不揆政之无非，见异惧惑，变易操行，以不宜改而变，只取灾焉！
现代文：鼓吹变复之道的人，见到灾变总是归罪于政治原因，不考察政治上有没有过失。见到怪异就惊惧疑惑，改变道德行为，把不应当改变的也改变了，结果只能是自取灾祸！
English: Those who advocate the path of reform and recovery always blame political causes when they see a disaster, without examining whether there is any political fault. When they see something strange, they are alarmed and doubtful, change their moral behavior, and change what should not be changed. The result can only be self-inflicted disaster!

古文：何以言必当雩也？
现代文：为什么说必定要举行雩祭呢？
English: Why is it said that there must be a burnt offering?

古文：曰：《春秋》大雩，传家、公羊、谷梁无讥之文，当雩明矣。
现代文：《春秋》上有关于雩祭的记载，作 传 的左丘明、公羊高、穀梁赤都对此没有讥刺的说法，应当雩祭是很清楚的。
English: "Spring and Autumn" has a record of the burnt offering, and the writers Zuo Quming, Gao Yanggao, and Gu Liangchao did not make sarcastic remarks about it. It is very clear that it should be a burnt offering.

古文：曾晰对孔子言其志曰： 暮春者，春服既成，冠者五六人，童子六七人，浴乎沂，风乎舞雩，咏而归。 
现代文：曾皙对孔子谈自己的志向说： 春末之时，春衣已经做好穿上，相约五六个成年人，六七个小孩子，在沂水里洗澡，在舞雩台上吹吹风，一路唱着歌走回来。 
English: Zeng Yao said to Confucius about his aspirations: At the end of spring, when the spring clothes are ready to be put on, five or six adults and six or seven children meet, take a bath in the spring water, blow the wind on the dance floor, and sing songs all the way back.

古文：孔子曰： 吾与点也！ 
现代文：孔子说： 我赞同曾点的想法！ 
English: Confucius said: I agree with Zeng Dotsu's idea.

古文：鲁设雩祭於沂水之上。暮者，晚也；春谓四月也。春服既成，谓四月之服成也。冠者、童子，雩祭乐人也。浴乎沂，涉沂水也，象龙之从水中出也。风乎舞雩，风，歌也。咏而馈，咏歌馈祭也，歌咏而祭也。
现代文：鲁国设雩祭之所在沂水旁。 暮 ，是晚的意思。 春，讲的是四月。 春服既成 ，讲的是四月的衣服已经做好了。 冠者 、 童子 ，指的是雩祭伴奏、跳舞的人。 浴乎沂 ，讲的是涉过沂水，象征从水中出来的龙。 风乎舞雩 ， 风 是讲唱歌。 咏而馈 ，是讲唱着歌用酒食雩祭，歌唱咏诵而祭祀。
English: In Lu, the place of the sacrificial feast is next to the reeds. "Twilight" means evening. "Spring" refers to April. "Spring clothes" means that the clothes for April are ready. "Champion" and "Boy" refer to the person who accompanies and dances the sacrificial feast. "Bathing" refers to wading through the reeds, symbolizing the dragon emerging from the water. "Wind" refers to dancing. "Wind" refers to singing. "Feeding the reeds" refers to eating the sacrificial feast with wine, singing and chanting, and sacrificing while singing.

古文：说论之家，以为浴者，浴沂水中也，风干身也。
现代文：解说《论语》的人，认为浴是在沂水中沐浴。风，是吹干身上。
English: Commentators of the Analects of Confucius believed that bathing was bathing in brackish water, and the wind was drying the body.

古文：周之四月，正岁二月也，尚寒，安得浴而风干身？
现代文：周历的四月，是夏历的二月，天气还在寒冷，怎么能沐浴后让风吹干身体呢？
English: April of the lunar calendar is February of the summer calendar, the weather is still cold, how can you let the wind dry your body after bathing?

古文：由此言之，涉水不浴，雩祭审矣。
现代文：由此说来，是涉水而不是沐浴，雩祭是确实的了。
English: Therefore, it is wading rather than bathing, and the burnt offering is certain.

古文：《春秋》《左氏传》曰： 启蛰而雩。 
现代文：《春秋左氏传》上说： 惊蛰时要雩祭。 
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" says: When you are frightened, you should make a burnt offering.

古文：又曰： 龙见而雩。启蛰、龙见。 皆二月也。春二月雩，秋八月亦雩。
现代文：又说： 龙星出现要雩祭 ，惊蛰与龙星出现，都在二月，春天二月雩祭，秋天八月也雩祭。
English: He also said: the appearance of the dragon and the dragon star requires a dragon sacrifice, and the appearance of the dragon and the dragon star are both in February, the spring is the February dragon sacrifice, and the autumn is the August dragon sacrifice.

古文：春祈谷雨，秋祈谷实。
现代文：春雩是为谷苗祈求雨水，秋雩是为谷穗祈求长得饱满。
English: The spring egret is praying for rain for the seedlings, and the autumn egret is praying for the ears to grow full.

古文：当今灵星，秋之雩也。
现代文：现在祭祀灵星，就是过去秋天举行的雩祭。
English: Right now, the spirit star is being worshipped, which is the reason for the dragonfly festival held last autumn.

古文：春雩废，秋雩在。故灵星之祀，岁雩祭也。
现代文：春雩废除了，秋雩还存在，所以现在对灵星的祭祀，就是每年的雩祭。
English: Spring eclipses have been abolished, but autumn eclipses still exist, so now the sacrifice to the spirit star is the annual burnt offering.

古文：孔子曰： 吾与点也！ 
现代文：孔子说： 我赞同曾点的想法。 
English: Confucius said: I agree with Zeng Dotsu's idea.

古文：善点之言，欲以雩祭调和阴阳，故与之也。使雩失正，点欲为之，孔子宜非，不当与也。
现代文：这是称赞曾点的说法，想用雩祭来调和阴阳之气，所以赞同他的想法，假如雩祭不符合正道，曾点想那样做，孔子应当反对，就不该赞同了。
English: This is a way of praising Zeng Ding. He wanted to use the burnt offering to reconcile the yin and yang, so he agreed with his idea. If the burnt offering did not conform to the righteous path, and Zeng Ding wanted to do that, Confucius should have objected and should not have agreed.

古文：樊迟从游，感雩而问，刺鲁不能崇德而徒雩也。
现代文：樊迟随孔子出游，对鲁国的雩祭有所感触而求问于孔子，这是批评鲁国不崇尚德行而光知道一再搞雩祭。
English: He was late to travel with Confucius, and asked Confucius about the sacrificial offering of Lu. This was a criticism of Lu for not advocating virtue, but knowingly repeatedly engaging in sacrificial offerings.

古文：夫雩，古而有之。
现代文：雩祭，很古以前就有的。
English: Bonfires have been around since ancient times.

古文：故《礼》曰： 雩祭，祭水旱也。 
现代文：所以《礼记》上说： 雩祭，是祭祀解除水旱灾害。 
English: Therefore, "Li Ji" said: "The burnt offering is a sacrificial rite to relieve floods and droughts.

古文：故有雩礼，故孔子不讥，而仲舒申之。
现代文：自古就有雩礼，所以孔子对此不讥刺，而董仲舒发挥了它的大义。
English: Since ancient times, there have been eulogies, so Confucius did not ridicule this, and Dong Zhongshu played its great justice.

古文：夫如是，雩祭，祀礼也。
现代文：如果是这样，雩祭，是祭祀之礼。
English: If so, the burnt offering is a ritual offering.

古文：雩祭得礼，则大水鼓用牲於社，亦古礼也。
现代文：雩祭符合礼，发大水就击鼓献上牲畜祭祀土地神，这也是符合于古礼的。
English: The burnt offering is in accordance with the rite, and when the floodwaters receded, drums were beaten to offer animal sacrifices to the god of the land, which is also in accordance with the ancient rite.

古文：得礼无非，当雩一也。
现代文：符合于礼就不会错，这是应当举行雩祭的第一条理由。
English: This is the first reason why the holocaust should be held.

古文：礼祭社，报生万物之功。
现代文：按照礼的规定，祭祀土地神，报答它生长万物的功德。
English: According to the rules of the rite, the god of the land is worshipped, and his merits of growing all things are rewarded.

古文：土地广远，难得辨祭，故立社为位，主心事之。
现代文：土地宽广遥远，难得普遍祭祀到，因此建立一个社作为供奉土地神的场所，一心一意地供奉它。
English: The land is vast and far away, and it is rare for universal sacrifices to be made there. Therefore, a shrine was established as a place to worship the land god, and to worship it wholeheartedly.

古文：为水旱者，阴阳之气也，满六合难得尽祀，故修坛设位，敬恭祈求，效事社之义，复灾变之道也。
现代文：造成水旱灾害的是阴阳之气，它充满天地之间，难得全部祭祀到，所以修建祭坛设立牌位，恭恭敬敬地祈求，仿效祭祀土地神的道理，这是消除灾害，恢复正常状况的办法。
English: It is the yin and yang energy that causes floods and droughts. It fills the space between heaven and earth, and it is rare for all the sacrifices to arrive. Therefore, building altars, setting up plaques, respectfully praying, and following the principle of sacrificing to the land god is a way to eliminate disasters and restore normal conditions.

古文：推生事死，推人事鬼。
现代文：把对待活人的办法推行于事奉死人，把对待人的办法推行于事奉鬼神。
English: The way to treat the living is to serve the dead, and the way to treat the dead is to serve the dead.

古文：阴阳精气，傥如生人能饮食乎？故共馨香，奉进旨嘉，区区惓惓，冀见答享。
现代文：阴阳精气，也许像活人一样能饮食吧，所以供奉芳香的祭品，奉献可口的祭品，诚心诚意，希望能对自己的供奉给予报答。
English: The essence of yin and yang may be able to eat and drink like a living person, so offer fragrant offerings, offer delicious offerings, be sincere, and hope to be rewarded for your offering.

古文：推祭社言之，当雩二也。
现代文：从推行祭祀社神方面说来，这是应当举行雩祭的第二条理由。
English: From the point of view of promoting the worship of the shrine's deity, this is the second reason why the wreath-laying ceremony should be held.

古文：岁气调和，灾害不生，尚犹而雩。
现代文：一年中阴阳之气调和，灾害不发生，尚且还要举行雩祭。
English: During the year, the yin and yang are in harmony, disasters do not occur, and yet the Bon Festival is still held.

古文：今有灵星，古昔之礼也。
现代文：现在祭祀灵星是依照古代的雩礼。
English: Nowadays, the worship of the spirit star is done according to the ancient rite.

古文：况岁气有变，水旱不时，人君之惧，必痛甚矣。
现代文：何况一年中阴阳之气发生了变化，水旱灾害经常出现，君主的惊惧，必然是很痛切的。
English: In addition, the yin and yang of the year have changed, floods and droughts often occur, and the monarch's shock is bound to be very painful.

古文：虽有灵星之祀，犹复雩，恐前不备，肜绎之义也。
现代文：虽然有了对灵星祭祀，仍然要再举行雩祭，唯恐只有前一项祭祀还不够周到，这就是一祭再祭的含义了。
English: Although there is a sacrifice to the spirit star, it is still necessary to hold the burnt offering again, lest only the previous sacrifice is not thoughtful enough. This is the meaning of one sacrifice after another.

古文：冀复灾变之亏，获酆穰之报，三也。
现代文：期望消除灾害带来的损失，获得庄稼丰收的报答，这是应当举行雩祭的第三条理由。
English: The third reason why the holocaust should be held is that it is hoped that the losses caused by the disaster will be eliminated and that a good harvest will be repaid.

古文：礼之心悃，乐之意欢忻。
现代文：行礼的时候心是至诚的，乐曲的节奏是欢快的。
English: When performing the salute, the heart is sincere and the rhythm of the music is cheerful.

古文：悃愊以玉帛效心，欢忻以钟鼓验意。
现代文：至诚可以用玉器丝帛来表达心意，欢快可以用钟鼓来检验诚意。
English: Sincerity can be expressed with a jade spindle, and cheerfulness can be tested with a bell and drum.

古文：雩祭请祈，人君精诚也。
现代文：雩祭祷告祈求，君主是极诚恳的。
English: The monarch is very sincere when he prays and asks for burnt offerings.

古文：精诚在内，无以效外。故雩祀尽己惶惧，关纳精心於雩祀之前，玉帛钟鼓之义，四也。
现代文：至诚的心意隐慝于内，无法表达出来，所以举行雩祭以尽量表达自己恐惧不安的心情，把自己的诚心献到雩祭台前。用玉帛钟鼓来表达祭祀的诚意，这是应当举行雩祭的第四条理由。
English: The sincerity of one's heart is hidden inside and cannot be expressed, so it is necessary to hold a wreath-laying ceremony to express one's fear and anxiety as much as possible, and to offer one's sincerity in front of the wreath-laying altar. The fourth reason why a wreath-laying ceremony should be held is to express the sincerity of the sacrifice with the tambourine and gong.

古文：臣得罪於君，子获过於父，比自改更，且当谢罪。
现代文：大臣得罪了君主，儿子对父亲犯了过错，等到自己改正时，尚且应当对自己的罪过进行道歉。
English: The minister has offended the monarch, the son has offended his father, and when he corrects himself, he should apologize for his sin.

古文：惶惧於旱，如政治所致，臣子得罪获过之类也。
现代文：君主对旱灾惶恐不安，如果旱灾是由政治所引起的，就好比大臣得罪君主和儿子对父亲犯了过错一样。
English: If the drought is caused by politics, it is as if a minister has offended the monarch and a son has offended his father.

古文：默改政治，潜易操行，不彰於外，天怒不释。故必雩祭，惶惧之义，五也。
现代文：不声不响地改变政治，暗中改变道德行为，不显露出来，上天的愤怒不会解除，所以必须举行雩祭，为表达对旱灾的惶恐不安的心意，这是应当举行雩祭的第五条理由。
English: Quietly changing politics, secretly changing moral behavior, without revealing, the wrath of heaven will not be relieved, so it is necessary to hold a holocaust, in order to express the fear and anxiety of drought, this is the fifth reason why the holocaust should be held.

古文：汉立博士之官，师弟子相呵难，欲极道之深，形是非之理也。
现代文：汉代设立博士这种官，老师学生互相责难，想要穷尽 道 的深奥，弄清是非的道理。
English: In the Han Dynasty, officials such as doctors were set up, teachers and students blamed each other, trying to exhaust the profundity of the road and clarify the truth of right and wrong.

古文：不出横难，不得从说；不发苦诘，不闻甘对。
现代文：不进行横加责难，就得不到正确的看法。不进行一再的追问，就听不到绝妙的回答。
English: Without cross-examination, there can be no right opinion; without repeated questioning, there can be no admirable answer.

古文：导才低仰，欲求裨也；砥石劘厉，欲求銛也。
现代文：摇动簸箕选择谷米，是想得到精米；用磨刀石磨刀，是想使刀刃锋利。
English: Shaking the pestle to select grain rice is to get polished rice; sharpening the knife with a sharpening stone is to make the blade sharp.

古文：推《春秋》之义，求雩祭之说，实孔子之心，考仲舒之意，孔子既殁，仲舒已死，世之论者，孰当复问？
现代文：以上议论是为了推究《春秋》的原义，寻求关于雩祭的道理，证实孔子的想法，查考董仲舒的心思。孔子已经死了，董仲舒已经死了，世间上的论述者，又应当去问谁呢？
English: The above discussion is to investigate the original meaning of "Spring and Autumn," to seek the truth about the burnt offering, to confirm the ideas of Confucius, and to investigate the thoughts of Dong Zhongshu. Confucius is dead, Dong Zhongshu is dead, and who should the world's commentators ask?

古文：唯若孔子之徒，仲舒之党，为能说之。
现代文：唯有像孔子这样的人，董仲舒这样的人，才能去解释它了。
English: Only someone like Confucius, someone like Dong Zhongshu, can explain it.

