古文：程繁问于子墨子曰： 夫子曰： 圣王不为乐。 
现代文：程繁问墨子说： 先生曾经说过： 圣王不作音乐。 
English: Cheng Huan asked Mozi, "Teacher, you once said that the Holy King does not make music.

古文：昔诸侯倦于听治，息于钟鼓之乐；士大夫倦于听治，息于竽瑟之乐；农夫春耕、夏耘、秋敛、冬藏，息于聆缶之乐。今夫子曰： 圣王不为乐。
现代文：以前的诸侯治国太劳累了，就以听钟鼓之乐的方式进行休息；士大夫工作太累了，就以听竽瑟之乐的方式进行休息；农夫春天耕种、夏天除草、秋天收获、冬天贮藏，也要借听瓦盆土缶之乐的方式休息，现在先生说： 圣王不作音乐。 
English: Former lords were too tired to govern the country, so they rested by listening to the music of bells and drums; scholars were too tired to work, so they rested by listening to the music of gongs; farmers cultivated in the spring, weeded in the summer, harvested in the fall, stored in the winter, and also rested by listening to the music of earthenware pots. Now the teacher said: The holy king does not make music.

古文：此譬之犹马驾而不税，弓张而不弛，无乃非有血气者之所不能至邪！ 
现代文：这好比马套上车后就不再卸下，弓拉开后不再放松，这恐怕不是有血气的人所能做到的吧！ 
English: It's like putting on a horse harness and not taking it off again, or pulling off a bow and not relaxing again. I'm afraid that's not something that people with a strong constitution can do!

古文：子墨子曰： 昔者尧舜有茅茨者，且以为礼，且以为乐。
现代文：墨子说： 以前尧舜只有茅草盖的屋子，所谓礼乐不过如此。
English: Mozi said, "In the past, there were only houses with thatched roofs. The so-called ceremonial music was nothing more than that.

古文：汤放桀于大水，环天下自立以为王，事成功立，无大后患，因先王之乐，又自作乐，命曰《护》，又修《九招》，武王胜殷杀纣，环天下自立以为王，事成功立，无大后患，因先王之乐，又自作乐，命曰《象》。
现代文：后来汤把桀放逐到大水，统一天下，自立为王，事成功立，没有大的后患，于是就承袭先王之乐而自作新乐，取各为《護》，又修《九招》之乐。周武王战胜殷朝，杀死纣王，统一天下，自立为王，没有了大的后患，于是袭先王之乐而自作新乐，取名为《驺虞》。
English: Later, Tang banished Gong to Dahui, unified the country, established himself as king, successfully established, and had no major problems, so he inherited the music of the former king and made his own new music, taking each as "Protection" and repairing the music of "Nine Movements." King Zhou Wu defeated the Yin Dynasty, killed King Gong, unified the country, established himself as king, and had no major problems, so he inherited the music of the former king and made his own new music, named "Dangyu."

古文：周成王因先王之乐，又自作乐，命曰《驺虞》。周成王之治天下也，不若武王；武王之治天下也，不若成汤；成汤之治天下也，不若尧舜。
现代文：周成王治理天下不如武王；周武王治理天下不如成汤；成汤治理天下不如尧舜。
English: Zhou Chengwang's governance of the world is not as good as that of King Wu; Zhou Wuwang's governance of the world is not as good as that of Cheng Tang; Cheng Tang's governance of the world is not as good as that of Gong.

古文：故其乐逾繁者，其治逾寡。
现代文：所以音乐逾繁杂的国王，他的治绩就逾少。
English: Therefore, music is more complex than the king, and his achievements are more than few.

古文：自此观之，乐非所以治天下也。 
现代文：由此看来，音乐不是用来治理天下的。 
English: From this point of view, music is not used to govern the world.

古文：程繁曰： 子曰： 圣王无乐。 
现代文：程繁说： 先生说： 圣王没有音乐。 
English: Cheng said, "The teacher said, 'The holy king has no music.

古文：此亦乐已，若之何其谓圣王无乐也？ 
现代文：但这些就是音乐，怎么能说圣王没有音乐呢？ 
English: But these are music, how can it be said that the Holy King has no music?

古文：子墨子曰： 圣王之命也，多寡之，食之利也。
现代文：墨子说： 圣王的教令：凡是太盛的东西就减损它。
English: Mozi said, "It is the edict of the holy king that anything that is too rich should be reduced.

古文：以知饥而食之者，智也，因为无智矣。
现代文：饮食于人有利，若因知道饥而吃的就算是智慧，也就无所谓智慧了。
English: Eating is good for you, but if eating because you are hungry is wisdom, it is not wisdom at all.

古文：今圣有乐而少，此亦无也。 
现代文：现在圣王虽然有乐，但却很少，这也等于没有音乐。 
English: Now, although there is music, there is very little of it, which means there is no music.

