古文：世祖纪上世祖太武皇帝，讳焘，太宗明元皇帝之长子也，母曰杜贵嫔。
现代文：世祖太武皇帝，讳称焘，太宗明元皇帝的长子，母亲叫杜贵嫔。
English: The ancestor of Emperor Taibu, known by the nickname "Dao," was the eldest son of Emperor Taizong Mingyuan, and his mother was called Du Guizhen.

古文：天赐五年生于东宫，体貌瑰异，太祖奇而悦之，曰： 成吾业者，必此子也。 
现代文：太祖天赐五年在东宫出生，体态容貌与常人大不相同，太祖十分惊奇，高兴地说： 完成我的事业的，必定是这个孩子。 
English: My great-grandfather was born in the East Palace five years ago by God's grace. His physique and appearance were very different from that of an ordinary person. My great-grandfather was very surprised and said happily, "It must be this child who will complete my career."

古文：泰常七年四月，封泰平王，五月，为监国。
现代文：泰常七年四月，被封为泰平王，五月，监理国家。
English: In April of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, he was named King Taiping, and in May, he became the supervisor of the country.

古文：太宗有疾，命帝总摄百揆，聪明大度，意豁如也。
现代文：太宗生病，命世祖总统百事，世祖聪明大度，应付裕如。
English: When Taizong fell ill, he ordered his ancestor, the president, to buy Pepsi. The ancestor was wise and generous, and coped well.

古文：八年十一月壬申，即皇帝位，大赦天下。
现代文：泰常八年十一月初九，登上皇位，大赦天下。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the 11th month of the 8th year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, he ascended the throne and was pardoned by the world.

古文：十有二月，追尊皇妣为密皇后，进司徒长孙嵩爵为北平王，司空奚斤为宜城王，蓝田公长孙翰为平阳王，其余普增爵位各有差。
现代文：十二月，世祖追尊皇母为密皇后，晋封司徒长孙嵩为北平王，司空奚斤为宜城王，蓝田公长孙翰为平阳王，其余各官普加官爵不等。
English: In December, the founder of the dynasty named the emperor's mother as the Empress Michi, the prince of Jinfu, the prince of Sidu, Sun Song, as the king of Peiping, the prince of Yicheng, Sikuo Shujin, the prince of Lantian, Sun Han, as the king of Pingyang, and the rest of the officials ranged from officials to nobles.

古文：于是除禁锢，释嫌怨，开仓库，赈穷乏，河南流民相率内属者甚众。
现代文：从此后解除各种禁锢，尽释嫌怨，开仓济民，黄河以南的流浪百姓相继归附朝廷的很多。
English: Since then, many of the wandering people south of the Yellow River have been successively annexed to the imperial court.

古文：始光元年春正月丙寅，安定王弥薨。
现代文：始光元年春季正月初四，安定王拓跋弥逝世。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：夏四月甲辰，东巡，幸大宁。
现代文：夏季四月十四日，世祖巡视东方，到了大宁。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, the eastern inspection team arrived in Daning.

古文：秋七月，车驾还宫。
现代文：秋季七月，世祖回到宫中。
English: Autumn and July, driving back to the palace.

古文：八月，蠕蠕率六万骑入云中，杀掠吏民，攻陷盛乐宫。
现代文：八月，蠕蠕率领六万骑兵侵入云中郡，屠杀掠抢吏卒百姓，攻陷盛乐宫。
English: In August, Cree Cree led 60,000 cavalrymen to invade Yunzhong County, slaughtering and looting officials and commoners, and capturing Shengle Palace.

古文：赭阳子尉普文率轻骑讨之，虏乃退走。
现代文：赭阳子尉普文率领轻骑兵讨伐，敌人退走。
English: Shanyang's lieutenant Puwen led the light cavalry to fight, and the enemy retreated.

古文：诏平阳王长孙翰等击蠕蠕别帅，破之，杀数千人，获马万余匹。
现代文：世祖下诏命平阳王长孙翰等击败蠕蠕的别帅，杀了数千人，俘获马一万多匹。
English: The patriarch issued an order to the King of Pingyang, the First Sun Han, and others to defeat the enemy soldiers, kill thousands of people, and capture more than ten thousand horses.

古文：语在《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事实记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The facts are recounted in "Creep."

古文：九月，大简舆徒，治兵于东郊，部分诸军五万骑，将北讨。
现代文：九月，整治车众，在京城东郊训练军队，调集诸军五万骑，准备北伐。
English: In September, they repaired the wagons, trained the army in the eastern suburbs of Beijing, and mobilized an army of fifty thousand horsemen to prepare for the Northern Expedition.

古文：冬十有二月，遣平阳王长孙翰等讨蠕蠕。
现代文：冬季十二月，派平阳王长孙翰等人率部讨伐蠕蠕。
English: In the winter of December, the king of Pingyang, Sun Han, and others were sent to lead the crusade against the Cormorants.

古文：车驾次祚山。蠕蠕北遁，诸军追之，大获而还。
现代文：世祖停驻祚山，蠕蠕北逃，诸军追之，大胜而归。
English: The founder of the world stopped at Lushan, fled northward, pursued by armies, and returned victorious.

古文：是年，刘义符为其臣徐羡之等所废杀，立义符弟义隆。
现代文：这一年，刘义符被其臣子徐羡之等废黜杀害，徐羡之拥立刘义符之弟刘义隆。
English: In the same year, Liu Yifu was deposed and killed by his vassal Xu Enzhi, who was supported by Liu Yifu's younger brother Liu Yilong.

古文：二年春正月己卯，车驾至自北伐，以其杂畜班赐将士各有差。
现代文：始光二年春季正月二十三日，世祖北伐归来，以其各色牲畜份额不等地分赐给从征的将士。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the spring of the second year of Zhiguang, the ancestor of the Northern Expedition returned, and his share of livestock was unequally distributed to the soldiers who followed the expedition.

古文：二月，慕容渴悉邻反于北平，攻破郡治，太守与守将击败之。
现代文：二月，慕容渴悉邻在北平反叛，攻破郡城，太守与守城将士打败了叛军。
English: In February, Murong Thirst and Neighbors rebelled in Peiping and broke through the county seat. The governor and the defenders defeated the rebels.

古文：三月丙辰，尊保母窦氏曰保太后。
现代文：三月初一，尊称保母窦氏为保太后。
English: On the first day of March, Lady Dou, the nanny of Prince Takamado, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：丁巳，以北平王长孙嵩为太尉，平阳王长孙翰为司徒，宜城王奚斤为司空。
现代文：初二，任命北平王长孙嵩为太尉，平阳王长孙翰为司徒，宜城王奚斤为司空。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Beiping Wang Changsun Song was appointed as a captain, Pingyang Wang Changsun Han was appointed as an apprentice, and Yicheng Wang Yaojin was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：庚申，营故东宫为万寿宫，起永安、安乐二殿，临望观，九华堂。
现代文：初五，营造从前的东宫为万寿宫，营建永安、安乐两座宫殿，建起临望观、九华堂。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the former East Palace was transformed into the Palace of Longevity, the two palaces of Yongan and Anle were built, and the Linyanggu and Jiuhadao were built.

古文：初造新字千余，诏曰： 在昔帝轩，创制造物，乃命仓颉因鸟兽之迹以立文字。自兹以降，随时改作，故篆隶草楷，并行于世。
现代文：确立了一千多个新字，世祖下诏书说： 过去帝轩，创立制度，营造万物，于是命令仓颉模仿鸟兽之迹创立文字，从此之后，应时改作，所以有篆隶草楷各种字体，并行于世。
English: Having established more than a thousand new characters, the ancestor issued an edict saying: In the past, the emperor created the system and created all things, so he ordered the barn owl to imitate the tracks of birds and beasts to create characters. From then on, it should be changed from time to time, so there are various fonts in the world.

古文：然经历久远，传习多失其真，故令文体错谬，会义不惬，非所以示轨则于来世也。
现代文：但是历时久远，流传下来多有失真，故致使文体错纰误漏，意义分歧，这不是示典轨于来世的办法。
English: However, it has lasted for a long time and has been passed down with many distortions, resulting in stylistic errors, omissions, and differences in meaning. This is not the way to show the canon in the afterlife.

古文：孔子曰，名不正则事不成，此之谓矣。
现代文：孔子说，名不正则事情不能成功，就说的是这些。
English: Confucius said that if the name is not right, things will not succeed. That's what he said.

古文：今制定文字，世所用者，颁下远近，永为楷式。 
现代文：今制定文字，把世间所要用的字式，颁布远近，永为楷式样本。 
English: Formulate the characters now, and promulgate the fonts that the world wants to use, from near and far, forever as an italic sample.

古文：夏四月，诏龙骧将军步堆、谒者仆射胡觐使于刘义隆。
现代文：夏季四月，世祖下诏命龙骧将军步堆、谒者仆射胡觐出使刘义隆政权。
English: In the summer of April, the patriarch issued an edict ordering the Longjing general to step down, and the Longjing general's servant to expel the envoy Liu Yilong from power.

古文：五月，诏天下十家发大牛一头，运粟塞上。
现代文：五月，下诏命天下百姓十家出大牛一头，以运送粮食到塞上。
English: In May, the emperor issued an edict ordering the people of all ten provinces to contribute one head of cattle to transport grain to Jiaxing.

古文：秋九月，永安、安乐二殿成，丁卯，大飨以落之。
现代文：秋季九月，永安、安乐两殿落成，十四日，大宴群臣共庆新殿落成。
English: In September of autumn, the Yongan and Anle halls were completed, and on the 14th, a grand banquet was held to celebrate the completion of the new hall.

古文：冬十月，治兵于西郊。
现代文：冬季十月，世祖在京城西郊调兵遣将。
English: In the winter of October, Shizu transferred troops to the western suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：癸卯，车驾北伐，平阳王长孙翰等绝漠追之。蠕蠕北走。
现代文：二十一日，世祖北伐，平阳王长孙翰等越过大漠追击敌人，蠕蠕北逃。
English: On the twenty-first day, the founder of the Northern Expedition, the King of Pingyang, Sun Han, crossed the desert to pursue the enemy, and fled northward.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事实记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：是年，赫连屈丐死，子昌僭立。
现代文：这一年，赫连屈丐逝世，子赫连昌即位。
English: In the same year, Kherian Kegui died, and his son Kherian Chang ascended to the throne.

古文：三年春正月壬申，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：始光三年正月二十二日，世祖北伐归来。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the third year of Spring, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition.

古文：班军实以赐将士，行、留各有差。
现代文：拿军用物资赏赐从征将士，出战、留守者，多少不等。
English: The amount of military supplies given to conscripted soldiers, those who went to war, and those who stayed behind varied.

古文：乞伏炽磐遣使朝贡，请讨赫连昌。
现代文：乞伏炽磐派使者前来朝拜纳贡，请求朝廷讨伐赫连昌。
English: Beggar Blazing Rock sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, and requested the imperial court to invade Herengchang.

古文：二月，起太学于城东，祀孔子，以颜渊配。
现代文：二月，在京城东部建太学，祭祀孔子，以颜渊配享。
English: In February, Taigaku was built in the eastern part of the capital, and Confucius was worshipped and Yanbyun was distributed.

古文：夏五月辛卯，中山公元纂进爵为王，南安公元素复先爵常山王。
现代文：夏季五月十三日，中山公元纂晋升爵位为王，南安公元素恢复先前的爵位常山王。
English: On the 13th day of May in summer, Zhongshan was promoted to the title of king, and Nan'an Gongye restored the previous title of King of Changshan.

古文：六月，幸云中旧宫，谒陵庙；西至五原，田于阴山；东至和兜山。
现代文：六月，世祖巡视云中旧宫，拜谒陵园庙宇；向西到了五原，在阴山打猎；东面到了和兜山。
English: In June, the ancestor inspected the old palace in Yunzhong, and the temples of the cemetery; he went to the west to the Five Plains and hunted in the gloomy mountains; he went to the east to the mountains.

古文：秋七月，筑马射台于长川，帝亲登台观走马；王公诸国君长驰射，中者赐金锦缯絮各有差。
现代文：秋季七月，在长川筑马射台，世祖亲自登上台观看跑马；王公及各国君跑马射箭，中的各赐给不等的金锦缯絮。八月，世祖回到宫中。
English: In the autumn, in July, at the Nagakawa Tsukuba Horse Shooting Range, Shiso himself climbed onto the stage to watch the horses run; princes and kings from all over the world ran horses and shot arrows, and each of them gave varying amounts of gold brocade. In August, Shiso returned to the palace.

古文：八月，车驾还宫。
现代文：刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：刘义隆遣使朝贡。帝以屈丐既死，诸子相攻，九月，遣司空奚斤率义兵将军封礼、雍州刺史延普袭蒲坂，宋兵将军周几率洛州刺史于栗磾袭陕城。
现代文：世祖因屈丐死后，他的几个儿子互相攻击，九月，派司空奚斤率领义兵将军封礼、雍州刺史延普袭击蒲坂，宋兵将军周几率领洛州刺史于栗石单袭击陕城。
English: After the death of the founder of the dynasty, several of his sons attacked each other. In September, he sent the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army, the general of the volunteer army,

古文：冬十月丁巳，车驾西伐，幸云中，临君子津。
现代文：冬季十月十一日，世祖西伐，到了云中，抵达君子津。
English: On the 11th day of October in winter, the ancestor of the westward march, arrived in the clouds and arrived in Juncizu.

古文：会天暴寒，数日冰结。
现代文：正逢天气突然寒冷，没几天津口的冰就结了起来。
English: The weather suddenly turned cold, and within a few days the ice in Tsuguchi froze solid.

古文：十有一月戊寅，帝率轻骑二万袭赫连昌。壬午，至其城下，徙万余家而还。
现代文：十一月初三，世祖率领两队轻骑袭击赫连昌，初七，攻到其城下，把其民户二万余家搬徙回国。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Shizuo led two teams of light cavalry to attack Helianchang. On the seventh day of the first month, he attacked the city and moved more than 20,000 households back to the country.

古文：语在《昌传》。
现代文：事实记录在《赫连昌传》中。
English: The facts are recorded in "Herenchang Biography."

古文：至祚山，班所虏获以赐将士各有差。
现代文：到了祚山，把所俘获的财物分别赐给众将士。
English: When he arrived at Lushan, he gave the captured goods to the soldiers.

古文：奚斤未至蒲坂，昌守将赫连乙升弃城西走。
现代文：奚斤的军马还没到蒲坂，赫连昌的守城将领赫连乙升便弃城西逃。
English: Before the horse-drawn chariots arrived at Busaka, Herengchang's garrison commander, Hereng Yitseng, fled west of the city.

古文：昌弟助兴守长安，乙升复与助兴自长安西走安定。
现代文：赫连昌的弟弟助兴据守长安，乙升又与赫连助兴一道从长安向安定逃去。
English: Helianchang's younger brother, Juxing, was in charge of Chang'an, and Yixing and Helianjuxing fled from Chang'an to the stable together.

古文：奚斤遂入蒲坂。
现代文：奚斤于是进入蒲坂。
English: As a result, 斤 moved to Gamasaka.

古文：十有二月，诏斤西据长安。
现代文：十二月，世祖下诏让奚斤据守长安。
English: In December, the ancestor issued an edict to let Xujin take over the defense of Chang'an.

古文：秦雍氐、羌皆叛昌诣斤降。
现代文：秦、雍的氐人、羌人都叛离赫连昌到奚斤这里归降。
English: Qin and Yong's Qin people and Qin people all rebelled from Helianchang and came to Shujin to surrender.

古文：武都氐王杨玄及沮渠蒙逊等皆遣使内附。
现代文：武都氐王杨玄以及沮渠蒙逊等都派使者请求归附。
English: Yang Xuan, the king of Wudang, and Mengxun, the governor of Chu, both sent envoys to request annexation.

古文：四年春正月乙酉，车驾至自西伐，赐留台文武生口、缯帛、马牛各有差。
现代文：始光四年春季正月十一日，世祖西伐归来，赐给留守文武官员隶户生口、锦缎、牛马不等。
English: On the 11th day of the 1st month of the spring of the 4th year of Shiguang, the ancestor of the Western Expedition returned, and gave the remaining civil and military officials household gifts, brocade, cattle and horses.

古文：从人在道多死，其能到都者才十六七。
现代文：从征的士卒在路途上死去的很多，能够最后坚持到都城的人只有十分之六七。
English: Many of the enlisted soldiers died on the way, and only 67 out of 10 were able to make it to the capital.

古文：己亥，行幸幽州。
现代文：二十五日，世祖到了幽州。
English: On the 25th, the parade arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：赫连昌遣其弟平原公定率众二万向长安。
现代文：赫连昌派其弟平原公赫连定率领二万人马向长安进发。
English: He Lianchang sent his brother, Pingyuan Gonghe Lianding, to lead 20,000 men to Chang'an.

古文：帝闻之，乃遣就阴山伐木，大造攻具。
现代文：世祖听说，便派人在阴山伐木，大造攻城器具。
English: When the patriarch heard of this, he sent men to the mountains to cut down trees and build siege engines.

古文：二月，车驾还宫。
现代文：二月，世祖车驾回到宫中。
English: In February, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：三月丙子，遣高凉王礼镇长安。
现代文：三月初三，世祖派高凉王拓跋礼镇守长安。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third month, the founder sent Gao Liang Wang Tuoba Li to guard Chang'an.

古文：诏执金吾桓贷造桥于君子津。
现代文：下诏命执金吾桓贷在君子津造桥。
English: The following edict ordered the execution of King Kanren to build a bridge in Junjitsu.

古文：丁丑，广平王连薨。
现代文：初四，广平王拓跋连逝世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Guangping King Tuoba died.

古文：夏四月丁未，诏员外散骑常侍步堆、谒者仆射胡觐等使于刘义隆。
现代文：夏季四月初四，世祖下诏命员外散骑常侍步堆、谒者仆射胡觐等出使刘义隆政权。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Liu Yilong issued an imperial edict to dispatch the Liu Yilong regime.

古文：是月，治兵讲武，分诸军，司徒长孙翰、廷尉长孙道生、宗正娥清三万骑为前驱，常山王素、太仆丘堆、将军元太毗步兵三万为后继，南阳王伏真、执金吾桓贷、将军姚黄眉步兵三万部攻城器械，将军贺多罗精骑三千为前候。
现代文：这个月，整治军队讲习武备，部署诸军，司徒长孙翰、廷尉长孙道生、宗正娥清等率领三万人为先头部队，常山王拓跋素、太仆丘堆、将军元太毗率步兵三万为后继，南阳王拓跋伏真、执金吾桓贷、将军姚黄眉率领步兵三万护送攻城器械，将军贺多罗率领精锐骑兵三千人为前部侦察。
English: This month, to rectify the army, the military preparedness was studied and deployed. The army was led by the thirty thousand soldiers led by the commander-in-chief Sun Han, the captain-in-chief Sun Daosheng, the courtier-in-chief Sun Daosheng, and the general Zong Zheng'eqing. The thirty thousand infantry soldiers led by Changshan King Tuoba Su, Taipu Qudui, and the general Yuan Taibi were the successors. The thirty thousand infantry soldiers led by Nanyang King Tuoba Fuzhen, the commander-in-chief Jin Wu Huan Guan, and the general Yao Huang Mei escorted the siege equipment.

古文：五月，车驾西讨赫连昌。
现代文：五月，世祖西讨赫连昌。
English: In May, He Zu Xi held a meeting with He Lianchang.

古文：辛巳，济君子津。
现代文：初九，渡过君子津。
English: All of a sudden, Tuobao and his party set out from Junzizu to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：三城胡酋鹊子相率内附。
现代文：三城的胡酋鹊子相继归顺朝廷。
English: The imperial princes of the three cities successively surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：帝次拔邻山，筑城，舍辎重，以轻骑三万先行。
现代文：世祖停驻在拔邻山，筑城，放弃笨重的物资，以轻锐骑兵三万人先行。
English: The founder of the world stopped at Bajiao Mountain, built a city, abandoned bulky materials, and marched ahead with 30,000 light cavalry.

古文：戊戌，至于黑水，帝亲祈天告祖宗之灵而誓众焉。
现代文：二十六日，到了黑水，世祖亲自祈天祷告祖宗神灵保此次行动，歃血誓师。
English: On the 26th, when they arrived in Heishui, the patriarch himself prayed to the heavens to pray for the protection of the ancestor's spirit during this action, and swore an oath of bloodshed.

古文：六月甲辰，昌引众出城，大破之。事在《昌传》。
现代文：六月初二，赫连昌率部出城，被世祖打得大败。事见《赫连昌传》。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, He Lianchang led his troops out of the city and was soundly defeated by Shizu. See "The Biography of He Lianchang."

古文：昌将麾下数百骑西南走，奔上邽。诸军乘胜追至城北，死者万余人，临阵杀昌弟河南公满及其兄子蒙逊。
现代文：赫连昌领着亲信数百名骑兵向西南方向逃窜而去，逃到上絡，各军乘胜追到城北，死者一万多人，在阵前世祖军队杀死赫连昌之弟河南公赫连满以及其兄之子赫连蒙逊。
English: He Lianchang led hundreds of cavalrymen to flee to the southwest and fled to Shangluo. The armies took advantage of the victory and chased them to the north of the city. More than 10,000 people died. In the battle of the previous generation, the ancestral army killed He Lianchang's brother, Henan Gongherenman, and his brother's son, He Lianmonson.

古文：会日暮，昌尚书仆射问至拔城，夜将昌母出走。
现代文：当时天色已晚，昌尚书仆射问至攻破城池，乘夜把赫连昌的母亲挟带而去。
English: At that time, it was late in the day, and Chang Shang's servant asked to break through the city, and took Heren Chang's mother away in the night.

古文：乙巳，车驾入城，虏昌君弟及其诸母、姊妹、妻妾、宫人万数，府库珍宝车旗器物不可胜计，擒昌尚书王买、薛超等及司马德宗将毛分之、秦雍人士数千人，获马三十余万匹，牛羊数千万。
现代文：初三，世祖入城，俘虏赫连昌的弟弟及其母亲、姊妹、妻妾、宫人万余人，缴获府库中的珍宝车旗各种器物不可胜数，擒获赫连昌的尚书王买、薛超等人以及司马德宗的将领毛修之、秦雍二州的人士数千人，缴获马匹三十多万匹，牛羊数千万头。
English: On the third day of the first month, the ancestor entered the city, captured more than ten thousand brothers, mothers, sisters, wives, concubines, and courtiers of Helianchang, seized countless treasures, banners, and various objects in the government treasury, captured thousands of people such as Shang Shu Wangmai, Xue Chao, and the generals Mao Xiuzhi and Qin Yong Erzhou from Helianchang, seized more than three hundred thousand horses, and tens of millions of cattle and sheep.

古文：以昌宫人及生口、金银、珍玩、布帛班赍将士各有差。
现代文：世祖把俘获宫人及生口、金银珍玩、布帛分别赐给众将士。
English: The founder of the dynasty gave the captured palace guards and their families, gold and silver treasures, and cloth bags to the soldiers.

古文：昌弟平原公定拒司空奚斤于长安城，娥清率骑五千讨之，西走上邽。
现代文：赫连昌的弟弟平原公赫连定在长安城迎战司空奚斤，娥清率领五千骑兵讨伐他们，敌人西逃上絡。
English: He Lianchang's younger brother, Pingyuan Gonghe Lianding, led 5,000 cavalry under the command of E Qing to fight against Sikuo Shujin in Chang'an City. The enemy fled to the west.

古文：辛酉，班师，留常山王素、执金吾桓贷镇统万。
现代文：初七，班师回朝，世祖留常山王拓跋素、执金吾桓贷镇守统万城。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, the class teacher returned to the imperial court, and the founder of the school, King Tuoba of Changshan, and the ruler of Jinwu Huanqian Town, became the guardian of the imperial capital.

古文：秋七月己卯，筑坛于祚岭，戏马驰射，赐射中者金锦缯絮各有差。
现代文：秋季七月初七，在祚岭筑坛，戏马射箭，世祖赐给射中的人金银锦帛各有不同。
English: In autumn, on the seventh day of the seventh month of the seventh month, there are different ways to build the altar in Fuling, play horse archery, and give gold and silver brocades to those who are shot by the ancestors.

古文：蠕蠕寇云中，闻破赫连昌，惧而还走。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯云中，听说朝廷军队打败了赫连昌，害怕了，举兵撤退。
English: Crouching in the clouds, he heard that the imperial army had defeated Helianchang. He was afraid and withdrew his troops.

古文：八月壬子，车驾至自西伐，饮至策勋，告于宗庙，班军实以赐留台百僚，各有差。
现代文：八月十一日，世祖西征归来，大宴功臣，告祀宗庙，把缴获的战利品分等级赐给留守的文武官员，各人数量不等。
English: On August 11, the founder of the Western Expedition returned, held a grand banquet for his meritorious vassals, announced the dedication of the ancestral temple, and awarded the captured trophies to the remaining civil and military officials, the number of each person varying.

古文：九月丁酉，安定民举城归降。
现代文：九月二十六日，安定城民献出城池，归顺朝廷。
English: On September 26, the citizens of the stable city surrendered the city and submitted to the imperial court.

古文：冬十有一月，以氐王杨玄为都督荆梁益宁四州诸军事、假征南大将军、梁州刺史、南秦王。
现代文：冬季十一月，世祖任命氐王杨玄为都督荆梁益宁四州诸军事、假征南大将军、梁州刺史、南秦王。
English: In the winter of November, the ancestor appointed Yang Xuan, the king of Zhai, as the governor of Jing, Liang, and Yining, the four states of military, the false general of the South, the prince of Liang, and the king of the South Qin.

古文：十有二月，行幸中山，守宰贪污免者十数人。
现代文：十二月，世祖出巡中山，州郡长官因贪污被免除职务的有十几个人。
English: In December, the patriarch went on a tour of Zhongshan. More than a dozen state and county governors were removed from office for corruption.

古文：癸卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：初四，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 25th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：复所过田租之半。
现代文：免除所经州县田租的一半。
English: Half of the land rent paid by the state and county is exempted.

古文：神元年春正月，以天下守令多行非法，精选忠良悉代之。
现代文：神元年春季正月，因天下郡守县令多干非法的事，世祖精选忠诚贤良的人取代他们。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：辛未，京兆王黎薨。
现代文：初二，京兆王拓跋黎逝世。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, King Tuoba died.

古文：二月，改元。
现代文：二月，改年号。
English: February, New Year's Day.

古文：赫连昌退屯平凉。
现代文：赫连昌退守平凉。
English: Herenchang retreated to Pingliang.

古文：司空奚斤进军安定。将军丘堆为昌所败，监军侍御史安颉出战，擒昌。
现代文：司空奚斤进军安定，将军丘堆被赫连昌打败，监军侍御史安颉出战，擒获了赫连昌。
English: Sikyong Shujin marched into the stable, General Qiu Dui was defeated by Herenchang, and the overseer of the army, the attendant Shi Anhui, went into battle and captured Herenchang.

古文：昌余众立昌弟定为王，走还平凉。
现代文：赫连昌的残余部队拥立赫连昌的弟弟赫连定为王，逃归平凉。
English: The remnants of Herengchang's army proclaimed Herengchang's younger brother Hereng as king and fled back to Pingliang.

古文：三月癸酉，诏侍中古弼迎赫连昌。
现代文：三月初五，世祖下诏命侍中古弼迎接赫连昌。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month, the ancestor issued an edict ordering the attendants of the Middle Temple to welcome He Lianchang.

古文：辛巳，弼等以昌至于京师。
现代文：十三日，古弼与赫连昌一道进入京城。
English: On the 13th, Gu Yao and He Lianchang entered the capital together.

古文：司空奚斤追定于平凉马髦岭，为定所擒。
现代文：司空奚斤在平凉马髦岭追击赫连定，被赫连定擒获。
English: Sikuo Shujin chased Herengding in Pingliang Mashiling and was captured by Herengding.

古文：丘堆先守辎重在安定，闻斤败，弃甲东走蒲坂。
现代文：丘堆先在安定护守军需辎重，听说奚斤失败，放弃兵甲东逃蒲坂。
English: Hill heap first in the stable to protect the military needs of the heavy, heard that he was defeated, abandoning the military to escape to the east of the hill.

古文：帝闻大怒，诏安颉斩堆。
现代文：世祖听说此事大为恼怒，下诏命安颉斩了丘堆。
English: When the patriarch heard of this, he was greatly angered and gave the order to An Xun to cut down the mound.

古文：夏四月，赫连定遣使朝贡，帝诏谕之。
现代文：夏季四月，赫连定派使者前来朝拜纳贡，世祖下诏抚慰。
English: In the summer of April, Heren sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, and the patriarch sent a message of consolation.

古文：壬子，西巡。
现代文：十五日，世祖西巡。
English: On the 15th, the Western Patrol left.

古文：戊午，田于河西。
现代文：二十一日，世祖到黄河以西打猎。
English: On the twenty-first day, the ancestor went to the west of the Yellow River to hunt.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：南秦王扬玄遣使朝贡。
现代文：南秦王杨玄派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Yang Xuan, king of Southern Qin, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：六月丁酉，并州胡酋卜田谋反伏诛，余众不安。
现代文：六月初一，并州胡酋长卜田因谋反被诛杀，其部众惶惶不安。
English: On the first day of June, Yuanzhou Hu chieftain Putian was killed for plotting a rebellion, and his followers were in a state of panic.

古文：诏淮南公王倍斤镇虑虒，抚慰之。
现代文：世祖下诏命淮南公王倍斤镇守虑羋，抚慰他们。
English: The founder of the dynasty ordered the Prince of Huainan, Bai Jianzhen, to keep an eye on them and comfort them.

古文：甲寅，行幸长川。
现代文：十八日，世祖巡视长川。
English: On the 18th, the patriarch made an inspection tour of Nagakawa.

古文：秋七月，车驾还宫。
现代文：秋季七月，世祖车驾还宫。
English: Autumn and July, driving back to the palace.

古文：八月，东幸广宁，临观温泉。
现代文：八月，世祖东至广宁，观赏温泉。
English: In August, from Shizu Higashi to Guangning, enjoy the hot springs.

古文：以太牢祭黄帝、尧、舜庙。
现代文：用牛、羊、猪太牢之礼祭祀黄帝、尧、舜庙。
English: Temples of the Yellow Emperor, the Dragon Emperor and the Dragon Emperor are worshipped with the etiquette of Taiji.

古文：蠕蠕大檀遣子将万余骑入塞。
现代文：蠕蠕的大檀派儿子率领万余名骑兵进入皇魏境内。
English: More than 10,000 cavalry entered the territory of the imperial Wei dynasty, led by the sons of the Great Dan faction.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：上郡休屠胡酋金崖率部内属。
现代文：上郡休屠胡酋长金崖率部属归顺朝廷。
English: Shang County Xiu Tuo Hu chief Jin Yap's headquarters was subordinated to the imperial court.

古文：九月，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月，世祖车驾回宫。
English: In September, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：上洛巴渠泉午触等万余家内附。
现代文：上洛巴头领泉午触等率万余家归顺朝廷。
English: More than 10,000 families, including the head of the Shangloba and the leader of the Quanpo, submitted to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月甲辰，北巡。
现代文：冬季十月初十，世祖出巡北方。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of winter, the ancestor went on a tour to the north.

古文：壬子，田于牛川。
现代文：十八日，在牛川打猎。
English: On the 18th, I went hunting in Ushikawa.

古文：刘义隆淮北镇将王仲德遣步骑二千余入寇济阳、陈留。
现代文：刘义隆淮北镇将王仲德派骑步兵二千多人侵犯济阳、陈留。
English: Liu Yilong invaded Jiyang and Chenlu with more than 2,000 cavalry and infantry sent by Wang Zhongde from Huaibei Town.

古文：是月，车驾还宫。
现代文：这个月，世祖回到宫中。
English: This month, Shizu returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：闰月辛巳，义隆又遣将王玄谟、兗州刺史竺灵秀步骑二千人寇荥阳，将袭虎牢。
现代文：闰月十七日，刘义隆政权又派将领王玄谟、兖州刺史竺灵秀率领骑步兵二千人侵犯荥阳，准备偷袭虎牢。
English: On the 17th day of the leap month, Liu Yilong's regime also sent two thousand cavalry and infantry under the command of generals Wang Xuanmu and Zhangzhou Zhishi and Lingxiu to invade Fenyang and prepare to raid the Tiger's Stronghold.

古文：豫州遣军逆击，走之。
现代文：豫州派军队击退了敌人。
English: Yuzhou sent troops to repel the enemy.

古文：上郡屠各隗诘归率万余家内属。
现代文：上郡屠各人隗诘归率领万余家归附朝廷。
English: Shang County, led by Tu Gui and more than 10,000 families, was annexed to the imperial court.

古文：定州丁零鲜于台阳、翟乔等二千余家叛入西山，劫掠郡县。州军讨之，失利。
现代文：定州丁零人鲜于台阳、翟乔等二千多家叛入西山，劫掠境内各郡县，州军前去讨伐，失利。
English: More than two thousand people from Dingye, Dingzhou, including Taiyang and Shijiao, invaded Xishan, plundered every county and county in the territory, and the state army went to fight, but failed.

古文：诏镇南将军、寿光侯叔孙建击之。
现代文：世祖下诏让镇南将军、寿光侯叔孙建前去征讨。
English: The ancestor issued an edict to let General Zhenan and Shuguang Hou's uncle Sun Jian go to the front to fight.

古文：十有一月，行幸河西，大校猎。
现代文：十一月，世祖巡视黄河西部，大规模围猎。
English: In November, the ancestors toured the western part of the Yellow River and conducted a large-scale hunt.

古文：十有二月甲申，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月二十一日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On December 21, Shizu returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是岁，皇子晃生。
现代文：这一年，皇子拓跋晃出生。
English: In the same year, Prince Takubaku was born.

古文：乞伏炽磐死，子暮末僭立。
现代文：乞伏炽磐去世，儿子暮末登位。
English: 乞伏炽磐 passed away, and his son ascended to the throne at the end of his life.

古文：沮渠蒙逊遣使朝贡。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Mengsung envoys paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：二年春正月，赫连定弟酒泉公俊自平凉来奔。
现代文：神二年春季正月，赫连定之弟酒泉公赫连俊从平凉前来投奔朝廷。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of the Jin Dynasty, Jiuquan Gong Kherianjun, the younger brother of Kherian Ding, came from Pingliang to the imperial court.

古文：丁零鲜于台阳等归罪，诏赦之。
现代文：丁零人鲜于台阳等服罪，世祖下诏赦免了他。
English: Ding Ziren had just served his sentence in Taiyang, and the patriarch pardoned him with an imperial edict.

古文：二月，上党李禹聚众杀太守，自称无上王，署置将帅。
现代文：二月，上党人李禹聚众杀了太守，自称为无上王，设置将帅。
English: In February, Li Yu, a high-ranking member of the party, gathered a crowd and killed the supreme governor, calling himself the supreme king and setting up the position of commander-in-chief.

古文：河内守将击破之。
现代文：河内守将打败了他。
English: Hanoi's goalkeeper will beat him.

古文：禹亡走入山，为人执送，斩之。
现代文：李禹逃入深山，被人绑缚送到官府，被杀。
English: Li Yu fled into the mountains, was tied up and taken to the government office, where he was killed.

古文：夏四月，治兵于南郊。
现代文：夏季四月，世祖在南郊整治兵卒。
English: In the summer of April, Shizu went to the southern suburbs to train soldiers.

古文：刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：刘义隆派使者前来朝贡。
English: Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：庚寅，车驾北伐，以太尉、北平王长孙嵩，卫尉、广陵公楼伏连留守京师，从东道与长孙翰等期会于贼庭。
现代文：二十九日，世祖开始北伐，命太尉、北平王长孙嵩，卫尉、广陵公楼伏连留守平城，自己从东道出发，与长孙翰相约在柔然汗国的王庭会师。
English: On the 29th, King Sejong began the Northern Expedition. His second-in-command, King Peiping's eldest grandson Song, his bodyguard, and Guangling Gonglou Furen stayed in Pingcheng. He set out from the host city and made an appointment with his eldest grandson Han to meet his mentor Wang Ting in Juran Khanate.

古文：五月丁未，次于沙漠。舍辎重，轻骑兼马，至栗水。蠕蠕震怖，焚烧庐舍，绝迹西走。
现代文：五月十六日，世祖到达沙漠，放弃所有军需辎重，亲自率领轻骑和备用马匹杀到栗水，蠕蠕震惊慌乱，焚烧自家房舍之后，绝迹西逃。
English: On May 16, Shizu arrived in the desert, gave up all military supplies, personally led light cavalry and spare horses to kill chestnuts, was shocked and panicked, burned his own house, and fled to the west.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：是月，赫连定来侵统万，东至侯尼城而还。
现代文：这个月，赫连定前来侵犯统万城，东至侯尼城然后就回去了。
English: This month, He Lianding came to invade Tongwan City, east to Houni City and then went back.

古文：秋七月，车驾东辕。
现代文：秋季七月，世祖率大军向东回国。
English: In the autumn, in July, Shiso led a large army back to the east.

古文：至黑山，校数军实，班赐王公将士各有差。
现代文：到了黑山，把缴获的战利品依照等级分给从征的将校们。
English: When they arrived in Montenegro, they divided the captured booty according to rank among the conscript officers.

古文：八月，帝以东部高车屯巳尼陂，诏左仆射安原率骑万余讨之。
现代文：八月，世祖因东部高车屯驻在已尼陂，下诏命左仆射安原率领万余名骑兵讨伐他们。
English: In August, Shizu ordered his left-hand man, Yasuhara Sakakibara, to lead more than 10,000 cavalrymen to fight against the Eastern Highlanders who were stationed in Ennio.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：冬十月，振旅凯旋于京师，告于宗庙。
现代文：冬季十月，大军凯旋至京城，告祀宗庙。
English: In the winter of October, he led the army in a triumphant return to the capital. He also made an offering to his ancestral temple.

古文：列置新民于漠南，东至濡源，西暨五原、阴山，竟三千里。
现代文：把柔然、高车各部落降附的老百姓迁徙到漠南，安置在东至濡源，西至五原、阴山的三千多里广阔的草原上。
English: The common people of the Zhuoran and Gaochang tribes were moved to the south of the desert and settled on the vast grassland of more than three thousand miles from the east to the source of water, from the west to the Wuhuan and the Yinshan.

古文：诏司徒平阳王长孙翰、尚书令刘洁、左仆射安原、侍中古弼镇抚之。
现代文：世祖下诏命司徒平阳王长孙翰、尚书令刘洁、左仆射安原、侍中古弼镇抚他们。
English: The founder of the dynasty ordered the scribes, King Pingyang, the eldest son, Sun Han, the secretary, Liu Jie, the left-hand servant, Sha'an Yuan, and the second-in-command, Gu Yao, to subdue them.

古文：十有一月，西巡狩，田于河西，至祚山而还。
现代文：十一月，世祖到西部狩猎，到了黄河西部，至祚山折回。
English: In November, the ancestor went hunting in the west, went to the west of the Yellow River, and returned to Lushan.

古文：三年春正月庚子，车驾还宫。
现代文：神三年春季正月十三日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the third year of the Spring, the emperor returned to the court.

古文：壬寅，大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：癸卯，行幸广宁，临温泉，作《温泉之歌》。
现代文：十六日，世祖到广宁寺，观临温泉，撰《温泉之歌》。
English: On the 16th, the ancestor went to Guangning Temple, visited the hot spring, and wrote "The Song of the Hot Spring."

古文：二月丁卯，司徒、平阳王长孙翰薨。
现代文：二月初十，司徒、平阳王长孙翰逝世。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Sun Han, the King of Pingyang, passed away.

古文：戊辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：三月壬寅，进会稽公赫连昌为秦王。
现代文：三月十六日，晋升会稽公赫连昌为秦王。
English: On March 16th, He Lianchang was crowned the King of Qin.

古文：癸卯，云中、河西敕勒千余家叛。
现代文：十七日，云中、河西敕勒人一千多家反叛。
English: On the 17th, more than a thousand people from Yunzhong and Jule in Hexi rebelled.

古文：尚书令刘洁追灭之。
现代文：尚书令刘洁追杀消灭了他们。
English: Shang Shu ordered Liu Jie to chase and destroy them.

古文：帝闻刘义隆将寇边，乃诏冀、定、相三州造船三千艘，简幽州以南戍兵集于河上以备之。
现代文：世祖听说刘义隆准备侵犯边境，于是下诏命冀、定、相三州造船三千艘，调集幽州以南守边士卒在黄河边严阵以待。
English: The Emperor heard that Liu Yilong was preparing to invade the border, so he issued an edict to build three thousand ships in the three states of Ji, Ding and Sang, and mobilized the border guards south of Yuzhou to wait on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：夏四月甲子，行幸云中。
现代文：夏季四月八日，世祖巡视云中。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of summer, the journey reaches the clouds.

古文：敕勒万余落叛走。
现代文：敕勒被迁徙的一万多个居民点叛离逃走。
English: More than ten thousand settlements in Hule were displaced and fled.

古文：诏尚书封铁追讨灭之。
现代文：世祖下诏让尚书封铁追杀消灭他们。
English: The patriarch ordered Shang Shufeng to pursue and exterminate them.

古文：五月戊戌，诏曰： 夫士之为行，在家必孝，处朝必忠，然后身荣于时，名扬后世矣。
现代文：五月十二日，世祖下诏书说： 大凡士人的行为，在家必要孝顺父母，在朝必定忠于君主，然后方能身家荣耀于当时，美名扬于后世。
English: On May 12th, the patriarch issued an imperial edict saying, "The actions of ordinary people are of great importance. At home, it is necessary to be filial to one's parents. In the morning, one must be loyal to the monarch. Then, one will be able to gain glory at that time and fame in the future.

古文：近遣尚书封铁翦除亡命，其所部将士有尽忠竭节以殒躯命者，今皆追赠爵号；或有蹈锋履难以自效者，以功次进位；或有故违军法私离幢校者，以军法行戮。
现代文：朕最近派尚书封铁消灭亡命之徒，他所统领的将士有竭尽忠节而牺牲了的，现在全部追赠爵号；如有奋勇杀敌立下战功的，以其功劳大小给予官位；如有故意违反军法私离岗位的，以军法处决。
English: Recently, I sent Shang Shufeng to exterminate the outlaws. All the soldiers under his command who have been loyal and sacrificed are now posthumously awarded the title of knight; those who have fought bravely and killed the enemy are given official positions according to their merits; those who have deliberately violated the military law and left their posts are executed according to the military law.

古文：夫有功蒙赏，有罪受诛，国之常典，不可暂废。
现代文：大凡有功蒙受赏赐，有罪遭到诛杀，这是国家的常典，不可有一时废置。
English: Great achievements are rewarded, and the guilty are killed. This is the country's rulebook, and it must not be discarded.

古文：自今以后，不善者可以自改。
现代文：从今以后，不善的人可以改过自新。
English: From now on, bad people can be reformed.

古文：其宣敕内外，咸使闻知。 
现代文：把这宣告天下，让人们都知道此事。 
English: Put it out there, let people know about it.

古文：六月，诏平南大将军、假丹阳王太毗屯于河上，以司马楚之为安南大将军、琅邪王，屯颍川。
现代文：六月，世祖下诏命平南大将军、假丹阳王太毗屯军黄河上，命司马楚之为安南大将军、琅笽王，驻军颍川。
English: In June, the patriarch issued an edict ordering General Pingnan and the fake Danyang King Taibin to garrison the troops on the Yellow River, and ordering General Ma Chu to garrison the troops on the Yellow River.

古文：秋七月己亥，诏曰： 昔太祖拨乱，制度草创；太宗因循，未遑改作，军国官属，至乃阙然。
现代文：秋季七月十五，世祖下诏书说： 过去太祖拨乱反正，草创各种制度，太宗因循，未及改作，军队国家为官原则各项制度，至今仍没有现成完整的制度。
English: On the fifteenth day of the seventh month in autumn, the ancestor issued an imperial edict saying: In the past, the great-great-grandfather initiated various systems, the great-great-grandfather followed them, but failed to reform them, and the army and the state were the official principles of various systems, and there is still no complete system ready.

古文：今诸征镇将军、王公仗节边远者，听开府辟召；其次，增置吏员。 
现代文：从今以后，各镇守出征的将军、王公出使边远地区的，都听开府征召；其次，增设官吏。 
English: From now on, all the generals sent by the town guards and princes to the outlying areas will be recruited by the government; secondly, more officials will be appointed.

古文：庚子，诏大鸿胪卿杜超假节、都督冀定相三州诸军事、行征南大将军、太宰，进爵为王，镇鄴，为诸军节度。
现代文：十六日，世祖下诏命大鸿胪卿杜超假节、都督冀定相三州诸军、行征南大将军、太宰，晋爵为王，镇守邺城，为各军节度。
English: On the 16th, the ancestor issued an order to the armies of the three states, including the Great Honored General Du Chao (大鸿卿) and the military governor Hebei Dingxiang (都督冀定相), to march to the South General, Dazai (太宰), and Jinjie (晋爵) for the king, and to guard the city of Shicheng (城) for the festival of each army.

古文：八月，清河群盗杀太守。
现代文：八月，清河郡一群百姓杀了太守。
English: In August, a group of people in Qinghe County killed the governor.

古文：刘义隆将到彦之，自清水入河，溯流西行。
现代文：刘义隆的将领到彦之，从清水进入黄河，沿河西行。
English: Liu Yilong's generals arrived at Yanqi, entered the Yellow River from Qingshui, and traveled west along the river.

古文：帝以河南兵少，诏摄四镇。
现代文：世祖以黄河南面军队稀少，下诏让杜超摄领四镇。
English: The emperor, seeing that there were few troops south of the Yellow River, ordered Du Chao to take charge of the four towns.

古文：乃治兵，将西讨。
现代文：于是整兵，准备西讨。
English: As a result, the troops were reorganized in preparation for the Western Conference.

古文：丙寅，到彦之遣将渡河攻冶坂，冠军将军安颉督诸军击破之，斩首五千余级，投水死者甚众。
现代文：十二日，到彦之派将领渡过黄河进攻冶坂，冠军将军安颉领各军打败敌人，斩首五千多，投水而死的敌人很多。
English: On the twelfth day, the general of the Hikone faction crossed the Yellow River to attack Yezhan, and the champion general An Xun led the army to defeat the enemy, beheading more than five thousand, and many enemies died by throwing water.

古文：甲戌，行幸南宫，猎于南山。
现代文：二十日，世祖到南宫巡视，在南山打猎。
English: On the 20th, the patriarch made a tour of the Southern Palace and went hunting in the Nanshan Mountains.

古文：戊寅，诏征西大将军长孙道生屯于河上。
现代文：二十四日，世祖下诏征召征西大将军长孙道生屯军河上。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the patriarch issued an edict to conscript General Sun Daosheng, commander of the Western Grand Army, to go to the river.

古文：九月己丑，赫连定遣弟谓以代寇鄜城，平西将军、始平公隗归等率诸军讨之，擒贼将王卑，杀万余人，谓以代遁走。
现代文：九月初六，赫连定派弟弟赫连谓以代侵犯城，平西将军、始平公隗归等率领各军讨伐他们，擒获敌将王卑，杀敌一万多人，谓以代逃走。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, Heren sent his younger brother Heren to invade the city. General Pingxi, Shi Ping Gong and Gu Gui led the armies to fight them, captured the enemy general Wang Bi, killed more than 10,000 enemies, and fled.

古文：癸卯，立密皇太后庙于鄴。
现代文：二十日，世祖在邺城建密皇太后庙。
English: On the 20th, the ancestor built a temple for the Empress Dowager Mi in Lucheng.

古文：甲辰，行幸统万，遂征平凉。
现代文：二十一日，世祖巡视统万城，接着征讨平凉。
English: On the 22nd, they marched to Tongman, and then attacked Pingliang.

古文：冬十月庚申，到彦之、王仲德沿河置守，还保东平。
现代文：冬季十月初七，到彦之、王仲德沿黄河布置守卫，退守东平城。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, Wang Zhongde and Zhi Yanzhi set up guards along the Yellow River and retreated to Dongping City.

古文：乙亥，冠军将军安颉济河，攻洛阳。
现代文：二十二日，冠军将军安颉渡过黄河，攻打洛阳。
English: On the 22nd, the champion general An Xuan crossed the Yellow River and attacked Luoyang.

古文：丙子，拔之，擒义隆将二十人，斩首五千级。
现代文：二十三日，攻下洛阳城，擒获刘义隆的将领二十人，杀敌五千人。
English: On the 23rd, they captured Luoyang City, captured twenty of Liu Yilong's generals, and killed five thousand of the enemy.

古文：时河北诸军会于七女津，彦之恐军南度，遣将王蟠龙溯流欲盗官船，征南大将军杜超等击破，斩之。
现代文：当时黄河以北各军在七女津会合，到彦之担心军队南渡黄河，派将领王蟠龙逆流而上打算盗取官船，征南大将军杜超等打败了他们，斩了王蟠龙。
English: At that time, all the armies north of the Yellow River met at Qinyaotsu. When Yan Zang was worried that the army would cross the Yellow River to the south, he sent the general Wang Hailong upstream to steal the official ship. Du Chao, the general of the Southern Expedition, defeated them and beheaded Wang Hailong.

古文：辛巳，安颉平虎牢，义隆司州刺史尹冲坠城死。
现代文：二十八日，安颉平定虎牢关，刘义隆的司州刺史尹冲坠城而死。
English: On the 28th, after An Ying subdued the tigers, Liu Yilong's provincial governor Yin Chong fell to his death.

古文：十有一月乙酉，车驾至平凉。先是，赫连定将数万人东御于鄜城，留其弟上谷公社于、广阳公度洛孤城守。
现代文：十一月初三，世祖到了平凉，这以前，赫连定率领数万人到城抵挡朝廷军队，留下弟弟上谷公赫连社于、广阳公度洛孤据守平凉。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the ancestor arrived at Pingliang. Before this, Herending led tens of thousands of people to the city to resist the imperial army, leaving his brother Shangguang Herensha in Guangyang Gongdu Luo to defend Pingliang.

古文：帝至平凉，登北原，使赫连昌招谕之，社于不降。
现代文：世祖到了平凉，登上北原，派赫连昌劝说社于投降，社于不同意。
English: When the ancestor arrived in Pingliang and ascended the North Plains, he sent Herenchang to persuade the community to surrender, but the community did not agree.

古文：诏安西将军古弼等击安定，攻平凉。
现代文：世祖下诏命安西将军古弼等攻打安定，攻平凉城。
English: The ancestor issued an edict ordering General Anxi to attack and stabilize Guzheng and level Liangcheng.

古文：定闻之，弃鄜城，入于安定，自率步骑三万从鹑觚原将救平凉，与弼相遇。弼击之，杀数千人，乃还走。
现代文：赫连定听说，放弃城，驻军安定，亲自率领骑步兵三万人从鹑觚原出发准备救助平凉，与古弼相遇，古弼率部迎击敌人，杀了数千人，敌军逃走。
English: He Lianding heard that the city was abandoned, the garrison was stable, and he personally led 30,000 cavalry and infantry to set out from the Plains of Reeds to prepare for the rescue of Pingliang. He met with Gu Yao. Gu Yao led his troops to meet the enemy, killed thousands of people, and the enemy army fled.

古文：定中重创，单骑遁走。
现代文：世祖下诏命各军四面围住敌人。
English: The Emperor issued an edict ordering the armies to encircle the enemy on all sides.

古文：获定弟丹阳公乌视拔、武陵公秃骨及公侯百余人。是日，诸将乘胜进军，遂取安定。
现代文：十二日，寿光侯叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生渡过黄河，到彦之、王仲德从清水进入济水，向东面的青州逃窜，刘义隆的兖州刺史竺灵秀放弃须昌，南逃湖陆。十五日，赫连定闹水荒，率领部下冲下高原，世祖下诏让武卫将军丘眷攻击敌人，赫连定大败，死难的有一万多人。赫连定受了重伤，单骑逃走。
English: On the 12th, Shuguang Hou's uncle, Sun Jian, and Ru Yin's father, Sun Dosheng, crossed the Yellow River, and Yan Zhi and Wang Zhongde fled from Qingshui to Jishui in the east to Qingzhou. Liu Yilong's uncle, Shizhi, abandoned Suchang and fled south to Hulunhu. On the 15th, Hulian Ding suffered a water shortage and led his subordinates to rush down the plateau. The patriarch ordered General Wu Wei Qiu to attack the enemy as soon as possible. Hulian Ding suffered a great defeat, and more than 10,000 people died. Hulian Ding was seriously injured and fled

古文：定从兄东平公乙升弃城奔长安，劫掠数千家，西奔上邽。
现代文：赫连定堂兄东平公赫连乙升弃城向长安逃去，劫掠数千户居民，西奔上圭阝。
English: He Lianding's cousin Dongping Gong He Lianyi abandoned the city and fled to Chang'an, robbed thousands of residents, and headed west to Shanggui.

古文：戊戌，叔孙建大破竺灵秀于湖陆，杀获五千余人。
现代文：十六日，叔孙建在湖陆大败竺灵秀，斩杀俘获五千多人。
English: On the 16th, Uncle Sun Jian defeated Gong Lingxiu in Hulun, killing and capturing more than 5,000 people.

古文：己亥，帝幸安定，获乞伏炽磐质子及定车旗，簿其生口、财畜，班赐将士各有差。
现代文：十七日，世祖巡示安定，俘获乞伏炽磐作为人质的儿子以及赫连定的车旗，把缴获的生口、财物、牲畜等，数量不等地赐给将士们。
English: On the seventeenth day, the patriarch made a tour of the stable, captured the son of the beggar Blazing Rock as a hostage, as well as the banner of the car set by Heren, and gave the captured livestock, property, livestock, etc., in varying quantities to the soldiers.

古文：庚子，帝自安定还临平凉，遂掘堑围守之。
现代文：十八日，世祖从安定又到了平凉，于是令人挖掘壕堑围困平凉城。
English: On the 18th, Shizu went from stable to calm, so he had trenches dug to besiege the city of calm.

古文：行幸纽城，安慰初附，赦秦雍之民，赐复七年。
现代文：到了纽城，安慰刚刚归附的老百姓，赦免秦、雍两州的百姓，免税七年。
English: When he arrived in New York City, he consoled the people who had just been annexed, pardoned the people of Qin and Yong, and exempted them from taxes for seven years.

古文：定陇西守及将士数千人来降。
现代文：赫连定陇西太守以及将士数千人前来投降。
English: Helian Ding, the governor of Shaanxi, and thousands of soldiers came to surrender.

古文：辛丑，冠军将军安颉率诸军攻滑台。
现代文：十九日，冠军将军安颉率领各军攻打滑台。
English: On the 19th, the champion general An Qi led the army to attack the slide.

古文：琅邪王司马楚之破刘义隆将于长社。
现代文：琅笽王司马楚之在长社打败刘义隆的将领。
English: Shao Wang, the general who defeated Liu Yilong in Changsha.

古文：沮渠蒙逊遣使朝贡。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Mengsung envoys paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：壬寅，封寿光侯叔孙建为丹阳王。
现代文：二十日，世祖封寿光侯叔孙建为丹阳王。
English: On the 20th, the ancestor, Shuguang Hou's uncle, Sun Jian, became the king of Danyang.

古文：十有二月丁卯，定弟社于、度洛孤面缚出降，平凉平，收其珍宝。
现代文：十二月十五日，赫连定之弟社于、度洛孤把自己绑缚起来出城投降，平凉被平定。珍宝收归魏廷。
English: On December 15th, He Lianding's younger brothers, She Yu and Du Luo Guo, tied themselves up and left the city to surrender. Pingliang was pacified, and the treasures were returned to Wei Ting.

古文：定长安、临晋、武功守将皆奔走，关中平。
现代文：赫连定长安、临晋、武功各城守将全部逃走，关中被平定。
English: In Chang'an, Linjin, and Guanzhong, the warlords of military merit all fled, and the war in Guanzhong subsided.

古文：壬申，车驾东还，留巴东公延普等镇安定。
现代文：二十日，世祖东归，留巴东公延普等镇守安定。
English: On the 20th, the ancestor returned to the east, and the town guards such as Dongba Dongguan and Yanpu remained stable.

古文：是岁，冯跋死，弟文通僭立。
现代文：这一年，冯跋去世，其弟文通登上皇位。
English: In the same year, Feng Bao died, and his younger brother, Wen Tong, ascended to the throne.

古文：四年春正月壬午，车驾次于木根山，大飨群臣，赐布帛各有差。
现代文：神四年春季正月初一，世祖车驾停驻在木根山，大宴群臣，赏赐数量不等的布帛。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Jin Dynasty, the ancestor's car was parked in Mugenyama, a large banquet was held for the courtiers, and cloth bags of varying quantities were given out.

古文：丙申，刘义隆将檀道济、王仲德从清水救滑台，丹阳王叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生拒之，道济等不敢进。
现代文：十五日，刘义隆的将领檀道济、王仲德从清水出发救助滑台，丹阳王叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生迎战，檀道济等不敢前进。
English: On the 15th, Liu Yilong's generals, Dang Daoji and Wang Zhongde, set out from Qingshui to rescue the slide. Danyang's King Uncle Sun Jian and Ruyin's Grand Duke Sun Daosheng joined the battle, but Dang Daoji did not dare to advance.

古文：是月，乞伏慕末为赫连定所灭。
现代文：这个月，乞伏慕末被赫连定消灭。
English: This month, Begging Mumu was eliminated by He Lianding.

古文：二月辛酉，安颉、司马楚之平滑台，擒义隆将朱羒之、李元德及东郡太守申谟。
现代文：二月初十，安颉、司马楚之平定滑台，擒获刘义隆的将领朱之、李元德以及东郡太守申谟。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 1st year of the 3rd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：癸酉，车驾还宫，饮至策勋，告于宗庙，赐留台百官各有差，战士赐复十年。
现代文：二十二日，世祖回到宫中，举行盛大庆功典礼，祭告祖庙，赏赐留守朝中的文武百官，战士免除十年赋税。
English: On the 22nd, the ancestor returned to the palace, held a grand celebration ceremony, dedicated the ancestral temple, rewarded hundreds of civil and military officials who remained in the court, and exempted soldiers from ten years of tax.

古文：丁丑，行幸南宫。
现代文：二十六日，世祖巡视南宫。
English: On the 26th, the patriarch inspected the Southern Palace.

古文：定州民饥，诏启仓以赈之。
现代文：定州发生饥荒，世祖下诏开仓济民。
English: There was a famine in Dingzhou, and the founder of the family decided to open a warehouse to help the people.

古文：义隆将檀道济、王仲德东走，诸将追之，至历城而还。
现代文：刘义隆将领檀道济、王仲德向东面逃去，众将追击，追到历城后返回。
English: Liu Yilong led the generals Dang Daoji and Wang Zhongde to flee to the east. The generals chased them, and after chasing them to Licheng, they returned.

古文：三月庚戌，冠军将军安颉献义隆俘万余人，甲兵三万。
现代文：三月三十日，冠军将军安颉献上俘获刘义隆的士卒一万多人，甲兵三万。
English: On March 30, the champion general An Xuan presented more than 10,000 soldiers and 30,000 armored soldiers who had captured Liu Yilong.

古文：夏五月庚寅，行幸云中。
现代文：夏季五月十一日，世祖巡视云中。
English: In the summer, on May 11th, the patriarch made a tour of the clouds.

古文：六月，赫连定北袭沮渠蒙逊，为吐谷浑慕璝所执。
现代文：六月，赫连定北袭沮渠蒙逊，被吐谷浑人慕俘获。
English: In June, He Lianding made an attack on the north of Deshu Mengxun and was captured by the Tuyuhun army.

古文：闰月乙未，蠕蠕国遣使朝献。
现代文：闰月十六日，柔然国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 16th day of the leap month, the state of Juran sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：诏散骑侍郎周绍使于刘义隆。
现代文：世祖下诏命散骑侍郎周绍出使刘义隆政权。
English: The founder of the dynasty issued an edict ordering Zhou Shao to send envoys to Liu Yilong's regime.

古文：秋七月己酉，行幸河西，起承华宫。
现代文：秋季七月初一，世祖巡视河西，建承华宫。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the founder of the dynasty made an inspection tour of Hexi and started to build the Chenghuagong Palace.

古文：八月乙酉，沮渠蒙逊遣子安周入侍。
现代文：八月初七，沮渠蒙逊派儿子安周到朝廷充当人质。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, An Zhou, the son of a Sunni monk, came to serve as an attendant.

古文：吐谷浑慕璝遣使奉表，请送赫连定。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗慕派使者奉上奏章，请送赫连定到朝廷。
English: Tu Gu sent an envoy to present a document requesting that he be sent to Wei.

古文：己丑，以慕璝为大将军、西秦王。
现代文：十一日，世祖任命慕为大将军、西秦王。
English: On the 11th day, the ancestor appointed Mu as the general and the king of the Western Qin Dynasty.

古文：九月癸丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月初六，世祖车驾回宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：庚申，加太尉长孙嵩柱国大将军，特进左光禄大夫崔浩为司徒，征西大将军长孙道生为司空。
现代文：十三日，世祖加授太尉长孙嵩为柱国大将军，特进、左光禄大夫崔浩为司徒，征西大将军长孙道生为司空。
English: On the 13th, Sun Song, the founder of the school, was awarded the rank of captain and became the general of Zhuguo, Choi Hao, the special envoy and doctor of the Left Guanglu, became the tutor, and Sun Daosheng, the general of the Western Expedition, became the secretary.

古文：癸亥，诏兼太常李顺持节拜河西王沮渠蒙逊为假节、加侍中、都督凉州及西域羌戎诸军事、行征西大将军、太傅、凉州牧、凉王。
现代文：十六日，世祖下诏命兼太常李顺持节拜河西王沮渠蒙逊为假节、加授侍中、都督凉州以及西域羌戎诸军事、行征西大将军、太傅、凉州牧、凉王。
English: On the 16th, the patriarch issued an imperial edict ordering the Emperor and Empress Dowager Li Shunji to set aside the festival to pay homage to the Western King of the He River, Depressed Quan, and Monsoon as a false festival, and to confer the titles of Vice-Admiral, Governor of Liangzhou and the Western Regions on the military, and to recruit the Western General, Taifu, Liangzhou Mu, and Liangwang.

古文：壬申，诏曰： 顷逆命纵逸，方夏未宁，戎车屡驾，不遑休息。
现代文：二十五日，世祖下诏书说： 一段时间以来，敌人纵逸，海内不宁，征战不断，兵马来不及休息。
English: On the 25th, the patriarch issued an imperial edict saying, "For some time now, the enemy has been retreating, the sea has been restless, the war has continued, and the soldiers and horses have not had time to rest.

古文：今二寇摧殄，士马无为，方将偃武修文，遵太平之化，理废职，举逸民，拔起幽穷，延登俊乂。昧旦思求，想遇师辅，虽殷宗之梦板筑，罔以加也。
现代文：今二寇摧灭，兵马无事可干，朕准备停武修文，遵太平之化，检理废职，举用逸民，提拔幽逸穷顿之士，延请举荐俊杰仁义之人，早晚思求，欲获为师为辅之人，即使是过去殷宗梦贤于板筑之时的殷勤，也没有朕此时思贤心情急切。
English: Now that the two robbers have been destroyed and the soldiers and horses have nothing to do, I am preparing to stop the military, revise the text, make it more peaceful, examine and abolish duties, promote good people, promote those who are quiet and poor, invite those who are kind and benevolent, think about it sooner or later, and those who want to be a teacher and aide. Even if I had the attentiveness of Yin Zong Mengxian in the past when I was building the board, I did not feel anxious about thinking about Xian at this time.

古文：访诸有司，咸称范阳卢玄、博陵崔绰、赵郡李灵、河间邢颖、勃海高允、广平游雅、太原张伟等，皆贤俊之胄，冠冕州邦，有羽仪之用。
现代文：朕访求有关部门，都说范阳卢玄、博陵崔绰、赵郡李灵、河间邢颖、渤海高允、广平游雅、太原张伟等人，是贤良俊杰之士，为州郡百姓称道，有翼护朝廷之才。
English: When I visited the relevant departments, they all said that Fan Yang Lu Xuan, Boling Cui Zhuo, Zhao County Li Ling, Hema Li Ying, Bohai Gao Yun, Guangping Yu Ya, Taiyuan Zhang Wei and others were virtuous and talented people, praised by the people of Zhoushu County, and had the ability to protect the imperial court.

古文：《诗》不云乎： 鹤鸣九皋，声闻于天 。
现代文：《诗经》不是说吗， 鹤鸣九皋，声闻于天 。
English: Isn't it said in the Book of Songs that the sound of nine cranes chirping can be heard in the sky?

古文：庶得其人，任之政事，共臻邕熙之美。《易》曰： 我有好爵，吾与尔縻之。 
现代文：如果得到这些人，委派给他们相应的政事，一定能够为朝廷美政出力。《易》说： 我有好爵，吾与尔縻之。 
English: If you get these people and assign them to the corresponding government affairs, you will surely be able to contribute to the imperial court's beauty politics. "Yi" said: I have a good peer, I am with Er Yao.

古文：如玄之比，隐迹衡门、不耀名誉者，尽敕州郡以礼发遣。 
现代文：凡是才华与卢玄等人相仿佛，隐居于市井山林，默默无闻的贤士，各州郡都要把他们礼请到朝廷来。 
English: All the obscure sages whose talents are similar to those of Lu Xuan and others, who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, should be invited to the imperial court by all states and counties.

古文：遂征玄等及州郡所遣，至者数百人，皆差次叙用。
现代文：于是征召卢玄等人及各州郡荐举的人，到达京城的有数百人，都依次录用。
English: As a result, Lu Xuan and others, as well as people recommended by various states and counties, were conscripted, and hundreds of people arrived in Beijing, all of whom were recruited in turn.

古文：冬十月戊寅，诏司徒崔浩改定律令。
现代文：冬季十月初一，世祖下诏命崔浩改定律令。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the imperial edict ordered the scholar Cui Hao to amend the legal edict.

古文：行幸漠南。
现代文：世祖巡视大漠南部。
English: Parade to the south of the desert.

古文：十一月丙辰，北部敕勒莫弗库若于，率其部数万骑，驱鹿数百万，诣行在所，帝因而大狩以赐从者，勒石漠南，以记功德。
现代文：十一月初十，北部敕勒酋长库若于，率领部属数万骑，驱赶鹿数百万头，到世祖巡视地点，世祖因此举行大规模狩猎活动，赏赐随从的官员，在大漠南部刻石铭记，记载功德。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the year, Ku Ruo, the chief of the northern Mule, led tens of thousands of horsemen and drove millions of deer to the ancestor's inspection site. As a result, the ancestor held a large-scale hunting activity, rewarded the accompanying officials, and engraved stones in the southern part of the desert to remember and record his merits.

古文：宜城王奚斤，坐事降爵为公。
现代文：宜城王奚斤，因犯罪被降爵为公。
English: Wang Shujin of Yicheng was knighted for his crimes.

古文：十二月丁丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月初一，世祖回到宫中。
English: On December 27th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：延和元年春正月丙午，尊保太后为皇太后，立皇后赫连氏，立皇子晃为皇太子，谒于太庙，大赦，改年。
现代文：延和元年春季正月初一，尊称保太后为皇太后，立赫连氏为皇后，立皇子拓跋晃为皇太子，拜谒太庙，大赦天下，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of

古文：己巳，诏曰： 朕以眇身，获奉宗庙，思阐洪基，廓清九服。
现代文：二十四日，世祖下诏书说： 朕以微躯，登上皇位，思开皇基，廓清海内。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the patriarch issued an imperial edict saying: I ascend the throne with a small body, think about the imperial foundation, and go to the sea.

古文：遭值季运，天下分崩。
现代文：可遭逢乱世，天下分崩离析。
English: The world may fall into chaos and break apart.

古文：是用屡征，罔或宁息，自始光至今，九年之间，戎车十举。
现代文：所以朕不断征战，没有稍停。从始光年间至今，九年之间，征战十起。
English: That's why I've continued to fight, without a moment's pause. From the beginning of the year to now, in nine years, I've fought ten times.

古文：群帅文武，荷戈被甲，栉风沐雨，蹈履锋刃，与朕均劳。
现代文：许多将帅文武官员，荷戈披甲，栉风沐雨，蹈锋履刃，与朕一起劳顿不已。
English: Many generals and officials, Hogo wearing armor, braving the wind and rain, and doing their best, worked tirelessly with me.

古文：赖神祗之助，将士宣力，用能摧折强竖，克翦大憝。
现代文：全凭神灵帮助，将士效力，所以能摧败强敌，克剪大凶。
English: With the help of the gods and the effectiveness of the generals, they were able to defeat the powerful enemy and overcome the great evil.

古文：兵不极武，而二寇俱灭；师不违律，而遐方以宁。
现代文：兵不极武，而二寇都被消灭；师不违律，而远方安宁。
English: If the soldiers do not use extreme force, the two robbers will be eliminated; if the division does not violate the law, there will be peace in the distance.

古文：加以时气和洽，嘉瑞并降，遍于郡国，不可胜纪。岂朕一人，独应此祐，斯亦群后协同之所致也。
现代文：加上时气和洽，嘉瑞并降，遍于郡国，不可胜数，这哪里因为是朕一人应此神佑，它也是群臣协同努力的结果。
English: In addition, there are innumerable times when the times are harmonious and the auspicious and unlucky coincide throughout the county. This is because I am the only one to respond to this blessing, and it is also the result of the concerted efforts of the ministers.

古文：公卿因兹，稽诸天人之会，请建副贰。
现代文：公卿应此，稽查天人之会，请立储君。
English: In response to this, the Kugyo inspected the Association of Heavenly Beings and asked them to set up a bank.

古文：夫庆赏之行，所以褒崇勋旧，旌显贤能，以永无疆之休。其王公将军以下，普增爵秩，启国承家，修废官，举俊逸，蠲除烦苛，更定科制，务从轻约，除故革新，以正一统。
现代文：大凡庆赏行为，是用来褒扬功臣元勋，旌显贤能，以永保江山稳固，其王公将军以下，普增官爵，启国承家，修废官、举俊杰，去除繁荷，更定科制，务从简约，除故革新，以正一统。
English: The great act of celebration is used to praise the meritorious heroes and heroines, the distinguished and virtuous, to keep the country stable, and the kings and generals below them, to increase the number of officials and nobles, to start the country's succession, to repair the waste officials, to raise the young and outstanding, to remove the heavy burden, to improve the scientific system, to keep it simple, to eliminate the innovation, and to unify it.

古文：群司当深思效绩，直道正身，立功立事，无或懈怠，称朕意焉。 
现代文：各部门当深思效劳，直道正身，立功立事，不要懈怠，以满足为朕意旨。 
English: All departments should work hard, be upright, make contributions, and do not slacken in order to meet our intention.

古文：二月丙子，行幸南宫。
现代文：二月初二，世祖巡视南宫。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：三月丁未，追赠夫人贺氏为皇后。
现代文：三月初三，世祖追赠夫人贺氏为皇后。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：壬申，西秦王吐谷浑慕璝，送赫连定于京师。
现代文：二十九日，西秦王吐谷浑慕，把赫连定送到京城。
English: On the 29th, the Western Qin king, Tu Guhongmu, sent He Lianding to the capital.

古文：夏五月，大简舆徒于南郊，将讨冯文通。
现代文：夏季五月，世祖在京城南郊大规模训练部队，准备讨伐冯文通。
English: In the summer of May, Shizu began a large-scale training of troops in the southern suburbs of Beijing, preparing to fight Feng Wentong.

古文：刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：六月庚寅，车驾伐和龙。
现代文：六月十七日，世祖讨伐和龙。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, the emperor went to war with the dragon.

古文：诏尚书左仆射安原等屯于漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：下诏命尚书左仆射安原等人在漠南屯军，以防备蠕蠕侵犯。
English: Zhao ordered Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, and others to stay in the south of the desert to guard against the creep.

古文：辛卯，兼散骑常侍邓颍使于刘义隆。
现代文：十八日，兼散骑常侍邓颖出使刘义隆。
English: On the 18th, Deng Ying, who was also a knight errant, sent Liu Yilong.

古文：秋七月己未，车驾至濡水。
现代文：秋季七月十七日，世祖到达濡水。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the ancestor arrived at Nuremizu.

古文：庚申，遣安东将军、宜城公奚斤发幽州民及密云丁零万余人，运攻具，出南道，俱会和龙。
现代文：十八日，世祖派遣安东将军、宜城公奚斤调发幽州百姓以及密云丁零族人一万多人，运送攻城器械，出南道，都汇集和龙。
English: On the 18th, Shizu dispatched General Anton, Yicheng Gongjunjin and dispatched more than ten thousand Yuzhou people and Miyun Dingli people to transport siege equipment and go out of Nando to gather dragons.

古文：帝至辽西，文通遣其侍御史崔聘奉献牛酒。
现代文：世祖到了辽西，冯文通派他的侍御史崔聘奉献牛酒。
English: When the patriarch arrived in western Liaoning Province, Feng Wentong sent his attendant, Streibei, to offer the cow wine.

古文：己巳，车驾至和龙，临其城。
现代文：二十七日，世祖到了和龙，面临敌城。
English: On the 27th, Shizu arrived at Horyu and faced the enemy city.

古文：文通石城太守李崇、建德太守王融十余郡来降，发其民三万人穿围堑以守之。
现代文：冯文通的石城太守李崇、建德太守王融率领十多个郡前来投降，世祖调发其百姓三万人挖掘壕堑把城池团团围住。
English: Li Chong, the governor of Shicheng and Wang Rong, the governor of Jiande, led more than ten counties to surrender, and the ancestor dispatched 30,000 of his people to dig trenches to surround the city.

古文：是月，筑东宫。
现代文：这个月，世祖筑建东宫。
English: In the same month, construction of the East Palace was completed.

古文：八月甲戌，文通使数万人出城挑战，昌黎公元丘与河间公元齐击破之，死者万余人。
现代文：八月初二，冯文通派遣数万人出城挑战，昌黎公元丘与河间公元齐打败了敌人，杀敌一万多人。
English: On the second day of August, Feng Wentong sent tens of thousands of people out of the city to challenge. Changli B.D. Qiu and Hema B.D. defeated the enemy and killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：文通尚书高绍率万余家保羌胡固。
现代文：冯文通的尚书高绍率领一万多家保卫羌胡固。
English: Feng Wentong's Shangshu Gaoshao led more than ten thousand people to defend Gonghu.

古文：己卯，车驾讨绍。辛巳，斩之。
现代文：初七，世祖讨伐高绍，初九，斩杀高绍。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the ancestor fought against Gaoshao, and on the 9th day of the 9th month, he killed Gaoshao.

古文：诏平东将军贺多罗攻文通带方太守慕容玄于猴固，抚军大将军、永昌王健攻建德，骠骑大将军、乐平王丕攻冀阳，皆拔之，虏获生口，班赐将士各有差。
现代文：世祖下诏命平东将军贺多罗攻打冯文通带方太守慕容玄于猴固，抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健攻打建德，骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕攻打冀阳，几座城池都被拿下，俘获的生口，世祖分等级赏赐给了众将士。
English: The founder of the dynasty gave the order to Pingdong General Hodoro to attack Feng Wentong and the party's eunuch Mu Rongxuan in Baigu, the general of the Fuzhou army, Yongchang King Tuoba Jian to attack Jiande, and the general of the horse cavalry, Leping King Tuoba Jian to attack Jiyang. Several castles were taken down, and the captured prisoners were given to the generals.

古文：九月乙卯，车驾西还。
现代文：九月十四日，世祖回到宫中。
English: September 14th, driving westbound.

古文：徒营丘、成周、辽东、乐浪、带方、玄菟六郡民三万家于幽州，开仓以赈之。
现代文：世祖移营丘、成周、辽东、乐浪、带方、玄菟六郡百姓共计三万多家到幽州，开仓放粮救济他们。
English: A total of more than 30,000 people from six counties, including Shizuo, Chengzhou, Liaodong, Lelang, Bokifang and Xuanfan, came to Yuzhou to open warehouses and distribute grain to help them.

古文：冬十月癸酉，车驾至濡水。
现代文：冬季十月初二，世祖到濡水。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the ancestors came to Nuremizu.

古文：吐谷浑慕璝遣使朝贡。
现代文：吐谷浑慕派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Humus of Tucu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：十有一月乙巳，车驾至自伐和龙。十有二月己丑，冯文通长乐公崇及其母弟朗、朗弟邈，以辽西内属。
现代文：十一月初四，世祖自和龙归来。十二月十九日，冯文通长乐公冯崇及其母弟朗、朗弟邈，举辽西归降。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, the ancestor returned from Hualong. On the 19th day of the 12th month, Feng Wentong, Changle Gong, Feng Chong and his mother and brother, Lang and Langdiao, returned to the west of Liaoning Province.

古文：文通遣将封羽围辽西。
现代文：冯文通派将封羽围困辽西。
English: Feng Wentong's faction besieged Feng Yu in western Liaoning.

古文：先是，辟召贤良，而州郡多逼遣之。
现代文：这以前，世祖征召贤良之才，而各州郡大多逼迫州中贤士前往京城。
English: Prior to this, the ancestor conscripted good talents, and most of the states and counties forced the state-level sages to go to Beijing.

古文：诏曰： 朕除伪平暴，征讨累年，思得英贤，缉熙治道，故诏州郡搜扬隐逸，进举贤俊。
现代文：世祖下诏说： 朕除伪平暴，连年征讨，思谋求得英贤之才，光大治道，所以下诏各郡搜寻隐逸人士，进举贤能。
English: The ancestor issued an edict saying: "In addition to the pseudo-civil violence, I have been collecting information for years, thinking about how to obtain the talents of the sages, and how to govern the country well. Therefore, I issued an edict to search for hidden people in each county, and promote their talents.

古文：古之君子，养志衡门，德成业就，才为世使。
现代文：古代的君子，养志衡门，德成业就，才能为世所用。
English: In ancient times, it was necessary for a gentleman to cultivate high morals and ethics in order to be able to serve the world.

古文：或雍容雅步，三命而后至；或栖栖遑遑，负鼎而自达。
现代文：他们或是雍容雅步，申命再三之后才到；或是盝盝遑遑，负袱而自达。
English: Either they are graceful and graceful, and only arrive after repeated orders; or they are lazy, burdened and self-sufficient.

古文：虽徇尚不同，济时一也。
现代文：虽然他们追求志向各不相同，济救时世的目的是一致的。
English: Although their aspirations are different, the purpose of helping others is the same.

古文：诸召人皆当以礼申谕，任其进退，何逼遣之有也！
现代文：每个被征召的人，官府应当晓之以礼，听任他们进退，岂有强迫他们的道理呢！
English: Every person who is called up, the authorities should know with respect, let them advance and retreat, is there any reason to force them!

古文：此刺史、守宰宣扬失旨，岂复光益，乃所以彰朕不德。
现代文：这些都是刺史、守宰宣扬失旨，哪里是为朕增光，分明是在光扬为朕的不德。
English: All of this is to distort history and distort the truth. Where there is glory for me, it is clearly glorying in my immorality.

古文：自今以后，各令乡闾推举，守宰但宣朕虚心求贤之意。
现代文：从今以后，都由各乡闾推举，各守宰只管宣明朕虚心求贤之意。
English: From now on, they are all elected by the townships, and the governors only need to declare that they are humbly seeking wisdom.

古文：既至，当时以不次之举，随才文武，任之政事。
现代文：贤才一到，应当以不次之举对待他们，随其文武之才，交任他们相应的职务政事。
English: As soon as the talents arrive, they should be treated in a non-subsequent manner, according to their literary and military talents, and they should be assigned to the corresponding positions and government affairs.

古文：其明宣敕，咸使闻知。 
现代文：明宣朕此意，让天下人都知道此事。 
English: Let it be known, let it be known.

古文：是年，秃发傉檀子保周弃沮渠蒙逊来奔，以保周为张掖公。
现代文：这一年，秃发亻辱檀之子秃发保周背弃沮渠蒙逊投奔朝廷，世祖任命保周为张掖公。
English: In the same year, Bald Baozhou, the son of Bald Baozhou, abandoned the dejected Mengxun and ran to the imperial court. The founder appointed Baozhou as Zhang Yigong.

古文：二年春正月乙卯，抚军大将军、永昌王健督诸军救辽西。
现代文：延和二年春季正月十五日，抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健率领诸军救助辽西。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the spring of the second year of Yanhe, the general of the Fuzhou army, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, led the army to rescue West Liaoning.

古文：丙寅，以乐安王范为假节、加侍中、都督秦雍泾梁益五州诸军事、卫大将军、仪同三司，镇长安。
现代文：十八日，世祖任命乐安王拓跋范为假节、加侍中、都督秦雍泾梁益五州诸军事、卫大将军、仪同三司，镇守长安。
English: On the 18th, the founder appointed Le'an Wang Tuoba Fan as the false festival, plus the attendant, the governor Qin Yongxuan Liangyi, the five states of the military, the general of the guards, the three departments of the ceremony, and the town guard Chang'an.

古文：二月庚午，诏兼鸿胪卿李继，持节假冯崇车骑大将军、辽西王，承制听置尚书已下；赐崇功臣爵秩各有差。
现代文：二月初一，世祖下诏命兼鸿胪卿李继，持节任命冯崇为车骑大将军、辽西王，依制听其设置尚书以下官员；赐给冯崇的功臣爵位品秩各有等级。
English: On the first day of February, Li Ji, the founder of the dynasty, issued an imperial edict and appointed Feng Chong as the general of cavalry and cavalry and the king of Liaoxi. According to the imperial edict, Feng Chong was appointed as the following officials:

古文：征西将军金崖与安定镇将延普及泾州刺史狄子玉争权构隙，举兵攻普，不克，退保胡空谷，驱掠平民，据险自固。
现代文：征西将军金崖与安定镇将延普以及泾州刺史狄子玉因争权结下怨仇，金崖率军攻打延普，不成功，退保胡空谷，驱赶掠夺平民，据险固守。
English: The Western Conquest general Jin Yap and the town of Anning will fight for power in Yanpu and Zhangzhou Jinshi Di Ziyu. They have a grudge against each other. Jin Yap led an army to attack Yanpu, but it was not successful. He withdrew to Hukong Valley, drove out and plundered civilians, and held on to his position.

古文：诏散骑常侍、平西将军、安定镇将陆俟讨获之。
现代文：世祖下诏命散骑常侍、平西将军、安东镇将陆俟讨伐捕获了他。
English: The patriarch issued an imperial edict ordering the errant equerry, General Pingxi, and General Andong to capture him.

古文：壬午，行幸河西。
现代文：十三日，世祖巡视黄河以西。
English: In the morning, go to the area west of the Yellow River.

古文：诏兼散骑常侍宋宣使于刘义隆。
现代文：下诏命兼散骑常侍宋宣出使刘义隆。
English: Under the imperial edict, Song Xuan, who was also a knight errant, sent his envoy Liu Yilong.

古文：丙申，冯崇母弟朗来朝。
现代文：二十七日，冯崇的母弟冯朗来到朝廷。
English: On the 27th, Feng Chong's mother and brother, Feng Lang, came to the imperial court.

古文：三月，司马德宗骠骑将军司马元显子天助来降。
现代文：三月，司马德宗的骠骑将军司马元显之子司马天助前来归降。
English: In March, Sima Tensuke, the son of Sima Motohide, the cavalry general of Sima Dezong, came to surrender.

古文：壬子，车驾还宫。
现代文：十三日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the thirteenth day, the patriarch returned to the palace.

古文：夏五月己亥，行幸山北。
现代文：夏季五月初一，世祖巡视山北。
English: In summer, on the first day of May, the ancestors patrol the northern part of the mountain.

古文：六月，遣抚军大将军、永昌王健，尚书左仆射安原督诸军讨和龙。
现代文：六月，世祖派抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健，尚书左仆射安原督领诸军讨伐和龙。
English: In June, the ancestor sent the general of the Fuzhou army, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, and Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, to lead the army to fight against the dragon.

古文：将军楼勃别将五千骑围凡城，交通守将封羽以城降，收其民三千余家。
现代文：将军楼勃的别将率五千骑兵围困凡城，冯文通的守将封羽举城投降，朝廷收编其部民三千多家。
English: The general, Lou Bo, led five thousand cavalrymen to besiege Fancheng, the general, Feng Wentong, surrendered the city, and the imperial court collected more than three thousand of his subordinates.

古文：辛巳，诏乐安王范发秦、雍兵一万人，筑小城于长安城内。
现代文：十四日，世祖下诏命乐安王拓跋范征发秦、雍二州士兵一万人，在长安城内筑建小城。
English: On the 14th, the founder of the dynasty issued an edict ordering the King of Le'an, Tuoba Fan, to send ten thousand soldiers from Qin and Yong to build a small city in Chang'an.

古文：秋八月，辽西王冯崇上表，求说降其父，帝不听。
现代文：秋季八月，辽西王冯崇上表，请求前去说服其父投降，世祖未予采纳。
English: In the autumn of August, Feng Chong, the king of West Liao, requested to go to persuade his father to surrender, but his request was not accepted.

古文：九月，刘义隆遣使朝贡，奉驯象一。
现代文：九月，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡，献上驯好的象一头。
English: In September, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, presenting a tame elephant.

古文：戊午，诏兼大鸿胪卿崔赜持节拜征虏将军杨难当为征南大将军、仪同三司，封南秦王。
现代文：二十二日，世祖下诏命兼大鸿胪卿崔赜持节拜征虏将军杨难当为征南大将军、仪同三司，封南秦王。
English: On the 22nd day of the year, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to the Great Homeric Emperor Cui Rongji, appointing the conscript general Yang Nan as the Grand General of the Conquest of the South, the Third Division of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the King of Southern Qin.

古文：冬十月，南秦王杨难当率众围汉中。
现代文：冬季十月，南秦王杨难当率部围困汉中。
English: In the winter of October, the Southern Qin King Yang Nantang led his troops to besiege Hanzhong.

古文：十有一月甲寅，车驾自山北还宫。
现代文：十一月十九日，世祖车驾从山北回到宫中。
English: On November 19th, the ancestor drove back to the palace from the north of the mountain.

古文：十有二月己巳，大赦天下。
现代文：十二月初五，世祖大赦天下。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, the founder of the world was pardoned.

古文：辛未，幸阴山之北。
现代文：初七，巡视阴山之北。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, patrol the north of the gloomy mountain.

古文：陇西休屠王弘祖率众内属。
现代文：陇西休屠酋长王弘祖率部民归附朝廷。
English: Wang Hongzu, the chief of Shensi Xiu Tu, and his followers were annexed by the imperial court.

古文：金崖既死，部人立崖从弟当川领其众。
现代文：金崖死后，部下拥立他的弟弟金当川为头领。
English: After Jin Yap's death, his subordinates appointed his younger brother, Jin Dangchuan, as their leader.

古文：诏兼散骑常侍卢玄使于刘义隆。
现代文：世祖下诏命兼散骑常侍卢玄出使刘义隆。
English: Liu Yilong was dispatched by Lu Xuan, the emperor's father-in-law and a knight-errant.

古文：是岁，沮渠蒙逊死，以其子牧犍为车骑大将军，改封河西王。
现代文：这一年，沮渠蒙逊去世，世祖任命其子沮渠牧健为车骑将军，改封河西王。
English: In the same year, Deshu Mengxun died, and the ancestor appointed his son Deshu Mujian as the general of chariot and cavalry, and changed his title to King of Hexi.

古文：三年春正月乙未，车驾次于女水，大飨群臣，班赐各有差。
现代文：延和三年春季正月初三，世祖到了女水，大宴群臣，赏赐文武官员。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Yanhe, the ancestor arrived in Nianshui, a large banquet was held, and the civil and military officials were rewarded.

古文：戊戌，冯文通遣其给事黄门侍郎伊臣乞和，帝不许。
现代文：初六，冯文通派其给事黄门侍郎伊臣请求讲和，世祖予以拒绝。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Feng Wentong sent him to the Yellow Gate to ask the attendant Isen to make peace, but the patriarch refused.

古文：丙辰，金当川反。
现代文：二十五日，金当川反叛。
English: On the 25th, the Jintang River rebelled.

古文：杨难当克汉中，送雍州流民七千家于长安。
现代文：杨难当攻下汉中，把雍州流民七千家送到长安。
English: When Yang Nan attacked Hanzhong, he sent 7,000 refugees from Yongzhou to Chang'an.

古文：二月丁卯，蠕蠕吴提奉其妹，并遣其异母兄秃鹿傀及左右数百人朝贡，献马二千匹。
现代文：二月初四，柔然的吴提奉献其妹妹，并派其异母兄秃鹿傀以及左右数百人朝贡，献上马二千匹。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, the gentle Wu Ti dedicated his sister, and sent his half-brother Bald Deer Puppet and several hundred people to pay tribute, offering two thousand horses.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 朕承统之始，群凶纵逸，四方未宾，所在逆僭。
现代文：十五日，世祖下诏书说： 朕刚刚登上皇位时，群凶纵横，四境都未臣服，到处都是逆贼。
English: On the fifteenth day, the patriarch issued an imperial edict saying, "When I had just ascended the throne, there were thugs everywhere, all four regions were not subject, and there were traitors everywhere.

古文：蠕蠕陆梁于漠北，铁弗肆虐于三秦。
现代文：蠕蠕在大漠北面蠢蠢欲动，铁弗在三秦横暴肆虐。
English: Cormorants are stirring in the northern part of the Great Desert, and tigers are wreaking havoc in Sanqin.

古文：是以旰食忘寝，抵掌扼腕，期在扫清逋残，宁济万宇。故频年屡征，有事西北，运输之役，百姓勤劳，废失农业，遭离水旱，致使生民贫富不均，未得家给人足，或有寒穷不能自赡者，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：所以朕废寝忘食，抵掌扼腕，希望能够扫清残敌，安宁海内，故而连年征战，经常在西北处打击敌人，运送军需的事，全靠当地百姓出力，他们荒废农业，遭遇水旱，所以导致老百姓贫富不均，不能家给人足，他们中有贫寒饥饿不能自给的情况，朕十分同情。
English: Therefore, I do not sleep and forget to eat, I clap my hands and wring my arms, I hope to be able to clear the remnants of the enemy and pacify the sea, so I have been fighting for years, I often fight the enemy in the northwest, and the transportation of military supplies is entirely dependent on the local people's efforts. They have abandoned agriculture and suffered from floods and droughts, which has led to the poor and rich people being unequal, unable to feed their families, and some of them are poor and hungry and unable to provide for themselves. I am very sympathetic.

古文：今四方顺轨，兵革渐宁，宜宽徭赋，与民休息。
现代文：现在天下秩序理顺，兵革之事渐少，应宽恕百姓的徭役，让百姓好好休养生息。
English: Now that the order of the world has been rationalized and the number of wars has gradually decreased, it is necessary to forgive the people's service and let the people have a good rest.

古文：其令州郡县隐括贫富，以为三级，其富者租赋如常，中者复二年，下穷者复三年。
现代文：朕命各州郡县调查老百姓贫富的情况，分为三等，其中富裕的租赋照常上交，中等的免除二年租赋，贫困的免除三年租赋。
English: I have ordered all states, counties and counties to investigate the situation of the poor and rich among the common people, and divide them into three classes, of which the rich will continue to pay rent, the middle-class will be exempted from two years of rent, and the poor will be exempted from three years of rent.

古文：刺史守宰当务尽平当，不得阿容以罔政治。
现代文：各刺史守宰应当公平允当地执行此事，不得阿谀纵容以耽误政事。
English: All provincial governors should implement this matter in a fair and reasonable manner, and must not be indulged in delaying political affairs.

古文：明相宣约，咸使闻知。 
现代文：朕明相宣约，使天下人都知此事。 
English: I am making this announcement so that everyone in the world will know about it.

古文：辛卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十八日，世祖到宫中。
English: On the 28th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：三月甲寅，行幸河西。
现代文：三月二十一日，世祖巡视黄河以西。
English: On March 21, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：闰月甲戌，秦王赫连昌叛走。
现代文：闰月十一日，秦王赫连昌叛逃。
English: On the 11th day of the leap month, Qin King He Lianchang defected.

古文：丙子，河西候将格杀之。
现代文：十三日，河西边哨将领抓住并杀了他。
English: On the 13th, the general of the Hexi Border Guard Station caught and killed him.

古文：验其谋反，群弟皆伏诛。
现代文：验核其谋反事实，其弟弟都被诛杀。
English: Several of his younger brothers were killed after it was established that he was indeed a rebel.

古文：己卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：十六日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 16th, the patriarch returned to the palace.

古文：彭城公元粟进爵为王。
现代文：彭城公元栗爵位晋升为王。
English: Pengcheng was promoted to king with the title of knight of the chestnut.

古文：辛巳，冯文通遣尚书高颙上表称蕃，诏征其侍子。
现代文：十八日，冯文通派尚书高上表甘为朝廷藩属，世祖下诏征召他的侍子。
English: On the 18th, Feng Wuntong sent Shang Shu to the highest table to be a member of the imperial court, and the ancestor issued an edict to conscript his attendants.

古文：戊子，金当川率其众围西川侯彭文晖于阴密。
现代文：二十五日，金当川率领部属把西川侯彭文晖围在阴密。
English: On the 25th, Jin Dangchuan and his subordinates surrounded Xi Chuan Hou Peng Wenyu in the gloom.

古文：夏四月乙未，诏征西大将军常山王素讨当川。
现代文：夏季四月初三，命征西大将军常山王拓跋素征讨金当川。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, the general of the Western Expedition, Changshan Wang Tuoba, was ordered to invade the Jintang River.

古文：丁未，行幸河西。
现代文：十五日，世祖抵达河西。
English: On the 15th, the ancestor arrived in Hexi.

古文：壬戌，获当川，斩之于长安以徇。
现代文：三十日，擒获金当川，将其在长安斩首示众。
English: On the 30th, Jin Dangchuan was captured and beheaded in Chang'an.

古文：六月甲辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：六月十三日，世祖回宫。
English: On June 13th, the ancestor returned to the palace.

古文：辛亥，抚军大将军、永昌王健，司空、汝阴公长孙道生，侍中古弼，督诸军讨和龙。
现代文：二十日，抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健，司空、汝阴公长孙道生，侍中古弼，督率诸军征讨和龙。
English: On the 20th, Fuzhong general, Yongchang king Tuoba Jian, Siku, Ruyin chief Sun Daosheng, and attendant Gu Yao led the army to fight against the dragon.

古文：芟其禾稼，徙民而还。
现代文：将其庄稼收割一空，驱赶其民众而还。
English: They wiped out his crops, drove out his people and came back.

古文：秋七月辛巳，东宫成，备置屯卫，三分西宫之一。
现代文：秋季七月二十，东宫建成，世祖备置禁卫军，数量为西宫的三分之一。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month in autumn, the East Palace was completed, and the emperor prepared the imperial guard, the number of which was one-third of that of the West Palace.

古文：壬午，行幸美稷，遂至隰城。
现代文：初四，世祖巡视美稷，顺便到了隰城。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the patriarch made a tour of Bifeng, and by the way, came to the city of Bifeng.

古文：命诸军讨山胡白龙于西河。
现代文：命令各军在西河讨伐山胡白龙。
English: He ordered all armies to fight against the mountain-climbing Hu Bailong in the West River.

古文：九月戊子，克之，斩白龙及其将帅，屠其城。
现代文：九月二十八日，攻克敌人，杀了白龙及其将帅，屠杀城中百姓。
English: On September 28, he defeated the enemy, killed the White Dragon and its commander, and massacred the people in the city.

古文：冬十月癸巳，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬季十月初二，柔然派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Juran sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲午，破白龙余党于五原。
现代文：初三，朝廷军队在五原打败白龙余党。
English: On the third day of the first month, the imperial army defeated the White Dragon Yu Party in Wuhuan.

古文：诏山胡为白龙所逼及归降者，听为平民。
现代文：世祖下诏命被白龙所逼的人以及投降的山胡，都免罪为民。
English: According to the Emperor's edict, the people who were forced by the white dragon and the surrendering beeches were all exonerated.

古文：诸与白龙同恶，斩数千人，虏其妻子，班赐将士各有差。
现代文：与白龙同恶作乱的，被杀了数千人，俘虏其妻与子，赏赐将士各有等级。
English: Those who made mischief with the White Dragon were killed by the thousands, their wives and children were captured, and their soldiers were rewarded with ranks.

古文：十有一月，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一月世祖回到宫中。
English: In November, the ancestor returned to the palace.

古文：十有二月甲辰，行幸云中。
现代文：十二月十六日，世祖巡视云中。
English: On December 16th, the patriarch made a tour in the clouds.

古文：太延元年春正月壬午，降死刑已下各一等。
现代文：太延元年春季正月十四日，世祖下诏将死罪以下的囚犯罪减一等。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Taiyan, the patriarch issued an edict to reduce the crimes of prisoners below the death penalty by one grade.

古文：癸未，出太祖、太宗宫人，令得嫁。
现代文：十五日，放出太祖、太宗时的宫女，命她们出嫁。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Taizu and Empress Dowager Taizong were released and ordered to get married.

古文：甲申，大赦，改年。
现代文：十六日，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 16th, the world was amnestied, and the year was changed.

古文：二月庚子，蠕蠕、焉耆、车师诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：二月十三，蠕蠕、焉耆、车师诸国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On February 13th, envoys from various countries, including Cm Cm, Yan Cm, and Che Shih, came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：诏长安及平凉民徙在京师，其孤老不能自存者，听还乡里。
现代文：世祖下诏命长安以及平凉百姓被迁移到京城的，其中孤寡衰老不能自养的，听任他们返回故乡。
English: The patriarch issued an edict ordering the people of Chang'an and Pingliang to be moved to the capital. Those who were old and unable to support themselves were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：丁未，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十日，世祖车驾回宫。
English: On the 20th, the ancestral carriage drove back to the palace.

古文：三月癸亥，冯文通遣大将渴烛通朝献，辞以子疾。
现代文：三月初六，冯文通派大将渴烛通前来朝拜纳贡，世祖以太子有病为借口，不见来使。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, Feng Wentong sent his general, Qian Xiantong, to pay tribute to the emperor. However, Emperor Taizi did not come to pay tribute to the emperor on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：夏五月庚申，进宜都公穆寿为宜都王，汝阴公长孙道生为上党王，宜城公奚斤为恆农王，广陵公楼伏连为广陵王，本官各如故。
现代文：夏季五月初五，世祖晋封宜都公穆寿为宜都王，汝阴公长孙道生为上党王，宜城公奚斤为恒农王，广陵公楼伏连为广陵王，各人本官依然照旧。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the summer, the founder of the Jin Dynasty, Yidu Gong Mu Shou, was the king of Yidu, Ru Yin Gong Changsun Daosheng was the king of the upper party, Yicheng Gong Shujin was the king of Heng Nong, Guangling Gonglu Furen was the king of Guangling, and everyone's position was still the same.

古文：遣使者二十辈使西域。
现代文：世祖派使者二十人出使西域各国。
English: The Patriarch sent twenty envoys to the countries of the Western Regions.

古文：甲戌，行幸云中。
现代文：十八日，世祖巡视云中。
English: On the 18th, the patriarch made an inspection tour of Yunzhong.

古文：六月甲午，诏曰： 顷者寇逆消除，方表渐晏，思崇政化，敷洪治道，是以屡诏有司，班宣思惠，绥理百揆。
现代文：六月初八，世祖下诏书说： 最近以来，贼寇消除，海内渐安，朕考虑崇扬政教德化，弘扬治道，所以屡屡诏命有关部门，宣明恩惠，调理百业。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the ancestor issued an imperial edict saying: "Recently, the banditry has been eliminated and the sea has gradually become peaceful. I am considering advocating the moralization of politics and religion, and promoting the administration of justice. Therefore, I have repeatedly issued imperial edicts to the relevant departments, to publicize favors, and to regulate hundreds of businesses.

古文：群公卿士，师尹牧守，或未尽导扬之美，致令阴阳失序，和气不平，去春小旱，东作不茂。
现代文：在各公卿士尹牧守中，有没尽到宣扬朕教化之美的，以致阴阳失序，风雨不调，去年春天小旱，春禾不盛。
English: Among all the noblemen, Yin Mu Shou, some did not do enough to promote the beauty of our enlightenment, so that the yin and yang were out of order, the wind and rain were out of balance, there was a small drought last spring, and the spring grass was not in bloom.

古文：忧勤克己，祈请灵祗，上下咸秩。
现代文：朕忧勤克己，祈请神灵，于是天时顺调。
English: I worried, worked hard, restrained myself, and prayed to the gods, so the sky was aligned with the time.

古文：岂朕精诚有感，何报应之速，云雨震洒，流泽沾渥。
现代文：难道是朕精诚感动天地，为什么回报如此之快，喜雨不断，山泽润泽。
English: Is it because I sincerely moved heaven and earth, why the return is so fast, the joy and rain continue, the mountains and marshes are moist.

古文：有鄙妇人持方寸玉印，诣潞县侯孙家，既而亡去，莫知所在。
现代文：有一个贫贱的妇人手持一寸见方的玉印，到潞县侯孙家，接着就不见了，不知她到什么地方去了。
English: There was a poor woman holding a one-inch-square jade seal in her hand. She went to the family home of Hou Sun in Handan County, and then disappeared. I don't know where she went.

古文：玉色鲜白，光照内映。
现代文：这块玉颜色鲜白，光泽透明。
English: This piece of jade is bright white in color and has a transparent luster.

古文：印有三字，为龙鸟之形，要妙奇巧，不类人迹，文曰 旱疫平 。
现代文：印上刻有三字，作龙鸟的形状，奇异精巧，不像是人类所为，刻文曰 旱疫平 。
English: There are three characters engraved on the seal, in the shape of a dragon and bird, which is strangely exquisite and does not look like it was made by humans. The inscription reads "Drought and Epidemic."

古文：推寻其理，盖神灵之报应也。
现代文：朕推究其中道理，觉得这是神灵的报应。
English: I deduced the reason and felt that this was the retribution of the gods.

古文：朕用嘉焉。
现代文：朕很高兴。
English: I am very happy.

古文：比者已来，祯瑞仍臻：所在甘露流液，降于殿内；嘉瓜合蒂，生于中山；野木连理，殖于魏郡；在先后载诞之乡，白燕集于盛乐旧都，玄鸟随之，盖有千数；嘉禾频岁合秀于恆农；白雉、白兔并见于勃海，白雉三只又集于平阳太祖之庙。
现代文：最近以来，瑞兆屡现：甘露流液，降于内殿；合蒂嘉瓜，在中山发现；魏郡发现合枝连理的野木，那里是先皇后诞生的地方；白色的燕子在盛乐旧都汇集，黑色的鸟跟随着，大概有千余只；恒农的嘉禾连年合秀；白色野鸡、白色的兔子都在渤海发现，三只白野鸡又在平阳太祖庙中集合。
English: Recently, Ruizhao has repeatedly appeared: nectar flow liquid, fell to the inner hall; Hettijagua, found in Zhongshan; Wei County found the wild tree of Heda Lianli, where the first queen was born; white swallows gathered in Shengle Old Town, followed by black birds, about more than a thousand; Hengnong's Jiahe consecutive years; white pheasants and white rabbits were found in the Bohai Sea, and three white pheasants gathered in the Pingyang Taizu Temple.

古文：天降嘉贶，将何德以酬之？
现代文：天降嘉瑞，朕以什么来酬答呢？
English: He sent twenty messengers to the west, and eighteen to the middle of the cloud.

古文：所以内省惊震，欣惧交怀。
现代文：每每想起来惊怵震动，欣喜惧怕交加。
English: Every time I think about it, I get a jolt of shock, mixed with joy and fear.

古文：其令天下大酺五日，礼报百神；守宰祭界内名山大川，上答天意，以求福禄。 
现代文：朕令天下大食五日，礼报百神，各太守县令祭祀辖境内的名山大川，上答天意，以祈求福禄。 
English: On the fifth day of the great feast, I ordered the whole world to offer sacrifices to the one hundred gods. Each daimyos and counties were ordered to offer sacrifices to the famous mountains and rivers within their jurisdiction, to answer the will of heaven, and to pray for good fortune.

古文：丙午，高丽、鄯善国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十日，高丽、鄯善国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 20th, envoys from Goryeo and South Jeolla Province came to pay tribute.

古文：戊申，诏骠骑大将军、乐平王丕等五将率骑四万东伐文通。
现代文：二十二日，世祖下诏命骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕等五位将领率领四万兵士东伐冯文通。
English: On the 22nd, the patriarch issued an edict ordering five generals, including the cavalry general and Leping Wang Tuobao, to lead the 40,000 soldiers of the Eastern Expedition of Feng Wentong.

古文：秋七月，田于棝杨。
现代文：秋季七月，世祖在木固阳打猎。
English: In autumn, in July, Shiso went hunting in Muguyang.

古文：己卯，丕等至于和龙，徙男女六千口而还。
现代文：二十四日，拓跋丕等到和龙，迁徙六千男女到内地。
English: On the 24th, six thousand men and women migrated from Tubo to Hulun.

古文：八月丙戌，遂幸河西。
现代文：八月初一，世祖顺道视察黄河以西。
English: On the first day of August, the patriarch made a visit to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：粟特国遣使朝献。
现代文：粟特国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Sogdians sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月甲戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月二十日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On September 20, Shizu returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月癸卯，尚书左仆射安原谋反伏诛。
现代文：冬季十月十九日，尚书左仆射安原谋反被杀。
English: In the winter of October 19th, Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao Anyuan, was killed while plotting a counterattack.

古文：甲辰，行幸定州，次于新城宫。
现代文：二十日，世祖视察定州，住在新城宫。
English: On the 20th, the inspection team arrived in Dingzhou and stayed in Xincheng Palace.

古文：十有一月乙丑，行幸冀州。
现代文：十一月十二日，世祖巡视冀州。
English: On November 12, the patriarch made an inspection tour of Jizhou.

古文：己巳，校猎于广川。
现代文：十六日，在广川阅武打猎。
English: On the 16th, a military parade was held in Hirokawa.

古文：丙子，行幸鄴，祀密太后庙。
现代文：二十三日，世祖巡视邺城，祭祀密太后庙。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived in Lucheng and made a sacrifice at the Temple of the Empress Dowager.

古文：诸所过，对问高年，褒礼贤俊。
现代文：每经过一个地方，慰问年高的人，褒奖礼遇贤良俊杰。
English: Every time I pass through a place, I will offer my condolences to the elderly, and I will reward and treat the virtuous.

古文：十有二月甲申，诏曰： 操持六柄，王者所以统摄；平政理讼，公卿之所司存；劝农平赋，宰民之所专急；尽力三时，黔首之所克济。
现代文：十二月初一，世祖下诏书说： 分理政柄，为王者应当统提；平衡政事，断理狱讼，是公卿的职责；劝农耕种，平调赋税，这是郡县宰令的当务之急；三时尽力，是百姓勉力所为的。
English: On the first day of December, the ancestor issued an imperial rescript saying: to divide the political power, the king should be the leader; to balance the political affairs and judge the prison litigation is the duty of the nobles; to advise the farmers to cultivate and to adjust the tax, this is the urgent task of the county and prefectural governors; to do their best at all times is what the people are trying to do.

古文：各修其分，谓之有序；今更不然，何以为治？
现代文：这些人各尽其职，称为井井有序。而今变得不是这样了，那朕以什么治理国家呢？
English: These people all did their duty and were called well-ordered. Now that is no longer the case, so how can we govern the country?

古文：越职侵局，有紊纲纪；上无定令，民知何从？
现代文：官员们越职侵权，扰乱纲纪；上面没有确定的指令，老百姓怎么知道何去何从？
English: Officials are violating their duties and disrupting discipline; without clear instructions from above, how can ordinary people know where to go?

古文：自今以后，亡匿避难，羁旅他乡，皆当归还旧居，不问前罪。民相杀害，牧守依法平决，不听私辄报复，敢有报者，诛及宗族；邻伍相助，与同罪。
现代文：从今以后，逃亡避难、流浪他乡的人，都应归还旧里，不再追问他以前的过错；老百姓互相残杀，地方官员依法判决，不准他们私下报复，如有敢报复的，诛杀其宗族；邻居如帮助他，与其同罪。
English: From now on, all those who have fled, taken refuge, or wandered away from their hometowns should return to their hometowns and no longer be asked about their previous wrongdoings; the common people should kill each other, local officials should make judgments according to the law and not allow them to take revenge in private, and if someone dares to take revenge, they should kill their relatives; if a neighbor helps him, he is guilty of the same crime.

古文：州郡县不得妄遣吏卒，烦扰民庶。
现代文：各州郡县不得妄自派吏卒扰烦百姓。
English: Each prefecture and county shall not arbitrarily send officials to disturb the people.

古文：若有发调，县宰集卿邑三老计赀定课，裒多益寡，九品混通，不得纵富督贫，避强侵弱。
现代文：如有征发调用的，县令必须召集乡邑三老商讨酬报课税，奖多益寡，九品混同，不得放纵富家督损穷人，避强欺弱。
English: If there is a requisition and transfer, the county order must convene the three old merchants of the township to solicit remuneration and report taxation, the award is mixed up, and the rich should not be allowed to control the poor, and the strong should not bully the weak.

古文：太守覆检能否，核其殿最，列言属州。
现代文：太守复检其才能优劣，核其政绩，上报属州。
English: The grand marshal will re-examine the merits of his talent, check his political performance, and report to the state.

古文：刺史明考优劣，抑退奸吏，升进贞良，岁尽举课上台。
现代文：刺史应考其优劣，贬退奸吏，提拔贞良，年终报知上级。
English: They should examine the merits and demerits of stabbing history, demote traitors, promote chastity, and report to their superiors at the end of the year.

古文：特守荷治民之行，当宣扬恩化，奉顺宪典，与国同忧。
现代文：各地方长官担负着治理百姓的大任，应当宣明朝廷恩泽教化，奉崇顺从宪章典制，与国同忧。
English: Local governors bear the great responsibility of governing the people. They should proclaim the benevolence and enlightenment of the imperial court, respect and obey the constitutional system, and share the country's concerns.

古文：直道正身，肃居官次，不亦善乎？ 
现代文：如官员们人人廉洁奉公，不也是很好的事吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be a good thing if all officials served the public with integrity?

古文：癸卯，遣使者以太牢祀北岳。
现代文：二十日，派使者用牛、猪、羊太牢之礼祭祀北岳。
English: On the 20th, an emissary was sent to offer sacrifices of oxen, pigs, and sheep to Hidake.

古文：二年春正月甲寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：太延二年春季正月初二，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, the car drove back to the palace.

古文：二月戊子，冯文通遣使朝贡，求送侍子，帝不许。
现代文：二月初六，冯文通派使者前来朝拜纳贡，请求送其子侍奉朝廷，世祖不同意。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Feng Wentong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, requesting to send his son to serve the imperial court. The patriarch did not agree.

古文：壬辰，遣使者十余辈诣高丽、东夷诸国，诏谕之。
现代文：初十，派遣十余名使者到高丽、东夷各国，奉诏慰抚他们。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, more than ten envoys were dispatched to the countries of Goryeo and Dongyi, to comfort them.

古文：三月丙辰，刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月初五，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On March 5, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：辛未，平东将军娥清、安西将军古弼，率精骑一万讨冯文通，平州刺史元婴又率辽西将军会之。
现代文：二十日，平东将军娥清、安西将军古弼，率领一万精锐骑兵讨伐冯文通，平州刺史元婴又率领辽西将军与之会合。
English: On the 20th, Pingdong General E Qing and Anxi General Gu Xi led ten thousand elite cavalry to fight Feng Wentong, and Pingzhou General Jishi Yuanbo led Liao Xi to meet him.

古文：文通迫急，求救于高丽，高丽使其大将葛蔓卢以步骑二万人迎文通。
现代文：冯文通迫于势急，向高丽求助，高丽派其大将葛蔓芦率领骑步兵二万人迎接冯文通。
English: In desperation, Feng Wentong appealed to Goryeo for help. Goryeo sent its general Ge Manlu, leading 20,000 cavalry and infantry, to meet Feng Wentong.

古文：甲戌，以阙镇虎牢。
现代文：二十三日，世祖命镇守虎牢关。
English: On the 23rd, the ancestor's life was sacrificed to guard the pass.

古文：夏四月甲申，皇子小兒、苗兒并薨。
现代文：夏季四月初二，皇子小儿、苗儿一起去世。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, Prince Xiao'er and Miao'er passed away together.

古文：五月乙卯，冯文通奔高丽。
现代文：五月初五，冯文通投奔高丽。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Feng Wentong went to Korea.

古文：戊午，诏散骑常侍封拨使高丽，征送文通。
现代文：初八，世祖下诏命散骑常侍封拔出使高丽，请求高丽送回冯文通。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the founder of the dynasty issued an edict ordering Zangjia Changzhi Bo to pull out the envoy Goryeo and request Goryeo to send Feng Wentong back.

古文：丁卯，行幸河西。
现代文：十七日，世祖巡视黄河以西。
English: On the 17th, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：赫连定之西也，杨难当窃据上邽。
现代文：在赫连定的西面，杨难当窃据上圭阝。
English: On the west side of Helianthus, Yang Nantang stole Shangguizhou.

古文：秋七月庚戌，诏骠骑大将军、乐平王丕等督河西、高平诸军讨之。
现代文：秋季七月初一，世祖下诏命令骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕等督领河西、高平各路军马讨伐杨难当。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the ancestor issued an edict ordering the cavalry general, Leping Wang Tuobao and other commanders to lead the troops and horses from Hexi and Gaoping to fight Yang Nantang.

古文：诏散骑侍郎、广平子游雅等使于刘义隆。
现代文：下诏命散骑侍郎、广平子游雅等人出使刘义隆政权。
English: Liu Yilong's regime was dispatched by the following edict: Sanki Jiro, Guangping Zi Youya and others.

古文：八月丁亥，遣使六辈使西域。
现代文：八月初八，派遣六批使者出使西域。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month, six groups of envoys were sent to the western region.

古文：帝校猎于河西。
现代文：世祖在河西阅武射猎。
English: The ancestor of the world read the martial art of shooting and hunting in Hexi.

古文：诏广平公张黎发定州七郡一万二千人，通莎泉道。
现代文：世祖下诏命广平公张黎征调定州七郡一万二千人，修通莎泉道。
English: The patriarch issued an imperial edict ordering Guangping Gong Zhang Lizei to transfer twelve thousand people from seven counties in Dingzhou and cut off Shasquan Road.

古文：甲辰，高车国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十五日，高车国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 25th, Gaochao sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：九月庚戌，骠骑大将军、乐平王丕等至略阳，难当奉诏摄上邽守。
现代文：九月初二，骠骑大将军乐平王拓跋丕等率军到略阳，杨难当奉诏为上絡太守。
English: On the second day of September, the cavalry general Leping Wang Tuobao led the army to Liaoyang, and Yang Nandu was awarded the title of Shangluo Taishu.

古文：高丽不送文通，遣使奉表，称当与文通俱奉王化。
现代文：高丽拒绝把冯文通送回，派使者奉奏章，声称其当与冯文通一起归奉王者教化。
English: Goryeo refused to send Feng Wentong back and sent an envoy to Bongseokjeon, claiming that he should be educated together with Feng Wentong.

古文：帝以高丽违诏，议将击之，纳乐平王丕计而止。
现代文：世祖因高丽违抗诏命，商议准备讨伐他们，最后采纳了乐平王的建议放弃原来意图。
English: Because of Goryeo's defiance of the imperial edict, King Sejo deliberated on preparing to fight them, and finally accepted King Leping's suggestion to give up the original intention.

古文：冬十有一月己酉，行幸棝杨，驱野马于云中，置野马苑。
现代文：冬季十一月初一，世祖巡视木固杨，把野马驱赶到云中郡，设置野马苑。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Shizu inspected Mugu Yang, drove the wild horses to Yunnan County, and set up a wild horse park.

古文：闰月壬子，车驾还宫。
现代文：闰月初五，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth lunar month, the car drove back to the palace.

古文：乙丑，颍川王提改封武昌王。
现代文：十八日，颍川王拓跋提被改封为武昌王。
English: On the 18th, King Tuoba of Qianchuan was renamed King Wuchang.

古文：河西王沮渠牧犍，遣使朝贡。
现代文：河西王沮渠牧犍，派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The king of Western Heze dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑慕璝死。
现代文：这一年，吐谷浑可汗慕去世。
English: In the same year, Tutani Hummucho died.

古文：三年春正月癸未，征东大将军、中山王纂薨。
现代文：太延三年春季正月初七，征东大将军、中山王拓跋纂逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Taiyan, the general of the Eastern Expedition, Zhongshan Wang Tuoba died.

古文：戊子，太尉、北平王长孙嵩薨。
现代文：十二日，太尉、北平王长孙嵩逝世。
English: On the 12th, Sun Song, the first lieutenant and the eldest son of King Peiping, passed away.

古文：乙巳，镇南大将军、丹阳王叔孙建薨。
现代文：二十九日，镇南大将军、丹阳王叔孙建去世。
English: On the 29th, Zhenan Grand General and Danyang King's uncle Sun Jian passed away.

古文：二月乙卯，行幸幽州，存恤孤老，问民疾苦；还幸上谷，遂至代。
现代文：二月初九，世祖巡视幽州，慰问抚恤孤寡贫老的人，探问百姓疾苦；又视察上谷，顺便到了代郡。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, the patriarch visited Yuzhou to offer condolences to the orphans and the poor, and inquire about the hardships of the people. He also visited Shanggu, and by the way, went to Dayi County.

古文：所过复田租之半。
现代文：经过的地方都免除一半田租。
English: Half of the field rent is waived in all the places they pass through.

古文：高丽、契丹国并遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、契丹国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Goryeo and Khitan both sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：三月丁丑，以南平王浑为镇东大将军、仪同三司，镇和龙。
现代文：三月初二，世祖任命南平王拓跋浑为镇东大将军、仪同三司，镇守和龙。
English: On the second day of March, the ancestor appointed Nanping Wang Tuobabun as the general of the town of Dongda, the three departments of the ceremony, the town guard and the dragon.

古文：己卯，舆驾还宫。
现代文：初四，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the ancestor returned to the palace.

古文：癸巳，龟兹、悦般、焉耆、车师、粟特、疏勒、乌孙、渴槃陀、鄯善诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：十八日，龟兹、悦般、焉耆、车师、粟特、疏勤、乌孙、渴盘、鄯善各国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 18th, envoys from all over the country, including Guizi, Yuepang, Yanqiao, Chaishi, Sogdian, Zuoqin, Usun, Qipan, and Shanshan, came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丁酉，刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十二日，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：夏五月己丑，诏曰： 方今寇逆消殄，天下渐晏。
现代文：夏季五月二十日，世祖下诏书说： 今天消除离乱，天下渐渐安宁。
English: On the 20th day of the 5th month of summer, the patriarch issued an imperial edict saying, "Today, we will eliminate chaos, and the world will gradually become peaceful."

古文：比年以来，屡诏有司，班宣惠政，与民宁息。
现代文：近年以来，朕屡屡诏令有关部门，宣明惠政，让民休养生息。
English: In recent years, I have repeatedly issued orders to relevant departments to publicize favorable policies and allow people to rest and recuperate.

古文：而内外群官及牧守令长，不能忧勤所司，纠察非法，废公带私，更相隐置，浊货为官，政存苟且。
现代文：但内外群官以及牧令守宰，不能尽职尽责，纠察非法，废公务私，更竞相偷偷设置额外负担，贪赃枉法，玩忽职守。
English: However, the group officials at home and abroad, as well as the pastoral guards, are unable to perform their duties, picket illegally, waste official duties and private duties, and even compete to secretly set up additional burdens, abuse the law, and neglect their duties.

古文：夫法之不用，自上犯之，其令天下吏民，得举告守令不如法者。 丙申，行幸云中。
现代文：夫法令不行，原因在上，可让天下吏卒百姓，举报那些不守法纪律令的官员们。 
English: An executive order is not enough. The reason for this is so that the world's bureaucrats can serve the people and report those officials who do not abide by the law and disciplinary orders.

古文：秋七月戊子，使抚军大将军、永昌王健，司空、上党王长孙道生，讨山胡白龙余党于西河，灭之。
现代文：二十七日，世祖巡视云中。秋季七月十五日，世祖命抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健，司空、上党王长孙道生，在西河讨伐山胡白龙余党，消灭了他们。
English: On the 27th day, the ancestor inspected the clouds. On the 15th day of the autumn, the ancestor ordered the general of the Fuzhou army, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, Siku, and Shangdang Wang Changsun Daosheng, to fight the remaining party of Hu Bailong in the West River and eliminate them.

古文：八月甲辰，行幸河西。
现代文：八月初一，世祖视察河西。
English: On the first day of August, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：九月甲申，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十二日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On September 12th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：丁酉，遣使者拜西秦王慕璝弟慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封西平王。
现代文：二十五日，派使者封西秦王慕之弟慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封西平王。
English: On the 25th, he sent an envoy to appoint Muriyan, the younger brother of the Western Qin King Murong, as the Zhenxi Grand General and the three departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and changed his title to the King of Xiping.

古文：冬十月癸卯，行幸云中。
现代文：冬十月初一，世祖抵达云中。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the parade reaches the clouds.

古文：十有一月壬申，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一月初一，回到宫中。
English: On the first day of November, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲申，破洛那、者舌国各遣使朝献，奉汗血马。
现代文：十三日，破落那、者舌国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡，奉献汗血马。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, all the emissaries of the kingdoms of the ruined nations came to pay homage to the tribute, and to offer the blood-stained horse.

古文：是岁，河西王沮渠牧犍世子封坛来朝。
现代文：这一年，河西王沮渠牧健世子封坛前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In this year, the prince of Hexi Wang Dequ, the successor of Mu Jian, came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：四年春三月庚辰，鄯善王弟素延耆来朝。
现代文：太延四年春季三月初五，鄯善王之弟素延耆前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month in the spring of the 4th year, the younger brother of King Zenzong Zenzong came to see the emperor.

古文：癸未，罢沙门年五十已下。
现代文：十三日，诏令五十岁以下的和尚一律还俗。
English: On the 13th, the emperor decreed that all monks under the age of fifty were to return to secular life.

古文：江阳王根薨。
现代文：江阳王拓跋根逝世。
English: Jiangyang Wanggen passed away.

古文：是月，高丽杀冯文通。
现代文：这个月，高丽杀了冯文通。
English: This month, Goryeo killed Feng Wentong.

古文：夏五月戊寅，大赦天下。
现代文：夏季五月初九，世祖大赦天下。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month in summer, the founder of the world was pardoned.

古文：丙申，行幸五原。
现代文：二十七日，世祖巡视五原。
English: On the 27th, the patriarch made a tour of the Five Plains.

古文：秋七月壬午，车驾北伐。
现代文：秋季七月十二日，世祖北伐。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Northern Expedition began.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事载《蠕蠕传》。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：冬十月乙丑，大飨六军。
现代文：冬季十月二十九日，世祖大赏六军。
English: In winter, on October 29th, the founder of the dynasty awarded the Six Armies.

古文：十二月丁巳，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：十二月二十二日，世祖北伐归来。
English: On December 22, the founder of the Northern Expedition returned.

古文：上洛巴泉蕇等相率内附。
现代文：上洛巴人泉等相继归附朝廷。
English: Upper Loba Renquan and other areas were successively annexed by the imperial court.

古文：诏兼散骑常侍高雅使刘义隆。
现代文：世祖下诏命兼散骑常侍高雅出使刘义隆政权。
English: The regime of Liu Yilong, the emissary of Gao Ya, the emperor's father-in-law, issued an imperial edict.

古文：五年春正月庚寅，行幸定州。
现代文：太延五年年春季正月二十五日，世祖巡视定州。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the parade went to Dingzhou.

古文：三月丁卯，诏卫大将军、乐安王范遣雍州刺史葛那取上洛。刘义隆上洛太守镡生长弃郡走。
现代文：三月初三，世祖下诏命卫大将军、乐安王拓跋范派雍州刺史葛那攻取上洛，刘义隆的上洛太守镡长生放弃州郡逃走。
English: On the third day of the third month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month

古文：辛未，车驾还宫。
现代文：初七，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：庚寅，以故南秦王世子杨保宗为征南大将军、秦州牧、武都王，镇上邽。
现代文：二十六日，世祖任命已故南秦王世子杨保宗为征南大将军、秦州牧、武都王，镇守上圭阝。
English: On the 26th, Yang Baozong, the son of the deceased King of Southern Qin, was appointed as the General of the Southern Expedition, the King of Qin, the King of Wudu, and the Town Warden of Shanggui.

古文：夏四月丁酉，鄯善、龟兹、疏勒、焉耆诸国遣使朝献。
现代文：夏季四月初三，鄯善、龟兹、疏勒、焉耆各国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month in summer, envoys from various countries including Jinshan, Guizi, Shule and Yanqi came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：五月丁丑，治兵于西郊。
现代文：五月十四日，世祖在京城西郊练兵。
English: On May 14th, the founder of the dynasty went to train soldiers in the western suburbs of Beijing.

古文：癸未，遮逸国献汗血马。
现代文：二十日，遮逸国奉献汗血马。
English: On the 20th, the country of Chia-Yat dedicated a blood-and-sweat horse.

古文：六月甲辰，车驾西讨沮渠牧犍，侍中、宜都王穆寿辅皇太子决留台事；大将军、长乐王嵇敬，辅国大将军、建宁王崇二万人屯漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：六月十一日，世祖亲自征讨沮渠牧犍，侍中、宜都王穆寿辅佐皇太子处理朝中日常事务；大将军、长乐王嵇敬，辅国大将军、建宁王拓跋崇率二万人屯军大漠南面，以防备蠕蠕。
English: On June 11th, the founder of the dynasty personally enlisted the help of the Empress Dowager, and the Vice-Chamberlain, Yidu King Mu Shou, assisted by the Crown Prince, dealt with the daily affairs of the dynasty; the Grand General, Changle King Su Jing, and the Vice-Grand General, Jianning King Tuoba Chong, led a 20,000-ton army to the south of the Great Desert to guard against worms.

古文：秋七月己巳，车驾至上郡属国城，大飨群臣，讲武马射。
现代文：秋季七月初七，世祖抵达上郡属国城，大宴群臣，讲论武备，驰马射箭。
English: In autumn, on the seventh day of the seventh month of July, the ancestor arrived in Shang County, a city belonging to the country, held a grand banquet for the ministers, gave a lecture on military preparedness, and went horseback archery.

古文：壬午，留辎重，分部诸军：抚军大将军、永昌王健，尚书令、钜鹿公刘洁督诸军，与常山王素二道并进，为前锋；骠骑大将军、乐平王丕，太宰、阳平王杜超，督平凉、鄜城诸军为后继。
现代文：二十日，世祖留下辎重物资，分别部署各路兵力：抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健，尚书令、钜鹿公刘洁督领各军，与常山王拓跋素二支军马齐头并进，作为先锋部队；骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕，太宰、阳平王杜超，督领平凉、城各军为后援部队。
English: On the 20th, the ancestor left behind a large amount of heavy materials and deployed troops from all directions: the general of the Fuzhou army, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, Shang Shuling, and Liu Jie, the governor of Menglu, led the armies and marched side by side with the horses of the two armies of Changshan Wang Tuoba Su, as the vanguard troops; the general of the horse cavalry, Leping Wang Tuoba Jian, Dazai, Yangping Wang Du Chao, the governor Ping Liang, and the army of the city were the backup troops.

古文：八月甲午，永昌王健获牧犍牛马畜产二十余万。
现代文：八月初二，永昌王拓跋健缴获沮渠牧犍的牛马畜产二十多万头。
English: On the second day of August, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian seized more than 200,000 heads of cattle and horses that were herded along the canal.

古文：牧犍遣弟董来率万余人拒战于城南，望尘退走。
现代文：牧犍派弟弟董来率领一万多人在城南迎战，望尘退走。
English: Mu Xi sent his younger brother Dong to lead more than ten thousand people to fight in the south of the city, hoping to retreat.

古文：丙申，车驾至姑臧，牧犍兄子祖逾城来降，乃分军围之。
现代文：初四，世祖到了姑臧，牧犍兄子沮渠祖出城前来投降，世祖于是分军围城。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Shizuo arrived at Guzheng. His elder brother, Muxun, came out of the city to surrender to Shizuo. Shizuo then led a detachment to besiege the city.

古文：九月丙戌，牧犍兄子万年率麾下来降。
现代文：九月初四，牧犍兄子沮渠万年率领部下前来投降。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12

古文：是日，牧犍与左右文武五千人面缚军门，帝解其缚，侍以籓臣之礼，收其城内户口二十余万，仓库珍宝不可称计。
现代文：这一天，沮渠牧犍与左右文武五千人自缚来到世祖军门之前，世祖亲自给他们松了绑，以藩属臣子的礼节接待了他们。世祖收编城内户口二十多万，仓库中搜出的珍宝不可胜数。
English: On this day, before the five thousand people of the left, right, left and right clans and armed forces came to the ancestral army gate, the ancestor personally untied them and received them with the etiquette of a vassal belonging to the clan. The ancestor collected more than two hundred thousand households in the city, and the treasures found in the warehouse were countless.

古文：进张掖公秃发保周爵为王，与龙骧将军穆罴、安远将军源贺分略诸郡，杂人降者亦数十万。
现代文：晋封张掖公秃发保周为王，与龙骧将军穆罴、安远将军源贺分略诸郡，各少数民族降者数十万。
English: Zhang Yigong Bald Guozhou was crowned king, and the counties of Longjing General Muxing and Anyuan General Yuan He were abolished, and hundreds of thousands of ethnic minorities were subjugated.

古文：牧犍弟张掖太守宜得，烧仓库，西奔酒泉。乐都太守安周南奔吐谷浑。
现代文：牧犍之弟张掖太守沮渠宜得焚烧仓库，西奔酒泉；乐都太守安周向南逃奔吐谷浑。
English: The younger brother of the herdsman, Zhang Xuan, the grand marshal of the Great Canal, burned the warehouse and ran to the west to the wine spring; the grand marshal of the Great Canal, An Zhou, fled to the south and ran to the valley.

古文：遣镇南将军奚眷讨张掖，遂至酒泉，牧犍弟酒泉太守无讳及宜得复奔晋昌。
现代文：世祖派镇南将军奚眷讨伐张掖，于是世祖又到了酒泉，牧犍弟酒泉太守无讳以及宜得又投奔晋昌。
English: The ancestor sent the Zhenan general and his retinue to fight against Zhang Ye, so the ancestor went to Jiuquan, and the younger brother of the herdsman, Jiuquan, did not hesitate and went to Jinchang.

古文：使弋阳公元洁守酒泉。
现代文：世祖派弋阳公元洁据守酒泉。
English: The ancestors of the world sent Jie to Shiyang to guard the wine spring.

古文：镇北将军封沓讨乐都，掠数千家而还。
现代文：镇北将军封沓讨伐乐都，掠抢数千家回军。
English: General Zhenbei besieged and besieged Leduc, plundered thousands of houses, and returned with his army.

古文：班赐将士各有差。
现代文：世祖数量不等地赏赐众将士。
English: The ancestors of the world rewarded the soldiers in varying amounts.

古文：戊子，蠕蠕犯塞，遂至七介山，京师大骇。
现代文：二十七日，蠕蠕侵犯边境，一直打到七介山，京城震惊。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the creep invaded the border, and the city was shocked as the creep went all the way to Qixia Mountain.

古文：皇太子命上党王长孙道生等拒之。
现代文：皇太子命充上党王长孙道生等迎战。
English: The crown prince ordered the head of the party, Sun Dosheng, to counterattack.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：冬十月辛酉，车驾东还，徒凉州民三万余家于京师。
现代文：冬季十月初一，世祖东还，把三万凉州百姓迁居到京城。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the founder of the Eastern Han Dynasty moved 30,000 people from Liangzhou to the capital.

古文：留骠骑大将军、乐平王丕，征西大将军贺多罗镇凉州。
现代文：留下骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕，征西将军贺多罗镇守凉州。
English: He left behind the cavalry general, Leping Wang Tuobao, and the general of the Western Conquest, Hedoro, to defend Liangzhou.

古文：癸亥，遣张掖王秃发保周谕诸部鲜卑，保周因率诸部叛于张掖。
现代文：初三，世祖派张掖王秃发保周告示各部鲜卑人，保周就率领各部落在张掖叛乱。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, King Bald Baozhou of Zhangye, the founder of the dynasty, sent a proclamation to all the subordinate tribes, and Baozhou led all the tribes to rebel in Zhangye.

古文：十有一月乙巳，刘义隆遣使朝献，并献驯象一。
现代文：十一月十六日，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡，并献上驯好的象一头。
English: On November 16, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, and presented a tamed elephant.

古文：是月，高丽及粟特、渴槃陀、破洛那、悉居半诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：这个月，高丽以及粟特、渴盘、破洛那、悉居半各国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: This month, envoys from Goryeo, Sogdia, Goryeo, Polonaise, Sikkim and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：十有二月壬午，车驾至自西伐，饮至策勋，告于宗庙。
现代文：十二月二十三日，世祖回到平城，论功行赏，告祭宗庙。
English: On December 23rd, the patriarch returned to Pingcheng, talked about the merits and rewards, and announced the dedication of the ancestral temple.

古文：杨难当寇上邽，镇将元勿头击走之。
现代文：杨难当侵犯上絡，镇将元勿头打退了他们。
English: When Yang Nandu invaded Shangluo, the town rebuffed them.

古文：是岁，鄯善、龟兹、疏勒、焉耆、高丽、粟特、渴槃陀、破洛那、悉居半等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，鄯善、龟兹、疏勒、焉耆、高丽、粟特、渴盘、破洛那、悉居半等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In that year, envoys from many countries, such as Shaoshan, Guizi, Shule, Yanzhong, Goryeo, Sogdia, Zhapan, Polona, and Sibu, came to pay tribute.

古文：世祖纪下宗纪太平真君元年春正月己酉，沮渠无讳围酒泉。
现代文：太平真君元年春季正月二十日，沮渠无讳围攻酒泉。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the first year of Taiping Zhenjun in the spring of the first year, he went to besiege Jiuquan.

古文：辛亥，分遣侍臣巡行州郡，观察风俗，问民疾苦。
现代文：二十二日，世祖分别派侍臣巡视各州郡，观察风俗，问民疾苦。
English: On the 22nd, the ancestor sent his courtiers to inspect each state and county separately, observe the customs, and ask the people about their hardships.

古文：壬子，无讳诱执弋阳公元洁。
现代文：二十三日，沮渠无讳诱捕弋阳公元洁。
English: On the twenty-third day, he brazenly entrapped Poyang Jie.

古文：二月己巳，诏假通直常侍邢颖使于刘义隆。
现代文：二月初十，世祖下诏命假通直常侍邢颖出使刘义隆政权。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17

古文：发长安五千人浚昆明池。
现代文：征调长安五千人疏浚昆明池。
English: 5,000 people from Chang'an were drafted in to dredge Kunming Lake.

古文：三月，酒泉陷。
现代文：三月，酒泉陷落。
English: In March, Jiuquan collapsed.

古文：夏四月庚辰，无讳寇张掖，秃发保周屯于删丹。
现代文：夏季四月二十三日，沮渠无讳侵犯张掖，秃发保周屯兵于删丹。
English: On the summer day of April 23rd, Zhu Diqiu blatantly encroached on Zhang Ye, and Bald Baozhou's troops marched into Qidan.

古文：丙戌，诏抚军大将军、永昌王健等督诸军讨保周。
现代文：二十九日，世祖下诏命抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健等督领各军讨伐保周。
English: On the 29th, the patriarch issued an edict to the general of the Fuzhou army, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, and other commanders to lead the army to fight against logging.

古文：五月辛卯，行幸北部。
现代文：五月初四，世祖巡视北部郡县。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the patriarch made a tour of the northern counties.

古文：乙巳，无讳复围张掖，不克，退还。
现代文：十八日，沮渠无讳又围张掖，攻城不克，退兵回去。
English: On the 18th day of the month, they brazenly encircled Zhangye again, besieged the city, and withdrew.

古文：丙辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十九日，世祖回到宫中。
English: B Chen, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：六月丁丑，皇孙浚生，大赦，改年。
现代文：六月二十一日，皇孙拓跋氵睿出生，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On June 21st, the emperor's grandson, Tuoba Rui, was born. He was granted amnesty and his name was changed.

古文：秋七月，行幸阴山。
现代文：秋季七月，世祖巡视阴山。
English: In autumn and July, the procession reached Mount Everest.

古文：己丑，永昌王健至番禾，破保周。周遁走。
现代文：初三，永昌王拓跋健到番禾，打败了秃发保周，保周领兵逃走。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian came to Panghe, defeated Balding Baozhou, and Baozhou led the soldiers to flee.

古文：丙申，皇太后窦氏崩于行宫。
现代文：初十，皇太后窦氏在行宫去世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Empress Dowager Dou died on her way to the palace.

古文：癸丑，保周自杀，传首京师。
现代文：二十七日，秃发保周自杀，首级送到京城。
English: On the 27th, Bald Guo Zhou committed suicide, and his head was sent to Beijing.

古文：八月甲申，无讳降，送弋阳公元洁及诸将士。
现代文：八月二十九日，沮渠无讳投降，送还弋阳公元洁及众将士。
English: On August 29th, he surrendered without hesitation and sent back the general Jie and his soldiers to Poyang.

古文：九月壬寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十八日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On September 17th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十有一月丁亥，行幸山北。
现代文：冬季十一月初三，世祖巡视山北。
English: On the third day of the first month of winter, Shizu inspected the northern part of the mountain.

古文：十二月，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月，世祖回到宫中。
English: In December, driving back to the palace.

古文：是岁，州镇十五民饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：这一年，魏国州郡有一半发生饥荒，官府开仓济民。
English: In that year, half of Wei Guozhou County suffered from famine, and the government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：以河南王曜子羯兒为河间王，后改封略阳王。
现代文：世祖封河南王拓跋曜的儿子羯儿为河间王，后改封为略阳王。
English: The ancestor named the son of King Tuobao of Henan Province, Yaer, as the King of Kawama, and later changed his name to the King of Liangyang.

古文：二年春正月癸卯，拜沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州牧、酒泉王。
现代文：太平真君二年春季正月二十日，拜沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州牧、酒泉王。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the second year of spring, he was appointed the general of the Western Conquest, the herdsman of Liangzhou and the king of Jiuquan.

古文：甲辰，行幸温泉。
现代文：二十一日，世祖到了温泉。
English: On the twenty-first day, the ancestor arrived at the hot spring.

古文：二月壬戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二月十一日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On February 11, Shiso returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月辛卯，葬惠太后于崞山。
现代文：三月初九，在崞山安葬惠太后。
English: On March 9th, Empress Dowager Hui was buried in Shaoshan.

古文：庚戌，新兴王俊、略阳王羯兒有罪，并黜为公。
现代文：二十八日，新兴王拓跋俊、略阳王拓跋羯儿犯罪，都降爵为公。
English: On the 28th, the emerging Wang Tuobaojun and Liao Yang Wang Tuobaojun committed crimes, and both were knighted.

古文：辛亥，封蠕蠕郁久闾乞列归为朔方王，沮渠万年为张掖王。
现代文：二十九日，世祖封蠕蠕郁久闾乞列归为朔方王，沮渠万年为张掖王。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the ancestor of the dynasty, Emperor Jiuyong, was enthroned as the King of Shuofang, and Emperor Zhangye was enthroned as the King of Zhangye.

古文：夏四月丁巳，刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏季四月初五，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of summer, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：庚辰，诏镇南将军、南阳公奚眷征酒泉。
现代文：二十八日，世祖下诏命镇南将军、南阳公奚眷出征酒泉。
English: On the 28th, the ancestor issued an edict ordering General Zhennan and Nanyang Gongyun to go to the spring to collect the liquor.

古文：五月辛卯，行幸山北。
现代文：五月初十，世祖巡视太行山以北。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month, the ancestor inspected the area north of Taihang Mountain.

古文：秋八月辛亥，诏散骑侍郎张伟等使刘义隆。行幸河西。
现代文：秋季八月初一，世祖下诏命散骑侍郎张伟等人出使刘义隆政权，世祖巡视黄河以西。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of August, the ancestor issued an edict ordering Zhang Wei and others to dispatch Liu Yilong's regime, and the ancestor inspected the west of the Yellow River.

古文：九月戊戌，抚军大将军、永昌王健薨。
现代文：九月十九日，抚军大将军、永昌王拓跋健逝世。
English: On September 19th, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian, General of the Fuzhong Army, passed away.

古文：冬十有一月庚子，镇南将军奚眷平酒泉，获沮渠天周、臧嗟、屈德，男女四千口。
现代文：冬季十一月二十二日，镇南将军奚眷平定酒泉，俘获沮渠天周、臧嗟、屈德，及男女四千人。
English: On the 22nd day of the 11th month of the winter, Zhenan General Zou Sheng besieged Ding Jiuquan, and captured Tian Zhou, Zou, Qu De, and 4,000 men and women.

古文：十有二月甲戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月二十一日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On December 21, Shizu returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丙子，刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十三日，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春正月甲申，帝至道坛，亲受符箓，备法驾，旗帜尽青。
现代文：太平真君三年春季正月初七，世祖前往道坛，接受道教符录，世祖备法驾前往，一色青色旗帜。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the third year of spring, the emperor came to the Buddhist altar, personally received the amulets, prepared the dharma chariot, and the flags were all black.

古文：语在《释老志》。
现代文：事情记述在《释老志》中。
English: The event is recorded in the "Shi Lao Zi."

古文：三月壬寅，北平王长孙颓有罪，削爵为侯。
现代文：三月二十六日，北平王长孙颓触犯国法，被削爵为侯。
English: On March 25th, the king of Peiping, Sun Yat-sen, was found guilty and demoted to marquis.

古文：夏四月，无讳走渡流沙，据鄯善。
现代文：夏季四月，沮渠无讳逃渡流沙河，盘据鄯善国。
English: In the summer of April, he brazenly fled across the Sand River and set up a base in Shan Shan.

古文：李皓孙宝据敦煌，遣使内附。
现代文：李皓的孙子李宝占据敦煌，派使者前往朝廷，请求归附。
English: Li Lan's grandson Li Bao occupied Dunhuang and sent an envoy to the imperial court to request annexation.

古文：五月，行幸阴山之北。
现代文：五月，世祖到阴山北面巡视。
English: In May, the patriarch went to inspect the northern face of Mount Yin.

古文：闰月，刘义隆龙骧将军裴方明、梁州刺史刘康祖寇南秦，南秦王杨难当败，奔于上邽。
现代文：闰月，刘义隆政权的龙骧将军裴方明、梁州刺史刘康祖侵犯南秦州，南秦王杨难当战败，奔逃上絡。
English: In the intercalary month, General Pei Fangming and Liu Kangzu, the Longjing generals of Liu Yilong's regime, invaded South Qin Province. King Yang Nandu of South Qin Province was defeated and fled into exile.

古文：六月丙戌，难当朝于行宫。
现代文：六月十一日，杨难当到世祖行宫朝拜。
English: On June 11, Yang Nantang went to the ancestral palace to pay homage.

古文：先是，起殿于阴山之北，殿始成而难当至，因名曰广德焉。
现代文：这以前，朝廷在阴山以北建行宫，行宫刚建成，杨难当就来了，世祖便把此宫叫广德宫。
English: Before this, the imperial court had built a palace north of the Yin Mountains. As soon as the palace was completed, Yang Nantang came, and the ancestors called this palace the Guangde Palace.

古文：秋七月丙寅，诏安西将军、建兴公古弼督陇右诸军及殿中虎贲与武都王杨保宗等从祁山南入，征西将军、淮阳公皮豹子与琅邪王司马楚之等督关中诸军从散关西入，俱会仇池；郁林公司马文思为征南大将军，进爵谯王，督洛豫诸军事南趣襄阳；征南将军、东安公刁雍东趣广陵，邀方明归路。
现代文：秋季七月二十二日，世祖下诏命安西将军、建兴公古弼督领陇右各军及殿中武士与武都王杨保宗等从祁山南入，征西将军、淮阳公皮豹子与琅笽王司马楚之等督关中各军从散关西进，都在仇池会合；郁林公司马文思为征南大将军，晋爵为王，督领洛豫诸军事，南赴襄阳；征南将军东安公刁雍东赴广陵，切断裴方明归路。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the founder of the dynasty ordered General Anxi, Jian Xing Gong, the governor of Guzheng, to lead the troops on the right and the samurai in the palace and the king of the capital Yang Baozong to enter from the south of Shaoshan, and the troops of General Anxi, the governor of Huaiyang Gongpi Leopards and the governor of Guzheng, King Sima Chu, to advance from the west to the west, all of which were meeting in Qiuqi; Marvin Si of the Yulin Company was the general of the Southern Expedition, Jin Jiao was the king, and the governor of

古文：冬十月己卯，封皇子伏罗为晋王，翰为秦王，谭为燕王，建为楚王，余为吴王。
现代文：冬季十月初六，世祖封皇子拓跋伏罗为晋王，拓跋翰为秦王，拓跋谭为燕王，拓跋建为楚王，拓跋余为吴王。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the prince Fulao became the king of Jin, Han the king of Qin, Tan the king of Yan, Jian the king of Chu, and Yu the king of Wu.

古文：十有二月辛巳，侍中、太保、襄城公卢鲁元薨。
现代文：十二月二十四日，侍中、太保、襄城公卢鲁元逝世。
English: On December 24, Lu Luyuan, a chamberlain, eunuch, and prince of Xiangcheng, passed away.

古文：丁酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十五日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 15th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：李宝遣使朝贡，以宝为镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、沙州牧，封敦煌公。
现代文：李宝派使者前来朝拜纳贡，世祖任命李宝为镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、沙州牧，封爵为敦煌公。
English: Li Bao sent an envoy to pay tribute to Nagon, and the ancestor appointed Li Bao as Zhenxi Grand General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shazhou Maki, and knighted as Dunhuang Gong.

古文：四年春正月己巳，征西将军皮豹子等大破刘义隆将于乐乡，擒其将王奂之、王长卿等。强玄明、辛伯奋弃下辨遁走，追斩之，尽虏其众。
现代文：太平真君四年春季正月二十八日，征西将军皮豹子等人率军在乐乡大败刘义隆的军队，俘获其将领王奂之、王长卿等人，强玄明、辛伯奋放弃下辨逃走，被皮豹子追斩，其部下尽数被俘。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of Taiping Zhenjun's fourth year of spring, the army of Liu Yilong, led by the general of the Western Expedition, Leather Leopard, defeated Liu Yilong's army in Le Township, captured his generals Wang Xizhi, Wang Changqing and others, and Qiang Xuanming and Xin Boten gave up and fled. They were chased down by Leather Leopard, and their subordinates were captured as many as possible.

古文：庚午，行幸中山。
现代文：二十九日，世祖巡视中山。
English: On the 29th, the patriarch inspected Zhongshan.

古文：二月丙子，车驾至于恆山之阳，诏有司刊石勒铭。
现代文：二月初五，世祖到了恒山南麓，下诏命有关部门刻石铭碑。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the founder arrived at the southern foot of Hengshan Mountain and ordered the relevant departments to carve a stone monument.

古文：是月，克仇池。
现代文：这个月，攻克仇池。
English: In the same month, he conquered Kechuike.

古文：三月庚申，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月二十日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On March 6th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：壬戌，乌洛侯国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十二日，乌洛侯国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 22nd, the Ulu State sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月，武都王杨保宗谋反，诸将擒送京师；诸氐、羌复推保宗弟文德为主，围仇池。
现代文：夏季四月，武都王杨保宗谋反，众将领把他捕送京城；各氐、羌少数民族推举杨保宗的弟弟杨文德为主帅围攻仇池。
English: In the summer of April, Yang Baozong, the King of Wudang, plotted a rebellion, and the generals arrested him and sent him to the capital; each of the Shan and Shan ethnic minorities elected Yang Baozong's younger brother, Yang Wende, as the commander to besiege Qiuqi.

古文：丁酉，大赦天下。
现代文：二十七日，世祖大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：己亥，行幸阴山。
现代文：二十九日，世祖巡视中山。
English: On the 29th, the patriarch inspected Zhongshan.

古文：五月，将军古弼大破诸氐，解仇池围。
现代文：五月，将军古弼大破诸氐，解除仇池之围。
English: In May, General Gu Yao defeated Zhu Xi and lifted the siege of Qiu Chi.

古文：六月庚寅，诏曰： 朕承天子民，忧理万国，欲令百姓家给人足，兴于礼义。
现代文：六月初一，世祖下诏书说： 朕奉天承运统治万民，日夜忧思，处理万国事务，想让百姓家家丰衣足食，知节知义。
English: On the first day of June, the patriarch issued an imperial edict, saying: "I have come to rule all the people under the guidance of Heaven. I have been thinking day and night, dealing with the affairs of all countries, and I want to make the people's homes well-fed, well-clothed, and well-educated.

古文：而牧守令宰不能助朕宣扬恩德，勤恤民隐，至乃侵夺其产，加以残虐，非所以为治也。
现代文：而牧守令宰等地方官员不能协助朕宣扬朝廷恩德，体恤百姓疾苦，甚至于还掠夺百姓的财产，施以暴虐，这哪能称得上是治理百姓呢？
English: But local officials such as pastors, sheriffs and governors cannot help us promote the virtues of the imperial court, sympathize with the sufferings of the people, and even plunder the property of the people and use violence. How can this be called governing the people?

古文：今复民赀赋三年，其田租岁输如常。
现代文：今天，朕令免除老百姓税赋三年，其田租岁贡仍同往年。
English: Today, we have exempted the common people from taxes for three years, and their land rent tax is still the same as in previous years.

古文：牧守之徒，各厉精为治，劝课农桑，不得妄有征发；有司弹纠，勿有所纵。 
现代文：地方长官，各应励精图治，劝民农桑耕织之事，不准动不动就调征百姓，如有这种情况发生，有关部门定要纠劾上奏，不要有所放纵。 
English: Local governors should make every effort to persuade the people and farmers to cultivate and weave mulberry, and not allow the people to be mobilized at any time. If such a situation occurs, the relevant departments must correct and report, and do not indulge.

古文：癸巳，大阅于西郊。
现代文：初四，世祖在京城西郊举行阅兵比武活动。
English: On the 24th, a large military parade was held in the western suburbs.

古文：秋九月辛丑，行幸漠南。
现代文：秋季九月初三，世祖巡视漠南。
English: In autumn, on the third day of the ninth month, the ancestor patrols the south of the desert.

古文：甲辰，舍辎重，以轻骑袭蠕蠕，分军为四道。
现代文：初六，放弃辎重物资，用轻骑袭击蠕蠕，分兵四路。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, he put down his heavy baggage and led his light cavalry in a surprise attack on Crum Crum, splitting his army into four parts.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情经过记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：镇北将军封沓亡入蠕蠕。
现代文：镇北将军封沓逃入蠕蠕部族中。
English: The Zhenbei general Fong Yao fled to the Cree Cree tribe.

古文：冬十一月，将军皮豹子等追破刘义隆将于浊水。
现代文：冬季十一月，将军皮豹子等在浊水追上刘义隆将领并歼灭了他们。
English: In the winter of November, General Peel the Leopard and others caught up with General Liu Yilong in Surabaya and annihilated them.

古文：甲子，车驾至于朔方。
现代文：二十七日，世祖到了朔方。
English: On the 27th, the ancestor arrived at the Shuo side.

古文：诏曰： 朕承祖宗重光之绪，思阐洪基，恢隆万世。
现代文：下诏书说： 朕继承祖宗皇脉，登基之后，思求光大洪基，让其万代隆盛。
English: The next imperial edict said: I have inherited the imperial lineage of my ancestors. After ascending the throne, I will strive to make Guangda Hongji prosperous for generations to come.

古文：自经营天下，平暴除乱，扫清不顺，二十年矣。
现代文：自从朕经营天下，平暴除乱，扫荡清理不顺从朝廷的逆贼，至今已经二十年了。
English: It's been twenty years since I've been running the world, quelling riots, and sweeping up traitors who don't obey the imperial court.

古文：夫阴阳有往复，四时有代谢。
现代文：大凡阴阳有往复，四时有代谢。
English: The great yin and yang are reciprocating, and there is a metabolism at four o'clock.

古文：授子任贤，所以休息；优隆功臣，式图长久，盖古今不易之令典也。
现代文：授权太子任用贤才，更替有序，优待功臣，国运长久，这乃是古今不变的大典。
English: Authorizing the prince to appoint wise men, orderly succession, preferential treatment of meritorious officers, and long-term national prosperity, this is a great text that has remained unchanged from ancient times to the present.

古文：其令皇太子副理万机，总统百揆。
现代文：朕现在命皇太子辅助朕料理万机，统领百官。
English: He will order the prince to assist in the handling of all the machines and to be the leader of Pepsi.

古文：诸朕功臣，勤劳日久，皆当以爵归第，随时朝请，飨宴朕前，论道陈谟而已，不宜复烦以剧职。
现代文：那些为朕立下汗马功劳的臣子，勤劳已久，都应当以爵还归宅第，朝廷有请便来，享宴朕前，论道陈言就行了，不应以其他繁杂的事情打扰他们。
English: Those courtiers who have worked for me for a long time should return home with a knighthood. If the imperial court invites them, they should come and enjoy the banquet before me. They should only make speeches, and should not disturb them with other complicated matters.

古文：更举贤俊，以备百官。
现代文：另外选举贤能俊杰的人，以充实百官。
English: In addition, the election of virtuous and talented people to enrich the hundred officials.

古文：主者明为科制，以称朕心。 
现代文：主持此事的人应明立科条律则，以让朕称心满意。 
English: The person who presides over this matter should clearly set out the rules and regulations so that I can be satisfied.

古文：十二月辛卯，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：十二月二十五日，世祖回到平城。
English: On December 25th, I drove back from the Northern Expedition.

古文：五年春正月壬寅，皇太子始总百揆。
现代文：太平真君五年春季正月初六，皇太子开始总管百官事务。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of spring, the crown prince began to be in charge of Pepsi.

古文：侍中、中书监、宜都王穆寿，司徒、东郡公崔浩，侍中、广平公张黎，侍中、建兴公古弼，辅太子以决庶政。
现代文：侍中、中书监、宜都王穆寿，司徒、东郡公崔浩，侍中、广平公张黎，侍中、建兴公古弼，辅佐太子处理国家大事。
English: The attendant, the middle school librarian, King Mu Shou of Yidu, the scholar, the Dong County official Cui Hao, the attendant, the Guangping official Zhang Li, the attendant, the Jian Xing official Gu Wei, and the assistant to the prince dealt with national affairs.

古文：诸上书者皆称臣，上疏仪与表同。
现代文：凡上书给太子的，都要称臣，礼仪与所称呼的尊卑一致。
English: All the people who submitted the letters called themselves vassals, and the ceremony used to submit the letters was the same as the playlist.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 愚民无识，信惑妖邪，私养师巫，挟藏谶记、阴阳、图纬、方伎之书；又沙门之徒，假西戎虚诞，生致妖孽。
现代文：十二日，世祖下诏书说： 一般老百姓没有见识，相信妖邪，私养巫师巫妇，挟藏谶记、阴阳、图纬、方术之书；又加上佛门之徒，假借西方虚妄的东西，漫生妖孽。
English: On the twelfth day, the patriarch issued an imperial edict saying: The common people have no insight, believe in evil spirits, privately raise wizards and witches, and possess books on the Book of Changes, the Yin and Yang, the Weights and Measures, and the Art of Sorcery; in addition, the followers of Buddhism use the false things of the West to spread witchcraft.

古文：非所以壹齐政化，布淳德于天下也。
现代文：这不是统一政治教化、广布厚德于天下的做法。
English: This is not the way to unify political indoctrination and spread virtue around the world.

古文：自王公已下至于庶人，有私养沙门、师巫及金银工巧之人在其家者，皆遣诣官曹，不得容匿。
现代文：从王公以下以至一般百姓，从今以后，如有私自豢养和尚、巫师及金银工匠之类的人在家的，都要送到官府，不得再行养蓄。
English: From now on, if anyone, from princes down to ordinary citizens, raises monks, wizards and gold and silver artisans at home, they will be sent to the government and will no longer be allowed to do so.

古文：限今年二月十五日，过期不出，师巫、沙门身死，主人门诛。
现代文：最后期限为今年二月十五日，过期不交的，巫师、和尚要诛杀，主人满门抄斩。
English: The deadline is February 15 this year. If the deadline is not met, the sorcerer and monk will be killed, and the owner will be beheaded.

古文：明相宣告，咸使闻知。 
现代文：明相宣告，让天下人都知道朕的旨意。 
English: Announce it openly, so that everyone in the world knows my will.

古文：庚戌，诏曰： 自顷以来，军国多事，未宣文教，非所以整齐风俗，示轨则于天下也。
现代文：十四日，又下诏书说： 一段时间以来，军队国家事务繁多，没有顾得上宣明教化，这不是整肃风俗，为天下宣明规范法则的做法。
English: On the 14th, another imperial edict was issued, saying: "For some time now, the military has been busy with a variety of national affairs and has not paid enough attention to enlightenment. This is not the way to rectify customs and proclaim the norms and laws to the world.

古文：今制自王公已下至于卿士，其子息皆诣太学。
现代文：今天朕命从王公以下至于一般官员，他们的孩子都送到太学。
English: Today, I ordered that the children of all officials, from the king down, be sent to Taigaku.

古文：其百工伎巧、驺卒子息，当习其父兄所业，不听私立学校。
现代文：那些百工匠人、仆役奴隶的孩子，当学习其父兄所从事的职业，不准私立学校读书。
English: The children of those hundreds of artisans, servants and slaves were not allowed to study in private schools, but had to learn the trades of their fathers and brothers.

古文：违者师身死，主人门诛。 
现代文：如有违反的，教师身死，主人满门抄斩。 
English: If there is a violation, the teacher will be killed, and the owner will be beheaded.

古文：二月辛未，中山王辰等八将，以北伐后期，斩于都南。
现代文：二月初六，中山王拓跋辰等八名将领，因为北伐时拖延了日期，在京城南部被诛杀。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, eight generals including Zhongshan King Tuoba Chen were killed in the southern part of Beijing because they delayed the date during the Northern Expedition.

古文：癸酉，骠骑大将军、乐平王丕薨。
现代文：初七，骠骑大将军、乐平王拓跋丕逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the great cavalry general, Leping Wang Tuobao, died.

古文：庚辰，行幸庐阙。
现代文：十五日，世祖巡视庐。
English: On the fifteenth day, the patriarch inspected the cocoon.

古文：三月戊戌，大会于那南池。遣使者四辈使西域。
现代文：三月初三，世祖在那南池举行盛大的阅兵式。派遣四批使者出使西域。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third month, the ancestor held a grand military parade in that south pond, and sent four groups of emissaries to the western region.

古文：甲辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：初九，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：癸丑，诏征西大将军、司空、上党王长孙道生镇统万。
现代文：十八日，世祖下诏命征西大将军、司空、上党王长孙道生镇守统万城。
English: On the 18th, the patriarch issued an imperial edict ordering the recruitment of General Xi, Siku, and the upper party king, Chosun Dousheng, to guard the capital city of Tongdu.

古文：夏四月乙亥，侍中、太宰，阳平王杜超为帐下所杀。
现代文：夏季四月十一日，侍中、太宰、阳平王杜超被帐下卫士杀害。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, Samurai, Dazai, and Yangping Wang Du Chao were all killed by guards.

古文：五月丁酉，行幸阴山之北。
现代文：五月初四，世祖巡视阴山以北。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the patriarch made a tour to the north of Mount Yin.

古文：六月，北部民杀立义将军、衡阳公莫孤，率五千余落北走。
现代文：六月，北部百姓杀害立义将军、衡阳公莫孤，率领五千多人向北逃去。
English: In June, the northern people killed General Liyi and Hengyang Gongmo Guo, and led more than 5,000 people to flee to the north.

古文：追击于漠南，杀其渠帅，余徙居冀、相、定三州为营户。
现代文：朝廷派兵追到漠南，杀了其主帅，其余的人被迁移到冀、相、定三州为营户。
English: The imperial court sent soldiers to chase it to the south of the country, killed its commander, and the rest of the people were relocated to the three states of Ji, Sang and Ding.

古文：西平王吐谷浑慕利延杀其兄子纬代。
现代文：西平王吐谷浑慕利延杀了自己兄长的儿子纬代。
English: King of Xiping, Tu Gu Humuli Yan, killed his brother's son, Shidai.

古文：是月，纬代弟叱力延等来奔，乞师。
现代文：这个月，纬代的弟弟叱力延等前来投降，请求援军。
English: This month, his younger brother, Zhaoli Yan, came to surrender and ask for reinforcements.

古文：以叱力延为归义王。
现代文：世祖封叱力延为归义王。
English: He was given the title of Guiyi Wang.

古文：秋七月癸卯，东雍州刺史沮渠秉谋叛伏诛。
现代文：秋季七月初十，东雍州刺史沮渠秉谋反被诛杀。
English: At the beginning of the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, Dongyongzhou stabbing history was killed.

古文：八月乙丑，田于河西。
现代文：八月初三，世祖在黄河以西打猎比武。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, the ancestor went on a hunting trip west of the Yellow River.

古文：壬午，诏员外散骑常侍高济使于刘义隆。
现代文：二十日，世祖下诏命员外散骑常侍高济出使刘义隆。
English: On the 20th day, Liu Yilong, an envoy from Gaoji, was sent by the emperor.

古文：晋王伏罗督高平、凉州诸军讨吐谷浑慕利延。
现代文：晋王拓跋伏罗督领高平、凉州各军讨伐吐谷浑慕利延。
English: The Jin king, Tuoba, led by the governor of Luo Province, Gaoping, and the armies of Liangzhou to fight against Tuyun, Humul, and Liyan.

古文：九月，帝自河西至马邑，观于崞川。
现代文：九月，世祖从河西到马邑，观看崞川。
English: In September, Shizu traveled from Hexi to Ma'eup to watch the Lugu River.

古文：己亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：初七，世祖回宫。
English: On the 14th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：丁未，行幸漠南。
现代文：初九，世祖巡视大漠以南。
English: On the 15th, the parade went to the south of the desert.

古文：冬十月癸未，晋王伏罗大破慕利延，慕利延走奔白兰。
现代文：冬季十月二十一日，晋王拓跋伏罗大败慕利延，慕利延向白兰逃去。
English: On October 21st in winter, Jin King Tuoba defeated Mu Liyan, and Mu Liyan fled to Bailan.

古文：慕利延从弟伏念、长史鵴鸠梨、部大崇娥等率其部一万三千落内附。
现代文：慕利延堂弟伏念、长史鸠梨、部大崇娥等率领自己的部民一万三千人归附朝廷。
English: Muriyan's cousins, Funei, Choshu Shiori, Budai Soe, and others led 13,000 of their own people to join the imperial court.

古文：十一月，刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一月，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In November, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：十二月，粟特国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月，粟特国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: In December, the Sogdian state sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十五日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the patriarch returned to the palace.

古文：六年春正月辛亥，车驾行幸定州，引见长老，存问之。
现代文：太平真君六年春季正月二十日，世祖巡视定州，召见州中年高的人，抚慰他们。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of Taiping Zhenjun, the ancestor inspected Dingzhou, summoned the middle-aged people of the state, and comforted them.

古文：诏兼员外散骑常侍宋愔使刘义隆。
现代文：下诏命员外散骑常侍宋出使刘义隆政权。
English: Liu Yilong's regime was overthrown by Song's envoys, who were ordered to ride out of the country.

古文：二月，遂西幸上党，观连理树于泫氏。
现代文：二月，世祖向西巡视上党，在泫氏观看连理树。
English: In February, the patriarch went on a tour of the upper party to the west, and watched Lian Li Shu at the Shun clan.

古文：西至吐京，讨徙叛胡，出配郡县。
现代文：西至吐京，讨伐迁徙叛乱的胡人，把他们分散配置在各郡县。
English: westward as far as Tujing, to fight the Hu people who were migrating and rebelling, and to disperse them in various counties.

古文：三月庚申，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月三十日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On March 6th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：诏诸有疑狱皆付中书，以经义量决。
现代文：世祖下诏凡疑难案件均移交中书省，按照经义原则裁决。
English: The imperial edict transferred all cases that had been pending for a long time to the disposition of the middle book, and sentenced according to the classic ancient sense.

古文：是月，酒泉公郝温反于杏城，杀守将王幡。
现代文：这个月，酒泉公郝温在杏城造反，杀了守将王幡。
English: In this month, Jiuquan's Prince Yan'en rebelled in Ancheng and killed the garrison commander Wang Fan.

古文：县吏盖鲜率宗族讨温。温弃城走，自杀，家属伏诛。
现代文：县吏盖鲜等率领宗族中人讨伐郝温，郝温放弃城池逃走，自杀，家属被诛杀。
English: Gui Xian, a county official, and other members of the clan led a crusade against Yuwen. Yuwen abandoned the city, fled, committed suicide, and his family members were killed.

古文：夏四月庚戌，征西大将军、高凉王那等讨吐谷浑慕利延于阴平白兰。
现代文：夏季闰四月二十二日，征西大将军、高凉王拓跋那等在阴平白兰讨伐吐谷浑慕利延。
English: On the 22nd day of the fourth month of the summer, the general of the Western Conquest and King Takubana of Gaoliang led a crusade against the Tumuli of Tugu in Yinping.

古文：诏秦州刺史、天水公封敕文击慕利延兄子什归于桴罕，散骑常侍、成周公万度归乘传发凉州以西兵袭鄯善。
现代文：世祖下诏命秦州刺史、天水公封敕文在粃罕攻打慕利延兄子什归，散骑常侍、成周公万度归受命调凉州以西兵袭击鄯善。
English: The ancestor issued an imperial edict ordering Qin Zhou Zhishi and Tianshui Gongfu Xianwen to attack Mu Liyan's brother and son Shigu in Shuhan, and the errant horseman, Cheng Zhou Guandu, was ordered to dispatch soldiers from the west of Liangzhou to attack Shishan.

古文：六月壬辰，车驾北巡。
现代文：六月初五，世祖北巡。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, the founder of the Chinese nation went on a northern tour.

古文：什归闻军将至，弃城夜遁。
现代文：什归听说朝廷军队快来了，放弃城池，在夜里逃走。
English: When Shigui heard that the imperial army was approaching, he abandoned the city and fled in the night.

古文：秋八月丁亥，封敕文入桴罕，分徙千家还上邽。
现代文：秋季八月初一，封敕文进入粃罕，分迁千家居民到上絡。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of August, Feng Rongwen entered Shuhan, and the residents of thousands of households were relocated to Shangluo.

古文：壬辰，度归以轻骑至鄯善，执其王真达以诣京师。帝大悦，厚待之。
现代文：初六，度归率领轻骑兵到鄯善，逮捕其国王真达送往京城，世祖大为高兴，十分优厚地接待了他。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Du Fu led the light cavalry to Shaoshan, arrested its king Zhen Da and sent him to the capital. Shizu was very happy and received him very graciously.

古文：车驾幸阴山之北，次于广德宫。
现代文：世祖巡视阴山以北，停驻在广德宫。
English: The patriarch inspected the north of Yin Mountain and stopped at the Guangde Palace.

古文：诏发天下兵，三分取一，各当戒严，以须后命。
现代文：下诏征调天下部队，各处调遣三分之一，进入战备状态，集结待命。
English: The next edict was to conscript and transfer the world's troops, deploy one-third of them everywhere, enter a state of combat readiness, and assemble on standby.

古文：徙诸种杂人五千余家于北边。
现代文：迁移各民族杂居的人五千多家到北部边疆。
English: The relocation of more than five thousand mixed-race people to the northern border.

古文：令民北徙畜牧至广漠，以饵蠕蠕。
现代文：命令百姓把畜牧北迁到广阔的沙漠，以引诱蠕蠕。
English: ordered the people to move their livestock north into the vast desert to lure the worms.

古文：壬寅，高凉王那军到曼头城，慕利延驱其部落西渡流沙，那急追。
现代文：十六日，高凉王拓跋那的军队到了曼头城，慕利延率领其部落西渡流沙河，拓跋那急忙追赶。
English: On the 16th, the army of Tuoba Na, the king of Gaoliang, arrived at Mandou City. Mu Liyan led his tribe to the west to cross the Sand River, and Tuoba Na hurried to catch up.

古文：故西秦王慕璝世子被囊逆军拒战，那击破之。被囊轻骑遁走，中山公杜丰精骑追之，度三危，至雪山，生擒被囊、什归及炽磐子成龙，送于京师。
现代文：已故西秦王慕的世子被囊率部拦截拓跋那，拓跋那打败了他们，被囊轻骑逃走，中山公杜丰率精锐骑兵追击，越过三危，追到雪山，生擒被囊、什归以及炽磐之子成龙，送到京城。
English: The late West Qin King Mu's heir was intercepted by Tuoba's cavalry. Tuoba's cavalry defeated them, and the cavalry fled. Zhongshan Duke Dufeng led the elite cavalry to chase them. They crossed the Three Dangers and chased them to the Snow Mountain. Zhouzhuang, Shigui, and Chenglong, the son of Blazing Rock, were sent to Beijing.

古文：慕利延遂西入于阗国。
现代文：慕利延于是向西逃到于阗国。
English: Muriyan then moved west into Yunnan Province.

古文：九月，卢水胡盖吴聚众反于杏城。
现代文：九月，卢水胡人盖吴纠集民众在杏城造反。
English: In September, Lu Shui Hu and Gui Wu gathered in Ancheng to plot a rebellion.

古文：冬十月戊子，长安镇副将元纥率众讨之，为吴所杀。
现代文：冬季十月初二，长安守军副将元纥率部讨伐，被盖吴杀害。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the deputy commander of the Chang'an garrison, Yuan Xuan, led a crusade and was killed by Gai Wu.

古文：吴党遂盛，民皆渡渭奔南山。
现代文：盖吴势力于是强大起来，老百姓全都渡过渭水逃奔南山。
English: As a result, Gaiwu's power became strong, and the common people all fled to Nanshan via Surabaya.

古文：于是诏发高平敕勒骑赴长安，诏将军叔孙拔乘传领摄并、秦、雍兵屯渭北。
现代文：于是世祖下诏调高平敕勒部骑兵奔赴长安，下诏将军叔孙拔受命统领并、秦、雍各州兵，屯集在渭水北面。
English: As a result, the founder of the dynasty ordered the cavalry of the Qin and Yong armies to move to Chang'an, and the next general, Sun Bu, was ordered to command the Qin and Yong armies, which were concentrated in the north of Surabaya.

古文：十有一月，高凉王那振旅还京师。
现代文：十一月，高凉王拓跋那凯旋京城。
English: In November, Gao Liang Wang Tuoba made a triumphant return to Beijing.

古文：己未，遣那及殿中尚书、安定公韩茂率骑屯相州之阳平郡，发冀州民造浮桥于确磝津。
现代文：初四，世祖派拓跋那以及殿中尚书、安定公韩茂率骑兵屯驻在相州阳平郡，调冀州百姓在郂津造浮桥。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the ancestor sent Tuobana, Shangshu, and Hanmao to stay in Yangping County of Xiangzhou with cavalry, and sent the people of Xiangzhou to build a pontoon bridge in Shuijin.

古文：盖吴遣其部落帅白广平西掠新平，安定诸夷酋皆聚众应之，杀汧城守将。
现代文：盖吴派其部落帅白广平西掠新平，安定地区各少数民族酋长都聚众响应，杀害城守将。
English: Gai Wu sent his tribe to besiege Bai Guangping and Xizhao Xinping, and all the ethnic minority chiefs in the stabilized area gathered to respond, killing the castle guard.

古文：吴遂进军李闰堡，分兵掠临晋巴东。
现代文：盖吴于是进军李闰堡，分兵袭扰临晋巴东一带。
English: Gai Wu then marched into Liyuan Fort, and his detachment attacked and disturbed the eastern area of Linjinba.

古文：将军章直与战，大败之，兵溺死于河者三万余人。
现代文：将军章直与他交战，大败叛军，在黄河中淹死的就达三万多人。
English: General Zhang directly fought with him, defeated the rebels, and more than thirty thousand people drowned in the Yellow River.

古文：吴又遣兵西掠至长安，将军叔孙拔与战于渭北，大破之，斩首三万余级。
现代文：盖吴又派兵西犯至长安，将军叔孙拔与敌人在渭水北面交战，大败敌人，斩首三万多人。
English: Gui Wu also sent troops westward to Chang'an. General Sunbu and the enemy fought in the north of Surabaya, defeating the enemy and beheading more than 30,000 people.

古文：庚申，孙东王窦漏头薨。
现代文：初五，辽东王窦漏头逝世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Liaodong Wang Douluo died.

古文：河东蜀薛永宗聚党盗官马数千匹，驱三千余人入汾曲，西通盖吴，受其位号。
现代文：河东蜀人薛永宗聚众盗抢官马数千匹，驱赶三千人到汾河弯曲处，西通盖吴，接受他的封号。
English: Xue Yongzong, a man from Shu in the east of the river, gathered a crowd to steal thousands of official horses and drove three thousand people to the bend of the Wei River, West Tongge Wu, to receive his seal.

古文：秦州刺史、金城公周鹿观率众讨之，不克而还。
现代文：秦州刺史、金城公周鹿观率部讨伐他们，无功而归。
English: Qinzhou Sashih and Jincheng Gong Zhou Shuguang led the troops to fight them, but to no avail.

古文：庚午，诏殿中尚书、扶风公元处真，尚书、平阳公慕容嵩二万骑讨薛永宗；诏殿中尚书乙拔率五将三万骑讨盖吴，西平公寇提三将一万骑讨吴党白广平。
现代文：十五日，世祖下诏命殿中尚书、抚风公元处真，尚书、平阳公慕容嵩率二万骑兵讨伐薛永宗；下诏命殿中尚书乙拔率领五名将领三万骑兵讨伐盖吴，西平公寇提率领三员将领一万骑兵讨伐盖吴党羽白广平。
English: On the fifteenth day of the year, the ancestor issued an edict to Shang Shu and Fufu Shuzhen in the hall, and Shang Shu and Pingyang Gong Murong Song led 20,000 cavalry to fight against Xue Yongzong; the edict ordered Shang Shu Yibat in the hall to lead five generals and 30,000 cavalry to fight against Gai Wu, and Xiping Gong Corti led three generals and 10,000 cavalry to fight against Wu Party member Uba Bai Guangping.

古文：盖吴自号天台王，署置百官。
现代文：盖吴自称天台王，设置百官。
English: Gai Wu claimed to be the king of the rooftop, setting up hundreds of officials.

古文：辛未，车驾还宫。
现代文：十六日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：选六州兵勇猛者二万人，使永昌王仁、高凉王那分领，为二道，各一万骑，南略淮泗以北，徙青徐之民以实河北。
现代文：选拔六州勇猛的兵士二万人，命永昌王拓跋仁、高凉王拓跋那分别统领，分为二路，各一万人，南攻淮泗以北，迁徙青、徐二州百姓充实黄河以北。
English: He selected 20,000 brave soldiers from six states, and appointed Yongchang Wang Tuobaren and Gaolang Wang Tuobaren to lead them separately. They were divided into two groups of 10,000 each, attacking from the south to the north of Huai'an, and migrating from the north of the Yellow River to enrich the people of the two states of Qing and Xu.

古文：癸未，车驾西巡。
现代文：二十七日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 27th, the patriarch returned to the palace.

古文：七年春正月戊辰，车驾次东雍州。
现代文：太平真君七年春季正月十四日，世祖率部来到东雍州。
English: On the 14th day of the first month in the spring of Taiping Zhenjun's seventh year, the patriarch and his entourage came to Dongyang Prefecture.

古文：庚午，围薛永宗营垒。
现代文：十六日，包围了薛永宗的营垒。
English: On the 16th, they surrounded Xue Yongzong's camp.

古文：永宗出战，大败。六军乘之，永宗众溃。
现代文：永宗出营迎战，大败，六军乘势攻击，薛永宗的部下溃散而去。
English: Yongzong marched out to meet the battle, but was soundly defeated. The Six Armies took advantage of the situation to attack, and Xue Yongzong's subordinates scattered.

古文：永宗男女无少长赴汾水死。
现代文：其士卒百姓不分男女老幼纷纷跳入汾水淹死。
English: Its soldiers and civilians, men, women, old and young alike, jumped into the rushing water and drowned.

古文：辛未，车驾南幸汾阴。
现代文：十七日，世祖向南来到汾水南岸。
English: On the 17th, the ancestor went south to the southern shore of Surabaya.

古文：庚辰，帝临戏水。
现代文：二十六日，世祖来到戏水。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the ancestor came to the pond.

古文：盖吴退走北地。
现代文：盖吴逃往北地。
English: Gai Wu retreated to the north.

古文：二月丙戌，幸长安，存问父老。
现代文：二月初二，世祖来到长安城，抚慰百姓。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, I arrived in Chang'an to offer my condolences to my parents.

古文：丁亥，幸昆明池。
现代文：初三，来到昆明池。
English: Junior 3, came to Kunming Pool.

古文：丙申，幸盩厔，诛叛民耿青、孙温二垒与盖吴通谋者。
现代文：十二日，来到周至，诛杀叛民耿青、孙温二营中与盖吴通连的人。
English: On the 12th, he came to Zhou to fight and kill the rebels Geng Qing and Sun Wen in the second battalion, who were allied with Gai Wu Tong.

古文：军次陈仓，诛散关氐害守将者。
现代文：军队停在陈仓，诛杀散关氐人中杀害朝廷将领的人。
English: The army stopped at Chen Cang and killed the person who killed the general of the imperial court.

古文：还幸雍城，田于岐山之阳。
现代文：又到了雍城，在岐山南面打猎。
English: They went to Yongcheng again and hunted in the south of Qishan.

古文：北道诸军乙拔等大破盖吴于杏城，吴弃马遁走。
现代文：北道各军乙拔等在杏城大败盖吴，盖吴弃马逃走。
English: All the armies of the North defeated Gai Wu in Ancheng, and Gai Wu abandoned his horse and fled.

古文：永昌王仁至高平，擒刘义隆将王章，略金乡、方与，迁其民五千家于河北。
现代文：永昌王拓跋仁率军到高平，擒获刘义隆的将领王章，攻击金乡、方兴，把两地百姓五千多家迁到黄河以北。
English: Yongchang Wang Tuobaren led an army to Gaoping, captured Liu Yilong's General Wangzhang, attacked Jinxiang and Fangxing, and moved more than 5,000 people from the two places to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：高凉王那至济南东平陵，迁其民六千余家于河北。
现代文：高凉王拓跋那率部到济南东面的平陵，把当地百姓六千多家迁到黄河以北。
English: Gao Liang Wang Tuobana led his troops to Pingling, east of Jinan, and moved more than six thousand local people north of the Yellow River.

古文：三月，诏诸州坑沙门，毁诸佛像。徙长安城工巧二千家于京师。
现代文：三月，世祖下诏命令把各地和尚活埋，摧毁所有佛像，把长安之中的能工巧匠二千多家迁到京城。
English: In March, the patriarch issued an imperial edict ordering that monks from all over the country be buried alive, that all Buddha statues be destroyed, and that more than 2,000 skilled craftsmen from Chang'an be moved to the capital.

古文：车驾旋轸，幸洛水，分军诛李闰叛羌。
现代文：世祖旋即回驾，抵达洛水，分派军队诛杀李闰等叛乱的羌人。
English: The patriarch immediately turned around, arrived in Luoshui, and dispatched an army to fight and kill Li Yue and other rebels.

古文：是月，金城边冏、天水梁会反，据上邽东城。秦州刺史封敕文击之，斩冏，众复推会为帅。
现代文：这个月，金城边礒、天水人梁会造反，占据上絡东城，秦州刺史封敕文征讨他们，斩了边礒，叛军又推举梁会为头领。
English: This month, the Jincheng and Tianshui People's Liang Association revolted and occupied Shanglian Dongcheng. Qinzhou issued an official document to punish them, beheaded the Liang Association, and the rebels promoted the Liang Association as the leader.

古文：夏四月甲申，车驾至自长安。
现代文：夏季四月初一，世祖到达长安。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, I drove back from Chang'an.

古文：戊子，鄴城毁五层佛图，于泥像中得玉玺二，其文皆曰： 受命于天，既寿永昌 ，其一刻其旁曰： 魏所受汉传国玺。 
现代文：初五，邺城摧毁五层佛塔，在泥像中得到二枚玉玺，其铭刻的文字都为 受命于天，既寿永昌 ，其中有一枚侧面刻有 魏所受汉传国玺 字样。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Lucheng destroyed the five-story pagoda, and obtained two jade urns in the mud statue. The inscribed words are "By order of heaven, both life and death are eternal," and one of them is engraved with the words "Wei Shoshu Han Chuan Guo" on the side.

古文：五月癸亥，安丰公闾根率骑诣上邽，与敕文讨梁会。会走汉中。
现代文：五月十一日，安丰公闾根率领骑兵到上圭阝，与封敕文合兵讨伐梁会，梁会逃往汉中。
English: On May 11th, Anfeng Gong Xuan led the cavalry to Shangguiyu, and joined forces with Fong Xuanwen to fight Liang Hui. Liang Hui fled to Hanzhong.

古文：盖吴复聚杏城，自号秦地王，假署山民，众旋复振。
现代文：盖吴率部众又聚集在杏城，自称为秦地王，署民为官，声势又壮大起来。
English: Gui Wu and his followers gathered again in Ancheng, calling themselves the King of Qin and the people's procuratorate, and their influence grew again.

古文：于是遣永昌王仁、高凉王那督北道诸军同讨之。
现代文：于是，世祖派永昌王拓跋仁、高凉王拓跋那督领北道诸军讨伐他。
English: As a result, the ancestors sent Yongchang Wang Tuobaren and Gaoliang Wang Tuobanen to lead the armies of the North to fight him.

古文：六月甲申，发定、冀、相三州兵二万人屯长安南山诸谷，以防越逸。
现代文：六月初二，世祖下诏征发定、冀、相三州士兵二万人屯扎长安南山各山谷中，以防止叛军逃走。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the emperor issued an edict calling for 20,000 soldiers from the three provinces of Ding, Hebei and Sang to camp in the valleys of the Chang'an South Mountain to prevent the rebels from escaping.

古文：丙戌，发司、幽、定、冀四州十万人筑畿上塞围，起上谷，西至于河，广袤皆千里。
现代文：初四，下诏征发司、幽、定、冀四州百姓十万人修筑京畿外围的要塞，起自上谷，西到黄河，范围有一千多里。
English: On the fourth day of early June, a total of 100,000 people from the four prefectures of Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeong

古文：秋八月，盖吴为其下人所杀，传首京师，永昌王仁平其遗烬。
现代文：秋季八月，盖吴被部下杀死，头颅被送到京城。永昌王拓跋仁荡平其残余势力。
English: In the autumn of August, Gai Wu was killed by his subordinates, and his head was sent to the capital. Yongchang King Tuoba Ren wiped out his remaining forces.

古文：高凉王那破盖吴党白广平；生擒屠各路那罗于安定，斩于京师。
现代文：高凉王拓跋那打败盖吴党徒白广平；在安定生擒屠各路那罗，把他送到京城斩首。
English: Gao Liang Wang Tuobana defeated Gui Wu Party member Bai Guangping; in Anning Zeng, he slaughtered all the way to Naro, and sent him to the capital to be beheaded.

古文：复略阳公羯兒王爵。
现代文：恢复略阳公羯儿王的爵位。
English: He reinstated the title of Prince Xiaoyang as a peer.

古文：八年春正月，吐京胡阻险为盗。
现代文：太平真君八年春季正月，吐京胡人据险为盗。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year of Taiping Zhenjun, the Beijing Hu people were robbed.

古文：诏征东将军武昌王提、征南将军淮南王他讨之，不下。
现代文：世祖下诏命征东将军武昌王拓跋提、征南将军淮南王拓跋他讨伐他们，未能获胜。
English: The patriarch issued an edict ordering the general of the Eastern Expedition, Wuchang Wang Tuobao, and the general of the Southern Expedition, Huainan Wang Tuobao, to fight them, but they failed to win.

古文：山胡曹仆浑等渡河西，保山以自固，招引朔方诸胡。
现代文：山胡曹仆浑等渡到黄河以西，据山自保，招引北方各族胡人。
English: Mountains such as Mount Hu Cao and Mount Hun migrated to the west of the Yellow River to protect themselves and attract Hu people from all ethnic groups in the north.

古文：提等引军讨仆浑。
现代文：拓跋提等领军讨伐曹仆浑。
English: Leaders such as Tuoba Ti led the army to fight against Cao Hun.

古文：二月己卯，高凉王那等自安定讨平朔方胡，因与提等合军，共攻仆浑，斩之。其众赴险死者以万数。
现代文：二月初一，高凉王拓跋那等从安定出发讨伐平定了朔方胡人的叛乱，与拓跋提等合兵一处，共同攻打曹仆浑，斩了他，他的部下赴险摔死的数以万计。
English: On the first day of February, Gao Liang Wang Tuoba and others launched a counterattack from the stable to quell the rebellion of the Shuo Fang Hu people. Together with Tuoba and others, they attacked Cao Puhun and killed him. His subordinates risked their lives and died by the tens of thousands.

古文：癸未，行幸中山，颁赐从官文武各有差。
现代文：初五，世祖巡视中山，赏赐随驾的文武官员。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the patriarch inspected Zhongshan and rewarded the accompanying civil and military officials.

古文：高阳易县民不从官命，讨平之，徙其余烬于北地。
现代文：高阳易县百姓不听官府命令，世祖派人讨伐平定了他们，把其残余势力迁移到北地。
English: The people of Gaoyang Yi County did not listen to the orders of the government. Shizhu sent people to fight and pacify them, and moved their remaining forces to the north.

古文：三月，河西王沮渠牧犍谋反，伏诛。
现代文：三月，河西王沮渠牧健谋反，被杀。
English: In March, the king of Hexi was killed for plotting a rebellion.

古文：徙定州丁零三千家于京师。
现代文：把定州丁零人三千家迁到京城。
English: The relocation of three thousand families from Dingzhou to Beijing.

古文：夏五月，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏季五月，世祖回到宫中。
English: Summer in May, driving back to the palace.

古文：六月，西征诸将扶风公元处真等八将坐盗没军资，所在虏掠，赃各千万计，并斩之。
现代文：六月，西征诸将扶风公元处真等八名将领因为盗窃军需物资，所经之地抢掠百姓，赃款各以千万计，都被诛杀。
English: In June, eight generals, including the general Fufeng, were killed for stealing military supplies, robbing civilians wherever they went, and stealing tens of millions of dollars each.

古文：八月，卫大将军、乐安王范薨。
现代文：八月，卫大将军、乐安王拓跋范逝世。
English: In August, Wei Daizheng and Le An Wang Tuoba Fan passed away.

古文：冬十月，侍中、中书监、宜都王穆寿薨。
现代文：冬季十月，侍中、中书监、宜都王穆寿逝世。
English: In the winter of October, Mu Shou, a chamberlain and the chief librarian of the court, passed away.

古文：十二月，鄯善、遮逸国并遣子朝献。
现代文：十二月，鄯善、遮逸国都派王子到朝廷进贡。
English: In December, the states of Shanshan and Zhayu sent princes to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：晋王伏罗薨。
现代文：晋王拓跋伏罗逝世。
English: The Jin king Tuoba Furo passed away.

古文：九年春正月，刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：太平真君九年春季正月，刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Taiping Zhenjun, Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：氐杨文德受义隆官号，守葭芦城，招诱武都、阴平五部氐民。
现代文：氐人杨文德接受了刘义隆的官爵名号，据守葭芦城，招降引诱武都、阴平五部氐民。
English: Yang Wende, a member of the Han Dynasty, accepted Liu Yilong's title of nobility and held onto Huludao City, inviting and enticing the people of Wudu and Yinping Five Provinces.

古文：诏仇池镇将皮豹子讨之。文德弃城南走，擒其妻子僚属。
现代文：世祖下诏命仇池镇将皮豹子讨伐他们，杨文德放弃城池向南逃去，皮豹子擒获了他的妻子儿女及其属僚。
English: The patriarch ordered the town of Qiuqi to fight the leopard, and Yang Wende abandoned the town and fled to the south. The leopard captured his wife, children, and his subordinates.

古文：义隆白水太守郎启玄率众救文德，豹子逆击，大破之。启玄、文德走还汉中。
现代文：刘义隆的白水太守郎启玄率军救助杨文德，皮豹子迎战，大破敌军，启玄、文德逃归汉中。
English: Liu Yilong's Baishui Dazhong, Qixuan, led an army to rescue Yang Wende. The leopard skin met the enemy and defeated the enemy army. Qixuan and Wende fled back to Hanzhong.

古文：宕昌羌酋梁瑾慈遣使内附，并贡方物。
现代文：宕昌羌人酋长梁瑾慈派使前来请求归附朝廷，并贡奉土特产。
English: An envoy sent by the chief of the Tang Dynasty Changye people, Liang Xunci, came to request to be annexed to the imperial court, and pay tribute to the local special products.

古文：二月癸卯，行幸定州。
现代文：二月二十五日，世祖巡视定州。
English: On the first day of February, the parade went to Dingzhou.

古文：山东民饥，启仓赈之。
现代文：太行山东百姓发生饥荒，官府开仓济民。
English: The people of Taihang in Shandong suffered from famine, and the government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：罢塞围作。
现代文：停止修筑各要塞的工事。
English: Stop building dams.

古文：遂西幸上党，诛潞叛民二千余家，徙西河离石民五千余家于京师。
现代文：世祖西至上党，诛杀潞地叛乱的百姓二千多家，把西河离石百姓五千多家迁往京城。
English: The West-supremacy Party killed more than 2,000 people who rebelled in Shandong, and moved more than 5,000 people from the West River to the capital.

古文：诏于壶关东北大王山累石为三封，又斩其北凤皇山南足以断之。
现代文：下诏在壶关东北大王山累起石头为三封，又斩断其北凤凰山的南山脚以断之。
English: The following edict piled up stones at the top of Mount Daowang in northeastern Kuguan for three times, and cut off the southern foot of Mount Phoenix in the north to break it.

古文：三月，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月，世祖回到宫中。
English: In March, Shizu returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：夏五月甲戌，以交趾公韩拔为假节、征西将军、领护西戎校尉、鄯善王，镇鄯善，赋役其民，比之郡县。
现代文：夏季五月初四，任命交公韩拔为假节、征西将军、领护西戎校尉、鄯善王，镇守鄯善国，催其百姓交纳租赋，承担劳役，同其他郡县一样。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of summer, he appointed Jiao Gong Hanba as a false festival, the general of the Western Conquest, the lieutenant of the Western Conquest, the king of the Western Conquest, and the town guard of the Western Conquest, urging his people to pay rent and undertake labor service, just like other counties.

古文：六月辛酉，行幸广德宫。
现代文：六月二十一日，世祖到达广德宫。
English: On June 21, he went to the Quang Duc Palace.

古文：丁卯，悦般国遣使求与王师俱讨蠕蠕，帝许之。
现代文：二十七日，悦般国派使者请求与朝廷的军队一起讨伐蠕蠕，世祖答应了。
English: On the 27th, Yuepang sent an envoy to the emperor to ask him to join the imperial army to fight against the Cumans. The emperor agreed.

古文：秋八月，诏中外诸军戒严。
现代文：秋季八月，世祖下诏命全国军队进入战备状态。
English: In autumn and August, the Emperor issued an edict placing all Chinese and foreign armies under martial law.

古文：九月乙酉，治兵于西郊。
现代文：九月十六日，世祖在京城西郊阅兵。
English: On September 16th, Shiso held a military parade in the western suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：丙戌，上幸阴山。
现代文：十七日，世祖巡视阴山。
English: On the seventeenth day, the patriarch inspected the gloomy mountain.

古文：是月，成周公万度归千里驿上，大破焉耆国，其王鸠尸卑那奔龟兹。
现代文：这个月，成周公万度归千里跃进，大破焉耆国，其国王鸠尸卑那投奔龟兹。
English: This month, Cheng Zhou Gongdu returned thousands of miles and leaped forward, smashing the country, and its king, Zang Qibna, fled to Kuez.

古文：冬十月辛丑，恆农王奚斤薨。
现代文：冬季十月初三，恒农王奚斤逝世。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, Heng Nong Wang Shujin passed away.

古文：癸卯，以婚姻奢靡，丧葬过度，诏有司更为科限。
现代文：初五，因为天下人办理婚事奢侈浪费，丧葬费用过度，世祖下诏命有关部门立科律加以限制。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, because the marriage was too extravagant and wasteful at that time, and the funeral was too extravagant, the relevant authorities were ordered to formulate provisions to restrict it.

古文：癸亥，大赦天下。
现代文：二十五日，世祖大赦天下。
English: On the 25th, the patriarch pardoned the whole country.

古文：十有二月，诏成周公万度归自焉耆西讨龟兹。
现代文：十二月，世祖下诏命成周公万度归从焉耆出发西讨龟兹。
English: In December, the patriarch issued an edict ordering Cheng Zhou to return to Yan'an and set out to the west to fight the tortoise.

古文：皇太子朝于行宫，遂从北讨。
现代文：皇太子在行宫朝拜世祖，于是随驾北伐。
English: The crown prince was visiting the palace to pay homage to his ancestor, so he accompanied the Northern Expedition.

古文：至于受降城，不见蠕蠕，因积粮城内，留守而还。
现代文：到了受降城，不见蠕蠕人，便在城内积聚粮草，留下守卫部队后就回来了。
English: When they arrived at the besieged city, they found no Cormorants, so they gathered grain and grass in the city, left the guard troops, and returned.

古文：北平王长孙敦坐事降爵为公。
现代文：北平王长孙敦因犯事被降爵为公。
English: The king of Beiping, Chosun Tun, was reduced to a duke because of the incident.

古文：十年春正月戊辰朔，帝在漠南，大飨百僚，班赐有差。
现代文：太平真君十年春季正月初一，世祖在大漠南面，大宴百官，赏赐不等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 10th year of Taiping Zhenjun's reign in the spring, the ancestor was in the south of the desert, a big banquet was held for hundreds of officials, and the rewards varied.

古文：甲戌，北伐。
现代文：初七，世祖北伐。
English: The seventh year of junior high school, the ancestor of the Northern Expedition.

古文：二月，蠕蠕渠帅尔绵他拔等率其部落千余家来降，蠕蠕吐贺真恐惧远遁。
现代文：二月，蠕蠕酋帅尔绵他拔等率领其部落千余家前来归降，蠕蠕吐贺真害怕了，远逃而去。
English: In February, Cm Cm, Cm Cm, Cm Cm, Cm Cm, Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm Cm, Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm

古文：事见《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情记录在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The incident was chronicled in "Creep."

古文：三月，遂搜于河西。
现代文：三月，在黄河西面巡视。
English: In March, it patrolled the west side of the Yellow River.

古文：庚寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十四日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On the 24th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：夏五月庚寅，行幸阴山。
现代文：夏季五月二十五日，世祖巡视阴山。
English: On the 25th day of the 5th month of summer, the ancestor of the world inspected the gloomy mountain.

古文：秋七月，浮图沙国遣使贡献。
现代文：秋季七月，浮图沙国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In the autumn, in July, the country of Futusas sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：九月，阅武碛上，遂北伐。
现代文：九月，世祖在戈壁阅兵习武，于是北伐。
English: In September, Shizu held a military parade in the Gobi Desert to practice martial arts, which led to the Northern Expedition.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情经过记在《蠕蠕传》中。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：冬十月庚子，皇太子及群官奉迎于行宫。
现代文：冬季十月初八，皇太子及百官到行宫奉迎世祖。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, the crown prince and his courtiers were waiting for the emperor in the imperial palace.

古文：壬午，大飨，班赐所获及布帛各有差。
现代文：壬午日，大宴群臣，赏赐给百官战利品及布帛不等。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, a large banquet was held for the courtiers, and booty and cloth gifts were given to hundreds of officials.

古文：十有一月，龟兹、疏勒、破洛那、员阔诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：十一月，龟兹、疏勒、破洛那、员阔各国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In November, envoys from Kuez, Shule, Polona, and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：十有二月戊申，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：十二月十七日，世祖车驾回到宫中。
English: On December 17th, the ancestor drove back to the palace.

古文：己酉，以平昌公元托真为中山王。
现代文：十八日，封平昌公元讠乇真为中山王。
English: On the 18th day of the lunar month of PyeongChang, Emperor Yongzheng was enthroned as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：十一年春正月乙酉，行幸洛阳，所过郡国，皆亲对高年，存恤孤寡。
现代文：太平真君十一年春季正月二十四日，世祖前往洛阳，所经郡县，世祖都亲自慰问年高的人，存抚孤寡百姓。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the spring of the 11th year of Taiping Zhenjun, the patriarch went to Luoyang. He went through counties and counties, and the patriarch personally consoled the elderly and cared for the widows and orphans.

古文：以高凉王那为仪同三司。
现代文：任命高凉王拓跋那为仪同三司。
English: Gao Liang Wang Tuobana was appointed as the third secretary of the ceremony.

古文：二月甲午，大搜于梁川。
现代文：二月初三，世祖到梁川大规模打猎演武。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the ancestor went to Liangchuan for a large-scale hunting and martial arts demonstration.

古文：皇子真薨。
现代文：皇子拓跋真逝世。
English: Prince Makoto passed away.

古文：是月，大治宫室，皇太子居于北宫。
现代文：这个月，世祖大建宫室，皇太子在北宫居住。
English: This month, Grandfather Da Jian's palace was built, and the crown prince lived in the North Palace.

古文：车驾遂征悬瓠，益遣使者安慰境外之民，其不服者诛之。
现代文：世祖出征悬瓠，另外派使者安慰境外百姓，不服从朝廷的都被诛杀掉。
English: The founder of the dynasty went on a military expedition, and sent an envoy to comfort the people outside the country. Those who disobeyed the imperial court were beaten to death.

古文：永昌王仁大破刘义隆将刘坦之、程天祚于汝东，斩坦之，擒天祚。
现代文：永昌王拓跋仁在汝水东面大破刘义隆的将领刘坦之、程天祚，杀了坦之，擒获天祚。
English: Yongchang King Tuoba Ren defeated Liu Yilong's generals Liu Tanzhi and Cheng Tianyao in the east of Ruisui, killed Tanzhi and captured Tianyao.

古文：夏四月癸卯，舆驾还宫，赐从者及留台郎吏已上生口各有差。
现代文：夏季四月十三日，世祖回到宫中，赐给随驾的人以及留在京城中的官员郎吏以上的奴婢数量不等。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the ancestor returned to the palace, and the number of slaves and maidservants given to those who accompanied him as well as the officials who remained in the capital ranged from the highest to the lowest.

古文：六月己亥，诛司徒崔浩。
现代文：六月初十，诛杀司徒崔浩。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, he killed Sgt. Choi Ho.

古文：辛丑，北巡阴山。
现代文：十二日，世祖北巡阴山。
English: On the 12th, the northbound train arrived at Yinshan.

古文：秋七月，义隆遣其辅国将军萧斌之率众六万寇济州。刺史王买得弃州走，斌之遂入城，仍使宁朔将军王玄谟西攻滑台。
现代文：秋季七月，刘义隆派其辅国将军萧斌之率领六万人马侵犯济州，刺史王买得放弃州城逃走，萧斌之于是进入城中，派宁朔将军王玄谟西攻滑台。
English: In the autumn of July, Liu Yilong sent his assistant general Xiao Binzhang to invade Jeju with 60,000 soldiers and horses. Wang Shishi was forced to give up the state capital and flee. Xiao Binzhang then entered the city and sent Ningshuo general Wang Xuanmuxi to attack the sliding platform.

古文：诏枋头镇将、平南将军、南康公杜道俊助守兗州。
现代文：世祖下诏命枋头镇将、平南将军、南康公杜道俊帮助守卫兖州。
English: Shantou Town Commander, General Pingnan, and Nankangong Du Daojun were ordered to help defend Zhangzhou.

古文：八月癸亥，田于河西。癸未，治兵于西郊。
现代文：八月初六，世祖到黄河西部打猎习武，二十六日，世祖在京城西郊治兵。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the ancestor went to the west of the Yellow River to hunt and practice martial arts. On the 26th day, the ancestor went to the western suburb of Beijing to fight.

古文：九月辛卯，舆驾南伐。
现代文：九月初四，世祖率兵南征。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the ancestor led the soldiers to march south.

古文：癸巳，皇太子北伐，屯于漠南。吴王余留守京都。
现代文：初六，皇太子北伐，屯兵于大漠南面，吴王拓跋余留守京城。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the crown prince led the Northern Expedition and stationed troops in the south of the great desert. Wu Wang Tuoba remained in Beijing.

古文：庚子，曲赦定冀相三州死罪已下。
现代文：十三日，世祖下诏赦免定、冀、相三州死罪以下的犯人。
English: On the 13th, the patriarch issued an edict to pardon the prisoners who were sentenced to death or less in the three states of Ding, Jie and Sang.

古文：发州郡兵五万分给诸军。
现代文：调发各州郡兵五万人分配给各军。
English: Fifty thousand soldiers were dispatched from each state and county and distributed to each army.

古文：冬十月癸亥，车驾止枋头。
现代文：冬季十月初六，世祖停驻在枋头。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the ancestor stopped in Shantou.

古文：诏殿中尚书长孙真率骑五千自石济渡，备玄谟遁走。
现代文：下诏命殿中尚书长孙真率领五千人从石济渡河，以防备王玄谟逃走。
English: The emperor ordered Sun Zhen, the chief scribe in the palace, to lead five thousand people to cross the river from Shiji to prevent Wang Xuanmu from escaping.

古文：乙丑，车驾济河。玄谟大惧，弃军而走。众各溃散，追蹑斩首万余级。器械山积。
现代文：初八，世祖渡黄河，王玄谟大为害怕，弃军逃走，部下纷纷溃散，被追上斩首的有一万多人，缴获的器械堆积如山。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the founder of the dynasty crossed the Yellow River. Wang Xuanmu was very scared. He abandoned his army and fled. His subordinates scattered one after another. More than 10,000 people were caught and beheaded, and the captured equipment piled up like a mountain.

古文：帝遂至东平。
现代文：世祖于是又到了东平。
English: As a result, Sezu went back to Dongping.

古文：萧斌之弃济州，退保历城。
现代文：萧斌之放弃济州，退守历城。
English: Xiao Bin abandoned Jeju and retreated to Licheng.

古文：乃命诸将分道并进：使征西大将军、永昌王仁自洛阳出寿春，尚书长孙真趋马头，楚王建趋钟离，高凉王那自青州趋下邳。
现代文：世祖于是命令诸将分道并进：征西大将军永昌王拓跋仁从洛阳向寿春，尚书长孙真赴马头，楚王拓跋建率部奔赴钟离，高凉王拓跋那从青州趋下邳。
English: The patriarch then ordered the generals to go their separate ways: the general of the Western Conquest, Yongchang Wang Tuoba Ren, went from Luoyang to Shuchun, Shangshu Changsun Zhen went to Ma Tau, Chu Wang Tuoba Jian led his troops to Zhongli, and Gaoliang Wang Tuoba Na went from Qingzhou to Jiuyuan.

古文：车驾自中道，十有一月辛卯，至于邹山。刘义隆鲁郡太守崔邪利率属城降。
现代文：世祖自己从中道出发，十一月初五，到了邹山，刘义隆政权的鲁郡太守崔邪利率城中人众投降。
English: The founder himself set out from the Middle Way and arrived in Shaoshan on the fifth day of the first month of November. The people in the city surrendered to Liu Yilong's regime of Lu County Governor Cui Yuling.

古文：使使者以太牢祀孔子。
现代文：世祖派使者用猪、牛、羊太牢之礼祭祀孔子。
English: He sent an emissary to hold a ritual to worship Confucius.

古文：壬子，次于彭城，遂趋盱眙。
现代文：二十六日，停驻彭城，顺便到了盱眙。
English: On the 26th, the train stopped at Pengcheng, and by the way, arrived at Handan.

古文：頞盾国献师子一。
现代文：安页盾国献上狮子一头。
English: Anzhi Dundu presented a lion.

古文：十有二月丁卯，车驾至淮。
现代文：十二月十二日，世祖到了淮河边。
English: On December 12, the patriarch arrived at the banks of the Huai River.

古文：诏刈雚苇，泛筏数万而济。
现代文：下诏割收苇，放数万只筏子渡过淮河。
English: Under the edict, tens of thousands of pigeons were released to cross the Huai River.

古文：义隆盱眙守将臧质闭门拒守。
现代文：刘义隆政权的盱眙守将臧质紧闭城门抵抗世祖的军队。
English: The defenders of Liu Yilong's regime will tenaciously close the gate to resist the ancestor's army.

古文：将军胡崇之等率众二万援盱眙。
现代文：将军胡崇之等率领二万人支援盱眙。
English: General Hu Chongzhi and others led 20,000 people to support him.

古文：燕王谭大破之，枭崇之等，斩首万余级，淮南皆降。
现代文：燕山拓跋谭大败敌军，杀了胡崇之等，斩首万余人，淮南各郡县尽皆投降。
English: Yanshan Tuobatan defeated the enemy army, killed Hu Chongzhi and others, beheaded more than 10,000 people, and all counties in Huainan surrendered.

古文：是月，永昌王仁攻悬瓠，拔之，获义隆守将赵淮，送京师斩之。
现代文：这个月，永昌王拓跋仁攻打悬瓠，攻克城池，俘获刘义隆守将赵淮，送到京城斩首。
English: This month, Yongchang King Tuoba Ren attacked Hanging Plough, conquered the city, captured Liu Yilong's commander Zhao Huai, and sent him to Beijing to be beheaded.

古文：过定项城，及淮西，大破义隆将刘康祖，斩之，并虏将军胡盛之、王罗汉等，传致行宫。
现代文：拓跋仁又平定项城，及淮河西部，大败刘义隆将刘康祖，杀了他，并俘虏了将军胡盛之、王罗汉等，送到行宫。
English: Tuoba Ren also conquered Xiangcheng, and the western part of the Huai River. Liu Yilong defeated Liu Kangzu, killed him, and captured the generals Hu Shengzhi and Wang Lohan, and sent them to the imperial palace.

古文：癸未，车驾临江。起行宫于瓜步山。
现代文：二十八日，世祖到了长江边，在瓜步山建行宫。
English: On the 28th, the patriarch arrived at the edge of the Yangtze River and built a palace in Guabushan.

古文：永昌王仁自历阳至于江西，高凉王那自山阳至于广陵，诸军皆同日临江，所过城邑，莫不望尘奔溃，其降者不可胜数。
现代文：永昌王拓跋仁自历阳抵达长江西岸，高凉王拓跋那自山阳抵达广陵，各军于同一日抵达长江岸边，所经过的各郡县，无不望风归附，投降的人不可胜数。
English: Yongchang Wang Tuobaren arrived at the west bank of the Yangtze River from Liyang, and Gaolang Wang Tuobanen arrived at Guangling from Shanyang. The armies arrived at the bank of the Yangtze River on the same day. Every county and county they passed through was conquered by the wind, and countless people surrendered.

古文：甲申，义隆使献百牢，贡其方物，又请进女于皇孙以求和好。
现代文：二十九日，刘义隆派使者送百牢，贡纳地方特产，又请求贡纳女儿给皇孙以求和好。
English: On the 29th, Liu Yilong sent an emissary to send a hundred dungeons, a local specialty of Gongna, and also asked Gongna's daughter to seek reconciliation with the emperor's grandson.

古文：帝以师婚非礼，许和而不许婚，使散骑侍郎夏侯野报之。
现代文：世祖考虑师婚非礼，同意讲和却不许通婚，派散骑侍郎夏侯野回报。
English: The emperor thought it was not proper to force a marriage by using the army. He agreed to the reconciliation of the two countries but did not agree to the marriage. He sent his equerry, Xia Houye, to reply to the Song people.

古文：诏皇孙为书致马通问焉。
现代文：世祖下诏命皇孙写信问好。
English: The patriarch issued an imperial edict ordering the grandson to write a letter of greetings.

古文：正平元年春正月丙戌朔，大会群臣于江上，班赏各有差，文武受爵者二百余人。
现代文：正平元年春季正月初一，世祖在长江边大宴群臣，给官员们数量不等的赏赐，文武官员受爵的有二百多人。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Zhengping, the patriarch held a grand banquet for his ministers on the banks of the Yangtze River, and gave a number of rewards to officials. More than 200 civil and military officials were knighted.

古文：丁亥，舆驾北旋。
现代文：初二，世祖北旋。
English: 2nd year of junior high school, Sezu Hokuso.

古文：是月，破洛那、罽宾、迷密诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：这个月，破洛那、宾、迷密诸国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: This month, emissaries from all over the world came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二月戊寅，车驾济河。
现代文：三月二十四日，世祖渡过黄河。
English: On March 24th, the patriarch crossed the Yellow River.

古文：癸未，次于鲁口。
现代文：二十九日，停驻鲁口。
English: On the 29th, it stopped at Lukou.

古文：皇太子朝于行宫。
现代文：皇太子在行宫朝见世祖。
English: The Crown Prince visits the Imperial Palace in the morning.

古文：三月己亥，车驾至自南伐，饮至策勋，告于宗庙。
现代文：三月十五日，世祖回到宫中。举行庆功典礼，在祖庙内设下祭祀酒席，告祭列祖列宗。
English: On March 15, the ancestor returned to the palace. A celebration ceremony was held, a sacrificial banquet was set up in the ancestral temple, and the ancestors were sacrificed.

古文：以降民五万余家分置近畿。
现代文：把归降的民众五万多家分别安置在京郊。
English: More than 50,000 returnees were resettled in the suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：赐留台文武所获军资生口各有差。
现代文：赏赐留京官员数量不等的战利品和奴仆。
English: The officials who stayed in Beijing were rewarded with varying amounts of spoils and servants.

古文：夏五月壬寅，大赦。
现代文：夏季五月十九日，世祖大赦天下。
English: On the 19th day of the fifth month of the summer, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：六月壬戌，改年。
现代文：六月初九，改年号。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, the year will be changed.

古文：车师国王遣子入侍。
现代文：车师国王派儿子前来充当人质。
English: The coachman king sent his son to become a samurai.

古文：诏曰： 夫刑网太密，犯者更众，朕甚愍之。
现代文：世祖下诏书说： 大凡刑法太严太细，犯罪的人就更多，朕深为同情。
English: The Emperor's edict said: If the criminal law is too strict and too detailed, more people will commit crimes. I deeply sympathize with them.

古文：有司其案律令，务求厥中。
现代文：有关部门要按照律令条文，务求公允。
English: Relevant departments should be in accordance with the provisions of the ritsuryo, in order to be fair.

古文：自余有不便于民者，依比增损。 
现代文：如有不便于百姓的，依实际情况加以增减。 
English: If it is inconvenient for the people, it will be increased or decreased according to the actual situation.

古文：诏太子少傅游雅、中书侍郎胡方回等改定律制。
现代文：下诏命太子少傅游雅、中书侍郎胡方回等改定律制。
English: The imperial edict ordered Prince Taishang Fu Youya, the secretary of the Central Committee, and others to revise the law.

古文：略阳王羯兒，仪同三司、高凉王那有罪赐死。
现代文：略阳王羯儿，仪同三司、高凉王拓跋那犯罪被赐死。
English: Liangyang Wang Xun Er, Yi Tong San Shi, Gao Liang Wang Tuoba were sentenced to death for their crimes.

古文：戊辰，皇太子薨。
现代文：十五日，皇太子逝世。
English: On the 15th, the Crown Prince passed away.

古文：壬申，葬景穆太子于金陵。
现代文：十九日，景穆太子被葬在金陵。
English: On the 19th, Prince Jingmu was buried in Jinling.

古文：秋七月丁亥，行幸阴山。
现代文：秋季七月初五，世祖巡视阴山。
English: In autumn, on the fifth day of the seventh month, the ancestor patrols the gloomy mountains.

古文：省诸曹吏员三分之一。
现代文：减少各部曹三分之一的吏员。
English: Let the ministries reduce the number of officials by one third.

古文：九月癸巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十二日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On September 12th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十月庚申，行幸阴山。
现代文：冬季十月初九，世祖巡视阴山。
English: In winter, on the 9th day of the 10th month, the parade goes to the gloomy mountain.

古文：刘义隆遣使朝贡。
现代文：刘义隆派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Liu Yilong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：诏殿中将军郎法祐使于义隆。
现代文：世祖下诏命殿中将军郎法出使刘义隆政权。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the palace general Lang Fa to dispatch the Liu Yilong regime.

古文：己巳，司空、上党王长孙道生薨。
现代文：十八日，司空、上党王长孙道生逝世。
English: On the 18th, Sun Dosheng, Secretary of the Kuomintang and the leader of the Upper Party, passed away.

古文：十有二月丁丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月二十七日，世祖回到宫中。
English: On December 27th, the patriarch returned to the palace.

古文：封皇孙浚为高阳王。
现代文：封皇孙拓跋为高阳王。
English: He named Emperor Sun Tuoba as the King of Gaoyang.

古文：寻以皇孙世嫡，不宜在蕃，乃止。
现代文：不久因皇孙是嫡系，不宜身处外藩，于是作罢。
English: Soon, since the imperial grandson was a direct descendant, it was not appropriate for him to be outside the domain, so he resigned.

古文：封秦王翰为东平王，燕王谭为临淮王，楚王建为广阳王，吴王余为南安王。
现代文：封秦王拓跋翰为东平王，燕王拓跋谭为临淮王，楚王拓跋建为广阳王，吴王拓跋余为南安王。
English: Feng Qin King Tuoba Han was the king of Dongping, Yan King Tuoba Tan was the king of Linhuai, Chu King Tuoba Jian was the king of Guangyang, and Wu King Tuoba Yu was the king of Nan'an.

古文：二年春正月庚辰朔，南来降民五千余家于中山谋叛，州军讨平之。
现代文：正平二年春季正月初一，从南面迁移而来的降民五千多家在中山叛乱，州军讨伐并平定了他们。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Zhengping in the spring, more than five thousand people who migrated from the south rebelled in Zhongshan, and the state army fought and pacified them.

古文：冀州刺史、张掖王沮渠万年与降民通谋，赐死。
现代文：冀州刺史、张掖王沮渠万年与其通谋，被赐死。
English: Jizhou stabbed history, Zhang Ye Wang frustrated the channel and conspired with him for thousands of years, and was sentenced to death.

古文：三月甲寅，帝崩于永安宫，时年四十五。
现代文：三月初五，世祖在永安宫突然逝世，享年四十五岁。
English: On the 5th of March, the patriarch died suddenly in Yongan Palace, at the age of forty-five.

古文：秘不发丧。中常侍宗爱矫皇后令，杀东平王翰，迎南安王余入而立之，大赦，改元为永平，尊皇后赫连氏为皇太后。
现代文：秘不发丧，中常侍宗爱假传皇后令，杀了东平王拓跋翰，迎接南安王拓跋余入宫，立他为皇帝，大赦天下，改年号为永平，尊称皇后赫连氏为皇太后。
English: Secretly grieving, the middle chamberlain Zong Ai forged the empress's order, killed the Dongping King Tuoba Han, welcomed the Nan'an King Tuoba Yu into the palace, made him emperor, pardoned the world, changed the year to Yongping, and honored the Empress Herien as the empress dowager.

古文：三月辛卯，上尊谥曰太武皇帝，葬于云中金陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：三月十三日，尊谥世祖为太武皇帝，葬于云中金陵，庙号为世祖。
English: On March 13th, Emperor Taibu was buried in Yunzhong Jinling, and the temple was named after him.

