古文：二十一日早起，寒甚，雨气渐收，众峰俱出，惟寺东南绝顶尚有云气。
现代文：二十一日早晨起来，天冷得很，雨气渐渐散开，众峰都露了出来，只有寺东南的最高顶还有云气。
English: I got up in the morning of the 21st, it was very cold, the rain gradually dispersed, and all the peaks were exposed. Only the highest peak southeast of the temple was still cloudy.

古文：与贯心晨餐毕，即出方丈中庭，指点诸胜。
现代文：和贯心吃完早餐，便走出方丈正厅堂，指点各处胜景。
English: After a hearty breakfast, he walked out of the abbot's main hall, pointing out the sights everywhere.

古文：盖正南而独高者为寨顶，顶又有石如鹦嘴，又名鹦嘴峰，今又名为老人峰。
现代文：正南面高出周围山峰的为寨顶，它顶部又有石头如同鹦鹉嘴，所以又叫鹦嘴峰，如今又称为老人峰。
English: Directly to the south, the highest peak of the surrounding mountains is the castle peak. Its top has stones like a parrot's beak, so it is also called the parrot's beak peak, and now it is also called the old man's peak.

古文：其北下之脊，一起而为罗汉，再起而为鹦哥，三起而为净瓶，四起而为观音，此为中支，北与展旗为对者也，而西，最峭削者为龟峰、双剑峰。龟峰三石攒起，兀立峰头，与双剑并列，而高顶有叠石，如龟三叠，为一山之主名。双剑亦与龟峰并立，龟峰三剖其下而上合，双剑两岐其顶而本根基连。
现代文：从谷侧呼喊一声，声音就会回响四次，这是因为龟峰东面的水帘谷石崖曲折环绕在它上面的缘故。龟峰东面最高的就是寨顶，西面最近的是含龟峰，含龟峰下面就是寨顶和含龟峰分脊的地方，而龟峰、双剑峰尖峭地插立在上面，因为被含龟峰所掩蔽，所以龟峰下那条石缝看上去或显或合；合在一起就形成一道屏障，有时突然分开露出天空，因而昨天便怀疑是一片白云。双剑峰也和龟峰并立着，龟峰下部有三处破裂开而上部合并在一起，双剑峰顶上分为两支而下面相连。
English: One shout from the valley side, the sound will be echoed four times. This is because the water curtain valley stone cliff zigzags around it on the east side of the turtle peak. The highest on the east side of the turtle peak is the village peak, the closest on the west side is the turtle peak. Below the turtle peak is the place where the village peak and the turtle peak are separated, and the turtle peak and the double sword peak stand sharply above. Because they are covered by the turtle peak, the stone gap under the turtle peak looks either apparent or closed; together they form a barrier, sometimes suddenly separated to reveal the sky, so yesterday it was suspected to

古文：其南有大书 壁立万仞 者，指寨顶而言也。
现代文：这两峰南面有一处写着 壁立万初 四个大字，那是指寨顶而言。
English: On the south side of these two peaks, there is a place where it is written, "Walled up forever, four big characters," which refers to the top of the village.

古文：款已剥落，云是朱晦庵。
现代文：字迹已经剥落，据说是朱晦庵书写的。
English: The handwriting has been peeled off and is said to have been written by Zhu Qian.

古文：此为西南过脊之中，东北与香盒峰为对者也，而旧寺之向因之。
现代文：这两峰处在寨顶往西南穿越过去的山脊的中部，和东北面的香盒峰对峙着，以前的寺庙一向构筑在此处。
English: These two peaks are located in the middle of the ridge that crosses the past in the southwest at the top of the village, facing the incense box peak in the northeast. Former temples have always been built here.

古文：从西而北，联屏障于左者，一为含龟峰，其下即为振衣台，二为明星峰，其上有窍若星。
现代文：由西向北，联成一线而在左边构成一道屏障的，首先是含龟峰，它下面就是振衣台。振衣台是从屏风般的崖壁中部悬空伸出去的平坦的石头，是登摩尼洞、一线天的道路所经处。
English: From west to north, forming a line and forming a barrier on the left, first of all is the Turtle Peak, and below it is the Dressing Table. The Dressing Table is a flat stone hanging out from the middle of the screen-like cliff wall, and it is the place where the Demoni Cave, the first line of the sky road, passes.

古文：三为双鳌峰，此环峙于谷西，而寨顶之脉西北尽于此。
现代文：这三座山峰环绕耸立在四声谷西面，寨顶的山脉往西北延伸到这三座山峰尽头处结束。
English: The three peaks surround and stand on the west side of the Valley of the Four Sounds. The mountain range at the top of the village extends northwest to the end of the three peaks.

古文：从南顶而东，最回环者为城垛峰、围屏峰，此为东南层绕之后，西北与双鳌峰为对者也。
现代文：从南面的寨顶往东，最曲折环绕的是城垛峰、围屏峰，它们就是东南面层层环绕的山峰后面的、与西北面的双鳌峰对峙着的那两座峰。
English: From the top of the village in the south to the east, the most tortuous surrounds are Castle Peak and Wai Ping Peak, which are the two peaks behind the peaks surrounded by layers in the southeast and facing the twin peaks in the northwest.

古文：从东而北，列磷峋于右者，覆者为轿顶峰，尖者为象牙峰，踞者为狮子峰。
现代文：从东向北，排列在右边的嶙峋的山峰，顶上如有顶盖遮蔽的是轿顶峰，尖耸的是象牙峰，蹲伏的是狮子峰。
English: From east to north, the rugged peaks are arranged on the right. If there is a canopy covering the top, it is the sedan peak, the ivory peak is pointed, and the lion peak is crouching.

古文：此联翩于谷东，而寨顶之脉东北转于此，又从北而骈立为案焉。
现代文：它们连绵起伏横亘在四声谷的东面，寨顶的山脉东北面由此转向，又在北面并排耸立起些山峰，成为案山。
English: They stretch uninterruptedly across the east side of the Valley of the Four Sounds, and the northeast side of the mountain range of Zhaidong is turned by them. In addition, some peaks stand side by side in the north, becoming the mountains of the case.

古文：平而突者为香盒峰也。
现代文：平坦而向上突起的是香盒峰，形态变幻而耸起的是灵芝峰，它就是方丈的静室所对着的山峰。
English: The flat but upwardly protruding peak is the Incense Box Peak, while the morphologically variable but rising peak is the Lingzhi Peak, which is the peak facing the abbot's seclusion room.

古文：幻而起者灵芝峰也，斜而张者展旗峰也，此排拱于谷北，而寨顶之脉西南尽于此。
现代文：倾斜伸展的是展旗峰，它东边高昂西边低矮，南北两面崖壁直立、南面的崖壁插入清澈的潭水中，这就是我进来时的山谷中那座在下面凿开石头修成栈道的崖壁。这三座山峰排列环绕在四声谷的北面，寨顶的山脉西南面到此结束。
English: It is the Zhangqi Peak that extends obliquely. It is high on the east side and low on the west side. The cliff walls on the north and south sides are upright. The cliff wall on the south side is inserted into the clear pool water. This is the cliff wall in the valley when I came in, which was hewn out of the rock below to make a walkway. These three peaks are arranged around the north side of the four-sound valley, and the southwest side of the mountain range at the top of the village ends here.

古文：此俱谷之内者也。
现代文：这些都是四声谷里面的山峰。
English: These are the peaks inside the Valley of Four Voices.

古文：若谷之外，展旗之北为天柱峰，又为狗儿峰。
现代文：若是四声谷的外面，展旗峰的北面为天柱峰，它就是昨天远远看去岔出圭玉一样的石片的那山峰，它旁边又是狗儿峰。
English: If it is the outside of the Valley of the Four Sounds, the north face of the Spreading Banner Peak is Tianzhu Peak, which is the peak that looked like a jade stone yesterday, and next to it is the Dog Peak.

古文：狮子之南为卓笔峰。
现代文：狮子峰的南面为卓笔峰。
English: To the south of Lion Peak is Zhuo Pen Peak.

古文：围屏峰之南，深壑中有棋盘石。
现代文：围屏峰的南面，深谷中有块棋盘石。
English: On the south side of the Wai Ping Peak, there is a checkerboard stone in the deep valley.

古文：寨顶之南又有朝帽峰。
现代文：寨顶的南面又有朝帽峰。
English: To the south of the top of the village is the Morning Hat Peak.

古文：接引峰。寨顶之西有画笔峰，水帘洞。此俱谷之外者也。
现代文：画笔峰岩石上有条泉，称为水帘洞。这些都是四声谷外面的山峰。
English: Paintbrush Peak There is a spring on the rock, called Water Curtain Cave. These are the peaks outside the Valley of the Four Sounds.

古文：其谷四面峰攒，独成洞窟。
现代文：这个地方四面山峰丛聚，中间单独形成洞穴。
English: This place is surrounded by mountains on all sides, with a cave forming in the middle.

古文：惟西向一峡，两崖壁立，水从中出，路亦从之。
现代文：唯独朝着西面有一个山峡，两边崖壁直立，水从中间流出，路也顺着山峡走。
English: However, there is a mountain gorge to the west, with cliff walls standing upright on both sides, water flowing from the middle, and the road running along the gorge.

古文：其南从龟峰之下，西从狮子峰之侧，北从香盒、天柱之间，皆逾峰跻隙而后得度，真霄壤天地间一灵胜矣。
现代文：从南面的龟峰下、西面的狮子峰侧面、北面的香盒峰和天柱峰之间，都要翻越山峰攀着石缝才能进出山谷，真是天地间的一处灵奇优美的地方。
English: From the bottom of the turtle peak in the south, the side of the lion peak in the west, and between the incense box peak and the Tianzhu peak in the north, you have to climb over the peaks and climb through the stone cracks to enter and exit the valley. It is truly a magical and beautiful place between heaven and earth.

古文：其中观音峰一枝，自寨顶北坠，分为二谷：西则方丈静室所托，最后为振衣台、摩尼洞之路；东则榛莽深翳。
现代文：其中观音峰那一支，从寨顶往北向下延伸，一共分为两个山谷：西面的就是方丈的静室坐落在其间的那个，最末端是上振衣台、摩尼洞的路；东面被芜杂丛生的草木厚厚地遮蔽着。
English: One of them, Guanyin Peak, extends down from the top of the village to the north and is divided into two valleys: the west side is the one where the abbot's meditation room is located, and the end is the road to Shangzhuidai and Mani Cave; the east side is thickly shaded by overgrown vegetation.

古文：余曳杖披棘而入，直抵围屏峰、城垛峰之下，仰视 饿虎赶羊 诸石，何酷肖也。
现代文：我拄着拐杖披开荆棘从东面山谷进去，直抵围屏峰、城垛峰下面，仰视 饿虎赶羊 等众多石头，形象是多么逼真啊！
English: I entered the valley from the east with crutches and thorns, and reached the foot of the Waiping Peak and the Castle Peak, looking up at the many stones such as the Hungry Tiger Chasing Sheep. How lifelike the image was!

古文：使芟夷深莽，叠级置梯，必有灵关再辟，奥胜莫殚竭尽者。
现代文：假若铲除掉长得很高的丛草，一级级铺起石瞪，搭起梯子，到达上面，一定有如同灵关再现和僻静优美的景致连续不尽的一些地方。
English: If we were to uproot the tall clumps of weeds, lay out the stone slabs one by one, set up ladders, and reach the top, there must be some places where the scenery is endless, such as the reappearance of the spirit pass and the secluded beauty.

古文：惜石乱棘深，无能再入。
现代文：可惜石头杂乱荆棘很深，无法再进去。
English: Unfortunately, the stone clutter and thorns are very deep, and it is no longer possible to enter.

古文：出，循狮子峰之北，逾岭南转，所谓轿顶、象牙诸峰，从其外西向视之，又俱夹叠而起。
现代文：走出山谷，顺着狮子峰的北面，翻过山岭转往南，向西看去，所说的轿顶、象牙等各山峰又都互相夹峙重叠而耸起。
English: Coming out of the valley, following the north face of Lion Peak, turning over the mountain range to the south, looking west, the said sedan roof, ivory and other peaks are all interlocked and overlapping.

古文：中悬一峰，恍若卓笔，有咄咄表示惊讶书空之状，名之曰卓笔峰，不虚也，不经此不见也。
现代文：中间倒悬着一座山峰，仿佛一支直立的笔，看上去有咄咄向天空书写的态势，称它叫卓笔峰是不错的，不经过这里就见不到它。
English: In the middle hangs an upside-down mountain, like an upright pen, which seems to be writing aggressively into the sky. It's not a bad idea to call it Zhuo Pen Peak. You can't see it without passing through here.

古文：峰之下俱石冈高亘。
现代文：卓笔峰下面尽是些石冈高高地横贯着。
English: Underneath Zhuo Pen Peak, there are a lot of boulders running across the highlands.

古文：其东又有石峰一支，自寨顶环而北，西与轿顶、象牙诸峰，又环成一谷。
现代文：它的东面又有一座石峰，从寨顶环绕向北，与西面的轿顶、象牙等众山峰又环绕而形成一个山谷。
English: On the east side of it, there is another stone peak, which is encircled from the top of the castle to the north, and from the top of the sedan, ivory and other peaks in the west, forming a valley.

古文：余从石冈直南披其底，复以石乱棘深而出。
现代文：我从石冈间一直向南穿行到石峰的底下，又是因为石头杂乱荆棘很深而退出来。
English: I walked through the rocks all the way south to the bottom of the rock peak, but I had to back out because the rocks were so jumbled and the thorns were so deep.

古文：因西逾象牙、狮子之间，其脊欹削，几无容足，回瞰内谷，真别有天地矣。
现代文：于是向西翻越象牙峰、狮子峰之间的山脊，那山脊倾斜陡直，几乎无法立脚，在山脊上回首俯瞰内谷，真是别有天地。
English: So I climbed westward over the ridge between Ivory Peak and Lion Peak. The ridge slopes steeply and is almost impossible to stand on. Looking back over the inner valley from the ridge is truly a different world.

古文：此东外谷之第一层也。
现代文：这是东外谷的第一层。
English: This is the first floor of the tower.

古文：复循外岭东行，南转二里，直披寨顶之后，是为棋盘石。
现代文：又顺四声谷外面的山岭往东走，折往南行两里，直穿到寨顶的后面，那里是棋盘石。
English: Walk east along the mountains outside the Valley of the Four Sounds, turn south for two miles, and go straight through to the back of the top of the castle, where is the checkerboard stone.

古文：一大石穹立谷中，上平如砥，镌其四旁，可踞可憩。
现代文：一块大石头高高地拱立在山谷中，上面平滑得如同磨刀石，四周经过凿削，可盘坐可休息。
English: A large stone stands high up in the valley, smooth as a whetstone, chiseled on all sides, where you can sit and rest.

古文：想其地昔有考槃，今成关莽，未必神仙之遗也。
现代文：我寻思这里以前曾有人隐居，如今成了与周围隔绝、杂草丛生的地方，未必是什么神仙的遗迹。
English: I wondered if this place, where people once lived in seclusion, was now a place isolated from the surroundings, overgrown with weeds, and not necessarily a relic of some god.

古文：其西南为朝帽峰，西北为寨顶，盖即围屏峰之后也。
现代文：它的西南边为朝帽峰，西北边为寨顶，它大概就位于围屏峰的后面。
English: Its southwest side is the morning cap peak, the northwest side is the village peak, and it is probably located behind the Wai Ping peak.

古文：其外峰一支，自朝帽峰下复环而北，又成一谷，但其山俱参差环立，不复如内二支俱石骨削成者矣。
现代文：它外面有一支山脉，从朝帽峰下面又环绕向北，另外形成一个山谷，只是那座山峰高低起伏，环绕耸立在山谷外，不再像里面的两支山脉都是由裸露的石头、直立的崖壁构成。
English: It has a mountain range on the outside, and from the bottom of the morning cap peak it is surrounded to the north, forming another valley, but that mountain is high and low, surrounded and standing outside the valley, no longer like the two mountains inside are made of bare stone, upright cliffs.

古文：此东外谷之第二层也。
现代文：这是东外谷的第二层。
English: This is the second floor of the tower.

古文：寨顶、朝帽之间，峰脊度处，一石南向而立，高数十丈，孤悬峰头，俨若翁仲，或称为接引峰，或称为石人峰。
现代文：寨顶峰、朝帽峰之间，峰脊穿越过去的地方，有块石头向南矗立着，高有几十丈，孤零零地悬在峰头上，俨然是一尊石像，它或称为接引峰，或称为石人峰。
English: Between the Zhai Peak and the Morning Hat Peak, where the ridge of the peak passes through the past, there is a stone standing to the south, dozens of meters high, hanging alone on the peak, like a stone statue. It is either called the Suction Peak or the Stone Man Peak.

古文：从棋盘石望之不觉神飞，疑从此可跻绝顶，遂披棘直穷岭下，则悬崖削石，无可攀跻也。
现代文：从棋盘石处眺望那石峰，不觉神思飞扬，我怀疑从棋盘石可以攀登到最高处，便劈开荆棘一直探寻到峰下面，然而面前却是悬崖削石，无可攀登。
English: Looking at the stone peak from the checkerboard stone, I suddenly felt my mind flying. I doubted that I could climb to the highest place from the checkerboard stone, so I split the thorns and explored all the way to the bottom of the peak. However, in front of me was a cliff cut stone, impossible to climb.

古文：仍从旧路至狮峰，过香盒峰，登灵芝峰，望天柱、狗儿二峰，直立北谷中。
现代文：仍旧从原路回到狮子峰，经过香盒峰，登上灵芝峰，从灵芝峰上望去，天柱、狗儿两座山峰直立在北边的山谷中。
English: I still returned to Lion Peak from the original road, passed through Incense Box Peak, and climbed Lingzhi Peak. Looking down from Lingzhi Peak, the two peaks of Tianzhu and Xuer stood upright in the valley to the north.

古文：盖展旗与其北一峰又环成一谷，此北外谷也。
现代文：大概展旗峰与它北面的一座山峰又环绕形成一个山谷，这是北外谷。
English: The roughly jutting peak is surrounded by a mountain to the north, forming a valley. This is the North Outer Valley.

古文：既而从展旗之西南，直东上其巅。
现代文：随即，从展旗峰的西南面，直往东登上峰顶。
English: Then, from the southwest side of Zhanqi Peak, go straight to the east to climb the peak.

古文：东南眺朝帽峰之东，又分立一石，亦如接引，而接引则隐不可见；南眺叠龟、双剑，俱若一壁回环，无复寸隙也。
现代文：向东南眺望，朝帽峰的东面，又分立着一块石头，也如同接引峰一样，而接引峰却被遮蔽着看不到；向南眺望，叠龟、双剑两座山峰都像是曲折环绕的一整块大石壁，不再露出一丝缝隙。
English: Looking to the southeast, on the east side of the morning cap peak, there is another stone standing separately, also as if it were a subduction peak, but the subduction peak is covered and cannot be seen; looking to the south, the stacked turtle and double sword two peaks are like a whole large stone wall surrounded by twists and turns, no longer revealing a trace of a gap.

古文：下峰，从夹栈西山，循潭外南行，出双鳌、明星、含龟之后，东视三峰，其背俱垂土可上。舍而更南，东入即水帘之径，逾叠龟、双剑，即下振衣谷中之道也。
现代文：我又放弃继续往南走，看见有条路往东面上去，心想必定是到寨顶的路无疑了。我鼓足勇气向上攀登，爬了两里，向西一看，叠龟峰和双剑峰已经在脚下，这才知道已经到了水帘洞山谷上。
English: I gave up walking further south and saw a road heading east, thinking there must be a way to the top of the fortress. I mustered the courage to climb up and climbed two miles. When I looked west, Stacked Turtle Peak and Double Sword Peak were already at my feet, and that's when I knew I had reached the Shuifen Cave valley.

古文：更舍而南，见有道东上，知为寨顶无疑矣。贾勇而登，二里，西视叠龟、双剑其西有隙可通，然掩映不见所从。
现代文：向下俯视谷中，东、西、南三面呈半环形，如同一块块玉，只有北面正对着龟峰和双剑峰，谷西面有条山峡通到外面，然而山峰草木掩映中看不见那山峡在哪里。
English: Looking down into the middle of the valley, the east, west, and south sides are semi-circular, like a single piece of jade. Only the north side is directly opposite the Turtle Peak and the Double Sword Peak. On the west side of the valley, there is a mountain gorge leading to the outside, but you can't see where the canyon is in the shadow of the mountain peaks.

古文：此南外谷之第一层也。
现代文：这是南外谷的第一层。
English: This is the first floor of the South Valley.

古文：循崖端再上，已而舍左从右，则见东南冈上，乱石涌起，有若双芝骈立，盘大茎小，下复并蒂，中有穿孔，其上飞舞成形，应接不暇。
现代文：顺着山崖边缘再向上爬，旋即抛开左边从右边攀登，便看见东南面的山冈上，乱石涌起，有两块石头若两棵灵芝并立，顶盘大茎杆小，下面似并蒂，中间有个孔。灵芝石以上，石头形态横飞纵舞，让人看了有应接不暇的感觉。
English: Climbing up along the edge of the cliff, immediately abandoning the left to climb from the right, I saw a jumble of stones on the southeastern hill. Two stones stood side by side like two Ganoderma lucidum. The top plate had a large stem and small stem, and the underside was similar to a pistil, and there was a hole in the middle. Above the Ganoderma lucidum stone, the stone forms danced horizontally, giving people a feeling of being overwhelmed.

古文：又上一里，既登一顶，复舍右从左，穿石隙而上，转而东南行，其顶更穹然也。
现代文：再往上攀一里，登上一顶后，又抛开右边从左边攀爬，穿过石缝上去，折向东南边走，山顶更加弯隆。
English: Then climb one mile up, climb to the top, and climb from the left to the right, climb up through the stone seams, turn to the southeast, and the summit is more inclined.

古文：其北复另起一顶，两顶夹而成峡，东南始于过脊，西北溢于水帘，山遂剖为两界，而过脊之度其东南者，一石如梁，横两顶之间，梁尽而轰崖削起，决无登理。
现代文：它的北面又另外耸起一顶，两顶夹峙，形成一个山峡，这山峡从东南面山脊越过去的地方开始，延伸到西北的水帘洞，山被剖成两崖，而越往东南面的山脊上，有块石头如同桥梁，横架在两顶间，石梁延伸到尽头，崩裂的崖壁笔直耸起，决无攀登的可能。
English: To the north of it, another peak rises, and the two peaks are sandwiched, forming a canyon. This canyon begins where the southeast ridge passes, and extends to the northwest water curtain cave. The mountain is cut into two cliffs, and on the southeast ridge, there is a stone like a bridge, cross-braced between the two peaks, the stone beam extends to the end, the cracked cliffs rise straight up, and there is no possibility of climbing.

古文：踞脊上回瞰南谷，崩隤直下，不见其底，但见东西对崖，悬岚倒翠，不知从何而入。
现代文：坐在山脊上回首俯瞰南边的山谷，一直向下塌落坠陷，见不到底，只看得到东西两边山崖对峙，山崖上雾气悬空缭绕翠色倒染，不知道从何处进入山谷中。
English: Sitting on the ridge, looking back and overlooking the valley to the south, I kept falling down and falling down, I couldn't see the bottom, I could only see the confrontation between the cliffs on both sides of the east and west, and the mist hanging in the sky on the cliff was dyed green, and I didn't know where to enter the valley.

古文：此南外谷之第二层也。
现代文：这是南外谷的第二层。
English: This is the second storey of the tower in the south outer valley.

古文：久之，觅路欲返，忽见峡北之顶，有石如凿级自峡中直上者，因详视峡南石上，亦复有级如之，始知其路不从脊而从峡也。
现代文：过了许久，想寻找道路返下山，忽然看见山峡习匕面的峰顶上，有岩石像被凿出的石瞪一样直伸峰顶，于是详细观察山峡南面的石头上，也有同样的石瞪，这才知道路不是从山脊上而是从山峡中走。
English: After a long time, I wanted to find a way to return down the mountain, and suddenly saw that on the top of the peak facing the canyon, there was a rock that stretched straight to the top like a hewn stone, so I observed in detail the same stone on the stone on the south side of the canyon. Only then did I know that the road was not from the ridge, but from the canyon.

古文：盖其寨为昔人盘踞之处，故梯险凿空，今路为草没，而石迹未泐è裂开。
现代文：大概这个寨以前有人盘踞着，所以在险峻的山崖上凌空凿出了石阶梯，如今路被草隐没，但石瞪并没有被破坏。
English: Presumably, this village was previously occupied by someone, so a stone staircase was carved out of the precipitous cliff. Today, the path is hidden by grass, but the stone staircase has not been destroyed.

古文：遂循级北下峡中，复自峡攀级北上，一里，复东登再高处，极其东南，则恍与接引比肩，朝帽觌相见面矣。
现代文：于是顺石瞪往北走下山峡，又从山峡中攀着石瞪往北上去，一里，又往东登上一个更高处，走到它的最东南边，便恍若有与接引峰肩并着肩，和朝帽峰面对着面的感觉。
English: As a result, I walked down the gorge following the stone to the north, climbed the stone to the north from the canyon, climbed a mile, climbed to the east to a higher place, and walked to its southeasternmost edge. It felt as if I was standing shoulder to shoulder with the peak, and facing the morning cap peak.

古文：惟朝帽东离立之石，自隐不见，而朝帽则四面孤悬，必无可登。
现代文：只有朝帽峰东面那块分立的石头，被遮隐着看不见，而朝帽峰四面孤悬，决不可能登上去。
English: Only the detached stone on the east side of the morning cap peak is obscured and cannot be seen, while the morning cap peak is isolated on all sides and can never be climbed.

古文：而接引之界于其中者，已立悬脊之上，两旁俱轰石错块，不特不仅仅是下不能上，即上亦不能下。
现代文：隔在中间的接引峰，已经耸立在高而陡的山脊上，两旁都是崩裂的大石头交错叠压，不仅是不可能登上去，而且就是登上去也不可能下来。
English: Separated in the middle by the connecting peak, it already stands on a high and steep ridge, on both sides of which there are cracked boulders interlaced and superimposed. It is not only impossible to climb up, but it is also impossible to climb down.

古文：其北下之谷即棋盘，其南下之谷即朝帽南来之脉所环而成者，亦不知其从何而入。
现代文：它北面下去就是棋盘石山谷，南面下去就是朝帽峰向南延伸过来的山脉环绕形成的山谷，也不知道是从何处进入山谷中。
English: To the north, it descends to the checkerboard stone valley, to the south, it descends to the valley formed around the mountains stretching south from the morning peak, and it is not known from where it enters the valley.

古文：此南外谷之第三层也。
现代文：这是南外谷的第三层。
English: This is the third floor of the South Valley Tower.

古文：时日色已暮，从绝顶四里下山。
现代文：唯独西面无外谷。
English: However, there is no outer valley to the west.

古文：东向入至双剑、叠龟之下，见有路可入水帘洞，第昏黑莫辨，亟逾岭入方丈焉。
现代文：而最高顶端的北面，东边分为围屏峰、城垛峰，西边分出鹦口峰；然而奇异的是，从下面仰望上去高高隆起显出奇幻的景象，从上面俯瞰下来反倒深陷而绝难观览到它的全貌。
English: On the north side of the highest peak, the east side is divided into Waping Peak, Castle Peak, and the west side is divided into Parrot Peak; however, it is strange that when looking up from below, the high uplift shows a fantastic scene, but when looking down from above, it is deep and difficult to see its whole picture.

古文：二十二日晨起，为贯心书《五缘诗》及《龟峰》五言二首、《赠别》七言一首。
现代文：当时天色已晚，我从最高顶上往卞走四里下了山。朝东边进到双剑峰、叠龟峰的下面，看见有路可以进入水帘洞，只是天色昏黑，不辨方向，于是疾速翻过山岭回到方丈。二十二日早晨起来，为贯心书写《五缘诗》、《龟峰》两首五言诗以及一首七言诗《赠别。
English: At that time, it was late in the day. I walked four miles from the highest peak down the mountain. I entered the east side to the bottom of the Double Sword Peak and the Stacked Turtle Peak, and saw that there was a road that could enter the curtain hole. However, it was dark and I could not tell the direction, so I quickly turned over the mountain and returned to the abbot. On the morning of the 22nd, I got up to write "Five Poems," "Turtle Peak" two five-word poems and a seven-word poem "Farewell" for perseverance.

古文：晨餐后，复逾振衣台，上至叠龟峰之下，再穿一线而东，复北过四声谷。
现代文：早餐后，又翻过振衣台，上到叠龟峰下面，再穿过一线天向东走，又往北经过四声谷。
English: After breakfast, I turned over the vibrating clothes stand, climbed up to the bottom of the stacked turtle peak, then walked east through the sky, and then north through the Valley of the Four Sounds.

古文：盖四声谷之壁，有一隙东南向，内皆大石叠架，若累级悬梯，便成楼阁，可通西北。
现代文：大概四声谷的四周崖壁中，有条夹缝向着东南，夹缝内全是大石头叠压堆架着，假若累砌石瞪，悬空架梯，便成了楼阁，顺着它可以通往山谷西北面。
English: In the cliff wall around the Valley of the Four Sounds, there is a crevice to the southeast. Inside the crevice, large stones are stacked and piled. If the stones are piled up and the ladder is suspended, it will become a castle. It can lead to the northwest side of the valley.

古文：而出其西北为摩尼洞，正下临方丈，平挹ì观音、净瓶、狮子诸峰。
现代文：而出了四声谷西北为摩尼洞，那里正下临方丈，和观音峰、净瓶峰、狮子峰等众山峰对平。
English: And the northwest of the Valley of the Four Sounds is Mani Cave, where the abbot is right below, and the peaks of Guanyin Peak, Jingjing Peak, Lion Peak and others are on the same level.

古文：遂下岭，西南循外谷入水帘洞。
现代文：于是走下岭，朝西南顺外谷进入水帘洞。
English: So I walked down the ridge, down the valley to the southwest, and entered the water curtain cave.

古文：其处三面环崖，回亘自天，而北与龟、剑二峰为对，泉从崖东飘坠，飞珠卷雪，为此中绝胜。
现代文：那地方山崖环绕着三面，从高空回旋而下，北面对着龟峰和双剑峰，泉水从山崖的东面飘落下坠，有如飞珠卷雪，是这地方风景最优美之处。
English: The place is surrounded by cliffs on three sides, circling down from the high altitude, facing the Turtle Peak and the Double Sword Peak in the north, and the spring water drifts and falls from the eastern side of the cliff, like flying snow. It is the most beautiful place in this place.

古文：徘徊不能去离开。久之，再饭于寺，别贯心行。
现代文：过了许久，再次到寺中吃了饭，然后告别了贯心出发。
English: After a long time, I went to the temple again to eat, and then I said goodbye and set off.

古文：仍从崖栈西出，十里，排前。
现代文：仍旧从崖壁间的栈道往西出来，走十里，到排前。
English: I still came out of the footpath between the cliffs to the west and walked ten miles to the front of the queue.

古文：五里，过状元桥北之分路亭，其南路乃由桥而至黄源窑者，从其西行十五里至留口，暮涉其溪。
现代文：又走五里，经过状元桥北面的分路亭，亭南面的路就是经过状元桥到黄源窑去的，我们从亭西面走十五里到达留口，天黑时涉水渡过村旁的溪流。
English: We walked another five miles, passing through the branch road pavilion on the north side of the Jowon Bridge, and the road on the south side of the pavilion went through the Jowon Bridge to Huangyuan Kiln. We walked fifteen miles from the west side of the pavilion to reach the mouth, and when it was dark, we waded across the stream next to the village.

古文：溪西即为贵溪界，其溪自黄源来，至此入大溪，而市肆俱在溪西，乃投宿焉。
现代文：溪流西面就是贵溪县界，这条摸流从黄源窖流来，到此处汇入一条大溪中，而集市店铺都在溪西面，于是投宿到店铺中。
English: The west side of the stream is the Guixi County boundary. This stream flows from Huangyuan Cellar and flows into a large stream here. The market shops are on the west side of the stream, so they stay in the shops.

古文：自排前至留口，回望龟峰，只见朝帽峰俨若一羊角插天，此西向之望也，与弋阳东面之望不殊纤毫，第此处转见一石人亭亭在旁更为异耳。
现代文：从排前到留口的路中，回首遥望龟峰的各山峰，只见朝帽峰俨若一只羊角插向天空，这是从西面望时所看到的形态，与从弋阳县东面望时所呈现出的形态分毫不差，只是转身从这个地方遥望，又看见一座岩石如人亭亭玉立在朝帽峰旁，更加奇异罢了。
English: On the way from the front of the line to the mouth of the line, looking back at the distant peaks of the turtle peak, I only saw the morning cap peak. If a sheep horn is inserted into the sky, this is the form seen when looking from the west. It is no worse than the form presented when looking from the east of Fenyang County. However, when I turned around and looked from this place, I saw a rock like a human pavilion standing next to the morning cap peak. It was even more bizarre.

