古文：太宗初即位，谓侍臣曰： 准《礼》，名，终将讳之。
现代文：唐太宗即位之初，曾对侍臣们说： 根据《周礼》的规定，帝王的名字，都要避讳。
English: At the beginning of his reign, Emperor Taizong of Tang once said to his courtiers: According to the regulations of "Zhouli," the name of the emperor should be avoided.

古文：前古帝王，亦不生讳其名，故周文王名昌，《周诗》云： 克昌厥后。 
现代文：可是古代的帝王，生前并不避讳这些，周文王叫昌，但《周诗》中写了 攻克姬昌之后 这样的诗句。
English: However, ancient emperors did not shy away from these things during their lifetimes. Zhou Wen Wang was called Qichang, but in the "Weekly Poetry" he wrote, "After conquering Qichang," a poem like this.

古文：春秋时鲁庄公名同，十六年《经》书： 齐侯、宋公同盟于幽。 
现代文：春秋时，鲁庄公名叫同，庄公十六年《春秋经》上有这样的字句： 齐侯、宋公在幽地结为同盟。 
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the names of Lu Zhuang Gong and Zhuang Gong were the same. In Zhuang Gong's "Spring and Autumn Classic" in the 16th year, there were such words: Qi Hou and Song Gong formed an alliance in a secluded place.

古文：惟近代诸帝，妄为节制，特令生避其讳，理非通允，宜有改张。 
现代文：只是到了后来，帝王们才制造出许多禁忌来，他们下令，生前就要对帝王的名字进行避讳。我认为这样做很没有道理，应该改变。 
English: It was only later that the emperors created a lot of taboos, they ordered that the name of the emperor should be avoided during his lifetime. I think this is very unreasonable and should be changed.

古文：因诏曰： 依《礼》，二名义不偏讳，尼父达圣，非无前指。
现代文：于是下诏说： 按照《礼记》，人名是两个字的，只要不是两个字连着出现，就不要避讳。
English: Therefore, the following edict was issued: According to the "Li Ji," a person's name is composed of two characters. As long as the two characters do not appear together, do not avoid it.

古文：近世以来，曲为节制，两字兼避，废阙已多，率意而行，有违经语。
现代文：孔子是通达事理的圣人，以前不是没有指出过这种事。近世以来，世人多加禁忌，生出很多避讳，与《礼记》的规定不符。现在应该遵循经典，从简约出发，效仿先哲，规范后世。
English: Confucius is a sage who is well versed in matters of reason, and he has pointed out this kind of thing before. Since modern times, the world has added more taboos and produced many shuns, which is inconsistent with the provisions of the "Rituals." Now it is necessary to follow the classics, proceed from simplicity, emulate the predecessors, and standardize the future.

古文：今宜依据礼典，务从简约，仰效先哲，垂法将来，其官号人名，及公私文籍，有 世 及 民 两字不连读，并不须避。 
现代文：官员的称谓、姓名，公私的文章书籍，只要 世 和 民 两个字不连读，就没有必要避讳。 贞观二年，中书舍人高季辅上疏说： 我私下看到，密王李元晓他们都是皇亲国戚，陛下对他们的关注仁爱之心，超过古代的帝王。
English: Officials' titles, names, public and private articles and books, as long as the words "world" and "people" are not read together, there is no need to avoid them. In the second year of Zhenguan, Gao Ji Shangsuo, a Chinese scholar, said: I privately saw that King Mi Wang Li Yuanxiao and they are all imperial relatives, and His Majesty's concern and benevolence for them exceeds that of ancient emperors.

古文：贞观二年，中书舍人高季辅上疏曰： 窃见密王元晓等俱是懿亲，陛下友爱之怀，义高古昔，分以车服，委以藩维，须依礼仪，以副瞻望。比见帝子拜诸叔，诸叔亦即答拜，王爵既同，家人有礼，岂合如此颠倒昭穆？
现代文：但是，陛下对于分派给他们兵马，委以重任这些大事，仍须遵循礼仪规范，以让天下人臣服。我看见皇子们拜见叔叔时，叔叔们也马上回礼。一个家庭有一个家庭的礼数，帝王之家也如此，岂能如此颠倒上下秩序呢？
English: However, His Majesty still has to follow the rules of etiquette for assigning soldiers and horses to them and entrusting them with important tasks in order to make the people of the world submit. I saw that when the princes visited their uncles, the uncles also immediately returned the salute. A family has a family number of salutes, and so does the emperor's family, so how can the order be reversed?

古文：伏愿一垂训诫，永循彝则。 
现代文：希望陛下加以教诲和训诫，永远遵循前人美好的礼仪。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will teach and admonish them to always follow the beautiful etiquette of their predecessors.

古文：太宗乃诏元晓等，不得答吴王恪、魏王泰兄弟拜。
现代文：唐太宗于是下诏李元晓等人，对吴王李恪、魏王李泰兄弟不用答拜。
English: Tang Taizong then ordered Li Yuanxiao and others not to pay homage to the brothers Wu Wang Li Ke and Wei Wang Li Tai.

古文：贞观四年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 经闻京城士庶居父母丧者，乃有信巫书之言，辰日不哭，以此辞于吊问，拘忌辍哀，败俗伤风，极乖人理。
现代文：贞观四年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我听说，京城的百姓在为父母服丧期间，有的人听信巫师的妖言，在辰日这天不哭，他们谢绝别人的哀悼慰问，拘泥于禁忌不允许悲伤，这是伤风败俗、违背人情事理的做法。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: I have heard that during the period of mourning for their parents, some people in Beijing listen to the sorcerer's oracle and do not cry on this day. They refuse the condolences of others, and adhere to the taboo of not allowing sadness. This is a practice that violates customs and violates human reason.

古文：宜令州县教导，齐之以礼典。 
现代文：现在下令各州县，让他们教导百姓，一律按照正确的礼仪规范去做。 
English: Now order the states and counties to teach the people to follow the correct etiquette.

古文：贞观五年，太宗谓侍臣曰：佛道设教，本行善事，岂遣僧尼道士等妄自尊崇，坐受父母之拜，损害风俗，悖乱礼经？
现代文：贞观五年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 佛教、道教徒，本应该广做善事，怎么能够让尼姑、道士等人妄自尊贵，坐着接受父母的跪拜礼呢？这样做只会损害民风民俗，使礼仪混乱。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: Buddhists and Taoists should do a wide range of good deeds, how can they let nuns, Taoists and others be arrogant and sit to receive the kneeling worship of their parents? Doing so will only damage folk customs and make the etiquette confused.

古文：宜即禁断，仍令致拜于父母。 
现代文：现在，应该马上下令禁止这种行为，仍旧让他们对自己的父母行跪拜礼。 
English: Now, there should be an immediate ban on this act and they should still be made to kneel before their parents.

古文：贞观六年，太宗谓尚书左仆射房玄龄曰： 比有山东崔、卢、李、郑四姓，虽累叶陵迟，犹恃其旧地，好自矜大，称为士大夫。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗对尚书左仆射房玄龄说： 近来，山东的崔、卢、李、郑四大姓，虽然在前几代就已衰败，但他们仍依仗旧时的名望，自高自大，号称士大夫。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shefang Xuanling: Recently, the four surnames of Shandong, Cui, Lu, Li, and Zheng, although they had decayed in previous generations, they still relied on the old reputation, were arrogant, and were known as Shidafu.

古文：每嫁女他族，必广索聘财，以多为贵，论数定约，同于市贾，甚损风俗，有紊礼经。
现代文：每当把女儿嫁给其他家族，总要大肆索取聘礼财物，一味贪图数量，根据财礼的数目决定婚约，就像集市上的商贩一样，这样做败坏了风俗，也搅乱了《礼经》的规定。
English: Whenever a daughter is to be married off to another family, the bridegroom and the bride's belongings are always demanded in large quantities, and the marriage is decided according to the number of gifts, just like the traders in the market. This has corrupted the customs and disturbed the provisions of the "Li Jing."

古文：既轻重失宜，理须改革。 
现代文：既然他们的门望与事实不符，看来，现在的礼仪制度应该有所改革了。 
English: Since their expectations do not match the reality, it seems that the current etiquette system should be reformed.

古文：乃诏吏部尚书高士廉、御史大夫韦挺、中书侍郎岑文本、礼部侍郎令狐德棻等，刊正姓氏，普责天下谱牒，兼据凭史传，剪其浮华，定其真伪，忠贤者褒进，悖逆者贬黜，撰为《氏族志》。
现代文：于是下诏，命吏部尚书高士廉、御史大夫韦挺、中书侍郎岑文本、礼部侍郎令狐德棻等人订正姓氏，普遍收集全国家谱。并根据史书传记，删除浮华，考订真假，如果一个家族上代出了忠贤，就提升等级，出了叛逆，就加以贬黜。依此标准，撰写了一部《氏族志》。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that the officials of the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat

古文：士廉等及进定氏族等第，遂以崔干为第一等。
现代文：后来，高士廉等人在唐太宗面前呈上所定的氏族等第时，仍把崔干列为第一等。
English: Later, when Gao Shillian and others presented the determined clan rank to Tang Taizong, they still listed Cui Gan as the first rank.

古文：太宗谓曰： 我与山东崔、卢、李、郑，旧既无嫌，为其世代衰微，全无官宦，犹自云士大夫，婚姻之际，则多索财物，或才识庸下，而偃仰自高，贩鬻松槚，依托富贵，我不解人间何为重之？
现代文：太宗说： 我和山东的崔、卢、李、郑，并无宿怨，只是因为他们世代衰微，现在已经没有一个人做官，却还自称是士大夫，婚嫁的时候，依此大量索取财物。有的人才能见识平庸低劣，却还悠然自得地自夸高门，炫耀死去的祖先，依附于富贵之列，我真不明白社会上为什么还会看重他们？
English: Taizong said, "I have no grudge against the Cui, Lu, Li, and Zheng of Shandong. It's just that because their generation is waning, there is no longer anyone who is an official, but still claims to be a scholar-official. When they get married, they use this to claim a large amount of property. Some people are able to see mediocrity and inferiority, but they still boast of high gates, show off dead ancestors, and cling to the ranks of the rich. I really don't understand why society still values them.

古文：且士大夫有能立功，爵位崇重，善事君父，忠孝可称，或道义清素，学艺通博，此亦足为门户，可谓天下士大夫。
现代文：如果有人能建立功业，爵位隆重，善于侍奉君主和父亲，忠孝都值得称赞，或者道德仁义高尚，学艺通博，这样也足以自立门户，称得上是士大夫。
English: If someone can establish a career, a grand title, good at serving the monarch and father, loyalty and filial piety are commendable, or morality and benevolence are high, and learning is extensive, this is also enough to be self-supporting, and can be called a scholar.

古文：今崔、卢之属，惟矜远叶衣冠，宁比当朝之贵？
现代文：如今崔、卢之类，只是自恃远祖的高官厚爵，怎能和当朝的显贵相比呢？
English: Today, the likes of Cui and Lu are merely high-ranking officials and aristocrats who have been in power since ancient times. How can they be compared to the dignitaries of that time?

古文：公卿已下，何暇多输钱物，兼与他气势，向声背实，以得为荣。
现代文：公卿以下的人，何苦给他们多送财物，助长他们的气势呢？他们只图虚名不顾实际，想借此增加自己的光彩。
English: Why do people below the rank of Kugyo bother to give them more wealth to bolster their power? They are only trying to increase their fame, regardless of reality.

古文：我今定氏族者，诚欲崇树今朝冠冕，何因崔干犹为第一等，只看卿等不贵我官爵耶？
现代文：我之所以要复位氏族，是为了树立当今显贵的地位，为什么还把崔干列在第一等，你们这不是看轻我朝的官爵吗？
English: The reason why I want to reinstate the clan is to establish the status of today's nobility. Why do you still list Cui Gan in the first place? Don't you despise the officials and nobles of my dynasty?

古文：不论数代已前，只取今日官品、人才作等级，宜一量定，用为永则。 
现代文：所以，不管以前如何，只按照今天的官品、人才来定等级，并且这次量定等级将作为永久的准则。 
English: Therefore, no matter how it was before, only according to today's official quality, talent to determine the grade, and this time the quantitative grade will be used as a permanent standard.

古文：遂以崔干为第三等。
现代文：于是把崔干定为第三等。
English: As a result, Cui Gan was relegated to the third class.

古文：至十二年，书成，凡百卷，颁天下。
现代文：贞观十二年，《氏族志》全书完成，共一百卷，颁行天下。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, the complete book of "The History of the Clan" was completed, a total of one hundred volumes, issued to the world.

古文：又诏曰： 氏族之美，实系于冠冕，婚姻之道，莫先于仁义。
现代文：其后，唐太宗下令说： 氏族高下，要以官爵相联系，婚姻的正道，要以仁义为先。
English: Afterwards, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered that: the higher and lower clans should be connected by the title of nobility, and the right way of marriage should be based on benevolence and righteousness.

古文：自有魏失御，齐氏云亡，市朝既迁，风俗陵替，燕、赵古姓，多失衣冠之绪，齐、韩旧族，或乖礼义之风。
现代文：自从北魏失国，北齐灭亡，朝野变化，风俗衰败。早先的燕、赵古姓，后人多失去官爵，以前齐、韩旧族，行为也有悖礼义。
English: Since the fall of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the demise of Northern Qi, the changes of the court and the country, and the decline of customs, the earlier Yan and Zhao Gu surnames, the descendants have mostly lost their titles, and the former Qi and Han old families have also behaved inappropriately.

古文：名不著于州闾，身未免于贫贱，自号高门之胄，不敦匹嫡之仪，问名惟在于窃赀，结褵必归于富室。
现代文：他们名不闻于乡里；身不免于贫贱，却自称高门后裔，而不讲究嫁娶礼仪，依仗名望只在于勒索财物，女儿必嫁给富贵之家。
English: Their names are not known in the countryside; they are not immune to poverty, but they claim to be descendants of high-ranking people, but they do not pay attention to marriage etiquette, relying on fame and reputation only to extort property, and their daughters will marry into rich families.

古文：乃有新官之辈，丰财之家，慕其祖宗，竞结婚姻，多纳货贿，有如贩鬻。
现代文：于是就有新做官的人和钱财多的人家，羡慕富贵人家的祖宗，抢着和人家攀亲，多送财物，如同买卖。
English: As a result, there are new officials and families with more money and wealth, envying the ancestors of rich and noble people, competing with others to become relatives, and sending more wealth, just like buying and selling.

古文：或自贬家门，受辱于姻娅；或矜其旧望，行无礼于舅姑。
现代文：双方有的自愿贬低家门，受辱于姻亲，有的夸耀过去的地位，在公婆面前行为无礼。
English: Some on both sides voluntarily belittle their families and are humiliated by their in-laws, while others boast of their past status and behave rudely in front of their in-laws.

古文：积习成俗，迄今未已，既紊人伦，实亏名教。
现代文：这种做法积习已久，已经成了风俗，至今还未改变，这既紊乱了人伦，也有亏于名教。
English: This practice has been accumulated for a long time, has become a custom, and has not changed so far. This has not only disrupted human relations, but has also been a disadvantage to the famous religion.

古文：朕夙夜兢惕，忧勤政道，往代蠹害，咸已惩革，唯此弊风，未能尽变。
现代文：我日夜谨慎小心，操劳政事，历代的弊端祸害，都已制止革除，唯有这项坏风气，还没有完全转变。
English: I have been cautious day and night, doing labor and political affairs, and the evils and scourges of all ages have been stopped and eliminated. However, this bad culture has not been completely transformed.

古文：自今以后，明加告示，使识嫁娶之序，务合礼典，称朕意焉。 
现代文：从今以后，让天下人都要懂得嫁娶的规矩，务必合乎礼法，按照朝廷的礼仪办事，才符合我的心意。 
English: From now on, I want everyone in the world to understand the rules of marriage, and to act according to the etiquette of the imperial court.

古文：礼部尚书王珪子敬直，尚太宗女南平公主。
现代文：礼部尚书王珪的儿子王敬直，娶了唐太宗的女儿南平公主。
English: Wang Jing Zhi, the son of the etiquette scholar Wang Zhi, married Nanping Princess, the daughter of Emperor Taizong of Tang.

古文：珪曰： 《礼》有妇见舅姑之仪，自近代风俗弊薄，公主出降，此礼皆废。
现代文：王珪说： 《礼记》上规定有妇人拜见公婆的礼仪。可近世以来，这种风气逐渐改变了，公主下嫁，这些礼节都被废弃了。
English: Wang Yao said: "The Book of Etiquette prescribes the etiquette for a woman to visit her in-laws. However, since the modern era, this culture has gradually changed. When a princess marries, these etiquettes have been abandoned.

古文：主上钦明，动循法制，吾受公主谒见，岂为身荣，所以成国家之美耳。 
现代文：陛下圣明，处处都遵循法令规范。我接受公主的拜见之礼，哪里只是自己的荣耀，其实是在成全大唐礼仪之邦的美名啊。 
English: Your Majesty, I follow the laws and regulations everywhere. When I receive a greeting from a princess, it is not for my own glory, but for the reputation of the country that perfected the Great Tang Dynasty's etiquette.

古文：遂与其妻就位而坐，令公主亲执巾，行盥馈之道，礼成而退。
现代文：于是和妻子在公婆的座位上就坐，让公主亲自拿着帕子，行侍奉父母的洗手进食之礼，礼毕，公主自行退下。
English: So he and his wife sat down on the seat of the in-laws, and asked the princess to take the handkerchief herself and perform the hand-washing and eating ceremony of serving her parents. After bowing, the princess withdrew on her own.

古文：太宗闻而称善。
现代文：唐太宗听说此事后非常赞成。
English: When Tang Taizong heard about this, he was very supportive.

古文：是后公主下降有舅姑者，皆遣备行此礼。
现代文：此后，凡是有公主下嫁，都要遵照这条礼仪。
English: From then on, any princess marrying into the royal family would have to follow this protocol.

古文：贞观十二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 古者诸侯入朝，有汤沐之邑，刍禾百车，待以客礼。
现代文：贞观十二年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 古时候，诸侯入朝拜谒天子，有专门住宿和沐浴的地方，供给他们一百车草喂养马匹，享受客人的礼遇。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his courtiers: In ancient times, when princes went to worship the Son of Heaven, they had a special place to stay and bathe, and they were provided with a hundred carloads of grass to feed their horses and enjoy the courtesy of guests.

古文：昼坐正殿，夜设庭燎，思与相见，问其劳苦。
现代文：白天天子在正殿里端坐，晚上在庭院中点燃蜡烛，向他们嘘寒问暖。
English: During the day, Tian Tianzi would sit in the main hall, and at night, he would light a candle in the courtyard to warm them.

古文：又汉家京成亦为诸郡立邸舍。
现代文：京城里还有为各个郡县专门设立的馆舍。
English: In the capital, there are also specially established buildings for each county.

古文：顷闻考使至京者，皆赁房以坐，与商人杂居，才得容身而已。
现代文：现在，我听说各地使者到京城，都租房子居住，他们和商人杂居在一起，仅有容身之地而己。
English: Now, I've heard that envoys from all over the country come to the capital and rent a house to live in. They live together with merchants and only have room for themselves.

古文：既待礼之不足，必是人多怨叹，岂肯竭情于共理哉。 
现代文：如今待客之礼如此怠慢，恐怕各地使者会产生怨恨，怎么还会愿意为朝廷尽职尽忠呢？ 
English: Now that hospitality is so neglected, I am afraid that envoys from all over the world will be resentful. How can they still be willing to perform their duties for the imperial court?

古文：乃令就京城闲坊，为诸州考使各造邸第。
现代文：于是，下令京城有条件的客栈，为各地来的使者营造馆舍。
English: As a result, he ordered the construction of a guest house in the capital for emissaries from all over the country.

古文：及成，太宗亲幸观焉。
现代文：修成之后，唐太宗还亲自前去参观视察。
English: After it was completed, Emperor Taizong of Tang personally went to inspect it.

古文：贞观十三年，礼部尚书王珪奏言： 准令，三品以上，遇亲王于路，不合下马，今皆违法申敬，有乖朝典。 
现代文：贞观十三年，礼部尚书王珪上奏说： 按照律令，三品以上的官员，在道路上遇到亲王，可以不下马致礼。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, Shangshu Wang of the Ministry of Ceremonies made the following speech: According to the law, officials with three or more court ranks who meet a prince on the road can salute him without dismounting.

古文：太宗曰： 卿辈欲自崇贵，卑我儿子耶？ 
现代文：不过现在，这种行为却是违法的，这实在与朝廷律令不符啊！ 唐太宗说： 你们想自己尊贵，而轻慢我的儿子们吗？ 
English: But now, this kind of behavior is illegal, which is really inconsistent with the imperial edict! Tang Taizong said: Do you want to be noble and despise my sons?

古文：魏征对曰： 汉、魏已来，亲王班皆次三公下。
现代文：魏徵说： 汉代、魏晋以来，亲王的礼遇都低于三公。
English: Wei Zheng said: Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei and Jin Dynasties, the courtesy of the prince has been lower than that of the three princes.

古文：今三品并天子六尚书九卿，为王下马，王所不宜当也。
现代文：然而，现在三品官员和天子六尚书九卿，都要为亲王下马致礼，这是亲王所不应该接受的礼节。
English: However, now the three court officials and the six princes and nine nobles all have to dismount for the prince, which is a courtesy that the prince should not accept.

古文：求诸故事，则无可凭，行之于今，又乖国宪，理诚不可。 
现代文：这样做既无先例可循，又违背国家的法令，于理实在不合。 
English: There is no precedent for doing so, and it violates the laws of the country, which is really unreasonable.

古文：帝曰： 国家立太子者，拟以为君。
现代文：唐太宗说： 国家确立的太子，是未来的国君。
English: Tang Taizong said: The prince established by the state is the future sovereign.

古文：人之修短，不在老幼。
现代文：一个人地位的高低，不在于年龄的长幼。
English: A person's status does not depend on his or her age.

古文：设无太子，则母弟次立。
现代文：如果太子去世，那么同母的弟弟就该列为太子。
English: If the prince dies, then the younger brother of the same mother should be listed as the prince.

古文：以此而言，安得轻我子耶？ 
现代文：你这样说，不是在轻视我的儿子吗？ 
English: Don't you despise my son when you say that?

古文：征又曰： 殷人尚质，有兄终弟及之义。
现代文：魏徵又说： 商代崇尚质实，有兄长去世，弟弟继承的规定。
English: Wei Zheng also said: The Shang Dynasty advocated quality and solidity, and there was a rule that the elder brother died and the younger brother succeeded.

古文：自周已降，立嫡必长，所以绝庶孽之窥窬，塞祸乱之源本。
现代文：从周代以来，都立长子为继承人，这样做就杜绝了庶子意图篡权夺位、制造混乱的可能性。
English: Since the Zhou Dynasty, the eldest son of the ruler was the heir, which eliminated the possibility of the illegitimate son's intention to usurp power and create chaos.

古文：为国家者，所宜深慎。 太宗遂可王珪之奏。
现代文：国君对此应该审慎。 于是，唐太宗接受了王珪的意见。
English: The sovereign should be cautious about this, so Emperor Taizong of Tang accepted Wang Yao's suggestion.

古文：贞观十四年，太宗谓礼官曰： 同爨尚有缌麻之恩，而嫂叔无服，又舅之与姨，亲疏相似，而服之有殊，未为得礼，宜集学者详议。
现代文：贞观十四年，唐太宗对礼官说： 现在，与你共同生活的人去世了，还要为他披麻戴孝。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the etiquette official: Now, the person who lived with you has passed away, you should also wear filial piety for him.

古文：余有亲重而服轻者，亦附奏闻。 是月尚书八座与礼官定议曰：
现代文：可是嫂子、叔叔去世了，却不服丧。舅舅和姨妈，都是亲属，但表丧的礼节却有差别。
English: However, my sister-in-law and uncle passed away, but they did not accept the mourning. My uncle and aunt are relatives, but there is a difference in the etiquette of mourning.

古文：臣窃闻之，礼所以决嫌疑、定犹豫、别同异、明是非者也，非从天下，非从地出，人情而已矣。
现代文：这些做法都不符合礼仪规范，应该招集学者来商议一下，制定出服丧的礼仪。有同属亲属但侍奉的礼数却很轻的，也应一起上奏。 就在同月，尚书八座和礼官定下了规范：臣听说，礼是用来判断疑惑不明的事理，决定迟疑不决的行为，区别异同，明辨是非的，它不是从天而降，也不是从地下冒出来的，而是根据人情事理推论出来的。
English: These practices do not conform to the etiquette norms. Scholars should be convened to discuss and formulate the etiquette of mourning. If there are relatives who belong to the same family, but the number of etiquette is very light, they should also be played together. In the same month, eight etiquette schools and etiquette officials set a standard: The minister heard that etiquette is used to judge doubtful matters, determine hesitant behavior, distinguish between similarities and differences, and distinguish between right and wrong. It does not descend from the sky, nor does it emerge from the ground, but is deduced from human circumstances.

古文：人道所先，在乎敦睦九族。
现代文：人道最重要的一点，是使九族和睦。
English: The most important point of humanity is to make the nine ethnic groups live in harmony.

古文：九族敦睦，由乎亲亲，以近及远。
现代文：九族和睦，在于由近及远，实行亲疏有别的礼节。
English: The harmony of the nine ethnic groups lies in the fact that from near and far, there is a different etiquette for relatives and strangers.

古文：亲属有等差，故丧纪有隆杀，随恩之薄厚，皆称情以立文。
现代文：亲属之间有差别，所以丧礼中的祭文，应根据情分的多少来书写。
English: There are differences between relatives, so the funeral eulogy should be written according to the degree of emotion.

古文：原夫舅之与姨，虽为同气，推之于母，轻重相悬。
现代文：舅舅和姨妈，和母亲是一族，但他们之间有差别，为什么呢？
English: My uncle and aunt and my mother are from the same family, but there is a difference between them. Why?

古文：何则？舅为母之本宗，姨乃外戚他姓，求之母族，姨不与焉，考之经史，舅诚为重。
现代文：舅舅和母亲是一家，姨妈出嫁后改姓丈夫的姓，成为别家的人，参考经史，舅舅的确比姨妈重要。
English: The uncle and the mother are one family, but the aunt changed her surname to her husband's surname after she got married and became a member of a different family. According to scripture, the uncle is indeed more important than the aunt.

古文：故周王念齐，是称舅甥之国；秦伯怀晋，实切《渭阳》之诗。
现代文：所以周王顾念着齐国，称齐国是舅甥之国。秦穆公不忘晋国重耳是他的舅舅，把他的儿子康公送到渭阳，作了《渭阳》这首诗。
English: Therefore, King Zhou took care of Qi Province, saying that Qi Province was the country of his uncle and nephew. Qin Mu Gong did not forget that Jin Province was his uncle, and sent his son Kang Gong to Fenyang and composed the poem "Fenyang."

古文：今在舅服止一时之情，为姨居丧五月，徇名丧实，逐末弃本，此古人之情或有未达，所宜损益，实在兹乎。
现代文：现在，舅舅去世，只是服丧三个月，对姨妈却要居丧五个月，迁就了虚名，丧失了人情，舍本逐末，背弃了根本。这大概是古人对人的感情没有考虑周全，应该有所增减。
English: Now, when my uncle died, it was only a three-month mourning period, but for my aunt, it was a five-month mourning period. They accommodated the false name, lost the human feelings, abandoned the basics, and betrayed the fundamentals. This is probably because the ancients did not consider people's feelings thoroughly, and they should have increased or decreased.

古文：《礼记》曰： 兄弟之子犹子也，盖引而进之也。
现代文：《礼记》说： 兄弟的孩子犹如自己的孩子，这是因为引而进之。
English: "The Book of Rites" says: A brother's child is like a child of one's own, because it is brought into the family.

古文：嫂叔之无服，盖推而远之也。 
现代文：嫂嫂、叔叔不用守丧，是因为推而远之。
English: His sister-in-law and uncle did not have to attend the funeral because they were too far away.

古文：礼，继父同居则为之期，未尝同居则不为服。
现代文：按礼的规定，和继父一起生活过，就要为他居丧一年，如果没有一起生活，就不用居丧。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, if you have lived with your stepfather, you must mourn him for one year. If you have not lived together, you do not have to mourn.

古文：从母之夫，舅之妻，二人相为服。或曰 同爨缌麻 。
现代文：至于继母、舅舅的妻子，对这二者服丧的礼节相同。
English: As for the stepmother and the uncle's wife, the funeral etiquette is the same for both of them.

古文：然则继父且非骨肉，服重由乎同爨，恩轻在乎异居。
现代文：常言道： 如果共同生活过的继父去世了，应该为他披麻戴孝。 继父并非生父，对他服丧隆重是因为共同生活过，恩情轻微是因为不住在一起。
English: There is a saying: If the stepfather you have lived with dies, you should be kind and considerate to him. The stepfather is not the biological father, and you should mourn for him because you have lived together, but not because you do not live together.

古文：固知制服虽系于名文，盖亦缘恩之厚薄者也。
现代文：因此，服丧虽然事关名分，但也随恩情厚薄而定。
English: Therefore, although mourning is a matter of prestige, it also depends on the degree of gratitude.

古文：或有长年之嫂，遇孩童之叔，劬劳鞠养，情若所生，分饥共寒，契阔偕老，譬同居之继父，方他人之同爨，情义之深浅，宁可同日而言哉？
现代文：如年长的嫂子，她抚养年幼的叔子像对待自己的亲生儿子一样，两人同甘共苦到终老，这比起一起生活的继父，和其他一起生活的人，情义的深浅怎可相提并论呢？
English: For example, an older sister-in-law who raises her younger brother-in-law as if he were her own son, and the two of them live together happily ever after, compared to a stepfather who lives together, and other people who live together, how can the profundity of the situation be compared?

古文：在其生也，乃爱同骨肉，于其死也，则推而远之，求之本源，深所未喻。
现代文：嫂子生前，二人情同骨肉，嫂子死后，却以外人的礼节对待她，这种做法实在让人难以理解。
English: During her sister-in-law's lifetime, the two of them were like flesh and blood. After her sister-in-law's death, however, he treated her with the etiquette of a stranger, which is really hard to understand.

古文：若推而远之为是，则不可生而共居；生而共居为是，则不可死同行路。
现代文：如果推而疏远是对的，那生前就不应住在一起；生前住在一起，死后就不应像看待路人一样看待嫂子。
English: If estrangement is correct, then they should not live together during their lifetime; if they lived together during their lifetime, they should not look at their sister-in-law like a passerby after death.

古文：重其生而轻其死，厚其始而薄其终，称情立文，其义安在？
现代文：生前恩情厚重而死后礼节轻微，用这个原则来衡量，有这样的道理吗？
English: Does it make sense to use this principle to measure the weight of kindness in life and the lightness of etiquette after death?

古文：且事嫂见称，载籍非一。
现代文：并且侍奉嫂子的礼节，史书上的记载也不一致。
English: And the etiquette of serving one's sister-in-law is also inconsistent in historical records.

古文：郑仲虞则恩礼甚笃，颜弘都则竭诚致感，马援则见之必冠，孔伋则哭之为位，此盖并躬践教义，仁深孝友，察其所行之旨，岂非先觉者欤？
现代文：后汉，郑仲虞抚养寡居的嫂子和她的儿子，待她的礼节和情义都很笃厚。晋时，颜弘都的嫂子双目失明，需要服用蛇胆，他千方百计弄到蛇胆，终于使嫂子重见光明。后汉将军马援对嫂子极为尊重，不戴帽子就不敢进屋拜见嫂子。《礼记》记载：孔子之孙孔伋在嫂子的灵位前痛哭。这些都是亲身实践礼义规范，极其仁义孝敬的人。能够深明其中大义的，难道不是先知先觉者吗？
English: During the Later Han Dynasty, Zheng Zhongyu raised his widowed sister-in-law and her son, treating her with great courtesy and consideration. During the Jin Dynasty, Yan Hongdu's sister-in-law was blind in both eyes and needed to take snake bile. He tried his best to get snake bile, and finally restored her sight. Later Han Dynasty General Ma Yuan had great respect for his sister-in-law, and would not dare to enter the house to visit her without wearing a hat. "Li Ji" records: Confucius's grandson Confucius cried bitterly in front of his sister-in-law's shrine. These are people who personally practice etiqu

古文：但于时上无哲王，礼非下之所议，遂使深情郁于千载，至理藏于万古，其来久矣，岂不惜哉！
现代文：现在没有圣明的哲人，百姓也不议论礼仪之事，致使礼仪之中包含的道理不被重视，这种情况由来已久，真让人痛惜啊。
English: Nowadays, there are no wise sages, and the people do not discuss matters of etiquette, so that the principles contained in etiquette are not taken seriously. This situation has been going on for a long time, and it is really regrettable.

古文：今陛下以为尊卑之叙，虽焕乎已备，丧纪之制，或情理未安，爰命秩宗，详议损益。
现代文：现在，陛下认为尊卑之序虽然都制定完备了，但丧礼制度还不合情理，于是令大臣详加审议修改。
English: Now, His Majesty believes that although the order of precedence is well established, the funeral system is still unreasonable, so he ordered the minister to review and revise it in detail.

古文：臣等奉遵明旨，触类傍求，采摭群经，讨论传记，或抑或引，兼名兼实，损其有余，益其不足，使无文之礼咸秩，敦睦之情毕举，变薄俗于既往，垂笃义于将来，信六籍所不能谈，超百王而独得者也。
现代文：我们遵照陛下圣旨，参考了经典、传记，进行了修改增删，使没有明文规定的礼仪变成条款，希望这会使人伦敦厚和睦，使日渐轻薄的民俗变得淳朴，改变过去浅薄的风俗，给后世留下榜样，这些是六经上没有谈到的，是陛下超越百世帝王独自获得的。
English: In accordance with His Majesty's wishes, we have consulted the classics, biographies, and made amendments, additions, and deletions to turn the unwritten etiquette into a clause, hoping that this will make London more harmonious, make the increasingly frivolous folk customs become simple, change the shallow customs of the past, and leave an example for future generations. These are not mentioned in the six sutras, and are obtained by His Majesty alone beyond a hundred emperors.

古文：谨按曾祖父母，旧服齐衰三月，请加为齐衰五月；嫡子妇，旧服大功，请加为期；众子妇，旧服小功，今请与兄弟子妇同为大功九月；嫂叔，旧无服，今请服小功五月。
现代文：我们谨遵礼仪，做了规定，如果曾祖母、曾祖父去世，过去服丧三个月，现在请陛下延长至五个月；嫡子的妻子，过去服丧九个月，现在请再延长；各位儿子的妻子服丧，请将过去规定的五个月改为九个月；嫂子、叔叔过去不服丧，现在请改为服丧五个月。
English: We respectfully followed the etiquette and made a provision that if the great-grandmother and great-grandfather passed away and mourned for three months in the past, we now ask His Majesty to extend it to five months; the wife of the legitimate son, who mourned for nine months in the past, now please extend it again; the wife of the sons, who mourned, please change the five months in the past to nine months; the sister-in-law and uncle, who did not mourn in the past, now please change to mourning for five months.

古文：其弟妻及夫兄亦小功五月。
现代文：弟弟的妻子和丈夫的兄弟也应服丧五个月。
English: The brother's wife and the husband's brother shall also mourn for five months.

古文：舅，旧服缌麻，请加与从母同服小功五月。
现代文：舅舅过去只披麻戴孝，现在请规定同对待继母一样，服丧五个月。
English: In the past, my uncle only wore the cloak of filial piety. Now, please stipulate that he be treated the same way as my stepmother, and that he be allowed to mourn for five months.

古文：诏从其议。
现代文：看毕，唐太宗下诏通过此项议案。
English: After all, Emperor Taizong issued an edict approving this motion.

古文：此并魏征之词也。
现代文：此议案的作者乃魏徵。
English: The author of the motion is Wei Zheng.

古文：贞观十七年十二月癸丑，太宗谓侍臣曰： 今日是朕生日。
现代文：贞观十七年，十二月癸丑日，唐太宗对大臣们说： 今天是我的生日。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, in December on the Day of the Ugly Goat, Tang Taizong said to his ministers: "Today is my birthday.

古文：俗间以生日可为喜乐，在朕情，翻成感思。
现代文：民间认为生日是可庆可贺的事情，但我却感慨万千。
English: People think that birthdays are a cause for celebration, but I am filled with emotion.

古文：君临天下，富有四海，而追求侍养，永不可得。
现代文：帝王君临天下，富有四海，可是想奉养父母，却永远无法做到。
English: Emperors rule the world and are rich beyond measure, but if they want to support their parents, they will never be able to do so.

古文：仲由怀负米之恨，良有以也。况《诗》云： 哀哀父母，生我劬劳。 
现代文：仲由贫困时，常常到外面去为父母背米，他到楚国做官之后，富有万钟之粟，但那时他的父母去世了，再想尽孝心已不可能，所以他感到非常遗憾。《诗经》说： 可怜我的父母，为养育我付出了多少艰辛啊。 
English: When Zhong Zhu was poor, he often went out to carry rice for his parents. After he became an official in the State of Chu, he became very rich, but then his parents died, and it was no longer possible for him to fulfill his filial duty, so he felt very sorry. "Song of Songs" said: "Pity my parents, how much hardship they paid to raise me."

古文：奈何以劬劳之辰，遂为宴乐之事！甚是乖于礼度。 
现代文：怎么可以在父母生我这样艰难的日子，举办宴会寻欢作乐呢？这实在是与礼仪相违。 
English: On such a difficult day, when my parents were giving birth to me, how could they hold a party to have fun? This is really against etiquette.

古文：因而泣下久之。
现代文：说完，便情不自禁地哭泣了许久。
English: After he finished, he couldn't help but cry for a long time.

古文：太常少卿祖孝孙奏所定新乐。
现代文：太常少卿祖孝孙上奏新近制定的音乐。
English: Shaoqing's great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.

古文：太宗曰： 礼乐之作，是圣人缘物设教，以为撙节，治政善恶，岂此之由？ 
现代文：唐太宗说： 礼仪、音乐，是圣人为了节制人们的情欲而设立的，用来教化百姓，它们应该符合规范。同样，政治的好坏，难道不也因此而生吗？ 
English: Tang Taizong said, "Rituals and music were established by sages in order to control people's passions, and they were used to educate the people. They should conform to the norms. Similarly, isn't that why politics is good or bad?

古文：御史大夫杜淹对曰： 前代兴亡，实由于乐。
现代文：御史大夫杜淹说： 前代的兴衰存亡，也跟音乐有关。
English: Chief historian Du Ruan said: The rise and fall of the previous generation is also related to music.

古文：陈将亡也为《玉树后庭花》，齐将亡也而为《伴侣曲》，行路闻之，莫不悲泣，所谓亡国之音。
现代文：陈后主灭亡，就是因为奢侈荒淫和为妃嫔们谱写淫曲《玉树后庭花》所造成的。齐灭亡，也是因为齐东昏侯作《伴侣曲》，行旅之人听到，无不悲伤而泣，这乃是亡国之音啊。
English: The downfall of Emperor Chen was caused by his extravagant immorality and the fact that he composed the lascivious song "Jade Garden Flowers" for his concubines. The downfall of Emperor Qi was also caused by Emperor Qidong's "Companion Song," which made travelers weep with sadness when they heard it. This is the sound of a dying country.

古文：以是观之，实由于乐。 
现代文：所以，国家的存亡，全在于音乐。 
English: Therefore, the country's survival depends entirely on music.

古文：太宗曰： 不然，夫音声岂能感人？
现代文：唐太宗不同意，说： 不是这样的，仅仅是声音怎么能影响人呢？
English: Tang Taizong disagreed, saying, "It's not like that. How can mere sound influence people?"

古文：欢者闻之则悦，哀者听之则悲。
现代文：快乐的人听到声音就会喜悦，哀伤的人听了就会悲伤。
English: Happy people will be happy when they hear the sound, and sad people will be sad when they hear it.

古文：悲悦在于人心，非由乐也。
现代文：悲喜之情在于人心，并非是音乐造成的。
English: Sadness and joy are in the human heart, not in the music.

古文：将亡之政，其人心苦，然苦心相感，故闻之则悲耳。
现代文：即将灭亡的国家，百姓内心凄苦。听到哀怨的音乐，内心十分感动，就会愈加悲伤。
English: In a country that is about to perish, the people are heartbroken. When they hear mournful music, their hearts are deeply moved, and they become even more sad.

古文：何乐声哀怨，能使悦者悲乎？
现代文：相反，一首悲哀的音乐，怎么会使快乐的人悲伤呢？
English: On the contrary, how can a sad piece of music make a happy person sad?

古文：今《玉树》、《伴侣》之曲，其声具存，朕能为公奏之，知公必不悲耳。 
现代文：现在，《玉树后庭花》、《伴侣曲》这些靡靡之音依然存在，我自己都可以演奏它们。但是，可以肯定，你们是不会悲伤的。 
English: Now, "Jade Garden Flowers" and "Companion Song" still exist, and I can play them myself. But, to be sure, you will not be sad.

古文：尚书右丞魏征进曰： 古人称：礼云，礼云，玉帛云乎哉！
现代文：尚书右丞魏徵接着说： 古人说，礼呀，礼呀，难道就是玉帛之类的礼器吗？
English: Shang Shuyuan and Wei Zheng then said, "The ancients said, bow down, bow down. Is it a ceremonial tool like a jade gong?

古文：乐云，乐云，钟鼓云乎哉！
现代文：乐呀，乐呀，难道就是钟鼓之类的乐器吗？
English: Leah, Leah, is it a musical instrument such as a gong?

古文：乐在人和，不由音调。 
现代文：音乐的关键在于人的心境，不在于音调。 
English: The key to music lies in one's state of mind, not in the tone.

古文：太宗然之。
现代文：唐太宗很赞同他的看法。
English: Tang Taizong thought his words were very reasonable.

古文：贞观七年，太常卿萧瑀奏言： 今《破陈乐舞》，天下之所共传，然美盛德之形容，尚有所未尽。
现代文：贞观七年，太常卿萧瑀上书说： 现在《破阵乐舞》在天下广为传颂，但此乐仍不足以形容陛下超世的武功和宏伟的业绩。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Grandmaster Xiao Yu wrote: "Nowadays, the "Battleship Break Dance" is widely praised around the world, but this music is still not enough to describe His Majesty's extraordinary martial arts and magnificent performance.

古文：前后之所破刘武周、薛举、窦建德、王世充等，臣愿图其形状，以写战胜攻取之容。 
现代文：陛下先后打败了刘武周、薛举、窦建德、王世充等乱世枭雄，我愿意来写一写陛下无人可比的神勇。 
English: Your Majesty has successively defeated Liu Wuzhou, Xue Qiu, Dou Jiande, Wang Shicheng and other world-renowned heroes. I would like to write about Your Majesty's unparalleled courage.

古文：太宗曰： 朕当四方未定，因为天下救焚拯溺，故不获已，乃行战伐之事，所以人间遂有此舞，国家因兹亦制其曲。
现代文：唐太宗说： 我在天下纷争的乱世，为了拯救天下苍生，迫不得已，才征讨四方，所以才有了这个舞蹈和音乐。
English: Tang Taizong said: I am in the chaotic world of strife in the world. In order to save the world's sentient beings, I had no choice but to solicit the four directions, so this dance and music came into being.

古文：然雅乐之容，止得陈其梗概，若委曲写之，则其状易识。
现代文：然而高雅的音乐，应该只陈述历史梗概，不宜把详情原原本本写出来。
English: However, elegant music should only present a historical outline, and it is not appropriate to write out the details in their original form.

古文：朕以见在将相，多有曾经受彼驱使者，既经为一日君臣，今若重见其被擒获之势，必当有所不忍，我为此等，所以不为也。 
现代文：我看当今朝廷的将相，很多都曾受敌人的驱使，如果现在又看到他们被俘虏的情景，毕竟曾经有过君臣关系，肯定会于心不忍。考虑到这些，所以我认为不可。 
English: In my opinion, many of today's court dignitaries were once driven by the enemy. If I were to see them captured again now, after all, they once had a monarch-vassal relationship, I would certainly not be able to bear it. Considering this, I think it is impossible.

古文：萧瑀谢曰： 此事非臣思虑所及。 
现代文：萧瑀道歉说： 这件事臣根本没有想到。 
English: Xiao Yao apologized and said: This matter did not occur to me at all.

