古文：凡论事者，违实不引效验，则虽甘义繁说，众不见信。
现代文：大凡论述事理的人，如果违背了事实而不举出证据，那么，即使道理讲得再动听，说得再多，大家也还是不相信的。
English: If those who discuss matters of reason go against the facts and do not provide evidence, then, no matter how persuasive they are or how much they say, people will still not believe them.

古文：论圣人不能神而先知，先知之间，不能独见，非徒空说虚言，直以才智准况之工也。
现代文：我论述圣人不能像神一样先知，在先知的人中间，并不是只有圣人才能预见，这不只是凭空瞎说，也不只是凭才智类推得巧妙。
English: When I say that a sage cannot be a prophet like God, and that among prophets it is not only the sage who foresees, I do not say this out of vanity, nor out of cleverness.

古文：事有证验，以效实然。
现代文：我的这种看法是有证据的，而且可以证明事实确实是这样。
English: I have evidence for this view, and can prove that this is indeed the case.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：有哪些事实可以用来证明它呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：孔子问公叔文子於公明贾曰： 信乎，夫子不言、不笑、不取，有诸？ 
现代文：孔子向公明贾打听公叔文子，说： 真的吗，公叔文子不说话、不笑、不要别人的东西吗？
English: Confucius asked Gongmingjia about Uncle Fumiko and said, "Is it true that Uncle Fumiko doesn't speak, doesn't smile, and doesn't want other people's things?

古文：对曰： 以告者过也。
现代文：有这样的事吗？ 公明贾回答说： 这是由于告诉你的人把话说过了头。
English: Is there such a thing? Gongming Jia replied, "It's because the person who told you said it first."

古文：夫子时然后言，人不厌其言；乐然后笑，人不厌其笑；义然后取，人不厌其取。 
现代文：公叔文子在该说的时候才说，所以人们不讨厌他的话；高兴的时候才笑，所以人们不讨厌他笑；符合礼义才索取，所以人们不讨厌他索取。 
English: Sir, he speaks when he ought to speak, and his words are not hated by others; he laughs when he ought to laugh, and his words are not hated by others; he takes when he ought to take, and his words are not hated by others.

古文：孔子曰： 岂其然乎？
现代文：孔子说： 难道真是这样吗？
English: Confucius said: Is it really so?

古文：岂其然乎？ 
现代文：难道真是这样吗？ 
English: Is that really how it is?

古文：天下之人，有如伯夷之廉，不取一芥於人，未有不言、不笑者也。
现代文：天下的人，能做到像伯夷那样的廉洁，不拿别人一点东西，但是从来没有不说话、不笑的人。
English: People all over the world can be as honest as Bo Yi, not taking anything from others, but there has never been a person who does not talk or laugh.

古文：孔子既不能如心揣度，以决然否，心怪不信，又不能达视遥见，以审其实，问公明贾乃知其情。
现代文：孔子既不能按照自己的心愿作出正确的判断，心有疑问不能相信，又不能看得非常透彻、非常远，以弄清楚事实，问了公明贾之后才知道了真实情况。
English: Confucius was not able to make a correct judgment according to his own wishes, could not believe when he had doubts, and could not see very thoroughly and very far to clarify the facts. He only knew the true situation after he asked Gongmingjia.

古文：孔子不能先知，一也。
现代文：孔子不能先知，这是第一条证据。
English: This is the first proof that Confucius cannot be a prophet.

古文：陈子禽问子贡曰： 夫子至於是邦也，必闻其政。
现代文：陈子禽问子贡说： 孔老夫子每到一个国家，必定知道这个国家的政治情况，是他自己打听来的呢？
English: Chen Ziying asked Zi Gong: Whenever Master Kong comes to a country, he must know the political situation of this country. Did he inquire about it himself?

古文：求之与？
现代文：还是人们主动告诉他的呢？ 
English: Or did people tell him?

古文：抑与之与？ 子贡曰： 夫子温良恭俭让以得之。 
现代文：子贡说： 他是凭着温良恭俭让这些美德得来的。 
English: Zigong said: He obtained these virtues by virtue of his gentleness and frugality.

古文：温良恭俭让，尊行也。
现代文：温良恭俭让是高尚的德行。
English: To be kind, courteous and frugal is a noble virtue.

古文：有尊行於人，人亲附之。
现代文：用高尚的德行对待人，人们就亲近他。
English: Treat people with noble virtues, and people will be close to him.

古文：人亲附之，则人告语之矣。
现代文：人们亲近他，那么人们就会告诉他了。
English: People get close to him, then people will tell him off.

古文：然则孔子闻政以人言，不神而自知之也。
现代文：既然如此，那么孔子就是由于人们告诉他才了解政治情况的，并不是神而自知的。
English: If this is so, then Confucius only understood the political situation because people told him to, and he did not know it on his own.

古文：齐景公问子贡曰： 夫子贤乎？ 
现代文：齐景公问子贡说： 孔老夫子是个贤人吗？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong asked Zigong: Is Kong Laofu Zi a sage?

古文：子贡对曰： 夫子乃圣，岂徒贤哉！ 
现代文：子贡回答说： 他乃是圣人，哪里只是个贤人呢？ 
English: Zigong replied, "He is a sage, but what is a wise man?

古文：景公不知孔子圣，子贡正其名。子禽亦不知孔子所以闻政，子贡定其实。
现代文：齐景公不知道孔子是圣人，子贡订正了他的名称；陈子禽也不知道孔子是用什么办法知道政治情况的，子贡确定了它的实情。
English: Qi Jing Gong did not know that Confucius was a saint, and Zigong revised his name; Chen Ziyi did not know how Confucius knew the political situation, and Zigong confirmed its truth.

古文：对景公云 夫子圣，岂徒贤哉 ，则其对子禽，亦当云 神而自知之，不闻人言 。
现代文：既然回答齐景公时说 他是圣人，哪里只是个贤人 ，那么子贡对子禽也应当说 他是神而自知的，不是听别人说的 。
English: Since Lord Qi Jing replied that he was a saint and not just a wise man, then the tributary should also say to the fowl that he is God and knows himself, and does not listen to others.

古文：以子贡对子禽言之，圣人不能先知，二也。
现代文：就子贡回答陈子禽的话来说，圣人不能先知，这是第二条证据。
English: As far as Zigong's answer to Chen Ziying is concerned, a sage cannot be a prophet. This is the second piece of evidence.

古文：颜渊炊饭，尘落甑中，欲置之则不清，投地则弃饭，掇而食之。孔子望见以为窃食。
现代文：颜渊饶火做饭，灰尘掉到饭甑里，想放开它不管饭就不干净了，想把有灰的饭倒掉就要糟踏一些饭，所以就把它挑出来吃了。孔子远远地看见了，认为颜渊是在偷饭吃。
English: Yan Yuan stoked the fire to cook, and the dust fell into the rice bowl. If he wanted to let it go, the meal would not be clean. If he wanted to throw away the ashes, he would have to spoil some rice, so he picked it out and ate it. Confucius saw it from a distance and thought that Yan Yuan was stealing rice.

古文：圣人不能先知，三也。
现代文：圣人不能先知，这是第三条证据。
English: This is the third proof that a saint cannot be a prophet.

古文：涂有狂夫，投刃而候；泽有猛虎，厉牙而望。
现代文：路上有个狂人，把刀戳在地上等着；野泽中有只猛虎，磨着牙在望着。
English: There is a madman on the road, waiting with his knife on the ground; there is a fierce tiger in the field, grinding its teeth and watching.

古文：知见之者，不敢前进。
现代文：知道或看到的人就不敢再向前走了。
English: Those who knew or saw did not dare to go any further.

古文：如不知见，则遭狂夫之刃，犯猛虎之牙矣。
现代文：如果不知道或者没有看见而继续往前走，那么就会被狂人杀掉，被老虎吃掉。
English: If you don't know, if you don't see, if you go ahead, you will be killed by a madman, you will be eaten by a tiger.

古文：匡人之围孔子，孔子如审先知，当早易道，以违其害。
现代文：匡人包围了孔子，如果孔子真能先知，那就该早早地换一条路走，以避开这场灾祸。
English: Confucius was besieged by the Kuang people. If Confucius really was a prophet, he should have taken a different path early on to avoid this disaster.

古文：不知而触之，故遇其患。
现代文：孔子因为事先不知道，所以才遇上匡人，遭了这场灾祸。
English: Because he did not know in advance, Confucius only encountered Kuangren and suffered this calamity.

古文：以孔子围言之，圣人不能先知，四也。
现代文：以孔子被围这件事来说，圣人不能先知，这是第四条证据。
English: As far as the siege of Confucius is concerned, a sage cannot be a prophet. This is the fourth piece of evidence.

古文：子畏於匡，颜渊后，孔子曰： 吾以汝为死矣。 
现代文：孔子在匡地被围困受到威胁，颜渊最后逃出来。孔子说： 我以为你死了。 
English: Confucius was besieged and threatened in Kuangdi, and Yan Yuan finally escaped. Confucius said: I thought you were dead.

古文：如孔子先知，当知颜渊必不触害，匡人必不加悖。
现代文：如果孔子先知，就应该知道颜渊一定没有遇害，匡人一定没有弄死他。
English: If Confucius is a prophet, he should know that Yan Yuanmao must not have been killed, and Kuangren must not have killed him.

古文：见颜渊之来，乃知不死；未来之时，谓以为死。
现代文：看到颜渊回来了，才知道他没有死；没有看见他回来的时候，说认为他死了。
English: When he saw Yan Yuan coming back, he knew he wasn't dead; when he didn't see him coming back, he said he thought he was dead.

古文：圣人不能先知，五也。
现代文：圣人不能先知，这是第五条证据。
English: This is the fifth proof that a saint cannot be a prophet.

古文：阳货欲见孔子，孔子不见，馈孔子豚。
现代文：阳货想让孔子来拜见他，孔子不去拜见，阳货就送给孔子一只蒸熟了的小猪。
English: Yangfang wanted Confucius to visit him. If Confucius did not visit, Yangfang gave Confucius a steamed piglet.

古文：孔子时其亡也，而往拜之，遇诸涂。
现代文：孔子探明阳货不在家的时候去拜谢他，不料在半路上碰见了阳货。
English: Confucius went to thank Yang Jia when he was not at home and met him on the way.

古文：孔子不欲见，既往，候时其亡，是势必不欲见也。
现代文：孔子本来是不想见到阳货的，所以既然去拜会，却又打探他不在家的时候才去，这种情况说明孔子坚决不想见到阳货。
English: Confucius originally did not want to see Yangfang, so since he went to the meeting, he only went when he was not at home. This situation shows that Confucius resolutely did not want to see Yangfang.

古文：反，遇於路。
现代文：可是回来时，却在路上碰上了他。
English: But when I came back, I ran into him on the road.

古文：以孔子遇阳虎言之，圣人不能先知，六也。
现代文：以孔子碰见阳货这件事来说，圣人不能先知，这是第六条证据。
English: In the case of Confucius' encounter with Yangfang, a sage cannot be a prophet. This is the sixth proof.

古文：长沮、桀溺偶而耕。孔子过之，使子路问津焉。
现代文：长沮、桀溺两人合作在一起耕地，孔子从旁边经过，派子路向他们打听渡口在什么地方。
English: The two of them worked together to cultivate the land. Confucius passed by and asked them where the ferry was.

古文：如孔子知津，不当更问。
现代文：如果孔子知道渡口在什么地方，就不该再去询问。
English: If Confucius knew where the ferry port was, he should not have asked.

古文：论者曰： 欲观隐者之操 。
现代文：辩护的人说： 这是想考察一下隐士的品行。 
English: The defence said: It was to look at the conduct of the hermit.

古文：则孔子先知，当自知之，无为观也。
现代文：既然孔子先知，那他就该自己知道，用不着考察。
English: Since Confucius was a prophet, he should have known this for himself, without having to investigate.

古文：如不知而问之，是不能先知，七也。
现代文：如果不知道而去问他们，这正好说明他不能先知，这是第七条证据。
English: If he doesn't know and asks them, it just shows that he can't be a prophet, which is the seventh proof.

古文：孔子母死，不知其父墓，殡於五甫之衢。
现代文：孔子的母亲去世了，因为孔子不知道他父亲的坟墓在何处，所以就把他母亲临时葬在五甫衢。
English: Confucius' mother died, and since he did not know where his father's grave was, he temporarily buried his mother in Wufu.

古文：人见之者，以为葬也。
现代文：别人看见就认为是正式埋葬了。
English: When others see it, they think it's been officially buried.

古文：盖以无所合葬，殡之谨，故人以为葬也。
现代文：大概是因为没找着与他父亲合葬的地方，在临时埋葬他母亲时，礼仪很郑重，所以别人就认为是正式埋葬了。
English: Probably because he couldn't find a place to bury his father, when he temporarily buried his mother, the etiquette was very solemn, so others thought it was a formal burial.

古文：邻人邹曼甫之母告之，然後得合葬於防。
现代文：邻居邹曼甫的母亲把孔子父亲的坟墓所在地告诉了他，然后才得以把他的父母合葬在防山。
English: The mother of a neighbor, Yu Manfu, told him the location of the grave of Confucius's father, and then he was able to bury his parents together in Fangshan.

古文：有茔自在防，殡於衢路，圣人不能先知，八也。
现代文：本来在防山就有他父亲的坟地，而孔子却把他的母亲临时葬在五甫衢路旁，圣人不能先知，这是第八条证据。
English: Originally, his father's burial place was in Mountain Defense, but Confucius temporarily buried his mother beside Wufu Road. A sage cannot be a prophet. This is the eighth piece of evidence.

古文：既得合葬，孔子反，门人后，雨甚至。
现代文：合葬之后，孔子先返回家里。门人后回来，雨下得很大。
English: After the joint burial, Confucius returned home first. The gatekeeper came back later, and it was raining heavily.

古文：孔子问曰： 何迟也？ 
现代文：孔子问： 怎么回来得这么晚啊？ 
English: Confucius asked, "How did you get back so late?"

古文：曰： 防墓崩。 
现代文：门人回答说： 防山的墓倒塌了。 
English: The disciples replied, "The tomb on the defensive wall collapsed because of the rain, and we are repairing the tomb there."

古文：孔子不应。孔子泫然流涕曰： 吾闻之，古不修墓。 
现代文：孔子不再说什么，门人说了好几遍，孔子才泪流满面地说： 我听说，古时候是不修墓的。 
English: Confucius did not say anything more. The man said it several times, and only then did Confucius say with tears streaming down his face, "I heard that in ancient times tombs were not repaired.

古文：如孔子先知，当先知防墓崩，比门人至，宜流涕以俟之。
现代文：如果孔子先知，应当事先知道防山的墓会倒塌，等到门人回来的时候，应该是流着泪等着他们。
English: If Confucius was a prophet, he should have known in advance that the tomb guarding the mountain would collapse, and when the gatekeepers returned, he should have waited for them in tears.

古文：人至乃知之，圣人不能先知，九也。
现代文：门人到家之后才知道墓倒塌了，圣人不能先知，这是第九条证据。
English: The doorkeeper only learned that the tomb had collapsed after arriving home. A saint cannot be a prophet. This is the ninth piece of evidence.

古文：子入太庙，每事问。
现代文：孔子进入太庙，每件事都问。
English: When Confucius arrived at the Imperial Temple, he had to ask about everything.

古文：不知故问，为人法也。
现代文：因为他不知道所以才问，这是为了给人们做榜样。
English: Because he didn't know, that's why he asked, to set an example for people.

古文：孔子未尝入庙，庙中礼器，众多非一。孔子虽圣，何能知之？
现代文：孔子从来没有进过太庙，庙里的礼器很多不只是一两件，孔子即使是圣人，怎么能都知道呢？
English: Confucius never entered the Great Temple. There are many ceremonial objects in the temple, not just one or two. Even if Confucius was a saint, how could he know everything?

古文：□□□： 以尝见，实已知，而复问，为人法。 
现代文：辩护的人说： 太庙里的礼器孔子曾经都见过，实际上他已经知道，然而还要再问一问，这是为了给别人做榜样。 
English: The defender said: Confucius had seen all the ceremonial objects in the Great Temple. In fact, he already knew them. However, I would like to ask another question. This is to set an example for others.

古文：孔子曰： 疑思问。 
现代文：孔子说： 有了疑问要想到请教别人。 
English: Confucius said, "When in doubt, consult someone else."

古文：疑乃当问也？
现代文：这是说有了疑难才应该问啊！
English: This means that you should only ask if you have a problem!

古文：实已知，当复问，为人法。孔子知《五经》，门人从之学，当复行问，以为人法，何故专口授弟子乎？
现代文：如果说 实际上已经知道，还应当再问，以此给人做榜样 ，那么孔子通晓 五经 ，学生们跟他学习，他也应该再去请教一下别人，以此来给人做榜样，为什么孔子只是给学生讲课而不请教别人呢？
English: If it is said that one should ask questions again to set an example, then Confucius was well versed in the Five Classics and his students should learn from him. He should also consult others to set an example. Why did Confucius only give lectures to his students and not consult others?

古文：不以已知《五经》，复问为人法，独以已知太庙复问为人法，圣人用心，何其不一也？
现代文：不用自己已经知道五经还去请教别人这种行为给人做榜样，唯独以自己已经知道太庙里的礼器而再问别人这种事给人做榜样，圣人的用心，怎么这样不一致呢？
English: You don't have to know the five sutras and ask others to teach you this kind of behavior to set an example for others, but you only have to know the etiquette in the temple and then ask others to do this kind of thing to set an example for others. How can the intentions of a saint be so inconsistent?

古文：以孔子入太庙言之，圣人不能先知，十也。
现代文：以孔子进太庙这件事来说，圣人不能先知，这是第十条证据。
English: As far as the matter of Confucius entering the Imperial Temple is concerned, a sage cannot be a prophet. This is the tenth piece of evidence.

古文：主人请宾饮食，宾顿若舍。
现代文：主人请宾客饮酒吃饭，或者想请客人住在他的家里。
English: The host invites guests to drink and eat, or wants to invite guests to stay in his home.

古文：宾如闻其家有轻子孙，必教亲彻馔退膳，不得饮食；闭馆关舍，不得顿。
现代文：客人如果听说他家有轻薄子孙，轻薄子孙必定会叫他的父母端走酒菜，使客人吃不上、喝不上；还会关上房门，使客人不能留宿。
English: If a guest hears that his family has a light-skinned grandchild, the light-skinned grandchild will certainly ask his parents to take away the wine and vegetables, so that the guest can not eat or drink; he will also close the door, so that the guest can not stay.

古文：宾之执计，则必不往。
现代文：那么客人会拿定主意，肯定不会再去了。
English: Then the guests will make up their minds and definitely won't go again.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：知请呼无喜，空行劳辱也。
现代文：因为客人知道被请去了也不会有高兴的事，只是白跑一趟受一番劳累和侮辱罢了。
English: Because the guest knows that there will be no joy in being invited, just a wasted trip with a lot of effort and indignity.

古文：如往无喜，劳辱复还，不知其家，不晓其实。
现代文：如果去了没有什么可高兴的事，又白劳累一场受顿侮辱回来，那是因为客人不了解主人的家庭，不了解他家的具体情况。
English: If there is nothing to be happy about when you go, and you come back exhausted and humiliated, it is because the guest does not know the host's family, does not know the specifics of his home.

古文：人实难知，吉凶难图。
现代文：人和具体情况都很难预知，吉凶也很难预料。
English: It is difficult to predict people and specific situations, and it is also difficult to predict fortunes.

古文：如孔子先知，宜知诸侯惑於谗臣，必不能用，空劳辱己，聘召之到，宜寝不往。
现代文：如果孔子先知，就应该知道诸侯已经被谗臣所迷惑，是一定不会任用自己的，只能空跑一趟还使自己受到侮辱，聘书和召令到了，也应该搁置起来不去应聘。
English: If Confucius is a prophet, he should know that the princes have been bewitched by their vassals, they will certainly not appoint their own, they can only run away and humiliate themselves, and when the letter of appointment and call comes, they should also put it on hold and not apply.

古文：君子不为无益之事，不履辱身之行。
现代文：君子不去做那种毫无益处的事情，不走使自己受到侮辱的路。
English: A gentleman does not do things that are of no benefit, he does not go down the road of humiliating himself.

古文：无为周流应聘，以取削迹之辱；空说非主，以犯绝粮之厄。
现代文：不必要周游列国去答应诸侯的聘请，而自取 削迹 的侮辱；不应该白费力气去游说那些不会采用自己主张的君主，而自找 绝粮 的灾祸。
English: It is not necessary to go round the world to solicit the favour of princes, and to incur the indignity of disgrace; it is not in vain to lobby princes who will not adopt one's ideas, and to incur the calamity of starvation.

古文：由此言之，近不能知。
现代文：由此说来，孔子似乎并不能先知。
English: Therefore, it seems that Confucius could not have been a prophet.

古文：论者曰： 孔子自知不用，圣思闵道不行，民在涂炭之中，庶几欲佐诸侯，行道济民，故应聘周流，不避患耻。
现代文：为孔子辩护的人说： 孔子自己知道是不会被任用的，圣人忧虑的是 道 行不通，老百姓生活在水深火热之中，他多半是想要辅佐诸侯，推行他的道而拯救老百姓，所以才答应诸侯的聘请周游列国，不躲避灾祸和耻辱。
English: Those who defended Confucius said: Confucius himself knew that he would not be appointed. The sage was worried that the way would not work, and the common people were living in a desperate situation. Most likely, he wanted to assist the princes, promote his way and save the common people. That is why he agreed to be hired by the princes to travel around the countries, not to avoid disaster and disgrace.

古文：为道不为己，故逢患而不恶。为民不为名，故蒙谤而不避。 
现代文：由于他为的是行道而不是为自己，所以遇到灾祸也下怨恨；为的是老百姓而不是为了出名，所以遭受诽谤也不顾忌。 
English: Because he works for the street and not for himself, he is hated when disaster strikes; because he works for the people and not for fame, he is not afraid of being slandered.

古文：曰：此非实也。
现代文：我说：这些都不是真实的。
English: I said, "This is not real.

古文：孔子曰： 吾自卫反鲁，然后乐正，雅颂各得其所。 
现代文：孔子说过： 我从卫国到鲁国后，才把《诗》的乐曲进行了整理，使《雅》乐和《颂》乐各得其适当的位置。 
English: Confucius said, "It was only after I went from the old country to the new country that I arranged the music of "Poetry" so that the music of "Elegy" and the music of "Hymn" would each have their proper place.

古文：是谓孔子自知时也。
现代文：这就是说孔子了解当时的形势。
English: This means that Confucius understood the situation at that time.

古文：何以自知？
现代文：根据什么说他自己知道呢？
English: On what basis does he say he knows?

古文：鲁、卫，天下最贤之国也。鲁、卫不能用己，则天下莫能用己也，故退作《春秋》，删定《诗》、《书》。
现代文：鲁国和卫国，是天下执行周礼最完备的国家，鲁国和卫国不能任用自己，那么天下就没有什么国家会任用自己了，所以他才回到鲁国作《春秋》，删改编定《诗》、《书》。
English: Russia and the Great Patriotic War are the most complete countries in the world in performing the weekly ritual. If Russia and the Great Patriotic War cannot appoint themselves, then no country in the world will appoint themselves. Therefore, he returned to Russia to write "Spring and Autumn" and edited and edited "Poetry" and "Book."

古文：以自卫反鲁言之，知行应聘时，未自知也。
现代文：以孔子从卫国回到鲁国这件事来说，可以知道孔子将要应聘时，还不知道自己前途如何。
English: In the case of Confucius returning to Lu from the old country, we can know that when Confucius was about to apply for a job, he did not know what his future would be.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：无兆象效验，圣人无以定也。
现代文：没有兆象而无从察考，圣人是没有根据来作出判断的。
English: Without signs and without observation, sages have no basis for judgment.

古文：鲁、卫不能用，自知极也；鲁人获麟，自知绝也。
现代文：等到鲁、卫两国不任用自己，这才知道已经到了穷途末路；等到鲁国人捉到了麒麟，他才知道自己再也没有什么希望了。
English: It wasn't until Lu and Wei didn't appoint him that he knew he had reached the end of the road; it wasn't until the Lu people caught Kirin that he knew he had no hope.

古文：道极命绝，兆象著明，心怀望沮，退而幽思。
现代文：道行不通，命也完了，征兆明明白白地显现出来，内心怀着怨恨、沮丧，只好回去冥思苦想。
English: The way does not work, the life is over, the signs are clearly manifested, and with resentment and frustration in my heart, I have to go back and meditate.

古文：夫周流不休，犹病未死，祷卜使痊也；死兆未见，冀得活也。
现代文：孔子不停地周游列国，如同生了病又不到死的地步，所以祈祷占卜希望病好，因为死的征兆还没有出现，希望能活下去。
English: Confucius constantly traveled around the countries, as if he was sick and not at the point of death, so he prayed and divined to hope that he would get better, because the signs of death had not yet appeared, hoping to live.

古文：然则应聘，未见绝证，冀得用也。
现代文：这样说来，孔子应聘是因为没有看到彻底绝望的证据，还希望自己能被任用。
English: In this way, Confucius applied for the job because he did not see any evidence of utter despair, and also hoped that he could be appointed.

古文：死兆见舍，卜还医绝，揽笔定书。
现代文：等到家中出现了要死人的征兆，占卜的人回头就走，医生也拒绝治疗，这才拿起笔来删定《诗》、《书》。
English: It wasn't until signs of impending death appeared at home, soothsayers turned their backs and left, and doctors refused to treat him, that he picked up a pen to erase "Poem" and "Book."

古文：以应聘周流言之，圣人不能先知，十一也。
现代文：以孔子应聘周游这件事来说，圣人不能先知，这是第十一条证据。
English: In the case of Confucius's travel around the world, this is the eleventh proof that a sage cannot be a prophet.

古文：孔子曰： 游者可为纶。走这可为矰。
现代文：孔子说： 鱼类可以钓到，兽类可以射获。
English: Confucius said: Fish can be caught, and animals can be shot.

古文：至於龙，吾不知，其乘云风上升。
现代文：至于龙，我不知道该怎么办，因为它能乘着云风上天。
English: As for the dragon, I don't know what to do with it, because it can ride the clouds and wind up to the sky.

古文：今日见老子，其犹龙邪！ 
现代文：今天见到老子，他大概就像龙一样吧！ 
English: When I saw Lao Tzu today, he probably looked like a dragon!

古文：圣人知物知事。老子与龙，人、物也，所从上下，事也，何故不知？
现代文：圣人知道物也知道事，老子和龙，一个是人，一个是物，龙的活动从上到下，从下到上，都是事，孔子为什么不能知道呢？
English: The sage knows things and knows things. Lao Zi and the dragon are one person and one thing. The activities of the dragon from top to bottom and from bottom to top are all things. Why can't Confucius know?

古文：如老子神，龙亦神，圣人亦神。神者同道，精气交连，何故不知？
现代文：如果老子是神，龙也是神，圣人也是神，那么神的活动应该有共同的规律，他们的精气可以互相沟通，为什么会不知道呢？
English: If Laozi is a god, dragons are also gods, and saints are also gods, then the activities of gods should have a common law, and their spirits can communicate with each other. Why do they not know this?

古文：以孔子不知龙与老子言之，圣人不能先知，十二也。
现代文：以孔子不知道龙和老子这件事来说，圣人不能先知，这是第十二条证据。
English: As far as the fact that Confucius did not know about the dragon and Laozi is concerned, a sage cannot be a prophet. This is the twelfth piece of evidence.

古文：孔子曰： 孝哉，闵子骞！
现代文：孔子说： 闵子骞真是孝顺啊！
English: Confucius said: "What filial piety!

古文：人不间於其父母昆弟之言。 
现代文：别人在他和他父母兄弟之间说不了挑拨离间的话。 
English: He served his parents and obeyed his brothers. He was praised by others for his parents and brothers, and there was no objectionable gossip about him.

古文：虞舜大圣，隐藏骨肉之过，宜愈子骞。
现代文：虞舜是个大圣人，他在掩盖亲属的错误方面，应该超过闵子骞。
English: Gudang is a great sage, and he should surpass Zangzang in covering up the mistakes of his relatives.

古文：瞽叟与象，使舜治禀、浚井，意欲杀舜。
现代文：舜的父亲瞽叟和异母弟象让他修理谷仓和淘井，打算借机杀害他。
English: Zou's father Zou and his half-brother Zeng asked him to repair the barn and water well, intending to use the opportunity to kill him.

古文：当见杀己之情，早谏豫止。既无如何，宜避不行，若病不为。
现代文：舜应当看出他们有要杀害自己的意思，应该早早地规劝他们预先防止事情的发生，既然无可奈何了，也应该躲开或装病不干。
English: You should see that they have the intention of killing themselves, you should advise them early on to prevent things from happening in advance, and since there is nothing you can do, you should also hide or feign illness.

古文：何故使父与弟得成杀己之恶，使人闻非父弟，万世不灭？
现代文：为什么要使他父亲和弟弟构成谋杀自己的罪名，使人们知道这件事而指责他的父亲和弟弟，以至万世之后还有人在谈论呢？
English: Why frame his father and brother for his murder, let it be known, blame his father and brother, and be talked about for the rest of eternity?

古文：以虞舜不豫见，圣人不能先知，十三也。
现代文：以虞舜不能预见这件事来说，圣人不能先知，这是第十三条证据。
English: To the extent that Gu Yao could not foresee this event, a saint cannot be a prophet, which is the thirteenth proof.

古文：武王不豫，周公请命，坛墠既设，筴祝已毕，不知天之许己与不，乃卜三龟，三龟皆吉。
现代文：周武王生病，周公乞求上天延续武王的寿命。设置了祭坛，读完了祝文以后，还不知道上天答应了自己的请求没有，于是就用龟甲占卜了三次，结果兆象都很吉利。
English: When King Zhou Wu fell ill, Zhou Gong begged Heaven to prolong King Wu's life. After setting up the altar and reading the congratulatory message, he still didn't know if Heaven had granted his request, so he divined three times with the tortoise shell, and the results were all auspicious.

古文：如圣人先知，周公当知天已许之，无为顿复卜三龟。
现代文：如果圣人是先知的，周公就应当知道上天已经答应了自己的请求，不必紧接着又用龟甲占卜三次。
English: If the sage was a prophet, Zhou Gong should have known that Heaven had granted his request, and he did not have to use the tortoise shell to tell fortunes three times.

古文：知圣人不以独见立法，则更请命，秘藏不见，天意难知，故卜而合兆，兆决心定，乃以从事。
现代文：知道圣人不以个人的意见来决定事情，所以周公还要乞求天命，并且把祝文秘藏起来不让人看见。由于天意很难知道，所以三次进行占卜，把得到的兆象合起来加以对照。
English: Knowing that sages do not decide things based on their personal opinions, Zhou Gong also begged for the fate of heaven and hid the secret of the congratulation letter. Since it is difficult to know the will of heaven, he performed divination three times and compared the signs obtained.

古文：圣人不能先知，十四也。
现代文：兆象定了心也就定了，于是就根据兆象的指示去办事。圣人不能先知，这是第十四条证据。
English: If the omens are right, the mind will be right, and it will act according to the instructions of the omens. A saint cannot be a prophet, this is the fourteenth proof.

古文：晏子聘於鲁，堂上不趋，晏子趋；授玉不跪。晏子跪。
现代文：晏子出使到鲁国。使臣在朝堂上不应该小步快走，而晏子却快步走了；君王授与玉时，使臣不应该跪着接，而晏子却跪下来接了。
English: An envoy should not walk briskly in the court, but the mule walked briskly; when the king awarded the jade, the envoy should not kneel to receive it, but the mule knelt down to receive it.

古文：门人怪而问於孔子。孔子不知，问於晏子。
现代文：学生们感到奇怪而去请教孔子，孔子也不知道是怎么回事，于是就去请教晏子。
English: The students felt strange and went to ask Confucius for advice. Confucius did not know what was going on, so he went to ask Zou Zi.

古文：晏子解之，孔子乃晓。
现代文：晏子解释之后，孔子才明白。
English: Confucius only understood after Xun Zi explained.

古文：圣人不能先知，十五也。
现代文：圣人不能先知，这是第十五条证据。
English: A saint cannot be a prophet, this is the fifteenth proof.

古文：陈贾问於孟子曰： 周公何人也？ 
现代文：陈贾问孟子，说： 周公是个什么样的人呢？ 
English: Chen Jia asked Mencius, saying: What kind of person is Zhou Gong?

古文：曰： 圣人。 
现代文：孟子回答说： 是圣人。 
English: Mencius replied, "He is a sage."

古文： 使管叔监殷，管叔畔也。二者有诸？ 
现代文：又问： 周公派管叔去监视武庚，后来管叔等人叛乱了，这两件事都有吗？ 
English: Another question: Zhou Gong sent Uncle Guan to monitor Wu Geng, and later Uncle Guan and others rebelled. Are these two things the same?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：孟子回答说： 是有的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文： 周公知其畔而使，不知而使之与？ 
现代文：又问： 周公是知道管叔要叛乱而派他去的呢？还是不知道而派他去的呢？ 
English: He also asked: Did Zhou Gong know that Uncle Guan was going to rebel and sent him there? Or did he not know and sent him there?

古文：曰： 不知也。 
现代文：孟子回答： 不知道才派他去的。 
English: Qi Wang said: I don't know.

古文： 然则圣人且有过与？ 
现代文：又问： 如此说来，圣人尚且也有过错吗？ 
English: Chen Jia said, "Then even sages can make mistakes?"

古文：曰： 周公，弟也，管叔，兄也。
现代文：孟子回答说： 周公是弟弟，管叔是哥哥。
English: Mencius replied: Zhou Gong is a younger brother, and Guanzhong is an older brother.

古文：周公之过也，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：周公有过错，不也是可以理解的吗？ 
English: Zhou Gong is at fault, isn't it understandable?

古文：孟子，实事之人也，言周公之圣，处其下，不能知管叔之畔。
现代文：孟子是个讲求实际的人，既说周公是圣人，又认为他处在做弟弟的地位，是不能预知管叔会叛乱的。
English: Mencius was a pragmatic person. He said that Zhou Gong was a saint, but he also believed that he was in the position of a younger brother and could not predict the uncle's rebellion.

古文：圣人不能先知，十六也。
现代文：圣人不能先知，这是第十六条证据。
English: A saint cannot be a prophet, this is the sixteenth proof.

古文：孔子曰： 赐不受命，而货殖焉，亿则屡中。 
现代文：孔子说： 子贡不听从天命而去经商营利，他猜测市场行情常常很准确。 
English: Confucius said: Zigong did not listen to the fate and went into business for profit. He often guessed the market very accurately.

古文：罪子贡善居积，意贵贱之期，数得其时，故货殖多，富比陶硃。
现代文：孔子责备子贡善于囤积，善于估计物价涨落的时机，多次都能抓住时机，所以赚了很多钱，跟陶朱公一样富有。
English: Confucius reproached Zigong for being good at hoarding, good at estimating the timing of price fluctuations, and being able to seize the opportunity many times, so he made a lot of money and was as rich as Tao Zhu Gong.

古文：然则圣人先知也，子贡亿数中之类也。
现代文：由此看来圣人的先知，也不过是像子贡屡次猜中行情一样。
English: From this point of view, the prophet of the saint is just like Zigong repeatedly guessing the market.

古文：圣人据象兆，原物类，意而得之。
现代文：圣人也是根据一定的迹象和征兆，考察推究事物的本源，然后经过判断而得出结论。
English: The sages also investigated and deduced the origin of things based on certain signs and symptoms, and then came to a conclusion through judgment.

古文：其见变名物，博学而识之。
现代文：圣人见到异常的事物能叫出它的名称，是由于学得多而记得住。
English: The sage can call out the name of an unusual thing when he sees it, because he has learned a lot and remembers it.

古文：巧商而善意，广见而多记，由微见较，若揆之今睹千载，所谓智如渊海。
现代文：圣人巧于推算，善于估计，见识广，记得多，从微小的苗头看到明显的结局，如同根据今天的事物进行推测而预见到千年以后的情况一样，这可以说是才智浩如渊海了。
English: A sage's ability to calculate, to estimate, to see, to remember, to see from the smallest beginnings to the most obvious consequences, as well as to extrapolate from today to a thousand years hence, may be said to be a vast ocean of wisdom.

古文：孔子见窍睹微，思虑洞达，材智兼倍，强力不倦，超逾伦等耳！目非有达视之明，知人所不知之状也。
现代文：孔子能够看到细微而不明显的事物，思考问题透彻，是由于他的才智比常人高很多倍，而又努力不懈，才超过了一般的人，但他的眼睛并没有超人的视力，能知道别人所不能知道的情况。
English: Confucius was able to see subtle and non-obvious things and think through problems, because his intelligence was many times higher than that of ordinary people, and he worked tirelessly to surpass the average person, but his eyes did not have superhuman vision and could know what others could not know.

古文：使圣人达视远见，洞听潜闻，与天地谈，与鬼神言，知天上地下之事，乃可谓神而先知，与人卓异。
现代文：如果看得透彻看得远，听得清楚无所不闻，能与天地交谈，能跟鬼神说话，知道天上地下的事情，那才称得上是神而先知，与一般人大不一样。
English: If you can see far and wide, hear clearly and hear everything, can talk to heaven and earth, can talk to ghosts and gods, and know things in heaven and on earth, then you can be called a god and a prophet, which is very different from ordinary people.

古文：今耳目闻见，与人无别，遭事睹物，与人无异，差贤一等尔，何以谓神而卓绝？
现代文：但是，现在圣人耳闻目见，与一般人没有什么差别；遇到的事情看到的东西和一般人没有什么不同，只是比贤人略微高明一点罢了，怎么能说像神一样无可比拟呢？
English: However, nowadays, sages hear and see, and there is no difference between them and ordinary people; they encounter things and see things that are no different from ordinary people, but they are only slightly more intelligent than sages, so how can they be said to be incomparable like gods?

古文：夫圣犹贤也，人之殊者谓之圣，则圣贤差小大之称，非绝殊之名也。
现代文：圣人跟贤人一个样，如果把才能特殊的人称为圣人，那么圣人与贤人只不过是区别才能大小的称呼，并不是完全不同的两种名号。
English: A saint is the same as a sage. If a person with a special talent is called a saint, then a saint and a sage are just names that distinguish the size of the talent, not two completely different names.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么来证明这个道理呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：齐桓公与管仲谋伐莒，谋未发而闻於国，桓公怪之，问管仲曰： 与仲甫谋伐莒，未发，闻於国，其故何也？ 
现代文：齐桓公与管仲商议讨伐莒国，谋画好了还没有行动而国内的人都知道了。桓公感到很奇怪，问管仲说： 我与仲父商议讨伐莒国，还没有行动，国内的人都知道了，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Prince Qi Huan consulted with Guan Zhong about the campaign against Yunnan. The plan was ready, but no action had been taken, and everyone in the country knew about it. Guan Zhong felt very strange and asked Guan Zhong, "I consulted with my father about the campaign against Yunnan, but no action has been taken, and everyone in the country knows about it. What is the reason for this?"

古文：管仲曰： 国必有圣人也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 国内一定有圣人。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "There must be saints in our country."

古文：少顷，当东郭牙至。管仲曰： 此必是已。 
现代文：一会儿，正好东郭牙来了，管仲说： 一定是这个人了。 
English: After a while, Dong Guo Ya arrived, and Guanzhong said, "It must be this person."

古文：乃令宾延而上之，分级而立。
现代文：于是就派一个管接待的官员把他请到殿堂上，分别按宾主的位置站好。
English: So he sent an official in charge of the reception to invite him to the hall and to stand in the position of the guest.

古文：管曰： 子邪，言伐莒？ 
现代文：管仲说： 是您说我们要讨伐莒国吗？ 
English: Guanzhong said, "Are you the one who said that we should invade China?"

古文：对曰： 然。 
现代文：东郭牙说： 是的。 
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：管仲曰： 我不伐莒，子何故言伐莒？ 
现代文：管仲说： 我没想要讨伐莒国，你凭什么说我们要讨伐莒国呢？ 
English: Guanzhong said, "I didn't want to invade China. How can you say that we want to invade China?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻君子善谋，小人善意。
现代文：东郭牙回答说： 我听说君子善于谋画，小人善于推测，我是私下推测出来的。 
English: Dong Guo Ya replied, "I have heard that a gentleman is good at planning, while a villain is good at guessing. I guessed it in private.

古文：臣窃意之。 管仲曰： 我不言伐莒，子何以意之？ 
现代文：管仲说： 我没有说要讨伐莒国，你根据什么推测的呢？ 
English: Guanzhong said, "I didn't say I wanted to invade Shandong Province. On what basis did you make that assumption?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻君子有三色：驩然喜乐者，钟鼓之色；愁然清净者，衰绖之色；怫然充满手足者，兵革之色。
现代文：东郭牙回答说： 我听说君子脸上有三种神色：婚庆喜事时，表露出欢乐高兴的神色；举办丧事时，表露出愁苦哀伤的神色；发生战争时，表露出非常愤怒以致气得四肢发抖的神色。
English: Dong Guo Ya replied, "I have heard that a gentleman's face has three expressions: when celebrating a wedding, he shows a happy and joyful expression; when holding a funeral, he shows a sad and sorrowful expression; when there is a war, he shows a very angry expression that makes his limbs tremble with anger.

古文：君口垂不，所言莒也；君举臂而指，所当又莒也。
现代文：你的口开而不闭，说的正是 莒 字；你的手臂举起来指，所对着的又是莒国的方向。
English: Your mouth is open and not closed, and you speak the very words of the Lord; your arm is raised and points in the direction of the Lord.

古文：臣窃虞国小诸侯不服者，其唯莒乎！
现代文：我私下想国家小而又不服从齐国的诸侯，大概只有莒国吧！
English: Privately, I think that countries that are small and do not obey the lords of Qi are probably the only ones!

古文：臣故言之。 
现代文：因此我就这样说了。 
English: That's why I said it.

古文：夫管仲，上智之人也，其别物审事矣。云 国必有圣人 者，至诚谓国必有也。
现代文：管仲是很有智慧的人，他善于区别事物考察事理，他说 国内一定有圣人 ，是真心诚意地说国内一定有。
English: Guanzhong is a very wise person. He is good at distinguishing between things and examining matters. He said that there must be a saint in China, and he sincerely said that there must be one in China.

古文：东郭牙至，云 此必是已 ，谓东郭牙圣也。
现代文：东郭牙来了，管仲说 一定是这个人 ，就是说东郭牙是圣人。
English: Dong Guo Ya came, and Guanzhong said that it must be this person, that is, Dong Guo Ya is a saint.

古文：如贤与圣绝辈，管仲知时无十二圣之党，当云 国必有贤者 ，无为言圣也。
现代文：如果圣人与贤人根本不是一类，管仲明知当时并没有像黄帝等十二圣之类的人，他就应该说 国内一定有贤人 ，不应当说是 圣人 。
English: If saints and sages are not the same at all, and Guanzhong knows that there were no such people as the Yellow Emperor and other twelve saints at that time, he should say that there must be sages in the country, not saints.

古文：谋未发而闻於国，管仲谓 国必有圣人 ，是谓圣人先知也。
现代文：谋画好了还没有行动而国内的人都知道了，管仲说 国内一定有圣人 ，这是说圣人能先知。
English: The plan is ready, but there is no action yet, and people in the country know about it. Guanzhong said that there must be a saint in the country, which means that a saint can prophesy.

古文：及见东郭牙，云 此必是已 ，谓贤者圣也。
现代文：等到看见了东郭牙，说 一定是这个人 ，是说贤人就是圣人。
English: When he saw Dong Guo Ya, he said, "It must be this man," meaning that a sage is a saint.

古文：东郭牙知之审，是与圣人同也。
现代文：东郭牙对事情了解得这样清楚，这和圣人是一样的啊。
English: Dong Guo Ya understands things so clearly, it's the same as a sage.

古文：客有见淳于髡於梁惠王者，再见之，终无言也。
现代文：有个宾客把淳于髡引见给梁惠王，梁惠王一连两次接见他，淳于髡始终一言不发。
English: A guest introduced him to Liang Hui Wang. Liang Hui Wang received him twice in a row, but Jun Yuxuan never said a word.

古文：惠王怪之，以让客曰： 子之称淳于生，言管、晏不及。及见寡人，寡人未有得也。
现代文：梁惠王对此很不高兴，因此责备那个宾客说： 你赞扬淳于先生，说管仲、晏婴都赶不上他，等到他见了我，我并没有什么收获。
English: Liang Hui Wang was very unhappy about this, so he scolded the guest and said: You praised Mr. Chunyu, saying that neither Guanzhong nor the baby can catch up with him. When he saw me, I had nothing to gain.

古文：寡人未足为言邪？ 
现代文：难道我不值得跟他谈话吗？ 
English: Don't I deserve to talk to him?

古文：客谓髡。
现代文：这个宾客把惠王的话告诉了淳于髡。
English: The guest relayed Hui Wang's words to Jun Yuqi.

古文：曰： 固也！吾前见王志在远，后见王志在音，吾是以默然。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 本来嘛，我前一次见惠王时，他的心思放在远处，后一次见他时，他的心思在音乐上，我因此没有说话。 
English: Jun Yuxuan said, "Actually, the last time I saw Hui Wang, his mind was far away, and the last time I saw him, his mind was on music, so I didn't speak.

古文：客具报，王大骇曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：宾客把淳于髡的话一一汇报给惠王，惠王听后大吃一惊，说： 哎呀！
English: The guests reported Chunyu's words one by one to Hui Wang. Hui Wang was taken aback and said, "Wow!

古文：淳于生诚圣人也？
现代文：淳于先生实在是个圣人呀！
English: Mr. Junyu is really a saint!

古文：前淳于生之来，人有献龙马者，寡人未及视，会生至。
现代文：前一次淳于先生来，正好有人来献龙马，还没来得及看，正碰上淳于先生来了。
English: The last time Mr. Junyu came, someone just happened to come to offer a dragon horse. Before I could see it, I met Mr. Junyu.

古文：后来，人有献讴者，为及试，亦会生至。
现代文：后一次他来，正好有人来献歌手，我还没来得及试听，正巧他又来了。
English: The last time he came, someone happened to bring a singer, and before I could audition, he happened to come again.

古文：寡人虽屏左右，私心在彼。 
现代文：我虽然屏退了左右的人，然而我的心思都在那儿。 
English: Even though I was looking away from people to the right and to the left, my mind was still there.

古文：夫髡之见惠王在远与音也，虽汤、禹之察，不能过也。
现代文：淳于髡能观察到惠王的心思在远处和音乐上，就是成汤、夏禹那样明察的人，也不能超过他。
English: Chun Yu Kun can observe Hui Wang's thoughts in the distance and in music. Even someone who observes as clearly as Cheng Tang and Xia Yu can't surpass him.

古文：志在胸臆之中，藏匿不见，髡能知之。
现代文：一个人的心思藏在心里，从外面发现不了，淳于髡却能知道。
English: A person's thoughts are hidden in the heart, and cannot be found from the outside, but can be known by the heart.

古文：以髡等为圣，则髡圣人也。如以髡等非圣，则圣人之知，何以过髡之知惠王也？
现代文：如果把淳于髡这类人看作是圣人，那么淳于髡就是圣人了；如果认为淳于髡这类人不是圣人，那么所谓圣人的明智，又怎么能超过淳于髡对于梁惠王的了解呢？
English: If people like Chunyu Kun are considered to be saints, then Chunyu Kun is a saint; if people like Chunyu Kun are not considered to be saints, then how can the wisdom of so-called saints surpass Chunyu Kun's understanding of King Liang Hui?

古文：观色以窥心，皆有因缘以准的之。
现代文：通过观察面部表情来探测内心的活动，都是由于有所依据才能推测得那么准确。
English: By observing facial expressions to detect inner activity, it is because there is a basis to speculate so accurately.

古文：楚灵王会诸侯，郑子产曰： 鲁、邾、宋、卫不来。 
现代文：楚灵王召集各国诸侯，郑国的子产说： 鲁、邾、宋、卫四国不会来。 
English: King Chuling called together the princes of various countries, and the sons of Zheng said, "The four kingdoms of Lu, Yao, Song and Wei will not come.

古文：及诸侯会，四国果不至。
现代文：等到各国诸侯聚会时，这四国果然没有到。
English: When the princes of various countries gathered, these four countries did not arrive.

古文：赵尧为符玺御史，赵人方与公谓御史大夫周昌曰： 君之史赵尧且代君位。 
现代文：赵尧是符玺御史，赵人方与公对御史大夫周昌说： 你手下的御史赵尧将要代替你的职位。 
English: Zhao Wei is the official historian, Zhao Renfang said to the official historian Dr. Zhou Chang: Your official historian Zhao Wei will take your place.

古文：其后尧果为御史大夫。
现代文：后来，赵尧果然做了御史大夫。
English: Later, Zhao Yao did indeed become a doctor of history.

古文：然则四国不至，子产原其理也；赵尧之为御史大夫，方与公睹其状也。
现代文：这样说来，四国诸侯不来参与盟会，郑子产是根据情理推断出来的，赵尧做御史大夫，方与公是通过某种状况观察出来的。
English: In this way, the princes of the Four Kingdoms did not come to participate in the alliance, Zheng Zi's birth was inferred based on reason, Zhao Zi was the chief historian, and Fang He Gong was observed through a certain situation.

古文：原理睹状，处著方来，有以审之也。
现代文：推究情理、观察状况，推断未来，都是有所依据而考察出来的。
English: Inferring the reason, observing the situation, and inferring the future are all based on evidence.

古文：鲁人公孙臣，孝文皇帝时，上书言汉土德，其符黄龙当见。
现代文：鲁人公孙臣，在汉文帝时上奏章给皇帝，说汉朝是土德，它的吉兆黄龙该要出现了。
English: Sun Zhen, a Lu man, wrote a letter to the emperor at the time of the Han Emperor Wen, saying that the Han Dynasty was a native German, and its auspicious yellow dragon should appear.

古文：後黄龙见成纪。
现代文：后来，黄龙果然在成纪这个地方出现了。
English: Later, Huanglong really appeared in Chengji.

古文：然则公孙臣知黄龙将出，案律历以处之也。
现代文：公孙臣知道黄龙将要出现，是根据乐律和历法推断出来的。
English: Gongsun Zhen knew that Huanglong would appear, which was deduced from the melody and the calendar.

古文：贤圣之知，事宜验矣。
现代文：贤圣的智慧如何，事情应该说已经得到验证了。
English: In the wisdom of the sages, it should be said that the matter has been verified.

古文：贤圣之才，皆能先知；其先知也，任术用数，或善商而巧意，非圣人空知。
现代文：贤圣的才能，是都能先知。他们的先知，是运用各种术数，或者是善于估计和巧妙的推算，并不是圣人凭空就知道的。
English: The ability of the saints is to be able to prophesy. Their prophets use all kinds of tricks, or are good at estimating and cleverly calculating. The saints do not know from nothing.

古文：神怪与圣贤，殊道异路也。
现代文：神怪与圣贤，是完全不同的两码事。
English: A monster and a saint are two completely different things.

古文：圣贤知不逾，故用思相出入；遭事无神怪，故名号相贸易。
现代文：圣人与贤人的才智差不多，所以他们动脑筋想问题互有长短；他们对待事情并没有什么神怪的地方，因而圣和贤这两种名号可以相互更换。
English: Saints and sages are of similar intelligence, so they use their brains to think about the length and breadth of problems; there is nothing strange about their approach to things, so the two names of saints and sages can be replaced with each other.

古文：故夫贤圣者，道德智能之号；神者，眇茫恍惚无形之实。
现代文：所以，贤、圣是道德高尚、智能卓越的称号；而 神 却是一种渺茫恍惚无形的事物。
English: Therefore, virtue and holiness are the titles of high morals and superior intelligence; but God is a vague, intangible thing.

古文：实异，质不得同；实钧，效不得殊。
现代文：事物不同，性质也不会一样；事物相同，表现也不会是两样。
English: If things are different, their nature will not be the same; if things are the same, their performance will not be different.

古文：圣神号不等，故谓圣者不神，神者不圣。
现代文：圣和神的名号是不同的，所以说圣不是神，神也不是圣。
English: The names of Holy and God are different, so Holy is not God, and God is not Holy.

古文：东郭牙善意，以知国情，子贡善意，以得货利。
现代文：东郭牙因为善于推测所以能知道国家的内情；子贡善于估计所以能够赚钱。
English: Dong Guo Ya is good at guessing, so he can know the inside story of the country; Zigong is good at estimating, so he can make money.

古文：圣人之先知，子贡、东郭牙之徒也。
现代文：圣人的先知，就是子贡、东郭牙这类人的先知。
English: The prophets of saints are the prophets of people like Zigong and Dongguo Ya.

古文：与子贡、东郭同，则子贡、东郭之徒亦圣也。夫如是，圣贤之实同而名号殊，未必才相悬绝，智相兼倍也。
现代文：圣人既然与子贡、东郭牙相同，那么子贡、东郭牙这类人也就是圣人了，既然如此，圣人与贤人的实质是一样的而只是名号不同，他们之间才能不一定相差很远，智慧也不会成倍相差。
English: Since saints are the same as Zigong and Dong Guo Ya, then people like Zigong and Dong Guo Ya are also saints. In this case, the essence of saints and sages is the same, but the names are different. Their talents are not necessarily far apart, and their wisdom is not doubly different.

古文：太宰问於子贡曰： 夫子圣者欤？
现代文：太宰向子贡问道： 孔子是个圣人吧？
English: Dazai asked Zigong, "Is Confucius a saint?

古文：何其多能也！ 
现代文：他怎么这样多才多艺呢？ 
English: How is he so versatile?

古文：子贡曰： 故天纵之将圣，又多能也。 
现代文：子贡回答说： 这本来是上天让他将成为圣人，又使他这么多才多艺的。 
English: Zigong replied, "It was Heaven that made him a saint and gave him so much talent.

古文：将者，且也。
现代文：将，就是将要的意思。
English: "Will" means "will be."

古文：不言已圣，言且圣者，以为孔子圣未就也。
现代文：子贡不说已经是圣人，而说将要成为圣人，是他认为孔子当时还没有成为圣人的缘故。
English: Zigong did not say that he was already a saint, but that he would become a saint, because he thought that Confucius had not yet become a saint.

古文：夫圣若为贤矣，治行厉操，操行未立，则谓且贤。
现代文：成为圣人和成为贤人一样，要修养磨炼自己的操行，操行还没有磨炼成功的时候，那只能说是将要成为贤人。
English: To become a saint is the same as to become a sage. One must cultivate and hone one's conduct. When one's conduct has not yet been successfully honed, it can only be said that one will become a sage.

古文：今言且圣，圣可为之故也。
现代文：现在子贡说孔子将要成为圣人，是因为圣人是可以做到的缘故。
English: Now Zigong says that Confucius will become a saint, because a saint can be made.

古文：孔子曰： 吾十有五而志於学，三十而立，四十而不惑，五十而知天命，六十而耳顺。 
现代文：孔子说： 我十五岁立志于学业，三十岁言行合于礼，四十岁能明白事理不迷惑，五十岁懂得了天命，六十岁一听到别人说的话，就能辨明是非真假。 
English: Confucius said: At the age of fifteen, I was determined to study; at the age of thirty, my words and deeds were in accordance with propriety; at the age of forty, I was able to understand the truth and not be confused; at the age of fifty, I understood the destiny of heaven; and at the age of sixty, I was able to distinguish the true from the false as soon as I heard what others said.

古文：从知天命至耳顺，学就知明，成圣之验也。
现代文：从 知天命 到 耳顺 ，学习有了成就，智慧更加通达，这是成了圣人的验证。
English: From knowing one's fate to listening to it, learning has been accomplished, wisdom has become more accessible, and this is the proof of becoming a saint.

古文：未五十、六十之时，未能知天命、至耳顺也，则谓之 且 矣。
现代文：还没有到五六十岁的时候，就不能 知天命 ，达到 耳顺 的程度，所以就称之为将要。
English: When you are not yet fifty or sixty years old, you cannot know the will of heaven and reach the level of listening, so it is called will.

古文：当子贡答太宰时，殆三十、四十之时也。
现代文：当子贡回答太宰的问话时，大概是孔子三四十岁的时候吧。
English: When Zigong answered Dazai's question, it was probably when Confucius was in his thirties or forties.

古文：魏昭王问於田诎曰： 寡人在东宫之时，闻先生之议曰 为圣易 有之乎？ 
现代文：魏昭王向田诎问道： 我做太子的时候。听说先生有这样的议论，说 做圣人容易 ，有这回事吗？ 
English: Wei Zhao Wang asked Tian Yao: When I was crown prince, I heard that you said that it was easy to become a saint. Is that true?

古文：田诎对曰： 臣之所学也。 
现代文：田诎回答说： 圣人是我所要学着去做到的。 
English: Tian Yao replied, "I want to learn how to play a saint.

古文：昭王曰： 然则先生圣乎？ 
现代文：昭王问： 这么说先生是圣人吗？ 
English: King Zhao asked, "So you are saying that you are a saint?"

古文：田诎曰： 未有功而知其圣者，尧之知舜也。待其有功而後知圣者，市人之知舜也。
现代文：田诎说： 没有作出功绩之前就能知道他是圣人，这是尧对舜的认识；等到有了功绩之后才能知道他是圣人，这是一般人对舜的认识。
English: Tian Yao said: You can know that he is a saint before he has done any meritorious deeds, which is the common knowledge of the people; you can only know that he is a saint after he has done some meritorious deeds, which is the common knowledge of the people.

古文：今诎未有功，而王问诎曰： 若圣乎？
现代文：现在我还没有什么功绩，而王就问我 你是圣人吗？ 
English: Now I have no merit, and the king asks me, "Are you a saint?"

古文：敢问王亦其尧乎？ 
现代文：敢问大王你也是尧一样的圣人吗？ 
English: Dare I ask, are you also a saint like the baboon?

古文：夫圣可学为，故田诎谓之易。
现代文：圣人是可能通过学习做到的，所以田诎说做圣人容易。
English: It is possible to become a saint through study, so Tian Yu said that it is easy to become a saint.

古文：如卓与人殊，禀天性而自然，焉可学？
现代文：如果圣人卓绝得与一般人大不一样，是禀受天性自然生成的，那怎么能学呢？
English: If the sages are so different from ordinary people and are naturally generated by nature, then how can they be learned?

古文：而为之安能成？
现代文：学习做圣人又怎么能成功呢？
English: How can learning to be a saint be successful?

古文：田诎之言 为圣易 ，未必能成，田诎之言为易，未必能是；言 臣之所学 ，盖其实也。
现代文：田诎说的 做圣人容易 ，未必能够成功；田诎说的 做圣人容易 ，也未必是对的。他所说的 圣人是我所要学着做到的 ，这大概倒是符合实际的。
English: Tian Yao said that it is easy to be a saint, but it may not be successful; Tian Yao said that it is easy to be a saint, but it may not be right. The saint he said is what I want to learn to do, which is probably realistic.

古文：可学，为劳佚殊，故贤圣之号，仁智共之。
现代文：圣人可以经过学习做到，只是用功的程度更特殊些罢了，所以贤人圣人的称号虽有区别，但在仁与智方面是共同的。
English: A sage can do it through study, but the degree of hard work is more special, so although the title of sage is different, it is common in terms of benevolence and wisdom.

古文：子贡问於孔子： 夫子圣矣乎？ 
现代文：子贡对孔子问道： 您已经是圣人了吗？ 
English: Zigong asked Confucius: Are you already a saint?

古文：孔子曰： 圣则吾不能。我学不餍，而教不倦。 
现代文：孔子说： 圣人，我达不到，我只是学习从不满足，教人从不觉得疲倦而已。 
English: Confucius said, "Sage, I can't attain it. I only study and am never satisfied. I only teach people and never feel tired."

古文：子贡曰： 学不餍者，智也；教不倦者，仁也。
现代文：子贡说： 学习不满足，就是智；教人不疲倦，就是仁。
English: Zigong said: Learning without satisfaction is wisdom; teaching without fatigue is benevolence.

古文：仁且智，夫子既圣矣。 
现代文：有仁又有智，您就是圣人了。 
English: With kindness and wisdom, you are a saint.

古文：由此言之，仁智之人，可谓圣矣。
现代文：由此说来，具有仁智的人，就可以称为圣人了。
English: Therefore, a person with benevolence and wisdom can be called a saint.

古文：孟子曰： 子夏、子游、子张得圣人之一体，冉牛、闵子骞、颜渊具体而微。 
现代文：孟子说： 子夏、子游、子张，都学到了圣人的一个方面；冉牛、闵子骞、颜渊，他们学到了圣人的各个方面，但程度不深。 
English: Mencius said: Zixia, Ziyu, and Zizhang have all learned one aspect of the sage; Ran Niu, Yao Zixuan, Yan Yuan, they have learned all aspects of the sage, but not to a deep degree.

古文：六子在其世，皆有圣人之才，或颇有而不具，或备有而不明，然皆称圣人，圣人可勉成也。
现代文：这六个人在当时，都具有做圣人的才能，有的略有圣人之才而不全面，有的具备了圣人之才而不够高明，然而都称他们是圣人，这说明圣人是可以经过努力学习而达到的。
English: At that time, these six people all had the ability to be saints. Some had a little saintly talent but not comprehensive, and some had saintly talent but were not clever enough. However, they all said they were saints, which shows that saints can be achieved through hard work.

古文：孟子又曰： 非其君不事，非其民不使，治则进，乱则退，伯夷也。
现代文：孟子又说： 不是他理想的君主就不去辅佐，不是他理想的百姓就不去召唤，天下太平时出来做官，天下大乱时退去归隐，伯夷是这样的人。
English: Mencius also said: If the ruler is not his ideal, he will not go to assist him; if the people are not his ideal, he will not summon them; if the world is at peace, he will come out to be an official; if the world is in turmoil, he will retreat into seclusion. Bo Yi is such a person.

古文：何事非君，何使非民，治亦进，乱亦进，伊尹也。可以仕则仕，可以已则已，可以久则久，可以速则速，孔子也。
现代文：什么样的君王都可以辅佐，什么样的百姓都可以召唤，局势稳定可以做官，社会动乱也可以做官，伊尹是这样的人。可以做官就做官，做不成官就不做，能做多久就做多久，该离开就赶快离开，孔子就是这样的人。
English: Any kind of king can be assisted, any kind of people can be summoned, a stable situation can be an official, social turmoil can also be an official, Yi Yin is such a person. If you can be an official, you can be an official, if you can't be an official, you can't be an official, if you can be an official, you can be an official, if you can be an official, you can be an official, if you can be an official, you can be an official, if you can be an official, you can be an official, if you can be an official, you can be an official, if you can be an official, you can be an official,

古文：皆古之圣人也。 
现代文：他们都是古代的圣人。 
English: They are all ancient sages.

古文：又曰： 圣人，百世之师也，伯夷、柳下惠是也。
现代文：孟子还说： 圣人，是百代的师表，伯夷，柳下惠正是这样的人。
English: Mencius also said: A sage is the teacher of a hundred generations. Bo Yi and Liu Shimo Hui are just such people.

古文：故闻伯夷之风者，顽夫廉，懦夫有立志；闻柳下惠之风者，薄夫敦，鄙夫宽。
现代文：因此，听到伯夷品性的人，贪婪的人廉洁了，懦弱的人也长了志气；听到柳下惠品性的人，刻薄的人厚道了，狭隘的人宽宏大度了。
English: Therefore, those who listen to Bai Gao Feng Liang Jie, the greedy will become clean, and the cowardly will become ambitious. Those who listen to Liu Xiao Hui Gao Feng Liang Jie, the mean will become generous, and the narrow-minded will become broad-minded.

古文：奋乎百世之上，百世之下闻之者，莫不兴起，非圣而若是乎？
现代文：他们兴起在百代以前，百代以后知道他们事迹的人，没有不受感动鼓舞的。
English: They arose a hundred generations ago, and after a hundred generations, no one who knew their deeds could fail to be moved and inspired.

古文：而况亲炙之乎？ 
现代文：难道不是圣人才能够达到这样的境界吗？
English: Isn't it a saint who can reach such a realm?

古文：夫伊尹、伯夷、柳下惠不及孔子，而孟子皆曰 圣人 者，贤圣同类，可以共一称也。
现代文：更何况亲身受到他们熏陶教育的人呢？ 伊尹、伯夷、柳下惠比不上孔子，然而孟子都把他们称为 圣人 ，说明圣人、贤人同是一类人，可以共用一个称号。
English: What is more, what about the people who were personally influenced and educated by them? Yi Yin, Bo Yi, and Liu Xiao Hui are not comparable to Confucius, but Mencius called them saints, indicating that saints and sages are the same kind of people and can share a title.

古文：宰予曰： 以予观夫子，贤於尧、舜远矣。 
现代文：宰予说： 据我看孔子，要比尧、舜贤良得多。 
English: Zayou said, "In my opinion, Confucius is much better than Zou and Zou Jiancou.

古文：孔子圣，宜言圣於尧、舜，而言贤者，圣贤相出入，故其名称相贸易也。
现代文：孔子是圣人，宰予应当说 比尧、舜更圣明 ，然而他说 贤 ，正说明圣、贤差不多，所以圣、贤这两个名称可以互相交换。
English: Confucius was a saint, and Zayu should have said that he was more saintly than Xing and Wu. However, he said "xian," which means that "saint" and "xian" are similar, so the two names "saint" and "xian" can be interchanged.

