古文：杨王孙者，孝武时人也。
现代文：杨王孙是汉武帝时的人。
English: Yang Wangsun was a young man at the time of Emperor Han.

古文：学黄、老之术，家业千余，厚自奉养生，亡所不致。
现代文：学习黄老之术，家业千金，重视养生之道，凡是有利于养生的东西，无不想法弄到。
English: Learning the art of Huanglao, making a lot of money in the family business, and attaching importance to the way of health care, anything that is conducive to health care can be obtained.

古文：及病且终，先令其子，曰： 吾欲裸葬，以反吾真，必亡易吾意。
现代文：到病危临终时，先在遣嘱中命令他的儿子说： 我死了要裸葬，让我返归自然之道，一定不能改变我的意愿。
English: When he was on the verge of death, he first ordered his son to say in his will: I want to be buried naked when I die, let me return to the natural way, and I must not change my will.

古文：死则为布囊盛尸，入地七尺，既下，从足引脱其囊，以身亲土。 
现代文：死后就用布袋装尸体，入地七尺，放下去以后，从脚上拉掉布袋子，让我的身体直接接触土壤。 
English: After I died, they put my body in a cloth bag and lowered it seven feet into the ground. After I was lowered, they removed the cloth bag from my feet and allowed my body to directly touch the soil.

古文：其子欲默而不从，重废父命；欲从之，心又不忍，乃往见王孙友人祁侯。
现代文：他的儿子想默默地不听从，又感到难以违背父亲的遣命；想听从父亲的意愿，心中又不忍，于是就去拜见父亲的好友祁侯。
English: His son wanted to disobey silently, but he found it difficult to go against his father's order; he wanted to obey his father's wishes, but he couldn't bear it in his heart, so he went to see his father's good friend Hao Hou.

古文：祁侯与王孙书曰： 王孙苦疾，仆迫从上祠雍，未得诣前。
现代文：祁侯给杨王孙写了一封信说： 你受疾病折磨，我急于跟随皇上到雍县祭祀，未能到府上看望你。
English: Yan Hou wrote a letter to Yang Wangsun, saying: You are suffering from illness, I am anxious to follow the emperor to the Yongxian sacrificial rites, but I have not been able to visit you at home.

古文：愿存精神，省思虑，进医药，厚自持。
现代文：希望你颐养精神，少考虑问题，请医生治疗，好好照顾自己。
English: I hope you can keep your spirits up, think less about problems, seek medical treatment, and take good care of yourself.

古文：窃闻王孙先令裸葬，令死者亡知则已，若其有知，是戮尸地下，将裸见先人，窃为王孙不取也。
现代文：我听说你先立下遣命，死后要裸葬，假使死者没有知觉就算了，如果死者有知觉，这是戮尸地下，将裸体去见先人，我认为你不该这样做。
English: I've heard that when you die, you're supposed to be buried naked. If the dead person is unconscious, that's fine. If the dead person is conscious, it's like dragging the corpse underground and going naked to meet the ancestors. I don't think you should do that.

古文：且《孝经》曰 为之棺椁衣衾 ，是亦圣人之遗制，何必区区独守所闻？
现代文：而且《孝经》上说 为死者置办棺椁衣衾 ，这也是圣人遣传下来的制度，你又何必独自坚持自己的见解呢？
English: Moreover, the "Book of Filial Piety" says that a coffin and clothes should be prepared for the deceased, which is also a system passed down by the sages. Why do you have to insist on your own opinion?

古文：愿王孙察焉。 
现代文：希望你审察我的意见。 
English: I hope you will consider my opinion.

古文：王孙报曰： 盖闻古之圣王，缘人情不忍其亲，故为制礼，今则越之，吾是以裸葬，将以矫世也。
现代文：杨王孙回信说： 我听说，古代的圣王循人情而不抑制自己的亲人，所以给人们制定了葬礼，如今却超越礼制规定实行厚葬，因此，我才要求裸葬，打算以此矫正社会上厚葬的风气啊。
English: Yang Wangsun wrote back: I heard that the ancient holy kings followed human feelings and did not restrain their relatives, so they set up funerals for people, but now they go beyond the rules of etiquette to carry out heavy burials. Therefore, I only asked for a naked burial, intending to correct the heavy burial tradition in society.

古文：夫厚葬诚亡益于死者，而俗人竞以相高，靡财单币，腐之地下。
现代文：厚葬实在无益于死者，可是世俗之人却竞相攀比，用尽钱财置办随葬品，让这些东西腐烂在地下。
English: A big funeral really does not benefit the deceased, but worldly people compete with each other, spend all their money on funeral paraphernalia and let these things rot in the ground.

古文：或乃今日入而明日发，此真与暴骸于中野何异！
现代文：或者今天才埋进地下，明天就被人挖掘，逭真是和暴尸荒野没有什么不同！
English: Or buried today and dug up tomorrow, it's really no different from the zombie wilderness!

古文：且夫死者，终生之化，而物之归者也。
现代文：况且，所谓死，就是生的结束，是万物的归宿。
English: Moreover, the so-called death is the end of life, the destination of all things.

古文：归者得至，化者得变，是物各反其真也。
现代文：归宿得以到达，死者得以变化，造就是物体各自返回到了它的本原啊。
English: The destination can be reached, the dead can be changed, and the object can be returned to its original state.

古文：反真冥冥，亡形亡声，乃合道情。
现代文：使本原返回到冥冥之中，无形无声，这才合乎道理和感情。
English: It is only reasonable and emotional to return the original to the darkness, invisible and silent.

古文：夫饰外以华众，厚葬以隔真，使归者不得至，化者不得变，是使物各失其所也。
现代文：装饰外表以哗众取宠，厚葬而隔离本原，使归宿不能到达，死者不能变化，这是使物体各失其所啊。
English: Decorating the exterior to attract the admiration of the public, and burying the dead in a mass grave to isolate the original, so that the destination cannot be reached, and the dead cannot change, this is to make the object lose its place.

古文：且吾闻之，精神者天之有也，形骸者地之有也。
现代文：而且我听说，精神是天所有，形骸归地所有。
English: Moreover, I have heard that the spirit belongs to the heavens and the body to the earth.

古文：精神离形，各归其真，故谓之鬼，鬼之为言归也。
现代文：精神离开形体，各自回到它的本原，所以称之为鬼，鬼就是说归啊。
English: The spirit leaves the body and returns to its original state, which is why it is called a ghost. A ghost is a return.

古文：其尸块然独处，岂有知哉？
现代文：死尸像土块一样空寂独处，怎么会有知觉呢？
English: How can a corpse be conscious when it is alone and empty like a block of earth?

古文：裹以币帛，隔以棺椁，支体络束，口含玉石，欲化不得，郁为枯腊，千载之后，棺椁朽腐，乃得归土，就其真宅。
现代文：用绢帛包裹尸体，用棺椁隔离泥土，肢体被缠绕束缚，口中含着玉石，想融化它却不能做到，郁郁不乐地变成干尸，千年以后，棺椁腐朽，才能归土，回到他真正的归宿。
English: The corpse is wrapped in cocoons, the coffin is used to isolate the soil, the limbs are wrapped around and bound, the mouth contains jade, it wants to melt but can't, it becomes a dry corpse, and after a thousand years, the coffin decays before it can return to the earth and return to its true home.

古文：由是言之，焉用久客！
现代文：由此说来，又何必长久为客呢！
English: Therefore, why stay as a guest for a long time!

古文：昔帝尧之葬也，窾木为椟，葛藟为缄，其穿下不乱泉，上不泄殠。
现代文：从前尧安葬的时候，掏空木头做棺材，外面用葛藤捆绑，挖掘墓穴深不及泉水，上面不漏泄腐气。
English: In the past, when a coffin was buried, the wood was hollowed out to make a coffin, the outside was tied with kudzu, the grave was dug deeper than the spring water, and the corrosive gas did not leak out.

古文：故圣王生易尚，死易葬也。
现代文：所以圣明的君王活着容易尊奉，死了容易安葬。
English: Therefore, it is easy to venerate the holy emperor when he is alive, and easy to bury him when he is dead.

古文：不加功于亡用，不损财于亡谓。
现代文：不把功夫花在无用的地方，没有宗旨就不损耗钱财。
English: Do not spend effort in useless places, do not waste money without a purpose.

古文：今费财厚葬，留归隔至，死者不知，生者不得，是谓重惑。
现代文：现在浪费钱财实行厚葬，阻留死者归土，使其和本原隔离，死的人不知道，活着的人也不能实现自己孝敬的愿望，造可以说是太糊涂了。呜呼！
English: Now they are wasting money and resources on the implementation of mass burials, preventing the dead from returning to the earth, and isolating them from the original. The dead do not know, and the living cannot realize their desire for respect. The creation can be said to be too muddled. Alas!

古文：於戏！
现代文：我不厚葬啊！ 
English: Alas!

古文：吾不为也。 
现代文：祁侯看了杨王孙的回信，说： 讲得好。 
English: Yan Hou read Yang Wansun's reply letter and said: Well said.

古文：祁侯曰： 善。 
现代文：杨王孙死后，终于裸葬。
English: After the death of Yang Wangsun, he was finally buried naked.

古文：遂裸葬。胡建字子孟，河东人也。
现代文：胡建，字子孟，河东郡人。
English: Hu Jian, surnamed Meng, from Hedong County.

古文：孝武天汉中，守军正丞，贫亡车马，常步与走卒起居，所以尉荐走卒，甚得其心。
现代文：汉武帝天汉年间，试任军正丞，家裹贫穷无钱置办车马，经常步行，与他的差役一同起居，所以藉机安慰差役，很得人心。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu was a probationary military commander. His family was poor and had no money to buy a carriage or horse. He often walked and lived with his attendants. Therefore, he took the opportunity to comfort the attendants, which was very popular.

古文：时监军御史为奸，穿北军垒垣以为贾区，建欲诛之，乃约其走卒曰： 我欲与公有所诛，吾言取之则取，斩之则斩。 
现代文：当时监军御史作奸犯科，凿穿北军军垒的墙垣，搭了间卖商品谋利的小屋子，胡建想杀掉他，就约来差役们说： 我打算和你们去杀个人，我说抓住他，你们就抓；我要你们杀他，你们就杀。 
English: Hu Jian wanted to kill him, so he arranged to meet the officers and said, "I am going to kill someone with you. If I say, 'Catch him,' you will catch him. If I want you to kill him, you will kill him."

古文：于是当选士马日，监御史与护军诸校列坐堂皇上，建从走卒趋至堂皇下拜谒，因上堂皇，走卒皆上。
现代文：于是定在选士马曰行动，到了那天，监御史与护军诸校列坐在堂廊上，胡建带着差役快步走到堂廊下拜谒，胡建起身时乘势登上堂廊，差役也都紧跟而上。
English: Therefore, it was decided to take action on the day of the election. On that day, the supervisor of history and the guards of the school sat in a row on the porch. Hu Jian walked with the guards to the porch to pay homage. When Hu Jian got up, he took the opportunity to climb onto the porch, and the guards also followed closely.

古文：建指监御史曰： 取彼。 
现代文：胡建指着监御史说： 抓住他。 
English: Pointing at the supervisor, Hu Jian said, "Catch him."

古文：走卒前曳下堂皇。建曰： 斩之。 
现代文：差役上前抓住监御史，使劲拽下堂廊。胡建说： 杀死他！ 
English: The policeman stepped forward, grabbed the supervisor and dragged him down the corridor. Hu Jian said, "Kill him!"

古文：遂斩御史。
现代文：差役就砍死了监御史。
English: The guard then hacked the supervisor to death.

古文：护军诸校皆愕惊，不知所以。
现代文：护军诸校都十分惊愕，不知道是因为什么。
English: The school's guards were stunned, and they didn't know why.

古文：建亦已有成奏在其怀中，遂上奏曰： 臣闻军法，立武以威众，诛恶以禁邪。
现代文：胡建已将写好的奏书带在怀中，于是上奏说： 我听军法说，立武以威众，诛恶以禁邪。
English: Hu Jian had already carried the finished recitation in his arms, so he recited: I have heard the military law say, establish military power by commanding the masses, and fight evil by prohibiting evil.

古文：今监御史公穿军垣以求贾利，私买卖以与士市，不立刚毅之心，勇猛之节，亡以帅先士大夫，尤失理不公。
现代文：如今监御史公然凿穿军垒墙垣来谋求商人之利，私自买卖参与士人经商，不立刚毅之心，勇猛之节，无法带领士大夫并作他们的表率，极为背理不公。
English: Nowadays, the supervisors of history openly cut through the fortress wall to seek the profit of merchants, and privately participated in the business of scholars. They did not have the courage and bravery to lead the scholars and set an example for them, which was extremely unreasonable and unfair.

古文：用文吏议，不至重法。
现代文：如果让文吏议罪，就会处以重法。
English: If you let a clerk plead guilty, you will be punished with a heavy sentence.

古文：《黄帝李法》曰： 壁垒已定，穿窬不由路，是谓奸人，奸人者杀。 
现代文：《黄帝李法》上说： 壁垒结成以后，穿洞违反结营规定，造就是奸邪的人，奸邪的人处死。 
English: "Yellow Emperor Li Fa" said: After the barrier is built, if a hole is pierced in violation of the camp regulations, it is a traitor, and the traitor is put to death.

古文：臣谨按军法曰： 正亡属将军，将军有罪以闻，二千石以下行法焉。 
现代文：我严格按军法办事，军法说： 军正不附属将军，将军有罪军正可以奏告皇帝，二千石以下官吏可以按军法处置。 
English: I act in strict accordance with the Military Law. The Military Law says: the military is not subordinate to the general, the general is guilty, the military can report to the emperor, and officials under 2,000 koku can be disposed of in accordance with the Military Law.

古文：丞于用法疑，执事不诿上，臣谨以斩，昧死以闻。 
现代文：军正丞属军正管辖，依据军法军正丞斩杀监军御史是有疑问的，但执事者应当即时处罚违法行为，不应该将事情推诿给上司，所以我就按军法杀了监军御史，冒死将此事奏闻。 
English: The military commission is under the jurisdiction of the military commission, and it is doubtful that the French military commission killed the inspector general according to the military law. However, the officer should immediately punish the illegal act, and should not push the matter to the superior, so I killed the inspector general according to the military law, and risked my life to report the matter.

古文：制曰： 《司马法》曰 国容不入军，军容不入国 ，何文吏也？
现代文：皇上下韶说： 《司马法》上说： 国家的礼节、风纪不进入军队，军队的礼节、风纪不进入国家，既然监军御史在军中犯法，为什么要听文吏的议论呢？
English: The emperor said: "The Sima Law" said: "The country's etiquette and discipline do not enter the army, and the army's etiquette and discipline do not enter the country. Since the overseer of the army has broken the law in the army, why listen to the discussion of the clerks?

古文：三王或誓于军中，欲民先成其虑也；或誓于军门之外，欲民先意以待事也；或将交刃而誓，致民志也。 
现代文：夏禹、商汤、周文王有时在军中宣誓，要民众先考虑好自己的计议；有时在军门外宣誓，要民众先在思想上做好战争准备；有时在两军将要交锋时宣誓，以激励民众的勇气。
English: Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and Zhou Wenwang sometimes swore an oath in the army, asking the people to first consider their own plans; sometimes swore an oath outside the army gate, asking the people to first prepare for war in their minds; sometimes swore an oath when the two armies were about to clash, in order to inspire the courage of the people.

古文：建又何疑焉？ 
现代文：你又何必疑惧呢？ 
English: Why should you be afraid?

古文：建由是显名。
现代文：胡建从此出了名。
English: Hu Jian has since become famous.

古文：后为渭城令，治甚有声。
现代文：后来，胡建做了渭城县县令，治绩很有名。
English: Later, Hu Jian became the county magistrate of Licheng County, and his performance was very famous.

古文：值昭帝幼，皇后父上官将军安与帝姊盖主私夫丁外人相善。
现代文：时值昭帝年幼，皇后的父亲骠骑将军上官安与昭帝姐姐盖长公主的情夫丁外人很要好。
English: When Emperor Zhao was young, the empress's father, General Zouqi Shangguan'an, and Emperor Zhao's sister, Princess Gaichang's lover, Ding Zengren, were very close.

古文：外人骄恣，怨故京兆尹樊福，使客射杀之。
现代文：丁外人骄横放肆，怨恨前任京兆尹樊福，就派刺客射死了他。
English: Ding Gaozhong was arrogant and presumptuous. He resented his predecessor, Jing Zhao Yin Yifu, and sent an assassin to shoot him.

古文：客臧公主庐，吏不敢捕。
现代文：刺客藏在盖主的别墅裹，官差不敢去捕捉。
English: The assassin was hiding in the owner's villa, and the police did not dare to catch him.

古文：渭城令建将吏卒围捕。
现代文：渭城县令胡建率领官兵围住别墅要逮捕刺客。
English: Lucheng County ordered Hu Jian to lead officers and soldiers to surround the villa to arrest the assassins.

古文：盖主闻之，与外人、上官将军多从奴客往，奔射追吏，吏散走。
现代文：盖主听说后，就和丁外人、骠骑将军上官安带着许多家奴兵丁赶来，边跑边射追打官差，官差四散逃跑。
English: After the landlord heard about it, he and the foreigner Ding and the cavalry general Shang Guan An arrived with many domestic slaves and soldiers. While running, they shot and chased the officials, and the officials scattered and fled.

古文：主使仆射劾渭城令游徼伤主家奴。
现代文：盖主指使仆射弹劾渭城县令胡建派游徼伤害了盖主家奴。
English: Gui Guanzhong ordered his servant to impeach Lucheng County's Hu Jian faction, which hurt Gui Guanzhong's servant.

古文：建报亡它坐。
现代文：胡建上书申诉自己没有什么罪。
English: Hu Jian wrote a letter to complain that he was not guilty.

古文：盖主怒，使人上书告建侵辱长公主，射甲舍门。
现代文：盖主十分气恼，派人上书诬告胡建侵犯侮辱长公主，用箭射盖主府第的大门。
English: The landlord was very angry and sent someone to falsely accuse Hu Jian of violating and insulting the eldest princess, and shot arrows at the door of the main building.

古文：知吏贼伤奴，辟报故不穷审。
现代文：胡建明知属下官吏伤害了公主的家奴，却避罪不报故意不追究查办。
English: Hu Jian clearly knew that subordinate officials had injured the princess's servant, but avoided reporting the crime and deliberately did not pursue the investigation.

古文：大将军霍光寝其奏。
现代文：大将军霍光压下了他们的奏章。
English: General Huo Guang suppressed their music.

古文：后光病，上官氏代听事，下吏捕建，建自杀。
现代文：后来霍光生病，上官桀代理政事，就命令官吏逮捕胡建，胡建被迫自杀。
English: Later, when Huo Guang fell ill, the high-ranking official, acting on behalf of the government, ordered officials to arrest Hu Jian. Hu Jian was forced to commit suicide.

古文：吏民称冤，至今渭城立其祠。
现代文：官吏百姓都说他死得冤枉，到现在渭城还建有他的祠堂。
English: Government officials and ordinary people all said that his death was unjustified, and his ancestral hall is still standing in Lucheng.

古文：朱云字游，鲁人也，徙平陵。
现代文：朱云，字游，鲁国人，后迁居平陵。
English: Zhu Yun, Zhi You, a native of Lu, later moved to Pingling.

古文：少时通轻侠，借客报仇。
现代文：年轻时交结轻捷豪健的侠客，藉助侠客报仇。
English: When he was young, he befriended a dashing knight and took revenge with the knight's help.

古文：长八尺余，容貌甚壮，以勇力闻。
现代文：他身高八尺多，容貌壮伟，以勇力闻名。
English: He stood more than eight feet tall, had a majestic appearance and was known for his bravery.

古文：年四十，乃变节从博士白子友受《易》，又事前将军萧望之受《论语》，皆能传其业。
现代文：四十岁时，才改变节操跟随博士白子友学习《周易》，又师从前将军萧望之学习《论语》，能够传承《周易》和《论语》。
English: At the age of forty, he changed his discipline to study "Zhou Yi" with Dr. Bai Zi Rong and "Analects" with the former general Xiao Wang, so that he could pass on "Zhou Yi" and "Analects."

古文：好倜傥大节，当世以是高之。
现代文：喜欢倜傥洒脱的大节，当时社会上的人因此而很看重他。
English: He liked to be free and easy-going, and people in society at the time valued him for this.

古文：元帝时，琅邪贡禹为御史大夫，而华阴守丞嘉上封事，言 治道在于得贤，御史之官，宰相之副，九卿之右，不可不选。
现代文：汉元帝的时候，琅邪郡人贡禹任御史大夫，代理华阴县丞嘉向皇帝上呈密封的奏章，说： 治理的办法在于得到贤才，御史大夫是副宰相，位在九卿之上，不能不挑选。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Yuan, Gong Yu, a resident of Ziyang County, was appointed as the imperial historian, and the representative of Huayin County, Zhao Jia, presented a sealed record to the emperor, saying: "The way to govern is to obtain talent. The imperial historian is the vice-chancellor and is above the nine nobles, and must be selected.

古文：平陵朱云，兼资文武，忠正有智略，可使以六百石秩试守御史大夫，以尽其能。 
现代文：平陵人朱云，文武兼备，忠正而有智略，可以让他以六百石的官秩试任御史大夫，以尽其能。 
English: Zhu Yun, a man of Pingling, who is both literate and armed, loyal and wise, can let him try to be a goshi taifu with an official rank of six hundred koku, and do his best.

古文：上乃下其事问公卿。
现代文：元帝就此事征询公卿大臣的意见。
English: Emperor Yuan consulted nobles and ministers on this matter.

古文：太子少傅匡衡对，以为 大臣者，国家之股肱，万姓所瞻仰，明王所慎择也。
现代文：太子少傅匡衡在对策中认为： 大臣是国家的股肱，是万民瞻仰的对象，圣明的君王都慎重地选择。
English: In his countermeasures, Fu Kuangheng, a young princeling, believed that: the minister is the capital of the country, the object of admiration of all the people, and the kings of the sacred are carefully selected.

古文：传曰下轻其上爵，贱人图柄臣，则国家摇动而民不静矣。
现代文：古书上说，下民轻视大官，卑贱的人图谋成为掌权大臣，就会使国家动摇而人民不安宁啊。
English: An ancient book says that if the common people despise the high officials and the lowly people try to become the ministers in power, the country will be shaken and the people will be restless.

古文：今嘉从守丞而图大臣之位，欲以匹夫徒步之人而超九卿之古，非所以重国家而尊社稷也。
现代文：如今嘉从代理县丞而图谋大臣之位，想让一个平民超升在九卿之上，这不是重视国家、尊崇江山社稷的做法。
English: Now that Jia has risen from acting county magistrate to the position of minister of strategy, he wants a commoner to rise above the nine nobles. This is not a way of valuing the country and honoring the country and society.

古文：自尧之用舜，文王于太公，犹试然后爵之，又况朱云者乎？
现代文：从尧选拔舜，到周文王重用姜太公，尚且试用之后才委以高官厚爵，又何况朱云之类的人呢？
English: From the selection of the gong to the re-use of the gong by King Zhou Wen, it was only after the trial that the high-ranking officials and noblemen were appointed, and what about people like Zhu Yun?

古文：云素好勇，数犯法亡命，受《易》颇有师道，其行义未有以异。
现代文：朱云一向喜欢勇武，多次犯法逃命，学习《周易》虽然很有水平，但他的德行仁义并没有什么为人称道的特异之处。
English: Zhu Yun has always been fond of bravery and martial arts. He has repeatedly broken the law and run for his life. Although his study of "Zhou Yi" is very advanced, there is nothing special about his virtue, benevolence and righteousness.

古文：今御史大夫禹洁白廉正，经术通明，有伯夷、史鱼之风，海内莫不闻知，而嘉猥称云，欲令为御史大夫，妄相称举，疑有奸心，渐不可长，宜下有司案验以明好恶。 
现代文：目前，御史大夫贡禹廉洁纯正，通晓经术，有伯夷、史鱼的风范，天下没有不知道的，可是嘉却曲意称颂朱云，想让他担任御史大夫，妄加称颂举荐，恐怕怀有奸邪的想法，这种欺诈行为不能助长，应交给有关官员审讯查验，弄明白他的用心。 
English: At present, there is no one in the world who does not know that Gong Yu, the imperial historian, is clean and pure, is familiar with the classics, and has the demeanor of a scholar and a historian. However, Jiachao's intention to praise Zhu Yun and want him to serve as an imperial historian, and his insistence on praising and recommending him, may be harboring the idea of treachery. This kind of fraudulent behavior cannot be encouraged, and should be handed over to the relevant officials for interrogation and inspection to understand his intentions.

古文：嘉竟坐之。
现代文：嘉竟然因此获罪。
English: As a result, Jia was found guilty.

古文：是时，少府五鹿充宗贵幸，为《梁丘易》。
现代文：这时，少府五鹿充宗尊贵受宠幸，他研究《梁丘易》。
English: At this time, the honorable and favored young prefect Wu Lu Cheng Zong was studying Liang Qiu Yi.

古文：自宣帝时善梁丘氏说，元帝好之，欲考其异同，令充宗与诸《易》家论。
现代文：从宣帝时开始推崇梁丘氏解释《周易》的学说，元帝爱好《梁丘易》，想考察一下《梁丘易》和其他解《易》之说的异同，就让五鹿充宗与其他《易》家辩论。
English: From the time of Emperor Xuan, the theory of Liang Qiu's interpretation of "Zhou Yi" was highly respected. Emperor Yuan loved "Liang Qiu Yi." If you want to examine the similarities and differences between "Liang Qiu Yi" and other interpretations of "Yi," let Woluqingsong debate with other "Yi" scholars.

古文：充宗乘贵辩口，诸儒莫能与抗，皆称疾不敢会。
现代文：五鹿充宗凭藉地位显贵，加上口才很好，众儒生中没有人能和他抗衡，都说有病，不敢和他辩论。
English: Due to his prominent position and eloquence, none of the Confucian scholars could compete with him. They all said that he was ill and did not dare to debate with him.

古文：有荐云者，召入，摄■登堂，抗着而请，音动左右。
现代文：有人推荐朱云，元帝召他入宫与五鹿充宗辩论，朱云提起长衣下摆，登阶上堂，抬头相询，声音洪亮震动左右。
English: Someone recommended Zhu Yun. Emperor Yuan summoned him to enter the palace to debate with Woluqiao Zong. Zhu Yun raised the hem of his robe, climbed the stairs to the hall, looked up and inquired, and his voice vibrated loudly.

古文：既论难，连拄五鹿君，故诸儒为之语曰： 五鹿岳岳，朱云折其角。 
现代文：辩论诘难开始以后，朱云接连讥刺五鹿充宗，所以众儒生评论他们这场辩论说： 五鹿充宗头上长角，朱云折断他的角。 
English: After the debate on the difficulties began, Zhu Yun successively ridiculed Wulao Chengzong, so the Confucian students commented on their debate saying: Wulao Chengzong has a long horn on his head, Zhu Yun broke his horn.

古文：由是为博士。
现代文：朱云因此成为博士。
English: As a result, Zhu Yun became a doctor.

古文：迁杜陵令，坐故纵亡命，会赦，举方正，为槐里令。
现代文：后来，朱云迁升杜陵县县令，因故意放走亡命徒而获罪，碰上皇帝大赦，被荐举为方正，做了槐里县县令。
English: Later, Zhu Yun was promoted to the county magistrate of Duling County, was found guilty of deliberately releasing a fugitive, was pardoned by the emperor, was recommended for the position of Founder, and became the county magistrate of Bali County.

古文：时中书令石显用事，与充宗为党，百僚畏之。
现代文：当时中书令石显专权，与五鹿充宗结成同党，朝中百官都害怕他们。
English: At that time, Shih Xian, the author of the edict, had absolute power and formed a same-party with Wolu Kangzong. All the officials in the imperial court were afraid of them.

古文：唯御史中丞陈咸年少抗节，不附显等，而与云相结。
现代文：衹有御史中丞陈咸年轻而坚持高尚的志节，不依附石显等人，而与朱云相交。
English: Chen Xian, who was young and adhered to a noble aspiration, did not rely on Shi Xian and others, but interacted with Zhu Yun.

古文：云数上疏，言丞相韦玄成容身保位，亡能往来，而咸数毁石显。
现代文：朱云多次上疏，说丞相韦玄成安身保位，不能有所进退，而陈咸多次抨击石显。
English: Zhu Yun repeatedly said that the prime minister Wei Xuancheng should maintain his position and not advance or retreat, while Chen Xian repeatedly criticized Shi Xian.

古文：久之，有司考云，疑风吏杀人。
现代文：过了很久，有关官员拷问朱云，怀疑他暗中唆使差吏杀人。
English: After a long time, the relevant officials interrogated Zhu Yun, suspecting him of secretly instigating the police officers to kill.

古文：群臣朝见，上问丞相以云治行。
现代文：群臣朝见时，元帝向丞相韦玄成询问朱云治理政务的成绩。
English: When the group of courtiers met at the Imperial Court, Emperor Yuan inquired about Zhu Yun's achievements in governing government affairs from the chancellor Wei Xuancheng.

古文：丞相玄成言云暴虐亡状。
现代文：韦玄成说朱云暴虐没有善政。
English: Wei Xuancheng said that there is no good governance in Zhu Yun's tyranny.

古文：时，陈咸在前，闻之，以语云。
现代文：当时陈咸在旁边，听见了韦玄成说的话，把它告诉了朱云。
English: At that time, Chen Xian was nearby, heard Wei Xuancheng's words and told Zhu Yun.

古文：云上书自讼，咸为定奏草，求下御史中丞。
现代文：未云上书为自己辩护，陈咸替他起草奏章草稿，请求皇帝批准将此事交给御史中丞处理。
English: Mingyun wrote a letter to defend himself, Chen Xian drafted a draft for him, and requested the emperor's approval to hand the matter over to Mishi Zhongzheng.

古文：事下丞相，丞相部吏考立其杀人罪。
现代文：结果，皇帝把这件事交给了丞相办理，丞相韦玄成布置属吏拷问朱云，将朱云定为杀人罪。
English: As a result, the emperor handed the matter over to the chancellor, and the chancellor, Wei Xuancheng, ordered his subordinates to interrogate Zhu Yun and declare Zhu Yun guilty of murder.

古文：云亡入长安，复与咸计议。
现代文：朱云逃入长安，又找陈咸商议对策。
English: Zhu Yun fled to Chang'an and sought out Chen Xian to discuss countermeasures.

古文：丞相具发其事，奏： 咸宿卫执法之臣，幸得进见，漏泄所闻，以私语云，为定奏草，欲令自下治，后知云亡命罪人，而与交通，云以故不得。 
现代文：丞相韦玄成全部查清了这些事，奏告皇上说： 陈咸身为宿卫皇宫、执掌法令的大臣，有幸得以进见皇上，却泄露所听到的话，私自告诉朱云，还替朱云起草奏章草稿，想使皇上让他处理朱云的案件，后来明知朱云是亡命的罪人，却和他相勾结，因此官吏抓不到朱云。 
English: The minister of justice, Wei Xuancheng, investigated all these matters and reported to the emperor, saying: Chen Xian, as the palace guard and the minister in charge of laws and regulations, had the honor of being able to see the emperor, but he leaked what he heard, told Zhu Yun in private, and drafted a draft of the musical score for Zhu Yun, trying to make the emperor let him deal with Zhu Yun's case. Later, knowing that Zhu Yun was a criminal, he colluded with him, so the officials could not catch Zhu Yun.

古文：上于是下咸、云狱，减死为城旦。
现代文：皇上于是下令把陈咸、朱云关进监狱，判了减死为城旦的刑罚。
English: The emperor then ordered Chen Xian and Zhu Yun to be put in prison, and the sentence was commuted to death.

古文：咸、云遂废锢，终无帝世。
现代文：陈咸、朱云就被废黜禁锢，一直到元帝去世。
English: Chen Xian and Zhu Yun were deposed and imprisoned until the death of Emperor Yuan.

古文：至成帝时，丞相故安昌侯张禹以帝师位特进，甚尊重。
现代文：到成帝时，丞相前安昌侯张禹因为是皇帝的老师，赐位特进，很尊宠。
English: At the time of the enthronement of the emperor, Zhang Yu, the former prince of Anchang, was given a special promotion because he was the emperor's teacher. He was highly respected.

古文：云上书求见，公卿在前。
现代文：朱云上书求见，皇上召见他时，公卿大臣都在旁边。
English: Zhu Yun wrote to the emperor to see him, and when the emperor summoned him, all the nobles and ministers were at his side.

古文：云曰： 今朝廷大臣上不能匡主，下亡以益民，皆尸位素餐，孔子所谓 鄙夫不可与事君 ， 苟患失之，亡所不至 者也。
现代文：朱云说： 如今朝廷大臣上不能匡扶君主，下不能给百姓带来利益，都是些空占职位、白领俸禄而不理事的人，就是孔子所说的 目光短浅的人不可以辅佐国君 ， 他们怕失去宠幸幸禄，就没有什么事做不出来 。
English: Zhu Yun said: Nowadays, the ministers of the imperial court cannot support the monarch, and the lower ones cannot bring benefits to the people. They are all people who occupy empty positions, white-collar salaries, and are not directors. That is, the short-sighted people mentioned by Confucius cannot support the sovereign. They are afraid of losing their favors, so they can't do anything.

古文：臣愿赐尚方斩马剑，断佞臣一人以厉其余。 
现代文：臣希望皇上赐给我尚方斩马剑，斩断一名佞臣的头来劝戒其他人。 
English: I hope that the emperor will give me a sword to cut off the head of a vassal to admonish others.

古文：上问： 谁也？
现代文：皇上问： 是谁啊？ 
English: The emperor asked: Who is it?

古文：对曰： 安昌侯张禹。 
现代文：朱云回答说： 安昌侯张禹。 
English: Zhu Yun replied: Anchang Hou Zhang Yu.

古文：上大怒，曰： 小臣居下讪上，廷辱师傅，罪死不赦。 
现代文：成帝大为恼火，说： 小臣居下谤上，在朝廷上侮辱我的老师，罪死不赦！ 
English: Emperor Cheng was very angry and said, "A junior minister slandered and insulted my teacher in the imperial court, and his crime is unforgivable!"

古文：御史将云下，云攀殿槛，槛折。
现代文：御史拖朱云下殿，朱云死死攀住殿前栏杆不走，结果把栏杆都拉断了。
English: The emperor dragged Zhu Yun down to the palace. Zhu Yun clung to the railing in front of the palace and refused to leave. As a result, the railing was broken.

古文：云呼曰： 臣得下从龙逢、比干游于地下，足矣！
现代文：朱云喊道： 我能到地下和关龙逄、比干交游，已经心满意足了！
English: Zhu Yun exclaimed: I can go underground and visit Guan Longtao and Bikang, I am satisfied with my life!

古文：未知圣朝何如耳？ 
现代文：祇是不知道国家前途会怎么样？ 
English: We just don't know what the future holds for the country.

古文：御史遂将云去。
现代文：御史终于拉着朱云走了。
English: Finally, Goshi led Zhu Yun away.

古文：于是左将军辛庆忌免冠解印绶，叩头殿下曰： 此臣素著狂直于世。
现代文：这时候左将军辛庆忌摘下帽子，解下印绶，在殿下叩头说： 这位臣子向来以狂放正直而闻名于世。
English: At this time, General Zuo Xinqingqi took off his hat, removed his seal, and bowed to His Highness, saying: This courtier has always been famous for his fierce honesty.

古文：使其言是，不可诛；其言非，固当容之。
现代文：假使他的话说得对，就不能杀他；假如他的话不对，本来也要宽容他。
English: If what he says is right, he should not be killed; if it is not right, he should be tolerated.

古文：臣敢以死争。 
现代文：我愿意冒死进言。 
English: I'm willing to go the extra mile.

古文：庆忌叩头流血。
现代文：辛庆忌叩头叩得鲜血直流。
English: Xinqing bogey kowtow beat the blood flow.

古文：上意解，然后得已。
现代文：成帝怒气逐渐消解，终于免了朱云的死罪。
English: Emperor Cheng's anger gradually dissipated, and he finally pardoned Zhu Yun's capital crime.

古文：及后当治槛，上曰： 勿易！
现代文：等到后来要修理栏杆时，成帝说： 不要调换！
English: When it came time to repair the railing, Cheng said, "Don't replace it!

古文：因而辑之，以旌直臣。 
现代文：照原样补好它，用来表彰刚烈正直的臣子。 
English: It should be repaired as it is, and used to commend the steadfast and honest vassals.

古文：云自是之后不复仕，常居鄠田，时出乘牛车从诸生，所过皆敬事焉。
现代文：朱云从此以后不再做官，经常住在邹县乡下，有时乘坐牛车出来走走，后面跟着很多学生，所过之处人们都很尊敬他。
English: From then on, Zhu Yun no longer worked as an official. He often lived in the countryside of Jixian County. Sometimes he would take the ox cart to go out for a walk, followed by many students. People respected him everywhere he went.

古文：薛宣为丞相，云往见之。宣备宾主礼，因留云宿，从容谓云曰： 在田野亡事，且留我东阁，可以观四方奇士。 
现代文：薛宣做丞相时，朱云去看望他，薛宣以宾主之礼相待，留他在府中歇宿，顺便对朱云说： 在乡下没什么事，暂且留居在我的东阁，可以看看四方奇士。 
English: When Xue Xuan was the prime minister, Zhu Yun went to visit him. Xue Xuan treated him as a guest and let him stay at his residence. He said to Zhu Yun in passing, "There is nothing to do in the countryside. I will stay in my East Pavilion for the time being, and you can see the Four Wonders of the World."

古文：云曰： 小生乃欲相吏邪？ 
现代文：朱云说： 小生想让我为吏吗？ 
English: Zhu Yun said: Does Xiao Sheng want me to be an official?

古文：宣不敢复言。
现代文：薛宣不敢再说。
English: Xue Xuan did not dare to say any more.

古文：其教授，择诸生，然后为弟子。
现代文：朱云传授学业，挑选学生，选众人中好的然后收为弟子。
English: Zhu Yun teaches the course, selects the students, selects the best among them and then accepts them as disciples.

古文：九江严望及望兄子元，字仲，能传云学，皆为博士。
现代文：九江郡人严望及严望哥哥的儿子严元，字仲，能传承朱云所学，都成为博士。
English: Yan Wang, a resident of Jiujiang County, and Yan Wang's brother's son, Yan Yuan and Zhan Zhong, were able to pass on Zhu Yun's learning and both became doctors.

古文：望至泰山太守。
现代文：严望官至泰山郡太守。
English: He rose to the position of governor of Taishan County.

古文：云年七十余，终于家。
现代文：朱云七十多岁时，在家中去世。
English: Zhu Yun passed away at his home when he was in his seventies.

古文：病不呼医饮药。
现代文：病时不请医生不吃药。
English: If you are sick, don't go to the doctor and don't take medicine.

古文：遗言以身服敛，棺周于身，士周于椁，为丈五坟，葬平陵东郭外。
现代文：留下遣言说，以身上穿的衣服入殓，用仅能容下身的小棺材，墓穴能放下棺椁就可以，结果坟祇有一丈五尺长，安葬在平陵束郭外。
English: He left a message saying that he would be buried in the clothes he was wearing, in a small coffin that could only hold his lower body, and that it would be fine if the coffin could be lowered into the grave. As a result, the grave was five feet long, and he was buried outside the mausoleum.

古文：梅福字子真，九江寿春人也。
现代文：梅福，字子真，九江郡寿春县人。
English: Meifu, Zizizhen, Jiujiang County, Shuchun County.

古文：少学长安，明《尚书》、《穀梁春秋》，为郡文学，补南昌尉。
现代文：年轻时在长安求学，通晓《尚书》、《谷梁春秋》，为郡裹的文学，补任南昌县县尉。
English: When he was young, he studied in Chang'an. He is familiar with "Shang Shu" and "Gu Liang Chunqiu," which are the literature of the county, and was appointed as the county officer of Nanchang County.

古文：后去官归寿春，数因县道上言变事，求假轺传，诣行在所条对急政，辄报罢。
现代文：后来辞官回了寿春，多次通过县道的使者上书谈论非常之事，还曾求借驿站的辊车，到天子所在的地方将皇上询问的紧急政事一一条录下来，然后逐条对答，总是不被采纳。
English: Later, the magistrate returned to Shuchun, and repeatedly wrote to him through the messenger of the county road to talk about the emergency. He also asked to borrow the station's car, and went to the place where the emperor was to record the emergency government affairs inquired by the emperor, and then answered one by one. It was always not accepted.

古文：是时，成帝委任大将军王凤，凤专势擅朝，而京兆尹王章素忠直，讥刺凤，为凤所诛。
现代文：这时成帝把政事托付给大将军王凤，王凤专擅朝政，而京兆尹王章一向忠正刚直，讥刺王凤，被王凤诛杀。
English: At this time, Emperor Chengzong entrusted the government affairs to the great general Wang Feng. Wang Feng was exclusively in charge of the government, while Jing Zhaoyin Wang Zhang had always been loyal and upright. He ridiculed Wang Feng and was killed by Wang Feng.

古文：王氏浸盛，灾异数见，群下莫敢正言。
现代文：王氏的势力逐渐强盛，灾异多次出现，群臣中没有人敢说直话。
English: The power of the Wang clan gradually became stronger, disasters and abnormalities occurred many times, and no one in the group of courtiers dared to speak frankly.

古文：福复上书曰：
现代文：梅福又上书说：
English: Mayfort also wrote:

古文：臣闻箕子佯狂于殷，而为周陈《洪范》；叔孙通遁秦归汉，制作仪品。
现代文：臣听说箕子在殷佯狂保身，却给周武王陈述《洪范》之书；叔孙通在秦朝时逃遁隐身，后来归附汉朝，为刘邦制定了礼仪制度。
English: The vassal heard that Zizi was in a frenzy to protect himself, but he presented the book of "Hong Fan" to King Zhou Wu; Uncle Sun Tong fled incognito during the Qin Dynasty, and later joined the Han Dynasty, and established a etiquette system for Liu Bang.

古文：夫叔孙先非不忠也，箕子非疏其家而畔亲也，不可为言也。
现代文：叔孙通先生不是不忠于秦朝，箕子也不是疏远家族背叛亲人，是因为他们无法进献忠言。
English: Mr. Tong's uncles and grandsons were not disloyal to the Qin Dynasty, nor were the sons and daughters who were estranged from their families and betrayed their relatives, because they were unable to offer loyal advice.

古文：昔高祖纳善若不及，从谏若转圜，听言不求其能，举功不考其素。
现代文：以前高祖皇帝采纳善言惟恐有失，从谏如流，听从善言而不管提意见者的才能如何，论功行赏而不问立功者过去的行为和来自何处。
English: In the past, Emperor Gaozhu only adopted good words when he was afraid of making mistakes, following the crowd, listening to good words regardless of the talent of the person who gave the advice, and rewarding meritorious deeds without asking the person who did the meritorious deed about his past behavior and where he came from.

古文：陈平起于亡命而为谋主，韩信拔于行陈而建上将。
现代文：陈平由亡命之徒而跃身为众谋士之主，韩信从小军官被破格提拔为大将军。
English: Chen Ping rose from a ruffian to become the chief of all advisers, and Han Xin was promoted from a petty officer to a general.

古文：故天下之士云合归汉，争进奇异，知者竭其策，愚者尽其虑，勇士极其节，怯夫勉其死。
现代文：所以天下的贤才异士云集归汉，争先恐后地进献奇谋异策，智者竭其计，愚者尽其虑，勇士更加勇敢，懦夫变得不怕死。
English: Therefore, the world's sages and geniuses flocked to return to Han, scrambling to devise new strategies, the wise tried their best, the fools tried their best, the warriors became more courageous, and the cowards became unafraid of death.

古文：合天下之知，并天下之威，是以举秦如鸿毛，取楚若拾遗，此高祖所以亡敌于天下也。
现代文：汇集天下的智慧，合并天下的威武，所以推翻秦朝就像举根鸿毛那样轻松，打败项羽如同弯腰拾东西那样容易，造就是高祖皇帝无敌于天下的原因啊。
English: The wisdom of the world was brought together and the might of the world was combined, so overthrowing the Qin Dynasty was as easy as lifting a feather. Defeating Xiang Yu was as easy as bending over to pick up something. This was the reason why Emperor Gaozu was invincible.

古文：孝文皇帝起于代谷，非有周、召之师，伊、吕之佐也，循高祖之法，加以恭俭。
现代文：孝文帝从代国来即皇帝位，没有周公、召公那样的师傅，也没有伊尹、吕尚那样的辅臣，遵循高祖皇帝的法令制度。增加了谦恭节俭的作风。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne from the time of the founding of the country. There were no masters like Zhou Gong or Zhao Gong, and there were no assistants like Yi Yin and Lushang. He followed the legal system of Emperor Gao Zu. He increased his humble and frugal work style.

古文：当此之时，天下几平。
现代文：在这个时候，天下将近太平。
English: At this time, the world is almost peaceful.

古文：繇是言之，循高祖之法则治，不循则乱。
现代文：由此说来，遵循高祖皇帝的法令制度就安定，不遵循就会出现混乱。
English: Therefore, the legal system that follows Emperor Gaozhu is stable, but if it is not followed, there will be chaos.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：秦为亡道，削仲尼之迹，灭周公之轨，坏井田，除五等，礼废乐崩，王道不通，故欲行王道者莫能致其功也。
现代文：秦朝无道，禁止孔子的学说，毁灭周公的制度，破坏井田制度，取消公、侯、伯、子、男五等封爵，礼义废弛，音乐崩坏，圣王的仁政之道中断，所以想推行王道的没有谁能收到功效。
English: The Qin Dynasty had no morality, banned the teachings of Confucius, destroyed the system of Zhou Gong, destroyed the system of Jing Tian, abolished the five ranks of knighthoods for princes, lords, great lords, sons, and men, wasted etiquette, ruined music, and interrupted the holy king's way of benevolent government. Therefore, no one who wants to promote the royal way can receive efficacy.

古文：孝武皇帝好忠谏，说至言，出爵不待廉茂，庆赐不须显功，是以天下布衣各厉志竭精以赴阙廷自衒鬻者不可胜数。
现代文：孝武皇帝爱纳忠谏，喜欢至理之言，谏静合乎武帝之意即可获得官爵，不必经由荐举和军功，所以天下的平民磨砺意志竭思尽虑，到朝廷来炫耀自己才能的人数不胜数。
English: Emperor Xiaowu loved the loyal and honest, liked the words of truth, and the quietness of the emperor could be obtained by the emperor. It was not necessary to go through the recommendation and military merit. Therefore, the commoners of the world sharpened their wills with great care, and the number of people who came to the court to show off their talents was countless.

古文：汉家得贤，于此为盛。
现代文：汉朝招揽贤才，在逭时最为众多。
English: The Han Dynasty solicited talents, with the most numerous at the time of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：使孝武皇帝听用其计，升平可致。
现代文：假使汉武帝听取这些人的建议，天下是可以升平的。
English: If Emperor Hanwu had listened to these people's advice, the world would have been leveled.

古文：于是积尸暴骨，快心胡、越，故淮南王安缘间而起。
现代文：可是，这时候汉武帝却以攻打匈奴、南越为快，致使积尸暴骨，所以淮南王刘安乘机谋反。
English: However, at this time, Emperor Hanwu was quick to attack the Xiongnu and South Vietnam, resulting in a pile of corpses, so King Liu An of Huainan took the opportunity to rebel.

古文：所以计虑不成而谋议泄者，以众贤聚于本朝，故其大臣势陵不敢和从也。
现代文：刘安之所以谋反不成而谋议泄露，是因为众贤士聚于朝廷，因此淮南王的大臣不敢追随刘安反叛。
English: The reason why Liu An's plot failed and the plot was leaked was because all the sages gathered at the imperial court, so the ministers of King Huainan did not dare to follow Liu An's rebellion.

古文：方今布衣乃窥国家之隙，见间而起者，蜀郡是也。
现代文：如今平民百姓竟然窥测国家形势，一旦认为有机可乘就举行反叛，像蜀郡广漠县男子郑躬等谋反就是这样。
English: Nowadays, the common people even spy on the national situation, and once they think there is an opportunity, they hold a rebellion. This is how Zheng Mu, a man from Guangmo County, Shu County, and others plotted a rebellion.

古文：及山阳亡徒苏令之群，蹈藉名都大郡，求党与，索随和，而亡逃匿之意。
现代文：等到山阳郡亡命之徒苏令团伙造时，践踏名都大郡，寻求党羽，网罗追随他们的人，而没有逃窜隐匿的意图。
English: When the Su Ling gang of fugitives from Sanyang County was formed, they trampled on the famous county, seeking followers and trapping those who followed them, with no intention of fleeing or hiding.

古文：此皆轻量大臣，亡所畏忌，国家之权轻，故匹夫欲与上争衡也。
现代文：这些人都轻视朝廷大臣，无所畏忌，这是因为国家权轻势弱，所以平民百姓才敢于要和皇上争权啊。
English: These people despised the ministers of the imperial court and were fearless. This was because the power of the state was weak, so the common people dared to fight for power with the emperor.

古文：士者，国之重器；得士则重，失士则轻。
现代文：贤士，是国家的重要人才；得士国家就强盛，失士国家就变弱。
English: Wise men are the important talents of the country; the country that gains wise men will become strong, and the country that loses wise men will become weak.

古文：《诗》云： 济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 人才济济，周文王因此安宁。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Talent abounds, so King Zhouwen is at peace.

古文：庙堂之议，非草茅所当言也。
现代文：议论朝廷政事，不是身居茅屋的人所应该说的。
English: Discussing the affairs of the imperial court is not something that should be said by someone who lives in a hut.

古文：臣诚恐身涂野草，尸并卒伍，故数上书求见，辄报罢。
现代文：我实在担心自己身死荒野，尸陈战场，所以多次上书求见，总是得不到采纳。
English: I was really worried about dying in the wilderness, dying on the battlefield, so I repeatedly wrote to ask for advice, but it was never accepted.

古文：臣闻齐桓之时有以九九见者，桓公不逆，欲以致大也。
现代文：我听说齐桓公时有人以 九九算法 求见的，齐桓公没有拒绝他，目的是想以此招来进献大事的人。
English: I heard that at the time of King Chihuan, someone asked for the 99-year-old formula. King Chihuan did not refuse him, with the aim of using it to attract people who would make great contributions.

古文：今臣所言非特九九也，陛下距臣者三矣，此天下士所以不至也。
现代文：现在我所说的并不衹是像 九九算法 那样的小事，陛下拒绝召见臣下已经有三次了，造就是天下贤士为什么不来的原因啊。
English: What I'm talking about now isn't just a trifle like the 99 algorithm. His Majesty has refused to summon his vassals three times already, and that's the reason why the world's sages don't come.

古文：昔秦武王好力，任鄙叩关自鬻；缪公行伯，繇余归德。
现代文：从前秦武王喜欢勇力，大力士任鄙入函谷关自荐；秦穆公实行霸业，繇余归附投诚。
English: Formerly, Qin King Wu liked bravery, and strong men were appointed to Hantian Guan to recommend themselves; Qin Mu Gong practiced hegemony, and the rest was attributed to Zoucheng.

古文：今欲致天下之士，民有上书求见者，辄使诣尚书问其所言，言可采取者，秩以升斗之禄，赐以一束之帛。
现代文：如今要想招徕天下的贤士，百姓有上书求见的，就让他们去谒见尚书，由尚书询问他们所说的内容，言论有可以采用的，就授以升斗俸禄，赏赐一束之帛。
English: Nowadays, if you want to recruit the world's sages, and the people have written to you asking to see them, let them go to see Shangshu. Shangshu will ask them what they said, and if their words can be used, they will be awarded a promotion and a bundle of money.

古文：若此，则天下之士发愤懑，吐忠言，嘉谋日闻于上，天下条贯，国家表里，烂然可睹矣。
现代文：如果这样做，那么天下的士人就会抒发自己的郁闷，倾吐忠言，皇上每天都能听到美好的谋议，这样一来，天下的系统，国家的表裹，就灿然分明，可以看得一清二楚了。
English: If this is done, then the world's statesmen will express their depression, pour out their loyal advice, and the emperor can hear good advice every day. In this way, the world's system, the country's watch, will be bright and clear, and can be seen clearly.

古文：夫以四海之广，士民之数，能言之类至众多也。
现代文：凭汉朝四海之广，士人、百姓之众，能够进献忠言的人必定极多。
English: Given the vast expanse of the Han Dynasty, there must have been a great number of scholars and common people who were able to offer loyal advice.

古文：然其俊杰指世陈政，言成文章，质之先圣而不缪，施之当世合时务，若此者，亦亡几人。
现代文：然而，其中的英俊杰出之士指陈时事政务，出言成章，纵然和先代圣贤相比也不荒谬，施行于当今社会合乎时务，像这样的人却没有几个。
English: However, there are only a few handsome and distinguished men among them who are able to handle current affairs and government affairs, whose words are consistent, even if they are not absurd compared to the sages of the past, and whose actions are in line with the current affairs in today's society.

古文：故爵禄束帛者，天下之厎石，高祖所以厉世摩钝也。
现代文：所以爵禄束帛是天下的砥石，高祖皇帝就是用它来激励世人的啊。
English: Therefore, the jiaoluo shackle is the world's whetstone, and Emperor Gaozhu used it to inspire the world.

古文：孔子曰： 工欲善其事，必先利其器。 
现代文：孔子说： 工匠要想做好他的事，必须要先磨快他的工具。 
English: Confucius said, "A craftsman must first sharpen his tools if he is to do his work well."

古文：至秦则不然，张诽谤之罔，以为汉驱除，倒持泰阿，授楚其柄。
现代文：到了秦朝却不是这样，张设诽谤的罗网，把人才都驱逐到汉朝，倒持泰阿宝剑，把剑柄交给陈涉、项羽等人。
English: However, this was not the case in the Qin Dynasty. A slanderous trap was set up to expel talented people to the Han Dynasty, and they were forced to hold the sword upside down and give the hilt to Chen Zang and Xiang Yu.

古文：故诚能勿失其柄，天下虽有不顺，莫敢触其锋，此孝武皇帝所以辟地建功为汉世宗也。
现代文：所以，如果真能不丧失权柄，天下即使发生混乱，也没有人敢图谋不轨，造就是汉武帝之所以能开拓疆土建立功业，成为汉朝受尊崇的皇帝的原因啊。
English: Therefore, if it is really possible not to lose power, even if there is chaos in the world, no one will dare to plot, which is why Emperor Hanwu was able to explore the territory and establish a career and become a respected emperor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今不循伯者之道，乃欲以三代选举之法取当时之士，犹察伯乐之图，求骐骥于市，而不可得，亦已明矣。
现代文：如今不遵循成就霸业者的做法，却要用夏、商、周三代选举的办法录用当代的士人，正犹如按照伯乐画的骏马图，到集市上去寻求千里马一样，决不可能得到，这已是十分明显的了。
English: Nowadays, instead of following the practice of those who have achieved hegemony, it is necessary to use the method of summer, business, and third-generation elections to recruit contemporary scholars. It is just as impossible to get it as it is to go to the bazaar according to the horse-drawn carriage map painted by Bo Le. This is already very obvious.

古文：故高祖弃陈平之过而获其谋，晋文召天王，齐桓用其仇，有益于时，不顾逆顺，此所谓伯道者也。
现代文：所以，高祖刘邦不计较陈平盗嫂受金之过而获得了他的奇谋，晋文公召请周天子与诸侯会盟于温，齐桓公重用曾与他为仇的管仲为相，衹求当时有益，不顾逆顺，造就是所谓的霸道啊。
English: Therefore, Liu Bang, the great-great-grandfather, did not care about Chen Ping's theft of his sister-in-law's money, and obtained his stratagem. Jinwen publicly invited Zhou Tianzi to ally with the princes in Wen. Qi Huan used his enemy as a mediator. The request was beneficial at the time. Regardless of the contrary, it was the so-called domineering way.

古文：一色成体谓之醇，白黑杂合谓之驳。
现代文：整体一色叫做纯，白黑相杂称为驳。
English: The whole color is called pure, and the white and black are called mixed.

古文：欲以承平之法治暴秦之绪，犹以乡饮酒之礼理军市也。
现代文：想用治理承平社会的办法治理暴秦的余业，正犹如用乡里饮酒的礼节治理军中的交易场所一样啊。
English: If you want to use the methods of governing a peaceful society to govern the excesses of tyrannical Qin, it is just like using the etiquette of drinking in the countryside to govern the trading places in the army.

古文：今陛下既不纳天下之言，又加戮焉。
现代文：现在陛下既不采纳天下人的进言，又加以迫害。
English: Now His Majesty neither accepts the advice of the people of the world nor persecutes them.

古文：夫■鹊遭害，则仁鸟增逝；愚者蒙戮，则知士深退。
现代文：鸱载喜鹊遇害，就会增进鸾凤的逃逝；愚昧的人受戮，就会促使智士隐藏得更深。
English: The killing of a magpie increases the flight of a phoenix; the killing of a fool causes a wise man to hide more.

古文：间者愚民上疏，多触不急之法，或下廷尉，而死者众。
现代文：近来愚民上书，多因其所言是不急之事而获罪，有的被交付廷尉审讯，死的人很多。
English: Recently, most of the fools who submitted letters were found guilty because what they said was not urgent, and some were handed over to court officers for interrogation. Many people died.

古文：自阳朔以来，天下以言为讳，朝廷尤甚，群臣皆承顺上指，莫有执正。
现代文：从阳朔年间以来，天下防人之口，法禁森严，朝廷更为严重，群臣都顺承皇上的意旨，没有人敢于坚持正确意见。
English: Since the Yangshuo era, the whole country has been on the defensive, laws and prohibitions have become stricter, the imperial court has become more serious, and the courtiers have all complied with the emperor's will. No one dares to insist on correct opinions.

古文：何以明其然也？
现代文：根据什么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that?

古文：取民所上书，陛下之所善，试下之廷尉，廷尉必曰 非所宜言，大不敬。 
现代文：拿百姓所上的奏书来说，陛下认为是好的，然后，把它交给廷尉处理试验他的态度，廷尉必定说： 不是所应该说的，大不敬。 
English: Take, for example, the report on the people's petition, which His Majesty thought was good, and then give it to the courtier to handle and test his attitude. The courtier must say: "Not what should be said, very disrespectful."

古文：以此卜之，一矣。
现代文：用这种做法测试，是根据之一。
English: Testing using this approach is based on one of the following.

古文：故京兆尹王章资质忠直，敢面引廷争，孝元皇帝擢之，以厉具臣而矫曲朝。
现代文：前京兆尹王章天性忠直，敢面辩廷争，孝元皇帝提拔他，用以激励尸位素食而矫正歪曲朝政的人。
English: The former Beijing Zhao Yin Wang Zhang was loyal and upright by nature, and dared to argue with the court. Emperor Xiaoyuan promoted him to encourage vegetarianism and correct those who distorted the imperial government.

古文：及至陛下，戮及妻子。
现代文：可是到了陛下，您却杀了他本人，乃至他的妻子。
English: But when it came to Your Majesty, you killed him yourself, and even his wife.

古文：且恶恶止其身，王章非有反畔之辜，而殃及家。
现代文：惩罚恶人，限于罪犯本身。王章并没有反叛之罪，而殃及全家。
English: The punishment of evildoers is limited to the criminals themselves. Wang Zhang did not commit the crime of rebellion, but it affected the whole family.

古文：折直士之节，结谏臣之舌，群臣皆知其非，然不敢争，天下以言为戒，最国家之大患也。
现代文：折断直士的节，封缄谏臣的嘴，大臣们都知道是错误的事，但不敢争言，天下的人都以怕说话招祸为戒。
English: Ministers know that it is wrong to break the vows of a vassal and seal the lips of a vassal, but they do not dare to argue. People all over the world are wary of speaking out for fear of inviting disaster.

古文：愿陛下循高祖之轨，杜亡秦之路，数御《十月》之歌，留意《亡逸》之戒，除不急之法，下亡讳之诏，博鉴兼听，谋及疏贱，令深者不隐，远者不塞，所谓 辟四门，明四目 也。
现代文：这样的情况是国家的大患，希望陛下遵循高祖的轨道，杜绝亡秦的歧路，多体会《十月之交》歌的精神，留意于《亡逸》篇的劝诫，废除不必要的法律，颁布没有忌讳的诏令，多看兼听，谋及疏贱，使深沉的不隐其言，偏远的不塞其路，所谓 辟四门，明四目 是也。
English: Such a situation is a great danger to the country. I hope that His Majesty will follow the track of Gao Zu, eliminate the wrong path of the dead Qin, experience more of the spirit of the "October Friendship" song, pay attention to the exhortation of the "Death and Departure" chapter, abolish unnecessary laws, promulgate edicts without taboos, see more and listen more, seek and lower, so that the deep does not hide its words, the remote does not block its path, the so-called "four doors, four eyes" is also.

古文：且不急之法，诽谤之微者也。 往者不可及，来者犹可追。 
现代文：况且不必要的法律，是招致诽谤的苗头。 往者不可及，来者犹可追。 
English: Moreover, unnecessary laws are the seeds of defamation. The past is unreachable, but those who come can still be chased.

古文：方今君命犯而主威夺，外戚之权日以益隆，陛下不见其形，愿察其景。
现代文：当今是君命受到侵犯，主威受到剥夺，外戚之权一天比一天强大，陛下看不见其实际情况，希望能看到它的影子。
English: Today, it is the sovereign's life that is being encroached upon, his authority that is being stripped from him, and the power of his relatives is growing stronger day by day. His Majesty cannot see the actual situation, but hopes to see its shadow.

古文：建始以来，日食地震，以率言之，三倍春秋，水灾亡与比数。
现代文：建始以来，所发生的日食、地震，按照比例而言，有春秋时期的三倍，水灾之多，就无法比较了。
English: Since the beginning of construction, the proportion of solar eclipses and earthquakes that have occurred is three times that of the spring and autumn period, and there are so many floods that it is impossible to compare.

古文：阴盛阳微，金铁为飞，此何景也！
现代文：阴盛阳衰，金铁如星飞，这是什么情景？
English: Yin, yang, yin, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang.

古文：汉兴以来，社稷三危。
现代文：汉朝自建立以来，国家发生过三次危机。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the country has experienced three crises.

古文：吕、霍、上官皆母后之家也，亲亲之道，全之为右，当与之贤师良傅，教以忠孝之道。
现代文：吕氏、霍氏、上官氏三家都是皇帝的母后之家。亲亲之道，安全为上，应当给他们贤良的师傅，教他们忠孝之道。
English: The Lv clan, the Huo clan, and the Shangguan clan are the three families of the emperor's empress dowager. The way of being close to relatives is the safest way, and they should be given good teachers to teach them the way of filial piety.

古文：今乃尊宠其位，授以魁柄，使之骄逆，至于夷灭，此失亲亲之大者也。自霍光之贤，不能为子孙虑，故权臣易世则危。
现代文：今天是给他们尊宠的职位，授予他们重大的权柄，使他们骄傲横逆，以至于遭到夷门灭族，这就是失掉了亲亲的至关重大之事，像霍光这样的贤智之人，尚且不能为子孙考虑周全，所以一般权臣的下一代就有危险。
English: Today, we are giving them positions of honor, granting them great power, making them proud and rebellious, so that they are expelled from the family. This is the most important thing about losing relatives. Wise people like Huo Guang cannot fully consider their children and grandchildren, so the next generation of general rulers is in danger.

古文：《书》曰： 毋若火，始庸庸。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 不要像大火一样，开始都是庸庸小火。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Don't be like a big fire, the beginning is a mediocre small fire.

古文：势陵于君，权隆于主，然后防之，亦亡及已。上遂不纳。
现代文：权势凌驾于君主之上的人，后来想防止出现问题，已经来不及了。
English: It was too late for those with power over the monarch to prevent problems later.

古文：成帝久亡继嗣，福以为宜建三统，封孔子之世以为殷后，复上书曰：
现代文：成帝不予采纳。成帝长期没有子嗣，梅福认为应当建立三统循环制度，封孔子一系为殷商的后裔。他又上书说：
English: Emperor Cheng did not adopt it. Emperor Cheng did not have a son for a long time. Meifu believed that a three-tiered circulation system should be established, and that Confucius was a descendant of Yin Shang. He also wrote:

古文：臣闻 不在其位，不谋其政 。
现代文：臣听说 不在其位，不谋其政 。
English: The minister heard that if you are not in power, you should not seek political power.

古文：政者职也，位卑而言高者罪也。
现代文：政就是职务。职位低而说大话的，是犯罪。
English: Politics is a position. It is a crime to be in a low position and talk big.

古文：越职触罪，危言世患，虽伏质横分，臣之愿也。
现代文：超越职权而犯罪，危言耸听而害世，虽被处死、身首分离，臣也愿意。
English: If you exceed your authority and commit a crime, if you are alarmist and harm the world, even if you are put to death and your head is cut off, your vassal is willing.

古文：守职不言，没齿身全，死之日，尸未腐而名灭，虽有景公之位，伏历千驷，臣不贪也。
现代文：如衹在位，不说话，到老时保全了身家性命，可是在死曰来临，尸未腐烂而名声已灭，这样就是有齐景公的职位，有马千驷，臣也不贪。
English: If you are on the throne, do not speak, and preserve your own life when you are old, but when the day of death comes, the body has not decayed and the reputation has been extinguished, then there is the position of Qi Jinggong, there is Ma Qianqian, and the minister is not greedy.

古文：故愿一登文石之陛，涉赤墀之途，当户牖之法坐，尽平生之愚虑。
现代文：所以只愿登上了文石之陛，进入赤墀之殿，入朝为官，就要尽平生的愚忠。
English: Therefore, if you want to ascend the throne of Emperor Wenshi, enter the palace of Emperor Akatsuki, and become an official in the imperial court, you must be loyal throughout your life.

古文：亡益于时，有遗于世，此臣寝所以不安，食所以忘味也。
现代文：就是无益于今天，也有好处留传于后世。造就是臣寝不安席，食不甘味的原因。
English: Even if it is not beneficial today, there are also benefits to be passed on to future generations. This is the reason why vassals do not sleep well and do not eat sweet.

古文：愿陛下深省臣言。
现代文：希望陛下深深地省察臣所说的话。
English: I hope His Majesty will deeply reflect on what I have said.

古文：臣闻存人所以自立也，壅人所以自塞也。
现代文：臣听说保全别人会保全自己，壅塞别人会自己壅塞。
English: The minister heard that if you protect others, they will protect themselves, and if you discourage others, they will discourage themselves.

古文：善恶之报，各如其事。
现代文：善恶之报应，各有其事。
English: The retribution of good and evil has its own reasons.

古文：昔者秦灭二周，夷六国，隐士不显，逸民不举，绝三绝，灭天道，是以身危子杀，厥孙不嗣，所谓壅人以自塞者也。
现代文：从前秦国灭掉西周和东周二君，平夷了六国，隐居之士不露面，逃逸之民不被推举，绝三统，灭天道，所以身遭危运，儿子被杀，孙子无后，造就是所说的壅塞别人会壅塞自己。
English: Former Qin wiped out Western Zhou and Eastern Zhou Jun, razed the Six Kingdoms, secluded people did not show their faces, fugitive people were not promoted, absolute three-in-one, extinguishing the way of heaven, so he was in danger, his son was killed, his grandson had no successor, and this is the so-called prevarication. Others will prevaricate themselves.

古文：故武王克殷，未下车，存五帝之后，封殷于宋，绍夏于杞，明著三统，示不独有也。
现代文：所以周武王减商，未下车，就存五帝之后，封殷后于宋，封夏后于杞，着明为三统相继，表示不独占天下。
English: Therefore, King Zhou Wu reduced the merchants and did not get off the train, after saving the five emperors, he sealed Yin in the Song Dynasty and sealed Xia in the Han Dynasty, clearly indicating that they were three in succession, indicating that they did not monopolize the world.

古文：是以姬姓半天下，迁庙之主，流出于户，所谓存人以自立者也。
现代文：所以姬姓占天下之半，迁庙之主，流出于户，造就是所说的保全别人会保全自己。
English: Therefore, her maiden name accounts for half of the world, the master of the relocation of the temple, the flow out of the household, and the creation is the so-called preservation of others will preserve themselves.

古文：今成汤不祀，殷人亡后，陛下继嗣久微，殆为此也。
现代文：现今成汤不再受祭，殷人没有后嗣，陛下的继嗣久微，也由于这样。
English: Today, Cheng Tang no longer receives sacrifices, Yin people have no heirs, and His Majesty's heirs are long gone, also due to this.

古文：《春秋经》曰： 宋杀其大夫。 
现代文：《春秋经》说： 宋杀其大夫。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Classic" said: Song killed his doctor.

古文：《穀梁传》曰： 其不称名姓，以其在祖位，尊之也。 
现代文：《谷梁》剿说： 所以不称名姓的原因，是因为他在祖辈之位，是为了表示尊敬。 
English: "Gu Liang" said: Therefore, the reason for not calling his name is because he is in the position of ancestors, in order to show respect.

古文：此言孔子故殷之后也，虽不正统，封其子孙以为殷后，礼亦宜之。
现代文：这是说孔子原来是殷商的后裔，虽不是正统，但封他的子孙为殷之后，于礼也是合宜的。
English: This is to say that Confucius was originally a descendant of a Yin merchant, although not orthodox, but after his descendants were sealed as Yin, it is also appropriate to do so.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诸侯夺宗，圣庶夺適。
现代文：诸侯可以强改宗子，圣人可以强改嫡子。
English: Princes can forcibly convert their sons, saints can forcibly convert their sons.

古文：传曰 贤者子孙宜有土 而况圣人，又殷之后哉！
现代文：古书上说 贤人的子孙应有封土 ，况且孔子又是圣人，本来就是殷商之后呢！
English: An ancient book says that the descendants of wise men should have fiefs, and besides, Confucius was a saint, after all he was a wealthy merchant!

古文：昔成王以诸侯礼葬周公，而皇天动威，雷风著灾。
现代文：西周初年，周成王按照诸侯的礼节安葬周公，而皇天动怒，雷雨大风，禾稼全部倒伏，大树都连根拔起。
English: In the first year of the Western Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Cheng Wang buried Zhou Gong according to the etiquette of the princes, but the emperor was angry, thunderstorms and high winds, crops were all overturned, and large trees were uprooted.

古文：今仲尼之庙不出阙里，孔氏子孙不免编户，以圣人而歆匹夫之祀，非皇天之意也。
现代文：现在，孔子的庙不出其故里，孔子的子孙不免成为编户之民，让圣人享受匹夫的祭祀，这不是皇天的本意啊。
English: Now, the temple of Confucius does not return to its original place, and the descendants of Confucius inevitably become the people of the editors, so that the saints can enjoy the sacrificial rites. This is not the original intention of the emperor.

古文：今陛下诚能据仲尼之素功，以封其子孙，则国家必获其福，又陛下之名与天亡极。
现代文：如今陛下果真能根据孔子的素王之功，来封赏他的子孙，那么国家必定能获得孔子的福佑，而且陛下的名声可以和天一样传至永远。
English: Now, if His Majesty can truly reward his children and grandchildren according to the merits of Confucius, then the country will surely receive the blessing of Confucius, and His Majesty's reputation can be passed on forever like heaven.

古文：何者？
现代文：这又是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：追圣人素功，封其子孙，未有法也，后圣必以为则。
现代文：追论圣人的素王之功，封赏他的子孙，没有法律规定，后世的圣人一定把造作为法则。
English: There is no legal provision for tracing the saint's contribution to Su Wang and awarding his descendants. The saints of later generations must take creation as the rule.

古文：不灭之名，可不勉哉！
现代文：这样做能获得不朽的名声，怎么可以不努力呢？
English: How can you not work hard when you can gain immortal fame by doing so?

古文：福孤远，又讥切王氏，故终不见纳。
现代文：梅福势单力孤，远离朝廷，又讥讽外戚王氏，所以最终得不到召见，建议也不被采纳。
English: Mei Foo was a lone hand, far away from the imperial court, and he ridiculed his maternal relative, the Wang clan. As a result, he was ultimately not invited, and his proposal was not accepted.

古文：初，武帝时，始封周后姬嘉为周子南君，至元帝时，尊周子南君为周承休侯，位次诸侯王。
现代文：当初，武帝在位时，始封周朝的后代姬嘉为周子南君，到元帝时，尊周子南君为周承休侯，地位仅次于诸侯王。
English: At first, when Emperor Wu was on the throne, Ji Jia, a descendant of the first emperor of the Zhou Dynasty, was Zhou Zi Nanjun. When Emperor Yuan came to power, he was Zhou Zi Nanjun, second only to the princes.

古文：使诸大夫博士求殷后，分散为十余姓，郡国往往得其大家，推求子孙，绝不能纪。
现代文：派大夫、博士们寻找殷商的后代，已分散成十几个姓，郡国往往找到殷人后裔的大家族，但推算子孙，却弄不清辈分。
English: The doctors and doctors sent to look for the descendants of Yin merchants have been scattered into more than a dozen surnames. The county often finds a large family of descendants of Yin people, but the descendants are not clear.

古文：时，匡衡议，以为 王者存二王后，所以尊其先王而通三统也。
现代文：当时匡衡的议论认为： 王者应封殷、周两代的后裔为诸侯王，这是尊敬他们先代的圣王而贯通夏、商、周三代的正朔啊。
English: At that time, Kuangheng's argument was that: the king should be named Yin, and the descendants of the two generations of Zhou should be crowned princes. This is to respect the holy kings of their predecessors and to pass through the three generations of Xia, Shang and Zhengshuo.

古文：其犯诛绝之罪者绝，而更封他亲为始封君，上承其王者之始祖。
现代文：其后裔因犯了诛减家族之罪而绝灭的，就改封别的亲属为始封君，承嗣其王者的始祖。
English: If his descendants died out because they committed the crime of diminishing the family, he changed the title of other relatives to the first prince, and became the ancestor of those who succeeded him.

古文：《春秋》之义，诸侯不能守其社稷者绝。
现代文：《春秋》之义，诸侯不能守卫其江山社稷者灭绝。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," princes cannot protect their provinces, and those who do so will be exterminated.

古文：今宋国已不守其统而失国矣，则宜更立殷后为始封君，而上承汤统，非当继宋之绝侯也，宜明得殷后而已。
现代文：如今宋国已经不守其世统而失去了封国，就应改立殷商的其他后裔为始封君，而上承商汤的血统，不应当承继宋国断绝的侯位，应明令找到殷商后裔为止。
English: Now that Song has lost its fief without adhering to its lineage, the other descendants of Yin Shang should be appointed as the first fief prince, and the bloodline of Shang Tang should not succeed to the fief of Song, but the descendants of Yin Shang should be found.

古文：今之故宋，推求其嫡，久远不可得；虽得其嫡，嫡之先已绝，不当得立。
现代文：如今推论追寻宋国的嫡系后裔，年代久远难以找到；即使能找到宋国的嫡系后裔，他们祖先的国家早已灭绝，也不应立为殷商之后。
English: Nowadays, it is difficult to trace the direct descendants of the Song Dynasty. Even if the direct descendants of the Song Dynasty can be found, the country of their ancestors has long been extinct, and it should not be set up after Yin Shang.

古文：《礼记》孔子曰： 丘，殷人也。 
现代文：《礼记》记载孔子的言论说： 孔丘是殷人的后代。 
English: "The Book of Rites" records the words of Confucius: "Confucius is a descendant of Yin.

古文：先师所共传，宜以孔子世为汤后。 
现代文：以前的老师都是这样传授的，应该以孔子的子孙承继商汤的后嗣。 
English: The previous teachers all taught in this way. The descendants of Confucius should succeed the heirs of Shangtang.

古文：上以其语不经，遂见寝。
现代文：皇上认为匡衡说的不符合经义，就把他的奏书留在宫中没有下发。
English: The emperor thought that what Kuang Heng said did not conform to the meaning of the sutra, so he left his report in the palace and did not issue it.

古文：至成帝时，梅福复言宜封孔子后以奉汤祀。
现代文：到成帝时，梅福又上书说应该封孔子的后代来承继商汤的祭祀。
English: When he became emperor, Meifu also wrote a letter saying that the descendants of Confucius should be appointed to succeed Shangtang's sacrificial rites.

古文：绥和元年，立二王后，推迹古文，以《左氏》、《穀梁》、《世本》、《礼记》相明，遂下诏封孔子世为殷绍嘉公。
现代文：绥和元年，立二王的后裔为诸侯王，推论追寻古代文字记载的踪迹，拿《左传》、《谷梁传》、《世本》、《礼记》相互验明，于是下诏封孔子的后代为殷绍嘉公。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the descendants of the two kings were made princes. By deduction, they traced the traces recorded in ancient texts, and used "Zo Zhuan," "Gu Liang Zhuan," "Seibo," and "Li Ji" to verify each other. Therefore, the descendants of Confucius were given the title of Yin Shao Jiagong.

古文：语在《成纪》。
现代文：语在《成帝纪》。
English: language in the "Chronicle of Emperor Chengdu."

古文：是时，福居家，常以读书养性为事。
现代文：这时，梅福住在家中，经常以读书、修身养性作为自己的工作。
English: At this time, Meifu lived at home and often took reading and self-cultivation as his work.

古文：至元始中，王莽颛政，福一朝弃妻子，去九江，至今传以为仙。
现代文：到元始年间，王莽专政，梅福在一天早晨抛弃妻子儿女，去了九江，到现在传说他成了神仙。
English: In the early years of the Yuan Dynasty, under Wang Mang's dictatorship, Meifu abandoned his wife and children one morning and went to Jiujiang. To this day, it is said that he became a god.

古文：其后，人有见福于会稽者，变名姓，为吴市门卒云。云敞字幼孺，平陵人也。
现代文：在那之后，有人在会稽郡看见过他，改名换姓，在吴县做市门卒。云敞，字幼孺，平陵人。
English: After that, someone saw him in Huiqi County, changed his name and surname, and worked as a gatekeeper in Wuxian County.

古文：师事同县吴章，章治《尚书经》为博士。
现代文：拜同县人吴章为老师，吴章研究《尚书经》为博士。
English: Wu Zhang, a native of Bai Tong County, was the teacher, and Wu Zhang studied "Shang Shu Jing" and became a doctor.

古文：平帝以中山王即帝位，年幼，莽秉政，自号安汉公。
现代文：平帝从中山王即皇帝位，年纪幼小，王莽把持朝政，白号安汉公。
English: Emperor Ping was the king of Zhongshan, that is, the emperor. He was very young, and Wang Mang was in charge of the imperial government. His alias was Anhan.

古文：以平帝为成帝后，不得顾私亲，帝母及外家卫氏皆留中山，不得至京师。
现代文：以平帝作为成帝的后嗣，平帝不能再照顾自己的亲人，他母亲及外祖父母家、舅家卫氏都留在中山国，不能到京师长安。
English: With Emperor Ping as the heir of Emperor Cheng, Emperor Ping could no longer take care of his relatives. His mother, maternal grandparents, and uncle, Emperor Wei, all stayed in Zhongshan and could not go to Beijing or Chang'an.

古文：莽长子宇，非莽隔绝卫氏，恐帝长大后见怨。
现代文：王莽的长子王字，责备王莽隔绝卫氏，担心平帝长大以后怨恨。
English: Wang Mang's eldest son, Wang Zi, reproached Wang Mang for isolating Wei, fearing that Emperor Ping would grow up to resent him.

古文：宇与吴章谋，夜以血涂莽门，若鬼神之戒，冀以惧莽。
现代文：王宇和吴章密谋，深夜把血涂在王莽的府门上，伪装成鬼神警告的样子，企图以此使王莽惊惧。
English: Wang Yu and Wu Zhang conspired to smear blood on Wang Mang's front door late at night, disguised as a warning from ghosts and gods, in an attempt to frighten Wang Mang.

古文：章欲因对其咎。
现代文：吴章打算乘机在对策时指出王莽的过失。
English: Wu Zhang intends to take the opportunity to point out Wang Mang's fault in the countermeasures.

古文：事发觉，莽杀宇，诛灭卫氏，谋所联及，死者百余人。
现代文：事情被发觉后，王莽杀死儿子王宇，诛灭卫氏，参与谋议的人都受到连坐，被处死了一百多人。
English: After the affair was discovered, Wang Mang killed Wang Yu's son, Wang Yu, and executed Wei Ji. All those who participated in the conspiracy were lynched, and more than a hundred people were executed.

古文：章坐要斩，磔尸东市门。
现代文：吴章被处以腰斩，在束市门分尸。
English: Wu Zhang was executed by beheading from the waist up, and his body was dismembered at the Sakuichi Gate.

古文：初，章为当世名儒，教授尤盛，弟子千余人，莽以为恶人党，皆当禁锢，不得仕宦。
现代文：当初，吴章为当世名儒，教授《尚书》特别有名，弟子多达千余人，王莽把他们看作恶人集团，都定罪禁锢，不准做官。
English: At the beginning, Wu Zhang was a famous contemporary Confucianist, the professor of "Shang Shu" was particularly famous, and there were more than a thousand disciples. Wang Mang regarded them as a group of villains. They were all convicted and imprisoned, and were not allowed to work as officials.

古文：门人尽更名他师。
现代文：于是，吴章的门徒全都另拜他人为师，讳言自己是吴章的弟子。
English: As a result, all of Wu Zhang's disciples took others as their teachers and concealed the fact that they were Wu Zhang's disciples.

古文：敞时为大司徒掾，自劾吴章弟子，收抱章尸归，棺敛葬之，京师称焉。
现代文：云敞当时任大司徒掾，自己承认是吴章的弟子，收抱吴章的尸体而归，置办棺材入殓安葬，京师中的人都称赞他。
English: Yun Zhan, who was the head of the Tujing Division at the time, admitted that he was a disciple of Wu Zhang. He hugged Wu Zhang's body and returned home. A coffin was placed in his coffin and he was buried. People in Beijing praised him.

古文：车骑将军王舜高其志节，比之栾布，表奏以为掾，荐为中郎谏大夫。
现代文：车骑将军王舜钦佩他的志气节操，将他比为乐布，上表奏请皇帝批准让云敞作自己的属吏，后又荐举他为中郎谏大夫。
English: The cavalry general Wang Qian admired his self-discipline, likened him to a piece of cloth, and asked the emperor to approve Yun Chang as his subordinate, and then recommended him as Zhong Lang Qian's doctor.

古文：莽篡位，王舜为太师，复荐敞可辅职。
现代文：王莽篡位后，王舜任太师，又举荐云敞可以担任辅弼官职。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, Wang Xuan was appointed Grand Master, and Yun Chang was recommended to serve as an assistant eunuch.

古文：以病免。
现代文：云敞称病免官。
English: Removed from duty due to illness.

古文：唐林言敞可典郡，擢为鲁郡大尹。
现代文：唐林说云敞可以主管郡的政事，王莽提拔他为鲁郡大尹。
English: Tang Lin said that Yunchang could be in charge of the county's political affairs, and Wang Mang promoted him to be Lu County Grand Yin.

古文：更始时，安车征敞为御史大夫，复病免去，卒于家。
现代文：更始时，朝廷用安车征召云敞任御史大夫，又称病辞官，后来死在家中。
English: At the time of the reformation, the imperial court used an ambulance to conscript Yun Chang as a goshi doctor, also known as a medical officer, who later died at home.

古文：赞曰： 昔仲尼称不得中行，则思狂狷。
现代文：赞日：从前孔子说如果不能得遇中庸之人和他论道，就思谋进取而有所不为。
English: Zangri: Confucius once said that if you can't meet a man of moderation and his doctrine, you should think about making progress and not do anything.

古文：观杨王孙之志，贤于秦始皇远矣。
现代文：观看杨王孙的志向，远远胜过秦始皇。
English: Watching the ambition of Yang Wangsun is far better than that of Qin Shihuang.

古文：世称朱云多过其实，故曰： 盖有不知而作之者，我亡是也。 
现代文：世人称颂朱云多言过其实，所以《论语》上说： 大概有不知道情况而随便述作的人，我孔子没有这种行为。 
English: The world praised Zhu Yun excessively, so the "Analects" said: There are probably people who do not know the situation and casually describe it. I, Confucius, do not have this kind of behavior.

古文：胡建临敌敢断，武昭于外。
现代文：胡建临敌敢于决断，勇武显明于外。
English: Hu Jian dared to make a decisive decision in the face of the enemy, and his bravery was obvious to the outside world.

古文：斩伐奸隙，军旅不队。
现代文：斩杀奸邪，使军队不惰怠。
English: We will eradicate the evil of treachery and make the army not lazy.

古文：梅福之辞，合于《大雅》，虽无老成，尚有典刑；殷监不远，夏后所闻。
现代文：梅福的言辞，合乎《诗经。
English: Meifu's words are consistent with the "Song of Songs."

古文：遂从所好，全性市门。
现代文：梅福终于按照自己的爱好，保全性情于吴县市门。
English: At last, Meifu followed his own inclination to preserve nature in Wuxian City Gate.

古文：云敞之义，著于吴章，为仁由己，再入大府，清则濯缨，何远之有？
现代文：云敞的节义，从收葬吴章显现出来，自己去做仁义之事，初为大司徒掾，后又再为车骑将军掾，遇治则出仕，遇乱则隐居，他的这种做法距离《楚辞。
English: From the burial of Wu Zhang, the profound meaning of the festival emerged, and he himself went to do benevolent and righteous things. At first, he was the grand steward, and later he was the chariot and cavalry general, and when he was killed, he served, and when he was in trouble, he lived in seclusion. This approach is far from the "Chu Zhi."

