古文：洪咨夔，字舜俞，於潜人。
现代文：洪咨夔，字舜俞，于潜人。
English: Hong Zhaojun, Zhaojun, Yu Qianren.

古文：嘉定二年进士，授如皋主簿，寻试为饶州教授。
现代文：考中嘉定二年进士，被授予如皋主簿，不久授为饶州教授。
English: Jiading was promoted to a scholar in the second year of the middle school entrance examination, was awarded the main book of Ruzhen, and soon became a professor of Raozhou.

古文：作《大治赋》，楼钥赏识之。
现代文：他写成《大治赋》，得到楼钥的赏识。
English: He wrote "Dajifu," which was appreciated by the building key.

古文：授南外宗学教授，以言去。
现代文：被授予南外宗学教授，因言论离职。
English: He was awarded the title of professor of Nanwai sectarian studies, but resigned from his post because of his remarks.

古文：丁母忧，服除，应博学宏词科，直院庄夏举自代。
现代文：遭母丧，服丧期满后，他应博学宏词科，直院庄夏推举他代替自己的官职。
English: After his mother's death, after the mourning period was over, he should learn the vast vocabulary, and Zhuang Xia, the courtier, elected him to replace his official post.

古文：崔与之帅淮东，辟置幕府，边事纤悉为尽力。
现代文：崔与之统帅淮东，把洪咨夔召为幕僚，他对边事十分尽力。
English: Cui and his commander Huadong summoned Hong Zhaojun as a staff member, and he did his best for the border affairs.

古文：丘寿隽代与之为帅，金人犯六合，扬州闭门设守，咨夔亟诣寿隽言曰： 金人忌楚，必未至扬，乃先自示弱，不特淮左之人心动，而金人且骄必来矣。
现代文：丘寿隽代替崔与之统帅淮东，金人进犯六合，扬州闭门防守，洪咨夔立即去对丘寿隽说： 金人顾忌楚州，一定不会到扬州，我们都自己先示弱，不仅会使淮东的人心动摇，而且金人将更骄横，一定来了。
English: Qiu Shouqi took the place of Cui and commanded Huai Dong. Jin attacked Liuhe and Yangzhou defended itself behind closed doors. Hong Zhiqi immediately went to Qiu Shouqi and said: Jin people are afraid of Chuzhou, they will not come to Yangzhou. We all show weakness first, which will not only shake the hearts of people in Huai Dong, but also make Jin people more arrogant. They will definitely come.

古文：第当远斥堠、精间探，简士马，张外郡声援而大开城门，晏然如平时。
现代文：只应该在远处安排放哨的人，精选间谍，选拔人马，夸大外郡的声援并大开城门，像平时一样。
English: It is only necessary to arrange watchmen at a distance, select spies, select men and horses, exaggerate the solidarity of foreign counties and open the gate wide, as usual.

古文：若金人果来犯，某当身任之。 寿隽愧谢。
现代文：如果金人真来进犯，我当然要亲上前线。 丘寿隽很惭愧。
English: If the invaders really come, I will of course go to the front line. I am very ashamed.

古文：已而金人果遁。
现代文：不久金人果然退走。
English: Not long after, the man did indeed leave.

古文：山阳兼帅事青州张林清献铜钱二十万缗，咨夔谓宜以所献就犒其军，如唐魏博故事，使无轻量中国心。
现代文：金国山阳守将兼青州统帅张林请求献上二十万缗铜钱，洪咨夔认为应把张林所献的铜钱用来犒赏他的人马，像唐代魏博镇那样，使他们没有轻视中国的心。
English: Zhang Lin, the Sanyang governor of Jin and the commander of Qingzhou, asked Zhang Lin to donate 200,000 baht of copper money. Hong Zhaojun thought that the copper money donated by Zhang Lin should be used to reward his men and horses, like Wei Bo Town in the Tang Dynasty, so that they did not despise the heart of China.

古文：帅乃令输其半，林亦不复来。
现代文：统帅就下令运来其中的一半，张林也不再来宋境。
English: The commander ordered half of them to be transported, and Zhang Lin did not return to Song.

古文：与之帅成都，请于帝，授咨夔籍田令、通判成都府。
现代文：崔与之统帅成都，向皇上请示，授予洪咨夔为籍田令、成都府通判。
English: Cui commanded Chengdu with him, and petitioned the emperor to grant Hong Zhaojun the title of Jiaotian and the title of Chengdu prefectural judge.

古文：与之为制置使，首檄咨夔自近，辞曰： 今当开诚心、布公道，合西南人物以济国事，乃一未有闻而先及门生、故吏，是示人私也。 卒不受，惟以通判职事往来效忠，蜀人高之。
现代文：崔与之为制置使，首先把洪咨夔召到身边，洪咨夔推辞说 ：如今应该开诚心、布公道，集中西南的人物来成就国事，我是一个没有声望的人而你用人先涉及门生、故吏，是向人们显示自己的私心。 他始终不接受任命，只以通判的身份往来效忠，蜀人认为他很高尚。
English: Cui and Ding first called Hong Zhaojun to his side, and Hong Zhaojun said, "Nowadays, we should be honest and fair, and concentrate on the people in the southwest to accomplish national affairs. I am a person with no reputation, and if you use someone who is a protégé or a former official, you are showing your selfishness to the people. He has always refused to be appointed, and has only been loyal as a judge. The people of Shu consider him to be very noble.

古文：寻知龙州。
现代文：不久洪咨夔任龙州知州。
English: Soon after, Hong Zhaojun was appointed as the governor of Longzhou and Chizhou.

古文：州岁贡麸金，率科矿户，咨夔曰： 将奉上乃厉民乎？ 出官钱市之。
现代文：龙州年年贡奉金，几乎都是从矿户那科敛来的，洪咨夔说： 要侍奉皇上就危害百姓吗？ 拿出官府的钱买金。
English: The Longzhou New Year's tribute money was almost all collected from miners. Hong Zhaojun said: If you want to serve the emperor, will you harm the people? Take out the government's money to buy gold.

古文：江油之民岁戍边，复苦餫饷，为请于制、漕司免之。
现代文：江油百姓年年戍守边境，又苦于运送粮饷，洪咨夔向制、漕二司请求免去这项差事。
English: The people of Jiangyou have been guarding the border year after year, and they have been struggling to transport grain. The Hongzhe County Government and the Second Division requested to be exempted from this task.

古文：毁邓艾祠，更祠诸葛亮，告其民曰： 毋事仇雠而忘父母。 
现代文：他毁去邓艾祠，重新祭祀诸葛亮，对那里的百姓说 ：不要事奉仇人而忘了父母。 
English: He destroyed Deng Ai's ancestral hall, re-dedicated Zhuge Liang, and said to the people there: "Don't serve the enemy and forget your parents."

古文：还朝，为秘书郎，迁金部员外郎。
现代文：恰好皇上下诏征求直言，他慨然说 ：我可以把想说的话都说给明主了。 
English: Just as the Emperor issued the edict to solicit candid opinions, he said with emotion, "I can say whatever I want to say to the Emperor."

古文：会诏求直言，慨然曰： 吾可以尽言寤主矣。 其父见其疏，曰： 吾能吃茄子饭，汝无忧。 史弥远读至 济王之死，非陛下本心 ，大恚，掷于地。
现代文：他的父亲见了他的奏疏说 ：我能吃茄子饭，你不要有什么忧虑。 史弥远读到 济王的死，不是陛下本意 时，非常愤怒，把他的奏疏扔到地上。
English: When his father saw his sonosho, he said, "I can eat eggplant rice, don't worry about it." When Shiyan read that the death of King Jie was not His Majesty's intention, he was very angry and threw his sonosho to the ground.

古文：转考功员外郎。
现代文：洪咨夔转官为考功员外郎。
English: Hong Zhejun transferred to the post of examiner.

古文：转对，复言李全必为国患。
现代文：百官转对，他又说李全一定是国家祸患。
English: A hundred officials turned right, and he said that Li Quan must be a national calamity.

古文：于是台谏李知孝、梁成大交论，镌二秩。
现代文：于是遭台谏李知孝、梁成大相继弹劾，他被降官二级。
English: As a result, he was impeached successively by the Taiwanese emperors Li Zhitiao and Liang Chengda, and he was demoted to the second level.

古文：读书故山，七年而弥远死，帝亲政五日，即以礼部员外郎召，入见，乞养英明之气，及论君子小人之分。
现代文：他在原来的山上读书，七年后史弥远去世，皇上亲政五天，就召用洪咨夔为礼部员外郎，他入朝拜见皇上，请求皇上修养英明的气质，并论述君子和小人的区别。
English: He used to study on the mountain. Seven years later, Shi Yiyuan passed away, and five days after the emperor took office, he summoned Hong Zhaojun to be the ceremonial member. He went to court to see the emperor, asked the emperor to cultivate a wise temperament, and discussed the difference between a gentleman and a villain.

古文：帝问今日急务，对以 进君子而退小人，开诚心而布公道 。
现代文：皇上询问当今最紧要的政事是什么，他以 进用君子而斥退小人，开诚心而布公道 来回答。
English: When the Emperor asked him what the most important political issue of the day was, he replied, "To promote the gentleman and expel the ruffian, to be open-hearted and fair."

古文：且言 在陛下一念坚凝 。
现代文：并说 这些都在陛下有坚定的信念 。
English: He said this was because of His Majesty's firm belief.

古文：又问在外人物，对以 崔与之护蜀而归，闲居十年，终始全德之老臣，若趣其来，可为朝廷重。
现代文：皇上又问在朝外的人物都有谁可以任用，他回答说： 崔与之守卫四川归来，闲居了十年，是一位始终保全德行的老臣，若请他入朝为官，可以作为朝廷的倚靠。
English: The emperor also asked who could be appointed from outside the imperial court. He replied, "Cui, who guarded the return of Sichuan with him and lived idly for ten years, is an old minister who has always preserved his virtue. If he is invited to enter the imperial court, he can be relied on by the imperial court.

古文：真德秀、魏了翁陛下所简知，当聚之本朝。 
现代文：真德秀、魏了翁是陛下所选拔了解的，应该让他们聚集到朝中来。 
English: Zhendexiu and Wei Liaowong were selected and understood by His Majesty, and they should be allowed to gather in the center of the country.

古文：翼日，与王遂并拜监察御史。
现代文：第二天，他和王遂一起被任命为监察御史。
English: The next day, he and Wang Sui were jointly appointed as supervisors.

古文：咨夔感激知遇，谓遂曰： 朝无亲擢台谏久矣，要当极本穷原而先论之。 乃上疏曰： 臣历考往古治乱之原，权归人主，政出中书，天下未有不治。
现代文：洪咨夔感激对他的知遇之恩，对王遂说 ：皇上不亲自提拔台谏已很久了，我们应该把治国的根本先论述清楚。 于是他上疏说 ：臣历考古代治乱的本原，权力归于人主，政事出于中书，天下没有不大治的。
English: Hong Zhiqi was grateful for the grace of his knowledge, and said to Wang Sui: "It has been a long time since the emperor did not personally promote the throne, we should clearly explain the fundamental principles of governing the country." So he said: "Subject to the study of the origin of ancient governance, power belongs to the master, government affairs are based on the Chinese book, and there is no great governance in the world.

古文：权不归人主，则廉级一夷，纲常且不立，奚政之问？
现代文：权力不归人主，那么清廉正直的人就会被铲除，三纲五常将不能确立，还有什么政事可考察？
English: If power does not belong to the people, then the clean and honest people will be eliminated, and the three principles and five constants will not be established. What other political affairs can be investigated?

古文：政不出中书，则腹心无寄，必转而他属，奚权之揽？
现代文：政事不出于中书，那么心腹人就会无所寄托，一定要投奔别处，还揽什么权？
English: If government affairs are not based on the Chinese book, then the confidant will have nothing to rely on, must go elsewhere, and what power will he gain?

古文：此八政驭群臣，所以独归之王，而诏之者必天官冢宰也。
现代文：这是国家施政八个方面中的驾驭群臣，所以大权只属于人主，而受诏命的人一定是百官。
English: This is one of the eight aspects of state governance to control the vassals, so the power belongs only to the master, and the person who receives the imperial edict must be the best of the best.

古文：陛下亲政以来，威福操柄，收还掌握，扬廷出令，震撼海宇，天下始知有吾君。
现代文：陛下亲自处理朝政以来，把国家的大权收回并掌握在自己手中，光大朝廷、发出政令，震撼了海内外，天下才知道有陛下。
English: Since His Majesty personally dealt with the government of the dynasty, he took back the power of the country and held it in his own hands. He expanded the imperial court, issued decrees, and shocked people at home and abroad. Only then did the world know about His Majesty.

古文：元首既明，股肱不容于自惰，撤副封，罢先行，坐政事堂以治事，天下始知有朝廷。
现代文：元首既已英明，大臣也不允许偷惰，撤销言事者的上疏副本，罢去先行，在政事堂处理政事，天下才知道有朝廷。
English: The Fuhrer is already wise, and the minister is not allowed to be lazy, revoke the copy of the speech, go ahead, and deal with political affairs in the government hall, so that the world knows that there is a court.

古文：此其大权、大政，亦略举矣。
现代文：这些大权、大政，也稍微确立了。
English: These great powers and great politics have also been established to some extent.

古文：然中书之敝端，其大者有四：一曰自用，二曰自专，三曰自私，四曰自固。
现代文：但中书的弊端，其中严重的有四条：一是自用，二是自专，三是自私，四是自固。
English: However, there are four serious drawbacks of Chinese books: one is self-use, the second is self-expertise, the third is selfishness, and the fourth is self-sufficiency.

古文：愿陛下于从容论道之顷，宣示臣言，俾大臣充初志而加定力，惩往辙而图方来，以仰称励精更始之意。 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：希望陛下在从容讲论治道的时候，表明我说的这些，使大臣充满信心并更加努力，惩前毖后，继往开来，以便与励精图治的纲领相符合。 
English: I hope that His Majesty, in his leisurely speech on governance, will show what I have said, so that the minister will be full of confidence and make more efforts to punish the former, the latter, and the past, so as to be consistent with the program of diligent governance.

古文：又首乞罢枢密使薛极以厉大臣之节，章三上，卒出之。
现代文：皇上高兴地接受了。他又首先请求罢去枢密使薛极以勉励大臣的节操，他三次上奏，终于使薛极被罢免。
English: The emperor gladly accepted. He first requested the removal of Privy Councilor Xue Ji to encourage the minister's self-restraint. He appealed three times, and finally Xue Ji was removed.

古文：其他得罪清议者，相继劾去，朝纲大振。
现代文：其他被公正的评论所摒弃的人，也相继被弹劾罢去，朝纲大振。
English: Others, rejected by fair comment, were successively impeached and removed from office.

古文：明年，改元端平。
现代文：第二年，改年号为端平。
English: The next year, the year was changed to Dengping.

古文：咨夔预乞于正月朔下诏求直言，使人人得尽言无隐，又乞令内职任之穹者各举所知，皆从之。
现代文：洪咨夔先请求在正月初一下诏征求直言，使人人能畅所欲言，又请求下令让内职中职权大的人推荐人才，皇上都采纳了。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the year, Emperor Hongzhi first requested that a decree be issued to solicit candid speech, so that everyone could speak freely. He also requested that an order be issued to allow people with greater authority within the ministry to recommend talents. The emperor accepted both requests.

古文：时登进诸儒，以广讲读、说书之选。
现代文：当时任用很多儒士，以扩大对讲读、说书的选拔。
English: At that time, many Confucianists were appointed to expand the selection of lectures and storybooks.

古文：咨夔言圣学之实，所当讲明而推行者有六：一，亲睦本支；二，正始闺门；三，警肃侍御；四，审正邪用舍；五，储养文武之才；六，忧根本无生事邀功。
现代文：洪咨夔说圣人学说的实际，所应该讲明并推行的有六点：一，亲睦自己的嫡系和庶出子孙；二，决定妻妾的名分；三，告诫和引导侍从官；四，审察正直的人和奸邪的人，决定是任用还是斥退；五，储备和培养文武人才；六，忧虑国家的根本，不要有惹事邀功的事情发生。
English: Hong Zhaojun said that there are six points that should be clarified and implemented in the practice of the doctrine of sages: First, make friends with one's legitimate and illegitimate children; Second, decide on the name of the wife and concubine; Third, admonish and guide the attendants; Fourth, examine honest people and evil-doers, decide whether to appoint or expel; Fifth, reserve and train literary and martial arts talents; Sixth, worry about the foundation of the country, and do not have things that cause trouble and invite merit.

古文：又言常平义仓、盐课及苗税多取之敝。
现代文：又说常平义仓、盐课和苗税多收取的弊病。
English: It is also said that the drawbacks of charging more for the warehouse, salt class and seedling tax in Changping.

古文：京湖以《八陵图》来上，咨夔援绍兴留司奉表八陵及东晋大都督亲谒五陵故事，乞先诏制臣往省，俟还，别议朝祭。
现代文：京湖献来《八陵图》，洪咨夔援引绍兴留司去八陵献奉表和东晋大都督亲自朝拜五陵的做法，请求先诏命制臣前去察看，等制臣回来，再另外议定朝拜、祭祀的形式。
English: Jinghu presented the "eight mausoleums map," and Hong Ziqi, citing the Shaoxing governor's visit to the eight mausoleums and the Eastern Jin governor's practice of personally paying homage to the five mausoleums, requested that the emperor first order the ministers to go and inspect them, and wait for the ministers to return, and then agree on another form of worship and sacrifice.

古文：又复以完颜守绪骨来献，时相侈大其事，咨夔曰： 此朽骨耳，函之以葬大理寺可也。
现代文：完颜守绪的遗骨献来，当时的宰相对此大张旗鼓地庆祝，十分奢侈，洪咨夔说 ：这是朽骨，把它装起来埋葬在大理寺就行。
English: When Yan Shouxu's remains were presented, the then prime minister celebrated with great fanfare. It was very extravagant. Hong Zhaojun said, "This is a rotten bone, just pack it up and bury it in Dali Temple."

古文：第当以金亡告九庙，归诸祖宗德泽，况与大敌为邻，抱虎枕蛟，事变叵测，顾可侈因人之获，使边臣论功，朝臣颂德。
现代文：只是应该把金国灭亡的事告诉九庙，归功于列祖列宗的恩德，何况与大敌为邻，就像抱着老虎，枕着蛟龙，时刻会有危险，事情变化莫测，却借着别人的俘获大肆奢侈，使边境守臣论功，朝臣颂德。
English: However, it is necessary to tell the Nine Temples about the downfall of the Jin Dynasty, and to attribute it to the benevolence of the ancestors, not to mention that being neighbors with the great enemy is like hugging a tiger and sleeping with a dragon. There will always be danger, things are unpredictable, but through the capture of others, extravagant luxury, the border guards will discuss their merits, and the courtiers will praise their virtues.

古文：且陛下知慕崇政受俘之元祐，独不鉴端门受降之崇宁乎？ 然不果悉从。
现代文：陛下羡慕元时在崇政殿接受俘虏、独独不借鉴崇宁时在端门受降吗？ 但最终没被采纳。
English: His Majesty envied the Yuan Dynasty for accepting captives at the Su Zheng Palace, but did not learn from the Su Nings when they surrendered at the gate? However, it was not adopted in the end.

古文：擢殿中侍御史，会王定入台察，力诋蒋重珍，咨夔乃按定疾视善良，乞罢之。
现代文：洪咨夔被提升为殿中侍御史，恰好王定进入御史台，极力诋毁蒋重珍，洪咨夔就弹劾王定忌恨善良的人，请求罢免他。
English: Hong Zhiqi was promoted to the palace to serve the imperial historian, just as Wang Ding entered the imperial history stage and tried his best to defame Jiang Chongzhen. Hong Ziqi impeached Wang Ding for hating good people and requested that he be dismissed.

古文：越三日，左迁定，而擢咨夔中书舍人，寻兼权吏部侍郎，与真德秀同知贡举，俄兼直学士院。时咨夔口疡已深，复上疏谓当引咎悔过，且乞祠，帝曰： 卿在朝多有裨益，何轻去？ 咨夔奏： 臣数备台谏、给舍，皆不能遏六月之师，何补于朝？
现代文：过了三天，王定被降官，而洪咨夔升为中书舍人，不久兼权吏部侍郎，与真德秀同时任知贡举，不久他兼直学士院，这时洪咨夔的口疮已重，他又上疏认为自己应该引咎悔过，并请求得到管理宫观的闲职，皇上说： 你在朝中对国家有很多裨益，为什么轻易离去？ 洪咨夔上奏： 臣屡次任台谏、给舍的官职，但都不能阻止六月朝廷下诏出师收复三京，对朝廷有什么补益？
English: After three days, Wang Ding was demoted, while Hong Zhaojun was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters. Soon, he was also the waiter of the authority department. At the same time as Zhen Dexiu, he was also in charge of the tribute. Soon, he was also in charge of the academy. At this time, Hong Zhaojun's mouth sores were already severe. He also thought that he should apologize and ask for the idle position of managing the palace view. The emperor said: You have a lot of benefits for the country in the DPRK, why did you leave so easily? Hong Zhaojun reported: Minister repeatedly appointed

古文：臣病久当去，去犹足裨风俗。 帝勉留之，迁吏部侍郎兼给事中。
现代文：臣病了很久，应该离朝，离开了还能有益于风俗。 皇上挽留他，升任他为吏部侍郎兼给事中。
English: The vassal had been ill for a long time, he should have left the court, leaving can also be beneficial to customs. The emperor retained him and promoted him to the position of the clerk's attendant and secretary.

古文：奏： 比徇私成俗，化实未更，所恃以一公铄万私者，独陛下耳，而好乐营缮，亲厚近属，保护旧臣，若未能无所系累。 上在位逾一纪，国本未立，未有敢深言之者，咨夔乞择宗室子养之，并为济王立后。
现代文：他上奏： 近来营私成俗，风化实际没改变，靠一公而削去万私的，只有陛下，而好乐营缮，厚待亲近的人，保护旧臣，似乎对陛下不能没有拖累。 皇上在位已超过十二年，没立皇太子，没有对此敢深说的，洪咨夔请求皇上选择宗室子孙在宫中抚养，并替济王确立后代。
English: He began: "Recently, it has become a custom to act in a private capacity, and the custom has not really changed. Only Your Majesty can rely on a prince to cut out all selfishness, but it seems that it is a drag for Your Majesty to be fond of entertaining, being kind to those close to you, and protecting former ministers. The Emperor has been on the throne for more than twelve years, and has not appointed a crown prince, and has not dared to speak about this in depth. Hong Zhaojun asked the Emperor to choose descendants to raise in the palace, and to establish descendants for the king.

古文：擢给事中，史嵩之入相，召赴阙下，进刑部尚书，拜翰林学士、知制诰。
现代文：洪咨夔升为给事中，史嵩之入朝任宰相，召他入朝，进升为刑部尚书，被授予翰林学士、知制诰。
English: Hong Zhaojun was promoted to the position of vice-premier, Shi Songzhi was promoted to the position of prime minister, he was promoted to the position of minister of justice, he was promoted to the position of minister of justice, he was awarded the title of scholar of Hanlin, and he was awarded the title of scholar of Zhizhe.

古文：求去愈力，加端明殿学士，卒。
现代文：洪咨夔更极力请求罢官，他被加官为端明殿学士。
English: Hong Zhaojun even more strongly requested to be dismissed, and he was promoted to the post of Duanming Palace scholar.

古文：御笔： 洪咨夔鲠亮忠悫，有助亲政，与执政恩例，特赠两官。 其遗文有《两汉诏令揽抄》、《春秋说》、外内制、奏议、诗文行于世。
现代文：洪咨夔去世，皇上御笔写道： 洪咨夔耿直忠诚，有助于新政，给他按执政的恩例，特赠他两官。 洪咨夔的遗文有《两汉诏令揽抄》、《春秋说》、外内制、奏议、诗文在世间流行。
English: After the death of Hong Zhaohui, the emperor wrote: "Hong Zhaohui's steadfast loyalty is conducive to the New Deal, and according to the graceful example of his reign, he was specially awarded two posts. "Two Han Dajiaoling Collection," "Spring and Autumn Saying," foreign and domestic system, report, and poetry are popular in the world.

古文：许奕，字成子，简州人。
现代文：许奕，字成子，简州人。
English: Xu Yi, also known as Cheng Zi, is a native of Jianzhou.

古文：以父任主长江簿。
现代文：因父亲的恩荫任长江县主簿。
English: He became the chief accountant of Yangtze County due to his father's favor.

古文：丁内艰，免丧调涪城尉。
现代文：遭母丧，服丧期满后调为涪城县尉。
English: After his mother's death, he was transferred to the position of Lucheng County Lieutenant.

古文：庆元五年，宁宗亲擢进士第一，授签书剑南东川节度判官。
现代文：庆元五年，宁宗亲自提拔他为第一名进士，被授予签书剑南东川节度判官。
English: In the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, Ningzong personally promoted him as the first Jin Shi, and he was awarded the signature sword of the South East River Festival Judge.

古文：未期年，持所生父心丧，召为秘书省正字，迁校书郎兼吴兴郡王府教授。
现代文：不到一年，他不穿丧服，在心中悼念亡父，为父亲守丧，被征召为秘书省正字，升为校书郎兼吴兴郡王府教授。
English: In less than a year, he did not wear mourning clothes, mourned his deceased father in his heart, held a memorial service for his father, was conscripted as the secretary of the provincial government, and was promoted to school teacher and professor of Wangfu, Wuxing County.

古文：寻迁秘书郎、著作佐郎、著作郎，权考功郎官，非报谒问疾不出。
现代文：不久升为秘书郎、著作佐郎、著作郎，他为权考功郎官，不是答谢应酬看望病人是不出来的。
English: He was soon promoted to secretary, bookkeeper, and bookkeeper. He was a merit officer, and was not allowed to visit patients unless it was for a thank-you party.

古文：迁起居舍人，韩侂胄议开边，奕贻书曰： 今日之势，如元气仅属，不足以当寒暑之寇。 又因转对，论： 今日之急惟备边，而朝廷晏然，百官充位如平时。
现代文：许奕升为起居舍人，韩胄议定扩充疆土，许奕给他写信说： 当今的形势，就像仅有元气一样，不能抵御寒暑的侵袭。 又借百官转对的机会，论道： 现在最紧迫的是防备边境，但朝廷安然，百官像平时一样。
English: Xu Yisheng was a resident, and Han Yu agreed to expand the territory. Xu Yisheng wrote to him, "The current situation, just like vitality alone, cannot resist the invasion of cold and heat. Taking the opportunity to turn the tables, he said, "The most urgent thing now is to guard the border, but the imperial court is safe, and the officials are as usual.

古文：京西、淮上之师败同罚异。
现代文：京西、淮上的军队失败相同但处罚不同。
English: The troops in western Beijing and Huai'an suffered the same defeat, but the punishment was different.

古文：总领，王人也，而听宣抚司节制，或为参谋。
现代文：总领，是有权力的，却受宣抚司节制，或者担任参谋。
English: The commander-in-chief, who has power, is restrained by the chief of staff, or serves as a staff officer.

古文：庙堂之议，外廷莫得闻，护圣之军，半发于外，而禁卫单薄。 乞鞫勘赃吏，永废勿用。
现代文：朝廷的决定，朝外的人不知道，保护皇上的军队，一半被调往外地，禁卫京城的力量很单薄。 他请求审查赃吏，永远不任用他们。
English: The decision of the imperial court was not known to people outside the imperial court, half of the troops protecting the emperor were transferred to other places, and the strength of the defense of the capital was very thin.He asked for a review of the eunuchs and never appointed them.

古文：特与放行以启侥幸者，宜加遏绝。
现代文：对那些侥幸过关的，应该加以遏制。
English: Those who get away with it should be reined in.

古文：所言皆侂胄所不乐也。
现代文：他所说的都是韩胄所不喜欢的。
English: Everything he said was not to Han Yan's liking.

古文：蜀盗既平，以起居舍人宣抚四川。
现代文：四川的盗贼平定后，许奕以起居舍人的身份宣抚四川。
English: After the thieves in Sichuan were subdued, Xu Yi proclaimed Sichuan as a resident.

古文：奕谓： 使从中遣，必淹时乃至，既又徒云犒师，而不以旌别淑慝为指，无以尉蜀父老之望。 执政是其言。
现代文：许奕说 ：使臣从朝中派出，一定是滞留时日才到，既然又只说是犒赏军队，却不以识别善良和邪恶为意图，没有什么能慰藉四川父老的期望。 执政认为他说的对。
English: Xu Yi said: The envoys sent from the central government must have been delayed for a long time. Since they only said that they would reward the army, but did not intend to identify good and evil, nothing could comfort the expectations of Sichuan's fathers and grandfathers. The government thought he was right.

古文：又请： 遇朝会，起居郎、舍人分左右立如常仪。
现代文：他又请求 ：遇到朝会时，起居郎、舍人分左右站立如同常仪。
English: He also requested that when it comes to the morning assembly, the chief priest and the deacon should stand side by side, as is customary.

古文：前后殿坐，侍立官御坐东南面西立，可以获闻圣训，传示无极。
现代文：前后殿坐，侍立官在御座的东南面向西而站，可以聆听圣训，传示本意。
English: Sitting in the front and back of the hall, the attendants stand in the southeast of the throne facing west, where they can listen to the hadiths and convey their intentions.

古文：臣僚奏事，亦不敢易。 诏下其疏讨论之。
现代文：臣僚奏事，也不敢改变。 皇上下诏把他的奏疏传下讨论。
English: His courtiers did not dare to change it, and the emperor ordered that his edict be passed down and discussed.

古文：遣奕使金，奕与骨肉死诀，诣执政趣受指请行，执政曰： 金人要索，议未决者尚多，今将奈何？ 奕曰： 往集议时，奕尝谓增岁币、归俘虏或可耳，外此其可从乎？
现代文：朝廷派许奕出使金国，许奕与骨肉亲人诀别，很快到执政那里接受指示请求出发，执政说： 金人索要的，还有很多没议定，如今将怎么办？ 许奕说： 原来议论这些时，我曾说过增加岁币，归还俘虏还可以，此外还能屈从金人吗？
English: The imperial court sent Xu Yi as an envoy to the gold country. Xu Yi bid farewell to his flesh and blood relatives, and soon went to the government to receive instructions and request to leave. The government said: There are still a lot of things that the gold people have asked for, but they have not been agreed upon. What will they do now? Xu Yi said: Originally, when discussing these things, I once said that it was okay to increase the annuity, and it was okay to return the captives. In addition, can we still succumb to the gold people?

古文：不可行者，当死守之。 寻迁起居郎兼权给事中，以国事未济力辞，不许。
现代文：不可行的，就应该以死相守。 不久他升为起居郎兼权给事中，因国事没什么起色他极力推辞，朝廷不允许。
English: If it is not possible, he should be protected by death. Soon after, he was promoted to the position of chief vassal and vested with power, but since there was no improvement in the state of affairs, he tried his best to refuse, but the imperial court would not allow it.

古文：金人闻奕名久，礼迓甚恭，方清暑，离宫相距二十里，至是特为奕还内。
现代文：金人听说许奕的名字已很久了，十分恭敬地迎接他，正赶上金国皇帝避暑，离宫与京城相距二十里，这时金国皇帝特意为许奕回到京城。
English: The goldsmith had heard the name of Xu Yi for a long time and greeted him very respectfully. He was just in time for the summer vacation of the Emperor of Jin, and was twenty miles away from the palace and the capital city. At that time, the Emperor of Jin specially returned to the capital city for Xu Yi.

古文：方射，奕破的十有一，乃卒行成。
现代文：射箭时，许奕射中了十一个目标，于是终于达成和议。
English: In archery, Xu Yi shot eleven targets, and finally reached a settlement.

古文：还奏，帝优劳久之，奕复奏： 和不可恃，宜葺纪纲，练将卒，使屈信进退之权，复归于我。 客有以使事贺者，奕怃然曰： 是岂得已者，吾深为天下愧之。 
现代文：许奕回朝禀奏，皇上优待、慰劳他很久。许奕又上奏： 和议不可靠，应该修纲纪，训练将士，使屈伸进退的大权，重新归属我们。 门客中有因许奕出使金国议和的事来向他祝贺的，许奕茫然地说： 这是不得已啊，我深为天下惭愧。 
English: Xu Yi returned to play the morning gong. The emperor had treated and comforted him for a long time. Xu Yi played again: Peace talks are unreliable. It is necessary to cultivate discipline, train soldiers, and make the power of advancing and retreating belong to us again. Some of the guests congratulated him on the matter of Xu Yi's peace talks with Kim Guo. Xu Yi said in a daze: This is a last resort. I am deeply ashamed.

古文：权礼部侍郎，条六事以献。
现代文：许奕为权礼部侍郎，他列具六件事献上。
English: Xu Yi is a waiter in the ceremonial affairs department. He lists six things to present.

古文：俄兼侍讲。
现代文：不久他兼任侍讲。
English: Soon he was also acting as an assistant speaker.

古文：会谏官五居安、傅伯成以言事去职，奕上疏力争之。
现代文：恰好谏官王居安、傅伯成因上疏的事被罢官，许奕上疏为他们力争。
English: It so happened that eunuchs Wang Juan and Fu Bocheng were dismissed from their posts because of Shang Zuo's affair, and Xu Yi Shang Zuo fought for them.

古文：其后又因灾异申言曰： 比年上下以言为讳，谏官无故而去者再矣。
现代文：随后又借灾异再三说 ：近年以来上下以言事为忌讳，谏官无故而被罢去的屡见不鲜。
English: Then, he repeatedly said, "In recent years, it has become taboo for anyone to say or do anything, and it is not uncommon for eunuchs to be dismissed without reason."

古文：以言名官，且不得尽，况疏远乎。 又论： 用兵以来，资赏泛滥，侥幸捷出，宜加裁制。 夏旱，诏求言，奕言： 当以实意行实政，活民于死，不可责偿于祷祠之间而已也。
现代文：以言为官名，尚且不能尽言，何况不是言官。 又论奏： 用兵以来，恩赏泛滥，侥幸的人走捷径进入仕途，应该加以清理。 夏季发生旱灾，皇上下诏征求直言，许奕说： 应该以实意施行实政，把百姓从死亡线上救活，不能就把希望寄托在祈祷和祭祀上就算了。
English: With speech as the official name, it is still not enough to say, let alone a speech official. Also on the play: Since the use of soldiers, the rewards have been overflowing, and lucky people have taken a shortcut to enter the career path, which should be cleaned up. In the summer, droughts occurred, and the Emperor issued an edict to solicit straight talk, Xu Yi said: It is necessary to implement real politics with sincerity and save the people from the death line, and it is not enough to pin hopes on prayers and sacrifices.

古文：蝗至都城，然后下礼寺讲酺祭，孰非王土，顾及境而惧，偶不至辇下，则终不以为灾乎。 又曰： 权臣之诛也，下至闾巷，欢声如雷。
现代文：蝗灾波及都城，然后才让礼寺请求祭祀，哪儿不是陛下的土地，看到灾害已达都城才害怕，如果灾害没到陛下的脚下，那就始终不认为发生了灾荒啦？ 又说 ：诛杀滥用权力的大臣，下至平民百姓，都欢声如雷。
English: The plague of locusts reached the capital city, and only then did the temple ask for a sacrifice. Where is not His Majesty's land? Only when the plague reached the capital city did they become afraid. If the plague did not reach His Majesty's feet, would they still not think that a disaster had occurred? He also said, "Fighting and killing ministers who abuse their power, down to the common people, they were all overjoyed."

古文：盖更化之初，人有厚望，久而无以相远也，此谤讟之所从生。 又曰： 内降非盛世事也，王璇进状不实而经营以求幸免，裴伸何人，骤为带御器械。 时应诏者甚众，奕言最为剀切。
现代文：更化初期，人们寄托着厚望，时间长了，国家政治并没有好到哪去，这样诽谤和怨言就产生了。 又说 ：内降不是盛世应该出现的事情，王王睿的进状不符合实际却周旋往来以求幸免，裴伸是什么人，很快成为带御器械。 当时应诏上疏的人很多，许奕说的最恳切。
English: In the early days of perestroika, people had high hopes, but as time went on and the country's politics did not improve much, such slander and complaints arose. They also said, "Caving in is not something that should happen in the golden age, Wang Wangrui's promotion was not in line with reality, but he circled back and forth to avoid it, and Pei Shin, what kind of person, soon became a tool. At that time, there were many people who should have been promoted, Xu Yi said most earnestly.

古文：摄兼侍读，每进读至古今治乱，必参言时事： 愿陛下试思，设遇事若此，当何以处之。 必拱默移时，俟帝凝思，乃徐竟其说。
现代文：许奕兼侍读，每当讲读到古今治乱的时候，他定要联系实际，提出： 希望陛下考虑一下，假如遇到类似的事情，应该怎么办？ 许奕一定要沉默一段时间，等皇上认真思考后，才慢慢讲明其中的道理。
English: Xu Yi, who also served as a reader, whenever he read about the ancient and modern times of chaos, he must contact the reality and put forward: I hope that His Majesty will consider what to do if he encounters a similar thing. Xu Yi must be silent for a while, and wait for the emperor to think seriously before slowly explaining the reason.

古文：帝曰： 如此则经筵不徒设矣。 
现代文：皇上说： 如此说来，经筵没白设呀。 
English: The emperor said, "In that case, it was all for nothing."

古文：迁吏部侍郎兼修玉牒官，兼权给事中，论驳十有六事，皆贵族近习之挠政体者。
现代文：许奕升为吏部侍郎兼修玉牒官，兼权给事中，议论驳回了十六件事，这些事都是贵族、宠臣妨碍政体的事。
English: Xu Yisheng was the attendant of the cadre department and the official of repairing the imperial edifice, and in the process of giving power, he rejected sixteen things, all of which were the things that the aristocrats and their favorites hindered the political system.

古文：而封还刘德秀赠典、高文虎之奉祠，士论尤韪之。
现代文：封还对刘德秀父母赠官、对高文虎授予宫观之职，这深得士大夫的赞许。
English: He also bestowed an official title on Liu Dexiu's parents, and conferred the title of Gongguan on Gao Wenhu, which was highly praised by the scholar-doctor.

古文：加杨次山少保、永阳郡王，奕上疏曰： 自古外戚恩宠太甚，鲜不祸咎，天道恶盈，理所必至。
现代文：杨次山被加封为少保、永阳郡王，许奕上疏说 ：自古以来，对外戚过分恩宠，很少不造成祸患的，天道讨厌过分的事，发生祸患是理所当然的。
English: Yang Jishan was awarded the title of Shao Bao and the title of King of Yongyang County. Xu Yi Shangsuo said, "Since ancient times, there have been excessive favors to relatives, which rarely do not cause harm. Heaven abhors excessive things, and it is natural for harm to occur.

古文：次山果辞，则宜从之，如欲更示优恩，则超转少傅，在陛下既隆于恩，在次山知止于义，顾不休哉！ 又言： 史弥远力辞恩命，宜从之以成其美。 疏入，不报。
现代文：杨次山如果推辞，就应该同意，如果想对他表示优待恩宠，那就越级升他为少傅，在陛下就是对他施以厚恩，在杨次山也知道这符合义理，这样不就了结了嘛！ 又说 ：史弥远极力推辞皇上的任命，应该同意以成其美。 奏疏献上后，没有答复。
English: If Yang Jishan refuses, he should agree, and if he wants to show him preferential treatment and grace, then he should be promoted to the rank of Shao Fu. In the case of His Majesty, it is to show him kindness, and Yang Jishan also knows that this is consistent with the principle of justice, so this is not the end! He also said: Shi Yiyuan tried his best to refuse the appointment of the emperor, and should agree to become his beauty. After the report was submitted, there was no reply.

古文：奕遂卧家求补外，以显谟阁待制知泸州。
现代文：许奕就呆在家中请求到地方任职，他以显谟阁待制的身份任泸州知州。
English: Xu Yi stayed at home and asked to be appointed to a local post. He was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and Zhizhou in the capacity of the vice-premier of the State Council.

古文：弥远问所欲言，奕曰： 比观时事，调护之功深，扶持之意少，非朝廷之利也。 
现代文：史弥远问他想说什么，许奕说： 近来看时事，调理保护的事情很多，而帮助朝政的意思很少，这对朝廷不利。 
English: When Shi Miyuan asked him what he wanted to say, Xu Yi said: "Recently, looking at current affairs, there are many things to regulate and protect, but there is little intention to help the government, which is unfavorable to the imperial court.

古文：嘉、叙、泸俱接夷壤，董蛮米在大入，俘杀兵民，四路创安边司穷治其事。
现代文：嘉、叙、泸州都和少数民族接壤，董蛮米在大举入境，俘虏、杀害军民，四路设安边司治理这件事。
English: Jiashu, Shuxiu and Zhangzhou all have borders with ethnic minorities. Dong Banmi entered the country on a large scale, captured and killed soldiers and civilians, and set up four border security departments to deal with the matter.

古文：奕得夷人质之以致所掠，由是迕安边司。
现代文：许奕获得少数民族的人后换回被他们掠走的边境居民，因此得罪了安边司。
English: Xu Yi offended An Bian Si by getting the ethnic minority people and then returning the border residents they had stolen.

古文：夷酋王粲浮檆木万计入贾，奕虑其荡水陆之险，驱之。
现代文：少数民族首领王粲运木万根来做买卖，许奕担心他毁坏水陆险要的地方，驱逐了他。
English: Minority leader Wang Bingyun came to do business, but Xu Yi expelled him, fearing that he would destroy land and water.

古文：安抚使安丙新立大功，谗忌日闻，宰相钱象祖出谤书问奕，奕喟而言： 士不爱一死而因于众多之口，亦可悲也。
现代文：安抚使安丙新立大功，每天都能听到对他的各种谗言，宰相钱象祖拿出诽谤安丙的文书问许奕，许奕感叹地说： 士不吝惜一死而被众口所困扰，也可悲啊。
English: To placate and enable Anpi to make new achievements, every day you can hear all kinds of criticisms against him. The Prime Minister Qian Xiangzu took out a document to slander Anpi and asked Xu Yi. Xu Yi said with regret: It is sad that a scholar did not spare his life and was troubled by everyone.

古文：奕愿以百口保之。 象祖艴然曰： 公悉安子文若此乎？ 适宇文绍节宣抚荆湖还，亦曰： 仆愿亦百口以信许公之言。 于是异论顿息，委寄益专。
现代文：钱象祖生气地说： 你就如此了解安子文吗？ 恰好宇文绍节宣抚荆湖回朝，也说： 我愿以百口人相信许公的话。 于是对安丙的奇谈怪论马上平息，朝廷对他的任用更加专一。
English: Qian Xiangzu said angrily, "Is that how you understand An Ziwen?" It happened to be the Wu Wenshao Festival that Wu Wenshao returned to Jinghu, and he also said, "I would like a hundred people to believe Xu Gong's words." As a result, the bizarre talk about An Hien immediately subsided, and the court was more specific about his appointment.

古文：奕于丙深相知，而职事所关必反复辩数以求直。
现代文：许奕和安丙十分相知，但有关职任的事一定要反复考察以求公正。
English: Xu Yi and An Hii know each other very well, but the matter of the position must be repeatedly examined in order to be fair.

古文：其后士多畔丙，奕独以书疏候问愈数。
现代文：后来士人大多背叛安丙，只有许奕用书信多次问候他。
English: Later, most of the scholars betrayed An Hii, and only Xu Yi sent him greetings by letter several times.

古文：移知夔州，表辞不行，改知遂宁府。
现代文：许奕调为夔州知州，他上表推辞不登程，就改任为遂宁知府。
English: Xu Yi transferred to Zhangzhou Chizhou, he did not go on the trip, he was reassigned to Suining Chifu.

古文：捐缗钱数十万以代民输，复盐策之利以养士，为浮梁作堤数百丈，民德之，画像祠于学。
现代文：他捐钱数十万缗替百姓纳税，又用盐利来养士，为桥梁修了数百丈的堤坝，百姓非常感激他，在学校中画像祭祀他。
English: He donated hundreds of thousands of baht to pay taxes on behalf of the people, and used salt profits to feed the sick, and built hundreds of dams for bridges. The people were very grateful to him, and worshipped him in pictures at school.

古文：进龙图阁待制，加宝谟阁直学士，知潼川府。
现代文：许奕升为龙图阁待制，加为宝谟阁直学士、潼川知府。
English: Xu Yisheng is a Longtu Pavilion trainee, a direct graduate of Baomu Pavilion, and the governor of Beichuan.

古文：霖雨坏城，撤而筑之，不以烦民，亦捐缗钱十二万为十县民代输，于是其民亦相与祠于东山僧舍。
现代文：连雨天使城墙毁坏，他拆去坏的地方重新修好，没烦扰百姓，也捐钱十二万缗替十县的百姓纳税，于是这里的百姓也纷纷在东山的僧寺祭祀他。
English: Even the rain angels destroyed the city wall. He tore down the damaged areas and rebuilt them, without disturbing the people. He also donated 120,000 baht to pay taxes for the people in ten counties. As a result, the people here also sacrificed to him in the Buddhist temple in Dongshan.

古文：会金人败盟，蜀道震扰，奕请 速选威望大臣宣抚，信赏必罚，以奖忠义、收人心。 又言： 忠义之招，体势倒持，兵食顿增，未知攸济，且斩将之人未闻褒擢，败军之将未见施行，事势不决，将有后时之悔。 御史劾奕欺罔，降一官。
现代文：正巧金人背叛盟约，蜀道震动，许奕请求 赶快选派有威望的大臣去四川任宣抚，要信赏必罚，以奖励忠义，收拾人心 。又说： 招抚忠义人，把大权交给别人，军队的粮饷立刻增多，不知如何供给。况且杀敌人将领的人没听说给以奖励提拔，打败仗的将军也没见有什么处罚，这样的事情都没有决断，将来恐怕有后悔的时候。 御史弹劾他欺罔，许奕被降官一级。
English: It just so happened that the Jin people betrayed the covenant, the Shu Road was shaken, and Xu Yi made a request to quickly select and send a prestigious minister to Sichuan to serve as an envoy, to believe in reward and punishment, to reward loyalty, and to tidy up the hearts of the people. He also said: "Invite loyal people, hand over great power to others, the army's grain supply will immediately increase, and I don't know how to supply it. Moreover, those who kill enemy generals have not heard of rewarding and promoting them, and the generals who defeat the war have not seen any punishment. Such things have not been decided, and I am afraid there will

古文：诏提举玉降宫，未数月，特复元官，提举崇福宫。
现代文：诏命他提举玉隆宫，几个月后，他又被特许官复原职，提举崇福宫。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to elevate the Yulong Palace. A few months later, he was reinstated as a special official and elevated the Chongfu Palace.

古文：还家，草遗表曰： 自念本非衰病，初染微疴。
现代文：许奕回到家中，起草遗表说： 自以为本来不衰老、没大病，只是刚染小病。
English: Xu Yi returned home, drafted a suicide note and said: I thought I was not aging and did not have a serious illness, but I just had a minor illness.

古文：当汤熨可去之时，臣以疾而为讳；及针石已穷之后，医束手而莫图。
现代文：在吃点药就能去病的时候，我讳疾忌医；等到用石针都不能治好的时候，医生也束手无策了。
English: When I can get rid of my illness by taking a little medicine, I avoid going to the doctor; when I can't be cured with a stone needle, the doctor is helpless.

古文：靖言膏肓所致之由，大抵脉络不通之故。 皆寓讽谏之意。
现代文：要说导致病入膏肓的原因，大抵是脉络不通的缘故。 其中都寓有讽谏的意思。
English: To say that the cause of the illness is fatal is mostly due to the lack of a clear line of descent, all of which have the meaning of irony.

古文：进显谟阁直学士致仕，赠通议大夫。
现代文：许奕升为显谟阁直学士辞官，被赠为通议大夫。
English: Xu Yisheng was appointed as the Direct Lecturer of Hsien Mok Court and was awarded the title of Doctor of General Discourse.

古文：初，奕之守泸，帝顾礼部尚书章颖曰： 许奕已去乎？ 起居舍人真德秀侍帝前，论人才，上以骨鲠称之。
现代文：当初，许奕为泸州守臣，皇上问礼部尚书章颖： 许奕已经离开了吗？ 起居舍人真德秀在皇上跟前侍奉，议论人才，皇上称赞许奕耿直。
English: At the beginning, Xu Yi was the governor of Zhangzhou. The emperor asked the head of the ceremonial department, Shang Shuzhangying, "Has Xu Yi left yet?" The resident servant, Zhen De Xiu, served in front of the emperor and discussed talents. The emperor praised Xu Yi.

古文：奕天性孝友，送死恤孤，恩意备至。
现代文：许奕天性孝友，给死者送葬，抚恤孤苦的人，对他们恩义备至。
English: Xu Yi natural filial piety, send the dead to be buried, and support those who are destitute, and be grateful to them.

古文：通籀隶书，所著有《毛诗说》、《论语尚书周礼讲义》、奏议、杂文行世。
现代文：他精通籀文隶书，著述有《毛诗说》、《论语讲义》、《尚书讲义》、《周礼讲义》、奏议、杂文在世间流行。
English: He is proficient in the writing of prose and prose, and his works such as "Mao's Poetry," "On Language Lectures," "Shangshu Lectures," "Zhouli Lectures," "Proposal," and miscellaneous writings are popular in the world.

古文：陈居仁，字安行，兴化军人。
现代文：陈居仁，字安行，兴化军人。
English: Chen Ju Ren, Zi An Xing, Xinghua soldier.

古文：父太府少卿膏，娶明州汪氏女，因家焉。
现代文：他的父亲太府少卿陈膏，娶明州汪氏的女儿为妻，于是家住在明州。
English: His father, the Taifu Shaoqing Chen An, married the daughter of the Mingzhou Wang family, and the family lived in Mingzhou.

古文：膏初为汾州教授，佐守臣张克戩捍金人。
现代文：陈膏开始为汾州教授，辅佐守臣张克戬抵御金人。
English: Chen An started as a professor of Zhangzhou, and was assisted by the tutor Zhang Kejun in resisting the Jin people.

古文：后知惠州，单马造曾衮垒，譬晓降之。
现代文：后来任惠州知州，单人匹马到曾衮的营垒中，用比喻讲明道理使他归降。
English: Later, he was appointed to Huizhou Zhizhou, and went to Zeng Yao's camp single-handedly, using a metaphor to explain the reason for his surrender.

古文：鄞僧王法恩谋逆事觉，或请屠城，膏方为御史，力论多杀非圣世事，胁从者悉宽宥之。
现代文：鄞县的和尚王法恩谋反的事被发觉，有人请求屠城，陈膏当时正任御史，极力论述多杀人不是盛世的事，被胁从的人都加以宽待。
English: The rebellion plotted by the Monk King Fahn of Min County was discovered, and there was a request to slaughter the city. At that time, Chen Pu was in charge of the imperial history, and he tried his best to argue that killing many people was not a prosperous thing, and that those who were coerced into following him should be treated leniently.

古文：居仁年十四而孤，以荫授铅山尉。
现代文：陈居仁十四岁丧父，因恩荫被授予铅山县尉。
English: Chen Ju-Ren lost his father at the age of fourteen and was awarded the title of Lead Mountain County Lieutenant for his kindness.

古文：绍兴二十一年举进士。
现代文：绍兴二十一年他被推举参加进士考试。
English: In the 21st year of Shaoxing, he was nominated to participate in the entrance examination.

古文：秦桧与膏有故，有劝以一见可得美官，居仁曰： 是有命焉。 终不自通。
现代文：秦桧与陈膏有故交，有人劝陈居仁去拜见秦桧就能获得美官，陈居仁说： 这是命中注定的事。 
English: Qin Hui and Chen An have a long-standing friendship. Some people advised Chen Jiren to go and pay homage to Qin Hui so that he could obtain a high-ranking position. Chen Jiren said, "This is a predestined matter.

古文：移永丰令，入盐行在点检赡军激赏酒库所籴场，诏修《高宗圣政》，妙选寮属，与范成大并充检讨官。
现代文：始终没走秦桧的门路。他转任永丰县令，入京任监行在点检赡军激赏酒库所籴场，皇上下诏修《高宗圣政》，选择僚属，他和范成大都充作检讨官。
English: He never followed the path of Qin Hui. He was transferred to Yongfeng County, and when he entered Beijing, he was appointed as the supervisor of the inspection of the wine warehouse where the inspection troops were awarded, and the emperor ordered the revision of "Gaozong Shengzheng" and the selection of his subordinates. He and Fan Chengda both served as inspectors.

古文：淮甸交兵，魏杞以宗正少卿使金，辟居仁幕下。
现代文：淮甸交战，魏杞以宗正少卿的身份出使金国，征召陈居仁为幕僚。
English: When war broke out in Huai-Dian, Wei Wei dispatched Jin Guo in the capacity of Zong Zheng Shaoqing and enlisted Chen Jiren as a staff member.

古文：时和战未决，金兵驻淮北，人情恟惧，突骑大至，弯弓夹道，居仁上马，犹从容举酒属杞： 天寒且酹此觞。 观者壮之。
现代文：当时和战不定，金兵驻在淮北，人心恐惧，突然金国骑兵到来，拉开弓箭站在道两旁，陈居仁上马，还从容举杯交给魏杞说： 天气寒冷，先喝了这杯酒。 
English: At that time, peace and war were uncertain, the gold soldiers were stationed in Huaibei, and people were afraid. Suddenly, the Chinese cavalry arrived and stood on both sides of the road with their bows and arrows drawn. Chen Jueren got on his horse and calmly raised his glass to Wei Wei and said: It's cold, drink this glass of wine first.

古文：乃谕金人开道入，卒成礼，减岁币而还。
现代文：观看的人很佩服他，于是他让金人开道入境，终于达成和议，减少岁币回到京城。
English: The people watching him admired him very much, so he let the gold person enter the country, finally reached a peaceful discussion, reduced the annual fee and returned to Beijing.

古文：因出疆赏，转承议郎，授诸王宫大小学教授。
现代文：因出使金国受赏，陈居仁转为承议郎，被授予诸王宫大小学教授。
English: As a reward for dispatching Jin Guo, Chen Jueren was turned into a negotiator and was awarded the highest rank of professor in Zhuwang Palace.

古文：杞秉国柄，居仁忍贫需远次，未尝求进。
现代文：魏杞掌握大权，陈居仁安于依次补任为官，不曾谋求进升。
English: Wei Wei seized power, and Chen Ju Ren An was successively appointed as an official, and did not seek promotion.

古文：虞允文欲引以为用，不就。
现代文：虞允文想召他为自己的幕僚，他不去。
English: Yu Yunwen wants to call him as his staff, but he won't go.

古文：允文欲与论兵，谢不能，退而贻书谓： 有定力乃可立事，若徒为大言，终必无成，幸成亦旋败。 允文为之色动。
现代文：虞允文想同他谈论兵事，他推辞说不行，回来后他给虞允文写信说 ：有能力才能成就大事，如果只说大话，最终将一事无成，幸而成功很快也要失败。 虞允文为此不高兴。
English: Yu Yunwen wanted to talk to him about military affairs, but he refused, saying it was impossible. After returning, he wrote to Yu Yunwen, "Ability can only achieve great things. If you only talk about great things, you will ultimately achieve nothing. Fortunately, success will soon lead to failure. Yu Yunwen is not happy about this.

古文：徙主军器监簿、宗正修玉牒。
现代文：陈居仁转为军器监主簿、宗正修玉牒。
English: Chen Jiren became the chief inspector of military equipment, and Zongzheng became the inspector of jade.

古文：转对，言： 立国须定规模，陛下非无可致之资，而规模未立。 孝宗初颇不怿，曰： 朕未尝不立规模。 居仁奏： 陛下锐意恢复，继乃通和，和、战、守三者迄今未定，孰为规模耶？ 允文曰： 此正前日定力之论，某今益知此言之当也。 
现代文：百官转对时，他说： 立国必须定下规制，陛下不是没有立国的资质，只是规制没定下。 孝宗开始很不高兴，说： 朕什么时候没定下规制。 陈居仁奏道 ：陛下锐意恢复失地，接着和金国讲和，和、战、守三方面至今不定，哪个是规制呢？ 虞允文说 ：这正是他先前有关能力的论述，我今天更知道这些话的恰当了。 
English: When the centurion turned to face him, he said, "The founding of a country requires the establishment of regulations. Your majesty is not unqualified to establish a country, but the regulations have not been established. Xiaozong began to be very unhappy, saying, "When did I not establish regulations?" Chen Jueren said, "Your majesty is determined to recover the lost territory, and then make peace with China, but the three aspects of peace, war, and defense are still uncertain. Which is the regulation?" Yu Yunwen said, "This is exactly his previous discussion about ability, and today I know these words are more appropriate."

古文：迁将作监丞，转国子丞。
现代文：陈居仁升为将作监丞，转为国子丞。
English: Chen Jiren was promoted to the position of vice-commander-in-chief and then to vice-commander-in-chief.

古文：九年，进秘书丞。
现代文：乾道九年升为秘书丞。
English: Nine years later, he was promoted to secretary jo.

古文：入对，论文武并用长久之术： 陛下奖进武臣，深得持平救偏之道，然未必得智谋勇略之士，或多便佞轻躁之徒，将复有偏胜之患。 帝喜纳。
现代文：入朝奏对，谈论文武并用长久的方法： 陛下奖励进用武臣，非常符合持平救偏的道理，但未必得到有智谋勇略的人，或者多是些邪佞轻浮的人，将又有偏重的祸患。 皇上高兴地采纳。
English: His Majesty's reward for the promotion of military officers is very much in line with the principle of equality and relief, but it may not necessarily get people with clever strategies, or more likely, those who are wicked and frivolous, and will have the misfortune of being biased.

古文：权礼部郎官。
现代文：陈居仁为权礼部郎官。
English: Chen Jiren was appointed to the post of deputy to the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：尝言台阁宜多用明习典故之士，帝问其人，居仁以李焘、莫济对。
现代文：他曾说台阁应该多用通晓典故的人，皇上问谁能胜任，他回答说李焘、莫济可以。
English: He once said that the cabinet should make more use of people who are familiar with the anecdotes. The emperor asked who could be competent, and he replied that Li Xi and Moji could.

古文：甫数日，召焘。
现代文：刚过了几天，李焘就被征召。
English: Just a few days later, Li Yao was called up.

古文：居仁力请外，乃知徽州。
现代文：陈居仁极力请求到地方任职，于是他被任命为徽州知州。
English: Chen Jueren strongly requested to serve in a local post, so he was appointed to Huizhou Zhizhou.

古文：帝令陛辞，慰谕遣之。
现代文：皇上命令他入朝向皇上辞别，对他进行慰勉、告诫。
English: The emperor ordered him to go to the imperial court to bid farewell to the emperor, and consoled and admonished him.

古文：至郡，告以天子节经费以惠俭瘠，不能推广圣德，吏则有罪。
现代文：他到徽州后，宣布说天子节约经费对百姓施以仁爱，不能推广恩德，官吏就有罪。
English: After he arrived in Huizhou, he announced that the Son of Heaven would save money and show benevolence to the people. If he could not promote benevolence, government officials would be guilty.

古文：乃招三衙军，植二表于庭，有输纳中度而遭抑退者，抱所输立表下，亲视之，人无留滞，吏不能措手，输税者恒裹赢以归。
现代文：于是招集三衙军，在庭中树起二个标志，有纳税符合标准却遭到抑退的人，拿着自己交纳的东西站在标志下，亲自观看，人不滞留，官吏不能处理，纳税的人常常是带着多余的税物而回。
English: As a result, the three-pronged army was summoned, and two signs were set up in the courtyard. People who had paid taxes in accordance with the standards but had been repressed stood under the sign with what they had paid and watched it in person. People did not stay, officials could not handle it, and taxpayers often returned with excess taxes.

古文：邻州有讼，多诣台省乞决于居仁。
现代文：邻州有诉讼，多到台省请求让陈居仁决断。
English: There are lawsuits in neighboring states, and many have gone to Taiwan Province to request that Chen Jiren make a decision.

古文：秩满，邦人挽留，由间道始得去。
现代文：陈居仁任官期满后，当地人挽留他，他走小路才得以离开。
English: After Chen Jiren's term of office expired, the locals detained him, and he was able to leave by taking a side road.

古文：入对，帝举新安之政奖之。
现代文：陈居仁入朝奏对，皇上用新安的政绩奖励他。
English: Chen Ju-Ren entered the imperial court to play the flute, and the emperor rewarded him with Xin'an's political achievements.

古文：请编类隆兴以来宽恤诏令，有曰： 法久则易玩，事久则易怠。
现代文：他请求把隆兴以来发布的宽恤诏令编辑分类，其中说道： 法令时间长了就容易忽视，事情时间长了就容易懈怠，只有严加戒饬，使人们在思想上有所警惕，那就会千万年如一日。 皇上说： 很有道理。 
English: He asked for a classification of the edicts issued since the Longxing Dynasty, saying, "If a decree takes a long time, it is easy to ignore it, and if a matter takes a long time, it is easy to slack off. Only by strictly enforcing discipline and making people wary in their thoughts will it last for thousands of years. The emperor said, "It makes sense."

古文：惟申加戒饬，有以儆其观听，则千万年犹一日。 帝曰： 名言也。 又言： 归正忠顺，过于优渥，而遇战士反轻。此曹出万死策勋，今老矣，添差已罢，廪稍半给，至丐于市，军士解体。乞加优恤，以终始念功之意，坚后生图报之心。 帝览之嘉叹。
现代文：他又说： 朝廷对归正的人和忠顺的人，过于优待，而对战士反而不重视。战士们出生入死建立功勋，如今老了，添差已被罢去，廪食也只给一半，甚至在市上乞讨，军士解体。请朝廷对他们加以优抚，来表明国家始终感念他们的功劳，使后来的战士坚定报国之心。 皇上看后很高兴。
English: He also said, "The Imperial Court treats those who have been converted and those who have been loyal too favorably, but it does not pay attention to the soldiers. The soldiers worked hard from birth to death to build up their merits, and now they are old, their posts have been removed, they are only given half of their rations, they even beg in the market, and their sergeants have been disbanded. I would like to ask the Imperial Court to give them a special treatment, to show that the country has always been impressed with their merits, and to make the later soldiers have a firm heart to serve the country. The Emperor was very pleased to see them.

古文：会驾大阅白石，即命再添差两任，衣粮全给，三军为之呼舞。
现代文：恰好皇上在白石阅兵，就命令给战士再添差两任，衣粮全给，三军因此而欢欣鼓舞。
English: Just as the emperor was on a military parade in Shiroishi, he ordered two more posts to be given to the soldiers, and all the food and clothing to be given. The three armies were delighted and encouraged.

古文：留为户部右曹郎官，命未下，朝方推《会要》赏，帝曰： 陈居仁治行为天下第一，可因是并赏之。 特转朝议大夫兼权度支，又兼权礼部。
现代文：陈居仁留任户部右曹郎官，诏命没下达，朝廷正为《会要》编成而论功行赏，皇上说 ：陈居仁的政绩是天下第一，可因此一起奖励他。 他特被转为朝议大夫兼权度支，又兼权礼部。
English: Chen Juerin remained in his post as the right-hand man of the household department, but the imperial decree was not issued, and the imperial court was discussing and awarding merit for the compilation of "Meeting Points." The emperor said: Chen Juerin's political performance is the best in the world, so he can be rewarded for it. He was specially transferred to be the doctor of the imperial court, and also the right-hand man, and also the right-hand man of the ceremony department.

古文：会枢属阙员，方进拟，帝曰： 岂有人才如陈居仁而可久为郎乎？ 即授枢密院检详文字，寻为右司，迁左司，又迁检正中书门下省诸房公事，历兼左藏诸库。
现代文：恰好枢密院缺额，正在选拔人员，皇上说 ：哪有陈居仁这样的人才可以久任郎官呢？ 就授予他枢密院检详文字，不久为右司，升为左司，又升为检正中书门下省诸房公事，历兼左藏诸库。
English: Just as there was a vacancy in the Privy Council and they were in the process of selecting personnel, the emperor said, "Who is there such a talented person as Chen Jiren who can serve as a vassal for a long time?" He awarded him the Privy Council's Inspection of Detailed Texts, and soon he was promoted to the Right Division, then to the Left Division, and then to the Inspection of General Affairs of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：居仁亲视按牍，尝谓： 有罪幸免则冤者何告，诬枉者七人皆当叙复。 执政难之，居仁退，疏其冤状上之。
现代文：陈居仁亲阅案卷，曾说： 有罪的被免罪那么有冤屈的人上哪里去申告，被诬陷冤枉的七个人都应该叙复。 执政不同意，陈居仁退去，写明他们的冤情呈上。
English: Chen Jueren himself read the case file and once said: If the guilty are exonerated, then where will the people with grievances go to report, and the seven people who were falsely accused should all report. The government disagreed, and Chen Jueren retreated and wrote down their grievances.

古文：帝曰： 居仁精审，尚复何疑。 诏以旱求言，居仁乞命公卿务行宽大，御史京镗极论从窄之敝，此风未革。
现代文：皇上说 ：陈居仁办事精密确当，还有什么可怀疑的。 因天旱下诏征求直言，陈居仁请求命令公卿务必实行宽大的政策，御史京镗透彻地论述施政太严的弊病，这种风气没有改变。
English: The emperor said, "Chen Jueren's work is precise and proper, and there is nothing to be suspicious of." Due to the drought, the imperial edict solicited frank speech, Chen Jueren requested to order the court noble to implement a lenient policy, and the imperial historian thoroughly discussed the ills of too strict governance. This culture has not changed.

古文：假吏部尚书使金，还，迁起居郎，寻兼详定一司敕令兼权中书舍人，泛恩滥赏，封缴无所避。
现代文：陈居仁以吏部尚书的身份出使金国，回来后，升为起居郎，不久兼任详定一司敕令兼权中书舍人，对朝廷的泛恩滥赏，他都给以封驳，无所回避。
English: Chen Ju-Ren was sent to the State of Jin as the official of the Ministry of Letters. After his return, he was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Ministry of Letters. Soon, he was also appointed as the detailed secretary of the Ministry of Letters and the person who gave up the power of the Ministry of Letters.

古文：因言： 恩惠不及小民，名为宽逋负，实以惠顽民耳；名为赦有罪，实以惠奸民耳。
现代文：他还说 ：恩惠不波及一般百姓，名义上放宽对拖欠税赋的征收，实际是对刁顽的人施恩；名义上赦免有罪的人，实际是对奸邪的人施恩。
English: He also said: the benefits do not extend to the general public. The nominal relaxation of the collection of tax arrears is actually a favor to the stubborn; the nominal pardon of the guilty is actually a favor to the evil-doers.

古文：愿尽放天下五等户身丁，四等户一半。 从之。
现代文：希望把五等户的身丁钱全部免去，四等户的免去一半。 
English: It is hoped that the fifth-class households will be exempted from all the body money, and the fourth-class households will be exempted from half.

古文：安定王子肜乞封妾为夫人，居仁缴奏，帝喜迎，谓有补风教。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的建议。安定王子肜请求加封他的妾为夫人，陈居仁驳还他的奏疏，皇上很高兴，认为对风教有补益。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion. Prince Anzai requested to add his concubine, Wu, as his wife, and Chen Ju-Ren rejected his request. The emperor was pleased and thought that it would be beneficial to the teaching of traditional customs.

古文：又论： 君人之道，贵在执要，今陛下亲细故而忽远猷，事末节而忘大体，愿举纲要以御臣下，省思虑以颐精神。 诘旦，令清中书之务。
现代文：陈居仁又论奏 ：驾驭人的方法，贵在掌握要领，现在陛下亲自处理小事而忽视远大的谋略，重视小节而忘了大体，希望陛下举纲要以御使臣下，减少思虑以颐养精神。 第二天早晨，命令他澄清中书的事务。
English: Chen Jueren also commented: "The way to manage people is to master the essentials, and now His Majesty personally deals with small things and ignores the grand strategy, attaches importance to the measures and forgets the general, and hopes that His Majesty will outline with the envoys, reduce the worries and nurture the spirit." The next morning, he ordered him to clarify the matters in the letter.

古文：权直学士院。
现代文：他为权直学士院。
English: He is a graduate of the Kwon Chung Academy.

古文：帝曰： 内外制向委数人，今陈居仁一人当之，不见其难。 乞诏大臣博议 绝浮费，汰冗兵，计当省之数，定蠲除之目，此富民之要术也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：内外制从前委托数人，现在陈居仁一人承担，不见他有什么为难。 陈居仁请求下诏让大臣深入广泛地讨论有关 停止浪费，裁减冗兵，统计应当节省的费用数，确定免掉的租税项目。 这些都是官民的要求。
English: The emperor said, "In the past, the domestic and foreign affairs system was entrusted to several people, but now Chen Jueren is the only one to bear the responsibility, and I don't see any difficulties for him. Chen Jueren requested that the minister make an edict to discuss in depth and extensively the issues of stopping waste, reducing redundancy, calculating the number of expenses that should be saved, and determining the tax items that should be exempted. These are the requirements of the public and private sectors.

古文：以集英殿修撰知鄂州，筑长堤捍江，新安乐寮以养贫病之民，拨闲田归之。
现代文：陈居仁以集英殿修撰的身份任鄂州知州，他筑长堤防御江水泛滥，翻新安乐寮使贫病的百姓住在那里，拨出闲田归他们使用。
English: Chen Ju-Ren was appointed to Ezhou Chizhou in the capacity of Shuxian of the Shuei Dynasty. He built a long embankment to defend against river flooding, renovated Anle-Liao to enable poor and sick people to live there, and set aside idle fields for their use.

古文：进焕章阁待制，移建宁府。
现代文：陈居仁升为焕章阁待制，转任建宁知府。
English: Chen Jiren was promoted to the position of Huan Zhangge, and transferred to the position of Jianning Prefecture.

古文：岁饥，出储粟平其价，弛逋负以巨万计，代输畸零茧税。
现代文：当年发生饥荒，他拿出储备的米来平衡粮价，对数以巨万计的拖欠税赋加以宽限，代交零散的茧税。
English: When a famine occurred that year, he took out rice reserves to balance grain prices, gave a grace period to tens of millions of tax arrears, and paid scattered taxes.

古文：有因告籴杀人者，会赦免，居仁曰： 此乱民也，释之将覆出为恶。 遂诛之。
现代文：有因告发买粮而杀人的，正赶上赦免罪犯，陈居仁说： 这是乱民，放了他将会再出来为恶。 就杀了罪犯。
English: When Chen Jiren was about to pardon a criminal who had killed a man for denouncing him for buying grain, he said, "This is a ruffian. If he is released, he will return to evil." So he killed the criminal.

古文：观察推官柳某死，贫不克归，二子行丐于道，闻而怜之，予之衣食，买田以养之，择师以教之。
现代文：观察推官柳某去世，贫困的无法归葬，他的二个儿子在路上乞讨，陈居仁听说后很怜悯他们，给他们衣服、粮食，买田来养活他们，选老师教育他们。
English: Observing the death of magistrate Liu Mou, the poor could not be buried, his two sons were begging on the road, Chen Jiren took pity on them, gave them clothes and grain, bought fields to feed them, and selected teachers to educate them.

古文：镇江大旱，又移居仁守镇江。
现代文：镇江发生大旱灾，又把陈居仁调到镇江为守臣。
English: A severe drought occurred in Zhenjiang, and Chen Jiren was transferred to Zhenjiang as the guardian.

古文：请以缗钱十四万给兵食，不报；为书以义撼丞相，然后许。
现代文：陈居仁请求用十四万缗钱供给士兵粮食，没有答复；他又写信以义打动丞相，然后才得到允许。
English: Chen Jiren's request to use 140,000 baht to supply soldiers with grain went unanswered; he wrote a letter to impress the prime minister with his righteousness before he was allowed to leave.

古文：发时密往觇之。
现代文：调发缗钱时陈居仁秘密前去观看。
English: When the money was transferred, Chen Jiren secretly went to watch.

古文：间遣籴运于荆楚商人，商人曰： 是陈待制耶？ 争以粟就籴。
现代文：他暗中派人向荆楚地区的商人买粮，商人问： 是陈待制派来的吗？ 就争相卖粮。
English: He secretly sent people to buy grain from merchants in the Jingchu area. The merchants asked: Was it sent by Chen Wait System? They competed to sell grain.

古文：居仁区画有方，所存活数万计。
现代文：陈居仁赈灾有方，使数以万计的人活了下来。
English: Chen Ju-Ren's skillful relief of the disaster enabled tens of thousands of people to survive.

古文：因饥民治古海鲜界港，为石〈石达〉丹徒境上，蓄泄以时，以通漕运。
现代文：他又发动饥民治理古时的海鲜界港，在丹徒修石石达，按时节储水放水，使漕运畅通。
English: He also launched the hungry people to govern the ancient seafood world port, in Dantu to repair the stone and stone, to store and release water on time, and to make the rowing smooth.

古文：治江阴奸僧。
现代文：他惩治江阴的奸僧。
English: He punished the evil monks in Jiangyin.

古文：加宝文阁待制、知福州。
现代文：陈居仁被加封为宝文阁待制、福州知州。
English: Chen Jiren was added to the Baobeng Pavilion, Fuzhou, Chizhou.

古文：入境，有饥民啸聚，部分迓兵遮击之，首恶计穷，自经死。
现代文：他到福州，有饥民聚在一起反抗，他分派迓兵阻击，首谋无计可施，自杀。
English: He went to Fuzhou, where starving people gathered to resist. He dispatched soldiers to stop them. The ringleader had no choice but to commit suicide.

古文：治宗室之暴横，申蛊毒之旧禁。
现代文：陈居仁治理宗室的暴横，申明毒害的旧禁令。
English: Chen Jueren governs the domicile of violence, affirming the old ban on poisoning.

古文：有召命求间者，再进华文阁直学士，提举太平兴国宫，卒，赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：有诏命求间者，陈居仁又升为华文阁直学士，提举太平兴国宫，他去世后，被赠为金紫光禄大夫。
English: When there was an imperial edict ordering him to intercede, Chen Jiren was promoted to the rank of a direct bachelor of the Chinese Academy of Letters and elevated to the Taiping Xingguo Palace. After his death, he was given the title of the doctor of the Golden Purple Light.

古文：居仁风度凝远，处己应物，壹以诚信。
现代文：陈居仁风度稳健宏远，对人对己，一律待以诚信。
English: Chen Jiren's demeanor is steady and far-reaching, and he treats everyone with integrity.

古文：临事毅然有守，所至号称循吏，皆立祠祀之。
现代文：遇事坚强果断有操守，所到之处号称是奉职守法的官吏，人们都建祠祭祀他。
English: He was strong and resolute in the face of adversity. He was known as a dutiful and law-abiding official everywhere he went. People built shrines to worship him.

古文：有奏议、制稿、诗文行世。
现代文：有奏议、制稿、诗文在世间流行。
English: Recitation, manuscript writing and poetry are all popular in the world.

古文：子卓。
现代文：他的儿子叫陈卓。
English: His son is named Chen Zhuo.

