古文：天行有常，不为尧存，不为桀亡。
现代文：天道有一定规律，它不为尧而存在，不为桀而灭亡。
English: The heavenly way has a certain law. It does not exist for the sake of the world, and it does not perish for the sake of the world.

古文：应之以治则吉，应之以乱则凶。
现代文：用导致安定的措施去适应它就吉利，用导致混乱的措施去适应它就凶险。
English: It is auspicious to adapt to it with measures that lead to stability, and it is dangerous to adapt to it with measures that lead to chaos.

古文：彊本而节用，则天不能贫；养备而动时，则天不能病；循道而不贰，则天不能祸。
现代文：加强农业这个根本而节约费用，那么天就不会使他贫穷；衣食给养齐备而活动适时，那么天就不会使他生病；遵循规律不出差错，那么天就不会使他遭殃。
English: Strengthen agriculture, which is fundamental and cost-saving, then the heavens will not make him poor; clothing and food supply is ready and activities are timely, then the heavens will not make him sick; follow the rules without making mistakes, then the heavens will not make him suffer.

古文：故水旱不能使之饥，寒暑不能使之疾，袄怪不能使之凶。
现代文：所以水涝旱灾不能使他挨饿，严寒酷暑不能使他生病，自然界的反常变异不能使他遭殃。
English: Therefore, floods and droughts cannot starve him, cold and heat cannot make him sick, and abnormal changes in the natural world cannot make him suffer.

古文：本荒而用侈，则天不能使之富;养略而动罕，则天不能使之全；倍道而妄行，则天不能使之吉。
现代文：农业荒废而生活用度奢侈，那么天就不会使他富裕；衣食不足却又十分懒惰，那么天就不能使他保全健康；违背规律而恣意妄为，那么天就不能使他吉利。
English: If agriculture is wasteful and his living expenses are extravagant, then Heaven will not make him rich; if he lacks food and clothing but is very lazy, then Heaven will not allow him to preserve his health; if he violates the law and acts arbitrarily, then Heaven will not make him lucky.

古文：故水旱未至而饥，寒暑未薄而疾，袄怪未至而凶。
现代文：所以水涝旱灾还没有来到他就已经挨饿了，严寒酷暑还没有迫近他就生病了，自然界的反常变异还没有出现他就遭殃了。
English: Therefore, before the floods and droughts come, he is already starving, before the cold and heat are approaching, he is sick, and before the abnormal changes in the natural world appear, he is suffering.

古文：受时与治世同，而殃祸与治世异，不可以怨天，其道然也。
现代文：他遇到的天时和社会安定时期相同，而灾祸却与社会安定时期不同，这不能埋怨上天，这是他所采取的措施造成的。
English: He encountered the same weather and social stability period, but the disaster was different from the social stability period. This cannot be blamed on the heavens, it was caused by the measures he took.

古文：故明于天人之分，则可谓至人矣。
现代文：所以明白了人和天的不同，就可以称作是思想修养达到了最高境界的人了。
English: Therefore, if you understand the difference between man and heaven, you can be called a person who has reached the highest level of ideological cultivation.

古文：不为而成，不求而得，夫是之谓天职。
现代文：不做就能成功，不求取就能得到，这叫做自然的职能。
English: You can succeed without doing, and you can get without seeking. This is called the function of nature.

古文：如是者，虽深、其人不加虑焉；虽大、不加能焉；虽精、不加察焉，夫是之谓不与天争职。
现代文：像这种情况，即使意义深远，那思想修养达到了最高境界的人对它也不加以思考；即使影响广大，那思想修养达到了最高境界的人对它也不加以干预；即使道理精妙，那思想修养达到了最高境界的人对它也不加以审察，这叫做不和自然争职能。
English: In such a case, even if the meaning is far-reaching, the person with the highest cultivation of thought will not think about it; even if it affects the masses, the person with the highest cultivation of thought will not interfere with it; even if the reason is subtle, the person with the highest cultivation of thought will not examine it. This is called the function of not competing with nature.

古文：天有其时，地有其财，人有其治，夫是之谓能参。
现代文：上天有自己的时令季节，大地有自己的材料资源，人类有自己的治理方法，这叫做能够互相并列。
English: Heaven has its own season, the earth has its own material resources, and human beings have their own governance methods. This is called being able to coexist with each other.

古文：舍其所以参，而愿其所参，则惑矣。
现代文：人如果舍弃了自身用来与天、地相并列的治理方法，而只期望于与自己相并列的天、地，那就糊涂了。
English: If a person abandons the governance method that he uses to be on a par with heaven and earth, and only expects heaven and earth to be on a par with him, then he is confused.

古文：列星随旋，日月递炤，四时代御，阴阳大化，风雨博施，万物各得其和以生，各得其养以成，不见其事，而见其功，夫是之谓神。
现代文：布列于天空的恒星互相伴随着旋转，日月交替照耀，四季交替，阴阳二气大量地化生万物，风雨广泛地滋润万物。万物各自得到了阴阳形成的和气而产生，各自得到了风雨的滋养而成长。看不见阴阳化生万物的工作过程而只见到它化生万物的成果，这就叫做神妙。
English: The stars displayed in the sky rotate with each other, the sun and the moon shine alternately, the four seasons alternate, and the yin and yang of the two airs produce all things in large quantities, and the wind and rain widely moisturize all things. All things are produced by the harmony formed by the yin and yang, and are nourished by the wind and rain. It is called miraculous not to see the working process of the yin and yang of the creation of all things, but only to see the results of its transformation of all things.

古文：皆知其所以成，莫知其无形，夫是之谓天功。
现代文：人们都知道阴阳已经生成的万物，却没有人知道它那无形无踪的生成过程，这就叫做天。
English: People know everything that has been created by yin and yang, but no one knows its invisible and trace-free creation process, which is called heaven.

古文：唯圣人为不求知天。
现代文：只有圣人是不致力于了解天的。
English: Only a sage is not committed to understanding the heavens.

古文：天职既立，天功既成，形具而神生，好恶喜怒哀乐臧焉，夫是之谓天情。
现代文：天的职能已经确立，天的功效已经形成，人的形体也就具备而精神也就产生了，好恶、喜怒、哀乐都蕴藏其中，这就是天然的情感。
English: The function of heaven has been established, the effect of heaven has been formed, the human form has been formed, and the spirit has been produced. The likes and dislikes, emotions, and sorrows are all contained in it. This is the natural emotion.

古文：耳目鼻口形能各有接而不相能也，夫是之谓天官。
现代文：耳朵、眼睛、鼻子、嘴巴、身体各有不同的感触外界的能力而不能互相替代，这就是天然的感官。
English: The ears, eyes, nose, mouth, and body each have a different ability to sense the outside world and cannot replace each other. These are the natural senses.

古文：心居中虚，以治五官，夫是之谓天君。
现代文：心居中心而统率五官，这叫作天然的君主。
English: When the mind is at the center and governs the five senses, it is called a natural monarch.

古文：财非其类以养其类，夫是之谓天养。
现代文：人类能够控制安排好与自己不是同类的万物，用它们来供养自己的同类，这叫作天然的供养。
English: Humans can control and arrange all things that are not the same as themselves, and use them to provide for their own kind, which is called natural provisioning.

古文：顺其类者谓之福，逆其类者谓之祸，夫是之谓天政。
现代文：能利用自然之物来供养人类的就是福，不能利用自然之物供养人类的就是祸患，这叫作天然的政治。
English: To be able to use the things of nature to support mankind is a blessing; not to be able to use the things of nature to support mankind is a calamity. This is called natural politics.

古文：暗其天君，乱其天官，弃其天养，逆其天政，背其天情，以丧天功，夫是之谓大凶。
现代文：蒙蔽了那天然的君主，扰乱了那天然的感官，抛弃了那天然的供养，违反了那天然的政治，背离了那天然的情感，以致丧失了天然的功绩，这就是大灾难了。
English: Having blinded the natural prince, disturbed the natural senses, forsaken the natural provision, violated the natural politics, departed from the natural affections, and thus lost the natural merit, this is the great calamity.

古文：圣人清其天君，正其天官，备其天养，顺其天政，养其天情，以全其天功。
现代文：圣人清醒自己那天然的君主，管理好自己那天然的感官，完备那天然的供养，顺应那天然的政治，保养那天然的情感，从而成全了天然的功绩。
English: The sage awakens his natural sovereign, manages his natural senses, perfects his natural sustenance, follows his natural politics, preserves his natural emotions, and thus fulfills his natural merit.

古文：如是，则知其所为，知其所不为矣；则天地官而万物役矣。
现代文：这样的话，就是明白了自己应该做的事，明白了自己不应该做的事，那么天、地都能发挥它的作用，万物都能被人类役使了。
English: In this way, if you understand what you should do and what you should not do, then heaven and earth can play their role, and all things can be used by mankind.

古文：其行曲治，其养曲适，其生不伤，夫是之谓知天。
现代文：他的行动就能处处有条理，他的保养就能处处恰当，他的生命就能不受伤害，这就叫作 知天 。
English: His actions can be organized everywhere, his maintenance can be appropriate everywhere, and his life can be unharmed. This is called knowing the heavens.

古文：故大巧在所不为，大智在所不虑。
现代文：所以最大的技巧在于有些事情不去做，最大的智慧在于不考虑不应该考虑的问题。
English: Therefore, the greatest skill lies in not doing some things, and the greatest wisdom lies in not considering issues that should not be considered.

古文：所志于天者，已其见象之可以期者矣；所志于地者，已其见宜之可以息者矣：所志于四时者，已其见数之可以事者矣；所志于阴阳者，已其见和之可以治者矣。
现代文：对于天的认识，不过是它所显现的天象中那些可以测定气候变化的天文资料罢了；对于大地的认识，不过是它所显现的适宜条件中那些可以便利种植庄稼的地文资料罢了；对于四季所要了解的，不过是它们所显现的规律中可以安排农业生产的节气罢了；对于阴阳所要了解的，不过是它们所显现的和气中可以治理事物的因素罢了。
English: The knowledge of the sky is nothing more than the astronomical data that can be used to measure climate change in the celestial phenomena that it reveals; the knowledge of the earth is nothing more than the geographical data that can be used to facilitate the planting of crops in the suitable conditions that it reveals; the four seasons are nothing more than the solar terms that can be arranged for agricultural production in the laws that they reveal; and the yin and yang are nothing more than the factors that they reveal and can govern things in the atmosphere.

古文：官人守天，而自为守道也。治乱，天邪？
现代文：圣人任用别人来掌握这些自然现象而自己所做的只是去掌握治理国家的原则。社会的安定或混乱，是由上天决定的吗？
English: The sages appointed others to master these natural phenomena, but all they did was to master the principles of governing the country. Is social stability or chaos determined by heaven?

古文：曰：日月星辰瑞历，是禹桀之所同也，禹以治，桀以乱；治乱非天也。
现代文：回答说：太阳月亮、行星恒星、祥瑞的历书，这在大禹和夏桀的时代是相同的；大禹使天下安定，夏桀使天下混乱；可见社会的安定或混乱并不是上天决定的。
English: He replied, "The sun, the moon, the planets, the stars, and the auspicious almanacs are the same in the era of Dayu and Xiaqi; Dayu makes the world stable, and Xiaqi makes the world chaotic; it can be seen that social stability or chaos is not decided by heaven.

古文：时邪？
现代文：那么，是时令造成的吗？
English: So, is it seasonal?

古文：曰：繁启蕃长于春夏，畜积收臧于秋冬，是禹桀之所同也，禹以治，桀以乱；治乱非时也。
现代文：回答说：庄稼春生夏长，秋收冬藏，这在禹与桀又是相同的；大禹使天下安定，夏桀使天下混乱；可见社会的安定混乱不是时令造成的。
English: He replied, "Crops are grown in the spring, harvested in the summer, and stored in the winter, which is the same for Yu and Zhou; Yu made the world stable, and Zhou made the world chaotic; it can be seen that social stability and chaos are not caused by the seasons.

古文：地邪？
现代文：那么，是大地造成的吗？
English: So, is the Earth to blame?

古文：曰：得地则生，失地则死，是又禹桀之所同也，禹以治，桀以乱；治乱非地也。
现代文：回答说：庄稼在大地上就生长，离开大地就死亡，这在大禹与夏桀时代又是相同的；大禹使天下安定，夏桀使天下混乱；可见社会的安定或混乱并不是大地造成的。
English: He answered, "Crops grow on the earth, and when they leave the earth, they die. This was the same in the times of Dayu and Harsong. Dayu made the world stable, and Harsong made the world chaotic. It can be seen that social stability or chaos is not caused by the earth.

古文：诗曰： 天作高山，大王荒之。彼作矣，文王康之。 
现代文：《诗》云： 天生高大的岐山，太王使它大发展；太王已经造此都，文王使它长平安。 
English: "Poetry" cloud: Born a high mountain, the great king has made it great; the great king has made this city, the king of literature has made it long and peaceful.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：天不为人之恶寒也辍冬，地不为人之恶辽远也辍广，君子不为小人之匈匈也辍行。
现代文：天不会因为人们厌恶寒冷就取消冬季，大地不会因为人们厌恶辽远就废除宽广，君子并不因为小人的叫嚣就停止。
English: Heaven does not abolish winter because people abhor the cold, the earth does not abolish vastness because people abhor vastness, and the gentleman does not stop because of the clamor of the villain.

古文：天有常道矣，地有常数矣，君子有常体矣。
现代文：上天有经久不变的规律，大地有经久不变的法则，君子有经久不变的规矩。
English: Heaven has long-standing laws, the earth has long-standing laws, and the gentleman has long-standing rules.

古文：君子道其常，而小人计其功。
现代文：君子做事把遵循大道义理视作平常，小人做事则斤斤计较功劳利好。
English: A gentleman regards it as normal to follow the principles of virtue, while a villain is more concerned with merit.

古文：诗曰： 礼义之不愆，何恤人之言兮！ 
现代文：《诗》云： 礼义上我错误不犯，何必担忧人说长道短？ 
English: "Poem" cloud: I do not make mistakes in etiquette, why should I worry about the long and short of it?

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：楚王后车千乘，非知也；君子啜菽饮水，非愚也；是节然也。
现代文：楚王外出时后边跟从的的车子有上千辆，并不是因为他聪明；君子粗茶淡饭，并不是因为他愚蠢；这种情况是时势命运的制约造成的。
English: When King Chu went out, there were thousands of cars following behind him, not because he was smart; the gentleman was not stupid; this situation was caused by the constraints of the current situation and fate.

古文：若夫志意修，德行厚，知虑明，生于今而志乎古，则是其在我者也。
现代文：如果一个人志意端正、德行美好，思虑精明，生活在今天却向往古代圣贤之道，那么这就是在意自己的努力了。
English: If a person has a sound mind, good morals, and shrewd thoughts, and lives in today's world but yearns for the way of the ancient sages, then this is caring about one's own efforts.

古文：故君子敬其在己者，而不慕其在天者；小人错其在己者，而慕其在天者。
现代文：所以，君子慎重地对待那些取决于自己的事情，而不去羡慕那些取决于上天的东西；小人丢下那些取决于自己的事情，而指望那些取决于上天的东西。
English: Therefore, a gentleman takes care of the things that depend on him, and does not envy the things that depend on heaven; a villain abandons the things that depend on him, and hopes for the things that depend on heaven.

古文：君子敬其在己者，而不慕其在天者，是以日进也；小人错其在己者，而慕其在天者，是以日退也。
现代文：君子慎重对待那些取决于自己的事情，而不去羡慕那些取决于上天的东西，因此天天进步；小人丢下那些取决于自己。的事情，而指望那些取决于上天的东西，因此天天退步。
English: A gentleman takes care of the things that depend on him, and does not envy the things that depend on heaven, and thus advances every day; a scoundrel abandons the things that depend on him, and hopes for the things that depend on heaven, and thus regresses every day.

古文：故君子之所以日进，与小人之所以日退，一也。
现代文：所以君子天天进步的原因与小人天天退步的原因，道理是一样的。
English: Therefore, the reason why a gentleman makes progress every day is the same as the reason why a villain regresses every day.

古文：君子小人之所以相县者，在此耳。
现代文：君子、小人相差悬殊的原因，就在这里。
English: This is the reason for the great difference between a gentleman and a villain.

古文：星坠木鸣，国人皆恐。曰：是何也？
现代文：流星坠落、树木发响，国都里的人都害怕，说：这是为什么呢？
English: The shooting stars fall, and the trees make a noise, so that all who are in the city are afraid, and say, "What does this mean?"

古文：曰：无何也！
现代文：回答说：这没有什么啊。
English: "It's nothing," he replied.

古文：是天地之变，阴阳之化，物之罕至者也。
现代文：这就是自然界的变化、阴阳二气的作用、事物中很少出现的现象啊。
English: This is the change in the natural world, the role of yin and yang, the phenomenon that rarely occurs in things.

古文：怪之，可也；而畏之，非也。
现代文：觉得它奇怪是可以的；但害怕它就错了。
English: It is right to find it strange; but it is wrong to fear it.

古文：夫日月之有蚀，风雨之不时，怪星之党见，是无世而不常有之。
现代文：那太阳、月亮发生日食、月食，狂风暴雨不合时节地突然袭击，奇怪的星星偶然出现，这些现象没有哪个时代不曾有过。
English: The sun, the moon, the occurrence of solar eclipses, lunar eclipses, the untimely sudden attacks of violent storms and rains, the accidental appearance of strange stars, these phenomena have never existed in any era.

古文：上明而政平，则是虽并世起，无伤也；上闇而政险，则是虽无一至者，无益也。
现代文：君主英明而政治清明，那么这些现象即使在同一时代都出现，也没有什么可害怕的；君主愚昧昏聩，那么这些现象即使一样都没出现，也毫无裨益。
English: If the prince is wise and politically astute, there is nothing to fear from all these phenomena, even if they occur at the same time; if the prince is stupid and dim-witted, there is nothing to be gained if none of these phenomena occur.

古文：夫星之坠，木之鸣，是天地之变，阴阳之化，物之罕至者也；怪之，可也；而畏之，非也。
现代文：流星的陨落，树木的发响，是天地的变化、阴阳的作用、事物中很少出现的现象，认为它奇怪是可以的，但害怕它就错了。
English: The falling of meteors, the ringing of trees, are the changes of heaven and earth, the effects of yin and yang, phenomena that rarely occur in things. It is okay to think that it is strange, but it is wrong to be afraid of it.

古文：物之已至者，人袄则可畏也。
现代文：在已经出现的事情中，人事上的反常现象才是可怕的。
English: Of all the things that have happened, the personnel anomalies are the most frightening.

古文：楛耕伤稼，耘耨失薉，政险失民，田薉稼恶，籴贵民饥，道路有死人，夫是之谓人袄。政令不明，举措不时，本事不理，夫是之谓人袄。礼义不修，内外无别，男女淫乱，则父子相疑，上下乖离，寇难并至，夫是之谓人袄。
现代文：粗放地耕种而伤害了庄稼，粗放地锄草而妨害了年成，政治险恶而失去了民心，田地荒芜而庄稼长不好，米价昂贵而百姓挨饿，道路上有饿死的人，这些叫做人事上的反常现象；政策法令不明确，采取措施不合时宜，具有根本意义的农业生产不加管理，发动劳役不顾农时，那么牛就会生出像马似的怪胎、马就会生出像牛似的怪胎，六畜就会出现怪异的现象，这些叫做人事上的反常现象；礼义不加整顿，内外没有分别，男女淫荡混乱，而父子互相猜疑，君臣离心离德，外寇内乱同时到来，这叫做人事上的反常现象。
English: Extensive ploughing harms the crops, extensive weeding hinders the harvest, sinister politics loses the people's hearts, the fields are barren and the crops do not grow well, rice prices are high and the people are starving, and there are people starving to death on the roads, these are called human anomalies; policies and decrees are not clear, measures are not timely, the fundamental agricultural production is not managed, and labor is initiated regardless of the farming time, then the cattle will give birth to a horse-like freak, the horse will give birth to a cow-like freak, and the six animals will have a strange phenomenon, these are called human anomalies;

古文：袄是生于乱，三者错，无安国。
现代文：人事上的反常现象实产生于昏乱。上述这三类反常现象交错发生，就不会有安宁的国家了。
English: Anomalies in personnel are actually caused by confusion. If the above three types of anomalies occur intermittently, there will be no peaceful country.

古文：其说甚尔，其菑甚惨。
现代文：这种人事上的反常现象解说起来道理很浅显，但它造成的灾难却很惨重。
English: The reason for this anomaly in personnel is very simple to explain, but the disaster it has caused is very serious.

古文：勉力不时，则牛马相生，六畜作袄。可怪也，而不可畏也。传曰： 万物之怪，书不说 。
现代文：这是可怕的，但不值得奇怪。古代解释经文的书上说： 各种事物的怪现象，经书上不作解说。 
English: This is terrible, but it is not surprising. An ancient book of interpretation said: "There is no explanation for the strange phenomena of various things in the scriptures."

古文：无用之辩，不急之察，弃而不治。
现代文：没有用处的辩说，不是急需的明察，应该抛弃而不加研究。
English: Useless arguments, not much-needed insight, should be discarded without examination.

古文：若夫君臣之义，父子之亲，夫妇之别，则日切瑳而不舍也。
现代文：至于那君臣之间的道义，父子之间的相亲，夫妻之间的区别，那是应该每天切磋琢磨而不能丢掉的啊。
English: As for the morality between princes and ministers, the close relationship between father and son, and the difference between husband and wife, that is something that should be honed every day and not thrown away.

古文：雩而雨，何也？
现代文：祭神求雨就下了雨，这是为什么呢？
English: The deity prayed for rain, and it rained. Why is that?

古文：曰：无何也，犹不雩而雨也。
现代文：回答说：这没有什么，它就像不去祭神求雨就下雨一样。
English: "It's nothing," he replied, "it's like praying for rain and getting rain without going to the shrine."

古文：日月食而救之，天旱而雩，卜筮然后决大事，非以为得求也，以文之也。
现代文：日食、月食发生了人们会去求救，天气干旱了就祭神求雨，占卜算卦然后决定大事，古人并不是认为这些做法能得到所祈求的东西，而只是用它们来文饰政事罢了。
English: When solar and lunar eclipses occurred, people would go to ask for help. When the weather was dry, they would pray to the gods for rain. The ancients did not think that these practices could get what they asked for, but only used them to embellish political affairs.

古文：故君子以为文，而百姓以为神。
现代文：所以君子把这些活动看作为一种文饰，但老百姓却把它们看得神乎其神。
English: So the gentry see these activities as a kind of decoration, but the common people see them as divine.

古文：以为文则吉，以为神则凶也。
现代文：把它们看作为一种文饰就吉利，把它们看得神乎其神就不吉利了。
English: It is lucky to see them as a kind of decoration, and it is unlucky to see them as divine.

古文：在天者莫明于日月，在地者莫明于水火，在物者莫明于珠玉，在人者莫明于礼义。
现代文：天上没有比太阳、月亮更明亮的了，地上没有比水火更明亮的了，物品之中没有比珍珠、宝玉更明亮的了，人间没有比礼义更明亮的了。
English: In the sky, there is nothing brighter than the sun and the moon, on the earth, there is nothing brighter than water and fire, among goods, there is nothing brighter than pearls and precious stones, and on earth, there is nothing brighter than courtesy.

古文：故日月不高，则光明不赫；水火不积，则晖润不博；珠玉不睹乎外，则王公不以为宝；礼义不加于国家，则功名不白。
现代文：因此太阳、月亮倘若不高悬空中，光辉就不显赫；水火如果不积聚，光泽就不广博；珠玉的光彩如果没有显露在外面，王公就不会把它当作珍宝；礼义不施于国中，功名就不显著。
English: Therefore, if the sun and the moon do not hang high in the sky, the brilliance will not be conspicuous; if the water and fire do not accumulate, the luster will not be extensive; if the brilliance of the jewel is not revealed outside, the prince will not regard it as a treasure; if courtesy is not exercised in the country, the fame will not be significant.

古文：故人之命在天，国之命在礼。
现代文：因此人的命运取决于上天，国家的命运取决于礼义。
English: Therefore, the fate of a person depends on the heavens, and the fate of a country depends on etiquette.

古文：君人者，隆礼尊贤而王，重法爱民而霸，好利多诈而危，权谋倾覆幽险而亡矣。
现代文：统治人民的君主，推崇礼义、尊重贤人，就能称王天下；重视法律、爱护人民就称霸诸侯；贪求财利、多行欺诈就会招致危险；玩弄权术、坑人害人、阴暗险恶就会招致灭亡。
English: Monarchs who rule the people, promote propriety and respect the wise, can be called kings of the world; those who attach importance to the law and love the people can be called domineering princes; those who are greedy for money and profit and commit many frauds will incur danger; those who play power games, undermine and harm others, and those who are dark and sinister will incur ruin.

古文：大天而思之，孰与物畜而制之！
现代文：认为大自然伟大而思慕它，哪里及得上把它当作物资积蓄起来而控制它？
English: If we think that nature is great and yearn for it, how can we control it by hoarding it as a resource?

古文：从天而颂之，孰与制天命而用之！
现代文：顺从自然而颂扬它，哪里及得上掌握自然规律而利用它？
English: Obeying nature and extolling it, how can we grasp the laws of nature and make use of them?

古文：望时而待之，孰与应时而使之！
现代文：盼望时令而等待它，哪里及得上因时制宜而使它为我所用？
English: Hoping for the right time and waiting for it, how can I make the right time and make it work for me?

古文：因物而多之，孰与骋能而化之！
现代文：依靠万物的自然增殖，哪里及得上施展人的才能而使它们根据人的需要来变化？
English: Relying on the natural multiplication of all things, where is it possible to exercise human talent and make them change according to human needs?

古文：思物而物之，孰与理物而勿失之也！
现代文：思慕万物而把它们当作与己无关的外物，哪里及得上管理好万物而不失去它们？
English: Where is the time to manage all things well without losing them?

古文：愿于物之所以生，孰与有物之所以成！
现代文：希望了解万物产生的原因，哪里比得上拥有形成物品的工具和条件？
English: What could be better than having the tools and conditions to form things, if you want to understand why things come into being?

古文：故错人而思天，则失万物之情。
现代文：所以放弃了人的努力而寄希望于天，那就违背了万物的实际情况。
English: Therefore, abandoning human efforts and placing hope in the heavens is contrary to the reality of all things.

古文：百王之无变，足以为道贯。
现代文：经历百代帝位都没有改变的东西，完全可以用来作为政治原则的常规惯例。
English: What has not changed through a hundred generations of emperors can be fully used as a regular practice of political principles.

古文：一废一起，应之以贯，理贯不乱。
现代文：国家有时衰微有时兴盛，都应该有一个通用的原则去顺合它。治理好这种常规惯例，国家就不会混乱。
English: A country sometimes declines and sometimes prospers, and there should be a general principle to suit it. If this routine is well managed, the country will not be chaotic.

古文：不知贯，不知应变。
现代文：如果不了解这种常规惯例，就不知道如何应付变化。
English: If you don't know that routine, you don't know how to deal with change.

古文：贯之大体未尝亡也。
现代文：这种常规惯例的主要内容从来没有消失过。
English: The essentials of this routine have never disappeared.

古文：乱生其差，治尽其详。故道之所善，中则可从，畸则不可为，匿则大惑。
现代文：社会的混乱，产生于这常规惯例的实施出了差错；社会安定，全在于这种常规惯例的实施十分周详。
English: Social disorder results when the implementation of this routine goes wrong; social stability depends on the thorough implementation of this routine.

古文：水行者表深，表不明则陷。治民者表道，表不明则乱。
现代文：所以，政治原则中那些被一般人看作为好的东西，如果符合这种常规惯例，就可以依从；如果偏离了这种常规惯例，就不可以实行；如果违反了这种常规惯例，就会造成极大的迷惑。
English: The principles of politics, therefore, which the vulgar regard as good, may be obeyed, if they are in accordance with this common usage; they may not be executed, if they deviate from this common usage; and they are a great nuisance, if they are contrary to this common usage.

古文：礼者，表也。非礼，昏世也；昏世，大乱也。故道无不明，外内异表，隐显有常，民陷乃去。
现代文：在水中跋涉的人用标志来表明深度，如果这种标志不明确，就会使人陷入深水淹死；治理民众的君主用标准来表明政治原则，如果这种标准不明确，就会造成混乱。礼制就是治理民众的标准。违反了礼制，就是昏暗的社会；昏暗的社会，就会大乱。
English: A man wading in the water uses a sign to indicate the depth, if this sign is not clear, it will cause a person to fall into deep water and drown; a monarch governing the people uses a standard to indicate political principles, if this standard is not clear, it will cause chaos. Etiquette is the standard for governing the people. Violation of etiquette is a dim society; a dim society will cause chaos.

古文：万物为道一偏，一物为万物一偏。愚者为一物一偏，而自以为知道，无知也。慎子有见于后，无见于先。
现代文：所以，政治原则没有照不亮的地方，它对外对内都有不同的标准，对隐蔽之事或显露之事都有永久不变的规定，那么民众的陷阱就可以除去了。世上的万事万物只体现了自然规律的一部分，每一种事物都只是万物的一部分，愚昧的人只认识了某一种事物的一个方面，就自以为了解了自然规律，实在是太无知了。
English: Therefore, the political principle has no blind spots, it has different standards from the outside to the inside, and it has permanent and unchanging regulations for hidden or revealed things, so the trap of the people can be eliminated. Everything in the world only reflects a part of the laws of nature, and every thing is only a part of all things. Ignorant people only know one aspect of a certain thing, and they think they understand the laws of nature. It's really too ignorant.

古文：老子有见于诎，无见于信。墨子有见于齐，无见于畸。宋子有见于少，无见于多。
现代文：慎子对在后服从的一面有所认识，但对在前引导的一面却毫无认识；老子对委曲忍让的一面有所认识，但对积极进取的一面却毫无认识；墨子对齐同平等的一面有所认识，但对等级差别的一面却毫无认识；宋子对寡欲的一面有所认识，但对多欲的一面却毫无认识。
English: Shen Zi knew the side of following behind, but did not know the side of leading in front; Lao Zi knew the side of toleration, but did not know the positive side; Mozi knew the side of equality, but did not know the side of rank difference; Song Zi knew the side of desire, but did not know the side of desire.

古文：有后而无先，则群众无门。有诎而无信，则贵贱不分。有齐而无畸，则政令不施，有少而无多，则群众不化。
现代文：只在后服从而不在前引导，那么群众就没有继续前进的门径；只委曲忍让而不积极进取，那么高贵和卑贱就不会有分别；只有齐同平等而没有等级差别，那么政策法令就不能贯彻实施；只求寡欲而不见多欲，那么群众就不易被感化。
English: If the masses only obey and do not lead, then there is no way for them to move forward; if they only obey and tolerate, but do not actively advance, then there will be no distinction between the high and the low; if there is only equality but no class difference, then the policies and decrees cannot be implemented; if there is only a desire for less, but not for more, then the masses will not be easily influenced.

古文：书曰： 无有作好，遵王之道；无有作恶，遵王之路。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 不要任凭个人的爱好，要遵循君主确定的正道；不要任凭个人的厌恶，要遵循圣王的道路前进。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Don't give in to personal preferences, follow the right path determined by the monarch; don't give in to personal aversion, follow the path of the holy king.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

