古文：张纂，字徽纂，代郡平城人也。
现代文：张纂，字徽纂，代郡平城人。
English: Zhang Zuo, Zha Hui Zuo, the representative of the county of Pingcheng.

古文：父烈，桑乾太守。
现代文：父亲张烈，桑干太守。
English: His father, Zhang Li, was the governor of Sangkang.

古文：纂初事尔朱荣，又为尔朱兆都督长史。
现代文：张纂开始为氽朱荣做事，又作氽朱兆都督长史。
English: Zhang Guan began to work for Zou Zhu Rong, and also as Zou Zhu Zhao, the governor of the capital.

古文：为兆使于高祖，遂被顾识。
现代文：为氽朱兆出使高祖，于是被高祖眷顾了解。
English: Gao Zu sent an envoy to Zhu Zhao, and Gao Zu was very understanding.

古文：高祖举义山东，刘诞据相州拒守，时纂亦在其中。
现代文：高祖在山东举义，相州刺史刘诞据城固守，当时张纂也在军中。
English: Gao Zu was in Shandong, and Liu Xizhi was in Xizhou, and Zhang Zuo was in the army at that time.

古文：高祖攻而拔之，以纂参丞相军事。
现代文：高祖攻取相州，以张纂为参丞相军事。
English: Gao Zu conquered the Liaoning Province and appointed Zhang Zuo as the Liaoning Minister of Military Affairs.

古文：纂性便僻，左右出内，稍见亲待，仍补行台郎中。
现代文：张纂性情善于逢迎，在高祖左右出入，渐被亲近优待，乃补行台郎中。
English: Zhang Zuo is good at meeting and greeting people. He came and went in and out of Gaozu, and gradually he was treated with closeness and preferential treatment. He is one of the complements of Gaozu.

古文：高祖启减国封，分赏文武，纂随例封寿张伯。
现代文：高祖启奏减少国封，分赏文武百官，张纂于是按例封为寿张伯。
English: Gaozhu Qisong reduced the number of state titles and gave awards to hundreds of civil and military officials, so Zhang Zuo was awarded the title of Zhuozhangbo.

古文：魏武帝末，高祖赴洛，以赵郡公琛为行台，守晋阳，以纂为右丞。
现代文：魏武帝末年，高祖去洛阳，用趟郡公高琛为行台，驻守晋阳，用张纂为右丞。
English: In the last years of Emperor Weiwu, Gao Zu went to Luoyang, using the county official Gao Jie as his guide, stationed in Jinyang, and used Zhang Zuo as his right hand man.

古文：转相府功曹参军事，除右光禄大夫。
现代文：又改任相府功曹参军事，授任右光禄大夫。
English: He was also appointed minister of the Gong Cao San Military and awarded the title of Uguanglu Doctor.

古文：使于茹茹，以衔命称旨。历中外、丞相二府从事中郎。
现代文：奉君命出使到茹茹。历任中外、丞相二府从事中郎。
English: He was dispatched to Juru by order of the emperor. He served as churo in two provinces, Chugai and Josho.

古文：邙山之役，大获俘虏，高祖令纂部送京师，魏帝赐绢五百匹，封武安县伯。
现代文：邙山之战，大获俘虏，高祖命令张纂的部队送往京城，魏帝赐予绢五百匹，封武安县伯。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, he was greatly taken prisoner. Gaozu ordered Zhang Zuo's troops to be sent to the capital, and Emperor Wei gave him 500 cranes and the title of Count of Wu'an County.

古文：复为高祖行台右丞，从征玉壁。
现代文：又任高祖行台右丞，跟随高祖出征玉壁。
English: He was also appointed as Gao Zu Xingtai Yu Zheng, and followed Gao Zu to go to the Jade Wall.

古文：大军将还山东，行达晋州，忽值寒雨，士卒饥冻，至有死者。
现代文：大军将要返回山东，行至晋州，忽遇寒雨，士兵饥寒，以致有死的人。
English: The large army will return to Shandong, travel to Jinzhou, and suddenly encounter cold rain, soldiers are hungry and cold, so that there are dead people.

古文：州以边禁不听入城。
现代文：州府因边禁不准入城。
English: The state government is not allowed to enter the city due to border restrictions.

古文：于时纂为别使，遇见，辄令开门内之，分寄民家，给其火食，多所全济。
现代文：此时呈隧为别使，遇见这种情况，就命打开城门接纳士兵，分散寄住在百姓家中，供应他们伙食，多被保全救济。
English: At this time, he was acting as a special envoy, and when he encountered this situation, he opened the city gate to receive soldiers, stayed in people's homes, and provided them with meals. Most of them were saved and given relief.

古文：高祖闻而善之。
现代文：高祖得知这件事而称赞他。
English: When Gaozu learned of this, he praised him.

古文：纂事高祖二十馀岁，传通教令，甚见亲赏。
现代文：张纂事奉高祖二十余年，传达政令，很被亲近赏识。
English: Zhang Codification served Gao Zu for more than 20 years, conveying government orders, and was very closely appreciated.

古文：世宗嗣位，侯景作乱颍川，招引西魏。
现代文：世宗继位，侯景在硕作乱，勾结西魏。
English: Sejong succeeded to the throne, and Houjing made trouble in Shuo, colluding with the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：以纂为南道行台，与诸将率讨之。
现代文：世宗以张纂为南道行台，与众将率军讨伐他。
English: Shizong took Zhang Zuo as the Southern Dao and marched against him with the generals.

古文：还，除瀛州刺史。
现代文：回来后，任瀛州刺史。
English: After returning, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：会世宗入为太子少傅。
现代文：拜见世宗。进宫为太子少傅。
English: Visited Sejong. Entered the Imperial Palace as the prince's apprentice.

古文：后与平原王段孝先、行台尚书辛术等攻围东楚，仍拔广陵、泾州数城，斩贼帅东方白额。
现代文：后舆平原王段孝先、行台尚书辛术等围攻塞楚，接连攻取卢堕、迳业敷城，斩杀贼军统帅东方白额。
English: Later, Wang Duan Xiaoqian, Wang Duan Shang Shuxin and others besieged Jiechu, successively captured Lu Pu, Zou Yejiki, and killed the commander of the rebel army, Dongfang Baigu.

古文：授仪同三司，监筑长城大使，领步骑数千镇防北境。
现代文：授予仪同三司，监筑垦垣大使，带领步兵骑兵敷千人镇守北方边境。
English: He conferred the ceremony with the three departments, supervised the construction of the Higaki Ambassador, and led the infantry and cavalry of a thousand people to guard the northern border.

古文：还，迁护军将军，寻卒。
现代文：回来后，改任护军将军，不久去世。
English: After his return, he was reassigned to the position of General of the Protectorate, and died soon after.

古文：张亮，字伯德，西河隰城人也。
现代文：张亮，字伯德，西河隰城人。
English: Zhang Liang, Zhibo De, the people of the West River Yucheng.

古文：少有干用。初事尔朱兆，拜平远将军。以功封隰城县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：年轻时有才干，开始为氽朱兆做事，拜任平远将军，因有功封隰城县伯，封邑五百户。
English: When he was young, he was talented and began to work for Gong Zhu Zhao. He was appointed to the post of General Pingyuan. Because of his achievements, he was awarded the title of Baicheng County Count, and 500 households in the county were awarded the title.

古文：高祖讨兆于晋阳，兆奔秀容。
现代文：高祖征讨尔朱兆到晋阳，氽朱兆逃到秀容。
English: Gao Zuzheng sent Zhu Zhao to Jinyang and Zhu Zhao fled to Xiurong.

古文：兆左右皆密通诚款，唯亮独无启疏。
现代文：氽朱兆左右的人都秘密地向高祖表示忠诚，惟独张亮没有启奏。
English: People around Zhu Zhao secretly expressed their loyalty to Gao Zu, but there was no public announcement.

古文：及兆败，窜于穷山，令亮及仓头陈山提斩己首以降，皆不忍，兆乃自缢于树。
现代文：到尔朱兆失败，逃到穷山，命令张亮及仆人陈山提斩自己的首级投降，二人皆不忍心，氽朱兆就在树上自缢。
English: When Zhu Zhao failed, he fled to Queshan and ordered Zhang Liang and his servant Chen Shanzhi to cut off their heads and surrender. Both of them could not bear it, and Zhu Zhao hanged himself on a tree.

古文：伯德伏尸而哭。
现代文：强毫伏尸而哭。
English: Crying in front of the corpse.

古文：高祖嘉叹之。
现代文：直担赞叹他。
English: I applaud him.

古文：授丞相府参军事，渐见亲待，委以书记之任。
现代文：授予丞相府参军事，逐渐被亲近，委以书记之任。
English: He was awarded the post of military attaché to the prime minister's office, gradually became close to him, and was entrusted with the post of secretary.

古文：天平中，为世宗行台郎中，典七兵事。虽为台郎，而常在高祖左右。
现代文：天平年间，任世塞行台郎中，主管七兵尚书事，虽然为台郎，而常在高祖左右。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Shichibyo Shoji was in charge of Shichibyo Shoji, who was a Tairo, but he was often around Koso.

古文：迁行台右丞。
现代文：升任行台右丞。
English: Promoted to the post of Gyoda Ujo.

古文：高仲密之叛也，与大司马斛律金守河阳。
现代文：高仲密叛乱之时，退毫舆大司马魁建金镇守迥荡。
English: At the time of Gao Zhongmi's rebellion, Ma Kui Jianjin, the chief secretary of the Central Military Commission (CMC), was on the prowl.

古文：周文帝于上流放火船烧河桥。
现代文：周文帝在上游放火船烧迥叠。
English: Zhou Wendi set fire to boats upstream and burned rafts.

古文：亮乃备小艇百馀艘，皆载长锁，锁头施钉。
现代文：亟塞准备小艇百余艘，皆装上长锁链，锁鲢头上安装上钉子。
English: More than a hundred small boats were hastily prepared, all equipped with long chains, and nails were installed on the lock heads.

古文：火船将至，即驰小艇，以钉钉之，引锁向岸，火船不得及桥。
现代文：火船将到，就飞驰小艇，用钉子钉住它，牵引锁链向河岸拉，火船不能到桥。
English: When the fireboat was about to arrive, he ran to the skiff, nailed it, and pulled the chain to the riverbank. The fireboat could not reach the bridge.

古文：桥之获全，亮之计也。
现代文：桥能保全，靠张亮的计谋。
English: The bridge can be saved, but it depends on Zhang Liang's strategy.

古文：武定初，拜太中大夫。
现代文：逮宣初年，拜授太中大夫。
English: In the first year after his arrest, he was awarded the title of Taichung Medical Doctor.

古文：薛琡尝梦亮于山上持丝，以告亮，且占之曰： 山上丝，幽字也。
现代文：整趣曾梦见退亮在山上挂丝，把遣件事告诉张亮，早上占遣件事，曰： 山上丝，是幽字。
English: Zhezhu had a dream that Feliang was hanging silk on the mountain, and he told Zhang Liang about the dispatching matter. In the morning, he told Zhang Liang about the dispatching matter, saying, "The silk on the mountain is Yuzha.

古文：君其为幽州乎？ 数月，亮出为幽州刺史。
现代文：您将治理幽州 几个月后，张亮为幽州刺史。
English: You will govern Yuzhou In a few months, Zhang Liang will make history in Yuzhou.

古文：属侯景叛，除平南将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：适逢侯景叛变，任平南将军、梁州刺史。
English: At the time of Hou Jing's mutiny, General Pingnan and Liang Zhou were appointed.

古文：寻加都督扬、颍等十一州诸军事，兼行台殿中尚书，转都督二豫、扬、颍等八州军事、征西大将军、豫州刺史、尚书右仆射、西南道行台。
现代文：不久加任都督扬、题等十一州诸军事，兼行台殿中尚书，转任都督二辽、握、题等八州军事、征西大将军、豫州刺史、尚书右仆射、西南道行台。
English: He was soon appointed as the military governor of eleven states, including Yang and Zhizhi, and concurrently as the military governor of eight states, including Liao, Jia and Zhizhi, the military governor of two Liao, Jia and Zhizhi, the military governor of eight states, the general of the Western Expedition, the military governor of Yuzhou, the military governor of the Southern Song Dynasty, and the military governor of the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：攻梁江夏、颍阳等七城，皆下之。
现代文：攻打梁江夏、题阳等七城，皆攻占了它们。
English: They attacked seven cities, including Liangjiangxia and Jiyang, and captured them all.

古文：亮性质直，勤力强济，深为高祖、世宗所信，委以腹心之任。
现代文：亟奎性情质朴正直，做事努力，精明干练，深为产担、世塞信任，托付他心腹重任。
English: Erkui has a simple and honest temperament, works hard, is shrewd and capable, is deeply responsible for production, is trusted by the world, and entrusts his subordinates with important tasks.

古文：然少风格，好财利，久在左右，不能廉洁，及历诸州，咸有黩货之闻。
现代文：然而缺少气度，贪图财利，久在君王左右，不能廉洁，及历任诸州，都有贪污纳贿的名声。
English: However, they lack dignity, are greedy for money and profit, have been around the king for a long time, cannot be clean, and successive states have a reputation for corruption and bribery.

古文：武定末，征拜侍中、汾州大中正。
现代文：亘迈末年，征入授侍中、逝出大中正。
English: At the end of his life, he was conscripted into the Junior Chamberlain's Corps and passed away while still a junior high school student.

古文：天保初，授光禄勋，加骠骑大将军、仪同三司，别封安定县男，转中领军。寻卒于位，赠司空公。
现代文：玉堡初年，授予光录勋，加任骠骑大将军、仪同三司，另封安定县男。改任中领军，不久在官职上逝世，追赠司空公。
English: In the first year of Yubo Castle, he was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun, and was also appointed as the General of the Horse, the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Man of Anding County. He was reappointed as the leader of the army, and died soon after in his official position, and was posthumously given the title of Sikuo.

古文：张耀，字灵光，上谷昌平人也。
现代文：张耀，字灵光，上谷昌平人。
English: Zhang Yao, Zi Lingguang, Shangguan Changping.

古文：父凤，晋州长史。
现代文：父亲张凤，任晋州长史。
English: His father, Zhang Feng, served as the governor of Jin Province.

古文：耀少而贞谨，颇晓史职。
现代文：张耀年少守正而恭谨，很懂得作官的职责。
English: At a young age, Zhang Yao was upright and respectful, and was very familiar with the duties of an official.

古文：解褐给事中，转司徒水曹行参军。
现代文：初仕任给事中的官职，又改任司徒水曹行参军。
English: At the beginning of his term of office, he was appointed to the current official position, and then he was appointed to join the army.

古文：义旗建，高祖擢为中军大都督韩轨府长史。
现代文：高祖树起义旗之时，提拔张耀为中军大都督韩轨府长史。
English: At the time of the uprising flag of Gaozhu, Zhang Yao was promoted to the Chinese military governor, Han Ruofu.

古文：及轨除瀛、冀二州刺史，又以耀为轨谘议参军。
现代文：韩轨任瀛、冀二州刺史，又任用张耀为韩轨谘议参军。
English: Han Rong Renyi and Hebei Erzhou stabbed history, and appointed Zhang Yao as Han Rong's advisory to join the army.

古文：后为御史所劾，州府僚佐及轨左右以赃罪挂网者百有馀人，唯耀清白独免。
现代文：后来被御史弹劾，州府的官吏以及韩轨左右的人因贪脏之罪触犯刑法的有一百多人，衹有张耀因清白独自得免。
English: Later, he was impeached by Emperor Hirohito. There were more than a hundred officials of the prefectural government and people around Hanraku who violated the criminal law for the crime of corruption. Only Zhang Yao was excused for his innocence.

古文：征为丞相府仓曹。
现代文：征入为丞相府仓曹。
English: He was conscripted into the chancellor's office.

古文：显祖嗣事，迁相府掾。
现代文：颢祖继位，张耀升任相府掾。
English: Zhang Yao was promoted to the post of minister of the prefectural government.

古文：天保初，赐爵都亭乡男，摄仓、库二曹事。诸有赐给，常使耀典之。
现代文：天保初年，赐予都亭乡男的爵位，代理仓、库二曹的事务，诸人有赏赐、供给之事，常让张耀主管。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the title of Doting Townsman was bestowed on Zhang Yao, and Zhang Yao was often put in charge of the affairs of the agent warehouse and the second warehouse, which were rewarded and supplied by many people.

古文：转秘书丞，迁尚书右丞。
现代文：改任秘书丞，又升任尚书右丞。
English: He was reassigned to the position of secretary joe and promoted to the position of senior secretary joe.

古文：显祖曾因近出，令耀居守。
现代文：显祖曾因到近处外出，令张耀在城中驻守。
English: Emperor Xianzu had ordered Zhang Yao to stay in the city because he had been out of town.

古文：帝夜还，耀不时开门，勒兵严备。
现代文：帝夜间回来，张耀不即时打开城门，陈兵严加防备。
English: When the emperor returned at night, Zhang Yao did not immediately open the city gate, and the Chen soldiers were on high alert.

古文：帝驻跸门外久之，催迫甚急。
现代文：帝在城门外停留了很长时间，催促非常急迫。
English: The emperor stayed outside the city gate for a long time, and the urging was very urgent.

古文：耀以夜深，真伪难辩，须火至面识，门乃可开，于是独出见帝。
现代文：张耀因夜深，真伪难辨，待火光照到脸上识别，城门才可以打开，于是独自出城拜见皇帝。
English: As it was late at night, Zhang Yao could not tell whether it was real or fake. He had to wait for the light of the fire to shine on his face before he could open the gate, so he went out of the city alone to see the emperor.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿欲学郅君章也？ 
现代文：颢祖笑着说： 你想学郅君章吧。 
English: The ancestor smiled and said, "You want to learn the Xing Jun chapter, right?"

古文：乃使耀前开门，然后入，深嗟赏之，赐以锦采。
现代文：就让张耀在前边开门，然后入城，非常赞赏他，赐予他采锦。
English: Let Zhang Yao open the door in front, and then enter the city. Appreciate him very much and give him a prize.

古文：出为南青州刺史，未之任。
现代文：出任南青州刺史，没有到任。
English: He was appointed to the post of South Qingzhou chief historian, but did not take up the post.

古文：肃宗辅政，累迁秘书监。
现代文：肃宗辅佐政事，张耀接连升任至秘书监。
English: Su Zongfu was promoted to the post of political assistant, and Zhang Yao was promoted to the post of secretary superintendent.

古文：耀历事累世，奉职恪勤，咸见亲待，未尝有过。
现代文：张耀历事几代帝王，履行职责恭谨勤勉，都被亲近优待，不曾有过失。
English: Zhang Yao has gone through several generations of emperors, performing his duties respectfully and diligently, and has been treated with closeness and preferential treatment, and has never made a mistake.

古文：每得禄赐，散之宗族。性节俭率素，车服饮食，取给而已。
现代文：每当得到俸禄赏赐，便分给宗族的人，性情节俭简朴，车马、服饰和饮食，也衹是取来以供需用罢了。
English: Whenever they were awarded a salary, it was distributed to the members of the clan. They were frugal and simple-minded, and they only took cars, horses, clothes, and food to meet their needs.

古文：好读《春秋》，月一遍，时人比之贾梁道。
现代文：喜欢读《春秋》，每月一遍，当时的人用买梁道比喻他。
English: He liked to read "Spring and Autumn" once a month, and people at the time used to compare him to a gazelle.

古文：赵彦深尝谓耀曰： 君研寻《左氏》，岂求服虔、杜预之纰缪邪？ 
现代文：趟彦深曾对张耀说： 您研究《左传》，难道是要找服虔、杜预的错误吗? 
English: Watanehikobuka once said to Zhang Yao: Are you studying "Zhu Chuan" to find the mistakes of Fuxu Qian and Du Yueh?

古文：耀曰： 何为其然乎？
现代文：张耀说： 怎么能为这个呢?
English: Zhang Yao said, "How can I do this?"

古文：《左氏》之书，备叙言事，恶者可以自戒，善者可以庶几。
现代文：《左传》之书，叙事详尽，恶者可以引以为戒，善者可以效法。
English: "Zo Zhuan" is a book with a detailed narrative. The wicked can be admonished, and the good can be imitated.

古文：故厉己温习，非欲诋诃古人之得失也。 
现代文：所以温习前事来勉励自己，不是想指责古人的得失。 
English: So review the past to encourage yourself, not to blame the ancients for their gains and losses.

古文：天统元年，世祖临朝，耀奏事，遇暴疾，仆于御前。
现代文：天统元年，世祖主持朝政，张耀启奏事情，遇到急病，仆倒在帝前。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Reign, the patriarch presided over the government of the dynasty, Zhang Yao initiated things, encountered a sudden illness, and fell down before the emperor.

古文：帝下座临视，呼数声不应。
现代文：帝离座亲临省视，叫了敷声没有答应。
English: The emperor left the throne to visit the provincial capital, but was rebuffed.

古文：帝泣曰： 岂失我良臣也！ 
现代文：帝流泪说： 难道要失掉我的良臣吗! 
English: The emperor shed tears and said, "Do I really have to lose my trusted vassal?"

古文：旬日卒，时年六十三。
现代文：十日后去世，当时六十三岁。
English: He died ten days later, aged 63.

古文：诏称耀忠贞平直，温恭廉慎。
现代文：皇帝下诏书称赞张耀忠贞平直，温和恭敬，廉洁谨慎。
English: The imperial edict commended Zhang Yaozhen for being loyal, upright, gentle, respectful, honest and prudent.

古文：赠开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射、燕州刺史，谥曰贞简。
现代文：追赠开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射、基业刺史，谧号为皇筵。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu, the title of Sanji, the title of Shoshu, the title of Utsushi, and the title of Gyeongsang, and his posthumous name was Kogo.

古文：赵起，字兴洛，广平人也。
现代文：赵起，字兴整，庐垩人。
English: Zhao Qi, Zi Xingjie, Zou Ren.

古文：父达，幽州录事参军。
现代文：父亲崖壁，为幽业绿事参军。
English: Father Cliff joined the army for the sake of Yuya.

古文：起性沉谨有干用。
现代文：整呓性格沉稳谨慎，有才干。
English: He is calm, prudent and talented.

古文：义旗建，高祖以段荣为定州刺史，以起为荣典签，除奉车都尉。
现代文：高祖起义之后，以兰遂为室业刺史，以赵垄为壁垒典签。任奉车都尉。
English: After the Gaozu Uprising, Lan Sui was appointed as the secretary of the office, and Zhao Reng was appointed as the signer of the wall. He was appointed as the captain of the carriage.

古文：天平中，征为相府骑曹，累加中散大夫。
现代文：玉平年间，召为相府骑曹，多次加授为中散大夫。
English: During the years of Yu Ping, he was called to be a prefectural councillor, and was awarded the title of Zhongshan doctor several times.

古文：世宗嗣事，出为建州刺史，累迁侍中。
现代文：世宗继位，出任建州刺史。几次升迁任侍中。
English: He succeeded to the throne of the Sejong Dynasty and served as the founder of the state. He was promoted several times to the position of chamberlain.

古文：起，高祖世频为相府骑兵二局，典知兵马十有馀年。
现代文：赵起，高祖时几次任相府骑兵二局，掌管兵马十余年。
English: Zhao Qi, Gao Zu was several times appointed to the Second Bureau of Cavalry of the Cabinet of Ministers, and was in charge of the soldiers and horses for more than ten years.

古文：至显祖即阼之后，起罢州还阙，虽历位九卿、侍中，常以本官监兵马，出内驱使，居腹心之寄，与二张相亚。
现代文：到显祖即位之后，赵起免去州官，回到朝廷，虽然历任九卿、侍中，时常以本官监督军队，出入奔走，居心腹之位，与二堡相当。
English: After Emperor Xianzu ascended the throne, Zhao Qi was removed from the position of prefectural official and returned to the imperial court, although the successive nine nobles and chamberlains often supervised the army as their own officials, rushed in and out, and took the position of a confidant, which was equivalent to the two castles.

古文：出为西兖州刺史，纠劾禁止，岁馀，以无验获免。
现代文：出任西兖州刺史，被举发弹劾，失去自由，一年多，因没有证据而得免。
English: He was impeached and lost his freedom for more than a year, but was pardoned because there was no evidence against him.

古文：河清二年，征还晋阳。
现代文：河清二年，召回置盐。
English: In the second year of Heqing, salt was recalled.

古文：三年，又加祠部尚书、开府。
现代文：三年，又加授祠部尚书、开府。
English: Three years later, he was additionally awarded the title of Shosho of the ancestral hall and the title of Kaifu.

古文：天统初，转太常卿，食琅邪郡干。
现代文：天统初年，改任太常卿，食琅邪郡的俸禄。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was transferred to the position of Taijōkyō, and received a salary of 邪郡.

古文：二年，除沧州刺史，加六州都督。
现代文：二年，任涂业刺史，加授六州都督。
English: In two years, he was appointed as the history of the painting industry, and was awarded the title of the governor of six states.

古文：武平中，卒于官。
现代文：武平年间，在官位上去世。
English: He died in office during the Wuhei era.

古文：徐远，字彦遐，广宁石门人也。其先出自广平。
现代文：涂达，字彦逦，庐宁五置人。他的祖先出生在卢垩。
English: His ancestors were all born in Luye.

古文：曾祖定，为云中军将、平朔戍主，因家于朔。
现代文：曾祖父涂定，为昼生军将、王塑戍主，于是家居于塑业。
English: His great-grandfather, Tu Ding, was a general of the day and the king of plastic arts, so his home was in the plastics industry.

古文：远少习吏事，郡辟功曹。
现代文：过年少学习官吏的职事，郡征召为功曹。
English: He learned the duties of an official at a very young age, and was called up by the county as a meritorious student.

古文：未几，与太守率户赴义旗，署防城都督，除瘿陶县令。
现代文：不久，舆太守率领所属百姓奔赴产蛆的义旗之下，代理防城都督，任瘿陶县令。
English: Soon after, the Empress Dowager, led by her people, rushed to Zhangye under the banner of righteousness, acting as the governor of Fangcheng and serving as the magistrate of Xingtao County.

古文：高祖以远闲习书计，命为丞相骑兵参军事，常征伐，克济军务，深为高祖所知。
现代文：直担因为峦室熟习文字与筹算，任命为丞相骑兵参军事，经常征战能成就军务，深为高祖所赏识。
English: Because of his familiarity with writing and calculation, he was appointed as chancellor and cavalryman to participate in military affairs. He was deeply appreciated by Gao Zu for his ability to accomplish military affairs through frequent military service.

古文：累历巨鹿、陈留二郡太守。
现代文：历任堑尘、速鱼二郡太守。
English: Successive governors of Shandong and Fujian.

古文：天保初，为御史所劾，遇赦免，沉废二年。
现代文：型呈初年，被御史弹劾，遇到赦免，埋没在下层二年未被起用。
English: In the first year, he was impeached by the emperor, pardoned, and buried in the lower level for two years without being used.

古文：显祖以远勋旧，特用为领军府长史，累迁东徐州刺史，入为太中大夫。
现代文：题担因为曲塞过去的功劳，特任用为领军府长史，几次升迁任塞徐州刺史，入朝为太中大夫。
English: Because of Qusei's past achievements, he was specially appointed as the leader of the military governor of history, promoted several times as the leader of Xuzhou, and entered the court as the middle doctor.

古文：河清初，加卫将军。
现代文：回遗初年，加授卫将军。
English: In the first year after his death, he was awarded the title of General of the Imperial Guards.

古文：二年，除使持节、都督东楚州诸军事、东楚州刺史。
现代文：二年，任使持节、都督塞楚州诸军事、塞楚业刺史。
English: In the second year, he was assigned to hold the festival, the military governor of Sichuan Province, and the history of Sichuan Province.

古文：天统二年，授仪同三司、卫尉。
现代文：孟铲二年，授任仪同三司、卫尉。
English: In the second year of Meng Tao, he was awarded the title of Third Division and Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：四年，加开府、右光禄大夫。
现代文：四年，加授开府、右光禄大夫。
English: In four years, he was awarded the title of Kaifu and Uko Roku no daibu.

古文：武平初卒。
现代文：武平初年去世。
English: Takehei died the following year.

古文：远为治慕宽和，有恩惠。
现代文：涂远治政崇尚宽和，对百姓施以恩惠。
English: Tu Yuan ruled the country peacefully and favored the people.

古文：至东楚，其年冬，邑郭大火，城民亡产业，远躬自赴救，对之流涕，仍为经营，皆得安立。
现代文：到束楚那年的冬天，城裹起了大火，城中的居民失去了产业，途逗亲自前往救火，对着百姓流泪，帮助他们经营产业，使他们都得到安置。
English: In the winter of that year, the city was engulfed in fire, and the residents of the city lost their property. Tongzhi personally went to fight the fire, shed tears for the people, helped them manage their property, and they were all resettled.

古文：长子世荣，中书舍人、黄门侍郎。
现代文：长子徐世荣，任中书舍人、黄门侍郎。
English: The eldest son, Xu Shirong, served as the school's librarian and Huangmen's chamberlain.

古文：王峻，字峦嵩，灵丘人也。
现代文：王峻，字峦嵩，灵丘人。
English: Wang Jun, Zhaojun Liang, Lingqiu Ren.

古文：明悟有干略。
现代文：聪明颖悟，有治事的才能和谋略。
English: Clever and insightful, with administrative talent and strategy.

古文：高祖以为相府墨曹参军，坐事去官。
现代文：高祖用他为相府墨曹参军，因事获罪，革除了官职。
English: Gao Zu used him as a consort to join the army, was found guilty, and was dismissed from his post.

古文：久之，显祖为仪同开府，引为城局参军。
现代文：很久之后，颢祖为仪同开府，征引他为城局参军。
English: After a long time, his ancestor, who was the founder of Iitong, conscripted him to join the army of the city government.

古文：累迁恒州大中正、世宗相府外兵参军。
现代文：几次升任为恒州大中正，世宗相府外兵参军。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of vice-president of Hengzhou University, and foreign soldiers from the Sejong Foreign Minister's Office joined the army.

古文：随诸军平淮阴，赐爵北平县男。
现代文：跟随众军平定淮阴，赐予北平县男的爵位。
English: He followed the troops to subdue Huaiyin and was given the title of the son of Beiping County.

古文：除营州刺史。
现代文：任营州刺史。
English: Ren Yingzhou stabbed history.

古文：营州地接边城，贼数为民患。
现代文：营州的土地连接着边城，贼人屡次骚扰，成为百姓的忧患。
English: Yingzhou's land is connected to the border city. Thieves have repeatedly harassed it, which has become a concern for the people.

古文：峻至州，远设斥候，广置疑兵，每有贼发，常出其不意要击之，贼不敢发，合境获安。
现代文：王峻到营州，在辽方设立哨所，广设疑兵，每当有贼人前来，时常出其不意拦击他们，贼人不敢前来，全境得到安宁。
English: Wang Jun went to Yingzhou, set up a sentry post in the Liao side, and set up a wide range of suspicious soldiers. Whenever there were thieves coming, he often stopped them by surprise. The thieves did not dare to come, and the whole territory was peaceful.

古文：先是刺史陆士茂诈杀室韦八百馀人，因此朝贡遂绝。
现代文：此前刺史陆士茂诈称杀死失韦所属的余人，因此向朝廷的贡赋就断绝了。
English: Previously, the assassin, Lu Shimao, fraudulently claimed to have killed the rest of the people who belonged to Zhu Wei, so the tribute to the imperial court was cut off.

古文：至是，峻分命将士，要其行路，室韦果至，大破之，虏其首帅而还。
现代文：遣时，王峻分别命令将士，截击他们所走的道路，失韦果然来到，把他们打得大败，俘虏了他们的主帅而还师。
English: At the appointed time, Wang Jun separately ordered his soldiers to intercept the road they were walking on, and they were defeated, their commander was captured, and the division was restored.

古文：因厚加恩礼，放遣之。
现代文：于是厚加礼遇，然后放他回去。
English: So they treated him with great courtesy and let him go.

古文：室韦遂献诚款，朝贡不绝，峻有力焉。
现代文：失韦于是奉献诚意，给朝廷的贡赋不断，这是王峻的功劳啊。
English: Therefore, he lost his dedication and sincerity, and continued to pay tribute to the imperial court. This is the merit of Wang Jun.

古文：初，茹茹主庵罗辰率其馀党东徙，峻度其必来，预为之备。
现代文：起初茹茹主庵罗辰率领他的余党束迁，王峻估计他一定前来，预先作了准备。
English: At first, Zhu Rong's master, Luo Chen, led his remaining party members to relocate. Wang Jun estimated that he would definitely come and made preparations in advance.

古文：未几，庵罗辰到，顿军城西。
现代文：不久，庵罗辰到，屯军城西。
English: Soon after, Iori Rochen arrived, and the army marched west of the city.

古文：峻乃设奇伏大破之，获其名王郁久闾豆拔提等数十人，送于京师。
现代文：王峻于是设奇兵埋伏，大破庵罗辰，俘获他的名王郁久间豆拔提等敷十人，送往京城。
English: Wang Jun then set up a surprise ambush, smashed Luo Chen's hermitage, captured his namesake, Ikuhuma Doubaty, and ten others, and sent them to the capital.

古文：庵罗辰于此遁走。
现代文：庵罗辰从此逃走。
English: Iori ran away from there.

古文：帝甚嘉之。迁秘书监。
现代文：颢祖大加嘉奖，升任秘书监。
English: He was highly commended and promoted to the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：废帝即位，除洛州刺史、河阳道行台左丞。
现代文：废帝即位，任洛州刺史、河阳道行台左丞。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and was appointed as the governor of Luozhou and the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：皇建中，诏于洛州西界掘长堑三百里，置城戍以防间谍。
现代文：皇建年间，奉诏在洛州西部边界挖长堑三百里，设置城防来防备间谍。
English: During the imperial construction, Bong Zhao dug a 300-mile long ditch on the western border of Luozhou and set up a city defense to guard against spies.

古文：河清元年，征拜祠部尚书。
现代文：河清元年，召拜祠部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Heqing Dynasty, Shang Shu was summoned to the ancestral hall.

古文：诏诣晋阳检校兵马，俄而还邺，转太仆卿。
现代文：奉诏到晋阳查核察看兵马，不久还邺，改任太仆卿。
English: He was ordered to go to Jinyang to inspect the troops and horses, but he was soon dismissed and reassigned to the post of grand chamberlain.

古文：及车驾巡幸，常与吏部尚书尉瑾辅皇太子、诸亲王同知后事。
现代文：皇帝巡幸，常与吏部尚书尉瑾辅佐皇太子、诸亲王共同掌管后方事宜。
English: When the emperor was on a tour, he often took charge of matters in the rear together with the imperial secretary, Shang Shufu, and the crown prince and princes.

古文：仍赐食梁郡干，迁侍中，除都官尚书。
现代文：于是赐食梁郡的俸禄。升任侍中，又任都官尚书。
English: As a result, he was given the salary of Shiryang County, promoted to the position of chamberlain, and appointed to the post of capital official.

古文：及周师寇逼，诏峻以本官与东安王娄睿、武兴王普等自邺率众赴河阳御之。
现代文：北周的军队进犯，诏王峻以本官舆东安王娄散、武兴王高普等人从邺率众奔赴河阳抗御。
English: North Zhou's army attacked, and Zhao Wangjun, with his vassals Dongan Wang Yansan and Wuxing Wang Gaopu, led the crowd to go to Heyang to resist.

古文：车驾幸洛阳，以悬瓠为周人所据，复诏峻为南道行台，与娄睿率军南讨。
现代文：皇帝亲临洛阳，因悬瓠被北周人占据，又诏令王峻为南道行台，舆娄散率军南讨。
English: The emperor personally visited Luoyang, which was occupied by the Northern Zhou people due to the suspension of the imperial edict, and ordered Wang Jun to march to the south and lead the army to the south.

古文：未至，周师弃城走，仍使慰辑永、郢二州。
现代文：还没有到达，北周人弃城逃走，于是派人慰问安抚永、郢二州。
English: Before they arrived, the Northern Zhou people abandoned the city and fled, so they sent condolences to pacify Yong and Jian Erzhou.

古文：四年春，还京师。坐违格私度禁物并盗截军粮，有司依格处斩，家口配没。
现代文：四年春，回到京城，因违法私运禁物并盗截军粮，主管官吏依法判他处斩，家人发配为奴。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, he returned to Beijing. For illegally smuggling prohibited goods and stealing military food, the competent officials sentenced him to beheading according to law, and his family members were assigned as slaves.

古文：特诏决鞭一百，除名配甲坊，蠲其家口。
现代文：皇帝特下韶用鞭拷打一百，除名发配甲坊，免除发配他的家人。
English: The emperor gave him a hundred lashes, exempted him from the distribution of armor, and exempted his family from the distribution.

古文：会赦免，停废私门。
现代文：适逢赦免，罢官居家。
English: When the time comes for a pardon, he will resign and stay at home.

古文：天统二年，授骠骑大将军、仪同三司，寻加开府。
现代文：丢筮二年，授骠骑大将军、仪同三司，不久加授开府。
English: In the second year after he was dethroned, he was awarded the title of General of Cavalry and the title of General of the Three Departments, and was soon awarded the title of Kaifu.

古文：武平初，除侍中。
现代文：亘迎初年，任侍中。
English: It was Wataru's first year as a junior samurai.

古文：四年卒。
现代文：四年去世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：赠司空公。
现代文：追赠司空公。
English: Presented to Shikugo.

古文：王纮，字师罗，太安狄那人也，为小部酋帅。
现代文：王弦，字师罗，太安狄那人，是小部族的酋长。
English: Wang Zhen, the calligrapher Luo, is from Taian, and is the chief of a small tribe.

古文：父基，颇读书，有智略。
现代文：父亲王基，读书很多，有智谋。
English: His father, Wang Ji, was a great reader and very resourceful.

古文：初从葛荣反，荣授基济北王、宁州刺史。
现代文：起初跟随姜茔谋反，姜萤授予王圭遗 迗、窒业刺史的官职。
English: At first, he followed Jiang Kuo in plotting a rebellion, and Jiang Huo awarded Wang Gui the official post of "widow" and Duye the official post of "priest."

古文：后葛荣破，而基据城不下，尔朱荣遣使喻之，然后始降。
现代文：后来葛荣被攻破，而王基据城固守，没有被攻下，叁朱萤派使者开导他，然后才投降。
English: Later, Ge Rong was breached, but Wang Jizhong held fast to the city and was not captured. Zou Zhuhuo sent an envoy to enlighten him before surrendering.

古文：荣后以为府从事中郎，令率众镇磨川。
现代文：尔塞茔后来以他为府从事中郎令，率部下镇守磨川。
English: Later, Ercei made him the prefect and made him the second-in-command, leading his subordinates to guard the town of Mahukawa.

古文：荣死，纥豆陵步藩虏基归河西，后逃归尔朱兆。
现代文：叁塞茔死，纥豆陵步藩俘虏王基到回西，后逃回投奔氽朱兆。
English: Xie Jie died, and Wang Ji, who was a prisoner of Peaslingbufang, went back to the west, and then fled back to Zhu Zhao.

古文：高祖平兆，以基为都督，除义宁太守。
现代文：高祖平定氽朱兆，以王基为都督，授任义宁太守。
English: Gaozu subdued Zhu Zhao and made Wang Ji the governor of the capital, and appointed him the governor of Yining.

古文：基先于葛荣军与周文帝相知，及文帝据有关中，高祖遣基与长史侯景同使于周文帝，文帝留基不遣。
现代文：王基从前在葛荣军中与周文童相知，到旦塞童据有盐中，产担派王基舆长史谜一起出使且塞童处，塞童留下王堇不让他回来。
English: Wang Ji once knew Zhou Wentong in Ge Rong's army. When he went to Danzai Dang, he sent Wang Ji Mei together with him to Danzai Dang, but Danzai Dang did not let him come back.

古文：基后逃归，除冀州长史，后行肆州事。
现代文：王基后逃回，授任冀长史，后来兼摄壁真的政事。
English: Wang Ji fled back and was appointed to the post of Hebei governor. Later, he also took charge of the political affairs of the Great Wall.

古文：元象初，累迁南益州、北豫州刺史。
现代文：五墓初年，几次升任为南益州、北豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Five Tombs, he was promoted several times to be the chief historian of South Yizhou and North Yuzhou.

古文：所历皆好聚敛，然性和直，吏民不甚患之。
现代文：所到的地方都好聚敛财富，然而性情平和直率，官吏和百姓不很厌恶他。
English: He amassed wealth wherever he went, but his disposition was peaceful and straightforward, and officials and common people did not dislike him very much.

古文：兴和四年冬为奴所害，时年六十五。
现代文：兴和四年冬季为奴仆所害，当时六十五岁。
English: He was sixty-five years old when he was killed by a slave in the winter of Heunghe four years ago.

古文：赠征东将军、吏部尚书、定州刺史。
现代文：追赠征束将军、吏部尚书、定刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Conscription, the title of General of the Cadre, and the title of Grand Historian.

古文：纮少好弓马，善骑射，颇爱文学。
现代文：王铉年少时喜欢弓箭、马匹，善于骑马射箭，非常爱好文学。
English: When he was young, Wang Yao liked bows and arrows, horses, was good at riding and archery, and was very fond of literature.

古文：性机敏，应对便捷。
现代文：天性机智敏捷，应对灵活。
English: Naturally quick-witted and flexible.

古文：年十三，见扬州刺史太原郭元贞，元贞抚其背曰： 汝读何书？ 
现代文：十三岁时，见到挝塑刺史主愿人堑重贞。五贞抚其背说： 你读什么书? 
English: When she was thirteen years old, she met her future husband, Zou Chongzhen. Wu Zhen stroked his back and said, "What books do you read?"

古文：对曰： 诵《孝经》。 
现代文：回答说： 诵读孝经》。 
English: He replied, "Chanting the Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：曰： 《孝经》云何？ 
现代文：五贞说： 《孝经》讲的是什么? 
English: Wuzhen said, "What does the Filial Piety Sutra talk about?"

古文：曰： 在上不骄，为下不乱。 
现代文：王弦说： 地位在上的不骄纵，地位在下的不作乱。 
English: He replied, "Those with high status should not be arrogant, and those with low status should not forget etiquette."

古文：元贞曰： 吾作刺史，岂其骄乎？ 
现代文：元贞说： 我作刺史，难道骄纵吗? 
English: Yuan Zhen said: I am a historian, am I being arrogant?

古文：纮曰： 公虽不骄，君子防未萌，亦愿留意。 
现代文：王弦说： 公虽不骄纵，然而君子防患于未然，也希望留意此事。 
English: Wang Zhen said: Although the public is not arrogant, but the gentleman should prevent problems in advance, and also hope to pay attention to this matter.

古文：元贞称善。
现代文：五贞称赞他。
English: Guo Yuanzhen listened to the continuous praise and said that he spoke well.

古文：年十五，随父在北豫州，行台侯景与人论掩衣法为当左为当右。
现代文：十五岁时，跟随父亲在北豫，行台谜和人谈论掩衣襟的方法是应当向左，还是应当向右。
English: At the age of fifteen, following his father in Beiyuan, he was walking the streets and talking to people about whether the way to cover the collar should be to the left or to the right.

古文：尚书敬显俊曰： 孔子云： 微管仲，吾其被发左衽矣 以此言之，右衽为是。 
现代文：尚书敬显俊说： 孔子说： 如果没有笪住，我们将头发披散不束，衣襟向左掩了，以此说来，衣襟向右掩是对的。 
English: Shangshu Jing Xianjun said: Confucius said: If there is no shackle, we will wear our hair loose and cover the collar to the left, so it is right to cover the collar to the right.

古文：纮进曰： 国家龙飞朔野，雄步中原，五帝异仪，三王殊制，掩衣左右，何足是非。 
现代文：王弦进言说： 国家帝王即位于北方荒野之地，称雄中原，五帝三王的礼仪、制度各自不同，衣襟向左或向右掩，哪裹值得谈论它的是与非。 
English: Wang Zhenjin said: The emperor of the country is located in the northern wilderness, known as the Central Plains. The etiquette and system of the five emperors and three kings are different, and the collar hides to the left or to the right, which is worth talking about its rights and wrongs.

古文：景奇其早慧，赐以名马。
现代文：侯景惊奇他年少聪明，赐给他名马。
English: Hou Jing was surprised at his precocity and gave him a good horse.

古文：兴和中，世宗召为库直，除奉朝请。
现代文：里型年间，世塞召为库直，任奉朝请。
English: During the Reign of Li, Shisei was called to serve as treasurer and was appointed to the imperial court.

古文：世宗暴崩，纮冒刃捍御，以忠节赐爵平春县男，赉帛七百段、绫锦五十匹、钱三万并金带骏马，仍除晋阳令。
现代文：世塞遇害突然去世，王越冒死捍卫世塞，因忠节赐予平春县男的爵位，赏赐帛七百段、绫锦五十匹、钱三万和金带骏马，并任置盐令。
English: Shisei was killed and died suddenly. Wang Yue, who risked his life to defend Shisei, was given the title of Pingchun County because of his loyalty. He was rewarded with seven hundred taels of silver, fifty horses of brocade, thirty thousand dollars and a horse with a gold sash, and he was allowed to keep salt.

古文：天保初，加宁远将军，颇为显祖所知待。
现代文：天保初年，加授宁远将军，很为显祖重视优待。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, General Ningyuan was awarded a posthumous promotion. He valued the preferential treatment for his ancestors.

古文：帝尝与左右饮酒，曰： 快哉大乐。 
现代文：帝曾与左右的人饮酒，说： 大乐痛快啊。 
English: Emperor Zeng drank alcohol with the people around him and said, "It's great fun.

古文：纮对曰： 亦有大乐，亦有大苦。 
现代文：王弦说： 也有大乐，也有大苦。 
English: Wang Huan said, "There are great joys and great sufferings.

古文：帝曰： 何为大苦？ 
现代文：帝说： 什么是大苦? 
English: The emperor said, "What is great suffering?"

古文：纮曰： 长夜荒饮不寤，亡国破家，身死名灭，所谓大苦。 
现代文：王弦说： 长夜荒饮而不醒悟，国破家亡，身死名减，就是所说的大苦。 
English: Wang Zhen said: Long nights of heavy drinking without waking up, the destruction of the country, the death of the family, the death of the name, is the great suffering.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：帝默然不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：后责纮曰： 尔与纥奚舍乐同事我兄，舍乐死，尔何为不死？ 
现代文：后来责备王弦说： 你与纥奚舍乐共同事奉我兄，舍乐为我兄死，你为何不死! 
English: Later, he reproached Wang Zhen and said, "You and Xie Le jointly served my brother, Xie Le died for my brother, why don't you die!"

古文：纮曰： 君亡臣死，自是常节，但贼竖力薄斫轻，故臣不死。 
现代文：王弦说： 君亡臣死，自然是正常的礼节，但贼人力气小，砍得轻，所以我没有死。 
English: Wang Zhen said, "It is a normal etiquette for a deceased subject to die, but a thief is weak and easy to cut, so I didn't die.

古文：帝使燕子献反缚纮，长广王捉头，帝手刃将下，纮曰： 杨遵彦、崔季舒逃走避难，位至仆射、尚书，冒死效命之士，反见屠戮，旷古未有此事。 
现代文：帝让燕子献反绑王弦，长广王抓住头，帝手举刀将要砍下。王弦说： 杨遵彦、崔季舒逃走躲避，职位达到仆射、尚书，冒死效命的贤士，反而被杀戮，旷古未有这样的事。 
English: Wang Zhen said, "Yang Zunyan and Cui Jishu ran away to hide, and their positions reached the position of shooting and writing, and they were sages who risked their lives, but they were killed. There has never been such a thing in ancient times."

古文：帝投刃于地曰： 王师罗不得杀。 
现代文：帝将刀扔到地上说： 王师罗不能杀。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan threw his sword on the ground and said, "Wang Xuan must not be killed."

古文：遂舍之。
现代文：于是放了他。
English: and they let him go.

古文：乾明元年，昭帝作相，补中外府功曹参军事。
现代文：干明元年，昭帝作相，补任中外府功曹参军事。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Zhao made him a consul, and he was appointed to the post of Sino-foreign provincial meritorious serviceman.

古文：皇建元年，进爵义阳县子。
现代文：皇建元年，晋升为义阳县子的爵位。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted to the peerage of Yiyang County.

古文：河清三年，与诸将征突厥，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：河清三年，与诸将征伐突厥，加授骠骑大将军。
English: In the third year of Heqing, he and other generals conquered the Turks, and was awarded the title of grand general.

古文：天统元年，除给事黄门侍郎，加射声校尉，四迁散骑常侍。
现代文：天统元年，任给事黄门侍郎，加授射声校尉，四次升任至散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was appointed as the Yellow Gate Attendant, awarded the additional rank of Captain, and was promoted four times to the rank of Sanzhi (free-riding) Samurai.

古文：武平初，开府仪同三司。
现代文：武平初年，任开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Wu Ping, he was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：纮上言： 突厥与宇文男来女往，必当相与影响，南北寇边。
现代文：王弦上书说： 突厥与宇文男来女往，必定相互呼应，从南北两个方面入侵边境。
English: Wang Zhen said in the letter: The Turks and the Uyghur men and women will certainly echo each other and invade the border from the north and south.

古文：宜选九州劲勇强弩，多据要险之地。
现代文：应当选派九州的勇士和善射之人，据守险要之地。
English: Warriors from Kyushu and good shooters should be selected to guard the critical areas.

古文：伏愿陛下哀忠念旧，爱孤恤寡，矜愚嘉善，舍过记功，敦骨肉之情，广宽仁之路，思尧、舜之风，慕禹、汤之德，克己复礼，以成美化，天下幸甚。 
现代文：我愿陛下哀怜顾念忠诚的老臣，热爱抚恤孤寡之人，同情奖励忠实善良之士，忘记他们的过失，牢记他们的功劳，珍重骨肉之情，广开宽厚仁爱之路，追思尧、舜之风，仰慕禹、汤之德，克己复礼，以成大治，这是天下的幸事。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will have pity on and remember the loyal old ministers, love and care for the lonely and the widows, sympathize with and reward the loyal and kind people, forget their faults, remember their merits, cherish the feelings of the flesh and blood, open up the broad road of benevolence, think about the wind of the dragon and the dragonfly, admire the virtue of Yu and Tang, and restrain oneself from rebelling, so as to become a great ruler. This is a blessing of the world.

古文：五年，陈人寇淮南，诏令群官共议御捍。
现代文：武平五年，陈人入侵淮南，皇帝命令众官共同商议防御之策。
English: In the fifth year of Wuping, the Chen people invaded Huainan, and the emperor ordered all officials to jointly discuss the defense strategy.

古文：封辅相请出讨击。
现代文：封辅相请求出兵讨伐。
English: The feudal auxiliaries requested the dispatch of troops for the crusade.

古文：纮曰： 官军频经失利，人情骚动，若复兴兵极武，出顿江淮，恐北狄西寇，乘我之弊，倾国而来，则世事去矣。
现代文：王弦说： 官军多次失利，人心不安，如果又兴兵动武，外出屯军江、淮，担心北狄西戎，乘我不利之时，倾国而来，则大事去矣。
English: Wang Zhen said, "The government army has suffered many defeats, and the people are uneasy. If the Xing soldiers take up arms again, go out to the Yangtze River and the Huai River, worry about the North Dixie River, and take advantage of my disadvantage to invade the country, then it will be a big deal.

古文：莫若薄赋省徭，息民养士，使朝廷协睦，遐迩归心，征之以仁义，鼓之以道德，天下皆当肃清，岂直伪陈而已！ 
现代文：不如薄赋轻徭，让百姓士人休养生息，使朝廷和睦，远近归心，以仁义征伐他们，以道德进攻他们，天下都当安定，难道衹是一个不合法的陈国吗。 
English: Is it not better to let the people and the scholars rest and recuperate, to make the imperial court harmonious and far-reaching, to conquer them with benevolence and righteousness, to attack them with morality, and the whole world should be stable? Is it an illegal Chen country?

古文：高阿那肱谓众人曰： 从王武卫者南席。 
现代文：高阿那肱对众人说： 同意王武卫的人在南边坐。 
English: Gao Ananyuan said to the crowd: Those who agree with Wang Wuwei should sit on the south side.

古文：众皆同焉。
现代文：众人都赞同他。
English: Everyone agrees with him.

古文：寻兼侍中，聘于周。
现代文：不久兼任侍中，出使周。
English: Soon he also served as a chamberlain, dispatching Zhou.

古文：使还即正，未几而卒。
现代文：出使回来即正式任侍中，没多久去世。
English: When he returned from his mission, he was officially appointed as a chamberlain, but he died not long after.

古文：纮好著述，作《鉴诫》二十四篇，颇有文义。
现代文：王弦好著述，作《鉴诫》二十四篇，很有文辞。
English: Wang Zhen is a good writer. He has written twenty-four articles of "Exhortation." He is very eloquent.

古文：史臣曰：张纂等并趋事霸朝，申其功用，皆有齐之良臣也。
现代文：史臣曰：张纂等人都事奉产压霸朝，伸张他们的功用，都是壹鱼的良臣啊。
English: Shichen said: Zhang Zuo and others all serve the production pressure and hegemony of the morning, and they are all good ministers of a fish.

古文：伯德之恸哭伏尸，灵光之拒关驻跸，有古人风焉。
现代文：但堕伏尸恸哭，玺光守关，使帝王停留暂驻，有古人的遣风啊。
English: However, the fallen corpse cried and wailed, and Yiguang guarded the gate, so that the emperor stayed temporarily, and the ancients sent the wind.

古文：赞曰：纂、亮、耀、起，徐远、纮、峻，奉日高升，凌风远振。
现代文：赞曰：纂、亮、耀、起，徐远、纮、峻，事奉帝王高升，乘风远振。
English: Zang said: "Shuan, bright, shining, rising, Xuyuan, bright, steep, serving the emperor Gaosheng, riding the wind and shaking."

古文：树死拒关，终明信顺。
现代文：树死拒关，最终表明自己的忠信和顺。
English: The tree refuses to die, and finally shows its loyalty and obedience.

