古文：夫作者曰圣，述者曰明。
现代文：所谓 圣 ，就是能够独立创造的人；所谓 明 ，就是能够继承阐发圣人学说的人。
English: A sage is a person who can independently create; a sage is a person who can inherit the teachings of a sage.

古文：陶铸性情，功在上哲。
现代文：通过文章和思想来陶冶后人的性情，古代圣贤在这方面有很大的功劳。
English: The ancient sages did a great deal to cultivate the disposition of future generations through their writings and thoughts.

古文：夫子文章，可得而闻，则圣人之情，见乎文辞矣。
现代文：如同孔子的文章，可以确实地看到；在这些文章里，圣人的思想感情是可以感受到的。
English: Like the writings of Confucius, one can actually see; in these writings, the thoughts and feelings of the sage can be felt.

古文：先王圣化，布在方册，夫子风采，溢于格言。
现代文：古代先王圣人教化万民的思想，在古书上记载着；孔子的言行，都充分表现在他的教导人的言论里。
English: The thoughts of ancient sages to enlighten the people are recorded in ancient books; the words and deeds of Confucius are fully expressed in his teachings.

古文：是以远称唐世，则焕乎为盛；近褒周代，则郁哉可从：此政化贵文之征也。
现代文：孔子说在唐尧时代文化就已经很丰富了，在周朝时期就有可以遵从的文化内涵了：这就是政治教化以文章为贵的象征。
English: Confucius said that in the Tang Dynasty, the culture was already very rich, and in the Zhou Dynasty, there was a cultural connotation that could be followed: this is the symbol of political indoctrination with articles as precious.

古文：郑伯入陈，以文辞为功；宋置折俎，以多文举礼：此事迹贵文之征也。
现代文：春秋时郑国攻入陈国，在对待晋国的责问中，郑国子产因为善于辞令而立下功劳。宋国曾用最隆重的宴会招待宾客，由于谈话富有文采，孔子特使弟子记录下来。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Zheng invaded Chen, and in the interrogation of Jin, Zheng's son-in-law was praised for being good at giving orders. Song had invited guests with the grandest banquet, and because the conversation was rich in literature, Confucius's special envoy disciple recorded it.

古文：褒美子产，则云 言以足志，文以足言 ；泛论君子，则云 情欲信，辞欲巧 ：此修身贵文之征也。
现代文：这些都是事业方面以文为贵的例证。孔子赞扬子产，说他不仅能用语言来很好地表达自己的思想，而且还能用文采把语言修饰得很漂亮。孔子谈到一般有才德的人时，就说情感应该真实，文辞应该巧妙。这些都是个人修养方面以文为贵的例证。
English: These are all examples of the value of literature in business. Confucius praised his progeny, saying that he could not only use language to express his thoughts well, but also use literature to decorate the language beautifully. When Confucius talked about ordinary talented people, he said that emotions should be true and words should be clever. These are examples of the value of literature in personal cultivation.

古文：然则志足而言文，情信而辞巧，乃含章之玉牒，秉文之金科矣。
现代文：由此可见，思想要充实而语言要有文采，情感要真诚而文辞要巧妙：这就是写作的基本法则。
English: Thus, thinking should be rich and language should be literary, emotions should be sincere and words should be skillful: this is the basic rule of writing.

古文：夫鉴周日月，妙极机神；文成规矩，思合符契。
现代文：圣人能够全面考察自然万物，并深入到其中精深奥妙的地方去；这样才能写成堪称楷模的文章，其表达的思想也才能与客观事物相吻合。
English: The sage can comprehensively examine all things of nature and go deep into the most profound and mysterious parts of it; in this way, he can write an exemplary article, and the thoughts expressed can also be consistent with objective things.

古文：或简言以达旨，或博文以该情，或明理以立体，或隐义以藏用。
现代文：圣人的著作有时用较少的语言来表达其主要思想，有时用丰富的文辞抒发感情；有时用明白的道理来建立文章的主体，有时用含蓄的思想而不直接显示文章的作用。
English: The works of sages sometimes use fewer words to express their main ideas, sometimes use rich words to express feelings; sometimes use clear principles to establish the main body of the article, and sometimes use implicit thoughts without directly showing the role of the article.

古文：故《春秋》一字以褒贬，《丧服》举轻以包重，此简言以达旨也。
现代文：如像《春秋》就常用极少的文字来批评和赞美，《礼记》里常用轻的丧服来概括重的丧服：这就是用较少的语言来表达主要思想的例子。
English: For example, "Spring and Autumn" uses very few words to criticize and praise, and "Rituals" uses light mourning clothes to summarize heavy mourning clothes: this is an example of using fewer words to express the main idea.

古文：《邠诗》联章以积句，《儒行》缛说以繁辞，此博文以该情也。
现代文：又如《诗经·豳风·七月》是用许多章句联结成篇的，《礼记·儒行》也常用复杂的叙述和丰富的辞句：这就是用较多的文辞来详尽地抒发情意的例子。
English: For example, "The Book of Poetry, the Wind, and the Month of July" is composed of many chapters, and "The Book of Rites and Decrees, the Practice of Confucianism" also uses complex descriptions and rich words: this is an example of using more words to express feelings in detail.

古文：书契决断以象夬，文章昭晰以象离，此明理以立体也。
现代文：此外，有的文章讲得像《夬》卦所说的那样决断干脆，有的文章写得像《离》卦所说的那样清楚透彻：这就是用明白的道理来建立文章主体的例子。
English: In addition, some articles are as decisive and straightforward as the "" Gua, and some articles are as clear and thorough as the "离" Gua: this is an example of using clear reason to establish the main body of the article.

古文：四象精义以曲隐，五例微辞以婉晦，此隐义以藏用也。
现代文：还有《周易》中的四种卦象，道理精深，意义曲折；《春秋》所运用的五种记事条例，也常是文辞微妙，意义宛转：这就是用含蓄的思想而不直接显示文章作用的例子。
English: There are also the four kinds of conundrums in "Zhou Yi" with profound reason and tortuous meaning; the five kinds of rules for keeping records used in "Spring and Autumn" are also often subtle in wording and meaningful: this is an example of using implicit thoughts without directly showing the role of the article.

古文：故知繁略殊形，隐显异术，抑引随时，变通适会，征之周孔，则文有师矣。
现代文：根据上述可知：各种文章在表现手法上，有详与略、隐与显的区别；所以写文章时，或压缩、或加详，要随不同的时机而定；写作上的千变万化，要适应不同的具体情况。所有这些，如果以周公、孔子的文章做标准，那么在写作上就算找到老师了。
English: According to the above, it can be seen that there are differences between detailed and abbreviated, implicit and explicit in the expression methods of various articles; therefore, when writing an article, whether to compress or to add details depends on different occasions; writing is ever-changing, and it is necessary to adapt to different specific situations. All of these, if the articles of Zhou Gong and Confucius are the standard, then it is enough to find a teacher in writing.

古文：是以论文必征于圣，窥圣必宗于经。
现代文：因此，评论文章一定要用圣人的标准来检验，寻求圣人的标准一定要以经典文著为根据。
English: Therefore, the review article must be tested with the standard of a saint, and the standard of seeking a saint must be based on classic literature.

古文：《易》称 辨物正言，断辞则备 ，《书》云 辞尚体要，弗惟好异 。
现代文：《周易·系辞》说： 辨明世间万物，给予正确的语言加以说明，语言可以简短但意义必须完善。 《尚书·毕命》说： 文辞应该抓住要点，不应该一味追求奇异。 
English: "Zhou Yi Jie" said: Identify all things in the world, give the correct language to explain, the language can be short but the meaning must be perfect. "Shang Shu Bi Sheng" said: The words should grasp the main points, and should not pursue the singularity.

古文：故知正言所以立辩，体要所以成辞，辞成无好异之尤，辩立有断辞之义。
现代文：由此可见，必须有恰当的说明才能表达出文章的论点，必须抓住要点才能安排好文章的辞采。倘能这样安排文辞，就能避免单纯追求奇异的毛病；这样建立起来的论点，也就能得到辞句明确的益处了。
English: It can be seen from this that a proper explanation is necessary to express the thesis of the article, and the main points must be grasped in order to arrange the words of the article. If the words can be arranged in this way, it will be possible to avoid the problem of simply pursuing singularity; the arguments established in this way will also benefit from clear words.

古文：虽精义曲隐，无伤其正言；微辞婉晦，不害其体要。
现代文：那么即使内容精深曲折，但不会影响到它说明的恰当；虽然文辞微妙宛转，但不会妨害它能抓住要点。
English: So even if the content is profound and tortuous, it will not affect the appropriateness of its explanation; although the wording is subtly addressed, it will not prevent it from grasping the main point.

古文：体要与微辞偕通，正言共精义并用；圣人之文章，亦可见也。
现代文：文章要抓住要点和辞句写得微妙并无矛盾，说明的恰当和内容的精深也可同时并存。这些情形，在圣人的文章里都可以看到。
English: The article should grasp the main points and the words should be written delicately without contradiction, and the appropriateness of the explanation and the depth of the content can coexist at the same time. These situations can be seen in the saint's article.

古文：颜阖以为∶ 仲尼饰羽而画，徒事华辞。 
现代文：颜阖说： 孔子好比在已有自然文采的羽毛上再加装饰似的，只追求华丽的辞藻。 
English: Yan Qi said: Confucius is like adding decoration to feathers that already have natural beauty. He only pursues ornate words.

古文：虽欲訾圣，弗可得已。然则圣文之雅丽，固衔华而佩实者也。
现代文：虽然颜阖想借此来指责圣人，但事实上是做不到的；因为圣人的文章是既雅正又华丽，本来就是兼有动人的文采和充实的内容的。
English: Although Yan Xuan wanted to use this to criticize the sage, it was actually impossible; because the sage's article was both elegant and gorgeous, it was originally both moving and full of content.

古文：天道难闻，犹或钻仰；文章可见，胡宁勿思？
现代文：自然之道本来是不易弄懂的，尚且有人去钻研它；文章是显而易见的东西，为什么不好好加以思考呢？
English: The way of nature is not easy to understand, yet people study it; writing is an obvious thing, why not think about it?

古文：若征圣立言，则文其庶矣。
现代文：如果能根据圣人的著作来进行写作，那么写成的文章就接近于成功了。总结：
English: If you can base your writing on the writings of the saints, then your essay will be close to success.

古文：赞曰∶妙极生知，睿哲惟宰。
现代文：只有圣人能懂得精妙的道理，因为他们具有特出的聪明才智。
English: Only sages can understand the subtle truth, because they have extraordinary intelligence.

古文：精理为文，秀气成采。
现代文：他们用精妙的道理做文章，秀美的才气成就文采。
English: They use subtle reason to make an article, and beautiful talent to achieve literary excellence.

古文：鉴悬日月，辞富山海。
现代文：他们的见解有如日月之明，他们的辞藻就像高山大海那样丰富。
English: Their opinions are as clear as the sun and the moon, and their words are as rich as the mountains and the sea.

古文：百龄影徂，千载心在。
现代文：古代圣人虽成过去，但他们的精神却永垂不朽。
English: Although the ancient sages have passed away, their spirit is immortal.

