古文：吴潜程元凤江万里王爚章鉴陈宜中文天祥
现代文：陈宜中，字与权，浙江永嘉人。年少时家里很穷，但他的性格特别倔强。
English: Chen Yizhong was born in Yongjia, Zhejiang Province. His family was poor when he was young, but his character was particularly stubborn.

古文：吴潜，字毅夫，宣州宁国人。秘阁修撰柔胜之季子。
现代文：有商贾推算他的生辰八字，认为他应当得到大贵，故把自己的女儿许给他为妻子。
English: A merchant, Jia, calculated the eight characters of his birthday and thought that he should receive a great honor, so he allowed his daughter to become his wife.

古文：嘉定十年进士第一，授承事郎、签镇东军节度判官。
现代文：到了太学后，因文章写得好而受到赞誉。宝年间，丁大全以亲戚乡里婢婿的关系奉承巴结卢允升、董宋臣，因而得到理宗皇帝的宠幸，擢升为殿中侍御史，在台谏官中特别骄横。
English: After arriving at the Imperial Academy, he was praised for his well-written articles. During the Bao years, Ding Daquan flattered Ba Jielu Yun Sheng and Dong Song Chen with the relationship of a relative's son-in-law, and thus he was favored by Emperor Rizong, promoted to the palace attendant, and was particularly arrogant among the Taiwan eunuchs.

古文：改签广德军判官。丁父忧，服除，授秘书省正字，迁校书郎，添差通判嘉兴府，权发遣嘉兴府事。转朝散郎、尚书金部员外郎。
现代文：陈宜中与黄镛、刘黻、林测祖、陈宗、曾唯六人上书皇帝批评、攻击他。丁大全因此恼怒，指使监察御史吴衍弹劾陈宜中，削夺了他的官职，拘禁、监管在其他州府。
English: Six people, including Chen Yizhong, Huang Qi, Liu Hui, Lin Shizhu, Chen Zong and Zeng Wei, sent a letter to the emperor to criticize and attack him. Ding Daquan was so angry that he ordered the inspector general Wu Yan to impeach Chen Yizhong, deprive him of his official position, and detain and supervise him in other state capitals.

古文：绍定四年，迁尚右郎官。
现代文：司业率十二所学校的学生，穿着整齐地送他到桥门之外。
English: Students from a dozen schools, neatly dressed, escorted him outside the bridge gate.

古文：都城大火，潜上疏论致灾之由： 愿陛下斋戒修省，恐惧对越，菲衣恶食，必使国人信之，毋徒减膳而已。
现代文：丁大全因此更加恼怒，立碑文在学校中，戒令学生们不要胡乱地议论国家的政事，又命令，凡从此以后有上书的人，前廊的生员仔细看过以后书面报送检院。因此，士大夫们众口一词地称道陈宜中他们，号为 六君子 。
English: Ding Daquan was even more angry because of this. He erected an inscription in the school, ordering the students not to discuss the country's political affairs in a disorderly manner. He also ordered that anyone who submitted a letter from now on would be carefully read by the students in the front hall and then reported to the procuratorate in writing. Therefore, the scholars and teachers praised Chen Yi for them, and called them the six gentlemen.

古文：疏损声色，必使天下孚之，毋徒彻乐而已。
现代文：陈宜中贬谪建昌军。丁大全被放逐之后，丞相吴潜上奏要求陈宜中还朝任职。
English: Chen Yizhong dethroned the Jianchang army. After Ding Daquan was exiled, the prime minister Wu Qianxiang asked Chen Yizhong to continue to serve in the imperial court.

古文：阉官之窃弄威福者勿亲，女宠之根萌祸患者勿昵。以暗室屋漏为尊严之区，而必敬必戒，以恒舞酣歌为乱亡之宅，而不淫不泆。
现代文：贾似道入朝仕相，再次请陈宜中还朝任职，有诏令六人都可免省试直接到京城赴考。景定三年，廷试，陈宜中考中录取为第二名。六人之中，陈宜中尤其通达时事政务。
English: Jia Lian Dao entered the position of imperial secretary, and again asked Chen Yizhong to serve in the imperial court. According to the imperial edict, all six of them could go directly to Beijing to take the examination without the provincial examination. In Jingding's third year, Chen Yizhong was admitted to the second place in the court examination and Chen Yizhong in the middle examination. Among the six, Chen Yizhong was particularly adept at current affairs and government affairs.

古文：使皇天后土知陛下有畏之之心，使三军百姓知陛下有忧之之心。
现代文：先后任绍兴府推官、户部架阁、秘书省正字、校书郎，数年以后迁升为监察御史。程元凤再次担任相职，贾似道担心他侵夺他的权力，想逐去他。
English: He successively served as the Shaoxing prefectural governor, the head of the household, the secretary of the province, and the school librarian. A few years later, he was promoted to the inspector of the history. Cheng Yuanfeng once again held the position of the official, and Jia Xi Dao was worried that he would usurp his power and wanted to expel him.

古文：然后，明诏二三大臣，和衷竭虑，力改弦辙，收召贤哲，选用忠良。
现代文：陈宜中首先弹劾程元凤纵容丁大全肆意作恶，为国家祸害的根源。命按法律格令处置，免除太府卿职。
English: Chen Yizhong first impeached Cheng Yuanfeng for conniving with Ding Daquan to commit wanton evil, which was the root cause of the national calamity. He was ordered to dispose of the case according to the law, and was exempted from the post of Taifuqing.

古文：贪残者屏，回邪者斥，怀奸党贼者诛，贾怨误国者黜。
现代文：陈宜中自己也请外任，担任江东提举茶盐常平公事。
English: Chen Yizhong himself also invited outsiders to serve as Jiangdong to raise tea and salt Changping public affairs.

古文：毋并进君子、小人以为包荒，毋兼容邪说、正论以为皇极，以培国家一线之脉，以救生民一旦之命。
现代文：咸淳四年，改任浙西提刑。咸淳五年，召还朝廷任崇政殿说书，累次迁升至礼部侍郎兼中书舍人。咸淳七年，闽地缺乏将帅，陈宜中以显文阁待制，任福州知州。在任官期间，深得民心，一年多以后，回朝廷担任刑部尚书。
English: In the fourth year of Xian Jun, he was transferred to the post of Zhejiang and Xizhi Censors. In the fifth year of Xian Jun, he was called back to the imperial court to serve as a Censors of the Imperial Palace, and was successively moved to the position of a Clerk of the Ceremonial Department and a Clerk of the Central Censors. In the seventh year of Xian Jun, there was a shortage of generals, and Chen Yizhong was put on standby at the Xianwen Pavilion in Fuzhou and Zhizhou. During his term of office, he won the hearts of the people, and after more than a year,

古文：庶几天意可回，天灾可息，弭灾为祥，易乱为治。 
现代文：咸淳十年，拜任签书枢密院事，并临时兼任参知政事。德祐元年，陈宜中升任为同知枢密院事。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, Chen Yizhong was appointed as a Privy Councillor of Tongzhi, and temporarily concurrently served as a Councillor of State. In the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Dezhu, Chen Yizhong was appointed as a Councillor of Tongzhi.

古文：又言： 重地要区，当豫畜人才以备患。
现代文：二月，贾似道在芜湖兵败丧师，于是以陈宜中知枢密院兼参知政事。
English: In February, when Jia Li Dao's troops were defeated and killed in Wuhu, Chen Yi was appointed to the Privy Council and the post of prefect.

古文：论大顺之理，贯通天人，当以此为致治之本。 又贻书丞相史弥远论事：一曰格君心，二曰节奉给，三曰振恤都民，四曰用老成廉洁之人，五曰用良将以御外患，六曰革吏弊以新治道。
现代文：此后，翁应龙从军中回朝，陈宜中问他贾似道在哪里，翁应龙回答说不知道。
English: After that, Weng Yinglong returned to the North from the army. Chen Yizhong asked him where Jia Lian Road was. Weng Yinglong replied that he did not know.

古文：授直宝章阁、浙东提举常平，辞不赴。
现代文：陈宜中以为贾似道已经死了，于是上奏疏请求对贾似道的误国之罪加以正法。
English: Chen Yizhong thought that Jia Li Dao was already dead, so he petitioned to rectify Jia Li Dao's crime of misleading the country.

古文：改吏部员外郎兼国史编修、实录检讨，迁太府少卿、淮西总领。
现代文：贾似道率军出行时，以他的亲信韩震总管禁兵，有的人说韩震想以兵劫持打算迁行的人，陈宜中借召韩震商量事情，暗中令埋伏壮士在衣袖中藏铁椎击杀了韩震，以表明不是贾似道的同党。
English: When Jia Liang Dao led the army on a journey, he banned the soldiers with his close confidant Han Zhen, some people said that Han Zhen wanted to use soldiers to kidnap the people who planned to move, Chen Yizhong borrowed Han Zhen to discuss the matter, and secretly ordered the ambush strongman to hide the iron vertebrae in his sleeve and killed Han Zhen to show that he was not a party member of Jia Liang Dao.

古文：又告执政，论用兵复河南不可轻易，以为： 金人既灭，与北为邻，法当以和为形，以守为实，以战为应。
现代文：当时，右丞相章鉴晚上逃跑了，曾渊子等人请诏令陈宜中代理丞相职事。恭帝诏以王火龠为左丞相，拜任陈宜中特进、右丞相。四月，王火龠还朝论事，即与陈宜中意见不合。台臣孙嵘叟请放逐潜说友、吴益、李珏回原籍，陈宜中认为： 簿录并不是盛世所做的事情，祖宗忠厚，未曾轻易用它。李珏刚刚被召入朝廷，立即加以重刑，恐怕此后难以示信于人。 
English: At that time, the Minister of the Right, Zhang Jian, ran away in the evening, and Zeng Yuanzi and others requested that Chen Yizhong be appointed as the acting Minister of the Right. Emperor Gong made Wang Huo as the Minister of the Left, and appointed Chen Yizhong as the special envoy and Minister of the Right. In April, Wang Huo still argued with Chen Yizhong, that is, he disagreed with Chen Yizhong. The Taiwanese Sun Yat asked for the expulsion of the hidden storyteller, Wu Yi, and Li Xuan back to their original home. Chen Yizhong believed that: The book was not something that

古文：自荆襄首纳空城，合兵攻蔡，兵事一开，调度浸广，百姓狼狈，死者枕藉，使生灵肝脑涂地，得城不过荆榛之区，获俘不过暧昧之骨，而吾之内地荼毒如此，边臣误国之罪，不待言矣。闻有进恢复之画者，其算可谓俊杰，然取之若易，守之实难。
现代文：王火龠力争，认为应该按孙嵘叟所说的办。适逢留梦炎从湖南到京城入朝，王火龠与陈宜中都请求罢免自己的职务，不理政务，请求以留梦炎担任相职。太皇太后于是以陈宜中担任左丞相，留梦炎担任右丞相，王火龠担任平章军国重事。
English: Wang Huoqi fought hard and believed that it should be done as Sun Yat-sen said. When Li Mengyan came from Hunan to Beijing to enter the imperial court, Wang Huoqi and Chen Yizhong both requested to be relieved of their duties, to ignore government affairs, and requested that Li Mengyan serve as the prime minister. The Grand Empress Dowager then appointed Chen Yizhong as the minister of the left, Li Mengyan as the minister of the right, and Wang Huoqi as the minister of military affairs.

古文：征行之具，何所取资，民穷不堪，激而为变，内郡率为盗贼矣。
现代文：王火龠接受任命，当天就去租赁民间的住房，把丞相府让给陈宜中，陈宜中上奏皇上，认为 一个推辞，一个接受，怎么能够解除天下人的讥笑呢 ？
English: On the day he accepted the appointment, Wang Huan rented a private house and gave the prime minister's office to Chen Yizhong. Chen Yizhong then appealed to the emperor, thinking, "How can a refusal and an acceptance relieve the mockery of the world?"

古文：今日之事，岂容轻议。 自后，兴师入洛，溃败失亡不赀，潜之言率验。
现代文：也辞职而去。
English: He also resigned and left.

古文：迁太府卿兼权沿江制置、知建康府、江东安抚留守。
现代文：派遣使者几次去挽留他，才至朝任职。当时，朝廷命张世杰等人分四路进军，陈宜中、留梦炎二丞相都督军马而不出战。
English: At that time, the imperial court ordered Zhang Shijie and others to march in four directions, but Chen Yizhong and Rum Mengyan did not go to war.

古文：上疏论保蜀之方，护襄之策，防江之算，备海之宜，进取有甚难者三事。
现代文：王火龠请以一丞相督师在吴门建筑关隘，以保护诸将士兵，不然的话，就自己请求担任此事。
English: Wang Huoqi asked the First Vice-Minister Supervisor to build a pass at Wumen to protect the soldiers, otherwise, he would request to take charge of the matter.

古文：端平元年，诏求直言，潜所陈九事：一曰顾天命以新立国之意，二曰植国本以广传家之庆，三曰笃人伦以为纲常之宗主，四曰正学术以还斯文之气脉，五曰广畜人才以待乏绝，六曰实恤民力以致宽舒，七曰边事当鉴前辙以图新功，八曰楮币当权新制以解后忧，九曰盗贼当探祸端而图长策。以直论忤时相，罢奉千秋鸿禧祠。
现代文：陈宜中感到惭愧，始与留梦炎上疏请求行边防守。这个意见在议论时臣僚们不能决断。
English: Chen Yizhong felt ashamed, and at first he did not want to stay in the dream, so he asked to defend the line. This opinion could not be decided by the ministers during the discussion.

古文：改秘阁修撰、权江西转运副使兼知隆兴府，主管江西安抚司。
现代文：七月，张世杰等人所率军队果然在焦山失败。王火龠上奏章说： 没有什么事比军务还重要，现二丞相一起担任都督，妙算计谋，指挥授任，我不能够知道。近来，六月出师，诸将缺乏统帅。
English: In July, the army led by Zhang Shijie and others was defeated at the battle of Jiaoshan. Wang Huojun wrote in his report: "There is nothing more important than military affairs. The current second prime minister is also the governor of the capital. I do not know how to calculate and command. Recently, in June, there was a lack of commanders-in-chief.

古文：擢太常少卿，奏造斛斗输诸郡租，宽恤人户，培植根本，凡十五事。
现代文：我难道不知道吴门相距京城不远，而一定要为此请求，大概大敌当前，不是陛下自任统帅，就是大臣们督师出征。
English: Don't I know that Wumen is not far from Beijing, and I must ask for this. Probably, at the moment of the great enemy, either His Majesty himself is the commander-in-chief, or the ministers are inspectors.

古文：进右文殿修撰、集英殿修撰、枢密都承旨、督府参谋官兼知太平州，五辞不允。又言和战成败大计，宜急救襄阳等事。
现代文：现在张世杰因为各位将领不能齐心协力而败，不知道国家能够经受几次失败？我既不能担负起这方面的职责，又不能听到这方面的言论，请求罢免我的官职。 没有获得允许。
English: Now Zhang Shijie is defeated because the generals can't work together, don't you know how many defeats a country can endure? I can neither shoulder the responsibilities in this regard, nor hear the remarks in this regard, and I request to be removed from my official post. I did not get permission.

古文：贻书执政，论京西既失，当招收京淮丁壮为精兵，以保江西。
现代文：王火龠子王某于是唆使京城的学生到宫廷上书，数落陈宜中的几十件过失，简单地说，就是： 赵氵晋、赵与鉴都弃城逃跑，陈宜中于是借使者去饰说，以此回报私人的恩德。
English: Wang Huanzi Wang then instigated the students of Beijing to write to the court, and counted dozens of faults in Chen Yizhong, simply put, that is: Zhao Yujin, Zhao and Ji both abandoned the city to escape, Chen Yizhong then borrowed an emissary to embellish, in return for personal kindness.

古文：权工部侍郎、知江州，辞不赴。
现代文：令狐概、潜说友都以守城降于蒙古，于是受他的包苴而成为他的羽翼。文天祥率兵勤王，陈宜中相信谗言而阻挠他。
English: Both Foxtrot and Hidden Storyteller were forced to defend the city when it fell to the Mongols, so they were embraced by him and became his wings. Wen Tianxiang led the army to serve the king, while Chen Yizhong believed his words and thwarted him.

古文：请养宗子以系国本，以镇人心。
现代文：贾似道丧失军队大败，以致误国，表面上请求惩罚而实际上暗地里袒护他。
English: Jia Xiangdao lost his army and suffered a great defeat, so that he misled the country, ostensibly asking for punishment, but actually secretly protecting him.

古文：改权兵部侍郎兼检正。
现代文：大兵压境于国门，勤王的军队留在京城而不派遣去御敌。
English: The imperial army is at the gates of the country, and the loyal troops remain in the capital instead of being sent to fight the enemy.

古文：论士大夫私意之敝，以为： 襄、汉溃决，兴、沔破亡，两淮俶扰，三川陷没。
现代文：宰相应当率兵督战，而他畏首畏尾，犹豫不决，商量好了的意见而不执行。吕师夔狼子野心，却派他去敌方通好请求结盟。
English: The prime minister should lead the troops and supervise the war, but he was timid, hesitant, and did not implement the well-discussed opinions. Lu Shi was ambitious, but sent him to the enemy to ask for an alliance.

古文：欲望陛下念大业将倾，士习已坏，以静专察群情，以刚明消众慝，警于有位，各励至公。
现代文：张世杰的步兵用之于水战，刘师勇的水兵用之于陆战，指挥授命失宜欠当，以致造成军事失败。我们恐怕误害国家的将不只一个贾似道。 奏书上后，陈宜中竟然离职而去，派遣使者去召他回朝，他没有至朝。
English: Zhang Shijie's infantrymen were used in naval warfare, Liu Shiyong's sailors were used in land warfare, and the command and assignment of orders was inappropriate, resulting in military defeat. We are afraid that there will be more than one Jia similar way to harm the country. After the report was issued, Chen Yizhong actually left his post and sent an envoy to call him back to the North, but he did not come to the North.

古文：毋以术数相高，而以事功相勉；毋以阴谋相讦，而以识见相先。
现代文：这以后，罢免王火龠，命临安府逮捕捉拿上书的京城学生。召陈宜中还是没有回朝。
English: After this, Wang Huayuan was dismissed, and the Beijing students who were ordered to arrest and seize the letter were arrested in Anfu. Chen Yizhong still did not return to the imperial court.

古文：协谋并智，戮力一心，则危者尚可安，而衰证尚可起也。 又请分路取士，以收淮、襄之人物。
现代文：太皇太后自己亲自写书信送给陈宜中的母亲杨氏，要她劝勉谕示她的儿子，陈宜中这才请求以祠官职入侍朝廷，于是拜任为醴泉观使。十月壬寅，才到朝廷，不久，被任命为右丞相，然而，宋朝大势已去。陈宜中仓惶间组织京城的民众当作士兵，市民十五岁以上的都入籍为兵，人们都以此感觉可笑。
English: The Empress Dowager herself personally wrote a letter to Chen Yizhong's mother, the Yang clan, asking her to advise and advise her son. Chen Yizhong only then requested to serve the imperial court as an ancestral official, so he was appointed as an envoy to Quanquan. In October, Ren Yin only arrived at the imperial court, and was soon appointed as the Minister of the Right, however, the Song Dynasty was already gone. Chen Yizhong in a panic organized the people of Beijing as soldiers, and citizens over the age of fifteen were naturalized as soldiers. People all felt ridiculous.

古文：试工部侍郎、知庆元府兼沿海制置使，改知平江府，条具财计凋敝本末，以宽郡民，与转运使王野争论利害。
现代文：十一月，派遣张全与尹玉、麻士龙的军队援助常州，尹玉与麻士龙都战死，而张全却不发一箭，迅速逃回。
English: In November, Zhang Quan sent troops with Yin Yu and Ma Shilong to aid Changzhou. Both Yin Yu and Ma Shilong were killed in the battle, but Zhang Quan did not fire a single arrow and quickly fled back.

古文：授宝谟阁待制，提举太平兴国宫，改玉隆万寿宫。
现代文：文天祥请求诛杀张全，陈宜中却释放了他而不问他的罪行。此后，常州被攻下，蒙军压境至独松关，周围的宋军望风而逃。
English: Wen Tianxiang requested to kill Zhang Quan, but Chen Yizhong released him without questioning his crime. After that, Changzhou was captured, the Mongolian army pressed the border to Duosongguan, and the surrounding Song army fled.

古文：试户部侍郎、淮东总领兼知镇江府。
现代文：陈宜中派遣使者到蒙军中请求讲和而没有被答应，即率群臣入宫请求迁徙都城，太皇太后不同意。
English: Chen Yizhong sent an envoy to the Mongolian army to request a peace treaty, but was not allowed to do so. He then led a group of courtiers into the palace to request that the capital be moved. The Empress Dowager did not agree.

古文：言边储防御等十有五事。
现代文：陈宜中痛哭失声地请求迁都，太皇太后于是命人装物、升车等待，发给百官路费银两。
English: Chen Yizhong pleaded for the relocation of the capital in tears and lost his voice, so the Empress Dowager ordered people to load goods, wait for the lift, and give the hundred officials two silver coins.

古文：改宝谟阁直学士，兼浙西都大提点坑冶，权兵部尚书、浙西制置使。
现代文：到傍晚，陈宜中没有入宫，太皇太后愤怒地说： 我起初不想迁都，而大臣们数次请求迁都，难道这不是欺骗我吗？ 
English: In the evening, Chen Yi did not enter the palace, and the Grand Empress Dowager said angrily: I did not want to move the capital at first, but the ministers asked to move the capital several times. Isn't this deceiving me?

古文：申论防拓江海，团结措置等事。
现代文：于是脱掉发簪、摘下用玉石做的耳环丢在地上，关上阁门，群臣要求入内引进奏疏，都没有被允许。
English: So he took off his hair braid, took off his earrings made of jade and threw them on the ground, closed the door to the attic, and the courtiers demanded to be allowed to enter the house to introduce the music, but they were not allowed.

古文：进工部尚书，改吏部尚书兼知临安府，乃论艰屯蹇困之时，非反身修德，无以求亨通之理。乞遴选近族以系人望，而俟太子之生。
现代文：大概陈宜中实际上打算第二天迁都，仓促间奏陈皇上，是没有经过仔细考虑所致。陈宜中起初与大元丞相伯颜预期在军中相会，不久对此感到后悔，没有按约前往。伯颜率兵到皋亭山，陈宜中晚上逃跑了，陆秀夫侍奉二王到温州，派遣人员寻召陈宜中，陈宜中到温州，他的母亲死了。
English: It is likely that Chen Yizhong actually planned to move the capital the next day, and the hasty interlude with Emperor Chen was not the result of careful consideration. Chen Yizhong initially expected to meet with the Grand Yuan chancellor Bo Yan in the army, but soon regretted this and did not go according to the agreement. Bo Yan led the troops to Shuting Mountain, Chen Yizhong ran away in the evening, Lu Xiuwu served the two kings to Wenzhou, dispatched personnel to find Chen Yizhong, Chen Yizhong to Wenzhou, and his mother died.

古文：帝嘉纳。兼侍读经筵，以台臣徐荣叟论列，授宝谟阁学士、知绍兴府、浙东安抚使，辞，提举南京鸿庆宫。遂请致仕，授华文阁学士知建宁府，辞。
现代文：张世杰抬他母亲的棺材到船上，于是与他一起到闽中。
English: Zhang Shijie carried his mother's coffin onto the boat and joined him on the raft.

古文：丁母忧，服除，转中大夫、试兵部尚书兼侍读，转翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，改端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，进封金陵郡侯。
现代文：益王立后，又以陈宜中为左丞相。井澳之役战败以后，陈宜中想侍奉益王逃至占城，于是，先到占城说是益王的意思，估计事情不可能，就没有返回。
English: After the establishment of King Yik, Chen Yizhong was appointed as the Minister of the Left. After the defeat in the Battle of Jing'ao, Chen Yizhong wanted to serve King Yik and fled to Zhancheng. Therefore, he said that it was King Yik's intention to go to Zhancheng first, but he estimated that it was impossible, and he did not return.

古文：以亢旱乞罢，免，改资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫，改知福州兼本路安抚使。
现代文：二王多次派人召他回来，最终还是未回。至元十九年，元军攻伐占城，陈宜中逃到暹罗，后来死于暹罗。
English: The two kings repeatedly sent people to call him back, but he ultimately did not return. By the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army attacked and occupied the city, and Chen Yizhong fled to Siam, where he later died.

古文：徙知绍兴府、浙东安抚使。召同知枢密院兼参知政事。
现代文：陈宜中为人处世多讲权术谋略，少年时为县学的学生，他的父亲当官受赃按法应当黥面受刑，陈宜中上书温州知州魏克愚请求宽恕他的父亲，让他代他父亲受刑。
English: Chen Yizhong was a student at the county school when he was a boy. His father was a high-ranking official and was punished according to the law. Chen Yizhong wrote to Wenzhou Zhizhou Wei Kegui to ask for forgiveness for his father and let him take the punishment on behalf of his father.

古文：入对，言： 国家之不能无敝，犹人之不能无病。
现代文：魏克愚认为这是官吏狡猾的行为，最后仍然依法处罚。后来，陈宜中为浙西提刑，魏克愚到郊外迎接他，陈宜中报礼不写官衔名称，也落款 部下民陈某 。
English: Wei Kegui thought that this was a cunning act of officials, and finally still punished according to law. Later, Chen Yizhong was punished for Zhejiang and Xizhong, Wei Kegui went to the suburbs to meet him, Chen Yizhong did not write the name of the official title, and also lost the money of his subordinate Chen Mou.

古文：今日之病，不但仓、扁望之而惊，庸医亦望而惊矣。
现代文：魏克愚惶恐不安，不敢接受，袖手以表示谢罪。陈宜中表面上以礼相待，而暗地里搜寻他的过错，一无所得。
English: Wei Ke was confused, afraid and uneasy, and did not dare to accept the apology. On the surface, Chen Yizhong treated him with courtesy, but secretly searched for his fault and got nothing.

古文：愿陛下笃任元老，以为医师，博采众益，以为医工。
现代文：此后，魏克愚揭发贾德生冒借官府木材事，违忤了贾似道，被废罢家居。
English: After that, Wei Kegui exposed that Jia Desheng had borrowed timber from the government and violated the Jia Lian Dao, and he was dismissed from the family.

古文：使臣辈得以效牛溲马勃之助，以不辱陛下知人之明。 
现代文：陈宜中入朝，仍特地指斥魏克愚居住乡里的不守法行为，贾似道令章鉴弹劾他，贬谪严州，魏克愚的死是陈宜中排挤他较多所致。文天祥，字宋瑞，一字履善，吉州吉水人。
English: When Chen Yizhong entered the imperial court, he still specifically denounced Wei Kegui's unruly behavior in the countryside, Jia Qian ordered Zhang Jian to impeach him, and denounced Yanzhou. Wei Kegui's death was largely caused by Chen Yizhong's ousting him.

古文：淳祐十一年，入为参知政事，拜右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：他相貌堂堂，身材魁伟，皮肤白美如玉，眉清目秀，观物炯炯有神。
English: He is handsome, tall, with a beautiful white skin, clear eyebrows, and a keen eye for things.

古文：明年，以水灾乞解机政。以观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：在孩提时，看见学宫中所祭祀的乡先生欧阳修、杨邦义、胡铨的画像，谥号都为 忠 ，即为此高兴，羡慕不已。说： 如果不成为其中的一员，就不是真正的男子汉。 
English: When he was a child, he was overjoyed and envious when he saw the pictures of Ouyang Xiu, Yang Bangyi, and Hu Yao, the town teachers who were worshipped in the school palace, and whose surnames were all "Zhong" (忠). He said, "If you don't become one of them, you're not a real man."

古文：又四年，授沿海制置大使，判庆元府。
现代文：他二十岁即考取进士，在集英殿答对论策。
English: At the age of twenty, he took the entrance examination to become a scholar, and answered the debate in the Shueiden hall.

古文：至官，条具军民久远之计，告于政府，奏皆行之。
现代文：当时理宗在位已很久，治理政事渐渐怠惰，文天祥以法天不息为题议论策对，其文章有一万多字，没有写草稿，一气写完。
English: At that time, Li Zong had been on the throne for a long time, the governance of political affairs was getting lazy, and Wen Tianxiang discussed and argued with the theme of law and order, and his article had more than 10,000 words. He did not write a draft, but finished it all at once.

古文：又积钱百四十七万三千八百有奇，代民输帛，前后所蠲五百四十九万一千七百有奇。
现代文：理宗皇帝亲自选拔他为第一名。考官王应麟上奏说 ：这个试卷以古代的事情作为借鉴，忠心肝胆好似铁石，我以为能得到这样的人才可喜可贺。 不久，他父亲逝世，回家守丧。
English: Emperor Rizong personally selected him as the first.Examiner Wang Yinglin reported: "This examination paper uses ancient events as a reference, loyalty is like iron, I thought it would be a blessing to get such a talent.Soon, his father passed away and he went home to mourn.

古文：以久任丐祠，且累章乞归田里，进封崇国公，判宁国府。还家，以醴泉观使兼侍读，召入对，论畏天命，结民心，进贤才，通下情。
现代文：开庆初年，元朝的军队侵伐宋朝，宦官董宋臣对皇上说要迁都，没有人敢议论说这是错的。文天祥当时入朝任命为宁海军节度判官，上书 请求斩杀董宋臣，以统一人心 。因不被采纳，就自己请免职回乡。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the Yuan Dynasty's army invaded the Song Dynasty, and eunuch Dong Songchen told the emperor to move the capital. No one dared to argue that this was wrong. At that time, Wen Tianxiang was appointed as the judge of the Ning Navy Festival, and wrote a letter to request the killing of Dong Songchen to unify the people. Because he was not accepted, he asked to be relieved of his duties and return to his hometown.

古文：帝嘉纳。
现代文：后来逐渐升官至刑部侍郎。
English: Xuanzong praised it and adopted it.

古文：拜特进、左丞相，进封庆国公。
现代文：董宋臣又升为都知，文天祥再次上书一一列举他的罪行，也没有回音。
English: Dong Songchen was also promoted to the position of tutsi, and Wen Tianxiang once again submitted a letter enumerating his crimes, but there was no response.

古文：奏： 乞令在朝之臣各陈所见，以决处置之宜。 改封许国公。
现代文：因此出外任瑞州知州，改迁江南西路提刑，升任尚书左司郎官，多次遭台官议论罢职。
English: As a result, he was appointed to the foreign post of Ruizhou-Chizhou, moved to the west side of the Yangtze River, was promoted to the post of the left secretary of Shangshu, and was dismissed many times by Taiwan officials.

古文：大元兵渡江攻鄂州，别将由大理下交址，破广西、湖南诸郡。
现代文：担任军器监并兼任代理直学士院。贾似道称说有病，请求退休，用以要挟皇上，诏令没应允。
English: He served as an inspector of military equipment and also served as the acting director of the Academy. Jia Xi Dao claimed to be ill and asked to retire, which was used to blackmail the emperor. The imperial edict was not complied with.

古文：潜奏： 今鄂渚被兵，湖南扰动，推原祸根，良由近年奸臣憸士设为虚议，迷国误军，其祸一二年而愈酷。
现代文：文天祥起草制诰，所写文字都是讽刺贾似道的。当时起草圣旨诰命的内制沿袭要呈文稿审查，文天祥没有写，贾似道不高兴，命令台臣张志立奏劾罢免他。天祥已经几次被斥责，援引钱若水的例子退休，当时他三十七岁。咸淳九年，起用为荆湖南路提刑。因此见到了原来的宰相江万里。
English: Wen Tianxiang drafted the edict, and the words he wrote were all satirical of Jia Lijiao. At that time, the internal system of drafting the sacred edict was to submit the document for review. Wen Tianxiang did not write, and Jia Lijiao was not happy, and ordered the Taiwanese minister Zhang Zhili to impeach and remove him. Tianxiang had been reprimanded several times, citing the example of Qian Ruoshui to retire, when he was thirty-seven years old. In the ninth year of Xian Chun, he was appointed to impose punishment on Jinghu South Road. Therefore, he saw the original prime minister Jiang Wanli.

古文：附和逢迎，媕阿谄媚，积至于大不靖。臣年将七十，捐躯致命，所不敢辞。
现代文：江万里平素就对天祥的志向、气节感到惊奇，同他谈到国事，神色忧伤地说 ：我老了，观察天时人事应当有变化，我看到的人很多，担任治理国家的责任，不就是在你吗？望你努力。 十年，改任赣州知州。德初年，长江上游告急，诏令天下勤王。
English: Jiang Wanli was always surprised by Tianxiang's aspirations and temperament, and when he talked to him about state affairs, he said with a sad look: I am old, I observe that there should be changes in personnel, I see a lot of people, it is up to you to take on the responsibility of governing the country, isn't it? I hope you will work hard. Ten years later, he was transferred to Zhangzhou Chizhou. In the first year of the German era, the upper reaches of the Yangtze River were in an emergency, and the emperor ordered the whole country to be loyal to the king.

古文：所深痛者，臣交任之日，上流之兵已逾黄、汉，广右之兵已蹈宾、柳，谓臣坏天下之事，亦可哀已。 又论国家安危治乱之原： 盖自近年公道晦蚀，私意横流，仁贤空虚，名节丧败，忠嘉绝响，谀佞成风，天怒而陛下不知，人怨而陛下不察，稔成兵戈之祸，积为宗社之忧。章鉴、高铸尝与丁大全同官，倾心附丽，躐跻要途。
现代文：文天祥捧着诏书流涕哭泣，派陈继周率领郡里的英雄好汉，同时联络溪峒蛮，派方兴召集吉州的士兵，各英雄豪杰群起响应，聚集兵众万人。此事报到朝廷，命令他以江南西路提刑安抚使的名义率军入卫京师。他的朋友制止他说 ：现在元兵分三路南下进攻，攻破京城市郊，进迫内地，你以乌合之众万余人赴京入卫，这与驱赶群羊同猛虎相斗没有什么差别。 文天祥答道 ：我也知道是这么回事。
English: Holding the edict, Wen Tianxiang wept bitterly. He sent Chen Jizhou to lead the heroes in the county, and at the same time contacted the barbarians in the river, and sent Fang Xing to gather the soldiers in Jizhou. All the heroes responded in groups, and gathered thousands of soldiers. The matter was reported to the imperial court, and he was ordered to lead the army into the Beijing division in the name of the pacifier in the west of the Yangtze River. His friend stopped him and said, "Now the former soldiers are attacking in three directions to the south, breaking through the suburbs of Beijing, and forcing the inland. You are going to defend Beijing with more than

古文：萧泰来等群小噂沓，国事日非，浸淫至于今日。陛下稍垂日月之明，毋使小人翕聚，以贻善类之祸。
现代文：但是，国家抚养培育臣民百姓三百多年，一旦有危急，征集天下的兵丁，没有一人一骑入卫京师，我为此感到深深地遗憾。
English: However, for more than three hundred years, the state has been raising and nurturing subjects and people, and once there is a crisis, soldiers from all over the world are recruited, but no one has ridden into the Beijing Defense Division. I feel deeply sorry for this.

古文：沈炎实赵与之腹心爪牙，而任台臣，甘为之搏击。
现代文：所以不自量力，而以身殉国，希望天下忠臣义士将会有听说此事后而奋起的。
English: Therefore, he did not measure his own strength, but sacrificed his life for the country, hoping that the loyal and righteous people in the world would rise up after hearing about this.

古文：奸党盘据，血脉贯穿，以欺陛下。
现代文：依靠仁义取胜就可以自立，依靠人多就可以促成事业成功，如果按此而行，那么国家就有保障了。 
English: Relying on benevolence and righteousness to win can be self-reliant, and relying on more people can contribute to the success of the cause. If you follow this, then the country will be guaranteed.

古文：致危乱者，皆此等小人为之。 又乞令大全致仕，炎等与祠，高铸羁管州军。
现代文：文天祥性格豁达豪爽，平生衣食丰厚，声伎满堂。到这时，痛心地自己贬损责罚自己，把家里的资产全部作为军费。
English: By this time, Wen Tianxiang, who had an open-minded and courageous personality, had been well-fed and clothed all his life, and had played a lot of music. At this time, he painfully belittled and punished himself, and used all the family's assets as military expenses.

古文：不报。属将立度宗为太子，潜密奏云： 臣无弥远之材，忠王无陛下之福。 帝怒潜，卒以炎论劾落职。
现代文：每当与宾客、僚属谈到国家时事，就痛哭流涕，抚案说道： 以别人的快乐为快乐的人，也忧虑别人忧虑的事情，以别人的衣食为衣食来源的人，应为别人的事而至死不辞。 八月，天祥率兵到临安，担任平江府知府。
English: Whenever he talked about national current affairs with guests and colleagues, he would weep bitterly, Fuxin said: People who take others' happiness as happiness, but also worry about others' worries, people who take others' food and clothing as food and clothing sources, should die for others' affairs. In August, Tianxiang led soldiers to Lin'an and served as the governor of Pingjiang Prefecture.

古文：命下，中书舍人洪芹缴还词头，不报，谪建昌军，寻徙潮州，责授化州团练使、循州安置。潜预知死日，语人曰： 吾将逝矣，夜必雷风大作。 已而果然，四鼓开霁，撰遗表，作诗颂，端坐而逝。
现代文：当时因为丞相陈宜中没有返回朝廷，没有派遣。
English: At that time, because Prime Minister Chen Yi did not return to the imperial court, there was no dispatch.

古文：时景定三年五月也。
现代文：十月，陈宜中至，于是派遣去任职。
English: In October, when Chen Yi reached middle school, he was sent to work.

古文：循人闻之，咨嗟悲恸。
现代文：朝议中刚刚擢升吕师孟为兵部尚书，封吕文德为和义郡王，想以此寻求和好。
English: In the imperial court's deliberation, Lu Shimen had just been promoted to be the commander of the military department, and Lu Wende to be the king of the county of Heyi. They wanted to seek reconciliation in this way.

古文：德祐元年，追复元官，仍还执政恩数。
现代文：师孟更加傲慢骄横、放肆。
English: His teacher Meng was even more arrogant and presumptuous.

古文：明年，以太府卿柳岳请赠谥，特赠少师。
现代文：文天祥辞别天子，上疏说： 朝廷姑息、牵制的意向很多，奋发、果断处事的例子很少，请求处斩师孟作为战事祭祀，用以鼓舞将士们的士气。 
English: Wen Tianxiang said goodbye to his son, Shang Zuo said: There are many intentions of the imperial court to appease and restrain, and there are few examples of hard work and decisive actions. He requested the execution of Shi Meng as a war sacrifice to encourage the morale of the soldiers.

古文：程元凤，字申甫，徽州人。绍定元年进士，调江陵府教授。
现代文：又说 ：宋代接受五代分裂割据的教训，削除藩镇，建立郡县城邑，虽然一时完全革除了尾大不掉的弊端，但是国家因此渐趋削弱。
English: He also said: The Song Dynasty accepted the lesson of five generations of division and separation, removed the han towns, and established the county towns. Although it completely eliminated the drawbacks of the tail size, the country was gradually weakened.

古文：端平元年，差江西转运司干办公事。
现代文：所以到一州就攻破一州，到一县就攻破一县，中原沦陷，悔恨、痛心哪里还来得及。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to conquer one state at one state, one county at one county, the Central Plains fell, and there is still time for remorse and heartache.

古文：丁母忧。淳祐元年，迁礼、兵二部架阁，以父老不忍去侧，迁太学正，以祖讳辞，改国子录。
现代文：现在应当划分天下为四镇，设置都督来作为它的统帅。把广南西路合并于荆湖南路，在长沙建立治所；把广南东路合并于江南西路，在隆兴建立治所；把福建路合并于江南东路，在番阳建立治所；把淮南西路合并于淮南东路，在扬州建立治所。
English: Now it is time to divide the country into four townships and set up a governor to be its commander-in-chief; to merge Guangnan West Road with Jinghu South Road and establish an administrative center in Changsha; to merge Guangnan East Road with Jiangnan West Road and establish an administrative center in Longxing; to merge Fujian Road with Jiangnan East Road and establish an administrative center in Panyang; to merge Huainan West Road with Huainan East Road and establish an administrative center in Yangzhou.

古文：父忧，服阕，迁太学博士，改宗学博士。以《诗》、《礼》讲荣王府。
现代文：责令长沙攻取鄂州，隆兴攻取蕲州、黄州，番阳攻取江东，扬州攻取两淮，使他们所辖的地区范围广、力量强，足以抵抗敌兵。
English: He ordered Changsha to capture Ezhou, Longxing to capture Wuzhou and Huangzhou, Panyang to capture Jiangdong, and Yangzhou to capture Liaohai, so that the area under their jurisdiction would be broad and strong enough to resist enemy soldiers.

古文：旁讽曲谕，随事规正，多所裨益，王亦倾心敬听。轮对，极论世运剥复之机及人主所当法天者。
现代文：约定日期，一齐奋起，只前进，不后退，夜以继日，图谋复地，敌兵兵力众多，但力量分散，疲于奔命，而我宋朝民众中的英雄豪杰，于其中等待机会攻敌，这样的话，敌兵就容易被打退了。 
English: The agreed date, rise up together, only advance, do not retreat, night and day, try to regain ground, the enemy troops are numerous, but the strength is scattered, exhausted, and the heroes and heroines among the Song Dynasty people are waiting for the opportunity to attack the enemy. In this case, the enemy soldiers will be easily repulsed.

古文：理宗览之曰： 有古遗直风。 
现代文：当时朝议以天祥的议论是疏阔，难以实行，因此，他的上书没有结果。
English: At that time, the imperial court's argument that Tianxiang was broad and difficult to implement, so his petition was fruitless.

古文：六年，进秘书丞兼权刑部郎官。
现代文：十月，文天祥到平江，元兵已从金陵出发进入常州。
English: In October, Wen Tianxiang went to Pingjiang, and Yuanbing left Jinling to enter Changzhou.

古文：七年，兼权右司郎官，迁著作郎，仍权右司郎官。轮对，指陈时病尤激切，当国者以为厉己。
现代文：文天祥派遣他的将帅朱华、尹玉、麻士龙与张全援助常州，行到虞桥，麻士龙战死，朱华率领广南军队，战于五牧，被打败，尹玉也打败了，争相渡水，扒张全军中的渡船，张全的士兵斩断他们的手指，都淹死了，尹玉率领残兵五百人夜间发起战斗，到第二天早晨都战死了。张全不发一箭，逃跑退却了。
English: Wen Tianxiang sent his generals Zhu Hua, Yin Yu, Ma Shilong and Zhang Quan to aid Changzhou. They went to Yuqiao. Ma Shilong died in the battle. Zhu Hua led the Guangnan army and fought in Wumu. He was defeated. Yin Yu was also defeated. They fought to cross the water. They seized the ferries in Zhang Quan's army. Zhang Quan's soldiers cut off their fingers and all drowned. Yin Yu led the remaining 500 soldiers to fight at night and all died in the next morning. Zhang Quan did not fire a single arrow and retreated.

古文：丐外，知饶州。
现代文：元兵攻入常州，占领了独松关。
English: Yuan soldiers invaded Changzhou and occupied Doksong Pass.

古文：郡初罹水灾，元凤访民疾苦，夙夜究心，修城堞，置义阡，宽诛求，察诬证。
现代文：陈宜中、留梦炎召令文天祥，弃守平江，退守余杭。第二年正月，担任临安知府。
English: In the first month of the second year, he assumed the post of Lin'an governor.

古文：进江、淮、荆、浙、福建、广南都大提点坑冶，仍兼知饶州冶司，岁有冬夏帐银，悉举以补郡积年诸税敛之不足者。芝生治所，众以治行之致，元凤曰： 五谷熟则民蒙惠，此不足异也。 召奏事，辞，不允，迁右曹郎官。
现代文：不多久，宋朝投降，宜中、张世杰都走了。
English: Not long after, the Song Dynasty surrendered, and Yizhong and Zhang Shijie both left.

古文：疏言实学、实政、国本、人才、吏治、生民、财计、兵威八事。
现代文：继续任命天祥为枢密使。不久，担任右丞相兼枢密使，作为使臣到元军中讲和谈判，与元朝丞相伯颜在皋亭山针锋相对争论。
English: He continued to appoint Tianxiang as a confidential envoy. Soon, he served as the right-hand minister and confidential envoy, as an envoy to the Yuan army to talk about peace negotiations, and argued with the former imperial minister Bo Yan in Shuting Mountain.

古文：寻兼右司郎官，拜监察御史兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：丞相发怒拘捕了他，同左丞相吴坚、右丞相贾余庆、知枢密院事谢堂、签枢密院事家铉翁、同签枢密院事刘祒，向北至镇江。
English: The prime minister got angry and arrested him, and together with the left prime minister Wu Jian, the right prime minister Jia Yuqing, the secretary of the Privy Council Xie Tong, the secretary of the Privy Council Jia Xiong, and the secretary of the Privy Council Liu Wei, they went north to Zhenjiang.

古文：丞相郑清之久专国柄，老不任事，台官潘凯、吴燧合章论列，清之不悦，改迁之，二人不拜命去。
现代文：天祥与他的侍客杜浒等十二人，于夜间逃入真州。苗再成出来迎接他，高兴得流着眼泪说： 两淮的士兵足可以兴复宋朝，只是二制置使有些矛盾，不能同心协力。 文天祥问道 ：这个计谋是从哪里来的呢？ 
English: Tianxiang, together with his attendant Du Xuan and twelve others, fled into Zhenzhou at night. Miao Rencheng came out to meet him, and said with tears of joy: Two soldiers can restore the Song Dynasty, but the two systems are somewhat contradictory and cannot work together. Wen Tianxiang asked: Where did this strategy come from?

古文：元凤上疏斥清之罪，其言明白正大，凯、燧得召还。
现代文：苗再成回答说 ：现在先约淮西兵赶赴建康，他们必然全力以防御我们淮西的士兵。
English: Miao Zhancheng replied, "Now that the soldiers from Huaixi have been ordered to rush to Jiankang, they will certainly do their best to defend our soldiers from Huaixi."

古文：有事于明堂，元凤疏言 祈天以实不以文 。
现代文：指挥东面各将帅，以通州、泰州兵攻打湾头，以高邮、宝应、淮安兵攻打杨子桥，以扬州兵攻打瓜步，我率领水军直捣镇江，同一天大举出兵。
English: Commanding the generals in the east, with Tongzhou and Taizhou soldiers to attack Wan Tou, with Gaoyou, Baoying and Huai'an soldiers to attack Yangzi Bridge, with Yangzhou soldiers to attack Guapu, I led the navy to directly attack Zhenjiang, and on the same day I sent troops.

古文：又言边备，谓 当申儆军实，以起积玩之势。 及言滥刑之敝。
现代文：湾头、杨子桥都是沿长江的脆弱之军，又日夜希望我们军队攻来，攻打他们，定会很快取胜。
English: Wan Tou and Yang Zi Qiao are both fragile armies along the Yangtze River, and they hope day and night that our army will attack and attack them, and they will surely win soon.

古文：十二年，拜右正言兼侍讲，以祖讳辞。
现代文：一齐从三个方向进攻瓜步，我自己率兵从长江水面中以较少的士兵佯攻，虽然有智慧的人也不能预料到这一点。
English: We attacked Guapu from three directions at the same time, and I myself led an army to attack from the surface of the Yangtze River with a small number of soldiers, although a wise person could not have predicted this.

古文：诏权以右补阙系衔。上疏论格心之学，谓 革士大夫之风俗，当革士大夫之心术。 至于文敝、边储、人才、民心、储将帅、救灾异，莫不尽言。
现代文：瓜步攻下后，以东面的军队入攻京口，西面的士兵入攻金陵，威胁浙江的后退之路，那么元军的大帅就可以生擒了。 天祥对此大加赞扬，随即写信送两个制置使，派遣使者四面联络。
English: After the capture of Guabu, the army in the east invaded Jingkou, and the soldiers in the west invaded Jinling, threatening the retreat of Zhejiang, then the general of the Yuan Army could be killed. Tianxiang praised this greatly, and immediately sent a letter to send two envoys, and sent envoys to liaise with all sides.

古文：余晦以从父天锡恃恩妄作，三学诸生伏阙上书白其罪状，司业蔡抗又力言之，元凤数其罪劾之。奏上，以晦为大理少卿，抗为宗正少卿。
现代文：天祥没有到的时候，扬州有逃跑归来的士兵说 ：秘密派遣一丞相进入真州劝说投降来了。 李庭芝信以为真，认为文天祥劝降来了。
English: When Tianxiang did not arrive, a soldier who had fled Yangzhou and returned said, "A prime minister has been secretly sent into Zhenzhou to persuade them to surrender." Li Tianzhixin believed this to be true and thought that Wen Tianxiang was persuading them to surrender.

古文：元凤又上疏留抗而黜晦，以安士心。乃命抗仍兼司业，晦予郡。
现代文：派苗再成迅速杀掉天祥。苗再成不忍心杀他，欺哄天祥到相城垒外，把制司的文书给他看，把他关在门外。
English: He sent Miao Rencheng to quickly kill Tianxiang. Miao Rencheng couldn't bear to kill him, so he tricked Tianxiang to go outside the city wall, showed him the official document of the party secretary, and shut him out.

古文：升殿中侍御史，仍兼侍讲。
现代文：好久以后，又派两批人分别去窥测证实天祥是否是来劝降的，如果是劝降的就杀了他。
English: After a long time, he sent two groups of people separately to spy and confirm whether Tianxiang had come to persuade him to surrender, and if so, to kill him.

古文：京城灾，疏言： 辍土木无益之役，以济暴露之民；移缁流泛滥之恩，以给颠沛之众。
现代文：两批人分别与天祥谈话后，证实其忠义，都不忍心杀他，派士兵二十人沿路护送至扬州，四更鼓响时抵达城下，听等候开城门的人谈，制置司下令防备文丞相很严密，文丞相与随从听说后相互吐舌，于是向东入海道，遇元兵，躲入四围土墙中得以免祸。
English: After two groups of people talked to Tianxiang separately and confirmed his loyalty, they could not bear to kill him. They sent twenty soldiers to escort him along the road to Yangzhou. When the fourth group arrived at the foot of the city at the sound of the drum, they listened to the conversation of the people waiting for the opening of the city gate. The construction and installation department ordered that the preparation of the prime minister was very strict. After hearing this, the prime minister and his entourage spat at each other, so they entered the sea to the east, met the Yuan soldiers, and hid in the surrounding earthen walls to avoid disaster.

古文：务行宽大之政，固结亿兆之心。
现代文：然而，因为饥饿而不能走路，于是向樵夫们讨得了一些剩饭残羹。
English: However, unable to walk because of hunger, he managed to get some leftover scraps from the woodcutters.

古文：旁招俊乂，而私昵无滥及之恩；屏去奸私，而贪黩无覆出之患。
现代文：走至板桥，元兵又来了，众人跑入竹林中隐伏，元兵进入竹林搜索，抓住杜浒、金应带走了。
English: Walking to Banqiao, the Yuan soldiers came again, everyone ran into the bamboo forest to hide, the Yuan soldiers entered the bamboo forest to search, grabbed the cuckoo, and took away the gold.

古文：谨便嬖之防，而不使之弄权；抑恩泽之请，而不至于无节。 言多剀切。
现代文：虞候张庆眼睛被射中了一箭，身上两度挨箭，文天祥两次都未被发现，得以脱身。
English: Zhang Qing was hit by an arrow in the eye and twice in the body, while Wen Tianxiang escaped undetected both times.

古文：宝祐元年，兼侍读，迁侍御史，言法孝宗八事。
现代文：杜浒、金应拿出身上的金银送给元军，才被放回，雇募二个樵夫抬着坐在箩筐里的文天祥到高邮，泛海坐船至温州。
English: Du Juan and Jin Ying took the gold and silver they had brought with them to the Yuan army, only to be sent back. They hired two woodsmen to carry Wen Tianxiang, who was sitting in a basket, to Gaoyou, and sailed across the sea to Wenzhou.

古文：荐名士二十余人，进尚书吏部侍郎兼中书舍人，兼同修国史、实录院同修撰，仍兼侍读。
现代文：听说益王未立，于是上表劝请即帝位，以观文殿学士、侍读的官职召至福州，拜右丞相。
English: Hearing that King Yi had not yet ascended to the throne, he was persuaded to abdicate the throne, and was summoned to Fuzhou to serve as chancellor of the imperial court.

古文：亟辞，出关，不允。
现代文：不久与陈宜中等人议论意见不统一。
English: Soon, discussions with Chen Yi and other people were not unified.

古文：有事于南郊，元凤为执绥官，答问多所开陈。
现代文：七月，于是以同都督职出任江南西路，准备上任，召集士兵进入汀州。
English: In July, he took up the post of governor of the southwestern part of the Yangtze River, preparing to take office and summoning soldiers to enter Tingzhou.

古文：帝因欲幸西太乙宫，力谏止之。三年，迁权工部尚书，力求补外，特授端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十月，派遣参谋赵时赏，咨议赵孟氵荣率领一支军队攻取宁都，参赞吴浚率一支军队攻取雩都，刘洙、萧明哲、陈子敬都从江西起兵来与他会合。
English: In October, he dispatched staff officer Zhao Shiyuan to advise Zhao Menghuirong to lead an army to capture Ningdu, and counselor Wu Jun to lead an army to capture Handan. Liu Bei, Xiao Mingzhe, and Chen Ziqing all raised troops from Jiangxi to join him.

古文：蜀境与沅、靖交急，朝廷欲择重臣出镇上流，用徐敏子易蜀帅及用向士璧为镇抚。
现代文：邹氵风以招谕副使在宁都召聚兵众，元兵攻打他们，邹氵风兵败，同起事率兵的人刘钦、鞠华叔、颜师立、颜起岩都死了。武冈教授罗开礼，起兵收复了永丰县，不久兵败被俘，死于狱中。天祥听说罗开礼死了，穿起丧服，痛哭不已。
English: In Ningdu, the vice-envoy of Fan Feng called for an army, the Yuan soldiers attacked them, and Fan Feng was defeated. Liu Qin, Ju Hua Shu, Yan Shili, and Yan Qiyan, who led the soldiers in the uprising, all died. Luo Kaili, a professor from WuGang, raised an army to recover Yongfeng County, and was soon captured and died in prison. Tianxiang heard that Luo Kaili had died, put on mourning clothes, and wept bitterly.

古文：元凤请下荆南，调兵援蜀，移吕文德上沅、靖。
现代文：至元十四年正月，元兵攻入汀州，天祥于是迁移漳州，请求入卫朝廷。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan soldiers invaded Tingzhou, so Tianxiang moved to Zhangzhou and requested to join the Imperial Guard.

古文：时赏、孟溁亦提兵归，独浚兵不至。未几，浚降，来说天祥。天祥缚浚，缢杀之。四月，入梅州，都统王福、钱汉英跋扈，斩以徇。五月，出江西，入会昌。
现代文：赵时赏、赵孟氵荣也率兵归来，唯独吴浚的士兵没有到。不久，吴浚降元，来游说文天祥。文天祥派人缚起吴浚，把他吊死了。四月，进入梅州，都统王福、钱汉英专横跋扈，被处斩了。五月，迁出江南西路，进入会昌。
English: Zhao Shiyuan and Zhao Menglu Rong also returned with their troops, but Wu Jun's soldiers did not arrive. Soon, Wu Jun, who was demoted to Yuan, came to lobby Wen Tianxiang. Wen Tianxiang sent someone to tie up Wu Jun and hanged him. In April, when they entered Meizhou, Du Tong Wangfu and Qian Han Ying acted arbitrarily and were executed. In May, they moved out of Jiangnan West Road and entered Huichang.

古文：六月，入兴国县。
现代文：六月，进入兴国县。
English: In June, it entered Xingguo County.

古文：七月，遣参谋张汴、监军赵时赏、赵孟溁等盛兵薄赣城，邹洬以赣诸县兵捣永丰，其副黎贵达以吉诸县兵攻泰和。
现代文：七月，遣参谋张汴、监军赵时赏、赵孟氵荣等率大军进逼赣城，邹氵风率领赣州各县的军队攻取永丰，他的副官黎贵达率领吉州各县的士兵攻取泰和。
English: In July, he sent staff officer Zhang Qian, supervisors Zhao Shiyun and Zhao Meng Rong, and other troops to force their way into Handan City. Handan Feng led the troops from all counties in Handan to capture Yongfeng, and his aide-de-camp Li Guida led the soldiers from all counties in Jizhou to capture Taihe.

古文：吉八县复其半，惟赣不下。
现代文：吉州八县克复了一半，仅剩赣州没有攻下。
English: Half of the eight counties in Jizhou have been recovered, and only Zhangzhou has not been captured.

古文：临洪诸郡，皆送款。
现代文：临洪各郡，都送钱劳军。
English: All counties bordering Hong Kong have sent money to the labour army.

古文：潭赵璠、张虎、张唐、熊桂、刘斗元、吴希奭、陈子全、王梦应起兵邵、永间，复数县，抚州何时等皆起兵应天祥。
现代文：潭州赵、张虎、张唐、熊桂、刘斗元、吴希、陈子全、王梦应在邵州、永州等地起兵，克复数县，抚州何时等人起兵响应文天祥。
English: Tanzhou Zhao, Zhang Hu, Zhang Tang, Xiong Gui, Liu Douyuan, Wu Xi, Chen Zi Quan, Wang Meng should raise an army in Shaozhou, Yongzhou and other places, and fight against several counties, when will Fuzhou and other people raise an army in response to Wen Tianxiang.

古文：分宁、武宁、建昌三县豪杰，皆遣人如军中受约束。
现代文：分宁、武宁、建昌三县豪杰，都派人到军中接受调遣参战。
English: The heroes of the three counties of Fenning, Wuning and Jianchang all sent people to the army to be transferred to participate in the war.

古文：江西宣慰使李恒遣兵援赣州，而自将兵攻天祥于兴国。
现代文：江南西路宣慰使李恒派遣士兵入援赣州，而自己率兵在兴国进攻文天祥的据点。
English: Xuancheng on the west side of the Yangtze River convinced Li Heng to send soldiers to aid Zhangzhou, while he led his own troops to attack Wen Tianxiang's stronghold in Xingguo.

古文：天祥不意恒兵猝至，乃引兵走，即邹洬于永丰。
现代文：文天祥没有预料到李恒的兵突然攻至兴国，于是率兵撤退，靠近永丰的邹氵风。
English: Wen Tianxiang did not expect Li Heng's soldiers to suddenly attack Xingguo, so he led the troops to retreat, close to Yongfeng's wind.

古文：洬兵先溃，恒穷追天祥方石岭。
现代文：邹氵风的军队已在他的前面溃败，李恒于是穷追文天祥至方石岭。
English: Shufeng's army had been defeated in front of him, so Li Heng chased Wen Tianxiang to Fangshi Ridge.

古文：巩信拒战，箭被体，死之。
现代文：巩信坚守拒战，身中数箭，死了。
English: Gongxin steadfastly refused to fight. He was hit by several arrows and died.

古文：至空坑，军士皆溃，天祥妻妾子女皆见执。
现代文：到达空坑，士兵都被打败溃散，天祥的妻妾子女都被抓住。
English: Arriving at the empty pit, the soldiers were defeated and dispersed, and Tianxiang's wife, concubine, and children were all caught.

古文：时赏坐肩舆，后兵问谓谁，时赏曰 我姓文 ，众以为天祥，禽之而归，天祥以此得逸去。
现代文：赵时赏坐在轿子中，后面的元兵讯问是谁，时赏说 我姓文 ，众兵以为是文天祥，活捉了他返回军营，文天祥因此得以逃脱。
English: Zhao Shizhong was sitting in a palanquin. The former soldiers behind him asked who he was. Shizhong said, "My surname is Wen." The soldiers thought it was Wen Tianxiang. They captured him alive and took him back to the military camp. Wen Tianxiang was able to escape.

古文：孙、彭震龙、张汴死于兵，缪朝宗自缢死。
现代文：孙、彭震龙、张汴死于军中，缪朝宗自己上吊死了。
English: Sun, Peng Zhenglong and Zhang Ye died in the army, while Miao Chaozong hanged himself.

古文：吴文炳、林栋、刘洙皆被执归隆兴。
现代文：吴文炳、林栋、刘洙都被抓住带回隆兴。
English: Wu Wenzhong, Lin Dong and Liu Yao were all caught and brought back to Longxing.

古文：时赏奋骂不屈，有系累至者，辄麾去，云： 小小签厅官耳，执此何为？ 由是得脱者甚众。
现代文：赵时赏怒骂不屈服，有的多次被抓来的，往往很快放掉，说： 小小的签厅官，抓来有什么用呢？ 因此得以逃脱的人很多。
English: Zhao Shijian scolded and did not give in, and some people who were caught many times were often quickly released, saying: "Little signing officer, what is the use of being caught? Therefore, there are many people who can escape.

古文：临刑，洙颇自辩，时赏〈口七〉曰： 死耳，何必然？ 于是栋、文炳、萧敬夫、萧焘夫皆不免。
现代文：到行刑的时候，刘洙多次辩解，时赏呵斥他说： 死了算了，何必这样呢？ 于是林栋、吴文炳、萧敬夫、萧焘夫都不能免难。
English: At the time of the execution, Liu Ye repeatedly defended and rebuked him, saying, "Let's say you're dead, why would you do such a thing? Therefore, Lin Dong, Wu Wenjun, Xiao Jingfu, and Xiao Yefu could not be spared.

古文：天祥收残兵奔循州，驻南岭。
现代文：文天祥召集残兵奔赴循州，驻扎于南岭。
English: Wen Tianxiang called up the remaining soldiers to rush to Zhouzhou and stationed them in Nanling.

古文：黎贵达潜谋降，执而杀之。
现代文：黎贵达暗中阴谋投降，被抓住杀了。
English: Li Guida secretly plotted to surrender and was caught and killed.

古文：至元十五年三月，进屯丽江浦。
现代文：至元十五年三月，进驻丽江浦。
English: In March of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was stationed in Lijiang Pu.

古文：六月，入船澳。
现代文：六月，入船澳。
English: In June, he entered the dock.

古文：益王殂，卫王继立。
现代文：益王死了，卫王继承王位。
English: King Yeshi died, and King Wei succeeded to the throne.

古文：天祥上表自劾，乞入朝，不许。
现代文：文天祥上表自责，请求入朝，没有获准。
English: Wen Tianxiang expressed his remorse and requested to enter the imperial court, but was not allowed.

古文：八月，加天祥少保、信国公。
现代文：八月，加封文天祥少保、信国公。
English: In August, he was given the additional titles of Wen Tianxiang Shao Bao and Xin Guo Gong.

古文：军中疫且起，兵士死者数百人。
现代文：军中瘟疫又流行，士兵死了几百人。
English: Plague broke out again in the army, and several hundred soldiers died.

古文：天祥惟一子，与其母皆死。
现代文：天祥唯一的一个儿子和他的母亲都死了。
English: Tianxiang's only son and his mother are both dead.

古文：十一月，进屯潮阳县。
现代文：十一月，进驻潮阳县。
English: In November, it moved to Chaoyang County.

古文：潮州盗陈懿、刘兴数叛附，为潮人害。
现代文：潮州盗贼陈懿、刘兴多次叛附无常，为潮阳人一大祸害。
English: Chaozhou thieves Chen Zhen and Liu Xing repeatedly rebelled and were unstable, which was a great disaster for Chaoyang people.

古文：天祥攻走懿，执兴诛之。
现代文：文天祥赶走了陈懿，抓住刘兴，杀了他。
English: Wen Tianxiang chased away Chen Yao, grabbed Liu Xing and killed him.

古文：十二月，趋南岭，邹洬、刘子俊又自江西起兵来，再攻懿党，懿乃潜道元帅张弘范兵济潮阳。
现代文：十二月，赶赴南岭，邹氵风、刘子俊又从江西起兵而来，再次攻伐陈懿的党羽，陈懿于是暗中勾结张弘范元帅，帮助、引导元军逼攻潮阳。
English: In December, they rushed to Nanling, and Shufeng and Liu Zijun also raised an army from Jiangxi to attack Chen Qi's party once again. Chen Qi then secretly colluded with Marshal Zhang Hongfan to help and guide the Yuan army to attack Chaoyang.

古文：天祥方饭五坡岭，张弘范兵突至，众不及战，皆顿首伏草莽。
现代文：文天祥正在五坡岭吃饭，张弘范的军队突然出现，众士兵随从措手不及，都埋头躲在荒草中。
English: Wen Tianxiang was having a meal in Wupoling when Zhang Hongfan's army suddenly appeared. The soldiers were caught off guard and hid in the weeds.

古文：天祥仓皇出走，千户王惟义前执之。
现代文：文天祥匆忙逃走，被千户王惟义抓住。
English: Wen Tianxiang fled in a hurry and was caught by Chihou Wang Weiyi.

古文：天祥吞脑子，不死。
现代文：天祥吞食脑子，没有死。
English: Tianxiang devoured his brain, but he did not die.

古文：邹洬自颈，众扶入南岭死。
现代文：邹氵风自刎颈项，众士兵扶着他至南岭才死。
English: Xuanfeng hanged himself by the neck, and the soldiers supported him until he died in Nanling.

古文：官属士卒得脱空坑者，至是刘子俊、陈龙复、萧明哲、萧资皆死，杜浒被执，以忧死。
现代文：僚属士卒得以从空坑逃脱的人，至此时刘子俊、陈龙复、萧明哲、萧资都死了，杜浒被抓住，忧愤而死。
English: At this time, Liu Zijun, Chen Longfu, Xiao Mingzhe, and Xiao Zi were all dead, and Du Juan was caught and died of grief.

古文：惟赵孟溁遁，张唐、熊桂、吴希奭、陈子全兵败被获，俱死焉。
现代文：仅有赵孟氵荣逃脱，张唐、熊桂、吴希、陈子全兵败被活捉，都被处死。
English: Only Zhao Meng Rong escaped, Zhang Tang, Xiong Gui, Wu Xi and Chen Zi were all captured alive and executed.

古文：唐，广汉张栻后也。
现代文：张唐，广汉张木式的后裔。
English: Zhang Tang, a descendant of the Guanghan Zhang Mu style.

古文：天祥至潮阳，见弘范，左右命之拜，不拜，弘范遂以客礼见之，与俱入厓山，使为书招张世杰。
现代文：文天祥被押至潮阳，见张弘范时，左右官员都命他行跪拜之礼，没有拜，弘范于是以宾客的礼节接见他，同他一起入山，要他写信招降张世杰。
English: When Wen Tianxiang was taken to Chaoyang and saw Zhang Hongfan, officials on both sides ordered him to kneel and bow. He did not bow, so Hongfan received him with the etiquette of a guest, went into the mountains with him, and asked him to write a letter to invite Zhang Shijie to surrender.

古文：天祥曰： 吾不能捍父母，乃教人叛父母，可乎？ 索之固，乃书所过《零丁洋诗》与之。
现代文：文天祥说： 我不能保卫父母，还教别人叛离父母，可以吗？ 因多次强迫索要书信，于是，写了《过零丁洋》诗给他们。
English: Wen Tianxiang said, "I can't protect my parents and teach others to betray them, can I? Because I was forced to ask for letters many times, I wrote the poem "Passing the Zero-Ding Yang" for them.

古文：其末有云： 人生自古谁无死，留取丹心照汗青。 弘范笑而置之。
现代文：这首诗的尾句说 ：人生自古谁无死，留取丹心照汗青。 弘范笑着收藏它。
English: The epilogue of this poem says, "Since ancient times, whoever has no death in his life, should keep his heart clean and pure." Hong Fan laughs as he collects it.

古文：厓山破，军中置酒大会，弘范曰： 国亡，丞相忠孝尽矣，能改心以事宋者事皇上，将不失为宰相也。 天祥泫然出涕，曰： 国亡不能救，为人臣者死有余罪，况敢逃其死而二其心乎。 弘范义之，遣使护送天祥至京师。
现代文：山战败后，元军中置酒宴犒军，弘范说： 丞相的忠心孝义都尽到了，若能改变态度像侍奉宋朝那样侍奉大元皇上，将不会失去宰相的位置。 天祥眼泪扑簌簌地说 ：国亡不能救，作为臣子，死有余罪，怎敢怀有二心苟且偷生呢？ 弘范感其仁义，派人护送文天祥到京师。
English: After the defeat in the Battle of the Mountain, the Yuan army held a wine banquet for the defeated troops, and Hong Fan said, "The loyalty and filial piety of the prime minister have all been fulfilled. If you can change your attitude to serve the great emperor Yuan as you served the Song Dynasty, you will not lose your position as prime minister." Tianxiang burst into tears and said, "The death of the country cannot be saved. As a vassal, there is more sin in death. How dare you harbor double-mindedness and live a secret life?" Hong Fan felt his benevolence and sent someone to escort Wen Tianxiang to the capital.

古文：天祥在道，不食八日，不死，即复食。
现代文：文天祥在路上，八天没有吃饭，没有死，才又吃饭。
English: When Wen Tianxiang was on the road, he didn't eat for eight days. He didn't die until he ate again.

古文：至燕，馆人供张甚盛，天祥不寝处，坐达旦。
现代文：到达燕京，馆舍侍员殷勤、陈设奢豪，文天祥没有入睡，坐待天亮。
English: Arriving in Yanjing, the attendants of the museum were diligent, the furnishings were luxurious, and Wen Tianxiang did not fall asleep and sat waiting for dawn.

古文：遂移兵马司，设卒以守之。
现代文：于是移送兵马司，令士卒监守他。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division, where he was guarded by officers.

古文：时世祖皇帝多求才南官，王积翁言： 南人无如天祥者。 遂遣积翁谕旨，天祥曰： 国亡，吾分一死矣。
现代文：当时元世祖皇帝多次搜求有才能的南宋官员，王积翁说： 南宋人中没有谁比得上文天祥的。 于是派遣王积翁去传达圣旨，文天祥说： 国家亡了，我只能一死报国。
English: At that time, Emperor Yuan Shizhu repeatedly searched for talented officials of the Southern Song Dynasty. Wang Zhiweng said, "There is no one in the Southern Song Dynasty who can match the above-mentioned Tianxiang." So he sent Wang Zhiweng to convey the holy will. Wen Tianxiang said, "The country is dead, I can only proclaim the country once I die."

古文：傥缘宽假，得以黄冠归故乡，他日以方外备顾问，可也。
现代文：倘若因为宽赦，能以道士回归故乡，他日以世俗之外的身份作为顾问，还可以。
English: If, as a result of clemency, he can return to his hometown as a Taoist priest, he can also serve as a consultant in a non-secular capacity.

古文：若遽官之，非直亡国之大夫不可与图存，举其平生而尽弃之，将焉用我？ 积翁欲合宋官谢昌元等十人请释天祥为道士，留梦炎不可，曰 天祥出，复号召江南，置吾十人于何地！ 事遂已。
现代文：假如立即给以高官，不仅亡国的大夫不可以此求生存，而且把自己平生的全部抱负抛弃，那么任用我有什么用呢？ 王积翁想与宋官谢昌元等十人一起请释放文天祥为道士，留梦炎不同意，说 ：文天祥放出后，又在江南号召抗元，置我十人于何地？ 此事于是作罢。
English: If high-ranking officials were to be appointed immediately, not only would it be impossible for doctors who had lost their country to survive, but they would also have to give up all their lifelong ambitions, so what use would it be to appoint me? Wang Zhiweng wanted to work with Song official Xie Changyuan and ten others to ask for the release of Wen Tianxiang as a Taoist, but Liu Mengyan disagreed, saying, "After Wen Tianxiang was released, he also called for anti-Yuan in the south of the Yangtze River. Where should I put my ten people?" The matter was therefore dropped.

古文：天祥在燕凡三年，上知天祥终不屈也，与宰相议释之，有以天祥起兵江西事为言者，不果释。
现代文：天祥在燕京共三年，皇上知道天祥始终不屈，同宰相议论放了他，遇上有人以文天祥起兵江南西路的事为借口，结果没有被释放。
English: Tianxiang was in Yanjing for a total of three years. The emperor knew that Tianxiang was always unyielding, and discussed and released him with the prime minister. When someone used the excuse that Wen Tianxiang had raised an army on the southwestern road of the Yangtze River, the result was that he was not released.

古文：至元十九年，有闽僧言土星犯帝坐，疑有变。
现代文：至元十九年，福建有一僧人说土星冒犯帝坐星，怀疑有变乱。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, a monk in Fujian said that Saturn had offended the emperor. He suspected that there had been a revolt.

古文：未几，中山有狂人自称 宋主 ，有兵千人，欲取文丞相。
现代文：不久，中山有一狂人自称 宋主 ，有兵千人，想救出文丞相。
English: Soon, there was a madman in Zhongshan who called himself "Song Lord" and had a thousand soldiers who wanted to rescue Minister Wen.

古文：京城亦有匿名书，言某日烧蓑城苇，率两翼兵为乱，丞相可无忧者。
现代文：京城也有未署名的书信，说某日火烧蓑城苇，率领两侧翼的士兵作乱，丞相就没有忧虑了。
English: There was also an unsigned letter from the capital, saying that one day he would set fire to the city walls and lead the soldiers on both sides into a riot, and the prime minister would have no worries.

古文：时盗新杀左丞相阿合马，命撤城苇，迁瀛国公及宋宗室开平，疑丞相者天祥也。
现代文：当时大盗刚刚暗杀了左丞相阿合马，命令撤除城苇，迁徙瀛国公及宋宗室到开平，怀疑信上说的丞相就是文天祥。
English: At that time, the bandit had just assassinated the Left Minister of War, Ahma, and ordered the removal of the city walls, the migration of the Duke of Song and the Song family to Kaiping, suspecting that the Minister of War mentioned in the letter was Wen Tianxiang.

古文：召入谕之曰： 汝何愿？ 天祥对曰： 天祥受宋恩，为宰相，安事二姓？
现代文：朝廷召见文天祥告谕说： 你有什么愿望？ 文天祥回答说 ：天祥深受宋朝的恩德，身为宰相，哪能侍奉二姓，愿赐我一死就满足了。 
English: The imperial court summoned Wen Tianxiang to announce: "What is your wish?" Wen Tianxiang replied: "Tianxiang is deeply endowed by the Song Dynasty. As a prime minister, how can I serve two surnames? Give me death and I will be satisfied."

古文：愿赐之一死足矣。 然犹不忍，遽麾之退。言者力赞从天祥之请，从之。
现代文：然而还不忍心，急忙挥手要他退去。有的说应该答应文天祥的要求，诏令可以。
English: However, he could not bear it and quickly waved his hand to ask him to leave. Some people said that Wen Tianxiang's request should be granted, and the imperial edict could be issued.

古文：俄有诏使止之，天祥死矣。
现代文：不一会儿又下诏加以阻止，天祥已死了。
English: Soon after, another edict was issued to stop it, and Tianxiang was dead.

古文：天祥临刑殊从容，谓吏卒曰： 吾事毕矣。 南乡拜而死。
现代文：文天祥临上刑场时特别从容不迫，对狱中吏卒说 ：我的事完了。 向南跪拜后被处死。
English: When Wen Tianxiang arrived at the execution site, he was particularly unhurried and said to the prison officials: "My work is done." After kneeling to the south, he was executed.

古文：数日，其妻欧阳氏收其尸，面如生，年四十七。
现代文：几天以后，他的妻子欧阳氏收拾他的尸体，面部如活的一样，终年四十七岁。
English: A few days later, his wife, Ouyang, picked up his lifeless body. He had the face of a 47-year-old.

古文：其衣带中有赞曰： 孔曰成仁，孟曰取义，惟其义尽，所以仁至。
现代文：他的衣服中有赞文说： 孔子说成仁，孟子说取义，只有忠义至尽，仁也就做到了。
English: In his robe, there is a praise that says: Confucius said to achieve benevolence, Mencius said to obtain righteousness, and only when loyalty is exhausted can benevolence be achieved.

古文：读圣贤书，所学何事，而今而后，庶几无愧。 
现代文：读圣贤的书，所学习的是什么呢？自今以后，可算是问心无愧了。 
English: What do you learn when you read the books of the sages? From now on, your conscience will be clear.

古文：论曰：自古志士，欲信大义于天下者，不以成败利钝动其心，君子命之曰 仁 ，以其合天理之正，即人心之安尔。
现代文：评论说：自古以来的仁人志士，希望信奉大义于天下的人，不因为成败、锋利钝挫而动摇自己的志向，君子认为这就是 仁 ，用它规合天理的正道，那么人心就安宁了。
English: He commented, "Since ancient times, people have aspired to be benevolent, and they hope that people who believe in the world's great righteousness will not waver in their aspirations because of success or failure, sharp or blunt setbacks. Gentlemen believe that this is benevolence, and use it to regulate the right path of heavenly principles, so that people's hearts will be at peace.

古文：商之衰，周有代德，盟津之师不期而会者八百国。
现代文：商朝衰落，西周拥德而代商，盟津的军队不约而同来会者有八百诸侯国家。
English: With the decline of the Shang Dynasty, the Western Zhou Dynasty favored Germany and negotiated on its behalf. The Ming-Tian armies were accompanied by 800 vassal states.

古文：伯夷、叔齐以两男子欲扣马而止之，三尺童子知其不可。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐两个男子汉想拦住马头加以阻止，三尺长的小孩也知道是挡不住的。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi, two men, tried to stop the horse's head and stop it, but the three-foot-long child also knew that it could not be stopped.

古文：他日，孔子贤之，则曰： 求仁而得仁。 宋至德祐亡矣，文天祥往来兵间，初欲以口舌存之，事既无成，奉两孱王崎岖岭海，以图兴复，兵败身执。
现代文：后来，孔子认为这是贤能的举动，就说： 只有追求仁义才能得到仁义。 宋到德年间灭亡了，文天祥来往于兵营之间，开始想以言论保卫宋朝，当事情没有达到目的，就侍奉两个幼主称王于岭南海边，企图兴复宋朝，兵败被俘。
English: Later, Confucius thought that this was a virtuous act, and said: "Only by pursuing benevolence can one obtain benevolence." When the Song Dynasty fell to Germany, Wen Tianxiang went back and forth between the barracks and began to defend the Song Dynasty with his words. When things did not reach their goal, he served two young princes called Wang on the southern coast of Lingnan in an attempt to restore the Song Dynasty. He was defeated and captured.

古文：我世祖皇帝以天地有容之量，既壮其节，又惜其才，留之数年，如虎兕在柙，百计驯之，终不可得。
现代文：我世祖皇帝以天地那么大的度量气魄，既赞扬他的节义，又爱惜他的才能，挽留他数年，好像老虎、犀牛关在笼子里，千方百计驯服它，然而始终不能达到目的。
English: My ancestor, the emperor, had the greatest courage in the world, both praising his righteousness and cherishing his talent. He kept him for several years, like a tiger or a rhinoceros in a cage. He tried his best to tame him, but he could not achieve his goal.

古文：观其从容伏质，就死如归，是其所欲有甚于生者，可不谓之 仁 哉。
现代文：看他从容大度的气质，视死如归的气概，是因为他所追求的东西比生命还重要，难道这不可以称之为 仁 吗？
English: Looking at his easy-going temperament, his death-defying spirit, it is because what he pursues is more important than life. Can this not be called benevolence?

古文：宋三百余年，取士之科，莫盛于进士，进士莫盛于伦魁。
现代文：宋代三百多年，录取士官的科举考试，没有什么比进士科考的规模还大，录取的进士中则没有谁能超过第一名了。
English: For more than three hundred years in the Song Dynasty, there was nothing bigger than the scale of the entrance examination for the admission of non-commissioned officers, and no one could exceed the first place among the admitted students.

古文：自天祥死，世之好为高论者，谓科目不足以得伟人，岂其然乎！
现代文：自从文天祥死后，社会上有些喜欢高谈阔论的人，认为科举考试不能够充分地选拔到伟大的人才，难道是这样吗？
English: Since the death of Wen Tianxiang, there are some people in the society who like to rant and rave, and think that the imperial examinations cannot adequately select great talents. Is this really the case?

