古文：孟子曰： 伯夷，非其君不事，非其友不友。不立于恶人之朝，不与恶人言。立于恶人之朝，与恶人言，如以朝衣朝冠坐于涂炭。
现代文：孟子说： 伯夷这个人，不是他自己认可的君主就不侍奉，不是他认可的朋友就不交往，不在恶的人的朝廷里做官，不与恶人谈话；如果在恶人的朝廷里做官，和恶人交谈，就好像穿着礼服戴着礼帽坐在污泥和炭灰等污浊的东西上。
English: Mencius said, "This man Bo Yi does not serve a prince whom he does not approve of, does not associate with a friend whom he does not approve of, does not work as an official in the court of an evil man, and does not converse with an evil man. If you work as an official in the court of an evil man and converse with an evil man, it is like wearing a ceremonial robe and a ceremonial hat while sitting on something filthy such as mud and soot.

古文：推恶恶之心，思与乡人立，其冠不正，望望然去之，若将浼焉。
现代文：推想他厌恶恶人的心理，想象他与乡下人站在一起，那人衣冠不整，他就会愤愤然离开，好像自己会被玷污一样。
English: Imagine his loathing of evil-doers, imagine him standing with a countryman whose clothes were not in order, and he would leave in a rage, as if he would be defiled.

古文：是故诸侯虽有善其辞命而至者，不受也。
现代文：因此，诸侯中虽然有人用动听的言辞请他去做官，他却不接受。
English: Therefore, although some of the lords invited him to become an official with beautiful words, he did not accept.

古文：不受也者，是亦不屑就已。
现代文：不接受的原因，是因为他瞧不起那些人。
English: The reason he didn't accept it was because he despised those people.

古文：柳下惠，不羞污君，不卑小官。进不隐贤，必以其道。遗佚而不怨，阨穷而不悯。
现代文：柳下惠却并不觉得侍奉贪官污吏是耻辱，也不会嫌弃官职太小；他进入朝廷就不隐藏自己的才干，但是一定要按自己的主张行事；就算被冷落遗忘而隐逸也不怨恨，处于困窘之境也不忧愁。
English: However, Liu Shimohui did not feel that it was a disgrace to serve corrupt officials, nor did he feel that the official position was too small; when he entered the imperial court, he did not hide his talent, but he must act according to his own ideas; even if he was neglected and forgotten, he would not resent it, and he would not be sad in a difficult situation.

古文：故曰： 尔为尔，我为我，虽袒裼裸裎于我侧，尔焉能浼我哉？ 
现代文：所以他说： 你是你，我是我，哪怕你在我旁边赤身露体，你又怎能玷污我呢？ 
English: So he said, "You are you, and I am I. Even if you were to stand naked before me, how could you defile me?

古文：故由由然与之偕而不自失焉，援而止之而止。
现代文：因此他怡然自得地与他人共处而不失常态，别人拉着他让他留下他也留下。
English: Therefore, he is self-satisfied to coexist with others without losing his normal state, others pull him to let him stay and he stays.

古文：援而止之而止者，是亦不屑去已。 
现代文：拉着他让他留下他也留下的原因，是因为他瞧不起那些人。 
English: The reason he kept him on was because he despised those people.

古文：孟子曰： 伯夷隘，柳下惠不恭。
现代文：孟子又说： 伯夷这个人狭隘，柳下惠又不够恭敬。
English: Mencius also said, "Bo Yi is a narrow-minded person, and Liu Shih-hui is not respectful enough.

古文：隘与不恭，君子不由也。 
现代文：狭隘和不恭敬，都是君子不该遵从和仿效的。 
English: narrow-minded and disrespectful, are not for a gentleman to follow and emulate.

