古文：杨居士张士平冯渐潘老人王先生周生韩志和张辞崔言
现代文：杨居士张士平冯渐潘老人王先生周生韩志和张辞崔言
English: Yang Jiuquan, Zhang Shiping, Feng Qianpan, old Mr. Wang, Zhou Sheng, Han Zhi and Zhang Jie, Cui Yan

古文：杨居士
现代文：杨居士
English: Comrade Yang

古文：海南郡有杨居士，亡其名，以居士自目，往往游南海枝郡，常寄食于人，亦不知其所止。
现代文：海南郡有个杨居士，忘了他的名字，总用居士来标榜自己，经常到南海郡各地游历，而且经常在别人家食宿，也不知道他住在哪里。
English: There is a householder named Yang in Hainan County. I have forgotten his name. He always uses householder to advertise himself. He often travels to various parts of Nanhai County, and often eats and sleeps at other people's homes. I don't know where he lives.

古文：谓人曰： 我有奇术，汝辈庸人，固不得而识矣。 
现代文：他对别人说： 我有出奇的法术，你们这些平庸的人当然不能知道了。 
English: He said to the others, "I have amazing magic, but of course you mediocre people can't know about it.

古文：后常至郡，会太守好奇者，闻居士来，甚喜，且厚其礼，命饮之。
现代文：后来他常常到郡里去，恰好太守喜欢奇人，听说居士来了，很高兴，并且以厚礼待他，请他喝酒。
English: Later, he often went to Shuri, which happened to be a castle town with a penchant for eccentrics. When he heard that a villager was coming, he was delighted, and treated him with great courtesy, inviting him for a drink.

古文：每宴游，未尝不首召居士，居士亦以此自负。
现代文：每次宴会或出游，总是第一个就把居士召来，杨居士也因为这种待遇而感到自己了不起。
English: Every banquet or outing, the householder is always the first to be called, and Yang Householder also feels great because of this treatment.

古文：一日使酒忤太守，太守不能容。
现代文：有一天，杨居士借着酒劲冲撞了太守，太守不能容忍。
English: One day, Yang Koji used the power of alcohol to bump into the governor, which the governor could not tolerate.

古文：后又会宴于郡室，阅妓乐，而居士不得预。
现代文：后来太守又在郡衙室内举行宴会，看歌妓表演音乐，而杨居士没能参加。
English: Later, the Empress Dowager also held a banquet in the guild hall to watch the geisha performing music, but Yang Koji was unable to attend.

古文：时有数客，亦不在太守召中，因谓居士曰： 先生尝自负有奇术，某向者仰望之不暇。一日遇先生于此，诚幸矣。
现代文：这时有几个人也是太守的常客，这次也不在太守邀请的客人之内，于是他们就对杨居士说： 先生曾经自负有奇术，我们一直很敬佩先生，只是没有机会与您相会，今日在这里遇到你，实在幸运啊。
English: At this time, there were several people who were also regular guests of Taishou, but this time they were not among the guests invited by Taishou, so they said to Yang Koji: Mr. was once proud of his magic, we have always admired Mr. very much, but we did not have the opportunity to meet you, and it was really lucky to meet you here today.

古文：虽然，今闻太守大宴客郡斋，而先生不得预其问，即不能设一奇术以动之乎？
现代文：虽然这样，然而今天听说太守在郡斋大宴宾客，而先生没能参与其中，你就不能施一奇术来扰乱他们吗？
English: In spite of this, today I heard that the abbot is hosting a grand banquet at the county seat, and since my husband is not able to attend, can't you do something to disturb them?

古文：必先生果无奇术耶。 
现代文：一定是先生果真没有奇术啊。 
English: It must be true that you don't have any magic.

古文：居士笑曰： 此末术耳，君试观我。
现代文：杨居士笑着说： 这只不过是微不足道的法术而已，你们看我作法。
English: Yang Koji smiled and said, "This is just a trivial spell. You should see how I do it."

古文：我为君召其妓，可以佐酒。 
现代文：我为你们把他的歌妓召来，可以让她们助酒兴。 
English: I have called his courtesans for you, that they may make merry with wine.

古文：皆曰： 愿为之。 
现代文：大家都说： 希望你施展法术。 
English: Everyone said, "I hope you cast a spell."

古文：居士因命具酒，使诸客环席而坐，又命小童闭西庑空室，久之乃启之。
现代文：杨居士就命人摆设酒席，让众客围着筵席坐下，又让小童把西厢房的空屋子关闭起来，过了很久才把门打开。
English: Yang Guosi then ordered someone to set up a banquet table, let the guests sit down around the table, and let the child close the empty room of the west wing, and opened the door after a long time.

古文：有三四美人自庑下来，装饰华焕，携乐而至。
现代文：就看见有三四个美貌女子从西厢下走来，她们打扮华丽光彩照人，带着乐器来到了。
English: I saw three or four beautiful women coming from the west wing. They were dressed in gorgeous and glamorous clothes, and they came with musical instruments.

古文：居士曰： 某之术何如？ 
现代文：杨居士说： 我的法术怎么样？ 
English: Yang Koji said: How is my magic?

古文：诸客人大异之，殆不可测。
现代文：众客人都觉得这事非常奇异，疑惑不解猜不出。
English: All the guests thought it was very strange, they couldn't figure it out.

古文：乃命列坐，奏乐且歌。
现代文：杨居士就命美人排好坐下，一边奏乐一边唱歌。
English: Yang Koji ordered the beauties to line up and sit down, while playing music and singing.

古文：客或讯其术，居士但笑而不答，时昏晦。
现代文：有的客人讯问他的法术，杨居士只是笑而不回答，这时天已昏黑。
English: When some guests questioned him about his magic, Yang Jushi just laughed and did not answer. It was already dark.

古文：至夜分，居士谓诸妓曰： 可归矣。 
现代文：到了半夜，杨居士对那些歌妓说： 你们可以回去了。 
English: At midnight, Yang Koji said to the geishas, "You can go back.

古文：于是皆起，入西庑下空室中。
现代文：于是那些歌妓都站起身来，走进西厢空屋子里。
English: So the geishas all got up and went into the West Wing's empty room.

古文：客相目骇叹，然尚疑其鬼物妖惑。
现代文：众客面面相觑而惊叹，可是还怀疑她们是鬼物迷惑人。
English: The guests look at each other in amazement, but still suspect that they are ghosts.

古文：明日，有郡中吏曰： 太守昨夕宴郡阁，妓乐列坐，无何皆仆地，瞬息暴风起，飘其乐器而去。
现代文：第二天，郡衙中有个吏员说： 太守昨晚在郡阁设宴，歌妓拿着乐器都坐好了，不久都倒在地上，转眼之间暴风就刮起来，那些乐器被刮得飘飘而去。
English: The next day, a clerk in the county magistrate said, "The governor held a banquet in the county pavilion last night, and the geisha all sat down with their musical instruments. Soon, they all fell to the ground. In a blink of an eye, a storm blew up, and those musical instruments were blown away.

古文：迨至夜分，诸妓方寤，乐器亦归于旧所。
现代文：将近到半夜时候，众歌妓才醒过来，乐器也回到了原来的地方。
English: It was nearly midnight before the singers woke up and the instruments returned to their original places.

古文：太守质问众妓，皆云黑无所见，竟不穷其由。 
现代文：太守质问那些歌妓，她们都说漆黑什么也没看见，终究没弄清什么原因。 
English: The daimyō questioned the geishas, but they all said that it was pitch black and that they couldn't see anything. In the end, they couldn't figure out why.

古文：诸客皆大惊，因尽以事对，或告于太守。
现代文：众客都大吃一惊，就把事情经过全都告诉了那个郡吏，又向太守报告了此事。
English: All the guests were taken aback, so they told the county official everything that had happened and reported the matter to the governor.

古文：太守叹异，即谢而遣之，不敢留于郡中。
现代文：太守惊叹居士法术奇异，就向居士道歉打发他走了，不敢把他留在郡中。
English: The abbot marveled at the strange magic of the householder, apologized to the householder and sent him away, not daring to leave him in the county.

古文：时开成初也。
现代文：那时是开成初年。
English: It was the first year of operation.

古文：张士平
现代文：张士平
English: Zhang Shiping

古文：唐寿州刺史张士平，中年以来，夫妇俱患瞽疾，历求方术，不能致。遂退居别墅，杜门自责。
现代文：唐朝寿州刺史张士平，从中年以后，夫妻俩都患眼病双目失明，到处寻求方术，也没能找到，就退职到别墅居住。
English: After middle age, both husband and wife suffered from an eye disease and were blind in both eyes. They searched everywhere for a cure, but could not find it, so they retired to live in a villa.

古文：唯祷醮星辰，以祈神之佑。
现代文：他谢绝一切宾客检查自己的过失，只设祭坛向星辰祷告，来祈请神仙保佑。
English: He refused to allow any of his guests to examine their own faults, and only set up an altar to pray to the stars and invoke the blessings of the gods.

古文：年久，家业渐虚，精诚不退。
现代文：年头多了，家业渐渐空虚了，但他的精诚之心仍然不减。
English: As he got older, the family business gradually became empty, but his dedication remained undiminished.

古文：元和七年壬辰，八月十七日，有书生诣门请谒，家人曰： 主公夫妇抱疾，不接宾客久矣。 
现代文：元和七年壬辰八月十七日，有个书生登门请求拜见，家人说： 我家主人夫妇患病，很久不接待宾客了。 
English: On the 17th day of the 8th month of the 7th year of the Yuan and the 7th year of the Ren, a scholar came to the door to ask for a meeting. The family said: My husband and wife are ill and have not received guests for a long time.

古文：书生曰： 吾虽书生，亦攻医术。
现代文：那个书生说： 我虽然是个书生，但也研究医术。
English: The student said: Although I am a student, I also study medicine.

古文：闻使君有疾，故来此耳。 
现代文：听说使君有病，特意来到这里。 
English: I heard that you were ill, so I came here specially.

古文：家人入白士平，士平忻然曰： 久病不接宾客，脱有方药，愿垂相救。 
现代文：家人进去禀报士平，士平高兴地说： 我久病不接待宾客，如果他有方术和丹药，希望他垂怜相救。 
English: Family members went in to inform Shiping. Shiping said happily, "I have been ill for a long time and do not receive guests. If he has any methods and remedies, I hope he will be merciful and help me."

古文：书生曰： 但一见使君，自有良药。 
现代文：家人告诉了书生，书生说： 只要我见一见使君，自然有好药。 
English: The family members told Shousei, and Shousei said, "As long as I see the envoy, there will naturally be good medicine."

古文：士平闻之，扶疾相见，谓使君曰： 此疾不假药饵，明日倩丁夫十人，锹锸之属，为开一井，眼当自然立愈。 
现代文：士平闻听这话，就带病去见书生，书生对使君说： 这个病不必用药物，明天请派十名劳工，准备锹一类的工具，为你开一口井，眼睛自然应该立刻就好。 
English: When Shiping heard this, he took his illness to Shousei. Shousei said to the envoy, "There is no need to use medicine for this illness. Please send ten laborers tomorrow to prepare tools such as hoes and dig a well for you. Your eyes should naturally get better immediately."

古文：如其言而备焉，书生即选圣地，自晨穿井，至夕见水，士平眼疾顿轻，及得新水洗目，即时明净，平复如初，十年之疾，一旦豁然。
现代文：张士平就按书生说的准备好了，书生就选择好地方，从早晨开始打井，到晚上见到水，士平的眼病顿时减轻了，等到拿来井中新水用它洗眼睛，士平的眼睛当时就看清了，康复得像当初一样，十年的疾病，一下子好利索了。
English: Zhang Shiping prepared according to what the student said, and the student chose a good place. He started digging a well in the morning and saw water in the evening. Shiping's eye disease was immediately alleviated. When he took the fresh water from the well and washed his eyes with it, Shiping's eyes could see clearly at that time, and he recovered as he did at the beginning. After ten years of illness, he suddenly felt better.

古文：夫妻感而谢之，厚遗金帛。
现代文：夫妻感动得向书生道谢，厚赠他金银布帛。
English: The couple were so moved that they thanked the student and presented him with a gold and silver cloth bag.

古文：书生曰： 吾非世间人，太白星官也。
现代文：书生说： 我不是世上的人，是太白星官。
English: The student said, "I'm not from this world, I'm a white star officer."

古文：以子抱疾数年，不忘于道，精心祷醮，上感星辰。
现代文：因为你患病几年，不忘于道，精心诚意设坛祭祀祈祷，感动了上天的星辰。
English: Because you have been ill for several years, do not forget the way, carefully and sincerely set up an altar for sacrifice and prayer, and moved the stars of heaven.

古文：五帝星君使我降受此术，以祛重疾，答子修奉之心。
现代文：五帝星君让我下界传你这个方术，来解除你沉重的疾病，酬答你修道敬奉的心。
English: Fifth Emperor Xingjun, let me pass down to you this method, to relieve you of your serious illness, and to reward you for your devotion.

古文：金帛之遗，非吾所要也。
现代文：你赠送的金帛，不是我需要的东西。
English: The gold ingot you gave me is not what I need.

古文：因留此法，令转教世人，以救疾苦，用增阴德。
现代文：就把这个方术留下，让你转交世人，用以救助疾苦之人，用以增添你的阴德。
English: Leave this recipe for you to pass on to the world, to help those who are suffering, and to enhance your sexual virtue.

古文：其要以子午之年五月戌酉、十一月卯辰为吉，丑未之年六月戌亥、十一月辰巳；寅申之年七月亥子、正月巳午；卯酉之年八月子丑、二月午未；辰戌之年九月申未、三月寅丑；巳亥之年十月申酉、四月寅卯。取其方位年月日时，即为福地，浚井及泉，必有良效矣。 
现代文：它的要旨在子午年五月戌酉、十一月卯辰为吉，丑未年六月戌亥、十一月辰巳为吉，寅申年七月亥子、正月巳午为吉，卯酉年八月子丑，二月午未为吉，辰戌年九月申未，三月寅丑为吉，已亥年十月申酉、四月寅卯为吉，取其方位年月日时就是福地，掘井挖到泉水，一定有好的效果。 
English: Its important points are: in the year of the Horse, the month of May is auspicious; in the year of the Horse, the month of November is auspicious; in the year of the Dog, the month of June is auspicious; in the year of the Tiger, the month of November is auspicious; in the year of the Goat, the month of July is auspicious; in the year of the Pig, the month of January is auspicious; in the year of the Goat, the month of August is auspicious; in the year of the Goat, the month of February is auspicious; in the year of the Goat, the month of September is auspicious; in the year of

古文：士平再拜受之。
现代文：士平拜了又拜接受了这个方术。
English: Shiping bowed and accepted this method.

古文：言讫，升天而去。
现代文：太白星官说完之后，就升空而去。
English: After Taibai finished speaking, he took off into the sky.

古文：冯渐
现代文：冯渐
English: Feng Zhan

古文：河东冯渐，名家子。
现代文：河东有个冯渐，是名门子弟。
English: There is a Feng Qian in Hedong, who is the son of a famous family.

古文：以明经入仕，性与俗背，后弃官隐居伊水上。
现代文：凭明经及第进入仕途，因为他的性格与世俗格格不入，后来就放弃官职到伊水上隐居。
English: He entered the career with a clear script and the first, because his character was incompatible with the world, and later he gave up his official position to live in seclusion on the Isu River.

古文：有道士李君以道术闻，尤善视鬼，朝士皆慕其能。
现代文：有个道士叫李君凭道术出名，尤其善于察看鬼物，朝中士大夫都敬慕他的才能。
English: There was a Taoist called Li Jun, who was famous for his Taoism and was particularly good at spotting ghosts. The sergeants and doctors in the morning all admired his talent.

古文：李君后退归汝颖，适遇渐于伊洛间，知渐有奇术，甚重之。
现代文：李君后来从京城回到汝颖，恰好在伊水与洛阳之间遇到了冯渐，知道冯渐有奇术，很敬重他。
English: Li Jun later returned to Yuying from Beijing. He happened to meet Feng Qian between Yishui and Luoyang. He knew that Feng Qian had magic and respected him very much.

古文：大历中，有博陵崔公者，与李君为僚，甚善。
现代文：大历年间，博陵有个崔相公，与李君是同僚，关系很好。
English: During the Great Calendar, there was a Cui Xianggong in Boling. He was a colleague of Li Jun, and they had a good relationship.

古文：李君寓书于崔曰： 当今制鬼，无过渐耳。 
现代文：李君寄信给崔相公说： 当今能制服鬼的人，没有超过冯渐的。 
English: Li Jun sent a letter to Cui Xianggong saying: Today, there is no one who can subdue the ghost more than Feng Qian.

古文：是时朝士咸知渐有神术数，往往道其名。
现代文：这时朝中士大夫全都知道冯渐有神奇的法术，常常称道他的名字。
English: At this time, all the doctors and sergeants knew that Feng Qian had magical spells, and they often praised his name.

古文：别后长安中人率以渐字题其门者，盖用此也。
现代文：冯渐告别出京后，长安城中的人都把渐字写在他们的门上，就是因为这个原因。
English: After Feng Qian's farewell to Beijing, people in Chang'an City wrote the word "Qian" on their doors for this reason.

古文：潘老人
现代文：潘老人
English: Old Man Pan

古文：嵩山少林寺，元和中，常因风歇，有一老人杖策扣门求宿。
现代文：嵩山少林寺，在元和年间，曾经因为大风刚停，有一个老人拄着拐杖敲门请求寄宿。
English: In Songshan Shaolin Temple, during the Yuan and Zhou dynasties, there was an old man on crutches who knocked on the door to ask for lodging because the wind had just died down.

古文：寺人以关门讫，更不可开，乃指寺外空室二间，请自止宿。
现代文：寺里的僧人用已经关上大门为理由，再也不肯开，就指点寺外两间空屋子，请老人自行歇宿。
English: The monks in the temple used the fact that the gate had already been closed as a reason and refused to open it again, so they pointed out two empty rooms outside the temple and asked the old man to sleep there.

古文：亦无床席，老人即入屋。
现代文：空室中也没有床和席子，老人就进了那个空屋。
English: There was no bed or mat in the vacant room, so the old man went into the empty room.

古文：二更后，僧人因起，忽见寺门外大明，怪而视之，见老人所宿屋内，设茵褥翠幕，异常华盛。又见陈到肴馔，老人饮啖自若，左右亦无仆从。
现代文：二更以后，僧人因为起夜，忽然发现寺门外非常亮，觉得奇怪就去看，看见老人所住的那个屋子里，摆设着垫子、褥子和翠绿色的帐幕，异常豪华丰美；又看到陈列着菜肴食品，老人安然地自己在那里又吃又喝，左右也没有仆人随从。
English: Two nights later, the monk woke up and suddenly noticed that it was very bright outside the temple gate. He thought it was strange and went to take a look. He saw that the room where the old man lived was furnished with cushions, curtains, and a turquoise green tent. It was extremely luxurious and beautiful. He also saw the dishes and food on display. The old man was eating and drinking peacefully by himself, with no servants following him around.

古文：讶其所以，又不敢开门省问，俱众伺之。
现代文：僧人由于老人的神秘而感到惊讶，又不敢开门去探讯，大家就一起等着看。
English: The monk was surprised by the mystery of the old man and did not dare to open the door to investigate. Everyone waited to see.

古文：至五更后，老人睡起，自盥洗讫，怀中取一葫芦子，大如拳，遂取床席帐幕，凡是用度，悉纳其中，无所不受。
现代文：到了五更以后，老人睡醒起来，自己洗漱完毕，就从怀中取出一个小葫芦，像拳头那么大，就把床、席、帐幕，以及所有用具用品，全都装在小葫芦里，没有装不下的东西。
English: After the five-day retreat, the old man woke up from sleep, and after washing himself, he took out a small gourd from his bosom, as big as his fist, and put the bed, the table, the tent, and all the utensils and supplies, all in the small gourd. There was nothing that could not be put in it.

古文：收讫，以葫芦子内怀中，空屋如故。
现代文：装完东西，老头又把葫芦放到怀里，空屋子还像原来一样。
English: After loading the things, the old man put the gourd in his arms again, and the empty house was still the same as before.

古文：寺僧骇异，开门相与谒问，老人辞谢而已。
现代文：寺里的僧人觉得惊异，打开门一起去拜见老人询问他，老人用言辞谢绝而已。
English: The monks in the temple were surprised. They opened the door and went to see the old man to ask him about it. The old man only declined with words.

古文：僧固留之住，问其姓名，云姓潘氏，从南岳北游太原。
现代文：僧人坚决留老人住下，问他的姓名，他说姓潘，从南岳来，往北走去游太原。
English: The monk resolutely let the old man stay and asked his name. He said his surname was Pan. He came from Nanyue and went north to visit Taiyuan.

古文：其后时有见者。
现代文：那以后时而有人看到这个老头。
English: Since then, the old man has been seen from time to time.

古文：王先生
现代文：王先生
English: Mr. Wang

古文：有王先生者，家于乌江上，隐其迹，由是里人不能辨，或以为妖妄。
现代文：有个王先生，家住在乌江上游，平常隐藏自己的形踪，因此村里人不能分辨，有人把他看作妖妄之人。
English: There is a Mr. Wang, who lives in the upper reaches of the Wujiang River. He usually hides his appearance, so the villagers can't tell him apart. Some people see him as a demon.

古文：一日里中火起，延烧庐舍，生即往视之，厉声呼曰： 火且止！
现代文：有一天，村子里起了大火，蔓延烧毁房舍，王先生就去看火，他厉声喊着说： 大火快停下来！
English: One day, a fire broke out in the village, spreading and burning down the houses. Mr. Wang went to see the fire. He shouted loudly, "Stop the fire!

古文：火且止！ 
现代文：大火快停下来！ 
English: Stop the fire!

古文：于是火灭，里人始奇之。
现代文：于是火熄灭了，村民们这才知道他是奇人。
English: As a result, the fire went out, and only then did the villagers know that he was a miracle worker.

古文：长庆中，有弘农杨晦之，自长安东游吴楚，行至乌江，闻先生高躅，就门往谒。
现代文：长庆年间，有个弘农人杨晦之。从长安向东去游吴楚，走到乌江，听说王先生行迹高缈，就登门去拜访。
English: During the period of Changqing, there was a Hong farmer, Yang Huizhi. He went from Chang'an to the east to visit Wuchu, walked to Wujiang, and heard that Mr. Wang had been to Gaojun, so he went to visit.

古文：先生戴玄绡巾，衣褐衣，隐几而坐，风骨清美。
现代文：王先生戴着黑色生丝头巾，穿着黑黄色的衣服，在几案后面坐着，仙风道骨清秀俊美。
English: Mr. Wang, wearing a black raw silk headscarf and black-and-yellow clothes, sat behind several cases.

古文：晦之再拜备礼，先生拱揖而已，命晦之坐其侧。
现代文：杨晦之对他拜了两拜礼节周到，而先生仅拱手一揖而已，叫晦之坐在他身旁。
English: Yang Huizhi bowed to him for two days of worship, but his master only bowed once and asked him to sit next to him.

古文：其议论玄畅，迥出意表，晦之愈健慕，于是留宿。是日乃八月十二日也。
现代文：他的议论深奥晓畅，远超出意料之外，晦之更加强烈地敬慕他，于是留住在那里，这天乃是八月十二日。
English: It was the twelfth of August, and he remained there, his discourse being more profound and eloquent than he had expected, and his admiration more ardent.

古文：先生召其女七娘者，乃一老妪也，年七十余，发尽白，扶杖而来。
现代文：王先生把他的女儿叫作七娘的叫来，原来是一个老太太，七十多岁了，头发全白了，扶着拐杖来到。
English: Mr. Wang called his daughter as the seventh daughter. It turned out to be an old lady, more than seventy years old, with completely white hair, who came on crutches.

古文：先生谓晦之曰： 此我女也，惰而不好道，今且老矣。 
现代文：王先生对杨晦之说： 这是我的女儿，懒惰而不好道，现在将要老了。 
English: Mr. Wang said to Yang Huizhi, "This is my daughter, she is lazy and bad mannered, and now she is getting old.

古文：既而谓七娘曰： 汝为吾刻纸状今夕之月，置于室东垣上。 
现代文：接着对七娘说： 你替我用纸剪一个月亮，像今晚月亮的样子，把它贴到屋里东墙之上。 
English: Then he said to the seventh daughter, "Cut out a moon for me out of paper, like tonight's moon, and paste it on the east wall of the house."

古文：有顷，七娘以纸月施于垣上，夕有奇光自发，洞照一室，纤毫尽辨，晦之惊叹不测。
现代文：过了一会儿，七娘把纸贴到墙上，晚上纸月亮上就有奇异的光自行发出，清清楚楚地照亮全室，连细小的毫毛都能分辨出来，晦之惊叹不已，猜测不出怎么回事。
English: After a while, the seventh daughter pasted the paper to the wall, and in the evening, the paper moon emitted a strange light on its own, clearly illuminating the whole room, even the tiny hairs could be distinguished, and she was amazed and could not guess what was going on.

古文：及晓将去，先生以杖击之毕，俄有尘起，天地尽晦。
现代文：等天亮时将要离去，王先生用杖敲击完毕，忽然有尘土飞起，天地全都暗下来。
English: When he was about to leave at dawn, after Mr. Wang had finished tapping with his cane, dust suddenly flew up, and the sky and earth were all darkened.

古文：久之尘敛，视其庭，则悬崖峻险，山谷重叠，前有积石尽目，晦之悸然背汗，毛发竖立。
现代文：过了很久，尘土消失了，再看那院子里，就变成了险峻的悬崖，前面积石满眼可见，晦之心惊胆颤背上出来汗，头发都竖了起来。
English: After a long time, the dust disappeared, and when I looked at the yard again, it had turned into a steep cliff, the front area of the stone was visible to the naked eye, my heart trembled with fear, I sweated on my back, and my hair stood on end.

古文：先生曰： 陵谷速迁，吾子安所归乎？ 
现代文：王先生说： 高山深岩迅速变迁，你回到哪里去呢？ 
English: Mr. Wang said: The high mountains and deep rocks are rapidly changing, where will you go back to?

古文：晦之益恐，洒泣言曰： 诚不知一旦有桑田之变，岂仙都瞬息，而尘世已千岁乎？ 
现代文：晦之更加恐慌，掉下眼泪说： 实在不知道一旦发生沧海桑田这种变化，难道仙都的一瞬间，世尘就已过了千年吗？ 
English: Hakuho panicked even more and shed tears, saying, "I really don't know, once such a sea-to-sea change occurs, will the world have already passed a thousand years in the blink of an eye?

古文：先生笑曰： 子无惧也，所以为娱耳。 
现代文：先生笑着说： 你不必担心，这是我用来娱乐的法术而已。 
English: The teacher smiled and said, "You don't have to worry, it's just a magic trick I use for fun.

古文：于是持篲扫其庭，又有尘起，有顷尘敛，门庭如旧。
现代文：于是拿扫把把院子扫一下，又有尘土飞起，过了一会儿，灰尘消失了，门庭如故。
English: So he took a broom and swept the yard, and the dust flew up again. After a while, the dust disappeared, and the courtyard remained as it was.

古文：晦之喜，即驰马而去。
现代文：杨晦之很高兴，就扬鞭打马而去。
English: Yang Huizhi was very happy, so he whipped his horse and left.

古文：一说：唐长庆初，山人杨隐之在郴州，常寻访道者。
现代文：另外有个说法：唐朝长庆初年，隐居修行者杨隐之在彬州，经常寻访有道之人。
English: In addition, there is a saying: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty in Changqing, the recluse practitioner Yang Yingzhi was in Binshou, often looking for virtuous people.

古文：有唐居士，土人谓百岁人，杨谒之，因留杨宿。
现代文：有个唐居士，当地人说他有一百岁了，杨隐之去拜访他，他就留杨隐之过夜。
English: There was a Tang villager, the locals said he was a hundred years old, Yang Yingzhi went to visit him, he stayed with Yang Yingzhi for the night.

古文：及夜，呼其女曰： 可将一个弦月子来。 
现代文：到夜里，唐居士把女儿叫出来对她说： 你可以拿弦一月亮来。 
English: In the middle of the night, Tang's householder called his daughter out and said to her: "You can bring the string and the moon."

古文：其女遂帖月于壁上，如片纸耳。
现代文：他的女儿就把月亮贴在墙上，好像一片纸似的。
English: His daughter taped the moon to the wall, like a piece of paper.

古文：唐即起祝之曰： 今夕有客，可赐光明。 
现代文：唐居士起身向月祷告说： 今天晚上有客人，请赐给光明。 
English: The Tang villager got up and prayed to the moon, saying, "Tonight we have guests, please give them light."

古文：言讫，室朗若张烛。
现代文：说完，室内明亮像点上蜡烛一样。
English: After that, the room was as bright as if a candle had been lit.

古文：周生
现代文：周生
English: Zhou Sheng

古文：唐太和中，有周生者，庐于洞庭山，时以道术济吴楚，人多敬之。
现代文：唐朝太和年间，有个周生在洞庭山盖房居住，时常用道术救济吴楚贫民，人们普遍敬重他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Zhou Sheng who lived in a house on Dongting Mountain and often used Taoism to help the poor in Wuchu. People generally respected him.

古文：后将抵洛谷之间，途次广陵，舍佛寺中，会有三四客皆来。
现代文：后来他将要抵达洛谷一带，途中在广陵临时停留，住在佛寺中，恰逢还有三四个游客来了。
English: Later, when he was about to arrive in the Luo Valley area, he made a temporary stop at Guangling on the way and lived in a Buddhist temple. Coincidentally, three or four tourists also came.

古文：时方中秋，其夕霁月澄莹，且吟且望。
现代文：这时正当中秋，那天晚上天气晴朗月色明亮，他们一边吟诗一边望月。
English: It was mid-autumn at the time, and the weather that evening was clear and the moon was bright. They looked at the moon while chanting.

古文：有说开元时明皇帝游月宫事，因相与叹曰： 吾辈尘人，固不得至其所矣，奈何？ 
现代文：有人说起开元年间唐玄宗游月宫故事，于是一起叹息说： 我们这些尘俗之人，本来不能到那个地方，怎么办呢？ 
English: Someone mentioned the story of Tang Xuan Zong's visit to the Moon Palace in the first year of the 21st century, so they sighed together and said: We, these ordinary people, can't go to that place, what should we do?

古文：周生笑曰： 某常学于师，亦得焉，且能挈月至之怀袂，子信乎？ 
现代文：周生笑着说： 我曾经向老师学习过，也学到了那个方术，而且能把月亮拿下来放到怀中或袖子里，你们相信吗？ 
English: Zhou Sheng said with a smile: I once learned from a teacher, and I also learned that method, and I can take the moon down and put it in my arms or sleeves, can you believe it?

古文：或患其妄，或喜其奇，生曰： 吾不为明，则妄矣。 
现代文：有人担心他说谎，有人喜欢他离奇，周生说： 我如不为你们弄明白，就成了说谎了。 
English: Some people are worried that he is lying, others like his eccentricity. Zhou Sheng said, "If I don't make it clear for you, it will be a lie."

古文：因命虚一室，翳四垣，不使有纤隙。
现代文：于是命人空出一个屋子，把四面墙遮住，不让它有一点小缝。
English: So he ordered someone to vacate a room and cover the four walls so that there would be no small gaps.

古文：又命以箸数百，呼其僮，绳而架之。
现代文：又命人拿来几百双筷子，叫他的仆人用绳子把它们捆束起来。
English: He also ordered that hundreds of pairs of chopsticks be brought and that his servants bind them with ropes.

古文：且告客曰： 我将梯此取月去，闻呼可来观。 
现代文：周生就告诉那几个游客说： 我将要登上这个筷子做的梯子取月亮去，你们听到我呼唤可以来看。 
English: Zhou Sheng told the tourists, "I'm going to climb up this ladder made of chopsticks to get the moon. If you hear my call, you can come and see."

古文：乃闭户久之，数客步庭中，且伺焉。
现代文：就关上门很久，几个游客在庭中散步，一边等着周生。
English: After closing the door for a long time, a few tourists took a walk in the garden, waiting for Zhou Sheng.

古文：忽觉天地曛晦，仰而视之，即又无纤云。
现代文：忽然觉得天昏地暗，仰脸一看，却又没有丝毫云彩。
English: Suddenly, I felt that the sky was dark and gloomy. When I looked up, there was not the slightest cloud.

古文：俄闻生呼曰： 某至矣。 
现代文：不一会儿，听到周生呼喊说： 我回来了。 
English: A short while later, Zhou Sheng was heard shouting, "I'm back."

古文：因开其室，生曰： 月在某衣中耳，请客观焉。 
现代文：于是把空室的门打开，周生说： 月亮在我的衣服中，请客人们观看。 
English: So he opened the door to the vacant room. Zhou Sheng said, "The moon is in my clothes. Please let the guests look at it."

古文：因以举之。
现代文：就把衣服掀起来。
English: Just lift your clothes up.

古文：其衣中出月寸许，忽一室尽明，寒逼肌骨。
现代文：那衣服中露出一寸多月亮，忽然满室全亮了，寒光浸人肌骨。
English: More than an inch of the moon was exposed in that dress, and suddenly the whole room was lit up, and the cold light soaked people's muscles and bones.

古文：生曰： 子不信我，今信乎？ 
现代文：周生说： 你们不相信我，现在相信了吧？ 
English: Zhou Sheng said: You don't believe me, do you now?

古文：客再拜谢之，愿收其光。
现代文：那几个游客拜了又拜，向他表示感谢，希望他把月光收回去。
English: The tourists bowed and thanked him, hoping he would take the moonlight back.

古文：因又闭户，其外尚昏晦。食顷方如初。
现代文：于是又关上门，室外还昏黑一片，过了一会儿，月光又和当初一样。
English: So he closed the door again. It was still pitch black outside, and after a while, the moonlight was the same as before.

古文：韩志和
现代文：韩志和
English: Han Zhihe

古文：韩志和者，本倭国人也，中国为飞龙卫士。
现代文：韩志和本来是日本人，在中国当飞龙卫士。
English: Han Zhihe was originally Japanese and served as a flying dragon guardian in China.

古文：善雕木为鸾鹤鸟鹊之形，置机捩于腹中，发之则飞高三二百尺，数百步外方始却下。
现代文：他善于把木头雕刻成鸾鹤鸟鹊的形状，把机关放到它们的肚子里，发动机关，它们就飞到二三百尺的高空，飞到几百步外才又下来。
English: He was good at carving pieces of wood into the shape of cranes and vultures, placing the mechanism in their stomachs, turning off the engine, and they would fly up to two or three hundred feet in the air, flying a few hundred paces before coming down again.

古文：又作龙床为御榻，足一履之，则鳞鬣爪角皆动，夭矫如生。
现代文：他又制作龙床御榻，脚一踩上去，龙的鳞须爪角全都会动，卷曲而有气势，像活的一样。
English: He also made a dragon's bed. As soon as you step on it, all the scales and claws of the dragon move, curling and powerful, as if they were alive.

古文：又于唐宪皇前，出蝇虎子五六十头，分立队，令舞梁州曲，皆中曲度；致词时，殷殷有声，曲毕则累累而退，若有尊卑等级焉。
现代文：他又在唐宪宗面前放出五六十头蝇虎子，把它们分开站成队，让它们按梁州曲跳舞，完全符合曲子的节拍，唱到词的时候，殷殷有声，曲子唱完就一个接一个地退下去，好像有尊卑等级似的。
English: He also released fifty or sixty fly tigers in front of Tang Xianzong, separated them and stood in a line, and let them dance according to the Liangzhou melody, completely in line with the rhythm of the melody. When the words were sung, there was a loud cheer, and after the melody was sung, they retreated one by one, as if there was a hierarchy.

古文：帝大悦，赐金帛加等，志和一出宫门，尽施散他人。
现代文：唐宪宗很高兴，重赏他金钱和丝绸，志和一出宫门，就全把它施舍给别人。
English: Tang Xianzong was very pleased, rewarded him with money and silk, and as soon as Zhihe left the palace, he gave it all to others.

古文：后忽失之。
现代文：后来忽然不知他哪里去了。
English: Then all of a sudden I didn't know where he was.

古文：张辞
现代文：张辞
English: Resignation

古文：咸通初，有进士张辞，下第后，多游淮海间，颇有道术。常养气绝粒，好酒耽棋。
现代文：咸通初年，有个进士叫张辞，考试下第，以后经常到淮海一带去游历，很有道术，平时养气，不吃五谷，喜欢饮酒迷恋下棋。
English: In the first year of Hamdang Tong, there was a new recruit named Zhang Ji, who got the first place in the exam. Later, he often went to the Huaihai area to travel. He was very good at Taoism, usually raised his spirits, did not eat grains, liked drinking and was obsessed with playing chess.

古文：鄙人以炉火药术为事，一旦睹之，乃大哂，命笔题其壁云： 争那金乌何，头上飞不住。
现代文：有个住在郊野的人把修炼丹药当作大事，有一天被张辞看到了，就把那人大大讥笑了一番，他提笔在人家墙壁上题了一首诗说： 争那金乌何，头上飞不住。
English: A man who lived in the countryside regarded the cultivation of herbal medicine as an important matter. One day, when he saw Zhang Qui, he ridiculed the man greatly. He took a pen and inscribed a poem on the wall of someone's house, saying: "Fight for the gold, you can't fly over your head."

古文：红炉漫烧药，玉颜安可驻。
现代文：红炉漫烧药，玉颜安可驻。
English: The red furnace burns incense, and the jade is safe.

古文：今年花发枝，明年叶落树。
现代文：今年花发枝，明年叶落树。
English: This year's flowers and branches, next year's leaves fall.

古文：不如且饮酒，朝暮复朝暮。 
现代文：不如且饮酒，朝暮复朝暮。 
English: If you drink alcohol, it will be morning after morning after morning.

古文：人咸异之。
现代文：人们都觉得这事奇异。
English: People were also very surprised by this.

古文：性不喜装饰，多历旗亭，好酒故也。
现代文：张辞本性不喜欢打扮自己，常光顾酒肆这是因为他好酒的缘故。
English: Zhang Ji by nature does not like to dress up, and often frequents liquor stores because of his affinity for wine.

古文：或人召饮，若合意，则索纸剪蛱蝶二三十枚，以气吹之，成列而飞，如此累刻，以指收之，俄皆在手。
现代文：有人请他饮酒，如果他满意，就用纸剪二三十枚蝴蝶，用气一吹，这些蝴蝶就成排地飞，这样过了很长时间，他就用手指去把它们回收回来，不一会儿都收在手上。
English: Someone would offer him alcohol, and if he was satisfied, he would cut twenty or thirty butterflies out of paper. With a puff of air, these butterflies would fly in rows, and after a long time, he would use his fingers to collect them, and soon they would all be in his hands.

古文：见者求之，即以他事为阻。
现代文：见到这个法术的人请求向他学习，他就用别的事推辞。
English: When people who saw the spell asked to learn from him, he used other excuses.

古文：尝游监城，多为酒困，非类辈欲乘其酒而试之，相竞较力。
现代文：他曾经游过监城，多次被酒醉倒。一伙行为不端的人想趁他酒醉去试他，互相争着与他较量力气。
English: He had been in jail, he had been drunk many times, and a bunch of misbehaving people wanted to test him while he was drunk, competing with each other to see how strong he was.

古文：邑令偶见，系之。
现代文：县令偶然看见了，就把张辞等都抓起来。
English: The county magistrate happened to see it and arrested Zhang Rong and the others.

古文：既醒，乃课述德陈情诗二律以献令，令乃立释之。
现代文：张辞酒醒以后，就以述德陈情为内容写了二首诗去献给县令，县令就立刻把他释放了。
English: After Zhang Ji sobered up, he wrote two poems dedicated to the county magistrate, who immediately released him.

古文：所记一篇云： 门风常有蕙兰馨，鼎族家传霸国名。
现代文：所记得的一篇是这样写的： 门风常有蕙兰馨，鼎族家传霸国名。
English: One of the articles I remember was written like this: "Lilies of the valley are often popular, and the Ding family is said to rule the country."

古文：容貌静悬秋月彩，文章高振海涛声。
现代文：容貌静悬秋月彩，文章高振海涛声。
English: Appearance quietly hangs the autumn moon, article high vibration sea waves.

古文：讼堂无事调琴轸，郡阁何妨醉玉觥。
现代文：讼堂无事调琴轸，郡阁何妨醉玉觥。
English: The court of public opinion has nothing to do with the tuning of the gong, and the county hall is as drunk as a skunk.

古文：今日东渐桥下水，一条从此镇常清。 
现代文：今日东渐桥下水，一条从此镇常清。 
English: Today, Dongzhan Bridge was launched into the water, and the town of Changqing has been clear ever since.

古文：自后邑宰多张之才，次求其道，日夕延接，欲传其术。
现代文：从此以后，县令很赞赏张辞的才华，接着又请求向他学道，早晨晚上还筵请招待他，想要让他传法术。
English: From then on, the county magistrate appreciated Zhang Ji's talent, then asked him to learn from him, and invited him in the morning and evening to teach him magic.

古文：张以明府勋贵家流，年少而宰剧邑，多声色狗马之求，未暇志味玄奥，因赠诗以开其意云： 何用梯媒向外求，长生只合内中修。
现代文：张辞认为县令是贵家子弟，年纪轻轻就做大县县令，经常追求声色狗马，顾不上刻苦钻研道家奥妙，于是赠诗来开启他的志趣，诗中写道： 何用梯媒向外求，长生只合内中修。
English: Zhang Ci thought that the county magistrate was the son of a noble family. He became the county magistrate at a young age. He often pursued the sound and color of dogs and horses. He did not care about diligently studying the mysteries of Taoism, so he gave a poem to open his ambition. He wrote in the poem: Why use the ladder medium to seek outside, longevity only in the middle.

古文：莫言大道人难得，自是行心不到头。 
现代文：莫言大道人难得，自是行心不到头。 
English: Mo Yan is a rare person on the boulevard. He is not self-centered.

古文：他日将欲离去，乃书琴堂而别。
现代文：后来将要离去，就在琴堂书写一首诗来告别。
English: Later, when he was about to leave, he wrote a poem in the piano hall to say goodbye.

古文：后人多云江南上升。
现代文：后人普遍传说张辞在江南飞升成仙。
English: Later generations generally say that Zhang Ci rose to immortality in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：初去日，乘酒醉，因求片楮，剪二鹤于厅前，以水噀之，俄而翔翥。
现代文：张辞当初离去那天，乘着酒醉就要了一张纸，在厅前剪了两只鹤，用水喷了它们，不一会儿鹤就飞起来。
English: On the day of Zhang Ji's departure, he took advantage of his drunkenness to ask for a piece of paper, cut two cranes in front of the hall, sprayed them with water, and soon the cranes were flying.

古文：乃曰： 汝可先去，吾即后来。 
现代文：张辞就对鹤说： 你们可以先走，我随后就来。 
English: Zhang Qie said to the crane: You can go first, I will come later.

古文：时邑令亦醉，不暇拘留，张遂得去。
现代文：当时县令也喝醉了，来不及约束留下他，张辞终于能够离去。
English: At that time, the county magistrate was also drunk, and it was too late to restrain him, and Zhang Rong was finally able to leave.

古文：其所题云： 张辞张辞自不会，天下经书在腹内。
现代文：他所题写的诗是： 张辞张辞自不会，天下经书在腹内。
English: The poem he inscribed is: Zhang Qizhi Zhang Qizhi will not come from, the world's scripture is in the abdomen.

古文：身即腾腾处世间，心即逍遥出天外。 
现代文：身即腾腾处世间，心即逍遥出天外。 
English: When the body is in the world, the mind is out of the world.

古文：至今为江淮好事者所说。
现代文：这事至今还被江淮一带好事的人所传说。
English: This story is still told to this day by people in the Jianghuai area.

古文：崔言
现代文：崔言
English: Cui Yan

古文：崔言者，隶职于左亲骑军。
现代文：崔言在左亲骑军中任职。
English: Cui Yan served in the Left Pro-Imperialist Cavalry.

古文：一旦得疾而目昏暗，咫尺不辨人物，眉发自落，鼻梁崩倒，肌肤生疮如疥。
现代文：有一天得了病，就眼前发黑，咫尺之间的人和物都分辨不清，眉毛和头发自行脱落，鼻梁塌陷。皮肤上生出像疥似的疮。
English: One day he fell ill, his eyes turned black, he couldn't distinguish between people and objects, his eyebrows and hair fell out on their own, the bridge of his nose collapsed, and he developed sores on his skin that looked like boils.

古文：皆目为恶疾，势不可救。
现代文：人们都把这病看作不治之症，看情势不能救活了。
English: People regard this disease as incurable, and cannot be saved.

古文：因为骆谷子午归寨使，遇一道流，自谷中出，不言姓名，受其方曰： 皂荚刺采一二升，烧之为灰。
现代文：因为崔言担任骆子午谷的归寨使，遇见一个道士从谷中出来，不说姓名，传给崔言一个药方，他说： 采一二升皂荚刺，把它烧成灰。
English: Because Cui Yan was acting as the returning envoy of Luo Zi Wu Valley, he met a Taoist who came out of the valley, without saying his name, and passed a prescription to Cui Yan. He said: Take one or two liters of saponin sting and burn it to ashes.

古文：大黄九蒸九曝，杵之为末。
现代文：把大黄蒸九次再晒干九次，然后把它捣成细末。
English: The rhubarb is steamed nine times, dried nine times and pounded into a fine powder.

古文：食上，浓煎大黄汤，以末七调而服之。 
现代文：饭前将皂荚刺灰、大黄末用匙调入大黄汤中，一齐服下。 
English: Before the meal, spoon the saponin prickly ash and rhubarb pulp into the rhubarb soup and serve together.

古文：旬日，须发再生，肌肤充润，所疾顿愈，眼明倍于寻常。
现代文：十天左右，崔言的胡子头发又重新长出来，肌肤充实有了光泽，所患疾病顿时痊愈了，眼睛比平时加倍明亮。
English: About ten days later, Cui Yan's beard and hair grew back, his skin became full and shiny, his illness was instantly cured, and his eyes were twice as bright as usual.

古文：道流传此方讫，却入山去。不知所之。
现代文：那个道士传完这个药方以后就回到山里去，不知到什么地方去了。
English: That Taoist went back to the mountains after passing on this prescription, and I don't know where he went.

