古文：海外自东南陬至东北陬者。
现代文：海外东经所记载的地方从东南角到东北角。
English: The places recorded by the Overseas Oriental Institute range from the southeast corner to the northeast corner.

古文：丘，爰有遗玉、青马、视肉、杨柳、甘华。
现代文：𨲠丘，这里有遗玉、青马、视肉怪兽、杨柳树、甘柤树、甘华树。
English: Muxiu Hill, there are relics of jade, blue horse, carnivorous monster, willow tree, camphor tree, camphor tree.

古文：甘果所生，在东海。
现代文：各种果实甜美的果树在此生长，它位于东海之中。
English: All kinds of sweet fruit trees grow here, it is located in the middle of the East Sea.

古文：两山夹丘，上有树木。
现代文：它的边上是两座山，中间是土山，上面长着树木。
English: On its edge are two mountains, in the middle is a mound of earth with trees growing on it.

古文：一曰嗟丘。
现代文：一说是嗟丘。
English: They say it's a cormorant hill.

古文：一曰百果所在，在尧葬东。
现代文：一说是各种果树生长的地方，位于帝尧所葬之地的东边。
English: It is said to be a place where all kinds of fruit trees grow. It is located to the east of the place where the emperor was buried.

古文：大人国在其北，为人大，坐而削船。
现代文：大人国在𨲠丘的北面，那里的人身材高大，正坐在船上撑船。
English: Grown-up country is to the north of Mule Hill, where a tall man is sitting on a boat, paddling.

古文：一曰在丘北。
现代文：另一种说法认为大人国在𨲠丘的北面。
English: Another view is that the adult country lies to the north of Mengqiu.

古文：奢比尸在其北，兽身、人面、大耳，珥两青蛇。
现代文：奢比尸在大人国的北面，那里的人都长着野兽的身子、人的面孔、大大的耳朵，耳朵上穿挂着两条青蛇。
English: It is in the north of the great country, where people have the bodies of beasts, human faces, big ears, and two blue snakes hanging from their ears.

古文：一曰肝榆之尸在大人北。
现代文：另一种说法认为肝榆尸在大人国的北面。
English: Another theory is that the liver corpse was found in the north of the adult country.

古文：君子国在其北，衣冠带剑，食兽，使二大虎在旁，其人好让不争。
现代文：君子国在奢比尸所在之地的北面，那里的人衣帽整齐，身上佩着剑，吃野兽肉，驱使两只有斑纹的虎，喜欢谦让而不争斗。
English: The country of the nobles is to the north of the place where Shambi's body is. The people there are neatly dressed, wear swords, eat wild animal meat, drive two striped tigers, and prefer to be humble rather than fight.

古文：有薰华草，朝生夕死。
现代文：那里有一种薰华草，早晨开花傍晚凋谢。
English: There is a kind of lavender that blooms in the morning and fades in the evening.

古文：一曰在肝榆之尸北
现代文：另一种说法认为君子国在肝榆尸所在之地的北面。
English: Another theory is that the gentleman's country is in the north of the place where the liver zombie is located.

古文：𧈫𧈫在其北，各有两首。
现代文：𧈫𧈫在君子国的北边，每条虹都有两个脑袋。
English: In the north of the gentleman's country, every rainbow has two heads.

古文：一曰在君子国北。
现代文：一说在君子国的北面。
English: It is said to be in the north of the gentleman's country.

古文：朝阳之谷，神曰天吴，是为水伯。
现代文：朝阳谷，有一个神人叫做天吴，就是所谓水神。
English: In the Chaoyang Valley, there is a godman called Tianwu, the so-called water god.

古文：在𧈫北两水间。
现代文：他住在𧈫北面的两条水流中间。
English: He lives in the middle of two streams on the north side of the reeds.

古文：其为兽也，八首人面，八足八尾，皆青黄。
现代文：他是野兽形状，长着八个脑袋而是人的脸面，八只爪子八条尾巴，背部是青中带黄的颜色。
English: He is beast-shaped, with eight heads but a human face, eight paws, eight tails, and a blue-yellow back.

古文：青丘国在其北，其狐四足九尾。
现代文：青丘国在朝阳谷的北面。那里有一种狐狸，长着四条腿和九条尾巴。
English: Qingqiu country is in the north of Chaoyang Valley. There is a fox with four legs and nine tails.

古文：一曰在朝阳北。
现代文：另一种说法认为青丘国在朝阳谷的北面。
English: Another view is that Qingqiu is in the north of Chaoyang Valley.

古文：帝命竖亥步，自东极至于西极，五亿十选九千八百步。
现代文：天帝命令竖亥用脚步测量大地，从最东边到最西边，一共为五亿零十万九千八百步。
English: The Heavenly Emperor ordered the boar to measure the earth with his footsteps, from the easternmost to the westernmost, for a total of five hundred million one hundred and ninety-nine thousand eight hundred steps.

古文：竖亥右手把算，左手指青丘北。
现代文：竖亥右手拿着算筹，左手指着青丘国的北边。
English: In his right hand, the boar is holding an abacus. In his left hand, he is pointing to the northern part of Qingqiu.

古文：一曰禹令竖亥。
现代文：一说是禹命令竖亥用脚步测量大地。
English: It is said that Yu ordered the boar to measure the land with his footsteps.

古文：一曰五亿十万九千八百步。
现代文：一说为五亿零十万九千八百步。
English: One says it's five hundred million, one hundred and ninety-nine thousand, eight hundred steps.

古文：黑齿国在其北，为人黑，食稻啖蛇，一赤一青，在其旁。
现代文：黑齿国在竖亥所处之地的北面，那里的人牙齿漆黑，吃稻米和蛇，有一红一青两条蛇伴在身边。
English: The country of the black teeth is in the north of the land where the boar lives. The people there have black teeth, eat rice and snakes, and have a red and a blue snake by their side.

古文：一曰在竖亥北，为人黑首，食稻使蛇，其一蛇赤。
现代文：另一种说法认为黑齿国在竖亥所在地的北面，那里的人是黑脑袋，吃着稻米驱使着蛇，其中一条蛇是红色的。
English: Another theory is that the Blacktooth country is to the north of the location of the boar, where the people are black-headed, eating rice and driving snakes, one of which is red.

古文：下有汤谷。
现代文：黑齿国的下面是汤谷。
English: Below the Black Tooth Country is the Yangtze Valley.

古文：汤谷上有扶桑，十日所浴，在黑齿北。
现代文：汤谷边上有一棵扶桑树，那里是十个太阳洗澡的地方，在黑齿国的北面。
English: There is a fusang tree on the edge of the soup valley, where ten suns bathe, in the north of the Black Tooth Country.

古文：居水中，有大木，九日居下枝，一日居上枝。
现代文：水的中间有一棵高大的树木，下面的树枝上住着九个太阳，上面的树枝住着一个太阳。
English: In the middle of the water, there was a tall tree. Nine suns lived on the lower branches, and one sun lived on the upper branches.

古文：雨师妾在其北。
现代文：雨师妾国在汤谷的北面。
English: The country of the rainmaker's concubine is in the north of the valley.

古文：其为人黑，两手各操一蛇，左耳有青蛇，右耳有赤蛇。
现代文：那里的人皮肤是黑色的，两只手各握着一条蛇，左边耳朵上挂有青色蛇，右边耳朵挂有红色蛇。
English: The people there have black skin and hold a snake in each hand. A blue snake hangs from the left ear and a red snake hangs from the right ear.

古文：一曰在十日北，为人黑身人面，各操一龟。
现代文：另一种说法认为雨师妾国在十个太阳所在地的北面，那里的人是黑色身子而人的面孔，两只手各握着一只龟。
English: Another theory is that the Rain Master's concubine country is in the north of the ten suns, where the people are black and human-faced, holding a turtle in each hand.

古文：玄股之国在其北。
现代文：玄股国在雨师妾的北面。
English: Xuanzang Province is in the north of the mistress of the rain.

古文：其为人衣鱼食，使两鸟夹之。
现代文：那里的人穿着鱼皮做的衣服，以鸥鸟为食，身边一左一右有两只鸟相随。
English: The people there wear clothes made of fish skin, eat ostriches, and have two birds following them, one to the left and one to the right.

古文：一曰在雨师妾北。
现代文：另一种说法认为玄股国在雨师妾国的北面。
English: Another view holds that the country of the Genzai is to the north of the country of the Mistress of Rain.

古文：毛民之国在其北，为人身生毛。
现代文：毛民国在玄股国的北面。那里的人全身长满了毛。
English: Mao's Republic is to the north of Xuanquan, and the people there are covered in hair.

古文：一曰在玄股北。
现代文：另一种说法认为毛民国在玄股国的北面。
English: Another theory holds that the Republic of Mao is to the north of the country of Xuanzang.

古文：劳民国在其北，其为人黑。
现代文：劳民国在毛民国的北边，这个国家的人长得很黑。
English: Lao People's Republic is in the north of Mao's Republic, and the people of this country are very dark-skinned.

古文：或曰教民。
现代文：有人说是教民国。
English: Some say it is because of the country's religion.

古文：一曰在毛民北，为人面目手足尽黑。
现代文：一说劳民国在毛民国的北边，那里的人面部、眼睛、手和脚都是黑色的。
English: They said that the Lao People's Republic is in the north of the Mao People's Republic, and the people there have black faces, eyes, hands and feet.

古文：东方句芒，鸟身人面，乘两龙。
现代文：东方的句芒神，长着鸟的身子人的面孔，乘着两条龙。
English: In the East, the god Meng, with the body of a bird and the face of a man, rides on two dragons.

