古文：西王母上元夫人云华夫人玄天二女
现代文：西王母上元夫人云华夫人玄天二女
English: Xi Wang's mother's former wife, Lady Yunhua, and the two daughters of Xuan Tian

古文：西王母
现代文：西王母
English: West Queen Mother

古文：西王母者，九灵太妙龟山金母也，一号太虚九光龟台金母元君。
现代文：西王母，就是九灵太妙龟山金母，还有一个号是太虚九光龟台金母之君。
English: Xi Wangmu is the golden mother of Jiuling Taimiao Turtle Mountain, and there is also a number that is the king of the golden mother of Taiyuan Taimiao Turtle Mountain.

古文：乃西华之至妙，洞阴之极尊。
现代文：她是西华的至妙，洞阴的极尊。
English: She is the epitome of the West, the supreme of the East.

古文：在昔道气凝寂，湛体无为，将欲启迪玄功，化生万物。
现代文：在从前道气沉寂，湛体无为，将要启迪玄功，使万物滋生。
English: In the past, the spirit was silent, and the body was inactive. It will enlighten the secret power, and make all things grow.

古文：先以东华至真之气，化而生木公。
现代文：就先用东华至真之气，变化而生木公。
English: He first used the spirit of East China to the truth, and changed it into wood.

古文：木公生于碧海之上，芬灵之墟，以主阳和之气。
现代文：木公生于碧海之上芳灵的土山，而主管阳和之气。
English: Mokong was born on the blue sea on the fragrant soil of the mountains, and is in charge of the yang and the wind.

古文：理于东方，亦号曰东王公焉。又以西华至妙之气，化而生金母。
现代文：管理东方，也称为东王公。又用西华至妙之气，变化而生金母。
English: Managing the East, also known as the King of the East, and using Xihua's exquisite air, changes and creates gold mother.

古文：金母生于神州伊川，厥姓侯氏，生而飞翔，以主元，毓神玄奥。
现代文：金母在神州伊川诞生，她姓侯，生来就能飞翔，而主宰本源，养育玄奥神灵。
English: Kimmo was born in Ikawa, Shinshu. Her last name is Hou. She was born with the ability to fly, and she dominates the Source, nurturing the gods of the Mysteries.

古文：于聅莽之中，分大道醇精之气，结气成形。
现代文：在迷茫之中分出大道醇精之气，使气聚结成形。
English: In the confusion, the avenue alcohol essence gas is separated, and the gas agglomeration is formed.

古文：与东王公共理二气，而育养天地，陶钧万物矣。
现代文：西王母与东王公共同调和二气，而育养天地造就万物。
English: The Western Queen Mother and the Eastern King jointly harmonize the two spirits, and nurture heaven and earth to create all things.

古文：柔顺之本，为极阴之元，位配西方，母养群品。
现代文：柔顺的根本也就是是极阴的初始，位配西方，生养众类。
English: The soft and smooth root is also the beginning of the extreme yin, which is aligned with the west and gives rise to many kinds of crows.

古文：天上天下，三界十方，女子之登仙者得道者，咸所隶焉。
现代文：天上天下，三界十方，凡女子登仙得道的人，都隶属西王母管辖。
English: All over the world, in the three realms and ten directions, all women who have ascended to the realm of immortality are under the jurisdiction of the West Queen Mother.

古文：所居宫阙，在龟山春山西那之都，昆仑之圃。阆风之苑。
现代文：她所居住的宫阙，在龟山春山西那之都，昆仑之圃，阆风之苑。
English: The palace where she lived is located in the capital of Kameyama, Shunsan, Shina, the garden of Kunlun, and the garden of Feng.

古文：有城千里、玉楼十二，琼华之阙、光碧之堂、九层玄室、紫翠丹房。
现代文：有城千里、十二座玉楼，以及琼华之阙、光碧之堂、九层玄室和紫翠丹房。
English: There are a thousand li in the city, twelve jade towers, as well as Qionghua's tower, Guangbi's hall, nine-storey backroom and purple and turquoise room.

古文：左带瑶池、右环翠水。
现代文：左边瑶池如带，右边翠水环绕。
English: The left side of the pond is dotted with reeds, while the right side is surrounded by green water.

古文：其山之下，弱水九重。洪涛万丈。
现代文：那座山下，弱水九重，洪涛万丈。
English: Beneath that mountain, there are nine levels of shallow water and a thousand levels of high water.

古文：非飚车羽轮，不可到也。
现代文：如果不乘飚车羽轮，就不可能到达。
English: If you don't take the tuk-tuk, you can't get there.

古文：所谓玉阙暨天，绿台承霄。
现代文：这就是所说的玉阙直至上天，绿台承接霄汉。
English: This is the so-called "Jade Dragon" until the sky, the green platform takes over the hero.

古文：青琳之宇，朱紫之房，连琳彩帐，明月四朗。
现代文：那芒玉般的屋檐，朱紫色的房屋，连着青碧色的彩帐，明月照耀四方。
English: The pomegranate-like eaves, the vermilion-colored houses, together with the azure-colored painted shutters, the bright moon shines in all directions.

古文：戴华胜，佩虎章，左侍仙女，右侍羽童。
现代文：戴着华美的首饰，佩着虎形花纹，左边站着仙女，右边站着羽童。
English: Wearing gorgeous jewelry, wearing a tiger pattern, on the left stands a fairy, on the right stands a feathered child.

古文：宝盖沓映，羽掺荫庭。
现代文：众多宝饰车盖互相映照，仙女拿的羽扇遮住了庭院。
English: Many jeweled car covers reflect each other, and a feather fan held by a fairy covers the courtyard.

古文：轩砌之下，植以白环之树，丹刚之林，空青万条，瑶干千寻，无风而神籁自韵，琅琅然皆九奏八会之音也。
现代文：栏于台阶之下，种着白环树，形成丹刚之林，空中青枝万条，美玉般的树干高达千寻，无风而如神箫自然成韵，响亮的声音都是九奏八会之音。
English: The column is under the steps, planted with white-ringed trees, forming a forest of Dangang, thousands of green branches in the air, the trunk of the tree is as high as Chihiro, and there is no wind, and it rhymes naturally like a shrine. The loud sounds are the sounds of the nine-play eight-party.

古文：神州在昆仑之东南，故尔雅云： 西王母目下是矣。 
现代文：神州在昆仑的东南，所以《尔雅》上说： 西王母眼皮底下就是。 
English: Shenzhou is in the southeast of Kunlun, so "Lya" said: it is right under the eyes of the Western Queen.

古文：又云： 王母蓬发，戴华胜。
现代文：又说：王母蓬松着头发，戴着华美的首饰。
English: He also said: "The Queen Mother wore her hair in loose waves and wore beautiful jewellery.

古文：虎齿善啸者，此乃王母之使，金方白虎之神，非王母之真形也。
现代文：长着虎牙善于长啸的，这是王母的使者，西方白虎神，不是王母的真形。
English: This is the messenger of the Queen Mother, the Western White Tiger God, who has tiger's teeth and is good at howling. This is not the true form of the Queen Mother.

古文：元始天王授以方天元统龟山九光之箓，使制召万灵，统括真圣，监盟证信，总诸天之羽仪。
现代文：元始天王给她方天元统龟山九光的道家秘文，让她控制召集各种生灵，统领真人圣人，监督盟誓验证凭证，总管天下羽仪。
English: Yuanshi Tianwang gave her the secret of the Taoist families of Fang Tianyuan, Guishan and Juguang, and let her control the summoning of all kinds of beings, command the real saints, supervise the oath verification certificates, and be in charge of the world feather ceremony.

古文：天尊上圣，朝晏之会，考校之所，王母皆临诀焉。
现代文：天尊上圣，朝宴之会，考校之所，王母都能来去那里。
English: The temple of heaven, the morning banquet, the examination hall, and the queen mother can all come and go there.

古文：上清宝经，三洞玉书，凡有授度，咸所关预也。
现代文：上清的宝经，三洞的玉书，凡授教度引之事，全是她所关涉参与的范围。
English: The treasure sutra of the Shang and Qing dynasties, the jade book of the Three Kingdoms, and all matters related to teaching and learning are all within the scope of her involvement.

古文：黄帝讨蚩尤之暴，威所未禁，而蚩尤幻变多方，征风召雨，吹烟喷雾，师众大迷。
现代文：黄帝征讨残暴的蚩尤，威力不能禁锢他，而且蚩尤又会多方幻变，征风召雨，吹烟喷雾，因而黄帝的军队大受迷惑。
English: The Yellow Emperor conscripted the brutal Qiu You. His power could not restrain him, and Qiu You would change in many ways, summoning wind and rain, and blowing smoke and spray. As a result, the Yellow Emperor's army was greatly confused.

古文：帝归息太山之阿，昏然忧寝。
现代文：黄帝回到太山休息迷迷糊糊地忧虑着躺着。
English: The Yellow Emperor went back to Taishan to rest, and lay there in a daze of worry.

古文：王母遣使者，被玄狐之裘，以符授帝曰： 太一在前，天一在后，得之者胜，战则克矣。 
现代文：王母派使者披着黑色狐皮大衣，把一张符交给黄帝，这个使者说： 太一在前，天一在后，得到它的人就能胜利，作战就能打败敌人了。 
English: The Queen Mother sent an emissary dressed in a black fox-skin coat to give a token to the Yellow Emperor. The emissary said: "The mother is in front, the day is behind. Whoever gets it will be able to win, and will be able to defeat the enemy in battle."

古文：符广三寸，长一尺，青莹如玉，丹血为文。
现代文：符宽三寸，长一尺，青光晶莹像玉一样，用丹血写的字。
English: Characters three inches wide, one foot long, crystal clear like jade, written in blood.

古文：佩符既毕，王母乃命一妇人，人首鸟身，谓帝曰： 我九天玄女也。 
现代文：黄帝把符佩带完以后，王母就命一个妇人，这个妇人长着人的脑袋鸟的身子，她对黄帝说： 我是九天玄女呀。 
English: After the Yellow Emperor had finished wearing the amulet, the Queen Mother sent for a woman with the head of a human and the body of a bird. She said to the Yellow Emperor, "I am a nine-day-old maiden.

古文：授帝以三宫五意阴阳之略，太一遁甲六壬步斗之术，阴符之机，灵宝五符五胜之文。
现代文：她又把三宫五意阴之略，太一遁甲六壬步斗之术，阴符之机，以及灵宝五符五胜之文，全都传给黄帝。
English: She also passed on to the Yellow Emperor the strategy of the Three Palaces, the Five Meanings and the Yin, the art of Tai-Yi-Kang-Kang-Liu-Ren-Bu-Dou, the art of Yin symbols, as well as the five treasures, five symbols and five victories.

古文：遂克蚩尤于中冀，剪神农之后，诛榆罔于阪泉，天下大定，都于上谷之涿鹿。
现代文：黄帝就在冀中战胜了蚩尤，剪除了神农之后，又在阪泉杀了榆罔，天下大定，在上谷的涿鹿建都。
English: The Yellow Emperor defeated Qiu You in Jizhong, and after cutting out Shennong, he killed Zhai in Hanquan, and the world was settled, and the capital was built in Elk in Shangguan.

古文：又数年，王母遣使白虎之神，乘白鹿，集于帝庭，授以地图。
现代文：又过了几年，王母又派白虎神为使者，乘着白鹿，停留在黄帝的庭院中，授给他地图。
English: A few years later, the Queen Mother sent the White Tiger God as a messenger, riding a white deer, to stay in the Yellow Emperor's courtyard and give him a map.

古文：其后虞舜摄位，王母遣使授舜白玉环。
现代文：其后虞舜代理国政，王母又派使者授给舜白玉环。
English: After that, the queen mother sent an emissary to confer the ring of white jade on him.

古文：舜即位，又授益地图，遂广黄帝之九州为十有二州。
现代文：舜即位，王母又给他增加地图，于是舜比黄帝时的九州扩大到十二州。
English: When he ascended the throne, the Queen Mother gave him an additional map, so he expanded Kyushu to twelve states compared to the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：王母又遣使献舜白玉琯，吹之以和八风。《尚书》帝验期曰： 王母之国在西荒也。 
现代文：王母又派使者献给舜白玉珪，吹它而和八风，《尚书》帝验期说： 王母之国在西方。 
English: The Queen Mother also sent an envoy to dedicate the White Jade Dragonfly, blowing it and the eight winds. "Shang Shu" said during the imperial examination period: The Queen Mother's country is in the West.

古文：昔茅盈字叔申；王褒字子登；张道陵字辅汉，洎九圣七真，凡得道授书者，皆朝王母于昆陵之阙焉。
现代文：从前，有个茅盈，字叫叔申；有个王褒，字叫子登；有个张道陵，字叫辅汉，及九圣七真，凡是得道授书的，都到昆仑山宫阙去朝拜王母。
English: Once upon a time, there was a Mao Ying, called Shu Shin; a Wang Bo, called Zidon; a Zhang Daoling, called Fu Han; and the Nine Holy Seven Immortals. All of them who had received Taoist teachings went to the Kunlun Mountain Palace to worship the Queen Mother.

古文：时叔申、道陵侍太上道君，乘九盖之车，控飞虬之轨，越积石之峰，济弱流之津，浮白水，凌黑波，顾盼倏忽，诣王母于阙下。
现代文：当时叔申、道陵侍奉太上道君，乘着九盖之车，驾驭着无角龙，越过积石的山峰，渡过微微细流的河津，浮于白水，凌于黑波，转眼之间来到宫阙之下，拜见王母。
English: At that time, Shushin and Dorying served the Grand Empress Dowager Dojun. They rode in a nine-deck carriage and drove a hornless dragon. They crossed the rocky mountain peaks, crossed the river with a fine current, floated on the white water and over the black waves, and came under the palace moat in the blink of an eye to visit the Queen Mother.

古文：子登清斋三月，王母授以《琼华宝曜七晨素经》。
现代文：王子登吃了三个月清斋，王母授给他《琼华宝曜七晨素经》。
English: Prince Deng fasted for three months, and the Queen Mother gave him the "Qiong Hua Bao Yang Qi Chen Su Jing."

古文：茅君从西城王君诣白玉龟台，朝谒王母，求长生之道。
现代文：茅盈从西城王君那里来到白玉龟台，朝拜西王母，求长生之道。
English: From Xicheng Wangjun, Mao Ying came to Shiudamugetai to worship Xi Wangmu and seek the way of eternal life.

古文：曰： 盈以不肖之躯，慕龙凤之年，欲以朝菌之脆，求积朔之期。 
现代文：他说： 我以不肖的躯体，渴求龙凤之寿，想要凭借朝菌般脆弱的身体，求得积日累日之期。
English: He said, "With my unshapely body, I yearn for longevity. I want to use my body, which is as fragile as an aspergillus, to accumulate days and days.

古文：王母愍其勤志，告之曰： 吾昔师元始天王及皇天扶桑帝君，授我以玉佩金珰二景缠炼之道，上行太极，下造十方，溉月咀日入天门，名曰玄真之经。
现代文：王母可怜他为志向而努力，告诉他说： 我从前的老师元始天王以及扶桑帝君，把《玉佩金珰二景缠炼之道》传授给我，上行太极，下到十方，喝月嚼日入天门，名叫玄真之经。
English: The Queen Mother took pity on him and told him: "My former teachers, the First Heavenly King and Emperor Fusang, taught me "The Way of the Jade and the Gold and the Two Landscapes," and I went up to the Taiji, down to the Ten directions, drank the moon, chewed the sun, and entered the heavenly gate. It is called the Sutra of the Unreal."

古文：今以授尔，宜勤修焉。
现代文：现在我把它传授给你，你应当勤修它。
English: Now that I have taught it to you, you should diligently practice it.

古文：因敕西城王君，一一解释以授焉。
现代文：于是命令王城王君，一一解释而传授给茅盈。
English: So he ordered Wangcheng Wangjun to explain it one by one and pass it on to Mao Ying.

古文：又周穆王时，命八骏与七华之士，使造父为御，西登昆仑，而宾于王母。
现代文：还有周穆王时，命八骏与七华之士，让造父当车夫，向西登上昆仑，而在王母那里作客。
English: There was also the time of King Zhou Mu, when he ordered the Eight Immortals and the Seven Immortals to make their father a coachman and travel westward to Kunlun, where they would stay with the Queen Mother.

古文：穆王持白珪重锦，以为王母寿，本具周穆王传。
现代文：周穆王拿出白珪和重锦，用它给王母作寿礼。这事在周穆王传中有叙述。
English: King Zhou Mu took out the egret and heavy brocade and used it to make a birthday gift to the queen mother. This is described in the biography of King Zhou Mu.

古文：至汉武帝元封元年七月七日夜，降于汉宫。
现代文：到了汉武帝元封元年七月七日夜，王母又降于汉宫。
English: On the evening of July 7th, the first year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, the Queen Mother was relegated to the Han Palace.

古文：语在汉武帝传内，此不复载焉。
现代文：记载在汉武帝传内，这里就不重复记载它了。
English: It is recorded in the biography of Emperor Hanwu, so it will not be repeated here.

古文：上元夫人
现代文：上元夫人
English: Mrs. Uemoto

古文：上元夫人，道君弟子也。
现代文：上元夫人，是道君的弟子。
English: Mrs. Kamimoto is a disciple of Michikun.

古文：亦玄古以来得道，总统真籍，亚于龟台金母。
现代文：她也是上古以来得道，总领真籍，仅次于龟台金母。
English: She is also a practitioner of Taoism since ancient times. She is second only to Guetai Jinniu in terms of having a real family name.

古文：新降之处多使侍女相闻，己为宾侣焉。
现代文：她所降临之处，经常派使女去告诉，自己到那里作客。
English: She would often send her maids to tell her where she was going as a guest.

古文：汉孝武皇帝好神仙之道，祷醮名山，以求灵应。
现代文：汉孝武皇帝爱好神仙之道，到名山祭祀祈祷以求灵应。
English: Emperor Han Xiaowu loved the way of the immortals and went to the famous mountain to worship and pray for inspiration.

古文：元封元年辛未七月七日夜，二唱之后，西王母降于汉宫。
现代文：元封元年即辛未年七月七日夜里，二更之后，西王母降临到汉宫。
English: On the night of July 7th in the first year of the Yuan dynasty, that is, in the year of Xinwei, two years later, the West Queen Mother came to the Han Palace.

古文：帝迎拜稽首，侍立久之。
现代文：汉武帝迎接拜见行了稽首礼，在王母身旁站了很久。
English: Emperor Hanwu welcomed the visit with a ceremonial bow and stood next to the Queen Mother for a long time.

古文：王母呼帝令坐，食以天厨，筵宴粗悉，命驾将去。
现代文：王母唤汉武帝让他坐下，把天厨食品赏给他吃，筵席安排粗略齐全，王母让备车将要回去。
English: The Queen Mother called for Emperor Han Wuding to sit down, and gave him the food from the Heavenly Kitchen to eat. The banquet was roughly arranged, and the Queen Mother had the carriage ready to go back.

古文：帝下席叩头，请留殷勤，王母复坐。
现代文：汉武帝离席叩头，诚恳地请她留下。王母又坐了下来。
English: Emperor Hanwu bowed his head and sincerely asked her to stay. The Queen Mother sat down again.

古文：乃命侍女郭密香，邀夫人同宴于汉宫。
现代文：于是王母就命侍女郭密香，邀请上元夫人同宴于汉宫。
English: So the Queen Mother ordered her maid, Guo Mixiang, to invite Lady Shangyuan to a banquet at the Han Palace.

古文：语在汉武帝传中。
现代文：这事记载在汉武帝传中。
English: This event is recorded in the biography of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：其后汉宣帝地节四年乙卯，咸阳茅盈字叔申，受黄金九锡之命，为东岳上卿司命真君太元真人。
现代文：其后，汉宣帝地节四年乙卯，咸阳有个茅盈字叫叔申，受到皇帝黄金九锡之命，作了东岳上卿、司命真君、太元真人。
English: After that, in the fourth year of the Han Xuan Emperor's Land Festival, Xianyang had a Maoying character called Shushen, who was ordered by Emperor Guanzhong and Juxi to become Dongyue Shangqing, Simin Zhenjun, and Taiyuan Zhenren.

古文：是时五帝君授册既毕，各升天而去。
现代文：这时五位帝君授给文书完毕，各自升天而去。
English: At this time, the five emperors finished conferring the document, and each ascended to heaven.

古文：茅君之师乃总真王君，西灵王母与夫人，降于句曲之山金坛之陵华阳天宫，以宴茅君焉。
现代文：茅盈之师就是总真王君。西王母与夫人，降临于勾曲山金坛陵上的华阳天宫，来与茅盈聚会。
English: Mao Ying's teacher was King Chaozhen. The West King's mother and his wife came to the Huayang Heavenly Palace on the Golden Altar Mausoleum of the Crooked Mountain to meet with Mao Ying.

古文：时茅君中君名固，字季佛，小君名衷，字思和，王母王君授以灵诀，亦受锡命紫素之册，固为定录君，衷为保命君，亦侍贞会。
现代文：当时茅盈的中君名固，字季佛，小君名衷，字思和，王母王君授给灵诀，也受赐命紫素之册，茅固为定录君，茅衷为保命君，也在宴会作陪。
English: At that time, Mao Ying's middle son, Nagao, was called Jifo, and his younger son, Natsuchin, was called Sihwa. The king's mother, Wang Wangjun, gave him the secret, and he was also given the order of the Book of Violets. Mao Ying was called Ding Luo Jun, and Maochin was called Guoyu Jun, and they also accompanied each other at the banquet.

古文：王君告二君曰： 夫人乃三天真皇之母，上元之高尊。
现代文：王君告诉二人说： 夫人乃是三天真皇之母，上元的高尊。
English: Wang Jun told the two, "My wife is the mother of the three-day true emperor, Shangyuan Gaozun.

古文：统领十方玉女之籍，汝可自陈。 
现代文：统领十方玉女的名籍，你们可以自己陈请。 
English: You can ask for the name of the leader of the Jifang Ladies.

古文：二君下席再拜，求乞长生之要。
现代文： 二人离席拜了又拜，讨求长生不老的要诀。
English: The two left the table and prayed again and again, seeking the secret of eternal life.

古文：夫人悯其勤志，命侍女宋辟非出紫锦之囊，开绿金之笈，以《三元流珠经》、《丹景道精经》、《隐地八术经》、《太极缘景经》凡四部，以授二君。
现代文：夫人被他们殷勤之志所感动，就命侍女宋辟非拿出紫锦囊，打开绿金书箱，把《三元流珠经》、《丹景道精经》、《隐地八术经》、《太极缘景经》共四部书，给了二人。
English: Moved by their diligence, Mrs. Song ordered her maid, Song Qifu, to take out the purple brocade bag, open the green gold bookcase, and give the two a total of four books, including the "Three Elements of the Pearl Sutra," the "Precious Sutra of the Dangjing Path," the "Hidden World of the Eight Qigong Sutras," and the "Taiji Yuejing Sutra."

古文：王母复敕侍女李方明，出丹瑶之函，披云殊之笈，出《玉佩金瑞经》、《太霄隐书经》、《洞飞二景内书》，传司命君。
现代文：王母又命侍女李方明，拿出丹琼匣子，打开云珠书籍，拿出《玉佩金瑞经》、《太霄隐书经》、《洞飞二景内书》，传司命君。
English: The Queen Mother also ordered her maid Li Fangming to take out Dan Qiong's box, open the books, and take out "Jade Pei Jinrui Sutra," "Tai Xiao Yin Sutra," "Dongfei Two Scenes Inside the Book," and the biography of the king.

古文：各授书毕，王母与夫人告去，千乘万骑，升还太空矣。
现代文：各授书完毕，王母与夫人告辞离去，带着千车万马升天返回太空。
English: After each book presentation, the Queen Mother and her wife said goodbye and left, returning to space with thousands of horses and chariots.

古文：云华夫人
现代文：云华夫人
English: Mrs. Yunhua

古文：云华夫人，王母第二十三女，太真王夫人之妹也。
现代文：云华夫人，是王母第二十三个女儿，太真王夫人的妹妹，名叫瑶姬。
English: Lady Yunhua was the 23rd daughter of the Queen Mother and the sister of Lady Taizhen Wang. Her name was Yan Ji.

古文：名瑶姬，受徊风混合万景炼神飞化之道。
现代文：她接受的是 徊风混合万景炼神飞化 的道术。
English: She accepted the Daoism of wandering wind mixed with a thousand sceneries to make the spirit fly.

古文：尝东海游还，过江上，有巫山焉，峰岩挺拔，林壑幽丽，巨石如坛，留连久之。
现代文：曾经从东海云游归来，经过长江之上，岸上有座巫山，那里峰岩挺拔，林壑幽美，巨石如坛，她在那里滞留很久。
English: Once, after returning from a trip to the East China Sea, she passed over the Yangtze River. On the bank of the river, there was a mountain called Wushan, where the rock peaks were towering, the forests were beautiful, and the boulders were like altars. She stayed there for a long time.

古文：时大禹理水，驻山下。
现代文：当时大禹治水，驻扎在山下。
English: At the time, Dayu was in charge of flood control and was stationed at the foot of the mountain.

古文：大风卒至，崖振谷陨不可制。
现代文：突然刮来狂风，崖谷震动山石滚落不可控制。
English: A violent wind suddenly blew, and the rockfall from the shaking cliff and valley was uncontrollable.

古文：因与夫人相值，拜而求助。
现代文：因为与夫人相遇，大禹就拜见她，向她求助。
English: Because of the encounter with his wife, Dayu went to see her and asked her for help.

古文：即敕侍女，授禹策召鬼神之书，因命其神狂章、虞余、黄魔、大翳、庚辰、童律等，助禹斫石疏波，决塞导厄，以循其流。
现代文：夫人就令侍女把用符策召鬼神的书交给他，同时命令狂章、虞余、黄魔、大翳，庚辰、童律等诸神，帮助大禹凿开山石疏通江水，把堵塞之处挖开，以顺通江流。
English: His wife ordered the maid to give him the book of summoning ghosts and gods with symbols, and at the same time ordered Crazy Zhang, Yu Yu, Yellow Devil, Great Dragonfly, Geng Chen, Tong Li and other gods to help Dayu hew open the mountains and dredge the river water, dig out the blockage, and smooth the flow of the river.

古文：禹拜而谢焉。
现代文：禹下拜向她道谢。
English: Yu Shimobai thanked her.

古文：禹尝诣之，崇轘之巅，顾盼之际，化而为石；或倏然飞腾，散为轻云，油然而止，聚为夕雨；或化游龙，或为翔鹤，千态万状，不可亲也。
现代文：大禹曾到崇山峻岭之顶去拜访她，夫人在转眼之间就能变成石头，或突然飞腾在空中散为轻云，又突然停下，凝聚成夕雨，有时变成游龙。有时化为翔鹤，状态万千，不可亲近。
English: Dayu once went to the top of a lofty mountain to visit her. In the blink of an eye, his wife could turn into stone, or suddenly soar into the sky, scatter into light clouds, and then suddenly stop, condense into a downpour, sometimes turn into a wandering dragon, and sometimes turn into a crane, in a myriad of states, not to be approached.

古文：禹疑其狡狯怪诞，非真仙也，问诸童律。
现代文：禹怀疑她狡猾奸诈离奇古怪不是真仙，就向童律询问。
English: Yu suspected that her cunning, treacherous, bizarre and eccentric was not a real fairy, so he asked Tong Li.

古文：律曰： 天地之本者道也，运道之用者圣也，圣之品次，真人仙人也。
现代文：童律说： 天地的根本是道，运用道的人是圣，圣的品级，依次是真人仙人。
English: Tongru said: The foundation of heaven and earth is the Way, and those who practice the Way are holy, and the level of holiness, in turn, are real people and immortals.

古文：其有禀气成真，不修而得道者，木公、金母是也。
现代文：其中有承气成真不修行而得到的。木公、金母就是这样的人。
English: Among them, there are those who have obtained the power to become real without practicing. Mokong and Kim Moo are such people.

古文：盖二气之祖宗、阴阳之原本、仙真之主宰、造化之元光。
现代文：原来是二气的祖宗、阴阳的源本、仙真的主宰、造化元光。
English: Originally, it was the ancestor of the two airs, the source of yin and yang, the ruler of the immortals, and the creator of the original light.

古文：云华夫人，金母之女也。昔师三元道君，受上清宝经，受书于紫清阙下，为云华上宫夫人。
现代文：云华夫人是金母的女儿，从前以三元道君为师，接受上清宝经，在紫清阙下接受宝书，封为云华上宫夫人。
English: Lady Yunhua is the daughter of Kim's mother. Formerly, she was taught by Sanyuan Daojun, received the Shang Qing treasure scripture, received the treasure book under Zi Qing's yoke, and was named Lady Yunhua of the Palace.

古文：主领教童真之士，理在玉英之台，隐见变化，盖其常也。
现代文：她主管教化童真之士，在玉英台理事。时隐时现而变化，原来是她的常态。
English: She is in charge of educating and transforming childlike people, and is a director at Yu Ying Tai. It changes from time to time, but it used to be her norm.

古文：亦由凝气成真，与道合体，非寓胎禀化之形，是西华少阴之气也。
现代文：她也是由气凝聚成的真人，与道合为一体，不是禀承凡胎肉体而化成之形，是西华少阴之气。
English: She is also a real person condensed by qi, and is one with the Tao. She is not a form that inherits the body of an ordinary fetus, but is the qi of Xihua Shaoyin.

古文：且气之弥纶天地，经营动植，大包造化，细入毫发。
现代文：而且气弥漫天空淹没大地，谋划营造动物植物，广泛包罗自然，细到毫毛头发。
English: Moreover, the atmosphere pervaded the sky and flooded the earth, planning to create animals and plants, widely encompassing nature, down to the finest hairs.

古文：在人为人，在物为物，岂止于云雨龙鹤，飞鸿腾凤哉？ 
现代文：与人一起她就变成人，与物一起她就变作物，哪止于云雨龙鹤飞雁腾凤呢？ 
English: Together with people, she becomes a person, together with things, she becomes a crop, which is not limited to clouds and rain, dragons and cranes, flying geese and phoenixes?

古文：禹然之，后往诣焉，忽见云楼玉台，瑶宫琼阙森然，既灵官侍卫，不可名识。
现代文：大禹认为他说得对，后来去拜见她，突然现出云楼玉台，瑶宫琼阙森然，又有灵官侍卫，不可指称记识。
English: Dayu thought that he was right. Later, when he went to visit her, Yunlou Yutai suddenly appeared, and Qiongwu Qiongwu suddenly appeared. There was also a spiritual officer guarding him.

古文：狮子抱关，天马启涂，毒龙电兽，八威备轩，夫人宴坐于瑶台之上。
现代文：狮子守着关隘，天马在道路上启行，毒龙电兽，八方备为乘轩，夫人安坐于瑶台之上。
English: The lion guards the pass, the heavenly horse sets off on the road, the poisonous dragon and the electric beast are ready to ride in all directions, and the lady sits on the ring.

古文：禹稽首问道，召禹使前而言曰： 夫圣匠肇兴，剖大混之一朴，发为亿万之体。
现代文：禹行了稽首礼请教道术，夫人召禹让他坐下，说： 圣匠初兴，剖开广大混沌之一朴，发散为亿万之体。
English: After Yu had performed the ceremonial bow, his wife called him to sit down and said, "The holy craftsman is just beginning. He has opened up the vast chaos of the earth and dispersed it into hundreds of millions of pieces.

古文：发大蕴之一苞，散为无穷之物。
现代文：揭开蕴积广大之一苞，散布为无穷之物。
English: Uncover one of the vast accumulations, spread as an infinite thing.

古文：故步三光而立乎晷景，封九域而制乎邦国，刻漏以分昼夜，寒暑以成岁纪，兑离以正方位，山川以分阴阳，城廓以聚民，器械以卫众，舆服以表贵贱，禾黍以备凶歉。凡此之制，上禀乎星辰，而取法乎神真，以养有形之物也。
现代文：又使日月星运行而确立时间，封九州之域而控制邦国，刻记漏壶而分昼夜，用寒暑来纪年，用兑离来正方位，用山川来分阴阳，用城廓来聚集百姓，用器械来保卫大众，用车马服饰来表示贵贱，用五谷来备荒年，所有这些制度，都是禀承于星辰，而取法于神仙其人，来养育有形之物啊。
English: They also set the time by the movement of the sun, moon and stars, controlled the country by sealing the Kyushu region, divided the day and night by recording the leaking pot, used the cold and heat to determine the year, used the separation to determine the positive direction, used the mountains and rivers to divide the yin and yang, used the city walls to gather the people, used the instruments to protect the public, used the car and horse costumes to indicate the high and low, and used the grain to prepare for the lean years. All of these systems are inherited from the stars, but take the method from the immortals to nurture tangible things.

古文：是故日月有幽明，生杀有寒暑，雷震有出入之期，风雨有动静之常。
现代文：因此，日月有暗有明，生杀有寒有暑，雷震有开始和结束之期，风雨有动和静的规律。
English: Therefore, the sun and the moon have darkness and light, life and death have cold and heat, thunderstorms have a beginning and an end, and wind and rain have dynamic and static patterns.

古文：清气浮乎上，而浊众散于下。
现代文：清气在上飘浮，而浊众散处于下。
English: Clear air floats on the top, while the crowd is scattered on the bottom.

古文：废兴之数，治乱之运，贤愚之质，善恶之性，刚柔之气，寿夭之命，贵贱之位，尊卑之叙，吉凶之感，穷达之期，此皆禀之于道，悬之于天，而圣人为纪也。
现代文：兴与废的气数，治与乱的命运，贤与愚的资质，善与恶的本性，刚与柔的气质，长寿与短命的命运，贵与贱的地位，尊与卑的次序，吉与凶的感应，不得志与得志的期限，这都禀承于道，掌握在天，而由圣人管理它。
English: The qi of prosperity and waste, the fate of governance and chaos, the qualification of virtue and folly, the nature of good and evil, the temperament of strength and weakness, the fate of long life and short life, the status of nobility and lowliness, the order of honor and lowliness, the influence of auspiciousness and evil, and the time limit for not aspiring and achieving one's aspiration are all inherited from the Tao, held in heaven, and managed by sages.

古文：性发乎天而命成乎人。
现代文：本性出于上天，命运多在于人为。
English: Nature comes from heaven, but destiny is mostly man-made.

古文：立之者天，行之者道。
现代文：本性形成于天，而处世要合于道义。
English: One's nature is formed by the heavens, and one's conduct in life should be in accordance with moral principles.

古文：道存则有，道去则非。道无物不可存也，非修不可致也。
现代文：道义存在则可，违背道义则不可，道义无处不在，无物不存，但需要一定的修养之功，才能达到。
English: Morality can exist, but it is impossible to violate it. Morality is everywhere, but it requires a certain amount of self-cultivation.

古文：玄老有言，致虚极，守静笃，万物将自复。
现代文：玄天老人说过，致虚到极点，守静到至诚，万物将自行恢复。
English: The old man Xuan Tian said that everything will be restored by itself, from vanity to perfection, and from tranquility to sincerity.

古文：复谓归于道而常存也。
现代文：恢复指的是回归于道而常存。
English: Restoration refers to returning to the way and abiding in it.

古文：道之用也，变化万端而不足其一，是故天参玄玄，地参混黄，人参道德。
现代文：道的运用，变化万端而不够其一，所以天参悟玄玄，地参悟混黄，人参悟道德。
English: The application of the Tao is ever-changing, but it is not enough to be the only one. Therefore, the heavenly ginseng enlightens the profound, the earthly ginseng enlightens the obscure, and the human ginseng enlightens the moral.

古文：去此之外，非道也哉。
现代文：除此之外，就不是道了。
English: Beyond that, it is not a path.

古文：长久之要者，天保其玄，地守其物，人养其气，所以全也。
现代文：长久的要点是，天保护它的玄，地保护它的物，人保护他的气，这就是用来保全的办法。
English: The long-term point is that heaven protects its mysteries, the earth protects its things, and man protects his breath. This is the method used for preservation.

古文：则我命在我，非天地杀之，鬼神害之，失道而自逝也。
现代文：那么，我的命运在于我，不是天地杀我，鬼神害我，失去道就失去了自己。
English: Then, my destiny lies in me. It is not heaven and earth that kill me, but ghosts and gods that harm me. If I lose my way, I lose myself.

古文：志乎哉，勤乎哉，子之功及于物矣，勤逮于民矣，善格乎天矣，而未闻至道之要也。
现代文：立志了，勤修了，您的功德达到物了，勤达到百姓了，善达到天了，然而没有听到至道的要诀。
English: You have made up your mind, you have worked hard, your merits have achieved results, your diligence has reached the people, and your goodness has reached the heavens, yet you have not heard the key to the true way.

古文：吾昔于紫清之阙受书，宝而勤之，我师三元道君曰，上真内经，天真所宝，封之金台。
现代文：我从前在紫清之阙得到书，以之为宝而勤修，我的老师三元道君说，上真的内经，是天真当作宝贝的东西，把它封存在金台。
English: Once upon a time, I obtained a book in Ziqing, and diligently studied it as a treasure. My teacher, Sanyuan Daojun, said that the Shangzheng Inner Canon was something that the naive regarded as a treasure, and sealed it in Jintai.

古文：佩入太微，则云轮上往，神武抱关，振衣瑶房，遨宴希林，左招仙公，右栖白山，而下眄太空。
现代文：带它进入太微，就有云轮往上升，神武把关，在瑶房整饰衣装，去遨游希世之林，左招仙公，右卧白山，而向下斜视太空。
English: If you take it into Taimiao, there will be a cloud wheel rising, Shenwu will check the gate, dress up the clothes in the antechamber, go to visit the forest of the world, recruit the immortals on the left, lie on the right of the White Mountain, and look down at the space.

古文：泛乎天津，则乘云骋龙，游此名山，则真人诣房，万人奉卫，山精伺迎。
现代文：在天河泛舟之后，就乘云跨龙游此名山，那么真人就登门拜访，万人都来侍奉护卫，山精也来伺候逢迎。
English: After rafting on the Tianhe River, take the cloud across the dragon to visit this famous mountain, then the real people will visit the door, everyone will come to serve the escort, and the mountain spirit will also come to serve the welcome.

古文：动有八景玉轮，静则宴处金堂。
现代文：动的时候有八景玉轮之车，静的时候就安处于金堂。
English: When it is moving, there is the Eight Scenery Jade Wheel Car, and when it is quiet, it is in the Golden Hall.

古文：亦谓之 太上玉佩金珰 之妙文也。
现代文：这也称之为 太上玉佩金珰 之妙文。
English: This is also known as the "miraculous story" of the "greatest jewel in the world."

古文：汝将欲越巨海而无飚轮，渡飞沙而无云轩，陟阨涂而无所举，涉泥波而无所乘，陆则困于远绝，水则惧于漂沦，将欲以导百谷而浚万川也。
现代文：你将要越过大海而没有飚轮，要渡过飞沙而没有云轩，登险途而没有舆车，涉泥波而没有船可乘，在陆上就会困于远方绝地。在水中就恐怕会漂泊沉沦，将要疏导百谷万川，危难长远啊。
English: You will have to cross the sea without a paddlewheel, cross the flying sand without a cloud, climb the perilous path without a public car, wade through muddy waves without a boat to ride, and on land you will be trapped in a distant land. In the water, you will probably drift and sink, and you will have to guide a hundred valleys and rivers, and the danger is long-term.

古文：危乎悠哉，太上愍汝之至，亦将授以灵宝真文，陆策虎豹，水制蛟龙，断馘千邪，检驭群凶，以成汝之功也。
现代文：太上很怜惜你，也将把灵宝真文传给你，在陆地驱逐虎豹，在水中制服蛟龙，斩断千邪，约束驾驭群凶，用以成就你的功业。
English: The Mother Superior pities you very much, and will also pass on to you the spiritual treasure true text, expel the tigers and leopards on land, subdue the dragons in the water, cut off a thousand evils, and restrain and control the evil spirits, and use it to accomplish your cause.

古文：其在乎阳明之天也。
现代文：它在于阳明之天。
English: It lies in the sky of the sun.

古文：吾所授宝书，亦可以出入水火，啸叱幽冥，收束虎豹，呼召六丁，隐瀹八地，颠倒五星，久视存身，与天相倾也。 
现代文：我所传授的宝书，也可以出入水火，震摄幽寞，收束虎豹，呼召六丁，使八地隐沦，使五星颠倒，久视存身，与天相倾。 
English: The precious book that I have taught can also go in and out of water and fire, shock loneliness, bind tigers and leopards, call six deities, make the eight lands disappear, make the five stars upside down, long-suffering existence, and be inclined to the sky.

古文：因命侍女陵容华出丹玉之笈，开上清宝文以授，禹拜受而去，又得庚辰、虞余之助，遂能导波决川，以成其功，奠五岳，别九州，而天锡玄珪，以为紫庭真人。
现代文：于是令侍女陵谷华拿出丹玉书箱，打开它拿出上清宝文交给他，禹拜谢受书而去，又得到庚辰、虞余的帮助，能够疏导波涛掘开河川，而成就治水之功，祭奠五岳，告别九州，天赐玄圭，用他作紫庭真人。
English: So he ordered his maid, Ling Gu Hua, to take out the jade box, open it, take out the Shang Qing treasure, and give it to him. Yu Bai Xie accepted the book and left. He also received the help of Geng Chen and Yu Yu, and was able to guide the waves to dig out the rivers, and achieve the feat of water control, to pay tribute to the Five Mountains, to bid farewell to Kyushu, and to use him as the real person of the Purple Garden.

古文：其后楚大夫宋玉，以其事言于襄王，王不能访道要以求长生，筑台于高唐之馆，作阳台之宫以祀之，宋玉作神仙赋以寓情，荒淫秽芜。
现代文：那以后楚大夫宋玉，把这件事说给襄王听，襄王不能访求道家之要诀而求得长生，就于高唐之馆筑坛台，作阳台之宫来祭祀她，宋玉作《神仙赋》来寄托心情，荒淫秽芜。
English: After that, Chu's doctor, Song Yu, told this matter to Xiang Wang. Since Xiang Wang could not seek the secret of Taoism to obtain eternal life, he built an altar in the hall of Gaotang and made a balcony palace to worship her. Song Yu made "Shenxianfu" to express his feelings. It was an obscene act.

古文：高真上仙，岂可诬而降之也？
现代文：高真上仙，怎么可以捏造事实而使她们降临呢？
English: How is it possible to fabricate facts and make them come true?

古文：有祠在山下，世谓之大仙，隔岸有神女之石，即所化也。
现代文：有个祠庙在山下，世人称之为大仙，隔岸有块神女石，就是云华夫人所化。
English: There is an ancestral temple at the foot of the mountain, known to the world as the Great Immortal, and across the river there is a stone goddess, who is the incarnation of Lady Yunhua.

古文：复有石天尊神女坛，侧有竹，垂之若篲。
现代文：还有石天尊神女坛，旁边有竹子，叶子垂下像扫帚。
English: There is also a stone altar for female deities, with bamboo next to it, the leaves hanging down like broomsticks.

古文：有稿叶飞物着坛上者，竹则因风扫之，终莹洁不为所污。楚人世祀焉。
现代文：有紫叶飞物落在坛上，竹子就凭风扫掉它，神女坛始终光净不被落物所污，楚人世代祭祀她。
English: If a purple-leafed flying object lands on the altar, the bamboo will sweep it away with the wind. The Shrine of the Goddess is always clean and is not polluted by falling objects. The people of Chu have worshipped her for generations.

古文：玄天二女
现代文：玄天二女
English: The Two Daughters of Xuan Tian

古文：燕昭王即位二年，广延国来献善舞者二人，一名旋波，一名提谟。
现代文：燕昭王登上王位的第二年，广延国来进献两个善于跳舞的人，一个名叫旋波，一个名叫提谟。
English: In the second year after King Yan Zhao ascended the throne, Guangyan Province came to present two people who were good at dancing, one named Zhou Bo and one named Tim.

古文：并玉质凝肤，体轻气馥，绰约而窈窕，绝古无伦。
现代文：这两个人都细皮嫩肉，体态轻盈，气息芳香，姿态柔美而又贤淑美貌，风华绝代，无与伦比。
English: These two people are both thin-skinned and tender, light-bodied, fragrant, soft-spoken and virtuous, with an unparalleled style.

古文：或行无影迹，或积年不饥。
现代文：两个女子有时走路既无身影也无足迹，有时常年不饥。
English: Sometimes the two women walk without a trace, sometimes they are not hungry all year round.

古文：昭王处以单绡华幄，饮以瓀珉之膏，饴以丹泉之粟。
现代文：昭王用单薄的丝绸制成华丽的篷帐给他们住，拿似玉的美石之膏给她们喝，拿丹泉的粟米给她们吃。
English: King Zhao made splendid tents out of thin silk for them to live in, gave them jade-like gemstone ointment to drink, and corn from Danquan to eat.

古文：王登崇霞台，乃召二人来侧。
现代文：昭王登上崇霞台，就召二人来陪伴。
English: When Zhao Wang boarded the Chongxia Platform, he called two actors to accompany him.

古文：时香风歘起，徘徊翔舞，殆不自支，王以缨缕拂之，二人皆舞。
现代文：这时香风吹起，徘徊飞舞，几乎不能自支，昭王用缨缕拂了一下，二女就都跳起舞来。
English: At this time, the incense wind blew, hovering and flying, almost unable to support themselves, Zhao Wang whisked it with a reed, and both girls danced.

古文：容冶妖丽，靡于翔鸾，而歌声轻飏。
现代文：她们容颜妖艳妩媚，华丽胜于翔鸾，而且歌声轻飏。
English: Their countenances are glamorous and charming, their beauty surpasses that of Xiang Yu, and their singing voices are light.

古文：乃使女伶代唱，其曲清响流韵，虽飘梁动尘，未足加焉。
现代文：昭王就让女伶代唱，那个曲调清脆响亮，和谐的声音如潺潺流水，即使用绕梁惊尘来比拟，也不算过分。
English: Zhao Wang asked the diva to sing on his behalf. The melody was crisp and loud, and the harmonious sound was like trickling water. Even if it was compared to the use of a coiled beam, it would not be too much.

古文：其舞一名萦尘，言其体轻，与尘相乱；次曰集羽，言其婉转，若羽毛之从风也；末曰旋怀，言其支体缅曼，若入怀袖也。
现代文：她们的舞蹈，一个叫萦尘，指的是她们的身体轻盈，可与飞尘相混；其次叫作集羽，指的是她们的舞姿婉转，能像羽毛随风飘动；最后一个舞蹈名叫旋怀，指的是她们的肢体细美，好像能揽入怀中装进袖内。
English: One of their dances is called 尘, which refers to the lightness of their bodies, which can be mixed with flying dust; the second is called 集羽, which refers to their graceful dance, which can flutter like feathers in the wind; and the last dance is called旋怀, which refers to the delicacy of their limbs, which seem to be able to be taken into the arms and put into the sleeves.

古文：乃设麟文之席，散华芜之香。
现代文：昭王于是摆设麟文之席，散发华芜之香。
English: King Zhaowang then set up the seat of Linwen, and spread the incense of Huayu.

古文：香出波弋国，浸地则土石皆香；着朽木腐草，莫不蔚茂；以薰枯骨，则肌肉皆生。
现代文：这种香出自波弋国，滴落地上，土石都香；洒到朽木腐草之上，草木无不茂盛，用它来薰枯骨，肌肉就都生长出来。
English: This incense comes from the country of Bophu, dripping on the ground, the earth and stones are fragrant; sprinkled on the rotten wood and grass, the plants are lush, use it to infuse the dead bones, and the muscles will grow.

古文：以屑铺地，厚四五尺，使二人舞其上，弥日无迹，体轻故也。
现代文：就用碎末铺地，厚四五尺，让二人在上面跳舞，跳了一整天，地上也没有痕迹，这是因为她们身体轻盈的缘故啊。
English: They made a four- or five-foot-thick floor out of rubble and had the two of them dance on it. They danced all day, and there was no trace of them on the floor, because of their light bodies.

古文：时有白鸾孤翔，衔千茎穟，穟于空中，自生花实，落地即生根叶，一岁百获，一茎满车，故曰盈车嘉穟。
现代文：这时有只白鸾孤飞，衔着千茎嘉禾，嘉禾在空中自动开花结果，落到地上就生出根和叶子，一年收获百次，一根茎就装满一车，所以叫做盈车嘉穗。
English: At this time, there was a lone egret flying alone, holding a thousand stalks of Jiahe. Jiahe automatically bloomed in the air, and when it fell to the ground, it produced roots and leaves. It was harvested a hundred times a year, and one stalk was filled with a cart, so it was called Yingche Jiahui.

古文：麟文者，错杂众宝以为席也，皆为云霞麟凤之状，昭王复以衣袖麾之，舞者皆止，昭王知为神异，处于崇霞之台，设枕席以寝宴，遣人以卫之。
现代文：麟文，就是把众多宝贝错杂起来用它作成席，都形成云霞麟凤的形状，昭王又把衣袖挥动一下，跳舞的人都停止下来，昭王知道两个女子是神异之人，就让她们住在崇霞台，安设枕席来睡觉宴乐，并派人守卫她们。
English: Linwen is to mix up many treasures and use it to make a seat, all of which form the shape of Yunxia Linfeng. Zhao Wang also waved his sleeve, and the dancers stopped. Zhao Wang knew that the two women were supernatural people, so he let them live in Chongxatai, set up a pillow seat to sleep and have fun, and sent someone to guard them.

古文：王好神仙之术，故玄天之女，托形作二人。
现代文：昭王喜好神仙之术，所以玄天二女托形化作二人。
English: King Zhao liked the magic of the gods, so the two daughters of the sky god were transformed into two people.

古文：昭王之末，莫知所在，或游于江汉。或在伊洛之滨，遍行天下，乍近乍远也。
现代文：昭王末年，没有人知道这两个女子在哪里，她们有时在江汉一带，有时在伊洛之滨，走遍了天下，有时走得近，有时走得远。
English: At the end of Zhao Wang's life, no one knew where the two women were. Sometimes they were in the area of the Han Dynasty, sometimes on the coast of the Ilo River. They traveled all over the world, sometimes close by, sometimes far away.

