古文：弘恭、石显议置萧望之于牢狱，汉元帝知其不肯就吏，而讫可其奏。
现代文：弘泰、石显商议把萧望之投置到牢狱之中，汉元帝明知道他不肯接受审判，却终于同意了弘恭他们的奏言。
English: Hong Tai and Shi Xian discussed putting Xiao Wangzhu in prison. Han Yuan Di Ming knew that he would not accept the trial, but finally agreed to Hong Gong's proposal.

古文：望之果自杀。
现代文：萧望之果然自杀了。
English: Depressed, he committed suicide.

古文：帝召显等责问以议不详，皆免冠谢，乃已。
现代文：汉元帝召见石显等人，责问他们审议不周到的罪过，石显等人都摘下官帽请罪，竟然完事了。
English: Emperor Han Yuan summoned Shi Xian and the others, scolded them for the crime of careless deliberation, and Shi Xian and the others all took off their official hats to plead guilty, and it was all over.

古文：王氏五侯奢僭，成帝内衔之，一旦赫怒，诏尚书奏诛薄昭故事，然特欲恐之，实无意诛也。窦宪恃宫掖声势，夺公主园，章帝切责，有孤雏腐鼠之比，然竟不绳其罪。
现代文：王氏的五个侯骄奢僭越，成帝心中怀恨，有一天赫然发怒，下令尚书上奏诛杀薄昭的往事，然而这只不过是想让他们害怕，实际上并没有诛杀的意图，窦宪倚仗着皇宫内戚的声望权势，夺取了公主的园田，汉章帝激切地斥责，用了孤雏腐鼠来做比方，可是竟然没有判窦宪的罪。
English: The five princes of the Wang clan were arrogant and arrogant, and the emperor harbored resentment in his heart. One day, he was furious and ordered the past of the killing of Bo Zhao to be recorded in the book. However, this was just to make them afraid. In fact, there was no intention of killing. Dou Xian relied on the prestige and power of the relatives in the palace to seize the princess's garden. Emperor Han Zheng furiously rebuked him and used a lonely rat as an analogy, but he did not find Dou Xian guilty.

古文：三君之失政，前史固深讥之矣。
现代文：这三个君主的政治昏乱，以前的史官确实深刻地讥刺过了。
English: The political confusion of these three monarchs has been well and truly satirised by former historians.

古文：司马公谓元帝始疑望之不肯就狱，恭、显以为必无忧，其欺既明，终不能治，可谓易期而难寤也。
现代文：司马光认为，汉元帝开始时就怀疑萧望之不肯接受因禁，恭弘、石显却认为一定没有忧患，他们的欺骗既然已明了了，最终却不能够处治，可以说汉元帝是好欺骗却难使他醒悟啊！
English: Sima Guang believed that Emperor Han Yuan suspected Xiaowang's unwillingness to accept the ban at the beginning, but Yasuhiro and Shi Xian thought that there must be no sorrow. Since their deception was clear, they could not deal with it in the end. It can be said that Emperor Han Yuan was good at deception but it was difficult to wake him up!

古文：予谓师傅大臣进退罪否，人主当决之于心，何为谋及宦者？
现代文：我认为，太师大臣的任免判罪与否，做君主的应该心中有所决断，怎么去跟宦官商量呢？
English: In my opinion, the monarch should make a decision in his or her heart as to whether to convict or not to convict the grandmaster minister. How should he or she consult with the eunuch?

古文：且望之先时已尝下廷尉矣，使其甘于再辱，忍耻对吏，将遂以恭、显之议为是耶！
现代文：况且萧望之开始时已经受过廷尉审讯了，让他甘心再受屈辱，忍着羞耻面对狱吏，这不是终于认为弘恭、石显的决议是对的吗！
English: Moreover, at the beginning of the depression, he had already been interrogated by a courtier, so he was willing to suffer humiliation again and face the prison officers with shame. Isn't it finally considered that Hong Gong and Shi Xian's decision was right!

古文：望之死与不死，不必论也。成帝委政外家，先汉颠覆；章帝仁柔无断，后汉遂衰，皆无足责。
现代文：萧望之死或不死，就不必议论了，汉成帝把政事交给母舅家族，导致了西汉的颠覆；汉章帝仁慈优柔而不果断，导致了东汉的衰微，这都不值得责难。
English: There is no need to discuss whether Xiaowang is dead or not. Emperor Hancheng handed over the political affairs to his maternal uncle's family, which led to the subversion of Western Han; Emperor Han Zheng, who was kind, gentle and indecisive, led to the decline of Eastern Han. None of this is worthy of reproach.

