古文：公孙接、田开疆、古冶子同事景公，恃其勇力而无礼，晏子请除之，公曰： 三子者搏之不得，刺之恐不中也。 
现代文：原文春秋时公孙接、田开疆、古冶子三人同为齐景公的大臣，三人仗着自己力大无比，对景公骄蛮无礼，因此晏子请求将此三人除去。景公说： 这三人力大无比，一般人根本不是他们的对手，派人谋刺又怕失手反会坏事，该如何是好呢？ 
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Gongsun Zi, Tian Kaijiang, and Gu Yezi were the three ministers of Qi Jing Gong. The three of them were incomparably powerful in their own right, and they were arrogant and rude to Jing Gong. Therefore, Zizi requested that the three of them be removed. Jing Gong said: These three people are incomparably powerful, and ordinary people are not their opponents at all. How should it be?

古文：晏子请公使人馈之二桃，曰： 三子何不计功而食桃？ 
现代文：晏子于是建议景公派人送他们三人两颗桃子，说： 大王赐三位大人两颗桃子，三位大人请自述其功以决定谁该吃桃。 
English: The cripple then suggested that the king send two peaches to the three of them, saying, "The great king has given two peaches to the three adults. The three adults should tell their own stories to decide who should eat the peaches."

古文：公孙接曰： 接一搏豨，而再搏乳虎，若接之功，可以食桃而无与人同矣。 
现代文：公孙接一听，首先开口说： 我曾一手打野猪，一手搏幼虎，说起我的勇力，那真是无人能比，我应该吃桃。 
English: His great-grandson listened and began by saying, "I once fought a wild boar with one hand and a young tiger with the other. When I talk about my courage, no one can match it. I should eat a peach."

古文：援桃而起。
现代文：说完起身拿起一桃。
English: After saying that, he got up and picked up a peach.

古文：田开疆曰： 吾伏兵而却三军者再，若开疆之功，亦可以食桃而无与人同矣。 
现代文：田开疆接着说： 我曾率伏兵两次阻退来犯的敌军，我的勇猛也是无人能比，我也应该吃桃。 说完也起身拿起一桃。
English: Tian Kaijiang went on to say: I once led an ambush to hold back the invading enemy army twice, and my bravery is second to none. I should also eat a peach. After saying this, I also got up and picked up a peach.

古文：援桃而起。古冶子曰： 吾尝从君济于河，鼋衔左骖①，以入砥柱之流。当是时也，冶少不能游，潜行逆流百步，顺流九里，得鼋而杀之。
现代文：这时古冶子大声说道： 我曾随景公渡河，突然一只巨大的河鳖一口衔住车驾中靠左边的那匹马，将马拖入河中央，当时我年纪小还不会游泳，只好闭气往上游前行百步，再顺河水漂流九里，才杀了那只河鳖。
English: At this time, Guyezi said in a loud voice: I once crossed the river with the scenery, and suddenly a huge river otter grabbed the horse on the left side of the car and dragged the horse into the middle of the river. At that time, I was too young to swim, so I had to take a hundred steps upstream and then drift along the river for nine miles before I killed the river otter.

古文：左操骖尾，右挈鼋头，鹤跃而出，津人相惊，以为河伯。
现代文：我左手抓着马尾，右手提着鳖头，像巨鹤冲天般跃出水面，当时在河边的人看到这一幕，都以为我是河神。
English: I grabbed the horse's tail with my left hand and the hoe with my right hand, and jumped out of the water like a giant crane soaring into the sky. People who were by the river at the time saw this scene and thought I was a river god.

古文：若冶之功，亦可以食桃而无与人同矣，二子何不反桃？ 
现代文：说起我的勇力才真的是无人可比，我才可以吃桃，你们二人还不快将桃子放到原处去？ 
English: When it comes to my courage, no one can really compare to me. I can eat a peach. Are you two still not happy to put the peach back where it belongs?

古文：抽剑而起。
现代文：说完拔剑站起。
English: After saying this, draw your sword and stand up.

古文：公孙接、田开疆曰： 吾勇不子若，功不子逮，取桃不让，是贪也；然而不死，无勇也。 
现代文：公孙接、田开疆说： 我们的勇敢的确不及你，我们的功绩也不及你，强行夺桃而不让你吃更是贪心的表现，若不能死在你面前，又是无勇的表现。 
English: Gongsun Zhi and Tian Kaijiang said: Our bravery is indeed not as good as yours, and our achievements are not as good as yours. Forcibly taking the peach and not letting you eat it is a manifestation of greed. If you can't die in front of you, it is also a manifestation of lack of courage.

古文：皆反其桃，挈领而死。
现代文：于是两人放回手中的桃子，然后自刎而死。
English: So the two of them put the peach back in their hands and then hanged themselves.

古文：古冶子曰： 二子死之，冶独生之，不仁；耻人以言而夸其声，不义；恨乎所行不死，无勇。 
现代文：古冶子见他二人自刎，难过地说： 你们二人死了，我如果独活于世，就是我不仁；用言语使你们觉得受到屈辱，是我不义；我痛恨自己的行为，若不死就是无勇。 
English: When the old smith saw that the two of them had killed themselves, he said sadly, "You two are dead. If I live alone in the world, I will be unkind. If I use words to make you feel humiliated, I am being unfair. I hate my actions. If I don't die, I am not brave."

古文：亦反其桃，挈领而死。
现代文：说完也放下手中的桃子，自刎而死。
English: After saying this, he also put down the peach in his hand and hanged himself to death.

古文：使者复命，公葬之以士礼。
现代文：使者回宫向景公复命，景公为他们举行了隆重的葬礼。
English: The envoys returned to the palace and restored their lives to the king, who held a grand funeral for them.

古文：其后诸葛亮作《梁甫吟》以哀之。
现代文：后人诸葛亮曾作《梁甫吟》以哀悼他们三人。
English: Later, Zhuge Liang composed "Liang Fu Ying" to mourn the three of them.

