古文：孙腾高隆之司马子如
现代文：孙腾，字龙雀，咸阳石安人氏。
English: Sun Teng, Zhe Longjiao, Xianyang Shi Anren.

古文：孙腾，字龙雀，咸阳石安人也。祖通，仕沮渠氏为中书舍人，沮渠灭，入魏，因居北边。
现代文：祖通，仕沮渠氏为中书舍人，沮渠氏败，入魏，定居北部边地。
English: Zotong, a descendant of the Deshu clan, was a Chinese scholar, but he was defeated by the Deshu clan, went to Wei, and settled in the northern border area.

古文：及腾贵，魏朝赠通使持节、侍中、都督雍华岐幽四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司徒公、尚书左仆射、雍州刺史，赠腾父机使持节、侍中、都督冀定沧瀛殷五州诸军事、太尉公、尚书令、冀州刺史。
现代文：腾富贵后，魏赠通使持节、侍中、都督雍华岐豳四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司徒公、尚书左仆射、雍州刺史，赠腾父机使持节、侍中、都督冀定沧瀛殷五州诸军事、太尉公、尚书令、冀州刺史。
English: After Tengfu Gui became rich, Wei bestowed Tengfu Gui with the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Yonghua, the military governor of the four states, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong, the title of Jizhong.

古文：腾少而质直，明解吏事。
现代文：腾少年时朴实坦诚，熟悉吏事。
English: When he was a boy, Teng was simple and honest, and was familiar with bureaucratic affairs.

古文：魏正光中，北方扰乱，腾间关危险，得达秀容。
现代文：魏正光年中，北方动乱，腾冒着危险偷渡关戍，来到了秀容。
English: In the middle of the Wei Zhengguang era, the north was in turmoil. He risked the danger of smuggling across the pass and came to Xiurong.

古文：属尔朱荣建义，腾隋荣入洛，例除冗从仆射。
现代文：适逢尔朱荣树起义旗，腾便跟随尔朱荣进入洛阳，依例升任冗从仆射。
English: When the uprising flag of Er Zhu Rongshu was raised, he followed Er Zhu Rong into Luoyang, and was promoted to the position of Zou Zi Fu Sha as usual.

古文：寻为高祖都督府长史，从高祖东征邢杲。
现代文：不久为高祖都督府长史，随从高祖东征邢杲。
English: He soon became Gao Zu's prefectural governor and followed Gao Zu on his eastward expedition.

古文：师次齐城，有抚宜镇军人谋逆，将害督帅。
现代文：军队驻扎齐城时，抚宜镇军人阴谋造反，欲害督帅。
English: When the army was stationed in Qicheng, the soldiers of Fui Town plotted to rebel and wanted to harm the superintendent.

古文：腾知之，密启高祖。
现代文：腾探听到了这一消息，急忙报告高祖。
English: Tengtang heard the news and hurried to report to Gaozu.

古文：俄顷事发，高祖以有备，擒破之。
现代文：事情很快爆发，由于高祖事前做了防备，擒获了这伙叛乱分子。
English: The incident soon broke out, and because Gaozu had prepared in advance, he captured the group of rebels.

古文：高祖之为晋州，腾为长史，加后将军，封石安县伯。
现代文：朝廷拜高祖为晋州刺史，腾做长史，加后将军，封石安县伯。
English: The imperial court worshiped Gao Zu as the history of Jinzhou, Teng as the long history, Gao as the general, and Shi'an County as the county seat.

古文：高祖自晋阳出滏口，行至襄垣，尔朱兆率众追。
现代文：高祖从晋阳动身经过滏口，抵达襄垣，尔朱兆领众从后追来。
English: Gaozu set off from Jinyang, passed through the Hukou, and arrived at Xiangyuan. Zhu Zhao led the crowd to follow him.

古文：高祖与兆宴饮于水湄，誓为兄弟，各还本营。
现代文：高祖在水边同兆宴饮，互相结拜兄弟后，各归军营。
English: Gaozhu feasted with Zhao at the water's edge, and after bowing to each other as brothers, they all returned to the camp.

古文：明旦，兆复招高祖，高祖欲安其意，将赴之，临上马，腾牵衣止之。
现代文：第二天清晨，兆又召高祖，高祖想安慰安慰他，打算前往，上马之前，腾拉着衣服给以了劝阻。
English: The next morning, Zhao called Gao Zu again. Gao Zu wanted to comfort and console him. He planned to go, but before getting on the horse, he tugged at his clothes to dissuade him.

古文：兆乃隔水肆骂，驰还晋阳。
现代文：于是兆便隔水谩骂，骑马赶回晋阳。
English: As a result, Zhao hurled insults across the water and rode back to Jinyang.

古文：高祖遂东。
现代文：这样，高祖就率部向东进发了。
English: In this way, Gao Zu led the troops to march eastward.

古文：及起义信都，腾以诚款，常预谋策。
现代文：当高祖起义信都时，腾因真心诚意地投入，故常参与大事的策划。
English: When Gao Zu rebelled against Xintu, Teng Ying was sincerely committed and often participated in the planning of major events.

古文：腾以朝廷隔绝，号令无所归，不权有所立，则众将沮散，苦请于高祖。高祖从之，遂立中兴主。
现代文：腾认为朝廷隔绝，无法对其发号施令，不权且立一人为帝，那么人心就会思散，所以屡次向高祖建议，而得采纳，于是中兴主被立为帝。
English: Teng believed that the imperial court was isolated, unable to issue orders to it, and had no right to appoint one person as emperor, so the people's minds would be distracted. Therefore, he repeatedly suggested to Gao Zu that it should be adopted, and thus the Lord of ZTE was appointed as emperor.

古文：除侍中，寻加使持节、六州流民大都督、北道大行台。
现代文：拜侍中，很快加使持节、六州流民大都督、北道大行台。
English: Among the attendants, it was soon joined by Jiji, the governor of the Six Provinces, and the governor of the Northern Province.

古文：高祖进军于邺，初留段荣守信都，寻遣荣镇中山，仍令腾居守。
现代文：高祖向邺城进军，让段荣留守信都，不久，改派荣镇驻中山，改令腾居守信都。
English: Gao Zu marched to Lucheng, leaving Duan Rong to guard the capital. Soon, he reassigned Rong Zhen to stay in Zhongshan, and ordered him to stay in Lucheng to guard the capital.

古文：及平邺，授相州刺史，改封咸阳郡公，增邑通前一千三百户，入为侍中。
现代文：攻克邺城后，授腾相州刺史，改封咸阳郡公，增加封邑连前合计一千三百户。入朝后为侍中。
English: After the conquest of Lucheng, Teng was awarded the title of Xiangzhou Shishi, changed the title of Xianyang County, and increased the number of fiefs and counties to a total of 1,300. After entering the imperial court, he was an attendant.

古文：时魏京兆王愉女平原公主寡居，腾欲尚之，公主不许。
现代文：这时魏京兆王愉的女儿平原公主正在守寡，腾想娶她为妻，但却遭公主拒绝。
English: At this time, Princess Pingyuan, the daughter of Wei Jing Zhao Wang Yu, was widowed. Teng wanted to marry her, but the princess refused.

古文：侍中封隆之无妇，公主欲之，腾妒隆之，遂相间构。
现代文：侍中封隆之无妻，公主想嫁给他，腾因此嫉妒隆之，而且矛盾闹得好大。
English: The princess wants to marry Fong Long, a chamberlain, who has no wife. As a result, Teng is jealous of Fong Long, and the conflict escalates.

古文：高祖启免腾官，请除外任，俄而复之。
现代文：高祖上书皇帝，请免朝官，任命其为外职，很快又复原位。
English: Gao Zu wrote to the emperor, asking him to remove the official from the imperial court and appoint him to a position outside the imperial court. He was soon reinstated.

古文：腾以高祖腹心，入居门下，与斛斯椿同掌机密。
现代文：孙腾为高祖心腹，居于高祖门下，同斛斯椿等共掌机密。
English: Sun Teng was Gao Zu's confidant, lived under Gao Zu's door, and shared secrets with his classmates.

古文：椿既生异端，渐至乖谬。
现代文：椿已滋发异心，因而两人关系总是不能协调。
English: Tsubaki has developed feelings of animosity, so the relationship between the two can never be reconciled.

古文：腾深见猜忌，虑祸及己，遂潜将十余骑驰赴晋阳。
现代文：腾深受猜忌，感觉到灾难马上要降临头上，于是秘密率领十余骑奔赴晋阳。
English: Teng was deeply suspicious and felt that disaster was about to befall him, so he secretly led more than ten horsemen to go to Jinyang.

古文：高祖入讨斛斯椿，留腾行并州事，又使腾为冀相殷定沧瀛幽安八州行台仆射、行冀州事，复行相州事。
现代文：高祖领兵讨伐斛斯椿，留腾行并州刺史事，又任命他为冀相殷定沧瀛幽安八州行台仆射、行冀州刺史事，复行相州刺史事。
English: Gao Zu led the troops to fight against the Jinshuchin, and appointed Ruyteng to carry out the historical event of uniting the states. He also appointed him to carry out the historical event of uniting the states of Jizhou, Jingding, Cangzhou, Yu'an, and Hachizhou, and to repeat the historical event of uniting the states of Jizhou.

古文：天平初，入为尚书左仆射，内外之事，腾咸知之，兼司空、尚书令。
现代文：天平初年，入朝为尚书左仆射，并主持内外所有的大事，兼司空、尚书令。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, he entered the imperial court as Shosho's right-hand man, and presided over all important matters both at home and abroad, as well as acting as Shosho's subordinate and Shosho's deputy.

古文：时西魏遣将寇南兖，诏腾为南道行台，率诸将讨之。
现代文：此时西魏遣将寇掠南兖，帝诏令腾为南道行台，统领诸位将领攻打。
English: At this time, the Western Wei Dynasty sent the invaders to raid Nanlu, and the emperor ordered Teng to march to the south and lead the generals to attack.

古文：腾性尪怯，无威略，失利而还。
现代文：腾怯懦，缺少威略，结果失败而返。
English: Cowardice, lack of discretion, and the result is failure.

古文：又除司徒。
现代文：又拜司徒。
English: He also worships Sitoru.

古文：初北境乱离，亡一女，及贵，远加推访，终不得，疑其为人婢贱。
现代文：当初北境边地战乱兴起时，腾丢失一女，富贵起来后，派人到处访问寻找，却没有获得线索，怀疑女儿成了他人的奴婢。
English: When the war in the northern borderland broke out, Teng lost a daughter. After he became rich, he sent people to visit and search everywhere, but they did not get any clues. He suspected that his daughter had become someone else's slave.

古文：及为司徒，奴婢诉良者，不研虚实，率皆免之，愿免千人，冀得其女。
现代文：腾为司徒后，凡有奴婢来请求成为良人时，并不问虚实，一概应允，其目的，是希望免除更多的人的奴婢身份，从中找到自己的女儿。
English: After becoming a monk, whenever a slave girl came to ask to become a lover, he did not ask whether it was true or not, but always agreed. His aim was to free more people from the status of slaves and find his own daughter from them.

古文：时高祖入朝，左右有言之者，高祖大怒，解其司徒。
现代文：高祖入朝，有人将这一情况作了报告，听说此事，高祖极其恼怒，撤掉了他的司徒官职。
English: When Gaozu entered the imperial court, someone made a report about this, and when Gaozu heard about it, he was extremely angry and removed his post as a steward.

古文：武定中，使于青州，括浮逃户口，迁太保。
现代文：武定中，受命出使青州，搜括浮逃户口，归，迁太保。
English: In the middle of Wuding, he was ordered to send an envoy to Qingzhou to search for fugitive households, return, and relocate to Taibo.

古文：初，博陵崔孝芬取贫家子贾氏以为养女，孝芬死，其妻元更适郑伯猷，携贾于郑氏。
现代文：早些年，博陵人崔孝芬收养贫寒人家的女子为养女，孝芬死，他的妻子改嫁郑伯猷，也将这个养女贾氏带到了郑家。
English: A few years earlier, the Boling resident Cui Xiaofeng adopted a woman from a poor family as his adopted daughter. After Xiaofeng's death, his wife remarried to Zheng Boqi, and also brought this adopted daughter Jia to the Zheng family.

古文：贾有姿色，腾纳之，始以为妾。其妻袁氏死，腾以贾有子，正以为妻，诏封丹阳郡君，复请以袁氏爵回授其女。
现代文：贾氏年轻美貌，孙腾就将她娶到家来，开始是妾，其妻袁氏身亡，腾认为贾氏养了儿子，便扶她做了正，帝诏封为丹阳郡君，腾又请求朝廷将前妻袁氏的爵号回授给女儿。
English: Jia was young and beautiful, and Sun Teng married her to his family. At first, she was a concubine, but his wife Yuan died. Teng believed that Jia had raised a son, so he helped her to become a princess, and was given the title of Danyang County Princess. Teng also asked the court to return the title of his ex-wife Yuan to his daughter.

古文：违礼肆情，多此类也。
现代文：这类违礼肆情之事还可举出一些。
English: There are many more examples of this kind of indiscretion.

古文：腾早依附高祖，契阔艰危，勤力恭谨，深见信待。
现代文：腾早年依附高祖，艰辛劳苦，恭谨勤勉，深得敬重。
English: In his early years, Teng adhered to Gao Zu, worked hard, was respectful and diligent, and was deeply respected.

古文：及高祖置之魏朝，寄以心腹，遂志气骄盈，与夺由己，求纳财贿，不知纪极。生官死赠，非货不行，餚藏银器，盗为家物，亲狎小人，专为聚敛。
现代文：当高祖将其安插入魏朝廷后，对其寄予重望，但他得志之时，骄狂傲气，予夺由己，求财纳贿，不知节制；生官死赠，不行贿赂是办不成功的；官府收藏的银器，他则盗为家有；亲近小人，重在聚敛。
English: When Gao Zu inserted it into the Wei court, he had high hopes for it, but when he was successful, he was arrogant and arrogant, and he did not know how to control himself, and he did not know how to ask for money and bribes; he was a lifetime official, and if he did not bribe, he would not succeed; he stole the silverware from the government collection; he was close to villains and concentrated on gathering.

古文：在邺与高岳、高隆之、司马子如号为四贵，非法专恣，腾为甚焉。
现代文：居住邺城，与高岳、高隆之、司马子如被人称为 四贵 ，但其专恣非法，无所不为，在这几人中最为突出。
English: Living in Lucheng, he is known as the Four Noblemen, along with Gao Yue, Gao Longzhi, and Sima Zi, but he is the most outstanding among these people because of his arbitrary and illegal actions.

古文：高祖屡加谴让，终不悛改，朝野深非笑之。
现代文：高祖曾经多次指责规劝，但他不能收敛，因此深受朝野人士的讥讽嘲笑。
English: Gaozu had been reprimanded and admonished many times, but he could not restrain himself, so he was ridiculed by people in and out of the imperial court.

古文：武定六年四月薨，时年六十八。
现代文：武定六年四月薨，时年六十有八。
English: Wu Ding died in April of the same year, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：赠使持节、都督冀定等五州诸军事、冀州刺史、太师、开府、录尚书事，谥曰文。
现代文：赠使持节、都督冀定等五州诸军事、冀州刺史、太师、开府、录尚书事，谥号文。
English: He gave gifts to the military of the five states, the history of Jizhou, Taishi, Kaifu, the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records, and so on.

古文：天保初，以腾佐命，诏祭告其墓。
现代文：天保初，以腾有佐辅之功，文宣帝诏令祭告其墓。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenxuan decreed that his tomb be dedicated to the merits of Tengyu Zuo.

古文：皇建中，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：皇建中，配享高祖庙庭。
English: In the middle of imperial construction, enjoy the high ancestral temple garden.

古文：子凤珍嗣。
现代文：子凤珍继嗣。
English: Zifeng Zhen's heir.

古文：凤珍庸常，武平中，卒于开府仪同三司。
现代文：凤珍愚昧平庸，武平中，死在开府仪同三司位上。
English: Feng Zhen was a stupid and mediocre person. He died in the middle of the military and civil war, at the top of the Kaifu ceremony and the Third Division.

古文：高隆之，字延兴，本姓徐氏，云出自高平金乡。
现代文：高隆之，字延兴，本姓徐，自称本家的郡望是高平金乡。
English: Gao Longzhi, surnamed Yanxing, real surname Xu, claims that his home county is Gaoping Jinxiang.

古文：父干，魏白水郡守，为姑婿高氏所养，因从其姓。
现代文：父干，魏朝白水郡郡守。因干被姑父高氏收养，所以就随了姑父的姓。
English: His father, Gan, was the governor of Baishui County in the Wei Dynasty. Because Gan was adopted by his uncle Gao, he took his uncle's surname.

古文：隆之贵，魏朝赠司徒公、雍州刺史。
现代文：隆之富贵后，魏朝赠干司徒公、雍州刺史。
English: After Takashi's wealth, the Wei Dynasty gave him Gan Shitugong and Yongzhou Shishi.

古文：隆之后有参议之功，高祖命为从弟，仍云渤海蓚人。
现代文：隆之后来立有辅佐之功，高祖请他做了叔伯弟弟，故称他是渤海地人氏。
English: Takashi later came to serve as an assistant, and Takasu asked him to be an uncle and a younger brother, so he was known as Mr. Haitian.

古文：隆之身长八尺，美须髯，深沉有志气。
现代文：隆之身高八尺，须髯漂亮，性格深沉且有志向。
English: Gao Huan said that he was Gao Huan's brother, so he said that he was Gao Huan's fellow countryman, a Haitian. He was eight feet tall, with a beautiful mustache, a deep temperament, and quite ambitious.

古文：魏汝南王悦为司州牧，以为户曹从事。
现代文：魏汝南王悦任司州牧，请他做了户曹从事。
English: Wei Runan Wang Yue was appointed as the provincial governor of Shizhou, and asked him to do the household chores.

古文：建义初，释褐员外散骑常侍，与行台于晖出讨羊侃于太山，晖引隆之为行台郎中，又除给事中。
现代文：建义初年，被朝廷委任为员外散骑常侍，同行台于晖前往泰山讨伐羊侃，晖推荐隆之为行台郎中，又拜给事中。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed by the imperial court as a non-commissioned horseback riding attendant, and his companion Tai Yu went to Mount Tai to fight against Yang Kan. He recommended Takenobu as a horseback rider, and also prayed for him.

古文：与高祖深自结托。
现代文：这时，同高祖关系极其密切。
English: At this time, the relationship with Gaozu was extremely close.

古文：高祖之临晋州，引为治中，行平阳郡事。
现代文：高祖移驻晋州，任命他为治中，并行平阳郡刺史事。
English: Gao Zu moved to Jinzhou and was appointed as a junior magistrate. He also served as the magistrate of Pingyang County.

古文：从高祖起义山东，以为大行台右丞。
现代文：随从高祖在山东起义后，被擢升为大行台右丞。
English: After following Gao Zu in the Shandong Uprising, he was promoted to Da Xiangtai Rongcheng.

古文：魏中兴初，除御史中尉，领尚食典御。
现代文：魏中兴初年，除御史中尉，领尚食典御之职。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Zhongxing Dynasties, in addition to the lieutenant of imperial history, he was given the post of imperial dietitian.

古文：从高祖平邺，行相州事。
现代文：跟着高祖平定邺地后，摄行相州刺史事。
English: After Gaozhu had subdued the Xiongdi, he filmed the historical event.

古文：从破四胡于韩陵，太昌初，除骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：从高祖在韩陵打败了四胡。太昌初，除骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: From Gaozhu, he defeated the four Hu in Hanling. At the beginning of Taichang, in addition to the cavalry general, there were three officers.

古文：西魏文帝曾与隆之因酒忿竞，文帝坐以黜免。
现代文：西魏魏文帝曾因喝酒之事与隆之结怨，而罢免了他的官爵。
English: Emperor Weiwen of the Western Wei Dynasty once had a grudge against Takashi due to his drinking, and dismissed him from the peerage.

古文：高祖责隆之不能协和，乃启出为北道行台，转并州刺史，封平原郡公，邑一千七百户。
现代文：高祖责备隆之不会协作忍让，便上书皇帝请放隆之出都城任北道行台，转并州刺史，封平原郡公，食邑一千七百户。
English: Gao Zu reproached Long Zhi for not cooperating and tolerating, so he sent a letter to the emperor to ask the emperor to release Long Zhi from the capital to serve as the governor of the North Road, to become the governor of the state, to become the governor of Pingyuan County, and to feed 1,700 households in the county.

古文：隆之请减户七百，并求降己四阶让兄腾，并加优诏许之，仍以腾为沧州刺史。
现代文：隆之请求减除七百户，还希望能让出自己的四阶转授给兄长高腾，朝廷特意下诏批准了他的请求，依然委任他做沧州刺史。
English: At Takashi's request, seven hundred households were deducted, and he also hoped to transfer his fourth-order lamasery to his brother Gaoteng. The Imperial Court specifically approved his request and still appointed him to be the Cangzhou lamasery.

古文：高祖之讨斛斯椿，以隆之为大行台尚书。
现代文：高祖诛讨斛斯椿，拜隆之为大行台尚书。
English: Gao Zu's treatise on camellia sinensis, and Bai Longshi's treatise on Da Xingtao.

古文：及大司马、清河王亶承制，拜隆之侍中、尚书右仆射，领御史中尉。
现代文：大司马、清河王为帝，拜隆之侍中、尚书右仆射，领御史中尉。
English: Daisima, the king of Qinghe, was the emperor, Baylong's attendant, Shang Shuxu, his right-hand man, was his lieutenant.

古文：广费人工，大营寺塔，为高祖所责。
现代文：他因浪费诸多人力，修建寺塔，而遭高祖责备。
English: He was scolded by Gaozu for wasting a lot of manpower building temples and pagodas.

古文：天平初，丁母艰解任，寻诏起为并州刺史，入为尚书右仆射。
现代文：天平初年，其母去世，隆之卸职守孝，很快帝诏令起复为并州刺史，入朝做尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, his mother passed away, Takanobu resigned his post to protect Takataka, and soon the imperial edict was revived to annex the state, and he entered the imperial court as Shoshu's right hand man.

古文：时初给民田，贵势皆占良美，贫弱咸受瘠薄。
现代文：此时初次由国家颁发给百姓田地，贵家势族乘机抢占良田美地，贫寒弱小得到的却是瘠薄之土。
English: At this time, for the first time, the state issued fields to the common people. The noble families took the opportunity to seize the good fields and lands, but the poor and the weak received thin soil.

古文：隆之启高祖，悉更反易，乃得均平。
现代文：隆之启禀高祖，马上全部进行了更改，才算取得了均平。
English: Takashi's high school founder, immediately made all the changes, and only then achieved parity.

古文：又领营构大将军，京邑制造，莫不由之。
现代文：又兼任营构大将之职，京城内的所有制造，都由他掌管。
English: He also concurrently held the position of general manager of construction, and he was in charge of all manufacturing in the capital.

古文：增筑南城，周回二十五里。
现代文：扩筑南边城墙，长达二十五华里。
English: The southern wall was extended to a length of twenty-five li.

古文：以漳水近于帝城，起长堤以防泛溢之患。
现代文：因为漳水临近皇宫，他又修造长堤用以防备洪水的暴涨。
English: Because Surabaya is close to the Imperial Palace, he also built a long dike to prevent the sudden rise of the flood.

古文：又凿渠引漳水周流城郭，造治水碾硙，并有利于时。
现代文：他还开挖渠道导引漳水入护城河，建造治水的碾石岂，这些都是有益于时的好事。
English: He also dug a channel to guide the water into the moat, and built a stone mill to control the water. These are all good things that are beneficial to the time.

古文：魏自孝昌已后，天下多难，刺史太守皆为当部都督，虽无兵事，皆立佐僚，所在颇为烦扰。
现代文：魏从孝昌年开始，天下动乱，刺史太守都是本州本郡的都督，即使没有战事，也都拥有一定数量的佐僚，因此对当地百姓颇多侵扰。
English: Wei from the beginning of Xiaochang, the country was in turmoil, and all the governors were the governors of their own counties. Even if there was no war, they all had a certain number of advisers, so they intruded a lot on the local people.

古文：隆之表请自非实在边要，见有兵马者，悉皆断之。
现代文：隆之上表，认为这都不是边境要地，而所有的兵马应该全部撤裁。
English: Takashi looked at the table and thought that this was not an important border area, and that all the soldiers and horses should be completely withdrawn.

古文：又朝贵多假常侍以取貂蝉之饰，隆之自表解侍中，并陈诸假侍中服用者，请亦罢之。
现代文：另外，朝贵们喜欢凭借常侍的官职来获得貂蝉的服饰，隆之上表请求解除自己的侍中之职，并同时希望所有享用侍中服饰的，也一概罢免。
English: In addition, members of the imperial family like to use their official position as a regular attendant to obtain the clothes of the cicada, and Taka requested to be relieved of his position as an attendant, and at the same time hoped that all those who enjoyed the attendant's clothes would also be dismissed.

古文：诏皆如表。
现代文：帝采纳其建议，下诏执行。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict adopting his opinion.

古文：自军国多事，冒名窃官者不可胜数，隆之奏请检括，获五万余人，而群小喧嚣，隆之惧而止。
现代文：自从国家进入多事之秋后，冒名顶替、窃居官位者不可胜数，隆之奏请检括，因涉及到五万多人，而引得舆论大哗，隆之惧怕起事，便停止了。
English: Since the country entered an eventful autumn, there have been countless impostors and those who have stolen official positions. Takenaka's performance should be censored, because it involved more than 50,000 people and caused a public outcry. Takenaka was afraid of causing trouble, so he stopped.

古文：诏监起居事，进位司徒公。
现代文：帝诏令隆之监起居事，进位司徒公。
English: The emperor ordered the prison warden of Takashi to take up residence, and promoted him to the rank of Shitogun.

古文：武定中，为河北括户大使。
现代文：武定中，隆之为河北括户大使。
English: In Wuding, Long Bin is the ambassador of Hebei Province.

古文：追还，授领军将军、录尚书事，寻兼侍中。
现代文：旋被朝廷召还，授领军将军、录尚书事，不久兼任侍中。
English: Xuan was recalled by the imperial court, given the title of general leading the army, recorded in the records, and soon also served as a chamberlain.

古文：续出行青州事。
现代文：依前出任青州刺史。
English: He will continue to serve as the mayor of Qingzhou.

古文：追还，拜太子太师、兼尚书左仆射、吏部尚书，迁太保。
现代文：又被追回，拜太子太师、兼尚书左仆射、吏部尚书，迁太保。
English: They were also chased back, including the Crown Prince Daishi, concurrently Shosho Zuhoji, Shosho Rikibu, and Shintaiho.

古文：时世宗作宰，风俗肃清，隆之时有受纳，世宗于尚书省大加责辱。
现代文：此时世宗主持朝政，使得世风大变，隆之偶尔收纳贿赂，世宗知晓后，就在尚书省当众大加斥责。
English: At this time, Shizong presided over the government of the dynasty, causing a great change in the world. Takashi occasionally accepted bribes, and when Shizong learned of this, he severely reprimanded him in public in Shangshu Province.

古文：齐受禅，进爵为王。
现代文：齐立国，进隆之爵位为王。
English: Qi established the country, and Jinlong's title became king.

古文：寻以本官录尚书事，领大宗正卿，监国史。
现代文：很快又以本官录尚书事，兼领大宗正卿，监修国史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of record keeper of records and books, concurrently holding the post of Daizong Zhengqing, responsible for supervising the national history.

古文：隆之性小巧，至于公家羽仪、百戏、服制时有改易，不循典故，时论非之。
现代文：隆之性格小有虚浮，对朝廷的羽仪、百戏、服制等常有改易，而不遵循旧制，所以招致了时论的非议。
English: Takashi's personality was a little vain, and he often changed the imperial court's feather ceremony, hundred plays, dress code, and so on, instead of following the old system, so he attracted the criticism of contemporary theory.

古文：于射堋上立三像人为壮勇之势。
现代文：他在射堂的靶墙上建了三个具有壮勇之势的人像。
English: On the target wall of the shooting hall, he erected three statues of heroic figures.

古文：显祖曾至东山，因射，谓隆之曰： 射堋上可作猛兽，以存古义，何为置人？
现代文：显祖曾到东山，在射箭的时候对隆之说： 射堂的靶墙上可做成猛兽形象，以便保存古义，你为什么要作成人形？
English: Xianzu once went to Dongshan and said to Takayuki when he was shooting arrows: You can make a fierce beast image on the target wall of the shooting hall in order to preserve the ancient meaning, why do you want to make a doll?

古文：终日射人，朕所不取。 
现代文：整天用箭射它们，我是不愿意的。 
English: I don't want to spend all day shooting arrows at them.

古文：隆之无以对。
现代文：隆之听了，无言以对。
English: Takashi was speechless.

古文：初，世宗委任兼右仆射崔暹、黄门郎崔季舒等，及世宗崩，隆之启显祖并欲害之，不许。
现代文：早些年，世宗交付重任给兼右仆射崔暹、黄门郎崔季舒等人，当世宗驾崩的时候，隆之向显祖进言，请他将这几个人处死，但遭到了拒绝。
English: In earlier years, Sejong entrusted important tasks to his right-hand man Choi Siam and his henchman Choi Ji Shu. When Sejong passed away, Takayuki proposed to Emperor Showa that he put these people to death, but he was refused.

古文：显祖以隆之旧齿，委以政事，季舒等仍以前隙，乃谮云： 隆之每见诉讼者，辄加哀矜之意，以示非己能裁。 
现代文：显祖认为隆之是旧人，便委托给政事，崔季舒诸人则利用原先结下的矛盾，向帝进谗说： 隆之每当接见上诉之人，就显示出特别的哀矜情绪，用来反映自己的权力有限。 
English: Xianzu thought that Long Zhi was an old man and entrusted him with political affairs, while Cui Jishu and others took advantage of the contradictions that had previously been settled and said to Emperor Jinlun: Whenever Long Zhi received an appellant, he showed a special mournful mood, which was used to reflect his limited power.

古文：显祖以其受任既重，知有冤状，便宜申涤，何得委过要名，非大臣义。
现代文：显祖认为隆之承担的职掌重大，知道他受了冤枉，极力地给以了保护，但又认为他推脱责任，求其声名，不是大臣的风度。
English: Xianzu thought that Takashi's responsibilities were great. He knew that he had been wronged and tried his best to protect him, but he also thought that he was shirking his responsibilities and seeking his reputation, not the minister's demeanor.

古文：天保五年，禁止尚书省。
现代文：天保五年，隆之被拘禁到了尚书省。
English: In the fifth year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court forbade him to go to Shangshu Province.

古文：隆之曾与元昶宴饮，酒酣，语昶曰： 与王交游，当生死不相背。 
现代文：有次，隆之与元昶一道喝酒，喝得正兴起的时候，对昶说： 同王交游往来，即使是死，也不会变卦。 
English: On one occasion, Takashi was drinking with Yuan Shao, and when they were getting drunk, he said to Yuan Shao, "Even if I die, my friendship with the king will not change."

古文：人有密言之者。
现代文：有人将此话密报了朝廷。
English: Someone secretly reported this sentence to Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：又帝未登庸之日，隆之意常侮帝。
现代文：另外，文宣帝在未登基之日，常常遭受隆之的欺侮。
English: In addition, Emperor Wenzhong often suffered from Takashi's bullying before he ascended to the throne.

古文：帝将受魏禅，大臣咸言未可，隆之又在其中。
现代文：帝将受魏禅让，大臣们都表示反对，隆之也是其中之一。
English: The emperor was forced to abdicate by Wei Zhen, and the ministers all expressed their opposition, with Longzhi being one of them.

古文：帝深衔之。因此，遂大发怒，令壮士筑百余下。放出，渴将饮水，人止之，隆之曰： 今日何在！ 
现代文：帝均把这些事牢牢记在心里，趁此机会，新帐旧账一齐算，帝下令壮士将他狠狠地揍打了一顿。放出尚书省后，他想喝水，有人不给他，隆之说： 现在在哪里！ 
English: The emperor kept these things firmly in mind, and took this opportunity to add up the new account and the old account. The emperor ordered the strong man to beat him severely. After releasing Shang Shuxuan, he wanted to drink water, but someone wouldn't give it to him, and Longzhi said, "Where are you now?"

古文：遂饮之。
现代文：硬是满足了自己的要求。
English: He drank a lot of water.

古文：因从驾，死于路中，年六十一。
现代文：又随从车驾出外巡幸，一下子死在路上，时年六十有一。
English: He also went on a sightseeing tour by car, and died suddenly on the road, at the age of sixty-one.

古文：赠冀定瀛沧幽五州诸军事、大将军、太尉、太保、冀州刺史、阳夏王。
现代文：赠冀定瀛沧幽五州诸军事、大将军、太尉、太保、冀州刺史、阳夏王。
English: Presented to Hebei Dingyuan Cangyu five states of military, general, lieutenant, Taibo, Jizhou Shishi, Yang Xia Wang.

古文：竟不得谥。
现代文：但没有得到谥号。
English: But he didn't get a nickname.

古文：隆之虽不涉学，而钦尚文雅，缙绅名流，必存礼接。
现代文：隆之虽然没有读书，但是崇尚文雅，凡遇缙绅名流，一定依礼接待。
English: Although Takashi did not study, he was a proponent of elegance, and when he met the gentry and celebrities, he always received them according to etiquette.

古文：寡姊为尼，事之如母，训督诸子，必先文义。
现代文：其寡姐做尼姑后，就像服侍母亲一样的对待；训育教导儿子，首先使用的还是文义。
English: After his sister-in-law became a nun, he treated her as if she were his mother; when disciplining and teaching his son, he first used the word meaning.

古文：世甚以此称之。
现代文：因此极得时论的称赏。
English: Therefore, it has won the praise of the theory of time.

古文：显祖末年，既多猜害，追忿隆之，诛其子德枢等十余人，并投漳水。又发隆之冢，出其尸，葬已积年，其貌不改，斩截骸骨，亦弃于漳流，遂绝嗣。
现代文：显祖末年，猜忌怀疑，即便是对死去的隆之也不放过，不仅诛杀了他的儿子德枢等十余人，全部投尸漳河，而且挖开隆之的坟墓，从棺材中拖出他的尸体，下葬虽有一年多，形象却丝毫没有改变，帝叫人斩断肢体，抛弃漳河。一下子，隆之绝了后代。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xianzu's life, he harbored suspicions even about the dead Emperor Longzhi. He not only killed more than ten people, including his son Dezhu, and threw them all into the Li River, but also dug up Longzhi's grave, dragged his body out of the coffin, and buried it for more than a year, but his image did not change at all. The emperor had his body chopped off and abandoned the Li River. Suddenly, Emperor Longzhi had no descendants.

古文：乾明中，诏其兄子子远为隆之后，袭爵阳夏王，还其财产。
现代文：乾明中，朝廷诏令其兄子子远为隆之的后嗣，袭爵阳夏王，还归还了家产财宝。
English: After the death of Emperor Wenxuan, his son Gao Yin ascended to the throne, and issued an edict to let the son of Long Zi's brother succeed to Long Zi, inherit the title of Yangxia King, and return the family property that had been confiscated in the past.

古文：初，隆之见信高祖，性多阴毒，睚眦之忿，无不报焉。
现代文：当初，隆之得高祖信任，但他阴险狠毒，对人稍有不满，肯定要想法报复。
English: At first, Takashi earned Gaozu's trust, but he was insidious and vicious. He was slightly dissatisfied with people, and he definitely wanted to take revenge.

古文：仪同三司崔孝芬以结婚姻不果，太府卿任集同知营构，颇相乖异，瀛州刺史元晏请托不遂，前后构成其罪，并诛害之。
现代文：仪同三司崔孝芬想同他结成姻亲，没有成功，太府卿任集和他一道知掌营建构造，两人颇是不和，瀛州刺史元晏以私事相托，没有结果，于是，隆之故意找岔子捏造罪名，让朝廷一个个地加以处死。
English: Yi Tong and Third Secretary Cui Xiaofeng wanted to marry him, but it did not work out. Grand Mufu Ren Ji and he worked together to build the structure. The two were quite at odds. Zhangzhou Zishi Yuanjun relied on private affairs, but it did not work out. Therefore, Longzhi deliberately fabricated charges and let the court execute them one by one.

古文：终至家门殄灭，论者谓有报应焉。司马子如，字遵业，河内温人也。
现代文：隆之最终满门抄斩，人们认为这是老天的报应。司马子如，字遵业，河内温地人氏。
English: Takashi was eventually beheaded, and people thought it was God's retribution. Sima Zi Ru, also known as Zunye, was from Hanoi's On district.

古文：八世祖模，晋司空、南阳王。模世子保，晋乱出奔凉州，因家焉。
现代文：八世祖模，晋时为司空，南阳王，模长子保，因朝廷动乱出奔凉州，于是就定居到了此地。
English: The eighth-generation ancestor Mō, who at the time of the Jin Dynasty was Siku, the King of Nanyang, and Mō's eldest son Bao, fled to Liangzhou due to the turmoil in the imperial court, and settled here.

古文：魏平姑臧，徙居于云中，其自序云尔。
现代文：魏平定姑臧，又迁居云中。子如的家谱是这样记载的。
English: Wei Pingding Gu Xuan moved to Yunzhong again. This is how Zi Ru's family tree is recorded.

古文：父兴龙，魏鲁阳太守。
现代文：父兴龙，魏鲁阳太守。
English: His father, Xinglong, was the governor of Wei and Luyang.

古文：子如少机警，有口辩。好交游豪杰，与高祖相结托，分义甚深。
现代文：子如少时机敏，能言善辩，还喜欢交结豪杰，尤其是依托高祖后，两人的情义更是深重。
English: The younger son is quick-witted, can speak well, and likes to make friends with heroes. Especially after relying on Gao Zuo, the relationship between the two is even more profound.

古文：孝昌中，北州沦陷，子如携家口南奔肆州，为尔朱荣所礼遇，假以中军。
现代文：孝昌中，北州沦陷，子如便携妻带子南逃肆州，受到尔朱荣的厚待，并被委任为中军将军。
English: In Xiaochang, when Beizhou fell, Zi Rong took his wife with him and fled south to Wuzhou. He was treated well by Er Zhu Rong and was appointed as a general of the Chinese army.

古文：荣之向洛也，以子如为司马、持节、假平南将军，监前军。
现代文：尔朱荣挺进洛阳，以子如为司马，持节、假平南将军，监领前军。
English: Le Zhurong marched into Luoyang, using his son as his steed, holding the festival, the fake Pingnan general, supervising the front army.

古文：次高都，荣以建兴险阻，往来冲要，有后顾之忧，以子如行建兴太守、当郡都督。
现代文：军队抵达高都，尔朱荣认为建兴地势险阻，为往来的要冲，故有后顾之忧，所以委派子如为建兴太守、当郡都督。
English: When the army arrived in Gaodu, Er Zhu Rong thought that Jianxing was in a precarious situation, as it was an important point of contact, so he was worried about the future, so he appointed his son as the governor of Jianxing and the governor of the county.

古文：永安初，封平遥县子，邑三百户，仍为大行台郎中。
现代文：永安初年，封平遥县子，食邑三百户，依然为大行台郎中。
English: In the first year of Yongan, the county seat of Pingyao County, with three hundred households in food villages, is still the largest among the Taihang Tairao.

古文：荣以子如明辩，能说时事，数遣奉使诣阙，多称旨，孝庄亦接待焉。
现代文：尔朱荣知道子如长于明辩，能分析形势，多次派遣他赴朝廷禀报情况，任务完成得很好，孝庄帝也曾接待过。
English: Zhu Rong knew that Zhu Rong was good at argumentation and could analyze the situation. He sent him to the imperial court many times to report the situation. The task was completed well, and Emperor Xiaozhuang also received him.

古文：葛荣之乱，相州孤危，荣遣子如间行入邺，助加防守。
现代文：葛荣叛乱，相州孤立无援，尔朱荣指令子如从小路赶赴邺城，助相州刺史防守。
English: After Ge Rong's rebellion, Xiangzhou was isolated and helpless. Zhu Rong's commanding officer rushed to Shicheng from a small road to help Xiangzhou defend against history.

古文：葛荣平，进爵为侯。
现代文：平定葛荣之乱，晋爵为侯。
English: He put down the Ge Rong Rebellion and was promoted to marquis.

古文：元颢入洛，人情离阻，以子如曾守邺城，颇有恩信，乃令行相州事。
现代文：元颢进据洛阳后，人心动摇，朝廷认为子如曾防守过邺城，在当地极有威信，就命令他行相州刺史事。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty entered Luoyang, people's hearts were shaken. The imperial court believed that if the son had defended Lucheng, he would have great prestige in the local area, and ordered him to carry out a historical event in the Lucheng Province.

古文：颢平，征为金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：元颢败亡，子如被征召为金紫光禄大夫。
English: Yuan Shao was defeated, and his son was conscripted to be the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：尔朱荣之诛，子如知有变，自宫内突出，至荣宅，弃家随荣妻子与尔朱世隆等走出京城。
现代文：尔朱荣被朝廷处死之前，子如知道事情会马上恶化，急忙溜出宫来，跑到尔朱荣家，带着尔朱氏的妻、子及尔朱世隆等逃出了京城。
English: Before Lr Zhu Rong was executed by the imperial court, Zi Rong, knowing that things would immediately get worse, hurriedly slipped out of the palace, ran to Lr Zhu Rong's home, and fled the capital with Lr Zhu's wife, son, and Lr Zhu Shilong.

古文：世隆便欲还北，子如曰： 事贵应机，兵不厌诈，天下恟恟，唯强是视，于此际会，不可以弱示人。
现代文：世隆想返归北地，子如不同意，说： 事不宜迟，兵不厌诈，天下大乱，唯强是视，于此机会，不可以向世人显现懦弱。
English: Shilong wanted to return to the North, but his son disagreed, saying, "It is not appropriate to be late, the soldiers are not tired of deception, the world is in turmoil, only the strong are regarded, in this opportunity, it is impossible to show cowardice to the world.

古文：若必走北，即恐变故随起，不如分兵守河桥，回军向京，出其不意，或可离溃。
现代文：如果想逃往北方，恐怕变故会接踵而至，不如兵分两路，一路把守河桥，另一路直扑京城，出其不意，极有可能使敌溃散。
English: If you want to escape to the north, I am afraid that misfortune will follow. It is better to divide the soldiers into two routes, one way to guard the river bridge, the other way to attack the capital, surprise, it is very likely to cause the enemy to break up.

古文：假不如心，犹足示有余力，使天下观听，惧我威强。 
现代文：假若未能随心所欲，但也很好地显现了自己的力量，集中了人们的视线，使其惧怕我的威势。 
English: If I didn't get my way, I did a good job of showing my strength, focusing people's attention, and making them afraid of my power.

古文：于是世隆还逼京城。
现代文：这样世隆就依子如之计进逼京师。
English: In this way, Shilong entered the Beijing division according to his plan.

古文：魏长广王立，兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：魏长广王即位，子如兼任尚书右仆射。
English: Emperor Wei Changguang ascended the throne, and his son Rong Rong also served as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：前废帝以为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵阳平郡公，邑一千七百户。
现代文：前废帝又拜他为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司，晋爵阳平郡公，食邑一千七百户。
English: The former deposed emperor also worshiped him as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, an etiquette official, a prince of Yangping County, and a ruler of 1,700 households.

古文：固让仪同不受。
现代文：子如坚辞不受仪同三司。
English: If the son insists, he will not be accepted by the ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：高祖起义信都，世隆等知子如与高祖有旧，疑虑，出为南岐州刺史。
现代文：高祖于信都举起义旗，尔朱世隆知子如与高祖关系密切，猜忌他，让他出任南岐州刺史。
English: Gao Zu and Yu Xin both raised the banner of righteousness. If Zhu Shilong's son had a close relationship with Gao Zu, he would be suspicious of him and let him serve as the governor of South Qizhou.

古文：子如愤恨，泣涕自陈，而不获免。
现代文：子如愤慨，痛哭流涕陈述自己不能赴任的理由，但是没有得到朝廷的批准。
English: The son, indignant and weeping bitterly, stated the reasons why he could not take office, but he did not get the approval of the imperial court.

古文：高祖入洛，子如遣使启贺，仍叙平生旧恩。
现代文：高祖进占洛阳，子如打发人带着礼物祝贺，还叙说两人往日的友情。
English: Gao Zu went to Luoyang, Zi Rude sent people to congratulate him with gifts, and also recounted the friendship between the two in the past.

古文：寻追赴京，以为大行台尚书，朝夕左右，参知军国。
现代文：很快被朝廷召回京师，任命为大行台尚书，朝夕跟随在皇帝的身边，参预国家大事。
English: He was soon called back to Beijing by the imperial court and was appointed as the Grand Marshal of the Court. He followed the emperor's side in the morning and evening and took part in important national events.

古文：天平初，除左仆射，与侍中高岳、侍中孙腾、右仆射高隆之等共知朝政，甚见信重。
现代文：天平初年，拜左仆射，与侍中高岳、侍中孙腾、右仆射高隆之等人共同执掌朝政，因而甚得皇帝信任。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, Emperor Tenpyo's second-in-command, Bai Zuoxia, together with his third-in-command, Gao Yue, his third-in-command, Sun Teng, and his third-in-command, Gao Longzhi, took charge of the imperial government, thus gaining the emperor's trust.

古文：高祖镇晋阳，子如时往谒见，待之甚厚，并坐同食，从旦达暮，及其当还，高祖及武明后俱有赉遗，率以为常。
现代文：高祖镇守晋阳，子如经常前去拜谒，所以高祖待他甚厚，并和他同桌吃饭，从早晨一直交谈到晚上，当他动身返京时，高祖和武明皇后都有馈赠。每次都是如此。
English: Gao Zu was stationed in Jinyang, and his son often went there to pay homage, so Gao Zu treated him very generously, and ate at the same table with him, talking from morning until evening. When he left to return to Beijing, Gao Zu and Empress Wu Ming had gifts. This was the case every time.

古文：子如性既豪爽，兼恃旧恩，簿领之务，与夺任情，公然受纳，无所顾惮。
现代文：子如生性豪爽，加之依恃旧恩，在掌管文簿登记的时候，任意予夺，公然收受贿赂，而毫无顾忌。
English: The son was born with a proud nature, coupled with clinging to the old grace. When he was in charge of the book registration, he arbitrarily took bribes and openly accepted bribes without any scruples.

古文：兴和中，以为北道行台，巡检诸州，守令已下，委其黜陟。
现代文：兴和中，为北道行台，巡检各州，太守县令诸官，可以随时罢黜升降。
English: For the sake of prosperity and prosperity, for the North Road, the inspection of each state, the governor of the county, and the officials can be promoted and demoted at any time.

古文：子如至定州，斩深泽县令；至冀州，斩东光县令。
现代文：子如到定州，杀了深泽县县令；至冀州，砍了东光县县令的头。
English: If he went to Dingzhou, he would kill the county magistrate of Fukasawa County; if he went to Jizhou, he would behead the county magistrate of Dongguan County.

古文：皆稽留时漏，致之极刑。
现代文：两人被斩，都是因为羁留事务而出了纰漏。
English: Two people were beheaded, all of them because of detention issues.

古文：若言有进退，少不合意，便令武士顿曳，白刃临项。
现代文：如果话说得不好，不合心意，便指使武士殴打，还用杀头相威胁。
English: If the words are not good and do not suit their intentions, they order the samurai to beat them and also threaten to kill them.

古文：士庶惶惧，不知所为。
现代文：士庶惶恐，不知怎么办才行。
English: The officials were panicked and had no choice.

古文：转尚书令。
现代文：转任尚书令。
English: Later, he was transferred to Shang Shuling.

古文：子如义旗之始，身不参预，直以高祖故旧，遂当委重，意气甚高，聚敛不息。
现代文：首举义旗之时，子如并未亲身参预，他只不过是凭借与高祖的关系，担当了朝廷的重任，因此狂妄自大，聚敛不息。
English: At the time of the first raising of the banner of righteousness, Zi Ru did not personally participate in the advance, he simply took on the important task of the imperial court by virtue of his relationship with Gao Zu, so he was arrogant and concentrated.

古文：时世宗入辅朝政，内稍嫌之，寻以赃贿为御史中尉崔暹所劾，禁止于尚书省。
现代文：此时世宗入朝辅政，内心里讨厌他，即指使御史中尉以赃贿罪弹劾，拘禁在尚书省。
English: At this time, Shizong entered the government as an aide to the emperor, and he hated him in his heart, so he ordered Lieutenant Mishi to impeach him on the charge of bribery, and he was detained in Shangshu Province.

古文：诏免其大罪，削官爵。
现代文：帝诏令免其死罪，削除官爵。
English: The imperial edict exempted him from the death penalty and removed his official title.

古文：未几，起行冀州事。
现代文：不多时日，起复为冀州刺史。
English: It didn't take long for the uprising to make history in Jizhou.

古文：子如能自厉改，甚有声誉，发摘奸伪，僚吏畏伏之。
现代文：子如能知错改错，在冀州揭发奸伪，其僚佐很是畏服，所以名声很好。
English: If a son can learn from his mistakes and correct them, and expose treachery and falsehood in Jizhou, his colleagues are very intimidated, so the reputation is very good.

古文：转行并州事。
现代文：转行并州刺史事。
English: He changed his career path and became a state senator.

古文：诏复官爵，别封野王县男，邑二百户。
现代文：诏复官爵，别封为野王县男。食邑二百户。
English: Zhao was reinstated as an official peer, and was given the title of the man of Nio County. There were 200 households in the food village.

古文：齐受禅，以有翼赞之功，别封须昌县公，寻除司空。
现代文：齐受禅，帝认为子如有翼赞之功，别封为须昌县公，很快升任司空。
English: Qi accepted Zen, and the emperor thought that if his son had the merit of winged praise, he should be appointed as the governor of Suchang County, and soon he was promoted to the position of Siku.

古文：子如性滑稽，不治检裁，言戏秽亵，识者非之。
现代文：子如幽默滑稽，说话不加裁剪，有时很是下流肮脏，因而受到了一些人的非议。
English: He has been criticised by some for his humorous, off-the-cuff and sometimes downright filthy language.

古文：而事姊有礼，抚诸兄子慈笃，当时名士并加钦爱，世以此称之。
现代文：不过，他侍奉其姊甚为殷勤，抚育诸兄之子女极其慈爱，故得到当时名流的称颂，人们自然地引作了榜样。
English: However, he served his sister very diligently and raised the children of his brothers very lovingly, so he was praised by the celebrities of the time and people naturally cited him as a role model.

古文：然素无鲠正，不能平心处物。
现代文：子如一向不耿直，也就不能平心待物。
English: If the child has always been dishonest, it will not be able to treat things with equanimity.

古文：世宗时，中尉崔暹、黄门郎崔季舒俱被任用。
现代文：世宗时，中尉崔暹、黄门郎崔季舒等人均受重用。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Lieutenant Choi Siem, Huangmen Lang Choi Ji Shu and others were all given important positions.

古文：世宗崩，暹等赴晋阳。子如乃启显祖，言其罪恶，仍劝诛之。
现代文：世宗驾崩后，崔暹等前往晋阳，子如趁机向显祖进言，诉说他们的罪恶，请求将其诛杀。
English: After the death of King Sejong, Choe Siam and others went to Jinyang, and Sejong took the opportunity to speak to Emperor Xianzu, telling him of their sins and requesting that he be killed.

古文：其后子如以马度关，为有司所奏。
现代文：不久，子如骑马过关，被有司劾奏。
English: Soon after, Zi Rong passed the examination on horseback and was impeached.

古文：显祖引子如数让之曰： 崔暹、季舒事朕先世，有何大罪，卿令我杀之？ 
现代文：显祖多次责备子如说： 崔暹、季舒事朕的先世，有什么大罪，你为何要劝我杀他们？ 
English: Emperor Xianzu repeatedly scolded his son, saying, "What was the great sin of Cui Siam and Ji Shuxi in my previous life, and why do you want to persuade me to kill them?

古文：因此免官。
现代文：于是子如的官职就被免掉了。
English: As a result, Sonu was removed from his post.

古文：久之，犹以先帝之旧，拜太尉。
现代文：过了许久，朝廷认为子如为先帝的旧臣，就拜他做了太尉。
English: After a long time, the imperial court considered his son to be an old vassal of the former emperor, and made him a captain.

古文：寻以疾薨，时年六十四。
现代文：不久因病而死，时年六十四。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards, aged 64.

古文：赠使持节、都督冀定瀛沧怀五州诸军事、太师、太尉、怀州刺史，赠物一千段，谥曰文明。
现代文：赠使持节、都督冀定瀛沧怀五州诸军事、太师、太尉、怀州刺史，赐物一千段，谥号文明。
English: The gift of the festival, the governor of the five states of the military, the grandmaster, the lieutenant, and the history of Huizhou, the gift of a thousand paragraphs, the nickname of civilization.

古文：子消难嗣。
现代文：子消难嗣继。
English: If a son dies, it is difficult to succeed him.

古文：尚高祖女，以主婿、贵公子，频历中书、黄门郎、光禄少卿。
现代文：消难娶高祖女，因是主婿、贵公子，而历职中书、黄门郎、光禄少卿。
English: He was able to marry his great-grandmother because he was the son-in-law of the lord and a noble prince, and he had served as Chushu, Huangmenro, and Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：出为北豫州刺史，镇武牢。
现代文：出任北豫州刺史，镇守武牢。
English: He served as the chief historian of North Henan Province and the town guard of Wudang Prison.

古文：消难博涉史传，有风神，然不能廉洁，在州为御史所劾。
现代文：消难博览史传，有风采神韵，但是却不廉洁，在北豫州时被御史弹劾过。
English: He is said to have been an expert in the history of eliminating difficulties. He has style and verve, but he is not honest. He was impeached by the emperor when he was in North Henan Province.

古文：又于公主情好不睦，公主谮诉之，惧罪，遂招延邻敌，走关西。
现代文：又由于与公主关系疏远，公主悄悄地向皇上控诉，消难害怕得罪，便招延邻国之敌，逃亡到关西。
English: In addition, due to the estrangement of relations with the princess, the princess quietly complained to the emperor, and was afraid of offending, so she invited the enemy of the neighboring country and fled to Kansai.

古文：子如兄纂，先卒，子如贵，赠岳州刺史。
现代文：子如兄纂，早死，因子如显贵，赠岳州刺史。
English: A son like an elder brother, an early death, a factor like a dignitary, a gift of Yuezhou stabbing history.

古文：纂长子世云，轻险无行，累迁卫将军、颍州刺史。
现代文：纂长子世云，轻佻无行，累迁卫将军、颍州刺史。
English: His eldest son, Shiyun, was a light-hearted and idle person. He was successively transferred to be a general of the Imperial Guards and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：世云本无勋业，直以子如故，频历州郡。
现代文：世云本无功勋，只是因为子如的缘故，数历州郡。
English: Shiyun was not a meritorious person, but because of his son, he was given the title of Count of Calicut.

古文：恃叔之势，所在聚敛，仍肆奸秽。
现代文：依恃叔父之权势，大力聚敛，肆行奸秽。
English: He clung to his uncle's power, gathered powerfully, and indulged in dirty tricks.

古文：将见推治，内怀惊惧，侯景反，遂举州从之。
现代文：在即将被治罪之时，内心惊恐，恰好侯景叛逆，世云便举州归从了侯景。
English: At the time when he was about to be punished, his heart was terrified, just as Houjing rebelled, Shiyun then subordinated the state to Houjing.

古文：时世云母弟在邺，便倾心附景，无复顾望。
现代文：此时世云的胞弟也在邺城，更使得他死心塌地地投靠了侯景。
English: At this time, Shiyun's brother-in-law was also in Lucheng, which made him even more determined to support Houjing.

古文：诸将围景于颍川，世云临城遥对诸将，言甚不逊。
现代文：朝廷诸将将侯景围困在颍川，世云登上城墙面对攻城的将领，出言极为不逊。
English: The imperial generals besieged Houjing in the Li River, and Shiyun climbed the city wall to confront the generals who were besieging the city. His words were extremely harsh.

古文：世宗犹以子如恩旧，免其诸弟死罪，徙于北边。
现代文：世宗顾及子如的脸面，免其诸弟死罪，将他们流放到了北边。
English: Sejong spared his brothers the death penalty and exiled them to the north in consideration of his son's face.

古文：侯景于涡阳败后，世云复有异志，为景所杀。
现代文：侯景在涡阳失败后，世云又有了异心，很快就被侯景砍头。
English: After Hou Jing's failure in the whirlwind, Shiyun had a change of heart and was soon beheaded by Hou Jing.

古文：世云弟膺之，字仲庆。
现代文：世云弟膺之，字仲庆。
English: Shiyun's younger brother Shizhi, nicknamed Zhongqing.

古文：少好学，美风仪。
现代文：少好学，风度好仪容美。
English: Less eager to learn, good manners and good looks.

古文：天平中，子如贵盛，膺之自尚书郎历中书、黄门郎。
现代文：天平中，子如大贵，膺之自尚书郎迁为中书郎、黄门郎。
English: In Tenpyo, his son, Daiki, was promoted from Sho Shuro to Chushuro and Omonro.

古文：子如别封须昌县公，回授膺之。
现代文：子如别封须昌县公，转让给了膺之。
English: His son, Rubei Fong, the governor of Suchang County, was transferred to his son.

古文：膺之家富于财，厚自封殖。
现代文：膺之家财富足，但还在不断积聚。
English: The wealth of the House of the Dragonfly is sufficient, but it is still accumulating.

古文：王元景、邢子才之流以夙素重之。
现代文：王元景、邢子才等人认为他有志向，十分推崇。
English: Wang Yuanjing, Zou Zi Cai and others believed that he had aspirations and highly respected him.

古文：以其疏简傲物，竟天保世，沦滞不齿。
现代文：因为疏简傲物，天保年间，一直遭到冷落。
English: During the Tenpo era, it had been left out of the limelight because of its simplistic style.

古文：乾明中，王晞白肃宗，除卫尉少卿。
现代文：乾明中，王将此情况向肃宗作了报告，朝廷委任他做了卫尉少卿。
English: In the middle of the Qianming Dynasty, Wang reported the situation to Su Zong, and the imperial court appointed him as the junior secretary of the imperial guards.

古文：河清末，光禄大夫。
现代文：河清末年，为光禄大夫。
English: In the last years of the Heqing Dynasty, he was the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：患泄利，积年不起，至武平中，犹不堪朝谒，就家拜仪同三司。
现代文：患痢疾，长年卧床不起，到武平中，还不能朝谒，诏就家拜仪同三司。
English: He suffered from dysentery and was bedridden for many years. When he went to Wuping Middle School, he was not yet able to perform the Hajj.

古文：好读《太玄经》，注扬雄《蜀都赋》。
现代文：膺之喜读《太玄经》，注释过扬雄的《蜀都赋》。
English: Zou Zhi read the "Tao Xuan Jing" with pleasure and annotated Yang Xiong's "Shu Du Fu."

古文：每云： 我欲与扬子云周旋。 
现代文：常说： 我想和扬子云比试高下。 
English: He often said: I want to compete with Yang Ziyun.

古文：齐亡岁，以利疾终，时年七十一。
现代文：齐亡的这年，因痢疾而死，时年七十一年。
English: In the year of Qi's death, he died of dysentery at the age of seventy-one.

古文：膺之弟子瑞，天保中为定州长史，迁吏部郎中。
现代文：膺之弟子瑞，天保中为定州长史，后迁吏部郎中。
English: Rui, a disciple of Zou, was a member of the Tianbao Middle School, and later became a member of the Renmin Middle School.

古文：举清勤平约。
现代文：举止清勤平约。
English: Behaviour and attendance are expected to be clean.

古文：迁司徒左长史，兼廷尉卿，以平直称。
现代文：迁司徒左长史，兼廷尉卿，因公平而受世人称颂。
English: The relocation officer, Zuo Changshi, who was also a courtier, was praised by the world for his fairness.

古文：乾明初，领御史中丞，正色举察，为朝廷所许。
现代文：乾明初年，领御史中丞，正色举察，被朝廷赞许。
English: In the first year of Emperor Qianming, he was promoted to the middle-ranking official of the imperial court, and was praised by the imperial court.

古文：以疾去职，就拜祠部尚书。
现代文：以疾病辞职，就拜祠部尚书。
English: Resigned due to illness, but continued to worship at the shrine.

古文：卒，赠瀛州刺史，谥曰文节。
现代文：卒，赠瀛州刺史，谥文节。
English: He was awarded the Shandong Provincial History Prize and the Shandong Literature Festival.

古文：子瑞弟幼之，清贞有素行，少历显位。
现代文：子瑞弟幼之，清贞有素行，年轻时历职显贵。
English: His son Rui and his younger brother, Qing Zhen, were well-behaved and had distinguished careers when they were young.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于眉州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇中，死于眉州刺史任上。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he died in Meizhou.

古文：子瑞妻，令萱之妹，及令萱得宠于后主，重赠子瑞怀州剌史，诸子亦并居显职。同游，武平末给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：子瑞妻，令萱的妹妹，当令萱得宠于后主时，朝廷重赠子瑞怀州刺史，诸位儿子都同居显位：同游，武平末年任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Zi Rui's wife, the younger sister of Ling Zi, when Ling Zi was favored by the queen mother, the imperial court re-gifted Zi Rui to Huai Zhou Shishi. All the sons lived together and were prominent: they traveled together, and in the last years of Wu Ping's life, he was given the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：同回，太府卿。
现代文：同回，太府卿。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to Dafu-kyo.

古文：同宪，通直常侍。
现代文：同宪，通直常侍。
English: He was a member of the same family, and became a Tsuneishi no zenshō.

古文：然同游终为嘉吏，隋开皇中尚书民部侍郎，卒于遂州刺史。
现代文：不过，同游终为嘉吏，隋开皇中为尚书民部侍郎，卒于遂州刺史位上。
English: However, the fellow traveler ended up being a meritorious official. In the Sui Dynasty, he was the attendant of the People's Department of Shangshu, and died in Suizhou on the throne of history.

古文：史臣曰：高祖以晋阳戎马之地，霸图攸属，治兵训旅，遥制朝权，京台机务，委寄深远。
现代文：史臣曰：高祖以晋阳为兵家重镇，是自己成就大业的根基所在，长期在这裹治兵训旅，积蓄力量，遥控朝廷大权，朝廷机务，托付者关系重大。
English: Shichen said: Gao Zu regarded Jinyang as a military stronghold, and it was the foundation of his great achievements. He had a long-term military training trip here, accumulated strength, remote-controlled the imperial power, the imperial machinery, and the trustees were of great importance.

古文：孙腾等俱不能清贞守道，以治乱为怀，厚敛货财，填彼溪壑。
现代文：而孙腾等人均不能清贞自守，不能以大道治理乱政，却一心聚敛，欲壑难填。
English: However, Sun Teng and others were not able to keep their chastity, and could not govern the chaotic government with a high road, but they gathered together, and it was difficult to fill their desires.

古文：昔萧何之镇关中，荀彧之居许下，不亦异于是乎！
现代文：当年萧何的留守关中，荀或的留守许都，可跟他们完全不一样呀!
English: At that time, Xiao He's left-behind Guanzhong, and Zou Or's left-behind Xu Du, are completely different from them!

古文：赖世宗入辅，责以骄纵，厚遇崔暹，奋其霜简，不然则君子属厌，岂易间焉。
现代文：多亏世宗入朝秉政，责罚他们的骄纵，全力依靠崔暹等人，发挥其严肃政纪的威力，要不然，君子们都一个个伤心失望了，其结果将不堪设想。
English: Thanks to Shizong for entering the imperial court and upholding the political system, punishing their arrogance, and fully relying on Cui Siam and others to exert their power of serious politics and discipline, otherwise, the gentlemen were all heartbroken and disappointed one by one, and the result would be unimaginable.

古文：孙腾牵裾之诚，有足称美。
现代文：孙腾当初牵衣劝诫的诚心，有值得称道的地方。
English: The sincerity of Sun Teng's exhortation at the beginning is commendable.

古文：隆之劳其志力，经始邺京，又并是潜德僚寀，早申任遇，崇其名器，未失朝序。
现代文：高隆之尽其心力于邺都的经营，又同是高祖早年未发迹时的朋友，早就结下深情，提高优待他俩的名位，大致说来还不失朝政基本秩序。
English: Gao Longzhi devoted all his efforts to the management of Shudu. He was also Gao Zu's friend in his early years, when Gao Zu had not yet made a fortune. He had already formed a deep affection for Gao Zu, and treated them both with preferential treatment. Generally speaking, he did not lose the basic political order of the dynasty.

古文：子如徒以少相亲重，情深昵狎，义非草昧，恩结宠私，勋德莫闻，坐致台辅。
现代文：至于司马子如，衹不过因为幼年时在一起玩耍胡闸而已，既无创业的贡献，又没有可称的政绩，竟白白地占据朝廷三公的高位!
English: As for Sima Ziyu, he occupied the high position of the Three Princes of the Imperial Court in vain, just because they played chess together when they were young, without any entrepreneurial contribution, and without any praiseworthy achievements.

古文：犹子之爱，训以义方，膺之风素可重，幼之清简自立，有足称也。
现代文：对其侄子的爱护，知道用大道理去教育他们。司马膺之的作风值得重视，司马幼之的清正自立，也值得称道。
English: He loves his nephews and knows how to educate them with great principles. Sima Yuanzhi's work style is worthy of attention, and Sima Yuanzhi's integrity and self-reliance are also worthy of praise.

古文：赞曰：闳、散胥附，萧、曹扶翼。齐运勃兴，孙、高陈力。
现代文：赞曰：像古人的辅佐周文王、汉高祖一般，当北齐国运兴起之际，孙腾、隆之都尽力相助，成就了大业。
English: Zang said: Like the ancients' assistants Zhou Wen Wang and Henkel Zu, when the Northern Qi National Movement arose, Sun Teng and Long Zhi both tried their best to help and achieved great things.

古文：黩货无厌，多惭衮职。
现代文：但他们贪得无厌，有负于自己的崇高职责。
English: But they are insatiably greedy and fail in their noble duty.

古文：司马滑稽，巧言令色。
现代文：至若司马子如，衹是一名无聊充数的官员。一个巧言令色的角色罢了。
English: As far as Sima Ziru is concerned, Zhai is a boring official. He is just a charismatic character.

