古文：丙子九月十九日余久拟西游，迁延二载，老病将至，必难再迟。
现代文：丙子年九月十九日我早就打算到西边旅游，拖延了两年，眼看年岁渐老，疾病也将缠身，必定难以再推迟了。
English: I had already planned to travel to the west on September 19th, the year of the rooster, but I delayed it for two years. As I get older, I will be plagued by illness, and it will be difficult to postpone it any longer.

古文：欲候黄石斋先生一晤，而石翁杳无音至；欲与仲昭兄把袂而别，而仲兄又不南来。
现代文：想等黄石斋先生来会一面，但石翁音信杳无；想与仲昭兄握手话别，而他又不南来这里。
English: I wanted to wait for Mr. Huang Shizai to come to the meeting, but there was no letter from Shi Weng; I wanted to shake hands with Brother Zhong Zhao, but he did not come here.

古文：咋晚趋晤仲昭兄于土渎庄。
现代文：昨晚赶去土读庄和仲昭兄会面。
English: Last night, I rushed to Doyosho to meet with Naka Akira.

古文：今日为出门计，适杜若叔至，饮至子夜，乘醉放舟。
现代文：今日正准备出门，恰好杜若叔来，我和他一同饮酒到子夜时分，然后乘醉上船出发。
English: Today I was getting ready to go out, when Uncle Du Ruo came. I drank with him until midnight, and then we got drunk and went on a boat.

古文：同行者为静闻师。
现代文：和我同行的是静闻禅师。
English: I was accompanied by Zen master Shizhen.

古文：二十日天未明，抵锡邑。
现代文：二十日天没有亮就抵达无锡县城。
English: On the 20th, they arrived in Wuxi County before dawn.

古文：比晓，先令人知会使知道王孝先，自往看王受时，已他出。
现代文：等到天明，先让人去通报王孝先，我自己去看望王受时，但他外出了。
English: Wait until dawn, let someone go to inform Wang Xiaolu first, I went to visit Wang Jue myself, but he went out.

古文：即过看王忠纫，忠纫留酌至午，而孝先至，已而受时亦归。
现代文：于是去探访王忠纫。忠纫留我饮酒到中午，这时王孝先到来，不久，王受时也回来了。
English: So I went to visit Wang Zhongji, who kept me drinking until noon, when Wang Xiao arrived first, and Wang Youlu came back soon after.

古文：时东曙为苍梧道，其乃郎伯昌所寄也。饮至深夜，乃入舟。
现代文：我已经醉了，又与王孝先一起到王受时处饮酒。王孝先将顾东曙的家信放在我的行李袋中，饮到深夜，才回船中。
English: I was already drunk, and I went to Wang Jie to drink alcohol with Wang Xiaoxian. Wang Xiaoxian put Gu Dongxu's family letter in my luggage bag, drank until late at night, and then returned to the ship.

古文：二十一日人看孝先，复小酌。
现代文：二十一日进城去看望王孝先，又和他一块喝酒。
English: On the twenty-first day, I went to the city to visit Wang Xiaoxian and had a drink with him.

古文：上午发舟，暮过虎丘，泊于半塘。
现代文：上午开船，傍晚经过虎丘，停泊在半塘。
English: The boat departs in the morning, passes through the Tiger Hill in the evening, and anchors in the middle of the pond.

古文：二十二日，早为仲昭市竹椅于半塘。
现代文：二十二日早上为仲昭在半塘购买竹椅。
English: On the morning of the 22nd, a bamboo chair was purchased for Nakaaki in the pond.

古文：午过看文文老乃郎，并买物阊门。
现代文：中午去探望文文老的儿子，并到间门购置物品。
English: At noon, he went to visit the son of Wenwenlao, and went to the next door to purchase items.

古文：晚过葑门看含晖兄。
现代文：晚上从菏门进城去看望含晖兄。
English: In the evening, I went to the city from the gate to visit my brother.

古文：一见辄涕泪交颐，不觉为之恻然。
现代文：一见面他就泪流满面，我内心禁不住生出怜悯之情。
English: As soon as I met him, he burst into tears, and I couldn't help but feel pity for him.

古文：盖含晖遁迹吴门且十五年，余与仲昭屡访之。
现代文：含晖在苏州隐居了将近十五年，我和仲昭曾多次探访过他。
English: Han Zheng lived in seclusion in Suzhou for nearly fifteen years. I and Zhong Zhao have visited him many times.

古文：虽播迁之余，继以家荡子死，犹能风骚自遣；而兹则大异于前，以其孙之剥削无已，而继之以逆也。
现代文：虽然在流离迁徙之后，接着又倾家荡产，儿子死亡，但是他仍然能吟诗作文，自我排遣。然而此时却与从前大不相同了，原因是他孙子对他盘剥无度，加之又件逆不孝。
English: Although after the displacement and migration, followed by the collapse of the family and the death of his son, he was still able to chant poetry and self-dispose. However, this time it was very different from before, because his grandson was merciless to him, in addition to being unfilial.

古文：因复同小酌余舟，为余作与诸楚玙书，诸为横州守。
现代文：于是又一起到我的船中喝酒，他为我写了给诸楚玲的信，到半夜才分别。
English: So we went back to my boat to drink, and he wrote a letter to Zhu Chuling for me. We didn't separate until midnight.

古文：夜半乃别。二十三日，复至阊门取染ō绸裱帖。
现代文：二十三日又到间门去取所染的粗绸和所裱的书帖。
English: On the twenty-third day, he went to the door of the room to retrieve the dyed coarse silk and the stolen books.

古文：上午发舟。七十里，晚至昆山。
现代文：上午开船，行七十里，天黑时到昆山县。
English: We set sail in the morning and sailed seventy miles, arriving in Kunshan County in the dark.

古文：又十余里，出内村，下青洋江，绝江而渡，泊于江东之小桥渡侧。
现代文：又行十多里，从内村出来，下青洋江，横江而渡，停泊在江东面的小桥渡旁。
English: Another ten-plus miles, out of Uchimura, down the Qingyang River, across the river, moored in the east side of the river next to the small bridge.

古文：二十四日五鼓行。
现代文：二十四日五更时出发。
English: We leave on the 24th at 5:00 a.m.

古文：二十里至绿葭浜，天始明。
现代文：行二十里到绿霞洪，天才亮。
English: Go twenty miles to the verdant and luxuriant, the genius is bright.

古文：午过青浦。
现代文：中午经过青浦县。
English: At noon, it passed through Qingpu County.

古文：下午抵余山北，因与静闻登陆，取道山中之塔凹而南。
现代文：下午抵达佘山北面，于是与静闻登陆，取道山中的塔凹向南走。
English: In the afternoon, we arrived at the north side of Lushan Mountain, so we disembarked with Jingwen and walked south along the pagoda concave in the mountain.

古文：先过一坏圃，则八年前中秋歌舞之地，所谓施子野之别墅也。
现代文：先经过一个荒废了的园圃，这是八年前中秋节唱歌跳舞的地方，人称施子野的别墅。
English: First, we pass an abandoned garden, which was a place of singing and dancing during the Mid-Autumn Festival eight years ago. It is known as the villa of Shizino.

古文：是年，子野绣圃征歌甫就，眉公同余过访，极其妖艳。
现代文：那年，施子野刚刚精心营造好园圃，征聘了一些唱歌的人，陈眉公同我来探访，景致极其优美动人。
English: That year, Shijino had just carefully built a garden and recruited some singers. Chen Meigong came to visit with me. The scenery was extremely beautiful and moving.

古文：不三年，余同长卿过，复寻其胜，则人亡琴在，已有易主之感。
现代文：不到三年，我和长卿来这里重新探寻那园圃旧日的风光情趣，却物是人非，已经有易主之感。
English: Less than three years later, I and Nagakyo came here to re-explore the scenery of the old days of the garden, but it was a mistake, there was already a sense of change.

古文：已售兵郎王念生。
现代文：如今则只剩得断榭残墙。
English: Now all that's left is a crumbling wall.

古文：而今则断榭零垣，三顿停顿而三改其观，沧桑之变如此。
现代文：我三次在这里停留，而每次的面貌各不相同，沧桑的变化如此之大！
English: I have stayed here three times, and each time the appearance is different, the vicissitudes of life are so great!

古文：越塔凹，则寺已无门，惟大钟犹悬树间，而山南徐氏别墅亦已转属。
现代文：越过塔凹，却见到寺已经没有门了，只有大钟仍然悬挂在树间，山南部的徐氏别墅也已经换了主人。
English: Crossing the moat, however, he saw that the temple no longer had a door, only the large bell still hung between the trees, and Xu's villa in the southern part of the mountain had also changed hands.

古文：因急趋眉公顽仙庐。
现代文：于是急忙前往陈眉公的顽仙庐。
English: So he hurried to Chen Meigong's palace.

古文：眉公远望客至，先趋避；询知余，复出，挽手入林，饮至深夜。
现代文：眉公远远地望见有客人来，先是赶忙避开；询问后知道是我，又走出来，挽着我的手走进他隐居的树林中，饮酒直到深夜。
English: Lord Mui saw a guest coming from far away, and at first he hurriedly avoided it; after questioning him, he knew it was me, and then he came out, took my hand and went into the woods where he lived in seclusion, drinking until late at night.

古文：余欲别，眉公欲为余作一书寄鸡足二僧，一号弘辩，一号安仁。
现代文：我打算告别时，眉公说要为我写一封信给鸡足山的两位僧人，硬要我稍作停留，因此没有开船。
English: When I was about to say goodbye, Miegong said that he would write a letter for me to the two monks from Jiu Jiao Mountain, insisting that I stay for a while, so I didn't set sail.

古文：强为少留，遂不发舟。二十五日清晨，眉公已为余作二僧书，且修以仪。
现代文：二十五日清晨，眉公为我写好了给两位僧人的信，并且置备了礼物送给我。
English: In the early morning of the 25th, Meigong wrote a letter to the two monks for me and prepared a gift for me.

古文：复留早膳，为书王忠纫乃堂母亲寿诗二纸，又以红香米写经大士馈余。
现代文：又留我们用早餐，书写了二幅给王忠纫母亲祝寿的诗帖，又把用红香米书写的佛经和所画的观音像赠送给我。
English: He also kept us for breakfast, wrote two poems to congratulate Wang Zhongji's mother on her birthday, and gave me a Buddhist sutra written with red-scented rice and a painting of Guanyin.

古文：上午始行。
现代文：上午才出发。
English: We don't leave until the morning.

古文：盖前犹东迂之道，而至是为西行之始也。三里，过仁山。
现代文：在这之前的行程仍是向东绕道，而到了这里才算往西旅行的开始。船行三里，经过仁山。
English: The journey before this was still a detour to the east, but here is the beginning of the journey to the west.

古文：又西北三里，过天马山。
现代文：又往西北三里，经过天马山。
English: Another three miles to the northwest, past Tianma Mountain.

古文：又西三里，过横山。
现代文：又向西三里，经过横山。
English: Another three miles to the west, past Yokoyama.

古文：又西二里，过小昆山。
现代文：又向西两里，经过小昆山。
English: Another two miles to the west, past Little Kunshan.

古文：贪晚行，为听蟹群舟所惊，亟入丁家宅而泊。
现代文：又朝西行三里进入柳湖，船向西横流而渡，从柳寺旁驶过。
English: The boat sailed westward for three miles into Liuhe Lake, crossed the stream to the west, and sailed past Liuji Temple.

古文：在嘉善北三十六里，即尚书改亭公之故里。
现代文：铆寺位于水流中央，重台高阁，五层高的方形佛塔与波光相辉映，也是水乡中的一处名胜。往西到庆安桥，行十里到章练塘。
English: Shun Temple is located in the middle of the water flow, with a high platform and a five-story square pagoda reflecting the waves. It is also a scenic spot in the water town. Go west to Qing'an Bridge and travel ten miles to Zhangren Pond.

古文：二十六日过二荡，十五里为西塘，亦大镇也，天始明。
现代文：又往西行十里为蒋家湾，它已经属于嘉善县。因为贪图夜晚航行，被听蟹的众船只惊骇，便赶快划到丁家宅停泊下来。二十六日接连驶过两荡，行十五里为西塘，它也是一个大镇，这时天才亮。
English: Another ten miles to the west was Jiangjia Bay, which already belonged to Jiashan County. Because of the desire to sail at night, they were shocked by the many ships listening to the crabs, so they quickly rowed to Dingjia's house to moor. On the 26th, they sailed through two waves in succession, fifteen miles to Xitang, which is also a large town, and it was only dawn.

古文：西十里为下圩荡，又南过二荡，西五里为唐母村，始有桑。
现代文：往西十里为下抒荡，又向南经过两荡，再往西行五里为唐母村，这里才有桑树。
English: Ten miles to the west is the lower Liang, and two miles to the south, and five miles to the west is the Tang mother village, where there are only mulberry trees.

古文：又西南十三里为王江泾，其市愈盛。
现代文：又向西南行十三里为王江径，集市更加繁盛。
English: Thirteen miles to the southwest is the Wangjiang Trail, and the bazaar is more prosperous.

古文：直西二十余里，出澜溪之中。
现代文：一直向西航行二十多里，进入澜溪中。
English: It sailed westward for more than twenty miles and entered the middle of the Lanxi River.

古文：西南十里为前马头，又十里为师姑桥。
现代文：从澜溪向西南行十里为前马头，又过十里为师姑桥。
English: From Lanxi to the southwest, it is ten miles to Qianma Tou, and another ten miles to Shigu Bridge.

古文：又八里，日尚未薄崦嵫，而计程去乌镇尚二十里，戒于萑苻，泊于十八里桥北之吴店村浜。
现代文：又行八里，太阳尚未落山，但估计离乌镇还有二十里路程，为防备盗贼，便停泊在十八里桥北面的吴店村洪。
English: Another eight miles, the sun has not yet set, but it is estimated that there are still twenty miles away from Wuzhen. In order to prevent thieves, they anchored in Wudian Cunhong, north of the eighteen-mile bridge.

古文：其地属吴江。二十七日平明行，二十里抵乌镇，入叩程尚甫。
现代文：二十七日天亮时出发，行二十里抵达乌镇，下船去拜望程尚甫。
English: On the 27th, they set out at dawn and traveled 20 miles to reach Wuzhen. They disembarked to visit Cheng Shangfu.

古文：尚甫方游虎埠，两郎出晤。
现代文：程尚甫正好游览虎埠去了，他的两个儿子出来相见。
English: Cheng Shangfu just happened to visit the tiger town, and his two sons came out to meet each other.

古文：捐橐中资，酬其昔年书价，遂行。
现代文：我拿出衣袋中的钱，偿还前些年欠他家的书费，便走了。
English: I took out the money in my pocket, repaid the book fees I owed to his family a few years ago, and left.

古文：西南十八里，连市。
现代文：向西南航行十八里，到连市。
English: Sail 18 miles southwest to Lianyungang.

古文：又十八里，寒山桥。
现代文：又行十八里，到寒山桥。
English: Another eighteen miles to Cold Mountain Bridge.

古文：又十八里，新市。
现代文：再行十八里，到新市。
English: Another eighteen miles to Xincheng.

古文：又十五里，曹村，未晚而泊。
现代文：又行十五里，到曹村，天未晚就停泊了。
English: Another fifteen miles to Cao Cun, and before the day was out, the boat was anchored.

古文：二十八日南行二十五里，至唐栖，风甚利。
现代文：二十八日从曹村往南行二十五里，到唐栖，风向很利于航行。
English: On the 28th, we sailed 25 miles south from Cao Village to Tangqi. The wind direction was very favorable for sailing.

古文：五十里，入北新关。
现代文：行五十里，入北新关。
English: Go fifty miles and enter Beixin Pass.

古文：又七里，抵棕木场，甫过午。
现代文：又行七里，抵达棕木场，才过中午。
English: After another seven miles, we arrived at the palm tree farm, just after noon.

古文：令僮子入杭城，往曹木上解元家，询黄石翁行旋，犹未北至。时木上亦往南雍，无从讯。
现代文：我叫憧子进杭州城，到曹木上解元家询问黄石斋的行踪，石翁仍没有从南方回来，当时曹木上也到南京国子监去了，无从打听黄石斋的消息。
English: I called my longed-for son to enter Hangzhou City and inquire about Huang Shizai's whereabouts at Cao Muxiang's family. Shi Weng still hadn't returned from the south. At that time, Cao Muxiang also went to Nanjing to supervise Guo Zi, unable to inquire about Huang Shizai's whereabouts.

古文：因作书舟中，投其家，为返舟计。
现代文：于是在船中写了封信，投到他家中后，返回船中。
English: So I wrote a letter in the boat, dropped it off at his house, and returned to the boat.

古文：此后行踪修阻，无便鸿即通信也。
现代文：这样做，是考虑到今后我行踪遥远，道路险阻，没有方便的通信条件。
English: This was done in consideration of the fact that in the future my whereabouts would be far away, the roads would be dangerous, and there would be no convenient communication conditions.

古文：晚过昭庆，复宿于舟。
现代文：晚上经过昭庆寺，又住宿在船中。
English: In the evening, we passed by Shokei-ji Temple and stayed on the boat.

古文：二十九日复作寄仲昭兄与陈木叔全公书，静闻往游净慈、吴山。
现代文：二十九日我又写了寄给仲昭兄和陈木叔的信。静闻去游览净慈寺和吴山。
English: On the 29th, I wrote another letter addressed to Brother Zhong Zhaobing and Uncle Chen Mu, and quietly went to visit Jingsi Temple and Wushan Mountain.

古文：是日复宿于舟。
现代文：这天晚上还是住在船中。
English: That night we stayed on the boat.

古文：三十日早入城，市参寄归。
现代文：三十日清早进城，买了些参托人捎回家。
English: On the 30th, I went into the city early in the morning, bought some ginseng and went home.

古文：午下舟，省行李之重者付归。
现代文：中午回到船中，又将行李中那些重的让船带回家。
English: I returned to the ship at noon and brought home the heavy luggage from the ferry.

古文：余同静闻渡湖入涌金门，市铜炊、竹筒诸行具。
现代文：我和静闻渡过湖进入涌金门，购置铜锅、竹筒等旅行用具。
English: Jing Wen and I crossed the lake to enter the Chung Kinmen, and purchased copper pots, bamboo canes and other travel equipment.

古文：晚从朝天门趋昭庆，浴而宿焉。
现代文：晚上从朝夭门赶往昭庆寺，洗过澡就睡了。
English: In the evening, I rushed to Zhaoqing Temple from the morning gate, took a shower and went to sleep.

古文：是日复借湛融师银十两，以益游资。
现代文：这天又向湛融师借了十两银子，用来添补旅游费用。
English: On this day, he also borrowed ten taels of silver from Zhan Rongshi to supplement the travel expenses.

古文：十月初一日，晴爽殊甚，而西北风颇厉。
现代文：十月初一日天气异常晴朗，但西北风刮得很猛。
English: On the first day of October, the weather was unusually fine, but the northwest wind was blowing very hard.

古文：余同静闻登宝石山巅。
现代文：我同静闻登上宝石山顶。
English: I climbed to the top of Jewel Mountain with Jingwen.

古文：巨石堆架者为落星石。
现代文：大石块堆砌叠架的地方为落星石。
English: The place where the large stones are stacked on a shelf is a rockfall.

古文：西峰突石尤屼嵲，南望湖光江影，北眺皋亭、德清诸山，东瞰杭城万灶，靡不历历。
现代文：西面的山峰石头突立，特别高耸，向南遥望湖光江影，往北远眺皋亭、德清等山，朝东俯瞰杭州城的万家烟火，无不清晰可辨。
English: The mountain peaks in the west are protruding and particularly high. To the south, you can see the shadow of the Huguang River. To the north, you can see the mountains of Fengting and Deqing. To the east, you can overlook the fireworks of Wanjia in Hangzhou. All of them are clearly distinguishable.

古文：下山五里，过岳王坟。
现代文：下了山走五里，经过岳王坟。
English: I walked five miles down the mountain and passed the grave of Yue Wang.

古文：十里至飞来峰，饭于市，即入峰下诸洞。
现代文：十里到飞来峰，在街市上吃了饭，就进入飞来峰下面的几个洞游览。
English: Ten miles to Fei Lai Feng, after eating at the street market, we went into several caves below Fei Lai Feng.

古文：大约其峰自枫木岭东来，屏列灵隐之前，至此峰尽骨露；石皆嵌空玲珑，骈列三洞；洞俱透漏穿错，不作深杳之状。
现代文：大约这座山峰从枫木岭向东延伸过来，如屏风横列在灵隐寺的前面，到此处峰脉终止，石头裸露出来；那石头都是中空玲珑的，有并列的三个洞，各洞都交错贯通，不显出幽深的样子。
English: The peak stretches eastward from the Maple Ridge, like a screen in front of Lingyin Temple. At this point, the peak ends and the stone is exposed; the stone is hollow and delicate, with three holes side by side, each hole interlacing and penetrating, without showing a deep appearance.

古文：余遍历其下，复各扪其巅。洞顶灵石攒空，怪树搏影，跨坐其上，不减群玉山头也。
现代文：这地方以前遭杨和尚的刊凿破坏，如今又遭到流浪的乞丐们的喧噪污染，而唯独此时众乞丐声息全无，山间的石头清朗明秀，四周毫无一点混杂的声音，宛若青山洗涤了它们的内部，蓝天擦洗了它们的外观一样。我游遍了洞下各处，又分别攀上山巅。
English: This place was previously destroyed by the chisel of Yang Monk, and now it is polluted by the noise of wandering beggars, but only at this time the beggars are silent, the stones in the mountains are clear and bright, and there is no mixed sound around, as if the mountains washed their insides and the blue sky scrubbed their exteriors. I swam all over the cave and climbed to the top of the mountain separately.

古文：其峰昔属灵隐，今为张氏所有矣。
现代文：洞顶上灵奇的石头钻天聚立，怪异的树木在风中摇曳着婆婆的倩影，跨跃到上边坐着，并不比西王母居住的群玉山头逊色。
English: The magical stones on the top of the cave drilled into the sky, the strange trees swaying in the wind with the mother-in-law's shadow, jumping to the top and sitting, are not inferior to the group of jade mountains where the West Queen Mother lives.

古文：下山涉涧，即为灵隐。
现代文：下了山涉过涧水，就是灵隐寺。
English: After descending the mountain and wading through Surabaya, it is Lingyin Temple.

古文：有一老僧，拥衲默坐中台，仰受日精，久不一瞬。
现代文：有个老和尚，裹着僧衣静静地坐在寺前的平台中央，仰面沐浴日光，许久不眨一次眼睛。
English: There was an old monk, wrapped in a monk's robe, sitting quietly in the center of the platform in front of the temple, his back bathed in sunlight, not blinking his eyes for a long time.

古文：已入法轮殿，殿东新构罗汉殿，止得五百之半，其半尚待西构也。
现代文：随后我进入法轮殿，它的东边正在新建罗汉殿，只塑了五百罗汉的一半，另一半还要等在西面建房塑造。
English: Then I entered the Falun Hall. To the east of it, a new Lohan Hall is being built. Only half of the five hundred Lohans have been sculpted, and the other half will have to wait until a building is built to the west.

古文：是日，独此寺丽妇两三群，接踵而至，流香转艳，与老僧之坐日忘空，同一奇遇矣。
现代文：这一天，唯独这寺有两三群妖艳美丽的妇人接连来到，胭脂的香味四下飘飞，美艳的容色到处显现，这与老和尚静静坐在太阳下望着天空，同样都是奇遇。
English: On this day, however, two or three groups of glamorous and beautiful women came to the temple one after another. The scent of rouge wafted everywhere, and beautiful faces appeared everywhere. This was just as much a strange encounter as the old monk sitting quietly in the sun and gazing at the sky.

古文：为徘徊久之。
现代文：为此，我在寺内徘徊了许久。
English: For this reason, I wandered around the temple for a long time.

古文：下午，由包园西登枫树岭，下至上天竺，出中、下二天竺。
现代文：下午，从包园往西登上枫木岭，下到上天竺，转出中天竺和下天竺。
English: In the afternoon, from Baoyuan to the west, ascend the Maple Ridge, descend to Shangtianyuan, and turn out of Zhongtianyuan and Xietianyuan.

古文：复循下天竺后，西循后山，得 三生石 ，不特骨态嶙峋，而肤色亦清润。
现代文：又顺下天竺后面，向西沿着后山，找到 三生石 ，它不只石骨的形态嶙峋，而且外色也清秀滋润。
English: I also went down behind Tianyao and westward along Houshan to find Sansheng Stone, which not only has the shape of a stone bone, but also has a beautiful and moist appearance.

古文：度其处，正灵隐面屏之南麓也，自此东尽飞来，独擅灵秀矣。
现代文：我估量这里正是灵隐寺对面屏风般横障着的山峰的南麓，从这里往东到飞来峰尽头，山石景物最为灵奇秀丽。
English: I estimate that this is the southern foot of the mountain peak that stands like a screen opposite Lingyin Temple, and from here to the east to the end of the flying peak, the rock scenery is the most beautiful.

古文：自下天竺五里，出毛家步渡湖，日色已落西山，抵昭庆昏黑矣。
现代文：从下天竺出来走五里，过了毛家步后渡湖，这时太阳已落西山，回到昭庆寺天色已经昏黑。
English: I walked five miles from the Lower Heavenly Staircase, and after passing Mao's footsteps, I walked to the lake. By this time, the sun had already set on the West Mountain, and it was already dark when I returned to Zhaoqing Temple.

古文：初二日，上午，自棕木场五里出观音关。
现代文：初二日上午，从棕木场出发，五里出观音关。
English: On the morning of the second day of the first lunar month, we set out from the palm tree farm and drove five miles to Guanyin Pass.

古文：西十里，女儿桥。
现代文：往西十里，到女儿桥。
English: Ten miles to the west, to Daughter Bridge.

古文：又十里，老人铺。
现代文：又十里，到老人铺。
English: Another ten miles to the old people's home.

古文：又五里，仓前。
现代文：又五里，到仓前。
English: Another five miles to Cangmae.

古文：又十里，宿于余杭之溪南。
现代文：又十里，住宿在余杭县城外的溪水南岸。
English: Another ten miles away, accommodation is on the south bank of the stream outside the city of Yuhang County.

古文：访何孝廉朴庵，先一日已入杭城矣。
现代文：去朴庵探访何孝廉，不想他已在前一天到杭州城去了。
English: When I went to visit He Xiaolian at Pak'an, I didn't think he had gone to Hangzhou City the day before.

古文：初三日自余杭南门桥得担夫，出西门，沿苕溪北岸行。
现代文：初三日在余杭县城南门桥雇到担夫，出城西门，沿苔溪北岸行。
English: On the third day of the first half of the month, a porter was hired at the South Gate Bridge in Yuhang County to leave the West Gate of the city and travel along the north bank of the Moss Creek.

古文：十里，丁桥铺。
现代文：十里，到丁桥铺。
English: It's ten miles to the Dingqiao store.

古文：又十里，渡马桥，则余杭、临安之界也。
现代文：又走十里，渡马桥，它是余杭、临安两县的交界处。
English: Another ten-mile walk to the horse bridge, which is the junction of Yuhang and Lin'an counties.

古文：又二里为青山，居市甚盛。
现代文：它的北面可以通到径山。又走两里为青山，民居市集非常繁盛。
English: To the north of it, you can walk to Jingshan. It is another two miles to Aoyama, and the residential market is very prosperous.

古文：溪山渐合，又有二尖峰屏峙。
现代文：到此处若溪与山峦逐渐靠近，前方又有两座尖峰如屏风一样耸立着。
English: At this point, the creek and the mountains are getting closer and closer, and there are two peaks in front of them, like a screen.

古文：一名紫薇，一名大山。
现代文：又行十五里，山势重新开阔。
English: After another fifteen miles, the mountain opened up again.

古文：十五里，山势复开。至十锦亭，一路从亭北西去者，于潜、徽州道也；从亭南西去者，即临安道也。
现代文：到十锦亭，一条路从亭北面向西而去，是通往于潜县、徽州府的路；从亭南面向西而去的，就是到临安县的路。
English: To Shujingting, a road from the north of the pavilion to the west is the road to Yuxian County and Huizhou Prefecture; from the south of the pavilion to the west is the road to Lin'an County.

古文：从亭西南又一里，一石梁横跨溪上，曰长桥。
现代文：从十锦亭往西南又走一里，有一条石梁横架在溪水上，称为长桥。
English: Another mile to the southwest from Shujingting, there is a stone beam on the stream, known as the Long Bridge.

古文：越桥而南又一里，入临安东关。
现代文：越过桥往南又行一里，进入临安县东关。
English: Cross the bridge and walk south for another mile to enter Dongguan, Lin'an County.

古文：山西关，土城甚低，县廨颓隘。外为吕家巷，阛闠盛于城。
现代文：出了西关，外面是吕家巷，街市的繁盛反而不比城内差。
English: Outside of Xiguan, there is Lujia Alley, and the prosperity of the street market is no worse than that of the city.

古文：又二里为皇潭，其阛闠与吕家巷同。
现代文：又走两里到皇潭，街市的情形与吕家巷一样。
English: Walking another two miles to Wangtan, the situation of the street market is the same as that of Lujia Alley.

古文：其西路分南北，北者亦于潜之道即捷径，南者新城道也。
现代文：皇潭西面道路分为南北两条，往北的也是通往于潜县的路，向南的是通往新城县的路。
English: The road on the west side of Wangtan is divided into two north-south roads. The northbound road is also the road leading to Yuxian County, and the southbound road is the road leading to Xincheng County.

古文：已而复循山向西南行，又八里为高坎，始通排简易木筏。
现代文：接着，我们又顺山向西南行，走八里到高坎，水流从这里以下才可以航行竹木筏。
English: Next, we headed south-west along the mountain, walking eight miles to Takakan. It is only from here that the current allows the bamboo rafts to sail.

古文：又三里，南入袅柳坞，复入山隘。
现代文：又走三里，向南进了袅柳坞，于是重新进入山隘中。
English: Walked another three miles, went south into the willow dock, and then re-entered the mountain pass.

古文：五里为下圩桥。
现代文：五里到下好桥。
English: It's five miles to the next bridge.

古文：由桥南溯溪西上，二里为全张，一村皆张氏之房也。
现代文：从桥南溯溪流西上，走两里为全张村，二村的人都是张姓家族。
English: From the bridge south to the west of the stream, walk two miles to the whole Zhang village. The people in the two villages are all Zhang family.

古文：走分水者，以新岭为间道，以全张为迂道。
现代文：到分水县去，从新岭走是小路，从全张村走为绕路。
English: Going to Wenshui County, walking from Xinling is a small road, and walking from Quanzhang Village is a detour.

古文：余闻新岭路隘而无托宿，遂宿于全张之白玉庵。
现代文：我听说从新岭走的那条路狭窄而且没有投宿的地方，便投宿在全张村的白玉庵。
English: I heard that the road from Xinling was narrow and there was no place to stay, so I stayed at Baiyuan in Quanzhang Village.

古文：僧意，余杭人也。
现代文：庵中僧人名叫意，是余杭县人。
English: The monk in the hermitage is named I, and is from Yuhang County.

古文：闻余好游，深夜篝灯瀹茗，为余谈其游日本事甚详。
现代文：他听说我爱好旅游，就深夜挑灯煮茶，给我非常详细地讲了他游历日本的事。
English: When he heard that I liked to travel, he lit a lamp and made tea late at night, and told me in great detail about his trip to Japan.

古文：初四日，鸡鸣作饭，昧爽西行。
现代文：初四日鸡叫时起来做饭，黎明就向西出发。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, when the rooster crows, he gets up and cooks, and at dawn he sets out to the west.

古文：二里，过桥，折而南又六里，上干坞岭。
现代文：走两里，越过一座桥，折往南又走六里，上了干坞岭。
English: Walk two miles, cross a bridge, turn south and walk six miles to the top of Dry Dock Ridge.

古文：其岭甚坦夷，盖于潜之山西来过脉，东西皆崇山峻岭，独此峡中坳。
现代文：此岭很平坦，是于潜县山西面延伸过来的山脉。东西两边都是崇山峻岭，只有这中间的山峡低凹。
English: This ridge is very flat, it is a mountain range extending from the west side of the mountain in Yuchuan County. Both sides of the east and west are high mountains, only the middle canyon is low.

古文：过脊处止丈余，南北叠塍而下，皆成稻畦。
现代文：过脉的地方只有一丈多宽，南北两面的梯田一层层向下延展，都是稻田。
English: The area where the line crosses is only a few feet wide, and the terraces on both the north and south sides extend downwards, layer upon layer, and are rice paddies.

古文：其山过东遂插天而起，曰五尖山。五尖之东北即新岭矣。
现代文：北面的水流到下坪桥，由青山汇入曹溪；南面的水流到沙宕，由新城县注入浙江，我不曾想到这低平的山冈竟然分隔开两边的水流。山脉延伸到东面便插天而起，叫五尖山。
English: To the north, the water flowed to the lower Pingqiao, from Qingshan into Caoxi; to the south, the water flowed to Shatago, from Xincheng County into Zhejiang. I never thought that this low-lying mountain would separate the two sides of the water flow. Mountains extending to the east would rise into the sky, called Wujian Mountain.

古文：循其西麓，又五里过唐家桥，则新城北界也。
现代文：沿着五尖山西麓，又走五里越过唐家桥，则是新城县的北界了。
English: Along the western foot of Wuzhishan Mountain, and five miles beyond the Tangjia Bridge, is the northern border of Xincheng County.

古文：白石崖山障其南。
现代文：白石崖山横障在唐家桥的南面。
English: The Shiroishi cliff is on the south side of the bridge.

古文：遂循水西南行，五里为华龙桥，有水自西坞来合。
现代文：于是顺水流向西南行，走五里为华龙桥，有一条水从西面山坞中流来交汇。
English: As a result, the water flowed to the southwest, going five miles to Hualong Bridge, and a stream of water from the west dock flowed to the intersection.

古文：过桥，南越一小岭，二里至沙宕，前有一石梁跨涧，曰赵安桥，则入新城道也。
现代文：跨过桥，向南翻越一座小岭，再走两里到沙宕村，村前面有一条石桥横架在涧流上，叫赵安桥，它是到新城县的通道。
English: Cross the bridge, climb over a ridge to the south, and then walk two miles to Shatagi Village. In front of the village, there is a stone bridge over the stream, called Zhao'an Bridge. It is the gateway to Xincheng County.

古文：由桥北西溯一涧，沿三九山北麓而入后叶坞。 三九 之名，以东则从赵安桥南至朱村，北则从赵安桥西南至白粉墙，南则从白粉墙东南至朱村，三面皆九里也。
现代文：从桥北面往西溯一条涧流，沿三九山北麓进到后叶坞。 三九 的得名，是因为东面从赵安桥南到朱村，北面从赵安桥西南到白粉墙，南面从白粉墙东南到朱村，三面都是九里路。
English: From the north side of the bridge to the west, a stream flows along the northern foot of the Sanjiushan Mountain to enter the Houye dock. The name of the Sanjiushan is because the east side is from the Zhao'an Bridge south to Zhu Village, the north side is from the southwest of the Zhao'an Bridge to the white powder wall, and the south side is from the southeast of the white powder wall to Zhu Village. All three sides are nine-mile roads.

古文：由后叶坞九里至白粉墙，为三九山北来之脊。
现代文：从后叶坞到白粉墙的九里之间，是三九山从北面延伸过来的山脊。
English: Between the Houye dock and the white powder wall, there is a ridge extending from the north side of Mount Sanjiu.

古文：其脊亦甚坦夷，东流者由后叶出赵安桥，西流者由李王桥合朱村，此 三九 所以名山，亦以水绕无余也。
现代文：那条山脊也很平坦，东边的水由后叶坞流出赵安桥，西边的水从李王桥流到朱村与另一条水汇合，之所以用 三九 来称呼这座山，也是因为水流环绕它四周的缘故。
English: That ridge is also very flat. The water on the east side flows from Houye dock to Zhao An bridge, and the water on the west side flows from Li Wang bridge to Zhu village and merges with another water. The reason why the mountain is called "39" is also because of the water flow around it.

古文：白粉墙之西二里，为罗村桥，有水自北来，有路亦岐而北，则新城道也。
现代文：白粉墙西面两里，为罗村桥，有条水流从北面流来，有条路也是岔向北去，那是去新城县的路。
English: Two miles west of the white powder wall is the Luo Village Bridge. There is a stream of water coming from the north, and there is also a road leading north, which is the road to Xincheng County.

古文：循水南行里许，为钵盂桥，有水西自龙门龛来。
现代文：顺水往南走一里左右，为钵盂桥，有一条水从西面的龙门完流来交汇。
English: Walk south along the water for about a mile, and you will come to a bridge. A stream of water flows from the western gantry to the confluence.

古文：由桥北即转而东，里余复折而南。
现代文：龙门完有座四仙传道岭，位于钵盂桥西面四里，属于于潜县境。由桥北面就转向东走，一里多以后又折向南。
English: Longmen has a complete Four Immortals Preaching Ridge, located four miles west of the bridge, belonging to the county border. From the north side of the bridge, turn east, and after one mile, turn south.

古文：其地东为三九，西为洞山，环坞一区，东西皆石峰嶙峋，黑如点漆，丹枫黄杏，翠竹青松，间错如绣，水之透壁而下者，洗石如雪，今虽久旱无溜即流水，而黑崖白峡，处处如悬匹练，心甚异之。
现代文：这里东边为三九山，西边为洞山，中间形成一片圆形山坞，东西两面都是嶙峋的石峰，岩石黑得像涂了漆，丹枫黄杏与翠竹青松错落装点在其间，犹如锦绣一般，水流穿过石壁飞流直下，把石头冲刷得像雪一样白，现在虽然久旱无水流，但黑色的崖壁，白色的峡谷，处处如悬挂着洁白的绢帛，我心中感到很是惊异。
English: Here, the east side is the Sanjiushan, the west side is the Dongshan, and a circular dock is formed in the middle. Both the east and west sides are rugged stone peaks. The rock is black as if it were painted. The Danfeng Huangxing and the Jade Bamboo and Blue Pine are interspersed among them, just like embroidery. The water flows through the stone wall and rushes down, washing the stone as white as snow. Although there is no water flow for a long time, the black cliffs, the white canyon, are like hanging white cocoons everywhere. I feel very surprised in my heart.

古文：二里，渡李王桥，遂至洞山之东麓。
现代文：走两里，跨过李王桥，便到了洞山的东麓。
English: After walking two miles and crossing the Li Wang Bridge, we arrived at the eastern foot of Dongshan.

古文：急置行李于吴氏先祠。
现代文：急忙将行李放在吴家的祖先祠堂中。
English: They hurriedly put their luggage in the ancestral hall of the Wu family.

古文：令僮觅炊店，不得。
现代文：叫憧子去找做饭的地方和旅店，没有找到。
English: He told his longed-for child to look for a place to cook and a hotel, but they were nowhere to be found.

古文：有吴姓者二人至，一为余炊，一为赠烛游洞，余以鱼公书扇答之。
现代文：后有两个姓吴的人来到，一个给我们做饭，一个送我们蜡烛用以游览岩洞，我用鱼公题写字画的扇子酬谢了他们。
English: Later, two people surnamed Wu came, one to cook for us, one to give us a candle to use to tour the cave, and I thanked them with a fish fan.

古文：余遂同静闻西向蹑山。
现代文：洞山从龙门完南面曲折地往东延伸过来，山中的石头棱角锋锐，痕印重叠。
English: Dongshan stretches from the south end of the gantry to the east in a zigzag fashion. The stones in the mountain are sharp-edged and have overlapping marks.

古文：沿小涧而上，石皆峡蹲壑透，清流漱之，淙淙有声。
现代文：它东南边半山腰有两个洞，正好瞰临李王桥下一带。
English: There are two caves in the southeastern half of the mountain, overlooking the area under the Li Wang Bridge.

古文：涧两旁石片涌出田畦中，侧者成塍，突者成台，竹树透石而出，枝耸石上而不见其根，干压石巅而不见其窦出处。
现代文：于是我同静闻向西登山。沿着一条小水涧向上爬，石头都像蹲在山峡穿出沟壑一样，清澈的流水冲刷在上面，发出涂涂的声响。水涧两旁石片从田畦中冒出来，斜着的成了田埂，凸起的形成平台，翠竹绿树穿破石头向上生长，枝叶伸展在石头上边而见不到树根，树干覆盖了石头顶端而见不到空隙。
English: So I climbed westward with Jing Wen. Climbing up along a small rill, the stones were like squatting in a canyon and passing through a gully. Clear running water washed over them, emitting a coating sound. The stone pieces on both sides of the rill emerged from the ridge, sloping into a ridge, forming a raised platform. The green bamboo trees grew up through the stone, the branches and leaves stretched over the stone without seeing the roots, and the tree trunks covered the top of the stone without seeing the gap.

古文：再上，忽一大石当涧而立，端方无倚，而纹细如波毂之旋凤，最为灵异。
现代文：再往上走，忽然见到一块大石头立在水涧当中，方方正正，周围无支撑，上面纤细的石纹如旋风吹皱的水波，最灵巧怪异。
English: Going further up, I suddenly saw a large stone standing in the middle of the stream. It was square and upright, with no support around it. The thin stone stripes on it were like the waves of water ruffled by a whirlwind, most deft and strange.

古文：再上，修竹中有新建睢阳庙，雪峰之龛在焉。
现代文：再继续向上，修长的竹丛中有座新建的唯阳庙，雪峰的遗体就存放在这里。
English: Further up, there is a newly built Weiyang Temple in the slender bamboo groves, where Xuefeng's remains are stored.

古文：一名灵隐庵。庵后危壁倚空，叠屏耸翠，屏之南即明洞也。
现代文：庵后高大的石壁插天而起，好似重叠的屏风堆青耸翠，屏风的南面就是明洞。
English: Behind the hermitage, a tall stone wall rises into the sky, like an overlapping screen of greenery. To the south of the screen is Myeongdong.

古文：如轩斯启，其外五柱穿列，正如四明之分窗，中有一柱，上不至檐，檐下亦垂一石，下不至柱，上下相对，所不接者不盈咫。
现代文：此洞如同一个轩阁敞开着，外面五根石柱交错排列，正如四明山的分窗，只是四明山的石头颜色差，不像这里成列的石柱的末端倒卷起来。中间有一根石柱，上没有抵到洞檐，而洞檐也垂吊下一块石头，还没有接到石柱，上下相对，间隔不到一尺。
English: This cave is open like a pavilion, with five stone pillars arranged in a staggered manner on the outside, just like the windows of Shiming Mountain, except that the stones of Shiming Mountain are of a different color, unlike the ends of the stone pillars lined up here. There is a stone pillar in the middle that does not reach the cave mouth, and the cave mouth also hangs a stone that has not yet been connected to the stone pillar, opposite the top and bottom, with a distance of less than one foot.

古文：柱旁有树高撑，至檐端辄逊而外曲，翠色拂岩而上，黑石得之益章越加明显。
现代文：石柱旁边有一棵树高大笔直，到洞檐则低曲而向外伸，青翠的树色自下而上映染石壁，黑色的石崖被映衬得更加显著。
English: Next to the stone pillar, there is a tall, straight tree. When it reaches the cave mouth, it bends low and stretches out. The green color of the tree is projected onto the stone wall from below, and the black cliff is set off more prominently.

古文：再南即为幽洞。
现代文：再往南就是幽洞。
English: Further south are the caves.

古文：二洞并启，中间石壁，色轻红若桃花。
现代文：两个洞并列敞开着，中间隔着石壁，石壁呈淡红色，若桃花一般。
English: Two holes are open side by side, separated by a stone wall in the middle. The stone wall is light red, like a peach blossom.

古文：洞口高悬，内若桥门之覆空，得呼声辄传响不绝，盖其内空峒无底也。
现代文：洞口高悬，里面如同倾覆的桥门，一有呼喊声传到就不停地回响，这是因为洞内空阔无底的缘故。
English: The mouth of the cave hangs high, and inside it is like an overturned bridge gate. Whenever a shout is heard, it echoes incessantly. This is because of the bottomless space inside the cave.

古文：廿丈之内，忽一转而北，一转而南。
现代文：进洞后不超过二十丈，忽然一边折往北，一边折向南。
English: After entering the cave, no more than 20 meters high, suddenly one side turned north, while the other side turned south.

古文：北者为干洞，拾级而上，如登橉ì即门槛蹑阁。
现代文：北边的是干洞，拾级而上，恰如踏着门槛登上楼阁。
English: To the north is the dry cave, climb up the stairs, just like stepping on the threshold of the castle.

古文：三十丈后，又转而南，辟一小阁，颇觉幽异。
现代文：进去三十丈以后，又折朝南面，那里建有一座小阁楼，让人感到特别幽静。
English: After entering the thirtieth floor, it turns to the south, where there is a small attic, which makes people feel particularly quiet.

古文：南者为水洞，一转即仙田成畦，塍界层层，水满其中，不流不涸。
现代文：南边的是水洞，一拐进去便是一块块的仙田、一层层的田埂，水流浸满田畦中，不外溢也不干涸。
English: On the south side is a water cave, and as soon as you turn into it, you are surrounded by fields and rice paddies. Water flows through the rice paddies, but does not overflow or dry out.

古文：人从塍上曲折而入，约廿丈，忽闻水声潺潺。
现代文：人从田埂上曲折地绕进去，大约二十丈后，忽然听到水声潺潺。
English: People meandered in from the fields, and after about twenty paces, they suddenly heard the sound of rushing water.

古文：透一小门而入，见一小溪自南来，至此破壑下坠，宛转无底，但闻其声。
现代文：穿过一个小石门进去，看见一条小溪从南面流来，到此处捣入深沟向下坠流，屈曲而见不到底，只能听到水声。
English: Entering through a small stone gate, I saw a small stream flowing from the south. At this point, it broke into a deep ditch and fell down. It bent and I couldn't see the bottom, I could only hear the sound of water.

古文：循溪而南，又过一峡。
现代文：顺小溪往南，又越过一个峡谷。
English: Following the stream to the south, we crossed another canyon.

古文：仍透小门而入，须从水中行，乃短衣去袜，溯水蹑流。
现代文：仍旧穿过一个小石门往里走，因为必须从水中经过，所以便挽起衣裤脱掉袜子，逆流涉水。
English: He still went in through a small stone gate, because he had to pass through the water, so he took off his pants and socks and waded against the current.

古文：又三十丈，中有倒垂若莲花，下卷若象鼻者，平沙隘门，忽束忽敞。
现代文：又走三十丈，溪流中石头丛生，它们都似莲花一样倒垂着，下端如象鼻一般卷曲，平缓的流沙，狭窄的山门，忽而局促，忽而敞开。
English: After another thirty meters, the stream is cluttered with stones. They are all hanging upside down like lotus flowers, the lower end is curled like an elephant's trunk, smooth quicksand, narrow mountain gate, suddenly cramped, suddenly open.

古文：再入，则石洞既尽，汇水一方，水不甚深，又不知汇者何来，坠者何去也。
现代文：这水洞正如荆溪的白鹤洞，但白鹤洞隐藏在山麓，容易获得水，此洞生在高高的山顶而同样有水，这是尤为奇特的。再进去，石洞已到尽头，那里汇积了一潭水，水不很深，又不知道这水从何处汇来，向下坠落到哪里去。
English: This cave is just like the White Crane Cave in the Jing River, but the White Crane Cave is hidden at the foot of the mountain, so it is easy to get water. This cave is born at the top of a high mountain and also has water, which is particularly strange. After entering, the stone cave has reached the end, where a pool of water has accumulated. The water is not very deep, and it is not known where the water comes from and where it falls.

古文：及出洞，半日之间，已若隔世。
现代文：等出洞来，觉得半日之间，恍若隔世。
English: When I came out of the cave, I felt like I had been away from home for half a day.

古文：下山，饭于吴祠。
现代文：下山后，在吴家祠堂吃了饭。
English: After descending the mountain, they had a meal at the ancestral hall of the Wu family.

古文：乃溯南来之溪，二里至太平桥。
现代文：然后便溯南面来的溪水，走两里到了太平桥。
English: Then I followed the stream coming from the south and walked two miles to Taiping Bridge.

古文：桥西为高氏，桥东为吴氏，亦李王桥之吴氏之派也，亦有先祠甚宏畅。
现代文：桥西居住的是姓高的人家，桥东是姓吴的人家，他们也是李王桥吴姓家族的分支，同样建有宽阔明亮的祖先祠堂。
English: The west side of the bridge is inhabited by a family with the surname Gao, and the east side of the bridge is inhabited by a family with the surname Wu. They are also branches of the Li Wangqiao family with the surname Wu. They also built a broad and bright ancestral hall.

古文：时日色甚高，因担夫家近，欲归宿，托言马岭无宿店，遂止祠中。
现代文：当时太阳仍高悬在天空，但因为担夫家离此地近，想回家住宿，便借口说马岭没有住宿的旅店，所以就停在祠堂中。
English: At that time, the sun was still high in the sky, but because the porter's house was close to here and wanted to go home to stay, he stopped in the ancestral hall on the pretext that there was no hotel in Maling.

古文：是日行仅三十五里，而所游二洞，以无意得之，岂不幸哉！
现代文：这天仅走了三十五里，然而所游览的两个洞，都是在无意中发现的，岂不幸运！
English: We only walked thirty-five miles that day, but the two caves we visited were both discovered unintentionally. Aren't we lucky!

古文：是晚风吼云屯，达旦而止。
现代文：这天夜晚风吼云集，直到天亮才停止。
English: On this day, the wind howled all night and did not stop until dawn.

古文：初五日，鸡再鸣，令僮起炊。
现代文：初五日鸡叫第二遍时叫憧仆起床烧火做饭。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, when the chicken is called for the second time, the servant is asked to get up and make a fire.

古文：炊熟而归宿之担夫至，长随夫王二已逃矣。
现代文：饭做熟时回家住宿的挑夫来到，但准备长途跟随我的担夫王二已经逃走了。
English: When the meal was ready, the porter came to take me home, but Wang Er, the porter who was going to accompany me on the long journey, had already fled.

古文：饭后又转觅一夫，久之后行。
现代文：饭后又辗转雇了一个担夫，许久后才出发。
English: After the meal, he hired a porter and set off a long time later.

古文：南二里，上马岭，约里许达其巅。
现代文：向南两里，上了马岭，大约一里左右到达马岭顶上。
English: Two miles to the south, up the col, about a mile or so to the top of the col.

古文：下马岭，南二里为内楮ǔ构树村坞，又一里为外楮村坞，从此而南，家家以楮为业。
现代文：马岭以北隶属新城县，水也流往新城县。马岭以南却隶属于潜县，县城在岭西北五十里，水经应诸埠流到分水县。下了马岭，往南走两里为内褚村坞，又过一里为外褚村坞，从此处往南，家家户户以种植构树造纸为业。
English: To the north of Maling belongs to Xincheng County, and the water also flows to Xincheng County. To the south of Maling, however, it belongs to Qian County. The county seat is fifty miles northwest of Ling, and the water flows through the ports to the watershed county. After leaving Maling, walk two miles south to the dock of Neihu village, and another mile south to the dock of Waihu village. From here to the south, every family is engaged in planting trees for papermaking.

古文：随山坞西南七里，过兑口桥，岐分南北，南抵应渚埠十八里。
现代文：顺山坞向西南走七里，跨过兑口桥，路便分为南北两条，北边那条到于潜县城约有四十里，往南的到应诸埠有十八里。
English: Go seven miles southwest along the dock, cross the bridge at the junction, and the road will be divided into two north-south roads. The northern one is about forty miles to the county town of Yuqian, and eighteen miles to the south of Yingzhou.

古文：兑口之水北自于潜，马岭之水东来，合而南去，路亦随之。
现代文：兑口桥下的水从北面于潜县流来，马岭的水从东边流来，汇合后向南流去，路也顺河延伸。
English: The water under the bridge at the junction flows from the north to Yuxian County, and the water from Maling flows from the east, and flows southward after the confluence. The road also extends along the river.

古文：八里，过板桥。
现代文：走了八里，越过板桥。
English: I walked eight miles and crossed the board bridge.

古文：桥下水自西坞来，与前水合，又南五里为保安坪。
现代文：桥下的水从西面山坞中流来，与前面所傍的水流交汇，溯水向西走，道路能够通到于潜县和昌化县。又向南走五里为保安坪。
English: The water under the bridge flows from the west side of the dock and meets the water in front of it. If you follow the water to the west, the road can lead to Yuqian County and Changhua County. You can also walk five miles south to Baofeng.

古文：又一里为玉涧桥，桥甚新整，居市亦盛，又名排石。山始大开。
现代文：应诸埠是于潜县的南界，溪南面就隶属分水县，于潜县的水往北流经玉涧桥，昌化县的水从西面麻汉埠流来，都在应诸埠汇合，因而水势才大起来。
English: The ports of Yingzhou are on the southern border of Jianxian County, the southern side of Xi'an is under the jurisdiction of Wenshui County, the water of Jianxian County flows northward through the Yulun Bridge, and the water of Changhua County flows from the west side of Mahan Port, all of which converge in Yingzhou Port, so the water potential is large.

古文：又东二里，止于唐家拱。其地在应渚埠北二里，原无市肆，担夫以应埠之舟下桐庐者，必北曲而经此，遂止于溪畔。
现代文：只是玉涧桥以上，已经不能行船，而麻汉埠以上，小船可直达昌化县城，于潜县来的水流显然不如昌化县的大。
English: However, it is no longer possible to sail above the Jade Dragon Bridge, and above Mahan Port, small boats can directly reach the city of Changhua County. The water flow from Yucheng County is obviously not as large as that of Changhua County.

古文：久之得桐庐舟。时日已中，无肆觅米，欲觅之应埠，而舟不能待，遂趁之行。
现代文：当时已是中午，因为无店铺买米，想去应埠买，但船不愿等待，于是只好随船走。
English: At that time it was already noon, because there was no shop to buy rice, I wanted to go to the port to buy, but the ship did not want to wait, so I had to go with the ship.

古文：下舟东南行十里，为分水县。
现代文：上船向东南行十里，就是分水县。
English: Ten miles southeast of the ship is Wenshui County.

古文：县在溪之西。
现代文：县城位于溪流西岸。
English: The county seat is located on the west bank of the stream.

古文：分水原止一水东南去，其西虽山势豁达，惟陆路八十里达于淳安。
现代文：分水县原本只有一股水向东南流去，县城以西虽然山势开阔，但只有陆路，走八十里到淳安县。
English: Originally, there was only one stream of water flowing to the southeast in Wenshui County. Although the mountains are wide to the west of the county seat, there is only a land route, which is 80 miles to Junan County.

古文：余初欲从之行，为王奴遁去，不便于陆，仍就水道，反向东南行矣。
现代文：我开初想从陆路走，因为姓王的奴仆逃去，从陆路不方便，所以仍然走水路，反过来向东南方向走。
English: At first, I wanted to go by land, because the servant surnamed Wang fled, and it was inconvenient to go by land, so I still took the waterway, and in turn went to the southeast.

古文：去分水东南二十里为头铺。
现代文：离开分水县城往东南二十里为头铺。
English: Leave the city of Wenshui County and head 20 miles southeast to the first shop.

古文：又十里为焦山，居市颇盛。
现代文：又行十里为焦山，房舍集市较为繁盛。
English: Jiaoshan is another ten miles away, and the housing market is more prosperous.

古文：已暮，不能买米，借舟人余米而炊。
现代文：这时已到傍晚，因为不能下船买米，便借了同船人的余米做饭吃。
English: By this time it was late afternoon, and since he could not get off the ship to buy rice, he borrowed some leftover rice from a shipmate to cook and eat.

古文：舟子顺流夜桨晚上行船，五十里，旧县，夜过半矣。
现代文：夜色中船夫顺流荡桨，行五十里到达旧县，已是半夜了。
English: In the middle of the night, the boatman paddled along the river and traveled fifty miles to reach the old county. It was already midnight.

古文：初六日，鸡再鸣，鼓舟，晓出浙江，已桐庐城下矣。
现代文：初六日鸡叫第二遍时开船，天明时驶出浙江，已到达桐庐城下了。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, when the rooster crowed for the second time, the ship set sail. By dawn, it had sailed out of Zhejiang and arrived under the city of Tonglu.

古文：令僮子起买米。
现代文：我叫憧仆下船去买了些米。
English: I told my servant to get off the boat and buy some rice.

古文：仍附其舟，十五里至滩上。
现代文：仍旧搭乘那只船，航行十五里到滩上。
English: He still took the boat and sailed fifteen miles to the beach.

古文：米舟百艘，皆泊而待剥，余舟遂停。
现代文：上百艘米船都停泊在此处，等着分载转运，子是我们的船停泊下来。
English: Hundreds of rice ships are moored here, waiting for transshipment, and it is our ship that is moored.

古文：亟索饭，饭毕得一舟，别附而去，时已上午。
现代文：我赶忙找饭吃，饭后另外找到一船，便换乘此船而行，这时已是上午。
English: I hurried to find something to eat. After dinner, I found another boat and took this one instead. It was already morning.

古文：又二里过清私口，又三里，人七里笼。
现代文：又行了两里，经过清私口；又行三里，进入七里笼。
English: He walked another two miles and passed through the gate of Qingyi; he walked another three miles and entered the seven-mile cage.

古文：东北风甚利，偶假寐，已过严矶。
现代文：东北风很便利航行，我偶尔打一会磕睡，船就已经过了严矶。
English: The northeast wind is very convenient for sailing. I occasionally dozed off for a while, and the ship had already passed the rocks.

古文：四十里，乌石关。
现代文：四十里后到乌石关。
English: Forty miles later, we arrived at Wushi Pass.

古文：又十里，止于东关之逆旅。
现代文：又行十里，停下来住宿在严州府东关的旅店中。
English: After another ten miles, they stopped to stay at a hotel in Dongguan, Yanzhou.

古文：初七日，雾漫不辨咫尺，舟人饭而后行，上午复霁。
现代文：初七日大雾迷漫，咫尺不辨，船夫吃了饭后开船，到上午雾气又散开。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, the fog was so thick that it was hard to tell what direction it was coming from. After the boatmen had eaten, they set sail. By the morning, the fog had dispersed.

古文：七十里，至香头已暮。
现代文：行七十里，到达香头时已是傍晚。
English: After a seventy-mile journey, it was already late afternoon when they reached Xiangtou.

古文：香头，山北之大村落也，张、叶诸姓，簪缨颇盛。月明风利，二十里，泊于兰溪。初八日，早登浮桥，桥内外诸舡ā船鳞次紧紧相连，以勤王师自衢将至，封桥聚舟，不听不允许上下也。
现代文：月明风顺，又行了二十里，停泊在兰溪县城。初八日早晨登上浮桥观览，见桥内外众多船只像鱼鳞一样密密麻麻地排列着，这是因为出兵援救朝庭的军队将要从衙州府来到，所以封锁浮桥，堵拦船只，不让它们自由上下。
English: On the morning of the 8th day of the first month of the year, the pontoon bridge was boarded for observation, and many ships were lined up inside and outside the bridge like fish scales. This was because the troops sent to rescue the imperial court were coming from Zhangzhou, so they blocked the pontoon bridge, blocking the ships and not allowing them to go up and down freely.

古文：遂以行囊令顾仆守之南门旅肆中，余与静闻俱为金华三洞游。
现代文：于是将行李交给顾仆看守，等候在县城南门旅店中，我和静闻一起去游览金华三洞。
English: So I handed my luggage to the attendant and waited at the Nanmen Hotel in the county seat. I went with Jingwen to visit the Three Caves of Jinhua.

古文：盖金华之山，横峙东西，郡城在其阳，浦江在其北，西垂尽处则为兰溪，东则义乌也。婺水东南从永康经郡之南门，而西北抵兰溪与衢江合。
现代文：金华山东西横耸，府城在它的南面，浦江县在它的北面，西边尽头处是兰溪县，东面则是义乌县，婆水从东南面的永康县流来，经过府城南门，流向西北到兰溪县与衙江汇合。
English: Jinhuashan is towering from east to west, Fucheng is to the south of it, Pujiang County is to the north of it, Lanxi County is at the end of the west, and Yiwu County is to the east. The water flows from Yongkang County in the southeast, through the south gate of Fucheng, and flows northwest to Lanxi County and the confluence with the Li River.

古文：然北山突兀天表，若负扆然，而背之东南行。问： 三洞何在？ 
现代文：我开初想走陆路，见溪流中有船溯流向东，便搭乘上去，溪水流淌在沙堤中间，四周山峰都离得很远，丹红的枫叶疏密有致，像与锦缎媲美，又像是用彩霞剪裁的，辉映重叠，十分艳丽奇异。
English: At first, I wanted to take the overland route. I saw a boat in the stream tracing to the east, so I took it. The stream water flowed in the middle of the sand dike, and the surrounding mountains were very far away. The red maple leaves were dense and consistent, comparable to brocade, and like they were cut with saiga, overlapping and overlapping, very beautiful and strange.

古文：则曰： 在北。 问： 郡城何在？ 则曰： 在南。 
现代文：北山高耸天外，犹如在背后立起的一道倚天屏障，我们的船背着它向东南方向行。向旁人询问、 三洞在哪里？  回答说： 在北面。 又问： 府城在何处？  却回答说： 在南面。 
English: Mount Beishan towered high in the sky, like a barrier leaning against the sky behind it. Our ship carried it on its back, heading southeast. When we asked others, "Where is San-dong?" they replied, "It's in the north." We also asked, "Where is the capital city?" but they answered, "It's in the south."

古文：始悟三洞不必至郡，若陆行半日，便可从中道而入，而时已从舟，无及矣。
现代文：这才清楚去三洞不必到府城，若从陆路走半日，便可从半路折进去，但当时已经坐上船，来不及了。
English: This made it clear that you don't have to go to the capital to go to San-dong. If you walk half a day by land, you can turn in halfway, but at that time you were already on the boat and it was too late.

古文：四十五里至小溪，已暮，月色如洗。
现代文：行四十五里到达小溪，已是傍晚，月色清新如洗。
English: After a forty-five-mile journey, we arrived at the creek. It was already evening, and the moon was as bright as day.

古文：又十五里登陆，投宿下马头之旅肆，以深夜闭门不纳。
现代文：又行十五里后登陆，到下马头的旅店中投宿，但因夜深旅店闭门不接纳。
English: After traveling another fifteen miles, they landed and stayed at a hotel in Shimamato, but the hotel was closed late at night and would not accept them.

古文：遇一王姓者，号敬川，高桥埠人。将乘月归，见客无投宿处，因引至西门外，同宿于逆旅。
现代文：后遇到一个姓王的准备乘月回去，看见客人无投宿处，他便带我们到金华府西门外，一同住宿在旅店中。
English: Later, we met a man surnamed Wang who was preparing to go back by the moon. Seeing that there was no place for the guests to stay, he took us to the west gate of Jinhua, where we stayed together in a hotel.

