古文：洪福源
现代文：洪福源，其先祖本为中国人。
English: Hong Fuyuan, whose ancestors were originally Chinese.

古文：洪福源，其先中国人，唐遣才子八人往教高丽，洪其一也。子孙世贵于三韩，名所居曰唐城。
现代文：唐朝遣才子八人至高丽，其中一人姓洪。从此，洪氏子孙成为高丽的贵族，所居之地名为 唐城 。
English: The Tang Dynasty sent eight talented people to Korea, one of whom was named Hong. From then on, the descendants of the Hong family became the aristocrats of Korea, living in a place called Tangcheng.

古文：父大宣，以都领镇麟州，福源为神骑都领，因家焉。
现代文：福源父亲洪大宣，以都领之职镇守麟州，福源为神骑都领，因此住家于麟州。
English: Fuyuan's father, Hong Da Xuan, guarded Linzhou as the official leader of the capital, and Fuyuan was the divine leader of the capital, so he lived in Linzhou.

古文：岁丙子，金源、契丹九万余众窜入高丽。
现代文：太祖十一年，女真、契丹九万人窜入高丽。
English: In the 11th year of King Taejo's reign, 90,000 Jurchens and Khitans invaded Korea.

古文：丁丑九月，夺江东城池据之。
现代文：十二年九月占据江东。
English: It occupied the eastern part of the Yangtze River in September 1912.

古文：戊寅冬十二月，太祖命哈赤吉、紥剌将兵追讨，大宣迎降，与哈赤吉等共击之，降其元帅赵冲。
现代文：十三年十二月，太祖命哈赤吉、扎剌领兵追讨，洪大宣降归于蒙古，并与哈赤吉共同击败女真、契丹，招降其元帅赵冲。
English: In December of the thirteenth year, the great-grandfather ordered Khachikhi and Zhaqin to lead the troops to recover, and Hongda announced that he would surrender to Mongolia. Together with Khachikhi, he defeated Jianzhen and Khitan and recruited his marshal Zhao Chong.

古文：壬午冬十月，又遣着古与等十二人窥觇纳款虚实，还，遇害。辛卯秋九月，太宗命将撒里答讨之，福源率先附州县之民，与撒礼塔并力攻未附者，又与阿儿秃等进至王京。
现代文：太宗三年九月，命撒礼塔领兵讨高丽，福源率领先归附之州县百姓与撒礼塔合力进攻那些尚未归附者，又与阿儿秃等进至王京。
English: In September of the third year of Taizong's reign, he ordered Zareta to lead the troops to besiege Goryeo, and Fu Yuan led the people of the annexed prefectures to attack those who had not yet been annexed, and went to Wangjing with Al Bald.

古文：高丽王皞乃遣其弟怀安公请降，遂置王京及州县达鲁花赤七十二人以镇之，师还。
现代文：高丽王遣其弟淮安公请求纳降。太宗设置王京及州县达鲁花赤七十二人来镇守。
English: King Goryeo sent his younger brother Huai An Gong to ask for a reduction. Emperor Taizong set up Wang Jing and seventy-two Daruhana Red Guards from Zhoushan County to guard the town.

古文：壬辰夏六月，高丽复叛，杀所置达鲁花赤，悉驱国人入据江华岛，福源招集北界四十余城遗民以待。
现代文：四年六月，高丽又反叛蒙古，杀所置达鲁花赤，把蒙古人都赶上江华岛，福源招集北部四十余城遗民等待蒙古军到来。
English: In June of the 4th year, Goryeo rebelled against Mongolia again, killed Darukha Chak, drove the Mongols to Ganghwa Island, and Fuyuan gathered the remaining people of more than forty cities in the north to wait for the arrival of the Mongol army.

古文：秋八月，太宗复遣撒礼塔将兵来讨，福源尽率所部合攻之，至王京处仁城，撒礼塔中流矢卒，其副帖哥引兵还，唯福源留屯。
现代文：八月，太宗再遣撒礼塔领兵征讨，福源率所部全体将士合攻，进至王京处仁城，撒礼塔中箭身亡，副将帖哥领兵回国，留福源屯守。
English: In August, Taizong sent Zaleyta again to lead the army to fight, and Fuyuan led all the soldiers of the headquarters to attack together, entering Wangjing and Rencheng. Zaleyta was killed by an arrow, and vice-commander Tego led the army back to China, leaving Fuyuan behind.

古文：癸巳冬十月，高丽悉众来攻西京，屠其民，劫大宣以东。
现代文：五年十月，高丽全力攻打西京，屠杀居民，劫掠大宣以东。
English: In October of the fifth year, Goryeo made an all-out attack on Saikyo, massacred residents, and looted the area east of Daesung.

古文：福源遂尽以所招集北界之众来归，处于辽阳、沈阳之间，帝嘉其忠。
现代文：福源将所招集北部百姓全部投奔我国，居于辽阳、沈阳之间，太宗嘉奖其忠义。
English: All the people in the northern part of the country who were called by Fuyuan fled to China and lived between Liaoyang and Shenyang. Emperor Taizong praised their loyalty.

古文：甲午夏五月，特赐金符，为管领归附高丽军民长官，仍令招讨本国未附人民。
现代文：六年五月，特赐金符，任命福源为管领归附高丽军民长官，仍令他招讨本国尚未归附人民。
English: In May of the sixth year, the special gift of gold and the appointment of Fuyuan as the leader of the Koryo military and civilian chiefs still made him invite the people who had not yet returned to their country.

古文：又降旨谕高丽之民，有执王〈酉及〉元构难之人来朝者，与洪福源同于东京居之，优加恩礼擢用，若大兵既加，拒者死，降者生，其降民令福源统之。
现代文：又降旨告诫高丽百姓，若有将王及原发难之人逮捕来朝者，与洪福源同在东京居住，待遇优厚，并加任用；若大兵来攻，抗拒者死，投诚者生；来归附的高丽民，令福源统领。
English: He also issued an order to warn the Korean people that if anyone came to Korea to arrest the king and the original troublemakers, they would live with Hong Fuyuan in Tokyo, receive generous treatment, and be promoted; if the soldiers came to attack, those who resisted would die, and those who surrendered would live; if the Korean people came to attach themselves, they would make Fuyuan the leader.

古文：乙未，帝命唐古拔都儿与福源进讨，攻拔龙冈、咸从二县，凤、海、洞三州山城及慈州，又拔金山、归、信、昌、朔州。
现代文：七年，太宗命唐古拔都儿与福源进讨高丽，攻克龙冈、咸从二县及凤、海、洞三州山城和慈州，又夺取金山、龟、信、昌、朔等州。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Taizong ordered Tang Gubadol and Fuyuan to advance into Goryeo, and they conquered the two counties of Koryanggang and Hamdang, as well as the three counties of Feng, Hai, and Dong, the mountain city of Sanshou, and Cizhou, and also captured the provinces of Jinshan, Kame, Xin, Chang, and Shuo.

古文：己亥春二月，入朝，赐以铠甲弓矢，及金织文段、金银器、金鞍勒等。
现代文：十一年二月，福源入朝，太宗赐以铠甲、弓矢、彩缎、金银器、金鞍勒等。
English: In February of the eleventh year, when Fuyuan entered the imperial court, Emperor Taizong gave him armor, bows and arrows, lacquerware, gold and silverware, and gold saddles.

古文：乙巳，定宗命阿母罕将兵与福源共拔威州平虏城。
现代文：太宗皇后四年，定宗命阿母罕领兵与福源共同攻克威州平虏城。
English: In the fourth year of Empress Taizong's reign, Dingzong ordered Amohan to lead an army with Fuyuan to conquer Pingru City in Weizhou.

古文：辛亥，宪宗即位，改授虎符，仍为前后归附高丽军民长官。
现代文：宪宗元年，改授虎符，仍为先后归附高丽军民长官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, the awarding of the Tiger Badge was changed, but it was still assigned successively to the military and civilian officials of Goryeo.

古文：癸丑，从诸王耶虎攻禾山、东州、春州、三角山、杨根、天龙等城，拔之。
现代文：三年，随诸王耶虎攻克禾山、东州、春州、三角山、杨根、天龙等城。
English: In three years, he conquered He Shan, Dongzhou, Chunzhou, Triangle Mountain, Yanggen, Tianlong and other cities with the kings and tigers.

古文：甲寅，与紥剌台合兵攻光州、安城、忠州、玄凤、珍原、甲向、玉果等城，又拔之。戊午，福源遣其子茶丘从紥剌台军。
现代文：四年，与扎剌台合兵攻克光州、安城、忠州、玄风、珍原、甲向、玉果等城。宪宗八年，福源遣其子茶丘加入扎剌台军。
English: In the fourth year, he joined forces with the Zhaotai to conquer the cities of Gwangju, Anseong, Chungju, Xuanfeng, Zhenyuan, Gaoxiang, and Yugang. In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Fu Yuan sent his son Chaoka to join the Zhaotai army.

古文：会高丽族子王綧入质，阴欲并统本国归顺人民，谮福源于帝，遂见杀，年五十三。
现代文：这时，高丽族子王纟享来蒙古朝为人质，他阴谋统辖高丽已归顺元朝的人民，因而向宪宗诬告福源，致使福源被杀，年五十三岁。
English: At this time, the son of the Koryo people, Wang Shanyuan, came to the Mongolian dynasty as a hostage. He plotted to rule over the people of Koryo, which had already surrendered to the Yuan dynasty. As a result, he falsely accused Fu Yuan to the Jianzong, resulting in Fu Yuan being killed at the age of fifty-three.

古文：后赠嘉议大夫、沈阳侯，谥忠宪。
现代文：后赠嘉议大夫，沈阳侯。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Honorable Mention, Shenyang.

古文：中统二年秋，茶丘雪父冤，世祖悯之，诏谕之曰： 汝父方加宠用，误絓刑章，故于已废之中，庸沛维新之泽。可就带元降虎符，袭父职，管领归附高丽军民总管。 
现代文：有子七人，俊奇、君祥二人最知名。洪俊奇小名茶丘，福源之次子。幼从军，以骁勇闻名，世祖以小名叫他。中统二年秋，茶丘为父雪冤，世祖怜悯他，令他带原赐虎符，承袭父职，管领归附高丽军民。
English: He had seven sons, of whom Junqi and Junxiang were the two most famous. Hong Junqi was the second son of the lesser-known Chakko and Fuyuan. As a young soldier, he was known for his bravery, and his grandfather named him after him. In the autumn of the second year of unification, Chakko's father was Xue Ren, and his grandfather took pity on him and ordered him to carry the tiger emblem originally given to him, to inherit his father's position, and to be in charge of the Korean army and people.

古文：至元六年，高丽权臣林衍叛。冬十一月，诏以其军三千从国王头辇哥讨平之，迁江华岛所有臣民，复归王京。
现代文：至元六年，高丽权臣林衍反叛我朝，十一月诏令茶丘率其军三千人随同国王头辇哥讨平，将江华岛上所有臣民都迁回王京。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lin Yan, a powerful vassal of Goryeo, rebelled against our dynasty. In November, the emperor ordered Chaka to lead his army of three thousand men, together with the king's eldest brother, to settle the dispute and move all the subjects on the island of Ganghwa back to Wangjing.

古文：十二月，帝命茶丘率兵往凤州等处，立屯田总管府。
现代文：十二月，太祖命茶丘率兵往凤州等处设立屯田总管府。
English: In December, Emperor Taizu ordered Chaka to lead an army to Fengzhou and other places to set up the Tonden General Administration Office.

古文：八年二月，入朝，赐钞百缗。
现代文：八年二月，入京见皇帝，赐钞百缗。
English: In February of the eighth year, he went to Beijing to see the emperor and was given a hundred yuan banknote.

古文：林衍余党裴仲孙等，立高丽王禃亲属承化侯为王，引三别抄军据珍岛以叛。
现代文：林衍余党裴仲孙等，立高丽王礻直亲属承化侯为王，占据珍岛反叛元朝。
English: Lin Yan Yu's party, Pei Zhongsun, and others established the direct relatives of the Goryeo king, Gog, as the king, occupying Jindo and rebelling against the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：五月，茶丘奉旨，偕经略使欣都进兵讨之，破其军，杀承化侯，其党金通精率余众走耽罗。
现代文：五月，茶丘奉旨同经略使欣都进兵讨平，杀承化侯，其部属金通精率其余众逃往耽罗。
English: In May, the tea master, with the order of the warlord, sent troops to Xindu to settle the dispute and killed Chenghua Hou. The rest of his subordinates, led by Jintong Jing, fled to Tanluo.

古文：帝遣侍卫亲军千户王岑与茶丘议征取之策，茶丘表陈： 通精之党，多在王京，可使招之，招而不从，击之未晚。 
现代文：帝遣侍卫亲军千户王岑与茶丘商议征取之策。茶丘奏称 ：通精之党多在王京，可令他们去招降，如招而不降，再出兵征讨不晚。 
English: Emperor's envoy to consult with Chifu Wang Xi and Chayu about the strategy of conscription. Chayu replied that most of the elite troops were in Wangjing and that they could be ordered to surrender, but if they did not surrender, it would not be too late to send out troops for conscription.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖采纳了这项建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：俄奉旨往罗州道监造战船，且招降耽罗。
现代文：不久，茶丘奉旨往罗州道监造战船，且招降耽罗。
English: Soon after, Chaka was ordered to supervise the construction of a warship in Luzhou Province, and he invited Tanra to surrender.

古文：茶丘得通精之侄金永等七人，俾招之。
现代文：茶丘招来了通精之侄金永等七人，再使他们去劝说通精投诚。
English: Chaka invited seven people, including Tsuchiya's nephew, Kim Yong, and persuaded them to persuade Tsuchiya to defect.

古文：通精不从，留金永，余尽杀之。
现代文：通精不从，除金永外，杀其余六人。
English: However, he did not comply, and killed the remaining six people in addition to Jin Yong.

古文：十年，诏茶丘与欣都率兵渡海，击破耽罗，获通精，杀之，悉免其胁从者，高丽始平。
现代文：十年，诏令茶丘与欣都率兵渡海击败了耽罗，擒获精通，处死，其余胁从均予赦免。高丽从此平定。
English: Ten years later, Emperor Taejo ordered Chakko and Shinto to lead their troops across the sea to defeat Tanro. Tanro was captured and executed, while the other warlords were pardoned. Goryeo has been pacified ever since.

古文：十一年，又命监造战船，经营日本国事。
现代文：至元十一年，又命茶丘监造战船，准备东征日本。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he also ordered Chau to supervise the construction of warships to prepare for the eastern expedition to Japan.

古文：三月，授昭勇大将军、安抚使，高丽军民总管如故。
现代文：三月，授茶丘为昭勇大将军、安抚使，仍为高丽军民总管。
English: In March, he was awarded the title of General Zhaoyong and Pacifying Envoy, and remained in charge of the military and civilian affairs of Korea.

古文：己卯，命茶丘提点高丽农事。
现代文：三月二日，命茶丘管理高丽农业。
English: On March 2nd, Myeongjaeok was put in charge of Koryo Agriculture.

古文：八月，授东征右副都元帅，与都元帅忽敦等领舟师二万，渡海征日本，拔对马、一岐、宜蛮等岛。
现代文：八月，授东征右副都元帅，与都元帅忽敦等领水军二万渡海征讨日本，攻占了对马、一岐、宜蛮等岛。
English: In August, he was awarded the title of Eastern Expedition Right Vice-Marshal of the Capital, and together with Marshal of the Capital, Htun, and other members of the Territorial Navy, he crossed the sea with 20,000 men to invade Japan, capturing the islands of Tsushima, Iki, and Ibadan.

古文：十四年正月，授镇国上将军、东征都元帅，镇高丽。
现代文：十四年正月，授镇国上将军、东征元帅，镇戍高丽。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was awarded the title of General of the State, Marshal of the Eastern Expedition, and the title of General of Goryeo.

古文：二月，率蒙古、高丽、女直、汉军，从丞相伯颜北征叛臣只鲁瓦歹等。
现代文：二月，率蒙古军、高丽军、女真军、汉军随丞相伯颜北征叛臣只鲁瓦歹等。
English: In February, he led the Mongolian Army, the Korean People's Army, the Jurchen Army, and the Han Army to follow the Northern Expedition led by the Minister of War, General Bo Yan.

古文：四月，至脱剌河，猝与贼遇，茶丘突阵无前，伯颜以其勇闻，赐白金五十两、金鞍勒、弓矢。
现代文：四月，至脱剌河，突然遇敌，茶丘冲锋陷阵，伯颜以其勇敢上报朝廷，赐白金五十两及金鞍勒、弓矢等物。
English: In April, at the time of the escape from the Yunnan River, he suddenly encountered an enemy, and the tea hill was stormed. Bo Yan reported his bravery to the imperial court, and was awarded fifty-two pieces of platinum, a gold saddle, a bow and arrow, and other items.

古文：十七年，授龙虎卫上将军、征东行省右丞。
现代文：至元十七年，授龙虎卫上将军、征东行省右丞。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Longhuwei Shangzheng (General of the Dragon and Tiger Guards) and the title of Provincial Right Officer of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：十八年，与右丞欣都将舟师四万，由高丽金州合浦以进，时右丞范文虎等将兵十万，由庆元、定海等处渡海，期至日本一岐、平户等岛合兵登岸。
现代文：十八年，与右丞欣都率领水军四万，由高丽金州合浦向日本进发。同时，右丞范文虎等领兵十万，由庆元、定海等处渡海，约定至日本一岐、平户等岛会师登陆。
English: In 18th year, together with Ujong Sinto, he led a naval force of 40,000 men from Jinju, Goryeo, to Japan. Meanwhile, Ujong Fan Wenhu and other leaders of 100,000 men crossed the sea from Qingyuan, Dinghai and other places, and agreed to land in Iki, Hirado and other islands in Japan.

古文：兵未交，秋八月，风坏舟而还。
现代文：时值八月，未交战而船为飓风所坏，只得回师。
English: It was August, and the ship was damaged by a hurricane without engaging in battle, and had to return to the division.

古文：十九年十月，命茶丘于平滦黑埚儿监造战船七百艘，以图后举。
现代文：十九年十月，命茶丘于平滦黑埚儿监造战船七百艘，计划再征日本。
English: In October of the 19th year, he ordered Chaka to supervise the construction of seven hundred warships in Pingyao and Heihe. He planned to re-enlist in Japan.

古文：二十一年十一月，复授征东行省右丞。
现代文：二十一年十一月，再授茶丘为征东行省右丞。
English: In November of the twenty-first year, Chaka was again awarded the title of Eastern Expedition Provincial Right-hand Man.

古文：茶丘夜令军中，多裂裳帛为旗帜，断马尾为旄，掩映林木，张设疑兵，乃颜兵大惊，以为官兵大至，遂降。
现代文：二十三年，命他往江浙等处遣散汉人复业。至元二十四年，乃颜反叛朝廷，御驾亲征，命茶丘率高丽军、女真军、汉军扈从。突然遇乃颜骑兵万余，而茶丘兵不满三千，大家有些害怕。茶丘张设疑兵，乃颜兵大惊，以为官军大队人马到了，纷纷投降。
English: In 233, he ordered him to go to the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces and other places to demobilize Han people and resume business. In 241, Naoyan rebelled against the imperial court, drove his own enlistment, and ordered Chakao to lead the Koryo army, the Jurchen army, and the Han army. Suddenly, there were more than 10,000 Naoyan cavalry, but less than 3,000 Chakao soldiers, and everyone was a little scared. Chakao suspected soldiers, and Naoyan soldiers were shocked, thinking that the government army brigade had arrived, and they surrendered one after another.

古文：帝闻之，厚加旌赏。凯还，授辽阳等处行尚书省右丞。
现代文：世祖闻知此事，厚予奖赏，回师后授茶丘为辽阳等处行尚书省右丞。
English: The ancestor of the world heard about this, gave a generous reward, and after returning to the teacher, awarded the tea house to Liaoyang and other places.

古文：二十七年，以疾辞。
现代文：二十七年，因病辞职。
English: In 2007, he resigned due to illness.

古文：叛王哈丹等窜入高丽，侵挠其国西京，距辽阳二千里皆骚动，中书省特起茶丘镇辽左，帝遣阇里台孛罗儿赐以金字圆符，命茶丘以便宜行事。
现代文：叛王哈丹等窜入高丽，侵扰高丽西京，距辽阳二千里的地方都为之骚动。中书省特起用茶丘镇守辽左，帝遣里台孛罗儿赐金字圆符，授权茶丘自行处决一切事务。
English: The traitor King Hadan and others invaded Goryeo and invaded the western capital of Goryeo, causing turmoil in places two thousand miles away from Liaoyang. The People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture specially appointed Chacao to guard Liao Zuo, while Emperor Taizong of Liaoning Province gave Chacao a gold circlet and authorized Chacao to execute all affairs on its own.

古文：二十八年，以疾卒，年四十八。
现代文：至元二十八年病卒，年四十八岁。
English: He died of illness in 1881, aged 48.

古文：子四人，长曰万。君祥，小字双叔，福源第五子也。
现代文：洪君祥小名双叔，洪福源之第五子。
English: Hong Junxiang was the fifth son of Hong Fuyuan.

古文：年十四，随兄茶丘见世祖于上京，帝悦，命刘秉忠相之，秉忠曰： 是儿目视不凡，后必以功名显，但当致力于学耳。 
现代文：十四岁那年随兄茶丘于上京朝见世祖，世祖很喜欢他，命刘秉忠给他看相。秉忠说他目光不凡，将来必功名显赫，但须致力于学。
English: At the age of fourteen, he followed his older brother, Chaku, to the emperor in Kyoto to meet the patriarch. The emperor liked him very much and ordered Liu Bingzhong to meet him. Bingzhong said that his eyes were extraordinary and that he would be famous in the future, but he had to devote himself to his studies.

古文：帝尝坐便殿，阅江南、海东舆地图，欲召知者询其险易，左丞相伯颜、枢密副使合达以君祥应旨，奏对详明，帝悦，酌以巨觥，顾谓伯颜曰： 是儿，远大器也。 六年，林衍叛，从头辇哥征之。
现代文：世祖命选师教诲。至元三年，挑选高丽民三百人为兵，令君祥统领。随从秃花秃烈、伯颜筑万寿山，开通州运河。有一次，世祖在便殿看江南和海东地图，要召一人询问地形之险易，左丞相伯颜和枢密副使合达都荐举君祥，君祥为世祖讲得详细明白。世祖大喜，亲酌一大杯酒赐饮。并对伯颜说 ：这孩子才气远大，会有出息。 至元六年，林衍反叛朝廷，君祥随头辇哥征讨。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he selected 300 soldiers from the Korean people and put Junxiang in command. He followed the Bald Flowers and the Bald Warriors and Bo Yan to build Mount Wanju and open the state canal. Once, the founder of the dynasty was looking at the map of the south of the Yangtze River and the east coast of the sea in the hall and wanted to call someone to inquire about the dangers of the terrain. The left chancellor Bo Yan and the vice-minister of the privy council Heda both recommended Junxiang. Junxiang spoke in detail and clearly for the founder of the dynasty. The founder was overjoyed and personally gave him a large glass of wine

古文：八年，戍河南。
现代文：八年，戍守河南。
English: Eight years later, he became governor of Henan Province.

古文：九年，掠淮西，破其大凹城。
现代文：九年，进军淮西，攻破大凹城。
English: In the ninth year, he marched into Huaxi and broke through the large concave city.

古文：十年，从元帅孛鲁罕袭淮东之射阳湖，俘其男女牛马。
现代文：十年，随元帅孛鲁罕袭击淮东之射阳湖，俘获男女人口及牛马。
English: Ten years later, he accompanied Marshal Jang Lukhan to attack Shayang Lake in Huadong, capturing men and women as well as cattle and horses.

古文：十一年，入朝。
现代文：十一年，君祥入朝。
English: In the eleventh year, Junxiang entered the imperial court.

古文：帝命伯颜伐宋，朝议以宋之兵力多聚两淮，闻我欲渡江，彼必移师拒守，遂命右卫指挥使秃满歹率轻锐二万攻淮安，以牵制之，君祥以蒙古汉军都镇抚从行。
现代文：世祖命伯颜伐宋，朝臣们认为，宋之兵力多集中在两淮，闻我军欲渡江，他们必调两淮军来抵御。于是命右卫指挥使秃满歹率轻捷精兵二万攻淮安以牵制，君祥则以蒙古汉军都镇抚之职随行。
English: According to the Emperor's will, the Song Dynasty's troops were mostly concentrated in the two Huai Provinces. When they heard that our army wanted to cross the river, they had to transfer the two Huai Provinces' troops to resist. Therefore, the commander of the Right Division was ordered to attack Huai'an with twenty thousand soldiers, and Junxiang accompanied with the post of Mongolian-Han military governor.

古文：后伯颜既渡江，帝命秃满歹还军萧县。
现代文：伯颜渡江之后，帝命秃满歹回师屯驻萧县。
English: After Bo Yan crossed the Yangtze River, the emperor's life was full of misdeeds and he returned to his division stationed in Xiao County.

古文：时君祥奉使伯颜军中，宋黄州制置使陈奕降，其子知涟水军，伯颜遣三十骑往招之，因令君祥入奏，帝曰： 卿可急还，陈知府降，即偕来也。 
现代文：君祥奉朝廷之命至伯颜军中，正值宋黄州制置使陈奕降元，其子为涟水军知军，伯颜准备派三十骑去招降，令君祥去请示朝廷。世祖说 ：卿可速回，陈知府若降，你同他一起来京。 
English: On the orders of the imperial court, Junxiang went to the army of Bo Yan. It was at the time of the establishment of Song Huangzhou that Chen Yi was demoted to Yuan. His son was the governor of the Surabaya army. Bo Yan was preparing to send thirty horsemen to invite him to surrender, and ordered Junxiang to go and ask the imperial court. The ancestor said: Sir, you can return quickly. If Chen Zhifu is demoted, you will come to Beijing with him.

古文：及与俱入朝，宴劳甚厚。
现代文：后来果然一同朝拜世祖，赐宴慰劳。
English: Later, they worshipped the patriarch together and gave him a feast to console him.

古文：从元帅孛鲁罕攻清河，拔之。
现代文：君祥又随元帅孛鲁罕攻克清河。
English: Junxiang also followed Marshal Yan Luhan in conquering Qinghe.

古文：伯颜师次镇江，谍报有宋洪都统者，为都督府将，伯颜谓君祥曰： 汝同姓，可往招致也。 
现代文：海州安抚丁顺约定投降，孛鲁罕令君祥去奏报朝廷，在上京遇见伯颜，便从伯颜南伐。伯颜克淮安，大军进至扬州，分兵攻淮西。大军至镇江，探知有宋洪都统为都督府将领，伯颜对君祥说： 此人与你同姓，可以招降。 
English: Hai Zhou pacified Ding Shun and agreed to surrender, Jianlu Han ordered Jun Xiang to report to the imperial court, met Bo Yan in Beijing, and then marched south from Bo Yan. Bo Yan took Huai'an, the army entered Yangzhou, and the detachment attacked Huaixi. The army went to Zhenjiang, and discovered that Song Hongdu Tong was the general of the governor's office. Bo Yan said to Jun Xiang: This person has the same surname as you, you can invite him to surrender.

古文：洪都统即欣然来见，君祥因厚遇之。
现代文：君祥果然招来了洪都统，并厚待他。
English: King Xiang really invited Hong Du Du and treated him well.

古文：师进，次临平山，距临安五十里，洪都统来报曰： 宋丞相陈宜中、殿帅张世杰皆已逃去，惟三宫未行，宜早定计，以活生民。 
现代文：大军进至临平山，离临安只有五十里。洪都统来报告说 ：宋丞相陈宜中、殿帅张世杰都已逃走，只有皇帝、太后、太子三宫未行，宜早做决定，使百姓得到拯救。 
English: The large army marched to Linping Mountain, only fifty miles from Lin'an. Hongdu unanimously reported: Song chancellor Chen Yizhong and grand marshal Zhang Shijie have all fled, only the emperor, the empress dowager, and the three princes have not left, it is advisable to make a decision early so that the people can be saved.

古文：伯颜遂令洪都统护宋三宫，令君祥随之。宋降，升武略将军、中卫亲军千户。
现代文：伯颜占据了临安，令洪都统保护宋室三宫。宋降后，升君祥为武略将军、中卫亲军千户。
English: Bo Yan occupied Lin'an and ordered Hong Du Tong to protect the three palaces of the Song dynasty. After the Song dynasty was overthrown, Sheng Junxiang became the general of Wu Liang and the middle guard of the pro-military thousand households.

古文：十五年，命佥江南民兵。
现代文：十五年，命君祥征江南民为兵。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, Emperor Taizong conscripted soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：还，升明威将军、中卫亲军副都指挥使。
现代文：回朝升明威将军、中卫亲军副都指挥。
English: Returning to the imperial court, General Ascended Mingwei and Vice-commander of the Central Guards pro-army both took command.

古文：十七年，进昭勇大将军。
现代文：十七年，晋升为昭勇大将军。
English: Seventeen years later, he was promoted to General Zhaoyong.

古文：十九年，授枢密院判官。
现代文：十九年，授枢密院判官。
English: He was appointed a Justice of the Privy Council in 1919.

古文：二十三年，转昭武大将军、同佥枢密院事。
现代文：二十三年转昭武大将军、同佥枢密院事。
English: In 233, he was promoted to Shōmu Taisho (Major General) and became a peer of the Privy Council.

古文：二十四年，乃颜叛，从世祖亲征。
现代文：二十四年，乃颜反叛，君祥随世祖亲征。
English: Twenty-four years later, Naoyan rebelled and Junxiang followed his ancestor to the front.

古文：每驻跸，君祥辄以兵车外环为营卫，布置严密，帝嘉之。
现代文：途中扎营，君祥总是以兵车在皇帝营外保护，布置严密，受到嘉奖。
English: On the way to the camp, Junxiang always protected outside the emperor's camp with a chariot, arranged strictly, and received awards.

古文：凯还，加辅国上将军。
现代文：凯旋回朝，加君祥辅国上将军。
English: After returning to the North in triumph, he was promoted to General of the Army.

古文：类次车驾起居，为《东征录》。
现代文：他把这次亲征中世祖的生活起居，纂为《东征录》。
English: He lived the life of the ancestors of the Middle Ages during this personal expedition and compiled it into "Eastern Expedition."

古文：二十八年，授辽阳行省右丞，用枢密院留，复居旧职。
现代文：二十八年，授辽阳行省右丞，因枢密院的挽留，仍居旧职。
English: In the 28th year, he was awarded the title of Liaoyang Provincial U.S.S.R. and remained in his former position due to the retention of the Privy Council.

古文：俄加集贤大学士，依旧同佥枢密院事。
现代文：不久加集贤大学士，仍旧为同佥枢密院事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Jixian University Scholar, and continued to serve as a peer of the Privy Council.

古文：议者欲自东南海口辛桥开河合滦河，运粮至上都，奉旨与中书右丞阿里相其利害，还，极言不便，罢之。
现代文：朝廷有人提出在东南海口辛桥地方开河，连接滦河，以便运粮至上都。君祥奉旨与中书右丞阿里去考察利害得失，回朝后极力说此议不妥，也就不再提起开河之事了。
English: Someone in the imperial court proposed to dredge the river in the southeastern Haikou Xinqiao area and connect it to the Min River in order to transport grain to the capital. Junxiang was instructed to go with the Chinese scholar Ali to examine the advantages and disadvantages. After returning to the imperial court, he strongly said that this proposal was not appropriate, and the matter of dredging the river was no longer mentioned.

古文：复奉使高丽，还，改佥书枢密院事。
现代文：又奉旨出使高丽，还朝后改为佥书枢密院事。
English: He was also dispatched to Goryeo by order, and later changed his post to that of the Privy Councillor.

古文：成宗即位，诏裁减久任官，知枢密院暗伯等奏： 君祥在枢密十六年，最为久者。 
现代文：成宗即位，诏令裁减久任官员，知枢密院暗伯等奏： 君祥在枢密院十六年，为最久的官。 
English: Emperor Chengzong ascended to the throne, the imperial edict reduced the number of long-serving officials, the Privy Council was abolished, and so on: King Xiang was in the Privy Council for 16 years, making him the longest-serving official.

古文：帝曰： 君祥始终一心，可勿迁也。 
现代文：成宗道： 君祥始终一心，不要调动。 
English: Cheng Zongdao: Junxiang always has one heart, do not move.

古文：大德二年，诏使高丽，台臣劾君祥以他事，中道追回，已而事罢。
现代文：大德二年，诏令他再出使高丽，台臣以其他事弹劾君祥，故中途把他追回，不久查明无事。
English: In the second year of the Great Emperor's reign, the Emperor ordered him to be sent to Korea again, and the Tai court officials impeached Junxiang for other matters, so they brought him back halfway, and soon found out that there was nothing wrong.

古文：三年，奉使江浙，问民间疾苦。
现代文：三年奉命至江浙访问民间疾苦。
English: Three years later, he was ordered to Jiangsu and Zhejiang to visit the suffering of the people.

古文：使还，退居昌平之皇华山，绝口不论时事者五年。
现代文：回京后退居于昌平之皇华山，五年绝口不论时事。
English: After returning to Beijing, he retreated to live in Wanghuashan, Changping, and did not speak to anyone for five years, regardless of current events.

古文：大德九年，擢司农，俄拜中书右丞。
现代文：大德九年，升为司农，不久拜为中书右丞。
English: In the ninth year of the Taide era, he was promoted to the position of Sino-Farmer, and soon after, he was promoted to the position of Chushujujo.

古文：十年春，改江浙行省右丞。
现代文：十年春改任江浙行省右丞。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, he was reappointed as the right-hand man of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：秋，改辽阳右丞，请于朝：宜新省治，增巡兵，设儒学提举官、都镇抚等员，以兴文化，修武备。
现代文：是年秋又改任辽阳行省右丞。在任辽阳行省右丞时，上书朝廷，建议新建省会，增加巡兵，设儒学提举官、都镇抚等，以兴文化、修武备。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Liaoyang Provincial Government. When he was appointed as the right-hand man of Liaoyang Provincial Government, he sent a letter to the Imperial Court, suggesting the construction of a new provincial capital, the increase of patrols, the establishment of a Confucianism promotion officer, a capital town governor, etc., to promote culture and military preparedness.

古文：郑鼎郑鼎，泽州阳城人。幼孤，能自立，读书晓大义，不妄言笑。既长，勇力过人，尤善骑射。
现代文：这些事尚未办成，逢武宗即位，召他为同知枢密院事，进阶荣禄大夫、平章政事，商议辽阳等处行中书省事。后改为辽阳行省平章政事，很快又改商议行省事。至大二年卒。郑鼎，泽州阳城人。自幼丧父，长大勇力过人，尤善于骑射。
English: These things have not yet been accomplished. When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he called him as Tongzhi Privy Councillor, advanced to Ronglu Doctor, Pingzhang Political Affairs, and consulted Liaoyang and other places to carry out the affairs of the central government. Later, it was changed to Liaoyang to carry out the affairs of the provincial government of Pingzhang, and soon changed to consult and carry out the affairs of the provincial government. Until the second year of his sophomore year. Zheng Ding, from Yangcheng, Zhejiang Province. He lost his father when he was young. He grew up with great courage and was particularly good at riding

古文：初为泽、潞、辽、沁千户。
现代文：初为泽、潞、辽、沁千户。
English: At the beginning, there were thousands of households in Zaze, Handan, Liao and Handan.

古文：岁甲午，从塔海绀不征蜀，攻二里散关，屡立战功，还屯秦中。
现代文：太宗六年，随塔海绀不征蜀，攻二里散关，屡立战功，回师屯驻秦中。
English: In the sixth year of Taizong's reign, he followed the tower of Haixun and did not collect Shu, attacked Erli and Sankuan, repeatedly made military achievements, and returned to his division stationed in Qinzhong.

古文：未几，宋将余侍郎烧绝栈道，以兵围兴元，鼎率众修复之，破宋兵，解兴元之围。
现代文：不久，宋将余侍郎烧毁栈道，围攻兴元，鼎率众修复栈道，击败宋兵，解兴元之围。
English: Soon after, Song general Yu Jirong burned down the causeway, besieged Xingyuan, led the crowd to repair the causeway, defeated Song soldiers, and lifted the siege of Xingyuan.

古文：乙巳，迁阳城县军民长官。
现代文：太宗皇后四年，调任阳城县军民长官。
English: In the fourth year of Empress Taizong, he was transferred to the post of Yangcheng County Military and Civil Affairs Officer.

古文：庚戌，从宪宗征大理国，自六盘山经临洮，下西蕃诸城，抵雪山。
现代文：宪宗三年，随世祖征大理国，自六盘山经临洮，攻下西蕃诸城，抵达雪山。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, he followed his ancestors to conquer Dali Province. From Liupanshan via Linyi, he conquered the cities of West Linyi and arrived at Snow Mountain.

古文：山径盘屈，舍骑徒步，尝背负宪宗以行。
现代文：山路崎岖盘旋，徒步前进，郑鼎背负世祖而行。
English: The mountain road is craggy and winding, and Zheng Ding walks on foot, carrying his ancestor on his back.

古文：敌据扼险要，鼎奋身力战，敌败北，帝壮之，赐马三匹。至金沙河，波涛汹涌，帝临水傍危石，立马观之。鼎谏曰： 此非圣躬所宜。 
现代文：敌扼守险要之地，鼎奋力战斗，打败敌人。至金沙江，波涛汹涌，世祖在河边危石边立马观察，鼎忙劝谏道： 这地方非圣上所到之处。 
English: The enemy held the critical place, fought hard, and defeated the enemy. As far as the Jinsha River, the waves were turbulent. The ancestor stood on the edge of the river to observe, and advised: This place is not a sacred place.

古文：别攻兴国军，遇宋兵五千，力战破之，擒其将桑太尉，责以懦怯，不忠所事，斩之。中统元年，以功迁平阳、太原两路万户。
现代文：九月，世祖屯驻江边，命诸将渡江而南，先到两岸者，举烽火为号。郑鼎首先登上南岸，大军随即过江。进围鄂州，鼎斗志更旺，攻兴国军，遇宋兵五千，为鼎大败，擒其将桑太尉。中统元年，因功升平阳、太原两路万户。
English: In September, the founder of the dynasty was stationed on the banks of the river and ordered his generals to cross the river to the south. The first to reach both banks was to hold a bonfire. Zheng Ding first boarded the south bank, and the army immediately crossed the river. Entering Ezhou, Ding's fighting spirit was more vigorous, he attacked the national army, encountered five thousand Song soldiers, and was defeated by Ding. In the first year of centralization, he was promoted to Pingyang and Taiyuan.

古文：阿蓝答儿、浑都海之乱，鼎分率本道兵讨之。
现代文：阿蓝答儿、浑都海之乱，鼎率本道兵马讨平。
English: In response to the Hunduhai Rebellion, Alang led the local soldiers and horses to settle the dispute.

古文：二年，诏鼎统征西等军，戍雁门关隘。
现代文：二年，诏令鼎统领征西等军，戍守雁门关。
English: In the second year, the emperor ordered Ding to lead the army to conquer the west and guard the gate of the wild goose.

古文：迁河东南、北两路宣抚使。
现代文：后调任河东南北两路宣抚使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of the special envoy to the north and south of Hedong Province.

古文：三年，改授平阳太原宣慰使。
现代文：三年，改授平阳太原宣慰使。
English: Three years later, he was awarded the title of "Pingyang Taiyuan Xuan Yue Envoy."

古文：至元三年，迁平阳路总管。
现代文：至元三年，调任平阳路总管。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the general manager of Pingyang Road.

古文：平阳地狭人众，常乏食，鼎乃导汾水，溉民田千余顷，开潞河鹏黄岭道，以来上党之粟。修学校，厉风俗，建横涧故桥以便行旅，民德之。
现代文：平阳地狭人多，常缺粮食，鼎疏导汾水，灌田千余顷，又开潞河鹏黄岭道，以运输上党的粮食，修建学校，改正风俗，修复横涧旧桥以便通行。人民都歌颂他。
English: Pingyang is densely populated with frequent food shortages. He oversaw the construction of more than a thousand hectares of irrigation fields and opened the Huangling Road to transport the party's grain, built schools, reformed customs, and repaired the old bridge to facilitate traffic. The people all sing his praises.

古文：七年，改佥书西蜀四川行尚书省事，将兵巡东川。
现代文：至元七年，改佥书西蜀四川行尚书省事，领兵巡察东川。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he changed his name to Xishu and traveled to Sichuan. He kept a low profile and led troops to inspect the East River.

古文：过嘉定，遇蜀兵，与战江中，擒其将李越，悉获战船。
现代文：过嘉定，遇蜀兵，战于江中，擒宋将李越，缴获所有战船。
English: Passing Jiading, encountering Shu soldiers, fighting in the middle of the river, the Song Dynasty will Li Yue, captured all the warships.

古文：八年五月，改军前行尚书省事。
现代文：八年五月，改任军前行尚书省事。
English: In May of the eighth year, he was reassigned to the military advance.

古文：十一年，从伐宋。
现代文：十一年，随大军伐宋。
English: In the eleventh year, he went to the Song Dynasty with the army.

古文：十二年，镇黄州。
现代文：十二年，镇守黄州。
English: In the twelfth year, he became the town guard of Huangzhou.

古文：夏四月，改授淮西宣慰使。
现代文：同年四月，改授淮西宣慰使。
English: In April of the same year, he was awarded the title of Huaxi Xuan Yue Envoy.

古文：十三年，加昭毅大将军，赐白金五百两。
现代文：十三年，加昭毅大将军，赐白金五百两。
English: In the thirteenth year, he promoted Zhaoyi to the rank of general and gave him five hundred taels of platinum.

古文：十七年，董文忠等奏： 郑也可拔都遇害，其叛人家属物产，宜悉与其子纳怀。 
现代文：至元十四年，改任湖北道宣慰使，镇戍鄂州。同年五月，蕲、黄二州反元，鼎领兵讨伐，在樊口战斗中，舟覆溺死，年六十三岁。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was reappointed as the Hubei Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Envoy, and was stationed in Huzhou. In May of the same year, he led the army to fight against the Yuan Dynasty in the two provinces of Anhui and Huangshan. During the battle of Hukou, he drowned at the age of 63.

古文：帝从之。赠中书右丞，谥忠毅。
现代文：赠中书右丞，谥忠毅。
English: Presented to Chushujo, Zou Zhongyi.

古文：后加赠宣忠保节功臣、平章政事、柱国，追封潞国公，谥忠肃。
现代文：后加赠宣忠保节功臣、平章政事、柱国，追封潞国公，谥忠肃。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of meritorious subject, the title of government affairs, the title of pillar state, the title of prince of Shikoku, and the title of chuzhu.

古文：子制宜。制宜小字纳怀，性聪敏，庄重有器局，通习国语。
现代文：郑制宜，小名纳怀，郑鼎之子，禀性聪敏，庄重，有度量，通晓蒙古语言。
English: Zheng Shiyi, nicknamed Na Huai, son of Zheng Ding, intelligent, dignified, measured, and fluent in the Mongolian language.

古文：至元十四年，袭父职太原、平阳万户，仍戍鄂州。
现代文：至元十四年，承袭父职，为太原、平阳万户，仍戍守鄂州，并兼代管府事。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, inheriting his father's position, he ruled Taiyuan and Pingyang, and remained in charge of Ezhou, and also took charge of government affairs.

古文：时鄂阙守，俾摄府事。十九年，朝廷将征日本，造楼船何家洲。
现代文：十九年，朝廷将征日本，在何家洲修造楼船。洲地狭小，众人要求将附近居民迁走。
English: In the 19th year, the imperial court will be sent to Japan to build a ship in Hejiazhou. The continent is small, and people are demanding that the nearby residents be moved away.

古文：洲地狭，众欲徙旁居民，制宜不从，改授宽地，居民德之。城中屡灾，或言于制宜曰： 恐奸人乘间为变，宜捕其疑似者，痛治之。 
现代文：制宜不肯，而将造船场改在宽地，居民都称颂他。城中多次发生火灾，有人对制宜说： 恐奸人乘机作乱，应把可疑者逮捕重惩。 
English: Many fires broke out in the city, and some people said to Seigi, "Terrorists are taking advantage of the situation to make trouble, and those who are suspected should be arrested and severely punished."

古文：制宜曰： 吾但严守备而已，奈何滥及无辜！ 
现代文：制宜说： 我们只要严密防守就是了，为何罪及无辜。 
English: The system says: We only need to be on the defensive, so why the guilt and innocence.

古文：不笞一人，灾亦遂息。
现代文：不鞭打一人，火灾还是息了。
English: If you don't whip one person, the fire will die out.

古文：有盗伏近郊，晨暮剽劫，流言将入城。
现代文：有盗伏于近郊，早晚进行剽劫，传说要进城来。
English: There are thieves lurking in the suburbs, robbing in the morning and evening, rumored to be coming to the city.

古文：俄有数男子自城外至，顾盼异常，制宜命吏缚入狱，问之无验，行省疑其非，将释之，不从。
现代文：忽然有几个男子从城外进来，左顾右盼，行为异常，制宜命人将他们逮捕入狱。审问也查不出证据，行省认为是抓错了人，要释放他们，制宜不肯。
English: Suddenly, several men from outside the city came in, looking left and right, behaving abnormally, and the governor arrested them and put them in prison. The interrogation also found no evidence, and the governor thought that they had arrested the wrong person and wanted to release them, but the governor refused.

古文：明日，再出城东，遇一人，乘白马，貌服殊异，制宜叱下，讯之，乃与前数男子同为盗者，遂正其罪，一郡帖然。
现代文：第二天出城东，遇一人乘白马，相貌服装异常，逮捕审问供称与前所捕数男子均为盗，于是判其罪，一郡人服帖，安然无事。
English: The next day, he went out of the eastern part of the city and encountered a person riding a white horse, his appearance and clothing were abnormal, he was arrested and interrogated, and he confessed that he was a thief like several men arrested before, so he was convicted, and a county of people were arrested, and they were safe and sound.

古文：二十四年，扈驾东征乃颜，请赴敌自效。
现代文：二十四年，制宜扈驾东征乃颜，请求杀敌报效。
English: Twenty-four years later, he went on an expedition to the East, asking to be rewarded for killing the enemy.

古文：帝顾左右曰： 而父殁王事，惟有一子，毋使在行阵。 
现代文：世祖对左右近臣说 ：他父亲为国家牺牲，只有这一个儿子，勿使他参加战斗。 
English: The patriarch said to his vassals on both sides: His father sacrificed himself for the country, and he is the only son. Don't let him take part in the battle.

古文：制宜请愈力，乃命从月儿吕那颜别为一军，以战功授怀远大将军、枢密院判官。
现代文：制宜请战更加坚决，只得让他随月儿吕那颜另为一军，因有战功授怀远大将军、枢密院判官。
English: He was more resolute in calling for war when the situation called for it, but he had to let his son, Lü Nanyan, join another army. For his war service, he was awarded the title of General Huaiyuan and a judge of the Privy Council.

古文：明年，车驾幸上都。
现代文：二十五年，世祖至上都。
English: Twenty-five years later, the patriarch is still supreme.

古文：旧制：枢府官从行，岁留一员司本院事，汉人不得与。
现代文：按原制：枢府官随行，每年留一员处理本院事，但汉人不得参与。
English: According to the original system: the central government officials accompany the procession, leaving one member each year to deal with the affairs of the hospital, but the Chinese are not allowed to participate.

古文：至是，以属制宜。制宜逊辞，帝曰： 汝岂汉人比耶！ 
现代文：这时却留制宜。制宜推辞，世祖说： 你非一般汉人可比。 
English: At this time, however, he reserved judgment. With the exception of judgment, the ancestor said: You are not comparable to ordinary Han people.

古文：竟留之。
现代文：终于把他留下来了。
English: They finally left him behind.

古文：二十八年，迁湖广行省参知政事，陛辞，帝曰： 汝父死王事，赏未汝及。
现代文：二十八年，调任湖广行省参知政事。赴任时，皇帝对他说： 你父亲为国捐躯，也不曾给你什么赏赐。
English: In the 28th year, he was transferred to the post of Huguang Xingguo Sanzhong Zhengji. When he took office, the emperor said to him: Your father sacrificed his life for the country, and did not give you any reward.

古文：近者，要束木伏诛，已籍没其财产人畜，汝可择其佳者取之。 
现代文：近来诛杀了要束木，没收了他财产人畜，你可拣最好的拿去。 
English: Recently, they have cut down a bunch of trees and confiscated his property, people and animals. You can take the best.

古文：制宜对曰： 彼以赃败，臣复取之，宁无污乎！ 
现代文：制宜说 ：他是因贪赃而败，臣再取其赃物，岂不是玷污了自己！ 
English: Shigeyoshi said, "He was defeated because of greed. If the vassal took back what he stole, wouldn't he have defiled himself?"

古文：帝贤其所守，赐白金五千两。
现代文：世祖称赞他的廉洁不染，赐白金五千两。
English: The patriarch praised his integrity and gave him 5,000 taels of platinum.

古文：未几，征拜内台侍御史。
现代文：不久，召拜内台侍御史。
English: Not long after, he was summoned to the Inner Court to serve the Emperor.

古文：安西旧有牧地，圉人恃势，冒夺民田十万余顷，讼于有司，积年不能理。
现代文：安西原有牧地，掌管养马的官员恃势侵占民田十万顷，百姓向官府陈诉，多年不能解决。
English: Anxi used to have pastures, but the officials in charge of horse breeding usurped 100,000 hectares of people's fields, and the people complained to the government, which could not be resolved for many years.

古文：制宜奉诏而往，按图籍以正之，讼由是息。三十年，除湖广行枢密副使。
现代文：制宜奉诏去处理，按图册公正判决。至元三十年，委任制宜为湖广行枢密副使。
English: In accordance with the edict, Xie Yi was dealt with according to the edict, and the judgment was fair according to the picture book. In 30 years ago, Xie Yi was appointed as the vice-secretary of the imperial envoy to Hunan.

古文：湖南地阔远，群寇依险出没，昭、贺二州及庐陵境，民常被害。
现代文：湖南地广路远，群寇恃险出没，昭、贺二州及庐陵境内，百姓常受其害。
English: Hunan is far away from the mainland, and marauding bands of bandits haunt the territory of Zhao, He Erzhou and Fuling, and the people are often harmed by them.

古文：制宜率偏师徇二州，道经庐陵永新，获首贼及其党，皆杀之。
现代文：制宜带小部分军队巡行此二州，道经庐陵永新，获贼首及其党徒，皆依法处斩。
English: It is necessary to take a small part of the army to patrol these two states, passing through Fuling Yongxin, and get the thief leader and his party members, all of whom will be executed according to law.

古文：茶乡谭计龙者，聚恶少年，匿兵器为奸，既捕获，其家纳赂以缓狱事，制宜悉以劳军，斩计龙于市，自是湖以南无复盗贼。
现代文：茶乡的谭计龙，聚集一些无赖少年，私藏兵器为非作歹，被捕，其家人向官府行贿，以求不急于惩处。制宜将所行贿赂都拿去劳军，而将谭计龙斩首示众。自此以后，湖南再无盗贼。
English: In the tea-growing region of Tanjielong, a group of young ruffians were arrested for the crime of possessing weapons. Their families paid bribes to the government so that they would not be punished. The government took all the bribes to the labor army and beheaded Tanjielong in public. Since then, there have been no more thieves in Hunan.

古文：元贞元年，有制：行枢密院添置副使一员，与制宜连署。
现代文：元贞元年，按规定：行枢密院增加副使一员，与制宜共同签署文件，共同负责。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Zhen, according to the regulations: the Executive Privy Council added a deputy envoy, signed a document with the system, and was jointly responsible.

古文：制宜以员非常设，先任者当罢。
现代文：制宜认为所增副使非常设官员，原先的副使当免职。
English: According to the regulations, the new deputy envoy is a non-permanent official, and the former deputy envoy should be dismissed.

古文：俄入朝，特授大都留守，领少府监，兼武卫亲军都指挥使，知屯田事。
现代文：不久入朝，授大都留守，管领少府监，兼武卫亲军都指挥使，管理屯田事。
English: Soon after he entered the imperial court, he stayed behind to confer the title of Daito, supervise the young prefectural inspectors, and command the pro-military guards, and manage the affairs of the military garrison.

古文：赠推忠赞治功臣、银青荣禄大夫、平章政事，追封泽国公，谥忠宣。
现代文：大德七年，晋地发生地震，平阳尤为严重，压死了许多人。制宜奉命去抚恤，昼夜兼程，由近路赶赴灾区。到灾区后深入民间，抚慰受伤群众，发给粟帛。十年，制宜病卒，享年四十七岁。
English: In the seventh year of the great German era, an earthquake occurred in Jin, Pingyang was particularly serious, and many people were crushed to death. Xie Yi was ordered to go to the disaster area to provide relief, and he traveled day and night, taking a short route. After arriving in the disaster area, he went deep into the people, comforted the injured people, and gave them to Maoyan. In the tenth year, Xie Yi died of illness, at the age of forty-seven.

古文：子阿儿思兰嗣。李进
现代文：赠推忠赞治功臣、银青荣禄大夫、平章政事，追封泽国公，谥忠宣。
English: He was given the awards of "Promoting Loyalty, Praising and Caring for Meritorious Subjects," "Silver Youth, Honorary Doctor," "Heavenly Order, Political Affairs," "Imperial Prince of Zhe," and "Promoting Loyalty."

古文：李进，保定曲阳人。
现代文：李进，保定曲阳人。
English: Li Jin, a singer from Baoding.

古文：幼隶军籍，初从万户张柔屯杞之三叉口，时荆山之西九十里曰龙冈者，宋境也。
现代文：自幼入伍，初随万户张柔屯驻于杞县三叉口。当时荆山西九十里龙冈即为宋境。
English: He enlisted in the army at a young age, and was first stationed at the junction of three rivers in Handan County with Wanyu Zhang Rhotun. At that time, Longgang, ninety miles west of Mount Jing, was Song territory.

古文：岁庚戌春，张柔引兵筑堡冈上。
现代文：定宗皇后二年春，张柔筑堡于冈上。
English: In the spring of the second year of Empress Jojong's reign, Zhang Rong built a castle on the hill.

古文：会淮水泛涨，宋以舟师卒至，主帅察罕率军逆战，进以兵十五人载一舟，转斗十余里，夺一巨舰，遂以功升百户。
现代文：淮河水涨，宋水军突然到来，蒙古军主帅察罕迎战，李进率士卒十五人，乘一舟转战十余里，夺敌一巨舰，因功升为百户。
English: The waters of the Huai River rose, the Song Navy suddenly arrived, the Mongolian army commander Chahan went to war, Li Jin led fifteen soldiers and officers, traveled more than ten miles by boat, captured a huge enemy ship, and was promoted to one hundred households for his service.

古文：戊午，宪宗西征，丞相史天泽时为河南经略大使，选诸道兵之骁勇者从，遂命进为总把。
现代文：宪宗八年，蒙古大军西征，丞相史天泽当时为河南经略大使，从诸道军队中挑选骁勇者随宪宗出征，命李进为总把。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the Mongolian army set out for the West. The prime minister, Shi Tianze, was the ambassador of Henan for economic and strategic affairs at the time. He selected the bravest soldiers from the armies of various provinces to go to war with Emperor Xianzong, and appointed Li Jin as the commander-in-chief.

古文：是年秋九月，道由陈仓入兴元，度米仓关，其地荒塞不通，进伐木开道七百余里。
现代文：是年九月，取道陈仓，入兴元，越过米仓关，一路荒凉，道路堵塞，李进伐木开道七百余里。
English: In September of the same year, he took the Chencang Road, entered Xingyuan, and crossed the Yicang Pass. The road was desolate, the road was blocked, and Li Jin opened a logging road for more than 700 miles.

古文：冬十一月，至定远七星关，其关上下皆筑连堡，宋以五百人守之，巴渠江水环堡东流。
现代文：十一月至定远七十关。该关上下皆筑堡相连，宋军以五百人扼守，巴渠江环堡东流。
English: From November to Dingyuan, there were 70 gates. The gates up and down were all connected to the fortress, the Song army was guarded by 500 people, and the Bachu River flowed east of the fortress.

古文：天泽命进往关下说降之，不从。
现代文：天泽命李进往关下说降。守军不听从。
English: Tianze ordered Li to march into the pass and surrender, but the defenders did not listen.

古文：进潜视间道，归白天泽曰： 彼可取也。 
现代文：李进暗察到有条偏僻小路，回营对天泽说： 此关可取。 
English: Li Jin noticed a remote path by heart and said to Tian Ze on his way back to the camp: This pass is good.

古文：夜将旦，进遂得其堡，守之，关路始通，诸军尽度。
现代文：当夜二更，进率勇士七十人，乘其不备而攻之，破门而入者二十人。
English: On the second day of the night, seventy warriors advanced, taking advantage of their unpreparedness to attack, and twenty people broke through the door.

古文：进以功受上赏。
现代文：守门者拔刀砍伤李进，且关了堡门。
English: The keeper slashed Li Jin with a knife and closed the gate.

古文：己未春二月，天泽兵至行在所，围合州钓鱼山寨。
现代文：进奋不顾身，与二十人力战，杀伤三十人，打开了堡门，诸军拥进，宋兵不能抵御，弃堡逃走。
English: Pushing forward regardless of his own strength, he fought with twenty men and killed thirty. He opened the castle gate, and the armies swarmed in. The Song soldiers could not resist and abandoned the castle and fled.

古文：夏五月，宋由嘉陵江以舟师来援，始大战三槽山西。
现代文：天将明，李进占领七十关，打开了前进的道路。宪宗九年二月，蒙古大军围攻合州钓鱼山寨。五月，宋水军由嘉陵江来援救，大战于三槽山之西。
English: In February of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the Mongolian army besieged the fishing village of Hezhou. In May, the Song Navy came to the rescue from the Jialing River, and the war was in the west of the Three Gorges.

古文：六月，战山之东，有功。
现代文：六月又大战于三槽山之东，李进均有战功。
English: In June, there was another big battle in the east of the Three Trough Mountains, in which Li Jin made great contributions.

古文：兵一交，宋前锋溃走，战舰继乱，顺流纵击，死者不可胜计。
现代文：秋七月，宋军战舰三百余艘停泊黑石峡东岸，以轻舟五十只为前锋，蒙古军船七十艘泊于黑石峡西岸，两军相距一里左右。
English: In autumn and July, more than three hundred warships of the Song Army anchored on the east coast of the Black Rock Gorge, with fifty light boats as the vanguard, and seventy Mongolian warships anchored on the west coast of the Black Rock Gorge. The two armies were about one mile apart.

古文：帝指顾谓诸将曰： 白旗下服红半臂突而前者，谁也？ 
现代文：宪宗立马于东山，拥兵二万，列阵于大江两岸。在史天泽指挥下，蒙古军发起攻势，宋军前锋败走，战舰混乱，蒙军顺流而下，宋军死者不可胜计。
English: The Mongolian army launched an offensive under the command of Shi Tianze, the Song army's vanguard was defeated, the warships were in disarray, the Mongolian army went down the river, and the Song army's dead were incalculable.

古文：天泽以进对，赏锦衣、名马。
现代文：宪宗问白旗下穿红衣冲锋陷阵者是谁，天泽说是李进，帝赏他锦衣、名马。
English: Kenzong asked Bai who was the person wearing the red coat who stormed the battlefield. Tianze said that it was Li Jin, and the emperor awarded him with the brocade coat and the famous horse.

古文：八月，又战浮图关，前后凡五战，皆以功受上赏。
现代文：八月，两军又战于浮图关。李进在前后五次战斗中，均以功受奖。
English: In August, the two armies fought again at Futu Pass. Li Jin received awards for his merits in all five battles.

古文：世祖即位，入为侍卫亲军。
现代文：世祖即位，李进入朝为侍卫亲军。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, and Li entered the imperial court as an attendant.

古文：中统二年，宣授总把，赐银符。
现代文：中统二年，授总把，赐银符。
English: In the second year of unification, he was awarded the title of general and given a silver medal.

古文：三年，从征李璮有功。
现代文：三年，随大军征李王有功。
English: In the third year, with a large army to recruit Li Wang, he achieved great success.

古文：至元八年，领兵赴襄阳。
现代文：至元八年，领兵赴襄阳。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he led an army to Xiangyang.

古文：十二年，从略地湖北、湖南。
现代文：十二年，随大军攻占湖北、湖南。
English: In the twelfth year, he conquered Hubei and Hunan with a large army.

古文：宋平，以兵马使分兵屯鄂州。
现代文：平宋后，任兵马使之职，屯兵鄂州。
English: After the Ping and Song dynasties, he was appointed as the commander of soldiers and horses and stationed in Ezhou.

古文：十三年，领军二千，屯田河西中兴府。
现代文：十三年，领军二千于河西中兴府屯田。
English: In the thirteenth year, he led an army of two thousand to Tonden in Zhongxingfu, Hexi.

古文：十四年，加武略将军，升千户。
现代文：十四年，加武略将军，升为千户。
English: In the 14th year of his reign, he was promoted to the rank of general and raised the number of households to 1,000.

古文：十五年，移屯六盘山，加武毅将军，赐金符。
现代文：十五年，屯驻于六盘山，加武毅将军，赐金符。
English: For fifteen years, he was stationed in Liupanshan, and was awarded a gold medal by General Gaowu Yi.

古文：十七年，升明威将军、管军总管。
现代文：十七年，升明威将军、管军总管。
English: Seventeen years later, he rose to the rank of General Mingwei and became the commander-in-chief.

古文：十九年，赐虎符，复进怀远大将军，命屯田西域别石八里。
现代文：十九年，赐虎符，晋升怀远大将军，奉命屯田于西域别石八里。
English: In the 19th year, he was awarded the Tiger Badge, promoted to General Huaiyuan, and was ordered to set up a garrison in Beishihachili in the western region.

古文：二十三年秋，海都及笃娃等领军至洪水山，进与力战，众寡不敌，军溃，进被擒。从至掺八里，遁还。
现代文：二十三年秋，海都及笃娃等进犯，军至洪水山，李进与之力战，寡不敌众，兵败被擒，至掺八里逃回。
English: In the autumn of the 23rd year, Haidu and Dukuwa attacked, and the army reached Fudaishan. Li Jin fought with them, and was outnumbered. He was defeated and captured, and fled back to Dopingbali.

古文：至和州，收溃兵三百余人，且战且行。
现代文：到和州收集被击溃兵卒三百余人，且战且行，回到京师。
English: He went to Hezhou to collect more than three hundred soldiers who had been routed, and went back to the Beijing Division.

古文：二十五年，授蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使司佥事。
现代文：至元二十五年，授蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使司佥事。
English: By the twenty-fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Mongolian imperial guards and troops were all commanded by envoys.

古文：明年，改授左翼屯田万户。
现代文：二十六年，改授左翼屯田万户。
English: In 1926, it was changed to "Left Wing Tonden Manko."

古文：元贞元年春。
现代文：贞元元年春卒。
English: Sadamoto graduated in the spring of 1891.

