古文：献公伐骊戎，克之，灭骊子，获骊姬以归，立以为夫人，生奚齐。其娣生卓子。
现代文：晋献公讨伐骊戎，征服了这个国家，杀了它的国君骊子，俘获骊姬回国，立她为夫人。骊姬生了奚齐，她妹妹生了卓子。
English: Jin Xianguo fought against Qian Rong, conquered the country, killed its sovereign Zongzi, captured Qian Ji, returned to the country, and made her his wife. Qian Ji gave birth to Qian Qi, and her sister gave birth to Zhuo Zi.

古文：骊姬请使申生主曲沃以速悬，重耳处蒲城，夷吾处屈，奚齐处绛，以儆无辱之故。
现代文：骊姬请求献公派太子申生去曲沃以逼他速死，另派公子重耳去蒲城，公子夷吾去屈，而把奚齐留在国都绛。
English: She requested the court to send Prince Shen Sheng to Quwo to force him to die quickly, and to send Prince Chong Er to Putuo, Prince Yiwu to Qu, and to keep Prince Xizhi in the capital.

古文：公许之。史苏朝，告大夫曰： 二三大夫其戒之乎，乱本生矣！
现代文：她说这是为了防备敌国的入侵，不让晋国受到耻辱。献公同意了她的请求。史苏上朝时对大夫们说： 你们可要戒备哩，晋国内乱的根子已经产生了！
English: She said this was in order to prevent the invasion of an enemy country and not to let Jin be humiliated. Xianggu agreed to her request. Shisu said to the doctors during the last dynasty: You have to be on your guard, the root of Jin's civil unrest has already arisen!

古文：日，君以骊姬为夫人，民之疾心固皆至矣。
现代文：当年，国君立骊姬为夫人，民众不满的心态原就达到了极点。
English: In that year, when the country's monarch, Empress Dowager Cixi, became the wife, the people's dissatisfaction reached its peak.

古文：昔者之伐也，兴百姓以为百姓也，是以民能欣之，故莫不尽忠极劳以致死也。
现代文：古代的明君从事征伐，是发动百姓为百姓除害，所以民众能高兴地拥戴他，无不尽忠竭力甚至不惜一死。
English: The ancient Ming prince engaged in the conquest, is to launch the people for the people to eliminate the harm, so the people can happily embrace him, unswervingly loyal efforts even at the cost of death.

古文：今君起百姓以自封也，民外不得其利，而内恶其贪，则上下既有判矣；然而又生男，其天道也？
现代文：现在国君发动百姓却是为的自己丰厚，民众对外攻战得不到利益，又厌恶国内君王的贪欲，所以上下已经离心了。然而骊姬生的又是儿子，难道这是天意？
English: Now the sovereign is mobilizing the people for his own enrichment, the people are not benefiting from foreign wars, and they detest the greed of the domestic monarchs, so the two sides have become estranged. However, the son of the Empress Dowager is also a son, is this the will of heaven?

古文：天强其毒，民疾其态，其乱生哉！
现代文：上天加强了晋国的祸害，民众不满这种状况，内乱就要发生了！
English: Heaven has strengthened the scourge of Jin, the people are dissatisfied with this situation, civil unrest is about to happen!

古文：吾闻君之好好而恶恶，乐乐而安安，是以能有常。
现代文：我听说国君应该喜欢好的事物，憎恶坏的事物，欢乐时就高兴，安定时就放心，这样统治才能持久正常。
English: I heard that the sovereign should like good things, hate bad things, be happy when he is happy, and be relieved when he is stable, so that his reign can be long and normal.

古文：伐木不自其本，必复生；塞水不自其源，必复流；灭祸不自其基，必复乱。
现代文：砍伐树木不从树根开始，必定会重新萌生；堵塞河水不从源头开始，必定会重新流淌；消灭祸乱不从根本着手，必定会重生祸乱。
English: Cutting down trees does not start from the roots, it will surely sprout again; blocking river water does not start from the source, it will surely flow again; eliminating disasters does not start from the root, it will surely regenerate disasters.

古文：今君灭其父而言其子，祸之基也。
现代文：如今国君杀了骊姬的父亲却又留下骊姬，这正是祸乱的根基啊。
English: Now the sovereign has killed Shunji's father, but left Shunji behind. This is the root of the calamity.

古文：畜其子，又从其欲，子思报父之耻而信其欲，虽好色，必恶心，不可谓好。
现代文：既留下骊姬，还要顺从她的欲望，她想报杀父之耻就会伸张野心。虽然外貌很美，但内心一定很丑恶，不能算是真正的美。
English: If she wants to avenge her father's death, she will be ambitious. Although she is beautiful on the outside, she must be ugly on the inside. She cannot be considered a true beauty.

古文：好其色，必授之情。
现代文：国君喜欢她的美丽外貌，必定会答应她的要求。
English: The sovereign liked her beautiful appearance and would certainly agree to her request.

古文：彼得其情以厚其欲，从其恶心，必败国且深乱。
现代文：她得到国君的宠爱会进一步加强政治上的欲望，扩张其野心，这样就必定会使晋国败亡并且造成深重的祸乱。
English: Her being favored by the sovereign will further strengthen her political desires and expand her ambitions, which will inevitably lead to the downfall of Jin and cause serious disasters.

古文：乱必自女戎，三代皆然。 
现代文：祸乱一定来自女人，夏、商、西周都是这样。 
English: The calamity must come from a woman, Xia, Shang and Xi Zhou are all like this.

古文：骊姬果作难，杀太子而逐二公子。
现代文：后来骊姬果然作乱，杀了太子申生并驱逐了公子重耳和夷吾。
English: Later, she caused a riot, killed Prince Shen Sheng and expelled Prince Chong Er and Empress Wu.

古文：君子曰： 知难本矣。 
现代文：有识之士说： 史苏洞察灾难的根源了。 
English: People of insight said: Su Su's insight into the root cause of the disaster.

