古文：◎外国三
现代文：日本，就是古代的倭奴国。
English: Japan is the ancient country of Wano.

古文：○日本日本，古倭奴国。唐咸亨初，改日本，以近东海日出而名也。
现代文：唐朝咸亨初年，因其地靠近东海，最早看到日出，才改名为日本。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Hamhung changed its name to Japan because it was the first to see the sunrise due to its proximity to the East Sea.

古文：地环海，惟东北限大山，有五畿、七道、三岛，共一百十五州，统五百八十七郡。
现代文：日本四面环海，只有东北部有少量大山，内分为五个畿、七个道、三个岛，共一百十五个州，统领五百八十七个郡。
English: Japan is surrounded by the sea on all sides, with only a few large mountains in the northeast. It is divided into five provinces, seven prefectures, and three islands, with a total of one hundred and fifteen prefectures and 587 counties.

古文：其小国数十，皆服属焉。
现代文：周围有小国数十个，都从属于日本。
English: There are dozens of small countries around it, all of which are subordinate to Japan.

古文：国小者百里，大不过五百里。户小者千，多不过一二万。
现代文：这些小国中，国土小的只有百里，大的也不超过五百里；户籍少的只有一千余户，多的也不超过一二万。
English: Of these small countries, the smallest has a territory of only one hundred li, while the largest does not exceed five hundred li; the smallest has a household registration of just over one thousand, while the largest has a household registration of no more than one hundred and twenty thousand.

古文：国主世以王为姓，群臣亦世官。
现代文：这些国家的国王世代都以王为姓，而各位大臣也都世代为官。
English: For generations, the kings of these countries have taken the surname of Wang, and the ministers have been in office for generations.

古文：宋以前皆通中国，朝贡不绝，事具前史。
现代文：宋代以前他们都与中国有来往，向朝廷朝贡不绝，其事以前各史籍均有记载。
English: Before the Song Dynasty, they all had dealings with China and made continuous tribute to the imperial court, which is recorded in various historical books.

古文：惟元世祖数遣使赵良弼招之不至，乃命忻都、范文虎等帅舟师十万征之，至五龙山遭暴风，军尽没。
现代文：只有元世祖几次派使臣赵良弼去招抚他们，他们都不来，于是便命令忻都、范文虎等人率水军十万前去征讨，到五龙山时遭遇暴风，全军覆没。
English: Only the ancestor of the first generation sent the envoy Zhao Liangqi several times to appease them, but they did not come, so he ordered Xindu, Fan Wenhu and others to lead a hundred thousand sailors to go and fight, and when they reached Wulong Mountain, they encountered a storm, and the whole army was destroyed.

古文：后屡招不至，终元世未相通也。
现代文：后来屡次派人去招抚都不来，终元朝一世他们都没与中国往来。
English: Later, they repeatedly sent people to entice them, but they did not come, and by the end of the Yuan Dynasty, they had no dealings with China.

古文：明兴，高皇帝即位，方国珍、张士诚相继诛服。
现代文：明朝建立后，高皇帝登位，方国珍、张士诚相继被诛或臣服。
English: After the establishment of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Gao ascended to the throne, and Fang Guozhen and Zhang Shicheng were successively banished or surrendered.

古文：诸豪亡命，往往纠岛人入寇山东滨海州县。
现代文：诸豪强亡命之徒往往纠集岛上之人入侵山东滨海的州县。
English: The powerful outlaws often gather people from the island to invade the prefectures and counties along the Shandong coast.

古文：洪武二年三月，帝遣行人杨载诏谕其国，且诘以入寇之故，谓： 宜朝则来廷，不则修兵自固。
现代文：洪武二年三月，皇帝派行人杨载前去日本颁发诏谕，并诘问他们为何入侵中国，对他们说： 你们要觉得合适就派使者到朝廷来修好，否则你们就备军自保。
English: In March of the second year of Hongwu, the emperor sent a messenger, Yang Zai, to Japan to issue an edict, and asked them why they had invaded China. He said to them, "If you think it is appropriate, send an envoy to the imperial court to make amends, otherwise, prepare an army to protect yourselves."

古文：倘必为寇盗，即命将徂征耳，王其图之。 
现代文：倘若你们一定要在中国为寇为盗，马上就派将领率兵前来征讨，大王自己考虑一下后果。 
English: If you must steal in China, immediately send generals and soldiers to collect, and consider the consequences for yourself.

古文：日本王良怀不奉命，复寇山东，转掠温、台、明州旁海民，遂寇福建沿海郡。
现代文：日本国王良怀不遵奉朝廷的命令，又侵略山东，转而掠夺温州、台州、明州旁的渔民，还侵略福建的沿海郡县。
English: Japanese King Liang Hui disobeyed the order of the imperial court, invaded Shandong, plundered the fishermen near Wenzhou, Taizhou and Mingzhou, and invaded the coastal counties of Fujian.

古文：三年三月又遣莱州府同知赵秩责让之，泛海至析木崖，入其境，守关者拒弗纳。
现代文：三年三月朝廷又派莱州府的同知赵秩前去责备日本国王，当他泛海渡舟到析木崖，进入日本境内，日本守关者拒绝接纳赵秩进关。
English: In March of the third year, the imperial court also sent Zhao Chizhi, a friend of the Laizhou government, to rebuke the Japanese king. When he entered Japan by crossing the sea to the sedimentation cliff, the Japanese guards refused to accept Zhao Chizhi.

古文：秩以书抵良怀，良怀延秩入。
现代文：赵秩将书信托人转交给良怀，良怀请赵秩进去。
English: Zhao Chizhi handed over the letter of trust to Liang Huai, and Liang Hui invited Zhao Chizhi inside.

古文：谕以中国威德，而诏书有责其不臣语。
现代文：赵秩向他谕告中国的威德，诏书中还有责备他不行臣子之事的话语。
English: Zhao Chizhi told him of China's virtue, and there were also words in the edict reproaching him for not behaving like a vassal.

古文：良怀曰： 吾国虽处扶桑东，未尝不慕中国。
现代文：良怀说 ：我的国家虽然地处扶桑之东，未尝不仰慕中国。
English: Liang Huai said: Although my country is located east of Fusang, I cannot help but admire China.

古文：惟蒙古与我等夷，乃欲臣妾我。
现代文：只是蒙古人与我们一样都是夷族，却想把我们变成臣妾。
English: It's just that the Mongolians are barbarians like us, but they want to turn us into their vassals.

古文：我先王不服，乃使其臣赵姓者訹我以好语，语未既，水军十万列海岸矣。
现代文：我国的先王不服，蒙古人便派一名姓赵的使臣拿好话来哄我们，可是他的话还没完，他们就把十万水兵排布在海岸上了。
English: The Mongolians were not satisfied with our first king, so they sent an envoy named Zhao to coax us with good words, but before his words were finished, they lined up a hundred thousand sailors on the coast.

古文：以天之灵，雷霆波涛，一时军尽覆。
现代文：靠天之灵，忽发雷霆波涛，一时之间让其全军覆没。
English: Relying on the spirit of heaven, the thunderous wave suddenly bursts forth, and its entire army disappears in an instant.

古文：今新天子帝中夏，天使亦赵姓，岂蒙古裔耶？
现代文：现今新的天子在中夏称帝，所派的使臣也姓赵，难道也是蒙古人的后裔吗？
English: Today, the new Son of Heaven is enthroned in China, and the envoys he has sent are also surnamed Zhao. Are they also descendants of the Mongols?

古文：亦将訹我以好语而袭我也。 
现代文：是不是也先拿好话骗我而后再袭击我。 
English: Didn't he also deceive me with kind words before attacking me?

古文：自左右将兵之。
现代文：说完之后拿眼睛看着左右想用兵器杀死赵秩。
English: After saying that, he looked around with his eyes and wanted to kill Zhao Ritchi with a weapon.

古文：秩不为动，徐曰： 我大明天子神圣文武，非蒙古比，我亦非蒙古使者后。
现代文：赵秩不为所动，慢慢地说： 我国大明天子神圣文武，非蒙古人可比，我也不是蒙古使者的后裔。
English: Unmoved, Zhao Ritchi said slowly, "Our great grandson, the Divine Literature and Martial Arts, is comparable to a non-Mongolian, and I am not a descendant of a Mongolian envoy.

古文：能兵，兵我。 
现代文：要是你们想使用兵器杀我，那就杀好了。 
English: If you want to use weapons to kill me, then kill me.

古文：良怀气沮，下堂延秩，礼遇甚优。
现代文：良怀气沮，亲自下堂请赵秩，对他礼遇甚优。
English: Liang Huai was dejected and personally went down to the hall to invite Zhao Ritchie. He was treated with great courtesy.

古文：遣其僧祖来奉表称臣，贡马及方物，且送还明、台二郡被掠人口七十余，以四年十月至京。
现代文：于是良怀派其僧人来中国奉表称臣，向朝廷贡献马匹和土产，并送还从明、台两个郡中掳掠去的七十余人。在四年十月到达京城。
English: As a result, Liang Huai sent his monks to China to serve as vassals, to offer horses and local products to the imperial court, and to return more than seventy people who had been abducted and plundered from the two counties of Ming and Taiwan. They arrived in Beijing in October of the fourth year.

古文：太祖嘉之，宴赉其使者，念其俗佞佛，可以西方教诱之也，乃命僧祖阐、克勤等八人送使者还国，赐良怀《大统历》及文绮、纱罗。
现代文：明太祖深为嘉赏，赐宴犒劳日本的使臣，心想日本的习俗是迷信佛教，可以西方的佛教来诱导他们，于是命令僧人祖阐、克勤等八人送日本使者回国，给日本国王良怀赏赐《大统历》和文绮、纱罗。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty was deeply appreciative and gave a banquet to praise the Japanese envoys. He thought that the Japanese custom was superstitious Buddhism, and that Western Buddhism could be used to induce them. Therefore, he ordered eight people, including the monks Zu Xing and Ke Qin, to send the Japanese envoys back to China and give the Japanese king Liang Hui the reward of the "Great General Calendar" and the papyrus and saros.

古文：是年掠温州。
现代文：该年他们又掳掠了温州。
English: That year, they also captured Wenzhou.

古文：五年寇海盐、氵敢浦，又寇福建海上诸郡。
现代文：五年他们入侵海盐、澉浦和福建省的海上各郡。
English: In the fifth year, they invaded Haiyan, Weipu and the maritime counties in Fujian Province.

古文：六年以于显为总兵官，出海巡倭，倭寇莱、登。
现代文：六年朝廷任命于显为总兵官，出海巡视倭人地区，倭人又入侵莱、登两个州。
English: In the sixth year, the imperial court appointed Yu Xian as the chief military officer, and he went to sea to inspect the Wajin region. The Wajin then invaded Lai and ascended to two provinces.

古文：祖阐等既至，为其国演教，其国人颇敬信。
现代文：祖阐等人到了日本，即为日本国演示教义，其国人对祖阐等人颇为敬信。
English: When Zu Ying et al. came to Japan, they demonstrated the doctrine for the Japanese nation, and the Japanese people had great respect for Zu Ying et al.

古文：而王则傲慢无礼，拘之二年，以七年五月还京。
现代文：而日本国王则傲慢无礼，将祖阐等人拘留了二年，在七年五月才回到京城。
English: The Japanese king, on the other hand, was arrogant and rude. He detained Zu Yan and others for two years, and only returned to Beijing in May of the seventh year.

古文：倭寇胶州。
现代文：此时倭人又入侵胶州。
English: At this time, the Japanese invaded Koju again.

古文：时良怀年少，有持明者，与之争立，国内乱。
现代文：当时良怀年纪尚轻，有个叫持明的人与他争王位，国内发生战乱。
English: At that time, Liang Hui was still young. A man named Ji Ming was competing with him for the throne, and there was a war in the country.

古文：是年七月，其大臣遣僧宣闻溪等赍书上中书省，贡马及方物，而无表。
现代文：该年七月，良怀的大臣派僧人宣闻溪等持书到中书省，向朝廷贡献马和土产，但没有表文。
English: In July of that year, the benevolent minister sent the monk Xuan Wengxi and others to hold the book to the Chinese Book Ministry to contribute horses and local products to the imperial court, but there was no written document.

古文：帝命却之，仍赐其使者遣还。
现代文：皇帝命令拒绝他们的贡物，仍让他们的使者带回去。
English: The emperor ordered that their tribute be refused, but that their envoys be allowed to take it back.

古文：未几，其别岛守臣氏久遣僧奉表来贡。
现代文：不久，良怀手下守卫别的岛屿的大臣氏久派僧人奉表前来献贡。
English: Not long after, Ujihisa sent a monk to pay tribute to Yoshitaka, who was guarding other islands with his men.

古文：帝以无国王之命，且不奉正朔，亦却之，而赐其使者，命礼臣移牒，责以越分私贡之非。
现代文：皇帝以他们没有国王的任命，且又不遵奉夏历为由，也拒绝了他们的贡品，将它赏赐给使者，还命令礼部大臣移文牒给他们，责备他们不该越份私自献贡。
English: On the grounds that they had not been appointed by the king and did not follow the lunar calendar, the emperor also refused their tribute and awarded it to the envoys. He also ordered the Minister of Ceremonies to give them a written notice, reproaching them that they should not overpay their tribute.

古文：又以频入寇掠，命中书移牒责之。
现代文：又因他们频频入侵掠夺，皇帝命令中书省移文牒谴责他们。
English: Also, because of their frequent invasion and plunder, the emperor ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to issue a written ultimatum condemning them.

古文：乃以九年四月，遣僧圭廷用等来贡，且谢罪。
现代文：于是日本国于洪武九年四月，派僧人圭廷用等人前来朝贡，并表示谢罪。
English: As a result, in April of the 9th year of Hongwu, Japan sent the monk Gui Tingyi and others to pay tribute to the imperial court and express their gratitude.

古文：帝恶其表词不诚，降诏戒谕，宴赉使者如制。
现代文：皇帝厌恶他们表文中的言词不诚实，降诏谕予以警戒，同时按惯例设宴招待使者。
English: The emperor detested the insincerity of the words in their documents, issued an edict to be on the alert, and at the same time set up a banquet to entertain the envoys.

古文：十二年来贡。
现代文：十二年日本国向朝廷献贡。
English: In 1912 Japan stopped paying tribute to the Imperial Court.

古文：十三年复贡，无表，但持其征夷将军源义满奉丞相书，书辞又倨。
现代文：十三年又来朝贡，没奉有表文，但其使者持有日本征夷将军源义满奉给丞相的文书，文书中的言辞又甚为傲慢。
English: In the thirteenth year, the tributes came again, but there was no written document. However, the emissary of the tributes held a document that the Japanese general Minamoto no Yoshimitsu had sent to the prime minister, and the words in the document were very arrogant.

古文：乃却其贡，遣使赍诏谯让。
现代文：朝廷退还他们的贡品，派使者持皇帝的诏书前去谴责他们。
English: The court returned their tribute and sent an emissary with an imperial edict to denounce them.

古文：十四年复来贡，帝再却之，命礼官移书责其王，并责其征夷将军，示以欲征之意。
现代文：十四年他们又来上贡，皇帝再次拒绝，命令礼部官员移文书谴责日本国王和该国的征夷将军，表示欲征讨他们。
English: Fourteen years later, they came again to pay tribute, but the emperor again refused, and ordered the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies to submit a document condemning the Japanese king and the country's seii shogun, expressing his desire to collect them.

古文：良怀上言：
现代文：良怀于是上疏说：
English: Liang Huai then said to Shang Zuo:

古文：臣闻三皇立极，五帝禅宗，惟中华之有主，岂夷狄而无君。
现代文：我听说三皇立极，五帝禅宗，只有中华有君主，难道不允许夷狄之族有君长？
English: I've heard that the Three Emperors and the Five Emperors of the Zen sect, and that only the Chinese have monarchs. Shouldn't the Yidi people be allowed to have monarchs?

古文：乾坤浩荡，非一主之独权，宇宙宽洪，作诸邦以分守。
现代文：乾坤浩荡，不能由一个君主独擅专权，宇宙宽宏，分成各个邦国以作守卫。
English: The universe is vast, and it is impossible for a single monarch to monopolize power. The universe is broad, and it can be divided into various states to serve as guards.

古文：盖天下者，乃天下之天下，非一人之天下也。
现代文：天下者，是所有天下人的天下，而不是一个人的天下。
English: The world is the world of all people, not the world of one person.

古文：臣居远弱之倭，褊小之国，城池不满六十，封疆不足三千，尚存知足之心。
现代文：我居住在又远又弱的倭人之地，是个又偏僻又弱小的国家，城池不满六十个，封土不足三千里，但我已存知足之心了。
English: I live in the distant and weak land of the Wajin, a remote and weak country, with less than sixty cities and less than three thousand miles of territory, but I already know my feet.

古文：陛下作中华之主，为万乘之君，城池数千余，封疆百万里，犹有不足之心，常起灭绝之意。
现代文：陛下您是中华的君主，是万乘之君王，拥有城池数千个，封土百万里，还存有不知足之心，常起灭绝异邦的意图。
English: Your Majesty, you are the monarch of China, the king of all-conquering, you have thousands of cities and towns, millions of miles of fiefdoms, and you still have an insatiable heart, often with the intention of exterminating foreign countries.

古文：夫天发杀机，移星换宿。地发杀机，龙蛇走陆。人发杀机，天地反覆。
现代文：上天忽发杀机，便会移星换宿；大地忽发杀机，便会龙蛇走陆；而人忽发杀机，便会天地反覆。
English: If the heaven suddenly sends a killing machine, it will move to another planet; if the earth suddenly sends a killing machine, a dragon and a snake will land; and if a person suddenly sends a killing machine, the heaven and the earth will repeat.

古文：昔尧、舜有德，四海来宾。
现代文：昔时尧、舜有德行，四海之人都来宾服。
English: In the old days, there was a virtuous line, and people from all over the world came to the guest service.

古文：汤、武施仁，八方奉贡。
现代文：汤、武施行仁政，八方之人都奉贡献。
English: Tang and Wu carried out benevolent policies, and people from all over the country made contributions.

古文：臣闻天朝有兴战之策，小邦亦有御敌之图。
现代文：我听说贵朝廷有兴战之意，我们小国也有御敌之策。
English: I have heard that your imperial court intends to go to war, and that our small country also has a plan to defeat the enemy.

古文：论文有孔、孟道德之文章，论武有孙、吴韬略之兵法。
现代文：若论比文有孔、孟的道德文章，若论比武也有孙、吴的兵法韬略。
English: If there is a hole in the comparison, it is Meng's moral article, and if there is a son in the comparison, it is Wu's military strategy.

古文：又闻陛下选股肱之将，起精锐之师，来侵臣境。
现代文：又听说陛下您已挑选精兵强将，前来侵犯我们国境。
English: I have also heard that Your Majesty has selected a strong army to invade our borders.

古文：水泽之地，山海之洲，自有其备，岂肯跪途而奉之乎？
现代文：我们的水泽之地，山海之洲，自然已有防备，岂肯跪在路途之中遵奉你们？
English: Our land of marshes and lakes, the continent of mountains and seas, has naturally been prepared. Will they kneel in the middle of the road to obey you?

古文：顺之未必其生，逆之未必其死。
现代文：顺你们之意未必一定能得到生存，违背你们也未必就是死路一条。
English: Following your wishes may not necessarily lead to survival, and going against your wishes may not necessarily lead to death.

古文：相逢贺兰山前，聊以博戏，臣何惧哉。
现代文：如果相逢在贺兰山之前，玩玩搏斗之戏，我也毫无畏惧。
English: If we meet before the Helan Mountain, and play the game of fighting, I will not be afraid.

古文：倘君胜臣负，且满上国之意。
现代文：倘若是您胜我败，且可满足贵国的意图。
English: If it is to your advantage and to the satisfaction of your country.

古文：设臣胜君负，反作小邦之差。
现代文：如果是我胜您败，您就蒙受小邦的羞辱。
English: If I defeat you, you will suffer the humiliation of a small state.

古文：自古讲和为上，罢战为强，免生灵之涂炭，拯黎庶之艰辛。
现代文：自古以来都是讲究以和为上策，以罢战为强计，免得生灵涂炭，把黎庶之民从艰辛中拯救出来。
English: Since ancient times, it has been emphasized that the best policy is to make peace, and the best strategy is to strike, so as not to harm the living and save the people of Lishang from hardships.

古文：特遣使臣，敬叩丹陛，惟上国图之。
现代文：现特地派遣使臣，敬将此意奉告到您的宫殿之前，希望贵国考虑。
English: I hope that your country will take this into consideration before dispatching a special envoy to convey this message to your palace.

古文：帝得表愠甚，终鉴蒙古之辙，不加兵也。
现代文：皇帝得到这个表文甚为愠怒，但鉴于元朝蒙古人的前辙，最终没有对日本出兵。
English: The emperor was very angry to receive this letter, but in view of the previous mistakes of the Mongolians of the Yuan Dynasty, he did not send troops to Japan in the end.

古文：十六年，倭寇金乡、平阳。
现代文：十六年，倭人又入侵金乡、平阳等地。
English: Sixteen years later, the Japanese invaded Jinxiang, Pingyang and other places.

古文：十九年遣使来贡，却之。
现代文：十九年他们派使者来献贡品，被退了回去。
English: In 1919, they sent an envoy to pay tribute, but were turned back.

古文：明年命江夏侯周德兴往福建滨海四郡，相视形势。
现代文：第二年朝廷命令江夏侯周德兴前往福建的滨海四郡，视察形势。
English: The following year, the imperial court ordered Jiang Xia Hou Zhou Dexing to go to the four counties along the coast of Fujian to inspect the situation.

古文：卫所城不当要害者移置之，民户三丁取一，以充戍卒，乃筑城一十六，增巡检司四十五，得卒万五千余人。
现代文：对于有的卫所的城墙不能保护要害的，将其移置；对于百姓每户中有三个男丁就抽取一个来充当戍卒，于是修筑了一十六座城墙，增设了四十五个巡检司，得到士卒一万五千多人。
English: If the walls of a certain watchtower could not protect the key, it was moved; for the common people, three men from each household were selected to serve as guards, so sixteen city walls were built, forty-five additional inspectors were added, and more than fifteen thousand soldiers were obtained.

古文：又命信国公汤和行视浙东、西诸郡，整饬海防，乃筑城五十九。
现代文：朝廷又命令信国公汤和出行巡视浙东、浙西的诸郡，整治海防，于是修筑城墙五十九座。
English: The imperial court also ordered Xingguo Gongtang and Zhitang to inspect the counties in eastern and western Zhejiang to rectify the coastal defense, and then built 59 city walls.

古文：民户四丁以上者以一为戍卒，得五万八千七百余人，分戍诸卫，海防大饬。
现代文：他又规定每户有四个男丁的抽取一个充当戍卒，这样就得到五万八千七百多人，分别戍守各卫所，海防得到大力加强。
English: He also stipulated that each household should have four men, one of whom should be chosen to act as a watchman, which resulted in more than 58,700 men guarding each watchtower separately, and the coastal defense was greatly strengthened.

古文：闰六月命福建备海舟百艘，广东倍之，以九月会浙江捕倭，既而不行。
现代文：闰六月，朝廷又命令福建准备海船一百艘，广东准备两百艘，在九月会同浙江一起搜捕倭人，不久这个命令停止执行。
English: In June, the imperial court also ordered Fujian to prepare 100 seagoing ships and Guangdong to prepare 200 ships, and in September they would join Zhejiang in searching for and arresting the Japanese. This order was soon suspended.

古文：先是，胡惟庸谋逆，欲藉日本为助。乃厚结宁波卫指挥林贤，佯奏贤罪，谪居日本，令交通其君臣。
现代文：此前，胡惟庸谋反，想藉日本的力量作为援助，于是以厚礼勾结宁波卫指挥林贤，向朝廷佯奏林贤有罪，把他贬谪到日本居住，实际上是要林贤与日本的君臣进行交通。
English: Previously, Hu Wei Yong plotted a rebellion and wanted to use Japan's strength as aid, so he colluded with Lin Xian, the commander of the Ningbo garrison, to trick the court into convicting Lin Xian and sending him to live in Japan. In fact, he wanted Lin Xian to communicate with Japanese officials.

古文：寻奏复贤职，遣使召之，密致书其王，借兵助己。
现代文：不久胡惟庸又上奏朝廷请求恢复林贤的职位，派使者到日本将林贤招回来，暗地里却致书信给日本国王，向日本借兵帮助自己。
English: Soon after, Hu Wei Yong petitioned the imperial court to reinstate Lin Xian and sent an envoy to Japan to invite Lin Xian back, but secretly sent a letter to the Japanese king to borrow soldiers from Japan to help himself.

古文：贤还，其王遣僧如瑶率兵卒四百余人，诈称入贡，且献巨烛，藏火药、刀剑其中。
现代文：林贤回来时，日本国王派僧人如瑶率军人四百多，谎称是向朝廷进贡，准备进献巨大的蜡烛等，实际上在其中暗藏了火药和刀剑。
English: When Lin Xian returned, the Japanese king sent more than four hundred soldiers led by the monk Rugao, falsely claiming that they were paying tribute to the imperial court, preparing to present huge candles, etc. In fact, gunpowder and swords were hidden in them.

古文：既至，而惟庸已败，计不行。
现代文：日本军卒到达时，胡惟庸已经失败，这个计谋便没有实行。
English: When the Japanese soldiers arrived, Hu Wei Yong had already failed, and the plan was not implemented.

古文：帝亦未知其狡谋也。
现代文：而皇帝也不知他们的这个计谋。
English: But the emperor was not aware of their plan.

古文：越数年，其事始露，乃族贤，而怒日本特甚，决意绝之，专以防海为务。
现代文：过了几年，此事才开始败露，于是皇帝下令灭了林贤的九族，对日本国特别恼怒，决意断绝与日本国的往来，专心一意致力于海防建设。
English: It took a few years for the matter to come to light, so the emperor ordered the extermination of Lin Xian's nine clans. He was particularly angry with Japan and decided to break off relations with Japan and concentrate on building coastal defenses.

古文：然其时王子滕祐寿者，来入国学，帝犹善待之。
现代文：然而此时日本国王之子滕寿来国子监学习，皇帝还善待于他。
English: However, at this time, Teng Shou, the son of the king of Japan, came to study at the Imperial Household Agency, and the emperor also treated him well.

古文：二十四年五月特授观察使，留之京师。
现代文：二十四年五月朝廷特意给滕寿授以观察使职衔，将他留在京城。
English: In May 1924, the imperial court specially gave Teng Shou the title of "observation officer" and kept him in Beijing.

古文：后著《祖训》，列不征之国十五，日本与焉。
现代文：后来皇帝著《祖训》一部，上面列有不准出兵征讨的国家十五个，日本也是其中之一。
English: Later, the emperor wrote a part of "Ancestor's Teaching," which listed fifteen countries that were not allowed to send troops for conscription, and Japan was one of them.

古文：自是，朝贡不至，而海上之警亦渐息。
现代文：此后，日本国不再前来朝贡，而海上的入侵骚扰也渐渐停息了。
English: After that, Japan no longer came to pay tribute, and the invasion and harassment at sea gradually ceased.

古文：成祖即位，遣使以登极诏谕其国。
现代文：明成祖即皇帝位时，派使者持登极的诏书前去谕告日本。
English: When Emperor Ming Cheng Zu ascended the throne, he sent an envoy to Japan with the imperial edict of enthronement.

古文：永乐元年又遣左通政赵居任、行人张洪偕僧道成往。
现代文：永乐元年又派遣左通政赵居任、行人张洪偕同僧人道成一起前往日本。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Zuo Tong Zhao Ju Ren, a politician, Zhang Hongyi, a pedestrian, and Tong Cheng, a monk, were sent to Japan.

古文：将行，而其贡使已达宁波。
现代文：将要出发时，日本国的朝贡使者已抵达宁波。
English: When they were about to leave, the Japanese envoys had already arrived in Ningbo.

古文：礼官李至刚奏： 故事，番使入中国，不得私携兵器鬻民。
现代文：礼部官员李至刚上奏说： 按以往的惯例，番国的使臣进入中国时，不能私自携带兵器卖给百姓。
English: Li Zhigang, an official of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said in his report: According to the previous practice, when the envoys of foreign countries enter China, they cannot carry weapons to sell to the people.

古文：宜敕所司核其舶，诸犯禁者悉籍送京师。 
现代文：应敕令有关官府前去审查他们的船只，将诸违反禁令的人悉数解送到京城来。 
English: The relevant authorities should be ordered to inspect their vessels, and all those who violate the ban should be deported to Beijing.

古文：帝曰： 外夷修贡，履险蹈危，来远，所费实多。
现代文：皇帝说： 外国夷人前来进贡，要履险蹈危，路途遥远，花费甚多。
English: The emperor said, "Foreign barbarians who come to pay tribute have to go through perils and dangers, the journey is long, and it costs a lot.

古文：有所赍以助资斧，亦人情，岂可概拘以禁令。
现代文：他们有所携带以资费用，也是人之常情，岂能一概以禁令拘留他们。
English: It is normal for them to have money and expenses on their person, so why can't they all be detained with a ban?

古文：至其兵器，亦准时直市之，毋阻向化。 
现代文：至于他们所私带的兵器，亦允许他们以时价出售，不应阻碍他们向化中国。 
English: As for the weapons they bring with them, they are also allowed to sell them at the current price, which should not prevent them from going to China.

古文：十月，使者至，上王源道义表及贡物。
现代文：十月，日本国使者到，奉上国王源道义的表文和贡品。
English: In October, the Japanese envoy arrived and presented the king with a letter of commendation and tribute.

古文：帝厚礼之，遣官偕其使还，赉道义冠服、龟钮金章及锦绮、纱罗。
现代文：皇帝以厚礼待之，派官员偕其使者一起回国，给源道义赏赐冠服、龟钮金章和锦绮、纱罗。
English: The emperor treated him with great courtesy, sent officials to encourage his envoys to return to China together, and rewarded Yuan Doyi with crown robes, golden turtle buttons, brocades, and sarongs.

古文：明年十一月来贺册立皇太子。
现代文：第二年十一月日本国派人向朝廷祝贺册立皇太子。
English: In November of the following year, Japan sent a delegation to congratulate the Imperial Court on the enthronement of the Crown Prince.

古文：时对马、台岐诸岛贼掠滨海居民，因谕其王捕之。
现代文：此时对马、台岐各岛有贼人抢劫沿海居民，朝廷就谕告日本国王捕捉贼人。
English: At this time, thieves were robbing coastal residents on the islands of Ma and Taiki, and the Imperial Court ordered the King of Japan to catch the thieves.

古文：王发兵尽歼其众，絷其魁二十人，以三年十一月献于朝，且修贡。
现代文：国王发兵尽歼贼人，捉住了贼人魁首二十人，在三年十一月献到朝廷，并进献贡物。
English: The king sent troops to wipe out the bandits and captured twenty of their leaders, who were presented to the imperial court in November of the following year, along with a tribute.

古文：帝益嘉之，遣鸿胪寺少卿潘赐偕中官王进赐其王九章冕服及钱钞、锦绮加等，而还其所献之人，令其国自治之。
现代文：皇帝益发嘉励他们，派鸿胪寺少卿潘赐偕宦官王进一起给日本国王赏赐九章冕服和加等的钱钞、锦绮，归还他们所献的贼人，让日本国自己处置他们。
English: The emperor encouraged them and sent Pan Zhaojun, the junior secretary of Hongye Temple, and Wang Jin, the eunuch, to reward the Japanese king with nine crowned robes and extra money and brocade, return the thieves they had offered, and let Japan deal with them on its own.

古文：使者至宁波，尽置其人于甑，烝杀之。
现代文：日本使者到宁波，将这些贼首全部放进甑里，用火将他们蒸死。
English: The Japanese envoy went to Ningbo, put all these thieves' heads in a basket and steamed them to death.

古文：明年正月又遣侍郎俞士吉赍玺书褒嘉，赐赉优渥。封其国之山为寿安镇国之山，御制碑文，立其上。
现代文：过了一年正月，皇帝又派侍郎俞士吉持印有玉玺的文书前去褒奖，给日本国王赏赐优厚的礼物，封日本国的山为寿安镇国之山，皇帝亲自撰写碑文立于山上。
English: After the first month of the year, the emperor also sent his attendant, Shishi Yoshitada, with a document stamped with a jade scepter, to reward the Japanese king with a generous gift, sealing the mountain of Japan as the mountain of Shouan Town. The emperor personally wrote the inscription and erected it on the mountain.

古文：六月，使来谢，赐冕服。
现代文：六月，日本使者前来谢恩，皇帝又给日本国王赏赐冕服。
English: In June, a Japanese envoy came to express his gratitude, and the emperor presented the Japanese king with a coronation robe.

古文：五年、六年频入贡，且献所获海寇。
现代文：五年、六年日本国频频向明朝廷献贡品，并将所抓获的海寇也献上来。
English: In the fifth and sixth years, Japan frequently offered tribute to the Ming court, and also presented captured sea crows.

古文：使还，请赐仁孝皇后所制《劝善》、《内训》二书，即命各给百本。
现代文：其使者回国时，请求朝廷赏赐仁孝皇后所制的《劝善》、《内训》二书，皇帝命令将该二书各给一百本。
English: When his envoy returned to China, he asked the imperial court to reward him with two books, "Suggestion of Goodness" and "Instructions," both of which were written by Empress Ninko. The emperor ordered that each of the two books be given a hundred copies.

古文：十一月再贡。
现代文：十一月日本国再次进贡。
English: In November, Japan paid tribute again.

古文：十二月，其国世子源义持遣使来告父丧，命中官周全往祭，赐谥恭献，且致赙。
现代文：十二月，日本国的世子源义持派使者前来报告其父的丧讯，朝廷派宦官周全前去吊祭，给日本国王赐谥号为恭献，并拿财物资助日本国办丧事。
English: In December, the heir of Japan, Minamoto no Yoshimochi, sent an envoy to report the news of his father's death. The Imperial Court sent eunuchs to prepare a hanging ceremony, give the Japanese king a posthumous name as a tribute, and take wealth to fund the Japanese state funeral.

古文：又遣官赍敕，封义持为日本国王。
现代文：同时朝廷又派官员持皇帝的敕令，封源义持为日本国王。
English: At the same time, the imperial court also sent officials to hold the emperor's edict, and crowned Yoshimochi as the king of Japan.

古文：时海上复以倭警告，再遣官谕义持剿捕。
现代文：此时海上又有倭人为寇的警报传来，朝廷再次派官员谕告源义持前去剿捕。
English: At this time, another warning of Japanese piracy came from the sea, and the imperial court once again sent officials to inform the source of Yoshimochi to go and capture him.

古文：八年四月，义持遣使谢恩，寻献所获海寇，帝嘉之。
现代文：八年四月，源义持派使者前来谢恩，不久向朝廷献上所抓获的海寇，皇帝嘉奖了他。
English: In April of the eighth year, MINAMOTO no Yoshimochi sent an envoy to express his gratitude, and soon presented the captured sea corsair to the imperial court. The emperor commended him.

古文：明年二月复遣王进赍敕褒赉，收市物货。
现代文：第二年二月皇帝又派王进持敕令褒奖日本国王，并在日本收买货物。
English: In February of the following year, the emperor also sent Wang Jinzhi to reward the Japanese king with an imperial edict and to purchase goods in Japan.

古文：其君臣谋阻进不使归，进潜登舶，从他道遁还。
现代文：日本国的君臣密谋阻止王进回国，王进偷偷地登上海船，从其他道路逃回国。
English: Japanese officials conspired to prevent Wang Jin from returning to the country. Wang Jin secretly boarded a ship and fled the country by other means.

古文：自是，久不贡。
现代文：从此，他们许久不来进贡。
English: Since then, they have not come to pay tribute for a long time.

古文：是年，倭寇盘石。
现代文：这一年，倭贼又入侵盘石。
English: In the same year, the Japanese invaders invaded Panshi again.

古文：十五年，倭寇松门、金乡、平阳。
现代文：十五年，倭贼入侵松门、金乡、平阳。
English: In 15 years, the Japanese invaded Songmen, Jinxiang and Pingyang.

古文：有捕倭寇数十人至京者。廷臣请正法。
现代文：有人捕获了数十名倭贼，将他们解送到京城，朝廷大臣请求将倭贼予以正法。
English: Someone captured dozens of wako and sent them to the capital, and the Minister of the Imperial Court requested that the wako be legalized.

古文：帝曰： 威之以刑，不若怀之以德，宜还之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：以刑罚威吓他们，不如以仁德感化他们，还是把他们放回去好。 
English: The emperor said, "If you threaten them with punishment, it is better to inspire them with benevolence, or to send them back."

古文：乃命刑部员外郎吕渊等赍敕责让，令悔罪自新。
现代文：于是命令刑部的员外郎吕渊等持敕令谴责他们，让他们悔罪自新。
English: Therefore, he ordered the members of the Criminal Investigation Department, such as Wai Lang Lu Yuan, to condemn them with an imperial edict, so that they would repent and reform.

古文：中华人被掠者，亦令送还。
现代文：同时让他们把掳掠去的中国人送回来。
English: At the same time, let them send back the abducted Chinese.

古文：明年四月，其王遣使随渊等来贡，谓： 海寇旁午，故贡使不能上达。
现代文：第二年四月，日本国王派使者随吕渊等人一起前来朝贡，说： 海盗纷繁，所以朝贡的使者无法到达贵国。
English: In April of the following year, the king of Japan sent an envoy to pay tribute along with Lyu Yuan and others, saying: Pirates abound, so the envoy of tribute cannot reach your country.

古文：其无赖鼠窃者，实非臣所知。
现代文：至于到贵国为寇为盗的无赖鼠窃之辈，我也实在不知他们的所作所为。
English: As for the thieving scoundrels who came to your country to steal, I really don't know what they did.

古文：愿贷罪，容其朝贡。 
现代文：希望能宽免我们的罪行，容许我们朝贡。 
English: I hope they will pardon our crimes and allow us to pay tribute.

古文：帝以其词顺，许之，礼使者如故，然海寇犹不绝。
现代文：皇帝认为其言词颇顺耳，答应了他们，仍像以前一样礼待使者，但海上盗贼仍然不绝。
English: The emperor thought that his words were quite agreeable and agreed to them, still treating the envoys with the same courtesy as before, but the sea thieves still continued.

古文：十七年，倭船入王家山岛，都督刘荣率精兵疾驰入望海埚。
现代文：十七年，倭贼的船进入了王家山岛，都督刘荣率精兵急忙进驻望海埚。
English: In the seventeenth year, the ship of the Japanese invaders entered Wangjiashan Island, and the governor Liu Rong and his elite soldiers hurriedly entered the station of Wanghaiguan.

古文：贼数千人分乘二十舟，直抵马雄岛，进围望海埚。
现代文：倭贼数千人分乘二十只船，直抵马雄岛，进而包围了望海埚。
English: Thousands of waka divided into twenty boats reached Maoxiong Island, and then surrounded Bozhong Bay.

古文：荣发伏出战，奇兵断其归路。
现代文：刘荣的伏兵出战，用奇兵切断倭贼的回路。
English: Liu Rong's ambush soldiers went out to fight and cut off the circuit of the Japanese bandits.

古文：贼奔樱桃园，荣合兵攻之，斩首七百四十二，生擒八百五十七。
现代文：倭贼便逃奔到樱桃园，刘荣合兵攻打，斩杀倭贼七百四十二人，活捉八百五十七名。
English: The yakuza then fled to the Cherry Orchard, where Liu Rong and his soldiers attacked and killed 742 yakuza and captured 857 alive.

古文：召荣至京，封广宁伯。
现代文：皇帝召刘荣到京城，封为广宁伯。
English: The emperor summoned Liu Rong to Beijing and named him Guangningbo.

古文：自是，倭不敢窥辽东。
现代文：从此，倭贼便不敢窥视辽东。
English: From then on, the Japanese invaders did not dare to look into Liaodong.

古文：二十年，倭寇象山。
现代文：二十年，倭贼入侵象山。
English: Twenty years ago, the Japanese invaded Xiangshan.

古文：宣德七年正月，帝念四方蕃国皆来朝，独日本久不贡，命中官柴山往琉球，令其王转谕日本，赐之敕。
现代文：宣德七年正月，皇帝忽念四方的藩国都来朝贡，只有日本久不进贡，便命令宦官柴山前往琉球，让琉球王转谕日本，同时赐给敕令。
English: In the first month of Xuande's seventh year, the emperor forgot to pay tribute to the court from all four provinces. Only Japan had not paid tribute for a long time, so he ordered the eunuch Chai Shan to go to Ryukyu, let the king of Ryukyu send a message to Japan, and at the same time give a royal decree.

古文：明年夏，王源义教遣使来。
现代文：第二年夏天，日本王源义教派使者来朝贡。
English: In the summer of the following year, Japan's King Minamoto sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：帝报之，赉白金、彩币。
现代文：皇帝还报他们，赏赐他们白金和彩币。
English: The emperor also rewarded them by giving them platinum and colored coins.

古文：秋复至。
现代文：该年秋天，日本使者又至。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Japanese envoy came again.

古文：十年十月以英宗嗣位，遣使来贡。
现代文：二年十月因英宗即皇帝位，日本派使臣前来朝贡。
English: In October of the second year, Japan sent envoys to pay tribute to Emperor Yingzong.

古文：正统元年二月，使者还，赉王及妃银币。
现代文：正统元年二月，日本使臣回国，皇帝给日本国王和王妃赏赐银币。
English: In February of the first year of the Orthodox era, when the Japanese envoys returned to Japan, the emperor presented the Japanese king and queen with silver coins.

古文：四月，工部言： 宣德间，日本诸国皆给信符勘合，今改元伊始，例当更给。 
现代文：四月，工部上奏说： 宣德年间，朝廷给日本各国都颁发信符以便审核，现今已经改变纪年，照例应当变更信符。 
English: In April, the Ministry of Industry and Trade made a report saying: During the Xuan De era, the Imperial Court issued letters to all countries in Japan for review. Now that the calendar has been changed, the letters should be changed as usual.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四年五月，倭船四十艘连破台州桃渚、宁波大嵩二千户所，又陷昌国卫，大肆杀掠。
现代文：四年五月，倭贼乘四十艘船接连攻破台州的桃渚、宁波的大嵩二两个千户所，又攻陷昌国卫，进行大肆杀掠。
English: In May of the fourth year, the Japanese invaders used forty ships to successively attack and destroy two thousand households in Taozhu and Dasong in Ningbo, and also invaded Changguowei, and carried out extensive killing and plundering.

古文：八年五月，寇海宁。
现代文：八年五月，倭贼又入侵海宁。
English: In May of the eighth year, the Japanese invaded Haining again.

古文：先是，洪熙时，黄岩民周来保、龙岩民钟普福困于徭役，叛入倭。
现代文：此前，洪熙年间，黄岩的平民周来保和龙岩的平民钟普福因被徭役所困，叛逃到倭国。
English: Previously, during the Hongxi era, Zhou Lai Bao, a civilian from Huangyan, and Zhong Pufu, a civilian from Longyan, were trapped by the imperial guards and defected to Wa.

古文：倭每来寇，为之乡导。
现代文：倭贼每次前来入侵，他们都做向导。
English: Every time the Japanese invade, they use them as guides.

古文：至是，导倭犯乐清，先登岸侦伺。
现代文：这一次他们又引导倭贼进犯乐清，先登上海岸做侦察。
English: This time, they also led the Wafang to invade Yueqing, and first boarded the coast to do reconnaissance.

古文：俄倭去，二人留村中丐食，被获，置极刑，枭其首于海上。
现代文：一会儿倭贼离去了，他们二人留在村中乞食，被抓获，处以极刑，将其首级割下来抛于海上。
English: After a while, the bandits left, and the two of them remained in the village, begging. They were caught, sentenced to death, and their heads were cut off and thrown into the sea.

古文：倭性黠，时载方物、戎器，出没海滨，得间则张其戎器而肆侵掠，不得则陈其方物而称朝贡，东南海滨患之。
现代文：倭贼性情狡黠，不时在船上载土产和兵器于海滨出没，得到机会则举兵器大肆侵掠，没有机会则把土产陈列在船上称自己是到中国来朝贡的，东南沿海各省都受其害。
English: From time to time, the Japanese pirates, with their cunning nature, would appear on the seashore with their native products and weapons on board. When they got the chance, they would use their weapons to plunder. When they didn't get the chance, they would display their native products on board and claim that they had come to China to pay tribute. All the provinces along the southeast coast suffered from this.

古文：景泰四年入贡，至临清，掠居民货。有指挥往诘，欧几死。
现代文：景泰四年日本派使者入贡，其使者到达临清时，掠夺居民的货物，有位指挥前去诘问，几乎被他们殴打致死。
English: In the fourth year of King Taejo, Japan sent an envoy to pay tribute. When the envoy arrived in Linqing, he plundered the goods of the residents. A commander went to interrogate him and was almost beaten to death by them.

古文：所司请执治，帝恐失远人心，不许。
现代文：有关官府请求将他们收执起来治罪，皇帝怕因此会失去人心，不答应。
English: The relevant authorities requested that they be detained and punished, but the emperor did not agree, fearing that he would lose the hearts of the people.

古文：先是，永乐初，诏日本十年一贡，人止二百，船止二艘，不得携军器，违者以寇论。
现代文：此前，永乐初年，朝廷曾诏令日本每十年献贡一次，每次献贡人数不能超过二百，船不能超过二艘，不能携带兵器，违反者以贼寇论处。
English: Previously, in the first year of Yongle, the imperial court had decreed that Japan should pay tribute once every ten years. The number of people paying tribute each time could not exceed two hundred, the ship could not exceed two, it could not carry weapons, and violators would be punished as thieves.

古文：乃赐以二舟，为入贡用，后悉不如制。
现代文：于是皇帝赐给他们二艘船，作为进贡之用，后来都没有遵守这个制度。
English: So the emperor gave them two ships as tribute, but later they did not observe this system.

古文：宣德初，申定要约，人毋过三百，舟毋过三艘。
现代文：宣德初年，朝廷又申定要约，进贡之人不能超过三百，船只不能超过三艘。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, the imperial court also confirmed the offer, the tribute could not exceed three hundred people, and the ships could not exceed three.

古文：而倭人贪利，贡物外所携私物增十倍，例当给直。
现代文：而倭人贪利，在贡物之外所携带的私货是贡品的十倍，按例都要给钱。
English: On the other hand, the Wajin were greedy, and the private goods they carried in addition to the tribute were ten times the amount of the tribute. As usual, they had to pay.

古文：礼官言： 宣德间所贡硫黄、苏木、刀扇、漆器之属，估时直给钱钞，或折支布帛，为数无多，然已大获利。
现代文：礼部官员上奏说 ：宣德年间他们所贡献的硫黄、苏木、刀扇、漆器等东西，按当时的市价估算给以钱钞，或折成布帛予以支付，数量虽不多，但他们已获很大利益。
English: An official from the Ministry of Ceremonies reported: "The things they contributed during the Xuande years, such as sulfur, cedar wood, fan blades, lacquerware, were paid with money or folded cloth according to the market price at that time. Although the amount was small, they have made a lot of profit.

古文：今若仍旧制，当给钱二十一万七千，银价如之。
现代文：现在若是仍沿习旧制，要付钱二十一万七千两，按银价也是一样。
English: Now, if you still follow the old system, you have to pay 217,000 taels, the same according to the price of silver.

古文：宜大减其直，给银三万四千七百有奇。 
现代文：请求皇上大减其价，只给他们银子三万四千七百多两。 
English: They asked the emperor to reduce the price considerably, and he only gave them 34,700 taels of silver.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：使臣不悦，请如旧制。
现代文：日本使臣不悦，请求皇帝仍按旧例付钱。
English: The Japanese envoy was not pleased and asked the emperor to continue to pay as before.

古文：诏增钱万，犹以为少，求增赐物。
现代文：皇帝下诏给他们再增钱一万两，他们还是嫌少，再请求增加赏赐物品。
English: The emperor issued an edict to give them an additional ten thousand taels of money, but they still didn't like it and asked for more rewards.

古文：诏增布帛千五百，终怏怏去。
现代文：皇帝又下诏增赐他们布帛一千五百匹，他们最终还是怏怏不乐地离去了。
English: The emperor then issued an edict granting them an additional fifteen hundred horses, but they eventually left in a sullen mood.

古文：天顺初，其王源义政以前使臣获罪天朝，蒙恩宥，欲遣使谢罪而不敢自达，移书朝鲜王令转请，朝鲜以闻。
现代文：天顺初年，日本国王源义政认为前次所派的使臣得罪了明朝廷，蒙恩予以宽恕，想派使者前来朝廷谢罪但不敢自达，便移文书给朝鲜国王，让朝鲜国王代为转达此意。
English: In the first year of Tenshun, the Japanese king, Minamoto no Yoshimasa, thought that the envoys sent the previous time had offended the Ming court and had been forgiven. He wanted to send an envoy to the court to apologize, but he did not dare to do so, so he sent a letter to the Korean king and asked the Korean king to convey this intention on his behalf.

古文：廷议敕朝鲜核实，令择老成识大体者充使，不得仍前肆扰，既而贡使亦不至。
现代文：朝鲜便将此事上报给明朝廷。朝廷商议后敕令朝鲜审核此事，让日本国王挑选老成识大体之人充当使臣，不是仍像以前那样大肆骚扰。日本的使者也没来。
English: North Korea reported the matter to the Ming court. After the court deliberated, it ordered North Korea to review the matter and let the Japanese king choose an experienced person to serve as an envoy, rather than continue to harass as before. The Japanese envoy did not come.

古文：成化四年夏，乃遣使贡马谢恩，礼之如制。
现代文：成化四年夏天，日本派使者向朝廷贡献马匹以表谢恩，皇帝仍按旧例礼待他们。
English: In the summer of 1864, Japan sent an envoy to the imperial court to offer horses as a token of gratitude. The emperor still treated them according to the old custom.

古文：其通事三人，自言本宁波村民，幼为贼掠，市与日本，今请便道省祭，许之。戒其勿同使臣至家，引中国人下海。
现代文：他们当中有通事三人，自述自己本是宁波的村民，幼时被倭贼掳掠，卖给日本，现在请求便道回宁波省祭祖先，皇帝答应了他们，但告诫他们不要和日本使臣一起到家里，以免引诱中国人下海。
English: Among them, there were three people who were familiar with the matter. They said that they were originally villagers from Ningbo, who were abducted by the Japanese when they were young and sold to Japan. Now they asked to go back to Ningbo Province to celebrate their ancestors. The emperor agreed to them, but warned them not to go home with the Japanese envoys, so as not to lure the Chinese to go to sea.

古文：十一月，使臣清启复来贡，伤人于市。
现代文：十一月，日本使臣清启又来朝贡，在闹市中打伤了人。
English: In November, the Japanese envoy Seiki came to pay tribute again, injuring people in the busy city.

古文：有司请治其罪，诏付清启，奏言犯法者当用本国之刑，容还国如法论治。且自服不能钤束之罪，帝俱赦之。
现代文：有关官府请求治他的罪，皇帝下诏把该请求交给清启。清启上奏说犯法应回到本国受刑，希望容许他回国再按法律治罪，并自述不能服钤束之罪，皇帝都予以宽免了。
English: The relevant government offices requested that he be punished for his crime, and the emperor issued a decree to submit this request to the Qingqi. The Qingqi reported that he should return to his home country to be punished for breaking the law, and hoped to allow him to return to his home country to be punished according to the law. He also said that he could not bear the crime of shackling, and the emperor pardoned him.

古文：自是，使者益无忌。
现代文：从此，日本使者更加无所顾忌。
English: Since then, Japanese envoys have been even more reckless.

古文：十三年九月来贡，求《佛祖统纪》诸书，诏以《法苑珠林》赐之。
现代文：十三年九月日本使臣又来朝贡，请求《佛祖统纪》等书，皇帝下诏给他们赏赐《法苑珠林》。
English: In September of the thirteenth year, Japanese envoys came to pay tribute again, requesting "Buddha Unification History" and other books, and the emperor issued an edict to reward them with "Fa Yuan Zhu Lin."

古文：使者述其王意，请于常例外增赐，命赐钱五万贯。
现代文：该使臣转述其国王的意思，请求在常例之外增加赏赐，皇帝便命令给他们再赐钱五万贯。
English: The envoy relayed the king's message and asked for an extra reward, and the emperor ordered to give them another 50,000 kroner.

古文：二十年十一月复贡。
现代文：二十年十一月，日本国又派使者上贡。
English: In November 1920, Japan sent another envoy to pay tribute.

古文：弘治九年三月，王源义高遣使来，还至济宁，其下复持刀杀人。
现代文：弘治九年三月，日本国王源义高派使者到中国，回去时路过济南，使者手下的人又持刀杀人。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Konji era, the Japanese king, Minamoto no Yoshitaka, sent an envoy to China. On his way back, he passed through Jinan, and the envoy's men killed people with knives.

古文：所司请罪之，诏自今止许五十人入都，余留舟次，严防禁焉。
现代文：当地官府请求朝廷治他们的罪，皇帝下诏命令从今以后只准五十人进入京都献贡，其余的人都留在船上，对他们严加防禁。
English: The local government asked the imperial court to punish them for their crime, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering that from now on, only fifty people would be allowed to enter Kyoto to pay tribute, and the rest would remain on the ship, and they would be strictly forbidden.

古文：十八年冬来贡，时武宗已即位，命如故事，铸金牌勘合给之。
现代文：十八年冬，日本使者前来献贡物，此时武宗已即皇帝位，下令像以前一样对待他们，铸金牌勘合后交给他们。
English: In the winter of the 18th year, Japanese envoys came to pay tribute. At this time, Emperor Buson, who had just ascended to the throne, ordered that they be treated as before, and the gold medals were cast and then handed over to them.

古文：正德四年冬来贡。
现代文：正德四年冬日本使者又来献贡。
English: In the winter of Zhengde's fourth year, the Japanese envoy came again to pay tribute.

古文：礼官言： 明年正月，大祀庆成宴。
现代文：礼官上奏说： 明年正月，大祀庆要摆宴席。
English: The chief etiquette officer said: Next year's New Year's Day, there will be a banquet to celebrate.

古文：朝鲜陪臣在展东第七班，日本向无例，请殿西第七班。 
现代文：朝鲜的陪臣安排在殿东的第七班，日本向来没有先例可循，请将他们安排在殿西的第七班。 
English: North Korea's attendants were placed in the seventh class in the east hall. Japan has no precedent to follow. Please place them in the seventh class in the west hall.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：礼官又言： 日本贡物向用舟三，今止一，所赐银币，宜如其舟之数。
现代文：礼官又说 ：日本进献贡物，向来都是用三艘船运来的，现今只运来一船，朝廷给他们赏赐银币，应按其贡物的多少而定数目。
English: The etiquette officer also said, "Japan has always brought its tribute in three ships, but now only one ship has been brought. The court will award them silver coins, the number of which should be determined according to the amount of their tribute."

古文：且无表文，赐敕与否，请上裁。 
现代文：况且他们这次献贡物没有表文，是否给他们下敕文，请求皇上裁定。 
English: Moreover, they did not submit a written request for the tribute this time. They asked the emperor to decide whether or not to give them a written request.

古文：命所司移文答之。
现代文：皇帝命有关官府移文答复他们就行。
English: The emperor ordered the relevant government offices to reply to them.

古文：五年春，其王源义澄遣使臣宋素卿来贡，时刘瑾窃柄，纳其黄金千两，赐飞鱼服，前所未有也。
现代文：五年春，日本国王源义澄派使臣宋素卿前来朝贡，此时刘瑾窃取大权，收了他们黄金千两，给他们赏赐飞鱼朝服，这是前所未有的。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the Japanese king, Yuan Yicheng, sent an envoy, Song Suqing, to pay tribute to the imperial court. At this time, Liu Bei stole the great power, collected a thousand taels of gold from them, and gave them flying fish imperial robes. This was unprecedented.

古文：素卿，鄞县朱氏子，名缟，幼习歌唱。
现代文：宋素卿，是鄞县朱氏的儿子，名缟，幼习歌唱。
English: Song Suqing, the son of the Zhu clan in Handan County, was a famous singer and learned to sing as a child.

古文：倭使见，悦之，而缟叔澄负其直，因以缟偿。
现代文：倭国使臣见后，喜爱他，而朱缟的叔叔朱澄欠倭国使臣的钱，便以朱缟抵债。
English: When the Japanese envoy saw him, he liked him, and Zhu Xi's uncle, Zhu Cheng, owed money to the Japanese envoy, so he used Zhu Xi to pay off the debt.

古文：至是，充正使，至苏州，澄与相见。
现代文：至此，朱缟充当日本的正使，至苏州时，朱澄便与他相见了。
English: At this point, Zhu Xi acted as Japan's chief envoy, and when he arrived in Suzhou, Zhu Cheng met him.

古文：后事觉，法当死，刘瑾庇之，谓澄已自首，并获免。
现代文：后来此事被发觉，按法律应当处死朱澄，刘瑾包庇了他，谓朱澄已经自首，获准免罪。
English: Later, the matter was discovered, and according to the law, Zhu Cheng should be put to death. Liu Ye covered up for him, saying that Zhu Cheng had already surrendered and was allowed to be exonerated.

古文：七年，义澄使复来贡，浙江守臣言： 今畿辅、山东盗充斥，恐使臣遇之为所掠，请以贡物贮浙江官库，收其表文送京师。 
现代文：七年，源义澄的使臣又来献贡，浙江的守卫大臣说： 现今畿辅、山东地区盗贼充斥，怕使臣遇到后遭受抢劫，请求将献贡之物贮存在浙江的官库里，只收其表文送到京城来。 
English: In the seventh year, Yuan Yizheng's envoys came to pay tribute again, and Zhejiang's Minister of Defense said, "Nowadays, Kifu and Shandong regions are full of thieves. For fear of being robbed after encountering the envoys, they requested that the objects of tribute be stored in the official treasury of Zhejiang, and only their documents be received and sent to Beijing.

古文：礼官会兵部议，请令南京守备官即所在宴赉，遣归，附进方物，皆予全直，毋阻远人向化心。
现代文：礼官会同兵部官员商议此事后，请求朝廷给南京守备官下令，在当地设宴赏赐使臣，然后送使臣回国，其所带的土产全部按价付钱，不阻碍远方之人的向化之心。
English: After discussing the matter with officials from the Ministry of Military Affairs, the etiquette officer requested the imperial court to order the Nanjing garrison officer to reward the envoy with a banquet in the local area, and then send the envoy back to China, paying the price of all the local produce he brought, so as not to hinder the heart of the distant people.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：嘉靖二年五月，其贡使宗设抵宁波。
现代文：嘉靖二年五月，日本派来朝贡的使臣宗设抵达宁波。
English: In May of the second year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Japanese envoy Muneyoshi, who was sent to pay tribute, arrived in Ningbo.

古文：未几，素卿偕瑞佐复至，互争真伪。
现代文：不久，宋素卿偕同瑞佐又来中国，他们之间互相争辩自己是真使臣，诬对方是伪使臣。
English: Soon, Song Suqing and Reizo came to China again. They argued among themselves that they were true envoys, while the other side was a false envoy.

古文：素卿贿市舶大监赖恩，宴时坐素卿于宗设上，船后至又先为验发。
现代文：宋素卿贿赂市舶的太监赖恩，使当地官府设宴时将宋素卿的座次排在宗设之上，宋素卿的船后到却先为验发。
English: Song Suqing bribed the eunuch Ryan of the city's ship, so that when the local government held a banquet, Song Suqing's seat would be ranked higher than that of the family, but Song Suqing's ship would arrive first for inspection.

古文：宗设怒，与之斗，杀瑞佐，焚其舟，追素卿至绍兴城下，素卿窜匿他所免。
现代文：宗设为此发怒，与他们争斗，杀死瑞佐，焚烧了瑞佐的船，追击宋素卿到绍兴城下，宋素卿逃匿到其他地方才幸免于死。
English: Angered by this, Zongsheng fought with them, killed Reizo, burned Reizo's ship, and chased Song Suqing to the outskirts of Shaoxing. Song Suqing fled to other places to avoid death.

古文：凶党还宁波，所过焚掠，执指挥袁琎，夺船出海。
现代文：杀人凶手回到宁波，所经过之处都遭其焚烧抢劫。他们还绑架了指挥袁王进，夺船出海。
English: The murderers returned to Ningbo and burned and looted everywhere they went. They also kidnapped the commander Yuan Wangjin and took the ship out to sea.

古文：都指挥刘锦追至海上，战没。
现代文：都指挥刘锦追到海上，战死。
English: Commander Liu Jin chased them all out to sea and was killed in the battle.

古文：巡按御史欧珠以闻，且言： 据素卿状，西海路多罗氏义兴者，向属日本统辖，无入贡例。
现代文：巡按御史欧珠将此上报朝廷，并说： 据宋素卿所言，西边海路的多罗义兴，向来属日本统辖，没有进贡的前例。
English: The inspector general, Ou Zhu, reported this to the imperial court, and said: According to Song Suqing, Dora Yixing on the western sea route has always been under the jurisdiction of Japan, and there is no precedent for tribute.

古文：因贡道必经西海，正德朝勘合为所夺。
现代文：因日本向朝廷进贡之道一定得经过西部海域，正德年间已经勘合过的金牌被多罗义兴所夺。
English: As Japan's tribute to the imperial court had to pass through the western seas, the gold medal, which had already been won during the Zhengde era, was won by Doro Yixing.

古文：我不得已，以弘治朝勘合，由南海路起程，比至宁波，因诘其伪，致启衅。 
现代文：宋素卿等人不得已，拿弘治年间勘合的金牌，从南边海路启程来到中国，等到宁波时，因为责问宗设为何冒充使臣，才致引起争斗。 
English: Song Suqing and others had no choice but to take the gold medal of the alliance during the Hongzhi era and set off from the southern sea route to China. It was only when they arrived in Ningbo that a fight broke out because they asked Munshi why he was posing as an envoy.

古文：章下礼部，部议： 素卿言未可信，不宜听入朝。
现代文：皇帝将该奏章交给礼部，礼部官员建议 ：宋素卿的言词未可尽信，不应让他进京入朝。
English: The emperor gave the musical score to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies suggested that Song Suqing's words could not be fully believed, and he should not be allowed to enter the capital and the imperial court.

古文：但衅起宗设，素卿之党被杀者多，其前虽有投番罪，已经先朝宥赦，毋容问。
现代文：但争斗是由宗设挑起的，宋素卿那一伙的人被杀不少。宋素卿以前虽犯有投番罪，但已经先朝宽恕赦免，可不再问罪。
English: However, the fight was instigated by Zongshe, and many people from Song Suqing's group were killed. Although Song Suqing had previously committed the crime of casting a watch, he had been pardoned by the previous government and could no longer be charged with the crime.

古文：惟宣谕素卿还国，移咨其王，令察勘合有无，行究治。 
现代文：现在只宣谕宋素卿回国，移文咨问日本国王，让他审察有无经过勘合的金牌，再行追究治罪。 
English: Now, the only thing to do is to order Song Suqing to return to the country and send a message to the Japanese king, asking him to examine whether there is a gold medal that has been welded, and then investigate and punish the crime.

古文：帝已报可，御史熊兰、给事张翀交章言： 素卿罪重不可贷，请并治赖恩及海道副使张芹、分守参政朱鸣阳、分巡副使许完、都指挥张浩。
现代文：皇帝已同意这个建议，御史熊兰、给事中张羽中交相上章说： 宋素卿的罪行深重不可宽恕，请求朝廷一并治赖恩及海道副使张芹、分守参政朱鸣阳、分巡副使许完、都指挥张浩的罪。
English: The emperor has agreed to this suggestion, and the chief secretary Xiong Lan and Zhang Yu, who were involved in the matter, said in the first chapter: Song Suqing's crimes are serious and unforgivable, and he asked the imperial court to jointly punish Lai En and the deputy envoy of the sea route, Zhang Qin, the deputy governor of the sea route, Zhu Mingyang, and the deputy inspector of the sea route, Xu Can, who were all responsible for Zhang Hao's crimes.

古文：闭关绝贡，振中国之威，寝狡寇之计。 
现代文：然后封闭海关断绝入贡，振兴中国的威风，使狡寇的阴谋无法实施。 
English: Then he closed the customs and cut off the tribute, reviving China's prestige and making the cunning plot impossible to carry out.

古文：事方议行，会宗设党中林、望古多罗逸出之舟，为暴风飘至朝鲜。
现代文：此事正在商讨行动，碰上宗设党徒中的中林、望古多罗所乘坐的船只，被暴风刮到朝鲜。
English: The matter was being discussed and action was being taken, when Zhonglin, a member of the Zongshi faction, and Wang Guodoro, a member of the Zongshi faction, were on a ship that was blown to Korea by a storm.

古文：朝鲜人击斩三十级，生擒二贼以献。
现代文：朝鲜人袭击并斩杀了他们三十人，活捉中林和望古多罗献到京城。
English: The North Koreans attacked and killed thirty of them, capturing Zhonglin and Bongudoro alive and presenting them to the capital.

古文：给事中夏言因请逮赴浙江，会所司与素卿杂治，因遣给事中刘稍、御史王道往。
现代文：给事中夏言因此请求朝廷将此二人押赴浙江，会同当地官府与宋素卿一起杂处治罪。朝廷于是派给事中刘穆和御史王道一起前往浙江。
English: As a result, Natsugen, who was involved in the case, requested the imperial court to send the two men to Zhejiang, and together with the local government and Song Suqing, to investigate and punish the crime. The imperial court then sent Liu Mu and Wang Dao, who were involved in the case, to Zhejiang.

古文：至四年，狱成，素卿及中林、望古多罗并论死，系狱。
现代文：嘉靖四年，讼事成立，宋素卿、中林、望古多罗三人一并处以死罪，关进牢狱之中。
English: In the fourth year of Jiajing, the case was established, and Song Suqing, Zhonglin, and Wang Guodaro were all sentenced to death and imprisoned.

古文：久之，皆瘐死。
现代文：时间一久，他们都病死在监狱之中。
English: Over time, they all fell ill and died in prison.

古文：时有琉球使臣郑绳归国，命传谕日本以擒献宗设，还袁琎及海滨被掠之人，否则闭关绝贡，徐议征讨。
现代文：此时有琉球的使臣郑绳回国，朝廷要他回国后转告日本国王，让他将宗设擒献到朝廷，归还袁王进和海滨郡县中被掳掠去的百姓，否则就封闭海关断绝其入贡，并商议征讨他们。
English: At this time, the Ryukyuan envoy Zheng Zhen returned to China, and the imperial court asked him to tell the Japanese king after returning to China, so that he would present the imperial edict to the imperial court and return Yuan Wangjin and the people who were abducted and plundered in the coastal counties, otherwise he would close the customs to cut off their tribute, and negotiate to collect them.

古文：九年，琉球使臣蔡瀚者，道经日本，其王源义晴附表言： 向因本国多事，干戈梗道。正德勘合不达东都，以故素卿捧弘治勘合行，乞贷遣。
现代文：九年，琉球的使臣蔡瀚，路过日本时，日本国王源义晴附表给蔡瀚带往朝廷，说： 向来因为日本国内多战事，干戈阻道，正德年间勘合的金牌无法到达东都，所以宋素卿只好捧着弘治年间勘合的金牌出使贵国，现请求朝廷宽恕并遣返他们。
English: In the ninth year, when the envoy of Ryukyu, Cai Han, passed by Japan, the Japanese king, Yuan Yiharu, gave Cai Han the attached table and brought it to the imperial court, saying: "Because of the many wars in Japan, the road to war has always been blocked, and the gold medal of the alliance between China and Germany could not reach the eastern capital, so Song Suqing had no choice but to take the gold medal of the alliance between Hongzhi and send it to your country, and now ask the imperial court for forgiveness and repatriate them.

古文：望并赐新勘合、金印，修贡如常。 
现代文：同时希望朝廷赐予新勘合的金牌、金印，我们可按往常那样进贡。 
English: At the same time, we hope that the Imperial Court will bestow a gold medal and a gold seal on Shinkawa, and we can pay tribute as usual.

古文：礼官验其文，无印篆，言： 倭谲诈难信，宜敕琉球王传谕，仍遵前命。 
现代文：礼官验收其表文时，发现上面没盖有印篆，便上奏说： 倭人诡诈难以使人相信，还是敕令琉球王传告他们，让他们仍遵前次所敕的命令行事。 
English: When the etiquette officer examined his form and found that it was not stamped with a seal, he reported: "It is hard to believe that the Wajin are so deceitful, so I have ordered the Ryukyuan king to inform them so that they will still follow the previous order."

古文：十八年七月，义晴贡使至宁波，守臣以闻。
现代文：十八年七月，源义晴所派的献贡使臣到达宁波，当地守卫大臣将此上报朝廷。
English: In July 18th, a tribute envoy sent by MINAMOTO no Yoshiharu arrived in Ningbo, and the local defense minister reported this to the imperial court.

古文：时不通贡者已十七年，敕巡按御史督同三司官核，果诚心效顺，如制遣送，否则却回，且严居民交通之禁。
现代文：此时日本已有十七年没与朝廷通贡了，朝廷敕令巡按御史督同三司的官员前去共同审核，如果他们确是诚心效顺，就按制度礼待并遣送他们回去，否则就拒绝他们，并严禁当地的居民与他们交通往来。
English: At this time, Japan had not paid tribute to the Imperial Court for seventeen years. The Imperial Court ordered the inspector general of history and the officials of the three departments to go and examine them together. If they were indeed sincere and obedient, they would be treated according to the system and sent back. Otherwise, they would be rejected and the local residents would be strictly prohibited from communicating with them.

古文：明年二月，贡使硕鼎等至京申前请，乞赐嘉靖新勘合，还素卿及原留贡物。
现代文：第二年二月，日本献贡的使臣硕鼎等人到达京城申述前次的请求，并乞求朝廷颁赐嘉靖朝新勘合的金牌，归还宋素卿其人和原先留在中国的贡物。
English: In February of the following year, the Japanese envoy Shuo Ding and others arrived in Beijing to appeal the previous request, and begged the imperial court to award the gold medal of Jiajing Dynasty to Xin Kanhe, and to return Song Suqing and his people and the tributes that originally remained in China.

古文：部议： 勘合不可遽给，务缴旧易新。
现代文：礼部建议说 ：勘合的金牌不能急急忙忙地给他们，务必要他们拿旧的来换新的。
English: The etiquette department suggested, "Don't give them the gold medal in a hurry, they must exchange the old one for a new one."

古文：贡期限十年，人不过百，舟不过三，余不可许。 
现代文：每次朝贡的日期限定十年，朝贡的人不得超过一百，船不得超过三艘，其余的请求不可答应。 
English: The date of each tribute is limited to ten years. The number of people paying tribute may not exceed one hundred, the number of ships may not exceed three, and other requests may not be granted.

古文：诏如议。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意。
English: The edict was issued in accordance with his wishes.

古文：二十三年七月复来贡，未及期，且无表文。
现代文：二十三年七月日本使臣又来朝贡。这次朝贡没有到该朝贡的日期，而且还没有表文上达。
English: In July 23rd, the Japanese envoys came again to pay tribute. This time, the tribute did not arrive on the due date, and the form had not yet been submitted.

古文：部臣谓不当纳，却之。
现代文：礼部大臣认为不应当接受，将贡物退回。
English: The Minister of Ceremonies thought that it should not be accepted, and the tribute was returned.

古文：其人利互市，留海滨不去。
现代文：该使臣就拿这些贡物与当地百姓互做交易获利，留在海滨地区不肯离去。
English: The envoy took advantage of these tributes to make deals with the local people, staying in the coastal area and refusing to leave.

古文：巡按御史高节请治沿海文武将吏罪，严禁奸豪交通，得旨允行。
现代文：巡按御史高节请求朝廷追治沿海地区文武将吏的罪，严禁奸商豪强与他们交通往来，皇帝同意。
English: On the occasion of the Grand Historian's Day, the patrol requested the imperial court to prosecute the crimes of the military generals in the coastal areas, and strictly prohibit the traffickers from communicating with them, and the emperor agreed.

古文：而内地诸奸利其交易，多为之囊橐，终不能尽绝。
现代文：而内地的诸奸商因从与他们的交易中可获利，多收容包庇他们，因此最终无法彻底禁绝。
English: On the other hand, the profiteers in the Mainland, because they can profit from trading with them, are more likely to shelter them, so they cannot be completely banned.

古文：二十六年六月，巡按御史杨九泽言： 浙江宁、绍、台、温皆滨海，界连福建福、兴、漳、泉诸郡，有倭患，虽设卫所城池及巡海副使、备倭都指挥，但海寇出没无常，两地官弁不能通摄，制御为难。
现代文：二十六年六月，巡按御史杨九泽上奏说： 浙江的宁波、绍兴、台州、温州都临海，其地界又与福建的福州、兴州、漳州、泉州各郡相连，常有倭人入侵，虽然设置了卫所城池和巡海副使、备倭都指挥等，但是海盗还是出没无常，两地的官员无法通气摄制，因此制御海盗就很困难。
English: In June 26th, Yang Jiu Ze, the chief inspector, said in his report: Zhejiang's Ningbo, Shaoxing, Taizhou, and Wenzhou all face the sea, and their borders are also connected to Fujian's Fuzhou, Xingzhou, Zhangzhou, and Quanzhou counties. There are often Japanese invasions. Although there are watchtowers, deputy maritime inspectors, and a Japanese commander, pirates still come and go. Officials in the two places can't take pictures, so controlling pirates is very difficult.

古文：请如往例，特遣巡视重臣，尽统海滨诸郡，庶事权归一，威令易行。 
现代文：请求朝廷按以往惯例，特地派遣巡视大臣，统摄滨海诸郡，处理庶事的权力归于统一，这样威严的命令才容易施行。 
English: In accordance with past practice, he asked the imperial court to send a special inspecting minister to supervise the coastal counties, and the power to deal with general affairs was unified. Such a majestic order would be easy to enforce.

古文：廷议称善，乃命副都御史朱纨巡抚浙江兼制福、兴、漳、泉、建宁五府军事。
现代文：朝廷大臣商讨后认为杨九泽所言很对，于是任命副都御史朱纨巡抚浙江，兼管福州、兴州、漳州、泉州、建宁五个府的军事。
English: After discussion, the ministers of the Imperial Court thought that what Yang Jiu Ze said was very right, so they appointed the vice-governor of the capital, Zhu Xi, as the governor of Zhejiang, and also in charge of the military of the five prefectures of Fuzhou, Xingzhou, Zhangzhou, Quanzhou and Jianning.

古文：未几，其王义晴遣使周良等先期来贡，用舟四，人六百，泊于海外，以待明年贡期。
现代文：不久，日本国王源义晴派使臣周良等人先期前来向朝廷献贡，贡品用四艘船装运，随行人员有六百。他们停泊在海外以等待明年的献贡日期。
English: Soon after, Japanese King Minamoto no Yoshiharu's envoy Zhou Liang and others came to pay tribute to the Imperial Court ahead of schedule. The tribute was shipped in four ships with an entourage of 600 people. They anchored overseas to wait for next year's tribute date.

古文：守臣沮之，则以风为解。
现代文：当地守卫大臣阻止他们，他们则说是被风飘来的作为解释。
English: The local defence minister stopped them, and they explained that they had been blown there by the wind.

古文：十一月事闻，帝以先期非制，且人船越额，敕守臣勒回。
现代文：十一月此事上报朝廷，皇帝认为先期到达不符合制度，况且献贡的人和船都超过了规定数额，敕令当地守卫大臣勒令他们回去。
English: In November, the matter was reported to the imperial court. The emperor believed that the early arrival was not in accordance with the system, moreover, the people and ships that paid tribute exceeded the specified amount, and ordered the local Minister of Defense to order them to go back.

古文：十二月，倭贼犯宁、台二郡，大肆杀掠，二郡将吏并获罪。
现代文：十二月，倭贼进犯宁波、台州两个郡，进行大肆杀掠，两个郡的将吏一并获罪下狱。
English: In December, the Japanese invaders invaded two counties, Ningbo and Taizhou, and carried out large-scale killing and plundering. The generals of the two counties were both sentenced to prison.

古文：明年六月，周良复求贡，纨以闻。
现代文：第二年六月，周良又请求献贡，朱纨将此上报朝廷。
English: In June of the following year, Zhou Liang again requested tribute, and Zhu Xi reported this to the imperial court.

古文：礼部言： 日本贡期及舟与人数虽违制，第表辞恭顺，去贡期亦不远，若概加拒绝，则航海之劳可悯，若稍务含容，则宗设、素卿之事可鉴。
现代文：礼部官员上奏说 ：日本国前来献贡的日期、船只和人数虽然违反了制度，但这次他们的表文中言辞恭顺，况且离献贡的日期也不远了，倘若一概加以拒绝，则航海之辛劳也应加怜悯，倘若稍加含容，则宗设、宋素卿之争亦可做借鉴。
English: An official from the Ministry of Ceremonies made a report, saying: Although the date, ships and the number of people who came to Japan to pay tribute violated the system, this time they were polite in their statement. Moreover, the date of the tribute was not far away. If they were to reject it altogether, the hardships of the voyage should also be pitied. If they were to be a little more tolerant, the dispute between the Imperial Family and Song Suqing could also be used as a reference.

古文：宜敕纨循十八年例，起送五十人，余留嘉宾馆，量加犒赏，谕令归国。
现代文：应敕令朱纨，让他遵循十八年的先例，送五十人进京朝贡，其余的人留在嘉宾馆，适量加以犒赏，然后谕令他们回国。
English: The emperor should order Zhu Xi to follow the eighteen-year precedent and send fifty people to pay tribute to the imperial court in Beijing, while the rest should stay in the guest house, be rewarded appropriately, and then be ordered to return to the country.

古文：若互市防守事，宜在纨善处之。 
现代文：若有双方互做贸易和防守之事，应让朱纨亲自处理。 
English: If there are matters of trade and defense between the two sides, Zhu Xi should be allowed to deal with them personally.

古文：报可。纨力言五十人过少，乃令百人赴都。
现代文：皇帝同意，朱纨则竭力说只送五十人太少，于是朝廷便让他送一百人赴京都。
English: The emperor agreed, but Zhu Xi insisted that sending only fifty people was too few, so the court asked him to send a hundred people to Kyoto.

古文：部议但赏百人，余罢勿赏。
现代文：礼部建议只给这一百人实行赏赐，其余的随行人员不给赏赐。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies suggested that only the one hundred people should be rewarded, and the rest of the entourage should not be rewarded.

古文：良诉贡舟高大。势须五百人。
现代文：周良则诉说装载贡品的船高大，必须有五百人才能驾驶。
English: Zhou Liang said that the ship carrying the tribute was so tall that it needed 500 people to drive it.

古文：中国商舶入海，往往藏匿岛中为寇，故增一舟防寇，非敢违制。
现代文：而且中国的商船进入海中以后，往往藏匿在岛中作为盗贼，所以要增加一艘船以防海盗，这不是故意违反制度。
English: Moreover, after entering the sea, Chinese merchant ships often hide in the islands as thieves, so it is not a deliberate violation of the system to add a ship to prevent pirates.

古文：部议量增其赏，且谓： 百人之制，彼国势难遵行，宜相其贡舟大小，以施禁令。 
现代文：礼部建议适量增加其赏赐，并说： 以一百人做定制，他们国家势必难以遵行，应量其献贡之船的大小，以实施禁令。 
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies suggested that the reward should be increased appropriately, and said: With a hundred people custom-made, their country is bound to be difficult to comply with, and should measure the size of their tribute ship to implement the ban.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：日本故有孝、武两朝勘合几二百道，使臣前此入贡请易新者，而令缴其旧。
现代文：日本国在孝宗、武宗两位皇帝当政时，曾勘合了近二百道金牌，其使臣前次入朝献贡时要求颁发新勘合的金牌，朝廷则让他们缴出旧的金牌。
English: When the two emperors, Takamune and Buso, were in power, Japan had amalgamated nearly two hundred gold medals. When their envoys came to pay tribute to the imperial court the last time, they asked for the newly amalgamated gold medals to be issued, but the imperial court told them to hand over the old gold medals.

古文：至是良持弘治勘合十五道，言其余为素卿子所窃，捕之不获。
现代文：这次周良持弘治年间勘合的十五道金牌前来入贡，说其余的金牌都被宋素卿的儿子窃走，已搜捕不到了。
English: This time, Zhou Liang came to pay tribute with the fifteen gold medals that were won during the reign of Hongzhi, saying that the remaining gold medals had been stolen by the son of Song Suqing and could not be found.

古文：正德勘合留十五道为信，而以四十道来还。
现代文：至于正德年间勘合的金牌，他们留下十五道作为凭信，拿四十道归还朝廷。
English: As for the gold medals that were reunited during the Zhengde era, they kept fifteen as proof and returned forty to the imperial court.

古文：部议令异时悉缴旧，乃许易新，亦报可。
现代文：礼部建议让他们在日后把旧勘合的金牌悉数上缴后，才给他们发新勘合的金牌，皇帝也同意了。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies suggested that they should hand over all the gold medals of the old Kwan Hoa ceremony in the future, and only then would they be given the gold medals of the new Kwan Hoa ceremony. The emperor agreed.

古文：当是时，日本王虽入贡，其各岛诸倭岁常侵掠，滨海奸民又往往勾之。
现代文：当此之时，日本国王虽然向明朝廷进贡，但其岛屿上的诸倭人每年却常侵略滨海地区，而滨海地区的奸民又往往与倭贼勾结在一起。
English: At that time, although the Japanese king paid tribute to the Ming court, the Wa on its islands often invaded the coastal areas every year, and the traitors in the coastal areas often colluded with the Wa.

古文：纨乃严为申禁，获交通者，不俟命辄以便宜斩之。
现代文：朱纨于是严厉申述禁令，一旦抓获与倭贼交通之人，不等朝廷的命令便相机斩杀。
English: Zhu Xi then sternly appealed against the ban. Once a person was caught communicating with a Japanese thief, the camera would be destroyed without waiting for an order from the imperial court.

古文：由是，浙、闽大姓素为倭内主者，失利而怨。
现代文：这样一来，浙江、福建那些长期以来作为倭贼代理人的大姓人家因失去利益而产生怨恨。
English: As a result, the big families in Zhejiang and Fujian, who have long been the agents of the Japanese thieves, have become resentful due to the loss of profits.

古文：纨又数腾疏于朝，显言大姓通倭状，以故闽、浙人皆恶之，而闽尤甚。
现代文：朱纨又数次上疏给朝廷，明白指出这些大姓勾通倭贼的情状，因此闽、浙两省的人都厌恶朱纨，其中闽籍人尤甚。
English: Zhu Xi also sent several letters to the imperial court, clearly pointing out the situation of these big names colluding with the Japanese invaders. Therefore, people in Shandong and Zhejiang provinces detest Zhu Xi, especially those from Shandong.

古文：巡按御史周亮，闽产也，上疏诋纨，请改巡抚为巡视，以杀其权。
现代文：巡按御史周亮，是闽籍出生，上疏诋毁朱纨，请求朝廷将巡抚改为巡视，以削夺朱纨的权力。
English: The inspector was Zhou Liang, who was born in Shijiazhuang. Shang Zuo slandered Zhu Xi and requested the court to change the inspector to a patrol, in order to deprive Zhu Xi of power.

古文：其党在朝者左右之，竟如其请。
现代文：在朝廷中为官的周亮的同党，竟然运用自己的力量和影响四出活动，使周亮的疏章获得通过。
English: Zhou Liang, who was an official in the imperial court and a member of the same party, actually used his power and influence to carry out four activities so that Zhou Liang's award would be approved.

古文：又夺纨官。罗织其擅杀罪，纨自杀。
现代文：接着又剥夺了朱纨的官职，罗织了朱纨擅杀无辜的罪名，朱纨便自杀而死。
English: Next, Zhu Xi was deprived of his official position, and Zhu Xi was accused of killing an innocent person. Zhu Xi then committed suicide and died.

古文：自是不置巡抚者四年，海禁复弛，乱益滋甚。
现代文：从此以后四年内没有设置巡抚之职，海禁又松弛了，海上盗寇之乱也更为严重。
English: In the four years since then, there has been no establishment of the post of inspector, the maritime ban has been relaxed, and the disturbance of pirates at sea has become more serious.

古文：祖制，浙江设市舶提举司，以中官主之，驻宁波。
现代文：按祖先的制度，在浙江设置市舶提举司，以宦官主持该司的事务，驻地在宁波。
English: According to the ancestral system, the Municipal Bureau of Shipping was set up in Zhejiang, with a eunuch presiding over the affairs of the department, based in Ningbo.

古文：海舶至则平其直，制驭之权在上。
现代文：海船到达时，市舶提举司评价其货物的价值，但制驭之权则在朝廷。
English: When a seagoing ship arrives, the city's shipping department evaluates the value of its cargo, but the power to control it lies with the imperial court.

古文：及世宗，尽撤天下镇守中官，并撤市舶，而滨海奸人遂操其利。
现代文：到世宗皇帝时，将镇守地方事务的宦官全部撤回朝廷，同时撤销了市舶，于是滨海地区的奸人便操纵了海上贸易的利益。
English: When Emperor Sejong came to power, he withdrew all the eunuchs who were in charge of local affairs to the imperial court, and at the same time abolished the merchant ships. As a result, swindlers in coastal areas manipulated the interests of maritime trade.

古文：初市犹商主之，及严通番之禁，遂移之贵官家，负其直者愈甚。
现代文：刚开始交易时还是以商人为主，等到严禁与番人交通的禁令下达后，这种交易便转移到贵官之家，这样贵官之家欠倭人之债的也愈来愈多。
English: At the beginning of the trade, it was still dominated by merchants, but after the ban on communication with the guards was issued, this trade was transferred to the noblemen's house, so that the noblemen's house owed more and more debts to the Japanese.

古文：索之急，则以危言吓之，或又以好言绐之，谓我终不负若直。
现代文：等到倭人前来索债太急时，这些官宦人家或以危言恫吓他们，或又以好话欺骗他们，说我们最终不会亏待你们的，等等。
English: When the Japanese came to demand their debts too urgently, these officials either threatened them with threatening words, or deceived them with kind words, saying that we would not treat you badly in the end, and so on.

古文：倭丧其赀不得返，已大恨，而大奸若汪直、徐海、陈东、麻叶辈素窟其中，以内地不得逞，悉逸海岛为主谋。
现代文：倭人没取得资金无法回去，为此大为怨恨，而大奸人如汪直、徐海、陈东、麻叶之流又长期聚集在他们当中，因在内地无法得逞其事，于是全部逃到海岛上去做主谋。
English: The Japanese could not go back without obtaining funds, and there was great resentment for this, and the great traitors such as Wang Zhi, Xu Hai, Chen Dong, and Asaba gathered among them for a long time, because they could not succeed in the mainland, so they all fled to the island to be the mastermind.

古文：倭听指挥，诱之入寇。
现代文：倭人都听他们的指挥，他们便引诱倭人做海盗。
English: The Wa obeyed their orders, and they lured the Wa into becoming pirates.

古文：海中巨盗，遂袭倭服饰、旂号，并分艘掠内地，无不大利，故倭患日剧，于是廷议复设巡抚。
现代文：海中的巨盗，于是都沿袭倭人的服饰、旗号，并且分船抢掠内地，无不获大利，因此倭寇之患日愈剧烈，于是朝廷大臣商议后又设置巡抚官职。
English: As a result, the great thieves of the sea all followed the costumes and banners of the Japanese, and divided their ships to plunder the inland, all of which were successful. As a result, the plight of the Japanese pirates became more and more severe, so after deliberation by the Minister of the Imperial Court, the post of inspector was established.

古文：三十一年七月以佥都御史王忬任之，而势已不可扑灭。
现代文：三十一年七月任命佥都御史王忄予出任巡抚之职，而此时倭贼寇盗之势已经炽盛，无法扑灭了。
English: In July 31st, the governor of the capital, Wang Shih, appointed him to the post of inspector, and at this time, the trend of Japanese piracy and theft was already in full swing and could not be extinguished.

古文：明初，沿海要地建卫所，设战船，董以都司、巡视、副使等官，控制周密。
现代文：明朝初年，沿海的关键地区建立了卫所，设置了战船，让都司、巡视、副使等官监督行事，因此控制得颇为周密。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, health stations were established in key coastal areas, warships were set up, and officials such as prefectural governors, inspectors, and deputy envoys were put in charge of supervision. As a result, control was quite thorough.

古文：迨承平久，船敝伍虚。
现代文：等到国内享受太平已久，以致战船破烂，军队空虚。
English: Wait until the country has enjoyed peace for a long time, so that the warship is broken and the army is empty.

古文：及遇警，乃募渔船以资哨守。
现代文：一旦遇到敌警，便招募渔船放哨守卫。
English: Once they encounter hostile police, they recruit fishing boats to stand guard.

古文：兵非素练，船非专业，见寇舶至，辄望风逃匿，而上又无统率御之。
现代文：这样的士兵没有经过长期训练，船也不是专业战船，于是一见到海寇的船只，总是望风而逃，而上面又没有统帅率领他们抵御海寇。
English: Such soldiers have not undergone long-term training, and the ship is not a professional warship, so when they see the sea pirates, they always look to the wind and flee, and there is no commander to lead them to resist the sea pirates.

古文：以故贼帆所指，无不残破。
现代文：以致贼船所到之处，无不受其残破。
English: As a result, wherever the pirate ship went, it left a trail of wreckage.

古文：三十二年三月，汪直勾诸倭大举入寇，连舰数百，蔽海而至。
现代文：三十二年三月，汪直勾结诸倭贼大举入侵，率战舰数百艘，蔽海而至。
English: In March of the year thirty-two, Wang Zhi colluded with the Japanese pirates to invade on a large scale, leading hundreds of warships to cover the sea.

古文：浙东、西，江南、北，滨海数千里，同时告警。
现代文：浙东、浙西、长江之南、长江之北，沿海数千里地方，同时告警。
English: East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang, south of the Yangtze River, north of the Yangtze River, thousands of miles along the coast, and at the same time alerted.

古文：破昌国卫。
现代文：倭贼攻破昌国卫。
English: The Japanese invaders broke through Chang Guowei.

古文：四月犯太仓，破上海县，掠江阴，攻乍浦。
现代文：四月又进犯太仓，攻破上海县，掠夺了江阴，攻打乍浦。
English: In April, they attacked Taicang, broke through Shanghai County, plundered Jiangyin, and attacked Zhapu.

古文：八月劫金山卫，犯崇明及常熟、嘉定。
现代文：八月他们又抢劫金山卫，进犯崇明、常熟和嘉定。
English: In August, they also robbed Jinshanwei and attacked Chongming, Changshu and Jiading.

古文：三十三年正月自太仓掠苏州，攻松江，复趋江北，薄通、泰。
现代文：三十三年正月他们又从太仓出发掠夺苏州，攻打松江，又朝长江以北进发，进逼通、泰两州。
English: In the first month of the 33rd year, they also set out from Taicang to plunder Suzhou, attack the Songjiang River, and head north of the Yangtze River, forcing their way through Taizhou and Taizhou.

古文：四月陷嘉善，破崇明，复薄苏州，入崇德县。
现代文：四月，他们攻陷嘉善，攻破崇明，又进逼苏州，进入崇德县。
English: In April, they captured Jiashan, broke through Chongming, and forced their way into Suzhou, entering Chongde County.

古文：六月由吴江掠嘉兴，还屯柘林。
现代文：六月，他们从吴江出发掠夺嘉兴，回来时驻扎在柘林。
English: In June, they set out from Wujiang to plunder Jiaxing, and when they returned, they were stationed in Yulin.

古文：纵横来往，若入无人之境，忬亦不能有所为。
现代文：他们纵横往来，如入无人之境，新任巡抚王忄予也无法有所作为。
English: They went back and forth, as if they were in no man's land, and the new governor, Wang Xiyu, was unable to make a difference.

古文：未几，忬改抚大同，以李天宠代，又命兵部尚书张经总督军务。
现代文：不久，王忄予改为大同巡抚，以李天宠代王忄予做浙江巡抚，朝廷又命令兵部尚书张经总督军务。
English: Soon, Wang Xiyu was changed to Datong's inspector general, and Li Tianchi replaced Wang Xiyu as Zhejiang's inspector general. The imperial court also ordered the military department to send a letter to Zhang Jing, the military governor.

古文：乃大征兵四方，协力进剿。
现代文：于是从四面八方征兵，协力进剿倭贼。
English: As a result, soldiers were recruited from all over to fight the Japanese invaders.

古文：是时，倭以川沙洼、柘林为巢，抄掠四出。
现代文：此时，倭贼以川沙洼、柘林为巢穴，四出掳掠。
English: At this time, the Japanese invaders used the rivers Saowa and Yulin as their lair, and went out to plunder everywhere.

古文：明年正月，贼夺舟犯乍浦、海宁，陷崇德，转掠塘栖、新市、横塘、双林等处，攻德清县。
现代文：第二年正月，倭贼夺船进犯乍浦、海宁，攻陷崇德，转而掳掠塘栖、新市、横塘、双林等地，攻陷了德清县。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Japanese raiders captured ships and attacked Zhaopu and Haining, captured and besieged Chongde, and then captured and plundered Tangsui, Xinshi, Hengtang, Shuanglin and other places, and conquered Deqing County.

古文：五月复合新倭，突犯嘉兴，至王江泾，乃为经击斩千九百余级，余奔柘林。
现代文：五月，在内地的倭贼又纠集新到的倭贼突然进犯嘉兴，到王江泾时，被张经斩杀了一千九百多人，其余的逃奔到柘林。
English: In May, the newly arrived Japanese invaders in the inland gathered and suddenly attacked Jiaxing. When they arrived at the mouth of the Wangjiang River, more than 1,900 people were killed by Zhang Jing, and the rest fled to Yulin.

古文：其他倭复掠苏州境，延及江阴、无锡，出入太湖。
现代文：其他倭贼又掠夺了苏州境内，波及到江苏、无锡，还出入于太湖。
English: Other Japanese pirates also plundered the territory of Suzhou, spreading to Jiangsu and Wuxi, and entering and leaving Taihu.

古文：大抵真倭十之三，从倭者十之七。
现代文：纵观倭贼之人，真正的倭人大致占十分之三，而跟随倭人为寇为盗的占十分之七。
English: Looking at the total number of waka, true waka roughly account for three out of ten, while those who follow the waka and commit theft account for seven out of ten.

古文：倭战则驱其所掠之人为军锋，法严，人皆致死，而官军素懦怯，所至溃奔。
现代文：倭贼遇战时，驱使其所掳掠来的人做前锋，法律严明，所以人人至死不退，而官军素来懦怯，倭贼一至则溃奔逃散。
English: In the event of war, the wafang would force the people they had captured to be the vanguard. The law was strict, so everyone would fight to the death, but the government army was always cowardly, and the wafang would run away at the first sign of danger.

古文：帝乃遣工部侍郎赵文华督察军情。
现代文：皇帝便派工部侍郎赵文华督察军情。
English: The emperor then sent Zhao Wenhua, an attendant of the Ministry of Works, as an inspector of military affairs.

古文：文华颠倒功罪，诸军益解体。
现代文：而赵文华却颠倒功罪，于是各路官军更加解体。
English: Zhao Wenhua, on the other hand, reversed the merits and demerits, as a result of which the various government and military forces disintegrated even more.

古文：经、天宠并被逮，代以周珫、胡宗宪。
现代文：张经、李天宠一并被逮捕问罪，以周王充、胡宗宪代替他们的职位。
English: Zhang Jing and Li Tiancai were arrested and questioned, and Zhou Wangchong and Hu Zongxian replaced them.

古文：逾月，珫罢，代以杨宜。
现代文：过了一个月，周王充被罢官，以杨宜代替周王充。
English: A month later, Zhou Wangchong was dismissed and replaced by Yang Yi.

古文：时贼势蔓延，江浙无不蹂躏。
现代文：此时倭贼势力蔓延，江苏、浙江无不遭受他们的蹂躏。
English: At this time, the influence of the Japanese invaders spread, and Jiangsu and Zhejiang were all ravaged by them.

古文：新倭来益众，益肆毒。
现代文：新来的倭贼越来越多，也更肆毒无忌。
English: There are more and more new yakuza, and they are getting more and more vicious.

古文：每自焚其舟，登岸劫掠。
现代文：每次他们都自焚其舟，然后上岸抢劫。
English: Each time they set fire to their boats and then came ashore to loot.

古文：自杭州北新关西剽淳安，突徽州歙县，至绩溪、旌德，过泾县，趋南陵，遂达芜湖。
现代文：从杭州的北新关向西剽掠淳安，突破徽州的歙县，到达绩溪、旌德，又经过泾县，奔向南陵，于是到达芜湖。
English: From Hangzhou's Beixin Pass to the west of Lushan, through Lushan County in Huizhou, to Jixi and Shunde, and then through Lushan County to Nanling, and then to Lugu Lake.

古文：烧南岸，奔太平府，犯江宁镇，径侵南京。
现代文：他们焚烧长江南岸后，奔向太平府，进犯江宁镇，直接侵犯南京。
English: After burning the south bank of the Yangtze River, they rushed to Taiping, attacked Jiangning Town, and directly invaded Nanjing.

古文：倭红衣黄盖，率众犯大安德门，及夹冈，乃趋秣陵关而去，由溧水流劫溧阳、宜兴。
现代文：倭贼着红衣黄盖，率领众人进犯大安德门，到夹冈时，又朝秣陵关进发，从溧水向溧阳、宜兴流动，并洗劫了溧阳和宜兴。
English: The Japanese bandits, wearing red clothes and yellow caps, led the crowd to attack the Great Ando Gate, and when they reached Jiagang, they also entered the morning of Fuling Pass, flowing from Surabaya to Poyang and Yixing, and ransacked Poyang and Yixing.

古文：闻官兵自太湖出，遂越武进，抵无锡，驻惠山。
现代文：听到官军从太湖出发后，便越过武进，抵达无锡，驻扎在惠山。
English: After hearing that the government army had set out from Taihu Lake, they crossed Wujin, arrived in Wuxi, and were stationed in Huishan.

古文：一昼夜奔百八十余里，抵浒墅。
现代文：他们一昼夜奔走一百八十多里，抵达浒墅，结果被官军包围。
English: They ran more than one hundred and eighty miles day and night and arrived at the villa. As a result, they were surrounded by government troops.

古文：为官军所围，追及于杨林桥，歼之。是役也，贼不过六七十人，而经行数千里，杀戮战伤者几四千人，历八十余日始灭，此三十四年九月事也。
现代文：官军追击到杨林桥，将这群倭贼歼灭在这一仗中，倭贼人数只有六七十，而经过的地方却达几千里，被他们杀戮杀伤的人几乎有四千，经历的时间达八十多天，这是三十四年九月的事。
English: The government army chased them to the Yanglin Bridge and annihilated the group of wafers. In this battle, the number of wafers was only sixty or seventy, but they traveled thousands of miles. The number of people killed and injured by them was almost four thousand, and the time they spent was more than eighty days. This happened in September of 1934.

古文：应天巡抚曹邦辅以捷闻，文华忌其功。
现代文：应天府的巡抚曹邦辅将捷报上奏到朝廷，赵文华对曹邦辅建功颇为顾忌。
English: When Cao Bangfu, the governor of Tianfu, reported the victory to the imperial court, Zhao Wenhua was wary of Cao Bangfu's contribution.

古文：以倭之巢于陶宅也，乃大集浙、直兵，与宗宪亲将之。
现代文：因倭贼的巢穴在陶宅，赵文华便大集浙江、直隶的军队，与胡宗宪一起带兵进剿。
English: Because the Japanese thief's lair was in the pottery house, Zhao Wenhua gathered a large number of troops from Zhejiang and Zhili, and together with Hu Zongxian led the troops into the castle.

古文：又约邦辅合剿，分道并进，营于松江之甎桥。
现代文：同时，赵文华还约曹邦辅一起联合进剿，分道并进，在松江的砖桥安下营寨。
English: At the same time, Zhao Wenhua also asked Cao Bangyu to jointly march into the Yunnan Province together, and they went their separate ways and camped under the brick bridge in the Songjiang Province.

古文：倭悉锐来冲，遂大败，文华气夺，贼益炽。
现代文：倭贼出动全部精锐前来冲击官军的军营，官军大败。于是赵文华气馁，而倭贼更为猖獗。
English: The Japanese invaders sent out all their elite to attack the government army's camp, and the government army was defeated. As a result, Zhao Wenhua was discouraged, and the Japanese invaders became even more rampant.

古文：十月，倭自乐清登岸，流劫黄岩、仙居、奉化、余姚、上虞，被杀掳者无算。
现代文：十月，倭贼从乐清登岸，流动洗劫了黄岩、仙居、奉化、余姚和上虞，这些地方被杀被掳的人无法计算。
English: In October, the Japanese pirates came ashore from Yueqing and ransacked Huangyan, Xianju, Fenghua, Yuyao and Shangyu. The number of people killed and captured in these places is incalculable.

古文：至〈山乘〉县乃歼之，亦不满二百人，顾深入三府，历五十日始平。
现代文：倭贼到达嵊县时，被官军歼灭，一数他们还不满二百人，却已深入到了三个府的地界之内，骚扰达五十日之久。
English: When the Japanese invaders arrived in Jixian County, they were annihilated by the government army. There were less than 200 of them, but they had penetrated deep into the boundaries of the three prefectures and had been harassed for 50 days.

古文：其先一枝自山东日照流劫东安卫，至淮安、赣榆、沭阳、桃源，至清河阻雨，为徐、邳官兵所歼，亦不过数十人，流害千里，杀戮千余，其悍如此。
现代文：此前有一支倭贼从山东的日照流动洗劫了东安卫，后来又到淮安、赣榆、沭阳、桃源等地，等到达清河时因下雨被阻，于是被徐、邳两地的官军所歼灭，清点时发现倭贼也才不过是数十人，却流害千里，杀戮了千余人，其骠悍达如此地步。
English: Previously, there was a Japanese bandit from Shandong's Rizhao River that ransacked Donganwei, and later went to Huai'an, Handan, Shenyang, Taoyuan and other places. When it reached Qinghe, it was blocked by rain, so it was annihilated by the government troops from Xu and Handan. When it was cleared, it was found that the Japanese bandits were only dozens of people, but they had traveled thousands of miles and killed more than a thousand people. Their bravery was so great.

古文：而文华自甎桥之败，见倭寇势甚，其自柘林移于周浦，与泊于川沙旧巢及嘉定高桥者自如，他侵犯者无虚日，文华乃以寇息请还朝。
现代文：赵文华自砖桥失败之后，发现倭寇势力更甚于以往。原先扎营在柘林的倭贼转移到周浦，与停泊在川沙旧巢穴中的倭寇和驻扎在嘉定高桥的倭贼往来自如，无时无日不侵犯其他地方，而赵文华却以倭患已经停息上报朝廷，请求回京。
English: After the failure of the brick bridge, Zhao Wenhua found that the wokou forces were more powerful than before. The wokou originally encamped in Yulin were transferred to Zhoupu, and the wokou anchored in the old lair of Chuansha and the wokou stationed in the high bridge of Jiading came from everywhere, invading other places all the time. However, Zhao Wenhua reported to the imperial court that the wokou had stopped, and requested to return to Beijing.

古文：明年二月，罢宜，代以宗宪，以阮鹗巡抚浙江。
现代文：第二年二月，杨宜被罢官，以胡宗宪代理杨宜的职务，任命阮鹗为浙江巡抚。
English: In February of the following year, Yang Yi was removed from office, with Hu Zongxian acting as Yang Yi's deputy, and Ruan Yu was appointed as the governor of Zhejiang Province.

古文：于是宗宪乃请遣使谕日本国王，禁戢岛寇，招还通番奸商，许立功免罪。
现代文：在此情况下胡宗宪便请求朝廷派使者前去谕告日本国国王，让他禁止岛上的贼寇进犯中国，将与番贼勾通的奸商招回来，答应让他们立功赎罪。
English: Under these circumstances, Hu Zongxian requested the imperial court to send an envoy to the king of Japan, asking him to prohibit the island's bandits from invading China, to call back the profiteers who had colluded with the bandits, and to promise that they would atone for their sins.

古文：既得旨，遂遣宁波诸生蒋洲、陈可愿往。
现代文：皇帝的圣旨颁下之后，胡宗宪便派宁波学士蒋洲、陈可愿前往日本。
English: After the emperor's edict was issued, Hu Zongxian sent the Ningbo scholars Jiang Zhou and Chen Ke to Japan.

古文：及是，可愿还，言至其国五岛，遇汪直、毛海峰，谓日本内乱，王与其相俱死，诸岛不相统摄，须遍谕乃可杜其入犯。
现代文：不久，陈可愿回来，说他们到了日本国的五个岛碰到汪直、毛海峰，说日本国内动乱，其国王和相国都已死，各岛之间没有统属关系，必须遍谕日本各岛才能杜绝倭寇的进犯。
English: Soon, Chen Ke would like to come back, saying that when they arrived at the five islands of Japan, they encountered Wang Zhi, Mao Hai Feng, saying that Japan was in turmoil, its king and partner country were dead, there was no affiliation between the islands, and they had to travel all over the islands of Japan in order to prevent the attack of the wokou.

古文：又言，有萨摩洲者，虽已扬帆入寇，非其本心，乞通贡互市，愿杀贼自效。
现代文：还有个叫萨摩洲的地方，虽然他们也乘船进犯中国，但这不是他们的本心所愿，他们请求与中国通贡互相贸易，并愿意杀贼以表示他们对中国的顺服之意。
English: There is also a place called Samos, although they also invaded China by boat, but this is not what they really wanted. They asked for tribute and trade with China, and were willing to kill thieves to show their obedience to China.

古文：乃留洲传谕各岛，而送可愿还。
现代文：蒋洲和陈可愿商议后，便留下蒋洲去传谕各岛，陈可愿回来汇报。
English: After Jiang Zhou and Chen Ke were willing to discuss, they left Jiang Zhou to preach to the islands. Chen Ke was willing to report back.

古文：宗宪以闻，兵部言： 直等本编民，既称效顺，即当释兵。
现代文：胡宗宪将此情况上报朝廷，兵部上奏说： 汪直等人本是中国的编户之民，既然声称效顺朝廷，应即刻放下武器。
English: Hu Zongxian reported this situation to the imperial court, and the military department reported: Wang Zhi and others were originally the people of China's Hakka people, and since they claimed to obey the imperial court, they should immediately lay down their weapons.

古文：乃绝不言及，第求开市通贡，隐若属国然，其奸叵测。
现代文：他们却丝毫不提及此事，还要求朝廷开通市场让他们通贡，隐然他们好像是中国的属国一样，其奸心不可叵测。
English: However, they did not mention the matter at all. They also asked the imperial court to open the market so that they could collect tribute. It was as if they were a vassal state of China. Their ulterior motives could not be fathomed.

古文：宜令督臣振扬国威，严加备御。
现代文：为此应命令督军大臣振扬国威，对海防严加守卫。
English: To this end, the Minister of the Army should be ordered to promote national prestige and strictly guard the coastal defense.

古文：移檄直等，俾剿除舟山诸贼巢以自明。
现代文：同时移檄文给汪直等人，让他们剿除舟山地区的各倭贼巢穴，以表明自己的心迹。
English: At the same time, he sent a letter to Wang Zhi and others, asking them to clean up all the wafers in Zhoushan to show their intentions.

古文：果海疆廓清，自有恩赉。 
现代文：如果此后海疆果然清静太平，朝廷对他们自然加以恩赏厚赐。 
English: If the sea was indeed calm and peaceful after that, the imperial court would naturally reward them generously.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时两浙皆被倭，而慈溪焚杀独惨，余姚次之。
现代文：此时两浙地区都遭受倭害，慈溪被倭贼焚烧杀戮最为严重，余姚次之。
English: At this time, both Zhejiang regions suffered from Japanese invasions. Cixi was the most severely burned and killed by Japanese invaders, followed by Yuyao.

古文：浙西柘林、乍浦、乌镇、皂林间，皆为贼巢，前后至者二万余人，命宗宪亟图方略。
现代文：浙西的柘林、乍浦、乌镇、皂林之间，都有倭贼巢穴，前后到达这些地方的倭贼有二万多人。
English: Between Yulin, Zhaopu, Wuzhen, and Saurin in western Zhejiang, there are lairs of ware-thieves. More than 20,000 ware-thieves have arrived in these places.

古文：七月，宗宪言： 贼首毛海峰自陈可愿还，一败倭寇于舟山，再败之沥表，又遣其党招谕各岛，相率效顺，乞加重赏。 
现代文：朝廷让胡宗宪赶快拿一个治理方略出来。七月，胡宗宪上奏说： 贼人的首领毛海峰自陈可愿回来后，先在舟山打败了倭寇，又在沥表再次击退倭寇的骚扰，并派遣他的党徒前去各岛屿上招抚贼人，率领他们效顺朝廷，请朝廷给毛海峰加以重赏。 
English: The court asked Hu Zongxian to quickly come up with a solution. In July, Hu Zongxian made a report saying: After the leader of the thieves, Mao Haifeng, returned from Chen Kechang, he first defeated the wokou in Zhoushan, and then repelled the harassment of the wokou in Bitou, and sent his party members to the islands to entice the thieves, lead them to obey the court, and ask the court to reward Mao Haifeng.

古文：部令宗宪以便宜行。
现代文：兵部让胡宗宪自己相机行事。
English: The military department let Hu Zongxian use his own camera.

古文：当是时，徐海、陈东、麻叶，方连兵攻围桐乡，宗宪设计间之，海遂擒东、叶以降，尽歼其余众于乍浦。
现代文：正当此时，徐海、陈东、麻叶三人正连兵一处围攻桐乡，胡宗宪设下计谋离间他们之间的关系，徐海便活捉了陈东和麻叶向官军投降，官军便在乍浦全部歼灭陈东和麻叶的余党。
English: Just at this time, the three soldiers, Xu Hai, Chen Dong and Ma Ye, were besieging Tongxiang at the same place. Hu Zongxian set up a strategy to separate the relationship between them. Xu Hai captured Chen Dong and Ma Ye alive and surrendered to the government army, and the government army completely destroyed the remaining party of Chen Dong and Ma Ye in Zhapu.

古文：未几，复蹴海于梁庄，海亦授首，余党尽灭。
现代文：不久，胡宗宪又率军跟踪徐海到梁庄，徐海也被杀，他的余党也被尽歼。
English: Soon after, Hu Zongxian led an army to track Xu Hai to Liangzhuang. Xu Hai was also killed, and the rest of his party was also wiped out.

古文：江南、浙西诸寇略平，而江北倭则犯丹阳及掠瓜洲，烧漕艘者明春复犯如皋、海门，攻通州，掠扬州、高耶，入宝应，遂侵淮安府，集于庙湾，逾年乃克。
现代文：这样，江南、浙西的贼寇略为平息，而长江以北的倭贼则进犯丹阳，劫掠瓜洲。烧毁漕运的倭贼第二年春天又进犯如皋、海门，攻打通州，抢劫扬州、高邮等地后，进入宝应，于是入侵淮安府，并在庙湾集结，过了一年官军才收复这些地方。
English: In this way, the banditry in the south of the Yangtze River and west of Zhejiang was quelled, while the bandits north of the Yangtze River attacked Danyang and plundered Guazhou. The bandits who burned the rowing boats attacked Ruyi and Haimen in the following spring, attacked Tongzhou, and robbed Yangzhou, Gaoyou and other places. After entering Baoying, they invaded Huai'an and gathered in Miao Wan. It took the government army one year to recover these places.

古文：其浙东之倭则盘踞于舟山，亦先后为官军所袭。
现代文：而浙东的倭贼则盘踞在舟山，官军也先后向他们发起攻击。
English: However, the Japanese invaders from eastern Zhejiang were entrenched in Zhoushan, and the government army launched attacks on them one after another.

古文：先是，蒋洲宣谕诸岛，至丰后被留，令僧人往山口等岛传谕禁戢。
现代文：先前，蒋洲到各岛屿去宣示朝廷的谕告，到达丰后岛时被当地人留了下来，他便派僧人到山口等岛屿上继续传示朝廷的禁令。
English: Previously, Jiang Zhou went to various islands to announce the imperial edict. When he arrived at Feng Hou Island, he was left behind by the locals. He then sent monks to Yamaguchi and other islands to continue to announce the imperial ban.

古文：于是山口都督源义长具咨送还被掠人口，而咨乃用国王印。
现代文：这样，山口的都督源义长便修好咨文，送还从中国掳掠去的人口，但他的咨文中用的乃是日本国王的印篆。
English: As a result, Yamaguchi's governor, Minamoto no Yoshinaga, wrote a message to return the captives from China, but he used the seal of the Japanese king.

古文：丰后太守源义镇遣僧德阳等具方物，奉表谢罪，请颁勘合修贡，送洲还。
现代文：丰后的太守源义镇也派僧人德阳等准备好土特产，奉表向朝廷谢罪，请求朝廷给他们颁发经勘合的金牌，以便他们向朝廷献贡，并将蒋洲送了回来。
English: Fengguo's daimyō, Yuan Yi Zhen, also sent the monk Deyang and others to prepare the local products, and sent a thank-you letter to the imperial court, requesting the imperial court to issue them a gold medal with a seal so that they could pay tribute to the imperial court, and sent Jiang Zhou back.

古文：前杨宜所遣郑舜功出海哨探者，行至丰后岛，岛主亦遣僧清授附舟来谢罪，言前后侵犯，皆中国奸商潜引诸岛夷众，义镇等实不知。
现代文：以前杨宜在任时，曾派遣郑舜功出海侦探情况，行到半后岛时，岛主也派僧人清授随船前来谢罪，说丰后岛有人为寇，前后侵犯中国，都是中国的奸商暗地里勾引各岛上的夷人引起的，源义镇等人实际上并不知晓。
English: In the past, when Yang Yi was in office, he had sent Zheng Bingong to go to sea to investigate the situation. When he went to the island, the island's owner also sent the monk Qing Zhu to come with the ship to apologize, saying that there were people on the island of Fenghou, invading China back and forth, all of which were caused by Chinese profiteers secretly seducing the barbarians on the islands. The people of Yuanyi Town and others did not actually know.

古文：于是宗宪疏陈其事，言： 洲奉使二年，止历丰后、山口二岛，或有贡物而无印信勘合，或有印信而无国王名称，皆违朝典。
现代文：这样一来，胡宗宪便上疏陈述这些情况，说： 蒋洲奉命出使二年来，只经过半后、山口两个岛屿，他们有的有贡物但没有经过勘合的印信，有的有印信却没有国王的名称，这些都是违反朝廷典章的。
English: As a result, Hu Zongxian made a brief statement of the situation, saying: In the two years since Jiang Zhou was ordered to send an envoy, he has only passed through the two islands of Huanhou and Yamaguchi. Some of them have tributes, but they do not have the seal of the king, and some of them do not have the name of the king. These are all in violation of the imperial edicts.

古文：然彼既以贡来，又送还被掠人口，实有畏罪乞恩意。
现代文：但是他们既然已前来献贡，又送还从中国掳掠去的人口，实在是有畏罪之心、请恩之意。
English: However, since they have come to pay tribute and return the people who were abducted from China, they really have a fear of sin and a sense of gratitude.

古文：宜礼遣其使，令传谕义镇、义长，转谕日本王，擒献倡乱诸渠，及中国奸宄，方许通贡。 
现代文：应该以礼遣送其使者回去，让他们谕告源义镇和源义长，要源义镇和源义长转告日本国王，让他将倡导将到中国作乱的诸渠长擒拿后献到朝廷，将逃到日本的中国奸宄之徒一并擒送到京都来，才答应与他们通贡贸易。 
English: Their envoys should be sent back with courtesy, and they should inform Yuan Yizhen and Yuan Yichang, and Yuan Yizhen and Yuan Yichang should tell the Japanese king, so that he will advocate the seizure of the canal barons who went to China to cause turmoil and present them to the imperial court, and send the Chinese traitors who fled to Japan to Kyoto together, before agreeing to pay tribute to trade with them.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：汪直之踞海岛也，与其党王滶、叶宗满、谢和、王清溪等，各挟倭寇为雄。
现代文：汪直盘踞在海岛上，与其党徒王氵敖、叶宗满、谢和和王清溪等人，各倚仗倭寇称雄。
English: Wang Zhiqin was stationed on the island, and he and his party members Wang Yao, Ye Zongman, Xie He and Wang Qingxi and others, each supported the wokou and claimed victory.

古文：朝廷至悬伯爵、万金之赏以购之，迄不能致。
现代文：朝廷甚至给他悬赏伯爵的爵位和黄金一万两，让他回来，他也不回。
English: The court even offered him a count's title and ten thousand taels of gold for his return, but he did not return.

古文：及是，内地官军颇有备，倭虽横，亦多被剿戮，有全岛无一人归者，往往怨直，直渐不自安。
现代文：到此时，内地的官军已颇有防备，倭贼虽然横行，亦多遭官军的剿戮，甚至还有全岛倭贼出来后竟没有一人生还的。于是倭贼往往埋怨汪直，汪直渐渐感到不安。
English: By this time, the government army in the mainland was already well prepared. Although the waka were rampant, they were often killed by the government army. Even after the whole island's waka came out, not a single person survived. As a result, the waka often complained about Wang Zhi, and Wang Zhi gradually felt uneasy.

古文：宗宪与直同郡，馆直母与其妻孥于杭州，遣蒋洲赍其家书招之。
现代文：胡宗宪与汪直同郡，便把汪直的母亲和家小都安置到杭州居住，派蒋洲持汪直的家书前去招抚汪直。
English: Hu Zongxian and Wang Zhizhi were from the same county, so he sent Wang Zhizhi's mother and children to live in Hangzhou, and sent Jiang Zhou to hold Wang Zhizhi's family letter to woo Wang Zhizhi.

古文：直知家属固无恙，颇心动。
现代文：汪直知道自己的家属平安无事后，颇为心动。
English: After Wang Zhi knew that his family members were safe and sound, he was quite moved.

古文：义镇等以中国许互市，亦喜。乃装巨舟，遣其属善妙等四十余人随直等来贡市，于三十六年十月初，抵舟山之岑港。
现代文：源义镇等人也因中国答应与他们互相开展贸易，也颇为高兴，于是他们装了一大船货，派其属下善妙等四十多人随汪直等人前来献贡和贸易，在三十六年十月初抵达舟山的岑港。
English: Yuan Yizhen and others were also quite happy because China promised to carry out trade with them, so they loaded a large shipload and sent more than forty people, including their subordinate Zhenmiao, to follow Wang Zhi and others to pay tribute and trade, and arrived at the port of Zhoushan in early October 36th.

古文：将吏以为入寇也，陈兵备。
现代文：当地的将吏以为是倭贼入寇，便陈兵防备。
English: The local generals thought it was a Japanese invasion, so they took precautions.

古文：直乃遣王滶入见宗宪，谓： 我以好来，何故陈兵待我？ 
现代文：汪直便派王氵敖去见胡宗宪，说： 我们是为通好而来的，为何布兵迎接我们？ 
English: Wang Zhi then sent Wang Yao to see Hu Zongxian, saying: "We have come for the sake of goodwill, why should the cloth soldiers welcome us?

古文：滶即毛海峰，直养子也。
现代文：王氵敖就是毛海峰，汪直的养子。
English: Wang Yao is Mao Haifeng, the adopted son of Wang Zhi.

古文：宗宪慰劳甚至，指心誓无他。
现代文：胡宗宪对他厚加慰劳，指心发誓没有其他意思。
English: Hu Zongxian consoled him and swore that he had no other intention.

古文：俄善妙等见副将卢镗于舟山，镗令擒直以献。
现代文：过了一会儿，善妙等人到舟山去拜见副将卢镗，卢镗让善妙把汪直拿住献给朝廷。
English: After a while, Zenmyo and others went to Zhoushan to visit Vice Admiral Lu Yao. Lu Yao asked Zenmyo to hold Wang Zhi to present him to the imperial court.

古文：语泄，直益疑。
现代文：此语泄露后，汪直更加疑虑。
English: After this was leaked, Wang Zhi was even more doubtful.

古文：宗宪开谕百方，直终不信，曰： 果尔，可遣滶出，吾当入见。 
现代文：胡宗宪百方开导，汪直始终不信，说： 果然像你所说的那样，可派王氵敖出来，我就登岸前来拜见。 
English: Hu Zongxian enlightened him in every possible way, but Wang Zhi still did not believe, saying: "It is indeed as you said, you can send Wang Xuan out, I will come ashore to see you."

古文：宗宪立遣之。
现代文：胡宗宪立刻把王氵敖遣送出来。
English: Hu Zongxian immediately sent Wang Yao away.

古文：直又邀一贵官为质，即命指挥夏正往。
现代文：汪直又邀一名贵官为人质，胡宗宪便命令指挥夏正前去。
English: Wang Zhi also invited a high-ranking official as a hostage, and Hu Zongxian then ordered commander Xia Zheng to go.

古文：直以为信，遂与宗满、清溪偕来。
现代文：汪直认为可信，便与叶宗满、王清溪一起来拜见。
English: Wang Zhi thought it was credible, so he came to visit together with Ye Zongman and Wang Qingxi.

古文：宗宪大喜，礼接之甚厚，令谒巡按御史王本固于杭州，本固以属吏。
现代文：胡宗宪大喜，对他们以厚礼相接，并让他们到杭州去拜谒巡按御史王本固，王本固则把汪直等人交给下属官吏处置。
English: Hu Zongxian was overjoyed, showered them with gifts, and told them to go to Hangzhou to pay homage to Wang Bengu, the inspector-general of the imperial court. Wang Bengu, in turn, handed Wang Zhi and others over to subordinate officials.

古文：滶等闻，大恨，支解夏正，焚舟登山，据岑港坚守。
现代文：王氵敖等人听到消息后，大恨，肢解了夏正，焚船登上山头，占据岑港。
English: After hearing the news, Wang Qian and others hated Xia Zheng, dismembered him, burned the ship, climbed the mountain, and occupied Da Nang.

古文：逾年，新倭大至，屡寇浙东三郡。
现代文：过了一年，新的倭寇大批涌来，屡次进犯浙东三个郡。
English: A year later, a large number of new wokou came and repeatedly attacked the three counties in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：其在岑港者，徐移之柯梅，造新舟出海，宗宪不之追。
现代文：岑港的倭贼便慢慢转移到柯梅，建造新船后出海，胡宗宪也不追击他们。
English: The Japanese pirates from Da Nang slowly moved to Gome, built a new ship and went to sea. Hu Zongxian did not pursue them.

古文：十一月，贼扬帆南去，泊泉州之浯屿，掠同安、惠安、南安诸县，攻福宁州，破福安、宁德。
现代文：十一月，倭贼扬帆往南而去，停泊在泉州的浯屿，抢劫同安、惠安、南安各县，攻打福宁州，攻破了福安、宁德等地。
English: In November, the Japanese pirates sailed south, anchored at Quanzhou's Lantau Island, robbed Tong'an, Hui'an, and Nan'an counties, attacked Funing Prefecture, and broke through Fu'an, Ningde, and other places.

古文：明年四月遂围福州，经月不解。
现代文：第二年四月倭贼包围了福州，时间长达一个多月。
English: In April of the following year, the Japanese besieged Fuzhou for more than a month.

古文：福清、永福诸城皆被攻毁，蔓延于兴化，奔突于漳州。
现代文：福清、永福各城也都遭倭寇攻毁，倭贼还骚扰兴化，在漳州地区奔突往来。
English: The cities of Fuqing and Yongfu were also attacked and destroyed by the Wokou, and the Wokou also harassed the Xinghua, rushing to and from the Zhangzhou area.

古文：其患尽移于福建，而潮、广间亦纷纷以倭警闻矣。
现代文：这样倭寇之患全转移到福建，而潮州、广州间也纷纷有倭警传来。
English: In this way, the wokou plague was completely transferred to Fujian, and wokou policemen also came from Chaozhou and Guangzhou.

古文：至四十年，浙东、江北诸寇以次平。
现代文：到四十年，浙东和长江以北的诸寇乱相继平定。
English: By the 40th year, the various rebellions in eastern Zhejiang and north of the Yangtze River were successively quelled.

古文：宗宪寻坐罪被逮。
现代文：胡宗宪不久因罪被逮捕下狱。
English: Hu Zongxian was soon arrested and jailed for the crime.

古文：明年十一月陷兴化府，大杀掠，移据平海卫不去。
现代文：第二年十一月，倭贼攻陷兴化府，进行大肆杀戮抢劫后，移居平海卫，不离开了。
English: In November of the following year, the Japanese invaded Xinghua Prefecture, and after killing and robbing a large number of people, they moved to Pinghaiwei and did not leave.

古文：初，倭之犯浙江也，破州县卫所城以百数，然未有破府城者。
现代文：当初，倭贼进犯浙江时，攻破州县卫所的城池数以百计，但却没有攻破府城的。
English: At first, when the Japanese invaded Zhejiang, they broke through hundreds of cities and towns of the prefectural health station, but they did not break through the capital city.

古文：至是，远近震动，亟征俞大猷、戚继光、刘显诸将合击，破之。
现代文：这次兴化府失陷，远近都受到极大震动，朝廷便急忙征调俞大猷、戚继光、刘显等将领合兵攻击，大败了倭贼。
English: This time, the fall of Xinghua was a great shock to both near and far, and the imperial court hurriedly recruited and dispatched generals such as Daxuan Daxuan, Qi Jiguang, Liu Xian and other generals to attack together, and defeated the Japanese invaders.

古文：其侵犯他州县者，亦为诸将所破，福建亦平。
现代文：而侵犯其他州县的倭贼也被各将攻破，福建的倭患也被平定了。
English: And the Japanese invaders who invaded other prefectures and counties were also defeated by each general, and the Japanese invasion in Fujian was also quelled.

古文：其后，广东巨寇曾一本、黄朝太等，无不引倭为助。
现代文：此后，广东的巨寇曾一本、黄朝太等人，无不勾引倭贼作为自己的援助。
English: Since then, Guangdong's giant kangaroos, the Yellow Emperor, and others have all lured the wafers as their own assistance.

古文：隆庆时，破碣石、甲子诸卫所。
现代文：隆庆时期，他们攻破了碣石、甲子等卫所。
English: At the height of the Qing Dynasty, they broke through the defense posts of Shanshi and Jiazi.

古文：已，犯化州石城县，陷锦囊所、神电卫。
现代文：之后，他们又进犯化州的石城县，攻陷锦囊所和神电所。
English: After that, they also invaded Shicheng County, Huazhou, and captured Jinzang Institute and Shendian Institute.

古文：吴川、阳江、茂名、海丰、新宁、惠来诸县，悉遭焚掠。
现代文：吴川、阳江、茂名、海丰、新宁、惠来各县，也都遭受他们的焚烧抢劫。
English: The counties of Wuchuan, Yangjiang, Maoming, Haifeng, Xinning and Huilai also suffered from their burning and looting.

古文：转入雷、谦、琼三郡境，亦被其患。
现代文：他们又转而进入雷州、廉州和琼州，这三郡也遭受其乱。
English: They then moved to Leizhou, Lianzhou and Qiongzhou, which were also affected by the turmoil.

古文：万历二年犯浙东宁、绍、台、温四郡，又陷广东铜鼓石双鱼所。
现代文：万历二年倭贼进犯浙东的宁波、绍兴、台州、温州四个郡，接着又攻陷广东的铜鼓石、双鱼所。
English: In the second year of Wanli, the Japanese invaders attacked Ningbo, Shaoxing, Taizhou and Wenzhou in eastern Zhejiang, followed by the capture of Tongzhuishi and Shuangsuisho in Guangdong.

古文：三年犯电白。
现代文：三年进犯电白。
English: Three years later, the electric white came.

古文：四年犯定海。
现代文：四年进犯定海。
English: It's been four years since the attack on Dinghai.

古文：八年犯浙江韭山及福建彭湖、东涌。
现代文：八年倭贼进犯浙江的韭山和福建的澎湖、东涌等地。
English: In eight years, the Japanese invaders invaded Lushan in Zhejiang and Penghu and Dongyung in Fujian.

古文：十年犯温州，又犯广东。
现代文：十年进犯温州，后来又进犯广东。
English: It invaded Wenzhou ten years ago, and later invaded Guangdong.

古文：十六年犯浙江。
现代文：十六年进犯浙江。
English: It has been 16 years since the invasion of Zhejiang.

古文：然时疆吏惩嘉靖之祸，海防颇饬，贼来辄失利。
现代文：但此时的海疆官吏已以嘉靖年间的祸乱引以为戒，海防颇为严密，倭贼来犯总是失利而回。
English: However, at this time, the coastal officials had already warned of the calamity of the Jiajing years, the coastal defense was quite strict, and the Japanese invaders always returned in defeat.

古文：其犯广东者，为蜒贼梁本豪勾引，势尤猖獗。
现代文：侵犯广东的倭贼，是受譙民梁本豪的勾引所致，势力尤为猖獗。
English: The Japanese invaders who invaded Guangdong were lured by Liang Benhao, a member of the Kuomintang, and their influence was particularly rampant.

古文：总督陈瑞集众军击之，斩首千六百余级，沈其船百余艘，本豪亦授首。
现代文：总督陈瑞集结各军攻击倭贼，斩杀了他们一千六百多人，击沉他们的船只一百余艘，梁本豪也被斩首。
English: Governor Chen Rui rallied the troops to attack the Japanese invaders, killing more than 1,600 of them and sinking more than 100 of their ships. Liang Benhao was also beheaded.

古文：帝为告谢郊庙，宣捷受贺云。
现代文：皇帝为此到郊庙告谢祖宗，宣告大捷并接受大臣们的祝贺。
English: To this end, the emperor went to the suburb temple to thank his ancestors, proclaim a great victory and accept the congratulations of the ministers.

古文：日本故有王，其下称关白者最尊，时以山城州渠信长为之。
现代文：日本以前有王，王之下最尊贵的是关白。此时山城州的渠长信长就是关白。
English: Japan used to have a king, and the most honorable person under the king was Kanpaku. At this time, the canal chief of Yamashiro Prefecture, Nobunaga, was Kanpaku.

古文：偶出猎，遇一人卧树下，惊起冲突，执而诘之。
现代文：有一天信长偶然出去狩猎，遇到一个人躺在树下，该人受惊后起来与信长发生冲突，信长把他抓起来审问。
English: One day, Nobunaga happened to go out hunting and met a man lying under a tree. The man was frightened and got up to clash with Nobunaga, who arrested and interrogated him.

古文：自言为平秀吉，萨摩州人之奴，雄健跷捷，有口辩。
现代文：该人自称是平秀吉，萨摩州人的奴隶，体魄雄健，身法矫捷，颇有辩才。
English: The man claimed to be TAIRA no Hideyoshi, a slave of the Satsuma people. He was physically strong, agile, and a skilled debater.

古文：信长悦之，令牧马，名曰木下人。
现代文：信长喜欢他，让他牧马，给他取名叫木下人。
English: Nobunaga liked him, let him herd horses, and named him Kinoshita.

古文：后渐用事，为信长画策，夺并二十余州，遂为摄津镇守大将。
现代文：后来渐渐让他办事，替信长出谋划策，夺取兼并了二十几个州，于是被信长委任为摄津的镇守大将。
English: Later, he gradually put him in charge of affairs, made suggestions for Nobunaga, conquered and annexed more than two dozen prefectures, and was appointed by Nobunaga as the town guard general of Regency.

古文：有参谋阿奇支者，得罪信长，命秀吉统兵讨之。
现代文：有个参谋叫阿奇支，因得罪了信长，信长便命令平秀吉带兵前去征讨。
English: There was a staff officer named Akichichi, who offended Nobunaga, and Nobunaga ordered TAIRA no Hideyoshi to go to the front with an army.

古文：俄信长为其下明智所杀，秀吉方攻灭阿奇支，闻变，与部将行长等乘胜还兵诛之，威名益振。
现代文：不久信长被其手下的大臣明智所杀。平秀吉刚好消灭了阿奇支，听说了事变后，与自己的部将行长等人乘胜回兵诛杀明智，于是威名更振。
English: Soon after, Nobunaga was killed by his subordinate minister, Akechi. After hearing of the incident, he and his minister, the governor, and others took advantage of the victory to fight against Akechi and kill Akechi. As a result, the prestige of Nobunaga was enhanced.

古文：寻废信长三子，僣称关白，尽有其众，时为万历十四年。
现代文：不久平秀吉废除了信长的三个儿子，自己称为关白，把信长的原有势力全收归到自己的手中，这时是万历十四年。
English: Soon after, TAIRA no Hideyoshi abolished Nobunaga's three sons, calling himself Kanshiro, and took all of Nobunaga's former power into his own hands. This was the 14th year of Wanli.

古文：于是益治兵，征服六十六州，又以威胁琉球、吕宋、暹罗、佛郎机诸国，皆使奉贡。
现代文：从此他更加整肃军队，征服了六十六个州，又以兵力威胁琉球、吕宋、暹罗、佛郎机等国，让这些国家给日本献贡。
English: Since then, he has further refined the army, conquered sixty-six states, and threatened countries such as Ryukyu, Luzon, Siam, and Flanders with troops, making these countries pay tribute to Japan.

古文：乃改国王所居山城为大阁，广筑城郭，建宫殿，其楼阁有至九重者，实妇女珍宝其中。
现代文：平秀吉又将国王所居的山城改为大阁，广筑城郭，兴建宫殿，其楼阁有建至九重的，其中珍藏有妇女和珍宝。
English: TAIRA no Hideyoshi also changed the mountain town where the king lived into a large castle, expanded the castle and built a palace. The castle was built up to nine stories high, including a collection of women and treasures.

古文：其用法严，军行有进无退，违者虽子婿必诛，以故所向无敌。
现代文：平秀吉行事法度森严，军队打仗有进无退，违反者不管是自己的儿子还是女婿都必诛死，所以他的军队所向无敌。
English: Taira no Hideyoshi had a strict code of conduct, and his army would fight to the bitter end. Anyone who violated this code, whether it was his son or his son-in-law, would be put to death. As a result, his army was invincible.

古文：乃改元文禄，并欲侵中国，灭朝鲜而有之。
现代文：平秀吉还将纪元改为文禄，想入侵中国，灭亡并占有朝鲜国。
English: Taira Hideyoshi also changed the era to Bunroku, wanted to invade China, perish and occupy Korea.

古文：召问故时汪直遗党，知唐人畏倭如虎，气益骄。
现代文：他召见并询问过以前汪直所留下的余党，了解到汉人像害怕虎狼一样害怕倭人，于是其气势益发骄横。
English: He summoned and interrogated the remnants of the party left behind by Wang Zhi, and learned that the Han feared the Japanese as much as they feared the tigers and wolves. As a result, his arrogance increased.

古文：益大治兵甲，缮舟舰，与其下谋，入中国北京者用朝鲜人为导，入浙、闽沿海郡县者用唐人为导。
现代文：他大治武器，扩军备战，修缮船舰，与其属下谋划，入侵中国北京的用朝鲜人做向导，入侵浙江、福建沿海郡县的则用汉人做向导。
English: He dealt with weapons, expanded armaments, repaired ships, and planned with his subordinates. He used North Koreans as guides to invade Beijing, China, and Han Chinese as guides to invade the coastal counties of Zhejiang and Fujian.

古文：虑琉球泄其情，使毋入贡。
现代文：他怕琉球会泄露该密谋，不让琉球向明朝廷献贡。
English: He was afraid that Ryukyu would reveal the plot and would not allow Ryukyu to pay tribute to the Ming court.

古文：同安人陈甲者，商于琉球。
现代文：有个同安人名叫陈甲，在琉球经商。
English: There is a Tongan named Chen Jia who does business in Ryukyu.

古文：惧为中国害，与琉球长史郑迥谋，因进贡请封之使，具以其情来告。
现代文：他怕遭到中国的迫害，便与琉球长史郑迥谋划，借进贡之际请求朝廷封他为使者，把日本国的情况上报朝廷。
English: He was afraid of being persecuted by China, so he plotted with the Ryukyuan chief historian Zheng Yao, and asked the court to appoint him as an envoy to report the situation in Japan to the court on the occasion of paying tribute.

古文：甲又旋故乡，陈其事于巡抚赵参鲁。
现代文：陈甲又回故乡，将此情况告诉了巡抚赵参鲁。
English: Chen Jia returned to his hometown and reported the situation to the inspector Zhao Sanlu.

古文：参鲁以闻，下兵部，部移咨朝鲜王。
现代文：赵参鲁将此上奏给皇帝，皇帝交给兵部，兵部则移咨文给朝鲜国王。
English: Zhao Sanlu reported this to the emperor, the emperor handed it to the military department, and the military department transferred the message to the Korean king.

古文：王但深辨向导之诬，亦不知其谋己也。
现代文：朝鲜国王却只辩解说所谓以朝鲜人为日本人入侵北京做向导是诬陷，也不知道日本人正在谋划吞并自己的国家。
English: The King of Korea, however, only defended that the so-called use of Koreans as guides for the Japanese invasion of Beijing was a frame-up, and did not know that the Japanese were planning to annex their own country.

古文：初，秀吉广征诸镇兵，诸三岁粮，欲自将以犯中国。
现代文：原先，平秀吉广泛征集各镇的军队，储备了三年的粮食，想自己带兵进犯中国。
English: Originally, Taira Hideyoshi extensively conscripted troops from various towns, stockpiled three years of grain, and wanted to invade China with his own troops.

古文：会其子死，旁无兄弟。
现代文：此时正好碰上他的儿子死亡，身旁又没有兄弟可以托付。
English: His son had just died, and he didn't have a brother to entrust him to.

古文：前夺丰后岛主妻为妾，虑其为后患。
现代文：此前平秀吉又将丰后岛的主妻夺来做自己的妾，怕丰后岛成为自己的后患。
English: Prior to this, Taira Hideyoshi also took the main wife of Toyohado Island to be his concubine, fearing that Toyohado Island would become his successor.

古文：而诸镇怨秀吉暴虐，咸曰： 此举非袭大唐，乃袭我耳。 
现代文：而各镇也都埋怨平秀吉为人暴虐，都说： 这次征兵不是去袭击大唐，而是袭击我们哪。 
English: And all the towns also complained that Taira Hideyoshi was a tyrant, saying: This conscription is not to attack Datang, but to attack us.

古文：各怀异志。
现代文：于是心里各怀异志。
English: As a result, they had different ideas in their hearts.

古文：由是，秀吉不敢亲行。
现代文：于是，平秀吉不敢亲自带兵出国作战。
English: As a result, TAIRA no Hideyoshi dared to personally lead troops to fight abroad.

古文：二十年四月遣其将清正、行长、义智，僧玄苏、宗逸等，将舟师数百艘，由对马岛渡海陷朝鲜之釜山，乘胜长驱，以五月渡临津，掠开城，分陷丰德诸郡。
现代文：二十年四月，平秀吉派遣他手下的大将清正、行长和义智，以及僧人玄苏、宗逸等，率战船数百艘，从对马岛渡海攻陷了朝鲜的釜山，然后乘胜长驱直入，五月渡过临津，劫掠开城，分别攻陷丰德各郡。
English: In April of the 20th year, Ping Hideyoshi dispatched his generals, including Qing Zheng, Guzheng, and Yizhi, as well as the monks Xuan Su and Zong Yat, and led hundreds of warships to cross the sea from the island of Tsushima to capture Busan in Korea, and then drove straight into the victorious Long March. In May, he crossed the Imjin, plundered Kaesong, and separately captured the counties of Funde.

古文：朝鲜望风溃，清正等遂偪王京。
现代文：朝鲜军队望风溃逃，清正等人便进逼王京。
English: The North Korean army tried to escape, but Qing Zheng and others entered Wangjing.

古文：朝鲜王李昖弃城奔平壤，又奔义州，遣使络绎告急。
现代文：朝鲜国王李日公放弃王京逃奔到平壤，后又逃奔到义州，派使臣络绎不绝地向明朝廷告急。
English: North Korean King Ri Il Gung abandoned Wangjing and fled to Pyongyang, and later to Yizhou, sending a steady stream of envoys to the Ming court.

古文：倭遂入王京，执其王妃、王子，追奔至平壤，放兵淫掠。
现代文：倭军于是进入王京，俘虏了朝鲜国的王妃和王子，并追击到平壤，让士兵肆行淫掠。
English: The Wa army then entered Wangjing, captured the princess and prince of Korea, and chased them to Pyongyang, letting the soldiers run amok.

古文：七月命副总兵祖承训赴援，与倭战于平壤城外，大败，承训仅以身免。
现代文：七月，明朝廷命令副总兵祖承训赴朝鲜救援，与倭军在平壤城外接战，结果大败，只祖承训一人幸免于死。
English: In July, the Ming court ordered the vice-commander-in-chief Zou Chengxun to go to North Korea to rescue and engage the Japanese army outside Pyongyang. The result was a crushing defeat, and only Zou Chengxun survived.

古文：八月，中朝乃以兵部侍郎宋应昌为经略，都督李如松为提督，统兵讨之。
现代文：八月，朝廷便任命兵部侍郎宋应昌为经略，都督李如松为提督，率军前往朝鲜讨伐倭人。
English: In August, the imperial court appointed Song Yingchang, the secretary of the military department, as the strategist, and the governor Li Rousong as the admiral, and led the army to Korea to fight the Japanese.

古文：当是时，宁夏未平，朝鲜事起，兵部尚书石星计无所出，募能说倭者侦之，于是嘉兴人沈惟敬应募。
现代文：正当此时，宁夏之乱未平，而朝鲜的战事又起，兵部尚书石星无计可施，便招募能说服倭人退兵之人前去侦探倭军的虚实，于是嘉兴人沈惟敬便应募。
English: At this very time, the Ningxia Rebellion was still raging, and the Korean War was raging again. With no way out, the War Department recruited someone who could persuade the Japanese to leave the army to go and investigate the truth and falsehood of the Japanese army. So Jiaxing man Shen Wei Jing volunteered.

古文：星即假游击将军衔，送之如松麾下。
现代文：石星即刻给他假封了一个游击将军的头衔，将他送到李如松的麾下听用。
English: Shi Xing immediately gave him a fake title of a guerrilla general and sent him to Li Rusong's command.

古文：明年，如松师大捷于平壤，朝鲜所失四道并复。
现代文：第二年，李如松的军队在平壤大捷，朝鲜国所失去的四个道一并被收复。
English: The following year, Ri Ryong Song's army won a great victory in Pyongyang, and the four provinces lost by North Korea were all recovered.

古文：如松乘胜趋碧蹄馆，败而退师。
现代文：李如松乘胜进军到碧蹄馆，因失败而退军。
English: Li Rousong marched into Bijie Pavilion with victory, but withdrew due to defeat.

古文：于是封贡之议起，中朝弥缝惟敬以成款局，事详《朝鲜传》。
现代文：于是朝廷中封贡的议论又起，朝廷为补救军事上的阙失便让沈惟敬调解成和局，此事详见本书《朝鲜传》。
English: As a result, the discussion of the tribute in the imperial court began again. In order to remedy the military blunder, the imperial court asked Shen Wei Jing to mediate a peace settlement. This matter is detailed in the book "History of Korea."

古文：久之，秀吉死，诸倭扬帆尽归，朝鲜患亦平。
现代文：时间一久，平秀吉死，诸倭军都扬帆回国，朝鲜之患也平息了。
English: After a long time, Taira Hideyoshi died, all the Japanese troops sailed back home, and the troubles in Korea subsided.

古文：然自关白侵东国，前后七载，丧师数十万糜饷数百万，中朝与朝鲜迄无胜算。
现代文：但是自从关白侵略东边国家开始，前后七年，丧失军队数十万人，花费粮饷钱财数百万，而明朝廷和朝鲜国的损失至今还无法算清。
English: However, in the seven years since the Kuomintang-Bai invasion of the eastern countries began, hundreds of thousands of troops have been lost, millions of grain and money have been spent, and the losses of the Ming Dynasty and the Korean country have not yet been calculated.

古文：至关白死，兵祸始休，诸倭亦皆退守岛巢，东南稍有安枕之日矣。
现代文：到关白死亡，兵祸才停息，诸路倭军也都退回岛内守巢，东南地区这才稍有安枕之日。
English: It was not until the death of Guan Bai that the war came to an end, and all the Wa troops retreated to the island to guard their nests. Only then did the southeastern region find some peace.

古文：秀吉凡再传而亡。终明之世，通倭之禁甚严，闾巷小民，至指倭相詈骂，甚以噤其小儿女云。
现代文：纵览整个明代，不与倭人来往的禁令一直很严，以至闾巷中的百姓互相争执时都责骂对方是倭贼，有的还拿倭贼来恫吓自己不听话的小儿女。
English: Throughout the entire Ming Dynasty, the ban on contact with the Japanese was very strict, so much so that when the people in the streets argued with each other, they scolded each other for being Japanese thieves, and some even used Japanese thieves to intimidate their disobedient children.

