古文：徐禧高永能沈起刘彝熊本萧注陶弼林广徐禧，字德占，洪州分宁人。
现代文：徐禧字德占，洪州分宁人。
English: Xu Xiyi is from Dezhan and Hongzhou is from Fening.

古文：少有志度，博览周游，以求知古今事变、风俗利疚，不事科举。
现代文：年青时有志向，博览群书周游各地，以求知古今事变、风俗利弊，不事科举。
English: When he was young, he had an ambition to travel all over the country with a large number of books, in order to learn about the past and present events, customs, advantages and disadvantages, and to study science.

古文：熙宁初，王安石行新法，禧作《治策》二十四篇以献。时吕惠卿领修撰经义局，遂以布衣充检讨。
现代文：熙宁初年，王安石颁行新法，徐禧写《治策》二十四篇进献，当时吕惠卿管领修撰经义局，徐禧于是以布衣的身份充当检讨。
English: In the first year of Xining, Wang Anshi promulgated the new law, and Xu Xi wrote 24 articles of "Policy" as a contribution. At that time, Lu Huiqing was in charge of the study of the Bureau of Justice, and Xu Xi acted as a reviewer in the capacity of cloth.

古文：神宗见其所上策，曰： 禧言朝廷用经术变士，十已八九，然窃袭人之语，不求心通者相半，此言是也。
现代文：神宗见到他所上的策论，说： 徐禧说朝廷用经术变士，已收到十之八九的功效，但这些人中，但偷袭他人之语，不求心灵相通占到半，这话是对的。
English: Seeing his strategy, Shenzong said, "Xu Xiyi was right when he said that the imperial court had used the art of magic to transform people, and had received 89% of the results. However, among these people, he did not ask for the spiritual connection to account for half, but secretly attacked the words of others.

古文：宜试于有用之地。 即授镇安军节度推官、中书户房习学公事。
现代文：应试任于有用之地。 随即被授任镇安军节度推官、中书户房习学公事。
English: He should be assigned to a useful place on a trial basis, and was immediately appointed as the commander of the Zhen'an Army and the official in charge of public affairs.

古文：岁余召对，顾问久之，曰： 朕多阅人，未见有如卿者。 擢太子中允、馆阁校勘、监察御史里行。
现代文：一年之后皇帝召对，询问了很长时间，说： 朕省视过很多人，没有见到有像你这样的。 升任太子中允、馆阁校勘、监察御史里行。
English: A year later, the emperor summoned him, questioned him for a long time, and said, "I have seen many people in our province, but I have never seen anyone like you.

古文：与中丞邓绾、知谏院范百禄杂治赵世居狱。
现代文：徐禧与御史中丞邓绾、知谏院范百禄共同处理赵世居狱案。
English: Xu Xiyi jointly handled the Zhao Shijiu prison case with the Imperial Historian of the Central Military Commission, Deng Xi, and Fan Bailu of Zhiyuan.

古文：李士宁者，挟术出入贵人间，尝见世居母康，以仁宗御制诗赠之。
现代文：有叫李士宁的，挟持方术出入地位贵显的人之间，曾见赵世居的母亲康，以仁宗御制诗赠给她。
English: There was a man named Li Shining, who held the position of the most important person in the world, who once saw Zhao Shiju's mother Kang, and gave her a poem composed by Emperor Renzong.

古文：又许世居以宝刀，且曰： 非公不可当此。 世居与其党皆神之，曰： 士宁，二三百岁人也。 解释其诗，以为至宝之祥。
现代文：又答应给世居宝刀，而且说： 非你不能当受这把宝刀。 赵世居与他的党羽都以之为神异，说： 李士宁是二三百岁的人。 解释他所赠的诗，认为它是至宝之祥。
English: He also promised to give Seju a precious sword, and said, "Only if you can't be worthy of this precious sword." Zhao Seju and his followers all regarded it as miraculous, saying, "Ri Shining is a two- or three-hundred-year-old man." He interpreted the poem he gave as the greatest treasure.

古文：及鞫世居得之，逮捕士宁，而宰相王安石故与士宁善，百禄劾士宁以妖妄惑世居，致不轨。
现代文：等到审讯赵世居时得到此诗，逮捕李士宁，但宰相王安石以前与李士宁友善，范百禄弹劾李士宁以妖妄迷惑赵世居，导致他越出常轨。
English: It was not until the trial of Zhao Shiju that he obtained this poem and arrested Li Shining. However, the Prime Minister Wang Anshi had previously been friendly with Li Shining, and Fan Bailu impeached Li Shining for confusing Zhao Shiju with delusions, causing him to deviate from the normal course.

古文：禧奏： 士宁遗康诗实仁宗制，今狱官以为反，臣不敢同。 百禄言： 士宁有可死之状，禧故出之以媚大臣。 朝廷以御史杂知、枢密承旨参治，而百禄坐报上不实贬，进禧集贤校理、检正礼房。
现代文：徐禧上奏： 李士宁赠给康的诗确实是仁宗御制诗，现在狱官认为李士宁谋反，我不敢苟同。 范百禄说： 李士宁有可死的罪状，徐禧故意开脱他以献媚大臣。 朝廷以御史杂知、枢密承旨参加处理，而范百禄因上报不实贬官，提升徐禧为集贤校理、检正礼房。
English: Xu Xiyi played up: The poem presented to Kang by Li Shining is indeed a poem of the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty, and now the prison officer thinks that Li Shining is plotting a rebellion, I can't agree. Fan Bailu said: Li Shining has a mortal sin, Xu Xiyi deliberately acquitted him as a minister of flattery. The imperial court participated in the handling with miscellaneous knowledge of history and secret orders, and Fan Bailu demoted the official because of the false report, and promoted Xu Xiyi to the collection of scholars and proofreaders and the procurator's office.

古文：安石与惠卿交恶，邓绾言惠卿昔居父丧，尝贷华亭富人钱五百万买田事，诏禧参鞫。
现代文：王安石与吕惠卿感情破裂互相憎恶仇恨，邓绾说吕惠卿过去居父丧时，曾借贷华亭富人五百万的钱买田，诏令徐禧参予审讯。
English: Wang Anshi and Lord Lv Hui had an emotional rupture of mutual hatred. Deng Yao said that Lord Lv Hui had borrowed five million yuan from a wealthy man in Huating to buy a field when his father passed away, and ordered Xu Xiyi to attend the trial.

古文：禧阴右惠卿，绾劾之，会绾贬官，狱亦解。
现代文：徐禧暗中庇护吕惠卿，邓绾弹劾他，恰逢邓绾贬官，于是狱案也被解除。
English: Xu Xiyi secretly sheltered Lyu Huiqing, Deng Yao impeached him, which coincided with Deng Yao's demotion, so the prison case was also dismissed.

古文：禧出为荆湖北路转运副使。
现代文：徐禧出任荆湖北路转运副使。
English: Xu Xiyi served as deputy envoy of Jinghu North Road Transportation.

古文：元丰初，召知谏院。
现代文：元丰初年，召为知谏院。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, he was summoned to Chihakuin.

古文：惠卿在鄜延，欲更蕃汉兵战守条约，诸老将不谓然，帝颇采听，将推其法于他路，遣禧往经画。
现代文：吕惠卿在延，打算改变蕃汉兵战守条约，众老将不以为然，皇帝却颇为采纳听取，将要在他路推行他的办法，派徐禧前往经划。
English: Lu Huixing in Yan, intends to change the Sino-Chinese soldiers' defense treaty, the veterans are not convinced, but the emperor is quite receptive to listen, will be in his way to promote his approach, send Xu Xie to the economic planning.

古文：禧是惠卿议，渭帅蔡延庆亦以为不然，帝召延庆还，加禧直龙图阁，使往代，以母忧不行。
现代文：徐禧肯定吕惠卿的意见，渭州主帅蔡延庆也不以为然，皇帝就把蔡延庆召回朝廷，加徐禧官直龙图阁，让他前往代替延庆，因母亲去世没能行成。
English: Xu Xiyi affirmed the opinion of Lv Huiqing, and Zhangzhou coach Cai Yanqing also disagreed. The emperor recalled Cai Yanqing to the court, and added Xu Xiyi's official Jilong Tu Ge to replace Yanqing, which could not be done due to his mother's death.

古文：服除，召试知制诰兼御史中丞。
现代文：丧期满，召试知制诰兼御史中丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was summoned to serve as Chisei Shosho and Goshi Chujo.

古文：官制行，罢知制诰，专为中丞。
现代文：元丰新官制颁行，解除知制诰之职，专为御史中丞。
English: The new official system was promulgated in Yuanfeng, and the post of secretary was abolished, and the post of vice-minister of history was created.

古文：邓绾守长安，禧疏其过，帝知其以惠卿故，虽改绾青州，亦左迁禧给事中。
现代文：邓绾镇守长安，徐禧分条陈述邓绾的过错，皇帝知道这是因为吕惠卿的缘故，虽然改邓绾守青州，也把徐禧降职为给事中。
English: The emperor knew that this was because of Lü Huiqing. Although he changed Deng Qian to the governor of Qingzhou, he also demoted Xu Xian to a subordinate position.

古文：种谔西讨，得银、夏、宥三州而不能守。
现代文：种谔西讨，夺得银、夏、宥三州但不能把守。
English: In the West Indies Test, they won the Silver, Summer and Youth trophies but were unable to retain the trophy.

古文：延帅沈括欲尽城横山，瞰平夏，城永乐，诏禧与内侍李舜举往相其事，令括总兵以从，李稷主馈饷。
现代文：延州主帅沈括打算在横山全部修筑城墙，俯瞰平夏，筑永乐城，诏令徐禧与内侍李舜举前去视其事，命令沈括总兵以从，李稷负责供应粮饷。
English: Shen Kuo, the commander-in-chief of Yanzhou, planned to build all the city walls in Hengshan, overlooking Pingxia, and build Yongle City. He ordered Xu Xi and his servant Li Qian to go ahead and take it as it is, ordered Shen Kuo's soldiers to follow, and Li Qian was responsible for supplying grain.

古文：禧言： 银州虽据明堂川、无定河之会，而故城东南已为河水所吞，其西北又阻天堑，实不如永乐之形势险厄。
现代文：徐禧说： 银州虽然据明堂川、无定河交汇之处，但旧城东南已被水所吞没，其西北又为天堑所阻，实在不如永乐的形势险阻。
English: Xu Xiyi said: Although Yinzhou is located at the confluence of the Myeongdong River and the Muding River, the southeast of the old city has been engulfed by water, and its northwest is blocked by natural obstacles. It is really not as dangerous as the situation in Yongle.

古文：窃惟银、夏、宥三州，陷没百年，一日兴复，于边将事功，实为俊伟，军锋士气，固已百倍；但建州之始，烦费不赀。
现代文：私下认为银、夏、宥三州，在陷没一百年之后，一日兴复，这在边将事功中，确实是俊伟之功，军锋士气，固然已藉此增长百倍；但是若在此置州，则建州之始，烦杂费用不可计量。
English: Privately, it is believed that the three states of Yin, Xia, and Yu, after being trapped for a hundred years, recovered one day, which is indeed a great achievement in the general's deeds, and the morale of the soldiers, of course, has increased a hundredfold; however, if the state is established here, it is the beginning of the establishment of the state, and the troublesome costs are immeasurable.

古文：若选择要会，建置堡栅，名虽非州，实有其地，旧来疆塞，乃在腹心。
现代文：如果选择要会，建置堡栅，名义上虽然不是州，实际上拥有其地，旧有的疆土边塞，仍在腹心。
English: If you choose to be, build a fortress, although not a state in name, but actually own its land, the old territory, the border fortress, is still in the bosom.

古文：已与沈括议筑砦堡各六。
现代文：已经与沈括商议修筑砦堡各六个。
English: It has negotiated with Shen Guanzhong to build six forts each.

古文：砦之大者周九百步，小者五百步，堡之大者二百步，小者百步，用工二十三万。 遂城永乐，十四日而成。
现代文：大砦周围九百步，小砦五百步；大堡周围二百步，小堡一百步，用工二十三万个。 于是修筑永乐城，十四天而修成。
English: There were nine hundred paces around the big fort and five hundred paces around the small fort; two hundred paces around the big fort and one hundred paces around the small fort, with a total of 230,000 workers.

古文：禧、括、舜举还米脂。
现代文：徐禧、沈括、李舜举回到米脂。
English: Xu Xiyi, Shen Quan and Li Yijie returned to Mizhi.

古文：明日，夏兵数千骑趋新城，禧亟往视之。
现代文：第二天，几千西夏骑兵直赴新城，徐禧及时前去视察。
English: The next day, several thousand Western Xia cavalry went straight to Xincheng, and Xu Xiyi went to inspect in time.

古文：或说禧曰： 初被诏相城，御寇，非职也。 禧不听，与舜举、稷俱行，括独守米脂。
现代文：有人劝徐禧说 ：开始你只是受诏命辅佐筑城，抵御敌人，不是你的职责。 徐禧没有听从，与李舜举、李稷一起前行，沈括独自镇守米脂。
English: Some people advised Xu Xiyi, saying, "In the beginning, you were only ordered by the emperor to assist in the construction of the city, and it is not your duty to resist the enemy." Xu Xiyi did not listen, and went ahead with Li Shanzhu and Li Xi, but remained alone to guard Mizhi.

古文：先是，种谔还自京师，极言城永乐非计，禧怒变色，谓谔曰： 君独不畏死乎？
现代文：先是，种谔从京城返回，极言修筑永乐城不是计谋，徐禧发怒变色，对种谔说 ：你独独不怕死吗？
English: First of all, when Zeng Yao returned from Beijing, he said that the construction of Yongle City was not a trick. Xu Xiyi became angry and said to Zeng Yao, "Aren't you afraid of dying alone?"

古文：敢误成事。 谔曰： 城之必败，败则死，拒节制亦死；死于此，犹愈于丧国师而沦异域也。 禧度不可屈，奏谔跋扈异议，诏谔守延州。
现代文：敢误成功之事。 种谔说 ：筑城必败，败则死，抗拒上级节制也是死；因此而死，总算强过丧失国家军队而沦陷异国。 徐禧估计种谔不可屈服，上奏种谔专横跋扈持不同意见，诏命种谔留守延州。
English: He dared not mistake success. Zong Yao said: Building a city is sure to fail, failure is death, resisting the superior restraint is also death; therefore, death is ultimately stronger than losing the national army and falling into a foreign country. Xu Xi estimated that Zong Yao could not give in, Zong Yao imperiously held different opinions, and ordered Zong Yao to stay in Yanzhou.

古文：夏兵二十万屯泾原北，闻城永乐，即来争边。
现代文：西夏兵二十万驻扎在泾原北，听说在永乐修筑城墙，就来争夺边地。
English: Two hundred thousand Western Xia soldiers were stationed in the north of Yuyuan. Hearing that the city wall was being built in Yongle, they came to fight for the borderland.

古文：人驰告者十数，禧等皆不之信，曰： 彼若大来，是吾立功取富贵之秋也。 禧亟赴之，大将高永享曰： 城小人寡，又无水，不可守。 禧以为沮众，欲斩之，既而械送延狱。
现代文：驰马来报告的有十多人，徐禧等人都不相信，说 ：它如果大举而来，这是我立功取得富贵的日子。 徐禧急忙赶到永乐城，大将高永亨说 ：城小人少，又没有水，不能驻守。 徐禧认为这是沮丧士气，打算斩杀高永亨，不久把他拘系送入延州监狱。
English: There were more than ten people who came to report on horseback, but Xu Xi and others did not believe them, saying: "If it comes in a big way, this is the day when I make merit and get rich." Xu Xi hurried to Yongle City, and General Gao Yongheng said: "The city has few villains, and there is no water, so it cannot be garrisoned." Xu Xi thought that this was a depressed morale, and planned to kill Gao Yongheng, and soon sent him to Yanzhou Prison.

古文：比至，夏兵倾国而至，永享兄永能请及其未陈击之。
现代文：等到达永乐，西夏兵倾国而至，高永亨的兄长高永能请求趁西夏没有列阵前袭击。
English: After arriving in Yongle, soldiers from Western Xia invaded the country, and Gao Yongheng's brother Gao Yongnang requested to take advantage of Western Xia's absence to attack.

古文：禧曰： 尔何知，王师不鼓不成列。 禧执刀自率士卒拒战。
现代文：徐禧说： 你知不知道，王师不鼓不成列。 徐禧亲自持刀率领士兵拒战。
English: Xu Xiyi said: Do you know that Wang Shifu did not drum and did not line up. Xu Xiyi personally led the soldiers to refuse to fight with a knife.

古文：夏人益众，分阵迭攻抵城下。
现代文：西夏人越来越多分成阵式，轮番攻击抵到永乐城下。
English: The Xixia people are increasingly divided into formations, and the attacks arrive at the foot of Yongle Castle.

古文：曲珍兵陈于水际，官军不利，将士皆有惧色。
现代文：曲珍在水滨列阵对敌，与西夏军交战不利，将士均面带惧色。
English: Qu Zhen lined up against the enemy on the waterfront, and the battle with the Western Xia Army was unfavorable, and the soldiers were scared.

古文：珍白禧曰： 今众心已摇，不可战，战必败，请收兵入城。 禧曰： 君为大将，奈何遇敌不战，先自退邪？ 俄夏骑卒度水犯陈。
现代文：曲珍报告徐禧说： 现在众人的斗志已动摇，不能战斗，战必败，请收兵入城。 徐禧说 ：你身为大将，怎么遇敌不战，自己先退却呢？ 不一会儿西夏骑兵渡水进犯宋兵兵阵。
English: Qu Zhen reported Xu Xiyi said: Now everyone's fighting spirit has been shaken, unable to fight, the battle will be defeated, please gather troops to enter the city. Xu Xiyi said: As a general, how can you meet the enemy without fighting, and retreat first? Soon the Western Xia cavalry crossed the water to invade the Song soldiers.

古文：鄜延选锋军最为骁锐，皆一当百，银枪锦袄，光彩耀日，先接战而败，奔入城，蹂后陈。
现代文：延先锋军最为骁勇锋锐，都是以一当百，银枪锦袄，光彩耀目，首先接战而败，奔走入城，践踏后阵。
English: Yan's vanguard army was the most courageous and sharp, all of them with a hundred talents, silver gun brocade, dazzling brilliance, first engaged in battle and defeated, rushed into the city, trampled on the rear.

古文：夏人乘之，师大溃，死及弃甲南奔者几半。
现代文：西夏人乘胜追击，宋军大溃败，死亡及弃甲而南逃的几乎占据了一半。
English: The Xixia people took advantage of the victory to pursue, the Song army was defeated, and the deaths and abandonment of the south occupied almost half of the south.

古文：珍与残兵入城，崖峻径窄，骑卒缘崖而上，丧马八千匹，遂受围。
现代文：曲珍与残兵入城，崖险峻路窄小，骑兵沿崖而上，丧失八千匹马，于是被西夏兵围困。
English: Qu Zhen and the remaining soldiers entered the city, the steep cliff road was narrow, the cavalry went up along the cliff, lost eight thousand horses, and was then besieged by the Western Xia soldiers.

古文：水砦为夏人所据，掘井不及泉，士卒渴死者太半。
现代文：水砦为西夏人所占据，挖井不及泉水，士兵渴死的人过半数。
English: The water fort was occupied by the Xixia people, the wells were less than spring water, and more than half of the soldiers died of thirst.

古文：夏人蚁附登城，尚扶创拒斗。
现代文：夏人像蚂蚁一样附墙登城，曲珍还带伤拒敌战斗。
English: Xia Ren climbed the city wall like an ant, and Qu Zhen still refused to fight the enemy with injuries.

古文：珍度不可敌，又白禧，请突围而南；永能亦劝李稷尽捐金帛，募死士力战以出，皆不听。
现代文：曲珍估计不能抵挡，又报告徐禧，请求突围而南走；高永能也劝李稷全部捐出金钱布帛，招募敢死勇士力战以突围，都不听从。
English: Qu Zhen estimated that he could not resist, and reported to Xu Xiyi, asking him to break out of the encirclement and go south; Gao Yongnang also advised Li Xi to donate all the money and cloth, and recruit brave warriors to fight to break out of the encirclement, but they did not listen.

古文：戊戌夜大雨，城陷，四将走免，禧、舜举、稷死之，永能没于陈。
现代文：晚上天下大雨，永乐城陷落，四将逃走免去一死，徐禧、李舜举、李稷死亡，高永能也死在战场上。
English: In the evening, it rained heavily, Yongle Castle fell, and the four generals fled to avoid death. Xu Xiyi, Li Yiju, and Li Yao died, and Gao Yongnang also died on the battlefield.

古文：初，括奏夏兵来逼城，见官兵整，故还。
现代文：开始，沈括上奏西夏兵来逼近永乐城，见官兵严整，所以返归。
English: At the beginning, the Western Xia soldiers came to approach Yongle City, and the officers and soldiers were strict, so they returned.

古文：帝曰： 括料敌疏矣，彼来未出战，岂肯遽退邪、必有大兵在后。 已而果然。
现代文：皇帝说 ：沈括料敌疏浅，彼来没有出战，怎肯马上退走呢？一定有大兵在后。 不久果然如此。
English: The emperor said, "Shen Parenthesis's enemies are few and far between, and since he did not go to war, how could he retreat immediately? There must be a large number of soldiers behind him." This was soon to be the case.

古文：帝闻禧等死，涕泣悲愤，为之不食。
现代文：皇帝听说徐禧等死亡，涕泣悲愤，为之吃不下饭。
English: When the emperor heard of the death of Xu Xiyi and others, he was so sad and angry that he could not eat.

古文：赠禧金紫光禄大夫、吏部尚书，谥曰忠愍。
现代文：赠徐禧为金紫光禄大夫、吏部尚书，谥号叫 忠愍 。
English: Xu Xiyi was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and the title of Shang Shu of the Ministry of Personnel. His posthumous name was Zhong Rong.

古文：官其家二十人。
现代文：以其家二十人为官。
English: Twenty members of his family became officials.

古文：稷工部侍郎，官其家十二人。
现代文：赠李稷为工部侍郎，以其家十二人为官。
English: He was given the title of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, and twelve members of his family became officials.

古文：禧疏旷有胆略，好谈兵，每云西北可唾手取，恨将帅怯尔。
现代文：徐禧粗犷有胆略，喜欢谈论兵事，每每说西北可以唾手而取，恨将帅怯懦。
English: Xu Xiyi is coarse and daring. He likes to talk about military affairs. Whenever he says that the northwest can be taken by surprise, he hates the general's cowardice.

古文：吕惠卿力引之，故不次用。
现代文：吕惠卿极力引荐他，所以得到越级任用。
English: Lu Huixing strongly recommended him, so he was promoted to a higher rank.

古文：自灵武之败，秦、晋困棘，天下企望息兵，而沈括、种谔陈进取之策。
现代文：自从灵武之败，秦、晋困急，天下企望停止用兵，但沈括、种谔陈述进取的策略。
English: Since the defeat of Lingwu, Qin and Jin have been in dire straits, and the whole world hopes to stop the use of soldiers, but the strategy of calming down and planting seeds is the best strategy.

古文：禧素以边事自任，狂谋轻敌，猝与强虏遇，至于覆没。
现代文：徐禧向来以边事自任，狂谋轻敌，突然与强大的敌人相遇，以至于全军覆没。
English: Xu Xiyi has always taken matters into his own hands, recklessly trifling with the enemy, and suddenly encountering a powerful enemy, so that the whole army was wiped out.

古文：自是之后，帝始知边臣不可信倚，深自悔咎，遂不复用兵，无意于西伐矣。
现代文：从此之后，皇帝才知道边臣不可以信任倚重，深自后悔自责，于是不再用兵，无意于对西讨伐了。
English: From then on, the emperor knew that the vassals could not be trusted and deeply regretted and blamed himself, so he no longer used soldiers and had no intention of fighting against the West.

古文：子俯自有传。
现代文：儿子徐俯自己有传。
English: His son Xu Pui has his own legend.

古文：李稷，字长卿，邛州人。
现代文：李稷字长卿，邛州人。
English: Li Shanzhong, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：父绚，龙图阁直学士。
现代文：父亲李绚，龙图阁直学士。
English: Her father, Li Huan, is a graduate of Longtu Pavilion.

古文：稷用荫历管库，权河北西路转运判官，修拓深、赵、邢三州城，役无愆素，然峭刻严忍。
现代文：李稷因荫补历经管库，代理河北西路转运判官，修筑拓展深、赵、邢三州州城，工役没有失误延搁，但严厉苛刻残忍。
English: Li Yingbin passed through the warehouse, acting as the judge of the West Hebei Road transshipment, and built and expanded the three provincial capitals of Shenzhen, Zhao and Handan. The workmen were not delayed by mistakes, but they were harsh and cruel.

古文：察访使者以为言，都水丞程昉亦诉其越职。
现代文：察访使者言及此事，都水丞程日方也上诉他超越职权。
English: When the visiting envoy mentioned the matter, the Japanese side also appealed that he had exceeded his authority.

古文：诏令件析。
现代文：诏令加以判析。
English: It is up to the imperial edict to judge.

古文：御史周尹又论稷父死二十年不葬，仅徙东路，俄提举蜀部茶场。
现代文：御史周尹又论李稷父亲死了二十年不葬，仅移任河北东路转送判官，不久提举蜀部茶场。
English: Historian Zhou Yin also said that Li Qian's father had not been buried for twenty years after his death, and was only transferred to the East Hebei Road to be transferred to the judge, and soon moved to the Shu Department Tea House.

古文：甫两岁，羡课七十六万缗，擢盐铁判官。
现代文：刚刚两年，超额缴纳租赋七十六万余缗，提升为盐铁判官。
English: Just two years ago, the excess payment of rent amounted to more than 7.6 million baht, and he was promoted to judge of salt and iron.

古文：诏推扬其功以劝在位，遂为陕西转运使、制置解盐。
现代文：诏令推举彰扬他的功绩以规劝在职的官吏，于是任陕西转运使、制置解盐。
English: The imperial edict recommended that he should be commended for his achievements in order to persuade the officials in office, so he was appointed as the transfer envoy of Shaanxi Province, and set up the desalination plant.

古文：秦民作舍道傍者，创使纳 侵街钱 ，一路扰怨，与李察皆以苛暴著称。
现代文：秦地百姓在路旁修建房舍的，首创使其交纳 侵街钱 。一路惊扰抱怨，李稷与李察都以苛刻严暴著称。
English: The people of Qin built houses on the roadside, and were the first to make them pay "street invasion money." All the way, they were shocked and complained. Li Yao and Richard were both known for being harsh and violent.

古文：时人语曰： 宁逢黑杀，莫逢稷、察。 
现代文：当时谚语说： 宁逢黑杀，莫逢稷察。 
English: At that time, a proverb said: "It is better to be killed than to be watched."

古文：种谔起兴、灵议，稷闻之亦上言： 可令边面诸将各出兵挠之，使不得耕种，则其国必困，国困众离，取可决也。 及出境，稷督饷，民苦折运，多散逸，稷令骑士执之，断其足筋，宛转山谷间，凡数十人，累日乃得死。
现代文：种谔兴起取西夏兴、灵州之议，李稷听说后也上言 ：可命边地众将各自出兵骚扰西夏，使之不能耕种，那么西夏国必定困乏，国家困乏则民众离心，取兴、灵州就有把握了。 等到出边境，李稷督责粮饷，百姓苦于辗转运输，多半逃亡，李稷命令骑兵捉拿，砍断他们的脚筋，辗转山谷间，共有几千人，数天后才得以死去。
English: After hearing of the proposal to take Xixiaxing and Lingzhou, Li Qiye also said: "If it is possible, the local people will send troops to harass Xixia and make it impossible to cultivate, then Xixia will certainly be poor, and if the country is poor, the people will be distracted, and Xing and Lingzhou will be safe." When they reached the border, Li Qiye ordered the grain to be stolen, the people were struggling to transport it, and most of them fled. Li Qiye ordered the cavalry to catch them, cut their footstrings, and dragged them between the valleys, a total of several thousand people, only to die a few days later.

古文：始，稷受旨得斩郡守以下，于是上下相临以峻法，虽小吏护丁夫，亦颛戮不请。
现代文：开始，李稷奉圣旨可斩郡守以下，于是从上到下都以严刑峻法相临，即使是小吏督责丁夫，也可以专擅杀戮不须请示。
English: At the beginning, Li Yu could execute the county magistrate and his subordinates according to his sacred will, so the severe punishments were meted out from the top to the bottom. Even if it was a minor official who supervised Ding Fu, he could kill without asking for instructions.

古文：军食竟不继。
现代文：军人粮食终于供应不上。
English: Finally, there is no longer a supply of food for soldiers.

古文：谔谋斩稷，客吕大钧引义责之，复使还取粮。
现代文：种谔图谋杀李稷，门客吕大钧引义责之，于是再使李稷返回取粮。
English: His protégé Lü Dazhao was held responsible for the murder of Li Qian, and Li Qian was forced to return to collect grain.

古文：既集，谔犹宣言稷乏军兴，致大功不就，坐削两秩，贬为判官。
现代文：粮食既已征集，种谔还是宣布说李稷耽误军用物资，致使大功不成，因此被削官两秩，贬为判官。
English: Even though the grain had already been collected and the seed sown, it was announced that Li Gan had delayed the delivery of military supplies, resulting in the failure of the great feat. As a result, he was demoted two ranks and relegated to the position of judge.

古文：永乐既城，稷悉辇金、银、钞、帛充牣其中，欲夸示徐禧，以为城甫就而中已实。
现代文：永乐城已筑成，李稷运载金、银、钞、帛全部充实城中，打算向徐禧夸耀，以为城刚修成而城中物质已充实。
English: Yongle City has been built, and Li Wei is carrying all the gold, silver, banknotes and banknotes to enrich the city. He intends to boast to Xu Xi that the city has just been built and the material in the city has been enriched.

古文：积金既多，故受围愈急，而稷守之不敢去，以及于难。
现代文：积藏金钱已多，所以虽被围困情况越来越危急，但李稷仍护守财物不敢离去，终于遇难。
English: He had already accumulated a lot of money, so although the siege was getting more and more critical, Li Yao still guarded his belongings and did not dare to leave, and finally died.

古文：李舜举别有传。
现代文：李舜举另外有传。
English: There is another legend about Li Shanzhu.

