古文：○和凝和凝，字成绩，郓州须昌人也。
现代文：和凝字成绩，郓州须昌人。
English: and the result of hand-lettering, Luzhou Suchang people are at the top.

古文：其九世祖逢尧为唐监察御史，其后世遂不复宦学。
现代文：他的九世祖和逢尧任唐朝的监察御史，后代就不再学做官。
English: His ninth-generation ancestor and Feng Yu served as the inspector-general of the Tang Dynasty, and his descendants would no longer learn to be officials.

古文：凝父矩，性嗜酒，不拘小节，然独好礼文士，每倾赀以交之，以故凝得与之游。
现代文：和凝的父亲和矩，生性喜好饮酒，不拘小节，但惟独喜欢礼待文士，每每倾尽家资和他们交往，因此和凝得以和这些文士交游。
English: Hoge's father, Hoge, had a natural affinity for alcohol and was not a stickler for etiquette, but he liked nothing more than to treat the scribes with courtesy. He spent all of the family's money on socializing with them, so Hoge was able to socialize with these scribes.

古文：而凝幼聪敏，形神秀发。
现代文：而和凝从小聪明机敏，形神秀发。
English: On the other hand, He Jing has been smart and alert since he was a child, and has beautiful hair.

古文：举进士，梁义成军节度使贺瑰辟为从事。瑰与唐庄宗战于胡柳，瑰战败，脱身走，独凝随之，反顾见凝，麾之使去。
现代文：考中进士，梁义成军节度使贺壤征召他为从事贺埭和唐庄宗在胡柳交战，贺壤战败，脱身逃跑，只有和凝跟着他，贺埭回头看见和凝，挥手让他离去。
English: A candidate for the middle school entrance examination, Liang Yicheng's military festival made He Rong recruit him to engage in the battle between He Rong and Tang Zhuangzong in Hu Liu. He Rong was defeated and escaped. Only He Rong followed him. He Rong looked back and saw He Rong and waved for him to leave.

古文：凝曰： 丈夫当为知己死，吾恨未得死所尔，岂可去也！ 
现代文：和凝说： 大丈夫应当为知己而死，我遣憾不能死得其所，怎么叮以离去！ 
English: Harmony said, "It is all right for a man to die for his friend, but I regret that I cannot die in his place, how can I leave him!"

古文：已而一骑追瑰几及，凝叱之不止，即引弓射杀之，瑰由此得免。瑰归，戒其诸子曰： 和生，志义之士也，后必富贵，尔其谨事之！ 
现代文：不久一个骑兵几乎要追上贺球，和凝喝斥他还不停，立即拉弓搭箭将骑兵射死，贺壤因此得以幸免，贺壤逃回，告诫他的儿子们说： 和生是有志节的义士，以后必定富贵，你们要恭谨地事奉他！ 
English: Not long after, a cavalryman almost caught up with He, but he kept shouting at him. He immediately drew a bow and arrow and shot the cavalryman to death. He was thus spared. He fled back and admonished his sons, saying: "Waseong is a righteous man with ambition, and he will certainly be rich in the future. You should respectfully serve him!"

古文：因妻之以女。
现代文：因而把女儿嫁给他。
English: So she married her daughter to him.

古文：天成中，拜殿中侍御史，累迁主客员外郎，知制诰，翰林学士，知贡举。是时，进士浮薄，喜为喧哗以动主司。
现代文：天成年间，和凝拜为殿中侍御史，积官升任主客员外郎，知制诰；翰林学士，知贡举造时，进士大多浮华浅薄，喜好喧哗以便打勤主考官。
English: Between the ages of ten and eighteen, He Zongbei was the attendant of the history of the palace, and he was promoted to the position of chief guest attendant, and he was known as a scholar; Hanlin was a scholar, and when he was a scholar, he was mostly flashy and shallow, and he liked noise so that he could work as a chief examiner.

古文：主司每放榜，则围之以棘，闭省门，绝人出入以为常。
现代文：主考官每次发榜，就用棘刺护围，关闭省门，禁绝人们出入，习以为常。
English: Every time the chief examiner issued a list, he used thorns to protect the enclosure, closed the provincial gate, forbade people to enter and exit, and took it for granted.

古文：凝彻棘开门，而士皆肃然无哗，所取皆一时之秀，称为得人。
现代文：和凝撤除棘刺打开省门，而士人都肃静无声，录取的都是一时秀杰，被称为善于选拔人才。
English: and remove the thorns, open the provincial gate, and the scholars are silent, the admission is a brilliant, known as good at selecting talent.

古文：晋初，拜端明殿学士，兼判度支，为翰林学士承旨。
现代文：后晋初年，拜为端明殿学士，兼判度支，任翰林学士承旨。
English: In the first year of the Later Jin Dynasty, he became a scholar of the Duanming Palace, and also a scholar of the Judiciary Branch, and a scholar of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：高祖数召之，问以时事，凝所对皆称旨。
现代文：晋高祖多次召见他，询问时事，和凝的回答都符合晋高祖的心意。
English: Jin Gaozu summoned him many times to inquire about current affairs, and his concise answers were in line with the wishes of Jin Gaozu.

古文：天福五年，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：天福五年，拜为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the fifth year of the Tenpu era, he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and became a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：高祖将幸鄴，而襄州安从进反迹已见。
现代文：晋高祖将要去邺都，而襄州安从进反叛的迹象已经败露。
English: Jin Gaozu will go to Shidu, and the signs of Xiangzhou An Congjin's rebellion have already been revealed.

古文：凝曰： 陛下幸鄴，从进必因此时反，则将奈何？ 
现代文：和凝说： 陛下去邺都，安从进必趁这个时候反叛，那怎么办呢？ 
English: He said, "Your Majesty should go to the capital, and An Zongjin should take advantage of this time to rebel. What should we do then?"

古文：高祖曰： 卿将何以待之？ 
现代文：晋高祖说： 你准备拿什么对付他？ 
English: Jin Gaozu said: What are you going to use against him?

古文：凝曰： 先人者，所以夺人也。
现代文：和凝说： 先发制人是战胜对方的办法。
English: He said: "Striking first is the way to defeat the other side.

古文：请为宣敕十馀通，授之郑王，有急则命将击之。 
现代文：请写下宣敕卜多道，交给郑王，一有危急就任命将领进攻。 
English: Please write down the pronouncements, give them to King Zheng, and if there is a crisis, appoint a general to attack.

古文：高祖以为然。
现代文：晋高祖认为不错。
English: Jin Gaozu thought it was good.

古文：是时，郑王为开封尹，留不从幸，乃授以宣敕。
现代文：造时，郑王任开封尹，留下来没有跟随去邺都，于是把宣敕交给他。
English: At the time of construction, Zheng Wangren opened the seal of Yin, but did not follow him to the capital, so he handed the proclamation to him.

古文：高祖至鄴，从进果反，郑王即以宣敕命骑将李建崇、焦继勋等讨之。
现代文：晋高祖到达邺都，安从进果然反叛，郑王就用宣敕任命骑将李建崇、焦继勋等人讨伐他。
English: When Emperor Gaozong arrived in Shandong, An Congjin rebelled, and King Zheng used the imperial edict to appoint cavalry commanders Li Jianchong and Jiao Jixun to fight him.

古文：从进谓高祖方幸鄴，不意晋兵之速也，行至花山，遇建崇等兵，以为神，遂败走。出帝即位，加右仆射，岁馀，罢平章事，迁左仆射。
现代文：安从进认为晋高祖刚到邺都，没料到晋兵如此神速，走到花山时，遇上李建崇等人的军队，以为是天兵神将，于是败逃晋出帝登位，加封和凝右仆射，一年多后，罢免平章事，迁任左仆射。
English: An Congjin thought that Jin Gaozu had just arrived in Shidu, but he did not expect Jin soldiers to be so fast. When he went to Huashan, he met the army of Li Jianchong and others, and thought that he was a heavenly soldier, so he fled from the imperial throne, sealed and condensed the right minion, and more than a year later, he was dismissed from the title and transferred to the left minion.

古文：汉高祖时，拜太子太傅，封鲁国公。
现代文：汉高祖时，拜为太子太傅，封为鲁国公。
English: When he was the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, he was crowned as the prince of Lu.

古文：显德二年卒，年五十八，赠侍中。凝好饰车服，为文章以多为富，有集百馀卷，尝自镂板以行于世，识者多非之。
现代文：显德二年去世，享年五十八岁，赠侍中和凝喜好打扮车马服饰，写文章以多为富，有集于一百多卷，曾自己刻板傅世，有见识的人大多非议他。
English: Hende died two years later, at the age of fifty-eight. He gave gifts to attendants and was fond of dressing up in horse and carriage costumes. He wrote articles on how to be rich, which have been collected in more than one hundred volumes. He used to be a rigid man, and most people with insight criticized him.

古文：然性乐善，好称道后进之士。唐故事，知贡举者所放进士，以己及第时名次为重。
现代文：但他生性乐于行善，喜好称道后进之士唐的惯例，任知贡举的人发榜录取的进士，以自己考中进士时的名次马重。
English: However, he is naturally happy to do good deeds, likes the practice of praising the Tang dynasty's less-advanced people, and the people who are allowed to pay tribute are the ones who are admitted to the list, and they are weighted by their own rank when they are admitted to the middle school.

古文：凝举进士及第时第五，后知举，选范质为第五。
现代文：和凝考中进士时是第五名，后来任知贡举，选范质为第五名。
English: He was the fifth when he was promoted to a scholar in the examination of concentration, and later he was appointed as a tribute, and he was the fifth in the selection criteria.

古文：后质位至宰相，封鲁国公，官至太子太傅，皆与凝同，当时以为荣焉。
现代文：后来范质位至宰相，封为鲁国公，官做到太子太傅，都和和凝相同，当时人以此为荣。
English: Later, people were proud of the fact that the standard of quality, the position of prime minister, the title of Lu Guogong, and the official title of Prince Taifu were all the same as that of Waseda.

古文：○赵莹赵莹，字玄辉，华州华阴人也。
现代文：趟莹字玄辉，华州华阴人。
English: Wai Ying Zi Xuan Hui, Huazhou Hua Yin Ren.

古文：为人纯厚，美风仪。
现代文：为人纯朴忠厚，风度仪表优美。
English: He is a simple and loyal person with a graceful demeanor.

古文：事梁将康延孝为从事。晋高祖为保义军节度使，以莹掌书记，自是徙镇常以莹从。
现代文：事奉梁将康延孝为从事晋高祖任保义军节度使，以赵莹为掌书记，从此调任常常让赵莹跟从。
English: Liang appointed Kang Yanxiao as the envoy to the ceremony of the promotion of the founder of the Guoying People's Liberation Army, with Zhao Ying as the secretary. Since then, Zhao Ying has often followed him.

古文：高祖将起兵太原，以问诸将吏，将吏或赞成之，莹独惧形于色，劝高祖毋反。
现代文：晋高祖将要在太原起兵，询问众将吏，有的赞成，赵莹偏偏露出畏惧的神色，劝晋高祖不要反叛。
English: Jin Gaozu was going to raise an army in Taiyuan, he asked the generals, some of them agreed, but Zhao Yingbi showed fear and advised Jin Gaozu not to rebel.

古文：高祖虽不用其言，心甚爱之。
现代文：晋高祖虽然没有采用他的意见，但心里很喜爱他。
English: Although Jin Gaozu did not adopt his opinion, he loved him very much.

古文：高祖即位，拜翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：晋高祖登位，拜任他为翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Jingu Gaozu ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the successor of Hanlin Baccalaureate, the attendant of the household, and the subordinate of the scholar of the same middle school.

古文：累拜中书令。
现代文：累经升迁至中书令。
English: He was promoted to the position of Clerk.

古文：出为晋昌军节度使、开封尹。
现代文：出任晋昌军节度使、开封尹。
English: He was appointed as the Jinchang Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and was given the title of Kaifeng Zor Yin.

古文：是时，出帝童昏，冯玉、李彦韬等用事，与桑维翰争权，乃共谮去之，以莹柔而易制，故复引以为相。
现代文：这时，晋出帝愚昧无知，冯玉、李彦韬等人专权，和桑维翰争权，于是共同诋毁挤走了桑维翰，认为趟莹柔顺容易控制，因此又推荐他为宰相。
English: At this time, Emperor Jin was stupid and ignorant, and Feng Yu, Li Yan Kun and others had exclusive power and competed with San Wei Han for power. Therefore, they jointly discredited and ousted San Wei Han. They thought that Wai Ying Rong was easy to control, so they recommended him as prime minister.

古文：契丹灭晋，莹从出帝北徙虏中，莹事兀欲为太子太保。
现代文：契丹灭晋，赵莹跟随晋出帝北迁到敌境，赵莹事奉兀欲为太子太保。
English: When the Khitans overthrew the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Ying followed the Jin Dynasty out of the northern part of the empire and moved to the enemy territory. Zhao Ying served as the prince's bodyguard.

古文：周太祖时，与契丹通好，遣尚书左丞田敏使于契丹，遇莹于幽州，莹见敏悲不自胜。
现代文：周太祖时，与契丹和好，派尚书左丞田敏出使契丹，在幽州遇上趟莹，趟莹见到田敏悲痛欲鲍。
English: At the time of Zhou Taizu, he made peace with the Khitan, and sent Shangshu Zuojo Tian Min to send an envoy to the Khitan. In Yuzhou, he met Wai Ying, and Wai Ying saw Tian Min's grief and longing for Bao.

古文：莹子易则、易从。
现代文：趟莹的儿子是赵易则、趟易从。
English: Wai Ying's sons are Zhao Yizi and Wai Yicong.

古文：当其徙而北也，与易从俱，而易则留事汉，官至刑部郎中。
现代文：当他北迁时，和赵易从一道，而赵易则留在汉，官做到刑部郎中。
English: When he moved north, he went with Zhao Yi, but Zhao Yi stayed in Han, and the official became a member of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：后莹病将卒，告于契丹，愿以尸还中国，契丹许之。
现代文：后来趟莹患病将死，向契丹申告，希望把尸体送回中原，契丹同意了。
English: Later, after Yingying fell ill and was about to die, she reported to Qidan that she hoped to send the body back to the Central Plains, and Qidan agreed.

古文：及卒，遣易从护其丧南归。
现代文：等他死后，派趟易从护丧南归。
English: After his death, it was easy to return from mourning to the south.

古文：太祖怜之，赠莹太傅，葬于华阴。
现代文：周太祖哀怜他，追赠赵莹为太傅，埋葬在华阴。
English: Zhou Taizu took pity on him, posthumously awarded Zhao Ying as Taifu, and buried him in Huayin.

古文：○冯玉冯玉，字璟臣，定州人也。
现代文：冯玉字璟臣，定州人。
English: Feng Yu Zi Xian, a native of Dingzhou.

古文：少举进士不中。
现代文：年轻时考进士不中。
English: He failed to pass the entrance examination when he was young.

古文：冯赟为河东节度使，辟为推官。
现代文：冯赞任河东节度使，征召他为推官。
English: Feng Zhan was appointed as the envoy of the Hedong Festival, and he was called up as a promoter.

古文：入拜监察御史，累迁礼部郎中，为盐铁判官。
现代文：入朝任监察御史，累经升迁为礼部郎中，任盐铁判官。
English: He entered the imperial court as an inspector of imperial history, and was promoted to vice-minister of ritual, and then to judge of salt and iron.

古文：晋出帝纳玉姊为后，玉以后戚知制诰，拜中书舍人。
现代文：晋出帝娶冯玉的姐姐为皇后，冯玉因是皇后的亲戚而任知制诰，拜为中书舍人。
English: Emperor Jinzhi married Feng Yu's sister as his empress. As Feng Yu was a relative of the empress, he was allowed to rule the country and was revered as the best scholar in China.

古文：玉不知书，而与殷鹏同为舍人，制诰常遣鹏代作。顷之，玉出为颍州团练使，拜端明殿学士、户部侍郎，迁枢密使、中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：冯玉没有学问，而和殷鹏同任舍人，常派殷鹏代作制诰遇了一段时间，冯玉出任颖州团练使，拜为端明殿学士、卢部侍郎，升任枢密使、中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Feng Yu was uneducated, but he served as a concubine with Yin Peng, and often sent Yin Peng to stand in for him for a period of time. Feng Yu served as a Yingzhou regimental drill sergeant, was a scholar of the Duanming Palace, a servant of Lu Bu, and was promoted to a privy councilor, a servant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and a subordinate of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：是时，出帝童昏，冯皇后用事，军国大务，一决于玉。
现代文：适时，晋出帝愚昧无知，冯皇后专权，军国大事，都取决于冯玉。
English: At the right time, the promotion of the emperor's stupidity and ignorance, the exclusive power of Empress Feng, and military affairs all depend on Feng Yu.

古文：玉尝有疾在告，自刺史已上，宰相不敢除授，以俟玉决。
现代文：冯玉曾患病休假，从刺史以上官吏，宰相不敢任命，而等冯玉决定。
English: Feng Yu had been on sick leave, and officials above the rank of secretary and prime minister did not dare to appoint him, and waited for Feng Yu to make a decision.

古文：玉除中书舍人卢价为工部侍郎，桑维翰以价资望浅为不可，由是与维翰有隙，维翰由此罢相。
现代文：冯玉任命中书舍入卢价为工部侍郎，桑维翰认为卢价资望太浅不行，因此和桑维翰产生矛盾，桑维翰因此被能相？
English: Feng Yu appointed Zhongshu Rounded Lu Guan as the attendant of the Ministry of Industry. San Weihan thought that Lu Guan's reputation was too shallow. Therefore, there was a contradiction with San Weihan. San Weihan was therefore able to see?

古文：玉为相，四方贿，积赀巨万。
现代文：冯玉担任宰相，四方贿赂，积聚家资上万。
English: Feng Yu served as prime minister, bribed four parties, and accumulated tens of thousands of family capital.

古文：契丹灭晋，张彦泽先以兵入京师，兵士争先入玉家，其赀一夕而尽。
现代文：契丹灭晋，张彦泽率兵先入京师，士兵们争先恐后地进入冯玉家，一夜之间把他的家财抢光。
English: When Khitan conquered Jin, Zhang Yanzhe led the troops to enter Beijing first. The soldiers scrambled to enter Feng Yu's house and robbed his family's wealth overnight.

古文：明日见彦泽，犹谄笑，自言愿得持晋玉玺献契丹，以冀恩奖。
现代文：第二天冯玉见到张彦泽，仍然笑脸谄媚，自称希望能拿着晋的玉玺献给契丹，以便求得恩赐奖赏。
English: The next day, Feng Yu saw Zhang Yanzawa, still smiling and charming, and said that he hoped to take Jin's jade scepter and offer it to Khitan in order to obtain the best reward.

古文：彦泽不纳。
现代文：张彦泽不理他。
English: Zhang Hikozawa ignored him.

古文：出帝之北，玉从入契丹，契丹以为太子太保。
现代文：晋出帝去北方，冯玉跟随进入契丹，契丹任命他为太子太保。
English: After he was promoted to emperor and went to the north, Feng Yu followed him into Khitan, and Khitan appointed him as the crown prince.

古文：周广顺三年，其子杰自契丹逃归，玉惧，以忧卒。
现代文：周广顺三年，他的儿子冯杰从契丹逃回，冯玉害怕，忧虑而死。
English: In the third year of Zhou Guangshun, his son Feng Jie fled back from Khitan, Feng Yu was afraid and worried and died.

古文：○卢质卢质，字子徵，河南人也。
现代文：卢质字子征，河南人。
English: Lu Zi Zi Zheng, from Henan Province.

古文：父望，唐司勋郎中。
现代文：父亲卢望，任唐司勋郎中。
English: His father, Lu Wang, was a middle-ranking official of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：质幼聪惠，善属文。
现代文：卢质从小聪明颖慧，善于写文章。
English: Lu Qian has been smart and clever since childhood, and is good at writing articles.

古文：事唐为秘书郎，丁母忧，解职。
现代文：在唐任秘书郎，为母亲服丧，罢职。
English: He worked as a secretary in Tang Dynasty China, but resigned from his post to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：后去游太原，晋王以为河东节度掌书记。
现代文：后来去漫游太原，晋王任命他为河东节度掌书记。
English: Later, he went to roam Taiyuan, and the King of Jin appointed him as the secretary of the Hedong Festival.

古文：质与张承业等定议立庄宗为嗣。庄宗将即位，以质为大礼使，拜行台礼部尚书。
现代文：卢质和张承业等人商定立唐庄宗为继承人唐庄宗将要登位，任命卢质为大礼使，拜为行台礼部尚书。
English: Lu Qian and Zhang Chengye and others agreed to set Tang Zhuozong as the successor. Tang Zhuozong will ascend to the throne, appoint Lu Qian as the grand envoy, and pray for the performance of the ritual.

古文：庄宗即位，欲以质为相。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，想让虐质做宰相。
English: Tang Zhuangzong ascended to the throne and wanted to make Masochism prime minister.

古文：质性疏逸，不欲任责，因固辞不受。
现代文：卢质生性懒散闲逸，不愿担负责任，因而坚决推辞不接受。
English: Lu Qingsheng is naturally lazy and idle, unwilling to take responsibility, so he resolutely refused to accept the resignation.

古文：拜太原尹、北京留守，迁户部尚书、翰林学士。
现代文：拜为太原尹、北京留守，升任卢部尚书、翰林学士。
English: Pray for Taiyuan Yin, who stayed in Beijing and was promoted to Lu Bu Shangshu, Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：从平梁，权判租庸，迁兵部尚书，后为学士承旨，仍赐 论思匡佐功臣 。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗平定梁，暂代判租庸，升任兵部尚书，后来任学士承旨，又赐给 论思匡佐功臣 封号。
English: He followed Tangzhuangzong to Pingdingliang, temporarily acting as the judge of Xianyong, was promoted to the military department of Shangshu, and later was appointed as a bachelor, and also gave a seal number to Onshikangso.

古文：天成元年，拜匡国军节度使。
现代文：天成元年，拜为匡国军节度使。
English: In the first year of the Tiancheng era, he served as the chief envoy of the Kuangguo Army.

古文：三年，拜兵部尚书，判太常卿事。
现代文：三年，拜为兵部尚书，判太常卿事。
English: Three years later, he was awarded the title of Hyobu Shosho and the title of Taizongqing.

古文：历镇河阳、横海。初，梁已篡唐，封哀帝为济阴王，既而杀之，瘗于曹州。
现代文：相继镇守河阳、横海当初，梁篡取唐后，封唐哀帝为济阴王，不久用毒酒害死他，埋在曹州。
English: At the beginning, when Liang usurped the empress of the Tang Dynasty and made Emperor Tang the king of Jilin, he successively governed the towns of Kheyang and Henghai. Soon after, he killed Emperor Liang with poisoned wine and buried him in Caozhou.

古文：同光三年，庄宗将议改葬，而曹太后崩，乃止。
现代文：同光三年，唐庄宗将商议改葬，而曹太后逝世，于是作罢。
English: In the third year of Tongguang, Tangzhuangzong will discuss the reburial, but Cao Taige passed away, so he abandoned it.

古文：因其故垅，稍广其封，以时荐飨而已。
现代文：沿袭旧坟，稍稍增大土堆，按时献祭罢了。
English: It's just a matter of following the old graves, slightly increasing the size of the mounds, and sacrificing on time.

古文：质乃建议立庙追谥，谥曰昭宣光烈孝皇帝，庙号景宗。
现代文：卢质于是建议修庙追加谧号，谧号叫昭宣光烈孝皇帝，庙号叫景宗。
English: Lu Qian then suggested that the temple should be repaired with an additional nickname, the nickname being Emperor Zhaoxuan, and the temple's nickname being Jingsong.

古文：天成四年八月戍申，明宗御文明殿，遣质奉册立庙于曹州。
现代文：天成四年八月戊申，唐明宗到文明殿，派卢质奉册在曹州建庙。
English: In August of the 4th year of Tiancheng, Wu Shen, Tang Ming Zong went to the Civilization Hall, and sent Lu Qi to build a temple in Caozhou.

古文：而议者以谓辉王不幸为贼臣所立，而昭宗、何皇后皆为梁所弑，遂以亡国，而 昭宣光烈 非所宜称，且立庙称宗而不入太庙，皆非是。共以此非质，大臣亦知其不可，乃奏去庙号。
现代文：而议事的人认为辉王不幸被贼臣拥立，而唐昭宗、何皇后都被梁杀死，因而亡国，不宜称 昭宣光烈 ，而且立庙称宗却不进入太庙，都不对，共同以此非难卢贸，大臣们也知道这样布行，于是上奏请求取消庙号。
English: The people at the meeting thought that King Hui was unfortunately supported by his vassals, while Emperor Zhaozong of Tang and Empress He were both killed by Liang, thus ruining the country. It was not appropriate to call Emperor Zhaozong brilliant, and it was not right to establish a temple and say that Emperor Zong did not enter the Great Temple. They all condemned Lu Miao in this way. The ministers also knew about this practice, so they made a request to cancel the temple name.

古文：秦王从荣坐谋反诛，质以右仆射权知河南府事。
现代文：秦土李从荣因谋反被杀，卢质以右仆射代管河南府事。
English: Qin Tu Li Cong Rong was killed for plotting a rebellion, and Lu Qi took over the administration of Henan Province as his right-hand man.

古文：废帝反凤翔，愍帝发兵诛之，竭帑藏以厚赏，而兵至凤翔皆叛降。
现代文：唐废帝在凤翔反叛，唐愍帝出兵讨伐他，用盎钱库的钱重赏，而军队到凤翔后都叛降了。
English: Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty rebelled in Fengxiang, Emperor Zhao of the Tang Dynasty sent troops to fight against him and rewarded him with money from the ounce bank, but the troops all rebelled after arriving in Fengxiang.

古文：废帝悉将而东，事成许以重赏，而军士皆过望。
现代文：唐废帝率领全部降兵束去，许诺事成后重赏，士兵们都大喜过望。
English: Emperor Tang Rui led all the troops to go, promising to reward them after the event, and the soldiers were overjoyed.

古文：废帝入立，有司献籍数甚少，废帝暴怒。
现代文：唐废帝登位，有关部门进献的钱很少，唐废帝十分恼怒。
English: When Emperor Tang Wulai ascended the throne, the relevant departments had very little money to donate, and Emperor Tang Wulai became very angry.

古文：自诸镇至刺史，皆进钱帛助国用，犹不足，三司使王玫请率民财以佐用。
现代文：从各藩镇到刺史，都进献钱和丝绸补充国用，还是不够，三司使王玫请求按比例征收百姓的财物补足国用。
English: From all the provinces and towns to Zhishi, they all donated money and silk to supplement the state, but it was still not enough. The three departments asked Wang Mei to request the proportionate collection of people's property to supplement the state.

古文：乃使质与玫等共议配率，而贫富不均，怨讼并起，囚系满狱。
现代文：于是让卢质和王玫等人共同议定分配的比例，而贫富不均，怨恨和诉讼一并产生，监狱凶犯爆满。
English: As a result, Lu Qian and Wang Mei and others jointly agreed on the distribution ratio, and the rich and poor were unequal, resentment and lawsuits arose together, and the prison was full of criminals.

古文：六七日间，所得不满十万。废帝患之，乃命质等借民屋课五月，由是民大咨怨。
现代文：六匕天中，得到的钱不足十万，唐废帝对此担忧，于是命令卢质依据民房征税五个月，因此百姓很不满意。
English: In six days, the money received was less than 100,000 yuan. Emperor Tang was worried about this, so he ordered Lu Qian to collect taxes based on private houses for five months, so the people were very dissatisfied.

古文：晋高祖入立，质以疾分司西京，拜太子太保。
现代文：晋高祖登位，卢质因病分管西京，拜为太子太保。
English: Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, Lu Jie was put in charge of the western capital due to illness, and he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：卒，年七十六，赠太子太师，谥曰文忠。
现代文：去世，享年七十六岁，赠太子太师，谧号文忠。
English: He died at the age of seventy-six, and was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, and the posthumous name of Munetada.

古文：○吕琦吕琦，字辉山，幽州安次人也。
现代文：吕琦字辉山，幽州安次人。
English: Lv Ying Zi Hui Shan, Yuzhou An Zi Ren.

古文：父兗，为横海军节度判官。
现代文：父亲吕充，任横海军节度判官。
English: His father, Lü Cheng, was a naval festival judge.

古文：节度使刘守文与其弟守光以兵相攻，守文败死，其吏民立其子延祚而事之，以兗为谋主。
现代文：节度使刘守文和他的弟弟刘守光率兵相互攻打，刘守文战败而死，那里的官吏百姓拥立他的儿子刘延祚并事奉他，以吕兖为主要谋臣。
English: The festival made Liu Shouwen and his brother Liu Shouguang lead their soldiers to fight against each other. Liu Shouwen was defeated and died. The officials and people there supported his son Liu Yanjun and served him, with Lvun as the main adviser.

古文：已而延祚又为守光所败，兗见杀。
现代文：不久刘延祚又被刘守光打败，吕兖被杀。
English: Soon after, Liu Yanqi was defeated by Liu Shuguang, and Lv Ying was killed.

古文：守光怒兗，并族其家。
现代文：刘守光愤恨吕充，一并把他的家灭族。
English: Liu Shouguang was angry with Lucheng, and together they wiped out his family.

古文：琦年十五，见执，将就刑，兗故客赵玉绐其监者曰： 此吾弟也。 
现代文：吕琦十五岁，被抓到，将要行刑，吕充过去的门客趟玉欺骗监刑的人说： 这人是我的弟弟。 
English: Lv Xuan was fifteen years old. He was caught and was about to be executed. Lv filled the past gate with jade to deceive the jailer and said, "This man is my brother."

古文：监者信之，纵琦去。
现代文：监刑的人相信了，放吕琦离去。
English: The prison guards believed him and let Lv Yao go.

古文：玉与琦得俱走，琦足弱不能行，玉负之而行，逾数百里，变姓名，乞食于道，以免。
现代文：赵玉和吕琦得以一起逃跑，吕琦双足无力不能行走，趟玉背着他走，走过几百里地，改名换姓，在路上讨饭，得以幸免。
English: Zhao Yu and Lv Yao were able to escape together. Lv Yao was too weak to walk, so Lv Yao walked behind him. He walked hundreds of miles, changed his name, begged for food on the road, and was spared.

古文：琦为人美风仪，重节概，少丧其家，游学汾、晋之间。
现代文：吕琦风度仪表俊美，看重气节，年幼失家，在汾、晋间游学。
English: Lv Ying's demeanor is handsome, he values temperament, he lost his home at a young age, and he traveled to Shandong and Jin to study.

古文：唐庄宗镇太原，以为代州军事推官。
现代文：唐庄宗镇守太原，任命他为代州军事推官。
English: Tang Zhuangzong, the commander of Taiyuan, appointed him as the military governor of Daizhou.

古文：后为横海赵德钧节度推官，入为殿中侍御史。
现代文：后来任横海赵德钧的节度推官，入为殿中侍御史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the festival supervisor of Zhao Deqi in Henghai, and was appointed as the attendant of history in the palace.

古文：明宗时，为驾部员外郎，兼侍御史知杂事。
现代文：唐明宗时，任驾部员外郎，兼侍御史知杂事。
English: When he was a member of the Tang Ming Dynasty, he was appointed as a driver's assistant, and also served as an attendant.

古文：河阳主藏吏盗所监物，下军巡狱，狱吏尹训纳赂反其狱，其冤家诉于朝，下御史台按验，得训赃状，奏摄训赴台。
现代文：河阳主藏吏盗窃监管的财物，投进军中监狱审理，狱吏尹训接受贿赂推翻诉讼，他的冤家向朝廷申诉，下令御史台查核，发现尹训受贿，上奏抓捕尹训到御史台。
English: The chief collector of Heyang stole the property under supervision and was sent to the military prison for trial. The warden, Yin Xun, accepted bribes to overturn the lawsuit. His wrongdoers appealed to the imperial court and ordered the State Administration of History to investigate. It was found that Yin Xun accepted bribes. The arrest of Yin Xun was reported to the State Administration of History.

古文：训为安重诲所庇，不与，琦请不已，训惧自杀，狱乃辨，蒙活者甚众。
现代文：尹训受安重诲庇护，没有交给御史台，吕琦不断奏请，尹训畏罪自杀，诉讼纔办明，因此活下来的人很多。
English: Yin Xun was protected by An Chongyun, and was not handed over to the Imperial Historian, Lv Ying constantly appealed, Yin Xun committed suicide, and the lawsuit was settled, so there are many people who survived.

古文：岁馀，迁礼部郎中、史馆修撰。
现代文：一年多后，升任礼部郎中、史馆修撰。
English: A little more than a year later, he was promoted to vice-chairman of the Rectification Department and editor of the History Museum.

古文：长兴中，废帝失守河中，罢居清化坊，与琦同巷，琦数往过之。
现代文：长兴年问，唐废帝在河中失守，罢任住在清化坊，和吕琦同在一个巷子，吕琦多次前去拜访他。
English: According to Chang Xingnian, Emperor Tang Wasted away in the middle of the river and lived in Qinghua Village. He was in a lane with Lv Ying, and Lv Ying went to visit him many times.

古文：后废帝入立，待琦甚厚，拜知制诰、给事中、枢密院直学士、端明殿学士。是时，晋高祖镇河东，有二志，废帝患之，琦与李崧俱备顾问，多所裨画。
现代文：后来唐废帝登位，对吕琦很好，拜为知制诰、给事中、枢密院直学士、端明殿学士，这时，晋高祖镇守河东，有二心，唐废帝为此担心，吕琦和李崧都作他的顾问，帮助出了许多主意。
English: Later, when Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, he was very kind to Lv Ying, bowing down to him, giving him the title of Zheng, Privy Council Direct Bachelor, and Duanming Palace Bachelor. At this time, Emperor Gaozong had two minds about guarding the east of the river. Emperor Gaozong was worried about this, and both Lv Ying and Li Ying served as his advisers and helped him come up with many ideas.

古文：琦言： 太原之患，必引契丹为助，不如先事制之。 
现代文：吕琦说： 太原的祸乱，必定向契丹求助，不如先发制人。 
English: Lv Ying said: The disaster in Taiyuan is bound to appeal to the Khitan for help. It is better to pre-empt it.

古文：自明宗时王都反定州，契丹遣秃馁、荝剌等助都，而为赵德钧、王晏球所败，秃馁见杀，荝剌等皆送京师。
现代文：自从唐明宗时王都在定州反叛，契丹派秃馁、蓟刺等人援助王都，而被赵德钧、王晏球打败，秃馁被杀，蓟刺等人都被送到京师。
English: Since the time of the Tang and Ming dynasties, all kings rebelled in Dingzhou, and the Khitan sent the vultures, vipers and others to aid the capital, but they were defeated by Zhao Deyu and Wang Shigu. The vultures were killed, and the vipers and others were sent to Beijing.

古文：其后契丹数遣使者求荝剌等，其辞甚卑恭，明宗辄斩其使者不报。
现代文：后来契丹多次派使臣索求蓟刺等人，言语十分谦卑恭敬，唐明宗就杀掉使臣不予理睬。
English: Later, Khitan sent envoys many times to ask for 刺 and others, the words were very humble and respectful, and Tang Mingzong killed the envoys and ignored them.

古文：而东丹王又亡入中国，契丹由此数欲求和。
现代文：而束丹王又逃进中原，契丹因此多次想求和。
English: However, King Soktan fled to the Central Plains, and Khitan tried to sue for peace many times.

古文：琦因言： 方今之势，不如与契丹通和，如汉故事，岁给金帛，妻之以女，使强籓大镇顾外无所引援，可弭其乱心。 
现代文：吕琦接着说： 当今的形势，不如和契丹讲和，依照汉的旧例，每年供给契丹金银丝绸，嫁女给他们，使得强藩大镇看到外族没有什么人可以引来援助自己，这样就可以消除他们作乱的打算。 
English: Lu Wei continued, "In today's situation, it is better to make peace with the Khitan. According to the old Han custom, we should supply gold, silver and silk to the Khitan every year, and marry daughters to them, so that the powerful feudal towns will see that there is no one from the foreign ethnic groups who can be brought in to help them. In this way, we can eliminate their plans to create turmoil.

古文：崧以琦语语三司使张延朗，延朗欣然曰： 苟能纾国患，岁费县官十数万缗，责吾取足可也！ 
现代文：李崧把吕琦的话告诉三司使张延朗，张延朗高兴地说： 如果能够缓解国家的灾患，每年花费朝廷几十万缉，责令我拿够此数就行了！ 
English: Li Qian told the words of Lü Qi to the Third Divisional Envoy Zhang Yanlang, and Zhang Yanlang said happily: "If we can alleviate the country's disaster and spend hundreds of thousands of money on the imperial court every year, just order me to get enough of this number!"

古文：因共建其事。
现代文：因而一同策划这事。
English: So we planned it together.

古文：废帝大喜，佗日以琦等语问枢密直学士薛文遇，文遇大以为非，因诵戎昱 社稷依明主，安危托妇人 之诗，以诮琦等。
现代文：唐废帝非常高兴，有一天拿吕琦等人的话询问枢密直学士薛文遇，薛文遇认为很不对，因而口诵戎昱 社稷依明主，安危托妇人 的诗句，藉以讥诮吕琦等人。
English: Emperor Tang Wulai was very pleased. One day, he asked the scholar Xue Wen Rong about the words of Lv Ying and others. Xue Wen Rong thought it was very wrong, so he recited the verses of "Ensure the safety of women" to ridicule Lv Ying and others.

古文：废帝大怒，急召崧、琦等问和戎计如何。
现代文：唐废帝大怒，紧急召来李崧、吕琦等人询问和戎的计策怎样。
English: The Tang Emperor was furious and urgently summoned Li Zhen, Lv Ying and others to inquire about He Rong's strategy.

古文：琦等察帝色怒，亟曰： 臣等为国计，非与契丹求利于中国也。 
现代文：吕琦等人察觉皇帝脸带怒气，急忙说： 我们为国家考虑，不是帮助契丹谋取中原的利益。 
English: Noticing the emperor's angry face, Lyu Wei and others hurriedly said: We are thinking about the country, not helping the Khitan to seek the interests of the Central Plains.

古文：帝即发怒曰： 卿等佐朕欲致太平而若是邪？
现代文：皇帝就发怒说： 你们想帮我达到太平却像这样做吗？
English: The emperor became angry and said, "Do you want to help me achieve peace, but act like this?

古文：朕一女尚幼，欲弃之夷狄，金帛所以养士而捍国也，又输以资虏，可乎？ 
现代文：我的一个女儿还小，想把她丢给夷狄，金银绸缎是用来养兵卫国的，又送去资助敌人，行吗？ 
English: One of my daughters is still young and I want to throw her to the barbarians. Gold, silver, silk and silk are used to raise soldiers and defend the country, and they are also sent to finance the enemy. Is that okay?

古文：崧等惶恐拜谢，拜无数，琦足力乏不能拜而先止。
现代文：李崧等人惶恐不安地下拜请罪，下拜无数次后，吕琦足上无力不能下拜而先停了。
English: Panicked and uneasy, Li Yao and the others prostrated themselves, and after prostrating countless times, Lu Yao was too weak to prostrate and stopped first.

古文：帝曰： 吕琦强项，肯以人主视我邪！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 吕琦倔翠，肯把我看成君主吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Lyu Bingcui, would you consider me a monarch?

古文：琦曰： 臣素病羸，拜多而乏，容臣少息。 
现代文：吕琦说： 我素来羸弱多病，下拜多了就无力，让我稍稍休息一下。 
English: Lv Ying said: I have always been weak and sickly. If I bow down more, I will be weak. Let me take a short break.

古文：顷之喘定，奏曰： 陛下以臣等言非，罪之可也，虽拜何益？ 
现代文：过了一会儿喘息停止，上奏说： 陛下认为找们说得不对，可以治罪，即使下拜有什么好处？ 
English: After a while, the breathing stopped, and the prelude said: Your Majesty thinks that what we have said is wrong and can be punished, even if there is any benefit in bowing down?

古文：帝意稍解，曰： 勿拜。 
现代文：皇帝的怒意逐渐消除，说： 不要下拜了。 
English: The emperor's anger gradually dissipated and he said, "Don't bow down.

古文：赐酒一卮而遣之，其议遂寝。
现代文：赐给一杯酒让他们回去，议和的事就作罢了。
English: Give them a glass of wine, let them go home, and let's talk peace.

古文：因迁琦御史中丞，居数月，复为端明殿学士。
现代文：接着迁吕琦为御史中丞，过了几个月，又授任端明殿学士。
English: Next, Lyu Hao was transferred to the position of goshi chujo, and a few months later, he was also awarded the title of Duanming palace bachelor.

古文：其后晋高祖起太原，果引契丹为助，遂以亡唐。
现代文：后来晋高祖在太原起兵，果然引来契丹援助，于是消灭了唐。
English: Later, Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, successfully attracted Khitan aid, and then eliminated Tang.

古文：琦事晋为秘书监，累迁兵部侍郎。
现代文：吕琦事奉晋任秘书监，多次升迁为兵部侍郎。
English: Lv Ying was promoted to the post of superintendent of secretaries, and was promoted several times to the post of attendant of the military department.

古文：天福八年卒。赵玉仕至职方员外郎，琦事之如父，玉疾，亲尝药扶侍，及卒，为其家主办丧葬。
现代文：天福八年去世趟玉官做到职方员外郎，吕琦像对待父亲一样事奉他，趟玉有病，亲自尝药扶侍，到死时，为他家主办丧葬。
English: In the eighth year of Tianfu, Watanabe died. Watanabe was a high-ranking government official and the younger brother of a high-ranking government official. Lyu Hao treated him like a father. When Watanabe was ill, he personally took medicine and assisted him. When he died, he hosted a funeral for his family.

古文：玉子文度幼孤，琦教以学，如己子，后举进士及第云。
现代文：趟玉的儿子趟文度年幼丧父，吕琦教他读书，像对自己的儿子一样，后来考中了进士。
English: Watanabe's son, Watanabe Mundo, lost his father at a young age. Lv Ying taught him to read, just as she did with her own son, and he later passed the entrance examination.

古文：琦有子馀庆、端。
现代文：吕琦有儿子叫吕余庆、吕端。
English: Lv Yao had sons named Lv Yuqing and Lv Duong.

古文：○薛融
现代文：薛融，汾州平迁人。
English: Xue Rong, a resettler from Zhangzhou.

古文：薛融，汾州平遥人也。少以儒学知名，唐明宗时为右补阙，直弘文馆。
现代文：年轻时以儒学闻名，唐明宗时任右补阙，直弘文馆。
English: When he was young, he was famous for his Confucianism. At that time, he was the Right Auxiliary Prelate of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, and the Naohiro Library.

古文：晋高祖镇太原，融为观察判官。高祖徙郓，欲据太原拒命，延见宾佐，问以可否，而坐中或赞成之，或恐惧不敢言，融独从容对曰： 融本儒生尔，军旅之事，未尝学也，进退存亡之理，岂易言哉！ 
现代文：晋高祖镇守太原，薛融任观察判官晋高祖调任郫州，想占据太原抗拒任命，召见宾僚，询问可否，而在座的人有的赞成，有的恐惧不敢说话，惟独薛融从容自如地回答说： 我薛融原是儒生而已，军队的事，不曾学习，进退存亡的道理，难道能轻易说吗！ 
English: Shing Gao Zu, the town guard of Taiyuan, and Xue Rong Ren, the observation judge of Shing Gao Zu transferred to Zhangzhou, wanted to occupy Taiyuan, resisted the appointment, summoned the guests, and inquired whether it was possible. While some people here were in favor, some were afraid to speak, but Xue Rong replied calmly: I Xue Rong Ren is only a Confucian, I have never studied the military affairs, the principle of advance and retreat, can I say it easily?

古文：高祖不之责也。
现代文：晋高祖没有责备他。
English: Jin Gaozu did not reproach him.

古文：高祖入立，拜吏部郎中，兼侍御史知杂事。
现代文：晋高祖登位，拜他为吏部郎中，兼侍御史知杂事。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was worshipped as a junior member of the cadre, and also as an attendant of the emperor, who was knowledgeable about miscellaneous matters.

古文：累拜左谏议大夫，迁中书舍人。
现代文：累经升迁为左谏议大夫，升任中书舍人。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zuo Jianli Doctor, and promoted to the position of Zhongshushe Renren.

古文：融曰： 文辞非臣所长也。 
现代文：薛融说： 文辞不是我擅长的。 
English: Xue Rong said, "Writing is not my forte.

古文：遂辞不拜。
现代文：于是推辞不接受。
English: I will not resign from this post.

古文：时诏修洛阳大内，融上疏切谏，高祖褒纳其言，即诏罢其役。
现代文：当时下韶修洛阳皇官，薛融上疏急切谏阻，晋高祖赞扬并采纳了他的意见，随即下诏停止修建宫殿。
English: At that time, Xue Rong, the imperial official in charge of Luoyang, raised an urgent objection, and Emperor Gaozu praised and adopted his opinion, and then issued an edict to stop building the palace.

古文：迁御史中丞，改尚书右丞，分司西京。
现代文：升任御史中丞，改为尚书右丞，分司西京。
English: Promoted to goshi chujo, changed to shoshu ujo, subdivided into Saikyo.

古文：卒，年六十。
现代文：去世，享年六十岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty.

古文：○何泽
现代文：何泽，广州人。
English: He Ze, from Guangzhou.

古文：何泽，广州人也。父鼎，唐末为容管经略使。
现代文：父亲何鼎，唐末任容管经略使。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, his father, He Ding, appointed Yang Guan Jing as a minor official.

古文：泽少好学，长于歌诗。
现代文：何泽年轻好学，擅长歌诗。
English: Heze is young, eager to learn, and good at poetry.

古文：举进士，为洛阳令。
现代文：考中进士，任洛阳令。
English: Entered the middle school examination, appointed to Luoyang.

古文：唐庄宗好畋猎，数践民田，泽乃潜身伏草间伺庄宗，当马谏曰： 陛下未能一天下以休兵，而暴敛疲民以给军食。
现代文：唐庄宗喜好打猎，多次践踏民田，何泽就潜身埋伏在草丛中等唐庄宗，挡着他的马谏阻说： 陛下没能统一天下以消除战事，却对疲惫的百姓横征暴敛以供给军需。
English: Tangzhuangzong was fond of hunting and repeatedly trampled on people's fields. Heze lurked in the bushes in the middle of Tangzhuangzong, blocking his horse and saying: Your Majesty has not been able to unify the country to eliminate the war, but has imposed on the tired people to supply military supplies.

古文：今田将熟，奈何恣畋游以害多稼？
现代文：眼下庄稼正要成熟，怎么能放纵打猎游乐损害众多庄稼？
English: Now that the crops are about to mature, how can indulging in hunting and recreation damage many crops?

古文：使民何以出租贼，吏以何督民耕？
现代文：这样让老百姓拿什么交租赋，让官吏怎样监督百姓耕作？
English: In this way, let the common people take what to pay rent, and let the officials supervise the people's farming?

古文：陛下不听臣言，愿赐臣死于马前，使后世知陛下之过。 
现代文：陛下如果不听取我的意见，希望赐我死在马前，让后世知道陛下的过错。 
English: If Your Majesty does not listen to my advice, I hope to die before the horse, so that future generations will know Your Majesty's fault.

古文：庄宗大笑，为之止猎。
现代文：唐庄宗大笑，因此停止了打猎。
English: Tang Zhuozong laughed loudly and stopped hunting.

古文：拜仓部郎中。
现代文：授何泽为仓部郎中。
English: Hosawa was the second son of Kurabe.

古文：明宗时，数上书言事。
现代文：庸明宗时，多次上书论事。
English: When he was a member of the Yongming sect, he wrote several times on the subject.

古文：明宗幸汴州，又欲幸鄴，而人情不便，大臣屡言不听；泽伏閤切谏，明宗嘉之，拜吏部郎中、史馆修撰。
现代文：唐明宗驾临汴州，又想到邺都，而人心不安，大臣们多次劝说都小采纳；何泽拜伏在官阙下急切谏阻，唐明宗赞扬他，拜为吏部郎中、史馆修撰。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of Tang went to Linshou, he also thought of the capital, but the people were uneasy, and the ministers repeatedly persuaded the capital to adopt it; He Zebei was eager to resist under the official's command, and Emperor Mingzong praised him, and He Zebei was a member of the cadre department and wrote for the history museum.

古文：泽外虽直言，而内实邪佞，尝于内殿起居，班退，独留，以笏叩颡，北望而呼曰： 明主，明主！ 
现代文：何泽表面上虽然直言不讳，而内心其实奸邪谄媚，曾在内殿请安，朝班退下后，独自留下，用手板敲打额头，北望呼叫说： 英明的君主，英明的君主！ 
English: Although he was outspoken on the surface, he was actually treacherous and charming in his heart. He once greeted the emperor in the inner hall, and after the imperial guard retreated, he was left alone, beating his forehead with a hand board, and looking to the north, he called out, "Wise monarch, wise monarch!"

古文：闻者皆哂之。
现代文：听见的人都讥笑他。
English: And all who heard it made fun of him.

古文：五代之际，民苦于兵，往往因亲疾以割股，或既丧而割乳庐墓，以规免州县赋役。
现代文：五代时，老百姓苦于用兵打仗，常常因亲人患病而割下自己腿上的肉来治病，有的已经死了还在守护坟墓的小屋中割下乳房，以便设法免去州县赋役。
English: During the Five Dynasties, the common people struggled to fight with soldiers, often cutting off the flesh of their own legs to cure their relatives who were ill. Some had already died and cut off their breasts in the huts guarding the tombs in order to try to be exempted from state and county service.

古文：户部岁给蠲符，不可胜数，而课州县出纸，号为 蠲纸 。
现代文：卢部每年下达免除租赋的文书，不可胜数，而责令州县出纸，号称 免租纸 。
English: The Ministry of Public Security issues countless rent-free documents every year, and orders counties to issue paper, known as rent-free paper.

古文：泽上书言其敝，明宗下诏悉废户部蠲纸。
现代文：何泽上书论说它的害处，唐明宗下诏全部废除户部免租纸。
English: He Zawangshu discussed its harmfulness, and the Tang and Ming Dynasties issued an edict abolishing all rent-free paper for households.

古文：泽与宰相赵凤有旧，数私于凤，求为给谏。
现代文：何泽和宰相赵凤有旧交，多次向趟凤表诉私衷，请求任命他为给谏。
English: Heze had an old friendship with Prime Minister Zhao Feng. He repeatedly expressed his private feelings to Wai Feng and requested that he be appointed as the new prime minister.

古文：凤薄其为人，以为太常少卿。
现代文：趟凤看不起他的为人，任命他为太常少卿。
English: Wafeng looked down on him as a person and appointed him to the post of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：敕未出而泽先知之，即称新官上章自诉。
现代文：敕命还没发布而何泽已事先知道，就署上新官名上章申诉。
English: The decree had not yet been issued and Heze had already known about it in advance, so he signed an appeal against the new official's name.

古文：章下中书，凤等言： 泽未拜命而称新官，轻侮朝廷，请坐以法。 
现代文：他的奏章下到中书省，赵凤等人说： 何泽还没有被任命受职就以新官自称，轻侮朝廷，请依法处理。 
English: His report was sent to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Zhao Feng and others said, "Heze has not yet been appointed to the post, and he is calling himself a new official, which is disrespectful to the imperial court. Please deal with him according to the law."

古文：乃以太仆少卿致仕，居于河阳。
现代文：于是以太仆少卿身份退休，住在河阳。
English: As a result, he retired as a servant of a minor lord and lived in Kawayo.

古文：泽时年已七十，尚希仕进，即遣婢宜子诣匦上章言事，请立秦王为皇太子。
现代文：何泽当时已经七十岁，还希求升官，随即派奴婢宜子到朝廷投书论事，请求立秦王为皇太子。
English: Heze was already seventy years old at the time, and he wanted to be promoted to the highest rank. He immediately sent his slave, Yoshiko, to the imperial court to submit a petition, requesting that King Qin be made crown prince.

古文：秦王素骄，多不轨，遂成其祸，由泽而始。
现代文：秦王素来骄横，常常行为不轨，于是酿成灾祸，这是从何泽开始的。
English: King Qin had always been arrogant and often misbehaved, which led to disaster. This started with Heze.

古文：晋高祖入立，召为太常少卿，以疾卒于家。
现代文：晋高祖登位，征召他为太常少卿，因病死在家中。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was conscripted to serve as Taizhong Shaoqing (太常少卿), but he died at home due to illness.

古文：○王权王权，字秀山，太原人也。
现代文：王权字秀山，太原人。
English: Wang Quan, also known as Xiu Shan, was from Taiyuan.

古文：唐左仆射起之曾孙。
现代文：唐左仆射王起的曾孙。
English: He was the great-grandson of Tang's left-hand retainer Sha Wangzhi.

古文：父荛，官至右司郎中。
现代文：父亲王莞，官做到右司郎中。
English: His father, Wang Guan, was a middle-ranking official.

古文：权举进士，为右补阙。
现代文：王权考中进士，任右补阙。
English: He was admitted to the middle school of Wang Quan Kao, and was appointed to the post of right supplement.

古文：唐亡，事梁为职方员外郎、知制诰、翰林学士，累迁御史中丞。
现代文：唐灭亡，在梁任职方员外郎、知制诰、翰林学士，累经升迁为御史中丞。
English: After the Tang Dynasty's demise, Liang was promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of History after serving as Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, Vice-Minister of Education, and Vice-Minister of Culture.

古文：唐庄宗灭梁，贬权随州司马。
现代文：唐庄宗灭梁，贬王权为随州司马。
English: Tangzhuangzong extinguished Liang, and the power to depose the king was transferred to Suizhou Sima.

古文：起为右庶子，累迁户部尚书。
现代文：起用为右庶子，累经升迁为户部尚书。
English: He was appointed as the second son, and was later promoted to head of the household.

古文：晋高祖时为兵部尚书。
现代文：晋高祖时任兵部尚书。
English: When he was promoted to Gaozu, he held the post of Hyobu Shosho.

古文：是时，高祖以父事契丹，权当奉使，叹曰： 我虽不才，安能稽颡于穹庐乎？ 
现代文：这时，晋高祖把塞丑当父亲事奉，王权应当奉命出使契丹，感叹说： 我虽然没有才能，又怎能在毡帐中跪拜？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Jinguo's ancestor, who served Ce Jiu as his father, lamented that the royal power should be ordered to send Khitan, saying: Although I have no talent, how can I kneel down in the account?

古文：因辞不行，坐是停任。
现代文：因而推辞不去，因此被停职。
English: He declined to do so and was therefore suspended.

古文：逾年以太子少傅致仕。
现代文：遇了一年以太子少傅身份退休。
English: One year later, he retired as a junior chef.

古文：卒，年七十入，赠左仆射。○史圭
现代文：去世，享年七十八岁，赠左仆射史圭，常山石邑人。
English: He passed away at the age of seventy-eight. He was survived by his left-hand man, Sho Shigui, a native of Stone Town, Changshan.

古文：史圭，常山石邑人也。为人明敏好学。
现代文：为人聪明机敏好学。
English: He is intelligent, quick-witted and eager to learn.

古文：为宁晋、乐寿县令，有善政，县人立碑以颂之。
现代文：任宁晋、乐寿县令，有政绩，县中人立碑颂扬他。
English: Ren Ningjin, the governor of Leju County, had political achievements, and people in the county erected a monument to praise him.

古文：郭崇韬镇成德，辟为从事。
现代文：郭崇韬镇守成德，征召他为从事。
English: Guo Chongxuan, the town guard of Chengde, conscripted him to be engaged in sumo.

古文：明宗时，为尚书郎。
现代文：唐明宗时，任尚书郎。
English: When he was a member of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was called Shang Shuro.

古文：安重诲为枢密使，荐圭直学士。
现代文：安重诲任枢密使，推荐史圭为直学士。
English: An Chong was appointed as a Privy Counsellor and recommended Shi Gui as a direct graduate.

古文：故事，直学士职虽清，而承领文书，参掌庶务，与判官无异。
现代文：按旧例，直学士职位虽然清闲，但承领文书，参加掌管众多事务，和判官没有差别。
English: According to the old practice, although the post of direct bachelor is idle, it is no different from the magistrate to receive documents and participate in the management of many affairs.

古文：重诲素不知书，倚圭以备顾问，始白许圭升殿侍立。
现代文：安重诲素来不知书，依靠史圭作顾问，就请求准许史圭上殿侍立。
English: An Chongyun never knew how to read and relied on Shi Gui as an adviser, so he requested permission from Shi Gui to attend the palace.

古文：枢密直学士升殿自圭始。
现代文：枢密直学士上殿是从史圭开始的。
English: The rise to the Privy Council began with Shigeyoshi.

古文：改尚书右丞，判吏部铨事。
现代文：史圭改任尚书右丞，判吏部铨事。
English: Shi Gui was reassigned to the post of Shang Shuxu Rongcheng, and was in charge of the justice department.

古文：重诲败死，圭出为贝州刺史。
现代文：安重诲败死，史圭出任贝州刺史。
English: After the death of An Chongyu, Shigui became the governor of Bozhou.

古文：罢归常山，闭门绝人事，出入闾里乘辎軿车。
现代文：罢免回到常山，闭门谢绝人事交往，出入里巷都乘坐有屏蔽的车子。
English: He returned to Changshan after being removed from office, closed his doors and refused to have any contact with people. He used a shielded car to go in and out of his home.

古文：晋高祖立，召拜刑部侍郎、盐铁副使，迁吏部侍郎，分知铨事，有能名。
现代文：晋高祖登位，召拜为刑部侍郎、盐铁副使，升任吏部侍郎，分知铨事，有能干的称誉。
English: He was promoted to the position of high-ranking ancestor, and was called to be the attendant of the criminal department, the vice-envoy of salt and iron, and was promoted to the attendant of the criminal department. He was well-versed in affairs and was praised for his ability.

古文：以疾罢，卒于常山。
现代文：因病罢免，死在常山。
English: He was dismissed due to illness and died in Changshan.

古文：○龙敏龙敏，字欲讷，幽州永清人也。
现代文：龙敏字欲讷，幽州永清人。
English: Long Min's character is greedy, Yuzhou Yongqing people.

古文：少仕州，摄参军。
现代文：年轻时在州中做官，代理参军。
English: When he was young, he worked as an official in the state and joined the army as a proxy.

古文：刘守光乱，敏避之沧州，遂客于梁，久不调。
现代文：刘守光作乱，龙敏逃避到沧州，于是在梁客居，很久没有调任。
English: Liu Shouguang caused chaos, Long Min fled to Cangzhou, so he stayed in Liang's guest house and was not transferred for a long time.

古文：敏素善冯道，道为唐庄宗从事，乃潜往依之。
现代文：龙敏素来和冯道交好，冯道任唐庄宗的从事，于是暗中去依附他。
English: Long Min had always been friendly with Feng Dao. Feng Dao was engaged in Tang Zhuangzong, so he secretly attached himself to him.

古文：监军张承业谓道曰： 闻子有客，可与俱来。 
现代文：监军张承业对冯道说： 听说你有客人，可以和他一道来。 
English: Zhang Chengye, the military supervisor, said to Feng Dao: I heard that you have a guest, you can come with him.

古文：道以敏见承业，承业辟敏监军巡官，使掌奏记。
现代文：冯道让龙敏拜见张承业，张承业推举龙敏担任监军巡官，让他掌管奏记。
English: Feng Dao asked Long Min to meet Zhang Chengye, and Zhang Chengye recommended Long Min to be the inspector of troops, and put him in charge of the report.

古文：庄宗即位，召拜司门员外郎。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，召拜为司门员外郎。
English: Tangzhuangzong ascended to the throne and was called to be the gatekeeper, Wairo.

古文：敏父咸式，年七十馀，而其祖父年九十馀，皆在鄴，敏乃求为兴唐尹，事祖、父以孝闻。
现代文：龙敏的父亲龙咸式，七十多岁，而他的祖父九十多岁，都在邺都，龙敏于是请求任兴唐尹，事奉祖父、父亲，以孝顺闻名。
English: Long Min's father, Long Xianshi, in his seventies, and his grandfather, in his nineties, were both in Shendu, so Long Min asked Ren Xing Tang Yin to serve his grandfather and father, who was known for his filial piety.

古文：丁母忧，去职。
现代文：为母亲服丧，离职。
English: He resigned from his post to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：赵在礼反，逼敏起视事。
现代文：趟在礼反叛，催逼龙敏出来处理事务。
English: This time, he rebelled at the ceremony, urging Long Min to come out to deal with the matter.

古文：明宗即位，在礼镇沧州，敏乃复得居丧。
现代文：唐明宗登位，赵在礼镇守沧州，龙敏纔又得以守丧。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, Zhao guarded Cangzhou in Lianzhen, and Long Minjun was able to observe the funeral.

古文：服除，累拜兵部侍郎。
现代文：服完丧，多次升迁为兵部侍郎。
English: After the funeral, he was promoted several times to the position of attendant of the military department.

古文：冯赟留守北京，辟敏副留守。
现代文：冯赞留守北京，推举龙敏为副留守。
English: Feng Zan stayed in Beijing, and Long Min was elected as his deputy.

古文：赟入为枢密使，敏拜吏部侍郎。
现代文：冯簧任枢密使，龙敏被授焉吏部侍郎。
English: Feng Rene was appointed as a privy councilor, and Long Min was given the title of chamberlain.

古文：是时，晋高祖起太原，乞兵契丹。
现代文：这时，晋高祖在太原起兵，向契丹请求援兵。
English: At this time, Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan and requested reinforcements from Khitan.

古文：唐废帝在怀州，赵德钧父子有异志，张敬达屯于晋安，势甚危急。
现代文：唐废帝在怀州，趟德钧父子有二心，张敬达屯驻在晋安，形势十分危急。
English: Emperor Tang Huadu was in Huizhou, Wudi Deyu and his son were of two minds, and Zhang Jingdatun was stationed in Jin'an. The situation was very critical.

古文：废帝问计从臣，敏曰： 晋所恃者契丹也。
现代文：唐废帝询问跟随他的臣子有什么办法，龙敏说： 晋仗恃的是丹。
English: When Emperor Gaozong inquired about the methods of the courtiers who followed him, Longmin said, "The one who should be promoted is Xidan.

古文：东丹王失国之君，今在京师，若以兵送东丹自幽州而入西楼，契丹且有内顾之忧，何暇助晋？
现代文：柬丹王是失去国家的君主，现在在京师，如果用兵送柬丹王从幽州进入西楼，契丹将有内颅之忧，哪有闲暇援助晋？
English: The King of Cambodia is a monarch who has lost his country and is now in Beijing. If soldiers are used to send the King of Cambodia from Yuzhou into the West Tower, the Khitan will have inner-cranial worries. Is there any leisure assistance for Jin?

古文：晋失契丹，大事去矣。 
现代文：晋失去契丹的支援，大事就完了。 
English: If Jin loses the support of Khitan, it's all over.

古文：又谓李懿曰： 敏，燕人也，能知德钧。
现代文：又对李懿说： 我龙敏是燕人，能够了解赵德钧。
English: He also said to Li Wei: I Longmin am a Swallow person, I can understand Zhao Deyu.

古文：德钧为将，守城婴堑，笃励健兒而已。
现代文：趟德钧为将领，依据壕沟守城，一心鼓励士兵罢了。
English: He was a general, defending the city according to the trench, and encouraging the soldiers.

古文：使其当大敌，奋不顾身，非其能也。
现代文：要让他身当大敌，奋不顾身，不是他的才能。
English: It's not his talent that makes him such a formidable foe.

古文：况有异志乎？
现代文：何况有二心呢？
English: What's more, there are two hearts?

古文：今闻驾前之马，犹有五千，愿得壮者千匹，健兵千人，与勇将郎万金，自平遥沿山冒虏中而趋官砦，且战且行，得其半达，则事济矣！ 
现代文：听说现在皇帝的马还有五千匹，希望得到壮马一千匹，矫健的士兵一千人，和勇将郎万金一道，从平适沿着山路进入契丹境内而前往官寨，一面走一面打，能够走完一半的路程，事情就成功了。 
English: Hearing that the emperor still had five thousand horses, he hoped to get a thousand strong horses and a thousand strong soldiers. Together with the brave general Lang Wanjin, he went from Pingdu along the mountain road into the territory of Khitan to the government camp. They fought as they walked, and were able to complete half of the journey, and the matter was successful.

古文：懿为言之废帝，废帝莫能用。
现代文：李懿替他告诉唐废帝，唐废帝没有采用。
English: Li Zhen told Emperor Tang Wasteland on his behalf that Emperor Tang Wasteland did not adopt it.

古文：然人皆壮其大言。
现代文：但人们都认为他的话语豪壮。
English: But people think his words are heroic.

古文：历晋为太常卿，使于吴越。
现代文：在晋历任太常卿，出使到昊越。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, he held the position of Taizhongqing and was sent to Ho Yue.

古文：是时，使吴越者，见吴越王皆下拜，敏独揖之。
现代文：这时，出使昊越的人，见到昊越王都要下拜，龙敏偏偏对他作揖。
English: At this time, the envoys of Hao Yue all bowed down when they saw the king of Hao Yue, and Long Min made a mockery of him.

古文：还，迁工部侍郎。
现代文：返回，升任工部侍郎。
English: He returned and was promoted to the position of a chamberlain in the engineering department.

古文：乾祐元年，疡发于首卒，赠右仆射。
现代文：干佑元年，头上发疮而死，赠右仆射。
English: In the first year of Ganymede's reign, he died of a boil on his head and was presented with a right-handed arrow.

