古文：十有一年春，齐国书帅师伐我。
现代文：十一年春季，齐国的国书率领军队攻打鲁国。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the state secretary of Qi led the army to attack Lu.

古文：夏，陈辕颇出奔郑。
现代文：夏季，陈国的辕颇逃到郑国。
English: In the summer, Chen fled to Zheng.

古文：五月，公会吴伐齐。
现代文：五月，哀公与吴国一起攻打齐国。
English: In May, Aiko and Wu attacked Qi together.

古文：甲戌，齐国书帅师及吴战于艾陵，齐师败绩，获齐国书。
现代文：甲戌日，齐国的国书率军与吴国军队在艾陵交战，齐国军队被打败。
English: On Armistice Day, the army of the State of Qi and the army of the State of Wu fought in Ailing, and the army of the State of Qi was defeated.

古文：秋七月辛酉，滕子虞母卒。
现代文：秋季七月辛酉日，滕隐公去世。
English: In the autumn, on the hottest day of July, Teng Yinggong passed away.

古文：冬十有一月，葬滕隐公。
现代文：冬季十一月，安葬滕隐公。
English: In the winter of November, Teng Yinggong was buried.

古文：卫世叔齐出奔宋。
现代文：卫国的世叔逃到宋国。
English: The uncle of the Emperor fled to the Song Dynasty.

古文：十一年春，齐为鄎故，国书、高无帅师伐我，及清。
现代文：十一年春季，齐国因为鄎地这一战的缘故，国书、高无邳带兵进攻我国，到达清地。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, because of the battle of Xingdi, the State of Qi and Gao Muxian led the soldiers to attack our country and reached Qingdi.

古文：季孙谓其宰冉求曰： 齐师在清，必鲁故也。
现代文：季孙对他的家臣之长冉求说： 齐国驻扎在清地，必然是为了鲁国的缘故，怎么办？ 
English: Ji Sun said to Ran Cu, the head of his vassals, "If Qi is stationed in Qing, it must be for the sake of Lu. What should we do?

古文：若之何？ 求曰： 一子守，二子从公禦诸竟。 季孙曰： 不能。 
现代文：冉求说： 您三位中间一位留守，两位跟着国君在边境抵御。 季孙说： 不行。 
English: Ran Qiu said, "Among the three of you, one will stay behind, and the other two will follow the sovereign to defend the border." Ji Sun said, "That's not possible.

古文：求曰： 居封疆之间。 
现代文：冉求说： 那就在境内近郊抵御。 
English: Ranqiu said, "Then fight them within the territory and in the suburbs."

古文：季孙告二子。二子不可。
现代文：季孙告诉了叔孙、孟孙，这两人不同意。
English: Ji Sun told his uncle Sun and Meng Sun, but the two disagreed.

古文：求曰： 若不可，则君无出。
现代文：冉求说： 如果不同意，那么国君就不要出去。
English: Ran Qiu said, "If you don't agree, then don't let the sovereign go out."

古文：一子帅师，背城而战。不属者，非鲁人也。
现代文：您一人带领军队，背城作战，不参加战斗的就不能算是鲁国人。
English: You are the only one to lead the army and fight behind the city. If you do not take part in the battle, you cannot be considered a citizen of Lu.

古文：鲁之群室，众于齐之兵车。一室敌车，优矣。
现代文：鲁国的卿大夫各家的总数比齐国的战车要多，即使您一家的战车也多于齐军，您担心什么？
English: The total number of generals and doctors in Lu is more than the number of chariots in Qi. Even if your family has more chariots than the Qi army, what are you worried about?

古文：子何患焉？二子之不欲战也宜，政在季氏。
现代文：他们两位不想作战是很自然的，因为政权掌握在季氏手里。
English: It's natural that the two of them don't want to fight, because the regime is in the hands of the Ji family.

古文：当子之身，齐人伐鲁而不能战，子之耻也，大不列于诸侯矣。 
现代文：国政承担在您的肩上，齐国人攻打鲁国而不能作战，这是您的耻辱。这就完全不配和诸侯并列了。 
English: It is your shame that the affairs of state are on your shoulders, that the people of Qi attacked Lu but were unable to fight, and that you do not deserve to be ranked with the princes.

古文：季孙使从于朝，俟于党氏之沟。武叔呼而问战焉。
现代文：季孙氏让冉求跟着他上朝，在党氏之沟等着，叔孙喊过冉求问他关于作战的意见。
English: Ji Sun asked Ran Cu to follow him to the imperial court and wait in the ditch of the Party clan. Ji Sun called Ran Cu to ask his opinion on the battle.

古文：对曰： 君子有远虑，小人何知？ 
现代文：冉求回答说： 君子有着深远的考虑，小人知道什么？ 
English: Ran Qiu replied: A gentleman has far-reaching considerations, what does a villain know?

古文：懿子强问之，对曰： 小人虑材而言，量力而共者也。 
现代文：孟孙硬是问他，他回答说： 小人是考虑了才干而说话，估计了力量才出力的。 
English: Meng Sun asked him, and he replied, "A small man speaks according to his ability, and only exerts power according to his strength.

古文：武叔曰： 是谓我不成丈夫也。 
现代文：叔孙说： 这是说我成不了大丈夫啊。 
English: The great-uncle said, "That means it's okay if I don't make it."

古文：退而蒐乘，孟孺子洩帅右师，颜羽御，邴洩为右。
现代文：退回去以后就检阅部队。孟孺子泄率领右军，颜羽为他驾御战车，邴泄作为车右。
English: After retreating, he reviewed the troops. Meng Yanzi led the right army, Yan Yu drove the chariot for him, and Yanzi rode on the right.

古文：冉求帅左师，管周父御，樊迟为右。
现代文：冉求率领左军，管周父为他驾御战车，樊迟作为车右。
English: Ran Qiu led the left army, Zhou's father drove the chariot for him, and Zou Zi drove the right chariot.

古文：季孙曰： 须也弱。 
现代文：季孙说： 樊迟年纪太轻了。 
English: Qisun said: "He is too young.

古文：有子曰： 就用命焉。 
现代文：冉求说： 因为他能够听从命令。 
English: Ran Cu said: Because he can follow orders.

古文：季氏之甲七千，冉有以武城人三百为己徒卒。老幼守宫，次于雩门之外。
现代文：季氏的甲士七千人，冉求带着三百个武城人作为自己的亲兵，老的小的守在宫里，驻扎在雩门外边。
English: The Ji clan had seven thousand warriors, Ran Cui took three hundred Wucheng people as his own soldiers, the old ones were kept in the palace and stationed outside the gate.

古文：五日，右师从之。
现代文：过了五天，右军才跟上来。
English: It took five days for the right wing to catch up.

古文：公叔务人见保者而泣曰： 事充政重，上不能谋，士不能死，何以治民？
现代文：公叔务人见到守城的人就掉眼泪说： 徭役烦、赋税多，上面不能谋划，战士不能拼命，用什么来治理百姓？
English: When he saw the people guarding the city, his uncle-in-law shed tears and said, "It's tiring and taxing. The higher-ups can't plan, and the soldiers can't fight to the death. What can we use to govern the people?

古文：吾既言之矣，敢不勉乎！ 
现代文：我已经这么说了，怎么敢不努力呢！ 
English: I've said it before, how dare you not work hard!

古文：师及齐师战于郊，齐师自稷曲。师不踰沟。
现代文：鲁军和齐军在郊外作战。齐军从稷曲攻击鲁军，鲁军不敢过沟迎战。
English: The Lu army and the Qi army fought in the suburbs. The Qi army attacked the Lu army from Xingqu, and the Lu army did not dare to cross the ditch to fight.

古文：樊迟曰： 非不能也，不信子也。请三刻而踰之。 
现代文：樊迟说： 不是不能，是不相信您，请您把号令申明三次，然后带头过沟。 
English: Hao Chi said, "It's not that I can't do it, it's that I don't trust you. Please state your command three times, and then lead the way across the ditch."

古文：如之，众从之。
现代文：冉求照他的话办，众人就跟着他过沟。
English: Ran Qiu obeyed his words.

古文：师入齐军。
现代文：鲁军攻入齐军。
English: The Lu army invaded the Qi army.

古文：右师奔，齐人从之，陈瓘、陈庄涉泗。
现代文：鲁国右军奔逃，齐国追赶。陈瓘、陈庄徒步渡过泗水。
English: Lu's right army fled and Qi's pursued them. Chen Xi and Chen Zhuang crossed the Surabaya River on foot.

古文：孟之侧后入以为殿，抽矢策其马曰： 马不进也。 
现代文：孟之侧在全军之后最后回来，他抽出箭来打他的马，说： 我走在最后是马不肯往前走。 
English: Meng Zhifang, who was the last to return after the whole army, drew an arrow to hit his horse and said, "I walked until the horse refused to walk any further."

古文：林不狃之伍曰： 走乎！ 
现代文：林不狃的伙伴说： 逃跑吗？ 
English: Lin's bewildered partner said, "Run away?

古文：不狃曰： 谁不如？ 
现代文：不狃说： 我不如谁？ 
English: But he said, "Who am I better than?

古文：曰： 然则止乎？ 
现代文：伙伴说： 那么停下来抵抗吗？ 
English: My partner said, "So you're going to stop and resist?"

古文：不狃曰： 恶贤？ 
现代文：不狃说： 停下来抵抗就好么？ 
English: Without hesitation, he said: Would it be all right to stop and resist?

古文：徐步而死。
现代文：从容缓步，被杀死。
English: He walked slowly and was killed.

古文：师获甲首八十，齐人不能师。
现代文：鲁军砍下甲士的脑袋八十个，齐国人不能整顿军队。
English: The Lu army cut off the heads of eighty warriors, and the Qi people could not reorganize the army.

古文：宵，谍曰： 齐人遁。 
现代文：晚上，侦探报告说： 齐国人逃跑了。 
English: In the evening, the detective reported: "The Qi people have fled."

古文：冉有请从之三，季孙弗许。
现代文：冉有三次请求追击，季孙没有允许。
English: Ran made three requests for pursuit, but Ji Sun did not allow it.

古文：孟孺子语人曰： 我不如颜羽，而贤于邴洩。
现代文：孟孺子对别人说： 我不如颜羽，但比邴泄高明。
English: Meng Yanzi said to others: I am not as good as others, but I am better than others.

古文：子羽锐敏，我不欲战而能默。
现代文：颜羽敏锐善战，我心虽不想作战，但口中不说逃走的话，邴泄却说 赶着马逃走 。 
English: Yan Yu was keen and good at fighting. Although my heart didn't want to fight, I didn't say anything about running away. Instead, I said, "I'll run away on my horse."

古文：洩曰： 驱之。  公为与其嬖僮汪锜乘，皆死，皆殡。
现代文：公为和他宠爱的小僮汪锜同坐一辆战车，一起战死，都加以殡敛。
English: He and his favorite pupil Wang Yao rode in a chariot together, died together in battle, and were both buried together.

古文：孔子曰： 能执干戈以卫社稷，可无殇也。 
现代文：孔子说： 能够拿起干戈保卫国家，可以不作为夭折来对待。 
English: Confucius said: "He who can take up arms to defend his country should not be treated as if he were dead."

古文：冉有用矛于齐师，故能入其军。
现代文：冉有使用矛攻杀齐军，所以能攻破齐军。
English: Ran You used a spear to attack and kill the Qi army, so he could defeat the Qi army.

古文：孔子曰： 义也。 
现代文：孔子说： 这是合于道义的。 
English: Confucius said, "It is morally right."

古文：夏，陈辕颇出奔郑。
现代文：夏季，陈国的辕颇逃亡到郑国。
English: In the summer, Chen fled to Zheng.

古文：初，辕颇为司徒，赋封田以嫁公女。有馀，以为己大器。
现代文：当初，辕颇做司徒，对封邑内的土田征收赋税为哀公的女儿出嫁之用；还有剩余的，就用来为自己铸造钟鼎。
English: At the beginning, Yan Po was a scholar, and he levied taxes on the soil in the fief to pay for the marriage of Aiguo's daughter; he also used the surplus to make a bell for himself.

古文：国人逐之，故出。
现代文：国内的人们驱逐他，所以出国。
English: The people inside the country expelled him, so he left the country.

古文：道渴，其族辕咺进稻醴、粱糗、腵脯焉。
现代文：在路上口渴，他的部下辕咺奉上甜酒、小米干饭、腌肉干。
English: Thirsty on the road, his subordinates were served sweet wine, millet rice, and stewed meat.

古文：喜曰： 何其给也？ 
现代文：辕颇高兴地说： 为什么这样丰盛？ 
English: "Why is it so plentiful?" said Toad, quite pleased.

古文：对曰： 器成而具。 
现代文：辕咺回答说： 器物铸成就准备食物了。 
English: The baboon replied, "The pottery has been made and the food has been prepared.

古文：曰： 何不吾谏？ 
现代文：辕颇说： 为什么不劝阻我？ 
English: "Why didn't you dissuade me?

古文：对曰： 惧先行。 
现代文：辕咺回答说： 怕被你先赶走。 
English: Toad replied, "I'm afraid you'll drive me away first."

古文：为郊战故，公会吴子伐齐。
现代文：为了在郊外作战的缘故，鲁哀公会合吴王进攻齐国。
English: In order to fight in the suburbs, Rui Gong gathered Wu Wang to attack Qi.

古文：五月克博，壬申，至于嬴。
现代文：五月，攻下博地。
English: In May, they captured Boji.

古文：中军从王。胥门巢将上军，王子姑曹将下军，展如将右军。齐国书将中军，高无将上军，宗楼将下军。
现代文：二十五日到达嬴地，中军跟随吴王，胥门率领上军，王子姑曹率领下军，展如率领右军，齐国的国书率领中军，高无邳率领上军，宗楼率领下军。
English: On the 25th, they arrived in Handan. The Chinese army followed the king of Wu, Shimen led the first army, the prince's aunt led the second army, Zhanru led the right army, Guoxiu of Qi led the Chinese army, Gao Muxuan led the first army, and Zonglou led the second army.

古文：陈僖子谓其弟书： 尔死，我必得志。 
现代文：陈僖子对他的弟弟陈书说： 你要是战死，我一定能够得志。 
English: Chen Zizi said to his brother Chen Shu: "If you die in the war, I will definitely be able to achieve my goal.

古文：宗子阳与闾丘明相厉也。
现代文：宗子阳和闾丘明也互相勉励。
English: Soshiyang and Zou Qiuming also encouraged each other.

古文：桑掩胥御国子。
现代文：桑掩胥为国书驾御战车。
English: Kuwabakken is the chariot driven by the emperor.

古文：公孙夏曰： 二子必死。 
现代文：公孙夏说： 这两个人必然战死。 
English: Gongsun Xia said, "These two must die in battle."

古文：将战，公孙夏命其徒歌《虞殡》。陈子行命其徒具含玉。
现代文：将要开始战斗，公孙夏命令他的部下唱《虞殡》，陈子行命令他的部下准备好含玉。
English: When the battle was about to begin, Gongsun Xia ordered his subordinates to sing "The Funeral of Yu," and Chen Zixing ordered his subordinates to prepare to play the tambourine.

古文：公孙挥命其徒曰： 人寻约，吴发短。 
现代文：公孙挥命令他的部下说： 每人拿一根八尺的绳子，吴国人头发短。 
English: Gongsunwei ordered his men: "Each of you take an eight-foot rope. The people of Wu have short hair.

古文：东郭书曰： 三战必死，于此三矣。 
现代文：东郭书说： 打了三次仗，一定得战死，在这里是第三次了。 
English: Dong Guoshu said, "If you have fought three times, you must die in battle. This is the third time."

古文：使问弦多以琴，曰： 吾不复见子矣。 
现代文：东郭书派人拿琴做礼品去问候弦多，说： 我不会再见到您了。 
English: Dong Guoshu sent someone with a gift of a piano to greet Xinduo, saying, "I won't see you again."

古文：陈书曰： 此行也，吾闻鼓而已，不闻金矣。 
现代文：陈书说： 这次去，我只能听进军的鼓声，听不到退军的金声了。 
English: Chen Shu said, "This time, I can only hear the drums of the advancing army, but not the golden sound of the retreating army.

古文：甲戌，战于艾陵，展如败高子，国子败胥门巢。
现代文：五月二十七日，两军在艾陵作战。展如打败高无邳，国书打败胥门巢。
English: On May 27th, the two armies fought in Ailing. Zhan Ru defeated Gao Muxuan, and Guoshu defeated Yao Mengniu.

古文：王卒助之，大败齐师。获国书、公孙夏、闾丘明、陈书、东郭书，革车八百乘，甲首三千，以献于公。
现代文：吴王率领的部队救助胥门巢，大败齐军，俘虏了国书、公孙夏、闾丘明、陈书、东郭书，革车八百辆，甲士的脑袋三千个，用来献给哀公。
English: The troops led by Wu Wang rescued the Humen Nest, defeated the Qi army, and captured the Guoshu, Gongsun Xia, Zou Quming, Chen Shu, Dong Guo Shu, eight hundred carts, and three thousand heads of knights, which were used to dedicate to the deceased.

古文：将战，吴子呼叔孙曰： 而事何也？ 对曰： 从司马。 
现代文：快要进入战斗，吴王喊叔孙说： 你担任什么职务？ 叔孙说： 司马。 
English: About to enter the battle, the king of Wu called his uncle and grandson and said, "What position do you hold?" The uncle and grandson said, "Sima."

古文：王赐之甲剑铍，曰： 奉尔君事，敬无废命。 
现代文：吴王把甲、剑、铍赐给他，说： 认真地承担你国君交给的任务，不要废弃命令。 
English: King Wu gave him a suit of armor, a sword, and a scepter, and said, "Earnestly undertake the task entrusted to you by your sovereign, and do not abandon your orders."

古文：叔孙未能对，卫赐进曰： 州仇奉甲从君而拜。 
现代文：叔孙不知该如何回答，子贡走在前面，说： 州仇敬受皮甲跟随着您。 
English: Uncles and grandsons do not know how to answer, Zigong walked in front and said: "The state is following you.

古文：公使大史固归国子之元，寘之新箧，褽之以玄，加组带焉。寘书于其上曰： 天若不识不衷，何以使下国？ 
现代文：叔孙叩头接受了赏赐。哀公派太史送回国书的头，放在新的筐里，下面垫上黑色和红色的丝绸，加上绸带，在上面放上一封信，说： 上天如果不了解你们的行为不正，怎么能让下国得胜？ 
English: Uncles and grandsons kowtowed and accepted the reward. The head of the book of the country sent back to the country by Aiko Taishi was placed in a new basket, with black and red silk padded underneath, together with a silk ribbon. A letter was placed on top, saying: If God does not understand the injustice of your actions, how can He let the country below win?

古文：吴将伐齐，越子率其众以朝焉，王及列士，皆有馈赂。
现代文：吴国将要攻打齐国，越王率领他的部下前去朝见，吴王和臣下都赠送食物财礼。
English: The State of Wu was about to attack the State of Qi. King Yue led his subordinates to go to the Imperial Court for a meeting. Both the King of Wu and his subjects presented gifts of food and money.

古文：吴人皆喜，唯子胥惧，曰： 是豢吴也夫！ 
现代文：吴国人都很高兴，惟独伍子胥感到忧惧，说： 这是在豢养吴国的骄气啊！ 
English: The people of Wu were very happy, but Wu Zixuan was worried and said, "This is nurturing the pride of Wu!

古文：谏曰： 越在我，心腹之疾也。壤地同而有欲于我。
现代文：就劝谏说： 越国在我们这里，是心腹中的一个病，同处在一块土地上而对我们有所要求。
English: He said: "The fact that Vietnam is here with us is a sickness in our hearts. We are on the same piece of land and they are making demands on us.

古文：夫其柔服，求济其欲也，不如早从事焉。
现代文：他们的驯服，是为了要求达到他们的欲望，我们不如早点下手。
English: Their taming is to ask for their desires to be met, we might as well get started early.

古文：得志于齐，犹获石田也，无所用之。
现代文：在齐国如愿以偿，就好像得到了石头田一样，没法使用。
English: If you get what you want in Qi Province, it's like getting a stone field, but you can't use it.

古文：越不为沼，吴其泯矣。使医除疾，而曰 必遗类焉 者，未之有也。
现代文：我们不把越国变成池沼，吴国就会被灭掉了，好比让医生治病，而说 一定要留下病根 ，是从来没有的。
English: If we don't turn Yue into a swamp, Wu will be wiped out. It's like asking a doctor to cure a disease, but saying that the root of the disease must be left behind, which has never happened.

古文：《盘庚》之诰曰： 其有颠越不共，则劓殄无遗育，无俾易种于兹邑。 是商所以兴也。
现代文：《尚书》的《盘庚》篇告诫说， 如果有猖狂捣乱不顺从命令的，就统统铲除不留后患，不要让他们的种族延长下去 ，这就是商朝所以兴起的原因。
English: The "Pan Geng" section of the "Shang Shu" warned that if there were rampant disturbances and disobedience to orders, they would all be eradicated without leaving a trace, and their race would not be allowed to continue, which is why the Shang Dynasty arose.

古文：今君易之，将以求大，不亦难乎？ 
现代文：现在您的做法相反，想要用这种办法来求得称霸的大业，不是太困难了吗？ 
English: Now you are doing the opposite. Isn't it too difficult to use this method to seek the great cause of hegemony?

古文：弗听。使于齐，属其子于鲍氏，为王孙氏。
现代文：吴王夫差不听，派伍子胥到齐国去。伍子胥把儿子托付给齐国的鲍氏，改姓王孙氏。
English: Wu Wangfu did not listen and sent Wu Zixuan to Qi. Wu Zixuan entrusted his son to the Bao clan in Qi and changed his surname to Wang Sun.

古文：反役，王闻之，使赐之属镂以死。
现代文：伍子胥从齐国回来，吴王听说这件事，便派人把属镂宝剑赐给伍子胥让他自杀。
English: When Wu Zixuan returned from Qi, the king of Wu heard about this and sent someone to give Wu Zixuan his sword so that he could commit suicide.

古文：将死，曰： 树吾墓槚，槚可材也，吴其亡乎！
现代文：伍子胥临死的时候说： 在我的坟墓上种植檟树，檟树可以成材。吴国大概就要灭亡了吧！
English: When Wu Zixuan was about to die, he said, "Plant an eucalyptus tree on my grave. The eucalyptus tree can be made into timber. Wu is probably about to perish!"

古文：三年，其始弱矣。
现代文：三年以后，吴国就要开始衰弱了。
English: After three years, Wu will begin to weaken.

古文：盈必毁，天之道也。 
现代文：骄傲自满必然失败，这是自然的道理啊。 
English: Pride and complacency inevitably fail, this is a natural reason.

古文：秋，季孙命修守备曰： 小胜大，祸也。齐至无日矣。 
现代文：秋季，季孙命令整顿防务，说： 小国战胜大国，这是祸患，齐国没有几天就会来到的。 
English: In the autumn, Ji Sun ordered to rectify the defense, saying: "It is a calamity for a small country to defeat a big country. Qi will come in a few days."

古文：冬，卫大叔疾出奔宋。
现代文：冬季，卫国的太叔疾逃亡到宋国。
English: In the winter, Emperor Taizong fled to Song.

古文：初，疾娶于宋子朝，其娣嬖。
现代文：当初，太叔疾娶了宋国子朝的女儿，她的妹妹受到宠爱。
English: At first, Great Uncle Zhi married a daughter of the Song Dynasty, and her younger sister was favored.

古文：子朝出。孔文子使疾出其妻而妻之。
现代文：子朝逃亡出国，孔文子让太叔疾休弃了他的妻子，而把女儿嫁给他。
English: After his son fled abroad, Confucius allowed his uncle to divorce his wife and marry his daughter to him.

古文：疾使侍人诱其初妻之娣，寘于犁，而为之一宫，如二妻。
现代文：太叔疾派随从引诱他前妻的妹妹，把她安置在犁地而为她造了一所房子，好像有两个妻子一样。
English: Uncle Sick sent his henchmen to seduce his ex-wife's sister, put her in a ploughed field and built a house for her, as if there were two wives.

古文：文子怒，欲攻之。仲尼止之，遂夺其妻。或淫于外州，外州人夺之轩以献。
现代文：孔文子发怒，想要攻打太叔疾，孔子加以劝阻，孔文子就夺回了女儿，太叔疾又在外州和另外一个女人通奸，外州人夺走了他的车子献给国君。
English: Confucius was furious and wanted to attack him. Confucius tried to dissuade him, and Confucius won back his daughter. Confucius also committed adultery with another woman in a foreign province, and the foreigners took away his car, which was dedicated to the sovereign.

古文：耻是二者，故出。
现代文：太叔疾为这两件事情感到羞耻，所以逃亡出国。
English: Uncle Zi was ashamed of these two things, so he fled abroad.

古文：卫人立遗，使室孔姞。
现代文：卫国人立了遗做继承人，让他娶了孔姞。
English: The guardian of the country appointed her as the heir, and let him marry Kong Yao.

古文：疾臣向魋纳美珠焉，与之城鉏。
现代文：太叔疾做了向魋的家臣，把珍珠献给向魋，向魋赠给他城鉏。
English: Great-uncle Zi became a vassal of Xiang Yu. He offered the pearl to Xiang Yu and gave him the castle.

古文：宋公求珠，魋不与，由是得罪。
现代文：宋景公索取这珍珠，向魋不给，因此得罪了宋景公。
English: Song Jing Gong asked for this pearl and refused to give it to Zou, thus offending Song Jing Gong.

古文：及桓氏出，城鉏人攻大叔疾，卫庄公复之。使处巢，死焉。
现代文：等到桓氏逃亡出国，城鉏人攻打太叔疾，卫庄公又让他回卫国去，让他待在巢地，死在那里。
English: When the Huan clan fled abroad, the people of Chenghuang attacked Uncle Zi, and Lord Weizhuang sent him back to defend the country. He stayed in his nest and died there.

古文：殡于郧，葬于少禘。
现代文：棺材停放在郧地，安葬在少禘。
English: The coffin was parked in the burial ground and buried in Shaoqi.

古文：初，晋悼公子慭亡在卫，使其女仆而田。
现代文：当初，晋悼公的儿子慭逃亡在卫国，让他的女儿为他驾车打猎。
English: At first, Jin Yuegong's son, Zou, fled to the motherland and asked his daughter to drive him to hunt.

古文：大叔懿子止而饮之酒，遂聘之，生悼子。
现代文：太叔懿子留他喝酒，就聘他的女儿做妻子，生了悼子。
English: His great-uncle Zou Zi let him drink, so he hired his daughter to be his wife, and she gave birth to a son.

古文：悼子即位，故夏戊为大夫。
现代文：悼子即位，所以夏戊做了大夫。
English: Yue Zi ascended to the throne, so Xia Wu became a doctor.

古文：悼子亡，卫人翦夏戊。
现代文：悼子逃亡，卫国削去夏戊的官爵和封邑。
English: The mourners fled, and the Emperor stripped Xia Wu of his title and fief.

古文：孔文子之将攻大叔也，访于仲尼。仲尼曰： 胡簋之事，则尝学之矣。甲兵之事，未之闻也。 
现代文：孔文子将要攻打太叔的时候，去征求孔子的意见，孔子说： 祭祀的事情，那是我曾经学过的；打仗的事情，我没有听说过。 
English: When Confucius was about to attack his great-uncle, he went to seek the advice of Confucius. Confucius said: "The matter of sacrifice, that is what I have learned; the matter of war, I have not heard of.

古文：退，命驾而行，曰： 鸟则择木，木岂能择鸟？ 
现代文：退下去，叫人套上车子就走，说： 鸟可以选择树木，树木哪里能选择鸟？ 
English: He said, "Birds can choose trees, where can trees choose birds?

古文：文子遽止之，曰： 圉岂敢度其私，访卫国之难也。 
现代文：孔文子立刻阻止他，说： 圉哪里敢自己打算，为的是防止卫国的祸患。 
English: Confucius immediately stopped him and said, "How dare you make plans to prevent the calamity of defending the country?

古文：将止。鲁人以币召之，乃归。
现代文：孔子打算留下来，鲁国人用财礼来召请他，于是就回到鲁国。
English: Confucius planned to stay, but the people of Lu invited him with gifts of money, so he returned to Lu.

古文：季孙欲以田赋，使冉有访诸仲尼。
现代文：季孙想要按田亩征税，派冉有征求孔子的意见。
English: Ji Sun wanted to levy a tax per mu of farmland, so he sent Ran Yu to seek the opinion of Confucius.

古文：仲尼曰： 丘不识也。 
现代文：孔子说： 丘不懂得这个。 
English: Confucius said: You do not understand this.

古文：三发，卒曰： 子为国老，待子而行，若之何子之不言也？ 
现代文：问了三次，最后说： 您是国家的元老，等着您的意见办事，为什么您不说话呢？ 
English: After asking three times, he finally said: You are the elder of the country, waiting for your opinion to act, why don't you speak?

古文：仲尼不对。
现代文：季孙不听。
English: Ji Sun did not listen.

