古文：起著雍困敦，尽阏逢敦牂，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年。梁武帝天监七年
English: a total of seven years. Emperor Liangwu was imprisoned for seven years

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监七年春，正月，魏颍川太守王神念来奔。壬子，以卫尉吴平侯昺兼领军将军。
现代文：春季，正月，北魏颍川太守王神念来投奔梁朝。壬子，梁朝任命卫尉吴平侯萧兼领军将军。
English: In the spring of the first month of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Shennian, the governor-general of Luochuan, came to the Liang Dynasty. According to his son, the Liang Dynasty appointed Wu Pinghou Xiao Jian, a guard lieutenant, as the leading general.

古文：诏吏部尚书徐勉定百官九品为十八班，以班多者为贵。
现代文：武帝诏令吏部尚书徐勉定百官九品为十八班，以班多者为贵。
English: Emperor Wu decreed that the cadres should be well-educated and diligently determined that the nine grades of officials should be divided into eighteen classes, and the one with the most classes should be the most valuable.

古文：二月，乙丑，增置镇、卫将军以下为十品，凡二十四班；不登十品，别有八班。
现代文：二月乙丑，增置镇、卫将军以下为十品，一共二十四班；不入十品之内的，另有八班。
English: In February, the second month of the year, the town and the general of the Guards were added to the Ten Classes, making a total of twenty-four classes; there were eight classes that were not included in the Ten Classes.

古文：又置施外国将军二十四班，凡一百九号。
现代文：又设置用于外国的将军二十四班，一共一百零九号。
English: It also set up 24 groups of generals for foreign countries, a total of 109 groups.

古文：庚午，诏置州望、郡宗、乡豪各一人，专掌搜荐。
现代文：庚午，武帝诏令设置州望、郡宗、乡豪各一人，专门掌管搜求人才向上举荐。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Wu issued an edict to appoint one person from each prefecture, county, and township to be in charge of searching and recommending talents.

古文：乙亥，以南兗州刺史吕僧珍为领军将军。
现代文：乙亥，梁朝任命南兖州刺史吕僧珍为领军将军。
English: Eihei, the Liang Dynasty appointed the leader of the army in southern Luzhou Province, Lv Sozhen.

古文：领军掌中外兵要，宋孝建以来，制局用事，与领军分兵权，典事以上皆得呈奏，领军拱手而已。
现代文：领军掌握内外兵权，但自从宋孝建年间以来，制局专权，与领军分享兵权，典事以上皆得呈奏，而领军则大权旁落，无所事事。
English: The leader of the army has the power to command the troops at home and abroad, but since Song Xiaojian came to power, the system bureau has had the exclusive power to share the military power with the leader of the army. All the ceremonies and above have to be performed, while the leader of the army has the power to stand aside and do nothing.

古文：及吴平侯昺在职峻切，官曹肃然；制局监皆近幸，颇不堪命，以是不得久留中，丙子，出为雍州刺史。
现代文：到了吴平侯萧但任领军一职时，由于他认真负责，执法严厉，所以官曹肃然而听命。制局监们都是皇帝的宠幸，很受不了萧的那一套，因此萧不能久留于朝廷之中，丙子，出任雍州刺史。
English: When Xiao Dan, the lord of Wuping, was appointed as the leader of the army, because of his conscientious responsibility and strict enforcement of the law, the official Cao Su nevertheless obeyed his orders. The system inspectors were the emperor's favorite, and could not stand Xiao's set, so Xiao could not stay long in the imperial court, and he was appointed as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：三月，戊子，魏皇子昌卒，侍御师王显失于疗治，时人皆以为承高肇之意也。
现代文：三月戊子，北魏皇子元昌去世，侍御师王显疗治有失，当时的人们都认为他是秉承了高肇的旨意而行事的。
English: In March, the Northern Wei prince Yuanchang died, and the attendant master Wang Xian failed to cure him. At that time, people thought that he was acting in accordance with Gao Zhao's will.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，皇太子纳妃，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月乙卯，梁朝皇太子纳妃子，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Liang Dynasty's crown prince Nafeizi was pardoned.

古文：五月，己亥，诏复置宗正、太仆、大匠、鸿胪，又增太府、太舟，仍先为十二卿。
现代文：五月己亥，武帝又设置宗正、太仆、大匠、鸿胪，并增设太府、太舟，加上原先的共为十二卿。
English: In May of the same year, Emperor Wu also set up the positions of Zongzheng, Daju, Daju, and Hongtao, and added Taifu and Taizhou, adding to the original total of twelve nobles.

古文：癸卯，以安成王秀为荆州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，梁朝任命安成王萧秀为荆州刺史。
English: At the same time, the Liang Dynasty appointed Ancheng Wang Xiao Xiu as the crown prince of Jingzhou.

古文：先是，巴陵马营蛮缘江为寇，州郡不能讨。秀遣防阁文炽帅众燔其林木，蛮失其险，州境无寇。
现代文：原先，巴陵的马营蛮沿长江为寇，州郡无法讨平，萧秀派遣防文炽率领一帮人马烧掉了江边的林木，蛮子失去了天险，无所依赖，故不敢再出来抢，从此州境内无有寇患。
English: Originally, the horse camp of Baling was robbed along the Yangtze River, and the state and county could not be leveled. Xiao Xiu dispatched the fire brigade and led a group of people and horses to burn the forest trees along the river. The barbarians lost the natural hazard and had nothing to rely on, so they dared not come out to rob again. Since then, there has been no robbery in the state.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，魏立高贵嫔为皇后。
现代文：秋季，七月甲午，北魏立高贵嫔为皇后。
English: In the autumn, in the first half of July, the Northern Wei Dynasty crowned Gao Guizhen as empress.

古文：尚书令高肇益贵重用事。
现代文：沿书令高肇因此越发贵重而专权了。
English: As a result, Guan Shuling Gaozhao became more and more valuable and powerful.

古文：肇多变更先朝旧制，减削封秩，抑黜勋人，由是怨声盈路。
现代文：高肇变更了许多先朝的旧制度，减削封秩，抑黜功勋之臣，因此而怨声载道。
English: Gao Zhao changed many of the old systems of the previous dynasties, reducing titles and ranks, and suppressing meritorious vassals. As a result, there was a lot of complaining.

古文：群臣宗室皆卑下之，唯度支尚书元匡与肇抗衡，先自造棺置听事，欲舆棺诣阙论肇罪恶，自杀以切谏；肇闻而恶之。
现代文：群臣宗室都俯首听命于高肇，唯有度支尚书元匡同高肇抗衡，他先自己做了一副棺材置于听事之处，准备用车把棺材装上运到殿上去讲论高肇的罪恶，然后自杀以对皇上进行死谏。
English: The family members of all the ministers bowed their heads and obeyed the orders of Gaozhao. The only one who stood up to Gaozhao was Du Zhi Shang Shou Yuan Kuang. He first made a pair of coffins himself and placed them in the audience place. He was going to load the coffins with a car and take them to the palace to talk about Gaozhao's evil, and then commit suicide to carry out the death sentence on the emperor.

古文：会匡与太常刘芳议权量事，肇主芳议，匡遂与肇喧竞，表肇指鹿为马。
现代文：高肇知道之后非常憎恨元匡，恰遇元匡与太常刘芳议定度量衡之事，高肇同意刘芳的意见，元匡便同高肇争执崐吵闹，把高肇比作是指鹿为马的赵高。
English: After Gao Zhao knew this, he hated Yuan Kuang very much. It happened that Yuan Kuang and Liu Fang agreed on the matter of weights and measures. Gao Zhao agreed with Liu Fang's opinion. Yuan Kuang then quarreled and quarreled with Gao Zhao, comparing Gao Zhao to Zhao Gao, who was a deer.

古文：御史中尉王显奏弹匡诬毁宰相，有司处匡死刑。
现代文：御史中尉王显在奏章中弹劾元匡诋毁宰相高肇，有关部门判处元匡死刑。
English: Wang Xian, a lieutenant of the Imperial History Department, impeached Yuan Kuang for slandering the Prime Minister Gao Zhao in a report, and the relevant departments sentenced Yuan Kuang to death.

古文：诏恕死，降为光禄大夫。
现代文：皇上诏令恕免元匡不死，降为光禄大夫。
English: The Emperor's edict exempted Yuan Kuang from death and reduced him to the rank of Guanglu doctor.

古文：八月，癸丑，竟陵壮公曹景宗卒。
现代文：八月癸丑，竞陵壮公曹景宗去世。
English: In August, the ugly, competing for the tomb of Cao Jingsong passed away.

古文：初，魏主为京兆王愉纳于后之妹为妃，愉不爱，爱妾李氏，生子宝月。
现代文：起初，北魏宣武帝为京兆王元愉纳于皇后的妹妹为妃子，元愉不喜爱她，而喜爱妾李氏，生下儿子宝月。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty as King of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yuan Yun, accepted the queen's younger sister as his concubine. Yuan Yun did not love her, but loved his concubine, the Li clan, and gave birth to a son, Bao Yue.

古文：于后召李氏入宫，捶之。
现代文：于皇后把李氏召入宫中，用棒打她。
English: The queen called Li into the palace and beat her with a stick.

古文：愉骄奢贪纵，所为多不法。
现代文：元愉骄奢贪纵，所做的大多是不法之事。
English: He was proud, extravagant and greedy, and most of what he did was illegal.

古文：帝召愉入禁中推案，杖愉五十，出为冀州刺史。
现代文：宣武帝把元愉召入宫中询问调查，打了他五十大棍，让他出任冀州刺史。
English: Emperor Xuanwu summoned Yuan Yu to the palace to inquire about the investigation, beat him with fifty big sticks, and let him serve as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：愉自以年长，而势位不及二弟，潜怀愧恨；又，身与妾屡被顿辱，高肇数谮愉兄弟，愉不胜忿；癸亥，杀长史羊灵引、司马李遵，诈称得清河王怿密疏，云 高肇弑逆 。
现代文：元愉自以为年长，但权势位置都比不上两个弟弟，因此心中暗怀愧恨。同时，由于自己和妾屡次被侮辱，高肇又数次谗言陷害自己兄弟三人，所以元愉内心不胜忿恨；癸亥，元愉杀了长史羊灵引、司马李遵，假称获得清河王元怿的秘密报告，报告中有 高肇弑君叛逆 之言。
English: At the same time, because he and his concubine were repeatedly insulted, and Gaozhao repeatedly accused him of framing his three brothers, his heart was filled with resentment; in other words, he killed Changshi Yang Lingyin, Sima Lizun, and pretended to obtain a secret report from the Qing River King, Geng Yao, which contained Gaozhao Yao's words of rebellion.

古文：遂为坛于信都之南，即皇帝位，大赦，改元建平，立李氏为皇后。
现代文：于是，元愉就在信都的南郊筑坛祭天，登上了皇帝位，发出大赦令，改年号为建平，并且立李氏为皇后。
English: As a result, Yuan Yu built an altar to worship heaven on the southern outskirts of Xindu, ascended to the throne, issued an amnesty decree, changed the year to Jianping, and established the Li clan as the empress.

古文：法曹参军崔伯骥不从，愉杀之。
现代文：法曹参军崔伯骥不顺从，元愉就杀了他。
English: Cui Boqi, a legal officer who joined the army, did not obey, and Yuan Yu killed him.

古文：在北州镇皆疑魏朝有变，定州刺史安乐王诠具以状告之，州镇乃安。
现代文：冀州之北的州镇都怀疑北魏朝廷有变故，定州刺史安乐王元诠把真实情况一一告诉他们，各州镇才安心了。
English: The towns in the north of Jizhou all suspected that there had been a change in the Northern Wei Dynasty. Dingzhou Sisi Anle Wangyuan told them the true situation one by one, and the towns were relieved.

古文：乙丑，魏以尚书李平为都督北讨诸军、行冀州事，以讨愉。
现代文：乙丑，北魏使命尚书李平为都督北讨诸军、行冀州事，让他去讨伐元愉。
English: Second ugly, the Northern Wei Dynasty mission Shangshu Li Ping for the governor of the north to fight the army, to carry out Jizhou affairs, let him go to fight Yuan Yu.

古文：平，崇之从父弟也。
现代文：李平是李崇叔父的弟弟。
English: Li Ping is the younger brother of Li Chong's uncle.

古文：丁卯，魏大赦，改元永平。
现代文：丁卯，北魏大赦天下，改年号为永平。
English: Ding Wu was pardoned by the Northern Wei Dynasty, and changed his era name to Yongping.

古文：魏京兆王愉遣使说平原太守清河房亮，亮斩其使；愉遣其将张灵和击之，为亮所败。
现代文：北魏京兆王元愉派遣使者去游说平原太守清河人房亮，房亮斩了来使；元愉派遣他的将领张灵和去攻打房亮，被房亮打败。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Yuan Yu of Jingzhao dispatched an envoy to lobby the plain's daimyo, the man of Qinghe, Fang Liang, but he was defeated by Fang Liang; Yuan Yu sent his general Zhang Linghe to attack Fang Liang and was defeated by Fang Liang.

古文：李平军至经县，诸军大集。夜，有蛮兵数千斫平营，矢及平账。平坚卧不动，俄而自定。
现代文：李平的军队到了经县，各路军队汇集一起，夜间，有数千名蛮兵来冲击李平的营地，飞箭射到了李平的帐内，但是李平坚卧不动，不一会儿就自行平定下来了。
English: Li Ping's army arrived in Jing County, and the armies from all directions gathered together. At night, thousands of barbarians attacked Li Ping's camp, and arrows were shot into Li Ping's tent. However, Li Ping did not move and soon settled down on his own.

古文：九月，辛巳朔，愉逆战于城南草桥。平奋击，大破之。愉脱身走入城，平进围之。
现代文：九月辛巳朔，元愉在城南草桥迎战李平，李平奋力攻击，大败敌军，元愉脱身而逃入城中，李平进军围城。
English: In September, Yuan Yu met Li Ping at the grass bridge in the south of the city. Li Ping attacked vigorously and defeated the enemy army. Yuan Yu escaped and fled into the city. Li Ping entered the siege.

古文：壬辰，安乐王诠破愉兵于城北。
现代文：壬辰，安乐王元诠在城北打败了元愉的军队。
English: In Imjin, the king of pleasure, Yuan Yi, defeated Yuan Yu's army in the north of the city.

古文：癸巳，立皇子绩为南康王。
现代文：癸巳，梁朝立皇子萧绩为南康王。
English: Soon after, Emperor Liang raised his son to the throne as King Nankang.

古文：魏高后之立也，彭城武宣王勰固谏，魏主不听。
现代文：北魏立高皇后之时，彭城武宣王元勰再三劝谏不可，宣武帝不听。
English: When Empress Gao of the Northern Wei Dynasty was established, Pengcheng Wuxuan Wang Yuanqi had to persuade her repeatedly, but Emperor Wuxuan did not listen.

古文：高肇由是怨之，数谮勰于魏主，魏主不之信。
现代文：高肇由此而怨恨元勰，数次在宣武帝面前进谗言诋毁元勰，宣武帝不听信。
English: As a result, Gao Zhao resented Yuan Shao, and several times he spoke in front of Emperor Xuanwu to denigrate Yuan Shao, but Emperor Xuanwu did not listen.

古文：勰荐其舅潘僧固为长乐太守，京兆王愉之反，胁僧固与之同，肇固诬勰北与愉通，南招蛮贼。
现代文：元勰崐推荐自己的舅舅潘僧固为长乐太守，京兆王元愉反叛，胁迫潘僧固与他同伙，高肇因此而诬告元勰北与元愉勾结相通，南招蛮贼。
English: Yuan Shao recommended his uncle Pan Zeng Gu to be the governor of Changle. King Yuan You rebelled and coerced Pan Zeng Gu and his associates. As a result, Gao Zhao falsely accused Northern Yuan Shao of colluding with Yuan Yue and Southern Zheng of being thieves.

古文：彭城郎中令魏偃、前防阁高祖珍希肇提擢，构成其事。
现代文：彭城武宣王元勰手下的郎中令魏偃、原先的防阁高祖珍希望高肇提拔他们，就与高肇勾结一起陷害元勰。
English: Pengcheng Wuxuan Wang Yuan's henchman Wei Wei, the original guard Gao Zuzhen hoped that Gao Zhao would promote them, and they colluded with Gao Zhao to frame Yuan.

古文：肇令侍中元晖以闻，晖不从，又令左卫元珍言之。
现代文：高肇命令侍中元晖上报宣武帝，元晖不从，又命令左卫元珍去报告了。
English: Gao Zhao ordered the attendant to report to Emperor Xuanwu, but Yuan Xuan did not obey, and ordered Zuo Yuanzhen to report.

古文：帝以问晖，晖明勰不然；又以问肇，肇引魏偃、高祖珍为证，帝乃信之。
现代文：宣武帝就此事询问元晖，元晖说明元勰不会如此；宣武帝又以此事问高肇，高肇叫来魏偃和高祖珍作证，宣武帝就相信了高肇的诬陷。
English: Emperor Xuanwu asked Yuan Shao about this, and Yuan Shao said that Yuan Shao would not do such a thing; Emperor Xuanwu also asked Gao Zhao about this, and Gao Zhao called Wei Wei and Gao Zuzhen to testify, and Emperor Xuanwu believed Gao Zhao's frame-up.

古文：戊戌，召勰及高阳王雍、广阳王嘉、清河王怿、广平王怀、高肇俱入宴。
现代文：戊戌，宣武帝召元勰以及高阳王元雍、广阳王元嘉、清河王元怿、广平王元怀、高肇一起入宴。
English: Emperor Xuanwu summoned Yuan Shao, as well as Goyang King Yuan Yong, Guangyang King Yuan Jia, Qinghe King Yuan Shao, Guangping King Yuan Huai, and Gao Zhao to join the banquet.

古文：勰妃李氏方产，固辞不赴。
现代文：元勰的妃子李氏正在生产，因此他再三推辞不去赴宴。
English: Geng Yao's concubine Li is in labor, so he repeatedly declines to go to the banquet.

古文：中使相继召之，不得已，与妃诀而登车，入东掖门，度小桥，牛不肯进，击之良久，更有使者责勰来迟，乃去牛，人挽而进。
现代文：中使相继而来宣召，元勰万不得已，只好与李氏诀别，然后登车而去，进入东掖门，过小桥，拉车的牛不肯向前，打了它很久还是不向前迈进，又有使者责备元勰来的迟了，于是只好去掉牛，由人把车拉进去。
English: The middle envoys came one after another to make a proclamation. As a last resort, Yuan Xuan had no choice but to say goodbye to Mr. Li, and then boarded the car and left. He entered the East Gate and crossed the small bridge. The ox that was pulling the car refused to move forward. He beat it for a long time and it still wouldn't move forward. Another messenger scolded Yuan Xuan for being late, so he had to remove the ox and have someone pull the car in.

古文：宴于禁中，至夜，皆醉，各就别所消息。
现代文：宴会在宫中举行，到了夜间，全都喝醉了，宣武帝令他们各就方便之处休息。
English: A banquet was held in the palace, and at night, when everyone was drunk, Emperor Xuanwu ordered them to rest in a convenient place.

古文：俄而元珍引武士赍毒酒而至，勰曰： 吾无罪，愿一见至尊，死无恨！ 
现代文：不一会儿，元珍带着武士送毒酒来了，元勰说： 我没有罪，希望能一见圣上，死而元恨！ 
English: Not long after, Yuan Zhen arrived with a samurai to deliver poisoned wine. Yuan Yao said, "I am not guilty, I hope to see the saint and hate him to death!"

古文：元珍曰： 至尊何可复见！ 
现代文：元珍说： 圣上怎么可以复见呢？ 
English: Yuan Zhen said: How can the saint see again?

古文：勰曰： 至尊圣明，不应无事杀我，乞与告者一对曲直！ 
现代文：元勰说： 皇上对明，不应该没有事就把我杀掉，乞求与诬告我的人当面对质！ 
English: Yuan Xuan said, "Emperor, it's clear that you shouldn't kill me without cause. I beg you to confront the person who falsely accused me!"

古文：武士以刀镮筑之，勰大言曰： 冤哉，皇天！
现代文：武士用刀环向元勰的脸上打去，元勰大声呼喊道： 冤枉啊！老天爷！
English: The samurai swung his sword at the face of Yuan Shao, and Yuan Shao shouted loudly, "You've been wronged! My God!

古文：忠而见杀！ 
现代文：我如此忠心反而被杀！ 
English: I was killed for being so loyal!

古文：武士又筑之，勰乃饮毒酒，武士就杀之，向晨，以褥裹尸载归其第，云王因醉而薨。
现代文：武士又打，元勰只好饮喝毒酒，武士上前杀了元勰，天亮之后，用褥子裹了尸体装在车上送回他的府第，声称大王因酒醉而死去。
English: The samurai fought again, and Geng Yao was forced to drink poisoned wine. The samurai came forward and killed Geng Yao. After dawn, he wrapped the body in cloth, loaded it onto a cart and sent it back to his capital, claiming that the great king had died of drunkenness.

古文：李妃号哭大言曰： 高肇枉理杀人，天道有灵，汝安得良死！ 
现代文：李妃放声大哭，高声喊道： 高肇冤枉杀人，伤天害理，老天爷有灵，你怎么能得到好死呢？ 
English: Li Fei burst into tears and shouted in a loud voice: Gao Zhao is guilty of unjustified killing, harming nature and reason. God willing, how can you get a good death?

古文：魏主举哀于东堂，赠官、葬礼皆优厚加等。
现代文：宣武帝在东堂为元勰举哀，赠官和葬礼莫不优厚加倍。
English: Emperor Xuanwu held a memorial service for Yuan Shao in the East Hall, and the number of officials and funerals was doubled.

古文：在朝贵贱，莫不丧气。行路士女皆流涕曰： 高令公枉杀贤王！ 
现代文：朝廷之内的大小官员，无不丧气叹息，行路男女都流着眼泪说： 高令公冤枉地杀害了贤德的彭城王。 
English: Officials of all ranks within the imperial court sighed in despair, and men and women on the road said with tears streaming down their faces: Gao Rongguo unjustly killed the virtuous King Pengcheng.

古文：由是中外恶之益甚。
现代文：从此朝廷内外对高肇更加憎恨得厉害了。
English: From then on, the hatred for Gaozhao inside and outside the imperial court became even more intense.

古文：京兆王愉不能守信都，癸卯，烧门，携李氏及其四子从百馀骑突走。
现代文：京兆王元愉不能守住信都，于癸卯之日，烧掉城门，携带着李氏以及四个儿子，在一百多名骑兵的护送下突围而逃。
English: King Yuan Yu of Jing Zhao couldn't hold Xindu, and on the day of the battle, he burned down the city gate and escaped with the Li clan and his four sons, escorted by more than a hundred cavalrymen.

古文：李平入信都，斩愉所置冀州牧韦超等，遣统军叔孙头追执愉，置信都，以闻。
现代文：李平进入信都，斩了元愉所设置的冀州牧韦超等人，派遣统军叔孙头去追捕元愉，抓住了他，押在信都，并报告朝廷。
English: Li Ping entered Xindu, beheaded Jizhou Mu Wei Chao and others set up by Yuan Yue, and sent the United Front to hunt down Yuan Yue, caught him, detained him in Xindu, and reported to the imperial court.

古文：群臣请诛愉，魏主弗许，命锁送洛阳，申以家人之训。
现代文：群臣们请求诛杀元愉，宣武帝不同意，命令把他锁住送来洛阳，要以家法来训责他。
English: The courtiers begged him to kill Yuan Yu, but Emperor Xuanwu disagreed and ordered him to be locked up and sent to Luoyang, where he was to be disciplined according to family law.

古文：行至野王，高肇密使人杀之。
现代文：当元愉走到野王之时，高肇秘密派人杀掉了他。
English: When Yuan Yu went to the wild king, Gao Zhao secretly sent someone to kill him.

古文：诸子至洛，魏主皆赦之。
现代文：元愉的几个儿子到了洛阳，宣武帝全赦免了他们。
English: Several of Yuan Yu's sons arrived in Luoyang, and Emperor Xuanwu pardoned them all.

古文：魏主将屠李氏，中书令崔光谏曰： 李氏方妊，刑至刳胎，乃桀、纣所为，酷而非法。
现代文：北魏宣武帝要杀李氏，中书令崔光劝谏说： 李氏正在怀孕，刳胎之刑，乃是桀、纣所为，太残酷而不合法。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to kill the Li clan, he ordered Cui Guang to persuade her, saying: "The Li clan is pregnant, and the punishment of abortion is done by the emperor and the empress. It is too cruel and illegal."

古文：请俟产毕然后行刑。 
现代文：请等她产毕，然后再行刑。 
English: Please wait for her to give birth before executing her.

古文：从之。
现代文：宣武帝听从了崔光的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：李平捕愉馀党千馀人，将尽杀之，录事参军高颢曰： 此皆胁从，前既许之原免矣，宜为表陈。 
现代文：李平拘捕了元愉的余党一千多人，将要全部杀掉，录事参军高颢说： 这些人都是胁从，前头既然已经许诺免他们不死，就应该上表说明情况。 
English: Li Ping has arrested more than a thousand remaining members of Yuan Yu's party and is going to kill them all. Gao Yao, who has joined the army, said in a recorded message: These people are all cowards. Since the front has promised not to kill them, they should explain the situation on the table.

古文：平从之，皆得免死。
现代文：李平听从了高颢的意见，因此这些人都得以免死。
English: Li Ping listened to Gao Yao's advice, so these people were spared from death.

古文：颢，祐之孙也。
现代文：高颢是高的孙子。
English: Gao Gan is Gao's grandson.

古文：济州刺史高植帅州军击愉有功，当封，植不受，曰： 家荷重恩，为国致效，乃其常节，何敢求赏！ 
现代文：济洲刺史高植率领州军攻打元愉，有功劳，应当加封，但是高植不接受，说： 我家承受朝廷重恩，为国家致身而效死，乃是应尽的大节，那里还敢求赏呢？ 
English: Gao Zhi led the state army to attack Yuan Rong, which was a great achievement and should be sealed, but Gao Zhi did not accept it, saying: My family has received great favor from the imperial court, and it is a great festival to die for the country. Where else would I dare to ask for a reward?

古文：植，肇之子也。
现代文：高植是高肇的儿子。
English: Gao Zhi is Gao Zhao's son.

古文：加李平散骑常侍。
现代文：李平被提为散骑常侍。
English: Li Ping was elevated to the rank of straggler.

古文：高肇及中尉王显素恶平，显弹平在冀州隐截官口，肇奏除平名。
现代文：高肇以及中尉王显向来忌恨李平，王显就弹劾李平在冀州偷偷地截留叛党男女而不输入官府为奴，高肇上奏把李平从朝廷中除名。
English: Gao Zhao and his lieutenant Wang Xian always hated Li Ping. Wang Xian impeached Li Ping for secretly detaining male and female rebels in Jizhou without bringing them into the government as slaves. Gao Zhao made a report to remove Li Ping from the imperial court.

古文：初，显祖之世，柔然万馀户降魏，置之高平、薄骨律二镇，及太和之末，叛走略尽，唯千馀户在。
现代文：当初，在献文帝之世，柔然国有一万多户投降北魏，被安置在高平、薄骨律二镇，到了太和末期，差不多叛逃贻尽，仅剩下了一千余户。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Xianwen, more than 10,000 households in Juran surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty and were resettled in two towns, Gaoping and Hubei. By the end of the Taihe period, there were almost no more defectors, and only more than 1,000 households remained.

古文：太中大夫王通请徙置淮北，以绝其叛，诏太仆卿杨椿持节往徙之。椿上言： 先朝处之边徼，所以招附殊俗，且别异华、戎也。
现代文：太中大夫王通请示要把这些柔然人迁置到淮北去，以便使他们再也无法叛逃，朝廷诏令太仆卿杨椿持节牌去那里负责迁移他们，杨椿上表说： 先朝之所以把这些柔然人安置在边境之地，是为了招附异族，并且区别汉、戎。
English: Wang Tong, the imperial physician, requested that the Zhuorans be relocated to Huaibei, so that they would no longer be able to defect. The imperial court ordered Yang Tsubaki, the eunuch, to go there with a festival sign and be responsible for relocating them. Yang Tsubaki said on the table: The reason why the previous government placed these Zhuorans in the border area was to invite foreigners, and to distinguish between Han and Eunuchs.

古文：今新附之户甚众，若旧者见徙，新者必不自安，是驱之使叛也。
现代文：现在，新归附的人口特别多，如果他们见过去归附的人被迁移，必定不能自安，这是驱赶着让他们叛逃。
English: Now, the newly-annexed population is particularly large, and if they see those who have been annexed in the past being relocated, they will not be able to reassure themselves, which is driving them to defect.

古文：且此属衣毛食肉，乐冬便寒；南士湿热，往必歼尽。
现代文：而且，这些人衣毛食肉，喜欢冬天不怕寒冷，南方气候潮湿闷热，把他们迁到那里去，一定会使他们全部病死。
English: Moreover, these people are carnivorous, like winter and are not afraid of cold, the southern climate is humid and sultry, and moving them there will surely make them all die of disease.

古文：进失归附之心，退无籓卫之益，置之中夏，或生后患，非良策也。 
现代文：这事如果实行的话，不但会失去境外的归附之心，而且也失去让他们在边地卫护的益处，再说把他们安置在中夏，或许会生后患，所以并非是良策。 
English: If this were to be implemented, it would not only lose the sense of belonging to the outside world, but also lose the benefits of letting them guard the border. In addition, placing them in the middle of the summer may cause problems later in life, so it is not a good idea.

古文：不从。遂徙于济州，缘河处之。
现代文：建议不被采纳，于是这些柔然人就被迁移到济州，让他们沿黄河边居住。
English: The suggestion was not accepted, so these gentle people were moved to Jeju and allowed to live along the Yellow River.

古文：及京兆王愉之乱，皆浮河赴愉，所在抄掠，如椿之言。
现代文：京兆王元愉叛乱之时，这些人都渡过黄河投奔元愉，一路抢劫掠夺，正如杨椿所预料的那样。
English: At the time of the rebellion of King Yuan of Jingzhao, these people all crossed the Yellow River to go to Yuan Yu, robbing and plundering all the way, as Yang Tsubing expected.

古文：庚子，魏郢州司马彭珍等叛魏，潜引梁兵趋义阳，三关戍主侯登等以城来降。
现代文：庚子，北魏郢州司马彭珍等人叛国，偷偷地带领梁朝兵赶往义阳，三关戌的主将侯登等人献城投降了梁朝。
English: Geng Zi, Northern Wei, Zhangzhou Sima, Peng Zhen and others betrayed the country and secretly led the Liang Dynasty soldiers to rush to Yiyang. The commander of Sankuan County, Hou Deng and others surrendered the city to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：郢州刺史娄悦婴城自守，魏以中山王英都督南征诸军事，将步骑三万出汝南以救之。
现代文：郢州刺史娄悦环城自守，北魏任命中山王元英为都督南征诸军事，统率步、骑兵三万出汝南前去援救。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhongshan Wang Yuanying as the governor of the south to conscript the military, and led 30,000 cavalry out of the south of Ru to rescue.

古文：冬，十月，魏悬瓠军主白早生杀豫州刺史司马悦，自号平北将军，求援于司州刺史马仙琕。
现代文：冬季十月，北魏悬瓠军主白早生杀了豫州刺史司马悦，自称为平北将军，向梁朝司州的马仙求救。
English: In the winter of October, the commander of the Northern Wei Hanging Army, Bai Premature, killed the Yuzhou assassin, Sima Yue. He called himself the General of Pingbei and appealed to Ma Xian of Liang Chaozhou for help.

古文：时荆州刺史安成王秀为都督。仙琕签求应赴。参佐咸谓宜待台报，秀曰： 彼待我以自存，援之宜速，待敕虽旧，非应急也。 
现代文：当时，荆州刺史安成王萧秀为都督，马仙把情况写在简上送给萧秀请求前去帮忙，萧秀手下的参佐们都认为这事要上报朝廷批准后方可行事，萧秀说：白早生等待着我们去援救，方可自存，所以应该火速去援救，等待朝廷批准虽是旧制，但并非是应急之策。 
English: At that time, Jingzhou prince Ancheng Wang Xiao Xiu was the governor of the capital, Ma Xian wrote the situation on a note and sent it to Xiao Xiu to ask him to help. Xiao Xiu's advisors all believed that this matter should be reported to the court for approval before they could act. Xiao Xiu said: Bai Yousheng is waiting for us to rescue, before he can save himself, so we should go to the rescue quickly. Waiting for the court's approval is an old system, but it is not an emergency measure.

古文：即遣兵赴之。
现代文：因此便派兵前去救援白早生。
English: Soldiers were immediately dispatched.

古文：上亦诏仙琕救早生。
现代文：梁武帝也诏令马仙去援救白早生。
English: Emperor Liangwu also ordered Ma Xian to rescue Bai Yansheng.

古文：仙琕进顿楚王城，遣副将齐苟儿以兵二千助守悬瓠。
现代文：马仙进驻楚王城，派遣副将齐苟儿带兵两千帮助守悬瓠。
English: Xianbei came to King Chu's City to settle down, and sent Vice Admiral Qigong with two thousand soldiers to help guard the hanging anchor.

古文：诏以早生为司州刺史。
现代文：梁武帝任命白早生为司州刺史。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed Bai Chaozheng as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：丙寅，以吴兴太守张稷为尚书左仆射。
现代文：丙寅，梁朝任命吴兴太守张稷为尚书左仆射。
English: Cui Yin, Liang Dynasty appointed Wu Xing Taishou Zhang Jun as Shang Shushi's right-hand man.

古文：魏以尚书邢峦行豫州事，将兵击白早生。
现代文：北魏委任尚书邢峦兼管豫州事务，率兵攻打白早生。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxuan to be in charge of the affairs of Yuzhou, and led the troops to attack Baizhousheng.

古文：魏主问之曰： 卿言早生走也？守也？
现代文：宣武帝问邢峦： 你说，白早生是逃跑，还是顽守呢？
English: Emperor Xuanwu asked Yao: Do you think Bai Chaozheng would run away or stick to it?

古文：何时可平？ 
现代文：何时可以讨平他？ 
English: When can he be appeased?

古文：对曰： 早生非有深谋大智，正以司马悦暴虐，乘众怒而作乱，民迫于凶威，不得已而从之。
现代文：邢峦回答： 白早生没有深谋大智，只因司马悦暴虐残忍，因此利用众人之愤怒而反叛作乱，百姓迫于他的凶威，不得已而顺从了他。
English: Zou replied: Bai didn't have much wisdom in his early life. It was only because of Sima Yue's brutality and cruelty that he took advantage of people's anger and rebelled. The people were forced by his cruelty to obey him.

古文：纵使梁兵入城，水路不通，粮运不继，亦成禽耳。
现代文：即使梁朝军队入城了，但是水路不通，粮运跟不上，也会被我们抓住的。
English: Even if Liang's army entered the city, but the waterway was impassable and the grain transport could not keep up, it would be caught by us.

古文：早生得梁之援，溺于利欲，必守而不走。
现代文：白早生得到梁朝的援助，被利欲冲昏头脑，必定死守而不跑。
English: Bai prematurely received the assistance of the Liang Dynasty, was carried away by greed, and must defend himself and not run away.

古文：若临以王师，士民必翻然归顺。不出今年，当传首京师。 
现代文：如果派朝廷军队前去讨伐，士民大众们必定翻然归顺，不出今年，一定能把白早生的首级送到京师来。 
English: If the imperial army were to be sent to fight, the common people would surely surrender, and this year, they would surely be able to bring the head of Baizhang Sheng to the capital.

古文：魏主悦，命峦先发，使中山王英继之。
现代文：宣武帝十分高兴，命令邢峦先出发，让中山王元英随后出发。
English: Emperor Xuanwu was very pleased and ordered Zou to leave first and Zhongshan Wang Yuanying to follow.

古文：峦帅骑八百，倍道兼行，五日至鲍口。丙子，早生遣其大将胡孝智将兵七千，离城二百里逆战。峦奋击，大破之，乘胜长驱至悬瓠。
现代文：邢峦率领八百骑兵，快速赶路，五天光景就到了鲍口，丙子，白早生派遣他的大将胡孝智率领七千兵卒，在离城二百里的地方迎战邢峦，邢峦奋勇出击，大败敌手，乘胜长驱直入，直抵悬瓠。
English: Yao led eight hundred cavalry and quickly made his way. Five days later, the scene reached Baokou. Baizi sent his general Hu Xiaozhi and seven thousand soldiers to meet Yao in a place two hundred miles away from the city. Yao fought bravely and defeated the enemy. He drove straight into the city and reached the Hanging Pagoda.

古文：早生出城逆战，又破之，因渡汝水，围其城。
现代文：白早生出城迎战，邢峦又打败了他，因此渡过汝水，围住了悬瓠城。
English: Bai left the city early to meet the battle, and Zou defeated him again, so he crossed the river and surrounded the city.

古文：诏加峦都督南讨诸军事。
现代文：北魏宣武帝诏令邢峦为都督南讨崐诸军事。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty decreed that the southern capital should be turned into a military base.

古文：丁丑，魏镇东参军成景隽杀宿豫戍主严仲贤，以城来降。
现代文：丁丑，北魏镇东参军成景隽杀了宿豫的主将严仲贤，献城投降梁朝。
English: Ding Yuxi, the Northern Wei Zhen Dongsang army Cheng Jing killed Yan Zhongxian, the commander of Suyuan, and surrendered the city to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：时魏郢、豫二州，自悬瓠以南至于安陆诸城皆没，唯义阳一城为魏坚守。
现代文：当时，北魏的郢、豫二州，从悬瓠以南直到安陆诸城全部丧失，只有义阳一城还坚守着。
English: At that time, the cities of the Northern Wei and the two states of Henan, from the south of the Hanging Mountains to Anlu, were all lost, and only one city, Yiyang, remained.

古文：蛮帅田益宗帅群蛮以附魏，魏以为东豫州刺史；上以车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、五千户郡公招之，益宗不从。
现代文：蛮族将帅田益宗率领群蛮投附北魏，北魏任命他为东豫州刺史，梁武帝以封为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、五千户郡公的好处招还田益宗，但是田益宗不接受。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed him as the chief historian of East Henan Province. Emperor Liang Wudi recruited Tian Yaksong with the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry,

古文：十一月，庚寅，魏遣安东将军杨椿将兵四万攻宿豫。
现代文：十一月庚寅，北魏派遣安东将军杨椿统率四万兵攻打宿豫。
English: In November, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched General Andong Yang Chin to lead 40,000 soldiers to attack Suyuan.

古文：魏主闻邢峦屡捷，命中山王英趣义阳，英以众少，累表请兵，弗许。
现代文：北魏宣武帝得知邢峦屡屡获捷，命令中山王元英前去义阳，元英因兵少，多上表请求增兵，朝廷不同意。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty learned that Yan had repeatedly won victories, he ordered the king of Zhongshan, Yuan Ying, to go to Yiyang. Yuan Ying, due to the small number of soldiers, asked for more soldiers, but the court did not agree.

古文：英至悬瓠，辄与峦共攻之。
现代文：元英到了悬瓠，就与邢峦一起攻城。
English: When Yuan Ying arrived at Xuanwu, he attacked the city together with Yao.

古文：十二月，己未，齐苟儿等开门出降，斩白早生及其党数十人。
现代文：十二月己未，齐苟儿等人打开城门出降，斩了白早生及其党羽几十人。
English: In December, Qigong'er and others opened the city gate to surrender, beheading dozens of Baizuosheng and his followers.

古文：英乃引兵前趋义阳。
现代文：元英带兵前去义阳。
English: Yuan Ying led his soldiers to Yiyang.

古文：宁朔将军张道凝先屯楚王城，癸亥，弃城走；项追击，斩之。
现代文：宁朔将军张道凝先驻扎在楚王城，癸亥，弃城逃跑，元英追击，斩了张道凝。
English: The Ningshuo general Zhang Daojing was first stationed in the city of Chu Wangcheng. He abandoned the city and fled. Yuan Ying chased him and beheaded Zhang Daojing.

古文：魏义阳太守狄道辛祥与娄悦共守义阳，将军胡武城、陶平虏攻之，祥夜出袭其营，擒平虏，斩武城，由是州境获全。
现代文：北魏义阳太守狄道人辛祥与娄悦共同防守义阳，将军胡武城、陶平虏攻打他们，辛祥夜间出来袭击胡、陶二人的营盘，擒获了陶平虏，斩了胡武城，从此州境获得完整。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xin Xiang, the governor of Yiyang and a native of Di Dao, and Mu Yue jointly defended Yiyang. Generals Hu Wucheng and Tao Pingru attacked them. Xin Xiang came out at night to attack the camp of Hu and Tao, captured Tao Pingru, and cut off Hu Wucheng. From this, the state border was complete.

古文：论功当赏，娄悦耻功出其下，间之于执政，赏遂不行。
现代文：论功劳辛祥应当得赏，但是娄悦耻于自己的功劳在辛祥之下，便向执政的高肇陷害辛祥，于是便没有奖赏辛祥。
English: On the merits, Hsin Xiang should be rewarded, but Miao Yue was ashamed of his own merits under Hsin Xiang, so he framed Hsin Xiang to the ruling Gaozhao, so there was no reward for Hsin Xiang.

古文：壬申，魏东荆州表 桓晖之弟兴前后招抚太阳蛮，归附者万馀户，请置郡十六，县五十。 
现代文：壬申，北魏东荆州上表称： 桓晖的弟弟桓叔兴前后招抚太阳蛮，前来归附的有一万多户，请求设置十六个郡，五十个县。 
English: Jinshin, Northern Wei, Eastern Jingzhou, the above table said: Huan Yao's younger brother, Huan Shuxing, went back and forth to seduce the sun, and more than ten thousand households came to attach, requesting the establishment of sixteen counties and fifty counties.

古文：诏前镇东府长史郦道元案行置之。
现代文：朝廷诏令前镇东府长史郦道元具体实施。
English: The imperial edict issued by the former governor of the town of Dongfu, Shi Yan Dogen, was implemented in concrete terms.

古文：道元，范之子也。
现代文：郦道元是郦范的儿子。
English: Gong Dogen was the son of Gong Fan.

古文：是岁，柔然佗汗可汗复遣纥奚勿六跋献貂裘于魏，魏主弗受，报之如前。
现代文：这一年，柔然佗汗可汗又派遣纥奚勿六跋向北魏进献貂裘，宣武帝不受，仍如前次那样作了答复。
English: In the same year, Zhu Ranzhong Khan Khan also sent Zhu Bailuo to the Northern Wei Dynasty to offer tribute to Emperor Xuanwu, but Emperor Xuanwu did not accept it, and still made a reply as before.

古文：初，高车侯倍穷奇为嚈哒所杀，执其子弥俄突而出。其众分散，或奔魏，或奔柔然。
现代文：起初，高车侯倍穷奇被哒所杀，抓了他的儿子弥俄突而去，其众分散，有的投奔了北魏，有的投靠了柔然。
English: At first, Gao Che Hou Bi Qianqi was killed by the cormorants, and his son Mi Ao was captured and ran away. They scattered, some of them went to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and some of them went to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：魏主遣羽林监河南孟威抚纳降户，置于高平镇。
现代文：宣武帝派遣羽林监河南人孟威接纳、安抚前来投降的人口，把他们安置在高平镇。
English: Emperor Xuanwu sent Meng Wei, a ranger from Henan Province, to receive and pacify the people who had come to surrender, and settled them in Gaoping Town.

古文：高车王阿伏王罗残暴，国人杀之，立其宗人跋利延。
现代文：高车王阿伏至罗十分残暴，高车国人杀了他，立他的同族之人跋利延为王。
English: The king of Gaochu, Avuzillo, was very cruel. The people of Gaochu killed him and made his fellow tribesman, Toritosan, king.

古文：嚈哒奉弥俄突以伐高车，国人杀跋利延，迎弥俄突而立之。
现代文：哒带上弥俄突讨伐高车，高车国人杀了跋利延，迎接弥俄突回国并立为王。
English: At the end of the tale, Miowu suddenly attacked Gaochang, and the Gaochang people killed Baoliyan to welcome Miowu back to the country and establish him as king.

古文：弥俄突与佗汗可汗战于蒲类海，不胜，西走三百馀里。
现代文：弥俄突与佗汗可汗在蒲类海交战，没有取胜，向西逃到三百多里远的地方去了。
English: Mirotch and Shankhan Khan fought in the Pudong Sea, but did not win, and fled westward to a place more than three hundred miles away.

古文：佗汗军于伊吾北山。
现代文：佗汗驻军于伊吾北山。
English: Shinkan garrisoned troops in Igu Kitayama.

古文：会高昌王麹嘉求内徙于魏，时孟威为龙骧将军，魏主遣威发凉州兵三千人迎之，至伊吾，佗汗见威军，怖而遁去。
现代文：正好高昌王麴嘉请求内迁到北魏去，当时孟威为龙骧将军，宣武帝派遣孟威带领三千凉州兵去迎接，到达伊吾之时，佗汗见到孟威的军队，就害怕得逃跑了。
English: At that time, Meng Wei was the general of Longjing. Emperor Xuanwu sent Meng Wei to lead three thousand soldiers from Liangzhou to meet him. When he arrived at Yigu, he was so scared when he saw Meng Wei's army that he ran away.

古文：弥俄突闻其离骇，追击，大破之，杀佗汗于蒲类海北，割其发送于威，且遣使入贡于魏。
现代文：弥俄突知道佗汗吓跑了，立即追击，大败敌方，在蒲类海的北边杀了佗汗，割下他的头发送给孟威，并且派遣使者到北魏进贡。
English: Knowing that Gonghan had run away, Miozhun immediately chased and defeated the enemy, killed Gonghan on the north side of the Pudong Sea, cut off his head and sent it to Meng Wei, and sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to pay tribute.

古文：魏主使东城子于亮报之，赐遗甚厚。
现代文：宣武帝指派东城子于亮接待使者，赐送崐特别丰厚。
English: Emperor Xuanwu assigned Dongcheng Zi Yu Liang to receive the envoy and gave him a particularly rich gift.

古文：高昌王嘉失期不至，威引兵还。
现代文：高昌王麴嘉没有在约定的时间到来，孟威带兵返回。
English: Gaochang Wang Bingjia did not arrive at the agreed time, and Meng Wei returned with his soldiers.

古文：佗汗可汗子丑奴立，号豆罗伏跋豆伐可汗，改元建昌。
现代文：佗汗可汗的儿子奴继位而立，号为豆罗伏跋豆伐可汗，改年号为建昌。
English: Sui Khan Khan's son, Nong, succeeded to the throne. He was given the title of Durofubaw Doubaw Khan, and the name of the year was changed to Jianchang.

古文：宋、齐旧仪，祀天皆服衮冕，兼著作郎高阳许懋请造大裘，从之。
现代文：刘宋、南齐时期的旧仪式，祀天时都穿戴兖冕，兼著作郎高阳人许懋奏请裁制大裘，得到采纳。
English: The old ceremony of the Liu Song Dynasty and the Nanqi Dynasty, in which a crown was worn at all times during the worship of the heavens, and in which the author, the disciple Gaoyang, requested that the music be cut down to a large chorus, was adopted.

古文：上将有事太庙，诏以 斋日不乐。自今舆驾始出，鼓吹从而不作；还宫，如常仪。 
现代文：梁武帝将祭太庙，诏令： 斋日禁止音乐，从现在开始舆驾出发，乐队跟从但不吹奏，还宫之时，仍按平常的仪式鼓吹奏乐。 
English: Emperor Liangwu will hold a festival at the Great Temple, and issue a decree: Music is prohibited on the day of fasting. From now on, the procession will set off, and the band will follow but not play. When returning to the palace, they will still play music according to the usual ceremony.

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监八年春，正月，辛巳，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：天监八年春季正月，辛巳，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year of Tianjing, Emperor Liangwu went to the southern suburbs to worship Heaven and pardon the whole world.

古文：时有请封会稽、禅国山者，上命诸儒草封禅仪，欲行之。
现代文：当时，有人奏请在会稽和国山封禅，梁武帝命令诸儒生草拟封禅仪式，准备进行封禅。
English: At that time, someone made a request for the sealing of the imperial seal at the imperial examination and the national mountain, and Emperor Liangwu ordered all the Confucian scholars to draft the sealing ceremony and prepare to seal the imperial seal.

古文：许懋建议，以为： 舜柴岱宗，是为巡狩。
现代文：许懋提出建议，认为： 舜帝在泰山烧柴祭天，是为了巡狩。
English: Xu Yao suggested that: the reason for Emperor Gong to burn firewood and hold a festival on Mount Tai was to go on a hunting tour.

古文：而郑引《孝经钩命决》云： 封于太山，考绩柴燎；禅乎梁甫，刻石纪号。 
现代文：而郑玄引《孝经钩命决》说： 在泰山大祭，烧柴祭天把政绩报告；在梁甫山祭地，刻石记载年号。 
English: However, Zheng Xuan quoted "The Decision of Filial Piety" and said: At the Taishan Festival, the firewood-burning festival will report the government's performance; at the Liangfushan Festival, the year number will be recorded on the carved stone.

古文：此纬书之曲说，非正经之通义也。
现代文：这是纬书的曲说，不是正式经书的本来意思。
English: This is a literary allusion, not a literal translation.

古文：舜五载一巡狩，春夏秋冬周遍四岳，若为封禅，何其数也！
现代文：舜帝五年巡狩一次，春夏秋冬巡遍四岳，如果为了封禅，为何这么频繁呢？
English: Emperor Yao went on a five-year hunting tour once, and toured the four mountains in spring, summer, autumn and winter. If it was for the purpose of sealing Zen, why was it so frequent?

古文：又如管夷吾所说七十二君，燧人之前，世质民淳，安得泥金检玉！
现代文：又如管夷吾所说的七十二君，燧人氏之前，世风质朴百姓淳厚，怎么能够把金粉书写在竹筒上呢？
English: Also, as I said about the seventy-two princes, before the Shun people, the people were simple and honest, so how could they write gold dust on a bamboo tube?

古文：结绳而治，安得镌文告成！
现代文：当时结绳而治，怎么能够镌刻文字报告成功呢？
English: At that time, the country was at a standstill, so how was it possible to successfully engrave a written report?

古文：夷吾又云： 惟受命之君然后得封禅。 
现代文：管夷吾又说： 只有受命之君，然后才能封禅。 
English: Guan Yiguo also said, "Only the emperor who has received the order can seal Zen."

古文：周成王非受命之君，云何得封太山、禅社首！
现代文：周成王不是受命之君，从何谈起封太山禅社首呢？
English: Zhou Chengwang is not an appointed ruler, so how can we talk about the appointment of the head of the Taishan Zen Society?

古文：神农即炎帝也，而夷吾分为二人，妄亦甚矣！
现代文：神农即是炎帝，然而管夷吾却说成是两个人，实在是荒唐。
English: Shennong is the Emperor of Fire, but Guan Yigu is said to be two people, which is really absurd.

古文：若圣主，不须封禅；若凡主，不应封禅。
现代文：如果是圣主，无须封禅；如果是凡主，不应该封禅。
English: If it is the Lord, there is no need to seal Zen; if it is the Lord, there should be no sealing Zen.

古文：盖齐桓公欲行此事，夷吾知其不可，故举怪物以屈之。
现代文：大概齐桓公想进行封禅，管夷吾知道不可以进行，所以有意列举许多奇异物象出现时才可以封禅的事例，以便难住齐桓公，使他打消了念头。
English: Qi Kuan Gong probably wanted to seal the Zen, but I knew that I could not do it, so I deliberately listed many cases of sealing the Zen only when strange objects appeared, in order to annoy Qi Kuan Gong and make him give up the idea.

古文：秦始皇尝封太山，孙皓尝遣兼司空董朝至阳羡封禅国山，皆非盛德之事，不足为法。
现代文：秦始皇曾经封禅太山，孙皓曾经派遣兼司空董朝到达阳羡封禅国山，都不是盛德之事，不足以效法。
English: Qin Shihuang had once fenced off the Zen Taishan, and Sun Yat-sen had sent the concurrently appointed governor Kuang Dong to reach the sun and fenced off the Zen Guoshan, neither of which was a matter of virtue, and neither of which was sufficient to follow the example.

古文：然则封禅之礼，皆道听所说，失其本文，由主好名于上，而臣阿旨于下也。
现代文：那么封禅的礼仪，全都是道听途说的事，失去了其本来的意义，完全是因为君主在上喜好名声，而臣子们在下曲意逢迎。
English: So the etiquette of Fuzan is all a matter of hearsay and has lost its original meaning, entirely because the monarch likes fame in the upper part, while the courtiers like it in the lower part.

古文：古者祀天祭地，礼有常数，诚敬之道，尽此而备。至于封禅，非所敢闻。 
现代文：古代的祀祭天地，礼仪有常规，诚敬之道，至此而完备，至于封禅，实在是不敢妄说。 
English: The ancient world of worship and sacrifice, the etiquette has a routine, the way of sincerity, and is thus complete. As for the seal of Zen, I really dare not say.

古文：上嘉纳之，因推演懋议，称制旨以答请者，由是遂止。
现代文：武帝表扬和采纳了许懋的意见，于是进一步扩充了许懋的建议，作为圣旨回答请求封禅的人，因此便中止了这一计划。
English: Emperor Wu commended and adopted Xu Rong's opinion, and then further expanded Xu Rong's suggestion, as the person who answered the request for sealing Zen, so he stopped this plan.

古文：魏中山王英至义阳，将取三关，先策之曰： 三关相须如左右手，若克一关，两关不待攻而破；攻难不如攻易，宜先攻东关。 
现代文：北魏中山王元英抵达义阳，将要攻取三关，先进行策划，他说： 三关相互依赖如左右手一般，如果攻克一关，其他两关便不攻而自破；攻难不如攻易，应该先攻打东关。 
English: When Wang Yuanying of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in Yiyang, he planned to attack the three passes first. He said, "The three passes are as interdependent as the right and left hands. If you conquer one pass, the other two passes will be broken without attacking; the attack is not as difficult as the attack is easy. You should attack the east pass first."

古文：又恐其并力于东，乃使长史李华帅五统向西关，以分其兵势，自督诸军向东关。
现代文：又担心对方合并力量于东关，就指派长史李华率领五统军的兵力去西关，以便分散对方的兵力，他自己则亲自督率各路军队去东关。
English: Worried about the other side's combined forces in Dongguan, he assigned Changshi Lihua to lead the troops of the Five-in-One Army to West Guan in order to disperse the other side's troops, and he himself personally supervised and led the troops from all directions to East Guan.

古文：先是，马仙琕使云骑将军马广屯长薄，军主胡文超屯松岘。
现代文：开初，马仙派云骑将军马广屯驻长薄，军主胡文超屯驻松岘。
English: At the beginning, Ma Xian sent the general Ma Guangtun stationed in Changbo, and the commander Hu Wenchao stationed in Songtao.

古文：丙申，英至长薄。戊戌，长薄溃，马广遁入武阳，英进围之。
现代文：丙申，元英到了长薄，戊戌，长薄被攻破，马广逃到武阳，元英又进兵围住了该城。
English: Bishin, Yuan Ying arrived at Chang thin, Wuzhong, Chang thin was broken, Ma Guang fled to Wuyang, Yuan Ying entered the army and surrounded the city.

古文：上遣冠军将军彭甕生、骠骑将军徐元季将兵援武阳。英故纵之使入城，曰： 吾观此城形势易取。 
现代文：梁武帝派遣冠军将军彭雍瓮生、骠骑将军徐元孝率兵援救武阳，元英故意让他们入城，说： 我察看这座城的形势，很容易攻取。 
English: Emperor Liangwu sent the champion general Peng Yongsheng and the cavalry general Xu Yuanxiao to rescue Wuyang. Yuanying deliberately let them enter the city, saying, "I have inspected the situation of this city, it is easy to capture."

古文：甕生等既入，英促兵攻之，六日而拔，虏三将及士卒七千馀人。
现代文：彭瓮生等人入城之后，元英便催促兵士发起急攻，六天就攻打下来了，俘虏了三个将领以及士卒七千多人。
English: After Peng Xinsheng and others entered the city, Yuan Yinglu urged the soldiers to launch a surprise attack, and they attacked the city in six days, capturing three generals and more than seven thousand soldiers.

古文：进攻广岘，太子左卫率李元履弃城走；又攻西关，马仙琕亦弃城走。
现代文：元英又挥师进攻广岘，太子左卫率李元履弃城逃跑；元英又攻打西关，马仙也弃城逃跑了。
English: Yuan Ying also attacked Guangyi with his army, and Prince Zuo and Li Yuanlu abandoned the city and fled. Yuan Ying also attacked Xiguan, and Ma Xian also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：上使南郡太守韦睿将兵救仙琕，睿至安陆，增筑城二丈馀，更开大堑，起高楼。
现代文：梁武帝指派南郡太守韦睿率兵援救马仙，韦睿到达安陆，把城墙加高到两丈多，又挖了大壕沟，起造高楼。
English: Emperor Liangwu assigned Wei Rui, the governor of Nan County, to lead an army to rescue Ma Xian. Wei Rui arrived in Anlu, raised the city wall to more than two stories, dug a large trench, and built a high-rise building.

古文：众颇讥其怯，睿曰： 不然，为将当有怯时，不可专勇。 
现代文：众人颇为讥笑韦睿这是显示怯懦，韦睿说： 不对，做将领当有胆怯的时候，不可以一昧地逞勇猛。 
English: The crowd jeered at Wayreth, saying that this was cowardice. Wayreth said, "No, as a general, when you're afraid, you can't be brave all the time.

古文：中山王英急追马仙，将复邵阳之耻，闻睿至，乃退。
现代文：中山王元英急追马仙，要报复邵阳之耻，听说韦睿到了，就撤退了。
English: Zhongshan Wang Yuan Ying urgently chased Ma Xian to avenge the shame of Shaoyang. When he heard that Wei Rui had arrived, he retreated.

古文：上亦有诏罢兵。
现代文：武帝也下达诏令罢兵。
English: Emperor Wu also issued an imperial edict ordering the soldiers to go on strike.

古文：初，魏主遣中书舍人鲷阳董绍慰劳叛城，白早生袭而囚之，送于建康。
现代文：原先，北魏宣武帝派遣中书舍人阳人董绍招抚慰劳反叛之城，白早生袭击并囚禁了董绍，把他送到了建康。
English: Originally, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the middle-aged scholar Dong Shao to the rebellious city to solicit consolation and labor. Bai attacked and imprisoned Dong Shao at an early age and sent him to Jiankang.

古文：魏主既克悬瓠，命于齐苟儿等四将之中分遣二人，敕扬州为移，以易绍及司马悦首。
现代文：悬瓠攻克之后，宣武帝命令从齐苟儿等四个将领之中分派两人，令扬州给梁朝送去移文，以这两人换回董绍和司马悦的首级。
English: After the siege was over, Emperor Xuanwu ordered that two of the four generals, including Qi Guorong, be sent to Yangzhou to deliver a letter to Liang Dynasty, and the two were exchanged for the heads of Dong Shao and Sima Yue.

古文：移书未至，领军将军吕僧珍与绍言，爱其文义，言于上，上遣主书霍灵超谓绍曰： 今听卿还，令卿通两家之好，彼此息民，岂不善也！ 
现代文：移文还没有到来，领军将军吕僧珍与董绍谈话，爱慕他的文才，告诉了梁武帝，梁武帝派主书霍灵超对董绍说： 现在让你回去，令你沟通两家之好，彼此休生养民，岂不是好事一桩！ 
English: The transfer of the documents had not yet arrived. The leading general, Lü Sengzhen, had a conversation with Dong Shao, admired his literary talent, and told Emperor Liang Wudi. Emperor Liang Wudi sent his chief secretary, Hor Ling Chao, to tell Dong Shao: Now let you go back, let you communicate the good of the two families, let each other rest and feed the people, wouldn't that be a good thing!

古文：因召见，赐衣物，令舍人周舍慰劳之，且曰： 战争多年，民物涂炭，吾是以不耻先言与魏朝通好，比亦有书全无报者，卿宜备申此意。
现代文：于是召见了董绍，赐给他衣物，又令舍人周舍慰劳了他，且对他说： 战争多年，百姓生灵涂炭，财物毁坏，我们因此不以先提出与魏朝和好为耻辱，近来也有信给贵国，但是一点答复也没有，您应该把我们的这个意思完整地转达一下。
English: So he summoned Dong Shao, gave him some clothes, and asked Zhou Shao to console him, and said to him: After many years of war, the people's lives have been charred, and their property has been destroyed. Therefore, it is a disgrace for us not to first propose a reconciliation with the Wei Dynasty. Recently, we have also sent a letter to your country, but there has been no reply at all. You should fully convey this intention of ours.

古文：今遣传诏霍灵秀送卿至国，迟有嘉问。 
现代文：现在派遣传诏霍灵秀送您回国，等待您的好消息。
English: Now send herald Hollingshaw to escort you back to your country, and wait for your good news.

古文：又谓绍曰： 卿知所以得不死不？
现代文：又对董绍说： 您知道不知道自己何以没有死呢？
English: He also said to Dong Shao: Do you know why you didn't die?

古文：今者获卿，乃天意也。
现代文：现在得到您，这是天意。
English: It's God's will to get you now.

古文：夫立君以为民也，凡在民上，岂可不思此乎！
现代文：建立君主完全是为了百姓大众，凡在君主之位者，岂可以不想到这个呢？
English: The monarchy was established solely for the sake of the people. How can anyone in the position of the monarch not think about this?

古文：若欲通好，今以宿豫还彼，彼当以汉中见归。 
现代文：如果贵国想和好，我们就立即把宿豫还给你们，你们也应当把汉中归还我们。 
English: If we are willing to be reconciled, we should return Suyuan City to the Wei Dynasty, and Wei should also return Hanzhong to us.

古文：绍还魏，言之魏主，不从。
现代文：董绍回到北魏后把梁朝请求和好的事讲了，但是宣武帝不同意。
English: After returning to the Northern Wei Dynasty, Dong Shao asked the Liang Dynasty for reconciliation, but Emperor Xuanwu did not agree.

古文：三月，魏荆州刺史元志将兵七万寇潺沟，驱迫群蛮，群蛮悉渡汉水来降，雍州刺史吴平侯昺纳之。
现代文：三月，北魏荆州刺史元志统率七万大军入寇潺沟，驱赶威迫各蛮族，群蛮全都渡过汉水来投降梁朝，雍州刺史吴平侯萧接纳了他们。
English: In March, the 70,000-strong army led by the Northern Wei ruler of Jingzhou, Yuan Shidong, entered the Kofun Valley, drove away and intimidated the barbarians. The barbarians all crossed the Han River to surrender to the Liang Dynasty, and the Yongzhou ruler, Wu Ping Hou Xiao, accepted them.

古文：纲纪皆以蛮累为边患，不如因此除之，昺曰： 穷来归我，诛之不祥。
现代文：州郡里身份地们较高的官员们都认为蛮人累累带来边患，不如乘此机会把他们除掉，萧却说： 他们走投无路来投归我们，我如杀掉他们，实在是不祥之事。
English: The higher-ranking officials in the state and county all thought that the barbarians had caused the border trouble, and it would be better to take this opportunity to get rid of them, but Xiao said: They have no choice but to return to us. If I kill them, it would be really ominous.

古文：且魏人来侵，吾得蛮以为屏蔽，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：况且北魏人来侵犯之时，我有这些蛮人做屏障，不也是很好吗！ 
English: Moreover, when the Northern Wei came to invade, I had these barbarians as a barrier, isn't it great!

古文：乃开樊城受其降，命司马硃思远等击志于潺沟，大破之，斩首万馀级。
现代文：于是打开樊城接受了这些前来投降的蛮人，又命令司马朱思远等人在潺沟攻击元英，大获全胜，斩首一万多名。
English: Therefore, he opened the city of Handan to accept these barbarians who came to surrender, and ordered Sima Zhu Siyuan and others to attack Yuan Ying in Handan, and won a complete victory, beheading more than 10,000 people.

古文：志，齐之孙也。
现代文：元志是元齐的孙子。
English: Yuan Zhi is the grandson of Yuan Qi.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，以临川王宏为司空，加车骑将军王茂开府仪同三司。
现代文：夏季，四月戊申，梁朝任命临川王萧宏为司空，加封车骑将军王茂开府仪同三司。
English: In the summer, in April, the Liang Dynasty appointed Wang Xiaohong of Linchuan as the Secretary of the Air Force, and Wang Mao, the General of the Cavalry, as the Third Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：丁卯，魏楚王城主李国兴以城降。
现代文：丁卯，北魏楚王城的主将李国兴献城投降梁朝。
English: Dingwu, the commander of the Northern Wei Chu King City, Li Guoxing, surrendered the city to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，癸巳，巴陵王萧宝义卒。
现代文：秋季七月，七月癸巳，梁朝巴陵王萧宝义去世。
English: In the autumn of July, Xiao Baoyi, King of the Liang Dynasty, died.

古文：九月，辛巳，魏封故北海王详子颢为北海王。
现代文：九月辛巳，北魏封已故北海王元详的儿子元颢为北海王。
English: In September, the Northern Wei dynasty crowned the son of the late Northern Sea King Yuan Jie as the Northern Sea King.

古文：魏公孙崇造乐尺，以十二黍为寸；刘芳非之，更以十黍为寸。
现代文：北魏公孙崇造乐尺，以十二黍为一寸，刘芳说他定的不对，改成以十黍为一寸。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Gongsun Chong made a musical ruler with twelve cymbals for one inch, but Liu Fang said that he was wrong and changed it to ten cymbals for one inch.

古文：尚书令高肇等奏： 崇所造八音之器及度量，皆与经传不同，诘其所以然，云 必依经文，声则不协。 
现代文：尚书令高肇等人上奏： 公孙崇所造的八音之器以及度量标准全都与经传所载不同，反问他为什么这样，他说： 一定依照经文的话，则声音就不协调。 
English: Shang Shu ordered Gao Zhao and others to play: The eight-tone instrument and the standard of measurement made by Gong Sun Chong were all different from those recorded in the scriptures. When he asked why, he said: If you must follow the scriptures, then the sound is not harmonious.

古文：请更令芳依《周礼》造乐器，俟成，集议并呈，从其善者。 
现代文：请求另外命令刘芳依照《周礼》造乐器，待制成之后集体议论鉴定并上呈，采用其中好的。 
English: The request also ordered Liu Fang to make musical instruments according to "Zhou Li," and after they are made, they will be collectively discussed and appraised and submitted, and the best one will be adopted.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：宣武帝诏令同意。
English: He complied.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，魏以司空广阳王嘉为司徒。
现代文：冬季，十月癸丑，北魏任命司空广阳王元嘉为司徙。
English: In the winter, at the end of October, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Yuanjia, the Secretary of the Air, Guangyang, as the Secretary of Emigration.

古文：十一月，己丑，魏主于式乾殿为诸僧及朝臣讲《维摩诘经》。
现代文：十一月己丑，北魏宣武帝在式乾殿为众僧以及朝臣们讲解《维摩诘经》。
English: In November, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty gave a lecture on the "Vima Sutra" to the monks and courtiers in the Qian Hall.

古文：时魏主专尚释氏，不事经籍，中书侍郎河东裴延隽上疏，以为： 汉光武、魏武帝，虽在戎马之间，未尝废书；先帝迁都行师，手不释卷。良以学问多益，不可暂辍故也。
现代文：当时，宣武帝专门崇尚佛教，不读经籍，中书侍郎河东人裴延上疏，指出： 汉光武帝、魏武帝，虽然忙于戎马征战，但是未曾废弃书籍，先帝迁都行军，手不释卷，正因为学问多有益处，不可以临时中断。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanwu exclusively advocated Buddhism and did not read the scriptures. Pei Yan Shangso, a Chinese book seller from the east of the river, pointed out: Emperor Han Guangwu and Emperor Weiwu, although they were busy with military campaigns, they did not abandon books. The former emperor moved the capital and marched without releasing the scroll. Precisely because learning is more beneficial, it cannot be temporarily interrupted.

古文：陛下升法座，亲讲大觉，凡在瞻听，尘蔽俱开。
现代文：陛下升上法座，亲自讲解佛法奥义，在场的人瞻听之际，内心尘蔽俱开。
English: His Majesty ascended to the Dharma throne and personally explained the mysteries of Buddhism. As those present listened, their hearts were filled with awe.

古文：然《五经》治世之模楷，应务之所先，伏愿经书互览，孔、释兼存，则内外俱周，真俗斯畅矣。 
现代文：然而《五经》是治世的楷模，处理世务所应首先研读的，所以恭敬地希望圣上佛经与儒书互读，孔学与释教兼存，如此则内外都能周全，教义和世务都能通畅。 
English: However, the "Five Classics" is a model for reigning, and it should be studied first before dealing with the world affairs. Therefore, it is respectfully hoped that the sacred Buddhist scriptures and Confucianism will be read together, and Confucianism and exegesis will coexist. In this way, both inside and outside can be comprehensive, and doctrine and world affairs can be smooth.

古文：时佛教盛于洛阳，中国沙门之外，自西域来者三千馀人，魏主别为之立永明寺千馀间以处之。
现代文：当时，佛教盛于洛阳，除中国和尚而外，从西域来的和尚还有三千多名，北魏宣武帝另外建立了永明寺一千多间禅房，来安置他们。
English: At that time, Buddhism was flourishing in Luoyang. In addition to China and Shang, there were more than three thousand monks from the Western Regions. Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty also established more than one thousand Zen rooms in Yongming Temple to accommodate them.

古文：处士南阳冯亮有巧思，魏主使与河南尹甄琛、沙门统僧暹择嵩山形胜之地，立闲居寺，极岩壑土木之美。
现代文：处士南阳人冯亮很聪明，宣武帝指派他同河南尹甄深、沙门统僧暹选择嵩山地形好的地方建立了闲居寺，修建得非常好，极尽岩壑土木之美。
English: The Nanyang official, Feng Liang, was very clever. Emperor Xuanwu assigned him, together with Yin Zhenzhen of Henan Province and the Samnite monk Siem, to choose a place with good terrain in Songshan to build a leisure temple. It was very well built, with the utmost beauty of rock and earth.

古文：由是远近承风，无不事佛，比及延昌，州郡共有一万三千馀寺。
现代文：于是远近受影响，无不信奉佛教，到了延昌之时，各州郡共有一万三千多处寺院。
English: As a result, Buddhism spread far and wide, and by the time of Yanchang, there were more than 13,000 temples in all prefectures.

古文：是岁，魏宗正卿元树来奔，赐爵鄴王。
现代文：这一年，北魏宗正卿元树来投奔梁朝，武帝赐予他邺王的爵位。
English: In that year, Northern Wei Zong Zhengqing Yuan Shu defected to the Liang Dynasty, and Emperor Wu gave him the title of Shao Wang.

古文：树，翼之弟也。
现代文：元树是元翼的弟弟。
English: The original tree is the younger brother of the original wing.

古文：时翼为青、冀二州刺史，镇郁游，久之，翼谋举州降魏，事泄而死。
现代文：当时，元翼是青、冀二州的刺史，坐镇郁洲，很久之后，元翼密谋率全州投降北魏，因事情泄露而被杀。
English: At that time, Yuan Ying was the chief historian of the two states of Qing and Hebei, sitting in the town of Yuzhou. Long after that, Yuan Ying conspired to lead the whole state to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and was killed because the matter was leaked.

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监九年
现代文：天监九年
English: The ninth year of the overseer

古文：春，正月，乙亥，以尚书令沈约为左光禄大夫，右光禄大夫王莹为尚书令。
现代文：春季正月，乙亥，梁朝任命尚书令沈约为左当禄大夫，右光禄大夫王莹为尚书令。
English: In the first month of spring, Yihai, the Liang Dynasty appointed Shang Shuling Shen Yu as the doctor of the Left Danglu, and Wang Ying, the doctor of the Right Guanglu, as the doctor of the Right Danglu.

古文：约文学高一时，而贪冒荣利，用事十馀年，政之得失，唯唯而已。
现代文：沈约的文章名高一时，然而贪求荣华之利，掌权十多年，对政治方面的得失，唯唯喏喏，只会顺从。
English: Shen Youyou's article is famous for a while, but he is greedy for the benefits of prosperity, has been in power for more than ten years, and is only obedient to the political gains and losses.

古文：自以久居端揆，有志台司，论者亦以为宜，而上终不用；乃求外出，又不许。
现代文：他自以为久为尚书省长官，因此有意于三公之位，人们的议论也认为他合适，但是梁武帝终究没任用他；他请求到外地去做官，也不准许。
English: He thought that he had been the governor of Shangshu Province for a long time, so he was interested in the position of the three princes, and people's discussions also considered him suitable, but Emperor Liangwu did not appoint him after all; he asked to go abroad to work as an official, and was not allowed.

古文：徐勉为之请三司之仪，上不许。
现代文：徐勉为他请求开府同三司之仪的官衔，武帝也不同意。
English: Emperor Wu did not agree to Emperor Xu's request to give him the official title of Kaifu and Sanji.

古文：庚寅，新作缘淮塘，北岸起石头迄东冶，南岸起后渚篱门迄三桥。
现代文：庚寅，梁朝新筑缘淮塘，北岸从石头起到东冶，南岸从后渚篱门起到三桥。
English: Geng Yin, newly built along the embankment of Huai Shui, from the north bank from the stone to the bund, from the south bank from the back to the three bridges.

古文：三月，丙戌，魏皇子诩生，大赦。
现代文：三月丙戌，北魏皇子元诩出生。
English: In March, the Northern Wei Dynasty prince Yuan Shao was born.

古文：诩母胡充华，临泾人，父国珍，袭武始伯。
现代文：元诩的母亲胡充华是临泾人，胡充华的父亲胡国珍袭位武始伯。
English: Yuanzhang's mother, Hu Chunhua, was from Linyi, and Hu Chunhua's father, Hu Guozhen, was from Wuxi.

古文：充华初选入掖庭，同列以故事祝之曰： 愿生诸王、公主，勿生太子。 
现代文：胡充华初被选入后宫之时，和她身份一样的嫔妃们照惯例替她祝告说： 愿生诸王、公主，不要生太子。 
English: When Hu Chunhua was first elected to the imperial court, the concubines of the same status as her, as usual, congratulated her and said: "May you give birth to kings and princesses, but not princes."

古文：充华曰： 妾之志异于诸人，奈何畏一身之死而使国家无嗣乎！ 
现代文：胡充华却说： 我的志向与你们不同，岂能害怕一身之死而让国家没有继承人呢？ 
English: Hu Chunhua, however, said: My aspiration is different from yours. Can I be afraid of dying alone and leaving the country without a successor?

古文：及有娠，同列劝去之，充华不可，私自誓曰： 若幸而生男，次第当长，男生身死，所不憾也！ 
现代文：到她怀孕之后，嫔妃们劝她把胎儿打掉，她却不干，并私下里发誓说： 如果有幸生下男孩，排行应该是长子，儿子生下来后我死去，没有丝毫遗憾之处。 
English: After she became pregnant, her concubines urged her to abort the fetus, but she refused to do so, and secretly swore: If I am lucky enough to give birth to a boy, the ranking should be the eldest son, I will die after my son is born, without the slightest regret.

古文：既而生诩。
现代文：很快就生下了元诩。
English: Soon after, she gave birth to Yuan Xuan.

古文：先是，魏主频丧皇子，年渐长，深加慎护，择良家宜子者以为乳保，养于别宫，皇后、充华皆不得近。
现代文：早先，北魏宣武帝屡丧皇子，他年纪渐渐大了，所以对元诩特别重视，谨慎护理，选择良家妇女中奶水好的做乳母，在别宫中哺养元诩，皇后和胡充华都不得接近。
English: Earlier, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty repeatedly lost his prince, and he was getting older. Therefore, he paid special attention to Yuan Xuan, carefully nursed him, chose a good nanny from a good family, and nursed Yuan Xuan in another palace. The queen and Hu Chonghua were not allowed to get close.

古文：己丑，上幸国子学，亲临讲肄。
现代文：己丑，梁武帝临幸国子学，亲自进入讲堂察视。
English: Embarrassed, Emperor Liangwu personally entered the lecture hall to inspect the school.

古文：乙未，诏太子以下及王侯之子年可从师者皆入学。
现代文：乙未，武帝诏令皇太子以下以及王侯之子年龄可以从师学习的都入学。
English: However, Emperor Wu decreed that anyone under the age of a crown prince or the son of a prince could enter the school.

古文：旧制：尚书五都令史皆用寒流。
现代文：旧制规定：尚书五都令史全都选用寒门出身者担任。
English: The old system stipulates that the five capital cities of Shangshu and Lingshi should all be chosen by people from the cold gate.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，诏曰： 尚书五都，职参政要，非但总领众局，亦乃方轨二丞；可革用士流，秉此群目。 
现代文：夏季，四月，丁巳，武帝诏令： 尚书五都，是参与朝政的重要职位，不但总领全局，而且与左右丞相并驾；可以择用士族门第出身的来担任，以操持全盘。 
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu decreed: Shangshu Wudu is an important position to participate in the government of the dynasty, not only the leader of the overall situation, but also the co-driver with the left and right prime ministers; it is possible to choose a person from the Shizoku clan to hold the position in order to control the overall situation.

古文：于是以都令史视奉朝请，用太学博士刘纳兼殿中都，司空法曹参军刘显兼吏部都，太学博士孔虔孙兼金部都，司空法曹参军萧轨兼左右户都，宣毅墨曹参军王颙兼中兵都；并以才地兼美，首膺其选。
现代文：于是以都令史的地位等同于奉朝请，任命太学博士刘纳兼殿中都，司空法曹参军刘显兼吏部都，太学博士孔虔孙兼金部都，司空法曹参军萧轨兼左右户都，宣毅将军府墨曹参军王兼中兵都，上述几人都因才能和门第俱属上流而首先被选中。
English: Therefore, with the status of the history of the capital as equivalent to the request of the imperial court, he appointed Liu Na, the doctor of science and the capital of the palace, Liu Xian, the secretary of the legal department and the capital of the legal department, Kong Qishun, the doctor of science and the capital of the financial department, Xiao Lu, the secretary of the legal department and the capital of the left and right households, and Miao Cao, the general of Xuan Yi and the capital of the military department and the capital of the middle class. The above-mentioned people were first selected because of their talent and the fact that they belonged to the upper class.

古文：六月，宣城郡吏吴承伯挟妖术聚众。癸丑，攻郡，杀太守硃僧勇，转屠旁县。
现代文：六月，宣城郡的吏员吴承伯以妖术召聚众人，癸丑，攻进郡城杀了太守朱僧勇，转而又去旁边的县去屠杀人口。
English: In June, Wu Chengbo, the magistrate of Xuancheng County, used sorcery to gather people and make them ugly. He attacked the county seat and killed the governor Zhu Sengyong, and then went to the next county to massacre the population.

古文：闰月，己丑，承伯逾山，奄至吴兴。
现代文：闫月己丑，吴承伯超过山岭，突然来到吴兴。
English: Wu Chengbo crossed the mountains and suddenly came to Wu Xing.

古文：东土人素不习兵，吏民恇扰奔散，或劝太守蔡撙避之，撙不可，募勇敢闭门拒守。
现代文：东边的人向来不操兵演武，所以官吏和老百姓们都担惊受怕，四处奔散，有人劝太守蔡撙躲避一下，蔡撙不愿意，他招募勇敢者关闭城门坚决拒守。
English: People in the east have always been reluctant to engage in military maneuvers, so the officials and ordinary people were terrified and scattered everywhere. Some people advised Cai Wei, the grand marshal, to take shelter for a while. Cai Wei did not want to, so he recruited brave people to close the city gate and resolutely refuse to defend it.

古文：承伯尽锐攻之，撙帅众出战，大破之，临陈斩承伯。
现代文：吴承伯竭尽全力攻城，蔡撙率众出战，大败敌手，亲自出阵，斩了吴承伯。
English: Wu Chengbo tried his best to attack the city, Cai Wei led the crowd to battle, defeated the enemy, personally went to battle, and beheaded Wu Chengbo.

古文：撙，兴宗之子也。
现代文：蔡撙是蔡兴宗的儿子。
English: Cai Jun is the son of Cai Xingzong.

古文：承伯馀党入新安，攻陷黟、歙诸县，太守谢览遣兵拒之，不胜，逃奔会稽，台军讨贼，平之。
现代文：吴承伯的残部进入新安，攻陷了黟、歙等县，太守谢览派兵抵抗，没有取胜，逃跑到会稽，朝廷军队前来讨伐贼寇，平定了他们。
English: The remnants of Wu Chengbo entered Xin'an and conquered the counties of Tonglu and Tonglu. The Taishu Xiexiang sent troops to resist, but did not win. He fled to Hui Fei. The imperial army came to fight the bandits and pacified them.

古文：览，沦之子也。
现代文：谢览是谢瀹的儿子。
English: Xie Chan is the son of Xie Yao.

古文：冬，十月，魏中山献武王英卒。
现代文：冬季十月，北魏中山献武王元英去世。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Yuanying, the Northern Wei Zhongshan champion, passed away.

古文：上即位之三年，诏定新历。员外散骑侍郎祖恒奏其父冲之考古法为正，历不可改。
现代文：梁武帝即位三年时，诏定新的历法，员外散骑侍郎祖上奏称他的父亲祖冲之考定古法正确，历法不可以改。
English: When Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne three years later, he decreed a new calendar. His father Zu Chongzhi said that the old calendar was correct and could not be changed.

古文：至八年，诏太史课新旧二历，新历密，旧历疏，是岁，始行冲之《大明历》。
现代文：到了八年之时，武帝又诏令太史核定新旧两种历法，新历法密，旧历法疏，这一年，开始实行祖冲之的《大明历》。
English: At the time of the eighth year, Emperor Wu also issued a decree to approve the new and old two calendars, the new calendar and the old calendar. In this year, the implementation of Zu Chong's "Great Ming Calendar" began.

古文：魏刘芳等奏： 所造乐器及教文、武二舞、登歌、鼓吹曲等已成，乞如前敕集公卿群儒义定，与旧乐参呈，若臣等所造，形制合古，出拊会节，请于来年元会用之。 
现代文：北魏刘芳上奏： 所制造的乐器以及教的文武二舞、登歌、鼓吹曲等已经完成，请求如以前圣旨所命令的那样召集公卿群儒们议定，与旧乐一起上呈。如果我们几人所制造的乐器，形式制度符合古式，敲奏起来合节奏的话，请于来年元旦朝会之时使用。 
English: Northern Wei Liu Fang played up: The musical instruments made and the martial arts two dances, ascending songs, and propaganda songs taught have been completed, and it was agreed to request that a group of noblemen and Confucians be convened as previously ordered by the Holy Will, and presented together with the old music. If the musical instruments made by several of us, the form system conforms to the ancient style, and if they are played up to the rhythm, please use them at the time of the New Year's Day meeting.

古文：诏： 舞可用新，馀且仍旧。 
现代文：宣武帝诏令： 舞蹈可以采用新的，其余的暂且仍用旧的。 
English: Emperor Xuanwu's edict: The dance can use new rhythms, but the rest should still use the old ones.

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监十年春，正月，辛丑，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：天监十年春季，正月辛丑，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the Heaven's Supervision, the first month of the year was grim and ugly. Emperor Liang Wudi held a heavenly festival in the southern suburbs and pardoned the whole world.

古文：尚书左仆射张稷，自谓功大赏薄，尝侍宴乐寿殿，酒酣，怨望形于辞色。
现代文：尚书左仆射张稷，自认为攻劳大，奖赏却少，一次他侍宴于东寿殿，酒酣之际，怨气不满表露于言语表情之中。
English: Shangshu's second-in-command, Zhang Ye, thought he had worked hard for little reward. Once, when he was serving at the East Shouden banquet and drinking wine, his resentment and dissatisfaction showed in his verbal expression.

古文：上曰： 卿兄杀郡守，弟杀其君，有何名称！ 
现代文：武帝说： 你的哥哥杀了郡太守，你的弟弟杀了他的君主，你有什么值得夸耀的呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Your brother killed the county magistrate, your brother killed his sovereign, what do you have to boast about?"

古文：稷曰： 臣乃无名称，至于陛下，不得言无勋。
现代文：张稷回答： 我是没什么值得炫耀的地方，但是为陛下效力以来，不能说没有功劳。
English: Zhang Ye replied: I have nothing to show off, but since I have served His Majesty, I cannot say that I have no merit.

古文：东昏暴虐，义师亦来伐之，岂在而已！ 
现代文：东昏侯残暴肆虐，义师也来讨伐他，何况我呢？ 
English: The East dusk is brutally raging, the righteous teacher has also come to fight him, and how about me?

古文：上捋其须曰： 张公可畏人！ 
现代文：武帝捋着他的胡须，说： 张公让人感到害怕呀！ 
English: Emperor Wu stroked his beard and said, "Zhang Gong is scary!

古文：稷既惧且恨，乃求出外；癸卯，以稷为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：张稷心里既惧害又怨恨，于是请求外放，癸卯，武帝任命他为青、冀二州刺史。
English: Zhang Xuan felt both fear and resentment in his heart, so he asked to be released, and Emperor Wu appointed him as the official historian of the two states of Qing and Hebei.

古文：王珍国亦怨望，罢梁、秦二州刺史还，酒后于坐启云： 臣近入梁山便哭。 
现代文：王珍国也有怨气，他被罢去梁、秦二州刺史还京后，于酒后在座位上启奏武帝说： 我前不久进入梁山便哭了。 
English: Wang Zhenguo also had a grudge. After he returned to Beijing after being dismissed from Liangshan and Qin Erzhou Zangshi, he recited Emperor Wu on his seat after drinking and said: I entered Liangshan not long ago and cried.

古文：上大惊曰： 卿若哭东昏，则已晚；若哭我，我复未死！ 
现代文：武帝听了大吃一惊，说道： 你如果哭东昏侯，则已经晚了；如果哭我，我还没有死！ 
English: Emperor Wu was taken aback and said, "If you cry, it is too late; if I cry, I am not dead yet!"

古文：珍国起拜谢，竟不答，坐即散，因此疏退。久之，除都官尚书。
现代文：王珍国站起来拜谢，竟然不回答，酒席当即就散了，王珍国因此被疏远了，很久之后，王珍国被任命为都官尚书。
English: Wang Zhenguo stood up and bowed in thanks, but he didn't answer, and the banquet was immediately dispersed. Wang Zhenguo was alienated as a result. After a long time, Wang Zhenguo was appointed as the official of the capital.

古文：丁巳，魏汾州山胡刘龙驹聚众反，侵扰夏州，诏谏议大夫薛和发东秦、汾、华、夏四州之众以讨之。
现代文：丁巳，北魏汾州山胡刘龙驹聚众造反，侵拢夏州，北魏宣武帝诏令谏议大夫薛和征调东秦、汾、华、夏四州的兵力讨伐刘龙驹。
English: Ding Si, Northern Wei's Shanzhou Mountain Hu Liu Longqi gathered the masses to rebel and invade Xiazhou, Northern Wei's Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict to persuade the doctor Xue and conscripted the forces of East Qin, Qi, Hua and Xia four states to fight against Liu Longqi.

古文：辛酉，上祀明堂。
现代文：辛酉，武帝在明堂祭祀。
English: Emperor Wu held a religious service in Myeongdong.

古文：三月，琅邪民王万寿杀东莞、琅邪二郡太守刘晰，据朐山，召魏军。
现代文：三月，琅邪百姓王万寿杀了东莞、琅邪二郡太守刘晰，占据了朐山，召请北魏军队前来。
English: In March, Wang Wanshou killed Dongguan and Liu Qiao, the governor of the two counties, occupied Lushan and summoned the Northern Wei army to come.

古文：壬戌，魏广阳懿烈王嘉卒。
现代文：壬戌，北魏广阳懿烈王元嘉去世。
English: Wang Yuanjia, a Northern Wei and Guangyang hero, passed away.

古文：魏徐州刺史卢昶遣郯城戍副张天惠、琅邪戍主傅文骥相继赴朐山，青、冀二州刺史张稷遣兵拒之，不胜。
现代文：北魏徐州刺史卢昶派遣郯城的戍副张天惠、琅邪的戍主傅文骥相继赶赴朐山，梁朝青、冀二州刺史张稷派兵抵挡他们，没有取胜。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zhang Tianhui, the vice-emperor of Xuzhou, sent Zhang Tianhui, the vice-emperor of Jiecheng, and Fu Wenyi, the lord of Jiecheng, successively rushed to Lushan. Liang Chaoxing and Zhang Ye, the emperors of the two states of Hebei, sent troops to resist them, but they did not win.

古文：夏，四月，文骥等据朐山，诏振远将军马仙琕击之。
现代文：夏季，四月，傅文骥等人占据了朐山，武帝诏令振远将军马仙去攻打。
English: In the summer, in April, Fu Wenjun and others occupied Lushan, and Emperor Wu ordered General Zhenyuan Ma Xian to attack.

古文：魏又遣假安南将军萧宝寅、假平东将军天水赵遐将兵据朐山，受卢昶节度。
现代文：北魏又派遣代理安南将军萧宝寅、代理平东将军天水人赵遐率兵据守朐山，接受卢昶的指挥调遣。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty also dispatched the acting Annan general Xiao Baoying and the acting Pingdong general Tianshui person Zhao Jun to guard Lushan and accept Lu Jun's command and dispatch.

古文：甲戌，魏薛和破刘龙驹，悉平其党，表置东夏州。
现代文：甲戌，北魏薛和打败了刘龙驹，把他的党羽全部铲平，并上表设置了东夏州。
English: Armor, Northern Wei Xuehe defeated Liu Longkun, shoveled all his party feathers, and set up the table in Dongxia Prefecture.

古文：五月，丙辰，魏禁天文学。
现代文：五月丙辰，北魏禁止了天文学。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty banned astronomy.

古文：以国子祭酒张充为尚书左仆射。
现代文：梁朝任命国子祭酒张充为尚书左仆射。
English: The Liang Dynasty appointed Zhang Zong, the head of the National Children's Festival, as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man.

古文：充，绪之子也。
现代文：张充是张绪的儿子。
English: Zhang Cheng is the son of Zhang Xu.

古文：马仙琕围朐山，张稷权顿六里以督馈运，上数发兵助之。
现代文：马仙围住了朐山，张稷临时驻扎六里以便监督粮运，梁武帝几次发兵协助他们。
English: Ma Xian encircled Lushan, Zhang Ye temporarily stationed in Liuli to supervise grain transportation, Emperor Liang Wu sent troops to assist them several times.

古文：秋，魏卢昶上表请益兵六千，米十万石，魏主以兵四千给之。
现代文：秋季，北魏卢昶上表朝廷请求增兵六千，米十万石，宣武帝给他增派了四千兵力。
English: In the autumn of the year, the Northern Wei Emperor Lu Xun made a request to the imperial court for an additional six thousand soldiers and 100,000 koku of rice. Emperor Xuanwu sent him an additional four thousand soldiers.

古文：冬，十一月，己亥，魏主诏扬州刺史李崇等治兵寿阳，以分朐山之势。
现代文：十一月己亥，宣武帝诏令扬州刺史李崇等人在寿阳操练军队，以便分散梁朝在朐山的兵势。
English: In November of Ji Hai, Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict ordering Yangzhou Zhishi Li Chong and others to drill troops in Shouyang in order to disperse Liang Dynasty's troops in Shaoshan.

古文：卢昶本儒生，不习军旅。
现代文：卢昶本是一个儒生，不熟悉军旅事务。
English: Lu Wei was originally a Confucian scholar and was not familiar with military affairs.

古文：朐山城中粮樵俱竭，傅文骥以城降；十二月，庚辰，昶引兵先遁，诸军相继皆溃。会大雪，军士冻死及堕手足者三分之二，仙琕追击，大破之。
现代文：朐山城中的粮食和柴火全都用尽了，傅文骥献城投降；十二月庚辰，卢昶带兵先逃跑了，其他各路军马都相继溃散，正好天下大雪，兵士冻死以及冻掉手脚的有三分之二，马仙追击，大获全胜。
English: The grain and firewood in Lushan City were all used up, and Fu Wenyi surrendered the city; in December, Geng Chen, Lu Wei led the soldiers to flee, and the other armies and horses were scattered one after another. It happened to be a heavy snowfall, and the soldiers froze to death and two-thirds of their hands and feet froze. Ma Xian pursued and won a great victory.

古文：二百里间，僵尸相属，魏兵免者什一二。收其粮畜器械，不可胜数。
现代文：二百里之间，僵尸遍地，北魏兵卒幸免于难者仅占十分之一二，梁朝军队收缴到的粮食、牲口以及各种器械，不可胜数。
English: Between two hundred miles, zombies everywhere, only two out of ten Northern Wei soldiers survived, and the grain, livestock and various equipment collected by the Liang Dynasty army are countless.

古文：昶单骑而走，弃其节传、仪卫俱尽；至郯城，借赵遐节以为军威。
现代文：卢昶单人匹马逃跑，丢弃了节传、仪卫之具。到了郯城，他借用了赵遐的节传显自己的军威，以掩饰自己的失败。
English: Lu Xun fled alone on horseback, discarding his ceremonial armor and ceremonial guards. When he arrived in Lucheng, he borrowed Zhao Xun's ceremonial armor to demonstrate his military power and cover up his defeat.

古文：魏主命黄门侍郎甄琛驰驲锁昶，穷其败状，及赵遐皆免官。
现代文：宣武帝命令黄门侍郎甄琛骑驿马去把卢昶锁拿到洛阳，仔细查问他惨败的状况，最后卢昶和赵遐全被免官。
English: Emperor Xuanwu ordered the Yellow Gate attendant, Zhen Qi, to ride a horse to take Lu Qi's lock to Luoyang, and carefully investigate the circumstances of his disastrous defeat. In the end, Lu Qi and Zhao Qi were all dismissed.

古文：唯萧宝寅全军而归。
现代文：只有萧宝寅把军队完整地带回。
English: Only Xiao Baoying brought the whole army back.

古文：卢昶之在朐山也，御史中尉游肇言于魏主曰： 朐山蕞尔，僻在海滨，卑湿难居，于我非急，于贼为利。
现代文：卢昶在朐山之时，御史中尉游肇对北魏宣武帝说： 朐山弹丸之地，偏处海滨，地势低下，异常潮湿，难以居住，对于我们不是急用之处，而对于贼敌则是非常有用的。
English: When Lu Xun was in Lushan, Mishi Lieutenant You Zhao said to Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwu: Lushan is a place of bullets, it is located on the seashore, the terrain is low, it is extremely humid, and it is difficult to live in. It is not a place of urgent use for us, but it is very useful for thieves.

古文：为利，故必致死而争之；非急，故不得已而战。
现代文：正因为对他们有用处，所以必定要拼死相争；对我们用处不大，所以不得已而交战。
English: Precisely because it is useful to them, they must fight to the death; it is of little use to us, so we have no choice but to fight.

古文：以不得已之众击必死之师，恐稽延岁月，所费甚大。
现代文：以不得已之众抵抗拼命的军队，恐怕拖延时日，耗费甚大。
English: I am afraid that it will take a long time and a great deal of effort to resist the desperate army with a desperate crowd.

古文：假令得朐山，徒致交争，终难全守，所谓无用之田也。
现代文：假使能得到朐山，徒然地导致双方互相争夺，终将难以保全，正所谓无用之地。
English: If it is possible to obtain Lushan, it will lead to the two sides competing with each other in vain, and it will eventually be difficult to preserve, which is the so-called useless land.

古文：闻贼屡以宿豫求易朐山，若必如此，持此无用之地，复彼旧有之疆，民役时解，其利为大。 
现代文：听说贼敌屡次提出要以宿豫交换朐山，如果真是这样的话，用这块无用之地，换回来那块过去就属我们所有的疆域，兵戈之争顿时化解，其益处是非常大的。 
English: I heard that the enemy bandits have repeatedly proposed to exchange Shaoshan with Suyuan. If this is the case, we can use this useless piece of land to exchange for the territory that used to belong to all of us. The military conflict will be immediately resolved, and the benefits will be very great.

古文：魏主将从之，会昶败，迁肇侍中。
现代文：宣武帝准备要照此行事，恰恰卢昶战败，就提升游肇为侍中。
English: Emperor Xuanwu was ready to act accordingly, and when Lu Yao was defeated, he promoted You Zhao to attendant.

古文：肇，明根之子也。
现代文：游肇是游明根的儿子。
English: You Zhao is the son of You Minggen.

古文：马仙琕为将，能与士卒同劳逸，所衣不过布帛，所居无帏幕衾屏，饮食与厮养最下者同。
现代文：马仙作为将帅，能同士卒们同甘共苦，穿的衣服都是布帛制成，住的地方没有帏幕衾屏，饮食与仆人、马等最低下者同样。
English: As a great general, Ma Xian was able to share the joys and sorrows with his subordinates. He wore clothes made of cloth, lived in a place without curtains or screens, and ate the same food as his servants, horses, and other inferior people.

古文：其在边境，常单身潜入敌境，伺知壁垒村落险要处，所攻战多捷，士卒亦乐为之用。
现代文：他镇守边境，常常只身潜入敌境，偷偷察看壁垒村落险要之处，打仗大多能获胜，士卒们也乐于为他卖力。
English: He guarded the border, often sneaking into the enemy territory alone, surreptitiously inspecting the most important places in the barrier villages, winning most of the battles, and the soldiers were also happy to work hard for him.

古文：魏以甄琛为河南尹，琛表曰： 国家居代，患多盗窃，世祖发愤，广置主司、里宰，皆以下代令长及五等散男有经略者乃得为之。
现代文：北魏任命甄琛为河南尹，甄琛上表说： 国家在代京建都之时，盗窃成患，世祖皇帝为此而发愤，广置主司、里宰，全都让代京令长以下及五等散男中有谋略者来担任。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhen Rong as Henan Yin. Zhen Rong said on the table: When the country was building the capital on behalf of Beijing, theft became a problem. The ancestor emperor was angry about this, and the director and the leader were all assigned to the Beijing commander and the strategist in the fifth class.

古文：又多置吏士为其羽翼，崇而重之，始得禁止。
现代文：又多置吏士做他们的羽翼，非常重视他们，盗贼方才得到禁止。
English: More and more officials were set up to be their wings, and great importance was attached to them. It was only then that thieves were banned.

古文：今迁都已来，天下转广，四远赴会，事过代都，五方杂沓，寇盗公行，里正职轻任碎，多是下才，人怀苟且，不能督察。
现代文：自从迁都以来，交往扩大，四方来会，已经远远超过了代都，而五方崐杂沓，寇盗公然行事，里正职位轻，事务琐碎，担任其职的大多是才能低下者，人人抱着苟且之心，不能起到督察的作用。
English: Since the relocation of the capital, the exchanges have expanded, and the four parties have come to the meeting, which has far exceeded that of the capital, while the five parties are mixed, the robbers act openly, the positions are light, the affairs are trivial, and the positions are mostly held by people with low talents. Everyone is cautious and cannot play the role of inspector.

古文：请取武官八品将军已下干用贞济者，以本官俸恤领里尉之任，高者领六部尉，中者领经途尉，下者领里正。
现代文：请求挑选武官中八品将军以下而又有才干且品行端正热心办事的人，让他们享受原来官职的俸禄和恤亲之禄而担任里尉的职务，高者领六部尉，中者领经途尉，下者领里正。
English: It is requested that able and diligent military attachés below the rank of General of the Eighth Grade be selected to enjoy the salary of their original posts and the reward of their relatives and serve as lieutenants. The highest-ranking person will be given the rank of Sixth Lieutenant, the middle-ranking person will be given the rank of Second Lieutenant, and the lower-ranking person will be given the rank of Lieutenant.

古文：不尔，请少高里尉之品，选下品中应迁者进而为之。督责有所，辇毂可清。 
现代文：不然的话，也可以稍微提高里尉的品级，选下品中应该提拔者晋升担任，只要有人专门负责督管，京城的治安即可好转。 
English: Otherwise, it is also possible to slightly raise the rank of the lieutenant, and the person who should be promoted in the selected product should be promoted. As long as someone is specifically responsible for supervision, the security of the capital can be improved.

古文：诏曰： 里正可进至勋品，经途从九品，六部尉正九品；诸职中简取，不必武人。 
现代文：宣武皇帝诏令： 里正的品级可以升到勋官初品，经途尉为从九品，六部尉为正九品，从诸职中选拔，不必由军人来担任。 
English: Emperor Xuanwu issued a decree: the rank of Li Zheng could be raised to the first grade of the officer grade, while the rank of lieutenant could be raised to the ninth grade, and the rank of captain could be raised to the ninth grade, and the rank of captain could be raised to the ninth grade, and the rank of captain could be raised to the ninth grade.

古文：琛又奏以羽林辚游军，于诸坊巷司察盗贼。于是洛城清静，后常踵焉。
现代文：甄深又上奏请把禁卫军作为游军，让他们在各坊巷中巡逻检查盗贼，于是洛阳城马上变得清静了，这种办法在后代也得到因袭。
English: Zhen shen also suggested that the imperial guard should be used as a tour group, and that they should patrol the streets and alleys to check for thieves. As a result, the city of Luoyang immediately became quiet, and this method was also adopted by future generations.

古文：是岁，梁之境内有州二十三，郡三百五十，县千二十二。
现代文：这一年，梁朝境内有二十三个州，三百五十个郡，一千零二十二个县。
English: In that year, there were 23 prefectures, 350 counties and 1,022 counties in the territory of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：是后州名浸多，废置离合，不可胜记。
现代文：这以后州名越来越多，废置离合，不可胜记。
English: Since then, the number of state names has increased, and the abolition of the clutch is unforgettable.

古文：魏朝亦然。
现代文：北魏也同样如此。
English: The same was true of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：上敦睦九族，优借朝士，有犯罪者，皆屈法申之。
现代文：梁武帝对同姓的亲族非常亲近宽厚，对朝廷官员也非常优待爱护，其中有犯法的，他都超越法律而替他们开脱。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very close and generous to his relatives with the same surname, and he also treated the court officials very well. Among them were those who broke the law, and he excused them beyond the law.

古文：百姓有罪，则案之如法，其缘坐则老幼不免，一人逃亡，举家质作，民既穷窘，奸宄益深。
现代文：而老百姓有罪，则一律按照法律处置，并且株连犯罪，不管老幼一概不免，一人逃亡，全家以身抵押服劳役，百姓既然被逼迫的走投无路，各种作奸犯科的窃盗反乱案件就更严重了。
English: As for the common people who are guilty, they will all be dealt with in accordance with the law, and joint and several crimes, regardless of age, are unavoidable, one person flees, the whole family pledges themselves for forced labor, and since the people are cornered, all kinds of theft and rebellion cases of committing crimes are more serious.

古文：尝因郊祀，有秣陵老人遮车驾言曰： 陛下为法，急于庶民，缓于权贵，非长久之道。
现代文：有一次，梁武帝去郊祀，有一个秣陵老头借此机会拦住御驾讲道： 陛下执法，对庶民太严酷，对权贵则太宽松，这不是长久之道。
English: Once, when Emperor Liangwu went to worship in the countryside, an old man from Fuling took the opportunity to stop him and preach: Your Majesty's law enforcement is too harsh on the common people and too lenient on the powerful. This is not a long-term solution.

古文：诚能反是，天下幸甚。 
现代文：如果能打一个颠倒，则天下大幸呀。 
English: If you can hit one upside down, you're in luck.

古文：上于是思有以宽之。
现代文：武帝于是考虑对百姓执法加以放宽。
English: Emperor Wu then considered relaxing the law for the common people.

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监十一年
现代文：天监十一年
English: The 11th year of Tianjing

古文：春，正月，壬辰，诏： 自今逋谪之家及罪应质作，若年有老小，可停将送。 
现代文：春季，正月壬辰，武帝诏令： 自今开始，流放之家以及罪该以身抵押服劳役者，如果有老人或小孩，可以把他们除外。 
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Wu issued an edict: From now on, if there are any old people or children, they can be excluded from the exile home and the laborers who should pay for their crimes.

古文：以临川王宏为太尉，骠骑将军王茂为司空、尚书令。
现代文：梁朝任命临川王萧宏为太尉，骠骑将军王茂为司空、尚书令。
English: The Liang Dynasty appointed Linchuan Wang Xiaohong as the first lieutenant, and the cavalry general Wang Mao as the second lieutenant and the secretary.

古文：丙辰，魏以车骑大将军、尚书令高肇为司徒，清河王怿为司空，广平王怀进号骠骑大将军，加仪同三司。
现代文：丙辰，北魏任命车骑大将军、尚书令高肇为司徙，清河王元怿为司空，广平王元司进封号为骠骑大将军，加封为仪同三司。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Gaozhao was appointed as the general of cavalry and cavalry, Gaozhao was appointed as the commander of cavalry and cavalry, Wang Yuanqi of Qinghe was appointed as the commander of cavalry and cavalry, Wang Yuanqi of Guangping was appointed as the commander of cavalry and cavalry, and Gaozhao was appointed as the commander of cavalry and cavalry.

古文：肇虽登三司，犹自以去要任，怏怏形于言色，见者嗤之。
现代文：高肇虽然位登三司，但犹自认为去掉了尚书令的要职，心里不痛快流露于言语颜色之间，见到的人都因此而嗤笑他。
English: Although Gao Zhao was promoted to the Third Division, he still thought that he had removed the important position of Shang Shuling, and his heart was not happy with the color of his words, and everyone who saw him laughed at him.

古文：尚书右丞高绰、国子博士封轨，素以方直自业，及肇为司徒，绰送迎往来，轨竟不诣肇。
现代文：尚书左丞高绰、国子博士封轨，向来以方正刚直为行事准则，到高肇当上司徒之后，高绰迎送往来行礼如仪，而封轨竟然不去拜见高肇。
English: When Gao Zhao was the chief disciple, Gao Zhao welcomed and escorted Gao Zhao with great courtesy, but Gao Zhao did not visit Gao Zhao when he was the chief disciple.

古文：绰顾不见轨，乃遽归，叹曰： 吾平生自谓不失规矩，今日举措，不如封生远矣。 
现代文：高绰在高肇那里也不见封轨前来，于是马上起身返回，叹息着说道： 我平生自认为不失规矩，但是今天的举动，不如封生太远了。 
English: Gao Piao didn't see Fong Sheng coming there, so he immediately got up and returned, saying with a sigh: I've always thought that I didn't break the rules, but today's move is too far away from Fong Sheng.

古文：绰，允之孙；轨，懿之族孙也。
现代文：高绰是高允的孙子，封轨是封懿的族孙。
English: Gao Bao is the grandson of Gao Yun, and Fulai is the grandson of Fulai.

古文：清河王怿有才学闻望，惩彭城之祸，因侍宴，谓肇曰： 天子兄弟讵有几人，而翦之几尽！
现代文：清河王元怿有才学，外界声望也不错，有鉴于彭城王元勰无罪而被杀之祸，一次借侍宴机会，他对高肇说： 天子的兄弟能有几人，而差不多翦除尽了！
English: King Yuan of Qinghe had talent for learning and had a good reputation in the outside world. In view of the misfortune of King Yuan of Pengcheng being killed without guilt, he once took the opportunity of a banquet to say to Gao Zhao: There can be several brothers of the Son of Heaven, but they have almost been eliminated!

古文：昔王莽头秃，藉渭阳之资，遂篡汉室。
现代文：过去王莽是个秃头，凭借国舅的地位，便篡夺了汉室的天下。
English: In the past, Wang Mang was a bald man, and he usurped the world of the Han family by virtue of his status as the uncle of the country.

古文：今君身曲，亦恐终成乱阶。 
现代文：现在你是个驼背，也恐怕最终会成为祸乱之端。 
English: Now you're a hunchback, and I'm afraid you're going to end up on the wrong side of the tracks.

古文：会大旱，肇擅录囚徒，欲以收众心。
现代文：正遇大旱，高肇擅自重新审理囚徒，想以崐此而收拢人心。
English: Faced with a severe drought, Gao Zhao re-tried prisoners without authorization, hoping to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：怿言于魏主曰： 昔季氏旅于泰山，孔子疾之。
现代文：元怿向北魏宣武帝进言： 过去季氏超越名分在泰山祭祀，孔子对此非常愤慨。
English: Yuan Zheng sent a message to Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty: In the past, the Ji clan overstepped its bounds in the Taishan sacrifices, and Confucius was very indignant about this.

古文：诚以君臣之分，宜防微杜渐，不可渎也。
现代文：这确实是从君臣名分来考虑的，应该防微杜渐，不可以冒犯呀。
English: This is indeed considered from the perspective of the dignity of the monarchs and ministers. It should be prevented, and it should not offend.

古文：减膳灵囚，乃陛下之事，今司徒行之，岂人臣之义乎！
现代文：减少膳食之费，重新审理囚徙，这是陛下的事情，现在则让司徒去干了，这那里是做人臣者的本份呢？
English: It is His Majesty's business to reduce the cost of meals, to re-examine the deportation of prisoners, and now he is letting Stout do it. Is this the duty of a statesman?

古文：明君失之于上，奸臣窃之于下，祸乱之基，于此在矣。 
现代文：明君失之于上，奸臣窃之于下，祸乱的根子，就在这里了。 
English: The root of the calamity is here. The Ming emperor lost it to the upper echelons, and his treacherous vassals stole it from the lower echelons.

古文：帝笑而不应。
现代文：宣武帝听了，笑而不答。
English: Emperor Xuanwu listened, laughed and did not answer.

古文：夏，四月，魏诏尚书与群司鞫理狱讼，令饥民就谷燕、恒二州及六镇。
现代文：夏季四月，北魏朝廷命令尚书与各官署审理狱讼案件，又命令饥民到燕、恒二州以及六镇去渡灾。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Wei imperial court ordered Shang Shu and various government departments to hear the prison case, and ordered the starving people to go to Yan, Heng Erzhou and Liucheng.

古文：乙酉，魏大赦，改元延昌。
现代文：乙酉，北魏大赦天下，改换年号为延昌。
English: Acetylene, the Northern Wei Dynasty pardoned the world, and changed the year to Yanchang.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，魏立皇子诩为太子，始不杀其母。
现代文：冬季，十月乙亥，北魏立皇子元诩为太子，并开了不杀其母的先例。
English: In the winter, in October, the Northern Wei Dynasty established the prince Yuan Xuan as the prince, and set a precedent of not killing his mother.

古文：以尚书右仆射郭祚领太子少师。
现代文：又让尚书右仆射郭祚兼任太子少师。
English: He also allowed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Jie Guoqi, to also serve as the prince's young master.

古文：祚尝从魏主幸东宫，怀黄以奉太子；时应诏左右赵桃弓深为帝所信任，祚私事之，时人谓之 桃弓仆射 、 黄少师 。
现代文：郭祚一次随北魏宣武帝临幸太子东宫，怀中特意装着黄瓜给太子吃；当时应诏左右赵桃弓深受宣武帝的信任，郭祚私下里巴结他，时人称他为 桃弓仆射 、黄少师 。
English: Guo Wei once accompanied the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwu to the East Palace of the Prince of Fortune, and deliberately carried cucumbers in his bosom for the prince to eat. At that time, Zhao Taoyuan was deeply trusted by the Emperor Xuanwu, and Guo Wei privately flirted with him. At that time, people called him Taoyuan's servant, Huang Shao Shi.

古文：十一月，乙未，以吴郡太守袁昂兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：十一月乙未，梁朝任命吴郡太守袁昂兼尚书右仆射。
English: In November of the same year, the Liang Dynasty appointed Yuan Ang Keng Shang, the governor of Wu County, as his right-hand man.

古文：初，齐太子步兵校尉平昌伏曼容表求制一代礼乐，世祖诏选学士十人修五礼，丹阳尹王俭总之。
现代文：当初，南齐太子步兵校尉平昌人伏曼容上表请示制定一代的礼乐，齐武帝诏令挑选学士十人修定五礼，由丹杨尹王俭总负责。
English: At the beginning, the Prince of Southern Qi and the Infantry Captain of PyeongChang, Fuman Rong, sent a request to establish a generation of etiquette. Emperor Qiwu ordered the selection of ten bachelors to fix the five etiquettes, with the general in charge being Danyang Yin Wang Jian.

古文：俭卒，以事付国子祭酒何胤。
现代文：王俭去世之后，这件事情交付给了国子祭酒何胤。
English: After the death of Wang Jian, the matter was handed over to the son of the country, the sacrificial wine He Yin.

古文：胤还东山，齐明帝敕尚书令徐孝嗣掌之。
现代文：何胤隐居东山之后，齐明帝命令尚书令徐孝嗣掌管其事。
English: After He Yin went into seclusion in Dongshan, Emperor Qiming ordered Shang Shuling to put Xu Xiaozhi in charge of the matter.

古文：孝嗣诛，率多散逸，诏骠骑将军何佟之掌之。
现代文：徐孝嗣被诛之后，材料大多散失，又诏令骠骑将军何佟之掌管。
English: After Xu Xiaozhi was arrested, most of the materials were lost, and he ordered the cavalry general He Xuan to take charge.

古文：经齐末兵火，仅有在者。
现代文：经过齐末的兵火，留存下极少数。
English: After the end of the war, very few remained.

古文：帝即位，佟之启审省置之宜，敕使外详。
现代文：武帝即位之后，何佟之启奏皇上，请示这一工作应该省去，还是应该继续，武帝旨令让下面先详细议定好再报上来。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Wu, He Yanzhi wrote to the emperor, asking whether this work should be omitted or continued. Emperor Wu ordered that the following should be agreed upon in detail before being reported.

古文：时尚书以为庶务权舆，宜俟隆平，欲且省礼局，并还尚书仪曹。诏曰： 礼坏乐缺，实宜以时修定。
现代文：当时，尚书认为开国伊始，王业初创，应该等到国势兴盛、天下承平之时再制礼定乐，所以想要暂且裁减礼乐官署，把事情退还给尚书仪曹，武帝诏令： 礼坏乐缺，确实应该及时修定。
English: At that time, Shang Shuxu believed that at the beginning of the founding of the country, the beginning of Wangye, it was necessary to wait until the country was prosperous and the world was at peace before establishing the etiquette music. Therefore, he wanted to temporarily reduce the etiquette official office and return the matter to Shang Shuxu, the etiquette expert. Emperor Wu decreed: The etiquette music is lacking, and it should be amended in a timely manner.

古文：但顷之修撰不得其人，所以历年不就，有名无实。
现代文：但是一下子得不到合适的修撰之人，所以历年没有完成，以致有名无实。
English: However, no one could find a suitable copyist at once, so it was left unfinished over the years, leading to a reputation that was nothing of the sort.

古文：此既经国所先，可即撰次。 
现代文：礼乐之制既然是治国安邦的头等大事，那么就应该立即开始修撰。 
English: Since the system of ceremonial music is a top priority for governing the country and securing peace, we should immediately begin to revise it.

古文：于是尚书仆射沈约等奏： 请五礼各置旧学士一人，令自举学古一人相助抄撰，其中疑者，依石渠、白虎故事，请制旨断决。 
现代文：于是，尚书仆射沈约等人上奏： 请五礼各置旧学士一人，命令他们自己推荐学古一人相助抄撰，其中有疑惑者，依照汉代石渠阁、白虎观的旧例，由圣上断决。 
English: As a result, Shang Shuxu's servant, Shao Shen, and others played the following tune: Ask the Five Rites to each place one old scholar, and order them to recommend one old scholar to help with the transcription. If there is any doubt, it will be decided by the saint according to the old example of the Han Dynasty Shiqui Pavilion and the White Tiger View.

古文：乃以右军记室参军明山宾等分掌五礼，佟之总其事。
现代文：于是让右军记室明山宾等人分掌五礼，何佟之全面负责此事。
English: As a result, he let the right-wing military record office Mingshan Bin and others take the lead, and He Yanzhi was fully responsible for the matter.

古文：佟之卒，以镇北咨议参军伏恒代之。
现代文：何佟之去世以后，又由镇北咨议参军伏代替他。
English: After He Yanzhi's death, he was replaced by Zhenbei Zhanbo.

古文：恒，曼容之子也。
现代文：伏是伏曼容的儿子。
English: Fu is the son of Fu Manrong.

古文：至是，《五礼》成，列上之，合八千一十九条，诏有司遵行。
现代文：到了现在，《五礼》修成，一起呈于武帝，合起来共有八千零一十九条，武帝诏令有关部门遵照施行。
English: Up to now, the "Five Rites" have been completed and presented to Emperor Wu, with a total of 8019 articles, and the relevant departments have complied with Emperor Wu's edict.

古文：己酉，临川王宏以公事在迁骠骑大将军。
现代文：己酉，临川王萧宏因公事而降职为骠骑大将军。
English: In addition, Linchuan Wang Xiaohong was demoted to the rank of cavalry general due to his official duties.

古文：是岁，魏以桓叔兴为南荆州刺史，治安昌，录东荆州。
现代文：这一年，北魏任命桓叔光为南荆州刺史，治所在安昌，附属于东荆州。
English: In the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Huan Shuguang as the historian of South Jingzhou, which was governed by Anchang and attached to East Jingzhou.

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监十二年
现代文：天监十二年
English: The 12th year of Tianjing

古文：春，正月，辛卯，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：春季，正月辛卯，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: In the spring, the first month of Xinwu, Emperor Liangwu went to the southern suburb to worship Heaven and forgive the world.

古文：二月，辛酉，以兼尚书右仆射袁昂为右仆射。
现代文：二月辛酉，梁朝任命兼尚书右仆射袁昂为右仆射。
English: At the end of February, the Liang Dynasty appointed Yuan Ang, Shang's right-hand man, as his right-hand man.

古文：己卯，魏高阳王雍进位太保。
现代文：己卯，北魏高阳王元雍进位为太保。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Gaoyang King Yuan Yong was promoted to Taibo.

古文：郁洲迫近魏境，其民多私与魏人交布。朐山之乱，或阴与魏通，朐山平，心不自安。
现代文：郁州挨近北魏边境，该地的民众大多私自同北魏人做买卖，朐山之乱时，有的人暗中与北魏勾结，朐山之乱平定之后，这些人心中非常不安。
English: Iuzhou is close to the border of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Most of the people in the area did business with the Northern Wei Dynasty. During the Lushan Rebellion, some people secretly colluded with the Northern Wei Dynasty. After the Lushan Rebellion was settled, these people were very uneasy.

古文：青、冀二州刺史张稷不得志，政令宽弛，僚吏颇多侵渔。
现代文：青、冀二州刺史张稷由于仕途不得志，政令松弛，以致僚属们多侵夺百姓。
English: Zhang Ye, the statesman of the two states of Qingdao and Hebei, had no ambition for his career, and his government decrees were slack, so that his subordinates were more likely to encroach on the people.

古文：庚辰，郁洲民徐道角等夜袭州城，杀稷，送其首降魏，魏遣前南兗州刺史樊鲁将兵赴之。
现代文：庚辰，郁州面姓徐道角等人夜袭州城，杀了张稷，送上他的道级投降了北魏，北魏派遣前南兖州刺史樊鲁率兵赶赴郁州。
English: Geng Chen, Yuzhou face surnamed Xu Daojuan and others attacked the city of Yuzhou at night, killed Zhang Ye, sent him to Daojian and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the former Southern Xizhou Zhisheng Lu and his army to Yuzhou.

古文：于是魏饥，民饿死者数万，侍中游肇谏，以为： 朐山滨海，卑湿难居，郁洲又在海中，得之尤为无用。
现代文：此时，北魏发生饥荒，百姓饿死的有几万人，侍中游肇进谏宣武帝，认为： 朐山靠着海，地势低下潮湿，难以居住，郁州更在海中，得到它尤其没有用处。
English: At this time, famine occurred in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and tens of thousands of people died of starvation. Emperor Xuanwu, a mid-level samurai, thought: Lushan is by the sea, the terrain is low and wet, and it is difficult to live. Iuzhou is in the middle of the sea, and it is especially useless to get it.

古文：其地于贼要近，去此闲远，以闲远之兵攻要近之众，不可敌也。
现代文：该地对于梁朝既是海道要冲，又靠近江、淮，而离我们却非常遥远，且不是军事要地，为了这闲远之地而派兵去攻打据守要冲近地的梁朝军队，是抵挡不过的。
English: For the Liang Dynasty, this place is both a strategic point on the sea route and close to the Yangtze River and Huai River, but it is very far away from us, and it is not a military important place. For the sake of this idle place, it is irresistible to send troops to attack the Liang Dynasty army, which is said to be close to the ground.

古文：方今年饥民困，唯宜安静，而复劳以军旅，费以馈运，臣见其损，未见其益。 
现代文：方今饥荒流行，百姓困苦，只应安宁，但是又要烦劳军旅，耗费粮食，对于出兵之事，我只看到它的损失，看不到他的益处。 
English: There is a famine at the moment, and the people are in distress. They deserve only peace, but they also have to work for the army and consume grain. As for sending troops, I only see its loss, not its benefit.

古文：魏主不从，复遣平西将军奚康生将兵逆之。
现代文：宣武帝没有听从游肇的劝谏，又派遣平西将军奚康生率兵去迎战梁朝军队。
English: Emperor Xuanwu did not listen to Yu Zhao's advice, and sent the Pingxi general Zang Kangsheng to lead the troops to fight against the Liang Dynasty army.

古文：未发，北兗州刺史康绚遣司马霍奉伯讨平之。
现代文：但是，奚康生还没有出发，梁朝北兖州刺史康绚就派遗司马霍奉伯讨平了郁州之乱。
English: However, Liang Kangsheng had not yet set off, and Liang Chao sent his heir, Maho Bongbo, to settle the Iuzhou Rebellion.

古文：辛巳，新作太极殿。
现代文：辛巳，梁朝新建成太极殿。
English: All of a sudden, Liang Chao's newly-built Taiji-den was in full swing.

古文：上尝与侍中、太子少傅建昌侯沈约各疏栗事，约少上三事，出，谓人曰： 此公护前，不则羞死！ 
现代文：武帝曾经同侍中、太子少傅建昌侯沈约各自写出关于栗子的典故，沈约有意少写三点，以显得自己学问比不上武帝，出来之后，他对人说： 此公自护其所短，忌讳别人比他强，否则会羞死的！ 
English: Emperor Wu once made an agreement with his chamberlain, Prince Fu Jianchang and Prince Shen to each write an allusion about chestnuts. Shen agreed to write at least three points to show that his knowledge was not as good as Emperor Wu's. After he came out, he said to the people: "This prince is not good at self-protection, and he must not say that others are better than him, otherwise he will die of shame!"

古文：上闻之，怒，欲治其罪，徐勉固谏而止。
现代文：武帝知道之后十分生气，要治沈约的罪，徐勉一再劝谏才止住。
English: Emperor Wu was very angry after he found out, and he wanted to punish Shen Yu's crime, but Xu Ren repeatedly persuaded him to stop.

古文：上有憾于张稷，从容与约语及之，约曰： 左仆射出作边州，已往之事，何足复论！ 
现代文：武帝对张稷抱怨自己感到很遗憾，就从容地与沈约谈到了张稷的事，沈约说： 左仆射出任边境上的青、冀二州刺史，已经是过去的事情了，何足再加议论！ 
English: Emperor Wu felt very sorry about Zhang Ye's complaint, so he calmly talked about Zhang Ye's matter with Shen Yu. Shen Yu said, "It is already a thing of the past for Zuo Fuxia to serve as the border of Qing and Hebei two states, how much more discussion!

古文：上以为约与稷昏家相为，怒曰： 卿言如此，是忠臣邪！ 
现代文：武帝认为沈约与张稷是亲家，袒护张稷，就生气地说道： 你说出这样的话，是忠臣吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu thought that Shen Yao and Zhang Ye were relatives, and angrily said, "If you say such a thing, are you a loyal subject?

古文：乃辇归内殿。
现代文：于是乘辇回到内殿去了。
English: So he rode back to the Inner Court on a donkey.

古文：约惧，不觉上起，犹坐如初；及还，未至床而凭空，顿于户下，因病；梦齐和帝以剑断其舌，乃呼道士奏赤章于天，称 禅代之事，不由己出 。
现代文：沈约由于害怕，竟没有觉察到武帝已经起身走了，还象原来那样一动不动地坐着。回到家之后，没有走到胡床跟前而坐空了，脑袋着地倒在了窗户下面，于是就病了。沈约梦见南齐和帝用剑割断了他的舌头，于是就叫来道士用赤色奏章向天神祈祷，说： 禅代的事情，不是我的主意。 
English: Out of fear, Shen Yao did not realize that Emperor Wu had already got up and left, and continued to sit motionless as before. After returning home, he did not go to the hu bed and sat empty, his head fell to the ground under the window, and he fell ill. Shen Yao dreamed that Nanzhi and the emperor cut off his tongue with a sword, so he called a Taoist to pray to the gods with red music, saying: The matter of Zen is not my idea.

古文：上遣主书黄穆之视疾，夕还，增损不即启闻，惧罪，乃白赤章事。
现代文：武帝派遣主书黄穆之来探视沈约的病情，天黑时返回，瞒下了沈约让道士用赤章祈天之事，又害怕获罪，最终还是把这件事对武帝讲了。
English: Emperor Wu sent the main writer Huang Mu to visit Shen Yao's illness, returned when it was dark, concealed the fact that Shen Yao had asked the Taoist to pray to heaven with a red sign, and was afraid of being punished, and finally told Emperor Wu about the matter.

古文：上大怒，中使谴责者数四。
现代文：武帝知道后勃然大怒，多次派人去谴责了沈约。
English: Emperor Wu was furious when he found out, and sent several people to reprimand Shen Yotong.

古文：约益惧，闰月，乙丑，卒。
现代文：沈约越发害怕了，于闫月乙丑，病故。
English: Shen Yoyo became more and more afraid, and died of illness in the second month of the second month.

古文：有司谥曰 文 ，上曰： 情怀不尽曰隐。 
现代文：有关部门给沈约的谥号为 文 ，梁武帝说： 心事不尽曰隐。 
English: Relevant departments have given the nickname "Wen" to Shen Yao, and Liang Wudi said: "My heart is not full of secrets."

古文：改谥隐侯。
现代文：于是又改谥号为隐侯。
English: As a result, he changed his family name to Tsuru.

古文：夏，五月，寿阳久雨，大水入城，庐舍皆没。
现代文：夏季，五月，寿阳久雨成灾，大水入城，房舍全被淹没。
English: In the summer, in May, Shouyang was hit by a long rain. Large amounts of water entered the city, and all the buildings were flooded.

古文：魏扬州刺史李崇勒兵泊于城上，水增未已，乃乘船附于女墙，城不没者二板。
现代文：北魏扬州刺史李崇指挥军队停在城墙上，水继续往上涨，于是又乘船爬到城墙上的短墙上面，城墙只差两板宽没有被淹。
English: Northern Wei Yangzhou engraving history Li Chong commanded the army to stop on the city wall, the water continued to rise, so he climbed by boat to the top of the short wall on the city wall. The city wall was only two boards wide and was not flooded.

古文：将佐劝崇弃寿阳保北山，崇曰： 吾忝守籓岳，德薄致灾，淮南万里，系于吾身，一旦动足，百姓瓦解，扬州之地，恐非国物。吾岂爱一身，取愧王尊！
现代文：将佐们劝李崇放弃寿阳而保北山，李崇说： 我受朝廷之命镇守一方之地，由于仁德不足而致使天降大灾，淮南万里之地，安危系于我一身，我若一旦离开，百姓就会瓦解奔散，扬州之地，恐怕就不属我国所有了，我岂能受惜自己的身子，而有愧于汉代黄河泛滥时不顾一已之安危而宿于堤上的王尊呢！
English: The generals advised Li Chong to give up Shouyang and protect the North Mountain. Li Chong said: I was ordered by the imperial court to guard one side of the land. Due to the lack of benevolence, it caused a great disaster. The land of Huainan is in my hands. If I leave, the people will disintegrate and scatter. The land of Yangzhou, I am afraid, does not belong to our country. Can I spare my own body, but I am not worthy of the king who lived on the dike when the Yellow River flooded in the Han Dynasty, regardless of the safety!

古文：但怜此士民无辜同死，可结筏随高，人规自脱，吾必与此城俱没，幸诸君勿言！ 
现代文：我只是怜悯这里的士人百姓们要无辜而与我同死，所以可以让他们扎筏子乘坐其上，随水而高，各人去求一条生路，我一定同这座城一起淹没，请各位不要再说了！ 
English: I just pity the people here who are innocent and want to die with me, so I can let them tie rafts to ride on it, high with the water, each one to seek a way of life, I will definitely drown with this city, please stop talking!

古文：扬州治中裴绚帅城南民数千家泛舟南走，避水高原，谓崇还北，因自称豫州刺史，与别驾郑祖起等送任子来请降。
现代文：扬州治中裴绚带领城南民众数千家划船往南逃跑，到高地上避水，他认为李崇一定回北方去了，因此就自称为豫州刺史，同别驾郑祖起等人送人质到梁朝请求投降。
English: Yangzhou governor Pei Huan led thousands of people from the south of the city to row south and escape to the highlands to avoid the water. He thought that Li Chong must have gone back to the north, so he called himself the historian of Yuzhou, and drove Zheng Zuqi and others to send hostages to the Liang Dynasty to request surrender.

古文：马仙琕遣兵赴之。
现代文：马仙派兵前去援应裴绚。
English: Ma Xian sent soldiers to assist Pei Hua.

古文：崇闻绚叛，未测虚实，遣国侍郎韩方兴单舸召之。绚闻崇在，怅然惊恨，报曰： 比因大水颠狈，为众所推。
现代文：李崇听说裴绚叛变了，但不测虚实，就派遣自己封国中的侍郎韩方兴单人乘船去召裴绚，裴绚知道李崇还在此地，怅然惊慌悔恨，但木已成舟，无可挽回，只好回答说： 日前因大水引起了流离颠沛，受众人的推举，方有此举。
English: Li Chong heard that Pei Huan had turned traitor, but he didn't know if it was true or not, so he sent Han Fangxing, his personal attendant, to summon Pei Huan by boat. Knowing that Li Chong was still here, Pei Huan panicked and regretted, but the ship had already sailed, and there was no turning back, so he had to reply: Recently, due to heavy water, there has been a lot of displacement, and it was recommended by many people that Fang should do this.

古文：今大计已尔，势不可追，恐民非公民，吏非公吏，愿公早行，无犯将士。 
现代文：现在大计已成，无可追回了，恐怕这里的百姓已经不是大人治下的百姓了，官吏也不是大人手下的官吏了，希望大人早日动身回去，不要冒犯我的将士们。 
English: Now that the grand plan has been accomplished, there is no going back. I am afraid that the people here are no longer the people under the rule of adults, and the officials are no longer the officials under the adults. I hope that the adults will go back as soon as possible, so as not to offend my soldiers.

古文：崇遣从弟宁朔将军神等将水军讨之，绚战败，神追，拔其营。
现代文：李崇派遣堂弟宁朔将军李神等人率领水军讨伐裴绚，裴绚战败，李神追击，占领了他的营盘。
English: Li Chong sent his cousin, Ningshuo General Li Shen and others to lead the naval forces to fight against Pei Hua. Pei Hua was defeated, and Li Shen pursued and occupied his camp.

古文：绚走，为村民所执，还，至尉升湖。曰： 吾何面见李公乎！ 
现代文：裴绚逃跑，被村民抓获，送回来时，到了尉升湖，裴绚说： 我有何脸面见李公呢！ 
English: When Pei Hua ran away, was caught by villagers, and sent back, she arrived at Fuxing Lake. Pei Hua said, "What a face I have to meet Li Gong!"

古文：乃投水死。
现代文：于是投水而死。
English: As a result, she drowned.

古文：绚，叔业之兄孙也。
现代文：裴绚是裴叔业的哥哥的孙子。
English: Pei Huan is the grandson of Pei Shujie's elder brother.

古文：郑祖起等皆伏诛。
现代文：郑祖起等人都伏法被诛。
English: Zheng Zuqi and others were all arrested.

古文：崇上表以水灾救解州任，魏主不许。
现代文：李崇上表朝廷因水灾而请求解除自己州刺史的职位，北魏宣武帝不准许。
English: Li Chong petitioned the imperial court to relieve him of the post of state historian due to the flood, but Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty did not allow him to do so.

古文：崇沉深宽厚，有方略，得士众心，在寿春十年，常养壮士数千人，寇来无不摧破，领敌谓之 卧虎 。
现代文：李崇深沉宽厚，有谋略，很得士庶之心，他在寿春十年，经常养着几千壮士，贼寇来犯无不被摧破，邻近的梁朝敌手称他为 卧虎 。
English: Li Chong is deep and generous, has a strategy, and is very popular with his subordinates. In the 10th year of his life, he often raised thousands of strong men. Thieves and robbers can commit any crime without being destroyed. The neighboring Liang Dynasty's enemies called him the Crouching Tiger.

古文：上屡设反间以疑之，又授崇车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、万户郡公，诸子皆为县侯，而魏主素知其忠笃，委信不疑。
现代文：梁武帝多次设反间计以便使北魏朝廷对李崇产生怀疑，又授予他车骑大奖军、开府仪同三司、万户郡公，他的几个儿子都被封为县侯。然而北魏宣武帝素知李崇忠诚老实，对他非常信任而毫不怀疑。
English: Emperor Liang Wudi repeatedly set up countermeasures in order to make the Northern Wei court doubt Li Chong, and awarded him the Grand Cavalry Prize Army, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Wanyu County, and several of his sons were named county magistrates. However, the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwudi knew that Li Chong was loyal and honest, and he trusted him very much without any doubt.

古文：六月，癸巳，新作太庙。
现代文：六月癸巳，梁朝新建成太庙。
English: At the end of June, the Liang Dynasty newly built the Grand Temple.

古文：秋，八月，戊午，以临川王宏为司空。
现代文：秋季，八月戊午，梁朝任命临川王萧宏为司空。
English: In the autumn, in the afternoon of August, Liang Dynasty appointed Linchuan Wang Xiaohong as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：魏恒、肆二州地震、山鸣，逾年不已，民履压死伤甚众。
现代文：北魏恒、肆二州发生地震，山发出鸣啸之声，一年多还没停止，民众被埋压死伤的特别多。
English: Earthquakes occurred in the Northern Wei, Hengduan and Zhouzhuang, and the mountain emitted a roaring sound, which has not stopped for more than a year. The number of people buried and crushed is particularly high.

古文：魏主幸东宫，以中书监崔光为太子少傅，命太子拜之。
现代文：北魏宣武帝临幸东宫，任命中书监崔光为太子少傅，命令太子向崔光下拜。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty visited the Eastern Palace of the Yuan Dynasty, appointed the Chinese librarian Cui Guang as the prince's junior tutor, and ordered the prince to bow down to Cui Guang.

古文：光辞不敢当，帝不许。
现代文：崔光辞让而不敢承当，宣武帝不许，坚持让太子拜。
English: Cui Guang refused to concede and did not dare to take on the responsibility, Emperor Xuanwu did not allow it and insisted that the prince should be worshipped.

古文：太子南面再拜，詹事王显启请从太子拜，于是宫臣皆拜。
现代文：太子面向南拜了两次，詹事王显启请圣上允许他跟随太子一起拜，于是东宫僚属一起下拜。
English: The crown prince bowed twice facing south, and King James asked the saint to allow him to follow the crown prince in bowing, so the members of the Eastern Court bowed together.

古文：光北面立，不敢答，唯西面拜谢而出。
现代文：崔光朝北面立着，不敢答礼，只朝西面拜谢后离去。
English: Cui Guang stood to the north, not daring to return the salute, but bowed to the west and left.

古文：高祖武皇帝三天监十三年
现代文：天监十三年
English: The 13th year of Tianjing

古文：春，二月，丁亥，上耕藉田，大赦。
现代文：春季，二月丁亥，梁武帝在藉田耕作，大赦天下。
English: In the spring, in February of Dinghai, Emperor Liang Wu was farming in a borrowed field, and he granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：宋、齐藉田用正月，至是始用二月，及致斋祀先农。
现代文：宋、齐时代都在正月耕作藉田，至此方改为二月耕作藉田，耕日以太牢祀神农炎帝也改在二月。
English: During the Song and Qi dynasties, people used to cultivate rented fields in the first month of the year. Since then, it has been changed to February, and the Shennongyan Emperor's cult day has also been changed to February.

古文：魏东豫州刺史田益宗衰老，与诸子孙聚敛无厌，部内苦之，咸言欲叛。
现代文：北魏东豫州刺史田益宗年老体衰，同儿子和孙子们聚敛无厌，部下深受其苦，都说要反叛。
English: Tian Yizong, a senior statesman of the Northern Wei Dynasty in East Yuzhou, was old and weak. He and his sons and grandchildren gathered tirelessly, and his subordinates suffered from it. They all said they wanted to rebel.

古文：魏主遣中书舍人刘桃符慰劳益宗，桃符还，启益宗侵扰之状。
现代文：北魏宣武帝派遣中书舍人刘桃符去慰劳田益宗，刘桃符回朝之后，向宣武帝启奏了田益宗侵扰当地的情状。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Liu Taofu, a Chinese scholar, to comfort the laborer Tian Yizong. After Liu Taofu returned to the North, he explained to Emperor Xuanwu the situation of Tian Yizong's invasion of the local area.

古文：魏主赐诏曰： 桃符闻卿息鲁生在淮南贪暴，为尔不已，损卿诚效。
现代文：宣武帝向田益宗赐诏说： 刘桃符听说你的儿子田鲁生在淮水之南贪敛暴虐，如果这样下去不停止，会损害你对朝廷的诚意效忠。
English: Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict to Emperor Tian Yizong, saying: Liu Taofu has heard that your son, Tian Lousheng, is indulging in violence in the south of Huai Shui. If this continues without stopping, it will damage your sincerity and loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：可令鲁生赴阙，当加任使。 
现代文：可令田鲁生前来朝廷，对他当另加任用。 
English: You can make Tian Lousheng come to the imperial court and give him another appointment.

古文：鲁生久未至，诏徙益宗为镇东将军、济州刺史；又虑其不受代，遣后将军李世哲与桃符帅众袭之，奄入广陵。
现代文：田鲁生长久未至，朝廷诏令田益宗调任镇东将军、济州刺史。又考虑到他不会接受别人来代替自己东豫州刺史之位，就派遣后将军李世哲与刘桃符率众去袭击田益宗，李世哲等人迅速地进入了广陵。
English: Long before the growth of Tianlu, the imperial court ordered Tian Yizong to be transferred to the post of Zhendong general and Jeju sashimi. Considering that he would not accept others to replace his post of Dongyuzhou sashimi, he sent the generals Li Shizhe and Liu Taofu to attack Tian Yizong, and Li Shizhe and others quickly entered Guangling.

古文：鲁生与其弟鲁贤、超秀皆奔关南，招引梁兵，攻取光城已南诸戍。
现代文：田鲁生与弟弟鲁贤、超秀都奔到关南，招引梁朝军队，攻取了光城以南的各个寨堡。
English: Tian Lousheng and his younger brothers Lu Xian and Chaoxiu all rushed to Guannan, attracted the Liang Dynasty army, and captured all the fortified castles south of Guangcheng.

古文：上以鲁生为北司州刺史，鲁贤为北豫州刺史，超秀为定州刺史。
现代文：武帝任命田鲁生为北司州刺史，鲁贤为北豫州刺史，超秀为定州刺史。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Tian Lousheng as the governor of North Sichuan Province, Lu Xian as the governor of North Henan Province and Chaoxiu as the governor of Dingzhou Province.

古文：三月，魏李世哲击鲁生等，破之，复置郡戍。
现代文：三月，北魏李世哲进攻田鲁生等人，打败了他们，重新设置了郡戍。
English: In March, Northern Wei Li Shizhe attacked Tian Lousheng and others, defeated them, and re-established the county magistrate.

古文：以益宗还洛阳，授征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：田益宗被命令回到洛阳，授予他征南将军、金紫光禄大夫之职。
English: Tian Yuxong was ordered to return to Luoyang, where he was given the position of general of the Southern Expedition and doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：益宗上表称为桃符所谗，及言 鲁生等为桃符逼逐使叛，乞摄桃符与臣对辨虚实。 
现代文：田益宗上表言称被刘桃符谗言所陷，并说： 鲁生等人被刘桃符逼迫而反叛，请求令刘桃符与我当面对质，以明虚实。 
English: Tian Yixong made a statement that he was trapped by Liu Taofu's slander, and said: Lu Sheng and others were persecuted by Liu Taofu and rebelled, requesting that Liu Taofu confront me face to face to clarify the truth.

古文：诏不许，曰： 既经大宥，不容方更为狱。 
现代文：诏令不准许，对田益宗说： 既然已经宽宥了你的谋叛之罪，不允许你再打官司了。 
English: The imperial edict did not allow him to do so, and he said to Tian Yuesong, "Since I have pardoned your crime of plotting treason, you are not allowed to sue again.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥，立皇子纶为邵陵王，绎为湘东王，纪为武陵王。
现代文：秋季，七月乙亥，梁朝立皇子萧纶为邵陵王，萧绎为湘东王，萧纪为武陵王。
English: In the autumn, in July of the Year of the Fire Rooster, the prince of the Liang Dynasty, Xiao Yu, became King of Shao Ling, Xiao Yu became King of Shandong, and Xiao Ji became King of Wuling.

古文：冬，十月，庚辰，魏主遣骁骑将军马义舒慰谕柔然。
现代文：冬季，十月庚辰，北魏宣武帝派遣骁骑将军马义舒召慰宣谕柔然国。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the cavalry general Ma Yi Shu to call for consolation and proclaim the country of Juren.

古文：魏王足之入寇也，上命宁州刺史涪人李略御之，许事平用为益州。
现代文：北魏王足入侵之时，武帝命令宁州刺史涪人李略抵抗，许诺事平之后任用他为益州刺史。
English: When the Northern Wei Wangfei invaded, Emperor Wu ordered Li Li, a Ningzhou Jishi, to resist, and after promising peace, he appointed him as the Jishi of Yizhou.

古文：足退，上不用，略怨望，有异谋，上杀之。
现代文：王足撤退之后，武帝不用李略，李略颇有怨忿，产生了反叛之心，武帝杀了他。
English: After Wangfei's retreat, Emperor Wu did not use Li Liao. Li Liao was quite resentful and had a rebellious heart. Emperor Wu killed him.

古文：其兄子苗奔魏，步兵校尉泰山淳于诞尝为益州主簿，自汉中入魏，二人共说魏主以取蜀之策，魏主信之。
现代文：李略哥哥的儿子李苗投奔北魏，步兵校尉泰山人淳于诞曾任益州主簿，从汉中投奔北魏，两人一起游说北魏宣武帝攻取蜀地，并献计献策，宣武帝深信不疑。
English: Li Liao's brother's son, Li Miao, went to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the infantry lieutenant, Taishan Ren Junyu, who was once the chief accountant of Yizhou Province, went from the Han Dynasty to the Northern Wei Dynasty. The two of them lobbied the Northern Wei Dynasty Emperor Xuanwu to conquer Shu, and offered plans and suggestions. Emperor Xuanwu was deeply convinced.

古文：辛亥，以司徒高肇为大将军、平蜀大都督，将步骑十五万寇益州；命益州刺史傅竖眼出巴北，梁州剌史羊祉出涪城，安西将军奚康生出绵竹，抚军将军甄琛出剑阁；乙卯，以中护军元遥为征南将军，都督镇遏梁、楚。
现代文：辛亥，北魏任命司徒高肇为大将军、平蜀大都督，统率步、骑兵十五万人侵益州；又命令益州刺史傅竖眼出巴郡之北，梁州刺史羊祉兵发庚城，安西将军奚康生兵发绵竹，抚军将军甄琛兵发剑阁；乙卯，任命中护军元遥为征南将军，让他都督、摄镇梁、楚。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Sittu Gaozhao as the general and the governor of Pingshu, leading 150,000 cavalrymen to invade Yizhou; he also ordered Yizhou to send Shifu Zhicheng to the north of Ba County, Liangzhou to send Shiyang soldiers to Gengcheng, Anxi to send Kangsheng soldiers to Mianzhu, and Fuzhou to send Zhenxing soldiers to Jiange; secondly, he appointed Zhongguo to send Yuan Yao to the south as a general, and made him the governor and the regent of Liang and Chu.

古文：游肇谏，以为： 今频年水旱，百姓不宜劳役。
现代文：游肇劝谏，认为： 现在连年水涝旱灾，老百姓不宜于再劳役了。
English: You Zhaozhao advised that: Now that there have been consecutive years of floods and droughts, it is not appropriate for the common people to go back to labor service.

古文：往昔开拓，皆因城主归款，故有征无战。
现代文：过去开拓疆域，都因为城主归顺投降，所以有征而无战。
English: In the past, the expansion of the territory, because the lord of the city surrendered, so there was no war.

古文：今之陈计者真伪难分，或有怨于彼，不可全信。
现代文：现在对出谋划策的人真伪难辨，或者是因为他们对梁朝有怨气，借我们出气，所以不可全信。
English: Now, it is difficult to distinguish the truth from the falsehood of the people who make suggestions, or because they have grudges against the Liang Dynasty and lend us their anger, so they cannot be fully trusted.

古文：蜀地险隘，镇戍无隙，岂得虚承浮说而动大军！
现代文：蜀地险隘，镇戍没有疏漏，怎么能听信他人的一番浮言而就轻易地出动大军呢？
English: Shu land is narrow and dangerous, and there are no omissions in Zhenyao. How can one believe the most pretentious words of others and easily dispatch a large army?

古文：举不慎始，悔将何及！ 
现代文：有所举动不在开始时谨崐慎，后悔哪里能来得及呢？ 
English: If you are not cautious at the beginning of a move, how can you regret it?

古文：不从。以淳于诞为骁骑将军，假李苗龙骧将军，皆领乡导统军。
现代文：宣武帝不听从，任命淳于诞为骁骑将军，又让李苗代理龙骧将军，两人都兼任向导统军。
English: Emperor Xuanwu did not listen, and appointed Jun Yuwen as the general of the cavalry, and Li Miao as the acting general of the dragons. Both of them also served as guides to the unified army.

古文：魏降人王足陈计，求堰淮水以灌寿阳。
现代文：北魏降将王足献策，请求拦堵淮水以淹灌寿阳。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent Wang Qi to propose a plan to block the Huai River to flood Shouyang.

古文：上以为然，使水工陈承伯、材官将军祖恒视地形，咸谓 淮内沙士漂轻不坚实，功不可就 。
现代文：梁武帝同意这一计策，命令水工陈承伯、材官将军祖视察地形，陈、祖二人都说： 淮水中沙土松软流动不坚实，工程无法完成。 
English: Emperor Liangwu agreed to this strategy and ordered the water engineer Chen Chengbo and the quartermaster general Zu to inspect the terrain. Both Chen and Zu said: The soft flow of sand and soil in Huai Shui is not solid, and the project cannot be completed.

古文：上弗听，发徐、扬民率二十户取五丁以筑之，假太子右卫率康绚都督淮上诸军事，并护堰作于钟离。
现代文：武帝不听，征调徐、扬之地的民，每二十户中征五丁，拦水筑堰，命令太子右卫率康绚都督淮上诸军事，并且守护筑堰工程，设置官属于钟离。
English: Emperor Wu did not listen. He conscripted the people of the land of Xu and Yang, and conscripted five out of every twenty households to block water and build weirs. He ordered the prince Uwei to lead the governor Kang Hua to join the military, and to guard the weir construction project. The installation officer belonged to Zhong Li.

古文：役人及战士合二十万，南起浮山，北抵巉石，依岸筑土，合脊于中流。
现代文：筑堰的劳和兵士共二十万人，南起浮山，北抵石，依岸筑土，合龙于淮水中流。
English: There are a total of 200,000 laborers and soldiers at the Tsukiji Dam. The flow originates from the Fushan River in the south, the Zhushan River in the north, the Tsukudo River in the east, and the Huai Shui River in the west.

古文：魏以前定州刺史杨津为华州刺史。津，椿之弟也。
现代文：北魏任命前定州刺史杨津为华州刺史，杨津是杨椿的弟弟。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the former Dingzhou magistrate Yang Jin as the Huazhou magistrate. Yang Jin was the younger brother of Yang Cam.

古文：先是，官受调绢，尺度特长，任事因缘，共相进退，百姓苦之。
现代文：早先之时，官家征收调绢，所用的尺子很长，主管征收调绢的人就见机行事，前来交纳的税户谁给贿赂就给谁量的多，谁不给贿赂就给谁量的短，老百姓苦不堪言。
English: In the early days, the ruler used by officials to collect the tax was long, and the person in charge of collecting the tax took advantage of the opportunity to act. Taxpayers who came to pay bribes gave more to those who paid more, and those who did not give bribes gave less to those who did not pay. The people were miserable.

古文：津令悉依公尺，其输物尤善者，赐以杯酒；所输少劣，亦为受之，但无酒以示耻。
现代文：杨津下令一律按照标准尺子来丈量，对于交送的物品质量好的人，赐以一杯酒；交送的物品稍微差的，也收下，但没有酒，以示耻辱。
English: Yang Jin ordered to measure everything according to the standard ruler, and to give a glass of wine to those who delivered items of good quality; those who delivered items that were slightly inferior were also accepted, but there was no wine to show shame.

古文：于是人竞相劝，官调更胜旧日。
现代文：于是，从们竞相勉励，官家调赋收入更加胜于往日。
English: As a result, officials and bureaucrats competed with each other, and the transfer of income was even better than in the past.

古文：魏太子尚幼，每出入东宫，左右乳母而已，宫臣皆不之知。
现代文：北魏的皇太子还幼小，每次出入东宫，相伴的只有左右随从和乳母，东宫的臣子们都不知道。
English: The crown prince of the Northern Wei Dynasty was still very young. Every time he entered and left the East Palace, he was accompanied only by his left and right attendants and a nanny. The courtiers of the East Palace did not know.

古文：詹事杨昱上言： 乞自今召太子必降手敕，令臣等翼从。 
现代文：詹事杨昱上言： 请求从今开始圣上召见太子一定要亲下手敕，命令我们护从。 
English: Yang Xuan's last words: From now on, I request that the Holy Father summon the crown prince to personally handcuff him and order us to escort him.

古文：魏主从之，命宫臣在直者从至万岁门。
现代文：北魏宣武帝采纳了他的建议，命令东宫臣子中值班的护送到万岁门。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty accepted his suggestion and ordered the courtiers of the Eastern Palace to escort him to the Gate of Long Life.

古文：魏御史中尉王显问治书侍御史阳固曰： 吾作太府卿，府库充实，卿以为何如？ 
现代文：北魏御史中慰王显对治书侍御阳固说： 我当太府卿之时，府库充实，您以为何如呢？ 
English: In the history of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the consoler Wang Xian said to the secretary Miyango: When I was the grand minister, the treasury was full. What do you think?

古文：固曰： 公收百官之禄四分之一，州郡赃赎，悉输京师，以此充府，未足为多。
现代文：阳固回答说 大人把百官的俸禄扣去四分之一，各州郡收缴的赃款和赎金，也全部运到京师，以此来充府库，不足为多。
English: Yanggu replied that the adults deducted a quarter of the salary of the centurion, and the stolen money and ransom collected by the states and counties were all transported to Beijing to fill the prefectural treasury, which was not enough.

古文：且 有聚敛之臣，宁有盗臣。 可不戒哉！ 
现代文：况且 与其有聚敛之臣，宁可有盗窃之臣 ，可不戒哉！ 
English: Moreover, it is better to have a thieving vassal than a collecting vassal.

古文：显不悦，因事奏免固官。
现代文：王显听了很不高兴，就借故上奏免了阳固的官。
English: Wang Xian was very unhappy to hear this, so he used this as an excuse to remove Yanggu from his post.

