古文：思道字子行，聪爽俊辩，通侻不羁。
现代文：卢思道，字子行。聪明善辩，通脱不羁。
English: Lu Si Dao is good at calligraphy. He is clever and eloquent. He is free and easy-going.

古文：年十六，中山刘松为人作碑铭，以示思道。思道读之，多所不解。
现代文：十六岁时，中山人刘松替人写碑铭，拿给卢思道看，思道读后，许多地方不懂。
English: At the age of sixteen, Liu Song, a resident of Zhongshan, wrote an inscription for someone and showed it to Lu Si Dao. After reading the inscription, Lu Si Dao did not understand many parts.

古文：乃感激读书，师事河间邢子才。
现代文：于是感奋读书，拜河间人邢子才为老师。
English: As a result, she studied hard, and it was only after she became a teacher that she became a teacher.

古文：后复为文示松，松不能甚解。
现代文：后来他写诗文给刘松看，刘松也没法全部读通。
English: Later, he wrote a poem for Liu Song to read, but Liu Song couldn't read it all.

古文：乃喟然叹曰： 学之有益，岂徒然哉！ 
现代文：于是，他喟然长叹说： 学习的益处，岂是空话！ 
English: Then he sighed deeply and said, "The benefits of learning are just empty words!

古文：因就魏收借异书。
现代文：他便向魏收借了许多奇书来读。
English: He borrowed many strange books from Wei to read.

古文：数年间，才学兼著。
现代文：几年之间，才学大有成就。
English: In just a few years, he has made great achievements in his studies.

古文：然不持操行，好轻侮人物。
现代文：可是他不注意自己的品行修养，喜欢轻视和侮辱别人。
English: However, he does not pay attention to his own moral cultivation, and likes to belittle and insult others.

古文：齐天保中，《魏史》成，思道多所非毁。由是前后再被笞辱，因而落泊不调。
现代文：齐天保年间，《魏史》撰成，卢思道多方诋毁攻击，因而前后多次受到鞭打的责罚，因而落泊不被任用。
English: During Qi Tianbo's tenure, "Wei Shi" was compiled, and Lu Si Dao was slandered and attacked from many sides. As a result, he was punished with whipping many times, so he was not appointed.

古文：后左仆射杨遵彦荐之于朝，解褐司空行参军、长兼员外散骑侍郎，直中书省。
现代文：后来左仆射杨遵彦把他举荐给朝廷，这才出仕担任司空行参军、长兼员外散骑侍郎，在中书省办事。
English: Later, his left-hand man, Yang Zunyuan, recommended him to the imperial court, and it was only then that he served as a flight attendant, commander and non-commissioned officer, horseman and equerry, and worked in the Chinese Book Ministry.

古文：文宣帝崩，当朝文士各作挽歌十首，择其善者而用之。
现代文：文宣帝去世，当朝的文士各写十首挽歌，选择其中好的加以使用。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan died, the scribes of the dynasty each wrote ten elegies and selected the best to be used.

古文：魏收、阳休之、祖孝征等不过得一二首，唯思道独有八篇。
现代文：魏收、阳休之、祖孝徵等人不过能被挑选上一二首而已，只有卢思道一个人独被选用了八首。
English: Wei Jie, Yang Xiu Zhi, Zu Xiaozheng and others could only be selected for one or two songs, but Lu Si Dao alone was selected for eight songs.

古文：故时人称为 八米卢郎 。
现代文：所以当时人把他称为 八米卢郎 。
English: That's why people called him Eight Mile Road at the time.

古文：后漏泄省中语，出为丞相西阁祭酒。
现代文：后来因泄露了中书省里的讲话内容，被放出担任丞相西阁祭酒。
English: Later, because he leaked the content of a speech given by the Minister of Education, he was dismissed from his post as the Minister of Justice.

古文：历太子舍人、司徒录事参军。
现代文：历任太子舍人、司徒录事参军。
English: Successive Crown Princes and Princes-in-waiting, including Prince Shotoku, joined the army.

古文：每居官，多被谴辱。
现代文：每次任职，大多受到谴责和侮辱。
English: Each time he took office, he was mostly denounced and insulted.

古文：后以擅用库钱，免归家。
现代文：后来因为擅自用掉府库的钱财，被免职回家。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post and sent home because he had spent money from the prefectural treasury without authorization.

古文：尝于蓟北，怅然感慨，为五言诗见意，世以为工。
现代文：他在蓟北时，曾经怅然感慨，写了五言诗表达自己的心情，当世人认为写得很好。
English: When he was in northern Jiangsu, he was so moved that he wrote a five-character poem to express his feelings, and the world thought it was well written.

古文：后为给事黄门侍郎，待诏文林馆。
现代文：后来又担任给事黄门侍郎，在文林馆待诏。
English: Later, he served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate and waited for the imperial edict at the Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：周武帝平齐，授仪同三司，追赴长安。
现代文：周武帝灭齐，授予仪同三司，召他前往长安。
English: Zhou Wudi was defeated, conferred the title of Tong San Shi, and summoned him to Chang'an.

古文：与同辈阳休之等数人作《听蝉鸣篇》。思道所为，词意清切，为时人所重。
现代文：他和同辈人阳休之等几个人写《听蝉鸣篇》，卢思道所写的诗句意境清新真切，被时人所推崇。
English: He and several of his contemporaries, such as Yang Xiu, wrote "Listening to the Cicadas," and the poems written by Lu Sidao were fresh and sincere, and were respected by the people of the time.

古文：新野庾信遍览诸同作者，而深叹美之。
现代文：新野人庾信把同作的几篇都读遍了，对卢思道的作品深深赞叹，认为写得很美。
English: Xinwuangren Yuxin has read several of Lu Si Dao's works. He is deeply impressed by Lu Si Dao's works and thinks they are beautifully written.

古文：未几，母疾，还乡。
现代文：不久，因母亲有病而回乡。
English: Soon after, she returned to her hometown due to her mother's illness.

古文：遇同郡祖英伯及从兄昌期等举兵作乱，思道豫焉。
现代文：正遇上同郡人祖英伯和他的堂兄祖昌期等人起兵叛乱，卢思道参预了这件事。
English: Lu Si Dao anticipated the rebellion of fellow county resident Zu Yingbo and his cousin Zu Changji.

古文：柱国宇文神举讨平之。思道罪当斩，已在死中。
现代文：柱国宇文神举讨平叛乱之后，按卢思道所犯的罪应当斩首，并已列在死罪名单中。
English: According to Lu Si Dao, the crimes committed after Zhu Guo Yuwen Jin led a counter-insurgency should be beheaded, and have been included in the list of capital crimes.

古文：神举素闻其名，引出，令作露布。
现代文：宇文神举早就听见卢思道的大名，便把他领了出来，让他写了一份露布。
English: Uwen Shenzhu had long heard of Lu Si Dao's daimyo, so he brought him out and asked him to write a manifesto.

古文：援笔立成，文不加点。
现代文：他提笔一写而就，文不加点。
English: He writes as soon as he picks up the pen, without adding a dot.

古文：神举嘉而宥之。
现代文：宇文神举十分赞赏并宽赦了他。
English: Yuwen Shenzhu fully appreciated and pardoned him.

古文：后除掌教上士。
现代文：后来被任命为掌教上士。
English: He was later appointed as a drill sergeant.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，迁武阳太守。
现代文：隋文帝当了丞相后，改任他为武阳太守。
English: After Sui Emperor Wen became the prime minister, he was appointed as the governor of Wuyang.

古文：余五十之年，忽焉已至，永言身事，慨然多绪，乃为之赋，聊以自慰云。
现代文：地位低下，不得志，便写了《孤鸿赋》来寄托自己的感情。其序中称： 我五十岁日期，忽然已到，咏及生平之事，感慨极多，因而写了这篇赋，聊以自慰。 云云。
English: With a low status and no ambition, he wrote "Solo Hong Fu" to express his feelings. In the preface, he said: I have suddenly reached the age of 50, and I have a lot of feelings about my life, so I wrote this Fu to talk about masturbation.

古文：开皇初，以母老，表请解职，优诏许之。
现代文：开皇初年，因母亲年老，上表请求离职。朝廷下优诏应许了他。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, because of his mother's old age, he asked to resign from his post. The imperial court promised him a promotion.

古文：思道恃才地，多所陵轹，由是官途沦滞。
现代文：卢思道自恃多才，经常看不起别人，所以官运不畅。
English: Lu Sidao prided himself on being multi-talented and often looked down on others, so his official career was not smooth.

古文：既而又著《劳生论》，指切当世。
现代文：后来又写了《劳生篇》，指斥当世之事。
English: Later, he also wrote "The Life of toil," denouncing the things of this world.

古文：岁余，奉诏郊劳陈使。
现代文：一年多后，奉诏到郊外慰问陈国使者。
English: More than a year later, he was ordered to go to the suburbs to offer condolences to the Chen envoy.

古文：顷之，遭母忧。
现代文：不久，因母亲去世而守丧。
English: Soon after, she was in mourning for the death of her mother.

古文：未几，起为散骑侍郎，参内史侍郎事。
现代文：没有多长时间，又起用为散骑侍郎，参预内史侍郎事。
English: It didn't take long before he was also appointed as a horseback riding attendant, and he participated in the prefectural history of attendants.

古文：于时，议置六卿，将除大理。
现代文：当时，商议设置六卿，准备任命大理卿。
English: At that time, the establishment of six Lords was discussed, and the appointment of Lord Dali was prepared.

古文：思道上奏曰： 省有驾部，寺留太仆；省有刑部，寺除大理。
现代文：卢思道上奏说： 省里设有驾部，寺里留有太仆；省里有刑部，寺里任命大理卿。
English: Lu Si said in his report: There is a driving department in the province, and there is a servant in the temple; there is a criminal department in the province, and the temple appoints Daliqing.

古文：斯则重畜产而贱刑名，诚为不可。 
现代文：这分明是重畜产而轻视刑名，我认为实在不合适。 
English: This is clearly heavy animal husbandry and belittles the name of the sentence, I think it is really inappropriate.

古文：又陈殿庭非杖罚之所，朝臣犯笞罪，请以赎论。
现代文：他又陈述说，殿堂当中不是杖打责罚人的地方，朝臣犯有该受杖打的罪行，请求允许他们用钱财赎罪。
English: He also stated that the hall of fame is not a place to punish people with a cane, and courtiers have committed crimes that should be beaten with a cane, and asked to be allowed to use money to atone for their sins.

古文：上悉嘉纳之。是岁，卒于京师。
现代文：皇帝全都表示赞赏并采纳。当年，死于京都。
English: The emperors all expressed their appreciation and accepted. That year, he died in Kyoto.

古文：上甚惜之，遣使吊祭焉。
现代文：皇帝十分惋惜，派使者前往吊祭。
English: The emperor was very sorry and sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony.

古文：叔彪少机悟，豪率轻侠，好奇策，慕诸葛亮之为人。
现代文：他有集二十卷，流传于世。儿子名赤松，大业年间，任河东县长。卢叔彪年轻时机智聪明，豪爽仗义，喜爱出奇制胜的计谋，很仰慕诸葛亮的为人。
English: He has a collection of twenty volumes, which have been passed down to the world. His son's name is Akamatsu, and during his career, he was the governor of Hedong County. Lu Shubiao was young, clever, brave and righteous, loved the strategy of surprising victory, and admired Zhuge Liang as a person.

古文：为贺拔胜荆州开府长史。胜不用其计，弃城奔梁。
现代文：任贺拔胜的荆州开府长史，贺拔胜不采纳他的计策，弃城投奔梁。
English: He Bansheng was appointed governor of Jingzhou Kaifu. However, He Bansheng did not adopt his strategy and abandoned the city.

古文：叔彪归本县，筑室临陂，优游自适。
现代文：卢叔彪回到本县，在山坡前搭了座小屋，悠闲自在地玩乐。
English: Lu Shubiao returned to this county, built a hut in front of the hillside, and enjoyed leisurely.

古文：齐文襄降辟书，辞疾不到。天保初，复征。不得已，布裙露车至鄴。
现代文：齐文襄下了征召的书信，他推辞有病不去，天保初年，他又被征召，不得已，穿着平民的布衣坐着一辆敞篷车到了邺。
English: Qi Wenxiang received a letter of conscription. He refused to go because he was ill. In the first year of Tianbao, he was conscripted again. As a last resort, he arrived at the capital in a convertible, wearing civilian clothes.

古文：杨愔往候之，以为司徒谘议，辞疾不受。
现代文：杨前往迎接，任命他为司徒谘议，他推辞有病不接受。
English: Yang went to meet him and appointed him as an advisor to Stow, but he refused to accept his resignation because he was ill.

古文：孝昭即位，召为中庶子，问以世事。
现代文：孝昭帝即位后，征召他为中庶子，向他请教当世形势。
English: After Emperor Xiaozhao ascended the throne, he summoned him as a middle child and asked him about the current situation.

古文：叔彪劝讨关西，画地陈兵势，请立重镇于平阳，与彼蒲州相对，深沟高垒，运粮实之。
现代文：卢叔彪劝皇帝征讨关西，并在地上画图陈述军队的布局形势，请求在平阳设置一个强大的军镇，和对方的蒲州对峙，深挖沟壕，高筑壁垒，储备好充足的粮食。
English: Lu Shubiao advised the emperor to conquer Kansai, and drew a map on the ground to state the layout situation of the army. He requested to set up a strong military town in Pingyang and confront the other side in Puzhou, dig deep trenches, build high barriers, and reserve sufficient grain.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：皇帝认为很有道理，采纳了这个方案。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：又愿自居平阳，成此谋略。
现代文：他又请命亲自镇守平阳，实现这个计划。
English: He also asked for the order to personally guard Pingyang to realize this plan.

古文：帝命元文遥与叔虎参谋，撰《平西策》一卷。
现代文：皇帝任命元文遥作卢叔彪的参谋，撰写了《平西策》一卷。
English: The emperor appointed Yuan Wenyao as Lu Shubiao's staff officer, and he wrote a volume of "Ping Xizhe."

古文：未几，帝崩，事寝。
现代文：不久，皇帝驾崩，这个计划就被搁下不提。
English: Soon after, the emperor died, and the plan was shelved.

古文：武成即位，拜仪同三司，判都官尚书，出为金州刺史，迁太子詹事。
现代文：武成即位后，他官拜仪同三司，判都官尚书，出任为合州刺史，又升任为太子詹事。
English: After Emperor Wucheng ascended to the throne, he was appointed to the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and the Third Division of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs

古文：叔彪在乡时，有粟千石，每至春夏，乡人无食者，令自载取。至秋，任还其价而不计。
现代文：卢叔彪在家乡时，有千石粟米，每年春夏季，乡里人没有粮食的，他都让他们自己用车装取；到了秋天，随便他们还多少而从不计较。
English: When Lu Shubiao was in his hometown, he had thousands of koku of corn. Every spring and summer, when the villagers had no grain, he would have them load it onto their cars; in the fall, they would return as much as they wanted and never argue about it.

古文：岁岁常得倍余。
现代文：结果年年都成倍地收回。
English: As a result, it has been withdrawn in multiples every year.

古文：既在朝通贵，自以年老，兒子又多，遂营一大屋，曰： 歌于斯，哭于斯。 
现代文：他在朝中地位显贵后，自己认为年事已高，儿子又多，于是建造了一座大房子，说道： 歌于此，哭于此。 
English: After he rose to prominence in the court, he thought that he was old and had many sons, so he built a big house and said: "Sing here, cry here."

古文：魏收常来诣之，访以洛京旧事。不待食而起，云： 难为子费。 
现代文：魏收经常来拜访他，询问一些洛京的旧事，不等吃饭就起身告辞，说道： 不用您破费了。 
English: Wei Hui often came to visit him, inquired about some old things in Luojing, and did not wait for dinner to get up and say goodbye, saying: You don't have to waste your time.

古文：叔彪留之，良久食至，但有粟飡葵菜，木碗盛之，片脯而已。
现代文：卢叔彪将他挽留下，过了很久饭端上来，只有小米饭和葵菜，用木碗盛放，仅有几片肉。
English: Lu Shubiao held him back, and after a long time the meal was served, only millet rice and sunflower greens, served in a wooden bowl, with only a few slices of meat.

古文：有一旧门人，醉言疏失，宗道令沈之于水。后坐酷滥除名。
现代文：魏收所带来的仆从，也都给安排一样的饭菜。齐被灭后，他回到范阳。
English: After Qi was killed, he returned to Fanyang.

古文：玄族子辅，字显光，本州别驾。
现代文：遇到兵乱城被攻陷，他和族弟卢士邃都冻饿致死，周将宇文神举因为二人有名望，将他们收殓安葬。
English: He and his brother Lu Shizhong both died of cold and hunger when the city fell to the invading soldiers. Because the two men were famous, Zhou placed them in a coffin and buried them.

古文：子同。同字叔伦，身长八尺，容貌魁伟，善于处世。
现代文：卢同字叔伦，身高八尺，容貌魁伟雄壮，善于为人处世。
English: Lu Tongzha Shulun, eight feet tall, handsome and majestic, good at dealing with people.

古文：太和中，起家北海王详国常侍。
现代文：太和年间，他起家时任北海王详的封国常侍。
English: During the Taiwa era, when he started his family, he served as a vassal of the Hokkai kings.

古文：熙平初，累迁尚书左丞。
现代文：熙平初年，因屡次升迁而当了尚书左丞。
English: In the first year of Heiping, he was promoted several times and became the senior secretary.

古文：时相州刺史奚康生征百姓岁调，皆长七八十尺，以邀忧公之誉，部内患之。
现代文：这时，相州刺史奚康生在征收百姓每年交纳的户调时，布的长度竟然有七八十尺，以此来求得为公家分忧的美名，部内对这种情况都感到不安。
English: At this time, when Kang Sheng, the chief secretary of the Xiangzhou County People's Government, was collecting the annual tax from the people, the length of the cloth was actually seventy or eighty feet, in order to gain a reputation for being a public concern. The ministry was uneasy about this situation.

古文：同于岁禄，官给长绢。
现代文：卢同在领取俸禄时，官府给的正是这种七八十尺长的绢。
English: When Lu Tong received his salary, the government gave him this 70-80-foot-long yakitori.

古文：同乃举案康生度外征调。
现代文：卢同便揭发奚康生超过规定征收户调。
English: Lu Tong then revealed that Zou Kangsheng exceeded the prescribed levy of household transfer.

古文：书奏，诏科康生罪，兼褒同在公之绩。
现代文：朝廷收到奏章后，传旨追查奚康生的罪责，并表彰卢同敢于维护国家利益的行为。
English: After receiving the report, the imperial court issued an order to investigate the culpability of Gong Kangsheng, and commended Lu Tong for daring to safeguard national interests.

古文：明帝世，朝政稍稀，人多窃冒军功。
现代文：孝明帝一代，朝政比较宽松，许多人都假冒战功。
English: In Emperor Xiaoming's generation, the imperial government was relatively lenient, and many people faked their war exploits.

古文：同阅吏部勋书，因加检核，得窃阶者三百余人。
现代文：卢同在查阅吏部的功勋登记文书时，加以检查核实，找出因假冒军功而晋升品级的多达百余人。
English: When inspecting the merit registration documents of the Personnel Department, Lu also checked and verified them to find more than a hundred people who were promoted due to fake military merits.

古文：乃表言：
现代文：于是便上表朝廷，说：
English: So he went to the imperial court and said:

古文：窃见吏部勋簿，多皆改换，乃校中兵秦案，并复乖舛。
现代文： 我见到吏部的功勋登记簿，其中多被涂改更换，便查阅中兵局所存奏案加以核对，发现也错讹百出。
English: When I saw the merit register of the cadre department, most of which had been altered and replaced, I checked the records kept by the Central Military Commission to check, and found that there were many mistakes.

古文：愚谓罪虽恩免，犹须刊定。
现代文：我以为过去的过错虽然可以恩免，但必须加以纠正定案。
English: I thought that although the mistakes of the past could be forgiven, they must be corrected.

古文：请遣一都令史，与令仆省事各一人，总集吏部、中兵二局勋簿，对句奏案。
现代文：请委派一位都令史，同时让所属部局各派一人，汇集吏部和中兵二局的功勋簿，对照奏案。
English: Please appoint a do ringshi, and at the same time, let each subordinate department send one person to collect the meritorious service record books of the two bureaus of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the People's Liberation Army, and compare the records.

古文：若名级相应者，即于黄素楷书大字，具件阶级数，令本曹尚书以硃印印之。
现代文：如果功名和品级相对应的，就用黄纸以大字楷书写下来，注明品级级数，让本部尚书以红印印上。
English: If the title of merit corresponds to the grade, use yellow paper to write it down in large block letters, indicate the grade number, and have the head office stamp it with a red seal.

古文：明造两通，一关吏部，一留兵局，与奏案对掌。
现代文：抄明两份，一份放在吏部，一份留在中兵局，和奏案同管。
English: Copy two copies, one to be kept in the Personnel Department, and one to be kept in the Central Military Commission, in the same folder as the report.

古文：进则防揩洗之伪，退则无改易之理。
现代文：这样进则可以防止涂改擦洗以作假，退则再没有更改替换的可能。
English: In this way, it is possible to prevent alteration and scrubbing for falsification, and there is no possibility of changing and replacing the return.

古文：从前以来，勋书上省，唯列姓名，不载本属。致令窃滥之徒，轻为苟且。
现代文： 从前以来，功勋奏书报到各部，只写名字，不记籍属，致使无耻小人，轻易得以取巧。
English: In the past, the records of meritorious service were reported to each ministry, and only the names were written, not the family names, which made it easy for shameless villains to take advantage of others.

古文：今请征职白身，具列本州郡县三长之所；其实官正职者，亦列官名曹别录历。
现代文：从今以后请在征召没有功名的人时，全部写上所在的州、郡、县三级名称；已经有官衔正职的，也写明官名、部别和经历。
English: From now on, please write down the name of the state, county, and county level in which you are located when recruiting people who do not have merit. If you already have a title or position, please also write down the title, department, and experience.

古文：皆仰本军印记其上，然后印缝，各上所司。
现代文：都用本军的印章盖在上面，然后合缝，各交上司。
English: They were all stamped with the army's seal, then sewn shut and handed over to their superiors.

古文：统将、都督，并皆印记，然后列上行台。
现代文：统将、都督，也都盖上印章，然后一起交送行台。
English: The supreme commander and the governor of the capital also stamped the seal, and then sent the platform together.

古文：行台关太尉。太尉检练精实，乃始关刺。
现代文：行台转太尉，太尉检查确实无误，才为正式的名帖。
English: Only when the post is promoted to the rank of captain and the captain's inspection is indeed correct can it become an official post.

古文：省重究括，然后奏申。
现代文：省要再次考查结束后，申奏朝廷。
English: After the provincial examination was over, the petition was sent to the imperial court.

古文：奏出之日，黄素硃印，关付吏部。
现代文：奏表送出之日，黄素纸盖红色印章，交付吏部。
English: On the day the report form is sent out, the yellow paper is stamped with a red seal and handed over to the personnel department.

古文：顷来，非但偷阶冒名，改换勋簿而已，或一阶再取，或易名受级，凡如此者，其人不少。
现代文： 近来，不仅偷升品级假冒名字，涂改更换功勋簿而已，还有已升品级后又再升迁，或者改名晋级，诸如此类，人数不少。
English: Recently, there have been many people who have not only stolen the fake names of those who have been promoted to higher ranks, and altered and replaced the order of merit book, but also those who have been promoted to higher ranks and then promoted again, or changed their names and promoted, and so on.

古文：良由吏部无法，防塞失方。
现代文：这也是由于吏部无法可循，没有好办法堵塞防止作伪。
English: This is also due to the fact that there is no good way to block and prevent forgery.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么会这样？
English: Why is that?

古文：吏部加阶之后，簿不注记，缘此之故，易生侥倖。
现代文：吏部给予晋级之后，簿上并不登记，正因为这种情形，容易使人产生侥幸得以升迁的想法。
English: After the promotion is given by the cadre department, it is not recorded in the book, and it is precisely because of this situation that it is easy for people to have the idea of being promoted by chance.

古文：自今叙阶之后，名簿具注，加补日月，尚书印记，然后付曹，郎中别作抄目，迁代相付。
现代文：从今以后，确定品级，便在功勋簿上的有关人名详细注明，加写日月，尚书盖印，然后付给部曹，郎中另外抄录，代代相传。
English: From now on, when the grade is determined, the names of the relevant people will be noted in detail on the merit book, and the date and month will be added, and the book will be stamped, and then it will be sent to the assistant, and the junior high school will copy it separately, and it will be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：此制一行，差止奸罔。
现代文：这种办法实行，大概可以杜绝奸佞之徒的作弊。 
English: If this method is implemented, it will probably be possible to prevent cheating by fraudsters.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：朝廷下诏同意实行。
English: He complied.

古文：同又奏曰：
现代文：卢同又奏道：
English: Lu Tong also sang:

古文：臣伏思黄素勋簿，政可粗止奸伪，然在军虚诈，犹未可尽。
现代文： 我深思之后，觉得黄色功勋簿，应该可以制止大部分作伪情况，但军队中的虚诈，则恐怕难以全部杜绝。
English: After deep reflection, I feel that the Yellow Order of Merit should be able to stop most cases of forgery, but I am afraid that it is difficult to completely eliminate fraud in the military.

古文：请自今在军阅簿之日，行台、军司、监军、都督各明立文案，处处记之。
现代文：请从今以后，在军队中查阅功勋簿时，行台、军司、监军、都督等都写清文书档案，处处详细记录。
English: From now on, when you consult the service record book in the army, please make sure that the march table, the military secretary, the supervisor of the army, the governor, etc. all write down the document files, and make detailed records everywhere.

古文：斩首成一阶以上，即令给券。
现代文：因斩得首级而达到晋级一级以上的，就让发给证书。
English: A certificate will be issued to those who have been promoted to the first grade and have achieved a promotion level or higher.

古文：其券，一纸之上，当中大书，起行台、统军位号，勋人甲乙。
现代文：这种证书用一张纸，在纸正中写上大字，注明行台、统军职位名号，立功人某甲某乙。
English: This kind of certificate uses a piece of paper, and writes a large character in the middle of the paper, indicating the line platform, the position name of the unified army, and the meritorious person A and B.

古文：斩三贼及被伤成阶以上，亦具书于券，各尽一行，当行竖裂。
现代文：斩三个人首级以及被对方砍伤能得到奖赏品级的，也都付给证书，写成一行，从这行字中间竖裂成两半。
English: Those who cut off the heads of three people and those who were cut by the other side and could get the reward level also paid a certificate, written in one line, and split in half from the middle of this line.

古文：其券，前后皆起年号日月，破某处阵，某官某勋，印记为验。
现代文：证书前后都写明年号和日月，破了某处敌阵，某官立某种功勋，以印记来检验。
English: The next year's issue and the month and day are written on the front and back of the certificate, the enemy's line is broken somewhere, a certain official establishes a certain merit, and it is checked with a seal.

古文：一支付勋人，一支付行台。记至京，即送门下，别丞守录。
现代文：一半交立功人，一半送到行台，登记后送到京城，就转送门下省，另用函件登记。
English: Half of them were handed over to the winners, half were sent to Xingtai, and after being registered, they were sent to Beijing. After that, they were sent to the next province and registered by mail.

古文：又自迁都以来，戎车屡捷，所以征勋转多，叙不可尽者，良由岁久生奸，积年长伪，巧吏阶缘，偷增遂甚。
现代文： 又自从迁都以来，战场捷报频传，所以作战立功者越来越多，到现在还奖赏不完的原因，是由于年代久长而产生弊端，积压年数既久便容易作伪，善于投机取巧的吏员靠等级而晋升，偷改增加的现象因而越来越多。
English: Since the relocation of the capital, battlefield reports of success have been frequent, so there are more and more combat meritorious persons, and the reason why there is still no end to the reward is due to the drawbacks caused by the long years, the backlog of years is long and it is easy to forge, the officials who are good at speculation and skill are promoted by grade, and the phenomenon of illegal change is increasing.

古文：请自今为始，诸有勋簿已经奏赏者，即广下远近，云某处勋判，咸令知闻。
现代文：请从现在开始，所有已在功勋簿上登记过并奖赏过的，便传告远近地方，说明是某处所立功勋，让所有人都知道。
English: Please, from now on, all those who have been registered and awarded in the Order of Merit will be announced far and near, indicating that it is a merit made somewhere, so that everyone knows.

古文：立格酬叙，以三年为断。
现代文：定下奖赏的规矩，以三年时间为限。
English: The rules for setting the reward are limited to three years.

古文：其职人及出身，限内悉令铨除；实官及外号，隋才加授。
现代文：在期限以内，全部授给职级及承认其资历。实际职务及封号，根据其才能加以授理。
English: Within the time limit, all ranks will be awarded and their qualifications will be recognized. Actual positions and titles will be awarded according to their abilities.

古文：庶使酬勤速申，立效者劝，事不经久，侥倖易息。
现代文：这样就能做到迅速奖励勤政者，鼓励为国立功的人，事情不拖过很多时间，作伪者也就容易止息。
English: In this way, it will be possible to quickly reward those who are diligent in politics and encourage those who are meritorious for the country. Things will not drag on for a long time, and it will be easy for the fakers to stop.

古文：或遭穷难，州无中正者，不在此限。
现代文：如果有遭遇困境，州中没有正直的官员，不受期限的限制。
English: When push comes to shove, there is no honest official in the state who is not subject to term limits.

古文：又勋簿之示，征还之日，即应申送。
现代文： 又功勋簿送法，应在出征还朝之时，即时申报送转有关部门。
English: For the delivery of the Medal of Merit, the relevant departments should be notified immediately at the time of departure.

古文：然顷来，行台、督将至京始造，或一年二岁，方上勋书。
现代文：可是向来由行台、督将回到京都后才开始编造，经过一年两年，才申奏朝廷。
English: However, it was only after the cast and director returned to Kyoto that they began to make up stories, and it took a year or two before they were reported to the imperial court.

古文：奸伪之原，实自由此。
现代文：奸伪的根源，实在由此产生。
English: This is the root cause of duplicity.

古文：于今以后，军还之日，便通勋簿，不听隔月。
现代文：从今以后，军队回朝之日，便送上功勋簿，不让隔月报送。 
English: From now on, on the day the troops return to the DPRK, they will be presented with the Medal of Merit, and will not be allowed to submit it every other month.

古文：诏复依行。
现代文：皇帝传旨又照此实行。
English: The Emperor's order was carried out accordingly.

古文：元叉之废灵太后也，相州刺史、中山王熙起兵于鄴。败之。
现代文：元叉废掉灵太后时，相州刺史、中山王熙起兵于邺郡，被元叉打败了。
English: When Yuan Shikai deposed the Empress Dowager, Sanzhou Zhishi and Zhongshan Wang Xi raised an army in Ying County and were defeated by Yuan Shikai.

古文：叉以同为持节兼黄门侍郎慰劳使，乃就州刑熙。
现代文：元叉便任命卢同为持节兼黄门侍郎慰劳使，前往相州处决中山王熙。
English: Yuan Zha then appointed Lu Tong as the consoler and attendant of the Yellow Gate, and went to Xiangzhou to execute Zhongshan Wang Xi.

古文：还，授正黄门。
现代文：回朝后，被授为正黄门侍郎。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was awarded the title of Zhenghuangmen jirao.

古文：同善事在位，为叉所亲。
现代文：卢同善于侍奉身居要职的人，深为元叉所信任。
English: Lu Tong is good at serving people in important positions and is deeply trusted by Yuan Xuan.

古文：戮熙之日，深穷党与，以希叉旨，论者非之。
现代文：当他杀中山王熙的时候，大肆追究处置中山王熙的同党和有过交往的人，以此来讨好元叉，评论者对此有非议。
English: When he killed Zhongshan Wangxi, he aggressively pursued and dealt with Zhongshan Wangxi's fellow party members and people who had dealings with him, in order to please Yuan Zha, which was criticized by commentators.

古文：同兄琇，少多大言，常云公侯可致。
现代文：卢同的哥哥卢，从年轻时就喜欢说大话，经常吹嘘说公侯的爵位轻易就可以得到。
English: From a young age, Lu Tong's elder brother, Lu, liked to talk big, and often boasted that the title of prince could be easily obtained.

古文：至此，始为都水使者。
现代文：可是这时才不过当名都水使者。
English: However, at this time, it was just a water messenger.

古文：同启求回身二阶以加琇。琇遂除安州刺史，论者称之。
现代文：卢同请求把自己的两个等级功劳转加给卢，卢因此被委任为安州刺史，评论者对此深为赞许。
English: Lu Tong requested that his two grades of merit be transferred to Lu, and Lu was thus appointed as the Anzhou Provincial Historian, which was highly praised by commentators.

古文：营州城人就德兴谋反，除同度支尚书，持节使营州慰劳，听以便宜从事。
现代文：营州城有个叫就德兴的人谋反，朝廷派卢同为度支尚书，持节前往营州安抚，让他有权相机行事。
English: In Yingzhou City, there was a man named Du Dexing who was plotting a rebellion. The imperial court sent Lu to the same place to pacify Yingzhou and give him the right to operate a camera.

古文：同乃遣贼家口三十人，并免家奴为良，赍书喻之。
现代文：卢同释放了就德兴家里三十人，并免除被强迫当家奴的人成为平民，同时派人送信劝降。
English: Lutong released 30 members of Dexing's family and exempted those who had been forced to be domestic slaves from becoming civilians. At the same time, he sent people to persuade them to surrender.

古文：德兴乃降，安辑其人而还。
现代文：就德兴就投降了。卢同安抚了众人之后就回朝了。
English: Only Dexing surrendered. After appeasing everyone, Lu Tong returned to the imperial court.

古文：德兴复反，诏同为幽州刺史，兼尚书行台，慰劳之。
现代文：就德兴不久又反叛，朝廷令卢同为幽州刺史、兼尚书行台，前往安抚。
English: As for Dexing, he soon rebelled again, and the imperial court ordered Lu Tong, who was also a historian of Yuzhou and a bookstore owner, to go to appease him.

古文：同虑德兴难信，勒众而往，为德兴所击，大败而还。
现代文：卢同觉得就德兴不守信用，便带去大队人马，被就德兴打得大败而回。
English: Lu Tong felt that Jie Dexing did not keep his promise, so he brought a large group of men and horses, and was defeated by Jie Dexing and returned.

古文：灵太后反政，以同叉党，除名。
现代文：灵太后重新执政后，认为卢同是元叉的同党，免了官。
English: After the Empress Dowager Ling regained power, she considered Lu Tong to be a member of the same party as Yuan Zha, and he was relieved of his duties.

古文：庄帝践祚，诏复本秩，除都官尚书，复兼七兵。
现代文：庄帝继位后，下诏恢复他的爵禄，任都官尚书，兼领七兵。
English: After Emperor Zhuang succeeded to the throne, he restored his peerage by imperial edict, and was appointed to the post of Shangshu and concurrently led seven soldiers.

古文：以前慰劳德兴功，封章武县伯，正除七兵。
现代文：又以他曾安抚就德兴的功劳，封为章武县伯，正式掌管七兵。
English: He was also given the title of Zhangwu County magistrate, officially in charge of the seven soldiers, in recognition of his efforts to appease Dexing.

古文：转殿中。
现代文：又转为殿中侍御史。
English: He was also transferred to the position of palace chamberlain.

古文：普泰初，除侍中，进号骠骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：普泰初年，任侍中，进号骠骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Putai, he served as a chamberlain, and was promoted to general of cavalry and doctor of medicine.

古文：同时久病，牵强启乞仪同。
现代文：这时卢同患病已久，还勉强处置政务，他请求封给仪同三司官职。
English: At this time, Lu Tong, who had been ill for a long time, still reluctantly dealt with government affairs. He requested to be appointed to the position of the third secretary of Iitong.

古文：初同之为黄门也，与节闵帝俱在门下，同异其为人，素相款托。
现代文：当初卢同任黄门侍郎时，和节闵帝同在门下省，卢同觉得节闵帝为人异乎寻常，一向特别亲密交接。
English: At the beginning, when Lu served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, he was in the same province as Emperor Jiechi. Lu Tong felt that Emperor Jiechi was an extraordinary person and had always been particularly close to him.

古文：帝以恩旧，许之，除仪同三司。
现代文：节闵帝想到和卢同的这段旧情，便应许了，授以仪同三司。
English: Thinking of his past relationship with Lu Tong, Emperor Jiechi promised to do so, and awarded him the title of Sanzhi.

古文：永熙初，薨，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：永熙初年去世，追封尚书右仆射。
English: Yongxi died in the first year of his reign, and was succeeded by his right-hand man, Shangshu.

古文：四子，长子斐嗣。
现代文：他有四个儿子，长子卢裴继承封爵。
English: He had four sons, the eldest of whom, Lu Pei, was knighted.

古文：斐字子章，性残忍，以强断知名。
现代文：卢裴字子章，性情残暴，以强制武断而闻名。
English: Lu Pei Zizizhang, known for his violent temper and forced arbitrariness.

古文：齐文襄引为大将军府刑狱参军，谓云： 狂简，斐然成章，非嘉名字也。 
现代文：齐文襄帝任用他为大将军府刑狱参军，对他说：  狂简，裴然成章 ，这可不是好名字啊！ 
English: Emperor Qianlong appointed him to join the army in the General's Prison, and said to him: "Crazy Jane, Pei Ranzhong Zhang, this is not a good name!"

古文：天保中，稍迁尚书左丞，别典京畿诏狱。
现代文：天保年间，逐渐升为尚书右丞，另外掌管京中的诏狱。
English: During the Tenpo era, he gradually rose to the position of Shoshuu-jo (尚書右丞) and was also in charge of the Imperial Prison in Kyoto.

古文：酷滥非人情所为，无问事之大小，拷掠过度，于大棒车辐下死者非一。
现代文：他滥用酷刑，不是一般人所能想象的，也不管事情大小，都拷打得非常过分，在大棒和车辐下死亡的人数众多。
English: His abuse of torture is beyond the imagination of ordinary people, and no matter how big or small, it is very excessive, and a large number of people have died under the big stick and the car.

古文：或严冬至寒，置囚于冰雪之上；或盛夏酷热，暴之日下，枉陷人致死者，前后百数人。
现代文：有时在严寒的冬天，将囚犯放在冰雪上受冻；有时在盛夏酷热的天气，让囚犯在烈日下暴晒。他冤枉和陷害人而致死的，前后有一百多人。
English: Sometimes in the bitter cold of winter, prisoners were placed on the ice and snow to freeze; sometimes in the heat of midsummer, prisoners were exposed to the scorching sun. He wronged and framed people, and more than a hundred people died.

古文：伺察官人罪失，动即奏闻。
现代文：他经常注意官员们，稍有过失，立即上奏皇帝。
English: He always paid attention to officials, and if he made a slight mistake, he would immediately report it to the emperor.

古文：朝士见之，莫不重迹屏气，皆目之为校事。
现代文：朝官们见到他时，无不恐惧不前屏住呼吸，把他看成是专门刺探人的校事官。
English: When the imperial officials saw him, they all held their breath in fear and regarded him as a school official who specialized in spying on people.

古文：斐扬扬得志，言必自矜。
现代文：而卢裴却洋洋得意，说起话来自吹自擂。
English: On the other hand, Lu Pei is cocky and speaks from the top of his head.

古文：后以谤史事，与李庶俱病鞭杖，死狱中。
现代文：后来因犯了诽谤国史的罪，和李庶一起在监狱中被鞭打而致病，死于狱中。
English: Later, for the crime of slandering the national history, he was whipped in prison together with Li Shao, which made him ill, and he died in prison.

古文：斐弟筠，青州中从事。
现代文：卢裴的弟弟卢筠，官青州中从事。
English: Lu Pei's younger brother, Lu Yao, is a middle school official in Qingzhou.

古文：同兄静，好学有风度，饮酒至数斗不乱。
现代文：卢同的哥哥卢青，好学很有风度，能连喝几斗酒而不发生迷乱。
English: Lutong's older brother, Lu Qing, is studious and very personable. He can even drink several buckets of wine without getting confused.

古文：上曰： 然。 
现代文：最后官至太常丞。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：遂废，卒于家。
现代文：大统初年，追赠太仆射、平州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Taipuzha and Pingzhou Zhishi.

古文：勇字季礼，景裕从弟也。
现代文：卢青的儿子卢景裕。卢勇，字季礼，是卢景裕的堂弟。
English: Lu Qing's son is Lu Jingyu. Lu Yong, also known as Qi Li, is Lu Jingyu's cousin.

古文：父璧，魏下邳太守。
现代文：父亲卢壁，为魏下邳太守。
English: His father, Lu Bi, was the governor-general of Wei.

古文：勇初与景裕俱在学，其叔同曰： 白头必以文通，季礼当以武达。
现代文：卢勇以前和卢景裕一起念书，他叔叔卢同道： 白头以后必定因为文才而扬名，季礼将会因为武功而显达。
English: Lu Yong used to study with Lu Jingyu, and his uncle Lu said, "From now on, Baotou will be famous for its literary talent, and Ji Lai will be famous for its martial arts."

古文：兴吾门者，二子也。 
现代文：振兴我们家门的，就靠这两个孩子了。 
English: It's up to these two children to revitalize our family.

古文：幽州反者仆骨邢以勇为本郡范阳王，时年十八。
现代文：幽州的反叛之人仆骨邢任命卢勇为本郡范阳王，当时他才十八岁。
English: At the age of eighteen, Lu Yong was appointed King Fan Yang of Yuzhou by his rebellious servant, Guozhen.

古文：后葛荣又以勇为燕王。
现代文：后来葛荣又任命卢勇为燕王。
English: Later, Ge Rong also appointed Lu Yong as the King of Swallows.

古文：齐神武起兵，卢文伟召之，不应。
现代文：齐神武起兵后，卢文伟招他相助，他没有答应。
English: After Qi Shenwu raised an army, Lu Wenwei called him for help, but he did not agree.

古文：尔硃氏灭，乃赴晋阳。
现代文：尔朱氏被灭后，他投奔到晋阳。
English: After the Erju clan was wiped out, he fled to Jinyang.

古文：神武署丞相主簿。
现代文：齐神武帝让他暂任丞相主簿。
English: Emperor Qishenwu allowed him to temporarily hold the post of prime minister.

古文：属山西霜俭，运山东租输，皆令实载，违者罪之。令勇典其事。
现代文：适逢当时山西因遭霜灾歉收，神武帝命将山东的租赋运去救济，下令要将车装满，违者要治罪，并令卢勇负责监督此事。
English: At that time, Shanxi was suffering from a bad harvest due to frost damage, and Emperor Shenwu ordered that the rents of Shandong should be transported to relief, ordered that the car should be filled, offenders should be punished, and ordered Lu Yong to be responsible for supervising the matter.

古文：乡郡公主虚僦千余车，勇劾之。
现代文：乡郡公主虚虚地装了千余车应付，被卢勇弹劾。
English: The princess of the township and county vainly loaded more than a thousand cars to cope, and was impeached by Lu Yong.

古文：公主诉于神武，而勇守法不亏。
现代文：公主到神武帝面前告状，而卢勇坚持法令不可破坏。
English: The princess complained to Emperor Jinmu, but Lu Yong insisted that the edict could not be broken.

古文：神武谓郭秀曰： 卢勇懔懔，有不可犯色，真公人也。
现代文：神武帝对郭秀道 ：卢勇严肃庄重，有不可侵犯之色，真是个公正率直的人。
English: Shenwu Emperor to Guo Xiudo: Lu Yong is serious and solemn, has an inviolable color, and is really a fair and straightforward person.

古文：方当委之大事，岂止纳租而已。 
现代文：应当对他委以大任，岂止让他负责纳租而已。 
English: He should be given more responsibility than just collecting rent.

古文：后行洛州事。元象初，官军围广州，未拔，行台侯景闻西魏救兵将至，集诸将议之。
现代文：后来他被任命为行洛州事，元象初年，官军围攻广州，尚未将城攻破，行台侯景听说西魏救兵将到，忙召集诸将商议对策。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Luozhou. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the government army besieged Guangzhou and had not yet broken through the city. When Gaotai Houjing heard that the West Wei relief army would arrive, he hastily convened the generals to discuss countermeasures.

古文：勇请进观形势，于是率百骑，各拢一马。至大騩山，知西魏将李景和将至。勇乃多置幡旗于树头，分骑为数十队，鸣角直前。禽西魏仪同程华，斩仪同王征蛮而还。
现代文：卢勇请令去侦察情况，于是带领骑兵百名，每人各带一匹马，到了大马鬼山，知道西魏大将李景和将要来到，卢勇于是在树梢上插了许多旌旗，将骑兵分为数十队，吹着号角向前冲击，擒获了西魏仪同程华，斩杀了仪同王征蛮后回师。
English: Lu Yong was ordered to investigate the situation, so he led a hundred cavalrymen, each with a horse, to the Great Horse Ghost Mountain. Knowing that the West Wei general Li Jinghe was about to arrive, Lu Yong then planted many banners on the treetops, divided the cavalry into dozens of teams, blew the horn and charged forward. He captured the West Wei Yi Tong Chenghua, killed the Yi Tong Wang, and then returned to the division.

古文：再迁阳州刺史，镇宜阳。
现代文：后来又改任阳州刺史，镇守宜阳。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Yangzhou chief historian and the town guard of Yiyang.

古文：叛人韩木兰、陈忻等常为边患，勇大破之。
现代文：叛党韩木兰、陈忻等经常骚扰边境，卢勇将他们打得大败。
English: Han Mulan, Chen Qi and other rebels often harassed the border, and Lu Yong defeated them.

古文：启求入朝，神武赐勇书曰： 吾委卿阳州，安枕高卧，无西南之虑矣。
现代文：他上表启奏要求到朝中为官，神武帝给卢勇回信道： 我委任卿镇守阳州，就可以安枕高卧，不再担心西南的边患。
English: At the beginning of his speech, he asked to become an official in the central government. Emperor Shenwu replied to Lu Yong, "I have appointed you to guard Yangzhou, so you can rest easy and no longer worry about the border troubles in the southwest."

古文：表启宜停，当使汉兒之中，无在卿前者。 
现代文：你的表奏暂时不予考虑，可以允许卿的妻子儿女到阳州和你同住，汉人之中，在卿之前还无先例。 
English: Your overtures will not be considered for the time being, and you can allow your wife and children to live with you in Yangzhou. Among the Han people, there is no precedent for this.

古文：卒，年三十二。
现代文：去世时，他年仅三十二岁。
English: He was only 32 when he died.

古文：勇有马五百匹，私造甲仗，遗启尽献之。
现代文：卢勇有五百匹马，私自造了铠甲兵器，死后遗命都献给朝廷。
English: Lu Yong had five hundred horses, and I made armor myself. After his death, he dedicated his last days to the imperial court.

古文：赠司空、冀州刺史，谥武贞。
现代文：追赠为司空、冀州刺史，谥号 武贞 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Siku and Jizhou Zhishi, and his posthumous name was Wu Zhen.

