古文：李贤弟远李贤字贤和，其先陇西成纪人也。
现代文：李贤字贤和，祖先是陇西成纪人。
English: Li Xian Zi Xian He, whose ancestor was a Shaanxi Cheng Ji Ren.

古文：曾祖父，魏太武时以子都督讨两山屠各殁于阵，赠宁西将军、陇西郡守。
现代文：曾祖父李富，魏太武帝时任子都督，在讨伐两山屠各族时阵亡，追赠宁西将军、陇西郡守。
English: His great-grandfather Li Fu, who was the son-in-law of Emperor Wei Taiwu, was killed in the Battle of the Two Mountains and was posthumously awarded the title of Ningxi General and Shaanxi County Governor.

古文：祖斌，袭领父兵，镇于高平，因家焉。
现代文：祖父李斌，承袭职位，率领父亲部属，在高平镇守，就在那里定居。
English: Grandfather Li Bin, inheriting the position, led his father's subordinates to guard the town of Gaoping and settled there.

古文：父文保，早卒。
现代文：父亲李文保，早年去世。
English: His father, Li Wenbao, died at an early age.

古文：魏大统末，以贤兄弟着勋，追赠泾原东秦三州刺史、司空。
现代文：魏大统末年，由于李贤兄弟功劳很大，追赠李文保为泾原东秦三州刺史、司空。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, due to the great merits of the Li Xian brothers, Li Wenbao was posthumously awarded the title of the former East Qin Sanzhou Sashishi and Sikuo.

古文：贤幼有志节，不妄举动。
现代文：李贤自幼就有志向节操，不轻举妄动。
English: Li Xian has had the spirit of self-restraint since he was a child, and has never acted rashly.

古文：尝出游，遇一老人，须眉皓白，谓之曰： 我年八十，观士多矣，未有如卿者。
现代文：有一次出去游玩，遇见一位老人，须眉雪白，对他说： 我八十岁了，见过很多人，但没有一个像你这样。
English: Once, when I was out for a walk, I met an old man with snow-white eyebrows, who said to me, "I am eighty years old, and I have met many people, but none like you.

古文：必为台牧，卿其勉之。 
现代文：将来必定做到台臣牧守，你好自为之。 
English: In the future, you will definitely become a Taizhen herdsman. You are welcome.

古文：九岁，从师受业，略观大旨而已，不寻章句。
现代文：九岁时，从师学习，只是概括看一下大意要旨，不在章节句子上下功夫。
English: At the age of nine, when learning from a teacher, I just looked at the general gist, and did not work hard on the chapters and sentences.

古文：或谓之曰： 学不精勤，不如不学。 
现代文：有人对他说： 学习时不专心勤奋，还不如不学。 
English: Someone said to him: If you don't concentrate and work hard while studying, it's better not to study.

古文：贤曰： 夫人各有志，贤岂能强学待问，领徒授业耶，唯当粗闻教义，补己不足。
现代文：李贤答道： 人各有志，我岂能拼命学习，以授徒为生，当个教书先生？只要大略知道一下内容，弥补自己的不足就够了。
English: Li Xian replied, "Everyone has their own aspirations. Can I study hard, make a living as an instructor, and become a teacher? It is enough to know a little about the content to make up for my own shortcomings.

古文：至如忠孝之道，实铭之于心。 
现代文：至于忠孝之道，其实早已铭记在心。 
English: As for the way of loyalty and filial piety, in fact, it has long been kept in mind.

古文：问者惭服。
现代文：问者惭愧而心服。
English: Those who asked him were both ashamed and impressed.

古文：年十四，遭父丧，抚训诸弟，友爱甚笃。
现代文：十四岁时父亲去世，抚养教育弟弟们，彼此十分友爱。
English: When he was fourteen, his father died. He raised and educated his younger brothers, and they loved each other very much.

古文：魏永安中，万俟丑奴据岐、泾等诸州反叛，魏孝庄遣尔朱天光率兵击破之。
现代文：魏永安年间，万俟丑奴占据岐、泾等州反叛，魏孝庄帝派尔朱天光率兵将其打败。
English: During the Wei and Yong'an dynasties, Wanzhong Ugly Slave occupied and rebelled against the states of Qi and Qi, and the Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang sent Zhu Tianguang and his soldiers to defeat him.

古文：其党万俟道洛、费连少浑犹据原州，未知丑奴已败。
现代文：他的党羽万俟道洛、费连少浑还占据原州，不知道万俟丑奴已经失败。
English: His followers, Wan Xuan Douluo and Fei Lian Shaohun, still occupy Wonju. They do not know that Wan Xuan Ugly Bastard has failed.

古文：天光遣使造贤，令密图道洛。
现代文：尔朱天光派使者到李贤处，命令李贤暗中算计万俟道洛。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent an envoy to Li Xian's place and ordered Li Xian to secretly calculate the amount.

古文：天光率兵续进。
现代文：尔朱天光率兵在后接应。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang and his soldiers followed behind.

古文：会贼党万俟阿宝战败逃还，私告贤曰： 丑奴已败，王师行至此。
现代文：恰巧贼党万俟阿宝战败逃回，私下告诉李贤道： 万俟丑奴已经失败，官军将要到达。
English: It so happened that the bandits fled back to Wanli after the defeat of Bao, and privately told Li Xiandao: "Wanli the ugly bastard has failed, the government army is about to arrive.

古文：阿宝以性命相投，愿能存济。 
现代文：我以性命相投，希望得到帮助。 
English: I put my life on the line, hoping for help.

古文：贤因令阿宝伪为丑奴使，绐道洛等曰： 今已破台军，须与公计事，令阿宝权守原州，公宜速往。 
现代文：李贤乘机让万俟阿宝伪装成万俟丑奴的使者，欺骗万俟道洛等说： 如今已经打败官军，必须与您商议大事，命令我暂时把守原州，您应急速前去。 
English: Li Xian took advantage of the opportunity to disguise Wanxun Abao as an emissary of Wanxun Ugly, and deceived Wanxun Daoluo, saying: Now that the official army has been defeated, I must discuss important matters with you, and order me to temporarily guard the original state. You should go quickly.

古文：道洛等信之，是日便发。
现代文：万俟道洛等人信以为真，当天就出发登程。
English: Many people, such as Dollo, believed it to be true and set out on the same day.

古文：既出而天光至，遂克原州。
现代文：尔朱天光随后赶到，占领原州。
English: Lzhu Tianguang then arrived and occupied Wonju.

古文：道洛乃将麾下六千人奔于牵屯山。
现代文：万俟道洛率领部下六千人逃向牵屯山。
English: Wanxuan Douluo led six thousand of his subordinates to flee to Tutun Mountain.

古文：天光见贤曰： 道洛之出，子之力也。 
现代文：尔朱天光见到李贤，对他说： 万俟道洛出城，是你的功劳。 
English: When Le Zhu Tianguang saw Li Xian, he said to him, "If Du Luo leaves the city, it is your achievement.

古文：贤又率乡人出马千匹以助军，天光大悦。
现代文：李贤又率领乡人牵出一千匹马资助军队，尔朱天光大喜。
English: Li Xian also led the villagers to bring out a thousand horses to support the army, which made Zhu Tianguang very happy.

古文：时原州亢旱，天光以乏水草，乃退舍城东五十里，牧马息兵。
现代文：当时原州大旱，缺乏水草，尔朱天光就退居城东五十里，放牧马匹，休整士卒。
English: At that time, there was a drought in Wonju and a lack of aquatic plants, so Er Zhu Tianguang retreated fifty miles east of the city to graze horses and rest and recuperate.

古文：令都督长孙邪利行原州事，以贤为主簿。
现代文：命令都督长孙邪利代理原州事务，任命李贤为主簿。
English: He ordered the governor Sun Yat-sen to act as the deputy of the original state affairs, and appointed Li Xian as the chief secretary.

古文：道洛复乘虚忽至，时贼党千余人在城中，密为内应，引道洛入城，遂杀邪利。
现代文：万俟道洛乘城内空虚，突然攻来，贼党千余人在城中，暗中策应，把万俟道洛放入城内，杀掉长孙邪利。
English: Wanying Daoluo took advantage of the emptiness in the city and suddenly attacked. More than a thousand thieves were in the city, secretly plotting to put Wanying Daoluo into the city and kill the eldest grandson, Yali.

古文：贤复率乡人殊死拒战，道洛乃退走。
现代文：李贤又率领乡人拼命抵抗，万俟道洛才退去。
English: Li Xian once again led the villagers in a desperate resistance, and it was only when Wan Xuan Daoluo retreated.

古文：又有贼帅达符显围逼州城，昼夜攻战，屡被摧衄。
现代文：又有贼帅达符显围逼州城，日夜进攻，屡被击退。
English: In addition, there were thieves who encircled the state capital, attacked day and night, and were repeatedly repulsed.

古文：贤间道赴雍州，诣天光请援。
现代文：李贤抄小道赶赴雍州，向尔朱天光请求援助。
English: Li Xian followed the trail and rushed to Yongzhou to request assistance from Er Zhu Tianguang.

古文：天光许之，贤乃返。
现代文：尔朱天光答应，李贤返回。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang agreed, and Li Xian returned.

古文：而贼营垒四合，无因入城。
现代文：可是贼军营垒四下包围，没有机会入城。
English: However, the bandits' camp was surrounded on all sides and they had no chance to enter the city.

古文：候日向夕，乃伪负薪，与贼樵采者俱得至城下。
现代文：等到天色将晚，他扮作背柴之人，与贼人中的樵夫一块到达城下。
English: When it was getting late, he disguised himself as a man carrying firewood and arrived at the foot of the city together with the woodcutter, who was one of the thieves.

古文：城中垂布引之，贼众方觉，乃弓弩乱发。射之不中，遂得入城，告以大军将至。
现代文：城上垂下布疋把他们拉上去，这时贼众才认出李贤，乱箭齐射，但未能射中，于是入城，告诉众人大军将至。
English: Cloth curtains were hung over the city to pull them up, and only then did the thieves recognize Li Xian. They fired a volley of arrows, but failed to hit him, so they entered the city and told everyone that a large army was coming.

古文：贼闻之，便即散走。
现代文：贼军听说，当即溃散而逃。
English: When the bandits heard of this, they immediately scattered and fled.

古文：累迁威烈将军、殿中将军、高平令。
现代文：多次升迁，历任威烈将军、殿中将军、高平县令。
English: He was promoted many times, and successively held the positions of General Wei Rong, General Tenzhong, and Gaoping County Commander.

古文：贺拔岳为侯莫陈悦所害，太祖西征。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害后，太祖西征。
English: After He Baturake was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, his great-grandfather went to the West.

古文：贤与其弟远、穆等密应侯莫陈崇。
现代文：李贤与弟弟李远、李穆等人暗中策应侯莫陈崇。
English: Li Xian and his brother Li Yuan, Li Mu and others secretly plotted against Hou Mo Chen Chong.

古文：以功授都督，仍守原州。
现代文：以功授都督，仍然镇守原州。
English: He was awarded the title of governor due to his meritorious service, and continued to defend Wonju.

古文：及大军将至秦州，悦弃城走，太祖令兄子导勒兵追之，以贤为前驱。
现代文：大军将到秦州时，侯莫陈悦弃城逃走。太祖命令兄长之子宇文导追击，以李贤为前锋。
English: When the large army was approaching Qinzhou, Hou Mo, Chen Yue and others abandoned the city and fled. The great-grandfather ordered his elder brother's son, Wu Wenduo, to pursue, with Li Xian as the vanguard.

古文：转战四百余里，至牵屯山及之，悦自刭于阵。
现代文：转战四百余里，到牵屯山时追上，侯莫陈悦在战场上自杀。
English: After fighting for more than four hundred miles, Hou Mo Chen Yue committed suicide on the battlefield.

古文：贤亦被重疮，马中流矢。
现代文：李贤也受重伤，坐骑被乱箭射中。
English: Li Xian was also seriously injured when his horse was hit by a stray arrow.

古文：太祖嘉之，赏奴婢、布帛及杂畜等，授持节、抚军大将军、都督。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他，赏给他奴婢、布帛及各种牲畜，授持节、抚军将军、都督。
English: The great-grandfather praised him, gave him slaves, cloth and all kinds of livestock, and awarded him with festivals, army generals, and governors.

古文：魏孝武西迁，太祖令贤率骑兵迎卫。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁时，太祖命令李贤率骑兵迎护。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, Emperor Taizu ordered Li Xian to lead the cavalry to meet him.

古文：时山东之众，多欲逃归。
现代文：当时太行山以东的士卒，大多打算逃回。
English: At that time, most of the taxi drivers east of Taihang Mountain were planning to flee back.

古文：帝乃令贤以精骑三百为殿，众皆惮之，莫敢亡叛。
现代文：皇帝命令李贤率精锐骑兵三百人殿后，大家都害怕他，没有敢逃跑叛变的。
English: After the emperor ordered Li Xian to lead 300 elite cavalrymen to the palace, everyone was afraid of him and did not dare to run away and rebel.

古文：封下邽县公，邑一千户。
现代文：封下圭阝县公，食邑一千户。
English: A thousand households in the food village of Guiyu County were sealed off.

古文：俄授左都督、安东将军，还镇原州。
现代文：不久，授左都督、安乐将军，回去镇守原州。
English: Soon, he was given the title of Zuo governor and Anle general, and went back to the town to guard the original state.

古文：大统二年，州民豆卢狼害都督大野树儿等，据州城反。
现代文：大统二年，州民豆卢狼杀害都督大野树儿等人，占据州城反叛。
English: In the second year of unification, the state's citizens, the Doulu wolves, killed the governor, Ohno Shu'er, and others, and occupied the state capital in rebellion.

古文：贤乃招集豪杰与之谋曰： 贼起仓卒，便诛二将，其势虽盛，其志已骄。
现代文：李贤于是召集豪杰之士，与他们商量道： 贼众仓猝起事，杀掉两位将军，其势虽大，其心已骄。
English: Li Xian then summoned the heroes and discussed with them, saying, "Thieves have suddenly risen up and killed two generals. Although their power is great, their hearts are already proud.

古文：然其政令莫施，唯以残剥为业。
现代文：他们没有推行政令，一味残忍盘剥。
English: They didn't push for an executive order, they just plundered with cruelty.

古文：夫以羇旅之贼，而驭乌合之众，势自离解。
现代文：以寓居之贼，驾驭临时拼凑的部众，势必自相瓦解。
English: A thief who lives in a house and controls a makeshift group of followers is bound to fall apart.

古文：今若从中击之，贼必丧胆。
现代文：今日如果从城中进攻，贼人必定失魂落魄。
English: Today, if you attack from the middle of the city, the thieves will surely lose their souls.

古文：如吾计者，指日取之。 
现代文：按我这个计划行事，很快就会取胜。 
English: If you follow my plan, you'll win soon.

古文：众皆从焉。
现代文：大家都表示服从。
English: Everyone obeyed.

古文：贤乃率敢死士三百人，分为两道，乘夜鼓噪而出。
现代文：李贤率领勇士三百人，分为两路，乘夜色呐喊杀出。
English: Li Xian led 300 warriors, divided into two groups, and rode out into the night shouting.

古文：群贼大惊，一战而败，狼乃斩关遁走。
现代文：贼众大惊，一战而败，豆卢狼夺关而逃。
English: The thieves were shocked, defeated in one battle, and the Doulu wolf escaped.

古文：贤轻与三骑追斩之。
现代文：李贤轻装骑马，与三名骑兵追上，杀死豆卢狼。
English: Li Xian lightly loaded on horseback, caught up with three cavalrymen and killed a wolf.

古文：迁原州长史，寻行原州事。
现代文：升任原州长史，随即代理原州政务。
English: He was promoted to the post of the former governor history, and then he became the acting governor of the former state.

古文：宁不从，屡战频北。
现代文：四年，莫折后炽勾结贼党，到处抢掠。
English: Four years later, after a lot of hard work, he became an ardent collaborator of the Kuomintang and plundered everywhere.

古文：贤乃率数百骑径掩后炽营，收其妻子、僮隶五百余人，并辎重等。
现代文：李贤率领乡兵，与代理泾州事务的史宁前去讨伐。莫折后炽列好阵势等待。李贤建议分兵进击，史宁不听，屡战屡败。李贤就率领数百名骑兵偷袭莫折后炽营垒，活捉其妻子、孩儿以及仆人奴隶五百余人，缴获其军用物资。
English: Li Xian led the local soldiers and went to fight against Shi Ning, who was in charge of the affairs of Zhangzhou. However, he waited in a good position. Li Xian suggested a detachment of soldiers to attack, but Shi Ning did not listen and repeatedly lost the battle. Li Xian led hundreds of cavalry to raid the camp of Shi Ning, and captured his wife, children and more than five hundred servants and slaves alive, and seized his military supplies.

古文：属后炽与宁战胜，方欲追奔，忽闻贤至，乃弃宁与贤接战。
现代文：当时莫折后炽刚刚击败史宁，正打算追击，突然听说李贤军到，就丢下史宁，与李贤交战。
English: At that time, he had just defeated Shi Ning and was planning to pursue him, when he suddenly heard that Li Xian's army had arrived, he left Shi Ning and fought with Li Xian.

古文：贤手斩十余级，生获六人，贼遂大败。
现代文：李贤亲手斩杀十余人，活捉六人，贼军大败。
English: Li Xian personally killed more than ten people, captured six people alive, and defeated the bandits.

古文：后炽单骑遁走。
现代文：莫折后炽单骑逃走。
English: He then fled on horseback.

古文：师还，以功赏奴婢四十口，杂畜数百头。
现代文：军队返回后，由于战功，赏赐奴婢四十人，各种牲畜数百头。
English: After the return of the troops, forty men and women and several hundred head of livestock were awarded for their war service.

古文：八年，授原州刺史。
现代文：八年，授原州刺史。
English: In the eighth year of unification, the imperial court ordered him to write the history of Wonju.

古文：贤虽少从戎旅，而颇闲政事，抚导乡里，甚得民和。
现代文：李贤虽然自少年起就从事征战，但对政事也十分熟悉，安抚教育乡里，百姓安宁。
English: Although Li Xian has been engaged in war since he was a boy, he is also very familiar with politics, pacifying and educating the countryside, and bringing peace to the people.

古文：十二年，随独孤信征凉州，平之。又抚慰张掖等五郡而还。
现代文：十二年，跟随独孤信平定凉州，又安抚张掖等五郡而返。
English: In the twelfth year, he followed Du Guoxin to subdue Liangzhou and pacify Zhangye and other five counties before returning.

古文：俄而茹茹围逼州城，剽掠居民，驱拥畜牧。
现代文：不久，蠕蠕围逼州城，抢劫百姓，赶走牲畜。
English: Soon, the creeps surrounded the state capital, robbed the people, and drove away the livestock.

古文：贤欲出战，大都督王德犹豫未决。
现代文：李贤想要出战，大都督王德犹豫不决。
English: Li Xian wanted to go to war, but the supreme governor Wang De hesitated.

古文：贤固请，德乃从之。
现代文：李贤再三请求，王德才答应。
English: After repeated requests from Li Xian, Wang Decai agreed.

古文：贤勒兵将出，贼密知之，乃引军退。贤因率骑士追击，斩二百余级，捕虏百余人，获驼马牛羊二万头，财物不可胜计。
现代文：李贤率兵将出，贼人已得到消息，退兵而去，李贤乘机率领骑兵追击，斩首二百余级，活捉一百余人，缴获驼马牛羊二万头，财物不可计算。
English: Li Xian led the soldiers out, the thieves had received the news and retreated, Li Xian took the opportunity to lead the cavalry in pursuit, beheaded more than 200 people, captured more than 100 people alive, captured 20,000 camels, horses, cattle and sheep, and the property was incalculable.

古文：所掠之人，还得安堵。
现代文：被掠去的百姓得以回家安居。
English: The plundered people were able to return home and live in peace.

古文：加授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：加授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In addition, there will be an award ceremony, a grand parade of chariots and horses, and three ceremonies.

古文：十六年，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十六年，升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry and appointed to the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：太祖之奉魏太子西巡也，至原州，遂幸贤第，让齿而坐，行乡饮酒礼焉。
现代文：太祖奉护魏帝西巡时，到达原州，驾幸李贤宅第，按照年龄排坐，行乡饮酒礼。
English: When the great-grandfather Bongu Wei Di was on a tour of the West, he arrived in Wonju, drove to Li Xian's house, sat in line according to his age, and went to the village drinking ceremony.

古文：其后，太祖又至原州，令贤乘辂，备仪服，以诸侯会遇礼相见，然后幸贤第，欢宴终日。
现代文：后来，太祖又到原州，令李贤乘上大车，备下礼服，以诸侯礼相见，然后到李贤家，欢宴终日。
English: Later, the great-grandfather went to Wonju again, ordered Li Xian to get on the carriage, prepared the ceremonial dress, met with the princes, and then went to Li Xian's house for an all-day feast.

古文：凡是亲族，颁赐有差。
现代文：凡是李贤的亲族，都有不同赏赐。
English: All of Li Xian's relatives received different rewards.

古文：魏恭帝元年，进爵河西郡公，增邑通前二千户。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，晋封河西郡公，食邑增至二千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the post of Hexi County Governor, and the number of food villages increased to two thousand.

古文：后以弟子植被诛，贤坐除名。
现代文：后来因为兄弟之子李植被处死，李贤也被免职。
English: Later, he was implicated in the murder of his brother's son, Li Zhi, and was removed from his post.

古文：俄授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：不久，又授为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Not long after, he was also awarded the title of General of Envoys, General of Chariots and Cavalry, and the Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：时荆州群蛮反，开府潘招讨之。
现代文：当时荆州蛮族反叛，开府潘招讨伐。
English: At that time, the Jingzhou barbarians rebelled, and Pan Zha led a crusade.

古文：令贤与贺若敦率骑士七千，别道邀截，击蛮帅文子荣，大破之。
现代文：命令李贤与贺若敦率领骑兵七千人，从另一条道路截击，大败蛮帅文子荣。
English: He ordered Li Xian and He Ruodong to lead seven thousand cavalry to intercept from another road, and defeated the very handsome Wen Zirong.

古文：遂于平州北筑汶阳城以镇之。
现代文：于是在平州以北修筑汶阳城镇守。
English: Therefore, the construction of Wenyang Town Guard was built in the north of Pingzhou.

古文：寻治郢州刺史。
现代文：随即任郢州刺史。
English: He was immediately appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：时以巴、湘初附，诏贤总监诸军，略定，乃迁江夏民二千余户以实安州，并筑甑山城而还。
现代文：当时巴州、湘州归附不久，诏命李贤总监各军，局势基本稳定后，迁移江夏百姓二千余户以充实安州，并修筑甑山城而归。
English: At that time, shortly after the annexation of Bazhou and Hunan, Li Xian, the general director of the army, was ordered to relocate more than two thousand households of Jiangxia people to enrich Anzhou and build Lushan City after the situation was basically stable.

古文：保定二年，诏复贤官爵，仍授瓜州刺史。
现代文：保定二年，诏命恢复李贤原有官职爵位，授瓜州刺史。
English: In the second year of Northern Zhou Baoding, the imperial court issued an edict to restore his official title, and appointed him as the governor of Guazhou.

古文：高祖及齐王宪之在襁褓也，以避忌，不利居宫中。
现代文：高祖和齐王宇文宪还是婴儿时，为了避开猜忌，不宜住在宫中。
English: In order to avoid suspicion, it is not appropriate to live in the palace when Gaozu and Qi Wang Yuwenxian are still babies.

古文：太祖令于贤家处之，六载乃还宫。
现代文：太祖下令让他们二人住在李贤家，六年后才回宫。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the two of them to live with Li Xian, and they only returned to the palace six years later.

古文：因赐贤妻吴姓宇文氏，养为侄女，赐与甚厚。
现代文：赏赐李贤之妻吴氏姓宇文氏，收为侄女，赏赐丰厚。
English: As a result, the imperial court gave Li Xian's wife, a member of the Wu clan, surnamed Uwen, a very rich reward as the queen's niece.

古文：及高祖西巡，幸贤第，诏曰： 朕昔冲幼，爰寓此州。
现代文：后来高祖西巡，驾幸李贤宅第，诏命道： 朕从前年幼，曾居此州。
English: Later, Gao Zu went on a tour of the West, and drove to Li Xian's residence, where he said, "I used to live in this prefecture when I was young.

古文：使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、瓜州诸军事、瓜州刺史贤，斯土良家，勋德兼着，受委居朕，辅导积年。
现代文：使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、瓜州诸军事、瓜州刺史李贤，是州中良家，功勋美德都很出名，接受委托，让朕居此，辅导多年。
English: He is a member of a prominent family in Guazhou, famous for his meritorious deeds and virtues. He accepted a commission to let me stay here and tutor him for many years.

古文：念其规弼，功劳甚茂。
现代文：念其规劝辅正，功劳甚大。
English: Considering his help in persuading me, his contribution is outstanding.

古文：食彼桑椹，尚怀好音，矧兹惠矣，其庸可忘？
现代文：食彼桑椹，尚且希望听到好话，何况如此恩惠，怎能忘记？
English: How can one forget to eat his mulberry and still hope to hear a kind word, not to mention such a favor?

古文：今巡抚居此，不殊代邑，举目依然，益增旧想。
现代文：今日巡行居此，如同代邑，举目依旧，更增往日之怀念。
English: Today, the parade is here, just like the daimyo, the eyes are still raised, and the nostalgia for the past is even greater.

古文：虽无属籍，朕处之若亲。
现代文：虽然不是一家，朕处之如同亲人。
English: Although we are not a family, we treat each other like relatives.

古文：凡厥昆季乃至子侄等，可并豫宴赐。 
现代文：凡是李贤的兄弟以及子侄，都可参加宴会受赏。 
English: All of Li Xian's brothers and nephews can attend the banquet and receive awards.

古文：于是令中侍上士尉迟恺往瓜州，降玺书劳贤，赐衣一袭及被褥，并御所服十三环金带一要、中厩马一匹、金装鞍勒、杂彩五百段、银钱一万。
现代文：于是命令中侍上士尉迟恺前往瓜州，以加盖印记的诏书慰劳李贤，赏赐衣服一件及被褥，另赏皇帝所用十三环金带一条、御马一匹、金饰鞍勒、杂色绸缎五百段、银钱一万。
English: Therefore, he ordered the staff sergeant lieutenant to go to Guazhou to console Li Xian with a stamped edict, award a piece of clothing and bedding, and also award a thirteen-ring gold belt used by the emperor, a horse, a gold saddle, five hundred pieces of mixed-colored silk and silk, and ten thousand silver coins.

古文：赐贤弟申国公穆亦如之。
现代文：赏赐李贤之弟申国公李穆也像这样。
English: The same thing happened to his younger brother, Sheng Guogong Li Mu.

古文：子侄男女中外诸孙三十四人，各赐衣一袭。
现代文：子侄男女中外诸孙共三十四人，各赐衣一件。
English: There are a total of thirty-four male and female nephews and nieces and grandchildren, each of whom was given a piece of clothing.

古文：又拜贤甥厍狄乐为仪同。
现代文：又任命李贤外甥厍狄乐为仪同。
English: He also appointed Li Xian's nephew, Zou Di Le, as his best man.

古文：贤门生昔经侍奉者，二人授大都督，四人授帅都督，六人别将。
现代文：凡曾经亲自侍奉李贤的人，二人授大都督，四人授帅都督，六人授别将。
English: Of those who personally served Li Xian, two were given the title of grand governor, four were given the title of grand marshal, and six were given the title of grand marshal.

古文：奴已免贱者，五人授军主，未免贱者十二人酬替放之。
现代文：凡奴仆中已取得平民身份者，五人授为军主，未取得平民身份者，有十二人赎出放回。
English: Of all the slaves who had been granted civilian status, five were made military commanders, and of those who had not been granted civilian status, twelve were ransomed and released.

古文：四年，王师东讨，朝议以西道空虚，虑羌、浑侵扰，乃授贤使持节、河州总管、三州七防诸军事、河州刺史。
现代文：四年，大军东征，朝廷认为西路空虚，担心羌族、浑族入侵，于是任命李贤为使持节、河州总管、三州七防诸军事、河州刺史。
English: In the fourth year, when the great army was marching eastward, the imperial court thought that the west road was empty, and feared the invasion of the Yi and Hun peoples. Therefore, Li Xian was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the head of Heshou, the military of the seven defenses of the three states, and the historian of Heshou.

古文：河州旧非总管，至是创置焉。
现代文：河州旧无总管，到这时才设置。
English: There was no head office in Hezhou before, and it was only set up at this time.

古文：贤乃大营屯田，以省运漕；多设斥候，以备寇戎。
现代文：李贤于是广泛屯田，节省漕运；多设巡逻，防备敌侵。
English: As a result, Li Xian extensively fortified the fields, saving on transportation by rowing; more patrols were set up to guard against enemy invasion.

古文：于是羌、浑敛迹，不敢向东。
现代文：羌、浑因此而收敛，不敢东犯。
English: As a result,  and 浑 have become more restrained and do not dare to commit crimes.

古文：五年，宕昌寇边，百姓失业，乃于洮州置总管府以镇遏之。
现代文：五年，宕昌侵犯边境，百姓失去家业，于是在洮州设置总管府，用来遏制外敌。
English: In the fifth year, when the Tang and Chang invaded the border, the people lost their family businesses, so the General Administration Office was set up in Zhangzhou to contain the foreign enemy.

古文：遂废河州总管，改授贤洮州总管、七防诸军事，洮州刺史。
现代文：废去河州总管，改授李贤为洮州总管、七防诸军事、洮州刺史。
English: He was abolished as the chief administrator of Hezhou, and Li Xian was re-assigned as the chief administrator of Zhangzhou, Qibao Zhu Military, and Zhangzhou Jian History.

古文：属羌寇石门戍，撤破桥道，以绝援军，贤率千骑御之，前后斩获数百人，贼乃退走。
现代文：这时羌人侵犯石门戍，撤毁桥梁，破坏道路，企图阻断援军，李贤率领一千名骑兵抵抗，先后斩杀、俘虏数百人，贼人才退去。
English: At this time, the barbarians violated the stone gate, demolished the bridge, damaged the road, and attempted to block the reinforcements. Li Xian led a thousand cavalry to resist, killed and captured hundreds of people, and the thieves retreated.

古文：羌复引吐谷浑数千骑，将入西疆。
现代文：羌人又引导吐谷浑数千骑兵，准备侵入西部边境。
English: He also led thousands of cavalry from Tugu to prepare to invade the western border.

古文：贤密知之，又遣兵伏其隘路，复大败之。
现代文：李贤暗中得知，派兵埋伏在要道，再次大败贼军。
English: Li Xian learned surreptitiously that he had sent soldiers to lie in wait on the main road, and once again defeated the rebel army.

古文：虏遂震慑，不敢犯塞。
现代文：敌人震慑，不敢再犯。
English: The enemy was shocked and did not dare to repeat the crime.

古文：俄废洮州总管，还于河州置总管府，复以贤为之。
现代文：不久，废去洮州总管，仍在河州设置总管府，还让李贤担任总管。
English: Soon after, the imperial court abolished the Zhangzhou General Administration and still set up the General Administration Office in Hezhou. Li Xian was still appointed as the General Administration.

古文：高祖思贤旧恩，征拜大将军。
现代文：高祖怀念李贤旧恩，调他入京，授大将军。
English: Gao Zu remembered Li Xian's old favor, transferred him to Beijing, and awarded him the rank of general.

古文：天和四年三月，卒于京师，时年六十八。
现代文：天和四年三月，在京师去世，当年六十八岁。
English: In March of the same year, he died in Beijing at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：高祖亲临，哀动左右。
现代文：高祖亲临致哀，哭声感动左右。
English: Gao Zu came in person to pay his respects, and was moved to tears.

古文：赠使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、泾原秦等十州诸军事、原州刺史。
现代文：追赠使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、泾原秦等十州诸军事、原州刺史。
English: The posthumous gift was sent to the military of ten states, including Jichijisai, the general of pillar country, the grand governor, and the Qin Emperor Qin, and the history of the original state.

古文：谥曰桓。
现代文：谥号为 桓 。
English: 号桓.

古文：子端嗣。
现代文：儿子李端承袭爵位。
English: He was succeeded by his son Ryōgen.

古文：端字永贵，历位开府仪同三司、司会中大夫、中州刺史。
现代文：李端字永贵，历任开府仪同三司、司会中大夫、中州刺史。
English: Li Duan's last name was Yonggui, and his successors were Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Secretary Zhong Dafu, and Zhongzhou Zhishi.

古文：从高祖平齐，于邺城战殁，赠上大将军，追封襄阳公，谥曰果。
现代文：跟随高祖平定齐国，在邺城阵亡，追赠上大将军，追封襄阳公，谥号为 果 。
English: He followed Gao Zu to pacify Qi, died in the battle of Shicheng, was posthumously awarded the title of General, and was posthumously awarded the title of Prince of Xiangyang.

古文：端弟吉，仪同三司。
现代文：李端之弟李吉，任仪同三司。
English: Li Ji, the younger brother of Li Duan, was appointed to the Third Division.

古文：吉弟崇，位至太府中大夫、上柱国、广宗郡公。
现代文：李吉之弟李崇，官至太府中大夫、上柱国，封广宗郡公。
English: Li Ji's younger brother, Li Chong, rose to the rank of Taifu junior doctor, Shangzhu Guo, and Guangzong County official.

古文：崇弟孝轨，开府仪同大将军、升迁县伯。
现代文：李崇之弟李孝轨，任开府仪同大将军，封升迁县伯。
English: Li Chong's younger brother, Li Xiaorong, was appointed the grand marshal of Kaifu and promoted to county magistrate.

古文：孝轨弟询，少历显位。
现代文：李孝轨之弟李询，从少年时就历任高官。
English: Li Xuan, the younger brother of Li Xiaolu, has been a high-ranking official since he was a boy.

古文：大象末，上柱国、陇西郡公。
现代文：大象末年，任上柱国，封陇西郡公。
English: In the last years of the elephant, he was appointed as the pillar of the country, and became the governor of the west county of Shaanxi.

古文：贤弟远，字万岁。
现代文：李远是李贤的弟弟，字万岁。
English: Li Yuan is the younger brother of Li Xian. Long live the characters.

古文：幼有器局，志度恢然。
现代文：自幼就有才识度量，志向宏远。
English: Since childhood, he has been talented and ambitious.

古文：尝与群儿为战斗之戏，指麾部分，便有军阵之法。
现代文：曾与一群儿童玩打仗游戏，他指挥的那部分，隐然有战阵之法。
English: He once played a war game with a group of children, and the part he commanded had a faintly martial feel to it.

古文：郡守见而异之，召使更戏。
现代文：郡守看见很惊奇，让他再玩一次。
English: It was very strange to see the county magistrate, let them do this game again.

古文：群儿惧而散走，远持杖叱之，复为向势，意气雄壮，殆甚于前。
现代文：众儿童害怕而走散，李远持杖喝斥，又摆成刚才的阵势，气势雄壮，比刚才更加可观。
English: The children are scared and scatter. Li Yuan holds a cane and shouts at them. They regroup in the same position as before, more impressive than before.

古文：郡守曰： 此小儿必为将军，非常人也。 
现代文：郡守说： 这孩子必定成为将军，不是平凡的人。 
English: The county governor said, "This child will surely become a general, not an ordinary person.

古文：及长，涉猎书传，略知指趣而已。
现代文：长大后，博览群书，略知旨趣而已。
English: When they grow up, they read a lot of books and only know a little about the world.

古文：魏正光末，天下鼎沸，敕勒贼胡琮侵逼原州，其徒甚盛。
现代文：魏正光末年，天下大乱，束力勒贼胡琮侵逼原州，势力很大。
English: In the last years of Wei Zhengguang, the world was in turmoil, and the bandit Hu Wei invaded and forced the original state, with great power.

古文：远昆季率励乡人，欲图拒守，而众情猜惧，颇有异同。
现代文：李远兄弟率领激励乡人，打算抵抗，可是众人互相猜忌，心中害怕，意见不一。
English: The Li Yuan brothers led the way in encouraging the villagers, intending to resist, but everyone was suspicious of each other, afraid in their hearts, and had different opinions.

古文：远乃按剑而言曰： 顷年以来，皇家多难。
现代文：李远按剑道： 近年以来，皇室多难。贼众乘机，恣逞残暴。
English: Li Yuan presses the kendo: In recent years, the imperial family has been facing many difficulties. Thieves are taking advantage of the situation and are behaving atrociously.

古文：匈党乘机，肆其毒螫。
现代文：天下不治，强徒嚣张。
English: When all else fails, arrogance is the best policy.

古文：王略未振，缓其枭夷。正是忠臣立节之秋，义士建功之日。
现代文：这正是忠臣守节之时，义士建功之日。
English: This is exactly the time of the Loyalist Day, the day of the hero's feats.

古文：丈夫岂可临难苟免，当在死中求生耳。
现代文：大丈夫岂能临危难而偷生？当从死地求生。
English: Can an able-bodied man in danger steal away with his life? He should try to live from the dead.

古文：诸人并世载忠贞，沐浴教义，今若弃同即异，去顺效逆，虽五尺童子，犹或非之，将复何颜以见天下之士。
现代文：各位都是世代忠贞，沐浴教化，如今倘若各执一词，效力逆贼，即使是五尺童子，也都知道不对，又有何面目见天下义士？
English: All of you have been loyal for generations and have been educated. Now, if you all hold to the word, the effectiveness of the traitor, even if you are a five-foot boy, you all know what is wrong, what are the faces of the world's righteous?

古文：有异议者，请以剑斩之！ 
现代文：有不同意者，请允许我用剑斩了他！ 
English: If anyone disagrees, please allow me to behead him with my sword!

古文：于是众皆股栗，莫不听命。
现代文：众人都大腿发抖，没有不服从的。
English: Everyone's legs were shaking, and no one disobeyed.

古文：乃相与盟歃，遂深壁自守。
现代文：于是互相盟誓饮酒，加固防御工事，严加防守。
English: So they swore to each other to drink alcohol, strengthen the fortifications, and strictly defend themselves.

古文：而外无救援，城遂陷。
现代文：但是外无援兵，城池终被攻陷。
English: However, there were no reinforcements from outside, and the castle was eventually captured.

古文：其徒多被杀害，唯远兄弟并为人所匿,得免。
现代文：他的党徒们大多被杀，只有李远兄弟被人藏起来，得以免祸。
English: Most of his followers were killed, but the Li Yuan brothers were able to hide and were not harmed.

古文：远乃言于贤曰： 今逆贼孔炽，屠戮忠良。
现代文：李远对李贤说： 如今反贼猖狂，屠杀忠良。
English: Li Yuan said to Li Xian, "Nowadays, the anti-thieves are rampant, and the slaughter is loyal.

古文：远欲间行入朝，请兵救援。
现代文：我打算从小道入朝，请求援兵。
English: I'm planning to sneak into the Imperial Palace and ask for reinforcements.

古文：兄晦迹和光，可以免祸。
现代文：兄长深自韬晦，可以免祸。
English: The elder brother is deeply self-deprecating, so he can avoid disaster.

古文：内伺衅隙，因变立功。
现代文：从中发现贼人破绽，乘变立功。
English: From this, the thief discovered the flaw and multiplied the change.

古文：若王师西指，得复表里相应，既殉国家之急，且全私室之危。
现代文：如果王师西征，可里外呼应，既救国家之急，又保个人之身。
English: If Wang teaches the West Expedition, it can be echoed inside and outside, both to save the country's urgent need and to protect the individual's body.

古文：岂若窘迫凶威，坐见夷灭！ 
现代文：岂能被贼势所迫，坐以待毙？ 
English: Will it be able to sit back and wait until it is forced to do so?

古文：贤曰： 是吾心也。 
现代文：李贤说： 我也是这样想。 
English: Li Xian said: I think so too.

古文：遂定东行之策。
现代文：于是定下东去的计策。
English: So they decided to head east.

古文：远乃崎岖寇境，得达京师。
现代文：李远在贼境中历经坎坷，终于到达京师。
English: Li Yuan went through a bumpy road in the country of thieves and finally arrived in Beijing.

古文：魏朝嘉之，授武骑常侍。
现代文：魏朝对他嘉奖，授为武骑常侍。
English: The Wei Dynasty gave him a commendation, awarding him the title of Wu Jia Changzhu.

古文：俄转别将，赐帛千匹，并弓刀衣马等。
现代文：随即转任别将，赏赐帛千匹，另有弓刀衣马等物。
English: He was immediately transferred to the position of vice-commander, and was rewarded with a thousand yakitori, a bow, a sword, a horse, and other items.

古文：及尔朱天光西伐，乃配远精兵，使为乡导。
现代文：尔朱天光西征时，分配给李远精锐士卒，让他担任向导。
English: When Zhu Tianguang went to the West, he assigned Li Yuan to the elite soldiers and let him serve as a guide.

古文：天光钦远才望，特相引接，除伏波将军、长城郡守、原州大中正。
现代文：尔朱天光钦佩李远的才识名望，特地举荐，任命他为伏波将军、长城郡守、原州大中正。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang admired Li Yuan's talent and fame, specially recommended him, and appointed him as General of Fubao, Governor of the Great Wall County, and Vice President of Wonju University.

古文：后以应侯莫陈崇功，迁高平郡守。
现代文：后来由于接应侯莫陈崇有功，升高平郡守。
English: Later, he was promoted to the governorship of Ping County due to his success in dealing with Hou Mo Chen Chong.

古文：太祖见远，与语悦之，令居麾下，甚见亲遇。
现代文：太祖见到李远，交谈后很喜欢他，命令他留在身边，待他很亲热。
English: The great-grandfather saw Li Yuan, liked him very much after the conversation, ordered him to stay by his side, and treated him very affectionately.

古文：及魏孝武西迁，授假节、银青光禄大夫、主衣都统，封安定县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁时，授假节、银青光禄大夫、主衣都统，封安定县伯，食邑五百户。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, there were five hundred households in the holiday festival, the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the main garment, the county seat of Fengdian County, and the food villages.

古文：魏文帝嗣位之始，思享遐年，以远字可嘉，令扶帝升殿。
现代文：魏文帝才继位时，思享长寿，认为李远的字很吉利，命令他扶帝上殿。
English: West Wei Emperor Wen had just ascended to the throne, and wanted to stay on the throne for a long time. Since Li Yuan's words were in line with his intentions, he ordered Li Yuan to help Emperor Wen into the palace.

古文：迁使持节、征东大将军，进爵为公，增邑千户，仍领左右。
现代文：升任使持节、征东大将军，晋封公爵，食邑增加一千户，仍兼任近侍。
English: He was promoted to the position of Envoy, General of the Expedition to the East, promoted to the rank of Duke, the number of households increased by a thousand, and he still served as a close attendant.

古文：从征窦泰，复弘农，并有殊勋。
现代文：跟随讨伐窦泰，收复弘农，都立下大功。
English: He made a great contribution to the fight against Dou Tai and the recovery of Hong Nong.

古文：授都督、原州刺史。
现代文：任都督、原州刺史。
English: The court awarded him the title of governor and ordered him to write the history of Wonju.

古文：太祖谓远曰： 孤之有卿，若身体之有手臂之用，岂可暂辍于身。
现代文：太祖对李远说： 我之有你，犹如身体有手臂之用，岂能片刻分离？
English: The great-grandfather said to Li Yuan: I have you, just as the body has the use of the arm, can you separate for a moment?

古文：本州之荣，乃私事耳。
现代文：本州的光荣，原是私事。
English: The glory of our state was originally a private matter.

古文：卿若述职，则孤无所寄怀。 
现代文：你若前去任职，我就无所寄托了。 
English: If you go for the post, I have nothing to rely on.

古文：于是遂令远兄贤代行州事。
现代文：于是命令李远之兄李贤代行州事。
English: So he ordered Li Yuan's brother, Li Xian, to act on his behalf.

古文：沙苑之役，远功居最，除车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵阳平郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：沙苑之战，李远功劳最大，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，晋封阳平郡公，食邑三千户。
English: In the Battle of Sha Yuan, Li Yuan made the greatest contribution. He was awarded the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, and the title of General of Cavalry.

古文：寻从独孤信东略，遂入洛阳。
现代文：不久随独孤信东征，入据洛阳。
English: Soon after, he went to Luoyang with Du Guoxin's eastward expedition.

古文：为东魏将侯景等所围。
现代文：被东魏将领侯景等人包围。
English: It was encircled by the Eastern Wei general Houjing and others.

古文：太祖至，乃解。
现代文：太祖军到，才解了围。
English: It took the arrival of Tai Zu's army to break the siege.

古文：及河桥之战，远与独孤信为右军，不利而退。
现代文：河桥之战时，李远与独孤信为右军，失利而退。
English: In the Battle of Heqiao, Li Yuan and Du Guoxin were the right-wing troops, but they lost and retreated.

古文：除大丞相府司马。
现代文：授大丞相府司马。
English: He was awarded the title of chancellor of the university.

古文：军国机务，远皆参之，畏避权势，若不在己。
现代文：军国机密大事，李远全都参预，畏避权势，似乎与自己无关。
English: In matters of military and state secrets, Li Yuan was always ahead of the game, shunned power, and seemed to have nothing to do with himself.

古文：时河东初复，民情未安，太祖谓远曰： 河东国之要镇，非卿无以抚之。 
现代文：当时河东刚刚收复，人心未安，太祖对李远说： 河东是国家要地，除了你，没有人能去安抚。 
English: At that time, Hedong had just been recovered, and people were not at ease. The great-grandfather said to Li Yuan: Hedong is an important place for the country, and no one can pacify it except you.

古文：乃授河东郡守。
现代文：于是授他为河东郡守。
English: As a result, he was awarded the title of Governor of Hedong County.

古文：远敦奖风俗，劝课农桑，肃遏奸非，兼修守御之备。
现代文：李远整顿风俗，勉励农桑，肃清奸匪，并修整防御工事。
English: Li Yuan rectified customs, encouraged farmers and mulberry growers, purged traitors, and repaired fortifications.

古文：曾未期月，百姓怀之。
现代文：上任不到一个月，百姓就对他表示感激。
English: Less than a month into the job, the people are missing him.

古文：太祖嘉焉，降书劳问。
现代文：太祖嘉许，致信慰问。
English: Great-grandfather commended, sent a letter of condolence.

古文：征为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：征调为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was conscripted as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：魏建东宫，授太子少傅，寻转少师。
现代文：魏国建立东宫，任命他为太子少傅，随即转任太师。
English: Wei established the East Palace, appointed him as the prince's junior tutor, and then transferred him to the position of master.

古文：东魏北豫州刺史高仲密请举州来附。
现代文：东魏北豫州刺史高仲密请求举州归附。
English: East Wei, North Yuzhou and Gao Zhongmi requested the annexation of Yuzhou.

古文：时齐神武屯兵河阳。
现代文：当时齐神武屯兵河阳。
English: At that time, Qishenwu's troops were stationed in Heyang.

古文：太祖以仲密所据辽远，难为应接，诸将皆惮此行。
现代文：太祖由于高仲密距此遥远，难以接应，众将都害怕此行。
English: As Gao Zhongmi is so far away, it is difficult for Taizu to respond, and the generals are afraid of this trip.

古文：远曰： 北豫远在贼境，高欢又屯兵河阳，常理而论，实难救援。
现代文：李远说： 北豫州远在贼境之内，高欢又屯兵河阳，以常理而言，的确很难救援。
English: Li Yuan said: Beiyuzhou is far away in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Gao Huan and his soldiers are stationed in Heyang. According to common sense, it is really difficult to rescue.

古文：但兵务神速，事贵合机。
现代文：但兵贵神速，事贵合乎机遇。
English: But haste makes waste, and opportunity makes waste.

古文：古人有言： 不入兽穴，安得兽子。 
现代文：古人有言： 不入虎穴，安得虎子。 
English: The ancients had a saying: Do not enter the tiger's den, but be a good tiger's cub.

古文：若以奇兵出其不意，事或可济。
现代文：若以奇兵出其不意，事情或许可以成功。
English: If you surprise them with a surprise, things might work out.

古文：脱有利钝，故是兵家之常。
现代文：万一失利，也是兵家常事。
English: If there is an accident, it is also a common thing for soldiers.

古文：如其顾望不行，便无克定之日。 
现代文：如果观望不前，便永无平定之日。 
English: If you wait and hesitate, but do not act, the Eastern Wei Dynasty will not have time to overcome.

古文：太祖喜曰： 李万岁所言，差强人意。 
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 李万岁所说，还勉强合我的心意。 
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "What Li Wan Rong said is still close to my heart.

古文：乃授行台尚书，前驱东出。
现代文：授他为行台尚书，任东行先锋。
English: He then ordered him to go to the Eastern Wei Dynasty as a forward.

古文：太祖率大军继进。
现代文：太祖率大军在后接应。
English: Taizu and his large army followed behind.

古文：远乃潜师而往，拔仲密以归。
现代文：李远率军悄悄前往，保护高仲密返回。
English: Li Yuan sent troops to infiltrate into North Henan Province and brought Gao Zhong back.

古文：仍从太祖战于邙山。
现代文：又随太祖在邙山作战。
English: He also fought with his great-grandfather in Lushan.

古文：时大军不利，远独整所部为殿。
现代文：当时大军失利，只有李远整顿部下断后。
English: At that time, the great army was defeated, only Li Yuan rectified his subordinates.

古文：寻授都督义州弘农等二十一防诸军事。
现代文：随即被任命为都督义州、弘农等二十一防诸军事。
English: He was immediately appointed as the governor of Yizhou, Hongnong and other 21 defense military.

古文：远善绥抚，有干略，守战之备，无不精锐。
现代文：李远善于治理部下，有才干谋略，对于进攻或防守的准备，无不精心锐思。
English: Li Yuan is good at managing subordinates, has the ability to strategize, and is meticulous in preparing for attack or defense.

古文：每厚抚外人，使为间谋，敌中动静，必先知之。
现代文：常常厚待境外之人，使他们成为间谍，敌人内部的动静，必能提前知道。
English: Foreigners are often treated well, so that they become spies, and the internal movements of the enemy must be known in advance.

古文：至有事泄被诛戮者，亦不以为悔。
现代文：那些因事情败露而被处死的间谍，也不因此而后悔。
English: Those spies who were executed as a result of the affair did not regret it.

古文：其得人心如此。尝校猎于莎栅，见石于丛蒲中，以为伏兔，射之而中，镞入寸余。
现代文：曾经在莎栅围猎，望见林木中有一石，误认为是卧在地上的兔子，发箭射中，箭头深入石头一寸有余。
English: Once, during a hunting trip in Shazher, he saw a stone in the forest and mistook it for a rabbit lying on the ground. When he shot an arrow, the arrow penetrated more than an inch into the stone.

古文：就而视之，乃石也。
现代文：走近一看，原来是块石头。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a rock.

古文：太祖闻而异之，赐书曰： 昔李将军广亲有此事，公今复尔，可谓世载其德。
现代文：太祖听说后，感到惊异，写信说： 从前李广将军实有此事，如今你又如此，可算是世代流传的功德。
English: After hearing this, the great-grandfather was surprised and wrote a letter saying: Once upon a time, General Li Guang actually did this, and now you are doing the same, which can be regarded as a merit passed down from generation to generation.

古文：虽熊渠之名，不能独擅其美。 
现代文：即使像熊渠那样的善射者，也不能独占美名。 
English: Even a good archer like Xiong Qu can't monopolize fame.

古文：东魏将段孝先率步骑二万趋宜阳，以送粮为名，然实有窥窬之意。
现代文：东魏将领段孝先率领步兵、骑兵二万人向宜阳推进，名为送粮，而实有伺机偷袭之意。
English: Eastern Wei general Duan Xiaoqian led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to push forward to Yiyang. It was called sending grain, but it really meant waiting for an opportunity to make a surprise attack.

古文：远密知其计，遣兵袭破之，获其辎重器械。
现代文：李远悄悄地了解了他的计谋，派兵袭击，将其打败，缴获其军用物资、兵器等。
English: Li Yuan quietly learned of his scheme, sent troops to attack, defeated him, and seized his military supplies, weapons, etc.

古文：孝先遁走。
现代文：段孝先逃走。
English: Duan Xiao fled first.

古文：太祖乃赐所乘马及金带床帐衣被等，并杂彩二千匹，拜大将军。
现代文：太祖就把自己的坐骑赏赐给李远，还赏赐有金带、床、衣被等物，另有杂色绸缎二千匹，任命他为大将军。
English: The great-grandfather rewarded Li Yuan with his horse, a gold belt, a bed, a quilt, and other items, as well as two thousand mixed-colored silks and satins, and appointed him general.

古文：顷之，除尚书左仆射。
现代文：不久，授尚书左仆射。
English: Soon after, Zushang Shushi left the palace.

古文：远白太祖曰： 远，秦陇匹夫，才艺俱尔。
现代文：李远对太祖说： 我是秦陇的一个普通人，说不上有什么才能技艺。
English: Li Yuan said to Taizu: I am an ordinary person in Qin Hui, I can't say what talents and skills I have.

古文：平生念望，不过一郡守耳。
现代文：生平愿望，不过是当个郡守罢了。
English: His life's ambition is nothing more than to become a county governor.

古文：遭逢际会，得奉圣明。
现代文：幸逢良机，得以侍奉圣明。
English: I was lucky enough to have the opportunity to serve Shomei.

古文：主贵臣迁，以至于此。
现代文：君王显贵而臣子升迁，以致于到今天。
English: Monarchs were distinguished and courtiers were promoted, so much so that it continues to this day.

古文：今位居上列，爵迈通侯，受委方面，生杀在手。
现代文：如今我位居高官，爵列上等，受委一方，生杀在手。
English: Now I am a high-ranking official, a peer of the first rank, a member of the committee, and I have a life and death in my hands.

古文：非直荣宠一时，亦足光华身世。
现代文：不仅荣贵一时，也足可光耀身世。
English: Not only for a moment of glory, but also to shine in the world.

古文：但尚书仆射，任居端揆，今以赐授，适所以重其罪责。
现代文：但尚书仆射，为尚书省长官，今日授我，恰恰是加重我的罪责。
English: But the promotion of Shang Shuxu to the post of governor of Shang Shuxu Province, which was conferred on me today, has actually increased my culpability.

古文：明公若欲全之，乞寝此授。 
现代文：您如果想要成全我，乞求您不要授我此职。 
English: If you want to make me perfect, I beg you not to give me this post.

古文：太祖曰： 公勋德兼美，朝廷钦属，选众而举，何足为辞。
现代文：太祖说： 您功德俱高，朝廷倚重，从众人中举荐，又有什么可以推辞？
English: The great-grandfather said: Your merits are all high, the imperial court relies on you, you are recommended by many people, what can you refuse?

古文：太祖又以第十一子达令远子之，即代王也。
现代文：况且我与你，犹如骨肉，难道会允许你因官职而退让，违背我的期望？ 李远没有办法，才接受任命。
English: Besides, you and I are like flesh and blood, would I allow you to compromise your official position and go against my expectations? Li had no choice but to accept the appointment.

古文：其见亲待如此。时太祖嫡嗣未建，明帝居长，已有成德；孝闵处嫡，年尚幼冲。
现代文：太祖又把第十一子宇文达交给李远，让他当儿子抚养，这就是代王。当时太祖尚未立世子，明帝年长，已表现出成人应具的美德。孝闵帝是嫡生，年纪还小。
English: The great-grandfather also gave the eleventh son, Uwenda, to Li Yuan to raise him as a son, which was the acting king. At that time, the great-grandfather had not yet had a son, and Emperor Ming was older and had already demonstrated the virtues that an adult should have. Emperor Xiaozhun was the eldest son and was still young.

古文：乃召群公谓之曰： 孤欲立子以嫡，恐大司马有疑。 
现代文：于是召集群公说： 我打算把嫡子立为世子，担心大司马猜疑。 
English: Therefore, he summoned Qun Gong and said, "I plan to make my legitimate son the heir, but I'm worried about his suspicion.

古文：大司马即独孤信，明帝敬后父也。
现代文：大司马就是独孤信，是明帝敬后的父亲。
English: Daisima was the father of Emperor Ming's empress.

古文：众皆默，未有言者,远曰： 夫立子以嫡不以长，礼经明义。
现代文：众人都不作声，没有一个说话。李远说： 立世子凭嫡生而不凭长幼，礼制上说得明明白白。
English: Everyone was silent, no one spoke. Li Yuan said, "If you want to establish a lineage, you should choose the eldest son, not the eldest son. The etiquette is very clear.

古文：略阳公为世子，公何所疑。
现代文：略阳公为世子，您又有什么怀疑？
English: Xiao Yang Gong is the son of the world, what doubts do you have?

古文：若以信为嫌，请即斩信。 
现代文：如果认为独孤信不满意，请允许我立即杀掉他。 
English: If you think that solitude is not satisfactory, allow me to kill him immediately.

古文：便拔刀而起。
现代文：说着便拔刀而起。
English: Saying this, he drew his knife and started to fight.

古文：太祖亦起曰： 何事至此！ 
现代文：太祖也起身说： 何致于这样！ 
English: The great-grandfather also stood up and said: "Why is this happening?

古文：信又自陈说,远乃止。
现代文：独孤信又陈述自己的道理，李远才不再说什么。
English: Li Yuan only stopped saying anything after he had stated his own truth.

古文：于是群公并从远议。
现代文：于是众人都赞成李远的意见。
English: As a result, everyone agreed with Li Yuan's opinion.

古文：出外拜谢信曰： 临大事，不得不尔。 
现代文：李远走到门外，向独孤信道歉说： 面临大事，不得不这样。 
English: Li Yuan walked out of the door and apologized to Du Guoxin, saying, "Faced with a big event, I have to do this.

古文：信亦谢远曰： 今日赖公，决此大议。 
现代文：独孤信也感谢李远道： 今日全仗您，才决定此等大事。 
English: Du Guoxin also thanked Li Yuandao: "It was you who made all the decisions today.

古文：六官建，授小司寇。
现代文：建立六官后，授小司寇。
English: The six official system was implemented, and the imperial court ordered Li Yuan to become a minor official.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进位柱国大将军，邑千户。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，升任柱国大将军，食邑一千户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne and was promoted to the general of the pillar country, and a thousand households in the county were affected.

古文：复镇弘农。
现代文：仍然镇守弘农。
English: He is still the town guard of Hongnong.

古文：远子植，在太祖时已为相府司录参军，掌朝政。
现代文：李远之子李植，在太祖时已经担任相府司录参军，掌管朝政。
English: Li Yuan's son, Li Zhi, had already served as the secretary of the prefectural government, joined the army, and was in charge of court politics at the time of the great-grandfather.

古文：谋颇漏泄，护知之，乃出植为梁州刺史。
现代文：晋国公宇文护掌权后，李植担心不被重用，于是密谋杀掉宇文护。计谋泄露，宇文护得知，派李植出任梁州刺史。
English: After Uwenguo, the prince of Jin, took power, Li Zhi was worried that he would not be reused, so he plotted to murder Uwenguo. The plot was leaked, and Uwenguo learned that Li Zhi was sent to Liangzhou to assassinate him.

古文：寻而废帝，召远及植还朝。
现代文：随即废去皇帝，召李远、李植回朝。
English: Soon after, Uwen Rong went to the Emperor Xiaozhun and summoned Li Yuan and Li Zhi and their sons to meet him.

古文：远恐有变，沉吟久之，乃曰： 大丈夫宁为忠鬼，安能作叛臣乎！ 
现代文：李远担心发生变故，沉思很久，说道： 大丈夫宁可为忠鬼，怎能当叛臣！ 
English: Li Yuan worried about the change of fortune and pondered for a long time, saying: "It's okay, I'd rather be a loyal ghost, how can I be a traitor!"

古文：遂就征。
现代文：决定应召。
English: He decided to accept the call-up.

古文：既至京师，护以远功名素重，犹欲全宥之。
现代文：到京师后，宇文护由于李远素来功大而名高，还想保全他。
English: After arriving in Beijing, Uwen Guo wanted to protect Li Yuan, who was famous for his great achievements.

古文：乃引与相见，谓之曰： 公儿遂有异谋，非止屠戮护身，乃是倾危宗社。
现代文：于是引见李远，对他说： 您的儿子有反叛的图谋，不仅要杀我一个人，而且要颠覆国家。
English: So he brought in Li Yuan and said to him, "Your son is plotting to rebel, not only to kill me, but also to overthrow the state.

古文：叛臣贼子，理宜同疾，公可早为之所。 
现代文：叛臣贼子，理应共同仇恨，您可以及早处理。 
English: Traitors and thieves deserve our common hatred. You can deal with them as soon as possible.

古文：乃以植付远。
现代文：就把李植交给李远。
English: and handed over Li Zhe to him.

古文：远素钟爱于植，植又口辩，乃云初无此谋。
现代文：李远向来钟爱李植，李植又能言善辩，说当初并没有这种打算。
English: Li Yuan has always loved Li Zhi, and Li Zhi can speak well, saying that he did not have such an intention at the beginning.

古文：远谓为信然。
现代文：李远信以为真。
English: Li Yuanxin thought it was true.

古文：诘朝，将植谒护，护谓植已死，乃曰： 阳平公何意乃自来也？ 
现代文：第二天早晨，带李植去见宇文护，宇文护以为李植已死，就说： 阳平公为什么自己前来？ 
English: The next morning, he took Li Zhi to see Yu Wen Rong. Yu Wen Rong thought Li Zhi was dead, so he said, "Why did Yang Ping Gong come by himself?

古文：左右云： 植亦在门外。 
现代文：身边的人说： 李植也在门外。 
English: People close to him say: Li Zhi is also outside the door.

古文：护大怒曰： 阳平公不信我矣！ 
现代文：宇文护大怒道： 阳平公不相信我了！ 
English: Yu Wengu was extremely angry and said, "Yang Ping Gong doesn't believe me!

古文：乃召入，仍命远同坐，令帝与植相质于远前。
现代文：于是召他们入内，仍然让李远与自己一同坐下，命令皇帝与李植在李远面前对质。
English: So he called them inside, still letting Li Yuan sit down with him, and ordered the emperor to confront Li Zhi in front of Li Yuan.

古文：植辞穷，谓帝曰： 本为此谋，欲安社稷，利至尊耳。今日至此，何事云云。 
现代文：李植说不出话来，对皇帝说： 这个计谋，本来是打算安定国家，对陛下有利。今日至此，还说什么！ 
English: Li Zhi was speechless and said to the emperor: "This scheme was originally intended to stabilize the country and benefit Your Majesty. What else can I say today!

古文：远闻之，自投于床曰： 若尔，诚合万死。 
现代文：李远听说，匐匍在胡床前说： 如果这样，臣该万死。 
English: Li Yuan heard that Yao said in front of Hu's bed: "If this is the case, the minister deserves to die."

古文：于是护乃害植，并逼远令自杀。
现代文：宇文护于是杀死李植，并威逼李远自杀。
English: Uwen Guo then killed Li Zhi and forced Li Yuan to commit suicide.

古文：时年五十一。
现代文：当年五十一岁。
English: He was fifty-one years old.

古文：植弟叔谐、叔谦、叔让亦死。
现代文：李植之弟李叔谐、李叔谦、李叔让也被处死。
English: Li Zhi's younger brothers, Li Shujun, Li Shuqian and Li Shujang, were also executed.

古文：余并以年幼得免。
现代文：其余的由于年幼得到赦免。
English: The rest were pardoned because they were minors.

古文：建德元年，晋公护诛，乃诏曰： 故使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、阳平郡开国公远，早蒙驱任，夙着勋绩，内参帷幄，外属藩维。
现代文：建德元年，晋公宇文护被处死，于是下诏道： 故使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、阳平郡开国公李远，早蒙重任，功勋卓著，内参军机，外安属国。
English: In the first year of the Jiande era, Jin Gong Uwenguo was put to death, so he issued the following edict: Therefore, the envoy Jichijie, the general of the pillar country, the grand governor, the founding father of Yangping County, Li Yuan, was given important responsibilities early, distinguished himself, joined the army at home, and was subordinate to the country at home.

古文：竭诚王室，乃罹横祸。
现代文：尽忠王室，竟遭横祸。
English: He was loyal to the royal family, but suffered a misfortune.

古文：言念贞良，追增伤悼。
现代文：怀念忠良，愈增伤感。
English: As I miss Tadayoshi, I feel more and more sad.

古文：宜加荣宠，用彰忠节。 
现代文：宜加荣宠，以彰忠节。 
English: Yiga Rongpiao, in recognition of the Loyalty Day.

古文：赠本官，加陕熊等十五州诸军事、陕州刺史。
现代文：追赠原任官职，加陕熊等十五州诸军事、陕州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded his former official position, and was added to the military of 15 states, such as Shaanxi Xiong, and the history of Shaanxi.

古文：谥曰忠。
现代文：谥号为 忠 。
English: His nickname is Zhong.

古文：隋开皇初，追赠上柱国、黎国公，邑三千户，改谥曰怀。
现代文：隋开皇初年，追赠上柱国、黎国公，食邑三千户，谥号改为 怀 。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty's reign, Shangzhu Guo and Li Guo Guo were posthumously awarded to 3,000 households in Zhucheng, and the family name was changed to Huai.

古文：植及诸弟，并加赠谥。
现代文：李植及其弟弟们，同时都予以追赠，并加谥号。
English: At the same time, Li Zhi and his brothers were given posthumous awards and given posthumous names.

