古文：◎武宗
现代文：武宗
English: Buzong

古文：武宗承天达道英肃睿哲昭德显功弘文思孝毅皇帝，讳厚照，孝宗长子也。
现代文：武宗承天达道英肃睿哲昭德显功弘文思孝毅皇帝，名叫朱厚照，孝宗长子。
English: Emperor Wu Zong, named Zhu Houzhao, the eldest son of Emperor Xiaozong, was the inheritor of Emperor Wu Zong.

古文：母孝康敬皇后。
现代文：其母孝康敬皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Takayasu.

古文：弘治五年，立为皇太子。
现代文：弘治五年，立为皇太子。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Kōji, he became crown prince.

古文：性聪颖，好骑射。
现代文：厚照天性聪颖，好骑马射箭。
English: He is naturally intelligent and good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：十八年五月，孝宗崩。
现代文：弘治十八年五月，孝宗死。
English: In May of the 18th year of the Konji era, Takamune died.

古文：壬寅，即皇帝位。
现代文：十八日，朱厚照即皇帝位。
English: On the 18th, Zhu Houzhao became emperor.

古文：以明年为正德元年，大赦天下，除弘治十六年以前逋赋。
现代文：以明年为正德元年，大赦天下。免除弘治十六年以前拖欠赋税。
English: The next year will be the first year of Zhengde, and the country will be amnestied. The tax arrears before the 16th year of Hongzhi will be exempted.

古文：戊申，小王子犯宣府，总兵官张俊败绩。
现代文：二十四日，小王子侵犯宣府，总兵官张俊溃败。
English: On the 24th, the little prince invaded Xuanfu, and the general officer Zhang Jun was defeated.

古文：庚戌，太监苗逵监督军务，保国公朱晖为征虏将军，充总兵官，右都御史史琳提督军务，御之。
现代文：二十六日，太监苗逵监督军务，保国公朱晖为征虏将军，兼任总兵官，右都御史史琳提督军务，抗击小王子。
English: On the 26th, Miao Wei, the eunuch, supervised military affairs, and Zhu Xi, the prince of the state of Bao Guo, became the conscript general and also served as the chief military officer. Shilin, the governor of the right capital, was in charge of military affairs and fought against the little prince.

古文：秋八月甲寅，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
现代文：八月二日，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: On August 2, Her Majesty the Empress Dowager became the Grand Empress Dowager, and the Empress became the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙子，召朱晖等还。
现代文：二十四日，召朱晖等回师。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Xi and others were called back.

古文：九月甲午，南京地震。
现代文：九月十三日，南京地震。
English: On September 13, the Nanjing earthquake occurred.

古文：丁酉，振陕西饥。
现代文：十六日，赈济陕西饥荒。
English: On the 16th, famine struck Shaanxi Province.

古文：冬十月丙辰，小王子犯甘肃。
现代文：十月五日，小王子侵犯甘肃。
English: On October 5, the Little Prince invaded Gansu.

古文：庚午，葬敬皇帝于泰陵。
现代文：十九日，葬孝皇帝于泰陵。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Xiaozhong was buried in Tai Ling.

古文：十一月甲申，御文华殿日讲。
现代文：十一月三日，到文华殿听讲经论史。
English: On November 3rd, I went to the Wenhua Hall to listen to a lecture on the history of scripture.

古文：是年，占城、安南入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、安南入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Zhancheng and Annan paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：正德元年春正月乙酉，享太庙。
现代文：正德元年正月五日，祭享太庙。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the first year of Zhengde, the celebration of the Great Temple began.

古文：己丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：九日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月壬子，御经筵。
现代文：二月二日，御经筵听讲经论史。
English: On February 2nd, His Eminence listened to a lecture on the history of scripture.

古文：乙丑，耕耤田。
现代文：十四日，耕种謖田。
English: On the 14th, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：三月甲申，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：三月四日，祭奠先师孔子。
English: On March 4th, a memorial service was held for Confucius.

古文：夏五月丙申，减苏、杭织造岁币。
现代文：五月十七日，减苏、杭织造岁币。
English: On May 17th, the New Year's coins were minted.

古文：六月辛酉，禁吏民奢靡。
现代文：六月十三日，禁止官吏奢侈。
English: On June 13, officials were banned from extravagant spending.

古文：免陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：免陕西受灾税粮。
English: Shaanxi was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：是日，大风雨坏郊坛兽瓦。
现代文：当天，大风雨震坏郊坛兽瓦。
English: On the same day, heavy wind and rain caused damage to the suburb's animal roof tiles.

古文：庚午，谕群臣修省。
现代文：二十二日，告诉群臣修身反省。
English: On the 22nd, he told his courtiers to mend their ways and reflect.

古文：秋八月乙卯，复遣内官南京织造。戊午，立皇后夏氏。
现代文：八月八日，派内官为南京织造。十一日，立皇后夏氏。
English: On August 8th, the imperial envoy was sent to Nanjing, and on the 11th, Empress Xia was established.

古文：冬十月丁巳，户部尚书韩文帅廷臣请诛乱政内臣马永成等八人，大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁主之。
现代文：十月十二日，户部尚书韩文率廷臣请求诛天乱政内臣马永成等八人，大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁支持此议。
English: On October 12th, the head of the household, Shangshu Hanwen, led by the courtier, requested eight people, including the political vassal, Ma Yongcheng, to support the motion, and the university scholars Liu Jian, Li Dongyang, and Xie Qian supported the motion.

古文：戊午，韩文等再请，不听。
现代文：十三日，韩文等再次请求，武宗不听。
English: On the 13th, Hanwen and others made another request, but Buson did not listen.

古文：以刘瑾掌司礼监，丘聚、谷大用提督东、西厂，张永督十二团营兼神机营，魏彬督三千营，各据要地。
现代文：用刘瑾掌管司礼监，丘聚、谷大用提督东、西厂，张永督十二团营兼神机营，魏彬督三千营，各占据要地。
English: Liu Wei was put in charge of the ceremonial supervisor, Qiu Ju and Gu Datai were put in charge of the east and west factories, Zhang Yongdu was in charge of the 12th battalion and the magic machine battalion, and Wei Bindu was in charge of the 3,000th battalion, each occupying an important place.

古文：刘健、李东阳、谢迁乞去，健、迁是日致仕。
现代文：刘健、李东阳、谢迁请求辞职，刘健、谢迁当天就辞官退职。
English: Liu Jian, Li Dongyang and Xie Qian requested to resign. Liu Jian and Xie Qian resigned on the same day.

古文：己未，东阳复乞去，不允。
现代文：十四日，李东阳又请求辞职，武宗不许。
English: On the 14th, Li Dongyang also requested to resign, but Wu Zong did not allow it.

古文：壬戌，吏部尚书焦芳兼文渊阁大学士，吏部侍郎王鏊兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：十七日，吏部尚书焦芳兼文渊阁大学士，吏部侍郎王鏊兼翰林学士。二十三日，停止每天讲授。
English: On the 17th, Jiao Fang and Wen Yuan Ge University of the Ministry of Personnel, and Wang Qi and Hanlin of the Ministry of Personnel, stopped teaching every day on the 23rd.

古文：十一月甲辰，罢韩文。
现代文：十一月二十九日，罢免韩文。
English: On November 29th, Hanwen was removed from office.

古文：十二月丁巳，命锦衣卫官点阅给事中。
现代文：十二月十三日，命锦衣卫官检阅给事中。
English: On December 13th, the life jackets were inspected by the guards.

古文：癸酉，除曲阜孔氏田赋。
现代文：二十九日，免除曲阜孔氏田赋。
English: On the 29th, it exempted Qufu Kongshi Tianfu.

古文：是年，哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Hami and Us went into hiding to pay tribute to the court.

古文：二年春正月乙亥朔，日有食之。乙酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德二年正月一日，有日食。十一日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Zhengde, there was a solar eclipse. On the 11th day, the grand festival heaven and earth was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：闰月庚戌，杖给事中艾洪、吕翀、刘蒨及南京给事中戴铣、御史薄彦徽等二十一人于阙下。
现代文：闰正月初六，杖给事中艾洪、吕羽中、刘及南京给事中戴铣、御史薄彦徽等二十一人于宫前阶下。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the leap year, Ai Hong, Lü Yu Zhong, Liu and Nanjing were given the scepter, and twenty-one people, including Dai Xuan and Mishi Bo Yanhui, were given the imperial scepter.

古文：二月戊戌，杖御史王良臣于午门，御史王时中荷校于都察院。
现代文：二月二十四日，杖御史王良臣于午门，御史王时中在都察院受刑。
English: On February 24th, Stick Mishi Wang Ryoshin was arrested at the gate, and Mishi Wang Shizhong was imprisoned at the Duza Academy.

古文：三月辛未，以大学士刘健、谢迁，尚书韩文、杨守随、张敷华、林瀚五十三人党比，宣戒群臣。
现代文：三月二十八日，因大学士刘健、谢迁，尚书韩文、杨守随、张敷华、林瀚等五十三人拉帮结派，宣布告诫群臣。
English: On March 28, it was announced that 53 people, including university scholars Liu Jian, Xie Qian, Shangshu Hanwen, Yang Shouzhu, Zhang Jihua, and Lin Han, had formed a gang and warned the ministers.

古文：是月，敕各镇守太监预刑名政事。
现代文：这月，命令各镇守太监参与刑狱政事。
English: This month, he ordered all the town eunuchs to participate in the administration of the prison.

古文：夏五月戊午，度僧道四万人。
现代文：五月十六日，使僧道四万人离俗。
English: On May 16th, 40,000 people were released from the Buddhist priesthood.

古文：己巳，复宁王宸濠护卫。
现代文：二十七日，恢复宁王宸濠护卫。
English: On the 27th, the Ningwang raft escort resumed.

古文：六月甲戌，孝宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：六月二日，孝宗神牌位附祭于太庙。
English: On June 2nd, the festival of the Plaque of the God of Filial Piety was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊寅，罢修边垣，输其费于京师。
现代文：六日，停修边墙，将修边墙费用转入京师。
English: On the 6th, the repair of the border wall was suspended, and the cost of repairing the border wall was transferred to the Beijing Division.

古文：秋八月丙戌，作豹房。
现代文：八月十五日，修建豹房。
English: On August 15th, the Leopard Room was built.

古文：冬十月甲申，逮各边巡抚都御史及管粮郎中下狱。
现代文：十月十四日，逮捕各边巡抚都御史及管粮郎中下狱。
English: On October 14th, the provincial governors of each side, Miyoshi and Kanehiro, were arrested and sent to prison.

古文：丙戌，南京户部尚书杨廷和为文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十六日，南京户部尚书杨廷和为文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 16th, Yang Tinghe, a member of the Nanjing Household Department and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, participated in important affairs.

古文：十二月壬辰，开浙江、福建、四川银矿。
现代文：十二月二十三日，开浙江、四川、福建银矿。
English: On December 23, silver mines were opened in Zhejiang, Sichuan and Fujian.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月丁未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德三年正月九日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Zhengde, the grand festival took place in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：辛亥，大计外吏，中旨罢翰林学士吴俨、御史杨南金。
现代文：十三日，全面登记外官，中途命令罢免翰林学士吴俨、御史杨南金。
English: On the 13th, the foreign minister was fully registered, and the order to dismiss Hanlin Baccalaureate Wu Hao and Goshi Yang Nanjin came midway.

古文：二月己巳，令京官告假违限及病满一年者皆致仕。
现代文：二月一日，下令凡是在京官员休假超期及病满一年的全部退休。
English: On February 1, he ordered the retirement of all officials in Beijing who had overstayed their leave or had been ill for more than a year.

古文：三月乙卯，赐吕柟等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐吕木冉等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 18th, there are differences in the number and origin of the winners such as Lv Mullan.

古文：夏四月乙亥，军民纳银，得授都指挥佥事以下官。
现代文：四月八日，军民上交银两，授予都指挥佥事以下官职。
English: On April 8th, the military and the people handed over the silver and the gold and conferred the official positions below the commander of the capital.

古文：六月壬辰，得匿名文书于御道，跪群臣奉天门外诘之。
现代文：六月二十六日，途中得到匿名文书，命群臣跪于奉天门追查。
English: On June 26, he received an anonymous document on the way and ordered his ministers to kneel at the Gate of Heaven to investigate.

古文：下三百余人于锦衣卫狱，寻释之。
现代文：下三百余人于锦衣卫狱，不久释放。
English: More than three hundred people were detained in Jinbei Prison, and were soon released.

古文：秋七月壬子，命天下选乐工送京师。
现代文：七月十六日，命天下推选乐工送到京师。
English: On July 16th, it was ordered to select musicians from all over the world and send them to Beijing.

古文：八月辛巳，立内厂，刘瑾领之。
现代文：八月十六日，设内厂，由刘瑾领导。
English: On August 16th, the internal factory was set up, led by Liu Wei.

古文：庚寅，下韩文锦衣卫狱，罚输米千石于大同。
现代文：二十五日，下韩文于锦衣卫狱。责罚他运米一千石去大同。
English: On the 25th, Hanwen was sent to Jinbei Prison. He was ordered to transport 1,000 kilos of rice to Datong.

古文：是月，山东盗起。
现代文：这月，山东盗贼大起。
English: This month, Shandong thieves are on the rise.

古文：九月癸卯，削致仕尚书雍泰、马文升、许进、刘大夏籍。
现代文：九月八日，削除已辞官退职的尚书雍泰、马文升、许进、刘大夏户籍。
English: On September 8, the household registrations of Shang Shuyongtai, Ma Wensheng, Xu Jin and Liu Daxia, who had resigned from their posts, were deleted.

古文：辛酉，逮刘大夏下狱，戍肃州。
现代文：二十六日，逮捕刘大夏下狱，戍边肃州。
English: On the 26th, Liu Daxia was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：癸亥，振南京饥。
现代文：二十八日，赈救南畿饥荒。
English: On the 28th, the famine in Nanki was averted.

古文：冬十月辛未，南京工部侍郎毕亨振湖广、河南饥。
现代文：十月七日，南京工部侍郎毕亨赈济湖广、河南饥荒。
English: On October 7th, Bi Heng, a chamberlain of the Nanjing Engineering Department, wrote about the famine in Jiguang and Henan Province.

古文：十一月乙未，振凤阳诸府饥。
现代文：十一月十一日，赈济凤阳各府饥荒。
English: On November 11, famine broke out in all prefectures of Fengyang.

古文：是年，安南、哈密、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，安南、哈密、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Hami, Samarkand and Uss paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：四年春正月丙午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德四年正月十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Zhengde, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：二月丙戌，削刘健、谢迁籍。
现代文：二月二十四日，削除刘健、谢迁官籍。
English: On February 24, Liu Jian and Xie Qian were removed from the civil service.

古文：三月甲辰，振浙江饥。
现代文：三月十二日，赈济浙江饥荒。
English: On March 12, famine broke out in Zhejiang Province.

古文：己酉，吏部侍郎张彩请不时考察京官，从之。
现代文：十七日，吏部侍郎张纟采请求不定期考察在京官员，武宗采纳了他的建议。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Jiecai, an attendant of the cadre department, requested an irregular inspection of officials in Beijing, and Emperor Wuzong accepted his suggestion.

古文：夏四月乙亥，王鏊致仕。
现代文：四月十四日，王鏊退休。
English: On April 14, Wang Xi retired.

古文：六月戊子，吏部尚书刘宇兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：六月二十八日，吏部尚书刘宇兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On June 28th, Liu Yuqian, the Secretary of the Personnel Department and a scholar of Wenyuqiao University, participated in important affairs.

古文：秋八月辛酉，遣使核各边屯田。
现代文：八月一日，遣使核实天下各边境屯田。
English: On August 1, envoys were sent to verify the border garrisons around the world.

古文：是月，义州军变。
现代文：这月，义州发生兵变。
English: This month, there was a mutiny in Yizhou.

古文：闰九月，小王子犯延绥，围总兵官吴江于陇州城。
现代文：闰九月，小王子侵犯延绥，包围总兵官吴江所在地一一一陇州城。
English: In September, the Little Prince invaded Yan'an and besieged the city of Ganzhou, where the commander-in-chief, Wu Jiang, was located.

古文：冬十一月甲子，犯花马池，总制尚书才宽战死。
现代文：十一月六日，侵犯花马池，总制尚书才宽战死。
English: On November 6, General Shang Shucai was killed in action after invading Huama Pond.

古文：十二月庚戌，夺刘健、谢迁等六百七十五人诰敕。
现代文：十二月二十三日，削夺刘健、谢迁等六百七十五人授官诰命。
English: On December 23rd, Liu Jian, Xie Qian and other 675 officials were executed.

古文：是年，两广、江西、湖广、陕西、四川并盗起。
现代文：这年，两广、江西、湖广、陕西、四川盗贼并起。
English: In this year, the two Guangxi, Jiangxi, Hunan, Shaanxi and Sichuan thieves started simultaneously.

古文：琉球、安南、哈密、土鲁番、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：琉球、安南、哈密、土鲁番、撒马儿罕来朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Annan, Hami, Turuban, Samal rarely came to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月丁卯，大祀天地于南郊。庚辰，籍故尚书秦纮家。
现代文：正德五年正月十日，在京城南郊大祭天地。二十三日，查抄原尚书秦家。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of Zhengde's fifth year, there was a grand festival in the southern suburb of Beijing. On the 23rd day, the original Shangshu Qin family was inspected.

古文：二月癸巳，兵部尚书曹元为吏部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二月七日，兵部尚书曹元为吏部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事物。
English: On February 7th, Cao Yuan, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, became a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, participating in important events.

古文：三月辛未，祷雨，释狱囚，免正德三年逋赋。
现代文：三月十六日，祈祷下雨，释放囚犯，免正德三年欠交赋税。
English: On March 16th, he prayed for rain, released prisoners, and exempted Zhengde from three years of tax arrears.

古文：乙酉，江西贼炽，右都御史王哲巡视南、赣，刑部尚书洪钟总制川、陕、河南、郧阳军务兼振恤湖广。
现代文：三十日，江西盗贼猖獗，右都御史王哲巡视南、赣二州，刑部尚书洪钟总督节制四川、陕西、河南、郧阳军务，兼赈恤湖广。
English: On the 30th, thieves were rampant in Jiangxi. Wang Zhe, the governor of the right capital, inspected the south and the two states of Shandong. Shang Shuhong Zhong, the governor of the criminal department, controlled the military affairs of Sichuan, Shaanxi, Henan and Shenyang, and was also responsible for Lake Guangxi.

古文：夏四月庚寅，安化王寘鐇反，杀巡抚都御史安惟学、总兵官姜汉。
现代文：四月五日，安化王蜫钅番反叛，杀巡抚都御史安惟学、总兵官姜汉。
English: On April 5th, Anhua Wang Yifan rebelled and killed the governor of the capital, An Wei Xue, and the commander-in-chief, Jiang Han.

古文：丙午，起右都御史杨一清总制宁夏、延绥、甘、凉军务，泾阳伯神英充总兵官，讨寘鐇。
现代文：二十一日，起用右都御史杨一清总制宁夏、延绥及甘、凉二州军务，泾阳伯神英充任总兵官，征讨蜫钅番。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Yang Yixing, the governor of Ningxia, Yancheng, and Gan and Liang Provinces, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the military affairs of Ningxia, Yancheng, and Gan and Liang Provinces, and Bo Shenying, the governor of Shenyang, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the military affairs.

古文：辛亥，诏赦天下。
现代文：二十六日，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict of amnesty was issued.

古文：太监张永总督宁夏军务。
现代文：太监张永总督宁夏军务。
English: Eunuch Zhang Yong, Governor of Ningxia Military Affairs.

古文：是日，游击将军仇钺袭执寘鐇，宁夏平。
现代文：这天，游击将军仇钺袭击并擒捉蜫钅番，平定宁夏。
English: On this day, the guerrilla general Qiu Xuan attacked and captured Yifan, pacifying Ningxia.

古文：五月癸未，焦芳致仕。
现代文：五月二十九日，焦芳辞官退职。
English: On May 29, Jiao Fang resigned and retired.

古文：六月庚子，帝自号大庆法王，所司铸印以进。
现代文：六月十六日，武宗自称大庆法王，有关部门铸造印进献给他。
English: On June 16th, Emperor Wuzong claimed to be the Daqing Fa Wang, and the relevant departments issued a stamp dedicated to him.

古文：丙午，刘宇罢。
现代文：二十二日，刘宇停职。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Yu was suspended.

古文：秋七月壬申，洪钟讨沔阳贼，平之。
现代文：七月十八日，洪钟征讨沔阳盗贼，平定沔阳。
English: On July 18th, Hong Zhong marched against the Poyang thieves and pacified Poyang.

古文：八月甲午，刘瑾以谋反下狱。
现代文：八月十一日，刘瑾因谋反被下狱。
English: On August 11th, Liu Wei was released from prison for plotting rebellion.

古文：诏自正德二年后所更政令悉如旧。
现代文：下诏从正德二年以后所更改的政策法令全部按原来的执行。
English: The following decreed that all policies and decrees that were changed after two years from the founding of the People's Republic of China will be implemented according to the original.

古文：戊戌，治刘瑾党，吏部尚书张彩下狱。
现代文：十五日，惩治刘瑾同伙。吏部尚书张彩下狱。
English: On the 15th, Liu Yao's accomplices were punished, and the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shuxu Zhang Cai, was sent to prison.

古文：己亥，曹元罢。
现代文：十六日，曹元停职。
English: On the 16th, Cao Yuan was suspended.

古文：丁未，革宁王护卫。
现代文：二十四日，革除宁王护卫。
English: On the 24th, Ning Wang's bodyguards were dismissed.

古文：戊申，刘瑾伏诛。
现代文：二十五日，刘瑾被诛灭。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Liu Ye was annihilated.

古文：己酉，释谪戍诸臣。
现代文：二十六日，释放贬官戍边诸位大臣。
English: On the 26th, all the ministers who had been demoted were released.

古文：九月丙辰，论平寘鐇功，封仇钺咸宁伯。
现代文：九月三日，讨论平定蜫钅番功劳，封仇钺咸宁伯。
English: On September 3rd, they discussed the achievements made in the suppression of the Xiongan Rebellion and the banishment of the enemy Xiongan Ningbo.

古文：戊午，吏部尚书刘忠、梁储并兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：五日，吏部尚书刘忠、梁储并兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the fifth day of the month, Liu Zhong and Liang Zhu, both of whom hold the title of Shangshu of the Personnel Department and are also scholars of Wenyu Academy, participated in important affairs.

古文：己未，以平寘鐇、刘瑾功，封太监张永兄富、弟容皆为伯。
现代文：六日，因平定蜫钅番、刘瑾有功，封太监张永兄长张富、弟张容皆为伯。
English: On the 6th, Zhang Yong's elder brother Zhang Fu and younger brother Zhang Rong, both eunuchs, were given posthumous honours for their achievements in subduing Fanban and Liu Bei.

古文：癸酉，封义子指挥同知朱德、太监谷大用兄大宽、马永成兄山、魏彬弟英皆为伯。
现代文：十九日，封义子指挥同知朱德、太监谷大用兄谷大宽、马永成兄马山、魏彬弟魏英皆为伯。
English: On the 19th, Fong Yizi's commanding comrade Zhu De, Eunuch Valley's elder brother Gu Da Guang, Ma Yongcheng's elder brother Ma Shan, and Wei Bin's younger brother Wei Ying were all buried.

古文：冬十月己亥，戮张彩尸于市。
现代文：十月十六日，杀张彩丢尸弃市示众。
English: On October 16th, Zhang Cai's murdered corpse was displayed to the public in the abandoned city.

古文：十二月己丑，贼陷江津，佥事吴景死之。
现代文：十二月七日，盗贼攻陷江津，佥事吴景战死。
English: On December 7, thieves invaded Jiangjin, and Wu Jing died in battle.

古文：是年，日本、占城、哈密、撒马儿罕、土鲁番、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，日本、占城、哈密、撒马儿罕、土鲁番、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Japan, Zhancheng, Hami, Samarkand, Turpan and Ussuri paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：六年春正月甲子，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德六年正月十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 6th year of Zhengde, the grand festival took place in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：癸酉，贼陷营山，杀佥事王源。
现代文：二十二日，盗贼攻陷营山，杀佥事王源。
English: On the 22nd, the thieves invaded Yingshan and killed Wangyuan.

古文：二月丙申，寘鐇伏诛。
现代文：二月十五日，蜫钅番伏诛。
English: On February 15th, he was arrested.

古文：己酉，起左都御史陈金总制江西军务讨贼。
现代文：二十八日，起用左都御史陈金总督节制江西军务征讨盗贼。
English: On the 28th, the governor of the Left Capital, Chen Jin, was appointed to control the military affairs of Jiangxi Province and to fight against thieves.

古文：三月戊辰，赐杨慎等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐杨慎等进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On March 18th, Yang Shen and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：庚午，惠安伯张伟充总兵官，右都御史马中锡提督军务，讨直隶、河南、山东贼。
现代文：二十日，惠安伯张伟充任总兵官，右都御史马中锡提督军务，征讨直隶、河南、山东盗贼。
English: On the 20th, Huian Bo Zhang Weichen was appointed as the chief military officer, and the right capital, Shima Zhongxi, was appointed as the admiral of military affairs, to recruit thieves from Zhili, Henan and Shandong.

古文：丙子，免被寇州县税粮一年。
现代文：二十六日，减免遭兵祸州县税粮一年。
English: On the 26th, the reduction and exemption of tax grain in counties affected by the war was raised to one year.

古文：是月，小王子入河套，犯沿边诸堡。
现代文：当月，小王子侵入河套，侵犯沿边各堡。
English: That month, the Little Prince invaded Hetao and encroached on the fortresses along the border.

古文：夏四月癸未，刘忠乞省墓归。
现代文：四月四日，刘忠乞求省视祖墓返回。
English: On April 4, Liu Zhong begged the provincial government to allow him to return to his ancestral tomb.

古文：是月，淮安盗起。
现代文：这月，淮安盗贼兴起。
English: This month, Huai'an thieves are on the rise.

古文：六月，山西盗起。
现代文：六月，山西盗贼兴起。
English: In June, Shanxi thieves emerged.

古文：秋七月壬申，贼犯文安，京师戒严。
现代文：七月二十四日，盗贼侵犯文安，京师戒严。
English: On July 24th, thieves invaded Wen'an, and martial law was declared in Beijing.

古文：癸酉，调宣府、延绥兵入援。
现代文：二十五日，征调宣府、延绥兵进入京师救援。
English: On the 25th, soldiers from Xuanfu and Yancheng were sent to the capital to help.

古文：八月己卯，兵部侍郎陆完将边军讨贼。
现代文：八月二日，兵部侍郎陆完率领边境军队征讨盗贼。
English: On August 2, Lu Gan, the secretary of the Military Department, led the border troops to fight the thieves.

古文：四川巡抚都御史林俊擒斩贼首蓝廷瑞、鄢本恕。
现代文：四川巡抚都御史林俊擒杀贼首领蓝廷瑞、鄢本恕。
English: The governor of Sichuan, the governor of the capital, Shilin Juntao, the leader of the murderers, Lan Tingrui, and Enomoto Imo.

古文：甲申，贼刘六犯固安。
现代文：七日，盗贼刘六侵犯固安。
English: On the seventh day, the thief Liu Liu invaded Guan.

古文：丙戌，召张伟、马中锡还。
现代文：九日，召张伟、马中锡回京。
English: On the 9th, Zhang Wei and Ma Zhongxi were summoned back to Beijing.

古文：九月丙寅，再调宣府及辽东兵益陆完军。
现代文：九月十九日，再次调集宣府及辽东兵增援陆完军队。
English: On September 19th, soldiers from Xuanfu and Liaodong were once again mobilized to reinforce the troops on the mainland.

古文：冬十月癸未，贼陷长山，典史李暹战死。
现代文：十月六日，盗贼攻陷长山，典史李暹战死。
English: On October 6th, the bandits captured Changshan, and Li Siem was killed in the battle.

古文：甲申，贼焚粮艘于济宁州。
现代文：七日，盗贼在济宁州焚烧粮食船只。
English: On the 7th, thieves set fire to grain ships in Jining.

古文：丁酉，甘州副总兵白琮败小王子于柴沟。
现代文：二十日，甘肃副总兵白琮在柴沟打败小王子。
English: On the 20th, the Gansu Vice-Commander-in-Chief Bai Xuan defeated the Little Prince in Chai Ditch.

古文：十一月庚戌，太监谷大用、张忠、伏羌伯毛锐帅京军会陆完讨贼。
现代文：十一月四日，太监谷大用、张忠、伏羌伯毛锐率领京师军队与陆完一起征讨盗贼。
English: On November 4th, the eunuchs Gu Dayong, Zhang Zhong, and Fuxinbo Mauri led the Beijing division army to fight the thieves together with Lu Gan.

古文：丙辰，户部侍郎丛兰、王琼振两畿、河南、山东。
现代文：十日，户部侍郎丛兰、王琼赈济两畿、河南、山东。
English: On the 10th, the household attendants Conglan and Wang Qiong went to the two provinces of Gyeonggi, Henan and Shandong.

古文：戊午，京师地震。
现代文：十二日，京师地震。
English: On the second day of the first month, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：辛酉，敕修省。
现代文：十五日，命令修身反省。
English: On the fifteenth day, the order was given to practice self-criticism.

古文：乙亥，瘗暴骨。
现代文：二十九日，掩埋外露的尸骨。
English: On the 29th, the exposed bones were buried.

古文：十二月癸巳，礼部尚书费宏兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十二月十七日，礼部尚书费宏兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事物。
English: On December 17th, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Mr. Shang Shufehong, who is also a scholar of Wen Yuange University, participated in the important event.

古文：甲午，清河口至柳铺，黄河清三日。
现代文：十八日，清河到柳铺一段，黄河水清澈三天。
English: On the 18th, Qinghe to Liupu section, the Yellow River water is clear for three days.

古文：辛丑，贼掠苍溪，兵备副使冯杰败死。
现代文：二十五日，盗贼抢劫苍溪，兵备副使冯杰战败而死。
English: On the 25th, the thieves robbed Cangxi, and the deputy commander Feng Jie was defeated and died.

古文：是年，自畿辅迄江、淮、楚、蜀，盗贼杀官吏，山东尤甚，至破九十余城，道路梗绝。
现代文：这年，从畿辅到江、淮、楚、蜀，盗贼杀害官吏，属山东最厉害，最盛时攻破官军九十余城，道路交通为此而阻塞断绝。
English: In this year, from Kifu to Jiangsu, Huai, Chu and Shu, thieves killed officials, which was the most severe in Shandong. At its peak, the government army conquered more than 90 cities, and road traffic was blocked for this reason.

古文：琉球、哈密入贡。
现代文：琉球、哈密入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Hamiri enters the morning tribute.

古文：七年春正月甲寅，贼犯霸州，京师戒严。
现代文：正德七年正月八日，盗贼侵犯霸州，京师戒严。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the seventh year of Zhengde, thieves invaded Bazhou, and Beijing imposed martial law.

古文：丁巳，陷大城，知县张汝舟、主簿李铨战死。
现代文：十一日，攻陷大城，知县张汝舟、主簿李铨战死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the city was captured, and Zhang Ruzhou of Zhixian County and Li Jun, the chief accountant, died in the battle.

古文：己未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月丁丑，副都御史彭泽、咸宁伯仇钺提督军务，太监陆訚监军，讨河南贼。
现代文：二月二日，副都御史彭泽咸宁伯仇钺提督军务，太监陆监督军队，征讨河南盗贼。
English: On February 2nd, Vice-governor of the capital Shi Peng Ze Xian Ning Bo Qian Ye, admiral of military affairs, eunuch of land supervision of the army, went to fight against the thieves in Henan.

古文：己卯，贼犯莱州，指挥佥事蔡显等力战死。
现代文：四日，盗贼攻陷莱州，指挥佥事蔡显等奋力战死。
English: On the fourth day, the thieves invaded Laizhou, and the commanding officers Cai Xian and others died in battle.

古文：三月辛未，副总兵时源败绩于河南，都督佥事冯祯力战死。
现代文：三月二十六日，副总兵时源在河南溃败，都督佥事冯祯奋力战死。
English: On March 26th, Vice-Commander-in-Chief Shi Yuan was defeated in Henan Province, and the governor, An Zhi Feng, died in battle.

古文：夏五月丙午，陆完败贼于莱州，山东贼平。
现代文：五月三日，陆完打败莱州贼、平定山东盗贼。
English: On May 3, Lu Gan defeated the thieves of Laizhou and subdued the thieves of Shandong.

古文：甲寅，左都御史陈金讨平抚州贼。
现代文：十一日，左都御史陈金征讨并平定抚州盗贼。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Left Metropolitan Chen Jin led a raid to subdue the Fuzhou thieves.

古文：丙寅，贼杀副都御史马炳然于武昌江中。
现代文：二十三日，盗贼杀害副都御史马炳然于武昌长江中。
English: On the 23rd, thieves killed the vice-governor of Wuchang in the Yangtze River.

古文：闰月壬辰，仇钺败贼于光山，河南贼平。
现代文：闰五月十九日，仇钺在光山打败盗贼，平定河南贼。
English: On the 19th day of the 5th month of the leap year, the enemy army defeated the thieves in Guangshan and pacified the Henan thieves.

古文：秋七月癸巳，江西贼杀副使周宪于华林。
现代文：七月二十二日，江西贼杀副使周宪于华林。
English: On July 22nd, Zhou Xian, the vice-commander of Jiangxi banditry, arrived in Hualin.

古文：丁酉，振四川饥。
现代文：二十六日，赈救四川饥荒。
English: On the 26th, the relief of the Sichuan famine began.

古文：八月癸亥，陆完追歼刘七等贼于狼山。
现代文：八月二十二日，陆完追歼刘七等贼于狼山。
English: On August 22nd, Lu Gan chased and killed Liu Qi and other thieves in Wolf Mountain.

古文：九月乙酉，陈金讨平华林贼。
现代文：九月十四日，陈金征讨并平定华林盗贼。
English: On September 14th, Chen Jin led a raid and subdued the Waring thieves.

古文：戊子，召洪钟还。
现代文：十七日，召洪钟回师。
English: On the 17th, Hong Zhong was summoned back to the division.

古文：都御史彭泽总制四川军务。
现代文：都御史彭泽总督节制四川军务。
English: The governor of the capital, Shi Pengze, restrained the military affairs of Sichuan.

古文：丙申，赐义子一百二十七人国姓。
现代文：二十五日，赐义子一百二十七人姓朱。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he bestowed upon his son-in-law a hundred and twenty-seven surnames beginning with Zhu.

古文：冬十月，免河南、江西、浙江被灾寇者税粮。
现代文：十月，免河南、江西、浙江遭灾害兵祸地方税粮。
English: In October, Henan, Jiangxi and Zhejiang were exempted from local taxes on grain.

古文：十一月壬申，时源为平贼将军，会彭泽讨四川贼。
现代文：十一月二日，时源为平贼将军，会同彭泽讨伐四川盗贼。
English: On November 2nd, Shigenobu was promoted to the rank of general, and together with Penza, he fought against the Sichuan thieves.

古文：丁亥，留大同、宣府、辽东兵于京营，李东阳谏，不听。
现代文：十六日，将大同、宣府、辽东兵留于京师，李东阳进谏，武宗不听。
English: On the 16th, the soldiers of Datong, Xuanfu and Liaodong were left in Beijing Division, Li Dongyang marched into the capital, and Wuzong did not listen.

古文：十二月丁卯，李东阳致仕。
现代文：十二月二十七日，李东阳辞官退职。
English: On December 27, Li Dongyang resigned from his post.

古文：是月，免两畿、山东、山西、陕西被灾寇者税粮。
现代文：这月，免两畿、山东、山西、陕西受灾害遭兵祸税粮。
English: This month, the two Kis, Shandong, Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces were exempted from the disaster tax.

古文：是年，安南、日本、哈密入贡。
现代文：当年，安南、日本、哈密入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Japan, and Hami paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：八年春正月癸酉，右副都御史俞谏代陈金讨江西贼。
现代文：正德八年正月三日，右副都御史俞谏代替陈金讨伐江西盗贼。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 8th year of Zhengde, the right vice-governor of the capital, Shi Jun, replaced Chen Jin to fight against the thieves in Jiangxi.

古文：壬午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：乙酉，以边将江彬、许泰分领京营，赐国姓。
现代文：十五日，因边将江彬、许泰分别带领京师营兵，赐姓朱氏。
English: On the fifteenth day, Jiang Bin and Xu Tai led the battalion of the Beijing Division respectively, and were given the surname Zhu.

古文：寻设两官厅军，命彬、泰分领之。
现代文：不久，设两官厅军，命令由江彬、许泰分别率领。
English: Soon, the two-bureau army was set up, commanded by Jiang Bin and Xu Tai respectively.

古文：癸巳，户部侍郎丛兰、佥都御史陈玉巡边。
现代文：二十三日，户部侍郎丛兰、佥都御史陈玉巡视边境。
English: On the 23rd, Cong Lan, the Household Attendant, and Chen Yu, the Governor of the Capital, patrolled the border.

古文：二月丙午，以平贼功，封太监谷大用弟大亮、陆訚侄永皆为伯。
现代文：二月七日，因平贼之功，封太监谷大用弟谷大亮、陆侄陆永均为伯。
English: On February 7th, because of the achievements of Ping Zhe, the younger brother of the eunuch Gu Da Liang and Lu Yong, the nephew of Lu Yong, were awarded the title of grand eunuch.

古文：三月戊子，置镇国府处宣府官军。
现代文：三月十九日，添置镇国府安置宣府官军。
English: On March 19th, the additional town of Guofu was established to accommodate the Xuanfu government army.

古文：甲午，以旱敕群臣修省。
现代文：二十五日，因天旱命群臣修身反省。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, because of the drought, the ministers were forced to repent.

古文：夏四月乙丑，彭泽破贼于剑州。
现代文：四月二十七日，彭泽在剑州打败盗贼。
English: On April 27th, Pengze defeated a thief in Jianzhou.

古文：五月辛巳，仇钺充总兵官，帅京营兵御敌于大同。
现代文：五月十四日，仇钺任总兵官，率京师营兵御敌于大同。
English: On May 14th, Qu Rong was appointed as the commander-in-chief and led the battalion of the Beijing Division against the enemy in Datong.

古文：六月戊戌，河决黄陵冈。
现代文：六月一日，黄陵冈黄河决堤。
English: On June 1, the Yellow River in Huanglinggang burst its banks.

古文：乙卯，俞谏破贼于贵溪。
现代文：十八日，俞谏在贵溪打败盗贼。
English: On the 18th, Zou defeated the thief in Guixi.

古文：秋八月，免南畿水灾税粮。
现代文：八月，免南畿水灾税粮。
English: In August, grain was exempted from the Nanki flood disaster tax.

古文：土鲁番袭据哈密。
现代文：土鲁番袭击并占据哈密。
English: Turfan attacked and occupied Hami.

古文：冬十月丁未，俞谏连破贼于东乡，江西贼平。
现代文：十月十三日，俞谏连续败贼于东乡，平定江西贼。
English: On October 13th, he defeated the bandits successively in Dongxiang and subdued the bandits in Jiangxi.

古文：十二月，南京刑部侍郎邓璋振江西饥。
现代文：十二月，南京刑部侍郎邓璋赈济江西饥荒。
English: In December, Deng Bingji, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department of Nanjing, witnessed the famine in Jiangxi Province.

古文：是年，哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，哈密入朝进贡。
English: This year, Hami paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：九年春正月丁丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德九年正月十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of Zhengde, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb.

古文：庚辰，乾清宫灾。
现代文：十六日，乾清宫火灾。
English: On the 16th, the Qianqing Palace caught fire.

古文：二月庚子，帝始微行。
现代文：二月六日，武宗第一次微服出行。
English: On February 6th, Wu Zong went on his first micro-suit trip.

古文：丙午，礼部尚书靳贵兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十二日，礼部尚书靳贵兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 12th, Shang Shuxinggui, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Wenyu Pavilion University, participated in important affairs.

古文：癸丑，彭泽、时源讨平四川贼。
现代文：十九日，彭泽、时源讨伐平定四川贼。
English: On the 19th, the Pengze and Jiyuan campaigns were launched to subdue the Sichuan bandits.

古文：三月辛巳，赐唐皋等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐唐皋等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 18th, Tang Xuan and other new members were awarded with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月丁酉，复宁王护卫，予屯田。
现代文：四月四日，恢复宁王护卫，授与屯田。
English: On April 4th, Ningwang Escort was reinstated, and Tongtian was awarded.

古文：五月乙丑，费宠致仕。
现代文：五月三日，费宏辞官退职。
English: On May 3, Fei Hong resigned from his post.

古文：己丑，彭泽总督甘肃军务，经理哈密。
现代文：二十七日，彭泽总督甘肃军务，经理哈密。
English: On the 27th, Pengze Governor of Gansu Military Affairs, Manager Hami.

古文：六月乙卯，开云南银矿。
现代文：六月二十四日，开云南银矿。
English: On June 24th, the Yunnan Silver Mine was opened.

古文：秋七月乙丑，小王子犯宣府、大同。
现代文：七月四日，小王子侵犯宣府、大同。
English: On July 4th, the Little Prince invaded Xuanfu and Datong.

古文：太监张永提督军务，都督白玉充总兵官，帅京营兵御之。
现代文：太监张永提督军务，都督白玉充任总兵官，率领京师营兵抗击。
English: Zhang Yong, the eunuch, became the admiral of military affairs, and Bai Yuzhong, the governor of the capital, became the chief military officer and led the battalion of the Beijing Division to fight back.

古文：八月辛卯朔，日有食之。辛丑，小王子犯白羊口。
现代文：八月初一日，有日食。十一日，小王子侵犯白羊口。
English: On the first day of August, there was a solar eclipse. On the eleventh day, the little prince invaded the mouth of the white sheep.

古文：乙巳，京师地震。
现代文：十五日，京师地震。
English: On the 15th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：己未，小王子入宁武关，掠忻州、定襄、宁化。
现代文：二十九日，小王子侵入宁武官，抢劫忻州、定襄、宁化。
English: On the 29th, Xiao Wang invaded Ningwukan and robbed Zhangzhou, Dingxiang and Ninghua.

古文：九月壬戌，犯宣府、蔚州。
现代文：九月三日，侵犯宣府、蔚州。
English: On September 3, it invaded Xuanwu and Ulju.

古文：庚午，帝狎虎被伤，不视朝，编修王思以谏谪饶平驿丞。
现代文：十一日，武宗与虎狎戏受伤，不上朝办公，编修王思进谏贬饶平驿丞。
English: On the 11th day, Wuzong was injured in a fight with a tiger and did not go to the office. The editor, Wang Sijin, reprimanded Ping Junjo.

古文：冬十月己酉，遣使采木于川、湖。
现代文：十月二十日，派使者到湖广、四川采木。
English: On October 20, envoys were sent to Huguang and Sichuan to collect timber.

古文：十一月辛酉，废归善王当沍为庶人，自杀。
现代文：十一月三日，废归善王当氵互为庶人，归善王自杀。
English: On November 3rd, Guizhen Wang committed suicide after being treated as a commoner.

古文：十二月甲寅，建乾清宫，加天下赋一百万。
现代文：十二月二十六日，兴建乾清宫，增加天下赋税一百万。
English: On December 26th, the Qianqing Palace was built, increasing the national tax by one million yuan.

古文：是年，安南、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，安南、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Hami, and Uss paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：十年春正月癸亥，薄暮，享太庙。
现代文：正德十年，正月初五傍晚，祭享太庙。
English: In the 10th year of Zhengde, on the evening of the 5th day of the 1st month of the year, the temple was dedicated.

古文：戊辰，薄暮，祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十日傍晚，祭天地于南郊。
English: On the evening of the 10th, the festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：三月壬申，杨廷和以忧去。
现代文：三月十五日，杨廷和因服丧离职。
English: On March 15th, Yang Tinghe left his post due to his death.

古文：夏闰四月辛酉，吏部尚书杨一清兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：闰四月四日，吏部尚书杨一清兼武英殿大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On leap April 4th, Yang Iqing, a member of the Personnel Department and a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency, participated in important matters.

古文：戊寅，召彭泽还。
现代文：二十一日，召彭泽回京。
English: On the 21st, Penza was summoned back to Kyoto.

古文：秋八月丙寅，小王子犯固原。
现代文：八月十二日，小王子侵犯固原。
English: On August 12th, the Little Prince invaded Gohara.

古文：冬十二月癸丑朔，日有食之。己卯，免南畿旱灾秋粮。
现代文：十二月初一日，有日食。二十七日，免南畿旱灾秋粮。
English: On the first day of the first month of December, there was a solar eclipse. On the 27th, the autumn grain was exempted from the drought in Nanki.

古文：是年，琉球、安南、哈密、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、安南、哈密、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: That year, Ryukyu, Annan, Hami, and Samarkand paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十一年春正月乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德十一年正月十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 11th year of Zhengde, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb.

古文：夏四月，振河南饥。
现代文：四月，赈救河南灾荒。
English: In April, the relief of Henan's disaster and famine began.

古文：五月庚寅，土鲁番以哈密来归。
现代文：五月十日，土鲁番用哈密前来归附。
English: On the 10th of May, Turuban came with Hami to annex it.

古文：甲辰，录自宫男子三千四百余人充海户。
现代文：二十四日，录用自处宫刑男子三千四百余人充当海户。
English: On the 24th, more than 3,400 men from the Imperial Palace were recruited to serve as seamen.

古文：是月，振陕西饥。
现代文：本月，赈救陕西饥荒。
English: This month, the relief of Shaanxi famine began.

古文：秋七月乙未，小王子犯蓟州白羊口，太监张忠监督军务，左都督刘晖充总兵官，帅东西官厅军御之。
现代文：七月十六日，小王子侵犯蓟州白羊口，太监张忠监督军务，左都督刘晖充任总兵官，率东西官厅军抗击。
English: On July 16th, the Little Prince invaded Baiyangkou, Zhangzhou. Zhang Zhong, the eunuch, supervised the military affairs, and Liu Kun, the left governor, served as the chief military officer and led the East and West government troops to fight back.

古文：丙午，工部侍郎赵璜、俞琳饬畿内武备。
现代文：二十七日，工部侍郎赵璜、俞琳整治畿内武备。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Qi and Gu Lin, the attendants of the engineering department, went to rectify the military situation in the Kinai region.

古文：八月丁巳，左都御史彭泽、成国公朱辅帅京营兵防边。
现代文：八月八日，左都御史彭泽、成国公朱辅率京营兵防备边境。
English: On August 8th, Shibunze, the governor of the Left Capital, and Zhu Fu, the prince of Chengguo, led the Beijing battalion to guard the border.

古文：庚申，赐宛平县被寇者人米二石。
现代文：十一日，赏赐宛平县遭受侵略的人美人米二石。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wanping County was awarded two stone of rice as a reward to the people who suffered from the invasion.

古文：甲子，杨一清致仕。
现代文：十五日，杨一清辞官退职。
English: On the 15th, Yang Iqing resigned and retired.

古文：丁丑，礼部尚书蒋冕兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十八日，礼部尚书蒋冕兼文渊阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 28th, Shangshu Jiang Guan and Wen Yuange University Scholar of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies participated in the military and national events.

古文：九月，土鲁番复据哈密，侵肃州，杀游击芮宁。
现代文：九月，土鲁番再次占据哈密，侵犯肃州，杀游击芮宁。
English: In September, Turuban once again occupied Hami, invaded Suzhou, and launched a guerrilla attack on Huning.

古文：冬十月己酉朔，享太庙，遣使代行礼。
现代文：十月初一日，祭奉太庙，派使者代武宗行祭祀礼节。
English: On the first day of October, the temple held a festival and sent an emissary to represent the Bu sect to perform the ritual.

古文：十一月甲申，免湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：十一月七日，免湖广受灾税粮。
English: On November 7th, the disaster-affected tax grain was exempted from Hukang.

古文：是年，琉球、天方入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、天方入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu and Amakata paid tribute to the Emperor.

古文：十二年春正月己丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：正德十二年正月十三日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 12th year of Zhengde, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：遂猎于南海子，夜中还，御奉天殿受朝贺。
现代文：接着去南海子打猎，半夜回到宫中，在奉天门接受朝贺。
English: He then went to Nanhaizi to hunt, returning to the palace in the middle of the night to receive morning greetings at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：三月癸巳，赐舒芬等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐舒芬等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 18th, there were differences in the number and origin of the candidates such as Shi Shufen.

古文：戊戌，以两淮、浙江、四川、河东盐课充陕西织造。
现代文：二十三日，用两淮、浙江、四川、河东盐课补充陕西织造。
English: On the 23rd, Shaanxi Weaving was supplemented with salt from the two Huai, Zhejiang, Sichuan and Hedong provinces.

古文：夏四月壬子，靳贵致仕。
现代文：四月七日，靳贵辞官退职。
English: On April 7, Xing Gui resigned from his post.

古文：丙辰，副总兵郑廉败土鲁番于瓜州。
现代文：十一日，副总兵郑廉打败土鲁番于瓜州。
English: On the 11th day, vice-commander Zheng Lian defeated Turuban in Guazhou.

古文：五月丙子，礼部尚书毛纪兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：五月二日，礼部尚书毛纪兼东阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On May 2, Shangshu Mao Ji, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University, participated in the military event.

古文：六月乙巳朔，日有食之。秋八月甲辰，微服如昌平。
现代文：六月一日，有日食。八月一日，扮成民装到昌平。
English: On June 1st, there was a solar eclipse. On August 1st, I went to Changping dressed in civilian clothes.

古文：乙巳，梁储、蒋冕、毛纪追及于沙河，请回跸，不听。
现代文：二日，梁储、蒋冕、毛纪追到沙河，请求武宗回宫，不听。
English: On the second day, Liang Chuang, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji chased him to the Shahe River and asked Emperor Wuzong to return to the palace, but he did not listen.

古文：己酉，至居庸关，巡关御史张钦闭关拒命，乃还。
现代文：六日，到居庸关，巡关御史张钦闭关拒绝，武宗才回京。
English: On the 6th day, when he arrived at Juyongguan, the inspector of the gate, Zhang Qin, refused to close the gate, and only then did Emperor Wuzong return to Beijing.

古文：丙辰，至自昌平。
现代文：十三日，亲自巡察昌平。
English: On the 13th, he personally inspected Changping.

古文：戊午，夜视朝。
现代文：十五日，晚上上朝办公。
English: On the 15th, I went to work in the morning.

古文：癸亥，副都御史吴廷举振湖广饥。
现代文：二十日，副都御史吴廷举赈济湖广饥荒。
English: On the 20th, Wu Ting, the deputy governor of Shishi, announced that there was a widespread famine in Lijiu Lake.

古文：丙寅，夜微服出德胜门，如居庸关。
现代文：二十三日，夜晚扮成民装出德胜门，到居庸关。
English: On the 23rd, dressed in civilian clothes, he went out of Deshengmen at night and went to Juyongguan.

古文：辛未，出关，幸宣府，命谷大用守关，毋出京朝官。
现代文：二十八日出关，巡幸宣府，命令谷大用守卫居庸关，京朝官不准出关。
English: On the 28th, he went out of the pass, inspected Xuanfu, and ordered Gu Dai to use guards to stay at Yongguan. Beijing officials were not allowed to go out of the pass.

古文：九月辛卯，河决城武。
现代文：九月十八日，城武黄河决堤。
English: On September 18th, the Chengwu Yellow River burst its banks.

古文：壬辰，如阳和，自称总督军务威武大将军总兵官。
现代文：十九日，到阳和，自称是总督军务威武大将军总兵官。
English: On the 19th, he went to Yanghe and claimed to be the governor of the military affairs, the commander-in-chief of the military.

古文：庚子，输帑银一百万两于宣府。
现代文：二十七日，运币银一百万两于宣府。
English: On the 27th, one million taels of silver were shipped to Xuanfu.

古文：冬十月癸卯，驻跸顺圣川。
现代文：十月一日，暂住于顺圣川。
English: On October 1, he temporarily lived in Shunsheng River.

古文：甲辰，小王子犯阳和，掠应州。
现代文：二日，小王子侵犯阳和，抢劫应州。
English: On the second day, Xiao Wang violated Yanghe and robbed Yingzhou.

古文：丁未，亲督诸军御之，战五日。
现代文：五日，亲自率领各军队抵抗，激战五天。
English: On the fifth day, he personally led the resistance of each army and fought fiercely for five days.

古文：辛亥，寇引去，驻跸大同。
现代文：九日，小王子引兵而逃，武宗遂进住大同。
English: On the 9th day, the little prince led the soldiers to flee, and Buson finally moved into Datong.

古文：十一月丁亥，召杨廷和复入阁。
现代文：十一月十五日，再召杨廷和入阁。
English: On November 15th, Yang Tinghe was recalled to the cabinet.

古文：戊子，还至宣府。
现代文：十六日，回到宣府。
English: On the 16th, he returned to Xuanwu.

古文：十二月癸亥，群臣赴行在请还宫，不得出关而还。
现代文：十二月二十二日，群臣赶到武宗住地请求回宫，没有出居庸关而回。
English: On December 22, a group of courtiers rushed to the residence of Emperor Wuzong to request him to return to the palace, but he did not leave the residence and returned to Yongguan.

古文：闰月丁亥，迎春于宣府。
现代文：闰十二月十六日，在宣府迎接春天到来。
English: On the 16th day of the 12th lunar month, people in Xuanwu welcomed the arrival of spring.

古文：是年，琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu and Ussuri came to pay tribute.

古文：十三年春正月辛丑朔，帝在宣府。
现代文：正德十三年正月一日，武宗在宣府。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of Zhengde, Wuzong was in Xuanfu.

古文：丙午，至自宣府，命群臣具彩帐、羊酒郊迎，御帐殿受贺。
现代文：六日，亲自巡察宣府。命令群臣准备彩帐、羊酒在郊外迎接，在帐篷内设殿受贺。
English: On the sixth day, he personally inspected the Xuanfu. He ordered the courtiers to prepare the lottery tickets and sheep wine to welcome him in the suburbs, and set up a hall inside the tent to receive congratulations.

古文：丁未，罢南郊致斋。
现代文：七日，停止南郊行斋戒。
English: On the seventh day, he stopped fasting in the southern suburbs.

古文：庚戌，大祀天地于南郊，遂猎于南海子。
现代文：十日，大祭天地于南郊，于是去南海子打猎。
English: On the 10th, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs, so I went to Nanhaizi to hunt.

古文：辛亥，还宫。
现代文：十一日，回到宫中。
English: On the eleventh day, he returned to the palace.

古文：辛酉，复如宣府。
现代文：二十一日，又到宣府。
English: On the 21st, I went to Xuanfu again.

古文：是月，振两畿、山东水灾。
现代文：这月，赈济两畿、山东水灾。
English: This month, floods hit the provinces of Ganzi and Shandong.

古文：给京师流民米，人三斗。
现代文：给京师流民每人三斗米。
English: Give each of the displaced people in Beijing three buckets of rice.

古文：瘗死者。
现代文：掩埋死人。
English: Bury the dead.

古文：二月己卯，太皇太后崩。
现代文：二月十日，太皇太后死。
English: On February 10, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：壬午，至自宣府。
现代文：十三日，亲自巡察宣府。
English: On the 13th, he personally inspected Xuanwu.

古文：三月戊辰，如昌平。
现代文：三月二十九日，到昌平。
English: March 29th, to Changping.

古文：夏四月己巳朔，谒六陵，遂幸密云。
现代文：四月一日，拜谒六陵，巡幸密云。五月一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of April, there was a full moon over the Six Mausoleums. On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：五月己亥朔，日有食之。驻跸喜峰口。
现代文：暂时驻扎喜峰口。十日，亲自巡察喜峰口。
English: On the 10th, he personally inspected the Xifeng Pass.

古文：戊申，至自喜峰口。六月庚辰，太皇太后梓宫发京师，帝戎服从。
现代文：六月十二日，太皇太后棺材从京师出发，武宗穿孝服随同前往。
English: On June 12th, the coffin of the Empress Dowager departed from Beijing, and Emperor Wuzong accompanied her in filial piety.

古文：甲申，葬孝贞纯皇后。
现代文：十六日，安葬孝贞纯皇后。
English: On the 16th, the funeral of Empress Xiaozhen took place.

古文：乙酉，至自昌平。
现代文：十七日，亲自巡察昌平。
English: On the 17th, he personally inspected Changping.

古文：秋七月己亥。录应州功，叙荫升赏者五万余人。
现代文：七月一日，记录应州功劳，依次授官升赏五万多人。
English: On July 1, a record of more than 50,000 people were awarded promotions in recognition of their contributions to the state.

古文：丙午，复如宣府。
现代文：八日，又到宣府。
English: On the eighth day, I went to Xuanfu again.

古文：八月乙酉，如大同。
现代文：八月十八日，到大同。
English: August 18th, to Datong.

古文：九月庚子，次偏头关。
现代文：九月三日，临时驻扎偏头关。
English: On September 3, he was temporarily stationed in Yehotou Pass.

古文：癸丑，敕曰： 总督军务威武大将军总兵官朱寿亲统六师，肃清边境，特加封镇国公，岁支禄米五千石。
现代文：十六日，下诏说： 总督军务威武大将军总兵官朱寿亲自率领六军，肃清边境，特加封为镇国公，每年给禄米五千石。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: Zhu Shou, General of the People's Liberation Army and Commander-in-Chief of the People's Liberation Army, personally led the six armies to clear the border, and was awarded the title of Zhen Guoguo, and 5,000 koku of rice was given to him every year.

古文：吏部如敕奉行。 
现代文：吏部按命令执行。 
English: The cadres carried out the order.

古文：甲寅，封朱彬为平虏伯，朱泰为安边伯。
现代文：十七日，封朱彬为平虏伯，朱泰为安边伯。
English: On the 17th, Zhu Bin was given the title of Pingru Bo, and Zhu Tai was given the title of Anbian Bo.

古文：冬十月戊辰，渡河。
现代文：十月二日，渡过黄河。
English: On October 2, he crossed the Yellow River.

古文：己卯，次榆林。
现代文：十三日，暂住榆林。
English: On the 13th, he temporarily stayed in Yulin.

古文：十一月庚子，调西官厅及四卫营兵赴宣、大。
现代文：十一月四日，调西官厅及四卫营兵赶到宣府、大同。
English: On November 4th, the officials and soldiers of the four guards battalions were transferred to Xuanfu and Datong.

古文：壬子，次绥德，幸总兵官戴钦第。
现代文：十六日，临时住绥德，巡视总兵官戴钦住宅。
English: On the 16th, he temporarily lived in Shunde and inspected the residence of the chief military officer Dai Qin.

古文：十二月戊寅，渡河，幸石州。
现代文：十二月十三日，渡黄河，巡幸石州。
English: On December 13th, they crossed the Yellow River and toured Shizhou.

古文：戊子，次太原。
现代文：二十三日，临时住太原。
English: On the 23rd, he temporarily moved to Taiyuan.

古文：是年，琉球、天方、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、天方、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Amakata, and Wajima paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十四年春正月丙申朔，帝在太原。
现代文：正德十四年正月一日，武宗住于太原。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year of Zhengde, Emperor Wu lived in Taiyuan.

古文：甲辰，改卜郊。
现代文：九日，改于郊外占卜。
English: On the 9th, it was changed to divination in the suburbs.

古文：壬子，还宣府。
现代文：十七日，回到宣府。
English: On the 17th, he returned to Xuanwu.

古文：二月壬申，至自宣府。
现代文：二月八日，亲自巡察宣府。
English: On February 8, he personally inspected the Xuanwu Palace.

古文：丁丑，大祀天地于南郊，遂猎于南海子。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于南郊，接着去南海子打猎。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs, followed by a hunting trip to Nanhaizi.

古文：是日，京师地震。
现代文：当天，京师发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：己丑，帝自加太师，谕礼部曰： 总督军务威武大将军总兵官太师镇国公朱寿将巡两畿、山东，祀神祈福，其具仪以闻。 
现代文：二十五日，武宗自加太师称号，告诉礼部说： 总督军务威武大将军总兵官太师镇国公朱寿将巡视两畿、山东，祭祀神祈祷幸福，其全部仪式要上报。 
English: On the 25th, Emperor Wuzong gave himself the title of Grand Master and told the Ministry of Ceremonies: General Zhu Shou, Governor-General of the Military Affairs, General Weiwu, and Grand Master Zhen Guogong, will tour the two provinces and Shandong, worship God and pray for happiness, and all the ceremonies must be reported.

古文：三月癸丑，以谏巡幸，下兵部郎中黄巩六人于锦衣卫狱，跪修撰舒芬百有七人于午门五日。
现代文：三月二十日，因进谏巡幸一事，下兵部郎中黄巩等六人于锦衣卫狱，让修撰舒芬等一百零七人于午门跪五天。
English: On March 20th, due to the matter of the imperial inspection tour, six people, including Huang Gong, a member of the lower military department, were imprisoned in Jinwei Prison, and 107 people, including Shuxian Shufen, were forced to kneel at the noon gate for five days.

古文：金吾卫都指挥佥事张英自刃以谏，卫士夺刃，得不死，鞫治，杖杀之。
现代文：金吾卫都指挥佥事张英以自杀进谏武宗，卫士夺过大刀，张英免于一死，经审查后杖杀。
English: King Wu Weidu ordered Zhang Ying to commit suicide and enter the Xiongwuzong, the guards took the big sword, Zhang Ying was spared from death, and after review, he was killed with a stick.

古文：乙卯，下寺正周叙、行人司副余廷瓒、主事林大辂三十三人于锦衣卫狱。
现代文：二十二日，下寺正周叙、行人司副余廷瓒、主事林大辂等三十三人于锦衣卫狱中。
English: On the 22nd, 33 people, including Zhou Xiu, the head of the Lower Temple, Yu Tingyao, the deputy of the Pedestrian Division, and Lin Dazhao, the head of the Department, were in Jinwei Prison.

古文：戊午，杖舒芬等百有七人于阙下。
现代文：二十五日，杖打舒芬等一百零七人于宫前台阶下。
English: On the 25th day of the month, 107 people, including the cane player Shufen, gathered at the foot of the steps in front of the palace.

古文：是日，风霾昼晦。
现代文：当天，整天风雨不停，天色昏暗。
English: On the same day, it was windy and rainy all day, and the sky was dark.

古文：夏四月甲子，免南畿被灾税粮。
现代文：四月一日，免南畿受灾税粮。
English: On April 1, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：戊寅，杖黄巩等三十九人于阙下，先后死者十一人。
现代文：十五日，杖打黄巩等三十九人于宫前阶下。先后打死十一人。
English: On the fifteenth day, thirty-nine people including Huang Gong were beaten with a cane under the front steps of the palace. Eleven people were killed in succession.

古文：五月己亥，诏山东、山西、陕西、河南、湖广流民归业者，官给廪食、庐舍、牛种，复五年。
现代文：五月七日，下诏凡是山东、山西、陕西、河南、湖广流民归业的，官吏给他们粮食、房屋、耕牛、粮种，免徭役五年。
English: On May 7th, the following edict was issued: If any of the refugees from Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, and Hunan returned to work, the officials would give them grain, houses, farm cattle, and grain seeds, and they would be exempted from forced labor for five years.

古文：六月丙子，宁王宸濠反，巡抚江西右副都御史孙燧、南昌兵备副使许逵死之。
现代文：六月十四日，宁王宸濠谋反，巡抚江西右副都御史孙燧、南昌兵备副使许逵死。
English: On June 14, Ning Wangjun plotted a rebellion, and the governor of Jiangxi Province, the right vice-governor of the capital, Shi Sunjun, and the vice-governor of Nanchang, the deputy military commander, Xu Jun, died.

古文：戊寅，陷南康。
现代文：十六日，攻陷南康。
English: On the 16th, Nankang was captured.

古文：己卯，陷九江。
现代文：十七日，攻陷九江。
English: On the 17th, Jiujiang fell.

古文：秋七月甲辰，帝自将讨宸濠，安边伯朱泰为威武副将军。帅师为先锋。
现代文：七月十三日，武宗亲自率军讨伐宁王朱宸濠，安边伯朱泰为威武副将军，率师为先锋。
English: On July 13th, Wu Zong personally led the army to fight against Zhu Xi, the king of Nanning, with An Bian Bo Zhutai as the deputy general and Wei Wu as the vanguard.

古文：丙午，宸濠犯安庆，都指挥杨锐、知府张文锦御却之。
现代文：十五日，宸濠侵犯安庆，都指挥杨锐、知府张文锦击退宁王宸濠。
English: On the fifteenth day, Yan invaded Anqing, and Yang Rui and the governor Zhang Wenzhong led the troops to repel Ning Wangyan.

古文：辛亥，提督南赣汀漳军务副都御史王守仁帅兵复南昌。
现代文：二十日，提督南赣汀漳军务副都御史王守仁率兵收复南昌。
English: On the 20th, Admiral Nanlu Tingyu, Vice-Governor for Military Affairs Wang Shouren led the troops to recapture Nanchang.

古文：丁巳，守仁败宸濠于樵舍，擒之。
现代文：二十六日，王守仁在樵舍打败并擒获朱宸濠。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Wang Shouren defeated and captured Zhu Xi in Ourshe.

古文：八月癸未，车驾发京师。
现代文：八月二十二日，武宗车驾从京师出发。
English: On August 22nd, Wu Zong drove from Beijing.

古文：丁亥，次涿州，王守仁捷奏至，秘不发。
现代文：二十六日，临时住涿州，王守仁捷报传到，密不发布胜利消息。
English: On the 26th, temporarily living in Bozhou, Wang Shou Ren Jie received the news and secretly released the news of victory.

古文：冬十一月乙巳，渔于清江浦。
现代文：十一月十五日，在清江浦打鱼。
English: November 15th, fishing in Qingjiangpu.

古文：壬子，冬至，受贺于太监张阳第。
现代文：二十二日，冬至日，在太监张阳住宅接受朝贺。
English: On the 22nd, the day of the winter solstice, he received morning greetings at the residence of the eunuch Zhang Yang.

古文：十二月辛酉，次扬州。
现代文：十二月一日，临时住扬州。
English: On December 1, he temporarily lived in Yangzhou.

古文：乙酉，渡江。
现代文：二十五日，渡过长江。
English: On the 25th, I crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：丙戌，至南京。
现代文：二十六日，到南京。
English: On the 26th, they arrived in Nanjing.

古文：是岁，淮、扬饥，人相食。
现代文：这年，淮、扬二州饥荒，人相残食。
English: This year, both Huai and Yang states suffered from famine, and people were forced to eat each other's leftovers.

古文：撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: Samarkand paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：十五年春正月庚寅朔，帝在南京。
现代文：正德十五年正月初一日，武宗在南京。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 15th year of Zhengde, Wuzong arrived in Nanjing.

古文：癸巳，改卜郊。
现代文：四日，改在郊外占卜。
English: On the 22nd, the regulations on suburbs were amended.

古文：夏四月己未，振淮、扬诸府饥。
现代文：四月二日，赈济淮、扬诸府饥荒。
English: On April 2, famine broke out in the provinces of Yanjihuai and Yang.

古文：六月丁巳。次牛首山，诸军夜惊。
现代文：六月一日，临时住牛首山，各军夜晚惊恐。
English: On June 1st, the temporary residence was moved to Niu Shou Mountain, and the troops were terrified at night.

古文：秋七月，小王子犯大同、宣府。
现代文：七月，小王子侵犯大同、宣府。
English: In July, the Little Prince invaded Datong and Xuanfu.

古文：八月癸未，免江西税粮。
现代文：八月二十八日，免江西税粮。
English: August 28th, Jiangxi tax-free grain.

古文：闰月癸巳，受江西俘。
现代文：闰八月八日，接受江西俘虏。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, Jiangxi prisoners were accepted.

古文：丁酉，发南京。
现代文：十二日，从南京出发。
English: On the 12th, they set off from Nanjing.

古文：癸卯，次镇江，幸大学士杨一清第，临故大学士靳贵丧。
现代文：十八日，临时住镇江，巡幸大学士杨一清住宅，亲临原大学士靳贵丧事。
English: On the 18th, he temporarily lived in Zhenjiang and visited the residence of Yang Yikqing, a former university scholar, and attended the funeral of the former university scholar.

古文：九月己巳，渔于积水池，舟覆，救免，遂不豫。
现代文：九月十五日，在积水池钓鱼，船翻，武宗得救免难，但是身体从此不适。
English: On September 15, while fishing in a retention pond, the boat overturned, and Takemune was saved, but he has been unwell ever since.

古文：冬十月庚戌，次通州。
现代文：十月二十六日，暂住通州。
English: On October 26th, he temporarily moved to Tongzhou.

古文：十一月庚申，治交通宸濠者罪，执吏部尚书陆完赴行在。
现代文：十一月六日，惩治与宸濠往来通好的同伙。捉拿吏部尚书陆完到武宗住处。
English: On November 6th, they punished the accomplices who had been in contact with Gong. The arresting officer, Shang Shulun, went to Bu Zong's residence.

古文：十二月己丑，宸濠伏诛。
现代文：十二月五日，宸濠伏诛。
English: On December 5th, she passed away.

古文：甲午，还京师，告捷于郊庙社稷。
现代文：十日，回到京师，向郊庙社稷祭告胜利捷报。
English: On the 10th day, he returned to Beijing and announced his victory to the suburb temple.

古文：丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。初献疾作，不克成礼。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于南郊，刚开始祭献，突然发病，没有完成全部礼仪。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs. Just after the start of the sacrifice, he suddenly fell ill and did not complete all the rituals.

古文：是年，琉球、占城、佛郎机、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、占城、佛郎机、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Zhancheng, Furanchi, and Turuban paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：十六年春正月癸亥，改卜郊。
现代文：正德十六年正月十日，改于郊外占卜。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 16th year of Zhengde, it was changed to divination in the suburbs.

古文：二月己亥，巡抚云南副都御史何孟春讨平弥勒州苗。
现代文：二月十六日，巡抚云南副都御史何孟春讨伐并平定弥勒州苗民。
English: On February 16th, He Mengchun, the governor of Yunnan and deputy governor of Yunnan, led a crusade to subdue the Miao people in Miele Prefecture.

古文：三月癸丑朔，日有食之。庚申，改西宫厅为威武团营。
现代文：三月一日，有日食。八日，改西官厅为威武团营。
English: On March 1st, there was a solar eclipse. On the 8th, the western government office was changed to the Weiwu camp.

古文：乙丑，大渐，谕司礼监曰： 朕疾不可为矣。其以朕意达皇太后，天下事重，与阁臣审处之。
现代文：十三日，武宗病危，告诉司礼监说 ：我的病治不好了，把朕的意思传达给皇太后，天下重大事情，与阁臣审查处理。
English: On the thirteenth day, Emperor Wuzong was critically ill, and he told the chief etiquette inspector, "My illness is incurable. Please convey my wishes to the empress dowager. This is a very important matter for the whole country, and it should be reviewed and handled by the cabinet ministers."

古文：前事皆由朕误，非汝曹所能预也。 
现代文：以前的事都是由于朕失误，并不是你们所能预料到的。 
English: What happened before was due to my mistakes, and it was not something you could have predicted.

古文：丙寅，崩于豹房，年三十有一。
现代文：十四日，死于豹房，享年三十一岁。
English: On the 14th, he died in Leopard Room at the age of 31.

古文：遗诏召兴献王长子嗣位。
现代文：遗诏召兴献王长子继位。
English: The last will and testament called for Prince Xingxian's eldest son to succeed him.

古文：罢威武团营，遣还各边军，革京城内外皇店，放豹房番僧及教坊司乐人。
现代文：罢免威武团营，遣还各边军，革除京城内外皇店，释放豹房轮留值班僧人及教坊司乐人。
English: He dismissed the Weiwu regimental battalion, repatriated the troops from all sides, removed the imperial residences inside and outside the capital, and released the monks on duty at the Leopard House and the musicians at the music school.

古文：戊辰，颁遗诏于天下，释系囚，还四方所献妇女，停不急工役，收宣府行宫金宝还内库。
现代文：二十一日，颁遗诏于天下，释放在狱囚犯，退还四方进献妇女，停止不急办工役，没收宣府行宫金银财宝回内库。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial edict was issued to the world, the prisoners in the prison were released, the women donated by the four parties were returned, the non-urgent labor service was stopped, and the gold, silver and treasures confiscated from the Xuanwu Palace were returned to the inner vault.

古文：庚午，执江彬等下狱。
现代文：二十三日，捉江彬等下狱。
English: On the 23rd, Fang Jiangbin and others were released from prison.

古文：世宗入立。
现代文：世宗入朝即位。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne.

古文：五月己未，上尊谥，庙号武宗，葬康陵。
现代文：五月八日，上尊谥，庙号武宗，葬于康陵。
English: On May 8th, Shangzong Zong, temple name Wu Zong, was buried in Kangling.

