古文：◎乐一
现代文：乐一
English: 乐一

古文：古先圣王，治定功成而作乐，以合天地之性，类万物之情，天神格而民志协。
现代文：古代的圣明君王，国家安定、功业成就而制作乐，以契合天地的本性，类同万物的性情。天神来到而民心协和。
English: In ancient times, the holy Ming emperors made music for the stability of the country and the achievement of their cause, in order to fit the nature of heaven and earth, and to be similar to the nature of all things. When the gods came, the people's hearts were reconciled.

古文：盖乐者心声也，君心和，六合之内无不和矣。
现代文：音乐，是抒发心中的音声。君心协和，宇宙之内便没有不协和的。
English: Music is the voice that expresses the heart. When your heart is in harmony, there is nothing in the universe that is out of harmony.

古文：是以乐作于上，民化于下。
现代文：因此音乐作于君上，便能化育下民。
English: Therefore, if music is made for the upper class, it will be able to nurture the lower class.

古文：秦、汉而降，斯理浸微，声音之道与政治不相通，而民之风俗日趋于靡曼。
现代文：秦、汉以后，这个道理渐渐衰微，音乐之道与国家的治理不相通，而人民的风俗一天天趋于奢侈淫靡。
English: After the Qin and Han dynasties, this principle gradually waned, the way of music was not compatible with the governance of the country, and the customs of the people became more and more extravagant and lascivious.

古文：明兴，太祖锐志雅乐。
现代文：明朝兴起，太祖决心推行雅正之乐。
English: With the rise of the Ming Dynasty, Taizu was determined to promote the music of elegance.

古文：是时，儒臣冷谦、陶凯、詹同、宋濂、乐韶凤辈皆知声律，相与究切厘定。
现代文：这时，文臣冷谦、陶凯、詹同、宋濂、乐韶凤等人都通晓音律，互相研究切磋整饬改定。
English: At this time, Wencheng Lengqian, Tao Kai, Zhan Tong, Song Qi, Le Qifeng and others were all familiar with the musical rhythms, and they studied each other to rectify and revise them.

古文：而掌故阔略，欲还古音，其道无由。
现代文：而掌故空乏缺略，想要返还古音，没有途径。
English: However, there is no way to return the ancient sound.

古文：太祖亦方以下情偷薄，务严刑以束之，其于履中蹈和之本，未暇及也。
现代文：太祖也正以民情苟且浇薄，务求用严厉的刑法来约束，对于躬行中庸谦和的根本，没有时间顾及。
English: The great-great-grandfather is also taking advantage of the people's sentiments, so as to use strict criminal law to restrict, and there is no time to take into account the essence of moderation and modesty.

古文：文皇帝访问黄钟之律，臣工无能应者。
现代文：文皇帝询问黄钟的乐律，百官浚有谁能应答。
English: Emperor Wen inquired about the melody of the yellow bell, and hundreds of officials gathered to see who could answer.

古文：英、景、宪、孝之世，宫县徒为具文。
现代文：英宗、景帝、宪宗、孝宗时代，宫廷乐器悬挂四面的制度只是文字上有记载而已。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Yeongjong, Emperor Gyeonggi, Emperor Gyeongjong and Emperor Gyeongjong, the system of hanging the court musical instruments on all four sides was only recorded in writing.

古文：殿廷燕享，郊坛祭祀，教坊羽流，慢渎苟简，刘翔、胡瑞为之深慨。
现代文：朝廷宴享，郊坛祭祀，教坊乐官、道士之流，轻慢亵渎草率简略。刘翔、胡瑞为此深切慨叹。
English: The imperial court banquet, the suburban altar sacrifice, the school music officials, the Taoist school, the frivolous blasphemy, the hasty and simple. Liu Xiang and Hu Rui deeply lamented this.

古文：世宗制作自任，张鹗、李文察以审音受知，终以无成。
现代文：世宗以制礼作乐为己任，张鸡、李文察以精审音律而受到知遇，终究没有成就。
English: Shizong took it upon himself to compose music, while Zhang Ji and Li Wencha were known for their meticulous examination of musical rhythms, but in the end they achieved nothing.

古文：盖学士大夫之著述止能论其理，而施诸五音六律辄多未协，乐官能纪其铿锵鼓舞而不晓其义，是以卒世莫能明也。
现代文：原因在于学士大夫的著述祇能论说乐律的理论，而实施于五音六律，便多不协和，乐官能记录音乐的实际演奏，却不懂得它的义蕴，因此整个明代没有人能明辨。
English: The reason is that the bachelor's thesis can only discuss the theory of music rhythm, but it is implemented in the five-tone and six-tone, it is mostly discordant, the music organ can record the actual performance of music, but it does not understand its meaning, so no one can distinguish it in the entire Ming Dynasty.

古文：稽明代之制作，大抵集汉、唐、宋、元人之旧，而稍更易其名。
现代文：考察明代制礼作乐，大致集中了汉、唐、宋、丞人的旧有制度，而稍微改变了它的名称。
English: The examination of the Ming Dynasty ceremonial music, roughly concentrated the old system of Han, Tang, Song and Joseon, and slightly changed its name.

古文：凡声容之次第，器数之繁缛，在当日非不烂然俱举，第雅俗杂出，无从正之。
现代文：凡是声音仪容的次序，礼器、礼数的繁琐规定，在当时并不是不能明确地全部举出来，祇是雅俗杂糅，无法予以规正。
English: At that time, all the cumbersome rules about the order of sounds and gestures, etiquette, and the number of etiquettes could not be clearly enumerated. They were just a mixture of elegance and vulgarity, and could not be regulated.

古文：故备列于篇，以资考者。
现代文：所以全部列于篇中，以供考察的人使用。
English: Therefore, all of them are listed in the article for the use of those who investigate.

古文：太祖初克金陵，即立典乐官。
现代文：太祖当初攻下金陵，便建立主管乐的官。
English: When the great-grandfather conquered Jinling, he established an official in charge of music.

古文：其明年置雅乐，以供郊社之祭。
现代文：第二年设置雅乐，以供给郊社祭祀时使用。
English: In the second year, "Gara" music was set up to provide music for the suburb's religious services.

古文：吴元年，命自今朝贺，不用女乐。
现代文：昊元年命令从此以后朝拜庆贺，不使用女乐。
English: The order of the first year of the year of Hao states that from now on, no female music should be used in the morning worship and celebration.

古文：先是命选道童充乐舞生，至是始集。
现代文：在此之前，命令选择道童充任乐舞生，到这时纔完成。
English: Prior to this, the order was to choose a Taoist child to act as a music dancer, and by this time the dance was complete.

古文：太祖御戟门，召学士朱升、范权引乐舞生入见，阅试之。
现代文：太祖驾临戟门，召令学士朱升、范权引导乐舞生入宫拜见，检阅试用。
English: The great-grandfather drove to the imperial court gate and summoned the bachelors Zhu Sheng and Fan Quan to guide the dancers into the palace for inspection and trial.

古文：太祖亲击石磬，命升辨五音。
现代文：太祖亲自敲击石磬，命令朱升分辨五音。
English: The great-grandfather himself struck the stone gong and ordered Zhu Sheng to distinguish the five tones.

古文：升不能审，以宫音为徵音。
现代文：朱升不能明辨，把宫音误辨为征音。
English: Zhu Sheng could not distinguish it clearly, and misidentified the palace sound as a call.

古文：太祖哂其误，命乐生登歌一曲而罢。
现代文：太祖嘲笑他的错误，命令乐生唱登歌一曲而结束。
English: Taizu laughed at his mistake, ordered the musicians to sing a song and ended it.

古文：是年置太常司，其属有协律郎等官。
现代文：这年设置太常司，它的官属有协律郎等官员。
English: In this year, the Taijōji was established, and its officials included officials such as the Kyoritsuro.

古文：元末有冷谦者，知音，善鼓瑟，以黄冠隐吴山。召为协律郎，令协乐章声谱，俾乐生习之。
现代文：元代末年有一个叫冷谦的人，懂得音律，善于演奏瑟，以道士隐居昊山，征召任协律郎，命令协和乐章的音谱，使乐生练习。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a man named Leng Qian, who knew the melody and was good at playing the zither. He lived in seclusion in Haoshan as a Taoist monk. He was conscripted as a henchman, ordered the musical score of the harmony movement, and made the musicians practice.

古文：取石灵璧以制磬，采桐梓湖州以制琴瑟。
现代文：在灵璧采取石头来制作磬，在湖州采伐桐梓树来制作琴瑟。
English: In Lingbi, stones were used to make gongs, and in Huzhou, trees were cut down to make harps.

古文：乃考正四庙雅乐，命谦较定音律及编钟、编磬等器，遂定乐舞之制。
现代文：于是考察订正四庙的雅乐，命令冷谦校定音律以及编钟、编磬等乐器，于是制定乐舞的制度。
English: As a result, the inspection revised the elegant music of the four temples, ordered Leng Qian to calibrate the tuning and musical instruments such as chimes and gongs, and thus formulated a system of music and dance.

古文：乐生仍用道童，舞生改用军民俊秀子弟。
现代文：乐生仍然用道童充任，舞生改用军民中俊秀的子弟充任。
English: Music students still use Taoist children to perform the role, while dancers use the children of military and civilians to perform the role.

古文：又置教坊司，掌宴会大乐。
现代文：又设置教坊司，主管宴会的大乐。
English: There is also a teacher in charge of the banquet.

古文：设大使、副使、和声郎，左、右韶乐，左右司乐，皆以乐工为之。
现代文：设置大使、副使、和声郎，左、右韶乐，左、右司乐，都用乐工来充任。
English: Set up ambassadors, deputy envoys, and chorus singers, left and right music, left and right music, all with musicians to perform their duties.

古文：后改和声郎为奉銮。
现代文：后来改和声郎为奉銮。
English: Later, he changed his name to Bongyeong.

古文：洪武元年春，亲祭太社、太稷。
现代文：洪武元年春，皇帝亲自祭祀太社、太稷。
English: In the spring of the first year of Hongwu, the emperor himself offered sacrifices to Taisha and Taiko.

古文：夏祫享于太庙。
现代文：夏合祭于太庙。
English: The Summer Wattle Festival concludes at Taimiao.

古文：其冬祀昊天上帝于圜丘。
现代文：这年冬茌圜丘祭祀昊天上帝。
English: This year, the Midwinter Mound began to offer sacrifices to Haotian God.

古文：明年，祀皇地祇于方丘，又以次祀先农、日月、太岁、风雷、岳渎、周天星辰、历代帝王、至圣文宣王，皆定乐舞之数，奏曲之名。
现代文：第二年，在方丘祭祀皇地只，又依次祭祀先农、日月、太岁、风雷、山岳河渎、周天星辰、历代帝王、至圣文宣王孔子，都规定了乐舞的礼数，奏曲的名称。
English: In the second year, the number of dances and the names of the pieces of music and dance were determined for the Fongqiu Festival, which was held in honor of the imperial family, and also for the Spring Festival, which was held in honor of the farmers, the sun, the moon, the sun-god, the wind and thunder, the mountains and rivers, the stars in the sky, the emperors of all ages, and Confucius.

古文：圜丘：迎神，奏《中和之曲》。
现代文：圜丘：迎接神灵，演奏《中和之曲》。
English: Makioka: Greet the deities and play "Nakawa no Kyoku."

古文：奠玉帛，奏《肃和之曲》。
现代文：祭献玉帛，演奏《肃和之曲》。
English: Sacrificing the Jade Urn, playing "Shuwa no Kyoku."

古文：奉牲，奏《凝和之曲》。
现代文：供奉祭牲，演奏《凝和之曲》。
English: Offering sacrificial animals and playing the "Song of Condensation."

古文：初献，奏《寿和之曲》，《武功之舞》。
现代文：第一次献礼，演奏《寿和之曲》，舞《武功之舞》。
English: The first offering, a performance of the "Song of the Summer Solstice" and the "Dance of Martial Arts."

古文：亚献，奏《豫和之曲》，终献，奏《熙和之曲》，俱《文德之舞》。
现代文：第二次献礼，演奏《豫和之曲》，最后一次献礼，演奏《熙和之曲》，都舞《文德之舞》。
English: The second offering, a performance of the "Song of Peace," and the last offering, a performance of the "Song of Peace," both dance the "Wende Dance."

古文：彻豆，奏《雍和之曲》。
现代文：撤除俎豆，演奏《雍和之曲》。
English: Remove the peas and play "Yonghe no Kyoku."

古文：送神，奏《安和之曲》。
现代文：礼送神灵，演奏《安和之曲》。
English: Send off the deities with a performance of "Anwa no Kyoku."

古文：望燎，奏《时和之曲》。
现代文：望祀燎祭，演奏《时和之曲》。
English: On the occasion of the Shinto purification rite, the performance of "Tokiwa no Kyoku" will be held.

古文：方丘并同，曲词各异，易望燎曰望瘗。
现代文：方丘的祭仪都与此相同，而曲词不相同，改望祀燎祭为望祀痉埋。
English: The rituals of Fangqiu are all the same, but the melody is different, changing from "Wangshi" to "Wangshi" buried.

古文：太社太稷，易迎神曰《广和》，省奉牲，余并与方丘同，曲词各异。
现代文：太社太稷的祭仪，改迎接神灵演奏《广和之曲》，省去供奉祭牲，其余都与方丘祭仪相同，曲词各不相同。
English: The ritual of Taishakusha Taiken was changed to welcome the gods with a performance of the "Song of Peace," omitting the offering of sacrificial animals. The rest is the same as the Fangqiu ritual, with different lyrics.

古文：先农：迎神、奠帛，奏《永和之曲》。
现代文：先农：迎接神灵、奠献玉帛，演奏《永和之曲》。
English: Farmers: Greet the deities, present the jade bowl, and play the "Song of Eternal Peace."

古文：进俎，奏《雍和之曲》。
现代文：进献俎豆，演奏《雍和之曲》。
English: Offering peas and playing "Yonghe no Kyoku."

古文：初献、终献，并奏《寿和之曲》。
现代文：第一次祭献、最后一次祭献，都演奏《寿和之曲》。
English: For the first offering and the last offering, the "Song of Peace" is played.

古文：彻豆、送神，并奏《永和之曲》。
现代文：撤除俎豆、礼送神灵，都演奏《永和之曲》。
English: "Song of Eternal Peace" is played when removing peas and giving gifts to the gods.

古文：望瘗，奏《太和之曲》。
现代文：望祀痉埋，演奏《太和之曲》。
English: Let's bury the dead and play "Taiwa no Kyoku."

古文：朝日：迎神，奏《熙和之曲》。
现代文：朝日：迎接神灵，演奏《熙和之曲》。
English: Asahi: Greet the deities and play "Heiwa no Kyoku."

古文：奠玉帛，奏《保和之曲》。
现代文：祭献玉帛，演奏《保和之曲》。
English: Sacrificing the Jade Urn, and playing the "Song of Peace."

古文：初献，奏《安和之曲》，《武功之舞》。
现代文：第一次祭献，演奏《安和之曲》，舞《武功之舞》。
English: The first offering, performance of "Anwa no Kyoku" and dance of "Buko no Dan."

古文：亚献，奏《中和之曲》，终献，奏《肃和之曲》，俱《文德之舞》。
现代文：第二次祭献，演奏《中和之曲》，最后一次祭献，演奏《肃和之曲》，都舞《文德之舞》。
English: The second offering, a performance of the "Song of Neutrality," and the last offering, a performance of the "Song of Tranquility," both feature the "Dance of Virtue."

古文：彻豆，奏《凝和之曲》。
现代文：撤除俎豆，演奏《凝和之曲》。
English: Remove the peas and play "Condensation Song."

古文：送神，奏《寿和之曲》。
现代文：送神，演奏《寿和之曲》。
English: Send God, play "Song of the Summer Solstice."

古文：望燎，奏《豫和之曲》。
现代文：望祀燎祭，演奏《熙和之曲》。
English: On the occasion of the religious festival, the "Song of Peace" will be performed.

古文：周天星辰，初附祀夕月，洪武四年别祀：迎神，奏《凝和》。
现代文：周天星辰。最初附祭于夕月，洪武四年另外祭祀。迎接神灵，演奏《凝和之曲》。
English: Zhou Tian Xingchen. Originally, the festival was held on the evening of the first lunar month, and in the fourth year of Hongwu, another festival was held. The gods were greeted and the "Song of Condensation" was performed.

古文：奠帛、初献，奏《保和》，《武功舞》。
现代文：祭献玉帛、第一次祭献，演奏《保和之曲》，舞《武功舞》。
English: The first offering, the performance of the "Song of Peace" and the "Martial Arts Dance."

古文：亚献，奏《中和》，终献，奏《肃和》，俱《文德舞》。
现代文：第二次祭献，演奏《中和之曲》，最后一次祭献，演妻《肃和之曲》，都舞《文德之舞》。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Neutrality" was played, and for the last offering, the "Song of Tranquility" was played.

古文：彻豆，奏《豫和》。
现代文：撤除俎豆，演奏《豫和之曲》。
English: Remove the peas and play the "Song of Yuhe."

古文：送神，奏《雍和》。
现代文：礼送神灵，演奏《雍和之曲》。
English: Send off the deities, play "Yonghe no Kyoku."

古文：太庙：迎神，奏《太和之曲》。
现代文：太庙：迎接神灵，演奏《太和之曲》。
English: Taimyo: Greet the deities and listen to the performance of "Taiwa no Kyoku."

古文：奉册宝，奏《熙和之曲》。
现代文：奉献册宝，演奏《熙和之曲》。
English: They dedicated a valuable book and performed "Heiwa no Kyoku."

古文：进俎，奏《凝和之曲》。
现代文：进献俎豆，演奏《凝和之曲》。
English: Peas were offered, and "Condensation" was played.

古文：初献，奏《寿和之曲》，《武功之舞》。
现代文：第一次祭献，演奏《寿和之曲》，舞《武功之舞》。
English: The first offering, a performance of the "Song of the Summer Solstice" and the "Dance of Martial Arts."

古文：亚献，奏《豫和之曲》，终献，奏《熙和之曲》，俱《文德之舞》。
现代文：第二次祭献，演奏《豫和之曲》，最后一次祭献，演奏《熙和之曲》，都舞《文德之舞》。
English: The second offering, a performance of the "Song of Peace," and the last offering, a performance of the "Song of Peace," both dance the "Wende Dance."

古文：彻豆，奏《雍和之曲》。
现代文：撤除俎豆，演奏《雍和之曲》。
English: Remove the peas and play "Yonghe no Kyoku."

古文：送神，奏《安和之曲》。
现代文：礼送神灵，演奏《安和之曲》。
English: Send off the deities with a performance of "Anwa no Kyoku."

古文：初献则德、懿、熙、仁各奏乐舞，亚、终献则四庙共之。
现代文：第一次祭献则德、懿、熙、仁庙各自演奏乐曲舞蹈。第二次、最后一次祭献则四庙共同进行。
English: For the first offering, De, Min, Hee, and Ren temples each performed music and dance. For the second and final offering, the four temples performed together.

古文：释奠孔子：初用大成登歌旧乐。
现代文：在学校祭奠孔子，开初用大成登歌的旧有乐曲。
English: Confucius was commemorated at the school, and for the first time, an old folk song was used.

古文：洪武六年，始命詹同、乐韶凤等更制乐章。
现代文：洪武六年纔命令詹同、乐韶凤等重新制作乐章。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered Zhan Tong, Le Qifeng and others to remake the music.

古文：迎神，奏《咸和》。
现代文：迎接神灵，演奏《咸和之曲》。
English: Greet the deities and play the "Song of Harmony."

古文：奠帛，奏《宁和》。
现代文：祭献玉帛，演奏《宁和之曲》。
English: Offering up the Jade Urn, and playing the "Song of Peace."

古文：初献，奏《安和》。
现代文：第一次祭献，演奏《安和之曲》。
English: The first offering, a rendition of "Anwa no Kyoku."

古文：亚献、终献，奏《景和》。
现代文：第二次祭献、最后一次祭献，演奏《景和之曲》。
English: The second offering, the last offering, was a performance of "Kagewa no Kyoku."

古文：彻馔、送神，奏《咸和》。
现代文：撤除仆食、礼送神灵，演奏《咸和之曲》。
English: Remove the food, send a gift to the gods, and play the "Song of the Salty Sea."

古文：历代帝王：迎神，奏《雍和》。
现代文：历代帝王：迎接神灵，演奏《雍和之曲》。
English: The emperors of past generations: greeted the gods and played "Yonghe no Kyoku."

古文：奠帛、初献，奏《保和》，《武功舞》。
现代文：祭献玉帛、第一次祭献，演奏《保和之曲》，舞《武功舞》。
English: The first offering, the performance of the "Song of Peace" and the "Martial Arts Dance."

古文：亚献，奏《中和》，终献，奏《肃和》，俱《文德舞》。
现代文：第二次祭献，演奏《中和之曲》，最后一次祭献，演奏《肃和之曲》，都舞《文德舞》。
English: For the second offering, the "Song of Neutrality" was played, and for the last offering, the "Song of Tranquility" was played.

古文：彻豆，奏《凝和》。
现代文：撤除俎豆，演奏《凝和之曲》。
English: Remove the peas and play "Condensation Song."

古文：送神，奏《寿和》。
现代文：礼送礼灵，演奏《寿和之曲》。
English: Gifts are given, and the "Song of the Summer Solstice" is performed.

古文：望瘗，奏《豫和》。
现代文：望祀痉埋，演奏《豫和之曲》。
English: Let's bury the dead and play "Yuwa no Kyoku."

古文：又定王国祭祀乐章：迎神，奏《太清之曲》。
现代文：又制定藩王国祭祀的乐章。迎接神灵，演奏《太清之曲》。
English: In addition, the music for the sacrificial rites of the kingdom of the domain was also established. To welcome the deities, "Taisei no Kyoku" was played.

古文：初献，奏《寿清之曲》。
现代文：第一次祭献，演奏《寿清之曲》。
English: The first offering, a performance of the "Song of Shouqing."

古文：亚献，奏《豫清之曲》。
现代文：第二次祭献，演奏《豫清之曲》。
English: The second offering, a performance of the "Song of Yuqing."

古文：终献，奏《熙清之曲》。
现代文：最后一次祭献，演奏《熙清之曲》。
English: The last offering, a performance of the "Song of He Qing."

古文：彻馔，奏《雍清之曲》。
现代文：撤除僎食，演奏《雍清之曲》。
English: Take away the yakitori and play "Song of the Yongqing Dynasty."

古文：送神，奏《安清之曲》。
现代文：礼送神灵，演奏《安清之曲》。
English: He gave a gift to the gods and played "Anqing's Song."

古文：其社稷山川，易迎神为《广清》，增奉瘗曰《时清》。
现代文：社稷山川，改变迎接神灵演奏《广清之曲》，增加供奉痉埋礼演奏《时清之曲》。
English: The company changed the performance of "Guangqing Song" to welcome the gods, and added the performance of "Jiqing Song" for the burial ceremony.

古文：此祭祀之乐歌节奏也。
现代文：这些是祭祀的乐歌节奏。
English: These are the rhythms of sacred music.

古文：洪武三年，又定朝会宴飨之制。
现代文：洪武三年，又制定朝会宴飨的礼制。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the etiquette of the imperial banquet was established.

古文：凡圣节、正旦、冬至、大朝贺，和声郎陈乐于丹墀百官拜位之南，北向。
现代文：凡是皇帝生日、正月初一、冬至、大型朝贺，和声郎在宫廷台阶百官礼拜位的南面陈列乐器，面向北。
English: For the emperor's birthday, the first day of the first month of the year, the winter solstice, and large-scale morning greetings, the accordionist displayed musical instruments on the south side of the palace steps, facing north.

古文：驾出，仗动。
现代文：车驾出，仪仗动。
English: The car pulls out and the ceremony begins.

古文：和声郎举麾，奏《飞龙引之曲》，乐作，升座。
现代文：和声郎举起指挥的小旗，演奏《飞龙引之曲》，音乐奏起，升登座位。
English: The accompanist held up the conductor's small flag and played "The Song of the Flying Dragon," the music began, and everyone rose to their seats.

古文：乐止，偃麾。
现代文：音乐停止，放下指挥小旗。
English: Stop the music, lower the conductor's pennant.

古文：百官拜，奏《风云会之曲》，拜毕，乐止。
现代文：百官跪拜，演奏《风云会之曲》，礼拜完睪，音乐停止。
English: The officials kneeled and played the "Song of the Wind and Cloud," and after the service, the music stopped.

古文：丞相上殿致词，奏《庆皇都之曲》，致词毕，乐止。
现代文：丞相上殿致上贺辞，演奏《庆皇都之曲》，致献贺辞完毕，音乐停止。
English: The prime minister delivered a congratulatory speech to the upper court and played the "Song of the Imperial Capital." After the congratulatory speech, the music stopped.

古文：百官又拜，奏《喜升平之曲》，拜毕，乐止。
现代文：百官又跪拜，演奏《喜升平之曲》，礼拜完毕，音乐停止。
English: The officials bowed again and played the "Song of the Rising Sun." After the prayer, the music stopped.

古文：驾兴，奏《贺圣朝之曲》，还宫，乐止。
现代文：皇帝起身，演奏脑圣朝之曲》，返回宫中，音乐停止。
English: The emperor got up and played the "Song of the Holy Spirit," returned to the palace, and the music stopped.

古文：百官退，和声郎、乐工以次出。
现代文：百官退朝，和声郎、乐工依次退出。
English: Hundreds of officials retreated to the imperial court, and the singers and musicians left in turn.

古文：凡宴飨，和声郎四人总乐舞，二人执麾，立乐工前之两旁；二人押乐，立乐工后之两旁。
现代文：凡是宴飨，和声郎四人总管乐舞，二人持指挥小旗，站在乐工前面的两旁；二人监督音乐，站立在乐工后面的两旁。
English: Whenever there is a banquet, the four choristers are in charge of the music and dance. Two of them hold the conductor's flag and stand on both sides in front of the musicians; two supervise the music and stand on both sides behind the musicians.

古文：殿上陈设毕，和声郎执麾由两阶升，立于御酒案之左右；二人引歌工、乐工由两阶升，立于丹陛上之两旁，东西向。
现代文：殿上陈设完毕，和声郎持着指挥小旗从两边台阶升登，站立在御酒案的左右两旁；二人引导歌工、乐工从台阶两边升登，站在台阶上的两旁，东西相向。
English: When the decorations in the hall were complete, the harmonica player, holding the conductor's flag, ascended the steps on both sides and stood on the left and right sides of the wine case; the two of them guided the singers and musicians up the steps on both sides and stood on both sides of the steps, facing east and west.

古文：舞师二人执旌，引武舞士立于西阶下之南；又二人执翿，引文舞士立于东阶下之南；又二人执幢，引四夷舞士立于武舞之西南；俱北向。
现代文：舞师二人持着羽尾装饰的小旗，引导舞士站在西阶下的南面；又有二人持着羽饰旗，引导文舞士站在东面台阶下的南面；又有二人持着幢旗，引导各地夷人舞士站在武舞的西南面；都面朝北方。
English: Two dancers holding small flags decorated with feather tails guide the dancers to stand on the south side under the west steps; two more holding feather-decorated flags guide the bun dancers to stand on the south side under the east steps; two more holding flags guide the barbarian dancers from all over the country to stand on the southwest side of the martial dance; the capital faces north.

古文：武舞曰《平定天下之舞》，象以武功定祸乱也；文舞曰《车书会同之舞》，象以文德致太平也；四夷舞曰《抚安四夷之舞》，象以威德服远人也。
现代文：武舞称《平定天下之舞》，象征用武功平定祸乱；文舞称《车书会同之舞》，象征以文德达到太平；各地夷人舞称《抚安四夷之舞》，象征用威严德泽宾服远方之人。
English: The martial dance is called the "Dance of Pacifying the World," symbolizing the use of martial arts to pacify the calamity; the literary dance is called the "Dance of Caring," symbolizing the use of literature to achieve peace; the dance of the barbarians in various regions is called the "Dance of the Four Barbarians," symbolizing the use of majesty to serve the distant people.

古文：此大乐二人，执戏竹，引大乐工陈列于丹陛之西，文武二舞乐工列于丹陛之东，四夷乐工列于四夷舞之北，俱北向。
现代文：引导大乐二人，持着指挥奏乐的戏竹，引导大乐工陈列在宫廷台阶的西面，文、武二舞乐工陈列在宫廷台阶的东面，四方夷乐工陈列在四方夷人舞的北面，都面朝北方。
English: The two conductors of the great music, holding the bamboos for conducting the music, and the conductors of the great music are displayed on the west side of the palace steps, the musicians of the literary and martial arts are displayed on the east side of the palace steps, and the musicians of the four directions are displayed on the north side of the four directions, all facing north.

古文：驾将出，仗动，大乐作。
现代文：皇帝车驾将要出来，仪仗行动，大乐奏起。
English: The emperor's carriage will come out, the ceremonial action will begin, and the grand music will begin.

古文：升座，乐止。
现代文：登上座位，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, the music has stopped.

古文：进第一爵，和声郎举麾，唱奏《起临濠之曲》。
现代文：进献第一巡爵，和声郎举起指挥小旗，歌唱演奏《起临濠之曲》。
English: For the dedication of the first brigadier, the harmonica player raised the conductor's pennant and sang and played the "Song of the Rising Sun."

古文：引乐二人引歌工、乐工诣酒案前，北面，重行立定。
现代文：引导乐工的二人引领歌工、乐工到酒案前面，面向北，重叠行列站定。
English: The two people guiding the musicians lead the singers and musicians to the front of the wine case, facing north, and the overlapping rows stand still.

古文：奏毕，偃麾，押乐引众工退。
现代文：奏乐结束，放下指挥小旗，监督音乐的人引导众歌工、乐工退下。
English: At the end of the performance, the conductor's flag is lowered, and the person supervising the music leads the singers and musicians to withdraw.

古文：第二，奏《开太平之曲》。
现代文：进献第二巡爵，演奏《开太平之曲》。
English: Presented by the 2nd Battalion of Foot Guards, playing "Kai Taihei no Kyoku."

古文：第三，奏《安建业之曲》。
现代文：进献第三巡爵，演奏《安建业之曲》。
English: Presented by the third brigadier general, and played "An Jianye's Song."

古文：第四，奏《大一统之曲》。
现代文：进献第四巡爵，演奏《削群雄之曲》。
English: Presenting the fourth brigadier general, playing "The Song of the Scraping Crowd."

古文：第五，奏《平幽都之典》。
现代文：进献第五巡爵，演奏《平幽都之曲》。
English: Presenting the fifth grand marshal, and playing "Pingyutou no Kyoku."

古文：第六，奏《抚四夷之曲》。
现代文：进献第六巡爵，演奏《抚四夷之曲》。
English: Presented by the 6th brigadier general, playing "Fushii no Kyoku."

古文：第七，奏《定封赏之曲》。
现代文：进献第七巡爵，演奏《定封赏之曲》。
English: Presented by the 7th brigadier general, the performance of "Song of Appreciation."

古文：第八，奏《大一统之曲》。
现代文：进献第八巡爵，演奏《大一统乏曲》。
English: Presented by the 8th grand marshal, the performance of the "Grand Unification Anthem."

古文：第九，奏《守承平之曲》。
现代文：进献第九巡爵，演奏《守承平之曲》。
English: A tribute to the ninth brigadier general, playing "Shou Shouhei's Song."

古文：其举麾、偃麾，歌工、乐工进退，皆如前仪。
现代文：其间举起指挥小旗、放下指挥小旗，歌工、乐工的进入退下，都如同前面所述的仪节。
English: In the meantime, the conductor's flag is raised, the conductor's flag is lowered, and the singers and musicians enter and leave, all as in the ceremony described above.

古文：进第一次膳，和声郎举麾，唱奏《飞龙引之乐》，大乐作。
现代文：进呈第一次膳食，和声郎举起指挥小旗，歌唱演奏《飞龙引之乐》，大乐奏起。
English: When the first meal was served, the harmonica player held up the conductor's flag, sang and played "The Music of the Flying Dragon," and the concert began.

古文：食毕，乐止，偃麾。
现代文：饮食完毕，音乐停止，放下指挥小旗。
English: When the meal is over, the music stops, and the conductor's flag is lowered.

古文：第二，奏《风云会之乐》。
现代文：进呈第二次膳食，演奏《风云会之乐》。
English: The second meal was served, and "The Music of Fengyunkai" was played.

古文：第三，奏《庆皇都之乐》。
现代文：进呈第三次膳食，演奏《庆皇都之乐》。
English: The third meal was served, and "The Music of the Imperial Capital" was played.

古文：第四，奏《平定天下之舞》。
现代文：进呈第四次膳食，演奏《平定天下之舞》。
English: The fourth meal was served, and the "Dance to Pacify the World" was performed.

古文：第五，奏《贺圣朝之乐》。
现代文：进呈第五次膳食，演奏《贺圣朝之乐》。
English: The fifth meal was served, and the "Song of the Sacred Pilgrimage" was played.

古文：第六，奏《抚安四夷之舞》。
现代文：进呈第六次膳食，演奏《抚安四夷之舞》。
English: The sixth meal was served, and the "Dance of the Four Emperors of Fuan" was performed.

古文：第七，奏《九重欢之乐》。
现代文：进呈第七次膳食，演奏《九重欢之乐》。
English: Presenting the seventh meal, playing "Ninefold Joy."

古文：第八，奏《车书会同之舞》。
现代文：进呈第八次膳食，演奏《车书会同之舞》。
English: The eighth meal was served, and the "Dance of the Car Club" was performed.

古文：第九，奏《万年春之乐》。
现代文：进呈第九次膳食，演奏《万年春之乐》。
English: The ninth meal was served, and "The Music of Everlasting Spring" was played.

古文：其举麾、偃麾如前仪。
现代文：其间举起指挥小旗、放下指挥小旗都如同前面所述的仪节。
English: In the meantime, the raising of the flag of command and the lowering of the flag of command are performed in the same manner as described above.

古文：九奏三舞既毕，驾兴，大乐作。
现代文：九次演奏、三遍舞蹈结束，皇帝起身，大乐奏起。
English: After nine performances and three rounds of dancing, the emperor stood up and the grand music began.

古文：入宫，乐止，和声郎执麾引众工以次出。
现代文：入宫，音乐停止，和声郎持着指挥小旗引导众歌工、乐工、舞工依次退出。
English: After entering the palace, the music stopped, and the singer, holding the conductor's flag, led the singers, musicians, and dancers out of the palace.

古文：宴飨之曲，后凡再更。
现代文：宴飨的乐曲，后来共更改两次。
English: The music of the banquet was later changed twice.

古文：四年所定，一曰《本太初》，二曰《仰大明》，三曰《民初生》，四曰《品物亨》，五曰《御六龙》，六曰《泰阶平》，七曰《君德成》，八曰《圣道行》，九曰《乐清宁》。
现代文：四年制定的，一是《本太初》，二是《仰大明》，三是《民初生》，四是《品物亨》，五是《御六龙》，六是《泰阶平》，七是《君德成》，八是《圣道行》，九是《乐清宁》。
English: They were formulated in four years. The first was "The Beginning of the Book," the second was "Mount Daming," the third was "The First-Born of the People," the fourth was "Goods and Wares," the fifth was "The Six Dragons," the sixth was "Tai Ji Ping," the seventh was "Jun De Cheng," the eighth was "Walking the Holy Path," and the ninth was "Joy and Purity."

古文：其词，詹同、陶凯所制也。
现代文：它的歌词是詹同、陶凯所作。
English: Its lyrics were written by Zhan Tong and Tao Kai.

古文：十五年所定，一曰《炎精开运》，二曰《皇风》，三曰《眷皇明》，四曰《天道传》，五曰《振皇纲》，六曰《金陵》，七曰《长杨》，八曰《芳醴》，九曰《驾六龙》。
现代文：十五年作成，一是《炎精开运》，二是《皇风》，三是《眷皇明》，四是《天道传》，五是《振皇纲》，六是《金陵》，七是《长杨》，八是《芳醴》，九是《驾六龙》。
English: It was written over a period of fifteen years. The first one is "Flamethrower," the second one is "Imperial Wind," the third one is "Favorite of the Emperor," the fourth one is "The Legend of Heaven," the fifth one is "Imperial Curriculum," the sixth one is "Jinling," the seventh one is "Changyang," the eighth one is "Aroma," and the ninth one is "Ride the Six Dragons."

古文：凡大朝贺，教坊司设中和韶乐于殿之东西，北向；陈大舞于丹陛之东西，亦北向。驾兴，中和韶乐奏《圣安之曲》。
现代文：凡是大朝贺，教坊司在殿堂的东西面陈设中和韶乐，面向北；在台阶的东西面陈设大舞，也面向北。皇帝起身，中和韶乐奏《圣安之曲》。
English: Usually, for the grand morning greetings, the priest would set up the music and dance on the east and west sides of the hall, facing north. The dance would be set up on the east and west sides of the steps, also facing north. The emperor would stand up and play the "Song of St. Ann" with the music and dance.

古文：升座进宝，乐止。
现代文：登上座位进献宝物，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, make your offerings, and the music stops.

古文：百官拜，大乐作。
现代文：百官礼拜，大乐奏起。
English: The dignitaries pray, and the grand music begins.

古文：拜毕，乐止。
现代文：礼拜结束，音乐停止。
English: When the service is over, the music stops.

古文：进表，大乐作。
现代文：进呈章表，大乐奏起。
English: After the presentation of the list of movements, the concert began.

古文：进讫，乐止。
现代文：进呈结束，音乐停止。
English: After the presentation, the music stopped.

古文：宣表目，致贺讫，百官俯伏，大乐作。
现代文：宣读章表目录，致上贺辞结束，百官俯身伏首，大乐奏起。
English: The chapter list was read out, the congratulatory speech concluded, the officials bowed their heads, and the grand music began.

古文：拜毕，乐止。
现代文：礼拜结束，音乐停止。
English: When the service is over, the music stops.

古文：宣制讫，百官舞蹈山呼，大乐作。
现代文：宣唱皇帝制命结束，百官行舞蹈山呼礼，大乐奏起。
English: The proclamation of the end of the emperor's system of command, the dance of the hundred officials, the shouts from the mountains, and the grand music began.

古文：拜毕，乐止。
现代文：礼拜结束，音乐停止。
English: When the service is over, the music stops.

古文：驾兴，中和韶乐奏《定安之曲》，导驾至华盖殿，乐止。
现代文：皇帝起身，中和韶乐演奏《定安之曲》，导引皇帝车驾到华盖殿，音乐停止。
English: The emperor got up, played "Jingan's Song" by Zhonghe Gongle, guided the emperor's car to Huagai Hall, and the music stopped.

古文：百官以次出。
现代文：百官依次退出。
English: Hundreds of officials withdrew in turn.

古文：其大宴飨，教坊司设中和韶乐于殿内，设大乐于殿外，立三舞杂队于殿下。
现代文：其大宴飨，教坊司左殿内设置中和韶乐，在殿外设置大乐，在殿下排立三舞杂队。
English: Its grand banquet, the left hall of the teacher's office is set up in the middle and the music, the hall is set up outside the hall, and the three dances are lined up in the hall.

古文：驾兴，大乐作。
现代文：皇帝起身，大乐奏响。
English: The emperor stood up, and the grand music began to play.

古文：升座，乐止。
现代文：登上座位，音乐停止。
English: Take your seats, the music has stopped.

古文：文武官入列于殿外，北向拜，大乐作。
现代文：文武官员在殿外入列，面向北跪拜，大乐奏起。
English: The civil and military officials lined up outside the hall, kneeled facing north, and the grand music began.

古文：拜毕，乐止。
现代文：礼拜结束，音乐停止。
English: When the service is over, the music stops.

古文：进御筵，乐作。
现代文：进献御筵，音乐奏起。
English: The music begins with the chanting of the Imperial Anthem.

古文：进讫，乐止。
现代文：进献完毕，音乐停止。
English: After the presentation, the music stopped.

古文：进花，乐作。
现代文：进献花，音乐奏起。
English: Flowers are presented, and the music begins.

古文：进讫，乐止。
现代文：进献结束，音乐停止。
English: After the presentation, the music stopped.

古文：进第一爵，教坊司奏《炎精开运之曲》，乐作。
现代文：进献第一巡爵，教坊司演奏《炎精开运之曲》，音乐奏起。
English: Presented by the First Constable, the Preceptor played "The Song of the Fire Sprite," and the music began.

古文：内外官拜毕，乐止。
现代文：内外官礼拜结束，音乐停止。
English: At the end of the Foreign Minister's sermon, the music stopped.

古文：散花，乐作。
现代文：散发鲜花，音乐奏起。
English: The flowers are scattered and the music begins.

古文：散讫，乐止。
现代文：散发结束，音乐停止。
English: The distribution ends, the music stops.

古文：第二爵，教坊司奏《皇风之曲》。
现代文：进献第二巡爵，教坊司演奏《皇风之曲》。
English: The second-in-command presented a gift, and the teacher played the "Song of the Imperial Wind."

古文：乐止，进汤。
现代文：音乐停止，进献汤。
English: The music stops and soup is served.

古文：鼓吹飨节前导至殿外，鼓吹止，殿上乐作。
现代文：鼓吹飨节在前面引导到达殿外，鼓吹音乐停止，殿上的音乐奏起。
English: Preaching the Dragon Boat Festival in front leads to the outside of the hall, the preaching music stops, and the music in the hall begins.

古文：群臣汤馔成，乐止。
现代文：群臣食汤锲结束，音乐停止。
English: The soup kitchen is over and the music has stopped.

古文：武舞入，教坊司请奏《平定天下之舞》。
现代文：武舞进入，教坊司请求演奏《平定天下之舞》。
English: The martial dance enters, and the teacher asks for a rendition of the "Dance to Pacify the World."

古文：第三爵，教坊司请奏《眷皇明之曲》，进酒如前仪。
现代文：进献第三巡爵，教坊司请求演奏《眷皇明之曲》，进献酒如同前面叙述的礼仪。
English: The third brigadier presented a gift, the superintendent of schools asked for a performance of the "Song of the Imperial Family," and the gift of wine was presented as per the previously described etiquette.

古文：乐止，教坊司请奏《抚安四夷之舞》。
现代文：音乐停止，教坊司请求演奏《抚安四夷之舞》。
English: The music stopped, and the teacher asked for a rendition of "Dance of the Four Emperors of Fu'an."

古文：第四爵，奏《天道传之曲》，进酒进汤如前仪。
现代文：进献第四巡爵，演奏《天道传之曲》，进献酒、进献汤如同先前的礼仪。
English: The fourth brigadier general was presented, the "Song of Heaven" was played, and wine and soup were offered, as was the previous etiquette.

古文：乐止，奏《车书会同之舞》。
现代文：音乐停止，演奏《车书会同之舞》。
English: The music stops, and "Dance of the Car Club" is played.

古文：第五爵，奏《振皇纲之曲》，进酒如前仪。
现代文：进献第五巡爵，演奏《振皇纲之曲》，进献酒如同前面所述的礼仪。
English: The presentation of the fifth knight, the playing of "The Emperor's Anthem" and the presentation of wine followed the aforementioned etiquette.

古文：乐止，奏百戏承应。
现代文：音乐停止，奏进百戏杂技艺人表演。
English: The music stops and the acrobats perform.

古文：第六爵，奏《金陵之曲》，进酒进汤如前仪。
现代文：进献第六巡爵，演奏《金陵之曲》，进献酒、进献汤如同前面所述仪节。
English: The presentation of the sixth brigadier general, the performance of the "Song of Jinling," the presentation of wine, and the presentation of soup are similar to the ceremonies mentioned above.

古文：乐止，奏八蛮献宝承应。
现代文：音乐停止，进奏八蛮献宝的艺人表演。
English: The music stops, and the musicians of the Eight Immortals perform.

古文：第七爵，奏《长杨之曲》，进酒如前仪。
现代文：进献第七巡爵，演奏《长杨之曲》，进献酒如同前面叙述的仪节。
English: The presentation of the seventh brigadier, the performance of the "Song of the Long Yang," and the presentation of wine are similar to the ceremony described above.

古文：乐止，奏采莲队子承应。
现代文：音乐停止，进奏采莲队子的艺人表演。
English: The music stopped and the performers of the Lotus Picking Team performed.

古文：第八爵，奏《芳醴之曲》，进酒进汤如前仪。
现代文：进献第八巡爵，演奏《芳醴之曲》，进献酒和汤如同前面所述仪节。
English: The presentation of the eighth legionnaire, the playing of the Song of Solomon, and the presentation of wine and soup followed the same ritual as before.

古文：乐止，奏鱼跃于渊承应。
现代文：音乐停止，进奏鱼跃于渊的艺人表演。
English: The music stopped, and the performers performed a fish-leaping-into-the-abyss routine.

古文：第九爵，奏《驾六龙之曲》，进酒如前仪。
现代文：进献第九巡爵，演奏《驾六龙之曲》，进献酒如同前面所述仪节。
English: The presentation of the 9th brigadier general, the performance of the "Chariot of the Six Dragons" and the presentation of wine are the same as the ceremony mentioned above.

古文：乐止，收爵。
现代文：音乐停止，收起酒爵。
English: Stop the music, put down the sherry.

古文：进汤，进大膳，乐作。
现代文：进献汤，进献大膳，音乐奏起。
English: The soup is served, the meal is served, and the music begins.

古文：供群臣饭食讫，乐止，百花队舞承应。
现代文：供给群臣饭食完毕，音乐停止，进奏百花队伍的艺人表演。
English: After the meal was served to the ministers, the music stopped, and the artists of the Hundred Flowers Team performed.

古文：宴成彻案。
现代文：宴会完成撤除食案。
English: The banquet completed the removal of the meal plan.

古文：群臣出席，北向拜，乐作。
现代文：群臣走出座席，面向北跪拜，音乐奏起。
English: The ministers come out of their seats and kneel facing north, and the music begins.

古文：拜毕，乐止。
现代文：礼拜结束，音乐停止。
English: When the service is over, the music stops.

古文：驾兴，大乐作、鸣鞭，百官以次出。
现代文：皇帝起身，大乐妻起，呜礼鞭以示肃静，百官依次退出。
English: The emperor stood up, the grand music wife stood up, bowed and whipped to show silence, and the hundred officials withdrew in turn.

古文：此朝贺宴飨之乐歌节奏也。
现代文：以上这些是朝贺宴飨的乐歌节奏。
English: These are the rhythms of the songs at the morning greeting banquet.

古文：其乐器之制，郊丘庙社，洪武元年定。
现代文：乐器的制度，郊丘庙社，在洪武元年制定。
English: The musical instrument system, Suburban Hill Temple Society, was established in the first year of Hongwu.

古文：乐工六十二人，编钟、编磬各十六，琴十，瑟四，搏拊四，柷敔各一，壎四，篪四，箫八，笙八，笛四，应鼓一；歌工十二；协律郎一从执麾以引之。
现代文：乐工六十二人，编钟、编磬各十六人，琴十人，瑟四人，搏拊四人，祝、敔各一人，塌四人，篪四人，箫八人，笙八人，笛四人，应鼓一人；歌工十二人；协律郎一人持指挥小旗来引导他们。
English: Sixty-two musicians, sixteen each for the bells and cymbals, ten for the harps, four for the viols, four for the cymbals, one for the gongs, one for the cymbals, four for the viols, four for the cymbals, four for the cymbals, eight for the viols, eight for the violas, four for the flutes, one for the drums; twelve singers; and an usher with a flag to lead them.

古文：七年复增籥四，凤笙四，壎用六，搏拊用二，共七十二人。
现代文：七年，又增加钥四人，凤笙四人，塌用六人，搏拊用二人，共七十二人。
English: In seven years, four more people were added to the key, four to the phoenix, six to the pigeon, and two to the pigeon, for a total of seventy-two people.

古文：舞则武舞生六十二人，引舞二人，各执干戚；文舞生六十二人，引舞二人，各执羽籥；舞师二人执节以引之。共一百三十人。
现代文：舞则武舞生六十二人，引舞二人，各自手持盾牌和大斧；文舞生六十二入，引舞二人，各自手持羽钥；舞师二人手持节杖导引，共一百三十人。
English: For the dance, there are sixty-two martial dancers, led by two dancers, each holding a shield and a large axe; sixty-two literary dancers, led by two dancers, each holding a feather key; and two dancers, each holding a staff, for a total of one hundred and thirty people.

古文：惟文庙乐生六十人，编钟、编磬各十六，琴十，瑟四，搏拊四，柷敔各一，壎四，篪四，箫八，笙八，笛四，大鼓一；歌工十。
现代文：只有文庙用乐生六十人，编钟、编磬各十六人，琴十人，瑟四人，搏拊四人，祝、敔各一人，垠四人，篪四人，箫八人，笙八人，笛四人，大鼓一人；歌工十人。
English: Only the Wenmiao Temple has sixty musicians, sixteen each for the chime and gong, ten for the harp, four for the flute, four for the gong, one each for the bell and gong, four for the gong, four for the gong, four for the gong, eight for the gong, eight for the gong, four for the flute, and one for the large drum; ten singers.

古文：六年铸太和钟。
现代文：六年，铸造太和钟。
English: Six years later, the Taihe bell was cast.

古文：其制，仿宋景钟。
现代文：其形制，仿照宋代的景钟。
English: Its shape is modeled after the Song Dynasty bell.

古文：以九九为数，高八尺一寸。
现代文：以九九为数，高八尺一寸。
English: He was ninety-nine years old and eight feet one inch tall.

古文：拱以九龙，柱以龙虡，建楼于圜丘斋宫之东北，悬之。
现代文：以九龙为拱，以龙簇为柱，在圜丘斋宫的东北建造楼，悬挂太和钟。
English: With Kowloon as the arch and the dragon cluster as the pillar, a building was built in the northeast of the Mengqiu Palace, and a bell was hung.

古文：郊祀，驾动则钟声作。
现代文：郊祀，皇帝动身，钟声即起。
English: Suburban worship, the emperor departs, and the bells ring out.

古文：升坛，钟止，众音作。
现代文：登上祭坛，钟声便停止，众音奏起。
English: Once on the altar, the bells stop and the mass begins.

古文：礼毕，升辇，钟声作。
现代文：礼仪结束，登上辇车，钟声响起。
English: After the ceremony, they boarded the carriage and the bells rang.

古文：俟导驾乐作，乃止。
现代文：等到导引皇帝车驾的音乐奏响，纔停止。
English: Wait until the music that guides the emperor's chariot begins to play, and the gongs will stop.

古文：十七年改铸，减其尺十之四焉。
现代文：十七年改铸，减少尺寸的十分之四。
English: Seventeen years later, it was recast and reduced in size by four-tenths.

古文：朝贺。
现代文：朝贺。
English: Morning greetings.

古文：洪武三年定丹陛大乐：箫四，笙四，箜篌四，方响四，头管四，龙笛四，琵琶四，闉六，杖鼓二十四，大鼓二，板二。
现代文：洪武三年，制定丹陛大乐：箫四人，笙四人，箜篌四人，方响四人，头管四人，龙笛四人，琵琶四人，筑六人，杖鼓二十四人，大鼓二人，板二人。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Emperor Tang's great music was formulated: gong four people, gong four people, gong four people, square bell four people, head pipe four people, dragon flute four people, lute four people, zong six people, cane drum twenty-four people, large drum two people, board two people.

古文：二十六年又定殿中韶乐：箫十二，笙十二，排箫四，横笛十二，壎四，篪四，琴十，瑟四，编钟二，编磬二，应鼓二，柷一，敔一，捕拊二，丹陛大乐：戏竹二，箫十二，笙十二，笛十二，头管十二，闉八，琵琶八，二十弦八，方响二，鼓二，拍板八，杖鼓十二。
现代文：二十六年，又制定殿中韶乐：箫十二人，笙十二人，排箫四人，横笛十二人，垠四人，篪四人，琴十人，瑟四人，编钟二人，编盘二人，应鼓二人，祝一人，敔一人，搏拊二人。丹陛大乐：戏竹二人，箫十二人，笙十二人，笛十二人，头管十二人，纂八人，琵琶八人，二十弦八人，方响二人，鼓二人，拍板八人，杖鼓十二人。
English: In the 26th year, the music of the hall was also established: twelve strings, twelve strings, four plucked strings, twelve flutes, four gongs, four gongs, ten harps, four serpents, two chimes, two cymbals, two drums, two wishes, one gong, two gongs. The music of the emperor: two bamboos, twelve strings, twelve gongs, twelve flutes, twelve trumpets, eight cymbals, eight lutes, eight strings, two gongs, two drums, eight cymbals, twelve cymbals.

古文：命妇朝贺中宫，设女乐：戏竹二，箫十四，笙十四，笛十四，头管十四，闉十，琵琶八，二十弦八，方响六，鼓五，拍板八，杖鼓十二。
现代文：受封号妇女朝贺中宫皇后，设置女乐：戏竹二人，箫十四人，笙十四人，笛十四人，头管十四人，纂十人，琵琶八人，二十弦八人，方响六人，鼓五人，拍板八人，杖鼓十二人。
English: The woman who received the title, the Empress of the Imperial Palace of Asaga, is set to female music: two string players, fourteen gongs, fourteen cymbals, fourteen flutes, fourteen bells, ten cymbals, eight lutes, eight 20 string instruments, six square bells, five drums, eight cymbals, and twelve cymbals.

古文：正旦、冬至、千秋凡三节。
现代文：正月旦日、冬至、千秋节共三个节日。
English: New Year's Day, Winter Solstice, and the Thousand-Autumn Festival are a total of three festivals.

古文：其后太皇太后、皇太后并用之。
现代文：此后太皇太后、皇太后都使用这个礼仪。
English: Since then, both the Grand Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager have used this etiquette.

古文：朔望朝参：戏竹二，箫四，笙四，笛四，头管四，闉二，琵琶二，二十弦二，方响一，鼓一，拍板二，杖鼓六。
现代文：朔日、望日朝见参拜：戏竹二人，箫四人，笙四人，笛四人，头管四人，纂二人，琵琶二人，二十弦二人，方响一人，鼓一人，掐板二人，杖鼓六人。
English: On the morning of the new year and the morning of the day of the rising sun, visit the following: two bamboo players, four gongs, four cymbals, four flutes, four pipe organs, two mandolins, two lutes, two twenty-stringed instruments, one square bell, one drum, two seesaws, and six cudgels.

古文：大宴。
现代文：大宴。
English: A big feast.

古文：洪武元年定殿内侑食乐：箫六，笙六，歌工四。
现代文：洪武元年，制定殿内侑食音乐：箫六人，笙六人，歌工四人。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, it was decided that there should be six singers, six musicians, and four singers to perform the music in the hall.

古文：丹陛大乐：戏竹二，箫四，笙四，琵琶六，闉六，箜篌四，方响四，头管四，龙笛四，杖鼓二十四，大鼓二，板二。
现代文：丹陛大乐：戏竹二人，箫四人，笙四人，琵琶六人，纂六人，箜篌四人，方响四人，头管四人，龙笛四人，杖鼓二十四人，大鼓二人，板二人。
English: Dan His Majesty's Great Music: two bamboo players, four gongs, four cymbals, six lutes, six mandolins, four gongs, four horns, four mouthpieces, four dragon flutes, twenty-four sticks and drums, two large drums, two boards.

古文：文武二舞乐器：笙二，横管二，闉二，杖鼓二，大鼓一，板一。
现代文：文武二舞的乐器：笙二人，横管二人，纂二人，杖鼓二人，大鼓一人，板一人。
English: Musical instruments for the two dances: two gongs, two horizontal pipes, two cymbals, two sticks, two drums, one large drum, one reed.

古文：四夷舞乐：腰鼓二，琵琶二，胡琴二，箜篌二，头管二，羌笛二，闉二，水盏一，板一。
现代文：四夷的舞乐：腰鼓二人，琵琶二人，胡琴二人，箜篌二人，头管二人，羌笛二人，纂二人，水盏一人，板一人。
English: Dance music of the four barbarians: two waist drums, two lutes, two harps, two cymbals, two horns, two bells, two flutes, two tambourines, two cymbals, one water jug, one board.

古文：二十六年又定殿内侑食乐：祝一，敔一，搏拊一，琴四，瑟二，箫四，笙四，笛四，壎二，篪二，排箫一，钟一，磬一，应鼓一。
现代文：二十六年，又制定殿内侑食乐：祝一人，敔一人，搏拊一人，琴四人，瑟二人，箫四人，笙四人，笛四人，顼二人，篪二人，排箫一人，钟一人，磬一人，应鼓一人。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, the feasting in the hall was also formulated: one person to wish, one person to sing, one person to fight, four people to play the harp, two people to sing, four people to sing, four people to sing, four people to play the flute, two people to sing, two people to sing, one person to row, one person to ring the bell, one person to sing, and one person to play the drums.

古文：丹陛大乐：戏竹二，箫四，笙四，头管二，琵琶二，闉二，二十弦二，方响二，杖鼓八，鼓一，板一。
现代文：丹陛大乐：戏竹二人，箫四人，笙四人，笛二人，头管二人，琵琶二人，纂二人，二十弦二人，方响二人，杖鼓八人，鼓一人，板一人。
English: His Majesty's Great Music: two bamboo players, four gongs, four cymbals, two flutes, two trumpets, two lutes, two lutes, two cymbals, two 20-stringed instruments, two square bells, eight sticks and drums, one drum, one board.

古文：迎膳乐：戏竹二，笙二，笛四，头管二，闉二，杖鼓十，鼓一，板一。
现代文：迎膳乐：戏竹二人，笙二人，笛四人，头管二人，纂二人，杖鼓十人，鼓一人，板一人。
English: Welcome music: two bamboo players, two gongs, four flutes, two pipe organs, two cymbals, ten cudgels, one drum, one board.

古文：进膳乐：笙二，笛二，杖鼓八，鼓一，板一。
现代文：进膳乐：笙二人，笛二人，杖鼓八人，鼓一人，板一人。
English: Music for the meal: two gongs, two flutes, eight sticks and drums, one drum, one board.

古文：太平清乐：笙四，笛四，头管二，闉四，方响一，杖鼓八，小鼓一，板一。
现代文：太平清乐：笙四人，笛四人，头管二人，纂四人，方响一人，杖鼓八人，小鼓一人，板一人。
English: Taiping Chingle: gong four people, flute four people, head pipe two people, tuba four people, square bell one person, stick and drum eight people, small drum one person, board one person.

古文：乐工舞士服色之制。
现代文：乐工、舞士服色的制度。
English: Musicians and dancers dress according to a system.

古文：郊庙，洪武元年定；朝贺，洪武三年定。
现代文：郊庙，洪武元年制定；朝贺，洪武三年制定。
English: Suburban temples, formulated in the first year of Hongwu; morning greetings, formulated in the third year of Hongwu.

古文：文武两舞：武舞士三十二人，左干右戚，四行，行八人，舞作发扬蹈厉坐作击刺之状，舞师二人执旌以引之；文舞士三十二人，左籥右翟，四行，行八人，舞作进退舒徐揖让升降之状，舞师二人执翿以引之。
现代文：文武两舞：武舞士三十二人，左持盾牌，右持大斧，四行，每行八人，舞蹈时作出发扬蹈厉坐作击刺的样子，舞师二人手持用羽尾装饰的小旗来导引舞队；文舞士三十二人，左持钥右持翟，四行，每行八人，舞蹈时作出进退舒徐揖让升降的样子，舞师二人手持羽饰旗来导引舞队。
English: Wenwu two dances: martial dancers thirty-two people, left holding a shield, right holding a large axe, four lines, eight people in each line, when dancing, make the appearance of carrying forward and sitting down as a stabbing, two dancers holding a small flag decorated with a feather tail to guide the dance team; Wen dancers thirty-two people, left holding a key and right holding a shovel, four lines, eight people in each line, when dancing, make the appearance of advancing and retreating, and letting rise and fall, two dancers holding a feather flag to guide the dance team.

古文：四夷之舞：舞士十六人，四行，行四人，舞作拜跪朝谒喜跃俯伏之状，舞师二人执幢以引之。
现代文：四夷之舞：舞士十六人，四行，每行四人，舞蹈时作出拜跪朝谒喜跃俯伏的样子，舞师二人手持幢来导引舞队。
English: Dance of the Four Barbarians: Sixteen dancers, four lines, four in each line. During the dance, the dancers kneel and prostrate themselves in a joyful manner. Two dancers lead the dance team, holding poles.

古文：此祭祀朝贺之乐舞器服也。
现代文：以上这些是祭祀朝贺的乐舞器物服饰。
English: The above are the musical and dancing instruments and clothing used for the morning greetings.

古文：当太祖时，前后稍有增损。
现代文：当太祖时期，前后略有增加减少。
English: During the Taizu period, there was a slight increase and decrease.

古文：乐章之鄙者，命儒臣易其词。
现代文：乐章中鄙陋的，便命令文臣改换其词。
English: He ordered Wencheng to change the words of the despicable movement.

古文：二郊之作，太祖所亲制。
现代文：二郊的乐章，是太祖亲自制作的。
English: The music of the two suburbs was composed by Taizu himself.

古文：后改合祀，其词复更。
现代文：后来改变合祭，它的词章又更换过。
English: Later, the closing ceremony was changed, and its lyrics were changed again.

古文：太社稷奉仁祖配，亦更制七奏。
现代文：太社稷供奉仁祖配祀，也更换制作七奏。
English: The Taisha gong was dedicated to the worship of the benevolent ancestor, and the production of the septet was also changed.

古文：尝谕礼臣曰： 古乐之诗，章和而正。
现代文：曾经训谕礼官说： 古乐的诗歌，词章和顺而端正。
English: He once told the etiquette official: "The verses of ancient music should be well-ordered.

古文：后世之诗，章淫以夸。
现代文：后世的诗歌，词章淫靡而夸饰。
English: In later poetry, the verses are lascivious and boastful.

古文：故一切谀词艳曲，皆弃不取。 
现代文：所以一切谄谀之词浮艳之曲都弃除不取。 
English: Therefore, all slanderous words and flashy melodies are not acceptable.

古文：尝命儒臣撰回銮乐歌，所奏《神降祥》、《神贶》、《酣酒》、《色荒》、《禽荒》诸曲，凡三十九章，命曰《御銮歌》，皆寓讽谏之意。
现代文：曾经命令文臣撰写回銮乐歌，所奏的《神降祥》、《神舰》、《酣酒》、《色荒》、《禽荒》等曲一共三十九章，命名为《御銮歌》，都寄托有讽谏的意思。
English: He once ordered a civil servant to write an elegy, and the thirty-nine chapters of the songs he played, such as "God's Descent," "God's Ship," "Bitter Wine," "Color Famine" and "Poultry Famine," were named "Elegy," all of which are based on the meaning of irony.

古文：然当时作者，惟务明达易晓，非能如汉、晋间诗歌，铿锵雅健，可录而诵也。
现代文：然而当时所作的诗，只求明白畅达容易知晓而已，不能如汉、晋时期的诗歌，铿锵雅健，可以记录来朗诵。
English: However, the poems made at that time only sought to be clear, smooth and easy to know, and could not be recorded and recited like the poems of the Han and Jin dynasties.

古文：殿中韶乐，其词出于教坊俳优，多乖雅道。
现代文：殿中的韶乐，它的歌词出自教坊俳优，多违背典雅之道。
English: The music in the hall, whose lyrics are from the haiku school, goes against the path of elegance.

古文：十二月乐歌，按月律以奏，及进膳、迎膳等曲，皆用乐府、小令、杂剧为娱戏。
现代文：十二月乐歌，按照月律来演奏，以及进膳、迎膳等曲，都用乐府、小令、杂剧作为娱乐游戏。
English: December music, played according to the rhythm of the month, as well as the meal, welcome meal and other songs, all use music, small order and miscellaneous plays as entertainment games.

古文：流俗喧哓，淫哇不逞。
现代文：流俗喧嚣，淫邪不正的乐曲诗歌纷乱不堪。
English: The hustle and bustle of popular culture, the debauchery and depravity of music and poetry are overwhelming.

古文：太祖所欲屏者，顾反设之殿陛间不为怪也。
现代文：太祖想要屏弃的，反而陈设在殿陛之间而不以为怪。
English: It is not surprising that what the great-grandfather wanted to discard was instead displayed among the royal family.

古文：永乐十八年，北京郊庙成。
现代文：永乐十八年，北京的郊庙建成。
English: In the 18th year of Yongle, Beijing's suburb temple was completed.

古文：其合祀合享礼乐，一如旧制。
现代文：那些合祭合享的礼乐，全部如同旧有的制度。
English: Those rites and music that are shared with the festival are all the same as the old system.

古文：更定宴飨乐舞：初奏《上万寿之曲》，《平定天下之舞》；二奏《仰天恩之曲》，《抚四夷之舞》；三奏《感地德之曲》，《车书会同之舞》；四奏《民乐生之曲》，《表正万邦之舞》；五奏《感皇恩之曲》，《天命有德之舞》；六奏《庆丰年之曲》；七奏《集祯应之曲》；八奏《永皇图之曲》；九奏《乐太平之曲》。
现代文：重新制定了宴飨乐舞：初奏《上万寿之曲》，《平定天下之舞》；二奏《仰天恩之曲》，《抚四夷之舞》；三奏《感地德之曲》，《车书会同之舞》；四奏《民乐生之曲》，《表正万邦之舞》；五奏《感皇恩之曲》，《天命有德之舞》；六奏《庆丰年之曲》；七奏《集祯应之曲》；八奏《永皇图之曲》；九奏《乐太平之曲》。
English: Re-formulated the banquet music and dance: the first play "Song of the Ten Thousand Years," "Dance of the Calming of the World"; the second play "Song of the Divine Grace," "Dance of the Four Emperors"; the third play "Song of the Land," "Dance of the Carriage Club"; the fourth play "Song of the Folk Musicians," "Dance of the Nations"; the fifth play "Song of the Royal Grace," "Dance of the Destiny of the Virtue"; the sixth play "Song of the Year of Abundance"; the seventh play "Song of the Collection"; the eighth play "Song of Emperor Yongtu"; the ninth play "Song of

古文：奏曲肤浅，舞曲益下俚。
现代文：奏曲肤浅，舞曲卑下俚俗。
English: The music is shallow and the dance is vulgar.

古文：景泰元年，助教刘翔上书指其失。
现代文：景泰元年，助教刘翔上奏书指出它的失误。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, assistant professor Liu Xiang pointed out its mistakes in the report.

古文：请敕儒臣推演道德教化之意，君臣相与之乐，作为诗章，协以律吕，如古《灵台》、《辟雍》、《清庙》、《湛露》之音，以振励风教，备一代盛典。
现代文：请求敕命文臣推衍道德教化的意旨，君臣相和的喜乐，作成诗歌词章，配上律吕乐曲，如同古代《灵台》、《辟雍》、《清庙》、《湛露》的音乐，以振奋勉励风俗教化，充作一代的盛大典制。
English: He asked the scholar to deduce the meaning of moral education, the joy of the harmony between the emperor and the people, and to write poetry and lyrics, accompanied by music, like the music of the ancient "Ling Tai," "Bai Yong," "Qing Miao" and "Tan Lu," to encourage the education of customs with enthusiasm, and serve as a grand ceremony for a generation.

古文：时以袭用既久，卒莫能改。
现代文：当时因沿袭使用已经很久，终究不能改变。
English: At that time, it had already been in use for a long time due to its lineage, so it could not be changed after all.

古文：其后教坊司乐工所奏中和韶乐，且多不谐者。
现代文：此后教坊司乐工所奏中和韶乐，且多有不和谐的。
English: After that, the music played by the music teacher was middling and muffled, and most of it was discordant.

古文：成化中，礼官尝请三倍其额，博教而约取之。
现代文：成化年间，礼官曾经请求三倍其数额，广博教训而约略择取。
English: During the Chenghua years, the etiquette official once asked for three times the amount, learned a lot and roughly selected.

古文：弘治之初，孝宗亲耕耤田，教坊司以杂剧承应，间出狎语。
现代文：弘治初年，孝宗举行亲耕藉田礼，教坊司以杂剧由艺人表演，问杂出现狎邪不庄重的词语。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Xiaozong held a family farming ceremony, and the teacher's office held a variety show performed by entertainers, in which there were some unseemly and undignified words.

古文：都御史马文升厉色斥去。
现代文：都御史马文升严厉的斥责弃去。
English: The governor of the capital, Ma Wensheng, sternly reprimanded him and dismissed him.

古文：给事中胡瑞尝言： 御殿受朝，典礼至大，而殿中中和韶乐乃属之教坊司，岳镇海渎，三年一祭，乃委之神乐观乐舞生，亵神明，伤大体。
现代文：给事中胡瑞曾经说： 御殿接受朝拜，典礼特别重大，而殿中的中和韶乐却隶属于教坊司，岳镇海滨，三年祭祀一次，却交托给神乐观的乐舞生，亵渎神明，损伤国家大的体统。
English: During the incident, Hu Rui once said: The imperial palace receives worship, and the ceremony is particularly important, but the middle and high music in the hall is subordinated to the teacher, Yue Town seafront, three years of sacrifice once, but entrusted to the god-optimistic music and dancers, blasphemous, damaging the national dignity.

古文：望敕廷臣议，岳渎等祭，当以缙绅从事。
现代文：希望敕命朝廷大臣商议。岳镇海滨等祭祀，应当用士大夫来担任。
English: It is hoped that the Minister of the Imperial Court will discuss it. Sacrifices such as the Yue Town seashore should be performed by Shidafu.

古文：中和韶乐，择民间子弟肆习，设官掌之。
现代文：中和韶乐，选择民间老百姓的子弟学习，设置官员来管理。
English: Zhonghe Gongle, choose the children of ordinary people to study, and set up officials to manage the circus.

古文：年久则量授职事。 
现代文：时间久了，就酌量授予职务。 
English: It's been a long time, so it's time to grant discretionary positions.

古文：帝以奏乐遣祭，皆国朝旧典，不能从也。
现代文：皇帝因奏乐和派人祭祀，都是本朝旧有的典制，故不能采纳。
English: The Emperor's order to play music and to send people to offer sacrifices were both part of the old imperial edict system of this dynasty, so they cannot be adopted.

古文：马文升为尚书，因灾异陈言，其一访名儒以正雅乐，事下礼官。
现代文：马文升任尚书，因灾害怪异上疏陈说，其中之一是，访求著名大儒以之端正雅乐。
English: Marvin was promoted to Shangshu, but was strangely omitted due to disasters. Chen said that one of them was to visit famous Confucian scholars to perform elegant music.

古文：礼官言： 高皇帝命儒臣考定八音，修造乐器，参定乐章。
现代文：事情下交礼官，礼官说： 高皇帝命令文臣考察制定八音，修造乐器，参定乐章。
English: When the matter was reported to the etiquette officer, the etiquette officer said: Emperor Gao ordered Wencheng to investigate and formulate eight tones, repair musical instruments, and determine the movement.

古文：其登歌之词，多自裁定。
现代文：那些登歌之词多亲自裁决确定。
English: The words of those songs were mostly decided by the singers themselves.

古文：但历今百三十余年，不复校正，音律舛讹，厘正宜急。
现代文：但是经历至今已一百三十多年，不再校正，音律舛违讹误，应迅速整饬端正。
English: However, the experience has been more than 130 years, and it is no longer corrected. If the rhythm is incorrect, it should be corrected quickly.

古文：且太常官恐未足当制器协律之任。
现代文：并且太常官恐怕不足以担当制作乐器、协和音律的大任。
English: And I'm afraid that too many officials are not enough to take on the big task of making musical instruments and harmonies.

古文：乞诏下诸司，博求中外臣工及山林有精晓音律者，礼送京师。
现代文：请求诏令下交各司，广泛征求朝廷内外百官以及隐逸山逸林有精通音律的，以礼送到京城。
English: Requests for imperial edicts were sent to all departments, and officials inside and outside the imperial court were widely solicited, as well as those who were well versed in the music of the hidden mountains and forests, and were sent to the capital as a courtesy.

古文：会礼官熟议至当，然后造器正音，庶几可以复祖制，致太和。 
现代文：会同礼官详细商议最恰当了，然后纔制造乐器端正音律，差不多可以恢复祖宗旧有制度，达到非常和美的境界。 
English: It is most appropriate to have a detailed discussion with the etiquette officer, and then make the musical instrument have a correct rhythm, which can almost restore the old system of the ancestors and achieve a very peaceful and beautiful state.

古文：帝可其奏。
现代文：皇帝同意他的奏请。
English: The patriarch approved his suggestion.

古文：末年诏南京及各王府，选精通乐艺者诣京师，复以礼官言而罢。
现代文：末年，下诏南京以及各藩王府，选拔精通音乐技艺的人到京城，又因礼官上言而罢除。
English: At the end of the year, the government of Nanjing and the royal courts of the various domains selected people who were proficient in music to come to the capital, but they were dismissed because of the etiquette officer's suggestion.

古文：正德三年，武宗谕内钟鼓司康能等曰： 庆成大宴，华夷臣工所观瞻，宜举大乐。
现代文：正德三年，武宗训谕内钟鼓司康能等人说： 祭祀、封禅礼毕举行庆祝成功的筵宴，是华夏四夷百官要亲自观看的，应该举行大乐。
English: In the third year of Zhengde, the bell and drum master Kang Neng and others said in the Wu Zong's instruction: The feast to celebrate the success of the sacrificial rites and the sealing ceremony should be personally watched by the hundreds of officials in Huaxia, and the great music should be held.

古文：迩者音乐废缺，无以重朝廷。 
现代文：近来音乐废弃缺脱，无法用来推重朝廷。 
English: Recently, music has been abandoned, unable to be used to promote the imperial court.

古文：礼部乃请选三院乐工年壮者，严督肄之，仍移各省司取艺精者赴京供应。
现代文：礼部于是请求选拔三院乐工中年轻健壮的，严格督促练习，并发文到各省司选取乐艺精通的人到京城供职应选。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies then requested the selection of young and strong musicians from the three hospitals, strictly urged them to practice, and sent a letter to the provincial departments to select people who were proficient in music to work in Beijing.

古文：顾所隶益猥杂，筋斗百戏之类日盛于禁廷。
现代文：只是隶属的人更加猥鄙驳杂，筋斗百戏杂技之类在宫廷一天天更加盛多。
English: It's just that the people who belong to it are more sordid and debauched, and there are more and more contests and acrobatics in the court every day.

古文：既而河间等府奉诏送乐户，居之新宅。
现代文：随后河问等府奉诏命送上乐户，居处在新宅。
English: Subsequently, Kawakuni and other prefectures were ordered by imperial edict to send them to Rakuho, where they lived in a new house.

古文：乐工既得幸，时时言居外者不宜独逸，乃复移各省司所送技精者于教坊。
现代文：乐工得到宠幸之后，时时说居处在外的不应该独自闲逸，于是又行文各省司所送上技艺精湛的到教坊。
English: After the musicians were favored, they always said that they should not be idle alone when they lived outside, so the provincial departments of the Ministry of Culture and Literature sent the skilled craftsmen to the teaching center.

古文：于是乘传续食者又数百人，俳优之势大张。
现代文：于是乘坐传车相继供食物的又有数百人，俳优艺人的势力大大扩张。
English: As a result, hundreds of people took the food trucks in succession, and the power of haiku artists greatly expanded.

古文：臧贤以伶人进，与诸佞幸角宠窃权矣。
现代文：臧贤以伶人身份进用，与众佞幸争夺宠幸窃取权力。
English: Zou Xian used his status as an eunuch to compete with other eunuchs to steal power.

古文：嘉靖元年，御史汪珊请屏绝玩好，令教坊司毋得以新声巧技进。
现代文：嘉靖元年，御史汪珊请求屏弃拒绝玩赏爱好之物，命令教坊司不准以新的音乐和精巧的技艺进献。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Wang Shanshan, the Grand Historian, requested the screen to abandon the refusal to play and enjoy hobbies, and ordered the teacher to not allow new music and exquisite skills to be presented.

古文：世宗嘉纳之。
现代文：世宗嘉赏采纳了他的意见。
English: The Sejong approved and adopted these opinions.

古文：是时更定诸典礼，因亦有志于乐。
现代文：这时重新制定各种典礼，于是也有志于改变乐。
English: At this time, various ceremonies were reformed, so there was also a desire to change the music.

古文：建观德殿以祀献帝，如协律郎肄乐供祀事。
现代文：建造观德殿以祭祀兴献帝，召令协律郎练习乐以供祭祀之事。
English: The construction of the Kuangde Hall was a ritual offering to the emperor, and the henchmen were summoned to practice music for the ritual.

古文：后建世庙成，改殿曰崇先。
现代文：后来世庙建成，改殿名崇先。
English: Later, the world temple was built, and the name of the temple was changed to Chongxian.

古文：乃亲制乐章，命大学士费宏等更定曲名，以别于太庙。
现代文：于是亲自制作乐章，命令大学士费宏等改定曲名，以与太庙相区别。
English: As a result, he personally composed a piece of music and ordered the university scholar Fei Hong and others to change the name of the piece in order to distinguish it from the Great Temple.

古文：其迎神曰《永和之曲》。初献曰《清和之曲》，亚献曰《康和之曲》，终献曰《冲和之曲》，彻馔曰《泰和之曲》，送神曰《宁和之曲》。
现代文：迎种称《永和之曲》，第一次进献称《清和之曲》，第二次进献称《康和之曲》，最后进献称《冲和之曲》，撤除撰食称《泰和之曲》，礼送神灵称《宁和之曲》。
English: The welcoming song is called the "Song of Eternal Peace," the first offering is called the "Song of Peace," the second offering is called the "Song of Peace," the last offering is called the "Song of Peace," the removal of food is called the "Song of Peace," and the gift of the gods is called the "Song of Peace."

古文：宏等复议，献皇生长太平，不尚武功，其三献皆当用《文德舞》。
现代文：费宏等人又议论，献皇帝生长在太平之世，不崇尚武功，三次进献都应当用《文德舞》。
English: Fei Hong and others also argued that Emperor Xian grew up in a peaceful world and did not advocate martial arts, and that the "Wen De Dance" should be used for the three presentations.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他们的议论。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：已而太常复请，乃命礼官会张璁议。
现代文：随后太常又请求，于是命令礼官会同张璁议论。
English: Subsequently, he made another request and ordered the etiquette official to have a discussion with Zhang Ye.

古文：璁言： 乐舞以佾数为降杀，不闻以武文为偏全。
现代文：张璁说： 乐舞以行列数而减省，没有听说以武舞、文舞为偏全。
English: Zhang Ye said, "Music and dance are reduced by the number of ranks, and it is not heard that martial arts and literature dance are incomplete.

古文：使八佾之制，用其文而去其武，则两阶之容，得其左而阙其右。
现代文：如果八佾的制度，用其文舞而除其武舞，则两阶的舞容，得到其左面，而缺失其右面。
English: If the system of eight steps is replaced by the system of martial dance, then the left side of the two-step dance is obtained, but the right side is missing.

古文：是皇上举天子礼乐，而自降杀之矣。 
现代文：这是皇上举行天子的礼乐，而自己减省了礼数。 
English: This is the Emperor holding the Divine Liturgy, and he himself has reduced the number of services.

古文：乃从璁议，仍用二舞。
现代文：于是听从张璁的议论，仍然使用文、武二舞。
English: As a result, he listened to Zhang Ye's argument and continued to use both the literary and martial arts.

古文：九年二月，始祈谷于南郊。
现代文：九年二月，开始在南郊举行祈谷祭祀。
English: In February of the ninth year, the prayer valley ritual began to be held in the southern suburbs.

古文：帝亲制乐章，命太常协于音谱。
现代文：皇帝亲自制作乐章，命令太常配上音谱。
English: The emperor himself composed the music and ordered the score to be added.

古文：是年，始祀先蚕，下礼官议乐舞。
现代文：这一年，开始祭祀先蚕，下交礼官议定乐舞。
English: This year, the first silkworm began to be sacrificed, and the lower etiquette officials agreed on music and dance.

古文：礼官言： 先蚕之祀，周、汉所同。
现代文：礼官说： 先蚕的祭祀，周、汉相同。
English: The etiquette official said, "The sacrifice of the first silkworm is the same in Zhou and Han dynasties.

古文：其乐舞仪节，经史不载。
现代文：它的乐舞礼仪礼节，经书、史书没有记载。
English: Its music and dance rituals and etiquette are not recorded in scriptures or history books.

古文：唐开元先蚕仪注，大乐令设宫县于北郊坛壝内，诸女工咸列于后，则祀先蚕用女乐可知。
现代文：唐代开元先蚕的仪节制度，大乐令在北郊坛场内设置四面悬挂乐器，众女工都列于后，那么祭祀先蚕用女乐可以得知。
English: According to the ceremonial system of the first silkworm in the Tang Dynasty, the Great Music Order set up musical instruments hanging on all four sides in the north suburb altar, and all female workers were listed at the end, so the female music used for the first silkworm sacrifice can be known.

古文：《唐六典》，宫县之舞八佾，轩县之舞六佾，则祀先蚕用八佾又可知。
现代文：《唐六典》记载，天子四面悬挂乐器的乐舞用八佾，诸侯陈列乐器三面悬挂的乐舞用六佾，那么祭祀先蚕用八佾又可以得知。
English: "Tang Six Classics" records that the music and dance of the musical instruments hanging on all four sides of the heavenly son used eight cymbals, and the music and dance of the musical instruments hanging on three sides of the vassals used six cymbals, so it can be known that the eight cymbals were used for the first sacrifice.

古文：然止言舞生冠服，而不及舞女冠服。
现代文：但是只是说到舞生冠服，而没有言及舞女冠服。
English: However, it only mentions the dancer's crown, but not the dancer's crown.

古文：陈昜《乐书享先蚕图》下，止有《宫架登歌图》，而不及舞。
现代文：陈旸《乐书，享先蚕图》下，只有《宫架登歌图》，而没有言及舞。
English: Under Chen Wei's "Music Book, Enjoying the First Silkworm Diagram," there is only "Miyagatake Ascending Song Diagram," but no mention of dance.

古文：夫有乐有舞，虽祀礼之常，然周、汉制度既不可考，宋祀先蚕，代以有司，又不可据。
现代文：有乐有舞，虽然是祭祀典礼的常规，但是周、汉时代的制度既不可考证，宋祭祀先蚕，以主管部门代替，又不可引以为据。
English: There is music and dance, although it is the norm of the sacrificial ceremony, but the system of the Zhou and Han dynasties can neither be verified, nor can it be used as evidence. The Song sacrificial ceremony was replaced by the competent department.

古文：惟开元略为近古，而陈氏《乐书》考据亦明。
现代文：只有开元略微接近古礼，而陈氏的《乐书》考据也分明。
English: Only the Kaigen is slightly close to the ancient rite, and the examination of Chen's "Music Book" is also clear.

古文：前享先农，既以佾数不足，降八为六，则今祀先蚕，止用乐歌，不用乐舞，亦合古制。
现代文：先前祭享先农，既以舞队列数不足，降八佾为六佾，那么现在祭祀先蚕，只用乐歌，不用乐无，也合于古代礼制。
English: In the past, the ancestors of the farmers who enjoyed the sacrifice were not satisfied with the insufficient number of dance queues, and the eight harps were reduced to six harps, so now the sacrifice of the first silkworm, only with music, without music, is also in line with the ancient ritual system.

古文：且以见少杀先农之礼。 
现代文：且以见稍减损于祭祀先农的礼仪。 
English: And it detracts slightly from the ritual of the sacrificial predecessors.

古文：帝以舞非女子事，罢不用。
现代文：皇帝因舞不是女子之事，罢除不用。
English: It's not a woman's business whether the emperor dances, so there's no need to remove him.

古文：使议乐女冠服以闻。
现代文：使议定乐女冠服上报。
English: Let's make a concerted effort to get the women's crown clothes into the newspapers.

古文：礼官言： 北郊阴方，其色尚黑。
现代文：礼官说： 北郊属阴方，其颜色崇尚黑色。
English: The etiquette official said: The northern suburbs belong to the Yin side, and its color is black.

古文：同色相感，事神之道。
现代文：颜色相同，互相感通，是事奉神的做法。
English: Having the same color and feeling each other is the way to serve God.

古文：汉蚕东郊，魏蚕西郊，色皆尚青，非其色矣。
现代文：漠祭祀先蚕于东郊，魏祭祀先蚕于西郊，颜色都崇尚青色，不合其色。
English: The first silkworm in the eastern suburb of the moss sacrifice, the first silkworm in the western suburb of the Wei sacrifice, the color is all advocating blue, which does not match the color.

古文：乐女冠服宜黑。 
现代文：乐女的冠服应该用黑色。 
English: Laughing Girl's crown should be black.

古文：乃用乐六奏，去舞。
现代文：于是用乐六奏，除去舞。
English: So they used music sextet, removing the dance.

古文：其乐女皆黑冠服，因定享先蚕乐章。
现代文：其乐女都穿戴黑色冠服，因此制定祭享先蚕的乐章。
English: The musicians all wear black gowns, so they have developed a movement to celebrate the first silkworm.

古文：又以祀典方厘定南北郊，复朝日夕月之祭，命词臣取洪武时旧乐歌，一切更改。
现代文：又因为祭祀典礼正在墼饬制定南北郊，恢复朝日、夕月的祭祀，命令文学之臣取洪武时期的旧乐歌，全部更改。
English: In addition, because the sacrificial ceremony was in the process of establishing the northern and southern suburbs, restoring the morning sun and evening moon rituals, he ordered the minister of literature to take the old songs of the Hongwu period and change them all.

古文：礼官因请广求博访，有如宋胡瑗、李照者，具以名闻。
现代文：礼官于是请求广泛征求询问，有像宋胡瑗、李照这样的人，都把名字上报。
English: The etiquette official then asked for a wide range of inquiries, and people like Song Huyao and Li Zhao all reported their names.

古文：授之太常，考定雅乐。
现代文：授予太常，考察制定雅乐。
English: Awarded too often, the study of the development of elegant music.

古文：给事中夏言乃以致仕甘肃行太仆寺丞张鹗应诏。
现代文：给事中夏言于是以退休的甘肃行太仆寺丞张鹦应诏。
English: In the middle of the matter, Xia Yan responded with the retired Gansu lineage priest Zhang Jia.

古文：命趣召之。
现代文：命令迅速征召他。
English: He was ordered to be called up immediately.

古文：既至，言曰：
现代文：到京后，说：
English: After arriving in Beijing, he said:

古文：大乐之正，乃先定元声。
现代文：大乐的正宗，是先确定黄钟。
English: The authentic way to have great music is to first determine the yellow bell.

古文：元声起自冥罔既觉之时，亥子相乘之际。
现代文：黄钟产生于天地混沌状态开启之时，亥与子相交之际。
English: The yellow bell was created when the chaotic state of heaven and earth began, when the boar and the rooster met.

古文：积丝成毫，积毫成厘，积厘成分。
现代文：积聚丝形成毫，积聚毫形成厘，积聚厘形成分。
English: Accumulation of fine particles, accumulation of fine particles, accumulation of fine particles.

古文：一时三十分，一日十二时。
现代文：一时焉三十分，一日为十二时。
English: Thirty minutes past the hour, the day becomes twelve o'clock.

古文：故声生于日，律起于辰。
现代文：所以声音生于日，律产生于辰。
English: Therefore, sound is born in the day, and law is born in the hour.

古文：气在声先，声从气后。
现代文：气在声之先，声跟从在气之后。
English: The breath precedes the voice, and the voice follows the breath.

古文：若拘于器以求气，则气不能致器，而反受制于器，何以定黄钟、起历元？
现代文：如果拘泥于器以寻求气，那么气不能得到器，而反被器所控制，怎么能确定黄钟、起算历元呢？
English: If you stick to the vessel to seek qi, then qi cannot get the vessel, and vice versa controlled by the vessel, how can you determine the yellow clock, the starting calendar?

古文：须依蔡元定，多截竹以拟黄钟之律，长短每差一分。
现代文：必须依照蔡元定的办法，多截取竹管以拟测黄钟的律吕，长短每根相差一分。
English: In accordance with the method determined by Cai Yuan, more bamboo tubes must be intercepted to simulate the measurement of yellow bells, with a difference of one minute between the length of each.

古文：冬至日按律而候，依法而取。
现代文：冬至日按照律管而占验，依照一定办法测取。
English: The winter solstice will be observed according to the law, and will be measured according to a certain method.

古文：如众管中先飞灰者，即得元气。
现代文：如果众律管中先飞出葭灰的，就是元气。
English: If the first to fly out of the ashes is the vitality.

古文：验其时刻，如在子初二刻，即子初一刻移于初二刻矣；如在正二刻，即子正一刻移于正二刻矣。
现代文：占验其时刻，如在子初二刻，便子初一刻移到了初二刻；如在正二刻，便子正一刻移到了正二刻。
English: If it is in the first two minutes, the first minute will be moved to the first two minutes; if it is in the second minute, the first minute will be moved to the second minute.

古文：顾命知历官一人，同臣参候，庶几元声可得，而古乐可复。
现代文：希望命令一名懂得律历的官员，同臣一起参验，差不多黄钟可以得到，而古乐可以恢复。
English: It is hoped that an official who understands the legal calendar will be ordered to attend the inspection together with the minister, and almost the yellow bell can be obtained, and the ancient music can be restored.

古文：又言：
现代文：又说：
English: He also said:

古文：古人制为十六编钟，非徒事观美，盖为旋宫而设。
现代文：古人制成十六编钟，并不只是观赏其美，而是为了旋相为宫音而设置。
English: The ancients made sixteen sets of bells, not only to enjoy their beauty, but also to set them to spin as the sound of the palace.

古文：其下八钟，黄钟、大吕、太簇、夹钟、姑洗、仲吕、蕤宾、林钟是已；其上八钟，夷则、南吕、无射、应钟、黄钟、大吕、太簇是已。
现代文：其下八钟，它们是黄钟、大吕、太蔟、夹钟、姑洗、仲吕、蕤宾、林钟；其上八钟，它们是夷则、南吕、无射、应钟、黄钟、大吕、太蔟、夹钟。
English: The eight bells below it are the Yellow Bell, the Big Lue, the Big Hoop, the Pinch Bell, the Guba, the Middle Lue, the Yibin, and the Lin Bell; the eight bells above it are the Yizi, the South Lue, the No Shot, the Ying Bell, the Yellow Bell, the Big Lue, the Big Hoop, and the Pinch Bell.

古文：近世止用黄钟一均，而不遍具十六钟，古人立乐之方已失。
现代文：近代只用黄钟一均，而不全部具备十六钟，古人立乐的方法已经失去。
English: In modern times, only yellow bells are used, and not all of them have sixteen bells. The method of the ancients has been lost.

古文：况太常止以五、凡、工、尺、上、一、四、六、勾、合字眼谱之，去古益远。
现代文：况且太常只以五、凡、工、尺、上、一、四、六、勾、合字眼为谱，离开古代更远。
English: Moreover, it is too common to use only five, van, gong, shaku, upp, one, four, six, hook, and conjunction as a spectrum, which is even further away from ancient times.

古文：且如黄钟为合似矣，其以大吕为下四，太簇为高四，夹钟为下一，姑洗为高一，夷则为下工，南吕为高工之类，皆以两律兼一字，何以旋宫取律，止黄钟一均而已。
现代文：并且如黄钟为合还相似，而以大吕为下四，太簇为高四，夹钟为下一，姑洗为高一，夷则焉下工，南吕为高工之类，都以两律兼一字，如何能旋相为宫音以取律，祇有黄钟一均而已。
English: Moreover, if the yellow bell is similar to the combination, and the big lute is the lower four, the big cluster is the high four, the clamped bell is the next, the cuckoo is the high one, the yakitori is the lower work, and the southern lute is the high work, all of which are based on the two laws and one word, how can the twisting phase be the palace sound to take the law, only the yellow bell is the same.

古文：且黄钟、大吕、太族、夹钟为上四清声。
现代文：并且黄钟、大吕、太蔟、夹钟焉上四清声。
English: In addition, the yellow bell, the large lute, the large gong and the small gong make four clear sounds.

古文：盖黄钟为君，至尊无比。
现代文：因为黄钟为君，最尊显无可比拟。
English: Because Huang Zhong is you, the most respected and incomparable.

古文：黄钟为宫，则十一律皆从而受制，臣民事物莫敢凌犯焉。
现代文：黄钟为宫，那么十一律都相从而受其制约，臣民万物没有谁敢侵犯。
English: If the Yellow Bell is the palace, then the Eleven Precepts are all the same and are thus subject to it. No one dares to infringe on the subjects' rights.

古文：至于夹钟为宫，则下生无射为徵，无射上生仲吕为商，仲吕下生黄钟为羽。
现代文：至于夹钟焉宫，则下面生出无射为征，无射上生仲吕为商，仲吕下生黄钟为羽。
English: As for the palace of the clamped bell, the following was born without a shot, the above was born without a shot, the middle ridge was a merchant, and the yellow bell was born under the middle ridge.

古文：然黄钟正律声长，非仲吕为商三分去一之次。
现代文：这样黄钟正律声长，不像仲吕为商去掉三分之一为次。
English: In this way, Huang Zhongzhong's chime is regular and long, unlike Zhong Lyu, who removed a third of the chime for the merchant.

古文：所以用黄钟为羽，必用子声，即上黄六之清声，正为不敢用黄钟全声，而用其半耳。
现代文：所以用黄钟为羽，必定用子声，就是上黄六的清声，正是不敢用黄钟全声，而用其半的原因。
English: Therefore, using the yellow bell as a feather, we must use the sub-voice, that is, the clear voice of the upper yellow six, which is the reason why we dare not use the full voice of the yellow bell, but use its half.

古文：姑洗以下之均，大率若此。
现代文：姑冼以下的均，大致像这样。
English: Below the level of guzheng, it's roughly like this.

古文：此四清声之所由立也。
现代文：造就是四清声确立的原因。
English: This is the reason for the establishment of the four clear voices.

古文：编钟十六，其理亦然。
现代文：编钟十六，它的道理也是这样。
English: As the clock strikes sixteen, so it goes.

古文：宋胡瑗知此义，故四清声皆小其围径以就之。
现代文：宋代的胡瑗知道这个道理，所以四清声都减小它的直径以适应它。
English: Hu Yao of the Song Dynasty knew this, so all four Qing Dynasty dynasties reduced its diameter to accommodate it.

古文：然黄钟、太簇二声虽合，大吕、夹钟二声又非，遂使十二律、五声皆不得正。至于李照、范镇止用十二律，不用四清声，其合于三分损益者则和矣。
现代文：然而黄钟、太簇二声虽然相合，大吕、夹钟二声又不合，于是使十二律、五声都不得其正，至于李照、范镇祇用十二律，不用四清声，其合于三分增减便协和了。
English: However, although the two tones of the yellow bell and the taizu were matched, the two tones of the large lute and the pendulum bell were not matched, so the twelve rhythms and five tones were not correct. As for Li Zhao and Fan Zhen, they only used the twelve rhythms and did not use the four clear tones, and their combination in the three-minute increment and decrement was harmonious.

古文：夷则以降，其臣民事物，安能尊卑有辨，而不相凌犯耶？
现代文：夷则以下，其臣民万物，怎么能尊卑有所分辨，而不相侵犯呢？
English: How can the superior and the inferior be distinguished without violating each other?

古文：臣又考《周礼》，圜钟、函钟、黄钟、天地人三宫之说，有荐神之乐，有降神之乐。
现代文：臣又考察《周礼》，圜钟、函钟、黄钟、天地人三官的学说，有进献神灵的音乐，有降神灵的音乐。
English: The minister also examined the "Weekly Ritual," the theory of the three organs of the bell, the clock, the yellow bell, the heaven and the earth, the music of the gods, and the music of the gods.

古文：所为荐神之乐者，乃奏黄钟，歌大吕，子丑合也，舞《云门》以祀天神。
现代文：所说的进献神灵的音乐，就是奏黄钟，歌大吕，子丑相合，舞《云门》以祭祀天神。
English: The so-called music for the dedication of the gods is to play the yellow bell, sing the great lute, and dance the "Cloud Gate" to worship the gods.

古文：乃奏太簇，歌应钟，寅亥合也，舞《咸池》以祀地祇。
现代文：于是演奏太簇，歌唱应钟，则是寅亥相合，舞《咸池》以祭祀地只。
English: As a result, the performance was too crowded, the singing was in response to the bell, it was a combination of Yin and Hai, and the dance "Hamchi" was performed in a sacrificial manner.

古文：乃奏姑洗，歌南吕，辰酉合也，舞《大韶》以祭四望。
现代文：于是演奏姑洗，歌唱南吕，则是辰酉相合，舞《大韶》以祭祀四望。
English: As a result, the performance of "Gucchi" and the singing of "Nanlu" coincided with the alignment of the constellations, and the dance of "Daxing" was performed with the ritual of looking around.

古文：乃奏蕤宾，歌林钟，午未合也，舞《大夏》以祭山川。
现代文：于是演奏蕤宾，歌唱林钟，则是午末相合，舞《大夏》以祭祀山川。
English: As a result, Yibin was played, Lin Zhong was sung, and it was the end of the afternoon, and the dance "Big Summer" was performed as a sacrifice to mountains and rivers.

古文：乃奏夷则，歌小吕，巳申合也，舞《大武》以享先祖，舞《大濩》以享先妣。
现代文：于是演奏夷则，歌唱小吕，巳申相合，舞《大武》以祭享先祖，舞《大濩》以祭享先妣。
English: So, they played "Izetsu," sang "Koryu" and "Misho" in unison, danced "Daibu" to celebrate their ancestors, and danced "Dawase" to celebrate their ancestors.

古文：所谓降神之乐者，冬至祀天圜丘，则以圜钟为宫，黄钟为角，太簇为徵，姑洗为羽，是三者阳律相继。
现代文：所说的降神之乐，冬至日祭祀天神于圜丘，便以圜钟为宫，黄钟为角，太蔟为征，姑洗为羽，这三者阳律相继。
English: The so-called music of the descending gods, the winter solstice day, the worship of the gods in the Mengqiu, then with the bell as the palace, the yellow bell as the corner, the great bell as the sign, and the cockerel as the feather, these three are one after another.

古文：相继者，天之道也。
现代文：相继，是上天之正道。
English: Succession is the right path of heaven.

古文：夏至祭地方丘，则以函钟为宫，夹钟为角，姑洗为徵，南吕为羽，是三者阴吕相生。
现代文：夏至日祭祀地祇于方丘，便以函钟为宫，夹钟为角，姑洗为征，南吕为羽，逭三者阴吕相生。
English: On the day of the summer solstice, the place of worship was in Fangqiu, so the bell was used as the palace, the bell was used as the horn, the bell was used as the sign, the southern bell was used as the feather, and the three were born together.

古文：相生者，地之功也。
现代文：相生，是大地之功绩。
English: Congeniality is the merit of the earth.

古文：祭宗庙，以黄钟为宫，大吕为角，太簇为徵，夹钟为羽，是三者律吕相合。
现代文：祭祀宗庙，以黄钟为宫，大吕焉角，太蔟为征，夹钟为羽，逭三者律吕相合。
English: In the ritual of the ancestral temple, the yellow bell is the palace, the large bell is the angle, the large bell is the sign, the small bell is the feather, and the three are the same.

古文：相合者，人之情也。
现代文：相合，是人之常情。
English: It's human nature to fall in love.

古文：且圜钟，夹钟也。
现代文：并且圜钟，就是夹钟。
English: And the gong of the bell is the gong of the bell.

古文：生于房心之气，为天地之明堂，祀天从此起宫，在琴中角弦第十徽，卯位也。
现代文：产生于房心二宿之气，是天地的明堂，祭祀上天从这里起宫，在琴中角弦第十徽，就是卯位。
English: Born from the spirit of the two inns in the center of the house, it is the bright hall of heaven and earth. From here, the temple is dedicated to heaven. In the middle of the harp, the 10th emblem is Ui.

古文：函钟，林钟也。
现代文：函钟就是林钟。
English: Hanzhong is Linzhong.

古文：生于坤位之气，在井东舆鬼之外，主地祇，祭地从此起宫，在琴中徽弦第五徽，未位也。
现代文：产生于坤位之气，在井束舆鬼宿以外，主应地只，祭祀地从这里起宫，在琴中征弦第五徽，就是未位。
English: Originated from the air of Kun's position, in addition to the Izukubo ghost hotel, the main should only, sacrificially from here to the palace, in the middle of the harp to solicit the fifth emblem, that is, unranked.

古文：黄钟，生于虚危之气，为宗庙，祭人鬼从此起宫，在琴中宫弦第三徽，子位也。
现代文：黄钟，产生于虚危二宿之气，是宗庙，祭祀人鬼从这里起宫，在琴中宫弦第三徽，就是子位。
English: The Yellow Bell, born out of the spirit of the two dangerous places, is the ancestral temple. The ritual of human and ghost worship starts from here. In the harp, the third string of the harp is the third rank.

古文：至若六变而天神降，八变而地祇格，九变而人鬼享，非有难易之分。
现代文：至于六变而天神下降，八变而地神至，九变而人鬼享祀，并不是有难易的分别。
English: As for the six transformations and the gods descend, the eight transformations and the gods descend, and the nine transformations and humans and ghosts enjoy worship, there is no difficult difference.

古文：盖阳数起子而终于少阴之申，阴数起午而终于少阳之寅。
现代文：因为阳数起于子而终结于少阴的申，阴数起于午而终结于少阳的寅。
English: Because the yang number starts from the zi and ends at the shen of the minor yin, and the yin number starts at the noon and ends at the chen of the minor yang.

古文：圜钟在卯，自卯至申六数，故六变而天神降。
现代文：圜钟在卯，从卯到申六敷，所以六变而天神下降。
English: The gong is in the u, and from the u to the shin there are six quarters, so the six changes and the heavenly god descends.

古文：函钟在未，自未至寅八数，故八变而地祇格。
现代文：函钟在未，从未到寅八数，所以八变而地只至。
English: The clock is in the middle of the night, and has never reached the number eight, so the number eight keeps changing.

古文：黄钟在子，自子至申九数，故九变而人鬼享。
现代文：黄钟在子，从子至申九数，所以九变而人鬼享祀。
English: The yellow bell is in the child, from the child to the nine, so the nine changes and the ghosts enjoy the worship.

古文：此皆以本元之声，召本位之神，故感通之理速也。
现代文：这些都以本元之声，召来本位之神，所以感通的道理迅速。
English: These are all based on the voice of the original, calling the god of the standard, so the reason for the induction is rapid.

古文：或者谓自汉以来，天地鬼神闻新声习矣，何必改作。
现代文：有人说从汉以来，天地鬼神听到新声已习惯了，何必要改作？
English: Some people say that since the Han Dynasty, heaven and earth have been accustomed to hearing new voices. Why is it necessary to change it?

古文：不知自人观天地，则由汉迄今千七百年；自天地观，亦顷刻间耳。
现代文：不知从人的角度观察天地，那么从汉至今已有一千七百年；从天地的角度观察，只是顷刻之间而已。
English: I don't know, but if you look at the world from a human perspective, it's been 1,700 years since the Han Dynasty; if you look at it from the perspective of heaven and earth, it's just a blink of an eye.

古文：自今正之，犹可及也。
现代文：从现在起端正它，还来得及。
English: Fix it now while you still can.

古文：并进所著乐书二部。
现代文：他同时进献所著的乐书二部。
English: He will also present two of his music books.

古文：其一曰《大成乐舞图谱》，自琴瑟以下诸乐，逐字作谱。
现代文：其中一部是《大成乐舞图谱》，从琴瑟以下众乐，逐字作谱。
English: One of them is "Daxing Music and Dance Chart," from the zither to the folk music, word for word.

古文：其一曰《古雅心谈》，列十二图以象十二律。
现代文：另一部是《古雅心谈》，列出十二图以象征十二律。
English: The other is "Koya Shingon," which lists twelve pictures to symbolize the twelve precepts.

古文：图各有说。
现代文：每图各有解说。
English: Each figure is accompanied by an explanation.

古文：又以琴为正声，乐之宗系。
现代文：又以琴为正声，是乐的宗系。
English: It also uses the qin as the positive voice, which is the lineage of music.

古文：凡郊庙大乐，分注琴弦定徽，各有归旨。
现代文：凡是郊庙大乐，分注琴弦来确定徽，各有归属。
English: In all suburban temple music, the strings are assigned to determine the emblem, and each has its own attribution.

古文：且自谓心所独契，斫轮之妙，有非口所能言者。
现代文：并且认为是心中独自领悟到的，精深绝妙有非口所能言传的。
English: And I think that it is only in the heart that one can understand the profound and wonderful things that are beyond words.

古文：疏下礼部。
现代文：奏疏下交礼部。
English: The performance of the lower court etiquette section is omitted.

古文：礼官言： 音律久废，太常诸官循习工尺谱，不复知有黄钟等调。
现代文：礼官说： 音律长久废弃，太常众官遵循练习工尺字谱，不再知有黄钟等调。
English: The etiquette officer said: The musical notation has been abandoned for a long time, too often the officials follow the practice ruler word list, and no longer know the yellow bell equal temperament.

古文：臣等近奉诏演习新定郊祀乐章，间问古人遗制，茫无以对。
现代文：臣等近来奉诏演练学习新制定的郊祀乐章，间或询问古人遗留下来的制度，茫然无话回答。
English: Ministers and others have recently been ordered to rehearse and study the newly formulated suburban religious music, and occasionally ask about the system left by the ancients, and are at a loss to answer.

古文：今鹗谓四清声所以为旋宫，其注弦定徽，盖已深识近乐之弊。
现代文：现在张鹦认为四清声是旋相为宫音，他注琴弦确定徽吝，大致已经深深地认识到近世乐律的弊端。
English: Now Zhang Piao thinks that the four clear sounds are the swirls for the palace sound. He has been paying attention to the strings to determine the insignia, and has generally been deeply aware of the drawbacks of modern music.

古文：至欲取知历者，互相参考，尤为探本穷源之论。
现代文：至于想取懂得历算的人，互相参考，尤其是探索根本穷究源头的议论。
English: As for those who want to take people who know the calendar, refer to each other, especially to explore the discussion of the fundamental source.

古文：似非目前司乐者所及。 
现代文：似乎不是目前的司乐官所能赶得上的。 
English: It doesn't seem that the current music director can keep up.

古文：乃授鹗太常寺丞，令诣太和殿较定乐舞。
现代文：于是授予张鹦任太常寺丞，命令到太和殿校定乐舞。
English: As a result, Zhang Jia was given the title of Grand Priest of Taizho-ji Temple and ordered to go to the Grand Hall of the Imperial Palace to hold a music and dance performance.

古文：鹗遂上言： 《周礼》有郊祀之乐，有宗祀之乐。
现代文：张鹦于是上疏说： 《周礼》有郊祀的音乐，有宗祀的音乐。
English: Zhang Jia then went on to say: "Zhou Li" has the music of a suburban religious service and the music of a religious service.

古文：尊亲分殊，声律自别。
现代文：尊敬亲人分别不同，声律自然就分开了。
English: Respecting relatives differently, the vocal rhythms naturally separated.

古文：臣伏听世庙乐章，律起林钟，均殊太庙。
现代文：臣听说世庙的乐章，律起于林钟，都不同于太庙。
English: The vassal heard that the movement of the world temple, the rhythm originated from the forest bell, is different from that of the world temple.

古文：臣窃异之。
现代文：臣私下感到怪异。
English: Privately, the vassal felt strange.

古文：盖世庙与太庙同礼，而林钟与黄钟异乐。
现代文：因为世庙与太庙礼仪相同，而林钟与黄钟是不同的乐。
English: Because the world temple and the imperial temple have the same etiquette, but the forest bell and the yellow bell are different music.

古文：函钟主祀地祇，位寓坤方，星分井鬼，乐奏八变，以报资生之功。
现代文：函钟主祭祀地只，位置寄寓在坤方，星宿的分野在井鬼，音乐演奏变八次，以报谢资生的功绩。
English: The main ritual site of the clock, the location is in Kunfang, the star field is in Jing, and the music performance is changed eight times to thank the students for their achievements.

古文：故用林钟起调，林钟毕调也。
现代文：所以用林钟起调，又以林钟毕调。
English: Therefore, the forest bell is used to start the tuning, and the forest bell is used to set the tuning.

古文：黄钟主祀宗庙，位分子野，星隶虚危，乐奏九成，以报本源之德。
现代文：黄钟主祭祀宗庙，位置的分星在子，星隶属二十八宿中的虚危，音乐演奏九成，以报答本源的美德。
English: The yellow bell is dedicated to the ancestral temple, the position of the star is in the middle, the star is in the middle of the twenty-eight lodges, and the music performance is 90% to repay the virtue of the source.

古文：故用黄钟起调，黄钟毕调也。
现代文：所以用黄钟起调，又用黄钟毕调。
English: Therefore, the yellow bell is used to start the tuning, and the yellow bell is used to tune it.

古文：理义各有归旨，声数默相感通。
现代文：理义各有归属，声数沉中互相感应沟通。
English: Each sense has its own attribution, and the voices communicate with each other through mutual induction.

古文：况天地者父母之象，大君者宗子之称。
现代文：况且天地是父母之象，大君是宗子的称呼。
English: Moreover, heaven and earth are the images of the parents, and grand prince is the title of the eldest son.

古文：今以祀母之乐，奏以祀子，恐世庙在天之灵，必不能安且享矣。
现代文：现在用祭祀母亲的乐曲，演奏以祭祀儿子，恐怕世庙在天之灵，必定不能安心地接受享礼。
English: Now with the music of the sacrificial mother, the performance of the sacrificial son, I am afraid that the world temple is in the spirit of heaven, and must not be able to accept the ceremony with confidence.

古文：不知谱是乐者，何所见也。
现代文：不知谱写这个乐的，见到了什么呢？
English: I don't know what the composer of this music saw.

古文：臣观旧谱乐章，字用黄钟，声同太庙。
现代文：臣考察旧谱乐章，字用黄钟，声同太庙。
English: The minister examined the old musical score, the words with the yellow bell, the voice with the temple.

古文：但审听七声，中少一律，今更补正。
现代文：但是细听七声，中间缺少一律，现在重新补充订正。
English: But listen carefully to the seven voices, the middle is lacking in uniformity, now re-supplemented and revised.

古文：使依奏格，则祖孙一气相为流通，函黄二宫不失均调。
现代文：使之依照规定，则祖孙互相一气贯通，函、黄二宫不失于均调。
English: If this is done in accordance with the regulations, then the grandparents and grandchildren will be able to communicate with each other, and Hanzhong and Huangniu will not lose the balance.

古文：尊亲之分两得，神人之心胥悦矣。 
现代文：尊与亲的名分两相获得，神与人的内心都感到愉悦。 
English: The name of honor and the name of kinship are both obtained, and the hearts of God and man are both pleased.

古文：诏下礼官。
现代文：诏令下交礼官议论。
English: The imperial edict was issued to submit to the etiquette officer for discussion.

古文：李时等覆奏，以为： 鹗所言，与臣等所闻于律吕诸书者，深有所合。
现代文：李时等人回奏，认为 张鹦所说的内容，与臣等从律吕等书中所看到的，有很多相合之处。
English: Li Shih et al. echoed that the content of what Zhang Jia said had a lot in common with what the ministers and others saw in the book of Lu Lu et al.

古文：盖黄钟一调，以黄钟为宫，太簇为商，姑洗为角，蕤宾为变徵，林钟为徵，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫。
现代文：黄钟这个调，以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，蕤宾为变征，林钟为征，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫。
English: In this tune of the Yellow Bell, the Yellow Bell is the palace, the Taishan is the merchant, the Guba is the corner, the Zhibin is the change, the Lin is the bell, the Nanlu is the feather, and the Ying is the changing palace.

古文：旧乐章用合，用四，用一，用尺，用工。
现代文：旧有乐章用合，用四，用一，用尺，用工。
English: In the old movements, the crescendo is used, the fourth is used, the first is used, the staff is used, and the beat is used.

古文：去蕤宾之勾，而越次用再生黄钟之六，此旧乐章之失也。
现代文：舍弃蕤宾之勾，而越过顺序用再生黄钟之六，这是旧有乐章的失误。
English: It is a mistake of the old movement to discard the hook of the gongbins and to use the sixth of the yellow bells to regenerate them out of sequence.

古文：若林钟一调，则以林钟为宫，南吕为商，应钟为角，大吕之半声为变徵，太簇之半声为徵，姑洗之半声为羽，蕤宾之半声为变宫。
现代文：如林钟逭一调，便以林钟为宫，南宫为商，应链为角，大吕的半声为变征，太蔟的半声为征，姑洗的半声为羽，蕤宾的半声为变宫。
English: If Lin Zhongxuan is a tune, then Lin Zhongxuan is the palace, Nan Gong is the merchant, Ying Zhen is the corner, Dalu's half-voice is the metamorphosis, Tai Xuan's half-voice is the metamorphosis, Gu Ji's half-voice is the feather, and Qibin's half-voice is the metamorphosis.

古文：迩者沈居敬更协乐章，用尺，用合，用四，用一，用工，用六。
现代文：近来沈居敬重新协和乐章，用尺，用合，用四，用一，用工，用六。
English: Recently, Shen Ju respected and re-concorded the movement, using the measure, using the time, using the four, using the one, using the work, using the six.

古文：夫合，黄钟也；四，太簇之正声也；一，姑洗之正声也；六，黄钟之子声也。
现代文：合，是黄钟；四，是太簇的正声；一，是姑洗的正声；六，是黄钟的半律。
English: He, is the yellow bell; four, is the positive tone of Ta Tzu; one, is the positive tone of Gu Xi; six, is the semi-regularity of the yellow bell.

古文：以林钟为宫，而所用为角徵羽者，皆非其一均之声，则谬甚矣。
现代文：以林钟为宫，而所用是角、征、羽的，都不是一均的声律，错谬得太远了。
English: Taking the forest bell as the palace, and using the horn, the signal, and the feather, are not uniform vocal rhythms, and the error is too far.

古文：况林钟一调，不宜用于宗庙，而太庙与世庙，不宜异调，鹗见尤真。
现代文：况且林钟一调，不适宜用于宗庙，而太庙与世庙，不应该不同调，张鹦的见解尤其正确。
English: Moreover, Lin Zhong is one tone, not suitable for the ancestral temple, and the Great Temple and the World Temple should not be different tones, Zhang Paro's opinion is particularly correct.

古文：自今宜用旧协音律，惟加以蕤宾勾声，去再生黄钟之六，改用应钟之凡，以成黄钟一均，庶于感格之义，深有所补。 
现代文：从今以后应该用旧协音律，祇增加蕤宾的勾声，舍弃再生黄钟之六，改用应钟的凡，以形成黄钟的一均，差不多对感于此而达于彼的道理，有很大的补充。
English: From now on, we should use the old consonant rhythm, only increase the hook sound of the cymbals, abandon the reproduction of the sixth of the yellow bells, and use the general of the bell to form the uniformity of the yellow bell, which is almost a great supplement to the reason of feeling this and reaching him.

古文：乃命鹗更定庙享乐音，而逮治沈居敬等。
现代文：于是命令张鹦重新制定庙享的音乐，而逮捕治沈居敬等人之罪。
English: As a result, he ordered Zhang Jia to reformulate the music of the temple, and arrested Zhi Shenju Kei and others for the crime.

古文：鹗寻谱定帝社稷乐歌以进。
现代文：张鹦按乐谱制定帝社稷乐歌进献。
English: Zhang Jia formulated the imperial eulogy according to the musical score.

古文：诏嘉其勤，晋为少卿，掌教雅乐。
现代文：下诏嘉奖他的功劳，升任为少卿，执掌教导雅乐。
English: The following edict commended him for his service, and he was promoted to Shaoqing, in charge of teaching classical music.

古文：夏言又引古者龙见而雩，命乐正习盛乐，舞皇舞。
现代文：夏言又援引古代苍龙星出现便举行祈雨的祭祀，命令乐正练习盛大乐曲，舞盛大的舞蹈。
English: Natsugan also cited the appearance of the ancient celestial dragon and held a rain-worshipping ceremony, ordering the musicians to practice grand music and dance a grand dance.

古文：请依古礼，定大雩之制。
现代文：请求依照古代的礼制，制定祈雨祭祀的仪制。
English: It was requested that a rain-worship ritual be established in accordance with ancient etiquette.

古文：当三献礼成之后，九奏乐止之时，皛括《云汉》诗辞，制为《云门》一曲，使文武舞士并舞而合歌之。
现代文：在三次祭奠礼完成之后，九奏乐曲停止之时，概括《云汉》诗的歌辞，作《云门》一曲，使文、武舞士一起舞蹈并共同歌唱。
English: After the completion of the three memorial services, when the nine-song concert ended, the lyrics of the poem "Yunhan" were summarized and made into a song "Yunmen," and the envoys and martial dancers danced together and sang together.

古文：帝可其议。
现代文：皇帝同意了他的提议。
English: The emperor agreed to his proposal.

古文：时七庙既建，乐制未备，礼官因请更定宗庙雅乐，言： 德、懿、熙、仁四祖久祧，旧章弗协。
现代文：当时七庙已经建成，乐的制度没有完备，礼官于是请求重新制定宗庙的雅乐，说： 德、懿、熙、仁四祖迁祧已久，旧有的乐章不协和。
English: At that time, seven temples had already been built, but the music system was not complete. The etiquette official then requested that the aristocratic music of the ancestral temple be reformulated, saying: The four ancestors of De, Gong, Xi, and Ren have long been relocated, and the old music is not harmonious.

古文：太祖创业，太宗定鼎，列圣守成。
现代文：太祖创立帝业，太宗定立国都，各代帝王保持成就和业绩。
English: The great-great-grandfather founded the imperial business, the great-great-grandfather established the national capital, and each generation of emperors maintained their achievements and performance.

古文：当有颂声，以对越在天，垂之万蜺。
现代文：应当有颂扬的乐歌，以歌颂答谢他们在天之灵，让他们的功业垂留万代。
English: Let there be songs of praise and thanksgiving to them in the heavenly places, and let their works be preserved for all generations.

古文：若特享，若祫享，若大祫，诗歌颂美，宜命儒臣撰述，取自上裁。
现代文：如若单独祭祀，如若集合远近祖先神主于太祖庙大合祭，如若重大的柿袷之祭，用诗歌颂扬美德，应该命令文学之臣撰述，由皇上裁定。
English: If there is a single sacrifice, if there is a gathering of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of

古文：其乐器、乐舞、各依太庙成式，备为规制。 
现代文：它的乐器、乐舞，各自依照太庙已成的形式，备办作为规矩制度。 
English: Its musical instruments, music and dance, each in accordance with the ancient temple has become a form, prepared as a rule system.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝下制命同意。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：已而尊献帝为睿宗，祔享太庙。
现代文：随后追尊献帝为睿宗，拊祭于太庙。
English: Subsequently, a memorial service was held for Emperor Ruizong, and a wreath-laying ceremony was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：于是九庙春特、三时祫、季冬大祫乐章，皆更定焉。
现代文：于是九庙春季特祀、三时的祖庙大合祭、冬末重大合祭所奏乐章，都重新制定。
English: As a result, the music for the nine temples' springtime special worship, the three o'clock ancestral temple grand festival, and the late winter grand festival have all been reformulated.

古文：十八年巡狩兴都，帝亲制乐章，享上帝于飞龙殿，奉皇考配。
现代文：十八年巡守兴都，皇帝亲自制作乐章，在飞龙殿祭祀上帝，供奉皇考配享。
English: In 18 years of patrolling the Xingdu, the emperor personally made music, sacrificed to God in the Flying Dragon Hall, and offered it to the imperial examination.

古文：其后，七庙火，复同堂之制，四时岁祫，乐章器物仍如旧制。
现代文：此后，七庙发生火灾，恢复同堂祭祀的制度，四季祭祀和岁时大合祭，乐章、器物仍然如同旧有制度。
English: After that, fires broke out in seven temples, and the system of worship in the same hall was restored, as well as the four-season worship and the year-end festival. The music and utensils are still the same as the old system.

古文：初增七庙乐官及乐舞生，自四郊九庙暨太岁神祇诸坛，乐舞人数至二千一百名。
现代文：开始增加七庙乐官和乐舞生从四郊九庙以及太岁神只等祭坛，乐舞人数多达二千一百名。
English: He began to increase the number of music officials and music dancers from seven temples to nine temples in four suburbs, as well as altars such as Taisei Shrine, and the number of music dancers reached 2,100.

古文：后稍裁革，存其半。
现代文：后来稍微裁减革除，保存一半。
English: Later, it was slightly reduced and the leather was removed, saving half of it.

古文：张鹗迁太常卿，复申前说，建白三事：一请设特钟、特磬以为乐节；一请复宫县以备古制；一请候元气以定钟律。
现代文：张鹗升迁太常卿，又重申先前的学说，建议三件事：一是请求设置特钟、特磬，作为乐的节度；二是请求恢复四面悬挂乐器的制度，以具备古代制度；三是请求占候元气以制定钟律。
English: Zhang Qian was promoted to Tai Changqing, and he reiterated the previous theory of the bell and suggested three things: one is to request the establishment of a special bell and a special bell as a music festival; the second is to request the restoration of the system of hanging musical instruments on all four sides to have an ancient system; the third is to request to take advantage of the momentum to formulate a bell rhythm.

古文：事下礼官，言： 特钟、特磬宜造乐悬，在庙廷中，周旋未便，不得更制。
现代文：事情下交礼官，说： 特钟、特磬应该制造乐悬，在庙庭中，周旋运动不方便，不能更改制作。
English: The etiquette official said, "The special bell and the special gong should make the music pendant. In the temple garden, it is inconvenient to rotate, and the production cannot be changed.

古文：惟黄钟为声气之元，候气之法，实求中气以定中声，最为作乐本原。
现代文：只有黄钟是声音气息的本源，占候元气的办法，实际是求索中和之气以确定中和之声，是制定乐律的根本。
English: Only the yellow bell is the source of the sound atmosphere, the method of accounting for the vitality. In fact, it is the search for the neutralization of the atmosphere to determine the neutralization of the voice, and it is the basis for formulating the melody.

古文：其说，若重室墐户，截管实灰，覆缇，按历气至灰飞，证以累黍，具有成法可依。
现代文：他的学说，如重叠屋室堵塞窗户，裁截律管填实葭灰，覆缇，按照治历中的推算节气至葭灰飞出，用累粒焉计量标准来证明，都有既定方法可以依凭。
English: His theory, such as overlapping rooms blocking windows, cutting pipes to fill with fly ash, covering cocoons, and following the calculation of the solar terms in the calendar until the fly ash flies out, using the measurement standard to prove, all have established methods to rely on.

古文：其法，筑室于圜丘外垣隙地，选知历候者往相其役，待稍有次第，然后委官考验。 
现代文：他的方法，建筑房屋于圜丘外墙的空隙之地，选择懂得历法占候的人前去辅助建筑工程，等到稍有次序，然后派官员考核占验。 
English: His method, building houses in the gap of the outer wall of the molehill, selected people who knew the calendar to assist the construction project, waited until there was a little order, and then sent officials to assess the occupation test.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从其说。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：仍诏取山西长子县羊头山黍，大小中三等各五斗，以备候气定律。
现代文：于是下诏选取山西长子县羊头山的黍米；大中小三等各五斗，以准备占候节气确定乐律。
English: Therefore, the following edict was issued to select glutinous rice from Mt. Yangtou in Shanxi's Changzi County; five dou for each of the three grades of college, junior high school and junior high school, in order to determine the music rhythm in preparation for the solar terms.

