古文：韩愈外甥刘卢钧薛逢费冠卿沈彬
现代文：韩愈外甥刘卢钧薛逢费冠卿沈彬
English: Han Yu's nephew Liu Lujing Xue Fengfei Guanqing Shen Bin

古文：韩愈外甥
现代文：韩愈外甥
English: Han Yu's nephew

古文：唐吏部侍郎韩愈外甥，忘其名姓，幼而落柘，不读书，好饮酒。
现代文：唐代吏部侍郎韩愈的外甥，忘了他的姓名。他小时候就放纵不羁，不读书，好饮酒。
English: The nephew of Han Yu, a waiter in the Tang Dynasty's cadre department, I forgot his name. When he was a child, he was wild, didn't read, and liked to drink.

古文：弱冠，往洛下省骨肉，乃慕云水不归。
现代文：二十岁左右，去洛阳探望亲人，竟然羡慕修道生活而不回来。
English: At the age of twenty or so, he went to Luoyang to visit his relatives, and was so envious of the monastic life that he did not return.

古文：仅二十年，杳绝音信。
现代文：将近二十年，音信断绝一点消息也没有。
English: For nearly two decades, there has been no news of him.

古文：元和中，忽归长安，知识阘茸，衣服滓弊，行止乖角。
现代文：元和年间，忽然回到长安，知识芜杂，衣服脏破，行为怪僻。
English: During the Yuan and He years, he suddenly returned to Chang'an. His knowledge was mixed, his clothes were dirty, and his behavior was eccentric.

古文：吏部以久不相见，容而恕之。
现代文：韩愈因为很久没有见到他，就容忍宽恕他。
English: Han Yu tolerated and forgave him because he had not seen him for a long time.

古文：一见之后，令于学院中与诸表话论，不近诗书，殊若土偶，唯与小臧赌博。
现代文：见一面之后，让他在韩愈家里的学馆中和表兄弟学习谈论。他不接触诗书，很象个泥塑人，只和小奴赌博。
English: After meeting him, he was sent to study and talk with his cousins in the school hall of Han Yu's home. He did not touch poetry books, he was very much like a clay figurine, he only gambled with his slaves.

古文：或厩中醉卧三日五日，或出宿于外，吏部惧其犯禁陷法，时或勖之。
现代文：有时在马厩中醉卧三天五天，有时出去到外面住宿。韩愈怕他违犯禁今陷入法网，就时常勉励他。
English: Sometimes he would lie drunk in the stables for three days and five days, and sometimes he would go out to stay. Han Yu often encouraged him, fearing that he would violate the ban and fall into the net of the law.

古文：暇日偶见，问其所长。云： 善卓钱锅子。 
现代文：闲暇的日子偶然见到，问他擅长什么，他说善于穿铜线串子。
English: I met him by chance in my free time and asked him what he was good at. He said he was good at stringing copper wire.

古文：试令为之，植一铁条尺余，百步内卓三百六十钱。一一穿之，无差失者。
现代文：试着让他做这个游戏，他就把一根铁条插在地上，露出一尺多长，在百步以内，穿三百六十个铜钱，一个一个都穿过铁条，没有偏差失误的。
English: If you try to make him play this game, he will stick an iron bar into the ground, exposing more than a foot long, within a hundred paces, through three hundred and sixty copper coins, one by one through the iron bar, without deviation or error.

古文：书亦旋有词句，以资笑乐。
现代文：写的文章也很快有了词句，以供笑谈取乐。
English: The articles I wrote soon had words and sentences, which made it fun to talk about.

古文：又于五十步内，双钩草 天下太平 字，点画极工。
现代文：还在五十步内，用双钩草书 天下太平 几个字，一点一画极有功力。
English: In addition, within fifty steps, with double-hook cursive, the world is peaceful, a few words, one point one picture is extremely powerful.

古文：又能于炉中累三十斤炭，支三日火，火势常炽，日满乃消。
现代文：又能在炉子中积累三十斤炭，支持三天火，火势一直炽烈，日期满了才消失。
English: It can also accumulate thirty catties of coal in the furnace, support three days of fire, the fire has been blazing, and the date is full before it disappears.

古文：吏部甚奇之，问其修道，则玄机清话，该博真理，神仙中事，无不详究。
现代文：韩愈认为他很出众，问他修道之事，他就明晰地讲解玄机。包罗广泛的真理，神仙中的事情，他无不详究。
English: Han Yu thought he was very outstanding. When he asked him about the practice of Buddhism, he clearly explained the mystery. Covering a wide range of truth, the things of the immortals, he was very detailed.

古文：因说小伎，云能染花，红者可使碧，或一朵具五色，皆可致之。
现代文：谈到小的技巧，他说能染花，红的可以使它变绿，或一朵花具备五种颜色，都能办到。
English: When it comes to small tricks, he says he can dye a flower, a red can turn it green, or a flower can have five colors.

古文：是年秋，与吏部后堂前染白牡丹一丛，云： 来春必作含棱碧色，内合有金含棱红间晕者，四面各合有一朵五色者。
现代文：这一年秋天，在韩愈后堂前染白牡丹一丛，他说来年春天一定变作绿色，花瓣中还带有条棱。里面该有金黄和含棱红色间杂的，四面应该有一朵五色的。
English: This autumn, in front of Han Yu's back hall, a bunch of peonies were dyed white. He said that next spring they would definitely turn green, and the petals would still have edges. There should be mixed golden yellow and red with edges inside, and there should be a five-colored one on all four sides.

古文：自劚其根下置药，而后栽培之，俟春为验。
现代文：他自己把白牡丹根下掘开，放上药，而后栽培它，等到春天作验证。
English: He dug up the white peony root himself, put the medicine, and then cultivated it until the spring for verification.

古文：无何潜去，不知所之。
现代文：不久，他悄悄地走了，不知到哪里去了。
English: Soon after, he slipped away and I don't know where he went.

古文：是岁，上迎佛骨于凤翔，御楼观之，一城之人，忘业废食。吏部上表直谏，忤旨，出为潮州刺史。
现代文：这一年，皇上到凤翔迎佛骨，御楼观看，全城的人都忘了正业顾不得吃饭，韩愈上表章直言劝谏，触犯皇帝意见，降职出京做潮州刺史。
English: This year, the emperor went to Fengxiang to welcome the Buddha's bones and watch the palace. People in the whole city forgot their duties and could not afford to eat. Han Yu made a direct appeal to the emperor, violated the emperor's opinion, and was demoted from Beijing to do the history of Chaozhou.

古文：至商山，泥滑雪深，颇怀郁郁。
现代文：到商山，道上泥滑雪深，心情特别郁闷。
English: On the way to Shangshan, the snow was deep and the mood was particularly gloomy.

古文：忽见是甥迎马首而立。拜起劳问，挟镫接辔，意甚殷勤。
现代文：忽然看见这个外甥迎着马头站着，跪拜起来慰问，扶着马镫，接过马缰，意态特别殷勤。
English: Suddenly, I saw this nephew standing facing the horse's head, kneeling down to offer condolences, holding the bridle, taking the bridle, with a particularly courteous attitude.

古文：至翌日雪霁，送至邓州，乃白吏部曰： 某师在此。不得远去。将入玄扈倚帝峰矣。 
现代文：到了第二天雪后天晴，送到邓州，才告诉韩愈说： 我的师父在这里，不能远去，将入玄境扈倚帝峰了。 
English: It was not until the next day, after the snow had melted and the weather had cleared, that he was sent to Dengzhou and told Han Yu: "My master is here, he cannot go far, he will enter the hidden world and sit on the imperial pinnacle."

古文：吏部惊异其言，问其师，即洪崖先生也。
现代文：韩愈听了他的话感到惊异，问他的师父，就是洪崖先生。
English: Surprised by his words, Han Yu asked his master, Mr. Hongya.

古文：东园公方使柔金水玉，作九华丹，火候精微，难于暂舍。
现代文：东园公正让他熔化金玉，作九华丹，火候精微，难以暂时离开。
English: Dongyuan justly let him melt the gold, make the nine-huatang, the heat is fine, it is difficult to leave temporarily.

古文：吏部加敬曰： 神仙可致乎？
现代文：韩愈更加敬佩地问： 成为神仙可以吗？
English: Han Yu asked even more admiringly: Is it okay to become a god?

古文：至道可求乎？ 
现代文：修仙的道理能够寻求吗？ 
English: Is it possible to seek the truth of cultivating immortals?

古文：曰： 得之在心，失之亦心。
现代文：他说： 得到它在于心，失去它也在于心。
English: He said: "Getting it is in the mind, losing it is in the mind.

古文：校功铨善，黜陟之严，仿王禁也。
现代文：积点功德称量善举，降职与提升，其严格的程度和皇法是相仿的。
English: Points are awarded according to merit, demotion and promotion, and the degree of rigor is similar to that of the Imperial Law.

古文：某他日复当起居，请从此逝。 
现代文：我将来再去问候起居，请允许我从此离去吧！ 
English: I will visit again in the future, please allow me to leave now!

古文：吏部为五十六字诗以别之曰： 一封朝奏九重天，夕贬潮阳路八千。
现代文：韩愈写了五十六个字的诗来与他告别，诗写道： 一封朝奏九重天，夕贬潮阳路八千。
English: Han Yu wrote a fifty-six-character poem to say goodbye to him, the poem wrote: A morning of nine days, evening of eight thousand.

古文：本为圣朝除弊事，岂将衰朽惜残年！
现代文：本为圣朝除弊事，岂将衰朽惜残年。
English: Originally, it was to remove the evils of the Holy Dynasty, but it will decline and regret the remaining years.

古文：云横秦岭家何在？雪拥蓝关马不前。
现代文：云横秦岭家何在，雪拥蓝关马不前。
English: The clouds are not far from Qinling's house, and the snow is not far from the horse.

古文：知汝远来应有意。好收吾骨瘴江边。 
现代文：知汝远来应有意，好收吾骨瘴江边。 
English: Know that you have come a long way, you should be intentional, so that you can gather your bones on the edge of the Lijiang River.

古文：与诗讫，挥涕而别，行入林谷，其速如飞。
现代文：把诗给他以后，挥泪而别。他走进森林峡谷，其快如飞。
English: After giving him the poem, he burst into tears and left. He walked into the forest canyon as fast as he could fly.

古文：明年春，牡丹花开，数朵花色，一如其说。但每一叶花中，有楷书十四字曰： 云横秦岭家何处，雪拥蓝关马不前。 
现代文：第二年春天，牡丹花开，数一数花的朵数以及花的颜色，完全如他所说的那样，只是每一叶花中，还有十四个楷书字： 云横秦岭家何处，雪拥蓝关马不前。 
English: In the spring of the second year, when the peonies were in bloom, he counted the number of flowers and the colors of the flowers exactly as he had said. However, in each petal, there were also fourteen Chinese characters: "Yun Yokocho Qinling Jia Wo, Xue Ying Lan Guan Ma Nian Qian."

古文：书势精能，人工所不及。
现代文：字的笔势精能，人工所不及。
English: The precision of the brushstroke of the characters is not as good as that of manual writing.

古文：非神仙得道，立见先知。
现代文：如果不是凭借仙术，立刻能察知未来，怎么能达到这种境界呢？
English: How can we reach this state if we can't immediately perceive the future with the help of magic?

古文：何以及于此也？或云，其后吏部复见之，亦得其月华度世之道。而迹未显尔。
现代文：有人说，那以后韩愈又见到了他的外甥，也得到了他的道家修炼之法，只是仙迹不够明显罢了。
English: Some people say that since then, Han Yu has met his nephew again, and also obtained his Taoist cultivation method, but the miracle is not obvious enough.

古文：刘潜
现代文：刘潜
English: Liu Qianqian

古文：刘潜，小字宜哥，唐宰相瞻之兄也。
现代文：刘潜，小名叫宜哥，是唐朝宰相刘瞻的哥哥。
English: Liu Qian, whose nickname was Yige, was the elder brother of Liu Zhan, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：家贫好道，尝有道士经其家，见潜异之，乃问知道否？
现代文：刘潜家里贫寒，而他喜欢道术。曾经有个道士经过他家，见到刘潜认为他与众不同，就问他知晓道家之术吗？他说： 知道。
English: Liu Qian's family is poor, but he likes Taoism. Once a Taoist passed by his house, saw Liu Qian thought he was different, and asked him if he knew Taoism? He said: I know.

古文：曰： 知之，某性饶俗气，业应未净，遽可强学邪。 道士曰： 能相师乎？ 
现代文：我的本性多俗气，罪孽可能未净，可以强学吗？ 道士说： 能互相学习吗？ 
English: How tawdry my nature is, my sins may be impure, can I study hard? The Taoist said: Can we learn from each other?

古文：潜曰： 何敢。 
现代文：刘潜说： 怎么敢。 
English: Liu Qian said: How dare you.

古文：于是师事之。
现代文：于是象侍奉老师那样事奉道士。
English: Therefore, he served the priests like a servant teacher.

古文：道士命潜曰： 山栖求道，无必裹巾。 
现代文：道士命令刘潜说： 到山上住着寻求道术，不必裹着头巾。 
English: The Taoist ordered Liu Qian to say, "You don't have to wear a headscarf to live in the mountains and seek Taoism.

古文：潜遂丫髻布衣，随道士入罗浮山。
现代文：刘潜就将头发梳成丫髻穿着布做的衣服，跟着道士进了罗浮山。
English: Liu Qian then combed her hair into a maiden dress made of cloth and followed the Taoist into the Luofu Mountain.

古文：初，潜与瞻俱读书为文，而性唯高尚，瞻性慕荣达。
现代文：当初，刘潜与刘瞻都读书做文章，而刘潜性情只喜高尚，刘瞻性情却是羡慕荣华发达。
English: At first, Liu Qian and Liu Zhan both read books and wrote articles, but Liu Qian's nature only liked the noble, while Liu Zhan's nature envied the prosperous and developed.

古文：潜尝谓瞻曰： 鄙必不第，则逸于山野。
现代文：刘潜曾经对刘瞻说： 我一定不能考中，就到山野隐逸。
English: Liu Qian once said to Liu Zhan: I can't take the middle school entrance examination, so I'll go to the mountains and hide.

古文：尔得第，则劳于尘俗，竟不及于鄙也。
现代文：你科举考中，却在尘俗中劳碌，终究赶不上我。
English: You are in the middle of the entrance examination, but you are working hard in the mundane world, and in the end you will not be able to catch up with me.

古文：然慎于富贵，四十年后，当验矣。 
现代文：然而你在富贵时要谨慎，四十年以后，就能验证了。 
English: However, you should be careful when you are rich. After forty years, you will be able to verify it.

古文：瞻曰： 神仙遐远难求，秦皇汉武，非不区区也。
现代文：刘瞻说： 神仙遥远难以寻求，秦始皇和汉武帝，不是也不得志。
English: Liu Zhan said: Immortals are far away and hard to find. Qin Shihuang and Emperor Wu of Han were not able to find them.

古文：廊庙咫尺易致，马周、张嘉贞，可以继踵矣。 
现代文：位列朝廷去做官如近在咫尺容易办到，象马周、张嘉贞，我可以跟上他们的脚步了。 
English: It's easy to become an official in the imperial court if you're close enough. Like Ma Zhou and Zhang Jiazhen, I can follow in their footsteps.

古文：自后潜愈思于道，乃隐于罗浮。
现代文：从那以后，刘潜在道术上更加精心思考，就到罗浮山隐居。
English: From then on, Liu Kuanzhong thought more carefully about Taoism and went into seclusion on Mount Luo.

古文：瞻进士登科，屡历清显，及升辅相，颇著燮调之称。
现代文：刘瞻进士及第，屡次历任清高显赫的官职，直到升为宰相，很以谨慎著称。
English: Liu Zhanjin, the third, repeatedly held high-ranking and prominent official positions until he was promoted to prime minister, and was known for his prudence.

古文：俄谪日南，行次广州朝台，泊舟江滨。
现代文：后来被贬到日南，途中停留在广州朝台，把船泊在江边。
English: Later, it was relegated to Nichinan, and stopped at Guangzhou Chaotai on the way, and moored the ship on the river.

古文：忽有丫角布衣少年，冲暴雨而来，衣履不湿。
现代文：这时，忽然有个头梳丫角身穿布衣的年轻人，冒着暴雨到来，而衣服和鞋子都没有湿。
English: At this time, a young man with a comb-over and wearing a cloth coat suddenly arrived, braving the torrential rain, but his clothes and shoes were not wet.

古文：云欲见瞻，左右皆讶，乃诘之。 但言宜哥来也。 
现代文：他说要见刘瞻，刘瞻手下的人都很惊讶，就盘问他。他告诉他们说： 你们只说宜哥来了。 
English: He said he wanted to see Liu Zhan. Liu Zhan's subordinates were surprised and questioned him. He told them, "You only said that Yigo was coming.

古文：以白，瞻问形状，具以对。
现代文：手下人把这话报告了刘瞻，刘瞻问那个人的形象状态，手下人详细地回答了。
English: The subordinate reported this to Liu Zhan, Liu Zhan asked the person's image status, and the subordinate answered in detail.

古文：瞻惊叹，乃迎入见之。
现代文：刘瞻又惊讶又感叹，就把刘潜迎接进去向他拜见。
English: Surprised and lamenting, Liu Zhan welcomed Liu Qian into the room and paid him a visit.

古文：潜颜貌可二十来，瞻以皤然衰朽，方为逐臣，悲喜不胜，潜复勉之曰： 与余为兄弟，手足所痛，潜日之言，今四十年矣。 
现代文：刘潜从面貌看大约二十来岁，刘瞻却已是白发衰朽之年，正做被流放之臣。刘瞻悲喜不自胜，刘潜又劝勉他说： 我和你是兄弟，手足所痛，往昔说的话，如今四十年了。 
English: Liu Qian looked to be in his twenties, but Liu Zhan was already white-haired and decrepit, and was serving as an exiled vassal. Liu Zhan was inconsolable, and Liu Qian advised him: "You and I are brothers, and our hands and feet hurt. What we said in the past is now forty years old.

古文：瞻亦感叹。谓潜曰： 可复修之否？ 
现代文：刘瞻也很感叹，就问刘潜说： 我可以重新去修道吗？ 
English: Liu Zhan was also very impressed, so he asked Liu Qian: Can I go back to the monastery?

古文：潜曰： 身邀荣宠，职和阴阳，用心动静，能无损乎？
现代文：刘潜说： 你身邀荣宠，职掌调和阴阳，无论动和静都用心，能够无损吗？
English: Liu Qian said: Are you able to invite honor and favor, balance yin and yang, and be careful in both movement and stillness?

古文：自非茅家阿兄，已升天仙，讵能救尔。
现代文：我不像茅家兄弟那样，已成开仙，怎么能够救你。
English: I am not like the Mao brothers, I have become a fairy godmother, how can I save you.

古文：今唯来相别，非来相救也。 
现代文：今天只来向你告别，不是来救你。 
English: I only came to say goodbye today, not to save you.

古文：于是同舟行，别话平生隔阔之事，一夕失潜所在。
现代文：于是同船而行，另外谈一些平生相隔阔别的事情。一天晚上，刘潜突然不见了。
English: So they went on the same boat, and in addition, they talked about some things that were far apart in their lives. One night, Liu Qian suddenly disappeared.

古文：今罗浮山中，时有见者。
现代文：现在罗浮山中，时而有人见到他。
English: Now, in the Luofu Mountains, he is occasionally seen.

古文：瞻遂南适，殁于贬所矣。
现代文：刘瞻就向南而去，死在被贬的地方。
English: Liu Zhan went to the south and died in the place where he was demoted.

古文：卢钧
现代文：卢钧
English: Lu Wei

古文：唐相国卢公钧，进士射策为尚书郎，以疾出为均州刺史。
现代文：唐朝丞相卢钧，由射策中进士而被授为尚书郎，带病出任均州刺史。
English: Lu Wei, the minister of the Tang Dynasty, was awarded the title of Shang Shulang by the junior high school students of Yajie, and served as the secretary of the history of Junzhou when he was ill.

古文：到郡疾稍加，羸瘠，不耐见人，常于郡后山斋养性独处。
现代文：到郡以后病情加重，瘦得很厉害，不耐烦见人，常常在郡后山斋养性独居。
English: After arriving in the county, his condition worsened, he became very thin, he was impatient to see people, and he often lived alone in the mountains behind the county.

古文：左右接待，亦皆远去，非公呼召，莫敢前也。
现代文：他手下侍奉的人员，也都离得远远的，不是卢公召呼，没有人敢到他面前。
English: The people who serve under him are also far away. They are not summoned by Lu Gong, and no one dares to come before him.

古文：忽一人衣饰弊故，逾垣而入，云，姓王。
现代文：忽然有一个人穿着打扮又破又旧，从墙外跳进来，自己说姓王。
English: Suddenly, a man dressed in shabby and old clothes jumped in from outside the wall and said his surname was Wang.

古文：问其所自，云，山中来。
现代文：卢钧问他从哪里来，他说从山中来。
English: Lu Yao asked him where he came from, and he said from the mountains.

古文：公笑而谓之曰： 即王山人也，此来何以相教。 
现代文：卢钧笑着对他说： 你就是王山人了，这次来用什么指教我呢？ 
English: Lu Yao smiled and said to him, "You are Wang Shanren, what are you using to teach me this time?"

古文：王曰： 公之贵，位极人臣，而寿不永，灾运方深，由是有沉绵之疾，故相救耳。 
现代文：王山人说： 您的禄位高，地位居于人臣的顶点，然而寿命不长，灾运正深，因此有久治不愈的疾病，所以来救你。 
English: The Mountain King said, "Your position is high, and your status is at the pinnacle of officials. However, your life expectancy is not long, and your misfortune is profound. Therefore, you have an incurable disease, so I have come to save you.

古文：山斋无水，公欲召人取汤茶之属，王止之，以腰巾蘸于井中，鲜丹一粒，捩腰巾之水以咽丹，与之约曰： 此后五日，疾当愈矣，康愈倍常。
现代文：山斋没有水，卢钧想要唤人送汤茶之类，王山人阻止他，用腰带到井中蘸水，拿出仙丹一粒，拧出腰带中的水，让卢钧把药咽下去，与卢钧约定说： 此后五天，病该好了，康健超过平常一倍。
English: There was no water in the mountainside, and Lu Yao wanted to call for people to bring him soup and tea. Wang Shanzhong stopped him, and used his belt to carry water to the well. He took out a cactus and squeezed out the water in his belt. Lu Yao swallowed the medicine and agreed with Lu Yao: "In the next five days, my illness should be better, and my health will be more than double the usual."

古文：后二年，当有大厄。
现代文：二年后，当有大厄运。
English: Two years later, a stroke of bad luck.

古文：勤立阴功，救人悯物为意，此时当再相遇，在夏之初也。 
现代文：你应勤立阴功，以救人悯物为念，那时当再相遇，时间在初夏。 
English: You should diligently set up the Yin Gong, save people and things with compassion in mind, then when you meet again, the time is in early summer.

古文：自是卢公疾愈，旬日平复。
现代文：从此卢钧病好了，十来天就康复了。
English: From then on, Lu Yao's illness was cured, and he recovered in about ten days.

古文：明年解印还京，署盐铁判官。
现代文：第二年解职回京，暂任盐铁判官。
English: He was dismissed from his post the following year and returned to Kyoto, temporarily serving as a salt and iron adjudicator.

古文：夏四月，于务本东门道左，忽见山人，寻至卢宅，喜而言曰： 君今年第二限终。
现代文：夏季四月，在务本东门道旁，忽然见到王山人，随即到卢家，高兴地说： 您今年第二次寿限过去了。
English: In the summer of April, I suddenly saw Wang Shanren on the side of the East Gate Road of Zhuben, and immediately went to Lu's house and said happily: Your second life limit this year has passed.

古文：为灾极重也，以君为郡，去年雪冤狱，活三人之命，灾已息矣。
现代文：本来为灾很重，因为你治理均州，去年昭雪冤狱，救活三个人的性命，所以灾已平息了。
English: Originally, the disaster was very serious, because you governed Jeonju, last year you cleared up the wrongful imprisonment and saved the lives of three people, so the disaster has subsided.

古文：今此月内，三五日小不康而已，固无忧也。 
现代文：现在这个月内，有三五天小病而已，当然不必忧虑了。 
English: So far this month, I've only had three or five days of minor illness, so of course I don't have to worry.

古文：翌日，山人使二仆持钱十千，于狗脊坡分施贫病而已。
现代文：第二天，王山人让两个仆人拿着十千钱，到狗脊坡分发施舍给贫穷有病的人。
English: The next day, the Wangshan people asked two servants to take ten thousand money and go to the Dog Ridge to distribute alms to the poor and sick.

古文：自此复去，云： 二十三年五月五日午时，可令一道士于万山顶相候。
现代文：从此又离去，说： 二十三年五月五日午时，可令一个道士到万山顶上等我。
English: Then he left again, saying, "At noon on May 5, 1923, I can have a Taoist monk wait for me at the top of Wanshan Peak."

古文：此时君节制汉土，当有月华相授，勿衍期也。 
现代文：这时你镇守汉中，当有月华交给你，不要误期呀！ 
English: At this time, you are in charge of Hanzhong, when there is a moon, it will be handed over to you, don't miss the deadline!

古文：自是公扬历清切，便蕃贵盛。
现代文：从此卢钧步步高升职近帝居，富贵极盛。
English: From then on, Lu Xun was promoted to a position close to the imperial palace, and became extremely wealthy.

古文：后出镇汉南之明年，已二十三年矣，及期，命道士牛知微，五日午时登万山之顶。
现代文：后来出镇汉南的第二年，已经是二十三年了，到了约定的日期，卢钧就令道士牛知微，在五日午时登上万山之顶。
English: Later, in the second year after leaving Hannan Town, it was already 23 years. On the agreed date, Lu Wei ordered the Taoist priest Niu Zhiwei to climb to the top of Wanshan at noon on the fifth day.

古文：山人在焉，以金丹二，便知微吞之，谓曰： 子有道气而寡阴功，未契道品，更宜勤修也。 
现代文：王山人已在那里，拿二粒金丹，叫牛知微把它吞服下去，对他说： 你有道气而缺少阴功，不合道品，应该勤修。 
English: The man from Mount Wang was already there. He took two pieces of jujube and asked Niu Zhiwei to swallow it. He said to him, "You have the spirit but lack the yin gong. You are not up to the mark. You should diligently practice."

古文：以金丹十粒，令授于公。
现代文：又拿十粒金丹，让牛知微给卢钧。
English: He also took ten pieces of jujube and asked Niu Zhiwei to give it to Lu Yao.

古文：曰： 当享上寿，无忘修炼。
现代文：说： 能享长寿，不要忘记修炼。
English: He said: If you can enjoy a long life, don't forget to cultivate.

古文：世限既毕，伫还蓬宫耳！ 
现代文：尘世期限完毕以后，等他回蓬莱仙宫吧！ 
English: After the earthly term is over, wait for him to return to Penglai Immortal Palace!

古文：与知微揖别，忽不复见。
现代文：王山人与牛知微一揖告别，忽然再也看不到他了。
English: Once Wangshan Man and Niu Zhi Wei said goodbye, they suddenly couldn't see him anymore.

古文：其后知微年八十余，状貌常如三十许。
现代文：其后牛知微八十多岁，样子常象三十多岁。
English: After that, Niu Zhi was in his eighties and often looked like he was in his thirties.

古文：卢公年九十，耳目聪明，气力不衰。
现代文：卢钧年纪九十岁了，耳不聋眼不花，气力没有衰退。
English: Lu Wei is ninety years old. He is not deaf or blind, and his strength has not declined.

古文：既终之后，异香盈室矣。
现代文：他死了以后，奇异的香气充满了屋子。
English: After he died, a strange aroma filled the house.

古文：薛逢
现代文：薛逢
English: Xue Feng

古文：河东薛逢，咸通中为绵州刺史。
现代文：河东薛逢，在咸通年间担任绵州刺史。
English: Hedong Xuefeng, served as Mianzhou chief historian during the Hamdang Tong period.

古文：岁余，梦入洞府，肴馔甚多而不睹人物，亦不敢飨之，乃出门。
现代文：一年以后，梦入洞府，美味菜肴很多却看不到人，他也不敢吃，就走出洞门。
English: A year later, he dreamed that he was in a cave. There were many delicious dishes, but he couldn't see anyone. He didn't dare to eat, so he walked out of the cave.

古文：有人谓曰： 此天仓也。 
现代文：有人对他说： 这是天仓。 
English: Someone said to him, "This is a storehouse.

古文：及明话于宾友，或曰： 州界有昌明县，有天仓洞，中自然饮食，往往游云水者得而食之。 
现代文：到天亮向宾朋叙述梦境，有人说： 绵州界内有个昌明县，昌明县有个天仓洞，洞中有自来就有的饮食，云游的人往往能够吃到它。 
English: When recounting the dream to friends and relatives at dawn, someone said: There is a Changming County within the borders of Mianzhou. There is a Tiancang Cave in Changming County. The cave has its own food, and wanderers can often eat it.

古文：即使道士孙灵讽与亲吏访焉。
现代文：薛逢就派道士孙灵讽与他自己的心腹到那里去访察。
English: Xue Feng sent the Taoist Sun Lingliao and his own henchman to visit there.

古文：入洞可十许里，犹须执炬，十里外渐明朗。
现代文：进洞约有十余里，还必须拿着蜡烛，十里外渐渐明朗。
English: It takes more than ten miles to get into the cave, and you have to hold a candle. After ten miles, it gradually becomes clear.

古文：又三五里，豁然与人世无异。
现代文：又走三五里，就亮亮堂堂与人世没有差异了。
English: Another thirty-five miles and there would be no difference between him and the rest of the world.

古文：崖室极广，可容千人。
现代文：那里的崖室极其宽广，可以容纳上千人。
English: The cliff chamber there is extremely wide and can accommodate thousands of people.

古文：其下平整，有石床罗列，上饮食名品极多，皆若新熟，软美甘香，灵讽拜而食之。
现代文：崖室下面平整，罗列着石床，石床上饮食名品极多，都象刚刚做熟一般，软美甜香，孙灵讽行过礼就吃。
English: The lower level of the cliff room is flat, lined with stone beds. There are many famous food items on the stone bed, all of which are just ripe, soft and sweet. Sun Ling will eat them after bowing.

古文：又别开三五所，请以奉薛公为信。
现代文：又另外打开三五个地方，又把洞中食物奉送给薛逢作为凭证。
English: Another three or five places were opened, and the food in the cave was given to Xue Feng as a certificate.

古文：及禀出洞门，形状宛然，皆化为石矣。
现代文：到拿出洞门时，那些食物的形状还象原来一样，但都变成石头了。
English: By the time the door was pulled out, the food was still in its original shape, but had turned to stone.

古文：洞中左右，散面溲面，堆盐积豉，不知纪极。
现代文：洞中两旁，散放着面粉和泡过的面粉，堆积着食盐和豆子，不知终局。
English: On both sides of the hole, flour and soaked flour are scattered, salt and beans are piled up, and the outcome is unknown.

古文：又行一二里，溪水迅急，既阔且深。
现代文：又走了一二里，溪水湍急，又宽又深。
English: A mile or two further on, the stream was fast-flowing, wide and deep.

古文：隔溪见山川居第历历然，不敢渡而止，近岸砂中，有履迹往来，皆二三尺，才知有人行处。
现代文：隔溪看见山川住宅都清清楚楚的，他们不敢渡过就停下来。靠近溪岸的沙子中，有来来往往鞋印的痕迹，鞋印都长二三尺，才知道这里也有人行走的地方。
English: Across the creek, the houses of the mountains and rivers are clearly visible, and they stop when they dare not cross. In the sand near the creek, there are traces of shoe prints that come and go. The shoe prints are two or three feet long, and only then do they know that there is also a place where people walk.

古文：薛公闻之，叹异灵胜，而莫穷其所以也。
现代文：薛逢闻听这些情况，以为灵胜而叹异，却没有什么办法穷究它为什么会是那样。
English: Hearing these circumstances, Xue Feng thought it was a miracle, but there was no way to investigate why it was like that.

古文：余按《舆地志》云：少室山有自然五谷甘果，神芝仙药。
现代文：我查考《舆地志》记载：少室山有天然的五谷、甜果以及灵芝仙药。
English: I checked the records of "Public Geography": Shomuroyama has natural grains, sweet fruits and Ganoderma lucidum.

古文：周太子晋学道上仙，有九十年资粮，留于山中。
现代文：周太子晋向上仙学道，把九十年资粮留在山中。
English: Zhou Taizi Jin went to Shangxian to learn the Tao, and left the ninety years of capital and grain in the mountains.

古文：少室在嵩山西十七里，从东南上四十里，为下定思，又上十里为上定思，十里中有大石门，为中定思。
现代文：少室山在嵩山西十七里，从东南上四十里，是下定思，又上十里是上定思，十里当中有个大石门，是中定思。
English: Shomuroyama is seventeen miles west of Mt. Song, and forty miles up from the southeast. It is the lower Ding Si, and ten miles up is the upper Ding Si. Among the ten miles, there is a large stone gate that is the middle Ding Si.

古文：自中定思西出，至崖头，下有石室，中有水，多白石英。
现代文：从中定思往西走，到崖头，下面有个石室，石室中有水，还有很多白石英。
English: From Zhongding Si, walk west to the cliff head, there is a stone room below, there is water in the stone room, and there is a lot of white quartz.

古文：室内有自然经书，自然饮食。
现代文：室内有原来就有的经书和饮食之物，与天仓洞无异。
English: The room has the original scriptures and food items, which is the same as that of Amakura-do.

古文：与此无异，又天台山东有洞，入十余里，有居人市肆，多卖饮食。
现代文：还有天台山的东侧也有洞，进去十多里，有居民、集市和店铺，店铺大多卖饮食。
English: There is also a cave on the east side of Tiantai Mountain, more than ten miles in, with residents, markets and shops, most of which sell food and drink.

古文：乾符中，有游僧入洞，经历市中，饥甚，闻食香，买蒸啖之。
现代文：乾符年间，有云游和尚进入洞中，经过市中，饿得很，又闻到食物的香味，就买来吃了。
English: In the year of the zodiac, a wandering monk entered the cave, passed through the market, was very hungry, and smelled the scent of food, so he bought and ate it.

古文：同行一僧，服气不食饭。
现代文：同行的一个和尚，只是服气而不吃饭。
English: A monk who was traveling with him only refused to eat.

古文：行十余里，出洞门，已在青州牟平县，而食僧俄变为石。
现代文：他们又走十几里，出了洞门，已在青州牟平县，而吃了东西的和尚不一会儿就变成了石头。
English: They walked another dozen miles, out of the cave gate, and were already in Muping County, Qingzhou, and the monk who had eaten something soon turned into stone.

古文：以此言之，王烈石髓，张华龙膏，得食之者，亦须累积阴功。
现代文：根据这种情况来说，王烈的石髓，张华的龙膏，能够吃它的人，也必须是积累阴功。
English: According to this situation, Wang Liao's stone pith, Zhang Hua's dragon paste, and those who can eat it must also accumulate yin gong.

古文：天挺仙骨，然可上登仙品。若常人啖之，必化而为石矣。
现代文：天挺仙骨，然可上登仙品的人才行，如果普通人吃了它，一定变化成石头了。
English: If ordinary people eat it, it will turn into stone.

古文：费冠卿
现代文：费冠卿
English: Lord Falconer

古文：费冠卿，池州人也。进士擢第，将归故乡，别相国郑公余庆。
现代文：费冠卿是池州人，进士及第后，将要回故乡，临行向相国郑余庆告别。
English: Fei Guanqing is a native of Chizhou, and will return to his hometown to bid farewell to his country, Zheng Yuqing.

古文：公素与秋浦刘令友善，喜费之行，托以寓书焉。
现代文：郑相国一向与秋浦县刘县令友好，费冠卿此行他很高兴，托费冠卿捎书信给他。
English: Zheng Sanguo has always been friendly with Liu County, Qiupu County. He was very pleased with Fei Guanqing's visit and asked Fei Guanqing to write a letter to him.

古文：手札盈幅，缄以授费，戒之曰： 刘令久在名场，所以不登甲乙之选者，以其褊率，不拘于时。
现代文：亲手书写满满一张纸，封上以后交给费冠卿，告诉他说： 刘县令久在名场，之所以没有考中进士的原因，就是因为他偏激直率，不被时俗所容。
English: He filled a piece of paper with his own handwriting, sealed it, and handed it to Fei Guanqing, telling him: Liu County has been in the famous field for a long time, and the reason why he did not enter the middle school examination is because he is too direct and is not tolerated by the times.

古文：舍科甲而就卑宦，可善遇之也。 
现代文：他舍弃科甲而就任卑微的官职，你应该好好对待他。 
English: You should treat him well because he gave up a first-class degree to take up a lowly government post.

古文：费因请公略批行止书末，贵其因所慰荐，稍垂青眼。
现代文：费冠卿趁机请相国在信的末尾略批几句关于他的品行的话，以相国所荐这个因由为贵，对他能稍加照顾。
English: Sir Ficun took the opportunity to ask his country to add a few words about his conduct at the end of the letter. The reason why he was recommended by his country was valuable, and he could be treated with a little care.

古文：公然之，发函批数行，复缄如初。
现代文：相国认为可以，就打开信函批了几行，又加封如初。
English: The other country thought it was okay, so they opened the letter, approved a few lines, and sealed it as before.

古文：费至秋浦，先投刺于刘，刘阅刺，委诸案上，略不顾盼。
现代文：费冠卿到了秋浦，先向刘县令投进名片，刘县令阅过名片就丢到桌子上，根本不回话。
English: When Lord Fei Guan arrived in Qiu Pu, he first gave his business card to Liu Xianling. After reading the business card, Liu Xianling threw it on the table and did not reply at all.

古文：费悚立俟命，久而无报，疑其不可也，即以相国书授阍者。
现代文：费冠卿在外悚立等候消息，很久也没有回复，就怀疑刘县令不许可，就把郑相国的书信交给守门人。
English: Fei Guanqing stood outside waiting for news, but there was no reply for a long time. He suspected that Liu County would not allow it, so he handed Zheng Xiangguo's letter to the gatekeeper.

古文：刘发缄览毕，慢骂曰： 郑某老汉，用此书何为？ 
现代文：刘县令打开信函看完，谩骂说： 郑某老汉，用这封信干什么？ 
English: Liu Xianling opened the letter and, after reading it, scolded: "Old man Zheng, what are you doing with this letter?

古文：劈而弃之，费愈惧，排闼而入，趋拜于前，刘忽闵然顾之，揖坐与语。
现代文：就把信扯碎扔掉了，费冠卿更加疑惧，就推开大门进去，快步向前施礼，刘县令忽然怜悯地看看他，揖让他坐下说话。
English: He tore up the letter and threw it away, and Lord Fecorn, still more suspicious, pushed open the gate to get in, walked briskly forward and bowed. Liu Xianling suddenly looked at him with pity and told him to sit down and talk.

古文：日暮矣，刘促令排店，费曰： 日已昏黑，或得逆旅之舍，亦不及矣。
现代文：天色晚了，刘县令催他去找店房，费冠卿说： 天已昏黑，或许来不及找到旅舍了。
English: It was late in the day, and Liu County ordered him to find a store room. Fei Guanqing said: It's already dark, maybe it's too late to find a hostel.

古文：乞于厅庑之下，席地一宵，明日徐诣店所。 
现代文：我请求在厅庑之下，在地上睡一夜，明天慢慢找旅店。 
English: I asked to sleep on the floor under the eaves of the hall for one night, and then slowly look for a hotel the next day.

古文：即自解囊装，舒毡席于地，刘即拂衣而入。
现代文：就自己解开行囊，把毡子打开铺在地上，刘县令当即拂衣而入。
English: He unzipped his traveling bag, opened the duster and laid it on the ground. Liu Xianling immediately whipped off his clothes and entered.

古文：良久出曰： 此非待宾之所，有阁子中。 
现代文：过了很久，刘县令出来说： 这里不是待客的地方，有个阁子可住。 
English: After a long time, the Liu County magistrate came out and said, "This is not a place to receive guests, there is a pavilion to live in."

古文：既而闲门，锁系甚严。
现代文：然后关了门，锁闭很严。
English: Then he closed the door, locking it tight.

古文：费莫知所以，据榻而息。
现代文：费冠卿不知这样做的原因，就靠在床上歇息。
English: Sir Philip, for reasons unknown, lay back and rested.

古文：是夕月明，于门窍中窥其外，悄然无声，见刘令自持篲畚，扫除堂之内外。
现代文：这天晚上月光明亮，费冠卿从门缝中往外探看，外面静悄悄地没有声息，看见刘县令亲自拿着扫帚簸箕，扫除大堂内外。
English: On this night, the moon was bright, and Lord Fei Guan looked out from the cracks in the door, and quietly there was no sound outside. He saw Liu Xianling himself holding a broom and sweeping the lobby inside and out.

古文：庭庑陛壁，靡不周悉。
现代文：庭院走廊台阶墙壁，无不全都扫遍。
English: The courtyard, the corridor, the steps and the walls were all swept away.

古文：费异其事，危坐屏息，不寐而伺焉。
现代文：费冠卿觉得这事奇异，就端坐着屏住呼吸，不睡觉等着。
English: Sir Francis thought this was strange, so he sat holding his breath, not sleeping, and waiting.

古文：将及一更，忽有异香之气，郁烈殊常，非人世所有。
现代文：快到一更天，忽然有奇异的香气，浓烈得不同平常，不是人世所有的。
English: Fast forward to the next day, suddenly there is a strange aroma, strong enough to be different from usual, not all of the world.

古文：良久，刘执版恭立于庭，似有所候。
现代文：很久，刘县令拿着手板恭恭敬敬的站在院子里，好象等待什么人。
English: For a long time, Liu Xianling stood respectfully in the yard with the handboard, as if waiting for someone.

古文：香气弥甚，即见云冠紫衣仙人，长八九尺，数十人拥从而至。
现代文：这时香气更浓烈了，就看见戴着云冠穿着紫衣的仙人，有八九尺高，由几十人簇拥跟随而来。
English: At this time, the fragrance became more intense, and I saw a nymph wearing a cloud crown and a purple robe, 89 feet tall, followed by dozens of people.

古文：刘再拜稽首，此仙人直诣堂中，刘立侍其侧。
现代文：刘县令拜了两拜又行稽首礼，这个仙人直到堂中，刘县令站在他身旁站着陪着。
English: The Liu County magistrate bowed twice and performed the ceremonial head bow. The hermit made it all the way to the middle of the hall. The Liu County magistrate stood next to him and accompanied him.

古文：俄有筵席罗列，肴馔奇果，香闻阁下。
现代文：不一会儿，有筵席摆设出来，美味佳肴和奇异水果的香气一直传到阁下。
English: In a short time, a banquet was set up, and the aroma of delicious dishes and strange fruits has been passed on to you.

古文：费闻之，已觉气清神爽，须臾奏乐饮酒。
现代文：费冠卿闻到香气，已经觉得神清气爽，一会儿，堂中又奏乐饮酒。
English: Fei Guanqing smelled the aroma and already felt refreshed. After a while, there was music and drinking in the hall.

古文：令刘令布席于地，亦侍饮焉。
现代文：仙人让刘县令在地上铺上席子，也陪着饮酒。
English: The hermit asked Liu Xianling to spread a mat on the ground, and he also drank alcohol with him.

古文：乐之音调，亦非人间之曲。
现代文：乐曲的音调，也不是人间之曲。
English: The tone of a piece of music is not the melody of the world.

古文：仙人忽问刘曰： 得郑某信否？ 
现代文：仙人忽然问刘县令， 有郑某的消息吗？ 。
English: The hermit suddenly asked the Liu County magistrate, "Do you have any news about Zheng?"

古文：对曰： 得信甚安。 
现代文：刘县令回答说， 收到的消息，说他很安康 。
English: The Liu County magistrate replied that the information received was that he was in good health.

古文：顷之又问： 得郑某书否。 
现代文：一会儿，仙人又问： 收到他的信了吗？ 
English: After a while, the genie asked again, "Did you get his letter?"

古文：对曰： 费冠卿先辈自长安来，得书。 
现代文：刘县令回答说： 费冠卿先辈从长安来，接到信了。 
English: The Liu County magistrate replied, "The ancestors of Fei Guanqing came from Chang'an and received a letter.

古文：笑曰： 费冠卿且喜及第也，今在此邪？ 
现代文：仙人笑着说： 费冠卿且喜及第了，现在在这里吗？ 
English: The hermit smiled and said, "Lord Fei Guanzhong, you have come to the right place. Are you here now?

古文：对曰： 在。 
现代文：刘县令回答说： 在。 
English: The Liu County magistrate replied: Yes.

古文：仙人曰： 吾未合与之相见，且与一杯酒。
现代文：仙人说： 我不该和他相见，且给他一杯酒。
English: The genie said, "I shouldn't have met him and given him a glass of wine.

古文：但向道果早行，即得相见矣。 
现代文：只要向往道术及早修行，就能相见了。 
English: As long as you aspire to practice Taoism as early as possible, you will be able to meet.

古文：即命刘酌酒一杯，送阁子中。
现代文：就让刘县令斟酒一杯，送到阁子中。
English: He asked the Liu County magistrate to pour a glass of wine and bring it to the pavilion.

古文：费窥见刘自呷酒半杯，即以阶上盆中水投杯中，疑而未饮。
现代文：费冠卿窥见刘县令自己把酒喝了半杯，立即拿台阶上盆子里的水倒进杯中，他就起疑心而没喝。
English: Fei Guanqing saw that Liu County ordered him to drink half a cup of wine, and immediately took the water in the basin on the steps and poured it into the cup. He was suspicious and did not drink it.

古文：仙人忽下阶，与徒从乘云而去。刘拜辞呜咽，仙人戒曰： 尔见郑某，但令修行，即当相见也。 
现代文：仙人忽然下了台阶，与随从的人们乘云而去，刘县令下拜辞别呜呜咽咽，仙人告诉他说： 你见到郑某，只让他修行，就能相见了。 
English: The hermit suddenly descended the steps and rode away on a cloud with his followers. Liu County ordered him to bow his head and stop whimpering. The hermit told him, "If you see Zheng, just let him practice and you will see him again."

古文：既去，刘即诣阁中，是酒犹在，惊曰：此酒万劫不可一遇，何不饮也。 
现代文：仙人走后，刘县令就到阁子中，看到酒还在，吃惊地说： 这种酒万劫都不能遇到一次，为什么不喝呢？ 
English: After the hermit left, the Liu County magistrate went to the pavilion, saw that the wine was still there, and said in surprise: This kind of wine can never be encountered once, why not drink it?

古文：引而饮之，费力争，得一两呷，刘即与冠卿为修道之友，卜居九华山。
现代文：就把酒拿过来喝，费冠卿尽力去争，喝到了一两口，刘县令就与费冠卿作了修道之友，选择九华山居住。
English: He took the wine and drank it. Lord Fei Guan tried his best to argue with him. When he had drunk one or two sips, Liu Xianling became a monastic friend of Lord Fei Guan and chose to live in Jiuhashan.

古文：以左拾遗征，竟不起。
现代文：朝廷以左拾遗征召，也没有赴任。
English: He was called up by the Imperial Court, but did not take up his post.

古文：郑相国寻亦去世，刘费颇秘其事，不知所降是何真仙也。沈彬
现代文：郑相国不久也去世了。刘费二人对那些事很保密，人们不知道那次降临的是什么真仙。沈彬
English: Zheng Xianguo also died soon after. Liu Fei and the two of them kept those things very secret, and people didn't know what kind of true demon had descended that time. Shen Binwu

古文：吴兴沈彬，少而好道，及致仕归高安，恒以朝修服饵为事。
现代文：吴兴人沈彬，年轻的时候就喜欢道术，等到辞官告老还乡回到高安，总把朝修服食药饵当作大事。
English: Wu Xingren Shenbin liked Taoism when he was young. When he returned to Gao'an after his retirement, he always took the morning exercise of taking herbal medicine as an important matter.

古文：尝游郁木洞观，忽闻空中乐声，仰视云际，见女仙数十，冉冉而下，迳之观中，遍至像前焚香，良久乃去。
现代文：他曾经游历郁木洞观，忽然听到空中有乐曲声，仰视云端，看见几十位女仙冉冉而下，径直到观中，逐个到神像前焚香，很久才离去。
English: He once visited the Ikuki Cave, and suddenly heard music in the air, looked up at the clouds, and saw dozens of nymphs running down the path to the center of the cave, burning incense one by one in front of the statues, before leaving for a long time.

古文：彬匿室中不敢出，既去，入殿祝之，几案上皆有遗香。
现代文：沈彬藏在室内不敢出来，女仙走后，他进殿祷告，看到几案之上有仙人遗留的香料制品。
English: Shen Bin hid in the room and did not dare to come out. After the nymphs left, he went into the temple to pray and saw several cases with spice products left behind by the nymphs.

古文：彬悉取置炉中。
现代文：沈彬把它全部拿放置香炉中。
English: Shen Bin took it all and placed it in the incense burner.

古文：已而自悔曰： 吾平生好道，今见神仙而不能礼谒，得仙香而不能食之，是其无分欤？ 
现代文：不久，他自己后悔地说： 我平生好道，今天见到了神仙却不能尽礼拜见，得到仙香却未能吃它，这是我没有缘分吗？ 
English: Soon, he himself regretted saying: I have been good all my life, today I saw a fairy but couldn't pay my respects, I got some incense but couldn't eat it, does this mean I don't have a destiny?

古文：初，彬恒诫其子云： 吾所居堂中，正是吉地，即葬之。 
现代文：当初沈彬经常告诫他的儿子说： 我所居住的堂中，正是吉地，我死之后就葬在这里。 
English: At first, Shen Bin often admonished his son, saying, "The hall I live in is a good place, and I will be buried here after I die.

古文：及卒，如其言。
现代文：等到他死后，他的儿子就按他说的去办。
English: After he died, his son did what he said.

古文：掘地得自然砖圹，制作甚精，砖上皆作吴兴字。
现代文：把地掘开发现一个原来就有的砖圹，制作很精美，砖上都制有吴兴字。
English: After digging up the ground, they found an original brick coffin, which was beautifully made, with the Wu Xing characters on the bricks.

古文：彬年八十余年。
现代文：沈彬八十多岁逝世。
English: Shen Bin died in his eighties.

古文：后豫章有渔人投生米于潭中捕鱼，不觉行远。忽入一石门，焕然明朗，行数百步，见一白髯翁，谤视之，颇类于彬。
现代文：后来豫章有个打鱼的人，把生米投到潭中捕鱼，不知不觉地走远了，忽然进入一个石门，光线明朗，走了几百步，看见一个白胡子老头，仔细一看他，很象沈彬。
English: Later, a fisherman in Yuanzhang threw uncooked rice into a pond to catch fish. Unknowingly, he went far away. Suddenly, he entered a stone gate with a clear light, walked a few hundred steps, and saw an old man with a white beard. Looking at him closely, he looked very much like Shen Bin.

古文：谓渔人曰： 此非尔所宜来，速出犹可。 
现代文：老头对打鱼的人说： 这里不是你所应该来的地方，赶快出去还可以。 
English: The old man said to the fisherman: "This is not the place you should come to, you can get out quickly."

古文：渔人遽出登岸，云入水已三日矣。
现代文：打鱼的人急忙奔出登上岸，别人说他入水已经三天了。
English: The fisherman hurried to the shore. Others said he had been in the water for three days.

古文：故老有知者云： 此即西仙天宝洞之南门也。 
现代文：过去老辈人有知道情况的人说： 这就是西仙天宝洞的南门啊。 
English: In the past, the elders and those who knew the situation said: This is the south gate of Xixian Tianbao Cave.

