古文：五国伐秦。
现代文：楚、赵、魏、韩、燕五国联合进攻秦国。
English: The five countries of Chu, Zhao, Wei, Han and Yan jointly attacked Qin.

古文：魏欲和，使惠施之楚。
现代文：魏国想要讲和，派惠施到楚国去。
English: Wei wanted to make peace and sent Huishi to Chu.

古文：楚将入之秦而使行和。
现代文：楚国准备让惠施到秦国去，让他主持讲和。
English: Chu prepared to let Huishi go to Qin and let him preside over the peace talks.

古文：杜赫谓昭阳曰： 凡为伐秦者楚也。
现代文：杜赫对昭阳说： 凡是参加讨伐秦国的国家是以楚国为首领的。
English: Duch said to Zhao Yang: All the countries that participated in the crusade against Qin were led by Chu.

古文：今施以魏来，而公入之秦，是明楚之伐而信魏之和也。
现代文：如今惠施以魏国的名义来到楚国，可是您让他到秦国去讲和，这是向秦国表明楚国主战而使它相信魏国主和。
English: Now Huishi has come to Chu in the name of Wei, but you asked him to go to Qin to talk about peace. This is to show Qin that Chu is the main war and make it believe that Wei is the main war.

古文：公不如无听惠施，而阴使人以请听秦。 昭子曰： 善。 
现代文：您不如不听惠施的话，而暗中派人去请求讲和，并表示听从泰国的命令。 昭阳说， 好。 
English: You might as well not listen to Huishu, but secretly send someone to beg for peace and say that you will obey Thailand's orders.

古文：因谓惠施曰： 凡为攻秦者魏也，今子从楚为和，楚得其利，魏受其怨。
现代文：于是对惠施说： 凡是参加进攻秦国的国家是以魏国为首领的，如今您跟随我们去讲和，楚国就会得到秦国的好处，魏国就会受到秦国的怨恨。
English: So he said to Hui Shi: All the countries that participated in the attack on Qin were led by Wei, now you are following us to make peace, Chu will get the benefits of Qin, and Wei will be resented by Qin.

古文：子归，吾将使人因魏而和。 
现代文：您先回去，我将派人通过魏国去讲和。 
English: If you go back first, I'll send someone to talk peace through Wei.

古文：惠子反，魏王不说。
现代文：惠施返回魏国，魏襄王很不高兴。
English: When Hui Shi returned to Wei, the king of Wei Xiang was very unhappy.

古文：杜赫谓昭阳曰： 魏为子先战，折兵之半，谒病不听，请和不得，魏折而人齐、秦，子何以救之?
现代文：杜赫对昭阳说： 魏国为您首先投入战斗，损失了一半兵力，向您报告军队处于困境之中，我们不听，请求讲和又没能办到，如果魏国调头去投靠齐国、秦国，您用什么办法挽救？
English: Duhe said to Zhao Yang: Wei was the first to enter the battle for you, lost half of its troops, and reported to you that the army was in a difficult situation. We did not listen, and we could not make peace. If Wei turned its back on Qi and Qin, how would you save it?

古文：东有越累，北无晋，而交未定于齐、秦，是楚孤也。
现代文：东面有越国造成的麻烦：北面没有魏国的援助，并且与齐国、秦国的邦交还没有确立，这样楚国就孤立了。
English: In the east, there were troubles caused by Yue: in the north, there was no assistance from Wei, and diplomatic relations with Qi and Qin had not yet been established, leaving Chu isolated.

古文：不如速和。 
现代文：不如迅速与秦国讲和。 
English: It would be better to quickly make peace with Qin.

古文：昭子曰： 善。 
现代文：昭子说： 好。 
English: Akiko said, "Good.

古文：因令人调和于魏。
现代文：于是派人告诉魏国与秦国讲和。
English: So they sent someone to tell Wei to make peace with Qin.

