古文：不凡之子，必异其生；大德之人，必得其寿。
现代文：不同凡响的人，出生的时候一定有特异的地方；有最高品德的人，必定能享高寿。
English: Extraordinary people must be born in a special place; people with the highest moral character must be able to enjoy a long life.

古文：称人生日，曰初度之辰；贺人逢旬，曰生申令旦。
现代文：称人生日叫 初度之辰 ；祝贺别人逢十的生日叫 生申令旦 。
English: To celebrate one's birthday is called the first hour; to congratulate others on their tenth birthday is called the birthday.

古文：三朝洗儿，曰汤饼之会；周岁试婴，曰晬盘之期。
现代文：婴儿出生三日替他沐浴，宴请亲友，称为 汤饼之会 ；孩子周岁用盘盛物抓周被称作作 晬盘之期 。
English: The third day after a baby's birth is the time to bathe him or her and hold a banquet for relatives and friends, which is known as the "potato cake party"; the week of the child's first birthday, when he or she grasps a tray of food, is known as the "meal tray period."

古文：男生辰曰悬弧令旦，女生辰曰设帨佳辰。
现代文：男孩出生要在家门的左边悬挂一张弓，称 悬弧令旦 ；女孩出生要在门的右边悬挂一块配巾，称 设帨佳辰 。
English: When a boy is born, a bow should be hung on the left side of the door, which is called "hanging a bow"; when a girl is born, a scarf should be hung on the right side of the door, which is called "hanging a scarf."

古文：贺人生子，曰嵩岳降神；自谦生女，曰缓急非益。
现代文：祝贺他人生儿子，说是 嵩岳降神 ；自谦说生了女儿，说是 缓急非益 。
English: Congratulating him on the birth of his son, he said that it was a god-sent blessing; modestly saying that he had a daughter, he said that it was not beneficial to delay.

古文：生子曰弄璋，生女曰弄瓦。
现代文：生男孩叫 弄璋 ，生女孩叫 弄瓦 。
English: A boy born is called a 弄, and a girl born is called a 弄瓦.

古文：梦熊梦罴，男子之兆；梦虺梦蛇，女子之祥。
现代文：梦中见到熊和罴是生男孩儿的征兆；梦见虺和蛇是生女儿的征兆。
English: To dream of a bear and a stork is a sign of a boy; to dream of a stork and a snake is a sign of a girl.

古文：梦兰叶吉兆，郑燕姞生穆公之奇；英物试啼声，晋温峤闻声知桓公之异。
现代文：梦见兰花预示吉祥，郑文的妾曾有因梦兰而生穆公的奇事；英杰人物都奇特，温峤听见幼年桓温的哭声便知他必定异于常人。
English: Dreaming of an orchid indicates auspiciousness, Zheng Wen's concubine once had a miracle of giving birth to a prince because of a dream orchid; heroic figures are all peculiar, Wen Wei heard the cries of young Kuan Wen and knew that he must be different from ordinary people.

古文：姜嫄生稷，履大人之迹而有娠；简狄生契，吞玄鸟之卵而叶孕。
现代文：姜嫄生下后稷，是因为踩着巨人的足迹而受孕；简狄生下契，是因为吞食了玄鸟蛋而怀孕。
English: Jiang Chen gave birth to Hou Yi, who was conceived by stepping on the footprints of a giant; Jian Di gave birth to Jie, who was conceived by swallowing the egg of a blackbird.

古文：鳞吐玉书，天生孔子之瑞；王燕投怀，梦孕张说之奇。
现代文：孔子诞生前，有麒麟吐出玉书，这是天降祥瑞；张说之母梦玉燕飞入怀中，由此受孕而生下张说。
English: Before the birth of Confucius, a unicorn spit out a jade book, which is a heavenly blessing; Zhang said that the mother of the dream jade swallow flew into her bosom, and thus conceived and gave birth to the next Zhang said.

古文：弗陵太子，怀胎十四月而始生；老子道君，在孕八十一年而始诞。
现代文：汉武帝妃怀胎十四个月而生下弗陵太子；老子在母腹中孕育了八十一年，才诞生在人世间。
English: Empress Hanwu was fourteen months pregnant when she gave birth to Prince Fulin; Laozi was in his mother's womb for eighty-one years before he was born into the world.

古文：晚年得子，调之老蚌生珠；暮岁登科，正是龙头属老。
现代文：晚年才得儿子称为 老蚌生珠 ，头发发白才考中进士称作 龙头属老 。
English: It was only in his later years that his son was called Laojing Zhenzhu, and it was only after his hair turned white that he passed the middle school entrance examination and was called Longtou is old.

古文：贺男寿曰南极星辉，贺女寿曰中天婺焕。
现代文：祝贺男子之寿，要说 南极星辉 ；祝贺女子之寿，要说 中天婺焕 。
English: To wish a man a happy birthday is to say that the South Pole is shining; to wish a woman a happy birthday is to say that the sun is shining.

古文：松柏节操，美其寿元之耐久；桑榆晚景，自谦老景之无多。
现代文：品节操守犹如松柏，是赞颂别人长寿健康；暮年景色好像日落桑榆，自谦年老来日无多。
English: The ethics of the Quality Festival are like pine and cypress, praising others for longevity and health; the scenery at the end of the year is like a sunset mulberry, and there is not much to be proud of in old age.

古文：矍铄称人康健，聩眊自谦衰颓。
现代文： 矍铄 是称赞老者健康， 聩眊 是自叹精力衰颓。
English: is to praise the health of the elderly,  is to lament the decline of energy.

古文：黄发儿齿，有寿之征；龙钟潦倒，年高之状。
现代文：头发由白变黄，牙齿掉而复长这是长寿的象征；行动不灵活体弱多病是年高体弱的情状。
English: Hair turns from white to yellow, teeth fall out and grow back, which is a symbol of longevity; inflexible movement, infirmity and illness are signs of old age and infirmity.

古文：日月逾迈，徒自伤悲；春秋几何，问人寿算。
现代文： 日月逾迈 ，是说时光流逝令人感叹伤悲； 春秋几何 这是请问别人年龄的说法。
English: The sun and the moon surpass each other, which means that the passage of time is sad and saddening; Spring and autumn are geometric This is a way of asking someone's age.

古文：称少年曰春秋鼎盛，羡高年曰齿德俱尊。
现代文： 春秋鼎盛 这是称赞他人年轻； 齿德俱尊 是称羡慕别人年高。
English: Spring and autumn are in full bloom, which is to praise others for being young, and to be envious of others for being old.

古文：行年五十，当知四十九年之非；在世百年，那有三万六千日之乐。
现代文：活到了五十岁，应当知道前四十九年的过失；人活百年，哪有三万六千天都是快乐如意的。
English: If you live to the age of fifty, you should know the mistakes of the previous forty-nine years; if you live for a hundred years, you will be happy for thirty-six thousand days.

古文：百岁曰上寿，八十曰中寿，六十曰下寿；八十曰耋，九十曰耄，百岁曰期颐。
现代文：人有上寿、中寿、下寿的区分，百岁为上寿，八十岁是中寿，六十岁是下寿；人活到八十岁叫做 耋 ，九十岁叫做 耄 ，一百岁称为 期颐 。
English: There is a distinction between people's upper life, middle life and lower life. One hundred years old is the upper life, eighty years old is the middle life, and sixty years old is the lower life; people who live to the age of eighty are called, ninety years old is called, and one hundred years old is called 期.

古文：童子十岁就外傅，十三舞勺，成童舞象；老者六十杖于乡，七十杖于国，八十杖于朝。
现代文：儿童年满十岁就外出拜师求学，十三岁时学习文舞，十五岁以上练习武舞。老人六十岁在乡里就会受敬重，七十岁在城邑里会受到敬重，八十岁时在朝廷里可受敬重。
English: At the age of ten, children go out to visit teachers and study, at the age of thirteen, they study literature and dance, and at the age of fifteen or older, they practice martial arts. The elderly will be respected in the countryside at the age of sixty, respected in the city at the age of seventy, and respected in the imperial court at the age of eighty.

古文：后生固为可畏，而高年尤是当尊。
现代文：年轻人固然值得敬畏，而老年人更应该受到尊敬。
English: While the young are to be feared, the elderly are to be revered.

