古文：十有四年春，王正月，季孙宿、叔老会晋士匄、齐人、宋人、卫人、郑公孙虿、曹人、莒人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人会吴于向。
现代文：十四年春季，周历正月，季孙宿、叔老会晋士匄、齐人、宋人、卫人、郑公孙虿、曹人、莒人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人在向地会见。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Ji Sunjuku, Shu Lao Hui, Jin Shijun, Qi Ren, Song Ren, Wei Ren, Zheng Gong, Sun Rong, Cao Ren, Yao Ren, Xuan Ren, Teng Ren, Xue Ren, Yao Ren and Xiao Yao Ren met in Xiangdi.

古文：二月乙未朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月乙未初一这天，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏四月，叔孙豹会晋荀偃、齐人、宋人、卫北宫括、郑公孙虿、曹人、莒人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人伐秦。
现代文：夏季四月，叔孙豹与晋国的荀偃、齐人、宋人、卫北宫括、郑公孙虿、曹人、莒人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人一起攻打秦国。
English: In the summer of April, Uncle and Grandson Leopard attacked Qin together with Jin's Zhai, Qi, Song, Bei Gong, Zheng, Cao, Yao, Teng, Xue, Yao, and Xiao Yao.

古文：己未，卫侯出奔齐。
现代文：己未日，卫侯逃到齐国。
English: The following day, Wei Hou fled to Qi Province.

古文：莒人侵我东鄙。
现代文：莒国人侵犯我国东面边境。
English: The Chinese are encroaching on our eastern border.

古文：秋，楚公子贞帅师伐吴。
现代文：秋季，楚国的公子贞率领军队攻打吴国。
English: In autumn, the prince Zhen of Chu led an army to attack Wu.

古文：冬，季孙宿会晋士匄、宋华阅、卫孙林父、郑公孙虿、莒人、邾人于戚。
现代文：冬季，季孙宿与晋国的士匄、宋国的华阅、卫国的孙林父、郑国的公孙虿、莒人、邾人在戚地会见。
English: In the winter, Qisunjuku met with scholars from Jin Province, Chinese readers from Song Province, Sun Lin's father from Wei Province, Gong Sun Qian from Zheng Province, Qin people and Qin people at their relatives' places.

古文：十四年春，吴告败于晋。会于向，为吴谋楚故也。范宣子数吴之不德也，以退吴人。
现代文：十四年春季，吴国到晋国报告战败情况，季孙宿，叔老和晋国的士匄、齐国人、宋国人、卫国人、郑国公孙趸、曹国人、莒国人、邾人、滕人、薛人、杞人、小邾人和吴国人在向地会见，这是为吴国策划进攻楚国的缘故。范宣子责备吴国不道德，以此拒绝了吴国人。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, when the State of Wu went to the State of Jin to report on the state of defeat, Ji Sunju, Shu Lao, and the statesmen of the State of Jin, the people of the State of Qi, the people of the State of Song, the people of the State of Wei, the people of the State of Zheng, the people of the State of Sun Quan, the people of the State of Cao, the people of the State of Yao, the people of the State of Yao, the people of the State of Teng, the people of the State of Xue, the people of the State of Yao, the people of the State of Xia

古文：执莒公子务娄，以其通楚使也。
现代文：晋国逮捕了莒国的公子务娄，这是因为莒国的使者和楚国有来往。
English: Jin arrested Zheng's son-in-law, Mu Zheng, because Zheng's envoys had dealings with Chu.

古文：将执戎子驹支。范宣子亲数诸朝，曰： 来！
现代文：将要逮捕戎子驹支，范宣子亲自在朝廷上责备他，说： 过来，姜戎氏！
English: Fan Xuan Zi himself rebuked him in court, saying: "Come here, Jiang Rong!

古文：姜戎氏，昔秦人迫逐乃祖吾离于瓜州，乃祖吾离被苫盖，蒙荆棘，以来归我先君。
现代文：从前秦国人追逐你的祖父吾离到瓜州，你的祖父吾离身披蓑衣、头戴草帽前来归附我们先君。
English: From before the Qin people chased your grandfather away to Guazhou, your grandfather away from the body, wearing a straw hat and a straw hat, came to join our ancestors.

古文：我先君惠公有不腆之田，与女剖分而食之。
现代文：我们先君惠公只有并不太多的土田，还和你的祖父平分着吃。
English: When we were younger, we only had a small amount of land, and we shared it equally with your grandfather.

古文：今诸侯之事我寡君，不如昔者，盖言语漏洩，则职女之由。
现代文：现在诸侯事奉我们寡君不如从前，这是因为说话泄漏机密，应当是由于你的缘故。
English: Now the lords do not serve us nobles as they did in the past, this is because of the leaking of secrets, it should be because of you.

古文：诘朝之事，尔无与焉！
现代文：明天早晨的事情，你不要参加了。
English: You don't want to be a part of tomorrow morning.

古文：与将执女！ 
现代文：如果参加，将要把你抓起来。 
English: If you participate, you will be arrested.

古文：对曰： 昔秦人负恃其众，贪于土地，逐我诸戎。
现代文：戎子回答说： 从前秦国人仗着他们人多，贪求土地，驱逐我们各部戎人。
English: The soldier replied, "Once upon a time, the Qin people took advantage of their large population, coveted land, and drove out our soldiers.

古文：惠公蠲其大德，谓我诸戎是四岳之裔胄也，毋是翦弃。
现代文：晋惠公显示了他的大德，说我们各部戎人，都是四岳的后代，不能加以丢弃。
English: Jin Huigong showed his great virtue, saying that all of our soldiers are descendants of the four mountains and cannot be discarded.

古文：赐我南鄙之田，狐狸所居，豺狼所嗥。
现代文：赐给我们南部边境的土田，那里是狐狸居住的地方，豺狼嚎叫的地方。
English: Give us the dirt fields of the southern border, where the foxes live and the jackals howl.

古文：我诸戎除翦其荆棘，驱其狐狸豺狼，以为先君不侵不叛之臣，至于今不贰。
现代文：我们各部戎人砍伐这里的荆棘，驱逐这里的狐狸豺狼，作为先君不侵犯不背叛的臣下，直到如今没有三心二意。
English: Our soldiers from all departments cut down the thorns here, drive out the foxes and wolves here, as the vassals of the forefathers who do not encroach or betray, until now they have not hesitated.

古文：昔文公与秦伐郑，秦人窃与郑盟而舍戍焉，于是乎有殽之师。
现代文：从前晋文公和秦国进攻郑国时，秦国人偷偷地和郑国结盟而并派兵戍守，因此就有殽地的战役。
English: In the past, when Jinwen Gong and Qin attacked Zheng, the Qin people secretly allied with Zheng and sent soldiers to defend, so there was a battle in Shantian.

古文：晋御其上，戎亢其下，秦师不复，我诸戎实然。
现代文：晋国在上边抵御，戎人在下边对抗，秦国的军队回不去，实在是我们各部戎人出力才让他们这样的。
English: The Jin resisted on the upper side, the Eunuchs fought on the lower side, and the Qin army could not go back. It was really the efforts of the Eunuchs in our various departments that made them like this.

古文：譬如捕鹿，晋人角之，诸戎掎之，与晋踣之，戎何以不免？
现代文：譬如捕鹿，晋国人抓住它的角，各部戎人拖住了它的后腿，和晋国一起让它仆倒。
English: For example, when hunting deer, the people of Jin grabbed its horns, the soldiers of various departments dragged its hind legs, and together with the people of Jin, made it fall down.

古文：自是以来，晋之百役，与我诸戎相继于时，以从执政，犹殽志也。岂敢离逷？
现代文：戎人为什么不能免于罪责呢？从这个时候以来，晋国的多次战役，我各部戎人没有不按时与晋军共同参加，以追随执事，如同支援殽地战役一样，岂敢违背？
English: Why can't soldiers be exempted from criminal responsibility? Since that time, there have been many battles in Jin Province, and our soldiers from all departments have not participated in the Jin Army on time, following the deacon, as well as supporting the Battle of Plains of Abraham. How dare they disobey?

古文：今官之师旅，无乃实有所阙，以携诸侯，而罪我诸戎！
现代文：现在各级官员恐怕实在有着过失，因而使诸侯有二心反倒要责怪我们各部戎人！
English: Now, I am afraid, officials at all levels are really at fault, so that the lords have second thoughts, but want to blame us, the soldiers of all departments!

古文：我诸戎饮食衣服，不与华同，贽币不通，言语不达，何恶之能为？
现代文：我们各部戎人饮食衣服和中原不同，财礼不相往来，言语不通，能够做什么坏事呢？
English: Our soldiers from various departments have different food and clothing from those in the Central Plains, do not have the same financial and social standing, and do not speak the same language. What bad things can they do?

古文：不与于会，亦无瞢焉！ 
现代文：不参加明天的会见，我也没有什么不舒畅的。 
English: If I don't attend tomorrow's meeting, I won't feel uncomfortable.

古文：赋《青蝇》而退。
现代文：赋了《青蝇》这首诗然后退下。
English: He recited the poem "The Blue Fly" and then left.

古文：宣子辞焉，使即事于会，成恺悌也。
现代文：范宣子表示歉意，让他参加会见的事务，显示了平易而不听谗言的美德。
English: Fan Xuan Zi apologized and let him participate in the meeting, showing the virtue of being easy-going and not listening to criticism.

古文：于是，子叔齐子为季武子介以会，自是晋人轻鲁币，而益敬其使。
现代文：当时子叔齐子作为季武子的副手而参加会见，从此晋国人减轻了鲁国的财礼而更加敬重鲁国的使臣。
English: At that time, Ji's uncle Qi Zi took part in the meeting as Ji Wuzi's deputy. Since then, Jin people have reduced Lu's financial gifts and paid more respect to Lu's envoys.

古文：吴子诸樊既除丧，将立季札。季札辞曰： 曹宣公之卒也，诸侯与曹人不义曹君，将立子臧。
现代文：吴子诸樊已经免除了丧服，打算立季札为国君，季札辞谢说： 曹宣公死的时候，诸侯和曹国人不赞成曹成公，打算立子臧为国君。
English: Wu Zizhu Yao had already removed his mourning clothes and planned to install Ji Zifang as the ruler of the country. Ji Zifang said: When Cao Xuan Gong died, the princes and Cao Guo Guo disapproved of Cao Cheng Gong and planned to install Ji Zifang as the ruler of the country.

古文：子臧去之，遂弗为也，以成曹君。
现代文：子臧离开了曹国，曹国人就没有按原来的计划去做，以成全了曹成公。
English: Zixuan left Cao, and the people of Cao did not follow the original plan to complete Cao Chenggong.

古文：君子曰： 能守节。 
现代文：君子称赞子臧说 能够保持节操 。
English: The gentleman praised Zixuan for being able to maintain discipline.

古文：君，义嗣也。谁敢奸君？
现代文：君王是合法的继承人，谁敢冒犯君位？
English: The monarch is the legitimate heir, who would dare to offend the throne?

古文：有国，非吾节也。
现代文：据有国家，不是我的节操。
English: Being the head of state is not something I should have.

古文：札虽不才，愿附于子臧，以无失节。 
现代文：札虽然没有才能，愿意追随子臧，以不失节操。 
English: Although Fuda has no talent, he is willing to follow Zixuan, in order not to lose discipline.

古文：固立之，弃其室而耕。
现代文：诸樊坚决要立他为国君，季札丢掉了他的家产而去种田，于是就不再勉强他。
English: Zhu Xi was determined to make him the ruler of the country, Ji Zha lost his family property and went to farmland, so he no longer forced him.

古文：乃舍之。夏，诸侯之大夫从晋侯伐秦，以报栎之役也。
现代文：夏季，诸侯的大夫跟随着晋悼公进攻秦国，以报复栎地一役。
English: In the summer, the lords' doctors followed Jin Yue Gong to attack Qin to avenge the Battle of Badi.

古文：晋侯待于竟，使六卿帅诸侯之师以进。
现代文：晋悼公在国境内等待，让六卿率领诸侯的军队前进。
English: Emperor Jinmu waited in the country and let the six nobles lead the troops of the lords forward.

古文：及泾，不济。
现代文：到达泾水，诸侯的军队不肯渡河。
English: When they reached Surabaya, the princes' army refused to cross the river.

古文：叔向见叔孙穆子，穆子赋《匏有苦叶》。
现代文：叔向进见叔孙穆子，穆子赋《匏有苦叶》这首诗。
English: My uncle went to see my uncle's grandson, Mu Zi, and Mu Zi gave him the poem "Bitter Leaves."

古文：叔向退而具舟，鲁人、莒人先济。
现代文：叔向退出以后就准备船只，鲁国人、莒国人先渡河。
English: After the uncle withdrew, he prepared boats, and the Lu people and the Yi people crossed the river first.

古文：郑子蟜见卫北宫懿子曰： 与人而不固，取恶莫甚焉！
现代文：郑国的子蟜进见卫国的北宫懿子说： 亲附别人而不坚定，最使人讨厌了，把国家怎么办？ 
English: Zheng Guo's son Yan Jin saw the northern palace of the imperial guard and said: "Being attached to others without being firm is the most annoying thing. What should the country do?

古文：若社稷何？ 
现代文：懿子很高兴。
English: Mame is very happy.

古文：懿子说。二子见诸侯之师而劝之济，济泾而次。
现代文：两个人去见诸侯的军队而劝他们渡河，军队渡过泾水驻扎下来。
English: The two men went to see the princes' army and persuaded them to cross the river. The army crossed the Surabaya River and settled down.

古文：秦人毒泾上流，师人多死。
现代文：秦国人在泾水上游放置毒物，诸侯的军队死去很多。
English: The Qin people placed poisons in the upper reaches of the Surabaya River, and many of the princes' troops died.

古文：郑司马子蟜帅郑师以进，师皆从之，至于棫林，不获成焉。
现代文：郑国司马子?率领郑国的军队前进，其他国家的军队也都跟上，到达棫林，不能让秦国屈服讲和。
English: Zheng Sima Zi led the Zheng army forward, and the armies of other countries also followed, reaching Yulin, and could not let Qin succumb to peace.

古文：荀偃令曰： 鸡鸣而驾，塞井夷灶，唯余马首是瞻！ 
现代文：荀偃命令说： 鸡叫套车，填井平灶，你只看着我的马首而行动。 
English: The command said: "The chicken calls for the cart, the stove fills the well, you only have to look at my horse's head to act.

古文：栾黡曰： 晋国之命，未是有也。
现代文：栾黡说： 晋国的命令，从来没有这样的。
English: Zou said, "There has never been such an order from Jin."

古文：余马首欲东。 
现代文：我的马头可要往东呢。 
English: My horse's head wants to go east.

古文：乃归。
现代文：就回国了。
English: They withdrew and returned to their country.

古文：下军从之。
现代文：下军跟随他回去。
English: The lower ranks followed him back.

古文：左史谓魏庄子曰： 不待中行伯乎？ 
现代文：左史对魏庄子说： 不等中行伯了吗？ 
English: Zuo Shi said to Wei Zhuangzi, "Shouldn't we wait for Zhong Xingbo to finish?

古文：庄子曰： 夫子命从帅。栾伯，吾帅也，吾将从之。
现代文：魏庄子说： 他老人家命令我们跟从主将，栾黡，是我的主将，我打算跟从他。
English: Wei Zhuangzi said, "The old man ordered us to follow the captain. Well, he is my captain, and I intend to follow him."

古文：从帅，所以待夫子也。 
现代文：跟从主将，也就是合理地对待他老人家。 
English: To follow the captain is to treat him reasonably.

古文：伯游曰： 吾令实过，悔之何及，多遗秦禽。 
现代文：荀偃说： 我的命令确实有错误，后悔哪里来得及，多留下人马只能被秦国俘虏。 
English: Zou said: My order was indeed a mistake, and there is no time for regret. If I had left more men and horses behind, they would have been captured by Qin.

古文：乃命大还。
现代文：于是就命令全军撤退。
English: He then ordered the entire army to retreat.

古文：晋人谓之迁延之役。
现代文：晋国人称这次战役为 迁延之役 。
English: The people of Jin Province called this battle the "deferred battle."

古文：栾鍼曰： 此役也，报栎之败也。
现代文：栾鍼说： 这次战役，是为了报复栎地的战败。
English: Zou Jing said: This battle is to avenge the defeat of Shantian.

古文：役又无功，晋之耻也。
现代文：作战又没有功劳，这是晋国的耻辱。
English: There was no merit in the battle, which was a disgrace to Jin.

古文：吾有二位于戎路，敢不耻乎？ 
现代文：我兄弟俩在兵车上，哪能不感到耻辱呢？ 
English: How can I not feel humiliated with my two brothers in a military vehicle?

古文：与士鞅驰秦师，死焉。
现代文：和士鞅冲入秦军中间，战死，士鞅回来。
English: He and Shizhao rushed into the middle of the Qin army, died in battle, and Shizhao came back.

古文：士鞅反，栾黡谓士匄曰： 余弟不欲往，而子召之。
现代文：栾黡对士匄说： 我的兄弟不想前去，你的儿子叫他去。
English: The donkey said to the donkey, "My brother does not want to go; your son has asked him to go."

古文：余弟死，而子来，是而子杀余之弟也。
现代文：我的兄弟战死，你的儿子回来，这是你的儿子杀了我的兄弟。
English: My brother died in the war, your son came back, it was your son who killed my brother.

古文：弗逐，余亦将杀之。 
现代文：如果不赶走他，我也要杀死他。 
English: If I don't get rid of him, I'm going to kill him.

古文：士鞅奔秦。
现代文：士鞅逃亡到秦国。
English: Shi Yan fled to Qin.

古文：于是，齐崔杼、宋华阅、仲江会伐秦，不书，惰也。
现代文：当时，齐国崔杼、宋国华阅、仲江一起进攻秦国。
English: At that time, Cui Yong of Qi, Huayuan of Song, and Zhongjiang attacked Qin together.

古文：向之会亦如之。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载他们的名字，是由于他们怠惰。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record their names because of their laziness.

古文：卫北宫括不书于向，书于伐秦，摄也。
现代文：向地会见的记载也和这一样。对卫国的北宫括在向地的会见不加记载，而记载在这次攻打秦国的战役中，这是由于他积极帮助的缘故。
English: There is no record of his meeting with the Northern Palace Guard, which is included in the meeting with the Northern Palace Guard, but it is recorded in this battle against Qin, which is due to his active help.

古文：秦伯问于士鞅曰： 晋大夫其谁先亡？ 
现代文：秦景公问士鞅说： 晋国的大夫谁先灭亡？ 
English: Qin Jinggong asked Shijie: Who was the first doctor to die in Jin?

古文：对曰： 其栾氏乎！ 
现代文：士鞅回答说： 恐怕是栾氏吧！ 
English: The judge replied, "I'm afraid it's Mr. Zou."

古文：秦伯曰： 以其汰乎？ 
现代文：秦景公说： 由于他的骄横吗？ 
English: Qin Jinggong said, "Is it because of his arrogance?"

古文：对曰： 然。
现代文：士鞅回答说： 对。
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：栾黡汰虐已甚，犹可以免。其在盈乎！ 
现代文：栾黡太骄横了，还可以免于祸难，祸难恐怕要落在栾盈的身上吧！ 
English: You are too arrogant, you can still avoid the calamity. I am afraid the calamity will fall on you!

古文：秦伯曰： 何故？ 
现代文：秦景公说： 为什么？ 
English: Qin Jinggong said: Why?

古文：对曰： 武子之德在民，如周人之思召公焉，爱其甘棠，况其子乎？
现代文：士鞅回答说： 栾武子的恩德留在百姓中间，好像周朝人思念召公，就爱护他的甘棠树，何况他的儿子呢？
English: The judge replied: "The benevolence of Zou Wuzhong remained among the people, just like the Zhou Dynasty people thought about calling a nobleman and cared for his neem tree, not to mention his son.

古文：栾黡死，盈之善未能及人，武子所施没矣，而黡之怨实章，将于是乎在。 
现代文：栾黡死了，盈的好处没有能到达别人那里，栾武子所施舍的又逐渐完了，而对栾黡的怨恨实在太明显，所以灭亡将会落在栾盈身上了。 
English: Xing is dead, Ying's benefits have not been able to reach others, the alms given by Xing Wu Zi are gradually over, and the resentment against Xing is too obvious, so the destruction will fall on Xing Ying.

古文：秦伯以为知言，为之请于晋而复之。
现代文：秦景公认为这是有见识的话，就为士鞅向晋国请求而恢复了他的职位。
English: Qin Jinggong thought that this was insightful, and he restored his position in response to Shifu's request to Jin.

古文：卫献公戒孙文子、甯惠子食，皆服而朝。
现代文：卫献公约请孙文子、宁惠子吃饭，这两个人都穿上朝服在朝廷上等待。
English: The Emperor invited Sun Wenzi and Ning Huizi to dinner, and both of them put on imperial robes and waited in the imperial court.

古文：日旰不召，而射鸿于囿。
现代文：太阳快下山了还不召见，反而在林子里射鸿雁。
English: The sun is about to go down, but I don't see it. Instead, I shoot wild geese in the forest.

古文：二子从之，不释皮冠而与之言。
现代文：两个人跟到林子里，卫献公不取下皮帽跟他们说话。
English: The two men followed into the woods, and Wei Xiangong did not take off his fur hat to talk to them.

古文：二子怒。
现代文：两个人都生气。
English: Both men were angry.

古文：孙文子如戚，孙蒯入使。
现代文：孙文子去了戚地，孙蒯入朝请命。
English: Sun Wenzi went to his relative's place, while Sun Yat-sen went to the imperial court to plead for his life.

古文：公饮之酒，使大师歌《巧言》之卒章。
现代文：卫献公招待孙蒯喝酒，让乐官唱《巧言》的最后一章。
English: Wei Xianguo invited Sun Xuan to drink and let the music officer sing the last chapter of "Witty Sayings."

古文：大师辞，师曹请为之。
现代文：乐宫辞谢。乐工师曹请求歌唱这一章。
English: Le Gong resigned. Musician Shi Cao asked to sing this chapter.

古文：初，公有嬖妾，使师曹诲之琴，师曹鞭之。
现代文：当初，卫献公有一个宠妾，让师曹教她弹琴，师曹鞭打过她。
English: At first, Wei Xian Gong had a favorite concubine, let Shizhao teach her to play the piano, and Shizhao whipped her.

古文：公怒，鞭师曹三百。
现代文：卫献公生气，鞭打师曹三百下。
English: Wei Xianguo got angry and whipped his teacher Cao 300 times.

古文：故师曹欲歌之，以怒孙子以报公。
现代文：所以现在师曹想利用唱这章诗的机会，来激怒孙蒯，以作为对卫献公的报复。
English: So now Shizhao wants to use the opportunity of singing this chapter of the poem to provoke Sun Yat-sen, as a revenge against Wei Xiangguang.

古文：公使歌之，遂诵之。
现代文：卫献公让师曹歌唱，师曹作了朗诵。
English: Wei Xiangong asked Shizhao to sing, and Shizhao gave a recitation.

古文：蒯惧，告文子。
现代文：孙蒯恐惧，告诉孙文子。
English: If Sun Yat-sen is afraid, tell Sun Yat-sen.

古文：文子曰： 君忌我矣，弗先，必死。 
现代文：孙文子说： 国君忌恨我了，如果不先下手，就必死于他的手中。 
English: Sun Wenzi said, "The sovereign hates me. If I do not strike first, I will die at his hands."

古文：并帑于戚，而入见蘧伯玉曰： 君之暴虐，子所知也。
现代文：孙文子把家中大小集中在戚地，然后进入国都，遇见蘧伯玉，说： 国君的暴虐，这是您所知道的。
English: Sun Yat-sen concentrated his family members, both large and small, in their relatives' lands, and then entered the capital, met Zibo Yu, and said, "You know about the tyranny of the sovereign.

古文：大惧社稷之倾覆，将若之何？ 
现代文：我很害怕国家的颠覆，您准备怎么办？ 
English: I am very afraid of the country's subversion. What are you going to do?

古文：对曰： 君制其国，臣敢奸之？
现代文：蘧伯玉回答说： 国君控制他的国家，下臣哪里敢冒犯他？
English: Zou Bo-yu replied, "The sovereign controls his country. How dare his vassals offend him?"

古文：虽奸之，庸知愈乎？ 
现代文：即使冒犯了他，立了新的国君，难道能确知比旧的国君会强一些吗？ 
English: Even if we offend him and set up a new sovereign, can we be sure that it will be better than the old one?

古文：遂行，从近关出。
现代文：于是就从最近的关口出国。
English: So he left the country through the nearest border crossing.

古文：公使子、子伯、子皮与孙子盟于丘宫，孙子皆杀之。
现代文：卫献公派子蟜、子伯、子皮和孙文子在丘宫结盟，孙文子把他们全都杀了。
English: Wei Xianguo sent Zijun, Zibo, Zibo and Sun Wenzi to form an alliance at Qiu Palace, and Sun Wenzi killed them all.

古文：四月己未，子展奔齐。公如鄄，使子行于孙子，孙子又杀之。
现代文：四月二十六日，子展逃亡到齐国，卫献公到了鄄地，派子行向孙文子请求和解，孙文子又杀了他。
English: On April 26th, Zicheng fled to Qi Province, and Wei Xian Gong went to Handan. He sent Zixing to Sun Wenzi to ask for reconciliation, but Sun Wenzi killed him again.

古文：公出奔齐，孙氏追之，败公徒于阿泽。鄄人执之。
现代文：卫献公逃亡到齐国，孙家的人追了上去，把卫献公的亲兵在阿泽击败，鄄地人逮捕了败兵。
English: Wei Xiangong fled to Qi Province, and the people of the Sun family chased him up, defeated Wei Xiangong's own soldiers in Aze, and the local people arrested the defeated soldiers.

古文：初，尹公佗学射于庾公差，庾公差学射于公孙丁。二子追公，公孙丁御公。
现代文：当初，尹公佗到庾公差那里学射箭，庾公差又到公孙丁那里学射箭，尹公佗和庾公差追逐卫献公，公孙丁驾御卫献公的车子。
English: At the beginning, Yin Gongzhao went to learn archery from Gong Gongzhao, Gong Gongzhao went to learn archery from Gongsun Ding, Yin Gongzhao and Gongzhao chased Wei Xianguo, Gongsun Ding drove Wei Xianguo's car.

古文：子鱼曰： 射为背师，不射为戮，射为礼乎。 
现代文：庾公差说： 如果射，是背弃老师；不射，将被诛戮，射了还是合于礼的吧！ 
English: "If you shoot, you're betraying your teacher; if you don't shoot, you'll be beaten to death. If you shoot, it's still proper!" said the magistrate.

古文：射两軥而还。
现代文：射中了车子两边的曲木然后回去。
English: Hit the curbs on both sides of the car and went back.

古文：尹公佗曰： 子为师，我则远矣。 
现代文：尹公佗说： 您为了老师，我和他的关系就远了。 
English: Yin Gongyao said: You are a teacher, my relationship with him is far away.

古文：乃反之。
现代文：于是回过车去追赶。
English: So I went back to the car to catch up.

古文：公孙丁授公辔而射之，贯臂。
现代文：公孙丁把马缰递给卫献公然后向尹公佗射去，射穿了他的臂膀。
English: Gongsun Ding handed the stirrup to Wei Xiangguo and then fired at Yin Xiangguo, piercing his arm.

古文：子鲜从公。
现代文：子鲜跟随卫献公出亡。
English: Zoshang followed Wei Xiangong and went into exile.

古文：及竟，公使祝宗告亡，且告无罪。
现代文：到达边境，卫献公派祝宗向祖先报告逃亡，同时说自己没有罪过。
English: When they arrived at the border, they reported their escape to their ancestors and said they were not guilty.

古文：定姜曰： 无神何告？
现代文：定姜说： 如果没有神灵，报告什么？
English: Ding Jiang said, "If there is no god, what is there to report?"

古文：若有，不可诬也。
现代文：如果有，就不能欺骗。
English: If there is, you can't cheat.

古文：有罪，若何告无？
现代文：有罪，为什么报告说没有罪？
English: Guilty. Why did the report say not guilty?

古文：舍大臣而与小臣谋，一罪也。
现代文：不与大臣商量而和小臣商量，这是第一条罪。
English: It is the first crime not to consult with a minister, but to consult with a vassal.

古文：先君有冢卿以为师保，而蔑之，二罪也。
现代文：先君有正卿作为师保，而你却轻视他们，这是第二条罪。
English: The previous ruler had Zhengqing as his tutor, but you despised them. This is the second crime.

古文：余以巾栉事先君，而暴妾使余，三罪也。
现代文：我用手巾梳子事奉过先君，而你残暴地对待我像对婢妾一样，这是第三条罪。
English: I served you with a handkerchief and a comb, and you treated me cruelly as if I were your slave, which is the third crime.

古文：告亡而已，无告无罪。 
现代文：只报告逃亡算了，不要报告没有罪！ 
English: Just report the escape, don't report that there is no crime!

古文：公使厚成叔吊于卫，曰： 寡君使瘠，闻君不抚社稷，而越在他竟，若之何不吊？
现代文：鲁襄公派厚成叔到卫国慰问，说： 寡君派遣瘠，听说君王失去了国家而流亡在别国境内，怎么能不来慰问？
English: Lu Xiang sent Uncle Atsuchika to offer condolences to the motherland, saying: "If a monarch sends condolences, and it is heard that the monarch has lost his country and is in exile in another country, how can he not offer condolences?

古文：以同盟之故，使瘠敢私于执事曰： 有君不吊，有臣不敏，君不赦宥，臣亦不帅职，增淫发洩，其若之何？  
现代文：由于同盟的缘故，谨派瘠私下对大夫们说： 国君不善良，臣下不明达事理，国君不宽恕，臣下也不尽职责，积怨很久而发泄出来，怎么办？  
English: As a result of the alliance, Zhenping privately said to the doctors: The sovereign is not kind, the vassals do not know the reason, the sovereign does not forgive, the vassals do not perform their duties, the resentment has been accumulated for a long time and is released, what should we do?

古文：卫人使大叔仪对曰： 群臣不佞，得罪于寡君。
现代文：卫国人派太叔仪回答，说： 下臣们没有才能，得罪了寡君。
English: The defenders of the country sent the great uncle Yi to answer, saying: The vassals have no talent and have offended the monarch.

古文：寡君不以即刑而悼弃之，以为君忧。
现代文：寡君不把下臣们依法惩处，反而远远地抛弃了下臣们，以成为君王的忧虑。
English: A tyrant does not punish his vassals according to the law, but abandons his vassals far away in order to become the king's concern.

古文：君不忘先君之好，辱吊群臣，又重恤之。
现代文：君王不忘记先君的友好，承您来慰问下臣们，又再加哀怜。
English: The sovereign does not forget the friendship of his predecessor, and has asked you to come and offer condolences to his subordinates, and to add to his sorrow.

古文：敢拜君命之辱，重拜大贶。 
现代文：谨拜谢君王的命令，再拜谢对下臣们的哀怜。 
English: I would like to thank the king for his order, and I would also like to thank his subordinates for their compassion.

古文：厚孙归，复命，语臧武仲曰： 卫君其必归乎！
现代文：厚成叔回国复命，告诉臧武仲说： 卫君恐怕会回去的吧！
English: Uncle Atsuchika came back to his country and told Zou Wuzhong: I'm afraid Wei Jun will go back!

古文：有大叔仪以守，有母弟以出，或抚其内，或营其外，能无归乎？ 
现代文：有太叔仪留守，有同胞兄弟鱄和他一起出国。有人安抚国内，有人经营国外，能够不回去吗？ 
English: There are great-uncles left behind, there are compatriots and brothers who go abroad with him. Some people pacify the country, some people operate abroad, can they not go back?

古文：齐人以郲寄卫侯。
现代文：齐国人把郲地让给卫献公寄住。
English: The people of Qi ceded the land to Wei Xiangong to live in.

古文：及其复也，以郲粮归。
现代文：等到卫献公复位的时候，还带着郲地的粮食回去。
English: When Emperor Wei was restored to the throne, he returned with grain from the ploughed fields.

古文：右宰穀从而逃归，卫人将杀之。
现代文：右宰穀先跟从卫献公后来又逃回国去，卫国人要杀掉他。
English: Zuo Zai Guxian followed Wei Xianguo and then fled back to the country, and the defenders wanted to kill him.

古文：辞曰： 余不说初矣，余狐裘而羔袖。 
现代文：他辩解说： 对过去的事情我不是乐于干的。我穿的是狐皮衣羊皮袖子。 
English: He pleaded: "I'm not happy about what happened in the past. I was wearing a fox fur coat with lambskin sleeves.

古文：乃赦之。
现代文：于是就赦免了他。
English: So he pardoned him.

古文：卫人立公孙剽，孙林父、甯殖相之，以听命于诸侯。
现代文：卫国人立公孙剽为国君，孙林父、宁殖辅助他，以听取诸侯的命令。
English: The defenders of the country appointed Sun Yat-sen as the sovereign, and Sun Lin's father, Ning Xuan, assisted him to listen to the orders of the lords.

古文：卫侯在郲。臧纥如齐，唁卫侯。
现代文：卫献公在郲地，臧纥去到齐国慰问卫献公。
English: Wei Xianguo was in Handan, and I went to Qi Province to console Wei Xianguo.

古文：卫侯与之言，虐。
现代文：卫献公和他说话，态度粗暴。
English: Wei Xianguo spoke to him in a rude manner.

古文：退而告其人曰： 卫侯其不得入矣！
现代文：臧纥退出以后告诉他的手下人说： 卫献公大概不能回国了。
English: After quitting, he told his subordinates: Wei Xianguo probably can't return to China.

古文：其言粪土也，亡而不变，何以复国？ 
现代文：他的话好像粪土。逃亡在外而不悔改，怎么能够恢复国君的地位呢？ 
English: His words are like dung. How can he restore the position of the sovereign if he flees abroad and does not repent?

古文：子展、子鲜闻之，见臧纥，与之言，道。
现代文：子展、子鲜听说这话，进见臧纥，和他们说话，通情达理。
English: When Zochan and Zixian heard this, they went to see Yao and talked to them in a reasonable manner.

古文：臧孙说，谓其人曰： 卫君必入。
现代文：臧纥很高兴，对他的手下人说： 卫君一定能回国。
English: He was very happy and said to his subordinates, "Weijun will definitely be able to return to the country."

古文：夫二子者，或輓之，或推之，欲无入，得乎？ 
现代文：这两个人，有的拉他，有的推他，想不回国，行吗？ 
English: These two people, some pulling him, some pushing him, don't want to go back to China, okay?

古文：师归自伐秦，晋侯舍新军，礼也，成国不过半天子之军，周为六军，诸侯之大者，三军可也。
现代文：军队进攻秦国回来。晋悼公取消新军，这是合于礼的。
English: The army returned from attacking Qin. It was proper for the Emperor to cancel the new army.

古文：于是知朔生盈而死，盈生六年而武子卒，彘裘亦幼，皆未可立也。
现代文：大国不超过天子军队的一半。周朝编定六个军，诸侯中强大的，三个军就可以了。当时，知朔生了盈就死去，盈出生六年以后武子就死了，彘裘也还小，都不能做继承人。
English: Great nations do not exceed half of the army of the Son of Heaven. The Zhou Dynasty compiled six armies, and the powerful among the princes, three armies are enough. At that time, Zhi Shuo died after giving birth to Ying, Takezi died six years after giving birth to Ying, and Gao Qiu was still young, and neither of them could be the heir.

古文：新军无帅，故舍之。
现代文：新军没有主将，所以就取消编制解散了。
English: The new army did not have a commander, so it was disbanded.

古文：师旷恃于晋侯。晋侯曰： 卫人出其君，不亦甚乎？ 
现代文：师旷随侍在晋悼公旁边，晋悼公说： 卫国人赶走他们的国君，不也太过分了吗？ 
English: Shigeki followed the attendant next to Jin Yue Gong, and Jin Yue Gong said: Isn't it too much for the defenders to drive away their sovereign?

古文：对曰： 或者其君实甚。
现代文：师旷回答说： 也许是他们国君实在太过分了。
English: Shi Ku replied, "Perhaps it is their sovereign who has gone too far."

古文：良君将赏善而刑淫，养民如子，盖之如天，容之如地。
现代文：好的国君将会奖赏善良而惩罚邪恶，抚养百姓好像儿女，覆盖他们好像上天一样，容纳他们好像大地一样。
English: A good ruler will reward the good and punish the evil, nurture his people like children, cover them like the sky, and contain them like the earth.

古文：民奉其君，爱之如父母，仰之如日月，敬之如神明，畏之如雷霆，其可出乎？
现代文：百姓尊奉国君，热爱他好像父母，尊仰他好像日月，恭敬他好像神灵，害怕他好像雷霆，哪里能够赶走呢？
English: The people worship the sovereign, love him like a parent, revere him like the sun and moon, respect him like a god, and fear him like thunder. Where can they drive him away?

古文：夫君，神之主而民之望也。
现代文：国君，是祭神的主持者同时是百姓的希望。
English: The sovereign is the presiding deity and at the same time the hope of the people.

古文：若困民之主，匮神乏祀，百姓绝望，社稷无主，将安用之？
现代文：如果让百姓的财货缺乏，神灵失去了祭祀者，百姓绝望，国家没有主人，哪里还用得着他？
English: If the people's wealth and goods are lacking, the gods have lost their worshippers, the people are in despair, and the country has no master, what use is there for him?

古文：弗去何为？
现代文：不赶走干什么？
English: Why not drive them away?

古文：天生民而立之君，使司牧之，勿使失性。
现代文：上天生了百姓而立他们的国君，让他统治他们，不让失去天性。
English: God gave birth to the people and set up their king, let him rule them, do not let them lose their nature.

古文：有君而为之贰，使师保之，勿使过度。
现代文：有了国君而又为他设立辅佐，让他们去教育保护他，不让他做事过分。
English: If you have a sovereign, you should set up assistants for him, let them educate and protect him, and don't let him do too much.

古文：是故天子有公，诸侯有卿，卿置侧室，大夫有贰宗，士有朋友，庶人、工、商、皂、隶、牧、圉皆有亲暱，以相辅佐也。
现代文：由于这样天子有公，诸侯有卿，卿设置侧室，大夫有贰宗，士有朋友，庶人、工、商、皂、隶、牧、圉各有他们亲近的人，用来互相帮助。
English: As a result, princes have princes, lords have nobles, nobles have concubines, doctors have priests, priests have friends, and commoners, workers, merchants, farmers, shepherds, and shepherds all have people close to them to help each other.

古文：善则赏之，过则匡之，患则救之，失则革之。
现代文：善良就奖赏，过失就纠正，患难就救援，错失就改正。
English: Kindness will be rewarded, faults will be corrected, difficulties will be rescued, and mistakes will be corrected.

古文：自王以下，各有父兄子弟，以补察其政。
现代文：从天子以下各有父兄子弟来观察补救他们的过失。
English: From the Son of Heaven downwards, there are fathers, brothers, and children to observe and remedy their faults.

古文：史为书，瞽为诗，工诵箴谏，大夫规诲，士传言，庶人谤，商旅于市，百工献艺。
现代文：太史加以记载，乐师写作诗歌，乐工诵读箴谏，大夫规劝开导，士传话，庶人指责，商人在市场上议论，各种工匠献技艺。
English: Musicians write poems, musicians recite proverbs, doctors advise and enlighten, scholars tell stories, commoners criticize, merchants discuss in the market, and various craftsmen offer their skills.

古文：故《夏书》曰： 遒人以木铎徇于路。官师相规，工执艺事以谏。 
现代文：所以《夏书》说： 宣令的官员摇着木铎在大路上巡行，官师小吏规劝，工匠呈献技艺以作为劝谏。 
English: Therefore, the "Summer Book" said: the officials of the proclamation marched on the highway, waving the rafts, the officials and petty officials exhorted, and the craftsmen presented their skills as exhortation.

古文：正月孟春，于是乎有之，谏失常也。
现代文：正月初春，在这个时候有人在路上摇动木铎，这是由于劝谏失去常规的缘故。
English: In the early spring of the first month of the year, at this time, someone shakes the raft on the road, which is due to the loss of the usual reason.

古文：天之爱民甚矣。岂其使一人肆于民上，以从其淫，而弃天地之性？
现代文：上天爱护百姓无微不至，难道会让一个人在百姓头上任意妄为，以放纵他的邪恶而失去天地的本性？
English: Heaven's love for the people is all-encompassing. Would it allow a person to act arbitrarily over the people, to indulge his evil and lose the nature of heaven and earth?

古文：必不然矣。 
现代文：一定不会这样的。 
English: It's not going to happen.

古文：秋，楚子为庸浦之役故，子囊师于棠以伐吴，吴不出而还。
现代文：秋季，楚康王由于庸浦这次战役的缘故，让子囊在棠地出兵，以攻打吴国。吴军不出战，楚军就回去了。
English: In the autumn, King Chu Kang, because of the Yonpo campaign, sent Zizuku to Tangdian to attack the State of Wu. The Wu army did not fight, and the Chu army went back.

古文：子囊殿，以吴为不能而弗儆。
现代文：子囊殿后，认为吴国无能因而不加警戒。
English: After the birth of Zi Zi, he thought that Wu was incompetent, so he did not take precautions.

古文：吴人自皋舟之隘，要而击之，楚人不能相救。吴人败之，获楚公子宜穀。
现代文：吴国人从皋舟的险道上拦腰截击楚军，楚国人不能彼此救应，吴国人打败了他们，俘虏了楚国公子宜穀。
English: The people of Wu intercepted the Chu army from the perilous path of the raft. The people of Chu could not help each other. The people of Wu defeated them and captured the prince of Chu, Yigu.

古文：王使刘定公赐齐侯命，曰： 昔伯舅大公，右我先王，股肱周室，师保万民，世胙大师，以表东海。
现代文：周灵王派刘定公将荣宠赐给齐灵公，说： 从前伯舅太公辅助我先王，作为周室的左右手，百姓的师保。世世代代酬谢太师的功劳，为东海各国的表率。
English: Zhou Ling Wang sent Liu Ding Gong to bestow the honor on Qi Ling Gong, saying: Once upon a time, my great-uncle assisted my grandfather, as the right and left hand of the Zhou family, the mentor of the people. From generation to generation, thanks to the merits of the great-uncle, as a model for the countries of the East Sea.

古文：王室之不坏，繄伯舅是赖。
现代文：王室之所以没有败坏，所依靠的就是伯舅。
English: The reason why the royal family has not been corrupted is that they rely on their uncle.

古文：今余命女环！兹率舅氏之典，纂乃祖考，无忝乃旧。
现代文：现在我命令你环，孜孜不倦地遵循舅氏的常法，继承你的祖先，不要玷辱你的先人。
English: Now I order you, Ring, to diligently follow your brother-in-law's code, to follow your ancestors, and not to dishonor your ancestors.

古文：敬之哉，无废朕命！ 
现代文：要恭敬啊！不要废弃我的命令！ 
English: Have some respect! Don't disobey my orders!

古文：晋侯问卫故于中行献子，对曰： 不如因而定之，卫有君矣。
现代文：晋悼公向中行献子询问卫国的事情。中行献子回答说： 不如根据现状而安定它。
English: Jin Mui Gong asked Zhong Xing Xianzi about the matter of defending the country. Zhong Xing Xianzi replied: It is better to stabilize it according to the current situation.

古文：伐之，未可以得志而勤诸侯。
现代文：卫国有国君了，攻打它，不见得能够如愿，反而烦劳诸侯。
English: When the prince of a country defends it, it is not always possible to attack it as desired, but it is troublesome to the princes.

古文：史佚有言曰： 因重而抚之。 
现代文：史佚有话说： 因为他已经安定而加以安抚。 
English: Shi Yan had a saying: Because he is stable, he can be appeased.

古文：仲虺有言曰： 亡者侮之，乱者取之，推亡固存，国之道也。 
现代文：仲虺有话说： 灭亡着的可以欺侮，动乱着的可以打倒。推翻已灭亡的巩固已存在的，这是国家的常道。 
English: There is a saying of Zhonglu: Those who are perishing can be bullied, and those who are in turmoil can be overthrown. It is the normal course of the country to overthrow what has perished and consolidate what already exists.

古文：君其定卫以待时乎！ 
现代文：君王还是安定卫国以等待时机吧！ 
English: Let the monarch wait for the right time to stabilize the defense of the country!

古文：冬，会于戚，谋定卫也。范宣子假羽毛于齐而弗归，齐人始贰。
现代文：冬季，季孙宿和晋国的士匄，宋国华阅、卫国孙林父、郑国公孙虿、莒人、邾人在戚地会见，这是为了商讨安定卫国。范宣子在齐国借了装饰仪仗的羽毛而不归还，齐国人开始有了二心。
English: In the winter, Qisunjuku met with scholars from Jin, Song, Hua, Wei, Sun Lin, Zheng, Shun, and Qin at their relatives' places, in order to discuss the stability of the defense of the country. Fan Xuanzi borrowed feathers from the decoration of the ceremonial battle in Qi and did not return them, and the people of Qi began to have two hearts.

古文：楚子囊还自伐吴，卒。
现代文：楚国的子囊进攻吴国回来后，就死了。
English: After returning from the attack on Wu by the Tsotsukes of Chu, he died.

古文：将死，遗言谓子庚： 必城郢。 
现代文：临死，遗言对子庚说： 一定要在郢地筑城。 
English: On his deathbed, his last words to Zi Geng were: "Be sure to build a city in Shunde."

古文：君子谓： 子囊忠。
现代文：君子认为： 子囊忠心。
English: A gentleman thinks: "Loyalty starts in the gonads."

古文：君薨不忘增其名，将死不忘卫社稷，可不谓忠乎？
现代文：国君死，不忘记谥他为 共 ；临死，不忘记保卫国家，难道能不说他忠心吗？
English: When the sovereign dies, he does not forget to serve the people; when he is about to die, he does not forget to defend the country. Can we not say that he is loyal?

古文：忠，民之望也。
现代文：忠心，是百姓的希望。
English: Loyalty is the hope of the people.

古文：《诗》曰： 行归于周，万民所望。 忠也。 
现代文：《诗》说， 行动归结到忠信，这是广大百姓的希望 ，这就是忠心的意思。 
English: "Poetry" said, action comes down to loyalty, this is the hope of the broad masses of the people, this is the meaning of loyalty.

