古文：雷公问于黄帝曰：五色独决于明堂乎？
现代文：雷公向黄帝问道：面部五种气色的变化，仅仅反应在明堂部位，是这样吗？
English: Lei Gong asked the Yellow Emperor: The changes of the five facial colors are only reflected in the bright hall, is that so?

古文：小子未知其所谓也。
现代文：弟子我不知道其意。
English: Disciple I don't know what that means.

古文：黄帝曰：明堂者，鼻也；阙者，眉间也；庭者，颜也；蕃者，颊侧也；蔽者，耳门也。
现代文：黄帝回答说： 明堂 就是鼻子， 阙 就是两眉之间的部位， 庭 就是前额部， 蕃 就是两颊的外侧， 蔽 是耳前方的部位。
English: The Yellow Emperor replied, "Mingtang is the nose,  is the area between the eyebrows, 庭 is the forehead,  is the outside of the cheeks, and 蔽 is the area in front of the ears.

古文：其间欲方大，去之十步，皆见于外，如是者寿，必中百岁。
现代文：以上所谈到的明堂、阙、庭、蕃、蔽这些部位的正常现象应该是端正、宽大、丰满，远离十步以后还能看得清楚。如果观察到某个人有以上的面相特征，他的寿命一定会达到一百岁。
English: The normal appearance of the above-mentioned parts of the mandala, eyelid, palate, eyelid and eyelid should be neat, large and plump, and can be seen clearly after ten steps away. If a person is observed to have the above facial features, his life expectancy will certainly reach one hundred years old.

古文：雷公曰：五言之辨，奈何？
现代文：雷公问：怎样辨别面部五官的表象呢？
English: Lei Gong asked: How to distinguish the appearance of facial features?

古文：黄帝曰：明堂骨高以起，平以直，五脏次于中央，六腑挟其两侧，首面上于阙庭，王宫在于下极，五脏安于胸中，真色以致，病色不见，明堂润泽以清，五官恶得无辨乎？
现代文：黄帝回答说：鼻骨高而隆起，鼻梁平且直，五脏的征候依次反应在鼻部中央，六腑的征候则反应在挟持鼻部两侧的部位，眉间、颜额在上，反应头面情况，两眼之间在下，反应心脏这个王宫的情况。当五脏在胸腔中安定和顺时，鼻部中央色泽正常，病色不显，鼻部看上去润泽清亮，如此，五官所显的病色怎么会辨别不出呢？
English: Huangdi replied: The nasal bone is high and raised, the bridge of the nose is flat and straight, the symptoms of the five viscera are sequentially reflected in the center of the nose, the symptoms of the six glands are reflected in the place holding the two sides of the nose, between the eyebrows, the forehead is on top, the situation of the head is reflected, between the two eyes is on the bottom, the situation of the heart, the royal palace, is reflected. When the five viscera are stable and smooth in the chest cavity, the central color of the nose is normal, the color of the disease does not appear, and the nose looks moist and clear, so how can

古文：雷公曰：其不辨者，可得闻乎？
现代文：雷公问：如果要辨别病色，可否让我听听具体方法吗？
English: Lei Gong asked: If you want to distinguish the symptoms, can you let me hear the specific method?

古文：黄帝曰：五色之见也，各出其色部。
现代文：黄帝说：五脏的各自的病色，各自会显现在相应的部位。
English: Huang Di said: The respective symptoms of the five viscera will each appear in the corresponding parts.

古文：部骨陷者，必不免于病矣。
现代文：若鼻部中央两侧反应五脏六腑的部位出现骨陷现象，那么此人一定是生病了。
English: If there is a depression in the central part of the nose on both sides of the reaction of the viscera, then the person must be ill.

古文：其色部乘袭者，虽病甚，不死矣。
现代文：如果各部位的气色显现于其相生的部位，表明病情虽重，但不至于死亡。
English: If the appearance of each part appears in its conjugate part, it indicates that the disease is severe, but not fatal.

古文：雷公曰：官五色奈何？
现代文：雷公问：五色所主的是什么病症呢？
English: Lei Gong asked: What is the illness of the owner of the five colors?

古文：黄帝曰：青黑为痛，黄赤为热，白为寒，是谓五官。
现代文：黄帝说：青、黑色主痛，黄、赤色主热，白色主寒，这就是五色所主。
English: Yellow Emperor said: blue and black are the main pain, yellow and red are the main heat, and white is the main cold. These are the five colors.

古文：雷公曰：病之益甚，与其方衰，如何？
现代文：雷公问：病情的加重和病邪的将衰，如何诊断呢？
English: Lei Gong asked: How to diagnose the worsening of the condition and the impending decline of the disease?

古文：黄帝曰：外内皆在焉。
现代文：黄帝说：外腑内脏的疾病的加重和将衰都在脉象上显现。
English: Huang Di said: The aggravation and decline of the disease of the external and internal organs are all manifested on the pulse image.

古文：切其脉口，滑小紧以沉者，病益甚，在中；人迎气大紧以浮者，其病益甚，在外。
现代文：切按病人的寸口脉，脉现滑、小、紧且沉的，其病日益加重，病在五脏；人迎脉，脉象出现大、紧且浮的，其病日益加重，病在六腑。
English: According to the patient's pulse, if the pulse is slippery, small, tight and heavy, the disease is getting worse and the disease is in the five viscera; if the pulse is large, tight and floating, the disease is getting worse and the disease is in the six viscera.

古文：其脉口浮滑者，病日进；人迎沉而滑者，病日损。
现代文：寸口脉，脉象浮滑的，病情日趋减轻；人迎脉，脉象沉而滑的，病情日渐减轻。
English: If the pulse is weak, the pulse is slippery, the condition is getting better and better; if the pulse is weak, the pulse is slippery, the condition is getting better and better.

古文：其脉口滑以沉者，病日进，在内；其人迎脉滑盛以浮者，其病日进，在外。
现代文：寸口脉，脉象滑且沉的，疾病日益严重，病在五脏；人迎脉，脉象滑盛且浮的，疾病日益严重，病在六腑。
English: If the pulse is weak, the pulse is slippery and heavy, and the disease is getting worse, the disease is in the five viscera; if the pulse is strong, the pulse is smooth and buoyant, and the disease is getting worse, the disease is in the six viscera.

古文：脉之浮沉及人迎与寸口气小大等者，病难已。
现代文：寸口脉和人迎脉的脉象浮沉大小一样，与人迎和寸口脉象四季有别相悖，其病难于治愈。
English: The size of the pulse at the base of the neck is the same as the size of the pulse at the base of the body. It is different from the pulse at the base of the neck and the pulse at the base of the body. The disease is difficult to cure.

古文：病之在脏，沉而大者，易已；小为逆。
现代文：病在五脏，脉象沉而大的，病易治愈；脉象沉而细小的，真阴衰而病呈逆象就难以治愈。
English: The disease is in the five viscera, the vein is like a heavy and large, the disease is easy to cure; the vein is like a heavy and small, and the disease is reversed, it is difficult to cure.

古文：病之在腑，浮而大者，其病易已。
现代文：病在六腑，脉象浮而大的，其病容易治愈。
English: The disease is at the sixth stage, the pulse is like floating and large, and the disease is easy to cure.

古文：人迎盛坚者，伤于寒；气口盛坚者，伤于食。
现代文：人迎脉象盛而坚的，表明外伤于寒邪；寸口脉象盛而坚的，表明内伤于饮食。
English: If the pulse is strong and firm, it indicates that the trauma was caused by the cold; if the pulse is strong and firm, it indicates that the internal injury was caused by the diet.

古文：雷公曰：以色言食之间甚，奈何？
现代文：雷公问：如何根据面部的色泽变化来判断疾病的轻重呢？
English: Lei Gong asked: How to judge the severity of the disease according to the color change of the face?

古文：黄帝曰：其色麤以明，沉夭者为甚。
现代文：黄帝说：气色粗糙而鲜明的，病轻；气色暗沉而晦暗的，病重。
English: Huangdi said: the appearance is rough and bright, the disease is light; the appearance is dark and gloomy, the disease is serious.

古文：其色上行者，病益甚；其色下行，如云彻散者，病方已。
现代文：气色从下向上蔓延，病情就逐渐加重；气色从上向下，像云雾消散一样逐渐消退的，疾病将要痊愈。
English: If the symptoms spread from the bottom to the top, the disease will gradually worsen; if the symptoms spread from the top to the bottom, and gradually subside like a cloud dissipating, the disease will be cured.

古文：五色各有脏部，有外部、有内部也。色从外部走内部者，其病从外走内；其色从内走外者，其病从内走外。
现代文：五色在面部的表现，均与脏腑所主相应部位有关，有的反应在鼻两侧，即外部，是六腑的病色；有的反应在鼻中央，即内部，是五脏的病色。如果五色的变化是从外部开始，逐渐发展到内部，则疾病的发生，是从六腑开始，而逐渐影响到五脏。五色的变化从内部开始，逐渐发展到外部，疾病则是从五脏开始，逐渐影响到六腑。
English: The appearance of the five colors on the face is all related to the corresponding parts of the main viscera. Some reactions on both sides of the nose, that is, externally, are the symptoms of the disease; some reactions in the middle of the nose, that is, internally, are the symptoms of the disease. If the changes in the five colors start from the outside and gradually develop to the inside, the disease occurs from the six glands and gradually affects the five glands. The changes in the five colors start from the inside and gradually develop to the outside, and the disease starts from the five glands and gradually affects the six glands.

古文：病生于内者，先治其阴，后治其阳，反者益甚。
现代文：疾病由五脏影响到六腑，应当首先治疗五脏，然后治疗六腑，违背这个原则疾病就会加重。
English: Diseases affect the five viscera and the six glands. The five viscera should be treated first, followed by the six glands. Violation of this principle will aggravate the disease.

古文：其病生于阳者，先治其外，后治其内，反者益甚。
现代文：疾病是由六腑而影响到五脏，就应当首先治疗六腑，然后治疗五脏，违背这个原则，疾病也会加重。
English: The disease affects the five viscera from the six pharynx, so the six pharynx should be treated first, and then the five viscera. If you violate this principle, the disease will get worse.

古文：其脉滑大以代而长者，病从外来。
现代文：如果脉象滑大或是代而长，为邪气从外侵袭人体。
English: If the pulse is too large or too long, the evil spirit will invade the body from the outside.

古文：目有所见，志有所恶，此阳气之并也，可变而已。
现代文：如果病人目有所妄见，心有所妄想，这是阳气过盛而致的病，治疗时应根据前面所述的原则灵活变通，疾病才能痊愈。
English: If the patient has delusions in his eyes and mind, this is a disease caused by the excess of yang qi. The treatment should be flexible according to the principles mentioned above, so that the disease can be cured.

古文：雷公曰：小子闻风者，百病之始也；厥逆者，寒湿之起也，别之奈何？
现代文：雷公问：弟子我听说，风邪是百病的根源；气血逆乱的痹证、厥证是由寒邪、湿邪引起的，应当怎样从面色进行鉴别呢？
English: Lei Gong asked: Disciple, I have heard that cold is the root cause of all diseases; the symptoms of qi and blood rebellion are caused by cold and dampness, how should we distinguish them from the complexion?

古文：黄帝曰：常候阙中，薄泽为风，冲浊为痹。
现代文：黄帝回答说：一般通过观察两眉间的色泽来鉴别，色泽浮露润泽是风邪引起的变化，色泽沉滞晦浊则主痹证。
English: Huang Di replied: Generally, the color between the two eyebrows is observed to identify. The color of the color is caused by the wind, and the color of the color is the main evidence.

古文：在地为厥。
现代文：如果色泽沉滞晦浊出现在地阁，则主厥证。
English: If a dull, dull color appears in the attic, it is a sign.

古文：此其常也，各以其色言其病。
现代文：这是一般规律，都是根据色泽的不同变化来诊断疾病的。
English: This is a general rule. Diseases are diagnosed on the basis of different changes in colour.

古文：雷公曰：人不病卒死，何以知之？
现代文：雷公问：人未患疾病却突然死亡，是什么原因呢？
English: Lei Gong asked: What is the reason for people not suffering from diseases to die suddenly?

古文：黄帝曰：大气入于脏腑者，不病而卒死矣。
现代文：黄帝回答说：这是由于剧烈的邪气乘人体正气虚弱之时侵入脏腑，所以没有明显的疾病征象就突然死亡。
English: The Yellow Emperor replied, "This is due to the fact that violent evil spirits invade the internal organs when the body's righteous energy is weak, so there are no obvious signs of illness and sudden death.

古文：雷公曰：病小愈而卒死者，何以知之？
现代文：雷公又问：疾病稍微好转却又突然死亡，怎样才能解释这种情况呢？
English: Lei Gong also asked: How can this situation be explained when a person's illness gets a little better, but then suddenly dies?

古文：黄帝曰：赤色出两颧，大如拇指者，病虽小愈，必卒死。
现代文：黄帝回答说：两颧出现拇指大小的赤色，即使疾病稍微好转，仍然会突然死亡。
English: The Yellow Emperor replied, "If your cheeks turn red as big as your thumb, even if your illness improves slightly, you will still die suddenly."

古文：黑色出于庭，大如拇指，必不病而卒死。
现代文：天庭出现拇指大小的黑色，虽然没有明显疾病征象，也会突然死亡。
English: A black mole the size of a thumb appears in the crown of the head. Although there are no obvious signs of the disease, it can also cause sudden death.

古文：雷公再拜曰：善哉！
现代文：雷公拜了两拜说：讲得好啊！
English: Lei Gong bowed twice and said, "That was a good speech!"

古文：其死有期乎？
现代文：病死的时间有规律吗？
English: Does the time of death from the disease follow a regular pattern?

古文：黄帝曰：察色以言其时。
现代文：黄帝回答说：黄帝说：观察面部气色的变化来判断病人死亡的时间。
English: Huang Di replied: Huang Di said: Observe the change of facial complexion to judge the time of death of the patient.

古文：雷公曰：善乎！
现代文：雷公说：好啊！
English: Lei Gong said: Good!

古文：愿卒闻之。
现代文：我想马上知道其中的道理。
English: Please tell us in detail.

古文：黄帝曰：庭者，首面也。
现代文：黄帝道：天庭，对应头面的状况。
English: Huangdi Road: Heavenly Garden, corresponding to the situation at the top.

古文：阙上者，咽喉也。
现代文：眉心的上部，对应咽喉的状况。
English: The upper part of the frown line, corresponding to the condition of the throat.

古文：阙中者，肺也。
现代文：两眉之间，对应肺的状况。
English: Between the eyebrows, corresponding to the condition of the lungs.

古文：下极者，心也。
现代文：两眼之间，对应心的状况。
English: Between the eyes, corresponding to the state of the heart.

古文：直下者，肝也。
现代文：两眼之间正下方的鼻柱部位，对应肝的状况。
English: The part of the nasal column directly below between the two eyes, corresponding to the condition of the liver.

古文：肝左者，胆也。
现代文：肝所主部位的左面，对应胆的状况。
English: The left side of the main part of the liver, corresponding to the gallbladder.

古文：下者，脾也。
现代文：鼻尖，对应脾的状况。
English: tip of the nose, corresponding to the condition of the spleen.

古文：方上者，胃也。
现代文：鼻翼，对应胃的状况。
English: nasal wings, corresponding to the condition of the stomach.

古文：中央者，大肠也。
现代文：面颊的中央部位，对应大肠的状况。
English: The central part of the cheek, corresponding to the condition of the large intestine.

古文：挟大肠者，肾也。
现代文：挟大肠所主部位的外侧，对应肾的状况。
English: Pinching the outside of the main part of the large intestine, corresponding to the condition of the kidneys.

古文：当肾者，脐也。面王以上者，小肠也。
现代文：在身体上肾与脐正相对，所以肾所主部位的下方，对应脐的状况。鼻尖上方，对应小肠的状况。
English: In the body, the kidneys are directly opposite the diaphragm, so the lower part of the main part of the kidney corresponds to the condition of the diaphragm. Above the tip of the nose, it corresponds to the condition of the small intestine.

古文：面王以下者，膀胱子处也。
现代文：鼻尖下方的人中沟，对应膀胱和子宫的状况。
English: The fissure below the tip of the nose, corresponding to the condition of the bladder and uterus.

古文：颧者，肩也。
现代文：两颧，对应肩部的状况。
English: Cheekbones, corresponding to the condition of the shoulder.

古文：颧后者，臂也。
现代文：两颧的外侧，对应臂的状况。
English: The outer side of the cheek, corresponding to the condition of the arm.

古文：臂下者，手也。
现代文：臂所主部位的下方，对应手的状况。
English: The lower part of the main part of the arm, corresponding to the condition of the hand.

古文：目内眦上者，膺乳也。
现代文：内眼角的上方，对应胸部和乳房的状况。
English: Above the inner corner of the eye, corresponding to the condition of the chest and breasts.

古文：挟绳而上者，背也。
现代文：面颊外侧耳边的上方，对应背的状况。
English: The outer cheeks above the ear, corresponding to the condition of the back.

古文：循牙车以下者，股也。
现代文：沿着颊车向下，对应大腿的状况。
English: Move down along the buccal cart, corresponding to the condition of the thigh.

古文：中央者，膝也。
现代文：上下牙床中间的部位，对应膝的状况。
English: The area in the middle of the upper and lower gum, corresponding to the condition of the knee.

古文：膝以下者，胫也。
现代文：膝所主部位的下方，对应小腿的状况。
English: Below the main part of the knee, corresponding to the condition of the calf.

古文：当胫以下者，足也。
现代文：小腿所主部位的下方，对应足的状况。
English: Below the main part of the calf, corresponding to the condition of the foot.

古文：巨分者，股里也。
现代文：口角两侧大纹处，对应大腿内侧的状况。
English: Large lines on both sides of the corners of the mouth, corresponding to the condition of the inner thigh.

古文：巨屈者，膝膑也。
现代文：面颊下方曲骨的部位，对应膝部膑骨的状况。
English: The area of the condyle below the cheek, corresponding to the condition of the tibia of the knee.

古文：此五脏六腑肢节之部也，各有部分。有部分，用阴和阳，用阳和阴，当明部分，万举万当。
现代文：以上就是五脏、六腑和肢体在面部的对应部位，五脏六腑和肢体发生病变，在相应的部位便会出现色泽异常。
English: The above are the corresponding parts of the viscera, glands, and limbs in the face. The viscera, glands, and limbs develop lesions, and abnormal color and luster will appear in the corresponding parts.

古文：能别左右，是谓大道，男女异位，故曰阴阳。审察泽夭，谓之良工。
现代文：全身在面部所主的位置确定后，就能够正确地诊断疾病了，在治疗时，阴衰而导致阳盛的，应当补阴以配阳；阳衰而导致阴盛者，则应当助阳以和阴，明确了人体各部与面部位置的关系和阴阳盛衰状况，辨证治疗就一定会恰当。
English: After the position of the whole body in the face is determined, it is possible to correctly diagnose the disease. In the treatment, if the yin and yang are caused by the yin and yang, the yin should be supplemented with the yang; if the yang is caused by the yin and yang, the yang should be assisted with the yin. The relationship between the various parts of the human body and the position of the face and the status of the yin and yang are clarified, and the differential treatment will definitely be appropriate.

古文：沉浊为内，浮泽为外。黄赤为风，青黑为痛，白为寒。黄而膏润为脓，赤甚者为血痛。
现代文：左右是阴阳升降的道路，所以辨别色泽在面部左右上下的移动，是辨别阴阳盛衰的重要规律，男子和女子面部色泽上下移动的诊断意义是不同的，男子左为逆右为顺，女子右为逆左为顺，这是因为男女阴阳属性不同。
English: Left and right are the ascending and descending paths of yin and yang, so distinguishing the movement of color and luster up and down on the left and right sides of the face is an important rule for distinguishing the rise and fall of yin and yang. The diagnostic significance of the upward and downward movement of men's and women's facial color and luster is different. For men, the left side is the reverse right side, and for women, the right side is the reverse left side. This is because men and women have different yin and yang attributes.

古文：甚为挛，寒甚为皮不仁。五色各见其部，察其浮沉，以知浅深；察其泽夭，以观成败；察其散搏，以知远近；视色上下，以知病处；积神于心，以知往今。
现代文：在色诊的运用上，除了明确人体各部与面部相应位置的关系外，还要审察面部色泽的荣润与晦暗，才能称其为高明的医生。面色沉滞晦暗的，主在里、在脏的病变。
English: In the application of color diagnosis, in addition to clarifying the relationship between various parts of the human body and the corresponding position of the face, it is also necessary to examine the glory and darkness of the facial color, in order to be called a clever doctor.

古文：故相气不微，不知是非，属意勿去，乃知新故。
现代文：浮露而鲜明的，主在表、在腑的病变。黄色和赤色主风病，青色和黑色主痛证，白色主寒证。
English: The main lesions are on the face and on the eyelids. Yellow and red are the main rheumatic diseases, blue and black are the main pain symptoms, and white are the main cold symptoms.

古文：色明不麤，沉夭为甚；不明不泽，其病不甚；其色散，驹驹然未有聚；其病散而气痛，聚未成也。
现代文：在疮疡等外科疾病中，局部色泽黄润，软如脂膏者，是成脓的表现；局部颜色深红，是血瘀未成脓的表现。
English: In surgical diseases such as canker sores, if the local color is yellowish and soft like grease, it is a manifestation of warts; if the local color is dark red, it is a manifestation of blood blisters that have not become warts.

古文：肾乘心，心先病，肾为应，色皆如是。
现代文：疼痛剧烈的，可以形成肢体拘挛。若寒邪甚，可出现皮肤麻痹不仁。
English: If the pain is severe, limb cramps may form. If the cold is severe, skin paralysis may occur.

古文：男子色在于面王，为小腹痛；下为卵痛；其圜直为茎痛，高为本，下为首，狐疝㿉阴之属也。
现代文：病色散漫不收者，为气滞引起的疼痛。
English: If the color of the disease is diffuse and does not return, it is pain caused by stagnation.

古文：女子在于面王，为膀胱子处之病，散为痛，搏为聚，方员左右，各如其色形。
现代文：病色积聚不散，为血液凝结而形成积聚。积聚面部的表现，有的是方，有的是圆，有的在左边，有的在右边，都和病色的表象相一致。
English: The accumulation of the lesion does not dissipate, it forms an accumulation due to blood clotting. The appearance of the accumulated face, some square, some round, some on the left, some on the right, are consistent with the appearance of the lesion.

古文：其随而下至胝为淫。
现代文：病色若随之下移到唇部，则表明患有白淫病。
English: If the lesion then moves down to the lips, it indicates leucism.

古文：有润如膏状，为暴食不洁。
现代文：若兼见唇色润泽如脂膏样者，为暴饮暴食、饮食不洁之物所引起的疾病。
English: If you see the lip color moisturizing like a lipstick, it is a disease caused by overeating, eating unclean things.

古文：左为左，右为右。其色有邪，聚散而不端，面色所指者也。
现代文：病色出现在左侧，就表明左侧有病；病色出现在右侧，说明是右侧有病。面部色泽异常，或聚或散而不端正的，只要根据病色所在的部位，就可以知道病变所在。
English: If the lesion appears on the left side, it indicates that there is a disease on the left side; if the lesion appears on the right side, it indicates that there is a disease on the right side. If the color of the face is abnormal, or it is mixed or scattered and not correct, as long as it is based on the part where the lesion is located, it can be known where the lesion is located.

古文：色者，青黑赤白黄，皆端满，有别乡，别乡赤者，其色赤大如榆荚；在面王为不日。
现代文：所谓面部的五色，就是青色、黑色，赤色、白色、黄色，在正常情况下，深浅适中而充满分别表现在各自的部位上；异常情况下，色泽会发生变化，异常的色泽，比如心主的赤色出现在鼻尖，像榆荚一样大小，说明疾病在近期内就会发生。
English: The so-called five colors of the face are cyan, black, red, white, and yellow. Under normal circumstances, the light and dark are moderate and full, respectively, in their respective parts; under abnormal circumstances, the color will change. Abnormal color, such as the red color of the subject, appears at the tip of the nose, the same size as the mole, indicating that the disease will occur in the near future.

古文：其色上锐，首空上向，下锐下向，在左右如法。以五色命脏，青为肝，赤为心，白为肺，黄为脾，黑为肾。肝合筋，心合脉，肺合皮，脾合肉，肾合骨也。
现代文：病色的形状，上部呈尖锐状的，表明头面部正气虚弱，邪气有向上发展的趋势；下部呈尖锐状的，则身体下部正气虚弱，邪气有向下发展的趋势；左侧或右侧呈尖锐状，与上部和下部的诊断意义一致。把面部五色同五脏相互联系，青色属肝，赤色属心，白色属肺，黄色属脾，黑色属肾，五脏又同外在组织相合，肝同筋相合，心同脉相合，肺同皮相合，脾同肉相合，肾同骨相合。
English: The shape of the lesion, the upper part is sharp, indicating that the head and face are weak in positive energy and the evil spirit has a tendency to develop upward; the lower part is sharp, the lower part of the body is weak in positive energy and the evil spirit has a tendency to develop downward; the left or right side is sharp, which is consistent with the diagnostic significance of the upper and lower parts. The five colors of the face are interconnected with the five viscera, the blue color belongs to the liver, the red color belongs to the heart, the white color belongs to the lung, the yellow color belongs to the spleen, and the black color belongs to the kidney. The five viscera are

