古文：齐高祖神武皇帝姓高氏，讳欢，字贺六浑，勃海蓚人也。
现代文：文皇帝名宝炬，是孝文皇帝的孙子，京兆王元愉的儿子。母亲为杨氏。
English: Emperor Wen was the grandson of Emperor Xiaowen and the son of King Zhao Wang Yuan Yu. His mother was a member of the Yang clan.

古文：六世祖隐，晋玄菟太守。隐生庆，庆生泰，泰生湖，三世仕慕容氏。
现代文：他在正始初年因父亲的罪名受牵连，兄弟都被关在宗正寺里。到宣武帝去世后，才得到昭雪。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was implicated in his father's crimes, and his brothers were all imprisoned in Sojo-ji Temple. It was only after the death of Emperor Xuanwu that he received the title of Shosetsu.

古文：及慕容宝败，国乱。
现代文：正光年间，被任命为直阁将军。
English: During the reign of Masamitsu, he was appointed as a general of the direct cabinet.

古文：湖率众归魏，为右将军。
现代文：当时，胡太后有许多宠爱的男人，宝炬和明帝密谋打算杀死他们，事情败露，被免职。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Hu had many favorite men, and Baotong and Emperor Ming conspired to kill them. The affair was exposed, and she was dismissed.

古文：湖生四子。
现代文：武泰年间，被封为邵县侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Tai, he was given the title of Hou of Shao County.

古文：第三子谧，仕魏，位至侍御史，坐法徙居怀朔镇。
现代文：永安三年，晋封南阳王。孝武帝即位，被任命为太尉、加侍中。永熙二年，晋位为太保、开府、尚书令。
English: In the third year of Yongan, he was promoted to Nanyang King. Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and he was appointed to the rank of captain and junior attendant. In the second year of Yongxi, he was promoted to Taibo, Kaifu, and Shang Shuling.

古文：谧生皇考树生，性通率，不事家业。
现代文：三年，孝武帝和高欢对抗，任命宝炬为中军四面大都督。
English: Three years later, Emperor Xiaowu confronted Gao Huan and appointed Baotong as the governor of the four provinces of the Chinese army.

古文：住居白道南，数有赤光紫气之异。
现代文：当他随从孝武帝入关后，又被任命为太宰、录尚书事。
English: When he followed Emperor Xiaowu into the imperial palace, he was appointed Dazai and recorded in the records.

古文：邻人以为怪，劝徙居以避之。
现代文：孝武帝去世时，丞相、略阳公宇文泰带领众公卿大臣奉表劝他继位，他推让了三次最后才答应。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaowu's death, the prime minister, Emperor Xiaoyang's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law, Emperor Wu's son-in-law,

古文：皇考曰： 安知非吉？ 
现代文：大统元年春正月初一，皇帝在城西即位，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the great unification, the emperor ascended the throne in the west of the city, pardoned the world, and changed the year.

古文：居之自若。
现代文：追称父亲为文景皇帝，母亲杨氏为皇后。
English: He posthumously called his father Emperor Wenjing and his mother Empress Yang.

古文：及神武生而皇妣韩氏殂，养于同产姊婿镇狱队尉景家。
现代文：初二，晋封丞相、略阳公宇文泰都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台，改封为安定郡公。任命尚书斛斯椿为太保，广平王赞为司徒。初八，立王妃乙氏为皇后，立皇子钦为皇太子。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was promoted to chancellor of the imperial court, vice-premier of the imperial court, governor of the Chinese and foreign armies, and was recorded in the records of the imperial court. He was appointed as the governor of the stable county. He was appointed as the guardian of the imperial court, and Guangping Wanzan was appointed as the guardian of the imperial court. In the eighth year of junior high school, he was appointed as the empress of Wangfei Yi and the crown prince of the imperial court.

古文：神武既累世北边，故习其俗，遂同鲜卑。
现代文：十七日，任命广陵王欣为太傅，任命仪同三司万俟寿乐干为司空。
English: On the 17th, Guangling Wang Xin was appointed as Taifu, and Yi Tong and Sanji Manju Shulekgan were appointed as Siku.

古文：长而深沈有大度，轻财重士，为豪侠所宗。
现代文：东魏将领侯景攻陷荆州。二月，前南青州刺史大野拔斩了兖州刺史樊子鹄，以州投降东魏。夏五月，给罪人减刑。
English: In February, the Eastern Wei general Hou Jing invaded Jingzhou. In the summer of May, the former South Qingzhou chief Shi Ohno commuted the sentences of the criminals.

古文：目有精光，长头高权，齿白如玉，少有人杰表。家贫，及娉武明皇后，始有马，得给镇为队主。
现代文：加封安定公宇文泰为柱国。秋七月，任命开府仪同三司念贤为太尉，司空万俟寿乐干为司徒，开府仪同三司越勒肱为司空。
English: In the autumn and July, Kaifu Yi and Sanji Nianxian were appointed as the first lieutenants, Siku Manju Shurogan as the tutor, and Kaifu Yi and Sanji Yuele as Siku.

古文：镇将辽西段长常奇神武貌，谓曰： 君有康济才，终不徒然。 
现代文：梁州刺史元罗以州降梁。九月，有关部门上奏准备煎熬在宫中使用的香脂膏，需用钱万贯。
English: In September, the relevant departments reported that the preparation of the balsam used in the palace required a lot of money.

古文：便以子孙为托。
现代文：皇帝因军队在外作战，停止该项开支。
English: The emperor stopped the expenditure because the army was fighting abroad.

古文：及贵，追赠长司空，擢其子宁而用之。
现代文：冬十月，太师、上党王长孙承业去世。
English: In the winter of October, Grand Master and Upper Party King Chosun Chengye passed away.

古文：神武自队主转为函使。
现代文：十二月，任命太保念贤为太傅，河州刺史梁景睿又为太尉。
English: In December, Taibao Nianxian was appointed as Taifu, and Liang Jingrui, the governor of Hebei Province, was appointed as Taifu.

古文：尝乘驿过建兴，云务书晦，雷声随之，半日乃绝，若有神应者。
现代文：二年春正月初九，到南郊祭祀，改用神元皇帝配祭。东魏攻陷夏州。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of spring, he went to the southern suburb to offer sacrifices, but he used the Emperor Shingen's offering instead. The Eastern Wei Dynasty invaded Xiazhou.

古文：每行道路，往来无风尘之色。
现代文：二月，仪同三司段敬讨伐叛乱的羌人梁定，平定了。
English: In February, Liang Ding, a member of the Yi Tong and the Third Division, who fought against the rebels, was pacified.

古文：又尝梦履众星而行，觉而内喜。
现代文：三月，任命凉州刺史李叔仁为司徒，司徒万俟寿乐干任太宰。夏五月，司空越勒肱去世。
English: In March, Li Shujen, the governor of Liangzhou, was appointed as the tutor, and the tutor Wan Xun Shule was appointed as Dazai. In the summer of May, the tutor Kuyue Lulu passed away.

古文：为函使六年，每至洛阳，给令史麻祥使。
现代文：秦州刺史、建忠王万俟普拨和他的儿子太宰万俟寿乐干带领部众投奔东魏。秋九月，任命扶风王孚为司空，太保斛斯椿为太傅。
English: Qin Zhou Zishi, Jianzhong Wang Wanzhong Pu Zhi and his son Dazai Wanzhong Shulekang led the troops to join the Eastern Wei Dynasty. In autumn and September, he appointed Fu Feng Wang Fu as Siku and Taibao Wanzhong as Taifu.

古文：祥尝以肉啖神武。
现代文：冬十一月，改追封始祖神元皇帝为太祖，道武皇帝为烈祖。
English: In the winter of November, Emperor Shingen, the first ancestor of the Sui Dynasty, was changed to Taizu, and Emperor Daowu was changed to Retsuzu.

古文：神武性不立食，坐而进之。
现代文：当年，关中发生大饥荒，人吃人，死去的有十分之七八。
English: In that year, there was a great famine in Guanzhong. People were eating each other, and seven out of ten people died.

古文：祥以为慢己，笞神武四十。
现代文：三年春二月，在槐里得到神玺，大赦天下。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, he was awarded the title of shinran and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：及自洛阳还，倾产以结客。
现代文：夏四月，太傅斛斯椿去世。
English: In the summer of April, Taifu Jinszqin passed away.

古文：亲故怪问之，答曰： 吾至洛阳，宿卫羽林相率焚领军张彝宅，朝廷惧其乱而不问，为政若此，事可知也。
现代文：五月，任命广陵王欣为太宰，贺拔胜为太师。六月，任命司空、扶风王孚为太保，以太尉梁景睿又任太傅。
English: In May, Guangling Wang Xin was appointed as Dazai, and He Basseng was appointed as Taishi. In June, Siku and Fu Feng Wang Fu were appointed as Taibo, and ether lieutenant Liang Jing Rui was appointed as Taifu.

古文：财物岂可常守邪？ 
现代文：以司徒、广平王赞任太尉，以开府仪同三司王盟任司空。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain with the approval of King Sitoru and King Guangping, and to the rank of sous-lieutenant with the approval of King Meng of the Three Departments with the approval of King Kaifu.

古文：自是乃有澄清天下之志。
现代文：冬十月，安定公宇文泰在沙苑大败东魏军，封宇文泰为柱国大将军。
English: In the winter of October, the Eastern Wei army was heavily defeated by the Steady Gong U Wentai in Shayuan, and U Wentai was named the general of the pillar country.

古文：与怀朔省事云中司马子如及秀容人刘贵、中山人贾显智为奔走之友。
现代文：十二月，司徒李叔仁在凉州私通东魏，建昌太守贺兰植打败他并将他斩首。
English: In December, when the scholar Li Shuren was in Liangzhou in the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the Jianchang Empress Helan Zhi defeated him and beheaded him.

古文：怀朔户曹史孙腾、外兵史侯景亦相友结。
现代文：四年春正月初一，在清晖室祭天，直到文帝去世一直习为常例。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, it was customary to offer sacrifices to the heavens in the imperial antechamber until the death of Emperor Wen.

古文：刘贵尝得一白鹰，与神武及尉景、蔡俊、子如、贾显智等猎于沃野。见一赤兔，每搏輙逸，遂至迥泽。
现代文：二月，东魏攻占了南汾、颍、豫、广四州。
English: In February, the Eastern Wei conquered Nanlu, Handan, Henan and Guangzhou.

古文：泽中有茅屋，将奔入，有狗自屋中出噬之，鹰兔俱死。
现代文：废了皇后乙氏。三月，立蠕蠕的女儿郁久闾氏为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In March, Ikuhida's daughter, Ikuhida's daughter, Ikuhida's daughter, Ikuhida's daughter, Ikuhida's daughter, Ikuhida's daughter, became empress.

古文：神武怒，以鸣镝射之，狗毙。
现代文：任命司空王盟为司徒。秋七月，东魏将领侯景等围攻洛阳，皇帝和安定公宇文泰东征。九月，车驾东征归来。
English: In the autumn and July, the Eastern Wei generals such as Hou Jing besieged Luoyang, and the emperor and the stable official Wentei went to the east. In September, he returned from the east by car.

古文：屋中乃有二人出，持神武襟甚急。
现代文：任命抚军将军梁定为南洮州刺史，以安抚西部蕃人。五年春二月，在京城内特赦。
English: Liang, the general of the Fuzhou army, was appointed as the governor of South Fuzhou in order to appease the people of West Fuzhou. In the spring and February of the fifth year, he was pardoned in Beijing.

古文：其母两目盲，曳杖，呵其二子，曰： 何故触大家！
现代文：夏五月，任命开府仪同三司李弼为司空。废除妓乐、杂役等人，让他们都成为编入户籍的平民。
English: In May of the same year, Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Li Jun were appointed as the secretaries of the sky. Prostitutes and miscellaneous servants were abolished, and they all became civilians who were incorporated into the household.

古文：出甕中酒，烹羊以待客。
现代文：秋七月，下诏说，从今以后每到朔望日皇帝将亲自审阅京城中正在囚禁的罪犯的案情材料。
English: In the autumn of July, the next imperial edict said that from now on, every time the emperor arrived in Shuangwang, he would personally review the case materials of the criminals being imprisoned in the capital.

古文：因自言善暗相，遍扪诸人，言皆贵，而指麾俱由神武。
现代文：任命司空、扶风王孚为太尉。冬十月，在阳武门外悬鼓，设有纸和笔，征求对朝政得失的意见。六年春正月初一，会见群臣。
English: He appointed Siku and Fu Feng Wang Fu as Taijun. In winter October, he hung a drum outside the Yangwu Gate and set up paper and pens to solicit opinions on the merits and demerits of the imperial government. On the first day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, he met with ministers.

古文：又曰： 子如历位显，智不善终。 
现代文：自从西迁以来到现在，礼乐制度才得以齐备。
English: It is only since the westward migration to the present that the ceremonial music system has become complete.

古文：饮竟，出行数里，还更访之。则本无人居，乃向非人也。
现代文：太尉、扶风王孚去世。二月，铸五铢钱，给犯人减罪。
English: The captain, Fu Feng Wang Fu, passed away. In February, a five-baht coin was minted to commute the prisoner's sentence.

古文：由是诸人益加敬异。
现代文：冬十一月，太师念贤去死。
English: In the winter of November, Grand Master Nian Xian passed away.

古文：孝昌元年，柔玄镇人杜洛周反于上谷，神武乃与同志从之。
现代文：七年春二月，幽州刺史、顺阳王仲景因罪被赐死。三月，夏州刺史刘平谋反，大都督于谨讨伐并活捉了他。秋七月，颁布政事的法令六条。
English: In the spring and February of the seventh year, the governor of Yuzhou, Shunyang Wang Zhongjing, was sentenced to death for his crime. In March, the governor of Xiazhou, Liu Ping, plotted a rebellion, and the grand governor Yuzheng fought and captured him alive. In the autumn and July, six decrees on government affairs were promulgated.

古文：丑其行事，私与尉景、段荣、蔡俊图之，不果而逃，为其骑所追。
现代文：冬十一月，反叛的羌人梁定聚集党徒驻屯在赤水城，秦州刺史独孤信讨平了他。
English: In the winter of November, Liang Ding, a rebellious member of the Xiongnu, gathered party members to settle in Chishui City. He was defeated by Qin Zhou Zhishi Du Guoxin.

古文：文襄及魏永熙后皆幼，武明后于牛上抱负之。
现代文：尚书奏请颁布十二条制度。十二月，皇帝来到凭云观，会见了各位亲王，相互叙了家人的礼节，亲手写了宗族的训诫十条赐给大家。八年春三月，开始设置六军。
English: In December, the emperor came to Fengyun, met with the princes, recited the etiquette of the family to each other, and personally wrote the ten commandments of the clan to give to everyone. In March of the spring of the eighth year, he began to set up the six armies.

古文：文襄屡落牛，神武弯弓将射之以决去，后呼荣求救，赖荣透下取之以免。
现代文：夏四月，善阝善王的哥哥善阝朱那率领部众内附。秋八月，任命太尉王盟为太保。冬十月，下诏命令皇太子镇守河东。
English: In the summer of April, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Goodwill's brother, Prince Good

古文：遂奔葛荣，又亡归尔硃荣于秀容。
现代文：十二月，出巡到达华州，在沙苑的北面建造了万寿殿。九年春正月，给罪人减刑。
English: In December, the inspection team arrived in Huazhou and built the Manshou Temple on the north side of Sha Yuan. In the first month of spring of the ninth year, the criminal's sentence was commuted.

古文：先是刘贵事荣，盛言神武美，至是始得见。
现代文：下令禁止中外的同堂兄弟姐妹通婚。闰月，车驾从华州归来。
English: The order prohibits the marriage of Chinese and foreign cousins. Leap month, driving back from Washington.

古文：以憔悴故，未之奇也。贵乃为神武更衣，复求见焉。
现代文：二月，东魏的北豫州刺史高仲密占领武牢关前来归附，任命仲密为侍中、司徒，封为渤海郡公。秋七月，大赦。
English: In February, Gao Zhongmi, a member of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, occupied Wudongguan in North Henan Province and came to annex it, appointing Zhongmi as an attendant and a magistrate, and making him the governor of Bohai County. In autumn and July, there was a general amnesty.

古文：因随荣之厩，厩有恶马，荣命剪之，神武乃不加羁绊而剪，竟不蹄啮。
现代文：任命太保王盟为太傅，太尉、广平王赞为司空。冬十二月，任命司空李弼为太尉。十年春正月甲子日，下诏公卿以下官员，每月上奏三件事，尽言朝政得失。
English: Appointed Taibo Wangmeng as Taifu, Taifu, Guangping Wangzan as Sikyong. In winter December, appointed Sikyong Li Xi as Taifu. On the first day of spring in the first month of the tenth year, officials below the title of Kugyo, report three things every month, and talk about the gains and losses of the government.

古文：已而起曰： 御恶人亦如此马矣。 
现代文：刺史二千石以上的，有忠直之言和良谋的，无所忌讳。夏五月，太师贺拔胜去世。
English: There is nothing to be ashamed of if you have a history of more than two thousand koku, have honest words and good strategies. In summer and May, Grand Master He Baskheng passed away.

古文：荣遂坐神武于床下，屏左右而访时事。
现代文：秋七月，更改度、量、衡器的制度。十一年夏五月，太傅王盟去世。
English: In autumn and July, the system of degrees, measures and weighing instruments was changed. In summer and May of the eleventh year, Taifu Wang Meng passed away.

古文：神武曰： 闻公有马十二谷，色别为群，将此竟何用也？ 
现代文：下诏所有犯有大辟罪的死囚犯，都由三公复审，然后用刑。
English: It was decreed that all death-row prisoners who had committed major crimes would be reviewed by the three public procurators and then sentenced.

古文：荣曰： 但言尔意。 
现代文：冬季，开始在城南修建圆丘。
English: In winter, the construction of a round mound began in the south of the city.

古文：神武曰： 方今天子愚弱，太后淫乱，孽宠擅命，朝政不行。
现代文：封皇子俭。十二年春二月，凉州刺史宇文仲和反叛，秦州刺史独孤信讨平他。三月，铸造五铢钱。夏五月，下诏令女子年龄不满十三岁的，不得出嫁。
English: In the spring and February of the twelfth year, Liangzhou sent Yu Wenzhong to quell the rebellion, and Qinzhou sent Yu Wenzhong to quell him. In March, the five-baht coin was minted. In the summer and May, it was decreed that women under the age of thirteen were not allowed to marry.

古文：以明公雄武，乘时奋发，讨郑俨、徐纥而清帝侧，霸业可举鞭而成。
现代文：秋九月，东魏渤海王高欢攻打玉壁，晋州刺史韦孝宽力战抵抗。冬十二月，高欢烧了营垒退兵。
English: In the autumn and September of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Huan, the king of the Bohai Sea, attacked the Jade Wall, and Jinzhou's Shishi Wei Xiaokang fought back. In the winter of December, Gao Huan burned the camp and retreated.

古文：此贺六浑之意也。 
现代文：十三年春正月，开掘白渠灌溉田地。
English: In the first month of spring in the 13th year, a white canal was dug to irrigate the fields.

古文：荣大悦，语自日中至夜半乃出。
现代文：二月，下诏从今以后，其罪应处以宫刑的犯人直接成为官奴隶，不加刑。
English: In February, the following edict was issued: From now on, prisoners whose crimes should be punished by palace punishment will directly become official slaves, with no additional punishment.

古文：自是每参军谋。
现代文：逃亡的奴隶应当黥字的，只追究逃亡罪。
English: If a fugitive slave should escape, only the crime of escape should be prosecuted.

古文：后从荣徙据并州，抵扬州邑人庞苍鹰，止围焦中。
现代文：任命开府仪同三司若干惠为司空。东魏渤海王高欢死去，他的司徒侯景占有颍川并带河南六州归附。任命侯景为太傅、河南大行台、上谷郡公。三月，大赦。
English: Appointed Kaifu Yi and three subordinate generals to serve as deputy governors. In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Huan, the king of the Bohai Sea, died, and his subordinate, Hou Jing, took possession of Luochuan and annexed six provinces of Henan. Appointed Hou Jing as Taifu, Henan Dagangdai, and Shanggu County governor. In March, amnesty.

古文：每从外归，主人遥闻行响动地。苍鹰母数见围焦，上赤气赫然属天。
现代文：夏五月，任命太傅侯景为大将军，开府仪同三司独孤信为大司马。
English: In May of the same year, Taifu Houjing was appointed as the grand general, and Kaifu Yi and Sanji Dukuxin were appointed as the grand secretaries.

古文：贼党至，去床，因见弑，时年二十九。
现代文：贼人同党来到，搬掉床，因而被杀，当年二十九岁。
English: He was twenty-nine years old when he was killed by a group of thieves who came and removed his bed.

古文：秘不发丧。
现代文：保密不发丧。
English: There will be no obituary.

古文：明年正月辛酉，魏帝举哀于太极东堂。诏赠物八万段，凶事依汉大将军霍光、东平王苍故事。赠假黄钺、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王玺绂，巉辌车、黄屋左纛、后部羽葆鼓吹、轻车介士，备九锡礼，谥曰文襄王。
现代文：第二年正月十一日，魏帝在太极东堂举行哀悼仪式，下诏赠给帛八万段，办理丧事依照汉朝大将军霍光、东平王苍的旧制，赠封假黄钺、使持节、相国、都督中外诸军事、齐王的印玺，赠给帝王丧礼使用的鍂车京车、黄屋左纛、后部羽葆鼓吹、轻车介士，准备了九锡礼仪，谥为文襄王。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the second year, Emperor Wei held a mourning ceremony in the East Hall of the Taiji Temple. He issued an edict to give 80,000 pieces of money, and handled the funeral in accordance with the old system of the Han Dynasty general Huo Guang and Dongping Wang Cang. He presented the fake Yellow Ribbon, the Ambassador's Day, the seal of the neighboring country, the military and foreign governors, and the seal of the King of Qi. He also presented the imperial funeral car used for the emperor's funeral, the Beijing Car, the Yellow House Left Hand Car, the Rear Feather Car, and the Light Car. He prepared the Jiuxi

古文：二月甲申，葬于义平陵之北。
现代文：二月初四，埋葬于义平陵的北面。
English: On the fourth day of the second lunar month, he was buried on the north side of the Yiping Mausoleum.

古文：天保初，追尊曰文襄皇帝，庙号世宗，陵曰峻成。
现代文：天保初年，追封为文襄皇帝，庙号世宗，陵称为峻成陵。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was enthroned as Emperor Wenxiang, his temple name was Shizong, and his mausoleum was called Juncheng Mausoleum.

古文：文襄美姿容，善言笑，谈谑之际，从容弘雅。
现代文：文襄皇帝仪容俊美，善于言笑，言谈和戏谑的时候，都从容宽宏高雅。
English: Emperor Wenxiang was handsome and good-looking. He was good at laughing and joking. When he talked and joked, he was calm, broad-minded and elegant.

古文：性聪警，多筹策，当朝作相，听断如流。
现代文：本性聪慧机敏，多有策略，当朝任相，听断如流。
English: By nature, he is intelligent, quick-witted, and has many strategies. When he was prime minister, he listened attentively.

古文：爱士好贤，待之以礼，有神武之风焉。
现代文：爱士好贤，以礼相待，有神武帝的遗风。
English: Love scholars, treat each other with courtesy, and carry on the legacy of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：然少壮气猛，严峻刑法。高慎西叛，侯景南翻，非直本怀狼戾，兼亦有惧威略。
现代文：但年轻气盛，刑法严峻，高慎的叛降西魏，侯景的南奔，不仅是他们本身凶狠不仁，也兼有害怕高澄的威严。
English: However, the young and vigorous, the severe criminal law, the prudent rebellion of the Western Wei Dynasty, and the southward flight of Houjing are not only fierce and cruel in themselves, but also have the majesty of fearing Gao Cheng.

古文：情欲奢淫，动乖制度。
现代文：情欲过度，举止违反制度。
English: Excessive sexual desire, behavior in violation of the system.

古文：尝于宫西造宅，墙院高广，听事宏壮，亚太极殿。神武入朝，责之，乃止。
现代文：他曾经在西宫建造院宅，墙高院广，十分宏伟壮观，仅次于太极殿，神武帝入朝见到后责备他，这才停建。
English: He once built a courtyard house in the West Palace, with high and wide walls, very grand and spectacular, second only to the Taiji Hall. Emperor Jimmu reproached him after seeing him enter the court, and the construction was stopped.

