古文：昭襄王五十二年
现代文：起，止，共二十八年。秦昭襄王五十二年
English: It lasted for a total of 28 years. The reign of King Qin Zhaoxiang lasted for 52 years.

古文：河东守王稽坐与诸侯通，弃市。
现代文：河东郡郡守王稽因犯通敌罪被判斩弃于市。
English: Wang Qi, the county governor of Hedong County, was sentenced to be banished from the city for the crime of colluding with the enemy.

古文：应侯日以不怿。
现代文：应侯范雎为此闷闷不乐。
English: As a result, Ying Hou Fan Rong was very unhappy.

古文：王临朝而叹，应侯请其故。
现代文：昭襄王嬴稷在坐朝治事时发声长叹，范雎询问其缘故。
English: Zhaoxiang Wang Rong uttered a long sigh while presiding over the court, and Fan Rong inquired about the reason.

古文：王曰： 今武安君死，而郑安平、王稽等皆畔，内无良将而外多敌国，吾是以忧。 
现代文：昭襄王说： 现在武安君白起已死，郑安平、王稽等又都背叛了，国家内无良将，外却有许多敌国，我因此而忧虑！ 
English: King Zhao Xiang said, "Now that Wu Anjun Baiqi is dead, Zheng Anping, Wang Qi, etc. have all betrayed, there are no bad generals in the country, but there are many enemy countries outside, so I am worried!

古文：应侯惧，不知所出。
现代文：范雎颇为恐惧，想不出用什么办法。
English: But when Fan Yu heard this, he felt afraid and couldn't think of any way to help.

古文：燕客蔡泽闻之，西入秦，先使人宣言于应侯曰： 蔡泽，天下雄辩之士。彼见王，必困君而夺君之位。 
现代文：燕国的客卿蔡泽听说了这件事，便向西进入秦国，先让人向范雎扬言说： 蔡泽是天下能言善辩之士，他一见到秦王，就必会使您为难，进而夺取您的位置。 
English: When Cai Ze, the guest of Yan, heard about this, he headed west into Qin. First, he had someone threaten Fan Ye, saying, "Cai Ze is an eloquent man. As soon as he sees the Qin King, he will certainly put you in a difficult position, and then seize your position."

古文：应侯怒，使人召之。
现代文：范雎很生气，遣人召蔡泽来见。
English: Fan Yu was very angry and sent someone to summon Cai Ze to see him.

古文：蔡泽见应侯，礼又倨。应侯不快，因让之曰： 子宣言欲代我相，请闻其说。 蔡泽曰： 吁，君何见之晚也！
现代文：蔡泽进见时态度傲慢不敬，使范雎大为不快，因此斥责他说： 你扬言要取代我做秦国的国相，那就让我听听你的根据。 蔡泽说： 吁，您见事何其迟啊！
English: When Cai Ze came to see him, his arrogant and disrespectful attitude greatly displeased Fan Yu, so he rebuked him: "If you are threatening to replace me as the Minister of State of Qin, then let me hear your reason." Cai Ze said: "Wow, how late you are to see things!

古文：夫四时之序，成功者去。
现代文：四个季节按春生、夏长、秋实、冬藏的次序，各完成它的功能而转换下去。
English: Even the shift of the four seasons is a natural law of success.

古文：君独不见夫秦之商君、楚之吴起、越之大夫种，何足愿与？ 
现代文：您难道没有看到秦国的商鞅、楚国的吴起、越国的文种的下场吗？
English: Have you not seen what happened to the merchants of Qin, the Wuqi of Chu, and the literati of Yue?

古文：应侯谬曰： 何为不可？
现代文：这有什么值得羡慕的呢？ 范雎故意辩驳说： 有什么不可以的！
English: What is there to be envied about this? Fan Ye deliberately argued: What is not allowed!

古文：此三子者，义之至也，忠之尽也。
现代文：这三个人的表现是节义的准则，忠诚的典范呀！
English: The performance of these three people is the standard of righteousness, the model of loyalty!

古文：君子有杀身以成名，死无所恨！ 
现代文：君子可以杀身成名，并且死而无憾。 
English: A gentleman can kill himself to become famous, and die without regret.

古文：蔡泽曰： 夫人立功岂不期于成全邪？
现代文：蔡泽说： 人们要建功立业，怎么会不期望着功成名就、全身而退呢！
English: Cai Ze said: When people want to build a career, how can they not expect to become famous, and withdraw completely!

古文：身名俱全者，上也；名可法而身死者，次也；名僇辱而身全者，下也。
现代文：身命与功名都能保全的，是上等的愿望；功名可以为后人景仰效法而身命却已失去的，就次一等了；声名蒙受耻辱而自身得以苟全的，便是最下一等的了。
English: It is the highest aspiration to preserve one's life and reputation; it is the next highest to preserve one's life and reputation for posterity; it is the next highest to preserve one's reputation and reputation for oneself; it is the lowest to preserve one's reputation and reputation for oneself.

古文：夫商君、吴起、大夫种，其为人臣尽忠致功，则可愿矣。
现代文：商鞅、吴起、文种，他们作为臣子竭尽全力忠于君主取得了功名，这是可以为人仰慕的。
English: Shang Qi, Wu Qi, and Wenzhong, as courtiers who did their best to be loyal to the monarch, gained fame, which is admirable.

古文：闳夭、周公，岂不亦忠且圣乎？
现代文：但是闳夭、周公不也是既忠心耿耿又道德高尚、智慧过人吗！
English: However, isn't Zhou Gong both loyal, moral, and wise?

古文：三子之可愿，孰与闳夭、周公哉？ 
现代文：从君臣关系上说，那三人虽然令人仰慕，可又哪里比得上闳夭、周公啊？ 范雎说： 是啊。 
English: From the perspective of the relationship between monarch and vassal, although those three are admirable, how can they be compared to Xingyao and Zhou Gong? Fan Rong said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 善。 蔡泽曰： 然则君之主惇厚旧故，不倍功臣，孰与孝公、楚王、越王？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 如此说来，您的国君在笃念旧情、不背弃有功之臣这点上能与秦孝公、楚悼王、越王哪一个相比呢？ 
English: Cai Ze said: In this way, which of your sovereigns can be compared with Qin Xiaogong, King Chu and King Yue in terms of remembering old feelings and not betraying meritorious vassals?

古文：曰： 未知何如。 
现代文：范雎说： 我不知道能不能比。 
English: Fan Ye said: I don't know if I can compare.

古文：蔡泽曰： 君之功能孰与三子？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 那么您与商鞅等三人相比，谁的功绩更大呢？ 
English: Cai Ze said: Then, compared with Shang Qi and the other three, whose achievement is greater?

古文：曰： 不若。 
现代文：范雎说： 我不如他们。 
English: Fan Ye said: I am not as good as them.

古文：蔡泽曰： 然则君身不退，患恐甚于三子矣。
现代文：蔡泽说： 这样的话，如果您还不引退，将遇到的灾祸恐怕要比那三位更严重了。
English: Cai Ze said: In this case, if you do not retire, the disaster you will encounter will probably be more serious than those three.

古文：语曰： 日中则移，月满则亏。 
现代文：俗话说： 太阳升到中天就要偏斜而西，月亮圆满了即会渐见亏缺。 
English: The old saying is right: The sun begins to set when it reaches noon, and the moon begins to wane when it is full.

古文：进退嬴缩，与时变化，圣人之道也。
现代文：进退伸缩，随时势的变化进行调整以求适应，是圣人的法则。
English: It is the sage's law to advance, retreat, expand and contract, and to adjust to changes in potential at any time in order to adapt.

古文：今君之怨已雠而德已报，意欲至矣而无变计，窃为君危之。 
现代文：现在您仇也报了，恩也报了，心愿完全得到满足却还不作变化的打算，我私下里为您担忧！ 
English: Now that you've paid back your enemies and received favors, and your heart's desire has been completely satisfied, but you still have no intention of changing, I'm secretly worried about you!

古文：应侯遂延以为上客，因荐于王。
现代文：范雎于是将蔡泽奉为上宾，并把他推荐给昭襄王。
English: Fan Ye then made Cai Ze his chief guest and recommended him to King Zhaoxiang.

古文：王召与语，大悦，拜为客卿。
现代文：秦王召见蔡泽，与他交谈，十分喜爱他，便授与他客卿的职位。
English: The king of Qin summoned Cai Ze, talked with him, loved him very much, and gave him the position of guest lord.

古文：应侯因谢病免。
现代文：范雎随即以生病为借口辞去了相国之职。
English: Fan Jun immediately resigned from his position as consul on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：王新悦蔡泽计画，遂以为相国，泽为相数月，免。
现代文：昭襄王一开始就赞赏蔡泽的计策，便任命他为相国。但蔡泽任相国几个月后，即被免职。
English: King Zhaoxiang appreciated Cai Ze's strategy from the very beginning and appointed him as his consort. However, Cai Ze was dismissed from his post after a few months as consort.

古文：楚春申君以荀卿为兰陵令。
现代文：楚国春申君黄歇任用荀卿为兰陵县令。
English: Huang Xie, the ruler of Chunshen of Chu, appointed Gongqing as the governor of Lanling County.

古文：荀卿者，赵人，名况，尝与临武君论兵于赵孝成王之前。
现代文：荀卿是赵国人，名况，曾经与临武君在赵国国君孝成王赵丹面前辩论用兵之道。
English: He was a native of Zhao, and once debated the use of soldiers with Lin Wu in front of Zhao Dan, the Prince of Zhao.

古文：王曰： 请问兵要。 
现代文：孝成王说： 请问什么是用兵的要旨？ 
English: Xiaocheng Wang said: What is the essence of using soldiers?

古文：临武君对曰： 上得天时，下得地利，观敌之变动，后之发，先之至，此用兵之要术也。 
现代文：临武君回答道： 上得天时，下得地利，观察敌人的变化动向，比敌人后发兵而先到达，这即是用兵的关键方略。 
English: Linwu Jun replied: The key strategy of using soldiers is to be in the right place at the right time, observe the changes in the enemy's movement, and arrive before the enemy sends troops.

古文：荀卿曰： 不然。
现代文：荀况说： 不是这样。
English: "It's not like that," he said.

古文：臣所闻古之道，凡用兵攻战之本，在乎一民。
现代文：我所听说的古人用兵的道理是，用兵攻战的根本，在于统一百姓。
English: The reason why the ancients used soldiers, as I have heard, is that the essence of using soldiers to fight lies in unifying the people.

古文：弓矢不调，则羿不能以中；六马不和，则造父不能以致远；士民不亲附，则汤、武不能以必胜也。
现代文：弓与箭不协调，就是善射的后羿也不能射中目标；六匹马不协力一致，即便善御的造父也无法将马车赶往远方；士人与百姓不和亲附国君，即是商汤、周武王也不能有必胜的把握。
English: If the bow and arrow are not coordinated, even a good archer cannot hit the target; if six horses do not work together, even the father of a good general cannot drive the carriage far away; if the nobles and the people are not close to the sovereign, even Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu cannot be sure of victory.

古文：故善附民者，是乃善用兵者也。
现代文：因此，善于使百姓归附的人，才是善于用兵的人。
English: Therefore, those who are good at winning the people's allegiance are those who are good at using soldiers.

古文：故兵要在乎附民而已。 临武君曰： 不然。
现代文：所以用兵的要领在于使百姓依附。 临武君说： 并非如此。
English: Therefore, the essence of using soldiers is to make the people dependent. Lin Wu Jun said: This is not the case.

古文：兵之所贵者势利也，所行者变诈也。
现代文：用兵所重视的是形势要有利，行动要讲究诡诈多变。
English: What is important in the use of troops is that the situation should be favorable and the actions should be tricky and changeable.

古文：善用兵者感忽悠闇，莫知所从出。
现代文：善用兵的人，行事疾速、隐蔽，没有人料得到他会从哪里出动。
English: A man who is good at using soldiers acts quickly and stealthily, and no one knows from where he will attack.

古文：孙吴用之，无敌于天下，岂必待附民哉！ 荀卿曰： 不然。
现代文：孙武、吴起采用这种战术，天下无敌，不见得一定要依靠百姓的归附啊！ 荀况说： 不对。
English: Sun Wu and Wu Qi adopted this tactic, the world is invincible, it is not necessary to rely on the people's affiliation!

古文：臣之所道，仁人之兵，王者之志也。
现代文：我所说的，是仁人的用兵之道和要统治天下的帝王的志向。
English: What I am talking about is the humane way of using soldiers and the ambition of emperors to rule the world.

古文：君之所贵，权谋势利也。
现代文：您所看重的是权术、谋略、形势、利害。
English: What you value is tactics, strategies, situations, and interests.

古文：仁人之兵，不可诈也。
现代文：则仁人用的兵，是不能欺诈的。
English: but the soldiers of charity cannot be cheated.

古文：彼可诈者，怠慢者也，露袒者也，君臣上下之间滑然有离德者也。
现代文：能够施用欺骗之术对付的，是那些骄傲轻慢的军队、疲惫衰弱的军队，以及君与臣、上级与下属之间不和相互离心离德的军队。
English: The troops that can be dealt with by deception are those that are proud and haughty, those that are tired and weak, and those that are at odds with each other, such as between a ruler and a vassal, or a superior and a subordinate.

古文：故以桀诈桀，犹巧拙有幸焉。
现代文：因此用夏桀的诈术对付夏桀，还有使巧成功或使拙失败的可能。
English: Therefore, it is possible to use Xia Yao's trick to deal with Xia Yao, and there is also the possibility of success or failure.

古文：以桀诈尧，譬之以卵投石，以指桡沸，若赴水火，入焉焦没耳。
现代文：而用夏桀的骗计去对付尧，就如同拿鸡蛋掷石头，把手指伸进滚水中搅动，如同投身到水火之中，不是被烧焦，便是被淹死。
English: But using Xia Yao's trick to deal with the dragonfly is like taking an egg and throwing a stone, sticking your finger into the boiling water and stirring it, as if throwing yourself into a fire, not being burned, or being drowned.

古文：故仁人之兵，上下一心，三军同力。臣之于君也，下之于上也，若子之事父，弟之事兄，若手臂之扞头目而覆胸腹也。
现代文：故而仁人的军队，上下一条心，三军同出力；臣子对国君，下属对上级，犹如儿子侍奉父亲，弟弟侍奉哥哥，犹如用手臂保护头颅、眼睛、胸膛和腹部。
English: Therefore, the army of benevolent people, the upper and lower one heart, the three armies with the same output; the vassal to the sovereign, the subordinate to the superior, like the son serving the father, the younger brother serving the elder brother, like using the arm to protect the head, eyes, chest and abdomen.

古文：诈而袭之，与先惊而后击之，一也。
现代文：这样的军队，用欺诈之术去袭击它，与先惊动了它而后才去攻击它，是一回事。
English: It is one thing to attack such an army by trickery, and another to startle it before attacking it.

古文：且仁人用十里之国则将有百里之听，用百里之国则将有千里之听，用千里之国则将有四海之听，必将聪明警戒，和傅而一。
现代文：况且，仁人若统治着十里的国家，他的耳目将布及百里，若统治着百里的国家，他的耳目便将布及千里，若统治着千里的国家，他的耳目就会遍及天下，这样，他必将耳聪目明、机警而有戒备，和众如一。
English: Moreover, if a benevolent person governs a country of ten miles, his ears and eyes will spread to a hundred miles; if he governs a country of a hundred miles, his ears and eyes will spread to a thousand miles; if he governs a country of a thousand miles, his ears and eyes will spread all over the world. In this way, he will be bright-eyed, alert and alert, and like everyone else.

古文：故仁人之兵，聚则成卒，散则成列，延则若莫耶之长刃，婴之者断；兑则若莫耶之利锋，当之者溃。圜居而方止，则若盘石然，触之者角摧而退耳。
现代文：因此仁人的军队，集结起来即为一支支百人的部队，分散开时即成战阵行列；延长伸展好似莫邪宝剑的长刃，碰上的即被斩断；短兵精锐仿佛莫邪宝剑的利锋，遇到的即被瓦解；安营扎寨稳如磐石，顶撞它的，角即遭摧折而退却。
English: Therefore, the army of benevolent people, when assembled, is a force supporting a hundred people, and when dispersed, it becomes a battle line; when extended and stretched, it is like the long blade of the evil sword, and when touched, it is cut off; when encountered, the short soldiers and elites are like the sharp edge of the evil sword, and when encountered, they are disintegrated; when encamped, it is stable as a rock, and when it is opposed, the corner is broken and retreats.

古文：且夫暴国之君，将谁与至哉？
现代文：再说那暴虐国家的君主，他所依靠的是什么呢？
English: Besides, what does the ruler of that tyrannical country rely on?

古文：彼其所与至者，必其民也。
现代文：只能是他的百姓。
English: It can only be his people.

古文：其民之亲我欢若父母，其好我芬若椒兰；彼反顾其上则若灼黥，若仇雠；人之情，虽桀、跖，岂有肯为其所恶，贼其所好者哉！
现代文：而他的百姓爱我就如同爱他的父母，喜欢我就如同喜欢芬芳的椒兰；反之，想起他的君主好似畏惧遭受烧灼黥刑，好似面对不共戴天的仇敌一般。人之常情，即便是夏桀、盗跖，也不会为他所厌恶的人去残害他所喜爱的人！
English: And his people love me as they love their parents, and like me as they like fragrant peppers; on the other hand, the monarch who thinks of him seems to be afraid of being burned and beaten, as if he were facing an implacable enemy. Human nature, even if it is a dog or a robber, will not kill the one he loves for the one he hates!

古文：是犹使人之子孙自贼其父母也。
现代文：这就犹如让人的子孙去杀害自己的父母，是根本不可能的。
English: It is as impossible as it is for the children of men to kill their parents.

古文：彼必将来告之，夫又何可诈也！
现代文：如此，百姓一定会前来告发君主，那又有什么诈术可施呢！
English: In this way, the people will certainly come to denounce the monarch, so what trickery can be applied!

古文：故仁人用国日明，诸侯先顺者安，后顺者危，敌之者削，反之者亡。
现代文：所以，由仁人治理国家，国家将日益强盛，各诸侯国先来归顺的则得到安定，后来依附的即遭遇危难；相对抗的将被削弱，进行反叛的即遭灭亡。
English: Therefore, if a benevolent person governs the country, the country will become increasingly strong. The first to submit will be stable, and those who later cling will be in danger; those who resist will be weakened, and those who rebel will be destroyed.

古文：《诗》曰： 武王载发，有虔秉钺，如火烈烈，则莫我敢遏， 此之谓也。 
现代文：《诗经》所谓 商汤竖起大旗，诚敬地握着斧钺，势如熊熊烈火，谁敢把我阻拦？ 正是说的这种情况。 
English: In the "Song of Songs," the so-called merchants raised a big banner, respectfully holding an axe, and the situation was like a raging fire. Who would dare to stop me? This is exactly the situation.

古文：孝成王、临武君曰： 善。
现代文：孝成王、临武君说： 对啊。
English: Lin Wu said, "That's right."

古文：请问王者之兵，设何道，何行而可？ 
现代文：那么请问君王用兵，应该建立什么教令、如何行动才好呢？ 
English: So, if the king uses soldiers, what edict should be established and how should he act?

古文：荀卿曰： 凡君贤者其国治，君不能者其国乱；隆礼贵义者其国治，简礼贱义者其国乱。
现代文：荀况答道： 总的来说，君王贤明的，国家就太平；君王无能的，国家就混乱；推崇礼教、尊重仁义的，国家就治理得好，荒废礼教、鄙视仁义的，国家就动荡不安。
English: Gong Fu replied: On the whole, if the king is wise, the country will be peaceful; if the king is incompetent, the country will be chaotic; if the country reveres etiquette and respects benevolence and righteousness, the country will be well governed; if the country abandons etiquette and despises benevolence and righteousness, the country will be unstable.

古文：治者强，乱者弱，是强弱之本也。
现代文：秩序井然的国家便强大，纲纪紊乱的国家便衰弱，这即是强与弱的根本所在。
English: A well-ordered country is strong, and a country with disordered discipline is weak. This is the fundamental difference between the strong and the weak.

古文：上足卬则下可用也，上不足卬则下不可用也。
现代文：君王的言行足以为人敬慕，百姓才可接受驱使，君王的言行不能为人景仰，百姓也就不会服从召唤。
English: The words and deeds of the king are enough for people to admire, and the people can only be driven by them. The words and deeds of the king cannot be admired by people, and the people will not obey the summons.

古文：下可用则强，下不可用则弱，是强弱之常也。
现代文：百姓可供驱使的，国家就强大，百姓不服调遣的，国家就衰弱，这即是强与弱的常理所在。
English: Where the people can be driven, the country is strong; where the people are not willing to be driven, the country is weak. This is the common sense of strength and weakness.

古文：好士者强，不好士者弱；爱民者强，不爱民者弱；政令信者强，政令不信者弱；重用兵者强，轻用兵者弱；权出一者强，权出二者弱；是强弱之常也。
现代文：齐国人重视兵家的技巧技击，施展技击之术，斩获一颗人头的，由官方赐八两金换回，不是有功同受赏。这样的军队遇到弱小的敌人，还可凑合着应付；一旦面对强大的敌军，就会涣然离散，如同天上的飞鸟，漫天穿行无拘无束，往返无常。
English: The people of Qi attach great importance to the skills and techniques of the soldiers, and display the skills and techniques of the soldiers. If a soldier's head is cut off, the official will give him eighty-two gold coins in exchange, which is not a merit and reward. Such an army encounters a weak enemy, but can also make up for it; once confronted with a strong enemy army, it will suddenly disperse, like the birds in the sky, traveling through the sky unrestrained, back and forth impermanently.

古文：齐人隆技击，其技也，得一首者则赐赎锱金，无本赏矣。
现代文：这是亡国之军，没有比这种军队更衰弱的了，它与招募一群受雇佣的市井小人去作战相差无几。魏国按照一定的标准选拔武勇的士兵。
English: It is an army of ruin, and nothing is more debilitating than such an army, which is little more than the enlistment of a group of hired ruffians to fight; the state selects its brave soldiers according to certain criteria.

古文：是事小敌毳，则偷可用也；事大敌坚，则涣焉离耳。
现代文：择取时，让兵士披挂上全副铠甲，拉开十二石重的强弓，身背五十支利箭，手持戈，头戴盔，腰佩剑，携带三天的食粮，每日急行军一百里。
English: When choosing, let the soldiers wear full armor, draw a twelve-stone strong bow, carry fifty sharp arrows on his back, hold a sword, wear a helmet, wear a sword, carry three days of food, and march a hundred miles every day.

古文：若飞鸟然，倾侧反覆无日，是亡国之兵也，兵莫弱是矣，是其去赁市佣而战之几矣。
现代文：达到这个标准的便为武勇之卒，即可被免除徭役，并分得较好的田地和住宅。但是这些士兵的气力几年后便开始衰退，而分配给他们的利益却无法再行剥夺，即使改换办法也不容易做得周全。故而，魏国的疆土虽大，税收却必定不多。
English: Those who reached this standard were soldiers of valor, could be exempted from corvee service, and were allocated better fields and houses. However, the strength of these soldiers began to decline after a few years, and the benefits allocated to them could no longer be expropriated, even if the changeover method was not easy to complete. Therefore, although the territory of Wei was large, the tax revenue was necessarily small.

古文：秦人，其生民也狭隘，其使民也酷烈，劫之以势，隐之以厄，忸之以庆赏，之以刑罚，使民所以要利于上者，非斗无由也。
现代文：这样的军队便是危害国家的军队了。秦国，百姓生计困窘，国家的刑罚却非常严酷，君王借此威势胁迫百姓出战，让他们隐蔽于险恶的地势，战胜了就给以奖赏，使他们对此习以为常，而战败了便处以刑罚，使他们为此受到箝制，这样一来，百姓要想从上面获得什么好处，除了与敌拼杀外，没有别的出路。
English: Such an army is an army that endangers the country. In the Qin Dynasty, the people's livelihood was miserable, but the state's punishment was very severe. The monarch used this power to coerce the people to go to war, let them hide in the dangerous terrain, give them a reward if they won, and let them get used to it. If they lost the war, they would be punished, and they would be restrained for this. In this way, if the people wanted to gain any benefits from above, there was no other way out except to fight and kill the enemy.

古文：使以功赏相长，五甲首而隶五家，是最为众强长久之道。
现代文：功劳和赏赐成正比例增长，只要斩获五个甲士的头，即可役使乡里的五家，这就是秦国比其他国家强大稳固的原因。
English: Merit and reward increase in a positive ratio. As long as you get the heads of five warriors, you can serve the five families in the village. This is the reason why Qin is stronger and more stable than other countries.

古文：故四世有胜，非幸也，数也。
现代文：所以，秦国得以四代相沿不衰，并非侥幸，而是有其必然性的。
English: Therefore, it is not a fluke, but an inevitability, that Qin has been able to survive for four generations.

古文：故齐之技击不可以遇魏之武卒，魏之武卒不可以遇秦之锐士，秦之锐士不可以当桓、文之节制，桓、文之节制不可以当汤、武之仁义，有遇之者，若以焦熬投石焉。
现代文：故此齐国善技击术的军队无法抵抗魏国择勇武士兵的军队，魏国择勇武士兵的军队无法抵抗秦国精锐、进取的军队；而秦国精锐的士兵却不能抵挡齐桓公、晋文公约束有方的军队，齐桓公、晋文公约束有方的士兵又不能抵挡商汤、周武王的仁义的军队，一旦遇上了，势必如用薄脆的东西去打石头，触之即碎。
English: Therefore, the army of Qi with good fighting skills could not resist the army of Wei who chose brave soldiers, and the army of Wei who chose brave soldiers could not resist the elite and enterprising army of Qin; while the elite soldiers of Qin could not resist the army of Qi Huan Gong and Jinwen, and the soldiers of Qi Huan Gong and Jinwen could not resist the benevolent army of Shangtang and King Zhouwu. Once they met, it would be like hitting a stone with something thin and brittle, and it would be broken at the touch.

古文：兼是数国者，皆干赏蹈利之兵也，佣徒鬻卖之道也，未有贵上安制綦节之理也。
现代文：况且那几个国家培养的都是争求赏赐、追逐利益的将领和士兵，他们就如同雇工靠出卖自己的力气挣钱那样，毫无敬爱国君，愿为国君拼死效力，安于制度约束，严守忠孝仁义的气节、情操。
English: Moreover, those countries train generals and soldiers who strive for rewards and pursue profits. They are like hired workers who earn money by selling their strength. They have no respect for patriots, are willing to work hard for the sovereign, are comfortable with institutional constraints, and strictly observe the principles and sentiments of loyalty, filial piety, and benevolence.

古文：诸侯有能微妙之以节，则作而兼殆之耳。
现代文：诸侯中如果有哪一个能够精尽仁义之道，便可起而兼并那几个国家，使它们陷入危急的境地。
English: If any of the lords can find a way to be benevolent, they can rise up and annex those countries, putting them in a critical situation.

古文：故招延募选，隆势诈，尚功利，是渐之也。
现代文：故在那几个国家中，招募或选拔士兵，推重威势和变诈，崇尚论功行赏，渐渐染成了习俗。
English: Therefore, in those countries, it has gradually become a custom to recruit or select soldiers, promote arrogance and deception, and advocate the reward of merit.

古文：礼义教化，是齐之也。
现代文：但只有尊奉礼义教化，才能使全国上下一心，精诚团结。
English: However, only by cultivating respect, propriety and righteousness can the whole country be united as one.

古文：故以诈遇诈，犹有巧拙焉；以诈遇齐，譬之犹以锥刀堕太山也。
现代文：所以用诈术对付欺诈成俗的国家，还有巧拙之别；而若用诈术对付万众一心的国家，就犹如拿小刀去毁坏泰山了。
English: Therefore, there is a difference between using deception to deal with a country where deception has become commonplace, and using deception to deal with a country where everyone is of one mind, it is like using a knife to destroy Mount Tai.

古文：故汤、武之诛桀、纣也，拱挹指麾，而强暴之国莫不趋使，诛桀、纣若诛独夫。
现代文：所以商汤、周武王诛灭夏桀、商纣王时，从容指挥军队，强暴的国家却都无不臣服，甘受驱使，诛杀夏桀、商纣王，即如诛杀众叛亲离之人一般。
English: Therefore, when Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu  annihilated Xia Yao and King Shang Yao, they calmly commanded the army, but the violent countries were all submissive and willing to be driven to kill Xia Yao and King Shang Yao, that is, like killing all the people who had defected from their relatives.

古文：故《泰誓》曰： 独夫纣， 此之谓也。
现代文：《尚书·泰誓》崐中所说的 独夫纣 ，就是这个意思。
English: This is the meaning of "self-sufficiency" mentioned in the "Shang Shu · Tai Wei" sutra.

古文：故兵大齐则制天下，小齐则治邻敌。
现代文：因此军队齐心协力、众志成城，当可掌握天下；军队尚能团结合作，当可惩治临近的敌国。
English: Therefore, the army should be able to control the whole world through concerted efforts and common aspirations; the army should be able to punish the nearby enemy countries through unity and cooperation.

古文：若夫招延募选，隆势诈，尚功利之兵，则胜不胜无常，代翕代张，代存代亡，相为雌雄耳。
现代文：至于那些征召、募选士兵，推重威势诈变，崇尚论功行赏的军队，则或胜或败，变化无常；有时收缩，有时扩张，有时生存，有时灭亡，强弱不定。
English: As for those armies that conscript and enlist soldiers, promote the use of force and deception, and advocate the reward of merit and performance, they are either victorious or defeated, changeable; sometimes shrink, sometimes expand, sometimes survive, sometimes perish, and their strength is uncertain.

古文：夫是之谓盗兵，君子不由也。 
现代文：这样的军队可称作盗贼之兵，而君子是不会这样用兵的。 
English: Such an army may be called a robber army, but a gentleman does not employ soldiers in this way.

古文：孝成王、临武君曰： 善。
现代文：孝成王、临武君说： 对啊。
English: Lin Wu said, "That's right."

古文：请问为将。 
现代文：那么还请问做将领的道理。 
English: Then please also ask the reason for being a general.

古文：荀卿曰： 知莫大乎弃疑，行莫大乎无过，事莫大乎无悔。事至无悔而止矣，不可必也。
现代文：荀况说： 谋虑最关键的是抛弃成败不明的谋划，行动最重要的是不产生过失，做事最关键的是不后悔；事情做到没有反悔就可以了，不必一定要追求尽善尽美。
English: "The most important thing in planning is to abandon plans whose success or failure is unknown, the most important thing in action is not to make mistakes, and the most important thing in doing things is not to regret; it's okay to do things without regret, you don't have to pursue perfection.

古文：故制号政令，欲严以威；庆赏刑罚，欲必以信；处舍收藏，欲周以固；徙举进退，欲安以重，欲疾以速；窥敌观变，欲潜以深，欲伍以参；遇敌决战，必行吾所明，无行吾所疑；夫是之谓六术。
现代文：所以制定号令法规，要严厉、威重；赏功罚过，要坚决执行、遵守信义；营垒、辎重，要周密、严固；迁移、发动、前进、后退，要谨慎稳重，快速敏捷；探测敌情、观察敌人的变化，要行动机密，混入敌方将士之中；与敌军遭遇，进行决战，一定要打有把握的仗，不打无把握的仗。这些称为 六术 。
English: Therefore, in formulating orders and regulations, it is necessary to be strict and dignified; in rewarding and punishing, it is necessary to resolutely implement and abide by good faith; in encampments and fortifications, it is necessary to be thorough and strict; in moving, launching, advancing, and retreating, it is necessary to be cautious, steady, and quick; in detecting the enemy situation and observing the changes of the enemy, it is necessary to act secretly and blend into the enemy soldiers; in encountering the enemy army and conducting a decisive battle, it is necessary to fight a battle with certainty, and not fight a battle without certainty. These are called the six arts.

古文：无欲将而恶废，无怠胜而忘败，无威内而轻外，无见其利而不顾其害，凡虑事欲熟而用财欲泰，夫是之谓五权。
现代文：不要为保住自己将领的职位和权力而放弃自己取胜的策略，去迁就迎合君王的主张；不要因急于胜利而忘记还有失败的可能；不要对内威慑，而对外轻敌；不要见到利益而不顾忌它的害处；考虑问题要仔细周详而使用钱财要慷慨宽裕。这些称为 五权 。
English: Don't give up your winning strategy in order to keep your position and power as a general, and cater to the king's opinion; don't forget the possibility of failure because of your eagerness to win; don't intimidate internally, but treat external enemies lightly; don't see benefits without considering its harms; consider issues carefully and use money generously. These are called the five powers.

古文：将所以不受命于主有三，可杀而不可使处不完，可杀而不可使击不胜，可杀而不可使欺百姓，夫是之谓三至。
现代文：此外，将领在三种情况下不接受君主的命令：可以杀死他，但不可令他率军进入绝境；可以杀死他，但不可令他率军攻打无法取胜的敌人；可以杀死他，但不可令他率军去欺凌百姓。这些称为 三至 。
English: In addition, there are three cases in which a general does not accept the monarch's order: he can be killed, but he must not lead his army into a desperate situation; he can be killed, but he must not lead his army to attack an invincible enemy; he can be killed, but he must not lead his army to bully the people. These are called three conditions.

古文：凡受命于主而行三军，三军既定，百官得序，群物皆正，则主不能喜，敌不能怒，夫是之谓至臣。
现代文：将领接受君主命令后即调动三军，三军各自到位，百官井然有序，各项事务均安排停当、纳入正轨，此时即便君主奖之也不能使之喜悦，敌人激之也不能使之愤怒。这样的将领是最善于治军的将领。
English: After receiving the monarch's order, the general immediately mobilizes the three armies, the three armies are in place, the officials are in order, and all affairs are arranged and put on track. At this time, even the monarch's award can not make him happy, and the enemy can not make him angry. Such a general is the best general at governing the army.

古文：虑必先事而申之以敬，慎终如始，始终如一，夫是之谓大吉。
现代文：行事前必先深思熟虑，步步慎重，而且自始至终谨慎如一，这即叫作 大吉 。
English: It is necessary to think deeply before acting, to be cautious step by step, and to be cautious from beginning to end. This is called daichi.

古文：凡百事之成也必在敬之，其败也必在慢之。
现代文：总之，各项事业，如果获得成功，必定是由于严肃对待这项事业；如果造成失败，必定是由于轻视这项事业。
English: In short, undertakings, if they succeed, must be due to the seriousness of this undertaking; if they fail, it must be due to the contempt of this undertaking.

古文：故敬胜怠则吉，怠胜敬则灭；计胜欲则从，欲胜计则凶。
现代文：因此，严肃胜过懈怠，便能取得胜利，懈怠胜过严肃，便将自取灭亡；谋划胜过欲望，就事事顺利，欲望胜过谋划，就会遭遇不幸。
English: Therefore, seriousness is better than slackness, it can achieve victory; slackness is better than seriousness, it will self-destruct; planning is better than desire, everything will go well; desire is better than planning, it will encounter misfortune.

古文：战如守，行如战，有功如幸。
现代文：作战如同守备一样，行动如同作战一样，获得成功则看作是侥幸取得。
English: Combat is seen as defensive, action as combat, and success is seen as a fluke.

古文：敬谋无旷，敬事无旷，敬吏无旷，敬众无旷，敬敌无旷，夫是之谓五无旷。
现代文：严肃制订谋略，不可废止；严肃处理事务，不可废止；严肃对待下属，不可废止；严肃对待兵众，不可废止；严肃对待敌人，不可废止，这些称为 五不废 。
English: To seriously formulate strategies cannot be abolished; to seriously handle affairs cannot be abolished; to treat subordinates seriously cannot be abolished; to treat soldiers seriously cannot be abolished; to treat the enemy seriously cannot be abolished, these are called the Five Essentials.

古文：慎行此六术、五权、三至，而处之以恭敬、无旷，夫是之谓天下之将，则通于神明矣。 
现代文：谨慎地奉行以上 六术 、 五权 、 三至 ，并恪守严肃不废止的原则，这样的将领便是天下无人能及的将领，便是可以上通神明的了。 
English: Prudently pursue the above six arts, five powers, three virtues, and adhere to the principle of seriousness and non-abrogation, such a general is a general that no one in the world can match, and can be a divine messenger.

古文：临武君曰： 善。
现代文：临武君说： 有道理。
English: Lin Wu said: That makes sense.

古文：请问王者之军制。 
现代文：那么请问圣明君王的军制又该怎样。 
English: So what should be the military system of the Holy Emperor Ming?

古文：荀卿曰： 将死鼓，御死辔，百吏死职，士大夫死行列。
现代文：荀况说： 崐将领建旗击鼓号令三军，至死也不弃鼓奔逃；御手驾战车，至死也不放松缰绳；百官恪守职责，至死也不离开岗位；大夫尽心效力，死于战阵行列。
English: According to the legend: General Zou led the three armies to build a banner and beat a drum, and he would not give up the drum and run away until he died; he drove a chariot with his own hands, and he would not loosen the reins until he died; hundreds of officials adhered to their duties, and they would not leave their posts until they died; the doctor worked hard and died in the line of battle.

古文：闻鼓声而进，闻金声而退。顺命为上，有功次之。
现代文：军队听到鼓声即前进，听到钲声即后退，服从命令是最主要的，建功还在其次。
English: When the army hears the sound of the drum, it advances; when it hears the sound of the gong, it retreats. Obeying orders is the most important thing, but making contributions is secondary.

古文：令不进而进，犹令不退而退也，其罪惟均。
现代文：命令不准前进而前进，犹如命令禁止后退而还要后退一样，罪过是相等的。
English: An injunction not to go forward, and yet to go forward, is as guilty as an injunction not to go back, and yet to go back.

古文：不杀老弱，不猎禾稼，服者不禽，格者不赦，奔命者不获。
现代文：不残杀老弱，不践踏庄稼，不追捕不战而退的人，不赦免相拒顽抗的人，不俘获跑来归顺的人。
English: Do not kill the old and the weak, do not trample the crops, do not chase those who retreat without a fight, do not pardon those who resist, and do not capture those who run to surrender.

古文：凡诛，非诛其百姓也，诛其乱百姓者也。
现代文：该诛杀时，诛杀的不是百姓，而是祸害百姓的人。
English: When it is time to fight and kill, it is not the people who fight and kill, but those who harm the people.

古文：百姓有捍其贼，则是亦贼也。
现代文：但百姓中如果有保护敌人的，那么他也就成为敌人了。
English: But if among the people there is someone who protects the enemy, then he has also become an enemy.

古文：以故顺刃者生，傃刃者死，奔命者贡。
现代文：所以，不战而退的人生，相拒顽抗的人死，跑来归顺的人则被献给统帅。
English: Therefore, the lives of those who retreated without a fight, those who stubbornly resisted and died, and those who ran to surrender were dedicated to the commander.

古文：微子开封于宋，曹触龙断于军，商之服民，所以养生之者无异周人，故近者歌讴而乐之，远者竭蹶而趋之，无幽闲辟陋之国，莫不趋使而安乐之，四海之内若一家，通达之属莫不从服，夫是之谓人师。《诗》曰： 自西自东，自南自北，无思不服。 
现代文：微子启因多次规劝商纣王，后归顺周王而受封为宋国国君，专门谄谀纣王的曹触龙被处以军中重刑，归附于周天子的商朝人待遇与周朝百姓没有区别，故而近处的人唱着歌欢乐地颂扬周天子，远方的人跌跌撞撞地前来投奔周天子。此外，不论是多么边远荒僻鄙陋的国家，周天子也派人去关照，让百姓安居乐业，以至四海之内如同一家，周王朝恩威所能达到的属国，没有不服从、归顺的。这样的君王即叫作 人师 ，即为人表率的人。《诗经》说： 自西自东，自南自北，无思不服。 
English: Micro Zi Kai was appointed as the prince of Song because of his many persuasions to the merchant Zhou Wang, who later returned to Shun King Zhou. Cao Shulong, the special king of Zhou, was punished with a heavy sentence in the army. The treatment of the Shang Dynasty people who were attached to Zhou Tianzi was no different from that of the Zhou Dynasty people. Therefore, people nearby sang songs to celebrate Zhou Tianzi joyfully, and people from afar stumbled to come to Zhou Tianzi. In addition, no matter how remote and desolate the country is, Zhou Tianzi also sent people to take care of it, so that the people could live and

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是指的这个。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：王者有诛而无战，城守不攻，兵格不击，敌上下相喜则庆之，不屠城，不潜军，不留众，师不越时，故乱者乐其政，不安其上，欲其至也。 临武君曰： 善。 
现代文：圣明君王的军队施行惩处而不挑起战争，固守城池而不发动进攻，与敌对阵作战而不先行出击，敌人上上下下喜悦欢欣就庆贺，并且不洗劫屠戮敌方的城镇，不偷袭无防备的敌人，不使将士们长久地滞留在外，军队出动作战不超越计划的时间，如此，便使混乱国家的百姓都喜欢这种施政方式，而不安心于受自己国君的统治，希望这种君王的军队到来。 临武君说： 你说的不错。 
English: The armies of the Holy Ming Monarch carry out punishments without starting a war, hold the city without launching an attack, fight with the enemy without attacking first, the enemies rejoice and celebrate with joy, and do not loot and slaughter the enemy's towns, do not attack the defenseless enemy, do not make the soldiers stay outside for a long time, and the army does not move and fight beyond the planned time, so that the people of the chaotic country like this mode of governance, but are not worried about being ruled by their own king, and hope that the army of this king will come. Lin Wu Jun said: You are right.

古文：陈嚣问荀卿曰： 先生议兵，常以仁义为本。仁者爱人，义者循理，然则又何以兵为？
现代文：陈嚣问荀况说： 您议论用兵之道，总是以仁义为根本，而仁者爱人，义者遵循情理，既然如此又怎么用兵打仗呢？
English: Chen Hanren said, "When you talk about the way of using soldiers, you always take benevolence and righteousness as the foundation, while the benevolent love others, and the righteous follow reason. In that case, how can you use soldiers to fight a war?

古文：凡所为有兵者，为争夺也。 
现代文：一切用兵之事都是为了争夺、攻伐啊。 
English: All things involving the use of troops are for the purpose of competition and attack.

古文：荀卿曰： 非汝所知也。
现代文：荀况说： 并非像你所理解的这样。
English: "It's not as you understand it," he said.

古文：彼仁者爱人，爱人，故恶人之害之也；义者循理，循理，故恶人之乱之也。
现代文：所谓仁者爱人，正因为爱人，才憎恶害人的人；义者遵循情理，正因为循理，才憎恶反叛、作乱的人。
English: The so-called benevolent person loves others, and it is precisely because he loves others that he hates those who harm others; the righteous person follows reason, and it is precisely because he follows reason that he hates those who rebel and make trouble.

古文：彼兵者，所以禁暴除害也，非争夺也。 
现代文：所以，用兵的目的在于禁暴除害，而不是为了争夺、攻伐。 
English: Therefore, the purpose of using troops is to prevent violence and eliminate harm, not to fight and attack.

古文：燕孝王薨，子喜立。
现代文：燕国燕孝王去世，子姬喜继位。
English: Yan Xiao Wang of Yan Guo died, and his son Ji Xi succeeded to the throne.

古文：周民东亡。
现代文：周王朝的百姓向东逃亡。
English: The Zhou people fled eastward.

古文：秦人取其宝器，迁西周公于惮狐之聚。
现代文：秦国人夺取了周王朝的宝鼎重器，并将西周文公姬咎迁移到狐之聚。
English: The Qin people seized the Baoding heavy weapons of the Zhou Dynasty, and moved the Western Zhou Dynasty to the Fox's Gathering.

古文：楚人迁鲁于莒而取其地。
现代文：楚国考烈王将鲁国国君迁到莒地，夺取了鲁国的封地。
English: King Korets of Chu moved the prince of Lu to Yunnan and seized the fief of Lu.

古文：昭襄王五十三年
现代文：秦昭襄王五十三年
English: The 53rd year of the reign of Qin Zhaoxiang

古文：摎伐魏，取吴城。
现代文：秦国将领率军讨伐魏国，攻占了吴城。
English: The general of Qin led the army to fight against Wei and captured Wucheng.

古文：韩王入朝。
现代文：韩国国君前来朝见昭襄王。
English: The Korean sovereign came to see King Shojo in the morning.

古文：魏举国听令。
现代文：魏国全国听从秦王的号令。
English: The whole country of Wei obeyed the call of the Qin King.

古文：昭襄王五十四年
现代文：秦昭襄王五十四年
English: The 54th year of the reign of King Qin Zhaoxiang

古文：王郊见上帝于雍。楚迁于巨阳。
现代文：昭襄王在雍城南郊祭祀上天。楚国迁都至钜阳。
English: King Zhaoxiang ascended to heaven in the southern suburb of Yongcheng. The capital of the State of Chu was moved to Shenyang.

古文：昭襄王五十五年
现代文：秦昭襄王五十五年
English: The fifty-fifth year of the reign of Qin Zhaoxiang

古文：卫怀君朝于魏，魏人执而杀之；更立其弟，是为元君。
现代文：卫国卫怀君到魏国都城大梁朝见魏王，魏国人将他抓住杀了，另立他的弟弟为卫国国君，是为元君。
English: Wei Guo Wei Huaijun went to the Wei capital, Daliang, to see the Wei king. The Wei people caught and killed him, and set up his younger brother as Wei Guo Guo Jun, and Yuan Jun.

古文：元君，魏婿也。
现代文：而元君是魏王的女婿。
English: However, Yuanjun was the son-in-law of King Wei.

古文：昭襄王五十六年
现代文：秦昭襄王五十六年
English: In the 56th year of the reign of King Qin Zhaoxiang

古文：秋，王薨，孝文王立。
现代文：秋季，秦昭襄王去世，子嬴柱继位，是为孝文王。
English: In the autumn, King Qin Zhaoxiang died and was succeeded by his son, King Xiaowen.

古文：尊唐八子为唐太后，以子楚为太子。
现代文：孝文王尊奉生母唐八子为唐太后，立子嬴异人为太子。
English: Prince Xiaowen honored his birth mother, Tang Ya Zi, as the empress dowager of the Tang Dynasty, and his father-in-law as the crown prince.

古文：赵人奉子楚妻子归之。
现代文：于是，赵国人便将嬴异人的妻子儿女送回秦国。
English: As a result, the people of Zhao sent the wives and children of the foreigners back to Qin.

古文：韩王衰绖入吊祠。
现代文：韩国国君则穿着丧服来到秦国，入殡宫吊唁祭奠昭襄王。
English: The Korean sovereign came to Qin wearing mourning clothes and went to the funeral hall to pay his respects to King Zhaoxiang.

古文：燕王喜使栗腹约欢于赵，以五百金为赵王酒。
现代文：燕国国君姬喜派使臣栗腹与赵王缔结友好盟约，并以五百金设置酒宴款待赵王。
English: The Empress Dowager Ji Xi sent the envoy Li Gang to conclude a friendship treaty with King Zhao, and entertained King Zhao with a banquet of 500 gold.

古文：反而言于燕王曰： 赵壮者皆死长平，其孤未壮，可伐也。 
现代文：栗腹返回燕国后对燕王说： 赵国的壮年男子都死在长平之战中了，他们的孤儿还都没有长大成人，可以去进攻赵国。 
English: After returning to Yan's country, Li Bei said to Yan Wang Rong: All the able-bodied men of Zhao died in the Battle of Changping. Their orphans have not yet grown up, so they can attack Zhao.

古文：王召昌国君乐闲问之，对曰： 赵四战之国，其民习兵，不可。 
现代文：燕王召见昌国君乐，询问他的意见。乐回答说： 赵国的四境都面临着强敌，需要四面抵抗，故国中百姓均已习惯于作战，不能去攻伐。 
English: Yan Wang summoned Chang Guo Junle and asked his opinion. Le replied: The four regions of Zhao are facing a strong enemy and need four-sided resistance. The people in his home country are already accustomed to fighting and cannot go to attack.

古文：王曰： 吾以五而伐一。 
现代文：燕王说： 我可以用五个人来攻打赵国的一个人。 
English: Yan Wang said, "We attacked them one by one with five people.

古文：对曰： 不可。 
现代文：乐答道： 那也不行。 
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：王怒。
现代文：燕王大怒。
English: Yan Wang flew into a rage.

古文：群臣皆以为可，乃发二千乘，栗腹将而攻鄗，卿秦攻代。
现代文：群臣都认为可以出兵攻赵，燕王便调动两千辆战车，一路由栗腹率领，进攻城，一路由卿秦率领，进攻代地。
English: The group of courtiers all thought that they could send troops to attack Zhao, so King Yan mobilized two thousand chariots, all the way led by Chestnut-belly, to attack the city, all the way led by Sir Qin, to attack the place.

古文：将渠曰： 与人通关约交，以五百金饮人之王，使者报而攻之，不祥，师必无功。 
现代文：大夫将渠说： 刚与赵国交换文件订立友好盟约，并用五百金置备酒席请赵王饮酒，而使臣一回来就发兵进攻人家，这是不吉利的，燕军队肯定无法获取战功。 
English: The doctor said, "It is unlucky that just after exchanging documents and signing a friendship treaty with Zhao Guo, and using five hundred gold to set up a wine table to invite Zhao Wang to drink, the envoy sent troops to attack others as soon as he returned. Yan's army will definitely not be able to gain military merit.

古文：王不听，自将偏军随之。
现代文：燕王不听将渠的劝阻，而且还亲自率领配合主力作战的部队随大军出发。
English: Yan Wang did not listen to the commander's dissuasion, and he personally led the troops that cooperated with the main force to set off with the large army.

古文：将渠引王之绶，王以足蹙之。将渠泣曰： 臣非自为，为王也！ 
现代文：将渠一把拉住燕王腰间结系印纽的丝带，燕王气得向他猛踢一脚，将渠哭泣着说： 我不是为了我自己，而是为大王您啊！ 
English: Shogo grabbed the ribbon that tied the knot around Yan Wang's waist, and Yan Wang kicked him angrily. Shogo cried and said, "I'm not doing this for myself, but for you, great king!"

古文：燕师至宋子，赵廉颇为将，逆击之，败栗腹于鄗，败卿秦、乐乘于代，追北五百馀里，遂围燕。
现代文：燕国的军队抵达宋子，赵王任命廉颇为将，率军迎击燕军，在鄗击败栗腹的部队，在代战胜卿秦、乐乘的部队，并乘胜追击燕军五百余里，顺势包围了燕国国都蓟城。
English: When Yan's army arrived in Songzi, King Zhao appointed Renpo to be the general and led the army to meet Yan's army, defeat Chestnut's army in Zhai, defeat Qing Qin's and Lejian's army in Zhai, and use the victory to pursue Yan's army for more than five hundred miles. As a result, Yan's country, Tudou, was surrounded.

古文：燕人请和，赵人曰： 必令将渠处和。 
现代文：燕王只得派人向赵国求和。赵国人说： 一定得让将渠前来议和才行。 
English: Yan Wang had to send someone to Zhao Guo to sue for peace. Zhao Guo said, "We must let the general come to negotiate peace."

古文：燕王以将渠为相而处和，赵师乃解去。
现代文：于是，燕王便任命将渠为相国，前往赵国议和，赵国的军队方才退走。
English: As a result, King Yan appointed General Du as his consort and went to Zhao to discuss peace. Zhao's army had just retreated.

古文：赵平原君卒。
现代文：这一年，赵国的平原君赵胜去世。
English: In this year, Zhao Sheng, the plain prince of Zhao, passed away.

古文：秦孝文王
现代文：秦孝文王
English: King Qin Xiaowen

古文：孝文王元年冬，十月，已亥，王即位；三日薨。
现代文：元年冬季，十月，己亥，孝文王正式登王位。
English: In the winter of the first year, October, Ji Hai, Xiaowen Wang officially ascended the throne.

古文：子楚立，是为庄襄王。
现代文：但孝文王在位仅三天就去世了，他的儿子嬴异人继位，是为庄襄王。
English: However, Prince Xiaowen died just three days into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Prince Zhuangxiang.

古文：尊华阳夫人为华阳太后，夏姬为夏太后。
现代文：庄襄王尊奉嫡母华阳夫人为华阳太后，尊奉生母夏姬为夏太后。
English: Zhuang Xiang Wang revered his legitimate mother, Huayang Lady, as Huayang Empress Dowager, and revered his biological mother, Xia Ji, as Xia Empress Dowager.

古文：燕将攻齐聊城，拔之。
现代文：燕国的一位将领率军攻克了齐国的聊城。
English: A general from Yan Province led an army to conquer Liaocheng from Qi Province.

古文：或谮之燕王，燕将保聊城，不敢归。
现代文：但是有人却在燕王面前说这个将领的坏话。这位将领因此而据守聊城，不敢返回燕国。
English: However, someone spoke ill of the general in front of King Yan. As a result, the general defended Liaocheng and did not dare to return to Yan's country.

古文：齐田单攻之，岁馀不下，鲁仲连乃为书，约之矢以射城中，遗燕将，为陈利害曰： 为公计者，不归燕则归齐。
现代文：齐国相国田单率军反攻聊城，为时一年多仍然攻克不下。齐人鲁仲连便写了一封信，捆在箭上射入城中给那位燕将，向他陈述利害关系说： 替您打算，您不是回燕国就是归附齐国。
English: Lu Zhonglian then wrote a letter, tied to an arrow and shot into the city to the Yan general, stating the stakes to him and saying, "I have a plan for you. Either you return to Yan or you join Qi."

古文：今独守孤城，齐兵日益而燕救不至，将何为乎？ 
现代文：而现在您独守孤城，齐国的军队一天天增多，燕国的援兵却迟迟不到，您将怎么办呢？ 
English: And now you are defending the lonely city alone, the army of Qi is increasing day by day, but the reinforcements of Yan are not late, what will you do?

古文：燕将见书，泣三日，犹豫不能自决，欲归燕，已有隙；欲降齐，所杀虏于齐甚众，恐已降而后见辱。
现代文：燕将见信后低声哭泣了好几天，但仍然犹豫不决。他想还归燕国，可是已与燕国有了嫌隙；想投降齐国，又因杀戮、俘获的齐国人太多，而害怕降齐后会遭受屈辱。
English: Yan Zheng saw the letter and cried in a low voice for several days, but he still hesitated. He wanted to return to Yan, but he already had a rift with Yan; he wanted to surrender to Qi, and because there were too many Qi people killed and captured, he was afraid that he would be humiliated after he was demoted to Qi.

古文：喟然叹曰： 与人刃我，宁我自刃！ 
现代文：于是长声叹息着说： 与其让人来杀我，宁可我自杀！ 
English: Then, with a long sigh, he said, "Rather than let someone kill me, I'd rather kill myself!"

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：便自刎身亡。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：聊城乱，田单克聊城。归，言鲁仲连于齐王，欲爵之。
现代文：鲁仲连为此逃到海边，说： 我与其因获得富贵而屈从于他人，宁可忍受贫贱而能放荡不羁、随心所欲！ 
English: Lu Zhonglian fled to the seashore for this reason, saying: I would rather endure poverty and be able to run wild and do whatever I want, rather than succumb to others because I have become rich!

古文：仲连逃之海上，曰： 吾富贵而诎于人，宁贫贱而轻世肆志焉！ 
现代文：魏国国君安王魏圉向孔斌询问谁是天下高士。孔斌说： 世上没有这种人。
English: King An of the State of Wei asked Kong Bin who was the world's highest-ranking scholar. Kong Bin said: There is no such person in the world.

古文：魏安釐王问天下之高士于子顺，子顺曰： 世无其人也；抑可以为次，其鲁仲连乎！ 王曰： 鲁仲连强作之者，非体自然也。 
现代文：如果说可以有次一等的，那么这个人就是鲁仲连了！ 安厘王说： 鲁仲连是强求自己这样做的，而不是他本性的自然流露。 
English: If there can be a second-class, then this person is Lu Zhonglian! Anli Wang said: Lu Zhonglian is forcing himself to do this, rather than the natural expression of his nature.

古文：子顺曰： 人皆作之。
现代文：孔斌说： 人都是要强求自己去做一些事情的。
English: Kong Bin said: People always want to force themselves to do something.

古文：作之不止，乃成君子；作之不变，习与体成；习与体成，则自然也。 
现代文：假如这样不停地做下去，便会成为君子；始终不变地这样做，习惯与本性渐渐相融合，也就成为自然的了。 
English: If you do this constantly, you will become a gentleman; if you do it constantly, habit and nature will gradually merge, and it will become natural.

古文：秦庄襄王
现代文：秦庄襄王
English: Qinzhuang Xiangwang

古文：庄襄王元年
现代文：元年
English: In the first year

古文：吕不韦为相国。
现代文：吕不韦任秦国的相国。
English: Lü Buwei was appointed as the crown prince of Qin.

古文：东周君为诸侯谋伐秦，王使相国帅师讨灭之，迁东周君于阳人聚。
现代文：东周国国君与各诸侯国谋划着共同攻击秦国，庄襄王因此派吕不韦统帅军队讨灭了东周，将东周国君迁移到阳人聚。
English: The sovereign of Eastern Zhou and the various vassal states planned to jointly attack Qin. Therefore, King Zhuangxiang sent Lü Buwei to command the army to destroy Eastern Zhou and relocate the sovereign of Eastern Zhou to Yangrenju.

古文：周既不祀。
现代文：周王朝至此灭亡，再无人主持祭祀了。
English: The Zhou Dynasty had thus perished, and there was no one to preside over the sacrificial rites.

古文：周比亡，凡有七邑：河南、洛阳、穀城、平阴、偃师、巩、缑氏。
现代文：周朝至灭亡时共有七邑：河南、洛阳、城、平阴、偃师、巩、缑氏。
English: From the Zhou Dynasty to the time of its demise, there were a total of seven townships: Henan, Luoyang, Cheng, Pingyin, Jinshi, Gong, and Meng.

古文：以河南、洛阳十万户封相国不韦为文信侯。蒙骜伐韩，取成皋、荥阳，初置三川郡。
现代文：庄襄王封相国吕不韦为文信侯，将河南洛阳十万户作他的封地。秦将蒙骜攻打韩国，夺取了成皋、荥阳，始设置三川郡。
English: Zhuang Xiang Wang made Lu Buwei, the vassal state of Lu Xiang, a vassal of Wenxin, and made 100,000 households in Luoyang, Henan Province, his fief. Qin sent Mengqi to attack Korea, captured Chengdu and Fenyang, and set up Sanchuan County.

古文：楚灭鲁，迁鲁顷公于卞，为家人。
现代文：楚国灭亡了鲁国，把鲁顷公迁移到，贬为平民。
English: When the State of Chu destroyed the State of Lu, the Luhaekong were relocated and reduced to the status of commoners.

古文：庄襄王二年
现代文：庄襄王二年
English: In the second year of King Zhuangxiang

古文：日有食之。
现代文：出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs.

古文：蒙骜伐赵，定太原，取榆次、狼孟等三十七城。
现代文：秦将蒙骜攻打赵国，夺取了榆次、狼孟等三十七城。
English: Qin sent Mengye to attack Zhao and captured thirty-seven cities, including Ganzi and Wolmeng.

古文：楚春申君言于楚王曰： 淮北地边于齐，其事急，请以为郡而封于江东。 
现代文：楚国春申君对楚考烈王说： 淮北地区与齐国接壤，防务吃紧，请在那里设置边郡，并把我封到江东。 
English: Chunshen of the State of Chu said to the King of Chukao and Liao: The Huaibei region borders with the State of Qi, and the defense is tight. Please set up a border county there and seal me to the east of the river.

古文：楚王许之。
现代文：楚王答应了他的要求。
English: King Chu agreed to his request.

古文：春申君因城吴故墟以为都邑，宫室极盛。
现代文：春申君便在过去吴国的旧都上筑城，作为自己的都邑。他所营造的宫室都极为华丽。
English: In the past, Chunshenjun built a city on the old capital of the State of Wu as his own capital. The palace rooms he created are extremely gorgeous.

古文：庄襄王三年
现代文：庄襄王三年
English: Three years of Zhuang Xiang Wang

古文：王龁攻上党诸城，悉拔之，初置太原郡。
现代文：秦国大将王率军进攻魏国上党郡各城，全部攻取，始设置太原郡。
English: Qin general Wang led the army to attack all the cities in Shangdang County, Wei Province, capturing them all and setting up Taiyuan County.

古文：蒙骜帅师伐魏，取高都、汲。
现代文：秦将蒙骜率军进攻魏国，占领了高都和汲。
English: Qin led Mengniu's army to attack Wei and occupied Gaodu and Quzhou.

古文：魏师数败，魏王患之，乃使人请信陵君于赵。
现代文：魏军屡战屡败，魏安王为此而忧虑，便派人到赵国请信陵君魏无忌回国。
English: The Wei army was repeatedly defeated in battle. King Wei An was worried about this and sent someone to the State of Zhao to ask Emperor Wei to return to the country.

古文：信陵君畏得罪，不肯还，诫门下曰： 有敢为魏使通者死！ 
现代文：信陵君惧怕归国后被判罪，不肯返回，并告诫他的门客们说： 有胆敢给魏国使者通报消息的，处死！ 
English: Fearing that he would be convicted after returning to China, Xinlingjun refused to return, and warned his followers: "If you dare to inform the Wei envoys, you will be executed!"

古文：宾客莫敢谏。
现代文：于是，宾客们都不敢规劝他。
English: As a result, the guests did not dare to dissuade him.

古文：毛公、薛公见信陵君曰： 公子所以重于诸侯者，徒以有魏也。
现代文：毛公、薛公为此拜见信陵君说： 您所以受到各国的敬重，只是因为强大的魏国还存在。
English: For this reason, Mao Gong and Xue Gong paid a visit to Xin Lingjun and said: You are respected by all countries, but only because the powerful State of Wei still exists.

古文：今魏急而公子不恤，一旦秦人克大梁，夷先王之宗庙，公子当何面目立天下乎！ 
现代文：现在魏国的情势危急，而您却毫不顾惜，如此，一旦秦国人攻陷了国都大梁，将先王的宗庙铲为平地，您当以何面目立在天下人的面前啊！ 
English: Now the situation in Wei is critical, but you do not care at all. So, once the Qin people have captured the capital city and leveled the former king's ancestral temple, how will you stand out in front of the world?

古文：语未卒，信陵君色变，趣驾还魏。
现代文：二人的话还未说完，信陵君已脸色大变，即刻驾车赶回魏国。
English: Before the two men had finished speaking, Xinlingjun's face had changed dramatically, and he immediately drove back to Wei.

古文：魏王持信陵君而泣，以为上将军。
现代文：魏王见到信陵君后握着他的手啜泣不止，随即便任命他为上将军。
English: When the Wei king saw Xinlingjun, he held his hand and sobbed endlessly, and then appointed him as a senior general.

古文：信陵君使人求援于诸侯。诸侯闻信陵君复为魏将，皆遣兵救魏。
现代文：信陵君派人向各诸侯国求援，各国听说信陵君重又担任魏国的大将，都纷纷派兵援救魏国。
English: Xinlingjun sent people to ask for help from various states. All countries heard that Xinlingjun was a great general of Wei and sent troops to rescue Wei.

古文：信陵君率五国之师败蒙骜于河外，蒙骜遁走。
现代文：信陵君率领五国联军在黄河以西击败蒙骜的军队，蒙骜带残部逃崐走。
English: Xinlingjun led the five-nation coalition to defeat the shackled army west of the Yellow River, and the shackled remnants fled.

古文：信陵君追至函谷关，抑之而还。
现代文：信陵君督师追击到函谷关，将秦军压制在关内后才领兵还魏。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Xinling Emperor's army pursued the Qin army to the Hanzhong Pass, and only after suppressing the Qin army inside the pass did he lead the army back to Wei.

古文：安陵人缩高之子仕于秦，秦使之守管。
现代文：魏国安陵人缩高的儿子在秦国供职，秦人让他负责守卫管城。
English: The son of Wei Anling's shrunken son served in Qin, and the Qin people put him in charge of guarding Guancheng.

古文：信陵君攻之不下，使人谓安陵君曰： 君其遣缩高，吾将仕之以五大夫，使为执节尉。 
现代文：信陵君率军攻管城不下，便派人去见安陵君说： 如果您能遣送缩高到我这里来，我将授给他五大夫的军职，并让他担任执节尉。 
English: When the army led by Xinlingjun could not take control of the city, he sent someone to see Anlingjun and said: "If you can send Zijigao to me, I will give him the military post of the five great men and let him serve as a lieutenant."

古文：安陵君曰： 安陵，小国也，不能必使其民。
现代文：安陵君说： 安陵是个小国，百姓不一定都服从我的命令。
English: Anling said: Anling is a small country, it cannot force its own people.

古文：使者自往请之。 
现代文：还是请使者您自己前去邀请他吧。 
English: Ask the messenger to go and invite him himself.

古文：使吏导使者至缩高之所。
现代文：于是就委派一个小官引导魏国的使者前往缩高的住地。
English: Therefore, a minor official was appointed to guide the emissary of Wei to the high-rise residence.

古文：使者致信陵君之命，缩高曰： 君之幸高也，将使高攻管也。
现代文：使者向缩高传达了信陵君的命令，缩高听后说： 信陵君之所以看重我，是为了让我出面去进攻管城。
English: The messenger conveyed Noburyo-kun's order to Shikao. Shikao listened and said, "The reason why Noburyo-kun values me is so that I can attack Guancheng."

古文：夫父攻子守，人之笑也；见臣而下，是倍主也。
现代文：而为父亲的攻城，作儿子的却守城，这是要被天下人耻笑的。
English: But for the father to attack the city, while the son defends the city, this is to be ridiculed by the world.

古文：父教子倍，亦非君之所喜。敢再拜辞！ 
现代文：况且我的儿子如果见到我就放弃了他的职守，那便是背叛他的国君；作父亲的若是教儿子背叛，也不是信陵君所喜欢的行为。
English: Moreover, if my son abandons his duties when he sees me, it would be a betrayal of his sovereign; if a father teaches his son to betray, it is not the behavior that Nobushige likes.

古文：使者以报信陵君。
现代文：我冒昧地再拜，不能接受信陵君的旨令。 
English: I have the temerity to bow again. I cannot accept Nobushige-kun's order.

古文：信陵君大怒，遣使之安陵君所曰： 安陵之地，亦犹魏也。
现代文：使者回报给信陵君，信陵君勃然大怒，又派使者到安陵君那里说： 安陵国也是魏国的领地。
English: The envoy replied to Xinlingjun. Xinlingjun flew into a rage, and sent another envoy to Anlingjun, saying: Anling is also the territory of Wei.

古文：今吾攻管而不下，则秦兵及我，社稷必危矣。
现代文：现在我攻取不下管城，秦国的军队就会赶到这里来攻打我，这样一来，魏国肯定就危险了。
English: Now if I can't attack Guanyu, then the Qin army will threaten me, and the country will inevitably be in danger.

古文：愿君生束缩高而致之！
现代文：希望您能将缩高活着捆送到我这里！
English: I hope you will be able to send me the bundle alive!

古文：若君弗致，无忌将发十万之师以造安陵之城下！ 
现代文：如果您不肯这么做，我就将调动十万大军开赴安陵城下。 
English: If you refuse to do so, I will mobilize 100,000 troops and march to the outskirts of Anling.

古文：安陵君曰： 吾先君成侯受诏襄王以守此城也，手授太府之宪，宪之上篇曰： 子弑父，臣弑君，有常不赦。
现代文：安陵君说： 我的先代国君成侯奉魏襄王的诏令镇守此城，并亲手把太府中所藏的国法授给了我。国法的上篇说： 臣子杀君王，子女杀父亲，常法规定绝不赦免这类罪行。
English: Anling said, "My predecessor, King Cheng Hou, guarded this city according to the edict of King Weizhong, and he personally gave me the national law hidden in the Great Palace. The first part of the national law says, "If a courtier kills the king, or a child kills his father, the common law stipulates that such crimes will never be pardoned."

古文：国虽大赦，降城亡子不得与焉。 
现代文：即使国家实行大赦，举城投降和临阵脱逃的人也都不能被赦免。 
English: Although the state has amnesty, even if the city is conquered and the fugitive becomes a fugitive, it cannot pardon such a person.

古文：今缩高辞大位以全父子之义，而君曰 必生致之 ，是使我负襄王之诏而废太府之宪也，虽死，终不敢行！ 
现代文：现在缩高推辞不受您要授与他的高位，以此成全他们的父子之义，而您却说 一定要将缩高活着捆送到我这里来 ，如此便是要让我违背襄王的诏令并废弃太府所藏的国法啊，我纵然去死，也终归不敢执行您的指示！ 
English: Now, Shitaka refuses to accept the high position you want to bestow on him, in order to fulfill the righteousness of their father and son, but you say that you must bring Shitaka to me alive and in chains, so you want me to violate King Xiang's edict and abandon the law of the land hidden in the Great Palace. Ah, even if I die, I will not dare to carry out your instructions!

古文：缩高闻之曰： 信陵君为人，悍猛而自用，此辞反必为国祸。
现代文：缩高闻听这件事后说： 信陵君这个人，性情凶暴蛮模，且刚愎自用，那些话必将给安陵国招致祸患。
English: After listening to the matter, Yan Gao said: "This person, Xinlingjun, has a fierce and brutal temperament, and is self-willed. Those words will surely bring disaster to Anling.

古文：吾已全己，无违人臣之义矣，岂可使吾君有魏患乎！ 
现代文：我已保全了自己的名声，没有违背作为臣子应尽的道义，既然如此，我又岂可让安陵君遭到来自魏国内部的危害呀！ 
English: I have preserved my reputation and have not violated the moral duties of a courtier, so how can I allow Anlingjun to be harmed from within Wei!

古文：乃之使者之舍，刎颈而死。
现代文：于是便到使者居住的客舍，拔剑刎颈，自杀而死。
English: So he went to the messenger's house and hanged himself.

古文：信陵君闻之，缟素辟舍，使使者谢安陵君曰： 无忌，小人也，困于思虑，失信于君，请再拜辞罪！ 
现代文：信陵君获悉这一消息后，身着素服避住到厢房，并派使者去对安陵君道歉说： 我真是个小人啊，为要攻取管城的思虑所困扰，对您说了一些不该说的话，请让我再拜，为我的罪过向您道歉吧！ 
English: After Mr. Xinling learned of this news, he took refuge in a guest room wearing plain clothes, and sent an envoy to apologize to Mr. Anling, saying: I am really a villain, troubled by the thought of capturing the capital, I said some things to you that I should not have said, please let me bow again, and apologize to you for my sins!

古文：王使人行万金于魏以间信陵君，求得晋鄙客，令说魏王曰： 公子亡在外十年矣，今复为将，诸侯皆属，天下徒闻信陵君而不闻魏王矣。 
现代文：庄襄王为了挑拨离间信陵君与魏王的关系，遣人携带万金前往魏国，寻找到被信陵君所杀的晋鄙的门客，让他去劝说魏王道： 信陵君流亡国外十年，现在重新担任了魏国的大将，各诸侯国的将领都隶属于他，致使天下的人只听说有信陵君这个人，而不知道还有魏王您了。 
English: In order to drive a wedge between the relationship between Xinlingjun and Wei Wang, Zhuang Xiangwang sent a man with a million of gold to Wei to find the disciple of Jin who was killed by Xinlingjun, and let him persuade Wei Wang: Xinlingjun had been in exile for ten years, and now he was once again the general of Wei, and the generals of all the principalities were subordinate to him. As a result, people all over the world only heard about this person, Xinlingjun, but did not know about you, Wei Wang.

古文：王又数使人贺信陵君： 得为魏王未也？ 
现代文：庄襄王又多次派人奉送礼物给信陵君表示庆贺说： 您做了魏国国君没有啊？ 
English: Zhuang Xiang Wang repeatedly sent people to send gifts to Xinlingjun to express his congratulations and said: Have you made Wei Guo Guo Jun?

古文：魏王日闻其毁，不能不信，乃使人代信陵君将兵。
现代文：魏王天天都听到这类诽谤信陵君的话，不能不信，于是就令人代替信陵君统领军队。
English: The Wei king heard this kind of slander against Xinlingjun every day and couldn't believe it, so he had someone else lead the army in place of Xinlingjun.

古文：信陵君自知再以毁废，乃谢病不朝，日夜以酒色自娱，凡四岁而卒。
现代文：信陵君明白自己第二次因别人的诋毁而被废黜了，便以生病为由不再朝见魏王参与议事，日夜饮酒作乐，沉湎于女色中，过了四年就死去了。
English: Knowing that he had been dethroned for the second time due to the slander of others, Xinlingjun, on the grounds of illness, no longer attended the court of Wei Wang to participate in the deliberation, drank alcohol day and night to make music, indulged in womanizing, and died four years later.

古文：韩王往吊，其子荣之，以告子顺。
现代文：韩国国君桓惠王亲至魏国吊丧。信陵君的儿子颇以此为荣，便将这件事告诉了孔斌。
English: Prince Huan Hui, the ruler of Korea, was buried in Wei. Mr. Xinling's son was quite proud of this, and he told this to Kong Bin.

古文：子顺曰： 必辞之以礼。 邻国君吊，君为之主。 
现代文：孔斌却说： 你一定要按照崐礼制推辞掉韩王的悼念活动！礼制规定： 邻国国君前往某国吊丧，这吊丧活动应由某国的国君来主持。 
English: However, Kong Bin said, "You must follow the etiquette system and cancel the memorial activities for King Han!" The etiquette system stipulates: When the monarch of a neighboring country goes to a certain country for a funeral, this funeral activity should be presided over by the monarch of a certain country.

古文：今君不命子，则子无所受韩君也。 
现代文：现在魏王并没有委命你代他主持吊丧仪式，因此你也就没有资格去接待韩王来进行吊丧了。 信陵君的儿子便未接受韩王的吊丧。
English: Now, the Wei king did not commission you to preside over the funeral ceremony on his behalf, so you are not qualified to receive King Han for the funeral.

古文：其子辞之。
现代文：五月，丙午，庄襄王去世，太子嬴政继位。
English: In the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month, Prince Zhuang Xiang passed away and was succeeded by his son, Prince Xuan Zheng.

古文：五月，丙午，王薨。太子政立，生十三年矣，国事皆委于文信侯，号称仲父。
现代文：嬴政这时只有十三岁，故一切国家大事都由文信侯吕不韦决定，号称他为 仲父 。
English: At that time, Yongsheng was only thirteen years old, so all national events were decided by Wenxin Hou Lvubei, who was known as the "middle father."

古文：晋阳反。
现代文：秦国属地晋阳反叛。
English: The Qin territory of Jinyang rebelled.

古文：始皇帝上元年
现代文：秦王政元年
English: In the first year of the Qin Dynasty

古文：蒙骜击定之。
现代文：秦国大将蒙骜率军平定了晋阳的叛乱。
English: General Meng Rong of Qin led the army to quell the rebellion in Jinyang.

古文：韩欲疲秦人，使无东伐，乃使水工郑国为间于秦，凿泾水自仲山为渠，并北山，东注洛。
现代文：韩国想要消耗秦国国力，使它不发兵东征，便派遣水利家郑国赴秦，游说秦国兴修水利，从仲山起，开凿一条引泾水、沿北山东注洛河的灌溉渠。
English: South Korea wanted to consume the national strength of Qin, so that it would not send troops to the East, so it sent the water conservator Zheng Guo to Qin to lobby Qin to build water conservancy. Starting from Zhongshan, it dug an irrigation canal to divert water along the Jiluo River in the east of North Shanshan.

古文：中作而觉，秦人欲杀之。
现代文：工程进行中，秦王觉察到了韩国的意图，为此要杀郑国。
English: During the project, Qin Wang sensed the intention of South Korea and wanted to kill Zheng Guo for this.

古文：郑国曰： 臣为韩延数年之命，然渠成，亦秦万世之利也。 
现代文：郑国说： 我确是为韩国延长了几年的寿命，但是这条灌溉渠如果修成了，秦国也可享万世之利啊。 
English: Zheng Guo said: I have indeed extended the life of South Korea for several years, but if this irrigation canal is completed, Qin can also enjoy the benefits of all ages.

古文：乃使卒为之。
现代文：秦王于是命他继续主持施工，完成了此项工程。
English: King Qin then ordered him to continue to preside over the construction and completed the project.

古文：注填阏之水溉舄卤之地四万馀顷，收皆亩一钟，关中由是益富饶。
现代文：这条水渠引淤浊而有肥效的水灌溉盐碱地四万多顷，每亩的收成都高达六斛四斗，秦国的关中一带因此更加富裕起来。
English: This canal drained silt and fertilized water to irrigate more than forty thousand hectares of saline and alkaline land. The harvest per mu was as high as six hundred mu, and the Guanzhong area of Qin Province became richer as a result.

古文：始皇帝上二年
现代文：秦王政二年
English: In the second year of the Qin Dynasty

古文：麃公将卒攻卷，斩首三万。
现代文：秦国将领公率军进攻魏国的卷地，斩杀三万人。
English: Qin general Gonggu led the army to attack Wei's territory, killing thirty thousand people.

古文：赵以廉颇为假相国，伐魏，取繁阳。
现代文：赵国任命廉颇代理相国之职，率军征伐魏国，攻取了繁阳。
English: Zhao Guo appointed Liangpo as the deputy of the Guo Guo, led the army to invade Wei, and captured the prosperous sun.

古文：赵孝成王薨，子悼襄王立，使武襄君乐乘代廉颇。
现代文：这时，赵国国君孝成王赵丹去世，他的儿子赵偃继位，是为悼襄王。悼襄王刚执政就令武襄君乐乘取代了廉颇。
English: At this time, Zhao Dan, the prince of Zhao, died, and his son Zhao Yao succeeded to the throne, in order to mourn the death of King Xiang.

古文：廉颇怒，攻武襄君，武襄君走，廉颇出奔魏。
现代文：廉颇因此大怒，攻击乐乘，乐乘跑开了。廉颇便逃奔到魏国的都城大梁。
English: Liang Puo was so angry that he attacked Le Rong and Le Rong ran away. Liang Puo then fled to the capital of Wei, Dalang.

古文：久之，魏不能信用。
现代文：但他在魏很久，仍得不到信任重用。
English: But for a long time in Wei, he was still not trusted and reused.

古文：赵师数困于秦，赵王思复得廉颇，廉颇亦思复用于赵。
现代文：此时，赵国的军队多次遭秦军围困，赵王想重新任用廉颇，廉颇也渴望着再为赵国效力。
English: At this time, the army of Zhao was repeatedly besieged by the Qin army. Zhao Wang wanted to reappoint Renpo, and Renpo was eager to serve Zhao again.

古文：赵王使使者视廉颇尚可用否。
现代文：赵王于是派使者前往大梁，观察廉颇是否还能被任用。
English: Zhao Wang sent an envoy to visit Renpo to see if he could still be appointed.

古文：廉颇之仇郭开多与使者金，令毁之。
现代文：廉颇的仇人郭开以重金贿赂那位使者，让他在赵王面前说廉颇的坏话。
English: Guo Kai, a corrupt enemy, bribed the envoy with a large sum of money so that he would say bad things about the corrupt leader when he returned.

古文：廉颇见使者，一饭斗米，肉十斤，被甲上马，以示可用。
现代文：廉颇会见使者时，有意一餐饭吃下一斗米、十斤肉，然后披挂铠甲，跃上战马，以此显示自己还可以率军去攻城陷阵。
English: When he met with the envoy, he deliberately ate a bucket of rice and ten pounds of meat with each meal, then put on armor and jumped on a warhorse to show that he could also lead an army to attack the city.

古文：使者还报曰： 廉将军虽老，尚善饭；然与臣坐，顷之三遗矢矣。 
现代文：使者回到赵国后向赵王报告说： 廉将军虽然老了，但饭量还好。只是陪我坐着的时候，不一会就去拉了三次屎。 
English: After the envoy returned to Zhao, he reported to Zhao Wang: Although General Liang is old, his diet is still good. However, when he was sitting with me, he soon went to defecate three times.

古文：赵王以为老，遂不召。
现代文：赵王由此认为廉颇已经老了，便不再召他回国。
English: Zhao Wang thought that Liang was quite old, so he no longer recalled him.

古文：楚人阴使迎之。
现代文：楚王获悉了这一情况，即偷偷地派人到魏国去迎接廉颇。
English: When King Chu learned of this, he secretly sent someone to Wei to meet Renpo.

古文：廉颇一为楚将，无功，曰： 我思用赵人。 
现代文：廉颇一担任楚国的将领后，就没有什么战功了。
English: Although Renpo was a general of the State of Chu, he had no military merit. He said, "I want to command the soldiers of the State of Zhao."

古文：卒死于寿春。
现代文：于是他感慨地说： 我真想指挥赵国的士兵啊！ 
English: So he said with emotion: I really want to command the soldiers of Zhao!

古文：始皇帝上三年
现代文：最终死在了楚国的寿春。秦王政三年
English: He eventually died in Shuchun, Chu.

古文：大饥。
现代文：秦国发生大饥荒。
English: There was a great famine.

古文：蒙骜伐韩，取十二城。
现代文：秦将蒙骜率军进攻韩国，夺取了十二座城池。
English: Qin led Mengniu's army to attack Korea, capturing twelve cities.

古文：赵王以李牧为将，伐燕，取武遂、方城。
现代文：赵国赵悼襄王任命李牧为大将，率军攻击燕国，占领了武遂、方城。
English: King Zhao of Zhao State appointed Li Mu as a general, led the army to attack Yan, and occupied Wusui and Fangcheng.

古文：李牧者，赵之北边良将也，尝居代、雁门备匈奴，以便宜置吏，市租皆输入莫府，为士卒费，日击数牛飨士；习骑射，谨烽火，多间谍，为约曰： 匈奴即入盗，急入收保。
现代文：李牧是赵国防守北部边疆的优秀将领，曾经领兵驻扎在代、雁门防备匈奴。根据当时的实际需要，他可以自行任用军吏官员，而城市的税收也都直接送到李牧的帐下，充作养兵的经费。
English: Li Mu was an outstanding general of the Zhao National Defense Force who guarded the northern frontier. He once led the troops stationed in Dangdai and Yanmen to guard against the Xiongnu. According to the actual needs at that time, he could appoint military officials on his own, and the city's taxes were also directly sent to Li Mu's account to fund the maintenance of soldiers.

古文：有敢捕虏者斩！ 
现代文：李牧令人每天宰杀好几头牛，供给将士们食用，并指挥部队练习射箭和骑马，小心谨慎地把守烽火台，多多派出侦察人员打探敌情，同时申明约束，号令说： 如果匈奴兵侵入边境进行掠夺，我军应立即收拾起人马、牛羊、物资等退入堡垒中固守，有胆敢逞强捕捉俘虏的，一律处斩！ 
English: Li Mu had several cows slaughtered every day to provide food for the soldiers, and commanded the troops to practice archery and horseback riding, carefully guarded the campfire, sent many reconnaissance personnel to explore the enemy situation, and at the same time affirmed the constraints, and ordered: If the Xiongnu soldiers invade the border to plunder, our army should immediately pack up the men, horses, cattle, sheep, materials, etc. and retreat to the fortress to hold on, and those who dare to capture the prisoners should be killed!

古文：匈奴每入，烽火谨，辄入收保不战。
现代文：如此，匈奴兵每次入侵，李牧的军队都严谨地点燃烽火报警，然后人马、物资退入堡垒中，只守不战。
English: Thus, every time the Xiongnu soldiers invaded, Li Mu's army rigorously lit bonfires to alert the police, and then the men, horses and materials retreated into the fortress, only to defend without fighting.

古文：如是数岁，亦不亡失。
现代文：这样过了好几年，也没有什么伤亡损失。
English: After several years like this, there is no loss of manpower and material.

古文：匈奴皆以为怯，虽赵边兵亦以为吾将怯。
现代文：匈奴人因此全都认为李牧胆小，就连赵国的守边官兵也认为自己的将帅太胆小了。
English: As a result, the Huns all thought that Li Mu was timid, and even the border guards of Zhao also thought that their general was too timid.

古文：赵王让之，李牧如故。
现代文：赵王为此而责备李牧，但李牧依旧维持老样子，不作变动。
English: Zhao Wang reproached Li Mu for this, but Li Mu still remained the same and did not change.

古文：王怒，使他人代之。
现代文：赵王怒不可遏，派其他人取代李牧统兵。
English: Zhao Wang was furious and sent others to replace Li Mu.

古文：岁馀，屡出战，不利，多失亡，边不得田畜。
现代文：此后一年多时间里，新任将领屡次率军迎击犯境的匈奴，可不但屡次作战失利，损失惨重，而且使边境骚扰不断，百姓无法正常地耕作和放牧。
English: After that, for more than a year, the new general repeatedly led the army to meet the Huns who violated the border, but not only repeatedly lost battles and suffered heavy losses, but also continuously harassed the border, making it impossible for the people to farm and graze normally.

古文：王复请李牧，李牧杜门称病不出。
现代文：赵王不得已又派人请李牧复出，李牧以生病为由闭门不出，拒绝接见来者。
English: Zhao Wang had no choice but to send someone to ask Li Mu to come back. Li Mu refused to meet the visitor, saying that he was ill and would not come out of the closed door.

古文：王强起之，李牧曰： 必用臣，臣如前，乃敢奉令。 
现代文：可是赵王坚持着非要让他重新出马不可，李牧无奈，便说： 如果一定要用我，必须允许我仍照从前的办法行事，我才敢接受您的命令。 
English: But Zhao Wang insisted that he had to let him ride the horse again. Li Mu was helpless and said: If you must use me, you must allow me to still act according to the previous method before I dare to accept your order.

古文：王许之。
现代文：赵王只好答应了他的要求。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：李牧至边，如约。
现代文：李牧重返北部边境，继续实行以往的约束。
English: Li Mu returned to the northern border and continued to enforce the previous restrictions.

古文：匈奴数岁无所得，终以为怯。
现代文：匈奴人几年来侵掠都毫无所获，却终究以为李牧是畏惧他们。
English: After several years of invasion and plunder, the Huns had achieved nothing, but eventually thought that Li Mu was afraid of them.

古文：边士日得赏赐而不用，皆愿一战。
现代文：守边军士每天得到赏赐却不被派用去抗击匈奴，故都希望与匈奴人打一仗。
English: The border guards, who are rewarded every day for not being sent to fight the Huns, want to fight the Huns.

古文：于是乃具选车得千三百乘，选骑得万三千匹，百金之士五万人，彀者十万人，悉勒习战；大纵畜牧、人民满野。
现代文：李牧于是备齐精选的战车一千三百辆，精选的战马一万三千匹，曾获过百金奖赏的勇士五万人，能拉硬弓的善射的士兵十万人，将他们全部组织起来，进行作战训练，并大力组织放牧，使放牧人遍布在边境田野。
English: Li Mu then prepared a total of 1,300 carefully selected chariots, 13,000 carefully selected horses, 50,000 warriors who had won hundreds of gold awards, and 100,000 soldiers who could pull hard bows and shoot well, organized them all, conducted combat training, and vigorously organized grazing, so that grazing people were all over the border fields.

古文：匈奴小入，佯北不胜，以数十人委之。
现代文：匈奴人小规模地入侵，李牧指令部队假败下来，且把数十人丢弃给匈奴。
English: The Huns invaded on a small scale, and Li Mu ordered his troops to feign defeat and abandon dozens of people to the Huns.

古文：单于闻之，大率众来入。
现代文：匈奴的单于听到这个消息后，即率军大举来犯。
English: As soon as he heard about the situation, he led a large number of people to invade.

古文：李牧多为奇陈，张左、右翼击之，大破之，杀匈奴十馀万骑，灭衤詹褴，破东胡，降林胡。
现代文：李牧多设奇阵，指挥部队从左、右两翼进行包抄，大破敌兵，斩杀匈奴十多万人马，乘胜灭掉了代地以北的胡族褴，攻破东胡，使林胡部族归降。
English: Li Mu set up a strange array, and the commanding troops encircled from the left and right wings, defeated the enemy soldiers, killed more than one hundred thousand Huns, and took advantage of the victory to eliminate the Hu tribe north of Dechi, defeated the East Hu, and made the Linhu tribe surrender.

古文：单于奔走，十馀岁不敢近赵边。
现代文：匈奴单于领残兵逃奔而去，此后十多年不敢再接近赵国边境。
English: The Xiongnu alone led the remnants of the army to flee, and did not dare to approach the border of Zhao for more than ten years.

古文：先是时，天下冠带之国七，而三国边于戎狄：秦自陇以西有绵诸、绲戎、翟、之戎，岐、梁、泾、漆之北有义渠、大荔、乌氏、朐衍之戎；而赵北有林胡、楼烦之戎；燕北有东胡、山戎；各分散居溪谷，自有君长，往往而聚者百有馀戎，然莫能相一。
现代文：在此之前，天下的文明国家有七个，其中三国的边境与戎狄部族接壤，这即是秦国，自陇以西有诸、绲戎、翟、等部族，岐、梁、泾、漆以北有义渠、大荔、乌氏、朐衍等部族；赵国北部有林胡、楼烦等部族；燕国北部有东胡、山戎等部族。这些部族各自分散居住在山谷溪涧，有自己的君长，虽往往有一百多个部族聚集在一起，却没有一个部族能将各部族统一起来。
English: Prior to this, there were seven civilized countries in the world, of which the borders of three countries bordered on the Yongde Tribe. These were the Qin Kingdom. To the west of Qin, there were Zhu, Qiong Rong, Yao, and other tribes; to the north of Qi, Liang, Yao, and Urushi, there were Yigu, Dali, Wu, and Yan tribes; to the north of Zhao, there were Lin Hu, Lou Dui, and other tribes; and to the north of Yan, there were Donghu, Shan Rong, and other tribes. These tribes were scattered in the valleys and creeks and had their own rulers. Although there were

古文：其后义渠筑城郭以自守，而秦稍蚕食之，至惠王遂拔义渠二十五城。
现代文：稍后，义渠部开始修筑城池以求自守，而秦国则慢慢地对它进行蚕食，到了惠王嬴驷时，攻占了它二十五座城池。
English: Later, the Yixue faction began to build castles to defend themselves, while the Qin state slowly encroached on it. By the time of Hui Wangye, it had captured twenty-five castles.

古文：昭王之时，宣太后诱义渠王，杀诸甘泉，遂发兵伐义渠，灭之；始于陇西、北地、上郡筑长城以拒胡。
现代文：及至昭襄王时，宣太后将义渠王引诱到甘泉杀了，随后即发兵进攻义渠，灭掉了该部族，始在陇西、北地、上郡等地修筑长城，崐以抵抗西北胡人的侵扰。
English: When it came to King Zhaoxiang, Empress Dowager Xuan lured King Yiguo to Ganquan and killed him. She then sent troops to attack Yiguo, exterminated the tribe, and began to build the Great Wall in Shaanxi, Hebei, Shangguan and other places to resist the invasion of the Northwest Hu people.

古文：赵武灵王北破林胡、楼烦，筑长城，自代并阴山下，至高阙为塞，而置云中、雁门、代郡。
现代文：赵国国君武灵王赵雍率军在北方击破林胡、楼烦等部族，自代经阴山下，到高阙，修筑长城，建立要塞，并设置了云中、雁门、代郡等郡。
English: Wuling Wang Zhao Yong, the sovereign of the State of Zhao, led the army to defeat the tribes of Linhu and Loudui in the north, and from generation to generation, they went through the underworld, to Gaocheng, built the Great Wall, established fortresses, and set up counties such as Yunzhong, Ganmen, and Dayi.

古文：其后燕将秦开为质于胡，胡甚信之；归而袭破东胡，东胡却千馀里；燕亦筑长城，自造阳至襄平，置上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽东郡以距胡。
现代文：再以后，燕国的将领秦开因曾在东胡作过人质，深得东胡的信任，返回燕国后率军袭击东胡，大破东胡兵，迫使它向北退却了一千多里。燕国于是也在造阳至襄平一线筑起长城，同时设置上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽东等郡，以抵御胡人的攻掠。
English: Later, Qin Kayin, the general of Yan, who had been a hostage in Donghu, was deeply trusted by Donghu. After returning to Yan, he led an army to attack Donghu, defeated Donghu soldiers, and forced it to retreat more than a thousand miles north. Yan then built the Great Wall along the line from Zhaoyang to Xiangping, and also set up counties such as Shanggu, Yuyang, Right Beiping, and Liaodong to resist the Hu people's attack and plunder.

古文：及战国之末而匈奴始大。
现代文：直到战国末期，匈奴部族才开始强大起来。
English: It was not until the end of the Warring States period that the Hun tribes began to grow in strength.

古文：始皇帝上四年
现代文：秦王政四年
English: The fourth year of the Qin Dynasty

古文：春，蒙骜伐魏，取旸、有诡。
现代文：春季，秦将蒙骜进攻魏国，夺取了、有诡。
English: In the spring, the Qin attacked and conquered the State of Wei.

古文：三月，军罢。
现代文：在三月间，停止了进军。
English: In March, the army was withdrawn.

古文：秦质子归自赵；赵太子出归国。
现代文：秦国送到赵国作人质的王子回归秦国，赵国在秦国充当人质的太子赵初也返回了赵国。
English: The prince who was sent to Zhao as a hostage by Qin returned to Qin, and Zhao's son Zhaohu, who was held hostage by Qin, also returned to Zhao.

古文：七月，蝗，疫。
现代文：七月，秦国发生蝗灾，瘟疫流行。
English: In July, a plague of locusts occurred in Qin.

古文：令百姓纳粟千石，拜爵一级。
现代文：国家下令：百姓凡缴纳粮食一千石的，即授给一级爵位。
English: The state decreed that any commoner who contributed one thousand koku of grain would be awarded a first-class peerage.

古文：魏安釐王薨，子景湣王立。
现代文：魏国国君安王去世，子魏增继位，是为景王。秦王政五年
English: King An of Wei died and was succeeded by his son Wei Zeng, who was King Jing. The reign of Qin lasted five years.

古文：始皇帝上五年蒙骜伐魏，取酸枣、燕、虚、长平、雍丘、山阳等二十城；初置东郡。
现代文：秦将蒙骜讨伐魏国，攻克酸枣、燕、虚、长平、雍丘、山阳等三十城；始设置东郡。
English: Qin sent Mengqi to fight against Wei, conquering 30 cities, including Zhujiazui, Yan, Qiu, Changping, Yongqiu and Sanyang; Dong County was initially set up.

古文：初，剧辛在赵与庞煖善，已而仕燕。
现代文：当初，剧辛在赵国时与庞煖关系极好。
English: At the beginning, when she was in Zhao, she had a very good relationship with Pang Jun.

古文：燕王见赵数困于秦，廉颇去而庞煖为将，欲因其敝而攻之，问于剧辛，对曰： 庞煖易与耳。 
现代文：不久，他到燕国做了官。燕王见到赵国的军队多次被秦军所困，廉颇离去而由庞煖担任赵军统帅，便想乘赵衰败之机进攻它。为此，燕王询问剧辛的意见。剧辛回答道： 庞煖这个人是很容易对付的！ 
English: Soon, he became an official in Yan's country. Yan Wang saw that the army of Zhao was trapped by the Qin army many times, and when Renpo left, Pang Jun took over as the commander of the Zhao army. He wanted to use the opportunity of Zhao's decline to attack it. To this end, Yan Wang asked Pang Xin's opinion. Pang Xin replied: Pang Jun is easy to deal with!

古文：燕王使剧辛将而伐赵。
现代文：燕王便派剧辛率兵攻打赵国。
English: King Yan then sent his troops to attack Zhao.

古文：赵庞煖御之，杀剧辛，取燕师二万。
现代文：赵军统帅庞煖指挥军队抵抗燕军，杀了剧辛，并俘获燕兵二万人。
English: The commander of Zhao's army, Pang Jun, commanded the army to resist Yan's army, killed Yan Xin, and captured 20,000 of Yan's soldiers.

古文：诸侯患秦攻伐无已时。
现代文：各诸侯国为秦国不断地进行侵略兼并而担忧不止。
English: All the vassal states were worried about Qin's continuous aggression and annexation.

古文：始皇帝上六年
现代文：秦王政六年
English: Six Years of the Qin Dynasty

古文：楚、赵、魏、韩、卫合从以伐秦，楚王为从长，春申君用事，取寿陵。
现代文：楚、赵、魏、韩、卫结成南北合纵联盟，共同讨伐秦国。楚国楚考烈王担任纵约长，春申君执掌军务，夺取寿陵，挥师直逼函谷关。
English: Chu, Zhao, Wei, Han, and Wei formed a north-south vertical alliance to jointly fight against Qin. King Chu Koryo of Chu served as the vertical commander, and Chunshen took charge of military affairs, captured Shuling, and waved the division directly to force Hantangguan.

古文：至函谷，秦师出，五国之师皆败走。
现代文：秦军出关迎战，五国的军队都大败而逃。
English: The Qin army went out to meet the war, and the armies of the five countries were defeated and fled.

古文：楚王以咎春申君，春申君以此益疏。
现代文：楚王将联军的失利归罪于春申君，春申君因此渐渐被楚王疏远了。
English: King Chu blamed the defeat of the allied forces on Chunshen, and Chunshen was gradually alienated by King Chu.

古文：观津人硃英谓春申君曰： 人皆以楚为强，君用之而弱。
现代文：观津人朱英对春申君说： 人们都认为楚国本是一个强国，只是因为由您执掌事务才衰弱下去了。
English: Zhu Yinglu, a resident of Guanzin, said to Chunshenjun: People all think that Chu was originally a powerful country, but it only became weak because you were in charge of affairs.

古文：其于英不然。
现代文：但我不这么看。
English: But I don't see it that way.

古文：先君时，秦善楚，二十年而不攻楚，何也？
现代文：先王在世时，秦国与楚国相友善，二十年间从不攻击楚国，这是为什么呢？
English: When the previous king was alive, Qin and Chu were friendly and never attacked Chu for twenty years. Why was that?

古文：秦逾黾厄之塞而攻楚，不便；假道于两周，背韩、魏而攻楚，不可。
现代文：是因为秦国要越过黾要塞来进攻楚国，十分不便；而要借道西周与东周之间，背对着韩国和魏国来征伐楚国，又为有后顾之忧不可行。
English: It was because it was very inconvenient for Qin to attack Chu by crossing the Zou Fortress, and it was not feasible for Qin to invade Chu by taking the road between West Zhou and East Zhou, turning its back on Korea and Wei.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：但是现在不同了。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：魏旦暮亡，不能爱许、鄢陵，魏割以与秦，秦兵去陈百六十里。
现代文：魏国朝不保夕，随时都会被灭亡，根本无力顾及它的属地许、鄢陵，一旦魏国将这两地割让给秦，秦国军队距离楚国的都城陈就不过一百六十里了。
English: The Wei dynasty was precarious and could be destroyed at any time. It was unable to take care of its territories of Xu and Fuling. Once Wei ceded these two lands to Qin, the Qin army was only 160 miles away from the capital city of Chu, Chen.

古文：臣之所观者，见秦、楚之日斗也。 
现代文：我所看到的是，秦楚两国天天陷于相互争斗之中了。 
English: What I see is that the two countries of Qin and Chu are locked in a daily struggle with each other.

古文：楚于是去陈，徙寿春，命曰郢。
现代文：楚国于是将都城由陈迁至寿春，命名为郢。
English: As a result, the state of Chu moved its capital from Chen to Shuchun and named it Tsume.

古文：春申君就封于吴，行相事。
现代文：春申君即去到他的封国吴地，仍行使相国的职权。
English: Even after Chun Shun went to his fief country Wu Di, he still exercised the authority of the neighboring country.

古文：秦拔魏朝歌，及卫濮阳。
现代文：秦军攻陷魏国的朝歌和卫国的都城濮阳。
English: The Qin army's conquest of the morning song of Wei and the capital city of Poyang, the defender of the country.

古文：卫元君率其支属徙居野王，阻其山以保魏之河内。
现代文：卫国卫元君率领他的宗族迁移到河内郡的野王居住，倚仗山势险阻，保有魏国的河内。
English: Emperor Weiguo Weigen led his clan to migrate and live in the wild king of Hanoi County, relying on the mountains and obstacles to keep Hanoi in Wei.

古文：始皇帝上七年伐魏，取汲。
现代文：秦王政七年秦军进攻魏国，夺取了汲。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of King Qin, the Qin army attacked Wei and captured Qum.

古文：夏太后薨。
现代文：秦国夏太后去世。
English: Empress Dowager Xia of Qin passed away.

古文：蒙骜卒。
现代文：秦将蒙骜去世。
English: Qin Shouwen passed away.

古文：始皇帝上八年魏与赵鄴。
现代文：秦王政八年魏国将邺割让给赵国。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of King Qin, the State of Wei ceded the gelding to the State of Zhao.

古文：韩桓惠王薨，子安立。
现代文：韩国国君桓惠王去世，子韩安继位。
English: King Huan Hui of Korea died and was succeeded by his son Han An.

古文：始皇帝上九年伐魏，取垣、浦。
现代文：秦王政九年秦军征伐魏国，攻克垣、蒲两城。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Qin, the Qin army invaded Wei and conquered the two cities of Walled City and Pu.

古文：夏，四月，寒，民有冻死者。
现代文：夏季，四月，天气骤然酷寒，秦国百姓有被冻死的。
English: In the summer, in April, the weather was suddenly very cold, and people in Qin were frozen to death.

古文：王宿雍。
现代文：秦王嬴政住宿在雍城。
English: Qin Wang Yanzheng stayed in Yongcheng.

古文：己酉，王冠，带剑。
现代文：己酉，秦王嬴政举行成年加冠礼，同时佩带宝剑。
English: After being crowned, King Qin held a coronation ceremony and wore a sword.

古文：杨端和伐魏，取衍氏。
现代文：秦国将领杨端和率军进攻魏国，夺取了衍氏。
English: Yang Duanhe, the general of Qin, led an army to attack Wei and captured the Yan clan.

古文：初，王即位，年少，太后时时与文信侯私通。
现代文：当初，秦王嬴政即位时年龄尚幼，太后赵姬时常与文信侯吕不韦私通。
English: At the beginning, when Qin King Yongzheng ascended the throne, he was still young, and Empress Dowager Zhao Ji often had an affair with Wenxin marquis Lü Buwei.

古文：王益壮，文信侯恐事觉，祸及己，乃诈以舍人嫪毐为宦者，进于太后。
现代文：嬴政渐渐长大，吕不韦担心此事败露，给自己招致祸患，便将自己的舍人假充作宦官，进献给太后。
English: Ying Zheng gradually grew up, and Lü Buwei, fearing that the affair would be exposed and bring misfortune to himself, pretended to be a eunuch and presented himself to the empress dowager.

古文：太后幸之，生二子，封毐为长信侯，以太原为毐国，政事皆决于毐；客求为毐舍人者甚众。
现代文：太后非常宠幸，与他生了两个儿子，并封为长信侯，把太原作为国，国家政事都由他来决定。宾客中请求作舍人的人非常之多。
English: The empress dowager was very fortunate to have two sons with him, and he was given the title of Changxin Hou, making Taiyuan a country, and he was responsible for all national affairs. Among the guests, there were many people who requested to be a concubine.

古文：王左右有与毐争言者，告毐实非宦者，王下吏治毐。
现代文：嬴政身边有人曾与发生过争执，因此告发实际并不是阉割过的宦官。嬴政于是下令将交给司法官吏治罪。
English: Some people around Yu Zheng had a dispute with him, so they reported that he was not actually a castrated eunuch. Yu Zheng then ordered that the eunuch be handed over to judicial officials to be punished.

古文：毐惧，矫王御玺发兵，欲攻蕲年宫为乱。
现代文：惊恐异常，便盗用御玺，假托秦王之命调兵遣将，企图攻击嬴政居住的蕲年宫，进行叛乱。
English: Terrified beyond belief, he misappropriated the imperial scepter, dispatched soldiers under the pretext of King Qin's order, and attempted to attack the Palace of the Year of the Dog, where the emperor resided, and carry out a rebellion.

古文：王使相国昌平君、昌文君发卒攻毐，战咸阳，斩首数百；毐败走，获之。
现代文：嬴政派相国昌平君、昌文君发兵讨伐，在咸阳展开大战，斩杀叛军数百人，在兵败逃亡时被秦王的军队抓获。
English: Changpingjun and Changwenjun, the ministers of state of the Yan government, launched a military crusade, launched a great war in Xianyang, killed hundreds of rebels, and were captured by the army of King Qin when they were defeated and fled.

古文：秋，九月，夷毐三族；党与皆车裂灭宗；舍人罪轻者徙蜀，凡四千馀家。
现代文：秋季，九月，嬴政下令诛灭父族、母族、崐妻族三族，并将氏党羽都处以车裂刑，杀灭这些党羽的宗族，舍人中因罪过较轻被放逐到蜀地的共四千多家。
English: In the autumn, in September, Yan Zheng ordered the annihilation of the three clans of the father clan, the mother clan, and the concubine clan, and the clan members were all sentenced to death by chariot. The clan members of these clan members were killed, and a total of more than four thousand people were banished to Shudi for minor offenses.

古文：迁太后于雍萯阳宫，杀其二子。
现代文：同时把太后迁移到雍城的阳宫囚禁起来，杀了她与所生的两个儿子。
English: At the same time, he moved the empress dowager to the Yanggong Palace in Yongcheng and imprisoned her, killing her and her two sons.

古文：下令曰： 敢以太后事谏者，戮而杀之，断其四支，积之阙下！ 
现代文：嬴政还下令说： 有敢于为太后事对我进行规劝的，一律斩首，砍断四肢，堆积在宫阙之下！ 
English: Yan Zheng also ordered: Anyone who dares to advise me on the empress dowager's affairs must be beheaded, have their limbs cut off, and be piled up under the palace gate!

古文：死者二十七人。
现代文：于是，有二十七人为此而死。
English: Twenty-seven people died as a result.

古文：齐客茅焦上谒请谏。
现代文：自齐国来的客卿茅焦通名求见秦王。
English: Maojiao, the guest of honor, who came from the State of Qi, went in search of the Qin King.

古文：王使谓之曰： 若不见夫积阙下者邪？ 
现代文：嬴政遣人告诉他说： 你难道没有看见那些堆积在宫阙之下的尸体吗？ 
English: The magistrate told him, "Don't you see the dead bodies piled up under the palanquin?

古文：对曰： 臣闻天有二十八宿，今死者二十七人，臣之来固欲满其数耳。
现代文：茅焦回答说： 我听说天上有二十八个星宿，现在已经死了二十七个人了，我来原本就是为了凑够那二十八位数的。
English: Mauchio replied, "I heard that there are twenty-eight stars in the sky, and now twenty-seven people have died. I came here to make up for those twenty-eight digits."

古文：臣非畏死者也！ 
现代文：我可不是那种怕死的人！ 
English: I'm not the kind of person who's afraid of death!

古文：使者走入白之。
现代文：使者跑回去向嬴政报告了茅焦的话。
English: The messenger ran back and reported Mao Jiao's words to Yan Zheng.

古文：茅焦邑子同食者，尽负其衣物而逃王。
现代文：与茅焦住在一起的同乡因害怕受牵连，都背负衣物四散逃亡了。
English: For fear of being implicated, all the villagers who lived with Mao Jiao fled with their clothes on their backs.

古文：王大怒曰： 是人也，故来犯吾，趣召镬烹之，是安得积阙下哉！ 
现代文：嬴政闻听使者的回报后怒发冲冠，说： 这个家伙，竟敢故意冒犯我，快取大锅来把他煮杀了，看他还如何为凑满二十八星宿而堆尸在宫阙下！ 
English: After hearing the reply from the envoy, Yan Zhengwen became furious and said: "How dare this fellow deliberately offend me! Quickly take a cauldron and boil him to death, and see how he will pile up the corpses under the palace to make up for the twenty-eight stars!"

古文：王按剑怒而坐，口正沫出。
现代文：嬴政手按宝剑坐在那里，口中唾沫星乱飞，随即令使者召茅焦入见。
English: The emperor sat there with his sword in his hand, spittle flying from his mouth, and immediately sent an envoy to summon Mao Jiao.

古文：使者召之入，茅焦徐行至前，再拜谒起，称曰： 臣闻有生者不讳死，有国者不讳亡。讳死者不可以得生，讳亡者不可以得存。
现代文：茅焦缓缓走上前来，伏地一拜再拜后起身，声言道： 我听说有生命的人不忌讳谈人死，有国家的人不忌讳谈国亡；忌讳死的人不能维持人的生命，忌讳亡的人也不能保证国家的生存。
English: Mao Qiao slowly stepped forward, bowed his head and stood up, saying: I have heard that people who have life are not afraid to talk about death, and people who have a country are not afraid to talk about the death of the country; people who are afraid of death cannot maintain human life, and people who are afraid of death cannot ensure the survival of the country.

古文：死生存亡，圣主所欲急闻也，陛下欲闻之乎？ 
现代文：有关生死存亡的道理，是圣明的君主急于要了解的，陛下想不想听我说一说呢？ 
English: Your Majesty is anxious to know the truth about life and death. Would you like to hear it from me?

古文：王曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：嬴政道： 你要谈的是什么啊？ 
English: Zhuang Wang asked, "What do you mean?

古文：茅焦曰： 陛下有狂悖之行，不自知邪？
现代文：茅焦说： 陛下有狂妄背理的行为，难道自己没有意识到吗？
English: Maojiao said, "Your majesty has behaved arrogantly and treacherously. Didn't you realize it yourself?

古文：车裂假父，囊扑二弟，迁母于雍，残戮谏士，桀、纣之行不至于是矣。
现代文：车裂假父，把两个弟弟装进囊袋中用刑具拷打致死，将母亲迁移到雍囚禁起来，并残杀敢于进行规劝的臣子，即使是夏桀、商纣王的行为也不至于暴虐到这个地步了！
English: Che Che cracked the fake father, put the two brothers into a bag and tortured them to death with torture tools, moved the mother to Yong prison, and killed the courtiers who dared to carry out persuasion, even the behavior of Xia Yu, the merchant king, is not violent to this point!

古文：令天下闻之，尽瓦解，无向秦者，臣窃为陛下危之！
现代文：如今只要天下的人听说了这些暴行，人心便全都涣散瓦解，再也不会有人向往秦国了。我为此私下里替陛下担忧！
English: Nowadays, as soon as people all over the world hear about these atrocities, their hearts all fall apart and disintegrate, and there will no longer be anyone yearning for Qin. I am secretly worried about His Majesty!

古文：臣言已矣！ 
现代文：我的话都说完了！ 
English: I've said all I have to say!

古文：乃解衣伏质。
现代文：于是便解开衣服，伏身在刑具上，等待受刑。
English: So he undid his clothes, lay down on the torture device, and waited to be punished.

古文：王下殿，手自接之曰： 先生起就衣，今愿受事！ 
现代文：嬴政闻言顿悟，匆忙下殿，亲自用手接扶他说： 您请起身穿好衣服，我现在愿意接受您的劝告！ 
English: After listening to the speech, Yan Zheng had an epiphany and hurried down to the palace. He personally took him by the hand and said: "Please get up and get dressed. I am now willing to accept your advice!"

古文：乃爵之上卿。
现代文：随即授给他上卿的爵位。
English: He was immediately given the title of Lord High Admiral.

古文：王自驾，虚左方，往迎太后，归于咸阳，复为母子如初。
现代文：嬴政还亲自驾车，空出左边的尊位，往雍城迎接太后返回都城咸阳，母子关系和好如初。
English: Yan Zheng also personally drove the car, vacated the left seat of honor, went to Yongcheng to meet the empress dowager and returned to the capital Xianyang. The mother-child relationship was as good as ever.

古文：楚考烈王无子，春申君患之，求妇人宜子者甚众，进之，卒无子。
现代文：楚国楚考烈王没有儿子，春申君为此非常忧虑，遍寻许多能生育的妇女进献给楚王，但是她们最终仍没有为楚王生下儿子。
English: King Chukorei of the State of Chu did not have a son, and Chunshen was very worried about this. He searched for many women who could give birth and offered them to King Chu, but in the end they still did not give birth to a son for King Chu.

古文：赵人李园持其妹欲进诸楚王，闻其不宜子，恐久无宠，乃求为春申君舍人。
现代文：赵国人李园带来他的妹妹想要献给楚王，可听说楚王不能养儿子，便担心时间久了，自己的妹妹会失去楚王的宠幸。于是他请求服侍春申君，做春申君的舍人。
English: Li Yuan, a native of Zhao, brought his sister to offer to King Chu, but when he heard that King Chu could not have a son, he was worried that it would take a long time for his sister to lose the favor of King Chu. So he asked to serve Prince Chunshen, to be Prince Chunshen's concubine.

古文：已而谒归，故失期而还。
现代文：不久，李园告假回赵国探亲，故意超过期限才返归春申君处。
English: Soon after, Li Yuan took a leave of absence to visit relatives in Zhao Guo and deliberately overstayed the deadline before returning to Chunshen.

古文：春申君问之，李园曰： 齐王使人求臣之妹，与其使者饮，故失期。 
现代文：春申君问他超假的原因，他说： 齐国国君派人求娶我的妹妹，我陪那位使者饮酒，所以耽误了归期。 
English: Chun Shenjun asked him the reason for the super-fake. He said, "Qi Guo Guo sent someone to ask for my sister's hand in marriage. I drank alcohol with the messenger, so I missed my return time.

古文：春申君曰： 聘入乎？ 
现代文：春申君说： 已经下聘礼订婚了吗？ 
English: Chunshen said: Have you sent a betrothal gift?

古文：曰： 未也。 
现代文：李园答道： 还没有。 
English: The old man said, "That's not enough!

古文：春申君遂纳之。
现代文：于是春申君便将李园的妹妹纳为妾。
English: As a result, Chunshen took Li Yuan's younger sister as a concubine.

古文：既而有娠，李园使其妹说春申君曰： 楚王贵幸君，虽兄弟不如也。
现代文：没过多久，李园的妹妹怀了身孕。李园即让她去劝说春申君道： 楚王非常宠信您，即便是他的亲兄弟也比不上。
English: Soon after, Li Yuan's sister became pregnant. Li Yuan sent her to persuade Chunshen, saying, "King Chu trusts you very much. Even his own brother is no match."

古文：今君相楚二十馀年而王无子，即百岁后将更立兄弟，彼亦各贵其故所亲，君又安得常保此宠乎！
现代文：如今您任楚国的相国二十多年了，可楚王依旧没有得到儿子。如此，待他去世后将改立他的兄弟为国君，而新国君也必定要使他的旧亲信分别得到显贵，这样的话，您又如何能永久地保持住您的荣宠地位呀！
English: Now, you have been the king of Chu for more than twenty years, but King Chu still has not had a son. So, after his death, he will replace his brother as the sovereign, and the new sovereign will certainly make his old cronies distinguished. In this case, how can you permanently maintain your position of honor and favor?

古文：非徒然也，君贵，用事久，多失礼于王之兄弟，兄弟立，祸且及身矣。
现代文：非但如此，而且由于您受楚王宠幸，长期执掌国事，肯定对楚王的兄弟有过许多失礼的地方，一旦他们登上王位，您就要大祸临头了。
English: Not only that, but since you have been favored by King Chu and have been in charge of state affairs for a long time, you must have been rude to King Chu's brothers. Once they ascend to the throne, you will be in big trouble.

古文：今妾有娠而人莫知，妾幸君未久，诚以君之重，进妾于王，王必幸之。
现代文：现在我身怀有孕，可还无人知晓，何况我获您宠爱时间不长，倘若果真以您的尊贵身分，将我进献给楚王，一定会得到他的宠幸。
English: Now I am pregnant, but no one knows it yet. Besides, I have not been favored by you for a long time. If you really dedicate me to King Chu in your distinguished capacity, you will surely get his favor.

古文：妾赖天而有男，则是君之子为王也。
现代文：如果我依赖上天的恩赐生下一个男孩儿，那么就是您的儿子要继位为王了。
English: If, by the grace of God, I have a boy, it will be your son who will succeed to the throne.

古文：楚国尽可得，孰与身临不测之祸哉！ 
现代文：这样一来，楚国便全都是您的了，这与在新君主统治下身临难以预料的灾祸相比，哪一个结果更好呢？ 
English: As a result, all of Chu will be yours. Which outcome is better than facing an unpredictable disaster under the rule of a new monarch?

古文：春申君大然之。乃出李园妹，谨舍而言诸楚王。
现代文：春申君大为赞同，便将李园的妹妹送出府，安置在馆舍中居中，派人谨慎地守护，然后向楚王推荐她。
English: Chun Shun greatly agreed, so he sent Li Yuan's sister out of the palace, placed her in the middle of the palace, sent someone to guard her carefully, and then recommended her to King Chu.

古文：王召入，幸之，遂生男，立为太子。
现代文：楚王即把她召纳入宫中，并且很宠爱她。不久，李园的妹妹果然生了个儿子，被立为太子。
English: King Chu immediately invited her into the palace and loved her very much. Soon, Li Yuan's younger sister gave birth to a son and was made crown prince.

古文：李园妹为王后，李园亦贵用事，而恐春申君泄其语，阴养死士，欲杀春申君以灭口；国人颇有知之者。
现代文：李园的妹妹成为王后后，李园也随着地位显赫，当权主事。但是他又深恐春申君将他曾指使妹妹说过的话泄漏出去，便暗中收养敢死的武士，准备让他们去杀春申君以灭口。居住在楚国都城中的人有不少知道这件事情的。
English: Li Yuan's younger sister became the queen, and Li Yuan also rose to power with his prominent position. However, he was deeply afraid that Chun Shen Jun would leak what he had instructed his younger sister to say, so he secretly adopted a death-defying samurai and prepared to have them kill Chun Shen Jun to silence him. Many people living in the capital city of Chu know about this.

古文：楚王病，硃英谓春申君曰： 世有无望之福，亦有无望之祸。
现代文：不久，楚王卧病不起。朱英对春申君说： 世上有未预料到而来的洪福，也有未预料到而来的灾祸。
English: Zhu Ying said to Chunshenjun: There are unforeseen blessings in the world, and there are also unforeseen disasters.

古文：今君处无望之世，事无望之主，安可以无无望之人乎！ 春申君曰： 何谓无望之福？ 
现代文：现在您处于生死变化不定的社会之中，为喜怒无常的君王效力，身边怎么能没有您尚未预料却忽然来到的帮手呢？ 春申君说： 什么叫作 未预料到而来的洪福 呢？ 
English: Now that you are in a society where life and death are uncertain, serving a temperamental king, how can you not have a helper around you who you did not expect but suddenly came? Chunshenjun said: What is called unexpected Hongfu?

古文：曰： 君相楚二十馀年矣，虽名相国，其实王也。
现代文：朱英答道： 您担任楚国的相国二十多年了，虽然名义上是相国，实际上却已相当于国君了。
English: Zhu Ying replied: You have served as a relative of the State of Chu for more than twenty years. Although you are nominally a relative of the State, in fact, you are equivalent to a sovereign.

古文：王今病，旦暮薨，薨而君相幼主，因而当国，王长而反政，不即遂南面称孤，此所谓无望之福也。 
现代文：如今楚王病重，随时都会死去，一旦病故，您即可辅助幼主，从而掌握国家大权，待幼主成年后再还政给他，或者干脆就面南而坐，自称为王。这便是所谓的 未预料到而来的洪福 了 。
English: Now King Chu is seriously ill and will die at any time. Once he passes away, you can assist the young master, thereby seizing the power of the state. When the young master comes of age, you can return the power to him, or simply sit facing south and call yourself king. This is the so-called unexpected Hongfu.

古文： 何谓无望之祸？ 
现代文：春申君又问： 那么什么是 未预料到而来的灾祸 呢？ 
English: Chunshen also asked: So what is an unexpected disaster?

古文：曰： 李园不治国而君之仇也，不为兵而养死士之日久矣。
现代文：朱英说： 李园不治理国事，却是您的仇敌；不管理军务统率军队，却长期以来豢养一些勇士。
English: Zhu Ying said: Li Yuan does not manage state affairs, but he is your enemy; he does not manage military affairs and lead the army, but he has been raising some warriors for a long time.

古文：王薨，李园必先入，据权而杀君以灭口，此所谓无望之祸也。 
现代文：如此，楚王一去世，李园必定抢先入宫廷夺权，杀您灭口。这即是所谓的 未预料到而来的灾祸。  
English: Thus, as soon as King Chu died, Li Yuan must have rushed into the palace to seize power and kill you. This is the so-called unexpected disaster.

古文： 何谓无望之人？ 曰： 君置臣郎中，王薨，李园先入，臣为君杀之，此所谓无望之人也。 
现代文：春申君再问道： 这样说来， 尚未预料却忽然来到的帮手 又是怎么回事呢？ 朱英回答： 您将我安置在郎中的职位上，待楚王去世，李园抢先入宫时，我替您杀了他除掉后患。这就是所谓的 尚未预料却忽然来到的帮手 。 
English: Chunshen asked again, "So, what's with the unexpected helper?" Zhu Ying replied, "You put me in the position of a brother-in-law. When King Chu died and Li Yuan entered the palace ahead of him, I killed him for you to get rid of the aftermath. This is the so-called unexpected helper."

古文：春申君曰： 足下置之。
现代文：春申君说： 您就不必过问这些事了。
English: Chunshen said: You don't have to ask about these things.

古文：李园，弱人也，仆又善之。且何至此！ 
现代文：李园是个软弱无能的人，况且我又对他很好，哪至于发展到这个地步呀！ 
English: Li Yuan is a weak and incompetent person, and besides, I am very kind to him, how could he have developed to this point!

古文：硃英知言不用，惧而亡去。
现代文：朱英明白自己的建议不会被春申君采纳了，便因担心发生变故累及自己而逃亡他乡。
English: Zhu Ying knew that his suggestion would not be accepted by Chun Shun, so he fled his hometown, fearing that something would happen to him.

古文：后十七日，楚王薨，李园果先入，伏死士于棘门之内。
现代文：十七天后，楚王去世，李园果然抢先进宫，把他豢养的勇士坦伏在棘门里面。
English: Seventeen days later, King Chu passed away, and Li Yuan successfully captured the front palace, and the warriors he had raised lay prostrate inside the ridge of thorns.

古文：春申君入，死士侠刺之，投其首于棘门之外；于是使吏尽捕诛春申君之家。
现代文：春申君一进来，勇士们即两面夹击，将他刺杀，并砍下他的头颅扔到宫门外面。接着，李园又派出官吏把春申君的家人全部捕获杀了。
English: As soon as Chunshenjun came in, the warriors clashed on both sides, stabbed him to death, and cut off his head and threw it outside the palace gate. Next, Li Yuan sent officials to capture and kill all of Chunshenjun's family members.

古文：太子立，是为幽王。
现代文：随后，太子芈悍继位，是为幽王。
English: Subsequently, the crown prince, Zou Han, succeeded to the throne. This was the beginning of Youwang.

古文：扬子《法言》曰：或问： 信陵、平原、孟尝、春申益乎？ 
现代文：扬雄《法言》曰： 有人问，信陵君、平原君、孟尝君、春申君是否有益于国家呢？ 
English: Yang Xiong's "Dharma Saying" says: Some people ask, "Are Xinying Jun, Pingyuan Jun, Meng Yu Jun, and Chunshen Jun beneficial to the country?"

古文：曰： 上失其政，奸臣窃国命，何其益乎！ 
现代文：回答的是： 国君不理政事，奸臣窃取了国家权力，他们对国家有什么益处啊！ 
English: The answer was: The sovereign does not manage the affairs of state, and treacherous vassals have stolen state power. What good are they to the country?

古文：王以文信侯奉先王功大，不忍诛。
现代文：嬴政因吕不韦事奉先王功劳卓著，不忍心将他杀死。
English: Because of Lü Buwei's outstanding services to the previous king, He Zheng could not bear to kill him.

古文：始皇帝上十年
现代文：秦王政十年
English: The 10th year of the Qin Dynasty

古文：冬，十月，文信侯免相，出就国。
现代文：冬季，十月，吕不韦被罢免相国之职，离开京城，到他的封国河南洛阳。
English: In the winter, in October, Lü Buwei was removed from the post of foreign minister and left Beijing for Luoyang, Henan Province, his fiefdom.

古文：宗室大臣议曰： 诸侯人来仕者，皆为其主游间耳，请一切逐之。 
现代文：秦国的王族大臣们建议说： 各诸侯国到秦国来作官谋职的人，大都是为自己的君主来游说，以挑拨离间我们君臣上下之间的关系，因此，请大王将他们一律驱逐出境。 
English: The ministers of the royal family of Qin suggested: Most of the people from various states who come to Qin to seek official positions are lobbying for their own monarchs, in order to sow discord between the relationship between our monarchs and their subjects. Therefore, I ask the great king to expel them all.

古文：于是大索，逐客。
现代文：于是，秦王下令全国实行大搜索，驱逐外来人。
English: As a result, King Qin ordered a nationwide search to expel foreigners.

古文：客卿楚人李斯亦在逐中，行，且上书曰： 昔穆公求士，西取由余于戎，东得百里奚于宛，迎蹇叔于宋，求丕豹、公孙支于晋，并国二十，遂霸西戎。
现代文：客卿楚国人李斯也在被逐之列。他在临离开前还上书秦王说： 从前穆公招纳贤才，由西部戎地选得由余，东方宛城物色到百里奚，在宋国迎取了蹇叔，晋国寻求到丕豹和公孙支。如此，秦国得以兼并二十多个封国，而称霸西戎。
English: Li Si, a guest of the Emperor of Chu, was also expelled. Before he left, he wrote to the King of Qin, saying: In the past, Mu recruited talents, selected Yu from the Western Military Region, went to the East to search for Bai Lijun, welcomed Uncle Zou in the Song Dynasty, and went to the Jin Dynasty to search for Zibo and Gong Sun Zhi. In this way, Qin was able to annex more than 20 feudal states and dominate the Western Military Region.

古文：孝公用商鞅之法，诸侯亲服，至今治强。
现代文：孝公任用商鞅实行变法，使各国都亲和服从，以至今日天下大治，国势强盛。
English: Xiao Gong appointed the negotiators to change the law, so that all countries were friendly and obedient, so that today the world is great and the country is strong.

古文：惠王用张仪之计，散六国之从，使之事秦。
现代文：惠王采纳张仪的策略，拆散六国的合纵联盟，使它们为秦国效力。
English: Hui Wang adopted Zhang Yi's strategy to break up the six-nation vertical alliance and make them work for Qin.

古文：昭王得范雎，强公室，杜私门。
现代文：昭王得到范雎的辅佐，加强了王室的权力，遏制了贵族家族的势力。
English: King Zhao was assisted by Fan Zang, strengthened the power of the royal family, and curbed the power of aristocratic families.

古文：此四君者，皆以客之功。
现代文：这四位君王都是依靠客卿的作用而建功立业的。
English: These four monarchs all relied on the power of foreign guests.

古文：由此观之，客何负于秦哉！
现代文：如此看来，客卿有什么地方辜负了秦国啊！
English: In this light, where did Hakka fail Qin?

古文：夫色、乐、珠、玉不产于秦而王服御者众，取人则不然，不问可否，不论曲直，非秦者去，为客者逐。
现代文：美色、音乐、宝珠、美玉都不产在秦国，可大王搜集来使用、享受的却很多。但对人的取舍偏不是这样，不问可不可用，不论是非曲直，凡非秦国人就一概不用，凡是客卿就一律驱逐。
English: Beauty, music, gems and precious stones are not produced in Qin, but there are many things that the great king can collect to use and enjoy. However, the choice of people is not like this, it can not be used without asking, whether it is right or wrong, all non-Qin people will not use it, and all guests will be expelled.

古文：是所重者在乎色、乐、珠、玉，而所轻者在乎人民也。
现代文：似此便是只看重美色、音乐、宝珠、美玉等，而轻视人才了。
English: To do so is to only value beauty, music, jewels, gems, etc., and to despise talent.

古文：臣闻太山不让土壤，故能成其大；河海不择细流，故能就其深；王者不却众庶，故能明其德。
现代文：我听说泰山不辞让细小的泥土，故能成就其巍峨；河海不择除细流，故能成就其深广；圣贤的君王不抛弃民众，故能明示他的恩德。
English: I have heard that Mount Tai does not refuse to give up small soil, so it can achieve its grandeur; the river sea does not choose to remove the trickle, so it can achieve its depth and breadth; the sage king does not abandon the people, so he can express his grace.

古文：此五帝、三王之所以无敌也。
现代文：这便是五帝三王所以能无敌于天下的原因。
English: This is the reason why the Five Emperors and Three Kings are invincible in the world.

古文：今乃弃黔首以资敌国，却宾客以业诸侯，所谓藉寇兵而赍盗粮者也。 
现代文：现在您抛弃那些非秦国籍的平民百姓，使他们去帮助敌国，辞退那些外来的宾客，令他们去为各诸侯效力，这就是所谓的把武器借给入侵者，把粮秣送给盗匪了。 
English: Now you are abandoning those non-Qin civilians, making them go to help the enemy country, dismissing those foreign guests, and making them go to work for various lords. This is called lending weapons to invaders and giving grain to bandits.

古文：王乃召李斯，复其官，除逐客之令。
现代文：嬴政看了李斯上的这封信，即召他入见，要恢复他的官职，并撤销逐客令。
English: Yan Zheng read this letter from Li Si and summoned him to appear before the court to restore his official position and revoke the order to expel him.

古文：李斯至骊邑而还。
现代文：此时李斯已走到了骊邑，接秦王召令后即刻回返。
English: At this time, Li Si had already gone to Puyi and immediately returned after receiving the summons from King Qin.

古文：王卒用李斯之谋，阴遣辩士赍金玉游说诸侯，诸侯名士可下以财者厚遗结之，不肯者利剑刺之，离其君臣之计，然后使良将随其后，数年之中，卒兼天下。
现代文：嬴政最终采用了李斯的计策，暗中派遣能言善辩的人携带金珠宝玉去游说各国国君。对各国有名望、有势力的人，凡是可以用钱财贿赂的，便出重金收买，结交他们，凡是不肯受贿的，便持利剑刺杀他们。挑拨各国国君与臣民之间的关系，离间他们的感情，然后派良将率兵攻打各国。这样，几年之内，秦国终于兼并了天下。
English: Yan Zheng finally adopted Li's strategy, secretly sending eloquent people carrying gold and jewels to lobby the sovereigns of various countries. For famous and powerful people in various countries, if they can be bribed with money and wealth, they will pay a lot of money to bribe and befriend them, and if they refuse to accept bribes, they will stab them with a sharp sword. He provoked the relationship between the sovereigns of various countries and their subjects, alienated their feelings, and then sent Liang Zheng to lead troops to attack various countries. In this way, within a few years, Qin finally annexed the world.

古文：始皇帝上十一年赵人伐燕，取狸阳。
现代文：秦王政十一年赵国人进攻燕国，夺取阳。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Qin, the people of Zhao attacked Yan and captured Yang.

古文：兵未罢，将军王翦、桓齮、杨端和伐赵，攻鄴，取九城。
现代文：战事还未结束，秦国的大将王翦、桓、杨端和已率军征伐赵国，攻击邺地，战领了九个城邑。
English: The war was not yet over, and the generals of Qin, Wang Xi, Huan, and Yang Duan, led their armies to conquer Zhao, attack Shantian, and lead nine cities and towns.

古文：王翦攻阏与、轑阳，桓齮取鄴、安阳。
现代文：其中王翦领兵攻打阏与、阳，桓率军夺取了邺、安阳。
English: Among them, Wang Qian led the troops to attack Shiyang and Yang, and the troops led by Huan captured Shiyang and Anyang.

古文：赵悼襄王薨，子幽缪王迁立。
现代文：赵国国君悼襄王去世，子赵迁继位，是为幽缪王。
English: Zhao Guo Guojun mourned the death of King Xiang, and his son Zhao Qian succeeded to the throne, and became the King of Youmu.

古文：其母，倡也，嬖于悼襄王，悼襄王废嫡子嘉而立之。
现代文：赵迁的母亲原是妓女，深得悼襄王的宠幸。为此，悼襄王废掉了正妻所生的长子赵嘉，将赵迁立为太子。
English: Zhao Qian's mother was originally a prostitute, and was deeply favored by King Miao of Xiang. For this reason, King Miao of Xiang dethroned his eldest son Zhao Jia, who was born to his legal wife, and elevated Zhao Qian to the position of crown prince.

古文：迁素以无行闻于国。
现代文：而赵迁向来以品行不端闻名全国。
English: Zhao Qian, on the other hand, has always been known throughout the country for his misconduct.

古文：文信侯就国岁馀，诸侯宾客使者相望于道，请之。
现代文：秦国文信侯吕不韦返回封国一年多了，在这期间，各诸侯国的宾客、使者纷纷前往邀请他，车马络绎不绝，在道上前后相望。
English: It has been more than a year since Lü Buwei, the prince of Qin, returned to his fief. During this time, guests and emissaries from various states have come to invite him, and there has been an endless stream of cars and horses, looking back and forth on the road.

古文：王恐其为变，乃赐文信侯书曰： 君何功于秦，封君河南，食十万户？
现代文：嬴政为此担心吕不韦会生出什么变故，便写信给他说： 您为秦国立下了什么功劳呢？秦国封您在河南，享用十万户封地的收入？
English: For this reason, Yanzheng was worried that Lü Buwei would produce some kind of change, so he wrote to him saying: What merit did you do for the Qin State? Did the Qin State seal you in Henan and enjoy the income of one hundred thousand fiefs?

古文：何亲于秦，号称仲父？
现代文：您与秦国有什么亲近关系？而要称您为 仲父 ？
English: What close relationship do you have with the State of Qin, and why do you want to be called a matchmaker?

古文：其与家属徙处蜀！ 
现代文：您还是携家属迁往蜀地居住吧！ 
English: You and your family have all moved to live in Shu!

古文：文信侯自知稍侵，恐诛。
现代文：吕不韦自知在渐渐地受到侵害逼迫，很惧怕被杀掉。
English: Lü Buwei knows that he is gradually being persecuted, and he is very afraid of being killed.

古文：始皇帝上十二年
现代文：秦王政十二年
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Qin

古文：文信侯饮酖死，窃葬。
现代文：秦国的吕不韦饮毒酒自杀身亡。
English: Lu Buwei of Qin State committed suicide by drinking poisoned wine.

古文：其舍人临者，皆逐迁之。
现代文：他的家人暗地里将他埋葬了。
English: His family secretly buried him.

古文：且曰： 自今以来，操国事不道如嫪毐、不韦者，籍其门，视此！ 扬子《法言》曰：或问： 吕不韦其智矣乎？
现代文：嬴政下令，吕不韦的舍人凡参加了哭吊的，一律驱逐、迁徙出境；并说： 从今以后崐，操持国家政事的人凡像、吕不韦一样乱无道的，将其家族的所有财产没收入官，照此办理！ 扬雄《法言》曰：有人问： 吕不韦他聪明吗？
English: Yan Zheng ordered that all of Lü Buwei's subordinates who took part in the crying and hanging should be expelled and migrated out of the country; and said: From now on, all those who conduct national politics who are as chaotic as Lü Buwei, and have not brought all of their family's property to the official, should do so! Yang Xiong's "Dictionary of the Law" says: Some people ask: Is Lü Buwei smart?

古文：以人易货。 
现代文：拿人做货物，进行交易。 
English: People are treated as commodities and traded.

古文：曰： 谁谓不韦智者欤？
现代文：回答说： 谁说吕不韦是聪明人啊！
English: He replied, "Who says Lü Buwei is a wise man?

古文：以国易宗。
现代文：用封国换取了宗族的灭亡。
English: They exchanged the fiefdom for the demise of their clan.

古文：吕不韦之盗，穿窬之雄乎！
现代文：吕不韦这个偷东西的人是穿墙行窃的奸雄啊！
English: Lu Buwei, the thief, is a villain who steals through walls!

古文：穿窬也者，吾见担石矣，未见雒阳也。 
现代文：穿墙行窃的，我见过担负斗石之量，没见过窃取洛阳的。 
English: I've seen those who steal through walls carry loads of stones, but I've never seen anyone steal from Luoyang.

古文：自六月不雨，至于八月。
现代文：秦国自六月到八月，一直不降雨。
English: There is no rainfall in Qin from June to August.

古文：发四郡兵助魏伐楚。
现代文：秦国调动四个郡的兵力，援助魏国进攻楚国。
English: Qin mobilized troops from four counties to help Wei attack Chu.

古文：始皇帝上十三年
现代文：秦王政十三年
English: The Thirteenth Year of the Qin Dynasty

古文：桓齮伐赵，败赵将扈輙于平阳，斩首十万，杀扈輙。
现代文：秦将桓率军征伐赵国，在平阳击败赵将扈辄的军队，斩杀十万人，并杀了扈辄。
English: Qin Shogun Huan led his army to conquer Zhao Province and defeated Zhao Shogun's army in Pingyang, slaughtering 100,000 people and killing Zhao.

古文：赵王以李牧为大将军，复战于宜安、肥下，秦师败绩，桓齮奔还。
现代文：赵国国君任命李牧为大将军，领兵在宜安、肥下与秦军再战，秦师大败，桓逃奔回秦国。
English: Zhao Guo Guojun appointed Li Mu as a great general, and led the army to rematch the Qin army in Yian and Heshan. The Qin army was defeated, and Huan fled back to Qin.

古文：赵封李牧为武安君。
现代文：赵王因此封李牧为武安君。
English: King Zhao therefore named Li Mu as Wu Anjun.

古文：始皇帝上十四年
现代文：秦王政十四年
English: The 14th year of the reign of Qin

古文：桓齮伐赵，取宜安、平阳、武城。
现代文：秦将桓进攻赵国，夺取了宜安、平阳、武城。
English: Qin General Huan attacked Zhao Province and captured Yian, Pingyang and Wucheng.

古文：韩王纳地效玺，请为籓臣，使韩非来聘。
现代文：韩国国君韩安向秦国割让土地，并献出国君的大印，请求作为秦国的附庸，派遣韩非为使节往秦国拜谒问安。
English: Han An, the sovereign of Korea, ceded land to Qin, presented the great seal of the sovereign, and requested to be a vassal of Qin and to send Han Fei as an envoy to Qin to pay homage.

古文：韩非者，韩之诸公子也，善刑名法术之学，见韩之削弱，数以书干韩王，王不能用。
现代文：韩非是韩国的公子之一，精通刑名法术的学说。他看到韩国国力日益削弱，多次写信给韩王求取录用，但总得不到韩王的任用。
English: Han Fei was one of the noble sons of Korea, and was well versed in the theory of criminal magic. He saw that Korea's national strength was weakening day by day, and wrote to King Han several times to ask for an appointment, but he never received an appointment from King Han.

古文：于是韩非疾治国不务求人任贤，反举浮淫之蠹而加之功实之上，宽则宠名誉之人，急则用介胄之士，所养非所用，所用非所养。
现代文：于是，韩非深恶韩国治国不致力于访求人才，选任贤能，反而推崇虚浮、乱无能的蠹虫之辈，把他们安置在与实际功劳不相称的高位上；国势宽松时骄纵宠爱那些徒有虚名的学者，国势紧急时就征用那些披甲戴盔的武士；所培养的人不是所能任用的人，所能任用的人却又不是所培养的人。
English: As a result, Han Fei deeply resented the fact that the South Korean government was not committed to seeking talents and appointing capable people, but instead promoted vain, chaotic and incompetent maggots and placed them in high positions that were not commensurate with their actual merits; when the national situation was loose, they arrogantly favored those scholars with fictitious names, and when the national situation was urgent, they requisitioned those armored and helmeted warriors; the people they trained were not the people they could appoint, and the people they could appoint were not the people they trained.

古文：悲廉直不容于邪枉之臣，观往者得失之变，作《孤愤》、《五蠹》、《内、外储》、《说林》、《说难》五十六篇，十馀万言。
现代文：为廉洁正直的人遭受奸邪不正的权臣的排斥而悲伤。他考察了以往的得失变化，撰写了《孤愤》、《五蠹》、《内储》、《外储》、《说林》、《说难》等五十六篇文章，约十多万字。
English: He was saddened by the fact that honest and upright people were ostracized by treacherous and dishonest dignitaries. He examined the changes in gains and losses in the past, and wrote fifty-six articles, about one hundred thousand words, including "Lonely Anger," "Five Sins," "Internal Reserves," "External Reserves," "Talking Forest" and "Difficult to Talk."

古文：王闻其贤，欲见之。
现代文：秦王嬴政听说韩非是个德才兼备的人，便想约见他。
English: Qin Wang Yanzheng heard that Han Fei was a man of both virtue and talent, so he wanted to make an appointment with him.

古文：非为韩使于秦，因上书说王曰： 今秦地方数千里，师名百万，号令赏罚，天下不如。
现代文：韩非正好作为韩国的使者来到秦国，就趁机写信呈给嬴政，劝说道： 现今秦国的疆域方圆数千里，军队号称百万，号令森严，赏罚公平，天下没有一个国家能比得上。
English: Han Fei happened to come to Qin as an envoy of South Korea, and took the opportunity to write a letter to Quanzheng, saying: The territory of Qin is thousands of miles in circumference, the army is said to be one million, the orders are strict, the rewards and punishments are fair, and no country in the world can match it.

古文：臣昧死愿望见大王，言所以破天下从之计。
现代文：而我鲁莽地冒死渴求见您一面，是想说一说破坏各国合纵联盟的计略。
English: And I have the temerity to be dying to see you, to tell you about a plot to destroy the union of nations.

古文：大王诚听臣说，一举而天下之从不破，赵不举，韩不亡，荆、魏不臣，齐、燕不亲，霸王之名不成，四邻诸侯不朝，大王斩臣以徇国，以戒为王谋不忠者也。 
现代文：您若真能听从我的主张，那么，您如果不能一举拆散天下的合纵联盟，战领赵国，灭亡韩国，使楚国、魏国臣服，齐国、燕国归顺，不能令秦国确立霸主的威名，使四周邻国的国君前来朝拜，就请您把我杀了在全国示众，以此告诫那些为君主出谋划策不忠诚的人。 
English: If you can truly follow my advice, then, if you are unable to break up the world's union of warring states, the warlord Zhao, the destruction of Korea, the submission of Chu and Wei, the submission of Qi and Yan, the establishment of the prestige of the overlord in Qin, and the kings of neighboring countries coming to worship, please kill me in public across the country to warn those who are not loyal to the monarch.

古文：王悦之，未任用。
现代文：嬴政读后，心中颇为喜悦，但一时还没有任用他。
English: After reading Yan Zheng, he was quite pleased in his heart, but he had not been appointed for a while.

古文：李斯嫉之，曰： 韩非，韩之诸公子也。今欲并诸侯，非终为韩不为秦，此人情也。
现代文：李斯很崐忌妒韩非，便对嬴政说： 韩非是韩国的一个公子，如今您想吞并各国，韩非最终还是要为韩国利益着想，而不会为秦国尽心效力的，这也是人之常情。
English: Li Si was very jealous of Han Fei, so he said to Yu Zheng: Han Fei is a noble son of South Korea, now you want to annex countries, Han Fei will eventually think about the interests of South Korea, but will not work hard for Qin, which is also human nature.

古文：今王不用，又留而归之，此自遗患也。
现代文：现在您不用他，而让他在秦国长期逗留后再放他回去，这不啻是自留后患啊。
English: Now you don't need him, but let him stay in Qin for a long time and then let him go back, which is a self-imposed problem.

古文：不如以法诛之。 
现代文：还不如依法将他除掉算了。 
English: Might as well get rid of him according to the law.

古文：王以为然，下吏治非。
现代文：秦王政认为李斯说得有理，便把韩非交司法官吏治罪。
English: Qin Wangzheng thought that Li was right, so he punished the judicial officials who had diplomatic relations with Korea and Africa.

古文：李斯使人遗非药，令早自杀。
现代文：李斯又派人送毒药给韩非，让他及早自杀。
English: Li Si also sent someone to deliver poison to Han Fei, so that he could commit suicide prematurely.

古文：韩非欲自陈，不得见。
现代文：韩非试图亲自向秦王嬴政陈述冤情，但却无法见到秦王。
English: Han Fei wanted to face Qin Wang to explain the rights and wrongs, but he could not see Qin Wang.

古文：王后悔，使赦之，非已死矣。
现代文：不久，秦王政有些后悔，就派人去赦免韩非，可是韩非已经死了。
English: Soon, Qin Wang Zheng had some regrets and sent someone to pardon Han Fei, but Han Fei was already dead.

古文：扬子《法言》曰：或问： 韩非作《说难》之书而卒死乎说难，敢问何反也？ 
现代文：扬雄《法言》曰：有人问： 韩非著《说难》篇议论游说之难，而他自己最终竟又死于 说难 ，那么我冒昧地请问，是什么原因使他的行动与言论相违背呢？ 
English: Yang Xiong's "Dharma Sayings" says: Some people ask: Han Fei wrote "Difficult to Say" to discuss the difficulty of lobbying, and he himself eventually died of difficulty in saying, so I venture to ask, what is the reason for his actions to contradict his words?

古文：曰： 《说难》盖其所以死乎！ 
现代文：回答是： 游说之难就是他致死的原因啊！ 
English: The answer is: The difficulty of lobbying is the reason for his death!

古文：曰： 何也？ 
现代文：那人问： 这是为什么？ 
English: Yan Wang said: Why?

古文： 君子以礼动，以义止，合则进，否则退，确乎不忧其不合也。
现代文：答道： 君子依照礼制行动，按照道义停止，所鼓吹的学说合乎礼义就前进，不合乎礼义就后退。
English: Answer: A gentleman acts in accordance with the etiquette and stops in accordance with morality. If the preached doctrine is in accordance with etiquette, he advances, and if it is not in accordance with etiquette, he retreats.

古文：夫说人而忧其不合，则亦无所不至矣。 
现代文：如此根本不用去担心自己的主张不合乎别人的意志。去劝说别人而又顾虑自己的说词不合别人的心意，那么也就会各种手段无所不用了。 
English: In this way, you don't have to worry about whether your opinion is in line with the will of others. If you try to persuade others while being concerned that your words are not in line with the will of others, then all means will be used.

古文：或曰： 非忧说之不合，非邪？ 
现代文：有人问： 韩非正是担忧自己的主张与对方的意志不相吻合，不是吗？ 
English: Some people asked: Isn't it true that South Korea and Africa are worried that their own position does not coincide with the will of the other side?

古文：曰： 说不由道，忧也。
现代文：答道： 游说他人却不遵照礼义准则，这是值得忧虑的。
English: A: It's worrisome when lobbyists don't follow proper etiquette.

古文：由道而不合，非忧也。 
现代文：而如果遵循了礼义准则，只是主张与他人的心意不合，便不必担忧了。 
English: However, if you follow the rules of etiquette and just disagree with others, you don't have to worry.

古文：臣光曰：臣闻君子亲其亲以及人之亲，爱其国以及人之国，是以功大名美而享有百福也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：我听说君子由亲近自己的亲人而至亲近别人的亲人，由热爱自己的国家而至热爱别人的国家，因此才能功勋卓著，名声美好，从而享有百福。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: I heard that a gentleman goes from being close to his own relatives to being close to other people's relatives, from loving his own country to loving other people's countries, so that he can have outstanding achievements and a good reputation, and thus enjoy a hundred blessings.

古文：今非为秦画谋，而首欲覆其宗国，以售其言，罪固不容于死矣，乌足愍哉！
现代文：如今韩非为秦国出谋献策，首先就是要以灭亡他的祖国来证实他的主张，犯下此类罪过，本来就是死有余辜的，哪里还值得怜悯啊！
English: Now, Han Fei is devising strategies for Qin. First of all, he wants to use the destruction of his motherland to prove his point. Committing such a crime is inherently blameworthy, and deserves no mercy!

古文：始皇帝上十五年
现代文：秦王政十五年
English: The 15th Year of the Qin Dynasty

古文：王大兴师伐赵，一军抵鄴，一军抵太原，取狼孟、番吾；遇李牧而还。
现代文：秦王嬴政出动大军进攻赵国，一路军队抵达邺地，一路军队抵达太原，攻克了狼孟、番吾，因遇到李牧统领的赵军而撤回。
English: Qin King Yongzheng dispatched a large army to attack Zhao. The army reached Shantian all the way, and the army reached Taiyuan all the way, defeated Wolf Meng and Fangwu, and withdrew because of encountering the Zhao army led by Li Mu.

古文：初，燕太子丹尝质于赵，与王善。
现代文：当初，燕国太子姬丹曾在赵国作人质，与生在赵国的秦王嬴政相友善。
English: At the beginning, Hidan, the prince of Yan, had been a hostage in Zhao, and was friendly with Qin Wang Xizheng, who was born in Zhao.

古文：王即位，丹为质于秦，王不礼焉。
现代文：待到嬴政即位，姬丹又在秦国充当人质。
English: By the time of the enthronement of the Yongzheng Emperor, Hidan had become a hostage in Qin.

古文：丹怒，亡归。始皇帝上十六年
现代文：但这时秦王嬴政却不以礼相待，太子丹一怒之下逃回了燕国。秦王政十六年
English: However, at this time, Qin Wang Bingzheng did not treat him with courtesy, and Prince Dan fled back to Yan Province in anger.

古文：韩献南阳地。
现代文：韩国割献南阳地给秦国。
English: South Korea allocates the Nanyang region to Qin.

古文：九月，发卒受地于韩。
现代文：九月，秦国派军队前往韩国接收。
English: In September, Qin sent troops to South Korea to take over.

古文：魏人献地。
现代文：魏国人割献土地给秦国。
English: The Wei people allotted land to Qin.

古文：代地震，自乐徐以西，北至平阴；台屋墙垣太半坏，地坼东西百三十步。
现代文：代地发生地震，自乐徐以西，北到平阴，楼台房屋墙垣大半塌毁，土地开裂一条臣缝，东西宽一百三十步。
English: An earthquake occurred on the site, from the west of Le Xu, north to Pingyin, most of the walls of the tower house collapsed, the land cracked a seam, one hundred and thirty paces wide.

古文：始皇帝上十七年
现代文：秦王政十七年
English: In the 17th year of the reign of Qin

古文：内史胜灭韩，虏韩王安，以其地置颖川郡。
现代文：秦国的内史腾率军灭掉了韩国，俘获韩国国君韩安。秦国在韩国的土地上设置了颍川郡。
English: The army led by Inner Historian Teng of Qin State annihilated South Korea and captured the Korean sovereign Hanan. Qin State established Suichuan County on the land of South Korea.

古文：华阳太后薨。
现代文：秦王政的祖母华阳太后去世。
English: Qin Wangzheng's grandmother, Empress Dowager Huayang, passed away.

古文：赵大饥。
现代文：赵国发生大饥荒。
English: A great famine occurred in Zhao Province.

古文：卫元君薨，子角立。
现代文：卫国卫元君去世，子卫角继位。
English: After the death of Emperor Go-Daigo, Emperor Go-Daigo was succeeded by Emperor Go-Daigo's son Emperor Go-Daigo.

古文：始皇帝上十八年
现代文：秦王政十八年
English: 18th year of the reign of King Qin

古文：王翦将上地兵下井陉，端和将河内兵共伐赵。
现代文：秦将王翦统率驻扎在上地的军队攻下井陉，杨端和率领河内驻军一同进攻赵国。
English: Qin general Wang Bingtong led the troops stationed in Shangdi to capture Jingyao, and Yang Duan led the troops stationed in Hanoi to attack Zhao.

古文：赵李牧、司马尚御之。
现代文：赵国的大将李牧、司马尚领兵顽强抵抗秦军。
English: Li Mu and Sima Shang, the generals of Zhao, led the troops to resist the Qin army.

古文：秦人多与赵王嬖臣郭开金，使毁牧及尚，言其欲反。
现代文：于是，秦国派人用重金收买赵王的宠臣郭开，让他在赵王面前诋毁李牧和司马尚，说他们企图兴兵反叛赵国。
English: As a result, the State of Qin sent someone to bribe Guo Kai, the favorite of King Zhao, with a large sum of money, and asked him to slander Li Mu and Sima Shang in front of King Zhao, saying that they were attempting to raise an army to rebel against the State of Zhao.

古文：赵王使赵葱及齐将颜聚代之。
现代文：赵王因此便派赵葱及齐国的将领颜聚取代他们。
English: King Zhao therefore sent Zhao Qian and the general of Qi to replace them.

古文：李牧不受命，赵人捕而杀之；废司马尚。
现代文：李牧不接受命令，赵国人便将他抓住杀了，并撤换了司马尚。
English: Li Mu did not accept the order, so the people of Zhao Province caught and killed him, and replaced Sima Shang.

古文：始皇帝上十九年
现代文：秦王政十九年
English: The 19th year of the reign of King Qin

古文：王翦击赵军，大破之，杀赵葱，颜聚亡，遂克邯郸，虏赵王迁。
现代文：秦将王翦率军攻击赵军，大败赵兵，杀赵葱，颜聚逃亡。秦军于是攻陷邯郸，俘虏了赵国国君赵迁。
English: Qin general Wang Qian led an army to attack Zhao's army, defeated Zhao's soldiers, killed Zhao Qian, and Yan Ju fled. The Qin army then attacked and captured Zhao Qian, the sovereign of Zhao.

古文：王如邯郸，故与母家有仇怨者皆杀之。
现代文：秦王政亲自驾临邯郸，将过去与他母亲家有仇怨的人全部杀了。
English: Qin Wang Zheng personally drove to Linyi and killed all those who had a grudge against his mother's family in the past.

古文：还，从太原、上郡归。
现代文：然后回驾，经太原、上郡返归秦都咸阳。
English: Then drive back and return to Qin capital Xianyang via Taiyuan and Shang County.

古文：太后薨。
现代文：秦王政的母亲太后赵姬去世。
English: Qin Wangzheng's mother, the Empress Dowager Zhao Ji, passed away.

古文：王翦屯中山以临燕。
现代文：秦将王翦领兵驻扎在中山，以监视、威慑燕国。
English: Qin stationed Wang Qian in Zhongshan to monitor and deter Yan.

古文：赵公子嘉帅其宗族百人奔代，自立为代王，赵之亡，大夫稍稍归之，与燕合兵，军上谷。
现代文：赵国的公子赵嘉统率他的宗族数百人逃往代地，自立为代王。赵国灭亡后，在逃的赵国官员们逐渐地投归代王，与燕国合兵一处，共同驻扎在上谷。
English: Zhao Jia Tong, the son of Zhao Guo, led hundreds of members of his clan to flee to the vicarage and established himself as the acting king. After the demise of Zhao Guo, the fleeing officials of Zhao Guo gradually returned to the acting king and joined forces with Yan Guo and were stationed together in Shanggu.

古文：楚幽王薨，国人立其弟郝。
现代文：楚国国君幽王去世，国人立他的弟弟芈郝为王。
English: The king of Chu, Yu Wang, died, and the people of Chu made his brother, Zou, king.

古文：三月，郝庶兄负刍杀之，自立。
现代文：三月，芈郝的庶兄负刍杀死了他，自立为楚王。
English: In March, Yao's brother-in-law, Negi Yao, killed him and declared himself King of Chu.

古文：魏景湣王薨，子假立。
现代文：魏国国君景王去世，子魏假继位。
English: The Emperor of Wei, King Jing, died and was succeeded by his son Wei Fu.

古文：燕太子丹怨王，欲报之，以问其傅鞠武。
现代文：燕国太子姬丹怨恨秦王嬴政，想要实施报复，为此征求太傅鞠武的意见。
English: Hidan, the prince of Yan, resented Qin's usurpation of power and wanted to take revenge, so he sought the advice of Taifu Jiuwu.

古文：鞠武请西约三晋，南连齐、楚，北媾匈奴以图秦。
现代文：鞠武建议太子丹西与韩、赵、魏三晋订约，南与齐、楚联合，北与匈奴媾和，赖此共同图谋秦国。
English: Jiwu suggested that Prince Danxi sign a treaty with Han, Zhao, and Wei Sanjin, that the south unite with Qi and Chu, and that the north make peace with Xiongnu, and that they jointly plot against Qin based on this.

古文：太子曰： 太傅之计，旷日弥久，令人心惽然，恐不能须也。 
现代文：太子丹说： 太傅的计略虽好，但要实现它却是旷日持久的事情，令人内心烦闷、焦躁，恐怕不能再等待了。 
English: Prince Dan said, "Though Taifu's strategy is good, it will take a long time to realize it. It makes me anxious and impatient. I'm afraid I can't wait any longer."

古文：顷之，将军樊於期得罪，亡之燕；太子受而舍之。
现代文：不久，秦国将领樊於期在本国获罪，逃到燕国。太子丹接纳了他，并让他住下。
English: Soon after, the general of Qin was found guilty in his own country and fled to Yan. Prince Dan accepted him and allowed him to live there.

古文：鞠武谏曰： 夫以秦王之暴而积怒于燕，足为寒心，又况闻樊将军之所在乎！
现代文：鞠武规劝太子丹说： 仅凭秦王的暴虐以及对燕国积存的愤怒、怨恨，就足以令人寒心的了，更何况他还将获悉樊将军被收留在燕国了呢！
English: Ju Wu admonished Prince Dan, saying, "Just the tyranny of King Qin and the anger and resentment he has accumulated against Yan's country are chilling enough. What's more, he will also learn that General Zou has been detained in Yan's country!

古文：是谓委肉当饿虎之蹊也。
现代文：这就等于把肉弃置在饿虎往来的小道上。
English: This is tantamount to abandoning the meat on a path frequented by hungry tigers.

古文：愿太子疾遣樊将军入匈奴。 
现代文：希望您尽快将樊将军送到匈奴去！ 
English: I hope you will send General Zou to the Xiongnu as soon as possible!

古文：太子曰： 樊将军穷困于天下，归身于丹，是固丹命卒之时也，愿更虑之！ 
现代文：太子丹说： 樊将军走投无路，归附于我，这本来就是我应当舍命保护他的时候了，请您还是考虑一下其他的办法吧！ 
English: Prince Dan said, "General Zou has no choice but to surrender to me. This is the time when I should protect him with my life. Please consider other options."

古文：鞠武曰： 夫行危以求安，造祸以为福，计浅而怨深，乃连结一人之后交，不顾国家之大害，所谓资怨而助祸矣！ 
现代文：鞠武说： 做危险的事情来求取安全，制造灾祸以祈求幸福，谋略浅薄而致积怨加深，为了结交一个新的朋友，而不顾及国家将遭受大的危害，这即是所谓的积蓄怨仇并助长灾祸了！ 
English: Jiwu said: "Doing dangerous things to seek safety, creating disasters to pray for happiness, making shallow plans to deepen resentment, and making a new friend without considering that the country will suffer great harm, this is called accumulating resentment and contributing to disaster!"

古文：太子不听。
现代文：太子丹对鞠武的劝说置之不理。
English: Prince Dan ignored Marutake's persuasion.

古文：太子闻卫人荆轲之贤，卑辞厚礼而请见之。
现代文：太子丹听说卫国人荆轲很贤能，便携带厚礼，以谦卑的言词求见他。
English: Prince Dan heard that the defender of the country, Jing Xuan, was very capable, so he brought a gift and asked to see him with humble words.

古文：谓轲曰： 今秦已虏韩王，又举兵南伐楚，北临赵。
现代文：太子丹对荆轲说： 现在秦国已俘虏了韩王，又乘势举兵向南进攻楚国，向北威逼赵国。
English: Prince Dan said to Jing Yi, "Now that Qin has captured the King of Han, it has raised an army to attack Chu to the south and Zhao to the north.

古文：赵不能支秦，则祸必至于燕。
现代文：赵国无力对付秦国，那么灾难就要降临到燕国头上了。
English: If Zhao is unable to deal with Qin, then disaster will befall Yan.

古文：燕小弱，数困于兵，何足以当秦！
现代文：燕国既小又弱，多次为战争所拖累，哪里还能够抵挡住秦国的攻势啊！
English: Yan's country is small and weak, and has been dragged down by war many times. How can it resist the offensive of Qin?

古文：诸侯服秦，莫敢合从。
现代文：各诸侯国都屈服秦国，没有哪个国家敢于再合纵抗秦了。
English: All the lords surrendered to Qin, and no one dared to unite with Yan.

古文：丹之私计愚，以为诚得天下之勇士使于秦，劫秦王，使悉反诸侯侵地，若曹沫之与齐桓公，则大善矣；则不可，因而刺杀之，彼大将擅兵于外而内有乱，则君臣相疑，以其间，诸侯得合从，其破秦必矣。
现代文：目前，我个人的计策颇愚鲁，认为如果真能获得一位天下最大无畏的勇士，让他前往秦国胁迫秦王政，迫使他将兼并来的土地归还给各国，就像曹沫当年逼迫齐桓公归还鲁国丧失的领土一样。如此当然是最好的了。假若不行，便乘机刺杀掉秦王嬴政。秦国的大将拥兵在外，而国内发生动乱，于是君臣之间相互猜疑。趁此时机，各国如能够合纵抗秦，就一定可以击败秦军。
English: At present, my personal strategy is rather foolish, I think that if I can really get one of the world's greatest fearless warriors, let him go to Qin to coerce Qin Wang Zheng and force him to return the annexed land to the countries, just as Cao Miao forced Qi Huan to return the lost territory of Lu. This is of course the best. If not, I will take the opportunity to assassinate Qin King Yanzheng. The general of Qin has soldiers outside, but there is turmoil in the country, so the monarchs and ministers are suspicious of each other. Taking advantage of this opportunity, if countries can unite against Qin, they can certainly defeat the

古文：唯荆卿留意焉！ 
现代文：希望您留心这件事情。 
English: I hope you will pay attention to this matter.

古文：荆轲许之。
现代文：荆轲答应了充当刺客赴秦。
English: Jing Yao agreed to go to Qin as an assassin.

古文：于是舍荆卿于上舍，太子日造门下，所以奉养荆轲，无所不至。
现代文：太子丹于是安排荆轲住进上等客舍，并天天亲往舍中探望，凡能够进送、供给荆轲的东西，没有不送到的。
English: Prince Dan then arranged for Jing Tao to live in a first-class guest house, and personally visited the house every day. Anything that could be brought in and supplied to Jing Tao was sent.

古文：及王翦灭赵，太子闻之惧，欲遣荆轲行。
现代文：及至秦将王翦灭亡了赵国，太子丹闻讯后惊恐不已，便想送荆轲出行。
English: When the Qin general Wang Qian died in the Zhao Kingdom, Prince Dan was so terrified after hearing the news that he wanted to send Jing Qian on a trip.

古文：荆轲曰： 今行而无信，则秦未可亲也。
现代文：荆轲说： 我现在前往秦国，但没有令秦人信任我的理由，这就未必能接近秦王。
English: Jing Yao said, "I am going to Qin right now, but there is no reason for the Qin people to trust me, so I may not be able to get close to King Qin.

古文：诚得樊将军首与燕督亢之地图，奉献秦王，秦王必说见臣，臣乃有以报。 
现代文：倘若果真得到樊将军的头颅和燕国督亢的地图奉献给秦王，秦王必定很高兴召见我，那时我才能够刺杀他以回报您。 
English: If I really get the head of General Zou and the map of Yan Guodu to offer to King Qin, King Qin will surely be happy to see me, and then I will be able to assassinate him in return.

古文：太子曰： 樊将军穷困来归丹，丹不忍也！ 
现代文：太子丹说： 樊将军在穷途末路时来投奔我，我实在不忍心杀他啊！ 
English: Prince Dan said, "General Zou came to me when he was at the end of his rope. I really can't bear to kill him!"

古文：荆轲乃私见樊於期曰： 秦之遇将军，可谓深矣，父母宗族皆为戮没！
现代文：荆轲于是私下里会见樊於期说： 秦国对待您，可说是残酷之极，您的父母、宗族都被诛杀或没收为官奴了！
English: Jing Yao then secretly met with Yao Yu and said: "Qin treated you extremely cruelly. Your parents and clan were all killed or confiscated as official slaves!"

古文：今闻购将军首，金千斤，邑万家，将奈何？ 
现代文：现在听说秦国悬赏千斤黄金、万户封地购买您的头颅，您打算怎么办呢？ 
English: Now that I have heard that the State of Qin is offering a reward of a thousand pounds of gold and ten thousand households to buy your head, what are you going to do?

古文：於期太息流涕曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：樊於期叹息地流着泪说： 那么能想出什么办法呢？ 
English: With tears streaming down her face, she said with a sigh, "So what can we come up with?

古文：荆卿曰： 愿得将军之首以献秦王，秦王必喜而见臣，臣左手把其袖，右手揕其胸，则将军之仇报而燕见陵之愧除矣！ 
现代文：荆轲说： 希望能得到您的头颅献给秦王，秦王见此必定欢喜而召见我，那时我左手拉住他的袖子，右手持匕首刺他的胸膛。这样一来，您的大仇得报，燕国遭受欺凌的耻辱也可以消除了！ 
English: Jing Yao said: I hope to get your head to offer to King Qin. Seeing this, King Qin must have been delighted and summoned me. At that time, I grabbed his sleeve with my left hand and stabbed him in the chest with a dagger in my right hand. In this way, your great revenge will be rewarded, and the shame of Yan's country being bullied can also be eliminated!

古文：樊於期曰： 此臣之日夜切齿腐心也！ 
现代文：樊於期说： 这正是我日日夜夜切齿烂心地渴求实现的事情啊！ 
English: Zou Yu said: "This is exactly what I have been longing to achieve day and night!

古文：遂自刎。
现代文：随即拔剑自刎。
English: After saying this, he committed suicide.

古文：太子闻之，奔往伏哭，然已无奈何，遂以函盛其首。
现代文：太子丹闻讯急奔而来，伏尸痛哭，但已经无可奈何了，就用匣子盛装起樊於期的头颅。
English: Prince Dan heard the news and rushed to the spot, weeping bitterly, but he had no choice but to use a box to contain the head of the deceased.

古文：太子豫求天下之利匕首，使工以药焠之，以试人，血濡缕，人无不立死者。
现代文：此前，太子丹已预先求取到天下最锋利的匕首，令工匠把匕首烧红浸入毒药之中，又用这染毒的匕首试刺人，只需渗出一丝血，人就没有不立即倒毙的。
English: Previously, Prince Dan had obtained the world's sharpest dagger in advance and had the craftsman dip the red-hot dagger into the poison, and then use the poisoned dagger to stab the person. If only a trace of blood seeped out, the person would not die immediately.

古文：乃装为遣荆轲，以燕勇士秦舞阳为之副，使入秦。
现代文：于是便准备行装送荆轲出发，又派燕国的勇士秦舞阳当他的助手，二人作为使者前往秦国。
English: As a result, he prepared to pack and send Jing Yao on his way. He also sent the warrior Qin Muyang from Yan as his assistant, and the two of them went to Qin as emissaries.

