古文：城在渒泽之中，无亢山名谷，而有付丘于其四方者，雄城也，不可攻也。
现代文：城池建在小片沼泽地带，虽然城周围没有高山深谷，但是有连绵不断的丘陵环绕于城池四周，这种城池叫做雄城，很难攻克，不要攻打。
English: The castle was built in a small swampy area. Although there are no high mountains or deep valleys around the castle, there are continuous hills surrounding the castle. This kind of castle is called a male castle. It is difficult to conquer, do not attack.

古文：军食流水，也。城前名谷，背亢山，雄城也，不可攻也。
现代文：敌军饮用流水，城池前临深谷，背靠高山，是雄城，不要攻打。
English: The enemy army drinks running water. The city faces a deep valley and is backed by high mountains. It is a strong city. Don't attack it.

古文：城中高外下者，雄城也，不可攻也。
现代文：城内地势高，城外地势低的城池是雄城，不要攻打。
English: The inner city is strong, but the outer city is weak. Don't attack.

古文：城中有付丘者，雄城也，不可攻也。
现代文：城内有连绵不断的丘陵的城池是雄城，不要攻打。
English: A city surrounded by rolling hills is a strong city. Don't attack it.

古文：营军趣舍，毋回名水，伤气弱志，可击也。
现代文：军队驻扎的营地四周，没有大河环绕作为屏障，军队士气受挫，斗志低落，对这样的军队可以攻击。
English: There is no big river around the camp where the army is stationed as a barrier. The army's morale is frustrated and the fighting spirit is low. Such an army can be attacked.

古文：城背名谷，无亢山其左右，虚城也，可击也。
现代文：城池背临深谷，其左右两面又没有高山，这是虚弱的城池，可以攻击。
English: The castle faces a deep valley, and there are no high mountains on its left and right sides. This is a weak castle, which can be attacked.

古文：□尽烧者，死壤也，可击也。
现代文：烧光了的，这是死亡了的地区，可以攻击。
English: Burned out, this is a dead area, ready to be attacked.

古文：军食泛水者，死水也，可击也。
现代文：军队饮用的是不流通的小沟渠的水，是死水，可以攻击。
English: The army drinks water from small ditches that do not circulate. It is stagnant water and can be attacked.

古文：城在发泽中，无名谷付丘者，牝城也，可击也。
现代文：城池建在大片的沼泽地带，又没有深谷和连绵不断的丘陵作屏障，这种城池叫做牝城，容易攻打，可以攻击。
English: The castle was built in a large swampy area, and there was no deep valley or continuous hills to act as a barrier. This kind of castle is called a fortified city. It is easy to attack and can be attacked.

古文：城前亢山，背名谷，前高后下者，牝城也，可击也。
现代文：城池前有高山，背临深谷，前高后低，是牝城，可以攻击。
English: There are high mountains in front of the castle, deep valleys behind, high in front and low behind, it is a castle, it can be attacked.

