古文：苏绰苏绰字令绰，武功人，魏侍中则之九世孙也。
现代文：苏绰字令绰，武功郡人，是三国时魏国侍中苏则的第九代孙。
English: Su Chaozhe, also known as Ling Chaozhe, a native of Wugong County, was the ninth-generation grandson of Su Ze, a courtier of the Wei Dynasty during the Three Kingdoms period.

古文：累世二千石。父协，武功郡守。
现代文：他的祖辈接连几代都当郡太守。父亲苏协，任职武功郡太守。
English: His ancestors successively served as county magistrates for several generations. His father, Su Xie, served as the county magistrate of Wu Gong.

古文：绰少好学，博览群书，尤善筭术。
现代文：苏绰年轻时喜欢学习，博览群书，特别擅长计算的方法。
English: When he was young, Su Qiao liked to study, read a lot of books, and was particularly good at calculating methods.

古文：从兄让为汾州刺史，太祖饯于东都门外。
现代文：他的堂兄苏让出任汾州刺史，太祖在束都门外为他饯行。
English: His cousin, Sujan, served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and his great-grandfather walked for him outside the gates of Sokoto.

古文：临别，谓让曰： 卿家子弟之中，谁可任用者？ 
现代文：临别的时候，太祖对苏让说： 您家子弟之中，谁可以任用? 
English: At the time of parting, the great-grandfather said to Sujan: Which of your children can be appointed?

古文：让因荐绰。
现代文：苏让于是推荐了苏绰。
English: Su Zhan recommended Su Qiao.

古文：太祖乃召为行台郎中。
现代文：太祖就召见苏绰，任命他为行台郎中。
English: The great-grandfather summoned Su Chaozhong and appointed him as a middle-ranking official.

古文：在官岁余，太祖未深知之。
现代文：在任一年多，太祖还没有很赏识他。
English: In office for more than a year, the great-grandfather has not appreciated him very much.

古文：然诸曹疑事，皆询于绰而后定。
现代文：但是各部门的官员有疑难不决的事情，都向苏绰征询然后才作决定。
English: However, when colleagues have difficult questions, they all ask him and then decide.

古文：所行公文，绰又为之条式。
现代文：所发送的公文，苏绰又为他们拟定条款格式。
English: He also prescribes the format for official documents to be issued.

古文：台中咸称其能。
现代文：行台的官员都称赞他的才能。
English: His talent has been praised in the industry.

古文：后太祖与仆射周惠达论事，惠达不能对，请出外议之。
现代文：后来有一次太祖跟仆射周惠达讨论政事，周惠达不能回答，请求让他出外找人商议。
English: Later, there was a time when the great-grandfather was discussing political affairs with his servant Zhou Huida. Zhou Huida could not answer, and asked him to go out and find someone to discuss with.

古文：乃召绰，告以其事，绰即为量定。
现代文：于是他把苏绰召来，把讨论的事情告诉他，苏绰立即为他加以裁定。
English: He called Su Qiao to inform the original committee of the matter, and Su Qiao immediately told him his opinion.

古文：惠达入呈，太祖称善，谓惠达曰： 谁与卿为此议者？ 
现代文：周惠达再进去呈报太祖，太祖连声叫好，问周惠达： 谁替你想出这些意见的呢? 
English: Zhou Huida then went in to present the report to the Grandfather. The Grandfather shouted his greetings and asked Zhou Huida: Who came up with these opinions for you?

古文：惠达以绰对，因称其有王佐之才。
现代文：周惠达回答说是苏绰，接著称赞他有辅佐帝王的才干。
English: Zhou Huida replied that it was Su Qiao, and then praised him for his ability to assist the emperor.

古文：太祖曰： 吾亦闻之久矣。 
现代文：太祖说： 我也听说这个人很久了。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "I've heard about this man for a long time.

古文：寻除著作佐郎。
现代文：不久太祖就授任苏绰为著作佐郎。
English: Soon, he was called to be a scribe.

古文：属太祖与公卿往昆明池观渔，行至城西汉故仓地，顾问左右，莫有知者。
现代文：有一次适逢太祖和公卿一起到昆明池观看打鱼，走到城西汉代仓库旧地的时候，回头询问左右侍候的人，没有谁知道。
English: Once upon a time, the great-grandfather and the nobles went to Kunming Pond to watch the fishing together. When they went to the old Han Dynasty warehouse in the west of the city, they turned around to ask the waiters. No one knew.

古文：或曰： 苏绰博物多通，请问之。 太祖乃召绰。具以状对。
现代文：有人说： 苏绰见多识广，请问他吧。 太祖就把苏绰召来询问，苏绰就把具体的情况一五一十地告诉他。
English: Some people said: Su Qiao is very knowledgeable, please ask him. Grandfather called Su Qiao to inquire, and Su Qiao told him the specific situation in detail.

古文：太祖大悦，因问天地造化之始，历代兴亡之迹。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，接着又问当初开天辟地的事情和历代兴亡的过程。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, and then asked about the groundbreaking event and the process of the rise and fall of past generations.

古文：绰既有口辩，应对如流。
现代文：苏绰很有口才，全都对答如流。
English: He's a smooth talker.

古文：太祖益喜。乃与绰并马徐行至池，竟不设网罟而还。
现代文：太祖更加欢喜，于是和苏绰一起骑着马并排慢走到了昆明池，竟忘了打鱼的事情而没有设置鱼网就回去了。
English: The great-grandfather was even more delighted, so he and Su Qiao rode side by side and slowly walked to Kunming Pool, but they forgot to fish and went back without setting up a fishing net.

古文：遂留绰至夜，问以治道，太祖卧而听之。
现代文：于是太祖把苏绰留下一直到了晚上，继续询问治国的方法，自己就躺下来听他陈述。
English: So the great-grandfather kept Su Zhao until the evening, continued to inquire about the method of governing the country, and lay down to listen to his statement.

古文：绰于是指陈帝王之道，兼述申韩之要。
现代文：苏绰于是向太祖说明了帝王安邦定国的正确措施，同时又论述了法家代表人物申不害、韩非子学说的要点。
English: Su Qiao then explained to the great-grandfather the correct measures for the emperor to secure the state, and at the same time discussed the main points of the teachings of the representative figures of the legalists, Shen Bozhong and Han Feizi.

古文：太祖乃起，整衣危坐，不觉膝之前席。语遂达曙不厌。
现代文：太祖听得竟然马上起来，正襟危坐，连膝盖在坐席上往前移了也不知道。
English: Hearing this, the great-grandfather got up immediately, sat bolt upright, and didn't even know that his knees had moved forward on the seat.

古文：诘朝，谓周惠达曰： 苏绰真奇士也，吾方任之以政。 即拜大行台左丞，参典机密。
现代文：就这样两人一直谈论到天亮也不感到厌倦。第二天早上，太祖对周惠达说： 苏绰真是个奇才，我要把政务委任给他。 太祖当即授任苏绰为大行台左丞，让他参与处理机密的事务。
English: In this way, the two continued to talk until dawn and did not feel tired. The next morning, Taizu said to Zhou Huida: Su Chaozhe is really a genius, I want to delegate government affairs to him. Taizu immediately appointed Su Chaozhe as Dagangdai Zuo, and let him participate in dealing with confidential matters.

古文：自是宠遇日隆。
现代文：从此以后太祖对苏绰的信任和待遇一天天隆厚。
English: Since then, he has been increasingly favored by Uwentai.

古文：绰始制文案程序，朱出墨入，及计帐、户籍之法。
现代文：苏绰又开始制定公文案卷的格式，规定行台发出的文件用朱笔，呈送入行台的文件用墨笔，并且制定记账和户籍登记的方法。
English: Su Qiao also began to formulate the format of official documents, stipulating that the documents issued by the administration should be written with a red pen, and the documents submitted to the administration should be written with an ink pen, and the methods of accounting and household registration should be formulated.

古文：大统三年，齐神武三道入寇，诸将咸欲分兵御之，独绰意与太祖同。
现代文：大统三年，齐神武帝兵分三路入侵，各将领都想分兵抵挡，衹有苏绰的意见和太祖相同。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, Emperor Qizhenwu's soldiers invaded in three directions. The generals wanted to split their forces to resist. Zou Youzuo's opinion was the same as that of his great-grandfather.

古文：遂并力拒窦泰，擒之于潼关。
现代文：于是他们集中兵力抵抗窦泰，在潼关把他活捉。
English: So they concentrated their forces to resist Dou Tai and captured him alive in Shaoguan.

古文：四年，加卫将军、右光禄大夫，封美阳县子，邑三百户。
现代文：大统四年，朝廷加授苏绰为卫将军、右光禄大夫，封爵美阳县子，封地三百户。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court conferred the title of Suqiao to General Wei and Doctor Uguanglu, and the title of nobility to the sons of Miyang County, with 300 fiefs.

古文：加通直散骑常侍，进爵为伯，增邑二百户。
现代文：后来又加授通直散骑常侍，提升爵位为伯，增加封地二百户。
English: Later, he was also awarded the title of Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi, promoted to the peerage of Bo, and his fiefdom was increased to 200 households.

古文：十年，授大行台度支尚书，领著作，兼司农卿。
现代文：大统十年，苏绰被任命为大行台度支尚书，领著作郎，兼任司农卿。
English: In the 10th year of the Great Reunification, Su Qiao was appointed as Da Xing Tai Duo Shi Shang Shu, leader of the scholars, and concurrently served as Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：太祖方欲革易时政，务弘强国富民之道，故绰得尽其智能，赞成其事。
现代文：当时太祖正想改革时政，致力于扩展强国富民的路子，因此苏绰得以尽力发挥他的智慧和能力，辅佐太祖成就大事。
English: At that time, Taizu was trying to reform politics and was committed to expanding the path of a strong country and rich people. Therefore, Su Zhuo was able to make the best use of his wisdom and ability to assist Taizu in achieving great things.

古文：减官员，置二长，并置屯田以资军国。
现代文：他主张裁减官员，设置党正、里长，并且设置屯田来资助统军治国的费用。
English: He was in favour of the reform of Uwentai, advocating the reduction of officials, the establishment of two chiefs, and the implementation of military garrisons to supply the army.

古文：又为六条诏书，奏施行之。
现代文：苏绰又草拟了六条诏令，奏请施行。
English: He also drafted six imperial decrees, which were reported to the imperial court for implementation.

古文：其一，先治心，曰：
现代文：第一条，首先修养自身的思想品德：
English: Article one, first of all cultivate one's own moral character:

古文：凡今之方伯守令，皆受命天朝，出临下国，论其尊贵，并古之诸侯也。
现代文：凡是当今的地方长官，都是由天朝任命，派到各地统治一方，说起他们的尊贵地位，都跟古代的诸侯相当。
English: All of today's local governors are appointed by the imperial court and sent to govern various regions. In terms of their noble status, they are comparable to the ancient princes.

古文：是以前世帝王，每称共治天下者，唯良宰守耳。
现代文：因此前代的帝王，常称说共同治理天下的，衹有优良的郡守县令罢了。
English: Therefore, the emperors of the previous generation, often referred to as co-governing the world, only had excellent county governors.

古文：明知百僚卿尹，虽各有所司，然其治民之本，莫若宰守之最重也。
现代文：君主明知各部门长官虽然各有所主管的工作，但是作为治理百姓的根本，那就没有什么像郡守县令那样最为重要的了。
English: The monarch knew that although the heads of departments each had their own responsibilities, as the basis for governing the people, there was nothing as important as the county magistrate.

古文：凡治民之体，先当治心。
现代文：大凡治理百姓的法则，首先应当加强自身的思想品德修养。
English: The law of great governance of the people, first of all, should strengthen their own ideological and moral cultivation.

古文：心者，一身之主，百行之本。
现代文：思想是全身的主宰，各种行为做法的根本。
English: Thought is the master of the whole body and the foundation of all kinds of behaviors and practices.

古文：心不清净，则思虑妄生。
现代文：思想不清净，就会胡思乱想。
English: If one's thoughts are not clear, one will think out of the box.

古文：思虑妄生，则见理不明。见理不明，则是非谬乱。
现代文：胡思乱想，就会不明事理。不明事理，就会是非颠倒。
English: If various concerns arise, the understanding of the truth will be unclear, and if the understanding of the truth is unclear, right and wrong will be confused.

古文：是非谬乱，则一身不能自治，安能治民也！
现代文：是非颠倒，就会一身不能自理，这样哪裹还能治理百姓呢?
English: If it is not reversed, it will not be able to take care of itself, so how can it govern the people?

古文：是以治民之要，在清心而已。
现代文：因此治理百姓的关键，在于心地要清净。
English: Therefore, the key to governing the people is to have a pure heart.

古文：夫所谓清心者，非不贪货财之谓也，乃欲使心气清和，志意端静。
现代文：所谓心地清净，不是说不贪图钱财，而是要让心情清净平和，精神端正沉静。
English: The so-called pure heart does not mean not to covet money, but to keep the heart clean and peaceful, and the spirit upright and calm.

古文：心和志静，则邪僻之虑，无因而作。
现代文：能够做到心情平和，精神沉静，那么邪恶不正的念头就无由产生。
English: If you can achieve peace of mind and calmness of spirit, then evil and wrong thoughts will have no reason to arise.

古文：邪僻不作，则凡所思念，无不皆得至公之理。
现代文：邪恶的念头不产生，那么凡是考虑的事情，没有不符合最公正无私的道理。
English: If evil thoughts do not arise, then everything that is considered does not contradict the most just and selfless principle.

古文：率至公之理以临其民，则彼下民孰不从化。
现代文：用遣最公正无私的道理来治理自己属下的百姓，那么百姓谁还不听从你的教化呢。
English: If you use the most just and selfless principle to govern the people under you, then who among the people will not listen to your enlightenment?

古文：是以称治民之本，先在治心。
现代文：因此说治理百姓的根本首先在于修养思想品德。
English: Therefore, it is said that the foundation of governing the people lies first and foremost in cultivating thought and character.

古文：其次又在治身。
现代文：其次在于陶冶身心。
English: The second is the cultivation of mind and body.

古文：凡人君之身者，乃百姓之表，一国之的也。
现代文：大凡君主的身心，都是百姓的表率，一国的目标。
English: The body and mind of a great monarch are the example of the people and the goal of a country.

古文：表不正，不可求直影；的不明，不可责射中。
现代文：标记不正，不能测得笔直的日影；目标不明显，不能要求别人射中。
English: If the mark is not correct, it is not possible to measure a straight shadow; if the target is not obvious, it is not possible to ask others to hit it.

古文：今君身不能自治，而望治百姓，是犹曲表而求直影也；君行不能自修，而欲百姓修行者，是犹无的而责射中也。
现代文：当今君王如果不能很好地陶冶自身，而希望治理好百姓，造就好像用弯曲的标记硬要测得笔直的影一样；君王如果不能注意自身德行的修养，却要百姓修养德行，这就好像没有目标却要求别人非射中不可。
English: If today's monarchs are unable to cultivate themselves well, but hope to govern the people well, it is like using a curved mark to measure a straight shadow; if the monarch cannot pay attention to the cultivation of his own virtue, but wants the people to cultivate virtue, it is like having no goal but requiring others to hit.

古文：故为人君者，必心如清水，形如白玉。
现代文：因此作为君主，必须心如清水，形如白玉。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, you must have a heart like clear water and a shape like a white jade.

古文：躬行仁义，躬行孝悌，躬行忠信，躬行礼让，躬行廉平，躬行俭约，然后继之以无倦，加之以明察。行此八者，以训其民。
现代文：亲自实行仁义，孝顺父母、敬爱兄长，忠诚守信，礼貌谦让，廉洁公平，勤俭节约，然后再加上毫不倦怠，加上明察秋毫，亲自做好这八个方面，用它来教导百姓。
English: To personally practice benevolence and righteousness, filial piety, respect for elders, loyalty and trustworthiness, courtesy and forbearance, honesty and fairness, diligence and thrift, and then add tirelessness, and careful observation, to personally do these eight aspects, and use it to teach the people.

古文：是以其人畏而爱之，则而象之，不待家教日见而自兴行矣。
现代文：因此百姓对君主既敬畏又爱戴，既效法又模仿，美好的品德用不着每家教诲每天显示而自然就可以培养起来了。
English: Therefore, the people both revere and love the monarch, both imitate and imitate, and the good character does not need to be shown every day by each family, but can be naturally cultivated.

古文：其二，敦教化，曰：天地之性，唯人为贵。
现代文：第二条，注重教育感化：天地万物的特性，祇有人是宝贵的。
English: Second, pay attention to the influence of education: the characteristics of all things in heaven and earth, only some people are precious.

古文：明其有中和之心，仁恕之行，异于木石，不同禽兽，故贵之耳。
现代文：因为明白人有中正平和的思想，仁爱宽厚的品行，跟木石有别，与禽兽不同，所以才觉得人是宝贵的。
English: Because they understand that people have a righteous and peaceful thought, benevolent and generous behavior, which is different from wood and stone, and different from animals, so they feel that people are precious.

古文：然性无常守，随化而迁。
现代文：然而人性不会永远不变，而是随着教化而变化。
English: However, human nature does not remain unchanged forever, but changes with education.

古文：化于敦朴者，则质直；化于浇伪者，则浮薄。
现代文：受到敦厚朴实的教化就会质朴正直；受到刻薄虚伪的教化就会虚浮轻薄。
English: If you are educated in a simple way, you will be simple and honest; if you are educated in a harsh and hypocritical way, you will be vain and frivolous.

古文：浮薄者，则衰弊之风；质直者，则淳和之俗。
现代文：虚浮轻薄就是一种衰落败坏的风气，而质朴正直则是一种淳厚和洽的风俗。
English: Vanity and frivolity are a decaying and corrupting culture, while simple honesty is a simple and harmonious custom.

古文：衰弊则祸乱交兴，淳和则天下自治。
现代文：衰落败坏，祸乱就会交替出现，淳厚和洽，天下自然就会太平。
English: If the country is decadent, disasters and disorders will arise alternately, and if the country is prosperous, the country will be governed well.

古文：治乱兴亡，无不皆由所化也。
现代文：治乱兴亡，无不都是由教化所决定的。
English: The rise and fall of civil unrest is determined by indoctrination.

古文：然世道雕丧，已数百年。
现代文：然而社会风气的败坏，已经几百年了。
English: However, the deterioration of social morals has been going on for hundreds of years.

古文：大乱滋甚，且二十岁。
现代文：天下大乱日益严重，至今也将近二十年。
English: The turmoil in the world is getting more and more serious, and it has been nearly twenty years since then.

古文：民不见德，唯兵革是闻；上无教化，惟刑罚是用。
现代文：百姓看不到仁德所在，耳闻目睹的祇是战争；统治者不施行教化，衹懂得使用刑罚。
English: The people do not see where benevolence lies, all they hear and see is war; the rulers do not carry out education, but only know how to use punishment.

古文：而中兴始尔，大难未平，加之以师旅，因之以饥馑，凡百草创，率多权宜。
现代文：国家复兴刚刚开始，巨大的灾难还没有平定，加上战争频繁，灾荒连年不断，各种规章制度刚开始草创，大都还是权宜之计。
English: National rejuvenation has just begun, huge disasters have not yet been quelled, coupled with frequent wars, continuous disasters, and various rules and regulations have just begun to be created, most of which are still stopgap measures.

古文：致使礼让弗兴，风俗未改。
现代文：致使礼让的风尚不能兴起，旧的风俗习惯不能改正。
English: The culture of comity cannot be allowed to take root, and old customs and habits cannot be corrected.

古文：比年稍登稔，徭赋差轻，衣食不切，则教化可修矣。
现代文：近年收成逐渐好转，徭役赋税稍微减轻，人民的衣食不成问题，那么教化就可以进行了。
English: In recent years, the harvest has gradually improved, the tax burden has been slightly reduced, and the people's food and clothing are not a problem, so the education can be carried out.

古文：凡诸牧守令长，宜洗心革意，上承朝旨，下宣教化矣。
现代文：大凡各位地方长宫，都应该除去杂念，端正思想，秉承朝廷的旨意，向百姓推行教化。
English: In general, all local chancelleries should remove impurities, rectify thoughts, adhere to the will of the imperial court, and promote enlightenment to the people.

古文：夫化者，贵能扇之以淳风，浸之以太和，被之以道德，示之以朴素。
现代文：所谓感化，贵在能够用淳厚的风尚去倡导，用平和的思想去浸润，用道德的行为去影响，用朴素的作风去示范。
English: Since ancient times, the safety, prosperity and death of a country have all been determined by enlightenment. Enlightenment is valuable in that it can encourage a sober style, spread a peaceful atmosphere, bestow moral grace, and show a simple habit.

古文：使百姓亹亹，中迁于善，邪伪之心，嗜欲之性，潜以消化，而不知其所以然，此之谓化也。
现代文：使百姓勤勉不倦，心中的想法趋向善，邪恶虚伪的念头，贪得无厌的习性都暗暗消失，而不知道出现这种情形的原因，造就叫做感化。
English: To make the people diligent and tireless, the thoughts in their hearts tend to be good, the evil and hypocritical thoughts, and the insatiable habits all secretly disappear, without knowing the reason for this situation, the creation is called influence.

古文：然后教之以孝悌，使民慈爱；教之以仁顺，使民和睦；教之以礼义，使民敬让。
现代文：然后用孝顺父母、敬爱兄长的道理教导百姓，让百姓慈爱；用仁厚和顺教导百姓，使百姓和睦；用礼义教导百姓，使百姓恭敬谦让。
English: Then, he taught the people the principles of filial piety and respect for one's elders, so that the people would be kind; he taught the people the principles of benevolence and obedience, so that the people would be harmonious; he taught the people the principles of courtesy and righteousness, so that the people would be respectful and humble.

古文：慈爱则不遗其亲，和睦则无怨于人，敬让则不竞于物。
现代文：百姓慈爱就不会遗弃亲人，和睦就不会怨恨他人，恭敬谦让就不会争夺财物。
English: Benevolence and fraternity will not miss any one not to be close, harmony and unity will not resent others, mutual respect and mutual concession will not compete for plunder.

古文：三者既备，则王道成矣。
现代文：这三方面都具备了，那么以仁义治理天下的局面就形成了。
English: If all three are available, then the heavenly way of governing the world is formed.

古文：此之谓教也。
现代文：这就叫做教。
English: This is called indoctrination.

古文：先王之所以移风易俗，还淳反素，垂拱而治天下以至太平者，莫不由此。
现代文：前代君王能够移风易俗、返璞归真、垂肩拱手治理天下而达到太平盛世的局面，没有不是通过教化来实现的。
English: The previous generation of monarchs was able to change customs, return to the truth, and govern the world with a bowed shoulder and an outstretched hand, and achieved a peaceful and prosperous situation. This was achieved through enlightenment.

古文：此之谓要道也。
现代文：造就是治理天下的重要方法。
English: Construction is an important method of governing the world.

古文：其三，尽地利，曰：人生天地之间，以衣食为命。
现代文：第三条，充分发挥地利：人生长在天地之间，把衣食看作是生命一样重要的大事。
English: The third is to give full play to geography: people grow up between heaven and earth, and regard food and clothing as an important matter as important as life.

古文：食不足则饥，衣不足则寒。
现代文：粮食不够就会挨饿，衣服不足就会受寒。
English: If you don't have enough food, you'll go hungry, and if you don't have enough clothes, you'll get cold.

古文：饥寒切体，而欲使民兴行礼让者，此犹逆阪走丸，势不可得也。
现代文：当饥寒交迫的时候，却要让百姓实行礼让，造就好像要弹丸往山坡上滚，势必不可能。
English: When people are starving and cold, it is impossible for them to be polite, and it is impossible to make them roll like marbles up a hillside.

古文：是以古之圣王，知其若此，故先足其衣食，然后教化随之。
现代文：因此古代英明的君主懂得这个道理，先让百姓丰衣足食，然后才跟着进行教化。
English: Therefore, the ancient wise monarchs understood this principle, first let the people have enough food and clothing, and then carry out the enlightenment.

古文：夫衣食所以足者，在于地利尽。
现代文：衣食能够丰足的原因，在于充分利用土地有利的条件。
English: The reason why food and clothing can be plentiful lies in making full use of the favorable conditions of the land.

古文：地利所以尽者，由于劝课有方。
现代文：能尽量利用土地有利条件的原因，是由于鼓励督促方法适宜。
English: The reason why the land can do its best is due to the fact that there is a way to persuade farmers.

古文：主此教者，在乎牧守令长而已。
现代文：主掌这项教育的人，就在于地方长官了。
English: Local governors at all levels are responsible for this task.

古文：民者冥也，智不自周，必待劝教，然后尽其力。
现代文：民就是冥的意思，自己考虑事情不周到，一定要靠勉励教诲，然后才会尽力去做。
English: The people is the meaning of "hidden," they do not consider things carefully, they must rely on encouragement and instruction, and then they will do their best.

古文：诸州郡县，每至岁首，必戒敕部民，无问少长，但能操持农器者，皆令就田，垦发以时，勿失其所。
现代文：各州郡县，每到年初一定告诫本地百姓，不论老幼，衹要能拿起农具的，就让他们都到田间，按时耕种，不要让田地荒芜。
English: Every year at the beginning of the year, all states, counties and counties must warn the local people, whether old or young, that if they want to pick up agricultural tools, they should go to the fields and cultivate them on time, and not let the fields become barren.

古文：及布种既讫，嘉苗须理，麦秋在野，蚕停于室，若此之时，皆宜少长悉力，男女并功，若援溺、救火、寇盗之将至，然后可使农夫不废其业，蚕妇得就其功。
现代文：等到播种完毕，茁壮的禾苗需要管理，麦子在田野成熟，蚕在屋裹结茧，在这时候，都应当老幼尽力，男女合作，好像拉起被水淹的人、救火、强盗将要来到一样紧急行动，然后才能使农夫不荒废本业，蚕妇得以完成其工作。
English: When the sowing is finished, the vigorous seedlings need to be managed, the wheat is mature in the field, and the silkworms are wrapped in the house. At this time, both the old and the young should do their best, and men and women should cooperate, as if to pull up the flooded people, fire fighting, and robbers will come to the same urgent action, and then the farmer can not waste his business, and the silkworm can complete his work.

古文：若有游手怠惰，早归晚出，好逸恶劳，不勤事业者，则正长牒名郡县，守令随事加罚，罪一劝百。
现代文：如果有游手好闲、早归晚出、好逸恶劳、不努力耕织的人，那么党正、里长就要记下他们的名字上报郡县，郡守县令就应根据情况加以处罚，罚一人就能勉励百人。
English: If there are idlers, people who come home early and go out late, people who are lazy and do not work hard, and people who do not work hard, then the party secretary and the village chief should write down their names and report them to the county, and the county magistrate should punish them according to the situation. One person can punish a hundred people.

古文：此则明宰之教也。
现代文：这样才是贤明的官员所应采取的教育方法。
English: Punish one person, educate thousands, this is the duty of a local magistrate who is knowledgeable and wise.

古文：夫百亩之田，必春耕之，夏种之，秋收之，然后冬食之。
现代文：一家百亩的田地，必定是春耕、夏种、秋收，然后冬天才有粮食。
English: A hundred mu of farmland must be cultivated in spring, sown in summer, harvested in autumn, and then there will be food in winter.

古文：此三时者，农之要也。
现代文：这三个季节是农业生产的重要时节。
English: These three seasons are important for agricultural production.

古文：若失其一时，则谷不可得而食。
现代文：如果耽误了一个季节，那么谷物就不能收获以供食用了。
English: If you miss one of those opportunities, you don't get the grain and you don't eat.

古文：故先王之戒曰： 一夫不耕，天下必有受其饥者；一妇不织，天下必有受其寒者。 若此三时不务省事，而令民废农者，是则绝民之命，驱以就死然。
现代文：因此前代君王告诫说： 一个农夫不耕种，天下必定有人因此挨饿；一个蚕妇不纺织，天下必定有人因此受寒。 如果这三个季节地方官员不注意审时度势，而使百姓荒废农业生产，这样就等于断绝百姓的性命，把他们赶向死路一样。
English: Therefore, the previous monarch warned: "If a farmer does not cultivate, there must be people starving in the world; if a silkworm does not weave, there must be people suffering from cold in the world; if local officials do not pay attention to the timing and situation in these three seasons, and let the people waste agricultural production, this is tantamount to cutting off the lives of the people and driving them to death.

古文：单劣之户，及无牛之家，劝令有无相通，使得兼济。
现代文：对那些缺乏劳力和没有耕牛的人家，应鼓励他们互通有无，使他们同舟共济。
English: Those who have no labor and no oxen should be persuaded to exchange what they have for what they do not have, so that they can help each other.

古文：三农之隙，及阴雨之暇，又当教民种桑、植果，艺其菜蔬，修其园圃，畜育鸡豚，以备生生之资，以供养老之具。
现代文：农事的间隙，以及阴雨天气不能干活的空闲子，又应当教百姓种桑树、果树和蔬菜，修整园圃，养育牲畜，以便准备生活的费用，以便供给养老的东西。
English: In the intervals between farm chores, as well as for idle children who cannot work in rainy weather, the people should also be taught to grow mulberry trees, fruit trees and vegetables, cultivate gardens, and raise livestock in order to prepare for the cost of living and to provide for old age.

古文：夫为政不欲过碎，碎则民烦；劝课亦不容太简，简则民怠。
现代文：处理政务不要过于琐碎，遇于琐碎百姓会感到烦扰；鼓励督促也不容许太简单，过于简单百姓就会懈怠。
English: Don't be too trivial in handling government affairs. If it is too trivial, the people will be annoyed. Encouragement and supervision should not be too simple. If it is too simple, the people will slack off.

古文：善为政者，必消息时宜而适烦简之中。
现代文：善于处理政务的官员，必须根据当时实际情况的变化而使烦简适中。
English: Officials who are good at handling government affairs must make the work simple and appropriate according to the changes in the actual situation at that time.

古文：故诗曰： 不刚不柔，布政优优，百禄是求。 如不能尔，则必陷于刑辟矣。
现代文：因此《诗经》中说： 不刚不柔，施行政令宽和，就能求得百福。 如果不能如此去做，那么必定会陷于施用刑律的境地。
English: Therefore, it is said in the "Song of Songs": "If you are not hard and inflexible, but are lenient and conciliatory, you will be able to obtain a hundred blessings; if you cannot do so, then you will certainly fall into the situation of applying criminal law."

古文：其四，擢贤良，曰：天生蒸民，不能自治，故必立君以治之。
现代文：第四条，选拔贤良人才：天生平民百姓，自身不能臻于完美的境界，因此必须设立君主来治理。
English: Article IV, Selection of Virtuous Talents: Born commoners, they cannot reach the realm of perfection, so a monarch must be established to govern.

古文：人君不能独治，故必置臣以佐之。
现代文：国君不能独自一人管理天下，因此必须安排官员来辅佐。
English: The sovereign cannot manage the world alone, so he must arrange officials to assist him.

古文：上至帝王，下及郡国，置臣得贤则治，失贤则乱，此乃自然之理，百王不能易也。
现代文：上至帝王，下到郡国。安排大臣如能得到贤人担任，天下就太平无事；如果没有贤人，天下就会动乱，造就是自然的道理，即使一百个帝王也改变不了。
English: As high as the emperor, as low as the county. If a wise man can be appointed as a minister, the world will be peaceful; if there is no wise man, the world will be in turmoil. Creation is a natural principle, even if a hundred emperors cannot change it.

古文：今刺史守令，悉有僚吏，皆佐治之人也。
现代文：现在各级地方长官，都设置僚属，这些都是辅佐管理政务的人。
English: Now, local governors at all levels have all set up subordinates, and these are people who assist in the management of government affairs.

古文：刺史府官则命于天朝，其州吏以下，并牧守自置。
现代文：刺史州官就由朝廷任命，州官以下的僚属，全都由刺史郡守自己任命。
English: The county magistrate was appointed by the imperial court, and all subordinates below the magistrate were appointed by the county magistrate himself.

古文：自昔以来，州郡大吏，但取门资，多不择贤良；末曹小吏，唯试刀笔，并不问志行。
现代文：自古以来，州郡的高级属员祇凭藉门第资格任命，大多没有选择德才兼备的人才；低级小吏衹是试其文笔优劣，全不问道德品行。
English: Since ancient times, high-ranking subordinate members of prefectures and counties have only been appointed by virtue of the qualification of disciples, and most of them have not chosen talents with both virtues and talents; low-level petty officials are trying their writing strengths and weaknesses, regardless of moral conduct.

古文：夫门资者，乃先世之爵禄，无妨子孙之愚瞽；刀笔者，乃身外之末材，不废性行之浇伪。
现代文：所谓门第资格，不过是先辈的爵位高低，俸禄的多少，不能担保子孙后代不愚昧；所谓文笔，不过是自身之外的末技，不会改变性格品行的刻薄伪诈。
English: The so-called qualification of lineage is nothing more than the level of peerage of the predecessors and the amount of salary, which cannot guarantee that future generations will not be stupid; the so-called writing is nothing more than the last skill outside of oneself, and will not change the character and behavior of the mean and deceitful.

古文：若门资之中而得贤良，是则策骐骥而取千里也；若门资之中而得愚瞽，是则土牛木马，形似而用非，不可以涉道也。
现代文：如果在门第资格高贵的人士之中能找到德才兼备的人才，造就好像驾驭着骏马而驰骋千里；如果在门第资格高贵的人中找到的是愚昧的庸才，这样就好像泥牛木马一样，形状相似但用途却完全不同，是不能登程的。
English: If you can find a talented person with both virtues and talents among those with high qualifications, it will be like riding a horse and galloping thousands of miles; if you find a stupid mediocrity among those with high qualifications, it will be like a mud horse, similar in shape but completely different in use, and cannot be boarded.

古文：若刀笔之中而得志行，是则金相玉质，内外俱美，实为人宝也；若刀笔之中而得浇伪，是则饰画朽木，悦目一时，不可以充榱椽之用也。
现代文：如果在文笔高超的人士中找到道德品行优秀的人才，这样就是具有黄金般的外表和玉石般的品质，裹外都美，确实是人中珍宝；如果在懂得舞文弄墨的人中找了一些刻薄伪诈的小人，这样就好像在朽木上雕饰图案，衹能一时好看，却不能用来充当椽木使用。
English: If you find people with excellent moral character among those who are good at writing, then they will have a golden appearance and jade-like qualities, and they will be beautiful on the outside, which is indeed a treasure among people; if you find some mean and deceitful villains among those who know how to make ink, it will be like carving patterns on rotten wood. The beak can look good for a while, but it cannot be used as a beak.

古文：今之选举者，当不限资荫，唯在得人。
现代文：现在选拔举荐人才，应当不限资格祖荫，祇在乎找到真正的良才。
English: Now the selection of recommending talents should be without qualification, just care about finding a real talent.

古文：苟得其人，自可起冢养而为卿相，伊尹、傅说是也，而况州郡之职乎。
现代文：假如能找到优秀的人才，自然可以把养马的奴仆起用为公卿宰相，伊尹、傅说就是这样的例子，更何况州郡的职位呢。
English: If you can find outstanding talent, you can naturally use a horse-breeding servant as a noble prime minister. Yi Yin and Fu said that this is such an example, not to mention the position of state and county.

古文：苟非其人，则丹朱、商均虽帝王之胤，不能守百里之封，而况于公卿之冑乎。
现代文：假如不是优秀的人才，那么即使是丹朱、商均那样的帝王后代，也不能保住百里的封地，何况公卿的后代呢。
English: If it were not for outstanding talent, then even the descendants of emperors such as Danzhu and Shangyun would not be able to keep the fiefdom of Hyakuri, let alone the descendants of nobles.

古文：由此而言，观人之道可见矣。
现代文：由此说来，观察一个人的道理就显耐易见了。
English: From this, it is easy to see the reason for observing a person.

古文：凡所求材艺者，为其可以治民。
现代文：大凡选拔官员要求其具备的才干技艺，是因为可以用来治理百姓。
English: The talents and skills that officials are required to possess are great because they can be used to govern the people.

古文：若有材艺而以正直为本者，必以其材而为治也；若有材艺而以奸伪为本者，将由其官而为乱也，何治之可得乎。
现代文：如果具有才干、技艺，又以正直的品德作为做人的根本，他必定用自己的才干把本职工作做好；如果有才干技艺却把邪恶伪诈作为做人的根本，他就会依仗自己的官位做坏事，又怎么能够治理得好呢。
English: If he has talent and skill and takes honesty as the foundation of his life, he will surely use his talent to do his job well; if he has talent and skill but takes evil and deception as the foundation of his life, he will rely on his official position to do bad things, and how can he govern well?

古文：是故将求材艺，必先择志行。
现代文：因此要选取有才干技艺的人才，必定首先观察一个人的道德品行。
English: Therefore, to select talented people, we must first observe a person's moral conduct.

古文：其志行善者，则举之；其志行不善者，则去之。
现代文：那些道德品质好的，就推举他；那些道德品行不好的，就弃置不用。
English: Those with good moral character should be promoted; those with bad moral character should be discarded.

古文：而今择人者多云 邦国无贤，莫知所举 。
现代文：如今负责选拔人才的官员大都说 自己管辖的那个地方没有贤才，不知该举荐谁 。
English: Most of the officials in charge of selecting talent now say that there is no talent in the place under their jurisdiction, and they don't know who to recommend.

古文：此乃未之思也，非适理之论。
现代文：这种说法是从来没有认真思考，并不是合理的言论。
English: In the future, the selection of talents should not be limited by their family background, but should mainly depend on their personal talents.

古文：所以然者，古人有言：明主聿兴，不降佐于昊天；大人基命，不擢才于后土。
现代文：之所以这样批评他们，是因为古人有这样的见解：英明的君主能够兴起，不是由于上天给他降下辅佐的大臣；德行高尚的人能够创业，不是由于地神给他选拔人才。
English: The reason why they were criticized in this way was that the ancients had this opinion: a wise monarch could not rise to the top because the heavens had sent him a minister to assist him; a virtuous person could not start a business because the earth god had selected a talent for him.

古文：常引一世之人，治一世之务。
现代文：经常是引用当世的人才，治理当世的政务。
English: It is often a matter of using the talents of the current generation to govern the current government affairs.

古文：故殷、周不待稷、契之臣，魏、晋无假萧、曹之佐。
现代文：因此商、周不可能依赖稷、契时代的大臣，魏、晋无法藉助萧何、曹参来辅佐。
English: Therefore, the ministers of the Yin and Zhou dynasties did not wait for the successors of the Wei and Jin dynasties, Wei and Jin did not need to borrow the help of Xiao He and Cao San.

古文：仲尼曰： 十室之邑，必有忠信如丘者焉。 岂有万家之都，而云无士，但求之不勤，择之不审，或用之不得其所，任之不尽其材，故云无耳。
现代文：孔子说过： 有十家人聚居的地方，必定有像我孔丘一样忠诚守信的人在其中。 哪裹会有万户人家的都市，却说没有人才的道理，衹是寻找不力，选择不精，或者使用不得其所，委任不尽其才，所以说没有罢了。
English: Confucius said: "Where there are ten families living together, there must be someone as loyal and trustworthy as I am." Where there is a city with thousands of families, it is said that there is no talent, but the reason is that the search is not strong, the choice is not fine, or the use is not in its place, the appointment is not up to its abilities, so there is nothing.

古文：古人云： 千人之秀曰英，万人之英曰隽。 今之智效一官，行闻一邦者，岂非近英隽之士也。
现代文：古人说： 千人之中的优秀人士叫做英，万人之中的英才叫做俊。 现在才智足以授予一个官职，德行能够闻名一方的人，难道不是接近英俊的人才吗?
English: The ancients said: The outstanding person among a thousand people is called Ying, and the outstanding person among ten thousand people is called Jun. Nowadays, talent is enough to grant a government post, and a person whose virtue can be famous is not close to handsome talent?

古文：但能勤而审察，去虚取实，各得州郡之最而用之，则民无多少，皆足治矣。
现代文：衹要能尽力去审察，辞退徒有虚名的人，选取有真才实学的人，各自发现本州郡中最优秀的人才来任用，那么无论百姓有多少，都能把地方治理好。
English: If we can do our best to investigate, dismiss those with false names, select those with real talent and real learning, and each find the best talent in our county to appoint, then no matter how many people there are, we can manage the local governance well.

古文：孰云无贤！
现代文：谁说没有贤才呢!
English: Who says there are no geniuses?

古文：夫良玉未剖，与瓦石相类；名骥未驰，与驽马相杂。
现代文：良玉在没有破开之前，跟瓦片石头相似；骏马还没有奔驰的时候，跟劣马相混杂也分不出来。
English: A good stone, before it is cracked, is like a pebble; but a shod horse, before it gallops, is like a bad horse.

古文：及其剖而莹之，驰而试之，玉石驽骥，然后始分。
现代文：等到把玉石剖开使它显露晶莹，让骏马飞驰来验试它的本领，这样美玉和石头、骏马和劣马才能分辨清楚。
English: Wait until the jade carving is chiseled and polished, ride a good horse to gallop and jump, beautiful jade and stone, good horse and bad horse can be separated.

古文：彼贤士之未用也，混于凡品，竟何以异。
现代文：那些贤人在还没有任用之前，混杂在平常的人群之中，凭什么能看出他们的不同呢。
English: Those sages, before they were appointed, mingled with the ordinary crowd. How could anyone tell the difference between them?

古文：要任之以事业，责之以成务，方与彼庸流较然不同。
现代文：关键是要把事业交给他们，责求他们成就事业，才能比较出他们跟那些庸人截然不同。
English: The key is to entrust the cause to them and ask them to accomplish the cause, so that they can be completely different from those mediocrities.

古文：昔吕望之屠钓，百里奚之饭牛，宁生之扣角，管夷吾之三败，当此之时，悠悠之徒，岂谓其贤。
现代文：古代的吕望以屠杀牲畜和钓鱼为生，百里奚替人喂牛，宁生敲打牛角求仕，管仲曾经几次打败仗，在那时候，众多的庸人难道会说他们是贤人吗。
English: In ancient times, Luwang made a living by slaughtering livestock and fishing. Bai Lijun fed cattle for people. Ninsheng beat the horns of cattle for payment. Guanzhong lost several wars. At that time, would many philistines say that they were wise men?

古文：及升王朝，登霸国，积数十年，功成事立，始识其奇士也。
现代文：等到他们当上王朝或者称霸的诸侯大国的辅佐，经过几十年，大功告成，事业完成，人们才认识到他们是奇才。
English: It wasn't until they became a dynasty or an auxiliary of a dominating princely power that, after decades, the great work was accomplished, the cause was completed, and people realized that they were wizards.

古文：于是后世称之，不容于口。
现代文：于是后代的人称赞他们的话，说也说不完。
English: As a result, the world has been praising them ever since.

古文：彼瑰伟之材，不世之杰，尚不能以未遇之时，自异于凡品，况降此者哉。
现代文：他们那样奇特的人才，非凡的俊杰，还不能在没有受到重用的时候，把自己跟普通人区别开来，何况才干比不上他们的人呢。
English: Their extraordinary talents, extraordinary talents, cannot distinguish themselves from ordinary people when they are not heavily used, let alone those who are not as good as them.

古文：若必待太公而后用，是千载无太公；必待夷吾而后任，是百世无夷吾。
现代文：如果必定要等有了姜太公然后才任用，这样一千年也没有太公；必定要等有了管仲然后才委任，这样一百代也没有管仲。
English: If it is necessary to wait until there is a Jiang Taigong before appointing him, then there will be no Taigong for a thousand years; if it is necessary to wait until there is a Guanzhong before appointing him, then there will be no Guanzhong for a hundred generations.

古文：所以然者，士必从微而至着，功必积小以至大，岂有未任而已成，不用而先达也。
现代文：所以这样说的原因，是因为士人必定是从卑微发展到显贵，功劳必定从小积累到大，哪裹有还没有委任就事业已成。不任用就先显达的道理。
English: Therefore, the reason for saying this is because a scholar must develop from humble to distinguished, and merit must be accumulated from small to large. After all, if there is no appointment, the cause has already been accomplished. The principle of appearing first without appointment.

古文：若识此理，则贤可求，士可择。
现代文：如果懂得这个道理，那么贤人就能找到，士人也能够加以选择。
English: If you understand this principle, then the wise can find it, and the scholar can choose it.

古文：得贤而任之，得士而使之，则天下之治，何向而不可成也。
现代文：找到贤人然后委任他，找到贤士然后使用他，那么天下要治理好，还有什么不能成功的呢。
English: Find a wise man and then appoint him, find a sage and then use him, then the world should be governed well, what else can not succeed?

古文：然善官人者必先省其官。
现代文：然而善于任用官员的人必定首先要减少他的官员。
English: However, the man who is good at appointing officials must first reduce his officials.

古文：官省，则善人易充，善人易充，则事无不理；官烦，则必杂不善之人，杂不善之人，则政必有得失。
现代文：官员减少了，那么好的人才容易充实到官府之中人才充实了，那么事情没有处理不好的；官员烦多，那么必定混杂不好的人，混杂了不好的人，那么政务必定有过失。
English: The number of officials has decreased, so it is easy to fill the government with good people. If the government is filled with good people, then things will not be handled badly. If there are too many officials, then there must be a mixture of bad people. If there is a mixture of bad people, then there must be mistakes in government affairs.

古文：故语曰： 官省则事省，事省则民清；官烦则事烦，事烦则民浊。 
现代文：因此人们说： 官员减少了，麻烦事情也会减少；麻烦事情少了，百姓就会清醒。
English: Therefore, people say: If there are fewer officials, there will be fewer troubles; if there are fewer troubles, the people will become more sober.

古文：清浊之由，在于官之烦省。案今吏员，其数不少。
现代文：官员繁多，琐事也就繁多；琐事繁多，百姓就会感到头脑昏乱。 清醒和昏乱的由来，在于官员的繁多还是减少。考察当今官员人数并不少。
English: A large number of officials means a large number of trifles; a large number of trifles will make the people feel dizzy. The origin of wakefulness and dizziness lies in the large number or decrease of officials. The number of officials today is not small.

古文：昔民殷事广，尚能克济，况今户口减耗，依员而置，犹以为少。
现代文：当初人多事广的时候，尚且能把政务搞好，何况现在户口减少，按照人数来设置官员，有人还认为太少。
English: In the beginning, when there were a lot of people, the government was able to do a good job. Moreover, now that the number of hukou is decreasing, officials are set up according to the number of people, and some people still think it is too few.

古文：如闻在下州郡，尚有兼假，扰乱细民，甚为无理。
现代文：好像听说下边的州郡，还有兼任或暂代官职的情况，因此搅扰百姓，太没道理。
English: I seem to have heard that there are concurrent or temporary officials in the states and counties below, so there is no reason to disturb the people.

古文：诸如此辈，悉宜罢黜，无得习常。
现代文：像逭一类的官吏，全都应当罢免，不能习以为常。
English: All officials such as Xing should be removed from office, and they should not be taken for granted.

古文：非直州郡之官，宜须善人，爰至党族闾里正长之职，皆当审择，各得一乡之选，以相监统。
现代文：不仅州郡的官员应当任用优秀的人才，就是基层的闾里正长一类的职务，都应当慎重选择，以便各自能选拔出一乡之中最合适的人才，来管理百姓。
English: Not only should officials of prefectures and counties appoint outstanding talents, but they should also carefully select positions such as grass-roots village chiefs, so that they can each select the most suitable talents in a township to manage the people.

古文：夫正长者，治民之基。
现代文：党正里长是治理百姓的基础。
English: The Party General Secretary is the foundation for governing the people.

古文：基不倾者，上必安。
现代文：基础不倾斜，处于上位的必定安稳。
English: The foundation is not tilted, and those at the top must be stable.

古文：凡求贤之路，自非一途。
现代文：大凡寻求贤才的途径，自然不止一条。
English: There is, of course, more than one way to find a great talent.

古文：然所以得之审者，必由任而试之，考而察之。
现代文：然而要审慎地选拔贤人的方法，必须通过任用来测试他们的能力，通过考核来观察他们的优劣。
English: However, in order to carefully select sages, it is necessary to test their ability through appointment and observe their strengths and weaknesses through assessment.

古文：起于居家，至于乡党，访其所以，观其所由，则人道明矣，贤与不肖别矣。
现代文：从家庭到乡间，查访他们做法的依据，观察他们取得成绩的缘由，那么他们的为人之道就清楚了，贤良和品行不好的人就可以区别开来了。
English: From the family to the countryside, visit the basis of their practices, observe the reasons for their achievements, then their way of life is clear, and good and bad people can be distinguished.

古文：率此以求，则庶无愆悔矣。其五，恤狱讼，曰：
现代文：用这样的方法来寻求人才，那就大概没有过失了。第五条，慎重对待诉讼：
English: If you use this method to find talent, then you are probably not at fault.Article five, be cautious about litigation:

古文：人受阴阳之气以生，有情有性。
现代文：人类感受阴阳二气而生，因此有感情有本性。
English: Human beings are born with yin and yang, so they have feelings and nature.

古文：性则为善，情则为恶。
现代文：本性使人们行善，感情控制不住就容易作恶。
English: People's nature makes them do good, but if they can't control their emotions, it's easy to do evil.

古文：善恶既分，而赏罚随焉。
现代文：善恶已经区分，赏罚随后也要得到运用。
English: Good and evil have been distinguished, and rewards and punishments should be applied accordingly.

古文：赏罚得中，则恶止而善劝；赏罚不中，则民无所措手足。
现代文：赏罚得当，那么恶行被制止而善行得到鼓励；赏罚不当，那么百姓就会手足无措。
English: If rewards and punishments are appropriate, then evil deeds will be stopped and good deeds will be encouraged; if rewards and punishments are inappropriate, then the people will be helpless.

古文：民无所措手足，则怨叛之心生。
现代文：百姓手足无措，怨恨反叛的念头就会产生。
English: The people are helpless, resentment and the idea of rebellion will arise.

古文：是以先王重之，特加戒慎。
现代文：因此前代的君王重视赏罚，特加戒慎。
English: Therefore, the previous generation of monarchs attached importance to reward and punishment, and were particularly cautious.

古文：夫戒慎者，欲使治狱之官，精心悉意，推究事源。
现代文：戒慎，就是要使审理案件的官员细心地尽力推究案件的根由。
English: Prudence is to make the officials in charge of the case make every effort to find out the root cause of the case.

古文：先之以五听，参之以证验，妙睹情状，穷鉴隐伏，使奸无所容，罪人必得。
现代文：首先要从五个方面听取案情，再拿其他证据作参考，巧妙审察细节，深入查明隐情，使奸诈之人无处容身，犯罪之人必定捉拿归案。
English: First of all, it is necessary to listen to the case from five aspects, then take other evidence as a reference, skillfully examine the details, and thoroughly identify the hidden circumstances, so that the treacherous person has nowhere to hide, and the criminal must be caught.

古文：然后随事加刑，轻重皆当，赦过矜愚，得情勿喜。
现代文：然后根据不同的情况判刑，判罚轻重适当，赦免轻微过失，原谅愚昧犯法，查明实情也不要自鸣得意。
English: Then, according to different circumstances, the sentence will be given, the severity of the punishment will be appropriate, the minor faults will be pardoned, the ignorance of the law will be forgiven, and the truth will be ascertained.

古文：又能消息情理，斟酌礼律，无不曲尽人心，远明大教，使获罪者如归。
现代文：还要能够参考人情事理，斟酌礼制法律，无不曲尽人情，深明仁义礼教，使犯罪的人好像回到家中一样。
English: It is also necessary to be able to refer to human feelings and reason, consider the rules of etiquette and law, be unswerving in fulfilling human feelings, and have a deep understanding of benevolence, righteousness and etiquette, so that people who commit crimes feel as if they have returned home.

古文：此则善之上也。
现代文：这才是最好的做法。
English: That is the best way forward.

古文：然宰守非一，不可人人皆有通识，推理求情，时或难尽。
现代文：然而地方长官并不止一人，不可能人人都有通达的见识，推求情理，有时也很难穷尽。
English: However, there is more than one local governor, and it is impossible for everyone to have insight, reason, and sometimes it is difficult to exhaust.

古文：唯当率至公之心，去阿枉之志，务求曲直，念尽平当。
现代文：祇是应当本着最公正的心地，去除曲意偏袒的念头，务求判明是非曲直，尽量使判决量刑都公平得当。
English: However, it should be in the spirit of the most fair, remove the idea of favoritism, in order to find out the rights and wrongs, and try to make the judgment and sentencing fair and appropriate.

古文：听察之理，必穷所见，然后栲讯以法，不苛不暴，有疑则从轻，未审不妄罚，随事断理，狱无停滞。
现代文：听诉和审查的方法，必须把所发现的情况追查得一清二楚，然后按法律用刑审讯，不苛刻不残酷，有疑问就从轻发落，还没有审查清楚就不乱施刑罚，根据事实判决处理，案件决不拖延积压。
English: As for the methods of hearing complaints and reviewing cases, it is necessary to thoroughly investigate the circumstances found, and then use criminal punishment in accordance with the law. It should not be harsh or cruel, and if there is any doubt, it should be dealt with lightly. If there is no clear review, the punishment should not be imposed indiscriminately, and the judgment should be handled according to the facts. The case should never be delayed and backlogged.

古文：此亦其次。
现代文：这样也是较好的做法。
English: This is also good practice.

古文：若乃不仁恕而肆其残暴，同民木石，专任捶楚。
现代文：如果不用仁厚宽恕的方式而肆意采用残暴的手段，把百姓视同木石，专用刑具鞭打。
English: If you do not use the way of benevolent forgiveness and wantonly use cruel means, treat the people as if they were wood and stone, and use special torture equipment to whip them.

古文：巧诈者虽事彰而获免，辞弱者乃无罪而被罚。
现代文：这样的话，巧言诡诈的人虽罪状明显却免于治罪，不善言辞的人却无罪而遭受刑罚。
English: In this way, those who are clever in speech and cunning are exempted from punishment, although their crimes are obvious, while those who are not good at speech are not guilty and are punished.

古文：有如此者，斯则下矣，非共治所寄。
现代文：像这样处理案件的，这就是最差的了，不是共同治理天下所可以依赖的。
English: When cases are handled like this, it's the worst, and it's not something we can rely on for the common governance of the world.

古文：今之宰守，当勤于中科，而慕其上善。
现代文：当今的地方长官，应当尽力按较好的做法处理，并慕求最好的做法。
English: Today's local governors should do their best to follow the best practices and strive for the best practices.

古文：如在下条，则刑所不赦。
现代文：如果是用最差的做法，那么刑律不会放过他们。
English: If they use the worst practices, then the criminal law will not let them off.

古文：又当深思远大，念存德教。
现代文：此外又应当深刻地思考远大的事业，心中要想到以德政教化百姓。
English: In addition, it is necessary to think deeply about the lofty cause, and think about educating the people with virtue.

古文：先王之制曰，与杀无辜，宁赦有罪；与其害善，宁其利淫。
现代文：前代先王的规定曾说到，与其滥杀无辜，宁可宽恕罪人；与其伤害好人，宁可利于奸邪。
English: The regulations of the previous king once said that rather than indiscriminately killing innocents, it is better to forgive sinners; rather than harming good people, it is better to benefit evil.

古文：明必不得中，宁滥舍有罪，不谬害善人也。
现代文：这就说明如果明知不能处理得当，那就宁可错免罪人，也不乱伤害好人。
English: Public punishment is not necessarily accurate, preferring to abandon those who are guilty, rather than easily hurt good people.

古文：今之从政者则不然。
现代文：当今执政的人却不是这样。
English: This is not the case with those currently in power.

古文：深文巧劾，宁致善人于法，不免有罪于刑。
现代文：他们死板地固守法律条文，千方百计罗列过失，宁可使好人受刑法处罚，也不让罪人免于刑罚。
English: They stick rigidly to the letter of the law and do their best to enumerate faults, preferring to subject good people to criminal punishment rather than allowing criminals to escape punishment.

古文：所以然者，皆非好杀人也，但云为吏宁酷，可免后患。
现代文：他们这样做的原因，都不是喜欢杀人，衹是认为当官就宁可严酷，这样可以避免因漏判而带来的后患。
English: The reason they do this is not because they like to kill, but because they think that officials would rather be harsh, so that they can avoid the consequences of missing the verdict.

古文：此则情存自便，不念至公，奉法如此，皆奸人也。
现代文：这样做就是怀有利己的心理，而不考虑最公正的原则，像这样执行法令，都是奸邪之人。
English: These people arbitrarily punish the innocent according to their own feelings, without considering fairness and selflessness. People who follow the law in this way are evil villains.

古文：夫人者，天地之贵物，一死不可复生。
现代文：人是天地万物之中最宝贵的，死了就不能复活。
English: Man is the most precious of all things in heaven and on earth. Once he dies, he cannot be resurrected.

古文：然楚毒之下，以痛自诬，不被申理，遂陷刑戮者，将恐往往而有。
现代文：然而在酷刑之下，因为受不住刑讯的痛苦而自诬有罪，又不经申诉审理，就被判刑杀害，恐怕到处都有。
English: However, under torture, because they cannot bear the pain of torture and falsely convict themselves, and without a complaint hearing, they are sentenced to be killed, I am afraid they are everywhere.

古文：是以自古以来，设五听三宥之法，着明慎庶狱之典，此皆爱民甚也。
现代文：因此自古以来，设置了从五个方面听取诉讼、对三种情况从宽处理的原则，写下了明察细审案件的法典，这些都是十分爱惜人民的做法。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, the principle of hearing lawsuits from five aspects and dealing with three situations with leniency has been set up, and a code of law has been written to inspect and scrutinize cases. These are all practices that are very considerate of the people.

古文：凡伐木杀草，田猎不顺，尚违时令，而亏帝道；况刑罚不中，滥害善人，宁不伤天心、犯和气也！
现代文：凡是砍树、割草、打猎不依时节，尚且违反有关农事的政令而损害帝王的治国之道；何况刑罚不当，乱杀好人，难道不使皇天伤心，触犯阴阳交合而化生万物的和气吗!
English: All the cutting of trees, mowing of grass, and hunting that do not follow the seasons, and yet violate the government decree on agricultural affairs and damage the emperor's way of governing the country; not to mention the improper punishment and indiscriminate killing of good people, do they not make the emperor sad, violate the yin and yang and create the harmony of all things!

古文：天心伤，和气损，而欲阴阳调适，四时顺序，万物阜安，苍生悦乐者，不可得也。
现代文：皇天伤心，和气受损，而想阴阳协调合适，四季顺理有序，万物丰盛乎安，百姓快乐高兴，这是不可能的。
English: Emperor Tian is sad, and the harmony is damaged, but it is impossible to think that the yin and yang are coordinated, the four seasons are logical and orderly, everything is abundant and safe, and the people are happy and happy.

古文：故语曰，一夫吁嗟，王道为之倾覆，正谓此也。
现代文：因此有人说过，一个人叹息，王道就会因此倾覆，说的正是这种情况。
English: Therefore, it was said that if a person sighs, the royal road will be overturned, which is exactly the case.

古文：凡百宰守，可无慎乎。
现代文：所有的地方长官，能不审慎匿。
English: All the regional governors can abscond.

古文：若有深奸巨猾，伤化败俗，悖乱人伦，不忠不孝，故为背道者，杀一利百，以清王化，重刑可也。
现代文：如果有人老奸巨猾，伤风败俗，违背人伦，不忠不孝，故意做出违背道德的行为，杀掉一人而有利于众人，以便使君王的教化清明，这样即使用重刑也是可以的。
English: If someone is treacherous, corrupt, unethical, disloyal, unfilial, and deliberately commits an immoral act, killing one person for the benefit of all, so that the king's edification is clear, then the use of heavy punishment is also possible.

古文：识此二途，则刑政尽矣。
现代文：懂得这两方面判罚的原则，那么刑政就完备了。
English: If we understand the principles of sentencing in these two aspects, then criminal policy will be complete.

古文：其六，均赋役，曰：
现代文：第六条，平均赋税徭役：
English: Article 6, the average tax officer shall:

古文：圣人之大宝曰位。
现代文：圣人最宝贵的是地位。
English: The most precious thing for a saint is status.

古文：何以守位曰仁，何以聚人曰财。
现代文：用来守住地位的是仁爱，用来凝聚百姓的是财富。
English: Benevolence is used to maintain status, and wealth is used to rally the people.

古文：明先王必以财聚人，以仁守位。
现代文：遣说明前代君王必定用财富凝聚百姓，用仁爱保守地位。
English: The envoys said that the previous monarchs must use wealth to unite the people and use benevolence to maintain their status.

古文：国而无财，位不可守。
现代文：国家如果没有财富，地位就保不住。
English: If a country does not have wealth, its status cannot be maintained.

古文：是故三以来，皆有征税之法。
现代文：因此从三皇五帝以来，都有征税的做法。
English: Therefore, taxation has been practiced since the time of the three emperors and five emperors.

古文：虽轻重不同，而济用一也。
现代文：虽然轻重不同，但作用是一样的。
English: Although the weight is different, the effect is the same.

古文：今逆寇未平，军用资广，虽未遑减省，以恤民瘼，然令平均，使下无匮。
现代文：现在叛贼强盗还没有扫干，军队费用的开支很大，虽然还没有来得及减省，以便救济百姓的疾苦，但要使它平均，让百姓不缺乏生活资料。
English: At present, the traitors and robbers have not yet been purged, and the military expenses are very large. Although it has not yet been possible to reduce them in order to relieve the sufferings of the people, it is necessary to balance them so that the people do not lack the means of subsistence.

古文：夫平均者，不舍豪强而征贫弱，不纵奸巧而困愚拙，此之谓均也。
现代文：所谓平均，不是免除豪强而衹征收贫弱人家，不纵容奸邪诡诈的人而使愚昧笨拙的人受困，造就叫做平均。
English: The so-called average is not to exempt the brave and strong, but to levy taxes on the poor and weak, and not to tolerate the treacherous and deceitful people, but to make the stupid and clumsy people suffer. The creation is called average.

古文：故圣人曰： 盖均无贫。 
现代文：因此圣人说： 衹要平均就没有贫困。 
English: Therefore, the sage said: "If there is an average, there is no poverty."

古文：然财货之生，其功不易。
现代文：然而财物的生产，其工作也不容易。
English: However, the production of wealth is not an easy task.

古文：织纴纺绩，起于有渐，非旬日之间，所可造次。
现代文：纺线织布，从一丝一线逐渐做起，不是十来天就可以随便完成的。
English: The spinning and weaving of fabric, starting from a single thread, can be completed in just a few days.

古文：必须劝课，使预营理。
现代文：必须不断鼓励督促，使人们预先经营料理。
English: We must constantly encourage and urge people to prepare food in advance.

古文：绢乡先事织纴，麻土早修纺绩。
现代文：出产丝织品的地方事先做好织作布帛之事，种麻的地方及早备办缉麻纺鲢。
English: In places where silk products are produced, the weaving of cloth cocoons should be prepared in advance, and in places where hemp is grown, hemp spinning cocoons should be prepared as early as possible.

古文：先时而备，至时而输，故王赋获供，下民无困。
现代文：提前做好准备，到时就能交纳，所以朝廷的赋税能够得到供给，百姓也不会困苦。
English: If you prepare in advance, you will be able to pay at the time, so the imperial tax can be supplied, and the people will not be in need.

古文：如其不预劝戒，临时迫切，复恐稽缓，以为己过，捶扑交至，取办目前。
现代文：如果不预先鼓励劝诫，到征收期限紧迫的时候，又怕拖延时间成为自己的过失，于是鞭抽棍打，责令马上备办交纳。
English: If you do not encourage and admonish in advance, when the collection deadline is tight, you will be afraid that delaying the time will become your own fault, so you will be whipped and ordered to prepare for payment immediately.

古文：富商大贾，缘兹射利，有者从之贵买，无者与之举息。
现代文：那些富有的商买趁此机会牟取暴利，有钱人家向他们高价购买，无钱的向他们付息借贷。
English: Those rich merchants took advantage of this opportunity to make windfall profits. The rich bought from them at high prices, and the poor paid interest to borrow from them.

古文：输税之民，于是弊矣。
现代文：交纳赋税的百姓于是遭殃了。
English: Taxpayers suffered as a result.

古文：租税之时，虽有大式，至于斟酌贫富，差次先后，皆事起于正长，而系之于守令。
现代文：征收租税的时候，虽然有大致的规定，至于考虑贫富差别，排列先后顺序，都由基层的党正里长提出意见，再由郡守县令决定。
English: When collecting taxes, although there are general regulations, as far as considering the difference between the rich and the poor and arranging the order of precedence are concerned, the grass-roots party leaders put forward opinions, which are then decided by the county magistrate.

古文：若斟酌得所，则政和而民悦；若检理无方，则吏奸而民怨。
现代文：如果考虑周全，那么政治和洽而百姓高兴；假如审核处理不得法，那么官吏就会作恶而百姓怨恨。
English: If it is well-considered, then the people will be happy with the political and social harmony; if the examination and treatment is illegal, then the officials will do evil and the people will resent it.

古文：又差发徭役，多不存意。
现代文：此外分派徭役，官员多不用心。
English: In addition, officials are often careless when assigning officials.

古文：致令贫弱者或重徭而远戍，富强者或轻使而近防。
现代文：致使贫穷体弱的人有的服重役而到远方防守，富有体壮的人有的派上轻差而在附近防卫。
English: As a result, some poor and weak people served as guards and defended far away, while some rich and strong people defended nearby.

古文：守令用怀如此，不存恤民之心，皆王政之罪人也。
现代文：郡守县令考虑事情如此草率，没有一点怜悯百姓的心肠，都是君王政务的罪人。
English: The county magistrate and the county magistrate considered the matter so hastily, without a bit of compassion for the people's heart and soul, are all sinners of the monarch's government affairs.

古文：太祖甚重之，常置诸座右。
现代文：太祖很重视这六条韶令，常把它放在座位右边。
English: Emperor Taizu attached great importance to these six edicts and often placed it on the right side of his seat.

古文：又令百司习诵之。
现代文：他又命令各部门官员学习背诵。
English: He also ordered officials from various departments to learn to recite it.

古文：其牧守令长，非通六条及计帐者，不得居官。
现代文：那些州官、郡守、县令等官长，凡是不通晓六条韶令和记账方法的，不能够任职。
English: Those state officials, county governors, county magistrates and other officials who are not familiar with the six imperial decrees and accounting methods cannot hold office.

古文：自有晋之季，文章竞为浮华，遂成风俗。
现代文：自从晋朝末年以来，文章竞相追求浮华的风格，终于成为习惯。
English: Since the end of the Jin Dynasty, articles have been competing to pursue a flashy style, and it has finally become a habit.

古文：太祖欲革其弊，因魏帝祭庙，群臣毕至，乃命绰为大诰，奏行之。
现代文：太祖想革除这种弊病，就趁着魏帝祭庙，群臣全都来到的机会，命令苏绰写了一篇大诰，奏请魏文帝推行。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to get rid of this malady, so he took the opportunity of the Wei Emperor's temple and all the courtiers to come, and ordered Su Zhaopu to write a grand edict and ask Emperor Weiwen to implement it.

古文：其词曰：惟中兴十有一年，仲夏，庶邦百辟，咸会于王庭。
现代文：大诰说：国家中兴十一年，仲夏，各地百官，全都会集朝廷。
English: Daxi said, "In the 11th year of the rise of the nation, in the middle of summer, hundreds of officials from all over the country will gather at the imperial court.

古文：柱国泰洎群公列将，罔不来朝。
现代文：上自柱国宇文泰，下至群公列将，没有谁不来朝拜。
English: There is no one who does not come to pay homage to the emperor, from the pillar country, Uwentai, down to the group of generals.

古文：时乃大稽百宪，敷于庶邦，用绥我王度。
现代文：当时大力制定各种法令，施予各地，用来告知我王法度。
English: At that time, various decrees were vigorously formulated and issued to various regions to inform us of the king's decrees.

古文：皇帝曰： 昔尧命羲和，允厘百工。
现代文：皇帝说： 当初尧任命羲和，恰当地管理百官。
English: The emperor said, "In the beginning, I appointed Xing He to properly manage the officials.

古文：舜命九官，庶绩咸熙。
现代文：舜任命九官，各种事业兴办起来。
English: He appointed nine officials and set up various undertakings.

古文：武丁命说，克号高宗。
现代文：武丁任命傅说，能够号称高宗。
English: Wu Ding appointed Fu said, can be known as Gaozong.

古文：时惟休哉，朕其钦若。
现代文：天时美好，寡人敬重顺从。
English: When the weather is fine, few people respect and obey.

古文：格尔有位，胥暨我太祖之庭，朕将丕命女以厥官。 六月丁巳，皇帝朝格于太庙，凡厥具僚，罔不在位。
现代文：你们各有职位，全都来到我太祖的王庭，寡人将把那些官职奉天意任命给你们。 六月丁巳，皇帝到太庙朝拜，凡是官员，无不在位。
English: Each of you has a position, and all of you have come to the royal court of my great-grandfather, and each of you will be appointed to those official positions by the will of heaven.In June, the emperor paid a visit to the Imperial Temple, and all officials were present.

古文：皇帝若曰： 咨我元辅、群公、列将、百辟、卿士、庶尹、御事，朕惟寅敷祖宗之灵命，稽于先王之典训，以大诰于尔在位。
现代文：皇帝这样说： 啊!我朝宰相、群公、列将、百官、卿士、庶尹、御事，寡人恭敬地发布祖宗的灵命，查考先王的典章训示，来告诫你们在职的诸位。
English: The emperor said, "Ah! I, the prime minister, the princes, the generals, the centurions, the nobles, the courtiers, and the officials, respectfully issue the spiritual mission of the ancestors, examine the decrees and instructions of the former king, and admonish you who are in office.

古文：昔我太祖神皇，肇膺明命，以创我皇基。
现代文：当初我太祖神皇，开始接受圣明的命令，来创立我朝伟大的基业。
English: At that time, I, the Great Ancestor God Emperor, began to receive orders from the Holy Light to establish the great foundation of my dynasty.

古文：烈祖景宗，廓开四表，底定武功。
现代文：烈祖景宗，开拓四方，以武功平定天下。
English: Emperor Jingzong, the founder of the dynasty, explored the four directions and conquered the world with martial arts.

古文：暨乎文祖，诞敷文德，龚惟武考，不霣其旧。
现代文：到了文祖，大力施行文教德政，遵奉武考，不失旧制。
English: At the time of the founder of Confucianism, he vigorously implemented the principles of Confucianism and Confucianism, adhered to the military examination, and did not lose the old system.

古文：自时厥后，陵夷之弊，用兴大难于彼东丘，则我黎人，咸坠涂炭。
现代文：自那时以后，衰颓的弊端已起，因而在那束丘兴起大难，我黎民百姓，都陷于涂炭。
English: Since that time, the evils of decay have set in, so that there is great trouble in the hills, and we, the people, are sunk in the mire.

古文：惟台一人，缵戎下武，夙夜祗畏，若涉大川，罔识攸济。
现代文：我继承先王帝业，早晚敬畏，好像要渡过大河一样，不知道该从哪裹过去。
English: I have inherited the emperor's legacy, and sooner or later I am awestruck, as if I were crossing a great river, and I don't know where to wrap myself.

古文：是用稽于帝典，揆于王廷，拯我民瘼。
现代文：因此稽查先帝典章，在朝廷上揣测，力求拯救百姓于疾苦之中。
English: Therefore, he examined the former emperor's edicts, speculated on the imperial court, and tried to save the people from suffering.

古文：惟彼哲王，示我彝训，曰天生蒸民，罔克自乂，上帝降鉴叡圣，植元后以乂之。
现代文：那贤明的君王，给我昭示日常的训诫，说苍天降生众多百姓，他们却不能治理自己，天帝俯察明智通达，设置天子来治理百姓。
English: The wise king showed me his daily admonition, saying that many people have been born into the world, but they cannot govern themselves. The heavenly emperor looked down with wisdom and understanding, and set up the Son of Heaven to govern the people.

古文：惟时元后弗克独乂，博求明德，命百辟群吏以佐之。
现代文：衹是天子也不能独自治理，要广泛征求才德兼备之人，任命百官群臣来辅佐他。
English: Even if he is the son of heaven, he cannot govern alone. It is necessary to widely solicit people who are both talented and moral, and appoint hundreds of officials and ministers to assist him.

古文：肆天之命辟，辟之命官，惟以恤民，弗惟逸念。
现代文：于是上天任命君主，君主任命百官，衹是用以救助民众，而并不是贪求安逸的想法。
English: As a result, Heaven appoints a monarch, and the monarch appoints a hundred officials, but it is to help the people, not to seek comfort.

古文：故其彝训曰： 后克艰厥后，臣克艰厥臣，政乃乂。 今台一人，膺天之嘏，既陟元后。
现代文：君主是头，黎民是脚，股肱的作用则是辅佐。上下一个整体，各自都在自己负责的岗位上辛劳，这样就能达到统治天下的准则要求。因此常训说： 君王能够付出君王的艰辛，大臣能够付出大臣的艰辛，政局就能安定。 现在我承受上天之福。已登上天子宝座。
English: The monarch is the head, the people are the feet, and the role of the clique is the assistant. The upper and lower totality, each of them are toiling in their responsible positions, so that they can achieve the standard requirements for ruling the world. Therefore, the sermon said: The king can pay the hardships of the king, the minister can pay the hardships of the minister, and the political situation can be stable. Now I bear the blessing of heaven. I have ascended to the throne of the son of heaven.

古文：股肱百辟又服我国家之命，罔不咸守厥职。
现代文：各位辅助大臣又服从我国家的命令，无不恪守职责。
English: The assistant ministers also obey the orders of our country, and all of them strictly abide by their duties.

古文：嗟夫，后弗艰厥后，臣弗艰厥臣，于政何弗斁，呜呼艰哉！
现代文：唉，如果君王不能付出君王的艰辛，大臣不能付出大臣的艰辛，政局怎么会不败坏呢。啊，确实艰辛啊!
English: Alas, if the king cannot bear the hardships of the king, and the minister cannot bear the hardships of the minister, how can the political situation not deteriorate.

古文：凡尔在位，其敬听命。 
现代文：诸位凡是在职的，希望听从寡人之命。 
English: All of you who are on duty, I hope you will follow someone's orders.

古文：皇帝若曰： 柱国，唯四海之不造，载繇二纪。
现代文：皇帝这样说： 柱国，四海不幸，由开始至今已有两代。
English: The emperor said this: The pillar country, the misfortune of the four seas, has had two generations since the beginning.

古文：天未绝我太祖列祖之命，用锡我以元辅。
现代文：皇天还没有断绝我太祖列祖之运命，因而把重臣赐给我。
English: The Emperor has not yet broken the fate of my great-grandfathers, so he has given me a senior vassal.

古文：国家将坠，公惟栋梁。
现代文：国家将要衰败，先生是国家的栋梁。
English: The country is about to fall apart, and you, sir, are the pillar of the nation.

古文：皇之弗极，公作相。
现代文：君王考虑不到之处，先生起来辅佐。
English: Where the sovereign cannot be considered, the lord stands up to assist.

古文：百揆諐度，公惟大录。
现代文：百官如有违反法度，先生可作统领。
English: If there is a violation of the law by a hundred officials, you can be the leader.

古文：公其允文允武，克明克乂，迪七德，敷九功，龛暴除乱，下绥我苍生，旁施于九土。
现代文：先生文武兼备，能明察是非，能治理天下，遵循武功七德，施行文事九功，平定暴乱，安抚我百姓，施恩九州土地。
English: He is skilled in both literature and martial arts, can see right from wrong, can govern the world, follow the seven virtues of martial arts, implement the nine virtues of literature, quell riots, pacify our people, and benefit the land of Kyushu.

古文：若伊之在商，周之有吕，说之相丁，用保我无疆之祚。 
现代文：好比伊尹在商，周王朝有吕尚，傅说辅佐武丁，因而可保我朝无穷无尽的幸福。 
English: Like Yi Yin in business, the Zhou Dynasty has Lushang, Fu said to assist Wuding, thus ensuring my endless happiness.

古文：皇帝若曰： 群公、太宰、太尉、司徒、司空。
现代文：皇帝这样说： 群公、太宰、太尉、司徒、司空。
English: The emperor said, "Gunkong, Dazai, Taiyi, Sito, and Siku."

古文：惟公作朕鼎足，以弼乎朕躬。
现代文：诸位作为寡人的三公重臣，辅佐寡人。
English: As the three most senior ministers, you are few in number, and you are supported by few.

古文：宰惟天官，克谐六职。
现代文：宰相是百官之首，能够协调治、教、礼、政、刑、事六种职事。
English: The prime minister is the head of a hundred officials and is able to coordinate six types of duties, including governance, education, ritual, politics, punishment, and affairs.

古文：尉惟司武，武在止戈。
现代文：太尉主管武事，武事的作用在于制止干戈。
English: The captain is in charge of martial arts, and the role of martial arts is to stop fighting.

古文：徒惟司众，敬敷五教。
现代文：司徒掌管人民，恭敬地施行各种教化。
English: St. Peter presided over the people and respectfully carried out all kinds of edification.

古文：空惟司土，利用厚生。
现代文：司空负责土地，利用田地使人民生活充裕。
English: The SFC is responsible for the land, using the fields to make people's lives more prosperous.

古文：惟时三事，若三阶之在天；惟兹四辅，若四时之成岁。
现代文：这三公职位，好像三台星在天上；这四个辅佐天子的官职，好像四季合起来组成一年。
English: These three public offices are like three stars in the sky; these four offices that support the Son of Heaven are like the four seasons that make up a year.

古文：天工人其代诸。 
现代文：上天的职任，我们这些人可要代替它去完成。 
English: Heaven's mission, we the people can replace it to complete.

古文：皇帝若曰： 列将，汝惟鹰扬，作朕爪牙，寇贼奸宄，蛮夷猾夏，汝徂征，绥之以惠，董之以威。
现代文：皇帝这样说： 各位将领，你们要大展雄才，作寡人英勇善战的勇士，贼寇违法作乱，蛮夷侵扰中原，你们前往征讨，用仁惠安抚他们，用威严监督他们。
English: The emperor said: "All of you generals, you should display your great talents and be brave warriors who are good at war. Thieves and robbers are breaking the law and causing chaos, and barbarians are invading the Central Plains. You should go to collect, pacify them with benevolence and beneficence, and supervise them with majesty.

古文：刑期于无刑，万邦咸宁。
现代文：施用刑罚期待达到无刑的地步，天下各地全都安宁。
English: The imposition of punishment is expected to reach the point of no punishment, and all parts of the world will be peaceful.

古文：俾八表之内，莫违朕命，时汝功。
现代文：使八方之内，没有谁违抗寡人的命令，这是你们的功劳。 
English: It is to your credit that no one on either side disobeyed anyone's orders.

古文：皇帝若曰： 庶邦列辟，汝惟守土，作民父母。
现代文：皇帝这样说： 各地众官，你们掌管所辖的区域，要作百姓的父母。
English: The emperor said, "Officers of various regions, you are in charge of the areas under your jurisdiction, be the parents of the people.

古文：民惟不胜其饥，故先王重农；不胜其寒，故先王贵女功。
现代文：百姓不能忍受饥饿，因此前代君王重视农业生产；百姓不能忍受寒冷，所以前代君王重视女功。
English: The people can't stand hunger, so the previous monarchs paid attention to agricultural production; the people can't stand cold, so the previous monarchs paid attention to women's gong.

古文：民之不率于孝慈，则骨肉之恩薄；弗惇于礼让，则争夺之萌生。
现代文：如果百姓不遵行孝慈，那么他们骨肉的恩情就会淡薄；不笃守礼让，那么他们争夺的恶念就会产生。
English: If the people do not practice filial piety, then the kindness of their flesh and blood will be weak; if they do not practice courtesy, then their evil thoughts of competition will arise.

古文：惟兹六物，寔为教本。
现代文：衹有这六件事情，才确实是教化的根本。啊!
English: Only these six things are truly the foundation of enlightenment. Ah!

古文：呜呼！为上在宽，宽则民怠。
现代文：身居上位治理百姓的官员应当宽容，但过于宽容百姓又会懈怠。
English: Officials who live in high places and govern the people should be tolerant, but if they are too tolerant, the people will slack off.

古文：齐之以礼，不刚不柔，稽极于道。 
现代文：衹有用礼法使他们思想行动一致，不刚不柔，才符合中正之道的准则。 
English: It is necessary to use etiquette to make their thoughts and actions consistent, not rigid or inflexible, in order to meet the standards of the Middle Way.

古文：皇帝若曰： 卿士、庶尹、凡百御事，王省惟岁，卿士惟月，庶尹惟日，御事惟时。
现代文：皇帝这样说： 卿士、各宫首长、办事人员，六件事情的实行，君王每年视察各地一次，卿士则应每月一次，众宫首长每天都应巡视，办事人员则应随时检查。
English: The emperor said, "Gentlemen and women, heads of palaces, and clerks, for the implementation of the six matters, the monarch should inspect all regions once a year, the noblemen and women should inspect once a month, the heads of palaces should inspect every day, and clerks should inspect at any time.

古文：岁月日时，罔易其度，百宪咸贞，庶绩其凝。
现代文：年月曰时，不改变那些制度，百官都作出表率，事业也就能成功。啊!
English: Over the years, without changing those systems, all officials have set an example, and the cause can be successful. Ah!

古文：呜呼！惟若王官，陶均万国，若天之有斗，斟元气，酌阴阳，弗失其和，苍生永赖；悖其序，万物以伤。
现代文：你们这些王官，治理各地，好像上天有北斗星，斟酌宇宙阴阳二气，不使它们失掉和谐，百姓永远有所依赖；如果违反了应有的次序，世间万物就会因此受到损伤。
English: You, the royal officials, govern all parts of the country as if there were a Big Dipper in the sky, weighing the yin and yang of the universe so that they do not lose their harmony, and the people will always have something to rely on. If the proper order is violated, everything in the world will be damaged.

古文：时惟艰哉！ 皇帝若曰： 惟天地之道，一阴一阳；礼俗之变，一文一质。
现代文：这是十分艰辛的事情啊! 皇帝这样说： 天地的规律，一阴一阳；礼俗的变化，一文一质。
English: This is a very difficult matter! The emperor said this: The laws of heaven and earth, one yin and one yang; changes in etiquette, one quality.

古文：爰自三五，以迄于兹，匪惟相革，惟其救弊，匪惟相袭，惟其可久。
现代文：从三皇五帝一直到今天，不仅有所变革，正因为它可以挽救时弊，不仅有所沿袭，正因为它可以保持长久。
English: From the Three Kings and Five Emperors to the present day, not only has there been change, precisely because it can save the ills of the times, not only has there been continuity, precisely because it can be maintained for a long time.

古文：惟我有魏，承乎周之末流，接秦汉遗弊，袭魏晋之华诞，五代浇风，因而未革，将以穆俗兴化，庸可暨乎。
现代文：我魏王朝，承袭周王朝的颓风败俗，接续秦、漠遗留的弊病，沿袭魏、晋的虚浮，五个朝代的浮薄风气，都相沿至今而还没有改革，如果要用它来使风俗纯正，振兴教化，难道能达到目的吗。
English: Our Wei Dynasty, inheriting the decadent customs of the Zhou Dynasty, continuing the ills left by the Qin and Qiang dynasties, inheriting the vanity of the Wei and Jin dynasties, and the vain customs of the five dynasties, have all followed each other so far and have not been reformed. If we want to use it to make customs pure, revitalize and enlighten, can we really achieve the goal?

古文：嗟我公辅、庶僚、列侯，朕惟否德，其一心力，祗慎厥艰，克遵前王之丕显休烈，弗敢怠荒。
现代文：我朝宰相、百官、列侯，寡人德微，还可凭着全副心力，敬慎于事业的艰辛，能遵循前代君王英明美好的事业，不敢怠懈荒废。
English: I am a prime minister, a hundred officials, a vassal lord, and there are very few people of virtue. I can still, with all my heart, be cautious about the hardships of the cause, can follow the wise and beautiful cause of the previous monarch, and dare not be lazy and wasteful.

古文：咨尔在位，亦协乎朕心，惇德允元，惟厥难是务。
现代文：啊，你们各在其职，也要跟我的想法一致重视有德行的人，信任仁厚的人，致力于这一艰辛的事业。
English: Ah, each of you, in your own way, must also, with me, value the virtuous, trust the benevolent, and devote yourselves to this arduous task.

古文：克捐厥华，即厥实，背厥伪，崇厥诚。
现代文：要能够捐弃浮华，追求真实，背离虚假，推崇诚信。
English: It is necessary to be able to give up vanity, pursue truth, depart from falsehood, and promote integrity.

古文：勿愆勿忘，一乎三代之彝典，归于道德仁义，用保我祖宗之丕命。
现代文：不要违反不要忘却，统一夏、商、周三代的固定法典，集中到道德仁义之上，用来保全我祖宗伟大的天命。
English: Do not violate, do not forget, unify the fixed codes of Xia, Shang and San dynasties, concentrate on morality, benevolence and righteousness, and use them to preserve the great destiny of my ancestors.

古文：荷天之休，克绥我万方，永康我黎庶。
现代文：承受皇天的福禄，能够安抚天下各地，永远使我朝百姓安宁。
English: Receiving the Emperor's blessing can pacify all parts of the world and bring peace to the people of my dynasty forever.

古文：戒之哉！
现代文：大家要谨慎啊!
English: Take this as a warning!

古文：戒之哉！
现代文：谨慎啊!
English: Take this as a warning!

古文：朕言不再。 柱国泰洎庶僚百辟拜手稽首曰：  亶聪明作元后，元后作民父母。 惟三五之王，率繇此道，用臻于刑措。
现代文：我的话不说第二遍了。 柱国宇文泰及百官跪拜叩头说：  确实聪明的人就做君主，君主做百姓的父母。 三皇五帝大都遵行这种治国之道，以使可以弃置刑法而不用。
English: I won't say my words a second time.Zhu Guo, Yu Wentai and hundreds of officials knelt and kowtowed and said: Truly wise people become monarchs, and monarchs become the parents of the people.The three emperors and five emperors mostly followed this way of governing the country, so that the criminal law could be abandoned and not used.

古文：自时厥后，历千载而未闻。
现代文：自那时以后，历经千年就再没有听说过。
English: Since then, after thousands of years, it has never been heard of again.

古文：惟帝念功，将反叔世，逖致于雍。庸锡降丕命于我群臣。
现代文：皇帝怀念三皇五帝的功绩，将要改变衰乱的时代，招引远方百姓和睦相处，于是赐降天命给我等群臣。
English: The emperor remembered the exploits of the three emperors and five emperors, and said that he would change the decadent era and attract people from far away to live in harmony, so he bestowed the Mandate of Heaven on me and other ministers.

古文：博哉王言，非言之难，行之实难。
现代文：君王这番话真是博大啊!并非说起来难，而是实行起来确实艰难。
English: The king's words are really great! It is not difficult to say, but it is really difficult to implement.

古文：罔不有初，鲜克有终。
现代文：做事情无不容易有个好开头，却很少能够有个好的结尾。
English: It is not easy to make a good beginning, but it is rarely possible to make a good ending.

古文：商书曰： 终始惟一，德乃日新。 
现代文：《商书》说： 始终如一不间断，这样德行才会日出新变化。 皇帝开始时毕恭毕敬，直到最后始终小心谨慎。
English: "Commercial book" said: Consistently and uninterruptedly, so that virtue will be the sunrise of new changes. The emperor began with respect and was always cautious until the end.

古文：惟帝敬厥始，慎厥终，以跻日新之德，则我群臣，敢不夙夜对扬休哉。惟兹大谊，未光于四表，以迈种德，俾九域幽遐，咸昭奉元后之明训，率迁于道，永膺无疆之休。 帝曰： 钦哉。 
现代文：以便达到新的德行，那么我们群臣，敢不早晚报答君王的美好教导吗。逭一正道，还未光大于四方，而远行布德，使九州深幽僻远之地，全都勤勉地奉行君王明确的训诫，全都归向正道，永远承受无穷无尽的福禄。 皇帝说： 你们可要认真谨慎啊! 
English: In order to achieve a new virtue, then, we, the courtiers, dare not repay the king's fine teaching sooner or later. To follow a righteous path is not yet greater than the four directions, but to travel far and wide, so that Kyushu, deep and far away, all diligently follow the king's clear instructions, all turn to the right path, and forever receive endless blessings. The emperor said: You must be very careful!

古文：自是之后，文笔皆依此体。
现代文：从此之后，文章的风格都依照这种体例。
English: Articles have followed this format ever since.

古文：绰性俭素，不治产业，家无余财。
现代文：苏绰品性节俭朴素，不经营私人产业，家中没有多余的财物。
English: Su Qiao's character is frugal and simple. He does not run a private business, and there are no superfluous belongings in his home.

古文：以海内未平，常以天下为己任。
现代文：因为天下还没有平定，他常把治理天下作为自己的责任。
English: Because the world has not yet been pacified, he often regards governing the world as his responsibility.

古文：博求贤俊，共弘治道，凡所荐达，皆至大官。
现代文：苏绰广泛寻求优秀人才，共同弘扬治国之道，凡是经他推荐的人，都做到大官。
English: Su Zhao extensively sought out outstanding talents to jointly promote the way of governing the country. All the people recommended by him have become high-ranking officials.

古文：太祖亦推心委任，而无间言。
现代文：太祖也诚心诚意地委任他，从来都没有闲言。
English: My great-grandfather also appointed him wholeheartedly, and there was never any gossip.

古文：太祖或出游，常预署空纸以授绰，若须有处分，则随事施行，及还，启之而已。
现代文：太祖有时外出巡游，经常预先在空白纸上签署自己的名号交给苏绰，如果有需要处理的事情，就让他根据情况施行，到回来以后，告诉左担一声就行了。
English: The great-grandfather sometimes went out on a tour, and often signed his name on a blank piece of paper and handed it to Su Qiao in advance. If there was anything that needed to be dealt with, he would let him do it according to the situation. When he came back, he would just tell Zuo Ya.

古文：绰尝谓治国之道，当爱民如慈父，训民如严师。
现代文：麸纬曾经说治国之道，应当爱护百姓就像一位慈祥的父亲，教导百姓就像一位严格的老师。
English: Zou Wei once said that the way to govern the country should be to love the people like a kind father, and to teach the people like a strict teacher.

古文：每与公卿议论，自昼达夜，事无巨细，若指诸掌。
现代文：苏绰每次与公卿议论，从白天到晚上，事情无论大小，都好像在手掌上筹划一样。
English: Every time he discussed the politics of the Imperial Court with court nobles and ministers, he knew every detail from day to night.

古文：积思劳倦，遂成气疾。
现代文：由于他长期思考，过于疲劳困倦。最终患上气血不通的疾病。
English: Due to his long-term thinking, he was too tired and sleepy. He eventually suffered from a disease that did not allow the flow of qi and blood.

古文：十二年，卒于位，时年四十九。
现代文：大统十二年，苏绰在任职期间去世，终年四十九岁。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, Su Chao died during his term of office, at the age of 49.

古文：太祖痛惜之，哀动左右。
现代文：太祖对苏绰的去世十分痛惜，悲哀的情感使左右的人感动。
English: The great-grandfather was very sorry about Su Qiao's death, and the sad emotion moved people on both sides.

古文：及将葬，乃谓公卿等曰： 苏尚书平生谦退，敦尚俭约。
现代文：到了将要下葬的时候，太祖就对公卿大臣说： 苏尚书干生谦让，十分注重节俭。
English: When Su Qiao was about to be buried, he said to the courtiers: Su Shangshu was always humble and conceded, advocating diligence, frugality and simplicity.

古文：吾欲全其素志，便恐悠悠之徒，有所未达；如其厚加赠谥，又乖宿昔相知之道。
现代文：我想成全他一贯的志向，就怕普通人对我的心意不能了解；如果追赠丰厚的财物和谧号给他。又违背往昔彼此相知的情义。
English: I want to fulfill his lifelong wish, and I am afraid that a mediocre person cannot understand it; if I give him a generous gift and a noble seal, it will violate our close friendship in the past.

古文：进退惟谷，孤有疑焉。 尚书令史麻瑶越次而进曰： 昔晏子，齐之贤大夫，一狐裘三十年。
现代文：真是左右为难，我有疑虑，不知该如何处置。 尚书令史麻瑶由后座走上前说： 古时晏子是齐国才德兼备的大夫，一件狐皮毛衣穿了三十年。
English: I was really in a dilemma, I had doubts and didn't know what to do. Shang Shu ordered Shi Miao to come forward from the back seat and said: In ancient times, Miao Zi was a doctor with both national talent and morality, and he wore a fox fur sweater for thirty years.

古文：及其死也，遗车一乘。
现代文：当他死的时候，衹派了一辆车子送葬。
English: When he died, Zou sent a car to take him to the funeral.

古文：齐侯不夺其志。
现代文：这说明齐侯不改变晏子的志向。
English: This shows that Qi Hou does not change the aspiration of Xunzi.

古文：绰既操履清白，谦挹自居，愚谓宜从俭约，以彰其美。 太祖称善，因荐瑶于朝廷。
现代文：苏绰既然操行清白，以谦虚礼让自居，鄙人认为丧事应当从俭，以便使他的美德发扬光大。 太祖连声赞好，于是把麻瑶推荐给朝廷。
English: Since Su Qiao had behaved innocently and behaved with modesty and courtesy, people thought that the funeral should be frugal in order to make his virtue flourish. The great-grandfather was highly praised, so he recommended Mochi to the imperial court.

古文：及绰归葬武功，唯载以布车一乘。
现代文：苏绰归葬武功，衹用布篷车一辆载送他的灵柩。
English: Su Qiao buried his martial arts skills, and used a cloth caravan to carry his coffin.

古文：太祖与群公，皆步送出同州郭门外。
现代文：太祖和群臣都步行送出同州城门外。
English: The great-grandfather and his retainers were sent out of Tongzhou City Gate on foot.

古文：太祖亲于车后酹酒而言曰： 尚书平生为事，妻子兄弟不知者，吾皆知之。
现代文：太祖亲自在车后把酒洒在地上祭奠，并说： 尚书平生做事，妻子儿女兄弟不知道的，我全都知道。
English: The great-grandfather himself poured wine on the ground in the back of the car to pay his respects, and said: Shang Shu has been doing things all his life, and I know everything that his wife, children and brothers don't know.

古文：惟尔知吾心，吾知尔意。
现代文：衹有你了解我的心思，我了解你的心意。
English: Only you know my heart, and I know your mind.

古文：方欲共定天下，不幸遂舍我去，奈何！ 因举声恸哭，不觉失卮于手。
现代文：正想共同安定天下，你却不幸就舍弃我而离开人世，怎么办呢! 接着太祖放声痛哭，酒杯掉在地上也没察觉。
English: Just when I was thinking of working together to stabilize the world, you had the misfortune to abandon me and leave this world. What should I do? Then my great-grandfather burst into tears. He didn't even notice that the wine glass had fallen to the ground.

古文：至葬日，又遣使祭以太牢，太祖自为其文。
现代文：到下葬当天，太祖又派遣使者用牛羊猪三牲齐备的太牢来祭奠，并亲自写下祭文。
English: On the day of the funeral, the great-grandfather sent an emissary to pay homage with a yakitori prepared with cattle, sheep and pigs, and personally wrote down the dedicatory text.

古文：绰又着佛性论、七经论，并行于世。
现代文：苏绰又着有《佛性论》、《七经论》，都流行于世上。
English: Su Qiao also wrote "Theory of Buddha Nature" and "Theory of the Seven Classics," both of which are popular in the world.

古文：明帝二年，以绰配享太祖庙庭。
现代文：明帝二年，把苏绰神位附在太祖的宗庙裹祭祀。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the Suqiao God's throne was attached to the ancestral temple of the great ancestor.

古文：子威嗣。
现代文：苏绰的儿子苏威继承了爵位。
English: Su Qiao's son Su Wei inherited the title.

古文：威少有父风，袭爵美阳伯。
现代文：苏威年轻时就有父亲的风度，承袭爵位为美阳伯。
English: Su Wei had his father's demeanor when he was young, inheriting the title of Miyang Bo.

古文：娶晋公护女新兴公主，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵怀道县公。
现代文：他娶晋公宇文护的女儿新兴公主为妻，被授车骑大将军、仪同三司，进封爵位为怀道县公。
English: He married Xinxing Princess, the daughter of Jin Gong Uwenguo, and was given the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry and the title of the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies. He was awarded the title of Lord of Huai Dao County.

古文：建德初，稍迁御伯下大夫。
现代文：建德初年，逐渐升任御伯下大夫。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was gradually promoted to his uncle's junior doctor.

古文：大象末，开府仪同大将军。
现代文：大象末年，任开府仪同大将军。
English: In the last years of his life, he was appointed Kaifu Yi Tong Da Genera.

古文：隋开皇初，以绰著名前代，乃下诏曰： 昔汉高钦无忌之义，魏武挹子干之风，前代名贤，后王斯重。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，因为苏绰在前朝很有名声，所以皇帝颁下诏书说： 当初汉高祖钦佩无忌的义气，魏武帝称述子干的遣风，前朝著名的贤人，后代的君王都十分推重。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty's reign, the emperor issued an edict saying, "At that time, Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty admired the fearless spirit of loyalty, Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty said that Su Zi Gan sent the wind, the former dynasty's famous sages, and future generations of emperors were all very important.

古文：魏故度支尚书、美阳伯苏绰，文雅政事，遗迹可称。
现代文：魏朝已故度支尚书、美阳伯苏绰，文教政事各方面所留下的事迹都值得称道。
English: It is commendable for the Wei Dynasty to have left behind the works of Du Zhi Shangshu, Meiyang Bo Suqiao, and all aspects of literature, education and politics.

古文：展力前王，垂声着绩。
现代文：他施展才力辅佐前朝君王，声名功绩永垂青史。
English: He used his talent to assist the king of the former dynasty, and his fame and achievements will never fade.

古文：宜开土宇，用旌善人。 于是追封邳国公，邑二千户。
现代文：应当赐给他土地房屋，用来表彰有道德的贤人。 于是追封苏绰为邳国公，封地二千户。
English: He was to be given land and a house as a reward for being a virtuous and wise man, and so Su Chao was made the prince of the State of Shan, and his fiefdom grew to 2,000 households.

古文：绰弟椿，字令钦。
现代文：苏绰的弟弟苏椿，字令钦。
English: Suqiao's younger brother, Suqin, also goes by the name Lingqin.

古文：性廉慎，沉勇有决断。
现代文：他品性廉洁，做事谨慎，沉着果敢，有决断。
English: He is honest, prudent, calm and resolute.

古文：正光中，关右贼乱，椿应募讨之，授荡寇将军。
现代文：正光年间，关西贼人作乱，苏椿响应招募前往征讨，任荡寇将军。
English: During the Zhengguang years, the Kansai bandits made a disturbance, and Su Tsubaki responded to the recruitment by going to collect, and became the general of the bandits.

古文：累功迁奉朝请、厉威将军、中散大夫，赐爵美阳子，加都督、持节、平西将军、太中大夫。
现代文：多次立功升任奉朝请、厉威将军、中散大夫，赐爵美阳子，又加任都督、持节、平西将军、太中大夫。
English: He was promoted many times for meritorious service to the Imperial Court, such as General Li Wei, Dr. Zhong San, and was given the title of Knight Miyoshi. He was also appointed as the governor of the capital, Jisai, General Pingxi, and the Grand Vice Admiral.

古文：大统初，拜镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫，赐姓贺兰氏。
现代文：大统初年，苏椿被授任镇束将军、金紫光禄大夫，赐姓贺兰氏。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Su Tsubaki was awarded the title of Zhenzoku General and the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and was given the surname of Heran.

古文：四年，出为武都郡守。
现代文：人统四年，他出任武都郡守。
English: Four years after the unification of Korea, he became the governor of Wudu County.

古文：改授西夏州长史，除帅都督，行弘农郡事。
现代文：后改任西夏州长史，又任帅都督，兼摄弘农郡职务。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Western Xia, and also as the governor of Shuai, as well as the duties of Zhenghongnong County.

古文：椿当官强济，特为太祖所知。
现代文：苏椿居官称职，精明干练，特别被太祖赏识。
English: Su Qin was a competent, shrewd and capable official, and was especially appreciated by his great-grandfather.

古文：十四年，置当州乡帅，自非乡望允当众心，不得预焉。
现代文：大统十四年，设置带领本州乡兵的帅都督一职，如果不是本乡有名望能符合众人心意的人，不能参预这项工作。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification, the post of the commander-in-chief leading the local soldiers was set up. If you are not a famous person in your hometown who can meet everyone's wishes, you cannot participate in this work.

古文：乃令驿追椿领乡兵。
现代文：于是让驿车征召苏椿，命令他带领乡兵。
English: So he had the carriage call up Su Tsubaki and ordered him to lead the soldiers.

古文：其年，破盘头氐有功，除散骑常侍，加大都督。
现代文：那年，苏椿打败槃头氐有功，授任散骑常侍，加任大都督。
English: That year, Su Tsubaki defeated Shantou Zou Ying, was awarded the title of horseback riding attendant, and was appointed Grand Governor.

古文：十六年，征随郡，军还，除武功郡守。
现代文：大统十六年，苏椿出征随郡，大军回师，授任他为武功郡守。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, Su Tsubaki went to war with the county, the army returned to the division, and he was awarded the title of martial arts county governor.

古文：既为本邑，以清俭自居，小大之政，必尽忠恕。
现代文：已在本邑任职，苏椿以清廉节俭自居，大小政务，必竭尽忠诚。
English: Su Tsubaki, who has served in this town, is a clean and frugal person. He is loyal to the best of his ability in all matters of government.

古文：寻授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵为侯。
现代文：不久授任使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进封爵位为侯。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division.

古文：武成二年，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督。
现代文：武成二年，官位升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督。
English: In the 2nd year of Wucheng, his official rank was raised to General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and Grand Governor.

古文：保定三年，卒。子植嗣。
现代文：保定三年，苏椿去世，他的儿子苏植继承了爵位。
English: Three years after Baoding, Su Tsubaki died, and his son Su Zhi inherited the title.

古文：史臣曰：书云： 惟后非贤弗乂，惟贤非后罔食 。是以知人则哲，有国之所先；用之则行，为下之常道。
现代文：史臣曰：《尚书》有这样的话： 君主非贤人不能治理好天下，贤人非君主就没有俸禄。 因此能真正理解大臣称得上聪明智慧，这是君主治国的先决条件；被任用就推行正确的治国措施，这是作为臣子的通常做法。
English: The historian said: "Shang Shu" has this saying: "A monarch who is not a wise man cannot govern the world well, and a wise man who is not a monarch has no salary. Therefore, it is a prerequisite for a monarch to be able to truly understand that a minister can be said to be smart and wise; and it is a common practice for a minister to implement correct governance measures after being appointed.

古文：若乃庖厨、胥靡、种德、微管之臣，罕闻于世；黜鲁、逐荆、抱关、执戟之士，无乏于时。斯固典慕所以昭则，风雅所以兴刺也。
现代文：至于厨师、奴隶能成为布施恩德给百姓、功勋卓著的大臣，这样的事情世间极少听说；被放逐在外、以守城门执戟侍卫为业的不得志士人在世上并不少见。这本来就是《典》《谟》要昭示用人的准则，《诗经》提倡指责昏庸君主的原因。
English: As for chefs and slaves being able to be generous to the people and outstanding ministers, such things are rarely heard of in the world; there are not a few people in the world who have been banished from the outside world and work as gatekeepers and attendants. This is originally the principle that "Qing" and "Mou" want to show when employing people, and the reason why "Song of Songs" advocates blaming the mediocre monarch.

古文：诚能监前事之得丧，劳虚己于吐握，其知贤也必用，其授爵也勿疑，则舜禹汤武之德可连衡矣，稷契伊吕之流可比肩矣。
现代文：如果确实能借鉴前事的得失，虚怀若谷地礼贤下士，知道了贤人必定任用，授予宫爵不要有所疑虑，那么这些君主就可以跟虞舜、夏禹、商汤、周武王的美德相比美，这些大臣也会跟后稷、契、伊尹、吕尚这一类贤臣并列了。
English: If they can truly learn from the gains and losses of previous events, cherish the virtuous corporals in the valley, know that the wise men must be appointed, and do not have any doubts about awarding the prince, then these monarchs can be compared with the virtues of Yu Yu, Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and King Zhou Wu, and these ministers will be on a par with the wise men such as Hou Yi, Qi, Yi Yin, and Lushan.

古文：太祖提剑而起，百度草创。
现代文：太祖提剑起家，各种制度开始创立。
English: The great-grandfather started his family with a sword, and various systems began to be created.

古文：施约法之制于竞逐之辰，修治定之礼于鼎峙之日。
现代文：在群雄竞相角逐的日子施行以法约束的制度，在势成鼎足对峙的时候加强安定政治的礼教。
English: To implement the system of legal restraint in the days when heroes are competing, and to strengthen the etiquette of stable politics when confrontations are at their peak.

古文：终能斲雕为朴，变奢从俭，风化既被，而下肃上尊；疆埸屡扰，而内亲外附。
现代文：最终能够破除凋敝的陋俗，返璞归真，改变奢靡的恶习，遵从节俭，好的风气已经遍布天下，地位低的人能恭敬有礼，居上位者能有尊严；虽然边境屡受侵扰，但朝中团结百姓依附。
English: In the end, it is possible to break the decadent vulgarity, return to the truth, change the extravagant bad habits, follow the thrift, the good customs have spread all over the world, the low-ranking people can be respectful and courteous, and the high-ranking people can have dignity; although the border has been repeatedly intruded, the DPRK and China are united and the people are attached.

古文：斯盖苏令绰之力也。
现代文：逭都是由于苏令绰的功劳。
English: It was all due to the efforts of Su Lingpo.

古文：名冠当时，庆流后嗣，宜哉。
现代文：他的名声位居当时之首，恩泽传到后代，这是很应该的。
English: His reputation was one of the highest of his time, and it is only right that his legacy be passed on to future generations.

