古文：五年春，王正月，王使荣叔归含，且赗。
现代文：五年春季，周历正月，周襄王派遣荣叔前来致送含在死者口中的玉和丧仪。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, King Zhou Xiang sent Uncle Rong to come and deliver the jade and funeral rites contained in the mouth of the deceased.

古文：三月辛亥，葬我小君成风。
现代文：三月辛亥日，安葬我国僖公的母亲成风。
English: In March, on the day of Xinhai, it became popular to bury the mother of our country's Xing Gong.

古文：王使召伯来会葬。
现代文：周襄王派遣召伯来参加葬礼。
English: King Zhou Xiang sent an envoy to summon the nobles to attend the funeral.

古文：夏，公孙敖如晋。
现代文：夏季，公孙敖去到晋国。
English: In the summer, Gongsun Yao went to Jin Province.

古文：秦人入鄀。
现代文：秦国进入鄀国
English: The Qin State enters the State of Yao

古文：秋，楚人灭六。
现代文：秋季，楚国灭亡了六国。
English: In the autumn, the Six Kingdoms of Chu were destroyed.

古文：冬十月甲申，许男业卒。
现代文：冬季十月甲申日，许僖公去世。
English: In the winter of October, on the 6th day of the 6th month, Xu Yigong passed away.

古文：五年春，王使荣叔来含且赗，召昭公来会葬，礼也。
现代文：五年春季，周襄王派遣荣叔前来致送含在死者口中的玉和丧仪，召昭公来参加葬礼，这是符合礼仪的。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, King Zhou Xiang sent Uncle Rong to come and deliver the jade and funeral rites contained in the mouth of the deceased, and summoned Zhao Gong to attend the funeral, which was in line with etiquette.

古文：鄀叛楚即秦，又贰于楚。
现代文：当初，鄀国背叛楚国亲近秦国，后来又倾向楚国。
English: At first, Min betrayed Chu and became close to Qin. Later, Min leaned toward Chu.

古文：夏，秦人入鄀。
现代文：夏季，秦国进入鄀国。
English: In the summer, the Qin State entered the Han State.

古文：六人叛楚即东夷。
现代文：六国人背叛楚国亲近东夷。
English: The people of the Six Kingdoms betrayed Chu and allied themselves with the Eastern Yi.

古文：秋，楚成大心、仲归帅师灭六。
现代文：秋季，楚国的成大心、仲归带兵灭亡了六国。
English: In the autumn, Cheng Daishin and Zhong Gui of the State of Chu led their troops to defeat the Six Kingdoms.

古文：冬，楚子燮灭蓼，臧文仲闻六与蓼灭，曰： 皋陶庭坚，不祀忽诸。
现代文：冬季，楚国的公子燮灭亡蓼国。臧文仲听到六国和蓼国灭亡，说： 皋陶、庭坚没有人祭祀了。
English: In the winter,, the prince of Chu, perished in. When  Wenzhong heard that the Six Kingdoms and  had perished, he said, "There is no one left to worship  Tao and  Jian."

古文：德之不建，民之无援，哀哉！ 
现代文：德行不建立，百姓没有人救援，可悲啊！ 
English: If virtue is not established, the people will have no one to rescue them. How sad!

古文：晋阳处父聘于卫，反过甯，甯嬴从之。
现代文：晋国的阳处父到卫国聘问，回国时路过甯地，甯嬴愿意跟着他。
English: The father of the Yang Dynasty in Jin went to the Northern Wei Dynasty to ask for advice. When he returned to China, he passed through Handan, and Handan was willing to follow him.

古文：及温而还，其妻问之，嬴曰： 以刚。
现代文：甯嬴到达温地又回来了，他妻子问他，甯嬴说： 太刚强了。
English: When the stork reached the warm land and came back, his wife asked him about the stork and the stork said, "It's too strong."

古文：《商书》曰： 沈渐刚克，高明柔克。 
现代文：《商书》说： 深沉的人要用刚强来克服，爽朗的人要用柔弱来克服。 
English: "Commercial Book" said: "Deep-rooted people should be overcome with toughness, and cheerful people should be overcome with tenderness."

古文：夫子壹之，其不没乎。
现代文：那个人只具备其中之一，恐怕不得善终吧！
English: That person only has one of them, I'm afraid it won't end well!

古文：天为刚德，犹不干时，况在人乎？
现代文：上天纯阳，属于刚强的德行，尚且不触犯寒暑四时运行的次序，何况人呢？
English: Heaven's pure sun, belongs to the strong virtue, yet does not violate the order of the four-hour operation of cold and heat, what about people?

古文：且华而不实，怨之所聚也，犯而聚怨，不可以定身。
现代文：而且华而不实，就会聚集怨恨。触犯别人而聚集怨恨，不能够安定自身。
English: Moreover, if you are flashy and insincere, you will accumulate resentment. If you offend others and accumulate resentment, you will not be able to stabilize yourself.

古文：余惧不获其利而离其难，是以去之。 
现代文：我是害怕不能得到利益反而遭到祸害，因此才离开他。 
English: I left him because I was afraid that I would be harmed instead of benefiting.

古文：晋赵成子、栾贞子、霍伯、臼季皆卒。
现代文：晋国的赵成子、栾贞子、霍伯、臼季都已经去世了。
English: Zhao Cheng Zi, Zou Zhen Zi, Hobo and Usuki from Jin Province have all passed away.

