古文：冯道，字可道，瀛州景城人。
现代文：冯道，字可道，瀛州景城人。
English: Feng Dao, Zhi Ke Dao, from Jingcheng, Ganzhou.

古文：其先为农为儒，不恆其业。
现代文：他的祖先或种田或读书，没有固定的职业。
English: His ancestors either farmed or studied, and had no fixed occupation.

古文：道少纯厚，好学善属文，不耻恶衣食，负米奉亲之外，惟以披诵吟讽为事，虽大雪拥户，凝尘满席，湛如也。
现代文：冯道小时善良淳厚，爱学习会写文章，不厌恶粗衣薄食，除备办饭食奉养双亲外，就只以读书为乐事，虽在大雪拥门的寒天，尘垢满席的陋室，也快乐自如。
English: Feng Dao was kind and honest when he was young. He loved to study and write articles. He did not dislike coarse clothing and thin food. In addition to preparing meals and supporting his parents, he only enjoyed reading. Although it was a cold day with heavy snow on the door, and the dirty room was full of dust, he was also happy.

古文：天祐中，刘守光署为幽州掾。
现代文：天年间，刘守光任他做幽州掾吏。
English: During the Heian period, Liu Shouguang appointed him as Yuzhou magistrate.

古文：守光引兵伐中山，访于僚属，道常以利害箴之，守光怒，置于狱中，寻为人所救免。
现代文：刘守光领兵讨伐中山国，问计于下属，冯道总是对他晓以利害，刘守光大怒，把冯道关进牢中，不久被人营救出来。
English: Liu Shuguang led the troops to fight against Zhongshan, and asked his subordinates for advice. Feng Dao always knew his interests. Liu Shuguang was furious and put Feng Dao in prison. He was soon rescued.

古文：守光败，遁归太原，监军使张承业辟为本院巡官。
现代文：刘守光战败逃回太原，监军使张承业任冯道为本院巡官。
English: Liu Shuguang was defeated and fled back to Taiyuan. Zhang Chengye, the supervising envoy, appointed Feng Dao as the inspector of this hospital.

古文：承业重其文章履行，甚见待遇。
现代文：张承业看重冯道的文章作为，很是礼待他。
English: Zhang Chengye valued Feng Dao's article as an example, and treated him very politely.

古文：时有周元豹者，善人伦鉴，与道不洽，谓承业曰： 冯生无前程，公不可过用。 
现代文：当时有一个叫周玄豹的人，善于给人看相，跟冯道不合，就对张承业说 ：冯生没有前途，明公不要过于信任使用他。 
English: At that time, there was a man named Zhou Xuanbao, who was good at reading people and did not get along with Feng Dao, so he said to Zhang Chengye: Feng Sheng has no future, Ming Gong should not trust him too much.

古文：时河东记室卢质闻之曰： 我曾见杜黄裳司空写真图，道之状貌酷类焉，将来必副大用，元豹之言不足信也。 
现代文：这时河东记室卢质听说后就说 ：我曾经见过杜黄裳司空的画像，冯道的形状面貌非常像他，将来必能充当大任，周玄豹的话不值得相信。 
English: At this time, Lu Qing of the Hedong Records Office said after hearing about it: I once saw a picture of Du Huang Xiang Sku, the shape and appearance of Feng Dao is very similar to him, he will certainly be able to play a major role in the future, Zhou Xuan Bao's words are not worth believing.

古文：承业寻荐为霸府从事，俄署太原掌书记，时庄宗并有河北，文翰甚繁，一以委之。
现代文：张承业旋即推举冯道担任霸府从事，接着又授他太原书记官，当时庄宗兼并黄河以北，往来文书非常多，全都交给冯道。
English: Zhang Chengye immediately promoted Feng Dao to be in charge of Baofu, and then appointed him as Taiyuan secretary. At that time, Zhuozong annexed the north of the Yellow River, and there were a lot of correspondence, all of which were handed over to Feng Dao.

古文：庄宗与梁军夹河对垒，一日，郭崇韬以诸校伴食数多，主者不办，请少罢减。
现代文：庄宗与后梁军队隔着黄河对阵，一天，郭崇韬因众将校中吃闲饭的人太多，主次不辨，请求罢免减少。
English: Zhuang Zong and Hou Liang's army were facing off across the Yellow River. One day, Guo Chongyao's request for dismissal was reduced because there were too many officers who were eating too much.

古文：庄宗怒曰： 孤为效命者设食都不自由，其河北三镇，令三军别择一人为帅，孤请归太原以避贤路。 
现代文：庄宗大怒说： 我为出力效命的将校设置饭食，竟不能自由，那黄河以北三镇，让三军另选一人统率，我就回太原为贤者让路。 
English: Zhuangzong said angrily, "I set up meals for the officers who worked hard, but I can't be free. In the three towns north of the Yellow River, let the three armies choose another person to lead, and I will go back to Taiyuan to make way for the wise man."

古文：遽命道对面草词，将示其众。
现代文：立即命令冯道当面起草文告，将要向大家宣读。
English: He immediately ordered Feng Dao to draft a statement in person, which will be read to everyone.

古文：道执笔久之，庄宗正色促焉，道徐起对曰： 道所掌笔砚，敢不供职。
现代文：冯道拿起笔很久，庄宗板着脸孔催促他，冯道慢慢站起回答说 ：冯道既然掌管文笔，哪里敢不听命履行职责。
English: Feng Dao took up the pen for a long time, Zhuo Zongban urged him with his face. Feng Dao slowly stood up and replied: Since Feng Dao is in charge of the pen, how dare he not obey his orders to perform his duties.

古文：今大王屡集大功，方平南寇，崇韬所谏，未至过当，阻拒之则可，不可以向来之言，喧动群议，敌人若知，谓大王君臣之不和矣。
现代文：现在大王屡建大功，正平定南方贼寇，郭崇韬所进谏的，不很妥当，不听从就行了，而不能因为刚才他的话，就让大家议论纷纷，敌人如果知道了，认为大王君臣不和了。
English: Now that the great king has repeatedly made great achievements and is suppressing the southern thieves and robbers, what Guo Chongzhen has done is not very appropriate. It is enough not to listen, but it is not because of his words just now, let everyone talk about it. If the enemy knows, they will think that the great king and his ministers are not at peace.

古文：幸熟而思之，则天下幸甚也。 
现代文：请仔细地考虑，就是天下的大幸呀。 
English: Please think about it carefully, it is the luck of the world.

古文：俄而崇韬入谢，因道为之解焉，人始重其胆量。
现代文：不久郭崇韬进来道歉，靠冯道解了围，别人从此敬重冯道的胆量。
English: Not long after, Guo Chongyao came in to apologize, and relied on Feng Dao to break the siege. Since then, others have respected Feng Dao's courage.

古文：庄宗即位鄴宫，除省郎，充翰林学士，自绿衣赐紫。
现代文：庄宗在邺宫即帝位，冯道任省郎，兼任翰林学士，从穿绿衣赐穿紫衣。
English: Zhuangzong was the emperor in the Summer Palace, Feng Dao was the provincial governor, also served as a scholar of Hanlin, and was given a purple robe from wearing a green robe.

古文：梁平，迁中书舍人、户部侍郎。
现代文：后梁灭亡后，迁升为中书舍人、户部侍郎。
English: After Hou Liang's death, he was promoted to the position of junior secretary and household attendant.

古文：丁父忧，持服于景城。
现代文：父亲去世，在景城服丧。
English: My father died and was buried in Jingcheng.

古文：《谈苑》：道闻父丧，即徒步见星以行，家人从后持衣囊追及之。遇岁俭，所得俸余悉赈于乡里，道之所居惟蓬茨而已，凡牧宰馈遗，斗粟匹帛无所受焉。
现代文：遇上年成不好，就将自己得到的俸禄的剩余，全都施给乡民救荒，冯道居住的地方，只是茅草棚而已，凡是官吏们送给他财物，一斗粟一匹布，都不接受。
English: If the previous year's harvest was not good, he would give all the surplus of the salary he received to the villagers to save the famine. The place where Feng Dao lived was just a thatched shed, and he would not accept any property given to him by the officials, such as a bucket of millet and a cloth.

古文：时契丹方盛，素闻道名，欲掠而取之，会边人有备，获免。
现代文：这时契丹势力正盛，一向闻知冯道的名声，想把他抢夺过来，恰逢边防军人有准备，冯道才得以避免。
English: At this time, the Khitan forces were in full swing. They had always been aware of Feng Dao's reputation and wanted to snatch him away. It was only when the border guards were ready that Feng Dao could be avoided.

古文：明宗入洛，遽谓近臣安重诲曰： 先帝时冯道郎中何在？ 
现代文：明宗进入洛阳后，马上对身边臣子安重诲说 ：先帝时的冯道郎中在哪里？ 
English: After Mingzong entered Luoyang, he immediately said to the courtiers around him, "Where is the Feng Doranzhong of the previous emperor?"

古文：重诲曰： 近除翰林学士。 
现代文：安重诲说： 最近授予翰林学士。 
English: Mr. An said, "Recently, I was awarded a bachelor's degree from Hanlin University.

古文：明宗曰： 此人朕素谙委，甚好宰相。 
现代文：明宗说 ：这人我很早就熟知了解他，是一位好的宰相材料。 
English: Myongjong said, "I have known this man for a long time and he is a good prime minister material.

古文：俄拜端明殿学士，端明之号，自道始也。
现代文：不久任为端明殿学士，端明这一殿名，是从冯道开始的。
English: He was soon appointed as a scholar of the Tangming Hall. The name of the Tangming Hall originated from Feng Dao.

古文：未几，迁中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章事。
现代文：不久，迁任中书侍郎、刑部尚书平章事。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Chusajiro (chamberlain) and the position of Shoshohei Shoji (head of the criminal investigation department).

古文：凡孤寒士子，抱才业、素知识者皆与引用；唐末衣冠，履行浮躁者必抑而镇之。
现代文：凡是贫寒无助的读书人，怀抱才识而未被知遇的，都引荐任用，后唐末年的文人士大夫，行为浮躁的，必定压着不用。
English: All readers who were poor and helpless, who had talents that were unknown, were recommended for appointment. Literary doctors at the end of the Tang Dynasty, who behaved impetuously, must be under pressure not to be used.

古文：恽，太宗子，故用梁王兔园名其书，冯道《兔园策》谓此也。
现代文：有叫任赞的工部侍郎，因一同退朝，跟同伴们在后面戏弄冯道说： 想快点走，一定得留下小孩读的《兔园册》。 冯道知道这，就叫来任赞对他说 ：《兔园册》都是有名的文人撰集的，我冯道能背得出来。
English: There was a waiter from the Ministry of Works named Ren Zhan, who, because they were retiring together, teased Feng Dao behind his back with his companions, saying, "If you want to leave quickly, you must leave behind the "Book of Rabbits." " Feng Dao knew this, so he called Ren Zhan to say to him, "The "Book of Rabbits" is a collection of famous writers, I, Feng Dao, can recite it.

古文：复有梁朝宰臣李琪，每以文章自擅，曾进《贺平中山王都表》云， 复真定之逆贼 。
现代文：现在朝中的文士只看重文场中的华词丽藻，便被录取做官，都是偷来的公卿官位，是多么无知浅薄呀！ 
English: Nowadays, the scribes in the imperial court only value the beautiful words in the literary field, and they are accepted as officials. They are all stolen noble official positions. How ignorant and shallow they are!

古文：道让琪曰： 昨来收复定州，非真定也。 
现代文：任赞大为羞愧。又有梁朝宰臣李琪，常以精于文辞章句自傲，曾经进上《贺平中山王都表》，说 收复了叛逆的城池真定 。
English: Li Qi, the vice-minister of the Liang Dynasty, often prided himself on his mastery of words and phrases. He once entered the "Heping Zhongshan Wangdu Table" and said that he had regained the rebellious Chengchi Zhending.

古文：琪昧于地理，顿至折角。
现代文：冯道责备他说： 不久前收复的是定州，不是真定。 李琪不明地理，顿时被挫折了傲气。
English: Feng Dao reproached him, saying, "It was Dingzhou that was recovered not long ago, not Zhending. Li Qi did not know the geography, and his pride was immediately frustrated.

古文：其后百僚上明宗徽号凡三章，道自为之，其文浑然，非流俗之体，举朝服焉。
现代文：后来百官为明宗上功德名号共奏三章，都是冯道一手写成，文章浑然一体，不是一般流俗的风格，举朝臣僚都佩服。
English: Later, Hyakukan composed a three-chapter concert for the Ming Dynasty on the name of merit, all of which were written by Feng Dao single-handedly. The article is a seamless whole, not a common style, and all the courtiers are impressed.

古文：道尤长于篇咏，秉笔则成，典丽之外，义含古道，必为远近传写，故渐畏其高深，由是班行肃然，无浇漓之态。
现代文：冯道特别擅长韵文歌赋，提笔就成，典雅清丽之外，内含古时德义道理，必被远近的人所传诵，所以同僚逐渐敬畏他的高深，因而同行时恭敬严肃，没有轻薄的样子。
English: Feng Dao is particularly good at rhyme and song, and his writing is perfect. In addition to being elegant and beautiful, it contains ancient and moral principles, which must be recited by people near and far. Therefore, his colleagues gradually fear his profoundness, so they are respectful and serious when they walk together, and there is no frivolous appearance.

古文：继改门下侍郎、户部吏部尚书、集贤殿弘文馆大学士，加尚书左仆射，封始平郡公。
现代文：接着改任门下侍郎、户部吏部尚书、集贤殿弘文馆大学士，加授尚书左仆射，封始平郡公。
English: Next, he was reappointed as his disciple's chamberlain, the head of the household staff, Shosho, Shiken-dono, a scholar of the Kobunkan University, Shosho's left-hand servant, and the prince of Shihei County.

古文：一日，道因上谒既退，明宗顾谓侍臣曰： 冯道性纯俭，顷在德胜寨居一茅庵，与从人同器食，卧则刍藁一束，其心晏如也。
现代文：一天，冯道朝拜后已退下，明宗回头对侍臣说： 冯道本性纯朴节俭，不久前在德胜寨住一座茅棚，与仆人同在一起吃饭，就睡在一捆茅草上，内心快乐自如。
English: One day, when Feng Dao had retired after paying homage, Mingzong looked back and said to his attendant: Feng Dao's nature is simple and frugal. Not long ago, he lived in a thatched hut in Deshengzhai, ate with his servants, and slept on a bundle of thatch. He was happy and at ease.

古文：及以父忧退归乡里，自耕樵采，与农夫杂处，略不以素贵介怀，真士大夫也。 
现代文：到因父亲去世到乡下守丧，自己耕种砍柴采摘，与农夫住在一起，全不因自己一向高贵而有其他想法，是真正的士大夫啊。 
English: To go to the countryside to mourn the death of his father, to cultivate, cut and collect firewood by himself, to live with a farmer, not because he was always noble and had other ideas, but because he was a true scholar.

古文：天成、长兴中，天下屡稔，朝廷无事。
现代文：天成、长兴年中，天下连年丰收，朝廷平安无事。
English: In the years of Tiancheng and Changxing, the country had bumper harvests year after year, and the imperial court was safe and sound.

古文：明宗每御延英，留道访以外事，道曰： 陛下以至德承天，天以有年表瑞，更在日慎一日，以答天心。
现代文：明宗每次到延英殿，都留下冯道以咨询其他事情，冯道说： 陛下以至高的道德承受天命，上天降以丰年表现祥瑞，更应该一天比一天小心谨慎，以回报上天的好心。
English: Every time Ming Zong went to Yan Ying Dian, he left Feng Dao behind to consult on other matters. Feng Dao said, "Your Majesty has accepted the destiny of heaven with the highest morality, and has been blessed by heaven with a prosperous year. Moreover, you should be more careful and cautious day by day to repay heaven's kindness."

古文：臣每记在先皇霸府日，曾奉使中山，径井陉之险，忧马有蹶失，不敢怠于衔辔；及至平地，则无复持控，果为马所颠仆，几至于损。
现代文：臣经常记得在先皇霸府时，曾经奉命到中山去，经过井陉天险时，担心马匹有闪失，不敢放松马嚼子和缰绳。等到达平地后，就不再小心抓牢控制，终于被马颠下来摔倒在地，几乎受了损伤。
English: The minister often remembers that when he was at the former Emperor's residence, he was ordered to go to Zhongshan, and when he passed through the natural hazard of the well, he was worried that the horses might slip and did not dare to loosen the horse's bit and reins. After reaching the flat, he no longer carefully grasped the control, and finally he was thrown down by the horse and fell to the ground, almost injured.

古文：臣所陈虽小，可以喻大。
现代文：臣所说的这件事情虽然小，但可用来说明大的道理。
English: Although the matter mentioned by the minister is small, it can be used to illustrate the larger truth.

古文：陛下勿以清晏丰熟，便纵逸乐，兢兢业业，臣之望也。 
现代文：陛下不要因为清平安闲丰收熟稔，就放纵享乐。兢兢业业，是臣所希望的啊。 
English: Your Majesty, don't indulge in pleasure for the sake of peace, leisure and a good harvest. Dedication is what your subjects want.

古文：明宗深然之。
现代文：明宗深以为然。
English: Myongjong is deeply convinced.

古文：他日又问道曰： 天下虽熟，百姓得济否？ 
现代文：另一天又问冯道说： 天下既然丰收，百姓能获得好处吗？ 
English: Another day, Feng Dao asked again, "Since there is a bumper harvest, can the people benefit from it?"

古文：道曰： 谷贵饿农，谷贱伤农，此常理也。
现代文：冯道说： 谷贵饿农，谷贱伤农，这是一贯的道理。
English: Feng Dao said, "It is a consistent principle that the more valuable the grain, the more hungry the farmers are, and the less valuable the grain, the more injured the farmers are."

古文：臣忆得近代有举子聂夷中《伤田家诗》云： 二月卖新丝，五月粜秋谷，医得眼下疮，剜却心头肉。
现代文：臣记得近代有一个叫聂夷中的举人有《伤田家诗》说 ：二月卖新丝，五月粜新谷，医得眼前疮，剜却心头肉。
English: The minister recalled that in modern times, there was a person from the Yaizhong people who said in the "Wounded Field Family Poem": "Sell new silk in February, plough the new valley in May, heal the sores in the eyes, but plough the heart."

古文：我愿君王心，化作光明烛，不照绮罗筵，遍照逃亡屋。  
现代文：我愿君王心，化作光明烛，不照绮罗筵，偏照逃亡屋。  
English: I would that the king's heart were as a candle of light, and not according to the light of mediums, but according to the light of a furnace.

古文：明宗曰： 此诗甚好。 
现代文：明宗说： 这首诗很好。 
English: Mingzong said, "This poem is very good.

古文：遂命侍臣录下，每自讽之。
现代文：立即命令侍臣录下来，经常自己诵读它。
English: He immediately ordered his valet to record it and often recited it himself.

古文：道之发言简正，善于裨益，非常人所能及也。
现代文：冯道说话简明有理，善于补益人君，不是一般人能达到的。
English: Feng Dao speaks concisely and reasonably, and is good at complementing people, which is not something that ordinary people can achieve.

古文：时以诸经舛缪，与同列李愚委学官田敏等，取西京郑覃所刊石经，雕为印版，流布天下，后进赖之。
现代文：当时因各种经书差乱错误，冯道与同僚李愚派学官田敏等人，取来洛阳郑覃刊刻的石经，雕刻同印板，流布天下，后人有赖于它。
English: At that time, due to various errors in the sutras, Feng Dao and his colleague Li Yu sent the scholar Tian Min and others to take the stone sutra engraved by Luoyang Zheng Yi, engraved with the seal plate, and spread it to the world. Later generations depended on it.

古文：明宗崩，唐末帝嗣位，以道为山陵使，礼毕，出镇同州，循故事也。
现代文：明宗驾崩，唐末帝即位，任冯道为营造陵墓的山陵使，葬事结束后，出任同州节度使，这是遵照以前惯例。
English: After the death of Emperor Mingzong and the enthronement of the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty, Feng Dao was appointed as the mausoleum envoy for the construction of the mausoleum. After the funeral, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the same state, which was in accordance with the previous practice.

古文：道为政闲澹，狱市无挠。
现代文：冯道治理政事雅静淡泊，没有讼诉的惊扰。
English: The governance of Fengdao is calm and tranquil, without the disturbance of lawsuits.

古文：一日，有上介胡饶，本出军吏，性粗犷，因事诟道于牙门，左右数报不应。
现代文：一天，有一位叫胡饶的，是军吏出身，性情粗犷，因事到衙门辱骂冯道，冯道身边的人多次解释而不理会。
English: One day, there was a man named Hu Rao, who was a military officer by birth and had a rough temperament. He insulted Feng Dao because of the incident at the palace gate. The people around Feng Dao ignored his explanation many times.

古文：道曰： 此必醉耳！ 
现代文：冯道说 ：这一定得让他喝醉！ 
English: Feng Dao said: This must have made him drunk!

古文：因召入，开尊设食，尽夕而起，无挠愠之色。未几，入为司空。
现代文：于是叫他进来，摆上酒杯安置食物，陪饮一晚上，一点也不生气。不久，入朝任司空。
English: So he asked him to come in, set out a wine glass, placed food, and accompanied him for a night of drinking. He was not angry at all. Soon, he entered the imperial court to serve as a magistrate.

古文：及晋祖入洛，以道为首相。
现代文：当晋高祖进入洛阳称帝后，以冯道担任首相。
English: When Emperor Gaozu entered Luoyang and proclaimed himself emperor, Feng Dao became prime minister.

古文：二年，契丹遣使加徽号于晋祖，晋祖亦献徽号于契丹，谓道曰： 此行非卿不可。 
现代文：第二年，契丹人派使者给晋高祖加称颂功德的徽号，晋高祖也给契丹国主献上徽号，对冯道说： 此行非您去不可。 
English: The following year, the Khitans sent an envoy to present the badge of praise to the merits of Jingu Zuca. Jingu Zuca also presented the badge to the Khitan sovereign and said to Feng Dao: "You must go on this trip."

古文：道无难色。
现代文：冯道脸无难色。
English: Feng Dao's face was expressionless.

古文：道曰： 纵急还，彼以筋脚马，一夕即追及，亦何可脱，但徐缓即不能测矣。 
现代文：晋高祖又说： 您官高德重，不宜深入沙漠充当一个普通的使者。 冯道说： 陛下受北朝的恩惠，臣又受陛下的恩惠，有什么不可！ 
English: Jingu Gaozu also said, "You are a high-ranking official, and it is not appropriate for you to go deep into the desert to act as an ordinary messenger."Feng Dao said, "Your majesty is favored by the Northern Dynasty, and your vassal is favored by your majesty.

古文：众乃服。四年二月，始至京师。
现代文：上路后，将到达西楼，契丹国主想到郊外迎接，他的臣下说： 天子没有迎接宰相的礼节。 
English: After going on the road, he will arrive at the West Tower. The Khitan sovereign wanted to greet him in the suburbs. His vassals said, "Heavenly Son did not have the etiquette to greet the prime minister."

古文：及还，朝廷废枢密使，依唐朝故事，并归中书，其院印付道，事无巨细，悉以归之。
现代文：因而才作罢，他的名声震动远方异族竟能这样。到回来时，朝廷废除枢密使，依唐朝旧例，全归到中书，将院印交给冯道，事无巨细，全委托冯道办理。
English: When he returned, the imperial court abolished the privy council and, in accordance with the old Tang dynasty custom, all matters were referred to Zhongshu and the imperial seal was handed over to Feng Dao. No matter how small, all matters were entrusted to Feng Dao.

古文：寻加司徒、兼侍中，进鲁国公。
现代文：不久加封司徒，兼侍中，进封为鲁国公。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of the Prince of the State of Lu.

古文：晋祖曾以用兵事问道，道曰：陛下历试诸艰，创成大业，神武睿略，为天下所知，讨伐不庭，须从独断。
现代文：晋高祖曾询问冯道用兵打仗的事，冯道说 ：陛下历尽各种艰险，开创立国大业，武略谋划，天下人都知道，讨伐不臣服的人，只须自己独自决定。
English: Jinguo Zou once asked Feng Dao about using soldiers to fight. Feng Dao said, "Your Majesty has gone through all kinds of hardships, started the founding of the National University, and planned military strategies. Everyone in the world knows that those who are not submissive must decide on their own.

古文：臣本自书生，为陛下在中书，守历代成规，不敢有一毫之失也。
现代文：臣本是读书人出身，为陛下在中书任职，恪守历代的成规，不敢有丝毫的过失。
English: The subject was born as a reader, and served as a secretary for His Majesty, abiding by the rules of past generations and not daring to make the slightest mistake.

古文：臣在明宗朝，曾以戎事问臣，臣亦以斯言答之。 
现代文：臣在后唐明宗朝时，明宗也曾以战事问臣，臣也用这话回答。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingzong in the late Tang Dynasty, Emperor Mingzong also asked Emperor Mingzong about the war, and Emperor Mingzong replied in the same way.

古文：晋祖颇可其说。
现代文：晋高祖很欣赏他的说法。
English: Jin Gaozu appreciated his words.

古文：道尝上表求退，晋祖不之览，先遣郑王就省，谓曰： 卿来日不出，朕当亲行请卿。 
现代文：冯道曾经上表请求退隐，晋高祖不看表，先派郑王去看望冯道，对他说： 您来日不出来任职，朕就亲自来请您。 
English: Feng Dao had requested to retire on the table, but Shing Gao Zu did not look at the table. He first sent Zheng Wang to visit Feng Dao and said to him: If you do not come to Japan to take office, I will come to invite you in person.

古文：道不得已出焉。
现代文：冯道不得已仍来任职。
English: As a last resort, Feng Dao still came to serve.

古文：当时宠遇，无与为比。
现代文：当时对冯道的恩宠厚遇，没有人能与他相比。
English: At that time, Feng Dao was treated with grace and favor, and no one could compare with him.

古文：晋少帝即位，加守太尉，进封燕国公。
现代文：晋少帝即位，加封守太尉，进封为燕国公。
English: Emperor Jin Shao ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Jifeng Shou Taifeng, and promoted to the title of Yan Guogong.

古文：道尝问朝中熟客曰： 道之在政事堂，人有何说？ 
现代文：冯道曾问朝中熟知的客人说 ：我在政事堂，别人有什么议论？ 
English: Feng Dao once asked a well-known guest from the DPRK and China: I am in the State Council, what do others have to say?

古文：客曰： 是非相半。 
现代文：客人说： 毁誉参半。 
English: The guest said: "The damage is mixed.

古文：道曰： 凡人同者为是，不同为非，而非道者，十恐有九。
现代文：冯道说： 凡与人相合的别人就称誉，与人不合的别人就诋毁，而诋毁我的人，十个中恐怕就有九个。
English: Feng Dao said, "Those who are compatible with others are praised, those who are incompatible with others are slandered, and those who slander me are probably nine out of ten.

古文：昔仲尼圣人也，犹为叔孙武叔所毁，况道之虚薄者乎！ 
现代文：古者仲尼是圣人，仍被叔孙武叔诋毁，何况我这样空虚浅薄的人呢！ 
English: The ancient Zhongni was a saint, but he was still slandered by his uncles and grandsons, let alone an empty and shallow person like me!

古文：然道之所持，始终不易。
现代文：然而冯道所坚持的，始终不改变。
English: However, what Feng Dao insisted on has never changed.

古文：后有人间道于少帝曰： 道好平时宰相，无以济其艰难，如禅僧不可呼鹰耳！ 
现代文：后来有人对少帝离间冯道说： 冯道只能做和平时期的宰相，不能靠他度过艰难时期，就像参禅的僧人用不上鹰犬一样！ 
English: Later, someone said to the young emperor about Feng Dao: Feng Dao can only be the prime minister in peacetime, he can't rely on him to get through the hard times, just like Zen monks can't use eagle-dogs!

古文：由是出道为同州节度使。
现代文：因此派冯道出朝任同州节度使。
English: Therefore, he sent Feng Daodu to the imperial court to be the envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：岁余，移镇南阳，加中书令。
现代文：一年多，调任南阳，加封中书令。
English: More than a year later, he was transferred to Nanyang and given the title of Zhongshirong.

古文：契丹入汴，道自襄、邓召入，契丹主从容问曰： 天下百姓，如何可救？ 
现代文：契丹人攻陷汴州，冯道经襄州、邓州应召而来，契丹国主从容问冯道说： 天下百姓，怎样才能得救？ 
English: When the Khitan invaded and occupied Bozhou, Feng Dao was summoned from Xiangzhou and Dengzhou. The Khitan sovereign calmly asked Feng Dao, "How can the people of the world be saved?"

古文：道曰： 此时百姓，佛再出救不得，惟皇帝救得。 
现代文：冯道说： 这时的百性，就是佛祖再世也救不得，只有皇帝您救得。 
English: Feng Dao said: At this time, even the reincarnation of the Buddha cannot save everyone, only the emperor can save you.

古文：其后衣冠不至伤夷，皆道与赵延寿阴护之所至也。
现代文：以后中原百姓不被伤害夷灭，都是冯道和赵延寿暗中庇护的结果。
English: The fact that the Central Plains people were not harmed and exterminated in the future was the result of Feng Dao and Zhao Yanshou's covert protection.

古文：是岁三月，随契丹北行，与晋室公卿俱抵常山。
现代文：这年三月，跟随契丹人到北方去，与晋朝皇室公卿一起抵达常山。
English: In March of this year, he followed the Khitan people to the north and arrived in Changshan with the court nobles of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：俄而比主卒，永康王代统其众。
现代文：不久契丹国主去世，永康王兀欲代替统领契丹军队。
English: Soon after, the Khitan ruler died, and King Yongkang wanted to take his place at the head of the Khitan army.

古文：及北去，留其族嘉里以据常山。
现代文：当再向北去时，留下他的族人解里据守常山。
English: When he went north again, he left behind his clan to defend Changshan.

古文：时汉军愤激，因共逐出嘉里，寻复其城。
现代文：当时常山的汉族军队出于激愤，一起赶走解里，收复了常山城。
English: At that time, the Han troops in Changshan were so enraged that they drove out Ge Li together and recovered Changshan City.

古文：道率同列四出按抚，因事从宜，各安其所。
现代文：冯道率领同僚，四出安抚，采取适宜措施处理各类事务，使人各安其所。
English: Feng Dao led his colleagues to pacify everywhere, take appropriate measures to deal with all kinds of affairs, and make everyone feel at ease.

古文：人或推其功，道曰： 儒臣何能为，皆诸将之力也。 
现代文：有人推举冯道的功劳，冯道说： 文臣有什么作为，都是各位武将的力量。 
English: Some people praised the merits of Feng Dao. Feng Dao said: What Wenshen has done is all the power of the generals.

古文：道以德重，人所取则，乃为众择诸将之勤宿者，以骑校白再荣权为其帅，军民由是帖然，道首有力焉。
现代文：冯道因为德高望重，是别人效仿的榜样，于是为众人从各将领中择取资历老而有功的人，以骑校白再荣临时充当他们的统帅，军民因而服帖，冯道出力最大。
English: As Feng Dao was highly respected for his virtue and was a role model for others to follow, it was decided to choose senior and meritorious generals from among the generals to temporarily serve as their commander-in-chief. The military and the people were thus satisfied, and Feng Dao had the greatest output.

古文：由是改其敕，记其略曰： 三司邦计，国法攸依，张璨体事未明，执理乖当，宜停见职，犯牛皮者贷命放之。 
现代文：契丹人先前留下冯道与李崧、和凝及文武官员在常山，这年闰七月二十九日，契丹有伪诏给李崧，让他挑选朝中文士十人到木叶山做事。契丹王麻答准备将冯道等人叫到帐下，想说服他们，李崧偶然先到，知道麻答的用心，害怕得变了脸色。
English: The Khitans had previously left Feng Dao, Li Yao, He Jing and the civil and military officials in Changshan. On July 29 of this year, the Khitans issued a fake edict to Li Yao, asking him to select ten North Korean and Chinese officials to work in Mount Muji. The Khitan king Ma Du prepared to call Feng Dao and others to his account, trying to convince them. Li Yao accidentally arrived first, knowing Ma Du's intentions, and his face turned pale with fear.

古文：大监听宣敕讫，闻敕云 执理乖当 ，尚曰： 中书自不能执理，若一一教外道判官执理，则焉用彼相乎！ 
现代文：麻答准备在第二天与朝士们一起去木叶山，李崧却不等冯道到，与和凝先溜出来，不久在帐门外与冯道相遇，因而分头而回。旋即李筠等人放火与契丹人交战，长槊相接。
English: Ma Du prepared to go to Mubei Mountain with the morning warriors on the next day, but Li Yu did not wait for Feng Dao to arrive, and slipped out with Ho Jing first. Soon, he met Feng Dao outside the tent door, so they parted ways. Li Yu and others immediately set fire and fought with the Khitan, and Nagatoro was connected.

古文：乾祐中，道奉朝请外，平居自适。
现代文：这天若是一齐到帐下，与麻答相见，稍有犹豫，就全被俘往北方了。
English: On this day, if they all came to the ledger, met with Mato, and hesitated a little, they would all be captured to the north.

古文：一日，著《长乐老自叙》云：
现代文：到从常山回来入京师朝见，汉高祖嘉奖他，授与太师职。汉隐帝乾佑年间，著《长乐老自叙》说：
English: When he returned from Changshan and entered the imperial court, Emperor Gaozong commended him and awarded him the title of Grand Master. During the reign of Emperor Qianyu of the Han Dynasty, he said in "The Autobiography of a Changle Elder":

古文：余世家宗族，本始平、长乐二郡，历代之名实，具载于国史家牒。
现代文： 我世家宗族，本在始平、长乐两郡，历代名声实迹，全记载在国史家谱中。
English: My family's ancestral lineage, originally from Shiheping and Changle counties, has been famous throughout the ages and is fully recorded in the national historical family tree.

古文：余先自燕亡归晋，事庄宗、明宗、闵帝、清泰帝，又事晋高祖皇帝、少帝。
现代文：我先从燕地逃回太原，服事唐庄宗、明宗、闵帝、清泰帝，又服事晋高祖皇帝、少帝。
English: I first fled from Yan Di back to Taiyuan, and served Tang Zhuozong, Ming Zong, Qian Di, Qing Tai Di, and also served Emperor Jinguo Zuo and the Young Emperor.

古文：契丹据汴京，为北主所制，自镇州与文武臣僚、马步将士归汉朝，事高祖皇帝、今上。
现代文：契丹占据汴京，被戎族之王所挟制，从镇州与文武同僚、马军步军将士回归汉朝，服事汉高祖皇帝和当今皇上。
English: Khitan occupied Beijing and was held hostage by the king of the Yongzhu people. He returned to the Han Dynasty from Zhenzhou with his colleagues from the Manchu and Ma armies and foot soldiers to serve the Han Emperor Gaozu and the current emperor.

古文：顾以久叨禄位，备历艰危，上显祖宗，下光亲戚。
现代文：回想长期以来忝居官位，备历艰难险阻，上显耀了祖宗，下光大了亲戚。
English: Recall that for a long time, he lived in an official position, experienced hardships and obstacles, and his ancestors shined on the top, and his relatives shined on the bottom.

古文：亡曾祖讳凑，累赠至太傅，亡曾祖母崔氏，追封梁国太夫人；亡祖讳炯，累赠至太师，亡祖母褚氏，追封吴国太夫人；亡父讳良建，秘书少监致仕，累赠至尚书令，母张氏，追封魏国太夫人。
现代文：已故曾祖讳名凑，追赠为太傅，已故曾祖母崔氏，追封为梁国太夫人；已故祖父讳名鮍，追赠为太师，故祖母褚氏，追封为吴国太夫人；亡父讳名良建，以秘书少监辞官退隐，追赠为尚书令，母亲张氏，追封为魏国太夫人。
English: The late great-grandfather, Zeng Zu, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and the late great-grandmother, Cui, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Mistress of Liang Guo; the late grandfather, Zeng Mian, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and the late grandmother, Zou Mian, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Mistress of Wu Guo; the late father, Zeng Mian Liang Jian, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Secretary, and the mother, Zhang, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Mistress of Wei.

古文：余阶自将仕郎，转朝议郎、朝散大夫、银青光禄大夫、金紫光禄大夫、特进、开府仪同三司。
现代文： 我的品级从将仕郎做起，转任朝议郎、朝散大夫、银青光禄大夫、金紫光禄大夫、特进、开府仪同三司。
English: My rank started from Shosheiro, and I was transferred to Shoseiro, Chosan-dokufu, Gin-Seiko-Roku-dokufu, Kin-Shiiko-Roku-dokufu, Tokujin, Kaifu-gi and Sanji.

古文：职自幽州节度巡官、河东节度巡官、掌书记，再为翰林学士，改授端明殿学士、集贤殿大学士、太微宫使，再为宏文馆大学士，又充诸道盐铁转运使、南郊大礼使、明宗皇帝晋高祖皇帝山陵使，再授定国军节度、同州管内观察处置等使，一为长春宫使，又授武胜军节度、邓随均房等州管内观察处置等使。
现代文：职位从幽州节度巡官、河东节度巡官、掌书记，再为翰林学士，改任端明殿学士、集贤殿大学士、太微宫使，再为弘文馆大学士，又充诸道盐铁转运使、南郊大礼使、唐明宗皇帝和晋高祖皇帝山陵使，再授以定国军节度、同州管内观察处置等使，一为长春宫使，又授武胜军节度，邓、随、均、房等州管内观察处置等使。
English: His posts ranged from Yuzhou Festival Supervisor, Hedong Festival Supervisor, and Secretary, to Hanlin Scholar, to Duanming Palace Scholar, Jixian Palace Scholar, Taiwei Palace Envoy, to Hongwu Museum Scholar, to Zhudao Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy, to Nanjiao Grand Envoy, to Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty and Emperor Jinguo's Ancestor's Mausoleum Envoy, to Ding Guojun Festival, to Changchun Palace Envoy, to Wu Shengjun Festival, to Deng, Su, Jun, Fang and other state-level observation and disposal envoys.

古文：正官自行台中书舍人，再为户部侍郎，转兵部侍郎、中书侍郎，再为门下侍郎、刑部吏部尚书、右仆射，三为司空，两在中书，一守本官，又授司徒、兼侍中，赐私门十六戟，又授太尉、兼侍中，又授戎太傅，又授汉太师。
现代文：官位从掌领幽州参军、试大理评事、检校太师、兼侍中，又授检校太师，兼中书令。正官从行台中书舍人，再任户部侍郎，转任兵部侍郎、中书侍郎，再为门下侍郎、刑部吏部尚书、右仆射，三任司空，两任中书，一守本官，又授司徒，兼侍中，赐给私门十六戟，又授太尉、兼侍中，又授契丹太傅，又授汉代太师。
English: The official ranks ranged from the commander of Yuzhou to join the army, the examiner of the examination, the inspector of the school, and the attendant, and he was also awarded the inspector of the school, and the junior secretary. The official was from Xingtai to the junior clerk of the school, and he was reappointed as the attendant of the household department, and he was reappointed as the attendant of the military department, and the attendant of the school, and he was reappointed as the junior attendant of the school, and he was reappointed as the inspector of the examination, and he was reappointed as the inspector of the

古文：爵自开国男至开国公、鲁国公，再封秦国公、梁国公、燕国公、齐国公。
现代文：爵位从开国男爵到开国公、鲁国公，再封为秦国公、梁国公、燕国公、齐国公。
English: The title of nobility went from the founding baron to the founding prince and the prince of Lu, and then to the prince of Qin, Liang, Yan and Qi.

古文：食邑自三百户至一万一千户，食实封自一百户至一千八百户。
现代文：食邑从三百户增至一万一千户，食实封自一百户增至一千八百户。
English: The number of food villages has increased from 300 to 11,000, and the number of food plots has increased from 100 to 1,800.

古文：勋自柱国至上柱国。
现代文：勋位从柱国升到上柱国。
English: The order was raised from pillar country to upper pillar country.

古文：功臣名自经邦致理翊赞功臣至守正崇德保邦致理功臣、安时处顺守义崇静功臣、崇仁保德宁邦翊圣功臣。
现代文：功名从经邦致理翊赞功臣到守正崇德保邦致理功臣、安时处顺守义崇静功臣、崇仁保德宁邦翊圣功臣。
English: His merits ranged from the meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious meritorious

古文：先娶故德州户掾褚讳濆女，早亡，后娶故景州弓高县孙明府讳师礼女，累封蜀国夫人。
现代文： 我先娶已故德州户椽姓褚讳名氵贲的女儿为妻，早亡；后娶已故景州弓高县孙明府讳名师礼的女儿，后封为蜀国夫人。
English: First, I married the daughter of the late Texas Hubei surnamed Yan Yan Mingzhu, who died young; then I married the daughter of the late Sun Mingfu Yan Yan Mingzhu, Jingzhou Yugao County, who was later given the title of Lady of Shu.

古文：亡长子平，自秘书郎授右拾遗、工部度支员外郎；次子吉，自秘书省校书郎授膳部金部职方员外郎、屯田郎中；第三亡子可，自秘书省正字授殿中丞、工部户部员外郎；第四子幼亡；第五子义，自秘书郎改授银青光禄大夫、检校国子祭酒兼御史中丞，充定国军衙内都指挥使，职罢改授朝散大夫、左春坊太子司议郎、太常丞；第六子正，自协律郎改授银青光禄大夫、检校国子祭酒兼御史中丞，充定国军节度使，职罢改授朝散大夫、太仆丞。
现代文：已亡大儿名平，从秘书郎升任右拾遗、工部度支员外郎；二儿名吉，从秘书省校书郎升任膳部金部职方员外郎、屯田郎中；已亡三儿名可，从秘书省正字升任殿中丞、工部户部员外郎；四儿小时就去世；五儿名义，从秘书郎改授银青光禄大夫、检校国子祭酒兼御史中丞，兼任定国军衙内都指挥使，后罢职改任朝散大夫、左春坊太子司议郎，授予太常丞；六儿名正，从协律郎改授银青光禄大夫、检校国子祭酒兼御史中丞，兼任定国军节度使，后罢职改任朝散大夫、太仆丞。
English: The deceased's eldest son, Nahei, was promoted from the secretary to the right to pick up the remains, the work department to the branch member of the work department; the second son, Nayoshi, was promoted from the secretary to the secretary of the provincial school to the staff member of the meal department, the financial department, and the middle school; the deceased's third son, Naoko, was promoted from the secretary to the secretary of the ministry, and the member of the work department; the fourth son died in an hour; in the name of the fifth son, from the secretary to the secretary, he was awarded the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the school inspection of the national children's

古文：静思本末，庆及存亡，盖自国恩，尽从家法，承训诲之旨，关教化之源，在孝于家，在忠于国，口无不道之言，门无不义之货。
现代文：大女儿嫁给已故兵部崔侍郎讳名衍的儿子太仆少卿名绚，封为万年县君；三女儿早亡，两孙儿幼亡。 静思家世渊源，福禄施于存者亡者，大都出自国家恩惠，全都秉守家法，接受训导的旨意，遵循教化的传统，对家里孝顺，对国家忠诚，口不说不道德的言语，家没有不仁义的财货。
English: The eldest daughter was married to the son of the late Hyobusu Choi Jirang Chan Namyang, the son of Taigu Shaoqing Minghua, and was given the title of Wanneng County Prince; the third daughter died early, and the two grandchildren died young. Meditating on the family history, the fortune given to the survivors and the deceased mostly came from the state's favor, all adhering to the family law, accepting the will of the training, following the tradition of enlightenment, being filial to the family and loyal to the country, not speaking immoral words, and the family did not have unkind wealth.

古文：所愿者下不欺于地，中不欺于人，上不欺于天，以三不欺为素。
现代文：所希望的是下不欺于地，中不欺于人，上不欺于天，以三不欺作为一贯的准则。
English: What is hoped for is not to deceive the earth below, not to deceive the people in the middle, and not to deceive the heavens above, with the three non-deception as a consistent standard.

古文：贱如是，贵如是，长如是，老如是，事亲、事君、事长、临人之道，旷蒙天恕，累经难而获多福，曾陷蕃而归中华，非人之谋，是天之祐。
现代文：贫贱是这样，富贵也是这样；年壮是这样，年老也是这样。服事双亲、服事君主、服事长辈、统治人民的道理方式，是要广泛地取得上天的帮助原谅，我家曾陷于蕃地而得以回归中原，不是人的智谋，而是上天的保佑。
English: The poor and lowly are one and the same, the rich and noble are one and the same, the young and strong are one and the same, and the old are one and the same. The rational way to serve one's parents, to serve the monarch, to serve the elders, and to rule the people is to widely obtain God's help and forgiveness. My family was once trapped in a bad situation and was able to return to the Central Plains, not by human wisdom, but by God's blessing.

古文：六合之内有幸者，百岁之后有归所。无以珠玉含，当以时服敛，以籧篨葬，及择不食之地而葬焉，以不及于古人故。
现代文：我是普天之下有幸的人，百年之后有个好的归宿，不用口含珠玉，应当穿平常的衣服入殓，用竹席子裹葬，并选一个不长粮食的地方埋在那里，因为我赶不上古代贤人。
English: I am the most fortunate person in the world. After a hundred years, I have a good destination. I don't need to wear jewels. I should wear ordinary clothes, be buried in a coffin, be wrapped in a bamboo mat, and be buried in a place where there is not much food, because I can't catch up with ancient sages.

古文：祭以特羊，戒杀生也，当以不害命之物祭。
现代文：不要以公牛祭祀，禁戒杀生，当不残害生命以祭祀。
English: Don't use bulls for sacrifice. It's forbidden to kill. You shouldn't use bulls for sacrifice if you want to save lives.

古文：无立神道碑，以三代坟前不获立碑故。
现代文：不要立神道碑，因为夏商周三代坟前都不立碑。
English: Do not erect a Shinto monument, because the three generations of Xia merchants did not erect a monument in front of the tomb.

古文：无请谥号，以无德故。
现代文：不要有谥号，因为没有德业。
English: Don't have a nickname, because there is no virtue.

古文：又念自宾佐至王佐及领籓镇时，或有微益于国之事节，皆形于公籍。
现代文：又自念从诸侯之佐到升为君王之相以及掌领藩镇时，对于国家有某些微小的贡献，都记载在国家的文籍中。
English: He also said that he had made some small contributions to the country when he was promoted from the vassal of the princes to the king's consort and when he was in charge of the hanzhen, which were all recorded in the country's literature.

古文：所著文章篇咏，因多事散失外，收拾得者，编于家集，其间见其志，知之者，罪之者，未知众寡矣。
现代文：所写的文章诗赋，因忙于国事而散失的以外，尚能收集到的，编成一本私家集子，从中可见我的志趣，理解我的人，怪罪我的人，不知各有多少。
English: The articles and poems that I have written, apart from those that I have lost due to being busy with national affairs, have been collected and compiled into a private collection, from which you can see my interests, those who understand me, and those who blame me, I don't know how many there are.

古文：有庄、有宅、有群书，有三子可以袭其业。
现代文：有田庄、有住宅、有许多书籍，有两个儿子可以继承家业。
English: They had a farm, a house, many books, and two sons to carry on the family business.

古文：于此日五盥，日三省，尚犹日知其所亡，月无忘其所能。
现代文：如此每天五次洁手，三次反省，才能每天知道自己的过失，每月不忘自己应该去做的事。
English: In this way, you can wash your hands five times a day and reflect three times a day, so that you can know your faults every day and do not forget what you should do every month.

古文：为子、为弟、为人臣、为师长、为夫、为父，有子、有犹子、有孙，奉身即有余矣。
现代文：作为儿子、弟弟、人臣、师长、丈夫、父亲，有儿子、侄子、孙子供养自己就足足有余了。
English: As a son, a younger brother, a minister, a teacher, a husband, a father, having sons, nephews, and grandchildren is more than enough to support oneself.

古文：为时乃不足，不足者何？
现代文：对于时势却有所不足，不足在什么地方呢？
English: However, there is a shortcoming with regard to the current situation. Where is the shortcoming?

古文：不能为大君致一统、定八方，诚有愧于历职历官，何以答乾坤之施。
现代文：不能为英明的君王达到一统天下，安定八方，确实有愧于所担任过的官职，没有什么以报答天地君王的恩惠。
English: It is not possible for a wise king to rule the whole world and keep everything stable. He is truly unworthy of the official position he has held. There is nothing to repay the favor of the kings of heaven and earth.

古文：时开一卷，时饮一杯，食味别声、被色，老安于当代耶！
现代文：有时读一卷书，有时饮一杯酒，吃美味，辨佳音，享美色到老安乐于当世吧！
English: Sometimes read a book, sometimes drink a glass of wine, eat delicious food, listen to good music, enjoy beauty until old age, and be happy in this world!

古文：老而自乐，何乐如之！
现代文：年老而能自感快乐，还有什么快乐比得上！
English: To be able to feel happy in your old age, what joy can compare with that!

古文：时乾祐三年硃明月长乐老叙云。
现代文：时乾佑三年夏月长乐老自序。 
English: When the three years of summer and the three years of summer and the three years of summer and the three years of summer and the three years of summer and the three years of summer.

古文：及太祖平内难，议立徐州节度使刘赟为汉嗣，遣道与秘书监赵上交、枢密直学士王度等往迎之。
现代文：到周太祖平定汉代朝廷内乱，商议拥立徐州节度使刘斌贝为汉代即位皇帝，派冯道和秘书监赵上交、枢密直学士王度等人去徐州迎接。
English: It was Zhou Taizu who quelled the civil strife in the Han Dynasty, negotiated the establishment of the Xuzhou Festival to make Liu Binbei the emperor of the Han Dynasty, and sent Feng Dao, Secretary Zhao Shangjiao, Privy Councilor Wang Du and others to Xuzhou to meet.

古文：道寻与赟自徐赴汴，行至宋州，会澶州军变。
现代文：冯道立即与刘斌贝从徐州赶赴汴京，走到宋州，遇上澶州兵变。
English: Feng Dao immediately rushed to Beijing from Xuzhou with Liu Binbei, walked to Songzhou, and encountered the Luzhou mutiny.

古文：枢密使王峻遣郭崇领兵至，屯于衙门外，时道与上交等宿于衙内。
现代文：枢密使王峻派郭崇领兵到宋州，驻扎在衙门外面，这时冯道与赵上交等人住在衙门里。
English: The privy councilor Wang Jun sent Guo Chong to Songzhou to lead the army and stationed outside the city gate. At this time, Feng Dao and Zhao Shangjiao and others lived in the city gate.

古文：是日，赟率左右甲士阖门登楼，诘崇所自，崇言太祖已副推戴。
现代文：这天，刘斌贝带领身边甲士关上门登上楼，责问郭崇来干什么，郭崇说太祖已被推戴为皇帝。
English: On this day, Liu Binbei led his attendants to close the door and went upstairs to ask Guo Chong what he was doing. Guo Chong said that the great-grandfather had been promoted to emperor.

古文：道德几时曾去世，舟车何处不通津，但教方寸无诸恶，狼虎丛中也立身。
现代文：身边甲士知道事情有变，以为是被冯道出卖了，都要杀冯道来解气，赵上交与王度听到后，都害怕得没有了主意。只有冯道坐卧如常，全无怯色，旋即也免于灾祸。冯道卑微时曾写诗说： 终闻海岳归明主，未省乾坤陷吉人。 到此他的话应验了。
English: The knights around him knew that things had changed, and thought that they had been betrayed by Feng Dao, and they wanted to kill Feng Dao to relieve their anger. After Zhao Shangjiao and Wang Du heard this, they were so scared that they had no idea. Only Feng Dao was lying down as usual, completely fearless, and was immediately spared from the disaster. When Feng Dao was humble, he wrote a poem saying: "Finally, I heard that Haidake had been converted to the Lord, and there was no need to do anything to be saved. At this point, his words came true."

古文：广顺初，复拜太师、中书令，太祖甚重之，每进对不以名呼。
现代文：广顺初年，又任命为太师、中书令，太祖很敬重他，每次冯道进见时太祖不直呼他的名字。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was also appointed as the Grand Master and the Chinese Calligrapher. Grandfather respected him very much. Every time Feng Dao saw him, Grandfather did not call him by his first name.

古文：及太祖崩，世宗以道为山陵使。
现代文：到太祖驾崩，周世宗以冯道担任山陵使。
English: By the time of his great-grandfather's death, Zhou Shizong had appointed Feng Dao as the envoy to the tomb.

古文：会河东刘崇入寇，世宗召大臣议欲亲征，道谏止之，世宗因言： 唐初，天下草寇蜂起，并是太宗亲平之。 
现代文：遇上河东刘崇进犯，世宗召集大臣商量想亲自征讨，冯道劝谏他，世宗便说 ：唐朝初年，天下草寇蜂起，都是太宗皇帝亲自平定他们。 
English: When confronted with the invasion of Liu Chong of Hedong, Shizong called the ministers together to discuss how to collect the taxes in person. Feng Dao advised him, and Shizong said: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, when the world's hawkers rose up, it was Emperor Taizong who personally quelled them.

古文：道奏曰： 陛下得如太宗否？ 
现代文：冯道回对说： 陛下比得上唐太宗吗？ 
English: Feng Dao replied, "Is Your Majesty comparable to Emperor Taizong of Tang?"

古文：世宗怒曰： 冯道何相少也！ 
现代文：世宗发怒说： 冯道多轻视我呀！ 
English: Sejong said angrily, "How much does Feng Tao despise me!

古文：乃罢。
现代文：冯道才作罢。
English: Only then did Feng Dao give up.

古文：及世宗亲征，不及扈从，留道奉太祖山陵。
现代文：到世宗亲往征伐，不叫冯道随从，留下他营造太祖陵墓。
English: Even though Zong Zong went to the battlefield, he did not ask Feng Dao to accompany him, leaving him to build the tomb of the great ancestor.

古文：时道已抱疾。
现代文：这时冯道已有病在身。
English: By this time, Feng Dao was already ill.

古文：及山陵礼毕，奉神主归旧宫，未及祔庙，一夕薨于其第，时显德元年四月十七日也，享年七十有三。
现代文：到山陵完工典礼后，奉太祖神主回旧时宫殿，还未送进祖庙祭祀，冯道就在一天晚上在他的家里去世，这是显德元年四月十七日，享年七十三岁。
English: After the completion ceremony of the mountain tomb, Feng Dao went back to the old palace to venerate the great-grandfather god, but before he was sent to the ancestral temple for sacrifice, he died in his home one evening. This was on April 17th, the first year of Xian De, at the age of seventy-three.

古文：世宗闻之，辍视朝三日，册赠尚书令，追封瀛王，谥曰文懿。
现代文：世宗听到消息，停止上朝三天，册赠为尚书令，追封为瀛王，谥号叫文懿。
English: Upon hearing the news, the Shizong halted the Shang Dynasty for three days. He was given the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and the posthumous title of Shao Wang (王). His posthumous name was Wen Rong.

古文：道历任四朝，三入中书，在相位二十余年，以持重镇俗为己任，未尝以片简扰于诸侯，平生甚廉俭。
现代文：冯道历任唐、晋、汉、周四朝，三次进中书省，居相位二十几年，以持重镇俗作为己任，不曾以片言只语惊扰诸侯。
English: Feng Dao successively held the posts of Tang, Jin, Han, and Thursday morning, and entered China's Book Ministry three times. He has been in the position for more than 20 years. He took upholding the customs of the town as his duty, and never alarmed the princes with a single word.

古文：逮至末年，闺庭之内，稍徇奢靡，其子吉，尤恣狂荡，道不能制，识者以其不终令誉，咸叹惜之。
现代文：一生非常清廉节俭，直到晚年，家里才稍为豪华一点。他的儿子冯吉，特别恣意狂荡，冯道管不住他，有识之人以他不能保住冯道的名声，都感到可惜。
English: He lived a very clean and frugal life, until his later years, the family was a little more luxurious. His son, Feng Ji, was particularly reckless and wild. Feng Dao could not control him, and people with insight felt sorry that he could not keep Feng Dao's reputation.

