古文：徐陵《鸳鸯赋》云： 山鸡映水那相得，孤鸾照镜不成双。
现代文：徐陵的《鸳鸯赋》写到： 山鸡映水那相得，孤鸾照镜不成双。
English: Xu Ling's "Gift" wrote: The pheasant and the water mirror each other, but the lone pheasant and the mirror do not make a pair.

古文：天下真成长会合，无胜比翼两鸳鸯。 
现代文：天下真成长会合，无胜比翼两鸳鸯。 
English: The world's true growth meeting, unbeatable.

古文：黄鲁直《题画睡鸭》曰： 山鸡照影空自爱，孤鸾舞镜幻作双。
现代文：黄鲁直的《题画睡鸭》写到： 山鸡照影空自爱，孤鸾舞镜不作双。
English: Huang Luzhi's "The Sleeping Duck" wrote: "The pheasant's shadow is self-love, and the lone pheasant's dance mirror is not a double."

古文：天下真成长会合，两凫相倚睡秋江。 
现代文：天下真成长会合，两凫相倚睡秋江。 
English: The world is really growing together, and the two are sleeping together in Akie.

古文：全用徐语点化之，末句尤精工。
现代文：全都是从徐陵的诗中加以变化提炼的，尤其是最后一句特别精妙传神刻画得特别好。
English: All of them are modified and refined from Xu Ling's poem, especially the last sentence, which is particularly well-portrayed.

古文：又有《黔南十绝》，尽取白乐天语，其七篇全用之，其三篇颇有改易处。
现代文：又有《黔南十绝》，全都是取自白居易的话，一共一篇全都用了，其中三篇有点儿改动变化。
English: There is also "Ten Masterpieces of Southern Fujian," all of which are taken from Bai Juyi's words. A total of one article has been used, and three of them have been slightly modified.

古文：乐天《寄行简》诗，凡八韵，后四韵云： 相去六千里，地绝天邈然。
现代文：白居易的《寄行简》一共八韵，后面四韵说的是： 相去六千里，地绝天邈然。
English: There are eight rhymes in Bai Juyi's "Journey to the West," and the last four rhymes say: Six thousand miles have passed, and the land is utterly desolate.

古文：十书九不达，何以开忧颜！
现代文：十书九不达，何以开忧颜！
English: Nine out of ten books don't measure up, what a shame!

古文：渴人多梦饮，饥人多梦餐。
现代文：渴人多梦饮，饥人多梦餐。
English: Thirsty people often dream of drinking, and hungry people often dream of eating.

古文：春来梦何处？
现代文：春来梦何处？
English: Where is the spring dream?

古文：合眼到东川。 
现代文：合眼到东川。 
English: A meeting of the eyes to the Higashikawa.

古文：鲁直翦为两首，其一云： 相望六千里，天地隔江山。
现代文：黄鲁直把它分成两首，一首写的是： 相望六千里，天地隔江山。
English: Huang Luchang divided it into two poems, one of which read: Six thousand miles separate heaven and earth.

古文：十书九不到，何用一开颜？ 
现代文：十书九不到，何用一开颜？ 
English: Nine times out of ten, what's the use of opening one's eyes?

古文：其二云：病人多梦医，囚人多梦赦。
现代文：另一首写的是： 病人多梦医，囚人多梦赦。
English: Another song reads: "Patients have more dreams than doctors, prisoners have more dreams than doctors."

古文：如何春来梦，合眼在乡社！ 
现代文：如何春来梦，合眼在乡社！ 
English: How to dream of spring and close one's eyes in the village!

古文：乐天《岁晚》诗七韵，首句云： 霜降水返壑，风落木归山。
现代文：白居易的诗《岁晚》一共七韵，第一句写的是： 霜降水返壑，风落木归山。
English: Bai Juyi's poem "Year's Eve" has a total of seven rhymes. The first sentence reads: "Frost falls, water returns to the lake, wind falls trees and returns to the mountain."

古文：冉冉岁将晏，物皆复本源。 
现代文：冉冉岁将晏，物皆复本源。 
English: As the years go by, everything will return to its original source.

古文：鲁直改后两句七字，作 冉冉岁华晚，昆虫皆闭关。 
现代文：黄鲁直只是改了最后两句一共七个字变作： 冉冉岁华晚，昆虫皆闭关。 
English: Huang Luchai just changed the last two sentences to a total of seven characters: Ran Ran Ran, insects are closed.

