古文：洞同天地，浑沌为朴，未造而成物，谓之太一。
现代文：天地浑然未分，整个地呈现出未分的混沌整体，当时还没有形成生出有形的万物，这种状态称之为 太一 。
English: Heaven and earth were completely undivided, and the whole earth presented an undivided chaotic whole. At that time, nothing tangible had yet been formed. This state is called Taichi.

古文：同出于一，所为各异，有鸟有鱼有兽，谓之分物。
现代文：万物都出自于这个 太一 状态，成形以后各不相同，有飞禽、走兽、游鱼，这就称之为 分物过程 。
English: All things come from this one state, and are different after being formed, including birds, beasts, and swimming fish. This is called the process of differentiation.

古文：方以类别，物以群分，性命不同，皆形于有。
现代文：以后又可根据不同的种类将它们区分开来，它们的物种、群体和生命形态也各不相同，但表现为有形这点上是一致的。
English: Later, they can be distinguished according to different types, and their species, groups and life forms are also different, but they are consistent in that they are tangible.

古文：隔而不通，分而为万物，莫能及宗，故动而谓之生，死而谓之穷，皆为物矣，非不物而物物者也，物物者亡乎万物之中。
现代文：各类物种因种类不同而互相阻隔不贯通，于是显示出它们的千差万别，并再也无法返回到它们原本那种混一的状态。所以万物均处于它们的生命运动状态，这也就有了 生 ，而 死 便是万物生命运动的终结。这些物种无论处在何种生命状态下都属有形物体，而不是虚无的物质，创造物的东西，造物者似乎已消失在万物之中了。
English: All kinds of species, because of their different species, are separated from each other and do not penetrate each other, thus showing their great differences, and can no longer return to their original mixed state. Therefore, all things are in their life movement state, which also has life, and death is the end of the life movement of all things. These species, no matter what life state they are in, are tangible objects, not empty matter, created things. The creator seems to have disappeared in all things.

古文：稽古太初，人生于无，形于有，有形而制于物。
现代文：考察天地未分的时候，人类从无中产生，表现为有形，一旦有了形体，就受物质的制约。
English: When the heavens and the earth were still undivided, human beings were created from nothing and manifested as tangible. Once they had a physical body, they were subject to material constraints.

古文：能反其所生，若未有形，谓之真人。
现代文：如果能够再返回到产生人的根本境地，就像没有形体的人那样，这样的人就叫 真人 。
English: If it is possible to return to the fundamental situation that gave rise to human beings, like a person without a body, such a person is called a real person.

古文：真人者，未始分于太一者也。
现代文：真人是尚未与 太一 分离。
English: The real person has not yet been separated from Taichi.

古文：圣人不为名尸，不为谋府，不为事任，不为智主，藏无形，行无迹，游无朕。
现代文：圣人不做名誉的承受者，也不做谋略的储藏者，不做事情的执行者，更不做智谋的主人；他隐蔽时没有形体，行动时没有影迹，遨游时没有徵兆。
English: The sage is not the recipient of honor, nor the repository of strategy, nor the executor of affairs, nor the master of wit; he has no form when he hides, no shadow when he acts, and no sign when he wanders.

古文：不为福先，不为祸始，保于虚无，动于不得已。
现代文：他不为福先也不为祸始；他保持着无形状态，行动完全出于自然。
English: He is neither a blessing nor a curse; he remains invisible and acts completely spontaneously.

古文：欲福者或为祸，欲利者或离害。
现代文：想要获得幸福的人有时却获得了灾祸，想要获得利益的人有时却遭受了损害。
English: Those who want to be happy sometimes suffer misfortune, and those who want to gain sometimes suffer harm.

古文：故无为而宁者，失其所以宁则危：无事而治者，失其所以治则乱。
现代文：所以不如 无为 ， 无为 倒能使人安宁，失去 无为 倒反而危险。这就像无事治理天下，有事天下混乱一样。
English: Therefore, it is better to do nothing, but doing nothing can make people calm, and losing doing nothing is dangerous.This is like governing the world without anything, and chaos in the world with something.

古文：星列于天而明，故人指之；义列于德而见，故人视之。
现代文：星辰排列在天空上闪闪发光，所以人们能够对它指指点点；义通过品行道德表现出来，所以人们总关注着它。
English: The stars shine brightly in the sky, so people can point to it; righteousness is expressed through morality, so people always pay attention to it.

古文：人之所指，动则有章；人之所视，行则有迹。
现代文：人们所指点的星辰，运行有它的轨迹；人们所关注的行义，行动有它的规矩。
English: The stars that people point to have their own trajectories; the actions that people pay attention to have their own rules.

古文：动有章则词，行有迹则议，故圣人掩明于不形，藏迹于无为。
现代文：因为星辰运行有它的轨迹，所以就引起人对星辰的评论；因为行义有它的规矩，所以就引起人对行义的议论。而圣人则将自己的光辉掩藏在无形之中，将形迹隐藏在无为之中。
English: Because the movement of the stars has its trajectory, it causes people to comment on the stars; because the practice of righteousness has its rules, it causes people to discuss the practice of righteousness. And the sage hides his brilliance in the formless, hides the shape in inaction.

古文：王子庆忌死于剑，羿死于桃棓，子路菹于卫，苏秦死于口。
现代文：王子庆忌因勇武死于刀剑之下，后羿因喜猎而被桃木棍子打死，子路则因勇忠而被人剁成肉酱，苏秦因摇唇鼓舌被人杀害。
English: Prince Qingyi died under the sword for bravery, Houyi was beaten to death with a mahogany stick for enjoying hunting, Zilu was chopped into meat sauce for bravery, and Su Qin was killed for wagging his tongue.

古文：人莫不贵其所有，而贱其所短，然而皆溺其所贵，而极其所贱，所贵者有形，所贱者无朕也，故虎豹之强来射，蝯貁之捷来措。
现代文：人没有不是推重张扬他的长处，而掩盖看轻他的短处的；因而常常沉醉得意于他自以为的长处和优点，而掩饰遮盖自以为低贱的短处和缺点。
English: It is not without reason that a man not only makes a great show of his good qualities, but conceals and despises his bad qualities; and therefore he often boasts of his supposed good qualities and excels in them, and conceals and covers up his supposed bad qualities and defects.

古文：人能贵其所贱，贱其所贵，可与言至论矣。
现代文：那些值得推重张扬的长处往往因表现出来而显得有具体特征，而那些短处缺点因被掩饰遮盖而不为人所见。
English: Strengths that are worth emphasizing tend to have specific characteristics because they are expressed, while weaknesses are not visible because they are covered up.

古文：自信者不可以诽誉迁也，知足者不可以势利诱也，故通性之情者，不务性之所无以为；通命之情者，不忧命之所无奈何；通于道者，物莫不足滑其调。
现代文：然而正是由于推重张扬长处，显得有具体特征而导致祸害：虎豹就因具有勇猛强大的长处和特征而招致射猎，猿猴就因具有敏捷灵巧的长处和特征而招致捕捉。那么反过来，如果一个人能推显他的短处而不张扬他的长处优点，就可以和他谈最高深的 道 的理论了。自信的人是不能用诽谤赞誉来改变他的志向的，知足的人是不能用权势利益来诱发他的欲望的。所以通达天性的人是不会追求天性所做不到的事情的，懂得命运的人是不会担忧命运本身所无法左右的事情的，通晓道体的人是没有外物能够搅乱他的内心和平的。
English: However, it is precisely because of the promotion of strengths and the appearance of specific characteristics that lead to disasters: tigers and leopards are attracted to hunting because of their strong and powerful strengths and characteristics, and apes are attracted to capture because of their agile and dexterous strengths and characteristics. Then, on the other hand, if a person can promote his shortcomings without promoting his strengths and advantages, it is possible to talk to him about the deepest theory of Tao. A confident person cannot use slander and praise to change his aspirations, and a contented person cannot use power interests to induce his desires. Therefore, a person who understands nature will not pursue things that nature cannot do, and a person who understands fate will

古文：詹何曰： 未尝闻身治而国乱者也。未尝闻身乱而国治者也。 
现代文：詹何说过： 还不曾听说过自身修养很好而国家治理得很差的事，也不曾听说过自身修养很差而国家治理得很好的事。 
English: Zhan He said, "I have never heard of a case of a person having good self-cultivation but poor state governance, nor have I heard of a case of a person having poor self-cultivation but good state governance."

古文：矩不正，不可以为方；规不正；不可以为员；身者，事之规矩也，未尝枉己而能正人者也。
现代文：矩尺不正就不能划出方形，圆规不标准就无法画出圆形来。自身的修养就像上述说的矩尺圆规，没听说过自身不正而使别人端正的事。
English: You can't draw a square with an improper ruler, and you can't draw a circle with a non-standard compass. Self-cultivation is like the above-mentioned rectangular ruler compass, you haven't heard that you are incorrect and make others correct.

古文：原天命，治心术，理好憎，适情性，则治道通矣。
现代文：溯源天性、端正心术、理顺好憎感情、调适情性，那么治国之道就通畅了。
English: Tracing the origin of nature, correcting the mind, rationalizing the good and bad feelings, and adjusting the emotions, then the way of governing the country is smooth.

古文：原天命则不惑祸福，治心术，则不妄喜怒；理好憎则不贪无用，适情性则欲不过节。
现代文：溯源天性就不会被祸福迷惑，端正心术就不会喜怒无常，理顺好憎感情就不会贪求那些于本性无用的东西，调适情性这欲念就不会没有节制。
English: Tracing the origin of nature will not be confused by misfortune and fortune, correcting the mind will not be temperamental, rationalizing the good and bad feelings will not be greedy for those things that are useless in nature, and adjusting the temperament, this desire will not be unrestrained.

古文：不惑祸福则动静循理，不妄喜怒则赏罚不阿，不贪无用则不似欲用害性，欲不过节则养性知足。
现代文：不被祸福所迷惑则行为就能动静循理，不喜怒无常这赏罚就不会出偏差，不贪求于本性无用的东西就不会因物欲而伤害本性，欲念有节制就可怡养天性而知足。
English: If you are not confused by misfortune and good fortune, your behavior can be calm and rational. If you are not moody, this reward and punishment will not be deviated. If you do not covet useless things in nature, you will not hurt nature due to material desire. If you have moderation in desire, you can nourish nature and be satisfied.

古文：凡此四者，弗求于外，弗假于人，反己而得矣。
现代文：这四个方面，都不能从外界求得，也不必借助别人的力量，只须立足自身就能得到。
English: These four aspects cannot be obtained from the outside, nor do they need the help of others, they can only be obtained by oneself.

古文：天下不可以智为也，不可以事治也，不可以仁附也，不可以强胜也。
现代文：天下的事情是不能单凭智力就能做成的，也不能单靠聪明就能认识清楚的，更不能只靠人的本事能办成的，同样不能只以仁术就能使人归顺的，单凭强力取胜更不可能。
English: The things of the world cannot be accomplished by intelligence alone, nor can they be clearly understood by wisdom alone, nor can they be accomplished by human ability alone, nor can they be subdued by benevolence alone, and it is even more impossible to win by force alone.

古文：五者，皆人才也，德不盛，不能成一焉。
现代文：这智力、聪明、本事、仁术、强力五项都归属人的才能范畴，但如果只有这些才能而德行不高，就不能做成每一件事情。
English: The five items of intelligence, cleverness, ability, benevolence, and strength all belong to the category of human abilities, but if these abilities are the only ones and virtue is not high, it is impossible to accomplish everything.

古文：德立则五无殆，五见则德无位矣。
现代文：只有德行修养好了，这五项才能也就随之能发挥作用；反之只强调突出这五项才能，那么德行修养也就被忽略了。
English: If virtue is cultivated well, these five talents will be able to play a role; if, on the other hand, only these five talents are emphasized, then virtue will be neglected.

古文：故得道则愚者有余，失道则智者不足。
现代文：所以只有获得了 道 ，就会使愚笨无能的人都会感到力量无穷；反之失去了 道 ，就会使聪明者都感到力不从心。
English: Therefore, only by gaining the Way, will the stupid and incompetent people all feel powerless; on the other hand, if the Way is lost, the intelligent people will all feel powerless.

古文：渡水而无游数，虽强必沉；有游数，虽羸必遂；又况托于舟航之上乎！
现代文：这就好像泅渡江河而没有游泳技术，即使身强体壮也一定会沉没；而有了游泳技术，即使身体瘦弱也一定会顺利渡过，更何况托身于舟船之上呢！
English: This is like crossing a river without swimming skills, even if you are strong and healthy, you will surely sink; and with swimming skills, even if you are thin and weak, you will surely pass smoothly, not to mention leaning on the boat!

古文：为治之本，务在于安民。安民之本，在于足用。足用之本，在于勿夺时。勿夺时之本，在于省事。省事之本，在于节欲。节欲之本，在于反性。反性之本，在于去载。去载则虚，虚则平。平者，道之素也；虚者，道之舍也。
现代文：治国的根本，务必要使人民安定；安定人民的根本，在于衣食充足；衣食充足的根本方法，在于不失农时；使人民不失农时的根本，在于减少徭役；减少徭役的根本，在于节制物欲；节制物欲的根本，在于归返虚静平和的天性；归返天性的根本，在于抛弃内心世界那些多余的精神压力；去掉抛弃了这些精神压力，心胸就会虚静；心胸虚静就平和；平和是道的基本素质，虚静则是道的居所宅舍。
English: The fundamental of governing the country is to ensure the stability of the people; the fundamental of stabilizing the people is to have enough food and clothing; the fundamental way to have enough food and clothing is not to lose the farmers; the fundamental way to make the people not lose the farmers is to reduce the corvee; the fundamental of reducing the corvee is to control the material desires; the fundamental of controlling the material desires is to return to the silent and peaceful nature; the fundamental of returning to nature is to abandon the unnecessary spiritual pressure in the inner world; remove the abandoned spiritual pressure, the heart will be silent; the heart will be peaceful; peace is the basic quality of the Tao, and silence is the residence of

古文：能有天下者必不失其国，能有其国者必不丧其家，能治其家者必不遗其身，能修其身者必不忘其心，能原其心者必不亏其性，能全其性者必不惑于道。
现代文：能够拥有天下的天子，必定不会失去诸侯国；能够拥有诸侯国的诸侯王，必定不会失去他的家族；而能够治理好自己家族的，也必定不会不注意自身的修养的；能够自身修养的人，也必定不会忽略自身的心性；而能够使自己心体返归本原的，必定不会亏损本性；不亏损本性的人，必定不会迷失 道体 的。
English: Those who can possess the sons of heaven will not lose their provinces; those who can possess the princes of provinces will not lose their families; those who can govern their families well will not neglect their cultivation; those who can cultivate themselves will not neglect their minds; those who can return their minds to their original state will not lose their natures; those who do not lose their natures will not lose their morality.

古文：故广成子曰： 慎守而内，周闭而外亲，多知为败，毋亲毋听，抱神以静，形将自正。
现代文：所以广成子说： 谨慎地持守着你的内心，周密地封闭与外界的接触，智慧过多不是一件好事情；不要看不要听，以虚静平和的心态拥有精神，那么形体就会自然端正。 
English: Therefore, Guangcheng Zi said: "Cautiously hold on to your heart, carefully close the contact with the outside world, too much wisdom is not a good thing; don't look, don't listen, have a spirit with an empty, quiet and peaceful state of mind, then the body will naturally correct.

古文：不得之己而能知彼者，未之有也。 
现代文：不能把握自身的虚静平和而能通晓道体，这是从未有过的事情。所以《易经》说： 收束口袋，没有过错也不会有赞誉。 
English: Not being able to grasp one's own emptiness, calmness, and peace, and being able to understand the way of the body, is something that has never happened before. Therefore, the "I Ching" says: "If there is no fault, there will be no praise."

古文：故《易》曰： 括囊，无咎无誉。 能成霸王者，必得胜者也；能胜敌者，必强者也；能强者，必用人力者也；能用人力者，必得人心也。能得人心者，必自得者也；能自得者，必柔弱也。
现代文：能够称霸成王的人，一定是获得胜利的人；能够战胜敌人的人，一定是个强大的人；而能够强大，一定是利用了民众的力量；能利用民众的力量的人，也必定是得人心的；能得人心，也一定自身修道得道的；而能够得其道的，一定是以柔弱处世处事的。
English: He who can dominate and become a king must be a victorious man; he who can defeat the enemy must be a strong man; and he who can be strong must have used the power of the people; he who can use the power of the people must also be popular; he who can win the hearts of the people must also be a virtuous man; and he who can win the hearts of the people must be a weak man.

古文：强胜不若己者，至于与同则格；柔胜出于己者，其力不可度。
现代文：强硬尽管能胜过不如自己的人，但碰上力量与之相等的人就互相抗衡而难以取胜了。
English: Tough though they may be, they are no match for a man of equal strength.

古文：故能以众不胜成大胜者，唯圣人能之。
现代文：而柔弱可以胜过比自己强大的人，它的无形的柔性之力是无法计算的。所以能从多次失败中转变为大胜利，这只有圣人才能做到。
English: But the weak can overcome those stronger than themselves, and its invisible, flexible power is incalculable, so it is only a sage who can turn repeated defeats into great victories.

古文：善游者，不学刺舟而便用之；劲坺者，不学骑马而便居之。轻天下者，身不累于物，故能处之。
现代文：善于游泳的人，不学撑船技术，只须运用游泳术便能渡河了；脚力强健的人，不学骑马技术，凭着强健脚劲便能行走了；看轻天下的人，因不受外物的诱惑，所以能安然处之。
English: People who are good at swimming can cross the river only by using swimming techniques without learning the rowing technique; people with strong feet can walk without learning horse riding techniques; people who look down on the world can live in peace because they are not tempted by external objects.

古文：泰王亶父处邠，狄人攻之，事之以皮币珠玉而不听，乃谢耆者而徙岐周，百姓携幼扶老而从之，遂成国焉。
现代文：泰王亶父居住在邠地，狄族人常来骚扰，亶父拿出皮革、帛币、珍珠玉器来进贡给狄人，但狄族人照样不断地侵扰。亶父于是辞别了邠地的父老长者迁移到岐周，百姓们扶老携幼跟随他，终于在岐周建立了国家。
English: The Thai king's father lived in Handan, and the Di people often came to harass him. The father took out leather, money, and pearl jade to pay tribute to the Di people, but the Di people still constantly intruded. The father then said goodbye to the parents and elders of Handan and moved to Qizhou. The people followed him with their children, and finally established a country in Qizhou.

古文：推此意，四世而有天下，不亦宜乎！
现代文：由亶父这种志向意愿推论，经过四代人的努力终于拥有了天下，这不是也相当合时宜的事吗？
English: Inferring from the aspiration and will of his father, through the efforts of four generations, he finally owned the world. Isn't this also quite a timely matter?

古文：无以天下为者，必能治天下者。
现代文：这也说明不将占有天下作为目的的人，就必定能治理好天下。
English: This also shows that those who do not take possession of the world as their goal must be able to govern the world well.

古文：霜雪雨露，生杀万物，天无为焉，犹之贵天也。
现代文：霜雪雨露，它使万物生长死亡，这些并不是上天有意而为，只是一种自然过程，而人民照样尊重上天。
English: Frost, snow, rain and dew, it makes all things grow and die, these are not intentional acts of heaven, just a natural process, and the people still respect heaven.

古文：厌文搔法，治官理民者，有司也，君无事焉。犹尊君也。
现代文：操持日常事务，主持执行法令，管理百官民众，这些是具体官员、有关部门做的事，君王并没有做这些事，但人们还是尊崇君王。
English: Conducting daily affairs, presiding over the implementation of laws and regulations, and managing hundreds of officials and people. These are things that specific officials and relevant departments do. The king did not do these things, but people still respect the king.

古文：辟地垦草者，后稷也；决河濬江者，禹也；听狱制中者，皋陶也；有圣名者，尧也。
现代文：拓垦荒地、开辟耕地的是后稷，挖决黄河、疏导长江的是大禹，审理刑狱、裁决公正的是皋陶，但是有圣王之名的却是尧帝。
English: It was Hou Yi who reclaimed the wasteland and opened up the cultivated land, Dayu who dug out the Yellow River and diverted the Yangtze River, and Juntao who tried and sentenced to prison and ruled fairly, but it was the Emperor Juntao who had the name of the holy king.

古文：故得道以御者，身虽无能，必使能者为己用。不得其道，伎艺虽多，未有益也。
现代文：所以掌握道术，以此来驾御天下的君王，他自己即使没有才能，但一定能使有才能的人为他服务、使用；而没有道术的人，技能就是再多也无济于事。
English: Therefore, a king who has mastered Daoism and uses it to rule the world, even if he does not have talent, will certainly be able to make talented people serve and use him; and for those who do not have Daoism, no amount of skill will help.

古文：方船济乎江，有虚船从一方来，触而覆之，虽有忮心，必无怨色。
现代文：乘着筏船渡江，有条空船随风飘来，把筏船撞翻，这时筏上的人尽管恼怒万分，但也没法向人泄愤怒。
English: While crossing the river on a raft, an empty boat floated in with the wind and knocked the raft over. At this time, the people on the raft, although extremely angry, were unable to vent their anger on anyone.

古文：有一人在其中，一谓张之，一谓歙之，再三呼而不应，必以丑声随其后。
现代文：现在假设那空船上有人，这情况就不同了，筏上的人有的会喊那船上的人赶快撑开，避免相撞，有的会叫那船上的人往一边靠，让出河道来，如那船上的人毫无反应，这时筏上的人必定会骂出难听的话来。
English: Now suppose that there are people on the empty boat, the situation is different. Some of the people on the raft will shout to the people on the boat to quickly push off to avoid a collision, and some will ask the people on the boat to lean to one side and give way to the river. If the people on the boat do not react, then the people on the raft will certainly swear out bad words.

古文：向不怒而今怒，向虚而今实也。
现代文：这前一种情况无处发怒，后一种情况发怒谩骂，这是因为前一种情况是空船，后一种情况是船上有人。
English: In the first case there is no cause for anger, but in the second case there is, because in the first case the ship is empty, and in the second case there are people on board.

古文：人能虚己以游于世，孰能訾之！
现代文：那么现在设想人如果虚无缥缈地在世上遨游，又有谁能诋毁他？
English: Now, suppose a man were to wander aimlessly through the world, who would be able to defame him?

古文：释道而任智者必危，弃数而用才者必困，有以欲多而亡者，未有以无欲而危者也；有以欲治而乱者，未有以守常而失者也。
现代文：放弃道而依靠智慧那是危险的，抛弃术数而单凭才能是会窘迫的；所以，只有因欲念多而灭亡的，没有因无欲而危险的；只有以欲治国而乱天下的，没有因守常道而亡天下的。
English: It is dangerous to abandon the path and rely on wisdom, and it is embarrassing to abandon the skill and rely on talent alone. Therefore, only those who perish because of too much desire are not dangerous because of no desire; only those who want to rule the country and disturb the world are not dead because of keeping the normal way.

古文：故智不足免患，愚不足以至于失宁。
现代文：因此，智慧不足以免除祸患，愚蠢倒不足以致使失去安宁。
English: Therefore wisdom is not sufficient to avoid calamity, nor is folly sufficient to cause loss of peace.

古文：守其分，循其理，失之不忧，得之不喜，故成者非所为也，得者非所求也。
现代文：持守本分，遵循事理，失去了不忧虑，得到了不兴奋。
English: Maintain this point, follow the facts, lost no worries, got no excitement.

古文：入者有受而无取，出者有授而无予，因春而生，因秋而杀；所生者弗德，所杀者非怨，则几于道也。
现代文：所以成功并不是所要做的，获得并不是所追求的，收入的只是接受而不是索取，付出的只是施授而不求回予；万物因春天而生长，随秋天而死亡，所生育的万物不因此而感激春天的恩德，所死亡的万物不因此而怨恨秋天的刑杀，这就接近 道 了。
English: Therefore, success is not to be done, acquisition is not to be pursued, income is only to be received and not to be asked for, and what is given is only to be given and not to be returned; all things grow with the spring and die with the autumn, all things that are born are not grateful for the grace of spring, and all things that die are not resentful of the slaughter of autumn. This is close to the Way.

古文：圣人不为可非之行，不憎人之非已也；修足誉之德，不求人之誉己也。不能使祸不至，信己之不迎也；不能使福必来，信己之不攘也。
现代文：圣人不做那些能让人非议的事，但不憎恨他人对自己的非议；修养值得赞誉的品德，但不要求他人对自己的赞誉；他不能使祸不来到，但相信自己是不会去惹祸的；他不能使福必定会降临，但相信自己也不至于会排斥降临的福。
English: A saint does not do what is reprehensible, but does not hate the reproach of others; cultivates praiseworthy qualities, but does not require others to praise him; he cannot prevent evil from coming, but believes that he will not cause it; he cannot prevent blessings from coming, but believes that he will not reject the blessings that come.

古文：祸之至也，百其求所生，故穷而不忧；福之至也，非其求所成，故通而弗矜。
现代文：灾祸的产生，不是他招惹产生的，所以陷入困境也不忧虑；幸福的降临，不是他刻意追求得到的，所以即使顺利、显达也不自傲。
English: The emergence of disaster is not caused by his provocation, so he is not worried about falling into a predicament; the advent of happiness is not obtained by his deliberate pursuit, so even if it is smooth and obvious, he is not proud.

古文：知祸福之制不在于己也，故闲居而乐，无为而治。
现代文：知道祸福的临界不在于本人，所以能悠闲自在快乐生活，无所作为地处置各种事情。
English: Knowing that the critical threshold of misfortune and good fortune does not lie in oneself, one can live a leisurely and happy life, and deal with various things without doing anything.

古文：圣人守其所以有，不求其所未得。
现代文：圣人是守着自己所拥有的东西，而正去追求他尚未得到的东西。
English: A saint is someone who protects what he has and pursues what he does not yet have.

古文：求其所无，则所有者亡矣；修其所有，则所欲者至。
现代文：如果去追求尚未得到的那一份，就有可能连原有的那一份也会失去；保持着已有的一份，那么所希望的东西自然会来到。
English: If you pursue the part that has not yet been obtained, you may even lose the original part; if you maintain the existing part, then what you hope for will naturally come.

古文：故用兵者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜也；治国者，先为不可夺，以待敌之可夺也。
现代文：所以用兵打仗就是这样，先做出不能打赢的样子，以等待可战胜敌人的机会；治国也是这样，首先要做出不想夺取他国的姿态，然后等待敌国可被夺取的机会。
English: So this is how to fight a war with soldiers. First, pretend you can't win and wait for an opportunity to defeat the enemy. This is also how to govern a country. First, pretend you don't want to conquer the other country, and then wait for an opportunity to conquer the enemy country.

古文：舜修之历山而海内从化，文王修之歧周而天下移风。
现代文：舜在历山修养德行，天下所有的人都被他感化归顺，周文王在岐周修养德行，天下风气随之被他改变。
English: Zou cultivated virtue in Leshan, and all the people in the world were influenced and converted by him. Zhou Wen Wang cultivated virtue in Qizhou, and the national ethos was changed by him.

古文：使舜趋天下之利，而忘修己之道，身犹弗能保，何尺地之有！
现代文：如果舜只顾追求天下的利益而忘掉修养德性，那么连他自身都难以保住，哪还会有尺寸的地盘可占有！
English: If the grasshopper only cares about pursuing the interests of the world and forgets to cultivate morality, then even he himself will be difficult to keep, and there will still be a large territory to occupy!

古文：故治未固于不乱，而事为治者，必危；行未固于无非，而急求名者，必剉也。
现代文：所以，当天下未必不乱时而去人为治理，必定是危险的；当品行还招非议时而急于去追求名声，一定是要受到挫折的。
English: Therefore, when the world is not necessarily disorderly, it must be dangerous to go to artificial governance; when the conduct is reprehensible, but eager to pursue fame, it must be frustrated.

古文：福莫大无祸，利莫美不丧。动之为物，不损则益，不成则毁，不利则病，皆险也，道之者危。
现代文：什么是 福 ，没有祸就是最大的幸福；什么是 利 ，不丧失既得的利益就是最大的利。 有为 这个东西，常常导致不是有益而是有损，不是成功而是毁坏，不是有利而是有害，都充满着危险，如果按 有为 去做的人也会危亡。
English: What is blessing, no harm is the greatest happiness; what is benefit, no loss of vested interests is the greatest benefit. Being for this thing often leads not to benefit but to harm, not to success but to destruction, not to benefit but to harm, all are full of danger, and if people do things according to their actions, they will also perish.

古文：故秦胜乎戎而败乎骰，楚胜乎诸夏而败乎柏莒。
现代文：所以秦穆公战胜西戎但却在崤山败于晋军之手，楚昭王战胜中原诸国却在栢莒被吴国打败。
English: Therefore, Qin Mu defeated Xirong, but was defeated by the Jin army in Shaoshan, and Chu Zhao defeated the Central Plains countries, but was defeated by the State of Wu in Handan.

古文：故道不可以劝而就利者，而可以宁避害者。
现代文：因此 道 是不能用来规劝那些追逐名利者的，而倒可以安宁那些想避害躲祸者的。
English: Therefore, the Tao cannot be used to persuade those who pursue fame and fortune, but it can pacify those who want to avoid harm and evade disaster.

古文：故常无祸，不常有福；常无罪，不常有功。
现代文：所以，应当是崇尚无祸而不是崇尚有福；应当是崇尚无罪而不是崇尚有功。
English: Therefore, it should be advocating no harm rather than advocating good fortune; it should be advocating no guilt rather than advocating merit.

古文：圣人无思虑，无设储，来者弗迎，去者弗将，人虽东西南北，独立中央。
现代文：圣人没有思虑，没有储备。
English: The sage has no scruples, no reserves.

古文：故处众枉之中不失其直，天下皆流，独不离其坛域。
现代文：对到来的他不迎接，对离开的他不送别。人们处东南西北，而他却独个站在中央。所以他能在大家都曲膝的环境之中不丧失他的正直；他能在大家都随流的趋势之下不偏离他的立足点。
English: He does not greet those who come, and he does not see those who leave. People are in the southeast and northwest, but he stands alone in the center. So he can not lose his integrity in an environment where everyone is bending their knees; he can not deviate from his foothold under the trend of everyone following the flow.

古文：故不为善，不避丑，遵天之道；不为始，不专己，循天之理。不豫谋，不弃时。与天为期；不求得，不辞福，从天之则。
现代文：所以不有意显美为善，不有意掩避丑陋，只是遵循着天道自然；他不首先创造，不独断专行，只是遵循自然之理；他不预先策划，不错失时机，与自然天道和合；不求获得，不辞让幸福，只是顺从自然法则。
English: Therefore, he does not intentionally show beauty as good, does not intentionally hide ugliness, but only follows the way of nature; he does not create first, does not arbitrarily act, but only follows the law of nature; he does not plan in advance, does not miss the opportunity, and is in harmony with the way of nature; he does not seek to obtain, does not give up happiness, but only obeys the laws of nature.

古文：不求所无，不失所得，内无祸，外无福，祸福不生，安有人贼？
现代文：他不追求自己所没有的，也不失去自己所拥有的，使内没有意外的祸害，外没有意外的福利。祸福都不产生，哪会有人来伤害你！
English: He does not pursue what he does not have, nor does he lose what he has, so that there is no unexpected evil within, and no unexpected benefit without. Neither evil nor good will arise, and no one will come to harm you!

古文：为善则观，为不善则议；观则生贵，议则生患。
现代文：行善事则引起人们的注意，做坏事则引起人们的非议；在人们的注意中必定会有责备的言论，而人们的非议一多必定会产生祸患。
English: To do a good deed attracts people's attention, to do a bad deed attracts people's disapproval; in people's attention there must be reproachful speech, and people's disapproval is bound to produce evil.

古文：故道术不可以进而求名，而可以退而修身；不可以得利，而可以离害。
现代文：所以道术是不能用来进取求得功名的，而只可以用来隐退修身的；不能用来获取利益的，而只能凭它来避害的。
English: Therefore, Daoism cannot be used to aggressively seek fame, but can only be used for retreat and self-cultivation; it cannot be used to gain benefits, but can only be used to avoid harm.

古文：故圣人不以行求名，不以智见誉。法修自然，己无所与。
现代文：所以圣人是不用品行去求功名的，不靠智慧去获取赞誉的；他是遵随自然，不加干预。
English: Therefore, a sage does not seek fame by his deeds, nor does he seek praise by his wisdom; he follows nature and does not interfere.

古文：虑不胜数，行不胜德，事不胜道。
现代文：思虑不胜术数，行为不胜 德 ，行事不胜 道 。
English: Thought is not better than skill, action is not better than virtue, and conduct is not better than the Way.

古文：为者有不成，求者有不得。
现代文：做事有不成功的，追求有得不到的。
English: There are unsuccessful things to do and unattainable pursuits.

古文：人有穷，而道无不通，与道争则凶。
现代文：有了走投无路的时候，而 道 无处不通，与 道 争抗争则凶险。
English: When there is no way out, and the road is impassable, it is dangerous to fight against the road.

古文：故《诗》曰： 弗识弗知，顺帝之则。 
现代文：所以《诗经》上说 无知无觉，顺随天的法则 。
English: That is why the "Book of Songs" says, "Ignorance is no excuse for following the laws of heaven."

古文：有智而无为，与无智者同道；有能而无事，与无能者同德。
现代文：有智慧而无所作为，与无智慧的人 道 相同；有才能而无所作为，与无才能的人 德 一样。
English: He that hath wisdom, and doeth it not, is of the same nature as he that hath no wisdom; and he that hath understanding, and doeth it not, is of the same nature as he that hath no understanding.

古文：其智也，皆之者至，然后觉其动也；使之者至，然后觉其为也。
现代文：这样的 智者 ，呼喊他他才过来，这时才被人家觉得他在活动；这样的 能人 ，指使他他才来到，这时才被人家觉得他在行动。
English: A wise man, when called, comes; when called, he acts; a man of power, when called, comes; when called, he acts.

古文：有智若无智，有能若无能，道理为正也，故功盖天下，不施其美；泽及后世，不有其名；道理通而人伪灭也。
现代文：有智慧就像无智慧，有能耐好像无能耐， 道 理就是这样。所以尽管功盖天下，却从不夸耀自己的美德；恩泽传及后代，却从不拥有名声。所以是 道 的理通达了，人为做作的事就灭绝了。
English: Wisdom is as folly is, and strength is as weakness is, and so is wisdom. Therefore, though their works be multiplied, yet will they not glorify themselves; and though their name be highly esteemed, yet shall they not have glory. Therefore wisdom is come into the world, but the works of men are perished.

古文：名与道不两明，人受名，则道不用，道胜人则名息矣，道与人竞长。章人者，息道者也。
现代文：名声与 道 不能同时彰显，人如爱名声，这 道 就不被重视； 道 战胜人的欲望，这 名声 就消失。 道 与名声竞相争长，人如显身扬名，这 道 就被止息。
English: Fame and Tao cannot coexist; if one loves fame, the Tao will not be valued; if Tao overcomes one's desires, the fame will disappear; if Tao competes with fame, the Tao will be stopped.

古文：人章道息，则危不远矣。
现代文：所以人名彰显， 道 就止息，这样离危险也就不远了。
English: Therefore, the name of the person is highlighted, the road stops, and the danger is not far away.

古文：故世有盛名，则衰之日至矣。
现代文：因此，世上到处张扬名声的时候，也就是 道 衰败之日将到来。
English: For this reason, the time is coming when the world will be held up to ridicule, and the day of its downfall will come.

古文：欲尸名者必为善。货欲为善者必生事，事生则释公而就私，货数而任己。
现代文：想要获取名声的人，就一定要去做善事，而一做善事也就必定会生出事端来，事端一旦滋生，就会放弃公道而迁就私情，背理而自私。
English: People who want to gain fame must do good deeds, and once they do good deeds, things will inevitably happen. Once things happen, they will give up justice and give in to personal feelings, and be unreasonable and selfish.

古文：欲见誉于为善，而立名于为质，则治不修故，而事不须时。
现代文：想通过做善事来获取赞誉，想通过表现贤能来树立名声，这样办事中因渗透了私心就不会遵循事理，急于表现自我而不待时机成熟。
English: If you want to gain praise by doing good deeds, if you want to establish a reputation by performing virtuous deeds, then you will not follow the truth because of selfishness, and you will be in a hurry to express yourself before the time is ripe.

古文：治不修故，则多责；事不须时，则无功。
现代文：因为办事不遵循事理，被人指责就会多起来；急于表现自我而不待时机成熟就会徒劳无功。
English: If you act irrationally, you will be criticized more; if you are eager to show yourself and do not wait for the right time, it will be in vain.

古文：责多功鲜，无以塞之，则妄发而邀当，妄为而要中。
现代文：指责多而功劳少，没有办法解决，于是就任意乱来以求得成功。
English: Accusations abound, but credit is scarce. There is no way to solve the problem, so they resort to arbitrary chaos in order to achieve success.

古文：功之成也，不足以更责，事之败也，不足以獘身。
现代文：但以乱来而取得的成功，也不足以改变所遭受的责难和非议；如果乱来而使事情没有成功，那就会使自己身败名裂。
English: But the success achieved by chaos is not enough to change the blame and criticism suffered; if things do not succeed due to chaos, it will ruin one's reputation.

古文：故重为善若重为非，而几于道矣。
现代文：所以要谨慎地对待行善和谨慎地对待行恶，如能明白这点，就离 道 不远了。
English: Therefore, you should be cautious about doing good and cautious about doing evil. If you can understand this, you are not far from the Way.

古文：天下非无信士也，临货分财必探筹而定分，以为有心者之于平，不若无心者也。
现代文：天下并不是没有诚实的人，但面临分配钱财、货物时就一定要用筹码来确定份额，因为人们总认为人心公平总不如无心客观的筹码来得公平。
English: It is not that there are no honest people in the world, but when faced with the distribution of money and goods, it is necessary to use chips to determine the share, because people always think that the fairness of the heart is always less fair than the unintentional and objective chips.

古文：天下非无廉士也，然而守重宝者必关户而全封，以为有欲者之于廉，不若无欲者也。
现代文：天下并不是没有廉洁的人，但看管重宝的人总将门窗关好，并加上密封条，因为人们总认为人不管怎样廉洁总不如原本就没有物欲的门窗封条来得廉洁。
English: It is not that there are no honest people in the world, but those who look after valuable things always close the doors and windows and add a seal, because people always think that no matter how honest a person is, it is not as good as the door and window seals that have no material desires.

古文：人举其疵则怨人，鉴见其丑则善鉴。人能接物而不与己焉，则兔于累矣。
现代文：别人如指出这人就毛病，这人就会怨恨人家，但镜子如能清楚地照出这人的毛病，这人就会认为这镜子是一面好镜子。
English: If others point out his faults, he resents them, but if a mirror clearly shows his faults, he considers it a good mirror.

古文：公孙龙粲于辞而贸名，邓析巧辩而乱法，苏秦善说而亡国。
现代文：人如果在和外物接触时能像对待镜子的态度一样不掺杂一丝一毫的私心成见，那就能免却很多麻烦。公孙龙善于辩说而扰乱了名实关系，邓析辩说乖巧而搞乱了法律问题，苏秦善于游说而丧身。
English: If, when coming into contact with foreign objects, people can treat them without any selfish prejudices, just as they do with mirrors, they can avoid a lot of trouble. Gongsun Long was good at arguing and disturbed the relationship between name and reality, Deng Xiaoping was good at arguing and confused legal issues, and Su Qin was good at lobbying and lost his life.

古文：由其道则善无章，修其理则巧无名。
现代文：所以遵循 道 ，那么就不会张扬特长；遵循 理 ，那么巧诈就不会显示。
English: Therefore, if you follow the Tao, you will not flaunt your talents; if you follow the Fa, you will not show your cunning.

古文：故以巧斗力者，始于阳，常卒于阴；以慧治国者，始于治，常卒于乱。
现代文：所以，用巧诈来斗力的，常常是始于善、终于恶；以智慧来治国的，常常是始于治、终于乱。
English: Therefore, the use of cunning to fight power often begins with good and ends in evil; the use of wisdom to govern the country often begins with rule and ends in chaos.

古文：使水流下，孰弗能治；激而上之，非巧不能。
现代文：让水往低处流，你不用干涉它，它就能做到。但要使水激扬而往上喷涌，不用机械、巧妙的技术是做不到的。
English: Let the water flow downwards, you don't have to interfere with it, it can do it. But to make the water swell and gush upwards, it can't be done without machinery and clever technology.

古文：故文胜则质掩，邪巧则正塞之也。
现代文：所以也说明一旦文采、花头花脑的东西占上风，那么质朴也就被掩盖了；奸邪机巧被施用，那么正直也就被阻塞了。
English: Therefore, it also shows that once the literary and flowery things prevail, then the simplicity is also covered up; treachery is cleverly applied, then honesty is also blocked.

古文：德可以自修，而不可以使人暴；道可以自治，而不可以使人乱。
现代文：德可以用来自我修养，而不能用来使人暴虐；道可以用来治理自身，而不能用来使人昏乱。
English: Virtue can be used to cultivate oneself, but cannot be used to make people tyrannical; Tao can be used to govern oneself, but cannot be used to make people dizzy.

古文：虽有圣贤之宝，不遇暴乱之世，可以全身，而未可以霸王也。
现代文：即使有做圣贤的资质，但如没遇上残暴动乱的世道，道与德也只能用来保全自身，而不能靠它们称霸称王。
English: Even if you have the qualifications to be a sage, if you do not encounter the brutality and turmoil of the world, the Tao and virtue can only be used to preserve yourself, but you can not rely on them to dominate.

古文：汤、武之王也，遇桀、纣之暴也。
现代文：汤、武之所以能称王天下，是因为碰上了桀、纣的残暴。
English: The reason why Tang and Wu can be called the kings of the world is because they encountered the brutality of Yao and Shao.

古文：桀、纣非以汤、武之贤暴也，汤、武遭桀、纣之暴而王也。
现代文：桀、纣不是因为汤、武的贤圣而残暴的，汤、武倒是碰上了桀、纣的暴政才称王的。
English: It is not because of the wisdom and wisdom of Tang and Wu that Tang and Wu are cruel, but it is because of the tyranny of Tang and Wu that Tang and Wu are called kings.

古文：故虽贤王，必待遇。
现代文：所以即使是圣贤，也必须等待一定的机遇才行。
English: So even if you are a sage, you have to wait for certain opportunities.

古文：遇者，能遭于时而得之也，非智能所求而成也。
现代文：机遇就是指遇到时机能把握它，这不是靠智能的追求所能做到的。
English: Opportunity means being able to seize the opportunity when it comes along. This is not something that can be achieved through the pursuit of intelligence.

古文：君子修行而使善无名，布施而使仁无章，故士行善而不知善之所由来，民诣利而不知利之所由出。故无为而自治。
现代文：君子修行而不谋求善名，施舍而不张扬仁爱，所以做到士人行善而不知 善 是从哪里来的，民众得到了利而不知 利 从何处出的，所以是 无为而自治 。
English: A gentleman practices without seeking fame, and gives alms without proclaiming benevolence. Therefore, it is possible for a scholar to do good without knowing where the good comes from, and for the people to receive benefits without knowing where the benefits come from. Therefore, it is autonomy without doing anything.

古文：善有章则士争名，利有本则民争功利二争者生，虽有贤者，弗能治。
现代文：反过来说，谋求善名就容易导致士人们争夺名声，知道 利 之本源就容易引起民众间争夺功劳；争名夺利的风气一旦形成，就是有贤明的君王也是不容易治理好社会的。
English: On the other hand, seeking a good reputation will easily lead to scholars competing for fame, and knowing the source of profit will easily cause people to compete for merit. Once the culture of competing for fame and profit is formed, it is not easy for a wise king to govern the society well.

古文：故圣人掩迹于为善，而息名于为仁也。
现代文：所以明白这种道理的君王大多是行善不留痕迹、施仁不留名声。
English: Therefore, most kings who understand this principle do good deeds without leaving a trace, and do not leave a reputation for benevolence.

古文：外交而为援，事大而为安，不叵内治而待时。
现代文：对外交好以求得援助，事奉大国以求得安定，不如将国内的事治理好以待时机到来。
English: For diplomacy, it is better to seek assistance, and to serve great powers to seek stability. It is better to manage domestic affairs well until the time comes.

古文：凡事人者，非以宝币，必以卑辞。
现代文：大凡侍奉别国，不是送去珍宝钱财，就是对人家低三下四。
English: When you serve other countries, you either send them precious money or treat them like dirt.

古文：事以玉帛，则货弹而欲不餍；卑体婉辞，则谕说而交不结；约束誓盟，则约定而反无日；虽割国之锱锤以事人，而无自恃之道，不足以为全。
现代文：用珍宝钱财侍奉别国，就是将钱财耗尽也未必使人家的欲望得到满足；低三下四、态度谦卑、好话说尽也未必能和别国建立友好关系；就是签订条约、立誓结盟，但说不定哪一天毁约撕盟。即使只拿出极少的钱财侍奉别国，但如果自身没有可依赖的基础，也还是不足以保全自己的。
English: To serve other countries with precious money and wealth, even if the money and wealth are exhausted, it may not be able to satisfy people's desires; to be humble, humble, and good-natured may not be able to establish friendly relations with other countries; to sign treaties and pledge alliance, but may one day break the treaty and break the alliance. Even if only a very small amount of money and wealth is spent to serve other countries, if there is no foundation to rely on, it is still not enough to protect oneself.

古文：若诚外释交之策，而慎修其境内之事，尽其地力以多其积，厉其民死以牢其城，上下一心，君臣同志，与之守社稷，教死而民弗离，则为名者不伐无罪，而为利者不攻难胜，此必全之道也。
现代文：如果放弃对外交结的策略，一心一意治理好国内的事务，充分利用土地资源和挖掘土地潜力，增加国家积累，勉励人民不怕牺牲以巩固城防，上下一心，君臣同一志向，团结广大民众保卫社稷国家，人民效死力也不离弃，那么想张扬名誉的不必去讨伐没有罪过的国家，想获得利益的不必去攻打难以取胜的对手，这才是保全国家的较好方式。
English: If one abandons the strategy of relying on foreign alliances, resolutely manages domestic affairs, makes full use of land resources and taps land potential, increases national accumulation, encourages the people not to be afraid of sacrifice to consolidate the city's defense, and has one heart and one mind, the monarchs and subjects have the same ambition, unites the broad masses to defend the society and the country, and the people do not abandon their efforts, then if one wants to promote one's honor, one does not have to go to war against a country that has committed no crime, and if one wants to gain benefits, one does not have to attack an opponent that is difficult to win. This is the best way to preserve

古文：民有道所同道，有法所同守，为义之不能相固，威之不能相必也，故立君以一民。
现代文：人民有了前进的道路便会一齐走在这道路上，有了法规就会一同遵守。当然单靠义理不能使人民牢固地团结在一起，同样单凭威势也不能使人民紧密地集聚在一起，所以要设立君王来使民心统一。
English: If the people have a way forward, they will walk together on this road; if they have laws and regulations, they will abide by them together. Of course, the people cannot be firmly united by virtue alone, nor can the people be closely gathered together by power alone. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a king to unify the people's hearts.

古文：君执一则治，无常则乱。
现代文：君王掌握 一 就能治理好天下，如没有常规天下就大乱。
English: Once the monarch is in control, he can govern the world well. If there is no rule of law, the world will be in chaos.

古文：君道者，非所以为也，所以无为也。何谓无为？
现代文：君王治理国家之道，不是靠有所作为，而是靠无为。那么，什么是 无为 ？
English: The way a monarch governs a country is not by doing something, but by doing nothing. So, what is doing nothing?

古文：智者不以位为事，勇者不以位为暴，仁者不以位为患，可谓无为矣。
现代文：即是聪明的人不借用权位来生事，勇武的人不凭靠权势来施暴，仁慈的人不利用地位来施恩惠，这些可以称为 无为 。
English: That is to say, intelligent people do not use their power to cause trouble, brave people do not use their power to commit violence, and benevolent people do not use their status to grant favors, which can be called doing nothing.

古文：夫无为，则得于一也。一也者，万物之本也，无敌之道也。
现代文：做到这种 无为 ，就算得到 一 。 一 是万物的根本，所向无敌的法宝。
English: If you can achieve this kind of inaction, you can even get one. One is the root of all things, the invincible magic weapon.

古文：凡人之性，少则猖狂，壮则暴强，老则好利。
现代文：大凡人的禀性是年轻时浮躁妄为，年壮时凶狠逞强，而到年长就追求起私利钱财来。
English: The stubbornness of the great mortal is impetuous when young, fierce when strong, and pursues selfish interests and money when older.

古文：一身之身既数变矣，又况君数易法，国数易君！
现代文：这可说人一生中是经历多次性格改变，又何况一个君主多次改更法令、一个国家多次更换君主呢！
English: It can be said that people go through many personality changes in their lifetime, not to mention that a monarch changes laws and decrees many times, and a country changes monarchs many times!

古文：人以其位通其好憎，下之径衙不可胜理，故君失一则乱，甚于无君之时。
现代文：每人都是从自己的地位立场出发来表达自己的爱憎，这种爱憎观因社会的错综复杂而变得五花八门，是难以一一理顺清楚的，所以君王失去了 一 就会乱套，这种乱套比没有君主时的混乱更厉害。
English: Everyone expresses their love and hate from the standpoint of their own status. This concept of love and hate has become multifarious due to the complexity of society. It is difficult to rationalize and clarify it one by one. Therefore, once the king is lost, there will be chaos. This chaos is more severe than the chaos when there is no monarch.

古文：故《诗》曰： 不愆不忘，率由旧章。 
现代文：因此，《诗经》上这样说： 不出差错，不忘过去，按照老规矩行事。 
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says: Don't make mistakes, don't forget the past, and follow the old rules.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：君好智，则倍时而任己，弃数而用虑。
现代文：君王如果喜欢运用智术，就会违背时令而放任自我，抛弃道理而运用心计。
English: If the king likes to use wisdom, he will violate the season and let himself go, abandon reason and use his mind.

古文：天下之物博而智浅，以浅搪博，未有能者也。
现代文：但实际上天下的事情广博而人的智术浅薄，用浅薄的智术去应对广博的事情，是不可能做好事情的。
English: But in fact, the world's affairs are vast and human wisdom is shallow. It is impossible to do things well with shallow wisdom.

古文：独任其智，失必多。
现代文：只想依靠个人的智慧来办事，失误必定不少。
English: If you just want to rely on your personal wisdom to get things done, you're bound to make a lot of mistakes.

古文：矣。
现代文：所以 任智 、 崇智 ，是死路一条。
English: So Ren Zhi, Chong Zhi, is a dead end.

古文：故好智，穷术也；好勇，则轻敌而简备，自偩而辞助。
现代文：同样崇尚勇武，就会轻视敌人而忽视防备，只凭自身力量而拒绝相互间的帮助。
English: Similarly advocating bravery, they will despise the enemy and neglect defense, and refuse to help each other by relying only on their own strength.

古文：一人之力以御强敌，不杖众多而专用身才，必不堪也。
现代文：用一个人的力量去抵抗强大的敌人，不凭借众人的力量而只凭自身力量，必定不能胜任。
English: Using one's strength to resist a powerful enemy, without relying on the strength of many people and relying only on one's own strength, must not be competent.

古文：故好勇，危术也。
现代文：所以崇尚勇武，是一条危险的道路。
English: Therefore, advocating bravery is a dangerous path.

古文：好与，则无定分。上之分不定，则下之望无止。
现代文：喜欢施舍，但无一定的标准，上面的分配没有标准，下面的奢望就没有止境。
English: Like charity, but without a certain standard, the above distribution has no standard, the below extravagance has no limit.

古文：若多赋敛，实府库，则与民为仇。
现代文：如果多施舍而增加赋税以充实国库，这实际上是与百姓过不去。
English: If you give more to charity and increase taxes to replenish the treasury, this is actually unacceptable to the people.

古文：少取多与，数未之有也。
现代文：但如果是赋税收得少，施舍却又多，这国库里的财钱数量就不足以开销。
English: But if taxes are low and charity is high, the amount of money in the treasury will not be enough for spending.

古文：故好与，来怨之道也。
现代文：所以喜欢施舍，是一种招致怨恨的做法。
English: So liking to give alms is a practice that causes resentment.

古文：仁智勇力，人之美才也，而莫足以治天下。
现代文：因此，仁、智、勇、力虽说是人的美好才能，但不足以治理天下。
English: Therefore, although benevolence, wisdom, courage and strength are the best human talents, they are not enough to govern the world.

古文：由此观之，贤能之不足任也，而道术之可修明矣。
现代文：由此看来，贤能是不值得依靠利用的，而道术却是可以遵循和发扬广大的。
English: From this point of view, virtue is not worth relying on, but Taoism can be widely followed and developed.

古文：圣人胜心，众人胜欲。
现代文：圣人凭心处事，众人以物欲行事。
English: A saint acts from the heart, but people act from the flesh.

古文：君子行正气，小人行邪气。
现代文：君子施行正气，小人施行邪气。
English: A gentleman practices righteousness, a villain practices wickedness.

古文：内便于性，外合于义，循理而动，不系于物者，正气也。
现代文：内心观念符合本性，外在行为符合义理，遵循事理而行动，不受外物的牵累，这就叫 正气 。
English: The inner concept accords with the nature, the outer behavior accords with the principle, the action follows the principle, and is not affected by external things. This is called righteousness.

古文：重于滋味，淫于声色，发于喜怒，不顾后患者，邪气也。
现代文：热衷于滋味、沉溺于声色，喜怒无常，行动不考虑后果，这就叫 邪气 。
English: Passionate about taste, addicted to sound and color, moody, acting without considering the consequences, this is called evil.

古文：邪与正相伤，欲与性相害，不可两立。一置一废，故圣人损欲而从事于性。
现代文：邪气与正气互相伤害，物欲与本性互相损伤，二者不可并立，一方树立，另一方必废弃，所以圣人是抛弃物欲而依顺本性。
English: Evil spirits and righteous spirits harm each other, and material desires and nature damage each other. The two cannot stand side by side. One side must be built up, and the other side must be abandoned. Therefore, a sage abandons material desires and obeys nature.

古文：目好色，耳好声，口好味，接而说之。不知利害嗜欲也，食之不宁于体，听之不合于道，视之不便于性。
现代文：眼睛喜看美色、耳朵喜听音乐、嘴巴爱尝美味，接触这些东西就喜欢上它们，这就是不懂嗜欲的害处；贪吃暴食不利于身体安宁，听淫声不合于大道，看美色不利于天性。
English: The eyes love beauty, the ears love music, the mouth loves good food, and when we come into contact with these things, we like them. This is the harm of not understanding cravings. Gluttony and gluttony are not conducive to physical peace, listening to obscene sounds is not conducive to the highway, and seeing beauty is not conducive to nature.

古文：三官交争，以义为制者，心也。
现代文：这口、耳、眼三种器官争着接受物欲，而能制约它们的是义理，即 心 。
English: The mouth, ear, and eye are three organs that compete to receive material desires, but it is the sense, that is, the mind, that can regulate them.

古文：割痤疽非不痛也，饮毒药非不苦也，然而为之者，便于身也。
现代文：割除毒疮不是不痛，喝下有毒性的药汤不是不苦，但是病人愿意忍受，这是因为对身体健康有帮助。
English: It is not painless to have a canker sore cut out, and it is not painless to drink poisonous decoction, but the patient is willing to put up with it because it is good for their health.

古文：渴而饮水非不快也，饥而大飱非不澹也，然而弗为者，害于性也。
现代文：渴了喝下生水也很痛快，饿了大吃一顿也很惬意，但是人们不这样做，这是因为对身体健康没有好处。
English: Drinking raw water when you are thirsty is also very pleasant, and eating a big meal when you are hungry is also very pleasant, but people do not do this because it is not good for their health.

古文：此四者，耳目鼻口不知所取去，心为之制，各得其所。
现代文：以上四种情况，耳、目、鼻、口这些器官是不知取舍的，只有用 心 才能够控制它们，让它们适可而止，各得其所。
English: In the above four cases, the ears, eyes, nose, and mouth are organs that cannot be ignored. Only with the heart can they be controlled, so that they can be adjusted and put in their proper place.

古文：由是观之，欲之不可胜，明矣。
现代文：由此看来，欲望不可任用，以物欲行事是不行的，这十分清楚地摆在我们面前。
English: From this perspective, it is very clear to us that desires cannot be used, and it is not possible to act according to material desires.

古文：凡治身养性，节寝处，适饮食，和喜怒，便动静，使在己者得，而邪气因而不生，岂若忧瘤疵之与痤疽之发，而豫备之哉！
现代文：大凡调养身体保养天性，就要做到调节起居、适量饮食、平和喜怒、劳逸结合，让这种养生之道始终落实贯彻，这样邪气就很难入侵到你的身体中来，哪像因担心肿瘤产生、毒疮发作而预防着那样伤神费心！
English: If you want to cultivate your body and maintain your nature, it is necessary to regulate your living, proper diet, peace, joy and anger, and the combination of work and rest, so that this way of life is always implemented, so that it is difficult for evil spirits to invade your body, which is like worrying about the occurrence of tumors and the onset of poisonous sores and preventing it!

古文：夫函牛之鼎沸而蝇蚋弗敢入，昆山之玉滇而尘垢弗能污也。
现代文：那能够盛下整头牛的沸腾大鼎，蚊蝇是不敢靠近的；那昆仑美玉纹理精细，尘埃是无法污损的。
English: It is a large boiling cauldron that can hold a whole cow, and mosquitoes and flies dare not approach it; the Kunlun jade is finely textured and cannot be stained by dust.

古文：圣人无去之心而心无丑，无取之美而美不失。
现代文：圣人丑不内萌而心灵纯洁、美不外致而心灵善美。
English: A saint is not ugly on the inside, but has a pure heart. A saint is not beautiful on the outside, but has a good heart.

古文：故奈把思亲不求福，飨宾修敬不思德，唯弗求者能有之。
现代文：所以祭祀只是为了思念亲人而不是为了祈求神灵降福，宴请只是为了对宾客表达敬意而不是为了回报，唯有不汲汲追求才能够得到想得到的东西。
English: Therefore, sacrifices are only for the purpose of missing relatives, not for the purpose of praying for the blessing of the gods, and banquets are only for the purpose of expressing respect for the guests, not for the purpose of return. You can only get what you want if you don't pursue it.

古文：处尊位者，以有公道而无私说，故称尊焉，不称贤也；有大地者，以有常术而无铃谋，故称平焉，不称智也。
现代文：处在尊贵地位的人，因为有公道而没有私见，所以称他为尊，而不称为贤。拥有大地的人，因为遵循常规而不玩权谋，所以说他公平，而不说他聪明。
English: The man of rank, because he is just, and has no opinion of his own, is called noble, not wise; the man of the earth, because he follows the rules, and does not play games, is called just, not wise.

古文：内无暴事以离怨于百姓，外无贤行以见忌于诸侯，上下之礼，袭而不离，而为论者然不见所观焉，此所谓藏无形者。
现代文：对内没有残暴的事情招来百姓的怨恨，对外不以贤能的行为招致诸侯的猜忌，上下礼节遵循而不偏离，想评说的人因为看不到想看到的形迹而无法评头品足，这就叫做藏匿于无形之中。
English: It is called "hiding in the formless" when there is no cruelty at home to arouse the resentment of the people, no virtuous behavior to arouse the suspicion of the lords abroad, no deviation from the upper and lower etiquette, and people who want to comment cannot comment because they cannot see the traces they want to see.

古文：非藏无形，孰能形！
现代文：如果不是藏匿于无形之中，谁不能知道他的情况呢？
English: Who could not know his condition if he did not hide in invisibility?

古文：三代之所道者，因也。
现代文：夏商周三代君王所遵循的道路，就是因顺。
English: The path followed by Xia Shangzhu, the third king of the dynasty, was Inshun.

古文：故禹决江河，因水也；后稷播种树谷，因地也；汤、武平暴乱，因时也。
现代文：所以大禹疏导江河，是因顺水性；后稷种植谷物，是因顺地力；汤武平定暴乱，是因顺时势。
English: Therefore, Dayu's dredging of rivers is due to water flow; Houyi's planting of cereals is due to earth flow; Tangwu's suppression of riots is due to time flow.

古文：故天下可得而不可取也，霸王可受而不可求也。
现代文：所以天下可以得到但不是靠强力来夺取，霸王的地位可以接受但不可强求。
English: Therefore, the world can be obtained, but not by force to seize, the status of the overlord can be accepted, but not forced.

古文：在智则人与之讼，在力则人与之争。
现代文：任用智慧则容易导致与人争讼，任用武力则容易导致与人竞争。
English: The appointment of wisdom is likely to lead to litigation, and the appointment of force is likely to lead to competition.

古文：未有使人无智者，有使人不能用其智于己者也；未有使人无力者，有使人不能施其力于己者也。
现代文：不能使他人没有智慧，但能使他人无法在你身上使用智慧；不能使他人不崇尚武力，但能使他人无法在你身上使用武力。
English: You cannot make others unwise, but you can make others unable to use wisdom on you; you cannot make others not advocate force, but you can make others unable to use force on you.

古文：此两者常在久见。
现代文：这两种情况崇尚的就是无形不现。
English: Both of these situations advocate invisibility.

古文：故君贤不见，诸侯不备；不肖不见，则百姓不怨。
现代文：所以君王的贤能不显露则使诸侯不戒备；不贤的事情不显露则使百姓怨恨无从产生。
English: Therefore, if the virtue of the monarch is not revealed, the princes will not be alerted; if the unvirtuous things are not revealed, the people's resentment will not be able to arise.

古文：百姓不怨则民用可得，诸侯弗备则天下之时可承。
现代文：百姓不怨恨，那么民众的力量你就可以利用、得到，诸侯不戒备，那么夺取天下的时势就可以利用。
English: If the people do not resent, then you can use and get the power of the people. If the lords are not alert, then you can use the current situation to seize the world.

古文：事所与众同也，功所与时成也，圣人无焉。
现代文：事情是与众人一起做的，功业是靠时势运用而生的，而圣人就要在这其中销声匿迹，看不出他参与了什么、做了什么。
English: Things are done together with people, deeds are born from the use of the current situation, and the sage will disappear in the midst of this, unable to see what he has participated in and done.

古文：故老子曰： 虎无所措其爪，兕无所措其角。 
现代文：所以《老子》说 老虎用不上它的利爪，犀牛用不上它的尖角 。
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said that tigers can't use their claws, and rhinos can't use their sharp horns.

古文：盖谓此也。
现代文：大概说的就是这种情况。
English: That's what they all say.

古文：鼓不灭于声，故能有声；镜不没于形，故能有形。
现代文：鼓不藏身于声，所以敲击时会发出声音；镜不没形于其中，所以外物照镜时会映出影像。
English: The drum is not hidden in the sound, so it will make a sound when struck; the mirror is not invisible in it, so the image will be reflected when the external object is viewed through the mirror.

古文：金石有声，弗叩弗鸣；管萧有音，弗吹无声。
现代文：金钟石磬可以发声，但不叩击它就不会鸣响；管箫可以发音，但不吹奏它就不会有乐音。
English: A bell can make a sound, but if it is not struck, it will not ring; a pipe organ can make a sound, but if it is not played, there will be no music.

古文：圣人内藏，不为物先倡，事来而制，物至而应。
现代文：圣人深藏不露，不做倡导的事，事物来到时才加以控制，外物降临时才作出应对。
English: The sage hides deep and does not reveal, does not do advocacy, controls things when they come, and responds to external things when they fall.

古文：饰其外者伤其内，扶其情者害其神，见其文者蔽其质。
现代文：修饰外表会伤害内质，放纵情感会伤害精神，表现文采会遮蔽质朴。
English: Modifying the appearance will hurt the inner quality, indulging the emotions will hurt the spirit, and the performance of literature will cover up the simplicity.

古文：无须臾忘为质者，必困于性；百步之中不忘其容者必累其形。
现代文：一刻都不忘掉表现贤能，这必定会困扰本性；走一百步路一直注意自己的步态仪容，这必定会劳累他的身体。
English: If he never forgets to perform virtuous deeds, his nature will be disturbed; if he walks a hundred paces, paying constant attention to his gait and appearance, his body will be exhausted.

古文：故羽翼美者伤骨骸，枝叶美者害根茎。能两美者，天下无之也。
现代文：所以羽毛翅翼美丽的飞鸟，因善飞而伤损它的骨骸；枝叶繁茂的树木，因枝叶消耗而损害它的根部，能够两全其美的，整个天下都难以找到。
English: Therefore, it is difficult to find a bird with beautiful feathered wings, whose skeleton is damaged due to good flight, or a tree with luxuriant branches and leaves, whose roots are damaged due to the consumption of branches and leaves, which can be the best of both worlds.

古文：天有明，不忧民之晦也，百姓穿户凿牖，自取照焉。地有财，不忧民之贫也，百姓伐木芟草，自取富焉。
现代文：天本有明，不忧虑百姓在黑暗中生活，而百姓也自会开门户、凿牖窗，从天上采光照亮房屋；地本有财，不忧虑百姓的贫穷，而百姓自会伐木砍草，从大地获取财物丰富生活。
English: Heaven is bright and does not worry about the people living in the dark, and the people will open the doorways, cut the windows, and illuminate the houses from the sky; the earth is rich and does not worry about the poverty of the people, and the people will cut wood and cut grass, and obtain wealth from the earth to enrich their lives.

古文：至德道者若丘山，嵬然不动，行者以为期也。
现代文：得道的人就像山丘、巍然不动，而行路人将它作为目标来攀登。
English: The wayfaring man is like a hill, motionless, while the wayfarer climbs it as a goal.

古文：直己而足物，不为人赣，用之者亦不受其德，故宁而能久。
现代文：这巍然不动的山丘只是自然而然地自给自足，它也不对人有过什么有意的施与，取用山丘财货的人也不必以为受了山的恩德而要去回报它，所以这山能安宁长久。
English: This motionless hill is just naturally self-sufficient. It has never given anything intentionally to people. People who take advantage of the hill's wealth and goods do not have to think that they have received the grace of the mountain and want to repay it, so this mountain can be peaceful for a long time.

古文：天地无予也，故无夺也；日月无德也，故无怨也。
现代文：天地也是这样不赐予，所以也就无剥夺；就像日月那样无恩施，故也不招惹怨恨。
English: In the same way, heaven and earth do not bestow, so there is no deprivation; just as the sun and moon do not bestow, so they do not cause resentment.

古文：喜德者必多怨，喜予者必善夺。
现代文：喜欢施恩的必定多怨恨，喜欢施予的必定会剥夺。
English: Those who like to give must have more resentment, and those who like to give must be deprived.

古文：唯灭迹于无为，而随天地自然者，唯能胜理，而为受名。
现代文：唯有在无为中隐匿自己踪迹、顺随天地自然的人，才能理解这个道理而不爱名。
English: Only those who hide their tracks in inaction and follow the nature of heaven and earth can understand this truth and not love the name.

古文：名兴则道行，道行则人无位矣。
现代文：名誉兴盛起来这道就行不通，道行得通则人就无须名位。
English: If one's reputation prospers, this path will not work. If one is able to practice the path, then one does not need a title.

古文：故誉生则毁随之，善见则怨从之。
现代文：所以称誉产生，这诋毁也就随之而来；善行显示，这恶恨也就跟着而至。
English: Wherefore, when the praises of men come, then cometh the reviling; and when the good work appeareth, then cometh the hating.

古文：利则为害始，福则为祸先。唯不求利者为无害，唯不求福者为无祸。
现代文：利是害的开始，福是祸的先导；唯有不追求利的人没有害，唯有不追求福的人没有祸。
English: Profit is the beginning of harm, blessing is the precursor of evil; only those who do not pursue profit are not harmed, and only those who do not pursue blessing are not harmed.

古文：侯而求霸者，必失其侯，霸而求王者必丧其霸。
现代文：是诸侯却要去谋求当霸主，就会连诸侯都保不住；是霸主却要想统治天下当天子，就会连霸主的位子都保不牢。
English: If the lords were to seek to become overlords, they would not be able to keep the lords; if the overlords wanted to rule the whole world, they would not be able to keep the position of the overlord.

古文：故国以全为常，霸王其寄也；身以生为常，富贵其寄也，能不以天下伤其国，而不以国害其身者，焉可以托天下也。
现代文：所以国家以保全自己为长久之计，称王称霸只是一种暂时的寄托；人生也以活命为长久之计，大贵大富只是一种暂时的寄托。能够不因为拥有天下而伤害国家，能够不因为拥有国家而伤害身体，这样的人可以将天下托付给他。
English: Therefore, the state takes self-preservation as a long-term strategy, and calling oneself king and hegemony is only a temporary trust; life also takes life as a long-term strategy, and being rich and famous is only a temporary trust. A person who can not harm the country because he owns the world, and can not harm his body because he owns the country, can entrust the world to him.

古文：不知道者，释其所已有，而求其所未得也。苦心愁虑以行曲，故福至则喜，祸至则怖，神劳于谋，智遽干事；祸福萌生，终身不悔，己之所生，乃仅愁人。
现代文：不懂 道 的人，放弃自己已拥有的，而去追求自己所没有得到的，煞费苦心玩弄智巧邪行，幸福来临就高兴，灾难临头就恐怖，策划计谋弄得疲劳不堪，事务纠缠得智困虑苦，灾祸由此产生也终身不悔，一切是自作自受，却反而埋怨人家。
English: People who do not understand the Way, give up what they already have and pursue what they have not obtained, painstakingly play with cleverness and evil practices, are happy when happiness comes, are terrified when disaster is imminent, are tired of planning and scheming, are entangled in affairs, are mentally distressed, and have no regrets for life when disasters occur. Everything is self-inflicted, but they blame others.

古文：不喜则忧，中未尝平；持无所监，谓之狂生。
现代文：不是沾沾自喜，就是忧心忡忡，心里总是不平衡，行为没有原则标准，这就叫做 狂妄之徒 。
English: People who are either complacent or anxious, who are always unbalanced in their minds, and whose actions have no principled standards are called arrogant.

古文：人主好仁，则无功者赏，有罪者释；好刑，则有功者废，无罪者诛。
现代文：君主如果喜好仁慈，就会对无功者奖赏、将有罪者释放；君主如果喜爱刑罚，就会废弃有功者，诛杀无罪者。
English: If a prince loves mercy, he will reward the unmeritorious and release the guilty; if a prince loves punishment, he will discard the meritorious and kill the innocent.

古文：及无好者，诛而无怨，施而不德，放准循绳，身无与事，若天若地，何不覆载。
现代文：而没有偏好的君主，如施行刑罚就没有人怨恨，如施舍恩德就没有人感戴；因为他效法水准，遵循墨绳，自身不参与事情本身；就像天地一样，什么事物不被覆盖和承载？
English: But a prince who has no preferences is not resented when he inflicts punishment, and is not respected when he gives alms; for he follows the standard, follows the ink, and does not himself take part in the matter; like the heavens and the earth, what is not covered and borne?

古文：故合而舍之者君也，制而诛之者法也，民已受诛，怨无所灭，谓之道。
现代文：所以将万物融合起来使之平平和和是君主的职责，制裁和诛杀罪犯是法律的功能。人如受惩罚而不表示怨恨遗憾，这就说明事情处理得合乎天道。
English: Therefore, it is the duty of the monarch to unite all things to make them peaceful, and it is the function of the law to punish and kill criminals. If people are punished without expressing resentment and regret, this shows that things are handled according to the heavenly way.

古文：道胜，则人无事矣。
现代文：道能占上风，这人间社会省却不少麻烦事。
English: The Tao can prevail, but this human society saves a lot of trouble.

古文：圣人无屈奇之眼，无瑰异之行，眼不视，行不观，言不议，通而不华，穷而不慑，荣而不显，隐而不穷，异而不见怪，容而与众同，无以名之，此之谓大通。
现代文：圣人不穿奇异服装，没有怪异行为；他的服饰不引起众人的议论，他的行为不引起众人观察，他的言论不引起众人的评论；通达时不浮华，困窘时不沮丧，荣贵时不炫耀，隐逸时不困窘，超凡脱俗而不被人感到怪诞，仪容和普通人一样。难以用名称来命名他，就叫做 大通 。
English: A sage does not wear strange clothes, does not behave strangely; his clothes do not arouse public discussion, his behavior does not arouse public observation, his speech does not arouse public comment; he is not flashy when he is enlightened, he is not depressed when he is embarrassed, he is not ostentatious when he is honorable, he is not embarrassed when he is secluded, he is not eccentric when he is eccentric, and his appearance is the same as that of an ordinary person. It is difficult to name him, so he is called Odong.

古文：升降揖让，趋翔周游，不得已而为也。非性所有于身，情无符检，行所不得已之事，而不解构耳，岂加故为哉！
现代文：升阶下堂的举止，拱揖谦让的礼节，小跑疾走，盘绕周旋，都是不得已而去做的，并不是出于人的本性，内心的情绪并不同这些举止行为符合。做到这种不得已的事情，而且一定要这样做的，哪里是特意这样安排的？
English: The demeanor of ascending the throne, the etiquette of bowing, trotting, and circling around, are all done as a last resort, not out of human nature, and the inner emotions do not match these behaviors. To achieve such a last resort, and to do so, where is it specially arranged?

古文：故不得已而歌者，不事为悲；不得已而舞者：不矜为丽。
现代文：所以不得已而唱歌的人，是难以表露悲情的；不得已而跳舞的人，是不会努力展示优美舞姿的。
English: Therefore, a person who has no choice but to sing is difficult to show sadness; a person who has no choice but to dance will not try to show a beautiful dance.

古文：歌舞而不事为悲丽者，皆无有根心者。
现代文：唱歌、跳舞不能表露悲情，展示优美舞姿，都是由于内心没有真情。
English: Singing, dancing can not show sadness, show graceful dance, all because there is no true feeling in the heart.

古文：善博者不欲牟，不恐不胜，平心定意，捉得其齐，行由其理，虽不必胜，得筹必多。
现代文：善于博弈的人，不一心想赢，他不担心不会赢，只是平心定意，投箸落子符合心意，行走棋子遵循规则，虽然不一定最后胜利，但得到的筹码一定不少。
English: A person who is good at the game does not want to win, he is not worried that he will not win, he is just calm and determined. The throwing chopsticks fall in line with his heart, and the walking pieces follow the rules. Although he may not win in the end, he will get a lot of chips.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：胜在于数，不在于欲。
现代文：这是因为博弈的胜负取决于术数技艺，而不取决于人主观愿望。
English: This is because the success or failure of the game depends on the skill of the number of operations, and not on the subjective desire of the person.

古文：驰者不贪最先，不恐独后，缓急调乎手，御心调乎马，虽不能必先载，马力必尽矣。
现代文：同样，善于赛马的人，不贪求跑在最前边，他也不害怕单独落在最后，只是通过双手调节快慢，驾御者的意图和马匹协调，虽然不一定跑在最前面，但马匹的能量被最大限度地调动起来了。
English: In the same way, a good horse racer does not want to be at the forefront, he is not afraid of being alone at the end, but by adjusting the speed with both hands, the driver's intention and the horse's coordination, although not necessarily running at the forefront, but the horse's energy is maximally mobilized.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：先在于数，而不在于欲也。
现代文：这是因为跑马领先，是在于技巧而不在于主观愿望。
English: That's because a runner's lead is based on skill, not desire.

古文：是故灭欲则数胜，弃智则道立矣。
现代文：因此，消除欲念这技术就能发挥出来，同样抛弃智慧这道术就能确立起来。
English: Therefore, the technique of eliminating desire can be brought into play, and the technique of abandoning wisdom can be established.

古文：贾多端则贫，工多技则穷，心不一也。
现代文：商人多方钻营就会失败、工匠技艺太繁就会困窘，这是因为他们心不专一。
English: It is because they are not single-minded that the merchant's many-sided drilling camp will fail, and the craftsman's too-varied skills will be embarrassed.

古文：故木之大者害其条，水之大者害其深。
现代文：所以树木粗大妨碍它的高度，水流阔广影响它的深度。
English: Therefore, the thick trees hinder its height, and the wide water flow affects its depth.

古文：有智而无术，虽钻之不通；有百技而无一道，虽得之弗能守。
现代文：有智慧而没有权术，即使钻营也不能通达；有百种技艺而没有纯一之道，即使获得了也不能持守。
English: There is wisdom, but no power, even if the drilling camp can not be reached; there are hundreds of skills, but there is no pure way, even if it is obtained, it can not be maintained.

古文：故《诗》曰： 淑人君子，其仪一也。
现代文：所以《诗经》上说： 贤人君子，他们的仪态总是一定不变的。
English: That's why the Book of Songs says, "Wise men and gentlemen, their demeanor is always the same."

古文：其仪一也，心如结也。 
现代文：仪态不变，因此诚心坚定不渝。 
English: The etiquette remains unchanged, so the sincerity is unswerving.

古文：君子其结于一乎！
现代文：君子的诚心大概就是这样专一坚定的。
English: The sincerity of a gentleman is probably so single-minded and firm.

古文：舜弹五弦之琴，而歌《南风》之诗，以治天下。周公骰蠕不收于前，钟鼓不解于悬，以辅成王而海内平。
现代文：舜只需弹奏五弦琴吟诵《南风》诗歌，就能治理好天下了；周公则进餐时还要忙于政务，钟鼓悬挂着不解下来，辛勤地辅佐成王平定天下。
English: Gong only needed to play the five-stringed qin and recite the poem "South Wind" to rule the world well; Zhou Gong was also busy with government affairs when he dined, and the bell and drum hung down and could not be taken down, diligently assisting Cheng Wang in pacifying the world.

古文：匹夫百晦一守，不逞启处，无所移之也。
现代文：平民百姓一家子守着百亩土地，没有空暇时间，也无法摆脱赖以生存的土地。
English: A family of ordinary people guard a hundred mu of land, have no free time, and cannot get rid of the land they rely on for survival.

古文：以一人兼听天下，日有余而治不足，使人为之也。
现代文：而君王一人执掌天下，时间还有剩余，政事不够他处理，因为他将事情分派给百官去办了。
English: But the king alone is in charge of the world, there is still time left, and there are not enough political affairs for him to deal with, because he has assigned the matter to a hundred officials to deal with.

古文：处尊位者如尸，守官者如祝宰。
现代文：处于尊位的君王就像尸主，处在官位上的百官就像祝宰。
English: The king in his exalted position is like the owner of the corpse, and the hundred officials in their official positions are like the celebrants.

古文：尸虽能剥狗烧彘，弗为也，弗能无亏；俎豆之列次，黍稷之先后，虽知弗教也，弗能害也。
现代文：尸主虽然会扎刍狗烧猪，但他不去做这些归他人的事，即使不会做这些事也没有什么损失；俎豆摆放顺序、黍稷上供先后，尸主尽管知道也不去指指点点，即使不懂这些规矩也没有什么影响。
English: Although the owner of the corpse can tie up a dog and burn a pig, he does not do these things that belong to others, and even if he cannot do these things, there is no loss; the peas are placed in order, and the urns are offered successively. The owner of the corpse does not point out the rules, even if he knows them, and even if he does not understand these rules, it has no effect.

古文：不能祝者，不可以为祝，无害于为尸；不能御者，不可以为仆，无害于为佐。
现代文：但一定要做到，不懂 祝 的人，不能让他担任祝者，但并不妨害他做尸主；不会驾车的人，不能让他担任御手，但并不影响他处于主位。
English: But it must be done. People who don't know how to make a wish can't let him be the celebrant, but it doesn't prevent him from being the owner of the corpse. People who can't drive can't let him be the caretaker, but it doesn't affect him being the owner.

古文：故位愈尊而身愈佚，身愈大而事愈少。
现代文：所以地位越尊贵就越安逸，身份越高杂事越少。
English: Therefore, the more honorable the position, the more comfortable it is, and the higher the status, the fewer the miscellaneous things.

古文：譬如张琴，小弦虽急，大弦必缓。
现代文：这就像弹琴，小弦虽然音调急迫，而大弦声音一定舒缓。
English: It's like playing the piano, the small strings sound urgent, but the big strings sound soothing.

古文：无为者，道之体也；执后者，道之容也。无为制有为，术也；执后之制先，数也。
现代文：无为是道的本体；处后是道的功能。无为驾驭有为，叫做 术 ；处后制约占先，叫做 数 。
English: Non-action is the body of the Tao; action is the function of the Tao. Non-action driving action is called 術; action followed by restraint is called 数.

古文：放于术则强，审于数则宁。
现代文：效仿 术 就强大，审察 数 就安宁。
English: Imitation is powerful, examination is tranquil.

古文：今与人卞氏之壁，未受者，先也；求而致之，虽怨不逆者，后也。
现代文：现在将卞氏之璧给人，不能接受这一点的，是先得到它的人；寻求才得到它，虽然埋怨却不反悔，是最后得到它的人。
English: Now that the masterpieces of Hao Shi have been given to others, those who can't accept this are the ones who get it first; those who seek to get it, although they complain but don't repent, are the ones who get it last.

古文：三人同舍，二人相争，争者各自以为直，不能相听，一人虽愚，必从而决之，非以智，不争也。
现代文：同样，两人斗殴，另一瘦弱者站在旁边，如果他帮其中的这个人忙，这个人就必定会获胜；如果他将两人中的一人拉开，这场相打就此平息。
English: In the same way, if two men are fighting, and another weak man is standing by, if he helps one of them, that one is sure to win; if he pulls one of them away, the fight is over.

古文：两人相斗，一赢在侧，助一人则胜，救一人则免，斗者虽强，必制一赢，非以勇也，以不斗也。
现代文：参加斗殴的双方都十分强壮，但却都受这一瘦弱者制约，不是因为瘦弱者骁勇，而是因为瘦弱者本身没有参与这场相打斗殴。
English: Both sides of the fight are very strong, but they are constrained by the thin man, not because the thin man is brave, but because the thin man himself is not involved in the fight.

古文：由此观之，后之制先，静之胜躁，数也。
现代文：由此看来，后来的制约着居先的，文静的胜过躁动的，这是一种规律。
English: From this point of view, it is a rule that the latter restricts the former, and the calm prevails over the agitated.

古文：倍道弃数，以求苟遇，变常易故，以知要遮，过则自非，中则以为候，暗行缪改，终身不瞎：此之谓狂。
现代文：背道弃数而寄希望于偶然，改变常规更易旧俗，凭小聪明来碰运气机会，有了过失就责难自己，侥幸碰中机会就认为是掌握了时机，行动愚昧且又荒谬更改，一辈子都不醒悟：这就叫做 狂妄 。
English: To deviate from the path and to trust in chance, to change one's habits more easily than one's customs, to try one's luck by a little cleverness, to blame oneself for one's mistakes, to think that one has grasped the opportunity by chance, to act foolishly and make absurd changes, and not to wake up for the rest of one's life: this is called arrogance.

古文：有祸则础，有福则赢，有过则悔，有功则矜，遂不知反：此谓狂人。
现代文：有了灾祸就屈服，有了一点福就自满，有了过失就追悔，有了功劳就骄傲，始终不知返回心意，这就叫做 狂人 。
English: With calamity, he gives in; with a bit of blessing, he is complacent; with a fault, he repents; with a merit, he is proud; and he never knows how to return to his heart. This is called a madman.

古文：员之中规，方之中矩，行成兽，止成文，可以将少，而不可以将众。
现代文：圆阵符合圆规，方阵符合方矩。行军排成兽阵，站立形成列队，这样可以率领少量人马而不能统率千军万马。
English: The circular array conforms to the circular standard, and the square array conforms to the square moment. The marching troops form a beast array, and stand up to form a line, so that they can lead a small number of people and horses, but cannot lead thousands of soldiers and horses.

古文：萝菜成行，瓶瓯有堤，量粟而春，数米而炊，可以治家，而不可以治国，涤杯而食，洗爵而饮，浣而后馈，可以养家老，而不可以飨三军。
现代文：蓼菜长成行，瓶瓯有底座，量粟而舂，数米而炊，这样的人可以管家务而不能治理国家。洗净杯盘进食，洗好爵来饮酒，洗涤干净以后侍候长辈用饭，这样的人可以在家赡养长者，但不能管理三军的伙食。
English: Such a person can manage household chores but cannot govern the country. He can wash the dishes and cups before eating, wash the glasses before drinking, and wait for the elders to eat after washing them. Such a person can support the elderly at home, but cannot manage the meals of the three armies.

古文：非易不可以治大，非简不可以合众。
现代文：不平易不能办大事，不简约不能聚合众人。
English: It is not easy to do big things, and it is not easy to gather a large number of people.

古文：大乐必易，大礼必简。
现代文：大型的音乐必定平易，重大的礼仪必定简略。
English: Therefore, the tunes and instruments of grand music must be very simple, and the grand ceremony must be very simple.

古文：易故能天，简故能地。
现代文：平易简约能成天地。
English: Plain and simple can make a world of difference.

古文：大乐无怨，大礼不责，四海之内，莫不系统，故能帝也。
现代文：大型音乐平易而没有怨伤，重大礼仪简略而不受责难，四海之内都能统领，所以这样的人能成为天子皇帝。
English: Large-scale music is easy without resentment, important etiquette is simple without reproach, and can be ruled within the four seas, so such a person can become the emperor of heaven.

古文：心有忧者，筐床袄席，弗能安也，菰饭刍牛，弗能甘也，琴瑟鸣芋弗能乐也。
现代文：心里有忧愁的人，即使有安适的床榻松软的垫席也不能让他安睡；即使有菰米饭牛羊肉吃也不能使他感到甘甜；即使有琴瑟竽的吹奏也不能使他快乐。
English: For a man who is sad at heart, even a comfortable bed and a soft cushion cannot make him sleep peacefully; even eating glutinous rice, beef and mutton cannot make him feel sweet; even the blowing of a lyre cannot make him happy.

古文：患解忧除，然后食甘寝宁，居安游乐。
现代文：而一旦内心的忧愁消除，就吃得香甜、睡得安稳、住得舒适、玩得快乐了。
English: But once the inner sadness is eliminated, you will eat sweetly, sleep peacefully, live comfortably, and have fun.

古文：由是观之，生有以乐也，死有以哀也。
现代文：由此看来，活着有它的乐趣，死去有它的哀伤。
English: From this point of view, to live has its joy, to die has its sorrow.

古文：今务益性之所不能乐，而以害性之所以乐，故虽富有天下，贵为天子，而不免为哀之人。
现代文：现在有些人致力于增加人本性所不乐意的东西，而损害了本性快乐的东西，因此即使富有得拥有天下，尊贵到做了天子，但还是免不了成为悲哀的人。
English: Nowadays, some people are committed to increasing the things that human nature is not happy with, and impairing the things that human nature is happy with. Therefore, even if they are rich enough to own the world and noble enough to be the son of heaven, they will still inevitably become sad people.

古文：凡人之性，乐恬而憎悯，乐佚而憎劳。
现代文：大凡人的天性，喜欢恬愉而讨厌忧虑，喜欢安逸而讨厌辛劳。
English: It is the nature of mortal man to love pleasure and hate pain, to love ease and hate labor.

古文：心常无欲，可谓恬矣；形常无事，可谓佚矣。
现代文：内心始终保持无欲，可称为恬愉；身体保持无事，可称为安逸。
English: When the mind is always free from desires, it can be called bliss; when the body is free from desires, it can be called ease.

古文：游心于恬，舍形于佚，以俟天命，自乐于内，无急于外，虽天下之大，不足以易其一概日月廋而无溉于志，故虽贱如贵，虽贫如富。
现代文：身心处于恬愉舒适之中，身体处于安逸闲适之中，等待天命的安排，内心自寻快乐，不着急身外的琐事，虽天下之大也不足以变易他的生活模式，日月隐藏也不能干扰他的生活态度。所以虽然低贱但他觉得尊贵，虽然贫寒他觉得富足。
English: His body and mind are in a state of pleasure and comfort, his body is in a state of ease and leisure, waiting for the arrangement of fate, his heart is looking for happiness, he is not anxious about trivialities outside his body, although the world is big, it is not enough to change his life pattern, and the sun and moon cannot interfere with his life attitude. Therefore, although he is lowly, he feels noble, and although he is poor, he feels rich.

古文：大道无形，大仁无亲，大辩无声，大廉不嗛，大勇不矜，五者无弃，而几乡方矣。
现代文：大道无形象，大仁无偏爱，大辩无声音，大廉无贪心，大勇无矜夸，这五者被保存下来，就差不多接近正道了。
English: If these five things are preserved, the path without image, the great man without partiality, the great argument without voice, the great man without greed, and the great man without boasting, are almost close to the right path.

古文：军多令则乱，酒多约则辩。
现代文：军令多变或不统一就会导致部队混乱，酒令太多或混乱就会导致酒席吵闹发生争执。
English: Fluctuating or inconsistent military orders will lead to confusion in the army, and too many orders or confusion will lead to quarrels at the banquet.

古文：乱则降北，辩则本贼。
现代文：部队混乱就容易临阵败逃或投降，酒席吵闹发生争执就容易互相伤害。
English: When troops are in disarray, it is easy for them to flee or surrender, and it is easy for them to hurt each other when they quarrel at a noisy banquet.

古文：故始于都者常大于鄙，始于乐者，常大于悲，其作始简者，其终本必调。
现代文：所以事情常常是开头美好，最终却变得丑鄙；事情常常是开头快乐，最后以不高兴收场。简简单单的事，最终变得繁琐不堪。
English: So things often start out beautiful and end up ugly; things often start out happy and end up unhappy; simple things end up complicated.

古文：今有美酒嘉肴以相飨，卑体婉辞以接之，欲以合欢，争盈爵之间反生斗，斗而相伤，三族结怨，反其所憎，此酒之败也。
现代文：现在有人准备好美酒佳肴宴请宾客，以卑恭的态度和委婉的言辞接待客人，想以此来交结朋友欢聚一场，但在饮酒过程中却以饮酒多少而发生了争执，并打斗起来造成伤害，为此双方族人结下仇怨、变成仇人，出现了原本不想见到的局面，这就是酗酒在坏事。
English: Nowadays, some people prepare a feast of wine and delicacies to invite guests, and receive guests with a humble attitude and euphemism, hoping to make friends and have a good time. However, during the drinking process, there was a dispute over how much alcohol to drink, and they fought to cause harm. For this reason, the two tribes have formed a grudge and become enemies, and a situation that they originally did not want to see has emerged. This is the bad thing of alcoholism.

古文：《诗》之失僻，乐之失刺，礼之失责。
现代文：《诗》的偏差在于后来的邪僻，《乐》的失误在于后来的怨刺，礼的偏差在于后来的苛责。
English: The deviation of "Poetry" lies in the later eccentricity, the error of "Music" lies in the later grudge, and the deviation of etiquette lies in the later harshness.

古文：徵音非无羽声也，羽音非无徵声也。五音莫不有声，而以徵羽定名者，以胜者也。
现代文：徵音中并不是没有羽音掺杂，羽音里也并不是没有徵音掺杂，五音中没有哪种声音不掺杂，但仍然以 徵 、 羽 等等来给五音定名，因为五音分别以本音调为本体来确定的。
English: There is no sound in the pentatonic scale that is not doped, but the pentatonic scale is still named by the symbols 徵, 羽, and so on, because the pentatonic scale is separately determined by the natural tone.

古文：故仁义智勇，圣人之所以备有也，然而皆立一名者，言其大者也。
现代文：所以仁义智勇四种品质，圣人都具备，然而对具体某个圣人用一种名号命名，是针对他身上的那种品质特别突出而言的。
English: Therefore, the four qualities of benevolence, righteousness, wisdom and courage are all possessed by saints, but the naming of a particular saint with a name is for that quality that is particularly prominent in him.

古文：阳气起于东北，尽于西南；阴气起于西南，尽于东北。
现代文：阳气在东北方产生，到西南方消失；阴气在西南方形成，到东北方衰弱。
English: Yang qi is generated in the northeast and disappears in the southwest; yin qi is formed in the southwest and weakens in the northeast.

古文：阴阳之始，皆调适相似，日长其类，以侵相远，或热焦沙，或寒凝水，故圣人谨慎其所积。
现代文：阴气和阳气在产生之初都是协调和适的，又非常相似的。它们随着时间的变化而各自增长本身的成分，以至渐渐拉大它们的差距，或者阳气极盛时热得沙石烤焦，或者阴气极盛时冷得河水结冰。因此圣人是谨慎地对待事物量的积累。
English: Yin and yang are harmonious and appropriate at the beginning, and they are very similar. With the change of time, they each increase their own composition, so that they gradually widen their gap. When yang is at its peak, it is hot enough to scorch sandstone, or when yin is at its peak, it is cold enough to freeze river water. Therefore, sages are cautious about the accumulation of things.

古文：水出于山而入于海，稼生于野而藏于凛，见所始则知终矣。
现代文：河水发源于高山而最终流注大海，庄稼生长于田野而最终收入粮库，这就是看到它们的开始便知道它们的归宿了。
English: Rivers originate in the mountains and eventually flow into the sea, crops grow in the fields and eventually enter the granary, which is to see their beginning and know their destination.

古文：席之先雚蕈，樽之上玄酒，沮之先生鱼，豆之先泰羹，此皆不快于耳目，不适于口腹，而先王贵之，先本而后未。
现代文：祭祀时，崇尚草编的席垫、装在樽中的玄酒、放在俎上的生鱼、盛在盘中的肉汁，这些物品是既不赏心悦目，也不合人胃口，但先王们就是看重它们，这是因为先王们重视的是祭祀之根本而不看重一些枝末的东西。
English: During the sacrificial rites, they advocated straw mats, wine in barrels, raw fish on a spade, and gravy on a plate. These items are neither pleasing to the eye, nor are they appetizing, but the ancients valued them. This is because the ancients valued the foundation of the sacrificial rites and did not value some of the branches.

古文：圣人之接物，千变万轸，必有不化面应化者。
现代文：圣人与外界事物打交道，在千变万化的环境中，圣人一定掌握着能应付千变万化的不变之道。
English: A sage deals with external things, and in an ever-changing environment, a sage must master the unchanging way that can cope with ever-changing things.

古文：夫寒之与暖相反，大寒地诉水凝，火弗为衰其暑；大热烁石流金，火弗为益其烈。
现代文：那寒与暖正相反，当大寒冻裂大地滴水成冰的时候，燃烧着的火却不因此降低它的热度；当大暑高温热得能使金属熔化的时候，燃烧着的火却也不因此增加它的热度。
English: The cold is the opposite of the warm. When the big freeze breaks the earth and water drips into ice, the burning fire does not thereby reduce its heat; when the big heat is so hot that it can melt metal, the burning fire does not thereby increase its heat.

古文：寒暑之变，无损益于己，质有之也。
现代文：寒暑的变化对火本身没有影响，这是因为火有它自己的特质。
English: Changes in heat and cold have no effect on fire itself, because fire has its own characteristics.

古文：圣人常后而不先，常应而不唱；不进而求，不退而让；随时三年，时去我先；去时三年，时在我后；无去无就，中立其所。
现代文：圣人常处后而不争先，常应和而不倡导；既不前进追求，也不退后谦让。跟随时间三年，时去我走；离开时间三年，时在我后。没有离开也没有趋就，居中站于应处的地位。
English: The sage is always behind, but not ahead; he is always accommodating, but not advocating; he neither advances in pursuit nor retreats in humility. If he follows time for three years, he will be ahead of me; if he leaves time for three years, he will be behind me. If he does not leave and does not converge, he will be in the middle, standing in the right place.

古文：天道无亲，唯德是与。
现代文：天道没有偏心私情，它只帮助有德之人。
English: The Way of Heaven has no partiality, it only helps the virtuous.

古文：有道者，不失时与人；无道者，失于时而取人。
现代文：有道之人，不失时机地去帮助他人；无道之人，丧失时机被人剥夺。
English: A virtuous man loses no time in helping others; a wicked man loses no time in being deprived.

古文：直己而待命，时之至不可迎而反也；要遮而求合，时之去不可追而援也。
现代文：自身正直而等待天命，时机来到不能迎上去而违逆它；拦截时机而强求合时；时机离去不能追上去而拉住它。
English: If you are honest with yourself, you can wait for your destiny. When the time comes, you can't meet it and go against it. When the time comes, you can't meet it and go against it. When the time comes, you can't meet it and go against it. When the time comes, you can't meet it and go against it.

古文：故不曰我无以为而天下远，不曰我不欲而天下不至。
现代文：所以一般不说我无所作为天下离我这么远，也不说我不想得天下天下不会落在我手里。
English: So I generally do not say that I do nothing and the world is so far away from me, nor do I say that I do not want to have the world and the world will not fall into my hands.

古文：古之存己者，乐德而忘贱，故名不动志；乐道而忘贫，故利不动心。
现代文：古代那些会保存自我的人，乐于道德而忘却贫贱，所以名誉不能改变他的志向。乐于道体而忘掉贫寒，所以利益不能改变他的心性。
English: In ancient times, those who preserved themselves were happy with morality and forgot about poverty, so fame could not change their aspirations. They were happy with morality and forgot about poverty, so profit could not change their minds.

古文：名利充天下，不足以概志，故廉而能乐，静而能澹。
现代文：名利就是充斥天下，都不足以牵动他的心，所以清廉而能快乐，虚静而能知足。
English: Fame and fortune are enough to fill the world, but they are not enough to affect his heart, so he can be happy when he is clean, and content when he is empty.

古文：故其身治者，可与言道矣。
现代文：所以这样修心养性的人，可以和他谈论道体的。
English: Therefore, a person who cultivates his mind and character in this way can talk to him about morality.

古文：自身以上至于荒芒尔远矣；自死而天下无穷尔滔矣，以数杂之寿，忧天下之乱，犹忧河水之少，泣而益之也。
现代文：从自身现在往上推算到上古时代，时间是够久远的了；又从自身死后往下推算世界，无穷无尽也够遥远的了。以一个几十年仓猝的一生，去忧虑天下的治乱，就像担心黄河水会减少、以泪水去增加它的水量一样。
English: It is long enough to extrapolate from one's own present to ancient times, and it is also far enough to extrapolate the world from one's own death to infinity. To worry about the world's chaos with a sudden life of decades is like worrying that the Yellow River's water will decrease and using tears to increase its water volume.

古文：龟三千岁，浮游不过三日，以浮游而为龟忧养生之具，人必笑之矣。
现代文：神龟寿长三千年而蜉蝣不过活三天，以短命蜉蝣去替神龟养生条件担忧，这一定会引起人们的嘲笑。
English: The tortoise's lifespan is three thousand years long, but the tortoise only lives for three days. To worry about the living conditions of the tortoise with a short-lived tortoise is sure to cause people to laugh.

古文：故不忧天下之乱，而乐其身之治者，可与言道矣。
现代文：所以不必要忧虑天下的治和乱，只以自身颐养为乐事就够了；如能这样，便可与他谈论道体了。
English: Therefore, there is no need to worry about the world's governance and chaos. It is enough to enjoy oneself. If you can do this, you can talk to him about morality.

古文：君子为善不能使福必来，不为非，而不能使祸无至。
现代文：君子行善，不一定能使福必到；君子不做坏事，也不一定能使祸不降临。
English: If a gentleman does a good deed, he may not be able to prevent a blessing; if a gentleman does not do a bad deed, he may not be able to prevent a misfortune.

古文：福之至也，非其所求，故不伐其功；祸之来也，非其所生，故不悔其行。
现代文：福的到来，不是靠自己追求的，所以得到幸福也不夸耀自己的功劳；祸的降临，不是自己招惹的，所以遭受不幸也不后悔自己的行表。
English: The arrival of blessing is not pursued by oneself, so he does not boast of his merits when he gets happiness; the advent of disaster is not provoked by himself, so he does not regret his actions when he suffers misfortune.

古文：内修极而横祸至者，皆天也，非人也。
现代文：内在的心性修养遵循一定的准则，如横祸降临，那就是天意了，不是人为的。
English: The inner cultivation of character follows a certain standard. If a calamity befalls, it is God's will, not man's.

古文：故中心常恬漠，累积其德；狗吠而不惊，自信其情。
现代文：所以应时常内心静漠恬淡，不要因外物牵累对德的修养；做到狗吠而不惊，对自己纯真的性情充分相信。
English: Therefore, you should always be calm and serene in your heart, do not let the cultivation of virtue be affected by external things; do not be surprised when the dog barks, and fully believe in your own pure disposition.

古文：故知道者不惑，知命者不忧。
现代文：所以懂得道的人不迷惑，知晓命运的人不忧虑。
English: Therefore, those who know the way are not confused, and those who know the fate are not worried.

古文：万乘之主卒，葬其骸于广野之中，祀其鬼神于明堂之上，神贵于形也。
现代文：万乘大国的君主死后，人们将他的尸骸埋在旷野地里，而在庙堂上祭祀他的神灵，这是因为精神比形体贵重。
English: After the death of the monarch of the Great Kingdom of Manchukuo, his remains were buried in the wilderness, and his deities were sacrificed in the temple, because the spirit is more precious than the body.

古文：故神制则形从，形胜则神穷，聪明虽用，必反诸神，谓之太冲。
现代文：所以精神处于制约地位，形体就服从精神，如形体制约精神，精神就会耗尽。聪明虽然管用，但还必须返归到精神上来，达到这种虚静中和境界的叫做 太冲 。
English: Therefore, the spirit is in a constrained position, the body obeys the spirit, if the form contracts the spirit, the spirit will be exhausted. Although cleverness works, it must also return to the spirit, and reaching this kind of empty calm and boundary is called Taichung.

