古文：○李崧李崧，深州饶阳人也。
现代文：李崧，深州饶阳人。
English: Li Wei, a native of Raoyang, Shenzhou.

古文：崧幼聪敏，能文章，为镇州参军。
现代文：李崧年幼时聪明机敏，能写文章，任镇州参军。
English: When Li Yao was young, he was clever and quick-witted, could write articles, and was allowed to join the army.

古文：唐魏王继岌为兴圣宫使，领镇州节度使，以推官李荛掌书记。
现代文：唐魏王李继岌任兴圣官使，领镇州节度使，委任推官李莞为掌书记。
English: King Li of Tang and Wei successively appointed the holy official envoy to Xing, the leading town and state festival envoy, and appointed the presiding officer Li Guan as the secretary.

古文：崧谓掌书吕柔曰： 魏王皇子，天下之望，书奏之职，非荛所当。 
现代文：李崧对掌书记吕柔说： 魏王是皇子，是天下的希望，掌管害奏的职务，不是李莞所能胜任的。 
English: Li Qiye said to Lu Rong, the secretary of the palm: Wei Wang is the prince, the hope of the world. He is not competent to be in charge of the post of evil.

古文：柔私使崧代为之，以示卢质、冯道，道等皆以为善。
现代文：吕柔擅自让李崧代替李莞，把他写的文稿拿给卢质、冯道看，冯道等人都觉得好。
English: Lyu Rong let Li Qian replace Li Guan without permission, and showed the manuscript he wrote to Lu Qian and Feng Dao. Feng Dao and others all felt good about it.

古文：乃以崧为兴圣宫巡官，拜协律郎。
现代文：于是任命李崧为兴圣官巡官，拜为协律郎。
English: Therefore, Li Qian was appointed as the inspector of Xing Shengguan, and Bai was appointed as the conciliator.

古文：继岌与郭崇韬代蜀，以崧掌书记。
现代文：李继岌和郭崇韬伐蜀，任命李崧马掌书记。
English: Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi were appointed as the secretary of the Party Central Committee.

古文：继岌已破蜀，刘皇后聪谗者言，阴遣人之蜀，教继岌杀崇韬，人情不安。
现代文：李继岌攻破蜀后，刘皇后听信别人的谗言，暗中派人到蜀，叫李继岌杀掉了郭崇韬，当时军心不安。
English: After Li Jidi defeated Shu, Empress Liu listened to the advice of others and secretly sent someone to Shu to tell Li Jidi to kill Guo Chongyao. At that time, the military was uneasy.

古文：崧入见继岌曰： 王何为作此危事？
现代文：李崧进见李继岌说： 大王为什么要做这样危险的事情？
English: Li Yujin saw Li Jizhe and said: Why would the great king do such a dangerous thing?

古文：诚不能容崇韬，至洛诛之何晚？
现代文：如果确实容不下郭崇韬，到洛阳杀他就晚了吗？
English: If Guo Chongyao really cannot be tolerated, is it too late to kill him in Luoyang?

古文：今远军五千里，不见咫尺之诏杀大臣，动摇人情，是召乱也。 
现代文：现在军队在外五千里远，没有看见一尺诏书就杀死大臣，动摇人心，这是招乱。 
English: Now the army is five thousand miles away, killing the minister without seeing a foot of edict, shaking people's hearts, this is inciting unrest.

古文：继岌曰： 吾亦悔之，奈何？ 
现代文：李继岌说： 我也后悔，怎么办呢？ 
English: Li Jizhe said: I also regret it, what should I do?

古文：崧乃召书吏三四人，登楼去梯，夜以黄纸作诏书，倒用都统印，明旦告谕诸军，人心乃定。
现代文：李崧于是召来三四个书吏，登上楼撤掉梯子，晚上用黄纸伪造诏书，倒盖上都统印章，第二天黎明告谕各军，军心纔安定下来。
English: Li Lan then summoned three or four scribes, climbed up the stairs and removed the ladder. In the evening, he forged the edict with yellow paper and reversed the seal. The next day, at dawn, he announced to the troops that the military situation had stabilized.

古文：师还，继岌死于道。
现代文：军队返回，李继岌死在路上。
English: When the army returned, Li Jie died on the way.

古文：崧至京师，任圜判三司，用崧为盐铁判官，以内忧去职还乡里。
现代文：李崧回到京师，任圜判三司，任命李崧为盥铁判官，因母亲去世离任回到乡里。
English: Li Lan returned to Beijing Division, appointed Li Lan to the Third Division, appointed Li Lan to the Iron Judge, and returned to the village after his mother's death.

古文：服除，范延光居镇州，辟崧掌书记。
现代文：守丧完毕，范延光在镇州，征召李崧任掌书记。
English: After the funeral, Fan Yanguang was in Zhenzhou to recruit Li Yu to serve as secretary.

古文：延光为枢密使，崧拜拾遗，直枢密院。
现代文：范延光任枢密使，李崧被拜为拾遣，直枢密院。
English: Fan Yanguang was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council, and Li Xi was worshiped as the messenger of the Privy Council.

古文：累迁户部侍郎、端明殿学士。
现代文：屡经升迁为户部侍郎、端明殿学士。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of household attendant, and became a scholar at Tomyo-den.

古文：长兴中，明宗春秋高，秦王从荣多不法，晋高祖为六军副使，惧祸及，求出外籓。
现代文：长兴中，唐明宗年岁已高，秦王李从荣常常不守法纪，晋高祖任六军副使，怕殃及自己，请求出任外藩。
English: In Changxing, Tang Mingzong was already old, Qin King Li Congrong often did not abide by laws and regulations, and Jingao's ancestor served as deputy envoy of the Six Armies, and he was afraid of harming himself, so he asked to be appointed to a foreign domain.

古文：是时，契丹入雁门，明宗选将以捍太原，晋高祖欲之。
现代文：这时，契丹进入雁门，唐明宗挑选将领保卫太原，晋高祖想去。
English: At this time, Khitan entered the Wild Goose Gate, Tang Mingzong selected generals to defend Taiyuan, and Jinguo Zu wanted to go.

古文：枢密使范延光、赵延寿等议将，久不决，明宗怒甚，责延寿等，延寿等惶恐，欲以康义诚应选，崧独曰： 太原，国之北门，宜得重臣，非石敬瑭不可也！ 
现代文：枢密使范延光、赵延寿等人商议挑选将领，很久不能决定，唐明宗很愤怒，斥责赵延寿等人，赵延寿等人惶恐不安，想让康义诚应选，李崧偏偏说： 太原，是国家的北门，应当用重臣把守，非用石敬瑭不可！ 
English: Privy envoys Fan Yanguang, Zhao Yanshou and others discussed the selection of generals and could not decide for a long time. Tang Mingzong was very angry and rebuked Zhao Yanshou and others. Zhao Yanshou and others were frightened and anxious and wanted Kang Yicheng to be selected. Li Xuan said: Taiyuan is the north gate of the country, it should be guarded by senior officials, and it must be guarded with stones!

古文：由是从崧议。
现代文：因此采纳了李崧的意见。
English: Therefore, the opinion of Li Wei was adopted.

古文：晋高祖深德之，阴遣人谢崧曰： 为浮屠者，必合其尖。 
现代文：晋高祖非常感激他，暗中派人告谢李崧说： 修建佛塔的人，必定合拢塔尖。 
English: Jin Gao Zu was very grateful to him, and secretly sent someone to tell Xie Lijun that "those who build a pagoda must close the spire."

古文：盖欲使崧终始成己事也。
现代文：想让李崧始终成全自己的事。
English: He wanted Li Yao to always accomplish his own things.

古文：其后晋高祖以兵入京师，崧窜匿伊阙民家，晋高祖召为户部侍郎，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：后来晋高祖率兵进入京师，李崧逃窜藏在伊阙百姓家中，晋高祖召他任户部侍郎，拜为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong led his troops into the capital city of Beijing, and Li Qiye fled and hid in the homes of the common people in Yili. Emperor Gaozong called him to serve as the steward of the household, the steward of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the secretary and privy councilor of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：丁内艰，起复。
现代文：为母亲服丧，服丧未满就被起用。
English: He was appointed to the post before his mother's funeral.

古文：高祖崩，出帝即位，以崧兼判三司，与冯玉对掌枢密。
现代文：受壶祖逝世，晋出帝登位，任命李崧兼判三司，和冯玉共同掌管枢密院。
English: Upon the death of Juzzu, he was crowned emperor, appointed the third secretary of the imperial court, and jointly presided over the Privy Council with Feng Yu.

古文：是时，晋兵败契丹于阳城，赵延寿在幽州，诈言思归以诱晋兵，崧等信之。
现代文：这时，晋兵在阳城打败契丹，赵延寿在幽州，诈称想回来以便诱惑晋兵，李崧等人相信了。
English: At this time, the Jin soldiers defeated the Khitan in Yangcheng, and Zhao Yanshou in Yuzhou falsely claimed that he wanted to return in order to tempt the Jin soldiers. Li Wei and others believed it.

古文：初，汉高祖在晋，掌亲军，为侍卫都指挥使，与杜重威同制加平章事，汉高祖耻之，怒不肯谢，晋高祖遣和凝谕之，乃谢。
现代文：当初，漠高祖在晋，掌管亲军，任侍卫都指挥使，和杜重威同一诏书加平章事，汉高祖对此感到耻辱，发怒不肯谢恩，晋高祖派和凝开导他，纔谢恩。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gaozu was in Jin, in charge of his own army, and he was in command of all the attendants and guards, and he and Du Chongwei signed the same edict. Emperor Gaozu felt humiliated by this, and he was angry and refused to thank him. Emperor Gaozu sent him a message to apologize and thank him.

古文：其后汉高祖出居太原，重威代为侍卫使，崧亦数称重威之材，于是汉高祖以崧为排己，深恨之。
现代文：后来汉高祖出京任战住在太原，杜重威代任侍卫使，李崧也多次称赞杜重威的才能，于是汉高祖认为李崧排斥自己，十分恨他。
English: Later, Han Gaozu went to Beijing to fight and lived in Taiyuan. Du Chongwei took his place as the bodyguard. Li Qiye also praised Du Chongwei's talent many times. Therefore, Han Gaozu thought that Li Qiye rejected him and hated him very much.

古文：崧又信延寿之诈以为然，卒以重威将大兵，其后败于中渡，晋遂以亡。契丹耶律德光犯京师，德光素闻延寿等称崧为人，及入京师，谓人曰： 吾破南朝，得崧一人而已！ 
现代文：李崧又对赵延寿的谎言信以为真，终于让杜重威率领大军，后来在中渡桥被打败，晋于是灭亡，契丹耶律德光侵犯京师，耶律德光素来听赵延寿等人称赞李崧的为人，等到进入京师后，对人说： 我攻破南面的朝廷，是要得到李崧一人罢了！ 
English: Li Qiye also believed Zhao Yanshou's lies, and finally let Du Chongwei lead the army. Later, he was defeated at Zhongdu Bridge, and Jin was destroyed. Qidan Yelu Deguang invaded Beijing Division. Yelu Deguang came to listen to Zhao Yanshou and others praise Li Qiye as a person. After entering Beijing Division, he told people: I broke through the southern court, I just want to get Li Qiye alone!

古文：乃拜崧太子太师。
现代文：于是拜李崧为太子太师。
English: As a result, Bai Lijun became the prince's grandmaster.

古文：契丹北还，命崧以族俱行，留之镇州。
现代文：契丹北归，命令李崧率领他的族人一起走，把他留在镇州。
English: When Khitan returned to the north, he ordered Li Xuan to lead his people and leave him in Zhenzhou.

古文：其后麻荅弃镇州，崧与冯道等得还。
现代文：后来麻苔放弃镇州，李崧和冯道等人得以返回。
English: Later, Mete abandoned Zhenzhou, and Li Yan and Feng Dao and others were able to return.

古文：高祖素不悦崧，又为怨者谮之，言崧为契丹所厚，故崧遇汉权臣，常惕惕为谦谨，莫敢有所忤。
现代文：汉高祖素来不喜欢李崧，李崧又被怨恨他的人诋毁，说李崧受到契丹的厚待，因此李崧碰上汉的权臣，常常忧惧地谦恭谨慎，不敢有所违忤。
English: Han Gaozhu had always disliked Li Qiye, and Li Qiye was slandered by those who resented him, saying that Li Qiye was treated well by the Khitan. Therefore, when Li Qiye encountered Han dignitaries, he was often timid and cautious, and did not dare to disobey.

古文：汉高祖入京师，以崧第赐苏逢吉，崧家遭乱，多埋金宝，逢吉悉有之。
现代文：汉高祖进入京师，把李崧的府第赐给苏逢吉，李崧家遭逢乱世，家中埋下很多金银财宝，苏逢吉全部据为己有。
English: When Han Gao Zu entered Beijing, he gave Li Lan's mansion to Su Fengji. Li Lan's family suffered from the turbulent times and buried a lot of gold, silver and treasures in their home. Su Fengji kept everything for himself.

古文：而崧弟屿、与逢吉子弟同舍，酒酣，出怨言，以为夺我第。
现代文：而李崧的弟弟李屿、李峩和苏逢吉的子弟同住一起，酒酣耳热，口出怨言，认为侵夺了他们的府第。
English: On the other hand, Li Lan's younger brothers, Li Yu and Li Yan, lived together with Su Fengji's children and complained bitterly, saying that he had invaded their homestead.

古文：崧又以宅券献逢吉，逢吉尤不喜。汉法素严，杨邠、史弘肇多滥弄法。
现代文：李崧又拿房契献给苏逢吉，苏逢吉还是不高兴漠的法令素来严酷，杨郇、史弘肇常常滥用刑法。
English: Li Wei also took the house deed and dedicated it to Su Fengji. Su Fengji was still unhappy because the laws had always been harsh, and Yang Wei and Shi Hongzhao often abused the criminal law.

古文：屿仆葛延遇为屿商贾，多干没其赀，屿笞责之。
现代文：李屿的仆人葛延遇为李屿做买卖，常常侵吞他的资财，李屿鞭打斥责他。
English: When Li Yu's servant Ge Yan was doing business for Li Yu, he often embezzled Li Yu's money. Li Yu scourged and reprimanded him.

古文：延遇夜宿逢吉部曲李澄家，以情告澄。
现代文：葛延遇晚上住在苏逢吉的部下李澄家，把事情告诉李澄。
English: Ge Yan met Li Cheng, a subordinate who lived in Su Fengji, in the evening and told Li Cheng about the matter.

古文：是时，高祖将葬睿陵，河中李守贞反。
现代文：这时，汉高祖将安葬在睿陵，河中李守贞反叛。
English: At this time, Han Gao Zu will be buried in Ruiling, and Li Shouzhen rebelled in the middle of the river.

古文：澄乃教延遇告变，言崧与其甥王凝谋因山陵放火焚京师，又以蜡丸书通守贞。
现代文：李澄于是唆使葛延遇报告作乱，说李崧和他的外甥王凝图谋趁安葬高祖将放火烧京师，又用蜡丸书勾结李守贞。
English: Li Cheng then instigated Ge Yan to report the incident as a riot, saying that Li Yu and his nephew Wang Jing were plotting to set fire to the capital while Gao Zu was being buried, and that they had colluded with Li Shuzhen using the wax ball book.

古文：逢吉遣人召崧至第，从容告之，崧知不免，乃以幼女托逢吉。
现代文：苏逢吉派人召李崧到家里，从容自如地告诉他，李崧知道不能幸免，于是把幼女托付给苏逢吉。
English: Su Fengji sent someone to call Li Yao at home and told him calmly that Li Yao knew that he could not be spared, so he entrusted his little daughter to Su Fengji.

古文：逢吉送崧侍卫狱。
现代文：苏逢吉送李崧到侍卫狱。
English: Su Fengji escorted Li Yao to the guards' room.

古文：崧出乘马，从者去，无一人，崧恚曰： 自古岂有不死之人，然亦岂有不亡之国乎！ 
现代文：李崧出来骑在马上，跟随他的人离去了，浚留下一人，李崧气愤地说： 自古以来难道有不死的人，难道有不灭亡的国家吗！ 
English: Li Lan came out on horseback, his followers left, leaving behind only one person. Li Lan said angrily, "Since ancient times, has there ever been an immortal person, or a country that will never perish?"

古文：乃自诬伏，族诛。
现代文：于是自己编造罪状伏罪，被灭族。
English: As a result, he fabricated a charge of conspiracy to commit a crime and was exterminated.

古文：崧素与翰林学士徐台符相善，后周太祖入立，台符告宰相冯道，请诛葛延遇，道以延遇数经赦宥，难之。
现代文：李崧素来和翰林学士徐台符友好，后来周太祖登位，徐台符告诉宰相冯道，请求杀掉葛延遇，冯道囚葛延遇多次受到赦免宽宥，感到为难。
English: Li Yu had always been friendly with Hanlin Scholar Xu Taifu. Later, when Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, Xu Taifu told Prime Minister Feng Dao that he had requested to kill Ge Yan Rong. Feng Dao felt embarrassed because Ge Yan Rong had been pardoned and pardoned many times.

古文：枢密使王峻闻之，多台符有义，乃奏诛延遇。
现代文：枢密使王峻听说后，赞扬徐台符有义气，于是上奏诛杀葛延遇。
English: After Wang Jun, the confidential envoy, heard about this, he praised Xu Tai for his loyalty, and then went on to kill Ge Yan.

古文：○李鏻
现代文：李鳞，唐代宗室的后代。
English: Li Qi, a descendant of the Tang dynasty family.

古文：李鏻，唐宗室子也。
现代文：他的伯父李阳在唐做官，咸通问任给事中。
English: His uncle Li Yang was an official in Tang, and Ham Tong was in the middle of an assignment.

古文：其伯父阳事唐，咸通间为给事中。鏻少举进士，累不中，客河朔间，自称清海军掌书记，谒定州王处直，处直不为礼。乃易其绿衣，更为绯衣，谒常山李弘规，弘规进之赵王王镕，镕留为从事。
现代文：李鳞年轻时考进士，多次役考中，客居河朔问，自称清海军掌书记，拜见定州王处直，王处直不还礼。于是换下绿色衣服，改穿鲱色衣服，拜见常山李弘规，李弘规把他推荐给赵王王镕，王镕留下他任从事。
English: When Li Qian was young, he took the entrance examination, and many times during the service examination, he stayed in the river to ask questions, claiming to be the secretary of the Qing Navy. He met Dingzhou Wang Zhanzhong, and Wang Zhanzhong did not return the courtesy. So he changed his green clothes, changed his clothes to navy blue, and met Changshan Li Hongbi. Li Hongbi recommended him to Zhao Wang Wangyi, and Wangyi left him to do his job.

古文：其后张文礼弑镕自立，遣鏻聘唐庄宗于太原。
现代文：后来张文礼杀掉王镕自立为王，派李鳞到太原拜访唐庄宗。
English: Later, Zhang Wenli killed Wang Qian and made himself king, and sent Li Qian to Taiyuan to visit Tang Zhuangzong.

古文：鏻为人利口敢言，乃阴为庄宗画文礼可破之策。
现代文：李鳞口齿伶俐敢于说话，于是暗中为唐庄宗谋划可以攻破张文礼的计策。
English: Li Qi was too shy to speak, so he secretly plotted a strategy for Tang Zhuozong that could defeat Zhang Wenli.

古文：后文礼败，庄宗以鏻为支使。
现代文：后来张文礼被打败，唐庄宗任命李鳞为支使。
English: Later, when Zhang Wenli was defeated, Tang Zhuangzong appointed Li Qiao as his envoy.

古文：庄宗即位，拜鏻宗正卿，以李琼为少卿。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，拜李鉼为宗正卿，任命李琼为少卿。
English: Tangzhuang Zong ascended to the throne, and he appointed Bai Lijun as Zong Zhengqing and Li Qiong as Shaoqing.

古文：献祖、懿祖墓在赵州昭庆县，唐国初建，鏻、琼上言： 献祖宣皇帝建初陵，懿祖光皇帝启运陵，请置台令。 
现代文：唐献祖、唐懿祖的陵墓在赵州昭庆县，唐刚建国，李鳞、李琼建议说： 唐献祖宣皇帝的建初陵、唐懿祖光皇帝的启运陵，请求设置台令。 
English: The mausoleums of Emperor Xuan of Tang Dynasty and Emperor Jingu of Tang Dynasty are located in Zhaoqing County, Zhao Prefecture. Li Qian and Li Qiong suggested that the mausoleum of Emperor Xuan of Tang Dynasty and the mausoleum of Emperor Juguang of Tang Dynasty should be set up.

古文：县中无赖子自称宗子者百馀人，宗正无谱牒，莫能考按。
现代文：县中无赖自称是宗室后代的有一百多人，宗正没有谱谍，无法考核。
English: There are more than a hundred villains in the county who claim to be the descendants of the family, but Zongzheng has no spies and cannot be assessed.

古文：有民诣寺自言世为丹阳竟陵台令，厚赂宗正吏，鏻、琼不复详考，遂补为令。
现代文：有一个人到寺中自称世代任丹阳竟陵台令，重金贿赂宗正官吏，李辚、李琼不再认真核定，就补他为台令。
English: There was a person who came to the temple and claimed that he had been appointed as the director of the Danyang Mausoleum for generations, and had bribed the official officials of the Zong Dynasty with a large sum of money. When Li Qian and Li Qiong no longer seriously approved, he was appointed as the director.

古文：民即持绛幡招置部曲，侵夺民田百馀顷，以谓陵园需地。民诉于官，不能决，以闻。
现代文：这人就拿着大红色旗帜招置部下，侵夺民田一百多顷，说这是陵园墙内的土地，老百姓向官府告状，不能断决，就将此事上报。
English: This person took a big red flag and led his subordinates to invade and seize more than a hundred hectares of people's fields, saying that this was land within the walls of the cemetery. The people complained to the government, and if they could not reach a decision, they reported the matter.

古文：庄宗下公卿博士，问故唐诸帝陵寝所在。
现代文：唐庄宗下诏公卿博士，询问过去唐各帝王陵墓在哪里。
English: Tangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuangzhuang.

古文：公卿博士言： 丹阳在今润州，而竟陵非唐事。
现代文：公卿博士们说： 丹阳在现在的润州，而竟陵与唐事无关。
English: The court nobles and doctors said: Danyang is in present-day Rongzhou, and the tomb has nothing to do with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：鏻不学无知，不足以备九卿。 
现代文：李鳞不学无术，不配置身九卿中。 
English: Li Yan did not study, did not have any skills, and was not assigned to be one of the nine nobles.

古文：坐贬司农少卿，出为河中节度副使。
现代文：因此被贬为司农少卿，出任河中节度副使。
English: As a result, he was demoted to the position of Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, and was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：明宗即位，以鏻故人，召还，累迁户部尚书。
现代文：唐明宗登位，因李鳞是老朋友，召他回朝，多次迁升为户部尚书。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of Tang ascended the throne, Li Qiao, an old friend, called him back to the imperial court, and he was promoted to the position of household secretary several times.

古文：鏻意颇希大用，尝谓冯道、赵凤曰： 唐家故事，宗室皆为宰相。
现代文：李鳞心中很希望受到重用，曾对冯道、赵凤说： 唐家旧例，宗室的人都任宰相。
English: In his heart, Li Yan very much hoped to be reused. He once said to Feng Dao and Zhao Feng: In the old Tang dynasty, the head of the family served as prime minister.

古文：今天祚中兴，宜按旧典，鏻虽不才，尝事庄宗霸府，识今天子于籓邸，论才较业，何后众人？
现代文：如今皇位中兴，应当遵循旧典，我李鳞虽然无能，但曾在唐庄宗的幕府任职，在藩邸认识当今的天子，论才能功业，有什么落在众人后面？
English: Now that the imperial throne is on the rise, we should follow the old classics. Although I am incompetent, I once served in the shogunate of Tangzhuangzong, and I know today's heavenly son in the residence of the clan. In terms of talent and career, what is behind everyone?

古文：而久置班行，于诸君安乎？ 
现代文：而长久置身朝班行列，各位安心吗？ 
English: But is it safe for everyone to stay in the morning shift line for a long time?

古文：道等恶其言。
现代文：冯道等人讨厌他的言语。
English: Feng Dao and others hate his words.

古文：后杨溥谍者见鏻言事，鏻谓安重诲曰： 杨溥欲归国久矣，若朝廷遣使谕之，可以召也。 
现代文：后来为杨溥打听消息的人拜见李鳞反映情况，李鉼就对安重诲说： 杨溥想回国很久了，如果朝廷派使臣晓谕他，可以召回他。 
English: Later, the person who inquired about Yang Hui's news met with Li Qiao to reflect on the situation, and Li Qiao said to An Chong: Yang Hui has wanted to return to China for a long time, and if the imperial court sends an envoy to tell him, he can be recalled.

古文：重诲信之，以玉带与谍者使为信，久而无效，由是贬鏻兗州行军司马。
现代文：安重诲相信了，把玉带交给通消息的人作为凭信，很久没有结果，因此贬李鳞为兖州行军司马。
English: An Chongyuan believed it, and gave the jade belt to the informant as a credential, but there was no result for a long time, so Li Qiao was relegated to the leading role in the march to Zhangzhou.

古文：鏻与废帝有旧，愍帝时，为兵部尚书，奉使湖南，闻废帝立，喜，以谓必用己为相。
现代文：李鳞和唐废帝有旧交，唐愍帝时，任兵部尚书，奉命出使湖南，听说唐废帝登位，很高兴，认为必定任用自己做宰相。
English: Li Qian had an old friendship with Emperor Gaozong of Tang. When Emperor Gaozong ascended the throne, he was in charge of the military and was ordered to dispatch an envoy to Hunan. When he heard that Emperor Gaozong had ascended to the throne, he was very happy and thought that he would definitely be appointed as prime minister.

古文：还过荆南，谓高从诲曰： 士固有否泰，吾不为时用久矣。
现代文：返回时经过剂南，对高从诲说： 士人的道路圊然有通有塞，我不被现时重用很久了。
English: On his way back, he passed through Jiannan and said to Gao Congyao: "The road of a scholar seems to be blocked. I have not been reused for a long time.

古文：今新天子即位，我将用矣！ 
现代文：如今新天子登位，我将受到重用了！ 
English: Now that a new emperor has ascended to the throne, I will be put to good use!

古文：乃就从诲求宝货入献以为贺，从诲与马红装拂二、猓犭然皮一，因为鏻置酒，问其副使马承翰： 今朝廷之臣，孰有公辅之望？ 
现代文：于是向高从诲索求财宝进献祝贺，高从诲给他两支红色马尾拂尘、一张长尾猿皮，并且为李鳞设宴，问他的副使马承翰： 如今朝廷的臣子，谁有宰相的声望？ 
English: Therefore, Gao Congzheng gave him two red horses' tails and a long-tailed ape's skin, and held a banquet for Li Qiao, and asked his deputy envoy Ma Chenghan: Today, the courtier of the court, who has the prestige of the prime minister?

古文：承翰曰： 尚书崔居俭、左丞姚顗，其次太常卢文纪也。 
现代文：马承翰说： 尚书崔居俭，左丞姚频，其次是太常卢文纪。 
English: Ma Chenghan said: Shangshu Cui Juzhen, Zuoying Yao Ping, followed by Taichang Lu Wenji.

古文：从诲笑顾左右，取进奏官报状示鏻顗与文纪皆拜平章事矣。
现代文：高从诲笑着环视手下人，取来进奏官的报状给李辚看，姚类和卢文纪都拜为平章事了。
English: Gao Cong smiled and looked around at his subordinates. He took the report from the sounding officer and showed it to Li Qian. Yao Rui and Lu Wenji both bowed to him.

古文：鏻惭失色。
现代文：李鳞羞惭失色。
English: Li Qiye lost his composure.

古文：还，遂献其皮、拂，废帝终不用。
现代文：回到京师，就献上猿皮、拂尘，唐废帝最终没有重用他。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he presented a monkey skin and a whisk to the emperor, but the emperor ultimately did not reuse him.

古文：初，李愚自太常卿作相，而卢文纪代之，及文纪作相，鏻乃求为太常卿。
现代文：当初，李愚从太常卿作到宰相，而卢文纪代任太常卿，到卢文纪作宰相，李鳞于是请求任太常卿。
English: At first, Li Gu was promoted from the position of the First Secretary to the Prime Minister, while Lu Wenji was promoted from the position of the First Secretary to the position of the Prime Minister. Li Yan then requested to be appointed the First Secretary.

古文：及拜命，中谢曰： 臣叨入相之资。 
现代文：到拜命时，谢表中说： 我有辱做宰相的资格。 
English: When he came to pay his respects, he said in his thank-you note: "I have the qualifications to be prime minister.

古文：朝士传以为笑。
现代文：朝中士人传作笑谈。
English: Morning sergeants are rumored to make jokes.

古文：鏻事晋累迁太子太保。
现代文：李鉼在晋多次升迁为太子太保。
English: Li Hongzhi was promoted several times during his reign to become the crown prince.

古文：汉高祖即位，拜鏻司徒，居数月卒，年八十八，赠太傅。
现代文：汉高祖登位，拜李鳞为司徒，遇了几个月去世，享年八十八岁，赠太傅。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, with Li Qian as his disciple, but died a few months later, at the age of 88, and was given the title of Taifu.

古文：○贾纬贾纬，镇州获鹿人也。
现代文：贾纬，镇州获鹿人。
English: Jia Wei, won the title of Deer Man of Zhenzhou.

古文：少举进士不中，州辟参军。
现代文：年轻时考进士不中，州中举荐他为参军。
English: When he was young, he failed to pass the entrance examination, but was recommended to join the army in middle school.

古文：唐天成中，范延光镇成德，辟赵州军事判官，迁石邑令。
现代文：唐天成中，范延光镇守成德，推荐他为赵州军事判官，升任石邑令。
English: In the middle of Tang Tiancheng, Fan Yanguang, the town guard of Chengde, recommended him as the military judge of Zhao, and he was promoted to the commander of Shishi.

古文：纬长于史学。
现代文：贾纬擅长史学。
English: Jia Wei is good at history.

古文：唐自武宗已后无实录，史官之职废，纬采次传闻，为《唐年补录》六十五卷。
现代文：唐代从唐武宗以后没有实录，史官的职务被废置，贾纬搜集编纂传闻，着《唐年补录》六十五卷。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, after Emperor Wu of Tang, there were no authentic records, and the post of historian was abolished. Jia Wei collected and compiled rumors, and wrote the "Tang Year Supplement" in sixty-five volumes.

古文：当唐之末，王室微弱，诸侯强盛，征伐擅出，天下多事，故纬所论次多所阙误。
现代文：正值唐末年，王室衰微弱小，诸侯强大兴盛，擅自征伐，天下多事，因此贾纬的编纂有很多缺误的地方。
English: It was the end of the Tang Dynasty, the royal family was weak and feeble, the princes were powerful and prosperous, the conquest was unauthorized, and there were many events in the world. Therefore, the compilation of Jia Wei had many shortcomings.

古文：而丧乱之际，事迹粗存，亦有补于史氏。
现代文：但在丧亡动乱的时候，事迹粗存梗概，也对史家有所裨益。
English: However, in times of death and turmoil, it is also beneficial for historians to have a rough outline of deeds.

古文：晋天福中，为太常博士，非其好也，数求为史职，改屯田员外郎、起居郎、史馆修撰，与修《唐书》。
现代文：晋天福年间，任太常博士，这不是他喜欢的，多次请求担任史官，改任屯田员外郎、起居郎、史馆修撰，参与修撰《唐书》。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tianfu, Dr. Ren Taizang, which was not to his liking, repeatedly requested to serve as a historian, and was reassigned to the posts of Tondenkangairo, Kijiro, and historian, and participated in the compilation of "Tang Shu."

古文：丁内艰，服除，知制诰。
现代文：遭逢母亲的丧事，服完丧，任知制诰。
English: He was bereaved of his mother, and after the funeral, he became a widower.

古文：累迁中书舍人、谏议大夫、给事中，复为修撰。
现代文：累经升迁为中书舍人、谏议大夫、给事中，又任修撰。
English: He has been promoted to the position of Chinese calligrapher, the doctor of debate, the person in charge of affairs, and the person in charge of revision.

古文：汉隐帝时，诏与王伸、窦俨等同修晋高祖、出帝、汉高祖实录。
现代文：汉隐帝时，下诏书命他和王伸、窦俨共同修撰晋高祖、晋出帝、汉高祖实录。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Yin, the imperial edict ordered him, Wang Shin, and Dou Xuan to jointly compile a true record of the founding fathers of the Jin Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty.

古文：初，桑维翰为相，常恶纬为人，待之甚薄。
现代文：当初，桑维翰任宰相，一向讨厌贾纬的为人，对他很刻薄。
English: At first, Sanveighan, who was the prime minister, had always disliked Jia Wei and was very mean to him.

古文：纬为维翰传，言 继翰死，有银八千铤。 
现代文：贾纬为桑维翰写传，称 桑维翰死后，有银子八千链 。
English: Jia Wei wrote a biography of Sun Weihan, saying that after Sun Weihan's death, there were eight thousand chains of silver.

古文：翰林学士徐台符以为不可，数以非纬，纬不得已，更为数千铤。广顺元年，实录成，纬求迁官不得，由是怨望。
现代文：翰林学士徐台符认为不能这样写，多次就此事指责贾纬，贾纬迫不得已，改成几千铲广顺元年实录完成，贾纬请求升官没有如愿，徒此产生怨恨。
English: Xu Taifu, a scholar of Hanlin, thought that it was not possible to write like this, and repeatedly criticized Jia Wei on this matter. Jia Wei was forced to change to several thousand shovels to complete the record in the first year of Shun. Jia Wei's request for promotion was not as desired, thus causing resentment.

古文：是时，宰相王峻监修国史，纬书日历，多言当时大臣过失，峻见之，怒曰： 贾给事子弟仕宦亦要门阀，奈何历诋当朝之士，使其子孙何以仕进？ 
现代文：适时，宰相王峻监修国史，贾纬记载每天的事，多说当时大臣的过失，王峻见到后，发怒说； 买给事的子弟做官也要看门阀，怎么一个个诋毁当朝士人，让他们的子孙怎样做官升迁？ 
English: At the right time, the prime minister Wang Jun supervised the national history, Jia Wei recorded the daily affairs, and talked more about the mistakes of the minister at that time. After Wang Jun saw it, he was angry and said; the children who were bought to be officials should also watch the door valve, how can they slander the officials of the dynasty one by one, and how can their children and grandchildren be promoted?

古文：言之太祖，贬平卢军行军司马。
现代文：将此事告诉周太祖，贬贾纬为平卢军行军司马。
English: He reported the matter to Zhou Taizu, and Jia Wei was demoted to the rank of marching sergeant of the Pinglu Army.

古文：明年卒于青州。
现代文：第二年死在青州。
English: He died the following year in Qingzhou.

古文：○段希尧
现代文：段希尧，河内人。
English: Duan Xizhe, a native of Hanoi.

古文：段希尧，河内人也。晋高祖为河东节度使，以希尧为判官。
现代文：晋高祖任河东节度使时，任命段希尧为判官。
English: When Jingao Zu was appointed as the envoy of the Hedong Festival, he appointed Duan Xijun as the judge.

古文：高祖军屯忻州，军中有拥高祖呼万岁者，高祖惶惑，不知所为。
现代文：晋高祖的军队屯驻在忻州，军中有人拥立晋高祖高呼万岁，晋高祖惶恐不安，不知所措。
English: Jin Gaozu's army was stationed in Zhangzhou. Some people in the army supported Jin Gaozu and chanted "long live Jin Gaozu." Jin Gaozu was terrified and at a loss.

古文：希尧劝高祖斩其乱首，乃止。
现代文：段希尧劝晋高祖斩为首作乱的人，纔平息此事。
English: Duan Xizhe advised Jin Gaozhu to kill the person who started the riot and calm down the situation.

古文：高祖将举兵太原，与其宾佐谋，希尧以为不可，高祖虽不听，然重其为人，不责之也。
现代文：晋高祖准备在太原起兵，和他的宾客僚佐商量，段希尧认为不行，晋高祖虽然没有听取，但看重他的为人，没有责备他。
English: Jin Gaozu was preparing to raise an army in Taiyuan, and discussed it with his guests and advisors. Duan Xiyu thought it was not possible. Although Jin Gaozu did not listen, he valued him as a person and did not blame him.

古文：高祖入立，希尧比诸将吏，恩泽最薄。久之，稍迁谏议大夫，使于吴越。
现代文：晋高祖登位，段希尧和将吏们相比，受到的恩赐最少过了很久，逐渐升迁为谏议大夫，出使到昊越。
English: When Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, Duan Xichen received a gift that was at least a long time ago compared to the generals. He was gradually promoted to the position of the chief adviser and sent to Ho Yue.

古文：是时，江、淮不通，凡使吴越者皆泛海，而多风波之患。
现代文：这时，长江、淮河不通，凡是出使昊越的人都航海而行，因而常有海上风波的灾祸。
English: At this time, the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River were impassable, and everyone who went to Hao Yue was sailing, so there were often disasters of sea storms.

古文：希尧过海，遭大风，左右皆恐惧，希尧曰： 吾平生不欺，汝等恃吾，可无恐也。 
现代文：段希尧遇海，遇上大风，手下人都感到恐惧，段希尧说； 我一生不骗人，你们依靠我，可以无需害怕。 
English: When Duan Xidi encountered the sea and a strong wind, all of his subordinates felt fear, Duan Xidi said; I will never lie to anyone, you can rely on me, there is no need to be afraid.

古文：已而风亦止。
现代文：不久风也停了。
English: Soon the wind died down.

古文：历莱、怀、棣三州刺史。
现代文：历任莱、怀、棣三州刺史。
English: Successive governors of Lai, Huai, and Handan made history in the three states.

古文：出帝时，为吏部侍郎，判东、西铨事，累迁礼部尚书。
现代文：晋出帝时，任吏部侍郎，判束、西铨事，屡经升迁为礼部尚书。
English: When he ascended to the throne, he was appointed as an attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, and served as a judge of the Imperial Court and the Western Court. After many promotions, he became a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：卒，年七十九，赠太子少保。
现代文：去世，享年七十九岁，赠太子少保。
English: He died at the age of seventy-nine and was given the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：○张允
现代文：张允，镇州人。
English: Zhang Yun, from Zhenzhou.

古文：张允，镇州人也。
现代文：年轻时在州中任张文礼的参军。
English: When he was young, he joined the army of Zhang Wenli in the middle of the state.

古文：少事镇州为张文礼参军。唐庄宗讨张文礼，允脱身降，庄宗系之狱，文礼败，乃出之为魏州功曹。
现代文：唐庄宗讨伐张文礼，张允脱身投降，唐庄宗把他关在狱中，张文礼被打败，纔放出他担任魏州功曹。
English: Tangzhuangzong besieged Zhang Wenli, Zhang Yun escaped and surrendered, Tangzhuangzong put him in prison, Zhang Wenli was defeated, and released him to serve as a Wei State Gong Cao.

古文：赵在礼辟节度推官，历沧、兗二镇掌书记。
现代文：赵在礼召为节度推官，历任沧、兖二镇掌书记。
English: Zhao was invited to be the secretary of the festival, and successively served as the secretary of the vicissitudes and the second town.

古文：入为监察御史，累迁水部员外郎，知制诰。
现代文：入朝为监察御史，屡经升迁为水部员外郎，知制诰。
English: He entered the imperial court as an inspector of imperial history, and was repeatedly promoted to the post of water department member, and then to the post of chancellor.

古文：废帝皇子重美为河南尹，掌六军，以允刚介，乃拜允给事中，为六军判官。
现代文：唐废帝的儿子李重美任河南尹，掌管六军，因张允刚直耿介，于是拜张允为给事中，任六军判官。
English: Li Chongmei, the son of the deposed Emperor of Tang, was appointed as the Henan Yin, in charge of the Six Armies, because Zhang Yun was a direct assistant to Geng, so he asked Zhang Yun to be the judge of the Six Armies.

古文：罢，迁左散骑常侍。
现代文：罢任，升为左散骑常侍。
English: He resigned from the post and was promoted to the rank of Zuo Sanzhi (左散騎) regular attendant.

古文：晋高祖即位，屡赦天下，允为《驳赦论》以献曰： 管子曰： 凡赦者小利而大害，久而不胜其祸；无赦者小害而大利，久而不胜其福。 
现代文：晋高祖登位，多次赦免天下罪人，张允作帜赦论》进献说： 管子说： 大凡赦免这种事利小害大，时间长了就经受不了它造成的灾祸；没有赦免则害小利大，时间长了有说不尽的好处。 
English: Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne and repeatedly pardoned the world's sinners, Zhang Yun said in the introduction to "On the Theory of Forgiveness": Guanzi said: Generally, the pardon of this kind of thing benefits the small and harms the great, and if the time is long, it will not be able to withstand the calamity caused by it; if there is no pardon, it will harm the small and benefit the great, and if the time is long, it will have inexpressible benefits.

古文：又汉之吴汉疾笃，帝问汉所欲言。
现代文：另外，漠代的吴汉病重，皇帝问昊汉想说什么。
English: In addition, Wu Han of the Desert Dynasty was seriously ill, and the emperor asked Hao Han what he wanted to say.

古文：汉曰： 惟愿陛下无赦尔！ 
现代文：昊汉说： 只希望陛下不要赦免罪人而已！ 
English: Haohan said, "I only hope that His Majesty will not pardon the guilty!"

古文：盖行赦不以为恩，不行赦不以为无恩，罚有罪故也。
现代文：不把实行赦免当成恩德，不把不实行赦免当成没有恩德；因为这是惩罚罪人的缘故。
English: Let not the granting of indulgences be regarded as a favour, nor the non-granting of indulgences as a privation; for it is for the punishment of the guilty.

古文：自古皆以水旱则降德音而宥过，开狴牢而出囚，冀感天心以救其灾者，非也。
现代文：自古以来都因水灾旱灾就颁布恩诏宽宥罪过，打开牢狱放出囚犯，希望感动上天的心而救助灾害，这是不对的。
English: Since ancient times, it has been wrong to issue edicts of pardon and forgiveness of sins due to floods and droughts, open prisons to release prisoners, and hope to touch the heart of heaven to rescue disasters.

古文：假有二人之讼者，一有罪而一无罪，若有罪者见舍，则无罪者衔冤。
现代文：假如有两个诉讼的人，一个有罪一个无罪，如果有罪的人被放掉，那么无罪的人就含冤了。
English: If there are two litigants, one guilty and one innocent, and if the guilty one is set free, then the innocent one is wronged.

古文：此乃致灾之道，非救灾之术也。
现代文：这是招至灾祸的做法，不是救灾的办法。
English: This is a recipe for disaster, not a remedy.

古文：至使小人遇天灾，则皆喜而相劝以为恶，曰： 国将赦矣，必舍我以救灾。 如此，则是教民为恶也。
现代文：以至于使得小人碰上天灾，就都高兴地相互鼓励作恶，说： 国家要进行赦免了，一定会释放我们来救灾，像这样，就是唆使百姓作恶。
English: So much so that when the villains are struck by a natural disaster, they cheerfully encourage each other to commit evil, saying, "The state is going to grant amnesty, it will surely release us to help with the disaster." In this way, they are inciting the people to commit evil.

古文：夫天之为道，福善而祸淫。
现代文：作为上天之道，是要降福给善人而降灾给恶人。
English: As the way to heaven, it is to bestow blessings on the good and disasters on the wicked.

古文：若舍恶人而变灾为福，则是天又喜人为恶也。
现代文：如果放了恶人就能变灾焉福，那么这样一来上天又喜欢人们作恶了。
English: If the release of evildoers can turn disaster into blessing, then in this way, God likes people to do evil.

古文：凡天之降灾，所以警戒人主节嗜欲，务勤俭，恤鳏寡，正刑罚而已。 
现代文：凡是上天降下灾祸，不过是用来警告劝诫君主节制嗜好欲望，致力于勤俭节约，哀怜孤寡老人，端正刑割罢了。 
English: All the calamities that are sent down from heaven are but warnings and exhortations to the monarch to restrain his appetites and indulgences, to devote himself to thrift and economy, to pity the lonely and the aged, and to mete out just punishment.

古文：是时，晋高祖方好臣下有言，览之大喜。
现代文：这时，晋高祖正喜好臣子提意见，看了十分高兴。
English: At this time, Emperor Jinguo was pleased to see that his vassal was willing to offer his opinion.

古文：允事汉为吏部侍郎，隐帝诛戮大臣，京师皆恐，允常退朝不敢还家，止于相国寺。
现代文：张允在汉任吏部侍郎，漠隐帝诛杀大臣，京师的人都很恐惧，张允常常退朝后不敢回家，住在相国寺中。
English: Zhang Yun served as an attendant of the cadre department in Han, the minister of the assassination of the Emperor of China, and the people of Beijing were very afraid. Zhang Yun often did not dare to go home after retiring, and lived in the Shogoku Temple.

古文：周太祖以兵入京师，允匿于佛殿承尘，坠而卒，年六十五。
现代文：周太祖率兵进入京师，张允藏在佛殿承尘中，掉下来摔死了。终年六十五岁。
English: Zhou Taizu led the troops into Beijing, Zhang Yun hid in the dust of the Buddha Hall, fell down and died. He was sixty-five years old.

古文：○王松王松，父徽，为唐僖宗宰相。松举进士，后唐时，历刑部郎中，唐末，从事方镇。
现代文：王松，父亲王徽，任唐僖宗的宰相王松考中进士，后唐时，历任刑部郎中，唐末，在方镇任职。
English: Wang Song, the father of Wang Hui, was the prime minister of the Tang Xizong, Wang Song Gao, a junior high school graduate, after the Tang Dynasty, he was the junior secretary of the Ministry of Justice, at the end of the Tang Dynasty, he served in Fangzhen.

古文：晋高祖镇太原，辟松节度判官。
现代文：晋高祖镇守太原，征召王松为节度判官。
English: He promoted Gao Zuzhen to the position of Taiyuan governor, and recruited Wang Song to be the judge of the festival.

古文：晋高祖即位，拜右谏议大夫，累拜工部尚书。
现代文：晋高祖登位，拜为右谏议大夫，屡经升迁为工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the position of high-ranking ancestor, and became a doctor of the Right Division of the Council of Elders. He was repeatedly promoted to the position of a senior official of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：出帝北迁，萧翰立许王从益于京师，以松为左丞相。
现代文：晋出帝北迁，萧翰在京师拥立许王李从益，任命王松为左丞相。
English: After he was promoted and moved to the northern part of the empire, Xiao Han supported Xu Wang and Li Congyi in Beijing, and appointed Wang Song as the Minister of the Left.

古文：汉高祖入洛，先遣人驰诏东京百官尝授伪命者皆焚之，使勿自疑，由是御史台悉敛百官伪敕焚之。
现代文：汉高祖进入洛阳，先派人驰马诏令曾授给伪职的束京百官都烧掉伪诏，让他们不要自起疑心，因此御史台全部收缴百官的伪诏烧掉。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu entered Luoyang, he first sent people to burn the forged edicts of hundreds of officials in Beijing who had been awarded fake posts, so that they would not be suspicious. Therefore, the Imperial Historian's Office confiscated all the forged edicts of hundreds of officials and burned them.

古文：松以手指其胸，引郭子仪自诮，以语人曰： 此乃二十四考中书令也。 
现代文：王松用手指着胸口，引郭子仪讥诮自己，告诉人说： 这是二十四考中书令。 
English: Wang Song pointed to his chest with his finger, mocked himself by quoting Guo Ziyi, and told people: "This is the letter of the 24th examination.

古文：闻者笑之。
现代文：听见的人都笑他。
English: Everyone who heard about it laughed.

古文：后松子仁宝为李守贞河中支使，守贞反，松以子故上书自陈，高祖怜之，但使解职而已。
现代文：后来王松的儿子王仁宝担任李守贞的河中支使，李守贞反叛，王松因儿子的缘故上书自白，汉高祖哀怜他，只是让他罢职而已。
English: Later, Wang Song's son, Wang Rimpao, served as Li Shouzhen's middle-of-the-river envoy, Li Shouzhen rebelled, Wang Song confessed in writing for the sake of his son, and Emperor Gaozu felt sorry for him, but only dismissed him.

古文：松有田城东，岁时往来京师，以疾卒。○裴皞裴皞，字司东，河东人也。
现代文：王松在京城束面有田产，一年四时往来于京师，因病去世裴嗥字司束，河东人。
English: Wang Song had a farm in Beijing-Sukumen, and commuted to and from Beijing-Shi at 4:00 a.m. every year. He died of illness in Pei'an-Zi'zhuang, a resident of Hedong.

古文：裴氏自晋、魏以来，世为名族，居燕者号 东眷 ，居凉者号 西眷 ，居河东者号 中眷 。皞出于名家，而容止端秀，性刚急，直而无隐。
现代文：裴氏自从晋、魏以来，世代都是名族，住茌燕的号称 束眷 ，住在凉的号称 西眷 ，住在河东的号称 中眷 裴嗥出身名门，而形容举止端庄秀美，性格刚强急躁，耿直役有隐瞒。
English: Since the Jin and Wei dynasties, the Pei clan has been a famous family for generations. Those who live in Yan and Yan are known as "Shukin," those who live in the cool are known as "Xigkin," and those who live in the east of the river are known as "Zhongkin." Pei was born into a famous family, but he described his demeanor as dignified and beautiful, his character as strong and impetuous, and he had secrets.

古文：少好学，唐光化中举进士，拜校书郎、拾遗、补阙。
现代文：年轻好学，唐光化年间中进士，拜为校书郎、拾遣、补阙。
English: Young and eager to learn, he was promoted to junior high school student during the Tang and Guanghua Dynasties, and was known as the school scribe, scout, and tutor.

古文：事梁为翰林学士、中书舍人。
现代文：在梁任翰林学士、中书舍人。
English: In Liang, he was a scholar of Hanlin and a scholar of Chinese literature.

古文：事后唐为礼部侍郎。
现代文：在后唐任礼部侍郎。
English: In the later Tang Dynasty, he served as a chamberlain of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：皞喜论议，每陈朝廷阙失，多斥权臣。
现代文：裴嗥专好议论，每次指陈朝廷阙失，常常斥责权臣。
English: Pei Jun was very fond of discussion, and every time he pointed out that the Chen dynasty and court had made a mistake, he often rebuked the powerful minister.

古文：改太子宾客，以老拜兵部尚书致仕。
现代文：改任太子宾客，因年老拜为兵部尚书辞官居家。
English: He was reappointed as a guest of the crown prince, and because of his old age, he became an official of the Ministry of Military Affairs and stayed at home.

古文：晋高祖起为工部尚书，复以老告，拜右仆射致仕。
现代文：晋高祖起用他任工部尚书，又以年老告退，拜为右仆射辞官居家。
English: Jin Gaozu appointed him as the secretary of the Ministry of Works, but he retired due to old age and stayed at home as the right-hand man of the retired officer.

古文：卒，年八十五，赠太子太保。
现代文：去世，享年八十五岁，赠太子太保。
English: He died at the age of eighty-five and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：皞以文学在朝廷久，宰相马胤孙、桑维翰，皆皞礼部所放进士也。后胤孙知举，放榜，引新进士诣皞，皞喜作诗曰： 门生门下见门生。 世传以为荣。维翰已作相，尝过皞，皞不迎不送。
现代文：裴皡以文章学问在朝任职很久，宰相马胤孙、桑维翰，都是裴嗥在礼部发榜录取的进士后来马胤孙知贡举，发榜后，带着新录取的进士拜访裴皡，裴皡高兴地作诗说： 门生门下见门生 世人相传以为荣耀桑维翰作宰相后，曾拜访裴嗥，裴嗥不迎不送。
English: Pei Jun served in the government for a long time with his articles and knowledge. Prime ministers Ma Yansun and San Weihan were both recruited by Pei Jun in the Ministry of Ceremonies. Later, Ma Yansun learned about the tribute. After the publication of the list, he visited Pei Jun with newly recruited recruits. Pei Jun happily wrote a poem saying, "A disciple sees a disciple under his disciple." It is said that after San Weihan became prime minister, he visited Pei Jun, and Pei Jun did not welcome or send him.

古文：人或问之，皞曰： 我见桑公于中书，庶寮也；桑公见我于私第，门生也。何送迎之有？ 
现代文：有人间他，裴嗥说： 我在中书省见桑公，我是一下属官吏；桑公在我家见我，他是门生哪有送迎的道理？ 
English: When he met someone, Pei Yao said, "I met Sang Gong in the Chinese Province of Calligraphy, I am a subordinate official; Sang Gong met me at my home, he is a disciple, what is the reason for seeing him off?

古文：人亦以为当。
现代文：人们也认为得当。
English: People also think it's appropriate.

古文：○王仁裕王仁裕，字德辇，天水人也。
现代文：王仁裕字德辇，天水人。
English: Wang Renyu is a virtuous man, a Tianshui man.

古文：少不知书，以狗马弹射为乐，年二十五始就学，而为人俊秀，以文辞知名秦、陇间。
现代文：年轻时不知书，以狗马弹射为乐，二十五岁纔开始学习，而为人俊秀，在秦、陇间以文辞闻名。
English: When he was young, he didn't know how to read and enjoyed dog and horse catapulting. At the age of twenty-five, he began to study. He was a brilliant man and was famous for his literary skills among the Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：秦帅辟为秦州节度判官。
现代文：秦州主帅召他任秦州节度判官。
English: The Qinzhou coach called him to be the judge of the Qinzhou Festival.

古文：秦州入于蜀，仁裕因事蜀为中书舍人、翰林学士。
现代文：秦州归入蜀后，王仁裕因而在蜀任中书舍人、翰林学士。
English: After Qinzhou was incorporated into Shu, Wang Renyu became a scholar and scholar of Hanlin in Shu.

古文：唐庄宗平蜀，仁裕事唐，复为秦州节度判官。王思同镇兴元，辟为从事。
现代文：唐庄宗平定蜀，王仁裕事奉唐，又任秦州节度判官，王思同镇守兴元，推举他为从事。
English: Zhuang Zong of Tang conquered Shushan, Wang Renyu served Tang, and was appointed as the judge of the Qin State Festival, and Wang Sitong was appointed as the town guard of Xingyuan.

古文：思同留守西京，以为判官。
现代文：王思同留守西京，委任他为判官。
English: Wang Sitong stayed in West Beijing and appointed him as a judge.

古文：废帝举兵凤翔，思同战败，废帝得仁裕，闻其名不杀，置之军中。自废帝起事，至其入立，驰檄诸镇，诏书、告命皆仁裕为之。
现代文：唐废帝在凤翔举兵，王思同战败，唐废帝得到王仁裕，知道他的名声没有杀他，把他安置在军中，自从唐废帝起事，到他进京登位，传檄各镇，诏书、告命都是王仁裕起草的。
English: Tang Wasting Emperor raised an army in Fengxiang, Wang Sicong was defeated, Tang Wasting Emperor got Wang Renyu, knew that his reputation did not kill him, and placed him in the army. Since Tang Wasting Emperor's uprising, when he entered Beijing and ascended to the throne, and spread to all towns, Wang Renyu drafted the edict and the order.

古文：久之，以都官郎中充翰林学士。
现代文：遇了很久，以都官郎中充翰林学士。
English: It has been a long time since I have met a person with the same name as a high-ranking government official.

古文：晋高祖入立，罢职为郎中，历司封左司郎中、谏议大夫。
现代文：晋高祖登位，罢职任郎中，历任司封左司郎中、谏议大夫。
English: Jinko Koso ascended the throne, resigned from his post and became a junior vassal, and the successive vassals became junior vassals, junior vassals, and senior vassals.

古文：汉高祖时，复为翰林学士承旨，累迁户部尚书，罢为兵部尚书、太子少保。
现代文：漠高祖时，又任翰林学士承旨，多次升迁为户部尚书，罢为兵部尚书、太子少保。
English: When he was the founder of Mogao, he also served as the Hanlin Scholar, and was promoted several times to the household secretary, the military secretary, and the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：显德三年卒，年七十七，赠太子少师。
现代文：颢德三年去世，享年七十匕岁，赠太子少师。
English: He died three years later, at the age of seventy-three, and was given the title of crown prince.

古文：仁裕性晓音律，晋高祖初定雅乐，宴群臣于永福殿，奏黄钟，仁裕闻之曰： 音不纯肃而无和声，当有争者起于禁中。 
现代文：王仁裕天生通晓音律，晋高祖初定雅乐时，在永福殿宴请群臣，演奏黄钟，王仁裕骢了说： 声音不纯正肃穆而又没有和声，当有争斗起于宫中。 
English: Wang Renyu was born with an innate knowledge of musical rhythms. When his great-great-grandfather, Jingu Gao, first decided on court music, he invited a group of ministers to a banquet at the Yongfu Hall and played the yellow bell. Wang Renyu said, "The sound is not pure and solemn, and there is no harmony. There should be a fight in the palace."

古文：已而两军校斗升龙门外，声闻于内，人以为神。喜为诗。
现代文：不多时两个军校在升龙门外争斗，声音传进官内，人们都认为王仁裕很神奇王仁裕喜好作诗。
English: Not infrequently, two military schools fight outside the Dragon Gate, and the sound is transmitted to the officials. People all think that Wang Renyu is very magical. Wang Renyu likes to write poetry.

古文：其少也，尝梦剖其肠胃，以西江水涤之，顾见江中沙石皆为篆籀之文，由是文思益进。
现代文：他小时候，曾梦见有人剖开他的肠胃，用西江水洗涤，看见江中沙石上都写有篆文籀文，从此文思更加长进。
English: When he was a child, he had a dream that someone cut open his intestines and washed them with water from the West River. He saw scribbles on the sand and rocks in the river. From then on, his literary thoughts became more mature.

古文：乃集其平生所作诗万馀首为百卷，号《西江集》。
现代文：于是汇集他平生所写诗一万多首编成一百卷，取名《西汀集》。
English: As a result, he collected more than ten thousand poems he had written in his lifetime and compiled them into one hundred volumes, which he called the "Sitting Collection."

古文：仁裕与和凝于五代时皆以文章知名，又尝知贡举，仁裕门生王溥、凝门生范质，皆至宰相，时称其得人。
现代文：王仁裕与和凝在五代时都以文章出名，又曾知贡举，王仁裕的门生王溥，和凝的门生范质，官都做到宰相，当时称赞他们善于获得人才。
English: At the time of the fifth generation, both Wang Renyu and He Jeng were famous for their articles, and had known tribute. Wang Renyu's protégé, Wang Qi, and He Jeng's protégé, Pan Qi, both became prime ministers. At that time, they were praised for their ability to acquire talent.

古文：○裴羽裴羽，字用化，其父贽，相唐僖宗，官至司空。
现代文：裴羽字用化，父亲裴贽，辅佐唐僖宗，官做到司空。
English: The character "Pei Yu" was used, and his father, Pei Xuan, was an assistant to Tang Xizong and an official of the Empress Dowager.

古文：羽以一品子为河南寿安尉。
现代文：裴羽以一品官子弟的身份出任河南寿安尉。
English: Pei Yu served as a Henan Shouan lieutenant with the status of a first-class official's son.

古文：事梁为御史台主簿，改监察御史。唐明宗时，为吏部郎中，与右散骑常侍陆崇使于闽，为海风所飘至钱塘。
现代文：在梁任御史台主簿，改任监察御史唐明宗时，任吏部郎中，和右散骑常侍陆崇出使闽，被海风吹飘到钱塘。
English: When Liang was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of the Imperial Historian's Office and was reassigned as the inspector of the Imperial Historian Tang Mingzong, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the cadre department, and the right cavalryman, Lu Su, was sent to Qiantang by the sea breeze.

古文：是时，吴越王钱镠与安重诲有隙，唐方绝镠朝贡，羽等被留经岁，而崇以疾卒。
现代文：这时，昊越王钱锷和安重诲有矛盾，唐正拒绝钱锷的朝贡，裴羽等人被扣留一年，而陆崇因病而死。
English: At this time, Hao Yue King Qian Ye and An Chong Yu had a conflict, Tang Zheng refused Qian Ye's tribute, Pei Yu and others were detained for one year, and Lu Chong died of illness.

古文：后镠遣羽还，羽求载崇尸与俱归。
现代文：后来钱铿派裴羽回去，裴羽请求载上陆崇的尸体一道回去。
English: Later, Qian Ye sent Pei Yu back, and Pei Yu asked to take Lu Chong's body back with him.

古文：镠初不许，羽以语感动镠，镠恻然许之，因附羽表自归。
现代文：钱缪最初不答应，裴羽以言词打动了钱缪，钱锷悲伤地答应了他，因而交付表书给裴羽表示自己要归附。
English: Qian Miao did not initially agree, but Pei Yu impressed Qian Miao with his words. Qian Ye sadly agreed to him, so he handed over the form to Pei Yu to say that he wanted to join.

古文：明宗得镠表大喜，由是吴越复通于中国。
现代文：唐明宗得到钱铿的表书非常高兴，从此昊越又和中原交往了。
English: Tang Mingzong was very happy to get Qian Ye's signature. Since then, Hao Yue has been in contact with Zhongyuan.

古文：羽护崇丧至京师，及其橐装还其家，士人皆多羽之义。
现代文：裴羽为陆崇谨丧到京师，把他的行装送回他家，士人都称赞裴羽的义气。
English: Pei Yu went to Beijing to mourn for Lu Chongzhen, and sent his uniform back to his home. The scholars all praised Pei Yu's loyalty.

古文：羽，周太祖时为左散骑常侍，卒，赠户部尚书。
现代文：裴羽，周太祖时任左散骑常侍，去世，赠户部尚书。
English: Pei Yu, Zhou Taizu's left rider at the time, passed away, and was presented with a book from the household department.

古文：○王延王延，字世美，郑州长丰人也。
现代文：王延字世美，郊州长丰人。
English: Wang Yan's character is Shimei, the governor of the suburbs is Fengren.

古文：少好学，尝以赋谒梁相李琪，琪为之称誉，荐为即墨县令。
现代文：年轻好学，曾带着赋拜见梁宰相李琪，李琪因此称誉他，推荐他任即墨县令。
English: Being young and eager to learn, Li Qiye, the prime minister of Liang Province, met Liang with a bow. Li Qiye praised him for this and recommended him to be appointed as the next governor of Mo County.

古文：冯道作相，与延故人，召拜左补阙。
现代文：冯道作宰相，和王延是老朋友，召拜为左补阙。
English: Feng Dao was the prime minister, and Wang Yan was an old friend, and Zhao Bei was the left assistant minister.

古文：迁水部员外郎，知制诰。
现代文：升任水部员外郎，知制诰。
English: He was promoted to the post of water department member, and became chiseled.

古文：拜中书舍人，权知贡举。吏部尚书卢文纪与故相崔协有隙。
现代文：拜为中书舍人，暂代知贡举吏部尚书卢文纪和前宰相崔协有矛盾。
English: There is a conflict between Lu Wenji, the interim secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and former Prime Minister Cui Xie.

古文：是时，协子颀方举进士，文纪谓延曰： 吾尝誉子于朝，贡举选士，当求实效，无以虚名取人。昔有越人善泅，生子方晬，其母浮之水上。人怪而问之，则曰： 其父善泅，子必能之。 
现代文：这时，崔协的儿子崔顽正考进士，卢文纪对王延说： 我曾在朝廷称誉你，贡举挑选士人，应当讲求实效，不要凭虚名录取人过去有个越人善于游水，生个儿子刚满一百天，他的母亲就把他浮在水上人们扬得奇怪就询问她，她说： 他的父亲善于游水，儿子必定能游水。 
English: At this time, Cui Xie's son Cui Yuzheng took the entrance examination for scholars, and Lu Wenji said to Wang Yan: I once praised you in the court, the tribute selected scholars, should be pragmatic, do not accept people with false names. In the past, there was a Yue person who was good at swimming, and his son was just one hundred days old, and his mother floated him on the water. People were curious and asked her, she said: His father is good at swimming, and his son must be able to swim.

古文：若是可乎？ 
现代文：像这样行吗？ 
English: Does it work like this?

古文：延退而笑曰： 卢公之言，为崔协也，恨其父遂及其子邪！ 
现代文：王延退下后笑着说： 卢公的话，是因崔协而说的，恨别人的父亲就牵连到儿子吗！ 
English: Wang Yan stepped back and said with a smile: Lu Gong's words were said because of Cui Xie. Does hating someone's father implicate the son?

古文：明年，选颀甲科，人皆称其公。累迁刑部尚书，以太子少保致仕。
现代文：第二年，选崔顺中甲科，人们都称赞他公道，多次升遥为刑部尚书，以太子少保辞官居家。
English: In the second year, Cui Shun was elected to Division A of the Middle School, and people praised him for his fairness. He was promoted several times to be a member of the Penal Correction Department, while his younger brother, Ether Zi, stayed at home.

古文：卒，年七十三。
现代文：去世，享年七十三岁。
English: He died at the age of 73.

古文：延为人重然诺，与其弟规相友爱，五代之际，称其家法焉。
现代文：王延为人看重信誉，和他的弟弟王规相友爱，五代的时候，人们都称赞他的家法。
English: Wang Yan was a man who valued reputation, and he and his brother Wang Gui loved each other. For five generations, people praised his family law.

古文：○马重绩马重绩，字洞微，其先出于北狄，而世事军中。
现代文：马重绩字洞微，他的祖先出身北狄，而世代在军中任职。
English: His ancestors were from Beidi and served in the military for generations.

古文：重绩少学数术，明太一、五纪、八象、《三统大历》，居于太原。
现代文：马重绩年轻时学敷衍，懂得太一、五纪、八象、《三统大历》，住在太原。
English: When he was young, Ma Chong Rong studied perfunctorily, knew the Taichi, the Five Dynasties, the Eight Dynasties, and the "Three Great Calendars," and lived in Taiyuan.

古文：唐庄宗镇太原，每用兵征伐，必以问之，重绩所言无不中，拜大理司直。明宗时，废不用。
现代文：唐庄宗镇守太原时，每次用兵征伐，必定询问他，马重绩说的无不应验，拜为大理司直：唐明宗时，废置不用他。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong was in charge of Taiyuan, every time he sent soldiers to fight, he would certainly ask him if there was anything wrong with what Ma Chongbai said, and he would bow to Dali Sizhi: When Tang Mingzong was in charge, he was not needed.

古文：晋高祖以太原拒命，废帝遣兵围之，势甚危急，命重绩筮之，遇《同人》，曰： 天火之象，乾建而离明。
现代文：晋高祖据有太原抗拒朝廷命令，唐废帝派兵包围他，形势十分危急，晋高祖命令马重绩占卦预测，遇《同人》卦，说： 天火的象征，干健而离明。
English: According to Jin Gaozu, Taiyuan resisted the order of the imperial court, and Emperor Tang sent troops to encircle him. The situation was very critical. Jin Gaozu ordered Ma Chong Rong to predict, and in the case of "Dongren" prediction, he said: The symbol of heaven and fire, strong and clear.

古文：健者君之德也，明者南面而向之，所以治天下也。
现代文：健是君德，明是南面而向的臣德，用来治理天下的。
English: Jian is gentlemanly virtue, and Ming is the southern-facing vassal of virtue, used to govern the world.

古文：同人者人所同也，必有同我者焉。
现代文：同人就是人所同，必定有与我相同的。
English: A fellow human being is a fellow human being, and there must be others like me.

古文：《易》曰： 战乎乾。 
现代文：《易》说： 战于干。 
English: "Yi" said: Let the battle begin.

古文：乾，西北也。
现代文：干，代表西北。
English: Dry, representing the northwest.

古文：又曰： 相见乎离。 
现代文：又说： 相见于离。 
English: He also said: Seeing each other is separation.

古文：离，南方也。
现代文：离，代表南方。
English: away, representing the south.

古文：其同我者自北而南乎？
现代文：与我相同的是自北而南吧？
English: Is it the same as me going from north to south?

古文：乾，西北也，战而胜，其九月十月之交乎？ 
现代文：干，代表西北，战而胜，大致在九月十月之交吧？ 
English: So, on behalf of the northwest, victory in battle, roughly at the turn of September and October?

古文：是岁九月，契丹助晋击败唐军，晋遂有天下。
现代文：这年九月，契丹帮助晋击败唐军，晋于是据有天下。
English: In September of that year, Khitan helped Jin defeat the Tang army, and Jin became the ruler of the world.

古文：拜重绩太子右赞善大夫，迁司天监。
现代文：拜马重绩为太子右赞善大夫，升任司天监。
English: Baima's great achievement was to become the prince's doctor, and he was promoted to the position of chief overseer.

古文：明年，张从宾反，命重绩筮之，遇《随》，曰： 南瞻析木，木不自续，虚而动之，动随其覆。
现代文：第二年，张从宾反叛，命令马重绩占卜，遇《随》卦，说： 南望箕、尾两星，它们不相连续。虚处振动，随动覆没。
English: In the second year, Zhang Congbin rebelled and ordered Ma Chongzheng to do divination. When he encountered "Sui" Gua, he said: "The two stars of the south lookout and the tail, they are not consecutive. The void vibrates, and disappears with the movement."

古文：岁将秋矣，无能为也！ 
现代文：一年将到秋天了，役有什么作为了。 
English: The year is coming to an end, and it's too late to do anything.

古文：七月而从宾败。
现代文：七月张从宾失败。
English: In July, Zhang Congbin failed.

古文：高祖大喜，赐以良马、器币。
现代文：晋高祖非常高兴，赐给他良马器物和钱币。
English: Jin Gaozu was very pleased and gave him fine horse equipment and money.

古文：天福三年，重绩上言： 历象，王者所以正一气之元，宣万邦之命。
现代文：天福三年，马重绩上奏： 历象，是帝王用来端正元气之始，宣命万邦的。
English: In the third year of Tianfu, Ma Chongyi played: History is used by emperors to correct the beginning of vitality and proclaim the destiny of all nations.

古文：而古今所纪，考审多差，《宣明》气朔正而星度不验，《崇玄》五星得而岁差一日，以《宣明》之气朔，合《崇玄》之五星，二历相参，然后符合。自前世诸历，皆起天正十一月为岁首，用太古甲子为上元，积岁愈多，差阔愈甚。
现代文：而古今所记载的，考察审定多有差误。《宣明历》气期正而星度得不到验证，《崇玄历》五星符合而每年差一天。以《宣明历》的气朔，合《崇玄历》的五星，两种历害相互参验，然后纔符合自前代各种历书，皆以天正十一月为一年的开头，用太古甲子马上元，积年越久，误差越严重。
English: However, there are many errors in the examination and verification of the records from ancient times to the present. The solar term of the "Xuanming Calendar" is positive, but the star rating cannot be verified. The five stars of the "Shuangyuan Calendar" are consistent, but one day is missing each year. With the solar term of the "Xuanming Calendar" and the five stars of the "Shuangyuan Calendar," the two calendars are tested against each other, and then they are consistent with the various calendars of the previous generation. They all start the year in November, and use the Taiko Jia immediately. The longer the age, the more serious the error.

古文：臣辄合二历，创为新法，以唐天宝十四载乙未为上元，雨水正月中气为气首。 
现代文：我就综合二历，创造新法，以唐天宝十四载乙未为上元，雨水正月中气为气首。 
English: Shangyuan is the first Jiazi, which began in the 14th year of Tang Tianbao, and the rain solstice in the middle of the first month is the beginning of the 24 solar terms.

古文：诏下司天监赵仁锜、张文皓等考覈得失。
现代文：下诏命司天监赵仁锜、张文皓等考核得失。
English: The following is the assessment of the gains and losses of the celestial supervisors Zhao Renyu and Zhang Wenyu.

古文：仁锜等言： 明年庚子正月朔，用重绩历考之，皆合无舛。 
现代文：赵仁锜等说： 明年庚子正月初一，用马重绩历考察，都符合，没有舛误。 
English: Zhao Renzhen and others said: Next year, on the first day of the first month of Geng Zi, with the horse heavy performance history inspection, are consistent, there is no mistake.

古文：乃下诏班行之，号《调元历》。行之数岁辄差，遂不用。
现代文：于是下诏颁行，取名《调元历推行几年就出现误差，于是不用。
English: So he issued an order to promulgate and implement it, called the "Chang Yuan Calendar." After a few years of use, there were errors, and it was no longer needed.

古文：重绩又言： 漏刻之法，以中星考昼夜为一百刻，八刻六十分刻之二十为一时，时以四刻十分为正，此自古所用也。
现代文：马重绩又说： 漏刻的办法是以中星考昼夜为一百刻，八又六十分之二十刻为一个时辰，半个时辰以四刻十分为正，这是自古以来所用的。
English: Ma Chong Rong also said: The method of missing the mark of time is to use the standard of the star in the 28th house to determine the day and night as one hundred minutes, eight minutes and twenty minutes as one hour, and one hour as four minutes and ten minutes. This is a method that has been used since ancient times.

古文：今失其传，以午正为时始，下侵未四刻十分而为午。
现代文：现今失傅，以午正为时辰的开始，往下侵不到四刻十分为午。
English: Nowadays, noon is the beginning of the hour, and it is less than four minutes to noon.

古文：重绩卒年六十四。
现代文：由此昼夜黄昏拂晓，都不符合，请依古法改正。 
English: Ma Chong Rong was 64 years old when he died.

古文：○赵延义
现代文：朝廷听从了。
English: The court complied.

古文：赵延义，字子英，秦州人也。
现代文：赵延义字子英，秦州人。
English: Zhao Yanyi Ziying, from Qinzhou.

古文：曾祖省躬通数术，避乱于蜀。
现代文：曾祖父赵省躬精通数术，在蜀中避乱。
English: Great-grandfather Zhao Shoumi was good at mathematics and escaped the turmoil in Shuzhong.

古文：父温珪，事蜀王建为司天监，每为建占吉凶，小不中，辄加诘责。
现代文：父亲赵温珪，跟随蜀王建任司天监，每次为王建占卜吉凶，小有不合，就加以责问。
English: His father, Zhao Wenqi, followed Wang Jianren, the chief overseer of Shu, and every time he divined good fortune for Wang Jian, if there was any discrepancy, he would scold him.

古文：温珪临卒，戒其子孙曰： 数术，吾世业，然吾仕乱国，得罪而几死者数矣！
现代文：赵温珪筛死时，告诫他的子孙说： 敷衍，是我们家世代的家业，但我在乱国做官，获罪而几乎被处死多次了！
English: When Zhao Wenxuan died, he admonished his children and grandchildren, saying: Perfunctory is the family business of our generation, but I was an official in a chaotic country, I was convicted and almost executed many times!

古文：子孙能以佗道仕进者，不必为也。 
现代文：子孙们如能以别的办法进入仕途，就不必从事敷衍了。 
English: If the descendants can enter the career in other ways, they do not have to engage in perfunctory work.

古文：然延义少亦以此仕蜀为司天监。
现代文：但赵延义年轻时也以敷衍在蜀任司天监。
English: However, when Zhao Yanyi was young, he also served as the chief overseer of heaven in Shu.

古文：蜀亡，仕唐为星官。
现代文：蜀灭亡，在唐住星官。
English: Shu perished, and a star official lived in Tang.

古文：延义兼通三式，颇善相人。
现代文：赵延义兼通三式，很善于给人看相。
English: Zhao Yanyi also has three styles, and is very good at giving people facial expressions.

古文：契丹灭晋，延义随虏至镇州。
现代文：契丹灭晋，赵延义随契丹到镇州。
English: When Khitan conquered Jin, Zhao Yanyi followed Khitan to Zhenzhou.

古文：李筠、白再荣谋逐麻答归汉，犹豫未决，延义假述数术赞成之。
现代文：李筠、白再荣商量驱逐麻答回汉，正犹豫不决，赵延义藉陈述数术赞成他们的做法。
English: Li Qian and Bai Zairong are hesitating to expel the Mahatma back to Han, but Zhao Yanyi agrees with their approach by stating the mathematics.

古文：周太祖自魏以兵入京师，太祖召延义问： 汉祚短促者，天数邪？ 
现代文：周太祖从魏州率兵进入京师，周太祖召见赵延义问道： 汉的国运短暂，是由于天命吗？ 
English: Zhou Taizu led the troops from Weizhou into the Beijing division. Zhou Taizu summoned Zhao Yanyi and asked: Han's National Day is short, is it due to fate?

古文：延义言： 王者抚天下，当以仁恩德泽，而汉法深酷，刑罚枉滥，天下称冤，此其所以亡也！ 
现代文：赵延义说： 称王的人安抚天下，应当用仁德恩泽，而漠的刑法很残酷，滥用刑罚，天下喊冤，造就是它灭亡的原因！ 
English: Zhao Yanyi said: Those who praise the king should use benevolence and grace to appease the world, but the criminal law of the desert is very cruel, the abuse of punishment, the world cries out for justice, and this is the reason for its demise!

古文：是时，太祖方以兵围苏逢吉、刘铢第，欲诛其族，闻延义言悚然，因贷其族，二家获全。
现代文：这时，周太祖正用兵包围苏逢吉、刘铢的家，想把他们灭族，听了赵延义的话感到毛骨悚然，因而宽免了他们的族人，两家得以保全。
English: At this time, Zhou Taizu was surrounding the homes of Su Fengji and Liu Ye with soldiers, wanting to exterminate them. Hearing Zhao Yanyi's words, he felt creepy, so he pardoned their relatives, and the two homes were preserved.

古文：延义事周为太府卿、判司天监，以疾卒。
现代文：赵延义在周任太府卿、判司天监，因病去世。
English: Zhao Yanyi, who served as Taifuqing and Shansi Tianjing during the Zhou Dynasty, passed away due to illness.

