古文：○李彻
现代文：○李彻
English: ○ Lee Cheol

古文：李彻，字广达，朔方岩绿人也。
现代文：李彻字广达，朔方岩绿人。
English: Li Chezhe is called Guangda, Shuo Fangyan is called Green Man.

古文：父和，开皇初为柱国。
现代文：父亲李和，开皇初年为柱国。
English: His father, Li He, became a pillar of the state in the first year of the emperor's reign.

古文：彻性刚毅，有器干，伟容仪，多武艺。
现代文：李彻生性刚毅，有才干，仪表魁伟，多有武艺。
English: Li Che was born with strong character, talent, great appearance, and martial arts skills.

古文：大冢宰宇文护引为亲信，寻拜殿中司马，累迁奉车都尉。
现代文：大冢宰宇文护把他当亲信，继而授他殿中司马，累次升迁到奉车都尉。
English: He was treated as a close confidant by the grand eunuch, Umenosuke, who subsequently awarded him the title of middle steward, and was repeatedly promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the imperial carriage.

古文：护以彻谨厚有才具，甚礼之。
现代文：宇文护因李彻忠厚有才，很礼遇他。
English: Because of Li Che's loyalty and talent, Uwenroo treated him very politely.

古文：护子中山公训为蒲州刺史，护令彻以本官从焉。
现代文：宇文护的儿子中山公宇文训当蒲州刺史，宇文护令李彻以本官身份跟着他。
English: Uwenshu's son, Nakayamakong Uwenshu, became the governor of Puzhou, and Uwenshu ordered Li Che to follow him as his own official.

古文：未几，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：不久，李彻任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Soon after, Li Che was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial Troops.

古文：武帝时，从皇太子西征吐谷浑，以功赐爵同昌县男，邑三百户。
现代文：周武帝时，李彻随皇太子西征吐谷浑，因有军功，赐爵为同昌县男爵，食邑三百户。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, Li Che followed the crown prince Xi Zheng to Tuyugun. Because of his military service, he was awarded the title of Baron of Tongchang County, with 300 households.

古文：后从帝拔晋州。
现代文：后随周武帝攻占晋州。
English: Later, Emperor Zhou conquered Jinzhou.

古文：及帝班师，彻与齐王宪屯鸡栖原。
现代文：武帝班师后，李彻与齐王宇文宪驻兵于鸡栖原。
English: After the division of Emperor Wu, Li Che and Qi Wang Yuwen stationed in Jisuyuan.

古文：齐主高纬以大军至，宪引兵西上，以避其锋。
现代文：北齐国主高纬率大军到，宇文宪引兵西上，以躲避其锋锐。
English: The main high-latitude army of North Qi arrived, and the Uwen gendarme led the soldiers westward to avoid its sharp edge.

古文：纬遣其骁将贺兰豹子率劲骑蹑宪，战于晋州城北。
现代文：高纬派其骁将贺兰豹子率劲旅追击宇文宪，双方大战于晋州城北。
English: Gao Wei sent his son He Lan Leopard to lead a vigorous journey to pursue Uwen Xian, and the two sides fought in the north of Jinzhou City.

古文：宪师败，彻与杨素、宇文庆等力战，宪军赖以获全。
现代文：宇文宪战败，李彻和杨素、宇文庆等人力战，宇文宪的部队才得以保全。
English: Yu Wenxian was defeated, Li Che and Yang Su, Yu Wenqing and other manpower wars, and Yu Wenxian's troops were preserved.

古文：复从帝破齐师于汾北，乘胜下高壁，拔晋阳，擒高湝于冀州，俱有力焉。
现代文：李彻又随周武帝打败北齐军于汾水之北，乘胜攻占高壁，攻下晋阳，擒拿高谐于冀州，李彻都出了大力。
English: Li Che and Zhou Wudi defeated the Northern Qi Army in the north of Surabaya, took advantage of the victory to occupy Gaowan, captured Jinyang, and captured Gaohong in Jizhou. Li Che made great efforts.

古文：录前后功，加开府，别封蔡阳县公，邑千户。
现代文：连同李彻前后的功勋，朝廷加授他开府，又封他为蔡阳县公爵，食邑一千户。
English: Together with the merits of Li Che before and after, the imperial court awarded him the additional honor of opening the capital, and also made him the duke of Caiyang County, leading a thousand households.

古文：宣帝即位，从韦孝宽略定淮南，每为先锋。
现代文：周宣帝即位后，李彻随韦孝宽略定淮南，每次都当先锋。
English: After Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, Li Che followed Wei Xiaokuan to settle Huainan, and each time he was the pioneer.

古文：及淮南平，即授淮州刺史，安集初附，甚得其欢心。
现代文：淮南平定后，就授李彻为淮州刺史，安抚那些刚刚归顺的人，很得他们的欢心。
English: After Huainan was pacified, Li Che was awarded the title of "Huaizhou Historian" to appease those who had just surrendered, and he was very popular with them.

古文：高祖受禅，加上开府，转云州刺史。
现代文：隋高祖受北周禅让后，加授他上开府，转任他为云州刺史。
English: After Sui Gaozu was ceded by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu and transferred to the post of Yunnan Provincial Historian.

古文：岁馀，征为左武卫将军。
现代文：一年多后，调他当左武卫将军。
English: More than a year later, he was transferred to the post of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：及晋王广之镇并州也，朝廷妙选正人有文武才干者，为之僚佐。
现代文：晋王杨广镇守并州后，朝廷选拔正直而有文才武略者，当他的僚属辅佐。
English: After the annexation of Jin Wang Yang Guang Zhen to the state, the imperial court selected an honest and literate person to be his assistant.

古文：上以彻前代旧臣，数持军旅，诏彻总晋王府军事，进爵齐安郡公。
现代文：皇上因李彻是前代旧臣，多掌军旅，有诏让李彻总管晋王府的军事，并晋其爵为齐安郡公。
English: The emperor, because Li Che was a former minister and had been in charge of more than one military brigade, had Li Che appointed as the head of the military of the Jin royal court, and made him the lord of Qi'an County.

古文：时蜀王秀亦镇益州，上谓侍臣曰： 安得文同王子相，武如李广达者乎？ 
现代文：当时蜀王杨秀也镇守益州，皇上对侍臣们说： 怎能得到文如王子相、武如李广达那样的人呢？ 
English: At that time, Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, was also in charge of the defense of Yizhou. The emperor said to his courtiers: "How can you get a man like Wen, the prince's minister, and Wu, like Li Guangda?"

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他就是这样被看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：明年，突厥沙钵略可汗犯塞，上令卫王爽为元帅，率众击之，以彻为长史。
现代文：次年，突厥的沙钵略可汗进犯边塞，皇上命令卫王杨爽为元帅，率部打击敌人，以李彻为长史。
English: The following year, the Turkic Shah Salih Khan attacked the border fortress, and the emperor ordered Wei Wang Yang Shuang to be the marshal and lead the troops to attack the enemy, with Li Che as the long history.

古文：遇虏于白道，行军总管李充言于爽曰： 周、齐之世，有同战国，中夏力分，其来久矣。
现代文：官军在白道遇上敌军，行军总管李充对杨爽说： 北周、北齐那时，就像战国时代一样，中原都被武力瓜分了，由来已久啊。
English: When the government army encountered the enemy army in Baidoa, the general manager of the march, Li Chong, said to Yang Shuang: At that time, North Zhou and North Qi, just like the Warring States period, the Central Plains were divided by force. It has been a long time.

古文：突厥每侵边，诸将辄以全军为计，莫能死战。
现代文：突厥每次侵犯边塞，诸将就以保全部队为上计，所以没有能够死战的。
English: Each time the Turks invaded a border post, the generals made it their top priority to protect the entire army, so there was no way to fight to the death.

古文：由是突厥胜多败少，所以每轻中国之师。
现代文：因此突厥胜多败少，所以每每轻视中原的军队。
English: As a result, the Turks had more victories than defeats, so they despised the armies of the Central Plains.

古文：今者沙钵略悉国内之众，屯据要险，必轻我而无备，精兵袭之，可破也。 
现代文：现在，沙钵略全部带来了国内的军队，占据险要之地，必然轻视我军而无防备。用精兵袭击他，可以破敌。 
English: Now that Shajiao has brought all the domestic troops to occupy the critical position, he will inevitably despise our army and be defenseless. If you attack him with elite soldiers, you can defeat the enemy.

古文：爽从之。
现代文：杨爽听了他的话。
English: Yang Shuang listened to his words.

古文：诸将多以为疑，唯彻奖成其计，请与同行。
现代文：诸将大多怀疑，只有李彻赞成这一计谋，请求与军同行。
English: Most generals were suspicious, but only Li Che agreed to this plan and asked to accompany the army.

古文：遂与充率精骑五千，出其不意，掩击大破之。
现代文：李彻于是与李充率精锐的骑兵五千，出其不意，袭击敌军，大破突厥。
English: Li Che and Li Chong then led an elite cavalry force of five thousand and, out of the blue, attacked the enemy army, defeating the Turks.

古文：沙钵略弃所服金甲，潜草中而遁。
现代文：沙钵略丢下所穿的金甲，从草中潜逃了。
English: The sandpiper dropped the golden armor he was wearing and fled through the grass.

古文：以功加上大将军。
现代文：李彻因战功加升为上大将军。
English: For his war service, Li Che was promoted to the rank of senior general.

古文：沙钵略因此屈膝称籓。
现代文：沙钵略因此屈膝称臣。
English: As a result, Satoyama bowed his knee and became a courtier.

古文：未几，沙钵略为阿拔所侵，上疏请援。
现代文：不久，沙钵略被阿拔侵犯，上书朝廷，请求增援。
English: Soon after, Saba was invaded by Aba and sent a letter to the imperial court, requesting reinforcements.

古文：以彻为行军总管，率精骑一万赴之。
现代文：朝廷以李彻为行军总管，率精骑一万赴敌。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Che as the general manager of the march, and he led ten thousand horsemen to the enemy.

古文：阿拔闻而遁去。
现代文：阿拔闻讯逃走。
English: Upon hearing the news, Aba fled.

古文：及军还，复领行军总管，屯平凉以备胡寇，封安道郡公。
现代文：部队回来后，又让李彻兼任行军总管，驻扎在平凉，以防备胡人。封李彻为安道郡公爵。
English: After the troops returned, he also made Li Che the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, stationed in Pingliang to guard against the Hu people. Li Che was named the Duke of Ando County.

古文：开皇十年，进位柱国。
现代文：开皇十年，李彻升为柱国。
English: Ten years after the founding of the emperor, Li Che rose to the pillar country.

古文：及晋王广转牧淮海，以彻为扬州总管司马，改封德广郡公。寻徙封城阳郡公。
现代文：晋王杨广转而镇守淮海后，以李彻为扬州总管司马，改封为德广郡公爵，不久徙封城阳郡公爵。
English: After Yang Guang, the king of Jin, was transferred to the town of Huaihai, Li Che became the chief steward of Yangzhou, and was renamed the Duke of Deguang County. He was soon renamed the Duke of Chengyang County.

古文：其后突厥犯塞，彻复领行军总管击破之。
现代文：此后突厥人进犯边塞，李彻又兼任行军总管，打败了他们。
English: After that, the Turks attacked the border fortress, and Li Che, who also served as the commander-in-chief of the march, defeated them.

古文：左仆射高颎之得罪也，以彻素与颎相善，因被疏忌，不复任使。
现代文：左仆射高赹得罪被杀后，因李彻一向与高赹交好，因此被疏远猜忌，不再被重用。
English: After his left-hand man shot Gao Yao and was killed, because Li Che had always been friends with Gao Yao, he was estranged and suspicious, and was no longer reused.

古文：后出怨言，上闻而召之，入卧内赐宴，言及平生，因遇鸩而卒。
现代文：李彻后来口出怨言。
English: Li Che later complained.

古文：大业中，其妻宇文氏为孽子安远诬以咒诅，伏诛。
现代文：高祖知道了叫他去，在卧室内赐宴。酒席上谈到平生之事，李彻因此被下毒毒死。大业中，他的妻子宇文氏，因被逆子李安远诬告有咒诅之事，被杀。
English: Gaozu found out and called him to his bedchamber to give a banquet. At the banquet, they talked about the events of his life, and Li Che was poisoned to death. During the great undertaking, his wife, Wu Wen, was falsely accused of cursing by his traitorous son, Li Anyuan, and killed.

古文：○崔彭
现代文：○崔彭
English: ○Cui Peng

古文：崔彭，字子彭，博陵安平人也。
现代文：崔彭字子彭，博陵安平人。
English: Cui Peng, the son of Peng, was born in Boling Anping.

古文：祖楷，魏殷州刺史。
现代文：祖父崔楷，西魏殷州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Cui Kai, was a historian of Yinzhou in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父谦，周荆州总管。
现代文：父亲崔谦，北周荆州总管。
English: His father, Cui Qian, is the chief administrator of North Zhou Jingzhou.

古文：彭少孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：崔彭小时即成孤儿，侍奉母亲，以孝顺闻名。
English: Orphaned at an early age, Cui Peng served his mother and was known for his filial piety.

古文：性刚毅，有武略，工骑射。
现代文：他生性刚毅，有武略，工于骑马射箭。
English: He was naturally strong-willed, had military strategy, and excelled at horse riding and archery.

古文：善《周官》、《尚书》，略通大义。
现代文：爱读《周官》、《尚书》，略通大义。
English: He likes to read "Zhou Guan" and "Shang Shu" and has a good grasp of logic.

古文：周武帝时，为侍伯上士，累转门正上士。
现代文：北周武帝时，他任侍伯上士，累次升迁，到转任门正上士。
English: At the time of the Northern Zhou Emperor, he served as an attendant staff sergeant, was repeatedly promoted, and was transferred to the position of the gate chief staff sergeant.

古文：及高祖为丞相，周陈王纯镇齐州，高祖恐纯为变，遣彭以两骑征纯入朝。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相后，北周陈王宇文纯镇守齐州，高祖怕宇文纯有变，派崔彭带两个骑兵去，调宇文纯入朝。
English: After the Sui Emperor Gaozu became the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, the Northern Zhou Dynasty's Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong took over the defense of Qizhou. Gaozu was afraid that Yu Wenzhong would change, so he sent Cui Peng with two cavalrymen and transferred Yu Wenzhong to the imperial court.

古文：彭未至齐州三十里，因诈病，止传舍，遣人谓纯曰： 天子有诏书至王所，彭苦疾，不能强步，愿王降临之。 
现代文：崔彭到离齐州三十里时，诈称有病，住在驿站里，派人去对宇文纯说： 皇上有诏书到王爷这里来，但崔彭苦于生病，不能勉强走路，请王爷降临到那里去。 
English: When Cui Peng was thirty miles away from Qizhou, he falsely claimed to be ill and lived in a post station. He sent someone to say to Yu Wenzhong: The emperor has issued an edict to come to the prince, but Cui Peng is suffering from illness and can barely walk. Please have the prince come there.

古文：纯疑有变，多将从骑至彭所。
现代文：宇文纯怀疑有变故，因此多带骑兵到崔彭的住所。
English: Yu Wenzhong suspected that something had changed, so he brought more cavalry to Cui Peng's residence.

古文：彭出传舍迎之，察纯有疑色，恐不就征，因诈纯曰： 王可避人，将密有所道。 
现代文：崔彭出驿站迎接他，看宇文纯有怀疑之色，怕他不愿被调动，因此骗宇文纯说： 王爷可避开他人，我将秘密告诉你事情。 
English: Cui Peng came out of the station to meet him. He was suspicious of Yu Wenzhong, fearing that he did not want to be transferred. Therefore, he lied to Yu Wenzhong and said, "Your Majesty can avoid others. I will tell you things in secret."

古文：纯麾从骑，彭又曰： 将宣诏，王可下马。 
现代文：宇文纯挥开随从的骑兵。崔彭又说： 将要宣读诏书，王爷可以下马了。 
English: Uwenchun waved away the accompanying cavalry. Cui Peng also said: The imperial edict will be read out, and the prince can dismount.

古文：纯遽下，彭顾其骑士曰： 陈王不从诏征，可执也。 
现代文：宇文纯立即下马。崔彭对他的骑士说： 陈王不服从调动，可抓起来！ 
English: Yu Wenzhong immediately dismounted. Cui Peng said to his knight: Chen Wang disobeyed the transfer, you can arrest him!

古文：骑士因执而锁之。
现代文：骑士因此把陈王抓起来捆住。
English: As a result, the knight grabbed Chen Wang and tied him up.

古文：彭乃大言曰： 陈王有罪，诏征入朝，左右不得辄动。 
现代文：崔彭于是大声说： 陈王有罪，有诏书调他入朝，左右不得乱动！ 
English: Cui Peng then said in a loud voice: Chen Wang is guilty, there is an edict to transfer him to the imperial court, he must not move around!

古文：其从者愕然而去。
现代文：陈王的随从惊愕离去。
English: After listening to this, the people around Yu Wenzhong were stunned and dispersed.

古文：高祖见而大悦，拜上仪同。
现代文：高祖见了很高兴，授崔彭为上仪同。
English: Gao Zu was very happy to see him, and gave Cui Peng the same honor.

古文：及践阼，迁监门郎将，兼领右卫长史，赐爵安阳县男。
现代文：隋高祖即位后，崔彭升任监门郎将，兼任右卫长史，赐爵安阳县男。
English: After Sui Gaozu ascended to the throne, Cui Peng was promoted to the position of gatekeeper, concurrently serving as the chief of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and was given a peerage as the man of Anyang County.

古文：数岁，转车骑将军，俄转骠骑，恆典宿卫。
现代文：几年后，转任车骑将军，继而转任骠骑将军，总是负责守卫皇宫。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the General of Chariots and Cavalry, and then to the General of Cavalry, always in charge of guarding the palace.

古文：性谨密，在省闼二十馀年，每当上在仗，危坐终日，未尝有怠惰之容，上甚嘉之。
现代文：他生性严谨细密，在任二十多年，凡是给皇上执仗时，总是整天端端正正地坐着，从未有疲倦松懈的样子，皇上很赞赏他。
English: He was by nature strict and meticulous. During his more than twenty years in office, whenever he was at war for the Emperor, he always sat upright all day long, never looking tired or sluggish. The Emperor appreciated him very much.

古文：上每谓彭曰： 卿当上日，我寝处自安。 
现代文：皇上常对崔彭说： 你给我值班执仗的时候，我就连睡觉都放心了。 
English: The emperor often said to Cui Penghu: When you give me a duty to wage war, I am relieved even to sleep.

古文：又尝曰： 卿弓马固以绝人，颇知学不？ 
现代文：又曾对他说： 你的弓马武艺，超过常人，但你读过书没有？ 
English: He also said to him, "Your skills in archery, horsemanship, and martial arts surpass those of ordinary people, but have you ever read a book?

古文：彭曰： 臣少爱《周礼》、《尚书》，每于休沐之暇，不敢废也。 
现代文：崔彭说： 我小时爱读《周礼》、《尚书》，每当有空，不敢荒废。 
English: Cui Peng said: When I was a child, I loved to read "Weekly Rituals" and "Shang Shu." Whenever I had free time, I didn't dare to waste it.

古文：上曰： 试为我言之。 
现代文：皇上说： 试着给我说说看。 
English: The emperor said, "Try to explain it to me."

古文：彭因说君臣戒慎之义，上称善。
现代文：崔彭因此说君臣要注意的一些事，皇上称赞说很好。
English: Therefore, Cui Peng said that there are some things that should be paid attention to by princes and ministers, and the emperor praised it as very good.

古文：观者以为知言。
现代文：旁观者认为他讲得很对。
English: Onlookers thought he was quite right.

古文：后加上开府，迁备身将军。
现代文：后来加授他为上开府，升任备身将军。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu and promoted to General of the Bodyguard.

古文：上尝宴达头可汗使者于武德殿，有鸽鸣于梁上。
现代文：皇上曾在武德殿宴请达头可汗的使者，有个鸽子在屋梁上鸣叫。
English: The emperor once invited the emissary of the Great Khan to a banquet in the Wude Hall, and a pigeon chirped on the roof beam.

古文：上命彭射之，既发而中。
现代文：皇上让崔彭射下它，他一发即中。
English: The emperor told Cui Peng to shoot it down, and he hit the bull's-eye.

古文：上大悦，赐钱一万。
现代文：皇上很高兴，赐他一万钱。
English: The emperor was delighted and gave him ten thousand rupees.

古文：及使者反，可汗复遣使于上曰： 请得崔将军一与相见。 
现代文：使者返回突厥，达头可汗又派使者来，对皇上说： 请求与崔将军一见。 
English: The envoy returned to the Turks, and the Dato' Khan sent another envoy, saying to the emperor: "Request a meeting with General Cui."

古文：上曰： 此必善射闻于虏庭，所以来请耳。 
现代文：皇上说： 这肯定是善射的大名传到突厥，所以来请相见。 
English: The emperor said, "This must be the daimyo who is good at shooting, and his fame has spread to Turkey, so come and meet him."

古文：遂遣之。
现代文：于是派崔彭去。
English: So he repatriated his captives.

古文：及至匈奴中，可汗召善射者数十人，因掷肉于野，以集飞鸢，遣其善射者射之，多不中。
现代文：到了匈奴，达头可汗召集几十个善射的，把肉掷到原野上，以引来飞鸢，让善射者射之，多未射中。
English: When they reached the Xiongnu, Dato' Khan gathered dozens of skilled marksmen and threw the meat onto the plain to attract flies. The skilled marksmen shot at the meat, but most of it missed.

古文：复请彭射之，彭连发数矢，皆应弦而落，突厥相顾，莫不叹服。
现代文：又请崔彭射之，崔彭连发几箭，飞鸢都应声而落地。突厥人面面相觑，没有不叹服的。
English: He also asked Cui Peng to shoot him. Cui Peng shot several arrows in quick succession, and all of them fell to the ground. The Turks looked at each other, none of them unconvinced.

古文：可汗留彭不遣百馀日，上赂以缯彩，然后得归。
现代文：可汗把崔彭留在那里一百多天，仍不放他回来。皇上送可汗缯采，他才得以回朝。
English: The khan kept Cui Peng there for more than a hundred days, and still would not let him return. The emperor sent the khan to the mines, and only then was he able to return to the empire.

古文：仁寿末，进爵安阳县公，邑二千户。
现代文：仁寿末年，崔彭晋爵为安阳县公，食邑二千户。
English: In the last years of his life, Cui Peng Jinjie was the governor of Anyang County, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：炀帝即位，迁左领军大将军。
现代文：炀帝即位后，崔彭任左领军大将军。
English: After Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, Cui Peng was appointed as the left leading general.

古文：从幸洛阳，彭督后军。
现代文：隋炀帝到洛阳，崔彭督管后军。
English: Emperor Sui and Qian went to Luoyang, and Cui Peng took charge of the rearguard.

古文：时汉王谅初平，馀党往往屯聚，令彭率众数万镇遏山东，复领慈州事。
现代文：当时刚刚平定汉王杨谅，其余党往往相聚。炀帝令崔彭率部几万镇守华山以东，又兼管慈州之事。
English: At that time, the Han King Yang Peng had just been subdued, and the rest of the party often gathered together. Emperor Qian ordered Cui Peng to lead tens of thousands of towns to guard the east of Huashan, and also take charge of Cizhou.

古文：帝以其清，赐绢五百匹。
现代文：炀帝因他清廉，赐他绢帛五百匹。
English: Emperor Yao, because of his chastity, gave him 500 horses.

古文：未几而卒，时年六十三。
现代文：崔彭不久去世，时年六十三岁。
English: Cui Peng died soon after, at the age of 63.

古文：帝遣使吊祭，赠大将军，谥曰肃。
现代文：炀帝派使者去吊祭，追赠他为大将军。谥号叫 肃 。
English: Emperor Qian sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony and posthumously made him a great general. His posthumous name was Su.

古文：子宝德嗣。
现代文：他儿子崔宝德继承爵禄。
English: His son, Cui Baode, will inherit his peerage.

