古文：皮寒热者，不可附席，毛发焦，鼻槁腊，不得汗，取三阳之络，以补手太阴。
现代文：皮寒热病的表现为，皮肤疼痛甚至不能接近席子，肺主皮毛，开窍于鼻。肺病寒热，故津液无以输布，而毛发焦黄，鼻中干燥，汗出不来。治疗时应泻足太阳膀胱经的络脉以去表热，兼补手太阴肺经的经穴。
English: The manifestation of chilblain fever is that the skin pain can not even approach the mat, the lung main fur, and the opening is in the nose. The lung disease is cold and hot, so the solution can not be transported, and the hair is scorched yellow, the nose is dry, and sweat can not come out. During treatment, it is necessary to relax the vas deferens of the solar urinary bladder to remove the superficial heat, and also to repair the too-shallow pulmonary meridian.

古文：肌寒热者，肌痛，毛发焦而唇槁腊，不得汗，取三阳于下，以去其血者，补足太阴，以出其汗。
现代文：肌寒热病，表现为肌肉痛，毛发焦且口唇干裂，无汗。治疗时取足太阳膀胱经在下肢有瘀血的络脉除其瘀血，再补足太阴脾经，以达到出汗而愈的效果。
English: Chikungunya fever, manifested as muscle pain, scorched hair and chapped lips, no sweat. During treatment, the sun bladder is taken through the vein of the lower limb with blood stains to remove the blood stains, and then the yin and yang spleen is supplemented to achieve the effect of sweating and healing.

古文：骨寒热者，病无所安，汗注不休，齿未槁，取其少阴于阴股之络；齿已槁，死不治。
现代文：骨寒热病表现为病人焦虑不安，汗大出不止。如果牙齿尚未枯槁，说明阴气尚存，治疗可取足少阴肾经在大腿内侧的络脉；若是牙齿已经枯槁了，就是死证，无法救治了。
English: Bone chilling fever manifests itself as the patient's anxiety and anxiety, sweating profusely. If the teeth are not yet withered, it means that the yin qi is still present, and the treatment can be taken by the foot less yin kidney through the vein on the inner thigh; if the teeth are already withered, it is a death certificate and cannot be cured.

古文：骨厥亦然。
现代文：骨厥病也是这样来判断的。
English: Osteoporosis is also judged in this way.

古文：骨痹，举节不用而痛，汗注、烦心，取三阴之经补之。
现代文：骨痹病，全身关节活动不自如，而且关节疼痛，汗出如注，心烦意乱，治疗应补三阴经。
English: Osteoporosis, the whole body joint movement is not comfortable, and the joints are painful, sweating profusely, distraught, the treatment should supplement the three yin.

古文：身有所伤，血出多，及中风寒，若有所堕坠，四肢懈惰不收，名曰体惰，取其小腹脐下三结交。
现代文：身体受外伤且出血很多，又受了风寒，或是从高处坠落受伤，以致四肢肌肉萎缩无力，懒得活动，这种病名为体惰。治疗应取病人小腹之下的结交处。
English: The body is traumatized and bleeds a lot, and suffers from wind and cold, or is injured by falling from a height, so that the muscles of the limbs are atrophied and weak, and they are too lazy to move. This disease is called laziness. The treatment should be taken from the patient's lower abdomen.

古文：三结交者，阳明、太阴也，脐下三寸关元也。
现代文：三结交就是足阳明胃经、足太阴脾经在脐下三寸处相交的关元穴。
English: The third junction is the junction where the foot yang stomach meridian and foot yin spleen meridian intersect three inches below the armpit.

古文：厥痹者，厥气上及腹，取阴阳之络，视主病也，泻阳补阴经也。
现代文：厥痹，是厥逆之气由下上行至腹部，治疗应该取阴经或阳经的络脉，但要察明主要病症在何经，若在阳经则用泻法，在阴经用补法。
English: Convulsions are the result of retrograde qi traveling from the bottom up to the abdomen. The treatment should be to take the vein of the yin or yang meridian, but it should be clear which meridian is the main disease. If it is the yang meridian, then the method of laxation should be used, and the method of supplementation should be used for the yang meridian.

古文：颈侧之动脉人迎。
现代文：颈部两侧的动脉是人迎脉。
English: The arteries on either side of the neck are the carotid arteries.

古文：人迎，足阳明也，在婴筋之前。
现代文：人迎脉上的穴位名为人迎穴，属于足阳明胃经，位置在两侧的颈筋之前。
English: The location of the acupoints on the anterior carotid artery is called the anterior carotid artery, which belongs to the anterior gastric meridian, and is located in front of the neck muscles on both sides.

古文：婴筋之后，手阳明也，名曰扶突。
现代文：颈筋之后的是手阳明大肠经的穴位，名为扶突穴。
English: Behind the cervical muscle is the anus of the large intestine, called the buttock.

古文：次脉，足少阳脉也，名曰天牖。
现代文：手阳明经之后是手少阳三焦经的穴位，名为天牖穴。
English: After the Hand Yang Ming Jing, there is a point of the Hand Shao Yang Three-Focus Jing, called the Heavenly Anvil Point.

古文：次脉，足太阳也，名曰天柱。
现代文：再后面是足太阳膀胱经的穴位，名为天柱穴。
English: Further back is the site of the foot-sun-bladder meridian, called the tarsus.

古文：腋下动脉，臂太阴也，名曰天府。
现代文：腋下的动脉是手太阴肺经的腧穴，名为天府穴。
English: The artery under the armpit is the anus of the palmar-pancreatic duct, called the Tianfu anus.

古文：阳迎头痛，胸满不得息，取之人迎。
现代文：阳热邪气上逆于阳经，会出现头痛，胸中满闷、呼吸不利的症状，治疗应取人迎穴。
English: Yang fever is contrary to yang qing, and will cause headache, chest tightness, and bad breathing. The treatment should be individualized.

古文：暴瘖气鞕，取扶突与舌本出血。
现代文：突然失音，气梗塞，应针刺扶突穴并点刺舌根出血。
English: Sudden loss of voice, gas infarction, needlestick puncture and bleeding at the base of the tongue.

古文：暴袭气蒙，耳目不明，取天牖。
现代文：突然耳聋，经气蒙蔽不通，耳失聪、目不明，治疗取天牖穴。
English: Sudden deafness, not being able to see through the qi, deafness, blurred vision, treatment is to remove the acupoints.

古文：暴挛痫眩，足不任身，取天柱。
现代文：突然发生筋脉拘挛、癫痫、眩晕，两足软弱不能站立的，取天柱穴。
English: Sudden occurrence of myocardial infarction, epilepsy, vertigo, weakness in both legs, unable to stand, take the Tianzhu hole.

古文：暴瘅内逆，肝肺相搏，血溢鼻口，取天府。
现代文：突然口渴，内脏气逆，肝肺两经脉邪火相搏，导致血上溢，口鼻出血，取天府穴。
English: Sudden thirst, visceral qi inversion, liver and lung meridians fight with each other, resulting in blood overflow, nose and mouth bleeding, taking Tianfu anus.

古文：此为天牖五部。臂阳明，有入頄遍齿者，名曰大迎。
现代文：以上所取的五穴，天牖穴居中，其他四穴聚拢在其四周，因此称为天牖五部。手阳明大肠经进入颧部而遍络齿龈的一支，穴名叫大迎穴，所以治疗下龋齿应取大迎穴。
English: The five holes taken above, the mandibular hole is in the middle, and the other four holes are gathered around it, so it is called the mandibular five parts. The large intestine enters the jaw and pervades one of the gums. The hole is called the large hole, so the large hole should be taken under the treatment of dental caries.

古文：下齿龋，取之臂,恶寒补之，不恶寒泻之。
现代文：恶寒的当用补法，不恶寒的用泻法。
English: If you have a bad cold, you should use the tonic method. If you do not have a bad cold, you should use the purgative method.

古文：足太阳有入頄遍齿者，名曰角孙。上齿龋，取之在鼻与頄前。方病之时，其脉盛，盛则泻之，虚则补之。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经入于颧部而遍络齿龈的一支，穴名为角孙穴，治疗上龋齿应取角孙穴，也可取鼻与颧之前的穴位治疗，刚得病的时候脉象充盈，应当用泻法，脉象虚弱就用补法。
English: The solar plexus of the foot passes into the hip and pervades one of the molars. The hole is called the great-grandson hole. For the treatment of the upper molars, the great-grandson hole should be taken. It can also be treated by taking the hole before the nose and palate. When the pulse is full, it should be laxed. If the pulse is weak, it should be supplemented.

古文：一曰取之出鼻外。足阳明有挟鼻入于面者，名曰悬颅，属口，对入系目本，视有过者取之。
现代文：另一种说法，也可以取鼻外侧的穴位治疗，在患病初期的时候，要遵循邪盛则泻，气虚则补的原则。足阳明胃经循鼻的两侧行于面部，其穴名为悬颅穴，经脉下行联属于口，上行的部分进入对侧的目本之中，因此头痛引动腮部疼痛的，治疗时可以根据情况取悬颅穴，应实则泻之，虚则补之，否则便会加重病情。
English: Another way of saying it is that you can also take the acupoints on the outside of the nose for treatment. In the early stages of the disease, you should follow the principle of evil is good, and qi deficiency is compensated. The foot and bright stomach pass through the nose on both sides of the face, and the hole is called the cranial cavity. The meridian descending line belongs to the mouth, and the ascending part enters the opposite eye socket. Therefore, if the headache causes pain in the neck, you can take the cranial cavity according to the situation during treatment. It should be true that it is lax, and false that it is compensated, otherwise it will

古文：损有余，益不足，反者益其。足太阳有通项入于脑者，正属目本，名曰眼系。头目苦痛，取之在项中两筋间。入脑乃别阴蹻、阳蹻，阴阳相交，阳入阴，阴出阳，交于目锐眦，阳气盛则瞋目，阴气盛则瞑目。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经通过项部的玉枕穴进入脑室，直接连属于目本，名为眼系，头目疼痛的应在项中两条筋之间取玉枕穴进行治疗，这条经脉由项进入脑，分别连属于阴跷、阳跷二脉，这两条脉阴阳相交，阳入于阴，阴出于阳，阴阳气交于眼内角的睛明穴，阳气过盛时则两目张而不合，阴气盛时则两目合而不张。
English: The solar plexus of the foot enters the ventricle through the jade pillow hole of the clavicle, and is directly connected to the eyes, called the ophthalmic system. If the head is painful, the jade pillow hole should be taken between the two muscles in the clavicle for treatment. This meridian enters the brain from the clavicle, and is connected to the two veins of yin and yang, respectively. These two veins intersect yin and yang, yang enters yin, yin enters yang, yin enters yang, yin and yang intersect the eye socket in the inner corner of the eye, when yang is too strong, the two

古文：热厥取足太阴、少阳，皆留之；寒厥取足阳明、少阴于足，皆留之。
现代文：治疗热厥病应取足太阴脾经和足少阴肾经，针刺时应留针一段时间；治疗寒厥病应取足阳明胃经和足少阳胆经，也应该留针较长时间。
English: For the treatment of febrile convulsions, you should take the foot-too-yin spleen meridian and the foot-less-yin kidney meridian, and you should keep the needle for a period of time when needling; for the treatment of cold convulsions, you should take the foot-yang bright stomach meridian and the foot-less-yang gall meridian, and you should also keep the needle for a long time.

古文：舌纵涎下，烦悗，取足少阴。
现代文：舌纵缓不收，口角流涎，胸脘烦闷的，是肾阴不足的表现，应针刺足少阴肾经。
English: If the tongue does not retract slowly, the corners of the mouth are runny, and the sternum is dull, it is a sign of insufficient kidney yin. It is necessary to prick the feet with a needle to reduce the kidney yin.

古文：振寒洒洒，鼓颔，不得汗出，腹胀烦悗，取手太阴，刺虚者，刺其去也；刺实者，刺其来也。
现代文：畏寒战栗，两颌鼓动，汗不得出，腹部胀满，胸脘烦闷，是肺气不足之证，治疗应取手太阴肺经。在进行针刺治疗时，属于虚证的，应该补养其正气；属于实证的，应该祛除其邪气。
English: Shivering, palpitations, sweating, bloated abdomen, chest tightness, is a sign of insufficient lung gas, the treatment should be taken by the yin and yang pulmonary meridian. In acupuncture treatment, if it is a false sign, it should replenish its positive energy; if it is a positive sign, it should eliminate its evil energy.

古文：春取络脉，夏取分腠，秋取气口，冬取经输。
现代文：四季针刺的规律是，春季刺络脉间的穴位，夏季刺肌肉与皮肤之间的穴位，秋季刺气口，冬季刺五输穴的经穴。
English: The regularity of acupuncture in the four seasons is that the acupoints between the acupoints in the spring, the acupoints between the muscles and the skin in the summer, the air outlets in the fall, and the five meridians in the winter.

古文：凡此四时，各以时为齐。
现代文：一年四季的针刺治疗，各自以季节、时令为取穴的标准，不能混淆。
English: Acupuncture treatment throughout the year, each with the season, the season as the standard of puncture, can not be confused.

古文：络脉治皮肤，分腠治肌肉，气口治筋脉，经输治骨髓、五脏。
现代文：刺络脉间的穴位可以治皮肤病，刺肌肉与皮肤之间的穴位可以治肌肉的病，刺手太阴肺经的穴位可治筋脉的病，刺五输穴的经穴可以治骨髓、五脏的病。
English: The acupoints between the carotid arteries can cure skin diseases, the acupoints between the carotid muscles and the skin can cure muscle diseases, the acupoints between the carotid arteries and the lungs can cure myocardial diseases, and the five carotid arteries can cure diseases of the bone marrow and the five internal organs.

古文：身有五部：伏兔一。腓二，腓者腨也。背三。五脏之输四。项五。
现代文：人身有五处重要的部位：一是伏兔；二是小腿外侧；三是背部；四是五脏的背俞穴；五是项部。
English: There are five important parts of the human body: one is the armpit; the second is the outside of the calf; the third is the back; the fourth is the dorsal fossa of the five viscera; and the fifth is the neck.

古文：此五部有痈疽者死。
现代文：这五个部位如果发生痈疽，都可能致死。
English: If gangrene occurs in these five areas, it can be fatal.

古文：病始手臂者，先取手阳明、太阴而汗出；病始头首者，先取项太阳而汗出；病始足胫者，先取足阳明而汗出。
现代文：痈疽之类的病如果是从手臂发生的，就先取手阳明大肠经、手太阴肺经的穴位治疗，汗出而热散，病可得解；病从头面发生的，可以先取颈项部的足太阳膀胱经的穴位针刺治疗，汗出而愈；如果是从足胫部发生的，就先取足阳明胃经的输穴，汗出而愈。
English: If a disease such as gangrene occurs in the arm, it can be treated at the point of the hand-yang-ming large intestine meridian and the hand-tai-yin-lung meridian. Sweating will dissipate the heat, and the disease can be solved. If the disease occurs in the head, it can be treated at the point of the foot-sun-bladder meridian in the neck and neck, and it will disappear with sweating. If it occurs in the foot and ankle, it can be treated at the point of the foot-yang-ming gastric meridian, and it will disappear with sweating.

古文：臂太阴可汗出，足阳明可汗出，故取阴而汗出甚者，止之于阳，取阳而汗出甚者，止之于阴。
现代文：手太阴肺经的穴位可以发汗，足阳明胃经的穴位也能发汗。由于阴阳二气的相互制约，因此，若是取阴经发汗而又出汗过多的，可以取阳经穴位来止汗；若是取阳经穴位发汗而汗出过多的，可以取阴经的穴位来止汗。
English: The hand is too yin and the lung meridian can sweat, and the foot is too yang and the stomach meridian can also sweat. Due to the mutual control of yin and yang, if you sweat too much when you take the yin meridian, you can take the yang meridian to stop sweating; if you sweat too much when you take the yang meridian, you can take the yin meridian to stop sweating.

古文：凡刺之害，中而不去则精泄；不中而去则致气。
现代文：针刺不当其危害在于,已经达到了针刺治疗的效果而仍留针不去的，就会导致人身精气的耗损；针刺时还没有刺中疾病就立即出针的，会使邪气聚而不散。
English: The harm of improper acupuncture lies in the fact that if the effect of acupuncture treatment has been achieved and the needle is still not removed, it will lead to the depletion of the human essence; if the needle is immediately released when the disease has not been punctured, it will cause the evil spirit to gather and not disperse.

古文：精泄则病甚而恇，致气则生为痈疽也。
现代文：精气耗散过多会使病情加重，形体赢瘦；邪气聚而不散则易引起痈疡。
English: Excessive dissipation of qi will aggravate the disease, and the body will become thin; if the evil qi is concentrated and not dispersed, it is easy to cause sores.

