古文：柳毅
现代文：柳毅
English: Liu Yi

古文：唐仪凤中，有儒生柳毅者应举下第，将还湘滨。念乡人有客于泾阳者，遂往告别。
现代文：唐朝仪凤年间，有一个叫柳毅的书生赴京赶考落第，要回湘滨，想到泾阳还住着自己的同乡，就前去告别。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar named Liu Yi who went to Beijing to pass the exam and wanted to go back to Xiangbin. Thinking that his fellow townsmen still lived in Fenyang, he went to say goodbye.

古文：至六七里，鸟起马惊，疾逸道左。
现代文：走了六七里路程，突然间鸟起马惊，马就飞快地跑到旁边的岔道上去了。
English: After walking for six or seven miles, suddenly the bird startled the horse, and the horse quickly ran to the next fork in the road.

古文：又六七里，乃止。
现代文：又跑出六七里才停下。
English: He ran another six or seven miles before stopping.

古文：见有妇人，牧羊于道畔。毅怪视之，乃殊色也。
现代文：这时他看到一个女人正在道旁牧羊。柳毅感到奇怪，仔细一看，那女子竟是殊绝之色。
English: At this time, he saw a woman shepherding sheep on the side of the road. Liu Yi felt strange, and when he took a closer look, the woman turned out to be exceptionally beautiful.

古文：然而蛾脸不舒，中袖无光。
现代文：但是她的俏脸愁苦不舒，她的巾袖污秽无光。
English: But her pretty face is sad, and her dress is filthy.

古文：凝听翔立，若有所伺。
现代文：她凝神而立，好像在等盼什么。
English: She stood transfixed, as if waiting for something.

古文：毅诘之曰： 子何苦而自辱如是？ 
现代文：柳毅问她道： 你为什么如此忧伤呢？ 
English: Liu Yi asked her, "Why are you so sad?"

古文：妇始楚而谢，终泣而对曰： 贱妾不幸，今日见辱于长者。然而恨贯肌骨，亦何能愧避？
现代文：女子这才痛苦地致谢，哭泣着回答说： 我很不幸，今蒙垂问，使你受辱，但是怨恨至极，也就不能羞愧退避了，请听听我的不幸遭遇吧。
English: The woman then thanked him bitterly, and answered, weeping: "I am very unhappy, and now I am being questioned, which is humiliating for you, but my hatred is so great that I cannot turn away in shame. Please listen to my misfortune."

古文：幸一闻焉：妾洞庭龙君小女也，父母配嫁泾川次子。
现代文：我是洞庭龙君的小女儿，由父母作主嫁给泾川龙王的儿子。
English: I am the youngest daughter of Dongting Longjun, who was married by my parents to the son of Xuchuan Longwang.

古文：而夫婿乐逸，为婢仆所惑，日以厌薄。既而将诉于舅姑。
现代文：但是我的丈夫玩乐无度，被婢女奴仆迷惑，对我一天比一天差，我就把这事告诉了公公婆婆。
English: But I told my parents-in-law about my husband's excessive partying, his infatuation with the maidservant, and the fact that I felt worse and worse every day.

古文：舅姑爱其子，不能御。
现代文：公公婆婆溺爱他们的儿子，不能把他管住。
English: Grandparents doted on their son, unable to control him.

古文：迨诉频切，又得罪舅姑。
现代文：等到我说的次数多了，要求更迫切的时候，这又得罪了公公婆婆。
English: When I spoke more often and demanded more urgently, this offended my parents-in-law.

古文：舅姑毁黜以至此。 
现代文：公公婆婆就把我赶到这里来了。 
English: My grandparents drove me here.

古文：言讫，歔欷流涕，悲不自胜。又曰： 洞庭于兹，相远不知其几多也。
现代文：说完，她抽抽搭搭地哭泣，不胜悲切。又说： 洞庭到这，也不知隔了多远。
English: When she had finished, she sobbed uncontrollably, overcome with grief, and added: "I don't know how far it is from the cave garden to here.

古文：长天茫茫，信耗莫通，心目断尽，无所知哀。
现代文：长天茫茫，连封书信都不能通。心里头孤独绝望，也不知有多么悲哀。
English: For a long time, I couldn't even write a letter. I was lonely and desperate, and I didn't know how sad I was.

古文：闻君将还吴，密通洞庭，或以尺书寄托侍者，未卜将以为可乎？ 
现代文：听说你要回到吴地去，如果能秘密地去通知洞庭，或者把一尺家书交付给侍者，说不定我还真就有救了呢！ 
English: I've heard that you want to go back to Wudi. If I can secretly inform Dongting, or hand over the one-meter family letter to the waiter, maybe I'll really be saved!

古文：毅曰： 吾义夫也。闻子之说，气血俱动，恨无毛羽，不能奋飞，是何可否之谓乎？
现代文：柳毅说： 我是个讲义气的人，听你如此一说，血往上撞，恨自己没有翼翅，不能振飞，这还说什么可不可以呢！
English: Liu Yi said, "I am a person with a sense of righteousness. Hearing you say this, my blood boils, and I hate myself for not having wings and not being able to fly. What else can I say?

古文：然而洞庭深水也，吾行尘间，宁可致意耶？
现代文：但是洞庭湖是深水，我行于尘埃之间，难道可以前去致意吗？
English: But Dongting Lake is deep water, I walk among the dust, can I really go to pay my respects?

古文：唯恐道途显晦，不相通达，致负诚托，又乖恳愿。
现代文：只怕路途一显一晦不相通达，辜负了你的委托，又违背了你的诚心。
English: I am afraid that the path may not be clear at all, and I may fail your commission and violate your sincerity.

古文：子有何术，可导我邪？ 
现代文：你有什么法术，可以教给我。 
English: What spells do you have that you can teach me?

古文：女悲泣且谢曰： 负载珍重，不复言矣。
现代文：女子哭着表示感谢，说： 此事的重要不再说了。
English: The woman wept and thanked him, saying: "I won't say any more about this important matter.

古文：脱获回耗，虽死必谢。
现代文：如果能得到我家的一点回音，我就是死了也要感谢你。
English: If I can get a little feedback from my family, I'll thank you even if I'm dead.

古文：君不许，何敢言？
现代文：可你现在还没有答应，我怎么敢说？
English: But you haven't said yes yet. How dare I say that?

古文：既许而问，则洞庭之与京邑，不足为异也。 
现代文：如果你是已经同意了才问的，那么我告诉你，洞庭和京城，没什么两样。 
English: If you have already agreed before asking, then I will tell you that Dongting and Beijing are no different.

古文：毅请闻之。
现代文：柳毅让她说清楚些。
English: Liu Yi asked her to speak more clearly.

古文：女曰： 洞庭之阴，有大橘树焉，乡人谓之社橘。
现代文：她说： 洞庭的南边，有一棵大桔树，乡里人叫它社桔。
English: She said: On the south side of Dongting, there is a large orange tree. The villagers call it the social orange.

古文：君当解去兹带，束以他物，然后叩树三发，当有应者。
现代文：你应当解去此带，用它捆扎别的东西，然后敲桔树三下。
English: You should untie this belt, use it to tie something else, and then knock three times on the orange tree.

古文：因而随之，无有碍矣。
现代文：当有人出来问你的时候，你就跟着往里走，那就什么障碍都没有了。
English: When someone comes out to ask you, you just follow them in, and then there are no obstacles.

古文：幸君子书叙之外，悉以心诚之话倚托，千万无渝。 
现代文：希望你除了传书捎信而外，我诚心诚意地全都讲出来，全指望你了，你可不能说话不算数啊！ 柳毅说： 你就放心好了！ 
English: I hope that in addition to sending a letter, you will sincerely tell me everything, I am counting on you, you can't talk without counting! Liu Yi said: You can rest assured!

古文：毅曰： 敬闻命矣。 女遂于襦间解书，再拜以进。
现代文：龙女于是就从衣襟里取出一封书信，拜了两拜把书信交给柳毅。
English: The dragon maiden then took out a letter from her lapel, bowed twice and handed the letter to Liu Yi.

古文：东望愁泣，若不自胜。
现代文：她望着东方愁泣，泣不成声的样子。
English: She looked to the east, weeping inconsolably.

古文：毅深为之戚，乃置书囊中。
现代文：柳毅见了，心中也好不悲切。
English: When Liu Yi saw it, his heart was not sad.

古文：因复问曰： 吾不知子之牧羊，何所用哉？神祗岂宰杀乎？ 
现代文：他把书信揣起来，就又问道： 我不知道你放羊有什么用，难道神祗也宰杀生灵吗？ 
English: He tucked the letter away and asked again: I don't know what use you have for herding sheep. Do the gods also kill living beings?

古文：女曰： 非羊也，雨工也。 
现代文：龙女说： 这不是羊，是雨工。 
English: The dragon maiden said: This is not a sheep, it is a rainmaker.

古文： 何为雨工？ 
现代文： 什么是雨工？ 
English: What is a rainmaker?

古文：曰： 雷霆之类也。 
现代文：龙女说： 雨工就是雷霆之类的东西。 
English: Dragon Maiden said: Rainmakers are like thunder.

古文：数顾视之，则皆矫顾怒步，饮龁甚异，而大小毛角，则无别羊焉。毅又曰： 吾为使者，他日归洞庭，幸勿相避。 
现代文：柳毅仔细看那些羊，羊的行动与其它羊很不一样，但羊的大小以及羊角羊毛与别的羊完全一样。柳毅说： 我是送信人，日后你回到洞庭，可不要把我忘了，不见我呀。 
English: Liu Yi carefully looked at those sheep. The sheep's actions were very different from other sheep, but the size of the sheep and the horn wool were exactly the same as other sheep. Liu Yi said: I am the sender. When you return to the cave garden in the future, don't forget me, don't see me.

古文：女曰： 宁止不避，当如亲戚耳。 
现代文：龙女说： 怎么会呢，我们应该像亲戚那样，常来常往。 
English: The dragon maiden said, "How can this be? We should be like relatives and visit each other often."

古文：语竟，引别东去。
现代文：说完，柳毅作别东去。
English: Having said that, Liu Yi left for the east.

古文：不数十步，回望女与羊，俱亡所见矣。
现代文：走了不到几十步，回头望龙女和羊，全都不见了。
English: After walking less than a few dozen steps, I looked back at the dragon girl and the sheep, and they were all gone.

古文：其夕，至邑而别其友。月余到乡还家，乃访于洞庭。
现代文：那天晚上，来到城里告别了朋友，一个多月之后便回到家乡，就到洞庭察访问。
English: That evening, I came to the city to say goodbye to my friends, and after more than a month, I returned to my hometown to visit Dongting.

古文：洞庭之阴，果有橘社。
现代文：洞庭湖的南面，果然有一棵社桔树。
English: On the south side of Dongting Lake, there really is an orange tree.

古文：遂易带向树，三击而止。
现代文：于是他就改换了衣带，面对着桔树，拍打了三下。
English: So he changed his belt, faced the orange tree and slapped it three times.

古文：俄有武夫出于波间，再拜请曰： 贵客将自何所至也？ 
现代文：不大一会儿，水波间出现一个武夫，他拜问柳毅说： 贵客是从哪里来的？ 
English: Not long after, a warrior appeared in the waves. He asked Liu Yi: "Where did you come from?

古文：毅不告其实，曰： 走谒大王耳。 
现代文：柳毅不告诉他实话，说： 我是跑来拜访龙王的。 
English: Liu Yi did not tell him the truth and said: I came to visit the Dragon King.

古文：武夫揭水指路，引毅以进。
现代文：于是，那武夫在前边揭水指路，拉着柳毅往里走。
English: As a result, Nawufu led the way, leading Liu Yi into the water.

古文：谓毅曰： 当闭目，数息可达矣。 
现代文：他对柳毅说： 你应该闭上眼睛，一会就到了。 
English: He said to Liu Yi, "You should close your eyes, you'll be there soon."

古文：毅如其言，遂至其宫。
现代文：柳毅照他说的去做，果然不一会儿就来到龙宫。
English: Liu Yi did as he was told, and soon arrived at the Dragon Palace.

古文：始见台阁相向，门户千万，奇草珍木，无所不有。
现代文：睁眼一看，楼台殿阁，门户千万，奇花异草，无所不有。
English: If you open your eyes, you will see that there are tens of thousands of buildings, tens of thousands of portals, and strange flowers and plants everywhere.

古文：夫乃止毅停于大室之隅。
现代文：那武夫就让柳毅在一间大厅的一角停下，说： 你在这等着。 
English: The man told Liu Yi to stop in a corner of a hall and said: "Wait here."

古文：曰： 客当居此以伺焉。 
现代文：柳毅说： 这是什么地方？ 
English: Liu Yi said: What kind of place is this?

古文：毅曰： 此何所也？ 
现代文：武夫说： 这是灵虚殿。 
English: The warrior said, "This is the spirit realm.

古文：夫曰： 此灵虚殿也。 谛视之，则人间珍宝，毕尽于此。
现代文：柳毅仔细观瞧，则是人间的各种奇珍异宝，全都陈列在这里。
English: If you look closely at Liu Yi, you will find all kinds of human treasures, all of which are displayed here.

古文：柱以白璧，砌以青玉，床以珊瑚，帘以水精。雕琉璃于翠楣，饰琥珀于虹栋。
现代文：柱是用白璧雕成的；墙是用青玉砌起的；床是用珊瑚做成的；帘子是用水精做成的；在翠楣上雕饰着琉璃；在虹栋上装饰有琥珀。
English: The pillars are made of white marble; the walls are made of jade; the beds are made of coral; the curtains are made of hydrogels; the chandeliers are carved with glaze; and the rainbow is decorated with amber.

古文：奇秀深杳，不可殚言。
现代文：建筑之宏伟，雕饰之精巧，不可言喻。
English: The grandeur of the architecture and the delicacy of the carvings are beyond words.

古文：然而王久不至。毅谓夫曰： 洞庭君安在哉？ 
现代文：然而龙王久久不到，柳毅便对武夫说： 洞庭君在哪呢？ 
English: However, the Dragon King did not arrive for a long time, so Liu Yi said to Wufu: Where is Dongting?

古文：曰： 吾君方幸玄珠阁，与太阳道士讲大经。
现代文：对方说： 我们龙王正在玄珠阁，与太阳道士讲大经，不一会儿就能完。 
English: The other party said: We, the Dragon King, are at the Gems Pavilion, talking with the Sun Taoist about the Great Sutra, and will be finished in a moment.

古文：少选当毕。 
现代文：柳毅说： 什么是大经？ 
English: Liu Yi said: What is Da Jing?

古文：毅曰： 何谓大经？ 夫曰： 吾君龙也，龙以水为神，举一滴可包陵谷。道士乃人也，人以火为神圣，发一灯可燎阿房。
现代文：武夫说： 我们龙君是龙，龙以水为神，拿一滴水可以包容陵谷；道士是人，人以火为神圣，用一盏灯就可以烧掉阿房宫。
English: The warrior said, "We dragon lords are dragons, and dragons take water as their god. With a drop of water, we can contain the necropolis. Taoists are humans, and humans take fire as sacred. With a single lamp, we can burn down the Afang Palace."

古文：然而灵用不同，玄化各异，太阳道士精于人理，吾君邀以听。
现代文：但是灵用之道不同，玄化之理各异。太阳道士精通于人间道理，我们龙君邀他来讲听。 
English: However, the ways of spiritual use are different, and the principles of metaphysics are different. The Sun Taoist is well versed in human principles, and we, the Dragon Kings, invited him to speak.

古文：言语毕，而宫门辟，景从云合，而见一人披紫衣，执青玉。
现代文：刚讲完，宫门打开，只见一人身披紫衣，手执青玉出现在那里。
English: Just after he finished speaking, the palace gate opened, only to see a person wearing a purple robe and holding a blue bead appear there.

古文：夫跃曰： 此吾君也。 
现代文：武夫跳起来说： 这就是我们龙王。 
English: The warrior jumped up and said, "This is our Dragon King.

古文：乃至前以告之。
现代文：于是他就到龙王面前禀告。
English: So he went to the Dragon King to complain.

古文：君望毅而问曰： 岂非人间之人乎？ 
现代文：龙王望着柳毅问道： 难道你不是人间的人吗？ 
English: The Dragon King looked at Liu Yi and asked: Aren't you a human?

古文：毅对曰： 然。 
现代文：柳毅回答说： 我是。 
English: Liu Yi replied: I am.

古文：毅而设拜，君亦拜。
现代文：柳毅下拜。龙君也下拜。
English: Liu Yi bowed down. Long Jun also bowed down.

古文：命坐于灵虚之下。谓毅曰： 水府幽深，寡人暗昧。夫子不远千里，将有为乎？ 
现代文：龙君让柳毅入座，对柳毅说： 水府幽深，寡人愚昧，敢问夫子不远千里而来，有什么事吗？ 
English: Longjun let Liu Yi take a seat, and said to Liu Yi: "Suifu is deep, few people are ignorant, dare to ask the master who is thousands of miles away, what's the matter?

古文：毅曰： 毅，大王之乡人也。长于楚，游学于秦。昨下第，间驱泾水右涘，见大王爱女，牧羊于野。风环雨鬓，所不忍视。
现代文：柳毅说： 我是大王的同乡，生长在楚地，游学于秦地，前些日子赴考不中，走到泾水边上，看到大王的爱女在野外牧羊，风吹玉环，雨浇两鬓，窘迫得令人目不忍睹。
English: Liu Yi said: I am a fellow villager of the great king. I grew up in Chu and traveled to Qin to study. A few days ago, I failed to pass the entrance examination. I walked to the edge of Surabaya and saw the great king's beloved daughter shepherding sheep in the field. The wind was blowing jade rings and the rain was pouring down. The embarrassment was too much to bear.

古文：毅因诘之，谓毅曰，为夫婿所薄，舅姑不念，以至于此。
现代文：于是我就问她。她对我说，因为夫婿对她不好，公婆不管，以至于到了这种地步。
English: So I asked her and she told me that it was because her husband did not treat her well that her in-laws did not care about her to such an extent.

古文：悲泗淋漓，诚怛人心。
现代文：她讲话的时候涕泪淋漓，确实令人伤心。
English: She was in tears as she spoke, it was really sad.

古文：遂托书于毅。毅许之。今以至此。
现代文：她请求我来送一封信，我就答应了，所以我才来到这里。 
English: She asked me to deliver a letter and I said yes, so I came here.

古文：帝知其冤而宥其失，前所遣责，因而获免。
现代文：上帝知道侄女的冤屈，宽恕了她的过失，所以我到泾阳去问罪，得到上帝的赦免。
English: God knew my niece's grievances and forgave her mistakes, so I went to Shenyang to ask for forgiveness and receive God's forgiveness.

古文：然而刚肠激发，不遑辞候，惊扰宫中，复忤宾客。愧惕惭惧，不知所失。 
现代文：但是我刚肠激发，没来得及告辞，惊扰了宫中，又忤犯了宾客，心中又愧又怕，不知还有什么过失。 
English: But I was so impetuous that I didn't have time to say goodbye, I disturbed the palace, I offended the guests, I was ashamed and afraid, and I don't know what else I did wrong.

古文：因退而再拜。
现代文：于是他退而再拜。
English: So he retreated.

古文：君曰： 所杀几何？ 
现代文：龙王说： 一共杀了多少人？ 
English: Dragon King said, "How many people did the dragon kill in total?"

古文：曰： 六十万 。 伤稼乎？ 
现代文：钱塘说： 六十万。 又问： 伤了庄稼没有？ 
English: Qiantang said, "Six hundred thousand." He also asked, "Did the crops get damaged?"

古文：曰： 八百里 。 无情郎安在？ 
现代文：回答说： 八百里。 龙王又问： 那个无情郎在哪？ 
English: He answered, "Eight hundred li." The Dragon King asked again, "Where is that heartless man?"

古文：曰： 食之矣。 
现代文：钱塘说： 让我吃了。 
English: Qiantang said: Let me eat it.

古文：君抚然曰： 顽童之为是心也，诚不可忍。
现代文：龙王安慰他说： 那顽童做出这等事，实在是不可忍受。
English: The Dragon King comforted him and said, "It's really unbearable for that urchin to do such a thing.

古文：然汝亦太草草。
现代文：但是你也做得太鲁莽了。
English: But you also did something reckless.

古文：赖上帝显圣，谅其至冤。
现代文：仰仗上帝显圣，体谅她的大冤。
English: Rely on God to manifest His holiness and understand her great misfortune.

古文：不然者，吾何辞焉？
现代文：不然，我怎么推辞呢？
English: Otherwise, how can I refuse?

古文：从此已去，勿复如是。 
现代文：从此以后，不要再这么干了。 
English: From now on, don't do it again.

古文：钱塘复再拜。
现代文：钱塘又拜。
English: Qiantang and worship.

古文：是夕，遂宿毅于凝光殿。
现代文：这天晚上，就让柳毅宿在凝光殿。
English: That evening, he let Liu Yi stay at the Condensation Hall.

古文：明日，又宴毅于凝碧宫。
现代文：第二天，又在凝碧宫设宴招待柳毅。
English: The next day, a banquet was also held at Geibi Palace to entertain Liu Yi.

古文：会友戚，张广乐，具以醪醴，罗以甘洁。初笳角鼙鼓，旌旗剑戟，舞万夫于其右。中有一夫前曰： 此钱塘《破阵》乐。 
现代文：会见亲戚朋友，摆设宏大的乐队，各种美酒糖果应有尽有，各种乐器，各式旌旗，各样兵器应有尽有，右边有一万人随乐起舞。有一个人上前报告说： 这是钱塘的《破阵》乐。 
English: Meeting with relatives and friends, setting up a grand orchestra, all kinds of wine and candy, all kinds of musical instruments, all kinds of flags, all kinds of weapons, and on the right side, ten thousand people dancing to the music. One person came forward to report: This is Qiantang's "Broken Line" music.

古文：旌鈚杰气，顾骤悍栗。坐客视之，毛发皆竖。
现代文：旗幡透着豪杰之气，勇猛异常，见了令人战栗，在座的人看了，毛发都竖起来。
English: The banner was imbued with the air of a great hero, it was extraordinarily brave, it was chilling to see, and everyone present saw it and their hair stood on end.

古文：复有金石丝竹，罗绮珠翠，舞千女于其左。中有一女前进曰： 此贵主《还宫》乐。 
现代文：左边有一千名女子跳舞，罗绮珠翠，重石丝竹。一女子上前报告说： 这是《贵主还宫》乐。 
English: On the left, there are a thousand women dancing, the strings are beaded and the strings are heavy. A woman comes forward to report: This is the music of "The Noble Lord Returning to the Palace."

古文：清音宛转，如诉如慕。
现代文：清新的乐声轻柔宛转，如诉如慕。
English: The fresh sound of the music is soft and gentle, like an appeal.

古文：坐客听之，不觉泪下。
现代文：在座的人听了，不觉泪下。
English: Those present burst into tears as they listened.

古文：二舞既毕，龙君太悦，锡以绔绮，颁于舞人。
现代文：两边的舞蹈结束之后，龙王十分高兴，赐绔绮奖励跳舞的人们。
English: After the dances on both sides were over, the Dragon King was very happy and rewarded the dancers with gongs.

古文：然后密席贯坐，纵酒极娱。
现代文：然后，大家依次坐好，纵酒娱乐。
English: Then, everyone took turns to sit down and enjoy a drink.

古文：酒酣，洞庭君乃击席而歌曰： 大天苍苍兮，大地茫茫。
现代文：酒酣，龙王拍着坐席唱道： 高天苍苍啊，大地茫茫。
English: Sipping wine, the Dragon King clapped his hands and sang: "Heavenly heavens, boundless land.

古文：人各有志兮，何可思量？
现代文：人各有志啊，怎么能思量？
English: Everyone has their own ambitions, how can you weigh them up?

古文：狐神鼠圣兮，薄社依墙。
现代文：狐神鼠圣啊，薄社依墙。
English: Holy Fox God and Holy Mouse, the thin shrine is leaning against the wall.

古文：雷霆一发兮，其孰敢当？
现代文：雷霆一发啊，其谁敢当？
English: A bolt from the blue, who would have thought?

古文：荷真人兮信义长，令骨肉兮还故乡。
现代文：威谢真人啊，信义长，令我骨肉啊，还故乡。
English: Thank you for being a real person, Xinyi Chang, for making me flesh and blood, and returning to my hometown.

古文：齐言惭愧兮何时忘？ 
现代文：齐说惭愧啊，何时忘？ 
English: Shame on you all, when will you forget?

古文：洞庭君歌罢，钱塘君再拜而歌曰： 上天配合兮，生死有途。此不当妇兮，彼不当夫。
现代文：龙王唱完，钱塘又唱道： 上天配合啊，生死有途。此不当妇啊，彼不当夫。心中辛苦啊，泾水之隅。
English: After the dragon king finished singing, Qiantang sang again: Heaven cooperates, life and death have a future. This is not a woman, he is not a husband. My heart is hard, the corner of Surabaya.

古文：毅踧踖而受爵。
现代文：风霜满鬓啊，雨雪罗襦。
English: Wind and frost, rain and snow.

古文：饮讫，复以二觞奉二君。乃歌曰： 碧云悠悠兮，泾水东流。
现代文：靠明公啊传素书，让骨肉啊家如初，永说珍重啊无时无。 钱塘歌罢，龙王也站起来，二人一起捧杯来到柳毅面前，柳毅恭敬不安地接过杯子，喝完之后，又回敬了两杯，然后唱道： 碧水悠悠啊，泾水东流。
English: Rely on Ming Gong ah, pass on the elementary book, let the bones and flesh ah, family as in the beginning, always say precious ah, timeless. Qiantang song, the Dragon King also stood up, the two came together to hold a cup in front of Liu Yi, Liu Yi respectfully and uneasily took the cup, after drinking it, he returned two cups, and then sang: Bishui yu yu ah, Surabaya east stream.

古文：伤美人兮，雨泣花愁。
现代文：伤美人啊，雨泣花愁。
English: Ah, woeful beauty, weeping and wailing in the rain.

古文：尺书远达兮，以解君忧。
现代文：尺书远达啊，以解君忧。
English: The shakusho reaches far and wide to solve your worries.

古文：哀冤果雪兮，还处其休。
现代文：哀冤果然昭雪啊，还处重玉之优。
English: The grievances have indeed been clarified, and the situation is excellent.

古文：荷和雅兮感甘羞，山家寂寞兮难久留。欲将辞去兮悲绸缪。 
现代文：承受和雅啊感甘馐，家中寂寞啊这里难久留，想要离去啊心里多悲愁。 
English: It's sweet to bear the elegance, it's lonely at home, it's hard to stay here for a long time, and it's sad to want to leave.

古文：歌罢，皆呼万岁。
现代文：他唱完，在座的都呼万岁。
English: After he finished singing, everyone in the audience shouted "hurrah."

古文：洞庭君因出碧玉箱，贮以开水犀。钱塘君复出红珀盘，贮以照夜玑。
现代文：于是，洞庭龙王和钱塘龙王各出一物，一个是盛有开水犀的碧玉箱，一个是盛着照夜玑的红珀盘，二人一块捧给柳毅。
English: As a result, the Dongting Dragon King and the Qiantang Dragon King each brought out one thing, one was a jasper box with a boiled water rhinoceros, one was a red poplar plate with a nightingale, and both of them presented it to Liu Yi.

古文：皆起进毅。毅辞谢而受。
现代文：柳毅先辞谢后接受。
English: Liu Yi first resigned and then accepted.

古文：然后宫中之人，咸以绡彩珠璧，投于毅侧，重叠焕赫。
现代文：然后，宫中之人，全都向柳毅送来珠宝丝帛等礼物，重重叠着，光彩焕然。
English: Then, the people in the palace all sent gifts such as jewelry and silk scarves to Liu Yi, overlapping and resplendent.

古文：须臾，埋没前后。
现代文：不一会，他就被前前后后堆积如山的礼物埋没了。
English: Before long, he was buried under a mountain of gifts.

古文：毅笑语四顾，愧揖不暇。
现代文：柳毅看看四面的人，不断地说话，不断地微笑，不断地揖手致谢。
English: Liu Yi looked at the people on all sides, constantly talking, constantly smiling, constantly rubbing his hands in thanks.

古文：泊酒阑欢极，毅辞起，复宿于凝光殿。
现代文：等到酒兴极浓之时，柳毅辞席，又在凝光殿住了一宿。
English: When the wine was very strong, Liu Yi resigned and stayed in the condensation hall for one night.

古文：翌日，又宴毅于清光阁。
现代文：次日，又在清光阁宴请柳毅。
English: The next day, he invited Liu Yi to a banquet at the Qingguang Pavilion.

古文：钱塘因酒作色，踞谓毅曰： 不闻猛石可裂不可卷，义士可杀不可羞耶？
现代文：钱塘龙王借酒遮脸，对柳毅说： 没听说 猛石可裂不可卷，义士可杀不可羞 吗？
English: Qiantang Dragon King borrowed wine to cover his face and said to Liu Yi: Haven't you heard that a rock can be cracked but not rolled, and a righteous man can be killed but not shamed?

古文：愚有衷曲，欲一陈于公。
现代文：我有几句心里话，想要对你说一说。
English: I have a few heartfelt words I'd like to say to you.

古文：如可，则俱在云霄；如不可，则皆夷粪壤。
现代文：如果可以，那咱们就都在云霄；如果不行，那就都成粪土。
English: If we can, then we are all in the sky; if not, then we are all in the dung.

古文：不幸见辱于匪人，今则绝矣。
现代文：你认为如何呢？ 柳毅说： 请讲。 
English: What do you think? Liu Yi said, "Please speak."

古文：将欲求托高义，世为亲戚，使受恩者知其所归，怀爱者知其所付。岂不为君子始终之道者？ 
现代文：钱塘说： 泾阳的妻子，就是洞庭龙王的女儿。她性情淑雅相貌美丽，被九姻推重，不幸被坏蛋凌辱。现在那坏蛋已经没了，想要与你结为亲戚，使受恩的知恩，让怀爱的能爱，这不是君子有始有终的做法吗？ 
English: Qiantang said, "Shuyang's wife is the daughter of Dongting Dragon King. She is kind, elegant, and beautiful. She was pushed by nine marriages, and was unfortunately abused by a villain. Now that villain is gone, she wants to marry you as a relative, so that she can know the grace of grace, and let love can love. Isn't this a gentleman's practice from beginning to end?

古文：毅肃然而作，歘然而笑曰： 诚不知钱塘君孱困如是。
现代文：柳毅肃然站起，忽然笑着说： 实在不知道钱塘君如此谨小慎微。
English: Liu Yi stood up solemnly and suddenly said with a smile: I really didn't know Qiantang was so cautious.

古文：毅始闻跨九州，怀五岳，泄其愤怒。
现代文：我刚开始时听说您跨九州，怀五岳，发泄愤怒。
English: When I started, I heard that you were venting your anger across Kyushu, carrying five mountains.

古文：复见断锁金，掣玉柱，赴其急难。
现代文：又看到您挣断重锁、拉倒玉柱，去救急难。
English: I also saw you break the heavy lock, pull down the pillar, and go to the emergency room.

古文：毅以为刚决明直，无如君者。
现代文：我以为刚烈耿直，没有能赶上你的。
English: I thought I was tough, but I couldn't keep up with you.

古文：盖犯之者不避其死，感之者不爱其生，此真丈夫之志。
现代文：犯法的不避死，感动的不贪生，这是真正的大丈夫的志气。
English: Do not avoid death when breaking the law, do not be greedy for life when you are moved, this is the true spirit of a great man.

古文：奈何箫管方洽，亲宾正和，不顾其道，以威加人？
现代文：为什么音乐正优美，宾客正和谐，不顾君子之道，以威力强加于人呢？
English: Why is it that the music is beautiful, the guests are harmonious, and the dance is imposed on people by force, regardless of the gentleman's way?

古文：岂仆之素望哉？
现代文：难道这是我平素希望的吗？
English: Is this what I've been hoping for?

古文：若遇公于洪波之中，玄山之间，鼓以鳞须，被以云雨，将迫毅以死，毅则以禽兽视之。
现代文：如果在洪波之中，在玄山之间遇上您，您鼓起鳞片和长须，披着云和雨，用死来逼迫我，我就会视您为禽兽。
English: If I were to meet you in the middle of the ocean, between the mountains, with your scales and whiskers bulging, shrouded in clouds and rain, chasing me with death, I would regard you as a beast.

古文：亦何恨哉？今体被衣冠，坐谈礼义，尽五常之志性，负百行之微旨。虽人世贤杰，有不如者，况江河灵类乎？
现代文：现在，你身穿锦衣，头顶高帽，坐在这里谈论礼义，尽五常的志性，负百行的微旨，即使是人间的贤杰，也比不上你，况且你还是江河里的灵类呢？
English: Now, you are dressed in brocade, with a tall hat on your head, sitting here talking about etiquette and righteousness, fulfilling the five constant aspirations, and the negative intentions of hundreds of lines. Even the human sages are not as good as you, and moreover, you are still the spirits in the rivers?

古文：而欲以蠢然之躯，悍然之性，乘酒假气，将迫于人。岂近直哉？
现代文：而你想要以蠢大的身躯，勇猛的性情，凭借着酒气，强迫别人，难道这是正直的吗？
English: And is it honest to say that you want to use your big body, your violent temper, and your alcoholism to force yourself on other people?

古文：且毅之质，不足以藏王一甲之间。然而敢以不伏之心，胜王不道之气。
现代文：况且我的气质，不足以藏到你的一甲之间，但是我敢于以不屈服的决心，胜过你不道德的霸气。
English: Moreover, my temperament is not enough to hide between your one and a half, but I dare to prevail over your immoral domineering with unbending determination.

古文：惟王筹之！ 
现代文：希望你三思。 
English: I hope you'll reconsider.

古文：钱塘乃逡巡致谢曰： 寡人生长宫房，不闻正论。向者词述狂妄，搪突高明，退自循顾，戾不容责。幸君子不为此乖间可也。 
现代文：钱塘龙王于是尴尬地说： 我从小生长在宫中，没听过正论，刚才说话狂妄，搪突了高明，退回来自我审视，可谓罪大恶极，希望你不要因为这一不愉快的事情发生而疏远就行了。 
English: Qiantang Dragon King then said awkwardly: I grew up in the palace, I have never heard the correct theory, just now I spoke arrogantly, impugned the high and mighty, returning to self-examination, can be described as a great sin, I hope you don't alienate yourself because of this unpleasant thing.

古文：其夕复欢宴，其乐如旧，毅与钱塘遂为知心友。
现代文：那天晚上又欢宴，音乐如旧，柳毅和钱塘龙王成了知心朋友。
English: That evening, there was another banquet, the music was the same as before, and Liu Yi and Qiantang Dragon King became close friends.

古文：明日，毅辞归。洞庭君夫人别宴毅于潜景殿，男女仆妾等悉出预会。夫人泣谓毅曰： 骨肉受君子深恩，恨不得展愧戴，遂至暌别。 
现代文：第二日，柳毅告辞要回家，洞庭龙王的夫人在潜景殿宴请柳毅，男女仆妾等全都不在场，夫人哭着对柳毅说： 我的亲生骨肉受您的深恩，遗憾的是还没有很好报答，就到了告别的时候。 
English: On the second day, Liu Yi said that he wanted to go home. Dongting Longwang's wife held a banquet for Liu Yi at the Hall of Hidden Scenery. None of Liu Yi's male and female servants and concubines were present. His wife cried and said to Liu Yi, "My own flesh and blood has been deeply blessed by you. Unfortunately, it has not been well repaid. It is time to say goodbye."

古文：使前泾阳女当席拜毅以致谢。
现代文：于是让前泾阳女当席向柳毅下拜致谢。
English: Therefore, let the former Zhengyang woman bow down to Liu Yi to express her thanks.

古文：夫人又曰： 此别岂有复相遇之日乎？ 
现代文：夫人又说： 现在一别，难道还有再相遇的日子吗？ 
English: She added: "Let's part now, is there a day when we can meet again?

古文：毅其始虽不诺钱塘之请，然当此席，殊有叹恨之色。
现代文：柳毅虽然当时没有应允钱塘王的提亲之请，但是现在，他很有叹恨的表情。
English: Although Liu Yi did not agree to Qiantang Wang's invitation to be a relative at that time, he now has a sighing expression.

古文：宴罢辞别，满宫凄然，赠遗珍宝，怪不可述。
现代文：宴罢相别，满宫人都很凄然。赠送的珍宝，尽难述说。
English: After the banquet, everyone in the palace was very sad. It's hard to describe the treasures that were presented.

古文：毅于是复循途出江岸。见从者十余人，担囊以随，至其家而辞去。
现代文：柳毅于是循着来路走回岸来，有十几个人担着东西跟在他身后。到家之后，那十几个人才离去。
English: Liu Yi then walked back to the shore along the same route he had come, with a dozen people carrying things behind him. After arriving home, the dozen people left.

古文：毅因适广陵宝肆，鬻其所得，百未发一，财以盈兆。
现代文：柳毅就到广陵珠宝店去，出卖他带回来的宝贝，卖了还不到百分之一，钱数已足够一兆。
English: Liu Yi went to the Guangling jewelry store to sell the treasure he brought back. He sold less than one percent, and the amount of money was enough for one trillion.

古文：故淮右富族咸以为莫如。
现代文：所以淮西的富户都以为不如他。
English: Therefore, rich households in Huaxi all think that they are not as good as him.

古文：遂娶于张氏，而又娶韩氏。
现代文：他就娶了一个张氏女为妻。又娶了韩氏。
English: He then married a daughter of the Zhang family. He also married the Han family.

古文：数月，韩氏又亡。
现代文：几个月后，韩氏又死了。
English: A few months later, Han died again.

古文：徙家金陵，常以鳏旷多感，或谋新匹。
现代文：他搬家到了金陵，常因为没有妻室而感慨，有的人就为他另谋配偶。
English: He moved to Jinling and often lamented the fact that he didn't have a wife. Some people even tried to find another spouse for him.

古文：有媒氏告之曰： 有卢氏女，范阳人也。
现代文：有一个媒人告诉他说，有一个卢氏女，是范阳人。
English: A matchmaker told him that there was a Lu woman who was from Fanyang.

古文：父名曰浩，尝为清流宰，晚岁好道，独游云泉。今则不知所在矣。
现代文：她父亲叫范浩，曾经是清流县令，晚年喜欢道教，独自各地周游，如今也不知在什么地方。
English: Her father's name is Fan Hao. He used to be the county magistrate of Qingliu County. In his later years, he liked Taoism and traveled around the country on his own. Now, he doesn't know where he is.

古文：母曰郑氏。
现代文：她母亲姓郑。
English: Her mother's surname is Zheng.

古文：前年适清河张氏，不幸而张夫早亡。
现代文：前年她嫁到清河的张家，不幸姓张的丈夫早死。
English: The year before last, she married into the Zhang family in Qinghe. Unfortunately, her husband, surnamed Zhang, died early.

古文：母怜其少，惜其慧美，欲择德以配焉。不识何如？ 
现代文：母亲可怜她年纪还小，爱惜她贤慧漂亮就想再选好郎君配她，不知柳毅有没有意。
English: Her mother felt sorry for her because she was still young and loved her for her wisdom and beauty, so she wanted to choose a good husband to match her. I don't know if Liu Yi had any intention.

古文：毅乃卜日就礼。
现代文：柳毅就选择了好日子举行婚礼。
English: Liu Yi chose a good day to hold the wedding.

古文：既而男女二姓，俱为豪族。法用礼物，尽其丰盛。金陵之士，莫不健仰。
现代文：男女两家都是豪门富户，典礼所用之物，尽量地丰盛，金陵的各界人士，没有不敬仰的。
English: Both men's and women's families are wealthy families, and the things used in the ceremony are as rich as possible. People from all walks of life in Jinling have nothing but respect for them.

古文：居月余，毅因晚入户，视其妻，深觉类于龙女，而逸艳丰厚，则又过之。
现代文：一个多月之后，柳毅晚上进屋，见自己的妻子很像龙女，而且比龙女还丰腴美艳。
English: More than a month later, Liu Yi entered the house in the evening and saw that his wife looked very much like a dragon maiden, and was even more voluptuous and beautiful than a dragon maiden.

古文：因与话昔事。
现代文：于是就和她谈起他与龙女的事。
English: So he told her about his affair with the dragon maiden.

古文：妻谓毅曰： 人世岂有如是之理乎？ 
现代文：妻对他说： 人世间哪能有这样的道理呢？ 
English: His wife said to him: How on earth can there be such a reason?

古文：经岁余有一子。毅益重之。
现代文：经过一年多的时间，妻子为他生下一子，他就更看重妻子了。
English: After more than a year, his wife gave birth to a son, which made him value his wife even more.

古文：既产逾月，乃浓饰换服。
现代文：孩子满月，就给孩子修饰打扮换上衣服，召集亲友相会。
English: When the child's moon is full, they will dress up the child, put on clothes, and gather relatives and friends to meet.

古文：召亲戚相会之间，笑谓毅曰： 君不忆余之于昔也？ 
现代文：这期间，妻子对柳毅说： 你不记得我的过去了。 
English: During this period, his wife said to Liu Yi: You don't remember my past.

古文：毅曰： 夙为洞庭君女传书，至今为忆。 
现代文：柳毅说： 过去我为洞庭龙王的女儿传书，至今还记忆犹新。 
English: Liu Yi said, "I used to deliver letters for Dongting Longwang's daughter, and I still remember it vividly.

古文：妻曰： 余即洞庭君之女也。
现代文：妻子说： 我就是洞庭龙王的女儿啊！
English: My wife said: I am the daughter of the Dragon King of Dongting!

古文：泾川之冤，君使得白。
现代文：泾川的冤枉，你使我得到昭雪。
English: You have wronged Shukawa, and you have caused me to get Akiyuki.

古文：衔君之恩，誓心求报。
现代文：我蒙受你的恩情，决心求报。
English: I'm grateful for your kindness and I'm determined to repay it.

古文：洎钱塘季父论亲不从，遂至暌违，天各一方，不能相问。
现代文：等到我的叔父钱塘龙王提亲你不应允，就离开了。天各一方，不能相问。
English: When my uncle, Qiantang Longwang, proposed marriage, you didn't agree and left. We were on opposite sides of the world and couldn't ask each other questions.

古文：父母欲配嫁于濯锦小儿。某惟以心誓难移。
现代文：父母要把我嫁给濯锦龙王的小儿子，但是我的决心难以改变。
English: My parents want me to marry the youngest son of the Dragon King, but I can't change my mind.

古文：亲命难背。
现代文：父母之命也难违。
English: It's hard to go against your parents' wishes.

古文：既为君子弃绝，分无见期，而当初之冤，虽得以告诸父母，而誓报不得其志，复欲驰白于君子。
现代文：被你拒绝之后，分处两地没有相见之期，而当初的冤情，虽然能告之于父母，却不能满足报恩的愿望，就又想跑来向你表白。
English: After being rejected by you, there was no time to see each other in the two places, and the original grievances, although they could be reported to their parents, could not satisfy the desire to repay the favor, so they wanted to come to confess to you.

古文：值君子累娶，当娶于张，已而又娶于韩。迨张韩继卒，君卜居于兹。故余之父母，乃喜余得遂报君之意。
现代文：正赶上你几次娶亲，先娶张氏，又娶韩氏，等到张韩二人相继早亡，你搬家到这里，所以我的父母就成全了我报答你的心愿。
English: Just in time for you to get married several times, first to Mr. Zhang and then to Mr. Han, until Mr. Zhang and Mr. Han died prematurely one after another, you moved here, so my parents fulfilled my wish to repay you.

古文：今日获奉君子，咸善终世，死无恨矣。 
现代文：今天能够侍奉你，一定要白头到老，死而无恨。 
English: To be able to serve you today, I must live to a ripe old age and die without hatred.

古文：因呜咽泣涕交下，对毅曰： 始不言者，知君无重色之心；今乃言者，知君有感余之意。
现代文：于是就呜咽啼泣，泪如雨下，对柳毅说： 才成亲的时候我没说实情，是因为知道你没有重色之心。至今天才说，是因为知道你有感动于我的意思。
English: So she sobbed and wept, her tears falling like rain, and said to Liu Yi: I didn't tell you the truth when we first got married, because I knew you didn't have a heavy heart. I only told you today because I knew you were moved by what I said.

古文：妇人匪薄，不足以确厚永心。故因君爱子，以托相生。
现代文：妇人微薄，不值得你立下永远对我好的决心，所以就借着你的爱子，来托付我的一生。
English: A paltry woman is not worth your determination to be good to me forever, so through your beloved son, entrust my life.

古文：未知君意如何，愁惧兼心，不能自解。
现代文：不知你意下如何，心里又愁又怕，不能自解。
English: I don't know what you're thinking, but I'm worried and afraid, and I can't help myself.

古文：君附书之日，笑谓妾曰： 他日归洞庭，慎无相避。 
现代文：你把我的书信接到手的时候，笑着对我说： 日后回到洞庭，一定不要避而不见我。 
English: When you received my letter, you smiled and said to me, "When you come back to Dongting in the future, be sure not to avoid seeing me."

古文：诚不知当此之际，君岂有意于今日之事乎？
现代文：实在不知道那个时候，你难道就有意于今天的事了吗？
English: I really don't know at that time, did you have any intention of today's event?

古文：其后季父请于君。君固不许。
现代文：后来叔父向你提亲，你坚决不应，你是确实不愿意吗？
English: Later, when your uncle asked you to marry him, you were adamant that you shouldn't. Did you really not want to?

古文：君乃诚将不可邪，抑忿然邪？
现代文：还是因为生气呢？你说说好吗？ 
English: Or was it because of anger? Would you like to talk about it?

古文：君其话之。 
现代文：柳毅说： 这好像是命里注定的。
English: Liu Yi said, "This seems to be predestined.

古文：毅曰： 似有命者。仆始见君子长泾之隅，枉抑憔悴，诚有不平之志。然自约其心者，达君之冤，余无及也。
现代文：我当初在泾阳之野见到你时，见你受冤抑郁而憔悴，确实有不平之心，心里想的只是帮你昭雪冤恨，没想别的。
English: When I first saw you in the fields of Shenyang, I saw that you were depressed and depressed by the injustice, and indeed had a sense of grievance. All I wanted to do was to help you clear up the injustice, and I didn't think about anything else.

古文：以言 慎勿相避 者，偶然耳。
现代文：对你说 一定不要避而不见 的话，是偶然说出来的，哪有什么想法？
English: When I said to you, "Don't look away," I said it by accident. What were you thinking?

古文：岂思哉？洎钱塘逼迫之际，唯理有不可直，乃激人之怒耳。
现代文：等到钱塘逼迫我的时候，只是因为没有那样的道理，才把我激怒的。
English: When Qiantang persecutes me, it is only because there is no such reason that it infuriates me.

古文：夫始以义行为之志，宁有杀其婿而纳其妻者邪？
现代文：当初我就是以正义的行为为决心，哪有用帮了人家逼人家作妻的道理呢？
English: At the beginning, I was determined to act justly. What was the point of helping others to force others to become their wives?

古文：一不可也。
现代文：这是一个不可。
English: This is a must.

古文：善素以操真为志尚，宁有屈于己而伏于心者乎？
现代文：我平素善于以恪守真诚为志尚，难道能委屈了自己又心安理得吗？
English: I have always been good at adhering to sincerity as my goal. Can I be wronged and have peace of mind?

古文：二不可也。
现代文：这是第二个不可。
English: This is the second imperative.

古文：且以率肆胸臆，酬酢纷纶，唯直是图，不遑避害。
现代文：当时纷纷互相敬酒，我因为直率地抒发胸臆，只图痛快，来不及避害。
English: At that time, they were toasting each other, and because I was bluntly expressing my thoughts, I was only trying to enjoy myself, too late to avoid harm.

古文：然而将别之日，见君有依然之容，心甚恨之。
现代文：但是要分别的时候，见到你有依恋的表情，我心里就特别后悔。
English: But when it was time to separate, seeing you with an expression of attachment made me feel particularly regretful.

古文：终以人事扼束，无由报谢。
现代文：但是终于因为人事的限制，不能报谢。
English: But finally, due to staffing constraints, it was not possible to return the favour.

古文：吁！今日君卢氏也，又家于人间。则吾始心未为惑矣。
现代文：唉，今天你是卢氏，又住在人间，那么我当初的想法不用疑惑了。
English: Alas, today you are Mr. Lu, and you live on earth, so there is no need to doubt my original thoughts.

古文：从此以往，永奉欢好，心无纤虑也。 
现代文：从此以后，咱们永远相亲相爱，心里没有丝毫的顾虑了。 
English: From now on, we will always love each other, and there is not the slightest concern in our hearts.

古文：妻因深感娇泣，良久不已。
现代文：妻子被深深感动，娇泣良久不已。
English: My wife was deeply moved and wept for a long time.

古文：有顷，谓毅曰： 勿以他类，遂为无心。固当知报耳。
现代文：过了片刻，妻子对柳毅说： 不要因为我不是人类，就以为我没有情意，我本来就知道应该报答。
English: After a while, his wife said to Liu Yi: Don't think that because I'm not human, I don't have feelings. I already knew that I should repay.

古文：夫龙寿万岁，今与君同之，水陆无往不适，君不以为妄也。 
现代文：龙的寿命是一万岁，现在我和你一样了。水陆两地没有不能去的地方，你不要以为荒唐。 
English: The lifespan of a dragon is ten thousand years, and now I'm just like you. There's no place you can't go, on land or at sea. Don't think it's ridiculous.

古文：毅嘉之曰： 吾不知国客，乃复为神仙之饵。 
现代文：柳毅赞叹说： 我不知道什么是皇帝的客人，却又能吃到神仙的酒宴！ 
English: Liu Yi said with admiration: "I don't know what an emperor's guest is, but I can have a god's feast!"

古文：乃相与觐洞庭。既至而宾主盛礼，不可具纪。
现代文：于是夫妻共同到洞庭探亲，到了之后，宾主的盛礼难以纪得周详。
English: So the husband and wife went to visit relatives in Dongting together. After arriving, it is difficult to describe the guest's grand ceremony in detail.

古文：后居南海，仅四十年。其邸第舆马，珍鲜服玩，虽侯伯之室，无以加也。
现代文：后来他家住在南海，将近四十年，他家的屋宇、车马、珍宝、物玩，即使是侯伯之家，也无法相比。
English: Later, his family lived in the South China Sea for nearly forty years, and his family's house, horses, chariots, treasures, and toys were incomparable even to those of the Hou Bo family.

古文：毅之族咸遂濡泽。
现代文：柳毅的族人全都沾光受惠。
English: All of Liu Yi's people have benefited from this.

古文：以其春秋积序，容状不衰，南海之人，靡不惊异。
现代文：一年年过去，却不见柳毅衰老。南海的人们，没有不惊异的。
English: Year after year has passed, but Liu Yi has not aged. People in the South China Sea are nothing short of amazed.

古文：洎开元中，上方属意于神仙之事，精索道术，毅不得安，遂相与归洞庭。
现代文：到了开元年中，皇上有意于神仙之事，到处求索道术，柳毅不得安宁，就和全家一起归居洞庭。
English: By the middle of the first year of the year, the emperor was interested in the matter of the immortals, and went everywhere to seek the rope way. Liu Yi could not rest, so he returned to Dongting with his whole family.

古文：凡十余岁，莫知其迹。
现代文：一共十几年没人知道他的踪迹。
English: For more than ten years, no one knew his whereabouts.

古文：至开元末，毅之表弟薛嘏为京畿令，谪官东南，经洞庭，晴昼长望，俄见碧山出于远波。
现代文：到了开元年末，柳毅的表弟薛嘏是京畿令，贬官东南路过洞庭，大白天里向水上一望，但见青山从水中升起。
English: By the end of the first year of the 21st century, Liu Yi's cousin, Xue Yao, was the governor of Gyeonggi Province. He passed Dongting in the southeast and looked down at the water in broad daylight, but saw the Qingcheng Mountain rising from the water.

古文：舟人皆侧立曰： 此本无山，恐水怪耳。 
现代文：船上人都望着说道： 这本来没有山，恐怕是水怪吧？ 
English: The people on board all looked at it and said, "There are no mountains here, I'm afraid it's a water monster."

古文：指顾之际，山与舟相逼。乃有彩船自山驰来，迎问于嘏。
现代文：指顾之间，山和船接近了，就一条彩船从那山中驶来，迎着薛嘏就发问。
English: During the inspection, the mountain and the boat approached, and a colored boat came from the mountain, and greeted Xue Yao and asked questions.

古文：其中有一人呼之曰： 柳公来候耳。 
现代文：其中有一个人喊他说： 柳公等着你呢！ 
English: One of them called out to him, "Ryugong is waiting for you!"

古文：嘏省然记之，乃促至山下，摄衣疾上。山有宫阙如人世，见毅立于宫室之中，前列丝竹，后罗珠翠，物玩之盛，殊倍人间。
现代文：薛嘏恍然记起柳毅，就急忙跑到山下，抓着衣襟急急忙忙上了山，见上面有一所宫阙和人间一样，柳毅站在宫室之中，前边排列着乐队，后边罗列着珠翠，古玩珍宝之多，比人间多出许多倍。
English: Xue Yao suddenly remembered Liu Yi, so he hurriedly ran to the foot of the mountain. He grabbed his coat and hurried up the mountain. He saw that there was a palace on the top, just like the one on earth. Liu Yi was standing in the middle of the palace, with the orchestra lined up in front of him, and the beads lined up behind him. There were so many antiques and treasures, many times more than on earth.

古文：毅词理益玄，容颜益少。
现代文：柳毅的谈论更加玄奥，容颜更加年少。
English: Liu Yi's talk is more profound, and his face is younger.

古文：初迎嘏于砌，持嘏手曰： 别来瞬息，而发毛已黄。 
现代文：一开始在墙下迎接薛嘏。他拉着薛嘏的手说： 咱俩才分别不长时间，而你的毛发都黄了！ 
English: At first, he greeted Xue Yao under the wall. He took Xue Yao's hand and said, "We've only been separated for a short time, and your hair is all yellow!

古文：嘏笑曰： 兄为神仙，弟为枯骨，命也。 
现代文：薛嘏笑着说： 你是神仙，我是枯骨，这是命啊！ 
English: Xue Yao smiled and said: You are a fairy, I am a dry bone, this is life!

古文：毅因出药五十丸遗嘏曰： 此药一丸，可增一岁耳。
现代文：柳毅于是就拿出五十丸药来送给薛嘏，说： 此药一丸，可增寿一岁。
English: Liu Yi then took out fifty pills and gave them to Xue Yao, saying, "One pill of this medicine can increase your life expectancy by one year."

古文：岁满复来，无久居人世，以自苦也。 
现代文：岁数满了你再来，不要久居人世，自己苦自己。 
English: Come back when you're old enough, don't live too long, and don't be too hard on yourself.

古文：欢宴毕，嘏乃辞行。
现代文：欢宴之后，薛嘏就辞行。
English: After the banquet, Xue Yao resigned.

古文：自是已后，遂绝影响。
现代文：从此以后，就再也没有踪迹。
English: There has been no trace of him since.

古文：嘏常以是事告于人世。
现代文：薛嘏常把这事告诉别人。
English: Xue Yao often told others about this.

古文：殆四纪，嘏亦不知所在。
现代文：大概四十年以后，薛嘏也不知去向。
English: About forty years later, Xue Yao did not know where to go.

古文：陇西李朝威叙而叹曰： 五虫之长，必以灵者，别斯见矣。
现代文：陇西李朝威叙述这事并叹道： 五虫一定以灵者为长，有别于这里见到的。
English: Li Chaowei from Shaanxi Province described the event and lamented: "The five insects must be made of spirits, which is different from what we see here.

古文：人裸也，移信鳞虫。
现代文：人是裸虫，而去相信鳞虫。
English: People are naked worms and believe in scale insects.

古文：洞庭含纳大直，钱塘迅疾磊落，宜有承焉。
现代文：洞庭龙王胸怀博大率直，钱塘龙王迅疾磊落，应该有所继承。
English: Dongting Dragon King is broad-minded and straightforward, Qiantang Dragon King is quick-witted, and should be inherited.

古文：嘏咏而不载，独可邻其境。
现代文：对薛嘏只咏叹而未作详细记载，只有他可邻近仙境。
English: For Xue Yao, there is only a sigh and no detailed record, only he can be close to the fairyland.

古文：愚义之，为斯文。 
现代文：我认为有意义，就写了这篇文章。
English: I thought it made sense, so I wrote this article.

