古文：○樊子盖
现代文：○樊子盖
English: ○ Braided lid

古文：樊子盖，字华宗，庐江人也。
现代文：樊子盖字华宗，庐江人。
English: The name Huazong, a native of the Minjiang River, is written in red ink.

古文：祖道则，梁越州刺史。
现代文：祖父樊道则，梁国的越州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Xing Dao Zi, served as the governor of Yue Prefecture during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父儒，侯景之乱奔于齐，官至仁州刺史。
现代文：父亲樊儒，侯景之乱时投奔北齐，官至仁州刺史。
English: His father, Xizhu, went to Beiqi during the Houjing Rebellion, and became an official in Renzhou.

古文：子盖解褐武兴王行参军，出为慎县令，东汝、北陈二郡太守，员外散骑常侍，封富阳县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：樊子盖开始当武兴王的行参军，后出京任慎县县令，东汝、北陈二郡的太守，员外散骑常侍，封爵富阳县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Zong Zi Gai began to join the army when King Wu Xing marched, and later he went to Beijing to serve as the county magistrate of Shen County, the governor of Dong Ru and North Chen two counties, a non-commissioned officer, a knight of Fuyang County, and 500 households in food villages.

古文：周武帝平齐，授仪同三司，治郢州刺史。
现代文：北周武帝平定北齐后，授他仪同三司，郢州刺史。
English: After the Northern Zhouwu Emperor subdued the Northern Qi, he awarded him the honor of the same three divisions, and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：高祖受禅，以仪同领乡兵，后除枞阳太守。
现代文：隋高祖受北周禅让后，他以仪同身份统领乡兵，后授枞阳太守。
English: After Sui Gao Zu was ceded by Northern Zhou Zen, he led the townspeople in the same capacity, and was later made the governor of Shenyang.

古文：平陈之役，以功加上开府，改封上蔡县伯，食邑七百户，赐物三千段，粟九千斛。
现代文：在平定陈国的战争中，他因有功被加授上开府，改封爵位为上蔡县伯，食邑七百户。赐他缣帛三千段，粟米九千斛。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Guo, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu for his meritorious service, and his title was changed to Shangcai County, with 700 households. He was given 3,000 dan of rice and 9,000 baht of corn.

古文：拜辰州刺史，俄转嵩州刺史。
现代文：授他辰州刺史，不久调任嵩州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Chenzhou chief historian, and was soon transferred to the post of Songzhou chief historian.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：遭母丧离职。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：未几，起授齐州刺史，固让，不许。
现代文：不久，授他齐州刺史，他推辞，朝廷不许推辞。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of "Chizhou Grand Historian." He declined, but the imperial court did not allow him to decline.

古文：其年，转循州总管，许以便宜从事。
现代文：这年，转任循州总管，同意他相机行事。
English: This year, he was transferred to the post of chief administrator of Zhouzhou and agreed to act as a camera.

古文：十八年入朝，奏岭南地图，赐以良马杂物，加统四州，令还任所，遣光禄少卿柳謇之饯于霸上。
现代文：开皇十八年入京，上奏朝廷岭南地图。朝廷赐他良马和其他杂物，让他统领四州，令他回到任上去，派光禄少卿柳謇之在灞上为他饯行。
English: In the eighteenth year of the emperor's reign, he entered Beijing and presented the imperial court with a map of southern Lingnan. The court gave him a fine horse and other sundries, let him rule over the four states, made him return to his post, and sent Guanglu Shaoqing Liu Xizhi to accompany him on the raft.

古文：炀帝即位，征还京师，转凉州刺史。
现代文：炀帝即位后，把他调回京师。后转任凉州刺史。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xizong, he was transferred back to the Beijing Division. Later, he was transferred to the Liangzhou Division.

古文：子盖言于帝曰： 臣一居岭表，十载于兹，犬马之情，不胜恋恋。
现代文：樊子盖对炀帝说： 我从居住岭南，到现在十年了。犬马之情，不胜恋恋。
English: "I have been living in Lingnan for ten years now. I am in love with dogs and horses.

古文：愿趋走阙庭，万死无恨。 
现代文：我想在朝廷奔走当差，万死无恨。 
English: I want to work at the imperial court, without any hatred.

古文：帝赐物三百段，慰谕遣之，授银青光禄大夫、武威太守，以善政闻。
现代文：炀帝赐给他缣采三百段，安慰、鼓励他，打发他到凉州赴任。后来，授他银青光禄大夫、武威太守，以仁政出名。
English: Emperor Qian gave him a reward of three hundred dan, comforted and encouraged him, and sent him to Liangzhou to take office. Later, he was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, Wuwei governor, and was famous for benevolent politics.

古文：大业三年入朝，帝引之内殿，特蒙褒美。
现代文：大业三年入京朝拜，炀帝把他带到内殿，特别夸奖他。
English: Three years after Daye's entry into the capital, he made a pilgrimage to the capital. Emperor Xuan took him to the inner hall and gave him special praise.

古文：乃下诏曰： 设官之道，必在用贤，安人之术，莫如善政。
现代文：炀帝于是下诏书说： 设官之道，必在用贤；安民之术，莫如仁政。
English: Emperor Qian then issued an imperial edict saying: The way to appoint officials must be to use the virtuous; the art of keeping the people safe is nothing like benevolent politics.

古文：龚、汲振德化于前，张、杜垂清风于后，共治天下，实资良守。
现代文：龚、汲振仁德教化于前，张、杜垂清风廉政于后，共治天下，真是好地方官。
English: Zhai and Kui Zhen were enlightened before, Zhang and Du were enlightened after, and they ruled the world together. They were really good local officials.

古文：子盖干局通敏，操履清洁，自剖符西服，爱惠为先，抚道有方，宽猛得所。处脂膏不润其质，酌贪泉岂渝其性，故能治绩克彰，课最之首。
现代文：樊子盖干练、敏锐，品性清廉，从出守西边以来，仁爱为先，安抚有方，恩威得宜，处在脂膏之中而不揩油，喝了贪泉之水怎可改变他的品性？所以他能政绩突出，考察官吏，他为第一。
English: From the time he went to the West, his benevolence came first, he was easy to placate, and his kindness was appropriate. He was in the middle of the grease without being greasy. How could drinking the water from the greedy spring change his character? Therefore, he was able to achieve outstanding political achievements and inspect officials. He was the first.

古文：凡厥在位，莫匪王臣，若能人思奉职，各展其效，朕将冕旒垂拱，何忧不治哉！ 
现代文：凡是在官位上的，没有哪个不是王臣，如能人人都想奉公尽职，各人施展其才能，我将垂拱而治，何愁天下不治呢？ 
English: In all official positions, there is no one who is not a prince. If everyone wants to serve the public and fulfill their duties, and everyone can use their talents, I will govern with confidence. Why worry about the world?

古文：于是进位金紫光禄大夫，赐物千段，太守如故。
现代文：于是提拔他当金紫光禄大夫，赐给他上千段缣帛，让他继续当太守。
English: Therefore, he was promoted to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and he was given more than a thousand rungs, so that he could continue to be the governor.

古文：五年，车驾西巡，将入吐谷浑。
现代文：大业五年，炀帝西巡，将到吐谷浑去。
English: After five years of hard work, Emperor Qian is driving westward and will enter Tugu Hun.

古文：子盖以彼多鄣气，献青木香以御雾露。
现代文：樊子盖因那里多有瘴气，献青木香以防雾露。
English: Because of the hazelnut cover, there is a lot of haze there, and the green wood incense is offered to prevent fog.

古文：及帝还，谓之曰： 人道公清，定如此不？ 
现代文：炀帝回来，对他说： 人人都说你很清白，真这样吗？ 
English: When Hao Di returned, he said to him, "Everyone says you are innocent, is that true?

古文：子盖谢曰： 臣安敢言清，止是小心不敢纳贿耳。 
现代文：樊子盖谢罪说： 我怎敢自称清廉，只是小心谨慎，不敢受贿罢了。 
English: Zongzi Gai Xie Sin said, "How dare I claim to be clean and honest, I am just being careful not to accept bribes."

古文：由此赐之口味百馀斛，又下诏曰： 导德齐礼，实惟共治，惩恶劝善，用明黜陟。
现代文：因此赐给他好吃的一百多斛。炀帝又下诏书说： 搞好道德教化，真是通用的治民办法。惩恶扬善，以明升降。
English: Therefore, he was given more than a hundred delicious gourds. Emperor Gao also issued an edict saying: To do a good job of moral education is a truly universal method of governing the people. Punish evil and promote good, and rise and fall with light.

古文：朕亲巡河右，观省人风，所历郡县，访采治绩，罕遵法度，多蹈刑网。
现代文：我亲自视察黄河以北地区，观察民风，经历各郡县，我都要考察政绩。这里很少遵守法令，大多触犯刑律。
English: I personally inspected the areas north of the Yellow River, observed the customs of the people, and went through each county and county. I had to examine the government's performance. There is little compliance with laws and regulations, and most of them violate the criminal law.

古文：而金紫光禄大夫、武威太守樊子盖，执操清洁，处涅不渝，立身雅正，临人以简。
现代文：但金紫光禄大夫、武威太守樊子盖，操行清廉，始终不渝，立身正派，为政简明。
English: However, Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu and Wu Wei Taishou Shanzi Gui were outstanding. They were incorruptible and unswerving in their conduct. They were upright and honest, and their politics were concise.

古文：威惠兼举，宽猛相资，故能畏而爱之，不严斯治。
现代文：他恩威并举，宽严兼济，所以百姓怕他爱他，不至于迫使他把政治搞得很严酷。
English: He is both benevolent and strict, so the people are afraid that he loves him and will not force him to make politics very harsh.

古文：实字人之盛绩，有国之良臣，宜加褒显，以弘奖励。
现代文：他实在有养民的大功绩，实在是国家的好大臣，应加以褒奖，以弘扬正气。
English: He really has made great achievements in supporting the people, and is really a good minister of the country. He should be commended in order to promote righteousness.

古文：可右光禄大夫，太守如故。 
现代文：授他右光禄大夫，仍旧当太守。 
English: He was given the title of Ukokoroku daibu (Master of the Right) and continued to serve as Daiju.

古文：赐缣千匹，粟麦二千斛。
现代文：赐给他缣帛一千匹，粮食二千斛。
English: And he gave him a thousand asses, and two thousand measures of corn.

古文：子盖又自陈曰： 臣自南裔，即适西垂，常为外臣，未居内职。
现代文：樊子盖又自陈说： 我是南方人，到了西边，常为外臣，未当京官，不能陪皇上，侍奉您。
English: I am from the south, and I have come to the west. I have often been a foreign minister, but I have never been an official in Beijing. I cannot accompany the emperor and serve you.

古文：不得陪属车，奉丹陛，溘死边城，没有遗恨。惟陛下察之。 
现代文：我死在边城，没有遗恨，只请陛下明察。 炀帝说： 你侍奉我，只不过侍奉一个人罢了。
English: I died in a border town, I have no grudge, I only ask Your Majesty to take a look. Emperor Zhao said: You serve me, but you only serve one person.

古文：帝曰： 公侍朕则一人而已，委以西方则万人之敌，宜识此心。 
现代文：把西边委托给你，你就是万人之敌。
English: Entrust the West to you, and you will be the enemy of all.

古文：六年，帝避暑陇川宫，又云欲幸河西。
现代文：应该明白我的用意。 大业六年，炀帝到陇川宫避暑，又说想到河西去。
English: In the sixth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Xizong spent the summer at the Xichuan Palace, and also said that he wanted to go on a pleasure tour to the west of Hexi.

古文：子盖倾望銮舆，愿巡郡境，帝知之，下诏曰： 卿夙怀恭顺，深执诚心，闻朕西巡，欣然望幸。
现代文：樊子盖盼望皇上去，盼望皇上巡视凉州。炀帝知道了，下诏书说： 你向来心怀忠诚，听说我西幸，欣然盼望我去。
English: Zong Zi Gui hoped that the emperor would go up, and hoped that the emperor would inspect Liangzhou. Emperor Zou learned of this, and issued an edict saying: You have always been loyal. I heard that I am fortunate, and I am looking forward to going.

古文：丹款之至，甚有可嘉。
现代文：你的耿耿忠心，真应嘉奖。
English: Your loyalty is truly commendable.

古文：宜保此纯诚，克终其美。 
现代文：应该保持这种纯洁的忠诚，直到最后。 
English: This chaste fidelity must be maintained to the end.

古文：是岁，朝于江都宫，帝谓之曰： 富贵不还故乡，真衣绣夜行耳。 
现代文：这年，他到江都宫朝见皇上。炀帝对他说： 富贵了却不回故乡去走走，就像穿着锦绣而夜里走路一样。 
English: That year, he went to the Jiangdu Palace to meet the emperor. Emperor Gao said to him: "If you are rich and do not go back to your hometown for a walk, it is like wearing brocade and walking at night."

古文：敕庐江郡设三千人会，赐米麦六千石，使谒坟墓，宴故老。当时荣之。
现代文：炀帝让子盖的故乡庐江郡搞个三千人的大聚会，赐给米麦六千石，让子盖回故乡拜谒祖坟，宴请父老乡亲，当时的人都以此为荣。
English: Emperor Qian allowed Ziguai's hometown, Minjiang County, to hold a large gathering of 3,000 people, gave 6,000 kilos of rice to Mimai, and allowed Ziguai to return to his hometown to pay homage to his ancestors' graves and invite his parents and fellow villagers to a banquet. People at that time were proud of this.

古文：还除民部尚书。
现代文：回京后授为民部尚书。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the title of Minbu Shosho.

古文：时处罗可汗及高昌王款塞，复以子盖检校武威太守，应接二蕃。
现代文：当时处罗可汗和高昌王都与朝廷通好，炀帝又让子盖任武威太守，与这两个蕃邦打交道。
English: At this time, Luo Khan and the King of Gaochang came to an amicable agreement, and Emperor Gao also served as the governor of Wuwei, and received the two kings.

古文：辽东之役，征摄左武卫将军，出长岑道。
现代文：辽东战争开始后，炀帝调他当左武卫将军，领兵出长岑道。
English: After the beginning of the Liaodong War, Emperor Gao transferred him to be the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, leading the troops out of the Changshu Road.

古文：后以宿卫不行。
现代文：后因要给炀帝当宿卫，没去成。
English: Later, he did not go because he was on guard duty at the palace.

古文：进授左光禄大夫，尚书如故。
现代文：提拔他当左光禄大夫，依旧当尚书。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zuo Guanglu's doctor, but he was still a scholar.

古文：其年帝还东都，以子盖为涿郡留守。
现代文：这年炀帝回东都，让子盖任涿郡留守。
English: This year, Emperor Xizong returned to Dongdu, leaving his son, Gui Ren, in charge of the county.

古文：九年，车驾复幸辽东，命子盖为东都留守。
现代文：大业九年，炀帝又到辽东去，命子盖为东都留守。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Qian went to Liaodong again, but his son Gui was left behind in Dongdu.

古文：属杨玄感作逆，来逼王城，子盖遣河南赞治裴弘策逆击之，返为所败，遂斩弘策以徇。
现代文：适逢杨玄感造反，来逼王城东都。子盖派河南赞治裴弘策迎击叛军，反为叛军所打败。子盖于是杀了裴弘策。
English: At the right time, Yang Xuanxuan rebelled and came to force Wangcheng Dongdu. Ziguai sent Henan Zanji Pei Hongtao to meet the rebels and was defeated by the rebels. Ziguai then killed Pei Hongtao.

古文：国子祭酒杨汪小有不恭，子盖又将斩之。
现代文：国子祭酒杨汪对他稍有不恭，子盖又要杀他。
English: Yang Wang, the national son's sacrificial drink, was a little disrespectful to him, and Zi Gai wanted to kill him.

古文：汪拜谢，顿首流血，久乃释免。
现代文：杨汪下拜谢罪，叩头叩出血来，很久以后才放他。
English: Yang Wang begged, Shantou bled, it took a long time to release him.

古文：于是三军莫不战栗，将吏无敢仰视。
现代文：于是三军没有不怕他的，将官们不敢抬头看他。
English: As a result, the three armies were all terrified, and none of the generals dared to look up.

古文：玄感每尽锐攻城，子盖徐设备御，至辄摧破，故久不能克。
现代文：杨玄感每次用尽精锐攻打东都，子盖都是不慌不忙地布防，叛军一来就被打败，所以很久不能打下东都。
English: Yang Xuanxuan felt that every time he used up his elite to attack Dongdu, Zigei would not rush to set up defenses, and the rebels would be defeated as soon as they arrived, so Dongdu could not be defeated for a long time.

古文：会来护兒等救至，玄感解去。
现代文：刚好来护儿的援兵到了，杨玄感就解去对东都的包围而离去。
English: Just as reinforcements arrived to take care of the children, Yang Xuanxuan felt relieved of the siege of Dongdu and left.

古文：子盖凡所诛杀者数万人。
现代文：子盖总共杀死的叛军有几万人。
English: In total, Zoga killed tens of thousands of rebels.

古文：又检校河南内史。
现代文：他又任检校河南内史。
English: He was also appointed inspector of Henan's internal history.

古文：车驾至高阳，追诣行在所。
现代文：炀帝到了高阳，他追到炀帝处。
English: When Emperor Xuan arrived in Gaoyang, he chased him to Emperor Xuan's quarters.

古文：既而引见，帝逆劳之曰： 昔高祖留萧何于关西，光武委寇恂以河内，公其人也。 
现代文：继而引他拜见皇上，炀帝迎接并慰劳他说： 往日汉高祖留萧何于关西，光武帝把河内委托给寇恂，你就是这样的人啊！ 
English: He then led him to meet the emperor, and Emperor Gong greeted and consoled him, saying: "In the past, the Han Emperor Gaozu left Xiao in Kansai, and Emperor Guangwu entrusted Hanoi to Guo Gan. You are such a person!

古文：子盖谢曰： 臣任重器小，宁可窃譬两贤！
现代文：樊子盖拜谢说： 我任重才小，怎可与这两位贤人相比？
English: Zongzi Gai Bai Xie said: I am too small, how can I compare with these two wise men?

古文：但以陛下威灵，小盗不足除耳。 
现代文：只因陛下威灵，小盗不值得清除罢了。 
English: It is only because of Your Majesty's Willingness that the thieves are not worth getting rid of.

古文：进位光禄大夫，封建安侯，尚书如故。
现代文：升他为光禄大夫，封为建安侯，仍旧当尚书。
English: He was promoted to doctor of Guanglu and given the title of Jian'an, but he was still a scholar.

古文：赐缣三千匹，女乐五十人。
现代文：赐他缣帛三千匹，女乐五十人。
English: He gave him three thousand donkeys and fifty female donkeys.

古文：子盖固让，优诏不许。
现代文：子盖推让不受，皇上不可。
English: The Empress cannot be pushed around.

古文：帝顾谓子盖曰： 朕遣越王留守东都，示以皇枝盘石；社稷大事，终以委公。
现代文：炀帝回头对子盖说： 我让越王留守东都，以显示皇家子孙重要。国家大事，最终还是要委托给你。
English: Emperor Xuan turned to Ziguai and said, "I let Yue Wang stay in Dongdu to show the importance of royal descendants. National affairs, in the end, should be entrusted to you."

古文：特宜持重，戈甲五百人而后出，此亦勇夫重闭之义也。
现代文：你特别应该稳重一点，有五百甲士保护，才能出门，这也是勇士注重防身的意思。
English: In particular, you should be steady and have 500 warriors to protect you before you go out, which is also the meaning of a warrior paying attention to self-defense.

古文：无赖不轨者，便诛锄之。
现代文：对那些无赖之徒和图谋不轨的就杀了他们。
English: As for the ruffians and schemers, kill them.

古文：凡可施行，无劳形迹。
现代文：凡是可以施行的，就不要麻烦上奏了。
English: Anything that can be done, don't bother to do.

古文：今为公别造玉麟符，以代铜兽。 
现代文：现在，特为你别造一枚玉麟符，以取代铜兽符。 
English: Nowadays, the jade unicorn symbol is used to replace the bronze beast-shaped symbol.

古文：又指越、代二王曰： 今以二孙委公与卫文升耳。
现代文：又指着越王、代王说： 我把这两个孙子交给你和卫文升。
English: He also pointed to King Yue and King Daewong and said, "Now I have entrusted these two grandsons to you and Wei Wensheng."

古文：宜选贞良宿德有方幅者教习之。
现代文：你要选择那些有德有才的人教导他们。
English: They should be taught by those who are loyal, good, virtuous, and of high moral character.

古文：动静之节，宜思其可。 
现代文：是动还是静，要想想这么做行不行。 
English: Whether it's moving or still, you have to think about whether it's possible to do this.

古文：于是赐以良田、甲第。
现代文：于是赐给子盖良田、府第。
English: As a result, reward was given to Shishigai Ryota and Yakudai.

古文：十年冬，车驾还东都，帝谓子盖曰： 玄感之反，神明故以彰公赤心耳。
现代文：大业十年冬天，炀帝回东都，对子盖说： 杨玄感造反，这是神明故意用这显示你的赤胆忠心罢了。
English: In the winter of the tenth year of Daye's reign, Emperor Yao returned to Dongdu and said to Zigu: "Yang Xuan sensed rebellion. This is just the gods deliberately using this to show your loyalty."

古文：析珪进爵，宜有令谟。 
现代文：给你加官晋爵，我应该有所指示。 
English: There should be a good plan for awarding Wang Guiyu and promoting him to a knighthood.

古文：是日下诏，进爵为济公，言其功济天下，特为立名，无此郡国也。
现代文：当天下诏书，让他晋爵为济公，说他功济天下，特意为他起这个名，并没有 济 这个郡国。
English: On the day of the imperial edict, he was promoted to the peerage of Jigong, saying that he had made great contributions to the world. He was specially given this name because he had not made any contributions to the county.

古文：赐缣三千匹，奴婢二十口。
现代文：赐他缣帛三千匹，奴婢二十口。
English: And he gave him three thousand asses, and twenty thousand menservants and maidservants.

古文：后与苏威、宇文述陪宴积翠亭，帝亲以金杯属子盖酒，曰： 良算嘉谋，俟公后动，即以此杯赐公，用为永年之瑞。 
现代文：他后来和苏威、宇文述在积翠亭陪皇上饮宴，炀帝亲自用金杯劝子盖喝酒，说： 好计谋要等你拿出来，就把这个金杯赐给你，以作为永远的祥瑞之物。 
English: Later, he and Su Wei and Yu Wen recounted a banquet at the Jie Cui Pavilion to accompany the emperor. Emperor Gao himself used a gold cup to persuade his son to drink, saying, "It is a good idea to wait until you take it out, then I will give you this gold cup as a forever auspicious thing."

古文：并绮罗百匹。
现代文：并赐他罗绮上百匹。
English: And he gave him a hundred rooks.

古文：十一年，从驾汾阳宫。
现代文：大业十一年，跟随炀帝到汾阳宫。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taiei era, he followed Emperor Shun to the Shanyang Palace.

古文：至于雁门，车驾为突厥所围，频战不利。
现代文：到了雁门，炀帝被突厥人包围，屡战不利。
English: When he arrived at the Wild Goose Gate, Emperor Yao was surrounded by the Turks and was repeatedly at a disadvantage.

古文：帝欲以精骑溃围而出，子盖谏曰： 陛下万乘之主，岂宜轻脱，一朝狼狈，虽悔不追。
现代文：炀帝想用精锐的骑兵突围出去，子盖劝阻说： 陛下是万乘之主，岂能轻忽？一朝狼狈，追悔不及。
English: Emperor Xuan wanted to break out of the encirclement with his elite cavalry, but Ziguai dissuaded him, saying, "Your Majesty is the Lord of Ten Thousand Paths, can't you be careless?

古文：未若守城以挫其锐，四面征兵，可立而待。
现代文：不如守城以挫其锐气，四面的援兵，可立而待。
English: It would be better to defend the city in order to deflate its spirit. Reinforcements on all sides could be waiting.

古文：陛下亦何所虑，乃欲身自突围！ 
现代文：陛下有什么可担心的，以至要亲自突围呢？ 
English: What has His Majesty to fear, that he should personally break out of the encirclement?

古文：因垂泣， 愿暂停辽东之役，以慰众望。
现代文：他因此而垂泪哭泣说： 请陛下暂停辽东战争，以慰天下。
English: For this reason, he shed tears and wept and said, "Please, Your Majesty, suspend the Liaodong War to comfort the world."

古文：圣躬亲出慰抚，厚为勋格，人心自奋，不足为忧。 
现代文：圣上亲自出去安抚众人，厚加赏赐，人心自奋，不足为忧。 
English: The emperor himself went out to appease them, he increased their ranks, everyone naturally fought bravely, and the siege of the Turkish soldiers was not enough to worry about.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：其后援兵稍至，虏乃引去。
现代文：这以后援兵稍至，突厥人于是离去。
English: A little later reinforcements arrived and the Turks left.

古文：纳言苏威追论勋格太重，宜在斟酌。
现代文：纳言苏威追论赏赐太重了，应该斟酌一下。
English: Nagan Su Hao said that the award is too heavy and should be considered.

古文：子盖执奏不宜失信。
现代文：子盖坚持说不能失信。
English: Don't break your promise to play the dulcimer.

古文：帝曰： 公欲收物情邪？ 
现代文：炀帝说： 你想收买人心吗？ 
English: Emperor Zou said, "Does the public want to buy off human feelings?

古文：子盖默然不敢对。
现代文：子盖默然，不敢回答。
English: Zong Zi Gui was silent, not daring to answer.

古文：从驾还东都。时绛郡贼敬槃陀、柴保昌等阻兵数万，汾、晋苦之。
现代文：他随炀帝回到东都，当时绛城反贼敬般陀、柴保昌等人率兵几万，汾阳、晋阳一带深以为苦。
English: He returned to Dongdu with Emperor Qian. At that time, the anti-thieves in Qiancheng were led by Pandu, Chai Baochang and others with tens of thousands of soldiers, and the areas around Shenyang and Jinyang were deeply distressed.

古文：诏令子盖进讨。
现代文：下诏命令子盖进剿。
English: He ordered the lid to be put into the urn.

古文：于时人物殷阜，子盖善恶无所分别，汾水之北，村坞尽焚之。
现代文：当时人多物盛，子盖不分善恶，把汾水以北的村落全烧了。
English: At that time, there were a lot of people and goods. Regardless of good or evil, Zigei burned all the villages north of Surabaya.

古文：百姓大骇，相率为盗。
现代文：百姓十分惊骇，都去作强盗。
English: The people were so frightened that they became thieves.

古文：其有归首者，无少长悉坑之。
现代文：有些来投降的，不管老少全部活埋。
English: Some came to surrender, and all of them, young and old, were buried alive.

古文：拥数万之众，经年不能破贼，有诏征还。
现代文：子盖拥有几万之众，却连年不能破贼，有诏书调他回京。
English: Zogai has tens of thousands of followers, but he has not been able to defeat the bandits for years. He was ordered to return to Beijing.

古文：又将兵击宜阳贼，以疾停，卒于京第，时年七十有二。
现代文：他又率兵进攻宜阳反贼，因病作罢，在京都府第中去世，时年七十二岁。
English: He also led troops to attack Yiyang against the bandits, but was forced to stop due to illness, and died at the age of seventy-two at Dai Junior High School in Kyoto Prefecture.

古文：上悲伤者久之，顾谓黄门侍郎裴矩曰： 子盖临终有何语？ 
现代文：炀帝悲伤很久，回头对黄门侍郎裴矩说： 子盖临终时有什么话没有？ 
English: Emperor Xuan was sad for a long time. He turned to Pei Neng, the Yellow Gate's steward, and said, "What did Zoga have to say on his deathbed?

古文：矩对曰： 子盖病笃，深恨雁门之耻。 
现代文：裴矩回答说： 子盖病重时，深以皇上雁门被困为耻。 
English: Pei replied, "When Zige was gravely ill, I was deeply ashamed that Emperor Yanmen was trapped.

古文：帝闻而叹息，令百官就吊，赐缣三百匹，米五百斛，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰景。
现代文：炀帝听了，叹息不已，让百官到樊府吊口言，赐樊家缣帛三百匹，米五百斛，追赠他为开府仪同三司，谥号为 景 。
English: Emperor Xuan listened and sighed deeply. He sent hundreds of officials to Xuanfu to deliver a speech. He gave Xuanfu three hundred yakitori horses and five hundred yakitori rice, and posthumously awarded him the title of Kaifu Yidong Sanji, and his posthumous name was Jing.

古文：会葬者万馀人。
现代文：送葬的有一万多人。
English: More than 10,000 people attended the funeral.

古文：武威民吏闻其死，莫不嗟痛，立碑颂德。
现代文：武威的官吏百姓听说他死了，没有不嗟叹痛惜的，为他立碑颂德。
English: When the officials and people of Wuwei heard that he had died, there was no one who did not lament and regret, and set up a monument in his honor.

古文：子盖无他权略，在军持重，未尝负败，临民明察，下莫敢欺。
现代文：樊子盖没有别的本事，带兵持重，未曾失败；治民明察，下不敢欺。
English: Zong Zi Gai has no other ability, he has never failed to lead soldiers and hold a heavy burden; he governs the people attentively and does not dare to deceive them.

古文：然严酷少恩，果于杀戮，临终之日，见断头鬼前后重沓为之厉云。
现代文：但他严酷少恩，敢于杀戮。临终那天，看见断头鬼在他前后走来走去，当他的恶鬼。
English: But he was harsh and ungrateful, and dared to kill. On the day of his death, he saw the decapitated ghost walking around in front of him, as his evil spirit.

古文：○史祥
现代文：○史祥
English: ○Shi Xiang

古文：史祥，字世休，朔方人也。
现代文：史祥字世休，朔方人。
English: Shi Xiangzhe is now retired, and is now a retired person.

古文：父宁，周少司徒。
现代文：父亲史宁，北周少司徒。
English: His father is Shi Ning, and his younger brother is Bei Zhou.

古文：祥少有文武才干，仕周太子车右中士，袭爵武遂县公。
现代文：史祥少有文才武略，仕北周，为太子车右中士，袭爵位为武遂县公。
English: Shi Xiang was a man of rare talent in literature and military strategy. He served the Northern Zhou Dynasty and was the right-hand sergeant of the prince's carriage. He inherited the title of Wu Sui County official.

古文：高祖践阼，拜仪同，领交州事，进爵阳城郡公。
现代文：隋高祖受北周禅让后，授他仪同，兼管交州事，晋爵为阳城郡公。
English: After Sui Gao Zu was ceded by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was given the title of Yi Tong, and was also in charge of state affairs. He was promoted to the rank of Yangcheng County official.

古文：祥在州颇有惠政。
现代文：史祥在交州，颇有仁政。
English: Shi Xiang in Jiaozhou, quite benevolent.

古文：后数年，转骠骑将军。
现代文：几年后，转任骠骑将军。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the post of cavalry general.

古文：伐陈之役，从宜阳公王世积，以舟师出九江道，先锋与陈人合战，破之，进拔江州。
现代文：在伐陈战争中，他随宜阳公王世积，率水军出九江道，为先锋，与陈军交战，打败陈军，进占江州。
English: During the Chen Campaign, he followed the lead of Yiyang Prince Wang Shijie and led the naval forces out of Jiujiang Province. As the vanguard, he fought and defeated the Chen forces and occupied Jiangzhou.

古文：上闻而大悦，下诏曰： 朕以陈叔宝世为僭逆，挻虐生民，故命诸军，救彼涂炭。
现代文：皇上听到消息，十分高兴，下诏书说： 我因陈叔宝世代为逆，肆虐百姓，所以命令诸军拯救那里的人民。
English: When the Emperor heard the news, he was very happy, and issued the following edict: "I have ordered the armies to save the people there because Chen Shubao's generation has been rebellious and has wreaked havoc on the people.

古文：小寇狼狈，顾恃江湖之险，遂敢泛舟楫拟抗王师。
现代文：小寇狼狈为奸，仗着江湖之险，所以敢泛舟江湖，对抗王师。
English: Xiao Kou acted as a traitor, taking advantage of the danger of the river and lake, so he dared to cross the river and lake to confront Wang Shi.

古文：公亲率所部，应机奋击，沉溺俘获，厥功甚茂。
现代文：你亲率所部，抓住机会奋勇进击，把敌人沉到江底又俘虏很多，其功很大。
English: You personally led your troops, seized the opportunity to attack bravely, sank the enemy to the bottom of the river and captured many prisoners, which was a great achievement.

古文：又闻帅旅进取江州。
现代文：又听说你率部攻占江州。
English: I've also heard that you and your troops have captured Jiangzhou.

古文：行军总管、襄邑公贺若弼既获京口，新义公韩擒寻克姑熟。
现代文：行军总管、襄邑公贺若弼既占京口，新义公韩擒虎攻克姑熟。
English: The general manager of the march, Xiangyi Gong He Ruo, occupied the capital, while Xinyi Gong Han Ruo defeated the tigers.

古文：骠骑既渡江岸，所在横行。
现代文：你骠骑将军既已渡江，自当所向无敌。
English: Once you have crossed the river, you will be invincible.

古文：晋王兵马即入建业，清荡吴、越，旦夕非远。
现代文：晋王的兵马将进建业，扫荡吴、越，为期不远。
English: Jin's soldiers and horses will march into Jianye and sweep through Wu and Yue for a short period of time.

古文：骠骑高才壮志，是朕所知，善为经略，以取大赏，使富贵功名永垂竹帛也。 
现代文：你骠骑将军的高才壮志，是我所知道的。望你好好经略，以立大功，得大赏，使富贵功名永垂史册。 
English: I know of your lofty ambition to ride a general. I hope that you will manage your affairs well, achieve great feats, win great rewards, and perpetuate your wealth and fame in the history books.

古文：进位上开府。
现代文：升他为上开府。
English: He was promoted to the position of Joko Kaifu.

古文：寻拜蕲州总管，未几，征拜左领左右将军。
现代文：不久，授他蕲州总管。不久，调任左领左右将军。
English: Soon, he was given the post of the chief administrator of Zhangzhou. Soon, he was transferred to the post of the left-collar general.

古文：后以行军总管从晋王广击突厥于灵武，破之。
现代文：后以行军总管身份，随晋王杨广在灵武进攻突厥，大破敌军。
English: Later, as the commander-in-chief of the march, he followed the Jin king Yang Guang in the Lingwu offensive against the Turks and defeated the enemy army.

古文：迁右卫将军。
现代文：升任右卫将军。
English: Promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：仁寿中，率兵屯弘化以备胡。
现代文：仁寿中，他率部屯扎弘化，以防备胡人。
English: In Renshou, he led his troops to occupy Honghua to prevent the Hu people from coming.

古文：炀帝时在东宫，遗祥书曰：
现代文：炀帝那时任东宫太子，送书信给史祥说：将军领兵在塞外，胡虏清尘。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao was the crown prince of the Eastern Palace, and sent a letter to Shi Xiang saying: "The general is leading the troops outside the fortress, and the henchmen are in the dust.

古文：将军总戎塞表，胡虏清尘，秣马休兵，犹事校猎，足使李广惭勇，魏尚愧能，冠彼二贤，独在吾子。
现代文：禾末马休兵，尚事打猎，足使李广惭愧于你的大勇，魏尚惭愧于你的大能。超过这两位贤人的，只有你了。
English: At the end of the war, Ma retired from the army, but continued to hunt. Li Guang was ashamed of your bravery, and Wei was ashamed of your power. You are the only one who surpasses these two wise men.

古文：昔余滥举，推毂治兵，振皇灵于塞外，驱犬羊乎大漠。
现代文：往日我滥竽充数，得以领兵，振皇威于塞外，驱犬羊于大漠。
English: In the past, I have been able to lead troops, raise the prestige of the emperor outside of Tibet, and drive dogs and sheep in the desert.

古文：于时同行军旅，契阔戎旃，望龙城而冲冠，眄狼居而发愤。
现代文：那是我们同行于军旅之中，相聚于军旗之下。我们望龙城而怒发冲冠，看狼居而发愤振威。
English: It was when we were traveling together in the army, gathered under the military flag. We looked at the Dragon City and were furious, and we looked at the Wolf House and were furious.

古文：将军英图不世，猛气无前，但物不遂心，俛从事。
现代文：将军你谋略盖世，勇往直前，但事不遂心，不能与你一起共事。
English: General, you've plotted your way into the world, and you've made great strides, but you haven't been able to accomplish your goals, and I can't work with you.

古文：每一思此，我劳如何。
现代文：每每想到这里，我心里愁得什么似的。
English: Every time I think about it, I feel sad inside.

古文：将军宿心素志，早同胶漆，久而敬之，方成鱼水。
现代文：将军你志向远大，我们早就如胶似漆，久而久之，我更敬重你，所以我们如同鱼水。
English: General, you are ambitious, we have long been like glue like paint, over time, I respect you more, so we are like fish water.

古文：近者陪随銮驾，言旋上京，本即述职南蕃，宣条下国，不悟皇鉴曲发，备位少阳，战战兢兢，如临冰谷。
现代文：近来我陪伴跟随皇上，说到上京长安去。我本想到南方我的番国去，在下国宣传皇上的旨意，不料皇上改变初衷，让我当了太子，我真是战战兢兢，如临深谷，如履薄冰。
English: Recently, I accompanied the Emperor when he went to Beijing and Chang'an. I had originally planned to go to the south, to my patron country, to propagate the Emperor's will in the country below. However, the Emperor changed his original intention and made me crown prince. I was really trembling, as if I were standing in a deep valley, treading on thin ice.

古文：至如建节边境，征伐四方，褰帷作牧，绥抚百姓，上禀成规，下尽臣节，是所愿也，是所甘心。
现代文：至于建节于边疆，征讨四方，在军帐里作一方长官，安抚百姓，上按规矩办事，下尽臣子之忠，这是我的愿望，是我所心甘情愿的。
English: As for building a festival in the borderlands, soliciting the four sides, acting as the commander of one side in the military account, pacifying the people, acting according to the rules at the top, and fulfilling the loyalty of the vassals at the bottom, this is my wish, I am willing.

古文：仰慕前修，庶得自效。
现代文：仰慕前贤，庶几可以报效国家。
English: Admire the former sages, and a few of them can serve the country.

古文：谬其入守神器，元良万国，身轻负重，何以克堪！
现代文：不料让我当了太子，入守神器，当万国首领。我身轻负重，怎能承受得了？
English: Unexpectedly, I was made the crown prince, the keeper of the sacred treasures, and the leader of all nations. How could I bear such a heavy burden?

古文：所望故人，匡其不逮。
现代文：希望老朋友帮助我。近来监国，很多空闲。
English: I hope my old friend will help me. I have been in charge of the country recently, and I have a lot of free time.

古文：比监国多暇，养疾闲宫，厌北阁之端居，罢南皮之驰射。
现代文：养病于闲宫之中，厌烦在北阁的闲居，不能在南皮骑马射箭。
English: He was fed up with the idleness of the North Pavilion, and could not ride a horse and shoot arrows in Nanpi.

古文：博望之苑，既乏名贤，飞盖之园，理乖终宴。
现代文：博望苑里，既缺名贤，飞盖园中，当然不会与凡庸之辈终宴。
English: In Bohangyuan Garden, there is a lack of famous people, and in Feigai Garden, of course, there will not be a banquet with ordinary people.

古文：亲朋远矣，琴书寂然，想望吾贤，疹如疾首。
现代文：亲朋们远走了，琴书都寂寞了，我想念我的贤士们，就像生了病，头很痛一样。
English: My relatives and friends are far away, my piano books are all lonely, I miss my sages, it's like I'm ill and my head hurts.

古文：祥答书曰：行人戾止，奉所赐况，恩纪绸缪，形于文墨。
现代文：史祥复信说：送信的人来临，我奉读了您赐给我的书信，知道了您的情况。您对我的恩情，形诸文墨。
English: Shi Xiang replied to the letter, "The sender has arrived. I have read the letter you gave me and learned about your situation. Your kindness to me is written in ink.

古文：不悟飞雪增冰之地，忽载三阳，毳幙韦韝之乡，俄闻九奏。
现代文：不料这飞雪增冰之地，忽然出了三春的太阳；这毳巾莫束袖的荒蛮地方，忽略听到了萧韶之乐。
English: Unexpectedly, in this land of flying snow and increasing ice, the sun of the third spring suddenly appeared; in this wild place with scarves and sleeves, I heard Xiao Yu's music.

古文：精骇思越，莫知启处。
现代文：我惊喜不已，思绪飞向远方，不知从何说起。
English: I was so surprised, my thoughts flew far away, I didn't know where to start.

古文：祥少不学军旅，长遇升平，幸以先人绪馀，备职宿卫。
现代文：史祥我小时未学军旅打仗，长大后又遇到太平世界，有幸因先人的余荫，得以当上宿卫。
English: Shi Xiang, when I was a child, I did not learn to fight in the army, and when I grew up, I encountered a peaceful world. I was fortunate to be able to become a night watchman because of the shadow of my ancestors.

古文：惧驽蹇无致远之用，朽薄非折冲之材，岂欲追踪古人，语其优劣？
现代文：我怕自己才如驽马，没有到远处去的本事；人如朽木，没有折冲之才。怎敢追随古人，与他们比优劣？
English: I'm afraid that I'm just like a pack horse, without the ability to go far away; people are like rotten wood, without the ability to break. How dare I follow the ancients and compare myself with them?

古文：曩者王师薄伐，天人受脤，绝漠扬旌，威震海外。
现代文：往昔王师征讨，天人都受到帮助；挥旗大漠，国威震动海外。
English: In the past, emperors and scholars were solicited, and the people were helped; the flag was waved in the desert, and the country's prestige was shaken overseas.

古文：当此之时，猛将如云，谋夫如雨。至若祥者，列于卒伍，预闻指踪之规，得免逗遛之责，循涯揣分，实为幸甚。
现代文：在那个时候，猛将如云，谋士如雨，至于我史祥，只不过排队在兵卒之中，得以听到您的指挥号令，得以免除逗留的责罚罢了。我能有机会根据您的指挥，揣摩您的用意，实在是我的大幸！
English: At that time, the fierce general was like a cloud, and the counselor was like rain. As for me, Shi Xiang, I just lined up among the soldiers to hear your command and to be exempted from the punishment of staying. I was lucky to have the opportunity to guess your intention according to your command.

古文：爰以情喻雷、陈，事方刘、葛，信圣人之屈己，非庸人之拟议。
现代文：您于是把我们的感情比作雷、陈，把交往的事情比作刘、葛，这实在是圣人您委曲自己，并非庸人我想这么去比。
English: You then compared our feelings to thunder and chen, and the things we interact with to liu and ge, which is really a saint you have appointed yourself, not a mediocrity I think so to compare.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：川泽之大，污潦攸归，松柏之高，茑萝斯托。
现代文：川泽很大，污水也归去；松柏很高，茑萝就依托它。
English: The river is large, and the sewage is also returned; the pine is high, and the dill is supported by it.

古文：微心眷眷，孟侯所知也。
现代文：我这依恋之心，是您所知道的。
English: You know the reason for my attachment.

古文：抑惟体元良之德，焕重离之晖，三善克修，万邦以正。
现代文：敬请您发扬元首的品德，焕发太阳的光辉，修行三善，那么天下万国就好了。
English: I respectfully ask you to carry forward the moral character of the head of state, radiate the brilliance of the sun, and practice the three virtues. Then all the nations of the world will be better off.

古文：斯固道高周诵，契叶商皓，岂在管蠡所能窥测！
现代文：这样，就会道行高过周诵，友好超过商山四皓。您的伟大，怎能管窥得到？
English: In this way, the Tao will be higher than the recitation, and the friendship will exceed the four mountains of commerce. How can you get a glimpse of your greatness?

古文：伏承监国多暇，养德怡神，咀嚼六经，逍遥百氏。
现代文：您监国多闲，还请您养德怡神，读六经和诸子百家。
English: Your supervision of the country is more than idle, and I also ask you to cultivate virtue and virtue, read the Six Classics and hundreds of sons and daughters.

古文：追西园之爱客，眷南皮之出游，畴昔之恩，无忘造次。
现代文：过去和您追西园之爱客，眷顾南皮的出游，您过去给我的恩典，我不会忘记。
English: I won't forget the grace you gave me in the past, when you chased the West Park's beloved guests and took care of Nanpi's outing.

古文：祥自忝式遏，载罹寒暑，身在边隅，情驰魏阙。
现代文：史祥我自从忝为边将，几过寒暑。我身在边疆，心向朝廷。
English: Shi Xiang, I have been a border guard since I was a young man, and I have been through the hot and cold weather. I am in the frontier, and my heart is in the imperial court.

古文：每至清风夕起，朗月孤照，想鸣葭之启路，思托乘于后车。
现代文：每到傍晚，清风徐起，明月孤照，就想鸣葭开路，就想坐在车后回到朝廷去。
English: Every evening, when the clear wind slowly rises and the bright moon shines, I want to open the road, I want to sit in the back of the car and go back to the court.

古文：塞表京华，山川悠远，瞻望浮云，伏增潸结。
现代文：边疆与京师山川悠远。仰望浮云，让我潸然泪下。
English: The frontier is far away from Beijing and the mountains and rivers. Looking up at the clouds, I burst into tears.

古文：太子甚亲遇之。
现代文：太子对他很亲近。
English: The prince is very close to him.

古文：炀帝即位，汉王谅发兵作乱，遣其将綦良自滏口徇黎阳，塞白马津，余公理自太行下河内。
现代文：炀帝即位后，汉王杨谅发兵造反，派部将綦良从滏口到黎阳，堵住白马津；派余公理从太行下河内。
English: After Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, the Han King Yang Peng sent troops to rebel. He sent the faction of Qian Liang from Hekou to Liyang to block Baima Jin; he sent the faction of Yu Gong Li from Taihang to Hanoi.

古文：帝以祥为行军总管，军于河阴，久不得济。
现代文：炀帝任史祥为行军总管，驻扎在河阴，好久不能过黄河。
English: Emperor Qian appointed Shi Xiang as the general manager of the march, stationed in Heyin, and could not cross the Yellow River for a long time.

古文：祥谓军吏曰： 余公理轻而无谋，才用素不足称，又新得志，谓其众可恃。恃众必骄。
现代文：史祥对部下说： 余公理轻佻无谋，才能一向不足称道。他又新近得志，以为部下很多可以依靠，仗着人多，必然骄傲。
English: Shi Xiang said to his subordinates: Yu Gong Li is frivolous and unscrupulous, and his ability has always been less than commendable. He has recently gained his ambition, thinking that he can rely on many subordinates, rely on many people, and must be proud.

古文：且河北人先不习兵，所谓拥市人而战。
现代文：而且，黄河以北的人不习兵战，即人们所说把市民赶去作战。
English: Moreover, people north of the Yellow River are not used to military warfare, that is, they are said to drive citizens to fight.

古文：以吾筹之，不足图也。 
现代文：照我看来，他不难对付。 
English: I don't think he's that hard to deal with.

古文：乃令军中修攻具，公理使谍知之，果屯兵于河阳内城以备祥。
现代文：于是下令军中修造进攻用的器具。余公理派人侦察到情况后，果然把部队驻扎在河阳内城，以防备史祥。
English: Therefore, he ordered the army to build offensive equipment. After Yu Gongri sent someone to investigate the situation, he actually stationed the troops in the inner city of Hayao to prevent Shixiang.

古文：祥于是舣船南岸，公理聚甲以当之。
现代文：史祥于是把船靠在黄河南岸，余公理聚集甲兵以阻挡。
English: Shi Xiang then put the ship on the south bank of the Yellow River, and Yu Gongli gathered armored soldiers to block it.

古文：祥乃简精锐于下流潜渡，公理率众拒之。
现代文：史祥于是挑选精兵从下游偷偷渡河，余公理率部拒守。
English: Shi Xiang then selected elite soldiers to sneak across the river from the lower reaches, and Yu Gongli refused to defend himself.

古文：祥至须水，两军相对，公理未成列，祥纵击，大破之。
现代文：史祥到了须水，两军相对，公理军没布好阵，史祥纵兵猛攻，大破公理。
English: When Shi Xiang arrived at the water's edge, the two armies faced each other. The Gong Li army did not set up a good front, and Shi Xiang's longitudinal soldiers stormed and broke the Gong Li.

古文：东趣黎阳讨綦良等。
现代文：史祥东进黎阳，讨伐綦良等人。
English: Shi Xiang marched eastward to Liyang and fought with Qiliang and others.

古文：良列阵以待，兵未接，良弃军而走。
现代文：綦良摆好阵势等待，还未交战，綦良就弃军逃走了。
English: Hailiang set up a position and waited. Before the battle, Hailiang abandoned the army and fled.

古文：于是其众大溃，祥纵兵乘之，杀万余人。
现代文：于是他的部下溃不成军，史祥乘机纵兵，杀了一万多人。
English: As a result, his subordinates were routed and could not form an army, and Shi Xiang took advantage of the situation and killed more than ten thousand people.

古文：进位上大将军，赐缣彩七千段，女妓十人，良马二十匹。
现代文：史祥升任上大将军，赐缣采七千段，女乐十人，良马二十匹。
English: Shi Xiang was promoted to the rank of senior general, and was given seven thousand dan, ten female singers, and twenty good horses.

古文：转太仆卿。
现代文：转任太仆卿。
English: He was transferred to the position of Taihoku-kyo.

古文：帝尝赐祥诗曰： 伯煚朝寄重，夏侯亲遇深。
现代文：皇上曾赐史祥诗道： 伯朝寄重，夏侯亲遇深。
English: The emperor once gave Shi Xiang a poem: "Hao Zhao was a heavyweight, Xia Hou was a heavyweight.

古文：贵耳唯闻古，贱目讵知今，早厓劲草质，久有背淮心。
现代文：贵耳唯闻古，贱目讵知今。早扌票劲草质，久有背淮心。
English: Your ears only hear the past, but your eyes only see the present. The morning mistletoe is vigorous and grassy, and has a long history.

古文：扫逆黎山外，振旅河之阴。
现代文：扫逆黎山外，振旅河之阴。
English: Sweeping away the shadow of Mount Lishan, shaking off the shadow of the Lijiang River.

古文：功已书王府，留情《太仆箴》。 
现代文：功已书王府，留情《太仆箴》。 
English: For his services to the Imperial Household Agency, he received a pardon for "The Servant of the Emperor."

古文：祥上表辞谢，帝降手诏曰： 昔岁劳公问罪河朔，贼尔日塞两关之路，据仓阻河，百姓胁从，人亦众矣。
现代文：史祥上表辞谢，炀帝亲草诏书说： 往年有劳你问罪兴师于河北，反贼那时占据了两关之路，占据粮仓，阻断黄河，百姓胁从，人也很多了。
English: Shi Xiang made a speech of thanks, and Emperor Qian said in the imperial edict: In previous years, you had the trouble to ask the sin of Xing Shi in Hebei. At that time, the anti-thieves occupied the two pass roads, occupied the granaries, blocked the Yellow River, and the people obeyed. There were many people.

古文：公竭诚奋勇，一举克定。
现代文：你尽忠奋勇，一举克定。
English: You've been loyal and brave, and you've held your ground.

古文：《诗》不云乎： 丧乱既平，既安且宁。 
现代文：《诗经》上不是说 丧乱既年，既安且宁 吗？
English: Isn't it said in the Book of Songs that after years of turmoil comes peace and tranquility?

古文：非英才大略，其孰能与于此邪！
现代文：如不是有雄才大略，谁能到这一步呀？
English: Who would have made it this far if it hadn't been for a stroke of genius?

古文：故聊示所怀，亦何谢也。 
现代文：所以我略略表示一下感谢之情，你又何必推辞呢？ 
English: So I'll say a little thank you, why don't you take it back?

古文：寻迁鸿胪卿。
现代文：不久，史祥升任鸿胪卿。
English: Soon after, Shi Xiang was promoted to Hongyuqing.

古文：时突厥启民可汗请朝，帝遣祥迎接之。
现代文：当时，突厥的启民可汗请求朝拜炀帝，炀帝让史祥去迎接他。
English: At that time, the Turkic Qimin Khan requested to pay homage to Emperor Zhao, and Emperor Zhao let Shi Xiang go to meet him.

古文：从征吐谷浑，祥率众出间道击虏，破之，俘男女千馀口。
现代文：跟随炀帝征讨吐谷浑，史祥率部从小路袭击贼人，打败了他们，俘虏男女一千多人。
English: Following Emperor Qian's campaign against the Tuyugun, Shi Xiang and his troops attacked the bandits from a side road, defeated them, and captured more than a thousand men and women.

古文：赐奴婢六十人，马三百匹。
现代文：炀帝赐他奴婢六十人，马三百匹。
English: The emperor gave him sixty male and female slaves and three hundred horses.

古文：进位左光禄大夫，拜左骁卫将军。
现代文：升任左光禄大夫，拜授左骁卫将军。
English: He was promoted to Doctor of the Left Guanglu and awarded the title of General of the Left Hanwei.

古文：及辽东之役，出蹋顿道，不利而还。
现代文：辽东战争中，他率部出蹋顿道，不利而还。
English: In the Liaodong War, he led his troops out of the Shandong Province, but was defeated.

古文：寿卒后，帝追思之，擢敏为守内史舍人，而交通博徒，数漏泄省中语。
现代文：因此削职为民。不久授他燕郡太守，被贼人高开道所包围，史祥装病不管事。城陷后，高开道对他很客气。
English: Therefore, he resigned his post and became a commoner. Soon, he was appointed the governor of Yan County. He was surrounded by the thief Gao Kaido, and Shi Xiang pretended to be ill and did not care. After the fall of the city, Gao Kaido was very polite to him.

古文：化及之反也，敏创其谋，伪授内史侍郎，为沈光所杀。○杨义臣
现代文：○杨义臣
English: ○Yang Yichen

古文：杨义臣，代人也，本姓尉迟氏。
现代文：杨义臣，代人，本姓尉迟。
English: Yang Yichen, acting, real surname Fuzi.

古文：父崇，仕周为仪同大将军，以兵镇恆山。
现代文：父亲尉迟崇，仕北周，为仪同大将军，率兵镇守恒山。
English: His father's first lieutenant was Chi Chong, and his second in command was Bei Zhou, who was the grand general of the Yi Tong army and led the troops to defend Hengshan.

古文：时高祖为定州总管，崇知高祖相貌非常，每自结纳，高祖甚亲待之。
现代文：当时，隋高祖任定州总管。尉迟崇知道高祖相貌非常，常常与他交结，高祖对他很亲近。
English: At that time, Sui Gaozu was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou. Ye Xi Chong knew that Gaozu was very good-looking and often crossed paths with him. Gaozu was very close to him.

古文：及为丞相，尉迥作乱，崇以宗族之故，自囚于狱，遣使请罪。
现代文：高祖为北周丞相后，尉迟迥造反，尉迟崇因与反贼是同族的缘故，把自己关在牢里，派人赴京请罪。
English: After Gao Zu became the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he rebelled, and because he was of the same race as the rebels, he locked himself in prison and sent someone to Beijing to plead guilty.

古文：高祖下书慰谕之，即令驰驿入朝，恆置左右。
现代文：高祖下书慰问他，让他乘驿车回朝，把他老是安排在身边。
English: Gao Zu comforted him with a letter, let him take a tuk-tuk back to the North, and always kept him by his side.

古文：开皇初，封秦兴县公。
现代文：开皇初年，封尉迟崇为秦兴县公爵。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, the prince of Qinxing County became the Duke of Qinxing County.

古文：岁馀，从行军总管达奚长儒击突厥于周盘，力战而死。
现代文：过了一年多，他随行军总管达奚长儒到周盘反击突厥，力战而死。
English: More than a year later, he accompanied the commander-in-chief of the marching army, Dagu Changru, to Zhoupan to fight back against the Turks, and died in battle.

古文：赠大将军、豫州刺史，以义臣袭崇官爵。
现代文：追赠他为大将军、豫州刺史，以尉迟义臣承袭他的官爵。
English: He posthumously granted him the title of grand general, and the title of prince of Yuzhou, and the title of lieutenant and minister of justice to succeed him.

古文：时义臣尚幼，养于宫中，年未弱冠，奉诏宿卫如千牛者数年，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：当时义臣还年幼，养育在宫中。不满二十岁，就已奉诏像千牛那样当侍卫几年了，皇上给他的赏赐很多。
English: At that time, Yoshinobu was still young and was raised in the palace. At the age of less than twenty, he had already served as an attendant for several years, and the emperor gave him many rewards.

古文：上尝从容言及恩旧，顾义臣嗟叹久之，因下诏曰： 朕受命之初，群凶未定，明识之士，有足可怀。
现代文：皇上闲谈时曾说到过去的一些朋友，看着义臣，嗟叹很久。因此下诏书说： 我刚受命登基时，群凶尚未平定，有识之士，有足可怀。
English: When the Emperor was chatting, he mentioned some of his friends from the past. He looked at Yoshinobu and sighed for a long time. Therefore, the next imperial edict said, "When I was newly appointed to the throne, the evil hordes had not yet been subdued, and there was still room for those with insight.

古文：尉义臣与尉迥，本同骨肉，既狂悖作乱鄴城，其父崇时在常山，典司兵甲，与迥邻接，又是至亲，知逆顺之理，识天人之意，即陈丹款，虑染恶徒，自执有司，请归相府。
现代文：尉迟义臣与尉迟迥，本同骨肉。尉迟迥既已作乱于邺城，其父尉迟崇当时在常山，统帅部队，既与尉迟迥相邻，又与尉迟迥是至亲。他知道逆顺的大理，认识天人的意思，就陈述丹心，担心被反贼牵连，于是自己把自己抓起来，请求到丞相府来。
English: Yixin Yixin and Yixin Yixin were originally the same flesh and blood. Yixin Yixin had already caused a disturbance in Shicheng, and his father, Yixong Yixin, was in Changshan at that time, commanding the troops. He was both a neighbor of Yixin Yixin and a close relative of Yixin Yixin. He knew the principle of reversing the order, knew the will of heaven and earth, and stated his heart, fearing to be implicated by anti-thieves, so he arrested himself and asked to come to the prime minister's office.

古文：及北夷内侵，横戈制敌，轻生重义，马革言旋。
现代文：到北狄入侵时，他又横戈杀敌，轻生重义，马革裹尸。
English: When the Northern Di invaded, he fought against and killed the enemy. He was a man of few words, and his body was shrouded in cloth.

古文：操表存亡，事贯幽显，虽高官大赏，延及于世，未足表松筠之志，彰节义之门。
现代文：他的节操表现在生死之上，他的事迹贯穿于人间地下。即使是给他高官大赏，并让官爵延及于他的子孙，也不足以表彰他松柏一样的壮志，也不足以表彰他的节义门庭。
English: His self-restraint is manifested in life and death, and his deeds run through the human underground. Even giving him a high-ranking award and extending the title of nobility to his descendants is not enough to commend his pine-like ambition, nor is it enough to commend his self-restraint.

古文：义臣可赐姓杨氏，赐钱三万贯，酒三十斛，米麦各百斛，编之属籍，为皇从孙。 
现代文：义臣，可赐姓杨氏，赐钱三万贯，酒三十斛，米麦各百斛，把他编入杨门家谱，作皇帝我的堂孙。 
English: Yichen, may I bestow upon you the surname Yang, grant you thirty thousand cords of money, thirty cords of wine, and a hundred cords of rice and wheat, and compile him into the Yangmen family tree, so that he may become the emperor's grandson.

古文：未几，拜陕州刺史。
现代文：不久，授杨义臣为陕州刺史。
English: Soon, Yang Yichen was awarded the title of Shaanxi Provincial Historian.

古文：义臣性谨厚，能驰射，有将领之才，由是上甚重之。
现代文：义臣谨慎忠厚，长于骑马射箭，有将领之才，因此皇上很器重他。
English: Yoshinobu was prudent and loyal. He was good at riding a horse and archery, and had the talent of a general. Therefore, the emperor held him in high esteem.

古文：其后突厥达头可汗犯塞，以行军总管率步骑三万出白道，与贼遇，战，大破之。
现代文：其后，突厥达头可汗进犯边塞，义臣以行军总管身份，率领步兵、骑兵三万人马，出白道，与贼人相遇，交战，大破贼人。
English: After that, the Turkic Dadu Khan invaded the frontier fortress, and Yichen, as the commander-in-chief of the march, led the infantry and cavalry of thirty thousand horses, out of the white road, met and fought with the thieves, and defeated the thieves.

古文：明年，突厥又寇边，雁门、马邑多被其患。
现代文：次年，突厥人又进犯边塞，雁门、马邑二地多受其害。
English: The following year, the Turks invaded the border fortress again, and the two areas of Yanmen and Ma'i suffered the most.

古文：义臣击之，虏遂出塞，因而追之，至大斤山，与虏相遇。
现代文：义臣打击他们，他们于是逃到塞外，义臣率兵追击，追到大斤山，与贼人相遇。
English: Yoritomo attacked them, and they fled to the other side of the country. Yoritomo and his soldiers pursued them to Dakinshan, where they encountered the thieves.

古文：时太平公史万岁军亦至，义臣与万岁合军击虏，大破之，万岁为杨素所陷而死，义臣功竟不录。
现代文：当时，太平公史万岁的人马也赶到了，义臣与万岁合力击贼，大败突厥兵。史万岁被杨素陷害致死，义臣的功劳竟不被著录。
English: At that time, the Taiping Public History Hall of Fame also arrived, and Yichen and the Hall of Fame joined forces to defeat the thieves and defeated the Turkish soldiers. The Hall of Fame was framed to death by Yang Su, and Yichen's achievements were not recorded.

古文：仁寿初，拜朔州总管，赐以御甲。
现代文：仁寿初年，义臣拜授朔州总管，赐给他御用的甲胄。
English: In the first year of his benevolent life, Yixing bestowed the title of Governor of Shuozhou and gave him a suit of armor.

古文：炀帝嗣位，汉王谅作乱并州。
现代文：炀帝继位后，汉王杨谅作乱于并州。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, the Han King Yang Peng made a disturbance in the annexed state.

古文：时代州总管李景为汉王将乔钟葵所围，诏义臣救之。
现代文：当时，代州总管李景被汉王的部将乔钟葵包围，有诏让义臣去救援他。
English: At that time, the governor of Daizhou, Li Jing, was surrounded by the Han king's general, Qiao Zhong Kwai, and there was an edict to let Yixin go to rescue him.

古文：义臣率马步二万，夜出西陉，迟明行数十里。
现代文：义臣率领骑兵、步兵二万，夜出西陉，快天亮时，已赶了几十里路。
English: Yichen led 20,000 cavalry and infantry out of Xidi at night, and by dawn, he had covered dozens of miles.

古文：钟葵觇见义臣兵少，悉众拒之。
现代文：乔钟葵侦悉义臣人马少，于是全部上阵来抵抗义臣。
English: Qiao Zhong Kwai detected that there were few Yishin men and horses, so they all went into battle to resist Yishin.

古文：钟葵亚将王拔骁勇，善用矛，射之者不能中，每以数骑陷阵。
现代文：钟葵的副将王拔，骁勇无敌，特善用矛肖，射他又射不中，他常带几个骑兵冲锋陷阵。
English: Wang Bata, the vice-commander of Zhongguo, was invincible in valor. He was very good at using spears, but he could not shoot well. He often led several cavalrymen to charge into battle.

古文：义臣患之，募能当拔者。
现代文：义臣特担心他，于是招募能够抵挡王拔的人。
English: Yixian was particularly worried about him, so he recruited people who could resist Wangba.

古文：车骑将军杨思恩请当之。
现代文：车骑将军杨思恩请求与王拔交战。
English: The chariot and cavalry general Yang Sion requested to fight with Wang Batu.

古文：义臣见思恩气貌雄勇，顾之曰： 壮士也！ 
现代文：义臣见思恩气貌雄勇，对他说： 真是壮士！ 
English: Yichen saw Siyen's heroic appearance and said to him, "What a strong man!

古文：赐以卮酒。
现代文：赐给他一卮酒。
English: He was given a pitcher of wine.

古文：思恩望见拔立于阵后，投觞于地，策马赴之。
现代文：思恩远远望见王拔站在阵后，就把酒斛往地上一丢，策马而赴敌。
English: Seeing Wang Ba standing at the rear of the battle from afar, Shien threw his wine goblet to the ground and rode his horse towards the enemy.

古文：再往不克，义臣复选骑士十余人从之。
现代文：思恩冲了两次，都没有克敌制胜，义臣就又选十几个骑兵随他前去。
English: Shun charged twice, but neither time was he able to defeat the enemy, so Yichen selected another dozen horsemen to go with him.

古文：思恩遂突击，杀数人，直至拔麾下。
现代文：思恩于是向前猛冲，杀了几个敌人，一直冲到王拔的军旗下。
English: Shun then rushed forward, killed several enemies, and rushed all the way to the banner of Wang Ba's army.

古文：短兵方接，所从骑士退，思恩为拔所杀。
现代文：两人短兵交战，思恩的随从骑兵退后，于是思恩被王拔所杀。
English: The two skirmishers fought, and Shinn's cavalry retreated, so Shinn was killed by Wang Batoru.

古文：拔遂乘之，义臣军北者十馀里。
现代文：王拔于是乘胜进军，义臣军退了十几里。
English: Wang Ba then took advantage of the victory to march into the army, and the Yixing Army retreated more than ten miles.

古文：于是购得思恩尸，义臣哭之甚恸，三军莫不下泣。
现代文：义臣于是赎回思恩的尸体，放声痛哭，三军无不流泪。
English: Yichen then redeemed Shien's corpse, burst into tears, and the three armies all shed tears.

古文：所从骑士皆腰斩。
现代文：思恩的随从骑兵都被腰斩。
English: Shun's attendant cavalrymen were all beheaded.

古文：义臣自以兵少，悉取军中牛驴，得数千头，复令兵数百人，人持一鼓，潜驱之涧谷间，出其不意。
现代文：义臣因自己兵少，于是把军中的牛和驴子全部清出来，清了几千头，又令兵卒几百人，每人拿一个鼓，偷偷地把牛和驴子赶到山谷里，出其不意。
English: Because he was short of soldiers, Yichen cleared out all the cattle and donkeys in the army, clearing out several thousand heads, and ordered several hundred soldiers, each with a drum, to secretly drive the cattle and donkeys into the valley, catching them by surprise.

古文：义臣晡后复与钟葵军战，兵初合，命驱牛驴者疾进。
现代文：吃了晚饭，义臣又与钟葵交战，两军刚交手，义臣就命令驱赶牛和驴子的疾速前进。
English: After eating dinner, Yisheng and Zhong Kwai-Wu fought again. As soon as the two armies fought, Yisheng ordered the cattle and donkeys to be driven forward at high speed.

古文：一时鸣鼓，尘埃张天，钟葵军不知，以为伏兵发，因而大溃，纵击破之。
现代文：一时间，战鼓震天，尘埃弥天，钟葵军不知究竟，还以为是伏兵大发，因此大大地溃败。
English: For a while, the war drums shook the sky, the dust was thick, and the army of bell and sunflowers did not know what to do, but also thought it was an ambush, so they were greatly defeated.

古文：以功进位上大将军，赐物二千段，杂彩五百段，女妓十人，良马二十匹。
现代文：义臣纵兵反击，大破钟葵。义臣因战功升任上大将军，赐缣采二千段，杂采五百段，女妓十人，良马二十匹。
English: As a result of his military exploits, Yoritomo was promoted to the rank of general, and was given 2,000 dan of rice, 500 dan of mixed rice, ten prostitutes, and twenty fine horses.

古文：寻授相州刺史。
现代文：继而授他为相州刺史。
English: He was subsequently awarded the title of "Soshu Sashimi Master."

古文：后三岁，征为宗正卿。
现代文：三年后，调义臣任宗正卿。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the position of Yoshiomi and appointed to the position of Muneyoshi chancellor.

古文：未几，转太仆卿。
现代文：不久，转任太仆卿。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the position of Taihoku-kyo.

古文：从征吐谷浑，令义臣屯琵琶峡，连营八十里，南接元寿，北连段文振，合围浑主于覆袁川。
现代文：随炀帝征讨吐谷浑。炀帝令义臣驻军于琵琶峡，军营相连达八十里，南接元寿，北连段文振，把吐谷浑国主包围在覆袁州。
English: Emperor Gong sent Yichen to garrison his army in Biwa Gorge. The military camps were connected by eighty miles, with Yuan Shou in the south and Wen Zhen in the north, encircling the ruler of the Tuyuhun Kingdom in Yuzhou.

古文：其后复征辽东，以军将指肃慎道。
现代文：此后又随炀帝征讨辽东，义臣率军直指肃慎道。
English: After that, he went to conquer Liaodong with Emperor Xizong, and Yixin led the army straight to Shushen Road.

古文：至鸭绿水，与乙支文德战，每为先锋，一日七捷。
现代文：到了鸭绿江，与乙支文德交战，义臣每次都当先锋，一天打了七次胜仗。
English: When he arrived at the Yalu River, he fought against Eulji Mende. Yichen was the vanguard every time, and won seven times in one day.

古文：后与诸军俱败，竟坐免。
现代文：后与各路人马都打了败仗，竟坐罪免职。
English: After that, he fought a losing battle against all comers and was even removed from office.

古文：俄而复位。
现代文：不久复职。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：明年，以为军副，与大将军宇文述趣平壤。
现代文：次年，以义臣为副将，与大将军宇文述去进攻平壤。
English: The following year, with Yoritomo as his vice-commander, he went to attack Pyongyang with General Umensu.

古文：至鸭绿水，会杨玄感作乱，班师，检校赵郡太守。
现代文：到了鸭绿江，碰上杨玄感作乱，班师回朝，代理赵郡太守。
English: When he arrived at the Yalu River, he encountered Yang Xuan, who felt that he was creating a disturbance. The class teacher returned to the North, acting as Zhao County's governor.

古文：妖贼向海公聚众作乱，寇扶风、安定间，义臣奉诏击平之。
现代文：妖贼向海公聚众作乱，寇掠于扶风、安定两地之间，义臣奉圣旨扫平了他们。
English: The devils and thieves gathered in the direction of Haigong to make trouble, and robbed and plundered between the two places of Fufeng and Ding'an. The virtuous minister swept them away according to his sacred will.

古文：寻从帝复征辽东，进位左光禄大夫。
现代文：继而随炀帝再征讨辽东，义臣升为左光禄大夫。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Xizong re-conquered Liaodong, and Yixian was promoted to Doctor of the Left Hand.

古文：时渤海高士达，清河张金称并相聚为盗，众已数万，攻陷郡县。
现代文：当时渤海人高士达、清河人张金称，都相聚为盗，已有几万之众，攻陷郡县。
English: At that time, the Bohai people Gao Shida and the Qinghe people Zhang Jin said that they all gathered together to steal, and there were tens of thousands of people who attacked counties.

古文：帝遣将军段达讨之，不能克。
现代文：炀帝派将军段达进讨，不能取胜。
English: Emperor Qian sent General Duan Da to advance the discussion, but he could not win.

古文：诏义臣率辽东还兵数万击之，大破士达，斩金称。
现代文：有诏让义臣率领从辽东回来的兵马几万去进剿。义臣大破高士达，斩了张金称。
English: An edict ordered Yichen to lead tens of thousands of soldiers and horses that had returned from eastern Liaodong Province to the capital. Yichen defeated Gao Shida and killed Zhang Jin.

古文：又收合降贼，入豆子，讨格谦，擒之，以状闻奏。
现代文：又收拾降兵，进入豆子赹，讨伐格谦，活捉了他。
English: He also collected the fallen soldiers, entered the bean cocoon, fought Ge Qian, and captured him alive.

古文：帝恶其威名，遽追入朝，贼由是复盛。
现代文：义臣报告了朝廷。炀帝厌恶他的威名，急急追他入朝。贼人因此又强大起来。
English: Yoshinobu reported this to the imperial court. Emperor Showa detested his reputation and hurried to bring him to the imperial court. As a result, the thief became powerful again.

古文：义臣以功进位光禄大夫，寻拜礼部尚书。
现代文：义臣因军功升任光禄大夫，不久拜授礼部尚书。
English: As a result of his military service, Yixian was promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor, and soon he was awarded the title of Reverend.

古文：未几，卒官。
现代文：不久，在官任上去世。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：○卫玄
现代文：○卫玄
English: ○ Wei Xuan

古文：卫玄，字文升，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：卫玄字文升，河南洛阳人。
English: Lacking grace, killing arbitrarily, when about to die, seeing the decapitated ghosts come to ask for their lives, they become fierce ghosts. Wei Xuan Zi Wensheng, Luoyang, Henan.

古文：祖悦，魏司农卿，父扌剽，侍中、左武卫大将军，玄少有器识，周武帝在籓，引为记室。
现代文：祖父卫悦，西魏司农卿。父亲卫扌剽，侍中、左武卫大将军。卫玄小时即有才气见识，北周武帝为藩王时，召卫玄任记室。
English: Grandfather Wei Yue, Secretary of Agriculture of the Western Wei Dynasty. Father Wei Xuan, Chamberlain, General of the Left Army of Wei. Wei Xuan had talent and insight when he was young, and when the Northern Zhou Emperor was the king of the domain, he called Wei Xuan to serve as a secretary.

古文：迁给事上士，袭爵兴势公，食邑四千户。
现代文：升任给事上士，承袭兴势公的爵位，食邑四千户。
English: He was promoted to staff sergeant, inheriting the title of grand marshal, and served 4,000 households.

古文：转宣纳下大夫。
现代文：转任宣纳下大夫。
English: He was transferred to the position of junior doctor.

古文：武帝亲总万机，拜益州总管长史，赐以万钉宝带。
现代文：周武帝总理国政后，授卫玄为益州总管长史，赐给他万钉宝带。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu ascended to the throne, appointed Wei Xuan as the governor-general of Yizhou, and bestowed upon him the Ten Thousand Nails Treasure Belt.

古文：稍迁开府仪同三司、太府中大夫，治内史事，仍领京兆尹，称为强济。
现代文：稍有升迁，到任开府仪同三司、太府中大夫、兼管内史事，仍兼任京兆尹，有强干之名。
English: He was promoted slightly, and was appointed Kaifu giri, Tong San Shi, Taifu Chudai, concurrently in charge of internal history, and still concurrently in charge of Jing Zhaoyun. He was known as a hard worker.

古文：宣帝时，以忤旨免官。
现代文：周宣帝时，卫玄因忤逆圣旨而被免除官职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Xuan, Wei Xuan was removed from his post for violating the sacred edict.

古文：高祖作相，检校熊州事。
现代文：隋高祖作北周丞相，卫玄代理熊州刺史。
English: Sui Gaozu was the minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, Wei Xuan was the acting governor of Xiongzhou.

古文：和州蛮反，玄以行军总管击平之。
现代文：和州蛮人反叛，卫玄以行军总管身份打平了他们。
English: and rebelled against the barbarians in the state, Wei Xuan, as the commander-in-chief of the march, defeated them.

古文：及高祖受禅，迁淮州总管，进封同轨郡公，坐事免。
现代文：高祖受禅后，卫玄升任淮州总管，晋封同轨郡公爵。后坐罪免职。
English: After Gao Zu accepted Zen, Wei Xuan was promoted to the post of the general manager of Huai Zhou and was promoted to the duke of the same county. He was removed from his post after he was found guilty of sedition.

古文：未几，拜岚州刺史。
现代文：不久，拜授岚州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：会起长城之役，诏玄监督之。
现代文：碰上大修长城的劳役，有诏让卫玄监督。
English: At the same time, the construction of the Great Wall began, and Emperor Wu ordered Emperor Wei to supervise the construction of the Great Wall.

古文：俄检校朔州总管事。后为卫尉少卿。
现代文：不久代理朔州总管，后任卫尉少卿。
English: He soon became acting governor of Shuozhou, and was later appointed to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：仁寿初，山獠作乱，出为资州刺史以镇抚之。
现代文：仁寿初年，山獠造反作乱，卫玄出京当资州刺史，以镇守安抚那里。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, Yamahoko rebelled and caused a riot, and Wei Xuan went to Beijing to investigate the situation in Zhizhou and pacify it with the help of the town guards.

古文：玄既到官，时獠攻围大牢镇，玄单骑造其营，谓群獠曰： 我是刺史，衔天子诏安养汝等，勿惊惧也。 
现代文：卫玄到任后，当时山獠正在围攻大牢镇，卫玄单人独骑到獠人的兵营，对獠人说： 我是刺史，奉皇上圣旨来安抚你们，不要怕。 
English: After Wei Xuan took office, when the Mongols were besieging the town of Dajiao, Wei Xuan rode alone to the camp of the Mongols and said to the Mongols: I am Tashi, and I am here to appease you according to the emperor's holy will. Don't be afraid.

古文：诸贼莫敢动。
现代文：诸贼不敢动。
English: The thieves did not dare to move.

古文：于是说以利害，渠帅感悦，解兵而去。
现代文：卫玄于是晓以利害，獠人的渠帅受了感动，解围而去。
English: Wei Xuan then knew that he was at a disadvantage, and was moved by the general's gesture. He broke the siege and left.

古文：前后归附者十馀万口。
现代文：前后归顺的獠人有十几万人。
English: There are more than one hundred thousand people in Handan who have surrendered.

古文：高祖大悦，赐缣二千匹，除遂州总管，仍令剑南安抚。
现代文：高祖十分高兴，赐卫玄缣纟采二千匹，授他为遂州总管，仍让他安抚剑南。
English: Gaozu was very pleased and gave Wei Xuan Zhe 2,000 horses and made him the governor of Suizhou. He still let him pacify Jian Nan.

古文：炀帝即位，复征为卫尉卿。
现代文：炀帝即位，又调他当卫尉卿。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, and he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：夷、獠攀恋，数百里不绝。
现代文：夷人、獠人舍不得他走，都来送行，几百里的路上，送者不绝。
English: The barbarians and barbarians could not bear to see him go, and they all came to see him off. On the journey of several hundred miles, there was no shortage of people to see him off.

古文：玄晓之曰： 天子诏征，不可久住。 
现代文：卫玄晓谕他们说： 天子下诏书调我回去，我不能久留。 
English: Wei Xuan told them: "God willing, I will be sent back by imperial edict. I can't stay for long.

古文：因与之诀，夷、獠各挥涕而去。
现代文：于是与他们告别，夷人、獠人挥泪而去。
English: So they said goodbye to them, and the barbarians and marauders left in tears.

古文：岁馀，迁工部尚书。
现代文：过了一年多，转任工部尚书。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the Ministry of Works.

古文：其后拜魏郡太守，尚书如故。
现代文：其后拜授魏郡太守，仍旧担任工部尚书。
English: After that, he was awarded the title of Wei County Governor, and still served as the head of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：帝谓玄曰： 魏郡名都，冲要之所，民多奸宄，是用烦公。
现代文：炀帝对卫玄说： 魏郡是有名的都市，是要冲之地。那里的百姓很奸刁，所以麻烦你去治理。
English: Emperor Qian said to Wei Xuan, "Wei County is a famous city, and it is a place to be rushed. The people there are very treacherous, so please go and govern it.

古文：此郡去都，道里非远，宜数往来，询谋朝政。 
现代文：这个郡离首都并不太远，你应该常回京师，参谋朝政。 
English: This county is not too far from the capital. You should often go back to Beijing to study and advise the government.

古文：赐物五百段而遣之。
现代文：赐他缣纟采五百段，而派他去。
English: Give him 500 rupees and send him on his way.

古文：未几，拜右候卫大将军，检校左候卫事。
现代文：不久，拜授右侯卫大将军，代理左侯卫大将军之事。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of General of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, acting as General of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards.

古文：大业八年，转刑部尚书。
现代文：大业八年，转任刑部尚书。
English: After eight years of hard work, he was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：辽东之役，检校右御卫大将军，率师出增地道。
现代文：辽东战争中，他代理右御卫大将军，率部出增地道。
English: In the Liaodong War, he acted as the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, and led the division to Zengji Province.

古文：时诸军多不利，玄独全众而还。
现代文：当时各路人马大多出师不利，只有卫玄所部全部回来。
English: At that time, most of the soldiers and horses were unfavorable, and only Wei Xuan's entire division survived.

古文：拜金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：拜授卫玄为金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：九年，车驾幸辽东，使玄与代王侑留守京师，拜为京兆内史，尚书如故。许以便宜从事，敕代王待以师傅之礼。
现代文：大业九年，炀帝到辽东，派卫玄与代王杨侑留守京师，拜授卫玄为京兆内史，仍旧担任刑部尚书，同意卫玄见机行事，又令代王待卫玄为老师。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gong went to Liaodong and sent Wei Xuan to stay in Beijing as a teacher along with the acting king, Yang Jiao. Wei Xuan was given the title of the internal history of Beijing and still served as the official secretary of the criminal department. Emperor Gong agreed with Wei Xuan to act as he saw fit, and also ordered the acting king to wait for Wei Xuan as a teacher.

古文：会杨玄感围逼东都，玄率步骑七万援之。
现代文：碰上杨玄感围逼东都洛阳，卫玄率领步兵、骑兵七万人马增援东都。
English: When Yang Xuan sensed encirclement and forced the eastern capital Luoyang, Wei Xuan led 70,000 infantry and cavalry to reinforce the eastern capital.

古文：至华阴，掘杨素冢，焚其骸骨，夷其茔域，示士卒以必死。
现代文：部队来到华阴，挖了杨素的坟墓，焚烧了他的骨头，把坟地全部铲平了，以显示必死的决心给士兵看。
English: When he arrived in Huayin, he unearthed Yang Su's tomb, burned his remains, and shoveled his ancestor to the ground, showing his determination to die.

古文：既出潼关，议者恐崤、函有伏兵，请于陕县沿流东下，直趣河阳，以攻其背。
现代文：出了潼关，有人担心崤山、函谷关之间有埋伏，请从陕县沿黄河东下，直奔河阳，以进攻叛军的背后。
English: When leaving Shaoguan, some people are worried about ambushes between Shaoshan and Hanyu Pass. Please go east from Shaanxi along the Yellow River and go straight to Heyang to attack the back of the rebels.

古文：玄曰： 以吾度之，此计非竖子所及。 
现代文：卫玄说： 以我看来，这一计谋不是杨玄感那小子所想得出来的。 
English: Wei Xuan said: In my opinion, this scheme was not thought out by Yang Xuanquan.

古文：于是鼓行而进。
现代文：于是击鼓前进。
English: So they beat the drums and marched.

古文：既度函谷，卒如所量。
现代文：过了函谷关，真如所预料的没有伏兵。
English: After passing through the Hakodate pass, it was finally as he had guessed.

古文：于是遣武贲郎将张峻为疑军于南道，玄以大兵直趣城北。
现代文：卫玄于是派武贲郎将张峻为疑兵，走南道，卫玄率统大部队奔向城北。
English: Wei Xuan then sent Wu Yulang to take Zhang Jun as a suspect soldier and go south. Wei Xuan led a large army to the north of the city.

古文：玄感逆拒之，且战且行，屯军金谷。
现代文：杨玄感迎战，卫玄边战边走，驻军于金谷。
English: Yang Xuan led his troops into battle. Wei Xuan fought side by side, and the large army was stationed in Jingu.

古文：于军中扫地而祭高祖曰： 刑部尚书、京兆内史臣卫文升，敢昭告于高祖文皇帝之灵：自皇家启运，三十馀年，武功文德，渐被海外。
现代文：他在军中扫地以祭高祖说： 刑部尚书、京兆内史臣卫文升，冒昧地昭告于高祖文皇帝的神灵：自从皇家承受天命，到现在三十多年，武功文德，渐渐影响海外。
English: He swept the ground in the army to offer sacrifice to Gao Zu and said: "The head of the Criminal Department, Shang Shu, and the historian of the Capital, Wei Wensheng, had the temerity to tell the spirit of Emperor Gao Zuwen: Since the royal family received the Mandate of Heaven, for more than thirty years, martial arts and morality have gradually influenced overseas.

古文：杨玄感孤负圣恩，躬为蛇豕，蜂飞蚁聚，犯我王略。
现代文：杨玄感辜负圣恩，自作蛇豕，蜂飞蚁聚，犯我王师。
English: Yang Xuan felt that he had failed to live up to the grace of God. He made a snake cocoon, gathered bees and ants, and raped his teacher.

古文：臣二世受恩，一心事主，董率熊罴，志枭凶逆。
现代文：臣下我两代受恩，一心侍奉国家，统率熊罴之众，志在剿灭逆党。
English: My two generations of vassals are grateful for the favor, serve the country wholeheartedly, lead the people of Xiongnu, and aim to annihilate the rebel party.

古文：若社稷灵长，宜令丑徒冰碎，如或大运去矣，幸使老臣先死。 
现代文：如国运尚在，应让丑类冰碎；如国运完了，则让我老臣先死。 
English: If the National Games are still on, let the uglies break the ice; if the National Games are over, let my old minister die first.

古文：词气抑扬，三军莫不涕咽。
现代文：他语气抑扬，三军感动，无不呜咽。
English: His tone is subdued, the three armies are moved, all are sobbing.

古文：时众寡不敌，与贼频战不利，死伤大半。
现代文：当时卫玄寡不敌众，与贼人频频作战，频频失利，死伤大半。
English: At that time, Wei Xuan was outnumbered, fought frequently with thieves, frequently lost, and suffered most of the deaths and injuries.

古文：玄感尽锐来攻，玄苦战，贼稍却，进屯北芒。
现代文：杨玄感率全部精兵来进攻，卫玄苦战，贼人稍稍退却。卫玄进而驻军北芒。
English: Yang Xuan sensed all the elite soldiers coming to attack, Wei Xuan fought hard, and the thieves retreated slightly. Wei Xuan then moved his garrison north.

古文：会宇文述、来护兒等援兵至，玄感惧而西遁。
现代文：刚好宇文述、来护儿的援兵赶到，杨玄感惧怕，因而向西逃走。
English: Just as Yuwen described, reinforcements arrived to take care of the child, Yang Xuan felt afraid, so he fled west.

古文：玄遣通议大夫斛斯万善、监门直阁庞玉前锋追之，及于阌乡，与宇文述等合击破之。
现代文：卫玄派通议大夫斛斯万善、监门直阁庞玉两人为前锋，追赶叛军，赶到阌乡，与宇文述等合击破敌。
English: Wei Xuan dispatched the interlocutory doctor Gong Si Wanzhen and the jailer Zhaogu Pangyu as the vanguard to pursue the attack, rushed to Xiangxiang, and defeated the rebels with the help of soldiers such as Wu Wenshu.

古文：车驾至高阳，征诣行在所。
现代文：炀帝回到高阳，调卫玄到行宫去。
English: Emperor Gaozong drove to Gaoyang and summoned Wei Xuan to the place where he was.

古文：帝劳之曰： 社稷之臣也。使朕无西顾之忧。 
现代文：炀帝慰劳他说： 你是国家的大臣，使我无西顾之忧。 
English: Emperor Qian consoled him, saying: "You are the minister of the country, so I have no worries about going to the West.

古文：乃下诏曰： 近者妖氛充斥，扰动关、河，文升率励义勇，应机响赴，表里奋击，摧破凶丑，宜升荣命，式弘赏典。
现代文：于是下诏书说： 近来妖雾充斥，搅动关、河。文升率领义师，应机赴敌，在华山黄河一带，奋勇杀敌，打败凶丑。
English: Therefore, the next imperial edict said: "Recently, the mists have been so thick that they have stirred up the pass and the river. Wen Sheng led the righteous teachers to go to the enemy at the right time, in the Huashan Yellow River area, and fought bravely to kill the enemy and defeat the villain.

古文：可右光禄大夫。 
现代文：应该下令奖赏，授他为右光禄大夫。 
English: A reward should be ordered, and he should be awarded the title of Doctor of the Right Light.

古文：赐以良田、甲第，资物巨万。
现代文：赐给他良田、府第、物资巨万。
English: He was given a good field, a fudai, and a huge amount of materials.

古文：还镇京师，帝谓之曰： 关右之任，一委于公。
现代文：他回来镇守京师长安，炀帝对他说： 关西就全部交给你了。
English: When he returned to Chang'an, the garrison town of the Beijing Division, Emperor Xuan said to him: "Kansai will be completely handed over to you."

古文：公安，社稷乃安；公危，社稷亦危。
现代文：你安全，国家就安全；你危险，国家也危险。
English: When the public is safe and sound, the country is safe and sound; when the public is in danger, the country is in danger.

古文：出入须有兵卫，坐卧恆宜自牢，勇夫重闭，此其义也。
现代文：出入要有卫兵防卫，坐卧都要关好门。勇士注重防身，就是这个意思。
English: Guards should be posted at the entrances and exits, and doors should be closed when sitting or lying down. This is what it means for a warrior to focus on self-defense.

古文：今特给千兵，以充侍从。 
现代文：现特给你一千兵卒，以补充你的卫队。 
English: Now, a thousand soldiers have been specially given to the prince to act as bodyguards.

古文：赐以玉麟符。
现代文：赐给他玉麟符。
English: Give him the golden unicorn.

古文：十一年，诏玄安抚关中。
现代文：大业十一年，有诏让卫玄安抚关中。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taiei era, there was a decree to let Wei Xuan pacify Guanzhong.

古文：时盗贼蜂起，百姓饥馑，玄竟不能救恤，而官方坏乱，货贿公行。
现代文：当时反贼蜂起，百姓饥荒，卫玄竟不能救助，而官府腐败，公开行贿。
English: At that time, there was an anti-thief uprising, the people were starving, and Wei Xuan was unable to help, while the government was corrupt and openly paid bribes.

古文：玄自以年老，上表乞骸骨，帝使内史舍人封德彝驰谕之曰： 京师国本，王业所基，宗庙园陵所在，藉公耆旧，卧以镇之。
现代文：卫玄自因年老，上表请求退休。炀帝派使者、内史舍人封德彝去对他说： 京师长安，是国家的根本，是王业的根基，宗庙园陵所在的地方。借你这个老帅，睡在那里镇守。
English: Emperor Gao sent an emissary to Feng Deyao, who was a historian, to tell him: "Chang'an, the capital of the country, is the foundation of the royal cause, the place where the ancestral temple and mausoleum are located. As a veteran, you can sleep there and guard the town."

古文：朕为国计，义无相许，故遣德彝口陈指意。 
现代文：我为国家考虑，不能同意你退休。所以派德彝去，口述我的旨意。 
English: For the sake of the country, I cannot agree to your retirement, so I have sent Decheng to dictate my will.

古文：玄乃止。
现代文：卫玄才作罢。
English: Wei Xuan can't do it.

古文：义师入关，自知不能守，忧惧称疾，不知政事。
现代文：大唐义军入关，卫玄自知不能守住长安，又忧又怕，自称有病，不管政事。
English: When the Datang rebels entered the pass, Wei Xuan knew that he could not hold Chang'an, and he was worried and afraid. He claimed to be ill and did not care about politics.

古文：城陷，归于家。
现代文：长安攻陷后，他回到家里。
English: After the fall of Chang'an, he returned home.

古文：义宁中卒，时年七十七。
现代文：义宁年中去世，时年七十七岁。
English: Yining died in middle age, at the age of seventy-seven.

