古文：民之外事，莫难于战，故轻法不可以使之。
现代文：民众认为对外没有比战争更难的了，所以朝廷用轻法就不能驱使他们去作战。
English: The people believe that nothing is more difficult for the outside world than war, so the imperial court cannot use a light law to drive them to fight.

古文：奚谓轻法？
现代文：什么叫轻法呢？
English: What do you call a light sentence?

古文：其赏少而威薄、淫道不塞之谓也。
现代文：即奖赏不多、刑罚不重，淫逸的路没有堵住。
English: That is to say, the reward is not much, the punishment is not heavy, and the way of lust is not blocked.

古文：奚谓淫道？
现代文：什么淫逸的道路呢？
English: What is the way of lewdness?

古文：为辩知者贵、游宦者任、文学私名显之谓也。
现代文：即是能言善道之人得到尊贵，不守本业、游散求官的人得到任用，各种思想得到显扬。
English: That is to say, those who are able to speak well are honored, those who do not stick to their profession and wander around seeking positions are appointed, and all kinds of ideas are promoted.

古文：三者不塞，则民不战而事失矣。
现代文：这三种途径若是不堵住，那么人民不肯出战，国家的战事就会失败。
English: If these three ways are not blocked, then the people will not go to war, and the country's war will fail.

古文：故其赏少，则听者无利也；威薄，则犯者无害也。
现代文：因为朝廷赏赐少，听从法令的人得不到好处；刑罚轻，违反法令的人没有什么妨害。
English: Because the reward of the court is small, those who obey the law will not benefit; the punishment is light, and those who violate the law will not be disturbed.

古文：故开淫道以诱之，而以轻法战之，是谓设鼠而饵以狸也，亦不几乎！
现代文：所以开淫逸之途来引诱百姓，用轻法驱使百姓去参战，是同诱捕老鼠而用狸猫作饵一样，是很危险的。
English: Therefore, it is very dangerous to seduce the people by the way of prostitution and to drive the people to go to war with light methods, just as it is to trap mice and use foxes and cats as bait.

古文：故欲战其民者，必以重法。
现代文：因此要想让人民出战，必须用重法。
English: Therefore, if you want to let the people go to war, you must use the heavy law.

古文：赏则必多，威则必严，淫道必塞，为辩知者不贵，游宦者不任，文学私名不显。
现代文：赏赐必须多，刑法必须严，淫逸的道路必须堵住。让能言善道之人得不到尊贵，游走求官之人得不到任用，各种思想不得显扬。
English: Rewards must be plentiful, the criminal law must be strict, and the path of lewdness must be blocked. So that those who can speak well will not be honored, those who wander around seeking positions will not be appointed, and all kinds of thoughts will not be shown.

古文：赏多威严，民见战赏之多则忘死，见不战之辱则苦生。
现代文：赏赐多而刑罚严，人民见到战争的赏赐多就忘了死的危险；见到不参加战争受到的侮辱就害怕那样地活着。
English: The rewards are many and the punishments are severe. When people see the rewards of war, they forget the danger of death; when they see the humiliation of not participating in the war, they are afraid to live like that.

古文：赏使之忘死，而威使之苦生，而淫道又塞，以此遇敌，是以百石之弩射飘叶也，何不陷之有哉？
现代文：重赏使他们忘记死的危险，严刑使他们害怕被人侮辱的活着，淫逸之路又被阻塞，用这样的政策对待敌人，好比用百石的强弩射飘摇的树叶，还有射不透的吗？
English: Rewarding them so that they forget the danger of death, punishing them so that they live in fear of being humiliated, and blocking their way to sexual indulgence, is this a policy for dealing with the enemy? It is like using a hundred-stone hammer to hit the swaying leaves. Is it impenetrable?

古文：民之内事，莫苦于农，故轻治不可以使之。
现代文：民众认为对内之事，没有比农事更苦的了，所以轻治不能役使他们。
English: The people believe that there is nothing more difficult than farming when it comes to domestic affairs, so light-touch regulation cannot help them.

古文：奚谓轻治？
现代文：什么叫轻治？
English: What is light treatment?

古文：其农贫而商富一一故其食贱者钱重，食贱则农贫，钱重则商富；末事不禁，则技巧之人利，而游食者众之谓也。
现代文：即农民穷而商人富。所以粮食贱而钱就值钱；粮食贱农民就穷，钱值钱商人就富。不约束商业和手工业，那么手工业者获利，而游荡求食的人也增多。
English: That is to say, farmers are poor and merchants are rich. Therefore, if grain is cheap, money is valuable; if grain is cheap, farmers are poor, and if money is valuable, merchants are rich. If commerce and handicrafts are not restricted, then the handicraftsmen will make profits, and the number of people wandering for food will increase.

古文：故农之用力最苦，而赢利少，不如商贾、技巧之人。
现代文：因此，农民用力最为辛苦，而获利最少，不如商业和手工业者。
English: Therefore, farmers work the hardest and earn the least, which is not as good as those in commerce and handicrafts.

古文：苟能令商贾、技巧之人无繁，则欲国之无富，不可得也。
现代文：如果能使商人和手工业者不那么多，而国家想要不富都是不可能的。
English: It is impossible for a country not to be rich if it can make its merchants and artisans not so rich.

古文：故曰：欲农富其国者，境内之食必贵，而不农之征必多，市利之租必重。
现代文：所以，想发展农业来富国，国内的粮价必贵，而不从事农业生产的赋敛必须增多，贸易的利税必须加重。
English: Therefore, if you want to develop agriculture to become a rich country, domestic grain prices must be expensive, and subsidies for those who do not engage in agricultural production must be increased, and trade profits and taxes must be increased.

古文：则民不得无田，无田不得不易其食。
现代文：那么，百姓不得不去种田，不种田就不得不买粮，粮价高农民就获利。
English: So, people have to go to the fields, and if they don't, they have to buy grain, and if grain prices are high, farmers make a profit.

古文：食贵则田者利，田者利则事者众。
现代文：种田获利，从事此业的人就会多。
English: If the farmland is profitable, more people will be engaged in this business.

古文：食贵，籴食不利，而又加重征，则民不得无去其商贾、技巧而事地利矣。
现代文：粮食贵，买粮就不合适，而又加重赋敛，那么，百姓就不得不放弃经商、手工业，而赚取田利。
English: If grain is expensive, it is not appropriate to buy grain, and it will increase austerity, then the people will have to give up business and handicrafts, and earn farmland profits.

古文：故民之力尽在于地利矣。
现代文：所以百姓的力量都集中到农业上了。
English: Therefore, the power of the people is concentrated in agriculture.

古文：故为国者，边利尽归于兵，市利尽归于农。
现代文：所以，治国的人要把守卫边境的好处都给士兵，贸易的好处都给农民。
English: Therefore, those who govern the country should give the soldiers all the benefits of guarding the border, and the farmers all the benefits of trade.

古文：边利归于兵者强，市利归于农者富。
现代文：边境的好处给士兵，就会强大；贸易的好处给农民，就会富庶。
English: The benefits of the border to the soldiers will be strong; the benefits of trade to the farmers will be prosperous.

古文：故出战而强、入休而富者，王也。
现代文：所以在外征战兵力强、在内国家富裕的，就能称王天下了。
English: Therefore, those who have a strong military force in foreign wars and are rich in domestic countries can be called kings.

