古文：许飞琼裴玄静戚玄符徐仙姑缑仙姑王氏女薛玄同戚逍遥茶姥张建章周宝
现代文：许飞琼裴玄静戚玄符徐仙姑缑仙姑王氏女薛玄同戚逍遥茶姥张建章周宝
English: Xu Fei, Qiong Pei, Xuan Jing, relatives of Xuan Fu, Xu Xian Gu, Xian Gu Wang's daughter, Xue Xuan, relatives of Shouyao, grandmother of tea, Zhang Jianzhang, Zhou Bao

古文：许飞琼
现代文：许飞琼
English: Xu Feiqiong

古文：唐开成初，进士许瀍游河中，忽得大病，不知人事，亲友数人。
现代文：唐朝开成初年，有个进士叫许瀍到河中游学，忽然得了一场大病，不省人事。他的几位亲友围坐着，守护着他。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a young scholar named Xu Jun who went to the middle of the river to study. He suddenly got a serious illness and lost consciousness. Several of his relatives and friends sat around and watched over him.

古文：环坐守之，至三日，蹶然而起，取笔大书于壁曰： 晓入瑶台露气清，坐中唯有许飞琼。
现代文：到了第三天，许瀍突然站起身来，取笔在墙壁上飞快地写道： 晓入瑶台露气清，坐中唯有许飞琼。
English: On the third day, Xu Rong suddenly stood up, took a pen and quickly wrote on the wall: Xiao Rong entered the ring, and only Xu Feiqiong sat in the middle.

古文：尘心未尽俗缘在，十里下山空月明。 
现代文：尘心未尽俗缘在，十里下山空月明。 
English: The dusty heart is not full of worldly affinities, ten miles down the mountain, the sky is moonlit.

古文：书毕复寐。
现代文：写完，许瀍又倒下睡着了。
English: After writing, Xu Yao fell asleep again.

古文：及明日，又惊起，取笔改其第二句曰 天风飞下步虚声 。
现代文：到了第二天，他又慌忙起来，取笔把墙上诗的第二句改为 天风飞下步虚声 。
English: The next day, he was in a hurry again. He took a pen and changed the second sentence of the poem on the wall to "The sky wind flies down in a rush."

古文：书讫，兀然如醉，不复寐矣。
现代文：写完，浑然无知地像醉了似的，不再睡觉了。
English: After I finished writing, I would wake up as if I were drunk, and I wouldn't go back to sleep.

古文：良久，渐言曰： 昨梦到瑶台，有仙女三百余人，皆处大屋。
现代文：过了很久，他才渐渐能说话了，他说： 我昨天在梦中到了瑶台，那里有仙女三百多人，都住在大屋子里。
English: It took a long time before he was able to speak. He said, "Yesterday I went to Xingtai in a dream. There are more than three hundred fairies there, and they all live in a big house.

古文：内一人云是许飞琼，遣赋诗。
现代文：其中有个人自己说是许飞琼，让我赋诗。
English: One of them said that she was Xu Feiqiong and asked me to compose a poem.

古文：及成，又令改曰： 不欲世间人知有我也。 
现代文：等诗写成了，她又叫我改，她说： 不想让世上的人知道有我。 
English: When the poem was finished, she asked me to change it. She said, "I don't want people in the world to know that I exist."

古文：既毕，甚被赏叹，令诸仙皆和，曰： 君终至此，且归。 
现代文：诗改完，很受赞赏，并令众仙依韵和诗。许飞琼说： 您就到此结束吧，暂且回去吧！ 
English: After the poem was revised, it was highly appreciated, and made all the immortals follow the rhyme and the poem. Xu Feiqiong said: You can end here, let's go back for the time being!

古文：若有人导引者，遂得回耳。 
现代文：就好像有人引导似的，终于回来了。 
English: As if guided by someone, he finally returned.

古文：裴玄静
现代文：裴玄静
English: Pei Xuanjing

古文：裴玄静，缑氏县令升之女，鄠县尉李言妻也。
现代文：裴玄静，是缑氏县令裴升的女儿，鄠县县尉李言的妻子。
English: Pei Xuanjing was the daughter of Pei Sheng, the magistrate of Jixi County, and the wife of Li Yan, the lieutenant of Jixi County.

古文：幼而聪慧，母教以诗书，皆诵之不忘。
现代文：玄静小时就很聪明伶俐，母亲教她诗书，她都能背诵下来不忘记。
English: Xuan Jing was very clever when she was a child. Her mother taught her poetry, and she could recite it without forgetting.

古文：及笄，以妇功容自饰。
现代文：到了十五岁的时候，就以妇功、妇容的标准要求自己。
English: By the time she was fifteen, she held herself to the standards of a woman's work and appearance.

古文：而好道，请于父母，置一静室披戴。
现代文：她又好道，就向父母请求，给她设置一间静室让她修道。
English: She was kind and asked her parents to set up a quiet room for her to practice.

古文：父母亦好道，许之。
现代文：她的父母也好修道，就答应了她的要求。
English: Her parents, both religious, agreed to her request.

古文：日以香火瞻礼道像，女使侍之，必逐于外。
现代文：她就每天烧香瞻仰礼拜道像，婢女服侍她，她便把婢女赶出去。
English: And she burnt incense every day, and adored the images, and her maidens ministered unto her: and she drove out her maidens.

古文：独居，别有女伴言笑。
现代文：她独居一室，另有女伴和她一起说说笑笑。
English: She lives in a single room and has a female companion with whom she chats and laughs.

古文：父母看之，复不见人，诘之不言。
现代文：父母去看她的女伴，又看不到人，问她，她又不说。
English: Her parents went to see her and saw no one. When they asked her about it, she didn't say anything.

古文：洁思闲淡，虽骨肉常见，亦执礼，曾无慢容。
现代文：她思虑纯静，闲适淡泊，虽然骨肉之亲常见，也还是恭守礼节，一点也没有轻慢的表示。
English: Her thoughts are pure and quiet, she is laid-back and easygoing, and although flesh-and-blood relatives are common, she still respects etiquette, and there is no sign of frivolity at all.

古文：及年二十，父母欲归于李言。
现代文：到了二十岁那年，父母要把她嫁给李言。
English: At the age of 20, her parents wanted her to marry Li Yan.

古文：闻之，固不可，唯愿入道，以求度世。
现代文：她听说了这件事，坚决不同意，只愿意入道，以求度世。
English: When she heard about this, she strongly disagreed and only wanted to enter the Buddhist path in order to survive.

古文：父母抑之曰： 女生有归是礼，妇时不可失，礼不可亏。
现代文：父母劝解她说： 女孩子生来就是要嫁人的，这是平常的道理。出嫁的时机不可错过，礼节不可亏缺。
English: Her parents advised her: "A girl is born to be married, this is the usual reason. The opportunity to get married should not be missed, and etiquette should not be lacking.

古文：倘入道不果，是无所归也。
现代文：倘若你入道没有得到正果，这就没有归宿了。
English: If you don't get the positive result after you enter the path, there is no home for you.

古文：南岳魏夫人亦从人育嗣，后为上仙。 
现代文：南岳魏夫人也嫁过人生过孩子，后来成为上仙。 
English: Lady Nangyue Wei also married, had children, and later became a saint.

古文：遂适李言，妇礼臻备。
现代文：玄静听了父母的劝告，就嫁给了李言，执守妇礼很周到。
English: After listening to her parents' advice, Xuan Jing married Li Yan. She was very careful to observe the wedding ceremony.

古文：未一月，告于李言： 以素修道，神人不许为君妻，请绝之。 
现代文：可是没到一个月，她就告诉李言： 因为我一向修道，神人不允许我做您的妻子，请终止这种关系。 
English: But less than a month later, she told Li Yan: Because I have always been a religious, the godman does not allow me to be your wife, please terminate this relationship.

古文：李言亦慕道，从而许焉。
现代文：李言也慕道，就听从她的话答应了。
English: Li Yan also wanted to go, so he listened to her words and agreed.

古文：乃独居静室焚修。
现代文：玄静就在静室独自居住烧香修行。
English: Xuan Jing lived alone in the seclusion room to burn incense and practice.

古文：夜中闻言笑声，李言稍疑，未之敢惊，潜壁隙窥之。
现代文：夜间听到玄静屋里有说笑的声音，李言稍稍产生了疑心，没敢惊动玄静她们，就悄悄地从墙缝偷看。
English: At night, Li Yan heard the sound of laughter in the room of Xuan Jing. Li Yan was a little suspicious. He did not dare to disturb Xuan Jing, so he quietly peeked through the cracks in the wall.

古文：见光明满室，异香芬馥。
现代文：看到玄静屋子里满屋光明，闻到浓郁的异香。
English: Seeing the room full of light in the quiet room, smelling the rich fragrance.

古文：有二女子，年十七八，凤髻霓衣，姿态婉丽。
现代文：又看到有两个女子，年龄有十七八岁，梳着凤髻，穿着霓裳，姿态妩媚俏丽。
English: I also saw two women, aged seventeen or eighteen, wearing phoenix braids and satin dresses, with a charming and playful attitude.

古文：侍女数人，皆云髻绡服，绰约在侧。
现代文：还有几个侍女，都留着云髻，穿着绡衣，姿态柔美地站在旁边。
English: There are also several maids of honour, all of them with clouded beards and dressed in satin, standing by meekly.

古文：玄静与二女子言谈。
现代文：玄静则与两个女子谈论着。
English: Xuan Jing is chatting with two women.

古文：李言异之而退。
现代文：李言觉得这事奇怪，就回去了。
English: Li Yan thought it was strange and went back.

古文：及旦问于玄静，答曰： 有之，此昆仑仙侣相省。
现代文：等到天亮向玄静询问，玄静回答说： 有这回事，这是昆仑山的仙侣来看望我。
English: After waiting until dawn to ask Xuan Jing, Xuan Jing replied: There is such a thing, this is a fairy couple from Kunlun Mountain coming to visit me.

古文：上仙已知君窥，以术止之，而君未觉。
现代文：上仙已经知道您偷看了，用法术禁止您，而您没觉察出来。
English: Shang Xian already knows that you peeped, and has forbidden you with spells, but you didn't notice.

古文：更来慎勿窥也，恐君为仙官所责。
现代文：再来的时候千万不要再偷看了，恐怕您被仙官责罚。
English: When you come again, don't peep again, I'm afraid you will be punished by the eunuch.

古文：然玄静与君宿缘甚薄，非久在人间之道。
现代文：但我与您宿缘很薄，不是久在人间之道。
English: But I'm not very close to you, and I don't have long to live.

古文：念君后嗣未立，候上仙来，当为言之。 
现代文：念您还没有后代，等上仙到来时，我能替您说说。 
English: Since you have no descendants, I can speak for you when the immortals arrive.

古文：后一夕，有天女降李言之室。
现代文：后来的一天晚上，有个仙女降临到李言的卧室。
English: Later, one evening, a fairy came to Li Yan's bedroom.

古文：经年，复降，送一儿与李言： 此君之子也，玄静即当去矣。 
现代文：过一年多，那个仙女又降临了，把一个小孩送给了李言，说： 这是您的儿子啊，玄静就该走了。 
English: After more than a year, the fairy appeared again and gave a child to Li Yan, saying, "This is your son, it's time for Xuan Jing to leave."

古文：后三日，有五云盘旋，仙女奏乐，白凤载玄静升天，向西北而去。
现代文：三天后，有五彩祥云在李家上空盘旋，仙女奏着天乐，凤凰驮着玄静升了天，向西北方向而去。
English: Three days later, a colorful auspicious cloud hovered over Li Jia, fairies played celestial music, and a phoenix carrying Xuan Jing ascended into the sky, heading northwest.

古文：时大中八年八月十八日，在温县供道村李氏别业。
现代文：这时是大中八年八月十八日，地点在温县供道村李家置买的田庄。
English: At this time, it was the 18th day of the 8th month of the 8th year of junior high school, and the place was the rice farm bought by the Li family from the village of Zhudao in Wen County.

古文：戚玄符
现代文：戚玄符
English: Chiharu-fu

古文：戚玄符者，冀州民妻也。
现代文：戚玄符是冀州一个平民的妻子。
English: His relative Xuanfu is the wife of a commoner in Jizhou.

古文：三岁得疾而卒。
现代文：她三岁的时候，曾经得病而死。
English: When she was three years old, she fell ill and died.

古文：父母号恸方甚，有道士过其门曰： 此可救也。 
现代文：正当她的父母痛哭喊叫得最伤心的时候，有个道士经过她家门前，道士说： 这个小孩可以救活。 
English: Just as her parents were crying and screaming their hearts out, a Taoist passed in front of her house. The Taoist said, "This child can be saved."

古文：抱出示之曰： 此必为神仙，适是气厥耳。 
现代文：她的父母就把她抱出来给道士看，道士说： 这个小孩将来一定做神仙。刚才是呼吸没有舒展罢了。 
English: Her parents took her out and showed her to a Taoist priest, who said: "This child will surely become a god. It's just that she can't breathe properly."

古文：衣带中解黑符以救之，良久遂活。
现代文：就从衣带中解下一张黑符用来救她，过了一阵子，小女孩就活了。
English: He removed a black symbol from his belt to save her, and after a while, the little girl survived.

古文：父母致谢，道士曰： 我北岳真君也。
现代文：她的父母向道士致谢，道士说： 我是北岳真君啊。
English: Her parents expressed their gratitude to the Taoist priest, who said, "I'm Hokudake Makimi.

古文：此女可名玄符，后得升天之道。 
现代文：这个小女孩可以起名叫玄符，后来得升天之道。 
English: This little girl could be named Xuanfu, and later ascended to heaven.

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：遂以为名。
现代文：父母就用玄符给小女孩作名字。
English: The parents gave the little girl a name in Chinese characters.

古文：及为民妻，而舅姑严酷，侍奉益谨。
现代文：等到玄符作了平民的妻子，而公婆对她又很严厉，她侍奉得更加谨慎。
English: When Xuanfu became a commoner's wife, and her in-laws were very strict with her, she served more carefully.

古文：常谓诸女曰： 我得人身，生中国，尚为女子，此亦所阙也。
现代文：她经常对诸女说： 我得为人身，生在中国，尚且当了女子，这是我的缺憾啊。
English: She often said to the women: I have to be a person, I was born in China, and I am still a woman, this is my shortcoming.

古文：父母早丧，唯舅姑为尊耳，虽被棰楚，亦无所怨。 
现代文：我的父母早亡，只有公婆作为尊长了，虽然我被殴打，也没有什么怨恨。 
English: My parents died early, and only my in-laws are left as elders. Although I was beaten, I don't hold any grudges.

古文：夜有神仙降之，授以灵药。
现代文：有一天夜里，有个神仙降临她家，拿灵药给她。
English: One night, a fairy came to her house and gave her a magic potion.

古文：不知其所修何道，大中十年丙子八月十日升天。
现代文：不知道她修的是什么道，在大中十年丙子八月十日升了天。
English: I don't know what path she followed, but in her 10th year of high school, she ascended to heaven on August 10th.

古文：徐仙姑
现代文：徐仙姑
English: Xu Xiangu

古文：徐仙姑者，北齐仆射徐之才女也，不如其师。
现代文：徐仙姑是北齐仆射徐之才的女儿，不知道她的老师是谁。
English: Xu Xianku is the daughter of Beiqi minion Xu Zhicai, and she doesn't know who her teacher is.

古文：已数百岁，状貌常如二十四五岁耳。
现代文：已经几百岁了，姿态面貌总像二十四五岁似的。
English: He is already several hundred years old, and his posture and appearance always resemble that of a twenty-four-five-year-old.

古文：善禁咒之术，独游海内，名山胜境，无不周遍。
现代文：她擅长禁咒的方术，常常独自一人云游四方，名山胜境无不普遍周游。
English: She is good at the forbidden spell, and often travels alone in the four directions, and travels around the famous mountains and scenic spots.

古文：多宿岩麓林窟之中，亦寓止僧院。
现代文：经常睡在岩洞或山林之中，也在和尚住的寺院住宿。
English: They often sleep in caves or mountain forests, and also stay in monasteries where monks live.

古文：忽为豪僧十辈，微词所嘲，姑骂之。
现代文：有一次，她忽然被十来个强横粗野的和尚隐晦地嘲讽，仙姑就骂了他们。
English: On one occasion, she was suddenly mocked in a subtle way by a dozen or so strong, rude monks, and she scolded them.

古文：群僧激怒，欲以力制，词色愈悖。
现代文：这群和尚被激怒了，想要用武力制服她，言词表情更下流了。
English: The group of monks were enraged and tried to subdue her by force, using even more foul language.

古文：姑笑曰： 我女子也，而能弃家云水，不避蛟龙虎狼，岂惧汝鼠辈乎？ 
现代文：仙姑笑着说： 我是个女子，能弃家而云游天下，不避蛟龙虎狼，难道还怕你们这些鼠辈吗？ 
English: The fairy godmother smiled and said, "I am a woman, I can leave home and travel all over the world, I don't have to avoid dragons and tigers. Are you afraid of these mice?

古文：即解衣而卧，遽撤其烛。
现代文：就脱了衣服躺下，立刻把灯吹灭了。
English: He undressed, lay down and immediately blew out the light.

古文：僧喜，以为得志。
现代文：和尚高兴了，以为能满足心愿了。
English: The monk was happy and thought that he could fulfill his wish.

古文：迟明，姑理策出山，诸僧一夕皆僵立尸坐，若被拘缚，口噤不能言。姑去数里，僧乃如故。
现代文：黎明的时候，仙姑衣着整齐出山了，那些和尚整整一夜都像僵尸似的，有的站着有的坐着，好像被拘住绑上了一样，嘴里也说不出话来，仙姑走出几里了，这些和尚才恢复原状。
English: At dawn, the fairy godmother dressed neatly and went out of the mountain. Those monks were like zombies all night long, some standing and some sitting, as if they were tied up. They couldn't speak, and it took the fairy godmother several miles to get them back to normal.

古文：来往江表，吴人见之四十余年，颜色如旧。
现代文：仙姑来往江东，吴人看过她四十多年，年年容颜依旧。
English: For more than forty years, Wu people have seen her coming and going in the east of the Yangtze River, and her appearance remains the same every year.

古文：其行若飞，所至之处，人畏敬若神明矣，无敢戏侮者。
现代文：她走路像飞一样，所到之处，人们敬畏她如同敬畏神明一样，没有人敢戏弄侮辱她。
English: She walks like a bird, and wherever she goes, people fear her as if she were a god. No one dares to make fun of her or insult her.

古文：咸通初，谓剡县白鹤观道士陶蒉云曰： 我先君仕北齐，以方术闻名，阴功及物，今亦得道。故我为福所及，亦延年长生耳。 
现代文：咸通初年，她对剡县白鹤观道士陶蒉云说： 我的先父在北齐做官，凭方术出名，阴功施及于物，现在又得道了，所以我被福分所连带，也延年长生了。 
English: In the first year of Hamdang, she said to Tao Bingyun, a practitioner of the White Crane Cult in Handan County: My forefather was an official in North Qi. He was famous for his methods. He applied yin and yang to things. Now he is a Taoist again. Therefore, I am connected to the place of good fortune and have lived a long life.

古文：以此推之，即之才女也。
现代文：根据这话推测，她就是徐之才的女儿。
English: Based on this, it is speculated that she is the daughter of Xu Zhicai.

古文：缑仙姑
现代文：缑仙姑
English: 仙姑

古文：缑仙姑，长沙人也。入道，居衡山，年八十余，容色甚少。
现代文：缑仙姑是长沙人，入道以后住在衡山，年龄八十多岁了，容颜依旧年轻。
English: Gong Xian Gu is from Changsha. After entering the Buddhist path, she lived in Hengshan. She is over 80 years old, but her face is still young.

古文：于魏夫人仙坛精修香火，十余年，孑然无侣。
现代文：在魏夫人仙坛精修香火，十多年了，一直孤孤单单地没有伴侣。
English: For more than ten years, Mrs. Wei has been refining incense at the Celestial Altar, and she has been lonely without a partner.

古文：坛侧多虎，游者须结队执兵而入，姑隐其间，曾无怖畏。
现代文：仙坛附近有很多虎，游山的人必须成群结队、拿着武器才敢进入，而仙姑在那里隐居，一点儿也不害怕。
English: There are many tigers near Siantan, and hikers must travel in groups and carry weapons before they dare to enter, but the hermit lives there in seclusion and is not afraid at all.

古文：数年后，有一青鸟，形如鸠鸽，红顶长尾，飞来所居，自语云： 我南岳夫人使也。以姑修道精苦，独栖穷林，命我为伴。 
现代文：几年以后，有一只青鸟，形状像斑鸠和鸽子似的，红头顶长尾巴，飞到仙姑的住处来，自语说： 我是南岳夫人的使者，因为仙姑修道精诚辛苦，独自住在穷林，命我给你作伴。 
English: A few years later, a bluebird, shaped like a turtle dove and a pigeon, with a red head and a long tail, flew to the fairy godmother's residence and said to himself: I am the messenger of Lady Nanyue, because the fairy godmother is a hard-working nun, lives alone in the poor forest, and ordered me to be your companion.

古文：他日又言： 西王母姓缑，乃姑之祖也。
现代文：过了几天，青鸟又说： 西王母姓缑，乃是你的祖先。
English: A few days later, the blue bird said again, "The West King's mother's family name is Ying, and she is your ancestor."

古文：闻姑修道勤至，将有真官降而授道，但时未至耳，宜勉于修励也。 
现代文：她听说你修道努力极了，将派真官降临向你传道，你应当更加努力修行啊。 
English: She has heard that you have made great efforts in your cultivation and that a real official will come to preach to you. You should make more efforts in your cultivation.

古文：每有人游山，必青鸟先言其姓字。
现代文：每当有人游山时，青鸟一定先说出游山人的姓名。
English: Whenever someone is hiking in the mountains, the blue bird must first say the name of the hiker.

古文：又曰： 河南缑氏，乃王母修道之故山也。 
现代文：它又说： 河南缑氏，乃是王母修道时住过的山。 
English: It also said: "Henan Jiu Clan is the mountain where the Queen Mother lived when she was a nun.

古文：又一日，青鸟飞来曰： 今夕有暴客，无害，勿以为怖也。 
现代文：又有一天，青鸟飞来说： 今天晚上有强暴之客，不要紧，不要因为这事害怕。 
English: Another day, the bluebird flew and said: "There is a violent guest tonight, it doesn't matter, don't be afraid of it."

古文：其夕，果有十余僧来毁魏夫人仙坛，乃一大石，方可丈余，其下空浮，寄他石之上，每一人推之则摇动，人多则屹然而震。
现代文：那天夜里，果然有十多个和尚来毁坏魏夫人的仙坛。仙坛本是一块大石头，方圆大约一丈开外，它下面空浮，架放在别的石头上。每当一个人推它，它就摇动，许多人推它，它就屹然震动。
English: That night, there were indeed more than ten monks who came to destroy Mrs. Wei's Altar of Immortals. The Altar of Immortals was originally a large stone, with a circumference of about one heel. It floated in the air below and was placed on other stones. Whenever a person pushed it, it shook, and when many people pushed it, it shook violently.

古文：是夕，群僧持火挺刃，将害仙姑。
现代文：这天晚上，一群和尚拿着火把举着刀，打算杀害仙姑。
English: That night, a group of monks carrying torches and swords plotted to kill the fairy godmother.

古文：入其室，姑在床上而僧不见。
现代文：他们进入仙姑室内时，仙姑躺在床上而和尚们却看不见。
English: When they entered her room, she was lying on the bed and the monks could not see her.

古文：僧既出门，即摧坏仙坛，轰然有声，山震谷裂。
现代文：和尚们出门以后，就去摧毁仙坛，发出轰轰隆隆的声音，山震谷裂。
English: After the monks went out, they went to destroy the celestial altar, emitting a booming sound, and the mountain shook and split.

古文：谓已颠坠矣，而终不能动，僧相率奔走。
现代文：和尚们认为仙坛已经掉下山崖了，细看却没能使它移动，和尚们慌忙一起逃走了。
English: The monks thought that the celestial altar had fallen down the cliff, but a closer look failed to move it, and the monks hurriedly fled together.

古文：及明，有远村至者云： 十僧中有九僧为虎所食，其一不共推，故免。 
现代文：到天亮以后，有从远处村子里来的人说： 十个和尚中有九个和尚被虎吃了，其中一个和尚没和大家一起去推仙坛，所以幸免。 
English: After dawn, some people from a distant village came and said, "Nine out of ten monks were eaten by tigers, but one monk was spared because he didn't go to the altar with everyone else."

古文：岁余，青鸟语姑迁居他所，因徙居湖南，鸟亦随之而往。人未尝会其语。
现代文：又过了一年多，青鸟告诉仙姑迁移到别处去居住，于是仙姑就移居湖南，鸟也跟随她离开，人们都没有能听懂鸟语的。
English: After more than a year, the blue bird told the fairy godmother to move to another place to live, so the fairy godmother moved to Hunan, and the bird also left with her. People could not understand the bird language.

古文：郑畋自承旨学士左迁梧州，师事于姑。
现代文：郑畋从承旨学士降职到梧州，像尊敬老师那样尊敬仙姑。
English: Zheng Yao was demoted from the position of Zheng Zhi Baccalaureate to Wuzhou, and he respected Xian Gu like he respected a teacher.

古文：姑谓畋曰： 此后四海多难，人间不可久居，吾将隐九疑矣。 
现代文：仙姑对郑畋说： 此后国家多难，人间不可久住了，我将到九嶷山去隐居了。 
English: The fairy godmother said to Zheng Qi: Since then, the country has been very difficult, and I cannot stay on earth for a long time. I will go to the Nine Mountains to live in seclusion.

古文：一旦遂去。
现代文：一天早晨，仙姑离开了。
English: One morning, the fairy godmother left.

古文：王氏女
现代文：王氏女
English: Wang's daughter

古文：王氏女者，徽之侄也。
现代文：王氏女，是王徽之的侄女。
English: Wang's daughter is Wang Huizhi's niece.

古文：父随兄入关，徽之时在翰林，王氏与所生母刘及嫡母裴寓居常州义兴县湖洑渚桂岩山，与洞灵观相近。
现代文：她的父亲随兄入关，徽之当时为翰林，王氏与她的生母刘氏以及嫡母裴氏，寄居在常州义兴县湖洑渚桂岩山，与洞灵观离得很近。
English: Her father followed his brother into the customs. He was Hanlin at that time. Wang, her birth mother Liu, and her mother Pei lived in Guiyan Mountain, Hulunzhu, Yixing County, Changzhou, very close to Dongling.

古文：王氏自幼不食酒肉，攻词翰，善琴，好无为清静之道。
现代文：王氏从小不吃酒肉，钻研词章，擅长弹琴，喜好清静无为之道。
English: Wang did not eat meat or drink alcohol since he was a child. He studied poetry, excelled at playing the piano, and liked the way of being quiet and doing nothing.

古文：及长，誓志不嫁。
现代文：等到长大时，她矢志不嫁。
English: When she grows up, she has vowed not to marry.

古文：常持大洞三十九章道德章句，户室之中，时有异香气。
现代文：经常诵读大洞三十九章《道德》章句，其室内时常有异香气味。
English: He often recites the thirty-nine chapters of "Moral," and his room often smells of incense.

古文：父母敬异之。
现代文：她的父母认为她不一般而敬重她。
English: Her parents thought she was unusual and respected her.

古文：一旦小疾，裴与刘于洞灵观修斋祈福，是日稍愈，亦同诣洞灵佛像前。焚香祈祝。
现代文：有一天，她得了小病，裴氏和刘氏到洞灵观设斋祈求保佑，这天她的病稍见好转，也一同到洞灵观佛像前烧香祷告。
English: One day, she had a minor illness, and Mr. Pei and Mr. Liu went to Dongling to pray for blessings. On this day, her illness improved slightly, and they also went to Dongling to burn incense and pray in front of the Buddha statue.

古文：及晓归，坐于门右片石之上，题绝句曰： 玩水登山无足时，诸仙频下听吟诗。
现代文：到天亮回来后，她坐在门右边一块石头上，题写一首绝句： 玩水登山无足时，诸仙频下听吟诗。
English: When she returned at dawn, she sat on a stone to the right of the door and inscribed a dictum: When playing with water and climbing mountains, listen to the chanting of the immortals.

古文：此心不恋居人世，唯见天边双鹤飞。 
现代文：此心不恋居人世，唯见天边双鹤飞。 
English: This heart is not in love with life, but sees the two cranes flying in the sky.

古文：此夕奄然而终。
现代文：这天晚上，王氏女忽然死了。
English: That evening, Ms. Wang died suddenly.

古文：及明，有二鹤栖于庭树，有仙乐盈室，觉有异香。
现代文：到天亮的时候，有两只鹤在她家院子里的树上停歇，有仙乐充满了她的住室，还觉得有奇异的香气。
English: By dawn, two cranes were resting on a tree in her courtyard, and a heavenly melody filled her living room, accompanied by a strange aroma.

古文：远近惊异，共奔看之。
现代文：远近的人都感到这事惊异，就一起跑去看。
English: People from near and far were amazed and ran to see.

古文：邻人以是白于湖洑镇吏详验，鹤已飞去，因囚所报者。
现代文：她的邻人把这件事情禀报给湖洑镇吏，请他详细查验。镇吏到时，鹤已经飞去，镇吏就把报事的那个邻人囚禁起来。
English: Her neighbour reported the incident to the Hubei township official, who was asked to investigate the matter in detail. By the time the township official arrived, the crane had already flown away, and the township official imprisoned the neighbour who reported the incident.

古文：裴及刘焚香告之曰： 汝若得道，却为降鹤，以雪邻人，勿使其滥获罪也。 
现代文：裴氏和刘氏烧香向她祷告说： 你如果得道成仙，再为我们降下仙鹤，来洗刷邻人的冤枉，不要使他因举报不实而获罪了。 
English: Mr. Pei and Mr. Liu burned incense and prayed to her, saying, "If you can attain immortality, then send down a crane for us to cleanse our neighbor's wrongdoing, so that he will not be punished for making a false report."

古文：良久，双鹤降于庭，旬日又降。
现代文：过了很久，有双鹤落到院子里，十来天后双鹤又飞落到她家院子中。
English: After a long time, a pair of cranes landed in her yard, and ten days later, another pair of cranes landed in her yard.

古文：葬于桂岩之下，棺轻，但闻香气异常。发棺视之。止衣舄而已。
现代文：家里把她葬在桂岩之下，人们觉得棺材轻，只闻到香气不同寻常，就打开棺材看，发现棺材中只有衣服鞋子而已。
English: At home, she was buried under the kuei rock. People thought the coffin was light and only smelled the unusual aroma. When they opened the coffin, they found only clothes and shoes in the coffin.

古文：今以桂岩所居为道室。
现代文：现已把她在桂岩所住的屋子改作道室。
English: She has now converted the room she lived in in Guiyang into a dojo.

古文：即乾符元年也。
现代文：王氏女得道的时间为乾符元年。
English: Wang's daughter was ordained in the first year of the Qianfu era.

古文：薛玄同
现代文：薛玄同
English: Xue Xuan Tong

古文：薛氏者，河中少尹冯徽妻也，自号玄同。
现代文：薛氏，是河中府少尹冯徽的妻子，自己取号叫玄同。
English: Xue is the wife of Yin Fenghui, a minor official of the Central Government of Hebei Province. She calls herself Xuan Tong.

古文：适冯徽，二十年乃言素志，称疾独处，焚香诵《黄庭经》，日二三遍。
现代文：嫁给冯徽二十年后才说出她平素的志向，假托有病自己独居，烧香诵读《黄庭经》，每天诵读两三遍。
English: It took her twenty years after marrying Feng Hui to reveal her ordinary aspirations. She lived alone under the pretense that she was ill, burned incense and recited the "Huangting Jing" two or three times a day.

古文：又十三年，夜有青衣玉女二人降其室，将至，有光如月，照其庭庑，香风飒然。
现代文：又过了十三年，一天夜里，有两位穿青衣的玉女降临她的室内。她们将要到达时，有光亮像月光似的照耀她家的院庭和房屋，香风习习。
English: Thirteen years later, one night, two beautiful maidens in blue robes came to her room. When they were about to arrive, her courtyard and house shone like moonlight, fragrant and fresh.

古文：时秋初，残暑方甚，而清凉虚爽，飘若洞中。
现代文：当时是初秋，残暑正热得厉害，而玄同住室却清凉虚爽，令人觉得飘逸洒脱，好像在洞府之中。
English: At that time, it was early autumn, and the residual heat was scorching. However, Xuan Tong's living room was cool and airy, making people feel free and carefree, as if they were in a cave.

古文：二女告曰： 紫虚元君主领南方，下校文籍，命诸真大仙，于六合之内，名山大川，有志道者，必降而教之。
现代文：两位玉女告诉玄同说： 紫虚元君主管南方，到下界考核文籍，下令诸位真人和大仙，在天地四方之内、名山大川之中，凡发现有立志学道的人，一定要降临去教他。
English: The two princesses told Xuan Tong that: "Zi Yu Yuanjun, who is in charge of the south, went to the lower realm to examine literature and ordered all real people and great immortals, in the four directions of heaven and earth, among the famous mountains and rivers, anyone who finds a person who is determined to learn, must come down to teach him.

古文：玄同善功，地司累奏，简在紫虚之府；况闻女子立志，君尤嘉之，即日将亲降于此。 
现代文：玄同积善的功德，地司已屡次陈奏，文书现存紫虚之府；况且听说女子立志为道，紫虚元君更加嘉许你，最近几天内将要亲自降临到这里。 
English: The land steward has repeatedly recited the merits of combining the two and accumulating the good, and the document is the existing house of Zi Xue; moreover, I heard that women are determined to be the way, Zi Xue Yuanjun praised you even more, and he will personally come here in the next few days.

古文：如此凡五夕，皆焚香严盛，以候元君。
现代文：如此一共五个晚上，玄同都烧香，恭敬隆重地等候紫虚元君。
English: In this way, for a total of five nights, the Xuan Tong all burned incense, respectfully and solemnly waiting for the Purple Emperor.

古文：咸通十五年七月十四日，元君与侍女群真二十七人降于其室，玄同拜迎于门。
现代文：咸通十五年七月十四日，紫虚元君与侍女群真二十七人，降临到玄同的静室，玄同在门前叩拜迎接。
English: On the 14th of July in the 15th year of Hamdang, Prince Zihyi and a group of 27 ladies-in-waiting arrived at Xuan Tong's seclusion room. Xuan Tong bowed before the door to greet them.

古文：元君憩坐良久，示以《黄庭》澄神存修之旨，赐九华丹一粒，使八年后吞之， 当遣玉女飚车，迎汝于嵩岳矣。 
现代文：紫虚元君坐下休息了很久，把《黄庭》澄神存修的旨要指点给玄同，赐给她一粒九华丹，让她八年后吞服， 到时候就会派玉女飚车，接你到嵩岳去了。 
English: Zi Yu Yuanjun sat down and rested for a long time. He wanted to point out to Xuan Tong the purpose of preserving and cultivating "Huangting" Cheng Shen, and gave her a grain of nine-huatang, so that she could swallow it after eight years. At that time, he would send a lady to pick you up and take you to Songyue.

古文：言讫散去。
现代文：说完众仙散去。
English: After saying this, all the immortals dispersed.

古文：玄同自是冥心静神，往往不食，虽真仙降眄，光景烛空，灵风异香，云璈钧乐，奏于其室，冯徽亦不知也，常复毁笑。
现代文：玄同从此潜心苦思，安定精神，往往不吃饭。虽然真人仙人降临眷顾，光影照亮天空，灵风送来异香，云璈天乐在玄同的静室演奏，冯徽也不知道，平常还是对玄同讥笑。
English: Since then, Xuan Tong has been immersed in hard work, has a stable spirit, and often does not eat. Although real people and immortals come to visit, light and shadow illuminate the sky, the spirit wind brings strange scents, and the clouds and heavenly music play in Xuan Tong's quiet room, Feng Hui does not know, and usually laughs at Xuan Tong.

古文：及黄巢犯关，冯与玄同寓晋陵。
现代文：等到黄巢进犯关中，冯徽与玄同寄居晋陵。
English: In the middle of the Huang Chao invasion, Feng Hui and Xuan were living together in Jinling.

古文：中和元年十月，舟行至渎口，欲抵别墅，忽见河滨有朱紫官吏及戈甲武士，立而序列，若迎候状。
现代文：中和元年四月，乘船走到渎口，将要抵达别墅时，忽然看到河边有些穿着朱衣紫衣的官吏、持戈披甲的武士，站在岸边有秩序地排列着，好像迎候什么人的样子。
English: In April of the first year of the Middle Kingdom, when he took a boat to Fulongkou and was about to arrive at the villa, he suddenly saw some officials dressed in vermilion and purple, and samurai wearing armor, standing on the shore in an orderly manner, as if they were waiting for someone.

古文：所在寇盗，舟人见之，惊愕不进。
现代文：所在之处的寇盗和船夫见到这个情景，都很惊讶愕然，不敢往前走。
English: When the robber and the boatman saw this scene, they were both surprised and stunned, and did not dare to go any further.

古文：玄同曰： 无惧也。 
现代文：玄同说： 不要害怕。 
English: Xuan Tong said, "Don't be afraid.

古文：即移舟及之，官吏皆拜。
现代文：就将船划过去到达迎候处，官吏都拜见玄同。
English: They rowed the boat over to the reception area, where the officials paid their respects to Xuan Tong.

古文：玄同曰： 未也，犹在春中，但去，无速也。 
现代文：玄同说： 没到时间，还在春天里，你们尽管去吧，不要太匆忙。 
English: Xuan Tong said: It's not time yet, it's still spring, you should go anyway, don't be too hasty.

古文：遂各散去。
现代文：那些迎候的官吏就各自散去了。
English: The waiting officials dispersed.

古文：同舟者莫测之。
现代文：同船的人没有人能猜测出玄同说的是什么。
English: No one on board could figure out what Xuan Tong was saying.

古文：明年二月，玄同沐浴，饵紫灵所赐之丹，二仙女亦密降其室。
现代文：第二年的二月，玄同洗了澡，吃了紫虚元君所赐给的丹药，两位仙女又秘密地降临她的静室。
English: In February of the following year, Xuan Tong took a bath and ate the herbal medicine given by Zi Yu Yuanjun, and the two fairies secretly descended on her seclusion room.

古文：十四日，称疾而卒，有仙鹤三十六只，翔集庭宇。
现代文：十四日，玄同假称得病而死。这时，有三十六只仙鹤飞翔而来，落在她家的院子里。
English: On the 14th day, Xuan Tong pretended to be ill and died. At this time, thirty-six cranes flew in and landed in the courtyard of her house.

古文：形质柔缓，状若生人，额中有白光一点，良久化为紫气。
现代文：玄同身体柔软，状态像活人一样，只是她的额中有白光一点，过了一会儿，白色光点变成了紫气。
English: Xuan Tong's body was soft and her condition was like that of a living person, except that there was a white spot on her forehead. After a while, the white spot turned purple.

古文：沐浴之际，玄发重生，立长数寸。
现代文：她洗澡的时候，黑发重新长出来，立时就长了几寸长。
English: While she was in the shower, her black hair grew back and instantly grew a few inches.

古文：十五日夜，云彩满空，忽尔雷电，棺盖飞在庭中，失尸所在，空衣而已。
现代文：十五日夜间，云彩满空，忽然间电闪雷鸣，玄同的棺盖飞在空中，尸体失去，不知在哪里，棺材中只剩下空衣而已。
English: On the night of the 15th, the sky was full of clouds, suddenly lightning flashed and thunder rumbled, the coffin lid flew in the air, the body was lost, I don't know where, only the empty clothes were left in the coffin.

古文：异香群鹤，浃旬不休。
现代文：那余留下的奇异的香气以及一群仙鹤，整整一旬还没散去。
English: The strange aroma and a group of cranes that remain have not dispersed for a whole season.

古文：时僖宗在蜀，浙西节度使周宝表其事，诏付史官。
现代文：当时唐僖宗在蜀州，浙西节度使周宝表奏其事，唐僖宗下诏把这件事交付史官记载。
English: At that time, Tang Xizong was in Shuzhou, and the Western Zhejiang Festival made Zhou Bao record the event, and Tang Xizong issued an edict to submit the matter to the historian for record.

古文：戚逍遥
现代文：戚逍遥
English: Qi Shuangyao

古文：戚逍遥，冀州南宫人也。
现代文：戚逍遥，是冀州南宫县人。
English: Qi Xiaoyang is a native of Nangong County, Jizhou.

古文：父以教授自资。
现代文：她的父亲靠教书来养活自己一家人。
English: Her father supported his family by teaching.

古文：逍遥十余岁，好道清淡，不为儿戏。
现代文：逍遥十多岁时就好道，喜欢清静淡泊，不做儿戏。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he was a happy child. He liked to stay quiet and did not play with toys.

古文：父母亦好道，常行阴德。
现代文：她的父母也好道，经常做些积阴德的事。
English: Her parents are also good-hearted, and often do things to accumulate virtue.

古文：父以《女诫》授逍遥，逍遥曰： 此常人之事耳。 
现代文：父亲把《女诫》这本书交给逍遥，逍遥说： 这只是平常人读的。 
English: The father gave the book "The Female Commandment" to Shao Yuan, and Shao Yuan said, "This is only read by ordinary people."

古文：遂取老子仙经诵之。
现代文：就拿来《老子道德经》读。
English: He took "Lao Zi Daodejing" to read.

古文：年二十余，适同邑蒯浔。
现代文：二十岁那年，逍遥嫁给同县的蒯浔。
English: At the age of twenty, Shouya married a woman from the same county.

古文：舅姑酷，责之以蚕农怠情。
现代文：她的公公、婆婆很残暴，常常用养蚕种田松懈懒惰作为理由责罚她。
English: Her father-in-law and mother-in-law were very cruel and often used her laziness as a reason to punish her.

古文：而逍遥旦夕以斋洁修行为事，殊不以生计在心，蒯浔亦屡责之。
现代文：而逍遥从早到晚把斋戒洁身修行当事做，一点儿也不把日常生计放在心上，蒯浔也屡次责备她。
English: However, Shouya did not pay attention to her daily life as she practiced fasting and cleanliness from morning to night, and Yao repeatedly scolded her.

古文：逍遥白舅姑，请返于父母。
现代文：逍遥禀告公婆，请求把她送回父母家里。
English: She sued her in-laws and asked to be sent back to her parents' home.

古文：及父母家亦逼迫，终以不能为尘俗事，愿独居小室修道，以资舅姑。
现代文：回到父母家，她的父母也逼迫她。她终究认为自己不能做尘世的俗事，愿意独自住在小屋子里修道，来帮助公婆。
English: When she returned to her parents' home, her parents also persecuted her. After all, she thought that she could not do the mundane things of the world, and she was willing to live alone in a small hut to help her in-laws.

古文：蒯浔及舅姑俱疑，乃弃之于室。
现代文：蒯浔和公婆都怀疑她，就把她遗弃在空室之中。
English: Both her mother-in-law and father-in-law were suspicious of her, so they abandoned her in an empty room.

古文：而逍遥但以香水为资，绝食静想，自歌曰： 笑看沧海欲成尘，王母花前别众真。
现代文：而逍遥只凭香火清水作为资本，绝食静想。自己作了一首歌： 笑看沧海欲成尘，王母花前别众真。
English: And Shouyao only relies on incense and water as capital, fasting and meditating. He made a song: Laugh and see the sea of change want to become dust, before the Queen Mother's flower, be true.

古文：千岁却归天上去，一心珍重世间人。 
现代文：千岁却归天上去，一心珍重世间人。 
English: A thousand years old, yet ascending to heaven, he cherished the people of the world with all his heart.

古文：蒯氏及邻里悉以为妖。
现代文：老蒯家和他们的邻里之人，都把逍遥看作妖孽。
English: The old man's family and the people in their neighborhood all consider Xuanwu to be a witch.

古文：夜闻室内有人语声，及晓，见逍遥独坐，亦不惊。
现代文：他们在晚上听到逍遥室内有人说话的声音，到天亮后却只见逍遥独自坐着，他们也不惊讶。
English: They are not surprised to hear the sound of someone talking in the common room in the evening, only to find the common sitting alone in the morning.

古文：又三日晨起，举家闻屋裂声如雷，但见所服衣履在室内，仰视半天，有云雾鸾鹤，复有仙乐香軿，彩仗罗列，逍遥与仙众俱在云中，历历闻分别言语。
现代文：又过了三天，早晨起来时，全家人听到房屋破裂的声音，像打雷一样，就跑去看，只见到逍遥所穿的衣服和鞋子在室内，他们仰视天空，看见半天空中有云雾鸾鸟和仙鹤，还有仙乐和女子乘坐的带帷幕的香车，色彩鲜明的仪仗罗列着，逍遥和众仙都在云雾中，清清楚楚地听到她告别的话。
English: Three days later, when they got up in the morning, the whole family heard the sound of the house cracking, like thunder, and ran to see, only to see the clothes and shoes worn by Shouya in the room. They looked up at the sky and saw the cloud of ostriches and cranes in the middle of the sky, as well as the curtain-draped chariot of Xuan Le and the woman, and the brightly colored ceremonial songs. Shouya and all the fairies were in the cloud, and they clearly heard her farewell.

古文：广陵有个卖茶的老太太，不知道她姓什么，也不知道她是哪里的人。
现代文：茶姥广陵有个卖茶的老太太，不知道她姓什么，也不知道她是哪里的人。
English: There is an old lady who sells tea at Tea Grandmother Guangling. I don't know her last name or where she is from.

古文：她永远象七十岁的人，但身体轻捷，健壮有力，耳不聋眼不花，鬓发浓黑。
现代文：她永远像七十岁的人，但身体轻捷，健壮有力，耳不聋眼不花，鬓发浓黑。
English: She always looks like a seventy-year-old, but her body is light, strong and powerful, she is not deaf or blind, and her hair is thick and black.

古文：年高望重的人互相传说，从晋元帝南渡以后就看见她，已经几百年了，而她的容颜状态没有改变。
现代文：年高望重的人互相传说，从晋元帝南渡以后就看见她，已经几百年了，而她的容颜状态没有改变。
English: People of high esteem tell each other that they have seen her for hundreds of years, ever since the arrival of Emperor Jin to the south, and the state of her face has not changed.

古文：每天早晨，她就拿着一器皿茶到集市上去卖，集市上的人都争着买。
现代文：每天早晨，她就拿着一器皿茶到集市上去卖，集市上的人都争着买。
English: Every morning, she takes a bowl of tea to the bazaar to sell it, and people at the bazaar compete to buy it.

古文：从日出到日落，卖了一整天了，而她器皿中的茶总是象刚熟一样，也不曾减少。
现代文：从日出到日落，卖了一整天了，而她器皿中的茶总是像刚熟一样，也不曾减少。
English: From sunrise to sunset, it has been sold for a whole day, and the tea in her vessel is always as if it is just ripe, and has not been reduced.

古文：胥吏把她抓去关押在监狱中，老太太拿着她卖茶的器具，自窗户中飞走了。
现代文：胥吏把她抓去关押在监狱中，老太太拿着她卖茶的器具，自窗户中飞走了。
English: The magistrate arrested her and put her in jail. The old lady took her tea set and flew out of the window.

古文：张建章
现代文：张建章
English: Zhang Jianzhang

古文：张建章为幽州行军司马。先好经史，聚书至万卷。
现代文：张建章担任幽州行军司马，广学经史，积聚的书籍达到一万卷。
English: Zhang Jianzhang served as Yuzhou Marching Sima, widely studied history, and accumulated 10,000 volumes of books.

古文：所居有书楼，但以披阅清净为事。
现代文：他的住处有座藏书楼，他就只管把翻阅书籍、洁净书楼当大事。
English: He has a library at his residence, and he makes it a priority to read books and keep the library clean.

古文：曾赍府帅命往渤海，遇风波泊舟，忽有青衣泛一叶舟而至，谓建章曰： 奉大仙命请大夫。 
现代文：曾经有一次，他带着府帅的命令前往渤海，途中遇到风浪，把船停泊下来。这时，忽然有一个穿青衣的人划着一叶小舟来到他的面前，对建章说： 我奉大仙的命令来请大夫。 
English: Once upon a time, he went to the Bohai Sea with the order of the governor, encountered wind and waves on the way, and moored the ship. At that time, a man in blue rowing a small boat suddenly came to him and said to Jianzhang, "I came to ask for a doctor by the order of the Great Immortal."

古文：建章应之。
现代文：建章答应前往。
English: Kenzho agreed to go.

古文：至一大岛，见楼台岿然，中有女仙处之，侍翼甚盛，器食皆建章故乡之常味也。
现代文：来到一个大岛上，看到那里楼台高大，当中有女仙住在那里，侍卫辅佐的人很多。招待建章吃饭，器物中的食品都是建章故乡常见的风味。
English: I came to a large island and saw the tall buildings there. Among them, a nymph lived there, and there were many attendants and assistants. I invited Kenzhang to dinner, and the food in the utensils was a common flavor of Kenzhang's hometown.

古文：食毕告退，女仙谓建章曰： 子不欺暗室，所谓君子也。
现代文：吃完饭告退，女仙对建章说： 您不做亏心之事，真是一位君子。
English: After finishing the meal and leaving, the fairy said to Jianzhang, "You don't do anything ungrateful. You are truly a gentleman."

古文：勿患风涛之苦，吾令此青衣往来导之。 
现代文：你不必担忧风涛之苦，我命令这个青衣仆人往返引导你。 
English: You don't have to worry about the hardships of the wind and waves. I order this servant in blue to guide you back and forth.

古文：及还，风波寂然，往来皆无所惧。
现代文：等到回船时，风平浪静，往来都没有什么可担心的。
English: By the time we got back to the boat, the wind had calmed down and there was nothing to worry about.

古文：及回至西岸，经太宗征辽碑，半没水中。
现代文：等到他回到西岸，经过太宗征辽碑，看到碑已埋没到水中一半了。
English: When he returned to the west coast, he passed the Taizongzheng Liao Monument and saw that the monument was already half-buried in the water.

古文：建章以帛裹面摸而读之，不失一字。
现代文：建章就用丝绸蒙面，用来摸着碑文把它读下来，没漏掉一个字。
English: Jian Zheng covered his face with silk and used it to feel the inscription and read it down without missing a word.

古文：其笃学如此，蓟门之人，皆能说之。
现代文：他好学到这种程度，蓟门的人都能说出他的事迹。
English: He is easy to learn to such an extent that everyone who knows him can tell his story.

古文：周宝
现代文：周宝
English: Zhou Bao

古文：周宝为浙西节度使，治城隍，至鹤林门得古冢，棺椟将腐。
现代文：周宝做浙西节度使时，有一次修城隍庙，在鹤林门到发掘一座古墓，棺材都快要腐烂了。
English: When Zhou Bao was the envoy of the Western Zhejiang Festival, he once repaired the Chengyu Temple and unearthed an ancient tomb at Hulin Gate. The coffin was about to rot.

古文：发之，有一女子面如生，铅粉衣服皆不败。
现代文：把它打开，看到里面有一个女子，面色如生，铅粉和衣服都没有坏。
English: He opened it and saw a woman inside, her face as fresh as a daisy, her face and clothes still intact.

古文：掌役者以告，宝亲视之，或曰： 此当时是尝饵灵药，待时而发，发则解化之期矣。 
现代文：掌管劳役的人把这情况报告了周宝，周宝亲自来察看，有人说： 这个女子当时曾经吃过灵药，等待到时发掘，发掘之日就是她尸解仙化的日期了。 
English: The person in charge of labor service reported this situation to Zhou Bao. Zhou Bao came to inspect it in person. Someone said: This woman had taken the elixir at that time and was waiting to be excavated. The day of the excavation was the date of her necropsy.

古文：宝即命改葬之，具车舆声乐以送。宝与僚属登城望之。
现代文：周宝就下令为那个女子改葬，安排车辆声乐去送她，周宝与他的同僚和下属官员登上城楼观望送葬的队伍。
English: Zhou Bao ordered to change the funeral for the woman, arranged for the vehicle to sing to send her, Zhou Bao and his colleagues and subordinate officials boarded the tower to watch the funeral procession.

古文：行数里，有紫云覆輀车之上。众咸见一女子，出自车中，坐于紫云，冉冉而上，久之乃没。
现代文：只见那些人走出几里地时，有一片紫色云气覆盖在灵车上，大家全都见到一个女子从车中出来，坐在紫色云气之上冉冉上升，很久才消失。
English: When the people had walked a few miles, a purple haze covered the hearse, and everyone saw a woman get out of the car, sit on the purple haze, and slowly rise, before disappearing for a long time.

古文：开棺则空矣。
现代文：打开棺材一看已经空了。
English: When the coffin was opened, it was empty.

