古文：文信侯欲攻赵以广河间，使刚成君蔡泽事燕三年，而燕太子质于秦。
现代文：文信侯吕不韦想要进攻赵国，来扩张他在河间的封地，他派刚成君蔡泽在燕国作大臣，经过三年努力，燕太子丹入秦为质。
English: Wenxin Hou Lü Buwei wanted to attack Zhao Province to expand his fief in Hema. He sent Gangcheng Jun Cai Ze to serve as a minister in Yan Province. After three years of hard work, Yan Prince Dan entered Qin as a pledge.

古文：文信侯因请张唐相燕，欲与燕共伐赵，以广河间之地。
现代文：文信侯又请秦人张唐到燕国作相国，以联合燕国攻伐赵国、扩大他在河间的封地。
English: Wenxin Hou also invited Zhang Tang, a Qin person, to go to Yan Guo to be a sister country, to attack Zhao Guo by uniting with Yan Guo, and to expand his fief in Hema.

古文：张唐辞曰： 燕者必径于赵，赵人得唐者，受百里之地。 
现代文：张唐推辞说： 到燕国去必须取道于赵国，由于过去伐赵结下仇怨，赵国正悬赏百里之地抓我。 
English: Zhang Tang said, "If you want to go to Yan's country, you must take the road from Zhao's country. Zhao's country is offering a reward of one hundred li to catch me, because I had a grudge against Zhao in the past.

古文：文信侯去而不快。
现代文：文信侯很不高兴地令他退下。
English: Unhappily, Bunshin Hou ordered him to step down.

古文：少庶子甘罗曰： 君侯何不快甚也? 
现代文：少庶子甘罗问： 君侯为什么这般不高兴呢？ 
English: The little bastard, Ganro, asked: Why is the prince so unhappy?

古文：文信侯曰： 吾令刚成君蔡泽事燕三年，而燕太子已入质矣。今吾自请张卿相燕，而不肯行。 
现代文：文信侯说： 我让刚成君蔡泽到燕国做了几年工作，使太子丹入朝为质，一切就绪了，现在我亲自请张唐到燕国为相，他竟推辞不去！ 
English: Wenxin Hou said: I asked Gangchengjun Cai Ze to go to Yan for a few years to do some work, so that Prince Dan entered the dynasty as a pledge, everything was ready, now I personally invited Zhang Tang to go to Yan, but he actually refused to go!

古文：甘罗曰： 臣行之。 
现代文：甘罗说： 我有办法让他去。 
English: "I have a way to let him go," he said.

古文：文信侯叱去曰： 我自行之而不肯，汝安能行之也? 
现代文：文信侯厉声斥到： 走开！我亲自出马他尚且无动于衷，你还能有什么办法！ 
English: Wenxin Hou snapped back: Go away! I personally went out to the horse and he was still indifferent, what else can you do!

古文：甘罗曰： 夫项櫜生七岁而为孔子师，今臣生十二岁于兹矣，君其试臣，奚以遽言叱也? 
现代文：甘罗辩解说： 古时项七岁时即为孔子师，我今年已十二岁了，君侯为何不让我去试一试，为何不由分说便呵斥于我呢！ 
English: Ganluo argued: In ancient times, when you were seven years old, you were already a Confucius scholar. I am twelve years old this year. Why didn't the prince let me try it? Why did he reject me out of hand?

古文：甘罗见张唐曰： 卿之功，孰与武安君? 
现代文：于是甘罗拜谒张唐，问他： 阁下认为您的功勋比武安君如何？
English: Therefore, Gan Luo paid homage to Zhang Tang and asked him, "Your Excellency, how do you think your feats compare to those of Wu Anjun?"

古文：唐曰： 武安君战胜攻取，不知其数；攻城堕邑，不知其数。
现代文：张唐说： 武安君战功赫赫，攻城略地，不可胜数，我张唐不如他。 
English: Zhang Tang said, "Wu Anjun's war exploits are great, and the places he attacked are countless. I, Zhang Tang, am not as good as him.

古文：臣之功不如武安君也。 
现代文：甘罗问： 您确认您的功劳不如武安君吗？ 
English: Gan Luo asked: Do you confirm that your merit is not as good as that of Wu Anjun?

古文：甘罗曰： 卿明知功之不如武安君欤? 
现代文：张唐答道： 是的，确实不如他。 甘罗又问： 您看，当年执掌秦政的应侯范雎与今日文信侯相比，哪一个权利更重呢？ 
English: Zhang Tang replied, "Yes, it is indeed inferior to him." Gan Luo also asked, "You see, compared to the Ying Hou Fan Qi, who was in charge of the Qin government at that time, and the Wenshin Hou today, which one has more rights?"

古文：曰： 卿明知为不如文信侯专欤? 
现代文：张唐说： 应该不如文信侯的权利重。 
English: Zhang Tang said: It should not be as important as the power of Wenxin Hou.

古文：曰： 知之。 
现代文：甘罗问： 您确认这一点吗？ 
English: Zhang Qing said: I really understand this.

古文：甘罗曰： 应侯欲伐赵，武安君难之，去咸阳七里，绞而杀之。
现代文：张唐说： 是的，确实不如他。 甘罗说： 当年应侯想攻打赵国，可武安君阻拦他，结果应侯在离咸阳七里处绞死武安君。
English: Zhang Tang said: Yes, it is indeed inferior to him. Gan Luo said: At that time, Ying Hou wanted to attack Zhao Province, but Wu Anjun blocked him. As a result, Ying Hou hanged Wu Anjun seven miles away from Xianyang.

古文：今文信侯自请卿相燕，而卿不肯行，臣不知卿所死之处矣! 
现代文：现在文信侯亲自请您去燕国任相，阁下却左右不肯，我不知道阁下身死何地啊！ 
English: Now, Wenxin Hou has personally asked you to become the minister of Yan Guo, but your excellency refuses. I don't know where your excellency died!

古文：唐曰： 请因孺子而行! 
现代文：张唐沉吟道： 那就麻烦您跟文信侯说我张唐乐意接受这一使命。 
English: Zhang Tang mused, "Then please tell Wenxin Hou that I, Zhang Tang, am willing to accept this mission."

古文：令库具车，厩具马，府具币，行有日矣。甘罗谓文信侯曰： 借臣车五乘，请为张唐先报赵。 
现代文：于是他让人准备车马盘缠，择日起程。甘罗又去跟文信侯说： 请君侯替我备五辆车子，让我先去赵国替张唐打通关节。 
English: So he asked someone to prepare the chariots and horses, and chose a day for the journey. Gan Luo also went to Wenshin Hou and said, "Please ask the prince to prepare five chariots for me, and let me first go to Zhao Province to make a joint for Zhang Tang."

古文：见赵王，赵王郊迎。
现代文：于是甘罗去见赵王，赵王亲自到郊外迎接他。
English: So Ganluo went to see Zhao Wang, and Zhao Wang went to the suburbs to meet him in person.

古文：曰： 闻之。  燕太子入秦者，燕不欺秦也。
现代文：甘罗问道： 大王听说太子丹入秦为质的事吗？ 赵王说： 听说了。 
English: Gan Luo asked: Did the great king hear about the matter of Prince Dan entering Qin as a hostage? Zhao Wang said: I heard about it.

古文：张唐相燕者，秦不欺燕也。秦、燕不相欺，则伐赵，危矣。
现代文：甘罗分析道： 太子丹到秦国做质子，燕国就不敢背叛秦；张唐在燕国做丞相，秦国也不会欺辱燕国。秦、燕两国亲近，就是为了攻打赵国，赵国已经危险了。
English: Gan Luo analyzed: Prince Dan went to Qin to be a proton, and Yan would not dare to betray Qin; Zhang Tang was a prime minister in Yan, and Qin would not bully Yan. Qin and Yan were close to each other in order to attack Zhao, and Zhao was already in danger.

古文：燕、秦所以不相欺者，无异故，欲攻赵而广河间也。
现代文：秦、燕相好，别无他故，只是为了攻伐赵国，扩张河间地盘而已。
English: Qin and Yan liked each other for no other reason than to invade Zhao and expand the territory between the rivers.

古文：今王资臣五城以广河间，请归燕太子，与强赵攻弱燕。 
现代文：为大王计，若能送给我五座城邑去拓展河间之地，就能使秦国遣还太子丹，并且联合赵国一道攻打燕国。 
English: According to the great king's plan, if he could give me five cities and towns to expand the land between the rivers, he would be able to make Qin return Prince Dan and attack Yan together with Zhao.

古文：赵王立割五城以广河间，归燕太子。
现代文：赵王当即割让五座城邑，秦国也打发太子丹归燕。
English: King Zhao immediately ceded five cities and towns, and the State of Qin also dispatched the crown prince, Denguiyan.

古文：赵攻燕，得上谷三十六县，与秦什一。
现代文：赵国攻打燕国，得上谷三十六县，分给秦国十分之一的土地。
English: Zhao attacked Yan and won 36 counties in Shanggu, and was given one-tenth of the land of Qin.

