古文：孝庄纪孝庄皇帝，讳子攸，彭城王勰之第三子。母曰李妃。
现代文：孝庄皇帝，名元子攸，是彭城王元勰的第三个儿子，母亲是李妃。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang, whose name was Yuan Ziyou, was the third son of King Yuan of Pengcheng. His mother was Li Fei.

古文：肃宗初，以勰有鲁阳翼卫之勋，封武城县开国公。
现代文：肃宗初年，因元勰有鲁阳护卫的功勋，封为武城县开国公。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, he was awarded the title of the founder of Wucheng County for his services as a Luyang escort.

古文：幼侍肃宗书于禁内。及长，风神秀慧，姿貌甚美。
现代文：幼小时在宫内侍奉肃宗读书。等到长大，风度特异，容貌十分美好。
English: When he was young, he served the Emperor Sozong in the imperial court and studied. When he grew up, his demeanor was unique and his appearance was very beautiful.

古文：拜中书侍郎、城门校尉、兼给事黄门侍郎，雅为肃宗所亲待，长直禁中。
现代文：被任命为中书侍郎、城门校尉、兼给事黄门侍郎，很得肃宗亲爱，长期在宫中值勤。
English: He was appointed to the position of Chusho-sajirō (chancellor of the imperial court), Shōmon-no-kantei (captain of the castle gate) and concurrently served as Kibōmon-sajirō (master of the yellow gate). He was very dear to Emperor Sozō and was on duty at the imperial court for a long time.

古文：迁散骑常侍、御史中尉。
现代文：升任散骑常侍、御史中尉。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Sanzhi no Tsuneishi and Lieutenant of Goshi.

古文：孝昌二年八月，进封长乐王。
现代文：孝昌二年八月，晋封为长乐王。
English: In August of the second year of Xiaochang, he was promoted to the post of Changle King.

古文：转侍中、中军将军。
现代文：改任侍中、中军将军。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Samurai Middle Rank and General of the Chinese Army.

古文：三年十月，以兄彭城王劭事，转为卫将军、左光禄大夫、中书监，实见出也。
现代文：三年十月，因哥哥彭城王元劭的事情，改任为卫将军、左光禄大夫、中书监，实际上被疏远了。
English: In October of the third year, due to the death of his brother, Pengcheng Wangyuanqian, he was reassigned as Wei general, Zuo Guanglu doctor, and Chinese book supervisor. In fact, he was estranged.

古文：及武泰元年春二月，肃宗崩，大都督尔朱荣将向京师，谋欲废立。
现代文：到武泰元年春二月，肃宗逝世，大都督尔朱荣将要赶到京城，策划废立。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of Wu Tai, Su Zong passed away, and Zhu Rong, the great governor, was going to rush to Beijing to plan the abolition of the government.

古文：以帝家有忠勋，且兼民望，阴与帝通，荣乃率众来赴。
现代文：因皇帝家有忠心功勋，而且在民众中有声望，暗中和皇帝联络，尔朱荣于是率领军队前来奔赴。
English: Because the emperor's family had been loyal and meritorious, and had a reputation among the people, secretly liaising with the emperor, Er Zhu Rong then led the army to come.

古文：夏四月丙申，帝与兄弟夜北渡河；丁酉，会荣于河阳。
现代文：夏四月丙申，皇帝和兄弟夜晚向北渡过黄河。丁酉，在河阳同尔朱荣相会。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor and his brothers crossed the Yellow River to the north at night. Ding Jun, met Zhu Rong in Heyang.

古文：戊戌，南济河，即帝位。
现代文：戊戌，向南渡过黄河，登上皇帝位。
English: Wuzhong, crossed the Yellow River to the south and ascended to the throne.

古文：以兄彭城王劭为无上王，弟霸城公子正为始平王。
现代文：任命哥哥彭城王元劭为无上王，弟弟霸城公子正为始平王。
English: He appointed his elder brother, Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, as the supreme king, and his younger brother, Pengcheng Gongzi, as the beginning king.

古文：以荣为使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、尚书令、领军将军、领左右，封太原王。
现代文：任命令朱荣为使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、尚书令、领军将军、领左右，封太原王。
English: Zhu Rong was ordered to be the envoy of the festival, the attendant, the governor of the military, the general, the secretary, the leading general, the leader of the left and right, and the former king.

古文：己亥，百僚相率，有司奉玺绂，备法驾，奉迎于河梁。
现代文：己亥，百官相继，有关官员献上玉玺丝带，备好皇帝车辆，到河梁迎接。
English: At the beginning of the year, hundreds of officials in succession, the relevant officials presented the jade ribbon, prepared the emperor's vehicle, and went to the river to meet.

古文：庚子，车驾巡河，西至陶渚。
现代文：庚子，皇帝巡视黄河，向西到达陶渚。
English: Geng Zi, the emperor, toured the Yellow River and went west to Tao Nagi.

古文：荣以兵权在己，遂有异志，乃害灵太后及幼主，次害无上王劭、始平王子正，又害丞相高阳王雍、司空公元钦、仪同三司元恆芝、仪同三司东平王略、广平王悌、常山王邵、北平王超、任城王彝、赵郡王毓、中山王叔仁、齐郡王温，公卿已下二千余人。
现代文：尔朱荣因兵权在自己手上，于是产生异心，就杀害灵太后和幼主，随之杀害无上王元劭、始乎王子正，又杀害丞相高阳王元雍、司空公元钦、仪同三司元恒芝、仪同三司束平王亘喳、广平王盈隧、常山王邮己、匙逛五塑、任毯王五垄、趟虽王互毖、中山王拯仁、查登王五过，以及公卿以下官员二千多人。
English: As he had the military power in his hands, he had a different idea and killed the spiritual empress dowager and the young master. He also killed the supreme king Yuan Xuan, the first prince Zheng, the chancellor Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, the secretary Kuang B.D. Qin, the eulogist and the third secretary Yuan Heng Zhi, the eulogist and the third secretary Zou Ping Wang Guan Yu, the Guangping King Ying Tun, the Changshan King Po Ji, the keeper of the five statues, the king of the five carpets, the king of the five jars, the king of the five jars, the king of the

古文：列骑卫帝，迁于便幕。
现代文：成列的骑兵护卫皇帝，遭到普通帐幕中。
English: The cavalry guarding the emperor, lined up in ranks, was surrounded by ordinary tents.

古文：既而荣悔，稽颡谢罪。
现代文：不久尔朱荣后悔，叩头认罪。
English: Zhu Rong soon repented and confessed.

古文：语在《荣传》。
现代文：记载在《水朱荣传》。
English: Recorded in "Water Zhu Rongxuan."

古文：辛丑，车驾入宫，御太极殿，诏曰： 太祖诞命应期，龙飞燕代，累世重光，载隆帝绪。
现代文：辛丑，皇帝进宫，到太极殿，下韶说： 太祖奉承天命，在燕代登基，世代相继。帝业兴隆。
English: Xin ugly, the emperor entered the palace, to the Taiji Hall, the lower jaw said: the great ancestor flattered the fate of heaven, ascended the throne in the Yan Dynasty, generation after generation. Imperial prosperity.

古文：冀欲阐兹洪业，永在无穷。
现代文：希望拓展宏大的业绩，国运无穷尽。
English: It is hoped that the grand achievements will be expanded, and the national games will be endless.

古文：岂图多难，遘兹百六，致使妖悖四起，内外竞侵，朝无恤政之臣，野多怨酷之士，实由女主专朝，致兹颠覆。
现代文：哪想到多灾多虽，遭遇到厄运，致使妖贼叛逆四处产生，内外竞相侵犯，朝廷没有忧虑政事的臣子，民间多怨恨酷政的士人，实在是由于女主专擅朝政，导致遣一颠沛困顿。
English: Who would have thought that, in spite of the many disasters and misfortunes that befell her, the rebellion of the demon-thieves arose everywhere, and they invaded both inside and outside the country. The courtiers of the imperial court who did not worry about politics, and the nobles who were hated by the people for their harsh politics, were actually caused by the fact that the empress was exclusively good at politics, which led to her being sent into a desperate plight.

古文：孝明皇帝大情冲顺，深存隐忍，奄弃万国，众用疑焉。
现代文：孝明皇帝性情淡泊柔顺，颇能克制忍耐，忽然抛弃天下，众人因此有疑问。
English: Emperor Xiaoming was mild-mannered and mild-tempered. He was quite capable of restraint and patience. However, he suddenly abandoned the world, which caused many people to have doubts.

古文：苟求胡出，入守神器，凡厥有心，莫不解体。
现代文：一意求取胡氏所生者，入宫登帝位，凡是有良心的人，无不人心离散。
English: Those who were born of the Hu clan, entered the palace and ascended to the throne, and those who had a conscience, were all disliked.

古文：太原王荣，世抱忠孝，功格古今，赴义晋阳，大会河洛，乃推翼朕躬，应兹大命。
现代文：太原王尔朱荣，世代持守忠诚孝顺，功劳高于古今，从晋阳为道义奔赴，在黄河洛水大会集，就推尊拥戴我，接受这一大位。
English: King Er Zhu Rong of Taiyuan, who has maintained loyalty and filial piety for generations, and whose merit is higher than that of the past and the present, rushed from Jinyang for morality and held a grand assembly in the Yellow River, Luoshui. He respected and supported me and accepted this great position.

古文：德谢少康，道愧前绪，猥以眇身，君临万国，如涉渊海，罔知所济。
现代文：我德行不及少康，道义有愧于先王，忝以渺小的德才，统御天下，如同越过深渊大海，不知如何渡过。
English: My virtue is not as good as Shokang's, and my morality is not as good as the former king's. With my small virtue, I rule the world. It's like crossing the abyss of the sea, and I don't know how to get across.

古文：可大赦天下，改武泰为建义元年。
现代文：可大赦天下，改武泰为建义元年。
English: However, he was pardoned by the emperor, and Wu Tai was changed to Jianyi in the first year of the reign.

古文：从太原王督将军士，普加五阶；在京文官两阶，武官三级。
现代文：跟随太原王的都督将领和军士，普遍增加五级；在京的文官加两级，武官加三级。
English: The governors, generals and military officers who followed the Taiyuan King generally increased by five levels; the civil officers in Beijing increased by two levels, and the military officers increased by three levels.

古文：复天下租役三年。 
现代文：免除天下三年的租税。 
English: exempt from tax for three years.

古文：壬寅，太原王尔朱荣上表，请追谥无上王为皇帝。
现代文：壬寅，太原王水朱荣上奏表，请求追谧无上王为皇帝。
English: Jinyin, the Taiyuan king Shuizhurong, sent a petition to the emperor, asking him to make him the emperor.

古文：余死于河阴者，诸王、刺史赠三司，三品者令仆，五品者刺史，七品以下及民郡、镇。
现代文：其余死于河阴的人，诸王、刺史赠仪同三司，三品者赠令仆，五品者赠刺史，七品以下和平民赠郡守、镇将。
English: The rest of the people who died in the shadow of the river, the kings and princes presented the award to the three departments, the three-ranked person presented the servant, the five-ranked person presented the award, and the seven-ranked and below and the civilians presented the county governor and town general.

古文：诸死者子孙，听立后，授封爵。
现代文：所有死亡者的子孙，准许选立继承者，授予封爵。
English: All descendants of the deceased are allowed to choose a successor and award a knighthood.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下韶同意。
English: He complied.

古文：癸卯，以前太尉公、江阳王继为太师、司州牧；骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史、北海王颢为太傅、开府，仍刺史；平东将军、光禄大夫、清渊县开国侯李延实为太保，进封阳平王，寻转太傅；安南将军、并州刺史元天穆为太尉公，封上党王；侍中、车骑大将军、仪同三司杨椿为司徒公；车骑大将军、仪同三司、顿丘郡开国公穆绍为司空公，领尚书令，进爵为王；使持节、车骑大将军、雍州刺史、上党公长孙稚为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为王，寻改封冯翊王；中军将军、殿中尚书元谌为仪同三司、尚书左仆射，封魏郡王；中军将军、给事黄门侍郎元顼为东海王；金紫光禄大夫、广陵王恭为仪同三司。
现代文：癸卯，任命前太尉公、江阳王元继为太师、司州牧；骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史、北海王豆题为太傅、开府，仍兼刺史；平束将军、光禄大夫、清渊县开国侯奎亘随为太保，晋封爵为阳王王，不久改任太傅；安南将军、并州刺史元天垄为太尉公，封为亡党王；侍中、车骑大将军、仪同三司杨椿为司徒公；车骑大将军、仪同三司、堕旦邮开国公蝈为司空公，兼领尚书令，升爵位为王；使持节、车骑大将军、雍州刺史、上墓公长孙稚为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，升爵位为王，不久改封为冯翊王；中军将军、殿中尚书元谌为仪同三司、尚书左仆射，封为魏郡王；中军将军、给事黄门侍郎元顼封为东海王；金紫光禄大大、广陵王元恭为仪同三司。
English: Zou Yu appointed the former lieutenant general, Jiangyang Wangyuan, as the successor of the Taiji and Shizhou Mu; the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, the same as the three divisions, Songzhou Shishi, and Beihai Wangzu, the same as the Taifu, Kaifu, and still the same as the Shishi; the general of the imperial navy, Guanglu Daifu, and the founder of Qingyuan County, Hou Kuiwan, were appointed as the Tai Po, and the prince of the imperial navy, Yang Wang Wang, was appointed as the Tai Fu; the general of the imperial navy, and the former general of the imperial navy,

古文：甲辰，追复故广阳王渊、故安乐王鉴爵。
现代文：甲辰，追复已故广阳王元渊、已故安乐王元鉴的爵位。
English: Jia Chen restored the titles of the late Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan and the late Anle Wang Yuan Jian.

古文：通直散骑常侍、敷城王坦为咸阳王，谏议大夫元贵平为东莱王，直阁将军元肃为鲁郡王，秘书郎中元晔为长广王，冯翊郡开国公源绍景复先爵陇西王，扶风郡开国公冯冏、东郡公陆子彰、北平公长孙悦并复其先王爵，以北平王超还复为安定王。
现代文：通直散骑常侍、敷城王元坦封为咸阳王，谏议大夫元贵平封为东莱王，直合将军元肃封为鲁郡王，秘书郎中元晔封为长广王，冯翊郡开国公源绍景恢复原来的爵位陇西王，扶风郡开国公冯同、东郡公陆子彰、北平公长孙悦都恢复原来的王爵，北平王元超恢复为安定王。
English: Tsunzhi Sanzhong riding attendant and Shicheng King Yuan Tanfu was crowned King of Xianyang, Zhengyi doctor Yuan Guiping was crowned King of Donglai, Zhouga general Yuan Sufu was crowned King of Lu County, secretary Langzhong Yuan Zifeng was crowned King of Changguang, Fengye County founding prince Yuan Shaojing was restored to his original title of King of Shaanxi, Fengye County founding prince Fengdong, Dongye County prince Lu Zichang, and Beiping prince Sun Yue were all restored to their original titles of King, and Beiping king Yuanchao was restored to the title

古文：丁未，诏内外解严。
现代文：丁未，诏令内外解除戒严。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Xiaozhuang issued a decree to lift the martial law in and around Beijing.

古文：庚戌，封大将军尔朱荣次子叉罗为梁郡王。
现代文：庚戌，封大将军尔朱荣的次子叉罗为梁郡王。
English: Geng Xuan, the second son of the great general Zhu Rong, became the king of Liang County.

古文：诏蠕蠕主阿那瑰赞拜不名，上书不称臣。
现代文：诏令蠕蠕主阿那瓖朝见参拜不称名字，上奏疏不称臣子。
English: The emperor decreed that Anaximenes should not be called by his name when he visited the emperor, and that he should not be called a vassal.

古文：是月，汝南王悦、北海王颢、临淮王彧前后奔萧衍，郢州刺史元愿达据城南叛。
现代文：这月，汝南王元悦、北海王元颢、临淮王元或先后投奔萧衍，郢州刺史元愿达占据城池向南方叛变。
English: In this month, King Yuan Yue of the South, King Yuan Xuan of the North Sea, and King Yuan of Linhuai may have successively defected to Xiao Yan, and Prince Shi Yuan of Zhangzhou was willing to occupy the city and mutiny to the south.

古文：五月丁巳朔，加大将军尔朱荣北道大行台。
现代文：五月丁巳初一，加授大将军尔朱荣为北道大行台。
English: On the first day of the new year in May, General Le Zhu Rong was awarded the title of Grand Marshal of the North.

古文：以尚书右仆射元罗为东道大使，征东将军、光禄勋元欣副之，巡方黜陟，先行后闻。
现代文：任命尚书右仆射元罗为柬道大使，征东将军、光禄勋元欣为他的副手，巡视各地升降官吏，先施行后报告。
English: He appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Yuanluo, as the ambassador to Cambodia, and the general of the Eastern Expedition, Guanglu Xun Yuanxin, as his deputy. He inspected the promotion and demotion of officials in various regions, and made a report after implementation.

古文：辛酉，大将军尔朱荣还晋阳，帝饯于邙阴。
现代文：辛酉，大将军令朱荣回晋阳，皇帝在邙阴饯行。
English: Xin Zhen, the general ordered Zhu Rong to return to Jinyang, and the emperor went to Jinyang.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 自孝昌之季，法令昏泯。怀忠守素，拥隔莫申；深怨宿憾，控告靡所。
现代文：丙寅，下诏说： 自孝昌的末年，法令昏暗废弃，心怀忠诚操守真情，被阻隔不能申述，深仇旧恨，控告没有地方。
English: Xiong Yin, the next edict said: Since the end of Xiaochang, the law has been abandoned, the heart is loyal and honest, it is blocked and cannot be appealed, the old hatred is deep, and there is no place for complaints.

古文：其有事在通途，横被疑异，名例无爽，枉见排抑。或选举不平，或赋役烦苛，诸如此者不可具说。
现代文：有人在畅通的大道上有事，横遭猜疑，刑名例案没有差错，冤枉地受排斥，有的选拔不公平，有的赋役繁多苛刻，诸如此类的难以一一诉说。
English: Some people have problems on the smooth road, they are suspected, there is no mistake in the punishment cases, they are unjustly excluded, some are unfairly selected, some are harshly forced, and it is difficult to tell them one by one.

古文：其有诉人经公车注不合者，悉集华林东门，朕当亲理冤狱，以申积滞。 
现代文：如有申诉人经官府审议不当的，都聚集到华林东门。我将亲自处理冤案，为积压迟滞者昭雪。 
English: If there are any complainants that are improperly removed after deliberation by the government, they will all gather at the East Gate of Hualin. I will personally deal with the grievances and clear up the backlog.

古文：己巳，齐州郡民贾皓聚众反，夜袭州城，会明退走。
现代文：己巳，齐州郡中平民贾皓聚集民众反叛，夜晚袭击州城，到天亮时退走。
English: At this time, Jiaqi, a civilian in Qizhou County, gathered people to rebel, attacked the city at night, and retreated at dawn.

古文：乙亥，晋州刺史樊子鹄克唐州，斩刺史崔元珍、行台郦恽，传首京师。
现代文：乙亥，晋州刺史樊子鹄攻克唐州，杀死刺史崔元珍、行台郦惮，传送首级到京城。
English: In Eihei, Jinzhou assassinated Cui Yuanzhen and Xingtai Xiuhuang, and sent their heads to Beijing.

古文：壬午，诏求德行、文艺、政事强直者，县令、太守、刺史皆叙其志业，具以表闻。
现代文：壬午，下诏寻求有德行、才学、行政刚强正直的人，县令、太守、刺史都叙述他们的志向业绩，卜表奏告。
English: In the morning of the ninth day of the ninth month, the following edict was issued to seek people with virtue, talent, administrative strength and honesty. The county magistrate, the governor and the chief historian all described their aspiration and performance, and the prediction report was issued.

古文：得三人以上，县令、太守、刺史赏一阶；举非其人，亦黜一阶。
现代文：寻得三人的，县令、太守、刺史赏一级；推举不合适的人，也降一级。
English: If three candidates are found, the county magistrate, the governor and the chief historian will be awarded the first grade; if the candidate is not suitable, he will be downgraded to the next grade.

古文：又以旧叙军勋不过征虏，自今以后宜依前式以上，余阶积而为品。
现代文：又因旧曰评军功不超过征虏将军以上，从今以后应依照从前的条例奏上，多余的级别积累而为等次。
English: In addition, since the old evaluation of military merit did not exceed that of conscript generals, from now on, according to the previous regulations, the accumulation of superfluous levels should be equalized.

古文：其从舆驾北来之徒，不在此例。
现代文：跟从皇帝从北方来的人，不在这一条例内。
English: Those who follow the emperor from the north are not included in this regulation.

古文：悉不听破品受阶，破阶请帛。
现代文：都不准跨等次受级，跨级者申请布帛。
English: are not allowed to cross-grade and be graded, and those who cross-grade apply for cloth bags.

古文：先是，萧衍遣其将曹义宗寇荆州。
现代文：在这以前，萧衍派遣他的将领曹义宗侵犯荆州。
English: Before that, Xiao Yan sent his general Cao Yizong to invade Jingzhou.

古文：癸未，以中军将军、吏部尚书费穆为使持节、都督南征诸军事，节度荆州刺史王罴以讨之。
现代文：癸未，任命中军将军、吏部尚书费穆为使持节、都督南征诸军事，调度荆州刺史王照去讨伐他。
English: At the same time, he appointed the general of the Chinese army and the head of the personnel department, Shang Shufemu, as the envoy of the festival, and the governor of the south was conscripted into the military, and dispatched Jingzhou Sisi Wangzhao to fight him.

古文：六月丁亥朔，追封兄真定县开国公子直为陈留王。
现代文：六月丁亥初一，追封哥哥真定县开国公子直为陈留王。
English: On the first day of the Dinghai Festival in June, he followed his elder brother, Jinding County's founding father, to become the Chen Liu Wang.

古文：庚寅，以镇军将军、金紫光禄大夫李虔为车骑大将军、仪同三司、特进。
现代文：庚寅，任命镇军将军、金紫光禄大夫李虔为车骑大将军、仪同三司、特进。
English: Geng Yin appointed the general of the town army, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor Li Qian as the general of the chariot and cavalry, the three divisions of the ceremony, and the special advance.

古文：辛卯，南荆州刺史李志据城南叛。
现代文：辛卯，南荆史李志占据城池向南方叛变。
English: Xinwu, Nanjingshi and Li Zhi occupied the city and rebelled to the south.

古文：通直散骑常侍高乾邕及弟等，率合流民、起兵于齐州之平原，频破州军。诏东道大使元欣喻旨，乃降。
现代文：通直散骑常侍高干邕和弟弟等人，率领流民，在齐州的平原起兵，频繁打败州中军队，诏令东道大使元欣晓谕皇帝旨意，于是投降。
English: Gao Ganjun and his younger brother, who both rode horseback, led the exiles and raised an army in the plains of Qizhou, frequently defeating the troops in the state, and ordered their host, the ambassador Yuan Xin, to announce the emperor's will, and then surrender.

古文：是月，葛荣饥，使其仆射任褒率车三万余乘南寇，至沁水。
现代文：这月，葛荣发生饥荒，派他的仆射任褒率领三万多辆车向南侵犯，到达沁水。
English: This month, Ge Rong suffered a famine and sent his servant Ren Bao to invade the south with more than thirty thousand vehicles, reaching Surabaya.

古文：癸卯，以高昌王世子光为平西将军、瓜州刺史，袭爵泰临县开国伯、高昌王。
现代文：癸卯，任命高昌王的世子元光为平西将军、瓜州刺史，继承爵位为泰临县开国伯、高昌王。
English: At the same time, he appointed the heir of King Gaochang, Yuan Guang, as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Guazhou, and the heir to the title of the founding count of Tai Lin County and the King of Gaochang.

古文：太尉公、上党王天穆为大都督、东北道诸军事，率都督宗正珍孙、奚毅、贺拔胜、尔朱阳都等讨任褒。
现代文：太尉公、上党王天穆担任大都督、东北道诸军事，率领都督宗正珍孙、奚毅、贺拔胜、尔朱阳都等人讨伐任褒。
English: Lieutenant-general and Shangdang Wang Tianmu served as the grand governor, and the military of Northeastern Province, led by the governor Zong Zheng Jinsun, Zou Yi, He Baxian, Er Zhuyang and others, fought and won the battle.

古文：帝以寇难未夷，避正殿，责躬撤膳。
现代文：皇帝因寇难没有平定，迁出正殿，责备自己并撤去膳食。
English: The emperor moved out of the main hall, blaming himself and withdrawing the meal.

古文：又班募格，收集忠勇。
现代文：又颁布招募条例，搜罗忠诚勇敢的人。
English: It also issued a recruitment regulation to recruit loyal and brave people.

古文：其有直言正谏之士、敢决徇义之夫、陈国家利害之谋、赴君亲危难之节者，集华林园，面论事。
现代文：凡是直言规劝的士人、敢于决战以身殉道义的武夫，陈述国家安危的谋略、为君亲危难赴节的人，聚集华林园，当面讨论事情。
English: All the scholars who are outspoken and exhorting, the warriors who dare to fight a decisive battle and die a moral death, the people who present the strategy for the safety of the country, and the people who go to the festival for their relatives in danger, gather in the Waring Garden to discuss things face to face.

古文：幽州平北府主簿河间邢杲，率河北流民十余万户反于青州之北海，自署汉王，号年天统。
现代文：幽州干北府主簿河间人邢呆，率领黄河以北的流民十多万户在青州的北海反叛，自己委任为汉王，年号为天统。
English: Yuzhou Ganbei Prefecture, the main book of Kawama people, led more than one hundred thousand families of exiles north of the Yellow River to rebel in the North Sea of Qingzhou, appointed himself as the king of Han, and the year name was Tian Tong.

古文：戊申，以征东将军、金紫光禄大夫李叔仁为车骑大将军、仪同三司，率众讨之。
现代文：戊申，任命征柬将军、金紫光禄大夫李叔仁为车骑大将军、仪同三司，率领军队讨伐他。
English: Wushin appointed Li Shuren, a conscripted Cambodian general and doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, as the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and led the army to fight against him.

古文：诏直寝纪业持节募新免牧户，有投名效力者授九品官。
现代文：韶令直寝纪业持符节招募新近免除的牧户，有报名效力的授予九品官。
English: The newly-exempted herdsmen were recruited on the Day of the Dead, and were awarded the title of Jiuping official with the effect of registration.

古文：己酉，诏诸有私马仗从戎者，职人，优两大阶，亦授实官；白民，出身外优两阶，亦授实官。
现代文：己酉，诏令凡有私马兵器而从征的，有职位的人，优评两大级，也授予实官；平民，基本职位外优评两级，也授实官。
English: According to the imperial edict, all those who have private weapons and follow the enlistment, and those who have positions, are awarded two grades of excellent evaluation, and are also awarded to real officers; civilians, who have two grades of excellent evaluation outside the basic positions, are also awarded to real officers.

古文：若武艺超伦者，虽无私马，亦依前条；虽不超伦，但射槊翘关一艺而胆略有施者，依第出身外，特优一大阶，授实官。
现代文：如果武艺超群，虽然没有私马，也按前一条例；虽然武艺不超群，但有射击举重一门技艺而胆略可用的，依门第的基本职位外，特优评一大级，授予实官。
English: If the martial arts are superior, although there is no private horse, it is also in accordance with the previous example; although the martial arts are not superior, but there is a skill of shooting and weightlifting that can be used, in addition to the basic position of the disciple, the first grade of the outstanding evaluation is awarded to the real official.

古文：若无姓第者，从八品出身，阶依前加，特授实官。
现代文：如果没有门第，为从八品的身份，等级依前述条例加授，特授予实官。
English: If there is no grade, the grade will be awarded in accordance with the above-mentioned regulations for the status of junior eighth grade, and will be specially awarded to real officers.

古文：辛亥，诏曰： 朕当亲御六戎，扫静燕代。大将军、太原王尔朱荣率精甲十万为左军，上党王天穆总众八万为前军，司徒公杨椿勒兵十万为右军，司空公穆绍统卒八万为后军。 
现代文：辛亥，下诏说： 我将亲率六军，肃清燕代，大将军、太原王尔朱荣率领精兵十万人为左军，上整王玉穆总领军队八万人为前军，司徒公杨椿统领兵士十万人为右军，司空公穆绍统领兵士八万人为后军。 
English: Xinhai, the next emperor, said: I will personally lead the six armies to clean up the Yan Dynasty, the general, Taiyuan Wang Er Zhu Rong led 100,000 elite soldiers as the left army, the army of the general of the Upper Zhengyang King Yu Mu led 80,000 soldiers as the front army, the soldiers of the general of the Stukong Yang Chin led 100,000 soldiers as the right army, and the soldiers of the general of the Sikuo King Musao led 80,000 soldiers as the rear army.

古文：是月，葛荣众退屯相州之北。
现代文：这月，葛荣的部队后撤到相州之北驻守。
English: This month, Ge Rong's troops retreated to the north of Xiangzhou.

古文：秋七月丁巳，诏从四品以上从征者不得优阶，正四品者优一阶。
现代文：秋七月丁巳，韶令从四品以上官员从征的不能优评等级，正四品的优一级。
English: In the autumn and July, the imperial edict decreed that officials with four or more awards could not be awarded the highest grade, and those with four or more awards could only be awarded the highest grade.

古文：军级从三品以上从征，四品者优一大阶。
现代文：军级从三品以上官员从征，四品的优一大级。
English: Military-grade officials with three or more pins were conscripted, and those with four pins were promoted to the next higher grade.

古文：正五品以下，还依前格，若有征阶十余，计入四品、三品。
现代文：正五品以下，仍依前面的条例，如有十多个从征等级，计算进四品、三品。
English: Those with less than five products are still subject to the previous regulations, and if there are more than ten levels of compliance, they are calculated into four products and three products.

古文：限授五阶。
现代文：限制授到五级。
English: The restriction was raised to level five.

古文：己未，诏前试守东郡太守唐景宣为持节、都督，于东郡召募侨居流民二千人，渡河随便为栅，准望台军。
现代文：己未，诏令先前试任塞郅太守的卢量宣为持节、都督，在塞型招募侨居的流民二千人，渡过黄河依据地形做栅栏，等候朝廷军队。
English: Lu Rongxuan, who had previously been appointed as the governor of Saigon, was proclaimed as the governor of the city. He recruited two thousand expatriates living in Saigon and crossed the Yellow River to make a fence according to the terrain, waiting for the imperial army.

古文：是月，齐献武王于鄴西北慰喻葛荣别帅称王者七人，众万余，降之。
现代文：这月，齐献武王在邺城西北慰劳晓谕姜莹别部将领中称王的七人，部众一万多人，降服了他们。
English: This month, Qi Xianwu defeated the seven kings among the other generals in the northwest of Handan, and more than ten thousand people in the army.

古文：乙丑，加大将军尔朱荣柱国大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：乙丑，加授大将军尔朱荣为柱国大将军、录尚书事。
English: Second ugliest, awarded the title of general, Zhu Rong is the pillar of the country's general, recorded in the records.

古文：辛巳，尚书奏断百官公给衣冠、剑佩、绶舄。
现代文：辛巳，尚书上奏禁断百官由官府供给衣帽、佩剑饰物、丝带鞋子。
English: Soon after, the government issued a decree banning all officials from being supplied with caps, sabers, and shoes with ribbons.

古文：壬子，光州人刘举聚众数千反于濮阳，自称皇武大将军。
现代文：壬子，光州人型壑聚集民众几千人在濮阳反叛，自称为皇武大将军。
English: In Imzi, Gwangju, thousands of people gathered to rebel in Poyang, calling themselves the Emperor's Generals.

古文：是月，高平镇人万俟丑奴僭称大位，署置百官。
现代文：这月，高平镇人万俟丑奴僭越称帝，设置百官。
English: This month, the townspeople of Gaoping Town became more and more emperors, setting up hundreds of officials.

古文：是月，临淮王彧自江南还朝。
现代文：这月，临淮王元或从长江以南回到朝廷
English: This month, Lin Huai Wangyuan may return to the imperial court from south of the Yangtze River

古文：八月，太山太守羊侃据郡引萧衍将军王辩攻兗州。
现代文：八月，叁山太守差坦占据郡城招引芦堑的将军工避攻打查州。
English: In August, Shaoshan Taishou Zhatan occupied the county seat to attract reed war workers to avoid attacking Chazhou.

古文：甲辰，诏大都督宗正珍孙率南广州刺史、都督郑先护讨刘举于濮阳，破平之。
现代文：甲辰，韶令大都督宗正珍孙率领南广州刺史、都督郑先护在进厘讨伐塑坠，打败平定了他们。
English: Jia Chen, the Grand Duke Zong Zheng Zhen Sun led the Southern Guangzhou Zhishi, and the Governor Zheng Xianguo fought against the plastic pendants in Jinli, and defeated and leveled them.

古文：以侍中、骠骑大将军、临淮王彧为仪同三司。
现代文：任命侍中、骠骑大将军、临淮王元盛为仪同三司。
English: He appointed Wang Yuan-sheng, the Vice-Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Household Agency, as the Third Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：是月，葛荣率众围相州。
现代文：这月，蔓萤率领军队包围担州。
English: This month, Manwohu led an army to encircle Danzhou.

古文：九月乙丑，诏太尉公、上党王天穆讨葛荣，次于朝歌之南。
现代文：九月乙丑，诏令太尉公、上党王左穆讨伐蔓茔，停驻在翅麸的南面。
English: In September of the second month of the ugly, the emperor ordered the captain and the upper party king Zuo Mu to fight against the vines, stationed in the south of the wings.

古文：己巳，以征东将军、齐州刺史元欣为沛郡王。
现代文：己巳，封征束将军、齐州刺史元欣为迪垫王。
English: At the same time, the general of the enlistment of conscripts, the governor of Qizhou, Shih Yuanxin, was crowned the king.

古文：壬申，柱国大将军尔朱荣率骑七万讨葛荣于滏口，破擒之，余众悉降。
现代文：壬申，柱国大将军尔朱荣率领骑兵七万人在鲎旦讨伐墓莹，打败擒获了他，其余的军队全部投降。
English: In Jinshin, the great general of the pillar country, Lzhu Rong, led 70,000 cavalrymen to fight against Tomb Ying in Wutan, defeated and captured him, and the rest of the army all surrendered.

古文：冀、定、沧、瀛、殷五州平。
现代文：冀、宣、涂、适、凿五州平定。
English: Hebei, Xuan, Tu, Shida and Hezhen were the five provinces to be pacified.

古文：乙亥，以平葛荣，大赦天下，改为永安元年。
现代文：乙亥，因平定蔓莹，大赦天下，改为永安元年。
English: The Year of the Boar was changed to the First Year of the Yong'an because of the pacification of Man Ying.

古文：辛巳，以柱国大将军、太原王尔朱荣为大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事，以荣子平昌郡开国公文殊、昌乐郡公文暢并进爵为王，以司徒公杨椿为太保，城阳王徽为司徒。
现代文：辛巳，任命柱国大将军、太原王尔朱荣为大丞相、都督回北畿外诸军事，任命金塞茔的儿子垩旦郡开国公主迭、昌乐郡公塞蝗都升爵位为王，任命司徒公垄眯为太保，越荡王正銮为司徒。
English: Xin Si appointed Zhu Guo Da Gen. and Taiyuan Wang Er Zhu Rong as the grand secretary of war, and the military of the military outside the North Kivu region as the governor, and appointed the son of Kim Sae Yeon, the daughter of the founder of Gueotan County, the daughter of the founder of Gueotan County, the daughter of the founder of Changle County, the daughter of the founder of Changle County, the daughter of the founder of Gueotan County, the daughter of the founder of Gueotan County, the daughter of the founder of Gueotan County, the daughter of the founder of Gueotan County, the daughter of the

古文：冬十月丁亥，尔朱荣槛送葛荣于京师。
现代文：冬十月丁亥，尔朱荣用囚车押送葛荣到京城。
English: In the winter of October, Dinghai, Er Zhu Rong escorted Ge Rong to the capital in a prisoner car.

古文：帝临阊阖门，荣稽颡谢罪，斩于都市。
现代文：皇帝前往闾阖门，葛荣叩头认罪，在都市中杀了他。
English: The emperor went to Shimen, Ge Rong kowtowed and confessed, and killed him in the city.

古文：丙申，以抚军将军、太常卿、太原王世子菩提为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丙申，任命抚军将军、太常卿、太原王世子菩提为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Bishin, appointed General Fuzun, Tai Changqing, and Bodhi, the son of the King of Taiyuan, as envoys for the festival, the general of the cavalry, and the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：丁酉，以冀州之长乐、相州之南赵、定州之博陵、沧州之浮阳、平州之辽西、燕州之上谷、幽州之渔阳七郡，各万户，增封太原王尔朱荣为太原国。
现代文：丁酉，以冀州的长乐、相州的南赵、定州的博陵、沧州的浮阳、平州的辽西、燕州的上谷、幽州的渔阳七个郡，各一万户，增封给太原王东朱荣为太原国。
English: Ding Rong, with the seven counties of Changle in Jizhou, Nan Zhao in Xiangzhou, Boling in Dingzhou, Fuyang in Cangzhou, Liaoxi in Pingzhou, Shanggu in Yanzhou, and Yuyang in Yuzhou, each with ten thousand households, increased the fief to Wang Dong Zhu Rong of Taiyuan as Taiyuan Province.

古文：戊戌，又加荣太师。
现代文：戊戌，又加授尔朱荣为太师。
English: In addition, Zhu Rong was also given the title of Grand Master.

古文：庚戌，以侍中、镇南将军、太原郡开国公于晖兼尚书左仆射，为行台，与齐献武王讨羊侃。
现代文：庚戌，任命侍中、镇南将军、太原郡开国公于晖兼任尚书左仆射，为行台，和齐献武王讨伐羊侃。
English: Geng Yao, appointed a chamberlain, Zhenan General, Taiyuan County Kaigong Yu Yao concurrently served as Shangshu Zuopu Yao, as a platform, and Qi Xianwu Wang to fight sheep.

古文：壬子，太师、江阳王继薨。
现代文：壬子，太师、江阳王元继逝世。
English: Jinshi, Taishi, and Jiangyang Wangyuan passed away.

古文：癸丑，以胶东县开国侯李侃希复其祖爵南郡王。
现代文：癸丑，命墨塞瑟开国侯奎皿益恢复他祖父的爵位直邵王。
English: He ordered the founder of the country, Khomeini, to restore his grandfather's title of Zhao Shao Wang.

古文：是月，车骑大将军、仪同三司李叔仁讨邢杲于潍水，失利而还。
现代文：这月，车骑大将军、仪同三司奎圭迄在塑丞讨伐迁曝，失败而回。
English: This month, the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry and the General of the Cavalry.

古文：大都督费穆大破萧衍军，擒其将曹义宗，槛送京师。
现代文：大都督盏穆大败芦堑的军队，擒获他的将领曹义宗，用囚车押送到京城。
English: The great governor, Qian Mu, defeated Lulu's army, captured his general, Cao Yizong, and sent him to the capital in a prison wagon.

古文：萧衍以北海王颢为魏王，号年孝基，入据南兗之铚城。
现代文：芦堑封北海王丞题为魏主，年号为垄基，进军占据直查业的画泌。
English: The painting of Beihai Wang Zheng, entitled Wei Lord, with the year of Rongji, entered and occupied the direct investigation industry.

古文：十有一月戊午，以无上王世子韶为彭城王，陈留王子宽为陈留王，宽弟刚为浮阳王，刚弟质为林虑王。
现代文：十一月戊午，封无上王的世子亘超为堑球王，陈留王的儿子元宣为速鱼王，正直的弟弟五剧为浮阳王，互剧的弟弟五质为挞卢王。
English: At noon of November, Wang Chao, the son of King Fongwu, became the King of the World, Chen Liu's son, Yuan Xuan, became the King of the Swift Fish, his honest brother, Wuhei, became the King of the Floating Sun, and his playful brother, Wuxi, became the King of Lu.

古文：癸亥，齐献武王、行台于晖，与徐兗行台崔孝芬、大都督刁宣大破羊侃于瑕丘，侃奔萧衍。
现代文：癸亥，齐献武王、行台王厘，和途兖行台崔画登、大都督韭在扯大败泌，铋投奔龃。曲平定。
English: 亥,齐献武王,行台王利,和途行台崔画登,大都督在扯大敗泌,投奔.曲平定.

古文：兗州平。戊寅，以上党王天穆为大将军、开府，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，任命上党王天穆为大将军、开府，世代担任茳蛆刺史。
English: Wu Yin, appointed the king of the upper party, Tian Mu, as the general and the head of the government, and served as the leader for generations.

古文：封前将军、太中大夫元凝为东安王。
现代文：封前将军、太中大夫元凝为东安王。
English: The former general and Grand Vice Admiral Yuan Rong became the King of Dongan.

古文：十有二月庚子，诏行台于晖回师讨邢杲，次于历下。
现代文：十二月庚子，诏令行台于晖撤军讨伐邢杲，停驻在历下。
English: In December, Geng Zi issued an imperial edict ordering the troops to withdraw from Yunnan and stay in Lijiang.

古文：是岁，葛荣余党韩楼复据幽州反。
现代文：这一年，墓萤的残余势力撞擅又占据幽州反叛。
English: In this year, the remnants of the Grave Fireflies rebelled and occupied Yuzhou.

古文：二年春正月甲寅，于晖所部都督彭乐率二千余骑北走于韩楼，乃班师。
现代文：二年春正月甲寅，于晖所辖都督彭乐率领二千多骑兵向北投奔韩楼，于是撤军。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, in the month of Jia Yin, Peng Le, the governor of Yunnan Province, led more than two thousand cavalrymen to the north to Hanlu, and then withdrew.

古文：二月癸未朔，诏诸禁卫之官从戎有功及伤夷者，赴选先叙。
现代文：二月癸未初一，诏令所有从征有功劳以及受伤的宫廷守卫官员，参与选拔后首先任用。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, the emperor ordered that all the palace guard officials who had distinguished themselves and were injured should be appointed first after participating in the selection.

古文：甲午，尊皇考为文穆皇帝，庙号肃祖，皇妣为文穆皇后。
现代文：甲午，尊崇皇帝的父亲为文穆皇帝，庙号为肃祖，皇帝的母亲为文穆皇后。
English: In the first century, the revered emperor's father was Emperor Wenmu, the temple name was Suzu, and the emperor's mother was Empress Wenmu.

古文：燕州民王庆祖聚众于上党，自称为王。
现代文：燕州平民王庆祖在上党聚集民众，自称为王。
English: Wang Qingzu, a commoner from Yanzhou, gathered people at the upper party and called himself Wang.

古文：柱国大将军尔朱荣讨擒之。
现代文：柱国大将军令朱荣讨伐擒获了他。
English: Zhu Rong was captured by the general Zhu Guotian.

古文：壬寅，诏散骑常侍、济阴王晖业兼行台尚书，督都督李德龙、丘大千镇梁国。
现代文：壬寅，诏令散骑常侍、济阴王晖业兼任行台尚书，统领都督李德龙、丘大干镇守梁国。
English: Ren Yin, the imperial command horseback riding attendant, Zi Yin Wang Xie concurrently served as the governor of Taitai Shangshu, the governor of the capital Li Delong, and the governor of Liang Province, Qiu Dagan.

古文：三月壬戌，诏大将军、上党王天穆与齐献武王讨邢杲。
现代文：三月壬戌，诏令大将军、上党王天穆和齐献武王讨伐邢呆。
English: In March, the Great General, the Upper Party King Tianmu and the King of Qi Xianwu were ordered to fight against the evil.

古文：夏四月癸未，迁肃祖文穆皇帝及文穆皇后神主于太庙，内外百僚普泛加一级。
现代文：夏四月癸未，迁肃祖文穆皇帝和文穆皇后的牌位到太庙，内外百官普遍加一级。
English: In the summer of April, the card ranks of Emperor Wenmu and Empress Wenmu were moved to the Great Temple, and all the officials at home and abroad were generally promoted to the next level.

古文：曲赦畿内，死罪至流人减一等，徒刑以下悉免。
现代文：赦免京城内囚徒，死罪到流放的人减一等，徒刑以下的全免。
English: Prisoners in the capital will be pardoned, and those sentenced to death or banishment will be downgraded to the first class, and those with less than a prison sentence will be completely pardoned.

古文：庚子，诏太原王尔朱荣下将士并泛加二级。
现代文：庚子，诏令太原王氽朱荣手下的将士普遍加二级。
English: Geng Zi decreed that the soldiers of the Taiyuan Wang Xi Zhu Rong were generally raised to the second level.

古文：辛丑，上党王天穆、齐献武王大破邢杲于齐州之济南。杲降，送京师，斩于都市。
现代文：辛丑，上党王天穆、齐献武王在齐州的擅亩大败珏堤，迂曝投降，押送到京城，在都市上斩首。
English: Xinxiu, the party king of Tianmu, and Qi Xianwu, the party king of Qizhou, suffered a crushing defeat and capitulation, and were escorted to Beijing and beheaded in the city.

古文：元颢攻陷考城，执行台元晖业、都督丘大千。
现代文：元颢攻占考城，捉住行台元晖业、都督丘大干。
English: Yuan Shao captured Kaocheng, and captured Xingtai Yuan Shaoye and Tudouqiu Dagan.

古文：五月壬子朔，元颢克梁国。
现代文：五月壬子初一，元颢攻克梁国。
English: In May, on the first day of the new year, Yuan Shao conquered Liang Province.

古文：丁巳，以抚军将军、前徐州刺史扬昱为使持节、镇东将军、东南道大都督，率众镇荥阳；尚书仆射尔朱世隆镇虎牢；侍中尔朱世承镇崿岅。
现代文：丁巳，任命抚军将军、前徐州刺史杨昱为使持节、镇束将军、东南道大都督，率领军队镇守荣阳；尚书仆射尔朱世隆镇守虚牢；侍中尔朱世承镇守竖亟。
English: Ding Si appointed General Fuzhong, the former Xuzhou general Yang Xi as the envoy, General Zenzoku, the governor of the southeastern province, led the army to guard Rongyang; Shang Shubao Shaer Zhu Shilong to guard Huye; and Zhu Shicheng, the attendant, to guard Zhesheng.

古文：辛酉，诏私马仗从戎优阶授官。
现代文：辛酉，韶令用私马从征的优评等级授予官职。
English: Soon, the imperial command used the excellent evaluation level of private horses to award official positions.

古文：壬戌，又诏募士一依征葛荣。
现代文：壬戌，又诏令招募兵士一概依据征讨葛荣时的条例。
English: In addition, the imperial edict ordered that the recruitment of soldiers should be based on the regulations at the time of the conquest of Ge Rong.

古文：甲子，又诏职人及民出马，优阶各有差。
现代文：甲子，又诏令在职的人和民众出马匹，优评等级多少不等。
English: In addition, the Emperor ordered the people in office and the public to come forward, and the level of evaluation varied.

古文：乙丑，内外戒严。
现代文：乙丑，内外严密戒备。
English: Second, martial law was imposed inside and outside the Northern Wei court.

古文：癸酉，元颢陷荥阳，执杨昱。
现代文：癸酉，元题攻占挝，捉住扰旦。
English: , the original theme is to capture Laos, to catch the disturbers.

古文：尔朱世隆弃虎牢遁还。
现代文：氽朱世隆放弃处空逃回。
English: Zhu Shilong gave up and fled back.

古文：甲戌，车驾北巡，乙亥，幸河内。
现代文：甲戌，皇帝向北巡视，乙亥，到河内。
English: Armor, the emperor to the north of the inspection, the second year of the boar, to Hanoi.

古文：丙子，元颢入洛。
现代文：丙子，五题进入迢坠。
English: Son of a bitch, five questions go to the winner.

古文：丁丑，进封城阳县开国公元祉为平原王，安昌县开国侯元鸷为华山王，并加仪同三司。
现代文：丁丑，进封球堡题开国公五扯为垩肚，叁旦昼开国侯墓盏为茎业王，都加授仪同三司。
English: Ding Yuxi, the opening of the ball castle, the opening of the country's five kings, the opening of the country's tombs, the opening of the country's tombs, the opening of the country's tombs, the opening of the country's tombs, and the opening of the country's tombs.

古文：戊寅，行台崔孝芬、大都督刁宣破元颢后军都督侯暄于梁国，斩之，擒其卒三千人。
现代文：戊寅，行台崔孝芬、大都督刁宣在鉴国打败互题的后军都督回，杀死堡堕，擒获他的兵士三千人。
English: Wu Yin, Xingtai Cui Xiaofeng, and Dadu Guo Xuan defeated each other's rearguard Dadu Guo in Jian Guo, killed Fort Guo, and captured three thousand of his soldiers.

古文：以侍中、车骑将军、尚书右仆射尔朱世隆为使持节、行台仆射、本将军、相州刺史，镇鄴城，以便宜从事。
现代文：任命侍中、车骑将军、尚书右仆射尔朱世隆为使持节、行台仆射、本号将军、扭州刺史，镇守苤啦，可依情况自行处理事务。
English: He appointed Zhu Shilong, a chamberlain, chariot and cavalry general, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Shaer, as the envoy of the festival, the go-between of the platform, the general of this issue, the twister of the state, and the town guard, and may handle affairs according to the situation.

古文：又诏上党百年以下九十以上板三品郡，八十以上四品郡，七十以上五品郡。
现代文：又诏令上党一百岁以下九十岁以上板授为三品郡守，八十岁以上板授为四品郡守，七十岁以上板授为五品郡守。
English: It also decreed that those under the age of one hundred and over the age of ninety should be awarded the title of three county governors, those over the age of eighty should be awarded the title of four county governors, and those over the age of seventy should be awarded the title of five county governors.

古文：太原王尔朱荣会车驾于长子，即日反旆。
现代文：太原王尔朱荣在长子会见皇帝，当天返回。
English: The King of Taiyuan, Er Zhu Rong, met with the emperor at the eldest son and returned the same day.

古文：上党王天穆北渡，会车驾于河内。
现代文：上党王天穆向北渡河，在河内会见皇帝。
English: The Shang king, Tianmu, crossed the river to the north and met with the emperor in Hanoi.

古文：六月己丑，仪同三司费穆为颢所害。
现代文：六月己丑，仪同三司费穆被元颢杀害。
English: In June, Yi Tong and the Third Division's Fei Mu were killed by Yuan Xuan.

古文：壬寅，克河内，斩太守元袭、都督宗正珍孙。
现代文：壬寅，攻克河内，杀死太守元袭、都督宗正珍孙。
English: Ren Yin, conquered Hanoi, killed the Imperial Governor Yuan Qi, and the son of the Grand Duke Zong Zheng.

古文：秋七月戊辰，都督尔朱兆、贺拔胜从硖石夜济，破颢子冠受及安丰王延明军，元颢败走。
现代文：秋七月戊辰，都督氽朱兆、贺拔胜从硖石夜晚渡河，打败元颢的儿子冠受和安丰王延明的军队，元颢失败逃跑。
English: In the autumn and July of the year of Bo Chen, the local governors, Zhu Zhao and He Ba Sheng, crossed the river from the night of Shanshi, defeated the army of Guan Jie, the son of Yuan Jie, and Yan Ming, the king of Anfeng, and Yuan Jie fled in defeat.

古文：庚午，车驾入居华林园，升大夏门，大赦天下。
现代文：庚午，皇帝进入华林园居住，登上大夏门，大赦天下。
English: At noon, the emperor entered the Hualing Garden to live, ascended the Great Summer Gate, and pardoned the world.

古文：以使持节、车骑将军、都督、颍川郡开国公尔朱兆为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：任命使持节、车骑将军、都督、颖川郡开国公尔朱兆为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He appointed Zhu Zhao, the envoy of Jizhi Festival, the general of chariot and cavalry, the governor of Yingchuan County and the founding father of Yingchuan County, as the general of chariot and cavalry and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：诏以前朝勋书多窃冒，宜一切焚弃之。若立效灼然为时所知者，别加科赏。
现代文：诏令因前朝功绩簿多有假冒，应全部焚毁抛弃，如立功显赫为当时人所了解的，分别加以赏赐。
English: According to the edict, all the records of the former dynasty's achievements should be burned and discarded, as many of them were forged. Those who had made outstanding contributions, as understood by the people at the time, should be awarded separately.

古文：蕃客及边酋翻城降，有勋未叙者，不在焚断之限。
现代文：外国的宾客和越城投降的边境首领，有功勋未任用的，不在焚毁的范围内。
English: Foreign guests and Vietcong surrendered border chiefs, meritorious and unappointed, are not within the scope of burning.

古文：北来军士及随驾文武、马渚立义，加泛五级；河北执事之官，二级；河南立义及迎驾之官，并中途扈从，亦二级。壬申，以柱国大将军、太原王尔朱荣为天柱大将军，加前后部羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：从北方来的兵士和随从皇帝的文武官员、在马渚起义的人，普加五级；黄河以北主事的官员，加二级；在黄河以南起义和迎接皇帝的官员，加上中途保护的人员，壬申，任命柱国大将军、太原王尔朱荣为天柱大将军，加授前后部仪仗、鼓吹。
English: The soldiers who came from the north and the civil and military officials who followed the emperor, and the people who revolted in Mazhu, were promoted to the fifth level of Puja; the officials who were in charge north of the Yellow River were promoted to the second level; the officials who revolted south of the Yellow River and welcomed the emperor, plus the personnel who protected them on the way, were promoted to Jinshin; the great general of Zhu Guo and the king of Taiyuan, Lzhu Rong, were promoted to the great general of Tianzhu, and were awarded the front and rear ceremonial battle and propaganda.

古文：癸酉，临颍县卒江丰斩元颢，传首京师。
现代文：癸酉，临颍县兵士江丰杀死元颢，传送首级到京城。
English: At that time, Jiang Feng, a soldier from Linyi County, killed Yuan Qi and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：甲戌，以将军、上党王天穆为太宰，司徒公、城阳王微为大司马、太尉公。
现代文：甲戌，任命大将军、上党王天穆为太宰，司徒公、城阳王元徽为大司马、太尉公。
English: Kuching, appointed the general and the upper party king, Tianmu, as the Dazai, and Prince Sutou and King Yuanhui of Chengyang as the grand steward and the second lieutenant.

古文：乙亥，晏劳天柱大将军尔朱荣、上党王天穆及北来督将于都亭，出宫人三百、缯绵杂彩数万匹，班赐有差。
现代文：乙亥，在都亭设宴慰劳天柱大将军水朱荣、上党王天穆和从北方来的都督将领，放出宫女三百人、锦缎各类丝织品几万匹，分发赏赐多少不等。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, a banquet was held at the Imperial Palace to console the laboring Tianzhu generals, such as Shuizhurong and Tianmu, as well as the governors-general from the north. Three hundred maids of honor and tens of thousands of brocade and various types of silk products were given out, and the amount of rewards distributed varied.

古文：又诸州郡遣使奉表行宫者，并加一大阶。
现代文：另外各州郡派遣使者送奏表到行宫的，都加一大级。
English: In addition, all the states and counties that sent envoys to deliver the report card to the imperial palace were given a higher rank.

古文：丁丑，获元颢弟顼，斩于都市。
现代文：丁丑，擒获元颢的弟弟元顼，在都市斩首。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the younger brother of Yuanzhang, was beheaded in the city.

古文：诏受元颢爵赏、阶级，悉追夺之。
现代文：下诏凡接受元颢爵位赏赐、官位品级的，都加以追夺。
English: According to the following edict, anyone who accepts the reward of the former imperial title and the official rank and grade will be pursued.

古文：己卯，以镇东将军、南青州刺史元旭为襄城王，平南将军、南兗州刺史元暹为汝阳王。
现代文：己卯，封镇束将军、南青州刺史亘但为塞越玉，平南将军、南变业刺史五逞为汝阳王。
English: Jiwu, Fuzhenzhu General, South Qingzhou engraving history, but for the Sa Yue Jade, Pingnan General, South Zhenye engraving history, Wugang for the Ruyang King.

古文：闰月辛巳，帝始居宫内。
现代文：闰七月辛巳，皇帝开始居住在宫内。
English: In late July, the emperor began to live in the palace.

古文：辛卯，以车骑将军、兼吏部尚书杨津为司空。
现代文：辛卯，任命车骑将军、兼吏部尚书奎锤为司空。
English: Xinwu, appointed the general of cavalry and chariots, and Shangshu Kuiheng of the cadre department as the deputy commander.

古文：巴州刺史严始欣据州南叛，萧衍遣其将萧玩、张鸿、江茂达等率众赴援。
现代文：旦州刺史题始卢占据州城向南叛变，趸面派遣他的将领萧玩、张鸿、江茂达等人率领军队赶去支援。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Lu occupied the state capital and rebelled to the south, sending his generals Xiao Gan, Zhang Hong, Jiang Maoda and others to lead the army to rush to support.

古文：八月庚戌朔，诏诸有公私债负，一钱以上巨万以还，悉皆禁断，不得征责。
现代文：八月庚戌初一，诏令所有公私欠账，一钱以上一万万以内，都全部禁止，不能征收。
English: On the first day of the eighth lunar month, the emperor decreed that all public and private debts of more than one yuan and less than 10,000,000 yuan were prohibited and could not be collected.

古文：已未，以侍中、太傅李延实为司徒公。
现代文：己未，任命侍中、太傅李延宫为司徒公。
English: At the same time, he appointed the chamberlain and grand steward Li Yan Gong as the steward.

古文：丁卯，封瓜州刺史元太荣为东阳王。
现代文：丁卯，封瓜州刺史元太荣为东阳王。
English: Dingwu, Guazhou Prince Yuan Tai Rong was crowned the King of Dongyang.

古文：甲戌，侍中、太保杨椿致仕。
现代文：甲戌，侍中、太保杨椿退休。
English: Armor bearer, chamberlain, and eunuch Yang Tsubaki retired.

古文：乙亥，诏车骑将军、右光禄大夫奚毅板授天柱大将军尔朱荣、太宰天穆下勋及祖父叔伯耆年老者牧守有差。
现代文：乙亥，诏令车骑将军、右光禄大夫奚毅授予天柱大将军尔朱荣、太宰天穆以其多余功勋施给祖父叔伯高龄者为州牧郡守，各有等级。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the General of the Chariot and the General of the Horse, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light, the Doctor of the Right Light,

古文：九月，大都督侯渊讨韩楼于蓟，破斩之。
现代文：九月，大都督侯渊在蓟城讨伐韩楼，打败并杀了他。
English: In September, the Grand Duke Hou Yuan attacked Han Lou in Licheng, defeated and killed him.

古文：幽州平。
现代文：幽州平定。
English: Yuzhou was pacified.

古文：万俟丑奴攻东秦城，陷之，杀刺史高子朗。
现代文：万俟丑奴攻打束秦城，攻下来了，杀死刺史高子朗。
English: If a bunch of ugly thugs attack Qincheng, they will attack and kill Gao Zilang.

古文：冬十月丁丑，以前司空公、丹阳王萧赞为司徒公。
现代文：冬十月丁丑，任命前司空公、丹阳王萧赞为司徒公。
English: In the winter of October in Dingwu, he appointed the former King of Siku and King of Danyang, Xiaozan, as the Prince of Sutu.

古文：十有一月己卯，就德兴自营州遣使请降。
现代文：十一月己卯，就德兴从营州派遣使者请求投降。
English: In November, he sent an envoy from Yingzhou to request the surrender of Dexing.

古文：丁亥，诏群官休停在外者皆令赴阙，程会有差。
现代文：丁亥，诏令休假在外的群官都赶往朝廷，时间长短多少不等。
English: Dinghai, the group of officials who were on vacation outside the imperial edict rushed to the imperial court, the length of time varied somewhat.

古文：丙午，以大司马、太尉公、城阳王徽为太保，司徒公、丹阳王萧赞为太尉公，开府仪同三司、雍州刺史长孙稚为司徒公。
现代文：丙午，任命大司马、太尉公、城阳王元徽为太保，司徒公、丹阳王萧赞为太尉公，开府仪同三司、雍州刺史长孙稚为司徒公。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, he appointed Da Sima, Taifu Gong, Jenyang Wang Yuanhui as Taibo, Sito Gong, Danyang Wang Xiaozan as Taifu Gong, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Yongzhou Zhishi Chang Sun Waki as Sito Gong.

古文：十有二月辛亥，萧衍兗州刺史张景邕、荆州刺史李灵起、雄信将军萧进明来降。
现代文：十二月辛亥，萧衍的兖州刺史张景邕、荆州刺史李灵起、雄信将军萧进明前来投降。
English: In December of Xinhai, Xiao Yan's Zhang Jingyao of Zhangzhou, Li Lingqi of Jingzhou, and Xiongxin General Xiao Jinming came to surrender.

古文：三年春正月己丑，益州刺史长孙寿、梁州刺史元俊等，遣将与征巴州都督元景夏讨严始欣，斩之。
现代文：三年春正月己丑，益州刺史长孙寿、梁州刺史元俊等人，派遣将领和征巴州都督元景夏讨伐严始欣，杀了他。
English: In the first month of the third year of Spring, Yizhou sent generals such as Sun Shou and Liangzhou sent generals such as Yuan Shijun to fight Yan Shixin and killed him.

古文：萧衍都督萧玩、何难尉、陈愁败走，斩玩首，俘获万余人。
现代文：萧衍的都督萧玩、何难尉、陈锹失败逃跑，斩下萧玩的首级，俘获一万多人。
English: Xiao Yan's governors Xiao Gan, He Dunyi and Chen Qi failed to escape, and Xiao Gan's head was chopped off, and more than ten thousand people were captured.

古文：辛丑，东徐州城民吕文欣、王赦等杀刺史元太宾，据城反。
现代文：辛丑，束徐州市民吕文欣、王赦等人杀死刺史元太宾，占据城池反叛。
English: Xin Xiu, a group of Xuzhou citizens, including Lü Wenxin and Wang Meng, killed Jishi Yuan Taibin and occupied the city to rebel.

古文：以抚军将军、都官尚书樊子鹄兼右仆射，为行台，督征南将军、都督贾显智，征东将军、徐州刺史严思达以讨之。
现代文：任命抚军将军、都官尚书樊子鹄兼任右仆射，为行台，统领征南将军、都督买显智，征束将军、途州刺史严思达讨伐他们。
English: He appointed the general of the Fuzhun army and the governor of the capital, Shang Shuxin Zixuan, to serve as his right-hand man, and led the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the governor of the capital, Ma Xian Zhi, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, and the governor of Tuzhou, Yan Sida, to fight against them.

古文：二月甲寅，克之。
现代文：二月甲寅，攻了下来。
English: In February, Kataoka attacked and took it down.

古文：东徐平。
现代文：束徐州平定。
English: Xuzhou has been pacified.

古文：三月，丑奴大行台尉迟菩萨寇岐州，大都督贺拔岳、可朱浑道元大破之。
现代文：三月，醒抠的大行台尉迟菩萨侵犯峻处，大都督贺拔岳、可朱浑道元将他打得大败。
English: In March, the dazzling Daigyo Taiji Chi Bodhisattva encroached on a precipitous place, and the great governor He Baturake and Zhu Hun Dogen defeated him.

古文：夏四月丁巳，以侍中、太尉公、丹阳王萧赞为使持节、都督齐济兗三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、齐州刺史。
现代文：夏四月丁巳，任命侍中、太尉公、丹阳王萧赞为使持节、都督齐济兖三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、齐州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, he appointed the chamberlain, the captain, and the king of Danyang, Xiaozan, as envoys, the governor of Qiji, the military of the three states, the cavalry general, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, and the history of Qizhou.

古文：丁卯，雍州刺史尔朱天光讨丑奴、萧宝夤于安定，破擒之，囚送京师。
现代文：丁卯，雍州刺史尔朱天光在安定讨伐丑奴、萧实夤，打败并擒获他们，押送到京城。
English: Dingwu, the prince of Yongzhou, Zhu Tianguang, led a stable crusade against Ugly Bastard and Xiao Shizhen, defeated and captured them, and escorted them to Beijing.

古文：甲戌，以关中平，大赦天下。
现代文：甲戌，因关中平定，大赦天下。
English: Armor-piercing war, due to the pacification of Guanzhong, was pardoned by the world.

古文：丑奴斩于都市，宝夤赐死于驼牛署。
现代文：丑奴在都市被斩首，宝夤被赐令自杀在驼牛署，
English: Ugly villain was beheaded in the city, Baojun was ordered to commit suicide in the camel station,

古文：六月戊午，诏胡氏亲属受爵于朝者黜附编民。
现代文：六月戊午，诏令胡氏在朝廷接受爵位的亲属罢黜后附列在编户齐民中。
English: In the afternoon of June, the emperor ordered that the Hu clan be added to the list of members of the House of Peers after the relatives who accepted the peerage at the imperial court were dismissed.

古文：嚈达国献师子一。
现代文：噘达国贡奉狮子一头。
English: The tribute of the Qing Dynasty was a lion's head.

古文：是月，白马龙涸胡王庆云僭称大位于水洛城，署置百官。
现代文：造月，白马龙涸胡人王庆云在水洛城僭越称帝，设置百官。
English: After the creation of the moon, the white horse dragon dried up, and King Qingyun of the Hu people proclaimed himself emperor in Shuilocheng and set up a hundred officials.

古文：秋七月丙子，天光平水洛城，擒庆云，坑其城民一万七千。
现代文：秋七月丙子，天光平定水洛城，擒获庆云，活埋城中民众一万七千人。
English: In the autumn and July, 17,000 people were buried alive in the city.

古文：癸巳，萧衍民革虬、卜汤世率堡聚内附。
现代文：癸巳，萧衍的百姓革虬、卜汤世率领坞堡内的人归附。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan's people, Ge Xuan and Bu Tongshi, led the people in the dockyard fort to attach.

古文：庚子，车骑大将军、仪同三司李叔仁坐事除名为民。
现代文：庚子，车骑大将军、仪同三司李叔仁因事获罪被削除名籍为平民。
English: Geng Zi, General of Cavalry and Cavalry, and Li Shuren, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, have been removed from the civil register.

古文：九月辛卯，天柱大将军尔朱荣、上党王天穆自晋阳来朝。
现代文：九月辛卯，天柱大将军尔朱荣、上党王天穆从晋阳前来朝见。
English: In September Xinwu, Tianzhu General Er Zhu Rong and Shang Party King Tianmu came from Jinyang to see the emperor.

古文：戊戌，帝杀荣、天穆于明光殿，及荣子仪同三司菩提。
现代文：戊戌，皇帝在明光殿杀死尔朱荣、天穆，以及尔朱荣的儿子仪同三司菩提。
English: According to legend, the emperor killed Er Zhu Rong, Tian Mu, and Er Zhu Rong's son, Iitong Sanshi Bodhi, in the Mingguang Palace.

古文：乃升阊阖门，诏曰：盖天道忌盈，人伦嫉恶，疏而不漏，刑之无舍。
现代文：于是登上阎阖门，下诏说：天道忌讳盈满，人间痛恨恶人，法网疏而不漏，刑罚不会舍弃。
English: He then ascended to the gate of hell and issued the following edict: Heaven is full of taboos, the world abhors evildoers, the net of the law is not leaky, and punishment will not be abandoned.

古文：是以吕霍之门，祸谴所伏；梁董之家，咎征斯在。
现代文：所以吕氏霍氏的门户，有祸患谴告潜伏；梁氏董氏的家族，存在着罪过的征兆。
English: Therefore, the gateway of the Lu family, the Huo family, has a curse lurking; the family of the Liang family, the Dong family, has a sign of sin.

古文：顷孝昌之末，天步孔艰，女主乱政，监国无主。
现代文：近来孝昌末年，国运艰难，女主扰乱政事，没有人处理国政。
English: Recently, in the last years of Xiaochang, the national movement was difficult, the mistress disturbed the political affairs, and no one dealt with the national affairs.

古文：尔朱荣爰自晋阳，同忧王室，义旗之建，大会盟津，与世乐推，共成鸿业。
现代文：尔朱荣自晋阳起事，忧虑王室，竖起正义的旗帜，在盟津大会集，并世之人乐意推举，共同完成大业。
English: Le Zhu Rong rose up from Jinyang, worried the royal family, and raised the banner of justice. At the Mengjin Assembly, people from all walks of life were willing to nominate and work together to complete the great cause.

古文：论其始图，非无劳效。
现代文：评论他开始的意图，不是没有功劳成效。
English: It is not without merit to comment on the intention with which he began.

古文：但致远恐泥，终之实难，曾未崇朝，豺声已露。
现代文：不过要达到远大目标就难办了，善始善终实为难事，竟然不到一个早晨的时间，豺狼的声音就露出来了。
English: However, it is difficult to achieve the ambitious goal, and it is really difficult to start well and end well. In less than one morning, the voice of the jackal was revealed.

古文：河阴之役，安忍无亲。
现代文：河阴的变乱，残忍无情。
English: The chaos of the river Yin is cruel and merciless.

古文：王公卿士，一朝涂地，宗戚靡遗，内外俱尽。
现代文：王公卿大夫，顷刻之间肝脑涂地，宗室亲戚无遗留，内外亲信都杀尽。
English: Dr. Wang Gongqing, in an instant, his heart was smashed to pieces. He left no family relatives behind, and all his close friends at home and abroad were killed.

古文：假弄天威，殆危神器。
现代文：他假托君命，危害帝位。
English: He jeopardized the imperial throne by pretending to entrust the prince with his life.

古文：时事仓卒，未遑问罪。
现代文：形势急迫，没有来得及定罪。
English: The situation was so urgent that there was no time to convict.

古文：寻以葛贼横行，马首南向，舍过责成，用平丑虏。
现代文：不久因葛荣贼寇横行，军队向南进发，就舍弃他的罪过责其成功，来平定贼寇。
English: Soon after Ge Rong's banditry became rampant, the army marched southward, abandoning his guilt and blaming his success to quell the banditry.

古文：及元颢问鼎，大驾北巡，复致勤王，展力行所。
现代文：等到元颢称帝，我向北巡视，他又为王事尽力，在我临时驻地效力。
English: When Yuan Shikai was proclaimed emperor, I went on a tour to the north, and he did his best for the king and worked at my temporary residence.

古文：以此论功，且可补过。既位极宰衡，地逾齐、鲁，容养之至，岂复是过？
现代文：以这来评定功绩，还可弥补罪过他在地位达到宰相，封地跨越齐、鲁后，奢侈到极点，哪裹又是罪过?
English: Using this to evaluate merit, he can also make up for his sins. He has reached the position of prime minister, fiefdoms across Qi and Lu, luxury to the extreme, what is the sin?

古文：但心如猛火，山林无以供其暴；意等漏卮，江河无以充其溢。
现代文：衹是他心如猛火，山林无法来供给他的暴烈；思想像渗漏的酒器，长江、黄河无法来填满他的欲壑。
English: His heart is like a raging fire, the mountains and forests cannot supply his violence; his thoughts are like leaking wine containers, the Yangtze River and the Yellow River cannot fill his desire.

古文：既见金革稍宁，方隅渐泰，不推天功，专为己力。与夺任情，臧否肆意，无君之迹，日月以甚。
现代文：看到战事逐渐平息，四方逐渐安宁，不推许上天的功劳，都以为是自己的力量，给与夺取任凭心情，褒扬贬斥肆行己意，目无君主的迹象，比曰月还明显。
English: Seeing the war gradually subside, the four sides gradually calm down, do not praise the merits of heaven, they all think that it is their own strength, give and take any mood, praise and condemn their own will, the signs of no monarch are more obvious than the moon.

古文：拔发数罪，盖不足称；斩竹书愆，岂云能尽。
现代文：拔下头发列举他的罪过，大概还不足以指责；砍下竹子书写他的错失，哪裹能够写尽?
English: Pluck out his hair and enumerate his sins, is probably not enough to blame; cut down the bamboo and write his mistakes, how can you write it all?

古文：方复托名朝宗，阴图衅逆，睥睨天居，窥觎圣历。
现代文：又正要假托朝见，暗中图谋作乱，窥伺帝位，觊觎圣人基业。
English: He was also about to pretend to be a member of the imperial court, secretly plotting to create turmoil, spy on the imperial throne, and slander the sage Mikae.

古文：乃有裂冠毁冕之心，将为拔本塞源之事。
现代文：竟然有撕裂皇冠毁坏帝冕的用心，将做拔除国家的根本堵塞源头的事情。
English: With the intention of tearing apart the crown and destroying the imperial crown, he will do something to remove the country's fundamental source of blockage.

古文：天既厌乱，人亦悔祸，同恶之臣，密来投告。
现代文：上天既厌恶战乱，人心也悔恨祸患，与他一起作恶的臣子，秘密前来告发。
English: Since heaven abhors war and turmoil, and the human heart also regrets calamities, the courtiers who commit evil with him secretly come to denounce them.

古文：将而必诛，罪无容舍。
现代文：一定要加以诛杀，罪过不容宽恕。
English: It must be fought and killed, and the crime cannot be forgiven.

古文：又元天穆宗室末属，名望素微，遭逢际会，颇参义举。
现代文：另外元天穆是宗室疏远的亲属，声望一向低微，遭遇机缘，参与了较多的正义举措。
English: In addition, Yuan Tianmu is an estranged relative of the family, his reputation has always been low, and he has encountered opportunities and participated in more justice measures.

古文：不能竭其忠诚以奉家国，乃复弃本逐末，背同即异，为之谋主，成彼祸心。
现代文：但他不能竭尽忠诚来侍奉国家，却又放弃根本追逐末流，违背正义依从异见，成为尔朱荣的主要谋臣，促成尔朱荣的祸心。
English: However, he could not serve the country with complete loyalty, but he gave up the fundamental pursuit of the lowest common denominator, violated justice and followed dissent, becoming the main adviser of Le Zhurong and contributing to Le Zhurong's evil intentions.

古文：是而可忍，孰不可恕！并以伏辜，自贻伊戚。
现代文：对这都可以容忍，那还有什么不可容忍的都加以诛杀，并贻害到他们的亲属。
English: All of this can be tolerated, but what is intolerable is to kill them and harm their relatives.

古文：元恶既除，人神庆泰，便可大赦天下。
现代文：元凶除掉，入神欢庆安宁，便可大赦天下。
English: If the main culprit is eliminated, the world will be a happier place.

古文：遣武卫将军奚毅、前燕州刺史崔渊率兵镇北中。
现代文：派遣武卫将军奚毅、前燕州刺史崔渊率领兵士镇守北中。
English: Wuwei General Zou Yi was dispatched, and soldiers led by former Yanzhou Governor Cui Yuan led the soldiers to guard the North Middle School.

古文：是夜，仆射尔朱世隆、荣妻乡郡长公主，率荣部曲焚西阳门，出屯河阴。
现代文：这天夜晚，仆射尔朱世隆、尔朱荣的妻子乡郡长公主，率领尔朱荣的部队焚烧西阳门，出城驻守河阴。
English: On this night, Zhu Shilong, the wife of Zhu Rong and the princess of the county head of the county, led Zhu Rong's troops to burn the Xiyang Gate and left the city to garrison Heyin.

古文：己亥，攻河桥，擒毅等于途，害之；据北中城，南逼京邑。
现代文：己亥，攻打河桥，在途中擒获了奚毅等人，杀害他们，占据北中城，向南逼近京城。
English: Jihai, attacking the river bridge, captured Zou Yi and others on the way, killed them, occupied the north of the city, and approached the capital to the south.

古文：诏以骠骑大将军、雍州刺史、广宗郡开国公尔朱天光为侍中、仪同三司，以侍中、司空公杨津为使持节、督并肆燕恆云朔显汾蔚九州诸军事、骠骑大将军、并州刺史、兼尚书令、北道大行台，经略并肆。
现代文：下韶任命骠骑大将军、雍州刺史、广宗郡开国公尔朱天光为侍中、仪同三司，任命侍中、司空公杨津为使持节、督并肆燕恒云朔显汾蔚九州诸军事、骠骑大将军、并州刺史、兼尚书令、北道大行台，攻取并州肆州。
English: The lower echelon appointed Zhu Tianguang, the grand general of cavalry, the chief historian of Yongzhou and the founding father of Guangzong County, as the chamberlain and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and appointed Yang Jin, the grand general of cavalry and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, as the commander of the military and the grand general of cavalry, the chief historian of Yongzhou, the grand general of cavalry, the grand secretary of ceremony and etiquette and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, and the grand general of cavalry, the grand general of cavalry, the grand general of cavalry, the grand general

古文：庚子，诏诸旧代人赴华林园，帝将亲简叙。
现代文：庚子，诏令旧代地的人赶往华林园，皇帝将亲自挑选任用。
English: Geng Zi issued an edict ordering the old generation to rush to the Hualing Garden, and the emperor would personally select and appoint them.

古文：以抚军将军、金紫光禄大夫高乾邕为侍中、河北大使，招集骁勇。
现代文：任命抚军将军、金紫光禄大夫高干邕为侍中、河北大使，招募聚集英勇的兵士。
English: He appointed General Fuzhong and Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu Gao Ganjun as the Vice-Chamberlain and Ambassador of Hebei Province, and recruited and gathered brave soldiers.

古文：冬十月癸卯朔，封安南将军、大鸿胪卿元宝炬为南阳王，大宗正卿、汝阳县开国公元修平阳王，通直散骑常侍、龙骧将军、新阳县开国伯元诞为昌乐王。
现代文：冬十月癸卯初一，封安南将军、大鸿胪卿元宝炬为南阳王，大宗正卿、汝阳县开国公元脩为平阳王，通直散骑常侍、龙骧将军、新阳县开国伯元诞为昌乐王。
English: On the first day of winter in October, General Fong Annan and the Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great Great

古文：复通直散骑常侍、琅邪县开国公李叔仁官爵，仍为使持节、大都督，以讨世隆。
现代文：恢复通直散骑常侍、琅邪县开国公的官爵。李叔仁的官职爵位，仍为使持节、大都督，前去讨伐世隆。
English: He restored the official title of Tsunzhi Sanzhong riding attendant, and the official title of the founder of Shiyan County. Li Shuren's official title was still that of the envoy, the grand governor, and he went to fight against Shilong.

古文：以魏郡王谌徙封赵郡王，谌弟子赵郡王置改封平昌王。
现代文：将魏郡王元谌迁封为趟郡王，元谌弟弟的儿子趟郡王元实改封为平昌王。
English: The king of Wei County, Wang Yuanqi, was changed to the king of Wuchang County, and the king of Wuchang County, Wang Yuanshi, the son of the younger brother of Wang Yuanqi, was changed to the king of Pyeongchang.

古文：仪同三司李虔薨。
现代文：仪同三司李虔逝世。
English: Yi Tong San Si Li Qian passed away.

古文：丁未，班募攻河桥格，赏帛授官各有差。
现代文：丁未，颁布招募兵士攻打河桥的条例，赏赐布帛授予宫爵各有等级。
English: Ding Wei, promulgated the regulations for recruiting soldiers to attack the river bridge, and rewarded the cloth with the rank of Duke.

古文：戊申，皇子生，大赦天下，文武百僚泛二级。
现代文：戊申，皇子出生，大赦天下，文武百官普加二级。
English: Wushen, the prince was born, the world was amnestied, and the civil and military officials were promoted to the second level.

古文：以平南将军、中书令魏兰根兼尚书左仆射，为河北行台，定相殷三州禀兰根节度。
现代文：任命平南将军、中书令魏兰根兼任尚书左仆射，担任河北行台，定相殷三个州接受兰根的调度
English: General Pingnan was appointed as the commander of the Chinese army, Wei Langen as the commander of the Chinese army, Shang Shuxi as the commander of the Chinese army, and Ding Xiangyin as the commander of the Chinese army in Hebei Province.

古文：乙卯，通直散骑常侍、假平西将军、都督李苗以火船焚河桥，尔朱世隆退走。
现代文：乙卯，通直散骑常侍、代理平西将军、都督李苗用火船焚烧河桥，尔朱世隆后退逃跑。
English: E, Tsunzhi, Zanzhong, Zanzhong, the acting general of Pingxi, and the governor Li Miao burned the bridge of the river with a fire boat, and Zhu Shilong retreated and fled.

古文：丙辰，诏大都督、兼尚书仆射、行台源子恭率步骑一万出自西道，行台杨昱领都督李侃希等部募勇士八千往从东路，防讨之。
现代文：丙辰，诏令大都督、兼尚书仆射、行台源子恭率领步兵骑兵一万人从西路出兵，行台杨昱统领都督李侃希等部队募集勇士八千人往东路出兵，防御讨伐他们。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuancheng's death, the grand governor, concurrently Shang Shufu, sent troops from the west with 10,000 infantry and cavalry led by Gongtai Yuan Ziqiang, and Gongtai Yang Jie led the governor Li Kanxi and other troops to recruit 8,000 warriors to send troops to the east to defend and fight against them.

古文：子恭仍镇太行丹谷。
现代文：子恭随之镇守太行丹谷。
English: Zi Gong was followed by the town guard Tai Xing Danggu.

古文：世隆至建州，刺史陆希质拒守。城陷，尽屠之，唯希质获免。
现代文：世隆到达建州，刺史陆希质抵御防守，城池沦陷，守军被全部屠杀，仅希质得以避免。
English: Shilong arrived in Jianzhou, and fought against the defense, the city fell, the defenders were all slaughtered, and only the rare quality was avoided.

古文：以中军将军、前东荆州刺史元显恭为使持节、都督晋建南汾三州诸军事、镇西将军、晋州刺史、兼尚书左仆射，为征西道行台，节度都督薛善乐、薛修义、裴元俊、薛崇礼、薛憘族等。
现代文：任命中军将军、前东荆州刺史元显恭为使持节、都督晋建南汾三州诸军事、镇西将军、晋州刺史、兼尚书左仆射，担任征西道行台，调度都督薛善乐、薛修义、裴元俊、薛崇礼、薛恬族等人。
English: Appointed the general of the Chinese army, the former East Jingzhou statesman Yuan Xianqong as the envoy of the festival, the governor Jin Jian of the South Yunnan and the three states of the military, the general of the west of the town, the Jinzhou statesman, and the left-hand man of the book, as the westward march platform, and dispatched the governor Xue Zhenle, Xue Xiuyi, Pei Yuanjun, Xue Chongli, Xue Yao and others.

古文：丁卯，诏以世隆北叛，河内固守，其在城督将文武普加二级，兵士给复三年。
现代文：丁卯，诏令因世隆向北叛变，河内坚固守卫，凡在城中的都督将领文武官员普遍增加二级，兵士免除三年赋税劳役。
English: Dingwu, because of Shilong's rebellion to the north, Hanoi was firmly guarded, and the civil and military officials of the governor generals in the city were generally increased by two levels, and the soldiers were exempted from three years of tax labor.

古文：壬申，尔朱世隆停建兴之高都，尔朱兆自晋阳来会之，共推太原太守、行并州刺史长广王晔为主，大赦所部，号年建明，普泛四级。
现代文：壬申，尔朱世隆停驻在建兴的高都，东朱兆从晋阳来同他会合，共同推举太原太守、代理并州刺史长广王元晔为君主，大赦所辖地区，年号为建明，普遍加四级。
English: In Jinshin, Er Zhu Shilong stayed in the Gaodu of Jianxing, and Dong Zhu Zhao came from Jinyang to meet with him, and jointly elected the Taiyuan Governor-General, Acting Governor-General and Governor-General Guang Wangyuan as the monarch, and the area under the amnesty was given the year name of Jianming, generally plus four levels.

古文：徐州刺史尔朱仲远反，率众向京师。
现代文：金丛刺史尔朱仲远反叛，率领军队打向京城。
English: Jin Cong stabbed Sr Zhu Zhongyuan, rebelled, and led the army to the capital.

古文：十有一月癸酉朔，诏车骑将军、左卫将军郑先护为使持节、大将军、大都督，与都督李侃希赴行台杨昱以讨之。
现代文：十一月癸酉初一，诏令车骑将军、左卫将军郑先护为使持节、大将军、大都督，和都督李侃孟赶赴行台握旦那裹去讨伐住远。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the emperor ordered the general of the cavalry and the general of the left, Zheng Xianbao, to hold the festival, and the general, the grand governor, and the governor Li Kan Meng rushed to Taiwan to hold the husband to fight and live far away.

古文：乙亥，以使持节、兼尚书令、西道大行台、司徒公长孙稚为太尉公，侍中、尚书令、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、临淮王彧为司徒公。
现代文：乙亥，任命使持节、兼尚书令、西道大行台、司徒公长孙稚为太尉公，侍中、尚书令、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、临淮王元或为司徒公。
English: Eihei, appointed the envoy Jichisai, concurrently the honorable secretary, the west road Daigongtai, the chief of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince

古文：丙子，以骠骑大将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史、广宗郡开国公尔朱天光开府，进爵为王。
现代文：丙子，任命骠骑大将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史、广宗郡开国公尔朱天光为开府仪同三司，升爵位为王。
English: Bing Zi, appointed the grand general of the imperial cavalry, the three officials of the imperial etiquette, the Yongzhou imperial eunuch, and Zhu Tianguang, the founding father of Guangzong County, as the three officials of the imperial etiquette, and was promoted to the king.

古文：丁丑，尔朱仲远陷西兗州，执刺史王衍。
现代文：丁丑，尔朱仲远攻占西兖州，捉住刺史王衍。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Er Zhu Zhongyuan occupied West Luzhou, and captured Sashi Wangyan.

古文：癸未，以右卫将军贺拔胜为东征都督。
现代文：癸未，任命右卫将军贺拔胜为东征都督。
English: Soon after, He Baxian, the right guard general, was appointed as the governor of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：壬辰，又以左卫将军、大都督郑先护兼尚书左仆射，为行台，与胜并讨仲远。
现代文：壬辰，又任命左卫将军、大都督郑先护兼任尚书左仆射，担任行台，和贺拔胜一起讨伐仲远。
English: Imjin, he also appointed General of the Left Division and Grand Governor Zheng Xianguo to concurrently serve as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, to serve as a platform, and to fight together with He Bascheng against Jiaoyuan.

古文：戍戌，诏罢魏兰根行台，以后将军、定州刺使薛昙尚为使持节、兼尚书，为北道行台，随机召发。
现代文：戊戌，下诏罢除魏兰根的行台职位，任命后将军、定州刺史薛昙尚为使持节、兼尚书，担任北道行台，依据形势需要召集调发兵马。
English: Wu Xi decreed that Wei Langen should be removed from the position of marching troops, and after the appointment, the general, Dingzhou Jishi Xue Xi, was appointed as the envoy, and also the ambassador, and served as the North Road marching troops, and according to the needs of the situation, summoned and dispatched soldiers and horses.

古文：行豫州刺史元崇礼杀后行州事阴导和，擅摄豫州。
现代文：代理豫州刺史元崇礼杀死后来的行州事阴导和，擅自执掌豫州事务。
English: The acting governor of Yuzhou, Yuan Chongli, killed the later governor of Yuzhou and took charge of the affairs of Yuzhou without authorization.

古文：庚子，贺拔胜与仲远战于滑台东，失利，仍奔之。
现代文：庚子，贺拔胜在滑台束同仲远交战，失败，继而逃奔。
English: Geng Zi and He Bi Sheng fought with each other at the sliding table, failed, and then ran away.

古文：十有二月壬寅朔，尔朱兆寇丹谷，都督崔伯凤战殁，都督羊文义、史五龙降兆，大都督源子恭奔退。
现代文：十二月壬寅初一，水朱兆侵犯丹谷，都督崔伯凤战死，都督羊文义、史五龙投降尔朱兆，大都督源子恭溃退。
English: On the first day of the first lunar month of December, Zhu Zhao invaded Danggu, the governor Cui Bofeng died in battle, the governor Yang Wenyi and Shi Wulong surrendered to Zhu Zhao, and the grand governor Yuan Zi retreated in defeat.

古文：甲辰，尔朱兆、尔朱度律自富平津上，率骑涉渡，以袭京城。
现代文：甲辰，余朱兆、众朱度律从富平津进军，率领骑兵渡河，来袭击京城。
English: Jia Chen, Yu Zhu Zhao, and Zhu Duru marched from Fupingjin and led the cavalry across the river to attack the capital.

古文：事出仓卒，禁卫不守。
现代文：事情突然，宫廷没有防守。
English: Suddenly, the palace was defenseless.

古文：帝出云龙门。
现代文：皇帝从云龙门外出。
English: The emperor went out from the Cloud Dragon Gate.

古文：兆逼帝幸永宁佛寺，杀皇子，并杀司徒公、临淮王彧，左仆射、范阳王诲。
现代文：余朱兆逼迫皇帝到永宁佛寺，杀死皇子，并杀死司徒公、临淮王元或，左仆射、范阳王元诲。
English: Yu Zhu Zhao forced the emperor to the Yongning Buddhist Temple and killed the prince, as well as killing Prince Sitou, Prince Linhuai, Prince Zuofei, and Prince Fanyang.

古文：戊申，元晔大赦天下。
现代文：戊申，元晔大赦天下。
English: Wushin, the former general secretary of the Communist Party of China, was pardoned.

古文：尔朱度律自镇京师。
现代文：尔朱度律亲自镇守京城。
English: Zhu Duru personally guarded the capital.

古文：甲寅，尔朱兆迁帝于晋阳；甲子，崩于城内三级佛寺，时年二十四。
现代文：甲寅，尔朱兆把皇帝迁到晋阳；甲子，皇帝在城内的三级佛寺逝世，终年二十四岁。
English: A Yin, Er Zhu Zhao moved the emperor to Jinyang; A Zi, the emperor died in the three-level Buddhist temple in the city, at the age of twenty-four.

古文：并害陈留王宽。
现代文：尔朱兆还一并害死陈留王元宽。
English: Er Zhu Zhao also killed Chen Liu Wang Yuan Guang.

古文：是月，河西人纥豆陵步蕃、破落韩常大败尔朱兆于秀容。
现代文：这月，黄河以西人纥豆陵步蕃、破落韩常在秀容大败尔朱兆。
English: This month, to the west of the Yellow River, people walk in the footsteps of pea mills, and the ruined Han Dynasty often defeated Zhu Zhao in the Show Rong.

古文：齐州城人赵洛周据西城反，应尔朱兆。刺史、丹阳王萧赞弃城走。
现代文：齐州市民趟洛周占据西城反叛，响应尔朱兆，刺史、丹阳王萧赞放弃城池逃跑。
English: The citizens of Qizhou went to Luozhou to occupy the west city and rebelled. In response, Er Zhuzhao, Zhishi and Danyang Wang Xiaozan abandoned the city and fled.

古文：南阳太守赵脩延执荆州刺史李琰之，自行州事。
现代文：南阳太守赵脩延捉住荆州刺史李琰之，自己代行州中事务。
English: Zhao Qianyan, the governor of Nanyang, caught Li Shizhi, the assassin of Jingzhou, and took charge of the affairs of Jingzhou on his own.

古文：中兴二年谥为武怀皇帝，太昌元年又谥孝庄皇帝，庙号敬宗。
现代文：中兴二年追谧皇帝为武怀皇帝，太昌元年又谧为孝庄皇帝，庙号为塑塞。
English: In the second year of Zhongxing's pursuit of the emperor, he was the emperor of Wuhuai, and in the first year of Taichang, he was the emperor of Xiaozhuang, and his temple name was Shuxing.

古文：十一月，葬于静陵。
现代文：十一月，安葬在盏堕。
English: In November, he was buried in Zhenping.

古文：史臣曰：魏自孝昌之末，天下淆然，外侮内乱，神器固将无主。
现代文：史臣曰：魏国自从孝昌的末年，天下骚动，外侵内乱，帝位就将没有主人。
English: Shichen said, "Since the end of the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, the kingdom of Wei has been in turmoil, with foreign invasion and civil strife, and the imperial throne will have no owner.

古文：庄帝潜思变化，招纳勤王，虽时事孔棘，而卒有四海。
现代文：庄帝暗中思念改变，招收接纳为王事尽力者，虽然形势艰难，而终于拥有天下。
English: Zhuang Di secretly yearned for change, recruited and accepted as the king's servant, although the situation was difficult, and finally owned the world.

古文：猾逆既翦，权强擅命，抑是兆谋运智之秋，劳谦夕惕之日也。
现代文：狡黠的叛逆剪灭后，权臣强族专擅朝政，遣或许正足产生谋略运用智慧的岁月，勤谨谦虚警惕戒备的时日。
English: After the cunning rebellion was wiped out, the powerful vassals of the powerful clans were exclusively in charge of the government, and the era of strategy and wisdom was born, and the era of diligence, modesty, and vigilance was born.

古文：未闻长辔之策，遽深负刺之恐，谋谟罕术，授任乖方，猜嫌行戮，祸不旋踵。
现代文：没有听到长久控御的策略，仓猝进入遭受刺击的危险区域，策划没有法术，委任违背方略，猜忌嫌疑加以杀戮，祸患随即到来。
English: Without hearing the strategy of long-term control, hastily entering the danger zone of being stabbed, planning without magic, delegating the strategy of violation, killing with suspicion, the calamity is coming.

古文：鸣呼！胡丑之为衅也，岂周衰晋末而已哉！至于高祖不祀，武宣享庙，三后降鉴，福禄固不永矣。
现代文：呜呼胡人贼寇造成的裂痕，哪衹是周朝末年和晋朝末年可比呢以致高祖不获祭祀，武宣合祭庙庭，三后俯察，福禄当然不长。
English: The rift caused by the Hu people and the thieves and robbers, which is comparable to the end of the Zhou Dynasty and the end of the Jin Dynasty, so that Gao Zu was not sacrificed, Wuxuan was combined with the temple garden, and the three queens were looked down upon. Of course, the fortune was not long.

