古文：◎太祖二洪武元年春正月乙亥，祀天地于南郊，即皇帝位。
现代文：洪武元年春正月初四日，祀天地于南郊，即皇帝位。定天下称号明，建元洪武。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Hongwu, the heaven and earth were enshrined in the southern suburbs, that is, the emperor's throne.

古文：追尊高祖考曰玄皇帝，庙号德祖，曾祖考曰恒皇帝，庙号懿祖；祖考曰裕皇帝，庙号熙祖，皇考曰淳皇帝，庙号仁祖，妣皆皇后。
现代文：追尊高祖考叫玄皇帝，庙号德祖；曾祖考叫恒皇帝，庙号懿祖；祖考叫裕皇帝，庙号熙祖；皇考叫淳皇帝，庙号仁祖；妻皆皇后。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was called Emperor Xuanzong, and his temple name was Dezu; Emperor Heng was called Emperor Zengzu, and his temple name was Shizuo; Emperor Yuzu was called Emperor Yuzu, and his temple name was Xizu; Emperor Jun was called Emperor Jun, and his temple name was Renzu; and all his wives were empresses.

古文：立妃马氏为皇后，世子标为皇太子。
现代文：立妃马氏为皇后，世子标为皇太子。
English: Empress Dowager Ma is the Empress, and Heir Apparent is the Crown Prince.

古文：以李善长、徐达为左、右丞相，诸功臣进爵有差。
现代文：以李善长、徐达为左、右丞相，诸功臣进爵有别。
English: With Li Shanchang and Xu Da as the left and right ministers, there is a difference in the number of meritorious vassals promoted to peerage.

古文：丙子，颁即位诏于天下。
现代文：初五日，颁即位诏书于天下。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the imperial edict of enthronement was issued to the world.

古文：追封皇伯考以下皆为王。
现代文：追封皇伯考以下皆为王。
English: Everyone is a king from the crown prince Bercow downwards.

古文：辛巳，李善长、徐达等兼东宫官。
现代文：初十日，李善长、徐达等兼东宫官。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Li Shanchang, Xu Da and other officials of the East Palace were appointed.

古文：甲申，遣使核浙西田赋。
现代文：十三日，遣使核实浙西田赋。
English: On the 13th, an envoy was sent to verify Zhejiang Xidanfu.

古文：壬辰，胡廷瑞克建宁。
现代文：二十一日，胡廷瑞攻克建宁。
English: On the 21st, Hu Tingrui defeated Jianning.

古文：庚子，邓愈为征戍将军，略南阳以北州郡。
现代文：二十九日，邓愈为征戍将军。攻略南阳以北州郡。
English: On the 29th, Deng Yu was appointed as the general of the Conquest of Nanyang. He attacked Nanyang and Beizhou County.

古文：汤和克延平，执元平章陈友定，福建平。
现代文：汤和攻克延平，活捉元平章陈友定，福建平定。
English: Tang He conquered Yanping, captured Yuanping Zhang Chen Youding alive, and pacified Fujian.

古文：是月，天下府州县官来朝。谕曰： 天下始定，民财力俱困，要在休养安息，惟廉者能约己而利人，勉之。 
现代文：当月，天下府州县官来朝，太祖告诫他们说 ：天下始定，百姓财力俱困，现在关键在于让百姓休养生息，这只有廉者能够约束自己而利于人，望大家共勉。 
English: That month, prefectural and county officials from all over the country came to the DPRK, and the great-grandfather admonished them, saying, "The country is at a turning point, and the people are financially strapped. The key now is to let the people rest and recuperate. Only the honest can restrain themselves and benefit the people. I hope everyone will work hard.

古文：二月壬寅，定郊社宗庙礼，岁必亲祀，以为常。
现代文：二月一日，规定郊社宗庙礼仪，每年必须亲自祭祀作为常规。
English: On February 1, the etiquette of the suburb's ancestral temple stipulated that the annual ritual must be performed in person as a rule.

古文：癸卯，汤和提督海运。
现代文：二日，汤和提督海运。
English: On the second day, the soup and the admiral were transported by sea.

古文：廖永忠为征南将军，朱亮祖副之，由海道取广东。
现代文：廖永忠为征南将军，朱亮祖为副将军，由海道取广东。
English: Liao Yongzhong was the general to conquer the south, and Zhu Liangzu was the vice-general to conquer Guangdong by sea.

古文：丁未，以太牢祀先师孔子于国学。戊申，祀社稷。
现代文：六日，用太牢在国学祀先师孔子。七日祀社稷。
English: On the sixth day, they used the dungeon to worship Confucius, the forerunner of Confucianism, and on the seventh day, they worshipped Shabdrung.

古文：壬子，诏衣冠如唐制。
现代文：十一日，诏定衣冠如唐朝制。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor decreed that the dress code would be the same as that of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：癸丑，常遇春克东昌，山东平。
现代文：十二日，常遇春攻克东昌，山东平定。
English: On the twelfth day, Changchun conquered Dongchang and Shandong was pacified.

古文：甲寅，杨璟克宝庆。
现代文：十三日，杨王景攻陷宝庆。
English: On the 13th, Yang Wangjing invaded Baoqing.

古文：三月辛未，诏儒臣修女诫，戒后妃毋预政。
现代文：二十九日，诏儒臣修订女规条，严禁后妃干预政治。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Zhao and Emperor Ru revised the female regulations, strictly forbidding the Empress Dowager to interfere in politics.

古文：壬申，周德兴克全州。
现代文：三十日，周德兴攻克全州。
English: On the 30th, Zhou Dexing conquered the whole state.

古文：丁酉，邓愈克南阳。
现代文：三月初一，邓愈攻克南阳。
English: On the first day of March, Deng Yu conquered Nanyang.

古文：己亥，徐达徇汴梁，左君弼降。
现代文：三日徐达前往汴梁，左君弼投降。
English: On the third day, Xu Da went to Qilian, and Zuo Junya surrendered.

古文：夏四月辛丑，蕲州进竹簟，却之，命四方毋妄献。
现代文：夏四月初一，蕲州进献竹席，太祖拒受，诏令四方不要随便进献。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, Bozhou offered bamboo seats, which Taizu refused to accept, and ordered the four parties not to offer them casually.

古文：廖永忠师至广州，元守臣何真降，广东平。
现代文：廖永忠率部队到广州，元守臣何真投降，广东平定。
English: Liao Yongzhong led the troops to Guangzhou, the former vassal Ho Zhen surrendered, and Guangdong was pacified.

古文：丁未，祫享太庙。
现代文：初七，集合祖先牌位在太庙举行大祭。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, a grand festival is held in Taimiao to collect ancestor plaques.

古文：戊申，徐达、常遇春大破元兵于洛水北，遂围河南。梁王阿鲁温降，河南平。
现代文：初八，徐达、常遇春大破元兵于洛水北，于是进围河南，梁王阿鲁温投降，河南平定。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xu Da and Chang Ji Chun defeated the Yuan soldiers in the north of Luoshui, and then entered Henan Province. Liang Wang Aruwen surrendered, and Henan Province was pacified.

古文：丁巳，杨璟克永州。
现代文：十七日，杨王景攻克永州。
English: On the 17th, Yang Wangjing conquered Yongzhou.

古文：甲子，幸汴梁。
现代文：二十四日，行幸汴梁。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, they went on a trip.

古文：丙寅，冯胜克潼关，李思齐、张思道遁。
现代文：二十六日，冯胜攻克潼关，李思齐、张思道逃走。
English: On the 26th, Feng Sheng conquered Shaoguan, and Li Sizi and Zhang Sidi fled.

古文：五月己卯，廖永忠下梧州，浔、贵、容、郁林诸州皆降。
现代文：五月十日，廖永忠攻下梧州，浔、贵、容、郁林各州都投降。
English: On May 10, Liao Yongzhong conquered Wuzhou, and the states of Handan, Guizhou, Yongkang and Yulin all surrendered.

古文：辛卯，改汴梁路为开封府。
现代文：二十二日，改汴梁路为开封府。
English: On the 22nd, it was renamed as Kaifeng Prefecture.

古文：六月庚子，徐达朝行在。甲辰，海南、海北诸道降。
现代文：六月一日，徐达朝见太祖，七日，海南、海北各道投降。
English: On June 1, Xu DaDao met with Taizu, and on the 7th, Hainan and North China capitulated.

古文：壬戌，杨璟、朱亮祖克靖江。
现代文：二十五日，杨王景、朱亮祖攻陷靖江。
English: On the 25th, Yang Wangjing and Zhu Liangzu invaded Jingjiang.

古文：秋七月戊子，廖永忠下象州，广西平。
现代文：秋七月二十日，廖永忠攻下象州，广西平定。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, Liao Yongzhong conquered Xiangzhou and subdued Guangxi.

古文：庚寅，振恤中原贫民。
现代文：二十二日，赈恤中原贫民。
English: On the 22nd, the Central Plains poor came out.

古文：辛卯，将还应天，谕达等曰： 中原之民，久为群雄所苦，流离相望，故命将北征，拯民水火。
现代文：二十三日，太祖将回应天，对徐达等说 ：中原百姓，久为群雄侵苦，流离相望，所以命令将帅北征，拯民于水火。
English: On the 23rd, the great-grandfather will respond to the day, saying to Xu Da and others: The Central Plains people have been suffering for a long time and have been displaced, so the order will be sent to the north to save the people from water and fire.

古文：元祖宗功德在人，其子孙罔恤民隐，天厌弃之。
现代文：元朝祖宗有功德于民，其子孙不顾百姓死活，老天厌弃他们。
English: The ancestors of the Yuan Dynasty have made contributions to the people, but their descendants do not care about the people's lives. God abhors them.

古文：君则有罪，民复何辜。
现代文：君有罪，百姓却是无辜的。
English: You are guilty, but the people are innocent.

古文：前代革命之际，肆行屠戮，违天虐民，朕实不忍。
现代文：前代革命之际，肆行屠戮，违天虐民，我实在不忍。
English: At the time of the previous revolution, I couldn't bear to see the carnage and cruelty against the people.

古文：诸将克城，毋肆焚掠妄杀人，元之宗戚，咸俾保全。
现代文：诸将攻下城池之时，不要肆意烧杀掠夺，元之宗室亲戚，都要保全。
English: When the generals capture the castle, do not wantonly burn, kill and plunder. The original family members must be preserved.

古文：庶几上答天心，下慰人望，以副朕伐罪安民之意。
现代文：这样上顺天意，下慰人望，符合我讨伐罪人安抚百姓之意。
English: This is in accordance with the will of heaven and the hope of consoling people, which is in line with my intention to fight sinners and appease the people.

古文：不恭命者，罚无赦。 
现代文：不恭守命令的罚无赦。 
English: Disobeying orders is punishable by death.

古文：丙申，命冯胜留守开封。
现代文：二十八日，命令冯胜留守开封。
English: On the 28th, Feng Sheng was ordered to stay in Kaifeng.

古文：闰月丁未，至自开封。
现代文：闰七月初九，从开封回宫。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, he returned to the palace from Kaifeng.

古文：己酉，徐达会诸将兵于临清。
现代文：十一日，徐达会合诸将兵于临清。
English: On the 11th day, Xu Da gathered all the generals and soldiers in Linqing.

古文：壬子，常遇春克德州。
现代文：十四日，常遇春攻克德州。
English: On the 14th, the common spring invaded Texas.

古文：丙寅，克通州，元帝趋上都。
现代文：二十八日，攻克通州，元帝逃往上都。
English: On the 28th, after conquering Tongzhou, Emperor Yuan fled to Shangdu.

古文：是月，征天下贤才为守令。
现代文：当月，征召天下贤才充当守令。
English: That month, the world's elite were called up to serve as guards.

古文：免吴江、庆德、太平、宁国、滁、和被灾田租。
现代文：免除吴江、广德、太平、宁国、滁、和受灾田租。
English: Wujiang, Guangde, Taiping, Ningguo, Handan, and the affected fields will be exempted from rent.

古文：八月己巳，以应天为南京，开封为北京。
现代文：八月一日，以应天为南京，开封为北京。
English: On August 1, Yingtian became Nanjing, and Kaifeng became Beijing.

古文：庚午，徐达入元都，封府库图籍，守宫门，禁士卒侵暴，遣将巡古北口诸隘。
现代文：二日，徐达进入元都，封存府库图籍，把守宫门，禁止兵士侵犯暴行，遣将巡古北口各关隘。
English: On the second day, Xu Da entered the capital of the Yuan Dynasty, sealed the prefectural records of Kutu, guarded the palace gate, forbade soldiers from committing violence, and sent generals to patrol the ancient North Gate.

古文：壬申，以京师火，四方水旱，诏中书省集议便民事。
现代文：四日，因京师起火，四方水旱灾害，太祖诏中书省集中讨论便民事宜。
English: On the fourth day, due to the fire of the Beijing Division and the drought disaster in the four directions, the central discussion of the Taizu Prefectural Government was a civil matter.

古文：丁丑，定六部官制。
现代文：九日，定六部官制。
English: On the 9th, the six-branch government system was established.

古文：御史中丞刘基致仕。
现代文：御史中丞刘基辞官。
English: Vice-Minister of History Liu Ji resigned.

古文：己卯，赦殊死以下。
现代文：十一日，大赦死罪以下的罪犯。
English: On the 11th, an amnesty will be granted to criminals who have committed crimes punishable by death or less.

古文：将士从征者恤其家，逋逃许自首。
现代文：救济从征将士家人，逃跑的允许自首。
English: Relief was provided to the families of conscripts, and those who had escaped were allowed to surrender.

古文：新克州郡毋妄杀。
现代文：新近攻克的州郡不要乱杀。
English: Do not kill indiscriminately in newly conquered provinces.

古文：输赋道远者，官为转运，灾荒以实闻。
现代文：输纳赋税道路遥远的，官府代为转运，出现灾荒据实报告。
English: The road of tax collection is far away, the government is acting as a transporter, and there are solid reports of disasters.

古文：免镇江租税。避乱民复业者，听垦荒地，复三年。
现代文：免镇江租税，逃难百姓复业的，任其开垦荒地，免三年赋税徭役。
English: Zhenjiang was exempted from paying taxes, the people who had fled the disaster were allowed to resume their jobs, they were allowed to reclaim wasteland, and they were exempted from paying taxes for three years.

古文：衍圣公袭封及授曲阜知县，并如前代制。
现代文：衍圣公袭封并授曲阜知县，一如前代制度。
English: As in the previous system, Yan Sheng Gong received the seal and was awarded the title of Fu Chi County.

古文：有司以礼聘致贤士，学校毋事虚文。
现代文：有司以礼聘招贤士，学校不要专事虚文。
English: Some departments recruit sages with courtesy, and schools should not specialize in writing fictitious essays.

古文：平刑，毋非时决囚。
现代文：定罪量刑，不要不是时候处决囚犯。
English: Convicting and sentencing, it is not too late to execute prisoners.

古文：除书籍田器税，民间逋负免征。
现代文：免除书籍田器税，民间拖欠负担免征。
English: Exempt books from field implements tax, and exempt the burden of civil delinquency.

古文：蒙古、色目人有才能者，许擢用。
现代文：蒙古、色目人有才能者，允许提升使用。
English: In Mongolia, people with color vision and talent are allowed to use it.

古文：鳏寡孤独废疾者，存恤之。
现代文：对鳏寡孤独废疾之人给予抚恤救济。
English: To give pension relief to widows, lonely and disabled people.

古文：民年七十以上，一子复。
现代文：百姓年满七十以上者，允许一子免去赋役。
English: If a commoner is over seventy years old, one son is allowed to be exempted from military service.

古文：他利害当兴革不在诏内者，有司具以闻。
现代文：其他有关利与害应当兴革的不在诏内者，有关部门应据实报告。
English: For other relevant benefits and harms that are not included in the edict, the relevant departments should make a factual report.

古文：壬午，幸北京。改大都路曰北平府。征元故臣。
现代文：十四日，行幸北京，改大都路为北平府，征元故臣。
English: On the 14th, he went to Beijing and changed the capital road to Beipingfu. He was a retired minister of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：癸未，诏徐达、常遇春取山西。
现代文：十五日，诏徐达、常遇春进取山西。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the emperor Xu Da and the emperor Changyu marched into Shanxi.

古文：甲午，放元宫人。
现代文：二十六日，放元宫人。
English: On the 26th, the ex-palace guard was released.

古文：九月癸亥，诏曰： 天下之治，天下之贤共理之。
现代文：九月二十日，太祖下诏说 ：天下之治，天下之贤士共同治理。
English: On September 20th, the great-grandfather issued an imperial edict: "The world is governed by the world, and the world is governed by the world's sages."

古文：今贤士多隐岩穴，岂有司失于敦劝欤，朝廷疏于礼待欤，抑朕寡昧不足致贤，将在位者壅蔽使不上达欤？
现代文：今贤士多隐崖穴，是官府失于敦劝，朝廷疏于礼待，还是我寡昧不足以招揽贤才，将在位的雍蔽使不能上达？
English: Now there are more than a few sages. Is it the government that has lost its ability to persuade, the court that has lost its ability to treat people with courtesy, or is it that I'm not clever enough to recruit sages, and that I'll be overshadowed in my reign so that I won't be able to reach them?

古文：不然，贤士大夫，幼学壮行，岂甘没世而已哉。
现代文：要不然，贤士大夫，幼学壮行，难道甘于没落世间。
English: Otherwise, Doctor of the Magi, would you be content with the decline of the world?

古文：天下甫定，朕愿与诸儒讲明治道。有能辅朕济民者，有司礼遣。 
现代文：天下刚定，我愿与诸儒讲明治道，有能辅佐我济世安民者，有司以礼相待。 
English: It has just been decided that I am willing to preach the Meiji Way with the Confucianists, and if there is anyone who can assist me in bringing peace and security to the world, I will treat them with courtesy.

古文：乙丑，常遇春下保定，遂下真定。
现代文：二十八日，常遇春攻下保定，于是直下真定。
English: On the 28th, Baoding was often attacked in the spring, so it was decided to attack it directly.

古文：冬十月庚午，冯胜、汤和下怀庆，泽、潞相继下。
现代文：冬十月三日，冯胜、汤和下怀庆，泽、潞相继下。
English: On October 3rd in winter, Feng Sheng, Tang He, Xiao Huaiqing, Ze and Zou successively ascended.

古文：丁丑，至自北京。
现代文：十日，回到京师。
English: On the 10th, he returned to Beijing.

古文：戊寅，以元都平，诏天下。
现代文：十一日，因元都平定，诏告天下。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor announced to the world that the Yuan Dynasty had been pacified.

古文：十一月己亥，遣使分行天下，访求贤才。
现代文：十一月二日，遣使分行天下，访求贤才。
English: On November 2nd, he sent emissaries to branch offices around the world to visit and solicit talents.

古文：庚子，始祀上帝于圜丘。
现代文：三日，第一次祭祀上帝于圜丘。
English: On the third day, the first sacrifice to the god took place on the mound.

古文：癸亥，诏刘基还。
现代文：二十六日，诏刘基还。
English: On the 26th, Liu Ji returned.

古文：十二月丁卯，徐达克太原，扩廓帖木儿走甘肃，山西平。
现代文：十二月一日，徐达攻克太原，扩廓帖木儿逃到甘肃，山西平定。
English: On December 1, Xu Da conquered Taiyuan, and Timur fled to Gansu, and Shanxi was pacified.

古文：己巳，置登闻鼓。
现代文：三日，置登闻鼓。
English: On the third day, the drum was set up.

古文：壬辰，以书谕明升。
现代文：二十六日，以书谕明癉。
English: On the 26th, it was announced in writing.

古文：二年春正月乙巳，立功臣庙于鸡笼山。
现代文：洪武二年正月十日，在鸡笼山立功臣庙。十二日，供奉太庙。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the second year of Hongwu, a hero temple was established in Jigu Mountain. On the 12th day, the temple was dedicated.

古文：丁未，享太庙。庚戌，诏曰： 朕淮右布衣，因天下乱，率众渡江，保民图治，今十有五年。
现代文：十五日，太祖下诏说： 我本淮右百姓，因天下大乱，率众渡江，保民图治，今已有十五年。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great-great-grandfather issued an edict saying: I have been leading the people to cross the river and protect the people for fifteen years.

古文：荷天眷祐，悉皆戡定。
现代文：蒙苍天保，各地都已戡定。
English: Thanks to Heaven's protection, all regions have been stabilized.

古文：用是命将北征，齐鲁之民馈粮给军，不惮千里。
现代文：命将北征，齐、鲁百姓送粮给军，不远千里。
English: He ordered the Northern Expedition, and the people of Qi and Lu sent grain to the army, thousands of miles away.

古文：朕轸厥劳，已免元年田租。
现代文：我体其烦劳，已免其元年田租。
English: Due to my hard work, I have been exempted from the land rent for the first year.

古文：遭旱民未苏，其更赐一年。
现代文：现遭旱灾，民未轻松，再免一年。
English: Now suffering from drought, the people are not at ease, and it will be another year.

古文：顷者大军平燕都，下晋、冀，民被兵燹，困征敛，北平、燕南、河东、山西今年田租亦与蠲免。
现代文：不久，大军平定燕都，攻下晋、冀，百姓遭受兵患，困于征敛，北平、燕南、河东、山西今年田租也一起免去。
English: Before long, the great army had pacified Yandu, captured Jin and Hebei, and the people suffered from the soldiers and were in trouble of collecting taxes. Beiping, Yan'nan, Hedong and Shanxi were also exempted from this year's land rent.

古文：河南诸郡归附，久欲惠之，西北未平，师过其地，是以未逞。
现代文：河南诸郡归附，久想施惠他们，因西北未平，师过其地，所以没有这样做。
English: He had long wanted to grant favors to the counties in Henan that had been annexed, but he did not do so because the northwest was not leveled and the division had passed through its territory.

古文：今晋、冀平矣，西抵潼关，北界大河，南至唐、邓、光、息，今年税粮悉除之。 
现代文：现在晋、冀平定，西抵潼关，北达大河，南到唐、邓、光、息之地，今年税粮全部免除。 
English: Now Jin and Hebei have been pacified, the west has reached Shouguan, the north has reached the Great River, and the south has reached Tang, Deng, Guangxi, and the land of peace. This year, all taxes and grain are exempted.

古文：又诏曰： 应天、太平、镇江、宣城、广德供亿浩穰。
现代文：又下诏说： 应天、太平、镇江、宣城、广德供应浩大。
English: The next edict said: In response to Tian Tian, Taiping, Zhenjiang, Xuancheng, and Guangde, the supply is huge.

古文：去岁蠲租，遇旱惠不及下。其再免诸郡及无为州今年租税。 
现代文：去年免租，但遇上旱灾，现再免诸郡和无为州今年租税。 
English: Last year, they were exempt from paying rent, but due to the drought, they are now exempt from paying taxes this year.

古文：庚申，常遇春取大同。
现代文：二十五日，常遇春攻取大同。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the Spring Offensive was launched against Datong.

古文：是月，倭寇山东滨海郡县。
现代文：当月，倭寇侵掠山东滨海郡县。
English: That month, the wokou invaded and plundered Shandong Binhai County.

古文：二月丙寅朔，诏修元史。
现代文：二月一日，下诏修元史。
English: On February 1st, the imperial edict to revise the original history was issued.

古文：壬午，耕耤田。
现代文：十七日，耕耒昔田。
English: On the 17th, the old fields were ploughed.

古文：三月庚子，徐达至奉元，张思道遁。
现代文：三月六日，徐达到奉元，张思道逃走。
English: On March 6, Xu reached Fengyuan, and Zhang Sidao fled.

古文：振陕西饥，户米三石。
现代文：赈救陕西饥荒，每户给米三石。
English: To relieve the famine in Shaanxi, each household was given three kilos of rice.

古文：丙午，常遇春至凤翔，李思齐奔临洮。
现代文：十二日，常遇春到凤翔，李思齐逃奔临洮。
English: On the twelfth day, often spring to Fengxiang, Li Sizi fled to Linyi.

古文：夏四月丙寅，遇春还师北平。
现代文：夏四月二日，常遇春还师北平。
English: On the second day of April in summer, the Spring Festival often comes to Beiping.

古文：己巳，诸王子受经于博士孔克仁。令功臣子弟入学。
现代文：五日，博士孔克仁给诸王子授经，令功臣子弟入学。
English: On the fifth day, Dr. Kong Keren gave the sutras to the princes and sent the sons of the meritorious ministers to school.

古文：乙亥，编《祖训录》，定封建诸王之制。
现代文：十一日，编祖训录，制定封建诸王制度。
English: On the 11th, he compiled the Ancestor's Manual and established the feudal system of kings.

古文：徐达下巩昌。
现代文：徐达攻下巩昌。
English: Xu Da captured Gongchang.

古文：丙子，赐秦、陇新附州县税粮。
现代文：十二日，赐秦、陇新近归附州县税粮。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Qin and Handan were newly transferred to Fuzhou County tax grain.

古文：丁丑，冯胜至临洮，李思齐降。
现代文：十三日，冯胜到临洮，李思齐投降。
English: On the 13th, Feng Sheng arrived in Linyi, and Li Sizi surrendered.

古文：乙酉，徐达袭破元豫王于西宁。
现代文：二十一日，徐达在西安袭破元朝豫王。五月一日，日食。
English: On the 21st, Xu Da defeated the Yuan Dynasty's Yu Wang in Xi'an. On the 1st of May, a solar eclipse.

古文：五月甲午朔，日有食之。丁酉，徐达下平凉、延安。
现代文：四日，徐达攻下平凉、延安。
English: On the fourth day, Xu Da conquered Pingliang and Yan'an.

古文：张良臣以庆阳降，寻叛。
现代文：张良臣率庆阳投降。不久反叛。
English: Zhang Liangchen led Qingyang to surrender, but they soon rebelled.

古文：癸卯，始祀地于方丘。
现代文：十日，第一次在方丘祀地。
English: On the 10th, they performed for the first time at the Fangqiu Shrine.

古文：六月己卯，常遇春克开平，元帝北走。
现代文：六月十七日，常遇春攻克开平，元帝逃到北方。
English: On June 17th, with the approach of spring, Emperor Yuan fled to the north.

古文：壬午，封陈日煃为安南国王。
现代文：二十日，封陈日火奎为安南国国王。
English: On the 20th, he was crowned King of Annam.

古文：秋七月己亥，鄂国公常遇春卒于军，诏李文忠领其众。
现代文：秋七月七日，鄂国公常遇春死于军中，诏李文忠领其众。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Hokukong Changchun died in the army, and Li Wenzhong led his people.

古文：辛亥，扩廓帖木儿遣将破原州、泾州。
现代文：十九日，扩廓帖木儿遣将破原州、泾州。
English: On the 19th, the expansionist Timur dispatched troops to break into Wonju and Yeoju.

古文：辛酉，冯胜击走之。
现代文：二十九日，冯胜将其击败。
English: On the 29th, Feng Sheng defeated him.

古文：丙辰，明升遣使来。
现代文：丙辰日，明日升派使臣来。
English: On the third day of the third month, Emperor Ascendant sent an envoy.

古文：八月丙寅，元兵攻大同，李文忠击败之。
现代文：八月四日，元兵进攻大同，李文忠将其击败。
English: On August 4, the Yuan soldiers attacked Datong, and Li Wenzhong defeated them.

古文：己巳，定内侍官制。
现代文：七日，制定内侍官制度。
English: On the 7th, the system of Inner Chamberlains was established.

古文：谕吏部曰： 内臣但备使令，毋多人，古来若辈擅权，可为鉴戒。
现代文：谕吏部说： 内臣只备使令，不要太多的人。自古以来这些人擅权，应引以为鉴。
English: The overseer said, "A vassal should only have envoys, not too many people. Since ancient times, these people have usurped power, and we should learn from their example."

古文：驭之之道，当使之畏法，勿令有功，有功则骄恣矣。 
现代文：驾驭他们的办法是使他们畏法，不让他们有功，有功就骄恣。 
English: The way to control them is to make them fear the law, not to let them have merit, and if they have merit, they will be arrogant.

古文：癸酉，《元史》成。
现代文：十一日，《元史》修成。
English: On the 11th day, "Original History" was completed.

古文：丙子，封王颛为高丽国王。
现代文：十四日，封王颛为高丽国王。
English: On the 14th, King Goryeo was enthroned.

古文：癸未，徐达克庆阳，斩张良臣，陕西平。
现代文：二十一日，徐达攻克庆阳，斩张良臣，陕西平定。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xu Da conquered Qingyang, slaughtered Zhang Liangchen, and subdued Shaanxi.

古文：是月，命儒臣纂礼书。
现代文：当月，太祖命令儒臣编纂礼书。
English: In the same month, Emperor Taizu ordered Confucius to compile a book of etiquette.

古文：九月辛丑，召徐达、汤和还，冯胜留总军事。
现代文：九月十日，太祖召徐达、汤和还朝，冯胜留下总领军事。
English: On September 10, Emperor Taizu summoned Xu Da and Tang He to return to the court, leaving Feng Sheng as the commander-in-chief.

古文：癸卯，以临濠为中都。
现代文：十二日，以临濠为中都。
English: On the 12th, Linyi was designated as the central capital.

古文：戊午，征南师还。
现代文：二十七日，征南师还。
English: On the 27th, the Southern Expedition returned.

古文：冬十月壬戌，遣杨璟谕明升。
现代文：冬十月一日，太祖派杨王景晓谕明日升。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the great-grandfather sent Yang Wangjing to announce the rising of the sun.

古文：甲戌，甘露降于钟山，群臣请告庙，不许。
现代文：十三日，甘露降在钟山，群臣请求祭告太庙，太祖不许。
English: On the thirteenth day, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：辛卯，诏天下郡县立学。
现代文：三十日，诏告天下郡县设立学校。
English: On the 30th, the emperor announced the establishment of schools in every county in the country.

古文：是月，遣使贻元帝书。
现代文：这月，派使者送给元帝书信。
English: This month, an emissary was sent to deliver a letter to the former emperor.

古文：十一月乙巳，祀上帝于圜丘，以仁祖配。
现代文：十一月十四日，祀上帝于圜丘，附带祭仁祖。
English: On November 14th, the deity was worshipped at Mengqiu, with an accompanying festival for the benevolent ancestor.

古文：十二月甲戌，封阿答阿者为占城国王。
现代文：十二月十三日，封阿答阿者为占城国王。
English: On December 13th, he crowned Atta as the king of Zhancheng.

古文：甲申，振西安诸府饥，户米二石。
现代文：甲申日，赈西安各府饥荒，每户给米二石。
English: On the day of Jiaxian, famine broke out in all the prefectures of Shaanxi, and each household was given two kilos of rice.

古文：己丑，大赉平定中原及征南将士。
现代文：二十八日，大奖平定中原及征南将士。
English: On the 28th, the grand prize went to the soldiers who pacified the Central Plains and conquered the South.

古文：庚寅，扩廓帖木儿攻兰州，指挥于光死之。
现代文：庚寅日，扩廓帖木儿进攻兰州，指挥于光死难。
English: On the day of Gyeongin, the expanded Timur attacked Lanzhou, and the commander was killed in the battle.

古文：是年，占城、安南、高丽入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、安南、高丽入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Jamsil, Annam, and Goryeo paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春正月癸巳，徐达为征虏大将军，李文忠、冯胜、邓愈、汤和副之，分道北征。
现代文：洪武三年春一月三日，徐达为征虏大将军，李文忠、冯胜、邓愈、汤和为副，分道北征。
English: In the spring of the third year of Hongwu, on January 3rd, Xu Da was appointed as the conscript general, Li Wenzhong, Feng Sheng, Deng Yu, and Tang He as deputies, and the Northern Expedition was divided.

古文：二月癸未，追封郭子兴滁阳王。
现代文：二月二十四日，追封郭子兴为滁阳王。
English: On February 24th, Guo Zixing was enthroned as the King of Shenyang.

古文：戊子，诏求贤才可任六部者。
现代文：二十九日，诏求可任六部的贤才。
English: On the 29th, he issued an edict calling for the appointment of six wise men.

古文：是月，李文忠下兴和，进兵察罕脑儿，执元平章竹贞。
现代文：这月，李文忠攻下兴和，进兵察罕脑儿，抓获元平章竹贞。
English: This month, Li Wenzhong conquered Xinghe, sent in soldiers to investigate the matter, and captured Yuan Pingzhang Zhuzhen.

古文：三月庚寅，免南畿、河南、山东、北平、浙东、江西广信、饶州今年田租。
现代文：三月一日，免南畿、河南、山东、北平、浙东、江西广信、饶州今年田租。
English: On March 1, this year's field rent of Nanki, Henan, Shandong, Beiping, East Zhejiang, Jiangxi Guangxin and Raozhou was exempted.

古文：夏四月乙丑，封皇子樉为秦王，棡晋王，棣燕王，橚吴王，桢楚王，榑齐王，梓潭王，杞赵王，檀鲁王，从孙守谦靖江王。
现代文：夏五月七日，封皇子木爽为秦王，木冈晋王，棣燕王、木肃吴王、桢楚王、齐王、梓潭王、杞赵王、檀鲁王，从孙守谦靖江王。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the summer, the crown prince Mu Shuang became the king of Qin, the king of Mu Gang Jin, the king of Yan Yan, the king of Wu of Muxu, the king of Chu, the king of Qi, the king of Zidan, the king of Zhao, the king of Danlu, and the king of Qianjing from Sun Shou.

古文：徐达大破扩廓帖木儿于沈儿峪，尽降其众，扩廓走和林。
现代文：徐达在沈儿峪大破扩廓帖木儿，其众尽降，扩廓逃到和林。
English: Xu Da made a big breach in Shen Erqin's encirclement of Timur, and his troops surrendered, and the encirclement fled to Warim.

古文：丙戌，元帝崩于应昌，子爱猷识理达腊嗣。
现代文：二十八日，元帝死于应昌，子爱猷识理达腊即位。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Yuan died in Yingchang, and his son Emperor Ai Xuanli Daras ascended to the throne.

古文：是月，慈利土官覃垕作乱。
现代文：这月，慈利土官覃后土作乱。
English: This month, Tzu Li, a local official, was ousted and the local people rioted.

古文：五月己丑，徐达取兴元。
现代文：五月一日，徐达攻取兴元。
English: On May 1, Xu Da captured Xingyuan.

古文：分遣邓愈招谕吐蕃。
现代文：分派邓愈招谕吐蕃。
English: Deng Yu was assigned to issue the invitation.

古文：丁酉，诏守令举学识笃行之士。
现代文：九日，太祖下诏令守令推举学识笃行之士。
English: On the 9th, Emperor Taizu issued a decree to nominate scholars.

古文：己亥，设科取士。
现代文：十一日，设科取士。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the post of Katori-shi was established.

古文：甲辰，李文忠克应昌。
现代文：十六日，李文忠攻克应昌。
English: On the 16th, Li Wenzhong defeated Yingchang.

古文：元嗣君北走，获其子买的里八剌，降五万余人，穷追至北庆州，不及而还。
现代文：元嗣君北逃，获其子买的里八剌，降五万余人，穷追到北庆州，不及而还。
English: Yuan Shijun fled to the north, and his son bought him eight fiefs. He lost more than fifty thousand people and chased them all the way to North Gyeongju, but he could not catch up with them.

古文：丁未，诏行大射礼。
现代文：十九日，诏行大射礼仪。
English: On the 19th, the grand firing ceremony was held.

古文：戊申，祀地于方丘，以仁祖配。
现代文：二十日，在方丘祀地，附带祭仁祖。
English: On the 20th, at the Fangqiu worship site, there will be an accompanying festival for the benevolent ancestor.

古文：辛亥，徐达下兴元。
现代文：二十三日，徐达攻下兴元。
English: On the 23rd, Xu Da attacked Xingyuan.

古文：邓愈克河州。
现代文：邓愈攻克河州。
English: Deng Yu conquered Hezhou.

古文：丁巳，诏开国时将帅无嗣者禄其家。
现代文：二十九日，诏开国将帅无嗣的给薪俸于家人。
English: On the 29th, the founder of the nation, Emperor Zhao, gave his salary to his family.

古文：是月旱，斋戒，后妃亲执爨，皇太子诸王馈于斋所。
现代文：当月旱，斋戒，后妃亲手做饭，皇太子诸王在斋所吃饭。
English: In that month, there was drought, fasting, the empress cooked with her own hands, and the crown princes and kings ate in the dining hall.

古文：六月戊午朔，素服草屦，步祷山川坛，露宿凡三日，还斋于西庑。
现代文：六月一日，太祖素服草屦，步行祷告山川坛，露宿三天，在西庑还斋。
English: On the first day of June, the great-great-grandfather dressed himself in straw sandals, walked to the mountain and river altars to pray, camped out for three days, and broke his fast in Xidi.

古文：辛酉，赉将士，省狱囚，命有司访求通经术明治道者。
现代文：四日，奖赏将士，审判狱中囚犯，命令官府征求通经术明治道之人。
English: On the 4th, he rewarded soldiers, judged prisoners in prison, and ordered the government to solicit people who had passed the Meiji Jutsu.

古文：壬戌，大雨。
现代文：五日，大雨。
English: On the fifth day, it rained heavily.

古文：壬申，李文忠捷奏至，命仕元者勿贺。
现代文：十五日，李文忠捷报到，命令仕元的人不要朝贺。
English: On the fifteenth day, Li Wenzhong reported for duty and ordered the staff not to make morning greetings.

古文：谥元主曰顺帝。
现代文：谥元主号顺帝。
English: The former emperor's patronymic is Shunde.

古文：癸酉，买的里八剌至京师，群臣请献俘。
现代文：十六日，买的里八剌到京师，群臣请求杀俘虏祭献。
English: On the sixteenth day, the bought eight-year-old calf arrived at the capital, and the courtiers asked for the sacrifice of the captive.

古文：帝曰： 武王伐殷用之乎？ 
现代文：太祖说 ：武王伐殷用过吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Did King Wu Haiyan ever use it?"

古文：省臣以唐太宗尝行之对。
现代文：省臣以唐太宗曾这样做过回答。
English: The provincial minister replied that Emperor Taizong of Tang had done so.

古文：帝曰： 太宗是待王世充耳。
现代文：太祖说 ：太宗是对待王世充。
English: The great-great-grandfather said: Taizong treated Wang Shichong.

古文：若遇隋之子孙，恐不尔也。 
现代文：若遇到隋之子孙，恐怕也不这样。 
English: If you meet the children and grandchildren of the Sui Dynasty, I'm afraid it won't be the same.

古文：遂不许。
现代文：于是不许。
English: So they disagreed.

古文：又以捷奏多侈辞，谓宰相曰： 元主中国百年，朕与卿等父母皆赖其生养，奈何为此浮薄之言？
现代文：又以捷报多夸张之辞，对宰相说： 元朝统治中国百年，我和你们父母都赖其生养，为何如此菲薄，请改掉。 
English: With exaggerated words, he said to the prime minister: "The Yuan Dynasty ruled China for a hundred years. I and your parents depend on it for our livelihood. Why are you so thin-skinned? Please change."

古文：亟改之。 乙亥，封买的里八剌为崇礼侯。
现代文：十八日，封买的里八剌为崇礼侯。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the fenced-off village of Yatai was renamed Chonglihou.

古文：丙子，告捷于南郊。
现代文：十九日，太祖在南郊告捷。
English: On the 19th, Taizu won in the southern suburbs.

古文：丁丑，告太庙，诏示天下。
现代文：二十日，告太庙，诏示天下。
English: On the 20th, it was announced to the world.

古文：辛巳，徙苏州、松江、嘉兴、湖州、杭州民无业者田临濠，给资粮牛种，复三年。
现代文：二十四日，迁苏州、松江、嘉兴、湖州、杭州百姓无业者到临濠耕作，给资金粮食耕牛种子，免三年租税。
English: On the 24th, the unemployed people from Suzhou, Songjiang, Jiaxing, Huzhou and Hangzhou moved to Linyi to farm, giving funds for grain and cattle seeds, and exempted from tax for three years.

古文：是月，倭寇山东、浙江、福建滨海州县。
现代文：这月，倭寇犯山东、浙江、福建滨海州县。
English: This month, wokou committed crimes in Shandong, Zhejiang and Fujian Binhai Prefecture.

古文：秋七月丙辰，明升将吴友仁寇汉中，参政傅友德击却之。
现代文：秋七月三十日，明升部将吴友仁侵犯汉中，参政傅友德将其击败。
English: On the 30th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wu Youren was invaded by Ming Sheng's troops and defeated by Fu Youde.

古文：中书左丞杨宪有罪诛。
现代文：中书左丞杨宪获罪被杀。
English: Yang Xian, Chushuzhizojo, was convicted and killed.

古文：八月乙酉，遣使瘗中原遗骸。
现代文：八月二十九日，派人埋葬中原遗骸。
English: On August 29, someone was sent to bury Nakahara's remains.

古文：冬十月丙辰，诏儒士更直午门，为武臣讲经史。
现代文：冬十月一日，太祖诏儒士到午门，为武臣讲授经史。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the great ancestor Zhao Ruishi came to the noon gate to give a lecture on the history of the sutra to the samurai.

古文：癸亥，周德兴为征南将军，讨覃垕，垕遁。
现代文：八日，周德兴任征南将军，讨伐覃篨，篨逃走。
English: On the 8th, Zhou Dexing was appointed as a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force. He went on a crusade and fled.

古文：辛巳，贻元嗣君书。
现代文：十一月七日，送书信给元嗣君。
English: On November 7th, I sent a letter to Mr. Mototsugu.

古文：十一月壬辰，北征师还。
现代文：十一月七日，北征师还。
English: On November 7, the Northern Expedition returned.

古文：甲午，告武成于郊庙。
现代文：十九日，太祖告武成于郊庙。
English: On the 19th, the great-great-grandfather reported to Wu Cheng at the suburb temple.

古文：丙申，大封功臣。
现代文：十一日，大封功臣。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Daifu, a meritorious vassal, died.

古文：进李善长韩国公，徐达魏国公，封李文忠曹国公，冯胜宋国公，邓愈卫国公，常遇春子茂郑国公，汤和等侯者二十八人。
现代文：进升李善长为韩国公，徐达魏国公，封李文忠曹国公，冯胜宋国公，邓愈卫国公，常遇春子茂郑国公，汤和等侯者二十八人。
English: There are 28 people, including Jin Sheng Li Shanzhong as the Korean prince, Xu Da Wei as the Wei prince, Feng Li Wenzhong as the Cao prince, Feng Sheng Song as the Song prince, Deng Yuwei as the Wei prince, often met Haruzi Maozheng as the Zheng prince, and Tang He as the Tang prince.

古文：己亥，设坛亲祭战没将士。
现代文：十四日，太祖设坛亲自祭祀战死将士。
English: On the 14th, Taizu himself set up a shrine to honor the war dead.

古文：庚戌，有事于圜丘。
现代文：二十五日，在圜丘祭天。
English: On the 25th, there will be a festival in Shizuoka.

古文：辛亥，诏户部置户籍、户帖，岁计登耗以闻，著为令。
现代文：二十六日，诏户部置户籍、户帖，每年登记上报，著为令。
English: On the 26th, the Ministry of Households issued an order to set up a household registration and household list, and to register and report every year.

古文：乙卯，封中书右丞汪广洋忠勤伯，御史中丞刘基诚意伯。
现代文：三十日，封中书右丞汪广洋忠勤伯，御史中丞刘基诚意伯。
English: On the 30th, Wang Guangyang Zhongqin (王广洋忠勤伯) and Liu Ji Chengyi (劉基誠意伯) were conferred the titles of the middle-ranked and middle-ranked officials.

古文：十二月癸亥，复贻元嗣君书，并谕和林诸部。
现代文：十二月八日，再次送书信给元嗣君，并晓谕和林各郡。
English: On December 8th, he sent another letter to Yuan Zhi and told the counties of He Lin.

古文：甲子，建奉先殿。
现代文：九日，建立奉先殿。
English: On the 9th, the Bokusen-den was established.

古文：庚午，遣使祭历代帝王陵寝，并加修葺。
现代文：十五日，派使臣祭历代帝王寝陵，并加以修复。
English: On the 15th, he sent envoys to visit the tombs of emperors throughout the ages and repair them.

古文：己卯，赐勋臣田。
现代文：二十四，赐勋臣田。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the month, he bestowed the title of Shoden.

古文：壬午，以正月至是月，日中屡有黑子，诏廷臣言得失。
现代文：二十七日，因正月到本月，太阳多次有黑子，诏朝廷臣子言得失。
English: On the 27th, due to the fact that from the first month of the year to this month, the sun had spots many times, the imperial court's vassal said something.

古文：是年，占城、爪哇、西洋入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、爪哇、西洋入朝进贡。
English: In that year, tribute was paid to the Western Han Dynasty from Jamsil, Java, and the West Indies.

古文：四年春正月丙戌，李善长罢，汪广洋为右丞相。
现代文：洪武四年春一月二日。罢李善长，任命汪广洋为右丞相。
English: On January 2nd, in the spring of the 4th year of Hongwu, Li Shanchang was dismissed and Wang Guangyang was appointed as the Minister of the Right.

古文：丁亥，中山侯汤和为征西将军，江夏侯周德兴、德庆侯廖永忠副之，率舟师由瞿塘，颍川侯傅友德为征虏前将军，济宁侯顾时副之，率步骑由秦陇伐蜀。
现代文：三日，中山侯汤和为征西将军，江夏侯周德兴、德庆侯廖永忠为副，率水军由瞿塘；颍川侯傅友德为征虏前将军，济宁侯顾时为副，率步兵骑兵由秦、陇，水陆并进伐蜀。
English: On the third day, Zhongshan Hou Tanghe was the general of the Western Conquest, Jiangxia Hou Zhou Dexing and Deqing Hou Liao Yongzhong were the deputies, and led the navy from Shantang; Shichuan Hou Fu Youde was the former general of the Conquest, Jining Hou Gu Shi was the deputy, and led the infantry and cavalry from Qin and Jiu, and marched into Shu by land and sea.

古文：魏国公徐达练兵北平。
现代文：魏国公徐达在北平练兵。
English: Wei Guogong Xu Da is training soldiers in Peiping.

古文：戊子，卫国公邓愈督饷给征蜀军。
现代文：四日，卫国公邓愈督粮饷给征蜀军队。
English: On the 4th, the Prince of the Great Patriotic War, Deng Yudu, gave grain to the army to conquer Shu.

古文：庚寅，建郊庙于中都。
现代文：六日，建郊庙于中都。
English: On the 6th, a suburb temple was built in Zhongdu.

古文：丁未，诏设科取士，连举三年，嗣后三年一举。
现代文：二十三日，下诏设科取士连举三年，以后三年一举。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: "Ketori Scholars will be promoted for three years in a row, and for the next three years, one promotion at a time."

古文：戊申，免山西旱灾田租。
现代文：二十四日，免山西旱灾田租。
English: On the 24th, the rent of the fields affected by the drought in Shanxi was exempted.

古文：二月甲戌，幸中都。
现代文：二月二十日，太祖行幸中都。
English: On February 20th, the great ancestor traveled to Zhongdu.

古文：壬午，至自中都。
现代文：二十八日从中都回宫。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the palace from the capital.

古文：元平章刘益以辽东降。
现代文：元朝平章刘益率辽东投降。
English: Liaodong surrendered under the leadership of the former Emperor Pingzhang Liu Yi.

古文：是月，蠲太平、镇江、宁国田租。
现代文：这月，免太平、镇江、宁国田租。
English: This month, Taiping, Zhenjiang and Ningguotian are free of rent.

古文：三月乙酉朔，始策试天下贡士，赐吴伯宗等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月一日，第一次策试天下贡士，赐吴伯宗等进士及第、出身有别。
English: On March 1st, for the first time, Wu Bozong and others were awarded the title of "National Hero of the People's Republic of China."

古文：乙巳，徙山后民万七千户屯北平。
现代文：二十一日，迁徙山后民一万七千户屯北平。
English: On the twenty-first day, seventeen thousand households of Shanhou people moved to Beiping.

古文：丁未，诚意伯刘基致仕。
现代文：二十三日，诚意伯刘基辞官。
English: On the 23rd, sincerity Bo Liuji resigned.

古文：夏四月丙戌，傅友德克阶州，文、隆、绵三州相继下。
现代文：夏四月四日，傅友德攻克阶州，文、隆、绵三州相继收复。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Fu Youde conquered Chaozhou, and Wen, Long and Mian recovered the three states one after another.

古文：五月，免江西、浙江秋粮。
现代文：五月，免江西、浙江秋粮。
English: In May, Jiangxi and Zhejiang Autumn Grains were exempted.

古文：六月壬午，傅友德克汉州。
现代文：六月一日，傅友德攻克汉州。
English: On June 1, Fu Youde invaded Hanzhou.

古文：辛卯，廖永忠克夔州。
现代文：十日，廖永忠克夔州。
English: On the 10th, Liao Yongzhong visited Zhangzhou.

古文：戊戌，明升将丁世贞破文州，守将朱显忠死之。
现代文：十七日，明升将丁世贞攻破文州，守将朱显忠死。
English: On the 17th, Ming Sheng defeated Ding Shizhen and broke through Wenzhou, and Zhu Xianzhong died.

古文：癸卯，汤和至重庆，明升降。
现代文：二十二日，汤和到重庆，明升投降。
English: On the 22nd, Tang He arrived in Chongqing, and Ming Sheng surrendered.

古文：戊申，倭寇胶州。
现代文：八日，倭寇犯胶州。
English: On the eighth day, the wokou attacked Jiaozhou.

古文：是月，徙山后民三万五千户于内地，又徙沙漠遗民三万二千户屯田北平。
现代文：当月，迁徙山后民三万五千户到内地，又迁沙漠遗民三万二千户屯田北平。
English: In the same month, 35,000 households of Shanhou people migrated to the mainland, and another 32,000 households of desert survivors moved to Tonden and Beiping.

古文：秋七月辛亥，徐达练兵山西。
现代文：秋八月一日，徐达练兵山西。
English: On the first day of August in autumn, Xu Da was training soldiers in Shanxi.

古文：辛酉，傅友德下成都，四川平。
现代文：十二日，傅友德攻下成都，四川平定。
English: On the 12th, Fu Youde conquered Chengdu, and Sichuan was pacified.

古文：乙丑，明升至京师，封归义侯。
现代文：十五日，明升到京城，封为归义侯。
English: On the 15th, Ming Sheng arrived in Beijing and was given the title of Guiyi Hou.

古文：八月甲午，免中都、淮、扬及泰、滁、无为田租。
现代文：八月十四日，免去中都、淮、扬及泰、滁、无为田租。
English: On August 14th, Zhongdu, Huai, Yang and Tai, Zou and Mubei were exempted from paying farm rent.

古文：十一月丙辰，有事于圜丘。
现代文：十一月七日，在圜丘祭天。
English: On the 7th of November, there will be a festival in Shizuoka.

古文：庚申，命官吏犯赃者罪勿贷。
现代文：十一日，诏令官吏犯贪赃者其罪不宽恕。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he issued an edict that officials who commit corruption will not be pardoned.

古文：是月，免陕西、河南被灾田租。
现代文：本月，免陕西、河南受灾田租。
English: This month, the affected fields in Shaanxi and Henan were exempted from rent.

古文：十二月，徐达还。
现代文：徐达还朝。
English: Xu Da is still in the morning.

古文：是年，安南、浡泥、高丽、三佛齐、暹罗、日本、真腊入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、氵孛泥、高丽、三佛齐、暹罗、日本、真腊入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Annan, Putuo, Goryeo, the Three Buddhas, Siam, Japan and Manchukuo paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：五年春正月癸丑，待制王祎使云南，诏谕元梁王把匝剌瓦尔密。
现代文：洪武五年春正月五日，待制王出使云南，诏谕元梁王把匝剌瓦尔密。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Hongwu, the king-in-waiting sent an envoy to Yunnan, and ordered Yuan Liang Wang to set up the Yiwu Walmi.

古文：祎至，不屈死。
现代文：到，不屈而死。
English: To die, unyielding.

古文：乙丑，徙陈理、明升于高丽。
现代文：十七日迁陈理、明升到高丽。
English: On the 17th, Chen Li was transferred, and Ming Sheng was transferred to Goryeo.

古文：甲戌，魏国公徐达为征虏大将军，出雁门，趋和林，曹国公李文忠为左副将军，出应昌，宋国公冯胜为征西将军，取甘肃，征扩廓帖木儿。
现代文：二十六日，魏国公徐达为征虏大将军，出雁门，趋和林，曹国公李文忠为左副将军，出应昌，宋国公冯胜为征西将军，直取甘肃，征讨扩廓帖木儿。
English: On the 26th, Wei Guogong Xu Da was the conscript general, and went to Ganmen and Chenghe Lin, Cao Guogong Li Wenzhong was the left deputy general, and went to Yechang, Song Guogong Feng Sheng was the western conscript general, and directly took Gansu, and conscripted and expanded Timur.

古文：靖海侯吴祯督海运，饷辽东。
现代文：靖海侯吴祯督海运，运粮辽东。
English: Jinghai marquis Wu Bingduo shipping, grain transportation Liaodong.

古文：卫国公邓愈为征南将军，江夏侯周德兴、江阴侯吴良副之，分道讨湖南、广西洞蛮。
现代文：卫国公邓愈为征南将军，江夏侯周德兴、江阴侯吴良为副，分道讨伐湖南、广西洞蛮。
English: Deng Yu, the Prince of the Defenders of the Fatherland, was the general of the Southern Expedition, and Jiangxia Hou Zhou Dexing and Jiangyin Hou Wu Liang were his deputies. They went their separate ways to fight against Hunan and Guangxi Dongman.

古文：二月丙戌，安南陈叔明弑其主日熞自立，遣使入贡，却之。
现代文：二月八日，安南陈叔明杀其主日火坚自立，遣使入朝进贡，明廷拒绝。
English: On February 8, Annan sent Chen Shuming to pay tribute to the North, but the Mingting refused.

古文：三月丁卯，都督佥事蓝玉败扩廓于土剌河。
现代文：三月二十日，都督佥事蓝玉在土剌河击败扩廓。
English: On March 20th, Blue Jade defeated Zhanhaku at the Tudou River.

古文：夏四月己卯，振济南、莱州饥。
现代文：夏四月二日，赈救济南、莱州饥荒。
English: On April 2nd, the summer, the relief of the famine in southern and Laizhou began.

古文：戊戌，始行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：二十一日，第一次行乡饮酒礼。
English: On the twenty-first day, the first drinking ceremony was held.

古文：庚子，邓愈平散毛诸洞蛮。
现代文：二十三日，邓愈平定散毛诸洞蛮。
English: On the 23rd, Deng Yu's troops laid waste to all the dungeons.

古文：五月壬子，徐达及元兵战于岭北，败绩。
现代文：五月六日，徐达和元兵在岭北开战，击败取胜。
English: On May 6th, Xu Da and Yuan Hei went to war in Lingbei, defeated and won.

古文：是月，诏曰： 天下大定，礼仪风俗不可不正。
现代文：当月，诏说： 天下大定，礼仪风俗不可不正。
English: In that month, the emperor said: The world is becoming more and more stable, and etiquette and customs must not be improper.

古文：诸遭乱为人奴隶者复为民。
现代文：那些遭乱沦为奴隶者恢复为民。
English: Those who had been enslaved were reinstated as citizens.

古文：冻馁者里中富室假贷之，孤寡残疾者官养之，毋失所。
现代文：冻饥者里中富裕人家应借贷他们，孤寡残疾者官府供养，不要流离失所。
English: Those who are cold and hungry should be lent money by middle-class and wealthy families, and those who are widowed or disabled should be supported by the government, and should not be displaced.

古文：乡党论齿，相见揖拜，毋违礼。
现代文：乡里论年龄，相见揖拜，不要违礼。
English: When it comes to age in the countryside, it's best to meet and make up, and don't break the rules.

古文：婚姻毋论财。
现代文：婚姻不要看财多少。
English: Marriage is not about how much money you have.

古文：丧事称家有无，毋惑阴阳拘忌，停柩暴露。
现代文：丧事看家里有无，不要迷信阴阳禁忌，停柩暴露。
English: See if there is a funeral at home, don't be superstitious about yin and yang taboos, and expose stagnation.

古文：流民复业者各就丁力耕种，毋以旧田为限。
现代文：流民复业后各按人力耕种，不要以旧田为限。
English: After returning to work, each migrant should cultivate according to their ability, and should not limit themselves to the old fields.

古文：僧道斋醮杂男女，恣饮食，有司严治之。闽、粤豪家毋阉人子为火者，犯者抵罪。 
现代文：僧道斋醮各种男女，放纵饮食，有关部门要严加管治，闽、粤豪富人家不要阉人之子，违者抵罪。 
English: Monks and nuns of all kinds, both men and women, indulge in eating and drinking. Relevant departments should strictly control and govern, and rich families in Guangdong should not indulge in eating and drinking. Violators will be punished.

古文：六月丙子，定宦官禁令。
现代文：六月一日，制定宦官禁令。
English: On June 1, the ban on eunuchs was enacted.

古文：丁丑，定宫官女职之制。
现代文：二日，定宫官女职制度。
English: On the second day, the job system for female officials in the palace was abolished.

古文：戊寅，冯胜克甘肃，追败元兵于瓜、沙州。
现代文：三日，冯胜攻克甘肃，追败元兵于瓜、沙州。
English: On the third day, Feng Sheng invaded Kansu and defeated Yuan soldiers in Gua and Shazhou.

古文：癸巳，定六部职掌及岁终考绩法。
现代文：十八日，制定六部职掌及岁终考绩法。
English: On the 18th, the six-part job duties and year-end performance appraisal law were formulated.

古文：壬寅，吴良平靖州蛮。
现代文：二十七日，吴良平靖州蛮。
English: On the 27th, Wu Liangping left Jingzhou.

古文：甲辰，李文忠败元兵于阿鲁浑河，宣宁侯曹良臣战没。
现代文：二十九日，李文忠在阿鲁浑河击败元兵，宣宁侯曹良臣战死。
English: On the 29th, Li Wenzhong defeated the Yuan soldiers in the Arugun River, and Xuanning Hou Cao Liangchen died in the battle.

古文：乙巳，作铁榜诫功臣。
现代文：三十日，作铁榜诫功臣。
English: On the 30th, he was awarded the Order of the Iron Banner.

古文：是月，振山东饥，免被灾郡县田租。
现代文：这个月，赈山东饥荒，免受灾郡县田租。
English: This month, Shaoshan East famine, from the disaster county land rent.

古文：秋七月丙辰，汤和及元兵战于断头山，败绩。
现代文：秋七月十一日，汤和和元兵在断头山开战，元兵败。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Tang and Yuan soldiers went to war at the Broken Head Mountain, and the Yuan soldiers were defeated.

古文：八月丙申，吴良平五开、古州诸蛮。
现代文：八月二十二日，吴良平定五开、古州诸蛮。
English: On August 22nd, Wu Liang defeated Ding Wukai and Guzhou Zhuanmen.

古文：甲辰，元兵犯云内，同知黄理死之。
现代文：三十日元兵进犯云内，同知黄里死。
English: Thirty-yen soldiers invaded Yunnai, and died in the same way as Huangli.

古文：九月戊午，周德兴平婪凤、安田诸蛮。
现代文：九月十四日，周德兴平定婪凤、安田诸蛮。
English: On September 14th, Zhou Dexing subdued Qi Feng and Yasuda Zhuan.

古文：冬十月丁酉，冯胜师还。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，冯胜师还。
English: In the winter of October 24th, Feng Sheng returned.

古文：是月，免应天、太平、镇江、宁国、广德田租。
现代文：这月，免应天、太平、镇江、宁国、广德田租。
English: This month, Tian, Taiping, Zhenjiang, Ningguo, and Guangde field rents are exempted.

古文：十一月辛酉，有事于圜丘。
现代文：十一月十八日，在圜丘有事。
English: On November 18th, there was an incident in Shaoshan.

古文：甲子，征南师还。
现代文：二十一日，征南师还。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Southern Expedition returned.

古文：壬申，纳哈出犯辽东。
现代文：二十九日，纳哈出侵犯辽东。
English: On the 29th, Naha invaded Liaodong.

古文：是月，召徐达、李文忠还。
现代文：这月，召徐达、李文忠还。
English: This month, Xu Da and Li Wenzhong were summoned.

古文：十二月甲戌，诏以农桑学校课有司。
现代文：十二月一日，诏告有关部门去农桑学校学习。
English: On December 1, he told the relevant departments to go to the agricultural mulberry school to study.

古文：辛巳，命百官奏事启皇太子。
现代文：八日，命令百官奏事向皇太子陈述。
English: On the 8th, he ordered 100 officials to report to the crown prince.

古文：庚子，邓愈为征西将军，征吐番。
现代文：二十七日，邓愈为征西将军，出征吐蕃。
English: On the 27th, Deng Yu became the general of the Western Expedition and went to Tujing.

古文：壬寅，贻元嗣君书。
现代文：二十九日，送书信给元嗣君。
English: On the 29th, I sent a letter to Mototsugu.

古文：是年，琐里、占城、高丽、琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，琐里、占城、高丽、琉球、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Zori, Zhancheng, Goryeo, Ryukyu, and Wushu paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：高丽贡使再至，谕自后三年一贡。
现代文：高丽贡使又到，晓谕以后三年一贡。
English: The envoy from Goryeo arrived again, and three years later, a tribute was paid.

古文：六年春正月甲寅，谪汪广洋为广东参政。
现代文：洪武六年春正月十二日，贬汪广洋为广东参政。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, Wang Guangyang was relegated to participate in Guangdong politics.

古文：二月乙未，谕暂罢科举，察举贤才。
现代文：二月二十三日，太祖命令暂停科举，观察推举贤才。
English: On February 23rd, Emperor Taizu ordered the suspension of the imperial examinations and the observation of the selection of scholars.

古文：壬寅，命御史及按察使考察有司。
现代文：三十日，命令御史和按察使考察有关部门。
English: On the 30th, he ordered the inspectors to inspect the relevant departments.

古文：三月癸卯朔，日有食之。颁《昭鉴录》，训诫诸王。
现代文：二月初一，日食。颁布《昭鉴录》，训诫诸王。六日，检阅。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse. Promulgation of the "Book of Remembrance," admonition to kings. On the sixth day, review.

古文：戊申，太阅。壬子，徐达为征虏大将军，李文忠、冯胜、邓愈、汤和副之，备边山西、北平。甲子，指挥使于显为总兵官，备倭。
现代文：三月一日，徐达为征虏大将军，李文忠、冯胜、邓愈、汤和为副，防备山西、北平。十三日，任命指挥使於显为总兵官，防备倭寇。
English: On March 1st, Xu Dadu was appointed as the Conscript General, with Li Wenzhong, Feng Sheng, Deng Yu and Tang He as deputies, to guard Shanxi and Peiping. On the 13th, the commanding officer, Yu Xian, was appointed as the chief military officer to guard against the Japanese invaders.

古文：夏四月己丑，令有司上山川险易图。
现代文：夏四月十八日，命令有关部门上山川险易图表。
English: In the summer of April 18th, the relevant departments were ordered to make a chart of mountain and river hazards.

古文：六月壬午，盱眙献瑞麦，荐宗庙。
现代文：六月十二日，盱眙献瑞麦，进献宗庙。
English: On June 12th, the urn was dedicated to Shimei, and was brought to the family temple.

古文：壬辰，扩廓帖木儿遣兵攻雁门，指挥吴均击却之。
现代文：二十二日，扩廓帖木儿遣兵进攻雁门，指挥吴均击退他们。
English: On the 22nd, Zengku Timur sent troops to attack the Wild Goose Gate, and Wu Jun led the troops to repel them.

古文：是月，免北平、河间、河南、开封、延安、汾州被灾田租。
现代文：当月，免除北平、河间、河南、开封、延安、汾州受灾田租。
English: In the same month, the rent of the affected fields in Beiping, Hema, Henan, Kaifeng, Yan'an and Luzhou was exempted.

古文：秋七月壬寅，命户部稽渡江以来各省水旱灾伤分数，优恤之。
现代文：秋七月三日，命令户部清查渡江以来各省水旱灾份数目，优加抚恤。
English: On July 3rd, the autumn, ordered the Household Department to check the number of floods and droughts in each province since crossing the river, and to increase the pension.

古文：壬子，胡惟庸为右丞相，八月乙亥，诏祀三皇及历代帝王。
现代文：十三日，胡惟庸为右丞相。八月六日，诏祀三皇及历代帝王。
English: On the 13th, Hu Wei Yong became the minister of justice, and on the 6th of August, the imperial rescript was issued to the three emperors and the emperors of all ages.

古文：冬十月辛巳，召徐达、冯胜还。
现代文：冬十月十三日，召徐达、冯胜回朝。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, Xu Da and Feng Sheng were summoned back to the North.

古文：十一月壬子，扩廓帖木儿犯大同，徐达遣将击败之，达仍留镇。
现代文：十一月十五日，扩廓帖木儿进犯大同，徐达遣将将其击败，并留下镇守。
English: On November 15th, the expanded Timur attacked Datong, and Xu Dahuan defeated him, leaving the town to defend itself.

古文：甲子，遣兵部尚书刘仁赈真定饥。
现代文：二十七日，派遣兵部尚书刘仁赈救真定饥荒。
English: On the 27th, the military department dispatched Shangshu Liu Renzhong to rescue Zhengjing famine.

古文：丙寅，冬至，帝不豫，改卜郊。
现代文：二十九日，冬至，帝身体不适，改卜郊。
English: On the 29th day, the winter solstice, the emperor became unwell and changed his mind.

古文：闰月乙亥，录故功臣子孙未嗣者二百九人。
现代文：闰月八日，录用故功臣子孙未嗣者二百零九人。
English: On the 8th day of the leap month, 209 descendants and heirs of the late heroes were hired.

古文：壬午，有事于圜丘。
现代文：十五日，行祭于圜丘。
English: On the fifteenth day, the procession of the festival was held in Shizuoka.

古文：庚寅，颁定《大明律》。
现代文：庚寅日，颁定大明律。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, the Great Ming Code was promulgated.

古文：是年，暹罗、高丽、占城、真腊、三佛齐入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗、高丽、占城、真腊、三佛齐入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Siam, Goryeo, Champa, Manchuria, and the Three Buddhas all paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：命安南陈叔明权知国事。
现代文：命安南陈叔明暂且主持国事。
English: Annan asked Chen Shuming to preside over state affairs for the time being.

古文：七年春正月甲戌，都督佥事王简、王诚、平章李伯升屯田河南、山东、北平。
现代文：洪武七年春正月八日，都督佥事王简、王诚，平章李伯升，在河南、山东、北平屯田。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring of Hongwu, the governors Wang Jian, Wang Cheng, and Ping Zhang Li Bo Sheng arrived in Henan, Shandong, and Beiping.

古文：靖海侯吴祯为总兵官，都督于显副之，巡海捕倭。
现代文：靖海侯吴祯任总兵官，都督于显任副职，巡行海上捕捉倭寇。
English: Jinghai marquis Wu Xi served as the commander-in-chief, and the governor Yu Xian served as the deputy, patrolling the sea to catch the wokou.

古文：二月丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月一日，日食。
English: On the first day of February, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：戊午，修曲阜孔子庙，设孔、颜、孟三氏学。
现代文：二十二日，修缮曲阜孔子庙，设孔、颜、孟三氏学说。
English: On the 22nd, the Qufu Confucius Temple was repaired, and the teachings of Kong, Yan and Meng San were set up.

古文：是月，平阳、太原、汾州、历城、汲县旱蝗，并免租税。
现代文：这月平阳、太原、汾州、历城、汲县遭受旱蝗灾害，一起免除租税。
English: This month, Pingyang, Taiyuan, Zhangzhou, Licheng, and Qiu counties suffered from locust disasters, and were exempted from tax.

古文：夏四月己亥，都督蓝玉败元兵于白酒泉，遂拔兴和。
现代文：夏四月四日，都督蓝玉在白酒泉击败元兵，攻克兴和。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of summer, the governor Lan Yu defeated the Yuan soldiers in Baijiuquan and conquered Xinghe.

古文：壬寅，金吾指挥陆龄讨永、道诸州蛮，平之。
现代文：七日，金吾指挥陆龄讨平永、道各州蛮。
English: On the seventh day, Kingo commanded the land to fight against Pingyong and the provinces.

古文：五月丙子，免真定等四十二祎府州县被灾田租。
现代文：五月十一日，免除真定等四十二府州县受灾田租。
English: On May 11, 42 prefectures and counties affected by the disaster were exempted from paying land rent.

古文：辛巳，振苏州饥民三十万户。
现代文：四月二十七日，赈济苏州饥民三十万户。
English: On April 27th, 300 thousand households of starving people in Suzhou were fed.

古文：癸巳，减苏、松、嘉、湖极重田租之半。
现代文：二十八日，减苏、松、嘉、湖极重田租的一半。
English: On the 28th, half of the heavy field rent of Su, Song, Jia and Huji was reduced.

古文：六月，陕西平凉、延安、靖宁、鄜州雨雹，山西、山东、北平、河南蝗，并蠲田租。
现代文：六月，陕西平凉、延安、靖宁、州遭受大雨冰雹，山西、山东、北平、河南遭受蝗灾，一起免除田租。
English: In June, Pingliang, Yan'an, Jingning and Zhouzhou in Shaanxi Province were hit by heavy rain and hail, and Shanxi, Shandong, Beiping and Henan were hit by locusts. All of them were exempted from land rent.

古文：秋七月甲子，李文忠破元兵于大宁、高州。
现代文：秋七月一日，李文忠在大宁、高州击破元兵。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Li Wenzhong defeated the Yuan soldiers in Taining and Gaozhou.

古文：壬申，倭寇登、莱。
现代文：九日，倭寇侵掠登、莱。
English: On the 9th, the Japanese invaded and plundered Deng and Lai.

古文：八月甲午朔，祀历代帝王庙。
现代文：八月一日，祀历代帝王庙。
English: On August 1st, the temple that has been dedicated to emperors throughout the ages will close.

古文：辛丑，诏军士阵殁父母妻子不能自存者，官为存养。
现代文：九月八日，诏军士阵亡、其父母妻子不能自己养活的，由官府养。
English: On September 8, Sergeant Zhao was killed in action, and his parents and wife, unable to support themselves, were raised by the government.

古文：百姓避兵离散或客死，遗老幼，并资遣还。
现代文：百姓逃避兵患而离散或者客死他乡而留下老幼的，一起出钱送还。
English: If the people are dispersed to escape the suffering of the soldiers, or if they die away from home, leaving behind the old and the young, they should pay money together to send them back.

古文：远宦卒官，妻子不能归者，有司给舟车资送。
现代文：远方做官死后，其妻子不能回归的，官府给予车船费用送回。
English: After the death of a distant official, if his wife cannot return, the government will pay the cost of the car and ship to send her back.

古文：庚申，振河间、广平、顺德、真定饥，蠲租税。
现代文：二十七日，赈济河间、广平、顺德、真定饥荒，免除租税。
English: On the 27th, Guizhimen, Guangping, Shunde, and Zhending were exempted from taxes due to famine.

古文：九月丁丑，遣崇礼侯买的里八剌归，遗元嗣君书。
现代文：九月十五日，派崇礼侯买的里八剌回，送元嗣君书信。
English: On September 15th, he sent a letter to Yuan Hejun from the eight provinces and autonomous regions.

古文：冬十一月壬戌，纳哈出犯辽阳，千户吴寿击走之。
现代文：冬十一月一日，纳哈出进犯辽阳，千户吴寿将其击走。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Naha invaded Liaoyang, and Chifu Wu Shou drove them away.

古文：辛未，有事于圜丘。
现代文：十日，在圜丘祭天。
English: On the 10th, a festival will be held in Shizuoka.

古文：十二月戊戌，召邓愈、汤和还。
现代文：十二月七日，召邓愈、汤和回京。
English: On December 7, Deng Yu and Tang He were summoned back to Beijing.

古文：是年，阿难功德国、暹罗、琉球、三佛齐、乌斯藏、撒里、畏兀儿入贡。
现代文：这年，阿难功德国、暹罗、琉球、三佛齐、乌斯藏、撒里、畏兀儿入朝进贡。
English: That year, Anangu from Germany, Siam, Ryukyu, the Three Buddhas, Ussuri, Sarri and Dangdang paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：八年春正月辛未，增祀鸡笼山功臣庙一百八人。
现代文：洪武八年春正月十一日，增祀鸡笼山功臣庙一百零八人。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the eighth year of Hongwu's reign, 108 people were added to the number of worshippers at Jiguanshan Gongsun Temple.

古文：癸酉，命有司察穷民无告者，给屋舍衣食。
现代文：十三日，命令官府检察贫民无依靠的，供给房屋和衣食。
English: On the 13th, the procuratorate ordered the government to provide housing, food and clothing to the destitute.

古文：辛巳，邓愈、汤和等十三人屯戍北平、陕西、河南。
现代文：二十日，邓愈、汤和等十三人在河南、陕西、北平守备屯田。
English: On the 20th, Deng Yu, Tang He and 13 others went to Henan, Shaanxi, and Beiping to defend the garrisons.

古文：丁亥，诏天下立社学。
现代文：二十七日，诏令天下设立社学。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor issued an edict to establish the world's first social science.

古文：是月，河决开封，发民夫塞之。
现代文：这个月，黄河在开封决口，朝廷动员百姓堵塞。
English: This month, the Yellow River was about to burst its banks, and the imperial court mobilized the people to block it.

古文：二月甲午，宥杂犯死罪以下及官犯私罪者，谪凤阳输作屯种赎罪。
现代文：二月四日，宽恕各种犯死罪以下和官犯私罪的罪犯，贬凤阳运输屯种。
English: On February 4th, he pardoned all kinds of criminals who had committed crimes less than capital crimes and crimes committed by officials, and ordered Fengyang to transport the seeds.

古文：癸丑，耕耤田。
现代文：二十三日，太祖耕耒昔田。
English: On the 23rd, the great-grandfather ploughed his old fields.

古文：召徐达、李文忠、冯胜还，傅友德等留镇北平。
现代文：召徐达、李文忠、冯胜还京，傅友德留镇北平。
English: Xu Da, Li Wenzhong and Feng Sheng returned to Beijing, while Fu Youde stayed in Beiping.

古文：三月辛酉，立钞法。
现代文：三月一日，建立钞法。
English: On March 1, the Banknote Law was established.

古文：辛巳，罢宝源局铸钱。
现代文：二十一日。罢宝源局铸钱。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Bureau of Mines and Resources began to mint money.

古文：夏四月辛卯，幸中都。
现代文：夏四月二日，行幸中都。
English: On the 2nd of April in the summer, I went on a trip to Chuo.

古文：丁巳，至自中都。
现代文：二十八日，太祖亲自巡察中都。
English: On the 28th, Taizu personally inspected the capital.

古文：免彰德、大名、临洮、平凉、河州被灾田租。
现代文：免彰德、大名、临洮、平凉、河州受灾田租。
English: Zhangde, Daimyo, Linyi, Pingliang, and Hezhou are exempted from the disaster-affected land rent.

古文：罢营中都。
现代文：罢营中都。
English: The whole city is on strike.

古文：致仕诚意怕刘基卒。
现代文：辞官人诚意伯刘基病死。
English: Dictator Zhengyin Bo Liuji died of illness.

古文：五月己巳，永嘉候朱亮祖偕傅友德镇北平。
现代文：五月十日，永嘉侯朱亮祖和傅友德共同镇守北平。
English: On May 10, Yongjia marquis Zhu Liangzu and Fu Youde jointly took charge of Beiping.

古文：六月壬寅，指挥同知胡汝平贵州蛮。
现代文：六月十四日，指挥同知胡汝平定贵州蛮。
English: On June 14th, commanding comrade Hu Ru to pacify Guizhou.

古文：秋七月己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月一日，日食。三日，改作太庙。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, there was a solar eclipse. On the third day, it was changed to Taimyo.

古文：辛酉，改作太庙。壬戌，召傅友德、朱亮祖还，李文忠、顾时镇山西、北平。
现代文：四日，召傅友德、朱亮祖还，李文忠、顾时镇守山西、北平。
English: On the fourth day, Fu Youde, Zhu Liang Zuyao, Li Wenzhong and Gu Shizhen were summoned to Shanxi and Beiping.

古文：戊辰，诏百官奔父母丧不俟报。
现代文：十日，诏令官吏奔父母丧事不要等着报告。
English: On the 10th, he ordered officials to rush to their parents' funerals and not wait for a report.

古文：京师地震。
现代文：京师地震。
English: Earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：丁丑，免应天、太平、宁国镇江及蕲、黄诸府被灾田租。
现代文：十九日，免应天、太平、宁国、镇江和蕲、黄各府受灾田租。
English: On the 19th, the affected fields in Tianjin, Taiping, Ningguo, Zhenjiang, Hefei and Huangshan provinces were exempted from the rent.

古文：八月己酉，元扩廓帖木儿卒。
现代文：八月二十二日，元朝扩廓帖木儿死。
English: On August 22, Timur, the leader of the Yuan Dynasty expansion, died.

古文：冬十月丁亥，诏举富民素行端洁达时务者。
现代文：冬十月一日，下诏推举富民中品行端庄明达时务之人。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the following edict was issued to nominate a person of good moral character and wisdom who would be able to deal with the current affairs.

古文：壬子，命皇太子诸王讲武中都。
现代文：二十六日，命皇太子诸王在中都研讨练习武功。
English: On the 26th, the crown prince ordered all the princes to study and practice martial arts in Zhongdu.

古文：十一月丁丑，有事于圆丘。
现代文：十一月二十一日，行祭于圜丘。
English: On November 21st, the procession began in Mengqiu.

古文：十二月戊子，京师地震。
现代文：十二月三日，京师地震。
English: December 3rd, Beijing earthquake.

古文：甲寅，遣使振苏州、湖州、嘉兴、松江、常州、太平、宁国、杭州水灾。
现代文：丁寅日，遣使赈救苏州、湖州、嘉兴、松江、常州、太平、宁国、杭州水灾。
English: On the day of Ding Yin, he sent envoys to rescue Suzhou, Huzhou, Jiaxing, Songjiang, Changzhou, Taiping, Ningguo and Hangzhou from floods.

古文：是月，纳哈出犯辽东，指挥马云、叶旺大败之。
现代文：这月，纳哈出进犯辽东，指挥马云、叶旺大败纳哈出。
English: This month, Naha went to invade Liaodong, commanding Ma Yun and Ye Wang to defeat Naha.

古文：是年，撒里、高丽、占城、暹罗、日本、爪哇、三佛齐入贡。
现代文：这年，撒里、高丽、占城、暹罗、日本、爪哇、三佛齐入朝进贡。
English: This year, Sarri, Goryeo, Jamsil, Siam, Japan, Java, and the Three Buddhas all paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：九年春正月，中山侯汤和，颍川侯傅友德，都督佥事蓝玉、王弼，中书右丞丁玉，备边延安。
现代文：洪武九年春正月，中山侯汤和，颍川侯傅友德，都督佥事蓝玉、王弼，中书右丞丁玉，在延安守备边防。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year of Hongwu, Zhongshan marquis Tang He, Shichuan marquis Fu Youde, local governors Anji Lan Yu, Wang Xi, and Zhongshu Yu Rong Ding Yu guarded the border in Yan'an.

古文：三月己卯，诏曰： 比年西征敦煌，北伐沙漠，军需甲仗，皆资山、陕，又以秦、晋二府宫殿之役，重困吾民。
现代文：三月二十五日，太祖下诏说： 多年西征敦煌，北伐沙漠，军需甲仗，皆赖山、陕，又因秦、晋二府宫殿之役，重困我民。
English: On March 25th, the great-great-grandfather issued an edict saying: "For many years, the Western Expedition to Dunhuang, the Northern Desert Campaign, and the War of the Third Coalition have all been fought in the mountains of Lai and Shaanxi, and because of the Palace Campaign in the two provinces of Qin and Jin, our people have been in dire straits.

古文：平定以来，闾阎未息。
现代文：平定以来，百姓未得休息。
English: Since the pacification, the people have not been able to rest.

古文：国都始建，土木屡兴。
现代文：国都刚建，土木屡兴。
English: The national capital has just been built, and civil engineering is flourishing.

古文：畿辅既极烦劳，外郡疲于转运。
现代文：近郊已经极为烦劳，外郡更是疲于转运。
English: The suburbs are already extremely tired, and the outer counties are even more tired of transportation.

古文：今蓄储有余，其淮、扬、安、徽、池五府及山西、陕西、河南、福建、江西、浙江、北平、湖广今年租赋，悉免之。 
现代文：现在蓄储有余，淮、扬、安、徽、池五府和山西、陕西、河南、福建、江西、浙江、北平、湖广今年租赋，全部免除。 
English: Now there is more than enough storage, and the five prefectures of Huai, Yang, An, Hui, and Chi, as well as Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, Fujian, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Beiping, and Hougang, are all exempt from rent this year.

古文：夏四月庚戌，京师自去年八月不雨，是日始雨。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，京师从去年八月到今天才下雨。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of summer, it has rained in Beijing from last August until today.

古文：五月癸酉，自庚戌雨，至是日始霁。
现代文：五月二十日，从四月二十七日下雨到今天才晴。
English: On May 20th, it rained from April 27th until today.

古文：六月甲午，改行中书省为承宣布政使司。
现代文：六月十一日，改中书省为承宣布政使司。
English: On June 11th, the Ministry of Education and Culture was reformed into the Ministry of Political Affairs.

古文：辛丑，李文忠还。
现代文：十八日，李文忠还京。
English: On the 18th, Li Wenzhong returned to Beijing.

古文：秋七月癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月一日，日食。
English: Autumn On July 1st, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：是月，蠲苏、松、嘉、湖水灾田租，振永平旱灾。
现代文：这月，免除苏、松、嘉、湖水灾田租，赈永平旱灾。
English: This month, the fields of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei were exempted from the flood disaster rent, and the Yongping drought was lifted.

古文：元将伯颜帖木儿犯延安，傅友德败降之。
现代文：元将伯颜帖木儿进犯延安，傅友德将其击败，伯颜投降。
English: Former general Boyan Timur invaded Yan'an, Fu Youde defeated him, and Boyan surrendered.

古文：八月己酉，遣官省历代帝王陵寝，禁刍牧，置守陵户。
现代文：八月二十七日，遣官祭历代帝王陵寝，禁止放牧，设守陵户。
English: On August 27th, the Tomb-sitting Ceremony of the Emperors of All Ages was held, during which grazing was prohibited and tomb-guarding households were set up.

古文：忠臣烈士祠，有司以时葺治。
现代文：忠臣烈士祠，官府要时时修治。
English: Loyalist Martyrs' Shrine, the government should constantly improve it.

古文：分遣国子生修岳镇海渎祠。
现代文：分别派国子生修岳镇海渎祠。
English: Separately, they sent students from Guozin to rebuild the Haihuang Temple in Yuezhen.

古文：西番朵儿只巴寇罕东，河州指挥甯正击走之。
现代文：西番朵儿只巴侵寇罕东，河州指挥宁正击走之。
English: Xifan Duo's son only invaded the east of Kohan, and the commander of Hezhou, Ning, was fighting him off.

古文：闰九月庚寅，以灾异诏求直言。
现代文：闰九月初九，因灾异诏求直言。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the leap year, due to natural disasters, it is imperative to speak frankly.

古文：冬十月己未，太庙成，自是行合享礼。
现代文：冬十月九日，太庙成，从此行合享礼。
English: On October 9th, winter, Taimiao Cheng, from this trip to enjoy the ceremony.

古文：丙子，命秦、晋、燕、吴、楚、齐诸王治兵凤阳。
现代文：十月二十日，命令秦、晋、燕、吴、楚、齐诸王在凤阳治理兵士。
English: On October 20, he ordered Qin, Jin, Yan, Wu, Chu and Qi kings to govern the soldiers in Fengyang.

古文：十一月壬午，有事于圆丘。
现代文：十一月二日，在圜丘祭天。
English: On November 2nd, a festival will be held in Shizuoka.

古文：戊子，徙山西及真定民无产者田凤阳。
现代文：十八日，迁山西及真定民无产的到凤阳耕作。
English: On the 18th, Shanxi and Zhending people moved to Fengyang for farming.

古文：十二月甲寅，振畿内、浙江、湖北水灾。
现代文：十二月五日，赈京师内、浙江、湖北水灾。
English: On December 5th, floods occurred in Beijing, Zhejiang, and Hubei.

古文：己卯，遣都督同知沐英乘传诣陕西问民疾苦。
现代文：三十日，遣都督同知沐英乘传驿到陕西问民间疾苦。
English: On the 30th, the capital governor sent Tongzhi Mu Ying to Shaanxi to inquire about the people's suffering.

古文：是年，览邦、琉球、安南、日本、乌斯藏、高丽入贡。
现代文：这年，贤邦、琉球、安南、日本、乌斯藏、高丽入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Xianbang, Ryukyu, Annan, Japan, Wuzang, and Goryeo paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十年春正月辛卯，以羽林等卫军益秦、晋、燕三府护卫。
现代文：洪武十年春正月十二日，以羽林等卫军作为秦、晋、燕三府护卫。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 10th year of Hongwu's reign, guards such as Uebayashi came to protect Qin, Jin, and Yan.

古文：是春，振苏、松、嘉、湖水灾。
现代文：这年春，赈苏、松、嘉、湖水灾。
English: In the spring of this year, flooding occurred in Liusu, Song, Jia and Huzhou.

古文：夏四月己酉，邓愈为征西将军，沐英为副将军，率师讨吐番，大破之。
现代文：夏四月二日，邓愈为征西将军，沐英为副将军，率师讨伐西蕃，大破西蕃。
English: On April 2 in summer, Deng Yu, as the general of the Western Expedition, and Mu Ying, as the vice-general, led the division to fight against Xicheng and defeated Xicheng.

古文：是月，振太平、宁国及宜兴、钱塘诸县水灾。
现代文：这月，赈太平、宁国、宜兴、钱塘各县水灾。
English: This month, floods hit the counties of Fengtai, Ningguo, Yixing and Qiantang.

古文：五月庚子，韩国公李善长、曹国公李文忠总中书省、大都督府、御史台，议军国重事。
现代文：五月二十三日，韩国公李善长、曹国公李文忠总领中书省、大都督府、御史台，议军国重事。
English: On May 23rd, South Korea's General Ri Son Chung and General Ri Moon Chung of the Republic of Korea, the General of the Republic of Korea, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General of the Republic of China, the General

古文：癸卯，振湖广水灾。
现代文：二十六日，赈湖广水灾。
English: On the 26th, the flooding in Wuhu was widespread.

古文：丙午，户部主事赵乾振荆、蕲迟缓，伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，户部主事赵乾赈荆、蕲迟缓，被杀。
English: On the 29th, the head of the household department, Zhao Qian, was killed.

古文：六月丁巳，诏臣民言事者，实封达御前。
现代文：六月十一日，诏臣民言事者，实封达御前。
English: On June 11th, the Emperor's subjects and the people's spokesmen left, and the actual seal arrived in front of the Emperor.

古文：丙寅，命政事启皇太子裁决奏闻。
现代文：二十日，命政事启奏皇太子裁决然后奏闻。
English: On the 20th, the Crown Prince's ruling was announced and then reported.

古文：秋七月甲申，置通政司。
现代文：秋七月八日，设置通政司。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, the post of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs was established.

古文：是月，始遣御史巡按州县。
现代文：这月，第一次派御史巡察州县。
English: This month, for the first time, the imperial historian was sent to inspect the county.

古文：八月庚戌，改建大祀殿于南郊。
现代文：八月四日，改建大祀殿到南郊。
English: On August 4, the reconstruction of the Great Hall of Worship moved to the southern suburbs.

古文：癸丑，选武臣子弟读书国子监。
现代文：七日，选武臣子弟在国子监读书。
English: On the seventh day, the children of samurai retainers were selected to study under the provincial overseer.

古文：九月丙申，振绍兴、金华、衢州水灾。
现代文：九月二十一日，赈救绍兴、金华、衢州水灾。
English: On September 21, the flood disaster in Shaoxing, Jinhua and Zhangzhou was relieved.

古文：辛丑，胡惟庸为左丞相，汪广洋为右丞相。
现代文：二十六日，胡惟庸为左丞相、汪广洋为右丞相。
English: On the 26th, Hu Weiyong was appointed as the left minister and Wang Guangyang as the right minister.

古文：冬十月戊午，封沐英西平侯。
现代文：冬十月十三日，封沐英西平侯。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, he was enthroned as the Prince of Xiping.

古文：辛酉，赐百官公田。
现代文：十六日，赐百官公田。
English: On the 16th, he gave 100 officials public land.

古文：十一月癸未，卫国公邓愈卒。
现代文：十一月九日，卫国公邓愈死。
English: On November 9, Emperor Deng Yu passed away.

古文：丁亥，合祀天地于奉天殿。
现代文：十三日，合祀天地于奉天殿。
English: On the 13th, the heavens and earth were enshrined together in the Bongten Hall.

古文：是月，免河南、陕西、广东、湖广田租。
现代文：该月，免河南、陕西、广东、湖广田租。
English: In the same month, Henan, Shaanxi, Guangdong and Hunan were exempted from the rent.

古文：威茂蛮叛，御史大夫丁玉为平羌将军，讨平之。
现代文：威茂蛮叛，御史大夫丁玉为平羌将军，讨平。
English: Wei Mao was a brutal rebel, and the imperial historian Ding Yu was a general of the Taira clan, seeking to bring him to heel.

古文：十二月乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月一日，日食。
English: December 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：丁未，录故功臣子孙五百余人，授官有差。
现代文：三日，录用故功臣子孙五百余人，授官有别。
English: On the third day, more than 500 descendants of former meritorious retainers were hired, and some were promoted to higher posts.

古文：是年，占城、三佛齐、暹罗、爪哇、真腊入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、三佛齐、暹罗、爪哇、真腊入贡。
English: This year, Zhancheng, Sanfo Qi, Siam, Java, and Mana paid tribute.

古文：高丽使五至，以嗣王未立，却之。
现代文：高丽使来五次，因其未立嗣王，朝廷拒绝。
English: The Koryo envoys came five times, but the imperial court refused them because they did not set up a successor king.

古文：十一年春正月甲戌，封皇子椿为蜀王，柏湘王，桂豫王，模汉王，植卫王。
现代文：洪武十一年春一月一日，分封皇子椿为蜀王，柏湘王，桂豫王，木英汉王，植卫王。
English: On the first day of January in the spring of the eleventh year of Hongwu, the crown prince Tsubaki was divided into King Shu, King Baoxiang, King Guiyu, King Muyinghan, and King Zewei.

古文：改封吴王橚为周王。
现代文：改封吴王木肃为周王。
English: Wu Wang Muxu was renamed Zhou Wang.

古文：己卯，进封汤和信国公。
现代文：六日，进封汤和信国公。
English: On the 6th, Jinfeng Tang and Nobukuni passed away.

古文：是月，徵天下布政使及知府来朝。
现代文：该月，征召天下布政使及知府来朝。
English: In the same month, political envoys and prefectural governors from all over the country were summoned to come to the DPRK.

古文：二月，指挥胡渊平茂州蛮。
现代文：二月，指挥胡渊平茂州蛮。
English: In February, the conductor was Hu Yuanyuan Pingmaozhou.

古文：三月壬午，命奏事毋关白中书省。
现代文：三月十日，命令奏事不要仅仅告诉中书省。
English: On March 10th, he ordered that the matter should not only be reported to the Ministry of Education.

古文：是月，第来朝官为三等。
现代文：该月，分来朝官为三等。
English: In the same month, he was promoted to the third rank in the imperial court.

古文：夏四月，元嗣君爱猷识理达腊殂，子脱古思帖木儿嗣。
现代文：夏四月，元嗣君爱猷识理达腊死，子脱古思帖木儿继位。
English: In the summer of April, the original heir, Aizhong Zhili Darla, died, and his son, Gu Si Timur, succeeded to the throne.

古文：五月丁酉，存问苏、松、嘉、湖被水灾民，户赐米一石，蠲逋赋六十五万有奇。
现代文：五月二十六日，存问苏、松、嘉、湖受水灾百姓，每户赐米一石，免除拖欠赋税六十五万多。
English: On May 26, the people of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei who were affected by the floods were asked to donate one stone of rice per household, and more than 650,000 people were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：六月壬子，遣使祭故元嗣君。
现代文：六月十二日，遣使者祭奠故元嗣君。
English: On June 12th, an envoy was sent to pay tribute to the late Mototsugu.

古文：己巳，五开蛮叛，杀靖州指挥过兴，以辰州指挥杨仲名为总兵官，讨之。
现代文：二十九日，五开蛮叛，杀害靖州指挥过兴，任命辰州指挥杨仲名为总兵官，讨伐五开叛蛮。
English: On the 29th, the Wukai rebels killed the commander of Jingzhou, Piao Xing, and appointed the commander of Chenzhou, Yang Zhong, as the chief military officer to fight the Wukai rebels.

古文：秋七月丁丑，振平阳饥。
现代文：秋七月七日，赈济平阳饥荒。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Pingyang famine occurred.

古文：是月，苏、松、扬、台海溢，遣官存恤。
现代文：这月，苏、松、扬、台海患，遣官抚恤。
English: This month, Su, Song, Yang and Taiwan were affected by the sea, and the dispatching officers received a pension.

古文：八月，免应天、太平、镇江、宁国、广德诸府州秋粮。
现代文：八月，免除应天、太平、镇江、宁国、广德各府州秋粮。
English: In August, the prefectures of Yingtian, Taiping, Zhenjiang, Ningguo and Guangde were exempted from the autumn grain.

古文：九月丙申，追封刘继祖为义惠侯。
现代文：九月十七日，追封刘继祖为义惠侯。
English: On September 17th, Liu Jizu was posthumously awarded the title of honorary vassal.

古文：冬十月甲子，大祀殿成。
现代文：冬十月二十五日，大祀殿落成。
English: In winter, on October 25th, the Great Hall of Worship was completed.

古文：十一月庚午，征西将军西平侯沐英率都督蓝玉、玉弼讨西番。
现代文：十一月一日征西将军西平侯沐英率都督蓝玉、王弼征讨西蕃。
English: On November 1st, the general of the Western Expedition, Xiping Hou Mu Ying, led by the governor, Lan Yu, and Wang Hui, set out to conquer Western Yunnan.

古文：是月，五开蛮平。
现代文：本月，五开蛮平定。
English: This month, Wukai has been fairly stable.

古文：是年，暹罗、阇婆、高丽、琉球、占城、三佛齐、朵甘、乌斯藏、彭亨、百花入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗、阇婆、高丽、琉球、占城、三佛齐、朵甘、乌斯藏、彭亨、百花入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Siam, Saba, Goryeo, Ryukyu, Zamcheng, Sanfo-Qi, Dokan, U-Tsang, Pengheng and Baika-Ryukyu paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：十二年春正月己卯，始合礼天地于南郊。
现代文：洪武十二年春一月十一日，第一次合祀天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day of January in the spring of the 12th year of Hongwu, the heavens and earth were worshipped together for the first time in the southern suburbs.

古文：甲申，洮州十八族番叛，命沐英移兵讨之。
现代文：十六日，洮州十八族番反叛，命沐英率兵征讨。
English: On the 16th, eighteen ethnic groups in Zhangzhou rebelled, and Mu Ying led the soldiers to fight.

古文：丙申，丁玉平松州蛮。
现代文：二十九日，丁玉平定松州蛮。
English: On the 29th, Ding Yu defeated Songzhou Ban.

古文：二月戊戌，李文忠督理河、岷、临、巩军事。
现代文：二月一日，李文忠督管河、岷、临、巩军事。
English: On February 1, Li Wenzhong took charge of the military affairs of He, Handan, Lin and Gong.

古文：乙巳，诏曰： 今春雨雪经旬。天下贫民困于饥寒者多有，其令有司给以钞。 
现代文：八日，太祖下诏说 ：今春雨雪下了十几天，天下贫民困于饥寒的不少，令官府给他们钱钞。 
English: On the eighth day, the great-grandfather issued an edict: "This spring, it has rained and snowed for more than ten days. Many poor people around the world are suffering from hunger and cold. The government should give them money."

古文：丙寅，信国公汤和率列候练兵临清。
现代文：二十九日，信国公汤和率列侯在临清练兵。
English: On the 29th, Nobukuni Gongtang and his retainers went to train soldiers in Linqing.

古文：夏五月癸未，蠲北平田租。
现代文：夏五月十七日，免去北平田租。
English: On the 17th day of summer in May, the North Hirata rent was waived.

古文：六月丁卯，都督马云征大宁。
现代文：六月三日，都督马云征伐大宁。
English: On June 3, Governor Ma Yun began the conquest of Daning.

古文：秋七月丙辰，丁玉回师讨眉县贼，平之。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，丁玉回师讨平眉县贼。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Ding Yu returned to his master to deal with the thieves in Pingmei County.

古文：己未，李文忠还掌大都督府事。
现代文：二十五日，李文忠还掌大督府事。
English: On the 25th, Li Wenzhong was still in charge of the affairs of the grand governor's office.

古文：八月辛巳，诏凡致仕官复其家，终身无所与。
现代文：八月十八日，诏令凡辞官回家的官吏免除其家赋税徭役，终身不再征取。
English: On August 18th, it was decreed that any official who returned home after leaving office would be exempted from tax collection for life.

古文：九月己亥，沐英大破西番，擒其部长三副使。
现代文：九月六日，沐英大破西番，抓获其部长三副使。
English: On September 6th, Mu Yingtao broke through the West and captured his minister and three deputy envoys.

古文：冬十一月甲午，沐英班师，封仇成、蓝玉等十二人为侯。
现代文：冬十一月一日，沐英班师回朝，封仇成、蓝玉等十二人为侯。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Mu Ying's class returned to the North, with twelve students including Feng Qucheng and Blue Jade.

古文：庚申，大宁平。
现代文：二十七日，大宁平定。
English: On the 27th, Daning was pacified.

古文：十二月，汪广洋贬广南，赐死。
现代文：十二月，汪广洋被贬广南，被赐死。
English: In December, Wang Guangyang was demoted to Guannan and sentenced to death.

古文：徵天下博学老成之士至京师。
现代文：征召天下博学老成之士到京师。
English: The world's most erudite and accomplished scholars were conscripted to teach in Beijing.

古文：是年，占城、爪哇、暹罗、日本、安南、高丽入贡。
现代文：这一年，占城、爪哇、暹罗、日本、安南、高丽入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Jamsil, Java, Siam, Japan, Annam, and Goryeo paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：高丽贡黄金百斤、白金万两，以不如约，却之。
现代文：高丽进贡黄金百斤、白金万两，因其不符约定，拒绝收纳。
English: Goryeo refused to accept the tribute of 100 catties of gold and 10,000 taels of platinum because it did not meet the agreement.

古文：十三年春正月戊戌，左丞相胡惟庸谋反，及其党御史大夫陈宁、中丞涂节等伏诛。
现代文：洪武十三年春正月初六，左丞相胡惟庸谋反，和其同党御史大夫陈宁、中丞涂节等一起被杀。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the spring of the 13th year of Hongwu, the Left Vice-Minister Hu Wei Yong plotted a rebellion, and he was killed together with the Party Secretary Chen Ning and the Middle Vice-Minister Tu Jie.

古文：癸卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，在南郊大祀天地。
English: On the 11th day, in the southern suburb of Daxi Tianchi.

古文：罢中书省，废丞相等官，更定六部官秩，改大都督府为中、左、右、前、后五军都督府。
现代文：罢中书省，废除丞相等官，更改制定六部官秩序，改大都督七府为中、左、右、前、后五军都督府。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was abolished, the post of chancellor and other officials were abolished, the order of the six ministries was changed, and the seven prefectures of the grand governor were changed to the central, left, right, front, and rear five military prefectures.

古文：二月壬戌朔，诏举聪明正直、孝弟力田、贤良方正、文学术数之士。
现代文：二月一日，诏推举聪明正直、孝弟力田、贤良方正、文学术数之士。
English: On February 1st, the imperial edict recommended intelligent, honest, filial, capable, virtuous, and literate scholars.

古文：发丹符，验天下金谷之数。
现代文：发丹符，统计天下金银粮食数量。
English: To count the amount of gold, silver and grain in the world.

古文：戊辰，文武官年六十以上者听致仕，给以诰敕。
现代文：七日，文武官年满六十岁以上的允许辞官，给以诰敕。
English: On the 7th, military attaches over the age of 60 were allowed to retire and were granted retirement.

古文：三月壬辰，减苏、松、嘉、湖重赋十之二。
现代文：三月一日，减免苏、松、嘉、湖重赋十分之二。
English: On March 1st, the reduction and exemption of Su, Song, Jiayang and Hubei increased by two-tenths.

古文：壬寅，燕王隶之国北平。
现代文：十一日，燕王朱棣建国北平。
English: On the 11th day of the 11th month, the king of the terns, Zhu Xi, founded Beiping.

古文：壬子，沐英袭元将脱火赤于亦集乃，擒之，尽降其众。
现代文：二十一日，沐英在亦集乃袭击元将脱火赤，活捉他，并尽降其众。
English: On the twenty-first day, Mu Ying defeated the attacking general in Yishino, captured him alive, and did his best to subdue his troops.

古文：夏四月己丑，命群臣各举所知。
现代文：夏四月二十九日，命群臣各自推举自己所知。
English: On the 29th day of the 4th month in the summer, the ministers of life each nominated their own knowledge.

古文：五月甲午，雷震谨身殿。
现代文：五月四日，雷震谨身殿。
English: On May 4th, the thunder shook my body.

古文：乙未，大赦。
现代文：五日，大赦。
English: On the fifth day, there was a general amnesty.

古文：丙申，释在京及临濠屯田输作者。
现代文：六日，释放在京和临濠屯田运输劳作之人。
English: On the 6th, people who worked in the transportation industry in Beijing and Linyi were released.

古文：己亥，免天下田租。
现代文：九日，免天下田租。
English: On the 9th, all land rent will be waived.

古文：吏以过误罢者还其职。
现代文：官吏以过失误罢的还其职务。
English: An official who was dismissed for negligence was reinstated.

古文：壬寅，都督濮英进兵赤斤站，获故元豳王亦怜真及其部曲而还。
现代文：十二日，都督濮英进兵赤斤站，抓获故元豳王亦怜真及其部曲而还。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the governor of Yunnan Province, Zou Ying, marched into the Red Crane Station and captured the late Yuan Shao Wang Yirizhen and his followers.

古文：是月，罢御史台。命从征士卒老疾者许以子代，老而无子及寡妇，有司资遣还。
现代文：这月，罢御史台，命从征士卒老了有病者允许子代，老而无子及寡妇，有司给钱送还。
English: This month, the order to withdraw from the history platform was issued, and the old and sick were allowed to send money to their children, and the old, childless and widows were given money to send back.

古文：六月丙寅，雷震奉天门，避正殿省愆。
现代文：六月七日，雷震奉天门，避上殿反省过失。
English: On June 7th, the thunder shook the gate of heaven, and people avoided going up to the hall to reflect on their mistakes.

古文：丁卯，罢王府工役。
现代文：六月八日。罢王府工役。
English: On June 8th, the King's Palace construction workers went on strike.

古文：丁丑，置谏院官。
现代文：十八日，设置谏院官。
English: On the 18th, the post of imperial official was established.

古文：秋八月，命天下学校师生，日给廪膳。
现代文：秋八月，命天下学校师生，每日由官方给膳食。
English: In autumn and August, it was decreed that teachers and students in schools across the country would be given daily meals by the authorities.

古文：九月辛卯，景川侯曹震、营阳侯杨璟、永城侯恭显屯田北平。
现代文：十月四日，景川侯曹震、营阳侯杨王景、永城侯薛显在北平屯田。
English: On October 4, Cao Zhen of Jingchuan County, Yang Wangjing of Yingyang County, and Xue Xian of Yongcheng County marched in Beiping County.

古文：乙巳，天寿节，始受群臣朝贺，赐宴于谨身殿，后以为常。
现代文：十八日，天寿节，第一次受群臣朝贺，在谨身殿赐宴，以后为常例。
English: On the eighteenth day, the Day of the Dead, for the first time, he received morning greetings from the courtiers and was given a banquet in the Hall of Honor, which became a regular occurrence thereafter.

古文：丙午，置四辅官，告于太庙。
现代文：十九日，设四辅官，告于太庙。
English: On the 19th, four assistant officials were set up and reported to the Imperial Temple.

古文：以儒士王本、杜佑、龚斅、杜斅、赵民望、吴源为春、夏官。
现代文：任命儒士王本、杜佑、龚、赵民望、吴源为春、夏官。
English: The Confucianists Wang Ben, Du You, Zou, Zhao Minwang, and Wu Yuan were appointed as the spring and summer officials.

古文：是月，诏陕西卫军以三分之二屯田。
现代文：这月，诏陕西卫军用三分之二屯田。
English: This month, two-thirds of the military garrisons in Shaanxi were taken over by the People's Liberation Army.

古文：安置翰林学士承旨宋濂于茂州，道卒。
现代文：安置翰林学士宋氵廉领旨到茂州，在路上死亡。
English: Song Yulian, a scholar of Hanlin, died on the way to Maozhou.

古文：冬十一月乙未，徐达还。
现代文：冬十一月九日，徐达还。
English: On November 9th, winter, Xu Dada was born.

古文：丙午，元平章完者不花、乃儿不花犯永平，指挥刘广战没，千户王辂击败之，擒完者不花。
现代文：二十日，元平章完者不花、乃儿不花进犯永平，指挥刘广战死，千户王辂击败他们，抓获完者不花。
English: On the 20th, those who completed the Yuanping chapter did not spend any money, and those who did not spend any money attacked Yongping. The commander Liu Guang died in the battle. Qianhuangyao defeated them, and those who completed the capture did not spend any money.

古文：十二月，天下府州县所举士至者八百六十余人，授官有差。
现代文：十二月，天下府州县所推荐之士到京师的有八百六十余人，授官有差别。
English: In December, there were more than 860 people recommended by prefectural and county governments to the Beijing division, and there was a difference in the awarding of posts.

古文：南雄侯赵庸镇广东，讨阳春蛮。
现代文：南雄侯赵庸镇守广东，讨伐阳春蛮。
English: Nanxiong marquis Zhao Yongzhen guarded Guangdong, and fought against Yangchun.

古文：是年，琉球、日本、安南、占城、真腊、爪哇入贡，日本以无表却之。
现代文：这一年，琉球、日本、安南、占城、真腊、爪哇入朝进贡，日本因无表被拒绝。
English: In this year, Ryukyu, Japan, Annan, Zhancheng, Jinla and Java paid tribute to the emperor, but Japan was rejected because it did not have a watch.

古文：十四年春正月戊子，徐达为征虏大将军，汤和、傅友德为左、右副将军，帅师讨乃儿不花。
现代文：洪武十四年春一月二日，徐达为征虏大将军，汤和、傅友德为左、右副将军，率师讨伐乃儿不花。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of Hongwu, on January 2nd, Xu Da was appointed as the general of conscription, Tang He and Fu Youde as the left and right vice-generals, and led the division to fight.

古文：命新授官者各举所知。
现代文：命新授官之人各举所知。
English: The new appointees are known in advance.

古文：乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：九日，大祀天地于南郊。
English: On the 9th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：壬子，罢天下岁造兵器。
现代文：二十六日，罢天下每年制造兵器。
English: On the 26th, the world stopped making weapons every year.

古文：癸丑，命公候子弟入国学。
现代文：二十七日，命公侯子弟入国学。
English: On the 27th, Myoko's son entered the national school.

古文：丙辰，诏求隐逸。
现代文：三十日，诏求隐逸之士。
English: On the 30th, he issued an edict to those who wished to live in seclusion to leave.

古文：二月庚辰，核天下官田。
现代文：二月二十四日，核实天下官田。
English: On February 24th, it was confirmed that all government-owned land in the country had been sold.

古文：三月丙戌，大赦。
现代文：三月一日，大赦。
English: On March 1, the amnesty ended.

古文：辛丑，颁《五经》、《四书》于北方学校。
现代文：十六日，颁五经、四书于北方学校。
English: On the 16th, the Five Classics and Four Classics were awarded to the North School.

古文：夏四月庚午，徐达率诸将出塞，至北黄河，击破元兵，获全宁四部以归。
现代文：夏四月十五日，徐达率诸将出塞，到北黄河，击破元兵，获全宁四部而归。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, Xu Da and his generals marched out of the citadel to the north of the Yellow River, defeated the Yuan soldiers, won four parts of Quan Ning, and returned.

古文：五月，五溪蛮叛，江夏侯周德兴讨平之。
现代文：五月，五溪蛮叛，江夏侯周德兴讨平。
English: In May, Wuxi rebelled violently, and Jiangxia lord Zhou Dexing tried to quell the rebellion.

古文：秋八月丙子，诏求明经老成之士，有司礼送京师。
现代文：秋八月二十四日，诏求明经老成之士，官府司礼送京师。
English: On the 24th day of the 8th month of the autumn, the prefectural magistrate sent a letter to the Beijing division.

古文：庚辰，河决原武、祥符、中牟。
现代文：二十八日，黄河在原武、祥符、中牟决口。
English: On the 28th, the Yellow River was at the mouth of the Huanwu, Xiangfu and Zhongmou Rivers.

古文：辛巳，徐达还。
现代文：二十九日，徐达还京。
English: On the 29th, Xu Da returned to Beijing.

古文：九月壬午朔，傅友德为征南将军，蓝玉、沐英为左、右副将军，帅征支南。
现代文：九月一日，傅友德为征南将军，蓝玉、沐英为左、右副将军，率师征云南。
English: On September 1, Fu Youde became the general to conquer the south, and Lan Yu and Mu Ying became the left and right vice-generals, leading the division to conquer Yunnan.

古文：徐达镇北平。
现代文：徐达镇守北平。
English: Xu Da Zhengu Beiping.

古文：丙午，周德兴移师讨施州蛮，平之。冬十月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二十五日，周德兴率军讨伐平定施州蛮。冬十月一日，日食。
English: On the 25th, Zhou Dexing led the army to fight and pacify Shizhou barbarians. In winter, on October 1, the solar eclipse.

古文：癸丑，命法司录囚，会翰林院给事中及春坊官会议平允以闻。
现代文：二日，命令法司审录囚犯，会同翰林院给事中和春坊官一起讨论平衡公允，然后报告。
English: On the second day, he ordered the Legal Department to interrogate the prisoners, and together with the Hanlin Institute to discuss the balance and fairness with the Chunfang officials, and then report.

古文：甲寅，免应天、太平、应德、镇江、宁国田租。
现代文：三日，免应天、太平、广德、镇江、宁国田租。
English: On the third day, Tian, Taiping, Guangde, Zhenjiang and Ningguo were exempted from land rent.

古文：癸亥，分遣御史录囚。
现代文：十日，分别派遣御史审录囚犯。
English: On the 10th, the prisoners were sent separately to be interrogated.

古文：己卯，延安侯唐胜宗帅师讨浙东山寇，平之。
现代文：二十八日，延安侯唐胜宗率师讨平浙东山寇。
English: On the 28th, Yan'an marquis Tang Shengzong led the army to fight against the Eastern Zhejiang mountain bandits.

古文：十一月壬午，吉安侯陆仲亨镇成都。
现代文：十一月一日，吉安侯陆仲亨镇守成都。
English: On November 1, Lu Zhongheng, the lord of Ji'an, came to defend Chengdu.

古文：庚戌，赵庸讨广州海寇，大破之。
现代文：二十九日，赵庸讨伐广州海寇，大破之。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Yong fought against the Guangzhou sea pirates and defeated them.

古文：十二月丁巳，命翰林春坊官考驳诸司章奏。
现代文：十二月七日，命令翰林春坊官考评各司奏章。
English: On December 7th, he ordered the Hanlin Chunfang official to evaluate the performance of each department.

古文：戊辰，傅友德大败元兵于白石江，遂下曲靖。
现代文：十八日，傅友德大败元兵于白石江，于是下曲靖。
English: On the 18th, Fu Youde defeated the Yuan soldiers in the Baishijiang River, and then withdrew to Qujing.

古文：壬申，元梁王把匝剌瓦尔密走普宁自杀。
现代文：二十二日，元梁王把匝剌瓦尔密逃走普宁自杀。
English: On the twenty-second day, Yuan Liang Wang took Yu Valmi away and Puning committed suicide.

古文：是年，暹罗、安南、爪哇、朵甘、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗、安南、爪哇、朵甘、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Siam, Annam, Java, Dogan, and Wuxia paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：以安南寇思明，不纳。
现代文：因安南侵犯思明，不予接纳。
English: Due to Annan's encroachment on Siming, it was not accepted.

