古文：《齐民要术》：凡栽一切树木，欲记其阴阳，不令转易。
现代文：《齐民要术》：凡是移栽各种树木，都要记住它的阴面和阳面，不要改变它原来的方位。
English: "Qiming Yaoshu": When transplanting all kinds of trees, it is necessary to remember its shady side and sunny side, and do not change its original position.

古文：阴阳易位，则难生。
现代文：如把阴面和阳面弄错，便难成活。
English: If you get the dark side and the light side wrong, it's hard to survive.

古文：小小栽者，不烦记也。
现代文：如系移栽很小的树苗，便可以不必去记。
English: If you transplant very small seedlings, you don't have to remember.

古文：大树髡之，不髡，风摇则死。
现代文：移栽大树时，应先将枝叶剪伐去；不剪去枝叶，风吹摇动，不容易成活。
English: When transplanting large trees, the branches and leaves should be cut off first; if the branches and leaves are not cut off, the wind will blow and shake, and it is not easy to survive.

古文：小则不髡。
现代文：小树不必剪去枝叶。
English: Small trees do not need to be pruned.

古文：先为深坑，内树讫，以水沃之，著土令如薄泥；东西南北摇之良久，摇则泥入根间，无不活者；不摇，根虚，多死。
现代文：先挖掘深坑，将树栽入坑中，随即用水浇灌，使土变成稀泥，把树向东西南北四面摇动一会儿，摇动，可以使稀泥进入到树根中间去，没有不成活的；不摇动，树根中间空虚着，多半会死掉。
English: First, dig a deep pit, plant the tree into the pit, and then water it with water to turn the soil into thin mud. Shake the tree from east to west, north to south, and shake it for a while. Shaking can make the thin mud enter the middle of the roots, and nothing will not come to life; without shaking, the middle of the roots is empty, and most will die.

古文：其小树，则不烦耳。
现代文：如移栽小树，便不必这样做了。
English: If you transplant a small tree, you don't have to do this.

古文：然后下土坚筑。
现代文：然后向坑中壅土捣实。
English: Then the soil is raked and tamped into the pit.

古文：近上三寸不筑，取其柔润也。
现代文：表面三寸厚的土不要捣实，可保持疏松湿润。
English: Do not tamp down the three-inch-thick soil on the surface, but keep it loose and moist.

古文：时时溉灌，常令润泽。
现代文：应时常浇水，使经常保持湿润。
English: It should be watered frequently to keep it moist.

古文：每浇水尽，即以燥土覆之。
现代文：每次浇水，等水耗尽后，便要用燥土覆盖。
English: After each watering, when the water is exhausted, it should be covered with dry soil.

古文：覆则保泽，不然即干。
现代文：覆土可以保持湿润，不覆土便会变干燥。
English: Covered soil can remain moist, while uncovered soil dries out.

古文：埋之欲深，勿令挠动。
现代文：树要埋得深，不要让树摇动。
English: The tree should be buried deep, do not let the tree shake.

古文：凡栽树讫，皆不用手捉及六畜抵突。
现代文：树栽过以后，一概不要用手抚摸，不要让六畜碰撞。
English: After the tree has been planted, do not touch it with your hands at all, and do not let the six animals collide.

古文：《战国策》曰： 夫柳，纵横、颠倒树之，皆生。
现代文：《战国策》一书曾经说： 柳树，不论是直着栽，卧着栽，颠倒着栽，都能够成活。
English: The book "Strategy of Warring States" once said: Willow trees, whether planted upright, lying down, or upside down, can survive.

古文：使千人树之，一人摇之，则无生柳矣。 
现代文：但如有一千人栽种柳树，只要有一人去摇动它们，便不会有一棵成活了。 
English: But if a thousand people plant willows, and only one person shakes them, not a single one will survive.

古文：凡栽树，正月为上时，谚曰： 正月可栽大树。 
现代文：凡栽树木，正月为上等农时，谚语说： 正月可栽大树。 
English: Wherever trees are planted, the first month is the best time for farmers. As the saying goes: You can plant big trees in the first month.

古文：言得时则易生也。
现代文：是说时令合适，树木就容易成活。
English: That is to say, when the season is right, it is easy for trees to survive.

古文：二月为中时，三月为下时。
现代文：二月为中等农时，三月为下等农时。
English: February is the middle agricultural time, and March is the lower agricultural time.

古文：然枣，鸡口；槐，兔目；桑，虾蟆眼；榆，负瘤散；自余杂木，鼠耳、虻翅，各其时。
现代文：但枣树宜 鸡口 移，槐树宜 兔目 移，桑树宜 虾蟆眼 移，榆树宜 负瘤散 移；其余的杂木，有的要等 鼠耳 移，有的要等 虻翅 移皆有自己的适宜时令。
English: However, the jujube tree should be moved to the chicken's mouth, the eucalyptus tree should be moved to the rabbit's eye, the mulberry tree should be moved to the shrimp's eye, and the eucalyptus tree should be moved to the anus; the remaining miscellaneous trees, some should be moved to the mouse's ear, and some should be moved to the eucalyptus wing, all have their own appropriate season.

古文：此等名，即皆是叶生形容之所象似。
现代文：以上所言各种名目，皆是指叶芽萌发时的形状。
English: The various names mentioned above all refer to the shape of the leaf bud at the time of germination.

古文：以此时栽种者，叶皆即生。早栽者，叶晚出。
现代文：在这些时候移栽，可以很快地长出叶子；栽得早的，叶子反而长出得晚。
English: Transplanted at these times, the leaves can grow quickly; planted early, the leaves grow late.

古文：虽然，大率宁早为佳，不可晚也。
现代文：情况虽然是这样，但一般说来还是宁可早栽比较好，切不可栽得晚了。
English: Although this is the case, it is generally better to plant early rather than late.

古文：树，大率种数既多，不可一一备举。凡不见者，栽莳之法，皆求之此条。
现代文：树木的种类很多，不能逐一列举，凡上面没有讲到的，栽种的方法，皆可参照本条所讲的去做。
English: There are many types of trees, and it is not possible to list them one by one. All planting methods not mentioned above can be done with reference to this article.

古文：崔寔曰：二月尽，三月，可掩树枝。
现代文：崔寔说：二月底和三月，可掩埋树枝。
English: Cui Wei said: At the end of February and March, the branches can be buried.

古文：埋树枝土中，令生；二岁已上，可移种矣。
现代文：将树枝埋入土中，使其长出根，两年以后便可移栽。
English: The branches are buried in the soil to grow roots, which can be transplanted after two years.

古文：《务本新书》：一切栽，枝记南北。
现代文：《务本新书》：所有的移栽，都应记清楚南北枝。
English: "The new book": all transplants should clearly remember the north and south branches.

古文：根深土远，宽掘上，以席包包裹，不令见日。
现代文：根扎得深在土中穿行远的，应宽留宿土把树栽掘出，用席包包裹严密，不要让它见到阳光。
English: If the roots are too deep in the soil to travel far, the soil should be left wide to dig out the tree, and it should be tightly wrapped in a mat, so that it does not see the sun.

古文：大车上般载，以人牵曳，缓缓而行。
现代文：放在大车上搬运，用人挽车缓慢行进。
English: They are loaded onto a truck for transport, and are slowly driven by a driver.

古文：车前数百步，平治路上车辙，务要平坦，不令车轮摇摆。
现代文：在车前几百步远的地方，便应将路上的车辙沟铲除垫平，路面务要平坦，不使车轮摇摆晃动。
English: A few hundred paces ahead of the car, the ruts on the road should be removed and smoothed. The road surface must be flat, so that the wheels do not wobble.

古文：于处所依法栽培，树树决活。
现代文：将树栽搬运到地方以后，便可依法栽植，保证栽一棵成活一棵。
English: After the trees are transported to the local area, they can be planted in accordance with the law, ensuring that each tree is planted and each tree is alive.

古文：古人有云： 移树无时，莫令树知。 
现代文：古人有句话说： 移树并没有一定的时间，重要的是不要让树感觉到。 
English: The ancients had a saying: There is no set time for moving a tree, the important thing is not to let the tree feel it.

古文：区宜宽深，以水搅土成泥，仍糁新粟大麦百余粒，即下树栽。
现代文：坑要掘得又宽大又深，用水把土搅拌成稀泥，并要掺进新谷子和大麦一百多颗，然后把树栽种植下去。
English: The pit should be dug wide and deep, the soil should be mixed with water to form a thin mud, and more than a hundred new kernels of corn and barley should be mixed in, and then the tree should be planted.

古文：树大者，须以木扶架。
现代文：树栽大时，需要用木作支架。
English: When the tree grows up, it needs to be supported with wood.

古文：若根不动摇，虽丈许之木可活。
现代文：只要树根不摇动，即便是一丈高的树栽也可以成活。
English: As long as the roots do not shake, even a tall tree can survive.

古文：仍须芟去繁枝，不可招风。
现代文：还应该把树栽的枝叶剪去，不可让它招风。
English: The branches and leaves of the tree should also be cut, and it should not be allowed to blow in the wind.

