古文：医官
现代文：医官
English: Medical Officer

古文：医人买得医官札付者，冠带而坐于店中。
现代文：有个医生买了朝廷医官的衣帽，穿戴起来坐在店里。
English: A doctor bought a court physician's cap and gown, put it on and sat in the shop.

古文：过者骇曰： 此何店，而有官在内？ 
现代文：过路的人惊奇地说： 这是什么店，怎么有官员坐在里面？ 
English: Passers-by said in surprise: What kind of shop is this, and how come there are officials sitting inside?

古文：旁人答曰： 此医官之店。 
现代文：旁边的人回答说： 这是医官之店。 
English: The man next to him replied, "This is a doctor's shop."

古文：写真
现代文：写真
English: Photo gallery

古文：有写真者，绝无生意。
现代文：有个人专门为人画像，总没有生意上门。
English: There is a man who specializes in portraits, but he never gets any business.

古文：或劝他将自己夫妻画一幅贴出，人见方知。
现代文：有人就劝他把自己夫妻合像画一幅贴出来，别人看到就会来找你画的。
English: Someone advised him to post a picture of him and his wife posing together. If others see it, they will come looking for you to paint it.

古文：画者乃依计而行。
现代文：画匠就按他说的办了。
English: The painter did as he was told.

古文：一日，丈人来望，因问： 此女是谁？ 
现代文：有一天，他的岳父来看他，见了那幅画，就问： 这个女的是谁？ 
English: One day, his father-in-law came to see him. When he saw the painting, he asked, "Who is this woman?"

古文：答云： 就是令爱。 
现代文：回答说： 是您的女儿。 
English: And he said, It is your daughter.

古文：又问： 他为甚与这面生人同坐？ 
现代文：又问： 她为什么和这个生人坐在一起呢？ 
English: He also asked: Why was she sitting with this stranger?

古文：僵蚕
现代文：僵蚕
English: Rigid silkworm

古文：一医久无生意，忽有求药者至。
现代文：一个医生，很久没有人请他看病了。
English: A doctor who hasn't been seen for a long time.

古文：开箱取药，中多蛀虫。
现代文：有一天，忽然来了个买药的，医生打开药箱取药，里面已经生了很多蛀虫。
English: One day, a man suddenly came to buy medicine. The doctor opened the medicine box to get the medicine, and there were already many maggots inside.

古文：人问 此是何物？ 曰： 僵蚕。 
现代文：买药的人问那是什么东西，医生回答说： 是僵蚕。 
English: The buyer asked what it was, and the doctor replied, "It's a stiff silkworm."

古文：又问： 僵蚕如何是活的？ 
现代文：那人又问： 僵蚕怎么是活的？ 
English: The man asked again, "How is the cocoon alive?"

古文：答曰： 吃了我的药，怕他不活？ 
现代文：医生说： 吃了我的药，还怕它不活？ 
English: The doctor said, "If you take my medicine, are you afraid it won't work?

古文：送药
现代文：送药
English: Drug delivery

古文：一医迁居，谓四邻曰： 向来打搅，无物可做别敬，每位奉药一帖。 
现代文：有个医生搬了新房，临走时，对邻居们说： 过去一直打搅大家，也没什么可送的，特敬送每位一副药。 
English: A doctor moved into a new house, and as he was about to leave, he said to his neighbors, "I've been disturbing everyone in the past, and I don't have anything to send. I'd like to send each of you a pack of medicine."

古文：邻舍辞以无病。
现代文：邻居们都说没有病，坚决不收。
English: The neighbors all said that they were not ill and that they would not accept it.

古文：医曰： 但吃了我的药，自然会生起病来。 
现代文：医生说： 现在虽然没有病，但吃了我的药，自然就会生病了。 
English: The doctor said: Although I am not sick now, if I take my medicine, I will naturally get sick.

古文：补药
现代文：补药
English: Tonic

古文：一医止宿病家，半夜屎急不便。乃出于一箱格中，闭之。
现代文：有一位医生，留住在病人家。半夜时，忽然要拉屎，一时找不到茅坑，就偷偷地屙在他药箱的一小格里。
English: There was a doctor who stayed at the patient's house. In the middle of the night, he suddenly had to defecate, and when he couldn't find a latrine, he secretly put a small bottle of water in his medicine chest.

古文：晨起，主人请用药。偶欲抽视此格，医坚持不许。
现代文：第二天早晨，主人起来要用药，碰巧要拉开那装屎的一格，医生马上拦住，坚决不让拉开。
English: The next morning, when the owner got up to take his medication, he happened to want to pull open the box containing the excrement. The doctor immediately stopped him and refused to let him pull it open.

古文：主人问： 是何药？ 
现代文：主人不明白，问： 是什么药？ 
English: The owner didn't understand and asked, "What kind of medicine?"

古文：答曰： 我自吃的补药在内。 
现代文：医生回答说： 这是我自己吃的补药。 偷肉
English: The doctor replied, "This is the tonic I ate myself.

古文：偷肉厨子往一富家治酒，窃肉一大块，藏于帽内。
现代文：一个厨师到一个富人家置办酒席，偷了一大块肉，藏在帽子里，恰巧被主人看见了。
English: A cook came to a rich man's house to prepare a banquet, stole a large piece of meat, hid it in his hat, and happened to be seen by the owner.

古文：适为主人窥见，有意作耍他拜揖，好使帽内肉跌下地来。
现代文：主人有意要耍弄他，让他弯腰作揖，好让帽子里的肉掉下来。
English: The owner wanted to play a trick on him by making him bend over so that the meat inside the hat would fall out.

古文：乃曰： 厨司务，劳动你，我作揖奉谢。 
现代文：就对厨师说： 师傅，你辛苦了，我作揖奉谢。 
English: and said to the cook, "Master, you have worked hard, and I thank you for making the stew.

古文：厨子亦知主人已觉，恐跌出不好看相。急跪下曰： 相公若拜揖，小人竟下跪。 
现代文：厨师知道主人已发觉他偷肉，见主人作揖，他不敢回敬作揖，怕肉从帽子里掉下来难堪，就急忙跪下说： 相公如果作揖，我就下跪了。 
English: The cook knew that his master had discovered that he was stealing meat, and when he saw that his master was cheating, he dared not return the compliment of cheating, for fear that the meat would fall out of his hat and embarrass him, so he hurriedly knelt down and said, "If my father-in-law cheats, I will kneel down."

古文：怨算命
现代文：怨算命
English: Grievance and fortune-telling

古文：或见医者，问以生意如何。
现代文：有人遇见一个医生，就上前询问他生意怎么样？
English: When you meet a doctor, do you go up to him and ask him how business is?

古文：答曰： 不要说起，都被算命先生误了。嘱我有病人家不要去走。 
现代文：医生回答说： 别提了，都让那个算命先生给耽误了，他叫我凡是有病的人家都不要去。 
English: The doctor replied, "Don't mention it, it was all delayed by that fortune-teller, who told me not to go to the house of anyone who was ill."

古文：篦头
现代文：篦头
English: Shantou

古文：篦头者被贼偷窃。
现代文：有一个替人篦头的人，家里被偷了。
English: There was a man who worked as a substitute chef, and his house was robbed.

古文：次日，到主顾家做生活。
现代文：第二天来到主顾家篦头时，仍然满脸愁容。
English: The next day, when he came to the client's home for steamed buns, his face was still sad.

古文：主人见其戚容，问其故。答曰： 一生辛苦所积，昨夜被盗。
现代文：主人问是怎么回事，回答说： 我一生辛辛苦苦积攒下来的财产，昨夜里全被贼偷去了。
English: When his master asked what had happened, he replied: "All my property, which I have worked hard to accumulate, was stolen by thieves last night.

古文：仔细想来，只当替贼篦了一世头耳。 
现代文：仔细想来，只当是替贼篦了一辈子的头。 
English: If you think about it, it's as if you've been working for a thief all your life.

古文：主人怒而逐之。
现代文：主人听后十分生气，就把他赶走了。
English: The owner was very angry after hearing this and chased him away.

古文：他日另换一人。问曰： 某人原是府上主顾，如何不用？ 
现代文：第二天又请了一个人来篦头，这个人问： 前一个篦头的原是您府上主顾，为什么不用他了？ 
English: The next day, he invited another person to make steamed buns. This person asked, "The previous baker was your family's main customer. Why don't you use him?"

古文：主人为述前言。其人曰： 这样不会讲话的，只好出来弄卵。 
现代文：主人把前一天的事说了，这个人说： 像这样不会说话的人，只好出来给人家弄蛋。 
English: The owner told the story of the previous day, and the man said: "People like this, who can't speak, have to go out and make eggs for other people.

古文：头嫩
现代文：头嫩
English: Head tenderloin

古文：一待诏替人剃头，才举手，便所伤甚多。
现代文：一个理发的给人剃头，才开始剃了几下，就伤了几处头皮。
English: When a barber shaves someone's head, he only shaves a few times before injuring several parts of the scalp.

古文：乃停刀辞主人曰： 此头尚嫩，下不得刀。
现代文：于是，他就放下刀子不剃了，并对主人说： 你的头皮太嫩，下不了刀。
English: So he put down his knife and did not shave, and said to his master: "Your scalp is too tender to be shaved.

古文：且过几时，俟其老了再剃罢。 
现代文：等过些时，让它长老点，再给你剃吧。 
English: Wait a while, let it grow, and then shave it off.

古文：不下剪
现代文：不下剪
English: No shearing

古文：裁缝裁衣，反覆量，久不肯下剪。
现代文：有一个裁缝为人裁衣，反复量了半天，也不肯下剪。
English: There was a tailor who cut people's clothes, measured them repeatedly for half a day, and refused to cut them.

古文：徒弟问其故，答曰： 有了他的，便没有了我的；有了我的，又没有了他的。 
现代文：徒弟问他原因，裁缝回答说： 有了他的，便没有了我的；有了我的，便没有了他的。 
English: The apprentice asked him why, and the tailor replied: "If you have him, you don't have me; if you have me, you don't have him."

古文：有进益
现代文：有进益
English: Profitable

古文：一翁有三婿，长裁缝，次银匠，惟第三者不学手艺，终日闲游。
现代文：一个老头有三个女婿，大女婿是裁缝，二女婿是银匠，只有三女婿游手好闲，什么手艺也不会。
English: An old man has three sons-in-law. The eldest son-in-law is a tailor, the second son-in-law is a silversmith, and only the third son-in-law is idle and does not know any craft.

古文：翁责之曰： 做裁缝的，要落几尺就是几尺；做银匠的，要落几钱就是几钱。
现代文：有一天，老人责备三女婿说： 做裁缝的，想留几尺布就是几尺布；做银匠的，想留几钱银就是几钱银。
English: One day, the old man scolded his third son-in-law, saying, "As a tailor, if you want to keep a few feet of cloth, it's a few feet of cloth; as a silversmith, if you want to keep a few coins, it's a few coins.

古文：独汝游手好闲，有何结局？ 
现代文：只有你游手好闲，没什么好结局。 
English: You're the one who's been slacking, and it's not going to end well.

古文：三婿曰： 不妨，待我打一把铁撬开人家库门，要取论千论百，也是易事，稀罕他几尺几钱！ 
现代文：三女婿说： 那有什么，等我打一把铁器，去撬开人家库门，要拿成千上万的钱财，也是容易的事，谁还稀罕那几尺几钱？ 
English: The third son-in-law said, "What's the matter with that? It's easy for me to get hold of thousands of dollars when I use an iron tool to break open someone's vault door. Who doesn't want to get their hands on a few dollars?"

古文：翁曰： 这等说，竟是贼了。 
现代文：老人吃惊地说： 那样做，就是贼了。 
English: Surprised, the old man said, "If you do that, you're a thief."

古文：婿曰： 他们两个整日落人家东西，难道不是贼？ 
现代文：三女婿反问： 他们两人整天拿人家的东西，难道就不是贼？ 
English: The third son-in-law asked: Aren't they both thieves, taking other people's things all day long?

古文：包活
现代文：包活
English: 包活

古文：一医药死人儿，主家诟之曰： 汝好好殡殓我儿罢了，否则讼之于官。 
现代文：一个医生医死了人家的小孩，主人生气地骂道： 你要把我的孩子好好埋葬了，咱就算完事，不然的话，我就到官府告你。 
English: A doctor treated and killed someone else's child. The owner angrily scolded him: "You have to bury my child properly. Let's just get it over with. Otherwise, I'll go to the government and sue you."

古文：医许以带归处置，因匿儿于药箱中。
现代文：医生答应带回去安葬，就把尸体装在药箱里。
English: The doctor agreed to take the body back for burial and put it in a medicine chest.

古文：中途又遇一家邀去，启箱用药，误露儿尸。
现代文：走到半路，医生又被一家人请去看病。他打开药箱用药时，不小心把小孩的尸体露了出来。
English: Halfway there, the doctor was invited by a family to see a patient again. When he opened the medicine box to apply the medicine, he accidentally exposed the child's corpse.

古文：主家惊问，对曰： 这是别人医杀了，我带去包活的。 
现代文：主人大惊，问是怎么回事。医生说： 这是别人医死了的小孩，我带回去医活。 
English: The owner was shocked and asked what had happened. The doctor said: "This is a child who was treated and died by someone else. I'm taking him back to be treated."

古文：索谢
现代文：索谢
English: Thank you.

古文：一贫士患腹泻，请医调治。
现代文：一个穷人拉肚子，请医生调治。
English: A poor man has a stomach ache. He asks the doctor to adjust his treatment.

古文：谓医曰： 家贫不能馈药金，医好之日，奉请一醉。 
现代文：那人对医生说： 我家很穷，付不起药钱。等我病好那天，一定好好犒劳你。 
English: The man said to the doctor: My family is very poor and can't afford to pay for medicine. When I get better, I will reward you.

古文：医从之。
现代文：医生答应了。
English: The doctor agreed.

古文：服药而愈，恐医索谢，诈言腹泻未止。
现代文：穷人吃药后腹泻好了，怕医生要他酬谢，就撒谎说肚子还没有治好。
English: After taking the medicine, the poor man's diarrhea was cured. Afraid that the doctor would ask him for a reward, he lied and said that his stomach was still not cured.

古文：一日，医者伺其大便，随往验之。
现代文：有一天，医生查看他的大便，验证是否病已治好。
English: One day, the doctor checked his stool to see if he was cured.

古文：见撒出者俱是干粪，因怒指而示之曰： 撒了这样好粪，如何还不请我？ 
现代文：发现那人屙的全是干屎，就生气地指着那干屎说： 你拉了这样好的干屎，为什么还不请我吃？ 
English: When he found that the man's bowl was full of dried excrement, he angrily pointed to the dried excrement and said, "You made such good dried excrement, why didn't you invite me to eat it?"

古文：大方打幼科
现代文：大方打幼科
English: Generously playing kindergarten

古文：大方脉采住小儿科痛打，旁人劝曰： 你两个同道中，何苦如此。 
现代文：有个给大人看病的医生踩住小儿科医生痛打，旁边的人劝说道： 你们都是同行，何必这样呢？ 
English: A doctor who treated adults stepped on a pediatrician and beat him severely. The people next to him tried to persuade him, saying, "You are all colleagues, why do you have to do this?

古文：大方脉曰： 列位有所不知，这厮可恶得紧。
现代文：给大人治病的医生说： 诸位有所不知，这家伙实在太可恶。
English: The doctor, who treats adults, said: "I don't know about you, but this guy is really disgusting.

古文：我医的大人俱变成孩子与他医，谁想他医的孩子，一个也不放大来与我医。 
现代文：我医治的大人都投胎转世成小儿让他医，可他医的小儿，一个也不放过来给我医。 
English: All the adults I treat have been reincarnated as children to be treated by him, but none of the children of his doctors are allowed to come and treat me.

古文：吃白药
现代文：吃白药
English: Take the white pill

古文：有终日吃药而不谢医者，医甚憾之。
现代文：有个整天吃药却不给医生钱的人，医生对他很不满意。
English: There was a man who took medicine all day and didn't pay the doctor. The doctor wasn't happy with him.

古文：一日，此人问医曰： 猫生病吃甚药？ 
现代文：一天，这人来问医生： 猫生病吃什么药？ 
English: One day, this man came to ask the doctor: What medicine should a sick cat take?

古文：曰： 吃乌药。 
现代文：医生说： 吃乌药。 
English: The doctor said, "Take the herbal medicine."

古文： 然则，狗生病吃何药？ 
现代文：那人又问： 那么，狗生病吃什么药呢？ 
English: The man then asked: So, what kind of medicine does a sick dog take?

古文：曰： 吃白药。 
现代文：医生说： 吃白药。 
English: The doctor said: Take white pills.

古文：跳蚤药
现代文：跳蚤药
English: Flea medicine

古文：一人卖跳蚤药，招牌上写出： 卖上好蚤药。 
现代文：有个人卖跳蚤药，招牌上写着： 卖上好的跳蚤药。 
English: There was a man selling flea medicine. The sign read: Sell good flea medicine.

古文：问： 何以用法？ 答曰： 捉住跳蚤，以药涂其嘴，即死矣。 医赔
现代文：买药的人问这药怎样用，卖药的说： 捉住跳蚤，把药涂在它嘴上，它马上就会死。 医赔
English: When the buyer asked how to use the medicine, the seller said, "If you catch a flea and apply the medicine to its mouth, it will die immediately.

古文：一医医死人儿，主人欲举讼。愿以己子赔之。
现代文：一个医生医死了人家的儿子，孩子的父亲要到官府去告他，医生只好把自己的儿子赔给他。
English: A doctor killed someone's son. The child's father wanted to go to the authorities to sue him. The doctor had to pay him for his son.

古文：一日医死人仆，家止一仆。
现代文：后来这个医生又医死了人家的仆人，又把家里惟一的一个仆人赔给了人家。
English: Later, this doctor also cured the servant of another family, and paid the only servant of the family to the other family.

古文：又以赔之。夜间又有叩门者云： 娘娘产里病，烦看。 
现代文：一天深夜，又有人来敲门，说： 我老婆生孩子患了病，请医生去看看。 
English: Late one night, someone knocked on the door again and said, "My wife and child are ill, please go and see a doctor."

古文：医私谓其妻曰： 淘气！那家想必又看中你了。 
现代文：医生听了，私下对妻子说： 真气人，那家想必是看中你了。 
English: The doctor listened and said to his wife privately, "That's really upsetting, that family must have had their eye on you.

古文：医屁
现代文：医屁
English: Doctor's Fart

古文：一人患病，医生看脉云： 吃了药，腹中定响，当走大便。不然，定撒些屁。 
现代文：一个人患病，医生给他诊完脉后说： 吃了我这药，肚子里肯定有响声，大便往往就通畅了，即使不通畅，也会放些屁。 
English: A man fell ill, and after examining his pulse, the doctor said, "After taking this medicine, there must have been a rumbling in my stomach, and my stool often became loose. Even if it was not loose, I would fart a little.

古文：少顷，坐中忽闻屁声。医曰： 如何？ 
现代文：病人吃完药后，不一会，听到有人放了声屁，医生炫耀地说： 怎么样，效果好吧？ 
English: After the patient finished taking the medicine, after a while, he heard someone fart, and the doctor said ostentatiously: How is it, is the effect good?

古文：客应云： 是小弟撒的。 
现代文：一客人应答说： 是小弟放的。 
English: A guest replied: It was my younger brother who set it off.

古文：医曰： 也好。 
现代文：医生说： 谁放都好。 
English: The doctor said, "Anyone can be released."

古文：冥王访名医
现代文：冥王访名医
English: The Dark Lord Visits a Famous Physician

古文：冥王遣鬼卒访阳间名医，命之曰： 门前无冤鬼者即是。 
现代文：阎王爷派小鬼查访人间名医，并且说： 你们看门前没有冤死鬼的就是。 
English: Yan Wangye sent the imp to visit the world-renowned doctor, and said: You are the ones who do not have the ghost of a wrongful death in front of your door.

古文：鬼卒领旨，来到阳世。
现代文：小鬼领旨，来到人间。
English: The imp came to the human world.

古文：每过医门，冤鬼毕集。
现代文：每过一个医门，门前都有许多冤鬼。
English: Every time you pass a doctor's door, there are many evil spirits in front of the door.

古文：最后至一门，见门首独鬼彷徨。曰： 此可以当名医矣。 
现代文：最后到了一医家，见门前只有一个鬼在荡来荡去，小鬼说： 这肯定是名医了。 
English: At last they came to a doctor's house, and there was only a ghost swinging in front of the door. The little ghost said, "This must be a famous doctor."

古文：问之，乃昨日新竖药牌者。
现代文：一打听，原来是昨天新挂牌开张的。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a new store that opened yesterday.

古文：取名
现代文：取名
English: Naming ceremony

古文：有贩卖药材离家数载者，其妻已生下四子。
现代文：有个贩卖药材的人离家数年，其妻已生下四个孩子。
English: A man who sells medicinal herbs has been away from home for several years and his wife has given birth to four children.

古文：一日夫归，问众子何来？
现代文：有一天丈夫回到家，追问四个孩子从何而来？
English: One day her husband came home and asked where the four children had come from.

古文：妻曰： 为你出外多年，我朝暮思君，结想成胎。故命名俱暗藏深意：长是你乍离家室，宿舟沙畔，故名宿砂；次是你远乡作客，我在家志念，故名远志；三是料你置货完备，合当归家，故唤当归；四是连年盼你不到，今该返回故乡，故唤茴香。 
现代文：妻子说： 因为你外出多年，我朝思暮想，结想成胎，所以取名全都暗藏深意：长子是你才离开家，宿舟沙畔，故名 宿砂 ；次子是你远乡作客，我在家志念，故名 远志 ；三子是你卖完货，应当归家，故唤 当归 ，四子是连年盼你不到，今该返回故乡，故唤 茴香 。 
English: The wife said, "Because you have been away for many years, I have been thinking about you day and night, and I want to conceive a child, so all the names have hidden deep meanings: the eldest son is the one who left the house, and the second son is the one who is away from home, and I am at home, so the name is Distant Dream; the third son is the one who has sold the goods and should return home, so the name is Homecoming; the fourth son is the one who has been looking forward to you for years, and now he should return to his hometown, so the name is Musk.

古文：夫闻之大笑曰： 依你这等说来，我再在外几年，家里竟开得一爿中药铺了！ 
现代文：丈夫听了妻子说的话，大笑说： 依你这样说来，我再在外待几年，家里竟能开得一间中药铺了。 
English: After listening to his wife's words, the husband laughed loudly and said, "According to you, if I stay out for a few more years, I will be able to open a traditional Chinese medicine shop at home."

古文：看脉
现代文：看脉
English: Look at the context.

古文：有医坏人者，罚牵麦十担，牵毕，放归。
现代文：有个医生，医死了人，主人罚他拉磨，磨十担麦子，医生磨完后被放了回去。
English: There was a doctor who healed a dead man. The owner punished him by making him grind ten loads of wheat. After the doctor had finished grinding, he was let go.

古文：次日，有叩门者曰： 请先生看脉。 
现代文：第二天，又有人敲门说： 请医生去看病。 
English: The next day, there was another knock at the door: "Please see a doctor."

古文：应曰： 晓得了。
现代文：医生说： 晓得了。
English: The doctor said: I see.

古文：你先去淘净在那里，我就来牵也。 
现代文：你先回去把麦子准备好，我就去拉。 
English: You go back and get the wheat ready, and I'll pull it.

古文：医女接客
现代文：医女接客
English: Medical receptionist

古文：医士、妓女、偷儿三人，死见冥王。
现代文：医生、妓女、小偷三人死后见阎王。
English: A doctor, a prostitute and a thief went to hell after their deaths.

古文：王问生前技术，医士曰： 小人行医，人有疾病，能起死回生。 
现代文：阎王问生前职业，医生答： 小人行医，人有疾病，能起死回生。 
English: Yan Wang asked about his previous occupation, and the doctor replied: A villain practises medicine, a person has a disease, and can bring the dead back to life.

古文：王怒曰： 我每常差鬼卒勾提罪人，你反与我把持抗衡，可发往油锅受罪。 
现代文：阎王大怒道： 我每次派鬼卒勾提罪人，你反与我对抗，应该罚你去下油锅受罪。 
English: Yan Wang said angrily, "Each time I send a ghost to summon a sinner, you fight against me. You should be punished and suffer the consequences."

古文：次问妓女，妓女曰： 接客，人没妻室者，与他解渴应急。 王曰： 方便孤身，延寿一纪。 
现代文：又问妓女，妓女说： 给没有老婆的人解渴应急。 阎王说： 方便孤身，延长寿命十二年。 
English: He also asked the prostitute, and the prostitute said: To quench the thirst of a man who has no wife.  Yan Wang said: It is convenient to be single, and prolongs life by twelve years.

古文：再问偷儿，答曰： 做贼。
现代文：再问小偷，小偷答道： 做贼。
English: Ask the thief again, and the thief answers: To be a thief.

古文：人家晒晾衣服，散放银钱，我去替他收拾些。 
现代文：人家晾晒衣服，散放银钱，我去替他们收拾。 
English: People dry their clothes and scatter money, and I go and clean up after them.

古文：王曰： 与人分劳代力也，加寿十年，发转阳世。 
现代文：阎王说： 这是给人代劳帮忙，增加寿命十年，放回阳世。 
English: Yan Wang said: This is to help people to work on behalf of others, increase their life expectancy by ten years, and return them to the sun.

古文：医士急忙哀告曰： 大王若如此判断，只求放我还阳。家中尚有一子一女，子叫他去做贼，女叫她去接客便了。 
现代文：医生急忙哀告说： 大王如果这样判决，只求放我返回阳世，家中还有一儿一女，儿子叫他去做贼，女儿叫她当妓女接客就是了。 
English: The doctor quickly lamented, "If the great king makes such a judgment, I can only ask to be released back into the world. I have a son and a daughter at home. My son asked me to be a thief, and my daughter asked me to be a prostitute to receive guests.

古文：幼科
现代文：幼科
English: Pediatrics

古文：富家延二医，一大方，一幼科。
现代文：有个富人请了两个医生：一个大方，一个幼科。
English: A rich man called in two doctors: a general practitioner and a pediatrician.

古文：客至。问： 二位何人？ 主人曰： 皆名医。 
现代文：来客问两位医生是谁，主人说： 都是名医。 
English: When the guest asked who the two doctors were, the host said, "They are both famous doctors."

古文：又问： 哪一科？ 主人曰： 这是大方，这个便是小儿。 
现代文：客人又问是哪一科，主人说： 这是大方，这个便是小儿。 
English: The guest asked again which subject, and the host said: "This is generosity, and this is children."

古文：曰： 不曾。 
现代文：骂
English: Swearing

古文：问： 何以不骂？ 
现代文：有个医生不学无术，病家花费了不少医药费，总是治不好病。
English: There is a doctor who does not learn anything, the patient has spent a lot of medical expenses, and it is always difficult to cure the disease.

古文：仆答曰： 要骂要打的人多得紧在那里，叫我如何挨挤得上？ 
现代文：因此，病人家十分怨恨，便让仆人到医生家去臭骂一通，出出怨气。不一会儿，仆人回来了，主人问骂了没有，仆人回答说： 没有。 主人问为什么没骂，仆人回答说： 要打他骂他的人一大堆，叫我如何挤得上！ 
English: Therefore, the patient's family was very resentful, so they asked the servant to go to the doctor's house and swear a lot, causing resentment. Soon, the servant returned, and the master asked if he had cursed, and the servant replied, "No." The master asked why he had not cursed, and the servant replied, "I want to beat a lot of people who have cursed him, so that I can squeeze them in!"

古文：游水
现代文：游水
English: Swimming in the water

古文：一医生医坏人，为彼家所缚。
现代文：有个医生医死了人，被病家用绳子捆住。
English: There was a doctor who treated a dead man and was tied up with a rope by the patient.

古文：夜半逃脱，赴水遁归。
现代文：医生半夜弄开了绳结，悄悄逃到河边，游水回了家。
English: The doctor untied the knot in the middle of the night, quietly fled to the river, and swam back home.

古文：见其子方读《脉诀》，遽谓曰： 我儿读书尚缓，还是学游水要紧。 
现代文：看见他的儿子正在灯下看医书，急切地对儿子说： 我儿读书可缓，还是学游泳要紧。 
English: Seeing his son reading a medical textbook under a lamp, he said eagerly to his son, "My son can study slowly, but it's important to learn to swim."

古文：相相
现代文：相相
English: phase phase

古文：有善相者，扯一人要相。
现代文：有个善于看相的人，拉住一个人要替他看相。
English: A man who was good at reading faces stopped someone to read his face for him.

古文：其人曰： 我倒相着你了。 
现代文：那人说： 我倒会看你的相。 
English: The man said, "I can tell by your face."

古文：相者笑云： 你相我何如？ 
现代文：看相的笑着说： 你相着我什么了？ 
English: He looked at me and said with a smile: What happened to you?

古文：答曰： 我相你决是相不着的。 
现代文：那个人回答说： 我相着你绝对是相不准的。 
English: The man replied: "I'm not sure about you at all.

古文：讳输棋
现代文：讳输棋
English: A game of bluff

古文：有自负棋高者。与人角，连负三局。
现代文：有个人自以为棋艺高超，和别人下棋，连输三盘。
English: There was a man who thought he was a great chess player, but when he played against others, he lost three games in a row.

古文：次日，人问之曰： 昨日较棋几局？ 
现代文：第二天，有人问他： 昨天下了几盘棋？ 
English: The next day, someone asked him: How many games of chess did you play yesterday?

古文：答曰： 三局。 
现代文：他回答道： 三盘。 
English: He replied, "Three sets."

古文：又问： 胜负何如？ 
现代文：又问： 胜负怎么样？ 
English: He also asked: What about the result of the game?

古文：曰： 第一局我不曾赢，第二局他不曾输，第三局我本等要和，他不肯罢了。 好棋
现代文：那人回答说： 第一盘我没有赢，第二盘他没有输，第三盘应该是和棋，对方又不肯和。 好棋
English: The man replied: I didn't win the first set, he didn't lose the second set, and the third set should have been a game of chess, but the opponent refused to play.

古文：一人以好棋破产，因而为小偷，被人缚住。
现代文：有个人因为嗜好下棋而破了产，去做小偷，被人捉住绑在那里示众。
English: There was a man who went bankrupt because of his hobby of playing chess. He became a thief and was caught, tied up and paraded around.

古文：有相识者，见而问之。
现代文：有棋友见了，问他是怎么回事。
English: A chess friend saw him and asked him what was going on.

古文：答云： 彼请我下棋，嗔我棋好，遂相困耳。 
现代文：这个人说： 对方请我下棋，怪罪我棋下得好，于是把我绑在这里。 
English: This person said: The other side invited me to play chess, blamed me for playing well, and then tied me here.

古文：客曰： 岂有此理？ 
现代文：棋友说： 岂有此理。 
English: The chess player said, "That's not true.

古文：其人答曰： 从来棋高一招，缚手缚脚。 
现代文：那个人答道： 从来都是棋高一招，缚手缚脚。 
English: The man replied, "It's always been a high-stakes game, tying hands and tying feet.

古文：银匠偷
现代文：银匠偷
English: The silversmith steals

古文：一人生子，虑其难养，请一星相家算命。
现代文：有个人生了儿子，怕不好养，便请来算卦的算命。
English: There was a man who had a son and was afraid that it would be difficult to raise him, so he invited a fortune-teller.

古文：星士曰： 关煞倒也没得，大来运限俱好。只是四柱中犯点贼星，不成正局。 
现代文：算命先生说： 关坎倒也没有，长大后命运门槛也还都好，只是四柱中犯点贼星，不成正局。 
English: The fortune-teller said: There is no barrier, and the threshold of fate is still good after growing up. However, if one of the four pillars is broken, it will not be a positive situation.

古文：那人曰： 不妨。只要养得大，就叫他学做银匠。 
现代文：那人说： 那倒没关系，只要养得大，就叫他学做银匠。 
English: The man said, "That doesn't matter. As long as he grows up, let him learn to be a silversmith."

古文：星士曰： 为何？ 
现代文：算命先生问： 这是为什么？ 
English: The fortune teller asked: Why is that?

古文：答曰： 做了银匠，哪日不偷几分银子养家活口。 
现代文：那人回答说： 做了银匠，哪天不偷几分银子养家糊口？ 
English: The man replied: "As a silversmith, how can you not steal a few pennies to feed your family?

古文：利心重
现代文：利心重
English: Interest is high

古文：银匠开铺三日，绝无一人进门。
现代文：有个银匠开业三天，没有一个人上门。
English: A silversmith opened for three days and no one came to the door.

古文：至暮有以碎银二钱来倾者，乃落其半，倾作对充与之。
现代文：一天傍晚，一个人拿了二钱碎银来熔铸，银匠偷偷地留下一半，只用一钱熔铸后交给那人。
English: One evening, a man took two pieces of silver and melted them down. The silversmith secretly kept half, melted it down to a single coin and gave it to the man.

古文：其人大怒，谓其利心太重。
现代文：那人很生气，说银匠取利之心太重。
English: The man was angry, saying the silversmith was too greedy.

古文：银匠曰： 天下人的利心再没有轻过如我的。
现代文：银匠说： 天下的人，取利之心再也没有比我轻的了。
English: The silversmith said, "There is no one in the world whose heart for profit is lighter than mine.

古文：开了三日店，止落得一钱，难道自己吃了饭，三分一日，你就不要还了？ 
现代文：开了三天店只拿了一钱，难道你自己吃了饭，别人三天的死活就不管了？ 
English: When you opened the store for three days, you only took one dollar. Did you eat the food yourself, and didn't care about the lives of others for three days?

古文：裁缝
现代文：裁缝
English: Dressmaker

古文：时年大旱，太守命法官祈雨，雨不至。太守怒欲治之。
现代文：有一年大旱，太守命法官求雨，结果还是没有下雨，太守很生气，要治法官的罪。
English: One year, there was a severe drought, and the Taishou judge begged for rain, but there was no rain. The Taishou was very angry and wanted to punish the judge.

古文：法官禀云： 小道本事平常，不如某裁缝最好。 
现代文：法官禀报说： 小道本事平常，不如请裁缝来。 
English: The judge's report said: Xiaodao's ability is ordinary, it is better to ask a tailor.

古文：太守曰： 何以见得？ 
现代文：太守说： 何以见得？ 
English: The lady-in-waiting said, "How do you know that?"

古文：答曰： 他要落几尺就是几尺。 
现代文：法官答道： 他要落几尺就是几尺。 
English: The judge replied: He fell a few feet.

古文：要尺
现代文：要尺
English: To shaku

古文：一裁缝上厕坑，以尺挥插墙上。便完忘记而去。
现代文：有个裁缝上厕所，把尺插在墙缝中，解完大便就走了。
English: A tailor went to the toilet, stuck his ruler in a crack in the wall, took a shit and left.

古文：随有一满洲人登厕，偶见尺，将腰刀挂在上面。
现代文：后来一个满洲人上厕所，见到墙上有尺，便将腰刀挂在尺上。
English: Later, a Manchurian went to the toilet, saw a ruler on the wall, and hung his waist knife on the ruler.

古文：少顷，裁缝转来取尺，见有满人，畏而不前，观望良久。
现代文：不一会儿裁缝回来取尺，见到满人和尺上挂着的腰刀，十分害怕，不敢上前拿尺。
English: After a while, the tailor came back to get the ruler. He saw the man and the loincloth hanging on the ruler. He was so scared that he didn't dare to take the ruler.

古文：满人曰： 蛮子你要甚么？ 
现代文：站了半天，满洲人说： 蛮子你要什么？ 
English: After standing for half a day, the Manchurian said, "What do you want, brute?"

古文：答曰： 小的要尺。 
现代文：裁缝回答说： 小的要尺。 
English: The tailor replied, "The small one."

古文：满人曰： 咱囚攘的，屙也没有屙完，你就要吃！ 
现代文：满洲人说： 王八蛋，咱屙也没有屙完，你就要吃！ 
English: The Manchurian said, "Bastard, we haven't finished eating yet, you have to eat!"

古文：木匠
现代文：木匠
English: Carpenter

古文：一匠人装门闩，误装门外。
现代文：有个木匠给别人装门闩，误将门闩装在门外。
English: A carpenter was fitting a deadbolt for someone else and accidentally left it outside the door.

古文：主人骂为 瞎贼 。
现代文：主人骂木匠是 瞎贼 。
English: The master called the carpenter a thief.

古文：匠答曰： 你便瞎贼！ 
现代文：木匠回答说： 你才是瞎贼！ 
English: The carpenter replied, "You are the thief!

古文：主怒曰： 我如何倒瞎？ 
现代文：主人大怒道： 我怎么瞎？ 
English: The master angrily said, "How can I be blind?

古文：匠曰： 你若有眼，便不来请我这样匠人。 
现代文：木匠说： 你如果有眼，就不会请我这样的木匠。 
English: The carpenter said, "If you had eyes, you wouldn't have hired a carpenter like me.

古文：待诏
现代文：待诏
English: To be announced

古文：一待诏初学剃头，每刀伤一处，则以一指掩之。
现代文：有个剃头匠初学剃头，每用刀刮破一处，就用一个手指按住伤口。
English: There was a barber who shaved his head for the first time. For every place he cut with the knife, he pressed the wound with one finger.

古文：已而，伤多，不胜其掩。乃曰： 原来剃头甚难，须得千手观音来才好。 取耳
现代文：不久，刀伤出现很多，五个指头全按上去了，头还没剃完，于是说： 原来剃头这么难，只有千手观音才做得来。 取耳
English: Soon, there were many knife wounds, the five fingers were all pressed up, and the head had not yet been shaved, so he said: Originally, it was so difficult to shave the head that only the Thousand-armed Goddess of Mercy could do it.

古文：一待诏为人看耳，其人痛极。问曰： 左耳还取否？ 
现代文：有个剃头匠为人掏耳朵，掏右耳朵时，那人喊痛。剃头匠问他： 左耳还掏吗？ 
English: A barber was cutting off a man's ear. When he cut off his right ear, the man cried out in pain. The barber asked him, "Do you still want to cut off your left ear?"

古文：曰： 方完，次及左矣。 
现代文：剃头匠说： 右边的掏完了，再掏左耳。 
English: The barber said, "Now that you have cut off the right ear, cut off the left ear."

古文：其人曰： 我只道就是这样取过去了。 
现代文：那人说： 我还以为你要从右边直接掏到左边呢。 
English: The man said, "I thought you were going to take it from the right directly to the left."

古文：同行
现代文：同行
English: Accompanying

古文：有善刻图书者，偶于市中唤人修脚。
现代文：有个善于刻印章的人，偶然到街上去修脚。
English: A seal engraver happened to be in town for a pedicure.

古文：脚已脱矣，修者正欲举刀，见彼袖中取出一袱，内裹图书刀数把。
现代文：他把鞋脱掉并伸过脚来，修脚匠正要举刀，看见那人从袖中取出一个包袱，里面装有几把刀子。
English: He took off his shoes and stretched them over his feet, and just as the man was about to raise his knife, he saw the man take out of his sleeve a bundle containing several knives.

古文：修者不知，以为剔脚刀也。遂拂然而去。
现代文：修脚匠不知是刻刀，以为是剔脚刀，于是拂袖而去。
English: The pedicurist did not know it was a carving knife, but thought it was a carving knife, so he whipped off his sleeve and left.

古文：追问其故，则曰： 同行中朋友，也来戏弄我。 
现代文：这人追问其原因，修脚匠道： 同行中的朋友，也来戏弄我。 
English: The man asked the reason, and the manicurist said, "My friend who was also traveling with me also came to tease me.

古文：酸酒
现代文：酸酒
English: Sour wine

古文：一酒家招牌上写： 酒每斤八厘，醋每斤一分。 
现代文：有家酒店的招牌上写着： 酒每斤八厘，醋每斤一分。 
English: On the signboard of a hotel it says: Eight centimes per catty of wine, one cent per catty of vinegar.

古文：两人入店沽酒，而酒甚酸。
现代文：两个人入店买酒喝，而酒很酸。
English: Two people go into a shop to buy and drink wine, and the wine is sour.

古文：一人咂舌攒眉曰： 如何有此酸酒，莫不把醋错拿了来？ 
现代文：其中一人咂舌皱眉说： 酒怎么这样酸，莫不是错把醋拿来了？ 
English: One of them, tongue-tied and frowning, said: "How can wine be so sour? Isn't it a mistake to bring vinegar?

古文：友人忙捏其腿曰： 呆子快莫做声，你看牌面上写着醋比酒更贵着哩！ 
现代文：友人急忙捏其大腿说： 呆子快别做声，你看牌子，醋比酒还贵哩！ 
English: A friend quickly pinched his thigh and said: "Don't make a noise, you idiot, look at the brand, vinegar is more expensive than wine!"

古文：卖淡酒
现代文：卖淡酒
English: Selling light liquor

古文：一家做酒，颇卖不去，以为家有耗神，请一先生烧楮退送。口念曰： 先除鹭鸶，后去青鸾。 
现代文：有户人家酿酒，因掺水卖不出去。主人以为有鬼怪作祟，于是请了一位道士烧纸画符驱逐鬼怪，那位道士口中念道： 先除鹭鸶，后去青鸾。 
English: There was a family that made wine, but couldn't sell it because it was mixed with water. The owner thought there was a ghost, so he asked a Taoist to burn paper symbols to drive out the ghost. The Taoist said, "First remove the warts, then go to Qingcheng."

古文：主人曰： 此二鸟你退送他怎的？ 
现代文：主人说： 这两种鸟，驱逐它们干什么？ 
English: The owner said, "What are these two birds doing here?

古文：先生曰： 你不知，都亏这两个禽鸟会下水，遣退了他，包你就卖得去！ 
现代文：先生说： 你不懂，都是亏在这两种鸟会下水，遣退了它们，包你把酒卖出去。 
English: The teacher said, "You don't understand, it's all thanks to these two birds that can go into the water. Send them away and let you sell the wine."

古文：医人
现代文：医人
English: Medical doctor

古文：有送医士出门者，犬适拦门而吠，主人喝之即止。
现代文：有个人送医生出门，狗恰巧挡住大门冲着医生狂叫，主人骂了一句，狗就不叫了。
English: A man was escorting a doctor out the door. The dog happened to block the door and barked at the doctor. The owner scolded the dog and it stopped barking.

古文：医赞其能解人意。主曰： 虽则畜生，倒也还会依人。 
现代文：医生称赞狗能解人意，主人说： 虽然是畜生，倒也还会依人。 
English: The doctor praised the dog for being able to understand people, and the owner said: Although it is an animal, it will still follow people.

古文：医按院
现代文：医按院
English: Ippo Academy

古文：一按院患病，接医诊视之。医惊持畏缩，错看了手背。
现代文：有个按院得了病，请医生来看病，医生十分担心害怕，诊脉时错按在病人的手背上。
English: A hospital patient fell ill and asked a doctor to come and see him. The doctor was very worried and afraid, and pressed the wrong pulse on the back of the patient's hand when diagnosing the pulse.

古文：按院大怒，责而逐之。
现代文：按院十分恼怒，把医生痛打了一顿，并赶他出去。
English: According to the hospital, he was so angry that he beat up the doctor and threw him out.

古文：医曰： 你打便打得好，只是你脉息俱无了。 
现代文：医生说： 打是打得好，只是你脉搏没了。 
English: The doctor said, "You are beating well, but your pulse is gone."

古文：愿脚踢
现代文：愿脚踢
English: May the kicking begin

古文：樵夫担柴，误触医士。
现代文：樵夫担着柴，不小心撞到医生身上。
English: Carrying firewood, the woodcutter accidentally bumped into the doctor.

古文：医怒，欲挥拳。
现代文：医生大怒，要动手打樵夫。
English: The doctor was so angry that he wanted to hit the widower.

古文：樵夫曰： 宁受脚踢，勿动尊手。 
现代文：樵夫说： 宁愿受脚踢，勿动尊手。 
English: The woodcutter said, "I'd rather be kicked. Don't move your hand."

古文：旁人讶之。
现代文：旁边的人感到不解，就问樵夫是什么原因。
English: The person next to him was puzzled and asked the woodcutter what the reason was.

古文：樵者曰： 脚踢未必就死，经了他的手，定然不能活。 
现代文：樵夫解释说： 脚踢未必会死，若经了他的手，定难活命。 
English: The woodcutter explained: "Kicking someone doesn't necessarily mean they will die, but if it were his hand, it would be difficult to survive.

古文：锯箭竿
现代文：锯箭竿
English: Saws and arrows

古文：一人往观武场，飞箭误中其身。
现代文：有个人去武场观看比赛，身上误中一箭。
English: A person went to a martial arts stadium to watch a match and was hit by an arrow by mistake.

古文：迎外科治之。医曰： 易事耳。 
现代文：找外科医生来为他治病，医生说： 小事一桩。 
English: He went to see a surgeon, who said: "It's nothing.

古文：遂用小锯锯外竿，即索谢辞去。
现代文：于是用锯子锯掉体外的箭竿，就索要费用打算离开。
English: As a result, he used a saw to saw off the external arrow shaft and planned to leave after demanding payment.

古文：问： 内截如何？ 
现代文：有人问： 留在体内的箭竿怎么办？ 
English: Some people ask: What about the arrowhead that remains in the body?

古文：答曰： 此是内科的事。 
现代文：医生回答说： 这是内科医生的事。 
English: The doctor replied, "That's up to the internist."

古文：退热
现代文：退热
English: Heat exhaustion

古文：有小儿患身热，请医服药而死。
现代文：有一个小孩发高烧，请医生诊治，吃了医生的药后就死了。
English: There was a child who had a high fever, consulted a doctor, took the doctor's medicine and died.

古文：父请医家咎之，医不信，自往验视。
现代文：小孩的父亲到医生家里责怪医生，医生不信，亲自来到小孩家里验看。
English: The child's father went to the doctor's house to blame the doctor. The doctor did not believe him and came to the child's house to examine him.

古文：抚儿尸谓其父曰： 你太欺心，不过要我为他退热，今身上幸已凉的了，倒反来责备我。 
现代文：抚摸着小孩的尸体，对小孩的父亲说： 你也太欺负人了，我只不过要给他退热，现在医得全身都冰凉了，你反倒来责怪我？ 
English: He stroked the child's corpse and said to the child's father: "You are too much of a bully. I was only trying to cool him down, but now his whole body is cold, and you are blaming me?

古文：炙坛
现代文：炙坛
English: Grilling platform

古文：有以酸酒饮客者，个个攒眉，委吞不下。
现代文：有个人用酸酒招待客人。客人喝了酒，个个皱眉，实在难以下咽。
English: There was a man who invited guests with sour wine. When the guests drank the wine, they all frowned. It was really hard to swallow.

古文：一人嘲之曰： 此酒我有易他良法，使他不酸。 
现代文：有个人嘲讽说： 我有好办法，让这种酒变得不酸。 
English: One person mocked: 'I have a good way to make this wine not sour.

古文：主人曰： 请教。 
现代文：主人急忙请问有什么好办法？
English: Master, please hurry, what's the best way?

古文：客曰： 只将酒坛覆转向天，底上用艾火连炙七次，明日拿起，自然不酸。 
现代文：那人说： 只要把酒坛子底朝天翻过来，底下用艾火连烤七次，到第二天拿起，自然就不酸了。 
English: The man said, "Just turn the bottom of the wine jug upside down and roast it seven times on a smoldering fire. When you pick it up the next day, it will naturally no longer be sour."

古文：主曰： 岂不倾去漏干了？ 
现代文：主人说： 那样的话，酒岂不漏完了？ 
English: The master said, "In that case, won't the wine run out?"

古文：客曰： 这等酸酒，不倾去要他做甚！ 
现代文：那人说： 这么酸的酒，不倒掉要它做什么？ 
English: The man said, "What can such sour wine do if it is not poured?"

古文：着醋
现代文：着醋
English: Vinegar dressing

古文：有卖酸酒者，客上店谓主人曰： 肴只腐菜足矣，酒须要好的。 
现代文：有一家酒馆卖的酒很酸。有一客人来到店里，对店主说： 只要青菜豆腐就可以了，酒一定要上好的。 
English: There is a pub that sells very sour wine. A customer came to the shop and said to the owner: "Just green vegetables and tofu will do, the wine must be good."

古文：少顷，店主问曰： 菜中可要着醋？ 
现代文：不一会儿，店主来问： 菜里放不放醋？ 
English: After a while, the shopkeeper came to ask: Can I put vinegar in the dish?

古文：客曰： 醋滴菜心甚好。 
现代文：客人说： 醋滴到菜心里也挺好。 
English: Guest said: Vinegar dripping into the heart of the dish is also quite good.

古文：又问曰： 腐内可要放些醋？ 
现代文：店主又问： 豆腐里放不放醋？ 
English: The shopkeeper asked again: Can vinegar be put in tofu?

古文：客曰： 醋烹豆腐也好。 
现代文：客人说： 醋熘豆腐也可以。 
English: The guest said, "Vinegar bean curd can also be used."

古文：再问曰： 酒内可要醋否？ 
现代文：店主再问： 酒里放不放醋？ 
English: The shopkeeper asks again: Can vinegar be put in wine?

古文：客讶曰： 酒中如何着得醋？ 
现代文：客人惊讶地说： 酒中怎么能放醋呢？ 
English: The guest was surprised and said: How can vinegar be put in wine?

古文：店主攒眉曰： 怎么处？
现代文：店主故意皱皱眉说： 哎呀，这可怎么办？
English: The shopkeeper deliberately frowned and said: Oh dear, what can we do about this?

古文：已着下去了。 
现代文：醋已经放进去了。 
English: The vinegar is already in.

古文：浼匠迁居
现代文：浼匠迁居
English: The carpenter's move

古文：一人极好静，而所居介于铜、铁两匠之间，朝夕聒耳，甚苦之。
现代文：有一个人，非常喜欢安静，但是他的左右邻居却一个是铜匠、一个是铁匠，从早到晚噪音刺耳，他感到非常痛苦。
English: There was a man who was very fond of peace and quiet, but his neighbours to the right and left were a coppersmith and a blacksmith, and the noise was deafening from morning to night, and he was very distressed.

古文：常曰： 此两家若有迁居之日，我宁可做东款谢。 
现代文：因此，他常常说： 如果这两家肯搬迁的话，我宁愿做东设宴来款谢他们。 
English: As a result, he often said, "If these two families are willing to move, I would rather host a banquet to thank them."

古文：一日，二匠并至曰： 我等欲迁矣，足下素许东道，特来叩领。 
现代文：有一天，铜匠和铁匠一起来到他家，对他说： 我们准备搬迁了，你原来就许下愿，说愿意为我们搬迁做东，所以，今天我们特来领受的。 
English: One day, the coppersmith and the blacksmith came to his house together and said to him: "We are preparing to move. You originally made a vow, saying that you would be willing to relocate for us, so today we are here to receive it.

古文：其人大喜，遂盛款之。
现代文：那个人非常高兴，马上就准备了丰盛的酒席来款待铜匠和铁匠。
English: The man was very happy and immediately prepared a sumptuous banquet to entertain the coppersmith and the blacksmith.

古文：席间问之曰： 汝两家迁往何处？ 
现代文：席间，他问铜匠和铁匠： 你们两家准备搬到哪里去呢？ 
English: During the meal, he asked the coppersmith and the blacksmith: Where are you two going to move to?

古文：答曰： 他搬至我屋里，我即搬至他屋里。 
现代文：铜匠和铁匠回答说： 他搬到我屋里，我就搬到他屋里。 
English: The smith and the coppersmith answered, "If he comes into my house, I will go into his house."

古文：抬柩
现代文：抬柩
English: Carrying the coffin

古文：一医生医死人，主家愤甚。呼群仆毒打，医跪求至再。
现代文：有一个医生，把病人医死了，主人非常气愤，喊来家里的仆人要毒打医生，医生跪下再三求饶。
English: There was a doctor who had cured a patient to death. The master was very angry and called his servants to beat the doctor severely. The doctor knelt down and repeatedly begged for forgiveness.

古文：主曰： 私打可免，官法难饶。 
现代文：最后，主人说： 私打可免，可是官法难容。 
English: In the end, the owner said: Self-dealing is unavoidable, but officialdom is unacceptable.

古文：即命送官惩治。
现代文：于是，就把医生押到官府治罪。
English: As a result, the doctor was sent to the government office to be punished.

古文：医畏罪，哀曰： 愿雇人抬，往殡殓。 
现代文：医生害怕被治罪，便哀声求告说： 我愿意雇人把死者抬去殡殓了。 
English: The doctor, fearing that he would be punished, cried out, "I would like to hire someone to carry the body to the funeral home."

古文：主人许之。
现代文：主人同意了。
English: The owner agreed.

古文：医苦家贫，无力雇募。
现代文：然而，医生家里很贫穷，没有钱雇人，家里有两个儿子。
English: However, the doctor's family was very poor and did not have the money to hire someone. There were two sons in the family.

古文：家有二子，夫妻四人共来抬柩。
现代文：于是，他们夫妻、儿子四个人便一起来抬柩。
English: As a result, the couple and their four sons came together to carry the anchor.

古文：至中途，医生叹曰： 为人切莫学行医。 
现代文：抬到中途，医生感叹地说： 为人切莫学行医。 
English: Halfway through, the doctor said with a sigh: "Don't learn to be a doctor.

古文：妻咎夫曰： 为你行医害老妻。 
现代文：妻子责怪丈夫说： 为你行医害老妻。 
English: The wife blamed her husband and said, "I've been treating your old wife for you.

古文：幼子云： 头重脚轻抬不起。 
现代文：小儿子说： 头重脚轻抬不起。 
English: The youngest son said, "I can't lift my heavy head."

古文：长子曰： 爹爹，以后医人拣瘦的。 
现代文：大儿子却劝父亲说： 爹爹，以后医人拣瘦的。 
English: The eldest son, however, advised his father: "Daddy, in the future, doctors will choose thin people.

古文：包殡殓
现代文：包殡殓
English: Funeral packages

古文：有医死人儿，许以袖归殡殓。其家恐见欺，命仆随之。
现代文：有个医生医死别人的儿子，答应用衣袖兜其儿尸为之送葬，死儿家恐怕被骗，命仆人跟随同往。
English: There was a doctor who treated the dead son of someone else, and promised to take the dead body of his child in his sleeve pocket and bury it. The dead child's family was afraid of being cheated, and ordered the servant to go with him.

古文：至一桥上，忽取儿尸掷之河内。
现代文：到了一桥上，医生忽然取出儿尸投入河内。
English: When they reached a bridge, the doctor suddenly took out the child's corpse and threw it into Hanoi.

古文：仆怒曰： 如何抛了我家小舍？ 
现代文：仆人大怒道： 为什么抛了我家的小儿？ 
English: The servant said angrily, "Why did you throw away my family's child?

古文：医曰： 非也。 
现代文：医生说： 不是的。 
English: The doctor said, "No."

古文：因举左袖曰： 你家的在这里。 
现代文：于是抬起左衣袖说： 你家的小主人在这里。 
English: Then he lifted up his left sleeve and said: "Here is the little master of your house."

古文：药户
现代文：药户
English: Pharmacy

古文：一乡人与城里人同行，见一妓女。乡人问： 是谁家宅眷？ 城里人曰： 此药户也。 
现代文：一乡下人和城里人一起走，见一妓女，乡下人问是谁家宅眷，城里人回答说： 她是药户家的。 
English: A countryman and a city dweller were walking together when they saw a prostitute. The country dweller asked who her family was, and the city dweller replied, "She's from a pharmacy."

古文：乡人曰： 原来就是开药店的家婆。 
现代文：乡下人说： 原来就是开药店的家婆。 
English: The villager said: It turned out to be my grandmother, who ran a pharmacy.

古文：小犬窠
现代文：小犬窠①
English: Puppy Bowl 1

古文：有人畜一金丝小犬，爱同珍宝。
现代文：有个人养了一只金丝小狗，爱如珍宝。
English: There was a man who had a tiny wire-haired dog that he loved like a treasure.

古文：恐其天寒冻坏，内外各用小棉褥铺成一窠，使其好睡。
现代文：因天寒害怕小狗冻坏，内外各用小棉褥铺成一窠，让小狗得以睡好。
English: Due to the cold weather, the puppy was afraid of freezing, so they used small cotton pads inside and outside to make a bed so that the puppy could sleep well.

古文：不意此犬一日竟卧于儿篮内，主人见之大笑曰： 这畜生好作怪，既不走内窠，又不往外窠，倒钻进小儿窠里去了。 
现代文：有一天不料此狗竟然趴在儿子的睡篮里。主人见了大笑说： 这畜生好能作怪，既不去内窠，又不到外窠，便钻进小儿窠里去了。 
English: One day, the dog was unexpectedly lying in his son's sleeping basket. When his owner saw it, he burst out laughing and said, "This animal is very capable of acting strangely. It doesn't go inside the crib, nor does it go outside the crib, but it burrows into the child's crib."

古文：不着
现代文：不着
English: Don't come

古文：街市失火，延烧百余户。
现代文：街市失火，蔓延烧了百余家。
English: A fire broke out in a street market and spread to burn more than a hundred homes.

古文：有星相二家欲移物以避。
现代文：有两家算卦的要搬移家物来避火。
English: Two families had to move their belongings to escape the flames.

古文：旁人止之曰： 汝两家包管不着，空费搬移。 
现代文：旁边的人劝止说： 你两家包管不着，搬移白费工夫。 
English: The people next to him tried to dissuade him, saying, "You can't take care of the two houses, and moving them would be a waste of time.

古文：星相曰： 火已到矣，如何说这太平话？ 
现代文：算卦的说： 火已烧到了，为何说这太平话？ 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The fire has already burned out, why do you say this nonsense?

古文：曰： 你们从来是不着的，难道今日反会着起来？ 
现代文：旁边的人说： 你们从来是不着的，难道今天反会着起来？ 
English: Someone nearby said: "You've never been late, are you going to be late today?

古文：胡须像
现代文：胡须像
English: Whiskers

古文：画士写真既就，谓主人曰： 请执途人而问之，试看肖否？ 
现代文：有个绘画的为人画完了像，对主人说： 请拿给过路人看看，验证一下像不像。 
English: A painter once finished painting a portrait of a man and said to the owner: Please show it to passers-by to verify whether it looks like him or not.

古文：主人从之。
现代文：主人依从让路人看。
English: The owner agreed to let passers-by take a look.

古文：初见一人问曰： 哪一处最像？ 
现代文：见到第一个人问道： 哪一处最像？ 
English: When he saw the first one, he asked, "Which one looks the most like you?"

古文：其人曰： 方巾最像。 
现代文：那人答： 方巾最像。 
English: The man replied: A square scarf is the most similar.

古文：次见一人，又问曰： 哪一处最像？ 其人曰： 衣服最像。 
现代文：接着问第二人： 哪一处最像？ 第二人说： 衣服最像。 
English: Then he asked the second, "Where does it look like?" The second said, "It looks like a dress."

古文：及见第三人，画士嘱之曰： 方巾、衣服都有人说过，不劳再讲，只问形体何如？ 
现代文：待见到第三人，绘画的叮嘱他说： 方巾、衣服都有人说过，不劳他讲，只问他形体像不像？ 
English: Waiting to see the third person, the painting's exhortation, he said: Some people have said that there are square scarves and clothes. It's not hard for him to tell, just ask him what the shape looks like?

古文：其人踌躇半晌，曰： 胡须最像。 
现代文：第三人看了半晌说： 胡须最像。 
English: A third person looked at the stubble and said: "The beard looks the best."

古文：三名斩
现代文：三名斩
English: Three names cut

古文：朝廷新开一例，凡物有两名者充军，三名者斩。
现代文：朝廷制定一个法规，凡物有两个名称者充军，有三个名称的斩。
English: The imperial court made a regulation that if anything had two names, it would be confiscated, and if it had three names, it would be destroyed.

古文：茄子自觉双名，躲在水中。
现代文：茄子觉得自己是双名，便躲藏在水里。
English: Eggplant feels that he is a double name and hides in the water.

古文：水问曰： 你来为何？ 
现代文：水问茄子道： 你来干什么？ 
English: Water asked Eggplant: What are you doing here?

古文：茄曰： 避朝廷新例。因说我有两名，一名茄子，一名落苏。 
现代文：茄子回答说： 躲避朝廷新例，因为他们说我有两个名称，一个是茄子，一个是落苏。 
English: Eggplant replied, "Avoiding the imperial court is a new precedent, because they say I have two names, one is Eggplant and the other is Losu.

古文：水曰： 若是这等，我该斩了：一名水，二名汤，又有那天灾人祸的放了几粒米，把我来当酒卖。 
现代文：水说： 如果是这样，我该斩了，我一叫水，二叫汤，又有那天灾人祸的放了几粒米，把我当酒卖。 
English: Water said: If this is the case, I should be beheaded. I asked for water and soup, and on that day the evil-doer put out a few grains of rice and sold me as wine.

古文：酒娘
现代文：酒娘
English: Wine Girl

古文：人问： 何为叫做酒娘？ 答曰： 糯米加酒药成浆便是。 
现代文：甲问乙什么叫酒娘，乙回答说： 糯米加酒药成浆便是。 
English: A asked B what a "wine maiden" was, to which B replied: "It's glutinous rice mixed with alcohol to make a paste."

古文：又问： 既有酒娘。为甚没有酒爷？ 
现代文：甲又问： 既然有酒娘，为啥没有酒爷。 
English: A also asked: Since there is a wine girl, why is there no wine master.

古文：答曰： 放水下去，就是酒爷。 
现代文：乙回答说： 放水下去就是酒爷。 
English: B replied: The one who lets the water go down is the master of the house.

古文：其人曰： 若如此说，你家的酒是爷多娘少了。 
现代文：甲说： 如果这样说，你家的酒是爷多娘少了。 
English: A said: If you put it that way, your family's alcohol consumption is more than usual.

古文：走作
现代文：走作
English: Lazy work

古文：一店中酿方熟，适有带巾者过。揖入使尝之。尝毕曰： 竟有些像我。 
现代文：有个酒坊酿酒刚好，正巧有个戴头巾的人路过，那人作揖后进来请求给他尝些，尝后说： 竟然有些像我。 
English: A man wearing a turban happened to be passing by a brewery that was making wine. The man came in after the ceremony and asked to try some. After tasting it, he said, "It's a little bit like me."

古文：店主知其秀才也，谢去之。少焉，一女子过，又使尝之。
现代文：店主一听，知其是秀才。不一会儿，一女子经过，又让女子尝了一些。
English: The shop owner knew he was a genius as soon as he heard about it. Soon, a woman passed by and let the woman taste some more.

古文：女子亦曰： 像我。 
现代文：女子也说： 像我。 
English: The girl also said, "Be like me."

古文：店主曰： 方才秀才官人说 像我 ，是酸意了。你也说 像我 ，此是为何？ 
现代文：店主说： 秀才刚刚说 像我 ，我便知道是 酸意 了，你也说 像我 ，这是为什么？ 
English: The shopkeeper said, "You just said, "Like me," and I knew it was sour. You also said, "Like me," why is that?"

古文：女子曰： 无他，只是有些走作。 
现代文：女子回答说： 没有别的，只是有些走作。 
English: The girl replied, "Nothing, just a little goofing around."

