古文：尔硃荣，字天宝，北秀容人也。
现代文：尔朱荣，字天宝，北秀容人。
English: Le Zhu Rong, the character Tian Bao, starring Beixiu Rongren.

古文：世为部落酋帅，其先居尔硃川，因为氏焉。
现代文：世代任部落的酋长，他的祖先居住在尔朱川，因地名取为姓氏。
English: A tribal chief for generations, his ancestors lived in the Erzhu River and took their surname from the name of the place.

古文：高祖羽健，魏登国初为领人酋长，率契胡武士从平晋阳，定中山，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：他的高祖尔朱羽健，魏道武帝登国初年任领人酋长，率领契胡的武士跟从魏军攻破晋阳，平定中山，被封为散骑常侍，因而定居在秀容川。
English: His gozul, Zhu Yu Jian, was appointed leader and chieftain in the first year of Emperor Wei Daowu's ascension to the throne. He led the warriors of Qihu to follow the Wei army to conquer Jinyang and pacify Zhongshan. He was awarded the title of knight errant, and thus settled in Xiurong River.

古文：以居秀容川，诏割方三百里封之，长为世业。
现代文：朝廷下诏划定周围三百里的土地分封给他，作为永久的家业。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict allocating the surrounding three hundred miles of land to him as a permanent family estate.

古文：道武初，以南秀容川原沃衍，欲令居之。
现代文：道武初年，因南秀容原野肥沃宽广，想让他迁到那里居住。
English: In the first year of his reign, he wanted to move there to live because of the fertility and vastness of the Southern Xiuyong Plain.

古文：羽健曰： 家世奉国，给侍左右，北秀容既在内，差近京师，岂以沃脊，更迁远地？ 
现代文：他说： 以后我家世代为国家效劳，侍奉在皇帝陛下左右，北秀容既然已经被开垦，离京城又近，怎么能因为土地的肥沃与瘠薄，再迁往离京城较远的地方呢？ 
English: He said: Future generations of my family will serve the country and serve around His Majesty the Emperor. Since Beixiu Rong has been reclaimed and is close to the capital, how can we move to a place further away from the capital due to the fertility and thinness of the land?

古文：帝许之。
现代文：道武帝同意他的请求。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：所居处曾有狗舐地，因而穿之得甘泉，因名狗舐泉。
现代文：他住的地方曾有狗用舌头舔地，因而在那地方挖掘得到一股甘泉，便取名为狗舔泉。
English: In the area where he lived, there used to be a dog licking the ground with its tongue. As a result, a spring was excavated in that area and named the "dog licking spring."

古文：曾祖郁德、祖代勤，继为酋长。
现代文：曾祖尔朱郁德、祖父尔朱代勤，继任为酋长。
English: Zenzul Zhuyude, grandfather of Lzhu Daiqin, succeeded as chief.

古文：代勤，太武敬哀皇后舅也。
现代文：代勤，是太武帝敬哀皇后的舅父。
English: The deputy was the uncle of the Empress Dowager.

古文：既以外亲，兼数征伐有功，给复百年，除立义将军。
现代文：因为有外戚的关系，加上多次征战有功，朝廷在他的封地内免除一百年的徭役，授予他为立义将军衔。
English: Because of the relationship with his relative, as well as his many war exploits, the imperial court exempted him from a hundred years of military service in his fief and awarded him the rank of General of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：曾围山而猎，部人射虎，误中其髀。
现代文：他曾到山中围猎，部落中有人用箭射杀猛虎，误中了他的大腿。
English: He once went hunting in the mountains. Someone in the tribe shot a tiger with an arrow and hit his thigh by mistake.

古文：代勤仍令拔箭，竟不推问，曰： 此既过误，何忍加罪。 
现代文：他让人将箭拔出，竟不追问是谁射的，说： 这是误伤，怎么忍心再加罪给他呢？ 
English: He made the arrows be pulled out, but did not inquire who had shot them, saying, "It was an accident. How can I bear to add to his guilt?"

古文：部内咸感其意。
现代文：部落内的人都被他所感动。
English: Everyone in the tribe was moved by him.

古文：位肆州刺史，封梁郡公，以老致仕，岁赐帛百疋以为常。
现代文：官至肆州刺史，被封为梁郡公。后因年老辞官，朝廷每年赐给他布帛一百匹作为常例。
English: He was awarded the title of Prince of Liang County. Later, due to his old age, the imperial court gave him one hundred cloth ponies every year as a rule.

古文：卒，谥曰庄。
现代文：去世后，谥号为庄。
English: After his death, his nickname was Zhuang.

古文：孝庄初，追赠太师、司徒公、录尚书事。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，追赠为太师、司徒公、录尚书事。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang's reign, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Taishi, Stogong, and Rokusho.

古文：父新兴，太和中继为酋长。
现代文：尔朱荣的父亲尔朱新兴，太和年间继任为酋长。
English: Lzhu Rong's father, Lzhu Xingxing, succeeded to the position of chieftain during the reign of Emperor Taizu.

古文：曾行马群，见一白蛇，头有两角，咒之，求畜牧蕃息。
现代文：曾赶着马群遇见一条白蛇，头上长有两只角，因而祝愿祈祷，请求畜牧兴旺。
English: Once, while driving a herd of horses, he came across a white snake with two horns on its head. He wished and prayed for the prosperity of animal husbandry.

古文：自是牛羊驼马，日觉滋盛，色别为群，谷量之。
现代文：从此，牛羊驼马，一天比一天繁盛。他凭身上的毛色将它们分列成群，用山谷的长短来测出它们的数量。
English: From then on, the cattle, sheep, camels and horses became more and more prosperous day by day. He sorted them into groups according to the color of their fur, and measured their number by the length of the valley.

古文：朝廷每有征讨，辄献私马，兼备资粮，助裨军用。
现代文：朝廷每次打仗，他都献出自己养的马，又准备好军粮，供军队需用。
English: Every time the imperial court went to war, he offered his own horses and prepared military rations for the army's needs.

古文：孝文嘉之。
现代文：因而得到孝文帝的嘉奖。
English: As a result, he received a commendation from Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：及迁洛，特听冬朝京师，夏归部落。
现代文：迁都洛阳后，朝廷特别允许他冬天到京城朝拜，夏天回到部落。
English: After the capital was moved to Luoyang, the imperial court gave him special permission to worship in the capital in winter and to return to his tribe in summer.

古文：每入朝，诸公王朝贵，竞以珍玩遗之，新兴亦报以名马。
现代文：每次入朝，所有的王公大臣，竞相把珍奇玩好送给他，他也送名马报答。
English: Every time he entered the imperial court, all the princes and ministers competed to give him the rare toy, and he also rewarded them with a famous horse.

古文：位散骑常侍、平北将军、秀容第一领人酋长。
现代文：官位至散骑常侍、平北将军、秀容第一领人酋长。
English: He rose to the ranks of straggling equerry, general of the North Korean army, and the first leader of the Shu Rong clan.

古文：新兴每春秋二时，恆与妻子阅畜牧于川泽，射猎自娱。
现代文：每年春秋两个季节，他都与妻子到山川大泽中检阅畜牧的情况，并骑马射猎以作娱乐。
English: Every spring and autumn, he and his wife go to Yamakawa-Ozawa Junior High School to inspect the situation of animal husbandry, and ride horses to hunt for entertainment.

古文：明帝时，以年老，启求传爵于荣。
现代文：孝明帝时，因自己年迈，请求朝廷将他的爵位传给儿子尔朱荣。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaoming, because of his old age, he asked the court to pass on his title to his son, Er Zhu Rong.

古文：卒，谥曰简。
现代文：去世后，谥号为简。
English: After her death, her nickname was Jane.

古文：孝庄初，赠太师、相国、西河郡王。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，赠封号为太师、相国、西河郡王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, his posthumous titles were Taishi, Shokoku, and Xihe County King.

古文：荣洁白，美容貌，幼而神机明决。
现代文：尔朱荣肤色白净，容貌俊美，从小就智慧超人，明于决断。
English: Le Zhu Rong is fair-skinned, good-looking, super-intelligent from an early age, and good at making decisions.

古文：及长，好射猎，每设围誓众，便为军阵之法，号令严肃，众莫敢犯。
现代文：长大后，喜欢骑马射猎，每次围猎誓众，都按照军队布阵的方式，号令严明，众人不敢违犯。
English: When he grew up, he liked to ride a horse and go shooting. Every time he hunted, he made an oath to follow the army's formation formation and issued strict orders, which people did not dare to violate.

古文：秀容界有池三所，在高山上，清深不测，相传曰祁连池，魏言天池也。
现代文：秀容一带有三处水池，都在高山上，清冽幽深，无法测量，相传叫祁连池，就是北魏时所说的天池。
English: There are three pools in the Xiu Rong area, all of which are on high mountains, clear and deep, and can not be measured. They are said to be called Qilian Pool, which was called Tianchi in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：父新兴曾与荣游池上，忽闻箫鼓音，谓荣曰： 古老相传，闻此声，皆至公辅。
现代文：他的父亲尔朱新兴同他一起到池中游泳，忽然听到空中传来箫笛锣鼓的声音。父亲对他说： 古代传说，听到这种声音的人，都官至王公宰辅。
English: His father, Er Zhu Xinxing, went to swim in the pool with him, and suddenly heard the sound of a flute and a drum in the air. His father said to him: "Ancient legends say that the person who hears this sound is the governor of the capital, the prince Zheifu.

古文：吾年老暮，当为汝耳。 
现代文：我年纪已到迟暮，当应在你的身上。 
English: I'm too late in life to be in yours.

古文：荣袭爵，后除直寝、游击将军。
现代文：他继承父亲的爵位，后来又被授予直寝、游击将军。
English: He inherited his father's title, and later was awarded the rank of general of guerrilla warfare.

古文：正光中，四方兵起，遂散畜牧，招合义勇。
现代文：正光年间，四方起兵，天下大乱，尔朱荣散掉畜群，招集义勇健儿。
English: During the Zhengguang years, the four sides raised an army, and the world was in turmoil. Er Zhu Rong scattered the herds and called for volunteers.

古文：以讨贼功，进封博陵郡公，其梁郡前爵听赐第二子。
现代文：因讨贼立下战功，被晋封为博陵郡公，过去的爵位给了他的二儿子。
English: He was awarded the title of Boling County Duke for his achievements in fighting against bandits. The previous title was given to his second son.

古文：时荣率众至肆州，刺史尉庆宾闭城不纳。
现代文：他率领军队到肆州，刺史尉庆宾关闭城门，不让进入。
English: He led the army to Wuzhou, stabbed Lieutenant Qingbin and closed the city gate, not allowing him to enter.

古文：荣怒，攻拔之，乃署其从叔羽生为刺史，执庆宾还秀容。
现代文：他非常恼怒，挥军将城池攻下，任命他的从叔尔朱羽生为刺史，押解尉庆宾回到秀容。
English: He was very angry, waved the army to capture the city, appointed his cousin Zhu Yansheng as the chief historian, and escorted Lieutenant Qingbin back to Xiurong.

古文：自是兵威渐盛，朝廷亦不能罪责。
现代文：从此，兵马逐渐强盛，朝廷也不能加罪于他。
English: From then on, soldiers and horses gradually became more powerful, and the imperial court could not punish him.

古文：及葛荣吞杜洛周，荣恐其南逼鄴城，表求东援相州，帝不许。
现代文：葛荣吞并杜洛周以后，尔朱荣担心他会向南进攻邺城，上表请求向东援助相州，孝明帝不同意。
English: After Ge Rong annexed Du Luo Zhou, Er Zhu Rong was worried that he would attack Handan to the south. He asked the table above for assistance to Handan in the east, but Emperor Xiaoming did not agree.

古文：荣以山东贼盛，虑其西逸，乃遣兵固守滏口以防之。
现代文：他又认为山东一带盗贼强大，怕他们向西进犯，便派兵把守滏口以作提防。
English: He also thought that the thieves in Shandong were powerful, and he was afraid that they would attack to the west, so he sent soldiers to guard the Hekou as a precaution.

古文：于是北捍马邑，东塞井陉。
现代文：北部派军队捍卫御马邑，东部命军士驻守井泾。
English: In the north, troops were sent to defend Mimayu, and in the east, commissioned officers were stationed at Ikuno.

古文：寻属明帝崩，事出仓卒，荣乃与元天穆等密议，入匡朝廷。
现代文：不久，孝明帝驾崩。由于事出突然，尔朱荣便与元天穆等人密议，准备进京匡扶朝廷。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaoming passed away. Due to the suddenness of the event, Er Zhu Rong secretly discussed with Yuan Tianmu and others to prepare to enter Beijing to support the imperial court.

古文：抗表云： 今海内草草，异口一言，皆云大行皇帝鸩毒致祸，举潘嫔之女以诳百姓，奉未言之兒而临四海。
现代文：他们向朝廷上表抗议，说： 现在天下议论纷纷，异口却同说一句话，都认为皇帝是被鸠酒毒害致死，抛出潘嫔的女儿以欺骗天下百姓，抬出不会说话的小孩子来君临天下。
English: They protested to the imperial court, saying: Now the whole world is talking about it, but different people are saying the same thing. They all think that the emperor was poisoned to death by drunkenness, that he threw out Pan Xuan's daughter to deceive the people of the world, and that he carried out a child who could not speak to rule the world.

古文：求以徐纥、郑俨之徒，付之司败。
现代文：我们请求把徐纥、郑俨之流交给有司处置。
English: We request that Xu Rong and Zheng Rong's families be handed over to the court for disposition.

古文：更召宗亲，推其明德。 
现代文：还要召集皇室宗亲，推举有道德有威望的人当皇帝。 
English: Also, the imperial relatives should be summoned to nominate a moral and prestigious person to be the emperor.

古文：于是将赴京师。
现代文：于是，准备统率军队进京。
English: As a result, he prepared to lead the army into the capital.

古文：灵太后甚惧，诏以李神轨为大都督，将于太行杜防。
现代文：灵太后十分恐慌，下诏命李神轨为大都督，将要在太行山一带布防。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling was very panicked, and issued an edict ordering Li Shenluo to be the grand governor, and he was to set up defenses around Mount Taihang.

古文：荣抗表之始，遣从子天光、亲信奚毅及仓头王相入洛，与从弟世隆密议废立。
现代文：尔朱荣上表抗言之初，就派他的从子尔朱天光、亲信奚毅和仓头王相悄悄进入洛阳，与他的从弟尔朱世隆密谋废立皇帝的事。
English: At the beginning of Zhu Rong's protest on the table, he sent his followers Zhu Tianguang, close confidant Zou Yi and Cangtou Wang Fang to quietly enter Luoyang and conspire with his brother Zhu Shilong to depose the emperor.

古文：天光乃见庄帝，具论荣心，帝许之。
现代文：尔朱天光见到孝庄帝元子攸，谈了尔朱荣的打算，元子攸同意即位。
English: When Zhu Tianguang met the Emperor of Xiaozhuang, Yuan Zi You, and discussed Zhu Rong's plan, Yuan Zi You agreed to take the throne.

古文：天光等还北，荣发晋阳，犹疑所立，乃以铜铸孝文及咸阳王禧等五王子孙像，成者当奉为主。
现代文：尔朱天光等人回到尔朱荣那里，他便从晋阳出发，向洛阳进军。他还怀疑拥立的皇帝是否合适，便用铜铸造孝文帝和咸阳王元禧等五王的子孙们的像，铸成的当拥立为君主。
English: When Lzhu Tianguang and others returned to Lzhu Rong, he set out from Jinyang and marched to Luoyang. He also doubted whether the emperor he supported was suitable, so he used copper to cast the statues of the descendants of five kings, including Emperor Xiaowen and King Yuanzhi of Xianyang. The cast statue of Dang Yong was established as the monarch.

古文：唯庄帝独就。
现代文：惟有元子攸的像铸造成功。
English: Only the statue of Motoko You was successfully cast.

古文：师次河内，重遣王相密迎庄帝与帝兄彭城王邵、弟始平王子正。
现代文：军队到达河内，他又派王相秘密将元子攸与孝明帝的哥哥、彭城王元勋、弟弟始平王元子正接来。
English: When the army arrived in Hanoi, he secretly sent the king's emissary to bring Yuan Zi You and Emperor Xiaoming's elder brother, Pengcheng Wang Yuanxun, and younger brother, Shihei Wang Yuanzong.

古文：武泰元年四月，庄帝自高渚度，至荣军，将士咸称万岁。
现代文：武泰元年四月，元子攸从高渚过黄河来到尔朱荣的军队，将士们一齐高呼万岁。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Tai, Yuan Zi You crossed the Yellow River from Gaozhu to the army of Er Zhu Rong. The soldiers shouted "Long live!" together.

古文：及庄帝即位，诏以荣为使持节、都督中外诸军事、大将军、开府、尚书令、领军将军、领左右、太原王。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，下诏封尔朱荣为使持节、都督中外诸军事、大将军、开府、尚书令、领军将军、领左右、太原王。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, and Zhu Rong was given the title of the envoy of the festival, the military, the general, the governor, the commander, the leader of the army, the leader of the left and right, and the king of Taiyuan.

古文：及度河，太后乃下发入道，内外百官皆向河桥迎驾。
现代文：尔朱荣率军渡过黄河，胡太后便散开发髻上路迎接，朝廷内外的官员都到河桥迎接孝庄帝的车驾。
English: Le Zhu Rong led the army across the Yellow River, and Empress Dowager Hu spread out a palanquin to greet them on the road. Officials from both inside and outside the imperial court came to the bridge to greet Emperor Xiaozhuang's chauffeur.

古文：荣惑武卫将军费穆之言，谓天下乘机可取，乃谲朝士共为盟誓，将向河阴西北三里。至南北长堤，悉命下马西度，即遣胡骑四面围之。
现代文：尔朱荣受武卫将军费穆之谗言的迷惑，以为可以乘机夺取天下。便诈称官员们要共同设盟立誓，将大家引向河阴西北三里的地方，到南面的长堤旁，命他们都下马向西渡河，立即派胡族骑兵将他们四面包围，扬言丞相高阳王想谋反，借机杀死了所有的官员。
English: Deluded by the insults of the Wuwei general Fei Mu, Er Zhu Rong thought that he could seize the opportunity to conquer the world. He falsely claimed that the officials would jointly set up a covenant and swear an oath, led everyone to a place three miles northwest of the river, to the south of the long embankment, ordered them all to dismount and cross the river to the west, immediately sent Hu cavalry to surround them on all sides, threatened that the prime minister Gao Yang Wang wanted to rebel, and took the opportunity to kill all the officials.

古文：妄言丞相高阳王欲反，杀百官王公卿士二千余人，皆敛手就戮。
现代文：王公卿士二千多人也都束手被杀。
English: More than two thousand princes and nobles were also killed.

古文：又命二三十人拔刀走行宫。庄帝及彭城王、霸城王俱出帐。
现代文：他又命二三十个心腹持刀来到行宫，孝庄帝和彭城王、霸城王都走出军帐。
English: He also ordered twenty or thirty henchmen to come to the imperial palace with swords, and Emperor Xiaozhuang, King Pengcheng, and King Baocheng all came out of the military tent.

古文：荣先遣并州人郭罗察共西部高车叱列杀鬼在帝左右，相与为应。
现代文：尔朱荣先派并州人郭罗察和西部高车国的叱列杀鬼守在孝庄帝的左右，作为接应。
English: Er Zhurong first sent the people of Guo Luocha and the western Gaocheng Province to kill the ghosts on the right and left of Xiaozhuang Emperor, as a response.

古文：及见事起，假言防卫，抱帝入帐，余人即害彭城、霸城二王。
现代文：他们二人看见事变发生，假称要保护皇帝，抱起孝庄帝进入军帐，其他的人便杀害了彭城王和霸城王。
English: The two of them saw the incident take place and, pretending to protect the emperor, picked up Emperor Xiaozhuang and entered the military headquarters. The others then killed King Pengcheng and King Baocheng.

古文：乃令四五十人迁帝于河桥，沉灵太后及少主于河。
现代文：又命四五十人将孝庄帝迁移到河桥，将灵太后和少主元钊沉入黄河溺死。
English: He also ordered forty or fifty people to move Emperor Xiaozhuang to the bridge of the river, and to drown Empress Dowager Ling and Young Master Yuan Qi in the Yellow River.

古文：时又有朝士百余人后至，仍于堤东被围。
现代文：这时，又有朝臣一百多人随后来到，在河堤东面被包围。
English: At this time, more than a hundred courtiers followed, and they were surrounded on the east side of the river embankment.

古文：遂临以白刃，唱云： 能为禅文者出，当原其命。 
现代文：军士们拔出利刃，尔朱荣高声说道 ：能够写传位诏书的人站出来，可以给你活命。 
English: The sergeants drew their swords, and Er Zhu Rong said in a loud voice: The person who can write the imperial edict stands up and can give you life.

古文：时有陇西李神俊、顿丘李谐、太原温子升并当世辞人，皆在围中，耻是从命，俯伏不应。
现代文：当时，有陇西人李神俊、顿丘人李谐、太原人温子升，都是当代的文章高手，被包围在当中，因耻于干这件事，便俯伏在地上不答应。
English: At that time, Li Shenjun from Shaanxi, Li Jing from Dongqiu, and Wen Zi Sheng from Taiyuan, all of whom were contemporary masters of essay writing, were surrounded. Ashamed of doing this, they prostrated themselves on the ground and refused to comply.

古文：有御史赵元则者，恐不免死，出作禅文。
现代文：御史赵元则，怕会被杀戮，出来起草传位的禅文。
English: The chief priest, Zhao Yuan, fearing that he would be killed, went out to draft a zen text to be handed down.

古文：荣令人诫军士，言元氏既灭，尔硃氏兴。其众咸称万岁。
现代文：尔朱荣又命人告诫将士们，说元氏就要灭亡，尔朱氏即将兴起，大家都要喊他万岁。
English: Lzhu Rong also ordered someone to admonish the soldiers, saying that the Yuan clan was about to perish, the Lzhu clan was about to rise, and everyone should shout long live him.

古文：荣遂铸金为己像，数四不成。
现代文：他便用金属铸造自己的像，四次都没有成功。
English: He cast his own likeness in metal four times without success.

古文：时荣所信幽州人刘灵助善卜占，言今时人事未可。
现代文：此时，他所信赖的幽州人刘灵助善于占卜，说今天时机还不成熟。
English: At this time, Liu Ling, a Yuzhou native whom he trusted, was good at divination and said that the time was not yet ripe.

古文：荣乃曰： 若我作不吉，当迎天穆立之。 
现代文：他便说： 如果我当皇帝不吉利，当迎立尔朱天穆。 
English: He then said: "If I am unlucky to become emperor, I should welcome Zhu Tianmu.

古文：灵助曰： 天穆亦不吉，唯长乐王有王兆耳。 
现代文：灵助说： 天穆也不吉利，惟长乐王有称帝的兆头。 
English: Ling Su said: The weather is not auspicious, but Changle Wang has the signs of an emperor.

古文：荣亦精神恍惚，不自支持，遂便愧悔。至四更中，乃迎庄帝，望马首叩头请死。
现代文：尔朱荣听后精神恍惚，不能自持，又惭愧又悔恨，到四更天时，又请出孝庄帝，跪在孝庄帝的马前叩头请死。
English: After hearing this, Le Zhu Rong was in a trance, unable to control himself, ashamed and remorseful. When he was four days old, he invited Emperor Xiaozhuang again, and knelt in front of Emperor Xiaozhuang's horse to bow and beg for death.

古文：其士马三千余骑，既滥杀朝士，乃不敢入京，即欲向北为移都之计。
现代文：他的三千多骑兵因滥杀朝臣，便不敢进入京城，想向北作迁都的打算。
English: His more than three thousand cavalrymen did not dare to enter the capital because of the indiscriminate killing of courtiers, and they wanted to move the capital to the north.

古文：持疑经日，始奉驾向洛阳宫。
现代文：徘徊迟疑一天，才护卫着皇帝的车驾向洛阳进发。
English: He hesitated for a day before escorting the emperor's chariot to Luoyang.

古文：及上北芒，视城阙，复怀畏惧，不肯更前。
现代文：登上邙山，看到城门，又心怀畏惧，不肯再向前走。
English: When he climbed Mount Lushan and saw the city gate, he was afraid and did not want to go any further.

古文：武卫将军汎礼苦执不听，复前入城，不朝戍。
现代文：武卫将军泛礼苦苦劝告，他也不听。又向前行进，入城后，也不朝拜皇帝，保卫京城。
English: He did not listen to the advice of General Wuwei, who advised him to make obeisance to the emperor. He also marched forward, and after entering the city, he did not bow to the emperor and defended the capital.

古文：北来之人，皆乘马入殿。
现代文：跟从他北边来的人，都骑着马进入宫殿。
English: Those who followed him from the north rode into the palace.

古文：诸贵死散，无复次序。
现代文：朝廷公卿大臣死的死，逃的逃，朝堂站班也没有了次序。
English: The death of a court noble or a minister, the death of a fugitive, the departure of a fugitive, and the departure of a member of the Imperial Household have also lost their order.

古文：庄帝左右，唯有故旧数人。
现代文：孝庄帝左右只有数名旧臣。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang has only a few old retainers around him.

古文：荣犹执移都之议，上亦无以拒焉。
现代文：尔朱荣仍然坚持迁都的意见，孝庄帝也无法抗拒。
English: Zhu Rong still insisted on the idea of moving the capital, and Emperor Xiaozhuang could not resist.

古文：又在明光殿重谢河桥之事，誓言无复二心。
现代文：他又在明光殿重新对河桥滥杀之事向朝廷谢罪，发誓说自己不再有二心。
English: In Meiko-den, he again apologized to the Imperial Court for the indiscriminate killing of Kawahashi, swearing that he no longer had a double heart.

古文：庄帝自起止之，因复为荣誓，言无疑心。
现代文：孝庄帝站起来劝止他，也向着他发誓，说自己没有任何疑心。
English: Xiao Zhuangdi stood up to dissuade him and swore to him that he had no doubts.

古文：荣喜，因求酒一遍。及醉熟，帝欲诛之，左右苦谏乃止。即以床辇向中常侍省。
现代文：尔朱荣高兴，因而举杯饮酒，等到他醉倒后，孝庄帝想杀掉他，左右的人苦苦劝阻才停止，便把尔朱荣睡的床抬到中常侍省。
English: Le Zhu Rong was happy, so he raised a glass of wine. When he fell into a drunken stupor, Emperor Xiaozhuang wanted to kill him. People around him tried hard to dissuade him, but he finally stopped. He then carried the bed where Le Zhu Rong was sleeping to the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：荣夜半方寤，遂达旦不眠。自此不复禁中宿矣。
现代文：他到半夜才醒酒，到天明也不敢入睡，从此不再在宫中住宿。
English: He did not sober up until the middle of the night and did not dare to fall asleep until dawn. From then on, he no longer stayed in the palace.

古文：荣女先为明帝嫔，欲上立为后，帝疑未决。
现代文：他的女儿原为孝庄帝的嫔妃，想立为皇后，孝庄帝迟疑未决。
English: His daughter, formerly the concubine of Emperor Xiaozhuang, wanted to become empress, but Emperor Xiaozhuang hesitated and was undecided.

古文：给事黄门侍郎祖莹曰： 昔文公在秦，怀嬴入侍。
现代文：给事黄门侍郎祖莹说： 过去文公在秦，怀赢奉父亲秦穆公之命嫁给他。
English: Zu Ying, the attendant of Huangmen, said: In the past, Wen Gong was in Qin, and Huai Ying married him according to the order of her father Qin Mu Gong.

古文：事有反经合义，陛下独何疑焉？ 
现代文：事情都有违反常情而又合乎道理的，陛下您为何再迟疑呢？ 
English: Things are both abnormal and reasonable. Your Majesty, why are you hesitating?

古文：上遂从之。荣意甚悦。
现代文：孝庄帝同意立尔朱荣的女儿为后，他非常高兴。
English: Xiao Zhuang agreed to play Zhu Rong's daughter, and he was very happy.

古文：于时，人间犹或云荣欲迁都晋阳，或云欲肆兵大掠，迭相惊恐，人情骇震。
现代文：这时，人们有的传说着尔朱荣想迁都晋阳，有的说他想纵兵大肆掳掠，人人惊恐不安。
English: At this time, some people said that Er Zhu Rong wanted to move the capital to Jinyang, and some said that he wanted to send troops to plunder and pillage. Everyone was frightened and uneasy.

古文：京邑士子，十不一存，率皆逃窜，无敢出者，直卫空虚，官守废旷。
现代文：京城中的读书人十不存一，相率逃跑，没有人敢出来。全城守卫空虚，官衙内空旷荒废。
English: The number of readers in the capital is less than one in ten, the chances of escape are higher, and no one dares to come out. The entire city is empty of guards, and the government offices are empty and deserted.

古文：荣闻之，上书谢愆。
现代文：尔朱荣听说后，上书向朝廷谢罪。
English: After hearing the news, Le Zhu Rong wrote a letter to the imperial court to apologize.

古文：无上王请追尊帝号；诸王、刺史，乞赠三司；其位班三品，请赠令仆；五品之官，各赠方伯；六品已下及白身，赠以镇郡。
现代文：无上王上表请求追尊先帝庙号；死去的各王和刺史，请赠给三司；位列三品的官员，请赠给令仆；五品的官员，赠给方伯；六品以下以及不在品位的，赠给镇郡。
English: There is no request for the temple number of the previous emperor; the dead kings and princes, please give to the three divisions; the officials ranked three pins, please give to the servants; the officials ranked five pins, give to the provincial governors; the officials ranked six pins and below, and those not ranked, give to the towns and counties.

古文：诸死者无后，听继，即授封爵。
现代文：那些被杀害的官员如无后代，听凭其他人继承，都授予封爵。
English: Those officials who were killed, if they had no descendants, were knighted, subject to succession by others.

古文：均其高下，节级别科，使恩洽存亡，有慰生死。
现代文：根据地位的高低、官阶的大小，使恩德施加在每个生者和亡者的身上，以便使他们得到抚慰。
English: According to one's status and rank, kindness is bestowed on everyone, living and dead, so that they may be comforted.

古文：诏从所表。
现代文：朝廷下诏按他们的表章办理。
English: The imperial court decreed that it would be handled according to their seal.

古文：又启帝，遣使巡城劳问。
现代文：无上王又启奏孝庄帝，派使者到京城各处安抚慰问，人们的情绪因此稍微安定了一些。
English: Emperor Wu also sent an envoy to various parts of the capital to comfort and console Emperor Xiaozhuang. As a result, people's moods stabilized a bit.

古文：于是人情遂安，朝士逃亡者，亦稍来归阙。
现代文：逃亡的朝臣也渐渐归来。
English: The fleeing courtiers also gradually returned.

古文：荣又奏请番直，朔望之日，引见三公、令、仆、尚书、九卿及司州牧、河南尹、洛阳河阴执事之官，参论国政，以为常式。
现代文：尔朱荣又奏请朝廷，让朝臣们轮流当值，每月的初一和十五，召见三公、令、仆、尚书、九卿，以及司州牧、河南尹、洛阳、河阴执事等官员，参与讨论国家大事，并作为制度固定下来。
English: Le Zhurong also asked the imperial court to let the courtiers take turns on duty, on the first day and the 15th day of each month, to summon the three princes, lords, servants, Shangshu, and nine nobles, as well as officials such as the governor of Shizhou, Henan Yin, Luoyang, and the deacon of Heyin, to participate in the discussion of national affairs, and to be fixed as a system.

古文：五月，荣还晋阳，乃令元天穆向京，为侍中、太尉公、录尚书事、京畿大都督，兼领军将军，封上党王，树置腹心在列职，举止所为，皆由其意。
现代文：这年五月，尔朱荣回到晋阳，便命元天穆进京，任侍中、太尉公、录尚书事、京畿大都督，兼领军将军，封为上党王。他还在各个职务上安插心腹，朝廷的一举一动，都要根据他的意思去办。
English: In May of that year, Er Zhu Rong returned to Jinyang and ordered Yuan Tianmu to go to Beijing, where he was appointed as a chamberlain, captain, secretary, governor of Gyeonggi Province, general and leader of the army, and was crowned as the party king. He also inserted his heart and soul into various positions, and every move of the imperial court had to be done according to his will.

古文：七月，诏加荣柱国大将军。
现代文：七月，朝廷加封尔朱荣为柱国大将军。
English: In July, the imperial court appointed Zhu Rong as the general of the pillar country.

古文：时葛荣向京师，众号百万。
现代文：这时，葛荣领军向洛阳进发，号称有百万之众。
English: At this time, Ge Rong led the army to Luoyang, claiming to have a million people.

古文：州刺史李神俊闭门自守。
现代文：相州刺史李神俊闭门自守，不阻拦敌人。
English: Sangju stabbing history Li Shenjun closed the door and defended himself, not blocking the enemy.

古文：荣率精骑七千，马皆有副，倍道兼行，东出滏口。
现代文：尔朱荣率领精锐骑兵七千，每个骑兵配有两匹马，倍道兼行，东出滏口，拦击葛荣。
English: Le Zhu Rong led the elite cavalry of seven thousand, each cavalry equipped with two horses, double road concurrently, east out of the gate, intercepted Ge Rong.

古文：而与葛荣众寡非敌。
现代文：而兵力却与葛荣众寡悬殊。
English: However, the number of troops is very small compared to Ge Rong.

古文：葛荣闻之，喜见于色，乃令其众办长绳，至便缚取。
现代文：葛荣听说后喜形于色，便令他的士兵置办长绳，尔朱荣的骑兵来了便将他们捆起来。
English: When Ge Rong heard of this, he was overjoyed and ordered his soldiers to prepare a long rope. When the cavalry of Er Zhu Rong arrived, they tied them up.

古文：自鄴以北，列阵数十里，箕张而进。荣潜军山谷为奇兵，分督将已上三人为一处，处有数百骑，令所在扬尘鼓噪，使贼不测多少。
现代文：自邺城以北，列阵数十里，像簸箕一样摆开阵势前进，尔朱荣暗中在山谷中埋伏军队作为奇兵，将督将以上职务的军官三人分为一处，每处率数百名骑兵，让他们指挥士兵在驻扎的地方擂鼓呐喊，扬起尘土，使敌人测不出有多少人马。
English: From the north of Liancheng, they lined up for dozens of miles and advanced like a dragonfly. Er Zhu Rong secretly ambushed the army in the valley as a special soldier. The commander divided the three officers with the above positions into one place, each with hundreds of cavalry, and let them command the soldiers to beat drums and shout and raise dust in the stationed place, so that the enemy could not detect how many men and horses there were.

古文：又以人马逼战，刀不如棒。
现代文：又派一支人马进攻敌兵。交战时，刀不如棍棒好用，他密令军士马上各准备一根木棒。
English: He also sent a team to attack the enemy soldiers. When fighting, swords are not as good as clubs. He secretly ordered the sergeants to immediately prepare a wooden club each.

古文：密勒军士，马上各赍袖棒一枚，至战时，虑废腾逐，不听斩级，使以棒，棒之而已。
现代文：交战以后，考虑便于冲破敌阵，不让骑兵斩掉敌人的首级，只抡起棒子打就行了。
English: After the engagement, it was considered to be easier to break through the enemy lines, not to let the cavalry chop off the heads of the enemy, just pick up a club and hit it.

古文：乃分命壮勇，所当冲突。
现代文：又命令勇壮骑兵，奋勇冲击。
English: He also ordered the brave cavalry to charge.

古文：号令严明，将士同奋。
现代文：他号令严明，将士上下一心，一起拼杀。
English: He gave strict orders to his soldiers to work hard and fight together.

古文：身自陷阵，出于贼后，表里合击，大破之。
现代文：他也亲自冲入敌阵，出现在敌兵的后队，与前面的军队前后合击，将敌兵打得大败。
English: He also personally rushed into the enemy lines, appeared in the rear of the enemy soldiers, clashed with the army in front and behind, and defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：于阵禽葛荣，余众悉降。
现代文：在战场上活捉葛荣，其他人全部投降。
English: They captured Ge Rong alive on the battlefield, and all the others surrendered.

古文：荣恐其疑惧，乃普令各从所乐，亲属相随，任所居止。
现代文：尔朱荣怕这些投降的将士心存疑惧，便下令让他们各自从事自己愿意干的职业，亲属们也可以跟着，任意挑选居住的地方。
English: Lv Zhurong was afraid that these surrendered soldiers would have doubts in their hearts, so he ordered them to engage in any profession they wanted, and their relatives could also follow, freely choosing where to live.

古文：于是群情喜悦，登即四散，数十万众，一朝散尽。
现代文：于是，大家都很高兴，立即四处散去。数十万人马，一下子全部解散。
English: As a result, everyone was happy and immediately dispersed. Hundreds of thousands of people all dispersed at once.

古文：待出百里之外，乃始分道押领，随便安置，咸得其宜。
现代文：等到散去的士兵走出一百里之外，才分道遣送，遇到合适的地方就安置他们居住，这些人都得到满意的住处。
English: They waited until the dispersed soldiers were a hundred miles away before they were sent on their separate ways, and when they found a suitable place, they were resettled. These people were all given satisfactory accommodation.

古文：获其渠帅，量才授用，新附者咸安。
现代文：俘获的敌兵将领，也都量才使用，新归附的人都很安心。
English: Captured enemy generals were also used only as needed, and the newly annexed people were very relieved.

古文：时人服其处分机速。
现代文：人们都佩服他处置得正确迅速。
English: People are impressed that he handled it correctly and quickly.

古文：乃槛车送葛荣赴阙。诏加荣大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事。
现代文：他又派囚车将葛荣送往洛阳，朝廷下诏加封他为大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事。
English: He also sent a prison wagon to take Ge Rong to Luoyang, and the imperial court gave him the title of grand chancellor and military governor of Hebei, Kansai, and other provinces.

古文：初，荣将讨葛荣，军次襄垣，遂大猎，有双兔起于马前，荣弯弓誓之曰： 中则禽葛荣，不中则否。 
现代文：尔朱荣开始讨伐葛荣时，军队到达襄垣，便大举围猎。有两只兔子在马前面奔跑，他弯弓立誓说： 射中了就能捉住葛荣，射不中就抓不住。 
English: When Le Zhurong began to fight against Ge Rong, the army arrived at Xiangyuan and made a big hunt. There were two rabbits running in front of the horse, and he swore with a bow and arrow: "If I hit it, I can catch Ge Rong, but if I don't hit it, I can't catch it."

古文：既而并应弦而殪，三军咸悦。
现代文：说完两只兔子应弦扑地，三军将士十分欢腾。
English: After saying that, the two rabbits fell to the ground, and the soldiers of the three armies were very excited.

古文：及后，命立碑于其所，号双兔碑。
现代文：后来，他命在这里立碑，取名叫双兔碑。
English: Later, he decided to erect a monument here, which he named the "Twin Rabbit Monument."

古文：又将战，夜梦一人从葛荣索千牛刀，葛荣初不肯与，此人自称己是道武皇帝，葛荣乃奉刀，此人手持授荣。
现代文：将要开战的前夜，他梦见一人向葛荣索要牛刀，葛荣开始不肯给，此人自称是道武皇帝，葛荣才把刀交出，这人又将刀授予他。
English: On the eve of going to war, he dreamed that a man asked Ge Rong for a cow's knife. At first, Ge Rong refused to give it to him. The man claimed to be Emperor Daowu. It was only when Ge Rong handed over the knife that the man gave it to him.

古文：寤而喜。自知必胜。
现代文：睡醒之后他很高兴，知道这一仗一定能获取胜利。
English: When he woke up, he was happy, knowing that the battle would be won.

古文：又诏以冀州之长乐、相州之南赵、定州之博陵、沧州之浮阳、平州之辽西、燕州之上谷、幽州之渔阳七郡，各万户，通前满十万。为太原国邑，又加位太师。
现代文：朝廷又下诏把冀州的长乐、相州的南赵、定州的博陵、沧州的浮阳、平州的辽西、燕州的上谷、幽州的渔阳七郡，各分出一万户，加上原来的共十万户，作为太原国的封邑。又给他加位为太师。
English: The imperial court further decreed that the seven counties of Changle in Jizhou, Nanzhao in Xiangzhou, Boling in Dingzhou, Fuyang in Cangzhou, Liaoxi in Pingzhou, Shanggu in Yanzhou, and Yuyang in Yuzhou should each have 10,000 households, adding to the original total of 100,000 households, as fiefs in Taiyuan Province. He was also promoted to Taishi.

古文：建义初，北海王元颢南奔梁，梁立为魏主，资以兵将。
现代文：建义初年，北海王元颢投奔南梁，梁封他为魏王，援助他兵马。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the King of the North Sea, Yuan Shao, went to Nanliang, and Liang made him the King of Wei and supported him with soldiers and horses.

古文：时邢杲以三齐应颢。
现代文：这时，邢杲率三齐之地响应元颢。
English: At this time, the land of the three equal powers responded to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：朝廷以颢孤弱，永安二年春，诏元天穆先平齐地，然后征颢。
现代文：朝廷认为元颢势单力弱，永安二年春，下诏命元天穆先平定齐地，然后征讨元颢。
English: The imperial court believed that the power of the Yuan Shao was weak, and in the spring of the second year of Yong'an, the imperial edict ordered the Yuan Shao to first subdue and then subjugate the Yuan Shao.

古文：颢乘虚径进，荣阳、武牢并不守，车驾出居河北。
现代文：元颢乘洛阳空虚，率兵径直前进。荥阳、武牢都没有守住，孝庄帝离开洛阳，避向河北。
English: With Luoyang empty, Yuan Shao led his troops straight ahead. Neither Luoyang nor Wudang could be held, and Emperor Xiaozhuang left Luoyang for Hebei.

古文：荣闻之，驰传朝行宫于上党之长子，舆驾于是南趣。
现代文：尔朱荣听说后，骑快马到上党长子的皇帝行宫，领着皇帝的车驾南进。
English: After hearing that, Le Zhu Rong rode a fast horse to the palace of the emperor, the eldest son of the upper party, and led the emperor's car to drive south.

古文：荣为前驱，旬日之间，兵马大集。
现代文：他作为前驱，十来天的时间，聚集了许多兵马。
English: As a forerunner, he gathered a large number of soldiers and horses over a period of ten days.

古文：天穆克平邢杲，亦度河以会。
现代文：元天穆平定邢杲后，也渡过黄河与尔朱荣会合。
English: Yuan Tianmu also crossed the Yellow River to meet with Le Zhurong after the battle was settled.

古文：车驾幸河内。荣与颢相持于河上，无船不得即度。
现代文：孝庄帝住进河内，尔朱荣与元颢的军队相持在黄河两岸，没有船只，不能马上渡过。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang lived in Hanoi, and Le Zhu Rong and Yuan Shao's army stood on both sides of the Yellow River. There were no ships, so they could not cross the river immediately.

古文：议欲还北，更图后举。
现代文：他想率军北还，以后再图谋大举。
English: He wanted to lead the army back to the north, and then try to make a big move.

古文：黄门郎杨侃、高道穆等并固执以为不可。
现代文：黄门郎杨侃、高道穆等人坚持认为不能北还。
English: Huangmen Lang, Yang Kan, Gao Daomu and others insisted that they could not return to the North.

古文：属马渚诸杨云有小船数艘，求为乡导。
现代文：马渚的杨姓人家说有数只小船，并愿意当向导。
English: A man surnamed Yang from Mazhu said that he had several small boats and was willing to act as a guide.

古文：荣乃令都督尔硃兆等率精骑夜济。
现代文：尔朱荣便派都督尔朱兆等人率精锐骑兵乘夜渡过黄河。
English: Zhu Rong then sent the governor Zhu Zhao and others to lead the elite cavalry across the Yellow River by night.

古文：颢奔。车驾度河，入居华林园。诏加荣天柱大将军，增封通前二十万户，加前后部羽葆鼓吹。
现代文：元颢逃去，孝庄帝渡过黄河入居华林园，下诏加封尔朱荣为天柱大将军，赠给封地民户连从前的共有二十万户，又加赠前后部羽葆鼓吹的仪仗。
English: Yuan Shao fled, Emperor Xiaozhuang crossed the Yellow River to live in the Hualin Garden, and issued the following edict: Gafonger Zhu Rong became the general of Tianzhu, and gave a total of 200,000 households to the fiefdoms, and also gave the ceremonial battle preached by the front and rear feathers.

古文：荣寻还晋阳，遥制朝廷，亲戚腹心，皆补要职，百僚朝廷动静，莫不以申。
现代文：尔朱荣不久又回到晋阳，遥控朝廷。他的亲信都担任朝廷要职，朝廷百官有什么动静，无不详细报告。
English: Soon after, Le Zhu Rong returned to Jinyang to remotely control the imperial court. His close confidants all held important positions in the imperial court, and detailed reports were made on the activities of the imperial officials.

古文：至于除授，皆须荣许，然后得用。
现代文：至于任免官员，都得经过他允许，然后才能任用。
English: As for the appointment and dismissal of officials, they must be approved by him before they can be appointed.

古文：庄帝虽受制权臣，而勤政事，朝夕省纳，孜孜不已。数自理冤狱，亲览辞讼。
现代文：孝庄帝虽然受他控制，却勤于政事，朝夕过问朝政，孜孜不倦，多次亲自处理冤案，阅读案件卷宗。
English: Although Xiaozhuangdi was under his control, he was diligent in political affairs. He questioned the imperial government morning and evening, worked tirelessly, and personally handled unjust cases and read case files many times.

古文：又选司多滥，与吏部尚书李神俊议正纲纪。
现代文：又因选官太滥，他与吏部尚书李神俊商议，要严肃朝廷法度。
English: In addition, because the selection of officials was too extravagant, he discussed with Li Shenjun, who was in charge of the personnel department, to take the imperial court's legal system seriously.

古文：而荣乃大相嫌责。
现代文：尔朱荣对此很为猜疑，并加谴责。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very suspicious of this and condemned it.

古文：曾关补定州曲阳县令，神俊以阶县不奏，别更拟人。
现代文：他曾要朝廷补任一名定州曲阳县的县令，李神俊认为是县级的官员，所以没有奏报给他，而另外选派。
English: He once asked the imperial court to fill the post of a county magistrate in Quyang County, Dingzhou. Li Shenjun thought it was a county-level official, so he did not report to him, but selected another one.

古文：荣大怒，即遣其所补者往夺其任。
现代文：尔朱荣雷霆大怒，便派他选定的那位官员到任上夺得这个官职。
English: Furious, Le Zhu Rong sent the official he had selected to seize the post.

古文：荣使入京，虽复微蔑，朝贵见之，莫不倾靡。
现代文：他又派人进京，来人虽然只稍微显示出不满，朝臣见了，没有不心怯胆寒的。
English: He also sent someone to Beijing, and although the visitor only showed a little dissatisfaction, the courtier saw him and did not hesitate.

古文：及至阙下，未得通奏，恃荣威势，至乃忿怒。
现代文：这人来到宫殿下，不让人奏报，依仗尔朱荣的权势，便大发脾气。
English: When this man came to the palace, he did not allow anyone to deliver the report, relying on the power of Er Zhu Rong, he lost his temper.

古文：神俊遂上表逊位。
现代文：李神俊便上表请求辞去职务。
English: Li Shenjun then requested to resign from his post.

古文：荣欲用世隆摄选，上亦不违。
现代文：尔朱荣想让尔朱世隆接替，孝庄帝也不敢违拗他的意见。
English: Er Zhu Rong wanted Er Zhu Shilong to succeed Mao, and Emperor Xiaozhuang did not dare to go against his opinion.

古文：荣曾启北人为河内诸州，欲为掎角势，上不即从。
现代文：尔朱荣曾经奏报朝廷，让北人任河内诸州的刺史，想和晋阳形成犄角之势，孝庄帝不同意。
English: Le Chu Rong once reported to the imperial court that he wanted the northerners to take over the leadership of the states of Hanoi in order to create a hostile situation with Jin Yang. Emperor Xiaozhuang did not agree.

古文：天穆入见论事，上犹未许。
现代文：元天穆入宫见孝庄帝，又说起这件事，孝庄帝仍然不同意。
English: Yuan Tianmu entered the palace to see Emperor Xiaozhuang, and when he mentioned this matter, Emperor Xiaozhuang still disagreed.

古文：天穆曰： 天柱既有大功，为国宰相，若请普代天下官属，恐陛下亦不得违。
现代文：天穆说： 天柱大将军尔朱荣既然立有大功，任国家的宰相，如果请求将天下的官吏都换掉，恐怕陛下您也不能违背。
English: Tianmu said: Since General Tianzhu Lzhu Rong has made great achievements and has been appointed as the country's prime minister, if you request to replace all the officials in the world, I'm afraid your majesty can't refuse.

古文：如何启数人为州，便停不用？ 
现代文：为什么他启奏委任几个人任州官，就拒绝不用？ 
English: Why did he appoint several people as state officials and then refuse to use them?

古文：帝正色曰： 天柱若不为人臣，朕亦须代；如其犹存臣节，无代天下百官理。 
现代文：孝庄帝厉色说道 ：天柱大将军如果不做朝廷的臣子，连我也可以代替；如果他还有做大臣的礼节，就没有代替天下百官的道理。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang said sharply, "If General Tianzhu does not become a courtier of the imperial court, even I can replace him; if he still has the etiquette of a minister, there is no reason to replace the world's hundred officials."

古文：荣闻，大怒曰： 天子由谁得立？
现代文：尔朱荣听说后，十分愤怒，说： 天子是谁立的？
English: After hearing this, Le Zhu Rong was very angry and said: Who set up the heavenly son?

古文：今乃不用我！ 
现代文：今天竟然不听我的话！ 
English: Today he didn't even listen to me!

古文：语皇后复嫌内妃嫔甚有妒恨之事。
现代文：尔朱皇后也与嫔妃们不和，很有些嫉妒的事情。
English: The Empress of Lzhu was also at odds with her concubines, and there was a great deal of jealousy.

古文：帝遣世隆语以大理，后曰： 天子由我家置立，今便如此。
现代文：孝庄帝派尔朱世隆用道理劝说她，皇后说： 天子是咱们家立的，他今天才能这样。
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor sent Zhu Shilong to persuade her with reason, and the queen said: The Son of Heaven is from our family, he can only be like this today.

古文：我父本日即自作，今亦复决？ 
现代文：我父亲那时应自己当皇帝，为何今天还没有决定？ 
English: At that time, my father was supposed to become emperor himself. Why hasn't it been decided today?

古文：世隆曰： 兄止自不为，若本自作，臣今亦得封王。 
现代文：尔朱世隆说： 哥哥只是自己不愿意当，如果他自己当皇帝，我也可以封王了。 
English: Lzhu Shilong said, "My brother just doesn't want to be emperor. If he becomes emperor himself, then I can also be crowned king."

古文：帝既外迫强臣，内逼皇后，恆怏怏不以万乘为贵。
现代文：孝庄帝外被强臣逼迫，内被皇后挟持，常郁郁不乐，并不因为自己居万乘之尊感到荣耀。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was persecuted by powerful vassals on the outside, and held hostage by the empress on the inside. He was often depressed and unhappy, and did not feel honored because he was a saint.

古文：先是，葛荣枝党韩娄仍据幽、平二州，荣遣都督侯深讨斩之。
现代文：原先，葛荣的余党韩娄仍占据幽、平二州，尔朱荣派都督侯深讨伐，并将他斩首。
English: Originally, Ge Rong's remaining party, Han Kuo, still occupied Yu and Ping two states, and Er Zhu Rong sent the governor Hou Sheng to fight, and beheaded him.

古文：时万俟丑奴、萧宝夤拥众豳、泾，荣遣其从子天光为雍州刺史，令率都督贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦等入关讨之。
现代文：这时，万俟丑奴、萧宝夤拥众活动在豳、泾一带，尔朱荣派他的从子尔朱天光任雍州刺史，命天光率领都督贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦等入关讨伐。
English: At this time, the activities of the followers of Wanqiu Ugliano and Xiao Baojun were in the areas of Handan and Handan, and Zhu Rong sent his son Zhu Tianguang as the leader of Yongzhou to make history, and ordered Tianguang to lead the governor He Bagu, Hou Mo Chen Yue and others to enter the border to fight.

古文：天光至雍州，以众少未进。
现代文：天光到达雍州，因人马少而没有进兵。
English: Tian Guang arrived in Yongzhou, but due to the lack of manpower, he did not enter the army.

古文：荣大怒，遣其骑兵参军刘贵驰驿诣军，加天光杖罚。
现代文：尔朱荣甚为恼怒，派他的骑兵参军刘贵飞驰到天光的军中，对天光施行杖罚。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very angry and sent his cavalry to join Liu Gui's army. Liu Gui galloped into Tian Guang's army and punished Tian Guang with a cane.

古文：天光等大惧，乃进讨，连破之，禽丑奴、宝夤，并槛车送阙。
现代文：天光等人非常惧怕，便发兵进讨。连破敌兵，擒获万俟丑奴和萧宝夤，并用囚车将他们送到京城。
English: Tianguang and others were very afraid, so they sent soldiers to investigate. They broke through the enemy soldiers, captured Wanzhong Ugly and Xiao Baojun, and sent them to Beijing in a prison van.

古文：天光又禽王庆云、万俟道乐，关中悉平。
现代文：天光又擒获王庆云、万俟道乐，关中全部平定。
English: Tianguang also captured Wang Qingyun and Wanzhong Dole, and the whole of Guanzhong was pacified.

古文：于是天下大难便尽。
现代文：于是，天下大的动荡已经结束。
English: As a result, the world's great turmoil has ended.

古文：庄帝恆不虑外寇，唯恐荣为逆。
现代文：孝庄帝常常不忧虑外患，而是惟恐尔朱荣反叛。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang often did not worry about external threats, but feared Zhu Rong's rebellion.

古文：常时诸方未定，欲使与之相持。及告捷之日，乃不甚喜，谓尚书令、临淮王彧曰： 即今天下，便是无贼？ 
现代文：平时各方都没有平定，他想使尔朱荣与四方敌兵相持，等到天下平定的捷报传来，他却不甚喜欢，对尚书令、临淮王元说 ：当今天下真的没有乱臣贼子吗？ 
English: In ordinary times, all sides were not pacified. He wanted to make Le Zhu Rong stand with the four-sided enemy soldiers. However, when the news of the world's pacification came, he did not like it very much. He said to Shang Shuling and Lin Huai Wang Yuan: Is it true that there are no ruffian thieves today?

古文：临淮见帝色不悦，曰： 臣恐贼平以后，方劳圣虑。 
现代文：临淮王见皇帝陛下的脸色不高兴，说： 恐怕四处的贼兵平定后，更会劳您忧虑。 
English: Lin Huai Wang was not happy to see the Emperor's face, and said, "I'm afraid you will be even more worried after all the bandits have been subdued."

古文：帝畏余人怪，还以他语解之，曰： 其实抚宁荒余，弥成不易。 
现代文：孝庄帝怕其他人听了生疑，便用别的话搪塞，说： 抚慰赈济天下的灾民，也很不容易。 
English: Xiaozhuangdi was afraid that others would listen to the doubts and use other words to avoid them, saying: It is not easy to comfort the victims of disasters around the world.

古文：荣好射猎，不舍寒暑，法禁严重。若一鹿出，乃有数人殒命。
现代文：尔朱荣喜欢射猎，不分盛夏寒冬都要进行，在打猎场上法令严格，如果有一只鹿逃出，便会有几个人被处死。
English: Le Zhu Rong likes shooting. It is carried out regardless of whether it is mid-summer or winter. The laws are strict on the hunting ground. If a deer escapes, several people will be executed.

古文：曾有一人，见猛兽便走，谓曰： 欲求活邪！ 
现代文：曾有一个人看见猛兽就逃走，对别人说： 我想逃命啊！ 
English: There was once a man who saw a ferocious beast and fled, saying to others: I want to escape!

古文：遂即斩之。
现代文：尔朱荣听说后，立即将他斩首。
English: When Le Zhu Rong heard about this, he immediately beheaded him.

古文：自此猎如登战场。
现代文：从此猎场犹如战场。
English: From then on, the hunting ground resembled a battlefield.

古文：曾见一猛兽在穷谷中，乃令余人重衣空手搏之，不令复损。
现代文：他曾在山谷中发现一头猛兽，便命手下的人穿上甲胄，空手与猛兽搏斗，不让损伤猛兽。
English: He once found a ferocious beast in the valley and ordered his men to put on armor and fight the beast with their bare hands to prevent the beast from being injured.

古文：于是数人被杀，遂禽得之。
现代文：于是，有好几个人被猛兽扑咬死去，才终于将它擒获。
English: As a result, several people were bitten to death by the beast before it was finally captured.

古文：持此而乐焉。
现代文：他以此作为快乐。
English: He does it for fun.

古文：列围而进，虽阻险不得回避，其下甚苦之。
现代文：围猎野兽时，士兵们向前行进，不管遇到多大的艰难险阻都不能回避，他的部下深以此为苦。
English: When hunting wild animals, the soldiers march forward, and no matter how difficult and dangerous they are, they cannot avoid it, and his subordinates suffer from this.

古文：太宰元天穆从容言荣勋业，宜调政养人。
现代文：太宰元天穆态度悠闲地对尔朱荣说，你已立下不世的勋业，应该安定下来料理朝政，调养身体。
English: Dazai Yuan Tianmu said to Le Zhu Rong in a leisurely manner, "You have established an immortal career, you should settle down to cooking and politics, and take care of your health.

古文：荣便攘肘谓天穆曰： 太后女主，不能自正，推奉天子者，此是人臣常节。
现代文：他挽着天穆的胳膊说 ：胡太后这个女人不行正道，匡扶天子，这是做臣子的本分。
English: He took Tianmu's arm and said, "Empress Dowager Hu, this woman is not on the right path, please support Tianzi, this is the duty of a courtier."

古文：葛容之徒，本是奴才，乘时作乱，譬如奴走，禽获便休。
现代文：葛荣之流本是奴隶，却乘时造反。就好比奴隶逃走，抓住他才能罢休。
English: Ge Rong's lineage was originally slaves, but took advantage of the time to rebel. It is like a slave escaping, you can only stop him by catching him.

古文：顷来受国大宠，未能混一海内，何宜今日便言勋也？
现代文：近几年来我受朝廷过分的宠爱，却没有能将海内统一，今天怎么能说有什么功劳呢？
English: In recent years, I have been overly favored by the imperial court, but I have not been able to unify the country. How can I say that I have any merit today?

古文：如闻朝士犹自宽纵，今秋欲共兄戒勒士马，校猎嵩原，令贪汙朝贵，入围搏虎。
现代文：听说朝臣们还很放纵，今年秋天我想和老兄你一起指挥将士在嵩原围猎，让那些迂腐贪婪的朝廷大臣进入围场与猛虎搏斗。
English: I've heard that courtiers are still very indulgent. This autumn, I'd like to work with you, my brother, to command the soldiers to hunt in the Songyuan enclosure, and let those pedantic and greedy courtiers enter the enclosure to fight the tigers.

古文：仍出鲁阳，历三荆，悉拥生蛮，北填六镇。
现代文：然后从鲁阳出发，经过三荆之地，全部将生蛮征服。再向北荡平六镇。
English: Then, starting from Luyang, passing through the Three Thorns, all of them will be conquered. Then, it will swing north to Pingliu Town.

古文：回军之际，因平汾胡。
现代文：班师回军的时候，顺势降服汾地的胡人。
English: When the team returned to the army, they surrendered to the Hu people in Shandong Province.

古文：明年简练精骑，分出江、淮，萧衍若降，乞万户侯；如其不降，径度数千骑，便往缚取。
现代文：明年再挑选精锐部队，分头向江、淮出击。梁帝萧衍如果投降，我请求封他为万户侯；如不投降，直接派数千骑兵渡江，将他俘获。
English: If Emperor Xiaoyan of the Liang Dynasty surrenders, I request that he be made a vassal lord of ten thousand households; if he does not surrender, I will directly send several thousand cavalry to cross the river and capture him.

古文：待六合宁一，八表无尘，然后共兄奉天子巡四方，观风俗，布政教，如此乃可称勋耳。
现代文：等到六合统一，四面八方没有征战的烟尘，我与老兄你一起护卫着天子，巡游四方，观览风景，布施政教，这样才可以称得上是功勋啊！
English: Wait until the reunification of the country, there is no smoke and dust of war in all directions, I and my brother will escort the heavenly son together with you, cruise in all directions, watch the scenery, and spread political education. This can only be called a merit!

古文：今若止猎，兵士懈怠，安可复用也？ 
现代文：如果现在停止围猎，将士们松懈怠惰，怎么可以再用来打仗呢？ 
English: If the hunting is stopped now, and the generals are slack and lazy, how can they be used to fight again?

古文：及见四方无事，乃遣人奏曰： 参军许周劝臣取九锡，臣恶其此言，已发遣令去。 
现代文：他看见四方平安无事，便派人奏报朝廷，说： 参军许周劝我让朝廷赐予九锡，我很讨厌这句话，已下令将他打发走了。 
English: When he saw that all was well in all directions, he sent a report to the court, saying: "Joining the army, Xu Zhou advised me to ask the court to give me nine hundred taels of silver. I hate this sentence and have ordered him to be sent away."

古文：荣时望得殊礼，故以意讽朝廷。
现代文：他当时实在希望得到朝廷特殊的礼遇，所以，想用这句话来讽喻朝廷。
English: At that time, he really hoped to receive special courtesies from the imperial court, so he wanted to use this sentence as a metaphor for the imperial court.

古文：帝实不欲与之，因称其忠。
现代文：孝庄帝实在不愿意赐给他，因而称赞他的忠诚用以搪塞。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang really did not want to give it to him, so he praised his loyalty and used it as an excuse.

古文：荣见帝年长明悟，为众所归，欲移自近，皆使由己。
现代文：尔朱荣见皇帝年龄越来越大，也越加聪明颖悟，被众人所尊崇，想靠近他，让他由自己摆布。
English: Seeing that the emperor was getting older and older, and more and more intelligent and enlightened, and was respected by many people, Le Zhu Rong wanted to get closer to him and let him be at his mercy.

古文：每因醉云，入将天子，拜谒金陵后，还复恆朔。
现代文：常假借喝醉酒说 ：将带上天子，拜谒金陵后，再回到恒朔。 
English: He would often go on vacation, get drunk, and say, "I will take the heavenly son with me, visit the Golden Mausoleum, and then return to Hengshuo."

古文：而侍中硃元龙辄从尚书索太和中迁京故事，于是复有移都消息。
现代文：而侍中朱元龙常向尚书询问太和年间孝文帝迁都的旧事。于是，朝野上下又传扬着要迁都的消息。
English: However, the chamberlain, Zhu Yuanlong, often asked Shangshu about the old story of Emperor Xiaowen's moving the capital during the reign of Emperor Taifu. As a result, the news of the capital's relocation was spread throughout the court.

古文：荣乃暂来向京，言看皇后娩难。
现代文：尔朱荣要暂时来京城居住，说是看望难产的皇后。
English: Le Zhu Rong wants to temporarily live in the capital, saying that he wants to visit the queen who is having difficulty giving birth.

古文：帝惩河阴之事，终恐难保，乃与城阳王徽、侍中杨侃、李彧、尚书右仆射元罗谋，皆劝帝刺杀之。
现代文：孝庄帝鉴于尔朱荣在河阴大肆杀害朝臣的教训，害怕自己终将自身难保。便与城阳王元徽、侍中杨侃、李、尚书右仆射元罗密谋，他们都劝孝庄帝将他诛杀。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was afraid that he would not be able to protect himself in the face of the lesson of Zhu Rong's wanton killing of courtiers in Hebei, so he plotted with King Yuanhui of Chengyang, the attendant Yang Kan, Li, and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Yuan Luo. They all advised Emperor Xiaozhuang to kill him.

古文：唯胶东侯李侃晞、济阴王晖业言荣若来，必有备，恐不可图。
现代文：惟有胶东侯李侃日希、济阴王元晖业认为尔朱荣如果来京，一定会有防备，恐怕不可谋图。
English: However, Jiaodong marquis Li Kan Rishi and Jiyin Wang Yuan Rongye believed that if Le Zhu Rong came to Beijing, he would certainly be guarded, and I am afraid it is impossible to plan.

古文：又欲杀其党与，发兵拒之。
现代文：又担心杀了他，他的党羽会发兵抗拒。
English: They also feared that if they killed him, his followers would rise up against them.

古文：帝疑未定，而京师人怀忧惧，中书侍郎邢子才之徒，已避之东出。
现代文：孝庄帝因而犹疑未决，而京城里的人都心怀恐惧，中书侍郎邢子才一类胆小怕事的人，已东出洛阳逃避。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaozhuang hesitated and was undecided, and the people in the capital were filled with fear. Only the most timid and fearful people, such as the Chinese scribe Lang Zizi, had fled from Luoyang.

古文：荣乃遍与朝士书，相任留。
现代文：尔朱荣给朝臣们寄来书信，表示希望他们能够留任。
English: Er Zhu Rong sent a letter to the courtiers, expressing the hope that they would be able to stay in office.

古文：中书舍人温子升以书呈帝，帝恆望其不来，及见书，以荣必来，色甚不悦。
现代文：中书舍人温子升把书信呈交给孝庄帝，孝庄帝一直希望尔朱荣不要来京城，等看到书信，认为他必定会来，面色很不高兴。
English: The person in charge of the Chinese library, Wen Zisheng, presented the letter to Emperor Xiaozhuang. Emperor Xiaozhuang had always hoped that Le Zhu Rong would not come to Beijing. When he saw the letter, he thought that he would definitely come. He looked very unhappy.

古文：武卫将军奚毅，建义初往来通命，帝每期之甚重，然以为荣通亲，不敢与之言情。
现代文：武卫将军奚毅，建义初年来往于朝廷与尔朱荣之间传递命令，孝庄帝常对他抱很大希望，然而，认为他与尔朱荣关系密切，不敢和他说心里话。
English: In the first year of Jianyi's reign, Wuwei General Zou Yi passed orders between the imperial court and Er Zhu Rong. Emperor Xiaozhuang often had high hopes for him, however, he believed that he had a close relationship with Er Zhu Rong and did not dare to speak to him.

古文：毅曰： 若必有变，臣宁死陛下难，不能事契胡。 
现代文：奚毅说 ：如果有什么变化，我宁可为陛下效忠去死，也不能侍奉这个胡人。 
English: Hao Yi said, "If there is any change, I would rather die in loyalty to His Majesty than serve this barbarian."

古文：帝曰： 朕保天柱无异心，亦不忘卿忠款。 
现代文：孝庄帝说 ：我只希望天柱大将军没有异心，也不希望你为我效忠。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang said, "I only hope that General Tianzhu has no ill will toward me, and I do not expect you to be loyal to me."

古文：三年八月，荣将四五千骑，发并州向京。
现代文：永安三年八月，尔朱荣率四五千骑兵从并州出发，进向京城。
English: In August of the third year of Yongan, Er Zhu Rong led four or five thousand cavalrymen to march to Beijing.

古文：时人皆言其反，复道天子必应图之。
现代文：人们都说他要谋反，又说天子一定会对付他。
English: People said that he was plotting a rebellion, and that the Son of Heaven would surely deal with him.

古文：九月初，荣至京。有人告云，帝欲图之。
现代文：九月初，尔朱荣到达洛阳，有人告诉他，孝庄帝想图谋他。
English: At the beginning of September, Er Zhu Rong arrived in Luoyang. Someone told him that Emperor Xiaozhuang wanted to plot against him.

古文：荣即具奏。帝曰： 外人亦言王欲害我，岂可信之？ 
现代文：他立即将这话奏报给皇帝，孝庄帝说： 外人也传说你想加害于我，怎么能够相信呢？ 
English: He immediately reported this to the emperor, and Emperor Xiaozhuang said, "Outsiders also say that you want to harm me, how can I believe it?

古文：于是荣不自疑，每入谒帝，从人不过数十，皆不持兵仗。
现代文：于是，尔朱荣不再疑心。每次入宫谒见皇帝，带领的从人不过数十名，而且都不带兵器。
English: As a result, Er Zhu Rong no longer doubted. Each time he entered the palace to see the emperor, he was led by only dozens of people, and they did not carry weapons.

古文：帝欲止，城阳王曰： 纵不反，亦何可耐？
现代文：孝庄帝想停止图谋尔朱荣，城阳王劝他说： 他纵然不反，也怎么能忍受呢？
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor wanted to stop Zhu Rong's scheming, King Chengyang advised him: "Even if he does not rebel, how can he bear it?

古文：况何可保耶？ 
现代文：况且又怎么保得住他不反呢？ 
English: Besides, how could he be kept from rebelling?

古文：又北人语讹，语 尔硃 为 人主 。
现代文：另外，北边的人说话发音不准，说 尔朱 为 人主 。
English: In addition, people in the north are not allowed to speak or pronounce, saying that Lzhu is the master of mankind.

古文：上又闻其在北言，我姓人主。
现代文：孝庄帝又听说尔朱荣在北边对人说，他姓 人主 。
English: Xiaozhuangdi also heard that Er Zhu Rong told people in the north that his surname was Ren Shou.

古文：先是，长星出中台，扫大角，恆州人高荣祖颇明天文，荣问之曰： 是何祥也？ 
现代文：原先，长星出自中台，扫动大角。恒州人高荣祖通晓天文，尔朱荣问他 ：这是什么吉祥的兆头？ 
English: Originally, the long star came from the middle of the table and swept the large horn. Gao Rongzu, a native of Hengzhou, knew about astronomy, so he asked: What is this auspicious sign?

古文：答曰： 除旧布新象也。昔长星扫大角，秦以之亡。 
现代文：高荣祖回答 ：是除旧布新的景象呀，过去长星扫大角，秦朝便被灭亡。 
English: Gao Rongzu replied: It is the removal of old cloth and the creation of a new scene. In the past, Changxing swept the Great Horn, and the Qin Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：荣闻之悦。
现代文：他听后非常高兴。
English: He was very happy to hear it.

古文：又荣下行台郎中李显和曾曰： 天柱至，那无九锡，安须王自索也？
现代文：再则，尔朱荣手下的行台郎中李显和曾经说过 ：天柱大将军来到京城，朝廷怎么能不赐给九锡，难道要大王他自己去要么？
English: On the other hand, Li Xianhe, one of Zhu Rong's henchmen, once said: When General Tianzhu came to the capital, how could the imperial court not give Jiuxi to him? Should the great king go himself?

古文：亦是天子不见机！ 
现代文：天子真是不懂事理！ 
English: The son of heaven really doesn't understand things!

古文：都督郭罗察曰： 今年真可作禅文，何但九锡。 
现代文：都督郭罗察说 ：今年真可以写传位的禅文了，岂只是赐给九赐！ 
English: The governor, Guo Rocha, said, "This year, it is really possible to write a zen text to be handed down, isn't it just given to the nine!"

古文：参军褚光曰： 人言并州城上有紫气，何虑天柱不应。 
现代文：参军褚光说 ：有人说并州城上空出现紫色的帝王之气，何愁不应在天柱大将军身上！ 
English: Joining the army, Hao Guang said: Some people said that the purple emperor's breath appeared in the sky over the state capital, so there should be no worries about General Tianzhu!

古文：荣下人皆陵侮帝左右，无所忌惮，其事皆上闻。
现代文：尔朱荣手下的人常凌辱孝庄帝左右的侍臣，以至于肆无忌惮。这些事孝庄帝都听说了。
English: Zhu Rong's subordinates often abused and humiliated Xiaozhuang's attendants, and Emperor Xiaozhuang heard all about it.

古文：奚毅又见，求闻。帝即下明光殿与语。
现代文：奚毅又叩见孝庄帝，询问尔朱荣的情况。
English: Zhai Yi also met with Xiaozhuang Emperor to inquire about the situation of Er Zhu Rong.

古文：帝又疑其为荣，不告以情。
现代文：孝庄帝到明光殿与他说话，又怀疑他是尔朱荣派来的，没有告诉给他实情。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang went to the Mingguang Palace to talk to him, but suspected that he was sent by Zhu Rong, and did not tell him the truth.

古文：及知毅赤诚，乃召城阳王徽及杨侃、李彧，告以毅语。
现代文：等到了解到奚毅的赤诚后，便召集城阳王元徽，以及杨侃、李，把奚毅说的情况告诉给他们。
English: After they found out the truth about Zhai Yi, they called in Chengyang Wang Yuanhui, as well as Yang Kan and Li, and told them what Zhai Yi had said.

古文：荣小女嫁与帝兄子陈留王，小字伽邪。荣尝指之曰： 我终当得此女婿力。 
现代文：尔朱荣的小女儿嫁给孝庄帝哥哥的儿子陈留王。陈留王小名叫伽邪，尔朱荣曾指着他说 ：我最终会凭借这个女婿的力量。 
English: Er Zhurong's younger daughter married Chen Liu Wang, the son of Emperor Xiaozhuang's elder brother. Chen Liu Wang's younger brother was named Ji Zhe, and Er Zhurong once pointed to him and said, "I will eventually rely on the strength of this son-in-law."

古文：徽又云： 荣虑陛下终为此患，脱有东宫，必贪立孩幼。
现代文：元徽又说 ：尔朱荣忧虑陛下最终成为他的祸患，如有东宫，他一定会立一个小孩子当太子。
English: Yuan Hui also said: "Er Zhu Rong is worried that His Majesty will eventually become his scourge. If there is an Eastern Palace, he will surely appoint a small child as crown prince."

古文：若皇后不生太子，则立陈留以安天下。 
现代文：假如皇后不生太子，就立陈留王以安定天下。 
English: If the empress does not give birth to a prince, she will set up Chen Liu Wang to stabilize the world.

古文：并言荣指陈留语状。
现代文：并叙述了尔朱荣指着陈留王说话的情况。
English: He also described how Le Zhu Rong pointed at Chen Liu Wang and spoke to him.

古文：帝既有图荣意，夜梦手持一刀自害，落十指节，都不觉痛。
现代文：孝庄帝既然产生了除掉尔朱荣的想法，夜里梦见自己拿一把刀残害自己，十个手指砍下来也不知道疼痛。
English: Since Emperor Xiaozhuang had the idea of getting rid of Er Zhu Rong, he dreamed at night that he took a knife to kill himself, and he did not know the pain of cutting off ten fingers.

古文：恶之，以告城阳王徽及杨侃。
现代文：他非常讨厌这个梦，便告诉了城阳王元徽和杨侃。
English: He hated the dream so much that he told Wang Yuanhui and Yang Kan.

古文：徽解梦曰： 蝮蛇螫手，壮士解腕。
现代文：元徽释梦说 ：梦见蝮蛇咬住了手，象征着壮士摆脱了束缚自己的东西。
English: The original emblem explains the dream: Dreaming of a python biting your hand symbolizes a strong man freeing himself from bondage.

古文：割指节与解腕何异？
现代文：割掉手指与这种解脱有什么区别？
English: What is the difference between cutting off a finger and this relief?

古文：去患乃是吉祥。 
现代文：去掉灾难便是吉祥。 
English: Removing the disaster is auspicious.

古文：闻者皆言善。
现代文：听的人都说对。
English: Everyone who listened said it was right.

古文：九月十五日，天穆到京，驾迎之。
现代文：九月十五日，元天穆到达京城，孝庄帝亲自迎接他。
English: On September 15, Yuan Tianmu arrived in Beijing, and Emperor Xiaozhuang personally greeted him.

古文：荣与天穆并从入西林园燕射。
现代文：尔朱荣与元天穆一起跟着孝庄帝到西林园宴饮。
English: Zhu Rong together with Yuan Tianmu followed Emperor Xiaozhuang to the West Forest Garden for a banquet.

古文：荣乃奏曰： 近来侍官皆不习武，陛下宜将五百骑出猎，因省辞讼。 
现代文：尔朱荣奏报说 ：近来侍臣们都不练习武艺，陛下应该率五百骑兵出去打猎，因而也可省去很多公务。 
English: "Recently, courtiers have not been practicing martial arts. His Majesty should go hunting with five hundred horsemen, and thus he can also save a lot of official duties," the newspaper said.

古文：先是奚毅言荣因猎挟天子移都，至是，其言相符。
现代文：先前奚毅曾说过尔朱荣想借围猎的机会挟制天子迁都，这时尔朱荣的话与奚毅说的相符。
English: Earlier, Zhai Yi had said that Le Zhu Rong wanted to use the opportunity of the siege to coerce Tianzi to move the capital. At that time, Le Zhu Rong's words were consistent with those of Zhai Yi.

古文：至十八日，召中书舍人温子升告以杀荣状，并问以杀董卓事。
现代文：到了十八日，孝庄帝召见中书舍人温子升，告诉他准备杀掉尔朱荣的打算，并询问汉代王允杀董卓的旧事。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Xiaozhuang summoned Wen Zi Sheng, a scholar of the Middle Kingdom, and told him of the plan to kill Er Zhu Rong, and inquired about the old story of Wang Yun's killing of Dong Zhuo in the Han Dynasty.

古文：子升具通本，上曰： 王允若即赦凉州人，必不应至此。 
现代文：温子升便奏报说 ：王允如果能立即赦免董卓的死罪，一定不会到这一步。 
English: "If Wang Yun could immediately pardon Dong Zhuo's capital crime, he would not have come to this point," Wen Zi Sheng wrote in a letter to a newspaper.

古文：良久，语子升曰： 朕之情理，卿所具知，死犹须为，况必不死！
现代文：孝庄帝停了很久，对温子升说： 我的处境想法，你都知道，死了也必须这样干，更何况不一定会死呢？
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang paused for a long time and said to Wen Zisheng, "You all know how I feel about my situation. Even if I die, I have to do this, and what's more, I don't have to die."

古文：宁与高贵乡公同日死，不与常道乡公同日生。 
现代文：我宁愿与高贵乡公同日死，不愿与长道乡公同日生。 
English: I would rather die on the same day as the nobles of my hometown than be born on the same day as the people of my hometown.

古文：上谓杀荣、天穆，即赦其党，便应不动。
现代文：又说杀死尔朱荣、元天穆后，就赦免他们的党羽，他们不会有什么举动。
English: He also said that after killing Le Zhu Rong and Yuan Tian Mu, he would pardon their followers, and they would not do anything.

古文：应诏王道习曰： 尔硃世隆、司马子如、硃元龙比来偏被委付，具知天下虚实，谓不宜留。 
现代文：应诏王道习说 ：尔朱世隆、司马子如、朱元龙长期以来都受尔朱荣的重用，详细了解天下的虚实，我认为不应该保留他们活命。 
English: In response, Wang Daoxi said: "Er Zhu Shilong, Sima Ziru, and Zhu Yuanlong have been reused by Er Zhu Rong for a long time, and have a detailed understanding of the world's reality. I think that they should not be kept alive.

古文：城阳王及杨侃曰： 若世隆不全，仲远、天光岂有来理？ 
现代文：城阳王元徽和杨侃说： 如果尔朱世隆不能保全性命，尔朱仲远和尔朱天光哪有来京的道理？ 
English: Chengyang Wang Yuanhui and Yang Kan said: If Lzhu Shilong could not save his life, why did Lzhu Zhongyuan and Lzhu Tianguang come to Beijing?

古文：帝亦谓然，无复杀意。
现代文：孝庄帝也认为他们说得对，不再有杀死尔朱世隆的意思。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang also thought that they were right, and no longer had the intention of killing Er Shulong.

古文：城阳曰： 荣数征伐，腰间有刀，或能狠戾伤人。
现代文：城阳王说 ：尔朱荣数年征战，腰间带有佩刀，或许能凶狠地杀伤别人。
English: Shioyang Wang said: Er Zhu Rong has been fighting for several years, with a sword at his waist, he may be able to kill others viciously.

古文：临事，愿陛下出。 
现代文：事情爆发时，望陛下能拔刀相助。 
English: When things get out of hand, I hope His Majesty can pull out a sword to help.

古文：乃伏侃等十余人于明光殿东。
现代文：孝庄帝便将杨侃等十多人埋伏在明光殿东侧。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang then ambushed more than ten people, including Yang Kan, on the east side of the Mingguang Palace.

古文：其日，荣与天穆并入，坐食未讫，起出。
现代文：这一天，尔朱荣与元天穆一起进宫，坐下来没有吃完饭，就站起来出去了。
English: On this day, Er Zhu Rong entered the palace together with Yuan Tianmu, sat down and did not finish the meal, but got up and went out.

古文：侃等从东阶上殿，见荣、天穆出至中庭，事不果。
现代文：杨侃等人从明光殿东面的台阶上殿，看见尔朱荣和元天穆已走到院子中间，事情没有成功。
English: Yang Kan and others went up the steps from the east of the Mingguang Hall and saw that Le Zhu Rong and Yuan Tianmu had walked to the middle of the courtyard. The matter did not succeed.

古文：十九日是帝忌日。二十日荣忌日。
现代文：十九日是孝庄帝的忌日，二十日是尔朱荣的忌日。
English: The 19th is the day of the death of Emperor Xiaozhuang, and the 20th is the day of the death of Zhu Rong.

古文：二十一日，暂入，即向陈留王家，饮酒极醉。
现代文：二十一日，尔朱荣突然入宫，到了陈留王的家中，因饮酒过量大醉。
English: On the twenty-first day, Er Zhu Rong suddenly entered the palace and arrived at the home of Chen Liu Wang. He was very drunk due to excessive drinking.

古文：遂言病动，频日不入。
现代文：便推说疾病发作，多日不进入宫中。
English: She then deduced that she was suffering from an illness and would not be able to enter the womb for several days.

古文：上谋颇泄，世隆等以告荣。
现代文：这时，孝庄帝的计划已泄露出去，尔朱世隆等人听到后报告给尔朱荣。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaozhuang's plan had leaked out, and after hearing it, Lzhu Shilong and others reported it to Lzhu Rong.

古文：荣轻帝，不谓能反。
现代文：他却轻视孝庄帝，认为他反不了。
English: However, he despised Emperor Xiaozhuang and thought that he could not win.

古文：预帝谋者皆惧。
现代文：参与孝庄帝制定处死尔朱荣计划的人都很害怕。
English: The people who participated in Xiaozhuangdi's plan to execute Er Zhu Rong were very scared.

古文：二十五日旦，荣、天穆同入，其日大欲革易。
现代文：二十五日早晨，尔朱荣、元天穆一同入宫。
English: On the morning of the 25th, Er Zhurong and Yuan Tianmu entered the palace together.

古文：上在明光殿东序中西面坐，荣与天穆并御床西北小床上南坐，城阳入，始一拜。
现代文：这一天他们很想改革朝廷的状况。孝庄帝在明光殿东边中间面向西坐着，尔朱荣与元天穆并坐在御座西北的小床上，面向南坐着。
English: On this day, they very much wanted to reform the situation of the imperial court. Emperor Xiaozhuang sat in the middle of the east side of the Mingguang Palace, facing west, while Zhu Rong and Yuan Tianmu sat on a small bed northwest of the throne, facing south.

古文：荣见光禄卿鲁安等持刀从东户入，即驰向御坐，帝拔千牛刀，手斩之，时年三十八。
现代文：城阳王元徽进来，只一拜，尔朱荣看见光禄卿鲁安等人拿着刀从东门进来，便跃身奔向御座，孝庄帝拔出千牛刀亲手将他杀死，尔朱荣时年三十八岁。
English: When King Yuan Hui of Chengyang came in, it only took a moment for Er Zhurong to see Guangluqing Luan and others coming in through the east gate with swords. He leapt to his feet and ran to the throne. Emperor Xiaozhuang pulled out a thousand-cattle knife and killed him with his own hands. Er Zhurong was thirty-eight years old at the time.

古文：得其手板上有数牒启，皆左右去留人名，非其腹心，悉在出限。
现代文：在缴获他的手板上发现有几行文字，都是他决定朝廷要去留的大臣的名单。不是他的心腹，都在赶出朝廷的范围。
English: Several lines of writing were found on the tablet he was captured with, all of which were a list of ministers he had decided the imperial court should retain. They were not his henchmen, but they were all being driven out of the realm of the imperial court.

古文：帝曰： 竖子！
现代文：孝庄帝看了骂道 ：小子！
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang saw this, he scolded: "Kid!

古文：若过今日，便不可制。 
现代文：如果过了今天，就不能制服你了。 
English: If it's after today, I won't be able to subdue you.

古文：时又天穆与荣子菩提亦就戮，于是内外喜叫，声满京城。
现代文：这时，元天穆与尔朱荣的儿子尔朱菩提也被除掉。于是，朝廷内外欢喜的叫喊声传遍京城。
English: At this time, Yuan Tianmu and Lzhu Rong's son, Lzhu Bodhi, were also eliminated. As a result, shouts of joy from inside and outside the imperial court spread throughout the capital.

古文：既而大赦。
现代文：不久，大赦尔朱荣的党羽。
English: Soon, Zhu Rong's party members were amnestied.

古文：荣虽威名大振，而举止轻脱，止以驰射为伎艺，每入朝见，更无所为，唯戏上下马。
现代文：尔朱荣虽然威名远扬，但举止轻率，只以骑马射箭为技艺。每次入京朝见皇帝，便没有别的作为，只会作马上马下的游戏。
English: Although his fame was far-reaching, Le Zhu Rong behaved imprudently, using only horse riding and archery as his skills. Every time he went to Beijing to see the emperor, he had nothing else to do but play horse games.

古文：于西林园宴射，恆请皇后出观，并召王公妃主，共在一堂。
现代文：在西林园饮酒射箭，他常常请皇后出来观看，并召集王公、嫔妃、公主，共处在一起。
English: He often invited the empress to come out to watch him drinking and archery in the West Forest Garden, and gathered princes, concubines, and princesses to live together.

古文：每见天子射中，辄自起舞叫，将相卿士，悉皆盘旋，乃至妃主妇人，亦不免随之举袂。
现代文：每看见天子射中箭的，他便跳跃喊叫，将相大臣们，也都跟着他呼喊。以至于嫔妃公主及宫中的其他妇人，也不免随着撩起衣裙欢呼。
English: Whenever he saw his son hit an arrow, he would jump up and shout, and his ministers would also shout after him. So much so that Princess Kunihime and the other women in the palace would cheer as he lifted up his dress.

古文：及酒酣耳热，必自匡坐，唱虏歌，为《树梨普梨》之曲。
现代文：到酒酣耳热，似醉非醉时，他便坐在那里唱胡人的歌，配以《树梨普梨》的曲子。
English: When the wine was hot and he seemed to be drunk or not, he would sit there and sing Hujin's song, accompanied by the tune of "Tree Pear Pear."

古文：见临淮王彧从容闲雅，爱尚风素，固令为敕勒舞。
现代文：他见临淮王元风度文静儒雅，崇尚风流，却坚持要临淮王跳敕勒舞。
English: He saw that Lin Huai Wang Yuan's demeanor was quiet and elegant, advocating elegance, but he insisted that Lin Huai Wang dance the Yule Dance.

古文：日暮罢归，便与左右连手蹋地，唱《回波乐》而出。
现代文：天黑归来，他与随从的人手拉着手，用脚在地上踏着节拍，唱着《回波乐》走出园林。
English: When he returned after dark, he and his entourage walked out of the garden holding hands, stepping on the ground with their feet to the beat and singing "Echoes."

古文：性甚严暴，愠喜无恆，弓箭刀槊，不离于手，每有瞋嫌，即行忍害，左右恆有死忧。
现代文：他的性情十分严酷暴烈，喜怒无常，弓箭刀槊，从不离手。每有愤怒和怀疑，便要杀人。因而左右的人常怀着死亡的担忧。
English: His temper was very harsh and violent, he was moody, he was fond of bows and arrows and knives, he never let go of his hands. Whenever he was angry or suspicious, he wanted to kill people. Therefore, people around him often feared death.

古文：曾欲出猎，有人诉之，披陈不已，发怒，即射杀之。
现代文：他曾经想外出打猎，有人劝阻他，陈说未完，引起他的恼怒，便将这个人射杀。
English: He once wanted to go out hunting, someone dissuaded him, and before he could finish his speech, he shot the man, which made him angry.

古文：曾见沙弥重骑一马，荣即令相触，力穷不复能动，遂使傍人以头相击，死而后已。
现代文：他见一个和尚身体胖大，骑着一匹马，他便让和尚和自己相撞。他用尽力气也不能撞倒和尚，便命其他人用头撞击，直到把和尚撞死。
English: He saw a big, fat monk on a horse, and he let the monk run into him. He couldn't knock the monk down with all his strength, so he ordered the others to head-butt him until he was dead.

古文：节闵帝初，世隆等得志，乃诏赠假黄钺、相国、录尚书、都督中外诸军事、晋王，加九锡，给九旒銮辂，武贲班剑三百人，辒辌车，准晋太宰、安平献王故事，谥曰武。
现代文：节闵帝初年，尔朱世隆等人受宠，朝廷便下诏追赠尔朱荣为假黄钺、相国、录尚书事、都督中外诸军事、晋王，赐给九锡，赠给九旒銮辂，佩剑的武贲郎三百人，鍂车京丧车一辆。参照晋太宰、安平献王的旧例，追赠谥号为武。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiechi, when people such as Er Zhu Shilong were favored, the imperial court issued an imperial edict to posthumously award Er Zhu Rong the title of "False Huang Di," "Father of the Nation," "Recorded in the Annals," "Governor of the Middle and Outer Military Regions," and "King of Jin," to Jiuxi, to Jiuzhaigou, 300 warriors with swords, and one carriage of the Beijing funeral procession. Referring to the old example of Jin Dazai and Anping offering the king, the posthumous posthumous title was Wu.

古文：又诏百官议荣配飨，司直刘季明曰： 晋王若配永安，则不能终臣节。
现代文：朝廷又召集百官议论尔朱荣的配飨，司直刘季明说： 晋王如果配飨孝庄帝，他却没有尽臣子的礼节。
English: The imperial court also convened a hundred officials to discuss Zhu Rong's matchmaking, and Liu Jiming said: If the Jin king matches Xiaozhuang Emperor, he has not exhausted the courtesy of a vassal.

古文：以此论之，无所配。 
现代文：由此看来，无法配飨。 
English: From this point of view, it is impossible to match.

古文：世隆作色曰： 卿合配？ 
现代文：尔朱世隆厉色问 ：你说怎么配？ 
English: Le Zhu Shilong asked sharply: How do you match?

古文：季明曰： 下官预在议限，据理而言，不合上心，诛翦唯命。 
现代文：季明答道 ：我的职责就是议论这件事，是根据道理讲的，不合乎您的心意，杀剐惟您是命。 
English: Ji Ming replied: My duty is to discuss this matter, it is based on reason, it does not suit your mind, killing is your life.

古文：众为之危，季明自若。
现代文：众人都替他担心，他镇定自若。
English: Everyone was worried about him, but he kept his cool.

古文：神武特加宽贷，奏免之。文略聪明俊爽，多所通习。
现代文：世隆不甘心，便让尔朱荣配飨在孝文帝的嗣庙中。
English: Shilong was not satisfied, so he let Er Zhu Rong serve as an attendant in Emperor Xiaowen's successor temple.

古文：齐文襄尝令章永兴马上弹琵琶，奏十余曲，试使文略写之，遂得八。
现代文：尔朱文略，尔朱荣的第五子，承袭哥哥叉罗的爵号为梁郡王。他聪明英俊，倜傥风流，学会了多方面的技能。齐文襄帝高澄曾命章永兴在马上弹琵琶，演奏了十多支曲子，试着让他记录下来，他写下了八支。
English: Lzhu Wenliu, the fifth son of Lzhu Rong, inherited the title of Liang Guo Wang from his brother Zhi Luo. He was smart and handsome, and learned many skills. Qibin Xiangdi Gaocheng once ordered Zhang Yongxing to play the lute on a horse. He played more than ten pieces and tried to have him record them. He wrote down eight.

古文：文襄戏之曰： 聪明人多不老寿，梁郡其慎之！ 
现代文：高澄跟他开玩笑说 ：聪明人大多不长寿，梁郡王你要小心啊！ 
English: Takasumi joked with him, "Most smart people don't live long, Liang Guorong, be careful!"

古文：文略对曰： 命之修短，皆在明公。 
现代文：文略对答说： 我性命的长短，都由您来决定。 
English: Wen Liang replied: The length of my life is up to you to decide.

古文：文襄怆然曰： 此不足虑。 
现代文：高澄很动情地说 ：这你不用担心。 
English: Takasumi said very emotionally: You don't have to worry about that.

古文：初，神武遣令恕文略十死，恃此益横，多所陵忽。
现代文：神武帝高欢曾下令饶恕文略犯十种罪过而不被处死。
English: Emperor Gao Huan had ordered that Wen Rongcheng be pardoned for committing ten kinds of crimes and not be executed.

古文：齐天保末，尝邀平秦、武兴、汝南诸王至宅，供设奢丽，各有赠贿。
现代文：他依仗这种特权，更加横行无忌，行为大多蛮横粗暴。齐天保末年，他曾邀集平秦王、武兴王、汝南王到家中宴饮，供给和摆设十分奢侈华丽，对每个人都有丰厚的馈赠。
English: Relying on this privilege, he became even more reckless, and most of his actions were quite brutal. In the last years of Qi Tianbo, he invited King Ping Qin, King Wu Xing, and King Runan to his home for a banquet. The food and decorations were very extravagant, and there were rich gifts for everyone.

古文：诸王共假聚宝物以要之，文略弊衣而往，从奴五十人，皆骏马侯服。
现代文：诸王一起借口收集宝物又邀请他。文略穿着破衣服前往，而跟从他的奴仆五十多人却骑着骏马，穿着公侯们才能穿的艳丽的衣服。
English: On the pretext of collecting treasures, the kings invited him, and he went there in rags, accompanied by more than fifty of his servants, who rode on fine horses and wore the splendid clothes of a prince.

古文：其豪纵不逊如此。
现代文：他的豪爽放纵都不逊色于这件事。
English: His gallant indulgences are not inferior to this.

古文：平秦王有七百里马，文略敌以好婢，赌取之。
现代文：平秦王有一匹日行七百里的好马，文略出示一个长得十分漂亮的婢子与他的好马比较，文略获胜得到了好马。
English: King Pingqin had a good horse that could travel seven hundred miles a day. Wenliang showed a very beautiful maid to compare with his good horse. Wenliang won and got a good horse.

古文：明日，平秦王使人致请，文略杀马及婢，以二银器盛婢头马肉而遗之。平秦王诉之于文宣，系于京畿狱。
现代文：第二天，平秦王派人邀请他，他将马和婢子杀死，用两件银器分别盛着婢子的人头和马肉送给平秦王，平秦王奏报给齐文宣帝，有司将他关押到京城郊区的监狱。
English: The next day, King Pingqin sent someone to invite him. He killed the horse and the servant girl, and used two pieces of silverware to give the servant girl's head and horse meat to King Pingqin. King Pingqin sent the report to Emperor Qibun Xuan, and Yushi imprisoned him in a prison on the outskirts of Beijing.

古文：文略弹琵琶，吹横笛，谣咏倦极，便卧唱挽歌。
现代文：他在狱中弹琵琶，吹横笛，唱歌唱累了，便卧在地上唱挽歌。
English: In prison he played the lute, the flute, and when he got tired of singing, he lay on the ground and sang elegies.

古文：居数月，夺防者弓矢以射人，曰： 不然，天子不忆我。 
现代文：过了几个月，他夺过守卫监狱士兵的弓箭去射别人，说： 不这样，天子就想不起我来。 
English: After a few months, he snatched the bows and arrows of the soldiers guarding the prison to shoot others, saying, "Otherwise, God will not remember me."

古文：有司奏，遂伏法。
现代文：有司奏闻朝廷，便将他绳之以法。
English: When the imperial court heard about this, they brought him to justice.

古文：文略尝大遗魏收金，请为父作佳传，收论荣比韦、彭、伊、霍，盖由是也。
现代文：他曾送给魏收很多钱，请求给他的父亲尔朱荣在《魏书》中写一篇好的传记吹嘘一番，所以，魏收在写史时将尔朱荣比作韦贤、彭越、伊尹、霍光，就是因为这个原因啊。
English: He had given Wei Cai a lot of money and asked his father, Er Zhu Rong, to write a good biography in "Wei Shu" to boast a little. Therefore, Wei Cai compared Er Zhu Rong to Wei Xian, Peng Yue, Yi Yin, and Huo Guang when writing history, for this reason.

古文：兆字万仁，荣从子也。
现代文：尔朱兆，字万仁，尔朱荣的从子。
English: Lzhu Zhao, Zi Wanren, a follower of Lzhu Rong.

古文：少善骑射，趫捷过人，数从荣游猎，至穷岩绝涧，人所不能升降者，兆必先之。
现代文：从小就善于骑射，身体轻捷矫健，超过常人。多次跟着尔朱荣游猎，在悬崖深渊，别人不能跨越的地方，他一定走在前面。
English: Since childhood, he has been good at riding and shooting, his body is light and agile, exceeding ordinary people. He has followed Le Zhu Rong on hunting trips many times, and in the cliff abyss, where others cannot cross, he must walk in front.

古文：手格猛兽，无所疑避。
现代文：赤手与猛兽格斗，毫不犹豫和逃避。
English: Fighting the beast with his bare hands, he didn't hesitate and ran away.

古文：荣以此特加赏爱，任为爪牙。
现代文：尔朱荣对他特别喜欢，常给予奖赏，将他看作心腹爪牙。
English: Le Zhu Rong was particularly fond of him, often gave him rewards, and regarded him as a subordinate.

古文：荣曾送台使，见二鹿，授兆二箭，令取供今食。遂构火以待之。
现代文：尔朱荣曾送别使者，看见两只鹿，给他两支箭，让他射取鹿供今天吃，便点燃篝火等待。
English: When he saw two deer, he gave him two arrows and told him to shoot the deer for today's meal. He then lit a bonfire and waited.

古文：俄而兆获其一，荣欲夸使人，责兆不尽取，杖之五十。
现代文：不大一会儿，他送回一只鹿。尔朱荣想向使者夸耀，却责备尔朱兆不将两只鹿都射中，打了他五十棍。
English: Not long after, he sent back a deer. Er Zhu Rong wanted to boast to the messenger, but he scolded Er Zhu Zhao for not shooting both deer and beat him with fifty sticks.

古文：荣之入洛，兆兼前锋都督。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳，尔朱兆任前锋都督。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, and Le Zhu Zhao served as the forward governor.

古文：孝庄即位，封颍川郡公。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，封他为颍川郡公。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, and he was named governor of Shichuan County.

古文：后从上党王天穆平邢杲。又与贺拔胜击斩元颢子冠受，禽之。
现代文：后来，他与上党王元天穆平定邢杲，又与贺拔胜联合击败元颢的儿子元冠受，将他擒获。
English: Later, he and the king of the Shang Dynasty, Yuan Tianmu, subdued and defeated Yuan Guanzhong, the son of Yuan Guanzhong, and captured him.

古文：进破安丰王延明，颢乃退走。
现代文：进而攻破安丰王元延明，这时元颢才退却。
English: He then broke through the Anfeng king, Yuan Yanming, at which time Yuan Shao retreated.

古文：庄帝还宫，论功除车骑大将军、仪同三司、汾州刺史。
现代文：孝庄帝回到京城，论功行赏，封他为车骑大将军、仪同三司、汾州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang returned to Beijing and awarded him for his meritorious deeds. He was given the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Third Division of the Imperial Household, and Grand Historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：尔硃荣死，兆自汾州据晋阳。
现代文：尔朱荣被处死后，尔朱兆从汾州占据晋阳。
English: After the execution of Er Zhu Rong, Er Zhu Zhao occupied Jinyang from Zhangzhou.

古文：元晔立，授兆大将军，进爵为王。兆与世隆等定谋攻洛。
现代文：东海王元晔继立，授予他大将军衔，晋爵位为王，他与尔朱世隆定下计谋，要攻破洛阳。
English: The king of the East China Sea, Yuan Shikai, granted him the rank of general and the title of king, and he and Zhu Shilong made a plan to break through Luoyang.

古文：兆遂轻兵倍道，掩袭京邑。
现代文：他率精锐部队日夜兼程，袭击洛阳。
English: He and his elite troops traveled day and night to attack Luoyang.

古文：先是，河边人梦神谓己曰： 尔硃家欲度河，用尔作氵垒波津令，为之缩水脉。 
现代文：在这之前，一个家住黄河边上的人梦见神对自己说 ：尔朱家的人想渡黄河，任用你为飈波津令，给他们测量水的深浅。 
English: Prior to this, a man who lived on the edge of the Yellow River had a dream in which God said to him, "The people of the Erju family want to cross the Yellow River. Appoint you as a surveyor to measure the depth of the water."

古文：月余，梦者死。
现代文：过了一个多月，做梦的人死去。
English: After more than a month, the dreamer dies.

古文：及兆至，有行人自言知水浅处，以草往往表插而导焉，忽失其所在。
现代文：等到尔朱兆率军来到，有一个过路的人说自己知道哪里水浅，用插草的办法以作引导。这人忽然不见踪影。
English: When Lzhu Zhao and his army arrived, a passerby said that he knew where the water was shallow and used the method of sowing grass to guide them. The man suddenly disappeared.

古文：兆遂策马涉度。
现代文：尔朱兆骑着马渡过黄河。
English: Le Zhu Zhao riding a horse across the Yellow River.

古文：是日暴风鼓怒，黄尘张天，骑叩宫门，宿卫乃觉。
现代文：这一天，狂风怒吼，黄尘弥天盖地，尔朱兆的骑兵叩打皇宫的大门，守卫的士兵才发觉。
English: On this day, when the wind was raging and the yellow dust covered the sky, Zhu Zhao's cavalry knocked on the gate of the imperial palace, and the soldiers on guard only found out.

古文：弯弓欲射，袍拨弦，矢不得发，一时散走。
现代文：想弯弓用箭射击，衣袍又挂住了弓弦，箭没法射出。一时四散逃走。
English: He tried to shoot an arrow with a bent bow, but his robe got caught in the bowstring, so he couldn't shoot the arrow. He scattered and ran away.

古文：庄帝步出云龙门外，为兆骑所击，幽于永宁佛寺。
现代文：孝庄帝步出云龙门外，被尔朱兆抓获，囚禁在永宁寺。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang stepped out of the Cloud Dragon Gate, was captured by Er Zhu Zhao, and imprisoned in Yongning Temple.

古文：兆扑杀皇子，汙辱妃嫔，纵兵虏掠。
现代文：他又杀死皇帝的儿子，污辱嫔妃，放纵士兵任意掳掠。
English: He also killed the emperor's son, insulted the Empress Dowager, and allowed soldiers to plunder at will.

古文：停洛旬余，先令卫送庄帝于晋阳，兆后于河梁监阅财货。
现代文：他在洛阳停留十多天，先命部将押送孝庄帝到晋阳，他在河梁监督察看抢来的财物。
English: He stayed in Luoyang for more than ten days. The Ministry of Ancestral Affairs escorted Emperor Xiaozhuang to Jinyang. He supervised and inspected the stolen property in Hailiang.

古文：初，兆将入洛，遣使招齐神武，欲与同举。
现代文：一开始，尔朱兆准备进兵洛阳，派人召集齐神武帝高欢，想同他一起举事。
English: At the beginning, Er Zhu Zhao was preparing to march into Luoyang. He sent someone to convene the Qishenwu Emperor Gaohuan and wanted to work with him.

古文：神武时为晋州刺史，谓长史孙腾曰： 臣而伐君，其逆已甚。
现代文：高欢当时任晋州刺史，对长史孙腾说： 臣子去讨伐国君，是大逆不道的事。
English: At that time, Gao Huan was appointed as the prefect of Jinzhou, and he said to Sun Teng, the prefect of Jinzhou: It is an act of high treason for a courtier to go and fight against the sovereign.

古文：我今不往，恐彼致恨，卿可往申吾意，但云山蜀未平，不可委去。 
现代文：我现在不同他一起去，恐怕会招致他的怨恨，你可去他那里一趟，申明我的意思，只说山蜀一带还没有平定，无法离去。 
English: If I don't go with him now, I'm afraid I'll incur his resentment. You can go to him and tell him what I mean. Just say that the area around Shanshu hasn't been pacified yet, so I can't leave.

古文：腾乃诣兆，具申意。
现代文：孙腾到尔朱兆那里，申明了高欢的意思。
English: Sun Teng went to Lzhu Zhao and clarified the meaning of Gaohuan.

古文：兆不悦，曰： 还白高兄弟，有吉梦，今行必克。
现代文：他很不高兴，说： 回去告诉高欢老兄，我做了一个好梦，这次一定能够成功。
English: He was very unhappy and said, "Go back and tell Brother Gao Huan that I had a good dream and I will definitely succeed this time."

古文：吾比梦吾亡父登一高堆，堆傍地悉耕熟，唯有马兰草株，往往犹在，吾父顾我，令下拔之。
现代文：我梦见我去世的父亲登上一个高高的土堆，土堆旁的地都经过犁耕。惟有几株马兰草还在生长。我的父亲看着我，让我将它们拔掉。
English: I had a dream that my dead father was on top of a high mound of earth. The ground around the mound had been ploughed. Only a few marram grasses were still growing. My father looked at me and told me to pull them out.

古文：吾手所至，无不尽出。
现代文：我的手到的地方，马兰草无不被拔出。
English: Where I can get my hands on it, there is no way the marram grass will not be pulled out.

古文：以此而言，往必有利。 
现代文：由此看来，这次去京城一定能够胜利。 
English: From this point of view, this trip to Beijing will surely be a success.

古文：腾还，具报之。神武曰： 兆等猖狂，举兵犯顺，吾势不可反事尔硃也。
现代文：孙腾归来，将这些话都告诉了高欢，高欢说： 尔朱兆此人如此猖狂，兴兵侵犯朝廷，我决不能反过来顺从尔朱氏啊！
English: When Sun Teng returned, he told Gao Huan all these words. Gao Huan said, "This man, Lzhu Zhao, is so reckless that he raised an army to invade the imperial court. I must not obey the Lzhu clan in return!"

古文：今天子列兵河上，兆进不能度，必退还。
现代文：现在，朝廷在黄河上陈列军队，尔朱兆无法渡过黄河，一定退还。
English: Now that the imperial court is displaying troops on the Yellow River, Lzhu Zhao cannot cross the Yellow River and must return it.

古文：吾乘山东下，出其不意，此徒可一举而禽。 
现代文：我乘势东下，出其不意，这伙人可一举擒获。 
English: I took advantage of the situation and went east. To my surprise, this group of people could be captured in one fell swoop.

古文：俄而兆克京师，孝庄幽絷，都督尉景从兆南行，以书报神武。
现代文：不久，尔朱兆占据京城，孝庄帝被囚禁，都督尉景跟随尔朱兆南进洛阳，写信报告给了高欢。
English: Soon, Er Zhu Zhao occupied Beijing, Emperor Xiaozhuang was imprisoned, and the governor, Lieutenant Jing, followed Er Zhu Zhao south to Luoyang, and wrote a report to Gao Huan.

古文：神武大惊，召腾，令驰驿诣兆，示以谒贺，密观天子所在，当于路邀迎，唱大义于天下。
现代文：高欢大为吃惊，召集孙腾，命他赶快到尔朱兆那里，向他表示真诚地祝贺，并秘密访察孝庄帝被囚禁的地方，准备在半路上用武力将他迎回，用大义号召天下。
English: Gao Huan was greatly surprised, summoned Sun Teng, ordered him to hurry to Lzhu Zhao, expressed his sincere congratulations to him, and secretly visited the place where Emperor Xiaozhuang was imprisoned, preparing to use force to welcome him back halfway and call the world with great righteousness.

古文：腾遇帝于中路，神武时率骑东转，闻帝已度，于是西还。
现代文：孙腾在半路上遇见押送孝庄帝的军队，这时高欢才率领骑兵东进，听说孝庄帝已被废除，便率兵西还。
English: In the middle of the road, Sun Teng met the army escorting Emperor Xiaozhuang. At this time, Gao Huancai led the cavalry eastward. When he heard that Emperor Xiaozhuang had been abolished, he led the soldiers westward.

古文：仍与兆书，具陈祸福，不宜害天子，受恶名于海内。
现代文：仍写信给尔朱兆，详细陈述利害关系，告诫他不要残害天下百姓，在海内留下恶名。
English: He still wrote to Er Zhu Zhao, detailing the stakes and warning him not to harm the people of the world and leave a bad name at sea.

古文：兆怒不纳，而帝遂遇弑。
现代文：尔朱兆看完十分恼怒，拒不采纳。竟将孝庄帝杀害。
English: After watching it, Lzhu Zhao was very angry and refused to accept it. He actually killed Xiaozhuangdi.

古文：初，荣既死，庄帝诏河西人纥豆陵步蕃等，令袭秀容。
现代文：当初，尔朱荣被处死，孝庄帝命河西人纥豆陵兵蕃等进攻秀容。
English: At first, Er Zhu Rong was put to death, and Emperor Xiaozhuang ordered the soldiers of the Hexi People's Mung Bean Mausoleum to attack.

古文：兆入洛后，步蕃兵势甚盛，南逼晋阳。
现代文：尔朱兆进攻洛阳后，步蕃的军队攻势正盛，向南进逼晋阳。
English: After Zhu Zhao's attack on Luoyang, Bu Xun's army was in full swing, pushing south to Jinyang.

古文：兆所以不暇留洛，回师御之。
现代文：所以，尔朱兆无暇在洛阳停留，马上回师抵御。
English: Therefore, Lzhu Zhao had no time to stay in Luoyang and immediately returned to defend against the division.

古文：频为步蕃所败，于是部勒士马，谋出山东，令人频徵神武。
现代文：多次被步蕃打败。于是，他准备率兵东出太行山，派人多次向高欢求援。
English: As a result, he prepared to lead his soldiers east out of Taihang Mountain, and repeatedly sent people to Gaohuan to ask for help.

古文：神武晋州僚属，并劝不行。神武揣其势迫，必无他虑，决策赴之。兆乃分三州六镇之人，令神武统领。
现代文：高欢在晋州的僚属都劝阻高欢不要出兵，高欢估计他处境窘迫，一定不会有别的顾虑，便决定带兵与他会合，尔朱兆便将三州六镇的兵马交给高欢统领。
English: Gao Huan's colleagues in Jinzhou all dissuaded Gao Huan from sending troops. Gao Huan estimated that he was in a difficult situation and would have no other concerns, so he decided to take soldiers to meet him. Er Zhu Zhao then handed over the soldiers and horses of six towns in the three states to Gao Huan's commander.

古文：神武既分兵别营，乃引兵南出，避步蕃之锐。
现代文：高欢将军队调度完毕，便领兵南趋，避开步蕃的锋芒。
English: After Gao Huan finished dispatching the army, he led the soldiers southward, avoiding the sharp edge of the steppe.

古文：步蕃至乐平郡，神武与兆还讨，破斩之。
现代文：步蕃率军到达乐平郡，高欢与尔朱兆回兵进击，将敌兵打败，斩杀了步蕃。
English: Bu Xuan led the army to arrive at Leping County, Gao Huan and Lzhu Zhao counterattacked, defeated the enemy soldiers, and killed Bu Xuan.

古文：及节闵帝立，授兆使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、柱国大将军，兼录尚书事、大行台。
现代文：节闵帝即位后，授予尔朱兆使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、柱国大将军，兼录尚书事、大行台。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jiechi, he awarded Er Zhuzhao with the positions of envoy, chamberlain, military governor of foreign countries, and general of the pillar country, as well as the posts of secretary and grand chamberlain.

古文：又以兆为天柱大将军，兆以是荣所终之官，固辞不拜。
现代文：又封他为天柱大将军，他因为这是父亲尔朱荣临终时担任的官职，坚决辞去。
English: He was also given the title of General of Tianzhu, but because this was the official position held by his father, Er Zhurong, at the end of his life, he resolutely resigned.

古文：寻加都督十州诸军事，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：不久，加封为都督十州诸军事，世袭并州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the military governor of ten states, hereditary and state history.

古文：神武之克殷州也，兆与仲远、度律约拒之。
现代文：高欢攻克殷州，尔朱兆与尔朱仲远、尔朱度律相约与高欢军对抗。
English: Gao Huan conquered Yinzhou, and Lzhu Zhao and Lzhu Zhongyuan and Lzhu Du Li agreed to fight against Gao Huan's army.

古文：仲远、度律次阳平，兆屯广阿，众号十万。
现代文：仲远、度律到达阳平，尔朱兆屯扎广阿，率众号称十万。
English: Zhongyuan and Duodu arrived in Yangping, and Zhu Zhaotun arrived in Guang'a, leading the crowd to be known as the hundred thousand.

古文：神武广纵反间，于是两不相信，各致猜疑。
现代文：高欢实行反间计，于是，尔朱兆与尔朱仲远等双方互不相信，各存猜疑。
English: Gao Huan implemented a counter-measure, as a result, both sides, such as Lzhu Zhao and Lzhu Zhongyuan, did not trust each other and were suspicious of each other.

古文：仲远等频使斛斯椿贺拔胜往喻之。兆轻骑三百，来就仲远，同坐幕下。
现代文：仲远等不断派部将斛斯椿、贺拔胜向他解释，他才率轻骑三百人到仲远这里来，同坐在军帐下。
English: Zhongyuan and others kept sending commanders such as Jinshchun and He Baxian to explain to him that he had just led three hundred people to come to Zhongyuan and sit together under the military ledger.

古文：兆性粗犷，意色不平，手舞马鞭，长啸凝望，深疑仲远等有变，遂趋出驰还。
现代文：他生性粗野，脸上有不平之色，手中挥舞着马鞭，长吁短叹地瞪着眼睛，惟恐仲远有别的变化，不大一会儿就骑上马走了。
English: He was rough by nature, his face was uneven, he waved a whip in his hands and stared with a long sigh, but fearing that there would be other changes, he soon got on his horse and left.

古文：仲远遣椿、胜等追而晓譬，兆遂拘缚将还，经日放遣。
现代文：仲远派斛斯椿、贺拔胜追赶并解劝他，他将两人捆起来带了回去。
English: Zhongyuan sent Jinszhuan and He Baxing to chase and dissuade him. He tied up the two and took them back to Zhongyuan.

古文：仲远等于是奔退。
现代文：过了一天才放还，仲远等人于是率兵退走。
English: They were not released until a day later, at which point Nakayama and the others led the troops away.

古文：神武乃进击，兆军大败。
现代文：高欢便向尔朱兆进攻，将他打得大败。
English: Gao Huan then attacked Lzhu Zhao and defeated him.

古文：兆与仲远、度律遂相疑阻，久而不和。
现代文：他与仲远、度律间互相猜疑，长久失和。
English: He and his distant companion, Du Ritsu, were suspicious of each other and had a long-term falling out.

古文：世隆请节闵纳兆女为皇后，兆乃大喜。
现代文：尔朱世隆请求节闵帝纳尔朱兆的女儿为皇后，他极为欢喜。
English: He was overjoyed to see the daughter of Emperor Ju Zhao become the empress.

古文：世隆谋抗神武，乃降辞厚礼，喻兆赴洛。
现代文：世隆想利用他抗击高欢，便卑辞下色给他写信，又送去厚礼，让他到洛阳来。
English: Shilong wanted to use him to resist Gao Huan, so he wrote him a despicable letter and sent him a gift to let him come to Luoyang.

古文：兆与天光、度律更自信约，然后大会韩陵山。战败，复奔晋阳。
现代文：他与尔朱天光、尔朱度律订立信约，然后在韩陵山会师，与高欢交战，被高欢打败，又逃到晋阳。
English: He made a confidential agreement with Lzhu Tianguang and Lzhu Duru, then joined the division in Hanling Mountain, fought with Gao Huan, was defeated by Gao Huan, and fled to Jinyang.

古文：其年秋，神武自鄴进讨之，兆遂大掠并州，走于秀容。
现代文：这年秋天，高欢从邺城进讨，尔朱兆大肆抢掠并州，退入秀容。
English: In the autumn of this year, Gao Huan marched in from Shicheng, and Er Zhu Zhao plundered and annexed the prefecture, and retired to Xiu Rong.

古文：神武又追击，度赤洪岭，破之。
现代文：高欢追击不舍，翻过赤洪岭，将他的军队摧垮。
English: Gao Huan pursued relentlessly, crossed the Chahong Ridge, and destroyed his army.

古文：兆窜于穷山，杀所乘马，自缢于树。
现代文：他逃向山中，杀掉自己骑的马，自缢在一棵树上。
English: He fled to the mountains, killed the horse he was riding and hanged himself from a tree.

古文：神武收葬之。
现代文：高欢将他的尸体埋葬。
English: Gao Huan buried his body.

古文：父买珍，宣武时武卫将军、华州刺史。
现代文：尔朱兆勇于战斗，却无当将领的才能。尔朱荣虽然喜欢他的胆量，但常说： 尔朱兆最多只能带领三千人马，多了就会乱。 
English: Although Le Zhu Rong liked his courage, he often said: Le Zhu Zhao can only lead three thousand horses at most, and if there are more, there will be chaos.

古文：彦伯性和厚，永安中，为荣府长史。
现代文：尔朱彦伯，是尔朱荣的从弟。性情平和宽厚，孝庄帝永安年间，任尔朱荣的长史。
English: Zhu Yanbo was Zhu Rong's younger brother. His disposition was peaceful and generous. During the reign of Xiaozhuang Emperor Yongan, Zhu Rong had a long history.

古文：节闵帝潜嘿于龙花佛寺，彦伯敦喻往来，尤有勤款。
现代文：节闵帝没继位前住在龙花佛寺，他多次去慰问探望，很是殷勤。
English: Before he succeeded to the throne, Emperor Jiechi lived in Longhua Buddha Temple. He visited the temple many times to offer condolences. He was very attentive.

古文：帝既立，尔硃兆以己不豫谋，大为忿恚，将攻世隆。
现代文：节闵帝登基，尔朱兆认为没有让他参与其事，极为气愤，准备进攻尔朱世隆。
English: When Emperor Jiechi ascended to the throne, Er Shizhao thought that he was not allowed to participate in the matter. He was extremely angry and prepared to attack Er Shulong.

古文：诏令华山王鸷慰兆，兆犹不释。
现代文：节闵帝命华山王元鸷去慰问尔朱兆，尔朱兆仍不谅解。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered Huashan Wangyuan to go and offer condolences to Lzhu Zhao, but Lzhu Zhao still did not understand.

古文：世隆复令彦伯自往喻之，兆乃止。
现代文：世隆又派彦伯前去解劝，他才停止发兵。
English: Shillong also sent Yan Bo to persuade him, and he stopped sending troops.

古文：及还，帝宴彦伯于显阳殿。
现代文：彦伯回到洛阳，节闵帝在显阳殿宴请他。
English: When Yanbo returned to Luoyang, Emperor Jie invited him to a banquet at the Xianyang Palace.

古文：时侍中源子恭、黄门郎窦瑗并侍坐。
现代文：这时，侍中源子恭、黄门郎窦瑗都在座。
English: At this time, the chamberlains, Minamoto no Tsukiyasu and Omono no Doukei, were both present.

古文：彦伯曰： 源侍中比为都督，与臣相持于河内。
现代文：彦伯说： 源侍中过去任都督，与我在河内相持。
English: Hiko-haku said, "Genzamizucho used to be the governor of the capital, and he and I hold the same views in Hanoi.

古文：当尔之时，旗鼓相望，眇如天隔。宁期同事陛下，为今日之忻也？ 
现代文：那个时候，两军旗鼓相望，我们遥远得就像有天地阻隔，哪里想着会一同侍奉陛下，有今天的欢乐呢？ 
English: At that time, the two armies faced each other, and we were as far away as if we were separated by heaven and earth. Who would have thought that we would serve His Majesty together and have today's joy?

古文：子恭曰： 蒯通有言，犬吠非其主。
现代文：源子恭说： 蒯通说过，犬吠无非都是为了主人。
English: Minamoto Zokyo said, "As Shintong said, a dog's bark is for its master.

古文：他日之事永安，犹今日之事陛下耳。 
现代文：那时候是为了孝庄皇帝，就像今天为了陛下一样啊！ 
English: At that time, it was for Emperor Xiaozhuang, just as it is for His Majesty today!

古文：帝曰： 源侍中可谓有射钩之心也。 
现代文：节闵帝说： 源侍中真可以说有管仲射钩的想法啊！ 
English: Emperor Setsubun said, "You can really say that Genzamurai-churo has the idea of a pipe hook!

古文：遂令二人极醉而罢。
现代文：便命二人畅饮，直到醉倒为止。
English: The two of them drank until they were drunk.

古文：后封博陵郡王，位司徒公。
现代文：彦伯后来被封为博陵郡王，位至司徒公。
English: Later, Hikobo was named the king of Boling County and ascended to the throne of Sito.

古文：于时炎旱，有劝彦伯解司徒者，乃上表逊位，诏许之。
现代文：这时天气干旱，有人劝他辞去司徒的职务，他便上表请求辞退这个职务，朝廷下诏允许他的请求。
English: At this time, the weather was dry, and someone advised him to resign from his post as a magistrate. He then petitioned to resign from this post, and the imperial court granted his request.

古文：俄除仪同三司、侍中，余如故。
现代文：不久，被授予仪同三司、侍中，其他任职照旧。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the rank of Sanji, Samurai, and other positions as before.

古文：彦伯于兄弟之中，差无过患。
现代文：彦伯与兄弟们相处，没有什么过失。
English: Hikobo gets along with his brothers without any fault.

古文：天光等败于韩陵，彦伯欲领兵屯河桥，世隆不从。
现代文：尔朱天光在韩陵被高欢打败，彦伯提议让自己领兵驻守河桥，尔朱世隆不同意。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang was defeated by Gao Huan in the Han Mausoleum, and Yan Bo proposed that he should lead his troops to garrison the river bridge, but Er Zhu Shilong disagreed.

古文：及张劝等掩袭世隆，彦伯时在禁直。
现代文：高欢的部将张劝等领兵进攻世隆时，彦伯正在宫中。
English: When the high-spirited general Zhang Xuan led the troops to attack Shilong, Yanbo was in the palace.

古文：长孙承业等启陈，神武义功既振，将除尔硃。
现代文：长孙承业等人向节闵帝启奏高欢声威大振，将要除掉朝廷中所有的尔朱氏的势力。
English: The eldest grandson, Chengye, and others sang loudly and triumphantly to Emperor Xuanzong, and they were going to remove all the power of the Zhu clan from the imperial court.

古文：节闵令舍人郭崇报彦伯知，彦伯狼狈出走，为人所执。
现代文：节闵帝派舍人郭崇报告彦伯知道。他狼狈逃出，被人抓住。
English: Emperor Jiechi sent his aide Guo Chong to report what Yan Bo knew. He fled in panic and was caught.

古文：寻与世隆同斩于阊阖门外，县首于斛斯椿门树，传于神武。
现代文：不久，与尔朱世隆一起在闾阖门外被杀害，头颅悬挂在斛律椿家门前的树上。
English: Soon after, he was killed together with Er Zhu Shilong outside the city gate, and his head was hung on a tree in front of the door of the Zhaorong House.

古文：先是洛中谣曰： 三月末，四月初，扬灰簸土觅真珠。 
现代文：这之前，洛阳城中有谣谚在流传： 三月末，四月初，扬灰簸土觅真珠。 
English: Prior to this, there was a popular saying in Luoyang City: "At the end of March and the beginning of April, dig up the earth and look for pearls."

古文：后以年老乞骸骨，赐二马辂车归河内，卒于家。
现代文：又说 ：头去项，脚根齐，驱上树，不须梯。 这时全部应验。
English: He also said, "If the head is shaved, the feet are made straight, and one is driven up a tree without a ladder, then everything will be fulfilled."

古文：子最嗣。仲远，彦伯弟也。
现代文：仲远，是尔朱彦伯的兄弟。
English: He is the brother of Zhu Yanbo.

古文：明帝末年，尔硃荣兵威稍盛，诸有启谒，率多见从。
现代文：孝明帝末年，尔朱荣的兵威渐盛，他的许多建议，尔朱荣大多采纳。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaoming, Le Zhurong's military prowess gradually flourished, and most of his suggestions were adopted by Le Zhurong.

古文：而仲远摹写荣书，又刻荣印，与尚书令吏，通为奸诈。
现代文：他模仿尔朱荣的字体，又仿刻尔朱荣的大印，与尚书令史一同作弊行奸。
English: He imitated the font of Ker Zhu Rong, and also imitated the great seal of Ker Zhu Rong, and cheated and committed treason together with Shang Shuling Shi.

古文：造荣启表，请人为官，大得财货，以资酒色。
现代文：仿造尔朱荣的奏章，请求朝廷给人官职，他从中捞取许多财货，以供饮酒狎妓之用。
English: He imitated the music of Er Zhu Rong and asked the imperial court to give him an official post, from which he extracted a lot of wealth for drinking and prostitutes.

古文：落魄无行业。
现代文：后来，他落魄潦倒，没有固定的职业。
English: Later, he fell on hard times and had no regular job.

古文：及孝庄即位，封清河公、徐州刺史，兼尚书左仆射、三徐大行台。寻进督三徐诸军事。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，封他为清河公、徐州刺史，兼任尚书左仆射、三徐大行台，不久，晋封为三徐督军事。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended the throne, he was given the titles of Qinghe Gong, Xuzhou Zhishi, Shangshu Zuopuzha, and Sanxu Dayangdai. Soon after, he was promoted to Sanxu Du Military.

古文：仲远上言： 窃见比来行台采募者，皆得权立中正，在军定第，斟酌授官。
现代文：他给朝廷上书说： 我见过去的行台招募任用官员，都能行使中正官的权力。在军队中确定等级，斟酌情况，授予官职。
English: He wrote a letter to the Imperial Court, saying, "I have seen that in the past, all officials in charge of recruitment and appointment in Taiwan were able to exercise the power of a high-ranking official.

古文：今求兼置，权济军要。
现代文：现在我请求兼任中正官的职务，以暂且解决军中将领们对官职的需求。
English: Now, I am requesting to concurrently hold the post of vice admiral to temporarily solve the demand of the generals for the post.

古文：若立第亦爽，关京之日，任有司裁夺 。
现代文：如果授予的官职不合适，进京的时候，任恁有司裁决定夺。 
English: If the official position awarded is not suitable, when entering Beijing, the secretary will decide to take it.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：朝廷同意了他的请求。
English: He complied.

古文：于是随情补授，肆意聚敛。
现代文：于是，他利用补授官职的机会，任意敲诈勒索，收受贿赂。
English: As a result, he took advantage of the opportunity to obtain a supplementary official post, arbitrarily extorting and accepting bribes.

古文：尔硃荣死，仲远勒其部众，来向京师。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，仲远统领军队来到京城。
English: After the death of Le Zhurong, Zhongyuan led the army to the capital.

古文：节闵立，进爵彭城王，加大将军，又兼尚书令，镇大梁。
现代文：节闵帝继位，授予他彭城王的爵号，加封为大将军，又兼任尚书令，镇守大梁。
English: When Emperor Jiechi succeeded to the throne, he was given the title of King of Pengcheng and the title of General. He also served as Shang Shurei and town guard Dalian.

古文：仲远遣使请准朝式，在军鸣驺。
现代文：他派使者到朝廷请求批准他享有的仪式，每次出行，允许随从的骑士们吆喝开道。
English: He sent an envoy to the court to ask for permission to enjoy the rites he enjoyed, allowing the knights who accompanied him to shout and open the way every time they traveled.

古文：节闵帝览启，笑而许之。
现代文：节闵帝看了他的奏章，笑了笑同意了。
English: Emperor Jiechi looked at his score, smiled and agreed.

古文：其肆情如此。
现代文：他就是这样放纵恣肆。
English: That's how reckless he is.

古文：复进督东道诸军事、本将军、衮州刺史，余如故。
现代文：他又升任为督东道诸军事、本将军、兖州刺史，其他职务照样不动。
English: He was also promoted to the posts of military governor, general, and governor of Zhangzhou Province, but his other posts remained unchanged.

古文：仲远天性贪暴，心如峻壑。
现代文：仲远生性贪婪暴烈，贪心犹如深不见底的沟壑。
English: Far away from each other, greed is fierce, and greed is like an unfathomable chasm.

古文：大宗富族，诬之以反，没其家口，簿籍财物，皆以入己。
现代文：大姓富豪，动不动就给他们加上谋反的罪名，将其全家扣押，财产抄没，据为己有。
English: He added the charge of plotting rebellion to them at every turn, seized their entire family, confiscated their property, and took it as his own.

古文：丈夫死者，投之河流，如此者不可胜数。
现代文：男人们被处死后，扔到河里。像这种事多得不可胜数。
English: Men were executed and thrown into the river, and there were countless similar cases.

古文：诸将妇有美色者，莫不被其淫乱。
现代文：将领们的妻子有长得漂亮的，没有不被他奸污的。
English: The wives of generals are all beautiful, and there is not one of them who has not been violated by him.

古文：自荥阳以东，输税悉入其军，不送京师。
现代文：自荥阳以东，老百姓交纳的赋税都归他的军队所有，不往京城里送。
English: From the east of Shenyang, the taxes paid by the common people are all owned by his army, and are not sent to the capital.

古文：时天光控关右，仲远在大梁，兆据并州，世隆居京邑，各自专恣，权强莫此。
现代文：这时，尔朱天光控制潼关以西的地方，他在大梁，尔朱兆据有并州，尔朱世隆住在京城，个个专断跋扈，为所欲为，权力之大，无人能比。
English: At this time, Lzhu Tianguang controlled the area west of Shaoguan. He was in Daliang, Lzhu Zhao was believed to have annexed the prefecture, and Lzhu Shilong lived in Beijing. Each of them ruled arbitrarily, did whatever they wanted, and had great power that no one could match.

古文：所在并以贪虐为事，于是四方解体。
现代文：所到之处，都贪取财货，虐待百姓。于是，天下被他们分解。
English: Everywhere they went, they coveted wealth and goods and abused the people. As a result, the world was broken up by them.

古文：又加太宰，解大行台。
现代文：朝廷又加封他为太宰，解除他大行台的职务。
English: The imperial court also made him Dazai and relieved him of his duties as daigodai.

古文：仲远专恣尤剧，方之彦伯、世隆，最为无礼。
现代文：他的蛮横无理尤为严重，对待尔朱彦伯和尔朱世隆最为无礼。
English: His arrogance and irrationality are particularly serious, and his treatment of Er Zhuyanbo and Er Zhu Shilong is the most disrespectful.

古文：东南牧守，下至人俗，比之豺狼，特为患苦。
现代文：东南一带上至刺史、太守，下至普通百姓，都将他比作豺狼，被他害苦深重。
English: In the southeastern region, people from Shishi and Taishu to ordinary people likened him to a jackal, and suffered a great deal from him.

古文：后移屯东郡，率众与度律等拒齐神武。
现代文：后来，他率军移驻东郡，与尔朱度律一起抗拒高欢。
English: Later, he moved his army to Dong County and resisted Gaohuan together with Er Zhu Duru.

古文：尔硃兆领骑数千自晋阳来会。
现代文：尔朱兆带领数千名骑兵从晋阳赶来会合。
English: Er Zhu Zhao led thousands of cavalrymen from Jinyang to the meeting.

古文：军次阳平，神武纵以间说，仲远等迭相猜贰，狼狈遁走。
现代文：军队到达阳平，高欢施行离间计，仲远他们之间互相猜疑，狼狈逃走。
English: When the army arrived at Yangping, Gao Huan made a plan to sow discord, and they became suspicious of each other and fled in confusion.

古文：中兴二年，复与天光等于韩陵战败，南走。寻乃奔梁，死于江南。
现代文：中兴二年，他又与尔朱天光一起在韩陵被高欢打败，向南逃遁，归顺南梁，死在江南。
English: In the second year of Zhongxing, he was defeated by Gao Huan together with Er Zhu Tianguang in Hanling, fled to the south, surrendered to Nanliang, and died in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：世隆，字荣宗，仲远弟也。
现代文：世隆，字荣宗，尔朱仲远的弟弟。
English: Shilong, Zha Rongzong, the younger brother of Er Zhu Zhongyuan.

古文：明帝末，兼直阁，加前将军。
现代文：孝明帝末年，兼任直阁，加封为前将军。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaoming, he also served as a cabinet minister, and was given the additional title of former general.

古文：尔硃荣表请入朝，灵太后恶之，令世隆诣晋阳慰喻荣。
现代文：尔朱荣上表请求入朝，灵太后十分厌恶他，命世隆到晋阳去安抚和慰问他。
English: When Er Zhu Rong requested to enter the imperial court, the Empress Dowager was very disgusted with him and went to Jinyang to appease and comfort him.

古文：荣因欲留之，世隆曰： 朝廷疑兄，故令世隆来。
现代文：尔朱荣想把他留下来，他说： 朝廷怀疑哥哥您，所以让我来。
English: Le Zhu Rong wanted to keep him, he said: The court suspects your brother, so let me come.

古文：今遂住，便有内备，非计之善。 
现代文：如果我留下，他们便会有准备，不是好的计策。 
English: If I stay, they will be prepared, not a good strategy.

古文：荣乃遣入。
现代文：尔朱荣便放他回洛阳。
English: Le Zhu Rong let him go back to Luoyang.

古文：荣举兵南出，世隆遂走，会荣于上党。
现代文：尔朱荣率兵南进，他便离开洛阳，与尔朱荣在上党相会。
English: He left Luoyang and met with Le Zhu Rong at the Shang Party.

古文：建义初，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：建义初年，朝廷封他为给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the imperial court appointed him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：庄帝之立，世隆预其谋，封乐平郡公。
现代文：孝庄帝被立，他参与谋划，所以，被封为乐平郡公。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was established, and he participated in the planning, so he was named the governor of Leping County.

古文：元颢逼大梁，诏为前将军、都督，镇武牢。
现代文：元颢进逼大梁，朝廷下诏命他为前将军、都督，镇守武牢。
English: He was forced into exile by Yuan Shao, and the imperial court ordered him to become a former general, governor of the capital, and town guard of the military prison.

古文：颢既克荥阳，世隆惧而遁还，庄帝仓卒北巡。
现代文：元颢攻克荥阳，他心里害怕，逃了回去，孝庄帝只得仓促北逃。
English: When Yuan Shao conquered Fenyang, he was afraid and fled back. Emperor Xiaozhuang had to flee north in a hurry.

古文：及车驾还宫，除尚书左仆射，摄选。
现代文：元颢失败，孝庄帝回到京城，封他为尚书左仆射，负责选拔人才。
English: After the failure of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhuang returned to Beijing and appointed him as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, responsible for selecting talents.

古文：庄帝之将图尔硃荣，每屏人言。
现代文：孝庄帝准备谋图尔朱荣，常摒退左右的人，与人密谈。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was preparing to plot against Zhu Rong. He often avoided people on his right and left and held secret talks with others.

古文：世隆惧变，乃为匿名书，自榜其门曰： 天子与侍中杨侃、黄门高道穆等为计，欲杀天柱。 
现代文：世隆害怕有变，在自己门上写道： 天子与侍中杨侃、黄门高道穆等人计议，想杀天柱大将军。 
English: Shilong was afraid of change and wrote on his door: Tianzi and the attendant Yang Kan, Huangmen Gao Daomu and others discussed and wanted to kill the Tianzhu General.

古文：还复自以此书与荣妻北乡郡公主，并以呈荣，劝其不入。
现代文：回来又将这张匿名纸帖送给尔朱荣的妻子北乡郡公主，并拿给尔朱荣看，劝他不要到洛阳来。
English: When he came back, he gave this anonymous postcard to Er Zhurong's wife, the princess of Beixiang County, and showed it to Er Zhurong to persuade him not to come to Luoyang.

古文：荣毁书唾地曰： 世隆无胆，谁敢生心！ 
现代文：尔朱荣撕毁纸帖，在地上吐了一口说： 世隆没有胆，谁敢对我生二心！ 
English: Le Zhu Rong tore up the paper and spat on the ground, saying, "Shirong has no guts, who would dare to have a second thought about me!"

古文：世隆又劝其速发。荣曰： 何忽忽？ 
现代文：世隆又劝尔朱荣迅速到洛阳来，尔朱荣问 ：为什么又如此匆忙？ 
English: Shilong also advised Er Zhu Rong to come to Luoyang quickly. Er Zhu Rong asked: Why are you in such a hurry?

古文：皆不见从。
现代文：他的建议都不被采纳。
English: None of his suggestions were taken up.

古文：荣死，世隆奉荣妻，烧西阳门夜走。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，世隆保护着尔朱荣的妻子，烧毁洛阳西阳门连夜逃走。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, Shilong protected the wife of Er Zhu Rong, burned the Xiyang Gate of Luoyang and fled overnight.

古文：北次河桥，杀武卫将军奚毅，率众还战大夏门外。
现代文：向北到达河桥，杀死武卫将军奚毅。又率领众人回到大夏门外厮杀。
English: He reached the bridge to the north and killed Wuwei General Zou Yi. He also led the crowd back to the Daxia Gate to fight and kill.

古文：及李苗烧绝河梁，世隆乃北遁。攻建州克之，尽杀人以肆其忿。
现代文：李苗烧毁河梁，世隆率众向北逃遁；攻下建州，杀尽城里所有的人以发泄他的愤恨。
English: Li Miao burned the river, Shilong led the crowd to flee to the north; captured Jianzhou, killed all the people in the city to vent his anger.

古文：至长子，与度律等共推长广王晔为主。
现代文：到了长子，他与尔朱度律等共同推举长广王元晔为国君。
English: When it came to the eldest son, he, together with Lzhu Dulu and others, jointly elected Changguang Wang Yuanjun as the sovereign.

古文：晔小名盆子，闻者皆以为事类赤眉。
现代文：元晔的小名叫盆子，知道的人都认为这件事就像赤眉军拥立刘盆子称帝一样。
English: Yuan Shao's nickname was Bonzi, and everyone who knew him thought that this was just like the Red Eyed Peas supporting Liu Bonzi to become emperor.

古文：晔以世隆为尚书令，封乐平郡王，加太傅，行司州牧，会兆于河阳。
现代文：元晔命世隆为尚书令，封他为乐平郡王，加太傅衔，行使司册刺史的权力，与尔朱兆在河阳会合。
English: Yuan Xuan ordered Shilong to be the official scribe, named him the king of Leping County, gave him the title of Tai Fu, exercised the authority of the scribe to record history, and met with Er Zhu Zhao in Heyang.

古文：兆既平京邑，让世隆曰： 叔父在朝多时，耳目应广，如何令天柱受祸？ 
现代文：尔朱兆平定洛阳后，责备世隆说： 叔父你在朝廷那么长时间，耳目众多，为什么还让天柱将军遭受杀身之祸？ 
English: After defeating Luoyang, Le Zhu Zhao reproached Shilong, saying, "Uncle, you have been in the imperial court for such a long time, with so many ears and eyes, why did you let General Tianzhu suffer the misfortune of being killed?

古文：按剑嗔目，词色甚厉。
现代文：说着按着剑柄，瞪大眼睛，口气非常严厉。
English: He said, pointing to the hilt of his sword, his eyes wide, his tone very stern.

古文：世隆逊辞拜谢，然后得已，而深恨之。
现代文：世隆低声下气，再三谢罪，然后才得到他的原谅，而内心里却对他非常恼恨。
English: In a subdued voice, Shilong repeatedly thanked him for his sins before receiving his forgiveness, but inside she was very angry with him.

古文：时仲远亦自滑台入京。
现代文：这时，尔朱仲远也从滑台来到洛阳。
English: At this time, Er Zhu Zhongyuan also came to Luoyang from the slide.

古文：世隆与兄弟密谋，虑元晔母干豫朝政，伺其母卫氏出行，遣数十骑如劫贼，于京巷杀之。
现代文：世隆与兄弟们密谋，担心元晔的母亲干预朝政，等到他的母亲卫氏出宫，便派了数十名骑兵扮成抢劫的盗贼，在京城的小巷中将她杀死。
English: Shilong conspired with his brothers, fearing that Yuancheng's mother would interfere in imperial politics. When his mother, Wei, left the palace, he sent dozens of cavalry dressed as robbers to kill her in the alleys of Beijing.

古文：公私惊愕，莫识所由。
现代文：吏民百姓，一片惊愕，但都不知道事情的缘由。
English: Officials, citizens and ordinary people were all stunned, but they did not know the cause of the incident.

古文：寻县榜，以千万钱募贼。
现代文：不久，县里贴出公文，悬赏千万钱捉拿住盗贼。
English: Soon, the county posted a notice, offering a reward of ten million yuan to catch the thief.

古文：百姓知之，莫不丧气。
现代文：百姓知道内情后，无不对朝政丧失信心。
English: After the people knew the inside story, they all lost confidence in the government.

古文：寻又以晔疏远，欲推立节闵帝。
现代文：不多时，又以元晔在皇室中关系疏远，想拥立广陵王元恭为帝。
English: Not infrequently, he alienated himself from the imperial family in favour of Yuan Shao and wanted to make Guangling Wang Yuan Gong emperor.

古文：而度律意在南阳王，乃曰： 广陵不言，何以主天下？ 
现代文：而尔朱度律却想拥立南阳王，便说： 广陵王不善于言辞，怎么能管理天下？ 
English: But Er Zhudu Lu wanted to support Nanyang Wang, so he said: Guangling Wang is not good at words, how can he manage the world?

古文：后知能语，遂行废立。
现代文：后来知道他善于辞令，便废除元晔，立广陵王为帝。
English: Later, knowing that he was good at rhetoric, he abolished the Yuan Dynasty and established the Guangling Emperor.

古文：初，世隆之为仆射，尚书文簿，在家省阅。
现代文：开初，世隆任仆射，尚书省的文书簿册都拿到自己家里审阅。
English: At the beginning of the opening, Shilong was the first to shoot, and Shang Shuxuan's books were all taken to his home for review.

古文：性聪解，又畏荣，深自克勉，留心几案，傍接宾客，遂有解了之名。
现代文：他性情聪明解悟，又畏惧尔朱荣，深深地克制和勉励自己，留心于案卷公文。接待宾客，也有通达明白的名声。
English: He is intelligent and insightful, but he is also afraid of Zhu Rong, deeply restrains and encourages himself, pays attention to the case file and official documents, receives guests, and has a reputation of being able to understand.

古文：荣死之后，无所顾惮。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，他无所顾忌。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, he had no scruples.

古文：及为令，常使尚书郎宋游道、邢昕在其宅听事，东西别座，受纳诉讼，称命施行。
现代文：任尚书令后，常让尚书郎宋游道、邢昕在他家里办理公事。两个人东西分坐，接受诉讼案件，遵照他的命令处理。
English: After the appointment of Shang Shuling, he often let Shang Shulang, Song Youdao, and Zou handle public affairs in his house. The two men sat separately, accepted litigation cases, and dealt with them according to his order.

古文：既总朝政，生杀自由，公行淫泆，信任群小，随情与夺。
现代文：他总揽朝政，生杀大权由他自专。荒淫骄奢，为所欲为。信任肖小之徒，随意予夺官职。
English: He was always in charge of court politics, and he had the power of life and death all to himself. He was lewd and arrogant, and did whatever he wanted. He trusted petty people, and gave them official positions at will.

古文：又兄弟群从，各拥强兵，割剥四海，极其贪虐。
现代文：他们兄弟几人，都拥有强大的军队，分割天下，肆意剥削，极其贪婪暴虐。
English: Several of their brothers, all possessing powerful armies, divided the world, exploited it wantonly, and were extremely greedy and tyrannical.

古文：奸谄蛆酷，多见信用；温良名士，罕豫腹心。
现代文：那些阿谀奉承，行为卑劣的无耻小人，大多被信任重用；德才兼备的名流雅士，却很难参与朝廷的政事。
English: Those shameless villains who flatter and behave despicably are mostly trusted and reused; famous aristocrats who are both virtuous and talented, but it is difficult to participate in the political affairs of the imperial court.

古文：于是天下之人，莫不厌毒。
现代文：天下的人对他们无不恨之入骨。
English: People all over the world have nothing but hatred for them.

古文：世隆寻让太傅。
现代文：不久，世隆让出太傅的职务。
English: Not long after, Shilong relinquished his position as taifu.

古文：节闵特置仪同三师之官，位次上公之下，以世隆为之。
现代文：节闵帝特意设置仪同三司的官职，位置在上公之下，让他担任。
English: Emperor Xuanzong specially set up the official position of the three departments of the imperial office, the position under the emperor, and let him serve.

古文：赠其父买珍相国、录尚书事、大司马。
现代文：封赠他的父亲尔朱买珍为相国、录尚书事、大司马。
English: His father, Er Zhu Maizhen, bestowed him with the titles of "friend of the country," "recorded in the annals of history" and "great steed."

古文：及齐神武起义兵，仲远、度律等愚赣恃强，不以为虑，而世隆独深忧恐。
现代文：齐神武帝高欢兴起义兵，尔朱仲远、尔朱度律等愚蠢蛮横，自恃强大，不以为虑，独有世隆深为忧虑恐慌。
English: Qizhenwu Emperor Gao Huan raised the volunteer army, and the Zhu Zhongyuan, Zhu DuLu, and other stupid and insolent, boasted of being powerful, did not think about it, and the unique world was deeply worried and panicked.

古文：及天光等败于韩陵，世隆请赦天下，节闵不许。
现代文：尔朱天光等人在韩陵失败，世隆请求大赦天下以安抚人心，节闵帝不同意。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang and others failed in Hanling, Shilong asked for a general amnesty to appease the people, and Emperor Jiejun did not agree.

古文：斛斯椿既据河桥，尽杀世隆党附，令行台长孙承业诣阙奏状，掩执世隆及兄彦伯，俱斩之。
现代文：斛斯椿占据了河桥，将世隆的党羽全部杀死，命行台长孙承业到朝廷奏闻，将世隆和他的兄弟彦伯抓获，一起斩首。
English: Gong Shizhun occupied the river bridge and killed all of Shilong's followers. Sun Chengye, the director of the Death March, reported to the imperial court that Shilong and his brother Yan Bo had been captured and beheaded together.

古文：初，世隆曾与吏部尚书元世俊握槊，忽闻局上詨然有声，一局子尽倒立，世隆甚恶之。
现代文：早先，世隆曾与吏部尚书元世俊作握槊的游戏。忽然听到局盘上口平的一声响动，一局子全部倒着立起，世隆心里很不高兴。
English: Earlier, Shilong had been playing a game of shakuhachi with the official, Shangshu Yuan Shijun. Suddenly, Shilong was very unhappy when he heard a loud noise on the board, and the whole board stood up upside down.

古文：又曾昼寝，其妻奚氏忽见一人持世隆首去。
现代文：他曾白天睡觉，妻子奚氏忽然看见一个人拿着他的头离去。
English: He had been sleeping during the day when his wife suddenly saw a man take his head and walk away.

古文：奚氏惊，就视，而世隆寝如故。
现代文：奚氏猛地一惊，过来一看，他依然在酣睡。
English: Mr. Zou was taken aback. When he came over, he was still in a deep sleep.

古文：既觉，谓妻曰： 向梦人断我头持去，意殊不适。 
现代文：醒后，他对妻子说 ：刚才梦见有人去下我的头拿走，心里感到很不舒适。 
English: When he woke up, he said to his wife, "I just had a dream that someone came and took my head, and I felt very uncomfortable.

古文：又此年正月晦日，令、仆并不上省，西门不开。
现代文：再则，这年正月的最后一天，尚书令和仆射都没上省台，宫中的西门没有打开。
English: In addition, on the last day of the first month of this year, Shang Shuling and Puxia did not go to the provincial capital, and the west gate of the palace did not open.

古文：忽有河内太守田帖家奴，告省门亭长云： 今旦为令王借车牛一乘，终日于洛滨游观。
现代文：忽然，河内太守田帖的家奴报告给省门亭长说 ：今天早晨为您家王爷借一辆牛车，在洛阳岸边游玩了一天。
English: All of a sudden, the servant of the family of Hanoi's governor, Tien Thieu, reported to the governor of the provincial capital: "This morning, I borrowed an ox-drawn cart for your prince and spent the day on the shore of Luoyang.

古文：至晚，王还省，将车出东掖门，始觉车上无褥，请为记识。 
现代文：到晚上王爷才回到省中，让车从东掖门出来，才发觉车上没有铺被褥，请您记下来。 
English: In the evening, Wang Ye returned to the provincial center, let the car come out of the East Gate, only to find that there was no bedding on the car, please write it down.

古文：亭长以令仆不上，西门不开，无迹入者。
现代文：亭长认为尚书令和仆射们都不上省，西门一直没有开过，无任何出入的痕迹。
English: The head of the pavilion believed that Shang Shuling and the servants did not go to the province, the west gate had not been opened, and there was no trace of any entry or exit.

古文：此奴固陈不已，公文列诉。
现代文：可这个仆人不停地坚持陈述请求，便写成公文呈送给上级官吏。
English: But the servant kept insisting on his request for a statement, and he wrote a document and submitted it to the higher-ranking officials.

古文：尚书都令史谢远疑，谓妄有假借，白世隆，付曹推验。
现代文：尚书都令史谢远表示怀疑，认为这里面有虚假不实的地方，告诉给世隆，交给有司调查。
English: Shangshu made Shi Xieyuan express doubts, believing that there was a false and untrue place in this, telling Shilong and handing it over to Yushi for investigation.

古文：时都官郎中穆子容究之。
现代文：都官郎中穆子容负责处理这件事。
English: The governor's son, Naka Mushirō, was put in charge of handling the matter.

古文：奴言，初来时，至司空府西，欲向省。
现代文：那个奴仆说： 我刚来时，到司空府的西面，想向省中去。
English: The servant said, "When I first arrived, I went to the west side of Shikongfu and wanted to go to the middle of the province.

古文：令王嫌迟，遣催车。车入，到省西门，王嫌牛小，系于关下槐树，更将一青牛驾车。
现代文：王爷嫌来得迟缓，派人催促车辆快走，车到省台西门，王爷嫌牛小，系在宫中的一棵槐树上，又换了一头青牛驾车。
English: Wangye didn't like to be late, so he sent someone to urge the car to go faster. The car arrived at the West Gate of Taitai Province. Wangye didn't like the cow to be small, so he tied it to a eucalyptus tree in the palace, and replaced it with a young cow to drive.

古文：令王著白纱、高顶帽，短小、黑色，傧从皆裙襦袴褶，握板，不似常时服章。
现代文：王爷身穿白纱衣服，头戴高顶帽子。身材矮小，面色黧黑的随从都穿着骑士们的裤褶和短衣，手里拿着板笏，不像是平常的衣着打扮。
English: The prince is dressed in white robes and a tall hat, and his short, dark-skinned attendants are dressed in knight's breeches and breeches, holding scepters in their hands, which does not seem to be normal attire.

古文：遂遣一吏将奴送入省中事东阁内，东厢第一屋中。
现代文：王爷派一名官吏将我送入省中厅堂的东阁内东面的第一个屋中。
English: Wangye sent an official to take me to the first room on the east side of the east pavilion of the provincial central hall.

古文：其屋先常闭。
现代文：这个屋子原先经常锁着门。
English: The room had always been kept locked.

古文：奴云，入此屋中有板床，床上无席，大有尘土，兼有甕米。
现代文：屋子中放有一张木板床，床上没有铺席，堆满了灰尘，屋里还有一瓮米。
English: There is a wooden bed in the room, there is no seat on the bed, it is full of dust, and there is a bowl of rice in the room.

古文：奴拂床坐，兼画地戏，甕中米亦握看之。
现代文：我将床擦拭一下坐在上面，又在地上画着玩以自我娱乐。瓮中的米我也抓一把看了看。 
English: I wiped the bed, sat on it, and amused myself by drawing on the floor. I also took a look at the rice in the bowl.

古文：后韩陵之败，斛斯椿先据河桥，遂西走氵垒波津，为人执送。
现代文：穆子容与谢远到这所房子前看了看，门关闭已久，全没有开过门的痕迹。
English: Mu Zirong and Xie Yuan went to the front of the house to take a look. The door had been closed for a long time, and there was no sign that the door had been opened.

古文：椿囚之，送齐神武，斩之都市。
现代文：到里面一看，情况与奴仆说的完全一样。
English: Looking inside, the situation is exactly the same as the servant said.

古文：天光，荣从祖兄子也。
现代文：他们把这些情况告诉给世隆，世隆心绪惆怅，心里很是厌恶，不久，即被诛杀。
English: They told this to Shilong. Shilong was heartbroken and disgusted, and was soon beaten to death.

古文：少勇决，荣特亲爱之，常预军戎谋。
现代文：尔朱天光，是尔朱荣的从祖哥哥的儿子。从小勇敢，有决断，尔朱荣对他特别亲近，常让他参与军队的谋划。
English: Lzhu Tianguang was the son of Lzhu Rong's paternal uncle. He was brave and determined from a young age, and Lzhu Rong was particularly close to him, often letting him participate in military planning.

古文：孝昌末，荣据并、肆，仍以天光为都将，总统肆州兵马。
现代文：孝昌末年，尔朱荣占据并州、肆州，任天光为都将，总统肆州的兵马。
English: At the end of Xiaochang's life, Le Zhurong occupied Bianzhou and Zhouzhou, Ren Tianguang was the general, and the president was Zhouzhou's soldier.

古文：明帝崩，荣向京师，委以后事。
现代文：孝明帝驾崩，尔朱荣率军至京城，将后方的事委托给他照料。
English: When Emperor Xiaoming passed away, Er Zhu Rong led the army to the capital and entrusted the affairs of the rear to his care.

古文：建义初，为肆州刺史，封长安县公。
现代文：建义初年，他被任命为肆州刺史，封为长安县公。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed as the official historian of Wuzhou and named the official historian of Chang'an County.

古文：荣将讨葛荣，留天光在州，镇其根本。谓曰： 我身不得至处，非汝无以称我心。 
现代文：尔朱荣即将讨伐葛荣，把他留在州内，镇守根据地，对他说 ：我力量达不到的地方，只有你才能让我称心如意。 
English: When Zhu Rong was about to fight Ge Rong, he left him in the state to guard the base and said to him, "Where my strength cannot reach, only you can satisfy my heart."

古文：永安中，与元天穆东破邢杲。
现代文：永安年间，他与元天穆一起打败邢杲。
English: During the Yong'an era, he and Yuan Tianmu defeated Zou together.

古文：元颢入洛，天光与天穆会荣于河内。
现代文：元颢入据洛阳，他与元天穆在河内与尔朱荣会面。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luoyang, and he and Yuan Tianmu met with Le Zhu Rong in Hanoi.

古文：荣发后，并、肆不安，诏天光兼尚书仆射，为并、肆等九州行台，仍行并州事。
现代文：尔朱荣发兵讨伐元颢后，并州、肆州局势很不安稳，朝廷命他为尚书仆射，任并州、肆州等九州行台，仍主管并州的政务。
English: After Er Zhu Rong sent troops to fight against the Yuan Dynasty, the situation in Anhui Province and Wuzhou Province was very unstable. The imperial court ordered him to serve as an aide-de-camp to Shang Shuxu, and he was in charge of the government affairs of Anhui Province, Wuzhou Province and other provinces in Kyushu.

古文：天光至并州，部分约勒，所在宁辑。
现代文：他到达并州，对不安定的地方进行约束管理，所到之处，都宁静稳定。
English: When he arrived in Anhui Province, he restricted and managed the unstable areas. Everywhere he went, there was tranquility and stability.

古文：颢破，还京师，改封广宗郡公。
现代文：元颢被打败后，他回到京城，被改封为广宗郡公。
English: After the defeat of the Yuan Dynasty, he returned to Beijing and was given the title of Guangzong County Governor.

古文：初，高平镇城人赫贵连恩等为逆，共推敕勤酋长胡琛为主，号高平王。遥臣沃野镇贼帅破六韩忉夤。
现代文：早先，高平镇城人赫贵连恩等聚众叛乱，推举敕勒酋长胡琛为首领，称号为高平王，遥向沃野镇的贼帅破六韩忄刃夤称臣。
English: Earlier, the townsmen of Gaoping Town, such as He Guilian and others, rallied and rebelled, and elected the chief of Mule, Hu Yao, as their leader. He was given the title of King of Gaoping Town, and the thief-commander of the distant Wo Ye Town broke the Six Han Dynasty and became a famous minister.

古文：琛入据高平城，遣其大将万俟丑奴来寇泾州。
现代文：胡琛占据高平城，派他的部将万俟丑奴进犯泾州。
English: Hu Yao occupied Gaoping City and sent his subordinate Wan Yao Ugly Bastard to invade Zhangzhou.

古文：琛后与莫折念生交通，侮僈忉夤。
现代文：胡琛后来与莫折念生勾结一起，轻慢污辱破六韩忄刃夤。
English: Hu Yao later colluded with Mok Swee Son to break the six-Korea truce.

古文：遣使人费律如至高平，诱斩琛，为丑奴所并，与萧宝夤相拒于安定。宝夤败还。
现代文：破六韩忄刃夤派使者费律到高平，诱杀胡琛，胡琛的军队全被万俟丑奴吞并。丑奴又与萧宝夤在安定对峙，萧宝夤失败。
English: At the end of the Six Kingdoms War, the Emperor sent an envoy, Fei Lu, to Gaoping to trap and kill Hu Yao. Hu Yao's army was completely absorbed by Wan Yao, the Ugly One. The Ugly One and Xiao Bao Yao were in a stable confrontation, and Xiao Bao Yao was defeated.

古文：建义元年夏，丑奴击宝夤于灵州，禽之，遂僭大号。
现代文：建义元年夏天，丑奴又率军在灵州进攻萧宝夤，并将宝夤擒获，他便伪称帝号。
English: In the summer of the first year of Jianyi, the Ugly Slave led the army to attack Xiao Baojun in Lingshou and captured Baojun. He then falsely called himself Emperor.

古文：时获西北贡师子，因称神兽元年，置百官。
现代文：这时，他获得西北部落进贡的狮子，因而称为神兽元年，并设置百官。
English: At this time, he obtained the lion that fell into tribute in the northwest, so it was called the first year of the divine beast, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：朝廷忧之，乃除天光使持节、都督、雍州刺史，率大都督武卫将军贺拔岳、大都督侯莫陈悦等讨丑奴。
现代文：朝廷对此十分忧虑，便命尔朱天光为使持节、都督、雍州刺史，率领大都督武卫将军贺拔岳、大都督侯莫陈悦等讨伐万俟丑奴。
English: The imperial court was very worried about this, and ordered Zhu Tianguang to be the envoy of the festival, the governor, and the governor of Yongzhou, and to lead the great governor Wuwei General He Badu and the great governor Hou Mo Chen Yue to fight against the ugly villains.

古文：天光初行，唯有军士千人。
现代文：天光刚出发，只有将士一千人。
English: As soon as daylight broke, only a thousand soldiers left.

古文：时东雍赤水蜀贼断路，天光入关击破之，简取壮健。
现代文：这时，东雍赤水蜀的贼兵拦住他的道路，他率军入关将他们打败，选取其中勇敢健壮的扩充队伍。
English: At this time, the bandits of Dongyong, Chishui and Shu blocked his way. He led the army into the pass to defeat them and selected the brave and robust expansion team.

古文：至雍，又税人马，合得万疋。
现代文：到了雍州，又向当地征收赋税，共得布绢一万匹。
English: When he arrived in Yongzhou, he also levied taxes on the local people, and obtained a total of ten thousand cloth donkeys.

古文：以军人寡少，停留未进。
现代文：因军队数量太少，所以逗留数日，没有前进。
English: Because the number of troops was too small, they stayed for a few days and did not advance.

古文：荣遣责之，杖天光百下。
现代文：尔朱荣派人去责罚他，打了他一百军棍。
English: Er Zhu Rong sent someone to punish him and beat him with a hundred truncheons.

古文：荣复遣军士二千人赴天光。天光令贺拔岳率千骑先驱，至岐州，禽其行台尉迟菩萨。
现代文：尔朱荣又派二千人马增援尔朱天光，天光令贺拔岳率一千骑兵作为先遣部队到达岐州，擒获万俟丑奴委任的行台尉迟菩萨。
English: Zhu Rong also sent two thousand horses to reinforce Zhu Tianguang, and Tianguang ordered He Baturak to lead a thousand cavalry as an advance force to reach Qizhou, and captured the brigade captain Chi Bosa, who was appointed by Wanzhong Ugly Slave.

古文：丑奴弃岐州走还安定。
现代文：丑奴放弃岐州，逃向安定。
English: The villain abandons Qizhou and flees to stability.

古文：天光发雍至岐，与岳合势，破丑奴，获萧宝夤。
现代文：天光调动雍州的军队进至岐州，与贺拔岳会合，打破丑奴，抓获萧宝夤。
English: Tianguang mobilized the army of Yongzhou to enter Qizhou, meet with He Batyue, break the ugly slave, and capture Xiao Baojun.

古文：于是泾、豳、二夏，北至灵州，及贼党结聚之类，并降。
现代文：于是泾州、豳州、二夏，北到灵州的贼兵，以及聚集在一起的其他匪徒，全部投降。
English: As a result, the bandits from Bozhou, Zhangzhou, Erxia, and as far north as Lingzhou, as well as the other bandits gathered together, all surrendered.

古文：唯贼行台万俟道洛不下，率众西依牵屯山，据险自守。
现代文：只剩下敌人的行台万俟道洛所部没有被打败，道洛率众向西据守牵屯山，凭险顽抗。
English: Only the enemy's troops in the area of Wanzhong and Douluo were not defeated. Douluo led the troops to the west to defend the Toutun Mountains, and stubbornly resisted the danger.

古文：荣责天光不获道洛，复遣使杖之百，诏削爵为侯。
现代文：尔朱荣责备天光没有擒获万俟道洛，又派使者打了他一百军棍，朝廷下诏将他降爵为侯。
English: Le Zhu Rong reproached Tian Guang for not capturing Wan Xuan Douluo, and sent an envoy to beat him with a hundred batons, and the court decreed that he would be demoted to marquis.

古文：天光与岳、悦等复向牵屯讨之，道洛战败，投略阳贼帅王庆云。
现代文：他又与贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦等人向牵屯山进军，讨伐万俟道洛，将敌人打败，道洛投奔略阳贼兵首领王庆云。
English: He also marched with He Batyue, Hou Mo, Chen Yue and others to Luitun Mountain, fought against Wanxuan Dolo, defeated the enemy, and Dolo defected to Wang Qingyun, the leader of the Yangzi bandits.

古文：庆云以道洛骁果绝伦，得之甚喜，便谓大事可图，乃自称皇帝，以道洛为大将军。
现代文：庆云因道洛骁勇超群，得到他十分高兴，便认为天下可以谋图。于是自称皇帝，命道洛为大将军。
English: Qingyun was overjoyed because of Dolo's bravery and thought that the whole world could plot against him, so he declared himself emperor and made Dolo general.

古文：天光乃入陇，至庆云所居永洛城，破其东城。
现代文：天光便率军入陇，进至王庆云所占据的水洛城，攻破他的东城。
English: Tianguang then led the army into the Yunnan Province, into the Shuiluo City occupied by Wang Qingyun, and broke through his East City.

古文：贼遂并趣西城。
现代文：敌兵便都集中在西城。
English: The enemy soldiers were all concentrated in the West Town.

古文：城中无水，众聚热渴。
现代文：城里面没有水，兵马聚集，又热又渴。
English: There was no water in the city, and the soldiers and horses were hot and thirsty.

古文：有人走降，言庆云、道洛欲突出。
现代文：有人出来投降，说庆云和道洛想要突围。
English: Someone came out to surrender, saying that Qingyun and Douluo wanted to break out.

古文：天光恐失贼帅，乃遣谓庆云，可以早降，若水决，当听诸人今夜共议。
现代文：天光怕抓不住贼兵首领，便派人对庆云说，可以早点投降。如果决定不下来，允许你们今天晚上一起议论。
English: Tian Guang was afraid that he would not be able to catch the leader of the bandits, so he sent someone to Qingyun to say that he could surrender earlier. If you decide not to come down, allow you to discuss this evening.

古文：又谓曰： 相知须水，今为小退。 
现代文：又对他说 ：我知道你们缺水，现在我军稍为退却，给你们让出水源。 
English: He also said to him, "I know that you are short of water, and now our army is retreating a little to give you water.

古文：贼众安悦，无复走心。天光密使军人多作木枪，各长七尺，至昏，布立人马，为防卫之势，又伏人枪中。
现代文：敌兵十分高兴，不再有逃走的想法，天光暗中派人多做一些木枪，各长七尺，到黄昏时布置人马，作防卫的架势。又埋伏士兵在木枪里面。
English: The enemy soldiers were very happy, and no longer had the idea of escaping. In the dark, they sent more men to make some wooden guns, each seven feet long, and at dusk they arranged men and horses in a defensive posture. They also ambushed the soldiers inside the wooden guns.

古文：其夜，庆云、道洛果突出，至枪，马各伤倒。
现代文：这天晚上，庆云、道洛果然突围而出，到了木枪旁边，马都受伤倒地。
English: That evening, Qingyun and Douluo successfully broke out of the encirclement, and when they reached the wooden gun, the horses were injured and fell to the ground.

古文：伏兵便起，同时禽获。
现代文：伏兵四起，庆云、道洛同时被擒。
English: There were four ambushes, and Qingyun and Dolo were captured at the same time.

古文：贼穷，乞降而已。
现代文：敌兵处境窘迫，纷纷乞降。
English: The enemy soldiers were in a difficult situation and begged for surrender one after another.

古文：天光、岳、悦等议悉阬之，死者万七千人，分其家口。
现代文：尔朱天光、贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦等人商议，全部把俘虏活埋，死者共一万七千人。又将他们的家口分散到各地。
English: Lzhu Tianguang, He Batyue, Hou Mo Chen Yue and others discussed and buried all the prisoners alive, with a total of 17,000 dead, and dispersed their families to various regions.

古文：于是三秦、河、渭、瓜、梁、鄯善咸来款顺。
现代文：于是，三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯善一带的人都来归顺。
English: As a result, people from the Sanqin, He, Handan, Gua, Liang, and Handan regions all came to submit.

古文：诏复天光前官爵。
现代文：朝廷下诏恢复了他过去的职务和官爵。
English: He was restored to his former position and rank by Imperial edict.

古文：岳闻荣死，还泾州以待，天光亦下陇，与岳图入洛之策。
现代文：贺拔岳听说尔朱荣在京城被杀，带兵回到泾州等待，尔朱天光也东下至陇，与贺拔岳商议进攻洛阳的计划。
English: He Batyue heard that Er Zhu Rong was killed in Beijing, and he took his soldiers back to Zhangzhou to wait. Er Zhu Tianguang also went east to Handan, and discussed with He Batyue the plan to attack Luoyang.

古文：既而庄帝进天光爵为广宗王，元晔又以为陇西王。
现代文：不久，孝庄帝给天光加封爵位为广宗王，元晔又封他为陇西王。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaozhuang gave Tianguang the title of Guangzong King, and the Yuan Dynasty also made him the King of Shaanxi.

古文：及闻尔硃兆已入京，天光乃轻骑向都，见世隆等，寻便还雍。
现代文：他听说尔朱兆已进入洛阳，便轻骑简从，奔向洛阳，见到世隆等人，不久又回到雍州。
English: He heard that Lzhu Zhao had entered Luoyang, so he rode lightly, ran to Luoyang, saw Shilong and others, and soon returned to Yongzhou.

古文：世隆等议废元晔，更举亲贤，遣告天光。天光与定策，立节闵帝。
现代文：世隆等人想废掉东海王元晔的帝位，另立一个和他们关系亲近、能力较强的人称帝，派使者将想法告诉了天光，天光与他们一起决定拥立节闵帝元恭。
English: Shilong and others wanted to abolish the throne of the East Sea king, Yuan Shikun, and set up another emperor who was closer to them and more capable. They sent an emissary to tell the idea to Tian Guang. Tian Guang decided to support the enthronement of Emperor Yuan Gong together with them.

古文：又加开府仪同三司、尚书令、关西大行台。
现代文：朝廷又加封天光为开府仪同三司、尚书令、关西大行台。
English: The Imperial Court also awarded Tenkuro the title of Kaifu-Gi-Dong Sanji, Shang Shurei, and Kansai Daigodai.

古文：天光北出夏州，遣将讨宿勤明达，禽之，送洛。
现代文：天光又率军北出夏州，派部将讨伐宿勤明达，俘获后送到洛阳。
English: Tianguang also led the army north out of Xiazhou, and the faction sent the crusade camp to Qinmingda, which was captured and sent to Luoyang.

古文：时费也头帅纥豆陵伊利、万俟受洛于等据有河西，未有所附。
现代文：这时，费也头的首领纥豆陵伊利、万俟受洛干等占据河西，没有依附其他势力。
English: At this time, the leaders of Feiyadu, such as Peasling Yili and Wanxu Lokan, occupied the west of the river and did not depend on other forces.

古文：天光以齐神武起兵信都，内怀忧恐，不暇他事。伊利等，但微遣备之而已。又除大司马。
现代文：天光因高欢在信都起兵，心怀忧虑，无暇顾及伊利等人的事情，只是略加责备而已，又被授予大司马。
English: Because of Gao Huan, Tian Guang raised an army in Xindu, worried, and had no time to consider the affairs of Yili and others. He was only slightly reprimanded, and was awarded the grand steed.

古文：时神武军既振，尔硃兆、仲远等并经败退。
现代文：这时，高欢军队的威风已经大振。尔朱兆、尔朱仲远等都被他打败。
English: At this time, the prestige of Gao Huan's army had already been greatly shaken. Lzhu Zhao, Lzhu Zhongyuan and others were all defeated by him.

古文：世隆累使徵天光，天光不从。
现代文：尔朱世隆多次派人请天光出兵，天光没有答应。
English: Zhu Shilong repeatedly sent people to ask Tianguang to send troops, but Tianguang did not agree.

古文：后令斛斯椿苦要天光云： 非王无以能定，岂可坐看宗家之灭？ 
现代文：后来，世隆又派斛斯椿苦苦请求天光，说： 非您不能平定高欢，您难道能看着尔朱氏被别人消灭吗？ 
English: Later, Shilong also sent Jingsqin to plead with Tianguang, saying: If you can't subdue Gaohuan, can you watch the Zhu clan be eliminated by others?

古文：天光不得已，东下，与仲远等败于韩陵。
现代文：天光不得已，挥军东下，与仲远等人在韩陵被高欢打败。
English: As a last resort, Tian Guang led his army eastward, and was defeated by Gao Huan together with Zhongyuan and others in Hanling.

古文：斛斯椿等先还，于河桥拒之，天光不得度，西北走，被执，与度律并送于神武。
现代文：斛斯椿等引军退还，领军在河桥把守，天光无法过去，便领败兵向西北逃走，被高欢的军队俘获，与尔朱度律一起送给高欢。
English: Gaozhuanzhun and other leading troops returned, and the leading troops guarded the bridge of the river, and the skylight could not pass, so they led the defeated soldiers to flee to the northwest. They were captured by Gaohuan's army and sent to Gaohuan together with Lzhu DuLu.

古文：神武送于洛，斩于都市。
现代文：高欢又将他送到洛阳，在街市上斩首。
English: Gao Huan sent him to Luoyang and beheaded him in the market.

古文：尔硃专恣，分裂天下，各据一方，赏罚自出，而天光有定关西之功，差不酷暴，比之兆与仲远，为不同矣。
现代文：尔朱氏专横肆虐，分裂天下，占据一方，赏罚由他们任意决定。而天光有平定关西的功劳，也不算残酷暴虐，比起尔朱兆和尔朱仲远，大不相同。
English: The Lzhu clan was tyrannical, divided the world, occupied one side, and the rewards and punishments were arbitrarily decided by them. And Tian Guang had the merit of pacifying Kansai, but it was not cruel and tyrannical. Compared to Lzhu Zhao and Lzhu Zhongyuan, it was very different.

