古文：兵有五名：一曰威强，二曰轩骄，三曰刚至，四曰助忌，五曰重柔。
现代文：军队有五种类型：第一种是威武强大，第二种是高傲骄横，第三种是刚愎自用，第四种是贪婪猜忌，第五种是优柔寡断。
English: There are five types of armies: the first is powerful, the second is arrogant, the third is self-serving, the fourth is greedy, and the fifth is indecisive.

古文：夫威强之兵，则屈软而待之；轩骄之兵，则恭敬而久之；刚至之兵，则诱而取之；忌之乒，则薄其前，噪其旁，深沟高垒而难其粮；重柔之兵，则噪而恐之，振而捅之，出则击之，不出则回之。
现代文：对付威武强大的军队要故意示弱，装出屈服的样子以便等待时机；对付高傲骄横的军队，可以装出恭敬的样子，以便能长期麻痹他们然后就可以伺机而动；对付刚愎自用的军队，可以用诱敌计而战胜；对付贪婪猜忌的军队，可以成逼其前锋，同时在其侧翼虚张声势加以骚扰，再用深沟高垒使其难于运粮补给：对付优柔寡断的军队，可以虚张声势施以恐吓，用小股部队作些试探性的攻击，如果敌军出动就加以攻击，如果敌军不出战就逼其后退。
English: In the face of a strong and powerful army, it is necessary to deliberately show weakness and feign submission in order to wait for the opportunity; against a proud and arrogant army, it is possible to pretend to be respectful, so that they can be paralyzed for a long time and then they can wait for the opportunity to move; against a stubborn and self-serving army, it is possible to use deception to defeat the enemy; against a greedy and suspicious army, it is possible to force its forwards while bluffing and harassing its flanks, and then use deep ditch high walls to make it difficult to transport grain supplies: against an indecisive army, it is possible to bluff and intimi

古文：兵有五恭、五暴。
现代文：军队有五种表示谦恭的情况，也有五种表现凶暴的情况。
English: There are five kinds of humility and five kinds of ferocity in the army.

古文：何谓五恭？
现代文：表示谦恭是哪五种情况呢？
English: What are the five cases of showing courtesy?

古文：入境而恭，军失其常。再举而恭，军无所粮。三举而恭，军失其事。四举而恭，军无食。五举而恭，军不及事。
现代文：第一是在进入对方国境立即表示谦恭，军队就会失去其正常的状态；第二次行动时向敌方表示谦卑恭敬，军队就会无从得到粮食补给；第三次行动时依然向敌方表现出谦卑恭敬，军队就会因贻误战机而作战失利；第四次行动时向敌方表现出谦卑恭敬，军队就会因没有食物与草料而挨饿；第五次进攻向敌方表现出谦卑恭敬，军队就无法完成任务了。
English: The first is to show humility immediately after entering the other side's border, and the army will lose its normal state; the second action is to show humility and respect to the enemy, and the army will not be able to get food supplies; the third action still shows humility and respect to the enemy, and the army will lose the battle due to the delay of the fighter; the fourth action shows humility and respect to the enemy, and the army will starve due to lack of food and fodder; the fifth attack shows humility and respect to the enemy, and the army will not be able to complete the task.

古文：入境而暴，谓之客。
现代文：表现凶暴又会是哪五种情况呢？
English: What are the five types of violent behavior?

古文：再举而暴，谓之华。三举而暴，主人惧。四举而暴，卒士见诈。五举而暴，兵必大耗。
现代文：一进入对方国境就表现凶暴，该国人定会把你当做外来客；第二次行动表现凶暴，就会引起该国哗然纷乱；第三次行动表现凶暴，就会引起该国百姓恐惧；第四次行动表现凶暴，你的士兵在该国就只能得到欺诈了；第五次行动再表现凶暴，你的军队就将大受损耗了。
English: The first act of violence on the other side of the frontier will cause the other side to regard you as a stranger; the second act of violence will cause the country to be in an uproar; the third act of violence will cause the people of the country to be afraid; the fourth act of violence will cause your soldiers to be cheated in the country; the fifth act of violence will cause your army to be exhausted.

古文：故五恭、五暴，必使相错也。
现代文：所以说，谦恭和凶暴要视情况交替使用。
English: Therefore, modesty and ferocity should be used alternately depending on the situation.

