古文：○郭崇韬郭崇韬，代州雁门人也，为河东教练使。
现代文：郭崇韬，代州雁门人，任河东教练使。
English: Guo Chongyao, a native of Ganmen in Daizhou, is the assistant coach of Hedong.

古文：为人明敏，能应对，以材干见称。
现代文：为人聪明机敏，能够应对自如，因富有才干受到称颂。
English: He is clever and quick-witted, can handle himself, and is praised for his ability.

古文：庄宗为晋王，孟知祥为中门使，崇韬为副使。
现代文：唐庄宗为晋王时，孟知祥为中门使，郭崇韬为副使。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong was the king of Jin, Meng Zhixiang was the middle envoy, and Guo Chongyi was the deputy envoy.

古文：中门之职，参管机要，先时，吴珙、张虔厚等皆以中门使相继获罪。
现代文：中门使这个职务，参加管理机密的军国大事，先前，昊珙、张虔厚等人都在任中门使暗相继受到惩罚。
English: Previously, Hao Yu, Zhang Qianhuo and others who held this position and participated in the management of confidential military affairs were secretly punished one after another.

古文：知祥惧，求外任，庄宗曰： 公欲避事，当举可代公者。 
现代文：孟知祥害怕，请求外出任职，唐庄宗说： 你想回避麻烦的事情，应当推荐能够代替你的人。 
English: Meng Zhixiang was afraid and asked to leave the office. Tang Zhuozong said, "If you want to avoid trouble, you should recommend someone who can replace you."

古文：知祥乃荐崇韬为中门使，甚见亲信。
现代文：孟知祥于是推荐郭崇韬任中门使，郭崇韬很受信赖。
English: Meng Zhixiang then recommended Guo Chongyao to be the middle gatekeeper. Guo Chongyao was very trustworthy.

古文：晋兵围张文礼于镇州，久不下，而定州王都引契丹入寇。
现代文：晋兵在镇州围攻张文礼，很久浚能攻克，而定州王都诱引契丹人前来侵犯。
English: Jin soldiers besieged Zhang Wenli in Zhenzhou, and it took a long time to defeat him, while the King of Dingzhou lured the Khitan people to invade.

古文：契丹至新乐，晋人皆恐，欲解围去，庄宗未决，崇韬曰： 契丹之来，非救文礼，为王都以利诱之耳，且晋新破梁军，宜乘已振之势，不可遽自退怯。 
现代文：契丹人到达新乐，晋人都感到害怕，打算解围离去，唐庄宗犹豫不决，郭崇韬说： 契丹这次来，并不是救张文礼，而是因为王都用利益引诱他们罢了，况且普刚刚攻破梁军，应当利用已经振奋的气势，不能因胆怯而匆忙撤退。 
English: When the Khitan arrived at Xinle, the Jin people were afraid and planned to break the siege and leave, but the Tangzhuangzong hesitated. Guo Chongyi said: The Khitan did not come this time to save Zhang Wenli, but because the kings had lured them with profits. Moreover, they had just broken through Liang's army. They should take advantage of the momentum that had been invigorated and not retreat in haste out of fear.

古文：庄宗然之，果败契丹。
现代文：唐庄宗认为他说得对，果然打败了契丹。
English: Tang Zhuangzong thought he was right and defeated Khitan.

古文：庄宗即位，拜崇韬兵部尚书、枢密使。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，拜郭崇韬为兵部尚书、枢密使。
English: Tangzhuangzong ascended to the throne, and Baiguo Chongzhen became the secretary of the military department and the confidential envoy.

古文：梁王彦章击破德胜，唐军东保杨刘，彦章围之。
现代文：梁王彦章击破德胜，唐军向东退守杨刘，王彦章包围了他们。
English: Liang Wangyanzhang defeated Desheng, the Tang army retreated to the east to defend Yang Liu, and Wangyanzhang surrounded them.

古文：庄宗登垒，望见彦章为重堑以绝唐军，意轻之，笑曰： 我知其心矣，其欲持久以弊我也。 
现代文：唐庄宗登上营垒，望见王彦章挖深沟断绝唐军的退路，心里不以为然，笑着说： 我明白他们的主意，他们想打持久战以便拖疲我。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong boarded the camp and saw Wang Yanzhang digging a deep trench to cut off the retreat of the Tang army. He was not convinced and said with a smile: I understand their idea, they want to fight a protracted war in order to exhaust me.

古文：即引短兵出战，为彦章伏兵所射，大败而归。
现代文：立即率领手持短剑的士兵出战，遭到王彦章的伏兵箭射，大败而回。
English: He immediately led soldiers armed with short swords into battle, but was ambushed by arrows fired by Wang Yanzhang, and was soundly defeated.

古文：庄宗问崇韬： 计安出？ 
现代文：唐庄宗问郭崇韬说： 有什么好办法呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong asked Guo Chongyao: What is the best way?

古文：是时，唐已得郓州矣，崇韬因曰： 彦章围我于此，其志在取郓州也。
现代文：这时，唐军已占领了郫州，郭崇韬于是说： 王彦章把我们围困在这里，他的目的是要夺取鄣州。
English: At this time, the Tang army had already occupied Zhangzhou. Guo Chongyi then said: Wang Yanzhang has us surrounded here. His aim is to seize Zhangzhou.

古文：臣愿得兵数千，据河下流，筑垒于必争之地，以应郓州为名，彦章必来争，既分其兵，可以图也。
现代文：我愿意带领几千士兵，占据黄河下游，在他必会争夺的地方修筑营垒，以策应郸州为名，王彦章一定会赶来争夺，在分散了他的兵力后，就可以算计他了。
English: I am willing to lead a few thousand soldiers, occupy the lower reaches of the Yellow River, and build a camp in the place where he will fight. In the name of responding to Zhangzhou, Wang Yanzhang will certainly come to fight. After dispersing his forces, he can be counted on.

古文：然板筑之功难卒就，陛下日以精兵挑战，使彦章兵不得东，十日垒成矣。 
现代文：但修筑营垒的事难以一下完成，陛下天天率精兵向王彦章挑战，迫使王彦章不能向东征战，十天后营垒就修成了。 
English: However, it was difficult to complete the construction of the camp all at once. His Majesty led his elite soldiers to challenge Wang Yanzhang every day, forcing Wang Yanzhang not to march to the east, and the camp was completed ten days later.

古文：庄宗以为然，乃遣崇韬与毛璋将数千人夜行，所过驱掠居人，毁屋伐木，渡河筑垒于博州东，昼夜督役，六日垒成。
现代文：唐庄宗认为可行，于是派郭崇韬和毛璋率领几千士兵晚上出发，经过的地方驱赶掳掠当地百姓，拆毁房屋，砍伐树木，渡过黄河在博州东面修筑营垒，昼夜督促施工，六天营垒就修成了。
English: Tang Zhuangzong thought it was feasible, so he sent Guo Chongzhen and Mao Jun to lead several thousand soldiers to set out at night, drive away and plunder the local people in the places they passed, demolish houses, cut down trees, cross the Yellow River to build a camp in the east of Boshou, and supervise the construction day and night. The camp was completed in six days.

古文：彦章果引兵急攻之，时方大暑，彦章兵热死，及攻垒不克，所失太半，还趋杨刘，庄宗迎击，遂败之。
现代文：王彦章果然率兵迅速进攻他们，当时正是大热天，王彦章的士兵被热死，营垒未能攻克，损失的士兵已有一大半，返回奔赴杨刘，唐庄宗迎面攻击他们，于是打败了他们。
English: Wang Yanzhang did indeed lead his soldiers to quickly attack them. It was a very hot day when he set out. Wang Yanzhang's soldiers were killed by the heat, the camp could not be conquered, and most of the lost soldiers returned to Yang Liu. Tang Zhuangzong attacked them head-on and defeated them.

古文：康延孝自梁奔唐，先见崇韬，崇韬延之卧内，尽得梁虚实。
现代文：康延孝从梁投奔唐，首先见郭崇韬，郭崇韬把他请到卧室内密谈，全部获知梁军的虚实。
English: When Kang Yanxiao left Liang to go to Tang, he first saw Guo Chongyi. Guo Chongyi invited him to his bedroom for a secret talk, where he learned all about Liang Jun's truth and lies.

古文：是时，庄宗军朝城，段凝军临河。
现代文：这时，唐庄宗驻扎在朝城，段凝驻扎在临河。
English: At this time, Tang Zhuozong was stationed in Chaocheng and Duan Zong was stationed in Linhe.

古文：唐自失德胜，梁兵日掠澶、相，取黎阳、卫州，而李继韬以泽潞叛入于梁，契丹数犯幽、涿，又闻延孝言梁方召诸镇兵欲大举，唐诸将皆忧惑，以谓成败未可知。
现代文：自从唐失去德胜后，梁兵天天征战澶、相二州，攻占黎阳、卫州，而李继韬以泽、潞二州叛归梁，契丹多次侵犯幽、涿二州，又听康延孝说梁正在召聚各镇的兵刀打算对唐采取大规模的军事行动，唐的将领们都感到忧虑困惑，认为不能预知胜负。
English: Since Tang lost its moral victory, Liang's soldiers have been marching every day to, Sāng two provinces, and conquered Liyang and Weizhou, while Li Jizhe and  two provinces rebelled against Liang, and the Khitan repeatedly invaded Yu and  two provinces. They also heard from Kang Yanxiao that Liang was gathering soldiers from all towns and was planning to take large-scale military action against Tang. Tang's generals were worried and confused, believing that victory and defeat could not be predicted.

古文：庄宗患之，以问诸将，诸将皆曰： 唐得郓州，隔河难守，不若弃郓与梁，而西取卫州、黎阳，以河为界，与梁约罢兵，毋相攻，庶几以为后图。 
现代文：唐庄宗也担忧这事，向将领们询问，将领们都说： 唐得到郓州，隔一条黄河难以固守，不如把郫州放弃给梁，而向西攻取卫州、黎阳，以黄河为界，和梁商定停战，不要再相互进攻，也许可以靠这个为将来作打算。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong was also worried about this and asked the generals about it. The generals all said, "Tang gained Bozhou, and it is difficult to hold on to it across the Yellow River. It is better to give up Bozhou to Liang, and go west to capture Weizhou and Liyang, with the Yellow River as the boundary. Agree an armistice with Liang, and do not attack each other again. Perhaps we can rely on this to plan for the future."

古文：庄宗不悦，退卧帐中，召崇韬问计，崇韬曰： 陛下兴兵仗义，将士疲战争、生民苦转饷者，十余年矣。
现代文：唐庄宗不高兴，退下躺在营帐里，召见郭崇韬询问计策，郭崇韬说： 陛下依仗正义起兵打仗，将士们在战事中疲于奔命，老百姓苦于输送军饷，已经十多年了。
English: Unhappy, Tang Zhuangzong retreated and lay down in his tent. He summoned Guo Chongyi to inquire about the strategy. Guo Chongyi said: "Your Majesty has been relying on justice to start a war, the soldiers are exhausted in the war, and the common people have been struggling to transport military pay for more than ten years.

古文：况今大号已建，自河以北，人皆引首以望成功而思休息。
现代文：何况如今国家大号已经树立，从黄河以北，人人都抬头盼望功成业就而想休养生息。
English: What's more, now that the national great trumpet has been established, from the north of the Yellow River, everyone is looking forward to success and wants to rest and recuperate.

古文：今得一郓州，不能守而弃之，虽欲指河为界，谁为陛下守之？
现代文：现在得到一个郫州，却不能坚守而放弃它，即使想划定黄河为界，谁肯替陛下把守呢？
English: Now that he has gained a county, he cannot hold on to it and give it up. Even if he wanted to delineate the Yellow River as the boundary, who would defend it for His Majesty?

古文：且唐未失德胜时，四方商贾，征输必集，薪刍粮饷，其积如山。
现代文：而且唐没有失去德胜时，四面八方的商人，微调转输的物资必定在此聚集，柴草粮饷，堆积如山。
English: Moreover, when Tang did not lose Desheng, merchants from all over the world would gather here to fine-tune the materials to be transferred, and the firewood, grass and grain would pile up like a mountain.

古文：自失南城，保杨刘，道路转徙，耗亡太半。而魏、博五州，秋稼不稔，竭民而敛，不支数月，此岂按兵持久之时乎？
现代文：自从丢失南城，保守杨刘，道路上辗转运输的物资，损失一大半而魏、博等五个州，秋天的庄稼还没有成熟，榨干老百姓来聚敛财物，也维持不了几个月，遭难道是按兵不动、持久作战的时候吗？
English: Since the loss of Nancheng, the maintenance of Yang Liu, the materials transported on the roads, the loss of more than half, and Wei, Bo and other five states, the autumn crops have not yet matured, squeezing the common people to accumulate wealth, can not be maintained for several months, is it time to stand still and fight?

古文：臣自康延孝来，尽得梁之虚实，此真天亡之时也。
现代文：我自从康延孝前来投奔后，全部获知梁军的虚寅，这确实是老天要消灭梁的时候。
English: Since Kang Yanxiao came to take refuge, I have learned all about Liang's army's shenanigans. This is indeed the time when God wants to destroy Liang.

古文：愿陛下分兵守魏，固杨刘，而自郓长驱捣其巢穴，不出半月，天下定矣！ 
现代文：希望陛下派出一部分军队把守魏州，固守杨刘，而从郓州长驱直入捣毁梁的老巢，不超过半个月，天下就安定了！ 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will send a part of the army to guard Weizhou, firmly guard Yang Liu, and drive straight from the governor of Yunnan into the old nest of the destroyed beams, no more than half a month, and the world will be stable!

古文：庄宗大喜曰： 此大丈夫之事也！ 
现代文：唐庄宗十分高兴地说： 这纔是大丈夫的事业啊！ 
English: Tang Zhuozong said happily, "This is a good cause!"

古文：因问司天，司天言： 岁不利用兵。 
现代文：于是向司天监询问，司天监说： 年岁不利于用兵打仗。 
English: So he inquired of the chief overseer of heaven, and the chief overseer of heaven said: "Age is not conducive to using soldiers to fight.

古文：崇韬曰： 古者命将，凿凶门而出。
现代文：郭崇韬说： 古时候任命将领，凿开凶门而出。
English: Guo Chongyao said: In ancient times, generals were appointed, and they went out of the gate.

古文：况成算已决，区区常谈，岂足信也！ 
现代文：何况规划好的计谋已经决定实施，区区老生常谈，哪里值得相信呢！ 
English: Besides, the well-planned stratagem has already been decided to be implemented, it's just a cliché, what's there to believe!

古文：庄宗即日下令军中，归其家属于魏，夜渡杨刘，从郓州入袭汴，八日而灭梁。
现代文：唐庄宗当天就向军队发布命令，把家属送回到魏州，晚上渡过杨刘，从鄣州出发袭击汴州，八天后就消灭了梁。
English: Tang Zhuangzong issued an order to the army on the same day, sent his family members back to Weizhou, passed Yang Liu in the evening, attacked Ganzhou from Ganzhou, and eliminated Liang eight days later.

古文：庄宗推功，赐崇韬铁券，拜侍中、成德军节度使，依前枢密使。
现代文：唐庄宗论功行赏，赐给郭崇韬铁券，拜为侍中、成德军节度使，依旧任枢密使。
English: Tang Zhuangzong rewarded Guo Chongtao with an iron certificate for his meritorious service, and he was appointed as an attendant and the festival envoy of the Chengde Army, and still served as a privy envoy.

古文：庄宗与诸将以兵取天下，而崇韬未尝居战阵，徒以谋议居佐命第一之功，位兼将相，遂以天下为己任，遇事无所回避。
现代文：唐庄宗和将领们用武力夺取天下，而郭崇韬不曾亲临战场，只是因谋划议论取得辅助帝王创业的第一大功，一身兼任将相，于是把治理天下当成自己的使命，碰上任何事情都不回避。
English: Tang Zhuangzong and the generals used force to conquer the world, while Guo Chongzhen did not visit the battlefield in person, but because of the planning and discussion, he obtained the first major achievement of assisting the emperor's entrepreneurship, and he also served as the commander-in-chief, so he took the governance of the world as his mission and did not avoid anything.

古文：而宦官、伶人用事，特不便也。
现代文：而宦官、伶人专权，就很不方便了。
English: But the exclusive power of eunuchs and eunuchs is very inconvenient.

古文：初，崇韬与宦者马绍宏俱为中门使，而绍宏位在上。
现代文：当初，郭崇韬和宦官马绍宏都任中门使，而马绍宏的官位更高。
English: At first, Guo Chongzhen and eunuch Ma Shaohong were both appointed as middle gate envoys, and Ma Shaohong's official rank was higher.

古文：及庄宗即位，二人当为枢密使，而崇韬不欲绍宏在己上，乃以张居翰为枢密使，绍宏为宣徽使。
现代文：到唐庄宗登位时，两人都应当任枢密使，而郭崇韬不希望马绍宏位居自己之上，于是任强居翰为枢密使，马绍宏为宣徽使。
English: When Emperor Tangzhuangzong ascended to the throne, both of them should have been appointed as Privy Envoys, but Guo Chongyi did not want Ma Shaohong to be above him, so he appointed Qiang Juhan as a Privy Envoy and Ma Shaohong as a Herald of the Great Seal.

古文：绍宏失职怨望，崇韬因置内勾使，以绍宏领之。
现代文：马绍宏失去枢密使职务而抱怨不满，郭崇韬于是设置内勾使，让马绍宏担任。
English: Mashaohong complained that he was dissatisfied with the loss of his position as a privy councillor, so Guo Chongyi set up an internal coaxing to let Mashaohong take up the post.

古文：凡天下钱谷出入于租庸者，皆经内勾。
现代文：凡是全国通过征收租赋得来的钱财俸禄，都要经过内勾使。
English: All the money and salaries obtained by the whole country through the levying of rents must be obtained through internal solicitation.

古文：既而文簿繁多，州县为弊，遽罢其事，而绍宏尤侧目。
现代文：不久因文案账籍过于繁多，各州县深受其害，于是废止了这件事，而马绍宏尤其怨恨。
English: Soon, because of the excessive number of copy accounts, the states and counties suffered from it, so the matter was abolished, and Ma Shaohong was particularly resentful.

古文：崇韬颇惧，语其故人子弟曰： 吾佐天子取天下，今大功已就，而群小交兴，吾欲避之，归守镇阳，庶几免祸，可乎？ 
现代文：郭崇韬很害怕，对他老朋友的子弟说： 我辅佐天子取得天下，现在大功告成，而小人们纷纷兴风作浪，我想迥避他们，回去守卫镇阳，也许可以避免灾祸，行吗？ 
English: Guo Chongyao was very scared and said to his old friend's younger son: "I assisted the Son of Heaven in conquering the world, and now the great work has been completed, while the little people are making waves. I want to avoid them and go back to guard Zhenyang. Maybe I can avoid the disaster, okay?"

古文：故人子弟对曰： 俚语曰： 骑虎者，势不得下。 今公权位已隆，而下多怨嫉，一失其势，能自安乎？ 
现代文：老朋友的子弟说： 俗话说： 骑虎难下。 现在你的权位已经很高，而下面有很多人怨恨和嫉妒，一旦失去你现在的地位，能够保全自己吗？ 
English: The son of an old friend said: As the saying goes, "It's hard to ride a tiger." Now that you have a high position of power, and there are many people below who are resentful and jealous, once you lose your current position, can you save yourself?

古文：崇韬曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：郭崇韬间： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Guo Chongyuan: What should we do?

古文：对曰： 今中宫未立，而刘氏有宠，宜请立刘氏为皇后，而多建天下利害以便民者，然后退而乞身。
现代文：回答说： 现在宫中还没有立皇后，刘氏受到宠爱，应当请求立刘氏为皇后，而多做些对天下有利而又方便百姓的事。然后请求隐退。
English: He replied: At present, there is no empress in the palace, and the Liu clan is favored. You should ask to make the Liu clan the empress, and do more things that are beneficial to the world and convenient for the people. Then ask to retire.

古文：天子以公有大功而无过，必不听公去。
现代文：天子因为你有大功劳而没有过错，必定不会听随你离去。
English: Heavenly Son, because you have great merits and no faults, will certainly not let you go.

古文：是外有避权之名，而内有中宫之助，又为天下所悦，虽有谗间，其可动乎？ 
现代文：这样一来，在外有不贪权的名声，在内有官中的帮助，又受到天下人的喜爱，即使有诬告离间，哪能动摇你的地位呢？ 
English: In this way, if you have a reputation for not being greedy for power outside, if you have help from officials inside, and if you are loved by people around the world, even if there is a false accusation, how can you shake your position?

古文：崇韬以为然，乃上书请立刘氏为皇后。
现代文：郭崇韬认为说得对，于是上书请求立刘氏焉皇后。
English: Guo Chongyao thought it was right, so he sent a letter requesting the appointment of Liu Shiyan as empress.

古文：崇韬素廉，自从入洛，始受四方赂遗，故人子弟或以为言，崇韬曰： 吾位兼将相，禄赐巨万，岂少此邪？
现代文：郭崇韬素来廉洁奉公，自从到洛阳后，纔开始接受四面八方的贿赂债赠，老朋友和子弟有的提出意见，郭崇韬说： 我官居将相，俸禄和赏赐的财物价值上万，难道缺少这些东西吗？
English: Guo Chongyong had always served the public with integrity. Since he came to Luoyang, he began to accept bribes and gifts from all sides. Some of his old friends and children raised their opinions. Guo Chongyong said: My official residence, salary and rewards are worth tens of thousands. Are these things lacking?

古文：今籓镇诸侯，多梁旧将，皆主上斩袪射钩之人也。
现代文：如今的藩镇诸侯，很多是梁过去的将领，都曾是与皇上同生死、共患难的人。
English: Today's feudal lords, many of whom were Liang's generals in the past, were people who lived and died with the emperor and went through hardships together.

古文：今一切拒之，岂无反侧？
现代文：现在拒绝接受他们所有的礼物，难道不会产生怨恨吗？
English: Wouldn't refusing to accept all their gifts now create resentment?

古文：且藏于私家，何异公帑？ 
现代文：况且收藏在自己家裹，跟公家的仓库有什么不同？ 
English: Moreover, what is the difference between a collection in one's own home and a public warehouse?

古文：明年，天子有事南郊，乃悉献其所藏，以佐赏给。
现代文：第二年，天子在南郊祭天，于是全部贡献出他所收藏的财物，以便协助赏赐。
English: In the second year, the Son of Heaven offered a sacrifice to Heaven in the southern suburb, and then he offered all the possessions he had collected in order to help with the reward.

古文：庄宗已郊，遂立刘氏为皇后。
现代文：唐庄宗在南郊祭天后，就立刘氏为皇后。
English: After the Southern Suburbs Festival, Tangzhuangzong made Liu the empress.

古文：崇韬累表自陈，请依唐旧制，还枢密使于内臣，而并辞镇阳，优诏不允。
现代文：郭崇韬多次上书自陈己见，请求依照唐的旧例，把枢密使的职务交还给内臣，而一同辞去镇阳的官职，庄宗以好言下韶不准许。
English: Guo Chongzhen repeatedly wrote to Chen in his own opinion, requesting that, in accordance with the old Tang custom, he return the post of privy councilor to his vassal, and resign the official post of Zhenyang together. Zhuangzong did not allow him with a kind word.

古文：崇韬又曰： 臣从陛下军朝城，定计破梁，陛下抚臣背而约曰： 事了，与卿一镇。 
现代文：郭崇韬又说： 我跟随陛下驻扎朝城，设计攻破梁军时，陛下摸着我的背约定说： 成功以后，给你一个镇。 
English: Guo Chongyao also said, "When I was stationed in the capital of the Joseon Dynasty with Your Majesty and planned to break through the Liang Army, Your Majesty touched my back and said, "After success, I will give you a town."

古文：今天下一家，俊贤并进，臣惫矣，愿乞身如约。 
现代文：现在天下统一，杰出贤明的人都来到朝廷，我精疲力尽了，希望依照前约退职。 
English: Now that the country is unified and eminent and wise people have come to the Imperial Court, I am exhausted and hope to retire in accordance with the previous agreement.

古文：庄宗召崇韬谓曰： 朝城之约，许卿一镇，不许卿去。
现代文：唐庄宗召见郭崇韬，对他说： 朝城的约定，我答应给你一个镇，没有答应你离去。
English: Tang Zhuangzong summoned Guo Chongtao and said to him: As agreed in the morning, I promised to give you a town, but I did not promise to let you leave.

古文：欲舍朕，安之乎？ 
现代文：想丢下我，去哪里呢？ 
English: If you want to leave me, where will you go?

古文：崇韬因建天下利害二十五事，施行之。
现代文：郭崇韬于是陈述关系天下利害的二十五件事，都按照他的意见施行丁。
English: Guo Chongzhen then made a statement of 25 matters concerning the interests of the world, all of which were carried out in accordance with his opinion.

古文：李嗣源为成德军节度使，徙崇韬忠武。
现代文：李嗣源任成德军节度使，调郭崇韬到忠武军。
English: Li Sigen was appointed as the German military's envoy to the Qing Dynasty and transferred to the Loyalist Army.

古文：崇韬因自陈权位已极，言甚恳至。
现代文：郭崇韬于是陈说自己的权位已到顶点，话说得很恳切。
English: Guo Chongyao then said that his power had reached its peak, and his words were very sincere.

古文：庄宗曰： 岂可朕居天下之尊，使卿无尺寸之地？ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 我怎么能够身居天下最高贵的位置，而让你没有尺寸安身的地方呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: How can I occupy the most noble position in the world, but you have no place to settle down?

古文：崇韬辞不已，遂罢其命，仍为侍中、枢密使。
现代文：郭崇韬不断推辞，唐庄宗于是收回任命，仍然任他为侍中、枢密使。
English: Guo Chongzhen constantly refused, so Tang Zhuozong withdrew the appointment and still appointed him as an aide-de-camp and confidential envoy.

古文：同光三年夏，霖雨不止，大水害民田，民多流死。
现代文：同光三年夏，大雨久下不停，大水毁坏老百姓的土地，很多老百姓流亡而死。
English: In the summer of the same year, the heavy rain continued for a long time, the water destroyed the land of the people, and many people died in exile.

古文：庄宗患宫中暑湿不可居，思得高楼避暑。
现代文：唐庄宗担心宫中热湿不能居住，想修建高楼避暑。
English: Tang Zhuangzong worried that the heat and humidity in the palace could not be lived in, and wanted to build a high-rise to escape the summer.

古文：宦官进曰： 臣见长安全盛时，大明、兴庆宫楼阁百数。
现代文：宦官进言说： 我看见长安全盛时期，大明、兴庆宫楼阁上百。
English: The eunuch Jin Yan said: I saw hundreds of palaces in Daming and Xingqing during the prosperous period of Changzheng.

古文：今大内不及故时卿相家。 
现代文：现在的皇官还比不上那时公卿宰相家。 
English: Today's imperial officials are no match for the noble chancellors of that time.

古文：庄宗曰： 吾富有天下，岂不能作一楼？ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 我拥有天下，难道不能修建一座楼？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: I own the world, can't I just build a building?

古文：乃遣宫苑使王允平营之。
现代文：于是派宫苑使王允平办理此事。
English: Therefore, the imperial court sent Wang Yunping to handle the matter.

古文：宦官曰： 郭崇韬眉头不伸，常为租庸惜财用，陛下虽欲有作，其可得乎？ 
现代文：宦官说： 郭崇韬皱着眉头不高兴，常常因租赋重而吝惜财物，陛下即使想建一座楼，那能成吗？ 
English: The eunuch said: Guo Chongyao frowned and was not happy. He often skimped on his belongings because of the heavy rent. Even if His Majesty wanted to build a building, could it be done?

古文：庄宗乃使人问崇韬曰： 昔吾与梁对垒于河上，虽祁寒盛暑，被甲跨马，不以为劳。
现代文：唐庄宗于是派人间郭崇韬说： 过去我和梁军在黄河边对峙，即使是寒冬盛夏，穿着镗甲骑在马上，都不觉得劳苦。
English: Tangzhuangzong then sent Guo Chongyi to say: In the past, I confronted Liang Jun on the edge of the Yellow River. Even in the cold winter and midsummer, wearing armor and riding on a horse, I did not feel laborious.

古文：今居深宫，廕广厦，不胜其热，何也？ 
现代文：现在住在幽深的宫廷中，有大屋子遮荫，却受不了天热，为什么呢？ 
English: Now he lives in a deep palace, with a large room for shade, but he can't stand the heat of the day. Why?

古文：崇韬对曰： 陛下昔以天下为心，今以一身为意，艰难逸豫，为虑不同，其势自然也。
现代文：郭崇韬回答说： 陛下过去以天下为己任，现在为自己一人作打算，艰难困苦和安逸快活，忧虑的事情不一样，情势自然这样。
English: Guo Chongzhen replied, "Your Majesty used to take the whole world as his responsibility, but now he plans for himself alone. The hardships and difficulties are different from the ease and happiness, and the worries are different. The situation is naturally like this.

古文：愿陛下无忘创业之难，常如河上，则可使繁暑坐变清凉。 
现代文：希望陛下不要忘记创业时的艰难，常常像在黄河边一样，那么就能使大热天因此变得凉快。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not forget the hardships of starting a business, which is often like being on the banks of the Yellow River, so that the hot weather can be cooled down.

古文：庄宗默然。
现代文：唐庄宗默默不语。
English: Zhuang Zong was speechless.

古文：终遣允平起楼，崇韬果切谏。
现代文：最后还是派王允平建楼，郭崇韬果然直言劝阻。
English: In the end, Wang Yunping was sent to build the building, and Guo Chongyao spoke frankly to dissuade him.

古文：宦官曰： 崇韬之第，无异皇居，安知陛下之热！ 
现代文：宦官说： 郭崇韬的家，跟皇帝的住处没有什么不同，哪里知道陛下多热呢！ 
English: The eunuch said: Guo Chongtao's home is no different from the emperor's residence. Who knows how hot His Majesty is!

古文：由是谗间愈入。
现代文：从此挑拨离间的话就越来越多地传到官里。
English: Since then, more and more divisive words have spread to the government.

古文：河南县令罗贯，为人强直，颇为崇韬所知。
现代文：河南县县令罗贯，为人刚强正直，很为郭崇韬所了解。
English: Luo Ran, the county magistrate of Henan County, is a strong and honest person, and is well known to Guo Chongyao.

古文：贯正身奉法，不受权豪请托，宦官、伶人有所求请，书积几案，一不以报，皆以示崇韬。
现代文：罗贯严格要求自己，奉公守法，不接受权贵富豪的请求托付，宦官、伶人有要向他请求的事情，书信堆满了案桌，一个都不答复，都拿给郭崇韬看。
English: Luo Ran strictly demanded of himself that he should obey the law and not accept the request of the powerful and rich to entrust him. The eunuchs and eunuchs had things to request from him. The desk was full of letters, none of which were answered, and they were all shown to Guo Chongyao.

古文：崇韬数以为言，宦官、伶人由此切齿。
现代文：郭崇韬多次为他说话，宦官、伶人因比对他恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Guo Chongzhen spoke for him many times, and the eunuchs and eunuchs hated him bitterly.

古文：河南自故唐时张全义为尹，县令多出其门，全义厮养畜之。
现代文：自从过去唐时张全义担任河南尹以来，县令大多出自他的门下，张全义像对下人一样养着他们。
English: Since Zhang Quanyi served as Henan Yin in the past Tang Dynasty, most of the county magistrates came from his school, and Zhang Quanyi raised them like subordinates.

古文：及贯为之，奉全义不屈，县民恃全义为不法者，皆按诛之。
现代文：到罗贯任县令时，不屈服于张全义，县中百姓依仗张全义犯法的人，都依法杀掉。
English: When Luo Quan served as the county magistrate, he did not give in to Zhang Quanyi, and the people in the county who violated the law by relying on Zhang Quanyi were all killed according to law.

古文：全义大怒，尝使人告刘皇后，从容为白贯事，而左右日夜共攻其短。
现代文：张全义大怒，曾派人报告刘皇后，刘皇后从容不迫地焉罗贯辩白，而手下的人日夜不停地一起攻击他的短处。
English: Zhang Quanyi was furious and sent someone to report to Empress Liu. Empress Liu calmly and coherently argued his case, while his subordinates worked day and night to attack his shortcomings.

古文：庄宗未有以发。
现代文：唐庄宗找不到合适的机会谈这件事。
English: Tang Zhuozong could not find a suitable opportunity to talk about it.

古文：皇太后崩，葬坤陵，陵在寿安，庄宗幸陵作所，而道路泥涂，桥坏。
现代文：皇太后死，安葬在坤陵，坤陵在寿安，唐庄宗到修建陵墓的地方去，而道路泥泞，桥梁毁坏。
English: The empress dowager died and was buried in Kunling, Kunling in Shouan, Tangzhuang went to the place where the mausoleum was built, but the roads were muddy and the bridges were destroyed.

古文：庄宗止舆问： 谁主者？ 
现代文：唐庄宗停车间道： 谁主管这个地方？ 
English: Tangzhuangzong Parking Lot Road: Who is in charge of this place?

古文：宦官曰： 属河南。 因亟召贯，贯至，对曰： 臣初不奉诏，请诘主者。 
现代文：宦官说： 这里归河南县管， 于是紧急召见罗贯，罗贯到后，回答说： 我本来就没有收到诏书，请责问主管这事的人。 
English: The eunuch said, "This is under the jurisdiction of Henan County," so he urgently summoned Luo Ran. When Luo Ran arrived, he replied, "I didn't receive the imperial edict in the first place. Please ask the person in charge of this matter."

古文：庄宗曰： 尔之所部，复问何人！ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 这是你管的地方，还问什么人！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: This is the place you are in charge of, who are you to ask!

古文：即下贯狱，狱吏榜掠，体无完肤。
现代文：立即把罗贯投进监狱，狱中官吏拷打他，打得他体无完肤。
English: Luo Ran was immediately thrown into prison, where officials tortured him and beat him to a pulp.

古文：明日，传诏杀之。
现代文：第二天，下诏杀掉罗贯。
English: The next day, he issued an edict to kill Luo Ran.

古文：崇韬谏曰： 贯罪无佗，桥道不修，法不当死。 
现代文：郭崇韬劝阻说： 罗贯没有别的罪，桥梁和道路没有修好，按法不应当处死。 
English: Guo Chongyao dissuaded him, saying: Luo Ran did not commit any other crimes, the bridges and roads had not been repaired, and he should not be put to death according to the law.

古文：庄宗怒曰： 太后灵驾将发，天子车舆往来，桥道不修，卿言无罪，是朋党也！ 
现代文：唐庄宗发怒说： 太后的灵车快要启程，天子的车马要从这里往来，桥梁道路没有修好，你说他无罪，你们是一伙的！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said angrily: The empress dowager's hearse is about to leave, the heavenly son's chariot and horse are to travel from here, bridges and roads have not been repaired, you say he is not guilty, you are a group!

古文：崇韬曰： 贯虽有罪，当具狱行法于有司。
现代文：郭崇韬说： 罗贯虽然有罪，应当由官府整理罪案执行法律。
English: Guo Chongyao said: Although Luo Ran is guilty, the government should sort out the crime and enforce the law.

古文：陛下以万乘之尊，怒一县令，使天下之人，言陛下用法不公，臣等之过也。 
现代文：陛下以统领万乘大国的尊严，对一个县令发怒，使天下的人，说陛下执法不公，这是我们做臣子的罪过。 
English: His Majesty, with the dignity of ruling a great country, became angry with a county magistrate, causing people all over the world to say that His Majesty's enforcement of the law was unfair. This is the fault of us as courtiers.

古文：庄宗曰： 贯，公所爱，任公裁决！ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 罗贯，是你喜欢的人，随你裁决吧！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: Luo Ran is a person you like, so make your own decision!

古文：因起入宫，崇韬随之，论不已。庄宗自阖殿门，崇韬不得入。
现代文：于是起身进宫，郭崇韬紧跟唐庄宗，争论不已，唐庄宗自己关上殿门，郭崇韬不能进去。
English: So he got up and entered the palace, Guo Chongyi followed Tang Zhuangzong, arguing endlessly. Tang Zhuangzong himself closed the palace door, Guo Chongyi could not enter.

古文：贯卒见杀。
现代文：罗贯结果被杀。
English: Luo Ran was killed as a result.

古文：明年征蜀，议择大将。
现代文：第二年伐蜀，拟议选派大将。
English: In the second year of felling Shu, it is proposed to select a general.

古文：时明宗为总管，当行。
现代文：当时唐明宗任总管，应当去。
English: At that time, Tang Ming was the head of the family, so he should go.

古文：而崇韬以谗见危，思立大功为自安之计，乃曰： 契丹为患北边，非总管不可御。
现代文：而郭崇韬因受到诬告处境危险，想立大功作为保全自己的办法，于是说： 契丹在北方边境形成祸患，不是总管去就不能抵御。
English: Guo Chongyao, who was in a dangerous situation due to being falsely accused, wanted to make a great contribution as a way to protect himself, so he said: The Khitan are a scourge on the northern border, and it is impossible to resist unless the head manager goes.

古文：魏王继岌，国之储副，而大功未立，且亲王为元帅，唐故事也。 
现代文：魏王李继岌，是国家的太子，但还没有建立大功；况且亲王任元帅，是唐的惯例。 
English: The Wei king, Li Jizhu, was the country's crown prince, but he had yet to achieve great success; moreover, it was customary in the Tang dynasty for princes to be appointed marshals.

古文：庄宗曰： 继岌，小子，岂任大事？
现代文：唐庄宗说： 李继岌，还是小孩子，哪能担当国家大事？
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: Li Jizhe is still a child, how can he be in charge of national affairs?

古文：必为我择其副。 
现代文：一定要替我为他选一个副手。 
English: Be sure to choose a deputy for him for me.

古文：崇韬未及言，庄宗曰： 吾得之矣，无以易卿也。 
现代文：郭崇韬还没来得及说话，唐庄宗就说： 我找到副手了，没有人能代替你。 
English: Before Guo Chongzhen could speak, Tang Zhuozong said: I have found a deputy, no one can replace you.

古文：乃以继岌为西南面行营都统，崇韬为招讨使，军政皆决崇韬。
现代文：于是任李继岌为西南面行营都统，郭崇韬为招讨使，军政大事都由郭崇韬决定。
English: As a result, Li Jizhe was appointed as the general of the south-west, Guo Chongyi as the envoy, and military and political events were decided by Guo Chongyi.

古文：唐军入蜀，所过迎降。
现代文：唐军进入蜀地，所经过的地方都投降迎接他们。
English: The Tang army entered Shu, and all the places they passed through surrendered to meet them.

古文：王衍弟宗弼，阴送款于崇韬，求为西川兵马留后，崇韬以节度使许之。
现代文：王衍的弟弟王宗弼，暗中与郭崇韬通好，请求担任西川兵马留后，郭崇韬答应让他作节度使。
English: Wang Yan's younger brother, Wang Zonglu, secretly communicated with Guo Chonglu. After he requested to stay as a soldier in the West River, Guo Chonglu agreed to let him serve as an envoy.

古文：军至成都，宗弼迁衍于西宫，悉取衍嫔妓、珍宝奉崇韬及其子廷诲。
现代文：军队到达成都后，王宗弼把王衍迁移到西宫，把王衍的嫔妓、珍宝都献给郭崇韬和他出儿子郭廷诲。
English: After the army reached the capital, Wang Zongqi moved Wang Yan to the West Palace, and dedicated Wang Yan's prostitutes and treasures to Guo Chongyi and his son Guo Tingyi.

古文：又与蜀人列状见魏王，请崇韬留镇蜀。
现代文：又和蜀人联名上状见魏王，请求留下郭崇韬镇守蜀地。
English: He also sent a joint petition to the Wei king with the people of Shu, requesting Guo Chongyi to stay and defend Shu.

古文：继岌颇疑崇韬，崇韬无以自明，因以事斩宗弼及其弟宗渥、宗勋，没其家财。蜀人大恐。
现代文：李继岌很疑心郭崇韬，郭崇韬无法表白自己，于是借故杀掉王宗弼和他的弟弟王宗渥、王宗勋，没收他们的家产，蜀人十分恐惧。
English: Li Jide was very suspicious of Guo Chongxuan. Guo Chongxuan could not confess himself, so he killed Wang Zongxuan and his brothers Wang Zongwu and Wang Zongxun under false pretenses and confiscated their family property. The people of Shu were very afraid.

古文：崇韬素嫉宦官，尝谓继岌曰： 王有破蜀功，师旋，必为太子，俟主上千秋万岁后，当尽去宦官，至于扇马，亦不可骑。 
现代文：郭崇韬素来嫉恨宦官，曾对李继岌说： 你有攻破蜀地的功劳，军队凯旋后，必定被立为太子，等到皇上死后，应当全部消灭宦官，就是合割过的马，也不能骑。 
English: Guo Chongxuan had always been jealous of eunuchs, and once said to Li Jizhe: You have the merit of conquering Shu. After the army's victory, you will surely be appointed as the crown prince. When the emperor dies, all eunuchs should be eliminated. Even horses that have been mated cannot be ridden.

古文：继岌监军李从袭等见崇韬专任军事，心已不平，及闻此言，遂皆切齿，思有以图之。
现代文：李继岌的监军李从袭等人眼见郭崇韬独揽军权，心中已很不满，听到他这样说，都切齿痛恨他，想用什么办法算计他。
English: Li Jizhe's overseer of the army, Li Congyi, and others saw Guo Chongya monopolize military power, and they were very dissatisfied in their hearts. When they heard him say this, they hated him with all their teeth and wanted to use any means to calculate him.

古文：庄宗闻破蜀，遣宦官向延嗣劳军，崇韬不郊迎，延嗣大怒，因与从袭等共构之。
现代文：唐庄宗听说攻破蜀地，派宦官向延嗣前来慰劳军队，郭崇韬不去郊外迎接，向延嗣大怒，于是和李从袭等人一起设计陷害他。
English: When Tangzhuangzong heard of the invasion of Shu, he sent eunuchs to Yanji to comfort the troops. Guo Chongyi did not go to the suburbs to meet him, and was furious with Yanji, so he and Li Conghai and others worked together to frame him.

古文：延嗣还，上蜀簿，得兵三十万，马九千五百匹，兵器七百万，粮二百五十三万石，钱一百九十二万缗，金银二十二万两，珠玉犀象二万，文锦绫罗五十万匹。
现代文：向延嗣返回京师，献上从蜀地得到的兵马财物账单，一共得到士兵三十万人，马九千五百匹，兵器七百万件，粮食二百五十三万石，钱一百九十二万缙，金银二十二万两，珠宝、玉器、犀牛角、象牙两万件，绫罗绸缎五十万匹。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he presented a bill for the soldiers, horses, and other property he had received from Shu. In total, he received 300,000 soldiers, 9,500 horses, 7 million weapons, 2.53 million koku of grain, 1.92 million ounces of money, 2.2 million ounces of gold and silver, 20,000 pieces of jewelry, jade, rhinoceros horn, and ivory, and 500,000 pieces of yakitori.

古文：庄宗曰： 人言蜀天下之富国也，所得止于此邪？ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 人称蜀地为天下富国，得到的就是这些吗？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said, "People say that Shu is the richest country in the world. Is this all we get?

古文：延嗣因言蜀之宝货皆入崇韬，且诬其有异志，将危魏王。
现代文：向延嗣于是说蜀地的宝物都进了郭崇韬的腰包，而且诬告郭崇韬别有打算，将会危及魏王。
English: Xiang Yanji then said that the treasures of Shu all went into Guo Chongyi's pocket, and falsely accused Guo Chongyi of having other plans, which would endanger the Wei king.

古文：庄宗怒，遣宦官马彦珪至蜀，视崇韬去就。
现代文：唐庄宗大怒，派宦官马彦珪到蜀，观察郭崇韬的动向。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was furious and sent eunuch Ma Yanyan to Shu to observe Guo Chongyi's movements.

古文：彦珪以告刘皇后，刘皇后教彦珪矫诏魏王杀之。
现代文：马彦珪报告了刘皇后，刘皇后让马彦珪假造诏书令魏王杀掉郭崇韬。
English: Ma Yanxuan reported to Empress Liu, and Empress Liu had Ma Yanxuan forge an imperial edict ordering the Wei king to kill Guo Chongxuan.

古文：崇韬有子五人，其二从死于蜀，余皆见杀。
现代文：郭崇韬有五个儿子，其中两个跟随郭崇韬死在蜀，其余的都被杀。
English: Guo Chongyao had five sons, two of whom followed Guo Chongyao and died in Shu, and the rest were all killed.

古文：其破蜀所得，皆籍没。
现代文：他攻破蜀地得到的财物，都被登记没收。
English: All of the property he obtained by breaking into Shu were registered and confiscated.

古文：明宗即位，诏许归葬，以其太原故宅赐其二孙。
现代文：唐明宗登位后，下诏准许送回家乡安葬，把他在太原的旧居赐给他的两个孙子。
English: After Emperor Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, he issued an edict allowing him to be sent back to his hometown for burial, and gave his former residence in Taiyuan to his two grandsons.

古文：当崇韬用事，自宰相豆卢革、韦悦等皆倾附之，崇韬父讳弘，革等即因佗事，奏改弘文馆为崇文馆。
现代文：当郭崇韬当权时，从宰相豆卢革、韦悦等人以下都依附他。郭崇韬的父亲名叫郭弘，豆卢革等人就藉别的事，上奏改弘文馆为崇文馆。
English: When Guo Chongzhen was in power, everyone from Prime Minister Dou Ronghe and Wei Yue to others depended on him. Guo Chongzhen's father was named Guo Hong, and Dou Ronghe and others took advantage of other things to change the Hongwen Museum into the Chongwen Museum.

古文：以其姓郭，因以为子仪之后，崇韬遂以为然。
现代文：因为他姓郭，于是把他当成郭子仪的后代，郭崇韬也就自认为是这样。
English: Because his surname was Guo, he was regarded as a descendant of Guo Ziyi, and Guo Chongyao considered himself as such.

古文：其伐蜀也，过子仪墓，下马号恸而去，闻者颇以为笑。
现代文：郭崇韬伐蜀时，经过郭子仪的墓地，下马悲号痛哭而离去，听见的人很以为可笑。
English: When Guo Chongyi was campaigning in Shoushu, he passed Guo Ziyi's graveyard, dismounted his horse, wept bitterly and left. People who heard this thought it was ridiculous.

古文：然崇韬尽忠国家，有大略。
现代文：但郭崇韬对国家竭尽忠诚，有雄才大略。
English: However, Guo Chongyao is loyal to the country and has great talent.

古文：安重诲，应州人也。其父福迁，事晋为将，以骁勇知名。
现代文：他攻破蜀地后，就派遣使臣以唐的威武恩德晓谕南诏各蛮族，打算藉此安抚招降他们，堪称胸有大志啊！安重诲，应州人。父亲安福迁，事奉晋任将领，以骁悍勇敢闻名。
English: After he conquered Shu, he sent envoys to the barbarian tribes of Nanzhao to tell them of Tang's military might and benevolence, intending to pacify them and invite them to surrender. What a great ambition! Rest in peace, people of Yingzhou. His father, Anfu Qian, served as a general and was famous for his bravery.

古文：梁攻硃宣于郓州，晋兵救宣，宣败，福迁战死。
现代文：梁在郫州进攻朱宣，晋军救援朱宣，朱宣被打败，安福迁战死。
English: Liang attacked Zhu Xuan in Zhangzhou, the Jin army rescued Zhu Xuan, Zhu Xuan was defeated, and Anfu Qian died in battle.

古文：重诲少事明宗，为人明敏谨恪。
现代文：安重诲年轻时跟随唐明宗，为人聪明机敏、谨慎恭敬。
English: When he was young, An Chongyuan followed the Tang and Ming Dynasties, and he was intelligent, alert, cautious and respectful.

古文：明宗镇安国，以为中门使，及兵变于魏，所与谋议大计，皆重诲与霍彦威决之。
现代文：唐明宗镇守安国军，任他为中门使，在魏州发动兵变时，所有参与谋划议论的大计，都由安重诲和霍彦威决断。
English: Tang Mingzong was in charge of the An Guo Army, and he was appointed as the middle gate envoy. When he launched a mutiny in Weizhou, all the major plans that were involved in the planning and discussion were decided by An Chongyu and Huo Yanwei.

古文：明宗即位，以为左领军卫大将军、枢密使，兼领山南东道节度使。
现代文：唐明宗登位，任为左领军卫大将军、枢密使，兼领山南束道节度使。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne and was appointed the left leader of the army, the general of the Guards, the privy envoy, and also the leader of the Shannan Sokudo Festival.

古文：固辞不拜，改兵部尚书，使如故。
现代文：他坚决推辞不接受，改任兵部尚书，依旧任中门使。
English: He resolutely refused to accept the resignation and was reassigned to the military department of Shangshu, still serving as the middle gate.

古文：在位六年，累加侍中兼中书令。
现代文：在位六年，累加侍中兼中书令。
English: After six years on the throne, he was promoted to the position of Samurai Middle Rank and Chushiryo.

古文：重诲自为中门使，已见亲信，而以佐命功臣，处机密之任，事无大小，皆以参决，其势倾动天下。
现代文：重诲自从任中门使后，已受到皇帝的亲近、信任，而以辅助帝王创业的功臣身份，担负处理军国大事的重要职责，事情无论大小，都要参加决断，他的权势震动天下。
English: He recalled that since he was appointed as the middle gate envoy, he had been close to and trusted by the emperor. As a meritorious person who assisted the emperor in starting a business, he shouldered the important responsibility of handling military affairs. No matter how big or small, he had to participate in the decision-making. His power shook the world.

古文：虽其尽忠劳心，时有补益，而恃功矜宠，威福自出，旁无贤人君子之助，其独见之虑，祸衅所生，至于臣主俱伤，几灭其族，斯其可哀者也。
现代文：虽然他竭尽忠诚劳费心力，不时对国家有所帮助，但他仗恃功劳炫耀宠信，作威作福，又没有贤人君子的协助，他一孔之见的计虑，是灾祸产生的根源，以至于人臣君主都受到伤害，差不多要被灭族，造就是他可悲的地方啊。
English: Although he devoted all his loyalty and effort, and from time to time helped the country, he used his merits to show off his favor, and he used his authority to do good. Without the assistance of a wise man and gentleman, his one-eyed consideration was the root cause of the disaster, so that the vassals of the monarch were harmed, almost to be exterminated, making him a pathetic place.

古文：重诲尝出，过御史台门，殿直马延误冲其前导，重诲怒，即台门斩延而后奏。
现代文：安重诲曾经外出，经过御史台门前，殿直马延不小心冲闯了他的前导，安重诲发怒，就在御史台门前杀掉马延然后纔上奏。
English: Once, An Chongyun went out and passed in front of the Goshidai Gate, and a horse-drawn carriage accidentally ran into his guide. Enraged, An Chongyun killed the horse-drawn carriage in front of the Goshidai Gate and then played the gong.

古文：是时，随驾子军士桑弘迁，殴伤相州录事参军；亲从兵马使安虔，走马冲宰相前导。
现代文：这时，随行的厅子军士桑弘迁，打伤了相州录事参军；亲从兵马使安虔，驰马冲闯宰相的前导。
English: At this time, the accompanying staff sergeant, Sang Hongqian, wounded the forerunner of the prime minister, Sangzhou Luo Ji, who was enlisting in the army. He personally led the soldiers and horses to An Qian, and galloped ahead of the prime minister.

古文：弘迁罪死，虔决杖而已。
现代文：桑弘迁因罪被处死，安虔只是被判鞭打罢了。
English: Sang Hongqian was executed for his crime, while An Qian was only sentenced to flogging.

古文：重诲以斩延，乃请降敕处分，明宗不得已从之，由是御史、谏官无敢言者。
现代文：安重诲由于杀死马延，于是请求下诏处分，唐明宗迫不得已听从了他，因此御史、谏官中没有人敢说什么了。
English: Because An Chongzhen killed Ma Yan, he asked for a punishment by imperial edict. The Tang and Ming dynasties had no choice but to listen to him, so none of the imperial historians or eunuchs dared to say anything.

古文：宰相任圜判三司，以其职事与重诲争，不能得，圜怒，辞疾，退居于磁州。
现代文：宰相任圜判三司，因他职责之内的事和安重诲发生争执，未能如愿，任圜发怒，借口有病辞职，退居在磁州。
English: The Prime Minister, Ren Rong, had a dispute with the Third Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate over a matter within the scope of his duties, and was unable to fulfill his wish. Ren Rong became angry, resigned on the pretext of illness, and retreated to Magizhou.

古文：硃守殷以汴州反，重诲遣人矫诏驰至其家，杀圜而后白，诬圜与守殷通谋，明宗皆不能诘也。
现代文：朱守殷以汴州反叛，安重诲派人伪造诏书驰马到任圜家，杀掉任圜然后纔上报，诬告任圜和朱守殷合谋，唐明宗都不能察问。
English: Zhu Shouyin rebelled with Bozhou, An Chongzhen sent someone to forge an imperial edict and ride a horse to Ren Ren's house, killed Ren Ren and then reported it to the press, falsely accusing Ren Ren and Zhu Shouyin of collusion, and the Tang and Ming dynasties could not investigate.

古文：而重诲恐天下议己因取三司积欠二百余万，请放之，冀以悦人而塞责，明宗不得已，为下诏蠲除之。
现代文：而安重诲怕天下人对自己不满，于是将三司积欠未收的赋税钱两百多万，请求免除，希望以此取悦于人而搪塞责任，唐明宗迫不得已，为他下诏免除赋税。
English: However, An Chong was afraid that people around the world would be dissatisfied with him, so he asked the three departments to waive the unpaid tax of more than two million, hoping to please people and evade responsibility. Tang Mingzong had no choice but to waive the tax for him.

古文：其威福自出，多此类也。
现代文：他作威作福，大多是这样一些事情。
English: He's a braggart, and it's mostly about stuff like this.

古文：是时，四方奏事，皆先白重诲然后闻。
现代文：这时，各地上奏的事情。都是先告诉安重诲然后纔上奏。
English: At this time, the things that were played in various places were all told to calm down first and then played.

古文：河南县献嘉禾，一茎五穗，重诲视之曰： 伪也。 
现代文：河南县进献吉祥的稻子，一根茎上长着五束稻穗，安重诲看了说： 假的。 
English: Henan County presented the auspicious rice, with five bunches of ears of rice growing on one stem. When An Chongyuan saw it, he said, "It's fake."

古文：笞其人而遣之。
现代文：鞭打送稻子的人并让他回去。
English: Whip the person who sent the rice and make him go back.

古文：夏州李仁福进白鹰，重诲却之，明日，白曰： 陛下诏天下毋得献鹰鹞，而仁福违诏献鹰，臣已却之矣。 
现代文：夏州李仁福进献白鹰，安重诲不接受，第二天，对唐明宗说： 陛下韶令天下不准进献鹰鹞，而李仁福违反诏令进献鹰，我已拒绝了。 
English: The next day, he said to Tang Mingzong, "Your Majesty has ordered that no one is allowed to offer eagle feathers, but Li Renfu violated the imperial edict and offered eagles. I have refused."

古文：重诲出，明宗阴遣人取之以入。
现代文：安重诲走后，唐明宗暗中派人把白鹰取进宫中。
English: After An Chongyu left, the Tang and Ming Dynasties secretly sent someone to take the white eagle into the palace.

古文：佗日，按鹰于西郊，戒左右： 无使重诲知也！ 
现代文：一天，在西郊试飞白鹰，告诫手下人说： 不要让安重诲知道了！ 
English: One day, while testing a white eagle in the western suburbs, he admonished his subordinates: "Don't let An Chongzhen know!"

古文：宿州进白兔，重诲曰： 兔阴且狡，虽白何为！ 
现代文：宿州进献白兔，安重诲说： 兔子既阴险又狡猾，即使是白色的又有什么用呢？ 
English: When a white rabbit was offered for sacrifice in Cangzhou, An Chong said, "Rabbits are insidious and cunning. Even if they are white, what good are they?

古文：遂却而不白。
现代文：于是拒受而不上报。
English: So they refused to accept it and did not report it.

古文：明宗为人虽宽厚，然其性夷狄，果于杀人。
现代文：唐明宗为人虽然宽厚，但他的性格野蛮，杀人很果断。
English: Although Tang Mingzong was a generous person, his character was savage and he killed people very decisively.

古文：马牧军使田令方所牧马，瘠而多毙，坐劾当死，重诲谏曰： 使天下闻以马故，杀一军使，是谓贵畜而贱人。 
现代文：马牧军使田令方牧养的马，瘦弱而死得很多，被弹劾应当处死，安重诲劝阻说： 假如天下人听说由于马的缘故，杀死一个军使，这就叫看重畜牲而轻视人。 
English: The army of horse herdsmen sent Tian Lingfang to shepherd the horses, which were thin and weak and died a lot. If they were impeached, they should be put to death. An Chongyuan dissuaded him, saying, "If the whole world heard that a military envoy was killed because of a horse, it would mean that people value animals and despise people.

古文：令方因得减死。
现代文：田令方于是得以免于一死。
English: As a result, Tian Lingfang was spared from death.

古文：明宗遣回鹘侯三驰传至其国。
现代文：唐明宗派回鹤侯三驰马传信到回鹊。
English: The Tang and Ming sects sent messengers to Huizhou by horse.

古文：侯三至醴泉县，县素僻，无驿马，其令刘知章出猎，不时给马，侯三遽以闻。
现代文：侯三到醴泉县，这个县素来偏僻，没有传信的马，县令刘知章外出打猎，没能及时供给马匹，侯三于是上奏。
English: Hou San went to Shiquan County. This county has always been remote, and there were no horses to carry messages. The county magistrate, Liu Zhizhang, went out hunting and was unable to supply horses in time. Hou San then played the horn.

古文：明宗大怒，械知章至京师，将杀之，重诲从容为言，知章乃得不死。
现代文：唐明宗大怒，把刘知章捆绑押送到京师，准备杀掉他，安重诲从容地焉他辩护，刘知章纔得以不死。
English: Tang Mingzong was furious. He had Liu Zhizhang bound and sent to the capital, ready to kill him. He calmly defended himself, and Liu Zhizhang did not die.

古文：其尽忠补益，亦此类也。
现代文：安重诲竭尽忠心做好事，也大都是这一类。
English: And most of them are of this kind, who are peaceable, devout, and do good.

古文：重诲既以天下为己任，遂欲内为社稷之计，而外制诸侯之强。
现代文：安重诲既然以天下为己任，于是打算对内为国家谋划，对外钳制诸侯的强大。
English: Since he regarded peace and stability as his responsibility, he intended to plan for the country at home and control the powerful lords abroad.

古文：然其轻信韩玫之谮，而绝钱镠之臣；徒陷彦温于死，而不能去潞王之患；李严一出而知祥贰，仁矩未至而董璋叛；四方骚动，师旅并兴，如投膏止火，适足速之。
现代文：但他轻信韩玫的诬告，而拒绝钱缪的称臣；枉自陷害杨彦温至死，而不能消除潞王的忧患；李严一出而孟知祥就产生贰心，李仁矩还没到董璋就反叛了；四面八方发生骚乱，军队各处作战，就像浇油膏灭火，恰恰足以加大火势。
English: However, he was gullible enough to believe Han Mei's false accusation, but refused Qian Mui's praise; he framed Yang Yanwen to death in vain, but could not eliminate the sorrow of the king of Qi; Li Yan came out and Meng Zhixiang had a bad heart, Li Ren Rong rebelled before he reached Donglu; there were riots in all directions, and the army fought everywhere, just like pouring oil to extinguish the fire, just enough to increase the fire.

古文：此所谓独见之虑，祸衅所生也。
现代文：这就是所谓一孔之见的计虑是灾祸产生的根源。
English: This is the so-called one-sided consideration is the root cause of the disaster.

古文：钱镠据有两浙，号兼吴越而王，自梁及庄宗，常异其礼，以羁縻臣属之而已。
现代文：钱铿占据两浙，号称兼有昊、越而称王，从梁到唐庄宗，常常用特殊的礼节，来束缚并使他称臣罢了。
English: Qian Ye occupied the two Zhejiang Provinces, boasting that he was both powerful and a king. From Liang to Tangzhuangzong, he often used special etiquette to bind and make him a minister.

古文：明宗即位，镠遣使朝京师，寓书重诲，其礼慢。
现代文：唐明宗登位后，钱锷派遣使臣到京师朝见，致信安重诲，礼节很傲慢。
English: After Emperor Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, Qianlong sent an envoy to Beijing to meet with the emperor, and sent a letter to reiterate the peace. The etiquette was very arrogant.

古文：重诲怒，未有以发，乃遣其嬖吏韩玫、副供奉官乌昭遇复使于镠。
现代文：安重诲很愤怒，但没有发泄，于是派他宠信的官吏韩玫、副供奉官乌昭遇出使到钱锷那里。
English: An Chongyun was very angry, but did not vent his anger, so he sent Han Mei, the official he trusted, and Wu Zhao, the vice-offering official, to Qian Ye.

古文：而玫恃重诲势，数凌辱昭遇，因醉使酒，以马箠击之。
现代文：而韩玫仗恃安重诲的权势，多次凌辱乌昭遇，藉醉发酒疯，用马鞭打他。
English: However, Han Mei fought against the power of Shuan An, repeatedly humiliated him, drove him mad with drunkenness, and whipped him with a horse.

古文：镠欲奏其事，昭遇以为辱国，固止之。
现代文：钱锷打算将这事上报，乌昭遇认为有辱国体，坚决劝阻了。
English: Qian Ye planned to report the matter, but Wu Zhaoyuan thought it was insulting to the National Sports Festival and strongly dissuaded him.

古文：及玫还，返谮于重诲曰： 昭遇见镠，舞蹈称臣，而以朝廷事私告镠。 
现代文：韩玫返回时，反而向安重诲诬告说： 乌昭遇见到钱铿，行舞蹈礼自称为臣子，而把朝廷的事私下告诉钱锷。 
English: When Han Mei returned, she falsely accused An Chongyun instead, saying, "Uzhao met Qian Ye, performed a dance and called himself a courtier, but told Qian Ye about the imperial court in private.

古文：昭遇坐死御史狱，乃下制削夺镠官爵，以太师致仕，于是钱氏遂绝于唐矣。
现代文：乌昭遇因罪死在御史台狱中，于是下令取消钱锷的官爵，以太师退休家居，从此钱氏就与唐断绝来往了。
English: Wu Zhaoyu died in the Gushidai Prison for his crime, so he ordered the cancellation of Qian Ye's official title and retirement home. Since then, Qian Ye has cut off contact with Tang.

古文：潞王从珂为河中节度使，重诲以谓从珂非李氏子，后必为国家患，乃欲阴图之。
现代文：潞王李从珂任河中节度使，安重诲认为李从珂不是李家的儿子，以后必定造成国家的祸患，于是打算暗中算计他。
English: King Li of Qin sent Li Zongke as a special envoy from the middle of the Qayin River, and An Chongyi thought that Li Zongke was not the son of the Li family, and that he would certainly cause the country's misfortune in the future, so he planned to secretly calculate him.

古文：从珂阅马黄龙庄，其牙内指挥使杨彦温闭城以叛。
现代文：李从珂在黄龙庄检阅战马，他的牙内指挥使杨彦温关闭城门叛乱。
English: Li Congke inspected the war horses in Huanglongzhuang, and his inner commander ordered Yang Yanwen to close the city gate to the rebellion.

古文：从珂遣人谓彦温曰： 我遇汝厚，何苦而反邪？ 
现代文：李从珂派人对杨彦温说： 我对你很好，何苦反叛呢？ 
English: Li Congka said to Yang Yanwen: I am very good to you, why bother to rebel?

古文：报曰： 彦温非叛也，得枢密院宣，请公趋归朝廷耳！ 
现代文：回答说： 我杨彦温不是要反叛，得到枢密院的命令，要你赶回朝廷！ 
English: He replied, "I, Yang Yanwen, am not trying to rebel. I received an order from the Privy Council to rush you back to the imperial court!"

古文：从珂走虞乡，驰骑上变。
现代文：李从珂跑到虞乡，飞马上报兵变。
English: Li ran from Ke to Yuxiang and reported the mutiny on horseback.

古文：明宗疑其事不明，欲究其所以，乃遣殿直都知范氲以金带袭衣、金鞍勒马赐彦温，拜彦温绛州刺史，以诱致之。
现代文：唐明宗疑心事情不清楚，想追查为什么会这样，于是派殿直都知范氲拿着有金带的夹衣、有金鞍金笼头的马赐给杨彦温，拜杨彦温为绛州刺史，以便引诱他来。
English: Tang Mingzong was suspicious and wanted to find out why things were not clear, so he sent Fan Zhen, the prefect of the imperial court, to give Yang Yanwen a jacket with a gold band, a horse with a gold saddle and a gold cage head, and to worship Yang Yanwen as the history of Zhangzhou, in order to entice him to come.

古文：重诲固请用兵，明宗不得已，乃遣侍卫指挥使药彦稠、西京留守索自通率兵讨之，而诫曰： 为我生致彦温，吾将自讯其事。 
现代文：安重诲坚决请求出兵讨伐，唐明宗迫不得已，于是派侍卫指挥使药彦稠、西京留守索自通率兵讨伐杨彦温，但告诫说： 替我活捉杨彦温送来，我要亲自讯问此事。 
English: An Chongyun firmly requested that troops be dispatched to fight against Yang Yanwen. Tang Mingzong had no choice but to act, so he sent the commander of the bodyguards to order Yang Yanwen to fight against Yang Yanwen. However, he warned, "If you capture Yang Yanwen alive for me, I will personally inquire into the matter."

古文：彦稠等攻破河中，希重诲旨，斩彦温以灭口。
现代文：药彦稠等人攻破河中，迎合安重诲的意旨，杀掉杨彦温灭口。
English: Yakuhiko Choshi and others broke through the middle of the river, catered to the intention of An Chongyu, and killed Yang Yanwen.

古文：重诲率群臣称贺，明宗大怒曰： 朕家事不了，卿等不合致贺！ 
现代文：安重诲率领群臣祝贺，唐明宗大怒说： 我家的事还没完，你们不应祝贺！ 
English: When An Chongyu led his ministers to congratulate him, Tang Mingzong said angrily, "My family's business is not over yet, you should not congratulate me!"

古文：从珂罢镇，居清化里第。
现代文：李从珂被罢去节度使，住在清化里家中。
English: Li was removed from the post of festival delegate and lived at home in Qinghua.

古文：重诲数讽宰相，言从珂失守，宜得罪，冯道因白请行法。
现代文：安重诲多次暗示宰相，说李从珂有失职守，应当按罪论处，冯道于是请求执法。
English: Ahn repeatedly hinted to the prime minister that Li Congke had dereliction of duty and should be punished according to the crime, and Feng Dao then requested the enforcement of the law.

古文：明宗怒曰： 吾兒为奸人所中，事未辨明，公等出此言，是不欲容吾兒人间邪？ 
现代文：唐明宗发怒说： 我儿子被坏人中伤，事情还没有分辨明白，你们说这样的话，是不想让我的儿子活在人世间吗？ 
English: Tang Mingzong said angrily, "My son was injured by a bad person, and things have not yet been distinguished and understood. If you say such a thing, don't you want my son to live in the world?"

古文：赵凤因言： 《春秋》责帅之义，所以励为臣者。 
现代文：赵凤于是说： 《春秋》责备将帅的意义，就是用来勉励做臣子的人的。 
English: Zhao Feng then said: "The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" reproaching the general is to encourage those who are courtiers.

古文：明宗曰： 皆非公等意也！ 
现代文：唐明宗说： 这都不是你们的意思！ 
English: Tang Mingzong said: This is not what you meant!

古文：道等惶恐而退。
现代文：冯道等人诚惶诚恐地退下了。
English: Feng Dao and the others retreated in panic.

古文：居数日，道等又以为请，明宗顾左右而言他。
现代文：过了几天，冯道等人又拿这事请求，唐明宗回视手下的人，说别的事情。
English: A few days later, Feng Dao and others made another request about this matter, and Tang Mingzong looked back at his subordinates and said something else.

古文：明日，重诲乃自论列，明宗曰： 公欲如何处置，我即从公！ 
现代文：第二天，安重诲就亲自出面谈论这事，唐明宗说： 你想怎么处理，我就随你怎么处理！ 
English: The next day, An Chongzheng himself came forward to discuss the matter. Tang Mingzong said, "I'll handle it any way you want!"

古文：重诲曰： 此父子之际，非臣所宜言，惟陛下裁之。 
现代文：安重诲说： 这是父子间的关系，不是我该说的，希望陛裁定！ 
English: "This is a relationship between father and son, it's not for me to say. I hope His Majesty will make a ruling!"

古文：明宗曰： 吾为小校时，衣食不能自足，此兒为我担石灰，拾马粪，以相养活，今贵为天子，独不能庇之邪！
现代文：唐明宗说： 我任小校的时候，吃穿都不够，这个儿子替我担石灰，拾马粪，藉此纔能过活，如今我贵为天子，偏偏不能保护他吗！
English: Tang Mingzong said, "When I was a primary school teacher, I didn't have enough to eat and wear. This son carried lime for me and picked up horse dung, which enabled him to make a living. Now that I'm the Son of Heaven, I can't protect him!"

古文：使其杜门私第，亦何与公事！ 
现代文：让他关在家里，对你又有什么妨害呢！ 
English: What's the harm in keeping him at home?

古文：重诲由是不复敢言。
现代文：安重诲从此不再敢说这件事。
English: From then on, An Chongyuan no longer dared to talk about it.

古文：孟知祥镇西川，董璋镇东川，二人皆有异志，重诲每事裁抑，务欲制其奸心，凡两川守将更代，多用己所亲信，必以精兵从之，渐令分戍诸州，以虞缓急。
现代文：孟知祥镇守西川，董璋镇守束川，两人都有二心，安重诲凡事都压制他们，务必要抑制他们的阴谋，凡是两川更换守将，大多用自己亲信的人，一定派精兵跟随，慢慢让他们分守各州，准备危急的时候有用。
English: Meng Zhixiang town guarding the West River, Donglu town guarding the Tsukawa River, both of them have two minds, and it is necessary to suppress their plots. Whenever the two rivers change guards, they mostly use their own trusted people, and they must send elite soldiers to follow, and slowly let them guard the states separately, which is useful when preparing for a crisis.

古文：二人觉之，以为图己，益不自安。
现代文：他们两人察觉后，认为这是算计他们，更加不安。
English: Both of them felt more uneasy when they realized it was a trick.

古文：既而遣李严为西川监军，知祥大怒，斩严；又分阆州为保宁军，以李仁矩为节度使以制璋，且削其地，璋以兵攻杀仁矩。
现代文：不久派李严任西川监军，孟知祥大怒，杀掉李严；又分板州为保宁军，任李仁矩为节度使来钳制董璋，并且削夺他的土地，董璋率兵进攻杀死李仁矩。
English: Soon, Li Yan was sent to supervise the troops in the West River. Meng Zhixiang was furious and killed Li Yan. In addition, Baoding Province was assigned to the Boryeong Army, and Li Renki was appointed as a special envoy to subdue Dong Hui and seize his land. Dong Hui led the troops to attack and kill Li Renki.

古文：二人遂皆反。
现代文：孟、董二人于是都反叛了。
English: Meng and Dong both rebelled.

古文：唐兵戍蜀者，积三万人，其后知祥杀璋，兼据两川，而唐之精兵皆陷蜀。
现代文：唐军守蜀的，共三万人，后来孟知祥杀死董璋，占据两川，而唐的精兵都留在蜀了。
English: A total of 30,000 Tang soldiers guarded Shu. Later, Meng Zhixiang killed Dong Xuan and occupied the two rivers, while Tang's elite soldiers remained in Shu.

古文：初，明宗幸汴州，重诲建议，欲因以伐吴，而明宗难之。
现代文：当初，唐明宗到汴州，安重诲建议，打算顺便伐昊，而唐明宗感到为难。
English: At first, Tang Mingzong went to Bozhou, but was embarrassed by the suggestion that he should go on a pilgrimage.

古文：其后户部尚书李钅粦得吴谍者言： 徐知诰欲举吴国以称籓，愿得安公一言以为信。 
现代文：后来户部尚书李鳞抓到昊的探子说： 徐知诰打算拿昊国称藩，希望得到安公的一句话作为凭信。 
English: Later, the scout who caught Hao said: Xu Zhisheng planned to take Hao Province as a domain, hoping to get a word from An Gong as a credential.

古文：鏻即引谍者见重诲，重诲大喜以为然，乃以玉带与谍者，使遗知诰为信，其直千缗。
现代文：李钻立即带来探子见安重诲，安重诲十分高兴认为应该这样，于是拿玉带给探子，让他带给徐知诰作为凭信，玉带价值干缉。
English: Li Dian immediately brought a probe to see An Chongyun, An Chongyun was very happy to think that this should be the case, so he took the jade to the probe and asked him to bring it to Xu Zhisheng as a certificate. The value of the jade belt was wanted.

古文：初不以其事闻，其后逾年，知诰之问不至，始奏贬鏻行军司马。
现代文：开始没有把这事上奏，后来过了一年，没有徐知诰的消息，纔上奏贬李鳞为行军司马。
English: At first, this matter was not reported, and later, after a year, there was no news of Xu Zhisheng. Li Qiao was relegated to the position of marching steward.

古文：已而捧圣都军使李行德、十将张俭告变，言： 枢密承旨李虔徽语其客边彦温云： 重诲私募士卒，缮治甲器，欲自伐吴。
现代文：不久捧圣都军使李行德、十将张俭报告事变，说： 枢密承旨李虔徽对他的门客边彦温说： 安重诲私自招募士兵，整治武器，准备亲自伐昊。
English: Soon after, Li Xingde and Zhang Jian, envoys of the Sacred Capital Army, came to report the incident, saying: Li Qianhui, who had received a secret order, said to his concubine Bian Yanwen: An Chong taught himself to recruit soldiers, rectify weapons, and prepare to go to war in person.

古文：又与谍者交私。  
现代文：又和探子作私下勾结。  
English: He also colluded with the spies.

古文：明宗以问重诲，重诲惶恐，请究其事。
现代文：唐明宗拿这些话问安重诲，安重诲惊慌恐惧，请求调查这事。
English: Tang Mingzong took these words to ask for reassurance, reassurance, alarm and fear, and asked for an investigation into the matter.

古文：明宗初颇疑之，大臣左右皆为之辨，既而少解，始告重诲以彦温之言，因廷诘彦温，具伏其诈，于是君臣相顾泣下。
现代文：唐明宗开始很怀疑，手下大臣都为他辩白，不久事情稍稍缓和些，纔把边彦温的话告诉安重诲，于是在朝廷上询问边彦温，边彦温承认都是假话，于是君臣相视而哭。
English: Tang Mingzong was very suspicious at first, and his ministers all defended him. Soon, things eased a little, and he told An Chongchu about the words of Bian Yanwen. He then questioned Bian Yanwen at the court. Bian Yanwen admitted that they were all lies, and the prince and the minister looked at each other and cried.

古文：彦温、行德、俭皆坐族诛。
现代文：边彦温、李行德、张俭都因罪被灭族。
English: Bian Yanwen, Li Xingde and Zhang Jian were all killed for their crimes.

古文：重诲因求解职，明宗慰之曰： 事已辨，慎无措之胸中。 
现代文：安重诲于是请求罢官，唐明宗安慰他说： 事情已经弄清楚，千万不要放在心上！ 
English: An Chongyuan then requested to be dismissed, and Tang Mingzong consoled him, saying, "Things have been clarified, don't worry about it!

古文：重诲论请不已，明宗怒曰： 放卿去，朕不患无人！ 
现代文：安重诲不断请求，唐明宗发怒说： 随你去，我不怕没人！ 
English: After repeated requests, Tang Mingzong angrily said, "Go ahead, I'm not afraid of anyone!"

古文：顾武德使孟汉琼至中书，趣冯道等议代重诲者。冯道曰： 诸公苟惜安公，使得罢去，是纾其祸也。 
现代文：示意武德使孟汉琼到中书省，催冯道等人前来商议代替安亘诲的人选，冯道说： 诸位如果怜惜安公，让他得以罢官离去，这纔是解除他的灾祸啊。 
English: Wu De instructed Meng Hanqiong to go to the Ministry of Education and Culture and urged Feng Dao and others to come to discuss the replacement of An Wuchang. Feng Dao said: "If you have mercy on An Gong and allow him to resign, this will relieve his misfortune.

古文：赵凤以为大臣不可轻动。
现代文：趟凤认为大臣不能随便更换。
English: Wafeng believes that the minister cannot be replaced at will.

古文：遂以范延光为枢密使，而重诲居职如故。
现代文：于是任范延光为枢密使，而安重诲官居原位。
English: As a result, Fan Yanguang was appointed as a Privy Councilor, while An Rongji remained in his original position.

古文：董璋等反，遣石敬瑭讨之，而川路险阻，粮运甚艰，每费一石，而致一斗。
现代文：董璋等人反叛，朝廷派石敬瑭前去讨伐，而两川道路险阻，粮食运输很困难，每每花费一石，只能送到一斗。
English: When Dong Xuan and others rebelled, the imperial court sent Shi Jingjun to fight them, but the roads in the two rivers were dangerous and grain transportation was very difficult. For every one stone spent, only one bucket could be delivered.

古文：自关以西，民苦输送，往往亡聚山林为盗贼。
现代文：从潼关以西，老百姓深受输送军饷的危害，常常逃亡聚积到山林做盗贼。
English: To the west of Shaoguan, the common people were greatly harmed by the transportation of military supplies, and often fled to the mountains and forests to become thieves.

古文：明宗谓重诲曰： 事势如此，吾当自行。 
现代文：唐明宗对安重诲说： 事势已经这样，我应亲自前往。 
English: Tang Mingzong said to An Chongyun: The situation is already like this, I should go there in person.

古文：重诲曰： 此臣之责也。 
现代文：安重诲说： 这是臣子的责任。 
English: "This is the responsibility of a vassal," said An Zhe.

古文：乃请行。
现代文：于是请求前往。
English: So he asked to go.

古文：关西之人闻重诲来，皆已恐动，而重诲日驰数百里，远近惊骇。
现代文：关西的人听说安重诲来了，都很恐惧震惊，而安重诲每天前进几百里，四面八方都震惊害怕。
English: People in Kansai were shocked and frightened when they heard of the arrival of the Anshu Ling. The Anshu Ling travels hundreds of miles every day, and they were shocked and frightened in all directions.

古文：督趣粮运，日夜不绝，毙踣道路者，不可胜数。
现代文：监督催促运粮，日夜不停，死在路上的人马，数不胜敷。
English: Supervising and urging the transportation of grain, day and night non-stop, the number of people who died on the road is countless.

古文：重诲过凤翔，节度使硃弘昭延之寝室，使其妻子奉事左右甚谨。
现代文：安重诲经过凤翔，节度使朱弘昭把他请到家里，让他的妻子儿女在安重诲身边小心侍奉。
English: After An Chongyi passed through Fengxiang, the festival made Zhu Hongzhao invite him to his home, so that his wife and children could carefully serve around An Chongyi.

古文：重诲酒酣，为弘昭言： 昨被谗构，几不自全，赖人主明圣，得保家族。 
现代文：安重诲饮酒遇量，对朱弘昭说： 不久前被谗言陷害，差点不能保全性命，幸好皇上英明神圣，纔能够保住家族不被灭杀。 
English: Reassured by the amount of alcohol consumed, he said to Zhu Hongzhao, "Not long ago, I was set up by slander, and I was almost unable to save my life. Fortunately, the emperor is wise and holy, and I was able to keep my family from being killed.

古文：因感叹泣下。
现代文：于是感叹着哭起来。
English: Then she sighed and began to cry.

古文：重诲去，弘昭驰骑上言： 重诲怨望，不可令至行营，恐其生事。 
现代文：安重诲离去后，朱弘昭骑马飞驰上报说： 安重诲有怨恨之心，不能让他到行营，怕他会惹事。 
English: After An Chongyun left, Zhu Hongzhao rode a horse and reported: An Chongyun has a grudge, and I can't let him go to the camp, for fear that he will cause trouble.

古文：而宣徽使孟汉琼自行营使还，亦言西人震骇之状，因述重诲过恶。
现代文：而宣徽使孟汉琼从行营出使回来，也说起西边人震惊害怕的情况，于是说到安重诲的过失、罪恶。
English: And Xuan Hui made Meng Hanqiong return from the campaign, and also talked about the situation that the westerners were shocked and afraid, and then talked about the mistakes and sins of An Chongchu.

古文：重诲行至三泉，被召还。
现代文：安重诲走到三泉时，被召回。
English: When An Chongzhen walked to Sanquan, he was recalled.

古文：过凤翔，弘昭拒而不纳，重诲惧，驰趋京师。
现代文：经过凤翔时，朱弘昭拒绝接待他，安重诲害怕了，飞奔京师。
English: When he passed Fengxiang, Zhu Hongzhao refused to receive him. An Chongyun was afraid and ran to the capital.

古文：未至，拜河中节度使。
现代文：还没到，拜为河中节度使。
English: If you haven't arrived yet, pray for the river festival.

古文：重诲已罢，希旨者争求其过。
现代文：安重诲罢官后，迎合皇上的人争相找他的过失。
English: After the dismissal of Emperor Anzong, those who pandered to the emperor scrambled to find fault with him.

古文：宦者安希伦，坐与重诲交私，常与重诲阴伺宫中动息，事发弃市。
现代文：宦官安希伦，因和安重诲私下勾结，常常和安重诲一起暗中窥视宫中的动静，事情暴露后被杀。
English: The eunuch An Shiren, because of his private collusion with An Chongyi, often secretly spied on the movements in the palace together with An Chongyi, and was killed after the affair was exposed.

古文：重诲益惧，因上章告老。
现代文：安重诲更加恐惧，于是上书请求告老回家。
English: An Juyong was even more afraid, so he wrote a letter asking to be allowed to return home.

古文：以太子太师致仕；而以李从璋为河中节度使，遣药彦稠率兵如河中虞变。
现代文：安重诲以太子太师离官居家；而以李从璋任河中节度使，派药彦稠率兵到河中防备发生变乱。
English: Yasuchika's father-in-law, Taishi, left his post and stayed at home, while Ikko's father-in-law, Ikko, was appointed as the regent of the middle of the river and sent Yakuhiko and his soldiers to the middle of the river to prevent disorder.

古文：重诲子崇绪、崇赞，宿卫京师，闻制下，即日奔其父。重诲见之，惊曰： 渠安得来！ 
现代文：安重诲的儿子安崇绪、安崇赞，守卫京师，听说制诏下发，当天就跑到父亲那里，安重诲见到他们，吃惊地说： 你们怎么能来！ 
English: An Chongxu and An Chongzan, the sons of An Chongxu and An Chongzang, guarded the capital. When they heard that the edict was issued, they ran to their father on the same day. When An Chongxu saw them, he was surprised and said, "How could you come?"

古文：已而曰： 此非渠意，为人所使耳。
现代文：不久又说： 这不是他的本意，被人唆使罢了。
English: He soon added: "It wasn't his intention, he was just goaded into it."

古文：吾以一死报国，余复何言！ 
现代文：我以死报国，其余的还说什么呢！ 
English: I served my country with my death, what does the rest say?

古文：乃械送二子于京师，行至陕州，下狱。
现代文：于是捆绑两个儿子送往京师，走到陕州时，被投进狱中。
English: So he tied up his two sons and sent them to Beijing Division, and when he got to Shaanxi, he was thrown into prison.

古文：明宗又遣翟光业至河中，视重诲去就，戒曰： 有异志，则与从璋图之。 
现代文：唐明宗又派翟光业到河中，监视安重诲的动向，告诫说： 如果他有二心，就和李从璋一起杀掉他。 
English: Tang Mingzong also sent Gong Guangye to the river to monitor An Chongyuan's movements and warned: If he has two hearts, kill him together with Li Congyuan.

古文：又遣宦者使于重诲。
现代文：又派宦官出使到安重诲那里。
English: He also sent an envoy of eunuchs to An Chongyi.

古文：使者见重诲，号泣不已，重诲问其故，使者曰： 人言公有异志，朝廷遣药彦稠率师至矣！ 
现代文：使臣见到安重诲，不停地悲号哭泣，安重诲问他是什么原因，使臣说： 有人说你有二心，朝廷派药彦稠率兵到了！ 
English: When the envoy saw An Chongzhen, he wept and wailed incessantly. When An Chongzhen asked him what the reason was, the envoy said, "Some people say you have two hearts. The imperial court has sent Yakuhiko Chusei to lead the troops!"

古文：重诲曰： 吾死未塞责，遽劳朝廷兴师，以重明主之忧。 
现代文：安重诲说： 我死也不能抵塞罪责，还劳朝廷兴师动众，加重皇上的忧虑。 
English: An Chongyuan said: I can't live up to my guilt even if I die. I have to work hard for the imperial court to motivate the masses and increase the emperor's worries.

古文：光业至，从璋率兵围重诲第，入拜于庭。
现代文：翟光业到后，李从瘴率兵包围安重诲的家，走进去在庭上拜见。
English: After Gong Guangye arrived, Li Conglu led his soldiers to surround An Chongyu's home and went inside to meet him in the courtyard.

古文：重诲降而答拜，从璋以楇击其首，重诲妻走抱之而呼曰： 令公死未晚，何遽如此！ 
现代文：安重诲低身答拜，李从璋用褪打他的头，安重诲的妻子跑过来抱着他呼叫说： 要他自己死还不晚，何必就像这样！ 
English: An Chongzhen bowed his head in response. Li Congzheng hit him on the head with a mallet. An Chongzheng's wife ran over, hugged him, and called out, "It's not too late for him to die. Why do it like this?"

古文：又击其首，夫妻皆死，流血盈庭。
现代文：又打安重诲妻子的头，夫妻两人都死了，血流满庭。
English: He also hit his wife on the head, and both husband and wife died, with blood flowing all over the yard.

古文：从璋检责其家赀，不及数千缗而已。
现代文：李从璋检查他的家产，不过几千缙罢了。
English: Li Congtao inspects his family's property, but it's only a few thousand baht.

古文：明宗下诏，以其绝钱镠，致孟知祥、董璋反，及议伐吴，以为罪。
现代文：唐明宗下诏，因他与钱铿绝交，导致孟知祥、董璋反叛，以及拟议讨伐昊，把这些作为罪行。
English: Tang Mingzong issued an edict because he had broken off diplomatic relations with Qian Ye, which led to the rebellion of Meng Zhixiang and Dong Ye, as well as the proposed battle of Hao, which were regarded as crimes.

古文：并杀其二子，其余子孙皆免。
现代文：同时杀掉他的两个儿子，其它的子孙都免于一死。
English: He killed his two sons at the same time, but spared his other children and grandchildren.

古文：重诲得罪，知其必死，叹曰： 我固当死，但恨不与国家除去潞王！ 
现代文：安重诲获罪后，知道自己必定被处死，叹息说： 我固然应当死，只是遣憾没有为国家消灭潞王！ 
English: After he was convicted, An Chongzhen, knowing that he would certainly be put to death, said with a sigh, "Of course, I should die, but I regret that I did not eliminate King Gong for the country!"

古文：此其恨也。
现代文：这就是他的遗憾。
English: That was his regret.

古文：呜呼，官失其职久矣！
现代文：唉，做官不能尽职由来已久了！
English: Alas, the inability to do one's duty as an official goes back a long way!

古文：予读梁宣底，见敬翔、李振为崇政院使，凡承上之旨，宣之宰相而奉行之。
现代文：我读梁的告示的底稿，知道敬翔、李振任崇政院使时，凡是秉承皇上的意旨，都告诉宰相让他执行。
English: When I read the draft of Liang's announcement, I knew that when Qi Xiang and Li Zhen were appointed as envoys of the State Council, they always told the prime minister to carry out the emperor's will.

古文：宰相有非其见时而事当上决者，与其被旨而有所复请者，则具记事而入，因崇政使闻，得旨则复宣而出之。
现代文：宰相有不同意见时而事情应当由皇上决断的，和虽秉承意旨而还有需要再请示的事情，就都记下来送进宫中，通过崇政使上奏，得到圣旨再宣布下发。
English: When the prime minister had a different opinion and the matter should be decided by the emperor, and even if he adhered to the will but there was still a need for further instructions, he would write it down and send it to the palace, and through the envoy of the Supreme Ruler, the sacred will would be announced and then issued.

古文：梁之崇政使，乃唐枢密之职，盖出纳之任也，唐常以宦者为之，至梁戒其祸，始更用士人，其备顾问、参谋议于中则有之，未始专行事于外也。
现代文：梁的崇政使，就是唐枢密使的职务，大概担负上下通报情况的责任，唐常常用宦官担任，到梁时为了防备祸患，纔改用士人担任，在皇官准备皇帝询问，参与谋划计议是有的，但不曾独自在外面管事。
English: Liang's high-ranking envoys, that is, the posts of Tang's confidential envoys, probably bear the responsibility of reporting the situation up and down. Tang often used eunuchs to serve. In order to prevent disasters, when he came to Liang, he used scholars to serve. The imperial officials prepared the emperor's inquiry and participated in the planning and discussion, but they did not manage the affairs outside alone.

古文：至崇韬、重诲为之，始复唐枢密之名，然权侔于宰相矣。
现代文：到郭崇韬、安重诲担任这个职务时，纔恢复唐枢密使的名称，但权力却和宰相一样大。
English: When Guo Chongzhen and An Chongzhen assumed this post, Zou resumed the name of Tang's envoy, but his power was as great as that of the prime minister.

古文：从世因之，遂分为二，文事任宰相，武事任枢密。
现代文：后代沿袭，于是一分为二，属于文官的事归宰相管，武官的事归枢密使管。
English: Subsequent generations followed suit, so it was divided into two, with civil affairs falling under the authority of the prime minister, and military affairs falling under the authority of the privy council.

古文：枢密之任既重，而宰相自此失其职也。
现代文：枢密使的责任既然这样重大，因而宰相从此就不能尽宰相的职能了。
English: Since the responsibility of the Privy Counsellor is so important, the Prime Minister can no longer perform the functions of the Prime Minister.

