古文：王若曰： 祖祭公，予小子虔虔在位，昊天疾威，予多时溥愆。
现代文：穆王这样说： 叔祖祭公，我是虔诚地在位执政。上天急于施威，我多有大错。
English: King Mu thus said: "Uncle, I have reigned piously. Heaven is eager to show its power. How wrong I have been.

古文：我闻祖不豫，有加予，维敬省不吊，田降疾病，予畏天威，公其告予懿德。 
现代文：我听说叔祖病势加重，我是郑重地前来探视。不善的老天降下这疾病，我害怕它的威严。请您告诉我美好的德行。 
English: I have heard that my uncle's condition has worsened, so I have come to visit him. I am afraid of the severity of this illness, which was brought down by the evil God. Please tell me about your good deeds.

古文：祭公拜手稽首曰： 天子，谋复疾，维不瘳，朕身尚在兹，朕魄在于天。
现代文：祭公行叩拜大礼，说： 天子!谋父我的病已不会好。我的身子还在这里，我的魂魄已经在天上。
English: and said, "Son of God, my father, my illness will not get better. My body is still here, but my soul is in heaven.

古文：昭王之所勖宅天命。 
现代文：昭王在保佑着你，就安居天命吧! 
English: King Zhao is blessing you, so live in peace!

古文：王曰： 呜呼，公，朕皇祖文王、烈祖武王，度下国，作陈周，维皇皇上帝，度其心，置之明德。
现代文：穆王说： 啊呀，祭公!我皇祖文王和烈祖武王，身处小国，办事周到无误。只有上天知晓他们的心思，把明德加于其身，把四方付与他们。
English: King Mu said: Ah, Sacrificer! My imperial ancestor King Wen and my martyred ancestor King Wu, being in a small country, performed their duties in an impeccable manner. Only Heaven knows their thoughts, bestows wisdom and virtue upon them, and bestows the Four Directions upon them.

古文：付俾于四方，用应受天命，敷文在下。
现代文：他们接受天命，布施文德在下土。我也借助于您文祖周公和叔祖召公的训导。
English: They have accepted the mandate of heaven, and the Buddha is in the lower earth. I have also taken advantage of the teachings of your great-grandfather Zhou Gong and uncle Zhao Gong.

古文：我亦维有若祖祭公之执，和周国，保憹王家。 王曰： 公称丕显之德，以予小子扬文武大勋，弘成康昭考之烈。 
现代文：我小子追学文王武王的微德，因而能够继承成王、康王的业绩，以执行天命，使大商的民众过得平稳。我也借助您叔祖祭公执持和谐我们周朝，安定王室。 穆王说： 祭公!列举您的美德，以帮助我小子发扬文王、武王的功勋，光大成王、康王以及我父昭王的业绩。 穆王又说： 祭公!
English: My son has studied the virtues of King Wen and King Wu, so he can inherit the achievements of King Cheng and King Kang to carry out the mandate of heaven and make the people of the merchants live smoothly. I also use your uncle's sacrifice to maintain the harmony of our Zhou Dynasty and stabilize the royal family. King Mu said: Sacrifice! List your virtues to help my son carry forward the merits of King Wen and King Wu, the glory of King Cheng and King Kang, and the achievements of my father, King Zhao. King Mu also said: Sacrifice!

古文：王曰： 公无困我哉，俾百僚，乃心率辅弼予一人。 
现代文：不要让我困惑啊!要让百官尽心，用来辅佐我呀! 
English: Don't let me be confused! Let the officials do their best to help me!

古文：祭公拜，稽首曰： 允乃诏，毕桓于黎民般。 
现代文：祭公行叩拜大礼道：你的诏告很适当啊，全是考虑到老百姓的安乐。 祭公又说： 天子!
English: The sacrificial public procession marched and worshipped in the grand ceremonial way: Your edict is very appropriate, considering the well-being of the people. The sacrificial public also said: Son of Heaven!

古文：公曰： 天子谋父，疾维维不瘳，敢告天子皇天，改大殷之命，维文王受之，维武王大克之，咸茂厥功。
现代文：谋父我的病好不了，敬告天子：上天改易殷商之命，是文王接受的，是武王灭了殷商，他们都建了丰功。
English: My father-in-law, unable to recover from my illness, respectfully reported to the heavenly son: It was King Wen who accepted the order of Heaven to change Yi Shang, and it was King Wu who annihilated Yin Shang, and they both achieved great feats.

古文：维天贞文王之董用威，亦尚宽壮，厥心康受憹之式用休。
现代文：是上天让文王持正，两次使用武力，又开阔壮大他的心思，制定治国的法式，得以完美。
English: It was heaven that allowed King Wen to be upright, to use force twice, to broaden and expand his mind, and to establish the French style of governing the country, which was perfect.

古文：亦先王茂绥厥心敬恭承之，维武王申大肆命戡厥敌。 
现代文：又有先王多次安定他的信念，文王都恭敬地接受。是武王重申天命，战胜了他的敌人。 祭公说： 天子!
English: It was King Wu who reaffirmed the Mandate of Heaven and defeated his enemies. The priest said, "Son of Heaven!

古文：公曰： 天子自三公上下辟于文武。文武之子孙，大开方封于下土。
现代文：自三公以下，都效法文王、武王，文王、武王的子孙大建邦国，分布于各地。
English: From the Three Princes on down, they all followed the example of King Fongwen and King Wu, and the descendants of King Fongwen and King Wu built a state, and they were distributed all over the country.

古文：天之所锡，武王使，疆土丕维周之基。丕维后稷之受命，是永宅之。
现代文：上天赐给武王的这片疆土，是周朝的基业，也是始祖后稷受命的地方，当永远守住它。
English: This piece of territory, which was given to King Wu by Heaven, is the foundation of the Zhou Dynasty, and it is also the place where the first ancestors were ordered to guard it forever.

古文：维我后嗣旁建宗子，丕维周之始并。
现代文：我们后继者广建嫡子为诸侯，作为周王室的屏障。啊呀，天子，三公!
English: Our successor, Guang Jian's legitimate son, will be a vassal, acting as a barrier to the Zhou royal family.

古文：呜呼，天子三公监于夏商之既败，丕则无遗后难，至于万亿年，守序终之。
现代文：以夏商的灭亡为鉴戒，就不会留下后患，传到万年、十万年，守着次序传到底。
English: Taking the demise of Xia Shang as a warning, there will be no lingering aftereffects, and it will be passed on for ten thousand years, one hundred thousand years, and it will be passed on to the end in an orderly manner.

古文：既毕丕，乃有利宗，丕维文王由之。 
现代文：如果传承到底，就有利于宗族，也是文王的初衷。 
English: If it is passed down to the end, it will be beneficial to the clan, which is also the original intention of King Wen.

古文：公曰： 呜呼，天子，我不则寅哉，寅哉。
现代文：祭公说： 啊呀，天子!我是慎重又慎重。
English: Said the priest: Ah, my son! I am cautious and prudent.

古文：汝无以戾反罪，疾丧时二王大功。
现代文：你不要因乖戾，反常、罚罪、嫉妒丧失了这二王的大功。
English: Do not, through malice, through wickedness, through iniquity, through envy, diminish the greatness of these two kings.

古文：汝无以嬖御固庄后。汝无以小谋败大作，汝无以嬖御士疾大夫卿士，汝无以家相乱王室而莫恤其外。尚皆以时中憹万国。
现代文：你木要用嬖妾蔽塞正宫，你不要因小打算而败坏大事，你不要以宠信的佞臣蔽塞正派之士用大夫、卿士，你不要用陪臣扰乱王室而不忧虑王室以外的事，要以这中正之道治理天下万国。 啊呀，三公!
English: Thou shalt not use thy concubines to overcrowd the royal palace; thou shalt not ruin great things by small plans; thou shalt not use thy trusted vassals to crowd out honest men with doctors and nobles; thou shalt not use thy vassals to disturb the royal family without worrying about matters outside the royal family; thou shalt govern all the nations of the world in this right and just way.

古文：呜呼，三公，汝念哉！汝无泯泯芬芬，厚颜忍丑，时维大不吊哉。
现代文：你们要多思考啊!你们不要昏昏糊糊，厚着脸皮忍受耻辱，这样就是大不善了。
English: You should think more! Don't be lazy, and don't put up with humiliation with a thick skin. That's not good.

古文：昔在先王，我亦维丕，以我辟险于难，不失于正，我亦以免没我世。
现代文：从前在先王的时候，我总是考虑让我们君王远离患难，不失去正道，我也就尽力度过我这一生。
English: In the past, when I was king, I was always thinking about how to keep our king away from trouble and not lose the right path, and I did my best to spend my life.

古文：呜呼，三公！
现代文：啊呀，三公!
English: Ah, the Three Wise Men!

古文：予维不起，朕疾。
现代文：我想我的病好不了啦，你们要大加重视啊，这样天下都会安定。
English: I don't think my illness will get better. You should pay more attention to it, and the world will be stable.

古文：曰： 康子之攸保勖教诲之，世祀无绝，不，我周有常刑。 
现代文：你们要承诺：明确你们的责任，勉励教诲天子，使世代的祭祀没有断绝。不然，我们周朝定有刑罚。 
English: Make a promise: clarify your responsibilities, encourage and teach the Son of Heaven, so that the generations of sacrifice are not cut off. Otherwise, we will have punishment in the morning.

古文：王拜手稽首党言。
现代文：穆王拜手叩头，接受善言。
English: Mu Wang bowed his head and accepted the kind words.

