古文：海内西北陬以东者。
现代文：海内北经所记载的是西北角以东的地方。
English: What is recorded in the Inner Northern Classic is the area east of the northwest corner.

古文：蛇巫之山，上有人操柸而东向立。
现代文：蛇巫山，上面有人手中拿着杯子向东站着。
English: Snake Wushan, with someone standing on top of it, holding a cup in his hand, facing east.

古文：一曰龟山。
现代文：另一种说法认为蛇巫山叫做龟山。
English: Another view is that Snake Mountain is called Turtle Mountain.

古文：西王母梯几而戴胜杖。
现代文：西王母靠倚着小桌案，头戴首饰，手中持杖。
English: The Queen of the West is leaning against a small table, wearing jewelry on her head and holding a cane in her hand.

古文：其南有三青鸟，为西王母取食。
现代文：她的南面有三青鸟，正在为西王母觅取食物。
English: To the south of her, there are three bluebirds, looking for food for the western king crab.

古文：在昆仑虚北。
现代文：西王母和三青鸟的所在地是在昆仑山的北面。
English: The Western Kingfisher and the Three Blue Birds are located in the northern part of Kunlun Mountain.

古文：有人曰大行伯，把戈。
现代文：有一个人，名叫大行伯，手中拿着戈。
English: There was a man named Da Xing Bo, who was holding a goose in his hand.

古文：其东有犬封国。
现代文：大行伯所居之地的东边有一个犬封国。
English: On the east side of the land where Da Xingbo lived, there was a dog-free country.

古文：贰负之尸在大行伯东。
现代文：贰负的尸体在大行伯所居之地的东边。
English: The dead body was found on the eastern side of the area where Da Xingbo lived.

古文：犬封国曰大戎国，状如犬。
现代文：犬封国也叫犬戎国，那里的人长得像狗。
English: Inufo Province is also called Inobu Province, where people look like dogs.

古文：有一女子，方跪进柸食。
现代文：犬封国有一位女子，正手持杯子，跪着进献食物。
English: There is a woman in Inufu Province who is holding a cup and kneeling down to offer food.

古文：有文马，缟身朱鬣，目若黄金，名曰吉量，乘之寿千岁。
现代文：那里还有一种带斑纹的马，是白色身子红色鬃毛，眼睛像黄金一样闪闪发光，名称是吉量，骑上它就能使人长寿千岁。
English: There is also a kind of horse with stripes, it is a white horse with red mane, eyes shining like gold, the name is auspicious, riding it can make people live a thousand years longer.

古文：鬼国在贰负之尸北，为物人面而一目。
现代文：鬼国在贰负之尸的北面，那里的人长着人的面孔却只有一只眼睛。
English: The land of ghosts lies to the north of the buried bodies. The people there have human faces but only one eye.

古文：一曰贰负神在其东，为物人而蛇身。
现代文：另一种说法认为贰负神在鬼国的东面，他是人的面孔而蛇的身子。
English: Another theory is that the god of the underworld is in the east of the land of ghosts. He has a human face and the body of a snake.

古文：蜪犬如犬，青，食人从首始。
现代文：蜪犬的外形像狗，全身是青色，它吃人是从人的头开始吃起。
English: The appearance of the mastiff is like that of a dog, its whole body is blue, and when it eats a human, it starts with the head.

古文：穷奇状如虎，有翼，食人从首始。
现代文：穷奇的外形像老虎，却生有翅膀，吃人是从人的头开始吃。
English: Its strange shape resembles that of a tiger, but it is born with wings. It begins to eat human beings from the head.

古文：所食被发。
现代文：正被吃的人是披散着头发的。
English: The man being eaten has his hair all over the place.

古文：在蜪犬北。
现代文：穷奇在蜪犬的北面。
English: Henqi is on the north side of Xining.

古文：一曰从足。
现代文：另一种说法认为穷奇吃人是从人的脚开始吃起。
English: Another way of saying it is that the people who eat strange things start by eating human feet.

古文：帝尧台、帝喾台、帝丹朱台、帝舜台，各二台，台四方，在昆仑东北。
现代文：帝尧台、帝喾台、帝丹朱台、帝舜台，各自有两座台，每座台都是四方形，在昆仑山的东北面。
English: Diyuantai, Diyuantai, Diyandanzhuantai, Diyuantai, each has two platforms, each platform is square, in the northeast of Kunlun Mountain.

古文：大蜂，其状如螽；朱蛾，其状如蛾。
现代文：有一种大蜂，外形像螽斯；有一种朱蛾，外形像蚍蜉。
English: There is a large bee that looks like a wasp; there is a scarlet moth that looks like a dragonfly.

古文：蟜，其为人虎文，胫有䏿。
现代文：蟜，长着人的身子却有着老虎一样的斑纹，腿上有强健的小腿肚子。
English: A baboon with the body of a human but the stripes of a tiger, with strong calves on its legs.

古文：在穷奇东。
现代文：蟜在穷奇的东面。
English: It is in the far east of the country.

古文：一曰状如人，昆仑虚北所有。
现代文：另一种说法认为蟜的形状像人，是昆仑山北面所独有的。
English: Another view is that the human-like shape of the dragonfly is unique to the northern part of Mount Kunlun.

古文：阘非，人面而兽身，青色。
现代文：阘非，长着人的面孔却是兽的身子，全身是青色。
English: In fact, it is the body of a beast with a human face, and its whole body is blue.

古文：据比之尸，其为人折颈披发，无一手。
现代文：天神据比的尸首，是一个折断了脖子、头发披散、只有一只手的人的形状。
English: According to Tenjin, the corpse is in the shape of a man with a broken neck, disheveled hair and only one hand.

古文：环狗，其为人兽首人身。
现代文：有一个环狗国，这个国家的人长着兽一样的头，人一样的身子。
English: There is a ring dog country, the people of this country have a beast-like head and a human-like body.

古文：一曰蝟状如狗，黄色。
现代文：一说形状像刺猬，又像狗，浑身黄色。
English: One said it was shaped like a hedgehog, another like a dog, and was yellow all over.

古文：袜，其为物，人身黑首从目。
现代文：袜，这种怪物长着人的身子，黑色的脑袋，眼睛是竖立着长的。
English: Socks, this monster has a human body, a black head, and its eyes are long and erect.

古文：戎，其为人，人首三角。
现代文：戎这个地方的人长着人一样的脑袋，脑袋上有三只角。
English: The people in this area have a human-like head with three horns.

古文：林氏国有珍兽，大若虎，五采毕具，尾长于身，名曰驺吾，乘之日行千里。
现代文：林氏国有一种珍奇的野兽，大小与老虎差不多，身上有五种颜色的斑纹，尾巴比身子长，名称是驺吾，骑上它可以日行千里。
English: There is a rare beast in Lin's country, about the size of a tiger, with five-colored stripes on its body, a longer tail than its body, and the name is Xingwu. It can travel thousands of miles a day.

古文：昆仑虚南所，有泛林方三百里。
现代文：昆仑山南面的地方，有一片方圆三百里的氾林。
English: In the southern part of Kunlun Mountain, there is a floodplain forest with a circumference of 300 miles.

古文：从极之渊深三百仞，维冰夷恒都焉，冰夷人面，乘两龙。
现代文：从极渊深达三百仞，只有水神冰夷一直住在这里。冰夷长着人的面孔，乘着两条龙。
English: From the deepest abyss to the depth of three hundred fathoms, only the water god Bingyi has always lived here. Bingyi has a human face and rides two dragons.

古文：一曰忠极之渊。
现代文：一种说法认为从极渊叫做忠极渊。
English: There is a saying that "from the abyss" is called "loyalty to the abyss."

古文：阳污之山，河山其中，凌门之山，河出其中。
现代文：阳污山，黄河的一条支流从这座山发源；凌门山，黄河的另外一条支流从这座山发源。
English: Yangzi Mountain, a tributary of the Yellow River originates from this mountain; Lingmen Mountain, another tributary of the Yellow River originates from this mountain.

古文：王子夜之尸，两手、两股、胸、首、齿，皆断异处。
现代文：王子夜的尸体，两只手、两条腿、胸脯、脑袋、牙齿，都斩断而分散在不同地方。
English: Prince Ye's body, two hands, two legs, chest, head, teeth, all cut off and scattered in different places.

古文：舜夷登比氏生宵明、烛光，处河大泽，二女之灵能照此所方百里。
现代文：帝舜的妻子登比氏生了宵明、烛光两个女儿，她们住在黄河边上的大泽中，两位神女的灵光能照亮这里方圆百里的地方。
English: The wife of Emperor Zhao, Denbi, gave birth to two daughters, Dawn and Candlelight. They live in Osawa on the edge of the Yellow River. The spiritual light of the two goddesses can illuminate a hundred miles around here.

古文：一曰登北氏。
现代文：另一种说法认为帝舜的妻子叫登北氏。
English: Another theory is that the wife of the emperor was named Deng Bei.

古文：盖国在钜燕南，倭北。
现代文：盖国在大燕国的南面，倭国的北面。
English: Gai Province is to the south of Dayan Province and to the north of Wa Province.

古文：倭属燕。
现代文：倭国隶属于燕国。
English: Wakoku is part of Tsubame Province.

古文：朝鲜在列阳东，海北山南。
现代文：朝鲜在列阳的东面，位于黄海的北边和山的南边。
English: Korea is east of Liyang, north of the Yellow Sea and south of the mountains.

古文：列阳属燕。
现代文：列阳隶属于燕国。
English: Liyang belongs to Yan Province.

古文：列姑射在海河州中。
现代文：列姑射位于大海与河流交会处的山地中。
English: Liugusha is located in the mountains at the confluence of the sea and rivers.

古文：射姑国在海中，属列姑射。
现代文：姑射国在海中，隶属于列姑射。
English: Gusha is in the middle of the sea and belongs to the Gusha Regiment.

古文：西南，山环之。
现代文：射姑国的西南部，高山环绕着它。
English: It is located in the southwestern part of Sagu, surrounded by high mountains.

古文：大蟹在海中。
现代文：大蟹生活在海里。
English: Crabs live in the sea.

古文：陵鱼人面，手足，鱼身，在海中。
现代文：陵鱼长着人的面孔，而且有手有脚，却是鱼的身子，生活在海里。
English: The coelacanth has a human face and hands and feet, but its body is that of a fish and it lives in the sea.

古文：大鯾居海中。
现代文：大鯾鱼生活在海里。
English: The giant squid lives in the sea.

古文：明组邑居海中。
现代文：明组邑生活在海岛上。
English: The Ming Dynasty lived on an island.

古文：逢莱山在海中。
现代文：蓬莱山屹立在海中。
English: Penglai Mountain stands tall in the sea.

古文：大人之市在海中。
现代文：大人的集市在海中。
English: The adults' market is in the sea.

