古文：五味所入：酸入肝，辛入肺，苦入心，咸入肾，甘入脾。
现代文：五味与五脏的吸收关系：酸味入肝脏，辛味入肺脏，苦味入心脏，咸味入肾脏，甘味入脾脏。
English: The absorption relationship between the five tastes and the five viscera is as follows: sour tastes enter the liver, pungent tastes enter the lungs, bitter tastes enter the heart, salty tastes enter the kidneys, and sweet tastes enter the spleen.

古文：是谓五入。五气所病：心为噫。
现代文：这就是所说的五味与五脏的吸收关系。
English: This is the so-called absorption relationship between the five tastes and the five organs.

古文：肺为咳。肝为语。
现代文：五脏之气失调后所引起的病变关系：心气失调则唉声叹气。
English: The relationship between the pathological changes caused by the dysregulation of the qi of the five internal organs: the dysregulation of the qi of the heart is a sigh.

古文：脾为吞。
现代文：肺气失调则咳嗽。
English: Lung dysregulation leads to coughing.

古文：肾为欠、为嚏。
现代文：肝气失调则表现在言语上，或说个不停，或沉默寡言。
English: Liver qi imbalance is manifested in speech, either talking non-stop, or being taciturn.

古文：胃为气逆、为哕、为恐。
现代文：脾气失调则反酸水。肾气失调则打呵欠、喷嚏。胃气失调则为气上逆，或干呕，或有恐惧感。
English: Temper dysregulation is acid reflux. Kidney dysregulation is yawning, sneezing. Gastric dysregulation is gas inversion, or retching, or a sense of fear.

古文：大肠、小肠为泄。
现代文：大肠、小肠病则不能泌别清浊，传送糟粕，而为泄泻。
English: Large intestine and small intestine diseases cannot secrete purine and transmit waste, but are diarrhea.

古文：下焦溢为水。
现代文：下焦不能通调水道，则水液泛溢于皮肤而为水肿。
English: If the lower focus cannot pass through the water channel, the water will overflow onto the skin and cause edema.

古文：膀胱不利为癃，不约为遗溺。
现代文：膀胱之气，化不利则为癃闭；不能约制则为遗尿。
English: Bladder gas, if it cannot be controlled, it is incontinence; if it cannot be controlled, it is urinary retention.

古文：胆为怒。
现代文：胆气失调则易发怒。
English: Those with dysregulation of the gallbladder are prone to anger.

古文：是谓五病。
现代文：这就是所说的五脏之气失调而发生的病变。
English: This is the so-called disease caused by the imbalance of the five internal organs.

古文：五精所并：精气并于心则喜，并于肺则悲，并于肝则忧，并于脾则畏，并于肾则恐，是谓五并。
现代文：五脏的精气合并所发生的疾病：精气汇聚于心脏则嘻笑无常，精气汇聚于肺脏则悲伤，精气汇聚于肝脏则忧愁、抑郁，精气汇聚于脾脏则畏惧，精气汇聚于肾脏则惊恐。
English: Diseases caused by the combination of the essence of the five internal organs: the essence gathered in the heart is laughter, the essence gathered in the lungs is sadness, the essence gathered in the liver is sadness, depression, the essence gathered in the spleen is fear, and the essence gathered in the kidney is panic.

古文：虚而相并者也。五脏所恶：心恶热，肺恶寒，肝恶风，脾恶湿，肾恶燥。
现代文：这就是所说的五并，都是由于本脏虚弱而使邪气相乘、相侮导致了病变。五脏的厌恶：心厌恶热，肺厌恶寒，肝厌恶风，脾厌恶湿，肾厌恶燥。
English: This is the so-called five combinations, all of which are due to the weakness of the innate organs, causing the evil spirits to multiply and the mutual contempt to lead to the disease.The five viscera's disgust: the heart abhors heat, the lungs abhor cold, the liver abhors wind, the spleen abhors wetness, and the kidneys abhor dryness.

古文：是谓五恶。
现代文：这就是所说的五脏所厌恶的五恶。
English: This is the so-called five evils that are detested by the five viscera.

古文：五脏化液：心为汗，肺为涕，肝为泪，脾为涎，肾为唾。
现代文：五脏化生的液体：心之液化为汗液，肺之液化为鼻涕，肝之液化为眼泪，脾之液化为涎水，肾之液化为唾液。
English: Liquids from the five viscera: the heart liquefies into sweat, the lungs liquefy into snot, the liver liquefies into tears, the spleen liquefies into saliva, and the kidneys liquefy into saliva.

古文：是谓五液。
现代文：这就是所说的五脏化生的五液。
English: This is what is referred to as the transformation of the five viscera into the five liquids.

古文：五味所禁：辛走气，气病无多食辛。咸走血，血病无多食咸。苦走骨，骨病无多食苦。甘走肉，肉病无多食甘。酸走筋，筋病无多食酸。
现代文：五味的禁忌：辛味走气，气病不可多食辛辣味；咸味走血，血病不可多食咸味；苦味走骨，骨病不可多食苦味；甘味走肉，肉病不可多食甘甜味；酸味走筋，筋膜有病不可多食酸味。
English: Taboos of the five tastes: pungent tastes go with qi, and one should not eat too much spicy taste when suffering from qi; salty tastes go with blood, and one should not eat too much salty taste when suffering from blood disease; bitter tastes go with bones, and one should not eat too much bitter taste when suffering from bone disease; sweet tastes go with meat, and one should not eat too much sweet taste when suffering from meat disease; sour tastes go with sinew, and one should not eat too much sour taste when suffering from fascia disease.

古文：是谓五禁，无令多食。
现代文：这就是所说的五脏各有相应的五味禁忌，不可使之多食。
English: This means that each of the five viscera has a corresponding five-flavor taboo, and it should not be allowed to eat too much.

古文：五病所发：阴病发于骨，阳病发于血，阴病发于肉，阳病发于冬，阴病发于夏。
现代文：五病所生：阴病发生于骨，阳病发生于血，阴病发生于肉，阳病发生于冬天，阴病发生于夏天。
English: Born of five diseases: Yin disease occurs in bone, yang disease occurs in blood, yin disease occurs in flesh, yang disease occurs in winter, and yin disease occurs in summer.

古文：是谓五发。五邪所乱：邪入于阳则狂，邪入于阴则痹，搏阳则为巅疾，搏阴则为瘖，阳入之阴则静，阴出之阳则怒。
现代文：这就是所说的阴病、阳病有五种发生的部位或时间。五邪所乱：邪气侵入于阳，则躁狂不宁；邪气侵入于阴，则肢体疼痛麻痹；邪气搏于阳，则阳气受伤，而发生头部疾病；邪气搏于阴，则阴气受伤，而发生失声；邪气由阳而入于阴，则从阴而为静、低沉；邪气由阴而出于阳，则从阳而为多躁好怒。
English: This is the so-called yin and yang diseases, which have five kinds of places or times of occurrence. The five evil things are chaotic: the evil spirit invades the yang, then mania and restlessness; the evil spirit invades the yin, then limb pain and paralysis; the evil spirit beats the yang, the yang is injured, and head disease occurs; the evil spirit beats the yin, the yin is injured, and loss of voice occurs; the evil spirit enters the yang from the yang, and from the yang it is quiet and muffled; the evil spirit leaves the yang from the yin, and from the yang it is irritable and angry.

古文：是谓五乱。五邪所见：春得秋脉，夏得冬脉，长夏得春脉，秋得夏脉，冬得长夏脉，名曰阴出之阳，病善怒，不治。
现代文：这就是所说的邪气侵入人体会导致五种不同的病理乱象。五种邪气所表现的脉象：春天见到秋天的毛脉；夏天见到冬天的石脉；长夏见到春天的弦脉；秋天见到夏天的洪脉；冬天见到长夏的濡缓脉。这就是所说的五邪脉。
English: This means that the so-called evil spirits invading the human body will lead to five different pathological disorders. The five evil spirits are represented by five veins: the spring sees the autumn hair vein; the summer sees the winter stone vein; the long summer sees the spring string vein; the autumn sees the summer flood vein; and the winter sees the long summer wet slow vein. This is the so-called five evil spirits.

古文：是谓五邪，皆同命，死不治。
现代文：五邪脉的预后相同，都属于不治的死证。
English: The prognosis of the five evil veins is the same, all of which are incurable death certificates.

古文：五脏所藏：心藏神，肺藏魄，肝藏魂，脾藏意，肾藏志。
现代文：五脏所藏：心藏神，肺藏魄，肝藏魂，脾藏意，肾藏志。
English: The five viscera contain: the heart contains God, the lungs contain the soul, the liver contains the spirit, the spleen contains the will, and the kidneys contain the mind.

古文：是谓五脏所藏。
现代文：这就是所说的五神脏所藏的神志。
English: This is the so-called Five Sacred Sins.

古文：五脏所主：心主脉，肺主皮，肝主筋，脾主肉，肾主骨。
现代文：五脏所主：心主脉，肺主皮，肝主筋，脾主肉，肾主骨。
English: The five viscera are: the main artery of the heart, the main skin of the lungs, the main muscle of the liver, the main meat of the spleen, and the main bone of the kidney.

古文：是谓五主。
现代文：这就是所说的五脏所主的部位。
English: This is the part of the body that is said to be dominated by the five internal organs.

古文：五劳所伤：久视伤血，久卧伤气，久坐伤肉，久立伤骨，久行伤筋。
现代文：五种过度的疲劳可以伤耗五脏的精气：久视则劳于精气而伤血，久卧则阳气不伸而伤气，久坐则血脉灌输不畅而伤肌肉，久立则劳于肾及腰、膝、胫等而伤骨，久行则劳于筋脉而伤筋。
English: Five kinds of excessive fatigue can deplete the essence of the five organs: long-sightedness is to work on the essence and hurt the blood, long-lying is to hurt the yang and hurt the yang, long-sitting is to hurt the muscles due to poor blood circulation, long-standing is to work on the kidneys and waist, knees, hips, etc. and hurt the bones, and long-walking is to work on the sinews and hurt the sinews.

古文：是谓五劳所伤。
现代文：这就是所说的五种过度的疲劳伤耗的五脏精气。
English: This is the essence of the five kinds of excessive fatigue.

古文：五脉应象：肝脉弦，心脉钩，脾脉代，肺脉毛，肾脉石。
现代文：五脏应四时的脉象：肝脉应春，端直而长，其脉象弦；心脉应夏，来盛去衰，其脉象钩；脾脉旺于长夏，其脉弱，其脉为代；肺脉应秋，轻虚而浮，其脉象毛；肾脉应冬，其脉象沉坚似石。
English: The five viscera should have the pulse of the four seasons: the liver pulse should be spring, straight and long, and its pulse should be like a string; the heart pulse should be summer, rise and fall, and its pulse should be like a hook; the spleen pulse should be strong in the summer, and its pulse should be weak, and its pulse should be a generation; the lung pulse should be autumn, light and floating, and its pulse should be like wool; the kidney pulse should be winter, and its pulse should be like a stone.

古文：是谓五脏之脉。
现代文：这就是所谓的应于四时的五脏平脉。
English: This is the so-called four o'clock rhythm of the internal organs.

