古文：卫康叔名封，周武王同母少弟也。其次尚有冉季，冉季最少。
现代文：卫国康叔名封，是周武王的同母弟，他们还有一个名冉季的弟弟，年龄最小。
English: Uncle Wei Guo Kang was Zhou Wu's younger brother by the same mother. They also had a younger brother named Ran Ji, who was the youngest.

古文：武王已克殷纣，复以殷余民封纣子武庚禄父，比诸侯，以奉其先祀勿绝。
现代文：周武王打败殷纣后，又把殷纣的遗民封给纣王的儿子武庚禄父，让他与诸侯同位，以便使其得以奉祀先祖，世代相传。
English: After King Zhou Wu defeated Yin Qi, he also gave the remnants of Yin Qi's people to the son of the king of Qi, Wu Genglu, so that he could be on the same level as the princes, so that they could worship their ancestors and be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：为武庚未集，恐其有贼心，武王乃令其弟管叔、蔡叔傅相武庚禄父，以和其民。
现代文：因武庚还未完全顺从，武王担心武庚有叛逆之心，便派自己的弟弟管叔、蔡叔监视并辅佐武庚禄父，用以安抚百姓。
English: Because Wu Geng was not yet completely obedient, King Wu was worried that Wu Geng had a rebellious heart, so he sent his younger brothers, Guan Uncle and Cai Uncle, to monitor and assist Wu Genglu's father in order to appease the people.

古文：武王既崩，成王少。
现代文：武王逝世后，成王年幼，尚在襁褓之中。
English: After the death of King Wu, King Chengwang was young and still in his infancy.

古文：周公旦代成王治，当国。
现代文：周公旦便代替成王主掌国事。
English: Zhou Gongdan then took the reins of state affairs in place of Prince Cheng.

古文：管叔、蔡叔疑周公，乃与武庚禄父作乱，欲攻成周。
现代文：管叔、蔡叔怀疑周公旦，就与武庚禄父发动叛乱，要攻打成周。
English: Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu suspected Zhou Gongdan, so they launched a rebellion with Wu Genglu's father to attack Cheng Zhou.

古文：周公旦以成王命兴师伐殷，杀武庚禄父、管叔，放蔡叔，以武庚殷余民封康叔为卫君，居河、淇间故商墟。
现代文：周公旦托成王之命组织军队讨伐殷国，杀死武庚禄父和管叔，放逐了蔡叔，并把武庚殷的遗民封给康叔，立他为卫国君主，居住在黄河、淇水之间，即商朝的旧都殷墟。
English: Zhou Gongdan ordered King Cheng to organize an army to invade Yin Province, kill Wu Genglu's father and uncle, banish Cai Shu, and assign the remnants of Wu Gengyin to Uncle Kang, appointing him as the monarch of the homeland, living between the Yellow River and the Qishui River, that is, the old capital of the Shang Dynasty, Yin Ruins.

古文：周公旦惧康叔齿少，乃申告康叔曰： 必求殷之贤人君子长者，问其先殷所以兴，所以亡，而务爱民。 
现代文：周公旦担忧康叔年轻，难以维持统治，于是反复告诫康叔： 你一定找到殷朝有才德、有威望、有经验的人，向他们了解殷朝兴衰成败的历史，并务必关心爱护自己的百姓。 
English: Zhou Gongdan worried that Uncle Kang was young and it was difficult to maintain his rule, so he repeatedly warned Uncle Kang: You must find people with talent, prestige and experience in the Yin Dynasty, learn from them the history of the rise and fall of the Yin Dynasty, and be sure to care about and love your own people.

古文：告以纣所以亡者以淫于酒，酒之失，妇人是用，故纣之乱自此始。
现代文：又告诫康叔纣灭亡的原因在于他饮酒无度，一味作乐，沉溺于女色之中，所以纣王时的混乱正从这里开始。
English: He also cautioned that the reason for the demise of Kang Xiuqi was that he drank excessively, made music all the time, and indulged in womanizing, so the chaos at the time of King Gong started from here.

古文：为《梓材》，示君子可法则。
现代文：周公旦还按照匠人制作木器必用规矩的道理，撰写了《梓材》，作为治国者用以效法的准则。
English: Zhou Gongdan also wrote "Zi Zi" in accordance with the principle that craftsmen must follow the rules for making wooden utensils, as a guideline for state leaders to follow.

古文：故谓之《康诰》《酒诰》《梓材》以命之。
现代文：所以称之为《康诰》、《酒诰》、《梓材》，并以之教导康叔。
English: Therefore, he called it "Kangyu," "Jiuyu" and "Zi Zai," and taught Kangshu to sing with it.

古文：康叔之国，既以此命，能和集其民，民大说。
现代文：康叔使用这些准则治理封国，安定敦睦他的人民，人民非常高兴。
English: Uncle Kang used these principles to govern the country and keep his people stable and tranquil. The people were very happy.

古文：成王长，用事，举康叔为周司寇，赐卫宝祭器，以章有德。
现代文：成王成人后，亲自主掌政权，任命康叔为周朝的司寇，把许多宝器祭器赐给他，用以表彰康叔的德行。
English: After Cheng Wang became an adult, he personally took control of the government, appointed Uncle Kang to be the governor of the Zhou Dynasty, and gave him many treasures and sacrificial objects to commend Uncle Kang's virtue.

古文：康叔卒，子康伯代立。
现代文：康叔逝世后，儿子康伯立为国君。
English: After the death of Uncle Kang, his son, Kang Bo-li, became the sovereign.

古文：康伯卒，子考伯立。
现代文：康伯逝世后，儿子考伯立为国君。
English: After the death of Khampol, his son Khampol became the ruler of the country.

古文：考伯卒，子嗣伯立。
现代文：考伯逝世后，儿子嗣伯立为国君。
English: After Cawber's death, his son, Cawber, became king.

古文：嗣伯卒，子伯立。
现代文：嗣伯逝世后，儿子伯立为国君。
English: After the death of his heir, his son Boryeong became the king.

古文：伯卒，子靖伯立。
现代文：伯逝世后，儿子靖伯立为国君。
English: After his death, his son, Jing Bolei, became the king.

古文：靖伯卒，子贞伯立。
现代文：靖伯逝世后，儿子贞伯立为国君。
English: After the death of Jing Bo, his son Zhen Bo Li became the sovereign.

古文：贞伯卒，子顷侯立。
现代文：贞伯逝世后，儿子顷侯立为国君。
English: After the death of Zheng Bo, his son, He Hou, became the sovereign.

古文：顷侯厚赂周夷王，夷王命卫为侯。
现代文：因顷侯用厚礼贿赂周夷王，夷王便又命卫国君称侯爵。
English: Because of this, the Marquis bribed King Zhou Yi with a large gift, and the King of Yi then ordered Emperor Wei to be made a marquis.

古文：顷侯立十二年卒，子厘侯立。
现代文：顷侯在立为国君十二年时逝世，儿子釐侯立为国君。
English: He died when he was 12 years old, and his son, Shun Hou, became the king.

古文：厘侯十三年，周厉王出奔于彘，共和行政焉。
现代文：釐侯十三年，周厉王逃亡到彘地，由召公、周公共同掌管政权，号为 共和 行政。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Zhou Hou, King Zhou Li fled to Shantian. Zhao Gong and Zhou Gong jointly controlled the political power and called themselves "Republic Administration."

古文：二十八年，周宣王立。
现代文：釐侯二十八年，周宣王立为天子。
English: In the 28th year of his reign, King Zhou Xuan was enthroned as the Son of Heaven.

古文：四十二年，厘侯卒，太子共伯余立为君。
现代文：四十二年，釐侯逝世，太子共伯余立为国君。
English: Forty-two years later, the prince died, and the crown prince and his uncle Yu became the sovereign.

古文：共伯弟和有宠于厘侯，多予之赂；和以其赂赂士，以袭攻共伯于墓上，共伯入厘侯羡自杀。
现代文：共伯之弟和曾被釐侯宠爱，釐侯给了和很多财物，和便用这些财物收买武士，在釐侯的墓地袭击共伯余，共伯被迫逃到釐侯墓道自杀。
English: Kyohei's younger brother, Kazuchika, was once favored by the vassal lord. The vassal lord gave Kazuchika a lot of wealth, and Kazuchika used this wealth to bribe a samurai to attack Kyohei in the vassal lord's graveyard. Kyohei was forced to flee to the vassal lord's graveyard and commit suicide.

古文：卫人因葬之厘侯旁，谥曰共伯，而立和为卫侯，是为武公。
现代文：卫人把共伯埋葬在釐侯墓旁，称之为共伯，立和为卫国国君，这就是武公。
English: The guards buried Comrade Comrade next to the tomb of Yan Hou, calling him Comrade Comrade, and establishing him as the prince of the guarding country, which is Wu Gong.

古文：武公即位，修康叔之政，百姓和集。
现代文：武公即位后，重新整饬康叔的政务，百姓和乐安定。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he reorganized the government affairs of Uncle Kang, and the people were happy and stable.

古文：四十二年，犬戎杀周幽王，武公将兵往佐周平戎，甚有功，周平王命武公为公。
现代文：四十二年，犬戎杀死周幽王，武公亲自指挥部将辅佐周天子平定犬戎的侵袭，建立了战功，周平王命武公称公。
English: In forty-two years, Injun Rong killed King Zhou Yu, and King Wu personally assisted Zhou Tianzi to suppress Injun Rong's invasion, establishing a war record. King Zhou Ping publicly praised Injun Rong.

古文：五十五年，卒，子庄公扬立。
现代文：五十五年，武公逝世，儿子庄公扬立为国君。
English: Fifty-five years later, King Wu passed away, and his son King Zhuang ascended to the throne.

古文：庄公五年，取齐女为夫人，好而无子。
现代文：庄公即位第五年，娶齐国女为夫人，齐女貌美但无子。
English: In the fifth year of his reign, Zhuang Gong married a woman from Qi, who was beautiful but had no children.

古文：又取陈女为夫人，生子，蚤死。
现代文：庄公便又娶陈国女为夫人，陈女生了个儿子，夭折了。
English: Zhuang Gong then married Chen Guojun as his wife, and Chen Guojun had a son, who died young.

古文：陈女女弟亦幸于庄公，而生子完。
现代文：陈女的妹妹亦被庄公宠幸，生了个儿子取名完。
English: Chen Niang's younger sister was also favored by Zhuang Gong and gave birth to a son.

古文：完母死，庄公令夫人齐女子之，立为太子。
现代文：完的母亲去世后，庄公让夫人齐女抚养完，并立完为太子。
English: After the death of his mother, Zhuang Gong let his wife Qi raise his daughter and made him crown prince.

古文：庄公有宠妾，生子州吁。
现代文：庄公还有个宠妾，生了个儿子名州吁。
English: Zhuang Gong also had a favorite concubine, who gave birth to a son, Meishu Xu.

古文：十八年，州吁长，好兵，庄公使将。
现代文：庄公十八年，州吁长大成人，喜好军事，庄公便派他做军队的将领。
English: In the eighteenth year of Zhuang Gong, Zhou Hau grew up and became an adult. He liked the military, and Zhuang Gong sent him to be the general of the army.

古文：石碏谏庄公曰： 庶子好兵，使将，乱自此起。 
现代文：卫国的上卿石碏好心进谏庄公说： 妾生的儿子喜好军事，您便让他做将领，祸乱将从此兴起。 
English: The high-ranking lord of the defense, Shi Yan, said to the benevolent ruler of Shanzhuang, "My concubine's son likes the military, so you made him a general. This is how the calamity will arise."

古文：不听。二十三年，庄公卒，太子完立，是为桓公。
现代文：庄公不听，二十三年，庄公逝世，太子完立为国君，这就是桓公。
English: Zhuang Gong did not listen, and in 23 years, Zhuang Gong passed away, and the crown prince became the sovereign. This is called Huan Gong.

古文：桓公二年，弟州吁骄奢，桓公绌之，州吁出奔。
现代文：桓公二年，弟州吁骄奢淫逸，桓公罢黜了他，州吁逃到国外。
English: In the second year of King Kan, his younger brother, Shuzhou Xu, was arrogant, extravagant and lewd. King Kan dismissed him, and Shuzhou Xu fled abroad.

古文：十三年，郑伯弟段攻其兄，不胜，亡，而州吁求与之友。
现代文：十三年，郑伯之弟段攻击哥哥，未能取胜，也逃走，州吁请求与他结为友好。
English: In the thirteenth year, Zheng Bo's younger brother Duan attacked his older brother, failed to win, and also fled. Zhou Xu requested to be friends with him.

古文：十六年，州吁收聚卫亡人以袭杀桓公，州吁自立为卫君。
现代文：十六年，州吁聚集卫国逃亡的人袭击并杀死桓公，州吁自己立为卫国国君。
English: In the 16th year of the Joseon Dynasty, a group of fugitives from the Joseon Dynasty attacked and killed King Huan, and Joseon established himself as the King of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：为郑伯弟段欲伐郑，请宋、陈、蔡与俱，三国皆许州吁。
现代文：因郑伯之弟段要讨伐郑国，州吁请求宋、陈、蔡共同支持段，三国都答应了这一请求。
English: Because Zheng Bo's younger brother Duan wanted to attack Zheng Guo, Zhou Xu requested that Song, Chen, and Cai jointly support Duan, and all three countries agreed to this request.

古文：州吁新立，好兵，弑桓公，卫人皆不爱。
现代文：州吁刚刚即位，因喜好军事、杀死桓公，卫人都厌恶他。
English: Zhouzhou Xu had just ascended the throne, but the guards hated him because of his fondness for the military and his killing of Emperor Huan.

古文：石碏乃因桓公母家于陈，详为善州吁。至郑郊，石碏与陈侯共谋，使右宰丑进食，因杀州吁于濮，而迎桓公弟晋于邢而立之，是为宣公。
现代文：石碏因桓公母亲家在陈国，佯装与州吁友善，卫国军队行至郑国国都的郊野，石碏与陈侯共谋计策，派右宰丑向州吁进献食品，借机在濮击杀州吁，而从邢地把桓公弟晋迎回卫国立为国君，这就是宣公。
English: Because Huan Gong's mother's home was in Chen Province, Shi Yan pretended to be friendly with Shuzhou Xu, and the National Guard troops went to the countryside of the capital city of Zheng Province. Shi Yan and Chen Hou worked together to devise a strategy, sent Yu Zai Ugly to present food to Shuzhou Xu, took the opportunity to kill Shuzhou Xu in Shuzhou, and promoted Huan Gong's younger brother back to Shuzhou Xu as the king of the country from Shuzhou. This is the proclamation.

古文：宣公七年，鲁弑其君隐公。
现代文：宣公七年，鲁人杀害了自己的国君隐公。
English: Seven years after the proclamation, the people of Lu killed their own sovereign, King Inko.

古文：九年，宋督弑其君殇公，及孔父。
现代文：九年，宋督杀死自己的国君殇公和大夫孔父。
English: In the ninth year of the Song Dynasty, Song Gu killed his own country's ruler, Zeng Gong, and his doctor, Kong Fu.

古文：十年，晋曲沃庄伯弑其君哀侯。
现代文：十年，晋国曲沃庄伯也杀死了自己的国君哀侯。
English: Ten years later, Quwo Zhuangbo of Jin also killed his own sovereign, Ma Hou.

古文：十八年，初，宣公爱夫人夷姜，夷姜生子伋í，以为太子，而令右公子傅之。
现代文：十八年，当初，宣公所宠爱的夫人夷姜生了儿子取名伋，伋被立为太子。宣公派右公子教导他。
English: At the beginning of the 18th year, Rong Yijang, the favorite wife of Xuan Guo, gave birth to a son named Yao, and Yao was appointed as the crown prince. Xuan Guo sent Yu Gongzi to teach him.

古文：右公子为太子取齐女，未入室，而宣公见所欲为太子妇者好，说而自取之，更为太子取他女。
现代文：右公子为太子娶齐国美女，美女还未与伋拜堂成婚，被宣公所见，宣公见齐国女长得漂亮，很喜欢，就自娶此女，而为太子另娶了其他女子。
English: The prince on the right married a beautiful woman from Qi for the prince, the beautiful woman had not yet been married to Zhai Baidang, and was seen by the proclamation, the proclamation saw that the woman from Qi was beautiful and liked her very much, so he married this woman, and married another woman for the prince.

古文：宣公得齐女，生子寿、子朔，令左公子傅之。
现代文：宣公得到齐女后，齐女生了儿子子寿、子朔，宣公派左公子教导他们。
English: After Xuan Guo got Qi Niang, Qi Niang Niang had sons Zishou and Zishuo. Xuan Guo sent Zuo Niang to teach them.

古文：太子伋母死，宣公正夫人与朔共谗恶太子伋。
现代文：太子伋母亲去世后，宣公正夫人与子朔共同在宣公面前中伤诬陷太子伋。
English: After the death of Prince Xuan's mother, Mrs. Xuan and Zishuo jointly slandered and framed Prince Xuan in front of Xuan.

古文：宣公自以其夺太子妻也，心恶太子，欲废之。
现代文：宣公原本就因自己抢夺太子之妻而讨厌太子，早想把他废掉。
English: Originally, Xuan Gong hated the prince because he robbed the prince's wife, and wanted to abolish him.

古文：及闻其恶，大怒，乃使太子伋于齐而令盗遮界上杀之。
现代文：等到听说太子的坏话后，怒气冲天，就派太子伋出使齐国，并暗中命令大盗在边境线上拦截击杀伋。
English: When he heard the prince's bad words, he was furious. He sent the prince to send an envoy to Qi, and secretly ordered the bandits to intercept and kill the mule on the border line.

古文：与太子白旄，而告界盗见持白旄者杀之。
现代文：宣公给太子白旄使节，告诫边境线上的大盗一见手持白旄使节的人就把他杀掉。
English: He made a proclamation to the white-bearded envoy of the prince and warned the bandits on the border to kill the white-bearded envoy at sight.

古文：且行，子朔之兄寿，太子异母弟也，知朔之恶太子而君欲杀之，乃谓太子曰： 界盗见太子白旄，即杀太子，太子可毋行。 
现代文：太子伋将要启程前往齐国，子朔的哥哥子寿，即太子的异母弟，深知子朔憎恨太子与君王欲除掉太子之事，就对太子说： 边界上的大盗只要见到太子你手持白旄使节，就会杀死你，太子千万不要去！ 
English: Prince Yao was about to leave for Qi. Zisaku's older brother Zizou, the prince's half-brother, knew that Zisaku hated the prince and that the king wanted to get rid of the prince, so he said to the prince: "If the great robber on the border sees the prince with the egret envoy in his hand, he will kill you. The prince must not go!"

古文：太子曰： 逆父命求生，不可。 
现代文：太子说： 违背父辈之命保全自己，这绝对不行。 
English: The prince said: "It is absolutely impossible to go against the orders of our fathers and preserve ourselves.

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是毫不犹豫地前往齐国。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：寿见太子不止，乃盗其白旄而先驰至界。
现代文：子寿见太子不听劝告，只好偷取他的白旄使节先于太子驾车赶到边界。
English: Seeing that the prince did not listen to the advice, Zi Shou had no choice but to steal his egret envoy and drive to the border ahead of the prince.

古文：界盗见其验，即杀之。
现代文：大盗见事先的约定应验了，就杀死了他。
English: The bandit killed him when he saw that the previous agreement had been fulfilled.

古文：寿已死，而太子伋又至，谓盗曰： 所当杀乃我也。 
现代文：子寿被杀后，太子伋又赶到，对大盗说： 应当杀死的是我呀！ 
English: After his son was killed, the crown prince arrived again and said to the robber: "I'm the one who should be killed!"

古文：盗并杀太子伋，以报宣公。
现代文：大盗于是又杀死太子伋，回报了宣公。
English: The bandit then killed the crown prince and returned the proclamation.

古文：宣公乃以子朔为太子。
现代文：宣公就立子朔为太子。
English: The proclamation of his accession to the throne made him crown prince.

古文：十九年，宣公卒，太子朔立，是为惠公。
现代文：十九年，宣公逝世，太子朔立为国君，这就是惠公。
English: In the 19th year, Prince Xuan died and Prince Shuo was enthroned as the country's monarch. This was Prince Hui.

古文：左右公子不平朔之立也，惠公四年，左右公子怨惠公之谗杀前太子伋而代立，乃作乱，攻惠公，立太子伋之弟黔牟为君，惠公奔齐。
现代文：左右两公子对子朔立为国君愤愤不平。惠公四年，左右公子因怨恨惠公中伤并谋杀太子伋而自立之事，便发起动乱，攻打惠公，立太子伋的弟弟黔牟为国君，惠公逃奔到齐国。
English: In the fourth year of Prince Hui's reign, the two princes on his right and left, who resented the fact that Prince Hui had been slandered and murdered and had become independent, instigated a riot and attacked Prince Hui. Prince Hui's younger brother, Jimu, was installed as the sovereign, and Prince Hui fled to Qi.

古文：卫君黔牟立八年，齐襄公率诸侯奉王命共伐卫，纳卫惠公，诛左右公子。
现代文：卫君黔牟八年时，齐襄公受周天子之命率领各诸侯国共同讨伐卫国，送卫惠公回国，诛杀了左右公子。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wei's reign, Qixiang was ordered by Zhou Tianzi to lead all the states in a joint crusade to defend the country, send Emperor Wei back to China, and kill the right and left princes.

古文：卫君黔牟奔于周，惠公复立。
现代文：卫君黔牟逃奔到周，惠公又重登君位。
English: Emperor Wei fled to Zhou, and Empress Dowager Hui ascended the throne again.

古文：惠公立三年出亡，亡八年复入，与前通年凡十三年矣。
现代文：惠公在初立国君后三年逃亡，八年后又回归卫国，前后通共十三年。
English: Huigong fled three years after the founding of the country, and eight years later he returned to defend the country, a total of thirteen years.

古文：二十五年，惠公怨周之容舍黔牟，与燕伐周。
现代文：二十五年，惠公对周接纳安置黔牟心怀不满，与燕国共同伐周。
English: In the twenty-fifth year, Huigong was dissatisfied with Zhou's acceptance and resettlement of Yu Mu, and jointly cut Zhou with Yan Guo.

古文：周惠王奔温，卫、燕立惠王弟颓为王。
现代文：周惠王逃奔到温，卫、燕共立惠王弟为王。
English: Zhou Hui Wang fled to Wen, Wei and Yan jointly established Hui Wang's younger brother Zhou as king.

古文：二十九年，郑复纳惠王。
现代文：二十九年，郑国又护送惠王回周。
English: In 1929, Zheng Guo escorted Hui Wang back to Zhou.

古文：三十一年，惠公卒，子懿公赤立。
现代文：三十一年，卫惠公逝世，儿子懿公赤立为国君。
English: In the 31st year, Emperor Wei passed away, and his son Emperor Zeng became the sovereign.

古文：懿公即位，好鹤，淫乐奢侈。
现代文：懿公登位后，喜欢养鹤，挥霍淫乐。
English: After the enthronement of the Duke of Xing, he liked to raise cranes and indulge in debauchery.

古文：九年，翟伐卫，卫懿公欲发兵，兵或畔。
现代文：九年时，翟攻伐卫国，卫懿公率军抵御，有些士兵背叛了他。
English: When he was nine years old, he led an army to defend the country, and some soldiers betrayed him.

古文：大臣言曰： 君好鹤，鹤可令击翟。 
现代文：大臣们说： 君王喜好鹤，就派鹤去抗击翟人吧！ 
English: The ministers said: The king likes cranes, so let's send a crane to fight the crane!

古文：翟于是遂入，杀懿公。
现代文：于是，翟人侵入卫国，杀死懿公。
English: As a result, the Xiongnu invaded the homeland and killed the Xiongnu.

古文：懿公之立也，百姓大臣皆不服。
现代文：懿公立为国君，百姓大臣心都不服。
English: The public is the sovereign, and the people are not satisfied with the minister.

古文：自懿公父惠公朔之谗杀太子伋代立至于懿公，常欲败之，卒灭惠公之后而更立黔牟之弟昭伯顽之子申为君，是为戴公。
现代文：从懿公父亲惠公朔攻讦谋杀太子伋自立为国君到懿公，百姓、大臣常想推翻他们，最后，终于灭了惠公的后代而改立黔牟的弟弟昭伯顽的儿子申为国君，他就是卫戴公。
English: From Yu Gong's father Huigong Shuo attacking and murdering the crown prince and establishing himself as the sovereign to Yu Gong, the people and ministers often wanted to overthrow them. Finally, the descendants of Huigong were finally eliminated and the son of Yu Mu's brother Zhaobao, Shen, was installed as the sovereign. He was Wei Dai Gong.

古文：戴公申元年卒。
现代文：戴公申于其元年逝世。
English: Dai Gongshin passed away in the first year of his reign.

古文：齐桓公以卫数乱，乃率诸侯伐翟，为卫筑楚丘，立戴公弟燬为卫君，是为文公。
现代文：齐桓公因卫国多次动乱，便率领诸侯讨伐翟，替卫在楚丘修筑城堡，立戴公弟毁为卫国国君，他就是文公。
English: Due to the repeated turmoil in the defense of the country, Lord Qi Kuan led the lords to fight for the castle, built a castle for the guards in Chuqiu, and appointed Dai Gonglian as the prince of the defense of the country. He was Wengong.

古文：文公以乱故奔齐，齐人入之。
现代文：文公因卫动乱逃奔到齐国，齐人送他回国。
English: Wenguang fled to Qi Province due to the Wei Disturbance, and the Qi people sent him back home.

古文：初，翟杀懿公也，卫人怜之，思复立宣公前死太子伋之后，伋子又死，而代伋死者子寿又无子。
现代文：当初，翟人杀死懿公，卫人怜悯他，想再立被宣公谋害的太子伋的后代，但伋的儿子已去世，代替伋死的子寿又无子。
English: At first, the guards took pity on him and wanted to reinstate the descendants of the prince who had been publicly assassinated, but his son had died, and there was no son to replace him.

古文：太子伋同母弟二人：其一曰黔牟，黔牟尝代惠公为君，八年复去；其二曰昭伯。
现代文：太子伋有两个同母弟：一个叫黔牟，黔牟曾代替惠公做了八年国君，后又被惠公赶出卫国，另一个叫昭伯。
English: There are two younger brothers of the same mother: one is called Yimou, Yimou once replaced Huigong as the ruler of the country for eight years, and was later driven out of the country by Huigong, and the other is called Zhao Bo.

古文：昭伯、黔牟皆已前死，故立昭伯子申为戴公。戴公卒，复立其弟燬为文公。
现代文：昭伯、黔牟都早已去世，所以卫人又立了昭伯的儿子申为戴公，戴公逝世后，卫人又立他的弟弟毁为文公。
English: Zhao Bo and Qimou had both died long ago, so the guards appointed Zhao Bo's son, Shen, as Dai Gong. After Dai Gong's death, the guards appointed his brother, Ru, as Wen Gong.

古文：文公初立，轻赋平罪，身自劳，与百姓同苦，以收卫民。
现代文：文公即位伊始，就减轻百姓的赋税，明断犯人的罪行，劳心劳力，和百姓同甘共苦，以此以来赢得民心。
English: From the beginning of the reign of King Wen, he reduced the people's taxes, clearly judged the crimes of the criminals, worked hard, and shared the hardships with the people, thus winning the people's hearts.

古文：十六年，晋公子重耳过，无礼。
现代文：十六年，晋公子重耳路过卫国，文公没有礼遇重耳。
English: Sixteen years ago, Jin Gongzi passed through the defense of the country with heavy ears, and Wen Gong did not have the courtesy to treat him with heavy ears.

古文：十七年，齐桓公卒。
现代文：十七年，齐桓公逝世。
English: Seventeen years later, Prince Qi Kan passed away.

古文：二十五年，文公卒，子成公郑立。
现代文：二十五年时，文公逝世，儿子成公郑立为国君。
English: At the age of twenty-five, Wengong died, and his son Chenggong Zhengli became the sovereign.

古文：成公三年，晋欲假道于卫救宋，成公不许。
现代文：成公三年时，晋国为了救宋想向卫借路，成公不答应。
English: When Chengong was three years old, Jin wanted to borrow Wei's road to save Song, but Chengong did not agree.

古文：晋更从南河度，救宋。
现代文：晋便改道渡南河救宋。
English: Jin then changed his route and crossed the Nanhe River to save Song.

古文：征师于卫，卫大夫欲许，成公不肯。
现代文：晋国征兵于卫，卫大夫想同意，而成公却拒绝了。
English: Jin recruited soldiers from Wei, Wei wanted to agree, but Chenggong refused.

古文：大夫元咺攻成公，成公出奔。
现代文：大夫元咺攻打成公，成公逃到了楚国。
English: Doctor Geng Yao attacked Cheng Gong, and Cheng Gong fled to Chu.

古文：晋文公重耳伐卫，分其地予宋，讨前过无礼及不救宋患也。卫成公遂出奔陈。
现代文：晋文公重耳为了报以前路过卫国而文公无礼和卫不援救宋国之仇，讨伐了卫国，并把卫国一部分土地分送给宋国。卫成公不得不逃亡到陈。
English: In order to avenge the fact that Jin Wenguang and Wei did not come to the aid of Song, and that Jin Wenguang was rude and did not come to the aid of Song, Jin Wenguang fought against Song, and gave a part of the land of Wei to Song. Wei Chenggong had to flee to Chen.

古文：二岁，如周求入，与晋文公会。
现代文：两年后，成公到周天子处请求帮助回国，与晋文公相会。
English: Two years later, Cheng Gong went to Zhou Tianzi to ask for help to return to China and meet with Jinwen Gong.

古文：晋使人鸩卫成公，成公私于周主鸩，令薄，得不死。
现代文：晋派人想用毒酒害死成公，成公贿赂了周王室主持毒杀的人，让他少放些毒药，才免于一死。
English: Jin sent someone to use poisoned wine to kill Chenggong. Chenggong bribed the person who presided over the poisoning of the Zhou royal family to let him put less poison in order to avoid death.

古文：已而周为请晋文公，卒入之卫，而诛元咺，卫君瑕出奔。
现代文：不久，周王替成公请求晋文公，成公终于被送回卫国，杀死了元咺，卫君瑕奔逃。
English: Soon after, Zhou Wang requested Jinwen Gong for Chenggong. Chenggong was finally sent back to Wei, killed Yuan Zang, and Wei fled.

古文：七年，晋文公卒。
现代文：七年时，晋文公逝世。
English: At the age of seven, Prince Jinwen passed away.

古文：十二年，成公朝晋襄公。
现代文：十二年时，成公朝见晋襄公。
English: At the age of twelve, Chenggong met Jinxianggong.

古文：十四年，秦穆公卒。
现代文：十四年时，秦穆公逝世。
English: At the age of fourteen, Qin Mu Gong passed away.

古文：二十六年，齐邴歜ù弑其君懿公。
现代文：二十六年时，齐邴歜杀死他的国君懿公。
English: At the age of twenty-six, Qizhi killed his sovereign, Zeng Gong.

古文：三十五年，成公卒，子穆公遬ù立。
现代文：三十五年时，成公逝世，儿子穆公遬立为国君。
English: At the age of thirty-five, Chenggong died, and his son Mu Gongjun became the king.

古文：穆公二年，楚庄王伐陈，杀夏征舒。
现代文：穆公二年时，楚庄王攻打陈国，杀死夏征舒。
English: When Mu Gong was two years old, the king of Chu Zhuang attacked Chen Guo and killed Xia Zhenshu.

古文：三年，楚庄王围郑，郑降，复释之。
现代文：三年时，楚庄王围攻郑国，郑侯投降。
English: In the third year, the king of Chu Zhuang besieged Zheng Guo, and Zheng Guo surrendered.

古文：十一年，孙良夫救鲁伐齐，复得侵地。
现代文：楚庄王又释放了他。十一年，孙良夫为援救鲁国而讨伐齐国，又收复被侵夺的领土。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang released him again. In the eleventh year, Sun Liangfu led a crusade against Qi in order to save Lu, and recovered the occupied territory.

古文：穆公卒，子定公臧立。
现代文：穆公逝世后，儿子定公臧立为国君。
English: After the death of Mu Gong, his son Ding Gong stood up as the sovereign.

古文：定公十二年卒，子献公衎立。
现代文：定公十二年逝世，儿子献公衎立为国君。
English: In the twelfth year of King Seongjo's death, his son ascended to the throne.

古文：献公十三年，公令师曹教宫妾鼓琴，妾不善，曹笞之。
现代文：十三年时，献公让乐师曹教宫中妾弹琴，妾弹得很差，曹笞打了她，以示惩罚。
English: When she was 13 years old, she was asked to play the harp by a concubine in Cao Jiao's palace. The concubine played the harp very poorly, and Cao Jiao beat her as a punishment.

古文：妾以幸恶曹于公，公亦笞曹三百。
现代文：妾以献公宠爱，就在献公面前说曹的坏话，故意中伤曹，献公也笞打曹三百下。
English: The concubine, who was favored by the officiant, spoke ill of Cao in front of the officiant, deliberately slandered Cao, and the officiant beat Cao three hundred times.

古文：十八年，献公戒孙文子、宁惠子食，皆往。
现代文：十八年时，献公告请孙文子、宁惠子进宴，两人如期前往待命。
English: In the 18th year, Sun Wenzi and Ning Huizi were invited to a banquet by an announcement, and the two went to standby as scheduled.

古文：日旰不召，而去射鸿于囿。
现代文：天晚了，献公还未去召请他们，却到园林去射大雁。
English: It was late in the day, and the sacrificial offering had not yet gone to summon them, but they went to the garden to shoot wild geese.

古文：二子从之，公不释射服与之言。二子怒，如宿。
现代文：两人只好跟从献公到了园林，献公未脱射服就与他们谈话，对献公的这种无礼行为，两人非常生气，便到宿邑去了。
English: The two had no choice but to follow Xianggu to the garden. Xianggu talked to them without taking off his uniform. The two were very angry at Xianggu's disrespectful behavior and went to the inn.

古文：孙文子子数侍公饮，使师曹歌《巧言》之卒章。
现代文：孙文子的儿子多次陪侍献公饮酒，献公让乐师曹唱《·小雅》中《巧言》篇的最后一章。
English: Sun Wenzi's son repeatedly accompanied the officiant to drink alcohol, and the officiant asked the musician Cao to sing the last chapter of the "Witty Sayings" in "· Xiao Ya."

古文：师曹又怒公之尝笞三百，乃歌之，欲以怒孙文子，报卫献公。
现代文：乐师曹本来就痛恨献公以前曾笞打他三百下，于是就演唱了这章诗，想以此激怒孙文子，来报复卫献公。
English: Musician Cao originally hated Wei Xiangguo and had beaten him 300 times before, so he sang this chapter of the poem to provoke Sun Wenzi and take revenge on Wei Xiangguo.

古文：文子语蘧伯玉，伯玉曰： 臣不知也。 
现代文：文子把这件事告诉了卫大夫蘧伯玉，蘧伯玉说： 我不知道。 
English: Fumiko told this to Dr. Wei Zibo. Zibo said, "I don't know."

古文：遂攻出献公。
现代文：于是孙文子赶走了献公。
English: As a result, Sun Wenzi drove away the dowry.

古文：献公奔齐，齐置卫献公于聚邑。
现代文：献公逃亡到了齐国，齐国把他安置在聚邑。
English: Xianguo fled to Qi Province, which placed him in Zhurong.

古文：孙文子、宁惠子共立定公弟秋为卫君，是为殇公。
现代文：孙文子、宁惠子共同立定公弟秋为卫国国君，这就是殇公。
English: Sun Wenzi and Ning Hui Zi jointly established the prince of the autumn as the prince of the country of defense, which is the prince of the autumn.

古文：殇公秋立，封孙文子林父于宿。
现代文：殇公秋即位后，把宿封给孙文子林父。
English: After Emperor Gongqiu ascended the throne, he gave the post to Sun Wenzilin's father.

古文：十二年，宁喜与孙林父争宠相恶，殇公使宁喜攻孙林父。
现代文：十二年时，宁喜与孙林父因争宠而至相攻讦，殇公让宁喜攻打孙林父。
English: When he was twelve years old, Ning Xi and Sun Lin's father came to fight each other because of their rivalry for favor. Sun Gong let Ning Xi fight Sun Lin's father.

古文：林父奔晋，复求入故卫献公。
现代文：林父逃奔到晋国，又请求晋国护送卫献公回国。
English: Lin's father fled to Jin and asked Jin to escort Wei Xian back to China.

古文：献公在齐，齐景公闻之，与卫献公如晋求入。
现代文：当时，献公在齐国。齐景公听到这个消息，和卫献公一起到晋国请求帮助返回卫国。
English: At that time, Xian Gong was in Qi Province. Upon hearing the news, Qi Jing Gong went to Jin Province with Wei Xian Gong to ask for help to return to the motherland.

古文：晋为伐卫，诱与盟。
现代文：晋国便去讨伐卫国，诱使卫与晋结盟。
English: Jin then went to fight against Wei, inducing Wei to ally with Jin.

古文：卫殇公会晋平公，平公执殇公与宁喜而复入卫献公。
现代文：卫殇公前去会见晋平公，平公逮捕了殇公与宁喜，紧接着就送卫献公回国。
English: Prince Wei Xuan went to meet Prince Jin Ping. Prince Ping arrested Prince Xuan and Prince Ning Xi, and immediately sent Prince Wei Xuan back to China.

古文：献公亡在外十二年而入。
现代文：献公在外逃亡十二年重又返回故国。
English: It's been 12 years since Deng Guo fled abroad and returned to his homeland.

古文：献公后元年，诛宁喜。
现代文：献公后元元年，诛杀宁喜。
English: In the first year of the first year after the dedication, Ning Xi was killed.

古文：三年，吴延陵季子使过卫，见蘧伯玉、史鳅，曰： 卫多君子，其国无故。 
现代文：三年，吴国延陵季子出使路过卫国，见到蘧伯玉和史说： 卫国君子很多，所以这个国家不会有患难。 
English: In the third year, the envoy of Ji Zi from the Yanling Mausoleum of the State of Wu passed through the defense of the country, and when he saw Zou Boyu and Shi Yan, he said: There are many patriots, so this country will not have difficulties.

古文：过宿，孙林父为击磬，曰： 不乐，音大悲，使卫乱乃此矣。 
现代文：他又路过宿地，孙林父为他击磬说： 不高兴，乐音很悲伤，使卫国动乱的就是这里呀！ 
English: He passed by his lodging place again, and Sun Lin's father struck a gong for him and said, "I'm not happy, the music is very sad, it's here that our country is in turmoil!"

古文：是年，献公卒，子襄公恶立。
现代文：同年，献公逝世，儿子襄公恶立为国君。
English: In the same year, Xiang Gong died, and his son, Xiang Gongxiong, became the king.

古文：襄公六年，楚灵王会诸侯，襄公称病不往。
现代文：襄公六年，楚灵王会见各诸侯，襄公托辞有病不去赴会。
English: In the sixth year of Prince Xiang's reign, King Chu Ling met with all the princes, but Prince Xiang had to excuse himself by saying that he was ill and could not attend the meeting.

古文：九年，襄公卒。
现代文：九年，襄公逝世。
English: Nine years later, Prince Xiang died.

古文：初，襄公有贱妾，幸之，有身，梦有人谓曰： 我康叔也，令若子必有卫，名而子曰 元 。 
现代文：当初，襄公有个小妾，很受宠爱，有孕后曾梦见有人对她说： 我是康叔，一定让你的儿子享有卫国，你的儿子应取名 元 。 
English: At the beginning, Prince Xiang had a concubine who was very beloved. After she became pregnant, she had a dream in which someone said to her: "I am Uncle Xiang, I will make sure that your son enjoys the defense of the country, and your son should be named Yuan."

古文：妾怪之，问孔成子。
现代文：妾醒后十分惊讶，询问孔成子。
English: The concubine was very surprised when she woke up and asked Kong Cheng Zi.

古文：成子曰： 康叔者，卫祖也。 
现代文：成子说： 康叔是卫国的始祖。 
English: Shigeko said, "Uncle Kang was the founder of our country.

古文：及生子，男也，以告襄公。
现代文：等到妾生下孩子，果真是个男孩，就把此梦告诉襄公。
English: When the concubine gave birth to a child, which turned out to be a boy, she told this dream to her husband.

古文：襄公曰： 天所置也。 
现代文：襄公说： 这是上天安排的！ 
English: Xiang Gong said: This was arranged by heaven!

古文：名之曰元。襄公夫人无子，于是乃立元为嗣，是为灵公。
现代文：于是给男孩取名元，恰好襄公夫人未生儿子，便立元为嫡子，这就是灵公。
English: So he named the boy Yuan, who happened to be the unborn son of Prince Xiang's wife, and established Yuan as the legitimate son, which is Linggong.

古文：灵公五年，朝晋昭公。
现代文：五年，灵公朝见晋昭公。
English: In the fifth year, Ling Gong saw Jin Zhaogong.

古文：六年，楚公子弃疾弑灵王自立，为平王。
现代文：六年，楚公子弃疾杀死灵王自立为国君，称平王。
English: In the sixth year, Chu Gongzi gave up his illness and killed King Ling and became the sovereign himself, known as King Ping.

古文：十一年，火。
现代文：十一年，卫发生了火灾。
English: Eleven years ago, a fire broke out in Wei.

古文：三十八年，孔子来，禄之如鲁。
现代文：三十八年，孔子来到卫国，卫给他同在鲁国时一样多的俸禄。
English: In the 38th year, Confucius came to Wei, and Wei gave him the same amount of salary as when he was in Lu.

古文：后有隙，孔子去。
现代文：后来，孔子与卫国国君发生矛盾，便离去了。
English: Later, a conflict arose between Confucius and the Emperor, and Confucius left.

古文：后复来。
现代文：不久，又周游到卫国。
English: Soon, he traveled around the country again.

古文：三十九年，太子蒯聩与灵公夫人南子有恶，欲杀南子。
现代文：三十九年，太子蒯聩和灵公夫人南子有仇，想杀掉南子。
English: In thirty-nine years, the crown prince Min and Lady Linggong had a grudge against Nan Zi and wanted to kill her.

古文：蒯聩与其徒戏阳遬谋，朝，使杀夫人。
现代文：蒯聩与他的家臣戏阳遬商议，等朝会时，让戏阳遬杀死夫人。
English: He discussed with his vassal, Jie Yang Jie, to have Jie Yang Jie kill his wife during the imperial court meeting.

古文：戏阳后悔，不果。
现代文：事到临头，戏阳后悔，没有动手。
English: When it came down to it, the actor regretted not doing it.

古文：蒯聩数目之，夫人觉之，惧，呼曰： 太子欲杀我！ 
现代文：蒯聩多次使眼色示意他，被夫人察觉，夫人十分恐惧，大呼道： 太子想杀我！ 
English: Zou repeatedly winked at him, which was noticed by his wife, who was very frightened and exclaimed, "The prince wants to kill me!"

古文：灵公怒，太子蒯聩奔宋，已而之晋赵氏。
现代文：灵公大怒，太子蒯聩逃奔到宋国，不久又逃到晋国赵氏那里。
English: Ling Gong was furious, and Prince Gong fled to Song Province, and soon after to the Zhao Clan in Jin Province.

古文：四十二年春，灵公游于郊，令子郢仆。
现代文：四十二年春天，灵公郊游，让子郢驾车。
English: In the spring of forty-two, Ling Gong went on an outing and let Zi Yao drive.

古文：郢，灵公少子也，字子南。
现代文：郢是灵公的小儿子，字子南。
English: Zou is the youngest son of Ling Gong, and his name is Nan.

古文：灵公怨太子出奔，谓郢曰： 我将立若为后。 
现代文：灵公怨恨太子逃亡，就对郢说： 我将要立你为太子。 
English: Resentful of the prince's escape, Ling Gong said to Zou: "I am going to make you the prince."

古文：郢对曰： 郢不足以辱社稷，君更图之。 
现代文：郢回答道： 郢不够格，不能辱没国家，您再想别的办法吧！ 
English: Toad replied: Toad is not qualified, he cannot humiliate the country, you can think of another way!

古文：夏，灵公卒，夫人命子郢为太子，曰： 此灵公命也。 
现代文：夏天，灵公逝世，夫人让子郢为太子，说： 这是灵公的命令！ 
English: In the summer, when Reigong passed away, his wife made Zizong the crown prince, saying, "This is Reigong's order!"

古文：郢曰： 亡人太子蒯聩之子辄在也，不敢当。 
现代文：郢答道： 逃亡太子蒯聩的儿子辄在，我不敢担当此重任。 
English: Zou replied, "The fugitive prince Zou's son Zou is here. I don't dare to take on such an important task."

古文：于是卫乃以辄为君，是为出公。
现代文：于是卫人就立辄为国君，这就是出公。
English: As a result, the guards were elevated to the position of sovereigns, which is a departure from public service.

古文：六月乙酉，赵简子欲入蒯聩，乃令阳虎许命卫十余人衰绖归，简子送蒯聩。
现代文：六月乙酉这一天，赵简子想送蒯聩回国，就让阳虎派十多个人装扮成卫国人，身穿丧服，假装从卫国来晋国迎接太子，简子为蒯聩送行。
English: On this day in June, Zhao Jianzi wanted to send Yao back to China, so he asked Yang Hu to send more than ten people dressed as patriots, wearing mourning clothes, pretending to come from the motherland to meet the crown prince, and Jianzi to see Yao off.

古文：卫人闻之，发兵击蒯聩。
现代文：卫人听到消息，组织军队攻击蒯聩。
English: When the guards heard the news, they organized an army to attack the cocoon.

古文：蒯聩不得入，入宿而保，卫人亦罢兵。
现代文：蒯聩不能回卫，只好跑到宿地自保，卫人也停止了进攻。
English: Unable to fight back, the baboon had no choice but to run to its lodgings for protection. The guards also stopped the attack.

古文：出公辄四年，齐田乞弑其君孺子。
现代文：出公辄四年，齐田乞杀死自己的国君孺子。
English: Four years after entering public service, Tsuchida begged to kill his country's ruler, Saeko.

古文：八年，齐鲍子弑其君悼公。
现代文：八年，齐鲍子杀死自己的国君悼公。
English: In the eighth year, Qi Baozi killed his own sovereign and mourned.

古文：孔子自陈入卫。
现代文：孔子从陈国来到卫国。
English: Confucius came to Japan from China.

古文：九年，孔文子问兵于仲尼，仲尼不对。
现代文：九年，孔文子向孔仲尼请教军事，仲尼不予回答。
English: In the ninth year, Confucius asked Kong Zhongni for military advice, but Zhongni did not answer.

古文：其后鲁迎仲尼，仲尼反鲁。
现代文：之后，鲁侯派人迎接仲尼，仲尼返回鲁国。
English: After that, the prince of Lu sent someone to meet Zhong Ni, and Zhong Ni returned to Lu.

古文：十二年，初，孔圉文子取太子蒯聩之姊，生悝。
现代文：十二年年初，孔圉文子娶了太子蒯聩的姐姐为妻，生了悝。
English: At the beginning of the twelfth year, Kong Yuwenzi married the sister of Prince Yu, and gave birth to a daughter.

古文：孔氏之竖浑良夫美好，孔文子卒，良夫通于悝母。
现代文：孔文子的仆人浑良夫英俊漂亮，孔文子去世后，浑良夫与悝的母亲私通。
English: Confucius's servant, Hunryufu, was handsome and beautiful. After Confucius's death, Hunryufu had an affair with Yao's mother.

古文：太子在宿，悝母使良夫于太子。
现代文：太子在宿地，悝母便让浑良夫到太子那里。
English: When the prince was at his lodging place, his mother sent him to the prince's place.

古文：太子与良夫言曰： 苟能入我国，报子以乘轩，免子三死，毋所与。 
现代文：太子对良夫说： 假使你能协助我回国，我将以赐你大夫所乘的车报答你，还赦免你三种死罪。
English: The crown prince said to Yoshio, "If you can help me return to my country, I will reward you by giving you the doctor's car, and I will also pardon you for the three capital crimes."

古文：与之盟，许以悝母为妻。
现代文：穿紫衣、袒裘服、带宝剑，都不在死罪之中。 
English: Wearing a purple robe, a silk dress, and carrying a sword are not among the capital offenses.

古文：闰月，良夫与太子入，舍孔氏之外圃。
现代文：二人订立了盟约，太子还允许悝母做良夫的妻子。闰十二月，良夫和太子回到国都，暂住孔氏的外園。
English: The two entered into a covenant, and the prince also allowed his stepmother to become the wife of the good husband. In December, the good husband and the prince returned to the capital, temporarily living in Kong's outer garden.

古文：昏，二人蒙衣而乘，宦者罗御，如孔氏。
现代文：晚上，两个人身着妇人衣服，头蒙围巾，乘车而来，由宦者罗驾车。
English: In the evening, two people dressed in women's clothes, with their heads covered with scarves, arrived in a car, driven by a young man.

古文：孔氏之老栾宁问之，称姻妾以告。遂入，适伯姬氏。
现代文：孔氏的家臣栾宁盘问他们姓名，他们自称是姻戚家的侍妾，于是顺利地进入孔氏家，直抵伯姬住所。
English: Mr. Kong's vassal Huning interrogated their names. They claimed to be the concubines of the in-laws, so they successfully entered Mr. Kong's house and arrived at the residence of Bo Kee.

古文：既食，悝母杖戈而先，太子与五人介，舆豭从之。
现代文：饭毕，悝母手持戈先到孔悝住所，太子与五人身穿甲胄，载着公猪随后而行。
English: At the end of the meal, Gong's mother went to Kong Yao's residence with Go in hand. The prince and the five others put on armor and rode away with the boar.

古文：伯姬劫悝于厕，强盟之，遂劫以登台。
现代文：伯姬把悝逼到墙角里，强迫他订立同盟，并劫持悝登上台，逼他召集群臣。
English: Burgee cornered Toad, forced him into an alliance, and abducted Toad onto the stage, forcing him to assemble his ministers.

古文：栾宁将饮酒，炙未熟，闻乱，使告仲由。
现代文：栾宁正要饮酒，烤肉还未熟，就听到一片乱糟糟的响声，派人告诉了仲由。
English: Huning was about to drink, and the grilled meat was still undercooked, when he heard a chaotic noise. He sent someone to find out why.

古文：召护驾乘车，行爵食炙，奉出公辄奔鲁。
现代文：召护驾着乘车，边饮酒边吃烤肉，护奉着出公辄逃奔到鲁国。
English: He called for an escort, drove by car, ate grilled meat while drinking, and fled to Lu with his escort.

古文：仲由将入，遇子羔将出，曰： 门已闭矣。 
现代文：仲由闻讯后赶到，将进孔宅，遇刚刚逃出孔家的子羔。子羔说： 门已经关闭。 
English: After hearing the news, Zhongyu arrived and was about to enter Kong's house when he met a lamb that had just escaped from Kong's house. The lamb said, "The door is closed."

古文：子路曰： 吾姑至矣。 
现代文：子路说： 我暂且去看看。 
English: Zi Lu said: Let me go and have a look.

古文：子羔曰： 不及，莫践其难。 
现代文：子羔说： 来不及了，你不要跟着悝去受难。 
English: And he said, It is too late; do not go down into the pit with them.

古文：子路曰： 食焉不辟其难。 
现代文：子路说： 享受悝的俸禄，不能看他受难不救。 
English: Zilu said, "I can't watch him suffer and not save him so that I can enjoy my salary."

古文：子羔遂出。
现代文：于是子羔逃走了。
English: So the lamb ran away.

古文：子路入，及门，公孙敢阖门，曰： 毋入为也！ 
现代文：子路要进去，来到门前，公孙敢关紧大门说： 不要再进去了！ 
English: Zi Lu wanted to go in, and when he came to the door, Gongsun dared to close the door and said, "Don't go in again!"

古文：子路曰： 是公孙也？
现代文：子路说： 你是公孙吧！
English: Zi Lu said, "You are the grandchild, right?"

古文：求利而逃其难。
现代文：拿着别人的利禄却躲避别人的危难。
English: Holding someone else's lucky charm but avoiding someone else's peril.

古文：由不然，利其禄，必救其患。 
现代文：我不能这样，享受人家的俸禄，一定拯救人家的危难。 
English: I can't do this, enjoy someone else's salary, and save someone else's peril.

古文：有使者出，子路乃得入。
现代文：这时有使者出来，子路才趁机进去。
English: At this time, an emissary came out, and Zi Lu took the opportunity to enter.

古文：曰： 太子焉用孔悝？
现代文：子路说： 太子怎么用得着孔悝做帮手？
English: Zilu said, "How could the prince need Kong Quan as a helper?

古文：虽杀之，必或继之。 
现代文：即使杀死他，也一定有人接替他进攻太子。 
English: Even if he is killed, someone will surely take his place and attack the crown prince.

古文：且曰： 太子无勇。若燔台，必舍孔叔。 
现代文：又说： 太子缺乏勇气，如果放火烧台，必然会释放孔叔。 
English: He also said: The prince lacks courage. If he sets fire to the stage, he will inevitably release Uncle Kong.

古文：太子闻之，惧，下石乞、盂黡敌子路，以戈击之，割缨。
现代文：太子听了，十分害怕，让石乞、盂黡下台阻挡子路，二人用戈击子路，割掉子路的帽缨。
English: When the prince heard this, he was very afraid. He asked the stone beggar and the eunuch to step down from the stage and block the path. The two of them used a hammer to cut off the brim of the path.

古文：子路曰： 君子死，冠不免。 
现代文：子路说： 君子死，帽子不能掉到地上。 
English: Zilu said: When a gentleman dies, his hat must not fall to the ground.

古文：结缨而死。
现代文：说着，系好帽缨死去。
English: Saying this, he tied his bonnets and died.

古文：孔子闻卫乱，曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：孔子听到卫国动乱的消息后说： 唉！
English: When Confucius heard the news of the patriotic turmoil, he said: Alas!

古文：柴也其来乎？
现代文：柴将会回来的吧？
English: Chai will come back, right?

古文：由也其死矣。 
现代文：可由，却死去了。 
English: He survived, but he died.

古文：孔悝竟立太子蒯聩，是为庄公。
现代文：孔悝终于立太子蒯聩为国君，这就是庄公。
English: Confucius finally made the crown prince the ruler of the country, which is Zhuang Gong.

古文：庄公蒯聩者，出公父也，居外，怨大夫莫迎立。
现代文：庄公蒯聩是出公的父亲，逃亡在外时，怨恨大夫们不迎立他为国君。
English: Zhuang Gongyi was a father who had retired from public service. When he fled abroad, he resented the doctors for not welcoming him as the king.

古文：元年即位，欲尽诛大臣，曰： 寡人居外久矣，子亦尝闻之乎？ 
现代文：元年即位后，庄公想把大臣们尽数杀死，说： 我在外久了，你们也曾经听说了吗？ 
English: After ascending the throne in the first year of the year, Zhuang Gong wanted to kill as many ministers as possible, saying: I have been away for a long time, have you ever heard of it?

古文：群臣欲作乱，乃止。
现代文：大臣们想作乱，庄公才不得不罢休。
English: The ministers wanted to make trouble, but Zhuang Gong had to stop.

古文：二年，鲁孔丘卒。
现代文：二年，鲁国孔丘去世。
English: Two years later, Confucius died in Lu.

古文：三年，庄公上城，见戎州，曰： 戎虏何为是？ 
现代文：三年，庄公登上城墙，看见戎州。说： 戎虏干吗要建城邑？ 
English: In the third year, Zhuang Gong climbed the city wall and saw Wonshu. He said, "Why do the Wonshu people want to build a city?

古文：戎州病之。
现代文：戎州人对他的话十分忧虑。
English: The people of Ebisuchu are very worried about his words.

古文：十月，戎州告赵简子，简子围卫。
现代文：十月间，戎州人告诉赵简子，简子包围卫国。
English: In October, the people of Eunoshu told Zhao Jianzi that Jianzi was encircling the defense of the country.

古文：十一月，庄公出奔，卫人立公子斑师为卫君。
现代文：十一月，庄公逃奔，卫人立公子斑师做国君。
English: In November, Zhuang Gong fled, and the guards made Guo Zi Baoshi the ruler of the country.

古文：齐伐卫，虏斑师，更立公子起为卫君。
现代文：齐国讨伐卫国，俘虏了斑师，改立公子起为国君。
English: Qigu fought to defend the country, captured the Mottled Division, and reinstated the prince as the sovereign.

古文：卫君起元年，卫石曼尃逐其君起，起奔齐。
现代文：卫君起元年时，卫石曼尃赶走起，起逃亡到齐国。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei, Wei Shi chased away the mandarin ducks and fled to Qi.

古文：卫出公辄自齐复归立。
现代文：卫出公辄又从齐返回卫国做国君。
English: Wei De Gongye returned from Qi to defend the country as the sovereign.

古文：初，出公立十二年亡，亡在外四年复入。
现代文：当初，出公即位十二年后逃亡，在外四年才得返回。
English: At first, he fled twelve years after his accession to the throne, and had to return after four years abroad.

古文：出公后元年，赏从亡者。
现代文：出公后元元年，赏赐了跟随他逃亡的人们。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, after he became a public official, he rewarded the people who fled with him.

古文：立二十一年卒，出公季父黔攻出公子而自立，是为悼公。
现代文：前后当政二十一年死去，出公叔父黔赶走出公儿子而自立为国君，这就是悼公。
English: Around the time of his 21st year in power, his father-in-law died, and his father-in-law's uncle came out of retirement to become the country's sovereign. This is called mourning.

古文：悼公五年卒，子敬公弗立。
现代文：悼公五年逝世，儿子敬公弗立为国君。
English: Five years after the death of King Eko, his son, King Eko Furi, became the country's king.

古文：敬公十九年卒，子昭公纠立。
现代文：十九年，敬公逝世，儿子昭公纠立为国君。
English: Nineteen years later, Emperor Keiko passed away, and his son, Emperor Akihito, was enthroned as Emperor.

古文：是时三晋强，卫如小侯，属之。
现代文：这时，三晋强盛起来，卫君如同小诸侯，附属于赵国。
English: At this time, the Three Dynasties of Jin and Qiang were flourishing, and Wei Jun, like a minor vassal, was attached to Zhao.

古文：昭公六年，公子亹ě弑之代立，是为怀公。
现代文：昭公六年，公子亹杀死昭公自立为国君，这就是怀公。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of King Zhaogong, Prince Zhao killed King Zhaogong and became the sovereign himself. This is the beginning of King Zhaogong.

古文：怀公十一年，公子颓弑怀公而代立，是为慎公。
现代文：怀公十一年，公子杀死怀公自立为国君，这就是慎公。
English: In the eleventh year of her pregnancy, she killed her husband and became the sovereign. This is prudence.

古文：慎公父，公子适；适父，敬公也。
现代文：慎公的父亲是公子适。适的父亲是敬公。
English: The father of Shingong is Gongzi Sui. The father of Sui is Jingong Zuo.

古文：慎公四十二年卒，子声公训立。
现代文：四十二年，慎公逝世，儿子声公训立为国君。
English: In forty-two years, Shinkong died, and his son, Shokongxun, became the king.

古文：声公十一年卒，子成侯遬立。
现代文：十一年，声公逝世，儿子成侯遬立为国君。
English: In the eleventh year, Shoko died, and his son, Naruho, became the sovereign.

古文：成侯十一年，公孙鞅入秦。
现代文：成侯十一年，公孙鞅进入秦国。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, Gongsun Rong entered Qin.

古文：十六年，卫更贬号曰侯。
现代文：十六年，卫被贬称为侯。
English: Sixteen years later, Wei was relegated to the position of marquis.

古文：二十九年，成侯卒，子平侯立。
现代文：二十九年，成侯逝世，儿子平侯立为国君。
English: In the 29th year, Cheng Hou died, and his son Ping Hou became the king.

古文：平侯八年卒，子嗣君立。
现代文：平侯于八年逝世，儿子嗣君立为国君。
English: Heiko died in the eighth year, and his son, Tsugunjin, became the sovereign.

古文：嗣君五年，更贬号曰君，独有濮阳。
现代文：嗣君于五年时又被贬称为君，仅有濮阳一地。
English: At the age of five, Tsukimi was relegated to being called Jun, only in Shenyang.

古文：四十二年卒，子怀君立。
现代文：四十二年，嗣君逝世，儿子怀君立为国君。
English: Forty-two years later, his heir died, and his son, Huai Jun, became the king.

古文：怀君三十一年，朝魏，魏囚杀怀君。
现代文：三十一年，怀君朝拜魏国，魏囚禁并杀害了怀君。
English: In the 31st year, Huai Jun paid homage to Wei. Wei imprisoned and killed Huai Jun.

古文：魏更立嗣君弟，是为元君。
现代文：魏改立嗣君弟，这就是元君。
English: Wei reformed and established the younger brother of the heir, which is the Yuanjun.

古文：元君为魏婿，故魏立之。
现代文：元君是魏国的女婿，所以魏国立了他。
English: Yuanjun was the son-in-law of Wei, so Wei nationalized him.

古文：元君十四年，秦拔魏东地，秦初置东郡，更徙卫野王县，而并濮阳为东郡。
现代文：元君十四年时，秦攻下魏国东部领土，秦国开始在这一带设置东郡。又把卫君迁徙到野王县，而把濮阳合并到东郡。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Qin conquered the eastern territory of Wei, and Qin began to set up Dong County in this area. He also moved Wei Jun to Yowang County, and merged Poyang into Dong County.

古文：二十五年，元君卒，子君角立。
现代文：二十五年元君去世，儿子君角立为君。
English: Twenty-five years ago, Yuanjun passed away, and his son, Junkaku, became the new ruler.

古文：君角九年，秦并天下，立为始皇帝。
现代文：君角九年时，秦兼并天下，嬴政立为始皇帝。
English: In the ninth year of King's Angle, Qin annexed the whole country, and Yongzheng became the first emperor.

古文：二十一年，二世废君角为庶人，卫绝祀。
现代文：二十一年，秦二世废掉卫君，君角成为普通平民，卫国世系彻底断绝。
English: In the twenty-first year, Qin II abolished the prince of Wei, the prince became an ordinary civilian, and the lineage of defending the country was completely cut off.

古文：太史公曰：余读世家言，至于宣公之太子以妇见诛，弟寿争死以相让，此与晋太子申生不敢明骊姬之过同，俱恶伤父之志。
现代文：太史公说：我阅读世家的记载，读到卫宣公太子因妻被杀，弟弟子寿与太子互相推让，争着去死，这与晋太子申生不敢声明骊姬的过错相同，都害怕伤害父亲的情面。
English: Taishikong said, "I read the records of the family, I read that the prince of Weixuan was killed because of his wife, and his younger brother, Tzu Shou, and the prince gave in to each other and fought to die. This is the same as the prince of Jin, Shen Sheng, who did not dare to declare the fault of Zou Ji. They were all afraid of hurting their father's feelings.

古文：然卒死亡，何其悲也！
现代文：然而，终于死去了，这是多么悲哀呀！
English: However, he finally died, how sad is that!

古文：或父子相杀，兄弟相灭，亦独何哉？
现代文：有的父子互相残杀，有的兄弟互相毁灭，这究竟是为什么呢？
English: Some fathers and sons kill each other, some brothers destroy each other. Why is this?

