古文：◎世祖十二十一年春正月乙卯，帝御大明殿，右丞相和礼霍孙率百官奉玉册玉宝，上尊号曰宪天述道仁文义武大光孝皇帝，诸王百官朝贺如朔旦仪，赦天下。
现代文：至元二十一年春，正月初六，皇帝驾临大明殿，右丞相和礼霍孙率领百官敬奉玉册玉宝，向皇帝献上尊号，为 宪天述道仁文义武大光孝皇帝 ，诸侯王、百官朝贺皇帝，如同每月初一、每年元旦的朝贺仪式一样隆重，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first century, on the sixth day of the first month of the year, the emperor arrived at the Daming Palace, and the right minister and Li Huosun led the hundred officials to pay tribute to the jade scroll and the jade treasure, and presented the honorary title to the emperor, as the Emperor Xian, the Emperor Xuan, the Prince of Princes, and the Emperor of the hundred officials, just as grand as the greeting ceremony on the first day of each month and the New Year's Day of each year, and forgave the world.

古文：丁巳，敕： 自今凡奏事者，必先语同列以所奏。
现代文：初八，皇上敕令说： 从今以后，凡是奏事的大臣，必须把上奏的内容先告诉同列的大臣。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor issued a decree: From now on, every minister who reports a matter must first inform the same ministers of the content of the report.

古文：既奏，其所奉旨云何，令同列知而后书之簿；不明以告而辄书簿者，杖必阇赤。 
现代文：上奏之后，接到的圣旨说了些什么，要让同列的知道，然后再写在书簿上，事先没有明白地告诉就记在书簿上的，对文书官处以杖刑。 
English: If, after the performance of the sacred music, the scribe does not make known to his fellow-scribes what was said, and then writes it down in the book, and if he does not make it clear beforehand, and then writes it down in the book, the scribe shall be punished with the cane.

古文：己未，罢云南都元帅府，所管军民隶行省。
现代文：初十，撤销云南都元帅府，其原来所管辖的军民隶属于云南行省管辖。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Yunnan Metropolitan Marshal's Office was revoked, and the military and civilians under its original jurisdiction were subordinated to the jurisdiction of Yunnan Province.

古文：甲子，罢扬州等处理算官，以其事付行省。
现代文：十五日，撤销扬州等地的理算官员，把他们的职事交给行省掌管。
English: On the 15th, the adjustment officials in Yangzhou and other places were revoked, and their duties were handed over to the province.

古文：江浙行省平章忙忽带进真珠百斤。
现代文：江浙行省平章政事忙忽带进献珍珠一百斤。
English: Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Pingzhang, was busy with political affairs and suddenly brought in a hundred catties of pearls.

古文：丙寅，阔阔你敦言： 屯田芍陂兵二千，布种二千石，得粳糯二万五千石有奇，乞增新附军二千。 
现代文：十二日，阔阔你敦上奏说： 在芍陂屯田的士卒二千人，播下粮种二千石，收获粳米、糯米二万五千多石，请求增加新附军士兵二千人。 
English: On the 12th, Kuo Kuang You Tun delivered a report, saying, "Two thousand soldiers have been stationed in Putun, and they have sown two thousand kilos of grain, harvested more than twenty-five thousand kilos of glutinous rice and glutinous rice, and requested an increase of two thousand soldiers from the New Annexed Army.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丁卯，建都王、乌蒙及金齿一十二处俱降。
现代文：十三日，建都酋王，以及乌蒙、金齿等十二地均归附朝廷。
English: On the 13th, the capital city of Jiandu, as well as 12 provinces including Umeng and Jingu, were all annexed to the imperial court.

古文：建都先为缅所制，欲降未能。
现代文：建都原先被缅国所控制，想归降朝廷而不能。
English: Jiandu was originally controlled by the Burmese, and wanted to surrender to the imperial court, but could not.

古文：时诸王相吾答儿及行省右丞太卜、参知政事也罕的斤分道征缅，于阿昔、阿禾两江造船二百艘，顺流攻之，拔江头城，令都元帅袁世安戍之。
现代文：当时诸侯王相吾答儿，以及行省右丞太卜、参知政事也罕的斤分路征伐缅国，在阿昔、阿禾两条江上建造二百艘船，顺流而下进攻缅国，占领江头城，命都元帅袁世安镇守。
English: At that time, the princes, kings, and emperors, as well as the provincial governors, emperors, chief advisers, and statesmen, set out to conquer Burma, built two hundred ships on the two rivers of Axi and Ahe, sailed down the river to attack Burma, occupied Jiangtou City, and the capital was guarded by Marshal Yuan Shian.

古文：遂遣使招谕缅王，不应。
现代文：于是派遣使臣去招降缅国国王。缅王不予理睬。
English: So they sent envoys to invite the Burmese king to surrender. The Burmese king ignored them.

古文：建都太公城乃其巢穴，遂水陆并进，攻太公城，拔之，故至是皆降。
现代文：建都的太公城乃是他的巢穴，便水陆两路并进，进攻太公城，攻了下来，这时候便都投降了。
English: Taigongcheng, where the capital was built, was his lair. He marched by land and by sea, attacked Taigongcheng, conquered it, and then surrendered.

古文：庚午，立江淮、荆湖、江西、四川行枢密院，治建康、鄂州、抚州、成都。
现代文：十六日，设立江淮、荆湖、江西、四川行枢密院，治所分别在建康、鄂州、抚州、成都。
English: On the 16th, the Privy Councils of Jianghuai, Jinghu, Jiangxi and Sichuan were set up, with the administrative offices in Jiankang, Ezhou, Fuzhou and Chengdu respectively.

古文：立耽罗国安抚司。
现代文：设置耽罗国安抚司。
English: Set up the Department of Pacification of Tangaroa.

古文：辛未，相吾答儿遣使进缅国所贡珍珠、珊瑚、异彩及七宝束带。
现代文：十七日，相吾答儿派遣使者向朝廷献上缅国所进贡的珍珠、珊瑚、异彩，以及七宝束带。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor sent an envoy to the imperial court to present the pearls, corals, gems, and cloths of the seven treasures that Myanmar had paid as tribute.

古文：甲戌，遣蒙古官及翰林院官各一人祠岳渎后土。
现代文：二十日，派遣蒙古官员及翰林院官员各一人祭祀五大山、四大水和后土神。
English: On the 20th, a Mongolian official and an official from the Khanlin Academy were each sent to offer sacrifices to the five great mountains, the four great waters, and the back soil god.

古文：遣王积翁赍诏使日本，赐锦衣、玉环、鞍辔。积翁由庆元航海至日本近境，为舟人所害。
现代文：派遣王积翁携带诏书出使日本，赐给他锦衣、玉环、鞍辔；王积翁由庆元航海到靠近日本国境的地方，被船上的水手杀害。
English: He sent Wang Jie on a mission to Japan with an imperial edict, and gave him a brocade robe, a jade ring, and a saddle; Wang Jie sailed from Qingyuan to a place near the Japanese border, and was killed by sailors on the ship.

古文：御史台臣言： 罪黜之人，久忘其名又复奏用，乞戒约。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说 ：犯了罪而遭到罢黜的人，连他们的名字都被人们忘掉很久了，现在又被上奏录用，请皇上谨慎地把握。 
English: The Minister of State for History reported to the Emperor: "People who have committed crimes and have been ousted, even their names have been forgotten for a long time, and now they have been reported to the Emperor, so please be careful.

古文：帝曰： 卿等所言固是，然其间岂无罪轻可录用者？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你们所说的话固然是对的，但是这些人当中难道没有罪行较轻而可以录用的人么？ 
English: The emperor said, "What you say is true, but isn't there anyone among these people who can be hired for a lesser crime?"

古文：御史大夫玉速帖木儿对曰： 以各人所犯罪状明白敷奏，用否当取圣裁。 
现代文：御史大臣玉速帖木儿回答说 ：我们只把各人所犯的罪过明明白白地敷陈上奏，用不用由皇上决定。 
English: The Minister of History, Tamaso Timur, replied: "We only present the sins committed by each person in a clear and unambiguous manner, and it is up to the Emperor to decide whether or not to use them."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙子，建宁叛贼黄华自杀。
现代文：二十二日，建宁的叛贼黄华自杀。
English: On the 22nd, the traitor Huang Hua of Jianning committed suicide.

古文：丁丑，云南诸路按察司官陛辞，诏谕之曰： 卿至彼，当宣明朕意，勿求货财，名成则货财随之，徇财则必失其名，而性命亦不可保矣。 
现代文：二十三日，云南诸路按察司的官员向皇上辞行上任，皇帝下诏告诫他们说： 你们到了那边，应当宣明我的旨意，不要贪图财物。功成名就了，财货也就随之而来了，曲从钱财必然丧失功名，甚至连性命都保不住。 
English: On the 23rd, the officials of the Yunnan Provincial Inspection Departments submitted their resignations to the emperor and took up their posts. The emperor issued an edict admonishing them: "When you get there, you should declare my will and not covet wealth. Fame and success will come, and wealth and goods will follow. You will inevitably lose your fame and fortune, and you will not even be able to save your life.

古文：己卯，马八儿国遣使贡珍珠、异宝、缣段。
现代文：二十五日，马八儿派遣使臣进贡珍珠、异宝、细绢。
English: On the 25th, Ma Bale dispatched envoys to bring tribute pearls, rare treasures, and fine enamelware.

古文：二月辛巳，以福建宣慰使管如德为泉州行省参知政事，征缅。
现代文：二月初二，任命福建宣慰使管如德为泉州行中书省参知政事，征伐缅国。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：浚扬州漕河。
现代文：疏浚扬州漕运的河道。
English: Dredging the river channel of Yangzhou rowing transport.

古文：罢高丽造征日本船。
现代文：停止高丽建造征伐日本的船只。
English: Stop Korea from building ships to invade Japan.

古文：丁亥，命翰林学士承旨撒里蛮祀先农于藉田。
现代文：初八，命翰林学士承旨撒里蛮在天子的籍田中祭祀神农氏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the scholar Hanlin was ordered to sacrifice to the Shennong clan in Tianzhong, the birthplace of the heavenly son.

古文：壬辰，以江西叛寇妻子赐鹰坊养虎者。
现代文：十三日，把江西叛贼的妻儿赐给鹰坊中的养虎人。
English: On the 13th, he gave the wives and children of the Jiangxi traitors to the tiger breeders in Yingfang.

古文：以别速带逃军七百余人付安西王屯田，给以牛具。
现代文：把别速带七百多名逃兵交给安西王屯田，赐给他们耕牛、农具。
English: More than seven hundred deserters were handed over to Anxi Wang Tun Tian with fasteners, and they were given oxen and farm tools.

古文：邕州、宾州民黄大成等叛，梧州、韶州、衡州民相挻而起，湖南宣慰使撒里蛮将兵讨之。
现代文：邕州、宾州的百姓黄大成等人叛乱，梧州、韶州、衡州的百姓也相约挺身而起作乱。湖南宣慰使撒里蛮率军讨伐他们。
English: The people of Luzhou and Pennsylvania rebelled against Huang Dacheng and others, and the people of Wuzhou, Luzhou, and Hengzhou also stood up and started a riot. Hunan Xuancheng ordered Saribaru to lead the army to fight them.

古文：甲午，罢群牧所。
现代文：十五日，撤销群牧所。
English: On the 15th, the herd management center was abolished.

古文：己亥，瑞州获叛民晏顺等三十二人，并妻孥送京师。
现代文：二十日，瑞州抓获叛民晏顺等三十二人，把他们连同妻儿一直送往京师。
English: On the 20th, Ruizhou captured thirty-two people, including the traitor Shushun, and sent them, together with their wives and children, all the way to Beijing.

古文：罢阿八赤开河之役，以其军及水手各万人运海道粮。
现代文：停止阿八赤开挖河道的工程，把那儿的军队以及水手各一万人派去运输从海道运来的粮食。
English: Stop the dredging of the river in Abaka and send the army and 10,000 sailors there to transport grain from the sea.

古文：放檀州淘金五百人还家。
现代文：遣放在檀州淘金的五百人回家。
English: Five hundred people sent home from the gold rush in Danzhou.

古文：丁未，括江南乐工。
现代文：二十八日，登记、聚集江南的乐工。
English: On the 28th, musicians from the south of the Yangtze River were registered and gathered.

古文：命阿塔海发兵万五千人、船二百艘助征占城，船不足，命江西省益之。
现代文：命令阿塔海派遣一万五千名士卒、二百艘战船协助征伐占城，船不够，命令江西行省添加。
English: He ordered Atahai to dispatch 15,000 soldiers and 200 warships to help conquer and occupy the city. There were not enough ships, so he ordered Jiangxi Province to send more.

古文：戊申，徙江淮行省于杭州，徙浙西宣慰司于平江，省黄州宣慰司入淮西道。
现代文：二十九日，把江淮行省的治所迁到杭州，把浙西宣慰司迁到平江，撤销黄州宣慰司，合并到淮西道宣慰司。
English: On the 29th, the administrative office of Jianghuaixing Province was moved to Hangzhou, the West Zhejiang Xuancheng Office was moved to Pingjiang, the Huangzhou Xuancheng Office was abolished and merged into the West Huaixing Road Xuancheng Office.

古文：立法轮竿于大内万寿山，高百尺。
现代文：在皇宫内的万寿山树立法轮竿，高一百尺。
English: The Manjushri Tree in the Imperial Palace is 100 feet tall.

古文：漳州盗起，命江浙行省调兵进讨。
现代文：漳州的盗贼兴起，命令江浙行省派军前去讨伐。
English: Thieves in Ganzhou rose up and ordered Jiangsu and Zhejiang to send troops to fight them.

古文：秦州总管刘发有罪，尝欲归黄华，事觉伏诛，迁故宋宗室及其大臣之仕者于内地。
现代文：秦州总管刘发获罪，他曾经想前去归顺黄华，事情发觉之后被处死。把亡宋的宗室及其在本朝入仕为官的大臣迁往内地。
English: Qin State Governor Liu Fa was found guilty. He once wanted to go to Shun Huanghua, but was executed after the matter was discovered. He moved the deceased Song's family and his ministers who were serving in this court to the mainland.

古文：三月辛亥，敕思、播管军民官自今勿迁。
现代文：三月初二，敕命思州、播州管军管民的官员，从今以后不得迁调。
English: On the second day of March, the officials in charge of the military and the people of Shizhou and Banzhou, who fought for their lives, must not be transferred from now on.

古文：丁巳，皇子北平王南木合至自北边。
现代文：初八，皇子北平王南木合从北部边境返回。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Prince Peiping Wang Nanmu He returned from the northern border.

古文：王以至元八年建幕庭于和林北野里麻里之地，留七年，至是始归，右丞相安童继至。
现代文：北平王从至元八年在和林以北的野里麻里地方建立幕庭，在那里滞留了七年，这时才回来。右丞相安童继他之后而来到。
English: In the eighth year of the Heian period, King Hakuhei built a pavilion in the Norimari region north of Warin, where he stayed for seven years before returning. Ando, the Minister of the Right, followed him.

古文：以张弘范等将新附军。
现代文：任命张弘范等人统率新附军。
English: Zhang Hongfan and others were appointed to lead the newly added troops.

古文：壬戌，更定虎符。
现代文：十三日，重新确定虎符的形制。
English: On the 13th, the shape of the tiger emblem was redefined.

古文：丙寅，乘舆幸上都。
现代文：十七日，皇帝乘车临幸上都。
English: On the 17th, the emperor rode a carriage to the imperial capital.

古文：丁卯，太庙正殿成，奉安神主。
现代文：十八日，太庙的正殿落成，把先皇的神主迁入。
English: On the 18th, the main hall of the grand temple was completed, and the god of the first emperor was moved in.

古文：甲戌，置潮、赣、吉、抚、建昌戍兵。
现代文：二十五日，在潮州、赣州、吉州、抚州、建昌州设置戍兵。
English: On the 25th, troops were deployed in Chaozhou, Zhangzhou, Jizhou, Fuzhou and Jianchang.

古文：乙亥，高丽国王王睶以皇帝尊号礼成，遣使来贺。
现代文：二十六日，高丽国王王贝春因敬奉皇帝尊号的典礼完成，派遣使臣前来祝贺。
English: On the 26th, King Baechun of Goryeo completed the ceremony of honoring the emperor's name and sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：夏四月壬午，令军民同筑堤堰，以利五卫屯田。
现代文：夏季，四月初四，命令军民共同修筑堤坝，以利于五卫的屯田。
English: In the summer, on the fourth day of the fourth month of April, he ordered the military and the people to jointly build a dam to benefit the garrison of the Five Guards.

古文：乙酉，省泉府司入户部，立大都留守司兼少府监，立大都路总管府，立西川、延安、凤翔、兴元宣课司。
现代文：初七，撤除泉府司，将其合并到户都。设立大都留守司，兼少府监。设立大都路总管府。设立西川、延安、凤翔、兴元宣课司。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Izumi Prefectural Office was abolished and merged with the Hodu Prefectural Office, the Daito Remaining Office and Junior Prefectural Supervisor were established, the Daito Road Administration Office was established, and the Nishikawa, Yan'an, Fengxiang, and Xingyuan Class Announcement Offices were established.

古文：从迷里火者、蜜剌里等言，以钞万锭为市于别十八里及河西、上都。
现代文：听从迷里火者、蜜剌里等人的意见，以一万锭钱钞在别十八里以及河西、上都进行贸易。
English: He listened to the opinions of those who were lost in the fire and those who were lost in the honey, and carried out trade with ten thousand baht banknotes in Beixiaoli, Hexi and Shangdu.

古文：以火者赤依旧扬州盐运使，岁市盐八十万石以赎过。
现代文：仍旧命令火者赤担任扬州盐运使，每年购买八十万石盐以赎罪。
English: He still ordered the fireman red to serve as the Yangzhou salt transport envoy, and to purchase eight hundred thousand stones of salt every year to atone for his sins.

古文：己亥，涿州巨马河决，冲突三十余里。
现代文：二十一日，涿州的巨马河决口，河水奔突三十余里。
English: On the 21st, the Juma River in Luzhou burst its banks, sending water rushing for more than 30 miles.

古文：庚子，湖广行省平章阿里海牙请身至海滨收集占城散军，复使南征，且趣其未行者，许之。
现代文：二十二日，湖广行省平章政事阿里海牙请求亲自到海滨地区集合占城失散的兵卒，令他们重新参加南征，并且催促那些尚未出发的军队。
English: On the 22nd, the political official of Pingzhang, Huguanggang Province, Ali Hague, requested to personally go to the coastal area to gather the scattered soldiers who occupied the city, make them re-join the Southern Expedition, and urge those troops who have not yet set out.

古文：壬寅，江淮行省进各翼童男女百人。
现代文：皇帝准许。二十四日，江淮行省进献各地方的童男女一百人。
English: Emperor's permission. On the 24th, 100 men and women from all parts of Jianghuai Province marched forward.

古文：忽都铁木儿征缅之师为贼冲溃。
现代文：忽都铁木儿征伐缅国的军队，受到贼军冲击，溃散。
English: All of a sudden, Tiemu'er conquered the Burmese army, which was attacked by the invaders and dispersed.

古文：戊申，高丽王王睶及公主以其世子謜来朝。
现代文：三十日，高丽国王王贝春和公主带着他们的世子王讠原前来朝见皇帝。
English: On the 30th, the King of Goryeo, King Baechun, and the princess came to see the emperor with their heir, King Seonwon.

古文：敕发思、播田、杨二家军二千从征缅。
现代文：敕令派遣思州、播州田、杨两家的士卒二千名从征缅国。
English: The imperial command dispatched two thousand soldiers from Shizhou, Banzhou, and Yang to conquer Burma.

古文：籍江南盐徒军，藏匿者有罪。
现代文：登记江南盐户从军的子弟入军册，藏匿者治罪。
English: The children of soldiers from Yanzu in the south of the Yangtze River will be registered to enter the military register, and those who hide will be punished.

古文：火儿忽等所部民户告饥，帝曰： 饥民不救，储粮何为？ 
现代文：火儿忽等人部属的民户陈告饥饿缺食，皇帝说： 不救济饥民，储存粮食干什么？ 
English: The emperor said, "If we don't help the hungry, what's the point of storing grain?

古文：发万石赈之。
现代文：发放一万石粮食赈济饥民。
English: 10,000 koku of grain was distributed to feed the hungry.

古文：命开元等路宣慰司造船百艘，付狗国戍军。
现代文：命令开元等路宣慰司建造一百艘船，交付给狗国的守军。
English: He ordered the construction of one hundred ships to be delivered to the defenders of the Dog Kingdom.

古文：云南行省为破缅国江头城，进童男女八十人，并银器币帛。
现代文：云南行省因为攻破了缅国的江头城，进献八十名童男女和银器、绢帛。
English: Yunnan Province presented 80 boys and girls with silverware and gongs for defeating Myanmar's Jiangtou City.

古文：五月己酉，从秃秃合言，立二千户，总钦察、康里子弟愿为国宣劳者。
现代文：五月初一，遵照秃秃合的意见，设立两名千户，统领钦察、康里愿意为国效劳的子弟。
English: On the first day of May, in accordance with the opinion of Bald Balding, two thousand households were set up, led by Qincha and Kangli, who were willing to serve the country.

古文：壬子，拘征东省印。
现代文：初四，扣留征东行省的印信。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the seal letter of the province of Donggang was detained.

古文：癸丑，枢密院臣言： 唆都溃军已令李恒收集，江淮、江西两省溃军，别遣使招谕，凡至者皆给之粮，舟楫损者修之，以俟阿里海牙调用。 
现代文：初五，枢密院大臣上奏说： 唆都溃散的部队已经命令李恒收集，江淮、江西两省的溃军另外派使臣前去招聚，凡是来的人都发给他们粮食，损坏了的船只进行修理，以待阿里海牙调用。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Minister of the Privy Council reported: Li Heng had ordered the troops that had been dispersed from the capital to be collected, and the defeated troops from the two provinces of Jianghuai and Jiangxi had also sent envoys to gather. Everyone who came gave them food, and the damaged ships were repaired to await the call of Ali Hague.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊午，敕中书省： 奏目及文册，皆不许用畏吾字，其宣命、札付并用蒙古书。 
现代文：初十，敕令中书省： 上奏的条目及文册都不允许用畏吾儿文，那些任命书、奏折都用蒙古文书写。 
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Education and Culture issued the following order: "It is not allowed to use the Mongolian script in any of the articles and catalogues. All the appointment letters and reports must be written in the Mongolian script."

古文：己未，荆湖占城行省言： 忽都虎、忽马儿等将兵征占城，前锋舟师至舒眉莲港不知所向，令万户刘君庆进军次新州，获占蛮，始知我军已还矣。
现代文：十一日，荆湖占城行省上奏说： 忽都虎、忽马儿等人率军征伐占城，前锋的水师抵达舒眉莲港以后，不知道该向什么地方前进。命令刘君庆进军，驻扎在新州抓住了占城的蛮族人，才知道我军已经回去了。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Jinghu provincial report on the occupation of the city said: "Hu Duhu, Hu Ma'er and others led the army to conquer and occupy the city. After the forward sailors arrived at Shu Meiliang Port, they did not know where to go. Liu Junqing was ordered to march, stationed in Xinzhou, and caught the barbarians who occupied the city. Only then did they know that our army had gone back.

古文：就遣占蛮向导至占城境，其国主遣阿不兰以书降，且言其国经唆都军马虏掠，国计已空，俟来岁遣嫡子以方物进。
现代文：立即派遣占城蛮人带路到了占城辖境，该国国王派遣阿不兰带着书信来投降，而且说他的国家经过唆都的兵马抢劫之后，国家财用已经空虚，待来年派遣嫡子带着地方特产前去向朝廷进贡。
English: The barbarians who occupied the city were immediately dispatched to lead the way to the territory under the jurisdiction of the city. The king of the country sent Aburan to surrender with a letter, and said that after his country was robbed by the soldiers and horses of the capital, the country's finances were empty. Next year, he would send his eldest son to pay tribute to the court with local special products.

古文：继遣其孙路司理勒蛰等奉表诣阙。 
现代文：接着又派遣他的孙子路司理勒蛰等人奉上表章前来朝廷。 
English: Next, he sent his grandson Lu Xilai and others to present the imperial seal to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，取高丽所产铁。
现代文：十七日，得到高丽所生产的铁。
English: On the 17th, they received the iron produced by Korea Institute.

古文：蠲江南今年田赋十分之二，其十八年已前逋欠未征者，尽免之。
现代文：免除江南今年田赋的十分之二；至元十八年以前拖欠未交的赋税全部免征。
English: Jiangnan will be exempted from two-tenths of this year's rice field tax; and all the tax arrears before the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty will be exempted.

古文：阿鲁忽奴言： 曩于江南民户中拨匠户三十万，其无艺业者多，今已选定诸色工匠，余十九万九百余户宜纵令为民。 
现代文：阿鲁忽奴上奏说 ：从前在江南民户中调拨的三十万匠户，其中大多数没有技艺。现在已经选定了各类工匠，余下的十九万零九百多户应该遣放他们为民。 
English: Arukunu reported as follows: "The 300,000 artisan households, most of which are unskilled, that were previously allocated among the households in the south of the Yangtze River, have now been selected, and the remaining 190,900 households should send them to the people.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诏谕各道提刑按察司分司事宜。
现代文：下诏晓谕各道提刑按察司分管的事务。
English: The following edict instructs each province to deal with the matter of sentencing according to the jurisdiction of the procuratorate.

古文：庚午，荆湖占城行省以兵进据乌马境，地近安南，请益兵，命鄂州达鲁花赤赵翥等奉玺书往谕安南。
现代文：二十二日，荆湖占城行省派兵进占乌马境域，地方靠近安南，请求增派援兵。命令鄂州镇守官赵翕等奉上玺书前往晓谕安南。
English: On the 22nd, Jinghu Zhancheng Province sent troops to occupy Uma territory, a place close to Annan, to request reinforcements. Ordered Huzhou town guard officer Zhao Wei and others to send a letter to Annan.

古文：河间任丘县民李移住谋叛，事觉伏诛。
现代文：河间府任丘县百姓李移住图谋叛乱，事情觉察后被处死。
English: Li, a commoner from Renqiu County, Kawama Prefecture, attempted to rebel by moving to another county. After the matter was discovered, he was put to death.

古文：括天下私藏天文图谶《太乙雷公式》、《七曜历》、《推背图》、《苗太监历》，有私习及收匿者罪之。
现代文：收聚天下私自藏匿的天文图谶《太乙雷公式》、《七曜历》、《推背图》、《苗太监历》，有暗中研习和收藏的，治罪。
English: The collection of the world's privately hidden astronomical charts, such as the Taiei-Lei formula, the seven-day calendar, the push-back chart, and the Miao-Tai monitoring calendar, including those secretly studied and collected, will be punished.

古文：丁丑，忽都虎、乌马儿、刘万户等率扬州省军二万赴唆都军前，遇风船散，其军皆溃。
现代文：二十九日，忽都虎、乌马儿、刘万户等率领扬州行省的水军二万人前往唆都军前，遇到大风船队失散，全军都瓦解了。
English: On the 29th, suddenly, the twenty thousand sailors of Yangzhou Province led by Tohu, Umar, Liu Wanyu and others went to the capital, but the fleet was dispersed in a gale, and the whole army collapsed.

古文：敕追乌马儿等诰命、虎符及部将所受宣敕，以河西孛鲁合答儿等代之，听阿里海牙节制。
现代文：敕令追缴乌马儿等人的诰命、虎符，以及他们的部将所接受的任命，派遣河西的孛鲁合答儿等人去代替他们，听从阿里海牙节制。
English: The imperial edict demanded the surrender of Umar's and others' sacred lives, the Tiger Emblem, as well as the appointment that their ministers had accepted, and sent in their place the followers of Zoroaster and others from the west of the river, who obeyed Ali Haig's restraint.

古文：闰五月己卯，封法里剌王为郡王，佩虎符。
现代文：闰五月初二，封法里剌王为郡王，佩戴虎符。
English: On the second day of the second lunar month of May, King Faridullah was crowned as the county king, wearing the tiger emblem.

古文：改思、播二州隶顺元路宣抚司，罢西南番安抚司，立总管府。
现代文：将思州、播州二州改属于顺元路宣抚司管辖。撤销西南番安抚司，成立总管府。
English: The two prefectures of Shizhou and Banzhou were placed under the jurisdiction of the Shunyuan Road Publicity and Reassurance Department, and the Southwest Patrol Publicity and Reassurance Department was abolished, and the General Administration Office was established.

古文：给西川蒙古军钞，使备铠仗，耕遂宁沿江旷土以食，四顷以下者免输地税。
现代文：赐给西川的蒙古军钱钞，让他们备办铠甲兵器，耕种遂宁沿江的空地以就食，凡耕种四顷以下土地的免交地税。
English: He gave money and banknotes to the Mongolian army in West River, let them prepare armored weapons, cultivate the open land along the Suining River for food, and exempt land tax for land under four hectares.

古文：命总帅汪惟正括四川民户。
现代文：命令总帅汪惟正登记四川的民户。
English: Generalissimo Wang Weizheng ordered the registration of Sichuan households.

古文：辛巳，加封卫辉路小清河神曰洪济威惠王。
现代文：初四，加封卫辉路小清河水神为 洪济威惠王 。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, the water god of the Xiaoqing River in Weihui Road, Gafeng, was named Hongji Weihui Wang.

古文：壬午，蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使八忽带征黄华回，进人口百七十一。
现代文：初五，蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使八忽带征讨黄华返回，收进人口一百七十一人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the command of the Mongolian bodyguards and relatives of the troops all returned the eight-hour band to recruit Huanghua, bringing in a population of one hundred and seventy-one.

古文：乙酉，以云南境内洪城并察罕章，隶皇太子。
现代文：初八，把云南境内的洪城合并入察罕章，隶属于皇太子。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Hongcheng in Yunnan was merged into Chahanzhang, which was subordinate to the crown prince.

古文：丙戌，行御史台自扬州迁于杭州。
现代文：初九，行御史台从扬州迁到杭州。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Executive History Department moved from Yangzhou to Hangzhou.

古文：庚寅，赐归附洞蛮官十八人衣，遣还。
现代文：十三日，赐给归顺的十八名蛮洞官员衣服，送他们返回。
English: On the 13th, they gave clothes to 18 officials of the barbarian dungeons who had surrendered, and sent them back.

古文：癸巳，赐北安王螭纽金印。
现代文：十六日，送给北安王带螭形钮键的金印。
English: On the 16th, a gold seal with a skull-shaped button was given to the King of Northern An.

古文：罢皮货所。
现代文：撤销皮货所。
English: Abolition of the fur-trading post.

古文：理算江南诸行省造征日本船隐币，诏按察司毋得沮挠。
现代文：清算江南各行省在建造征伐日本的战船中隐瞒的弊端，诏令各地按察司不得从中阻挠。
English: to clear up the hidden defects in the construction of warships for the conquest of Japan by the provinces in the south of the Yangtze River, and ordered the inspectors in various regions not to obstruct them.

古文：甲辰，安南国王世子陈日烜遣其中大夫陈谦甫贡玉杯、金瓶、珠绦、金领及白猿、绿鸠、币帛等物。
现代文：二十七日，安南国王的世子陈日火亘派遣他的中大夫陈谦甫进贡玉杯、金瓶、珠绦、金领，以及白猿、绿鸠、绢帛等物。
English: On the 27th, King Annan's heir, Chen Riguang, sent his middle doctor, Chen Qianfu, to pay tribute with jade cups, gold bottles, beads, gold collars, as well as white apes, green ferns, ferns and other things.

古文：丙午，以侍卫亲军万人修大都城。
现代文：二十九日，派遣一万名侍卫亲军修筑大都城垣。
English: On the 29th, he dispatched ten thousand bodyguards and troops to build the city walls.

古文：六月壬子，遣使分道寻访测验晷景、日月交食、历法。
现代文：六月初六，派遣使臣分路寻访、测量日影、日食和月食的发生、制定历法的方法。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：增官吏俸，以十分为率，不及一锭者量增五分。
现代文：增加官吏的俸禄，以十分作为一个级别，增加的俸钱不到一锭的，酌情增加五分。
English: Increase the salary of officials to ten points as a level, and if the salary increase is less than one baht, increase it by five points as appropriate.

古文：甲寅，诏封皇子脱欢为镇南王，赐涂金银印，驻鄂州。
现代文：初八，下诏封皇子脱欢为镇南王，赐给涂金的银印，驻留在鄂州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that the prince would no longer be the king of Zhenan, and gave him a gold-plated silver seal, which he kept in Ezhou.

古文：庚申，改蒙古都元帅府为蒙古都万户府，炮手元帅府为炮手万户府，炮手都元帅府为回回炮手军匠万户府。
现代文：十四日，把蒙古都元帅府改为蒙古都万户府，炮手元帅府改为炮手万户府，炮手都元帅府改为回回炮手军匠万户府。
English: On the 14th, the Mongolian Capital Marshal's Office was changed to the Mongolian Capital Wanyuan's Office, the Gunner's Marshal's Office was changed to the Gunner's Wanyuan's Office, and the Gunner's Marshal's Office was changed to the Gunner's Gunsmith's Wanyuan's Office.

古文：甲子，命也速带儿所部军六十人淘金双城。
现代文：十八日，命令也速带儿部下的士兵六十人在双城淘金。
English: On the 18th, the order was also given to quickly bring 60 soldiers from his subordinates to pan for gold in Shuangcheng.

古文：从憨答孙请，移阿剌带和林屯田军与其所部相合，屯田五河。
现代文：遵照憨答孙的请求，把阿剌带和和林的屯田军与他自己的部下相合，迁移到五河屯田。
English: In accordance with the request of his grandson, he combined the Ayu Belt and He Lin's Tonden Army with his own subordinates and moved them to the Wuhe Tonden.

古文：乙丑，中卫屯田蝗。
现代文：十九日，中卫的屯田发生蝗灾。
English: On the 19th, a locust plague broke out in Zhongwei's military garrison.

古文：甲戌，赐皇子爱牙赤怯薛带孛折等及兀剌海所部民户钞二万一千六百四十三锭，皇子南木合怯薛带、怯怜口一万二百四十六锭。
现代文：二十八日，赐给皇子爱牙赤的禁卫军士兵孛折等以及兀剌海所部的民户钱钞二万一千六百四十三锭，赐给皇子南木合的禁卫军、怯怜口钱钞一万零二百四十六锭。
English: On the 28th, twenty-one thousand six hundred and forty-three baht in banknotes were given to the soldiers of the Imperial Guard, who loved the prince, as well as to the private households in the central part of the Bohai Sea, and ten thousand two hundred and forty-six baht in banknotes were given to the Imperial Guard, who loved the prince.

古文：以马一万一百九十五、羊一万六十，赐朵鲁朵海紥剌伊儿所部贫军。
现代文：把一万零一百九十五匹马、一万零六十头羊赐给朵鲁朵海和札剌伊儿部下贫穷的士兵。
English: He gave ten thousand one hundred and ninety-five horses and ten thousand and sixty sheep to the poor soldiers of Dorudohai and the men of Zadokiel.

古文：秋七月丁丑朔，敕荆湖、西川两省合兵讨义巴、散毛洞蛮。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，敕令荆湖、西川两省合兵讨伐又巴、散毛洞蛮夷。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, the two provinces of Jinghu and Xichuan joined forces to fight against the barbarians in Yataba and Sanmaodong.

古文：云南省臣言： 腾越、永昌、罗必丹民心携贰，宜令也速带儿或汪总帅将兵讨之。 
现代文：云南行省大臣上奏说 ：腾越、永昌、罗必丹的百姓心怀异志，应当命令也速带儿或者汪总帅率军讨伐他们。 
English: The minister of Yunnan Province said in his report: The people of Tengyue, Yongchang, and Lopidan harbor different aspirations, and should be ordered to fight them with the army led by Wang Shoushuai.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇上批示说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：命枢密院差军修大都城。
现代文：命令枢密院派遣军队修缮大都的城垣。
English: Ordered the Privy Council to send troops to repair most of the city's walls.

古文：己卯，立衍福司。
现代文：初三，设立衍福司。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the Department of Prosperity was established.

古文：中书省臣言： 宰相之名，不宜轻授。
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说： 宰相的名义，不应当轻易授给。
English: The Minister of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report: The title of prime minister should not be given out easily.

古文：今占城省臣已及七人，宜汰之。 
现代文：如今占城的中书省大臣已经达到七人，应当将他们淘汰。 
English: There are now seven ministers of the Chinese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and they should be eliminated.

古文：诏军官勿带相衔。
现代文：诏令军官不得带有宰相的头衔。
English: Military officers are not allowed to hold the title of prime minister.

古文：赐皇子北安王印。
现代文：赐给王子北安王印信。
English: A letter with the seal of King Hokkien was given to the prince.

古文：复扬州管匠提举司。
现代文：恢复扬州管匠提举司。
English: Yangzhou Guanzhong Hoisting Office was restored.

古文：丁亥，江淮行省以占城所遣太半达连紥赴阙，及其地图来上。
现代文：十一日，江淮行省令占城所遣送来的铁匠前来朝廷，并把占城的地图带来献上。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the blacksmith sent by the Jianghuai Provincial Government to occupy the city came to the imperial court and presented the map of the city.

古文：塔剌赤言： 头辇哥国王出戍高丽，调旺速等所部军四百以往，今头辇哥已回，留军耽罗，去其妻子已久，宜令他军更戍。 
现代文：塔剌亦上奏说 ：头辇哥国王出兵戍守高丽，调遣旺速等人所率领的四百名士兵前往。如今头辇哥已经返回，部队留驻在耽罗，士兵们离开妻儿已经很久，应当令别的军队去换防。 
English: Thakur also reported that the king sent 400 soldiers, led by Wang So and others, to defend Goryeo. Now that the king has returned, the troops are stationed in Thang Lo. The soldiers have been away from their wives and children for a long time, and other troops should be sent to change the guard.

古文：伯颜等议，以高丽军千人屯耽罗，其留戍四百人纵之还家，从之。
现代文：伯颜等建议，派遣一千名高丽士兵驻守在耽罗，那留守的四百人遣放他们回家。
English: Bo Yan and others suggested sending a thousand Koryo soldiers to stay in Tamro, and the remaining four hundred sent them home.

古文：戊子，诏镇南王脱欢征占城。
现代文：皇帝允从。十二日，诏令镇南王脱欢征讨占城。
English: The emperor complied. On the 12th, he issued an imperial edict ordering the king of Zhenan to get rid of the hooligans and occupy the city.

古文：遣所留安南使黎英等还其国，日烜遣其中大夫阮道学等以方物来献。
现代文：遣发所留下的安南使臣黎英等人返回其本国，陈日火亘派遣他的中大夫阮道学等以当地特产前来献上。
English: Annan's envoy, Lai Ying, and others left behind at the dispatch office returned to their home countries, and Chen Ronghuo sent his doctor, Nguyen Dao Xu, and others to present local specialties.

古文：总帅汪惟正言： 一门兄弟从仕者众，乞仍于秦、巩州置便宜都总帅府，仍用元帅印，即其兄弟四人择一人为总帅，总帅之下总管府令其兼之。
现代文：总帅汪惟正上奏说： 我的一家兄弟中，在官场任职的很多，请仍旧在秦州、巩州设置便宜行事的都总帅府，仍然使用元帅的印信，就在我的四个兄弟中选择一人为总帅，总帅之下的总管府令其兼管。
English: Generalissimo Wang Wei Zheng said in his report: Among my brothers, many of whom are in the government, please still set up the Generalissimo's Office in Qinzhou and Gongzhou, which acts cheaply, still use the Marshal's seal, and choose one of my four brothers as the Generalissimo. The General Administration Office under the Generalissimo will also manage it.

古文：汪氏二人西川典兵者，亦择其一为万户，余皆依例迁转。 
现代文：汪氏在西川领兵的有两人，也挑选一个人担任万户，其余都按照常例调任他职。 
English: Mr. Wang had two people leading the troops in Xichuan. He also selected one person to be the leader of 10,000 households, and the rest were transferred to other positions in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：赐贫乏者阿鲁浑、玉龙帖木儿等钞，共七千四百八十锭。
现代文：赐给贫穷的人阿鲁浑、玉龙帖木儿等钱钞，总数为七千四百八十锭。
English: Alukhun, Yulong Timur and other banknotes were given to the poor, with a total of 7,480 baht.

古文：八月丁未，云南行省言： 华帖、白水江、盐井三处土老蛮叛，杀诸王及行省使者。 
现代文：八月初二，云南行省上奏说： 华帖、白水江、盐井三地的土老蛮部族叛乱，杀死诸侯王及行省的使者。 
English: On the second day of the first month of August, the envoy to Yunnan Province said: The barbarian tribes in Huate, Baishuijiang and Yanjing revolted and killed the princes and the envoys to the province.

古文：调兵千人讨之。
现代文：调兵一千人讨伐叛贼。
English: A thousand soldiers were dispatched to fight the traitors.

古文：定拟军官格例，以河西、回回、畏吾儿等依各官品充万户府达鲁花赤，同蒙古人，女直、契丹同汉人。
现代文：拟定军官的规格条例，以河西、回回、畏吾儿等部族的人，依照各自的官品充任万户府镇守官，与蒙古人相同；女真人、契丹人与汉人相同。
English: To draw up the specifications and regulations for officers, people from tribes such as the Hexi, Hui Hui, and Hui Wu'er will be appointed as town guards of all prefectures in accordance with their official titles, the same as the Mongolians; the Jurchen and Khitan people are the same as the Han people.

古文：若女直、契丹生西北不通汉语者，同蒙古人；女直生长汉地，同汉人。
现代文：如果女真人、契丹人是生长在西北的，不通汉语，则与蒙古人相同；如果是生长在汉族地区的女真人，则与汉人相同。
English: If a Jurchen or Khitan is born in the northwest and does not speak Chinese, he is the same as a Mongolian; if a Jurchen is born in a Han region, he is the same as a Han Chinese.

古文：己酉，御史台臣言： 无籍之军愿从军杀掠者，初假之以张渡江兵威，今各持弓矢，剽劫平民，若不分隶各翼，恐生他变。 
现代文：初四，御史台大臣上表说 ：没有正式军籍而愿意随军杀敌掳掠的士兵，当初是借助于他们以壮大渡江的军威。如今他们各自带着武器去抢劫普通百姓，如果不把他们分属于各营统辖，恐怕会生出别的事故。 
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Minister of Military History said at the table: soldiers who do not have an official military rank and are willing to follow the army to kill the enemy and plunder, initially with the help of them to strengthen the military prestige of crossing the river. Now they each carry weapons to rob ordinary people. If they are not divided into battalions, I am afraid that other accidents will occur.

古文：诏遣之还家。
现代文：皇帝下诏遣送他们回家。
English: The emperor gave the order to send them home.

古文：辛亥，征东招讨司聂古带言： 有旨进讨骨嵬，而阿里海牙、朵剌带、玉典三军皆后期。
现代文：初六，征东招讨司聂古带上奏说： 皇上有旨，命令出兵征讨骨嵬国，而阿里海牙、朵剌带、玉典三支军队都没有按期到达。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an order to send troops to conquer the country, but the three armies of Ali Haiga, Do Xizhe and Yuden did not arrive on schedule.

古文：七月之后，海风方高，粮仗船重，深虞不测，姑宜少缓。 
现代文：七月以后，正是海风大的时候，装着粮食、武器的船很重，很难预料会发生什么不测的事，应当暂且缓一步征讨。 
English: After July, when the sea breeze is strong, the ships carrying grain and weapons are very heavy, and it is difficult to predict what will happen. It is necessary to postpone the collection step for the time being.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：占城国王乞回唆都军，愿以土产岁修职贡，使太盘亚罗日加翳、大巴南等十一人奉表诣阙，献三象。
现代文：占城国王请求把唆都的军队调回去，愿意以本地特产每年向朝廷进贡。派遣大罗盘亚罗日加翳、大巴南等十一人奉上表章前来朝廷，献上三头驯象。
English: The king of Zhancheng requested that the army of the capital be transferred back, and was willing to pay tribute to the court every year with local special products. Eleven people, including the great compasses Aroshigayo and Dabanan, were sent to the court to present three tamed elephants.

古文：甲子，放福建畲军，收其军器，其部长于近处州郡民官迁转。
现代文：十九日，遣放福建的畲族军队，收回他们的武器，其部队的长官则升调为近处的州郡管理民事的官员。
English: On the 19th, the Dai troops in Fujian were dispatched and their weapons were recovered, and the commanders of their troops were promoted to be the officials in charge of civil affairs in the nearby counties.

古文：庚午，车驾至自上都。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝的车驾从上都返回京师。
English: On the 25th, the emperor's carriage drove from Shangdu back to Beijing.

古文：甲戌，搠完上言： 建都女子沙智治道立站有功，已授虎符，管领其父元收附民为万户。
现代文：二十九日，搠完上奏说： 建都的女子沙智治理地方建立驿站有功，已经授予虎符，管辖其父亲原来收附的百姓，担任万户。
English: On the 29th, Zou finished his report and said: The woman who built the capital, Shaji, has made great contributions to the local governance and the establishment of the post office. She has been awarded the Tiger Emblem, and will govern the people who were originally annexed by her father, and will serve 10,000 households.

古文：今改建昌路总管，仍佩虎符。 
现代文：现在改授为建昌路总管，仍旧佩戴虎符。 
English: Now he has been reclassified as the head of Jianchang Road, and still wears the tiger emblem.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九月甲申，京师地震。
现代文：九月初十，京师发生地震。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：并市舶司入盐运司，立福建等处盐课市舶都转运司。
现代文：把市舶司合并入盐运司，设立福建等地盐课市舶都转运司。
English: The city shipping department was merged into the salt transportation department, and the salt transportation department of the city of Fujian and other places was established.

古文：中书省言： 福建行省军饷绝少，必于扬州转输，事多迟误。
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：福建行省的军饷极少，必须从扬州转运，事情大多被延误。
English: According to a report from the General Office of the People's Republic of China (PRC) General Administration of Press and Publication, very few military supplies were sent to Fujian Province. They had to be transported from Yangzhou, and most of the items were delayed.

古文：若并两省为一，分命省臣治泉州为便。 
现代文：如果把两个行省合并为一个，命省臣在泉州设立一个分省则较为方便。 
English: If the two provinces are merged into one, it would be more convenient to set up a sub-province in Quanzhou.

古文：诏以中书右丞、行省事忙兀台为江淮等处行中书省平章政事，其行省左丞忽剌出、蒲寿庚，参政管如德分省泉州。
现代文：下诏任命中书右丞、暂掌行省事务的忙兀台为江淮等处行中书省平章政事，该行省左丞忽剌出、蒲寿庚和参知政事管如德在泉州掌管分省事务。
English: The following edict appointed the Vice-governor of Central Shandong Province, Ping Zhang, who was temporarily in charge of provincial affairs, as the Vice-governor of Central Shandong Province, and the Vice-governors of Central Shandong Province, Quanzhou, as the Vice-governor of Central Shandong Province, Quanzhou, and Quanzhou, and the Vice-governors of Central Shandong Province, Quanzhou, as the Vice-governor of Central Shandong Province, Quanzhou.

古文：癸巳，太白犯南斗。
现代文：十九日，太白金星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On the 19th, it was too white for Venus to commit a crime.

古文：丙申，以江南总摄杨琏真加发宋陵冢所收金银宝器修天衣寺。
现代文：二十二日，把江南总管杨琏真加发掘亡宋陵墓所得到的金银财宝用来修建天衣寺。
English: On the 22nd, the gold, silver and treasure obtained from the excavation of the dead Song Dynasty mausoleum by Yang Xizhen, the head of the Southern Jiangsu Province, was used to build Tianyi Temple.

古文：甲辰，海南贡白虎、狮子、孔雀。
现代文：三十日，海南进贡白虎、狮子、孔雀。
English: On the 30th, Hainan paid tribute to the white tiger, lion and peacock.

古文：冬十月丁未，享于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月初三，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: In winter, on the third day of October, offerings are made to the Great Temple.

古文：戊申，四川行省言金齿遗民尚多未附，以要剌海将探马赤军二千讨之。
现代文：初四，四川行中书省上奏说： 金齿国的百姓还有很多没有归附，派遣要剌海率领二千名探马赤军前去讨伐他们。 
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Education and Culture issued a report on the Sichuan trip, saying: There are still a lot of people in the Golden Tooth Country who have not joined, and it is necessary to send Bohai to lead two thousand Red Army soldiers to fight them.

古文：己酉，敕： 管军万户为行省宣慰使者，毋兼管军事；仍为万户者，毋兼莅民政。 
现代文：初五，敕令： 管军万户担任行省宣慰使的，不得兼管军事；仍旧担任万户的，不得兼理民政。 
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued: Those who have served as provincial propaganda and consolation envoys must not also be in charge of military affairs; those who still serve as provincial propaganda and consolation envoys must not also be in charge of civil affairs.

古文：壬子，定涟海等处屯田法。
现代文：初八，制定涟海等处屯田法。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Tonden Law was enacted in Bohai and other places.

古文：辛酉，征东招讨司以兵征骨嵬。
现代文：十七日，征东招讨司派兵征伐骨嵬。
English: On the 17th, the East Conquest Invitation Division sent soldiers to collect bones.

古文：宋有手记军，死则以兄弟若子继，诏依汉军籍之，毋文其手。
现代文：亡宋有一支在手上刺上标记的军队，士兵战死了则以兄弟或儿子继任，皇帝下诏，按照汉军的体制将他们登记入籍，但不要再把他们的手刺上标记。
English: In the late Song Dynasty, there was an army of soldiers who were marked with thorns on their hands. When soldiers died in battle, they were succeeded by their brothers or sons. The emperor issued an edict to register them for naturalization in accordance with the system of the Chinese army, but not to mark their thorns on their hands.

古文：丁卯，和礼霍孙请设科举，诏中书省议，会和礼霍孙罢，事遂寝。
现代文：二十三日，和礼霍孙请求设立科举考试，皇帝诏命中书省讨论，适逢和礼霍孙罢官，事情便搁置下来。
English: On the 23rd, He Lihuosun requested the establishment of the imperial examination, and the emperor issued an edict to discuss it with the Ministry of Education. When He Lihuosun was dismissed, the matter was put on hold.

古文：以招讨使张万为征缅招讨使，佩三珠虎符。
现代文：任命招讨使张万为征缅招讨使，佩戴三珠虎符。
English: Zhang Wan was appointed as the highest-ranking envoy to recruit Burmese and wear the three-pearl tiger emblem.

古文：戊辰，立常平仓，以五十万石价钞给之。
现代文：二十四日，建立常平仓粮库，供给可购五十万石粮食的钱钞。
English: On the 24th, a grain depot was built from the Changping warehouse, supplying banknotes for purchasing 500,000 koku of grain.

古文：甲戌，诏谕行中书省，凡征日本船及长年篙手，并官给钞增价募之。
现代文：三十日，下诏晓谕行中书省，凡是征用来讨伐日本的船只和长年撑船的篙手，都由官府付钱，增价招募他们。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict issued by the Ministry of Education and Culture decreed that all ships that had been requisitioned to fight against Japan, as well as sailors who had been manning the ships for many years, would be paid for by the government, and they would be recruited at a higher price.

古文：赐贫乏者押失、忻都察等钞一万四千三锭。
现代文：赐给押失、忻都察等贫穷的人钱钞一万四千零二锭。
English: 14,020 baht in cash and banknotes were given to destitute people such as those who lost their homes and those who were forced to leave their homes.

古文：十一月甲申，封南木里、忙哥赤郡公。
现代文：十一月十一日，封南木里、忙哥赤为郡公。
English: On November 11th, Fengnan Mili and Busy Brother Aka became county magistrates.

古文：戊子，命北京宣慰司修滦河道。
现代文：十五日，命令北京宣慰司修治滦河的河道。
English: On the 15th, he ordered the Beijing Propaganda and Consolation Department to repair the course of the Fenhe River.

古文：己丑，江西行省参知政事也的迷失禽获海盗黎德及招降余党百三十三人，即其地诛黎德以徇，以黎德弟黎浩及伪招讨吴兴等槛送京师。
现代文：十六日，江西行省参知政事也的迷失擒获海盗黎德，并招降他的余党一百三十三人，就在当地将黎德依法处死，把黎德的弟弟黎浩，以及伪招讨使吴兴等人用囚槛押送到京师。
English: On the 16th, the pirates Li De, who had gone to Jiangxi Province to seek political advice, and who had also lost his way, captured him, and subdued the remaining one hundred and thirty-three members of his party. They executed Li De in accordance with the law on the spot, and sent Li De's brother Li Hao, as well as Wu Xing and others, who had been falsely solicited, to Beijing.

古文：迁转官员薄而不就者，其令归农当役。
现代文：调职的官员嫌地方太穷而不去就职的，命他们归耕务农，承担徭役。
English: The officials who were transferred to the new posts did not like the fact that the region was too poor for them to take up their posts, so they were ordered to return to farming and agricultural work and take on the role of foremen.

古文：庚寅，占城国王遣使大罗盘亚罗日加翳等奉表来贺圣诞节，献礼币及象二，占城旧州主宝嘉娄亦奉表入附。
现代文：十七日，占城国王派遣使臣大罗盘亚罗日加翳等奉上表章，前来恭贺皇帝的寿诞佳节，献上礼金及两头驯象。占城旧州的头人宝嘉娄也奉上表章入朝归附。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the king of Chamcheng sent envoys such as the great compass, Alorizhgayu, to come to congratulate the emperor on his birthday, presenting gifts and two elephants. Bao Jiayu, the head of the old state of Chamcheng, also presented the last watch chapter to the dynasty.

古文：庚子，以范文虎为左丞，商量枢密院事。
现代文：二十七日，任命范文虎为左丞，参议枢密院事务。
English: On the 27th, Fan Wenhu was appointed as the left-hand man of the Privy Council.

古文：太阴犯心。
现代文：太阴星干犯星宿天区。
English: Too gloomy a star makes the criminal's heart stay in the heavens.

古文：辛丑，和礼霍孙、麦术丁、张雄飞、温迪罕皆罢。
现代文：二十八日，和礼霍孙、麦术丁、张雄飞、温迪罕都被革职。
English: On the 28th, He Lihuosun, Mei Zhuting, Zhang Xiongfei, and Wendi Han were all dismissed.

古文：前右丞相安童复为右丞相，前江西榷茶运使卢世荣为右丞，前御史中丞史枢为左丞，不鲁迷失海牙、撒的迷失并参知政事，前户部尚书拜降参议中书省事。
现代文：前右丞相安童重新担任右丞相，前江西榷茶转运使卢世荣担任右丞，前御史中丞史枢担任左丞，不鲁迷失海牙、撒的迷失均任参知政事，前户部尚书拜降参议中书省事务。
English: Former Vice-Minister of the Right Andong was reappointed Vice-Minister of the Right, former Vice-Minister of Jiangxi Tea Transport Lu Shirong was appointed Vice-Minister of the Right, former Vice-Minister of History Zhongzheng and Vice-Minister of History Zu were appointed Vice-Minister of the Left, both Vice-Minister of the Right and Vice-Minister of the Left were appointed Vice-Minister of Government, and former Vice-Minister of the Household Shang Shubei was appointed Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China and Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China.

古文：敕中书省整治钞法，定金银价，禁私自回易，官吏奉行不虔者罪之。
现代文：敕令中书省整顿钞法，核定金银的钞价，禁止私自交易，官吏奉行不认真的，治罪。
English: In the imperial edict, the central government rectified the banknote law, approved the banknote price of gold and silver, prohibited private transactions, and punished officials who did not take it seriously.

古文：壬寅，安童、卢世荣言： 阿合马专政时所用大小官员，例皆奏罢，其间岂无通才？
现代文：二十九日，安童、卢世荣上奏说 ：阿合马专权时所任用的大小官员，全部都被奏请罢职，其中难道没有通达而有才能的人？
English: On the 29th, Andong and Lu Shirong made a report, saying, "All the officials, big and small, who were appointed at the time of the Aahama dictatorship have been asked to resign. Aren't there any intelligent and talented people among them?

古文：宜择可用者仍用之。 
现代文：应当选择可以任用的仍旧任用他们。 
English: Those who can be appointed should be chosen and they should be appointed.

古文：诏依所言汰选，毋徇私情。
现代文：下诏照他们所说的进行淘汰、挑选，不得曲从私情。
English: The following edict is to carry out the elimination and selection as they said, and must not be influenced by personal feelings.

古文：癸卯，福建行省遣使入八合鲁思招降南巫里、别里剌、理伦、大力等四国，各遣其相奉表以方物来贡。
现代文：三十日，福建行省派遣使者八合鲁思去招降南巫里、别里剌、理伦、大力等四国，四国国王各派遣其宰相奉上表章，带着当地特产前来朝贡。
English: On the 30th, the Fujian Provincial Government sent an envoy, Yahe Lu Si, to invite four countries, including Nanwuli, Beilizhou, Liren, and Deli, to surrender. The kings of the four countries each sent their chancellors to present the imperial seal and brought local special products to pay tribute.

古文：以江淮间自襄阳至东海多荒田，命司农司立屯田法，募人开耕，免其六年租税并一切杂役。
现代文：因为江淮间从襄阳到东海有很多荒田，命令司农司制定屯田法，招募百姓进行耕种，免征其六年的租税和一切杂役。
English: Because there are a lot of wasteland between the Yangtze River and the Huai River from Xiangyang to the East China Sea, he ordered the Department of Agriculture to formulate the Tun Tian Law, recruit people to cultivate, and exempt them from taxes and all miscellaneous services for six years.

古文：赐蒙古贫乏者也里古、薛列海、察吉儿等钞十二万四千七百二十二锭。
现代文：赐给蒙古的穷人也里古、薛列海、察吉儿等钱钞十二万四千七百二十二锭。
English: 124,722 baht was given to the poor people of Mongolia in the form of money and banknotes such as Yeriku, Xerehei, and Chakir.

古文：十二月甲辰朔，中书省臣言： 江南官田为权豪寺观欺隐者多，宜免其积年收入，限以日期，听人首实，逾限为人所告者，征以其半给告者。 
现代文：十二月初一，中书省大臣上奏说： 江南的官田被有权势的人和寺庙道观所欺骗、隐瞒的很多，应当没收他们积年所收入的田租，限定时间，听任人们出首告发被隐瞒田产的实数。超过了期限而被人告发的，把所征田租的一半给那告发的人。 
English: On the first day of December, the Minister of the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China'

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：立常平盐局。
现代文：设立常平盐局。
English: The Changping Salt Bureau was established.

古文：乙巳，崔彧言卢世荣不可为相，忤旨罢。
现代文：初二，崔上奏说卢世荣不能够担任宰相，这顶撞了圣旨，被革职。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Cui Shangsoo said that Lu Shirong could not serve as prime minister, which ran counter to the holy will and was dismissed.

古文：以丁壮万人开神山河，立万户府以总之。
现代文：派一万名壮丁去挖掘神山河，设置万户府以掌管这件事。
English: Send ten thousand strong men to dig up the Kamiyama River, and set up the Wanyu Prefecture to take charge of the matter.

古文：辛亥，以仪凤司隶卫尉院。
现代文：初八，把仪凤司隶属于卫尉院。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the year, Yi Feng Shi was subordinated to the Guards Academy.

古文：癸亥，卢世荣言： 京师富豪户酿酒，价高而味薄，以致课不时输，宜一切禁罢，官自酤卖，向之岁课，一月可办。 
现代文：二十日，卢世荣上奏说： 京师有钱的豪门大户所酿造的酒，价钱高而酒味薄，以至于酒税不能按时交纳，应当全部禁止酿造，由官府自己酿造卖售。原来一年所得的酒税，一个月就可以收得。 
English: On the 20th, Lu Shirong made a report, saying: The wine brewed by the rich and powerful families in Beijing is expensive and has a weak taste, so that the liquor tax cannot be paid on time. All brewing should be banned, and the government should brew and sell the wine itself. The liquor tax originally earned in one year can be collected in one month.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲子，以高丽提举司隶工部。
现代文：二十一日，把高丽提举司隶属于工部。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Koryo Construction Division was subordinated to the Engineering Department.

古文：乙丑，祀太一。
现代文：二十二日，祭祀太一神。
English: On the 22nd, the worship of Taichin came to an end.

古文：丙寅，荆湖占城行省遣八番刘继昌谕降龙昌宁、龙延万等赴阙，奉羊马、白毡来贡，各授本处安抚使。
现代文：二十三日，荆湖占城行省派遣八番的、刘继昌招降龙昌宁、龙延万等前来朝廷，龙昌宁等带着羊、马、白毡前来进贡，朝廷向他们各授以本地的安抚使。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Jichang sent eight emissaries to Zhangcheng, Jinghu Province, including Long Changning and Long Yanwan, who were recruited by Liu Jichang, to the imperial court. Long Changning came to pay tribute with sheep, horses and egrets, and the imperial court gave them each a local pacifying envoy.

古文：立宣慰司，招抚西南诸蕃等处酋长。
现代文：设立宣慰司，招抚西南各藩部的酋长。
English: The Consolation Division was established to consult with the chieftains of the southwestern domains.

古文：癸酉，命翰林承旨撒里蛮、翰林集贤大学士许国祯，集诸路医学教授增修《本草》。
现代文：三十日，命令翰林学士承旨撒里蛮、翰林集贤大学士许国祯召集各路的医学教授增修《本草》。
English: On the 30th, he ordered Hanlin B.A. Sariman and Hanlin Jixian University Scholar Xu Guozhen to summon medical professors from all walks of life to revise "The Materia Medica."

古文：是月，镇南王军至安南，杀其守兵，分六道以进，安南兴道王以兵拒于万劫，进击败之，万户倪闰战死于刘村。
现代文：当月，镇南王的军队抵达安南，杀死其守军，分成六路进军。安南的兴道王率军在万劫抵抗，镇南王发起进攻，击败了他。万户倪闰在刘村战死。
English: That month, Zhenan Wang's army arrived in Annan, killed its defenders and marched in six directions. Annan's Xingdao Wang led the army in resistance, Zhenan Wang launched an attack and defeated him. Wanyu Ni Yue died in Liu Village.

古文：以泾州隶都总帅府、赐蒙古贫乏者兀马儿等钞二千八百八十五锭、银四十锭。
现代文：把泾州隶属于都总帅府。赐给贫困的蒙古人兀马儿等人钱钞二千八百八十五锭、银两四十锭。
English: He subordinated Zhangzhou to the General Headquarters of the Capital and gave the impoverished Mongolians, such as Xing Maer and others, money in the amount of 2885 baht and 240 baht in silver.

古文：二十二年春正月戊寅，以命相诏天下。
现代文：至元二十二年春，正月初五，把皇帝的命相下诏昭告天下。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emperor's life was announced to the world.

古文：民间买卖金银、怀孟诸路竹货、江淮以南江河鱼利，皆弛其禁。
现代文：对于民间买卖金银、怀孟等路产的竹制品、江淮以南江河的渔业之利，都放宽有关的禁令。
English: For the private trade of gold and silver, bamboo products such as Huai Meng and the benefits of fisheries in the rivers south of the Yangtze and Huai Rivers, the relevant prohibitions have been relaxed.

古文：诸处站赤饮食，官为支给。
现代文：各地驿站的饮食由官府支付费用。
English: Fees for meals at stations around the country are paid by the government.

古文：遣官诸路虑囚，罪轻者释之。
现代文：派遣官员到各地查询审判囚犯的情况，罪行轻微的，将他们释放。
English: Send officials to various regions to inquire about the status of the trials of prisoners, and release them if their crimes are minor.

古文：徙屯卫辉新附军六千家，廪之京师，以完仓廪。
现代文：把屯驻在卫辉的六千新归附的军户迁徙到京师，以完成粮仓的修建。
English: The six thousand newly annexed military households stationed in Weihui will be relocated to Beijing Division to complete the construction of grain silos.

古文：发五卫军及新附军浚蒙村漕渠。
现代文：派遣五卫军和新附军的士兵去疏浚蒙村的河道。
English: Send the soldiers of the Fifth Guards Army and the New Annexed Army to dredge the river in Mengcun.

古文：庚辰，立别十八里驿传。
现代文：初七，设立别十八里驿站。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the Beixiaoli Railway Station was established.

古文：毁宋郊天台。
现代文：拆毁亡宋在郊外祀天的祭坛。
English: Tear down the altars that worshipped Heaven in the suburbs in the late Song Dynasty.

古文：桑哥言： 杨琏真加云，会稽有泰宁寺，宋毁之以建宁宗等攒宫；钱唐有龙华寺，宋毁之以为南郊。
现代文：桑哥上奏说： 杨辇真加说：会稽有一座泰宁寺，宋朝将它拆毁之后，用来修建停放宁宗等人棺木的攒宫；钱塘有一座龙华寺，宋朝拆毁之后作为南郊的祭坛。
English: Sango Shangso said: Yang Xizhenga said: there is a Taining Temple in Hefei, after the Song Dynasty demolished it, it was used to build a storage palace for the coffins of Ningzong and others; there is a Longhua Temple in Qiantang, after the Song Dynasty demolished it, it was used as an altar in the southern suburbs.

古文：皆胜地也，宜复为寺，以为皇上、东宫祈寿。 
现代文：这些都是胜地，应当恢复为寺庙，作为皇上、太子祈求寿考的地方。 
English: These are places of interest and should be restored as temples, as places for emperors and princes to pray for longevity.

古文：时宁宗等攒宫已毁建寺，敕毁郊天台，亦建寺焉。
现代文：当时宁宗等人的攒宫已被毁掉建造寺庙。皇上敕令拆毁祀天的祭坛，也在这里建造寺庙。
English: At that time, the temple of Ningzong and others had been destroyed to build a temple. The emperor ordered the demolition of the altar dedicated to heaven and the construction of a temple here.

古文：壬午，诏立市舶都转运司。
现代文：初九，下诏设立市舶都转运使司。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, it was decided to set up the Municipal Bureau of Shipping.

古文：立上都等路群牧都转运使司、诸路常平盐铁坑冶都转运司。
现代文：设立上都等路群牧都转运使司、诸路常平盐铁坑冶都转运使司。
English: Set up the Shangdu and other roads, the herdsmen and herdsmen, and all roads, the Changping salt and iron pits, and the metallurgists.

古文：甲申，遣使代祀五岳、四渎、东海、后土。
现代文：十一日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五大山、四大水、东海和后土神。
English: On the 11th day, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the five great mountains, the four great waters, the East Sea and the deities of the hinterland.

古文：戊子，阔阔你敦言： 先有旨遣军二千屯田芍陂，试土之肥硗，去秋已收米二万余石，请增屯士二千人。 
现代文：十五日，阔阔你敦上奏说： 早先皇上有旨，派遣两千名士兵在芍陂屯田，以试验土地的肥瘠，去年秋天已经收获粮米二万多石，希望增派屯田的士兵二千人。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Kuokou Youton reported to the emperor, "Earlier, the emperor had the idea of sending two thousand soldiers to test the fertility of the land. Last autumn, more than twenty thousand koku of grain and rice were harvested. I hope to send an additional two thousand soldiers to Tongtian.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：徙江南乐工八百家于京师。
现代文：把江南的八百户乐工迁徙到京师来。
English: He moved 800 families of musicians from the south of the Yangtze River to Beijing.

古文：封驸马唆郎哥为宁昌郡王，赐龟纽银印。
现代文：封驸马唆郎哥为宁昌郡王，赐给他饰有龟形钮键的银印。
English: He crowned Ma Yue's younger brother as the king of Ningchang County and gave him a silver seal decorated with a turtle-shaped button.

古文：西川赵和尚自称宋福王子广王以诳民，民有信者；真定民刘驴儿有三乳，自以为异，谋不轨；事觉，皆磔裂以徇。
现代文：西川的赵和尚自称亡宋福王的儿子广王以欺骗百姓，百姓有相信的；真定的百姓刘驴儿有三乳，自以为与众不同，图谋不轨。
English: Zhao Monk of West River claimed to be Guang Wang, the son of the late King Songfu, in order to deceive the people, but the people did not believe him. The true people believed that Liu Xie'er had three breasts, thought he was different from others, and plotted against him.

古文：移五条河屯田军五百于兀失蛮、札失蛮。
现代文：事情被发觉以后，两人都依法被凌迟处死。把五条河的五百名屯田军迁移到兀失蛮、扎失蛮地方。
English: After the matter was discovered, both of them were executed according to the law. Five hundred soldiers from Wujiahe were relocated to Zhaozhuang and Zhaozhuang.

古文：辛卯，发诸卫军六千八百人给护国寺修造。
现代文：十八日，调拨各卫的士兵六千八百人供建造护国寺之用。
English: On the 18th, 6,800 soldiers from each branch of the Imperial Guard were assigned to the construction of a national defense temple.

古文：广御史台赃罚库。
现代文：扩建御史台的赃罚库。
English: Expansion of Gohsidai's 罚庫.

古文：癸巳，枢密臣言： 旧制四宿卫各选一人参决枢密院事，请以脱列伯为佥院。 
现代文：二十日，枢密院大臣上奏说： 按照旧制，在四支宿卫军中各选一人参与枢密院事务的决策，请任命脱列伯为枢密院佥事。 
English: On the 20th, the Minister of the Privy Council reported: In accordance with the old system, one person from each of the four guards should be elected to participate in the decision-making of the Privy Council's affairs. Please appoint Drebber as a Privy Councillor.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诏括京师荒地，令宿卫士耕种。
现代文：下诏统计京师地区的荒地，命宿卫的士兵耕种。
English: The following statistics show the wasteland in the Beijing Division area, cultivated by the soldiers of the Life Guards.

古文：乙未，中书省臣请以御史大夫玉速帖木儿为左丞相，中书撒里蛮为御史大夫。罢行御史台，以其所属按察司隶御史台，行御史台大夫拨鲁罕为中书省平章政事。
现代文：二十二日，中书省大臣请求任命御史大夫玉速帖木儿为左丞相，任命御史中丞撒里蛮为御史大夫；撤销行御史台，把原先属于行御史台的按察司隶属于御史台；行御史台大夫拨鲁罕担任中书省平章政事。
English: On the 22nd, the Minister of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy requested the appointment of the Chief Historian, Tamehaya Timur, as the Minister of the Left, and the appointment of the Chief Historian, Tomo Chujo Sariman, as the Chief Historian; the Executive Historian's Office was revoked, and the Inspector of the Executive Historian's Office, which originally belonged to the Executive Historian's Office, was subordinated to the Executive Historian's Office; the Executive Historian's Office's Chief Historian, Zhu Luhan, served as the Political Affairs Officer of the Executive Historian's Office.

古文：帝曰： 玉速帖木儿朕当思之，拨鲁罕宽缓，不可。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：玉速帖木儿我可以考虑；拨鲁罕为人松懈迟缓，不可以。 
English: The emperor said, "I can consider Tamaseki Timur; I cannot consider Zilu, who is a lazy person.

古文：安童对曰： 阿必赤合何如？ 帝曰： 此事朕自处之。
现代文：安童说： 合必赤怎么样？ 皇帝说 ：这件事我自己会处理。
English: Ando said, "How about Hebei Red?" The emperor said, "I'll take care of it myself."

古文：罢行御史台者，当如所奏。 
现代文：撤销行御史台的事当按你们上奏的意见办理。 
English: The matter of revoking the executive history platform should be handled according to your opinions.

古文：卢世荣请罢福建行中书省，立宣慰司，隶江西行中书省。
现代文：卢世荣请求撤销福建行中书省，设立宣慰司，隶属于江西行中书省。
English: Lu Shirong requested the revocation of Fujian Province of Chinese Calligraphy and the establishment of the Department of Chinese Calligraphy, which is affiliated with Jiangxi Province of Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：又言： 江南行中书省事繁，恐致壅滞，今随行省立行枢密院总兵，以分其务为便。 
现代文：又说： 江南行中书省事务繁忙，恐怕造成办事阻塞、停滞，现在应当随各行中书省设立行枢密院以掌管军事，分担行中书省的事务，较为有利。 
English: He also said: The affairs of the provinces in the south of the Yangtze River are busy, which is likely to cause the obstruction and stagnation of affairs. Now it is more advantageous to set up a privy council with each province to control the military and share the affairs of the provinces.

古文：帝曰： 行院之事，前日已言，由阿合马欲其子忽辛兼兵柄而止，今议行之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 行枢密院的事情，前天已经说过，因为阿合马想让他的儿子忽辛兼掌兵权而中止了这件事，现在可以商量实行。 
English: The emperor said, "The matter of the Privy Council, which we discussed the day before yesterday, and which Ahama suspended because he wanted his son, Qu Hsin, to assume military power, can now be discussed and carried out.

古文：流征占城擅还将帅二十三人于远方。
现代文：把征伐占城而擅自返回的二十三名将帅发配到远方。
English: The twenty-three men who returned without permission from the conquest and occupation of the city were sent far away.

古文：丙申，帝畋于近郊。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝在京师的近郊行猎。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：升武备监为武备寺，尚医监为太医院，职俱三品，升六部为二品。
现代文：把武备监升格为武备寺，尚医监升格为太医院，职俸都是三品。把六部升格为二品。
English: The Wu Bei Supervisor was upgraded to the Wu Bei Temple, and the Shang Medical Supervisor was upgraded to the Tai Hospital, and the salaries were all three products. The six departments were upgraded to two products.

古文：以合必赤合为中书平章政事，命礼部领会同馆。
现代文：任命合必赤为中书平章政事。命令礼部管辖会同馆。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to supervise the association and the museum.

古文：初，外国使至，常令翰林院主之，至是改正。
现代文：原先外国的使臣来到，总是让翰林院主管，这时才改变过来。
English: In the past, when foreign envoys came, they always asked the head of the Hanlin Academy to lead them, but this has now changed.

古文：荆湖占城行省平叛蛮百六十六洞。
现代文：荆湖占城行省平定叛乱的蛮洞一百六十六个。
English: There are 166 barren caves in Jinghu, which is the capital of the province.

古文：诏禁私酒。
现代文：下诏禁止私人酿酒。
English: The following edict prohibited private brewing of alcohol.

古文：己亥，分江浙行省所治南康隶江西省。
现代文：二十六日，分出江浙行省所辖治的南康隶属于江西行省。
English: On the 26th, Nankang, which is under the jurisdiction of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, was subordinated to Jiangxi Province.

古文：辛丑，以杨兀鲁带为征骨嵬招讨使，佩二珠虎符。
现代文：二十八日，任命杨兀鲁带为征伐骨嵬招讨使，佩戴二珠虎符。
English: On the 28th, Yang Bailu was appointed as the envoy for the bone-cutting campaign, wearing the two-pearl tiger emblem.

古文：壬寅，造大樽于殿，樽以木为质，银内而金外，镂为云龙，高一丈七寸。
现代文：二十九日，在殿上制造一个大酒樽，酒樽以木头作为内胎，内壁是银，外壁是金，雕镂着云龙，高一丈零七寸。
English: On the 29th, a large wine barrel was made in the hall. The wine barrel was made of wood as the inner tube, the inner wall was silver, the outer wall was gold, and it was carved with a cloud dragon. It was 0.7 inches high.

古文：是月壬午，乌马儿领兵与安南兴道王遇，击败之，兵次富良江北。
现代文：当月初九，乌马儿率军和安南兴道王的军队遭遇，将他击败，军队驻扎在富良江北岸。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Umar and his army encountered the army of King Annan Xingdao and defeated him. The army was stationed on the north bank of the Fulang River.

古文：乙酉，安南世子陈日烜领战船千余艘以拒。
现代文：十二日，安南国的世子陈日火亘率领一千多艘战船进行抵抗。
English: On the 12th, Chen Riguang, the son of Annan, led more than a thousand warships to resist.

古文：丙戌，与战，大破之，日烜遁去，入其城。
现代文：十三日，官军与安南军接战，将敌军打得大败，陈日火亘逃走。乌马儿进入敌城之后，回军驻扎在富良江北岸。
English: On the 13th, the government army fought with Annan's army, defeated the enemy army and fled. After Umar entered the enemy city, the Hui army was stationed on the north bank of the Fura River.

古文：还屯富良江北，唆都、唐古带等引兵与镇南王会。
现代文：唆都、唐古带等领兵与镇南王会师。
English: The leaders of the army, such as Yu Du and Tang Gu Zi, joined forces with Zhenan Wang.

古文：二月乙巳，驻跸柳林。
现代文：二月初二，皇上驻跸于柳林。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：增济州漕舟三千艘，役夫万二千人。
现代文：增加济州漕运的船只三千艘，船夫一万二千人。
English: The number of vessels of Jeju Rowing Transport will increase by 3,000, and the number of boatmen will increase by 12,000.

古文：初，江淮岁漕米百万石于京师，海运十万石，胶、莱六十万石，而济之所运三十万石，水浅舟大，恒不能达，更以百石之舟，舟用四人，故夫数增多。
现代文：最初，从江淮每年漕运粮米一百万石到京师，其中海运十万石，胶州、莱州运去六十万石，而济州所运为三十万石，水浅船大，常常不能运到。后来改用能装一百石的船，每条船用四个人，因而船工的人数增加了。
English: At first, one million koku of grain and rice were transported from Jianghuai to Beijing-Shi every year, of which 100,000 koku were transported by sea, and 600,000 koku were transported from Jiaozhou and Laizhou, while 300,000 koku were transported from Jeju. The water was shallow and the ships were large, so it was often impossible to transport them. Later, ships with a capacity of 100 koku were used, with four people on each ship, so the number of ship workers increased.

古文：塞浑河堤决，役夫四千人。
现代文：用民工四千人堵塞浑河堤防的决口。
English: Four thousand migrant workers are being used to plug the breach in the Hun River levee.

古文：诏改江淮、江西元帅招讨司为上中下三万户府，蒙古、汉人、新附诸军相参，作三十七翼。
现代文：下诏把江淮、江西元帅招讨司改为上、中、下三个万户府，蒙古人、汉人、新归附的各军互相混杂，编为三十七营。
English: The next edict changed the recruiting stations for the marshals of the Jianghuai and Jiangxi Provinces into the upper, middle, and lower three wanfu, and the Mongolian, Han, and newly annexed armies were mixed together and organized into thirty-seven battalions.

古文：上万户：宿州、蕲县、真定、沂郯、益都、高邮、沿海七翼；中万户：枣阳、十字路、邳州、邓州、杭州、怀州、孟州、真州八翼；下万户：常州、镇江、颍州、庐州、亳州、安庆、江阴水军、益都新军、湖州、淮安、寿春、扬州、泰州、弩手、保甲、处州、上都新军、黄州、安丰、松江、镇江水军、建康二十二翼。
现代文：上万户府包括：宿州、蕲县、真定、沂郯、益都、高邮、沿海等七营；中万户府包括：枣阳、十字路、邳州、邓州、杭州、怀州、孟州、真州等八营；下万户府包括：常州、镇江、颍州、庐州、亳州、安庆、江阴水军营、益都新军营、湖州、淮安、寿春、扬州、泰州、弩手营、保甲营、处州、上都新军营、黄州、安丰、松江、镇江水军营、建康等二十二营。
English: The upper ten thousand households include: seven battalions such as Suzhou, Jixian, Zhending, Shandong, Yidu, Gaoyou, and Coastal; the middle ten thousand households include: eight battalions such as Zaoyang, Crossroads, Shandong, Hangzhou, Huizhou, Mengzhou, and Zhenzhou; the lower ten thousand households include: Changzhou, Zhenjiang, Shandong, Shandong, Anqing, Jiangyin Water Military Camp, Yidu New Military Camp, Huzhou, Huai'an, Shuchun, Yangzhou, Taizhou, Haotie Camp, Baogao Camp, Zhenzhou, Shangdu New

古文：翼设达鲁花赤、万户、副万户各一人，以隶所在行院。
现代文：各营均设置镇守官、万户、副万户各一人，隶属于所在地的行枢密院。
English: Each battalion has a town warden, 10,000 households, and one deputy 10,000 households, all of which are subordinate to the local Privy Council.

古文：江西盗黎德等余党悉平。
现代文：江西盗贼黎德等人的余党全部被平定。
English: The remnants of the Jiangxi thief Li De and others were all subdued.

古文：以应放还五卫军穿河西务河。
现代文：派遣本应放假回家的五卫军士卒疏通河西务河道。
English: The Fifth Guards soldiers, who were supposed to be home on leave, were sent to dredge the West Wei River.

古文：旧例，五卫军十人为率，七人三人，分为二番，十月放七人者还，正月复役，正月放三人者还，四月复役，更休息之。
现代文：按照旧例，五卫军以十人为一组，分别以七人和三人作为二轮，每年十月放七人的一轮回家，正月再来服役；正月放三人的一轮回家，四月再来服役，轮流让他们休息。
English: According to the old practice, the Five Guards Army is a group of ten people, with seven and three as the second round, respectively. Every October, seven people are sent home in one round and come back to service in the first month; three people are sent home in one round in the first month and come back to service in April, and they take turns to rest.

古文：丙午，以荆湖行省所隶八番、罗甸隶西川行省，分岚、管为二州。
现代文：初三，把隶属于荆湖行省的八番、罗甸隶属于西川行省。把岚城、管州分为二州。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he divided Baphan, which belonged to Jinghu Province, and Luodian, which belonged to Xichuan Province, into two provinces. He also divided Fucheng and Guanzhou into two provinces.

古文：加封桑乾河神洪济公为显应洪济公。
现代文：加封桑乾河神洪济公为 显应洪济公 。
English: The addition of the Sanqian River god Hongji Gong is a manifestation of Hongji Gong.

古文：己酉，为皇孙阿难答立衍福司，职四品，使、同知、副使各一员。
现代文：初六，为皇孙阿难答设立衍福司，职俸为四品，衍福司使、同知、副使各设一人。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3

古文：辛亥，广东宣慰使月的迷失讨潮、惠二州盗郭逢贵等四十五寨，皆平，降民万余户、军三千六百一十人，请将所获渠帅入觐，面陈事宜，从之。
现代文：初八，广东宣慰使月的迷失讨伐潮州、惠州两州的盗贼郭逢贵等四十五寨，全部平定，投降的百姓一万余户、兵卒三千六百一十人，月的迷失请求将俘获的贼首押解入京，觐见皇帝，当面陈奏事宜。皇帝允从。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Guangdong Xuancheng consoled Guo Fenggui, a thief from the two states of Chaozhou and Huizhou, with the request of Guo Xuancheng to bring the captured thief's head to Beijing for an audience with the emperor to discuss the matter face to face. The emperor agreed.

古文：丙辰，诏罢胶、莱所凿新河，以军万人隶江浙行省习水战，万人载江淮米泛海由利津达于京师。
现代文：十三日，下诏停止开凿胶州、莱州的新河道，把一万名士兵隶属于江浙行省学习水战，一万人运载江淮的粮米浮海从利津抵达京师。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an edict to stop the excavation of new river channels in Jiaozhou and Laizhou, to send 10,000 soldiers to Jiangsu and Zhejiang to learn water warfare, and 10,000 people to carry grain and rice from Jiangsu and Huai from Lijin to Beijing.

古文：辛酉，御史台臣言： 近中书奏罢行御史台，改按察司为提刑转运司，俾兼钱谷，而纠弹之职废矣。请令安童与老臣议。 
现代文：十八日，御史台大臣上奏说 ：近日中书省上奏撤销行御史台，把按察司改为提刑转运司，令其兼管钱粮，纠查、弹劾的职司却废弃了，请让安童和老臣们商议此事。 
English: On the 18th, the Minister of the Office of the Historian made a report saying: Recently, the Ministry of Education and Culture made a report revoking the Office of the Historian, changing the Office of the Inspector General to the Office of the Criminal Investigation and Transportation Division, making it concurrently in charge of money and grain, but the functions of investigation and impeachment were abandoned. Please let Ando and the elders discuss this matter.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：壬戌，太阴犯心。
现代文：十九日，太阴星干犯心宿天区。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the great Yin star caused the criminal's heart to stay in the heaven zone.

古文：中书省臣卢世荣请立规措所，经营钱谷，秩五品，所用官吏以善贾为之，勿限白身人，帝从之。
现代文：中书省大臣卢世荣请求设立规措所，掌管钱粮，俸禄为五品，所任用的官吏以优秀的商贾充任，不要限制没有职名的百姓任职。
English: Lu Shirong, Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, requested the establishment of a regulation office, in charge of money and grain, with a salary of five rupees. The appointed officials should be excellent merchants, and should not restrict people without titles from serving.

古文：参知政事不鲁迷失海牙等因奏世荣姻党有牛姓者，前为提举，今浙西运司课程颇多，拟升转运副使，亦从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。参知政事不鲁迷失海牙等人趁此机会上奏卢世荣的姻亲中有一个姓牛的，先前担任提举官，现在浙西转运司赋税较多，打算提升他为转运副使。皇帝也依允了。
English: The emperor agreed. Some people, such as the prefect of political affairs, took this opportunity to report that one of Lu Shirong's in-laws, whose surname was Niu, had previously served as a nominating official, but now the West Zhejiang Transportation Department was paying more taxes, and they planned to promote him to deputy transportation envoy. The emperor also agreed.

古文：诏旧城居民之迁京城者，以赀高及居职者为先，仍定制以地八亩为一分；其或地过八亩及力不能作室者，皆不得冒据，听民作室。
现代文：诏令从旧城迁入京城新城区的居民，让钱财多的和身居官职的人先迁，并确定以八亩地作为一分的制度，那些超过了八亩地，以及没有资财建造房屋的，都不得冒占地皮，听任百姓建屋。
English: The edict ordered the residents who moved from the old city into the new urban area of Beijing to let those with more money and wealth and those in government positions move first, and established a system of eight mu of land as one point. Those who have more than eight mu of land, and those who do not have the resources to build houses, are not allowed to occupy the land and let the people build houses.

古文：升御带库为章佩监。
现代文：把御带库升格为章佩监。
English: The library was promoted to the rank of chapter inspector.

古文：徙右千户只儿海迷失分地泉州。
现代文：把右千户只儿海迷失的封地迁移到泉州。
English: The lost fiefdoms of the right thousand households were moved to Quanzhou.

古文：赐合剌失都儿新附民五千户，合剌赤、阿速、阿塔赤、昔宝赤、贵由赤等尝从征者，亦皆赐之。
现代文：把新归附的百姓五千户赐给合剌失都儿，曾经随同他出征的乌蛮人、阿速、阿塔赤、昔宝赤、贵由赤，也都给予赏赐。
English: He gave the newly annexed five thousand households of the people to Hapi, the lost capital, and also gave rewards to the barbarians who had been with him on the campaign, Ahau, Ataka, the former Baoraka, and Guiyuaka.

古文：以民八十户赐皇太子宿卫臣尝从征者。
现代文：把八十户百姓赐给曾经跟随皇太子出征的宿卫臣。
English: Eighty households were given to retired guardsmen who had accompanied the crown prince to the front.

古文：用卢世荣言，回买江南民土田。
现代文：采纳卢世荣的意见，大量购买江南百姓的土地。
English: Adopted Lu Shirong's opinion and purchased a large amount of land from the people in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：诏天下拘收铜钱。
现代文：诏令全国收聚铜钱。
English: The emperor ordered the collection of copper money throughout the country.

古文：申禁私造酒曲。
现代文：申令禁止私造酒曲。
English: A decree forbids the making of bootleg songs.

古文：戊辰，车驾幸上都。
现代文：二十五日，皇上的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 13th, the emperor drove to Shangdu.

古文：帝问省臣： 行御史台何故罢之？ 
现代文：皇帝问中书省大臣说 ：行御史台为什么要撤销？ 
English: The emperor asked the Minister of the Ministry of Literature: "Why should the Imperial History Museum be abolished?"

古文：安童曰： 江南盗贼屡起，行御史台镇遏居多，臣以为不可罢。
现代文：安童说 ：江南的盗贼屡次作乱，由行御史台进行镇压、遏制的时候居多，臣以为不可能奏效。
English: Ando said: Thieves in the south of the Yangtze River have repeatedly caused disturbances, and most of the time the government has suppressed and contained them. The minister thought it was impossible to be effective.

古文：然与江浙行中书省并在杭州，地甚远僻，徙之江州，居江浙、湖南、江西三省之中为便。 
现代文：然而行御史台与江浙行中书省都在杭州，地方很遥远、偏僻，把它迁到江州去，处于江浙、湖南、江西三省的当中较为方便。 
English: However, both the Imperial History Museum and the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Museum are in Hangzhou, a very distant and remote place. It is more convenient to move it to Jiangsu, which is located in the middle of the three provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, Hunan and Jiangxi.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：立真定、济南、太原、甘肃、江西、江淮、湖广等处宜慰司兼都转运使司，以治课程，仍立条制。
现代文：设立真定、济南、太原、甘肃、江西、江淮、湖广等处的宣慰司兼都转运使司，以管赋税，并建立条令、制度。
English: Set up the relief and consolation department and the capital transfer and dispatch department in Jinding, Jinan, Taiyuan, Gansu, Jiangxi, Jianghuai, Hukang and other places to control taxation, and establish regulations and systems.

古文：禁诸司不得擅追管课官吏，有敢沮扰者，具姓名以闻。
现代文：向各司的衙署发出禁令，不得擅自逼迫、追比管理赋税的官吏，有敢于从中阻挠、扰乱的，开具他们的姓名上报。
English: An injunction will be issued to the tax inspection departments of all departments, prohibiting them from persecuting or pursuing the tax administration officials without authorization. If they dare to obstruct or disrupt, their names will be reported.

古文：增济州漕运司军万二千人。
现代文：增加济州漕运司的士兵一万二千人。
English: The number of soldiers of the Jeju Steamship Company was increased by 12,000.

古文：立江西、江淮、湖广造船提举司。
现代文：设立江西、江淮、湖广提举司。
English: Jiangxi Province, Jianghuai Province and Hubei Province were set up.

古文：令江浙行省参政冯珪，湖广行省右丞要束木、参政潘杰，龙兴行省左丞伯颜、参政杨居宽、签省陈文福，专领课程事。
现代文：命令江浙行省参政冯王圭、湖广行省右丞要束木、参政潘杰，龙兴行省左丞伯颜、参政杨居宽、佥省陈文福专管赋税方面的事务。
English: He ordered Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Councillor Feng Wang Gui, Hubei Provincial Councillor Yu Zeng, Councillor Pan Jie, Longxing Provincial Councillor Zuo Bo Yan, Councillor Yang Ju Kuan, and Handan Provincial Councillor Chen Wenfu to be in charge of tax affairs.

古文：以瓮吉剌带为中书左丞相。
现代文：任命瓮吉剌带为中书左丞相。
English: He appointed Gong Jizhong as the Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：己巳，复立按察司。
现代文：二十六日，重新设立按察司。
English: On the 26th, the Investigation Division was re-established.

古文：拨民二万七千户与驸马唆郎哥。
现代文：拨出二万七千户百姓赐给驸马唆郎哥。
English: Twenty-seven thousand households were allotted and given to his younger brother.

古文：以忽都鲁为平章政事。
现代文：任命忽都鲁为平章政事。
English: Appointment of Khudulu as a high-ranking government official.

古文：诏： 各道提刑按察司，能遵奉条画，莅事有成者，任满升职，赃污不称任者，罢黜除名。 
现代文：诏令 ：各道提刑按察司，能够遵守条令，办事有成就的，任期届满即可升职；贪赃而不能胜任的罢职，除去名籍。 
English: Imperial edict: Each province shall appoint a chief inspector to impose punishments, and those who are able to comply with the edict and have achievements can be promoted upon the expiration of their term of office; those who are corrupt and incompetent can be dismissed, and their names will be removed from the register.

古文：诏立供膳司，职从五品，达鲁花赤、令、丞各一员。
现代文：下诏设立供膳司，职俸为从五品，监印官、令、丞各一人。
English: The following edict established the Office of the Keeper of the Imperial Table, with a salary of five mon, one each for the Keeper of the Imperial Seal, the Keeper of the Imperial Table, and the Keeper of the Imperial Table.

古文：罢融州总管府为州。
现代文：撤销融州总管府，改为州府。
English: Revoke the Rongzhou General Administration Office and change it to a prefectural office.

古文：三月丙子，遣太史监候张公礼、彭质等往占城测候日晷。
现代文：三月初四，派遣太史监候张公礼、彭质等人前往占城测量日影。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, Zhang Gongli, Peng Jian and others were sent to Zhancheng to measure the sun's shadow.

古文：癸未，罢甘州行中书省，立宣慰司，隶宁夏行中书省。
现代文：十一日，撤销甘州行中书省，设立宣慰司，隶属于宁夏行中书省。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Ministry of Education and Culture of Ganzhou Province was revoked, and the Ministry of Propaganda and Consolation was established, affiliated to the Ministry of Education and Culture of Ningxia Province.

古文：荆湖占城行省请益兵，时陈日烜所逃天长、长安二处兵力复集，兴道王船千余艘聚万劫，阮盝在永平，而官兵远行久战，悬处其中，唆都、唐古带之兵又不以时至，故请益兵。
现代文：荆湖占城行中书省请求增兵。当时陈日火亘所逃去的天长、长安两处，兵力又重新聚集，兴道王的一千多艘战船聚集在万劫，阮衊驻扎在永平，而朝廷的军队远行在外长期战斗，悬处于他们当中，唆都、唐古带的军队又不按时到达，因而行省才请求增兵。
English: At that time, the two places of Tianchang and Chang'an, which Chen Ronghu fled, the troops were re-gathered. More than a thousand warships of King Xingdao were gathered in Wanhu, and Nguyen Xuan was stationed in Yongping. The imperial army was far away and fought for a long time in the outside world, and was suspended among them. The army of the capital and the Tang Dynasty did not arrive on time, so the province only requested additional troops.

古文：帝以水行为危，令遵陆以往。
现代文：皇帝认为从水路走危险，令他们沿着陆路前进。
English: The emperor thought it was dangerous to go by water, so they went by land.

古文：庚子，诏依旧制，凡盐一引四百斤，价银十两，以折今钞为二十贯，商上都者，六十而税一。
现代文：二十八日，下诏按照旧的规定，凡盐引，一张为四百斤，价格为十两银子，以之折合成钱钞为二十贯，在上都经商的抽取六十分之一的税。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued, according to the old regulations, for salt, a piece was four hundred catties, the price was twelve pieces of silver, and the folded money was twenty yuan, and one-sixtieth of the tax was levied on those who did business in Shangdu.

古文：增契本为三钱。
现代文：把契约的本金增加为三钱。
English: Increase the principal of the contract to three dollars.

古文：立上都规措所回易库，增坏钞工墨费每贯二分为三分。
现代文：设立上都规措所回易库，收取坏钞的工本费，每贯由二分增至三分。
English: It is planned to set up a depository for the return of bad banknotes, and the cost of collecting bad banknotes will be increased from two points to three points.

古文：夏四月癸卯，立行枢密院都镇抚司，置畏兀驿六所。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，设立行枢密院都镇抚司。在畏兀儿地区设置驿站六所。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office of the Director of the Office.

古文：丙午，以征日本船运粮江淮及教军水战。
现代文：初四，用征伐日本的船只运送粮食到江淮，并训练士兵进行水战。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, ships that had been used to conquer Japan were used to transport grain to Jianghuai, and soldiers were trained to conduct naval warfare.

古文：庚戌，监察御史陈天祥劾中书右丞卢世荣罪恶，诏世荣、天祥皆赴上都。
现代文：初八，监察御史陈天祥弹劾中书右丞卢世荣的罪恶，皇帝下诏令卢世荣、陈天祥都前来上都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Chen Tianxiang, the inspector of the imperial historian, impeached the evil of Lu Shirong, the middle-ranking official, and the emperor issued a decree ordering Lu Shirong and Chen Tianxiang to come to Shangdu.

古文：壬子，江陵民张二妻邓氏一产三男。
现代文：初十，江陵百姓张二的妻子邓氏一胎生下三个儿子。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the wife of Jiangling citizen Zhang Er, Deng Shi, gave birth to three sons.

古文：癸丑，诏追捕宋广王及陈宜中。
现代文：十一日，诏令追捕亡宋的广王和陈宜中。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Guang Wang and Chen Yizhong of the late Song Dynasty were ordered to be hunted down.

古文：遣中书省、枢密院、御史台官各一员，决大都及诸路罪囚。
现代文：派遣中书省、枢密院和御史台的官员各一人，判决大都及各路的罪囚。
English: Send one official each from the Ministry of Education, the Privy Council, and the Imperial Historian's Office to adjudicate on most and all prisoners.

古文：大都、汴梁、益都、庐州、河间、济宁、归德、保定蝗。
现代文：大都、汴梁、益都、庐州、河间、济宁、归德、保定发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in Dadu, Qiliang, Yidu, Zhangzhou, Hema, Jining, Guide and Baoding.

古文：辛酉，以耽罗所造征日本船百艘赐高丽。
现代文：十九日，把耽罗所建造征伐日本的战船一百艘赐给高丽。
English: On the 19th, he gave Goryeo 100 warships built by Tanra for the conquest of Japan.

古文：壬戌，御史中丞阿剌帖木儿、郭佑，侍御史白秃剌帖木儿，参知政事撒的迷失等以卢世荣所招罪状奏。
现代文：二十日，御史中丞阿剌帖木儿、郭佑、侍御史白秃剌帖木儿、参知政事撒的迷失等，把卢世荣所招认的罪状上奏给皇帝。
English: On the 20th, the vice-president of the imperial court, Ah Ying Timur, the vice-president of the imperial court, Guo You, the attendant of the imperial court, Bai Ying Timur, the councillor of the imperial court, and the lost of the councillor of the imperial court, reported to the emperor the crime confessed by Lu Shirong.

古文：阿剌帖木儿等与世荣对于帝前，世荣悉款服。
现代文：阿剌帖木儿等人和卢世荣在皇帝面前对质，卢世荣全部供认服罪。
English: Ah Qin Timur and others confronted Lu Shirong in front of the emperor, and Lu Shirong all confessed to the crime.

古文：改六部依旧为三品。
现代文：把六部的职俸依旧改为三品。
English: The salary of the six departments will still be changed to three products.

古文：诏： 安童与诸老臣议世荣所行，当罢者罢之，更者更之，其所用人实无罪者，朕自裁决。 
现代文：皇帝诏令 ：安童和老臣们议论卢世荣的所作所为，应当革职的革职，应当调职的调职，他所任用的人当中，确实无罪的，由我亲自裁决。 
English: Emperor's edict: Ando and his senior ministers will discuss Lu Shirong's actions, and decide which of his appointees should be dismissed, which should be transferred, and which should be transferred. I will personally decide which of his appointees are truly innocent.

古文：癸亥，敕以麦术丁所行清洁，与安童治省事。
现代文：二十一日，敕令： 因为麦术丁行事清正廉洁，与安童一起掌管中书省事务。 
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the imperial edict: Because Mai Zhuting acted with integrity, he and Ando would jointly take charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：五月甲戌，以御史中丞郭佑为中书省参知政事。
现代文：五月初二，任命御史中丞郭佑为中书省参知政事。
English: On the second day of the month of May, Guo You, the Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China.

古文：丁丑，减上都商税。
现代文：初五，减少上都的商税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, reduce Shangdu's commercial tax.

古文：戊寅，广平、汴梁、钧、郑旱。
现代文：初六，广平、汴梁、钧州、郑州发生旱灾。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, droughts occurred in Guangping, Qilian, Zhangzhou and Zhengzhou.

古文：以远方历日取给京师，不以时至，荆湖等处四行省所用者隆兴印之，合剌章、河西、西川等处所用者京兆印之。
现代文：因为远方所用的历书由京师供给，不能按时送达，荆湖等四个行省所用由隆兴印刷，合剌章、河西、西川等地所用由京兆府印刷。
English: Because the almanac used in distant places is supplied by the Beijing division and cannot be delivered on time, it is printed by Longxing Printing for four provinces such as Jinghu, and printed by Jingzhao Prefecture for places such as Hexizhang, Hexi and Xichuan.

古文：诏甘州每地一顷输税三石。
现代文：诏令甘州的每个地方一顷地均交纳税粮三石。
English: The edict ordered each locality in Ganzhou to pay an average of three kilos of tax-paid grain per hectare.

古文：壬午，以军千人修阿失盐场仓。
现代文：初十，派一千名士兵修建阿失盐场的仓库。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, he sent a thousand soldiers to build a warehouse for the lost salt field.

古文：以忻都为踢里玉招讨使，佩虎符，有旨： 不可兴兵远攻，近地有不服者讨之。 
现代文：任命忻都为踢里玉招讨使，佩戴虎符。皇上有旨说： 不可以起兵进攻远地，但近地有不服从的可以讨伐。 
English: The Emperor had decreed that no troops should be sent to attack distant lands, but those who disobeyed him in the near lands could be put to death.

古文：右巴等洞蛮平。
现代文：右巴等洞蛮被平定。
English: The right-hand bus and other tunnels were completely leveled.

古文：甲申，立汴梁宣慰司，依安西王故事，汴梁以南至江，以亲王镇之。
现代文：十二日，设立汴梁宣慰司，按照安西王的旧例，汴梁以南直到长江派亲王镇守。
English: On the 12th, the Xuanliang Xuanliao Division was set up. According to the old example of King Anxi, the prince was sent south of Xuanliang to the Yangtze River to guard the town.

古文：丁亥，中书省臣言： 六部官冗甚，可止以六十八员为额，余悉汰去。 
现代文：十五日，中书省大臣上奏说： 六部的官员十分繁杂，可以限定以六十八名官员为定额，其余的全部淘汰出去。 
English: On the 15th, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: The officials of the six departments are very complicated, and the quota can be limited to sixty-eight officials, and all the rest can be eliminated.

古文：诏择其廉洁有干局者存之。
现代文：皇帝下诏挑选那些廉洁而有才干气度的人上来。
English: The emperor issued an edict to select those who were honest and talented.

古文：分汉地及江南所拘弓箭兵器为三等，下等毁之，中等赐近居蒙古人，上等贮于库；有行省、行院、行台者掌之，无省、院、台者达鲁花赤、畏兀、回回居职者掌之，汉人、新附人虽居职无有所预。
现代文：把北方汉人地区以及江南收缴的弓箭兵器分为三等，下等的毁掉，中等的赐给住在附近的蒙古人，上等的贮存在仓库里；有行中书省、行枢密院、行御史台的地方，由行省、行院、行台掌管；没有行省、行院、行台的地方，由当地的镇守官和畏兀儿、回回人中的官员掌管，汉人和新归附的江南人即使担任着官职也不得过问。
English: The bow and arrow weapons confiscated from the northern Han areas and the southern Jiangsu should be divided into three classes. The lower ones should be destroyed, the middle ones should be given to the Mongolians living nearby, and the higher ones should be stored in warehouses. Where there is a provincial office, a privy council, or a government office, the provincial office, the privy council, and the government office should be in charge; where there is no provincial office, the government office, or the government office, the local town guards and local officials should be in charge. The Han people and the newly annexed southern Jiangsu people should not be questioned, even if they hold official positions.

古文：戊子，改升江、乌定、朵里灭该等府为路。
现代文：十六日，把升江、乌定、朵里灭该等府改为路。
English: On the 16th, the prefectures of Shoujiang, Uding and Dolishe were transformed into roads.

古文：云南行省臣脱帖木儿言蠲逋赋、征侵隐、戍叛民、明黜陟、罢转运、给亲王、赋豪户、除重税、决盗贼、增驿马、取质子、定俸禄、教农桑、优学者、恤死事、捕逃亡十余事，命中书省议其可者行之。
现代文：云南行中书省大臣脱帖木儿上奏谈及：免除拖欠未交的赋税、征收侵夺隐瞒的田租、在有叛民的地方设防、明确官员的升降制度、停止转运物资、亲王的供给、向豪门征收赋税、免除重税、处死盗贼、增加驿马、选取质子军士兵、核定官员的俸禄、教百姓进行农桑生产、优待读书人、抚恤为王事而死的人、追捕逃亡者等，一共十多件事。皇帝命令中书省商议，可行的就实行。
English: During his trip to Yunnan, the Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of the People's Republic

古文：庚寅，真定、广平、河间、恩州、大名、济南蚕灾。
现代文：十八日，真定、广平、河间、恩州、大名、济南发生蚕灾。
English: On the 18th, the silkworm plague occurred in Jinding, Guangping, Hema, Enzhou, Daimyo, and Jinan.

古文：增大都诸门尉、副各一人。
现代文：增加大都各城门的尉守、副守各一人。
English: The number of castle keepers and deputy keepers at most of the city gates will be increased by one each.

古文：敕朵儿只招集甘、沙、速等州流徙饥民。
现代文：敕令朵儿只招收甘州、沙州、肃州等州流亡迁徙的饥民。
English: Only starving migrants from Gansu, Shazhou, Suzhou and other provinces are admitted to the school.

古文：行御史台复徙于杭州。
现代文：行御史台重新搬迁到杭州。
English: The History Channel relocated to Hangzhou.

古文：丁酉，徙行枢密院于建康。
现代文：二十五日，把行枢密院搬迁到建康。
English: On the 25th, the Executive Privy Council was relocated to Jiankang.

古文：戊戌，汴梁、怀孟、濮州、东昌、广平、平阳、彰德、卫辉旱。
现代文：二十六日，汴梁、怀孟、濮州、东昌、广平、平阳、彰德、卫辉发生旱灾。
English: On the 26th, droughts occurred in Qilian, Huai Meng, Luzhou, Dongchang, Guangping, Pingyang, Changde and Weihai.

古文：罢江南造船提举司。
现代文：撤销江南造船提举司。
English: Revocation of Jiangnan Shipbuilding Promotion Division.

古文：陈日烜走海港，镇南王命李恒追袭，败之。
现代文：陈日火亘逃到海港，镇南王命令李恒率军追击他，遭到失败。
English: Chen Rihe fled to the seaport, and the king of Zhenan ordered Li Heng to lead an army to chase him, but he was defeated.

古文：适暑雨疫作，兵欲北还思明州，命唆都等还乌里。
现代文：适逢夏雨，军中发生疫病，士兵们都想返回北边的思明州，镇南王命令唆都等返回乌里。
English: During the summer rains, an epidemic broke out in the army, and the soldiers all wanted to return to Siming Prefecture in the north. The king of Zhenan ordered them all to return to Uri.

古文：安南以兵追蹑，唆都战死；恒为后距，以卫镇南王，药矢中左膝，至思明，毒发而卒。
现代文：安南派兵追袭，唆都战死。李恒作为全军的殿后，因为护卫镇南王，一支毒箭射中了他的左膝，到思明的时候，毒性发作而死。
English: Annan sent troops in pursuit, and both died in the battle. Li Heng, as the rear guard of the whole army, because he was escorting the southern king of the town, a poisonous arrow hit his left knee, and by the time he realized it, he died of a toxic attack.

古文：六月庚戌，命女直、水达达造船二百艘及造征日本迎风船。
现代文：六月初九，命令女真、水达达部建造二百艘船，并建造征伐日本的迎风船。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, he ordered Jianzhen and the Ministry of Water Resources to build 200 ships, and to build windward ships for the conquest of Japan.

古文：辛亥，扬州进芝草。
现代文：初十，扬州敬献灵芝草。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Yangzhou presented Ganoderma lucidum.

古文：丙辰，遣马速忽、阿里赍钞千锭往马八图求奇宝，赐马速忽虎符，阿里金符。
现代文：十五日，派遣马速忽、阿里携带一千锭钱钞前往马八儿国购求奇宝，赐给马速忽虎符、阿里金符。
English: On the fifteenth day, Ma Sokou and Ali were sent to Ma Bailiang with a thousand baht banknote to buy the treasure. Ma Sokou was given a tiger charm and Ali a gold charm.

古文：高丽遣使来贡方物。
现代文：高丽派遣使臣来进贡地方特产。
English: Goryeo sends envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：庚午，诏减商税，罢牙行，省市舶司入转运司。
现代文：二十九日，下诏减低商税，撤销牙行，把市舶司合并到转运司。
English: On the 29th, the lower edict reduced the commercial tax, revoked the dental office, and merged the municipal shipping department into the transshipment department.

古文：左丞吕师夔乞假五月，省母江州，帝许之，因谕安童曰： 此事汝蒙古人不知，朕左右复无汉人，可否皆自朕决。
现代文：左丞吕师夔请假五个月到江州探望母亲，皇帝允许了他，于是告谕安童说 ：这事你们这些蒙古人不懂得，我的左右又没有汉人，可以还是不可以都由我自己决定。
English: Zuo Cheng Lu Shijie took a five-month leave of absence to visit his mother in Jiangzhou. The emperor gave him permission, and then told Ando, "You Mongolians don't understand this. There are no Han Chinese around me. Whether I can or not is up to me."

古文：汝当尽心善治百姓，无使重困致乱，以为朕羞。 
现代文：你应当尽心好好治理百姓，不要让他们陷入严重的困境而引起动乱，成为我的耻辱。 
English: You should do your best to govern the people well, and not let them fall into a serious predicament and cause turmoil, which would be a disgrace to me.

古文：参知政事张德润献其家人四百户于皇太子。
现代文：参知政事张德润把他的家族属下四百户人献给皇太子。
English: Zhang Derun, a member of the Council of Elders, presented the crown prince with four hundred members of his family.

古文：马湖部田鼠食稼殆尽，其总管祠而祝之，鼠悉赴水死。
现代文：马湖部的田鼠几乎把庄稼吃光了，当地总管建立祠庙祭祀它们，田鼠全部跳入水中而死。
English: The field mice in Ma Hu almost ate up all the crops. The local government established a temple to worship them. The field mice all jumped into the water and died.

古文：秋七月壬申，造温石浴室及更衣殿。
现代文：秋季，七月初二，建造温石浴室和更衣殿。
English: In the autumn, on the second day of the seventh month, the warm stone bath and dressing hall were built.

古文：癸酉，诏禁捕猎。
现代文：初三，下诏禁止捕猎。
English: On the third day of the new year, hunting was banned.

古文：甲戌，敕秘书监修《地理志》。
现代文：初四，敕令秘书监修撰《地理志》。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the imperial secretary supervised the compilation of "Geography."

古文：乙亥，安南降者昭国王、武道、文义、彰宪、彰怀四侯赴阙。
现代文：初五，安南投降的昭国王和武道、文义、彰宪、彰怀四个侯前来朝廷。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, King Zhao, who had surrendered to Annan, and the four princes of Budo, Wenyi, Changchun, and Changhuai came to the imperial court.

古文：戊寅，京师蝗。
现代文：初八，京师发生蝗灾。
English: In the eighth month of the year, a plague of locusts struck Kyoto.

古文：分甘州屯田新附军三百人，田于亦集乃之地。
现代文：分出甘州屯田的新附军三百人到亦集乃地方屯田。
English: Three hundred soldiers of the New Annexed Army, who had been detached from the Ganzhou garrison, also gathered in the local garrison.

古文：己卯，以米千石廪瓮吉剌贫民。
现代文：初九，以一千石米供给瓮吉剌的贫民食用。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he provided 1,000 koku of rice to feed the poor people in Jijiang.

古文：壬午，陕西四川行中书省左丞汪惟正入见。
现代文：十二日，陕西四川行中书省左丞汪惟正入朝觐见。
English: On the 12th, Wang Weizheng, the left-hand man of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, who was on a trip to Sichuan in Shaanxi Province, visited the Imperial Court.

古文：甲申，改阔里吉思等所平大小十溪洞悉为府、州、县。
现代文：十四日，把阔里吉思等人所平定的大小溪洞全部改为府、州、县。
English: On the 14th, he changed the names of all the large and small caves pacified by Korigishi and others to prefectures, prefectures, and counties.

古文：修汴梁城。
现代文：修筑汴梁城。
English: The construction of Qilian City.

古文：丁亥，广东宣慰使月的迷失入觐，以所降渠帅郭逢贵等至京师，言山寨降者百五十余所。
现代文：十七日，广东宣慰使月的迷失入朝觐见，把他所招降的敌军元帅郭逢贵等带到京师，说投降的山寨共有一百五十多处。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Guangdong Xuancheng led the lost of the moon into the imperial court, and brought the enemy marshal Guo Fenggui, whom he had invited to surrender, to the Beijing division, saying that there were more than one hundred and fifty villages that had surrendered.

古文：帝问： 战而后降邪，招之即降邪？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：他们是打了之后才投降的，还是一招降就投降的呢？ 
English: The emperor asked: Did they surrender only after fighting, or did they surrender at the first stroke of a pen?

古文：月的迷失对曰： 其首拒敌者臣已磔之矣，是皆招降者也。 
现代文：月的迷失回答说 ：那些一开始就进行抵抗的，我已经把他们凌迟处死了，这些都是一招就投降的。 
English: The Lost Moon replied, "Those who resisted at the beginning, I have already killed them, these are the ones who surrendered at the first attempt."

古文：因言： 塔术兵后未尝抚治其民，州县官复无至者，故盗贼各据土地，互相攻杀，人民渐耗，今宜择良吏往治之。 
现代文：借此机会又说 ：塔术在战争之后没有安抚当地的百姓，连州县官也没有派到那些地方去，因此盗贼各自占据土地，互相攻击杀掠，人口逐渐耗损，现在应当挑选官员去治理那些地方。 
English: He also took this opportunity to say, "Taju did not pacify the local people after the war, and even the state and county officials were not sent to those places. Therefore, the thieves occupied the land separately, attacked and killed each other, and the population was gradually depleted. Now it is time to select officials to govern those places."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚寅，枢密院言： 镇南王脱欢所总征交趾兵久战力疲，请于奥鲁赤等三万户分蒙古军千人，江淮、江西、荆湖三行院分汉军、新附军四千人，选良将将之，取镇南王脱欢、阿里海牙节制，以征交趾。 
现代文：二十日，枢密院上奏说 ：镇南王脱欢所统辖征伐安南的士兵，因为长期征战已经疲劳。请在奥鲁赤等三名万户的属下分出一千名蒙古军，江淮、江西、荆湖三处行枢密院属下分出四千名汉军、新附军，选择优秀的将领统率他们，听从镇南王脱欢、阿里海牙节制，以征伐安南。 
English: On the 20th, the Privy Council issued a report saying: "The soldiers under the command of the Jinan Wang Dehuan Commissariat for the Conquest of South Annam, because they have been tired for a long time, are requested to allocate one thousand Mongolian troops under the subordinates of three million households such as Oruchai, and four thousand Chinese troops and newly attached troops under the subordinates of the Privy Council in the three provinces of Jianghuai, Jiangxi and Jinghu, select excellent generals to lead them, and obey the command of the Jinan Wang Dehuan Commissariat for the Conquest of South Annam and Ali Haiga to conquer South Annam.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：复以唐兀带为荆湖行省左丞。
现代文：重新任命唐兀带为荆湖行中书省左丞。
English: Tang Xizhe was reappointed as the left assistant secretary of the Ministry of Education during the Jinghu trip.

古文：唐兀带请放征交趾军还家休憩，诏从脱欢、阿里海牙处之。
现代文：唐兀带请求遣放原来征伐安南的士兵回家休息，皇上下诏由脱欢、阿里海牙处置。
English: Tang Xizhe requested that the soldiers who had originally conquered Annan be sent home to rest, and the emperor issued an edict to be disposed of by Zhuang Huan and Ali Hague.

古文：给诸王阿只吉分地贫民农具牛种，令自耕播。
现代文：赐给诸侯王阿只吉分地上的贫民耕牛、种子，令他们自己耕耘、播种。
English: The vassal king, Ahdudgyi, gave the poor of the land oxen and seeds, so that they could plough and sow.

古文：乙未，云南行省言： 今年未暇征缅，请收获秋禾，先伐罗北甸等部。 
现代文：二十五日，云南行中书省上奏说： 今年来不及征伐缅国，请让我们在收获了秋天的粮食以后，先征伐罗北甸等部落。 
English: On the twenty-fifth day of his trip to Yunnan, he delivered a report to the People's Commissariat of the People's Republic of China, saying, "It is too late to invade Burma this year. Please let us first invade the tribes of Luo and Putian after harvesting the autumn grain.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚子，改开、达、梁山三州隶夔州路。
现代文：三十日，把开州、达州、梁山三州改属于夔州路。
English: On the 30th, the three prefectures of Kaizhou, Dazhou and Liangshan were transferred to Ganzhou Road.

古文：给钞万二千四百锭为本，取息以赡甘、肃二州屯田贫军。
现代文：供给钱钞一万二千四百锭作为本金，收取利息以赡养甘州、肃州二州屯田的贫穷士兵。
English: The banknote of 12,400 baht was provided as the principal, and interest was collected to support the poor soldiers in Tonden, Gansu and Suzhou.

古文：八月辛酉，命有司祭斗三日。
现代文：八月初一，命令官府祭祀北斗星三天。
English: On the first day of August, the government ordered a three-day ritual to worship the Big Dipper.

古文：戊申，分四川镇守军万人屯田成都。
现代文：初八，分派四川的镇守军一万人到成都屯田。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, 10,000 Sichuan town guards were dispatched to Chengdu Tonden.

古文：丙辰，车驾至自上都。
现代文：十六日，皇上的车驾从上都来到京师。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's carriage drove from Shangdu to the capital, Wuxi.

古文：己未，诏复立泉府司，秩从二品，以答失蛮领之。
现代文：十九日，下诏恢复设立泉府司，职俸为从二品，任命答失蛮掌管。
English: On the 19th, the following edict restored the establishment of the Izumi Prefecture, the salary was two products, and the appointment and dismissal were in charge.

古文：初，和礼霍孙以泉府司商贩者，所至官给饮食，遣兵防卫，民实厌苦不便，奏罢之。
现代文：最初，和礼霍孙把泉府司看成像商贩一样的地方，来到这里由该官署供给饮食，而且派兵把守，百姓确实厌烦憎恶，感到不便，因为官员上表而撤销。
English: At first, he and Li Huosun saw the Quanfushi as a place like a merchant. When they came here, the government office provided food and drink, and sent soldiers to guard. The people were really bored, disgusted, and inconvenienced, because the officials were on the table and canceled.

古文：至是，答失蛮复奏立之。
现代文：到这时，由答失蛮重新上奏而建立。
English: By this time, it was established that the music had been re-recorded from scratch.

古文：丙寅，遣蒙古军三千人屯田清、沧、靖海。
现代文：二十六日，派遣三千名蒙古军士兵到清州、沧州、靖海屯田。
English: On the 26th, 3,000 Mongolian soldiers were sent to Qingzhou, Cangzhou and Jinghai Tunden.

古文：戊辰，罢禁海商。
现代文：二十八日，罢除对于海上贸易的禁令。
English: On the 28th, the ban on maritime trade was lifted.

古文：省合剌章、金齿二宣抚司为一，治永昌。
现代文：把合剌章、金齿两地的宣抚司合并为一个，治所设在永昌。
English: The Publicity and Guidance Departments of Hefei and Jintao were merged into one, and the administrative office was set up in Yongchang.

古文：立临安广西道宣抚司。
现代文：设立临安广西道宣抚司。
English: Establishment of Lin'an Guangxi Road Publicity Department.

古文：中书省臣奏： 近奉旨括江淮水手，江淮人皆能游水，恐因此动摇者众。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：近来奉旨招聚江淮的水手，江淮的人都能够游水，恐怕会因此而有许多人心中不安。 
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report, "Recently, we received an order to recruit sailors from the Yangtze River and the Huai River. People from the Yangtze River and the Huai River can swim. I am afraid that many people will be uneasy because of this.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：罢榷酤。
现代文：撤销酒的专卖。
English: Withdrawal of the monopoly on the sale of alcohol.

古文：初，民间酒听自造，米一石官取钞一贯。
现代文：原先，民间的酒听任自己酿造，一石米的酒由政府收取一贯钱钞的酒税。
English: Originally, people were allowed to brew their own alcohol, and the government collected the customary amount of tax per kilo of alcohol.

古文：卢世荣以官钞五万锭立榷酤法，米一石取钞十贯，增旧十倍。
现代文：卢世荣用官钱五万锭设立酒的专卖法，一石米的酒收取十贯钱钞的税钱，比原来增加十倍。
English: Lu Shirong used 50,000 baht of government money to set up a liquor monopoly. He charged a tax of 10 yuan on a kilo-metre of liquor, ten times more than before.

古文：至是罢榷酤，听民自造，增课钞一贯为五贯。
现代文：到这时，停止酒的专卖，听任百姓自己酿造，把酒税钱从一贯增加为五贯。
English: At this time, stop the monopoly of wine sales, let the people brew their own, and increase the wine tax money to five yuan.

古文：敕拘铜钱，余铜器听民仍用。
现代文：敕令收聚铜钱，其余的铜器听任百姓继续使有。
English: The imperial edict collected copper money, and the remaining copper utensils were left to the people to continue to use.

古文：令福建黄华畲军有恒产者为民，无恒产与妻子者编为守城军。
现代文：命令福建黄华的畲军余部，有固定产业的遣放为民；没有固定产业的，和妻儿一起编为守城军。
English: He ordered the remnants of the Wei army in Huanghua, Fujian, with a fixed industry to be sent to the people; those without a fixed industry, together with their wives and children, were organized into a castle defense army.

古文：汪惟正言巩昌军民站户并诸人奴婢，因饥岁流入陕西、四川者，彼即括为军站。
现代文：汪惟正上奏说 ：巩昌路军民驿站的站户以及许多人的奴婢，因为荒年而流落到陕西、四川，当地就聚集他们组成为军队的驿站。 
English: Wang Weizheng said in his report: The station owners of the Gongchang Road military and civilian station, as well as many slaves and maidservants, were displaced to Shaanxi and Sichuan due to the famine, and they gathered there to form a military station.

古文：帝曰： 信如所言，当鸠集与之，如非己有而强欲得之者，岂彼于法不惧邪？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：真是如所说的那样，应当把这些流民集中起来交还给巩昌。如果不属于自己所有而想要强行得到，难道他们不懂得畏惧法律么？ 
English: The emperor said, "Indeed, as has been said, these exiles should be gathered together and returned to Gongchang. If they do not belong to their own property and want to obtain it by force, do they not know how to fear the law?"

古文：九月乙亥，听民自实两淮荒地，免税三年。
现代文：九月初六，听由百姓自己种植两淮的荒地，免税三年。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the people were allowed to plant two acres of wasteland by themselves, which was tax-free for three years.

古文：中书省以江北诸城课程钱粮听杭、鄂二行省节制，道途迂远，请改隶中书，从之。
现代文：中书省把江北各城市的赋税钱粮听由杭州、鄂州两个行省支配，道路曲折遥远，请求改由中书省节制，皇帝允从。
English: The People's Government of the People's Republic of China asked the People's Government of the People's Republic of China to transfer the tax money and grain from the cities in the north of the Yangtze River to the two provinces of Hangzhou and Ezhou. The road was long and tortuous, and the request was changed to the People's Government of the People's Republic of China. The emperor agreed.

古文：永昌、腾冲二城在缅国、金齿间，摧圮不可御敌，敕修之。
现代文：永昌、腾冲二城在缅国和金齿之间，城垣毁坏坍塌，无法抵御敌人，皇帝敕命修整。
English: The two cities of Yongchang and Tengchong are located between Myanmar and Jintao. The city walls were destroyed and collapsed, unable to resist the enemy, and the emperor worked hard to repair them.

古文：敕： 自今贡物惟地所产，非所产者毋辄上。 
现代文：皇帝敕令： 从今以后，贡品只能是当地所产的，不是当地所产的不要随便献上。 
English: Emperor's edict: From now on, tributes can only be locally produced, and those that are not locally produced should not be casually offered.

古文：丙子，真蜡、占城贡乐工十人及药材、鳄鱼皮诸物。
现代文：初七，真腊、占城进贡乐工十名，以及药材、鳄鱼皮等物。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, ten musicians from Zhancheng and Zhancheng paid tribute, as well as medicinal herbs, crocodile skins and other items.

古文：辛巳，收集工匠之隐匿者。
现代文：十二日，收聚被隐匿起来的工匠。
English: On the 12th, the hidden artisans were gathered.

古文：丙戌，速木都剌、马答二国遣使来朝。
现代文：十七日，速木都剌、马答两佃派遣使者前来朝见皇上。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, both Hayaki and Mata sent envoys to the emperor.

古文：庚寅，敕征交趾诸军，除留蒙古军百、汉军四百为镇南王脱欢宿卫，余悉遣还，别以江淮行枢密院所总蒙古兵戍江西。
现代文：二十一日，敕令征伐安南的各军，除留下一百名蒙古军、四百名汉军士兵作为镇南王脱欢的卫队之外，其余的全部调回。另派江淮行枢密院所统辖的蒙古军士兵戍守江西。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial command ordered the armies to conquer Annan, except for the remaining one hundred Mongolian soldiers and four hundred Chinese soldiers as the guards of the king of Zhenan, the rest were all transferred back. In addition, the Mongolian soldiers under the jurisdiction of the Jianghuaihang Privy Council were sent to guard the west of Jiangxi.

古文：癸巳，云南贡方物。
现代文：二十四日，云南进贡地方特产。
English: On the 24th, Yunnan paid tribute to local special products.

古文：乌蒙叛，命四川行院也速带儿将兵讨之，马湖总管汝作以蛮军三百为助。
现代文：乌蒙部族叛乱，命令四川行枢密院也速带儿率军讨伐叛民，马湖总管汝作派遣三百名蛮军协助。
English: When the Umong tribe rebelled, he ordered the Privy Council to go to Sichuan and quickly lead an army to fight the rebels. Ma Hu, the general manager, dispatched three hundred barbarians to help.

古文：降西崖门酋长阿者等百余户。
现代文：降伏西崖门酋长阿者等一百多民户。
English: More than a hundred private households, including the surrender of the West Yagumen chief, Aja, followed.

古文：冬十月己亥，以钞五千锭和籴于应昌府。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，用五千锭钱钞在应昌府购买平价粮食。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, they used 5,000 baht banknotes to buy grain at a reasonable price in Yingchang.

古文：复分河间、山东盐课转运司为二。
现代文：重新把河间、山东的盐课转运司分为两个。
English: Re-divided the salt class transshipment department in Hama and Shandong into two.

古文：遣合撒儿海牙使安南。
现代文：派遣合撒儿海牙出使安南。
English: Send Annan to the Hague.

古文：遣雪雪的斤领畏兀儿户一千戍合剌章。
现代文：派遣雪雪的斤率领畏兀儿的一千军户戍守合剌章。
English: Dispatching a thousand soldiers, led by the fearless leader, to guard and defend the imperial seal.

古文：庚子，享于太庙。
现代文：初二，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: On the second day of the new year, offerings were made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲辰，修南岳庙。
现代文：初六，修建南岳庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the construction of Nangyue Temple was completed.

古文：乙巳，枢密院臣言： 脱脱木儿遣使言，阿沙、阿女、阿则三部欲叛，宜遣人往召，如不至，乘隙伐之。 
现代文：初七，枢密院大臣上奏说 ：脱脱木儿派遣使臣来说，阿沙、阿女、阿则三个部族准备叛乱，应该派人去征召他们前来朝廷，如果不来，就趁机会讨伐他们。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Minister of the Privy Council made a report, saying, "Draftwood sent an envoy to say that the three tribes of Asha, Ajo, and Ajo were preparing to rebel, and that someone should be sent to summon them to come to the imperial court. If they did not come, they should take the opportunity to fight them."

古文：不允，因敕谕之： 事不议于云南王也先帖木儿者，毋辄行。 
现代文：皇上不准。借此事而下敕令晓谕他们说 ：事情没有和云南王也先帖木儿商量，不要随便采取行动。 
English: The emperor did not allow it, and issued an imperial edict on the matter, instructing them: "Do not take any action without first discussing the matter with the king of Yunnan and Timur."

古文：诏征东招讨使塔塔儿带、扬兀鲁带以万人征骨嵬，因授扬兀鲁带三珠虎符，为征东宣慰使都元帅。
现代文：诏令征东招讨使塔塔而带、杨兀鲁带率领一万人征伐骨嵬，因此而授予杨兀鲁带三珠虎符，任征东宣慰使都元帅。
English: The imperial edict ordered the East Conquest Campaign to be led by Tata, and Yang Bailu to lead 10,000 men to conquer and cut down the Ossuary. Therefore, Yang Bailu was awarded the Three-Pearl Tiger Badge and appointed as the Marshal of the East Conquest and Consolation Campaign.

古文：壬子，长葛、郾城各进芝草。
现代文：十四日，长葛、郾城地方各进献灵芝草。
English: On the 14th, the Changge and Lucheng regions each presented Ganoderma lucidum.

古文：癸丑，立征东行省，以阿塔海为左丞相，刘国杰、陈岩并左丞，洪茶丘右丞，征日本。
现代文：十五日，建立征东行中书省，任命阿塔海为行省左丞相，刘国杰、陈岩均任行省左丞，洪茶丘任行省右丞，征伐日本。
English: On the 15th, the Ministry of Calligraphy of the Eastern Expedition was established, and Atahai was appointed as the Minister of the Left of the Eastern Expedition, Liu Guojie and Chen Yan were appointed as the Minister of the Left of the Eastern Expedition, and Hong Chaqiu was appointed as the Minister of the Right of the Eastern Expedition to conquer Japan.

古文：赐脱里察安、答即古阿散等印，令考核中书省，其制如三品。
现代文：赐予脱里察安、答即古阿散等人印信，令他们考核中书省，其官阶相当于三品。
English: He bestowed letters of commendation on people such as De Li Zhaan and Dazhiguo Asan, and ordered them to be appraised by the Ministry of Education. Their official ranks were equivalent to the third grade.

古文：丙辰，以参议帖木儿为参知政事，位郭佑上，且命之曰： 自今之事，皆责于汝。 
现代文：十八日，任命中书省参议帖木儿为参知政事，职位在郭佑之上，并且命令他说： 从今以后的事情都由你负责。 
English: On the 18th, he appointed Timur, the counselor of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture, as a political advisor, a position above Guo You, and ordered him: "From now on, you will be in charge of everything."

古文：马法国入贡。
现代文：马法国入朝进贡。
English: France pays tribute to the emperor.

古文：戊午，以江淮行省平章忙兀带为江浙省左丞相。
现代文：二十日，任命江淮行省平章政事忙兀带担任江浙行省左丞相。
English: On the 20th, Ping Zhang of Jianghuai Province, who was busy with political affairs, was appointed as the Minister of the Left of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces.

古文：初，西川止立四路，阿合马滥用官，增而为九，台臣言其地民少，留广元、成都、顺庆、重庆、夔府五路，余悉罢去。
现代文：开始，西川只设立四个路，因为阿合马随意任用官员，增加成为九个路。御史台大臣认为那个地方人少，只保留广元、成都、顺庆、重庆、夔府五个路，其余的全部撤销。
English: At first, there were only four roads in Xichuan, but the number of roads increased to nine due to the arbitrary appointment of officials by Ahama. The Minister of History believed that the number of people in that region was small, and only five roads in Guangyuan, Chengdu, Shunqing, Chongqing, and Yefu were retained, while the rest were completely revoked.

古文：后以山谷险要，蛮夷杂处，复置嘉定路、叙州宣抚司以控制之。
现代文：后来因为山谷险要，各蛮夷的部民杂处，又重新设置嘉定路、叙州宣抚司以控制他们。
English: Later, because of the dangerous situation in the valley, the subordinate people and miscellaneous departments of the barbarians set up the Jiading Road and the Suzhou Relief Division to control them.

古文：升大理寺为都护府，职从二品。
现代文：把大理寺升格为都护府，职俸为从二品。
English: He upgraded Dali Temple to the status of the capital's protectorate, and the salary was doubled.

古文：都护府言合剌禾州民饥，户给牛二头、种二石，更给钞一十一万六千四百锭，籴米六万四百石，为四月粮赈之。
现代文：都护府上奏说：合剌禾州的百姓饥荒，每户供给耕牛二头，种籽二石；另外，拨给钱钞十一万六千四百锭购买粮米六万零四百石，作为四个月的口粮赈济他们。
English: The report delivered at the Capital Protectorate said: In response to the famine of the people in Hezhou, each household was provided with two oxen and two kilos of seeds; in addition, 116,400 baht was allocated to purchase 60,400 kilos of grain and rice as rations for four months to help them.

古文：癸亥，以答即古阿散理算积年钱谷，别置司署，与省部敌，干扰政务，并入省中。
现代文：二十五日，由于答即古阿散另外设置官署清理、核算积年的钱粮数目，和中书省的六部相对立，干扰政务，将该官署合并到中书省。
English: On the 25th, as a result of the response that Guasan separately set up an office to clean up and account for the number of grain and money accumulated over the years, and it was in opposition to the six departments of the Central Book Ministry, interfering with government affairs, the office was merged into the Central Book Ministry.

古文：丁卯，敕枢密院计胶、莱诸处漕船，高丽、江南诸处所造海舶，括佣江淮民船，备征日本。
现代文：二十九日，敕命枢密院登记胶州、莱州等地漕运的船只和高丽、江南等地所建造的海船，集中雇佣江淮地区的民船，准备征伐日本。
English: On the 29th, he ordered the Privy Council to register the ships rowed from Jiaozhou, Laizhou and other places, and the seagoing ships built in Goryeo, Jiangnan and other places, and to hire the civilian ships in the Jianghuai region to prepare for the conquest of Japan.

古文：仍敕习泛海者，募水工至千人者为千户，百人为百户。
现代文：同时训练漂海的人，招募船工达到一千名的担任千户，达到一百名的担任百户。
English: At the same time, they trained those who drifted on the sea and recruited 1,000 boatmen to serve 1,000 households and 100 boatmen to serve 100 households.

古文：塔海弟六十言： 今百姓及诸投下民，俱令造船于女直，而女直又复发为军，工役繁甚。
现代文：塔海的弟弟六十上奏说 ：现在百姓及投下州的民户，都令他们到女真部去造船，而女真部又重新遣发他们当兵，徭役非常繁重。
English: Takai's younger brother, who was in his sixties at the time, said, "Nowadays, the people and the households that left the prefecture have all ordered them to go to Onemane-bu to build ships, and Onemane-bu has sent them back to be soldiers, and the labor is very heavy.

古文：乃颜、胜纳合儿两投下鹰坊、采金等户独不调。 
现代文：唯独乃颜、胜纳合儿两个投下州的鹰坊猎户、采金户等没有调去。 
English: Only Naoyan and Shengnaheer, two eagle hunters and gold miners who left the state, were not transferred.

古文：有旨遣使发其民。
现代文：皇帝颁旨，派遣使臣调发当地百姓为军。
English: The emperor issued an order to dispatch envoys to mobilize the local people for the army.

古文：乌蒙蛮夷宣抚使阿蒙叛，诏止征罗必丹兵，同云南行省出兵讨之。
现代文：乌蒙蛮夷的宣抚使阿蒙叛变，下诏征伐罗必丹的军队停止出征，让他们同云南行署一起出兵讨伐阿蒙。
English: The proclamation of Umong the Barbarian caused Amon to rebel, and the army that was sent to subjugate Lopidan stopped going to war, and they sent troops to fight Amon together with the Yunnan Provincial Government.

古文：郭佑言： 自平江南，十年之间，凡钱粮事八经理算。
现代文：郭佑上奏说： 自从平定江南以后，十年中间，所有钱粮方面的事经过八次清理核算。
English: Guo You said: Since the pacification of the south of the Yangtze River, in the middle of the decade, all money and grain matters have been cleared and accounted for eight times.

古文：今答即古阿散等又复钩考，宜即罢去。 
现代文：现在答即古阿散又重新清查考核，应当立即停止。 
English: Now the answer is that ancient Asan has been re-examined and assessed, and it should be stopped immediately.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝赞许，采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：十一月己巳朔，广东宣慰使月的迷失以英德、循、梅三路民少，请改为州，又请以管军总管于跃为惠州总管，蔚州知州木八剌为潮州达鲁花赤。
现代文：十一月初一，广东宣慰使月的迷失因为英德、循州、梅州三个路的人口少，请求改为州；又请求任命管军总管于跃为惠州总管，蔚州知州木八剌为潮州镇守官。
English: On the first day of November, Guangdong Xuancheng requested to be changed to a prefecture because the population of Yingde, Xuzhou and Meizhou was small. It also requested that Yu Yue, the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, be appointed as the commander-in-chief of Huizhou, and that Mu Yatai, the commander-in-chief of Chizhou, be appointed as the commander-in-chief of Chaozhou.

古文：帝疑其专，不允。
现代文：皇帝怀疑他想专权，不予允从。
English: The emperor suspected that he wanted to have absolute power and did not allow him to do so.

古文：御史台臣言： 御史台、按察司以纠察百官为职，近钩校钱谷者恐发其奸，私聚群不逞之徒，欲沮其事，愿陛下依旧制谕之。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说： 御史台、按察司以纠弹、考察百官作为自己的职责，最近检查、考核钱粮的官员害怕他们的奸谋被揭发，暗中聚集了一群不法之徒，想要阻挠这件事，希望陛下依据原有的制度法令晓谕他们。 
English: The Minister of the Office of the Historian said in his report: The Office of the Historian and the Office of the Inspector General have made it their duty to investigate and investigate hundreds of officials. The officials who have recently inspected and assessed the money and grain are afraid that their treachery will be exposed. They have secretly gathered a group of lawless people who want to obstruct this matter. I hope that His Majesty will tell them in accordance with the original system and laws.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝批示说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：庚午，赐皇子爱牙赤银印。
现代文：初二，赐给皇子爱牙赤银印。
English: On the second day of the school year, Prince Aiga was given a red and silver seal.

古文：壬申，以讨日本，遣阿八剌督江淮行省军需，遣察忽督辽东行省军需。
现代文：初四，因为讨伐日本，派遣阿八剌监督江淮行省的军用物资，派遣察忽监督辽东行省的军用物资。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, because of the crusade against Japan, he dispatched Aba Yao to supervise the military supplies of Jianghuai Province, and dispatched Zhaogu to supervise the military supplies of Liaodong Province.

古文：甲戌，置合剌章、四川、建都等驿。
现代文：初六，设置合剌章、四川、建都等地的驿站。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, set up stations in Hezheng, Sichuan, Jiandu and other places.

古文：戊寅，遣使告高丽发兵万人、船六百五十艘，助征日本，仍令于近地多造船。
现代文：初十，派遣使者告诉高丽派遣一万名士兵、六百五十艘战船协助征伐日本。仍旧命令他们在靠近日本的地方多造战船。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, an envoy was dispatched to tell Korea to send ten thousand soldiers and six hundred and fifty warships to assist in the conquest of Japan. They were still ordered to build more warships near Japan.

古文：己丑，籍重庆府不花家人百二十三户为民。
现代文：二十一日，将重庆府不花的家奴一百二十三户登记入籍为民户。
English: On the twenty-first day, one hundred and twenty-three households of slaves in Chongqing were registered as private households.

古文：御史台臣奏： 昔宋以无室家壮士为盐军，数凡五千，今存者一千一百二十二人，性习凶暴，民患苦之，宜给以衣粮，使屯田自赡。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说 ：从前宋朝把没有家室的壮士组成盐军，总共五千人，现在尚存一千一百二十二人，他们的性情习惯凶强横暴，百姓们因此而忧患痛苦，应当发给他们衣服粮食，让他们屯田养活自己。 
English: The Minister of State for History made a report, saying: In the past, the Song Dynasty formed a salt army of able-bodied men without families, a total of five thousand, and now there are eleven hundred and twenty-two people left. Their temperaments are strong and violent, and the people are suffering because of this. They should be given clothes and food, and let them farm the land to feed themselves.

古文：诏议行之。
现代文：皇上下诏，令商议实行。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to implement these suggestions.

古文：癸巳，敕漕江淮米百万石，泛海贮于高丽之合浦，仍令东京及高丽各贮米十万石，备征日本。
现代文：二十五日，敕令漕运江淮的粮米一百万石渡海运到高丽的合浦贮存起来，并命令东京和高丽各贮存粮米十万石，以备征伐日本之用。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor ordered that one million koku of grain and rice from Jianghuai be transported by boat to Hepu in Goryeo for storage, and ordered Tokyo and Goryeo to each store 100,000 koku of grain and rice in preparation for the conquest of Japan.

古文：诸军期于明年三月以次而发，八月会于合浦。
现代文：各军约定于明年三月按顺序出发，八月在合浦会师。
English: It was agreed that the armies would set out in sequence in March of the following year, and meet at Hepu in August.

古文：乙未，以秃鲁欢为参知政事，卢世荣伏诛。
现代文：二十七日，任命秃鲁欢为参知政事。卢世荣被处死。
English: On the 27th, Baldur Huan was appointed to be a member of the Council of State. Lu Shirong was executed.

古文：丙申，赦囚徒，黥其面，及招宋时贩私盐军习海道者为水工，以征日本。
现代文：二十八日，大赦囚徒，在他们的脸上刺字，并招募宋朝对贩私盐和熟悉海路的士兵为水手，征伐日本。
English: On the 28th, he pardoned the prisoners, tattooed their faces, and recruited soldiers from the Song Dynasty who were salt smugglers and familiar with the sea route as sailors to invade Japan.

古文：十二月，敕减天下罪囚。
现代文：十二月初一，敕令为天下的罪囚减刑。
English: On the first day of December, the imperial edict was issued to commute the sentences of the world's criminals.

古文：以占城遁还忽都虎、刘九、田二复旧职，从征日本。
现代文：把从占城逃回的忽都虎、刘九、田二恢复旧职，命他们随军征伐日本。
English: He reinstated Hu Duhu, Liu Jiu and Tian Er, who had fled back from Zhancheng, to their former positions and ordered them to follow the army to conquer Japan.

古文：增阿塔海征日本战士万人、回回炮手五十人。
现代文：增加阿塔海征伐日本的战士一万人、回回族炮手五十人。
English: Increase the number of Atahai warriors to conquer Japan by 10,000 and the number of Hui-Hui gunners by 50.

古文：己亥，从枢密院请，严立军籍条例，选壮士及有力家充军。
现代文：初二，按照枢密院的请求，严格建立军籍条例制度，挑选年轻人和身强力壮的人充任兵卒。
English: On the second day of the new year, in accordance with the request of the Privy Council, a strict system of military registration regulations was established, and young people and able-bodied people were selected to serve as soldiers.

古文：敕枢密院： 向以征日本故，遣五卫军还家治装，今悉选壮士，以正月一日到京师。 
现代文：皇帝敕命枢密院 ：原来因为征伐日本的缘故，派遣五卫军士兵回家准备行装，现在全部挑选年轻力壮的，于正月一日到达京师。 
English: The Emperor ordered the Privy Council: Originally, because of the conquest of Japan, the soldiers of the Five Guards Army were sent home to prepare for shipment. Now, all the young and strong soldiers are selected to arrive at the Beijing Division on the first day of the first month.

古文：江淮行省以战船千艘习水战江中。
现代文：江淮行省以一千艘战船在江中练习水战。
English: A thousand warships from the provinces of Jianghuai and Xingguo practiced naval warfare in the middle of the river.

古文：辛丑，诛答即古阿散党人蔡仲英、李蹊。
现代文：初四，将答即古阿散的党羽蔡仲英、李蹊处死。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Cai Zhongying and Li Xuan, the party members who answered that they were Gua San, were executed.

古文：丁未，皇太子薨。
现代文：初十，皇太子去世。
English: At the age of ten, the Crown Prince passed away.

古文：戊午，以中卫军四千人伐木五万八千六百，给万安寺修造。
现代文：二十一日，派四千名中卫军士兵砍伐木料五万八千六百株，供万安寺修造屋舍。
English: On the twenty-first, 4,000 soldiers of the Middle Guards were sent to cut down 58,600 trees to build a house for the temple.

古文：己未，丹太庙楹。
现代文：二十二日，把太庙的屋柱涂为朱红色。
English: On the 22nd, the pillars of the Great Temple were painted vermilion red.

古文：乙酉，立集贤院，以札里蛮领之。
现代文：二十四日，建立集贤院，派札里蛮掌管。
English: On the 24th, the Jixian Academy was established, and Pazari was put in charge of it.

古文：戊子，罢合剌章打金规运所及都元帅。
现代文：二十七日，撤销合剌章打制金器的规措所以及都元帅府。
English: On the 27th, the regulation institute of goldsmiths and the marshal's office were revoked.

古文：敕合剌章酋长之子入质京师，千户、百户子留质云南王也先帖木儿所。
现代文：敕命合剌章酋长的儿子到京师做人质，千户、百户的儿子则留在云南王也先帖木儿那儿做人质。
English: The son of the chief, who risked his life to join Zhang, went to Beijing to be a hostage, while the sons of thousands and hundreds of households stayed with the king of Yunnan to be a hostage.

古文：中书省臣奏： 纳速丁言，减合剌章冗官，可岁省俸金九百四十六两；又屯田课程专人主之，可岁得金五千两。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：纳速丁说，裁减合剌章的冗官，每年可以节省俸钱九百四十六两；再把屯田的赋税派专人掌管，每年可收取五千两银子。 
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy reported: Naso Ding said that reducing the number of redundant officials with the rank of general could save 946,000 taels of salary each year; and that putting a special person in charge of the taxation of military camps could collect 5,000 taels of silver each year.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：皇上均予允从。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：遣只必哥等考核云南行省。
现代文：派遣只必哥等考核云南行省。
English: The dispatch only needs to be sent to Yunnan Province for assessment.

古文：庚寅，诏毋迁转工匠官。
现代文：二十九日，下诏不得升迁、转调管理工匠的官员。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that officials who manage artisans shall not be promoted or transferred.

古文：辛卯，敕有司祭北斗。
现代文：三十日，敕命官府祭祀北斗星。
English: On the 30th, he died, and the government held a ceremony to worship the Big Dipper.

古文：是岁，命江浙转运司通管课程。
现代文：这一年命江浙转运司统管赋税。
English: This year, the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Transportation Department was put in charge of tax collection.

古文：集诸路僧四万于西京普恩寺，作资戒会七日夜。
现代文：集中各路的四万名僧侣在西京的普恩寺举行七天七夜的资戒法会。
English: Forty thousand monks from all walks of life gathered at the Pu'en Temple in West Beijing to hold a seven-day, seven-night Buddhist precepts puja.

古文：并省重庆等处州县。
现代文：合并、裁撤重庆等地的州县。
English: The merger and abolition of counties in Chongqing and other places.

古文：占城行省参政亦黑迷失等以军还，驻海外四州，遣使以闻，敕放其军还。
现代文：占城行省参政亦黑迷失等率军返回，屯驻在海外四州，派使者报告朝廷。
English: Zhancheng went to the provinces to participate in politics and returned with an army, stationed in four overseas provinces, and sent envoys to report to the imperial court.

古文：赐皇子脱欢，诸王阿鲁灰、只吉不花，公主囊家真等，钞计七千七百三十二锭、马六百二十九匹、衣段百匹、弓千、矢二万发。
现代文：皇帝敕令，遣送他的军队回来。赏赐皇子脱欢，诸侯王阿鲁灰、只吉不花，公主囊加真等人，总计钱钞七千七百三十二锭、马六百二十九匹、衣段一百匹、弓一千张、箭二万支。
English: The emperor issued an order to send his army back, and rewarded the prince for his debauchery, the princes for their good fortune, the princess for her bravery, and others with a total of 7,732 banknotes, 629 horses, 100 clothes, 1,000 bows, and 20,000 arrows.

古文：赐诸王阿只吉、合儿鲁、忙兀带、宋忽儿、阿沙、合丹、别合剌等及官户散居河西者，羊马价钞三万七千七百五十七锭、布四千匹、绢二千匹。
现代文：赏赐诸侯王阿只吉、合儿鲁、忙兀带、宋忽儿、阿沙、合丹、别合剌等，以及散居在河西的官户，总计羊马价钱钞三万七千七百五十七锭、布四千匹、绢二千匹。
English: He rewarded the lords and princes, such as Ah Yu Ji, He Er Lu, He Ying Cao, Song Huo Er, Asha, He Dan, and Be He Yao, as well as the government officials scattered in Hexi, with a total of thirty-seven thousand seven hundred and fifty-seven sheep and horse price banknotes, four thousand cloth horses, and two thousand mules.

古文：以伯八剌等贫乏，给钞七万六千五百二锭。
现代文：因为伯八剌等人贫困，赐给钱钞七万六千五百零二锭。
English: Because Bo Yat-sen and others were poor, they were given money and banknotes totaling 76,502 baht.

古文：赏诸王阿只吉、小厮、汪总帅、别速带、也先等所部及征缅、占城等军，钞五万三千五百四十一锭、马八千一百九十七匹、羊一万六千六百三十四、牛十一、米二万二千一百石、绢帛八万一千匹、绵五百三十斤、木绵二万七千二百七十九匹、甲千被、弓千张、衣百七十九袭。
现代文：赏赐诸侯王阿只吉、小厮、汪总帅、别速带、也先等人的部属，以及征伐缅国、占城等地的军队，总计钱钞五万三千五百四十一锭、马八千一百九十七匹、羊一万六千六百三十四头、牛十一头、米二万二千一百石、绢帛八万零一千匹、棉五百三十斤、木棉二万七千二百七十九匹、甲一千副、弓一千张、衣服一百七十九件。
English: He rewarded the subordinates of vassals such as vassals of vassals such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vassals of princes such as vass

古文：命帝师也怜八合失甲自罗二思八等递藏佛事于万安、兴教、庆寿等寺，凡一十九会。
现代文：命令帝师也怜八合失、甲自罗二思和等依次在万安寺、兴教寺、庆寿寺等寺庙举行佛事，共举行十九次。
English: The emperor also ordered the Buddhist services to be held at temples such as Wan'an Temple, Xingjiao Temple, and Keiju Temple, and a total of nineteen Buddhist services were held.

古文：断死罪二百七十一人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共二百七十一人。
English: A total of 271 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

