古文：◎世宗二
现代文：世宗二
English: Sejong II

古文：二十二年春正月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：嘉靖二十二年正月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 22nd year of Jiajing, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：三月庚戌，复遣使采木湖广。
现代文：三月六日，又派使者到湖广采木。
English: On March 6th, an envoy was sent to Wuhuang to collect wood.

古文：是春，俺答屡入塞。
现代文：这年春天，俺答多次侵入边塞。
English: This spring, I made several incursions into the border fortress.

古文：秋八月，犯延绥，总兵官吴瑛等击败之。
现代文：八月，侵犯延绥，被总兵官吴瑛等击败。
English: In August, it invaded Yancheng and was defeated by the general Wu Ying and others.

古文：冬十月，朵颜入寇，杀守备陈舜。
现代文：十月，朵颜侵犯，杀守备陈舜。
English: In October, Doyan invaded and killed Chen Zhen.

古文：十二月乙酉，免南畿被灾税粮。
现代文：十二月十五日，免南畿受灾税粮。
English: On December 15, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：是年，占城、土鲁番、撒马儿罕、天方、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，占城、土鲁番、撒马儿罕、天方、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Zhancheng, Turuban, Samarkand, Tianfang and Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二十三年春正月丙寅，俺答犯黄崖口。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年正月二十七日，俺答侵犯黄崖口。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the 23rd year of Jiajing, I decided to invade the Yellow Cliff.

古文：二月戊寅，犯大水谷。
现代文：二月九日，侵犯大水谷。
English: On February 9th, the invasion of Dashu Valley began.

古文：三月癸丑，犯龙门所。
现代文：三月十五日，侵犯龙门所。
English: On March 15th, the Longmen Town was invaded.

古文：丁巳，赐秦鸣雷等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十九日，赐秦鸣雷等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the 19th, Qin Minglei and others were conferred the title of "Candidate" with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：秋七月，俺答犯大同，总兵官周尚文战于黑山，败之。
现代文：七月，俺答侵犯大同，总兵官周尚文在黑山战败俺答。
English: In July, we invaded Datong. General Zhou Shangwen was defeated in Montenegro.

古文：八月甲午，翟銮罢。
现代文：八月二十八日，翟銮退职。
English: On August 28th, Zou retired.

古文：九月癸卯，免浙江被灾税粮。
现代文：九月七日，免浙江受灾税粮。
English: On September 7, Zhejiang was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：丁未，吏部尚书许赞兼文渊阁大学士，礼部尚书张璧兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十一日，吏部尚书许赞兼文渊阁大学士，礼部尚书张璧兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xuzan Shangshu of the Personnel Department and a scholar of the Wenyuan Pavilion, and Zhang Bi of the Ceremonial Department and a scholar of the East Pavilion, participated in important affairs.

古文：壬子，振湖广灾。
现代文：十六日，赈救湖广灾害。
English: On the 16th, I went to rescue the Hukang disaster.

古文：冬十月戊辰，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：十月三日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On October 3, Henan was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：甲戌，小王子入万全右卫。
现代文：九日，小王子侵入万全右卫。
English: On the 9th, Little Prince invaded Manchukuo.

古文：戊寅，掠蔚州，至于完县。
现代文：十三日，抢劫尉州，到达完县。
English: On the 13th, he robbed Yezhou and arrived in Wanxian.

古文：京师戒严。
现代文：京师戒严。
English: The capital is under martial law.

古文：乙酉，逮总督宣大兵部尚书翟鹏、巡抚蓟镇佥都御史朱方下狱，鹏谪戍，方杖死。
现代文：二十日，逮捕总督宣府、大同兵部尚书翟鹏、巡抚蓟镇佥都御史朱方下狱，翟鹏贬官戍边，朱方被杖责打死。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Fang, the governor of Xuanfu, the commander of the Datong Military Department, Shang Shuxu and Zhu Peng, and the inspector of the Datong Military Department, Zhu Zhen and Zhu Du, were arrested and sent to prison. Zhu Peng was demoted and Zhu Fang was beaten to death with a stick.

古文：十一月庚子，京师解严。
现代文：十一月五日，京师解除戒严。
English: On November 5, martial law was lifted in Beijing.

古文：加方士陶仲文少师。
现代文：加方士陶仲文少师。
English: Canadian student Tao Zhongwen.

古文：十二月丙子，振江西灾。
现代文：十二月十二日，赈救江西灾害。
English: On December 12th, the rescue of Jiangxi disaster occurred.

古文：是年，安南入贡，日本以无表却之。
现代文：这年，安南入朝进贡，日本因没有上奏被拒绝。
English: This year, Annan paid tribute to the DPRK, and Japan was rejected because it did not pay tribute.

古文：二十四年春二月戊申，诏流民复业，予牛种，开垦闲田者给复十年。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年二月十五日，下诏流民复业，给予耕牛和粮种，开垦空田的免赋役十年。
English: On the 15th day of February in the 24th year of Jiajing, the exiled people were allowed to return to work, and were given oxen and grain, and ten years of free labor to reclaim the empty fields.

古文：三月壬午，逮总督宣大兵部侍郎张汉下狱，谪戍。
现代文：三月二十日，逮捕总督宣府、大同兵部侍郎张汉下狱，贬官戍边。
English: On March 20th, the governor of Xuanfu was arrested, and Zhang Han, the attendant of the Datong military department, was jailed and demoted.

古文：夏五月壬戌朔，日有食之。六月壬辰，太庙成。
现代文：五月初一日，有日食。六月一日，太庙建成。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. On the first day of June, the Great Temple was completed.

古文：是夏，免畿辅、山西、陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：这年夏天，免畿辅、山西、陕西受灾税粮。
English: In the summer of this year, the disaster-affected tax grain was exempted in Kiyosu, Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：秋七秋壬戌，有事于太庙，赦徒罪以下。
现代文：七月二日，在太庙有事，赦免服劳役以下罪行。
English: On July 2, there was an incident in Taimiao, and the following crimes were pardoned.

古文：八月丙午，瘗暴骸。
现代文：八月十六日，掩埋外露尸骨。
English: On August 16th, they buried the exposed bones.

古文：己酉，张璧卒。
现代文：十九日，张璧死。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Bi passed away.

古文：庚戌，俺答犯松子岭，杀守备张文瀚。
现代文：二十日，俺答侵犯松子岭，杀守备张文瀚。
English: On the 20th, I decided to invade Songziling and kill Zhang Wenhan.

古文：是月，犯大同，参将张凤、指挥刘钦等战死。
现代文：这月，参将张凤、指挥刘钦等战死。
English: This month, senior general Zhang Feng, commander Liu Qin and others died in battle.

古文：九月丁丑，召夏言入阁。
现代文：九月十七日，召夏言入阁。
English: On September 17th, Zhao Xiayan was appointed to the cabinet.

古文：冬十一月辛巳，许赞罢。
现代文：十一月二十二日，许赞停职。
English: On November 22, Xu Zhan was suspended.

古文：是年，安南、琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、琉球、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Annan, Ryukyu, and Ussuri provinces paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：二十五年春三月戊辰，四川白草番乱。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年三月十一日，四川白草番叛乱。
English: On March 11th, 25 years after the Jiajing Incident, the Sichuan Bai Caoban Rebellion broke out.

古文：夏五月戊辰，俺答款大同塞，边将杀其使。
现代文：五月十三日，俺答到大同边塞，边将杀其来使。
English: On May 13th, I arrived at the Datong border, and the border guard ordered me to kill him.

古文：六月甲辰，犯宣府，千户汪洪战死。
现代文：六月十九日，侵犯宣府，千户汪洪战死。
English: On June 19th, after invading Xuanfu, Qianhu Wanghong died in battle.

古文：秋七月癸酉，以醴泉出承华殿，廷臣表贺，停诸司封事二十日。
现代文：七月十九日，因醴泉出于承华殿，廷臣上奏祝贺，停各官吏封事二十日。
English: On July 19th, as Quanquan was leaving the Chenghua Palace, the courtiers sent congratulations, and the officials stopped the ceremony on the 20th.

古文：嗣后，庆贺斋祀悉停封奏。
现代文：此后，庆贺斋戒祭祀全部停止封奏。
English: After that, all celebratory fasting rites stopped being performed.

古文：是月，俺答犯延安、庆阳。
现代文：这月，俺答侵犯延安、庆阳。
English: This month, I will invade Yan'an and Qingyang.

古文：八月壬子，免山东被灾税粮。
现代文：八月二十八日，免山东受灾税粮。
English: On August 28th, the disaster-affected grain in Shandong was exempted from tax.

古文：九月，俺答犯宁夏。
现代文：九月，俺答侵犯宁夏。
English: In September, I decided to invade Ningxia.

古文：冬十月丁亥，犯清平堡，游击高极战死。
现代文：十月三日，侵犯清平堡，游击高极战死。
English: On October 3, the Qingping Fortress was invaded, and the guerrilla Gaoji died in battle.

古文：癸巳，代府奉国将军充灼谋反，伏诛。
现代文：九日，代府奉国将军充灼谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the 9th, the representative of the prefectural government, General Bongoku, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：甲午，杀故建昌侯张延龄。
现代文：十日，杀原建昌侯张延龄。
English: On the 10th, Zhang Yanling, a member of the Jianchang clan, was killed.

古文：十二月丁未，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：十二月十四日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On December 14th, the disaster-affected grain in Henan was exempted from the tax.

古文：是年，土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Turuban was the first to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二十六年春三月庚午，赐李春芳等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年三月十九日，赐李春芳等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 19th, 26 years after the founding of Jiajing, Li Chunfang and others were conferred the title of academician with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月乙巳，巡抚四川都御史张时彻、副总兵何卿讨平白草叛番。
现代文：四月二十四日，巡抚四川都御史张时彻、副总兵何卿征讨并平定白草叛番。
English: On April 24th, Zhang Shicun, the governor of Sichuan, and He Qing, the deputy commander-in-chief of the army, went to subdue the Bai Cao rebels.

古文：己酉，俺答求贡，拒之。
现代文：二十八日，俺答乞求进贡，被拒绝。
English: On the 28th, I begged for tribute and was refused.

古文：秋七月丙辰，河决曹县。
现代文：七月七日，曹县黄河决堤。
English: On July 7, the Yellow River in Cao County burst its banks.

古文：八月丙戌，免陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：八月八日，免陕西受灾税粮。
English: On August 8th, Shaanxi was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：九月戊辰，户部尚书王杲以科臣劾其通贿下狱，遣戍。
现代文：九月二十日，户部尚书王杲因科臣弹劾其接受贿赂被下狱，遣送戍边。
English: On September 20th, the head of the household, Wang Shoshu, was impeached by Kosen for accepting bribes and was sent to Hulunbuir.

古文：闰月丙午，振成都饥。
现代文：闰九月二十八日，赈救成都饥荒。
English: On the 28th day of the 9th month of the leap year,  saved Chengdu from famine.

古文：冬十一月壬午，大内火，释杨爵于狱。乙未，皇后崩。
现代文：十一月五日，皇宫发生火灾。从狱中释放杨爵。十八日，皇后死。
English: On November 5, a fire broke out in the imperial palace. Yang Jie was released from prison. On the 18th, the empress died.

古文：十二月辛酉，逮甘肃总兵官仇鸾。
现代文：十二月十四日，逮捕甘肃总兵官仇銮。
English: On December 14th, the arrest of Gansu general officer Qiu Jun.

古文：乙亥，海寇犯宁波、台州。
现代文：二十八日，海盗侵犯宁波、台州。
English: On the 28th, pirates invaded Ningbo and Taizhou.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：二十七年春正月，把都儿寇广宁，参将阎振战死。
现代文：嘉靖二十七年正月，把都儿侵犯广宁。参将阎振战死。
English: In the first month of the 27th year of Jiajing, the capital was invaded by Guangning. General Yan Zhen died in battle.

古文：癸未，以议复河套，逮总督陕西三边侍郎曾铣，杖给事中御史于廷。
现代文：六日，因倡议恢复河套，逮捕总督陕西三边侍郎曾铣，杖给事中御史于朝廷。
English: On the sixth day, because of the initiative to restore Hetao, the governor of Shaanxi, the three-sided waiter Zeng Yao, was arrested, and the stick was given to the imperial court.

古文：罢夏言。
现代文：罢免夏言。
English: Natsugen was dismissed.

古文：三月癸巳，杀曾铣，逮夏言。
现代文：三月十八日，杀曾铣，逮捕夏言。
English: On March 18th, Zeng Yao was killed and Xia Yan was arrested.

古文：癸卯，出仇鸾于狱。
现代文：二十八日，释放仇銮出狱。
English: On the 28th, he was released from prison.

古文：夏五月丙戌，葬孝烈皇后。
现代文：五月十二日，安葬孝烈皇后。
English: On May 12th, the funeral of Empress Xiaoling took place.

古文：秋七月戊寅，京师地震。
现代文：七月五日，京师发生地震。
English: On July 5, an earthquake occurred in the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：庚子，西苑进嘉谷，荐于太庙。
现代文：二十七日，西苑进献嘉谷，被进献到太庙。
English: On the 27th, Xiyuan was presented to Jiayu, and was then presented to Taimiao.

古文：八月丁巳，俺答犯大同，指挥顾相等战死，周尚文追败之于次野口。
现代文：八月十五日，俺答侵犯大同，指挥顾相等战死。周尚文追击并打败俺答于次野口。
English: On August 15th, I invaded Datong, and the commander Gu Zong and others were killed. Zhou Shangwen chased and defeated I, who was in charge of Tienokou.

古文：九月壬午，犯宣府，深入永宁、怀来、隆庆，守备鲁承恩等战死。
现代文：九月十日，侵犯宣府，深入永宁、怀来、隆庆，守备鲁承恩等战死。
English: On September 10, they invaded Xuanfu, penetrated deep into Yongning, Huailai, and Longqing, and killed guards such as Lu Cheng'en.

古文：乙未，免陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：二十三日，免陕西受灾税粮。
English: On the 23rd, the disaster-affected tax grain in Shaanxi Province was exempted.

古文：冬十月癸卯，杀夏言。
现代文：十月二日，杀夏言。
English: On October 2nd, the "Killing Natsugen" began.

古文：十一月乙未，诏抚按官采生沙金。
现代文：十一月二十四日，下诏抚安官采集生沙金。
English: On November 24th, the next day, Fuzhou security officers began to collect raw sand gold.

古文：是年，日本入贡。
现代文：当年，日本前来进贡。
English: That year, Japan came to pay tribute.

古文：二十八年春二月乙巳，振陕西饥。
现代文：嘉靖二十八年二月五日，赈救陕西饥荒。
English: On February 5, the 28th year of Jiajing, Zeng helped relieve the famine in Shaanxi.

古文：辛亥，南京吏部尚书张治为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，祭酒李本为少詹事兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：十二日，南京吏部尚书张治为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，祭酒李本为少詹事兼翰林学士，入阁参与机要事务。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Zhang Zhi, a member of Nanjing's Ministry of Personnel, became a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, and Li Ben, a member of the Ministry of Sacrifices and Scholarships and a scholar of Hanlin Academy, joined the cabinet to participate in important affairs.

古文：壬子，俺答犯宣府，指挥董昜等败没，遂东犯永宁，关南大震。
现代文：十三日，俺答侵犯宣府，指挥董等败死，于是俺答东犯永宁，关南大为震慑。
English: On the 13th, I responded to the invasion of Xuanfu, and the commander Dong and others were defeated and killed, so I responded to the East criminal Yongning, and Guan Nan was a great shock.

古文：乙卯，周尚文败俺答于曹家庄。
现代文：十六日，周尚文在曹家庄打败俺答。
English: On the 16th, Zhou Shangwen defeated me in Caojiazhuang.

古文：丙辰，宣府总兵官赵国忠又败之于大滹沱。
现代文：十七日，宣府总兵官赵国忠又在大滹沱打败俺答。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Guozhong, the commander-in-chief of the General Staff of the Xuanwu Army, came to Daxu to defeat me again.

古文：三月辛未朔，日有食之。丁亥，皇太子薨。
现代文：三月初一日，有日食。十七日，皇太子死。
English: On the first day of March, there was a solar eclipse. On the 17th, the crown prince died.

古文：秋七月，浙江海贼起。
现代文：七月，浙江海盗大起。
English: In July, the Zhejiang Pirates rose up.

古文：九月，朵颜三卫犯辽东。
现代文：九月，朵颜三卫侵犯辽东。
English: In September, Doyan Sanwei invaded Liaodong.

古文：冬十月辛丑，免畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：十月五日，减免畿内受灾税粮。
English: On October 5, tax relief for foodstuffs affected by the disaster in the Kinai region came into effect.

古文：是年，日本、琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，日本、琉球前来进贡。
English: That year, Japan and Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：二十九年春三月壬午，赐唐汝楫等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年三月十八日，赐唐汝楫等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 18th, the 29th year of Jiajing, Tang Ruxuan and others were conferred the title of Jin Shi, and their ranks and origins were different.

古文：是月，琼州黎贼平。
现代文：这月，琼州黎贼被平定。
English: This month, the Qiongzhou bandits were subdued.

古文：夏六月丁巳，俺答犯大同，总兵官张达、副总兵林椿战死。
现代文：六月二十四日，俺答侵犯大同，总兵官张达、副总兵林椿战死。
English: On June 24th, I responded to the invasion of Datong, and the commander-in-chief Zhang Da and the deputy commander-in-chief Lin Tsubaki died in battle.

古文：是夏，免陕西、河南、江北被灾夏税。
现代文：这月，免陕西、河南、江北受灾夏税。
English: This month, Shaanxi, Henan and Jiangbei were exempted from the disaster-affected summer tax.

古文：秋八月丙寅，封方士陶仲文为恭诚伯。
现代文：八月五日，封方士陶仲文为恭诚伯。
English: On August 5th, Fengfang Shi Tao Zhongwen was awarded the title of Gongcheng Bo.

古文：丁丑，俺答大举入寇，攻古北口，蓟镇兵溃。
现代文：十七日，俺答大举入侵，进攻古北口，蓟镇兵被击败。
English: On the 17th, we made a large-scale invasion and attacked Gubeikou, and the soldiers of Shanzhen were defeated.

古文：戊寅，掠通州，驻白河，分掠畿甸州县，京师戒严。
现代文：十八日，抢劫通州，驻于白河，分别抢劫畿甸州县，京师戒严。
English: On the 18th, the robbery of Tongzhou, stationed in Baihe, respectively, the robbery of Kijiangzhou County, Beijing Division of martial law.

古文：召大同总兵官仇鸾及河南、山东兵入援。
现代文：召大同总兵官仇銮及河南、山东兵入京救援。
English: The general officer of the Datong Army, Qiu Qi, and soldiers from Henan and Shandong were called to Beijing for rescue.

古文：壬午，薄都城。
现代文：二十二日，迫近都城。
English: On the 22nd, approaching the capital.

古文：仇鸾为平虏大将军，节制诸路兵马，巡抚保定都御史杨守谦提督军务，左谕德赵贞吉宣谕诸军。
现代文：仇銮为平虏大将军，节制诸路兵马，巡抚保定都御史杨守谦提督军务，左谕德赵贞吉宣告诸军。
English: His enemy was the great general Pingru, who restrained all the troops and horses, the governor of Baoding, Gu Shi Yang, guarded the military affairs of the admiral, and the left-hand man, De Zhao Zhengyi, proclaimed the army.

古文：癸未，始御奉天殿，戒敕群臣。
现代文：二十三日，开始到奉天殿，告诫群臣。
English: On the 23rd, he began to go to the Temple of Heaven to admonish the courtiers.

古文：甲申，寇退。
现代文：二十四日，俺答退走。
English: On the 24th, I decided to leave.

古文：逮守通州都御史王仪。
现代文：逮捕守备通州都御史王仪。
English: The arrest of the guardian of the capital of Tongzhou, Wang Yi.

古文：丙戌，京师解严。
现代文：二十六日，京师解除戒严令。
English: On the 26th, martial law was lifted in Beijing.

古文：杖赵贞吉，谪外任。
现代文：杖赵贞吉，贬官外任。
English: Jie Zhao Zhengyi, demoted to the position of non-official.

古文：丁亥，仇鸾败绩于白羊口。
现代文：二十七日，仇銮在白羊口失败。
English: On the 27th, the enemy failed at the mouth of the White Goat.

古文：兵部尚书丁汝夔、巡抚侍郎杨守谦有罪，弃市。
现代文：兵部尚书丁汝夔、巡抚侍郎杨守谦犯罪，被丢尸弃市。
English: The war secretary, Shangshu Ding Ruxuan, and the governor's aide-de-camp, Yang Shouqian, committed crimes and were thrown out of the city.

古文：杖左都御史屠侨、刑部侍郎彭黯。
现代文：杖打左都御史屠侨、刑部侍郎彭黯。
English: Zuo Mi Shi Tu Qiao, the scepter-wielding governor of the Left Capital, and Peng Qiao, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：九月辛卯，振畿内被寇者。
现代文：九月一日，赈济畿内遭战乱军民。
English: On September 1st, war-torn soldiers and civilians came to the city of Kinki in Kansai.

古文：乙未，罢团营，复三大营旧制，设戎政府，以仇鸾总督之。
现代文：五日，罢免团营，恢复三大营旧制，设置军事政府机关，命仇銮领导。
English: On the fifth day, the regimental battalion was dismissed, the old system of three battalions was restored, a military government agency was set up, and the leaders of the vendetta were appointed.

古文：丁酉，罢领营中官。
现代文：七日，召回领营中官。
English: On the seventh day, the camp commander was recalled.

古文：戊申，免畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：十八日，免畿内受灾税粮。
English: On the 18th, disaster-affected tax grain in the Kinai region was exempted.

古文：壬子，废郑王厚烷为庶人。
现代文：二十二日，废郑王厚烷为庶人。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Wang Houxan was deposed as a commoner.

古文：冬十月甲戌，张治卒。
现代文：十月十四日，张治死。
English: On October 14th, Zhang Ji passed away.

古文：十一月癸巳，分遣御史选边军入卫。
现代文：十一月四日，分遣御史选边军入卫。
English: On November 4th, the detachment of the selected border troops entered the guard.

古文：壬寅，祧仁宗，祔孝烈皇后于太庙。
现代文：十三日，祭祀仁宗祖庙，附祭孝烈皇后于太庙。
English: On the 13th, there will be a ritual at the Ninsong Ancestral Temple, and an additional ritual for the Empress Xiaoling at the Grand Temple.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球前来进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三十年春三月壬辰，开马市于宣府、大同，兵部侍郎史道经理之。
现代文：嘉靖三十年三月四日，在宣府、大同开设马市，由兵部侍郎史道经理。
English: On March 4th, the 30th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, a horse market was opened in Xuanfu and Datong, with the attendant of the military department as the manager of the historical road.

古文：夏四月壬午，下经略京城副都御史商大节于狱。
现代文：四月二十四日，下经略京城副都御史商大节于狱。
English: On April 24th, he was sentenced to prison for subverting the Great Festival of the History Merchants of the Capital.

古文：秋九月乙未，京师地震，诏修省。
现代文：九月十日，京师发生地震，下诏修身反省。
English: On September 10th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and I had to reflect on myself.

古文：冬十一月，俺答犯大同。
现代文：十一月，俺答侵犯大同。
English: In November, I decided to invade Datong.

古文：是年，免两畿、河南、江西、辽东、贵州、山东、山西被灾税粮。
现代文：这年，免两畿、河南、江西、辽东、贵州、山东、山西受灾税粮。
English: In this year, the disaster-affected tax grain of the two Kis, Henan, Jiangxi, Liaodong, Guizhou, Shandong and Shanxi was exempted.

古文：三十一年春正月壬辰，俺答犯大同。
现代文：嘉靖三十一年正月九日，俺答侵犯大同。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 31st year of Jiajing, I decided to invade Datong.

古文：甲午，入弘赐堡。
现代文：十一日，侵入弘赐堡。
English: On the 11th, they invaded Hongji Castle.

古文：二月癸丑，振宣、大饥。
现代文：二月一日，赈救宣府、大同饥荒。
English: On February 1st, relief workers from Xuanfu and Datong went on a hunger strike.

古文：辛酉，俺答犯怀仁川，指挥佥事王恭战死。
现代文：九日，俺答侵犯怀仁川，指挥佥事王恭英勇战死。
English: On the 9th, I responded to the invasion of Huai'in River, and the commander Wang Gong died heroically.

古文：己巳，建内府营，操练内侍。
现代文：十七日，建立内府营兵，操练内部侍从。
English: On the 17th, the inner-prefectural battalion was established, and the internal attendants were drilled.

古文：三月戊子，大将军仇鸾帅师赴大同。
现代文：三月六日，大将军仇銮率兵赶赴大同。
English: On March 6, General Qiu Jun led his troops to rush to Datong.

古文：辛卯，礼部尚书徐阶兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：九日，礼部尚书徐阶兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 9th, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Xu Jia, who is also a scholar of Donggak University, participated in important affairs.

古文：夏四月丙寅，把都儿、辛爱犯新兴堡，指挥王相等战死。
现代文：四月十四日，把都儿、辛爱侵犯新兴堡，指挥王相等英勇战死。
English: On April 14th, the capital and Xin'ai invaded the emerging fortress, and the commanding officer, Wang Xiang, died a heroic death.

古文：癸卯，罢各边马市。
现代文：二十四日，倭寇侵犯浙江。
English: On the 24th, the Japanese invaded Zhejiang.

古文：冬十月己未，兵部尚书赵锦坐仇鸾党戍边。
现代文：五月三日，召仇銮回京。二十七日，倭寇攻陷黄岩。十月十日，兵部尚书赵锦给仇銮同伙定罪戍边。
English: On May 3rd, he summoned Qianlong back to Beijing. On the 27th, the wokou invaded Huangyan. On October 10th, the military commander Zhao Jin convicted Qianlong's accomplices.

古文：壬戌，免江西被灾税粮。
现代文：十三日，免江西受灾税粮。
English: On the 13th, the disaster-affected tax grain in Jiangxi was exempted.

古文：十二月丁巳。光禄少卿马从谦坐诽谤杖死。
现代文：十二月九日，光禄少卿马从谦定诽谤罪被打死。
English: On December 9, Guanglu Shaoqing Ma Congding was beaten to death for the crime of defamation.

古文：三十二年春正月戊寅朔，日食，阴云不见。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年正月一日，有日食，因有阴云看不见。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 32nd year of Jiajing, there was a solar eclipse, which could not be seen because of the clouds.

古文：己卯，侍郎吴鹏振淮、徐水灾。
现代文：二日，侍郎吴鹏赈救淮、徐州水灾。
English: On the second day, chamberlain Wu Pengyao saved Huaihai and Xuzhou from floods.

古文：二月甲子，倭犯温州。
现代文：二月十七日，倭寇侵犯温州。
English: On February 17th, the Japanese invaded Wenzhou.

古文：壬申，俺答犯宣府，参将史略战死。
现代文：二十五日，俺答侵犯宣府，参将史略英勇战死。
English: On the 25th, I responded to the invasion of Xuanfu, and General Shi Liang died a heroic death.

古文：三月丁丑，振陕西饥。
现代文：三月一日，赈济陕西饥荒。
English: On March 1, the famine in Shaanxi Province of Fujian Province began.

古文：辛巳，吉能犯延绥，杀副总兵李梅。
现代文：五日，吉能侵犯延绥，杀副总兵李梅。
English: On the fifth day, Yoshino invaded Yancheng and killed Vice-Commander-in-Chief Li Mei.

古文：壬午，兵部侍郎杨博巡边。
现代文：六日，兵部侍郎杨博巡视边境。
English: On the 6th, Yang Bo, the secretary of the military department, inspected the border.

古文：甲申，振山东饥。
现代文：八日，赈济山东饥荒。
English: On the 8th, famine broke out in Shandong Province.

古文：甲午，赐陈谨等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐陈谨等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the 18th, Chen Jizhi and other scholars were awarded with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：甲辰，俺答犯宣府，副总兵郭都战死。
现代文：二十八日，俺答侵犯宣府。副总兵郭都战死。
English: On the 28th, I responded to the invasion of Xuanfu. The deputy commander-in-chief died in battle.

古文：闰三月，海贼汪直纠倭寇濒海诸郡，至六月始去。
现代文：闰三月，海盗汪直纠集倭寇迫近沿海各郡，到六月才离去。
English: In leap March, the pirate Wang Zhi entangled and gathered the wokou approaching the coastal counties, and did not leave until June.

古文：秋七月戊午，俺答大举入寇，犯灵丘、广昌。
现代文：七月十四日，俺答大举入侵，侵犯灵丘、广昌。
English: On July 14, we launched a large-scale invasion, invading Lingqiu and Guangchang.

古文：乙丑，河套诸部犯延绥。
现代文：二十一日，河套各部侵犯延绥。
English: On the twenty-first day, all parts of Hetao invaded Yancheng.

古文：己巳，俺答犯浮图峪，游击陈凤、朱玉御之。
现代文：二十五日，俺答侵犯浮图峪，游击陈凤、朱玉领兵抗击。
English: On the 25th day, we responded to the invasion of the floating raft, and the guerrilla Chen Feng and Zhu Yu led the troops to fight back.

古文：庚午，河南贼师尚诏陷归德及柘城、鹿邑。
现代文：二十六日，河南盗贼师尚诏攻陷归德及柘城、鹿邑。
English: On the 26th, the Henan thief division Shang Zhao attacked and captured Guide, Lucheng and Luyi.

古文：八月丙子，小王子犯赤城。
现代文：八月二日，小王子侵犯赤城。
English: On August 2, the Little Prince invaded Akagi.

古文：丙申，师尚诏攻太康，官军与战于鄢陵，败绩。
现代文：二十二日，师尚诏攻太康，官军与师尚诏激战于鄢陵，官军溃败。
English: On the 22nd, Shang Zhao's division attacked Taikang, and the government army fought fiercely with Shang Zhao's division in Fuling. The government army was routed.

古文：戊戌，振山东灾，免税粮。
现代文：二十四日，赈救山东灾害，减免税粮。
English: On the 24th, the relief of the disaster in Shandong and the reduction of tax-free grain began.

古文：九月丙午，俺答犯广武，巡抚都御史赵时春败绩，总兵官李涞、参将冯恩等力战死。
现代文：九月三日，俺答侵犯广武，巡抚都御史赵时春失败，总兵官李涞、参将冯恩等奋力战死。
English: On September 3, I responded to the invasion of Guangwu, the governor of the capital, Zhao Shichun, failed, and the commander-in-chief, Li Jun, and the general, Feng En, fought and died.

古文：辛酉，以敌退告谢郊庙。
现代文：十八日，因敌人退却，祭告感谢郊庙。
English: On the 18th, as the enemy retreated, the suburb temple was thanked.

古文：冬十月甲戌，振河南、山东饥。
现代文：十月一日，赈救河南、山东饥荒。
English: On October 1, the famine relief in Henan and Shandong began.

古文：庚子，师尚诏伏诛，贼平。
现代文：二十七日，师尚诏被诛杀，贼乱被平定。
English: On the 27th, his mentor Shang Zhao was beaten to death, and the banditry was finally put down.

古文：辛丑，京师外城成。
现代文：二十八日，京师外城修成。
English: On the 28th, the construction of the outer city of Beijing was completed.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球前来进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三十三年春正月壬寅朔，以贺疏违制，杖六科给事中于廷。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年正月一日，因庆贺奏疏违反规定，在朝廷杖打六科给事中。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 33rd year of Jiajing, due to the violation of the regulations of the celebration, the six subjects of the imperial scepter were in the process of being given.

古文：戊辰，官军围倭于南沙，五阅月不克，倭溃围出，转掠苏、松。
现代文：二十七日，官军在南沙围剿倭寇，前后五次经历月余没有攻克，倭寇攻破重围逃出，转而攻掠苏州、松江。
English: On the 27th, the government army encircled the wokou in Nansha, but failed to conquer it five times in the past month. The wokou broke through the encirclement and escaped, and then attacked Suzhou and Songjiang.

古文：二月庚辰，官军败绩于松江。
现代文：二月九日，官军在松江失败。
English: On February 9, the government army was defeated in Matsue.

古文：三月乙丑，倭犯通、泰，余众入青、徐界。
现代文：三月二十五日，倭寇侵犯通、泰，其余的进入青、徐界内。
English: On March 25th, the wokou invaded Tong and Tai, and the rest entered the Qing and Xu realms.

古文：夏四月甲戌，振畿内饥。
现代文：四月四日，赈救畿内饥荒。
English: On the 4th of April, the relief of famine in the Kinai region began.

古文：乙亥，倭犯嘉兴，都司周应桢等战死。
现代文：五日，倭寇侵犯嘉兴，都司周应桢等英勇战死。
English: On the fifth day, the wokou invaded Jiaxing, and Tusi Zhou Yinglu and others died heroically.

古文：乙酉，陷崇明，知县唐一岑死之。
现代文：十五日，攻陷崇明，知县唐一岑死。
English: On the fifteenth day, Chongming was captured, and Zhixian Tang died.

古文：五月壬寅，倭掠苏州。
现代文：五月三日，倭寇抢劫苏州。
English: On May 3, wokou robbed Suzhou.

古文：丁巳，南京兵部尚书张经总督军务，讨倭。
现代文：十八日，南京兵部尚书张经总督军务，征讨倭寇。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jing, the military governor of the Nanjing Military Department, went to recruit wako.

古文：六月癸酉，俺答犯大同，总兵官岳懋战死。
现代文：六月四日，俺答侵犯大同，总兵官岳懋英勇战死。
English: On June 4th, we invaded Datong, and the commander-in-chief, Yue Xuan, died a heroic death.

古文：己丑，侍郎陈儒振大同军士。
现代文：二十日，侍郎陈儒赈救大同军士。
English: On the 20th, waiter Chen Ruxuan came to the rescue of Sergeant Datong.

古文：秋八月癸未，倭犯嘉定，官军败之。
现代文：八月十五日，倭寇侵犯嘉定，被官军打败。
English: On August 15, the Japanese invaders invaded Jiading and were defeated by the government army.

古文：庚寅，复战，败绩。
现代文：二十二日，又战，官军失败。
English: On the 22nd, there was another battle, and the government army was defeated.

古文：九月丁卯，俺答犯古北口，总督杨博御却之。
现代文：九月二十九日，俺答侵犯古北口，总督杨博击退其进攻。
English: On September 29, I responded to the invasion of Gubeikou, and Governor Yang Bo repelled the attack.

古文：是年，暹罗、土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗、土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Siam, Turpan, Tianfang, Samarkand, and Wuxi paid tribute to the North.

古文：三十四年春正月丁酉朔，倭陷崇德，攻德清。
现代文：嘉靖三十四年正月一日，倭寇攻陷崇德，进攻德清。
English: On the first day of the first month of the thirty-fourth year of Jiajing, the Wokou invaded and conquered Chongde and attacked Deqing.

古文：二月丙戌，工部侍郎赵文华祭海，兼区处防倭。
现代文：二月二十一日，工部侍郎赵文华祭祀大海，兼在居住地防备倭寇。
English: On February 21st, Zhao Wenhua, a chamberlain of the engineering department, made a sacrifice to the sea, and also guarded against Japanese pirates at his place of residence.

古文：是月，俺答犯蓟镇，参将赵倾葵等战死。
现代文：这月，俺答侵犯蓟镇，参将赵倾葵等战死。
English: This month, I responded to the invasion of Handan Town, and General Zhao Jiankui and others died in battle.

古文：三月甲寅，苏松兵备副使任环败倭于南沙。
现代文：三月十九日，苏松兵备副使任环在南沙打败倭寇。
English: On March 19th, Su Song's deputy commander Ren Huan defeated the Japanese invaders in Nansha.

古文：夏四月戊子，俺答犯宣府，参将李光启被执，不屈死。
现代文：四月二十四日，俺答侵犯宣府，参将李光启被捉，因不屈服而死。
English: On April 24th, I responded to the encroachment of the Xuanfu, and the general Li Guangqi was captured and died for not yielding.

古文：五月甲午，总督侍郎张经、副总兵俞大猷击倭于王江泾，大破之。乙巳，倭分道掠苏州属县。
现代文：五月一日，总督侍郎张经、副总兵俞大猷在王江泾大败倭寇。十二日，倭寇分路抢劫苏州属县。
English: On May 1st, Zhang Jing, the governor's aide-de-camp, and the deputy commander-in-chief of the soldiers, Daju, defeated the wokou in Wangjiangyuan. On the 12th, the wokou robbed the counties of Suzhou.

古文：己酉，逮张经下狱。
现代文：十六日，逮捕张经下狱。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Jing was arrested and released from prison.

古文：六月壬午，兵部侍郎杨宜总督军务，讨倭。
现代文：六月十九日，兵部侍郎杨宜总督军务，征讨倭寇。
English: On June 19th, Yang Yi, the governor of the military affairs department of the Ministry of Military Affairs, conscripted wako.

古文：秋七月乙巳，倭陷南陵，流劫芜湖、太平。
现代文：七月十三日，倭寇攻陷南陵，流窜抢劫芜湖、太平。
English: On July 13th, the wokou invaded Nanling, and the yakuza looted Wuhu and Taiping.

古文：丙辰，犯南京。
现代文：二十四日，侵犯南京。
English: On the 24th, they invaded Nanjing.

古文：八月壬辰，苏松巡抚都御史曹邦辅败倭于浒墅。
现代文：八月三十日，苏松巡抚都御史曹邦辅在浒墅打败倭寇。
English: On August 30th, the governor of Su Song Province, Cao Bangyu, defeated the wako at the villa.

古文：九月乙未，赵文华及巡按御史胡宗宪击倭于陶宅，败绩。
现代文：九月三日，赵文华及巡按御史胡宗宪在陶宅攻击倭寇，官军失败。
English: On September 3rd, Zhao Wenhua and the inspector-general Hu Zongxian attacked the wokou in the pottery house, and the government army failed.

古文：丙午，俺答犯大同、宣府。
现代文：十四日，俺答侵犯大同、宣府。
English: On the 14th, I decided to invade Datong and Xuanfu.

古文：戊午，犯怀来，京师戒严。
现代文：二十六日，侵犯怀来，京师戒严。
English: On the 26th, when Huailai was invaded, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：辛酉，参将马芳败寇于保安。
现代文：二十九日，参将马芳在保安打败俺答。
English: On the 29th, General Ma Fang defeated me at the guard.

古文：是秋，免江北、山东被灾秋粮。
现代文：当年秋天，减免江北、山东受灾秋粮。
English: In the autumn of that year, the autumn grain affected by the disaster in Jiangbei and Shandong was exempted.

古文：冬十月庚寅，杀张经及巡抚浙江副都御史李天宠、兵部员外郎杨继盛。
现代文：十月二十九日，杀张经及巡抚浙江副都御史李天宠、兵部员外郎杨继盛。
English: On October 29th, Zhang Jing and the governor of Zhejiang, the vice-governor of the capital, Li Tiancai, as well as Yang Jisheng, a member of the military department, were killed.

古文：辛卯，倭掠宁波、台州，犯会稽。
现代文：三十日，倭寇侵掠宁波、台州，侵犯会稽。
English: On the 30th, wokou invaded and plundered Ningbo and Taizhou, encroaching on the capital.

古文：十一月壬辰朔，日有食之。庚申，倭犯兴化、泉州。
现代文：十一月初一日，有日食。二十九日，倭寇侵犯兴化、泉州。
English: On the first day of November, there was a solar eclipse. On the 29th, wokou invaded Xinghua and Quanzhou.

古文：闰月丁丑，免畿内水灾税粮。
现代文：闰十一月十六日，免畿内水灾税粮。
English: On leap November 16th, the flood relief tax for grain in the Kinai region was waived.

古文：十二月甲午，开山东、四川银矿。
现代文：十二月四日，开山东、四川银矿。
English: On December 4th, the Shandong and Sichuan silver mines were opened.

古文：壬寅，山西、陕西、河南地大震，河、渭溢，死者八十三万有奇。
现代文：十二日，山西、陕西、河南发生大地震，渭水、黄河涨水，淹死八十三万余人。
English: On the 12th, a major earthquake occurred in Shanxi, Shaanxi and Henan. Surabaya and the Yellow River flooded, drowning more than 830,000 people.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三十五年春正月壬午，官军击倭于松江，败绩。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年正月二十二日，官军在松江与倭寇战斗中失败。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the 35th year of Jiajing, the government army was defeated in the battle with the Japanese pirates in Songjiang.

古文：二月甲午，振平阳、延安灾。
现代文：二月五日，赈救平阳、延安灾害。
English: On February 5th, Zou helped Pingyang and Yan'an disasters.

古文：己亥。杨宜罢。
现代文：十日，杨宜停职。
English: On the 10th, Yang Yi was suspended.

古文：戊午，吏部尚书李默坐诽谤下锦衣卫狱，论死。
现代文：二十九日，吏部尚书李默因犯诽谤罪被下锦衣卫狱处死。
English: On the 29th, Li Mo, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was sentenced to death for the crime of defamation.

古文：巡抚侍郎胡宗宪总督军务，讨倭。
现代文：巡抚侍郎胡宗宪总督军务，征讨倭寇。
English: The governor's aide-de-camp, Governor General of Military Affairs Hu Zongxian, went to recruit wako.

古文：三月丁丑，赐诸大绶等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐诸大绶等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the 18th of March, various ranks and origins were given to those who were promoted to higher ranks.

古文：夏四月丙申，振陕西灾。
现代文：四月八日，赈救陕西灾害。
English: On April 8th, the disaster relief in Shaanxi Province was completed.

古文：甲辰，倭寇无为州，同知齐恩战死。
现代文：十六日，倭寇侵犯无为州，同知齐恩英勇战死。
English: On the 16th, the Wokou invaded Muwaishu, and Zi'en died a heroic death.

古文：辛亥，游击宗礼击倭于崇德，败没。
现代文：二十三日，游击宗礼在崇德攻击倭寇，官军溃败。
English: On the 23rd, the guerrilla Zongli attacked the wokou in Chongde, and the government army was defeated.

古文：五月乙丑，赵文华提督江南、浙江军务。
现代文：五月八日，赵文华提督江南、浙江军务。
English: On May 8th, Zhao Wenhua, Admiral of Jiangnan, Zhejiang Military Affairs.

古文：丁亥，左通政王槐采矿银于玉旺峪。
现代文：三十日，左通政王槐在玉旺峪采集银矿。
English: On the 30th, Zuotong Zhengwangyu went to collect silver ore in Yuwangyu.

古文：六月丙申，总兵官俞大猷败倭于黄浦。
现代文：六月九日，总兵官俞大猷在黄埔打败倭寇。
English: On June 9th, the commander-in-chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, General Gong Dazhao, defeated the Japanese invaders in Whampoa.

古文：辛丑，俺答犯宣府，杀游击张纮。
现代文：十四日，俺答侵犯宣府，杀游击张。
English: On the 14th, I decided to invade Xuanwu and kill the guerrilla Zhang.

古文：秋七月辛巳，胡宗宪破倭于乍浦。
现代文：七月二十五日，胡宗宪在乍浦大败倭寇。
English: On July 25th, Hu Zongxian defeated the Wokou in Chapu.

古文：八月壬寅，诏采芝。
现代文：八月十六日，下诏采集灵芝。
English: On August 16th, Lingzhi was collected.

古文：辛亥，胡宗宪袭破海贼徐海于梁庄。
现代文：二十五日，胡宗宪打败海盗徐海于梁庄。
English: On the 25th, Hu Zongxian defeated the pirate Xu Hai in Liangzhuang.

古文：九月乙丑，徽王载埨有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：九月十日，徽王朱载土仑犯罪，废为庶人。
English: On September 10th, Zhu Jiaotulun, the King of Hui, committed a crime and was deposed as a commoner.

古文：免南畿被灾税粮。
现代文：免南畿受灾税粮。
English: Nanki is exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：壬午，以平浙江倭，祭告郊庙社稷。
现代文：二十七日，因平定浙江倭寇，祭告郊庙社稷。
English: On the 27th, because of the suppression of the Zhejiang Wokou, the suburb temple society was punished.

古文：冬十月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一日，有日食。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月戊午，打来孙犯广宁，总兵官殷尚质等战死。
现代文：十一月三日，打来孙侵犯广宁，总兵官殷尚质等英勇战死。
English: On November 3, Sun invaded Guangning, and the general officer Yin Shangqing and others died heroically.

古文：十二月丁未，犯环庆。
现代文：十二月二十二日，侵犯环庆。
English: On December 22nd, the encroachment of Huanqing.

古文：三十六年春二月，俺答犯大同。
现代文：嘉靖三十六年二月，俺答侵犯大同。
English: In February of the 36th year of Jiajing, I answered the invasion of Datong.

古文：三月壬午，把都儿寇迁安，副总兵蒋承勋力战死。
现代文：三月二十九日，把都儿侵犯迁安，副总兵蒋承勋奋力战死。
English: On March 29th, the capital was invaded and moved to An, and Vice-Commander-in-Chief Jiang Chengxun died in battle.

古文：是月，吉能寇延绥，杀副总兵陈凤。
现代文：这月，吉能侵犯延绥，杀副总兵陈凤。
English: This month, Yoshino invaded Yancheng and killed Vice-Commander Chen Feng.

古文：夏四月丙申，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿灾。
现代文：四月十三日，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿发生火灾。
English: On April 13th, a fire broke out in the three halls of Bongteng, Huagai, and Jishin.

古文：壬寅，下诏引咎修斋五日，止诸司封事，停刑。
现代文：十九日，下诏自己承担责任，修整五天，停止各官吏封事，停止用刑。
English: On the 19th, he announced that he would take responsibility, rectify the five days, stop the officials from sealing, and stop the use of punishment.

古文：五月癸丑，倭犯扬、徐，入山东界。
现代文：五月一日，倭寇侵犯扬、徐二州，进入山东境内。
English: On May 1, the wokou invaded Yang and Xu Erzhou and entered Shandong.

古文：癸亥，采木于四川、湖广。
现代文：十一日，在四川、湖广采伐木料。
English: On the 11th, timber harvesting began in Sichuan and Hukang.

古文：辛未，倭犯天长、盱眙，遂攻泗州。
现代文：十九日，倭寇侵犯天长、盱眙，于是进攻泗州。
English: On the 19th, the wokou invaded Tianchang and Handan, and then attacked Handan.

古文：丙子，犯淮安。
现代文：二十四日，侵犯怀安。
English: On the 24th, it invaded Huai'an.

古文：六月乙酉，兵备副使于德昌、参将刘显败倭于安东。
现代文：六月四日，兵备副使于德昌、参将刘显在安东打败倭寇。
English: On June 4th, Deputy Military Commander Yu Dechang and General Liu Xian defeated the wako in Andong.

古文：甲午，罢陕西矿。
现代文：十三日，停开陕西矿场。
English: On the 13th, the Shaanxi mine was shut down.

古文：秋七月庚午，诏广东采珠。
现代文：七月十九日，下诏广东采集珠宝。
English: On July 19th, Guangdong began to collect jewelry.

古文：九月，俺答子辛爱寇应、朔，毁七十余堡。
现代文：九月，俺答之子辛爱侵犯应、朔二州，捣毁七十余堡。
English: In September, Sin Ai, the son of Er Er, invaded Ying and Shuo and destroyed more than 70 castles.

古文：冬十一月丁丑，辛爱围右卫城。
现代文：十一月二十八日，辛爱包围右卫城。
English: On November 28th, Xin Ai besieged the Right Guard City.

古文：是冬，免山东、浙江被灾税粮。
现代文：这年冬天，减免山东、浙江受灾税粮。
English: This winter, Shandong and Zhejiang were exempted from grain tax.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三十七年春正月癸亥，罢河南矿。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年正月十四日，停开河南矿场。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the 37th year of Jiajing, the Henan mine was shut down.

古文：三月辛未，始免三大营听征官军营造工役。
现代文：三月二十三日，开始减免三大营厅征调官军营造工役。
English: On March 23rd, the reduction and exemption of the military construction labor of the three major camp offices began.

古文：夏四月癸未，振辽东饥。
现代文：四月四日，赈救辽东饥荒。
English: On April 4th, the relief of the famine in Liaodong began.

古文：辛巳，倭分犯浙江、福建。
现代文：六日，倭寇分道侵犯浙江、福建。
English: On the 6th, the Japanese invaders invaded Zhejiang and Fujian.

古文：秋八月己未，吉能犯永昌、凉州，围甘州。
现代文：八月十五日，吉能侵犯永昌、凉州，围攻甘州。
English: On August 15, Yoshino invaded Yongchang and Liangzhou and besieged Ganzhou.

古文：冬十月癸丑，礼部进瑞芝一千八百六十本，诏广求径尺以上者。
现代文：十月十日，礼部进献吉祥灵芝一千八百六十棵，下诏广泛采集直径在一尺以上的。
English: On October 10, the Ministry of Ceremonies presented 1,860 auspicious Ganoderma lucidum plants, the largest of which had a diameter of more than one foot.

古文：十一月丁亥，谕法司恤刑。
现代文：十一月十四日，告诉法官抚恤刑狱。
English: On November 14th, he told the judge that he wanted a prison sentence with a pension.

古文：是年，琉球、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、暹罗来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu and Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：三十八年春二月庚午，把都儿犯潘家口，渡滦河，逼三屯营。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年二月二十八日，把都儿侵犯潘家口，渡过滦河，逼进三屯营。
English: On February 28th, 38th year of Jiajing, Du'er invaded Panjiakou, crossed the Li River, and forced his way into the Sandun Camp.

古文：三月己卯，掠迁安、蓟州、玉田。
现代文：三月七日，抢掠迁安、蓟州、玉田。
English: On March 7th, the looting moved to An, Zhangzhou, and Tamada.

古文：庚寅，赐丁士美等进士及第、出身有差。癸巳，倭犯浙东，海道副使谭纶败之。
现代文：十八日，赐丁世美等进士和不同出身。二十一日，倭寇侵犯浙东，被海道副使谭纶打败。
English: On the 18th, Ding Shimei and other talented soldiers from different backgrounds were awarded. On the 21st, the Japanese invaders invaded eastern Zhejiang and were defeated by the deputy envoy of the sea route, Tan Yu.

古文：甲午，逮浙江总兵官俞大猷。
现代文：二十二日，逮捕浙江总兵官俞大猷。
English: On the 22nd, the chief military officer of Zhejiang Province, Yu Daxuan, was arrested.

古文：夏四月丁未，倭犯通州。
现代文：四月六日，倭寇侵犯通州。
English: On April 6, the Japanese invaded Tongzhou.

古文：甲寅，倭攻福州。
现代文：十三日，进攻福州。
English: On the 13th, they attacked Fuzhou.

古文：庚申，倭攻淮安，巡抚凤阳都御史李遂败之于姚家荡，倭退据庙湾。
现代文：十九日，进攻淮安，被巡抚凤阳都御史李遂打败于姚家荡，倭寇退守庙湾。
English: On the 19th, they attacked Huai'an and were defeated by the Fengyang governor Li Sui at Yaojiahuang. The wokou retreated to Miao Bay.

古文：丙寅，副使刘景韶大破倭于印庄。
现代文：二十五日，副使刘景韶大败倭寇于印庄。
English: On the 25th, the deputy envoy Liu Jingyao defeated the Wokou in Inzhuang.

古文：五月辛巳，逮总督蓟辽右都御史王忬下狱。
现代文：五月十日，逮捕总督蓟辽右都御史王忄予下狱。
English: On May 10, the governor of the Liao Dynasty, Wang Xi, was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：甲午，刘景韶破倭于庙湾，江北倭平。
现代文：二十三日，刘景韶在庙湾大败倭寇，平定江北倭寇。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Jingyao defeated the wokou in Miaowan and pacified the north river wokou.

古文：六月乙巳，辛爱犯大同。
现代文：六月五日，辛爱侵犯大同。
English: On June 5, Xin Ai invaded Datong.

古文：秋八月己未，李遂、胡宗宪破倭于刘家庄。
现代文：八月二十日，李遂、胡宗宪在刘家庄打败倭寇。
English: On August 20, Li Sui and Hu Zongxian defeated the wokou in Liu Jiazhuang.

古文：甲子，振辽东饥，给牛种。
现代文：二十五日，赈救辽东饥荒，给耕牛和粮种。
English: On the 25th, he saved the famine-stricken Liaodong Province and gave the farmers cattle and grain seeds.

古文：是月，俺答犯土木，游击董国忠等战死。
现代文：这一月，俺答侵犯土木，游击董国忠等英勇战死。
English: This month, I answered the violation of civil engineering, guerrilla Dong Guozhong and other heroic deaths.

古文：九月，犯宣府。
现代文：九月，侵犯宣府。
English: In September, they invaded Xuanfu.

古文：是年，土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密、暹罗入贡。
现代文：当年，土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密、暹罗来朝进贡。
English: In that year, Turuban, Tianfang, Samarkand, Rumen, Hami, and Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：三十九年春正月丙戌，俺答犯宣府。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年正月二十日，俺答侵犯宣府。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the 39th year of Jiajing, we decided to invade Xuanfu.

古文：二月丁巳，南京振武营兵变，杀总督粮储侍郎黄懋官。
现代文：二月二十二日，南京振武营发生兵变。杀总督粮储侍郎黄懋官。
English: On February 22, a mutiny broke out in the Zhenwu Camp in Nanjing, and the governor's cupbearer, Huang Yikan, was killed.

古文：戊午，振顺天、永平饥。
现代文：二十三日，赈救顺天、永平饥荒。
English: On the 23rd day of the month, the relief of Shuntian and Yongping famine began.

古文：倭犯潮州。
现代文：倭寇侵犯潮州。
English: Wokou invade Chaozhou.

古文：三月癸未，大同总兵官刘汉袭败兀慎于灰河。
现代文：三月十七日，大同总兵官刘汉在灰河袭击打败兀慎。
English: On March 17th, the Datong general officer Liu Han attacked and defeated Hao Sheng in Haihe.

古文：丁亥，打来孙犯广宁，陷中前所。杀守备武守爵、黄廷勋。
现代文：二十一日，打来孙侵犯广宁，攻陷中前所，杀守备武守爵、黄廷勋。
English: On the twenty-first day, Sun invaded Guangning, captured the middle front, and killed the guards, Beiwu Shujie and Huang Tingxun.

古文：夏五月壬午，振山西三关饥。
现代文：五月十七日，赈救山西三关饥荒。
English: On May 17th, the Shanxi Sankuan Famine Relief Campaign was launched.

古文：壬辰，盗入广东博罗县，杀知县舒颛。
现代文：二十七日，盗贼进入广东博罗县，杀知县舒颛。
English: On the 27th, the thieves entered Guangdong's Boluo County and Suizhi County's Shuxi.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，把都儿犯蓟西，游击胡镇御却之。
现代文：七月一日，把都儿侵犯蓟西，被游击胡镇击退。
English: On July 1, it invaded western Shaanxi and was repulsed by the guerrillas of Huzhen.

古文：庚午，刘汉袭俺答于丰州，破之。九月己巳，俺答犯朔州、广武。
现代文：六日，刘汉在丰州袭击并打败俺答。九月六日，俺答侵犯朔州、广武。
English: On the 6th, Liu Han attacked and defeated me in Fuzhou, and on the 6th of September, I invaded Shuozhou and Guangwu.

古文：冬十二月，土蛮犯海州东胜堡。
现代文：十二月，土蛮侵犯海州东胜堡。
English: In December, the barbarians invaded Dongsheng Fort in Haizhou.

古文：是月，闽、广贼犯江西。
现代文：这月，广贼侵犯江西。
English: This month, the bandits invaded Jiangxi Province.

古文：是年，免畿内、山西、山东、湖广、陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：当年，免畿内、山西、山东、湖广、陕西受灾税粮。
English: In that year, the disaster-affected tax grain in Kinai, Shanxi, Shandong, Hukang and Shaanxi was exempted.

古文：暹罗入贡。
现代文：暹罗来朝进贡。
English: Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：四十年春二月辛卯朔，日当食，不见。
现代文：嘉靖四十年二月初一日，应当出现日食，但没看见。
English: On the first day of February in the 40th year of Jiajing, there should have been a solar eclipse, but I did not see it.

古文：振山东饥。
现代文：赈救山东饥荒。
English: to relieve the famine in Shandong Province.

古文：丁未，景王之国。
现代文：十七日，景王到封国上任。
English: On the seventeenth day, King Gyeongbokgung arrived in the vassal state to take office.

古文：三月壬戌，振京师饥。
现代文：三月二日，赈救京师饥荒。
English: On March 2nd,  came to the aid of Beijing Division during the famine.

古文：夏四月丁未，振山西饥。
现代文：四月十八日，赈救山西饥荒。
English: On April 18th, the relief of Shanxi famine began.

古文：五月乙亥，李本以忧去。
现代文：五月十六日，李本因父母丧事去职。
English: On May 16, Li Ben left his post due to the death of his parents.

古文：闰月丙辰，贼犯泰和，杀副使汪一中、指挥王应鹏。
现代文：闰五月二十七日，盗贼侵犯泰和，杀副使汪一中、指挥王应鹏。
English: On the 27th day of leap May, thieves invaded Taihe and killed the deputy commander Wang Yingpeng and the commander Wang Yingpeng.

古文：秋七月己丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月一日，有日食。
English: On July 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：庚戌，俺答犯宣府，副总兵马芳御却之。
现代文：二十二日，俺答侵犯宣府，被副总兵马芳击退。
English: On the 22nd, I attempted to invade Xuanfu, but was repulsed by the deputy commander-in-chief, Ma Fang.

古文：九月庚子，犯居庸关，参将胡镇御却之。
现代文：九月十三日，侵犯居庸关，被参将胡镇击退。
English: On September 13, he invaded Juyongguan and was repulsed by the general Hu Zhen.

古文：辛丑，振南畿灾。
现代文：十四日，赈救南畿灾害。
English: On the 14th, the rescue of Nanki disaster occurred.

古文：冬十一月甲午，礼部尚书袁炜为户部尚书兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：十一月八日，礼部尚书袁炜为户部尚书兼武英殿大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On November 8th, Yuan Qi, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, became a member of the Household Ministry and a member of the Imperial Household Agency, participating in important affairs.

古文：庚戌，吉能犯宁夏，进逼固原，辛亥，万寿宫灾。
现代文：二十四日，吉能侵犯宁夏，进逼固原。二十五日，万寿宫发生火灾。
English: On the 24th, Yoshino invaded Ningxia and forced its way into Gouyuan. On the 25th, a fire broke out in the Manshou Palace.

古文：十二月丙寅，把都儿犯辽东盖州。
现代文：十二月十一日，把都儿侵犯辽东盖州。
English: On December 11, it invaded Gaizhou in eastern Liaoning Province.

古文：是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: This year, Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：四十一年春三月辛卯，白兔生子，礼部请告庙，许之，群臣表贺。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年三月七日，白兔生子，礼部请求祭告宗庙，世宗同意了，文武百官上奏庆贺。
English: On March 7, in the 41st year of Jiajing, the White Rabbit gave birth to a son. The ceremonial department requested that a memorial service be held at the patriarchal temple. The patriarch agreed, and hundreds of civil and military officials attended to celebrate.

古文：壬寅，赐申时行等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐申时行等进士及第及不同的出身。
English: On the 18th, it was announced that new recruits such as Ji Xing would be promoted to the first and second ranks and from different backgrounds.

古文：己酉，重作万寿宫成。
现代文：二十五日，重建万寿宫完工。
English: On the 25th, the reconstruction of the Wan Shou Palace was completed.

古文：夏五月壬寅，严嵩罢。
现代文：五月十九日，严嵩停职。
English: On May 19, Yan Song was suspended.

古文：壬子，土蛮攻汤站堡，副总兵黑春力战死。
现代文：二十九日，土蛮进攻汤站堡，副总兵黑春奋力战死。
English: On the 29th, the barbarians attacked Tang Station Fort, and the vice-chief soldier Heichun died in battle.

古文：秋九月壬午，三殿成，改奉天曰皇极，华盖曰中极，谨身曰建极。
现代文：九月一日，三殿重修完工，改奉天殿为皇极殿，华盖殿为中极殿，谨身殿为建极殿。
English: On September 1, the reconstruction of the third hall was completed, and the Tenden Hall was renamed the Imperial Hall, the Huagai Hall was renamed the Central Hall, and the Zenshin Hall was renamed the Jianji Hall.

古文：冬十月，免南畿、江西被灾税粮。
现代文：十月，免南畿、江西受灾税粮。
English: In October, Nanki and Jiangxi were exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：十一月乙酉，分遣御史访求方士、法书。
现代文：十一月五日，分别派御史探访寻找方士、法书。
English: On November 5th, they sent their envoys to search for a sorcerer and a law book.

古文：丁亥，逮胡宗宪，寻释之。
现代文：七日，逮捕胡宗宪，不久释放。
English: On the 7th, Hu Zongxian was arrested and released soon after.

古文：辛丑，吉能犯宁夏，副总兵王勋战死。
现代文：二十一日，吉能侵犯宁夏，副总兵王勋英勇战死。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yoshino invaded Ningxia, and the vice-chief soldier Wang Xun died a heroic death.

古文：己酉，倭陷兴化。
现代文：二十九日，倭寇攻陷兴化。
English: On the 29th, the Japanese invaded and occupied Xinghua.

古文：是月，延绥总兵官赵岢分部出塞袭寇，败之。
现代文：这月，延绥总兵官赵岢分兵出塞抗击吉能并将其击败。
English: This month, Yancheng's commander-in-chief, Zhao Jun, sent troops to fight against and defeat Jinnang.

古文：免陕西、湖广被灾及福建被寇者税粮。
现代文：减免陕西、湖广受灾及福建遭受侵略之地税粮。
English: The tax on grain in Shaanxi and Hukang, which suffered from the disaster, and Fujian, which suffered from the invasion, will be reduced or exempted.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：四十二年春正月戊申，俺答犯宣府，南掠隆庆。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年正月二十九日，俺答侵犯宣府，向南侵掠隆庆。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the 42nd year of Jiajing, we decided to invade Xuanfu and invade and plunder Longqing to the south.

古文：夏四月庚申，倭犯福清，总兵官刘显、俞大猷合兵歼之。
现代文：四月十三日，倭寇侵犯福清，被总兵官刘显、俞大猷合兵围歼。
English: On April 13th, the wokou invaded Fuqing and were encircled and annihilated by the general officers Liu Xian and Zou Daqi.

古文：丁卯，副总兵戚继光破倭于平海卫。
现代文：二十日，副总兵戚继光在平海卫攻破倭寇。
English: On the 20th, the deputy commander-in-chief, Qi Jiguang, defeated the wokou in Pinghaiwei.

古文：秋八月乙亥，总兵官杨照袭寇于广宁塞外，力战死。
现代文：八月二十九日，总兵官杨照在广宁塞外袭击俺答，奋力战死。
English: On August 29, Yang Zhao, the commander-in-chief of the People's Liberation Army, attacked and died in battle outside Guangningye.

古文：冬十月丁卯，辛爱、把都儿破墙子岭入寇，京师戒严，诏诸镇兵入援。
现代文：十月二十二日，辛爱、把都儿攻破墙子岭进入内地侵犯，京师戒严，下诏各卫兵入京师救援。
English: On October 22nd, Xin'ai and the capital broke through the wall and entered the mainland, and the Beijing Division was placed under martial law, and the guards were ordered to enter the Beijing Division for rescue.

古文：戊辰，掠顺义、三河，总兵官孙膑败死。
现代文：二十三日，掠取顺义、三河，总兵官孙膑战败而死。
English: On the 23rd, after plundering Shunyi and Sanhe, the general officer Sun Yat-sen was defeated and died.

古文：乙亥，大同总兵官姜应熊御寇密云，败之。
现代文：三十日，大同总兵官姜应熊在密云抗击并打败入侵之敌。
English: On the 30th, the Datong general officer Jiang Ying Xiong resisted and defeated the invading enemy in Miyun.

古文：十一月丁丑，京师解严。
现代文：十一月二日，京师解除戒严令。
English: On November 2, martial law was lifted in Beijing.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：四十三年春正月壬辰，土蛮黑石炭寇蓟镇，总兵官胡镇、参将白文智御却之。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年正月十八日，土蛮黑石炭侵掠蓟镇，被参将白文智抵抗击退。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 43rd year of Jiajing, the barbarian black coal invaded and plundered the town of Zou, and was repulsed by the general Bai Wenzhi resistance.

古文：二月己酉，伊王典楧有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：二月六日，伊王典木英犯罪，废为庶人。
English: On February 6th, Yi Wang Dian Muxing committed a crime and was deposed as a commoner.

古文：戊午，倭犯仙游，总兵官戚继光大败之，福建倭平。
现代文：十五日，倭寇侵犯仙游，总兵官戚继光大败倭寇，福建倭寇遂被平定。
English: On the fifteenth day, the wokou invaded Xianyu, the general officer Qi Jiguang defeated the wokou, and the Fujian wokou was finally pacified.

古文：闰月丙申，盗据漳平，知县魏文瑞死之。
现代文：闰二月二十三日，盗贼占据漳平，知县魏文瑞死。
English: On February 23rd, thieves occupied Suiping, and Wei Wenrui of Zhixian County died.

古文：三月己未，官军击潮州倭，破之。
现代文：三月十七日，官军攻破潮州倭寇。
English: On March 17th, the government army defeated the Chaozhou wako.

古文：乙卯，获桃于御幄，群臣表贺。
现代文：四月四日，免畿内受灾税粮。五月初一日，有日食。十四日，世宗在帐幕中得到桃子，群臣上奏庆贺。
English: On April 4th, disaster-affected tax grain in the Kinai region was exempted. On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. On the 14th, Sejong received peaches in his tent, and his retainers came to celebrate.

古文：六月辛卯，倭犯海丰，俞大猷破之。
现代文：六月二十一日，倭寇侵犯海丰，被俞大猷攻破。
English: On June 21st, the wokou invaded Haifeng and were defeated by the Shidao.

古文：冬十二月，南韶贼起，守备贺铎、指挥蔡胤元被执死之。
现代文：十二月，南韶盗贼大起，守备贺铎、指挥蔡胤元被擒拿而死。
English: In December, the thieves of Nanlu rose up, guarding Hefei, and the conductor Cai Yanyuan was captured and died.

古文：俺答犯山西，游击梁平、守备祁谋战死。
现代文：俺答侵犯山西，游击梁平、守备祁谋战死。
English: We responded by invading Shanxi, guerrilla Liang Ping, and guarding Zhouzhuang, and died in battle.

古文：是年，西番、哈密、安南入贡，鲁迷国贡狮子。
现代文：这年，西番、哈密、安南来朝进贡，鲁迷国进贡狮子。
English: In this year, Saipan, Hami, and Annan came to pay tribute to the DPRK, and the lion of Lvmai paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：四十四年春三月丁巳，赐范应期等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年三月二十日，赐范应期等进士及第及不同的出身。
English: On March 20th, the 44th year of the Jiajing Emperor, he bestowed the title of Fan Yingjie (范应期) and other titles and different origins.

古文：己未，袁炜致仕。
现代文：二十二日，袁炜辞官退职。
English: On the 22nd, Yuan Qi resigned from his post.

古文：辛酉，严世蕃伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，严世蕃被诛杀。
English: On the 24th, Yan Shiyan was beaten to death.

古文：是月，土蛮犯辽东，都指挥線补衮、杨维藩战死。
现代文：这月，土蛮侵犯辽东，都指挥纟泉补衮、杨维藩英勇战死。
English: This month, the barbarian invaders invaded Liaodong, and both commanders, Quan Quan and Yang Wei, died heroically in battle.

古文：夏四月庚辰，吏部尚书严讷、礼部尚书李春芳并兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：四月十四日，吏部尚书严讷、礼部尚书李春芳一起兼任武英殿大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On April 14th, the Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel and the Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Li Chunfang, also served as a scholar of the Wuying Palace, participating in important affairs.

古文：壬午，俺答犯肃州，总兵官刘承业御却之。
现代文：十六日，俺答侵犯肃州，总兵官刘承业将其击退。
English: On the 16th, we attempted to invade Suizhou, but General Liu Chengye repulsed it.

古文：六月甲戌，芝生睿宗原庙柱，告庙受贺，遂建玉芝宫。
现代文：六月九日，原睿宗庙一柱子上生长一枝灵芝，祭告祖庙接受庆贺，于是兴建玉芝宫。
English: On June 9, a sprig of Ganoderma lucidum grew on a pillar of the Yuan Rui ancestral temple to announce that the ancestral temple would receive congratulations, and the Jade Jade Palace was built.

古文：秋八月壬午，获仙药于御座，告庙。
现代文：八月十八日，世宗在御座上获得仙药，祭告祖庙。
English: On August 18th, King Sejong received the elixir on the throne and dedicated it to the ancestral temple.

古文：冬十一月癸卯，严讷致仕。
现代文：十一月十日，严讷辞官退职。
English: On November 10, he resigned from his post.

古文：戊申，奉安献皇帝、后神主于玉芝宫。
现代文：十五日，献皇帝、献皇后神牌被奉安于玉芝宫。
English: On the 15th, the sacred tablets dedicated to the emperor and the empress were enshrined in the Jade Palace.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：四十五年春二月癸亥，户部主事海瑞上疏，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年二月一日，户部主事海瑞上疏，被下锦衣卫狱。
English: On February 1st, 45 years after the founding of Jiajing, the head of the Household Division, Hai Rui Shang Soh, was sent to the Jin Yi Wei Prison.

古文：是月，俞大猷讨广东山贼，大破之。
现代文：本月，俞大猷征讨广东山贼，大破山贼。
English: This month, the campaign to crack down on mountain bandits in Guangdong, known as the Great Crackdown on Mountain Bandits, began.

古文：浙江、江西矿贼陷婺源。
现代文：浙江、江西矿贼攻陷婺源。
English: Miners in Zhejiang and Jiangxi attacked and occupied Yuyuan.

古文：三月己未，吏部尚书郭朴兼武英殿大学士，礼部尚书高拱兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：三月二十八日，吏部尚书郭朴兼武英殿大学士，礼部尚书高拱兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On March 28th, Guo Pak and Wu Ying, both of the Ministry of Personnel, and Shang Shu Gao Gong and Wen Yuange, both of the Ministry of Ceremonies, participated in important business.

古文：夏四月壬戌朔，日有食之。丙戌，俺答犯辽东。
现代文：四月初一日，有日食。二十五日，俺答侵犯辽东。
English: On the first day of April, there was a solar eclipse. On the 25th, I decided to invade Liaodong.

古文：六月丙子，旱，亲祷雨于凝道雷轩，越三日雨，群臣表贺。
现代文：六月十七日，天旱，世宗亲自到凝道雷轩祈祷雨，过了三天，终于降下雨来，群臣上奏庆贺。
English: On June 17th, Sejong personally went to Gundo Leixuan to pray for rain after the drought. Three days later, it finally rained, and the ministers came to celebrate.

古文：秋七月乙未，俺答犯万全右卫。
现代文：七月六日，俺答又侵犯万全右卫。
English: On July 6th, I once again violated Wanquan's right.

古文：冬十月丁卯，犯固原，总兵官郭江败死。
现代文：十月十日，侵犯固原，总兵官郭江战败而死。
English: On October 10th, the invasion of Gouyuan, the general officer Guo Jiang was defeated and died.

古文：癸酉，犯偏头关。
现代文：十六日，侵犯偏头关。
English: On the 16th, they violated the first pass.

古文：闰月甲辰，犯大同。参将崔世荣力战死。
现代文：闰十月十七日，侵犯大同，参将崔世荣奋力相战，竭力而死。
English: On the 17th day of leap October, when Datong was invaded, General Cui Shirong fought hard and died trying.

古文：十一月己未，帝不豫。
现代文：十一月三日，世宗身体不舒服。
English: On November 3, Sejong became unwell.

古文：十二月庚子，大渐，自西苑还乾清宫。
现代文：十二月十四日，病危，从西苑回到乾清宫。
English: On December 14th, critically ill, he returned to the Qianqing Palace from the West Courtyard.

古文：是日崩，年六十。遗诏裕王嗣位。
现代文：当天死于宫内，终年六十岁，遗诏由裕王即位。
English: On the same day, he died at the Imperial Palace, at the age of sixty, and Emperor Hirohito succeeded to the throne.

古文：隆庆元年正月，上尊谥，庙号世宗，葬永陵。
现代文：隆庆元年正月，上尊谥，庙号世宗，葬于永陵。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Longqing era, Shangzong, the temple name of Shizong, was buried in Yongling.

古文：赞曰：世宗御极之初，力除一切弊政，天下翕然称治。
现代文：评论：世宗登位之初，竭力根除一切弊政，天下曾一度得到治理。
English: Comment: At the beginning of the reign of King Sejong, every effort was made to eradicate all maladministration, and the country was once governed.

古文：顾迭议大礼，舆论沸腾，幸臣假托，寻兴大狱。
现代文：然而反复议论大礼，众人舆论沸腾，使奸臣趁机得势，不久大兴刑狱。
English: However, repeated discussions about the great gift, and the public opinion of everyone boiled, so that the treacherous minister took advantage of the opportunity to gain momentum, and soon the prison was opened.

古文：夫天性至情，君亲大义，追尊立庙，礼亦宜之；然升祔太庙，而跻于武宗之上，不已过乎！
现代文：世宗天性讲感情，做君主后亲自施行仁义政策，追尊谥号，建立祖庙，礼节也较为合适；然而升神牌于太庙，且高于武宗之上，这不是太过分了吗！
English: It is the nature of the world's patriarchs to be emotional, and after becoming monarchs, they personally implement the policy of benevolence and righteousness, pursue honor and glory, establish ancestral temples, and the etiquette is also more appropriate; however, it is not too much to ascend to the gods in the imperial temple and be higher than the emperor!

古文：若其时纷纭多故，将疲于边，贼讧于内，而崇尚道教，享祀弗经，营建繁兴，府藏告匮，百余年富庶治平之业，因以渐替。
现代文：因当时政治风云变幻，将士疲惫于边境御敌，奸贼趁机内讧，加上他崇尚道教，祭享也没有什么原则，营建经常兴起，使府库库藏告缺，百多年的富庶治平之大业，因此逐渐衰落。
English: Due to the changing political situation at that time, the soldiers were tired of fighting the enemy at the border, the traitors took advantage of the opportunity to plunder, and he advocated Taoism, there was no principle of sacrifice and enjoyment, construction often arose, the government treasury was short of funds, and the great cause of prosperity and peace for more than 100 years gradually declined.

古文：虽剪剔权奸，威柄在御，要亦中材之主也矣。
现代文：虽然曾经铲除奸臣，自己紧握大权，但概括起来也算一个功过各半的君主。
English: Although he once eradicated his treacherous vassals and clung to power, he is generally considered to be a monarch who has achieved more than his fair share.

