古文：人主之所以禁使者，赏罚也。赏随功，罚随罪。
现代文：国君役使和限制臣下的东西是赏赐和刑罚。赏赐依据功劳，刑罚根据罪行。
English: What the sovereign serves and restricts his subjects is reward and punishment, reward according to merit, punishment according to crime.

古文：故论功察罪，不可不审也。
现代文：所以论定功劳，调查罪行不能不审慎。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be prudent in determining the merits and investigating the crimes.

古文：夫赏高罚下，而上无必知其道也，与无道同也。
现代文：赏功罚罪，但国君不确知其中的道理，那同没有法度是一样的。
English: Rewarding merit and punishing crime, but the sovereign is not sure of the reason, is the same as having no law.

古文：凡知道者，势、数也。
现代文：凡是懂得法度的都懂依仗权势统治的方法。
English: Anyone who understands the rule of law understands how to rule by force.

古文：故先王不恃其强，而恃其势；不恃其信，而恃其数。
现代文：所以古代帝王不仗恃他的强悍而是仗恃他的权力；不仗恃他的忠信而是他的统治方法。
English: Therefore, ancient emperors did not rely on their strength, but on their power; they did not rely on their loyalty, but on their method of rule.

古文：今夫飞蓬遇飘风而行千里，乘风之势也；探渊者知千仞之深，县绳之数也。
现代文：如今飞蓬遇旋风而行程千里，是凭借风势啊；测量深潭的人能够知道八千尺的深度是运用了悬绳测量法。
English: Today, a flying saucer travels thousands of miles in a cyclone, thanks to the wind; a person measuring the depth of a deep pool can know that the depth of eight thousand feet is using the suspension rope measurement method.

古文：故托其势者，虽远必至；守其数者，虽深必得。
现代文：所以凭借外部力量即使道路遥远也一定能到达。掌握了测量方法即使非常深也一定能测出来。
English: Therefore, with the help of external forces, even if the road is far away, it can be reached, and if the measurement method is mastered, it can be measured even if it is very deep.

古文：今夫幽夜，山陵之大，而离娄不见；清朝日，则上别飞鸟，下察秋豪。
现代文：就像离娄在黑夜中连高大的山也看不见，而清晨的阳光明亮，他能够辨别天上的飞鸟，地上秋天的毫毛。
English: Just as the nightingale cannot see the tall mountains in the dark, but the morning sun is bright, he can distinguish the birds in the sky and the autumn hairs on the ground.

古文：故目之见也，托日之势也。
现代文：所以眼睛能看见东西是靠太阳的光明。
English: So the eye can see things by the light of the sun.

古文：得势之至，不参官而洁，陈数而物当。
现代文：善于掌握权势的君主不需多设官吏而有廉洁的效果，运用合适的方法处理事物。
English: Monarchs who are good at controlling power do not need to set up more officials to have a clean effect, and use appropriate methods to deal with things.

古文：今恃多官众吏，官立丞、监。
现代文：现在治国的人，依靠官多吏众，官吏下又设辅佐和监察人员。
English: At present, those who govern the country rely on officials and officials, and there are assistants and supervisors under officials.

古文：夫置丞立监者，且以禁人之为利也；而丞、监亦欲为利，则何以相禁？
现代文：设立辅佐和监察人员是为了禁止官员们谋私利。但辅佐和监察人员也想谋私利，那么怎么去禁止呢？
English: The establishment of assistants and supervisors is to prohibit officials from seeking personal gain. But assistants and supervisors also want to seek personal gain, so how to prohibit it?

古文：故恃丞、监而治者，仅存之治也。
现代文：因此依靠辅佐和监察人员治理国家的是暂时的。
English: Therefore, it is temporary to rely on assistants and supervisors to govern the country.

古文：通数者不然也。
现代文：通晓治国方法的国君不会这样。
English: A sovereign who knows how to run a country would not do such a thing.

古文：别其势，难其道，故曰：其势难匿者，虽跖不为非焉。
现代文：分开他们的权势，使谋私之道有障碍，所以他的势力难以隐瞒私利之时，即使像盗跖那样凶恶也不敢做坏事。
English: Separate their power, make the way of self-interest have obstacles, so when his power is difficult to conceal self-interest, even if he is as fierce as a robber, he will not dare to do bad things.

古文：故先王贵势。
现代文：所以古代帝王重视权力的运用。
English: Therefore, ancient emperors attached great importance to the use of power.

古文：或曰： 人主执虚、后以应，则物应稽验；稽验，则奸得。 
现代文：有人说： 君主持虚心、稳重的态度对待一切就能使事物得到相应的查验，经过查验就能发现奸邪。 
English: Some people said: If you adopt a modest and steady attitude towards everything, you can make things get the corresponding inspection, and after the inspection, you can find the evil.

古文：君以为不然。
现代文：我认为不是这样。
English: I don't think so.

古文：夫吏专制决事于千里之外，十二月而计书以定，事以一岁别计，而主以一听，见所疑焉，不可蔽，员不足。
现代文：官吏在远离国君千里之外的地方决断政务，十二月按时将决断的事登在簿书上。一年一计，而君主听一次，即使有所怀疑也不能断定，因为物证不足。
English: Government officials decide on government affairs in places thousands of miles away from the sovereign, and in December, the decisions are duly recorded in the books. It happens once a year, and the sovereign hears about it once. Even if there is some doubt, it cannot be determined, because there is not enough material evidence.

古文：夫物至，则目不得不见；言薄，则耳不得不闻。
现代文：但是东西出现在眼皮底下眼睛就不能看不到，声音在耳边响起就不能听不见。
English: But if something appears under the eyelid, the eye cannot help but see it, and if a sound rings in the ear, the ear cannot help but hear it.

古文：故物至则变，言至则论。
现代文：所以东西在眼前就能辩别；言论响起就能论定。
English: Therefore, things can be discerned in front of one's eyes; statements can be determined when they are made.

古文：故治国之制，民不得避罪，如目不能以所见遁心。
现代文：所以治理清明的国家的法制，人民不能隐藏他们的罪恶，就像眼睛不能使见到的一切逃出心的审视一般。
English: So the rule of law governs a clean country, the people cannot hide their sins, just as the eye cannot make everything it sees escape the scrutiny of the heart.

古文：今乱国不然，恃多官众吏。
现代文：政治昏乱的国家不是这样，只凭官吏众多。
English: This is not the case in countries in political turmoil, where a large number of officials is enough.

古文：吏虽众，同体一也。
现代文：官吏虽众，利益一致。
English: Although there are many officials, their interests are the same.

古文：夫同体一者相不可。
现代文：利益一致不可能互相监督。
English: It is impossible to supervise each other when interests coincide.

古文：且夫利异而害不同者。先王所以为保也。
现代文：而且利害不同，才是古代君主用以互相保证的。
English: Moreover, different interests are what ancient monarchs used to guarantee each other.

古文：故至治，夫妻、交友不能相为弃恶盖非，而不害于亲，民人不能相为隐。
现代文：所以好的政治，夫妻、朋友都不能互相包庇罪恶，这不是不顾念亲情，而是人民不容他们隐瞒。
English: Therefore, good politics, husband and wife, and friends cannot cover up each other's sins. This is not a disregard for family ties, but the people do not allow them to hide.

古文：上与吏也，事合而利异者也。
现代文：君主与官吏，事务相关而利益不同。
English: The monarch and the officials are related to each other and have different interests.

古文：今夫驺、虞以相监，不可，事合而利异者也。
现代文：让马夫和马夫互相监督就不行，因为他们事务相关而利益一致。
English: It is not possible for the groom and the groom to supervise each other, because their affairs are related and their interests are the same.

古文：若使马、焉能言，则驺、虞无所逃其恶矣，利异也。
现代文：假如马会说话，马夫的罪恶就无未能隐藏了，因为马和马夫的利益是相矛盾的。
English: If the horse could speak, the evils of the groom could not be hidden, because the interests of the horse and the groom are contradictory.

古文：利合而恶同者，父不能以问子，君不能以问臣。
现代文：利益一致，罪恶相同的人，父亲不能追究儿子，君主不能追究臣下。
English: A father cannot prosecute his son, a prince cannot prosecute his vassal, if their interests are the same and their crimes the same.

古文：吏之与吏，利合而恶同也。
现代文：官吏与官吏就是利益相同而罪恶也相同。
English: Officials and officials have the same interests and the same evils.

古文：夫事合而利异者，先王之所以为端也。
现代文：只有事务相关而利益不同的人们，才是帝王建立互相保证的根据。
English: Only people who are related to each other and have different interests are the basis for the emperor to establish mutual guarantee.

古文：民之蔽主，而不害于盖。贤者不能益，不肖者不能损。
现代文：人民蒙蔽君主而无妨碍，这个制度，贤者不能增加，不贤的人不能减少。
English: The people hoodwink the monarch without hindrance, this system, the wise cannot increase, and the unwise cannot decrease.

古文：故遗贤去知，治之数也。
现代文：所以，治国可以不要贤人，不要智者，是由于运用了正确的统治方法。
English: Therefore, it is possible to govern the country without a sage or a wise man, because the correct method of governing has been applied.

