古文：序纪昔黄帝有子二十五人，或内列诸华，或外分荒服。
现代文：昔日黄帝有子二十五人，有的分布于华夏各地，有的散布于极远的蛮荒之境。
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor had twenty-five sons, some of whom were distributed throughout China, and some of whom were scattered far and wide in the wild.

古文：昌意少子，受封北土，国有大鲜卑山，因以为号。
现代文：小儿子昌意，受封于北土，领地内有大鲜卑山，因而以其为国号。
English: The youngest son, Changyi, was enthroned in the North, and the territory included Daxingbei Mountain, which became the country's name.

古文：其后世为君长，统幽都之北，广漠之野。畜牧迁徙，射猎为业，淳朴为俗，简易为化，不为文字，刻木纪契而已。世事远近，人相传授，如史官之纪录焉。
现代文：此后，世为君主，统治着幽都之北广漠无垠的沃野，过着游牧生活，而以射猎为业，民风淳朴，政治文化简易，没有文字，刻木记事而已，古时和现代发生的事情，全靠人口头传授，正如史官所记载的那样。
English: Since then, the world has been a monarch, ruling the vast and boundless fertile fields north of the quiet city, living a nomadic life, but with hunting as a business, the folk style is simple, the political culture is simple, there is no writing, only carved wood, and what happened in ancient times and modern times, all rely on human oral transmission, as recorded by historians.

古文：黄帝以土德王，北俗谓土为托，谓后为跋，故以为氏。
现代文：黄帝以土德而为天下之主，北方的风俗称土为 托 ，称后为 跋 ，因此以之作为姓氏。
English: The Yellow Emperor is the lord of the world with his native soil. The northern custom is to call the soil "Tuo" (托) and later "Wu" (跋), so it is used as a surname.

古文：其裔始均，入仕尧世，逐女魃于弱水之北，民赖其勤，帝舜嘉之，命为田祖。
现代文：昌意的后裔始均，在尧帝时为官，曾将女魃逐出弱水以北的地区，民众感戴他的勤劳，舜帝对他甚为嘉许，任命他为田祖。
English: The descendants of Changyi Shi Jun, who was an official at the time of Emperor Xuan, once drove the female empress out of the area north of Weak Water. The people appreciated his hard work. Emperor Xuan was very appreciative of him and appointed him as Tianzu.

古文：爰历三代，以及秦汉，獯鬻、猃狁、山戎、匈奴之属，累代残暴，作害中州，而始均之裔，不交南夏，是以载籍无闻焉。
现代文：历经夏、商、周三代，到了秦汉时期，獯鬻、猃狁、山戎、匈奴等族，世代残暴，为害中原，而始均的后裔却未与中原交往，因此史籍中没有关于他们的记载。
English: After the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties, in the Qin and Han dynasties, the Jiao, Yao, Shan Rong, Xiongnu and other ethnic groups were cruel and harmed the Central Plains for generations. However, the descendants of Shi Jun did not interact with the Central Plains, so there is no record of them in the historical books.

古文：积六十七世，至成皇帝讳毛立，聪明武略，远近所推，统国三十六，大姓九十九，威振北方，莫不率服。
现代文：历经六十七世，成皇帝拓跋毛被立为主。他聪慧明智，武功赫赫，为远近的部族所拥戴，统辖三十六个部落，九十九个大氏族，威震北方，万众无不敬服。
English: After the sixty-seventh generation, Emperor Tuoba Mao was enthroned as the ruler. He was intelligent and wise, with great military prowess. He was revered by tribes near and far. He presided over thirty-six tribes and ninety-nine great clans, dominating the north, and was admired by all.

古文：崩。
现代文：逝世。
English: He passed away.

古文：节皇帝讳贷立，崩。
现代文：节皇帝拓跋贷继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Tuoba died on the 14th day of the 11th month.

古文：庄皇帝讳观立，崩。
现代文：庄皇帝拓跋观继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Zhuang Tuoba Guan was succeeded and died.

古文：明皇帝讳楼立，崩。
现代文：明皇帝拓跋楼继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Ming Dynasty died.

古文：安皇帝讳越立，崩。
现代文：安皇帝拓跋越继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor An of Tuoba and Yue, who was the main successor, passed away.

古文：宣皇帝讳推寅立。
现代文：宣皇帝拓跋推寅继立为主。
English: Emperor Xuan Tuoba promoted the succession of Yin.

古文：南迁大泽，方千余里，厥土昏冥沮洳。
现代文：率领部族南迁大泽，大泽方圆千余里，土地苍茫辽阔，地势低洼湿润。
English: He led the tribe to move south to Osawa. Osawa is more than a thousand miles in circumference, the land is vast, and the terrain is low-lying and wet.

古文：谋更南徙，未行而崩。
现代文：计划再次南迁，没有成行便已去世。
English: He planned to move south again, but died before he could do so.

古文：景皇帝讳利立，崩。
现代文：景皇帝拓跋利继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Jing Tuoba was succeeded by Tuoba Li and died.

古文：元皇帝讳俟立，崩。
现代文：元皇帝拓跋俟继立为主，逝世。
English: The former Emperor Tuoba, who was the main successor, passed away.

古文：和皇帝讳肆立，崩。
现代文：和皇帝拓跋肆继立为主，逝世。
English: and Emperor Tuoba, and died.

古文：定皇帝讳机立，崩。
现代文：定皇帝拓跋机继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Ding Tuoba was the first to set up the machine, and he died.

古文：僖皇帝讳盖立，崩。
现代文：僖皇帝拓跋盖继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Gao Tuoba covered the succession and died.

古文：威皇帝讳侩立，崩。
现代文：威皇帝拓跋侩继立为主，逝世。
English: Emperor Tuoba of Wei, who was the main successor, died.

古文：献皇帝讳邻立。
现代文：献皇帝拓跋邻继立为主。
English: The dedication to Emperor Tuoba and his successors is the main focus.

古文：时有神人言于国曰： 此土荒遐，未足以建都邑，宜复徙居。 
现代文：当时有位神人降临国中，说： 此地荒凉偏远，不足以兴建城池，应该再次迁居。 
English: At that time, a divine man descended to the country and said: This place is desolate and remote, not enough to build a city, it should be moved again.

古文：帝时年衰老，乃以位授子。
现代文：献皇帝其时年迈衰老，于是将君位传给儿子。
English: Emperor Xian was old and senile at the time, so he passed the throne to his son.

古文：圣武皇帝讳诘汾。
现代文：圣武皇帝名诘汾。
English: Emperor Shenwu is famous.

古文：献帝命南移，山谷高深，九难八阻，于是欲止。
现代文：献帝下令南迁，一路上山高谷深，险阻重重，于是打算停止继续南下。
English: Emperor Xian ordered to move to the south. Along the way, the mountains and valleys were deep, and there were many obstacles. Therefore, he planned to stop moving further south.

古文：有神兽，其形似马，其声类牛，先行导引，历年乃出。始居匈奴之故地。
现代文：突然遇到一只形似马、声如牛的神兽，为他们引路，经过一年的跋涉，才脱离险境，迁居到匈奴故地。
English: Suddenly they met a divine beast that looked like a horse and sounded like a cow, who led the way for them. After a year of trekking, they got out of danger and moved to the land of the Xiongnu.

古文：其迁徙策略，多出宣、献二帝，故人并号曰 推寅 ，盖俗云 钻研 之义。
现代文：拓跋部落的迁移策略，多出于宣、献二帝，所以人们并称他们为 推寅 ，在鲜卑语中是 钻研 的意思。
English: The migration strategy of the Tuoba tribe was mostly motivated by propaganda and the worship of the two emperors, so people also called them Tuyin, which means "study hard" in the Xianbei language.

古文：初，圣武帝尝率数万骑田于山泽，欻见辎軿自天而下。
现代文：当初，圣武帝拓跋诘汾曾率数万骑兵在山泽间围猎，忽见辎车从天而降。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Wu Tuoba led tens of thousands of cavalry to hunt in the mountains and lakes, and suddenly saw a chariot fall from the sky.

古文：既至，见美妇人，侍卫甚盛。
现代文：赶上前去，见一美貌女子，侍卫众多，仪仗繁盛。
English: When he caught up with her, he saw a beautiful woman, numerous attendants and guards, and a flourishing ceremonial parade.

古文：帝异而问之，对曰： 我天女也，受命相偶。 
现代文：圣武帝大为惊异地上前询问，女子答道： 我，是天上的仙女，受命与你成亲。 
English: Emperor Wu was very surprised and came forward to inquire. The woman replied, "I am a fairy from heaven, and I have been ordered to marry you."

古文：遂同寝宿。
现代文：于是二人当晚同宿。
English: The two ended up sharing a room that night.

古文：旦，请还，曰： 明年周时，复会此处。 
现代文：清晨，女子辞别，说： 明年此时，在此相会。 
English: In the early morning, the woman bids farewell, saying: Next year at this time, we will meet here.

古文：言终而别，去如风雨。
现代文：言终而别，去如风雨。
English: Say good-bye at the end, and go like the wind and rain.

古文：及期，帝至先所田处，果复相见。
现代文：到了约定的日期，圣武帝到昔日相会之处，果然与天女相逢。
English: On the agreed date, Emperor Shenwu went to the place where they had met in the past and met the heavenly maiden.

古文：天女以所生男授帝曰： 此君之子也，善养视之。
现代文：天女将所生的男孩交给圣武帝说： 这是您的儿子，好好地抚养照顾他。
English: The celestial maiden handed the boy she had given birth to to Emperor Wu and said, "This is your son, raise him well and take care of him."

古文：子孙相承，当世为帝王。 
现代文：子孙相续，到时会成为帝王。 
English: Descendants in succession, will then become the emperor.

古文：语讫而去。
现代文：说罢离去。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：子即始祖也。故时人谚曰： 诘汾皇帝无妇家，力微皇帝无舅家。 
现代文：这个男孩就是始祖神元皇帝拓跋力微，因此当时的人们传说道： 诘汾皇帝无妇家，力微皇帝无舅家。 
English: This boy was the ancestor of Emperor Shingen Tuoba Liwei, so people at that time said: "Emperor Tuoba has no wife, Emperor Liwei has no uncle."

古文：帝崩。
现代文：圣武帝拓跋诘汾逝世。
English: Emperor Wu died suddenly.

古文：始祖神元皇帝讳力微立。
现代文：始祖神元皇帝拓跋力微继立为主。
English: Emperor Shingen, the founder of the dynasty, exerted great efforts to establish the dynasty.

古文：生而英睿。
现代文：他生而英明睿智。
English: He was born wise and sagacious.

古文：元年，岁在庚子。
现代文：元年，庚子年。
English: The first year of the year, the year of the rooster.

古文：先是，西部内侵，国民离散，依于没鹿回部大人窦宾。
现代文：先前，西部的部落入侵，拓跋部部众离散，只好依附于没鹿回部酋长窦宾。
English: Previously, when the western tribes invaded, the Tuoba clan was dispersed and had to rely on Dou Bin, the chief of the Muxia Hui clan.

古文：始祖有雄杰之度，时人莫测。
现代文：神元帝拓跋力微，具有英雄豪杰的气度，而当时无人觉察。
English: Shenyuan Emperor Tuobao was weak and had the air of a hero, but no one noticed it at the time.

古文：后与宾攻西部，军败，失马步走。始祖使人以所乘骏马给之。
现代文：后来他跟随窦宾攻打西部部落，大军战败，窦宾失马步行，拓跋力微派人将自己所骑的骏马送给窦宾。
English: Later, he followed Dou Bin to attack the western tribes, the army was defeated, Dou Bin lost his horse and walked, and Tuoba sent someone to give the horse he rode to Dou Bin.

古文：宾归，令其部内求与马之人，当加重赏，始祖隐而不言。
现代文：窦宾回来后，命部下寻求赠马之人，欲加重赏，而拓跋力微沉默不语。
English: After Dou Bin's return, the person whose subordinates were looking for a gift horse wanted to increase the reward, while Tuo Bao Liang was silent.

古文：久之，宾乃知，大惊，将分国之半以奉始祖。始祖不受，乃进其爱女。
现代文：过了很久，窦宾才知道，大惊，打算将领土的一半分给拓跋力微，拓跋力微坚辞不受，于是窦宾将爱女嫁给了他。
English: It took a long time for Dou Bin to realize, to his great surprise, that he was planning to give half of his territory to Tuobao. Tuobao was adamant that he would not accept this, so Dou Bin married his beloved daughter to him.

古文：宾犹思报恩，固问所欲。
现代文：然而窦宾仍思报恩，一再询问拓跋力微有何要求。
English: However, Dou Bin still wanted to return the favor, and repeatedly asked Tuoba Lijiao what he wanted.

古文：始祖请率所部北居长川，宾乃敬从。
现代文：于是拓跋力微请求率领所部北居长川，窦宾欣然允诺。
English: As a result, Tuo reluctantly asked Dou Bin to lead the Northern Division of the General Headquarters to Nagakawa, and Dou Bin readily agreed.

古文：积十数岁，德化大洽，诸旧部民，咸来归附。
现代文：十几年后，德化普及昌盛，离散的旧部民众全部归附。
English: A dozen years later, Dehua became popular and prosperous, and all the scattered people of the old part were annexed.

古文：二十九年，宾临终，戒其二子，使谨奉始祖。
现代文：二十九年，窦宾临终时，告诫他的两个儿子要恭敬地侍奉拓跋力微。
English: In 1929, on his deathbed, Dou Bin admonished his two sons to respectfully serve the emperor.

古文：其子不从，乃阴谋为逆。
现代文：然而两个儿子没有听从他的劝告，暗中图谋不轨。
English: However, his two sons did not listen to his advice and plotted secretly.

古文：始祖召杀之，尽并其众，诸部大人，悉皆款服，控弦上马二十余万。
现代文：拓跋力微将他们召来杀掉，吞并了他们的部众，各部落的酋长们诚心归服，拓跋力微统辖的骑士达二十余万之众。
English: Tuoba Liwei called them to come and kill them, swallowed up their subordinates, the chiefs of the tribes sincerely submitted, and the knights under the jurisdiction of Tuoba Liwei reached more than 200,000 people.

古文：三十九年，迁于定襄之盛乐。
现代文：三十九年，迁居于定襄的盛乐。
English: In the 39th year of his reign, the tribe moved to Dingxiang.

古文：夏四月，祭天，诸部君长皆来助祭，唯白部大人观望不至，于是征而戮之，远近肃然，莫不震慑。
现代文：四月，举行祭天大典，各部酋长全都应邀前来参加祭典，惟有白部酋长观望不至，于是拓跋力微将他召来杀掉，远近各部为之肃然起敬，无不为拓跋力微的威严所震慑。
English: In April, a grand festival was held, and the chiefs of all ministries were invited to attend the festival. However, the chief of the White Ministry did not come to watch, so Tuoba called him to kill him. Ministries near and far were awed by him, and everyone was stunned by the majesty of Tuoba.

古文：始祖乃告诸大人曰： 我历观前世匈奴、蹋顿之徒，苟贪财利，抄掠边民，虽有所得，而其死伤不足相补，更招寇雠，百姓涂炭，非长计也。 
现代文：拓跋力微对各部酋长说： 我历观前世的匈奴、蹋顿等族，贪图财利，抢掠边民，虽有所获，而与其伤亡相比，得不偿失，更招来仇敌，百姓生灵涂炭，终非长久之计。 
English: Tuoba Liwei said to the chiefs of the various departments: I have experienced the Huns, Huns and other ethnic groups in the previous life, who are greedy for money and profit, and rob the border people. Although they have gained something, compared with their casualties, they have gained nothing, and even more, they have attracted enemies, and the people's lives have been charred. It is not a long-term strategy.

古文：于是与魏和亲。
现代文：于是与曹魏和亲。
English: So he made peace with Cao Wei.

古文：四十二年，遣子文帝如魏，且观风土。
现代文：四十二年，拓跋力微派儿子拓跋沙漠汗前往曹魏，并考察中原的风土人情。
English: In 42, Emperor Jinguan sent his son Emperor Wen to Wei to observe the local customs.

古文：魏景元二年也。
现代文：当时正是曹魏景元二年。
English: It was the second year of Cao Wei Jing Yuan.

古文：文皇帝讳沙漠汗，以国太子留洛阳，为魏宾之冠。聘问交市，往来不绝。魏人奉遗金帛缯絮，岁以万计。
现代文：文皇帝拓跋沙漠汗，以太子的身份滞留洛阳，成为曹魏的首席贵宾，常常宾客盈门，门庭若市，来访者络绎不绝，魏人赠送的金帛丝棉，每年数以万计。
English: Emperor Wen Tuoba sweated in the desert and stayed in Luoyang as an ethereal being. He became the chief guest of Cao Wei. He often had many guests at his gate. The gate was crowded with visitors, and the Wei people gave him tens of thousands of pieces of gold-plated silk cotton every year.

古文：始祖与邻国交接，笃信推诚，不为倚伏以要一时之利，宽恕任真，而遐迩归仰。
现代文：拓跋力微在与邻国交往时，推诚置信，从不仗势欺人，谋取一时的利益，待人宽厚朴实，博得了远近各族的拥戴敬仰。
English: In his dealings with neighboring countries, he acted with sincerity and confidence, never resorted to force or deception, sought short-term benefits, treated people with generosity and simplicity, and won the support and admiration of all ethnic groups near and far.

古文：魏晋禅代，和好仍密。
现代文：魏晋禅代后，拓跋力微与中原王朝仍和好如初。
English: After the Wei, Jin and Zen dynasties, Tuoba and the Central Plains dynasties were still as good as ever.

古文：始祖春秋已迈，帝以父老求归，晋武帝具礼护送。
现代文：拓跋力微年事已高，沙漠汗因父亲年迈请求北归，晋武帝司马炎备礼护送。
English: Tuoba Li is very young, Desert Khan has requested to return to the north due to his father's old age, and Emperor Jinwu Sima is eager to escort him.

古文：四十八年，帝至自晋。
现代文：四十八年，沙漠汗自晋朝返回故土。
English: In the 48th year, the desert khan returned to his homeland from the Jin Dynasty.

古文：五十六年，帝复如晋；其年冬，还国。
现代文：五十六年，沙漠汗再次前往晋朝，当年冬天回国。
English: In 1956, Desert Khan went to Jin Dynasty again and returned to China in the winter of that year.

古文：晋遗帝锦、罽、缯、彩、绵、绢诸物，咸出丰厚，车牛百乘。
现代文：晋帝送给他锦？缯、彩、绵、绢等物，数量丰厚，装满了一百辆牛车。
English: The Jin emperor gave him brocade, silk, cotton, silk and other things, a large quantity, filled with a hundred ox carts.

古文：行达并州，晋征北将军卫瓘，以帝为人雄异，恐为后患，乃密启晋帝，请留不遣。
现代文：行至并州，晋征北将军卫馞认为沙漠汗为人雄豪，气度不凡，恐为后患，于是密奏晋帝，请求留住沙漠汗不让他回去。
English: When he went to Bozhou, the Northern Jin general, Wei Wei, thought that Desert Khan was a heroic person with an extraordinary temperament and feared that he would be a problem, so he secretly appealed to the Jin emperor to keep Desert Khan and not let him go back.

古文：晋帝难于失信，不许。
现代文：晋帝不便失信于人，未加批准。
English: Emperor Jin inconveniently broke faith with the people and did not give approval.

古文：瓘复请以金锦赂国之大人，令致间隙，使相危害。
现代文：卫馞又请求用金帛收买各部酋长，让他们挑拨离间，伺机加害沙漠汗。
English: The garrison also requested to bribe the chiefs of various departments with gold ingots, so that they would sow discord and wait for an opportunity to inflict desert sweat.

古文：晋帝从之，遂留帝。
现代文：晋帝应允，于是扣留了沙漠汗。
English: Emperor Jin agreed, and detained Desierto Khan.

古文：于是国之执事及外部大人，皆受瓘货。
现代文：自此拓跋氏国中的主事者与各部酋长，都接受了卫馞的贿赂。
English: From then on, all the officials and chieftains in Tuoba's kingdom accepted Wei Yao's bribes.

古文：五十八年，方遣帝。
现代文：五十八年，才允许沙漠汗北归。
English: It took 58 years for the desert khan to be allowed to return north.

古文：始祖闻帝归，大悦，使诸部大人诣阴馆迎之。
现代文：拓跋力微得知沙漠汗归来，高兴万分，派各部酋长到阴馆去迎接他。
English: Upon learning of the return of the Desert Sweat, Tuoba was overjoyed and sent the chiefs of various departments to the Hades to welcome him.

古文：酒酣，帝仰视飞鸟，谓诸大人曰： 我为汝曹取之。 
现代文：酒酣耳热之时，沙漠汗仰视飞鸟，对各位酋长说： 看我为大家取下来。 
English: In the heat of the moment, Desert Khan looked up at the birds and said to the chiefs: "Let me take them down for you."

古文：援弹飞丸，应弦而落。
现代文：拉开弹弓射去，飞鸟应弦而落。
English: He pulled out his slingshot and shot, and the bird fell to the strings.

古文：时国俗无弹，众咸大惊，乃相谓曰： 太子风彩被服，同于南夏，兼奇术绝世，若继国统，变易旧俗，吾等必不得志，不若在国诸子，习本淳朴。 
现代文：当时北方还没有弹弓，众人看了大惊失色，相互议论道： 太子神情服饰与中原相同，兼有绝世的奇异之术，如果继承国统后，变革旧有的习俗，我们必不得志，不像留在国内的几位王子，保持了淳朴的本色、习俗。 
English: At that time, there was no slingshot in the north, and everyone was shocked and disconcerted, and discussed with each other: The prince's appearance and clothing are the same as that of the Central Plains, and he also has a unique and extraordinary skill. If we inherit the unification of the country and change the old customs, we will be disappointed. Unlike several princes who remained in the country, we have maintained our simple nature and customs.

古文：咸以为然。且离间素行，乃谋危害，并先驰还。
现代文：大家都同意这种看法，且一向对沙漠汗进行挑拨离间，于是意图加害沙漠汗，一起先期驰返。
English: Everyone agrees with this view, and has been sowing discord with the Desert Sweat, so they intend to harm the Desert Sweat and return together in advance.

古文：始祖问曰： 我子既历他国，进德何如？ 
现代文：拓跋力微问道： 我儿子游历他国，德行有何进步？ 
English: Tuo reluctantly asked: My son has traveled to other countries, how has his virtue improved?

古文：皆对曰： 太子才艺非常，引空弓而落飞鸟，是似得晋人异法怪术，乱国害民之兆，惟愿察之。 
现代文：各部酋长全都回答说： 太子才能技艺不同寻常，用空弓射落飞鸟，似乎学到了晋人的异法怪术，这是乱国害民的预兆，愿大王明察。 
English: The chiefs of all the departments replied: The prince's talent and skill are unusual. He shoots down birds with an empty bow. It seems that he has learned the strange magic of the Jin people. This is a harbinger of chaos and harm to the people. May the great king see clearly.

古文：自帝在晋之后，诸子爱宠日进，始祖年逾期颐，颇有所惑，闻诸大人之语，意乃有疑。因曰： 不可容者，便当除之。 
现代文：自沙漠汗去了晋帝国之后，拓跋力微对其他几位王子的宠爱日益加深；再加上拓跋力微年过百岁，处事已不太明智，听了各部酋长的话，不禁心生疑虑。于是说： 不能容的，就应当除掉。 
English: After Desert Khan left for the Jin Empire, Tu Ba Li Wei's fondness for several other princes deepened day by day; coupled with the fact that Tu Ba Li Wei was over a hundred years old, his actions were not very wise, and after listening to the words of the chiefs of various departments, he couldn't help but have doubts. So he said: If it is intolerable, it should be eliminated.

古文：于是诸大人乃驰诣塞南，矫害帝。
现代文：于是各部酋长驰往塞南，假托拓跋力微的旨意，杀害了沙漠汗。
English: As a result, the chiefs of various departments rushed to Senan, and killed Desert Khan under the pretense that it was the will of Totoku.

古文：既而，始祖甚悔之。
现代文：随后，拓跋力微又大为后悔。
English: Afterward, Tuo regretted his feeble efforts.

古文：帝身长八尺，英姿瑰伟，在晋之日，朝士英俊多与亲善，雅为人物归仰。
现代文：文帝沙漠汗身长八尺，英姿魁伟，在晋朝之日，朝中的英俊之士多与他亲善，深为名士们所景仰。
English: Emperor Wen was eight feet tall, with a majestic appearance. On the day of his accession to the throne, many of the court's handsome men befriended him, and he was deeply admired by celebrities.

古文：后乃追谥焉。
现代文：后来追谥他为 文帝 。
English: He later became known as Emperor Wen.

古文：其年，始祖不豫。
现代文：同年，拓跋力微健康状况恶化。
English: In the same year, Tuoba's health deteriorated.

古文：乌丸王库贤，亲近任势，先受卫瓘之货，故欲沮动诸部，因在庭中砺钺斧。
现代文：乌丸王库贤是拓跋力微的心腹，很有权势，受了卫馞的贿赂，意图离散各部落，故意在庭院中磨斧钺。
English: King Kuxian of Wuchang was a confidant of Tuobao, a very powerful man, who was bribed by the guards, who intended to separate the tribes, and who deliberately sharpened axes in the courtyard.

古文：诸大人问欲何为，答曰： 上恨汝曹谗杀太子，今欲尽收诸大人长子杀之。 
现代文：各部落的酋长问他要干什么，他回答说： 大王恨你们进谗言害死了太子，现在要将各部落酋长的长子都抓起来杀掉。 
English: The chiefs of the tribes asked him what he wanted to do, and he answered: "The Great King hates you for having killed the crown prince by slandering him, and now he wants to arrest and kill the eldest sons of the chiefs of the tribes.

古文：大人皆信，各各散走。
现代文：酋长们信以为真，纷纷率领各自的部落逃走。
English: The leaders of each tribe believed his words and led their followers away.

古文：始祖寻崩。
现代文：拓跋力微不久逝世。
English: Tuoba died shortly afterwards.

古文：凡飨国五十八年，年一百四岁。
现代文：统治国家凡五十八年，享年一百零四岁。
English: He ruled the country for 58 years and died at the age of 104.

古文：太祖即位，尊为始祖。
现代文：太祖道武帝拓跋王圭即位后，尊他为 始祖 。
English: After the great-grandfather Emperor Tuoba Wang Gui ascended the throne, he was revered as the founder.

古文：章皇帝讳悉鹿立，始祖之子也。
现代文：章皇帝拓跋悉鹿继立，始祖之子。
English: Emperor Zhang Tuoba and Deer Jili, the son of the founder.

古文：诸部离叛，国内纷扰。
现代文：在位时各部落离叛，国内纷扰。
English: When he was on the throne, the tribes rebelled and there was civil strife.

古文：飨国九年而崩。
现代文：统治国家九年去世。
English: He died after ruling the country for nine years.

古文：平皇帝讳绰立，章帝之少弟也。
现代文：平皇帝拓跋绰继立，他是章帝拓跋悉鹿的小弟弟。
English: He was the younger brother of Emperor Zhangdi and Emperor Tuoba.

古文：雄武有智略，威德复举。
现代文：雄武而有智谋，重振拓跋部的威德。
English: Heroic and resourceful, he revived the morale of the troops.

古文：七年，匈奴宇文部大人莫槐为其下所杀，更立莫槐弟普拨为大人。
现代文：在位七年时，匈奴宇文部酋长莫槐被部下所杀，莫槐的弟弟普拨被立为酋长。
English: During his seven-year reign, the Hunnu chief of the Ministry of Education, Mogao, was killed by his subordinates, and Mogao's brother, Pu Zhao, was appointed chief.

古文：帝以女妻拨子丘不勤。
现代文：平帝拓跋绰将女儿嫁给普拨之子丘不勤为妻。
English: Emperor Ping Tuoba married his daughter to Pu Zhi's son Qiu Baozhong.

古文：帝飨国七年而崩。
现代文：拓跋绰在位七年去世。
English: Tuoba died after seven years on the throne.

古文：思皇帝讳弗立，文帝之少子也。
现代文：思皇帝拓跋弗继立，他是平帝拓跋绰的少子。
English: Si Emperor Tuobao Jili, he is the younger son of the Ping Emperor Tuobao.

古文：聪哲有大度，为诸父兄所重。
现代文：聪明睿智，气度不凡，为诸位叔父、兄长所推重。
English: Smart and wise, with an extraordinary demeanor, he was highly recommended by his uncles and older brothers.

古文：政崇宽简，百姓怀服。
现代文：施政崇尚宽松简明，百姓归服。
English: The policy advocates loose and concise, and the people submit to it.

古文：飨国一年而崩。
现代文：在位一年去世。
English: He died a year into his reign.

古文：昭皇帝讳禄官立，始祖之子也。
现代文：昭皇帝拓跋禄官继立，他是始祖拓跋力微之子。
English: He was the son of Emperor Zhao's ancestor Tuoba Liwei.

古文：分国为三部：帝自以一部居东，在上谷北，濡源之西，东接宇文部；以文帝之长子桓皇帝讳猗统一部，居代郡之参合陂北；以桓帝之弟穆皇帝讳猗卢统一部，居定襄之盛乐故城。
现代文：将国人分为三部：拓跋禄官自领一部居东，在上谷之北、濡源之西，东面与匈奴宇文部相接；以文帝拓跋沙漠汗的长子桓皇帝拓跋猗统率一部，居代郡参合陂以北；以猗之弟穆皇帝拓跋猗卢统率一部，居定襄的盛乐故城。
English: He divided the Chinese people into three parts: the officials of Tuoba Lu, led by himself, were in the east, in the north of Shanggu, in the west of Niuyuan, and in the east they were adjacent to the Ministry of Education of Xiongnu; Emperor Huan, the eldest son of Emperor Tuoba Desert Khan, was in the north of Sanghe County; Emperor Mu, the younger brother of Emperor Yu, was in the east of Shengle Old Town.

古文：自始祖以来，与晋和好，百姓乂安，财畜富实，控弦骑士四十余万。
现代文：自始祖拓跋力微以来，与晋朝和好，百姓安居乐业，财物牲畜富足，此时骑士已达四十余万人。
English: Since the time of the founder Tuoba's feeble efforts, there had been peace with the Jin Dynasty, the people lived in peace and contentment, and their property and livestock were plentiful. By this time, there were more than 400,000 knights.

古文：是岁，穆帝始出并州，迁杂胡北徙云中、五原、朔方。
现代文：这一年，拓跋猗卢出兵并州，将北方各少数民族部众北迁至云中、五原、朔方。
English: In the same year, Tuoba and Lu dispatched troops to annex the prefecture, and moved the northern ethnic minorities to Yunzhong, Wuhuan, and Shuofang.

古文：又西渡河击匈奴、乌桓诸部。
现代文：又西渡黄河攻击匈奴、乌桓诸部。
English: They also crossed the Yellow River to the west to attack the Xiongnu and Wuhu.

古文：自杏城以北八十里，迄长城原，夹道立碣，与晋分界。
现代文：自杏城以北八十里直至长城，夹道立碑，与晋帝国分界而治。
English: From eighty miles north of Ancheng to the Great Wall, a roadside monument was erected to mark the boundary with the Jin Empire.

古文：二年，葬文帝及皇后封氏。
现代文：二年，安葬文帝拓跋沙漠汗及皇后封氏。
English: Two years later, Emperor Wen Tuoba and Empress Feng were buried.

古文：初，思帝欲改葬，未果而崩。至是，述成前意焉。
现代文：当初，思帝拓跋弗打算改葬文帝及其皇后，未及实施便已去世，至此，才实现了他的愿望。
English: At first, Sidi Toubafu planned to change the burial of Emperor Wen and his empress, but he died before he could do it, and only then did his wish come true.

古文：晋成都王司马颖遣从事中郎田思，河间王司马颙遣司马靳利，并州刺史司马腾遣主簿梁天，并来会葬。
现代文：晋成都王司马颖派从事中郎田思、河间王司马派司马靳利、并州刺史司马腾派主簿梁天，一起参加了葬礼。
English: Jin Chengdu Wang Sima Ying faction was engaged in Zhong Lang Tian Si, Kawama Wang Sima faction was engaged in Sima Xili, and Liang Tian, the main book of the state-level Sima Ying faction was engaged in Sima Xili, and they attended the funeral together.

古文：远近赴者二十万人。
现代文：远近而来参加葬礼的达二十万人。
English: Up to 200,000 people came from near and far to attend the funeral.

古文：三年，桓帝度漠北巡，因西略诸国。
现代文：三年，桓帝拓跋猗渡过大漠向北巡视，乘势扫荡西部诸国。
English: In the third year, Emperor Kan traveled across the desert to the north to inspect the situation and sweep the western countries.

古文：四年，东部未耐娄大人倍斤入居辽东。
现代文：四年，东部的未耐娄部落酋长倍斤率部众入居辽东。
English: In the fourth year, the chiefs of the Mianyang tribe in the east moved to Liaodong with a large number of people.

古文：五年，宇文莫廆之子逊昵延朝贡。
现代文：五年，宇文部落酋长莫蝅之子逊昵延前来朝贡。
English: In the fifth year, Sun Nien, the son of the chief of the Uwen tribe, Mogi, came to pay tribute.

古文：帝嘉其诚款，以长女妻焉。
现代文：昭帝拓跋禄官嘉许他的忠诚亲善，将长女嫁给他为妻。
English: Emperor Tuoba's officials commended his loyalty and friendship and married his eldest daughter to him.

古文：七年，桓帝至自西略，诸降附者二十余国，凡积五岁，今始东还。
现代文：七年，拓跋猗西征凯旋而归，西方降附归顺的达二十余国。历时五年，至今方才东归。
English: In the seventh year, the Western Expedition of the Tuoba Expedition returned in triumph, and more than 20 countries in the West surrendered. It took five years, and only now have they returned to the East.

古文：十年，晋惠帝为成都王颍逼留在鄴。
现代文：十年，晋惠帝司马衷被成都王司马颖强留在邺城。
English: Ten years later, the benefactor of the Jin Dynasty, Sima Zhen, was left in Lucheng by Chengdu Wang Sima Yingqiang.

古文：匈奴别种刘渊反于离石，自号汉王。
现代文：匈奴的旁支刘渊在离石造反，自称汉王。
English: Liu Yuan, a tributary of the Xiongnu, rebelled against Li Shishi and claimed to be the king of Han.

古文：并州刺史司马腾来乞师。桓帝率十余万骑，帝亦同时大举以助之，大破渊众于西河、上党。
现代文：并州刺史司马腾前来求援，拓跋猗率十余万骑出征，拓跋禄官也同时大举出兵相助，大破刘渊部众于西河、上党。
English: In addition, the prefectural governor Sima Teng came to ask for help, and more than a hundred thousand cavalrymen were dispatched to the expedition, and the officials of the prefectural government also sent soldiers to help, greatly defeating Liu Yuan's troops in the West River and the Upper Party.

古文：会惠帝还洛，腾乃辞师。
现代文：恰逢晋惠帝返回洛阳，于是司马腾辞送拓跋氏援军。
English: When Emperor Jinhui returned to Luoyang, Sima Teng resigned to send reinforcements to the Tuoba clan.

古文：桓帝与腾盟于汾东而还。
现代文：拓跋猗与司马腾在汾河东岸盟誓后率军返回。
English: Tuobao and Sima Teng led the army back after taking an oath on the east bank of the Wei River.

古文：乃使辅相卫雄、段繁，于参合陂西累石为亭，树碑以记行焉。
现代文：并命辅相卫雄、段繁在参合陂西垒石为亭，立碑记载此次军事行动。
English: In addition, he ordered Auxiliary Guardsman and Duan Sheng to build a stone pavilion in the west of Shenghe, and erect a monument to record the military operation.

古文：十一年，刘渊攻司马腾，腾复乞师。
现代文：十一年，刘渊进攻司马腾，司马腾再次求援。
English: In the eleventh year, Liu Yuan attacked Sima Teng, and Sima Teng again called for help.

古文：桓帝以轻骑数千救之，斩渊将綦母豚。渊南走蒲子。
现代文：拓跋猗派轻骑数千驰援，斩刘渊部将綦母豚，刘渊南逃蒲子。
English: Tuoba sent thousands of light horsemen to ride to the rescue. Liu Yuan's subordinates would slaughter sows, and Liu Yuan's vassals would flee.

古文：晋假桓帝大单于，金印紫绶。
现代文：晋王朝封拓跋猗为大单于，赐给金印紫绶。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, the fief of Tuobao was given to Datan Yu, and the gold seal and purple ribbon were given to Zoro.

古文：是岁，桓帝崩。
现代文：本年，桓帝拓拔猗逝世。
English: This year, Emperor Kan died.

古文：帝英杰魁岸，马不能胜。常乘安车，驾大牛，牛角容一石。
现代文：拓跋猗英俊魁伟，马不能载，常乘坐大牛驾的座车，牛角能容一石。
English: Tuobao is a handsome and powerful man. He can't carry a horse, so he often rides in a carriage driven by a big ox. The horn of the ox can hold one stone.

古文：帝曾中蛊，呕吐之地仍生榆木。
现代文：猗曾中蛊毒，呕吐之处生长出榆树。
English: The baboon had been poisoned, and eucalyptus trees grew where she vomited.

古文：参合陂土无榆树，故世人异之，至今传记。
现代文：参合陂本地并无榆树，所以世人十分惊异，至今传述。
English: There are no eucalyptus trees in the local area, so the world was very surprised, and it has been passed down to this day.

古文：帝统部凡十一年。
现代文：猗统率诸部凡十一年。
English: He has been leading all the ministries for eleven years.

古文：后定襄侯卫操，树碑于大邗城，以颂功德。
现代文：后来定襄侯卫操在大邗城立碑，颂扬猗的功德。
English: Later, Ding Xiang Hou Weiguo erected a monument in Dalat City, praising the merits of Yao.

古文：子普根代立。
现代文：猗之子普根代立。
English: Tsukuda's son, Pugen, took over.

古文：十二年，賨人李雄僭帝号于蜀，自称大成。
现代文：十二年，躴族人李雄在蜀地自立为帝，自称国号为 大成 。
English: In the twelfth year, Li Xiong, a member of the Yi ethnic group, established himself as emperor in Shu. He called himself Taisei.

古文：十三年，昭帝崩。
现代文：十三年，昭帝拓跋禄官逝世。
English: In the thirteenth year, Emperor Zhao died.

古文：徒何大单于慕容廆遣使朝贡。
现代文：徒河大单于慕容蝅派使臣朝贡。
English: Tuohe Datan sent envoys to pay tribute to Murong Yao.

古文：是岁，羯胡石勒与晋马牧帅汲桑反。
现代文：同年，羯族人石勒与西晋马牧帅汲桑造反。
English: In the same year, Shi Le, a member of the Yi ethnic group, rebelled against Ma Mu Shuai Qusang of West Jin.

古文：穆皇帝天姿英特，勇略过人，昭帝崩后，遂总摄三部，以为一统。
现代文：穆帝拓跋猗卢天姿英特，勇略过人，昭帝死后，总摄三部，成为一体。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhao, a total of three parts were shot, becoming one.

古文：元年，刘渊僭帝号，自称大汉。
现代文：穆帝元年，刘渊自立为帝，自称国号为 大汉 。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Mu, Liu Yuan established himself as emperor and claimed the title of "Great Han."

古文：三年，晋并州刺史刘琨遣使，以子遵为质。
现代文：三年，西晋并州刺史刘琨派使节前来，将儿子刘遵送作人质。
English: In the third year of the Western Jin Dynasty, Liu Jun, the governor of the annexed state, sent an envoy to take his son Liu Zun as a hostage.

古文：帝嘉其意，厚报馈之。
现代文：猗卢嘉许他的诚意，以丰厚的礼品作为回报。
English: Gonglu appreciated his sincerity and rewarded him with a rich gift.

古文：白部大人叛入西河，铁弗刘虎举众于雁门以应之，攻琨新兴、雁门二郡。
现代文：白部酋长反叛，率部进入西河郡，铁弗刘虎在雁门聚众响应，进攻刘琨所辖的新兴、雁门二郡。
English: The Baibe chieftain rebelled and led his troops into the West River County, and the tyrant Liu Hu rallied the masses in response at the Wild Goose Gate and attacked the two counties of Xinxing and Wild Goose Gate under the jurisdiction of Liu Bei.

古文：琨来乞师，帝使弟子平文皇帝将骑二万，助琨击之，大破白部；次攻刘虎，屠其营落。
现代文：刘琨前来求援，猗卢派侄儿拓跋郁律率骑兵二万，协助刘琨作战，大破白部；随即攻打刘虎，毁灭其营地。
English: Liu Hui came to ask for help, and Yan Lu sent his nephew Tuoba Yu to lead 20,000 cavalry to assist Liu Hui in the battle and destroy the White Army; he then attacked Liu Hui and destroyed his camp.

古文：虎收其余烬，西走度河，窜居朔方。
现代文：刘虎收集残部，向西逃窜，渡过黄河，逃入朔方定居。
English: Liu Hu collected the remnants, fled westward, crossed the Yellow River, and fled to Shuo Fang to settle down.

古文：晋怀帝进帝大单于，封代公。
现代文：晋怀帝司马炽升任猗卢为大单于，封代公。
English: Jin Huai Di Sima Zhao was promoted to the post of Zhenlu for the great single, the feudal lord.

古文：帝以封邑去国悬远，民不相接，乃从琨求句注、陉北之地。
现代文：猗卢因为封地距所居之地过远，不能与部众连为一体，于是向刘琨索求句注陉以北之地。
English: Because his fiefdom was too far from where he lived, he could not be united with his subordinates, so he asked Liu Yinsao for a place to the north.

古文：琨自以托附，闻之大喜，乃徙马邑、阴馆、楼烦、繁畤、崞五县之民于陉南，更立城邑，尽献其地，东接代郡，西连西河、朔方，方数百里。
现代文：刘琨认为这一来便有了依托，闻之大喜，将马邑、阴馆、楼烦、繁、崞五县的民众迁到句注陉以南，重建城镇，将东接代郡，西连西河、朔方，方圆数百里的土地全部献出。
English: Liu Wei thought that this time he had the support and was very pleased to hear it. He moved the people of Ma'e, Yingguan, Loudui, Shanzhong, and Shantou five counties to the south of Jiuyuan, rebuilt the town, and donated the land of Dongjie County, Xilian West River, Shuofang, and hundreds of miles in radius.

古文：帝乃徙十万家以充之。
现代文：猗卢于是迁来十万户部民，用以充实这块土地。
English: So he moved a hundred thousand of his people to enrich this piece of land.

古文：刘琨又遣使乞师救洛阳，帝遣步骑二万助之。晋太傅东海王司马越辞以洛中饥馑，师乃还。
现代文：刘琨又派使节请求发兵援救洛阳，猗卢派二万步骑兵赴援，西晋太傅东海王司马越以洛阳饥馑为由加以谢绝，于是援军撤回。
English: Liu Bei also sent envoys to request the dispatch of troops to rescue Luoyang, and Minlu sent twenty thousand infantry and cavalry to help. West Jin Taifu East Sea King Sima Yue refused on the grounds that Luoyang was starving, so the reinforcements were withdrawn.

古文：是年，刘渊死，子聪僭立。
现代文：同年，刘渊死，其子刘聪僭立为帝。
English: In the same year, Liu Yuan died, and his son Liu Congjun became emperor.

古文：四年，刘琨牙门将邢延据新兴叛，招引刘聪。
现代文：四年，刘琨部下牙门将邢延占据新兴郡叛乱，勾结刘聪进犯。
English: In the fourth year, Liu Yan's subordinate Zangmen General Zou Yan occupied the emerging county rebellion, and colluded with Liu Cong to attack.

古文：帝遣军讨之，聪退走。
现代文：猗卢派军征讨，刘聪军退走。
English: Bonlu sent an army to fight, but Liu Cong's army retreated.

古文：五年，刘琨遣使乞师以讨刘聪、石勒。
现代文：五年，刘琨派使节请求援军以征讨刘聪、石勒。
English: Five years later, Liu Bei sent an envoy to request reinforcements to fight Liu Cong and Shi Le.

古文：帝以琨忠义，矜而许之。
现代文：猗卢因刘琨心怀忠义，郑重地答应了。
English: Yan Lu, because of Liu Ye's loyalty, solemnly agreed.

古文：会聪遣其子粲袭晋阳，害琨父母而据其城，琨来告难，帝大怒，遣长子六脩、桓帝子普根，及卫雄、范班、姬澹等为前锋，帝躬统大众二十万为后继。
现代文：恰逢刘聪派其子刘粲袭击晋阳，杀害刘琨的父母，占据了晋阳城。刘琨派人通报这一灾难，猗卢大怒，派长子拓跋六、猗之子拓跋普根，及卫雄、范班、姬澹等为前锋，亲自统率二十万大军为后援，前往征讨。
English: Coincidentally, Liu Cong sent his son Liu Hui to attack Jinyang, killing Liu Hui's parents and occupying Jinyang City. Liu Hui sent someone to report the disaster, infuriating Lu. He sent his eldest son Tuoba Liu, Tuoba's son Tuoba Pugen, and Wei Xiong, Fanban, and Ji Yao as forwards, and personally led a 200,000-strong army as back-up to go to investigate.

古文：粲惧，焚辎重，突围遁走。
现代文：刘粲极为恐惧，焚毁辎重，突围逃走。
English: Liu Yao was extremely afraid, and he burned down the coffin and fled.

古文：纵骑追之，斩其将刘儒、刘丰、简令、张平、邢延，伏尸数百里。
现代文：拓跋部骑兵纵马猛追，斩刘聪部将刘儒、刘丰、简令、张平、邢延，刘聪军横尸数百里。
English: The cavalrymen of the Tuoba Division chased them on horseback, and killed Liu Ru, Liu Feng, Jian Ling, Zhang Ping, and Jian Yan of the Liu Cong Division. The corpses of Liu Cong's army were strewn for hundreds of miles.

古文：琨来拜谢，帝以礼待之。
现代文：刘琨前来拜谢，猗卢以礼相待。
English: Liu Yi came to thank him, and Yan Lu treated him with courtesy.

古文：琨固请进军，帝曰： 吾不早来，致卿父母见害，诚以相愧。
现代文：刘琨一再请求继续进军，猗卢说： 我没有早来，致使您的父母遇害，确实感到惭愧。
English: Liu Yao repeatedly asked to continue the march. Gong Lu said, "I'm really ashamed that I didn't come earlier and caused your parents to be killed."

古文：今卿已复州境，然吾远来，士马疲弊，且待终举。
现代文：如今您已收复了所辖的州境，然而我军远道而来，兵马疲惫，就到此为止吧。
English: Now that you have regained control of your state borders, however, our troops have come a long way and are tired, so let's stop here.

古文：贼奚可尽乎？ 
现代文：贼人怎能一下子杀尽呢？ 
English: How can a thief kill all at once?

古文：馈琨马牛羊各千余，车令百乘，又留劲锐戍之而还。
现代文：于是赠给刘琨马、牛、羊各千余头，车一百辆，又留下精锐部队驻守，然后撤回。
English: As a result, Liu Xuan was given more than a thousand horses, cattle, and sheep, and a hundred cars. He also left elite troops stationed there, and then withdrew.

古文：是年，晋雍州刺史贾疋、京兆太守阎鼎，以晋怀帝为刘聪所执，共立怀帝兄子秦王业为太子，于长安称行台。
现代文：本年，西晋雍州刺史贾疋、京兆太守阎鼎，因晋怀帝司马炽为刘聪俘虏，共立怀帝哥哥的儿子秦王司马业为太子，在长安建立行台一一一临时政府。
English: This year, West Jin, Yongzhou, Zhang Shizhi, Jia Jia, and Jing Zhao, the eunuch Yan Ding, were captured by Liu Cong because of Jin Huai Di Sima Blaze, and the son of Huai Di's brother, Qin Wang Sima Ye, was crowned as the prince, establishing the Xingtai-Xingtai Provisional Government in Chang'an.

古文：帝复戒严，与琨更克大举。
现代文：于是猗卢下令戒严，与刘琨策划大举进兵。
English: Therefore, Qianlu ordered martial law and planned a large-scale invasion with Liu Bei.

古文：命琨自列晋行台，部分诸军，帝将遣十万骑从西河鉴谷南出，晋军从蒲坂东度，会于平阳，就食聪粟，迎复晋帝。
现代文：命刘琨自组晋朝行台，统率指挥诸军。猗卢计划派十万骑兵从西河郡的鉴谷南下，晋军由蒲坂东进，在平阳会师，消灭刘聪，迎回晋怀帝。
English: Liu Bei planned to send 100,000 cavalry southward from Jiangu in Xihe County, and the Jin army eastward from Busan to join the division in Pingyang, eliminate Liu Cong, and welcome back Emperor Huai.

古文：事不果行。
现代文：可这一计划没能实现。
English: However, this plan did not come to fruition.

古文：六年，城盛乐以为北都，修故平城以为南都。
现代文：六年，修筑盛乐城作为北都，修整平城旧城作为南都。
English: In six years, Shengle City was built as the northern capital, and the old city of Pingcheng was renovated as the southern capital.

古文：帝登平城西山，观望地势，乃更南百里，于氵垒水之阳黄瓜堆筑新平城，晋人谓之小平城，使长子六脩镇之，统领南部。
现代文：猗卢登上平城西面的山岭，观望地势，于是又在平城以南一百里、飈水北岸的黄瓜堆兴筑新平城，晋人称之为小平城，命长子六镇守，统领南部。
English: Qianlu ascended the mountains to the west of Pingcheng to observe the terrain, and then built a new Pingcheng in the cucumber heap on the north shore of Surabaya, a hundred miles south of Pingcheng. The Jin people called it Xiao Pingcheng, and the eldest son of the eldest son guarded six towns and ruled the south.

古文：七年，帝复与刘琨约期，会于平阳。
现代文：七年，猗卢与刘琨再次约定日期，在平阳会师。
English: Seven years later, Gong Lu and Liu Ye once again agreed on a date to meet in Pingyang.

古文：会石勒擒王浚，国有匈奴杂胡万余家，多勒种类，闻勒破幽州，乃谋为乱，欲以应勒，发觉，伏诛。
现代文：恰逢石勒擒获王浚，拓跋部属下有匈奴杂胡万余家，多为石勒族类，听说石勒攻破幽州，便密谋叛乱，以响应石勒。
English: At the same time that Shilou was conquered by Wang Jun, there were more than a thousand Huns, mostly from the Shilou ethnic group, under the Tuoba Department. When they heard that Shilou had invaded Yuzhou, they plotted a rebellion in response to Shilou.

古文：讨聪之计，于是中止。
现代文：事情泄露，全被诛杀，于是征讨刘聪的计划即告中止。
English: The whole affair was leaked and they were all killed, so the plan to solicit Liu Cong was immediately suspended.

古文：八年，晋愍帝进帝为代王，置官属，食代、常山二郡。
现代文：八年，晋愍帝司马业晋封猗卢为代王，允许他设置属下各级官僚机构，以代、常山二郡为食邑。
English: In the eighth year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jinshi, Emperor Ma, Emperor Jianfeng, and Emperor Lu became the acting king, allowing him to set up bureaucratic agencies at all levels, with the two counties of Jinshi and Changshan as food towns.

古文：帝忿聪、勒之乱，志欲平之。
现代文：猗卢对刘聪、石勒的犯上作乱极为愤恨，一心要消灭他们。
English: Gong Lu was extremely angry with Liu Cong and Shi Le for their crime of creating a disturbance, and was bent on eliminating them.

古文：先是，国俗宽简，民未知禁。
现代文：先前，拓跋部政俗宽松简约，民众不知法度。
English: Previously, Tuoba's politics and customs were loose and simple, and the people did not know the law.

古文：至是，明刑峻法，诸部民多以违命得罪。
现代文：至此，则明刑峻法，诸部部民多因违犯法令而获罪。
English: As a result, harsher punishments were introduced, and many people were convicted of violating the law.

古文：凡后期者皆举部戮之。或有室家相携而赴死所，人问； 何之？ 答曰： 当往就诛。 
现代文：凡超过规定期限的，全都整个部落整个部落的被杀掉，有的是携家带口奔赴死地，不知内情的人问 到哪里去 ，回答说 前去送死 。
English: Anyone who overstayed the deadline was killed, the entire tribe was killed, and some people ran to their deaths with their families. People who did not know the inside story asked where to go and were told to go and be killed.

古文：其威严伏物，皆此类也。
现代文：猗卢以威严镇服百姓，皆如此类。
English: They are all like this.

古文：九年，帝召六修，六修不至。
现代文：九年，猗卢召见六，六不至。
English: In the ninth year, Gong Lu summoned the six, but the six did not come.

古文：帝怒，讨之，失利，乃微服民间，遂崩。
现代文：猗卢大怒，发兵征讨，作战失利，于是微服私访民间，随即逝世。
English: Qianlu was enraged, sent troops to solicit, and lost the battle, so he paid a private visit to the people, and then died.

古文：普根先守外境，闻难来赴，攻六修，灭之。
现代文：拓跋普根原本镇守边境，得知猗卢的死讯率军赶回，向六发动进攻，歼灭六。
English: Tuoba Pugen, who had been guarding the border, learned of Gong Lu's death and led his army to rush back, launch an attack on the Six, and annihilate the Six.

古文：卫雄、姬澹率晋人及乌丸三百余家，随刘遵南奔并州。
现代文：卫雄、姬澹率晋人及乌丸人三百余家，随刘遵南奔并州。
English: Wei Xiong, Ji Xuan led more than three hundred Jin people and Wu Maru people, and followed Liu Zunan to annex the state.

古文：普根立月余而薨。
现代文：普根继位一月有余逝世。
English: He died in January, a month after taking the throne.

古文：普根子始生，桓帝后立之。
现代文：普根之子刚刚降生，被桓帝猗的后人拥立为主。
English: Pugen's son had just been born, and was supported by the descendants of Emperor Kan.

古文：其冬，普根子又薨。
现代文：这年冬天，普根之子又告夭折。
English: This winter, Pugen's son passed away.

古文：是年，李雄遣使朝贡。
现代文：本年，成汉皇帝李雄派使臣朝贡。
English: This year, Emperor Li Xiong of the Han Dynasty sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：平文皇帝讳郁律立，思帝之子也。
现代文：平文皇帝拓跋郁律继立，他是思帝拓跋弗之子。
English: The Pingwen Emperor Tuoba Yu Lu succeeded to the throne. He was the son of Sidi Tuoba Fu.

古文：姿质雄壮，甚有威略。
现代文：姿质雄壮，很有威严和谋略。
English: His posture is majestic, he is very dignified and strategic.

古文：元年，岁在丁丑。
现代文：平文皇帝元年，丁丑年。
English: The first year of Emperor Pingwen, the second year of Emperor Dingwu.

古文：二年，刘虎据朔方，来侵西部。帝逆击，大破之。虎单骑迸走。
现代文：二年，刘虎占据朔方，进犯西部地区，拓跋郁律率军迎击，大破敌军，刘虎单骑逃走。
English: In the second year, Liu Hu occupied the Shuo side and attacked the western region. Tuoba Yu Ritsu led the army to counterattack, broke the enemy army, and Liu Hu fled alone.

古文：其从弟路孤率部落内附，帝以女妻之。
现代文：刘虎堂弟路孤率其部落归附，拓跋郁律将女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: Liu Hu's cousin Lu Xun led his tribe to annexation, and Tuoba Yu Lu married his daughter to him as his wife.

古文：西兼乌孙故地，东吞勿吉以西，控弦上马将有百万。
现代文：拓跋郁律向西兼并了乌孙国故地，向东吞并了勿吉族以西的地区，拥有骑士近百万之众。
English: To the west, Tuoba Yu Lu annexed the homeland of the Wusun nation, and to the east, he annexed the area west of the Beiji tribe, possessing nearly one million knights.

古文：刘聪死，子粲僭立，为其将靳准所杀。渊族子曜僭立。
现代文：汉烈宗刘聪去世，其子刘粲继位，被其部将靳准所杀，汉高祖刘渊同族兄弟之子刘曜继立为帝。
English: Han Liu Cong, the founder of the Han dynasty, died, and his son Liu Ye succeeded to the throne. He was killed by his subordinate general Zou Jun. Liu Yu, the son of Liu Yuan, the founder of the Han dynasty, succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝闻晋愍帝为曜所害，顾谓大臣曰： 今中原无主，天其资我乎？ 
现代文：拓跋郁律得知晋愍帝司马业被刘曜杀害，对大臣们说： 如今中原无主，真是天助我也！ 
English: When Tuoba Yu Lu learned that Emperor Jinshi's horse was killed by Liu You, he said to the ministers: "Nowadays, the Central Plains has no owner. Heaven help me!"

古文：刘曜遣使请和，帝不纳。
现代文：刘曜派使臣前来议和，拓跋郁律置之不理。
English: Liu Ye sent envoys to negotiate peace, but Tuoba Yu Lu ignored them.

古文：是年，司马睿僭称大位于江南。
现代文：本年，司马睿在江南自立为帝。
English: This year, Sima Rui established himself as emperor in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：三年，石勒自称赵王，遣使乞和，请为兄弟。
现代文：三年，石勒自称赵王，派使节前来乞和，请求与拓跋郁律结为兄弟。
English: Three years later, Shile, calling himself King Zhao, sent envoys to beg for peace and to ask Tuoba Yu Lu to become his brother.

古文：帝斩其使以绝之。
现代文：拓跋郁律斩其使者以示势不两立。
English: Tuoba Yu Rui cut off his messenger to show that he would not stand between the two.

古文：四年，私署凉州刺史张茂遣使朝贡。
现代文：四年，自封的凉州刺史张茂派使节前来朝贡。
English: Four years later, envoys from the self-proclaimed Zhangmao faction of the Liangzhou Jishi came to pay tribute.

古文：五年，僭晋司马睿遣使韩暢加崇爵服，帝绝之。治兵讲武，有平南夏之意。
现代文：五年，晋元帝司马睿派使臣韩畅给拓跋郁律加官晋爵，拓跋郁律予以拒绝，操练兵马，加强军备，有平定南方之志。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Emperor Sima Rui sent envoy Han Chang to give Tuoba Yu Lu a promotion to the rank of knight, but Tuoba Yu Lu refused, he trained soldiers and horses, strengthened armaments, and had a desire to pacify the south.

古文：桓帝后以帝得众心，恐不利于己子，害帝，遂崩，大人死者数十人。
现代文：桓帝猗的后人见拓跋郁律深得众心，惟恐对自己的子孙不利，于是害死了平文帝拓跋郁律，各部酋长受牵连而被处死的达数十人之多。
English: Emperor Kuan's descendants were so impressed with Tuoba Yu Lu that they killed Emperor Pingwen, fearing that it would be detrimental to their own children and grandchildren. Dozens of chieftains were implicated and executed.

古文：天兴初，尊曰太祖。
现代文：道武帝天兴初年，拓跋郁律被尊为 太祖 。
English: In the first year of Emperor Daowu's reign, Tuoba Yuritsu was revered as the great-grandfather.

古文：惠皇帝讳贺傉立，桓帝之中子也。
现代文：惠皇帝拓跋贺亻辱继立，他是桓帝猗未成年的儿子。
English: Emperor Hui, who was the minor son of Emperor Huan, was enthroned.

古文：以五年为元年。
现代文：以平文帝五年为惠帝元年。
English: The first year of the emperor's martyrdom was the fifth year of the emperor's reign.

古文：未亲政事，太后临朝，遣使与石勒通和，时人谓之女国使。
现代文：拓跋贺亻辱未能亲自主持政事，而由太后临朝听政。派遣使节与石勒言和，时人称之为女国使。
English: However, she was not able to govern independently, and the Empress Dowager Lin listened to the government. She sent an envoy to make peace with Shi Le, which was called the envoy to the country.

古文：二年，司马睿死，子绍僭立。
现代文：二年，晋元帝司马睿逝世，其子司马绍继位。
English: Two years later, Emperor Jinxuan died, and his son Sima Shao succeeded to the throne.

古文：四年，帝始临朝。
现代文：四年，拓跋贺亻辱临朝亲政。
English: In four years, he became a pro-government politician.

古文：以诸部人情未悉款顺，乃筑城于东木根山，徙都之。
现代文：因各部落的人心还未完全诚心归服，于是在东木根山兴建城池，迁都于此。
English: As the hearts and minds of the tribes had not yet been completely converted, a castle was built in Higashimuneyama, and the capital was moved there.

古文：是年，张茂死，兄寔子骏立，遣使朝贡。
现代文：本年，张茂死，其兄张萛之子张骏继立，派使节前来朝贡。
English: This year, Zhang Mao died, and his brother Zhang Ye's son, Zhang Ye Jili, sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：五年，帝崩。
现代文：五年，惠帝拓跋贺亻辱逝世。
English: Five years later, Hui Di passed away.

古文：是年，司马绍死，子衍僭立。
现代文：本年，晋明帝司马绍死，其子司马衍继位。
English: This year, Emperor Jinming died and was succeeded by his son Sima Yan.

古文：炀皇帝讳纥那立，惠帝之弟也。
现代文：炀皇帝拓跋纥那继立，他是惠帝的弟弟。
English: Emperor Tuoba was the younger brother of Emperor Hui.

古文：以五年为元年。
现代文：以惠帝五年为炀帝元年。
English: The first year of the emperor's martyrdom was the fifth year of the emperor's reign.

古文：三年，石勒遣石虎率骑五千来寇边部，帝御之于句注陉北，不利，迁于大宁。
现代文：三年，石勒派石虎率五千骑兵进犯边境，炀帝率军迎击于句注陉北，失利，退往大宁。
English: In the third year, Shi Le sent Shi Hu and five thousand cavalry to invade the border. Emperor Qian led the army to counterattack in the north of Jujuy, but failed and retreated to Daning.

古文：时烈帝居于舅贺兰部。帝遣使求之，贺兰部帅蔼头，拥护不遣。
现代文：当时拓跋翳槐生活在他舅舅所在的贺兰部，炀帝派使者请他回来，贺兰部酋帅蔼头为保护拓跋翳槐，不让他回去。
English: At that time, Tuobao was living in the Helan Department, where his uncle was stationed. Emperor Qian sent an envoy to ask him to return. The head of the Helan Department, the chieftain, protected Tuobao and did not allow him to return.

古文：帝怒，召宇文部并势击蔼头。
现代文：炀帝大怒，召请宇文部并力攻击蔼头。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and summoned the Ministry of Education to join forces to attack Ai.

古文：宇文众败，帝还大宁。
现代文：宇文部战败，炀帝率军退回大宁。
English: The imperial education department was defeated, and Emperor Xuan led the army back to Danning.

古文：四年，石勒擒刘曜。
现代文：四年，石勒擒获刘曜。
English: In four years, Shi Leyu won Liu You.

古文：五年，帝出居于宇文部。
现代文：五年，炀帝出奔，居于宇文部。
English: Five years later, Emperor Xuan fled and went to live in the Ministry of Education.

古文：贺兰及诸部大人，共立烈帝。
现代文：贺兰部及诸部酋长共立拓跋翳槐为主。
English: Helan and the chiefs of the various departments are mainly responsible for the construction of the bridge.

古文：烈皇帝讳翳槐立，平文之长子也。
现代文：烈皇帝拓跋翳槐继位，他是平文帝拓跋郁律的长子。
English: Emperor Tuoba, the eldest son of Emperor Tuoba Yu Lu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：以五年为元年。
现代文：以炀帝五年为烈帝元年。
English: The first year of the emperor's martyrdom was the fifth year of the emperor's reign.

古文：石勒遣使求和，帝遣弟昭成皇帝如襄国，从者五千余家。
现代文：后赵石勒派使者求和，拓跋翳槐派弟弟拓跋什翼犍前往后赵首都襄国，随同前往的有五千余家。
English: Later, Zhao Shile sent an envoy to sue for peace, and Tuobao sent his brother Tuobao Shijie to the Zhao capital Xiangguo, accompanied by more than five thousand families.

古文：二年，石勒僭立，自称大赵王。
现代文：二年，石勒自立为帝，自称 大赵王 。
English: Two years later, Shiller declared himself emperor, calling himself the Great Zhao King.

古文：五年，勒死，子大雅僭立。
现代文：五年，石勒死，其子石大雅继位。
English: Five years later, Shi strangled to death, and his son Shi Daya succeeded to the throne.

古文：慕容廆死，子元真代立。
现代文：慕容蝅死，其子慕容元真继立。
English: Murong Xuan died, and his son Murong Yuanzhen succeeded him.

古文：六年，石虎废大雅，僭立。
现代文：六年，石虎废黜石大雅，自立为帝。
English: Six years later, Shihu dethroned Shi Daya and established himself as emperor.

古文：李雄死，兄子班立。
现代文：成汉太宗李雄死，其兄之子李班继位。
English: Chenghan Taizong Li Xiong died and was succeeded by his brother's son Li Ban.

古文：雄子期，杀班自立。
现代文：李雄之子李期，杀死李班自立为帝。
English: Li Xiong's son, Li Ji, killed Li Ban and declared himself emperor.

古文：七年，蔼头不修臣职，召而戮之，国人复贰。
现代文：七年，蔼头不修臣职，拓跋翳槐将他召来杀掉，国人再次叛乱。
English: In the seventh year, Aitoh did not perform his duties as a vassal, and Tuobao summoned him to kill him, and the people of the country rebelled again.

古文：炀帝自宇文部还入，诸部大人复奉之。
现代文：炀帝拓跋纥那自宇文部返回，各部酋长又奉他为主。
English: Emperor Tuoba returned from the Department of Education, and the chiefs of all departments followed him.

古文：炀皇帝复立，以七年为后元年。
现代文：炀帝拓跋纥那复位后，以烈帝七年为后元年。
English: In the first year after the restoration of Emperor Tuoba, Emperor Ye was enthroned for seven years.

古文：烈帝出居于鄴，石虎奉第宅、伎妾、奴婢、什物。
现代文：烈帝拓跋翳槐出奔，居于邺城，后赵太祖石虎送给他宅第、伎妾、奴婢、器物。
English: The martyr Emperor Tuoba fled and lived in Lucheng. Later, Zhao Taizu Shihu gave him a mansion, concubines, slaves and utensils.

古文：三年，石虎遣将李穆率骑五千纳烈帝于大宁。国人六千余落叛炀帝，炀帝出居于慕容部。
现代文：三年，石虎派部将李穆率五千骑兵将拓跋翳槐送回大宁，国人六千余部落背叛拓跋纥那，炀帝拓跋纥那出奔，居于慕容部。
English: Three years later, Shihu sent Li Mu and five thousand cavalrymen to send Tuobao back to Daning. More than six thousand tribes in China betrayed Tuobao, and Emperor Tuobao fled and lived in Murong.

古文：烈皇帝复立，以三年为后元年。
现代文：烈帝拓跋翳槐复位后，以炀帝三年为后元年。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Tuoba, the first year after the emperor's enthronement was the third year after the emperor's death.

古文：城新盛乐城，在故城东南十里。
现代文：兴建新盛乐城，在故城东南十里处。
English: Construction of the new Shengle City, located ten miles southeast of the old city.

古文：一年而崩。
现代文：一年后逝世。
English: He died a year later.

古文：昭成皇帝讳什翼犍立，平文之次子也。
现代文：昭成皇帝拓跋什翼犍继立，他是平文帝拓跋郁律的次子。
English: He was the second son of Emperor Tuoba and the second son of Emperor Tuoba and the second son of Emperor Tuoba.

古文：生而奇伟，宽仁大度，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：生而奇伟，宽仁大度，喜怒不形于色。
English: He was born to be great, generous and magnanimous, and his feelings of joy and anger never change.

古文：身长八尺，隆准龙颜，立发委地，卧则乳垂至席。
现代文：身长八尺，高鼻梁，有着龙一般的容颜，站则长发垂地，卧则乳垂至席。
English: He is eight feet tall, with a high bridge of the nose, and has the face of a dragon. When he stands, his long hair hangs down to the floor, and when he lies down, his breasts hang down to the seat.

古文：烈帝临崩顾命曰： 必迎立什翼犍，社稷可安。 
现代文：拓跋翳槐临终前留下遗命： 必迎立什翼犍，社稷可安。 
English: On his deathbed, Tuoba Yao left behind his last will and testament: We will definitely welcome Shiji Yao, and the society will be safe.

古文：烈帝崩，帝弟孤乃自诣鄴奉迎，与帝俱还。
现代文：拓跋翳槐死后，拓跋什翼犍之弟拓跋孤亲自前往邺城奉迎拓跋什翼犍，与他一同返回。
English: After the death of Tuobao, Tuobao's younger brother, Tuobao, personally went to Lucheng to welcome Tuobao and returned with him.

古文：事在《孤传》。
现代文：此事记载于《拓跋孤传》。
English: This event is recorded in "The Legend of the Tuoba Orphans."

古文：十一月，帝即位于繁畤之北，时年十九，称建国元年。
现代文：十一月，拓跋什翼犍即位于繁城之北，时年十九岁，此年被称为建国元年。
English: In November, at the age of nineteen, Tuobaoshi Tsubame, who was located in the north of the bustling city, was born. This year is known as the first year of the founding of the People's Republic.

古文：是岁，李雄从弟寿杀期僭立，自号曰汉。
现代文：本年，李雄堂弟李寿杀死李期，自立为帝，自称国号为 汉 。
English: This year, Li Xiong's cousin Li Shou killed Li Ji, declared himself emperor, and called himself Han.

古文：二年春，始置百官，分掌众职。
现代文：建国二年春，昭成帝拓跋什翼犍开始设置百官，分掌众职。
English: In the spring of the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Taobao began to set up hundreds of officials and assign them to various posts.

古文：东自濊貊，西及破洛那，莫不款附。
现代文：东自氵岁貊，西至破洛那，莫不归附。
English: There is nothing to be attached to from the east to the west as far as Bologna.

古文：夏五月，朝诸大人于参合陂，议欲定都氵垒源川，连日不决，乃从太后计而止。
现代文：夏五月，在参合陂朝会各部酋长，商议欲定都氵垒源川，连日不决，于是听从太后的意见，终止此事。
English: In the summer of May, the chiefs of the various departments of the Sangha and Dynasties Council deliberated for several days to decide whether or not to attack Yuanchuan, but they did not reach a decision, so they listened to the opinion of the empress dowager and terminated the matter.

古文：语在《皇后传》。
现代文：事见《皇后传》。
English: The story is told in "Queen's Biography."

古文：娉慕容元真妹为皇后。
现代文：聘慕容元真之妹为皇后。
English: The younger sister of Murong Yuan Zhen was appointed as empress.

古文：三年春，移都于云中之盛乐宫。
现代文：建国三年春，迁都于云中郡的盛乐宫。
English: In the spring of the third year after the founding of the People's Republic, the capital was moved to Shengle Palace in Yunnan County.

古文：四年秋九月，筑盛乐城于故城南八里。
现代文：建国四年秋九月，修筑盛乐城于故城城南八里处。
English: In the autumn and September of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Shengle Castle was built eight miles south of the old city.

古文：皇后慕容氏崩。
现代文：皇后慕容氏逝世。
English: Empress Murong passed away.

古文：冬十月，刘虎寇西境。
现代文：冬十月，刘虎进犯西部边境。
English: In the winter of October, Liu Hu attacked the western border.

古文：帝遣军逆讨，大破之，虎仅以身免。
现代文：昭成帝派军迎击，大破敌军，刘虎仅以身免。
English: Emperor Zhaocheng sent an army to meet the attack and defeated the enemy army. Liu Hu only escaped with his life.

古文：虎死，子务桓立，始来归顺，帝以女妻之。
现代文：刘虎死，其子刘务桓继立，始来归顺，昭成帝将女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: After Liu Hu's death, his son Liu Muhuan succeeded him and began to submit, and Emperor Zhao Chengdu married his daughter to him as his wife.

古文：十二月，慕容元真遣使朝贡，并荐其宗女。
现代文：十二月，慕容元真派使节前来朝贡，并推荐其同宗女子作为皇后的人选。
English: In December, an envoy from the Murong Yuanzhen faction came to pay tribute and recommended a woman from the same family as a candidate for empress.

古文：五年夏五月，幸参合陂。
现代文：建国五年夏五月，昭成帝驾临参合陂。
English: In the summer and May of the fifth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Chengdu came to the imperial court.

古文：秋七月七日，诸部毕集，设坛埒，讲武驰射，因以为常。
现代文：秋七月七日，各部落齐聚，筑起高台，举行比武大会，此后便形成为一种制度。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, all the tribes gathered together, built a hill, and held a martial arts competition. After that, it became a system.

古文：八月，还云中。
现代文：八月，昭成帝返回云中郡。
English: In August, Emperor Zhaocheng returned to Yunzhong County.

古文：是年秋，司马衍死，弟岳僭立。
现代文：本年秋天，晋成帝司马衍死，其弟司马岳继位。
English: In the autumn of this year, Emperor Jincheng died, and his younger brother Sima Yue succeeded to the throne.

古文：六年秋八月，慕容元真遣使请荐女。
现代文：建国六年秋八月，慕容元真派来使者，请求昭成帝迎娶所推荐的女子。
English: In the autumn and August of the sixth year of the founding of the country, Murong Yuanzhen sent an envoy to request Emperor Zhao Chengdu to marry the recommended woman.

古文：是年，李寿死，子势僭立，遣使朝贡。
现代文：本年，汉中宗李寿死，其子李势继位，派使臣前来朝贡。
English: This year, Han Zhongzong Li Shou died, and his son Li Xian succeeded to the throne, and sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：七年春二月，遣大人长孙秩迎后慕容氏元真之女于境。
现代文：建国七年春二月，昭成帝派大臣长孙秩迎娶皇后一一一慕容元真同宗女子于其境内。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the founding of the country, in February, Emperor Shojo sent the minister Chosun Chichimei to marry the empress Murong Yuanzhen, a woman from the same family, in its territory.

古文：夏六月，皇后至自和龙。
现代文：夏六月，皇后自和龙抵达。
English: In the summer of June, Empress Dowager Zihe Long arrived.

古文：秋七月，慕容元真遣使奉聘，求交婚。帝许之。
现代文：秋七月，慕容元真派使者来访，请求通婚，昭成帝应允。
English: In the autumn and July, Murong Yuanzheng sent an envoy to Xiamen to ask for intermarriage, and Emperor Zhao Rongcheng agreed.

古文：九月，以烈帝女妻之。
现代文：九月，将烈帝拓跋翳槐之女嫁给慕容元真为妻。
English: In September, he married Murong Yuanzheng, the daughter of Emperor Tuobao.

古文：其年，司马岳死，子聃僭立。
现代文：本年，晋康帝司马岳死，其子司马聃继位。
English: This year, the Emperor Jinkang, Sima Yue, died, and his son, Sima Ye, succeeded to the throne.

古文：八年，慕容元真遣使朝贡。
现代文：建国八年，慕容元真派使朝贡。
English: In the eighth year of the founding of the country, Murong Yuanzhen faction sent tribute to the imperial court.

古文：是年，张骏私署假凉王。
现代文：本年，张骏自封为代理凉王。
English: This year, Zhang Ye has appointed himself as the acting king of cool.

古文：九年，石虎遣使朝贡。
现代文：建国九年，石虎派使朝贡。
English: In the ninth year of the founding of the nation, Sekigahata sent a tribute to the emperor.

古文：是年，张骏死，子重华代立。
现代文：本年，张骏死，其子张重华代立。
English: This year, Zhang Xuan died, and his son Zhang Chonghua took over.

古文：十年，遣使诣鄴观衅。
现代文：建国十年，昭成帝派使臣前往邺城，察看后赵的虚实动向。
English: In the 10th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Zheng sent an envoy to Licheng to observe the true and false movements of Hou Zhao.

古文：是年，司马聃擒李势。
现代文：本年，晋穆帝司马聃擒获汉后主李势。
English: This year, Jin Mu Di Sima Jie won the title of Han Empress.

古文：张重华遣使朝贡。
现代文：张重华派使朝贡。
English: Zhang Chonghua sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十一年，慕容元真死，子俊代立。
现代文：建国十一年，慕容元真死，其子慕容俊代立。
English: In the eleventh year of the founding of the country, Murong Yuanzhen died, and his son Murong Jun took over.

古文：十二年，西巡，至河而还。
现代文：建国十二年，昭成帝西巡，至黄河而还。
English: In the 12th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Chengdi went on a tour to the West, but returned to the Yellow River.

古文：是年，石虎死，子世立。
现代文：本年，后赵太祖石虎死，其子石世继位。
English: This year, the late Zhao Taizu Shihu died, and his son Shi Shi succeeded to the throne.

古文：世兄遵，杀世自立。
现代文：石世之兄石遵，杀死石世自立为帝。
English: Shisei's brother, Shizun, killed Shisei and became emperor.

古文：尊兄鉴，杀遵自立。
现代文：石遵之兄石鉴，又杀死石遵自立为帝。
English: Shi Zun's brother, Shi Jian, also killed Shi Zun and made himself emperor.

古文：十三年，魏郡人冉闵，杀石鉴僭立。
现代文：建国十三年，魏郡人冉闵，杀死石鉴自立为帝。
English: In the 13th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Ran Yu, a native of Wei County, killed Shijian and became emperor.

古文：十四年，帝曰： 石胡衰灭，冉闵肆祸，中州纷梗，莫有匡救，吾将亲率六军，廓定四海。 
现代文：建国十四年，昭成帝说： 石胡衰亡，冉闵肆虐，中原纷争，无人拯救，我将亲率六军，平定四海。 
English: In the fourteenth year of the founding of the country, Emperor Zhao Zheng said: Shihu is in decline, Ran Zhi is raging, the Central Plains are in conflict, and there is no one to save. I will personally lead the six armies and pacify the four seas.

古文：乃敕诸部，各率所统，以俟大期。
现代文：于是命令各部落，各率所辖部众，集结待命。
English: He then ordered all the tribes and their subordinates to assemble and be on standby.

古文：诸大人谏曰： 今中州大乱，诚宜进取，如闻豪强并起，不可一举而定，若或留连，经历岁稔，恐无永逸之利，或有亏损之忧。 
现代文：各部酋长劝阻道： 如今中原大乱，确应进取，然而听说豪强并起，并不能一举平定，如或征战持久，历时一年，恐怕不会获得一劳永逸之利，还会有亏损之忧。 
English: The chiefs of various ministries dissuaded: Today, the Central Plains Great Disturbance has broken out, and it is indeed necessary to forge ahead. However, I have heard that it is not possible to pacify everything in one fell swoop. If the war continues for a long time, lasting one year, I am afraid that we will not be able to gain a once-and-for-all advantage, and there will also be worries about losses.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：于是昭成帝便放弃了这一计划。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：是岁，氐苻健僭称大位，自号大秦。
现代文：本年，氐族人苻健自立为帝，自称国号为 大秦 。
English: This year, the Qiang people's Qian Jian became the emperor and called himself the Great Qin.

古文：十五年，慕容俊灭冉闵，僭尊号。
现代文：建国十五年，慕容俊消灭冉闵，僭立为帝。
English: In the fifteenth year after the founding of the People's Republic, Murong Jun annihilated Ran and became emperor.

古文：十六年，慕容俊遣使朝贡。
现代文：建国十六年，慕容俊派使朝贡。
English: In the 16th year of the founding of the country, the Murongjun faction sent tribute.

古文：是年，张重华死，子曜灵立。
现代文：本年，张重华死，其子张曜灵代立。
English: This year, Zhang Chonghua died, and his son Zhang Youling succeeded him.

古文：重华庶兄祚杀曜灵而自立，称凉公。
现代文：张重华庶兄张祚杀死张曜灵自立，自称凉公。
English: Zhang Chonghua's brother-in-law Zhang Hao killed Zhang Youling and became independent, calling himself Liang Gong.

古文：十七年，遣使于慕容俊。
现代文：建国十七年，昭成帝派使臣访问慕容俊。
English: In the 17th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Akihito sent an envoy to visit Murongjun.

古文：张祚复称凉王，置百官，遣使朝贡。
现代文：张祚改称凉王，设置百官，派使节前来朝贡。
English: Zhang Xuankai called himself the King of Cool, set up hundreds of officials, and sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十八年，太后王氏崩。
现代文：建国十八年，太后王氏逝世。
English: In the 18th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Empress Dowager Wang died.

古文：是年，苻健死，子生僭立。
现代文：本年，苻健死，其子苻生代立。
English: This year, Hao Jian died, and his son Hao Sheng was born to succeed him.

古文：羌姚襄自称大将军、大单于。
现代文：羌族人姚襄自称大将军、大单于。
English: Yao Xiang, a member of the Yao ethnic group, called himself a "great general" and "great leader."

古文：张瓘、宋混杀张祚，立重华少子玄靖，称凉王。
现代文：张馞、宋混杀死张祚，拥立张重华的小儿子张玄靖，称凉王。
English: Zhang Ye and Song Jian killed Zhang Ye and supported Zhang Chonghua's youngest son, Zhang Xuanjing, known as the King of Cool.

古文：十九年春正月，刘务桓死，其弟阏头立，潜谋反叛。
现代文：建国十九年春正月，刘务桓死，其弟刘阏头代立，阴谋反叛。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 19th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Liu Muhuan died, and his brother Liu Shantou took his place and plotted a rebellion.

古文：二月，帝西巡，因而临河，便人招喻，阏头从命。
现代文：二月，昭成帝西巡，抵达黄河岸边，派人招抚、劝喻刘阏头，刘阏头从命。
English: In February, when Shao Chengdi was on a tour of the West and arrived at the shore of the Yellow River, he sent someone to coax and persuade Liu Shantou, and Liu Shantou complied.

古文：冬，慕容俊来请婚，许之。
现代文：冬，慕容俊前来求婚，昭成帝应允。
English: In winter, Murong Jun came to propose marriage, and Emperor Zhao Rong agreed.

古文：二十年夏五月，慕容俊奉纳礼币。
现代文：建国二十年夏五月，慕容俊送来聘礼。
English: In the summer and May of the 20th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Murong Jun sent a bride price.

古文：是年，苻坚杀苻生而僭立。
现代文：本年，苻坚杀死苻生，自立为帝。
English: This year, He Jian killed his twin and became emperor.

古文：姚襄为苻眉所杀。
现代文：姚襄为苻眉所杀。
English: Yao Xiang was killed by Frowning.

古文：二十一年，阏头部民多叛，惧而东走。
现代文：建国二十一年，刘阏头所部部民大多反叛，刘阏头心怀恐惧向东逃走。
English: In the 21st year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, most of Liu Shantou's subordinates rebelled, and Liu Shantou fled to the east in fear.

古文：渡河，半济而冰陷，后众尽归阏头兄子悉勿祈。
现代文：渡黄河时，所率部众刚渡过一半，河冰塌陷，所剩部众全数投奔了刘阏头哥哥的儿子悉勿祈。
English: When crossing the Yellow River, the group led by Liu Shantou had just crossed half of it when the river ice collapsed. The rest of the group all rushed to help Liu Shantou's brother's son, Shibuqi.

古文：初，阏头之叛，悉勿祈兄弟十二人在帝左右，尽遣归，欲其自相猜离。
现代文：当初，刘阏头叛逃时，悉勿祈兄弟十二人都在昭成帝身边任职，昭成帝将他们全部遣返，想让他们与刘阏头自相猜疑。
English: At the time of Liu Shantou's defection, all 12 brothers were working alongside Emperor Zhaocheng. Emperor Zhaocheng repatriated all of them, intending to make them and Liu Shantou suspicious of each other.

古文：至是，悉勿祈夺其众。
现代文：至此，悉勿祈夺取了刘阏头的部众。
English: At this point, Liu Shantou's followers should not pray for victory.

古文：阏头穷而归命，帝待之如初。
现代文：刘阏头走投无路，只好投案自首，昭成帝仍待之如初。
English: Liu Shantou was cornered and had no choice but to turn himself in. Emperor Zhao remained as he had been.

古文：二十二年春，帝东巡，至于桑乾川。
现代文：建国二十二年春，昭成帝东巡，抵达桑乾川。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Chengdu arrived at Kuang Qianchuan after his eastern inspection tour.

古文：三月，慕容俊遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月，慕容俊派使朝贡。
English: In March, the Murongjun faction sent tribute.

古文：夏四月，帝还云中。
现代文：夏四月，昭成帝返回云中。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Zhao returned to Yunzhong.

古文：悉勿祈死，弟卫辰立。
现代文：悉勿祈死，其弟卫辰代立。
English: Don't pray for his death, his brother, Wei Chen, will take his place.

古文：秋八月，卫辰遣子朝贡。
现代文：秋八月，卫辰派儿子前来朝贡。
English: In autumn and August, Wei Chen sent his son to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二十三年夏六月，皇后慕容氏崩。
现代文：建国二十三年夏六月，皇后慕容氏逝世。
English: In June of the summer of the 23rd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Empress Murong died.

古文：秋七月，卫辰来会葬，因而求婚，许之。
现代文：秋七月，卫辰前来参加慕容皇后的葬礼，趁机求婚，昭成帝应允。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Weichen came to attend the funeral of Empress Murong, and took the opportunity to propose marriage, which Emperor Shosho accepted.

古文：是岁，慕容俊死，子暐立，遣使致赙。
现代文：本年，慕容俊死，其子慕容日韦继立，昭成帝派使臣前往吊唁，并送去丧礼所需的财物。
English: This year, Murong Jun died, and his son, Murong Xibei, succeeded him. Emperor Akechi sent an envoy to pay condolences and send the necessary funeral goods.

古文：二十四年春，卫辰遣使朝聘。
现代文：建国二十四年春，卫辰派使者前来朝拜。
English: In the spring of the 24th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Weichen sent an envoy to pay homage.

古文：是年，司马聃死，衍子千龄僭立。
现代文：本年，晋穆帝司马聃死，晋成帝司马衍之子司马千龄继位。
English: This year, Emperor Jinmu died, and Emperor Jincheng's son Sima Qianling succeeded to the throne.

古文：二十五年，帝南巡，至君子津。
现代文：建国二十五年，昭成帝南巡，抵达君子津。
English: In the 25th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Chengdi was on a southern tour and arrived in Juncizu.

古文：冬十月，行幸代。
现代文：冬十月，驾临代郡。
English: Winter in October, driving through Worcester County.

古文：十一月，慕容暐荐女备后宫。
现代文：十一月，慕容日韦推荐女子以备后宫的人选。
English: In November, Murong Rihwei recommended a woman to prepare a harem.

古文：二十六年冬十月，帝讨高车，大破之，获万口，马牛羊百余万头。
现代文：建国二十六年冬十月，昭成帝征伐高车部，大破之，俘获一万人，马牛羊百余万头。
English: In the winter and October of the 26th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Chengdu led an expedition to conquer the Gao Cart Department. He defeated it and captured 10,000 people and more than one million horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：是年，张重华弟天锡杀玄靖而自立。
现代文：本年，张重华之弟张天锡杀死张玄靖，自立为王。
English: This year, Zhang Tianxi, the younger brother of Zhang Chonghua, killed Zhang Xuanjing and declared himself king.

古文：二十七年春，车驾还云中。
现代文：建国二十七年春，昭成帝返回云中。
English: In the spring of the 27th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhaocheng returned to Yunzhong.

古文：冬十一月，讨没歌部，破之，获牛马羊数百万头。
现代文：冬十一月，征讨没歌部，破之，俘获牛马羊数百万头。
English: In the winter of November, there was a campaign against the no-singing club, which was defeated and millions of cattle, horses and sheep were captured.

古文：二十八年春正月，卫辰谋反，东渡河。
现代文：建国二十八年春正月，卫辰谋反，东渡黄河。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 28th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Weichen plotted a rebellion and sailed east to the Yellow River.

古文：帝讨之，卫辰惧而遁走。
现代文：昭成帝率军征讨，卫辰因恐惧而逃走。
English: Emperor Akechi led an army to conquer it, and Weichen fled in fear.

古文：冬十二月，苻坚遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十二月，前秦世祖苻坚派使臣前来朝贡。
English: In the winter of December, the former Qin ancestor Yu Jian sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，司马千龄死，弟弈僭立。
现代文：本年，司马千龄死，其弟司马弈继位。
English: This year, Sima Qianling died, and his younger brother Sima Yi succeeded him.

古文：二十九年夏五月，遣燕凤使苻坚。
现代文：建国二十九年夏五月，昭成帝派燕凤出使前秦。
English: In the summer and May of the 29th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhaoxing sent Yanfeng to the Former Qin Dynasty.

古文：三十年冬十月，帝征卫辰。
现代文：建国三十年冬十月，昭成帝率军征伐卫辰。
English: In the winter of October of the 30th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhaoxing led an army to conquer Yecheng.

古文：时河冰未成，帝乃以苇絙约澌，俄然冰合，犹未能坚，乃散苇于上，冰草相结，如浮桥焉。
现代文：当时黄河河面还未完全封冻，昭成帝命人用芦苇编成粗绳缠绕、填塞冰缝，随即冰层封合，然而并不坚固，于是将芦苇、稻草撒在冰上，冰草相结，如同浮桥一般。
English: At that time, the surface of the Yellow River was not completely frozen. Emperor Zhaocheng ordered people to use reeds to weave coarse ropes to wrap around and fill the ice cracks. The ice layer was then sealed, but it was not strong. Therefore, reeds and straw were sprinkled on the ice, and the ice weeds were tied together, just like a pontoon.

古文：众军利涉，出其不意，卫辰与宗族西走，收其部落而还，俘获生口及马牛羊数十万头。
现代文：大军迅速渡过黄河，出其不意，卫辰率族人西逃，昭成帝驱赶其部落而还，俘获人口及马牛羊数十万。
English: The large army quickly crossed the Yellow River. Unexpectedly, Wei Chen and his people fled west. Emperor Zhaocheng drove out his tribe and returned, capturing hundreds of thousands of people, horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：三十一年春，帝至自西伐，班赏各有差。
现代文：建国三十一年春，昭成帝西征归来，按等级颁发赏赐。
English: In the spring of the 31st year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Akechi returned from the Western Expedition, and awards were given according to rank.

古文：三十二年正月，帝南幸君子津。
现代文：建国三十二年正月，昭成帝南至君子津。
English: In the first month of the 32nd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Chengdi went as far south as Juncizu.

古文：冬十月，幸代。
现代文：冬十月，驾临代郡。
English: Winter in October, driving through Worcester County.

古文：三十三年冬十一月，征高车，大破之。
现代文：建国三十三年冬十一月，征伐高车部，大破之。
English: In November of the winter of the 33rd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the conquest of Gao Chebu began.

古文：是年，苻坚擒慕容暐。
现代文：本年，苻坚擒获慕容日韦。
English: This year, Zou Jianqi won the Murong Sunway.

古文：三十四年春，长孙斤谋反，伏诛。
现代文：建国三十四年春，长孙斤谋反，被诛杀。
English: In the spring of the 34th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the eldest grandson, Jin, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：斤之反也，拔刃向御座，太子献明皇帝讳寔格之，伤胁。
现代文：长孙斤谋反之时，拔出利刃刺向御座，太子献明皇帝拓跋萛拼死格挡，胸肋受伤。
English: When the eldest grandson, Jin, plotted a rebellion, he pulled out a sharp blade and stabbed the throne. The crown prince, Emperor Taobao, fought to the death and was wounded in the ribs.

古文：夏五月，薨，后追谥焉。
现代文：夏五月，不治身亡，后来追谥他为献明帝。
English: He died in May of the same year, and was later revered as Emperor Xianming.

古文：秋七月，皇孙珪生，大赦。
现代文：秋七月，皇孙拓跋王圭降生，大赦。
English: In autumn and July, the grandson of Emperor Tuoba, Wang Gui, was born, and he was granted amnesty.

古文：是年，司马弈臣桓温，废弈为海西公，立睿子昱。
现代文：本年，东晋大臣桓温，将皇帝司马弈废为海西公，立晋元帝司马睿之子司马昱为帝。
English: This year, the Eastern Jin minister, Kuan Wen, abolished the emperor Sima Yi as the Emperor of the West, and established Sima Yu, the son of the former emperor Sima Rui, as the emperor.

古文：三十五年，司马昱死，子昌明僭立。
现代文：建国三十五年，晋简文帝司马昱死，其子司马昌明继位。
English: In the 35th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Jin Jianwen died and was succeeded by his son Sima Changming.

古文：三十六年夏五月，遣燕凤使苻坚。
现代文：建国三十六年夏五月，昭成帝派燕凤出使前秦帝国。
English: In the summer and May of the 36th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhaoxing sent Yanfeng to the former Qin Empire.

古文：三十七年，帝征卫辰，卫辰南走。
现代文：建国三十七年，昭成帝亲征卫辰，卫辰南逃。
English: In the thirty-seventh year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhao Zheng personally recruited Emperor Weichen, and Emperor Weichen fled south.

古文：三十八年，卫辰求援于苻坚。
现代文：建国三十八年，卫辰向前秦皇帝苻坚求援。
English: In the 38th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Weichen appealed to the former Qin Emperor Yu Jian for help.

古文：三十九年，苻坚遣其大司马苻洛率众二十万及朱彤、张蚝、邓羌等诸道来寇，侵逼南境。
现代文：建国三十九年，苻坚派其大司马苻洛率领二十万大军，与朱彤、张蚝、邓羌等分路进犯，直逼南部边境。
English: In the 39th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Yu Jian sent his general secretary, Ma Yuluo, to lead a 200,000-strong army, and together with Zhu Xi, Zhang Ye, Deng Yao and others, they attacked the southern border.

古文：冬十一月，白部、独孤部御之，败绩。
现代文：白部、独孤部迎击，战败。
English: The White Section and the Solitary Section counterattacked, but were defeated.

古文：南部大人刘库仁走云中。
现代文：南部统帅刘库仁退回云中郡。
English: The southern commander Liu Kuren returned to Yunnan County.

古文：帝复遣库仁率骑十万逆战于石子岭，王师不利。
现代文：昭成帝又派刘库仁率十万骑兵在石子岭迎战，作战失利。
English: Emperor Zhaocheng also sent 100,000 cavalry led by Liu Curen to fight in Shiziling, but the battle was a failure.

古文：帝时不豫，群臣莫可任者，乃率国人避于阴山之北。
现代文：其时昭成帝患病在身，群臣无人可当重任，于是率领国人避难于阴山之北。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaocheng was ill, and there was no one to take on the important task, so he led the Chinese people to take refuge in the north of Yin Mountain.

古文：高车杂种尽叛，四面寇钞，不得刍牧。复度漠南。
现代文：高车部各族全部反叛，四面受敌，无法维持统治，继续向漠南迁移。
English: All the ethnic groups in Gaochao rebelled and were attacked from all sides. Unable to maintain their rule, they continued to migrate south into the desert.

古文：坚军稍退，乃还。
现代文：前秦军稍退，方才返回。
English: The former Qin army retreated a little before returning.

古文：十二月，至云中，旬有二日，帝崩，时年五十七。
现代文：十二月，抵达云中郡，十二天后，昭成帝拓跋什翼犍逝世，享年五十七岁。
English: In December, he arrived in Yunzhong County. Twelve days later, Emperor Taobao died at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：太祖即位，尊曰高祖。
现代文：太祖道武帝拓跋皀即位，尊拓跋什翼犍为 高祖 。
English: The great-great-grandfather Emperor Daowu ascended the throne, and was revered as the great-great-grandfather.

古文：帝雅性宽厚，智勇仁恕。
现代文：昭成帝生性宽厚，智勇兼备，仁慈为怀。
English: Emperor Akechi was a man of great generosity, wisdom, courage, and mercy.

古文：时国中少缯帛，代人许谦盗绢二匹。守者以告，帝匿之，谓燕凤曰： 吾不忍视谦之面，卿勿泄言。
现代文：其时国中丝帛数量很少，代郡人许谦盗绢二匹，看守者向昭成帝报告，昭成帝隐而不宣，对燕凤说： 我不忍心因此而面对许谦，你不要泄露此事。
English: At that time, the number of silk cocoons in the country was very small. On behalf of the county people, Xu Qian stole two cocoons. The guards reported to Emperor Zhao Chengdi. Emperor Zhao Chengdi secretly said to Yan Feng: I can't bear to face Xu Qian because of this. You shouldn't reveal this matter.

古文：谦或惭而自杀，为财辱士，非也。 
现代文：许谦或许会因惭愧而自杀，为财辱士，实不足取。 
English: Xu Qian may commit suicide out of shame, because he is a dishonest person and did not earn enough money.

古文：帝尝击西部叛贼，流矢中目。
现代文：昭成帝曾在攻打西部叛贼时，被流矢射中眼睛。
English: Emperor Akechi was shot in the eye by a stray arrow while attacking Western rebels.

古文：贼破之后，诸大臣执射者，各持锥刀欲屠割之。帝曰： 彼各为其主，何罪也。 
现代文：歼灭叛贼后，诸大臣抓到射手，各持尖刀要将他屠割，昭成帝却说： 他不过是各为其主罢了，有什么罪呢？ 
English: After annihilating the traitors, the ministers caught the archer, each holding a sharp knife to slaughter him, but Emperor Zhao Chengdi said: He is just each his own master, what is the crime?

古文：乃释之。
现代文：于是将其释放。
English: As a result, the brother was released.

古文：是岁，苻坚灭张天锡。
现代文：本年，苻坚消灭张天锡。
English: This year, Yan Jian eliminated Zhang Tianxi.

古文：史臣曰：帝王之兴也，必有积德累功博利，道协幽显，方契神祗之心。
现代文：史臣曰：帝王的兴起，必须行善积德，建立丰功伟绩，造福于苍生。
English: Shichen said: The rise of the emperor must do good and accumulate virtue, establish great achievements, and benefit sentient beings.

古文：有魏奄迹幽方，世居君长，淳化育民，与时无竞。
现代文：施政的方针、策略既要顾全大局，又要兼顾细微末节，方能契合神灵之心。魏国占据北方，拓跋氏世居君长之位，普及教化，养育万民，与时无争。
English: The policy and strategy of governance should not only take into account the overall situation, but also take into account the subtleties, so as to be in line with the heart of the gods. Wei occupied the north, and the Tuoba clan occupied the position of monarchs, spreading enlightenment and educating the people, and there is no conflict with the times.

古文：神元生自天女，桓、穆勤于晋室。
现代文：始祖神元皇帝为天女所生，桓帝、穆帝尽忠于西晋皇室。
English: The founder, Emperor Shingen, was born of a celestial maiden, and Emperor Kan and Emperor Mu were loyal to the West Jin royal family.

古文：灵心人事，夫岂徒然？
现代文：天命人事，岂会徒然而无应验、回报。
English: Is it possible for a person to be predestined by God, yet not fulfilled or rewarded?

古文：昭成以雄杰之姿，包君子之量，征伐四克，威被荒遐，乃立号改都，恢隆大业。
现代文：昭成帝以雄杰之姿，怀君子器量，征伐四方，攻无不克，威镇远方，于是立号迁都，恢弘大业。
English: Emperor Zhaocheng, with the appearance of a hero and the ability of a gentleman, conquered the four directions, attacked everything, and conquered the distant places. Therefore, he set up the slogan of moving the capital, and made great achievements.

古文：终于百六十载，光宅区中。
现代文：此后魏帝国在前后一百六十年间雄踞中原。
English: After that, the Wei Empire dominated the Central Plains for one hundred and sixty years.

古文：其原固有由矣。
现代文：追本溯源，是有其历史的渊源的。
English: Tracing back to the source is to have its historical origin.

