古文：徐孝嗣，字始昌，东海郯人也。
现代文：徐孝嗣字始昌，是东海郯地人。
English: Xu Xiaozhi, also known as Shichang, is a native of the East China Sea.

古文：祖湛之，宋司空；父聿之，著作郎：并为太初所杀。
现代文：祖父徐湛之，做过宋的司空；父亲徐聿之，官著作郎：都是被刘劭杀死的。
English: Grandfather Xu Zhanzhi, who served as Song's deputy; father Xu Zhizhi, the official's son: both were killed by Liu Bei.

古文：孝嗣在孕得免。
现代文：徐孝嗣还没降生所以逃过了一死。
English: Xu Xiaozhi hadn't been born yet, so he escaped death.

古文：幼而挺立，风仪端简。
现代文：小时候风姿特殊，端庄挺拔。
English: When he was a child, he had a special demeanor, he was dignified and upright.

古文：八岁，袭爵枝江县公，见宋孝武，升阶流涕，迄于就席。
现代文：八岁时，承袭了枝江县公的爵位，见到宋孝武帝，登上台阶就流下泪来，一直到进入席位。
English: At the age of eight, he inherited the title of Duke of Yangtze River County, and when he saw Emperor Song Xiaowu, he shed tears when he climbed the steps, until he entered the seat.

古文：帝甚爱之。
现代文：皇帝非常喜欢他。
English: The emperor liked him very much.

古文：尚康乐公主。
现代文：匹配给康乐公主。
English: A match for Princess Kangra.

古文：泰始二年，西讨解严，车驾还宫，孝嗣登殿不著韎，为治书御史蔡准所奏，罚金二两。
现代文：泰始二年，西征结束，皇帝回到宫中，徐孝嗣上殿没有穿袜子，被治书御史蔡准奏告，罚金二两。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, after the end of the Western Expedition, the emperor returned to the palace. Xu Xiaozhi did not wear socks when he went to the palace. He was fined two rupees for not wearing socks.

古文：拜驸马都尉，除著作郎，母丧去官。
现代文：拜为驸马都尉，任著作郎，因母亲去世免官。
English: He served as captain of the imperial horse and as a writer, but was dismissed due to his mother's death.

古文：为司空太尉二府参军，安成王文学。
现代文：为司空太尉二府参军，安成王文学。
English: Joined the army in two prefectures as an officer of the Imperial Air Force, and became a famous writer.

古文：孝嗣姑适东莞刘舍，舍兄藏为尚书左丞，孝嗣往诣之。
现代文：徐孝嗣的姑姑嫁给东莞的刘舍，刘舍的哥哥刘藏是尚书左丞，徐孝嗣去拜访他。
English: Xu Xiaozhi's aunt married Liu Xie from Dongguan. Liu Xie's brother Liu Zang was a scholar, and Xu Xiaozhi went to visit him.

古文：藏退语舍曰： 徐郎是令仆人，三十余可知矣。
现代文：刘藏回去对刘舍说： 徐郎是堪任尚书令和仆射的人才，等到他三十多岁就可以知道了。
English: Liu Zang went back to Liu She and said, "Xulang is a talented person who is capable of writing and shooting. You can find out when he is in his thirties.

古文：汝宜善自结。 
现代文：你要好好结交他。 
English: You've got to get to know him.

古文：升明中，迁太祖骠骑从事中郎，带南彭城太守，随府转为太尉谘议参军，太守如故。
现代文：升明年间，迁为太祖骠骑从事中郎，兼任南彭城太守，随主人转为太尉谘议参军，仍兼南彭城太守。
English: In the middle of the following year, he was transferred to be the grand ancestor's equerry and engaged in the middle, and also served as the governor of South Pengcheng. With his master, he was transferred to the lieutenant to advise him to join the army, and still served as the governor of South Pengcheng.

古文：齐台建，为世子庶子。
现代文：齐建置台阁，任为世子庶子。
English: They built a pavilion together, and he was appointed heir to the throne.

古文：建元初，国除，出为晋陵太守，还为太子中庶子，领长水校尉，未拜，为宁朔将军、闻喜公子良征虏长史，迁尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，转长史。
现代文：建元初年，世子的封国撤销，出任晋陵太守，回朝做太子中庶子，领长水校尉。没有拜领，为宁朔将军、闻喜公子良的征虏长史，迁任尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，转任长兼侍中。
English: In the first year of the first year of the first century, the heir's fief was revoked, he was appointed as the governor of Jinling, returned to the imperial court as the prince's middle son, and led the Chosui lieutenant. Without a bailiff, he was the conscript of Ningshuo General and Wenki Kojira, and was transferred to the Shoshu Librarian, the prince's right guard, and was transferred to the chief and chamberlain.

古文：善趋步，闲容止，与太宰褚渊相埒。
现代文：他步态优雅，举止安闲，和太宰褚渊相媲美。
English: He has an elegant gait and a relaxed demeanor, comparable to that of Dazai Shanyuan.

古文：世祖深加待遇。
现代文：世祖对他非常好。
English: The patriarch treated him very well.

古文：尚书令王俭谓人曰： 徐孝嗣将来必为宰相。 
现代文：尚书令王俭对别人说： 徐孝嗣将来一定会做宰相。 
English: Shang Shuling Wang Jian said to others: Xu Xiaozhi will definitely be the prime minister in the future.

古文：转充御史中丞。
现代文：转任御史中丞。
English: He was transferred to the post of Goshi chujo.

古文：世祖问俭曰： 谁可继卿者？ 
现代文：世祖问王俭说： 谁可以接替你呢? 
English: The patriarch asked Wang Jian, "Who can succeed you?"

古文：俭曰： 臣东都之日，其在徐孝嗣乎！ 
现代文：王俭说： 我辞官退休之日，接替我的一定是徐孝嗣吧! 
English: Wang Jian replied: After the minister's dismissal from the post of prime minister, I am afraid that only Xu Xiaozhi is best suited to take over.

古文：出为吴兴太守，俭赠孝嗣四言诗曰： 方轨叔茂，追清彦辅。
现代文：出任吴兴太守时，王俭赠给徐孝嗣一首四言诗： 和叔茂并驾齐驱，直追彦辅。
English: When Wu Xing was appointed as the new empress dowager, Wang Jian presented Xu Xiaozhi with a four-character poem: He and Shumo are neck and neck, and they are in hot pursuit of Yan Fu.

古文：柔亦不茹，刚亦不吐。 
现代文：柔软的并不吃下，刚硬的也不吐出。 
English: The soft is not eaten, and the hard is not spit out.

古文：时人以比蔡子尼之行状也。
现代文：当时的人都把他的行为和蔡子尼行状上说的相比。
English: People at the time compared his behavior to that of Tsai Zeni.

古文：在郡有能名。
现代文：在郡上称为贤能之人。
English: He is known as a man of virtue in the county.

古文：会王俭亡，上征孝嗣为五兵尚书。
现代文：正碰上王俭死了，皇上征辟徐孝嗣为五兵尚书。
English: Just as Wang Jian died, the emperor conscripted Xu Xiaozhi as one of the five soldiers.

古文：其年，上敕仪曹令史陈淑、王景之、朱玄真、陈义民撰江左以来仪典，令谘受孝嗣。
现代文：这一年，皇上命令仪曹令史陈淑、王景之、朱玄真、陈义民撰写晋南迁以来的仪礼典章，让他们向徐孝嗣请教。
English: In this year, the emperor ordered the Ceremonial Cao to order Chen Shu, Wang Jingzhi, Zhu Xuanzhen and Chen Yimin to write the ceremonial regulations since the relocation to Jinan, and let them ask Xu Xiaozhe for advice.

古文：明年，迁太子詹事。
现代文：第二年，迁任为太子詹事。
English: The following year, he was transferred to Prince Zhanji.

古文：从世祖幸方山。
现代文：跟随世祖游幸方山。
English: Follow the ancestors on a tour of Mount Happo.

古文：上曰： 朕经始此山之南，复为离宫之所。
现代文：皇上说： 我打算经营这山的南面，作为营造行宫的地方。
English: The emperor said: I intend to manage the southern side of this mountain as a place to build a palace.

古文：故应有迈灵丘。 
现代文：所以应该超越灵丘。 
English: Therefore, we should go beyond the spirit mound.

古文：灵丘山湖，新林苑也。
现代文：灵丘的山和湖，是新林苑。
English: The hills and lakes of Lingqiu are the new forest garden.

古文：孝嗣答曰： 绕黄山，款牛首，乃盛汉之事。
现代文：徐孝嗣回答说： 绕过黄山，直抵牛首山，是鼎盛汉朝的事。
English: Xu Xiaozhi replied, "Bypassing the Huangshan Mountain and reaching the NiuShou Mountain is the peak of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今江南未广，民亦劳止，愿陛下少更留神。 
现代文：现在江南地方不够开阔，人民也正劳苦不息，希望陛下稍稍谨慎从事。 
English: At present, the south of the Yangtze River is not open enough, and the people are also working hard. I hope that His Majesty will be a little cautious.

古文：上竟无所修立。
现代文：皇上竟然没有修建什么。
English: The Emperor didn't even build anything.

古文：竟陵王子良甚善之。
现代文：竟陵王子良很喜爱他。
English: Even Prince Goryo loved him.

古文：子良好佛法，使孝嗣及庐江何胤掌知斋讲及众僧。
现代文：子良喜欢佛法，让徐孝嗣和庐江何胤掌管斋戒、讲论佛法事务和众僧事务。
English: Zilang was fond of Buddhism, and he let Xu Xiaozhi and Qianjiang Heyin take charge of fasting and lecturing on Buddhist affairs and the affairs of the monks.

古文：转吏部尚书。
现代文：转任为吏部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the Rikibu Shosho.

古文：寻加右军将军，转领太子左卫率。
现代文：不久加封右军将军，转领太子左卫率。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Right Division and transferred to the Prince's Left Division.

古文：台阁事多以委之。
现代文：台阁中的大事大多委托给他。
English: Most of the important things in the cabinet were entrusted to him.

古文：世祖崩，遗诏转右仆射。
现代文：世祖去世，遗书中命他转任为右仆射。
English: After the death of the founder, his last will and testament ordered him to be transferred to the post of right-hand man.

古文：隆昌元年，迁散骑常侍、前将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：隆昌元年，迁散骑常侍、前将军、丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Danyang Yin, a former general and equestrian, was exiled.

古文：高宗谋废郁林，以告孝嗣，孝嗣奉旨无所厘赞。
现代文：高宗谋划废掉郁林王，把这事告诉徐孝嗣，徐孝嗣接受了他的旨意没有异议。
English: Gaozong planned to abolish King Yulin, and told this to Xu Xiaozhi. Xu Xiaozhi accepted his will without objection.

古文：高宗入殿，孝嗣戎服随后。
现代文：高宗上殿，徐孝嗣穿着战服跟在后面。
English: Gao Zong went up to the palace, followed by Xu Xiaozhi in his military uniform.

古文：郁林既死，高宗须太后令，孝嗣于袖中出而奏之，高宗大悦。
现代文：郁林王已经死了，高宗还在等待太后的命令，徐孝嗣从袖子襄拿出来交给他，他非常高兴。
English: Yu Lin Wang had already died, Gao Zong was still waiting for the empress's order, Xu Xiaozhi took it out of his sleeve and handed it to him, he was very happy.

古文：以废立功，封枝江县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：因为废郁林王立下了功劳，封为枝江县侯，食邑一千户。
English: Because of the merits set up by the wasteful Yu Lin Wang, he was awarded the title of the lord of Shejiang County, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：给鼓吹一部，甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：赐给一部鼓吹，上殿带领穿甲衣的仪仗五十人。
English: It was given to a group of preachers, who marched up to the main hall leading fifty men dressed in armor.

古文：转左仆射，常侍如故。
现代文：转为左仆射，常侍职位如故。
English: He was transferred to the position of Left Footman, but his position as a regular attendant remained the same.

古文：明帝即位，加侍中、中军大将军。定策勋，进爵为公，增封二千户。
现代文：明帝即位，加侍中、中军大将军，拥立明帝有功，爵号进为公，增封食邑二千户。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and he was accompanied by a middle-ranking officer and a high-ranking general of the Chinese army. He had the merit of supporting Emperor Ming, the title of nobility was promoted to the public, and the number of fiefs and counties was increased by two thousand.

古文：给班剑二十人，加兵百人。
现代文：赐给班剑仪仗二十人，加兵卒一百人。
English: He gave twenty men to the ceremonial sword team and a hundred additional soldiers.

古文：旧拜三公乃临轩，至是帝特诏与陈显达、王晏并临轩拜授。
现代文：过去拜任三公才要皇上不坐正殿而到殿前，这时皇帝特地诏令让他和陈显达、王晏一起到殿前拜授。
English: In the past, the Emperor had to come to the front of the hall without sitting in the main hall to pay homage to the three princes. At that time, the Emperor specifically ordered him to come to the front of the hall to pay homage together with Chen Xianda and Wang Xi.

古文：北虏动，诏孝嗣假节顿新亭。
现代文：北方的少数民族发动战事，诏令徐孝嗣暂且持节驻守新亭。
English: The ethnic minorities in the north launched a war, and ordered Xu Xiaozhi to stay in Xinting for the time being.

古文：时王晏为令，民情物望，不及孝嗣也。
现代文：当时王晏是尚书令，他所受的民众拥戴，还不如徐孝嗣。
English: At that time, Wang Qian was the chief secretary, and he was not as popular as Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：晏诛，转尚书令，领本州中正，余悉如故。
现代文：王晏被杀，孝嗣就转任为尚书令，领本州中正，其他的官衔都和过去一样。
English: When Wang Xi was killed, Xiaozhi was transferred to the post of Shang Shuling, the leader of the Honshu Zhongzheng, and all other official ranks were the same as before.

古文：孝嗣爱好文学，赏托清胜。
现代文：俭圣园喜好文学，志趣清雅出众。
English: Jian Sheng Yuan likes literature and has a clear and elegant mind.

古文：器量弘雅，不以权势自居，故见容建武之世。
现代文：他器量宏大，不自夸自己的权势，所以在建武年间能被容身。
English: He is a man of great stature and does not boast of his power, so he was able to be accommodated during the Jianwu years.

古文：恭己自保，朝野以此称之。
现代文：恭敬自律以求保身，朝廷和在野士人都因此称赞他。
English: He respected self-discipline in order to protect himself, and both the imperial court and the wild samurai praised him for this.

古文：初，孝嗣在率府，昼卧斋北壁下，梦两童子遽云 移公床 。
现代文：当初，徐孝嗣任太子卫率，白天躺在书斋的北墙下，梦见两个小孩突然说：移一下您的床。 
English: At first, Xu Xiaozhong, who was in charge of the prince's guard, lay under the north wall of the study during the day and dreamed that two children suddenly said, "Move your bed."

古文：孝嗣惊起，闻壁有声，行数步而壁崩压床。
现代文：徐孝嗣受惊起来，听见墙里有声音，走了几步墙就倒下来压住了他的床。
English: Xu Xiaoji panicked when he heard a noise in the wall. After walking a few steps, the wall fell down and crushed his bed.

古文：建武四年，即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：建武四年，就以本号封赐开府仪同三司。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, he was given the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：孝嗣闻有诏，敛容谓左右曰： 吾德惭古人，位登衮职，将何以堪之。
现代文：徐孝嗣听见这样的诏令，表情严肃地对左右的人说： 我的德行比起古人来令人惭愧，而却要占据上公的职位，怎么能够承受。
English: When Xu Xiaozhi heard this edict, he said to the people around him with a serious expression, "Compared to the ancients, my virtue is shameful, but how can I bear to occupy the position of Shangguo?

古文：明君可以理夺，必当死请。
现代文：圣明的君主可以用道理来使他改变主意，我一定以死相请。
English: The Lord of Light can reason with him to change his mind, but I must beg him with my death.

古文：若不获命，正当角巾丘园，待罪家巷耳。 固让不受。
现代文：假如不获批准，我就要戴上头巾，回归田园，在家中等待获罪了。 坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: If I don't get approval, I'll have to put on a headscarf, return to the countryside, and wait at home to be punished.

古文：是时连年虏动，军国虚乏。
现代文：这时接连几年敌人入侵，军队和国家都力乏财虚。
English: At this time, the enemy invaded several years in a row, and the army and the country were short of strength and money.

古文：孝嗣表立屯田曰： 有国急务，兵食是同，一夫辍耕，于事弥切。
现代文：徐孝嗣上表请立屯田制说：国家最急切的任务，是军事和粮食，两者不分上下，即使一个男子停止耕种，对国情来说也是急迫的。
English: Xu Xiaozhi said, "The most urgent tasks of the country are military and grain, both of which are up and down. Even if a man stops farming, it is urgent for the national situation."

古文：故井陌疆里，长毂盛于周朝，屯田广置，胜戈富于汉室。
现代文：所以分属井田加以耕种，周朝就拥有众多战车，广泛地设置屯田，汉代就常有军事胜利。
English: Therefore, it was divided into fields and cultivated, the Zhou Dynasty had many chariots and extensively set up military camps, and there were often military victories in the Han Dynasty.

古文：降此以还，详略可见。
现代文：从造到以后，可以知道大概的情况。
English: From the time it was built until now, you can get a general idea of the situation.

古文：但求之自古，为论则赊；即以当今，宜有要术。
现代文：但是依靠古代的先例，来谈论国政毕竟有点迂阔；切实地拿到今天来实行，应该有恰当的措施。
English: However, relying on ancient precedents to talk about national politics is a bit of a stretch; in order to effectively implement it today, there should be appropriate measures.

古文：窃寻缘淮诸镇，皆取给京师，费引既殷，漕运艰涩。
现代文：我想那些沿着淮河的各个边镇，都要由京都供应粮草，费用很大，运送起来又十分不便。
English: I think that all the border towns along the Huai River have to be supplied with grain and grass by Kyoto, which is very expensive and very inconvenient to transport.

古文：聚粮待敌，每若苦不周，利害之基，莫此为急。
现代文：聚集粮食等待敌兵，总是苦于不周到，军事上的利害，没有比这更急切的。
English: There is nothing more urgent in military affairs than to collect provisions and wait for the enemy.

古文：臣比访之故老及经彼宰守，淮南旧田，触处极目，陂遏不修，咸成茂草。
现代文：我近来访问了年老的人和管理当地的官员，淮河以南的旧田，到处都望不到头，池塘坡没有经过修整，都长满了茂盛的草。
English: I recently visited the old people and management of local officials, the old fields south of the Huai River, everywhere can not see the head, the pond slope has not been repaired, are full of lush grass.

古文：平原陆地，弥望尤多。
现代文：平原和陆地，满眼都是。
English: Plains and land, an eyeful of trout.

古文：今边备既严，戍卒增众，远资馈运，近废良畴，士多饥色，可为嗟叹。
现代文：现在既然边防很严峻，戍守的士兵增加了很多，单靠从远处运送粮饷，却把近处很多田地荒废着，士兵多有饥饿的样子，实在让人叹息。
English: Now that the border defense is very severe and the number of soldiers guarding it has increased a lot, relying solely on transporting grain sacks from far away, but leaving many fields in the vicinity barren, many soldiers look hungry, it really makes one sigh.

古文：愚欲使刺史二千石躬自履行，随地垦辟。
现代文：我想让刺史二千石亲自操办这件事，随地开垦良田。
English: I'd like to let Sashi, who has a net worth of 2,000 koku, run the business himself and open up good fields wherever he likes.

古文：精寻灌溉之源，善商肥确之异。
现代文：精心地寻找可供灌溉的水源，妥善地商议田地肥瘠的差异。
English: Carefully search for water sources that can be used for irrigation, and properly discuss differences in field fertility.

古文：州郡县戍主帅以下，悉分番附农。
现代文：从在州郡县戍守的主帅以下的人，都要轮流参加农事。
English: All people below the rank of the head coach in the state, county and county should take turns to participate in agricultural affairs.

古文：今水田虽晚，方事菽麦，菽麦二种，益是北土所宜，彼人便之，不减粳稻。
现代文：现在水田种植已经晚了，正可以种菽和麦，这两种谷物，更是北方的土地适合种的，他们喜欢菽麦，不下于喜欢粳稻。
English: Now it is too late to plant paddy fields, but it is possible to grow buckwheat and barley. These two cereals are more suited to the northern lands. They like buckwheat no less than they like rice.

古文：开创之利，宜在及时。
现代文：开垦的益处，取决于赶上农时。
English: The benefits of reclamation depend on catching up with agricultural time.

古文：所启允合，请即使至徐、兖、司、豫，爰及荆、雍，各当境规度，勿有所遗。
现代文：假如我的建议合适，请立即派使者到徐、兖、司、豫，以及荆、雍各州去，分别根据当地状况定下计划，不要有所遗漏。
English: If my suggestion is suitable, please immediately send emissaries to the provinces of Xu, Min, Si and Yu, as well as Jing and Yong, and make plans according to local conditions, so as not to miss anything.

古文：别立主曹，专司其事。
现代文：特别设立一个主管的机构，专门执掌这件事。
English: In particular, a competent body should be set up to deal specifically with this matter.

古文：田器耕牛，台详所给。
现代文：农具和耕牛，都由国家供给。
English: Agricultural tools and cattle are supplied by the state.

古文：岁终言殿最，明其刑赏。
现代文：年底考核他们政绩的好坏，明确对他们的奖惩。
English: At the end of the year, their political performance will be evaluated, and their rewards and punishments will be made clear.

古文：此功克举，庶有弘益。
现代文：这一办法如果成功，肯定会带来很多好处。
English: If this approach is successful, it will certainly bring a lot of benefits.

古文：若缘边足食，则江南自丰。权其所饶，略不可计。 
现代文：如果边防上粮食充足，那么江南也就自然丰裕了，衡量它的好处，实在计算不尽。
English: If there is sufficient grain on the border, then the south of the Yangtze River will naturally be abundant, and the benefits of measuring it are truly incalculable.

古文：事御见纳。
现代文：意见奉上被采纳。
English: The opinion is hereby adopted.

古文：时帝已寝疾，兵事未已，竟不施行。
现代文：当时皇帝已经病重，而战事又不断，竟然没有执行下去。
English: At that time, the emperor was already seriously ill, and the war was going on, and it was not carried out.

古文：帝疾甚，孝嗣入居禁中，临崩受遗托，重申开府之命。加中书监。
现代文：皇帝病得特别厉害，徐孝嗣住到宫裹，皇上临死前他受到皇上的遗嘱，再次命令他自己设置官府。加中书监。
English: The emperor was extremely ill, and Xu Xiaozhe was confined to the palace. Before the emperor died, he received the emperor's last will and testament, and was once again ordered to set up his own government office.

古文：永元初辅政，自尚书下省出住宫城南宅，不得还家。
现代文：永元初辅佐政事，从尚书省搬出来住到宫城裹的南宅，不许回家。
English: Yongyuan, the first assistant to the political affairs, moved out from Shangshu Province to live in the south house of Miyagi, and was not allowed to go home.

古文：帝失德稍彰，孝嗣不敢谏诤。
现代文：皇上德行不检的情形显露出来以后，徐孝嗣不敢直言相谏。
English: After the Emperor's immoral behavior was revealed, Xu Xiaozhi did not dare to speak out.

古文：及江礻石见诛，内怀忧恐，然未尝表色。
现代文：等到江柘被杀，心裹感到恐惧不安，但是没有表现出来。
English: By the time Jiang Chen was killed, my heart was filled with fear and anxiety, but I didn't show it.

古文：始安王遥光反，众情遑惑，见孝嗣入，宫内乃安。
现代文：始安王萧遥光谋反，大家都很困惑遑急，看见徐孝嗣进来，宫中才安定下来。
English: Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang plotted a rebellion, and everyone was confused and anxious. It was only after seeing Xu Xiaozhi come in that the palace settled down.

古文：然群小用事，亦不能制也。
现代文：但是一群奸臣掌管了国政，他也不能制服他们。
English: But a group of treacherous vassals took control of the country's politics, and he was unable to subdue them.

古文：进位司空，固让。
现代文：进位司空，坚持推辞掉。
English: Advancing Sifu, insisting on resigning.

古文：求解丹阳尹，不许。
现代文：请求解除丹阳尹，没有得到准许。
English: The request to dismiss Danyang Yin was not approved.

古文：孝嗣文人，不显同异，名位虽大，故得未及祸。
现代文：徐孝嗣是文人，没有表现出附和谁反对谁，所以虽然名高位尊，也没有遭致祸害。
English: Xu Xiaozhi was a man of letters, and he did not show that he supported or opposed anyone. Therefore, although he was famous and held a high position, he did not suffer any harm.

古文：虎贲中郎将许准有胆力，领军隶孝嗣，陈说事机，劝行废立。
现代文：虎贲中郎将许准很有胆识魄力，率领军队投奔徐孝嗣，陈述当前情势，劝他废掉皇帝另立新君。
English: Lt. Gen. Ho Chi Minh had the courage to lead his troops to Xu Xiaozhi, explain the current situation, and persuade him to abolish the emperor and install a new emperor.

古文：孝嗣迟疑久之，谓必无用干戈理，须少主出游，闭城门召百僚集议废之，虽有此怀，终不能决。
现代文：徐孝嗣犹豫了很久，认为实在不应该动用刀兵，可等少主出游时，关闭城门召集朝廷百官共议废帝之事，虽然有这个想法，终究没有下决心去做。
English: Xu Xiaozhi hesitated for a long time, thinking that he really should not use swords and soldiers, but that he could wait for the young lord to travel, close the city gate, and convene the court officials to discuss the abolition of the emperor. Although he had this idea, he did not make up his mind to do it.

古文：群小亦稍憎孝嗣，劝帝召百僚集议，因诛之。
现代文：那群小人也渐渐讨厌徐孝嗣，劝皇帝召集百官议论，藉机杀掉他。
English: The group of villains also grew to hate Xu Xiaozhi, and persuaded the emperor to convene a hundred officials to discuss and take the opportunity to kill him.

古文：冬，召孝嗣入华林省，遣茹法珍赐药，孝嗣容色不异，少能饮酒，药至斗余，方卒。
现代文：这年冬，皇上召徐孝嗣到华林省，派遣茹法珍赐给他毒药，徐孝嗣脸色都没变，还能喝酒，吃药后喝了一斗酒，才死去。
English: In the winter of that year, the emperor summoned Xu Xiaozhi to Hualin Province, and sent Zhu Fazhen to give him poison. Xu Xiaozhi's face did not change, and he could still drink. After taking the medicine, he drank a barrel of wine before he died.

古文：乃下诏曰： 周德方熙，三监迷叛，汉历载昌，宰臣构戾，皆身膏斧钺，族同烟烬。
现代文：于是皇上下诏令说： 周朝世德正盛时，有 三监，反叛，选朝的运数正昌盛，有当权大臣谋反，他们都自身被处死，同族也如灰烬灭掉。
English: Therefore, the Emperor issued the following edict: When the Zhou Dynasty was in its golden age, there were three supervisors, a rebellion, the election of the Zhou Dynasty was in its golden age, and a minister in power plotted a rebellion. All of them were put to death, and their compatriots were wiped out like ashes.

古文：匡翼之诚无闻，谄黩之迹屡著。沈文季门世。
现代文：推察前代的事引以为戒。徐孝嗣凭藉着世代的资历，很早就得到恩宠，凭藉各种机会，终于登上了高位。
English: Xu Xiaozhi, by virtue of the seniority of his generation, was favored very early, and by virtue of various opportunities, he finally ascended to a high position.

古文：此下缺沈文季，字仲达，吴兴武康人。
现代文：没有听见他有匡扶皇室的忠诚，却屡屡表现出僭越轻慢的行迹。选土至门世原阙 。沈文季字仲达，是吴兴武康人。
English: It was not heard that he had the loyalty to support the royal family, but he repeatedly showed a more and more frivolous behavior. He was chosen to be a disciple. Shen Wenzhi, known as Zhongda, was a Wu Xingwu Kang person.

古文：父庆之，宋司空。
现代文：父亲沈庆之，做过宋的司空。
English: His father, Shen Qingzhi, was a Song Dynasty official.

古文：文季少以宽雅正直见知。
现代文：沈文季从小就因为宽厚文雅品格正直而闻名。
English: From an early age, Shen Wenzhi was known for his generosity, elegance and honesty.

古文：孝建二年，起家主簿，征秘书郎。
现代文：孝建二年，开始做主簿，征召授任为秘书郎。
English: In the second year of Xiao Jian, he began to do the main book, and was called up and appointed as a secretary.

古文：以庆之勋重，大明五年，封文季为山阳县五等伯。
现代文：因为沈庆之功勋卓著，大明五年，加封沈文季为山阳县五等伯。
English: Because of Shen Qing's outstanding achievements, in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, Shen Wenzhi was awarded the title of Sanyang County's fifth grade.

古文：转太子舍人，新安王北中郎主簿，西阳王抚军功曹，江夏王太尉东曹掾，迁中书郎。
现代文：转任太子舍人，新安王北中郎主簿，西阳王抚军功曹，江夏王太尉束曹掾，迁任中书郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of prince's attendant, Xin'an Wang Bei Zhongro Muzhuo, Xiyang Wang Fu Jun Gong Cao, Jiangxia Wang Taifu Sok Cao Yao, and transferred to the position of Zhong Shuroo.

古文：庆之为景和所杀，兵仗围宅，收捕诸子。
现代文：沈庆之被景和所杀，军兵包围他的住宅，要拘捕他的儿子们。
English: Shen Qingzhi was killed by Jinghe, and soldiers surrounded his house to arrest his sons.

古文：文季长兄文叔谓文季曰： 我能死，尔能报。 
现代文：沈文季的长兄文叔对他说： 我可以死，你可以为咱们报仇。 
English: Shen Wenzhi's eldest brother, Uncle Wen, said to him, "I can die, you can take revenge for us."

古文：遂自缢。
现代文：就上吊自杀了。
English: and hanged himself.

古文：文季挥刀驰马去，收者不敢追，遂得免。
现代文：沈文季挥舞着大刀骑马逃走了，来抓他的人不敢追，才免于一死。
English: Shen Wenzhi waved a big sword and rode away. The people who came to catch him did not dare to chase him, only to be spared from death.

古文：明帝立，起文季为宁朔将军，迁太子右卫率，建安王司徒司马。
现代文：明帝即位，任用沈文季为宁朔将军，迁太子右卫率，建安王司徒司马。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he appointed Shen Wenzhi as the general of Ningshuo, moved the crown prince to the right guard, and promoted Jianan Wang to the position of Stusima.

古文：赭圻平，为宣威将军，庐江王太尉长史。
现代文：平定赭圻后，为宣威将军，庐江王太尉长史。
English: After the battle was settled, the general Xuan Wei and the king of the Minjiang River, Taiyi Changshi, were promoted.

古文：出为宁朔将军、征北司马、广陵太守。
现代文：出任宁朔将军、征北司马、广陵太守。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, the conqueror of North Sima, and the governor of Guangling.

古文：转黄门郎，领长水校尉。
现代文：转任为黄门郎，领长水校尉。
English: He was transferred to the post of Huangmenluo and became the leader of the Changshui school.

古文：明帝宴会朝臣，以南台御史贺咸为柱下史，纠不醉者。
现代文：明帝宴集群臣，让南台御史贺臧做柱下史，查办不喝醉的人。
English: Emperor Ming gathered a group of courtiers for a banquet, and asked the Nantai governor, He Zheng, to make a detailed history and investigate those who were not drunk.

古文：文季不肯饮酒，被驱下殿。
现代文：沈文季不肯喝酒，被赶下殿去。
English: Shen Wencai refused to drink and was driven out of the palace.

古文：晋平王休祐为南徐州，帝问褚渊须干事人为上佐，渊举文季。
现代文：晋平王刘休佑掌领南徐州，皇上向褚渊询问办事干练可以辅佐的人选，褚渊推举了沈文季。
English: Jinping King Liu Xiu You was in charge of South Xuzhou, and the emperor asked Gongyuan for candidates who could help with administrative skills, and Gongyuan nominated Shen Wenzhi.

古文：转宁朔将军、骠骑长史、南东海太守。
现代文：转为宁朔将军、骠骑长史、南束海太守。
English: He became the general of Ningshuo, the cavalry commander of Changshi, and the governor of Nanzukhai.

古文：休祐被杀，虽用薨礼，僚佐多不敢至，文季独往省墓展哀。
现代文：休佑被杀时，虽然用了侯王的葬礼，他的下属臣僚大多不敢参加。惟独沈文季去看视墓地表示哀痛。
English: When Xu You was killed, although Hou Wang's funeral was used, most of his subordinate ministers did not dare to attend. Only Shen Wencai visited the cemetery to express his sorrow.

古文：出为临海太守。
现代文：出任临海太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to the capital to serve as the deposed Fu Taishu.

古文：元徽初，迁散骑常侍，领后军将军，转秘书监。
现代文：元徽初年，迁任散骑常侍，领后军将军，转任秘书监。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of straggler, leading the rear army general, and transferred to the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：出为吴兴太守。
现代文：出任吴兴太守。
English: Wu Xing became the de facto ruler.

古文：文季饮酒至五斗，妻王氏，王锡女，饮酒亦至三斗。
现代文：沈文季喝酒可以喝到五斗，他的妻子王氏，是王锡的女儿，酒也可以喝三斗。
English: Shen Wenzhi can drink up to five doos of alcohol, while his wife Wang Zhi, the daughter of Wang Xi, can drink up to three doos of alcohol.

古文：文季与对饮竟日，而视事不废。
现代文：沈文季和她终日对饮，但政事也没有荒废。
English: Shen Wenzhi and her all day drinking, but politics is not wasted.

古文：升明元年，沈攸之反，太祖加文季为冠军将军，督吴兴钱塘军事。
现代文：升明元年，沈攸之谋反，太祖加封沈文季为冠军将军，督管吴兴钱塘军事。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Shen Yu plotted a rebellion, and his great-grandfather appointed Shen Wenzhi as the champion general and military governor of Wu Xing Qiantang.

古文：攸之先为景和衔使杀庆之。
现代文：沈攸之先前服从景和的命令杀了沈庆之。
English: Shen Youzhi previously obeyed the order of Jinghe and killed Shen Qingzhi.

古文：至是文季收杀攸之弟新安太守登之，诛其宗族。
现代文：到这时沈文季去捕杀攸之的弟弟新安太守沈登之，并杀灭他的族人。
English: At this time, Shen Wenzhi went to kill Youzhi's brother, the new An governor Shen Dengzhi, and killed his relatives.

古文：加持节，进号征虏将军，改封略阳县侯，邑千户。
现代文：加持节，进号征虏将军，改封略阳县侯，食邑一千户。
English: On the Day of Blessing, the number of conscripted generals was increased, the county was renamed Liaoyang County, and a thousand households in the county were provided with food.

古文：明年，迁丹阳尹，将军如故。
现代文：第二年，迁任丹阳尹，将军的职衔如故。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the post of Danyang Yin, but his title of general remained the same.

古文：齐国初建，为侍中，领秘书监。
现代文：变厘刚建立起来，做了侍中，领秘书监。
English: After the establishment of Zengli, he became a chamberlain and the supervisor of the secretary.

古文：建元元年，转太子右卫率，侍中如故。
现代文：建五元年，转任为太子右卫率，依旧任侍中。
English: In the fifth year of the Jian era, he was transferred to the position of the prince's right guard, still serving as a chamberlain.

古文：改封西丰县侯，食邑千二百户。
现代文：改封酉丰题堡，食邑一千二百户。
English: It was renamed Shufengchi Fort, with 1,200 households in the food village.

古文：文季风采棱岸，善于进止。
现代文：沈文季风采峻拔严正，进退有法。
English: The Shenwen monsoon is severe and severe, and there is a law for advancing and retreating.

古文：司徒褚渊当世贵望，颇以门户裁之，文季不为之屈。
现代文：司徒褚渊是当时的权贵，多藉派别出身度量人，沈文季对他却不屈意奉承。
English: Sutou Shanyuan was a dignitary at that time, mostly measured by his faction background, but Shen Wenzhi flattered him unyieldingly.

古文：世祖在东宫，于玄圃宴会朝臣。
现代文：世祖为太子时，在玄圃和朝臣举行宴会。
English: When the founder was crown prince, he held banquets for courtiers in the garden.

古文：文季数举酒劝渊，渊甚不平，启世祖曰： 沈文季谓渊经为其郡，数加渊酒。 
现代文：沈文季屡次向褚渊劝酒，褚渊感到不服气，对世祖说： 沈文季以为我做过他的郡守，屡次让我饮酒。 
English: Shen Wenzhi repeatedly tried to persuade Shanyuan to drink, but Shanyuan was not convinced and said to Shizuo: Shen Wenzhi thought I had been his county magistrate, and repeatedly made me drink.

古文：文季曰： 惟桑与梓，必恭敬止。
现代文：沈文季说： 正因乡里人之间，才恭敬相待。
English: Shen Wenzhi said: It is precisely because of the villagers that they treat each other with respect.

古文：岂如明府亡国失土，不识枌榆。 遂言及虏动，渊曰： 陈显达、沈文季当今将略，足委以边事。 
现代文：怎么能像太守您失去国土，不认识故乡 于是谈到北方敌人的入侵，褚渊说： 陈显达、沈文季是当今有谋略的大将，可以把边防大事交给他们。 
English: How can you lose your land and not know your hometown like the grand marshal So when it comes to the invasion of the northern enemy, Yu Yuan said: Chen Xianda and Shen Wenzhi are today's strategic generals and can hand over the border defense to them.

古文：文季讳称将门，因是发怒，启世祖曰： 褚渊自谓是忠臣，未知身死之日，何面目见宋明帝？ 
现代文：沈文季很忌讳说启己出身将门，就因此发怒，向世祖启奏说： 褚渊自称是忠臣，不知等他死的那天，有什么面目去见宋明帝? 
English: Shen Wenzhi said that it was taboo for him to say that he was born a general, so he became angry and said to his ancestor: Zou Yuan claimed to be a loyal subject. I don't know what kind of face he had when he went to see Emperor Song Ming on the day of his death.

古文：世祖笑曰： 沈率醉也。 
现代文：世祖笑着说： 沈卫率喝醉了。 
English: The ancestor smiled and said, "Shen Weizhou is drunk.

古文：中丞刘休举其事，见原。
现代文：中丞刘休因此事弹劾他，得到了谅解。
English: Vice-commander Liu Hui impeached him for this and received understanding.

古文：后豫章王北宅后堂集会，文季与渊并善琵琶，酒阑，渊取乐器为《明君曲》。
现代文：后来豫章王在北宅后堂集会，沈文季和褚渊都擅长弹奏琵琶，酒喝到尽兴时，褚渊取来一把乐器，弹了《明君曲》。
English: Later, Yu Zhangwang held a meeting in the back hall of the North Mansion. Both Shen Wenzhi and Gongyuan were good at playing the lute. When the wine was drunk to the full, Gongyuan took a musical instrument and played "Mingjunqu."

古文：文季便下席大唱曰： 沈文季不能作伎儿。 
现代文：沈文季就走下席位高声叫道： 沈文季不能做一个乐伎。 
English: Shen Wenzhi stepped down from his seat and shouted loudly: "Shen Wenzhi can't do a play."

古文：豫章王嶷又解之曰： 此故当不损仲容之德。 
现代文：豫章王萧嶷又替他解释说： 这本来无碍于仲容的德行。 
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi also explained for him: This would not have been detrimental to Zhongrong's virtue.

古文：渊颜色无异，曲终而止。
现代文：褚渊脸色都没有改，弹完了才停下。
English: Shibuya's face did not change, and he only stopped when he had finished playing.

古文：文季寻除征虏将军，侍中如故，迁散骑常侍，左卫将军，征虏如故。
现代文：沈文季不久任征虏将军，侍中如故。迁任为散骑常侍，左卫将军，征虏将军如故。
English: Shen Wenzhi was soon appointed as a conscript general, a chamberlain as before. He was later transferred to a cavalryman, a left guard general, a conscript general as before.

古文：世祖即位，转太子詹事，常侍如故。
现代文：世祖即位，转任太子詹事，仍任散骑常侍。
English: When the founder ascended the throne, he was transferred to the position of Prince Zhan Zhi, but he was still a knight-errant.

古文：永明元年，出为左将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：永明元年，出任左将军、吴郡太守。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he served as the left general and the governor of Wu County.

古文：三年，进号平东将军。
现代文：三年，进号平东将军。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to General Pingdong.

古文：四年，迁会稽太守，将军如故。
现代文：四年，迁任为会稽太守，将军如故。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to the position of auditor-general, a position he held until his death.

古文：是时连年检籍，百姓怨望。
现代文：这时因为接连几年检察税务，老百姓怨言很多。
English: At this time, because of several years of procuratorial taxation, the common people have a lot of complaints.

古文：富阳人唐宇之侨居桐庐，父祖相传图墓为业。
现代文：富阳人唐寓之寄居在桐庐，世代相传以选墓谋生。
English: The people of Fuyang lived as sojourners in Tonglu, and for generations they made a living by selecting tombs.

古文：宇之自云其家墓有王气，山中得金印，转相诳惑。
现代文：唐寓之自己说他家的墓地有王者气象，从山裹得到一枚金印，到处诳骗别人。
English: Tang Yu himself said that his family's graveyard had the atmosphere of a king. He obtained a gold seal from the mountain and deceived others everywhere.

古文：三年冬，宇之聚党四百人于新城水断商旅，党与分布近县。
现代文：永明三年冬天，唐寓之聚集党羽四百人，在新城河上抢劫过往的商贩行人，他的手下分布在近处各县。
English: In the winter of the third year of Yongming, 400 party members gathered in Tangye to rob passing merchants and pedestrians on the Xincheng River. His men were distributed in the nearby counties.

古文：新城令陆赤奋、桐庐令王天愍弃县走。
现代文：新城县令陆赤奋、桐庐县令王天愍放弃县城逃走了。
English: Xincheng County leader Lu Chakfen and Tonglu County leader Wang Tianyao abandoned the county seat and fled.

古文：宇之向富阳，抄略人民，县令何洵告鱼浦子逻主从系公，发鱼浦村男丁防县。
现代文：唐寓之进逼富阳，抢劫百姓，县令何洵告诉了鱼浦的子逻主从系公，发动鱼浦村成年男子保卫县境。
English: Tang Yue's invasion forced Fuyang and robbed the people. The county magistrate He Yue told Uupu's son, Luo Zi, to mobilize the adult men of Uupu village to defend the county border.

古文：永兴遣西陵戍主夏侯昙羡率将吏及戍左右埭界人起兵赴救。
现代文：永兴地方主管派遣驻守西陵的夏侯昙羡率领兵将戍卒以及境内平民赶去救援。
English: Yongxing local leaders dispatched Xia Hou Xuan, who was stationed in Xiling, to lead the soldiers to rescue the soldiers and civilians in the territory.

古文：宇之遂陷富阳。
现代文：唐寓之就攻陷了富阳。
English: Tang Yizhi invaded and conquered Fuyang.

古文：会稽郡丞张思祖遣台使孔矜、王万岁、张繇等配以器仗将吏白丁，防卫永兴等十属。
现代文：会稽郡丞张思祖派台使孔矜、王万岁、张繇等人带领配执器仗的兵将和平民百姓，在永兴等十个地方防守。
English: Zhang Shizu, the county magistrate, dispatched Confucius, Wang Wanlong, Zhang Ye and others to lead the soldiers and civilians equipped with weapons to defend ten places including Yongxing.

古文：文季亦遣器仗将吏救援钱塘。
现代文：沈文季也派执掌武器仪仗的兵将去援救钱塘。
English: Shen Wenzhi also sent soldiers in charge of weapons and ceremonial weapons to rescue Qiantang.

古文：宇之至钱塘，钱塘令刘彪、戍主聂僧贵遣队主张玕于小山拒之，力不敌，战败。
现代文：唐寓之到了钱塘，钱塘县令刘彪、戍主聂僧贵派队主张开在小山阻击他们，抵挡不住，战败了。
English: When the Tang family arrived in Qiantang, Liu Biao, the governor of Qiantang County, sent troops to block them on a hill. They could not resist and were defeated.

古文：宇之进抑浦登岸，焚郭邑，彪弃县走。
现代文：唐寓之进入抑浦登岸，焚烧城镇，刘彪抛弃县城逃跑丫。
English: Tang Yue went ashore in Yupu and burned the town, while Liu Biao abandoned the county seat and fled.

古文：文季又发吴、嘉兴、海盐、盐官民丁救之。
现代文：沈文季又派吴郡、嘉兴、海盐、盐官的民兵去援救。
English: Shen Wenzi also sent militiamen from Wu County, Jiaxing, Haiyan and Yan'an to the rescue.

古文：贼分兵出诸县，盐官令萧元蔚、诸暨令陵琚之并逃走，余杭令乐琰战败乃奔。是春，宇之于钱塘僭号，置太子，以新城戍为天子宫，县廨为太子宫。
现代文：贼兵分路进攻各县，盐官县令萧元蔚、诸暨县令陵琚之都逃跑了，余杭县令乐琰战败也逃跑了，这年春天，唐寓之在钱塘自称皇帝，设立太子，把新城戍当作天子的宫殿，县裹的官署当作太子宫殿。
English: The bandits attacked the counties in separate routes. Xiao Yuanwei, the governor of Yan'an County, and the governor of Zhujing County, both fled. Ling Le, the governor of Yuhang County, also fled after being defeated. In the spring of this year, Tang Yuzhi proclaimed himself emperor in Qiantang, set up a prince, and regarded Xincheng as the palace of the son of heaven, and the government office in the county as the prince's palace.

古文：弟绍之为扬州刺史。
现代文：他的弟弟唐绍之任扬州刺史。
English: His younger brother, Tang Shao, became Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：钱塘富人柯隆为尚书仆射、中书舍人，领太官令，献铤数千口为宇之作杖，加领尚方令。
现代文：钱塘的富产柯隆做尚书仆射、中书舍人，领太官令。柯隆献上几千把箭挺给唐寓之作兵器，加领尚方令。
English: Qiantang's rich Kolong was a scholar's servant, a scholar's layman, and received the order of the eunuch. Kolong presented thousands of arrows to Tangye as a weapon, and received the order of the eunuch.

古文：分遣其党高道度徐寇东阳，东阳太守萧崇之、长山令刘国重拒战见害。
现代文：分别派他的党徒高道度悄悄地进攻东阳，束阳太守萧崇之、长山县令刘国重在抵抗中被杀。
English: Gao Daodu, one of his party members, quietly attacked Dongyang, while the governor of Sokyang, Xiao Chongzhi, and the governor of Changshan County, Liu Guochong, were killed in the resistance.

古文：崇之字茂敬，太祖族弟。
现代文：萧崇之字茂敬族弟。
English: Xiao Chongzhi is the younger brother of Maojing.

古文：至是临难，贞正果烈。
现代文：这时面对死亡，表现得贞义刚烈。
English: At this time, in the face of death, he showed chastity and fortitude.

古文：追赠冠军将军，太守如故。
现代文：追赠冠军将军，太守如故。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Champion General.

古文：贼遂据郡。
现代文：贼兵就占据丁东阳郡。
English: The bandits occupied Ding Dongyang County.

古文：又遣伪会稽太守孙泓取山阴。时会稽太守王敬则朝正，故宇之谓乘虚可袭。
现代文：又派遣伪会稽太守孙泓攻打山阴，当时会稽太守王敬则离任入朝，所以唐寓之以为可以乘虚而入。
English: He also dispatched Sun Yat-sen, the pseudo-commissioner of the imperial court, to attack Shanyin. At that time, the commissioner of the imperial court, Wang Jing, left his post to enter the imperial court, so Tangye thought that he could take advantage of the situation.

古文：泓至浦阳江，郡丞张思祖遣浃口戍主汤休武拒战，大破之。
现代文：孙泓到了浦阳江，郡丞张思祖派浃的戍主汤休武同他们作战，打了大胜仗。
English: When Sun Yat-sen arrived at the Poyang River, the county magistrate Zhang Shizu sent the warlord Tang Xiuwu to fight with them and won a great victory.

古文：上在乐游苑，闻宇之贼，谓豫章王嶷曰： 宋明初，九州同反，鼠辈但作，看萧公雷汝头。 
现代文：皇上在乐游苑，听说唐寓之造反，对豫章王萧嶷说： 宋明帝初年，九州一同谋反，这帮鼠头鼠脑的家伙尽管闸吧，看我萧公用雷打你们的头。 
English: The emperor was at Le Youyuan when he heard about the rebellion in Tangye. He said to Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi: "In the first year of Song Ming Emperor, Kyushu plotted a rebellion together. Don't listen to this bunch of rat-faced guys. Watch me, Xiao Gong, hit your heads with thunder.

古文：遣禁兵数千人，马数百匹东讨。
现代文：派遣了几千名禁军，数百匹战马去东逼征讨。
English: He sent several thousand forbidden soldiers and hundreds of horses to the East to force them to fight.

古文：贼众乌合，畏马。
现代文：贼兵本来是乌合之众，害怕骑兵。
English: The bandits were originally a rabble, afraid of the cavalry.

古文：官军至钱塘，一战便散，禽斩宇之，进兵平诸郡县。
现代文：官军一到钱塘，刚交战贼兵就溃败了，抓获唐寓之杀了，义进兵平定了各县。
English: As soon as the government army arrived in Qiantang, the bandit soldiers were defeated immediately after the battle, the Tang family was captured and killed, and the righteous soldiers leveled all counties.

古文：台军乘胜，百姓颇被抄夺。
现代文：台军乘着打了胜仗，又对百姓抢掠一番。
English: The Taiwanese army took advantage of the victory and plundered the people.

古文：军还，上闻之，收军主前军将军陈天福弃市，左军将军中宿县子刘明彻免官削爵付东冶。
现代文：军队回到京城，皇上听说了这事，拘捕了军主前军将军陈天福，并将他处死示众，左军将军中宿县壬刘明彻免去官职削夺了爵位交给束冶处置。
English: When the army returned to the capital, the emperor heard about it, arrested the commander, former army general Chen Tianfu, and put him to death in front of the public. The general of the Left Army, Zhongju County, Ren Liu Mingche, was removed from his official position, stripped of his title, and handed over to Sokye.

古文：天福，上宠将也，既伏诛，内外莫不震肃。天福善马槊，至今诸将法之。
现代文：速玉桓，是皇上宠爱的将领，被处死以后，朝廷内外都感到震惊和恐惧陈天福擅长使用马槊，到现在各将领都模仿他。
English: The Emperor's favorite general, Hayatama Kuan, was executed. After his death, both inside and outside the Imperial Court were shocked and horrified. Chen Tianfu was good at using a stirrup, and all generals imitate him to this day.

古文：御史中丞徐孝嗣奏曰： 风闻山东群盗，剽掠列城，虽匪日而殄，要暂干王略。
现代文：御史中丞徐孝嗣上奏说： 听说山东有群强盗，抢掠各地，虽然没多久就消灭了，但终归暂时打乱了皇上的统治。
English: Grand Historian Xu Xiaozhi said: I heard that there were a group of robbers in Shandong who plundered all over the country. Although they did not last long, they eventually temporarily disrupted the emperor's rule.

古文：郡县阙攻守之宜，仓府多侵秏之弊，举善惩恶，应有攸归。
现代文：郡县缺乏能攻战守备的能力，国家的府库又多耗费侵失的弊端，褒奖善政惩处恶政，应该使他们各得其所。
English: Counties and counties lack the ability to prepare for war, and the national treasury suffers from the drawbacks of excessive expenditure and loss. They should be rewarded for good governance and punished for bad governance.

古文：吴郡所领盐官令萧元蔚、桐庐令王天愍、新城令陆赤奋等，县为首劫破掠，并不经格战，委职散走。
现代文：吴郡下属的盐官令萧元蔚、桐庐县令王天愍、新城县令陆赤奋等人，眼看县城被劫掠，都不率兵抵抗，放弃职责逃跑。
English: Xiao Yuanwei, the salt official subordinate to Wuxian County, Wang Tianyao, the Tonglu County official, Lu Chiafen, the Xincheng County official, and others, seeing the county seat being looted, did not lead soldiers to resist, abandoning their duties and fleeing.

古文：元蔚、天愍还台，赤奋不知所在。
现代文：萧元蔚、王天愍回到了台省，陆赤奋不知跑到哪里去了。
English: Xiao Yuanwei and Wang Tianyao returned to Taiwan Province, and Lu Chiafen did not know where he had gone.

古文：又钱塘令刘彪、富阳令何洵，乃率领吏民拒战不敌，未委归台。
现代文：又钱塘县令刘彪、富阳县令何洵，于是率领军兵百姓奋力抵抗未能挡住，并没有弃城回台省。
English: Liu Biao, the governor of Qiantang County, and He Qian, the governor of Fuyang County, then led the soldiers and people to resist and could not stop them, and did not abandon the city to return to Taiwan Province.

古文：余建德、寿昌在劫断上流，不知被劫掠不？
现代文：其他像建德、寿昌，在劫断的上游地带，不知道有没有遭到侵扰?
English: Others, such as Jiande and Shuchang, are in the upstream area of the hijacking. Do you know if they have been disturbed?

古文：吴兴所领余杭县被劫破，令乐琰乃率吏民径战不敌，委走出都。
现代文：吴兴下属的余拉婴被攻占，县令就率领军民迎战不能抵挡，退出城外。
English: Wu Xing's subordinate Yu Lajiao was occupied, and the county order led the army and the people to fight, unable to resist, and withdrew from the city.

古文：会稽所领诸暨县，为劫所破，令陵琚之不经格战，委城奔走，不知所在。
现代文：会稽下属的诸暨县，被强盗攻破，县令陵琚之没有组织抵抗，就放弃县城逃跑，不知下落。
English: Zhuji County, a subordinate of the Audit Commission, was broken into by robbers, and without any organized resistance from the county magistrate, he gave up the county seat and fled, his whereabouts unknown.

古文：案元蔚等妄藉天私，作司近服，昧斯隐慝，职启虔刘。
现代文：查萧元蔚等人妄自凭藉着皇上的恩惠，因是亲戚得到官职，却欺瞒失职，奏请处死。
English: Zha Xiao Yuan Wei and others, who arrogantly took advantage of the emperor's favor, because they were relatives, to obtain official positions, but deceived and failed to perform their duties, were sentenced to death.

古文：会稽郡丞张思祖谬因承乏，总任是尸，涓诚刍效，终焉无纪。
现代文：会稽郡丞张思祖慌乱中接替重任，总管此事，竭诚效忠，但毕竟不成体统。
English: The county auditor, Zhang Sizu, took over in the middle of the turmoil. He was in charge of the whole affair and was loyal to the end, but he was not a good example.

古文：平东将军吴郡太守文季、征虏将军吴兴太守西昌侯鸾，任属关、河，威怀是寄。
现代文：平东将军吴郡太守沈文季、征虏将军昱垒太守西昌侯萧銮，职责便是掌管关、河一带，重任本已交托给了他们。
English: The general of Pingdong, the governor of Wu County, Shen Wenzhi, and the conscript general of the fortress, the governor of Xichang, Hou Xiaoqi, are in charge of the Guan and He areas, and the heavy responsibilities have been entrusted to them.

古文：辄下禁止彪、琰、洵，思祖、文季视事如故，鸾等结赎论。 
现代文：所以理应下令不许再让刘彪、乐琰、何洵仍任旧职，张思祖、沈文季可以在现职继续管事，等人应罚金赎罪。 
English: Therefore, an order should be issued not to allow Liu Biao, Le Quan and He Quan to continue to hold their former positions, Zhang Sizu and Shen Wenzhi can continue to manage in their current positions, and others should be fined to atone for their sins.

古文：诏元蔚等免，思祖、鸾、文季原。
现代文：诏令萧元蔚等人免罪，张思祖、萧鸾、沈文季被解脱。
English: Xiao Yuanwei and others were pardoned, and Zhang Shizu, Xiao Yao, and Shen Wencai were also released.

古文：文季固让会稽之授，转都官尚书，加散骑常侍。
现代文：至坚决推辞出任会稽太守，转任为都官尚书，加散骑常侍。
English: He resolutely refused to serve as the grand steward of the association, and was transferred to the post of the official of the capital, Shosho, with the addition of the rank of samurai.

古文：出为持节、督郢州司州之义阳诸军事、左将军、郢州刺史，还为散骑常侍，领军将军。
现代文：出为持节、督察郢州司州的；羞陨诸军事、左将军、郢州刺史。回朝官任散骑常侍，领军将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Ji Jie (持节) and the title of inspector of the Bozhou Prefecture; he was also awarded the titles of military, left general, and Bozhou chief historian; and he was appointed as a samurai and a leading general.

古文：世祖谓文季曰： 南士无仆射，多历年所。 
现代文：世祖对他说： 南方的士人没有做过仆射，已经多年了。 
English: The patriarch said to him: The scholars in the south haven't done the puja for many years.

古文：文季对曰： 南风不竞，非复一日。 
现代文：沈文季回答说： 南方吹来的风不劲进，早不是一天两天的事了。 
English: Shen Wenzhi replied: The wind blowing from the south is not strong, it is not a matter of a day or two.

古文：文季虽不学，发言必有辞采，当世称其应对。
现代文：沈文季虽然学问不深，说话却颇有文采，当世人称赞他善于应对。
English: Although Shen Wenzhi's knowledge is not deep, his speech is quite literary, and when the world praises him, he is good at coping.

古文：尤善釐及弹棋，釐用五子。
现代文：他特别擅长玩篓和弹棋，玩笔用五个子。
English: He is particularly good at playing dice and chess, using five dice to play.

古文：以疾迁金紫光禄大夫，加亲信二十人，常侍如故。
现代文：因病迁金紫光禄大夫，增加亲信侍从二十一人，常侍如故。
English: Due to illness, Dr. Jin Ziguanglu was transferred, the number of trusted attendants was increased by 21, and the number of regular attendants remained the same.

古文：转侍中，领太子詹事，迁中护军，侍中如故。
现代文：转任侍中，兼领太子詹事，迁任中护军，侍中如故。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, concurrently leading the prince Zhanji, transferred to the position of middle guard, and remained a chamberlain.

古文：以家为府。
现代文：在家宅辟置官署。
English: A government office was set up in the family home.

古文：隆昌元年，复为领军将军，侍中如故。
现代文：隆昌元年，又做了领军将军，侍中如故。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he became the leading general again, and remained an attendant.

古文：豫废郁林，高宗欲以文季为江州，遣左右单景隽宣旨，文季口自陈让，称年老不愿外出，因问右执法有人未，景隽还具言之。
现代文：参预了废掉郁挞王的事，想让他任辽州刺史，派身边侍从里呈读旨意，至为自己辞谢，自称年纪老了不愿意出朝任官，并询问右执法之职有没有人选，回到宫中据实报告。
English: He wanted to make him the official historian of Liaozhou, so he sent an attendant to read his will, but he declined, saying that he was too old to become an official, and asked if there were any candidates for the post of right-hand law enforcement, and returned to the palace to report truthfully.

古文：延兴元年，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：延兴元年，迁任为尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he was transferred to the post of Shangshu Yuhusa.

古文：明帝即位，加领太子詹事，增邑五百户。
现代文：明帝即位，加领太子詹事，食邑增加五百户。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Prince Zhan Zhi was awarded the title of Jialing, and the number of food villages increased by 500 households.

古文：尚书令王晏尝戏文季为吴兴仆射。
现代文：尚书令王晏曾经嘲笑沈文季是吴兴仆射。
English: Shang Shuling Wang Yao once ridiculed Shen Wenzhi as Wu Xingpu Yao.

古文：文季答曰： 琅邪执法，似不出卿门。 
现代文：至回答说： 王递的执法，好像不离您的家族。 
English: Zu replied, "It seems that the law enforcement of Wangfujing does not leave your family.

古文：寻加散骑常侍，仆射如故。
现代文：不久加散骑常侍，仆射如故。
English: He was soon joined by a straggling equerry, and so it went on.

古文：建武二年，虏寇寿春，豫州刺史丰城公遥昌婴城固守，数遣轻兵相抄击，明帝以为忧，诏文季领兵镇寿春。
现代文：建武二年。北方敌军攻打寿春，豫州刺史丰城公萧遥昌在城裹固守，屡次派轻健的军兵袭击对方，明帝为此很忧虑，诏令沈文季领兵镇守寿春。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, when the northern enemy attacked Shouchun, the governor of Shifeng City, Xiao Yaochang, who came from Yuzhou, kept a tight grip on the city and repeatedly sent light and strong soldiers to attack the other side. Emperor Ming was very worried about this and ordered Shen Wenzhi to lead the soldiers to guard Shouchun.

古文：文季入城，止游兵不听出，洞开城门，严加备守，虏军寻退，百姓无所伤损。
现代文：沈文季进入城中，不许军兵出城游击，把城尸弓敞开，严加守备，很快敌军就退了，百姓没有受到什么伤害。
English: Shen Wenzhi entered the city, forbade the soldiers to leave the city for guerrilla attacks, opened the city corpse bow, and guarded it strictly. Soon the enemy army retreated, and the people did not suffer any harm.

古文：增封为千九百户。
现代文：增封为一千九百户。
English: The number of households was increased to nineteen hundred.

古文：寻加护军将军，仆射、常侍如故。
现代文：不久加护军将军，仆射、常侍如故。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of general of the escorting army, but his position as an aide-de-camp and regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：王敬则反，诏文季领兵屯湖头，备京路。
现代文：王敬则发动叛乱，皇上诏令选塞至领兵进驻，守卫入塞的道路。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, launched a rebellion, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering troops to be stationed to guard the road into the citadel.

古文：永元元年，转侍中、左仆射，将军如故。
现代文：永元元年，转任侍中、左仆射，将军如故。
English: In the first year of the Edo period, he was transferred to the post of Samurai Middle Captain and Left Footman, and remained a general until his death.

古文：始安王遥光反，其夜，遣三百人于宅掩取文季，欲以为都督，而文季已还台。
现代文：始安王萧遥光叛乱，这天晚上，派了二百人到沈文季的家裹来抓他，想让他做都督，但是沈文季已经回尚书台去了。
English: On the evening of the rebellion, King Xiao Yaoguang of Shi'an sent two hundred men to the home of Shen Wenzhi to capture him and wanted him to be the governor, but Shen Wenzhi had already returned to Shang Shudai.

古文：明日，与尚书令徐孝嗣守卫宫城，戎服共坐南掖门上。
现代文：第二天，他和尚书令徐孝嗣守卫宫城，穿着战袍共同坐在南掖门上。
English: The next day, he and Shang Shuling ordered Xu Xiaoshi to guard the palace city, wearing battle robes and sitting together on the South Gate.

古文：时东昏已行杀戮，孝嗣深怀忧虑，欲与文季论世事，文季辄引以他辞，终不得及。
现代文：当时已经大开杀戒，感到非常忧虑，想和沈文季谈论政事，沈文季就岔开话题，终于没说到这些。
English: At that time, he was very anxious and wanted to talk about politics with Shen Wenzhi. Shen Wenzhi opened the topic and finally did not say these things.

古文：事宁，加镇军将军，置府。侍中、仆射如故。
现代文：事情平息以后，加镇军将军，准许辟置官署，侍中、仆射如故。
English: After the situation calmed down, the general of the town's army was allowed to set up an official office, and the attendants and courtiers remained as before.

古文：文季见世方昏乱，托以老疾，不豫朝机。
现代文：沈文季看见世事昏乱，假托年老有病，不参预朝政。
English: Shen Wenzhi saw that the world was chaotic, and pretended to be old and sick, and did not participate in pre-imperial politics.

古文：兄子昭略谓文季曰： 阿父年六十为员外仆射，欲求自免，岂可得乎？ 
现代文：他哥哥的儿子沈昭略对他说： 叔父六十岁做上员外仆射，想要使自己免于灾祸，难道做得到吗? 
English: His brother's son, Shen Zhaoyu, said to him, "My uncle is sixty years old, and he wants to save himself from disaster, but can he do it?

古文：文季笑而不答。
现代文：沈文季笑而不回答。
English: Shen Wencai laughed and did not answer.

古文：同孝嗣被害。
现代文：跟徐孝嗣一同被杀。
English: He was killed together with Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：其日先被召见，文季知败，举动如常，登车顾曰： 此行恐往而不反也。 
现代文：这天他先被召见，沈文季知道要完了，举止仍和平常一样，登上车子还回头说： 这一去恐陷回不来了。 
English: On this day, he was summoned first, Shen Wenzhi knew that it was over, his demeanor was still the same as usual, he got on the car and looked back and said: This is gone, I can't come back.

古文：于华林省死，时年五十八。
现代文：死在华林省，当时五十八岁。
English: He was 58 years old when he died in Hualin Province.

古文：朝野冤之。
现代文：朝野都为他感到冤屈。
English: Asano all felt a sense of grievance for him.

古文：中兴元年，赠侍中、司空，谥忠宪。
现代文：中兴元年，赠侍中、司空，谧号忠宪。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, he was given the titles of Junior Chamberlain and Empress Dowager, and his posthumous name was Zhongxian.

古文：兄子昭略，有刚气。
现代文：他哥哥的儿子沈昭略，很有刚烈之气。
English: His brother's son, Shen Zhaoyuan, is very strong-willed.

古文：升明末为相国西曹掾，太祖赏之，及即位，谓王俭曰： 南士中有沈昭略，何职处之？ 
现代文：升明末年，做了相国西曹掾，太祖很欣赏他，到即位时，对王俭说： 南方士人中有偭叫沈昭略的，给他个什么官呢? 
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, he became the Western Cao Pi, the father-in-law of the country. The grandfather-in-law appreciated him very much. When he ascended to the throne, he said to Wang Jian: Among the Nanfang people, there is a man named Shen Zhaoli, what kind of position should he be given?

古文：俭曰： 臣已有拟。 
现代文：王俭说： 我已经定好了。 
English: Wang Jian said: I have already decided.

古文：奏转前军将军，上不欲违，可其奏。
现代文：奏请转任为前军将军，皇上不想反对，同意了。
English: The Emperor did not want to object and agreed.

古文：寻迁为中书郎。
现代文：不久迁任为中书郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of chushiro.

古文：永明初，历太尉大司马从事中郎，骠骑司马，黄门郎。
现代文：永明初年，历太尉大司马从事中郎，骠骑司马，黄门郎。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Lieutenant Li Daima was engaged in the role of middle-man, riding the horse of Sima and Huangmenro.

古文：南郡王友、学华选，以昭略为友，寻兼左丞。
现代文：南郡王友、学华选，任沈昭略为友，不久兼任左丞。
English: Wang You and Xue Hua Xuan of Nan County were appointed as friends of Shen Zhaoyu, and soon he was also appointed as the left jongleur.

古文：元年，出为临海太守，御史中丞。
现代文：永明元年，出任临海太守，御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was appointed as Linhai Dazhu, Goshi Chujo.

古文：累迁侍中，冠军将军，抚军长史。
现代文：他在建武年间曾经畅怀饮酒以自为韬晦，和谢潇很好。多次迁升为侍中，冠军将军，抚军长史。
English: During the Jianwu era, he used to enjoy drinking alcohol to disguise himself, and he was very good with Xie Xiao. He was promoted to chamberlain many times, champion general, and leader of the army.

古文：永元元年，始安王遥光起兵东府，执昭略于城内。
现代文：永元元年，始安王萧遥光在束府起兵反叛，把沈昭略扣押在城内。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the King of Shi'an, Xiao Yaoguang, raised an army to rebel in Sokfu and briefly detained Shen Zhaogu in the city.

古文：昭略潜自南出，济淮还台。
现代文：沈昭略偷偷地从南门跑出来，渡过淮河回到禁城。
English: Shen Zhaoyuan secretly ran out of the South Gate, crossed the Huai River and returned to the Forbidden City.

古文：至是与文季俱被召入华林省。
现代文：这时和沈文季一起被召入华林省。
English: At this time, he was called to Hualin Province together with Shen Wenzhi.

古文：茹法珍等进药酒，昭略怒骂徐孝嗣曰： 废昏立明，古今令典。
现代文：茹法珍等人奉上药酒，沈昭略怒骂徐孝嗣说： 废掉昏君另立明主，这是古今通用的典则。
English: Ru Fazhen and others were given medicinal liquor, and Shen Zhao slightly scolded Xu Xiaozhi, saying: Abolish the dim prince and establish a bright master. This is a universal rule from ancient times to the present.

古文：宰相无才，致有今日。 
现代文：是宰相没有才能，才弄到今天的地步。 
English: It was the Prime Minister's lack of ability that got us to where we are today.

古文：以瓯掷面破，曰 作破面鬼 。
现代文：用瓦罐砸破了脸，说要 作个破脸鬼 。
English: He smashed his face with a pot and said he wanted to be a face-breaker.

古文：死时年四十余。
现代文：死时四十多岁。
English: He was in his forties when he died.

古文：弟昭光，闻收至，家人劝逃去，昭光不忍舍母，遂见获，杀之。
现代文：其弟沈昭光，听说拘捕的人来了。他的家人劝说他逃走，沈昭光不忍心抛下他的母亲，就被抓住，杀掉了。
English: His younger brother, Shen Zhaoguang, heard that the arresting officers were coming. His family members persuaded him to escape. Unable to leave his mother, Shen Zhaoguang was caught and killed.

古文：中兴元年，赠昭略太常，昭光廷尉。
现代文：中兴元年，朝廷赠沈昭略为太常，沈昭光为廷尉。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, the Imperial Court presented Shen Zhaoliu with the title of Grand Marshal, and Shen Zhaoguang with the title of Imperial Lieutenant.

古文：史臣曰：为邦之训，食惟民天，足食足兵，民信之矣。
现代文：史臣曰：治理国家的法则，祇有食物对百姓是最重要的，粮食丰足士兵众多，百姓就很安定了。
English: Shichen said: the rule of governing the country, only food is the most important for the people, plenty of grain soldiers, the people are very stable.

古文：屯田之略，实重战守。
现代文：屯田的策略，实在比战事还要重要。
English: The strategy of Tonden is more important than the war itself.

古文：若夫充国耕殖，用殄羌戎，韩浩、枣祇，亦建华夏置典农之官，兴大佃之议。
现代文：像那趟充国懂得耕植，所以消灭了羌戎，韩浩、枣祇，也建议华夏设立典农的官职，提倡大行耕作。
English: Like that time, the country of Fuchu knew how to cultivate, so it eliminated the Yong Rong, Han Ho, and Zaozi. It also recommended that Huaxia establish the official position of a farmer, and advocated extensive farming.

古文：金城布险，峻垒绵疆，飞刍輓粒，事难支继。
现代文：城池险要，营垒高峻，疆界绵长，运送粮草，实在很难供应得上。
English: The castle is at risk, the fortifications are high, the borders are long, and it is very difficult to transport grain and grass.

古文：一夫不耕，或钟饥馁，缘边戍卒，坐甲千群。
现代文：一个男子不种地，就有人要挨饿，边防上的士兵，有千群之多。
English: If one man does not farm, others go hungry, and there are thousands of soldiers on the border.

古文：故宜尽收地利，因兵务食。
现代文：所以应该尽量利用土地，用士兵自己的力量来获得粮食。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to make the best use of the land and use the soldiers' own strength to obtain food.

古文：缓则躬耕，急则从战。
现代文：军情缓和就亲自种地，军情紧急就参加战斗。
English: When the military situation eases, he will personally plant land, and when the military situation is urgent, he will participate in the battle.

古文：岁有馀粮，则红食可待。
现代文：每年如有余粮，那么历史上有过的粮食多得变质发红的情况就可以出现了。
English: If there is surplus grain every year, then the situation that historically there has been too much grain to spoil and turn red can occur.

古文：前世达治，言之已详。
现代文：前朝的政治，说得已经很详细了。
English: The politics of the previous government have already been described in great detail.

古文：江左以来，不暇远策，王旅外出，未尝宿饱，四郊婴守，惧等松刍。
现代文：自从偏安江左以来，没有来得及制定长远的计划，王国的军队外出征战，投有得到过温饱，在四方边疆镇守，就像弱小的松苗一样惊惧。
English: Since the parting of the Yangtze River, there has been no time to formulate a long-term plan. The kingdom's army has gone out to fight, has been fed and clothed, and has stood guard at the four corners of the frontier, just like a weak pine sapling.

古文：县兵所救，经岁引日，凌风泙水，转漕艰长。
现代文：官兵来援救，缓慢得经年累月，逆风溯水，运输起来十分艰难。
English: The officers and soldiers came to the rescue, slowly over the years, against the wind and water, and it was very difficult to transport.

古文：倾窖底之储，尽仓敖之粟，流马木牛，尚深前弊，田积之要，唯在江淮。
现代文：竭尽地窖的储藏、仓库的粟米来供应，运用木牛流马，还是脱不了旧毛病，耕作积粮的关键，仍在于开垦江、淮地区。
English: After exhausting the storage of cellars and the storage of corn to supply, using wooden oxen and horses, it is still impossible to get rid of the old problems. The key to cultivating stored grain is still in the Kailuan River and Huaihai region.

古文：郡国同兴，远不周急。
现代文：郡国共同推行，无须从远方来解救粮食的危急。
English: If the county and the country work together, there is no need to come from far away to relieve the crisis of grain.

古文：故吴氏列戍南滨，屯农水右，魏世淮北大佃，而石横开漕，皆辅车相资，易以待敌。
现代文：所以呈迩南滨驻守，就在辽右屯田耕作，魏国在淮北垦植，就在石横开凿水道运粮，都是采用了唇齿相依的办法，以求能轻松地迎战敌人。
English: Therefore, Chengdu's Nanbin garrison, Liao Yu's cultivation of tundra, Wei Guo's planting in Huaibei, and Shibei's excavation of water channels for grain transportation all adopted the method of lip-to-tooth dependence in order to easily meet the enemy.

古文：孝嗣当蹙境之晨，荐希行之计，王无外略，民困首领，观机而动，斯仪殆为空陈，惜矣！
现代文：徐孝嗣在难险窘迫的情形之下，提出值得推行的计策，而皇上没有谋略，百姓失却首领之人，不能够见机行事，于是这一良策就成为空言，实在可惜的很!
English: Under difficult and perilous circumstances, Xu Xiaozhi proposed a strategy worth implementing, but the emperor did not have a strategy, and the people lost their leader, who could not act at the right time, so this good strategy became empty talk, which was really a pity!

古文：赞曰：文忠作相，器范先标。
现代文：赞曰：文忠公身居相位，行为堪称楷模。
English: It was praised that: "Wen Zhong Gong is in good health, and his behavior is exemplary."

古文：有容有业，可以立朝。
现代文：有器量有功业，可以使一朝振立。
English: If you have the ability, you can make a difference.

古文：丰城历仕，音仪孔昭。
现代文：丰城渐次升迁，言谈举止都十分出色。
English: Fengcheng has been gradually promoted, and his speech and manners are very good.

古文：为舟等溺，在运同消。
现代文：虽然乘舟而行其实难逃溺亡的命运，厄运一来同样要消逝。
English: Although it is actually difficult to escape the fate of drowning by boat, bad luck will also disappear.

