古文：宪宗讨吴元济。
现代文：原文
English: Original text from

古文：唐邓节度使高霞寓既败，袁滋代将，复无功。
现代文：唐宪宗命令唐邓节度使高霞寓讨伐吴元济失败以后，又命令袁滋代替高霞寓为节度使讨伐贼人，但是仍然徒劳无功。
English: After the failure of Tang Xianzong's order to Tang Deng Jiedu to make Gao Xiaye fight against Wu Yuanji, he also ordered Yuan Zi to replace Gao Xiaye as Jiedu to fight against thieves, but it was still in vain.

古文：李愬求自试，遂为随唐邓节度使。
现代文：李愬毛遂自荐前去讨伐吴元济，于是唐宪宗便任命他为随唐邓节度使。
English: Li Hanmao then recommended himself to go and fight against Wu Yuanji, so Tang Xianzong appointed him as a special envoy of Tang Deng Jiedu.

古文：愬以军初伤夷，士气未完，乃不为斥候部伍。
现代文：李愬认为官军在和吴元济交战失败以后，士气还没有恢复，因此下令暂停斥候出任务。
English: Li Yu believed that the morale of the government army had not recovered after the failure of the engagement with Wu Yuanji, so he ordered the suspension of the scouting mission.

古文：或有言者，愬曰： 贼方安袁公之宽，我不欲使震而备我。 
现代文：对此有人提出了疑义，李愬说： 贼人已经习惯了袁大人宽仁带兵的作风，因此他们防备松懈，我不想轻易地打草惊蛇。 
English: Some people have raised doubts about this, Li Wei said: Thieves have become accustomed to Yuan's style of leading soldiers, so their defenses are lax. I don't want to frighten the snakes easily.

古文：乃令于军中曰： 天子知愬能忍耻，故委以抚养，战非我事也。
现代文：接着又诏告全军： 皇上知道我能隐忍，因此只是委派我来安抚军士们的情绪，至于作战打仗，这不是我的职责。 
English: Then he issued another edict to the whole army: "The emperor knows that I can be patient, so he has only appointed me to calm the emotions of the soldiers. As for fighting, that is not my duty.

古文：齐人以想名轻，果易之。
现代文：因李愬名望不重，贼人也产生了轻视之心。
English: Because Li Yan's reputation was not important, the thief also had a feeling of contempt.

古文：愬沉鸷，能推诚待士，贼来降，辄听其便，或父母与孤未葬者，给粟帛遣还，劳之曰： 而亦王人也，无弃亲戚。 
现代文：其实李愬为人沉稳，能以诚待人。遇到贼人来投降，李愬都任他们在营中随意走动，从来不加以任何监视或者限制；遇到有投降人的父母、孤儿没有安葬，就会赠送金帛和米粮，让他们回乡奔丧，并说： 你们也是天子的臣民，不可以遗弃自己的亲人。 
English: In fact, Li Qiye was a calm person and could treat people with sincerity. When thieves came to surrender, Li Qiye allowed them to move freely in the camp, and never imposed any monitoring or restrictions. When parents and orphans of those who surrendered were not buried, he would give them gold ingots and rice grain to let them return home to mourn, and said: You are also subjects of the Son of Heaven, and you must not abandon your relatives.

古文：众愿为愬死，故山川险易，与贼情伪，皆能晓之。
现代文：众人都被李愬的诚意所打动，都愿为李愬效死命，因此有关贼人的军情以及贼营的地形、兵力的布置，李愬都已经是了如指掌了。
English: Many people were moved by Li Qiye's sincerity and were willing to die for Li Qiye. Therefore, Li Qiye already knew everything about the military situation of the bandits, the terrain of the bandits' camp, and the arrangement of troops.

古文：居半岁，知士可用，乃请济师。
现代文：半年之后，李愬看到军士们个个士气高昂、训练有素，知道打仗的时机成熟，于是就请求增加军队。
English: Half a year later, Li Wei saw that all the sergeants had high morale and were well-trained, and knew that the time was ripe for war, so he asked for more troops.

古文：于是缮铠厉兵，攻马鞍山，下之。拔道口栅，战楂枒山，以取炉冶城，平青陵城。
现代文：于是整顿军备，先攻打马鞍山，攻破道口栅，占领楂枒山，夺取炉冶城，平定青陵城，擒获了大将丁士良。
English: As a result, they rectified their armaments, first attacked Ma'anshan, broke through the road gate, occupied Lushan, captured the metallurgical city, pacified Qingling City, and captured the general Ding Shiliang.

古文：擒骠将丁士良，异其才，不杀。
现代文：李愬怜惜他是个将才，没有杀他。
English: Li Gan felt sorry for him because he was a general and did not kill him.

古文：署捉生将，士良策曰： 吴秀琳以数千兵不可破者，陈光洽为之谋也，我能为公取之。 
现代文：任命他为捉贼将，丁士良献计说： 吴秀琳虽然只有数千兵力，但是官军却屡次攻打不下，完全是因为有陈光洽为他出谋划策，我愿为李公擒获陈光洽。 
English: Appointing him as a thief-catcher, Ding Shiliang said: Although Wu Xiulin has only a few thousand troops, the government army has repeatedly been unable to attack him, entirely because Chen Guangchao has provided him with advice. I am willing to obtain Chen Guangchao for Li Gongyao.

古文：乃擒以献，于是秀琳举文城栅降。
现代文：果然，在丁士良擒拿陈光洽以后，吴秀琳就在文城栅弃械投降了。
English: Sure enough, after Ding Shiliang took Chen Guangchao, Wu Xiulin surrendered in Wencheng Fence.

古文：遂以其众攻吴房，残外垣，始出攻。吏曰： 往亡日，法当避。 
现代文：于是李愬利用贼兵攻打吴房，等到破外城以后再让官兵出击，这时小吏说： 今天是凶日，不宜出兵。 
English: So Li Lan used the robber soldiers to attack Wu Fang, and waited until the outer city was breached before letting the officers and soldiers attack. At this time, the minor officials said: Today is a bad day, it is not appropriate to send troops.

古文：愬曰： 彼谓我不来，此可击也。 
现代文：李愬说： 正因为贼人认为我不会紧追，才更是我进攻的最好时机。 
English: Li Wei said: It is precisely because the thief thinks that I will not follow closely that it is the best time for me to attack.

古文：众决死战，贼乃走。
现代文：众军士也愿意和贼人一决死战，将士们拼命杀敌，贼兵四处逃窜。
English: All the sergeants were also willing to fight to the death with the bandits. The officers fought hard to kill the enemy, and the bandits fled everywhere.

古文：或劝遂取吴房，愬曰： 不可。
现代文：有人建议干脆将吴房夷平，以防止贼人再次聚集。李愬说： 不可以。
English: Some people suggested that Wu Fang should simply be razed to the ground to prevent thieves from gathering again. Li Jun said: No.

古文：吴房拔，则贼力专，不若留之，以分其力。 
现代文：夷平了吴房，贼人的兵力就会更容易集中，还不如保留吴房，以分散贼人兵力。 
English: If Wu Fang is razed to the ground, it will be easier to concentrate the thief's forces. It is better to keep Wu Fang to disperse the thief's forces.

古文：初，秀琳降，愬单骑抵栅下与语，亲释缚，署以为将。
现代文：当初，吴秀琳自缚来投降的时候，李愬只身来到文城栅下，亲切地安慰他，亲自给他松绑，并任命他为将领。
English: At the beginning, when Wu Xiulin tied herself up to surrender, Li Yao came to Wencheng Gate alone, consoled him cordially, untied him personally, and appointed him as the general.

古文：秀琳为愬策曰： 必破贼，非李祐无以成功者。 
现代文：吴秀琳也献计说： 要想攻破吴元济，不擒获李祐不能成功。 
English: Wu Xiulin also proposed a plan, saying, "If you want to defeat Wu Yuanji, you cannot succeed unless you capture Li Yu."

古文：祐，贼健将也，守兴桥栅，其战常易官军。
现代文：李祐是吴元济手下的大将，负责兴桥栅的防守，每次同他作战官军都会无功而返，不得不另外派兵进行围剿。
English: Li Yu was the general under Wu Yuanji, responsible for the defense of Xingqiao Lattice. Every time the official army fought with him, they would return without success, and had to send another army to carry out the siege.

古文：愬候祐护获于野，遣史用诚以壮士三百伏其旁，见羸卒若将燔聚者，祐果轻出，用诚擒而还。
现代文：李愬命令将军史用诚率领三百精兵在李愬营地附近的郊野中进行埋伏，另外派出一些老兵，假装要攻击焚烧李祐的营地，李祐果然中计出兵迎敌，结果被史用诚所俘虏。
English: Li Yu ordered General Shi Youcheng to lead three hundred elite soldiers in an ambush in the countryside near Li Yu's camp. In addition, he sent some veterans to pretend to attack and burn Li Yu's camp. Li Yu successfully dispatched troops to meet the enemy, and as a result was captured by Shi Youcheng.

古文：诸将素苦祐，请杀之，愬不听，以为客将，间召祐及李忠义，屏人语至夜艾。
现代文：官军曾经多次吃过李祐的苦头，请求李愬将他杀死，但是李愬没有同意，反而以客将之礼厚待李祐，甚至让旁人告退，单独和李祐、李忠义两个人彻夜长谈，李忠义也是个贼将。
English: The government army had suffered the hardships of Li Yu many times and asked Li Xuan to kill him, but Li Xuan did not agree. Instead, he treated Li Yu with the courtesy of a guest general, and even let others withdraw. He had a long talk with Li Yu and Li Zhongyi alone all night long. Li Zhongyi was also a thief general.

古文：忠义亦贼将，军中多谏此二人不可近。
现代文：军官们纷纷劝说李愬，不能和这两个贼将太接近了，李愬反而更加地尊重礼遇这两个人。
English: The officers tried to persuade Li Yao not to get too close to the two thieves, but Li Yao treated the two men with more respect.

古文：愬待益厚。乃募死士三千为突将，自教之。
现代文：另外，李愬也募集勇士三千人做突击兵，亲自督导他们训练。
English: In addition, Li Yong also recruited three thousand warriors to be commandos and personally supervised their training.

古文：会雨，自五月至七月不止，军中以为不杀祐之罚，将吏杂然不解。
现代文：恰好在这期间，大雨不止，从五月一直下到了七月。官军中间传出了 天雨不止是上天为责罚李愬不杀李祐 的谣言。
English: During this period, heavy rain continued to fall from May to July. Rumors spread among the government troops that the rain was not just God's punishment for not killing Li Yu.

古文：想力不能独完祐，乃持以泣，曰： 天不欲平贼乎？
现代文：由于官军们不能谅解李愬礼遇李祐等人的做法，因此士气大为低落，单靠李愬一个人无法保全李祐。李愬无计可施，只好让人将李祐关了起来，哭着说： 难道是上天不让我平贼吗？
English: As the government troops could not understand Li Qiye's treatment of Li You and others, Li Qiye's morale was very low. Li Qiye alone could not save Li You. Li Qiye had no choice but to have someone lock up Li You, crying, "Isn't it heaven that won't let me defeat the thief?"

古文：何见夺者众耶？ 
现代文：大家为什么都反对我的做法呢？ 
English: Why is everyone against what I'm doing?

古文：则械而送之朝，表言： 必杀祐，无与共谋蔡者。 
现代文：说完，将李祐送交朝廷处置，并且上表奏请： 如果一定要杀李祐，就没人一起谋划攻破蔡州了。 
English: Having said that, Li Yu was sent to the imperial court for disposition, and the following request was made: If you must kill Li Yu, then no one will plan to attack Caizhou together.

古文：诏释以还愬，愬乃令佩剑出入帐下，署六院兵马使，祐奉檄呜咽。
现代文：宪宗却下诏释放了李祐，还给了李愬。李愬命令李祐统领六院兵马，每天佩剑出入帐下议事。
English: However, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict to release Li Yu and return him to Li Gan. Emperor Xianzong ordered Li Yu to lead the soldiers and horses of the Sixth Courtyard and enter and leave the palace every day with a sword.

古文：诸将乃不敢言，由是始定袭蔡之谋矣。
现代文：李祐手捧公文，不禁感动得泪流满面，其他官军也不敢再有反对的意见。于是上下一心，共同商议攻打蔡州的计划。
English: Holding the official document in his hand, Li Yu couldn't help but be moved to tears, and the other government troops didn't dare to have any more opposing opinions. So he made up his mind to jointly discuss the plan to attack Caizhou.

古文：李愬之将袭蔡也，旧令敢舍谍者族。
现代文：李愬准备袭击蔡州的时候，先前曾有窝藏间谍要灭族的律令，李愬后来将旧令撤销，一律不予追究。
English: When Li Qiye was preparing to attack Caizhou, there had previously been a legal order to hide spies to exterminate ethnic groups. Li Qiye later revoked the old order and would not be investigated.

古文：愬刊其令，一切抚之，故谍者反效以情，愬益悉贼虚实。
现代文：密谍在感激之下，反而给李愬提供军情，使他们更加能掌握敌人的动静虚实。
English: In gratitude, the spy instead provided military intelligence to Li Yao, so that they could better grasp the enemy's movements and movements.

古文：时李光颜战数胜，元济率锐师屯洄曲以抗光颜。
现代文：早先李光颜接连打了几次胜仗，吴元济率领精兵驻扎在洄曲，对抗李光颜。
English: Earlier, Li Guangyan had won several victories in a row. Wu Yuanji led the elite soldiers stationed in Xingqu to fight against Li Guangyan.

古文：愬知其隙可乘，乃夜起师，祐以突将三千为前锋，李忠义副之，愬率中军三千，田进诚以下军殿，出文城栅，令曰： 引而东。 
现代文：李愬知道自己有机可乘，就在半夜发兵，命令李祐率领三千名突击兵担任前锋，以李忠义为副将协助他，自己则亲自率领中军三千人，田进诚以下的各军压阵，作为支应。出了文城栅以后，李愬下达命令说： 向东转。 
English: In the middle of the night, knowing that he could take advantage of the situation, Li Kun sent troops and ordered Li Yu to lead 3,000 storm troopers to serve as the vanguard, with Li Zhongyi as the vice-general to assist him, while he personally led 3,000 Chinese troops and the armies of Tian Jincheng and below to support him. After leaving the Wenshong Gate, Li Kun issued an order saying: Turn to the east.

古文：六十里止，袭张柴，歼其戍，敕士少休，益治鞍铠，发刃彀矢。
现代文：行经六十里止住，立刻袭击张柴寨，彻底将防守的敌军全部歼灭了，然后让部队稍作休息，整理马鞍、盔甲，磨利刀刃，准备好弓矢，待命出击。
English: After traveling sixty miles, he stopped and immediately attacked Zhangzhaizhai, completely annihilated all the defending enemy forces, and then let the troops take a short break, tidy up the saddle, armor, sharpen the blade, prepare the bow and arrow, and stand by to attack.

古文：会大雨雪，天晦，凛风偃旗裂肤，马皆缩栗，士抱戈冻死于道十一二。
现代文：这时天下起了大雪，天色阴暗，寒风凛冽，许多士兵都因为受不了严寒气候，皮肤被冻裂了，连马也都畏缩不前，冻死在路上的士兵有十之一二。
English: At this time, there was heavy snow, the sky was gloomy, and a cold wind was blowing. Many soldiers couldn't stand the cold weather, and their skin was cracked by the cold. Even the horses were afraid to go forward. Two out of ten soldiers froze to death on the road.

古文：张柴之东，陂泽阻奥，众未尝蹈也，皆谓投不测，始发。
现代文：张柴寨的东面，泥泞难以行走，从没有人走过这条路，于是大家都认为前途难以预测。
English: The eastern side of Zhangzhaizhai is muddy and difficult to walk. No one has ever walked this road, so everyone thinks that the future is unpredictable.

古文：吏请所向，愬曰： 入蔡州取吴元济。 
现代文：部队刚刚要出帐幕，军吏前来请示目的地，李愬说： 进入蔡州攻打吴元济。 
English: The troops were just about to leave the tent, the military officers came to ask for the destination, Li Wei said: Enter Caizhou to attack Wu Yuanji.

古文：士失色，监军使者泣曰： 果落祐计。 
现代文：军士们一听，人人脸色改变监军也哭着说： 元帅果真已经中了李祐的圈套。 
English: As soon as the sergeants listened, everyone's face changed, and the supervisors also cried and said: The marshal has really fallen into Li Yu's trap.

古文：然业从愬，人人不敢自为计。
现代文：但是已经跟随了李愬，人人也不敢自作主张。
English: But everyone has followed Li Yao, and no one dares to make their own claims.

古文：愬分轻兵断桥道，以绝洄曲道；又以兵朗山道。行七十里，夜半，至悬瓠城，雪甚。
现代文：李愬派出一支小部队破坏桥道，断绝洄曲的退路，又派兵切断朗山山道的后路，继续向前行进了七十里，半夜时分来到悬瓠城。
English: Li Qiye sent a small force to destroy the bridge and cut off the retreat route of the Xuanqu. He also sent soldiers to cut off the back route of the Langshan Mountain Road, and continued to march forward for seventy miles. At midnight, they came to the city of Xuanqiu.

古文：城旁皆鹅鹜池，愬令击之，以乱军声。
现代文：这时天空大雪纷飞，城旁都是饲养鹅、鹜的池塘，李愬命令人将鹅、鹜惊扰起来，以此来遮掩兵马声，吴房、朗山戍守的贼兵都没有发觉。
English: At this time, there was heavy snow in the sky, and there were ponds with geese and storks near the city. Li Yan ordered people to disturb the geese and storks in order to cover the sound of the soldiers and horses. The robber soldiers guarding Wu Fang and Langshan did not notice.

古文：贼吴房、朗山戍晏然无知者，祐等坎墉先登，众从之，杀门者开关，留持柝，传夜自如。
现代文：李祐等人首先率兵士登城，杀死城门的守卫之后，打开城门，但是仍然像平常那样打更报时。第二天天亮，大雪停了。
English: Li Yu and others first led the soldiers to the city, and after killing the guard of the gate, they opened the gate, but still changed the time as usual. At dawn the next day, the heavy snow stopped.

古文：黎明雪止，愬入驻元济外宅，蔡吏惊曰： 城陷矣! 
现代文：李愬进入吴元济屯兵的外城，蔡州官吏这才惊恐地大叫起来： 城已经失陷了。 
English: When Li Gan entered the outer city of Wu Yuanji's garrison, the officials of Caizhou cried out in horror: The city has fallen.

古文：元济尚不信，曰： 是洄曲子弟来索褚衣耳。 
现代文：吴元济还是不相信地说： 也许是洄曲的子弟兵前来领取棉衣吧。 
English: Still in disbelief, Wu Yuanji said, "Perhaps it is the soldiers of the Song Dynasty who have come to pick up cotton clothes."

古文：及闻号令，曰： 常侍传语。 
现代文：等听到传令兵说： 常侍有令。 
English: When they heard the herald say, "The attendants have their orders."

古文：始惊，曰： 何常侍得至此。 
现代文：这才惊惧地问： 哪位常侍到这里？ 
English: Then, alarmed, he asked: "Who is it that often comes here?"

古文：率左右登牙城。
现代文：急忙率领亲信登上牙城。
English: He hurriedly led his cronies up the mountain.

古文：田进诚进兵薄之，愬计元济且望救于董重质，乃访其家慰安之，使无怖，以书召重质，重质以单骑白衣降。
现代文：这时候田进诚已经率领军队将他们团团包围了。李愬判断，吴元济肯定会寄希望于董重质出兵救援，于是亲自到董家探访了他的家人，安慰他们不要惊慌，并亲自写了一封招降书。董重质看了信以后，一个人身穿白衣前来归降。
English: At this time, Tian Jincheng had already led the army to encircle them. Li Yan judged that Wu Yuanji would certainly hope for Dong Chongqing to send troops for rescue, so he personally visited Dong's family, comforted them not to panic, and personally wrote a letter of surrender. After Dong Chongqing read the letter, a person dressed in white came to surrender.

古文：进诚火南门，元济请罪，梯而下，槛送京师。
现代文：于是田进诚火烧南门，吴元济看到大势已去，下城梯请求投降，被关入牢车，押送到京师。
English: As a result, Tian Jincheng set fire to the south gate, Wu Yuanji saw that the momentum had gone, went down the stairs to request surrender, was put in a prison car, and escorted to Beijing Division.

古文：不械送祐，则谤者不息。此与司马懿祁山请战奉诏而止同一机轴，皆成言先入，度其必不忤而后行之者也。
现代文：没有将李祐上刑具送往京城，毁谤的话就不会停息，这和当年司马懿祁山请战，等奉到皇帝的诏令就停止，所用的是相同的机略，都是先与上面定好战略，料定不会违背既定方针而后才提出自己不想实行的。
English: Without sending the instrument of torture to the capital, the slander will not stop. This is the same tactic as when Sima Shaoshan called for a war and then stopped when he received the emperor's edict. They both set a strategy with the emperor first, expecting that it would not violate the established policy, and then proposed that they did not want to implement it.

古文：辛毗持节而蜀师老，李祐还幕而吴寇平，虽将之善，君亦与焉。
现代文：就好像辛毗传达圣旨之后，蜀国的军队就不堪作战了。李祐重回到李愬的帐下，贼寇就平定了，这固然是由于为将的善于用兵，而知人善任的贤君，也是成事的原因。
English: It was as if, after Xin Pi had conveyed the sacred will, the army of Shu was no longer able to fight. When Li Youjie returned to Li Xuan's charge, the bandits were subdued. This was certainly due to the fact that the general was good at using soldiers, and the sage who knew people well was also the reason why things were accomplished.

古文：岳侯平杨幺，李愬克元济，无一不资才于敌，亦由威信素孚，操纵在手故也。后人漫然学之，鲜不堕敌之间矣!
现代文：岳飞平杨幺、李愬灭吴元济，虽然都是借贼将攻贼首，也是因为将帅本身素有威望，能够服众；再者早已经掌握了敌人的情势，才能够克敌制胜。
English: Although Yue Fei leveled Yang Mi and Li Qian annihilated Wu Yuan Ji, both of them were borrowers who would attack the heads of thieves, it was also because the general himself had prestige and was able to convince the public; moreover, he had already mastered the situation of the enemy before he was able to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：岑彭、费祎，亡其身，俱为降人刺杀，曹瞒、苻坚亡其师，赤壁之役，操信黄盖之降以取败；淝水之战，降将朱序谋归晋，阴导晋败秦，彼皆老于兵事者，而犹如此。可不慎与？
现代文：如果后人不衡量自身的能力，只会依葫芦画瓢，难保不会失败。就像岑彭、费祎，结果都是被降兵所杀，赤壁之战，曹操盲信黄盖的投降而失败，淝水之战苻坚也是因为降将朱序谋降晋朝，暗中助晋败秦而失败。他们都是沙场老将，深懂军事，尚且这样，后人能不谨慎小心吗？
English: If future generations do not measure their own ability, they will only rely on gourds to draw pictures, and it is difficult to guarantee that they will not fail. Just like Gong Peng and Fei Yao, the results were all killed by soldiers, the Battle of the Red Cliffs, Cao Cao's blind belief in Huang Gai's surrender failed, and the Battle of Surabaya was also due to Zhu Zheng's attempt to surrender to Jin Dynasty and secretly helped to defeat Qin Dynasty. They are all veterans of the battlefield and have a deep understanding of military affairs. Even so, can future generations be careless?

古文：能用谍，不妨舍谍。
现代文：要能很好地运用间谍，不妨让人窝藏间谍，但是必须要先查明间谍的所在，才能够很好地掌握他们。
English: If you want to make good use of spies, you may have people hide spies, but you must first find out where the spies are before you can get a good grip on them.

古文：然必先知谍，方能用谍；必能使民不隐谍，方能知谍；必恩威有以服民，方能使民不隐谍。
现代文：只有让百姓不私自窝藏间谍，才能够察觉出他们的存在；只有对百姓恩威并施，才能使百姓不隐藏间谍。
English: Only by allowing the people not to hide spies from themselves can their existence be detected; only by showing grace to the people can the people not hide spies.

古文：呜呼，难言矣。
现代文：这其中有很大的学问!
English: There is a lot of knowledge involved!

古文：近有邑宰，急欲弭盗，谓诸盗往往获自妓家，必驱妓出境，乃清盗薮。
现代文：近来有一个县令想要肃清境内的盗匪，他认为既然昔日曾经多次在妓馆捕获盗匪，不如将所有的妓女都赶出县境，那么盗匪也就自然会销声匿迹了。
English: Recently, there was a county magistrate who wanted to get rid of the robbers in the county. He thought that since robbers had been caught in brothels many times in the past, it would be better to drive all the prostitutes out of the county, and then the robbers would naturally disappear.

古文：夫妓家果薮盗，正宜留之，以为捕役耳目之径。若薮之境外，与薮之境内庸愈？
现代文：其实盗匪常常流连于妓馆，不是正好给捕役缉捕盗匪提供了很好的线索吗，与其让盗匪聚集在县外，还不如让他们留在县内，好就近监视掌握他们呢。
English: In fact, robbers often linger in brothels. Isn't it just right to provide a good clue for the police to catch the robbers? Instead of letting the robbers gather outside the county, it is better to let them stay in the county, so as to monitor and control them closely.

古文：假令盗薮民家，亦将尽民而驱之乎？
现代文：照着那个县令的逻辑，如果盗匪盘踞在民家，是否也要将全县的百姓都驱逐出境呢？
English: According to the logic of that county order, if the robbers are entrenched in private homes, should the people of the whole county be deported?

古文：不深严捕役之督，而求盗无薮，斯无策之甚者也。
现代文：身为县令，不督责衙役们尽职尽力地拘捕盗匪，反倒只是希望盗匪没有落脚的地方，真是非常的没有头脑了。
English: As the county magistrate, he did not instruct the bailiffs to do their best to arrest the robbers, but only hoped that the robbers did not have a foothold, which was really very stupid.

