古文：周铁虎程灵洗子文季周铁虎，不知何许人也，梁世南渡。
现代文：周铁虎，不知是什么地方人氏，梁朝时渡江来到南方。
English: Zhou Tiehu, I don't know what local people, Liang Dynasty, came to the south when crossing the river.

古文：语音伧重，膂力过人，便马槊，事梁河东王萧誉，以勇敢闻，誉板为府中兵参军。
现代文：语音粗重，体力过人，熟习骑马用槊，曾经为梁朝河东王萧誉效力，以勇敢闻名，萧誉上奏表任命他为府中兵参军。
English: His voice was rough, his physical strength was superior, and he was familiar with riding a horse and using a saddle. He had once served for King Xiaoyu of the Liang Dynasty and was known for his bravery. Xiaoyu appointed him to join the army as a soldier of the prefectural government.

古文：誉为广州刺史，以铁虎为兴宁令。
现代文：萧誉任广州刺史，用周铁虎为兴宁县令。
English: Xiao Rong was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou and Zhou Tiehu was appointed as the governor of Xingning County.

古文：誉迁湘州，又为临蒸令。
现代文：萧誉调任湘州，又用他为临蒸县令。
English: Xiao You was transferred to Xiangzhou, and he was also used as the leader of Lintong County.

古文：侯景之乱，元帝于荆州遣世子方等代誉，且以兵临之。
现代文：侯景作乱时，元帝在荆州派世子萧方等取代萧誉，并且以兵力相威胁。
English: When Hou Jing made a disturbance, the Yuan Emperor sent his son Xiao Fang and others to replace Xiao Ren in Jingzhou, and threatened him with military force.

古文：誉拒战，大捷，方等死，铁虎功最，誉委遇甚重。
现代文：萧誉舆萧方等开战，结果大捷，萧方等死了，周铁虎战功最大，萧誉对他非常倚重和优待。
English: Xiao Fong and others went to war, and the result was a great victory. Xiao Fong and others died. Zhou Tiehu made the greatest contribution to the war. Xiao Fong attached great importance to him and treated him favorably.

古文：及王僧辩讨誉，于阵获铁虎，僧辩命烹之，铁虎呼曰： 侯景未灭，柰何杀壮士！ 
现代文：到王僧辩讨伐萧誉时，在战阵上活捉了周铁虎，王僧辩下令在沸水鼎中烹杀他，周铁虎大声呼叫说： 侯景还没有消灭，怎么就杀掉壮士。 
English: When Wang Sangye was fighting against Xiao Ren, Zhou Tiehu was captured alive on the battlefield by Wang Sangye, who ordered him to be boiled in boiling water and killed. Zhou Tiehu shouted loudly, "Hou Jing has not been eliminated, how can you kill a strong man?"

古文：僧辩奇其言，乃宥之，还其麾下。
现代文：王僧辩赏识他的豪言壮语，就宽恕了他，把他原先的部属还给他。
English: Appreciating his brave words, the king and priest forgave him and returned his former subordinate to him.

古文：及侯景西上，铁虎从僧辩克任约，获宋子仙，每战皆有功。
现代文：当侯景向西进犯，周铁虎随从王僧辩打败了任约，活捉了宋子仙，每次战斗都有功。
English: When Houjing attacked to the west, Zhou Tiehu, following Wang Sangyan, defeated Ren Yao and captured Song Zixian alive. Each battle was a success.

古文：元帝承制授仁威将军、潼州刺史，封沌阳县子，邑三百户。
现代文：梁元帝秉承皇帝旨意任命他为仁威将军、潼州刺史，封沌阳县子，食邑三百户。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed him as the general of Renwei, the governor of Bozhou, the son of Chaoyang County, and the head of 300 households in the county.

古文：又从僧辩克定京邑，降谢答仁，平陆纳于湘州。
现代文：周铁虎又随从王僧辩攻克了京都，降服了谢答仁，在湘州平定了陆纳。
English: Zhou Tiehu followed Wang Sangyan and conquered Kyoto, subdued Xie Danren, and defeated Lu Na in Hunan.

古文：承圣二年，以前后战功，进爵为侯，增邑并前五百户。
现代文：承圣二年，因为先后皆有战功，爵级提升为侯，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共五百户。
English: In the second year after the consecration, because all of them had distinguished themselves in the war, they were promoted to the rank of knight and given additional food and wine, totaling a total of 500 households previously given.

古文：仍为散骑常侍，领信义太守，将军如故。
现代文：随后担任散骑常侍，领信义太守，将军职务仍旧。
English: Subsequently, he served as a knight errant, holding the title of Shinyi Taishu, and still held the position of general.

古文：高祖诛僧辩，铁虎率所部降，因复其本职。
现代文：高祖诛杀了王僧辩，周铁虎率领部下降顺，因而官复原职。
English: Gao Zu killed Wang Sanfen, Zhou Tiehu led the collar to fall down, and thus the post was restored.

古文：徐嗣徽引齐寇渡江，铁虎于板桥浦破其水军，尽获甲仗船舸。
现代文：徐嗣徽勾引齐寇渡江，周铁虎在板桥浦打败了他们的水军，缴获了全部盔甲兵器和船只。
English: Xu Shihui lured Qi Ke to cross the river, Zhou Tiehu defeated their navy in Banqiao Pu and captured all armor weapons and ships.

古文：又攻历阳，袭齐寇步营，并皆克捷。
现代文：又进攻历阳，袭击齐寇步兵军营，全都获胜。
English: They also attacked Liyang and stormed the Zico infantry camp, and all of them were victorious.

古文：嗣徽平，绍泰二年，迁散骑常侍、严威将军、太子左卫率。
现代文：平定徐嗣徽后，绍泰二年，周铁虎升任散骑常侍、严威将军、太子左卫率。
English: After the suppression of Xu Shihui, Zhou Tiehu was promoted to the rank of straggler, General Yan Wei, and Prince Zuo Wei in the second year of Shaotai.

古文：寻随周文育于南江拒萧勃，恒为前军。
现代文：不久随着周文育在南江拒战萧勃，常作前军。
English: Soon, with Zhou Wenyu's failure to resist the war in the South China Sea, he often became a front-line soldier.

古文：文育又命铁虎偏军，于苦竹滩袭勃前军欧阳頠。
现代文：周文育又用周铁虎为偏军，在苦竹滩攻袭萧勃的前军欧阳顿。
English: Zhou Benyu also used Zhou Tiehu as a partial army to attack Xiao Bo's former army Ouyang Tong at the Bitter Bamboo Beach.

古文：又随文育西征王琳，于沌口败绩，铁虎与文育、侯安都并为琳所擒。
现代文：又随从周文育西征王琳，在沌人败，周铁虎与周文育、侯安都一起被王琳抓获。
English: Wang Lin followed Zhou Wenyu to conquer the West, but was defeated in the chaos. Zhou Tiehu, Zhou Wenyu and Hou An were all captured by Wang Lin.

古文：琳引见诸将，与之语，唯铁虎辞气不屈，故琳尽宥文育之徒，独铁虎见害，时年四十九。
现代文：王琳接见他们，与他们谈话，衹有周铁虎言词气概不屈不挠，所以王琳饶恕了周文育这些人，惟独周铁虎一人被害，这年四十九岁。
English: Wang Lin received them, talked with them, and had Zhou Tiehu's words and indomitable spirit, so Wang Lin forgave Zhou Wenyu these people, but only Zhou Tiehu was killed, this year he was forty-nine years old.

古文：高祖闻之，下诏曰： 天地之宝，所贵曰生，形魄之徒，所重唯命。
现代文：高祖得知后，下韶书说： 天地间的宝物，最为珍贵的是生存，形神兼备的人类，最为重要的是生命。
English: When Gao Zu learned of this, he wrote in his diary: The most precious treasure in heaven and earth is life, and the most important thing is life.

古文：至如捐生立节，效命酬恩，追远怀昔，信宜加等。
现代文：至于舍弃生命建立名节，献出生命酬谢恩德的人，对这些前贤先哲的迫念，的确应该加等。
English: As for those who gave up their lives to establish famous festivals, and those who gave their lives to reward and thank people, the longing for these former sages should indeed be increased.

古文：散骑常侍、严威将军、太子左卫率、潼州刺史、领信义太守沌阳县开国侯铁虎，器局沈厚，风力勇壮，北讨南征，竭忠尽力。
现代文：散骑常侍、严威将军、太子左卫率、潼州刺史、领信义太守沌阳县开国侯周铁虎，器质朴实稳重，风格刚武雄健，北讨南征，尽忠尽力。
English: The knight errant, the general Yan Wei, the prince Zuo Wei, the statesman Zhang Zizhi, and the leader Xinyi, the grand marshal of Qoyang County, the founder of the state, Zhou Tiehu, are simple and stable, the style is strong and vigorous, the north is fighting against the south, and they are loyal and do their best.

古文：推锋江夏，致陷凶徒，神气弥雄，肆言无挠。
现代文：在江夏冲锋时，被凶敌所获，但神情气概越发威武，放声而言，不惧不挠。
English: When charging in Jiangxia, he was caught by the fierce enemy, but his spirit became more and more powerful, and he was not afraid to resist.

古文：岂直温序见害，方其理须，庞德临危，犹能瞋目。
现代文：被害之曰岂衹是梳理胡须从容赴死的温序，还胜过怒¨圆睁慷慨就刑的庞德。
English: The victim is said to be the order of the day for combing his beard and calmly going to his death, even better than Pound, who was angry and generous with his punishment.

古文：忠贞如此，恻怆兼深，可赠侍中、护军将军、青、冀二州刺史，加封一千户，并给鼓吹一部，侯如故。 天嘉五年，世祖又诏曰： 汉室功臣，形写宫观，魏朝猛将，名配宗祧，功烈所以长存，世代因之不朽。
现代文：如此忠诚坚定，令人倍加悲伤，应该追赠他为侍中、护军将军、青冀二州刺史，增赐食邑一千户，并且赏给鼓吹乐一部，侯位仍旧 天嘉五年，世祖又下韶书说： 漠室功臣，肖像描画在宫廷台阁，魏朝猛将，配享在帝王宗庙，他们的功绩事业以此长存，千秋万代因而不朽。
English: So loyal and steadfast, it is doubly sad that he should be posthumously awarded as a chamberlain, a general of the escort, a history of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, an additional gift of a thousand households, and an award to a part of the propaganda music, the marital status is still Tianjia five years, and the ancestor also said in the imperial edict: the hero of the desert chamber, the portrait is drawn on the palace table, and the fierce general of the Wei Dynasty, is shared in the emperor's ancestral temple. Their meritorious deeds are perpetuated in this way, so they are immortal for thousands of generations.

古文：故侍中、护军将军、青、冀二州刺史沌阳县开国侯铁虎，诚节梗亮，力用雄敢，王业初基，行间累及，垂翅贼垒，正色寇庭，古之遗烈，有识同壮。
现代文：前侍中、护军将军、壹冀二州刺史沌阳县开国侯周铁虎，忠诚节操正直清亮，才质杰出果毅，开创王业，征战累累，不幸失陷于贼阵，仍能神色凛然在敌营，这种古代烈士的遣风，为有识之士共同钦仰。
English: Zhou Tiehu, a former chamberlain, general of the escort army, and the first marquis of Guoyang County, one of the two states in Hebei Province, was a loyal, honest and clear-cut person, with outstanding talent and determination. He pioneered the royal career, fought in many wars, and unfortunately fell into a bandit camp. He was still able to look dignified in the enemy camp. This ancient martyr's style is admired by people of insight.

古文：陨身不屈，虽隆荣等，营魂易远，言追嘉惜。
现代文：他献身不屈之后，虽然已经追封而高居光荣的行列，然而英灵容易随时光而远逝人间，所以特此嘉许。
English: After his dedication and unyielding, although he has been chased and ranked high in the ranks of glory, however, it is easy for him to pass away at any time, so I would like to commend him.

古文：宜仰陪需寝，恭颁飨奠，可配食高祖庙庭。 
现代文：他应该随附在先帝祭殿，恭敬地分享祭奠，可以配享在高祖祭庙。 
English: He should accompany the former emperor in the hall of worship, respectfully share in the memorial service, and can share in the ancestral temple.

古文：子瑜嗣。
现代文：他的儿子周瑜继承对他的追封赠赏。
English: His son Zhou Yu inherited his posthumous award.

古文：时有盱眙马明，字世朗，梁世事鄱阳嗣王萧范。
现代文：当时还有盱眙人马明，字世朗，曾经在梁朝为鄱阳嗣王萧范效力。
English: At that time, there was also a man named Ma Ming, also known as Shilang, who had worked for the Yang Dynasty's successor, King Xiao Fan, in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：侯景之乱，据庐江之东界，拒贼临城栅。
现代文：侯景作乱时，马明据守庐江束部的边界，在临城战栅抵御贼寇。
English: When Houjing made a disturbance, Ma Ming defended the border of Sokube in the Li River and resisted the bandits at the battlements of Lincheng.

古文：元帝授散骑常侍、平北将军、北兗州刺史，领庐江太守。
现代文：元帝任命他为散骑常侍、平北将军、北兖州刺史，领庐江太守。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed him to be a knight errant, the general of North Pyongan Province, the governor of North Pyongan Province, and the governor of Panjiang Province.

古文：荆州陷没，归于高祖。
现代文：型业失陷后，他归附直担。
English: After the collapse of the model industry, he was assigned to the direct burden.

古文：绍泰中，复官位，封西华县侯，邑二千户。
现代文：睦年间，恢复官位，封西华县侯，食邑二千户。
English: During the Mutsu era, he was reinstated as an official, given the title of the lord of Xihua County, and his food village grew to 2,000 households.

古文：亦随文育西征王琳，于沌口军败，明力战死之，赠使持节、征西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：他也随着旦塞直西征旦继，在迤旦兵败，墅旦力战而死，追赠为使持节、征西将军、竖刺史。
English: He also followed the Western Expedition of the Tang Dynasty, was defeated in the Battle of Shantang, and died in the Battle of Shantang. He was posthumously awarded with the titles of Envoy to the West, General of the Western Expedition, and Historian of the Western Expedition.

古文：程灵洗，字玄涤，新安海宁人也。
现代文：程灵洗字玄涤，新安海宁人。
English: Cheng Ling washes the characters, Xin An Haining people.

古文：少以勇力闻，步行日二百馀里，便骑善游。
现代文：年轻时以骁勇有力气闻名，一日能步行二百余里，熟习骑马善于游泳。
English: When he was young, he was known for his bravery and strength. He could walk more than two hundred miles a day, and he was good at riding horses and swimming.

古文：梁末，海宁、黟、歙等县及鄱阳、宣城郡界多盗贼，近县苦之。
现代文：梁朝末年，海宁、黟、歙等县和鄱阳、宣城郡边界上多有盗贼，邻近各县深受其苦。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, there were many thieves on the borders of Haining, Handan, Handan and other counties, as well as Fenyang and Xuancheng counties, and the neighboring counties suffered from them.

古文：灵洗素为乡里所畏伏，前后守长恒使召募少年，逐捕劫盗。
现代文：程灵洗一向为乡里人所敬畏，前后几任守长常常派他招募年轻人，驱逐拘捕劫贼强盗。
English: Cheng Ling Zai has always been feared by the villagers. Several wardens have often sent him to recruit young people, expel and arrest thieves and robbers.

古文：侯景之乱，灵洗聚徒据黟、歙以拒景。
现代文：侯景作乱时，程灵洗聚集人众据守黟县、歙县抵御侯景。
English: When Houjing made a disturbance, Cheng Lingwu gathered a crowd of people to defend Jixian County and Jixian County against Houjing.

古文：景军据有新安，新安太守湘西乡侯萧隐奔依灵洗，灵洗奉以主盟。
现代文：侯景的叛军攻占了新安，新安太守湘西乡侯萧隐奔逃投靠程灵洗，程灵洗尊奉他主持抗侯联盟。
English: The rebels of Houjing conquered Xin'an, and the new governor of Xin'an, Hunan West Township, Hou Xiaoyin, fled to Cheng Lingbai. Cheng Lingbai was honored by him to preside over the anti-Hou alliance.

古文：梁元帝于荆州承制，又遣使间道奉表。
现代文：梁元帝在荆州秉承皇帝旨意，程灵洗派使者从偏僻小路到荆州上表致意。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan in Jingzhou, adhering to the emperor's will, sent an envoy from Chengling to Jingzhou to pay his respects.

古文：刘神茂自东阳建义拒贼，灵洗攻下新安，与神茂相应。
现代文：刘神茂在束阳树起义旗抗御贼寇，程灵洗攻下新安，与刘神茂相呼应。
English: Liu Shenmao echoed Liu Shenmao's actions in Sokyangshu Uprising Banner Against Thieves and Robbers, and Cheng Lingwu's capture of Xin'an.

古文：元帝授持节、通直散骑常侍、都督新安郡诸军事、云麾将军、谯州刺史资，领新安太守，封巴丘县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：元帝授给他持节、通直散骑常侍、都督新安郡诸军事、云麾将军、谯州刺史资格，领新安太守，封为巴丘县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Yuan conferred on him the qualifications of holding festivals, being a regular attendant on horseback, the military governor of Xin'an County, the general of Yunnan Province, and the historian of Zhangzhou Province, the title of the governor of Xin'an Province, the title of the governor of Bachu County, and 500 households of food villages.

古文：神茂为景所破，景偏帅吕子荣进攻新安，灵洗退保黟、歙。
现代文：刘神茂被侯景打败，侯景的偏军之帅吕子荣进攻新安，程灵洗退却保守黟县、歙县。
English: Liu Shenmao was defeated by Houjing, the handsome Lv Zirong of Houjing's partial army attacked Xin'an, and Cheng Lingchi retreated to the conservative counties of Yixian and Yixian.

古文：及景败，子荣退走，灵洗复据新安。
现代文：到侯景失败，吕子荣退走，程灵洗又进据新安。
English: When Houjing failed, Lü Zirong retreated, and Cheng Lingwu advanced to Xin'an.

古文：进军建德，擒贼帅赵桑乾。
现代文：进兵到建德，擒获贼帅赵桑干。
English: The soldiers marched to Jiande and captured the thief Zhao Sangan.

古文：以功授持节、散骑常侍、都督青、冀二州诸军事、青州刺史，增邑并前一千户，将军、太守如故。
现代文：因有战功被任命为持节、散骑常侍、都督青冀二州诸军事、青州刺史，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千户，将军、太守二职仍旧。
English: Due to his war exploits, he was appointed as Jijie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangjie, Zangj

古文：仍令灵洗率所部下扬州，助王僧辩镇防。
现代文：随后命令程灵洗率领部属下扬州，协助王僧辩镇守防御。
English: Subsequently, he ordered Cheng Lingchi to lead his subordinate Yangzhou to assist Wang Sangfen in defending the town.

古文：迁吴兴太守，未行，僧辩命灵洗从侯瑱西援荆州。
现代文：又调任吴兴太守，还没有上任，王僧辩命令程灵洗随从侯琐向西救援荆州。
English: He also transferred Wu Xing to the position of governor-general, but before he took office, Wang Sangyan ordered Cheng Lingqin to follow Hou Zuo to the west to rescue Jingzhou.

古文：荆州陷，还都。
现代文：荆州失陷后，回到京都。
English: After Jingzhou fell, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：高祖诛僧辩，灵洗率所领来援，其徒力战于石头西门，军不利，遣使招谕，久之乃降，高祖深义之。
现代文：高祖诛杀王僧辩时，程灵洗率领部属来援救，那天夜晚竭力大战于石头城西门，战斗失利，高祖派使者对他招降晓谕，在较长时间的犹豫后程灵洗才投降，高祖很赞许他的忠义。
English: When Gao Zu attacked and killed Wang Sofen, Cheng Lingchi led his subordinates to come to the rescue. That night, they fought hard at the West Gate of Stone Town, but lost the battle. Gao Zu sent an envoy to him to invite him to surrender. After a long period of hesitation, Cheng Lingchi surrendered. Gao Zu highly praised his loyalty.

古文：绍泰元年，授使持节、信武将军、兰陵太守，常侍如故，助防京口。
现代文：绍泰元年，任命他为使持节、信武将军、兰陵太守，常侍一职仍旧，协助防守京。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, he was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of Xinwu, and the governor of Lanling. He still served as a regular attendant and assisted in the defense of Beijing.

古文：及平徐嗣徽，灵洗有功，除南丹阳太守，封遂安县侯，增邑并前一千五百户，仍镇采石。
现代文：平定徐嗣徽，程灵洗有功，被任命为南丹阳太守，封为遂安县侯，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千五百户，随后前往采石镇守。
English: He was awarded the title of Southern Danyang Governor, the title of Su'an County Governor, and the title of Shuxi County Governor. In total, a total of 1,500 households were awarded the title of Shuxi County Governor, and then he went to the quarry township governor.

古文：随周文育西讨王琳，于沌口败绩，为琳所拘。
现代文：程灵洗随从周文育西讨王琳，在沌口大败，被王琳拘禁。
English: Cheng Lingqi followed Zhou Wen Yuxi to fight Wang Lin. He was defeated in Chaogou and was detained by Wang Lin.

古文：明年，与侯安都等逃归。
现代文：第二年，与侯安都等逃回。
English: The following year, he fled back with Hou Andu and others.

古文：兼丹阳尹，出为高唐、太原二郡太守，仍镇南陵。
现代文：兼任丹阳尹，出任高唐、太原二郡太守，随后镇守南陵。
English: He also served as Danyang Yin, and was the governor of the two counties of Gaotang and Taiyuan, and later the governor of Nanling.

古文：迁太子左卫率。
现代文：升任太子左卫率。
English: He was promoted to the position of crown prince left guard.

古文：高祖崩，王琳前军东下，灵洗于南陵破之，虏其兵士，并获青龙十馀乘。
现代文：高祖去世，王琳的前军束下，程灵洗在南陵打垮了他们，俘虏了士兵，并且缴获青龙船舰十余艘。
English: Gaozu died, and Cheng Lingwu defeated Wang Lin's former army in Nanling, captured soldiers, and captured more than ten Qinglong ships.

古文：以功授持节、都督南豫州缘江诸军事、信武将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：因有战功被任命为持节、都督南豫州缘江诸军事、信武将军、南豫州刺史。
English: Due to his war service, he was appointed as the military commander of Ji Jie, the military governor of South Yuzhou, the military commander of Yangtze River, the general of Xinwu and the historian of South Yuzhou.

古文：侯瑱等败王琳于栅口，灵洗乘胜逐北，据有鲁山。
现代文：侯琐等在栅口击败了王琳，程灵洗乘胜追逐败敌，进据鲁山。
English: Hou Zuo and others defeated Wang Lin at the gate, Cheng Lingwu took advantage of the victory to chase the defeated enemy, and entered Lu Shan.

古文：征为左卫将军，馀如故。
现代文：天子征召他为左卫将军，其余封赏仍旧。
English: Heaven's Son conscripted him as the General of the Left Division, and the rest of the rewards are still outstanding.

古文：天嘉四年，周迪重寇临川，以灵洗为都督，自鄱阳别道击之，迪又走山谷间。
现代文：天嘉四年，周迪第二次侵犯临川，天子任命程灵洗为都督，从鄱阳的另一条通道进击，周迪又从山谷间逃走了。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Jia, Zhou Di invaded Linchuan for the second time. Tian Zi appointed Cheng Ling Zi as the governor, and attacked from another channel in Shenyang. Zhou Di also fled from the valley.

古文：五年，迁中护军，常侍如故。
现代文：五年，程灵洗升任为中护军，常侍这一职务仍旧。
English: Five years later, Cheng Lingqin was promoted to the position of middle bodyguard, and the position of regular attendant still exists.

古文：出为使持节、都督郢、巴、武三州诸军事、宣毅将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：后来调出京城担任使持节、都督郢巴武三州诸军事、宣毅将军、郢州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the capital to serve as the envoy of the festival, the military of the three states of the capital, the general of Xuan Yi, and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：废帝即位，进号云麾将军。
现代文：废帝即位，提升官号为云麾将军。
English: The deposed emperor ascended the throne and was promoted to the official title of General Yun Qi.

古文：华皎之反也，遣使招诱灵洗，灵洗斩皎使，以状闻。
现代文：华皎反叛，派使者招引程灵洗，程灵洗斩杀华皎的使者，并把逭件事报告给朝廷。
English: Hua Tuo rebelled, sent an envoy to lure Cheng Ling Zhao, Cheng Ling Zhao killed Hua Tuo's envoy, and reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：朝廷深嘉其忠，增其守备，给鼓吹一部，因推心待之，使其子文季领水军助防。
现代文：朝廷十分赞赏他的忠心，增强了他的防备兵力，赏给鼓吹乐一部，于是推心置腹地对待他，又派他的儿子程文季率领水军协助防守。
English: The imperial court highly appreciated his loyalty, strengthened his defense force, and rewarded him with a part of the propaganda. Therefore, they treated him sincerely and sent his son, Cheng Wenzhi, to lead the navy to assist in the defense.

古文：是时周遣其将长胡公拓跋定率步骑二万助皎攻围灵洗，灵洗婴城固守。
现代文：这时周派遣将领长胡公拓跋定率领步兵骑兵二万人援助华皎进攻围困程灵洗，程灵洗环城四面固守。
English: At this time, Zhou dispatched General Hu Gongtuo, who led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to aid Huayu in attacking and besieging Chenglingwuy. Chenglingwuy encircled the city and defended it on all sides.

古文：及皎退，乃出军蹑定，定不获济江，以其众降。
现代文：到华皎退走了，程灵洗就出兵暗中追踪拓跋定，拓跋定过不了江，只好率领部属投降。
English: When Hua Wei retreated, Cheng Lingqi sent troops to secretly track Tuoba Ding. Tuoba Ding could not cross the river, so he had to lead his subordinates to surrender.

古文：因进攻周沔州，克之，擒其刺史裴宽。
现代文：程灵洗于是攻打周的沔州，攻下来了，活捉了该州刺史裴宽。
English: Cheng Ling Zai then attacked Zhou's Bozhou, captured and captured the state's crown prince Pei Guang alive.

古文：以功进号安西将军，改封重安县公，增邑并前二千户。
现代文：因有战功被提升官号码安西将军，提升爵位封为重安县公，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共二千户。
English: Due to his war service, he was promoted to the rank of General Anxi, promoted to the peerage and appointed as the governor of Chong'an County, and granted an additional food township, totaling a total of two thousand households previously granted.

古文：灵洗性严急，御下甚苛刻，士卒有小罪，必以军法诛之，造次之间，便加捶挞，而号令分明，与士卒同甘苦，众亦以此依附。
现代文：程灵洗性情严厉急躁，管理部下非常苛刻，士卒有点小罪，一定按军法惩治，鲁莽情急的时候，便用鞭棍抽打，但却号令分明，舆士卒同甘共苦，所以部属也因此依顺归附他。
English: Cheng Lingwu was stern and impatient, and his subordinates were very harsh. If a soldier committed a minor crime, he would be punished according to military law. If he was reckless and impatient, he would be whipped with a whip. However, his orders were clear. Public officials should share the same joys and sorrows, so his subordinates also obeyed him.

古文：性好播植，躬勤耕稼，至于水陆所宜，刈获早晚，虽老农不能及也。
现代文：程灵洗生性喜欢播种栽植。亲自耕田种地，至于水田旱地的栽种，收获时令的早晚，即使是老农也不如他清楚。
English: Cheng Ling Ying likes to sow and plant. He personally cultivates fields and lands, and as for the cultivation of paddy fields and dry lands, even the old farmers are not as clear as he is about the time of harvest.

古文：伎妾无游手，并督之纺绩。
现代文：他的歌女妻妾无人游手好闲，由他责令亲手纺纱绩麻。
English: His songstress wife and concubine were not idle, and he ordered her to spin the yarn by hand.

古文：至于散用赀财，亦弗俭吝。
现代文：至于资财钱物的分配使用，也不吝啬。
English: As for the allocation and use of assets and money, they are not stingy.

古文：光大二年，卒于州，时年五十五。
现代文：光大二年，在郢州逝世，逭年五十五岁。
English: He died in Ganzhou in his second year of college, at the age of fifty-five.

古文：赠镇西将军、开府仪同三司，谥曰忠壮。
现代文：追赠为镇西将军、开府仪同三司。谧号是忠壮。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhenxi Shogun and Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji. His posthumous name was Zhongzhuang.

古文：太建四年，诏配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：太建四年，圣旨恩准配享在直担祭庙。
English: It's been four years since it was built, and the blessings of the divine will be enjoyed at the Zhitang Festival Temple.

古文：子文季嗣。文季字少卿。
现代文：儿子迢塞至继承。程文季字少卿。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Cheng Wenzhi, who was given the title of Shaoqing.

古文：幼习骑射，多干略，果决有父风。
现代文：幼年习练骑马射箭，富有才干谋略，有他父亲果敢决断的作风。
English: He learned horseback riding and archery at an early age. He is a talented strategist and has his father's decisive style.

古文：弱冠从灵洗征讨，必前登陷阵。
现代文：他在二十岁左右就随从程灵洗出军征讨，每战必定首先登城陷阵。
English: At around the age of twenty, he followed Cheng Lingwu to go out to fight in the army, and in every battle, he would be the first to enter the city.

古文：灵洗与周文育、侯安都等败于沌口，为王琳所执，高祖召陷贼诸将子弟厚遇之，文季最有礼容，深为高祖所赏。
现代文：程灵洗与周文育、侯安都等在沌口大败，被玉壁抓获，直担召见被俘将领的子弟并且优待他们，其中程文季最有礼节法度，很得高祖赞赏。
English: Cheng Lingqi, together with Zhou Wenyu and Hou Andu, suffered a crushing defeat in Chaokou and were captured by the Jade Wall. They took it upon themselves to summon the sons of the captured generals and treated them well. Among them, Cheng Wenyi was the most courteous and highly appreciated by Gaozu.

古文：永定中，累迁通直散骑侍郎、句容令。
现代文：丞童年间，连续升任为通直散骑侍郎、匀容县令。
English: During his childhood, he was successively promoted to Tsuchida Sanzhijirō and Uniryo County magistrate.

古文：世祖嗣位，除宣惠始兴王府限内中直兵参军。
现代文：世担继承帝位，任命捏塞至为宣惠筮璺王府限内中直兵参军。
English: He was in charge of the succession to the throne, and he appointed Jian Zi to be the first to enlist in the army within the time limit set by the Xuan Hui royal court.

古文：是时王为扬州刺史，镇冶城，府中军事，悉以委之。
现代文：这时始兴王担任扬州刺史，镇守在冶城，帅府的军事，全部委托给程文季。
English: At this time, Shixing Wang served as Yangzhou chief historian, the town guard in Yecheng, and the military commander of Shuaifu, all of which were entrusted to Cheng Wenzhi.

古文：天嘉二年，除贞毅将军、新安太守，仍随侯安都东讨留异。
现代文：天嘉二年，任命为贞毅将军、新安太守，于是随从堡安都向东进军讨伐留异。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he was appointed as General Zhengyi and the new Andean governor, so he marched to the east with Bu Andu to fight the dissidents.

古文：异党向文政据有新安，文季率精甲三百，轻往攻之。
现代文：留异的党徒向文政盘据在新安，程文季率领精兵三百人，轻装急进攻打新安。
English: The dissident party members made an offer to Wen Zheng in Xin'an, and Cheng Wenzhi led 300 elite soldiers to attack Xin'an with light equipment.

古文：文政遣其兄子瓒来拒，文季与战，大破瓒军，文政乃降。
现代文：向文政派他哥哥的儿子向瓒前来抗御，程文季与他激战，彻底打垮了他，向文政这才投降。
English: Xiang Wensheng sent his brother's son Xiang Yao to resist, Cheng Wencai fought with him fiercely, completely defeated him, and only then surrendered to Wensheng.

古文：三年，始兴王伯茂出镇东州，复以文季为镇东府中兵参军，带剡令。
现代文：三年，始兴王伯茂出镇东州，又用程文季为镇东府中兵参军，兼任剡县县令。
English: Three years later, Shixing Wang Bomao left the town of Dongzhou, and Cheng Wencai joined the army as a soldier from the town of Dongfu, and also served as the county magistrate of Jixian County.

古文：四年，陈宝应与留异连结，又遣兵随周迪更出临川，世祖遣信义太守余孝顷自海道袭晋安，文季为之前军，所向克捷。
现代文：四年，陈实应与留异联合勾结，又出兵跟着旦迪再犯龌川，世担派遣值盏太守金耋垣从海路袭击置宣，捏塞季担任前军，所攻之处，全都获胜。
English: In the fourth year, Chen Shixing allied with Rui Yi, and sent troops to follow Dandi to recapture Shichuan. Shetan dispatched the duty officer Kim Yeonggi to attack and besiege Xuan from the sea, and held out for a while as the vanguard. They won all the places they attacked.

古文：陈宝应平，文季战功居多，还，转府谘议参军，领中直兵。
现代文：平定陈实应，程文季战功最多，凯旋回军后，调任镇束府谘议参军，领中直兵。
English: Chen Shiying and Cheng Wenzhi made the greatest contribution to the war, and after their triumphant return to the army, they were transferred to the town of Sokfu to advise and join the army, leading the middle and direct soldiers.

古文：出为临海太守。
现代文：后来调出京城任堕复太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to the capital to serve as the deposed Fu Taishu.

古文：寻乘金翅助父镇郢城。
现代文：不久乘金翅舰协助父亲镇守郢继。
English: Soon after, he assisted his father in the administration of the town by taking the Golden Wing Ship.

古文：华皎平，灵洗及文季并有捍御之功。
现代文：平定茎堕，程灵洗和跫塞季都有抵御之功。
English: Calming the falling stalks, Cheng Lingwashing and the withering season all have the effect of resisting.

古文：及灵洗卒，文季尽领其众，起为超武将军，仍助防郢州。
现代文：到程灵洗去世时，崔塞垩全部统领父亲的部属，服丧期间夺情起用为超武将军，仍旧协助防守郢州。
English: At the time of Ling Chai's death, Trisei led all of his father's subordinates. During the period of mourning, he was used as a super general and still assisted in the defense of Zhangzhou.

古文：文季性至孝，虽军旅夺礼，而毁瘠甚至。
现代文：程文季生性最孝，虽然军中禁止丧事礼仪，但还是因哀痛过度而形貌非常憔悴。
English: Cheng Wencai was the most filial by nature. Although funeral etiquette was banned in the military, he still looked very sad due to excessive grief.

古文：太建二年，为豫章内史，将军如故。
现代文：越车二年，担任邃童内史，将军一职仍旧。
English: In the second year of Yuezhe, he was in charge of the internal history of Yedong, and still held the position of general.

古文：服阕，袭封重安县公。
现代文：服丧期满，承袭父亲重安县公的爵位。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he succeeded to his father's title of Duke of Chong'an County.

古文：随都督章昭达率军往荆州征萧岿。
现代文：随同都督章昭达率军前往翅州征讨芦垄。
English: Accompanied by Governor Zhang Zhaoda, he led the army to Wenzhou to conquer Lulong.

古文：岿与周军多造舟舰，置于青泥水中。
现代文：芦蛊与周军造了大量舟舰，暂时搁放在青泥水中。
English: Lulu and Zhou Jun built a large number of boats and temporarily placed them in the blue muddy water.

古文：时水长漂疾，昭达乃遣文季共钱道戢轻舟袭之，尽焚其舟舰。
现代文：遣时水涨流急，章昭达就派担直至与钱道堂一道轻舟进袭，焚毁了那裹的全部舟舰。
English: When the water rose rapidly, Zhang Zhaoda took charge until he and Qian Daodang attacked in a light boat and burned all the boats.

古文：昭达因萧岿等兵稍怠，又遣文季夜入其外城，杀伤甚众。
现代文：章昭达乘萧归等的士卒有些疲倦时，又派程文季在夜晚攻入外城，杀死杀伤很多敌军。
English: When Zhang Zhaoda's soldiers were a little tired after returning from the battle, he sent Wencai to attack the outer city at night, killing and wounding many enemy troops.

古文：既而周兵大出，巴陵内史雷道勤拒战死之，文季仅以身免。
现代文：稍后不久周兵大量从内城杀出，巴陵内史雷道勤抵抗奋战而死，程文季仅自身脱难。
English: Shortly afterwards, a large number of Zhou soldiers were killed from the inner city, Baling Neishi Lei Daoqin resisted and died in battle, and Cheng Wenqi was the only one to escape.

古文：以功加通直散骑常侍、安远将军，增邑五百户。
现代文：因为有战功加任通直散骑常侍、安远将军，增赐食邑五百户。
English: Because of his war exploits, he was appointed to the post of Tsuchizuchikizanki no Tsuneishi, General Anyon, and was granted an additional 500 households in Shokui.

古文：五年，都督吴明彻北讨秦郡，秦郡前江浦通涂水，齐人并下大柱为杙，栅水中，乃前遣文季领骁勇拔开其栅，明彻率大军自后而至，攻秦郡克之。
现代文：五年，都督吴明彻向北进军攻打秦郡，秦郡之前的江浦与涂水相通，齐军打下并排的大柱成为木桩，形成栅栏横立在水中，吴明彻派程文季率领骁勇士卒为先头部队拔开栅栏，然后亲自率领大部队随后杀人，攻取了秦郡。
English: In the fifth year, the governor Wu Mingcher marched north to attack Qin County. Before Qin County, Jiangpu was connected to Tuishui. The Qi army knocked down the side-by-side pillars to become wooden piles, forming a fence that stood in the water. Wu Mingcher sent Cheng Wencai to lead the soldiers to pull the fence, and then personally led the large force to kill people and capture Qin County.

古文：又别遣文季围泾州，屠其城，进攻盱眙，拔之。
现代文：又另外派遣程文季围攻泾州，破城以后杀掉了全城军民，再攻旺险，攻下来了。
English: He also dispatched Cheng Wencai to besiege Bozhou. After breaking through the city, he killed all the soldiers and civilians in the city. He then attacked Wangan and conquered it.

古文：仍随明彻围寿阳。
现代文：随后仍然随着吴明彻围攻寿盐。
English: Afterwards, he still besieged Shoushan with Wu Mingche.

古文：文季临事谨急，御下严整，前后所克城垒，率皆迮水为堰，土木之功，动逾数万。
现代文：担塞垩为人处事严格急躁，管理部下严厉整肃，前前后后所攻下的城垒，大抵都是用筑坝拦水灌城的办法，土木沙石的运取，一动工就超过数万人。
English: The guards were strict and hasty in dealing with people, and the subordinates of the management carried out strict rectification. The fortresses that were attacked before and after were mostly built by damming, stopping water and filling the city. The transportation of civil sand and stone exceeded tens of thousands of people as soon as the construction began.

古文：每置阵役人，文季必先诸将，夜则早起，迄暮不休，军中莫不服其勤干。
现代文：每逢立阵安营役用人力，程文季必定身先将士，每夜早起，直到天黑工作不停，军中没有谁不佩服他的勤劳能干。
English: Every time he set up a camp and used manpower, Cheng Wencai would be the first to go, getting up early every night and working non-stop until dark. No one in the army did not admire his hard work and ability.

古文：每战恒为前锋，齐军深惮之，谓为程虎。
现代文：每逢战斗，常为尖兵，齐军对他非常忌惮，称他为程虎。
English: Whenever there was a battle, he was often the top soldier. The Qi army was very wary of him and called him Chenghu.

古文：以功除散骑常侍、明威将军，增邑五百户。
现代文：因有战功被任命为散骑常侍、明威将军，增赐食邑五百户。
English: Due to his war exploits, he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, General Ming Wei, and was granted an additional 500 households of food villages.

古文：又带新安内史，进号武毅将军。
现代文：又兼任新安内史，提升官号为武毅将军。
English: He also served as Xin'an's internal historian, and was promoted to the official title of General Wu Yi.

古文：八年，为持节、都督谯州诸军事、安远将军、谯州刺史。
现代文：八年，任命为持节、都督谯州诸军事、安远将军、尽纽刺史。
English: In the eighth year, he was appointed as Jisai, the military governor of Bozhou, the general of Anyuan, and the historian.

古文：其年，又督北徐仁州诸军事、北徐州刺史，馀并如故。
现代文：这年，又任命为督北途仁州诸军事、北涂州刺史，其他的官职仍旧。
English: In the same year, he was also appointed as the military governor of the northern province of Renzhou and the military governor of the northern province of Tuizhou. Other official positions remain unchanged.

古文：九年，又随明彻北讨，于吕梁作堰，事见明彻传。
现代文：九年，又随从呈旦旦邀北伐，在旦矾作坝逼水入城，这件事见吴明彻传。
English: In the ninth year, he followed the leader of the Northern Expedition, who had been invited to present the Dan Dan, and built a dam at Dan Dan to force water into the city. This event is recorded in Wu Ming Che's biography.

古文：十年春，败绩，为周所囚，仍授开府仪同三司。
现代文：十年春天，打了败仗，被周囚禁，随后还加任他为开府仪同三司。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, he fought a losing battle and was imprisoned by Zhou. Later, he was appointed as the keeper of the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：十一年，自周逃归，至涡阳，为边吏所执，还送长安，死于狱中。
现代文：十一年，从届潜逃回南方，逃到涡阳，被边境上的官吏扣押，送回长安，死在监狱中。
English: In the eleventh year, he fled back to the south from hiding, fled to Turbuyang, was detained by officials at the border, sent back to Chang'an, and died in prison.

古文：后主是时既与周绝，不之知也。
现代文：这时后主已经舆周断绝交往，不知道他的死讯。
English: At this time, the owner had already severed contact with the public and did not know about his death.

古文：至德元年，后主始知之，追赠散骑常侍。
现代文：至德元年，后主才知道这件事，追赠他为散骑常侍。
English: It was not until the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate that his heirs became aware of this, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Sanzhishi no Tsunenobu.

古文：寻又诏曰： 故散骑常侍、前重安县开国公文季，纂承门绪，克荷家声。
现代文：不久又下诏书说： 已故的散骑常侍、前重安县开国公程文季。继承家门世系，能够发扬家传的声誉。
English: Soon after, an imperial edict was issued, saying: The late straggler and former attendant of the founding of Chong'an County, Gongcheng Wencai, inherits the family lineage and can carry forward the family's reputation.

古文：早岁出军，虽非元帅，启行为最，致果有闻，而覆丧车徒，允从黜削。
现代文：早年从军，虽然不是元帅，但行军作战最为勇敢，战绩卓著富有声誉，然而后来打了败仗丧失了兵车士卒，确实应该贬职罢官。
English: In his early years in the army, although he was not a marshal, he was the bravest marcher in the war, and his war record was outstanding and reputable. However, he later lost a battle and lost a soldier. He really should be demoted and dismissed.

古文：但灵洗之立功捍御，久而见思，文季之埋魂异域，有足可悯。
现代文：不过他父亲程灵洗抗敌御寇的战功，令人经久思念，程文季葬身异国，也值得怜悯。
English: However, his father Cheng Lingqin's war exploits against the enemy invaders are a lasting memory, and Cheng Wencai's burial in a foreign country is also worthy of pity.

古文：言念劳旧，伤兹废绝，宜存庙食，无使馁而。
现代文：考虑到慰恤先皇旧臣，哀悼他的香火已经废绝，应该为他立庙享祭，不使饥饿。
English: Considering that the incense of condolence for the former emperor and his ministers has been abolished, it is necessary to build a temple for him to enjoy the sacrifice and avoid starvation.

古文：可降封重安县侯，邑一千户，以子飨袭封。 
现代文：可降封为重安县侯，食邑一千户，由儿子型承袭封赏。 
English: He can be downgraded to a lord of Chong'an County, a thousand households in the food village, and the award will be inherited by his son.

古文：史臣曰：程灵洗父子并御下严苛，治兵整肃，然与众同其劳苦，匪私财利，士多依焉，故临戎克办矣。
现代文：史臣曰：程灵洗父子管理部下都严厉苛刻，训练军队整齐严肃，但能与部属同劳共苦，不谋求个人的财利，将士很拥戴他们，所以临阵交兵就能打胜仗了。
English: Shichen said: Cheng Lingqi and his son are strict and harsh in managing their subordinates. They train the army neatly and seriously, but they can work hard with their subordinates and do not seek personal financial gain. The soldiers are very fond of them, so they can win the battle in the front line.

