古文：子劢。劢字文约，弱不好弄，喜愠不形于色。
现代文：萧劢字文约，自幼不爱玩耍，喜怒不形于色。
English: Xiao Yao's character is very formal, he doesn't like to play since he was a child, and his emotions are all over the place.

古文：位太子洗马，母忧去职，殆不胜丧。
现代文：作太子洗马时，因母去世而辞官，由于悲痛伤身几乎难以操办丧事。
English: When he was crown prince, he resigned due to the death of his mother, and it was almost impossible for him to handle the funeral due to grief.

古文：每一思至，必徒步之墓。
现代文：每当想到母亲，必定要徒步到墓上去。
English: Whenever I think of my mother, I have to hike to the grave.

古文：或遇风雨，仆卧中路，坐地号恸，起而复前，家人不能禁。
现代文：有时遇到风雨，摔倒在半路上，便坐在地上痛哭，然后起来再往前走，家里人也阻拦不住。
English: Sometimes, when they encounter wind and rain, they fall down in the middle of the road, sit on the ground and cry, and then get up and walk forward, and their families can't stop them.

古文：景特所锺爱,曰： 吾百年后，其无此子乎。 
现代文：父亲萧景特别喜爱他，曾说： 我百年之后，怎能少了这样的儿子呢。 
English: His father, Xiao Jing, was particularly fond of him and once said: "After a hundred years, how can I be without such a son?"

古文：使左右节哭。
现代文：吩咐左右人关照他节哀。
English: He ordered those around him to pay attention to his mourning.

古文：服阕,除太子中舍人。
现代文：丧服期满后，被任为太子中舍人。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed as the crown prince's junior attendant.

古文：景薨于郢镇，或以路远，秘其凶问，以疾渐爲辞。
现代文：萧景死在郢州，因为路远，别人就对他隐瞒了凶讯，而谎称是病重。
English: Xiao Jing died in Zhangzhou. Because of the distance, others withheld the news of his death and falsely claimed that he was seriously ill.

古文：劢乃奔波，届于江夏，不进水浆者七日。
现代文：萧劢于是奔波前往，赶到江夏，已是七天水米未进。
English: So Xiao Yao hurried to Jiangxia. It had been seven days since the flood.

古文：庐于墓所，亲友隔绝。
现代文：埋葬父亲后，他在墓旁结庐而眠，断绝亲友往来。
English: After burying his father, he slept on the ground next to the grave and cut off all contact with his relatives and friends.

古文：会叔父昙下诏狱，劢乃率昆弟群从同诣大理，虽门生故吏，莫能识之。
现代文：这时他叔父萧昙被朝廷逮捕下狱，他带领家中兄弟们一起赶到大理上诉，由于他劳累哀痛日久而形容憔悴，以至于他家的门生故吏也没有人认出他来。
English: At this time, his uncle Xiao Yao was arrested and imprisoned by the imperial court. He led his brothers and sisters in the family to rush to Dali to appeal. Due to his fatigue and sorrow, he described the pain for a long time, so that his family's protégées did not recognize him.

古文：后袭封吴平侯，对扬王人，悲恸呜咽，傍人亦爲陨涕。
现代文：后来承袭父爵为吴平侯，在册封仪式上，面对朝廷官吏，悲痛呜咽，旁边人看了也为之掉泪。
English: Later, he succeeded his father as Wu Ping Hou. At the investiture ceremony, he sobbed with grief in front of the court officials, and the people around him also shed tears.

古文：除淮南太守，以善政称。
现代文：作淮南太守时，因治理有方而被称颂。
English: As Huainan's grand vizier, he was praised for his skillful governance.

古文：迁宣城内史，郡多猛兽，常爲人患，及劢在任，兽暴爲息。
现代文：后改任宣城内史，境内多猛兽，经常危害人民，萧劢到任后，野兽的危害得到治理。
English: Later, he was appointed to proclaim the history of the city. There were many ferocious beasts in the territory, which often harmed the people. After Xiao Wei took office, the harm of the beasts was controlled.

古文：又迁豫章内史，道不拾遗，男女异路。
现代文：又改任豫章内史，结果境内路不拾遗，男女有别而道不同行。
English: He was also assigned to the internal history of Yuzhang. As a result, there was no trace of him within the territory, and men and women went their separate ways.

古文：徙广州刺史，去郡之日，吏人悲泣，数百里中，舟乘填塞，各齎酒肴以送劢。
现代文：后调任广州刺史，当离开豫章郡时，官吏百姓都悲痛落泪，沿途几百里舟车堵塞，人们都带着酒食来给他送行。
English: Later, he was transferred to Guangzhou to write history. When he left Yuanzhang County, the officials and people were sad and tearful. The boat was blocked for hundreds of miles along the way, and people came to see him off with wine and food.

古文：劢人爲纳受，随以钱帛与之。
现代文：萧劢都接收下来，但随后又给予他们钱财。
English: Xiao Yao accepted them all, but later gave them money.

古文：至新淦县岓山村，有一老姥以盘擎鳅鱼，自送舟侧奉上之，童儿数十人入水扳舟，或歌或泣。
现代文：走到新淦县山斤山村时，有一位老太太用盘子托着泥鳅，从送行的船侧奉献上来，又有几十名少年跳进水里给他拉船，又是唱歌，又是流泪。
English: When he got to the mountain village of Shanjin in Xinlu County, an old lady came up from the side of the boat with a plate holding muddy water, and dozens of young boys jumped into the water to pull the boat for him, singing and shedding tears.

古文：广州边海，旧饶，外国舶至，多爲刺史所侵，每年舶至不过三数。
现代文：广州地处沿海，向来是富庶地区，外国商船到此，多被当地刺史盘剥侵夺，所以每年来船不过三几次。
English: Guangzhou is located on the coast and has always been an affluent area. When foreign merchant ships come here, they are mostly plundered by local pirates, so they only come here three times a year.

古文：及劢至，纤豪不犯，岁十馀至。
现代文：自萧劢到此，对他们秋毫无犯，于是一年就有十几趟到来。
English: Since Xiao Yao arrived here, there has been no crime against them, so there are more than a dozen visits a year.

古文：俚人不宾，多爲海暴，劢征讨所获生口宝物，军赏之外，悉送还台。
现代文：当地的俚族人不顺服，经常在海上行凶抢劫，萧劢对他们进行讨伐，俘获的人口财物，除犒赏军队外，全部送交朝廷。
English: The local Yi people did not obey, and often carried out violent robberies at sea. Xiao Yu carried out a crusade against them, and all the captured people and property, except for the reward for the army, were sent to the imperial court.

古文：前后刺史皆营私蓄，方物之贡，少登天府。
现代文：他以前的刺史们都营私中饱，当地的土产贡品多被私吞，很少能进入朝廷仓库。
English: His former aides-de-camp were well-heeled, the local tributes were mostly swallowed up, and they were rarely able to enter the imperial storehouse.

古文：自劢在州，岁中数献，军国所须，相继不绝。
现代文：自从萧劢到任，一年里向朝廷进奉数次，国家军政所需的资财，源源不断地输送。
English: Since Xiao Wei took office, he has made several visits to the imperial court in a year, and the funds and resources needed for the country's military and political affairs have been continuously transported.

古文：武帝叹曰： 朝廷便是更有广州。 
现代文：梁武帝感叹道： 朝廷算是又添了一个广州。 
English: Emperor Liangwu lamented: The imperial court has added another Guangzhou.

古文：有诏以本号还朝，而西江俚帅陈文彻出寇高要，又诏劢重申蕃任。
现代文：有诏令让他以本号还朝，这时西江的俚人头领陈文彻窜犯高要，于是又下诏让萧劢再任原职。
English: There was an imperial edict ordering him to return to the imperial court with this title. At this time, Chen Wenche, the leader of the Xijiang Uyghur people, became a high-ranking criminal, so the imperial edict was issued ordering Xiao Qi to return to his original post.

古文：未几，文彻降附。
现代文：不久陈文彻投降归附。
English: Soon after, Chen Wenche surrendered and was annexed.

古文：劢以南江危险，宜立重镇，乃表台于高凉郡立州。
现代文：萧劢认为南江地方险要，应该设立重镇，于是上表朝廷，建议在高氵京郡设州一级建制。
English: Xiao Yao thought that the Nanjiang region was critical and that a major town should be established, so he presented a proposal to the imperial court to establish a state-level organization in Gaozhongjing County.

古文：敕仍以爲高州，以西江督护孙固爲刺史。
现代文：朝廷下令改为高州，命西江督护孙固为刺史。
English: The imperial court ordered that it be changed to Gaozhou, and ordered the governor of the Xijiang River, Sun Gu, to make history.

古文：征爲太子左卫率。
现代文：征召萧劢回朝任太子左卫率。
English: Xiao Yao was called back to the imperial court to serve as the prince's bodyguard.

古文：劢性率俭，而器度宽裕，左右尝将羹至胸前翻之，顔色不异，徐呼更衣。
现代文：萧劢生性率直有节制，而且气量宽宏。一次手下人曾把一碗菜汤不慎打翻在他胸前，他脸色不变，慢声叫人给他换衣服。
English: Xiao Hongsheng's frankness is restrained, and his temperament is generous. Once, a subordinate accidentally knocked over a bowl of vegetable soup on his chest, his face remained unchanged, and he slowly asked someone to change his clothes.

古文：聚书至三万卷，披翫不倦，尤好东观汉记，略皆诵忆。
现代文：他收藏图书多达三万卷，披阅观览而不知疲倦，尤其爱读《东观汉记》，大部分都能背诵下来。
English: He has a collection of as many as thirty thousand volumes of books, and he reads and watches tirelessly. He especially loves reading "Dongguan Han Ji," and can recite most of it.

古文：陈太妃生临川靖惠王宏、南平元襄王伟。
现代文：刘显曾经拿着书考问他，他对答如流，甚至卷次和行数都不出错误。
English: Liu Xian once asked him to take a book test, and he answered fluently, even the number of volumes and lines did not make mistakes.

古文：吴太妃生安成康王秀、始兴忠武王憺。
现代文：他很少结交朋友，只和河东裴子野、范阳张缵关系密切。
English: He rarely makes friends, and only has a close relationship with Hedong Peizhino and Fanyang Zhangye.

古文：费太妃生鄱阳忠烈王恢。长沙宣武王懿字元达，文帝长子也。
现代文：萧劢死在回京的路上，追赠侍中，谥为光侯。长沙宣武王萧懿，字元达，是梁文帝的长子。
English: Xiao Yao died on his way back to Beijing, and was posthumously awarded the title of Knight of the Imperial Court. Xiao Yao, the Prince of Xuanwu of Changsha, was the eldest son of Emperor Liangwen.

古文：少有令誉，解褐齐安南邵陵王行参军，袭爵临湘县侯。
现代文：他从小就有美誉，出仕任齐安南邵陵王的行参军。承袭爵位为临湘县侯。
English: He has had a good reputation since childhood. He served in the army of King Shao Ling of Southern Qi, inheriting the title of Marquis of Linxiang County.

古文：历位晋陵太守，以善政称。
现代文：历任晋陵太守，以美政而得到当时人的称赞。
English: Successive governors of the Jin Mausoleum were praised by the people of the time for their good governance.

古文：永明末，爲梁、南秦二州刺史，加督。
现代文：永明末年，任梁、南秦二州刺史，加都督。
English: At the end of the Yongming era, he was appointed as the governor of Liang, the governor of the two states of Southern Qin, and the governor of Jiaozuo.

古文：是岁，魏军入汉中，遂围南郑。
现代文：当年，魏军入侵汉中，进而围困南郑。
English: In that year, the Wei army invaded Hanzhong and then besieged Nan Zheng.

古文：懿随机拒击，乃解围遁去。
现代文：萧懿随机应变，领兵出击，魏军于是解围逃走。
English: Xiao Yao made a haphazard response, led the troops to attack, and the Wei army then broke the siege and fled.

古文：又遣氐帅杨元秀攻取魏历城等六戍。
现代文：他又派氐人统率杨元秀攻打并夺取了魏国的历城等六处戍地。
English: He also sent his troops under the command of Yang Yuanxiu to attack and capture six places including Licheng in Wei.

古文：魏人震惧，边境遂宁。
现代文：魏人十分震惊，于是边境得以安宁。
English: The Wei people were very shocked, so the border was calm.

古文：永元二年，裴叔业据豫州反，懿以豫州刺史领历阳、南谯二郡太守讨之，叔业惧，遂降魏。
现代文：永元二年，裴叔业占据豫州反叛，萧懿以豫州刺史的身份率领历阳、南谯二郡太守前去讨伐，裴叔业十分害怕，便投降了北魏。
English: In the second year of Yongyuan, Pei Shuhei occupied the rebel state of Yuzhou, and Xiao Yu, in the capacity of the historian of Yuzhou, led Liyang and the governor of Nanlu County to go to fight. Pei Shuhei was very afraid and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：武帝时在雍州，遣典签赵景悦说懿兴晋阳之甲，诛君侧之罪。
现代文：梁武帝当时在雍州，派了典签赵景悦来劝说萧懿兴兵起义，清除国君身旁的佞臣，清算他们的罪行。
English: Emperor Liangwu was in Yongzhou at the time, and he sent the legate Zhao Jingyue to persuade Xiao Rongxing to revolt, to purge the vassals around the sovereign, and to clear up their crimes.

古文：懿不答。
现代文：但萧懿没有答复。
English: But Xiao Yao did not reply.

古文：既而平西将军崔慧景入寇，奉江夏王宝玄围台城，齐室大乱，驰信召懿。
现代文：不久，平西将军崔慧景入侵，拥戴江夏王萧宝玄围困台城。齐王室大乱，便派快马送急信召萧懿救援。
English: Soon after, the Pingxi general Cui Huijing invaded and besieged Taicheng with the support of Xia Wang Xia Xia Xiao Baogen. The Qi royal family was in turmoil, so they sent a fast horse to send an express to summon Xiao Yao for rescue.

古文：懿时方食，投箸而起，率锐卒三千人入援。
现代文：当时萧懿正在吃饭，他把筷子一扔，拍案而起，率领精兵三千人赶去救援。
English: At that time, Xiao Yao was having dinner. He threw down his chopsticks, jumped up, and led 3,000 elite soldiers to the rescue.

古文：武帝驰遣虞安福下都说懿曰： 诛贼之后，则有不赏之功，当明君贤主，尚或难立；况于乱朝，何以自免。
现代文：梁武帝又派遣虞安福飞速前往都城，劝说萧懿： 杀贼之后，便有了盖世的大功，即使遇到明君贤主在位，也难以自全；何况现在正是昏乱的朝廷，怎么能够免于灾祸？
English: Emperor Liangwu also sent Guanfu to the capital to persuade Xiao Yao: "After killing a thief, you have done a great service to the world. Even if there is a wise ruler on the throne, it is difficult to be self-sufficient. Moreover, now that the imperial court is in a state of confusion, how can it be free from disaster?"

古文：若贼灭之后，仍勒兵入宫，行伊、霍故事，此万世一时。
现代文：如果在消灭贼寇之后，立即领兵入朝，按照古代贤相伊尹、霍光的办法实行，这是万世难逢的机会。
English: If, after the elimination of the bandits, the troops are immediately led into the North, in accordance with the methods of the ancient sages Yi Yin and Huo Guang, this is a rare opportunity.

古文：若不欲尔，便放表还历阳，托以外拒爲事，则威振内外，谁敢不从。
现代文：如果不这样做，便上表请求回到历阳，以抵御外患为借口，这样威震天下，谁敢不听从！
English: If you don't do this, then the table will ask you to return to Liyang, under the pretext of resisting external disasters. This will make the world tremble. Who would dare not obey!

古文：一朝放兵，受其厚爵，高而无人，必生后悔。 
现代文：否则一朝放弃兵权，接受朝廷的高官厚禄，地位很高而手下无人，以后一定会有后悔的时候。 
English: Otherwise, there will definitely be a time of regret in the future when the emperor abandons military power, accepts the high-ranking officials of the imperial court, has a high status and has no subordinates.

古文：长史徐曜甫亦苦劝，并不从。
现代文：长史徐曜甫也苦苦劝谏，萧懿一概不听。
English: Long Shi Xu Youfu also tried to persuade Xiao Yao, but Xiao Yao would not listen.

古文：慧景遣其子觉来拒，懿击大破之，乘胜而进，慧景衆溃，追斩之。
现代文：崔慧景派他的儿子崔觉前来接战，萧懿发起进攻，大败崔觉，并乘胜前进。崔慧景的军队溃败，一阵追击，萧懿斩了崔慧景。
English: Cui Huiqing sent his son Cui Jue to fight, Xiao Jun launched an attack, defeated Cui Jue, and advanced with the victory. Cui Huiqing's army was defeated, and after a period of pursuit, Xiao Jun beheaded Cui Huiqing.

古文：授尚书令、都督征讨水陆诸军事。
现代文：朝廷封他为尚书令、都督征讨水陆诸军事。
English: The imperial court appointed him as Shang Shuling, the governor of the capital, to recruit soldiers from the army, navy and air force.

古文：时东昏肆虐，茹法珍、王咺之等执政，宿臣旧将，并见诛夷。
现代文：当时东昏侯萧宝卷暴虐无道，胡作非为，茹法珍、王口亘之等人掌握朝政大权，老臣旧将都被残杀。
English: At that time, Xiao Baoling, the Dongguan warlord, was ruthless and unscrupulous, Ru Fazhen, Wang Guowan and others seized the supreme power of the imperial government, and the old ministers and generals were killed.

古文：懿既勋高，独居朝右，深爲法珍等所惮，乃说东昏，将加酷害。
现代文：萧懿功勋极高，独自居于朝廷，茹法珍等十分害怕他，他们便劝说东昏侯，准备施毒计害死萧懿。
English: Xiao Yao's merits were very high, he lived alone in the imperial court, and Zhu Fazhen and others were very afraid of him. They persuaded Dong Wouhou to prepare a poison plan to kill Xiao Yao.

古文：徐曜甫知之，密具舟江渚，劝令西奔。
现代文：徐曜甫得知消息，暗地里准备好船只停在江边，劝告他往西逃亡。
English: When Xu Youfu learned the news, he secretly prepared a boat to stop at the river and advised him to flee to the west.

古文：懿不从，曰： 古皆有死，岂有叛走尚书令邪？ 
现代文：萧懿不肯听从，他说： 自古以来，人都有一死，岂有叛变逃走的尚书令？ 
English: Xiao Yao did not want to listen, he said: Since ancient times, everyone has one death, is there a written order to mutiny and escape?

古文：寻见留省赐药，与弟融俱殒。
现代文：不久，朝廷派人赐下毒药，萧懿和弟弟萧融一同死去。
English: Soon after, the imperial court sent someone to administer poison, and Xiao Yu and his brother Xiao Rong died together.

古文：谓使者曰： 家弟在雍，深爲朝廷忧之。 
现代文：萧懿死前对使者说： 家弟在雍州，我深为朝廷担忧。 
English: Before his death, Xiao Yao said to the messenger: My brother is in Yongzhou, I am deeply worried about the imperial court.

古文：中兴元年，赠司徒。
现代文：中兴元年，追赠为司徒。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Stu."

古文：宣德太后临朝，改赠太傅。
现代文：宣德太后临朝听政，又改封为太傅。
English: When Empress Dowager Xuande was in power in the Lin Dynasty, Xiao Yao was given the title of Taifu.

古文：天监元年，追崇丞相，封长沙郡王，諡曰宣武。
现代文：天监元年，追尊为丞相，封长沙郡王，谥号宣武。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, Tsuizen was appointed chancellor, crowned the king of Changsha County, and given the posthumous name of Xuanwu.

古文：给九旒鸾辂、黄屋左纛，葬礼依晋安平王故事。
现代文：赐给九旒的鸾车，黄屋左纛，葬礼依照晋朝安平王的规矩。
English: The carriage given to Jiuzhaigou, Huangya Zuoqi, the funeral according to the rules of the Anping King of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：懿名望功业素重，武帝本所崇敬。
现代文：萧懿名望功勋一向很高，梁武帝本来就很崇敬他。
English: Xiao Yao's reputation and achievements have always been very high. Emperor Wu of Liang was originally very respectful of him.

古文：帝以天监元年四月丙寅即位，是日即见褒崇。
现代文：武帝在天监元年四月初八即位，当天立即表彰和追封萧懿。
English: Emperor Wu ascended the throne on the 8th day of the 4th month of the 1st year of Tianjun, and immediately commended and chased Xiao Qi on the same day.

古文：戊辰，乃始赠第二兄敷、第四弟畅、第五弟融。
现代文：初十，才封赠二哥萧敷、四弟萧畅、五弟萧融。
English: At the age of ten, the second brother Xiao Shiki, the fourth brother Xiao Chang, and the fifth brother Xiao Rong were awarded.

古文：至五月，有司方奏追皇考皇妣尊号，迁神主于太庙。
现代文：到五月，有关方面才上奏追尊武帝父母的封号，并将神主迁入太庙。
English: It wasn't until May that the relevant authorities traced the seal names of Emperor Wu's parents and moved the deity to the Imperial Temple.

古文：帝不亲奉，命临川王宏侍从。
现代文：皇帝没有亲自奉送，而让临川王萧宏侍从。
English: The emperor did not personally send it, but let Linchuan King Xiaohong serve as an attendant.

古文：子慎嗣。业弟藻。
现代文：七月，皇帝坐在殿前平台上，派兼太尉、散骑常侍王玢奉策文追上太祖文皇帝、献皇后和德皇后的尊号。他先封赠下辈，然后才封赠长辈，先低后高，又在殿前平台上而不是在正殿让人奉上策文，有识者因此而讥笑和议论纷纷。萧渊藻字靖艺。
English: In July, the emperor was sitting on the platform in front of the hall, and he sent Wang Zhe, who was also a captain and a horseback rider, to present the imperial seal to Emperor Taizu, Emperor Xianwen, and Empress Dowager of the German Empire. He first gave the seal to the younger generation, then to the elders, first to the low and then to the high, and on the platform in front of the hall, rather than in the main hall, people were presented with the imperial seal, which caused the knowledgeable people to laugh and discuss. Xiao Yuanjiaoji Jingyi.

古文：藻字靖艺，仕齐位着作佐郎。天监元年，封西昌县侯，爲益州刺史。
现代文：在齐朝官为著作佐郎。梁天监元年，封为西昌县侯，作益州刺史。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun's reign, he was named the marquis of Xichang County and wrote the history of Yizhou.

古文：时邓元起在蜀，自以有克刘季连功，恃宿将，轻少藻，藻怒乃杀之。
现代文：当时邓元起在蜀地，自恃有破刘季连的功劳，倚仗宿将的资格，轻视渊藻，渊藻于是发怒杀了他。
English: At that time, Deng Yuanzhi was in Shoudi, boasting of the achievement of defeating Liu Jilian, relying on the qualification of the host, and despising Yuanmao. Yuanmao then killed him in anger.

古文：既天下草创，边徼未安，州人焦僧护聚衆数万，据郫、繁作乱。
现代文：当时天下初定，边境未安，益州人焦僧护聚众数万，占据郫县、繁县作乱。
English: At that time, the country was still undecided, and the border was not secure. Tens of thousands of people from Yizhou gathered to protect Jiaosang, occupied Min County and Shang County, and started a riot.

古文：藻年未弱冠，集僚佐议，欲自击之。
现代文：渊藻当时不满二十岁，会集部属商议，打算亲自去讨伐。
English: At this time, Lu Lian was not yet ten years old. He summoned his staff member Sashi for discussion and wanted to personally attack Jiao Sangu.

古文：或陈不可，藻大怒，斩之阶侧。
现代文：有人表示反对，渊藻大怒，把他在台阶旁斩了。
English: When someone objected, he flew into a rage and beheaded him on the steps.

古文：乃乘平肩舆，巡行贼垒。
现代文：于是乘坐一顶平肩舆，到贼寇营垒外巡视。
English: As a result, Xiao Cao took a flat-shouldered car to inspect the outside of the camp occupied by the bandits.

古文：贼聚弓乱射，矢下如雨，从者举楯御箭，又命除之，由此人心大安，贼乃夜遁。
现代文：贼寇乱箭像雨点儿一样射来，随从们举起盾牌为他遮挡，他命令拿开，于是人心安定，贼寇连夜逃走。
English: The bandits shot arrows like raindrops. His followers raised their shields to shield him, and he ordered them to take them off. As a result, everyone's hearts were at ease, and the bandits fled into the night.

古文：藻命骑追击，平之。
现代文：渊藻派骑兵追击，平定了祸乱。
English: Yuanmao sent his cavalry to chase after them and quelled the chaos.

古文：九年，征爲太子中庶子。
现代文：天监九年，征召他为太子中庶子。
English: In the ninth year of Tenken, he was called up to be the prince's second son.

古文：初，邓元起之在蜀也，崇于聚敛，财货山积。
现代文：起先，邓元起在蜀地时，喜欢聚敛，搜刮的财物堆成山。
English: At first, when Deng Yuanqi was in Shunde, he liked to collect, and the property he scrounged piled up into a mountain.

古文：金玉珍帛爲一室，名爲内藏；绮縠锦罽爲一室，号曰外府。
现代文：把金玉珍宝归一库房，叫作内藏；把粮食织物归一库房，叫作外府。
English: If gold and jade treasures are kept in one storehouse, it is called inner hoarding; if grain and fabric are kept in one storehouse, it is called outer hoarding.

古文：藻以外府赐将帅，内藏归王府，不有私焉。
现代文：渊藻把外府赏赐将帅，内藏归于王府，不占为私有。
English: Fuyuso gave the rewards of the outer palace to Shoshuai, and the inner treasure to the royal palace, which was not privately owned.

古文：及是还朝，轻装就路。
现代文：等回朝廷时，两袖清风，轻装上路。
English: When returning to the imperial court, two sleeves of fresh air, lightly loaded on the road.

古文：再迁侍中。
现代文：后又改任为侍中。
English: Later, he was reappointed to Samurai chujo (chamberlain).

古文：藻性谦退，不求闻达，善属文，尤好古体。
现代文：渊藻生性谦逊退让，不追求名声与显贵。善写文章，尤其爱好古体文。
English: He is naturally humble and conceding, and does not pursue fame and prominence. He is good at writing articles, and is particularly fond of classical literature.

古文：自非公宴，未尝妄有所爲，纵有小文，成辄弃本。
现代文：但如果不是在宴享聚会的场合应酬，并不肯轻易动笔，即使写一些短小文章，写成后往往随即扔掉。
English: But if it's not a banquet or a party, they don't want to start writing. Even if they write some short articles, they often throw them away immediately.

古文：历雍、兖二州刺史。
现代文：历任雍、兖二州刺史。
English: The successors of Yong and Zou have made history in the two states.

古文：频莅州镇，人吏咸称之。
现代文：他频繁调任数州，处处受到吏民的称赞。
English: He was frequently transferred to several prefectures, and was praised by officials and people everywhere.

古文：推善下人，常如弗及。
现代文：他善意待人，谦虚退让。
English: He recommended kindness to subordinates, often as if it were not enough.

古文：普通六年，爲军师将军，与西丰侯正德北侵涡阳，辄班师，爲有司奏，免官削爵土。
现代文：普通六年，担任军师将军，和西丰侯萧正德北侵魏地涡阳，因擅自撤军，被有关部门弹奏，免去官职，褫夺爵位与封地。
English: For six years, he served as the general of the military division, and along with the West Feng Hou Xiao Zhengde invaded the northern Wei land of Wuyang. For withdrawing troops without authorization, he was punished by the relevant departments, relieved of his official position, and deprived of his title and fief.

古文：八年，复封爵。
现代文：普通八年，恢复封爵。
English: After eight years, his fiefdom and title were restored.

古文：中大通三年，爲中军将军，太子詹事，出爲丹阳尹。
现代文：中大通三年，担任中军将军、太子詹事，出京作丹阳尹。
English: For three years, Zhong Datong served as the general of the Chinese army, the prince Zhanji, and went to Beijing as Danyang Yin.

古文：帝每称其小字，叹曰： 子弟并如迦叶，吾复何忧。 
现代文：武帝常爱叫他小名，感叹说： 子弟们如果都像迦叶一样，我还愁什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu often called him by a nickname and lamented: "If my children are all like Ka Ye, what should I worry about?

古文：入爲尚书左仆射，加侍中，固辞，不许。
现代文：后来入朝作尚书左仆射，加侍中衔，他坚持推辞不受，朝廷不准。
English: Later, he entered the imperial court as a courtier's right-hand man, and was promoted to the middle rank of attendant. He insisted that he would not accept the resignation, and the imperial court did not allow him to join the imperial court.

古文：大同五年，迁中卫将军、开府仪同三司、中书令，侍中如故。
现代文：大同五年，改任中卫将军、开府仪同三司、中书令，侍中不变。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of Lieutenant-General, Keifu Ritsuryo Sanji, Chushiro, and still held the post of chamberlain.

古文：藻性恬静，独处一室，床有膝痕，宗室衣冠莫不楷则。
现代文：渊藻性情恬静，常常一人在屋里独坐，时间久了床上都被双膝磨出痕迹。宗室显贵们无不把他奉为楷模。
English: He was a quiet character, often sitting alone in the room. After a long time, his knees would wear out on the bed. His noble parents held him up as a role model.

古文：常以爵禄太过，每思屏退，门庭闲寂，宾客罕通。
现代文：渊藻常认为自己享有的爵位俸禄过多，总想减去一些。他很少与人来往，门前冷落。
English: Fuyuso often thought that the salary he received from his title was too much, and he always wanted to reduce it. He rarely interacted with people and was left out in the cold.

古文：简文尤敬爱之。
现代文：简文帝特别敬重喜欢他。
English: Emperor Jianwen especially respected and liked him.

古文：自遭家祸，恒布衣蒲席，不食鲜禽，非公庭不听音乐，武帝每以此称之。
现代文：自从家中遭难，父亲萧懿被东昏侯杀后，经常是布衣蒲席，不食珍馐美味，不是参加朝会宴享不听音乐。武帝每每因此而称赞他。
English: Ever since the tragedy at home, after his father Xiao Yao was killed by Dong Dou Hou, he often dressed in plain clothes, did not eat delicacies, did not attend the imperial banquet, and did not listen to music. Emperor Wu praised him for this.

古文：出爲南徐州刺史。
现代文：外放为南徐州刺史。
English: The external broadcast is the history of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：侯景乱，藻遣世子彧率兵入援。
现代文：侯景作乱，渊藻派他的长子萧率兵救援。
English: Hou Jing caused a riot, and Yuanmao sent his eldest son Xiao to lead the soldiers to rescue him.

古文：及城开，加散骑常侍。侯景遣其仪同萧邕代之据京口，藻因感气疾。
现代文：建康城破之后，侯景假借帝命给他加衔散骑常侍，并派他的仪同萧邕代渊藻镇守京口，渊藻因此郁闷成病。
English: After the destruction of Jiankang City, Hou Jiankang, by the order of the emperor, gave him the title of strolling equerry, and sent his courtier to guard Kyoguchi together with Fusang Zhen in the reign of Xiao Zhou. As a result, Fusang became depressed and fell ill.

古文：或劝奔江北，藻曰： 吾国之台铉，任寄特隆，既不能诛翦逆贼，正当同死朝廷耳。 
现代文：有人劝他投奔江北东魏，他说： 我是国家重臣，蒙国厚恩，既然不能诛灭逆贼，只有与朝廷同归于尽了。 
English: Some people advised him to go to the Northeastern Wei Dynasty. He said, "I am a senior state minister and have been favored by the state. Since I can't exterminate the traitors, I can only go down with the imperial court."

古文：朗弟明字靖通，少被武帝亲爱，封贞阳侯。
现代文：于是绝食而死。萧渊朗的弟弟萧渊明，字靖通。从小便受梁武帝的喜爱，被封为贞阳侯。
English: As a result, he went on a hunger strike and died. Xiao Yuanlang's younger brother Xiao Yuanming, also known as Jing Tong, was loved by Emperor Liangwu from an early age and was given the title of Prince of Zhengyang.

古文：太清元年，爲豫州刺史，百姓诣阙拜表，言其德政，树碑于州门内。
现代文：太清元年，他任豫州刺史，百姓们到朝廷上表，陈叙了他的德政，将碑树立在州门内。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou, and the people went to the imperial court, recounted his German politics, and erected the monument in the state gate.

古文：及碑匠采石出自肥陵，明乃广营厨帐，多召人物，躬自率领牵至州。识者笑之，曰： 王自立碑，非州人也。 
现代文：当石匠从肥陵采来做碑的石头时，萧渊明请厨夫设帐，召集了很多人，亲自领人将石碑运到州里。知道的人取笑他，说： 这是大人自己立碑，并不是州人啊。 
English: When a stonemason was quarrying stone from Huling to make a monument, Xiao Yuanming asked the cook to set up an account, gathered a lot of people, and personally led the people to transport the stone monument to the state. People who knew him made fun of him, saying: This is an adult who erected the monument himself, not a person from the state.

古文：武帝既纳侯景，大举北侵，使南康王会理总兵，明乃拜表求行。
现代文：梁武帝接纳了侯景，大举出兵攻打北方，派南康王萧会理领兵，萧渊明上表请求同行。
English: Emperor Liangwu accepted Houjing and sent troops to attack the north in a big way. He sent Nankang Wang Xiao to lead the troops, and Xiao Yuanming requested to accompany him.

古文：固请，乃许之。
现代文：因为他一再请求，武帝准许了。
English: Not averse to a firm request, the emperor agreed.

古文：会理已至宿预，诏改以明代爲都督水陆诸军趣彭城，大图进取。
现代文：萧会理当时已到了宿预，诏书又下，改派萧渊明代萧会理为都督，率领水陆诸军前往彭城，准备大举进攻。
English: At that time, Xiao Huili had already arrived at the prefectural capital, and the imperial edict was issued again, reassigning Xiao Yuan Ming Dynasty Xiao Huili as the governor, leading the army and navy to Pengcheng to prepare for a large-scale attack.

古文：敕曰： 侯景志清邺、洛，以雪雠耻。
现代文：皇帝下敕书说： 侯景立志扫除邺、洛，以报仇雪耻。
English: The imperial edict said: "Hou Jing is determined to sweep away Luo and Luo to avenge the disgrace."

古文：其先率大军，随机抚定。
现代文：他先率大军，见机行动。
English: He led a large army and took action when he saw an opportunity.

古文：汝等衆军可止于寒山筑堰，引清水以灌彭城。大水一泛，孤城自殄，慎勿妄动。 
现代文：你们众军可只行到寒山，停下筑堰，引水淹彭城，大水一泛滥，孤城就会自灭，要谨慎，不要轻举妄动。 
English: Your armies can only go as far as the frigid mountains, stop at the weir, and bring water to flood Pengcheng. Once the water floods, the isolated city will self-destruct. Be careful not to make any rash moves.

古文：明师次吕梁十八里，作寒山堰以灌彭城，水及于堞，不没者三板。
现代文：萧渊明的军队到距离吕梁十八里处，修筑了寒山堰用来淹彭城，水涨到城墙上的矮墙，只剩下三板高没淹。
English: When Xiao Yuanming's army was 18 miles away from Luliang, they built a cold mountain weir to flood Pengcheng. The water rose to the low wall on the city wall, leaving only a three-board high wall to be flooded.

古文：魏遣将慕容绍宗赴救，明谋略不出，号令莫行。诸将每谘事，辄怒曰： 吾自临机制变，勿多言。 
现代文：魏派将领慕容绍宗前去救援彭城。萧渊明提不出谋略，他的号令没有部队听从，每当将领们向他问事，他就生气地说： 我自会随机应变，不要多嘴。 
English: Wei sent general Mu Rong Shao Zong to rescue Pengcheng. Xiao Yuanming could not come up with a strategy, and his orders were not obeyed by the troops. Whenever the generals asked him questions, he would angrily say, "I will adapt to the situation. Don't talk too much."

古文：衆乃各掠居人，明亦不能制，唯禁其一军无所侵掠。
现代文：将士各自去抢掠当地的居民，萧渊明不能制止，只有他自己那支军队没有抢掠。
English: The generals each went to plunder the local residents. Xiao Yuanming could not stop them. Only his own army did not plunder.

古文：绍宗至，决堰水，明命将救之，莫肯出。
现代文：慕容绍宗领兵到达以后，决开了堤堰，萧渊明派将领去救援，但没人肯率兵出击。
English: After Murong Shaosong arrived to lead the troops, he broke through the dike, Xiao Yuanming sent generals to rescue, but no one was willing to lead the troops to attack.

古文：魏军转逼，人情大骇。
现代文：魏军转而进攻，人们都非常害怕。
English: The Wei army turned to attack, and people were very afraid.

古文：胡贵孙谓赵伯超曰： 不战何待。 
现代文：胡贵孙对赵伯超说： 不作战还要等待什么？ 
English: Hu Guisun said to Zhao Bochao: If we don't fight, what are we waiting for?

古文：伯超惧不能对。
现代文：赵伯超吓得不敢回答。
English: Zhao Bochao was too scared to answer.

古文：贵孙乃入陈苦战，伯超拥衆弗敢救，曰： 与战必败，不如全军早归。 
现代文：胡贵孙便入阵苦战，赵伯超领着大军不敢救援，并说： 和敌人作战肯定失败，不如保全军队早些回去。 
English: Hu Guisun then entered into a bitter battle, Zhao Bochao led a large army and did not dare to rescue, and said: Fighting with the enemy will certainly fail, it is better to preserve the army and go back earlier.

古文：乃使具良马，载其爱妾自随。
现代文：他便让人备好良马，载上自己的爱妾逃走。
English: He then had a good horse prepared and fled with his mistress.

古文：贵孙遂没。
现代文：胡贵孙战死。
English: Hu Guisun died in the battle.

古文：伯超子威方将赴战，伯超惧其出，使人召之，遂相与南还。
现代文：赵伯超的儿子赵威正准备前去接战，赵伯超担心他出兵，派人去把他召回，于是父子一起南归。
English: Zhao Bochao's son, Zhao Wei, was preparing to go to the front to fight. Zhao Bochao was worried that he would send troops and sent someone to call him back, so father and son returned south together.

古文：明醉不能兴，衆军大败，明见俘执。
现代文：萧渊明这时正喝得大醉不能起来，军队大败，萧渊明被俘。
English: At this time, Xiao Yuanming was too drunk to get up. The army was defeated and Xiao Yuanming was captured.

古文：北人怀其不侵掠，谓之义王。
现代文：北方人感激他不让军队侵掠民众，称他为 义王 。
English: The northerners were grateful to him for not allowing the army to plunder the people and called him the Righteous King.

古文：及至魏，魏帝引见明及诸将帅，释其禁，送晋阳。
现代文：当到魏以后，魏帝召见萧渊明和他的众将领，给他松开绳索，将他们送往晋阳。
English: When he arrived in Wei, Emperor Wei summoned Xiao Yuanming and his generals, loosened the ropes for him, and sent them to Jinyang.

古文：勃海王高澄礼明甚重，谓曰： 先王与梁主和好十有馀年，闻彼礼佛文，常云奉爲魏主并及先王，此甚是梁主厚意。不谓一朝失信，致此纷扰。 
现代文：勃海王高澄用隆重的礼仪来接待他，对他说： 先王和梁王和好了十多年，听说他作了礼佛文，常说要奉送给魏主和先王，这是梁主的厚意，没想到一朝失信，才招致纷争和侵扰。 
English: Bo Hai King Gao Cheng received him with grand ceremony and said to him: The previous king and King Liang have been reconciled for more than ten years. I heard that he made a Buddhist ritual, and often said that he would give it to the Lord of Wei and the previous king. This is the kindness of the Lord of Liang. I did not expect to lose trust in the morning, only to cause disputes and intrusion.

古文：因欲与梁通和，使人以明书告武帝，方致书以慰高澄。
现代文：魏因此想与梁通好，派人带着萧渊明的信去见梁武帝，梁武帝才写信去问候高澄。
English: Wei therefore wanted to be on good terms with Liang, and sent someone with Xiao Yuanming's letter to see Emperor Liangwu. Emperor Liangwu then wrote to greet Gao Cheng.

古文：东魏除明散骑常侍。
现代文：东魏任萧渊明为散骑常侍。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Xiao Yuanming served as a cavalryman.

古文：及闻社稷沦荡，哀泣不舍昼夜。
现代文：后来听说国家丧乱，他不分昼夜地哭泣。
English: Later, when he heard that the country was in turmoil, he cried day and night.

古文：魏平江陵，齐文宣使送明至梁，并前所获梁将湛海珍等皆听从明归。令上党王涣率衆送之。
现代文：魏平定了江陵，齐文宣派人送萧渊明到梁，并让以前所俘的梁将湛海珍等都随萧渊明回去，同时命上党人王涣带兵去送他们。
English: Wei pinned down Jiangling, Qi Wenxuan sent people to send Xiao Yuanming to Liang, and let the previously captured Liang general Zhan Haizhen and others all go back with Xiao Yuanming, and at the same time ordered the party member Wang Qian to lead the soldiers to send them.

古文：是时太尉王僧辩、司空陈霸先在建康，推晋安王方智爲太宰、都督中外诸军事，承制置百官。
现代文：当时，太尉王僧辩、司空陈霸先在建康，推晋安王萧方智为太宰，都督内外军事。按照以往的制度设置百官。
English: At that time, Taijun Wang Sangye and Jiankang Wang Xiao Fangzhi were promoted to Dazai and military governors at home and abroad, respectively. According to the previous system, 100 officials were set up.

古文：涣军渐进，明与僧辩书求迎，僧辩不从。
现代文：王涣的军队渐渐接近建康，萧渊明传信给王僧辩，请求他们出迎，王僧辩不肯。
English: Wang Yao's army gradually approached Jiankang. Xiao Yuanming sent a letter to Wang Sofen, asking them to meet him, but Wang Sofen refused.

古文：及涣破东关，斩裴之横，僧辩惧，乃纳明。
现代文：后来，王涣攻破了东关，杀了裴之横，王僧辩害怕了，才接纳了萧渊明。
English: Later, Wang Xi broke through Dongguan and killed Pei Zhi Heng. Wang Sangye was afraid and accepted Xiao Yuanming.

古文：于是梁舆东度，齐师北反。
现代文：于是梁军东渡，齐的军队回到了北方。
English: As a result, Liang's army went to the east and Qi's army returned to the north.

古文：明至，望朱雀门便长恸，迄至所止，道俗参问，皆以哭对之。
现代文：萧渊明到了建康，望着朱雀门放声大哭，到达住所才止住悲声。一路上，人们向他问候，他都是哭着回答。
English: When Xiao Yuanming arrived in Jiankang, he stared at the door of Suzak and burst into tears. He only stopped crying when he reached his residence. People greeted him along the way, and he responded with tears.

古文：及称尊号，改承圣四年爲天成元年，大赦境内。
现代文：萧渊明改承圣四年为天成元年，在境内大赦。
English: Xiao Yuanming changed the fourth year of his succession to become the first year of Tiancheng, and was amnestied in the territory.

古文：以方智爲太子，授王僧辩大司马，遣其子章驰到齐拜谢。
现代文：他以萧方智为太子，授王僧辩为大司马，派儿子萧章驰往齐拜谢。
English: He made Xiao Fangzhi the crown prince, bestowed the title of "King" on Wang Sangye as the grand steed, and sent his son Xiao Zhangzhi to Qi Baixie.

古文：齐遇明及僧辩使人，在馆供给宴会丰厚，一同武帝时使。
现代文：齐对待萧渊明和王僧辩的使者，食宿供给及宴会都很丰厚，和对待梁武帝的使者一样。
English: Qi treated the emissaries of Xiao Yuanming and Wang Sofen, the provision of accommodation and banquets were plentiful, as well as the emissaries of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：及陈霸先袭杀僧辩，复奉晋安王，是爲敬帝，而以明爲太傅、建安王。报齐云： 僧辩阴谋篡逆，故诛之。 
现代文：后来陈霸先杀了王僧辩，再次扶持晋安王，也就是梁晋帝，而以萧渊明为太傅、建安王，通知齐说： 王僧辩阴谋反叛篡权，所以诛灭了他。 
English: Later, Chen Ba first killed Wang Sangye, again supported King Jinan, that is, Emperor Liang Jin, and with Xiao Yuanming as Taifu, King Jianan, informed Qi that: Wang Sangye plotted to rebel and usurp power, so he destroyed him.

古文：仍请称臣于齐,永爲蕃国。
现代文：仍然请求称臣于齐，永做齐的藩国。
English: We still ask the feudal domains to declare their allegiance to Qi and remain forever aligned.

古文：齐遣行台司马恭及梁人盟于历阳。
现代文：齐派行台司马恭与梁人在历阳订立盟约。
English: The Taiji Chief Magong and the Liang people made a pact in Liyang.

古文：后留止省内，慥心知祸及，遂肆丑言。
现代文：第二年，齐人征召萧渊明，陈霸先仍称藩臣，即将派使者护送萧渊明赴齐时，萧渊明背上长疽而死。
English: The following year, when the Qi people conscripted Xiao Yuanming, Chen Baxian still called him a minister of the clan, and was about to send an envoy to escort Xiao Yuanming to Qi, Xiao Yuanming died of gangrene on his back.

古文：湘东大怒，付狱杀之。临川靖惠王宏字宣达，文帝第六子也。
现代文：当时王琳与陈霸先互相对抗，齐文宣派兵送永嘉王萧庄去梁当国君，追谥萧渊明为闵皇帝。临川靖惠王萧宏字宣达，是文帝萧顺之的第六个儿子。
English: At that time, Wang Lin and Chen Baxian were opposed to each other. Qi Wenxuan sent troops to send Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang to Liang to become the king of the country, and pursued Yu Xiao Yuanming to become the emperor of Qi. Linchuan Jinghui King Xiaohong Zi Xuanda was the sixth son of Emperor Wen Xiao Shunzhi.

古文：长八尺，美须眉，容止可观。
现代文：身长八尺，胡子和眉毛都长得漂亮，容貌举止风度翩翩。
English: He is eight feet tall, has beautiful whiskers and eyebrows, and his manners are a sight to behold.

古文：仕齐爲北中郎桂阳王功曹史。
现代文：在齐朝官任北中郎桂阳王的功曹史。
English: The history of the merits of Guiyang Wang, the Northern Middle-Caste official in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：宣武之难，兄弟皆被收。道人释惠思藏宏。
现代文：其兄宣武王萧懿遇难时，兄弟们都被抓捕，和尚惠思把萧宏藏了起来。
English: When his brother Xuanwu Wang Xiaohong was killed, his brothers were all arrested, and Monk Huisi hid Xiaohong.

古文：及武帝师下，宏至新林奉迎。
现代文：等梁武帝军队沿江东下，萧宏到新林迎接。
English: When Emperor Liangwu's army was heading east along the river, Xiao Hong went to Xinlin to meet them.

古文：建康平，爲中护军，领石头戍事。
现代文：攻下建康后，担任中护军，掌管石头戍的防务。
English: After the capture of Jiankang, he served as a middle guard and was in charge of the defense of Stone Town.

古文：天监元年，封临川郡王，位扬州刺史，加都督。
现代文：天监元年，封临川郡王，官作扬州刺史，并加都督衔。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, he was given the title of King of Linchuan County, the official title of Yangzhou Historian, and the title of Governor.

古文：四年，武帝诏宏都督诸军侵魏。
现代文：天监四年，武帝令萧宏统率各路军马侵魏。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjing, Emperor Wu ordered Xiao Hong to lead all the armies to invade Wei.

古文：宏以帝之介弟，所领皆器械精新，军容甚盛，北人以爲百数十年所未之有。
现代文：萧宏由于是御弟，所统领的军队都器械精良，军容强盛，北魏认为是南朝百十年来没有过的。
English: Since Xiao Hong was a younger brother, the armies he led were all well-equipped and powerful. The Northern Wei Dynasty believed that the Southern Dynasty had not been in existence for a hundred years.

古文：军次洛口，前军克梁城。
现代文：军队驻扎在洛口，前锋攻下梁城。
English: The army was stationed in Lokou, and the vanguard captured Liangcheng.

古文：巨集部分乖方，多违朝制，诸将欲乘胜深入，宏闻魏援近，畏懦不敢进，召诸将欲议旋师。
现代文：萧宏不懂军事，指挥调度缺乏常识，多与朝廷制度不合。诸将想乘胜深入敌境，萧宏听说魏国援军离此不远，畏缩胆怯不敢进军，召集诸将商议，打算退兵。
English: Xiao Hong did not understand military affairs, lacked common sense in command and control, and was mostly at odds with the imperial court system. The generals wanted to take advantage of the victory and go deep into the enemy territory. When Xiao Hong heard that the Wei reinforcements were not far away, he was afraid and did not dare to march in. He gathered the generals for discussion and planned to withdraw.

古文：吕僧珍曰： 知难而退，不亦善乎。 
现代文：吕僧珍说： 知难而退，不是也好吗。 
English: Lv Sozhen said: It is better to retreat when facing difficulties.

古文：宏曰： 我亦以爲然。 
现代文：萧宏说： 我也觉得是这样。 
English: Xiao Hong said: I also think so.

古文：柳惔曰： 自我大衆所临，何城不服，何谓难乎？ 
现代文：柳忄炎说： 我大军所到，何城不克？怎么叫作难呢？ 
English: Liu Xuanyan said, "When my large army arrives, what city will it attack? How can it be called a difficult situation?"

古文：裴邃曰： 是行也，固敌是求，何难之避？ 
现代文：裴邃说： 我们这次出兵，本来就是为寻敌作战，有什么难需要躲避呢？ 
English: Pei Yao said: This time, we sent troops to fight in search of the enemy. What is so difficult to avoid?

古文：马仙琕曰： 王安得亡国之言。
现代文：马仙王卑说： 大王怎么能说亡国的话！
English: Ma Xian Wang Bei said, "How can a great king talk about overthrowing the country!

古文：天子扫境内以属王，有前死一尺，无却生一寸。 
现代文：天子倾全国兵马归你统率，只有前进一尺死，决无后退一寸生！ 
English: The Son of Heaven has thrown the entire country's soldiers and horses under your command. You can only advance one foot and die, but you can never retreat one inch and live!

古文：昌义之怒须尽磔，曰： 吕僧珍可斩也。
现代文：昌义之怒发冲冠，嚷道： 吕僧珍该杀！
English: Changyi's anger boiled over and he shouted: "You should kill Lv Sozhen!"

古文：岂有百万之师，轻言可退，何面目得见圣主乎！ 
现代文：哪里有百万大军轻易说退却的，那还有什么脸面见君王呢！ 
English: Where a million-strong army can easily be said to have retreated, what kind of face does a king have?

古文：朱僧勇、胡辛生拔剑而起曰： 欲退自退，下官当前向取死！ 
现代文：朱僧勇、胡辛生拔剑而起说： 谁要退他自己退，下官决心前进战死。 
English: Zhu Sangyong and Hu Xinsheng drew their swords and said, "Whoever wants to retreat should retreat himself. The lower-ranking officers are determined to advance and die in battle."

古文：议者已罢，僧珍谢诸将曰： 殿下昨来风动，意不在军，深恐大致沮丧，欲使全师而反。 
现代文：散会以后，吕僧珍向诸将道歉说： 殿下昨天风病发作，无意于军事，如深入敌国，恐怕招致大败，所以想保全军队而还。 
English: After the meeting broke up, Lü Sozhen apologized to the generals and said, "Your highness had a stroke yesterday, and had no intention of going to war. If you go deep into the enemy country, I'm afraid you will suffer a crushing defeat. Therefore, I wanted to preserve the army and returned.

古文：又私裴邃曰： 王非止全无经略，庸怯过甚。
现代文：又私下对裴邃说： 萧宏不但完全没有用兵的韬略，而且无能胆小得厉害。
English: He also said privately to Pei Yao: Xiao Hong not only completely lacked the tactic of using soldiers, but he was also too cowardly to do so.

古文：吾与言军事，都不相入。
现代文：我和他谈论军事，根本是一窍不通。
English: When I talk to him about the military, he's clueless.

古文：观此形势，岂能成功。 
现代文：看这样的形势，怎么能成功。 
English: Looking at this situation, how can we succeed?

古文：宏不敢便违群议，停军不前。
现代文：萧宏也不敢马上就违背众人的意见，于是就按兵不动。
English: Xiao Hong didn't dare to go against everyone's opinion right away, so he didn't budge.

古文：魏人知其不武，遗以巾帼。北军歌曰： 不畏萧娘与吕姥，但畏合肥有韦武。 
现代文：魏国人知道他不会打仗，就送他一套女人服饰，并编了首歌唱道： 不怕萧娘与吕姥，只怕合肥有韦虎。 
English: The Wei people knew that he would not fight, so they gave him a set of women's clothing, and made up a song to sing: Not afraid of Xiao Niang and Lvuba, only afraid of Hefei with Weihu.

古文：武谓韦叡也。
现代文： 虎 ，指的是韦睿。
English: "Tiger" refers to Weir.

古文：僧珍叹曰： 使始兴、吴平爲元帅，我相毗辅，中原不足平。
现代文：吕僧珍叹息说： 如果让始兴王或者吴平侯为元帅，我为辅佐，中原不难平定。
English: Lv Sozhen sighed and said, "If we let Shixing Wang or Wu Pinghou be the marshal and I be the assistant, it would not be difficult to pacify the Central Plains.

古文：今遂敌人见欺如此。 
现代文：现在却让敌人如此欺侮！ 
English: Now they let the enemy bully them like this!

古文：乃欲遣裴邃分军取寿阳，大衆停洛口。
现代文：于是想派裴邃分兵攻取寿阳，而大军仍停驻洛口。
English: Therefore, he wanted to send Baekje's detachment to attack Shouyang, but the large army was still stationed in Lokou.

古文：宏固执不听，乃令军中曰： 人马有前行者斩。 
现代文：萧宏坚决不许，并在军中下令： 人马有前进者斩。 
English: Xiao Hong resolutely refused to allow it, and ordered in the army: Anyone who advances must be killed.

古文：自是军政不和，人怀愤怒。
现代文：从此军中上下不和，人人心怀愤怒。
English: From then on, there was discord between the top and bottom of the army, and everyone was angry.

古文：魏奚康生驰遣杨大眼谓元英曰： 梁人自克梁城已后，久不进军，其势可见，当是惧我。王若进据洛水，彼自奔败。 
现代文：魏国奚康生派杨大眼跑到前线对元英说： 梁人自攻下梁城以后，长时间不进军，看形势是害怕我们，大王如果进军占据洛水，他们一定会自己败逃。 
English: Wei Guo and Kang Sheng sent Yang Dajian to the front line to tell Yuan Ying: Liang people have not marched into the army for a long time since the attack on Liangcheng. The situation is that they are afraid of us. If the great king marches in to occupy Luoshui, they will surely be defeated and flee.

古文：元英曰： 萧临川虽騃，其下有好将韦、裴之属，亦未可当。望气者言九月贼退，今且观形势，未可便与交锋。 
现代文：元英说： 萧宏虽然蠢笨，下面还有良将韦睿、裴邃等人，也难以对付；望气的人说过，到九月贼会退走，如今暂且观察形势，不可马上和他交战。 
English: Yuan Ying said: Although Xiao Hong is stupid, there are good generals such as Wei Rui and Pei Yao below him, and they are also difficult to deal with; hopeful people have said that the thieves will retreat by September. Now, we will observe the situation for the time being, and we cannot fight with him immediately.

古文：张惠绍次下邳，号令严明，所至独克，下邳人多有欲来降。
现代文：张惠绍驻军下邳，号令严明，他的军队所到必克，下邳很多人都想来归降。
English: Zhang Huishao garrisoned in the Lower Yangtze River, the call is clear, his army will come, many people in the Lower Yangtze River want to come and surrender.

古文：惠绍曰： 我若得城，诸卿皆是国人；若不能破贼，徒令公等失乡，非朝廷吊人本意也。
现代文：惠绍说： 我如果攻下此城，各位便都是我朝的人；如果不能破贼，白白让你们无家可归，这不合朝廷爱民的本意。
English: Hui Shao said, "If I capture this city, you will all be my people; if I cannot defeat the bandits, I will make you homeless for nothing. This is not in line with the intention of the imperial court to love the people."

古文：今且安堵复业，勿妄自辛苦。 
现代文：如今还是先安心各务本业，不要白费辛苦。 
English: Nowadays, it's still important to take care of your own business first, so don't waste your hard work.

古文：降人咸悦。
现代文：来投降的都很高兴。
English: Those who came to surrender were happy.

古文：九月，洛口军溃，宏弃衆走。
现代文：九月，洛口梁军溃败，萧宏弃众逃跑。
English: In September, Luokou Liang's army was defeated, and Xiao Hong deserted and fled.

古文：其夜暴风雨，军惊，宏与数骑逃亡。
现代文：起因是夜里起了暴风雨，军中惊恐，萧宏就带了几骑人马逃走。
English: The cause was that a storm arose in the night, the army panicked, and Xiao Hong fled with several horsemen.

古文：诸将求宏不得，衆散而归。
现代文：诸将找不到他，军队就解体往回跑。
English: The generals couldn't find him, and the army broke up and ran back.

古文：弃甲投戈，填满水陆，捐弃病者，强壮仅得脱身。
现代文：丢弃的盔甲兵器铺满了道路和河流。扔下了病弱者，只有强壮的才得以脱身。
English: Discarded armour and weaponry littered the roads and rivers, leaving the sick and weak behind and only the strong able to escape.

古文：宏乘小船济江，夜至白石垒，款城门求入。
现代文：萧宏乘小船过江，夜里来到白石垒，叩门请求入城。
English: Xiao Hong crossed the river in a small boat, came to the White Stone Fort at night, knocked on the door and asked to enter the city.

古文：临汝侯登城谓曰： 百万之师，一朝奔溃，国之存亡，未可知也。
现代文：临汝侯萧猷登城对他说： 百万大军一下子就崩溃了，国家的存亡难以预料。
English: Lin Ryu Hou Xiao Xuan went to the city and said to him: A million-strong army collapsed all at once, and the country's survival is unpredictable.

古文：恐奸人乘间爲变，城门不可夜开。 
现代文：恐怕有奸细乘机入城作乱，城门夜间不能开。 
English: The city gates cannot be opened at night for fear of spies taking the opportunity to enter the city and cause trouble.

古文：宏无辞以对，乃缒食馈之。
现代文：萧宏无言以对。城上用绳子给他吊下来饭食。
English: Xiao Hong was speechless. The castle used a rope to dangle food down to him.

古文：惠绍闻洛口败，亦退军。
现代文：张惠绍听说洛口溃败，便也退兵回去。
English: When Zhang Huishao heard of the Lokou defeat, he also withdrew.

古文：六年，迁司徒，领太子太傅。
现代文：天监六年，改任司徒，兼太子太傅。
English: After six years as celestial overseer, he was reassigned to the post of tutor, and also became the prince's daifu.

古文：八年，爲司空、扬州刺史。
现代文：八年，任司空、扬州刺史。
English: In eight years, he served as the secretary of the sky and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：十一年正月，爲太尉。
现代文：十一年正月，任太尉。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：其年冬，以公事左迁骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪，未拜，迁扬州刺史。
现代文：那年冬天，因公事降职为骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪，还未正式任命，改任扬州刺史。
English: In the winter of that year, due to his official duties, he was demoted to the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the ceremony of opening the prefecture and the three departments, but he was not officially appointed, and he was reassigned as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：十二年，加司空。
现代文：十二年，加司空衔。
English: Twelve years later, he was promoted to the vacant rank.

古文：十五年，所生母陈太妃薨，去职。
现代文：十五年，生母陈太妃去世，辞去官职。
English: Fifteen years later, his birth mother, Chen Taifei, passed away and he resigned from the government.

古文：寻起爲中书监，骠骑大将军、扬州刺史如故。
现代文：不久又任命为中书监，骠骑大将军、扬州刺史职务不变。
English: Soon after, he was appointed China's chief librarian, and his posts as general of the imperial cavalry and historian of Yangzhou remained unchanged.

古文：宏妾弟吴法寿性粗狡，恃宏无所畏忌，辄杀人。
现代文：萧宏妾的弟弟吴法寿性情粗暴狡诈，仗着萧宏无所畏忌，擅自杀人。
English: The younger brother of Xiao Hong's concubine, Wu Fashou, had a rough and cunning temperament. He was not afraid of Xiao Hong and committed suicide.

古文：死家诉，有敕严讨。法寿在宏府内，无如之何。
现代文：死者家属告状，朝廷下令严办，法寿藏在萧宏府内，便拿他没办法。
English: The dead man's family filed a complaint, and the court ordered a strict investigation. As Faju was hidden in Xiao Hongfu, there was nothing they could do to get him.

古文：武帝制宏出之，即日偿辜。
现代文：武帝下诏把萧宏从家里叫出来，当天就法办了吴法寿。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict calling Xiao Hong out of his home, and on the same day, Wu Fazhou was arrested.

古文：南司奏免宏司徒、骠骑、扬州刺史。武帝注曰： 爱宏者兄弟私亲，免宏者王者正法，所奏可。 
现代文：南司上奏免去萧宏司徒、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史的职位，武帝批示道： 我爱护萧宏是出于兄弟私情，罢免他是按国家法令办事，准其所奏。 
English: Emperor Wu issued an order to remove Xiao Hongzhi from the posts of Nanshi Shangso, Shou Jie Da Geng, and Yangzhou Shishi, saying: I love and protect Xiao Hongzhi out of brotherly and personal feelings. The removal of Xiao Hongzhi is in accordance with the state laws and regulations, and is allowed to be carried out by him.

古文：宏自洛口之败，常怀愧愤，都下每有窃发，辄以宏爲名，屡爲有司所奏，帝每贳之。
现代文：萧宏自从洛口战败，经常心怀羞惭郁闷，京城里只要有奸邪不法的事，往往都打着他的招牌，于是屡次被有关部门奏报，武帝也总是宽恕他。
English: Since his defeat in the Battle of Lokou, Xiao Hong was often ashamed and depressed. As long as there was treachery and lawlessness in the capital, it was often under his signature. As a result, he was repeatedly reported by the relevant departments, and Emperor Wu always forgave him.

古文：十七年，帝将幸光宅寺，有士伏于骠骑航待帝夜出。
现代文：十七年，武帝要到光宅寺去，有人潜伏在骠骑航等待武帝夜里经过。
English: In the seventeenth year, Emperor Wu wanted to go to Kojak-ji Temple. Someone was lurking in the horse-drawn carriage waiting for Emperor Wu to pass by in the night.

古文：帝将行心动，乃于朱雀航过。
现代文：武帝将要出门时突然心跳，于是改从朱雀航经过。
English: When Emperor Wu was about to leave the house, he suddenly felt a heartbeat, so he passed by Suzakhang instead.

古文：事发，称爲宏所使。
现代文：此事被发觉，这人声称是萧宏指使。
English: The matter was discovered and the person claimed to be directed by Xiao Hong.

古文：帝泣谓宏曰： 我人才胜汝百倍，当此犹恐颠坠，汝何爲者。
现代文：武帝流着泪训诫萧宏说： 我人才比你强百倍，坐这个位置还怕栽跟斗，你为何要这样呢？
English: With tears streaming down his face, Emperor Wu admonished Xiao Honglu, saying, "My talent is a hundred times stronger than yours. Sitting in this position, you are still afraid of a fight. Why do you want to do this?

古文：我非不能爲周公、汉文，念汝愚故。 
现代文：我不是不能学周公和汉文帝把位置让给你，只是考虑到你太愚笨。 
English: I'm not saying that I can't learn from Zhou Gong and Emperor Wen of Han to give up my position to you, I'm just considering that you are too stupid.

古文：宏顿首曰： 无是，无是。 
现代文：萧宏叩头申辩道： 没有这回事，没有这回事。 
English: Xiao Hong kowtowed and pleaded: There is no such thing, there is no such thing.

古文：于是以罪免。
现代文：于是因罪免去职位。
English: As a result, he was removed from his post for his crime.

古文：而纵恣不悛，奢侈过度，修第拟于帝宫，后庭数百千人，皆极天下之选。
现代文：然而还是任意放纵不肯改过，奢侈过度，府第建造得和皇宫差不多，后宅美女成百上千，都是天下的绝色佳丽。
English: However, there is still arbitrary indulgence that refuses to be reformed, extravagance is excessive, the palace is built almost like the imperial palace, and there are hundreds of beautiful women in the backyard, all of whom are the most beautiful women in the world.

古文：所幸江无畏服玩侔于齐东昏潘妃，宝屧直千万。
现代文：所宠幸的江无畏，其穿戴赏玩可与齐东昏侯的潘妃相比，她穿的鞋子就价值千万。
English: Jiang Muji, her favorite, can be compared to Panfei, the dowager empress of Qidong, in terms of what she wears. The shoes she wears are worth tens of millions.

古文：好食鰿鱼头，常日进三百，其佗珍膳盈溢，后房食之不尽，弃诸道路。
现代文：她好吃鲫鱼头，经常一天得三百个，其他珍馐也堆得满满的，后房的人吃不完，都扔在路上。
English: She was a great eel-eater, often getting through three hundred eels a day, and other delicacies were also piled high. The people in the back room couldn't finish them all and threw them on the road.

古文：江本吴氏女也，世有国色，亲从子女遍游王侯后宫，男免兄弟九人，因权势横于都下。
现代文：江无畏本是吴氏女，吴家世代出美女，其亲属子女遍于王侯的后宫。吴氏子吴免有兄弟九人，倚仗权势横行京城。
English: Originally, Jiang Muji was a daughter of the Wu clan, and generations of the Wu family have produced beautiful women. Their relatives and children are all over the harem of the prince. The son of the Wu clan, Wu Mu, has nine brothers, and relies on power to run rampant in the capital.

古文：宏未几复爲司徒。
现代文：萧宏不久又官复司徒。
English: Xiao Hong was soon reinstated as a magistrate.

古文：普通元年，迁太尉、扬州刺史，侍中如故。
现代文：普通元年，改任太尉、扬州刺史，侍中不变。
English: In the first year of the common era, he was reassigned to the rank of captain, Yangzhou sashimi, and remained a chamberlain.

古文：七年四月薨，自疾至薨，舆驾七出临视。
现代文：七年去世，自他有病到去世，武帝曾七次亲去探视。
English: He died seven years later. From the time of his illness until his death, Emperor Wu personally visited him seven times.

古文：及薨，诏赠侍中、大将军、扬州牧，假黄钺，并给羽葆、鼓吹一部，增班剑爲六十人，諡曰靖惠。
现代文：死后，下诏追赠侍中、大将军、扬州牧，授予黄钺，并赐给羽葆和鼓吹一部，把他的班剑仪仗增加到六十人。谥为靖惠。
English: After his death, he posthumously bestowed the title of Chamberlain, Grand General, Yangzhou Patriarch, awarded the Yellow Ribbon, and gave a portion to Feather Badge and Preaching, increasing his squad of ceremonial swords to sixty. He was known as Jing Hui.

古文：宏以介弟之贵，无佗量能，恣意聚敛。
现代文：萧宏全靠御弟的尊贵身份，没有别的才能。
English: Xiao Hongqu relies on his younger brother's noble status, and has no other talent.

古文：库室垂有百间，在内堂之后，关钥甚严。
现代文：他肆意聚敛财物，有近百间库房，都在他内室后面，锁得很严紧。
English: He amassed wealth freely, with nearly a hundred storerooms, all behind his inner chamber and tightly locked.

古文：有疑是铠仗者，密以闻。
现代文：有人疑心藏的是兵器，密报朝廷。
English: Some people suspect that it is a weapon, a secret report to the imperial court.

古文：武帝于友于甚厚，殊不悦。
现代文：武帝与他兄弟之情甚厚，听了也很不高兴。
English: Emperor Wu was very fond of his brother, and was very unhappy to hear this.

古文：宏爱妾江氏寝膳不能暂离，上佗日送盛馔与江曰： 当来就汝欢宴。 
现代文：萧宏喜爱他的妾江氏，吃饭睡觉一会儿也离不开。于是武帝有一天送嘉肴给江氏，说： 我要去你那儿吃饭。 
English: Xiao Hong loved his concubine, Ms. Jiang, and he couldn't eat or sleep without her. So Emperor Wu one day sent some delicacies to Ms. Jiang, saying, "I want to eat at your place."

古文：唯携布衣之旧射声校尉丘佗卿往，与宏及江大饮，半醉后谓曰： 我今欲履行汝后房。 
现代文：只带了一个旧时的朋友射声校尉丘佗卿前往，与萧宏和江氏开怀畅饮，半醉后突然对萧宏说： 我想到你后房去看看。 
English: He only brought an old friend, Lieutenant Qiu Junqing, to drink with Xiao Hong and Mr. Jiang. When he was half drunk, he suddenly said to Xiao Hong, "I want to go to your back room to have a look."

古文：便呼后合舆径往屋所。
现代文：说着叫上看管后房的人直奔库房。
English: Saying that, the person who was watching the back room ran straight to the storeroom.

古文：宏恐上见其贿货，顔色怖惧。
现代文：萧宏害怕武帝发现屯积的财物，吓得变了脸色。
English: Xiao Hong was afraid that Emperor Wu would find the accumulated wealth, and his face turned pale with fright.

古文：上意弥信是仗，屋屋检视。
现代文：武帝更以为藏的是兵器，便挨门查看。
English: Emperor Wu thought they were hiding weapons, so he went door to door to check.

古文：宏性爱钱，百万一聚，黄牓标之，千万一库，悬一紫标，如此三十馀间。
现代文：萧宏生性爱钱，把一百万串在一起，贴一张黄帖；一千万作一堆，悬挂一个紫色的标签，像这样的共有三十多间。
English: Xiao Hongsheng love money, string a million together, put up a yellow post; ten million make a pile, hang a purple label, there are more than 30 rooms like this.

古文：帝与佗卿屈指计见钱三亿余万，馀屋贮布绢丝绵漆蜜紵蜡朱沙黄屑杂货，但见满库，不知多少。
现代文：武帝和佗卿屈指计算，共有钱三亿多。其他房子藏的是布、绢、丝、绵、漆、蜜、纟宁、蜡、朱砂、黄屑、杂货，只见满屋都是，不知有多少。
English: Emperor Wu and Lord Zou are the best at calculating, with a total of more than 300 million yuan. Other houses are hiding cloth, felt, silk, cotton, lacquer, honey, linseed oil, wax, cinnabar, yellow crumbs, and groceries. I don't know how many are all over the house.

古文：帝始知非仗，大悦，谓曰： 阿六，汝生活大可。 
现代文：武帝这才知道不是兵器，十分高兴，对他说： 阿六，你真会过日子啊。 
English: Emperor Wu only then knew that it was not a weapon, and was very happy, saying to him: Ah Luo, you really know how to live.

古文：方更剧饮，至夜举烛而还。
现代文：又回去接着痛饮，一直到夜里才打着火把回去。
English: They went back again and continued to drink until late at night, when they returned with torches.

古文：兄弟情方更敦睦。
现代文：兄弟间的情义更为亲近和睦。
English: The feeling between brothers is closer and more harmonious.

古文：宏都下有数十邸出悬钱立券，每以田宅邸店悬上文券，期讫便驱券主，夺其宅。
现代文：萧宏在京城有数十处店铺作抵押贷款的生意，常把借钱人的田宅店铺作抵押品记在债券上，到期不能偿还便把债户赶出去，夺走他们的田宅。
English: Xiao Hong has dozens of shops in Beijing, mainly engaged in the business of mortgage loans. He often puts borrowers' homestead shops as collateral on the bonds. If they can't repay the bonds, he will drive the borrowers out and take away their homestead.

古文：都下东土百姓，失业非一。
现代文：京都与浙东一带的百姓不少因此失去生存依靠。
English: As a result, many people in Kyoto and eastern Zhejiang lost their livelihoods.

古文：帝后知，制悬券不得复驱夺，自此后贫庶不复失居业。
现代文：武帝知道后，下令让他放债不得夺人田宅，从此贫苦百姓才不再丧失家产。
English: After Emperor Wu learned of this, he ordered that his moneylenders should not be allowed to seize people's homes. From then on, poor people would no longer lose their homes.

古文：晋时有钱神论，豫章王综以宏贪吝，遂爲钱愚论，其文甚切。
现代文：晋朝时曾有一篇《钱神论》，豫章王萧综因为萧宏贪婪吝啬，于是写了《钱愚论》，文章很尖刻。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, there was an article "Theory of the God of Money." Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoshu wrote "Theory of Money" because Xiao Hong was greedy and stingy. The article was very sharp.

古文：帝知以激宏，宣旨与综： 天下文章何限，那忽作此？ 
现代文：武帝知道后就用它来劝止萧宏，并对萧综说： 天下可写的文章有多少，为什么非要写这个。 
English: After Emperor Wu knew, he used it to persuade Xiao Hong to stop, and said to Xiao Siming: How many articles can be written in the world, why do you have to write this?

古文：虽令急毁，而流布已远，宏深病之，聚敛稍改。
现代文：虽然叫他马上毁掉这篇文章，但已流传开去，萧宏被它刺痛，聚敛稍有改正。
English: Although he was told to immediately destroy the article, it had already spread. Xiao Hong was stung by it, and the aggregation was slightly corrected.

古文：宏又与帝女永兴主私通，因是遂谋弑逆，许事捷以爲皇后。
现代文：萧宏又与武帝女儿永兴公主私通，因此谋划弑帝篡位，许诺事成之后立她为皇后。
English: Xiao Hong also had an adulterous affair with Emperor Wu's daughter, Princess Yongxing, so he plotted to usurp the throne, promising to make her the empress after the deed was done.

古文：帝尝爲三日斋，诸主并豫，永兴乃使二僮衣以婢服。
现代文：武帝曾作初三斋戒，各位公主都参与其事，永兴公主让两个男仆穿上婢女的衣服混进去动手。
English: Emperor Wu once fasted for the first three days of the new year, and all the princesses took part in it. Princess Yongxing had two male servants dress up in the clothes of the maidservants and join in.

古文：僮踰阈失屦，合帅疑之，密言于丁贵嫔，欲上言惧或不信，乃使宫帅图之。
现代文：男仆过门槛时掉了鞋，阁帅见鞋产生怀疑，密告丁贵嫔，丁贵嫔怕告诉武帝武帝不信，便吩咐宫帅去办理。
English: When the male servant crossed the threshold, he dropped his shoes. Seeing the shoes, the palace superintendent became suspicious and tipped off Ding Guizhen. Ding Guizhen was afraid to tell Emperor Wu that Emperor Wu did not believe him, so he ordered the palace superintendent to handle the matter.

古文：帅令内舆人八人，缠以纯绵，立于幕下。
现代文：宫帅让宫内八名仆役用纯绵裹身，藏在屏幕后面。
English: The palace superintendent had the palace's eight servants wrap themselves in pure cotton and hide behind a screen.

古文：斋坐散，主果请间，帝许之。
现代文：坐斋散了以后，永兴公主果然请求离开，武帝答应了。
English: After breaking the fast, Princess Yongxing indeed asked to leave, and Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：主升阶，而僮先趣帝后。八人抱而擒之，帝惊坠于扆。
现代文：永兴公主走上台阶，那两个男仆赶到武帝身后，幕后八人把他们抱住拿下，武帝受惊吓栽倒在屏风上。
English: Princess Yongxing walked up the steps, and the two male servants rushed behind Emperor Wu. Eight people behind the scenes hugged them and held them down. Emperor Wu panicked and fell down on the screen.

古文：搜僮得刀，辞爲宏所使。
现代文：从二人身上搜出刀子，供出是萧宏指使。
English: A knife was retrieved from the bodies of the two men, and Xiao Hong instructed Zhuo to provide it.

古文：帝秘之，杀二僮于内，以漆车载主出。
现代文：武帝没有张扬，在宫内杀了这二人，用黑色的车子把永兴公主拉出宫去。
English: Emperor Wu did not make a fuss, killed the two in the palace, and dragged Princess Yongxing out of the palace in a black car.

古文：主恚死，帝竟不临之。
现代文：公主怀恨而死，武帝到底也没去看她。
English: The princess died with a grudge, and Emperor Wu did not visit her at all.

古文：帝诸女临安、安吉、长城三主并有文才，而安吉最得令称。
现代文：武帝的女儿临安、安吉、长城三个公主都有文才，而安吉公主名声最佳。
English: Emperor Wu's three princesses, Lin'an, Anji and the Great Wall, all have literary talent, and Princess Anji has the best reputation.

古文：宏性好内乐酒，沈湎声色，侍女千人，皆极绮丽。
现代文：萧宏生性好色嗜酒，沉湎于声色，有侍女千人，都极漂亮。
English: Xiao Hongsheng was a womanizer and drunkard. He was obsessed with the tone of his voice and had a thousand maids, all of whom were extremely beautiful.

古文：后爲东扬州刺史，薨。
现代文：他处世欠谨慎，所以屡遭降免。
English: He has been repeatedly demoted and dismissed for his indiscretions.

古文：正义弟正德。正德字公和，少而凶慝，招聚亡命，破冢屠牛，兼好弋猎。
现代文：萧宏有儿子十来个，可知名的七人，长子正仁字公业，官作到秘书丞，早死，谥为哀世子。正仁的弟弟正义嗣位。萧正德字公和，从小凶狠奸邪，结交无赖亡命徒，盗掘坟墓，屠杀耕牛，又好打猎。
English: Xiao Hong had more than ten sons, seven of whom are well-known. The eldest son, Zheng Ren Zi Gongye, worked as a bureaucrat and secretary, and died young, leaving a sad legacy. Zheng Ren's younger brother, Zheng De Zi Gonghe, was a vicious evil-doer from a young age, befriended rogue outlaws, robbed graves, slaughtered cattle, and enjoyed hunting.

古文：齐建武中，武帝胤嗣未立，养以爲子。
现代文：齐朝建武年间，梁武帝还没有生子，收养他作儿子。
English: During the Jianwu period of the Qi Dynasty, Emperor Liang Wudi did not have a son yet, so he adopted him as his son.

古文：及平建康，生昭明太子，正德还本。
现代文：等平定建康以后，生下昭明太子，正德还归本家。
English: After Jiankang was pacified, Prince Akiming was born, and Zhengde returned to his family.

古文：天监初，封西丰县侯，累迁吴郡太守。
现代文：天监初年，封他为西丰县侯，逐渐升迁为吴郡太守。
English: In the first year of the overseer of heaven, he was appointed as the governor of Xifeng County, and was gradually promoted to the governor of Wu County.

古文：正德自谓应居储嫡，心常怏怏，每形于言。
现代文：正德自以为本应作太子，心怀不满，常在言语中表露出来。
English: Zhengde thought that he should have been crown prince. He was dissatisfied and often showed it in his speech.

古文：普通三年，以黄门侍郎爲轻车将军，置佐史。
现代文：普通三年，以黄门侍郎的身份作轻车将军，赐予设置佐史官。
English: For three years, he served as a general of light vehicles in the capacity of a Yellow Gate attendant, and was given the position of assistant historian.

古文：顷之奔魏。
现代文：不久投奔魏国。
English: He soon went to Wei.

古文：初去之始，爲诗一绝，内火笼中，即咏竹火笼，曰： 桢干屈曲尽，兰麝氛氲销，欲知怀炭日，正是履冰朝。 
现代文：离开梁朝时，作诗一首，放在火笼里头，即《咏竹火笼》诗。诗中说： 桢干屈曲尽，兰麝氛氲销，欲知怀炭日，正是履冰朝。 
English: When he left the Liang Dynasty, he wrote a poem and placed it in the fire box, namely, the poem "The Bamboo Fire Box." The poem said: "If you want to know the coal mining day, it is the morning of walking on ice."

古文：至魏称是被废太子。
现代文：到魏国后自称是被废太子。
English: After arriving in Wei, he claimed to be a deposed prince.

古文：时齐萧宝寅先在魏，乃上表魏帝曰： 岂有伯爲天子，父作扬州，弃彼密亲，远投佗国。
现代文：当时齐朝的萧宝寅已先在魏国，向魏帝上奏说： 哪里有伯父作天子，父亲作扬州刺史，而抛弃骨肉至亲，远投他国？
English: At that time, Xiao Baoying of the Qi Dynasty was already in Wei and reported to Emperor Wei: "Where is there an uncle who is the son of heaven and a father who is the history of Yangzhou, but abandoned his flesh and blood relatives and went to another country?

古文：不若杀之。 
现代文：这样的人不如杀了。 
English: It's better to kill such people.

古文：魏既不礼之，正德乃杀一小儿称爲己子，远营葬地，魏人不疑，又自魏逃归。
现代文：魏国对他不加礼遇，正德就杀了一个小孩，说是自己的儿子，埋在魏国，魏人于是不再怀疑他。
English: Wei did not treat him with courtesy. Zheng De killed a child, said it was his son, and buried him in Wei, so the Wei people no longer suspected him.

古文：见于文德殿，至庭叩头。
现代文：后又从魏国逃回去，在文德殿谒见武帝，到殿内磕头。
English: Later, he fled back from Wei and met Emperor Wu at the Palace of the Grand Dukes, and went to the palace to bow his head.

古文：武帝泣而诲之，特复本封。
现代文：武帝流着泪把他训诫一顿，又恢复了他本来的封爵。
English: Emperor Wu admonished him with tears and restored his original knighthood.

古文：正德志行无悛，常公行剥掠。
现代文：正德恶行不改，经常公开抢劫。
English: Zhengde did not change his evil ways and often committed robbery in public.

古文：时东府有正德及乐山侯正则；潮沟有董当门子暹，世谓之董世子者也；南岸有夏侯夔世子洪。
现代文：当时东府城有正德和乐山侯萧正则，潮沟有董当门的儿子董暹，即被人称为董世子的，南岸有夏侯夔的长子夏侯洪，这四条恶棍，是百姓的大祸害。
English: At that time, there were Zhengde and Leshan Hou Xia Zhengzu in Dongfu Town, Dong Siam, the son of Dong Dangmen, who was known as the son of Dong Shiji, in Chaogou, and Xia Houhong, the eldest son of Xia Houyi, on the south bank. These four villains were a great scourge to the people.

古文：此四凶者，爲百姓巨蠹，多聚亡命，黄昏多杀人于道，谓之 打稽 。时勋豪子弟多纵恣，以淫盗屠杀爲业，父祖不能制，尉逻莫能御。
现代文：他们招揽大批亡命之徒，黄昏时在路上杀人，把这叫 打稽 。当时的功臣豪门子弟多放纵不法，专门杀人抢劫奸人妻女，父辈管束不住，官吏也制止不了。
English: They recruited a large number of desperadoes to kill people on the road at dusk, which was called taiping. The sons of the heroic heroes of the time mostly indulged in lawlessness, specializing in killing and robbing adulterous wives and daughters. Their fathers could not control them, and officials could not stop them.

古文：车服牛马，号西丰骆马，乐山乌牛。
现代文：驾车的牛马，号称西丰骆马，乐山乌牛。
English: The driving horse, known as Xifeng vicuña and Leshan wuyu.

古文：董暹金帖织成战袄，直七百万。
现代文：董暹用金帖织成战袄，值钱七百万。
English: Dong Siam used gold thread to weave a war banner, worth seven million.

古文：后正则爲劫，杀沙门，徙岭南死。
现代文：后来萧正则因为抢劫，杀害和尚，被流放到岭南，在那儿被斩。
English: Later, Xiao Zhengzhe was exiled to Lingnan for robbery and killing a monk, and was beheaded there.

古文：洪爲其父夔奏系东冶，死于徒。
现代文：夏侯洪被他父亲告发，关押在东冶的监狱里，服刑时死去。
English: Xia Houhong was denounced by his father, detained in a prison in Dongye, and died while serving his sentence.

古文：暹坐与永阳王妃王氏乱，诛。
现代文：董暹因和永阳王妃王氏通奸，被杀。
English: Dong Siem was killed for committing adultery with Yongyang Wang, the queen of the Wang clan.

古文：三人既除，百姓少安。
现代文：三人被除后，百姓才稍得安宁。
English: It was only after the three men were removed that the people regained some peace.

古文：正德淫虐不革，寻除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：正德作恶不改。不久被任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: Zheng De did not change his evil ways. Soon he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：六年爲轻车将军，随豫章王北侵。
现代文：普通六年，任轻车将军，跟随豫章王萧综北侵魏国。
English: He served as a general of light vehicles for six years and followed Yuanzhang Wang Xiao to the north to invade Wei.

古文：正德辄弃军委走，爲有司所奏下狱。
现代文：正德擅自弃军逃走，被有关官吏弹劾下狱。
English: Zhengde abandoned the army without authorization and fled. He was impeached and sent to prison by the relevant officials.

古文：帝复诏曰： 汝以犹子，情兼常爱，故越先汝兄，剖符连郡。
现代文：武帝又下诏说： 因为你是我侄子，又曾过继给我，所以对你倍加爱护，加官晋爵，超过你的兄长。
English: Emperor Wu also issued an edict saying, "Because you are my nephew and were once given to me as an heir, I love you more than your elder brother.

古文：往年在蜀，昵近小人，犹谓少年情志未定。
现代文：以前在蜀地时，你亲近小人，还认为你是年轻不懂事。
English: In the past, when you were in Shudi, you were close to villains and thought you were too young to understand.

古文：更于吴郡杀戮无辜，劫盗财物，雅然无畏。
现代文：到吴郡后变本加厉，杀戮无辜，劫盗财物，全然肆无忌惮。
English: After arriving in Wuxi County, he became even more violent, killing innocent people and stealing property, completely unscrupulously.

古文：及还京师，专爲逋逃，乃至江乘要道，湖头断路，遂使京邑士女，早闭晏开。
现代文：等回到京城以后，专门收养亡命之徒，祸害得路断人稀，以至京城百姓门户早闭晚开。
English: After returning to the capital, they specially adopted the outlaws, and the scourge was so rare that the people of the capital closed their doors early and opened them late.

古文：又夺人妻妾，略人子女，徐敖非直失其配匹，乃横尸道路；王伯敖列卿之女，诱爲妾媵。
现代文：又夺人妻妾、抢人子女。徐敖不光妻子被夺，还横尸道路；王伯敖身为公卿，女儿被你诱作婢妾。
English: You also robbed people's wives, concubines, and children. Xu Yao not only robbed his wife, he also robbed the road; Wang Bo Yao was a noble, and his daughter was lured by you to be a concubine.

古文：我每加掩抑，冀汝自新，了无悛革，怨雠逾甚。
现代文：我屡次为你遮掩，把事情压下去，希望你能改过自新，你却没有一点悔改之意，反而怨愤更甚。
English: I have repeatedly covered up for you, suppressed things, and hoped that you would reform, but you have no intention of repenting, but are even more resentful.

古文：遂匹马奔亡，志怀反噬。
现代文：后来只身逃亡敌国，以亲为仇。
English: Later, he fled the enemy country alone, taking revenge on his relatives.

古文：遣信慰问，冀汝能还，果能来归，遂我夙志。
现代文：我曾派人传信慰问，希望你能回来，结果真能回归故国，了却我平生之愿。
English: I once sent someone to convey my condolences, hoping that you would come back. As a result, I was able to return to my home country, which is my lifelong wish.

古文：谓汝不好文史，志在武功，令汝杖节，董戎前驱。岂谓汝狼心不改，包藏祸胎，志欲覆败国计，以快汝心。
现代文：心想你不好读书，志在武功，所以让你掌兵权，领兵上阵作战；谁知你狼心不改，包藏祸心，一心想使国家颠覆败亡，以快你的心意。
English: Thinking that you are not good at reading and aspire to martial arts, so let you take over the military power and lead the soldiers into battle; who knows if you will not change your mind, hide your evil intentions, and want to subvert and defeat the country, to quicken your mind.

古文：今当宥汝以远，无令房累自随。
现代文：如今宽恕你到远方去，不要让家属跟你同去了。
English: Now forgive you to go far away, and don't let your family go with you.

古文：敕所在给汝禀饩。
现代文：我让你所在处供应你吃穿用度。
English: I'll have your place supply you with food and clothing.

古文：王新妇、见理等当停太尉间，汝余房累悉许同行。 
现代文：你的新妇和儿子见理可以留在太尉府，其他家属也可以和你同去。 
English: Your new wife and son can stay in the captain's house, and other family members can go with you.

古文：于是免官削爵土，徙临海郡。
现代文：于是免去其官职，削去封地，流放到临海郡。
English: As a result, he was relieved of his official position, stripped of his fief, and exiled to Linhai County.

古文：未至徙所，道追赦之。
现代文：还未到流放地，半道又追上赦免了他。
English: Before reaching the place of exile, he was caught and pardoned halfway.

古文：八年，复封爵。
现代文：普通八年，恢复了他的封地和爵位。
English: After eight years, his fiefdom and title were restored.

古文：正德北还，求交朱异。
现代文：正德从流放路上北归后，设法和朱异结交。
English: After Zhengde returned to the north from the exile road, he tried to make friends with Zhu Yizhong.

古文：帝既封昭明诸子，异言正德失职。
现代文：武帝封了昭明太子和其他诸王子后，朱异向武帝进言说正德还没有应有的职分。
English: After Emperor Wu enthroned Prince Zhaoming and other princes, Zhu Rong suggested to Emperor Wu that Zhengde did not have the position he should have.

古文：中大通四年，特封临贺郡王。
现代文：中大通四年，特地封正德临贺郡王。
English: In the fourth year of junior high and high school, Zhengde Lin He was specially named the king of Lin He County.

古文：后爲丹阳尹，坐所部多劫盗，复爲有司所奏，去职。
现代文：后来作丹阳尹时，因其下属经常抢劫财物，又被官吏弹劾，罢免职位。
English: Later, as Danyang Yin, because his subordinates often robbed property, he was impeached by officials and dismissed from his post.

古文：出爲南兖州，在任苛刻，人不堪命。
现代文：外放作南兖州刺史，在任上苛刻残暴，百姓难以忍受。
English: It has been described as the history of Nan'anzhou. He was harsh and cruel in office, which was unbearable for the people.

古文：广陵沃壤，遂爲之荒，至人相食噉。
现代文：广陵富饶之地，竟成一片荒芜，以至于人相食。
English: Guangling, a land of plenty, has turned into a wasteland, so much so that people are eating each other.

古文：聚蓄米粟，宅内五十间室，并以爲仓。
现代文：屡次任用他都无能力胜任，便从此废黜不用。
English: Repeatedly, he was appointed without being able to do the job, so he was dismissed.

古文：自征虏亭至于方山，悉略爲墅。
现代文：这更加深了他的怨恨，于是暗地蓄养敢死之士，整天巴望国家动乱。从征虏亭到方山，都被他强占为田庄。
English: This only deepened his resentment, so he secretly nurtured those who dared to die, and all day long hoped for national turmoil. From Zheyruting to Fangshan, they were all forcibly occupied by him as estates.

古文：蓄奴僮数百，皆黥其面。
现代文：蓄养奴仆数百人，都在脸上刺了字。
English: He kept hundreds of slaves, all of whom had the word tattooed on their faces.

古文：太清二年秋，侯景反，知其有奸心。
现代文：太清二年秋天，侯景反，侯景的党徒徐思玉在魏国时常和正德交往，十分投机，知道正德有奸心。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jingran and Xu Siyu, a party member of Hou Jing, often interacted with Zhengde in Wei. They were very opportunistic and knew that Zhengde had a treacherous heart.

古文：景党徐思玉在北经与正德相知，至是景遣思玉至建邺，具以事告。又与正德书曰： 今天子年尊，奸臣乱国，以景观之，计日必败。
现代文：于是侯景派思玉到建邺，把侯景的打算告诉他。侯景又给正德写信说： 如今天子年迈，奸臣乱国，据我看，败亡之日已屈指可数。
English: So Hou Jing sent Siyu to Jianye to tell him of his plans. Hou Jing also wrote to Zhengde, saying, "If today's son is old and a traitor and has ruined the country, in my opinion, the day of defeat is already numbered.

古文：大王属当储贰，中被废辱，天下义士，窃所忿慨。
现代文：大王本为太子，半道上却受被废之辱，天下义士无不为之愤慨。
English: The great king was originally a crown prince, but he suffered the humiliation of being dethroned halfway through, and all the righteous in the world were indignant.

古文：大王岂得顾此私情，弃兹亿兆。
现代文：大王怎能只顾伯侄私情而抛弃拥戴你的千万人呢？
English: How can the great king abandon the tens of millions of people who support you for the sake of his nephew's personal feelings?

古文：景虽不武，实思自奋。 
现代文：我虽说不上勇武，却也想奋起有所作为。 
English: I don't have the ability, but I really want to push myself.

古文：正德得书大喜，曰： 侯景之意，暗与人同，天赞我也。 
现代文：正德见信大喜说： 侯景的意思和我暗合，真是天助我也。 
English: Zheng De was overjoyed to see the letter and said, "Hou Jing's meaning coincides with mine. Heaven help me."

古文：遂许之。
现代文：于是就应允给侯景作内应。
English: He agreed to Hou Jing's request.

古文：及景至，正德潜运空舫，诈称迎荻，以济景焉。
现代文：等侯景军队到北岸，正德偷发空船，假说去运芦荻，把侯景渡过江来。
English: When Hou Jing's army reached the north bank, Zheng De secretly sent an empty boat, supposedly to transport reeds, to bring Hou Jing across the river.

古文：朝廷未知其谋，以正德爲平北将军，屯朱雀航。
现代文：朝廷不知道正德的阴谋，委任他为平北将军，驻军朱雀航。
English: The imperial court did not know about Zhengde's plot and appointed him as the general of Pingbei, garrisoning Zhu Zakhang.

古文：景至，正德乃北向望阙三拜跪辞，歔欷流涕，引贼入宣阳门。与景交揖马上，退据左卫府。
现代文：侯景来到后，正德向北拜了三拜，跪下辞别，并虚欠欷流泪。然后引贼入宣阳门，与侯景在马上互相作揖，退守左卫府。
English: After Hou Jing arrived, Zheng De bowed three times to the north, knelt down to say goodbye, and shed tears. Then he led the thieves into Xuanyang Gate, and he and Hou Jing immediately fought with each other and retreated to the left guard.

古文：先是，其军并着绛袍，袍里皆碧，至是悉反之。
现代文：起先，他的军队都穿红袍，里边穿青衣，这时便里外反过来穿。
English: At first, his troops wore red coats on the outside and blue coats on the inside.

古文：贼以正德爲天子，号曰正平元年。
现代文：侯景立正德为天子，号正平元年。
English: Hou Jingli Zhengde was the son of Heaven, and his name was Zhengping in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：初童谣有之，故以应也；又世人相佷，必称正平耳。
现代文：因为起初童谣中有 正平 之语，所以用此年号以应童谣。另外人们在发怒争吵时，也都必口称正平。
English: Because at the beginning of the nursery rhyme, there was the word Zhengping, so this year's name was used to correspond to the nursery rhyme. In addition, people must also call Zhengping when they are angry and quarreling.

古文：正德乃以长子见理爲太子，以女妻景。
现代文：正德立长子见理为太子，把女儿嫁给侯景，侯景作丞相。
English: Zheng De made his eldest son, Jian Li, the crown prince, married his daughter to Hou Jing, and made Hou Jing the prime minister.

古文：景爲丞相，与约曰： 平城之日，不得全二宫。 
现代文：正德和他相约说： 破城之日，不能留下萧衍、萧纲父子。 
English: Zheng De made an appointment with him and said, "On the day the city is destroyed, we cannot leave Xiao Yan and Xiao Gang, father and son, behind.

古文：又令畿内王侯三日不出者，诛之。
现代文：又下令，京畿内王侯三天内不出城投降的，杀无赦。
English: He also ordered that if the princes of Gyeonggi Province did not surrender within three days, they would be killed without mercy.

古文：及台城开，正德率衆挥刀欲入，贼先使其徒守门，故正德不果。
现代文：等到攻破台城，正德领人拿刀要闯进去杀萧衍父子，侯景令他们守门，因此正德未能得逞。
English: While waiting to conquer Taicheng, the leader of Zhengde took a knife to break in and kill Xiao Yan and his son. Hou Jing ordered them to guard the door, so Zhengde failed.

古文：乃复太清之号，降正德爲侍中、大司马。
现代文：侯景恢复太清年号，降正德为侍中、大司马。
English: Hou Jing restored the Taiqing era name, and demoted Zhengde to a chamberlain and grand steward.

古文：正德入问讯，拜且泣。
现代文：正德入宫向武帝问讯，一边下拜一边流泪。
English: Zhengde entered the palace to ask Emperor Wu for information, and shed tears while bowing down.

古文：武帝曰： 惙其泣矣，何嗟及矣。 
现代文：武帝说： 你哭得怪伤心，可后悔也来不及了。 
English: Emperor Wu said: You are crying with a strange sadness, but it's too late to regret it.

古文：正德知爲贼所卖，深自咎悔，密书与鄱阳嗣王契，以兵入。
现代文：正德知道被侯景出卖，深深感到后悔，写密信与鄱阳嗣王萧范相约，让他引兵入城。
English: Zhengde knew that he had been betrayed by Houjing and deeply regretted it. He wrote a secret letter to make an appointment with Wang Xiao Fan, the successor of Shanyang, and asked him to lead troops into the city.

古文：贼遮得书，乃矫诏杀之。
现代文：侯景截获书信，借武帝之命杀了他。
English: Hou Jing intercepted the letter and killed him on the orders of Emperor Wu.

古文：先是，正德妹长乐主适陈郡谢禧，正德奸之，烧主第，缚一婢，加玉钏于手，以金宝附身，声云主被烧死，检取婢尸并金玉葬之。
现代文：当初，正德的妹妹长乐公主嫁给陈郡谢禧，正德奸污了她，放火烧了公主的宅第，捆了一个婢女，给她手上戴上玉钏，身上佩上金饰，声称公主被烧死，收拾婢女的尸体和金玉一块儿埋了。
English: At first, Zhengde's sister, Princess Changle, was married to Chen County's Xie Xiyi. Zhengde raped her, set fire to the princess' house, tied up a maid, put a jade bracelet on her hand and gold jewelry on her body, claimed that the princess was burned to death, and buried the maid's body together with the gold and jade.

古文：仍与主通，呼爲柳夫人，生二子焉。
现代文：继续和公主通奸，并称她为柳夫人，生下两个儿子。
English: He went on to have an affair with the princess, whom he called Lady Willow, and they had two sons.

古文：日月稍久，风声渐露。
现代文：时间稍长，逐渐露出风声。
English: The time is a little longer, gradually revealing the rumor.

古文：后黄门郎张准有一雉媒，正德见而夺之。
现代文：后来黄门郎张准养了一只雉媒，就是经过驯养用以诱捕其他野鸡的野鸡，正德见了把它抢去。
English: Later, Huangmen Lang Zhang Jun raised a pheasant, which was domesticated to trap other pheasants, and Zhengde saw it and snatched it.

古文：寻会重云殿爲净供，皇储以下莫不毕集。准于衆中吒骂曰： 张准雉媒非长乐主，何可略夺！ 
现代文：不久碰上重云殿作法事，皇储以下全部汇集，张准便在众人中骂道： 张准的雉媒不是长乐公主，怎么能随便抢走！ 
English: Not long after, he came across Chouyunden practicing the Dharma, and the crown prince and all the others gathered, and Zhang Zheng scolded them in the crowd: Zhang Zheng's matchmaker is not Changle Princess, how can he just snatch her away!

古文：皇太子恐帝闻之,令武陵王和止之乃休，及出，送雉媒还之。
现代文：皇太子怕传到武帝耳朵里，赶紧让武陵王劝解才平息下来。出来以后，正德把雉媒送还。
English: The crown prince was afraid that the rumor would reach the ears of Emperor Wu, so he quickly asked King Wuling to persuade him to calm down. After he came out, Zheng De sent the mediums back.

古文：其后梁室倾覆既由正德，百姓至闻临贺郡名亦不欲道。
现代文：后来梁朝覆亡总归都是由于正德，百姓们甚至听到临贺郡名字都耻于出口。
English: Later, the overthrow and death of the Liang Dynasty were all due to Zhengde, and the people were ashamed to even hear the name of Linhe County.

古文：正德弟正则。
现代文：有童谣说： 宁逢五虎入市，不欲见临贺父子。 
English: There is a nursery rhyme that says: I'd rather have five tigers enter the market than see Lin He and his son.

古文：正则字公衡，天监初，以王子封乐山侯。
现代文：竟是如此憎恶他。萧正则，字公衡，天监初年，因是王子被封为乐山侯。
English: In the first year of his imprisonment, Xiao Zhengzhe, whose name means "fair and balanced," was given the title of "Hill of Joy" because he was a prince.

古文：累迁太子洗马、舍人。
现代文：他多次升迁，任太子洗马、舍人。
English: He has been promoted many times, and has been appointed as the prince to wash horses and give away people.

古文：恒于第内私械百姓令养马，又盗铸钱。
现代文：他经常在家私自拘留百姓，让他们养马，又偷偷地铸钱币。
English: He often detained people at his private home, let them keep horses, and secretly minted coins.

古文：大通二年，坐匿劫盗，削爵徙郁林。
现代文：大通二年，因藏匿抢劫盗窃犯人而获罪，被削去爵位流放到郁林。
English: In the second year of his reign, he was convicted of hiding a robber and thief and was stripped of his title and exiled to Yulin.

古文：帝敕广州日给酒肉，南中官司犹处以侯礼。
现代文：皇帝命令广州地方官府每天供给萧正则酒肉，南方官衙中人仍以王侯的礼节来对待他。
English: The emperor ordered the local government of Guangzhou to provide Xiao Zhengzhe with wine and meat every day, and the people in the southern government still treated him with the etiquette of a prince.

古文：正则滋怨诸父，与西江督护靳山顾通室，招诱亡命，将袭番禺。
现代文：萧正则对他的父辈产生了怨恨，与西江督护靳山顾串通，引诱并招来一些亡命之徒，准备攻打番禺。
English: Xiao Zhengzhe developed a grudge against his parents, colluded with the governor of the West River and the guardian of Lushan Gu, lured and invited some outlaws, and prepared to attack Panyu.

古文：未及期而事发，遂鸣鼓会将攻州城。
现代文：还未到预定的日期，他们的阴谋就暴露了，于是他们便鸣鼓聚集起来准备攻打州城。
English: Before the appointed time, their plot was discovered, and they gathered with drums to attack the state capital.

古文：刺史元景仲命长史元孝深讨之。正则败，逃于厕，村人缚送之，诏斩于南海。
现代文：刺史元景仲命令长史元孝深讨伐萧正则，萧正则被打败，逃入厕所，被村民抓获，绑起来送往官府。
English: The assassin, Shih Yuan Jingzhong, ordered the chief, Shih Yuan Xiao, to make a deep attack on Xiao Zhengzhe. Xiao Zhengzhe was defeated, fled into the toilet, was captured by the villagers, tied up and sent to the government office.

古文：有司请绝属籍，收妻子。
现代文：诏令将萧正则在南海斩首，有关部门上表请求将他从宗族的名册中除去，将他的妻子关押。
English: Xiao Zhengyi was beheaded in the South China Sea by imperial edict, and the relevant departments made a petition to remove him from the family register and arrest his wife.

古文：诏听绝属籍，妻子特原。
现代文：下诏同意把他从宗族的名册中去除，对他的妻子宽大处理。
English: The emperor agreed to remove him from the family register and to treat his wife more leniently.

古文：正则弟正立。
现代文：萧正则的弟弟名萧正立。
English: Xiao Zhengzhe's younger brother is named Xiao Zhengli.

