古文：李遐周许老翁李珏章全素
现代文：李遐周许老翁李珏章全素
English: Li Yuzhong, Zhou Xu, and Li Yuzhang are all vegetarians.

古文：李遐周
现代文：李遐周
English: Li Yanzhou

古文：李遐周者，颇有道术。
现代文：李遐周很有道术。
English: Li Yanzhou is very good at martial arts.

古文：唐开元中，尝召入禁中。
现代文：唐代开元年间，他曾被召入宫中。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, he was summoned to the palace.

古文：后求出住玄都观。
现代文：后来他请求离开宫禁住进玄都观。
English: Later, he asked to leave the palace and not be allowed to enter the imperial palace.

古文：唐宰相李林甫尝往谒之。
现代文：宰相李林甫曾经前去拜访过他。
English: Premier Li Linfu once went to visit him.

古文：遐周谓曰： 公存则家泰，殁则家亡。 
现代文：他对李林甫说： 你在，你的家就安全；你亡，你的家也亡。 
English: He said to Li Linfu: If you stay, your home will be safe; if you die, your home will also die.

古文：林甫拜泣，求其救解。
现代文：李林甫流泪叩拜，求他解救。
English: Li Linfu bowed down in tears and begged him for help.

古文：笑而不答，曰： 戏之耳。 
现代文：李遐周笑而不答，只是说： 开句玩笑罢了。 
English: Li Qizhou laughed and did not answer, but said: "It's just a joke."

古文：天宝末，禄山豪横跋扈，远近忧之；而上意未寤。
现代文：天宝末年，安禄山豪横跋扈，远近都担忧，但是皇上还没有醒悟。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, the Anlu Mountains were full of warlords, and people both near and far were worried, but the emperor had not yet woken up.

古文：一旦遐周隐去，不知所之。
现代文：有一天李遐周隐去，不知他到哪儿去了。
English: One day, Li Yao went to Zhouyin. I don't know where he went.

古文：但于其所居壁上，题诗数章，言禄山僭窃及幸蜀之事。时人莫晓，后方验之。
现代文：他只在住处的墙上题了几首诗，记的是安禄山想要窃国和唐玄宗将要到蜀地避难的事，当时的人谁也看不明白，后来才验证了。
English: He only inscribed a few poems on the wall of his residence, noting that An Lushan wanted to steal the country and that Tang Xuan Zong was going to take refuge in Shu. At that time, no one could understand it, but later it was verified.

古文：其末篇曰： 燕市人皆去，函关马不归。
现代文：其中最后一首是： 燕市人皆去，函关马不归。
English: The last one is: "All the people of Yancheng will leave, and no one will return from Hanzhongma."

古文：若逢山下鬼，环上系罗衣。 
现代文：若逢山下鬼，环上系罗衣。 
English: If there is a ghost at the foot of the mountain, there is a ghost on the ring.

古文： 燕市人皆去 ，禄山悉幽蓟之众而起也。 函关马不归 者，哥舒翰潼关之败，疋马不还也。 若逢山下鬼 者，马嵬蜀中驿名也。 环上系罗衣 者，贵妃小字玉环，马嵬时，高力士以罗巾缢之也。
现代文： 燕市人皆去 ，是说安禄山和幽州、蓟州的众将都起来造反； 函关马不归 ，是说哥舒翰潼关兵败，全军覆没，匹马不还； 若逢山下鬼 ，是说如果走到马嵬坡这个地方； 环上系罗衣 ，是说杨贵妃小字玉环，唐玄宗到蜀地避难，走到马嵬坡，高力士用罗巾把她勒死。
English: Yancheng people are all going, it means that the people of Anlu Mountain, Yuzhou and Zhangzhou will all rise up and rebel; Hanguan horses will not return, it means that Goshukhan Shiguan was defeated, the whole army was annihilated, and the horses did not return; If there is a ghost under the mountain, it means that if you go to this place in Magangpo; On the ring, it is Luo Yi, it means that Yang Guifei small character jade ring, Tang Xuan Zong took refuge in Shu, went to Magangpo, and Gao Lixi strangled her with a towel.

古文：其所先见，皆此类矣。
现代文：李遐周的先见之明，都和这事相类似。
English: Li Yizhou's foresight is similar to this.

古文：许老翁
现代文：许老翁
English: Xu Laowong

古文：许老翁者，不知何许人也。
现代文：不知道许老翁是什么地方人。
English: I don't know what region Xu Lao Weng is from.

古文：隐于峨嵋山，不知年代。
现代文：他隐居在峨嵋山，也不知那是什么年代。
English: He lived in seclusion in Mount Emei, I don't know how old he was.

古文：唐天宝中，益州士曹柳某妻李氏，容色绝代。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，益州的一个士曹柳某的妻子李氏，长得特别漂亮。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the wife of Cao Liu, a scholar from Yizhou, was particularly beautiful.

古文：时节度使章仇兼琼，新得吐番安戎城，差柳送物至城所，三岁不复命。
现代文：当时节度使章仇兼琼，新得了吐番的安戎城，派柳某到安戎城去送东西，三年没有回来复命。
English: At that time, the festival made Zhang Qianqian Qiong, An Rongcheng, who had just won the spitting ban, send Liu to An Rongcheng to send something, and he did not return for three years.

古文：李在官舍，重门未启，忽有裴兵曹诣门，云是李之中表丈人。
现代文：李氏住在官舍，足不出户，没有开过院门。忽然有一个姓裴的兵曹来到她家叫门，说是李氏的表叔。
English: Ms. Li lived in an official residence, never left the house, and never opened the gate of the hospital. Suddenly, a soldier surnamed Pei came to her house to call, saying that he was Ms. Li's cousin.

古文：李云： 无裴家亲。 
现代文：李氏说： 我家没有姓裴的亲戚。 
English: Mr. Li said: My family has no relatives with the surname Pei.

古文：门不令启，裴因言李小名，兼说其中外氏族。李方令开门致拜，因欲餐。
现代文：她不让给姓裴的开门。于是姓裴的就叫出了李氏的小名，同时说出她家内外氏族的姓名，李氏这才让开门，并向姓裴的下拜。
English: She did not allow the door to be opened to the surname Pei. Therefore, the surname Pei called out the nickname of the Li clan, and at the same time said the names of the clans inside and outside her family. Only then did the Li clan allow the door to be opened and bowed down to the surname Pei.

古文：裴人质甚雅，因问柳郎去几时。
现代文：准备做饭给姓裴的吃。姓裴的很文雅，就问柳郎离家多久了。
English: He was preparing to cook for a gentleman named Pei. Pei was very polite, so he asked Yanagiro how long he had been away from home.

古文：答云： 已三载矣！ 
现代文：李氏回答说，已经三年了。
English: Mr. Li replied that it had been three years.

古文：裴云： 三载义绝 ，古人所言，今欲如何？
现代文：姓裴的说： 三年，情义已经断绝，这是古人说的。现在你打算怎么办呢？
English: Mr. Pei said, "Three years ago, the situation has been severed, this is what the ancients said. What are you going to do now?

古文：且丈人与子，业因合为伉俪，愿无拒此。
现代文：我和你，已经因此应该成为夫妻了。希望你不要拒绝这件事。 
English: You and I should be husband and wife by now. I hope you don't refuse this.

古文：而竟为裴丈所迷，似不由人可否也。
现代文：李氏到底被姓裴的迷住了，这好像不是由人决定的。
English: In the end, Mr. Li was captivated by the surname Pei, which does not seem to be determined by people.

古文：裴兵曹者，亦既娶矣。
现代文：这位裴兵曹，就娶了她。
English: This Pei Petty Officer married her.

古文：而章仇公闻李姿美，欲窥觇之。乃令夫人特设筵会，屈府县之妻，罔不毕集。唯李以夫婿在远辞焉。
现代文：而章仇兼琼听说李氏姿色美丽，想要见一见，就让他的夫人特意操办了一个宴会，所有府官县官的妻子，全都来了，只有李氏因为丈夫在远地而推辞了。
English: But Zhang Qianqiong heard that Mr. Li was beautiful and wanted to see him, so he asked his wife to specially organize a banquet. All the wives of prefectural and county officials came, but only Mr. Li declined because her husband was far away.

古文：章仇妻以须必见。乃云： 但来，无苦推辞。 
现代文：章仇兼琼的妻子因为必须见到李氏，便对李氏说： 你只管来，不要苦苦地推辞。 
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong Mao's wife had to see Mr. Li, so she said to him, "Just come, don't be reluctant to come."

古文：李惧责遂行。
现代文：李氏怕受到责备，就去了。
English: Fearing that he would be blamed, Mr. Li went.

古文：着黄罗银泥裙，五晕罗银泥衫子，单丝罗红地银泥帔子，盖益都之盛服也。
现代文：她穿的是黄罗银泥裙、五晕罗银泥衫子、单丝罗红地银泥帔肩，是益都最华丽的衣服。
English: She is wearing a yellow and silver mud skirt, a five-colored and five-colored mud shirt, and a single-colored and red-colored mud shoulder, which is the most gorgeous dress in Yidu.

古文：裴顾衣而叹曰： 世间之服，华丽止此耳。 
现代文：裴兵曹见了她的衣服叹道： 人世间的衣服，华丽也只能到这种程度而已。 
English: When Cao Pei saw her dress, he sighed, "Clothes in the human world can only be so gorgeous.

古文：回谓小仆： 可归开箱，取第三衣来。 
现代文：他回头对仆人说： 你回去把我的衣箱打开，把第三套衣服拿来。 
English: He turned to his servant and said, "Go back and unpack my wardrobe and bring me the third set of clothes."

古文：李云： 不与第一而与第三，何也。 
现代文：李氏说： 不给我第一套，而给我第三套，为什么？ 
English: Mr. Li said, "Instead of giving me the first set, give me the third set. Why?

古文：裴曰： 第三已非人世所有矣。 
现代文：裴兵曹说： 这第三套已经不是人间有的了。 
English: Pei said, "This third set of rules does not exist in the human world.

古文：须臾衣至，异香满室。
现代文：不一会儿衣服取来了，满屋飘着异香。
English: Soon after, the clothes were taken away, and the house was filled with a strange smell.

古文：裴再眎，笑谓小仆曰： 衣服当须尔耶？
现代文：裴兵曹又看了看，笑着对仆人说： 衣服应当如此吧？
English: Petty Officer Pei looked at it again, smiled and said to the servant, "Is that how clothes should be?

古文：若章仇何知，但恐许老翁知耳。 
现代文：象章仇兼琼这种人是不能知道什么的，只怕许老翁知道而已。 
English: People like Xiang Zhang, Qian Qian and Qiong cannot know anything, only Xu Lao Weng can know.

古文：乃登车诣节度家，既入，夫人并座客，悉皆降阶致礼。
现代文：于是李氏就登车来到节度使家。李氏进门之后，章仇夫人及所有的座中客人，全都走下台阶来行礼迎接。
English: After Mr. Li entered the door, Mrs. Zhang Qiu and all the guests at the banquet all walked down the steps to salute.

古文：李既服天衣，貌更殊异。
现代文：李氏穿了仙衣之后，容貌更加美得出众，见到的人非常喜欢她。
English: After Ms. Li wore the fairy dress, her appearance was even more beautiful and outstanding, and people who saw her liked her very much.

古文：观者爱之。坐定，夫人令白章仇曰： 士曹之妻，容饰绝代。 
现代文：坐定之后，章仇夫人让人向章仇兼琼禀报说： 士曹的妻子已经来了，她的容貌服饰都是绝无仅有的。 
English: After sitting down, Zhang Qiu's wife sent someone to report to Zhang Qiu and Qiong Yao: "Scao's wife has arrived, her appearance and clothing are unique.

古文：章仇径来入院，戒众勿起。
现代文：章仇兼琼直接走进院来，告诉大家不要站起来。
English: Zhang Qiuqian Qiong walked directly into the hospital and told everyone not to stand up.

古文：见李服色，叹息数四，乃借帔观之，则知非人间物。
现代文：他见到李氏的衣服颜色，再三地赞叹，就把李氏的披肩借来观赏。一看就知道这不是人间的东西。
English: When he saw the color of Mr. Li's clothes, he repeatedly admired them, and borrowed Mr. Li's shawl to watch. At a glance, he knew that this was not an earthly thing.

古文：试之水火，亦不焚污。
现代文：把它放到水里和火上试验，也不着火也不污染。
English: It has been tested in water and on fire, and it does not catch fire or pollute.

古文：因留诘之。
现代文：于是散席的时候就把李氏留下盘问。
English: As a result, Mr. Li was left behind for cross-examination during the break.

古文：李具陈本末。
现代文：李氏详细地陈述了事情的始末。
English: Mr. Li gave a detailed account of the events.

古文：使人至裴居处，则不见矣。
现代文：章仇兼琼派人去到裴兵曹的住处，裴兵曹却不见了。
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong Qian sent someone to Pei Cao's residence, but Pei Cao had disappeared.

古文：兼琼乃易其衣而进，并奏许老翁之事。
现代文：章仇兼琼就把李氏的衣服换下来，送到皇宫里，并且向皇上奏报了许老翁的事。
English: Zhang Qianqiong changed Li's clothes and sent them to the imperial palace, and reported to the emperor about Xu Lao Weng.

古文：敕令以计须求许老。
现代文：皇上下令让他设法找到许老翁。
English: The emperor ordered him to try to find Xu Laowong.

古文：章仇意疑仙者往来，必在药肆。因令药师候其出处，居四日得之。
现代文：章仇兼琼想，仙人往来，一定在药店，于是他就让药师等候着许老翁的出现。等了四天就等到了。
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong thought that the hermit must be in the pharmacy, so he asked the pharmacist to wait for the appearance of Xu Lao Weng. He waited for four days.

古文：初有小童诣肆市药。药师意是其徒，乃以恶药与之。
现代文：一开始有一位小童到药店来买药，药师认为这是许老翁的弟子，就把一些不好的药卖给他。
English: At the beginning, a child came to the pharmacy to buy medicine. The pharmacist thought that this was a disciple of Xu Lao Weng, and sold him some bad medicine.

古文：小童往而复来，且嘱云： 大人怒药不佳，欲见捶挞。 
现代文：小童去而复返，而且说： 我家大人见药不好很生气，想要打我。 
English: The child went away and came back, and said: My family's grown-ups are angry because the medicine is no good, and they want to beat me.

古文：因问： 大人为谁？ 童子云： 许老翁也。 
现代文：于是问他家大人是谁，童子说： 是许老翁。 
English: So he asked him who the adult in the family was, and the boy said: "It's Xu Lao Weng."

古文：药师甚喜，引童白府。
现代文：药师非常高兴，领着小童来向章仇兼琼报告了。
English: The pharmacist was very happy and led the child to report to Zhang Qiu and Qiong.

古文：章仇令劲健百人，卒吏五十人，随童诣山，且申敕令。
现代文：章仇兼琼立刻派出一百名身体健壮的人，还有五十名兵士，跟着小童进山，要去传达皇帝的诏令。
English: Zhang Qianqiong immediately sent a hundred able-bodied men and fifty soldiers to follow the boy into the mountains to deliver the emperor's edict.

古文：山峰巉绝，众莫能上。
现代文：山峰陡峭险绝，众人没有能上的。
English: The mountain is so steep and dangerous that no one has been able to climb it.

古文：童乃自下大呼。
现代文：小童就在山下大声喊。
English: The child shouted loudly at the bottom of the mountain.

古文：须臾老翁出石壁上，问何故领尔许人来，童具白其事。
现代文：片刻间，老翁出现在石壁上，问为什么领来这么多人。小童详细地说明了事情的始末。
English: In a moment, the old man appeared on the stone wall and asked why so many people had come. The child explained in detail how it all began.

古文：老翁问童曷不来，童曷不来，童遂冉冉蹑虚而上。
现代文：老翁问小童为什么不上去，小童就冉冉地踩着空中而升上去。
English: The old man asked the boy why he didn't go up, and the boy quickly stepped into the air and went up.

古文：诸吏叩头求哀云： 大夫之暴，翁所知也。 
现代文：卒吏们叩头哀求道： 我们大人的粗暴老翁是知道的。 
English: The officers bowed their heads and begged: "Our master's rude old man knows what he's doing.

古文：老翁乃许行，谓诸吏曰： 君但返府，我随至。 
现代文：老翁这才答应走一趟。老翁对卒吏们说： 你们只管先回府，我马上就到！ 
English: Only then did the old man agree to make the trip. The old man said to the bailiffs: You just have to go back to the house first, I'll be there in a minute!

古文：乃吏卒至府未久，而翁亦至焉。
现代文：等到吏卒们回到府中不一会儿，老翁也到了。
English: Not long after the officials returned to the residence, the old man also arrived.

古文：章仇见之，再拜俯伏。
现代文：章仇兼琼见了老翁，连连下拜俯身恭伏。
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong saw the old man and bowed down in homage.

古文：翁无敬色。
现代文：老翁脸上没有敬色。
English: The old man's face showed no emotion.

古文：因问娶李者是谁。
现代文：于是章仇兼琼问老翁： 那个娶李氏的人是谁？ 
English: So Zhang Qiu and Qiong asked the old man: Who is the person who married Li?

古文：翁曰： 此是上元夫人衣库之官，俗情未尽耳。 
现代文：老翁说： 那个人是上元夫人的衣库官，俗情未了罢了。 
English: The old man said, "That man is Mrs. Shangyuan's wardrobe officer. He's just a philistine.

古文：章仇求老翁诣帝。许云： 往亦不难。 
现代文：章仇兼琼求老翁到皇帝那去一趟，许老翁说： 去也不难。 
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong implored the old man to go to the emperor, and Xu Lao Weng said, "It is not difficult to go.

古文：乃与奏事者克期至长安。
现代文：于是他就和要到京城奏事的人约定了到达长安的日期。他提前到了长安。
English: So he agreed on a date to arrive in Chang'an with the person who was going to report to the capital. He arrived in Chang'an ahead of schedule.

古文：先期而至。有诏引见。
现代文：皇上下令让人领他去见。
English: The emperor ordered that he be brought to him.

古文：玄宗致礼甚恭。
现代文：唐玄宗对他很恭敬。
English: Tang Xuan Zong treated him with great respect.

古文：既坐，问云： 库官有罪，天上知否？
现代文：坐下之后，唐玄宗问： 库官有罪，天上知道不知道？ 
English: After sitting down, Tang Xuan Zong asked: The treasurer is guilty, heaven knows?

古文：翁云： 已被流作人间一国主矣。 
现代文：许老翁说： 已被流放到人间作了一国之主了。 
English: Xu Lao Weng said, "I have been exiled to the human world to become the ruler of a country."

古文：又问： 衣竟何如。 
现代文：又问： 那衣服究竟怎么样？ 
English: He also asked: What exactly is wrong with that dress?

古文：许云： 设席施衣于清净之所，当有人来取。 
现代文：许老翁说： 在清静的地方放下坐席，把那衣服放到坐席上，就会有人来取这衣服。 
English: Xu Laoweng said: Put down the seat in a quiet place, put the clothes on the seat, and someone will come to pick up the clothes.

古文：上敕人如其言。
现代文：皇上下令按许老翁说的去做。
English: The emperor ordered them to do as Xu Lao Rong said.

古文：初不见人，但有旋风卷衣入云，顾盼之间，亦失许翁所在矣。
现代文：起初不见有人来，只有旋风把衣服卷入云中。大家顾盼的时候，许老翁也不见了。
English: At first, no one came, only the whirlwind swept the clothes into the clouds. While everyone was looking forward, Xu Lao Weng also disappeared.

古文：又一说云：天宝中，有士人崔姓者，尉于巴蜀，才至成都而卒。
现代文：另一种说法是，天宝年间，有一位姓崔的士人，到巴蜀去做县尉，刚走到成都就死了。
English: Another theory is that during the Tenpo era, there was a scholar surnamed Cui who went to Bashu to become a county official, but died as soon as he reached Chengdu.

古文：时连帅章仇兼琼，哀其妻少而无所投之，因于青城山下置一别墅。
现代文：当时的观察使章仇兼琼可怜他的妻子年轻轻的没地方去，就在青城山下为她盖了一所别墅。
English: Observations at the time made Zhang Qianqiong feel sorry for his young wife who had no place to go, so he built a villa for her at the foot of Qingcheng Mountain.

古文：又以其色美，有聘纳之意。计无所出，因谓其夫人曰： 贵为诸侯妻，何不盛陈盘筵，邀召女客？
现代文：又因为她姿色很美，有纳她作妾的意思，但是想不出来好办法，于是就对自己的夫人说： 你贵为诸侯的妻子，为什么不操办一个盛大的宴会，邀请女客来玩玩？
English: And because she was very beautiful, he wanted to take her as a concubine, but he could not think of a good way, so he said to his wife: You are the wife of princes, why not organize a grand banquet and invite female guests to play?

古文：五百里内，尽可迎致。 
现代文：五百里之内的女客，全可以请到。 
English: All female guests within five hundred miles can be invited.

古文：夫人甚悦。
现代文：夫人非常高兴。
English: My wife is very happy.

古文：兼琼因命衙官，遍报五百里内女郎，克日会成都，意欲因会便留亡尉妻也，不谓已为族舅卢生纳之矣。
现代文：章仇兼琼于是就让衙门里的官吏，普遍通知五百里内的女郎，按照限定的日期到成都赴会，意思是想要趁宴会就把亡故县尉的妻子留下。没想到那女人已被族舅卢生娶了去。
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong then asked the officials in the gate to inform all the girls within 500 miles to go to Chengdu to attend the meeting in accordance with the limited date, meaning that they wanted to take advantage of the banquet to leave the wife of the deceased county lieutenant. I did not expect that the woman had been married by the uncle of Lu Sheng.

古文：卢舅密知兼琼意，令尉妻辞疾不行。
现代文：卢生暗中得知章仇兼琼的意图，让县尉的遗孀托病不去。
English: Lu Sheng secretly learned of Zhang Qianqian Qiong's intention to persuade the county captain's widow not to go because she was ill.

古文：兼琼大怒，促左右百骑往收捕。
现代文：章仇兼琼非常生气，派左右一百名骑兵去搜捕。
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong Jun were very angry and sent about a hundred cavalrymen to search and arrest him.

古文：卢舅时方食，兵骑绕宅已合。卢谈笑自若，殊不介怀。
现代文：当时卢生正在吃饭，骑兵已包围了他的住宅。卢生谈笑自如，很不在乎。
English: At that time, Lu Sheng was having dinner, the cavalry had surrounded his house. Lu Sheng talked and laughed freely, and didn't care.

古文：食讫，谓妻曰： 兼琼意可知矣，夫人不可不行。
现代文：吃完饭，他对妻子说： 章仇兼琼的用意很清楚了。夫人不能不去。
English: After the meal, he said to his wife, "Zhang Qianqiong's intention is very clear. My wife can't go.

古文：少顷，即当送素色衣来，便可服之而往。 
现代文：过一会儿，就会有人给你送素色衣服来，你就可以穿上那衣服去了。 
English: In a little while, someone will bring you a plain white robe, and you can put it on and go.

古文：言讫，乘骡出门。
现代文：说完，他骑上骡子出了门。
English: With that, he mounted the mule and rode out the door.

古文：兵骑前揽不得，徐徐而去，追不能及。
现代文：兵骑们上前捉他也捉不住。他慢慢地前行，却追不上他。
English: And the horsemen came up to take him, but they could not overtake him; and he went on slowly, but they could not overtake him.

古文：俄使一小童捧箱，内有故青裙、白衫子、绿帔子、绯罗縠绢素，皆非世人所有。
现代文：不多时他让一个小童捧来一个箱子，箱内有一件旧青裙，一件白衫子，一件绿帔子，全都是用极好的丝织品制成的，不是人世间所有的。
English: Not infrequently he would ask a child to bring him a box containing an old blue dress, a white shirt, and a green satin dress, all of which were made of the finest silk fabrics, and not all of which could be found on earth.

古文：尉妻服之至成都。
现代文：县尉的遗孀穿上这套衣服来到成都。
English: The county lieutenant's widow put on this suit and came to Chengdu.

古文：诸女郎皆先期而至。
现代文：其他女客们已经提前早到了。
English: The other women have arrived early.

古文：兼琼觇于帷下，及尉妻入，光彩绕身，美色傍射，不可正视。
现代文：章仇兼琼在帷下接见女客们。当走进县尉的遗孀时，只见她光彩绕身，美色焕然，不能正面看她。
English: Zhang Quan Qiong received the female guests under the curtain. When he walked into the widow of the county captain, he only saw her radiant beauty, and could not look at her face to face.

古文：坐者皆摄气，不觉起拜。
现代文：在座的人都吸了一口气，不知不觉地起来便拜。
English: Everyone present took a breath and unconsciously rose to their feet to bow.

古文：会讫归，三日而卒。
现代文：等到宴会结束回去，三天后她就死了。
English: She waited until the party was over to go home, and three days later she was dead.

古文：兼琼大骇，具状奏闻。
现代文：章仇兼琼大吃一惊，写奏章报告了皇帝。
English: Zhang Qianqiong was so surprised that he wrote a report to the emperor.

古文：玄宗问张果。果云： 知之，不敢言。
现代文：唐玄宗问张果，张果说： 我知道，但是我不敢说。
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked Zhang Guo, Zhang Guo said: I know, but I dare not say.

古文：请问青城王老。 
现代文：请陛下问青城山的王老。 
English: Your Majesty, please ask the king of Qingcheng Mountain.

古文：玄宗即诏兼琼，求访王老进之。
现代文：唐玄宗就下诏让章仇兼琼求访王老送到宫里来。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to let Zhang Qianqian and Qiong Shu visit Wang Lao and bring them to the palace.

古文：兼琼搜索青城山前后，并无此人。唯草市药肆云： 常有二人，日来卖药，称王老所使。 
现代文：章仇兼琼搜索青城山的前后，并没有王老这个人，只有草市上药店的主人说，曾经有两个人，有一天来卖药，自称是王老派来的。
English: Before and after Zhang Qiu and Qiong Jun searched Qingcheng Mountain, there was no such person as Wang Lao. Only the owner of the pharmacy in Cao Shi said that there were once two people who came to sell medicine one day, claiming to be sent by Wang Lao.

古文：二人至，兼琼即令衙官随之，入山数里，至一草堂。
现代文：那两个人又来，章仇兼琼就让衙中的官吏跟着他们去找王老。进山几里，来到一所草堂。
English: The two men came again, and Zhang Qianqiong asked the officials in the court to follow them to find Wang Lao. They went several miles into the mountains and came to a grass hut.

古文：王老皤然鬓发，隐几危坐。
现代文：只见王老鬓发雪白，靠着几案坐在那里。
English: Wang Laojun could only be seen sitting there, white-haired and leaning on several cases.

古文：衙官随入，遂宣诏，兼致兼琼意。
现代文：官吏们跟着走进去，立即就宣读了诏书，还传达了章仇兼琼的意思。
English: The officials followed them in and immediately read out the edict, also conveying the meaning of Zhang Qianjun.

古文：王老曰： 此必多言小儿张果也。 
现代文：王老说： 这一定是那个多嘴多舌的张果干的！ 
English: Wang Lao said: This must have been done by that talkative Zhang Guo!

古文：因与兼琼克期到京师。
现代文：于是他和章仇兼琼约定日期到京城去。
English: So he and Zhang Qiu and Qiong agreed on a date to go to Beijing.

古文：令先发表，不肯乘传。
现代文：他让章仇兼琼先送去奏章，自己不肯乘坐驿站的马车。
English: He asked Zhang Quan and Qiong to send Song Zhang first, but he refused to take the carriage of the station.

古文：兼琼从之。
现代文：章仇兼琼听从了他。
English: Zhang Qiu and Qiong Rong obeyed him.

古文：使才至银台，王老亦到。
现代文：使者刚到银台，王老也到了。
English: As soon as the messenger arrived at Gintei, Wang Lao also arrived.

古文：玄宗即召问之。
现代文：唐玄宗立刻就召见他，向他请教。
English: Tang Xuan Zong immediately summoned him and asked him for advice.

古文：时张果犹在玄宗侧，见王老，惶恐再拜。
现代文：当时张果还在唐玄宗身边。他见了王老惶恐地连连下拜。
English: At that time, Zhang Guo was still with Tang Xuanzong. When he saw Wang Lao, he bowed down in fear.

古文：王老叱果曰： 小子何不言之。又遣远取吾来。 
现代文：王老呵斥张果说： 你小子为什么不直接告诉他，还打发人大老远把我找来！ 
English: Wang Lao yelled at Zhang Guo and said, "Why didn't you tell him directly and send someone far away to find me!

古文：果言 小仙不敢，专候仙伯言耳。 
现代文：张果说： 小仙不敢，专等着仙伯来说呢！ 
English: Zhang Guo said: Xiao Xian did not dare to wait for Xian Bo to speak!

古文：王老乃奏曰： 卢二舅即太元夫人库子。因假下游，以亡尉妻微有仙骨，故纳为媵。
现代文：王老于是对唐玄宗说： 卢二舅就是太元夫人专门管库的人，趁着假期下界来游玩，因为死亡县尉的妻子有仙骨，所以纳她为妾。
English: Wang Lao then said to Tang Xuan Zong, "Uncle Lu Ruan is the person who is in charge of the special treasury for Mrs. Taiyuan, and he is taking advantage of the holiday to visit the lower realm. Because the wife of the deceased county officer had a sacral bone, he took her as a concubine.

古文：无何，盗太元夫人衣服与着，已受谪至重。今为欝单天子矣。
现代文：不久，他偷了太元夫人的衣服给她穿，已受到极重的惩罚，现在已经是欝单天子了。
English: Not long after, he stole Mrs. Taiyuan's clothes to dress her. He was severely punished, and now he is a bachelor.

古文：亡尉妻以衣太元夫人衣服，堕无间狱矣。 
现代文：死亡县尉的妻子因为穿了太元夫人的衣服，被堕入无间狱了。 
English: The wife of the dead prefectural lieutenant was thrown into a dungeon for wearing Mrs. Taiyuan's clothes.

古文：奏讫，苦不愿留。
现代文：说完，他苦苦请求，不肯留下。
English: Having said that, he begged and pleaded not to stay.

古文：玄宗命放还，后不知所在。
现代文：唐玄宗下令放他回山，后来不知他到什么地方去了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong ordered to let him go back to the mountain, and later I don't know where he went.

古文：李珏
现代文：李珏
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李珏，广陵江阳人也。
现代文：李珏是广陵江阳人。
English: Li Wei is from Jiangyang, Guangling.

古文：世居城市，贩籴自业。
现代文：他家世代住在城里，以贩卖粮食为职业。
English: His family has lived in the city for generations, making a living by selling grain.

古文：而珏性端谨，异于常辈。
现代文：李珏的性情端庄谨慎，和一般人不一样。
English: Li Yao's temperament is dignified and cautious, which is different from that of ordinary people.

古文：年十五时，父适他行，以珏专贩事。
现代文：他十五岁的时候，他父亲到别的地方去了，把贩卖粮食的事交给李珏专管。
English: When he was fifteen years old, his father went to another place and entrusted the business of selling grain to Li Xuan.

古文：人有籴者，与籴。珏即授以升斗，俾令自量。不计时之贵贱，一斗只求两文利，以资父母。
现代文：有人来买粮，李珏就把升和斗交给人家，让人家自己量，不按当时粮食的贵贱计价，一斗粮只赚两文钱的利，用来资助父母。
English: When someone came to buy grain, Li Yao would hand over the sheng and dou to the other person, let the other person measure for himself, not according to the price of grain at that time. A barrel of grain would only earn a profit of two cents, which would be used to subsidize his parents.

古文：岁月既深，衣食甚丰。
现代文：时间长了，他家的衣食却很丰足。
English: It's been a long time, but his family has plenty of food and clothing.

古文：父怪而问之。具以实对。
现代文：他的父亲感到奇怪，就问他是怎么回事，他全都如实告诉父亲。
English: His father was surprised and asked him what had happened, and he told him the whole story.

古文：父曰： 吾之所业，同流中无不用出入升斗，出轻入重，以规厚利。
现代文：父亲说： 我做粮食生意的时候，同行中都是用升斗出入，出的时候用小斗，入的时候用大斗，用来赚取大利。
English: My father said, "When I was in the grain business, my colleagues used to enter and leave with a bucket, exit with a small bucket, and enter with a large bucket to earn extra profits.

古文：虽官司以春秋较榷，终莫断其弊。
现代文：虽然有关官吏年年春秋两季都要检查较正升斗的准确，但是始终不能制止弊病。
English: Although the officials concerned should check the accuracy of the relatively positive rising bucket in spring and autumn every year, they still cannot stop the malady.

古文：吾但以升斗出入皆用之，自以为无偏久矣。
现代文：我只是用同一个升和斗出入，时间已很久了，自以为没有什么偏差了。
English: I just go in and out with the same lift and bucket, it's been a long time, I don't think there's any deviation.

古文：汝今更出入任之自量，吾不可及也。
现代文：你现在改为出入自己量，我不如你。
English: You are now entering and exiting at your own pace. I am not as good as you.

古文：然衣食丰给，岂非神明之助耶！ 
现代文：但是自己量还能衣食丰足，难道是神明帮助你吗？ 
English: But you can still have enough food and clothing in your own right. Is it the gods helping you?

古文：后父母殁，及珏年八十余，不改其业。
现代文：后来，他的父母都亡故了，直到他活到八十多岁，也没改变他的职业。
English: Later, both his parents died, and he lived until he was in his eighties, without changing his profession.

古文：适李珏出相，节制淮南。珏以新节度使同姓名，极用自惊，乃改名宽。
现代文：恰巧宰相李珏出京做淮南节度使，李珏因为与新节度使重名，自己非常吃惊，就改名叫李宽。
English: It just so happened that the prime minister, Li Hongzhi, went to Beijing to be the envoy of the Huainan Festival. Li Hongzhi was very surprised because his name was the same as that of the new festival, so he changed his name to Li Guang.

古文：李珏下车后数月，修道斋次。
现代文：李珏到任后几个月，修道施舍，做了不少善事。
English: A few months after Li Rong took office, he gave alms and did a lot of good deeds.

古文：夜梦入洞府中，见景色正春，烟花烂熳，翔鸾舞鹤，彩云瑞霞，楼阁连延。
现代文：一天夜里，他梦见自己进入一个洞府中，看见那里面正是春天景色，烟花烂熳，鸾翔鹤舞，云霞祥瑞，楼阁连绵。
English: One night, he dreamed that he entered a cave town, and saw that it was a spring scene there, with fireworks, soaring cranes, clouds and castles.

古文：珏独步其下，见石壁光莹，填金书字，列人姓名。似有李珏，字长二尺余。
现代文：李珏独自走在其中，见一块石壁上光亮莹莹，上面书写着金字，列着许多人名，其中好像有 李珏 二字。字长二尺多。
English: Li Qian walked alone among them, and saw a stone wall shining brightly, with gold writing on it, listing many names, among which seemed to be the name of Li Qian. The writing was more than two feet long.

古文：珏视之极喜，自谓生于明代，久历显官，又升宰辅，能无功德及于天下。
现代文：李珏看了非常高兴，自己以为生在一个圣明的时代，长时期做过显官，又升为宰相，怎能对天下没有功德。
English: Li Yao was very happy to see it. He thought that he was born in a sacred era, had been a high-ranking official for a long time, and had been promoted to prime minister. How could he have no merit to the world?

古文：今洞府有名，我必仙人也。
现代文：现在洞府中有名，自己肯定会成为神仙。
English: Now that he is famous in Dongfu, he is sure to become a god.

古文：再三为喜。
现代文：他再三地感到高兴。
English: He was repeatedly delighted.

古文：方喜之际，有二仙童自石壁左右出。
现代文：正高兴的时候，有两个仙童从石壁左右走出来。
English: When they were happy, two fairy children came out from around the stone wall.

古文：珏问： 此何所也？ 曰： 华阳洞天。
现代文：李珏打听这是什么地方，二童子说： 这是华阳洞天。
English: Li Qian asked what this place was, and the two boys said: This is Huayang Cave.

古文：此姓名非相公也。 
现代文：这里的 李珏 不是你。 
English: It's not you, Li Yao.

古文：珏惊，复问： 非珏何人也？ 
现代文：李珏一惊，又问： 不是我是谁呢？ 
English: Surprised, Li Yao asked again, "Who am I?

古文：仙童曰： 此相公江阳部民也。 
现代文：仙童说： 这个人是江阳县的百性。 
English: Xiantong said: This person is the best in Jiangyang County.

古文：珏及晓，历记前事，益自惊叹，问于道士，无有知者。
现代文：李珏直到天亮，还清楚地记得梦中的事，更加惊叹不已。他去向道士打听，道士们没有知道的。
English: Li Qian clearly remembered the events of the dream until dawn, and was even more amazed. He went to inquire with the Taoists, but they did not know.

古文：复思试召江阳官属诘之。亦莫知也。
现代文：又找江阳县的官吏们询问，也没有知道的。
English: He also inquired with officials in Jiangyang County, but they did not know.

古文：乃令府城内求访同姓名者。
现代文：于是他又让人在府城内寻找同姓名的人。
English: So he asked people to look for someone with the same name in the prefecture.

古文：数日，军营里巷相推。乃得李宽旧名珏。遂闻于珏。
现代文：几天之后，军营街巷到处寻找，才知道李宽以前也叫李珏，就向李珏报告了。
English: A few days later, they searched everywhere in the streets and lanes of the military camp, only to find out that Li Guang had also been called Li Yao before, so they reported it to Li Yao.

古文：乃以车舆迎之，置于静室，斋沐拜谒，谓为道兄，一家敬事，朝夕参礼。
现代文：于是李珏就派车把李宽接来，安置在一个清静的屋子里，吃完斋饭，洗完澡，然后再拜谒，称李宽为道兄。李珏的全家都敬奉李宽，早晨晚上都参拜行礼。
English: Therefore, Li Lan sent a car to fetch Li Guang and placed him in a quiet room. After eating the meal and taking a bath, he then paid homage to Li Guang, calling him his elder brother. Li Lan's entire family revered Li Guang and attended the morning and evening prayers.

古文：李情景恬淡，道貌秀异，须长尺余，皓然可爱。
现代文：李宽的性情恬淡，道貌出众，胡须一尺多长，白白的，十分可爱。
English: Li Guang's temperament is light, his appearance is outstanding, his beard is more than a foot long, white, and very cute.

古文：年六十时，曾有道士教其胎息，亦久不食。
现代文：他六十岁的时候，曾经有一个道士教给他胎患之术，也很久没有吃粮食了。
English: When he was sixty years old, a Taoist once taught him the art of fetal suffering, and he had not eaten food for a long time.

古文：珏愈敬之。
现代文：李珏更加敬重他。
English: Li Yan respected him even more.

古文：及月余，乃问曰： 道兄平生得何道术？
现代文：等到一个月以后，李珏就问他： 道兄平常修得了什么道术？
English: After waiting for a month, Li Yao asked him: What do you usually learn from your elder brother?

古文：服炼何药？
现代文：服用什么药？
English: What medicine do you take?

古文：珏曾梦入洞府，见石壁姓名，仙童所指，是以迎请师事，愿以相授。
现代文：我曾经作梦进入一个洞府，看到了石壁上有道兄的姓名，是仙童告诉了我，所以把您请来做我的老师，希望能把道术传授给我。 
English: I once dreamt that I entered a cave and saw the name of a Taoist elder on the stone wall. It was Fairchild who told me about it, so I asked you to be my teacher, hoping that you could teach me the Taoism.

古文：宽辞以不知道术服炼之事。
现代文：李宽推辞说自己不知道道术服食炼丹的事。
English: Li Guang said that he did not know anything about Taoism, the wearing of the robes, and the eating of the sacred herbs.

古文：珏复虔拜，因问宽所修何术。
现代文：李珏又虔诚地参拜。接着就问李宽修习什么道术。
English: Li Yao also reverently attended the worship. He then asked Li Guang what kind of Taoism he was practicing.

古文：宽辞以愚民不知所修，遂具贩籴以对。
现代文：李宽推辞说自己是愚民，不知道修习什么。
English: Li Guang refused, saying that he was a stupid person and did not know what to study.

古文：珏再三审问，咨嗟曰： 此常人之难事，阴功不可及也。 
现代文：于是他就把自己如何做粮食生意详细地告诉了李珏。李珏仔细地问了多次，慨叹说： 这是一般人难以做到的事。我的阴功不如你啊！ 
English: So he told Li Yao in detail how to do his grain business. Li Yao carefully asked many times, lamenting: This is something that is difficult for ordinary people to do. My yin gong is not as good as yours!

古文：复曰： 乃知世之动静食息，莫不有报。
现代文：又说： 我这才知道，人世间的动、静、食、息各个方面，全都有报应。
English: He also said, "This is how I know that all aspects of the human world - movement, stillness, eating, and breathing - all have their retribution.

古文：苟积德，虽在贫贱，神明护解，名书仙籍，以警尘俗。 
现代文：一个人如果积德，尽管是贫贱之身，神明也保护他，也能名书仙籍，以警告尘世间的人们。 
English: If a person is virtuous, even if he is poor, the gods will protect him, and he can also write famous books to warn the people of the world.

古文：又问胎息不食之由。
现代文：他还向李宽询问修习胎息不吃饭的办法，李宽详细地告诉了他。
English: He also asked Li Guang about the method of practicing fetal breathing without eating, and Li Guang told him about it in detail.

古文：具以对。珏师其胎息，亦不食。
现代文：他就向李宽学习胎息，也不吃饭。
English: He learned from Li Kuan how to suck his mother's breast, and he doesn't eat.

古文：宽年百余岁，轻健异常。
现代文：李宽活到一百多岁，身体非常轻健。
English: Li Guang lived to be more than a hundred years old, and his body was very light.

古文：忽告子孙曰： 吾寄世多年，虽自养气，亦无益汝辈。 
现代文：他忽然告诉子孙们说： 我活在世上多年，虽然我自己修养真气，对你们也没有好处。 
English: He suddenly told his children and grandchildren, "I have lived on this earth for many years, and although I have cultivated my virtue, it is of no benefit to you.

古文：一夕而卒。
现代文：一天晚上他就死了。
English: He died one night.

古文：三日棺裂声。
现代文：三天之后，他的棺材有裂开的声音。
English: Three days later, his coffin cracked open.

古文：视之，衣带不解，如蝉蜕，已尸解矣。
现代文：一看，他的衣带没解，象蝉蜕一样，已经脱离肉体飞升成仙去了。
English: At first glance, there was no mistaking his belt. Like a cicada, he had left his body and soared into immortality.

古文：章全素
现代文：章全素
English: Zhang Quanzhong

古文：吴郡蒋生，好神仙。
现代文：吴郡的蒋生，喜欢神仙。
English: Jiang Sheng from Wuxian County likes immortals.

古文：弱岁弃家，隐四明山下，尝从道士学炼丹。
现代文：二十岁的时候离开家，隐居在四明山下。他曾经跟道士学习炼丹术。
English: He left home at the age of twenty and lived in seclusion at the foot of Mount Shimei. He once studied alchemy with a Taoist priest.

古文：遂葺炉鼎，爨薪鼓鞴，积十年；而炼丹卒不成。
现代文：于是他就修炉灶，置铁锅，拉风箱，烧柴薪，一干就是十年。但是他没有炼出丹来。
English: So he repaired the stove, put an iron pot, a bellows, and burned wood for ten years, but he didn't make any money.

古文：其后寓游荆门，见有行乞于市者，肤甚頝，裸然而病，且寒噤不能语。
现代文：后来他迁居到荆门，在市上看到一个要饭的。要饭的人肤色很憔悴，裸着身子，还有病，而且打着寒噤不能说话。
English: Later, he moved to Jingmen and saw a beggar in the market. The beggar had a very pale complexion, was naked, had an illness, and was shivering and unable to speak.

古文：生怜其穷困，解裘衣之，因命执侍左右。
现代文：蒋生可怜他穷困，脱下自己的衣服给他穿。
English: Jiang Sheng took pity on his poverty and took off his own clothes to dress him.

古文：徵其家。
现代文：于是蒋生让他跟随自己。
English: So Jiang Sheng let him follow him.

古文：对曰： 楚人章氏子，全素其名，家于南昌，有沃田数百亩。属年饥，流徙荆江间，且十年矣。
现代文：他打听这个人的家。要饭的回答说： 我是楚人，姓章，名全素，家住南昌，有几百亩肥沃的田地，因为连年闹饥荒，流落在荆江之间，将近十年了。
English: He inquired about the man's home. The beggar replied, "I am a Chu person, my surname is Zhang, my name is Quanzhong, I live in Nanchang, I have several hundred mu of fertile fields, but because of the famine that has been going on for years, I have been stranded between the Jing River for nearly ten years.

古文：田归于官，身病不能自振，幸君子怜而容焉。
现代文：田产归了官，身体有病不能自己救助，多亏您可怜我收留我。 
English: The farmland has been returned to the government, and I am physically ill and cannot help myself. Thanks to your pity, you took me in.

古文：于是与蒋生同归四明山下。
现代文：于是章全素和蒋生一起回到四明山下。
English: So Zhang Quansu and Jiang Sheng returned to the foot of Shiming Mountain together.

古文：而全素甚惰，常旦寐自逸。
现代文：章全素很懒，常常早晨睡懒觉，贪图安逸。
English: Zhang Quan Su is very lazy. He often sleeps late in the morning and craves comfort.

古文：蒋生恶骂而捶者不可计。
现代文：为这事，蒋生厌恶他，打骂他不知多少次。
English: For this, Jiang Sheng loathed him and beat him I don't know how many times.

古文：生有石砚在几上，忽一日，全素白蒋生曰： 先生好神仙者，学炼丹且久矣。
现代文：蒋生有一块石砚放在几案上。忽然有一天，章全素对蒋生说： 先生是好神仙的人，学习炼丹已经很长时间了。
English: One day, Zhang Quansu said to Jiang Sheng, "My teacher is a good man, and he has been learning to make refined dan for a long time.

古文：夫仙丹食之，则骨化为金，如是安有不长生耶？
现代文：吃了仙丹，就可以化骨为金，这样哪有不长生的呢？
English: If you eat the peony, you can turn your bones into gold, so what is there not to live long?

古文：今先生神丹，能化石砚为金乎？
现代文：现在先生的神丹，能把这块石砚变成金子吗？
English: Now, Mr. Shindan, can you turn this rock into gold?

古文：若然者，吾为先生有道术士。 
现代文：如果能这样，我才认为先生是一位有道的术士。 
English: If I can do that, then I'll think you're a real sorcerer.

古文：生自度不果，心甚惭；而以他词拒之曰： 汝佣者，岂能知神仙事乎！
现代文：蒋生自己估计办不到，心里很惭愧，却用别的话拒绝他说： 你是一个仆人，哪能知道神仙的事呢？
English: Jiang Sheng didn't think he could do it, and he felt very ashamed. However, he refused to do so, saying, "You are a servant, how can you know about the gods and spirits?"

古文：若妄言，自速笞骂之辱。 
现代文：你要是胡说八道，可是自己来讨打骂！ 
English: If you're going to bullshit, do it yourself!

古文：全素笑而去。
现代文：章全素笑着离开了。
English: Zhang Quansu left with a smile.

古文：后月余，全素于衣中出一瓢甚小，顾谓蒋生曰： 此瓢中有仙丹，能化石为金。
现代文：一个多月以后，章全素从衣服里取出一个很小的瓢来，看着对蒋生说： 这个瓢里有仙丹，能把石头变成金子。
English: More than a month later, Zhang Quansu took out a very small jar from his clothes, looked at it and said to Jiang Sheng, "This jar contains immortelle, which can turn stones into gold.

古文：愿得先生石砚，以一刀圭傅其上。可乎？ 
现代文：我愿意得到先生的石砚，把一刀圭的仙丹放在那上面，可以吗？ 
English: I'd like to get hold of Mr. Stone's pickaxe and place a single cactus on it, would that be all right?

古文：蒋生性轻果，且以为诞妄，诟骂曰： 吾学炼丹十年矣，尚未能穷其妙；佣者何敢与吾喋喋议语耶！ 
现代文：将生生性轻率作判断，以为这是胡扯，就骂道： 我学炼丹十年了，还不能彻底弄清它的奥妙，你是一个仆人怎敢和我喋喋不休地大讲特讲呢？ 
English: He thought it was nonsense, and scolded, "I have been learning the exercises for ten years, but I still can't figure out its secret. How dare you, a servant, talk to me incessantly?"

古文：全素佯惧不对。
现代文：章全素假装害怕不回答。
English: Zhang Quansu pretended to be afraid and did not answer.

古文：明日，蒋生独行山水间，命全素守舍，于是键其门而去。
现代文：第二天，蒋生要到山水间独自行走，让章全素看家，于是就锁上门走了。
English: The next day, Jiang Sheng wanted to walk alone in the mountains and let Zhang Quan Su look after the house, so he locked the door and left.

古文：至晚归，则见全素已卒矣。
现代文：到了晚上回来，却看到章全素已经死了。
English: When he came back in the evening, he found that Zhang Quansu had died.

古文：生乃以箦蔽其尸，将命棺而瘗于野。
现代文：蒋生就用竹席盖上他的尸体，要做棺材把他葬到野外。
English: Jiang Sheng covered his body with a bamboo mat to make a coffin and buried him in the open.

古文：及彻其箦，而全素尸已亡去，徒有冠带衣履存焉。
现代文：等到撤掉席子，发现章全素的尸体已经没有了，只有帽子、衣服和鞋留在那里。
English: When they removed the mat, they found that Zhang Quanzhen's body was no longer there, only his hat, clothes and shoes remained.

古文：生大异，且以为神仙得道者，即于几上视石砚，亦亡矣。
现代文：蒋生非常奇怪，以为他是得道的神仙，立即回头看几案上的石砚，也没有了。
English: Jiang Sheng was very strange, he thought he was a divine being, and immediately looked back at the stalagmites on several cases, and they were gone.

古文：生益异之。
现代文：蒋生更奇怪。
English: Jiang Sheng is even stranger.

古文：后一日，蒋生见药鼎下有光。生曰： 岂非吾仙丹乎？ 
现代文：一天之后，蒋生发现药锅的下边有光亮，便说： 难道是我的仙丹吗？ 
English: A day later, Jiang Sheng found a light on the bottom of the pot of medicine and said, "Is it my fairy godmother?"

古文：即于烬中探之，得石砚，其上寸余，化为紫金，光甚莹彻。
现代文：他立即就到灰烬里寻找，找到了石砚，石砚上一寸多的地方，变成了紫金，光亮非常莹澈。
English: He immediately went to search in the ashes and found a stalagmite. More than an inch of the stalagmite turned into purple-gold, shining very brightly.

古文：盖全素仙丹之所化也。
现代文：大概是章全素的仙丹化的。
English: It's probably the candied form of the whole bean.

古文：生始悟全素果仙人，独恨不能识，益自惭恚。
现代文：蒋生这才明白，章全素果然是位仙人，只恨当初不认识他。蒋生更加惭愧，悔恨。
English: It was only then that Jiang Sheng understood that Zhang Quanzhu was indeed a hermit. He only hated that he did not know him at the beginning. Jiang Sheng was even more ashamed and regretful.

古文：其后蒋生学炼丹卒不成，竟死于四明山。
现代文：这以后蒋生学炼丹到底没成功，终于死在四明山。
English: After this, Jiang Sheng did not succeed in learning to refine dan, and finally died in Shiming Mountain.

