古文：如何！ 湛生女辄杀之，为士流所怪。范晔，字蔚宗，顺阳人，车骑将军泰少子也。
现代文：范晔，字蔚宗，顺阳人，是车骑将军范泰的小儿子。
English: Fan Yu, surnamed Weizong, a Shunyang native, was the youngest son of the cavalry general Fan Tai.

古文：母如厕产之，额为砖所伤，故以砖为小字。
现代文：是他母亲上厕所时生下来的，额角被地下的砖头磕破了。所以他父母便用 砖 作他的小名字。
English: He was born when his mother was on the toilet, and the corner of his forehead was broken by a brick from underground, so his parents used "brick" as his nickname.

古文：出继从伯弘之，袭封武兴县五等侯。
现代文：他过继给他堂伯父范弘之，范晔继承了范弘之的爵位武兴县五等侯。
English: He succeeded his great-uncle Fan Hongzhi, and Fan Ye inherited Fan Hongzhi's title of Wuxing County's fifth-ranked marquis.

古文：少好学，博涉经史，善为文章，能隶书，晓音律。
现代文：范晔小时候便爱读书，广泛地阅读经史书籍。他很会作文章，能写隶体字，熟悉音乐。
English: When Fan Jun was a child, he loved to read and extensively read books on history. He was very good at writing articles, could write in cursive, and was familiar with music.

古文：年十七，州辟主簿，不就。高祖相国掾，彭城王义康冠军参军，随府转右军参军，入补尚书外兵郎，出为荆州别驾从事史。
现代文：他十七岁时，本州选他当主簿，范晔没接受，但接受了宋武帝刘裕的相国掾，彭城王刘义康冠军将军，随同本府转任右军参军，又到京城补任尚书外兵郎，再外出当荆州别驾从事史。
English: When he was seventeen years old, Honshu selected him to be the chief accountant. Fan Yu did not accept, but he accepted the son-in-law of the Song Emperor Liu Yu, the Pengcheng King Liu Yikang champion general. He transferred to the right army to join the army, and went to Beijing to fill in as a foreign soldier, and then went out to Jingzhou to engage in history.

古文：寻召为秘书丞，父忧去职。服终，为征南大将军檀道济司马，领新蔡太守。
现代文：不久又被调回当秘书丞。父亲去世他离职，三年孝服满期，当征南大将军檀道济的司马，兼领新蔡太守。
English: Soon he was transferred back to the position of secretary-general. After his father's death, he left the post, and when his three-year period of filial piety expired, he became the Sima of the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and also led the new Cai Taizhou.

古文：道济北征，晔惮行，辞以脚疾，上不许，使由水道统载器仗部伍。
现代文：檀道济北伐时，范晔害怕到北方去，以脚病的借口推辞。文帝不同意，叫他从水路管理军队的后勤，比如处理武器和衣服粮食的供应工作。
English: During the Northern Expedition, Fan Zheng was afraid to go to the north, using the excuse of foot disease. Emperor Wen disagreed and asked him to manage the logistics of the army from the waterway, such as handling the supply of weapons, clothing and grain.

古文：军还，为司徒从事中郎。倾之，迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：北伐结束，当司徒府从事中郎，不久，升任尚书部郎。
English: At the end of the Northern Expedition, when Shuto-fu was engaged as churo, he was soon promoted to shoshiburo.

古文：元嘉元年冬，彭城太妃薨，将葬，祖夕，僚故并集东府。
现代文：元嘉元年冬天，彭城王太妃去世，将下葬的那天晚上，政府部门的官员都集中在东府之中。
English: In the winter of Yuan Jia Yuan, Pengcheng Wang Tofei died, and on the evening of the funeral, officials from government departments were concentrated in Dongfu.

古文：晔弟广渊，时为司徒祭酒，其日在直。
现代文：范晔的弟弟范广渊，当时是司徒府祭酒，当天轮他值班。
English: Fan Hui's younger brother, Fan Guangyuan, was the head brewer of the Stofu festival wine at the time, and he was on duty that day.

古文：晔与司徒左西属王深宿广渊许，夜中酣饮，开北牖听挽歌为乐。
现代文：范晔和司徒左西属王深住在范广渊处，半夜中喝酒吃肉，打开北边窗子欣赏挽歌，把这当成一件快乐的事。
English: Fan Zheng and Szeto Zuoxi's Wang Sheng lived in Fan Guangyuan. They drank wine and ate meat in the middle of the night, opened the north window to enjoy elegy, and regarded this as a happy thing.

古文：义康大怒，左迁晔宣城太守。
现代文：刘义康听了大怒，贬他去宣城当太守。
English: Liu Yikang was so angry that he demoted him to be the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：不得志，乃删众家《后汉书》为一家之作。在郡数年，迁长沙王义欣镇军长史，加宁朔将军。
现代文：范晔在那里很不得志，于是整理各家关于后汉的史籍，编成新的《后汉书》一部，在太守任上的几年后，再迁任长沙王刘义欣镇军长史，加号宁朔将军。
English: Fan Yu was very discouraged there, so he sorted out the historical records of various families about the Later Han Dynasty and compiled a new "Later Han Dynasty Book." A few years after he took office as the governor, he was transferred to Changsha King Liu Yixin Town as the military commander, plus Ningshuo General.

古文：兄皓为宜都太守，嫡母随皓在官。
现代文：他的哥哥范詗当宜城太守，范晔的嫡母随范詗生活。
English: His elder brother, Fan Ye, was the governor of Yicheng. Fan Ye's legitimate mother lived with Fan Ye.

古文：十六年，母亡，报之以疾，晔不时奔赴；及行，又携妓妾自随，为御史中丞刘损所奏。太祖爱其才，不罪也。
现代文：元嘉十六年，他的嫡母去世，范晔称自己正患病，好久才奔赴丧事，而且带着妓妾一同前往。被御史中丞刘损弹劾，太祖文帝因为欣赏他的才干，没有处罚他。
English: In 16th year of Yuan Jia, his mother-in-law passed away. Fan Ye said that he was suffering from an illness, and it took him a long time to rush to the funeral, and he took a prostitute along with him. He was impeached by the Grand Historian Liu Ji, but Emperor Wenzong did not punish him because he appreciated his talent.

古文：服阕，为始兴王浚后军长史，领南下邳太守。及浚为扬州，未亲政事，悉以委晔。
现代文：范晔为他嫡母守孝期满，便当始兴王刘浚后军长史，兼任南下邳太守，到刘浚当扬州刺史时，刘浚不管理政事，大小事全部委托给范晔。
English: When his legitimate mother's term of filial piety expired, Fan Jun served as the military governor of Shixing Wang Liu Jun, and concurrently served as the governor of Nanjia Jun. When Liu Jun was appointed governor of Yangzhou, Liu Jun did not manage government affairs, and all matters were entrusted to Fan Jun.

古文：寻迁左卫将军、太子詹事。
现代文：不久范晔又升任右卫将军，太子詹事。
English: Soon after, Fan Qi was promoted to the post of the right guard general, and Prince Zhan Zhi was promoted to the same post.

古文：晔长不满七尺，肥黑，秃眉须。
现代文：范晔身高不满七尺，胖而且黑，眉毛轻淡，胡须很少。
English: Fan Yao is less than seven feet tall, fat and dark, with light eyebrows and little beard.

古文：善弹琵琶，能为新声。
现代文：他很会弹琵琶，且能作新曲。
English: He is very good at playing the pipa and can compose new songs.

古文：上欲闻之，屡讽以微旨，晔伪若不晓，终不肯为上弹。
现代文：文帝几次想听他的演奏，并且多次暗示他这样做。范晔假装不知道，最终不肯为文帝弹奏。
English: Emperor Wen several times wanted to hear him play, and repeatedly suggested that he do so. Fan Ye pretended not to know, and eventually refused to play for Emperor Wen.

古文：上尝宴饮欢适，谓晔曰： 我欲歌，卿可弹。 
现代文：一次文帝宴请大臣，对范晔说： 我想唱歌，你为我弹琴吧！ 
English: Once, Emperor Wen invited the minister to a banquet and said to Fan Ye: "I want to sing, you play the piano for me!"

古文：晔乃奉旨。
现代文：范晔于是按文帝的话办了。
English: Fan Ye then obeyed the order.

古文：上歌既毕，晔亦止弦。
现代文：文帝歌一唱完，范晔便马上停止弹奏。
English: When the emperor had finished singing, Fan Ye also stopped strumming the strings.

古文：初，鲁国孔熙先博学有纵横才志，文史星算，无不兼善。
现代文：鲁郡人孔熙先学问渊博，有纵横捭阖的才干，诸如文学历史哲学星命算术，无不通晓。
English: Kong Xixian, a native of Lu County, was well-educated and talented in many fields, such as literature, history, philosophy, and astrology.

古文：为员外散骑侍郎，不为时所知，久不得调。
现代文：当时他正当员外散骑侍郎，不被当时的人物赏识，长久没有升官。
English: At that time, he was just a non-commissioned officer, not appreciated by the people at that time, and he was not promoted for a long time.

古文：初熙先父默之为广州刺史，以赃货得罪下廷尉，大将军彭城王义康保持之，故得免。
现代文：当年孔熙先的父亲孔默之当广州刺史，因为贪污被投入监狱，大将军彭城王刘义康从中斡旋，孔默之得以免罪。
English: At that time, Kong Xixian's father, Kong Meizhi, was a historical figure in Guangzhou. Because he was thrown into prison for corruption, the general Pengcheng Wang Liu Yikang mediated, and Kong Meizhi was exonerated.

古文：及义康被黜，熙先密怀报效，欲要朝廷大臣，未知谁可动者，以晔意志不满，欲引之。
现代文：到了刘义康被废成庶人时，孔熙先心怀旧恩，想报答他当年救自己父亲的恩德，打算联系朝中大臣，但不知道那些人能被说动，心想范晔郁郁不得志，想把他拉过来。
English: When Liu Yikang was abolished as a commoner, Kong Xixian was nostalgic for the favor, wanted to repay the favor he saved his father that year, planned to contact the ministers of the DPRK and China, but did not know that those people could be persuaded, thought Fan Yu was depressed and discouraged, and wanted to pull him over.

古文：而熙先素不为晔所重，无因进说。
现代文：只是孔熙先一向不被范晔看重，无法下手。
English: It's just that Kong Xixian has always been unappreciated by Fan Rong and unable to make a move.

古文：晔外甥谢综，雅为晔所知，熙先尝经相识，乃倾身事综，与之结厚。
现代文：范晔的外甥谢综，很得范晔欢心，孔熙先之前便认识他，于是千方百计奉承他，和他拉得很近。
English: Fan Kuo's nephew Xie Zong was very popular with Fan Kuo. Kong Xixian had known him before, so he tried his best to flatter him and get close to him.

古文：熙先藉岭南遗财，家甚富足，始与综诸弟共博，故为拙行，以物输之。
现代文：孔熙先借助他父亲任广州刺史的余财和富足的家私，和谢综及其兄弟们赌博，故意装着自己水平低下，把财物大肆地输给谢氏兄弟们。
English: With the help of his father's surplus wealth and rich family, Kong Xi first gambled with Xie Zhao and his brothers, deliberately pretending to be inferior and losing his wealth to Xie's brothers.

古文：综等诸年少，既屡得物，遂日夕往来，情意稍款。
现代文：谢综等众年轻兄弟，既然多次得到孔熙先的钱财，于是和孔熙先日夜来往，情深意密。
English: Xie Zhao and other young brothers, since they have repeatedly received money and wealth from Kong Xixian, so they came and went with Kong Xixian the other day and night, and they are deeply in love.

古文：综乃引熙先与晔为数，晔又与戏，熙先故为不敌，前后输晔物甚多。
现代文：谢综于是又把孔熙先介绍给范晔，又和范晔一起戏乐赌博。孔熙先照旧装出赌博低能的模样，前前后后输给范晔很多钱财。
English: Xie Zhao then introduced Kong Xi to Fan Yu, and they played gambling together. As usual, Kong Xi pretended to be a gambling imbecile and lost a lot of money to Fan Yu.

古文：晔既利其财宝，又爱其文艺。
现代文：范晔一方面贪心孔熙先的钱财，另一方面欣赏孔熙先的才干。
English: On the one hand, Fan Ye was greedy for Kong Xixian's money, on the other hand, he appreciated Kong Xixian's talent.

古文：熙先素有词辩，尽心事之，晔遂相与异常，申莫逆之好。
现代文：孔熙先一贯能说会道，又倾全力伺候范晔，范晔于是和孔熙先关系越来越好，并且发誓他们同生共死。
English: Kong Xixian was always able to speak his mind and devoted all his efforts to serving Fan Yu. As a result, Fan Yu's relationship with Kong Xixian became better and better, and they swore to live and die together.

古文：始以微言动晔，晔不回，熙先乃极辞譬说。
现代文：孔熙先先用隐晦的话挑动范晔，范晔没有反应，之后孔熙先用更露骨的话挑他。
English: Kong Xi first provoked Fan Rong with vague words, Fan Rong did not react, and then Kong Xi first provoked him with more explicit words.

古文：晔素有闺庭论议，朝野所知，故门胄虽华，而国家不与姻娶。
现代文：范晔的私生活中有些丑事传播很远，朝廷民间都知道，所以虽然他门户很高，但皇室和他家没有结成婚姻关系。
English: Some scandals in Fan Kui's private life have spread far and wide, and are known to the people of the court. Therefore, although he is highly regarded, the royal family and his family have not entered into a marriage relationship.

古文：熙先因以此激之曰： 丈人若谓朝廷相待厚者，何故不与丈人婚，为是门户不得邪？
现代文：孔熙先用这来激将他说： 丈人如果认为皇上待您深厚的话，怎么不和您家订定婚约，难道是您家门户不够格吗？
English: Kong Xi first used this to excite him: "If your father-in-law thinks that the emperor treats you generously, why doesn't he sign a marriage contract with your family? Is it because your family is not good enough?

古文：人作犬豕相遇，而丈人欲为之死，不亦惑乎？ 
现代文：人家不过把您当成猪狗看待罢了。但丈人却想为他效忠尽力，难道不是愚蠢到极点吗？ 
English: People only see you as a pig and a dog, but isn't it extremely stupid for a father-in-law to want to do his best to be loyal to him?

古文：晔默然不答，其意乃定。
现代文：范晔闭口不答，他此时才决心反叛朝廷。
English: Fan Ye was silent and did not answer, but his intention was firm.

古文：时晔与沈演之并为上所知待，每被见多同。
现代文：当时范晔和沈演之同时被文帝宠遇，每每被同时召见。
English: At that time, Fan Yu and Shen Yuan were both favored by Emperor Wen, and were each summoned at the same time.

古文：晔若先至，必待演之俱入；演之先至，尝独被引，晔又以此为怨。
现代文：范晔要是先到的话，总是等沈演之一同进去，沈演之先到的话，有时单个的被文帝召见，范晔因此心生怨恨。
English: If Fan Ye arrived first, he would always wait for one of Shen Yuan's entourage to enter with him. If Shen Yuan arrived first, he would sometimes be called to see Emperor Wen individually, which made Fan Ye resentful.

古文：晔累经义康府佐，见待素厚。及宣城之授，意好乖离。
现代文：范晔本人也多次在刘义康府中任职，很得刘义康赏识，在刘义康贬他去当宣城太守时，两人关系一度弄僵。
English: Fan Qi himself also served in Liu Yikang's government for many times, which was greatly appreciated by Liu Yikang. When Liu Yikang demoted him to be the governor of Xuancheng, the relationship between the two men once became deadlocked.

古文：综为义康大将军记室参军，随镇豫章。
现代文：谢综当时做刘义康大将军记室参军，随同刘义康镇守豫章。
English: At that time, Xie Zomei joined the army as a member of Liu Yikang's general staff, and accompanied Liu Yikang to guard Yuzhang.

古文：综还，申义康意于晔，求解晚隙，复敦往好。
现代文：谢综回来，把刘义康的谢意带给范晔，请求消除过去的隔膜，恢复当年亲密的关系。
English: Xie Zhao came back and told Fan Qi about Liu Yikang's intentions, asking him to eliminate the later contradictions and restore the previous friendship.

古文：晔既有逆谋，欲探时旨，乃言于上曰： 臣历观前史二汉故事，诸蕃王政以訞诅幸灾，便正大逆之罚。
现代文：范晔既然打算谋反，想探听皇上的心思，于是对文帝说： 我遍读两汉史书，各个藩王如果被发现有诅咒或幸灾乐祸的罪行，一般都要被处以死刑。
English: Since Fan Ye was planning to rebel and wanted to know the emperor's thoughts, he said to Emperor Wen: I have read the history books of the two Han dynasties. If the kings of each domain are found guilty of cursing or gloating, they are generally sentenced to death.

古文：况义康奸心衅迹，彰著遐迩，而至今无恙，臣窃惑焉。
现代文：况且刘义康奸诈和背叛的劣迹已很显然，远近皆知，而到现在还没事，我很不明白。
English: Moreover, Liu Yikang's bad deeds of treachery and betrayal have been very obvious, known far and wide, but until now it's okay, I don't understand.

古文：且大梗常存，将重阶乱，骨肉之际，人所难言。
现代文：况且大奸臣的存在，恐怕会导致更大的奸恶谋反事情的出现。
English: Moreover, the existence of a big traitor, I am afraid, will lead to the emergence of greater treachery and plotting.

古文：臣受恩深重，故冒犯披露。 
现代文：陛下亲人之间的事，是臣子们很难开口说出的，但我受皇上厚恩，所以这里敢冒死陈辞。 
English: Matters between members of His Majesty's family are difficult for courtiers to discuss openly, but I have the Emperor's favor, so I dare to speak out here.

古文：上不纳。
现代文：文帝没有采纳他的意见。
English: The Emperor did not listen.

古文：熙先素善天文，云： 太祖必以非道晏驾，当由骨肉相残。江州应出天子。 
现代文：孔熙先一贯懂天文知识，说： 文帝一定不能寿终正寝，一定会因为骨肉相杀而丢命，江州一定会出真龙天子。 
English: Kong Xixian always understood astronomical knowledge and said, "Wen Di must not die in his sleep, he must lose his life because of fratricide, and Jiangzhou must produce a true dragon god."

古文：以为义康当之。
现代文：他认为刘义康就是未来的真龙天子。
English: He believes that Liu Yikang is the real dragon of the future.

古文：综父述亦为义康所遇，综弟约又是义康女夫，故太祖使综随从南上，既为熙先所奖说，亦有酬报之心。
现代文：谢综的弟弟谢约又是刘义康的女婿。
English: Xie Zomei's younger brother Xie You is also Liu Yikang's son-in-law.

古文：广州人周灵甫有家兵部曲，熙先以六十万钱与之，使于广州合兵。
现代文：所以文帝叫谢综随同刘义康南下。谢综因为被孔熙先称赞，也想设法报答他。广州人周灵甫家族有一些卫兵人马，孔熙先送给周灵甫六十万银钱，叫周灵甫在广州集合兵力。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen asked Xie Saming to go south with Liu Yikang. Because Xie Saming was praised by Kong Xi, he also wanted to try to repay him. The Guangzhou family of Zhou Lingfu had some guards. Kong Xi first gave Zhou Lingfu 600,000 silver coins and told Zhou Lingfu to gather troops in Guangzhou.

古文：灵甫一去不反。
现代文：周灵甫却一去不返。
English: Zhou Lingfu, however, never returned.

古文：大将军府史仲承祖，义康旧所信念，屡衔命下都，亦潜结腹心，规有异志。
现代文：大将军府史仲承祖，也是刘义康过去信得过的心腹，多次带着各种命令到京城里探听消息，也暗中和他们勾结，打算一同谋反。
English: General Fuchizhong, Liu Yikang's long-term confidant, repeatedly went to Beijing with a mission. He also secretly made friends with many confidants who had different ambitions.

古文：闻熙先有诚，密相结纳。
现代文：仲承祖听说孔熙先效忠刘义康，也和孔熙先暗中结纳。
English: He heard that Kong Xi was sincere, so he secretly came to make friends.

古文：丹阳尹徐湛之，素为义康所爱，虽为舅甥，恩过子弟，承祖因此结事湛之，告以密计。
现代文：丹阳尹徐湛之一向被刘义康赏识，虽然他们是舅甥关系，其实比自己的亲子弟还亲密。仲承祖也因此结纳徐湛之，把其中的一些计划告诉了他。
English: One of Danyang's Yin, Xu Zhan, was highly regarded by Liu Yikang. Although they were nephews, they were actually closer than his own children. Therefore, Zhong Chengzu also befriended Xu Zhan and told him some of his plans.

古文：承祖南下，申义康意于萧思话及晔，云： 本欲与萧结婚，恨始意不果。与范本情不薄，中间相失，傍人为之耳。 
现代文：仲承祖南下后，又把刘义康打算结交的愿望告诉了萧思话和范晔，说： 彭城王刘义康本来想和萧公您结为婚姻关系，很遗憾这个打算没有实现，和范晔您老本来关系很好，中间闹了矛盾，那是因为旁人挑拨所致。 
English: After Zhong Chengzu went to the south, he also told Xiao Sizhe and Fan Qi about Liu Yikang's desire to make friends, saying: Pengcheng King Liu Yikang originally wanted to marry Xiao Gong, it is a pity that this plan did not come to fruition, and Fan Qi has always had a good relationship with you, and there was a conflict between them, which was caused by others.

古文：有法略道人，先为义康所供养，粗被知待；又有王国寺法静尼亦出入义康家内，皆感激旧恩，规相拯拔，并与熙先往来。
现代文：有一个叫法略的僧人，先前被刘义康所供养，刘义康待他不错；又有一个王国寺尼姑法静，也在刘义康家中出入。他们都对刘义康的恩德感戴不已，打算设法拯救刘义康，也都和孔熙先来往。
English: There was a monk named Faryo, who had previously been supported by Liu Yikang, and Liu Yikang treated him well; there was also a nun from the Kingdom Temple, Fa Jing, who also came and went from Liu Yikang's home. They were all deeply impressed by Liu Yikang's kindness and intended to try to save Liu Yikang, and they also visited Kong Xian.

古文：使法略罢道，本姓孙，改名景玄，以为臧质宁远参军。
现代文：孔熙先叫法略别做和尚，恢复原姓孙氏，改名景玄，叫他做臧质的宁远参军。
English: Kong Xixi first called on Fa Xiaotong not to be a monk, to restore the original surname Sun, to change his name to Jing Xuan, and to have him join the army in Ningyuan.

古文：熙先善于治病，兼能诊脉。
现代文：孔熙先很会治病，也会拿脉。
English: Kong Xixian is very good at curing diseases, and can also take the pulse.

古文：法静尼妹夫许耀，领队在台，宿卫殿省。
现代文：法静尼姑的妹夫许耀，在台城中当队长，在宫殿中值班。
English: Sister Fa Jing's brother-in-law Xu Yao was a captain in Taichung and was on duty in the palace.

古文：尝有病，因法静尼就熙先乞治，为合汤一剂，耀疾即损。
现代文：一次他得了病，通过法静的关系请孔熙先医治。孔熙先为他开了一道药方，许耀吃了药便好了。
English: Once when he fell ill, he asked Kong Xixian to treat him through Fa Jing's connections. Kong Xixian prescribed a medicine for him, and Xu Yao felt better after taking the medicine.

古文：耀自往酬谢，因成周旋。
现代文：许耀又亲自去酬谢他，因此也和孔熙先过往甚密。
English: Xu Yao also personally went to reward and thank him, so he also had a close relationship with Kong Xixian.

古文：熙先以耀胆干可施，深相待结，因告逆谋，耀许为内应。
现代文：孔熙先因为许耀有胆量有才干，值得利用，于是和许耀关系搞得极好，乘机把谋反的打算告诉他，许耀便同意在内部响应。
English: Kong Xi first because Xu Yao has courage and talent and is worth using, so he has a very good relationship with Xu Yao. He took the opportunity to tell him about the plan to rebel, and Xu Yao agreed to respond internally.

古文：豫章胡遵世，籓之子也，与法略甚款，亦密相酬和。
现代文：豫章人胡遵世，是胡藩的儿子，和法略和尚关系很要好，也暗中响应。
English: Yu Zhang's son, Hu Zunshi, was a son of the Hu clan, and he had a very good relationship with Faryou Monk, and he also secretly responded.

古文：法静尼南上，熙先遣婢采藻随之，付以笺书，陈说图谶。
现代文：法静南下，孔熙先派他的婢女采藻跟着她，叫她带上给刘义康的书信，论说天道。
English: When the nun Far Jing went to the south, Kong Xi first sent a servant girl to go with him to collect algae, and handed her a letter, explaining the story.

古文：法静还，义康饷熙先铜匕、铜镊、袍段、棋奁等物。
现代文：法静回来，刘义康又赠给孔熙先一只铜匕首、一双铜钳子、一套袍缎、一套棋奁等礼品。
English: When Fa Jing returned, Liu Yikang also presented Kong Xizun with a bronze dagger, a pair of bronze pliers, a set of robes, a set of chess pieces and other gifts.

古文：熙先虑事泄，鸩采藻杀之。
现代文：孔熙先担心这事可能泄露，用毒药害死了采藻。
English: Kong Xixian was worried that the matter might leak out, and used poison to kill Zhaoxing.

古文：湛之又谓晔等： 臧质见与异常，岁内当还，已报质，悉携门生义故，其亦当解人此旨，故应得健兒数百。
现代文：徐湛之又对范晔等人说： 臧质非常赞成我们的行动，年内他将回到京城，我们已经告诉了他，叫他带领他所有的门生故吏，他也明白我的意思，所以他那里应能得到几百个壮士。
English: Xu Zhanzhi also said to Fan Qian and others: Gongye is very much in favor of our actions, he will return to Beijing within the year, we have already told him to lead all his disciples and dignitaries, he also understands what I mean, so he should be able to get hundreds of strong men from there.

古文：质与萧思话款密，当仗要之，二人并受大将军眷遇，必无异同。
现代文：臧质和萧思话关系很好，估计会邀请萧思话一同举事，这两个都受到过大将军的恩宠，一定不会拒绝此事。
English: Gongye and Xiao Sizhe have a good relationship, and it is estimated that Xiao Sizhe will be invited to hold an event together. Both of them have been favored by the great general, and they will not refuse this matter.

古文：思话三州义故众力，亦不减质。郡中文武，及合诸处侦逻，亦当不减千人。
现代文：萧思话三个州的部曲故吏，也不比臧质的少，郡中的文武官员，和其他各处的警戒士兵，也应不少于一千人。
English: There should be not less than one thousand officials of the three prefectures, not less than one thousand civil and military officials in the county, and not less than one thousand soldiers on guard in other places.

古文：不忧兵力不足，但当勿失机耳。 
现代文：我们不用担心兵力不够，只怕错过好时机罢了。 
English: We don't have to worry about not having enough troops, we just have to worry about missing the right moment.

古文：乃略相署置，湛之为抚军将军、扬州刺史，晔中军将军、南徐州刺史，熙先左卫将军，其余皆有选拟。
现代文：于是他们互相设置官职；徐湛之当抚军将军、扬州刺史，范晔当中军将军、南徐州刺史，孔熙先右卫将军，其余的都有任命。
English: As a result, they set up official positions for each other; Xu Zhanzhi was appointed as the general of the Tongfu army, Yangzhou was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, Fan Yu was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, Nan Xuzhou was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, Kong Xixian was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, and the rest were appointed.

古文：凡素所不善及不附义康者，又有别簿，并入死目。
现代文：凡是他们一贯讨厌或不附从刘义康的，又另抄一本，以便将这些人处死。
English: Anyone who did not have a good relationship with Liu Yikang in ordinary times and did not depend on him, but had another registration, was included in the list of the dead.

古文：熙先使弟休先先为檄文曰：
现代文：孔熙先叫他弟弟孔休先作了一篇檄文说：
English: Kong Xixi first asked his brother Kong Xiu to write an obituary, saying:

古文：夫休否相乘，道无恆泰，狂狡肆逆，明哲是殛。故小白有一匡之勋，重耳有翼戴之德。
现代文：好运和恶运相互循环，社会并不总是安定，其中也有奸恶小人阴谋反叛，主持正义的人是一定会坚决消灭他们的，所以公子小白有匡复王室的功劳，公子重耳有戴立王室的大恩。
English: Good luck and bad luck cycle with each other. Society is not always stable. Among them, there are also villains who plot rebellion. Those who preside over justice will definitely and resolutely eliminate them. Therefore, Prince Xiaobai has the merit of restoring the royal family, and Prince Chonglu has the great grace of establishing the royal family.

古文：自景平肇始，皇室多故，大行皇帝天诞英姿，聪明睿哲，拔自籓国，嗣位统天，忧劳万机，垂心庶务，是以邦内安逸，四海同风。
现代文：从景平时少帝即位以来，朝廷出了很多乱子，当今皇帝天生英明、聪达贤圣，从藩国而登基做皇帝，继承先帝统天理地。日理万机，全心全意地在众多事务上操劳，所以国家太平，四海安定。
English: Since the enthronement of the young emperor at the time of Jingping, there have been many troubles in the imperial court. Today's emperor is naturally wise, talented and wise. He ascended to the throne from the domain to become the emperor, inheriting the previous emperor. He is well-organized and works wholeheartedly on many affairs, so the country is peaceful and the four seas are stable.

古文：而比年以来，奸竖乱政，刑罚乖淫，阴阳违舛，致使衅起萧墙，危祸萃集。
现代文：但是近年以来，奸佞小人危害朝政，赏罚失调，阴阳错乱，所以导致祸起萧墙，危机来临。
English: However, in recent years, the villains have been endangering the government, the rewards and punishments have been out of balance, and the yin and yang have been out of kilter, which has led to the disaster of the collapse of the wall and the coming crisis.

古文：贼臣赵伯符积怨含毒，遂纵奸凶，肆兵犯跸，祸流储宰，崇树非类，倾坠皇基。
现代文：奸臣赵伯符心怀毒计，终于露出他的狰狞面目，想起兵在外出巡视时谋害皇上，危害太子，树立他的一帮小人，准备阴谋篡夺皇上的权力。
English: The treacherous vassal Zhao Bofu, harboring a poisonous plot, finally revealed his true face, recalling that the soldiers plotted to kill the emperor when they were out on patrol, endangering the prince, setting up his gang of villains, and preparing a plot to usurp the emperor's power.

古文：罪百浞、犭壹，过十玄、莽，开辟以来，未闻斯比。
现代文：他的罪恶多过浞和壹的一百多倍。祸害十倍于王莽桓玄。从天地开辟以来，从未听说过这么严重的罪行。
English: His sins are more than a hundred times greater than those of the First World War, and his evil deeds are ten times greater than those of Wang Manghuan Xuan. Since the creation of heaven and earth, such a serious crime has never been heard of.

古文：率土叩心，华夷泣血，咸怀亡身之诚，同思糜躯之报。
现代文：因此举国痛心，我国甚至有人流出血泪，都准备不顾自身的安危，尽全力奋斗以拯救皇室的安危大业。
English: Therefore, the whole country is heartbroken, and some people in our country are even shedding blood and tears, and are ready to do their best to save the royal family's safe cause, regardless of their own safety.

古文：湛之、晔与行中领军萧思话、行护军将军臧质、行左卫将军孔熙先、建威将军孔休先，忠贯白日，诚著幽显，义痛其心，事伤其目，投命奋戈，万殒莫顾，即日斩伯符首，及其党与。
现代文：徐湛之、范晔和代理中领军萧思话、代理护军将军臧质、代理左卫将军孔熙先、建威将军孔休先，他们的忠诚可以和白日相比，诚实可以感动神灵。他们痛心疾首，不愿意看到邪恶势力的猖獗，不顾自身的安危，拿起武器，义无反顾，当天便将赵伯符和他的党羽一同斩首。
English: Xu Zhanzhi, Fan Qian and acting middle army leader Xiao Sizhu, acting general of the garrison Zeng Qi, acting left guard general Kong Xixian, acting general of Jian Wei Kong Xiu, their loyalty can be compared with the day, and their honesty can move the gods. They are heartbroken, unwilling to see the rampant evil forces, regardless of their own safety, take up arms, do not hesitate, and behead Zhao Bofu and his party together on the same day.

古文：虽豺狼即戮，王道惟新，而普天无主，群萌莫系。
现代文：虽然这些豺狼已被消灭，皇室大业得以复兴，但天下没有了君王，众人不知道哪个是他们的主人。
English: Although these jackals have been eliminated and the royal cause revived, there is no king in the world, and people do not know who their master is.

古文：彭城王体自高祖，圣明在躬，德格天地，勋溢区宇，世路威夷，勿用南服，龙潜凤栖，于兹六稔，苍生饥德，亿兆渴化，岂唯东征有《鸱鸮》之歌，陕西有勿翦之思哉！
现代文：彭城王是高祖皇帝的儿子，聪明圣智，品德比天还高，功劳比大地还厚，当此动乱时期，无须犹豫便应即位做皇帝。他有帝王的征兆于今已六年。普天百姓迫切地希望他作主，亿万人民渴望他登基领导，岂止是周公东征时鸱鸪唱歌的盛况和召公陕西的治理成绩可以拟的。
English: King Pengcheng is the son of Emperor Gaozu. He is wise and saintly, his moral character is higher than the heavens, and his merits are greater than the earth. During this turbulent period, he should ascend to the throne as emperor without hesitation. It has been six years since he had the signs of an emperor. The people of the whole world desperately hope that he will be the ruler, and hundreds of millions of people are eager for him to ascend to the throne and lead. This is more than the grandeur of Zhou Gong's singing during the Eastern Expedition and his achievements in governing Shaanxi.

古文：灵祗告征祥之应，谶记表帝者之符，上答天心，下惬民望，正位辰极，非王而谁？
现代文：多年来神灵屡次显示他帝王的征兆，谶书早就有彭城王当皇帝的说法，为了上报老天爷的眷顾，下答人民的愿望，彭城王当天便做皇帝，这是理所当然的。
English: Over the years, the gods have repeatedly shown signs of his emperorship, and there has long been a saying in the imperial rescript that King Pengcheng was the emperor. In order to report God's patronage and answer the people's wishes, King Pengcheng became the emperor on the same day, which is a matter of course.

古文：今遣行护军将军臧质等，赍皇帝玺绶，星驰奉迎。百官备礼，骆驿继进，并命群帅，镇戍有常。若干挠义徒，有犯无贷。
现代文：现在派代理护军将军臧质等人，带着皇帝的玺印和衣帽，迅速前往奉迎彭城王到京城，朝廷百官准备好礼仪，随后接着前往，同时各地长官统帅，照旧镇守藩国，如果有人妨碍正义的事业，定当严惩不贷。
English: Now, they sent the acting general of the imperial bodyguard, Yan Guo, and others, with the emperor's seal and cap, to quickly go to the capital to welcome the King of Pengcheng. The imperial officials prepared the etiquette, and then went to the capital. At the same time, the commanders of the local officials guarded the country as before. If anyone obstructed the just cause, they would be severely punished.

古文：昔年使反，湛之奉赐手敕，逆诫祸乱，预睹斯萌，令宣示朝贤，共拯危溺，无断谋事，失于后机，遂使圣躬滥酷，大变奄集，哀恨崩裂，抚心摧哽，不知何地，可以厝身。辄督厉尪顿，死而后已。
现代文：当年使者返回，徐谌之奉行皇上亲笔敕书，远远地警戒害祸，先预感到灾祸的可能性，叫他告诉朝中大臣们，共同拯救危难，不要使奸人占了先机。但是皇上不幸被弑杀，大祸突然来临，我们悲痛欲绝，抚胸流泪，不知道在哪里可以立脚，只好努力工作勤勉行事，到死才放下。 
English: When the envoy returned that year, Xu Yanzhi followed the emperor's handwritten letter, warned of the disaster from afar, foresaw the possibility of the disaster, and told him to tell the ministers of the DPRK and China to jointly save the danger, and not to let the traitors take the lead. However, the emperor was unfortunately killed, the disaster came suddenly, we were heartbroken, stroking our chests and shedding tears, and did not know where to stand, so we had to work hard and act diligently until we died.

古文：熙先以既为大事，宜须义康意旨，晔乃作义康与湛之书，宣示同党曰：
现代文：孔熙先认为既然打算办大事，应该有刘义康的亲笔指示，范晔于是写了一篇刘义康给徐湛之的书信，给他的同党看。
English: Kong Xixian thought that since he was planning to do something big, he should have Liu Yikang's personal instructions, so Fan Yu wrote a letter from Liu Yikang to Xu Zhan and showed it to his fellow party members.

古文：吾凡人短才，生长富贵，任情用己，有过不闻，与物无恆，喜怒违实，致使小人多怨，士类不归。祸败已成，犹不觉悟，退加寻省，方知自招，刻肌刻骨，何所复补。
现代文：信中说： 我只不过是一个平常人，才能不足，生长富贵之家，纵情任意，从未听过别人对我的批评，更不会处理人际关系，喜怒无常，所以一些小人对我心怀怨恨，士大夫们也没有归心于我，祸乱快到了，我还不觉醒，后来退下思考，才知道这都是自己招致的，纵然割骨剖肉，但怎么能补回这些错误呢？
English: The letter said: I am just an ordinary person, lack of talent, grew up in a wealthy family, indulged in any way, never heard others criticize me, let alone deal with interpersonal relationships, temperamental, so some villains hold a grudge against me, the scholars did not confide in me, the disaster is coming, I am not awake yet, and then retreat to think, only to know that this is all self-inflicted, even if the bones are cut, but how can I make up for these mistakes?

古文：然至于尽心奉上，诚贯幽显，拳拳谨慎，惟恐不及，乃可恃宠骄盈，实不敢故为期罔也。
现代文：然而我忠心地伺候皇上确实可以让神明都知道，我奉献了一片赤诚忠心，只想自己做得还不够好。正因如此，才使我借着皇上的宏恩而骄奢淫逸，但并不是故意欺骗皇上，难道我会选择谋反招致灭亡的下场吗？
English: However, I have faithfully served the emperor, and I can truly let the gods know that I have dedicated a piece of sincerity and loyalty, but I just don't want to do it well enough. It is for this reason that I have been able to live luxuriously through the emperor's great grace, but I did not intentionally deceive the emperor. Will I choose to rebel and cause the end of my life?

古文：岂苞藏逆心，以招灰灭，所以推诚自信，不复防护异同，率意信心，不顾万物议论，遂致谗巧潜构，众恶归集。
现代文：所以才率性而行，不作虚伪的举动，更没想到防护各种心地险恶的奸人，而只是轻信他人，没有考虑到人们的议论，于是导致谗佞之人从中拨弄是非，把各种罪过都归到我头上。
English: For this reason, I have acted prudently and without hypocrisy, and I have not even thought of protecting all kinds of evil-minded traitors, but have only trusted others, and have not considered what people have said, which has led to the scoffers making mischief out of it and attributing all kinds of sins to me.

古文：甲奸险好利，负吾事深；乙凶愚不齿，扇长无赖；丙、丁趋走小子，唯知谄进，伺求长短，共造虚说，致令祸陷骨肉，诛戮无辜。
现代文：甲则奸邪险恶，汲汲于利，深深的背叛了我；乙则凶恶愚蠢，不为人挂齿，散布没有事实的谣言；丙丁则是趋奉小人，只知道谄媚上司，等待时机，从中进谗，造出种种谎言，以至灾乱在骨肉至亲中间发生，导致诛杀无辜的善人。
English: On the one hand, the traitor is sinister and evil, seeking profit and betraying me deeply; on the other hand, he is vicious and stupid, not to be trusted, and spreads rumors without facts; on the other hand, he is a villain, only knows how to flatter his boss, waits for the right time, takes advantage of it, and creates all kinds of lies, so that the disaster occurs between the flesh and blood relatives, leading to the killing of innocent good people.

古文：凡在过衅，竟有何征，而刑罚所加，同之元恶，伤和枉理，感彻天地。
现代文：凡是他们列举的我的罪行，哪里有事实根据，但我却受到惩罚，仿佛我是最大的罪人，这简直伤天害理，老天爷知道了也会深深地震怒。
English: All the crimes they list against me, where there is any factual basis, but I am punished as if I were the greatest sinner, this is simply outrageous, and heaven knows, it would also deeply anger me.

古文：吾虽幽逼日苦，命在漏刻，义慨之士，时有音信。每知天文人事，及外间物情，土崩瓦解，必在朝夕。
现代文：我虽然被幽禁，一天苦过一天，性命时刻都有被毁灭的可能，但是天下节义慨慷之士，时常带给我一些信息，因此每每知道当今的天时和人事，以及外面的人情，实际上目前正处于一种土崩瓦解的态势，这一定会在朝夕间发生。
English: Although I am under confinement, suffering day after day, and my life is at risk of being destroyed at any time, the compassionate people of the world often bring me some information, so whenever I know the current time and personnel, as well as the human situation outside, I am actually currently in a state of collapse, which will definitely happen in the morning and evening.

古文：是为衅起群贤，滥延国家，夙夜愤踊，心复交战。朝之君子及士庶白黑怀义秉理者，宁可不识时运之会，而坐待横流邪。
现代文：所以众多贤人进行活动，举国响应，我日思夜想，朝廷中心怀正义之情的君子仁人们，难道不知时运来临却坐以待毙吗？
English: Therefore, many sages carry out activities, the whole country responds, I think day and night, the courteous and benevolent people with a sense of justice at the center of the court, do they not know that the time is coming but sit still?

古文：除君侧之恶，非唯一代，况此等狂乱罪骫，终古所无，加之翦戮，易于摧朽邪。
现代文：除去皇帝周围的奸贼，每代都有例子，况且这些奸贼罪恶滔天，猖狂无忌，自古以来从未有他们那么坏的。
English: Apart from the traitors around the emperor, there are examples in every generation, and moreover, these traitors have never been as bad as they are since ancient times.

古文：可以吾意宣示众贤，若能同心奋发，族裂逆党，岂非功均创业，重造宋室乎！
现代文：公开处死他们，可谓易于反掌。您可以把我的这个意思告诉大家，如果能同心协力，族灭奸党，难道你们不是创业的元勋吗？难道不是再次创造了宋朝吗？
English: You can tell everyone what I mean by this. If we can work together, Party for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, wouldn't you be the founding fathers of entrepreneurship? Wouldn't you have created the Song Dynasty again?

古文：但兵凶战危，或致侵滥，若有一豪犯顺，诛及九族。
现代文：但是兵事是不吉祥的，战争是危险的，可能导致滥杀无辜。如果谁有一点不忠的行为，九族株连。
English: But military affairs are inauspicious, war is dangerous, and may lead to the indiscriminate killing of innocents. If anyone has the slightest act of disloyalty, the nine tribes will be united.

古文：处分之要，委之群贤，皆当谨奉朝廷，动止闻启。
现代文：具体的处置工作，请众位贤人自行决断，你们都应该恭谨地侍奉朝廷，行动上多多请示。
English: For the specific disposition of the work, I ask all the wise men to make their own decisions. You should all respectfully serve the imperial court and ask for more guidance in your actions.

古文：二十二年九月，征北将军衡阳王义季、右将军南平王铄出镇，上于武帐冈祖道，晔等期以其日为乱，而差互不得发。
现代文：过去我们之间的嫌疑，一切都勾销。若事成之后，我便会在北门谢罪，到有关部门接受审判。如果这样能安定国家，我死而不恨，你们努力吧！ 元嘉二十二年九月，征北将军衡阳王刘义季，右将军南平王刘铄外出边镇就任。文帝在武帐岗设宴送他们。范晔等人约定在这天举事，但是没有约好，以至于阴谋不能得逞。
English: The suspicions between us in the past have all been written off. If things work out, I will confess my sins at the North Gate and go to the relevant departments for trial. If this can stabilize the country, I will die without hatred, you can do your best! In September of the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, the Northern General Hengyang Wang Liu Yizi and the Right General Nanping Wang Liu Ye went to the border town to take office. Emperor Wen held a banquet for them at Wuzhigang. Fan Ye and others agreed to hold an event on this day, but there was no agreement, so that the conspiracy could not succeed.

古文：于十一月，徐湛之上表曰： 臣与范晔，本无素旧，中忝门下，与之邻省，屡来见就，故渐成周旋。
现代文：十一月，徐湛之写了一道疏奏上报说： 我和范晔，本来没有深交，中间偶然在门下省任职，和他的单位相邻，他多次到我这里来，所以和他周旋了一些。
English: In November, Xu Zhanzhi wrote an anecdote in his report, saying: I didn't have a deep friendship with Fan Yu originally. By chance, I held a position in the province under his supervision, which was adjacent to his unit. He came to see me many times, so I had some dealings with him.

古文：比年以来，意态转见，倾动险忌，富贵情深，自谓任遇未高，遂生怨望。
现代文：但近年以来，他的本性渐渐暴露，他为人乘巧险恶、嫉妒心很强，满心渴望富贵荣华，总觉得自己职位太低，于是心怀怨恨之情。
English: But in recent years, his true nature has gradually been exposed. He is manipulative and sinister. He is very jealous. He is full of longing for wealth and glory. He always feels that his position is too low, so he harbors resentment.

古文：非唯攻伐朝士，讥谤圣时，乃上议朝廷，下及籓辅，驱扇同异，恣口肆心，如此之事，已具上简。
现代文：他不仅攻击朝廷大臣、讥讽当今圣明时代，而且议论皇上和藩镇亲王，抨击他厌恶的人，煽动他亲近的人，肆恐地诽谤，这方面的事，皇上已很熟悉了。
English: He not only attacked the ministers of the imperial court and ridiculed the current era of enlightenment, but also talked about the emperor and the princes of the domain, attacked those he disliked, incited those close to him, and slandered wildly. In this respect, the emperor has become very familiar with this matter.

古文：近员外散骑侍郎孔熙先忽令大将军府吏仲承祖腾晔及谢综等意，欲收合不逞，规有所建。
现代文：最近员外散骑侍郎孔熙先突然叫大将军府里的官员仲承祖告诉范晔和谢综等人的计划，想纠合不轨奸人，打算谋反。
English: Recently, the general's foreign errand boy, Kong Xixian, suddenly called the officials in the general's office, Zhong Chengzu, to tell them about the plans of Fan Yu and Xie Zomei and others. He wanted to entangle the traitors and planned to rebel.

古文：以臣昔蒙义康接盼，又去岁群小为臣妄生风尘，谓必嫌惧，深见劝诱。兼云人情乐乱，机不可失，谶纬天文，并有征验。晔寻自来，复具陈此，并说臣论议转恶，全身为难。
现代文：又因为我当年曾经蒙受大将军的眷顾，加上去年的一些麻烦，小人们以为我和朝廷有矛盾，以至他们不断地诱惑我，劝我参加他们的行动，又加上人情喜欢反叛，他们认为不能放过机会，加上天文谶讳等书上说的一些模糊的话，范晔不久亲自前来，陈述这方面的意思，并且说有关我的舆论越来越坏，性命恐怕难保。
English: And because I had once been favored by the great general, plus some troubles last year, the little people thought that I had a conflict with the court, so they constantly tempted me and advised me to participate in their actions, plus human nature likes to rebel, they thought they could not miss the opportunity, plus some vague words said in books such as Astronomy, Fan Yu soon came in person to state his intention in this regard, and said that the public opinion about me was getting worse and worse, and his life would be difficult to protect.

古文：即以启闻，被敕使相酬引，究其情状。
现代文：我马上启告皇上，皇上告诉我继续和他来往，了解他们的所有活动。
English: I immediately informed the Emperor, who told me to continue to keep in touch with him and to keep abreast of all their activities.

古文：于是悉出檄书、选事、及同恶人名、手墨翰迹，谨封上呈，凶悖之甚，古今罕比。
现代文：我用这办法得以搞清他们的檄文、任命的官职，及同时谋反人的姓名、书信和其他的墨迹，这里全部上交。他们凶逆到了极点，从古到今都少有。
English: By this means I have been able to ascertain their obituaries, the offices they held, and the names, letters, and other writings of the conspirators, all of which are here submitted.

古文：由臣暗于交士，闻此逆谋，临启震惶，荒情无措。 
现代文：这一切都是因为我在交友方面不慎引起的，以至听到这样大的谋反阴谋，我这里惶恐地上报皇上，手足无措。 
English: All of this was caused by my carelessness in making friends, so much so that when I heard about such a big conspiracy, I panicked and reported it to the emperor.

古文：诏曰： 湛之表如此，良可骇惋。晔素无行检，少负瑕衅，但以才艺可施，故收其所长，频加荣爵，遂参清显。
现代文：文帝下诏书说： 徐湛之的表疏说的这些，确实骇人听闻，范晔一贯品行不端，青年以来一直名声丑恶，只因他有一点小才艺，所以留意他这一点，多次赐与他荣华和爵位，以至到了今天如此清显重要的位置上。
English: Emperor Wen said in his edict: "What Xu Zhanzhi's epitaph says is truly appalling. Fan Zheng has always been of bad character and has had a bad reputation since he was young. It is only because he has a little talent that he has been noticed, and he has been given glory and peerage many times, so that he is in such an important position today.

古文：而险利之性，有过溪壑，不识恩遇，犹怀怨愤。
现代文：但是他险恶好利的贪婪之心，比大山谷还难填满。
English: But his insidious, greedy heart is harder to fill than the valley.

古文：每存容养，冀能悛革，不谓同恶相济，狂悖至此。便可收掩，依法穷诘。 
现代文：他不感恩戴德，反而心怀怨气，我总是容允他这些缺点，希望他能悔过自新，竟没想到他同其他人狼狈为奸，疯狂反逆到如此地步！马上逮捕，依据法律，彻底查清。 
English: He is not grateful, but rather holds grudges. I always tolerate his shortcomings and hope that he will repent and reform. I had no idea that he was in cahoots with others and had gone so far in his insane treason! Arrest him immediately and investigate him thoroughly in accordance with the law.

古文：其夜，先呼晔及朝臣集华林东阁，止于客省。
现代文：当天晚上，文帝首先叫范晔和朝廷大臣东阁会合，在范晔未工作过的部门呆着。
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Wen first called Fan Qi and the Minister of the East Cabinet to meet, and stayed in the department where Fan Qi had not worked.

古文：先已于外收综及熙先兄弟，并皆款服。
现代文：之前在外面逮捕了谢综和孔熙先兄弟，他们都供认不讳。
English: Before that, brothers Xie Zhao and Kong Xixian were arrested outside. They both confessed to the crime.

古文：于时上在延贤堂，遣使问晔曰： 以卿觕有文翰，故相任擢，名爵期怀，于例非少。
现代文：这时文帝正在延贤堂，他派人问范晔： 因为你能作一些文章，所以推举你做官，照说职位和爵号是能叫你满意的，按习惯说这并不亏待。
English: At this time, Emperor Wen was in the Yanxian Hall. He sent someone to ask Fan Qi: Because you can write some articles, you are recommended to be an official. According to the custom, the post and the title can satisfy you. This is not a disadvantage.

古文：亦知卿意难厌满，正是无理怨望，驱扇朋党而已，云何乃有异谋？ 
现代文：本来也知道你欲壑难填，你只不过是无理怨恨，驱使狐群狗党而已，你怎么会有谋反的打算？ 
English: Originally, I also knew that you wanted to stir up trouble. You are nothing but an unreasonable grudge, driving the foxes and dogs party. How could you have a plan to rebel?

古文：晔仓卒怖惧，不即首款。
现代文：范晔在仓猝之际非常恐惧，说自己没有谋反事实。
English: In a moment of panic, Fan Ye was very afraid and said that he had not conspired against the truth.

古文：上重遣问曰： 卿与谢综、徐湛之、孔熙先谋逆，并已答款，犹尚未死，征据见存，何不依实。 
现代文：文帝再派人去问他： 你和谢综、徐湛之、孔熙先谋反，他们都已供认，且还没有死，证据明摆着，为什么不按实回答！ 
English: Emperor Wen again sent someone to ask him: You and Xie Zhai, Xu Zhanzhi, and Kong Xi plotted the rebellion in advance, they have all confessed, and they are not dead, the evidence is clear, why not answer truthfully!

古文：晔对曰： 今宗室磐石，蕃岳张跱，设使窃发侥幸，方镇便来讨伐，几何而不诛夷。
现代文：范晔回答说： 现今的皇室如同磐石般坚固，藩镇鼎立在四方，即使想暗中侥幸起事，方镇的人们便马上来讨伐，我们很快便会被消灭。
English: Fan Rong replied, "Today's imperial family is as solid as a rock, and the towns of the Han Dynasty stand on all four sides. Even if you want to secretly start an accident, the people of the towns will immediately come to fight, and we will soon be wiped out.

古文：且臣位任过重，一阶两级，自然必至，如何以灭族易此。
现代文：况且我的职位和待遇远胜一般人，一两级以后的官职，自然会轮到我，为什么我会用族灭的代价来获得这些呢？
English: Moreover, my position and treatment are far superior to the average person. After one or two levels of official positions, it will naturally be my turn. Why would I use the price of extermination to obtain these?

古文：古人云： 左手据天下之图，右手刎其喉，愚夫不为。 
现代文：古人说：左手据有天下版图，右边被别人的刀子搁在颈上，即使愚蠢的人也不会这样选择机会。
English: The ancients said: The left hand holds the map of the world, and the right hand is held by someone else's knife on the neck. Even a stupid person would not choose such an opportunity.

古文：臣虽泥下，朝廷许其觕有所及，以理而察，臣不容有此。 
现代文：我虽然平庸愚昧，再加朝廷认为我有一些作文章的才能。按理说，我不会这样作。 
English: In spite of my mediocre stupidity, the imperial court also thinks I have some talent for writing articles. Logically, I will not do this.

古文：上复遣问曰： 熙先近在华林门外，宁欲面辨之乎？ 
现代文：文帝再派人问他： 孔熙先正在华林门外，难道你不想和他对质吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen sent another person to ask him: Kong Xixian is just outside the Waring Gate, don't you want to confront him?

古文：晔辞穷，乃曰： 熙先苟诬引臣，臣当如何！ 
现代文：范晔这时才没什么话说，但仍称： 要是孔熙先诬陷牵扯我，那该怎么办？ 
English: At this time, Fan Qi had nothing to say, but still said: If Kong Xixian framed and implicated me, what should I do?

古文：熙先闻晔不服，笑谓殿中将军沈邵之曰： 凡诸处分，符檄书疏，皆范晔所造及治定。
现代文：孔熙先听说范晔不认罪，笑着对殿中将军沈邵之说： 所有这些东西，符信书疏文告，都是范晔作的或者是他修改过的。
English: When Kong Xi first heard that Fan Kui had pleaded not guilty, he smiled and said to the palace general Shen Shaozhi: All these things, according to the letter and the notice, were made by Fan Kui or modified by him.

古文：云何于今方作如此抵蹋邪！ 
现代文：怎么现在还作如此抵赖呢？ 
English: How is it possible to make such a denial now?

古文：上示以墨迹，晔乃具陈本末，曰： 久欲上闻，逆谋未著。又冀其事消弭，故推迁至今。负国罪重，分甘诛戮。 
现代文：文帝把墨迹证据拿给范晔看，范晔才把前后经过一齐说出来： 我好久以前便想启告皇上，只因谋反的事情不明显，又希望这件事消失，所以耽误到今天，我有负于国，罪行深重，愿意被处死。 
English: Emperor Wen showed the ink evidence to Fan Rong, and it was only then that Fan Rong was able to tell the whole story: I wanted to inform the emperor a long time ago, only because the treason was not obvious, and I wanted the matter to disappear, so I delayed until today. I am guilty of the country, the crime is serious, and I am willing to be executed.

古文：其夜，上使尚书仆射何尚之视之，问曰： 卿事何得至此？ 
现代文：当天晚上，文帝派尚书仆射何尚之探视范晔，问他： 你的问题怎么到这步田地？ 
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Wen sent Shang Shufu to visit Fan Qi, and asked him: How did your problem come to this stage?

古文：晔曰： 君谓是何？ 
现代文：范晔回答： 您认为这是为什么？ 
English: Fan Ye replied: Why do you think that is?

古文：尚之曰： 卿自应解。 
现代文：何尚书说： 你自己应该明白。 
English: He Shangshu said: You yourself should understand.

古文：晔曰： 外人传庾尚书见憎，计与之无恶。
现代文：范晔说： 外面传说庾尚书被皇上憎恨，此事估计和他没什么麻烦。
English: Fan Yu said: It is said that the Emperor hated Zou Shangshu, so I don't think this would be a problem for him.

古文：谋遂之事，闻孔熙先说此，轻其小兒，不以经意。今忽受责，方觉为罪。
现代文：谋反的事，听孔熙先说过此事，因为把他看成小孩，不觉得这事有什么大不了，现在忽然被斥责才觉得有罪。
English: In the matter of plotting a rebellion, when I heard Kong Xi mentioned the matter first, because I regarded him as a child, I didn't think it was a big deal, but now I suddenly felt guilty when I was reprimanded.

古文：君方以道佐世，使天下无冤。
现代文：您正以高明的谋略辅佐朝廷，应使国家没有冤情之人。
English: You are assisting the imperial court with a clever strategy, and you should make the country free of grievances.

古文：弟就死之后，犹望君照此心也。 
现代文：即使我死之后，仍希望您明白我的这个心意。 
English: Even after my death, I still hope that you will understand my heart.

古文：明日，仗士送晔付廷尉，入狱，问徐丹阳所在，然后知为湛之所发。
现代文：第二天，狱卒送范晔到监狱，入狱以后，范晔问徐湛之关在哪儿，然后才知此事是徐湛之告发的。
English: The next day, the jailer sent Fan Qi to the prison. After entering the prison, Fan Qi asked Xu Zhan where the prison was, and then learned that the matter was reported by Xu Zhan.

古文：熙先望风吐款，辞气不桡，上奇其才，遣人慰劳之曰： 以卿之才，而滞于集书省，理应有异志。此乃我负卿也。 
现代文：孔熙先根据实情供认，一点也不隐瞒，文帝觉得他很有才能，派人慰劳他说： 以你的才能，却在集书省沉滞多年，理所当然有谋反心理，这是我对不起你。 
English: Kong Xi first confessed according to the facts and did not hide anything. Emperor Wen felt that he was very talented and sent someone to console him. He said, "With your talent, you have been stagnating in the book collecting province for many years. Naturally, you have a rebellious mentality. I feel sorry for you."

古文：又诘责前吏部尚书何尚之曰： 使孔熙先年将三十作散骑郎，那不作贼。 
现代文：又责怪前吏部尚书何尚之说： 让孔熙先年到三十仍作散骑郎官，怎么不造反！ 
English: He also blamed the former cadre, Shang Shu, for saying: "If Kong Xi was allowed to remain a cadet until the age of thirty last year, how could he not rebel!

古文：熙先于狱中上书曰： 囚小人猖狂，识无远概，徒扌旬意气之小感，不料逆顺之大方。与第二弟休先首为奸谋，干犯国宪，捴脍脯醢，无补尤戾。
现代文：孔熙先在狱中写了一封给文帝的信说： 本罪犯狂乱猖蹶，没有远见，意气用事，不知忠诚反逆的好坏，和二弟孔休先带头造反，违反国法，纵然被千刀万剐，油煎火烤，也不能补回自己的罪过。
English: Kong Xixian wrote a letter to Emperor Wen in prison, saying, "This criminal is wild and reckless, has no foresight, is full of ambition, and does not know whether it is good or bad to be a loyal rebel. He and his second brother Kong Xiuyan led the rebellion, violated the national law, and even if they were killed by a thousand cuts and roasted in oil, they could not make up for their sins.

古文：陛下大明含弘，量苞天海，录其一介之节，猥垂优逮之诏。
现代文：皇上英明神圣，宽容大量，包天容地，记住我的一点微末小才，竟下了一道优待囚犯的诏书。
English: The Emperor, who is wise and holy, and has a great deal of tolerance, and who is generous to a fault, bearing in mind my meager talents, has actually issued an edict for the preferential treatment of prisoners.

古文：恩非望始，没有遗荣，终古以来，未有斯比。
现代文：这是我首先没有想到的，纵然是死后也是很光荣的。从古以来，犯人从未有过这样的遭遇的。
English: It's not the first thing I thought of, but it's a great honour, even if it's posthumous. Prisoners haven't been treated like this since time immemorial.

古文：夫盗马绝缨之臣，怀璧投书之士，其行至贱，其过至微，由识不世之恩，以尽躯命之报，卒能立功齐、魏，致勋秦、楚。
现代文：秦国那些盗马食肉后又为秦穆公冲锋陷阵的罪人，身抱金玉反复投书的卞和，他们的品行至为高贵，他们的罪过至为轻浅，只因记住主上的大恩便能为主上全力驱驰，全身报国，终究能为秦国楚国建功，我虽然亲身陷入反逆大罪中，名誉节操都已丧失了。
English: Those sinners in Qin who stole horses, ate meat, and then stormed into battle for Qin Mu Gong, holding gold and jewels and repeatedly signing peace treaties, their moral conduct was most noble, and their sins were most trivial. Only by remembering the Lord's great grace could they drive with all their might, and serve the country with their whole body. After all, they were able to make contributions to Qin and Chu. Although I personally fell into the great crime of treason, I have lost all honor and integrity.

古文：囚虽身陷祸逆，名节俱丧，然少也慷慨，窃慕烈士之遗风。
现代文：但是自青年以来，胸怀大志，内心仰慕古代那些高尚英勇的志士的为人。
English: But since his youth, he has been a man with great aspirations and a heartfelt admiration for those noble and heroic heroes of antiquity.

古文：但坠崖之木，事绝升跻，覆盆之水，理乖收汲。
现代文：但是从悬崖上掉下的树木，再也不能上去了，倒出来的盆中之水，再也不能回到其中了。
English: But the tree that falls from the cliff cannot get back up again, and the water that is poured out of the basin cannot get back in again.

古文：方当身膏鈇钺，诒诫方来，若使魂而有灵，结草无远。
现代文：正应该亲身被斩杀，作为后人的鉴戒。如果使我的魂魄有灵气的话，那么我也会结草相报。
English: I should be personally beheaded, as a warning to future generations. If my soul has a spirit, then I will also write a report.

古文：然区区丹抱，不负夙心，贪及视息，少得申暢。
现代文：我这一点小小的忠心，会违背过去的一贯想法。
English: My one small act of loyalty would go against everything I've ever believed.

古文：自惟性爱群书，心解数术，智之所周，力之所至，莫不穷揽，究其幽微。考论既往，诚多审验。
现代文：爱惜现在这一瞬间的喘息，让我稍稍表明我的希望。想起自己本性喜爱读书，了解各种术数和学问，人的智力能达到的、无不普遍流览，精研其中微妙的地方，验证自己预言过的话，有很多都应验了。
English: Loving the breath of the present moment, let me express a little of my hope, recalling my natural affinity for reading, for learning all the arts and sciences, for seeing what the human mind is capable of, for studying their subtleties, for verifying my prophecies, many of which have been fulfilled.

古文：谨略陈所知，条牒如故别状，愿且勿遗弃，存之中书。
现代文：我这里把我知道的说说，一条一条的列在上面。希望皇上不要忘记，把它们存放在中书省。
English: Here, I have listed what I know, one by one. I hope the Emperor will not forget and store them in the Central Library.

古文：若囚死之后，或可追存，庶九泉之下，少塞衅责。 
现代文：如果我死之后，也许会追忆起来，这样我在九泉之下，也许能偿偿我欠皇上的债的万分之一。 
English: If I die, perhaps I will be remembered, so that I may be able to repay one ten-thousandth of my debt to the emperor.

古文：所陈并天文占候，谶上有骨肉相残之祸，其言深切。
现代文：范晔在监狱里，和谢综及孔熙先分别被关在不同的地方。
English: Fan Rong is in prison, and is being held separately from Xie Zaming and Kong Xixian.

古文：晔在狱，与综及熙先异处，乃称疾求移考堂，欲近综等。
现代文：于是范晔说自己有病想改换一下审讯他的地方，希望靠近谢综他们。
English: So Fan Yu said that he was ill and wanted to change the place where he was interrogated, hoping to be closer to Xie Zhao and them.

古文：见听，与综等果得隔壁。
现代文：这要求被同意了，于是和谢综等人得以成为隔壁。
English: This request was granted, and Xie Zomei and others were able to become neighbors.

古文：遥问综曰： 始被收时，疑谁所告？ 
现代文：范晔远远地问谢综说： 你开始被逮捕时，怀疑是谁告的密？ 
English: Fan Qi asked Xie Zui from a distance, "When you were first arrested, did you have any suspicions about who was the informant?

古文：综云： 不知。 晔曰： 乃是徐童。 
现代文：谢综说不知道。范晔说： 是徐童告发的。 
English: Xie Zong said that he did not know. Fan Yu said: It was Xu Tong who reported it.

古文：童，徐湛之小名仙童也。
现代文：童，即是徐湛之的小名仙童。
English: Tong, that is, is a minor fairy child of Xu Zhan.

古文：在狱为诗曰： 祸福本无兆，性命归有极。
现代文：范晔在监狱里写了一首诗： 祸福本无兆，性命归有极。
English: Fan Qi wrote a poem in prison: "There is no sign of misfortune or good fortune, life is a matter of chance."

古文：必至定前期，谁能延一息。
现代文：必至定前期，谁能延一息。
English: The first half of the season is bound to come to an end, so who can take a breather?

古文：在生已可知，来缘忄画无识。
现代文：在生已可知，来缘画无识。
English: During his lifetime, it was already known that he did not know how to draw.

古文：好丑共一丘，何足异枉直。
现代文：好丑共一丘，何足异枉直。
English: Ugly and ugly all in one, what a coincidence.

古文：岂论东陵上，宁辨首山侧。
现代文：岂论东陵上，宁辨首山侧。
English: As for the east mausoleum, it is better to start from the mountain side.

古文：虽无嵇生琴，庶同夏侯色。
现代文：虽无稽生琴，庶同夏侯色。
English: Although he did not learn to play the zhiqin, he became a pupil of Xia Hou.

古文：寄言生存子，此路行复即。 
现代文：寄言生存子，此路行复即。 
English: If you send a message to the surviving son, you will be sent back immediately.

古文：晔本意谓入狱便死，而上穷治其狱，遂经二旬，晔更有生望。
现代文：范晔开始时的想法，以为一到监狱便会被处死，但是文帝要把他们的案子追查到底，于是用了二十几天，范晔突然以为自己可能不会被处死。
English: Fan Qi's initial thought was that he would be executed as soon as he arrived at the prison, but Emperor Wen wanted to investigate their case to the end, so it took twenty days for Fan Qi to suddenly think that he might not be executed.

古文：狱吏因戏之曰： 外传詹事或当长系。 
现代文：狱吏于是跟他开玩笑说： 外面传闻说詹事你有可能被长期关起来。 
English: The warden then teased him, saying, "There is a rumor out there that Zhan Zhe may be imprisoned for a long time.

古文：晔闻之惊喜，综、熙先笑之曰： 詹事当前共畴昔事时，无不攘袂瞋目。及在西池射堂上，跃马顾盼，自以为一世之雄。而今扰攘纷纭，畏死乃尔。
现代文：范晔听了这话，惊喜不已，谢综和孔熙先讽刺他说： 詹事你先前共同筹划此事时，举手叫喊，昂头瞪眼，在西池射堂上，骑在马上扬扬得意，以为自己是当世最了不起的英雄，但现在却纷纷纭纭，怕死到这步田地。
English: When Fan Ye heard this, he was astonished. Xie Zomei and Kong Xi Xian ridiculed him and said, "When you were planning this together, you were shouting with your hands up, your eyes were wide open, you were riding on a horse at the West Lake Shooting Range, and you thought you were the greatest hero in the world, but now you are all trembling, afraid to die.

古文：设令今时赐以性命，人臣图主，何颜可以生存？ 晔谓卫狱将曰： 惜哉！薶如此人。 
现代文：即使现在允许你活下去，做臣子的谋害皇上，又有什么脸面活着。 范晔对卫狱将说： 可惜，要是没有我这个人。 
English: Even if you are allowed to live now, as a courtier plotting to assassinate the emperor, what is the point of living? Fan Ye said to the warden: It would be a pity if there were no one like me.

古文：将曰： 不忠之人，亦何足惜。 
现代文： 不忠诚的人，有什么可惜的。 
English: The warden said, "What's wrong with being unfaithful?

古文：晔曰： 大将言是也。 
现代文：范晔说： 你说的有理。 
English: Fan Ye said: The general's words are right.

古文：将出市，晔最在前，于狱门顾谓综曰： 今日次第，当以位邪？ 
现代文：他们将被绑赴刑场。范晔走在最前面，在监狱大门时，他回头对谢综说： 今日行走的次序，是按官职的高低来的吗？ 
English: They will be bound for the execution site. Fan Qi walked in the front, and when he was at the prison gate, he turned back to Xie Zhao and said: Is the order of today's walk according to the rank of the official?

古文：综曰： 贼帅为先。 
现代文：谢综说： 谋反的头头走在最前面。 
English: Xie Zhao said: The ringleaders of the rebellion are at the forefront.

古文：在道语笑，初无暂止。
现代文：在路上他们一边说一边笑，一直没停止。
English: On the way, they talked and laughed non-stop.

古文：至市，问综曰： 时欲至未？ 
现代文：到了刑场，范晔问谢综说： 行刑的时候快到了没有？ 
English: Arriving at the execution site, Fan Qi asked Xie Zui: "Is it almost time for the execution?"

古文：综曰： 势不复久。 
现代文：谢综说： 估计不会太久。 
English: Xie Zhao said: It doesn't look like it will be too long.

古文：晔既食，又苦劝综，综曰： 此异病笃，何事强饭。 
现代文：范晔吃完了最后一顿饭，又规劝谢综吃一些。谢综说： 这跟病重时不同，有什么必要非吃饭不可。 
English: After Fan Qi finished his last meal, he also urged Xie Zomei to eat some. Xie Zomei said: This is different from when you are seriously ill, you must eat if there is any necessity.

古文：晔家人悉至市，监刑职司问： 须相见不？ 
现代文：范晔的亲人都到了刑场。监斩官问范晔： 需要见一见吗？ 
English: Fan Qi's relatives have all arrived at the execution site. The execution officer asked Fan Qi: Do you need to see him?

古文：晔问综曰： 家人以来，幸得相见，将不暂别。 
现代文：范晔向谢综说： 家人都来了，很庆幸能相见，想要和他们多呆一些时间。 
English: Fan Rongxiang Xie Zong said, "All my family members are here. I'm glad to see them and I want to spend more time with them.

古文：综曰： 别与不别，亦何所存。来必当号泣，正足乱人意。 
现代文：谢综说： 相见与否，我无所谓，他们来了必定会哭，只会让人心情更烦而已。 
English: Xie Zhao said, "Whether I see them or not, I don't care. When they come, they are bound to cry, which will only make people more upset."

古文：晔曰： 号泣何关人，向见道边亲故相瞻望，亦殊胜不见。吾意故欲相见。 
现代文：范晔说： 哪管他们哭呢？先看见路边亲人好友目送我们，也远远比不相见好，但我的本意是相见一下好。 
English: Fan Wei said, "Who cares if they cry? Seeing our relatives and friends on the roadside to see us off is far better than not seeing each other, but my original intention was to see each other.

古文：于是呼前。
现代文：于是范晔叫他的亲人到前面来。
English: So he called the groom forward.

古文：晔妻先下抚其子，回骂晔曰： 君不为百岁阿家，不感天子恩遇，身死固不足塞罪，奈何枉杀子孙。 
现代文：范晔的妻子先下来抚摸她的儿子，回过头来骂范晔说： 你不顾百岁老母，不感激皇上大恩，你自己死了倒没有什么，只是冤枉害杀子孙。 
English: Fan Yu's wife came down first to touch her son, then turned around and scolded Fan Yu, saying, "You don't care about your hundred-year-old mother, you don't appreciate the emperor's great favor, and your own death is nothing, but the unjustified killing of your children and grandchildren.

古文：晔干笑云罪至而已。
现代文：范晔尴尬地笑着说有罪有罪。
English: Fan Ye smiled awkwardly and said guilty guilty.

古文：晔所生母泣曰： 主上念汝无极，汝曾不能感恩，又不念我老，今日奈何？ 
现代文：范晔的生母哭着说： 皇上对你那么好，你竟然一点也不想到这一点，也不管我已年老，今天还将怎么样！ 
English: Fan Qi's birth mother cried and said, "The emperor has been so good to you, you didn't even think about this at all, and it doesn't matter how old I am, what will happen today!

古文：仍以手击晔颈及颊，晔颜色不怍。
现代文：用手打范晔的颈项扇他的耳光，范晔脸上一点也不愧疚。
English: He slapped Fan Qi's neck with his hand. Fan Qi did not feel guilty at all.

古文：妻云： 罪人，阿家莫念。 
现代文：他妻子说： 有罪的人，婆婆不要管他。 
English: His wife said: "He's a guilty man, mother-in-law, leave him alone."

古文：妹及妓妾来别，晔悲涕流涟，综曰： 舅殊不同夏侯色。 
现代文：范晔的妹妹和姬妾前来道别，范晔满面流泪。谢综说： 舅舅的表现远远不如夏侯玄。 
English: Fan Yu's sister and concubine came to say goodbye, and Fan Yu was in tears. Xie Zui said: Uncle's performance is far less than Xia Houxuan.

古文：晔收泪而止。
现代文：范晔顿时便不流泪了。
English: Fan Ye did not shed tears at all.

古文：综母以子弟自蹈逆乱，独不出视。
现代文：谢综的母亲因为儿子兄弟亲自谋反，独独她一个人没有来和谢综等告别。
English: Xie Zomei's mother did not come to say goodbye to Xie Zomei alone, because her son's brother personally plotted the rebellion.

古文：晔语综曰： 姊今不来，胜人多也。 
现代文：范晔对谢综说： 你母亲今天不来，比别人强多了。 
English: Fan Wei said to Xie Zhao: The old people are not coming now, which is better than many others.

古文：晔转醉，子蔼亦醉，取地土及果皮以掷晔，呼晔为别驾数十声。
现代文：范晔喝很多酒，醉了，他的儿子范蔼也醉了。范蔼抓起地上的土团和果皮向范晔的脸上扔去，叫骂范晔别驾几十声。
English: Fan Rong drank a lot of wine and got drunk, and his son Fan Rong was also drunk. Fan Rong grabbed the soil and peel on the ground and threw it at Fan Rong's face, shouting dozens of curses at Fan Rong.

古文：晔问曰： 汝恚我邪？ 
现代文：范晔问他： 你恨我吗？ 
English: Fan Ye asked him: Do you hate me?

古文：蔼曰： 今日何缘复恚，但父子同死，不能不悲耳。 
现代文：范蔼说： 今天何必再憎恨，只是父子同时被处死，不能不悲痛罢了。 
English: Fan A said, "There's no need to hate today, it's just that the father and son were executed at the same time, and I can't help but feel sad."

古文：晔常谓死者神灭，欲著《无鬼论》；至是与徐湛之书，云 当相讼地下 。
现代文：范晔常常认为人一死便灵魂消失，想写一篇《无鬼论》，这时写了一封给徐湛之的信，里面说： 一定会在阎罗王那里控诉你。 
English: Fan Ye often thought that a person's soul would disappear after death, and he wanted to write a "ghostless theory." At that time, he wrote a letter to Xu Zhanzhi, saying, "I will definitely sue you at the King of Hell."

古文：其谬乱如此。
现代文：他就是这样的荒唐狂悖。
English: He's just this kind of wild and crazy guy.

古文：又语人： 寄语何仆射，天下决无佛鬼。若有灵，自当相报。 
现代文：他又对人说： 转告何仆射，天下决没有佛和鬼神，如果有鬼神的话，一定会报答他。 
English: He also said to the man, "Tell him that there are no Buddhas or ghosts in the world. If there are ghosts, they will surely repay him."

古文：收晔家，乐器服玩，并皆珍丽，妓妾亦盛饰，母住止单陋，唯有一厨盛樵薪，弟子冬无被，叔父单布衣。
现代文：抄范晔的家时，各种文物宝贝玩具衣服，都非常珍贵华丽，他的歌伎和小老婆都穿得很好，他母亲的住处是单调简陋的小房间，只有一个厨房装柴草。他弟弟的儿子冬天没有被子，他叔父冬天穿着一件布衣。
English: When I visited Fan Xuan's home, all kinds of cultural relics, toys, and clothes were very precious and gorgeous. His kabuki and his little wife were well dressed. His mother's residence was a drab and simple small room with only a kitchen equipped with firewood. His brother's son did not wear a coat in winter, and his uncle wore a cloth coat in winter.

古文：晔及子蔼、遥、叔蒌、孔熙先及弟休先、景先、思先、熙先子桂甫、桂甫子白民、谢综及弟约、仲承祖、许耀，诸所连及，并伏诛。
现代文：范晔和他的儿子范蔼、范遥、范叔委、孔熙先和他弟弟孔休先、孔景先、孔思先，孔熙先的儿子孔桂甫、孔桂甫的儿子孔白民，谢综和他弟弟谢约、仲承祖、许耀等和其他与本案相连的，都被处决。
English: Fan Rong and his sons Fan Ai, Fan Yao, Fan Shicui, Kong Xixian and his brothers Kong Xiuxian, Kong Jingxian, Kong Sixian, Kong Xixian's son Kong Guifu, Kong Guifu's son Kong Baimin, Xie Zhai and his brother Xie You, Zhong Chengzu, Xu Yao and others connected with the case were all executed.

古文：晔时年四十八。
现代文：范晔当时四十八岁。
English: Fan Jun was 48 years old at the time.

古文：晔兄弟子父已亡者及谢综弟纬，徙广州。
现代文：范晔的兄弟子侄和叔伯辈已逃亡的，以及谢综的弟弟谢纬，冲军广州。
English: Fan Yu's brothers, nephews and uncles had already fled, and Xie Zhao's younger brother, Xie Wei, rushed to Guangzhou.

古文：蔼子鲁连，吴兴昭公主外孙，请全生命，亦得远徙，世祖即位得还。
现代文：范蔼的儿子范鲁连，是吴兴昭公主的外孙，公主请求饶恕他的性命，也得以充军，世祖即位后他们都回到内地。
English: Fan's son, Fan Lulian, was the grandson of Princess Wu Xingzhao. The princess begged for his life to be spared, and he was allowed to join the army. They all returned to the mainland after the founding father ascended the throne.

古文：晔性精微有思致，触类多善，衣裳器服，莫不增损制度，世人皆法学之。
现代文：范晔很聪明细腻，思虑巧妙，遇到每一件器物，都会想出修饰整理的办法。他穿的衣裳用过的工具无不改变原来的尺度和样式，当时的人都向他效法学习。
English: Fan Kui was very clever and delicate, he was very thoughtful and ingenious. Whenever he came across a piece of utensil, he would come up with a way to decorate and arrange it. The tools he used to make the clothes he wore all changed the original scale and style, and people at the time learned from him.

古文：撰《和香方》，其序之曰： 麝本多忌，过分必害；沈实易和，盈斤无伤。
现代文：他写了一本《和香方》，序言部分说： 麝香有很多忌讳，太多必然有害。沉实容易和平，即使有一斤也没有妨碍。
English: He wrote a book, "Wakompo," and said in the preface, "There are many taboos about musk, and too much of it is bound to be harmful.

古文：零藿虚燥，詹唐粘湿。甘松、苏合、安息、郁金、奈多、和罗之属，并被珍于外国，无取于中土。
现代文：零藿干枯而燥热，一挨着糖便变得甜腻而潮湿，甘松、苏合、安息、郁金、李多、和罗这些东西都被外国人珍视，中国人则不当回事。
English: Zengqi is dry and hot, and it becomes sweet and moist as soon as it is mixed with sugar. Sweet pine, suahe, rest, tulip, lido, and luo are all prized by foreigners, but they are unimportant to the Chinese.

古文：又枣膏昏钝，甲煎浅俗 ，非唯无助于馨烈，乃当弥增于尤疾也。 
现代文：另外枣膏气味昏浊，甲煎则味道浅薄。不仅不利于强烈的芳香，而且更会增加人的疾病。 
English: In addition, the smell of jujube paste is hazy, and the taste of roasted jujube is shallow. It is not only detrimental to the strong aroma, but also increases human diseases.

古文：此序所言，悉以比类朝士： 麝本多忌 ，比庾炳之； 零藿虚燥 ，比何尚之； 詹唐粘湿 ，比沈演之； 枣膏昏钝 ，比羊玄保； 甲煎浅俗 ，比徐湛之； 甘松、苏合 ，比慧琳道人； 沈实易和 ，以自比也。
现代文：这序言中说的都用来比拟朝中大臣。 麝本多忌 ，比喻庾炳之； 零藿虚燥 ，比喻何尚之； 詹唐黏湿 比喻沈演之 ； 枣膏昏钝 ，比喻羊玄保； 甲煎浅俗 ，比喻徐湛之； 甘松苏合 ，比喻慧琳道人； 沉实易和 ，用来比喻自己。
English: Everything said in this preamble is used to compare the ministers of the two Koreas. 本多忌 (本多忌) is used as a metaphor for ; 零虚燥 (零虚燥) is used as a metaphor for 何尚 (何尚); 詹唐粘湿 (詹唐粘湿) is used as a metaphor for沈演 (沈演); 枣膏昏鈍 (枣膏昏鈍) is used as a metaphor for羊玄保 (羊玄保); 甲煎浅俗 (甲煎浅俗) is used as a metaphor for徐湛 (徐湛); 甘松苏合 (甘松苏合) is used as a metaphor

古文：晔狱中与诸甥侄书以自序曰：
现代文：范晔在监狱中写信给他的侄子和外甥们自我介绍说：
English: Writing to his nephews and nieces from prison, Fan Wei introduced himself:

古文：吾狂衅覆灭，岂复可言，汝等皆当以罪人弃之。
现代文： 我因为猖狂谋反遭至毁灭，是没有什么话说的，但是你们等应该因我是罪人而与我画清界线。
English: I have nothing to say about being destroyed because of my violent rebellion, but you should draw a line with me because I am a sinner.

古文：然平生行己任怀，犹应可寻。
现代文：但是我平素的为人，仍然值得研究。
English: But I'm an ordinary person, so it's still worth studying.

古文：至于能不，意中所解，汝等或不悉知。
现代文：至于我的能力或不足处，我估计，也许你们还不知道。
English: As for my abilities or shortcomings, I guess you may not know them yet.

古文：吾少懒学问，晚成人，年三十许，政始有向耳。
现代文：我小时候不爱读书，到很晚才成熟，年龄到三十岁，才开始有心问学。
English: When I was a child, I didn't like to read. I didn't mature until very late, and I didn't have the heart to learn until I was thirty.

古文：自尔以来，转为心化，推老将至者，亦当未已也。
现代文：从那时以来，逐渐地潜心学问，估计以后的日子，也会这样继续下去。
English: Since then, I have gradually immersed myself in learning, and I expect that this will continue in the future.

古文：往往有微解，言乃不能自尽。
现代文：读书上我总有一些新的理解或体会，语言有时还不能准确表达。
English: When reading, I always have some new understanding or experience, which sometimes cannot be accurately expressed in words.

古文：为性不寻注书，心气恶，小苦思，便愦闷；口机又不调利，以此无谈功。
现代文：读书时不爱参考过去的注解。我心气不好，如果稍微用心思考一下，便会烦闷，所以每次拿起笔来写成的文章，没有让我完全满意的。
English: When reading, I don't like to refer to past annotations. I'm not in a good mood, and if I think about it with a little attention, I'll get bored, so every time I pick up a pen to write an article, it doesn't make me completely satisfied.

古文：至于所通解处，皆自得之于胸怀耳。文章转进，但才少思难，所以每于操笔，其所成篇，殆无全称者。常耻作文士。
现代文：常常觉得仅仅做一个文人很可耻。作文最怕的是把话说得太多，词藻太多妨碍感情的表达，小意思不利大主题，韵律改变了原文的本意。
English: I often feel it's a shame just to be a writer. What I'm most afraid of in composition is to say too much, too many words hinder the expression of feelings, too little meaning is detrimental to the main theme, and the rhythm changes the original meaning.

古文：文患其事尽于形，情急于藻，义牵其旨，韵移其意。
现代文：虽然有时也作一两篇合意的，但大多数文章仍然有这些缺点，正像细致描摹的图画没有意趣一样，我这样并未有真正的收获。
English: Although there are occasionally one or two consensual ones, most of the articles still have these shortcomings, just as detailed drawings have no meaning, so I have no real gain.

古文：虽时有能者，大较多不免此累，政可类工巧图缋，竟无得也。
现代文：平生认为文章表达的情意，应以思想为主，而用华美的言辞表达。
English: I always think that the sentiment expressed in an article should be based on thought, and should be expressed with beautiful words.

古文：以意为主，则其旨必见；以文传意，则其词不流。
现代文：以思想为主，那么中心必然显明。以华美的言辞表达，那么语言便不致太过没有限制。
English: If thought dominates, then the center must be clear. If words are expressed with beauty, then language will not be too unrestrained.

古文：然后抽其芬芳，振其金石耳。
现代文：然后抽出其中好的地方，突出深刻之处。
English: and then enhance its fragrance and blend its gemstone sound.

古文：此中情性旨趣，千条百品，屈曲有成理。
现代文：这其中的关节意趣，千条万条，每一处都有它固有的规律。
English: There are thousands and thousands of joints in this, and each one has its own inherent laws.

古文：自谓颇识其数，尝为人言，多不能赏，意或异故也。
现代文：我认为自己相当熟悉其中的方法。曾经对别人说，别人都不理解，大概是各人心思放在不同的事务上的原因。
English: I think I'm pretty familiar with how to do it, and I've said to people that people don't understand, probably because everyone's mind is on different things.

古文：性别宫商，识清浊，斯自然也。观古今文人，多不全了此处，纵有会此者，不必从根本中来。
现代文：另外我相当了解文章韵律的运行规律，知道哪儿该轻，哪儿该重，这是文章本身的特点。比较古来文人，很多人对这个问题不太熟悉，纵然有懂一些的，也不过是作文过程中体会出来的。
English: In addition, I am quite familiar with the running rules of the prosody of the article, knowing where to be light and where to be heavy, which is the characteristic of the article itself. Comparing ancient authors, many people are not familiar with this issue, and even if they do understand it, it is only because they have experienced it during the composition process.

古文：言之皆有实证，非为空谈。
现代文：如果把这些道理说得清楚明白或以具体的文章作例子，那就更要真成就，而不能空谈。
English: If these principles are clearly explained or concrete articles are used as examples, then it is more important to have real achievements rather than empty talk.

古文：年少中，谢庄最有其分，手笔差易，文不拘韵故也。
现代文：年轻一辈中，谢庄最会这一点，文笔落脚处，往往不被韵律所束缚。
English: Among the younger generation, Xie Zhuang is the most aware of this, and the place of writing is often not bound by prosody.

古文：吾思乃无定方，特能济难适轻重，所禀之分，犹当未尽。
现代文：我体会并没有特别的技巧，只不过能处理那些难写和轻重缓急的地方。尽管如此，仍有不足之处。
English: I didn't find any special skills, just the ability to deal with difficult writing and prioritization issues, but there were still shortcomings.

古文：但多公家之言，少于事外远致，以此为恨，亦由无意于文名故也。
现代文：只是我的文章有很多平庸地方，特别新颖独特的东西并不多。这是我的遗憾，也许是因为不想通过文章获取声名的原因。
English: It's just that my articles have a lot of mediocrity, and there aren't many things that are particularly new and unique. This is my regret, perhaps because I don't want to gain fame through articles.

古文：本未关史书，政恆觉其不可解耳。
现代文：本来我和历史书没什么关联，只是觉得其中有些地方弄不太清楚而已。
English: Originally, I had nothing to do with history books, I just felt that some of them were not very clear.

古文：既造《后汉》，转得统绪，详观古今著述及评论，殆少可意者。
现代文：写了《后汉书》后，慢慢知道其中的奥秘。仔细体味古人的历史著作和他们的评论，很少有令人满意的。
English: After writing "Post-Han Shu," I gradually learned the secrets of it. Carefully reading the historical works of the ancients and their comments, there are few satisfactory ones.

古文：班氏最有高名，既任情无例，不可甲乙辨。
现代文：班固这方面名声最好。但他编书时任意增删没有规则，不能条分理析。
English: Banggu has the best reputation in this regard. However, when he was compiling the book, there were no rules for adding and deleting, and it was not possible to analyze the articles.

古文：后赞于理近无所得，唯志可推耳。博赡不可及之，整理未必愧也。
现代文：我的文章在渊博丰富上赶不上他，但其中的逻辑条理不在他之下。
English: My articles are not as rich as his, but their logical structure is not inferior to his.

古文：吾杂传论，皆有精意深旨，既有裁味，故约其词句。
现代文：我的杂传论述都有深刻的涵义，想使它们更典范一些，所以其中的词句非常简洁。
English: My miscellaneous discourses have a deep meaning, and I want to make them more exemplary, so the words in them are very concise.

古文：至于《循吏》以下及《六夷》诸序论，笔势纵放，实天下之奇作。
现代文：至于《循吏传》和《六夷》等篇的序论，文章气势纵横捭阖，确实是天下奇文。
English: As for the prefaces of "Biographies of Officials" and "The Six Emperors" and other works, the articles are full of vigor and are truly a wonder of the world.

古文：其中合者，往往不减《过秦》篇。
现代文：其中好的地方，往往不比《过秦论》逊色。
English: Among them, the good places are often not inferior to "On the Qin Dynasty."

古文：尝共比方班氏所作，非但不愧之而已。
现代文：我曾经和班固的文章进行比较，发觉不仅不比他差，甚至有过之而无不及。
English: When I compare the books I once read by my classmates, there are so many that are much better, and I'm not just not ashamed.

古文：欲遍作诸志，前汉所有者悉令备。虽事不必多，且使见文得尽。
现代文：本来我想把志都写下来，《汉书》上写过的志都要写，即使不那么详细，但使人读志时能了解当时的情况。
English: Originally, I wanted to write down all my aspirations. I wanted to write down all the aspirations that were written in the Chinese book, even if they were not so detailed, but I wanted people to be able to understand the situation at the time when reading my aspirations.

古文：又欲因事就卷内发论，以正一代得失，意复未果。
现代文：我又想因具体文章就文中进行评论，以便总结后汉一代的成败经验教训，但这个想法又没实现。
English: I also wanted to comment on specific articles in order to summarize the lessons learned from the successes and failures of the post-Han generation, but this idea did not come to fruition.

古文：赞自是吾文之杰思，殆无一字空设，奇变不穷，同合异体，乃自不知所以称之。
现代文：赞自然是我文章中最出众的，可以说，没有一个字是多余的，奇巧变化，令人目不暇接，同中有异，异中有同，我不知道该怎样来夸赞它们。
English: Of course, the part of the praise is the outstanding conception of my article. There is probably not a single word that is false, the writing is trying to be surprising, the highlights are one after another, that is, the same content should be described in different ways, and even I don't know how to praise it.

古文：此书行，故应有赏音者。
现代文：这书一旦通行，应该有赏识的人。
English: This book appears in society, and it is bound to be appreciated by people.

古文：纪、传例为举其大略耳，诸细意甚多。
现代文：纪和传照例是大概的，但也有一些精致细腻之处。
English: The examples of discipline and transmission are approximate, but there are also some delicate and delicate points.

古文：自古体大而思精，未有此也。
现代文：自古以来文章结构宏大而思虑精绝的，从未有超过本书的。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a work of such a grand structure and thought-provoking precision.

古文：恐世人不能尽之，多贵古贱今，所以称情狂言耳。
现代文：我担心世人不能明白它们。又因世人贵古贱今所以说了这些自大的话。
English: I'm afraid that people in the world can't understand, most of them are too old and too young, so they let their emotions run wild.

古文：吾于音乐，听功不及自挥，但所精非雅声，为可恨。
现代文：我在音乐上，听的水平不如弹的水平，但我精通的不是正统高雅的东西，这是我的遗憾。
English: In music, my level of listening is not as good as my level of playing, but I am not proficient in orthodox and elegant things, which is my regret.

古文：然至于一绝处，亦复何异邪。
现代文：然而到了那些极精妙的地方，它们和那些高雅音乐几乎一样的高明动人。
English: However, when it comes to the finer points, they are almost as brilliant and moving as the high music.

古文：其中体趣，言之不尽，弦外之意，虚响之音，不知所从而来。
现代文：其中的体会乐趣，简直说不完，弦律之外的意趣，流动在空中的音韵，简直不知它们是从哪儿来的。
English: The pleasure of experiencing it is almost indescribable, the meaning beyond the string rhythm, the melody flowing in the air, I just don't know where they come from.

古文：虽少许处，而旨态无极。
现代文：虽然这样的时候不多，但那种意境再也没有第二处的。
English: Although there aren't many times like this, there's no second place for that kind of artistic mood.

古文：亦尝以授人，士庶中未有一毫似者。
现代文：我曾把这个意趣告诉别人，士大夫中没有一个人有半点同感的。
English: I have told others about this idea, but none of the senior officials have the slightest sympathy for it.

古文：此永不传矣。
现代文：这种妙处是永远不能传给别人的。
English: This advantage can never be passed on to others.

古文：吾书虽小小有意，笔势不快，余竟不成就，每愧此名。
现代文：我的书法虽有一定的成就，但笔势不流畅，终究没什么成就，每每为此而惭愧。 
English: Although my calligraphy has certain achievements, but the handwriting is not smooth, after all, there is no achievement, I am ashamed of this.

古文：晔《自序》并实，故存之。
现代文：范晔的《自序》都是真话，这里录下来。
English: Fan Ye's "Self-sequence" is all true. Record it here.

古文：蔼幼而整洁，衣服竟岁未尝有尘点。死时年二十。
现代文：范蔼小时候卫生整洁，他的衣服能整年不沾一点灰尘，死时才二十岁。
English: When Fan Ai was a child, he was very clean and tidy. His clothes would not get a speck of dust on them for an entire year. He was only 20 years old when he died.

古文：晔少时，兄晏常云： 此兒进利，终破门户。 
现代文：范晔小时候，他哥哥范晏常说： 这孩子汲汲于名利，终究会败坏我们家族。 
English: When Fan Xuan was a child, his brother Fan Xuan often said: This child is addicted to fame and fortune, and will eventually corrupt our family.

古文：终如晏言。
现代文：最后果然应证了他的话。
English: In the end, his words came true.

