古文：《夏书》曰：禹抑洪水十三年，过家不入门。
现代文：《尚书·夏书》上记载：禹治理洪水的十三年中，其间路过家门口也不回家看望亲人。
English: "Shangshu · Xiashu" recorded: In the thirteen years of Yu's flood control, during which he passed the front door of his house, he did not go home to visit his relatives.

古文：陆行载车，水行载舟，泥行蹈毳，山行即桥。
现代文：行陆路时乘车，水路乘船，泥路要踩木橇，山路坐轿，走遍了所有地方。
English: When traveling by land, they take a car, when traveling by water, they take a boat, when traveling on dirt roads, they have to walk on wooden rafts, and when traveling on mountain roads, they have to take a sedan. They have traveled everywhere.

古文：以别九州，随山浚川，任土作贡。
现代文：从而划分了九州边界，顺着山势地形，疏浚了淤积的河流，根据土地物产确定了贡赋等级。
English: As a result, the borders of Kyushu were delineated, silted rivers were dredged along the mountainous terrain, and tribute levels were determined based on land and property.

古文：通九道，陂九泽，度九山。
现代文：使九州道路通畅，筑起了九州的泽岸，度量了九州山势的物产。
English: He made Kyushu's roads smooth, built Kyushu's riverbanks, and measured the production of Kyushu's mountains.

古文：然河灾衍溢，害中国也尤甚。
现代文：然而还有黄河泛滥成灾，给中原地区造成很大危害。
English: However, the Yellow River also flooded, causing great harm to the Central Plains.

古文：唯是为务。故道河自积石历龙门，南到华阴，东下砥柱，及孟津、雒汭，至于大邳。
现代文：于是集中力量治理黄河，引导河水自积石山经过龙门，南行到华阴县，东下经砥柱山和孟津、雒汭，到达大邳山。
English: As a result, they concentrated their efforts on managing the Yellow River, guiding the river water from Jishishan via Longmen, southward to Huayin County, and eastward via Tianzhu Mountain and Mengjin and Handan to reach Dafeng Mountain.

古文：于是禹以为河所从来者高，水湍悍，难以行平地，数为败，乃厮二渠以引其河。北载之高地，过降水，至于大陆，播为九河，同为逆河，入于勃海。
现代文：禹以为大邳以上黄河流经的地区地势高，水流湍急，难以在大邳以东的平地经过，否则会时常败堤破岸，造成水灾，于是开凿两条河道将黄河分流成两条，引黄河东流直接入海，从地势较高的冀州地区流过，经降水，到大陆泽，分拨成九条支流，共同迎受黄河之水，流入勃海。
English: Yu thought that the area where the Yellow River flows above Dalat is high and the water flow is rapid. It is difficult to pass through the flat land to the east of Dalat, otherwise it will often break the bank and cause floods. Therefore, he dug two channels to separate the Yellow River into two, led the eastward flow of the Yellow River directly into the sea, flowed from the high-lying Jizhou region, through precipitation, to the mainland lake, and divided into nine tributaries to jointly receive the water of the Yellow River and flow into the Bohai Sea.

古文：九川既疏，九泽既洒，诸夏艾安，功施于三代。
现代文：九州河川都已疏通，九州大泽都筑了障水堤岸，华夏诸国得到治理而安定，其功绩使夏、商、周三代受益不绝。
English: Rivers in Kyushu have been dredged, levees have been built across the Ozawa River in Kyushu, and the countries of China have been governed and stabilized. Their achievements have benefited China, merchants, and the third generation.

古文：自是之后，荥阳下引河东南为鸿沟，以通宋、郑、陈、蔡、曹、卫，与济、汝、淮、泗会。
现代文：从大禹治水以后，后人又自荥阳以下引黄河水往东南流，成为鸿沟，把宋、郑、陈、蔡、曹、卫各国连结起来，分别与济、汝、淮、泗诸水系交会。
English: After Dayu's flood control, later generations led the Yellow River water from Poyang to the southeast, creating a chasm that connected the Song, Zheng, Chen, Cai, Cao, and Wei states, respectively, with the Ji, Ru, Huai, and Lu water systems.

古文：于楚，西方则通渠汉水、云梦之野，东方则通沟江淮之间。
现代文：在楚地，西方在汉水和云梦泽之间修渠连通，东方则在江淮之间用沟渠相连。
English: In Chudi, the west is connected by a canal between the Han River and the Yunmenze River, while the east is connected by a canal between the Huai River and the Yangtze River.

古文：于吴，则通渠三江、五湖。
现代文：在吴地于三江、五湖间开凿河渠。
English: In Wudi, canals were dug between the three rivers and five lakes.

古文：于齐，则通菑济之间。
现代文：在齐则于菑、济二水间修渠。
English: In Qi, the canal was repaired between the two rivers of Yunnan and Zhejiang.

古文：于蜀，蜀守冰凿离碓，辟沫水之害，穿二江成都之中。
现代文：在蜀，有蜀守李冰凿开离堆，以避沫水造成的水灾；又在成都一带开凿二条江水支流。
English: In Shu, Li Bing, the governor of Shu, chiseled away from the heap to avoid the flood caused by the foam water; he also chiseled two river tributaries in the Chengdu area.

古文：此渠皆可行舟，有余则用溉，百姓飨其利。
现代文：这些河渠水深都能行舟，有多余的水就用来灌溉农田，给百姓带来了很多便利。
English: These canals are deep enough for boats, and the extra water is used to irrigate farmland, bringing a lot of convenience to the people.

古文：至于所过，往往引其水益用溉田畴之渠，以万亿计，然莫足数也。
现代文：至于渠水所过地区，人们往往又开凿一些支渠引渠水灌溉农田，流入田地的水渠数目之多不下千千万万，但由于规模小，不值得计数。
English: As for the areas through which the canal water passes, people often dig some branch canals to introduce canal water to irrigate farmland. The number of canals flowing into the fields is as high as thousands of millions, but due to the small scale, it is not worth counting.

古文：西门豹引漳水溉邺，以富魏之河内。
现代文：西门豹引漳水灌溉邺郡的农田，使魏国的河内地区富裕起来。
English: The West Gate Leopard diverted water to irrigate the farmland in Handan County, making the Hanoi region of Wei rich.

古文：而韩闻秦之好兴事，欲罢之，毋令东伐，乃使水工郑国间说秦，令凿泾水自中山西邸瓠口为渠，并北山东注洛三百余里，欲以溉田。
现代文：韩国听说秦国好兴办工役等新奇事，想以此消耗它的国力，使它无力对山东诸国用兵，于是命水利工匠郑国找机会游说秦王，要它凿穿泾水，从中山以西到瓠口，修一条水渠，出北山向东流入洛水长三百余里，计划用它来灌溉农田。
English: Korea heard that the Qin state was fond of new wonders such as labor service, and wanted to use this as a way to consume its national strength and make it unable to use troops against Shandong countries. Therefore, it ordered the water conservancy craftsman Zheng Guo to find an opportunity to lobby the Qin king, asking him to drill through Surabaya, from the west of Zhongshan to Hukou, to build a water canal, and from the north mountain to the east to flow into Luoshui for more than three hundred miles, planning to use it to irrigate farmland.

古文：中作而觉，秦欲杀郑国。郑国曰： 始臣为间，然渠成亦秦之利也。 
现代文：渠未成，郑国的目的被发觉，秦王要杀他，郑国说： 臣开始是韩国的细作，但水渠修建成功后确实对秦国有利。 
English: Before the canal was completed, Zheng Guo's purpose was discovered, and the Qin king wanted to kill him. Zheng Guo said, "The minister started out as a fine work of Korea, but after the successful construction of the canal, it was indeed beneficial to Qin Guo.

古文：秦以为然，卒使就渠。
现代文：秦国以为他说得对，最后命他继续把渠修成。
English: Qin thought he was right, and finally ordered him to continue building the canal.

古文：渠就，用注填阏之水，溉泽卤之地四万余顷，收皆亩一钟。
现代文：渠成后，引来淤积混浊的泾河水，灌溉两岸低洼的盐碱地四万多顷，亩产都达到了六石四斗。
English: After the canal was completed, the silted and turbid water of the Min River was brought in to irrigate more than 40,000 hectares of low-lying saline and alkaline land on both sides of the river, and the production per mu reached six stone and four bu.

古文：于是关中为沃野，无凶年，秦以富强，卒并诸侯，因命曰郑国渠。
现代文：从此关中沃野千里，再没有饥荒的年头，秦国因此富强起来，最后并吞了诸侯各国，因把此渠命名为 郑国渠 。
English: From then on, there were thousands of miles of fertile fields in Guanzhong, and there were no more years of famine. As a result, the State of Qin became rich and strong, and finally absorbed the various states. This canal was named the Zheng Guo Canal.

古文：汉兴三十九年，孝文时河决酸枣，东溃金堤，于是东郡大兴卒塞之。
现代文：汉朝建立后三十九年，到孝文帝时黄河堤决于酸枣县，东边的金堤被冲垮，于是东郡动员了许多兵卒堵塞决口。
English: Thirty-nine years after the establishment of the Han Dynasty, when Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne, the Yellow River dike was located in Azabu County, and the golden dike on the east was washed away. Therefore, Dong County mobilized many soldiers to block the breach.

古文：其后四十有余年，今天子元光之中，而河决于瓠子，东南注钜野，通于淮、泗。
现代文：此后过了四十多年，到本朝天子元光年间，黄河又在瓠子决口，向东南流入钜野泽，将淮河、泗水连成一片。
English: More than forty years later, during the reign of Emperor Taizong, the Yellow River flowed south-east into the Qianye Lake at the Qianye Pass, connecting the Huaihe River and the Qianye River.

古文：于是天子使汲黯、郑当时兴人徒塞之，辄复坏。
现代文：于是天子命汲黯、郑当时调发人夫、罪徒堵塞决口，往往刚刚堵塞好就又被水冲毁。
English: As a result, the life of the heavenly son was darkened, and Zheng then dispatched a man and a criminal to block the outlet, often just blocked and then destroyed by water.

古文：是时武安侯田鼢é为丞相，其奉邑食鄃。
现代文：那时朝中的丞相是武安侯田蚡，他的奉邑是鄃县，以鄃县租税为食。
English: At that time, the chancellor of the court was Wu'an Hou Tian Qi, and his fief was Qi County, and he lived off the taxes of Qi County.

古文：鄃居河北，河决而南则鄃无水灾，邑收多。
现代文：而鄃县在黄河以北，黄河决口水向南流，鄃县没有水灾，收成很好。
English: However, Handan County is north of the Yellow River, and the water from the mouth of the Yellow River flows southward. There is no flood in Handan County, and the harvest is very good.

古文：鼢言于上曰： 江河之决皆天事，未易以人力为强塞，塞之未必应天。 
现代文：所以田蚡对皇帝说： 江河决口都是上天的事，不易用人力强加堵塞，即便将决口堵塞了，也未必符合天意。 
English: Therefore, Tian Xuan said to the emperor: The opening of rivers and streams is a matter of heaven. It is not easy to impose a blockage with manpower. Even if the opening is blocked, it may not be in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：而望气用数者亦以为然。
现代文：此外望云气和以术数占卜的人也都这样说。
English: In addition, people who rely on divination and fortune-telling say the same thing.

古文：于是天子久之不事复塞也。
现代文：因此天子很长时间没有提堵塞决口的事。
English: Therefore, for a long time, the heavenly son did not bring up the issue of blocking the mouth.

古文：是时郑当时为大农，言曰： 异时关东漕粟从渭中上，度六月而罢，而漕水道九百余里，时有难处。
现代文：那时郑当时任大司农职，说道： 往常从关东漕运的粮食是沿渭水逆流而上，运到长安估计要用六个月，水路全程九百多里，途中还有许多难行的地方。
English: At that time, Zheng, who was the director of the agricultural department at the time, said: The grain that is usually rowed from Guandong is transported upstream along the Surabaya River. It is estimated that it will take six months to transport it to Chang'an. The entire waterway is more than nine hundred miles, and there are many difficult places along the way.

古文：引渭穿渠起长安，并南山下，至河三百余里，径，易漕，度可令三月罢；而渠下民田万余顷，又可得以溉田：此损漕省卒，而益肥关中之地，得谷。 
现代文：若从长安开一条渠引渭水，沿南山而下，到达黄河才三百多里，是一条直道，容易行船，估计只需要三个月就可以运完；而且沿渠农田一万多顷又可以得到灌溉。这样既能减少漕省运粮的人力和时间，节省开支，又能使关中农田更加肥沃，收成更好。 
English: If a canal is opened from Chang'an to divert water, it will only take more than three hundred miles to reach the Yellow River along the Nanshan. It is a straight road, easy to navigate, and it is estimated that it will only take three months to complete the transportation. Moreover, more than ten thousand hectares of farmland along the canal can be irrigated. This will not only reduce the manpower and time for grain transportation and save expenses, but also make the farmland in Guanzhong more fertile and have a better harvest.

古文：天子以为然，令齐人水工徐伯表，悉发卒数万人穿漕渠，三岁而通。
现代文：天子认为说得对，命来自齐地的水利工匠徐伯表测地势，确定河道走向，动员全部兵卒数万人开凿漕渠，历时三年完工。
English: Tianzi thought he was right. Xu Bo Ruan, a water conservancy craftsman from Qi, was ordered to survey the terrain, determine the direction of the river, and mobilize tens of thousands of soldiers to dig a canal. It took three years to complete.

古文：通，以漕，大便利。
现代文：漕渠开通，用来漕运，果然十分便利。
English: When the canal was opened, it was used for rowing transport, which turned out to be very convenient.

古文：其后漕稍多，而渠下之民颇得以溉田矣。
现代文：此后水运就渐渐多起来，水渠一带的老百姓都颇能得到以水溉田的利益。
English: Since then, water transport has gradually increased, and the people around the canal have been able to enjoy the benefits of water irrigation.

古文：其后河东守番系言： 漕从山东西，岁百余万石，更砥柱之限，败亡甚多，而亦烦费。
现代文：这以后，河东守番系说： 从山东漕运粮米西行入关，每年一百多万石，中间经过砥柱这个行船的禁限地区，有许多漕船船坏人亡，而且运费也太大。
English: After this, the governor of Hedong Province said: "From Shandong, rowing ships carrying grain from west to west enter the customs, with more than one million stones each year. In the middle, they pass through the restricted area of the pillar, many rowing ships have bad people killed, and the freight cost is too high.

古文：穿渠引汾溉皮氏、汾阴下，引河溉汾阴、蒲坂下，度可得五千顷。
现代文：若穿渠引汾水灌溉皮氏、汾阴一带的土地，引黄河水灌溉汾阴、蒲坂一带的土地，估计可以造田五千顷。
English: It is estimated that 5,000 hectares of farmland can be created if a canal is built to divert water from the Yangtze River to irrigate the land around Peizhi and Jinyin, and to divert water from the Yellow River to irrigate the land around Jinyin and Busan.

古文：五千顷故尽河堧弃地，民茭牧其中耳，今溉田之，度可得谷二百万石以上。
现代文：这五千顷田原来都是河边被遗弃的荒地，老百姓只在其中打草放牧，如今加以灌溉耕种，估计可得粮食二百万石以上。
English: These five thousand hectares of fields were originally abandoned wastelands along the river, where the common people only grazed. Now they are irrigated and cultivated, and it is estimated that more than two million koku of grain can be obtained.

古文：谷从渭上，与关中无异，而砥柱之东可无复漕。 
现代文：这些粮食沿渭水运入长安，与直接从关中收获的没有两样，而不再从砥柱以东漕粮入关。 
English: This grain was transported into Chang'an along the Surabaya River, which is no different from the grain harvested directly from Guanzhong. Instead, grain is no longer transported from the east of the pillar.

古文：天子以为然，发卒数万人作渠田。
现代文：天子同意他的意见，动员兵卒数万人造渠田。
English: The emperor agreed with his opinion and mobilized tens of thousands of soldiers to build drainage fields.

古文：数岁，河移徙，渠不利，则田者不能偿种。
现代文：几年以后，黄河改道，渠水不足，种渠田的连政府贷给的种子也难以偿还。
English: A few years later, the Yellow River was rerouted, the drainage was insufficient, and even the seeds loaned by the government were difficult to repay.

古文：久之，河东渠田废，予越人，令少府以为稍入。
现代文：久而久之，河东渠田完全报废，朝廷把它分给从越地内迁的百姓耕种，使少府能从中得到一点微薄的租赋收入。
English: Over time, the canal fields to the east of the river were completely abandoned, and the imperial court gave them to the people who had moved from the hinterland to cultivate them, so that Shofu could get a little meager rental income from them.

古文：其后人有上书欲通褒斜道及漕事，下御史大夫张汤。汤问其事，因言： 抵蜀从故道，故道多坂，回远。
现代文：这以后有人上书，是为了想打通褒斜道以及漕运的事，天子将这件事交给御史大夫张汤处理，张汤详细了解后，说道： 从汉中入蜀向来走故道，故道有许多山坂大坡，曲折路远。
English: After this, someone submitted a letter, in order to get through the matter of the slope and the rowing. Tianzi handed the matter over to the chief historian Zhang Tang to deal with. After Zhang Tang understood it in detail, he said: From Hanzhong to Shu, I have always walked the old road. Therefore, the road has many mountains and slopes, and the road is long and tortuous.

古文：今穿褒斜道，少坂，近四百里；而褒水通沔，斜水通渭，皆可以行船漕。
现代文：今若凿穿褒斜道，山坂坡路少，比故道近四百里的路程；而且褒水与沔水相通，斜水与渭水相通，都能通行漕船。
English: There are fewer mountain and slope roads, and the distance is nearly four hundred miles longer than that of the old road. Moreover, the waterway connects the waterway to the waterway, and the waterway connects the waterway to the waterway, and the waterway can be navigated by rowing boats.

古文：漕从南阳上沔入褒，褒之绝水至斜，间百余里，以车转，从斜下下渭。
现代文：漕船从南阳沿沔水上行驶入褒水，从褒水登陆到斜水旱路一百多里，以车转运，再下船顺斜水下行驶入渭水。
English: The rowing boat travels from Nanyang along the Surabaya water into the Po water, from the landfall of the Po water to the oblique water dry road for more than a hundred miles, transfers by car, and then disembarks and travels down the oblique water into the Surabaya.

古文：如此，汉中之谷可致，山东从沔无限，便于砥柱之漕。
现代文：这样不但汉中的粮食可以运来，山东的粮食从沔水而上不会遇到阻隔，比经砥柱漕运方便。
English: In this way, not only can the grain of Hanzhong be transported, but the grain of Shandong will not encounter obstacles from Surabaya, which is more convenient than the wheelbarrow.

古文：且褒斜材木竹箭之饶，拟于巴蜀。 
现代文：而且褒斜地区的木材箭竹，其富饶可以与巴蜀相比拟。 
English: Moreover, the richness of wood arrow bamboo in the Baoshan area is comparable to that of Bashu.

古文：天子以为然，拜汤子卬为汉中守，发数万人作褒斜道五百余里。
现代文：天子认为有道理，封张汤的儿子卬为汉中郡太守，调发数万人开出一条长五百多里的褒斜道。
English: Tianzi thought it was reasonable to appoint Zhang Tang's son, Zou, as the governor of Hanzhong County. He dispatched tens of thousands of people to open a more than five-hundred-mile-long slope.

古文：道果便近，而水湍石，不可漕。
现代文：果然方便而且路程近，但是水流湍急多石，粮船不能通行。
English: It turned out to be convenient and the distance was close, but the current was very fast and rocky, and the grain ship could not pass.

古文：其后庄熊罴言： 临晋民愿穿洛以溉重泉以东万余顷故卤地。
现代文：此后庄熊罴说： 临晋地区的老百姓愿意凿穿洛水筑成水渠，用来灌溉重泉以东原有的一万多顷盐碱地。
English: Afterwards, Zhuang Xiong Yao said: "The people of Linjin region are willing to dig through Luo water to build canals to irrigate more than 10,000 hectares of saline land east of the heavy spring.

古文：诚得水，可令亩十石。 
现代文：倘若果然能得水灌溉，可使每亩产量达到十石。 
English: If water can be obtained for irrigation, the output per mu can reach ten stone.

古文：于是为发卒万余人穿渠，自征引洛水至商颜山下。
现代文：于是调发兵卒一万多人开渠，自徵城引洛水到商颜山下。
English: As a result, more than 10,000 soldiers were dispatched to open canals and draw water from the city to Shangyan Mountain.

古文：岸善崩，乃凿井，深者四十余丈。
现代文：由于土岸容易塌方，于是沿流凿井，最深有的达到四十多丈。
English: Since the earth bank is prone to collapse, wells have been drilled along the river, with the deepest reaching more than forty meters.

古文：往往为井，井下相通行水。
现代文：许多地方都凿了井，井下相互连通，使水通行。
English: Wells have been dug in many places, and they are interconnected underground to allow water to flow.

古文：水颓以绝商颜，东至山岭十余里间。
现代文：水从地下穿商颜山而过，东行直到山岭之中十多里远。
English: The water passes through the Shangyan Mountains from underground and travels eastward until it is more than ten miles away in the mountains.

古文：井渠之生自此始。
现代文：从此产生了井渠。
English: This led to the creation of the well channel.

古文：穿渠得龙骨，故名曰龙首渠。
现代文：凿渠时曾掘出了龙骨，所以给此渠命名为龙首渠。
English: When the canal was dug, the keel was excavated, so the canal was named Longshou Canal.

古文：作之十余岁，渠颇通，犹未得其饶。
现代文：这条渠筑了十多年，有些地方通畅了，但是并未得到太大的好处。
English: The canal has been under construction for more than ten years, and some places have been smoothed, but it has not received much benefit.

古文：自河决瓠子后二十余岁，岁因以数不登，而梁楚之地尤甚。
现代文：自从黄河在瓠子决口后二十多年，每年土地都因水涝没有好收成，梁楚地区更为严重。
English: For more than 20 years since the Yellow River burst its banks in Zizi, the land has not had a good harvest every year due to waterlogging, and the situation in Liangchu area is even more serious.

古文：天子既封禅巡祭山川，其明年，旱，干封少雨。
现代文：天子既已封禅，并巡祭了天下名山大川，第二年，天旱，据说是上天为了要晒干泰山封土而少雨。
English: Since the Son of Heaven had sealed Zen and made a pilgrimage to the world-famous mountains and rivers, the next year, the drought, it is said, was caused by the lack of rain in order to dry the fief of Mount Tai.

古文：天子乃使汲仁、郭昌发卒数万人塞瓠子决。于是天子已用事万里沙，则还自临决河，沈白马玉璧于河，令群臣从官自将军已下皆负薪窴决河。
现代文：于是命汲仁、郭昌调发兵卒数万人堵塞瓠子决口，阻止水涝，天子从万里沙祠祷神以后，回来的路上亲临黄河决口处，沉白马、玉璧于河中祭奠河神，命令所有随从的官员自将军衔以下，都背负柴薪，填塞决口。
English: As a result, Guo Chang dispatched tens of thousands of soldiers to block the mouth of the Yangtze River and stop the flood. After praying to the gods at the Wanli Sand Temple, Tianzi personally visited the mouth of the Yellow River on his way back. Shen Bai Ma and Yubi paid tribute to the river gods in the middle of the river. He ordered all the officials below the rank of general to carry firewood and fill the mouth of the river.

古文：是时东郡烧草，以故薪柴少，而下淇园之竹以为楗。
现代文：当时东郡百姓只能烧草做饭，因为柴薪很少，因而命砍伐淇园的竹子作为塞决口的楗桩。
English: At that time, the people of Dong County could only burn grass to cook, because there was little firewood, so they were ordered to cut down the bamboo of the garden as a pile to plug the breach.

古文：天子既临河决，悼功之不成，乃作歌曰： 瓠子决兮将奈何？晧晧旰旰兮闾殚为河！
现代文：天子既然亲临决河处，悼念堵塞决口的事没有成功，作歌道： 瓠子河决啊有何办法，浩浩瀚瀚啊州闾已尽为河。
English: Since the heavenly son personally visited the place where the river was dammed, he mourned the fact that the damming of the river was not successful, and composed a song: How can the river be dammed? How can it be dammed? How can it be dammed? How can it be dammed? How can it be dammed?

古文：殚为河兮地不得宁，功无已时兮吾山平。
现代文：尽为河啊地方不安，河工无休止啊吾山已经凿平。
English: It's all about the river Ah, the region is in turmoil, river works are incessant Ah, my mountain has been leveled.

古文：吾山平兮钜野溢，鱼沸郁兮柏冬日。
现代文：吾山已平啊钜野泽外流，水族喧嚷啊迫天齐日。
English: My mountain has been flattened and the floodwaters have receded, the aquariums are noisy and the sun is setting.

古文：延道弛兮离常流，蛟龙骋兮方远游。
现代文：河道废弛啊水离常流，蛟龙驰骋啊正远游。
English: The river is slack and the water is out of the normal flow, and the dragon is galloping and swimming far away.

古文：归旧川兮神哉沛，不封禅兮安知外！
现代文：水归旧道啊神福滂沛，若不封禅啊怎知此事！
English: Returning to the old way brings great blessings. If you don't practice Zen, how will you know about it?

古文：为我谓河伯兮何不仁，泛滥不止兮愁吾人！
现代文：为我告河伯啊因何不仁，泛滥不止啊愁煞人。
English: For me to sue Hebe for being so unkind, and for the flood to continue, is heartbreaking.

古文：啮桑浮兮淮、泗满，久不反兮水维缓。 
现代文：河浸齧桑啊淮、泗水满，久不归故道啊唯愿水流稍缓。 
English: The river is full of water, but it will not return to the old way for a long time. I wish the water flow was a little slower.

古文：一曰： 河汤汤兮激潺湲，北渡污兮浚流难。
现代文：另一首是： 河水汤汤啊流急，北渡回曲啊疏浚难。
English: Another song is: The river is fast, but it is difficult to dredge the North Channel.

古文：搴长茭兮沈美玉，河伯许兮薪不属。
现代文：揭草埽于决口啊沉美玉于河，河伯纵许息水啊奈薪柴不足。
English: The grass is wilting at the mouth of the river, the river is sinking, and the river is short of water and firewood.

古文：薪不属兮卫人罪，烧萧条兮噫乎何以御水！
现代文：薪柴不足啊卫人获罪，民烧柴尚不足啊如何御水！
English: There is not enough firewood, so the guards are guilty, and there is not enough firewood for the people to burn, so how can there be water!

古文：颓林竹兮楗石灾，宣房塞兮万福来。 
现代文：伐淇园之竹啊楗阻石柱，堵塞宣房啊万福来。 
English: The bamboo in the felling park is blocking the stone pillar, and the blockage in Xuanwu is bringing good luck.

古文：于是卒塞瓠子，筑宫其上，名曰宣房宫。
现代文：于是塞住了瓠子决河，在决口处筑了一座宫殿，取名为宣房宫。
English: As a result, he dammed the Hanzi River and built a palace at the mouth of the river, which was named the Xuanfang Palace.

古文：而道河北行二渠，复禹旧迹，而梁、楚之地复宁，无水灾。
现代文：并修二条渠引河水北行，恢复了禹时的样子，梁、楚地区重又得到安宁，没有水灾了。
English: At the same time, two canals were built to divert the river water to the north, restoring the appearance of Yu Shi, and the Liang and Chu regions were once again peaceful, and there were no floods.

古文：自是之后，用事者争言水利。
现代文：从此以后，负责河渠事的官员争相建议修筑水利。
English: Since then, officials in charge of river and canal affairs have been scrambling to propose the construction of water conservancy.

古文：朔方、西河、河西、酒泉皆引河及川谷以溉田；而关中辅渠、灵轵引堵水；汝南、九江引淮；东海引钜定；泰山下引汶水：皆穿渠为溉田，各万余顷。
现代文：朔方、西河、河西、酒泉等地都引黄河以及川谷中的水灌溉农田；而关中的辅渠、灵轵渠引川中诸水；汝南、九江地区引淮河水；东海郡引钜定泽水；泰山周围地区引汶水。各自所开渠都能灌溉农田万余顷。
English: Shuofang, Xihe, Hexi, Jiuquan and other places all draw water from the Yellow River and the river valley to irrigate farmland; while Guanzhong's auxiliary canal and Linglu canal draw water from the middle of the river; Runan and Jiujiang areas draw water from the Huai River; Donghai County draws water from the Dingze River; and areas around Mount Tai draw water from the Wen River. Each canal can irrigate more than 10,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：佗小渠披山信道者，不可胜言。
现代文：其他小渠以及劈山凿通的水道，不可尽言。
English: Other small canals and waterways chiseled through the mountains are too numerous to mention.

古文：然其著者在宣房。
现代文：但工程最大的还是宣房治河的工程。
English: However, the largest project is still the project of Xuanfang river control.

古文：太史公曰：余南登庐山，观禹疏九江，遂至于会稽太湟，上姑苏，望五湖；东窥洛汭、大邳，迎河，行淮、泗、济、漯洛渠；西瞻蜀之岷山及离碓；北自龙门至于朔方。
现代文：太史公说： 我曾南行登上庐山，观看禹疏导九江的遗迹，随后到会稽太湟，登上姑苏台，眺望五湖；东行考察了洛汭、大邳，逆河而上，走过淮、泗、济、漯、洛诸水；西行瞻望了西蜀地区的岷山和离碓；北行自龙门走到朔方。
English: Taishigong said: I went to the south to climb Lushan Mountain to see the relics of Yu Zhaoduo in Jiujiang, and then went to Caijing Taigu, climbed Gu Sudai and looked at the Five Lakes; to the east, I visited Luoyang and Daxu, and walked upstream, passing Huai, Luoyang, Jizhou, Yunnan and Luozhu; to the west, I visited Lushan and Yizhuang in the West Shu region; and to the north, I walked from Longmen to Shuo.

古文：曰：甚哉，水之为利害也！
现代文：深切感到：水与人的利害关系太大了！
English: Deeply felt: the water and human interests are too great!

古文：余从负薪塞宣房，悲《瓠子》之诗而作《河渠书》。
现代文：我随从天子出行，也曾背柴薪堵塞宣房决口，为感伤天子所作鹅《瓠子》，因此写下了《河渠书》。
English: I traveled with the son of heaven, and I also carried firewood to block the mouth of Xuanwu, and the goose "Dragonfly" made for the sentimental son of heaven, so I wrote the "River Canal Book."

