古文：孟子见齐宣王曰： 所谓故国者，非谓有乔木之谓也，有世臣之谓也。
现代文：孟子拜见齐宣王，说： 我们平时说的历史悠久的国家，不是说这个国家有年代久远的树木，而是指有世代建立功勋的大臣。
English: Mencius paid a visit to King Qi Xuan and said: When we usually speak of a country with a long history, we do not mean that the country has trees with a long history, but refers to ministers who have built up merits for generations.

古文：王无亲臣矣，昔者所进，今日不知其亡也。 
现代文：可大王您现在却没有亲信的大臣了，过去所任用的一些人，现在也都没有职位不知到哪里去了。 
English: But Your Majesty, you now have no trusted ministers, and some of the people you appointed in the past no longer have positions, and I don't know where they are.

古文：王曰： 吾何以识其不才而舍之？ 
现代文：齐宣王说： 我怎么才能识别出那些没有才能的人而不用他呢？ 
English: Qi Xuanwang said: How can I identify those without talent without using him?

古文：曰： 国君进贤，如不得已，将使卑逾尊，疏逾戚，可不慎与？
现代文：孟子回答说： 国君选用贤才，在不得已的时候，甚至会把原本地位低的提拔到地位高的人之上，把原本关系疏远的提拔到关系亲近的人之上，这种事能不慎重吗？
English: Mencius replied, "Can a sovereign be careless in selecting a man of merit, and in a time of desperation even promote a man of low position to a higher position, and a man of distant relation to one of close relation?

古文：左右皆曰贤，未可也；诸大夫皆曰贤，未可也；国人皆曰贤，然后察之；见贤焉，然后用之。
现代文：因此，左右亲信都说某人贤能，不可轻信；众位大夫都说某人好，还是不可轻信；全国的人都说某人贤能，然后去考察他，发现他是真正的贤才，再任用他。
English: Therefore, if one's close friends and relatives all say that someone is capable, one should not be gullible; if many doctors say that someone is good, one should still not be gullible; if people all over the country say that someone is capable, then they should examine him, find out that he is a true talent, and then appoint him.

古文：左右皆曰不可，勿听；诸大夫皆曰不可，勿听；国人皆曰不可，然后察之；见不可焉，然后去之。
现代文：左右亲信都说某人不行，不可轻信；众位大夫都说某人不行，还是不可轻信；全国的人都说某人不行，然后去考查他，发现他真不行，再罢免他。
English: If one's close friends and relatives all say that someone is no good, one should not be gullible; if all the doctors say that someone is no good, one should still not be gullible; if all the people in the country say that someone is no good, then go and examine him, find out that he really is no good, and then dismiss him.

古文：左右皆曰可杀，勿听；诸大夫皆曰可杀，勿听；国人皆曰可杀，然后察之；见可杀焉，然后杀之。
现代文：左右亲信都说某人该杀，不可轻信；众位大夫都说某人该杀，还是不可轻信；全国的人都说某人该杀，然后去考查他，发现他真该杀，再杀掉他。
English: If all your friends and relatives say that someone should be killed, don't believe them; if all the doctors say that someone should be killed, don't believe them; if all the people in the country say that someone should be killed, then go and investigate him, find out that he really should be killed, and then kill him.

古文：故曰，国人杀之也。
现代文：所以说，是全国人杀的他。
English: Therefore, he was killed by the whole nation.

古文：如此，然后可以为民父母。 
现代文：这样做，才可以做老百姓的父母官。 
English: Only in this way can they be the parents of the people.

