古文：起强圉协洽五月，尽著雍涒滩二月，不满一年。
现代文：起强圉协洽正月，尽四月，不满一年。
English: The new year, the end of April, less than a year.

古文：高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝中天福十二年五月，乙酉塑，永康王兀欲召延寿及张砺、和凝、李崧、冯道于所馆饮酒。
现代文：后汉高祖天福十二年五月，乙酉朔，永康王兀欲召请赵延寿及张砺、和凝、李崧、冯道等人到自己的馆舍饮酒。
English: Later, in May of the 12th year of the Han Dynasty, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Tianfu, Yongkang Wang Yao wanted to invite Zhao Yanshou, Zhang Xuan, He Jie, Li Qian, Feng Dao and others to drink alcohol at his mansion.

古文：兀欲妻素以兄事延寿，兀欲从容谓延寿曰： 妹自上国来，宁欲见之乎？ 
现代文：兀欲的妻子素来以兄长事奉赵延寿，兀欲就从容地对赵延寿说： 妹妹远从契丹来，难道不想见见她吗？ 
English: Xun Zhi's wife had always served Zhao Yan Shou as his elder brother. Xun Zhi calmly said to Zhao Yan Shou, "My sister has come all the way from Qidan, don't you want to see her?"

古文：延寿欣然与之俱入。
现代文：赵延寿欣然和他一起走入后堂。
English: Zhao Yanshou gladly walked into the back hall with him.

古文：良久，兀欲出，谓砺等曰： 燕王谋反，适已锁之矣。 
现代文：过了许久，兀欲出来，对张砺等人说： 燕王蓄谋反叛，刚才已经把他锁起来了。 
English: After a long time, the stork wanted to come out and said to Zhang Ye and the others: "Yan Wang is plotting to rebel. He has just been locked up.

古文：又曰： 先帝在汴时，遗我一筹，许我知南朝军国。
现代文：又说： 先帝在大梁时，留给我一个计划，允许我主持南朝军国大事。
English: He also said, "When the former emperor was in Dalian, he left me a plan to allow me to preside over the military affairs of the Southern Dynasty.

古文：近者临崩，别无遗诏。
现代文：近日驾崩之前，没有其他遗诏。
English: There were no other wills before his recent death.

古文：而燕王擅自知南朝军国，岂理邪！ 
现代文：而燕王擅自主持南朝军国大事，岂有此理！ 
English: However, there is no reason why Yan Wang should hold the military affairs of the Southern Dynasty without authorization!

古文：下令： 延寿亲党，皆释不问。 
现代文：下令道： 赵延寿的亲友朋党，全都开释不予查问。 
English: The order said: Zhao Yanshou's relatives, friends and party members were all released without questioning.

古文：间一日，兀欲至待贤馆受蕃、汉官谒贺，笑谓张砺等曰： 燕王果于此礼上，吾以铁骑围之，诸公亦不免矣。 
现代文：隔了一天，兀欲到待贤馆接受蕃、汉官员的拜贺，笑着对张砺等人说： 燕王如果真的在这里行这种礼仪，我就将用铁甲骑兵包围此地，诸位也就难免遭殃了。 
English: A day later, Zou wanted to go to the Hall of the Wise Men to receive the greetings of Zou and Han officials, and said to Zhang Zou and others with a smile: "If King Yan really performs this kind of etiquette here, I will surround this place with armored cavalry, and you will inevitably suffer.

古文：后数日，集蕃、汉之臣于府署，宣契丹主遗制。
现代文：几天以后，集中蕃、汉大臣到恒州府衙，宣读契丹主的遗诏。
English: A few days later, the central government and Han ministers went to Hengzhou Prefecture to read out the last will and testament of the Qidan Lord.

古文：其略曰： 永康王，大圣皇帝之嫡孙，人皇王之长子，太后钟爱，群情允归，可于中京即皇帝位。 
现代文：遗诏大略说： 永康王，是大圣皇帝的嫡长孙，是人皇王的长子，太后所钟爱，群情所归，可以在中京即皇帝位。 
English: The will said in outline: King Yongkang, the eldest legitimate grandson of the Great Holy Emperor, is the eldest son of the human king, loved by the empress dowager and loved by the crowd, and can be the emperor in Beijing.

古文：于是始举哀成服。
现代文：于是开始为先帝举哀，穿起丧服。
English: So they began to mourn for the former emperor and put on mourning clothes.

古文：既而易吉服见群臣，不复行丧，歌吹之声不绝于内。
现代文：然后又换上吉服接见群臣，不再行丧礼，歌声乐声在署内响个不停。
English: Then he changed into a kichifuku to receive the ministers, and no longer performed the funeral rites. The sound of singing and music rang out incessantly in the station.

古文：辛巳，以绛州防御使王晏为建雄节度使。
现代文：辛巳，后汉高祖任命绛州防御使王晏为建雄节度使。
English: Soon after, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Gao Zu, appointed the defense minister of Bozhou, Wang Qi, as Jianxiong's special envoy.

古文：帝集群臣庭议进取，诸将咸请出师井陉，攻取镇、魏，先定河北，则河南拱手自服。
现代文：后汉高祖召集群臣在朝廷商议进军路线。众将领都建议从井陉出兵，攻取镇、魏二州，先平定河北，河南就会自己拱手称臣。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty summoned a group of courtiers to the imperial court to discuss the march route. The generals all suggested that they should send troops from Jingye to capture the town and Wei Erzhou, and first pacify Hebei. Henan would then surrender to the courtiers.

古文：帝欲自石会趋上党，郭威曰： 虏主虽死，党众犹盛，各据坚城。
现代文：高祖想从石会出兵，进军上党。
English: Gaozu wanted to send troops from the Stone Association to march into Shang Party.

古文：我出河北，兵少路迂，傍无应援，若群虏合势，共击我军，进则遮前，退则邀后，粮饷路绝，此危道也。
现代文：郭威说： 契丹主虽然死了，可是党羽部众还很强盛，各自占据坚固的城池；我们出兵河北，士兵缺少，道路迂回，帝边没有接应救援，如果这些胡虏联合攻击我军，那么我军前进则受阻击，后退，则受拦截，运粮道路也会断绝，这是条危险的道路。
English: Guo Wei said: Although the Khitan lord is dead, the party and its followers are still very strong, each occupying a strong city; we sent troops to Hebei, soldiers are lacking, roads are detoured, and there is no rescue on the imperial side. If these Khurus jointly attack our army, then our army's advance will be blocked, retreat will be intercepted, and the grain transportation road will be cut off. This is a dangerous road.

古文：上党山路险涩，粟少民残，无以供亿，亦不可由。
现代文：上党的山路艰险难走，沿路粮少民穷，没有供给，也不能走。
English: The mountain road to the top of the party is arduous and dangerous, along the road there is little food and the people are poor, there is no supply, and it can not go.

古文：近者陕、晋二镇，相继款附，引兵从之，万无一失，不出两旬，洛、汴定矣。 
现代文：近来陕、晋二镇相继向我们投诚归附，如果率兵从这里走，是万无一失的，不出二十天，洛阳、大梁就可平定了。 
English: Recently, the towns of Shaanxi and Jin have successively surrendered to us. If you lead the troops from here, it is foolproof. Within twenty days, Luoyang and Dalian can be leveled.

古文：帝曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：高祖说： 爱卿所说极是。 
English: Emperor Gao said: Just as you said.

古文：苏逢吉等曰： 史弘肇大军已屯上党，群虏继遁，不若出天井，抵孟津为便。 
现代文：苏逢吉等人说： 史弘肇的大军已驻札在上党，胡虏们相继逃跑，不如从天井出兵，奔赴孟津最为便捷。 
English: Su Fengji and others said: Shi Hongzhao's large army has been stationed in Shangdang, and the Khuriks have fled one after another. It is better to send troops from the ceiling, and it is most convenient to rush to Mengjin.

古文：司天奏： 太岁在午，不利南行。
现代文：司天官上奏道： 太岁星在午的方位，不利于南行。
English: The chief magistrate gave the following report: The position of the Taisei Star at noon is not conducive to traveling south.

古文：宜由晋、绛抵陕。 
现代文：应该从晋、绛二州进军到达陕州。 
English: It is necessary to march from the two states of Jin and Qin to reach Shaanxi.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：高祖听从了这种意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：辛卯，诏以十二日发北京，告谕诸道。
现代文：辛卯，诏令十二日从北京发兵，向各道宣布通知。
English: On the twelfth day of Xinwu, the emperor issued an order to send troops from Beijing and announced the notice to all provinces.

古文：甲午，以太原尹崇为北京留守，以赵州刺史李存瑰为副留守，河东幕僚真定李骧为少尹，牙将太原蔚进为马步指挥使以佐之。
现代文：甲午后汉高祖任命太原尹刘崇为北京留守，赵州刺史李存为副留守，河东幕僚真定人李骧为少尹，牙将太原人蔚进为马步指挥使来辅助他们。
English: In the afternoon of A, Han Gao Zu appointed Taiyuan's Yin Liu Chong to stay in Beijing, Zhao Zhou's Zhishi Li Cun to stay as a deputy, the East Hedong staff member Zhending's Li Wei to stay as Shao Yin, and the commander of Taiyuan's Wei Jin to stay as Ma Bu commander to assist them.

古文：存瑰，唐庄宗之从弟也。
现代文：李存是后唐庄宗的堂弟。
English: Li Cun is a cousin of the late Tang Dynasty Zhuozong.

古文：是日，刘晞弃洛阳，奔大梁。
现代文：这一天，刘放弃洛阳逃奔大梁。
English: On this day, Liu abandoned Luoyang and fled to Daliang.

古文：武安节度副使、天策府都尉、领镇南节度使马希广，楚文昭王希范之母弟也，性谨顺，希范爱之，使判内外诸司事。
现代文：武安节度副使、天策府都尉、代理镇南节度使马希广是楚国文昭王马希范同母的弟弟，性情恭谨温顺，马希范喜欢他，让他处理内外各司的事务。
English: Deputy envoy of the Wu'an Sect, lieutenant of the Tianzefu, and acting deputy of the Zhenan Sect, Ma Xiguang was the younger brother of the same mother of the King of Chu, Ma Xifan. He was polite and meek. Ma Xifan liked him and let him handle the affairs of all departments at home and abroad.

古文：壬辰夜，希范卒，将佐议所立。
现代文：壬辰夜里，马希范去世，将领们商议拥立人选。
English: In the early hours of the morning, Ma Xifan passed away, and the generals were discussing who to appoint.

古文：都指挥所张少敌，都押牙袁友恭，以武平节度使知永州事希萼，于希范诸弟为最长，请立之。
现代文：都指挥使张少敌、都押牙袁友恭，认为武平节度使兼主持永州事务的马希萼，在马希范兄弟中年龄最大，建议立马希萼。
English: Zhang Shaoqi, the commander-in-chief, and Yuan Youqiong, the deputy commander-in-chief, believed that Ma Xicel, Wu Ping's ceremonial envoy who also presided over the affairs of Yongzhou, was the oldest among the Ma Xifan brothers, and recommended Ma Xicel immediately.

古文：长直都指挥使刘彦瑫、天策府学士李弘皋、邓懿文、小门使杨涤皆欲立希广。
现代文：长直都指挥使刘彦，天策府学士李弘皋、邓懿文，小门使杨涤，都希望立马希广。
English: Liu Yan, the commanding officer of Changzhidu, Li Hongzhu, the bachelor of Tianzefu, Deng Yowen, and Yang Ya, the small gatekeeper, all hope that Ma Xiguang will succeed.

古文：张少敌曰： 永州齿长而性刚，必不为都尉之下明矣。
现代文：张少敌说： 马希萼年长而为人刚强，必定不肯屈居都尉马希广之下是很明显的。
English: Zhang Shaoqi said: Ma Xicai is old and strong, and it is obvious that he will not yield to Captain Ma Xiguang.

古文：必立都尉，当思长策以制永州，使帖然不动则可。不然，社稷危矣。 
现代文：如果一定要立马希广，就要想个长远之计来控制马希萼，使他顺从不动就可以，如果不这样，国家社稷就危险了。 
English: If it is necessary to immediately increase the number of horses, it is necessary to think of a long-term plan to control the horse, so that he can be obediently immobile. If not, the national society will be in danger.

古文：彦瑫等不从。
现代文：刘彦等不答应。
English: Liu Yan and others did not agree.

古文：天策府学士拓跋恒曰： 三十五郎虽判军府之政，然三十郎居长，请遣使以礼让之。不然，必起争端。 
现代文：天策府学士拓跋恒说： 三十五郎马希广即使主理军政大事，但三十郎马希萼年龄居长，也应派遣使者以礼相让；不然，一定会起争端。 
English: "Thirty-five-year-old Ma Xiguang is in charge of military and political affairs, but thirty-five-year-old Ma Xiguang is too old, so he should send an envoy to make concessions; otherwise, disputes will surely arise.

古文：彦瑫等皆曰： 今日军政在手，天与不取，使它人得之，异日吾辈安所自容乎！ 
现代文：刘彦等人都说： 现在军政大权在手，上天赐予而不取，让他人得到，今后我们这些人哪有安身之处！ 
English: Liu Yan and others all said: Now the military and political power is in our hands, God gives and does not take away, let others get it, in the future there is no place for us people to live!

古文：希广懦弱，不能自决。乙未，彦瑫等称希范遗命，共立之。
现代文：马希广为人懦弱，不能自己决断；乙未，刘彦等称有马希范遗命，共同拥立马希广。
English: Ma Xiguang is weak and cannot decide for himself; Yi Wei, Liu Yan and others said that Ma Xifan left a will, and they jointly supported Ma Xiguang.

古文：张少敌退而叹曰： 祸其始此乎！ 
现代文：张少敌退下来叹息道： 大祸就要从这里开始了！ 
English: Zhang Shaoqi retreated and sighed: The great disaster is about to begin from here!

古文：与拓跋恒皆称疾不出。
现代文：从此和拓跋恒都称有病，不再出门。
English: Since then, both he and Tuoba Heng have claimed to be ill and no longer go out.

古文：丙申，帝发太原，自阴地关出晋、绛。
现代文：丙申，后汉高祖从太原起兵，从阴地关开往晋、绛二州。
English: Bishen, the ancestor of the later Han Dynasty, started from Taiyuan and went to Jin and Shan states from Yidiguan.

古文：丁酉，史弘肇奏克泽州。
现代文：丁酉，史弘肇奏报攻克泽州。
English: Ding Rong and Shi Hong made a report to invade Khezhou.

古文：始，弘肇攻泽州，刺史翟令奇固守不下。
现代文：开始，史弘肇进攻泽州，刺史翟令奇死守城池，攻不下来。
English: At the beginning, Shi Hongzhao attacked Zeshu, while Zhishu Qiling strangely defended the castle and could not be captured.

古文：帝以弘肇兵少，欲召还。
现代文：后汉高祖认为是史弘肇兵少，想召回撤兵。
English: Later, Han Gao Zu believed that Shi Hong had fewer soldiers and wanted to recall the withdrawal.

古文：苏逢吉、杨邠曰： 今陕、晋、河阳皆已向化，崔廷勋、耿崇美朝夕遁去；若召弘肇还，则河南人心动摇，虏势复壮矣。 
现代文：苏逢吉、杨说： 现在陕、晋、河阳都已归顺我朝，崔廷勋、耿崇美早晚要逃跑，如果召回史弘肇，那么河南就会人心动摇，而胡虏的气焰会再度嚣张起来。 
English: Su Fengji and Yang said, "Now that Shaanxi, Jin, and Heyang have all surrendered to our dynasty, Cui Tingxun and Geng Chongmei will have to flee sooner or later. If Shi Hongzhao is recalled, then Henan will be shaken, and the arrogance of Huru will rise again."

古文：帝未决，使人谕指于弘肇。弘肇曰： 兵已及此，势如破竹，可进不可退。 
现代文：后汉高祖没决定，就派人将此事告诉史弘肇，史弘肇说： 军队已到达此地，就像势如破竹，只能前进而不能后退。 
English: After the Han Emperor Gaozu did not decide, he sent someone to tell Shi Hongzhao about the matter. Shi Hongzhao said: The army has arrived here, it is as if they have broken through, they can only advance but not retreat.

古文：与逢吉等议合。帝乃从之。
现代文：与苏逢吉等人的建议相吻合，后汉高祖于是就听从了这个意见。
English: Su Fengji's and other people's suggestions coincided, and the late Han Emperor Gaozu then listened to this opinion.

古文：弘肇遣部将李万超说令奇，令奇乃降。弘肇以万超权知泽州。
现代文：史弘肇派部将李万超前去说服崔令奇，令奇便归降了，史弘肇命李万超代理主持泽州事务。
English: Shi Hongzhao sent Li Wanchao forward to persuade Cui Lingqi, Lingqi then capitulated, and Shi Hongzhao appointed Li Wanchao to act as acting chairman of Zhezhou affairs.

古文：崔廷勋、耿崇美、奚王拽剌合兵逼河阳，张遇帅众数千救之，战于南阪，败死。
现代文：崔廷勋、耿崇美、奚王拽刺联兵逼近河阳城，张遇率领几千人马前往救援，在南阪和敌军展开战斗，战败而死。
English: Cui Tingxun, Geng Chongmei, and Shao Wang led a joint force of dragons to approach Hayao City. Zhang Yutong led several thousand horses to the rescue, fought with the enemy army in Nanhan, and was defeated and died.

古文：武行德出战，亦败，闭城自守。
现代文：武行德从河阳城中出来助战，也战败了，退回城中闭门自守。
English: Wu Xingde came from the city of Heyang to help in the battle, but was also defeated and returned to the city to defend himself behind closed doors.

古文：拽剌欲攻之，廷勋曰： 今北军已去，得此何用！
现代文：拽刺想要攻城，崔廷勋说： 现在契丹的军队已向北撤退了，得到这座城池有什么用！
English: When he wanted to attack the city, Cui Tingxun said: Now that the Khitan army has retreated to the north, what is the use of getting this city!

古文：且杀一夫犹可惜，况一城乎！ 
现代文：而且杀死一个人还觉得可惜，更何况毁灭一个城呢！ 
English: And it is a shame to kill a man, let alone destroy a city!

古文：闻弘肇已得泽州，乃释河阳，还保怀州。
现代文：听说史弘肇已取得泽州，于是就放弃河阳，退守怀州。
English: Hearing that Shi Hongzhao had captured Zezhou, he abandoned Heyang and retreated to defend Waizhou.

古文：弘肇将至，廷勋等拥众北遁，过卫州，大掠而去。
现代文：史弘肇军队临近泽州，崔廷勋等人率领众军向北逃走，路过卫州，大肆抢掠而离去。
English: Shi Hongzhao's army was close to Zezhou, and Cui Tingxun and others led the army to flee north, passing through Weizhou, looting and leaving.

古文：契丹在河南者相继北去，弘肇引兵与武行德合。
现代文：契丹在河南的军队就相继逃往北方。史弘肇领兵和武行德会合。
English: The Khitan army in Henan fled to the north one after another. Shi Hongzhao led the troops and Wu Xingde met.

古文：弘肇为人，沉毅寡言，御众严整，将校小不从命，立挝杀之。士卒所过，犯民田及系马于树者，皆斩之。
现代文：史弘肇为人稳重坚毅、沉默寡言，统领军队，号令严明、军纪整肃，大小将领稍不服从命令，立刻打死；士兵经过的地方，凡侵犯百姓田地和在树上系马的，一律斩首。
English: Shi Hongzhao was a man of stability, fortitude, and taciturnity. He led the army, issued strict orders, and enforced military discipline. Any general, big or small, who slightly disobeyed orders was immediately killed. Wherever soldiers passed, they would behead anyone who encroached on people's fields or tied horses to trees.

古文：军中惕息，莫敢犯令，故所向必克。
现代文：军队中人人小心谨慎，不敢违犯军令，所以所向无敌、攻无不克。
English: Everyone in the army is cautious and does not dare to violate military orders, so they are invincible and invincible.

古文：帝自晋阳安行入洛及汴，兵不血刃，皆弘肇之力也。
现代文：高祖从晋阳一路平安进入洛阳和大梁，士兵的刀枪没沾过血，都是靠了史弘肇之力。
English: Gao Zu entered Luoyang and Dalian safely all the way from Jinyang. The soldiers' swords and guns were not stained with blood, all thanks to Shi Hongzhao's strength.

古文：帝由是倚爱之。
现代文：高祖从此更加倚重、喜爱他了。
English: Since then, Gaozu has come to rely on and love him even more.

古文：辛丑，帝至霍邑，遣使谕河中节度使赵匡赞，仍以契丹囚其父延寿告之。
现代文：辛丑，后汉高祖到达霍邑，派使臣招谕河中节度使赵匡赞，并把契丹囚禁他父亲赵延寿的事告诉他。
English: Xin Qiu, the late Han Emperor Gaozu, arrived in Huoyun and sent an envoy to invite Huanzhong Jiedu to make Zhao Kuangzhan, and told him about the Qidan's imprisonment of his father Zhao Yanshou.

古文：滋德宫有宫人五十馀人，萧翰欲取之，宦者张环不与。
现代文：德宫内有五十多名宫女，萧翰想要带走，宦官张环不给。
English: There are more than fifty maids of honour in the Imperial Palace. Xiao Han wants to take them away, but Zhang Huan, the eunuch, won't let him.

古文：翰破锁夺宫人，执环，烧铁灼之，腹烂而死。
现代文：萧翰砸坏宫门的锁。抢走宫女，抓起张环，用烧红的铁烙他，直把肚子烫烂而死。
English: Xiao Han broke the lock of the palace gate. He snatched the concubine, grabbed Zhang Huan, branded him with a red-hot iron, scalded his stomach to death.

古文：初，翰闻帝拥兵而南，欲北归。恐中国无主，必大乱，己不得从容而去。
现代文：当初，萧翰听说后汉高祖率兵南下，想向北回国，因为怕中原无主后，必然大乱，自己就不能从容回国了。
English: At first, Xiao Han heard that Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty had led his troops to the south, and he wanted to return to the north, because he was afraid that if the Central Plains were left without a master, there would inevitably be chaos, and he would not be able to return to the country.

古文：时唐明宗子许王从益与王淑妃在洛阳，翰遣高谟翰迎之，矫称契丹主命，又以从益知南朝军国事，召己赴恒州。
现代文：当时后唐明宗的儿子许王李从益和王淑妃在洛阳，萧翰派高谟翰去迎接他们，假称契丹主的命令，让李从益主持南朝军国大事，召自己去恒州。
English: At that time, Xu Wang, the son of Tang Mingzong, Li Congyi and Wang Shufei were in Luoyang. Xiao Han sent Gao Muhan to meet them, pretending to be the order of the Qidan Lord, asking Li Congyi to preside over the military and national affairs of the Southern Dynasty and summoning himself to Hengzhou.

古文：淑妃、从益匿于徽陵下宫，不得已而出。
现代文：王淑妃和李从益藏在后唐明宗徽陵的下宫里，不得已才出来。
English: Wang Shuxi and Li Congyizang were hiding in the lower palace of Hui Mausoleum of the late Tang and Ming Dynasties before they had to come out.

古文：至大梁，翰立以为帝，帅诸酋长拜之，以礼部尚书王松、御史中丞赵远为宰相，前宣徽使甄城翟光鄴为枢密使，左金吾大将军王景崇为宣徽使，以北来指挥使刘祚权侍卫亲军都指挥使，充在京巡检。
现代文：到了大梁，萧翰立李从益为皇帝，并领着众酋长向他朝拜。命礼部尚书王松、御史中丞赵远为宰相，命前宣徽使甄城人翟光邺为枢密使，命左金吾大将军王景崇为宣徽使，命北来指挥使刘祚代理侍卫亲军都指挥使，充任在京巡检。
English: When he arrived in Daliang, Xiao Han made Li Congyi the emperor and led all the chiefs to pay homage to him. He appointed Wang Song of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies and Zhao Yuan of the Ministry of History to be the prime ministers, Zhen Guangyao of the People's Procuratorate to be the imperial envoy, Wang Jingsong of the Great General of the Left Jingu to be the envoy of the Great General of the People's Procuratorate, Liu Hui to be the acting commander of the bodyguards to be the acting commander of the procuratorate, and to serve as the inspector in Beijing.

古文：松，徽之子也。
现代文：王松是王徽的儿子。
English: Wang Song is Wang Hui's son.

古文：百官谒见淑妃，淑妃泣曰： 吾母子单弱如此，而为诸公所推，是祸吾家也！ 
现代文：文武百官拜见王淑妃，淑妃哭泣道： 我们母子二人这样孤单弱小，却被你们各位推上这个位置，这是祸害我家呵！ 
English: Hundreds of officials and generals came to see Wang Shufei. Shufei wept and said, "Our mother and son are so lonely and weak, but you all have pushed them into this position. This is the scourge of my family!"

古文：翰留燕兵千人守诸门，为从益宿卫。
现代文：萧翰留下一千名燕兵，把守各个大门，并作为李从益的值宿警卫。
English: Xiao Han left a thousand Yan soldiers to guard the various gates and serve as guards on duty for Li Congyi.

古文：壬寅，翰及刘晞辞行，从益饯于北郊。
现代文：壬寅，萧翰和刘辞行，李从益在北郊为二人饯行。
English: Ren Yin, Xiao Han and Liu resigned, and Li Cong Yi went on a two-man trip in the northern suburbs.

古文：遣使召高行周于宋州，武行德于河阳，皆不至。淑妃惧，召大臣谋之曰： 吾母子为萧翰所逼，分当灭亡。
现代文：李从益派遣使者到宋州召高行周、到河阳召武行德，都不到，王淑妃害怕，召集大臣商量道： 我们母子被萧翰逼迫，本当去死。
English: Li Congyi sent emissaries to Songzhou to summon Gao Xing Zhou and to Heyang to summon Wu Xing De, but they did not arrive. Wang Shuxi was afraid and summoned the ministers to discuss the matter, saying: Our mother and son were persecuted by Xiao Han and really went to die.

古文：诸公无罪，宜早迎新主，自求多福，勿以吾母子为意！ 
现代文：但你们都没有罪，应该及早准备迎接新的君主，为自己多多求福，不要以我们母子为念了！ 
English: But you are not guilty, you should prepare early to welcome the new monarch, seek more blessings for yourself, and stop thinking about our mother and son!

古文：众感其言，皆未忍叛去。
现代文：大家被她的一番话所感动，都不忍背叛他们而离去。
English: Everyone was so moved by her words that they couldn't bear to betray them and leave.

古文：或曰： 今集诸营，不减五千，与燕兵并力坚守一月，北救必至。 
现代文：有人说： 现在集中各营兵马，不少于五千，和燕兵合力坚守一个月，北边必有救兵来到。 
English: Some people said: Now concentrate the battalions of soldiers and horses, no less than five thousand, and join forces with the Yan soldiers to hold out for a month, and there will surely be rescuers coming from the north.

古文：淑妃曰： 吾母子亡国之馀，安敢与人争天下！
现代文：淑妃说： 我们母子本身就是亡国的苟活之人，怎么敢和别人争夺天下！
English: Shu Fei said, "Our mother and son are themselves people who yearn for the death of the country. How dare they compete with others for the world!"

古文：不幸至此，死生惟人所裁。
现代文：已经不幸到这个地步了，生死就任人去裁夺吧。
English: It's unfortunate that it's come to this, but it's up to the person in charge to decide.

古文：若新主见察，当知我无所负。
现代文：如果新的君主明察这一切，应当知道我们无负于人。
English: If the new sovereign sees all this, he must know that we are not inferior to anyone.

古文：今更为计画，则祸及他人，阖城涂炭，终何益乎！ 
现代文：如果现在再要计划用兵，那就会祸及他人，造成满城生灵涂炭，最终又有什么好处呢？ 
English: If we were to plan to use troops again now, it would harm others and create a city full of charred corpses. In the end, what good would it do?

古文：众犹欲拒守，三司使文安刘审交曰： 余燕人，岂不为燕兵计！
现代文：众大臣还要坚守城池抵抗，三司使文安人刘审交说： 我是燕人，还能不为燕兵着想！
English: The ministers also had to stand firm in their resistance, and the Third Division sent Liu Xunjun, a citizen of Wen'an, to say: I am a Swallow Man, how can I not think about the Swallow Soldiers!

古文：顾事有不可如何者。
现代文：但事情有无可奈何的。
English: But there is no way around it.

古文：今城中大乱之馀，公私穷竭，遗民无几，若复受围一月，无噍类矣。
现代文：现在城中大乱以后，无论官家私人都穷到了底，留下的百姓没多少，如果再被围一个月，那就没有能喘气的人。
English: Now, after the turmoil in the city, no matter whether it is the officials or the private people, they are all poor to the bottom, and there are not many people left. If they are surrounded for another month, there will be no one who can breathe.

古文：愿诸公勿复言，一从太妃处分。 
现代文：希望大家不要再说，一切都听从太妃的处理决定。 
English: I hope everyone will stop saying that everything is subject to Toffee's decision.

古文：乃用赵远、翟光鄴策，称梁王，知军国事。遣使奉表称臣迎帝，请早赴京师，仍出居私第。
现代文：于是采用赵远、崔光邺的建议，李从益改称梁王，主持这里的军国之事；派出使者向后汉高祖奉表称臣迎帝，请他早日前来京师，并从宫中搬出住到私宅。
English: Therefore, using the suggestion of Zhao Yuan and Cui Guangyao, Li Congyi changed his name to Liang Wang and presided over the military affairs here; he sent an envoy to the later Han Emperor Gao Zu and asked him to come to Beijing earlier and move out of the palace to live in a private house.

古文：甲辰，帝至晋州。
现代文：甲辰，后汉高祖到达晋州。
English: Jia Chen, the progenitor of the later Han Dynasty, arrived in Jinzhou.

古文：契丹主兀欲以契丹主德光有子在国，己以兄子袭位，又无述律太后之命，擅自立，内不自安。
现代文：契丹主兀欲因为先帝耶律德光有儿子留在辽国，而自己是代替哥哥的儿子承袭皇位，又没有述律太后的命令，擅自即位，所以内心不安。
English: Because the previous ruler, Yerut Deqin, had a son who remained in Liao, and he wanted to succeed to the throne in place of his brother's son, without the order of the Dowager Empress Dowager, he was uneasy.

古文：初，契丹主阿保机卒于勃海，述律太后杀酋长及诸将凡数百人。
现代文：当初，契丹主阿保机死于勃海，述律太后杀死酋长和众将领约几百人。
English: At first, the Khitan chief, Abokhi, died in the Bohai Sea, and the Dowager Empress Surya killed about several hundred chiefs and generals.

古文：契丹主德光复卒于境外，酋长诸将惧死，乃谋奉契丹主兀欲勒兵北归。
现代文：这次契丹主德光又死于国外，酋长和众将们怕死，于是策划尊奉契丹主兀欲统率军队向北回国。
English: This time, the Khitan lord Deguang died abroad, and the chiefs and generals were afraid of death, so they planned to return to the north with the army led by the revered Khitan lord Zang You.

古文：契丹主以安国节度使麻荅为中京留守，以前武州刺史高奉明为安国节度使。
现代文：契丹主兀欲命安国节度使麻为中京留守，命前武州刺史高奉明为安国节度使。
English: The Khitan lord, wishing to save his life and secure the country's independence, had Ma stay in the capital. Before his death, Buzhou ruler Gao Fengming was appointed as the envoy to secure the country's independence.

古文：晋文武官及士卒悉留于恒州，独以翰林学士徐台符、李澣及后宫、宦者、教坊人自随。
现代文：后晋的文武官员和士卒全都留在恒州，只让翰林学士徐台符、李浣以及后宫、宦官、教坊的舞乐人员跟随自己。
English: Later Jin's civil and military officials and soldiers all stayed in Hengzhou, only allowing Hanlin scholars Xu Taifu and Li Xuan, as well as the harem, eunuchs, and the dance staff of the teaching hall to follow them.

古文：乙巳，发真定。
现代文：乙巳，从真定出发。
English: Now, let's start from Shinjuku.

古文：帝之即位也，绛州刺史李从朗与契丹将成霸卿等拒命，帝遣西南面招讨使、护国节度使白文珂攻之，未下。
现代文：后汉高祖即位后，绛州刺史李从朗和契丹将军成霸卿等人抗拒诏命。后汉高祖派西南面招讨使、护国节度使白文珂攻打他们，但未能攻克。
English: After Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty ascended to the throne, people such as Zhangzhou Zishi Li Conglang and Khitan General Cheng Baqing resisted the imperial edict. Emperor Gaozu dispatched the southwestern envoys and the national guard to have Bai Wenke attack them, but they were unable to defeat him.

古文：帝至城下，命诸军四布而勿攻，以利害谕之。
现代文：高祖来到城下，命令各部军队四面围住但不攻城，向李从朗等人晓以利害，劝谕归降。
English: Gaozhu came to the city and ordered the armies to surround the city on all sides but not to attack it. He advised Li Conglang and others to surrender.

古文：戊申，从朗举城降。
现代文：戊申，李从朗开城投降。
English: Wushin, Li surrenders from Langkaicheng.

古文：帝命亲将分护诸门，士卒一人毋得入。以偏将薛琼为防御使。
现代文：后汉高祖命令只派亲将分守各门，士卒一人也不许入城；命偏将薛琼为防御使。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty ordered that only his generals should be assigned to guard each gate, and that no soldiers should enter the city; instead, he ordered Xue Qiong to be the defense envoy.

古文：辛亥，帝至陕州，赵晖自御帝马而入。
现代文：辛亥，后汉高祖到达陕州，赵晖亲自牵皇帝的马进城。
English: In Xinhai, after the Han Emperor Gaozu arrived in Shaanxi, Zhao Jun personally led the emperor's horse into the city.

古文：壬子，至石壕，汴人有来迎者。
现代文：壬子，抵达石壕，大梁百姓有远来迎接的。
English: Jinsi, arrived at the stone ditch, the beam people have come from far away to meet.

古文：六月，甲寅朔，萧翰至恒州，与麻荅以铁骑围张砺之第。
现代文：六月，甲寅朔，萧翰来到恒州，与麻合派铁甲骑兵包围了张砺的住宅。
English: In June, Gao Yinshuo and Xiao Han came to Hengzhou and surrounded Zhang Ye's residence with Mahe's armored cavalry.

古文：砺方卧病，出见之，翰数之曰： 汝何故言于先帝，云胡人不可以为节度使？
现代文：张砺正卧病在床，出来接见他们，萧翰就数落他说： 你为什么对先帝说胡人不可以作节度使？
English: Zhang Ye was ill in bed and came out to meet them. Xiao Han counted him down and said: "Why did you tell the former emperor that the Hu people could not serve as emissaries?

古文：又，吾为宣武节度使，且国舅也，汝在中书乃帖我！
现代文：还有，我是宣武节度使，而且是国舅，你在中书就胆敢告我！
English: Moreover, I am the ambassador of the Xuanwu Festival, and also the uncle of the country, you dare to accuse me in the middle of the book!

古文：又，先帝留我守汴州，令我处宫中，汝以为不可。
现代文：还有，先帝留我守大梁，让我住在宫里，你却说不行。
English: Also, the former emperor left me to guard the girders and let me live in the palace, but you said no.

古文：又，谮我及解里于先帝，云解里好掠人财，我好掠人子女。
现代文：还有，在先帝面前诬告我和解里，说解里爱抢人的财物，说我爱抢人的女子。
English: Also, in front of the former emperor, I was falsely accused of being a conciliator, a woman who loved to rob people's property, and a woman who said that I loved to rob people.

古文：今我必杀汝！ 
现代文：今天我一定得宰了你！ 
English: I'm gonna have to kill you today!

古文：命锁之。
现代文：命人把他锁起来。
English: I order you to lock him up.

古文：砺抗声曰： 此皆国家大体，吾实言之。
现代文：张砺高声说： 这些事都有关国家大体，我确实说过。
English: Zhang Ye said in a loud voice: These things are related to the country as a whole, I did say that.

古文：欲杀即杀，奚以锁为！ 
现代文：要杀就杀，还锁起来干什么？ 
English: What's the point of killing someone if you're going to lock them up?

古文：麻荅以大臣不可专杀，力救止之，翰乃释之。
现代文：麻说不能擅自杀戮大臣，极力解救、阻止，萧翰才把他释放。
English: Asa said that he couldn't kill the minister without permission, and tried his best to save and stop him, but it was only then that Xiao Han released him.

古文：是夕，砺愤恚而卒。
现代文：这天夜里，张砺又恨又怒而死。
English: That night, Zhang Ye died of hatred and anger.

古文：崔廷勋见麻荅，趋走拜，起，跪而献酒，麻荅踞而受之。
现代文：崔廷勋看到麻，快步走上前去叩拜，并起身后跪着献酒，麻蹲坐着接受。
English: Cui Tingxun saw Ma, walked quickly forward to bow, and got up and kneeled to offer wine, while Ma squatted to receive it.

古文：乙卯，帝至新安，西京留司官悉来迎。
现代文：乙卯，后汉高祖到达新安，西京留守各司的官员都来迎接。
English: Second, after the Han Emperor Gaozu arrived in Xin'an, officials from all departments left in West Beijing came to greet him.

古文：吴越忠献王弘佐卒。
现代文：吴越国忠献王钱弘佐去世。
English: Qian Hongsa, the Wuyue Guozhongxian King, passed away.

古文：遗令以丞相弘倧为镇海、镇东节度使兼侍中。
现代文：遗命委任丞相钱弘为镇海、镇东节度使兼侍中。
English: He appointed the chancellor Qian Hong as Zhenhai and Zhen Dong Jiedu envoy and chamberlain.

古文：丙辰，帝至洛阳，入居宫中，汴州百官奉表来迎。
现代文：丙辰，后汉高祖来到洛阳，进入并居住宫中。大梁的文武百官奉上表章前来迎接。
English: Emperor Xianchen, the founder of the Han Dynasty, came to Luoyang, entered and lived in the palace. The great scholar and military leader was greeted by hundreds of officials.

古文：诏谕以受契丹补署者皆勿自疑，聚其告牒而焚之。
现代文：后汉高祖下诏书让那些接受契丹任命按排的人不要自己疑虑，将任命文告状牒收集起来烧掉。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty issued an edict that those who accepted the appointment of Khitan should not hesitate to collect and burn the appointment notice.

古文：赵远更名上交。
现代文：赵远改名为上交。
English: Zhao Yuan changed his name to Shangjiao.

古文：命郑州防御使郭从义先入大梁清宫，密令杀李从益及王淑妃。
现代文：后汉高祖命令郑州防御使郭从义先头进入大梁，清理内宫，密令杀死李从益和王淑妃。
English: Later, the Han Emperor Gaozu ordered the Zhengzhou defense to make Guo Congyi head into the beam, clean up the inner palace, and secretly kill Li Congyi and Wang Shufei.

古文：淑妃且死，曰： 吾儿为契丹所立，何罪而死！
现代文：淑妃临死前说： 我儿子是被契丹人立为皇帝，有什么罪而至死！
English: Before her death, Princess Sukhee said, "My son was made emperor by the Khitans, for what crime did he have to die!

古文：何不留之，使每岁寒食，以一盂麦饭洒明宗陵乎！ 
现代文：为什么不能留下他一个，让每年的寒食节有一盂麦饭洒在明宗陵前呢！ 
English: Why can't he be left alone and have a bunch of barley sprinkled in front of the Ming Dynasty Mausoleum during the annual cold food festival?

古文：闻者泣下。
现代文：听到的人都流下眼泪。
English: Everyone who heard it shed tears.

古文：戊午，帝发洛阳。
现代文：戊午，后汉高祖从洛阳出发。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty set out from Luoyang.

古文：枢密院吏魏仁浦自契丹逃归，见于巩。
现代文：枢密院的官吏魏仁浦从契丹逃回，在巩县叩见后汉高祖。
English: Wei Rimpu, an official of the Privy Council, fled back from Khitan and met with Emperor Gaozu in Gongxian.

古文：郭威问以兵数及故事，仁浦强记精敏，威由是亲任之。
现代文：郭威问契丹的兵力和故事，魏仁浦为人精细敏捷、博闻强记，郭威从此亲近重用他。
English: Guo Wei asked about Khitan's military strength and stories. Wei Rimpu was a fine and agile person with a strong memory. Guo Wei has been close to him ever since.

古文：仁浦，卫州人也。
现代文：魏仁浦是卫州人。
English: Wei Rimpu is a native of Weizhou.

古文：辛酉，汴州百官窦贞固等迎于荥阳。
现代文：辛酉，汴州的窦贞固等文武百官在荥阳迎接后汉高祖。
English: Hundreds of civil and military officials such as Xin Yi and Dou Zhenggu from Zhangzhou greeted the founder of the Later Han Dynasty in Shenyang.

古文：甲子，帝至大梁，晋之籓镇相继来降。
现代文：甲子，后汉高祖到达大梁，后晋的藩镇相继前来归降。
English: Gaozi, the founder of the later Han Dynasty, arrived in Dalian, and the towns of the later Jin Dynasty came one after another to surrender.

古文：丙寅，吴越王弘倧袭位。
现代文：丙寅，吴越王钱弘承袭王位。
English: Cui Yin and Wu Yue King Qian Hong succeeded to the throne.

古文：戊辰，帝下诏大赦。
现代文：戊辰，后汉高祖下诏书实行大赦。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozhu issued an edict to grant amnesty.

古文：凡契丹所除节度使，下至将吏，各安职任，不复变更。
现代文：凡是契丹所委任的节度使，下至将领官吏，各自安于职守，不再变更。
English: There will be no change in the posts of the military governors appointed by the Khitan, down to the generals and officials, who will remain in their posts.

古文：复以汴州为东京，改国号曰汉，仍称天福年，曰： 余未忍忘晋也。 
现代文：又把汴州改为为东京，改国号为汉，年号仍称天福，他说： 我不忍忘却晋呵！ 
English: He also changed Bozhou to Tokyo, changed the country name to Han, and the year name is still called Tianfu. He said: I can't bear to forget Jin Mao!

古文：复青、襄、汝三节度。
现代文：恢复青、襄、汝三州的节度使。
English: Restore the three states of Qing, Xiang and You.

古文：壬申，以北京留守崇为河东节度使，同平章事。
现代文：壬申任命北京留守刘崇为河东节度使、同平章事。
English: Jinshin appointed Liu Chong, who stayed in Beijing, as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：契丹述律太后闻契丹主自立，大怒，发兵拒之。
现代文：契丹述律太后听说兀欲自立为契丹主，大怒，派兵前去抗击。
English: When the Empress Dowager Shuritsu of Khitan heard that Zou wanted to establish himself as the ruler of Khitan, she was furious and sent soldiers to fight back.

古文：契丹主以伟王为前锋，相遇于石桥。
现代文：契丹主兀欲派伟王为前锋，在石桥相遇。
English: The leader of the Khitans, Zang You, sent Wei Wang as a striker, and they met at Stone Bridge.

古文：初，晋侍卫马军都指挥使李彦韬从晋主北迁，隶述律太后麾下，太后以为排陈使。
现代文：当初，后晋侍卫马军都指挥使李彦韬跟随后晋出帝向北迁徙，隶属于述律太后麾下，太后任命为排陈使。
English: At first, Emperor Jin's attendants, guards, and horse troops were all commanded by Li Yanqi, who migrated north with Emperor Jin and was subordinate to Empress Dowager Shuritsu, who appointed him as a platoon commander.

古文：彦韬迎降于伟王，太后兵由是大败。
现代文：李彦韬向伟王投降，太后的军队因此大败。
English: Li Yanqi surrendered to the Great King, and the empress dowager's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：契丹主幽太后于阿保机墓。
现代文：契丹主把太后囚禁在阿保机墓旁。
English: The Khitan lord imprisoned the empress dowager next to the tomb of Ahok.

古文：改元天禄，自称天授皇帝，以高勋为枢密使。
现代文：改年号为天禄，自称为天授皇帝，任命高勋为枢密使。
English: He changed the name of the year to Tianlu, called himself the Emperor of Heaven, and appointed Gao Xun as a confidential envoy.

古文：契丹主慕中华风俗，多用晋臣，而荒于酒色，轻慢诸酋长，由是国人不附，诸部数叛，兴兵诛讨，故数年之间，不暇南寇。
现代文：契丹主仰慕中原的风俗，所以多用原后晋的大臣，而他自己沉湎于酒色之中，轻视怠慢各位酋长，因此国内人不归附于他，各部落多次叛乱，就兴兵讨伐，所以几年里顾不上向南侵犯。
English: The Khitan lord admired the customs of the Central Plains, so he often used ministers from the Yuan and Later Jin dynasties, while he himself indulged in wine and despised and neglected the chiefs. Therefore, the people of the country did not adhere to him, and the tribes rebelled many times and raised armies to fight, so for several years they did not care about invading the south.

古文：初，契丹主德光命奉国都指挥使南宫王继弘、都虞候樊晖以所部兵戍相州，彰德节度使高唐英善待之。
现代文：当初，契丹主耶律德光命奉国都指挥使南宫人王继弘、都虞候樊晖带领所部人马守卫相州，彰德节度使高唐英对他们很好。
English: At the beginning, the Khitan lord Yerudoglu ordered Wang Jihong, the man of the Southern Court, and Dugong Houyi, the man of the Southern Court, to guard Xiangzhou under the command of the commander of the National Capital, and Gao Tangying was very kind to them.

古文：安国节度使高奉明闻唐英死，心不自安，请于麻荅，署马步都指挥使刘鐸为节度副使，知军府事，身归恒州。
现代文：守兵缺乏铠甲兵器，高唐英就把铠甲兵器给他们，对他们倚重信赖就像亲戚一样。高唐英听说后汉高祖南下，带领本镇请求归降；派往的使者还没返回，王继弘、樊晖就已杀死了高唐英。王继弘自称为留后，派使者告诉说高唐英反复无常。后汉高祖诏令王继安国节度使高奉明听说高唐英被杀，心里忐忑不安，向麻请求署理马步都指挥使刘铎为节度副使，主持军府事务，自己回归恒州。
English: The guards lacked armored weapons, so Gao Tangying gave them armored weapons and relied on them as if they were relatives. Gao Tangying heard that Emperor Gaozong of the Han Dynasty went to the south and led the town to request surrender; the envoys sent to him had not yet returned, and Wang Jihong and Yao had already killed Gao Tangying. Wang Jihong claimed to stay behind and sent an envoy to tell Gao Tangying that he was fickle. The Emperor Gaozong ordered Wang Jian Guo Jiedu to inform Gao Bongming that Gao Tangying had been killed. Gao Bongming was uneasy, and he

古文：帝遣使告谕荆南。
现代文：后汉高祖派遣使者通告安抚荆南。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to pacify Jingnan.

古文：高从诲上表贺，且求郢州，帝不许。及加恩使至，拒而不受。
现代文：高从诲上表章祝贺，并要求郢州，后汉高祖不答应；等到后汉高祖派的加恩使来到，高从诲拒不接受。
English: Gao Congyu congratulated the previous chapter and asked Zhangzhou, but the later Han Gao Zu did not agree; when the post-Han Gao Zu faction's envoy came, Gao Congyu refused to accept.

古文：唐主闻契丹主德光卒，萧翰弃大梁去，下诏曰： 乃眷中原，本朝故地。 
现代文：南唐主听说契丹主耶律德光去世，萧翰放弃大梁逃往北方，下诏书道： 我眷恋着中原，那是本朝的故土。 
English: When the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty heard that the Khitan lord, Yerut Deguang, had died, and that Shokhan had abandoned his capital and fled to the north, he issued a decree: I am attached to the Central Plains, which is the native land of this dynasty.

古文：以左右卫圣统军、忠武节度使、同平章事李金全为北面行营招讨使，议经略北方。闻帝已入大梁，遂不敢出兵。
现代文：派左右卫圣统军、忠武节度使李金全为北面行营招讨使，筹划攻取北方；听说后汉高祖已进入大梁，于是不敢出兵。
English: He dispatched the Left and Right Guards of the Holy United Army and the Chungwu Sect to persuade Li Jinquan to be the envoy to the north, and planned to invade the north. After hearing that Han Gao Zu had entered Dalian, he did not dare to send troops.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，以马希广为天策上将军、武安节度使、江南诸道都统，兼中书令，封楚王。
现代文：秋季，七月甲午，后汉高祖任命马希广为天策上将军、武安节度使、江南诸道都统，兼中书令，封为楚王。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of July 1st, Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty appointed Ma Xiguang as the General of the Heavenly Defense, the Ambassador of the Wu'an Festival, the Governor-General of the Southern Provinces, the Clerk of the Central Government, and the King of Chu.

古文：或传赵延寿已死。
现代文：有人传说赵延寿已经死了。
English: Some people say that Zhao Yanshou is dead.

古文：郭威言于帝曰： 赵匡赞，契丹所署，今犹在河中，宜遣使吊祭，因起复移镇。
现代文：郭威对后汉高祖说： 赵匡赞是契丹任命的，现在还留在河中，我们应派遣使者前往吊唁祭祀，从而起用他，并调换镇所。
English: Guo Wei said to the later Han Emperor Gaozu: Zhao Kuangzan was appointed by Khitan and is still in the river. We should send an envoy to the condolence and sacrifice, and thus employ him and change the town.

古文：彼既家国无归，必感恩承命。 
现代文：他已无家无国可归，一定会感恩戴德听从陛下的诏命。 
English: He has no home and no country to return to, and he will surely be grateful to obey His Majesty's edict.

古文：从之。
现代文：后汉高祖听从这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：会鄴都留守、天雄节度使兼中书令杜重威、天平节度使兼侍中李守贞皆奉表归命。
现代文：正值邺都留守、天雄节度使兼中书令杜重威、天平节度使兼侍中李守贞都奉上表章前来归顺。
English: Zheng Jian Du stayed behind, Tian Xiong, the festival envoy and middle secretary, Du Chong Wei, and Tian Ping, the festival envoy and chambermaid, Li Shouzhen, all came to surrender.

古文：重威仍请移它镇。
现代文：杜重威并请求调到其他藩镇。
English: Du Chongwei also requested to be transferred to other towns.

古文：归德节度使兼中书令高行周入朝，丙申，徙重威为归德节度使，以行周代之；守贞为护国节度使，加兼中书令；徙护国节度使赵匡赞为晋昌节度使。
现代文：归德节度使兼中书令高行周前来朝觐。丙申，调杜重威为归德节度使，命高行周代替他；命李守贞为护国节度使，加官兼中书令；调护国节度使赵匡赞为晋昌节度使。
English: He sent Du Chongwei as the envoy for the festival of returning to Germany and ordered Gao Xing Zhou to replace him; he sent Li Shuzhen as the envoy for the festival of protecting the country and appointed Gao Xing Zhou as the envoy for the festival of protecting the country; he sent Zhao Kuanzhan as the envoy for the festival of protecting the country and appointed Gao Xing Zhou as the envoy for the festival of protecting the country.

古文：后二年，延寿始卒于契丹。
现代文：过了二年，赵延寿才死于契丹。
English: It took two years for Zhao Yanshou to die at the hands of the Khitan.

古文：吴越王弘倧以其弟台州刺史弘亻叔同参相府事。
现代文：吴越王钱弘派他的弟弟台州刺使钱弘共同参预相府事务。
English: Qian Hong, the king of Wuyue, sent his younger brother Taizhou Sheng to persuade Qian Hong to jointly participate in the affairs of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：李达以其弟通知福州留后，自诣钱唐见吴越王弘倧，弘倧承制加达兼侍中，更其名曰孺赟。
现代文：李达命他的弟弟李通主持福州留后事务，自己到钱唐拜见吴越王钱弘，吴越王承用制书加封李达为兼侍中，改他的名为孺。
English: Li Da ordered his brother Li Tong to preside over the affairs of staying in Fuzhou, and he went to Qiantang to meet Wu Yue Wang Qian Hong. Wu Yue Wang undertook the bookmaking and sealed Li Da as an attendant, and changed his name to Yu.

古文：既而孺赟悔惧，以金笋二十株及杂宝赂内牙统军使胡进思，求归福州。进思为之请，弘倧从之。
现代文：不久，李孺又悔又怕，用二十株金笋和其它珍宝贿赂内牙统军使胡进思，请求回归福州；胡进思替他请求，钱弘答应了。
English: Soon, Li Yan was both remorseful and afraid. He bribed Hu Jinshi with twenty gold ingots and other treasures to request Hu Jinshi to return to Fuzhou; Hu Jinshi asked for him, and Qian Hong agreed.

古文：杜重威自以附契丹，负中国，内常疑惧。及移镇制下，复拒而不受，遣其子弘璲质于麻荅以求援。
现代文：杜重威自从投靠契丹、背叛中原后，心里常常疑惧；等到调任归德节度使的制令下达，他又拒不接受；他派自己的儿子杜弘到麻处作人质，以换取契丹的援兵。
English: Du Chongwei, after defecting to the Khitans and betraying the Central Plains, often had doubts in his heart. When the order to transfer him back to Germany was issued, he refused to accept it. He sent his son Du Hong to the province of Ma as a hostage in exchange for reinforcements from the Khitans.

古文：赵延寿有幽州亲兵二千在恒州，指挥使张琏将之，重威请以守魏。
现代文：当时，赵延寿有二千名幽州亲兵驻扎在恒州，由指挥使张琏率领，杜重威请契丹派他们来帮助固守魏州。
English: At that time, Zhao Yanshou had two thousand Yuzhou soldiers stationed in Hengzhou, led by the commander Zhang Jun. Du Chongwei asked Khitan to send them to help defend Weizhou.

古文：麻荅遣其将杨衮将契丹千五百人及幽州兵赴之。
现代文：麻派将领杨衮率契丹一千五百人和幽州兵马前往。
English: The leader of the Ma faction, Yang Hui, led 1,500 Khitan and Yuzhou soldiers and horses to the scene.

古文：闰月，庚午，诏削夺重威官爵，以高行周为招讨使，镇宁节度使慕容彦超副之，以讨重威。
现代文：闰七月庚午，后汉高祖诏令削去杜重威的官职爵位，派高行周为招讨使，镇宁节度使慕容彦超为副招讨使，出兵讨伐杜重威。
English: On the afternoon of leap July, Emperor Gaozhu of the Later Han Dynasty issued an edict to reduce Du Chongwei's official title and rank, and sent Gao Xingzhou as a recruiting envoy, and Zhanning Jiedu sent troops to fight Du Chongwei, appointing Murong Yanchao as a deputy recruiting envoy.

古文：辛未，杨邠、郭威、王章皆为正使。
现代文：辛未，杨、郭威、王章都为正使。
English: Xin Wei, Yang, Guo Wei and Wang Zhang are all high-ranking envoys.

古文：时兵荒之馀，公私匮竭，北来兵与朝廷兵合，顿增数倍。
现代文：当时正是兵荒马乱之后，国家、百姓都资财空乏，太原来的兵和后晋的兵合在一起，顿时兵员增加了几倍。
English: At that time, just after the Warring States period, the country and the people were short of funds and resources, so the original soldiers and the post-Jin soldiers were combined, and the number of soldiers suddenly increased several times.

古文：章白帝罢不急之务，省无益之费以奉军，用度克赡。
现代文：王章建议后汉高祖取消不急之务，省去无益的化费来供给军队，费用开支才能足够。
English: Wang Zhang suggested that the late Han Emperor Gaozu should cancel non-urgent tasks and save useless expenses to supply the army. Only then would the expenses be sufficient.

古文：庚辰，制建宗庙。
现代文：庚辰，后汉高祖制令兴建宗庙。
English: Geng Chen, the founder of the Later Han Dynasty, ordered the construction of a family temple.

古文：太祖高皇帝，世祖光武皇帝，皆百世不迁。
现代文：太祖高皇帝刘邦、世祖光武皇帝刘秀，都百代不迁。
English: Emperor Gao's great-great-grandfather Liu Bang and Emperor Guangwu's great-great-grandfather Liu Xiu have remained unchanged for hundreds of generations.

古文：又立四亲庙，追尊谥号。凡六庙。
现代文：又建立了高祖、曾祖、祖、考四座亲庙，追尊谥号，共六座庙。
English: He also established four family temples, including Gao Zu, Zeng Zu, Zu, and Gao, and a total of six temples named after his ancestors.

古文：麻荅贪猾残忍，民间有珍货、美妇女，必夺取之。
现代文：麻为人贪婪、奸诈、残忍，民间有的珍奇宝物、美丽妇女，他都一定要夺取到手。
English: If a man is greedy, treacherous, and cruel, he is sure to get his hands on some rare treasures and beautiful women.

古文：又捕村民，诬以为盗，披面，抉目，断腕，焚炙而杀之，欲以威众。
现代文：他还捕捉村民，诬陷为强盗，剥皮、挖眼、砍手，用火活活烧死，想用这些酷刑来威吓百姓。
English: He also captured villagers, framed them as robbers, skinned them, gouged out their eyes, cut off their hands, and burned them alive. He wanted to use these tortures to intimidate the people.

古文：常以其具自随，左右前后悬人肝、胆、手、足，饮食起居于其间，语笑自若。
现代文：他常把那些刑具随身携带，居室周围悬挂有人的肝、胆、手、脚，而他在里面饮食起居，从容谈笑。
English: He often carried the instruments of torture with him, and there were human livers, gall bladders, hands, and feet hanging around his room, while he ate, slept, and talked and laughed there.

古文：出入或被黄衣，用乘舆，服御物，曰： 兹事汉人以为不可，吾国无忌也。 
现代文：进出有时身穿黄袍，乘坐天子的车驾，使用宫中物品，他说： 这些事，汉人认为不可，可是在我国是毫无忌讳的。 
English: Wearing a yellow robe when going in and out, riding in the chariot of the son of heaven, and using items from the imperial palace, he said, "Han people think these things are unacceptable, but in our country there is no taboo.

古文：又以宰相员不足，乃牒冯道判弘文馆，李崧判史馆，和凝判集贤，刘昫判中书，其僭妄如此。
现代文：又因宰相人员不足，就用牒文命冯道兼判弘文馆，命李崧兼判史馆，命和凝兼判集贤馆，命刘兼判中书，他的僭越妄为竟到达如此地步。
English: In addition, due to the shortage of personnel for the prime minister, he used the ultimatum to order Feng Daojun to judge the Hongwen Museum, Li Yuanzhong to judge the History Museum, He Jing to judge the Shixian Museum, and Liu Jian to judge the Chinese book. His arrogance has reached such a level.

古文：然契丹或犯法，无所容贷，故市肆不扰。
现代文：然而规定，契丹人如有犯法，不能宽免，所以街市店铺不受滋扰。
English: However, according to the regulations, if a Khitan violates the law, he cannot be pardoned, so the street market stores are not disturbed.

古文：常恐汉人亡去，谓门者曰： 汉有窥门者，即断其首以来。 
现代文：他常怕城中的汉人偷偷跑掉，对把守城门的人说： 汉人如有窥探城门的，就砍掉他的脑袋来见我！ 
English: He was always afraid that the Han Chinese in the city would secretly run away, and said to the person guarding the city gate: If there is a Han Chinese who is spying on the city gate, cut off his head and come to see me!

古文：麻荅遣使督运于洺州，洺州防御使薛怀让闻帝入大梁，杀其使者，举州降。
现代文：麻派使者到州督运粮草，州防御使薛怀让听说后汉高祖已入大梁城，就杀死那使者，率全州归降。
English: Ma sent an envoy to the prefectural governor to transport grain and grass. The prefectural defense made Xue Huaijan hear that the Han Emperor Gaozu had entered Dalian City. He killed the envoy and led the whole prefecture to surrender.

古文：帝遣郭从义将兵万人会怀让攻刘鐸于邢州，不克，鐸请兵于麻荅，麻荅遣其将杨安及前义武节度使李殷将千骑攻怀让于洺州。
现代文：后汉高祖派郭从义领兵一万会同薛怀让进攻邢州的刘铎，不能攻克。刘铎向麻请求救兵，麻派将领杨安和前义武节度使李殷率一千骑兵攻击州的薛怀让。
English: Later, the Han Emperor Gao Zu sent Guo to attack Liu Bei in Bozhou with ten thousand soldiers led by Guo Zongyi and Xue Huai Rong, but they could not conquer Liu Bei. Liu Bei asked Ma to rescue the soldiers, and Ma faction general Yang An and former Yi Wu Jie Du ordered Li Yin to attack Xue Huai Rong in Bozhou with one thousand cavalry.

古文：怀让婴城自守，安等纵兵大掠于邢、洺之境。
现代文：薛怀让绕城固守，杨安等人纵兵大肆抢掠邢州、州一带。
English: Xue Huai was allowed to hold fast around the city, while Yang An and his soldiers plundered and pillaged Zhangzhou and the surrounding areas.

古文：契丹所留兵不满二千，麻荅令所司给万四千人食，收其馀以自入。
现代文：契丹留在恒州的兵不满二千人，麻却让有关司衙发给一万四千人粮饷，他把多出的收入自己的腰包。
English: Khitan left less than two thousand soldiers in Hengzhou, but Ma had the relevant priests distribute food to fourteen thousand people, and he pocketed the extra income.

古文：麻荅常疑汉兵，且以为无用，稍稍废省，又损其食以饲胡兵。众心怨愤，闻帝入大梁，皆有南归之志。
现代文：麻常怀疑汉人兵将，而且认为毫无用处，逐渐地削减其兵员，又减少其粮食供给，而用来给契丹兵吃，众汉兵心里怨恨愤怒，听说后汉高祖入大梁，就都有向南投奔的意原。
English: As the Chinese soldiers were often suspicious of the Han soldiers and thought that they were useless, they gradually reduced their number of soldiers and reduced their food supply, which was used to feed the Khitan soldiers. The Chinese soldiers were resentful and angry in their hearts. When they heard that the late Han Gao's ancestor had entered the Great Beam, they all had the idea of running south.

古文：前颍州防御使何福进，控鹤指挥使太原李荣，潜结军中壮士数十人谋攻契丹，然畏契丹尚强，犹豫未发。
现代文：前颍州防御使何福进、控鹤指挥使太原李荣，暗地里联络军中的几十名壮士，谋划袭击契丹人，但怕契丹兵力尚强，所以犹豫没有发起行动。
English: He Fuxin, who was in charge of the defense of Zhangzhou at the time, and Li Rong, who was in charge of controlling the cranes in Taiyuan, secretly contacted dozens of strong men in the army and planned to attack the Khitan, but they were afraid that the Khitan army was still strong, so they hesitated and did not launch the action.

古文：会杨衮、杨安等军出，契丹留恒州者才八百人，福进等遂决计，约以击佛寺钟为号。
现代文：正赶上杨衮、杨安等人率兵外出作战，契丹留在城内的士兵才有八百人，何福进等人于是决定，约好以佛寺敲钟为起事信号。
English: Just in time for Yang Pi, Yang An and others to go out to fight with their soldiers, there were only eight hundred soldiers left in the city by Khitan. Therefore, He Fuxin and others decided to arrange to ring the bell of the Buddhist temple as a signal to rise up.

古文：辛巳，契丹主兀欲遣骑至恒州，召前威胜节度使兼中书令冯道、枢密使李崧、左仆射和凝等，会葬契丹主德光于木叶山。
现代文：辛巳，契丹主兀欲派骑兵到恒州，召前威胜节度使兼中书令冯道、枢密使李崧、左仆射和凝等，会同安葬契丹先帝耶律德光于木叶山。
English: At that time, the Khitan lord Zang wanted to send cavalry to Hengzhou to summon the former Wei Sheng and the Chinese envoy Feng Dao, the confidential envoy Li Xi, and the left-hand servants Ya and Jie, and together they would bury the Khitan leader Diyeruddeguang on Mubei Mountain.

古文：道等未行，食时，钟声发。
现代文：冯道等人还没上路，吃饭时，钟声突然响起。
English: Feng Dao and others had not yet set out on the road, when they were eating, the bell suddenly rang.

古文：汉兵夺契丹守门者兵，击契丹，杀十馀人，因突入府中。
现代文：汉兵夺过契丹守门兵士的兵器进攻契丹人，杀死了十几人，又冲入府衙中。
English: The Han soldiers seized the weapons of the Khitan gatekeepers and attacked the Khitans, killing more than a dozen people, and then rushed into the city.

古文：李荣先据甲库，悉召汉兵及市人，以铠仗授之。焚牙门，与契丹战。
现代文：李荣首先占领武库，召唤汉人士兵和市民，将兵器铠甲分发给他们，焚烧牙门，和契丹兵厮杀。
English: Li Rong first occupied the arsenal, summoned Han soldiers and citizens, distributed weapons and armor to them, burned the gate, and fought with the Khitan soldiers.

古文：荣召诸将并力，护圣左厢都指挥使、恩州团练使白再荣狐疑，匿于别室，军吏以佩刀决幕，引其臂，再荣不得已而行。
现代文：李荣号召汉将通同合力起事。护圣左厢都指挥使、恩州团练使白再荣狐疑不定，藏匿到其他房子的帘幕后；起事官兵用佩刀砍掉帘幕，拽着他的胳膊，白再荣不得已而一起走。
English: Li Rong called on all Han generals to work together to rise up. The commander of the left guard compartment and the Enzhou regimental drill made Bai Zairong uncertain and hid behind the curtain of other houses; the riot officers and soldiers cut off the curtain with a saber and dragged his arm. Bai Zairong had no choice but to walk together.

古文：诸将继至，烟火四起，鼓噪震地。
现代文：其它汉军将领相继到达，四周烟火冲天，鼓噪喊杀声震地。
English: Other Chinese generals arrived one after another, surrounded by fireworks, drums and shouts.

古文：麻荅等大惊，载宝货家属，走保北城。
现代文：麻等人大为惊恐，装上钱财宝物和家属，逃往北城拒守。
English: Asa and others were greatly alarmed, loaded up with money, treasures and family members, and fled to the northern city to refuse to defend themselves.

古文：而汉兵无所统壹，贪狡者乘乱剽掠，懦者窜匿。
现代文：而汉兵没有统一指挥行动，贪婪狡诈的乘乱抢掠，胆小怕事的鼠窜藏匿。
English: But the Han soldiers did not have a unified command action, greedily and cunningly took advantage of the chaos to loot, and cowardly and timid rats hid.

古文：八月，壬午朔，契丹自北门入，势复振，汉民死者二千馀人。
现代文：八月壬午朔，契丹军队从北门开入恒州城，势头又振作起来，汉民被杀的有二千多人。
English: In the early afternoon of August, the Khitan army entered Hengzhou City from the north gate, and the momentum picked up again. More than two thousand Han people were killed.

古文：前磁州刺史李谷恐事不济，请冯道、李崧、和凝至战所慰勉士卒，士卒见道等至，争自奋。
现代文：前磁州刺史李怕起事不成，就请冯道、李崧、和凝到阵前慰问勉励士兵，士兵见冯道等人来，各自争先奋勇杀敌。
English: Before the battle, Li, who was afraid of failing, invited Feng Dao, Li Yao, and He Jing to come to the front to offer condolences and encourage the soldiers. When the soldiers saw Feng Dao and others coming, they all rushed to kill the enemy.

古文：会日暮，有村民数千噪于城外，欲夺契丹宝货、妇女，契丹惧而北遁，麻荅、刘晞、崔廷勋皆奔定州，与义武节度使邪律忠合。忠，即郎五也。
现代文：适逢日落西山，有好几千村民在城外鼓噪呐喊，要抢夺契丹人的金银财宝和妇女，契丹害怕而向北逃去。麻、刘、崔廷勋全都逃往定州，与义武节度使邪律忠会合，邪律忠就是邪律郎五。
English: At sunset on the West Mountain, several thousand villagers were shouting and shouting outside the city to rob the Khitan of gold, silver, treasure and women. The Khitan was afraid and fled to the north. Ma, Liu and Cui Tingxun all fled to Dingzhou, and met with Yiwu Jiedu to make the evil ruler, the evil ruler is the evil ruler five.

古文：冯道等四出安抚兵民，众推道为节度使。
现代文：冯道等人四出巡行按抚士兵和百姓，大家推举冯道为节度使。
English: Feng Dao and others went on a four-day procession to propitiate the soldiers and people, and everyone elected Feng Dao as the festival envoy.

古文：道曰： 我，书生也，当奏事而已，宜择诸将为留后。 
现代文：冯道说： 我是个书生，只能向上奏报事情罢了，应从众位武将里选择留后。 
English: Feng Dao said: I'm a scholar, I can only report things to the higher-ups. I should choose from among the generals to stay behind.

古文：时李荣功最多，而白再荣位在上，乃以再荣权知留后，具以状闻，且请援兵。
现代文：当时李荣功劳最大，而白再荣官位在他以上，就让白再荣代理主持留后事务，写成奏章上报，并且请派援兵。
English: At that time, Li Rong was the most meritorious, and Bai Zairong was higher than him, so he asked Bai Zairong to act as the representative to preside over the post-retirement affairs, write a report, and ask for reinforcements.

古文：帝遣左飞龙使李彦从将兵赴之。
现代文：后汉高祖派左飞龙使李彦从领兵前往。
English: Later, Han Gao Zu sent Zuo Feilong to make Li Yan go from leading the troops.

古文：白再荣贪昧，猜忌诸将。
现代文：白再荣为人贪婪昏昧，猜忌其他将领。
English: Bai Zairong is greedy, dim-witted, and suspicious of other generals.

古文：奉国厢主华池王饶恐为再荣所并，诈称足疾，据东门楼，严兵自卫。
现代文：奉国军主华池人王饶怕被白再荣吞并，假称脚有病，占据东门楼，严加防范守卫。
English: Wang Rao, the leader of the Fengguo army, was afraid of being annexed by Bai Zairong, so he pretended to have a bad foot, occupied the East Gate Building, and guarded it strictly.

古文：司天监赵延乂善于二人，往来谕释，始得解。
现代文：司天监赵延和王、白二人友善，往来劝说解释，才得和解。
English: The chief magistrate, Zhao Yan, and Wang and Bai were friendly, and they went back and forth to persuade and explain before they were able to reconcile.

古文：再荣以李崧、和凝久为相，家富，遣军士围其第求赏给，崧、凝各以家财与之，又欲杀崧、凝以灭口。
现代文：白再荣认为李崧、和凝等人久做宰相，家中殷富，派军士们包围二人的住宅，请求发赏钱，李崧、和凝各自拿出家财分给他们；但白再荣又想杀掉二人以灭口。
English: Bai Zairong thought that Li Qian, He Jian and others had been prime ministers for a long time, and their families were rich. He sent soldiers to surround the two people's homes and asked for reward money. Li Qian and He Jian each took out their family wealth and gave it to them. However, Bai Zairong also wanted to kill the two people to silence them.

古文：李谷往见再荣，责之曰： 国亡主辱，公辈握兵不救。
现代文：李前去会见白再荣，责备他说： 国家灭亡、君主蒙辱，你们手握兵权不去解救。
English: Li went to meet Baizhe Rong and scolded him: "The country is ruined, the monarch is humiliated, and you don't take military power into your own hands to save it.

古文：今仅能逐一虏将，镇民死者近三千人，岂独公之力邪！
现代文：现在刚刚驱遂了一个胡虏将领，镇州百姓死了近三千人，难道单单是你的力量！
English: Now you have just defeated a Khurik general, nearly three thousand people in Zhenzhou have died, is it just your strength!

古文：才得脱死，遽欲杀宰相，新天子若诘公专杀之罪，公何辞以对？ 
现代文：刚刚脱离死境，就想杀戮宰相，新天子如果追究你擅杀大臣的罪过，你用什么话来回答？ 
English: Having just escaped death, you want to kill the prime minister. If you are prosecuted for the crime of killing a minister, what words will you use to answer?

古文：再荣惧而止。
现代文：白再荣害怕而住手。
English: Bai Zairong was afraid and stopped.

古文：又欲率民财以给军，谷力争之，乃止。
现代文：他又想搜刮百姓的钱财来供给军队，李极力抗争，才算作罢。
English: He also wanted to extort money from the people to supply the army, which Li strenuously opposed.

古文：汉人尝事麻荅者，再荣皆拘之以取其财，恒人以其贪虐，谓之 白麻荅 。
现代文：汉人中曾给麻供事的，白再荣都把他们抓起来来索取财物，恒州人因为他贪婪暴虐，都叫他 白麻 。
English: Among the Han people who had served Ma, Bai Zairong arrested them and demanded their property. The people of Hengzhou called him Bai Ma because he was greedy and violent.

古文：杨衮至邢州，闻麻荅被逐，即日北还，杨安亦遁去，李殷以其众来降。
现代文：杨衮到达邢州，听说麻已被驱逐，当天向北返回，杨安也领兵跑了；李殷率领他的军队前来投降。
English: Yang Hui arrived in Zhangzhou, heard that Ma had been expelled, and returned to the north the same day. Yang An also led his army to flee; Li Yin led his army to surrender.

古文：庚寅，以薛怀让为安国节度使。
现代文：庚寅，后汉高祖任命薛怀让为安国节度使。
English: Geng Yin, the founder of the Later Han Dynasty, appointed Xue Huaijan as the chief envoy of the An Guo Festival.

古文：刘鐸闻麻荅遁去，举邢州降；怀让诈云巡检，引兵向邢州，鐸开门纳之，怀让杀鐸，以克复闻。
现代文：刘铎听说麻逃跑，就率邢州投降，而薛怀让诈称要入城巡视检查，领兵开向邢州，刘铎大开城门让他们进来，薛怀让杀死刘铎，以攻克收复邢州上报。
English: When Liu Ye heard that Ma had escaped, he led Zhangzhou to surrender, while Xue Huaijian fraudulently claimed that he wanted to enter the city for inspection. He led the soldiers to Zhangzhou, Liu Ye opened the city gate for them to enter, and Xue Huaijian killed Liu Ye in order to conquer and recover Zhangzhou to report.

古文：朝廷知而不问。
现代文：朝廷知道此事但不追问。
English: When the imperial court found out, they did not hesitate to ask questions.

古文：辛卯，复以恒州顺国军为镇州成德军。
现代文：辛卯，后汉又把恒州顺国军改为镇州成德军。
English: Soon after, the Later Han Dynasty changed the name of the Hengzhou Shunkuo Army to the Zhenzhou Chengdu German Army.

古文：乙未，以白再荣为成德留后。
现代文：乙未，后汉高祖任命白再荣为成德留后。
English: However, the later Han Emperor Gaozu appointed Bai Zairong as Chengde's successor.

古文：逾年，始以何福进为曹州防御使，李荣为博州刺史。
现代文：一年后，才任命何福进为曹州防御使，李荣为博州刺史。
English: A year later, He Fuxin was appointed as the defense minister of Caozhou, and Li Rong as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：敕： 盗贼毋问赃多少皆抵死。 
现代文：后汉高祖敕令： 盗贼不问赃物多少全都处死罪。 
English: Post-Han Emperor Gao Zu's edict: All thieves, no matter how much they stole, were to be put to death.

古文：时四方盗贼多，朝廷患之，故重其法，仍分命使者逐捕。
现代文：当时各地盗贼蜂起，朝廷深为担忧，所以刑法从严，并分派使者到各处追捕。
English: At that time, thieves were rising up all over the country, and the imperial court was deeply worried. Therefore, the criminal law was tightened, and emissaries were dispatched to hunt them down everywhere.

古文：苏逢吉自草诏，意云： 应贼盗，并四邻同保，皆全族处斩。 
现代文：苏逢吉自己草拟诏文，大意是： 接应盗贼，连同四邻同保，都全族处以斩首。 
English: Su Fengji himself drafted the edict, to the effect of: In response to the thieves, together with the four neighbors and the guarantor, the whole family will be beheaded.

古文：众以为： 盗犹不可族，况邻保乎！ 
现代文：众大臣认为： 盗贼尚且不可灭族，况且是四邻同保呢！ 
English: The ministers thought: Thieves are still an indestructible race, and what's more, they are the guarantors of their neighbors!

古文：逢吉固争，不得已，但省去 全族 字。
现代文：苏逢吉坚持抗争，不得已，只删去了 全族 二字。
English: Su Fengji persisted in his struggle, and as a last resort, he only deleted two words, "the whole nation."

古文：由是捕贼使者张令柔杀平阴十七村民。
现代文：由此，捕贼使者张令柔杀死了平阴县十七村的百姓。
English: As a result, the thief-catching emissary Zhang Ling Rong killed the people of the 17th village of Pingyin County.

古文：逢吉为人，文深好杀。
现代文：苏逢吉为人，用法刻严、专嗜杀戮。
English: Su Fengji is a man with a strict use of the law and a penchant for killing.

古文：在河东幕府，帝尝令静狱以祈福，逢吉尽杀狱囚还报。
现代文：在河东幕府时，后汉高祖曾命他 静狱 来祈求福，苏逢吉杀尽狱中囚犯回来答复。
English: When he was in the Hedong Shogunate, Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty ordered him to stay in prison to pray for good luck. Su Fengji killed all the prisoners in prison and came back to answer.

古文：及为相，朝廷草创，帝悉以军旅之事委杨邠、郭威，百司庶务委逢吉及苏禹珪。
现代文：等做到宰相时，朝廷初创，后汉高祖把一切军务委交杨、郭威，各部的事务委交苏逢吉和苏禹。
English: When he became prime minister, Yang and Guo Wei were put in charge of all military affairs committees, while Su Fengji and Su Yu were put in charge of departmental affairs committees.

古文：二相决事，皆出胸臆，不拘旧制。虽事无留滞，而用舍黜陟，惟其所欲。
现代文：这二位宰相决断事务，都根据自己的想法，不拘泥于旧有的典章制度；虽然事情没有耽搁滞留，但他的任用舍弃、罢免升迁，只是随心所欲。
English: Both of these chancellors made decisions according to their own ideas, not sticking to the old system of ordinances. Although there was no delay in the matter, his appointment, resignation, dismissal and promotion were just whatever he wanted.

古文：帝方倚信之，无敢言者。
现代文：后汉高祖正依靠、信任他们，没有敢说的。
English: Later Han Gao Zu was relying on and trusting them, and did not dare to say anything.

古文：逢吉尤贪诈，公求货财，无所顾避。
现代文：苏逢吉尤其贪婪奸诈，公开索取钱财，毫无顾忌。
English: Su Fengji was particularly greedy and treacherous, openly soliciting money without any scruples.

古文：继母死，不为服；庶兄自外至，不白逢吉而见诸子，逢吉怒，密语郭威，以他事杖杀之。
现代文：他的继母死后，他不穿丧服。他的异母哥哥从外地来，没禀报他去看各个侄子，苏逢吉就恼怒了，私下告诉郭威，以其他事由把哥哥用仗打死。
English: After the death of his stepmother, he did not wear mourning clothes. His half-brother came from out of town and did not inform him to see his nephews. Su Fengji was angry and privately told Guo Wei that he had killed his brother in battle for other reasons.

古文：楚王希广庶弟天策左司马希崇，性狡险，阴遗兄希萼书，言刘彦瑫等违先王之命，废长立少，以激怒之。
现代文：楚王马希广的异母弟弟天策左司马马希崇，生性狡猾阴险，悄悄写信给长兄马希萼，说刘彦违背先王的遗命，废除长兄而拥立少弟，借此来激怒马希萼。
English: The half-brother of King Ma Xiguang of Chu, Tianzhe Zuosima Ma Xitong, born cunning and insidious, quietly wrote to the eldest brother Ma Xicai, saying that Liu Yan violated the last will of the former king, abolished the eldest brother and supported the younger brother, thereby angering Ma Xicai.

古文：希萼自永州来奔丧，乙巳，至趺石，彦瑫白希广遣侍从都指挥使周廷诲等将水军逆之，命永州将士皆释甲而入，馆希萼于碧湘宫，成服于其次，不听入与希广相见。
现代文：马希萼从永州前来奔丧，乙巳，到达趺石。刘彦告诉马希广，请派侍从都指挥使周廷诲等人率水军前往迎接，命永州将士全解甲入城，让马希萼住在碧湘宫，在其驻地服丧，不让进入，与马希广相见。
English: Ma Xicai came from Yongzhou to attend the funeral, and arrived in Shanshi. Liu Yan told Ma Xicai that he should send his attendants to lead the navy to meet him, and ordered Yongzhou to disarm all the soldiers and enter the city, let Ma Xicai live in Bixiang Palace, attend the funeral at his residence, and not allow him to enter and meet Ma Xicai.

古文：希萼求示还朗州，周廷诲劝希广杀之。
现代文：马希萼请求返回朗州，周廷诲劝马希广杀掉马希萼。
English: Ma Xicai requested to return to Lanzhou, Zhou Ting exhorted Ma Xicai to kill Ma Xicai.

古文：希广曰： 吾何忍杀兄！宁分潭、朗而治之。 
现代文：马希广说： 我怎忍心杀哥哥，宁愿和他分管潭州、朗州而统治楚国！ 
English: Ma Xiguang said, "How can I bear to kill my brother, I'd rather be in charge of Tanzhou and Langzhou with him and rule the state of Chu!"

古文：乃厚赠希萼，遣还朗州。
现代文：于是给马希萼丰厚的赏赐，送还朗州。
English: So he gave Ma Xicai a rich reward and sent him back to Lanzhou.

古文：希崇常为希萼诇希广，语言动作，悉以告之，约为内应。
现代文：马希崇常为马希萼侦察马希广，乃至马希广的一言一行，都告诉马希萼，相约作为城中内应。
English: Ma Xizong often scouts Ma Xiguang for Ma Xiguang, and even every word and deed of Ma Xiguang tells Ma Xiguang that they should meet in the city.

古文：契丹之灭晋也，驱战马二万匹归其国。
现代文：契丹灭亡后晋，驱赶战马二万匹回归辽国。
English: After the death of Khitan, Jin drove 20,000 horses back to Liao.

古文：至是汉兵乏马，诏市士民马于河南诸道不经剽掠者。
现代文：到这时后汉军队缺乏战马，诏令到河南各道未经契丹抢掠的地方去购买士民的马匹。
English: By this time, the Han army was short of war horses, and the emperor ordered to go to places in Henan Province that had not been plundered by the Khitan to buy horses for the soldiers.

古文：制以钱弘倧为东南兵马都元帅、镇海、镇东节度使兼中书令、吴越王。
现代文：后汉高祖制令任命钱弘为东南兵马都元帅，镇海、镇东节度使兼中书令，吴越王。
English: After the founding of the Han Dynasty, Qian Hong was appointed as the Southeastern Marshal of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Zhenhai and Zhendong Festival Envoy, and Wu Yue Wang.

古文：高从诲闻杜重威叛，发水军数千袭襄州，山南东道节度使安审琦击却之。
现代文：高从诲听说杜重威背叛，就出动水军几千人袭击襄州。山东南道节度使安审琦将他击退。
English: When Gao Congyun heard of Du Chongwei's betrayal, he dispatched a naval force of several thousand men to attack Xiangzhou. The South Shandong Provincial People's Court ordered the Security Interrogation Team to repel him.

古文：又寇郢州，刺史尹实大破之。
现代文：高从诲又侵犯郢州，被刺史尹实打得大败。
English: Gao Congyu invaded Ganzhou again and was soundly defeated by Shi Yinshi.

古文：乃绝汉，附于唐、蜀。
现代文：于是断绝与后汉的关系，依附于南唐、后蜀。
English: As a result, it broke off relations with the Later Han Dynasty and clung to Southern Tang and Later Shu.

古文：初，荆南介居湖南、岭南、福建之间，地狭兵弱，自武信王季兴时，诸道入贡过其境者，多掠夺其货币。
现代文：当初，荆南介于湖南、岭南和福建之间，地域狭窄，兵力薄弱。从武信王高季兴时起，各道进贡经过这里者，被他多次掠夺钱财货物。
English: At the beginning, Jingnan was located between Hunan, Lingnan and Fujian. The area was narrow and the troops were weak. From the time of the rise of Wuxin King Gao Ji, the tributes from all directions passed through here, and he repeatedly plundered money and goods.

古文：及诸道移书诘让，或加以兵，不得已复归之，曾不为愧。
现代文：到各道下书谴责，或派兵讨伐，他不得已才把财物送还，竟不感羞愧。
English: He sent letters to all the provinces to condemn them, or sent troops to fight them, but he was forced to return the property, and he was not ashamed.

古文：及从诲立，唐、晋、契丹、汉更据中原，南汉、闽、吴、蜀皆称帝。
现代文：等到高从诲为王，后唐、后晋、契丹、后汉更替占据中原，南汉、闽、吴、后蜀都称帝，高从诲贪图各国的赏赐，就四处称臣。
English: When Gao Congchu became king, the Central Plains was occupied successively by the Later Tang, Later Jin, Later Khitan, and Later Han dynasties. The Southern Han, Liao, Wu, and Later Shu were all proclaimed emperors, and Gao Congchu was greedy for rewards from various countries, so he promoted his ministers everywhere.

古文：从诲利其赐予，所向称臣，诸国贱之，谓之 高无赖 。
现代文：各国都鄙视他，称他为 高无赖 。
English: Every country despised him and called him a scoundrel.

古文：唐主以太傅兼中书令宋齐丘为镇南节度使。
现代文：南唐主任命太傅兼中书令宋齐丘为镇南节度使。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang appointed Song Qiqiu, Taifu and General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, as the envoy of the Zhenan Festival.

古文：南汉主恐诸弟与其子争国，杀齐王弘弼、贵王弘道、定王弘益、辨王弘济、同王弘简、益王弘建、恩王弘伟、宜王弘照，尽杀其男，纳其女充后宫。
现代文：南汉主担心弟弟们和他的儿子争天下，就杀掉齐王刘弘弼、贵王刘弘道、定王刘弘益、辨王刘弘济、同王刘弘简、益王刘弘建、恩王刘弘伟、宜王刘弘照，并杀尽其家中男子，把妇女充入后宫。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty was worried that his younger brothers and his son would fight for the world, so he killed Qi King Liu Hongzhi, Gui King Liu Hongdao, Ding King Liu Hongyi, Bin King Liu Hongji, Tong Wang Liu Hongjian, Yi King Liu Hongjian, En King Liu Hongwei, Yi King Liu Hongzhao, and killed all the men in his family, filling the harem with women.

古文：作离宫千馀间，饰以珠宝，设镬汤、铁床、刳剔等刑，号 生地狱 。
现代文：他还命建造离宫一千多间，装饰上珠宝，设置镬汤、铁床、刳剔等刑具，号称 生地狱 。
English: He also ordered the construction of more than a thousand rooms away from the palace, decorated with jewels, and set up torture instruments such as stewing soup, iron beds, and scouring, known as living hell.

古文：尝醉，戏以瓜置乐工之颈试剑，遂断其头。
现代文：有一次喝醉了酒，开玩笑地把一个瓜放在乐工的脖子上试剑，于是砍掉了乐工的脑袋。
English: Once, when he was drunk, he playfully put a melon around the neck of a musician to test his sword, and then chopped off the musician's head.

古文：初，帝与吏部尚书窦贞固俱事晋高祖，雅相知重，及即位，欲以为相，问苏逢吉： 其次谁可相者？ 
现代文：当初，后汉高祖和吏部尚书窦贞固同在后晋高祖处供事，互相深知敬重，待后汉高祖当了皇帝，想任命窦贞固为宰相，他问苏逢吉道： 你之外，有谁能作宰相？ 
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty and the official Shang Shu Dou Zhenggu worked together at the office of Emperor Gaozu of the Later Jin Dynasty, and they knew and respected each other. When Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty became the emperor, he wanted to appoint Dou Zhenggu as the prime minister. He asked Su Fengji: Who can be the prime minister besides you?

古文：逢吉与翰林学士李涛善，因荐之，曰： 昔涛乞斩张彦译，陛下在太原，尝重之，此可相也。 
现代文：苏逢吉和翰林学士李涛知己，于是就推荐李涛，说： 过去李涛请求斩掉张彦泽，陛下在太原，曾看重他，此人可以作宰相。 
English: Su Fengji and Hanlin Scholar Li Tao's confidant, so he recommended Li Tao, saying: In the past, Li Tao requested to behead Zhang Yanze. His Majesty in Taiyuan once valued him. This person can be prime minister.

古文：会高行周、慕容彦超共讨杜重威于鄴都，彦超欲急攻城，行周欲缓之以待其弊。
现代文：正好高行周、慕容彦超到邺都共同讨伐杜重威。慕容彦超想要加紧攻城，而高行周想放慢进攻来等待敌人的漏洞。
English: Just at that time, Gao Xingzhou and Murong Yanchao went to Shandong to jointly fight against Du Chongwei. Murong Yanchao wanted to intensify the siege of the city, while Gao Xingzhou wanted to slow down the attack to wait for the enemy's loopholes.

古文：行周女为重威子妇，彦超扬言： 行周以女故，爱贼不攻。 
现代文：高行周的女儿是杜重威的儿媳，彦超扬言说： 高行周为他女儿的缘故，爱护敌人而不发动进攻。 
English: Gao Xingzhou's daughter was Du Chongwei's daughter-in-law, and Yan Chao threatened, "For the sake of his daughter, Gao Xingzhou will love and protect the enemy and not launch an attack."

古文：由是二将不协。
现代文：从此两将不和。
English: The two would never see eye to eye again.

古文：帝恐生他变，欲自将击重威，意未决。
现代文：后汉高祖怕生出其他突变，就想亲自去打杜重威，但主意还没定。
English: Afraid of giving birth to other mutations, the late Han Gao Zu wanted to personally fight Du Chongwei, but his mind was still undecided.

古文：涛上疏请亲征。
现代文：这时，李涛上疏请皇帝御驾亲征。
English: At this time, Li Tao asked the emperor to personally lead the expedition.

古文：帝大悦，以涛有宰相器。
现代文：后汉高祖大为高兴，认为李涛有宰相才器。
English: Later, Han Gao Zu was very pleased and thought that Li Tao had the ability of a prime minister.

古文：九月，甲戌，加逢吉左仆射兼门下侍郎，苏禹珪右仆射兼中书侍郎，贞固司空兼门下侍郎，涛户部尚书兼中书侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：九月，甲戌，苏逢吉加官为左仆射兼门下侍郎、苏禹加官为右仆射兼中书侍郎，窦贞固加官为司空兼门下侍郎，李涛加官为户部尚书兼中书侍郎，都为同平章事。
English: In September, in Kuching, Su Fengji was promoted to the position of left-hand servant and junior secretary, Su Yu was promoted to the position of right-hand servant and junior secretary, Dou Zhengu was promoted to the position of secretary and junior secretary, and Li Tao was promoted to the position of household secretary and junior secretary, all of which were the same rank.

古文：戊寅，诏幸澶、魏劳军，以皇子承训为东京留守。
现代文：戊寅，后汉高祖下诏书，去澶州、魏州慰劳军队，命皇子刘承训为东京留守。
English: Emperor Wu Yin, the forefather of the later Han Dynasty, issued an edict to go to Bozhou and Weizhou to comfort the labor troops, and ordered Prince Liu Chengxun to stay in Tokyo.

古文：冯道、李崧、和凝自镇州还。己卯，以崧为太子太傅，凝为太子太保。
现代文：冯道、李崧、和凝从镇州返回，己卯，后汉高祖任李崧为太子太傅，和凝为太子太保。
English: After Feng Dao, Li Xi, and He Geng returned from Zhenzhou, Li Xi became the crown prince and He Geng became the crown prince and He Geng became the crown prince.

古文：庚辰，帝发大梁。
现代文：庚辰，后汉高祖从大梁出发。
English: Geng Chen, the founder of the later Han Dynasty, set out from Dayang.

古文：晋昌节度使赵匡赞恐终不为朝廷所容，冬，十月，遣使降蜀，请自终南山路出兵应援。
现代文：晋昌节度使赵匡赞顾虑最终不能被后汉朝廷所容，在冬季，十月，派使臣归降后蜀，请求从终南山路出援兵接应。
English: The Jinchang Festival made Zhao Kuanzan worry that he could not be tolerated by the post-Han imperial court. In the winter, in October, he sent an envoy to the capitulation of Hou Shu, requesting reinforcements from the final Nanshan Road.

古文：戊戌，帝至鄴都城下，舍于高行周营。
现代文：戊戌，后汉高祖来到邺都城下，住在高行周军营中。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozu came to the city of Shidu and lived in Gao Xingzhou's military camp.

古文：行周言于帝曰： 城中食未尽，急攻，徒杀士卒，未易克也。不若缓之，彼食尽自溃。 
现代文：高行周对高祖说： 城中粮食未尽，现在猛攻，白白损失士卒，不容易攻克城池；不如慢慢围困它，城中粮尽自然溃败。 
English: Gao Xing Zhou said to Gao Zu, "The food in the city is not exhausted, now we are storming, losing soldiers in vain, it is not easy to conquer the city; it is better to slowly besiege it, the food in the city will naturally collapse.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：高祖认为是这样。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：慕容彦超数因事陵轹行周，行周泣诉于执政，掏粪壤实其口，苏逢吉、杨邠密以白帝。
现代文：慕容彦超屡次借事端凌辱高行周，高行周向执政大臣哭诉，用双手捧粪土塞嘴，苏逢吉、杨将情况密报高祖。
English: Murong Yanchao repeatedly took advantage of the situation to insult Gao Xing Zhou. Gao Xing Zhou cried to the ruling minister and stuffed his mouth with dung with both hands. Su Fengji and Yang secretly reported the situation to Gao Zu.

古文：帝深知彦超之曲，犹命二臣和解之。又召彦超于帐中责之，且使诣行周谢。
现代文：高祖深知慕容彦超理屈，仍命两位大臣和解；又把慕容彦超召到营帐里责备，并让他去向高行周谢罪。
English: Gaozu was well aware of Murong Yanchao's reasoning, and still ordered the two ministers to reconcile; he also summoned Murong Yanchao to the camp to reprimand him, and let him go to Gao Xing Zhou to apologize.

古文：杜重威声言车驾至即降，帝遣给事中陈观往谕指，重威复闭门拒之。
现代文：杜重威曾声称高祖的车驾到达就投降，高祖派给事中陈观前去宣布旨意，杜重威却又关城门拒绝。
English: Du Chongwei once claimed that Gao Zu's chauffeur arrived and surrendered. Gao Zu sent Chen Guan to announce his will, but Du Chongwei closed the gate and refused.

古文：城中食浸竭，将士多出降者。
现代文：城中粮食逐渐吃光。将士多有出城投降的。
English: The food in the city gradually ran out. Many soldiers left the city to surrender.

古文：慕容彦超固请攻城，帝从之。
现代文：慕容彦超坚持请求攻城，高祖同意。
English: Murong Yanchao insisted on the request to attack the city, and Gaozu agreed.

古文：丙午，亲督诸将攻城，自寅至辰，士卒伤者万馀人，死者千馀人，不克而止。
现代文：丙午，高祖亲自督励众将攻城，从寅时攻到辰时，士卒伤了一万多人，死了一千多人，未能攻下而收兵。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Gaozu personally encouraged the crowd to attack the city. From the morning of the third day to the morning of the fourth day, more than ten thousand soldiers were injured and more than one thousand died.

古文：彦超乃不敢复言。
现代文：慕容彦超于是不敢再说攻城。
English: Murong Yixuan did not dare to attack the city.

古文：初，契丹留幽州兵千五百人戍大梁。
现代文：当初，契丹留下一千五百名幽州兵守卫大梁。
English: At first, Khitan left fifteen hundred Yuzhou soldiers to guard the girders.

古文：帝入大梁，或告幽州兵将为变，帝尽杀之于繁台之下。
现代文：高祖进入大梁，有人密报幽州兵将发动兵变，高祖把所有幽州兵都杀死在繁台下面。
English: Gaozu entered the girders, someone secretly reported that the Youzhou soldiers would launch a mutiny, Gaozu killed all the Youzhou soldiers under the platform.

古文：乃围鄴都，张琏将幽州兵二千助重威拒守，帝屡遣人招谕，许以不死。琏曰： 繁台之卒，何罪而戮？
现代文：待现在围困邺都，张琏率二千名幽州兵帮助杜重威拒守，高祖于是屡次派人劝谕招降，许诺不杀死；张琏说： 繁台下面的幽州兵卒，有什么罪而遭杀戮？
English: However, now that the city of Fengtu was besieged, Zhang Ye led two thousand Yuzhou soldiers to help Du Chongwei to resist. Gaozu then repeatedly sent people to persuade Du Chongwei to surrender, promising not to kill him. Zhang Ye said: What is the crime of the Yuzhou soldiers under Fengtai to be killed?

古文：今守此，以死为期耳。 
现代文：现在坚守此城，只求一死罢了。 
English: Now we must hold on to this city and hope for nothing but death.

古文：由是城久不下。
现代文：因此城池久攻不下。
English: As a result, the castle could not be captured for a long time.

古文：十一月，丙辰，内殿直韩训献攻城之具，帝曰： 城之所恃者，众心耳。众心苟离，城无所保，用此何为！ 
现代文：十一月丙辰，内殿直韩训进献攻城的器械，高祖说： 守城所倚仗的，是众人的心；如果众人离心离德，城池就无人保卫，用这些器械干什么！ 
English: In November of the year of the Horse, the inner hall of the palace was drilled and the instruments for attacking the city were dedicated. Gao Zu said, "What defends the city is the hearts of the people. If the people are divided, the city will be defenseless. What should we do with these instruments?"

古文：杜重威之叛，观察判官金乡王敏屡泣谏，不听。
现代文：杜重威背叛后汉，观察判官金乡人王敏屡次哭泣劝谏，杜重威不听。
English: Du Chongwei betrayed the Han Dynasty. Wang Min, a judge from Jinxiang, observed that Du Chongwei did not listen to repeated crying and persuasion.

古文：及食竭力尽，甲戌，遣敏奉表出降。
现代文：到现在粮食吃光、气力用尽，甲戌，派王敏出城奉上降表。
English: Up to now, the grain is exhausted, the strength is exhausted, the armor is worn out, and Wang Min is sent out of the city to receive the watch.

古文：乙亥，重威子弘琏来见；丙子，妻石氏来见。石氏，即晋之宋国长公主也，帝复遣入城。
现代文：乙亥，杜重威的儿子杜弘琏前来朝见；丙子，杜重威的妻子石氏来朝见，石氏就是后晋的宋国长公主。高祖再次把他们送回城中。
English: Eihei, Du Hongtao, the son of Du Chongwei, came to see the emperor; Bingzi, the wife of Du Chongwei, Shi Shi, came to see the emperor. Shi Shi is the eldest princess of the Song Dynasty in the Later Jin Dynasty. Gaozu sent them back to the city again.

古文：丁丑，重威开门出降，城中馁死者什七八，存者皆尪瘠无人状。
现代文：丁丑，杜重威大开城门，出城投降。这时，城中十有七、八的人都饿死了，活着的也都骨瘦如柴没有人样。
English: Dingwu and Du Chongwei opened the city gate and left the city to surrender. At this time, seven or eight out of ten people in the city died of starvation, and those who were still alive were as thin as wood and had no personality.

古文：张琏先邀朝廷信誓，诏许以归乡里。及出降，杀琏等将校数十人，纵其士卒北归。
现代文：张琏先要求朝廷讲信用发誓，高祖下诏令允许返归家乡；等出降以后，杀张琏等将领军校几十人；释放其他士兵北归家乡。
English: Zhang Xuan first asked the imperial court to swear allegiance, and Gao Zu issued a decree to allow him to return to his hometown; after the surrender, he killed dozens of generals of the military academy, including Zhang Xuan; and released other soldiers to return to their hometowns.

古文：将出境，大掠而去。
现代文：那些幽州兵将出魏州地界时，大肆抢掠而去。
English: When those Yuzhou soldiers left the territory of Weizhou, they looted and plundered.

古文：郭威请杀重威牙将百馀人，并重威家赀籍之以赏战士，从之。
现代文：郭威请求杀死杜重威的一百多名牙将，并抄没杜重威家中的资财赏给战士们，高祖同意了。
English: Guo Wei requested to kill more than a hundred of Du Chongwei's tooth soldiers, and confiscated Du Chongwei's family's assets to reward the soldiers, Gaozu agreed.

古文：以重威为太傅兼中书令、楚国公。
现代文：高祖任命杜重威为太傅兼中书令、楚国公。
English: Gaozu appointed Du Chongwei as Taifu and Chung Shuling, the Duke of Chu.

古文：重威每出入，路人往往掷瓦砾诟之。
现代文：杜重威每次出入，路上的人常常向他扔碎砖烂瓦诟骂他。
English: Every time Du Chongwei went out, people on the road often threw broken bricks and tiles at him and cursed him.

古文：臣光曰：汉高祖杀幽州无辜千五百人，非仁也；诱张琏而诛之，非信也；杜重威罪大而赦之，非刑也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：后汉高祖杀害无辜的幽州士卒一千五百人，是不仁；引诱张琏投降而又杀死他，是不信；杜重威罪恶大却赦免了他，是不刑。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: After the Han Dynasty, Gao Zu killed 1,500 innocent Yuzhou soldiers, which was inhumane; luring Zhang Ye to surrender and then killing him was unbelief; Du Chongwei committed a great sin but pardoned him, which was impunity.

古文：仁以合众，信以行令，刑以惩奸，失此三者，何以守国！
现代文：仁用以团结大众，信用以执行命令，刑用以惩罚奸佞，失掉这三者，凭什么守卫国家！
English: Benevolence is used to unite the public, trust is used to execute orders, and punishment is used to punish traitors. If these three are lost, how can the country be protected?

古文：其祚运之不延也，宜哉！
现代文：他的皇位不能延续，也是应该的！
English: His reign cannot continue, and rightly so!

古文：高行周以慕容彦超在澶州，固辞鄴都。
现代文：高行周因为慕容彦超在澶州，所以极力辞去相近的邺都。
English: Gao Xingzhou, because Murong Yanchao was in Ganzhou, tried his best to leave the nearby Ganzhou.

古文：己卯，以忠武节度使史弘肇领归德节度使，兼侍卫马步都指挥使，义成节度使刘信领忠武节度使兼侍卫马步副都指挥使，徙彦超为天平节度使，并加同平章事。
现代文：己卯，后汉高祖命忠武节度使史弘肇领归德节度使，兼侍卫马步都指挥使；命义成节度使刘信领忠武节度使兼侍卫马步副都指挥使；调慕容彦超为天平节度使，并加同平章事。
English: Later, Han Gao Zu's mission of loyalty and military discipline made Shi Hongzhao the leader of the festival of returning to virtue, and also the commander of the horse guards; the mission of loyalty and military discipline made Liu Xinyi the leader of the loyalty and military discipline, and also the deputy commander of the horse guards; and the mission of moderation made Yonghongchao the leader of the balance of the scales, and added the same.

古文：吴越王弘踧大阅水军，赏赐倍于旧。胡进思固谏，弘倧怒，投笔水中，曰： 吾之财与士卒共之，奚多少之限邪！ 
现代文：吴越王钱弘大举检阅水军，赏赐比过去多一倍，胡进思极力劝谏减少赏赐，钱弘动怒，把笔投到水里，说： 我的财产和士卒共有，有什么多少的界限呢！ 
English: Qian Hong, the king of Wuyue, inspected the navy in a big way, and the reward was twice as much as before. Hu Jinshi tried his best to persuade him to reduce the reward. Qian Hong became angry and threw the pen into the water, saying: My property is shared with the soldiers, what is the limit?

古文：十二月，丙戌，帝发鄴都。
现代文：十二月，丙戌，后汉高祖从邺都出发。
English: In December, the pro-Han Gaozu departed from Shidu.

古文：蜀主遣雄武都押牙吴崇恽，以枢密使王处回书招凤翔节度使侯益。
现代文：后蜀主孟昶派雄武都押牙吴崇恽，带上枢密使王处回的信，招凤翔节度使侯益归降。
English: Later, the Shu lord Meng Xuan sent Wu Chongyi, a powerful military commander, with a letter from the king's envoy, to persuade Fengxiang Jiedu to make Houyi surrender.

古文：庚寅，以山南西道节度使兼中书令张虔钊为北面行营招讨安抚使，雄武节度使何重建副之，宣徽使韩保贞为都虞候，共将兵五万，虔钊出散关，重建出陇州，以击凤翔。奉銮肃卫都虞候李廷珪将兵二万出子午谷，以援长安。
现代文：庚寅，命山南西道节度使兼中书令张虔钊为北面行营招讨安抚使，命雄武节度使何重建为副安抚使，命宣徽使韩保贞为都虞候，共率五万兵马，张虔钊从散关出兵，何重建从陇州出兵，来攻击凤翔；又命奉銮肃卫都虞候李廷领兵二万出子午谷，去援助长安。
English: Geng Yin ordered Zhang Qianqian to be appointed as the envoy of the festival of the south-west road and the envoy of the central government to recruit the pacification envoy for the north, ordered He Xiongwu to be appointed as the deputy pacification envoy, ordered Han Baozhen to be appointed as the governor of the capital and led a total of fifty thousand soldiers and horses, Zhang Qianqian to send troops from Sankuan and He Qianqian to attack Fengxiang, and ordered Li Ting, who was appointed as the governor of the Sui, to lead twenty thousand soldiers out of Ziogu to aid Chang'an.

古文：诸军发成都，旌旗数十里。
现代文：各军从成都出发时，旌旗连绵几十里。
English: When the armies set out from Chengdu, their banners stretched for dozens of miles.

古文：辛卯，皇子开封尹承训卒。
现代文：辛卯，后汉高祖的皇子开封尹刘承训去世。
English: Xinwu, the prince of the late Han Emperor Gaozu, Kaifeng Yin Liu, passed away.

古文：承训孝友忠厚，达于从政，人皆惜之。
现代文：刘承训为人孝顺、友爱、忠诚、厚道，而且通晓政务，人都对他的死感到惋惜。
English: Liu Chengxun was a man of filial piety, brotherly love, loyalty, and kindness, and was well versed in government affairs. People felt sorry for his death.

古文：癸巳，帝至大梁。
现代文：癸巳，后汉高祖抵达大梁。
English: Suddenly, the ancestors of the later Han Dynasty arrived in Daliang.

古文：威武节度使李孺赟与吴越戍将鲍修让不协，谋袭杀修让，复以福州降唐。修让觉之，引兵攻府第，是日，杀孺赟，夷其族。
现代文：威武节度使李孺与吴越守将鲍修让不和，李孺谋划袭击杀死鲍修让，再率福州投降南唐；鲍修让察觉了，领兵进攻福州府署，这天，杀死李孺，灭其家族。
English: The Great Martial Arts Festival caused Li Qian and Wu Yue Shou to quarrel with Bao Xujang. Li Qian planned to attack and kill Bao Xujang, and then led Fuzhou to surrender to Nantang. Bao Xujang noticed, led the troops to attack the Fuzhou government office, and on this day, killed Li Qian and destroyed his family.

古文：乙未，追立皇子承训为魏王。
现代文：乙未，后汉高祖追立皇子刘承训为魏王。
English: Two years later, Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty appointed Prince Liu Chengxun as the King of Wei.

古文：侯益请降于蜀，使吴崇恽持兵籍、粮帐西还，与赵匡赞同上表请出兵平定关中。
现代文：侯益请求归降于后蜀，让吴崇恽拿走凤翔的兵籍和粮帐向西返回，并与赵匡赞一同上表章请求出兵平定关中。
English: Hou Yi requested to surrender to Hou Shu, let Wu Chongyi take away Feng Xiang's military record and grain account and return to the west, and together with Zhao Kuanzan, he requested to send troops to subdue Guanzhong.

古文：己酉，鲍修让传李孺赟首至钱塘，吴越王弘倧以丞相山阴吴程知威武节度事。
现代文：己酉，鲍修让把李孺的头传至钱唐，吴越王钱弘派丞相山阴人吴程主持威武节度事务。
English: Ji Yao and Bao Xiu sent Li Yao's head to Qiantang, and Wu Yue Wang Qianhong sent the prime minister and shaman Wu Cheng to preside over the Weiwu Festival affairs.

古文：吴越王弘倧，性刚严，愤忠献王弘佐时容养诸将，政非己出，及袭位，诛杭、越侮法吏三人。
现代文：吴越王钱弘，生性刚毅、严厉，愤恨忠献王钱弘佐容忍宠养众将，政令不出于自己。待他承袭王位，诛杀杭、越二州玩忽败坏法纪的三个官吏。
English: King Qianhong of Wuyue was born with a strong and stern character. He was an angry and loyal subject of King Qianhong, who tolerated and nurtured many generals. He did not issue decrees of his own accord. When he was to succeed to the throne, he fought and killed three officials from Hang, Yue and Erzhou who had been negligent and had broken the law.

古文：内牙统军使胡进思恃迎立功，干预政事；弘倧恶之，欲授以一州，进思不可。
现代文：内牙统军使胡进思倚仗着有迎立新王的功劳，干预政事；钱弘厌恶他，想让他去管辖一个州，胡进思不愿意。
English: The Inner Fang United Army made Hu Jinshi rely on the merit of welcoming the new king and intervene in political affairs; Qian Hong detested him and wanted him to govern a province, but Hu Jinshi was unwilling.

古文：进思有所谋议，弘倧数面折之。
现代文：他有时陈述自己的谋略，钱弘就多次当面折辱他。
English: He sometimes stated his strategy, and Qian Hong repeatedly insulted him in person.

古文：进思还家，设忠献王位，被发恸哭。
现代文：胡进思回到家，设了一个忠献王的牌位，披散头发痛哭。
English: Hu Jinshi returned home, set up a loyalty card table, and wept bitterly.

古文：民有杀牛者，吏按之，引人所市肉近千斤。
现代文：百姓有杀牛的，官吏查访此事，拿来他人所买的肉近一千斤。
English: When the people killed a cow, the officials investigated the matter and took nearly a thousand catties of meat bought by others.

古文：弘倧问进思： 牛大者肉几何？ 
现代文：钱弘问胡进思： 牛大的有多少肉？ 
English: Qian Hong asked Hu Jinshi: How much beef is there?

古文：对曰： 不过三百斤。 
现代文：答道： 不过三百斤。 
English: He replied, "Only three hundred catties."

古文：弘倧曰： 然则吏妄也。 
现代文：钱弘说： 那么官吏是胡说。 
English: Qian Hong said: Then the officials are talking nonsense.

古文：命按其罪。
现代文：命人查办官吏的罪。
English: Ordering people to investigate the crimes of officials.

古文：进思拜贺其明。
现代文：胡进思向钱弘拜贺他的明察。
English: Hu Jinshi congratulated Qian Hongbai on his insight.

古文：弘亻宗曰： 公何能知其详？ 
现代文：钱弘问： 您怎么能知道得这样详细？ 
English: Qian Hong asked: How can you know so much?

古文：进思踧躇对曰： 臣昔未从军，亦尝从事于此。 
现代文：胡进思恭敬而不安地答道： 臣过去没从军时，也曾干这种事。 
English: Hu Jinshi respectfully and uneasily replied: In the past, when the minister was not in the military, he also did this kind of thing.

古文：进思以弘倧为知其素业，故辱之，益恨怒。
现代文：胡进思认为钱弘知道他原来的旧业，故意侮辱他，更加愤恨恼怒。
English: Hu Jinshi thought that Qian Hong knew his former occupation and deliberately insulted him, which made him even more angry.

古文：进思建议遣李孺赟归福州，及孺赟叛，弘倧责之，进思愈不自安。
现代文：胡进思建议派李孺回福州，等到李孺反叛，钱弘责备他，胡进思越发自感不安。
English: Hu Jinshi suggested sending Li Yao back to Fuzhou. When Li Yao rebelled and Qian Hong rebuked him, Hu Jinshi felt more and more uneasy.

古文：弘倧与内牙指挥使何承训谋逐进思，又谋于内都监使水丘昭券，昭券以为进思党盛难制，不如容之，弘倧犹豫未决。
现代文：钱弘和内牙指挥使何承训计划驱逐胡进思，又和内都监使水丘昭券商议，水丘昭券认为胡进思党羽众多难以制服，不如宽容他，钱弘犹豫不决。
English: Qian Hong and the commander of the Inner Fang ordered He to accept the training plan to expel Hu Jinshi, and also discussed with the Inner Capital Supervisor Shuqiu Zhaojuan. Shuqiu Zhaojuan believed that it was difficult to subdue Hu Jinshi's many party members, so it was better to tolerate him. Qian Hong hesitated.

古文：承训恐事泄，反以谋告进思。
现代文：何承训怕事情泄露，反而把密谋告诉了胡进思。
English: He Chengxun was afraid that the matter would be leaked, but instead he told Hu Jinshi about the conspiracy.

古文：庚戌晦，弘倧夜宴将吏，进思疑其图己，与其党谋作乱，帅亲兵百人戎服执兵入见于天策堂，曰： 老奴无罪，王何故图之？ 
现代文：庚戌晦，钱弘夜里宴请将领官员，胡进思怀疑他谋害自己，便与他的党羽策划作乱，率领亲兵一百人，身着戎装手持武器开进宫内在天策堂见钱弘，胡进思说： 老奴没有罪，大王为什么要谋害我？ 
English: At night, Geng Bingwei and Qian Hong held a banquet for generals and officials. Hu Jinshi suspected that Qian Hongwei was plotting to kill himself, so he and his followers plotted a riot. He led a hundred of his own soldiers, dressed in military uniforms and armed with weapons, into the palace to see Qian Hongwei in the Temple of Heaven. Hu Jinshi said: The old slave is not guilty, why would the great king plot to kill me?

古文：弘倧叱之不退，左右持兵者皆愤怒。
现代文：钱弘喝斥他，他不退，周围执兵器的人都很愤怒。
English: Qian Hong shouted at him, but he didn't back down. The people around him who were wielding weapons were furious.

古文：弘倧猝愕不暇发言，趋入义和院。
现代文：钱弘猛然惊愕得没有时间发话，跑入义和院。
English: Qian Hong was so shocked that he didn't have time to speak and ran into the Yiwu Courthouse.

古文：进思锁其门，矫称王命，告中外云： 猝得风疾，传位于同参相府事弘亻叔。 
现代文：胡进思锁上院门，假传王命，宣告朝廷内外： 因突然中风，传位给同参相府事钱弘。 
English: Hu Jinshi locked the door of the upper house, falsely transmitted the king's order, and announced inside and outside the imperial court: Due to a sudden stroke, the throne was passed to the same minister, Qianhong.

古文：进思因帅诸将迎弘亻叔于私第，且召丞相元德昭。
现代文：胡进思于是率领众将到私宅迎接钱弘入宫，并召丞相远德昭。
English: Hu Jinshi then led the crowd to the private residence to welcome Qian Hong into the palace, and summoned the emperor.

古文：德昭至，立于帘外不拜，曰： 俟见新君。 
现代文：元德昭到达，站立在帘外不拜，说： 等待谒见新君。 
English: When Yuan Dezhao arrived, he stood outside the curtain and said, "Wait for me to meet the new prince."

古文：进思亟出褰帘，德昭乃拜。
现代文：胡进思急忙出去欣开帘子，元德昭才下拜。
English: Hu Jinshi hurriedly went out to open the curtain, and Yuan De Zhao bowed down.

古文：进思称弘倧之命，承制授弘亻叔镇海、镇东节度使兼侍中。
现代文：胡进思伪称弘之命，承奉制书授钱弘镇海、镇东节度使兼侍中。
English: On the order of Hu Jinshi, he served as the secretary of Zhenhai, Zhendong, Zhenhai, Zhendong and Zhendong.

古文：弘亻叔曰： 能全吾兄，乃敢承命。不然，当避贤路。 
现代文：钱弘说： 能保全我哥哥，才敢接受此命，否则，我当避路让贤。 
English: Qian Hong said: If I can save my brother, then I dare to accept this life. Otherwise, I should give way to Xian.

古文：进思许之。
现代文：胡进思答应他。
English: Hu Jinshi agreed.

古文：弘亻叔始视事。
现代文：钱弘开始处理国事。
English: Qian Hong began to deal with state affairs.

古文：进思杀水丘昭券及进侍鹿光铉。
现代文：胡进思杀死水丘昭券和进侍鹿光铉。
English: Hu Jinshi killed Shuiqiu Zhaochen and entered the service of Lu Guangya.

古文：光弦，弘倧之舅也。
现代文：鹿光铉是钱弘的舅舅。
English: Lu Guangyao is Qian Hong's uncle.

古文：进思之妻曰： 它人犹可杀，昭券，君子也，奈何害之！ 
现代文：胡进思的妻子说： 他人还可杀，昭券是君子，怎么能杀害！ 
English: Hu Jinshi's wife said, "Other people can still be killed, he is a gentleman, how can he be killed!"

古文：是岁，唐主以羽林大将军王延政为安化节度使、鄱阳王，镇饶州。
现代文：这一年，南唐主命羽林大将军王延政为安化节度使、鄱阳王，镇守饶州。
English: In that year, Wang Yan Zheng, General of the South Tang Dynasty, was appointed by the Lord of the South Tang Dynasty as the envoy of the Anhua Festival, the King of Shenyang, and the town guard of Raozhou.

古文：高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝中乾祐元年
现代文：乾元年春季，正月，乙卯，后汉高祖大赦天下，改年号为乾。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Qian, the first month, the second month, and the second month of the year, the founder of the Han Dynasty was pardoned, and the year name was changed to Qian.

古文：春，正月，乙卯，大赦，改元。帝以赵匡赞、侯益与蜀兵共为寇，患之。会回鹘入贡，诉称为党项所阻，乞兵应接。
现代文：后汉高祖因为赵匡赞、侯益和后蜀兵联合侵犯，深感忧虑。正赶上回鹘送来贡品，诉称在路上被党项人所阻拦，请求发兵接应。
English: Later Han Gaozu was deeply worried because of the joint invasion by Zhao Kuanzan, Hou Yi and later Shu soldiers. He was just in time to send tribute to Huizhou, complained that he was blocked by party members on the road, and requested that troops be sent to meet him.

古文：诏右卫大将军王景崇、将军齐藏珍将禁军数千赴之，因使之经略关西。
现代文：高祖诏令左卫大将军王景崇、将军齐藏珍率领禁军几千人赶赴，乘此让王景崇等人取得关西。
English: Gao Zu'er ordered the Left Division General Wang Jing Chong and General Qi Zangzhen to lead several thousand soldiers of the Forbidden Army to rush to the scene, thereby allowing Wang Jing Chong and others to capture Kansai.

古文：晋昌节度判官李恕，久在赵延寿幕下，延寿使之佐匡赞。
现代文：晋昌节度使判官李恕，多年在赵延寿幕府中，赵延寿派他去辅佐赵匡赞。
English: Jinchang Festival made the judge Li Shou, for many years in Zhao Yanshou's shogunate, Zhao Yanshou sent him to assist Zhao Kuanzan.

古文：匡赞将入蜀，恕谏曰： 燕王入胡，岂所愿哉！
现代文：赵匡赞将要入蜀，李恕劝谏说： 燕王身入契丹朝，难道是他自愿的吗？
English: Zhao Kuangzan is going to enter Shu, Li Shuxuan said: Yan Wang entered the Qidan Dynasty, is he voluntary?

古文：今汉家新得天下，方务招怀，若谢罪归朝，必保富贵。
现代文：现在汉家新得天下，正致力招降怀远，如果认罪回归朝廷，一定能保住富贵。
English: Now that the Han family is new to the world, they are working hard to recruit people from far and wide. If they plead guilty and return to the imperial court, they will certainly be able to maintain their wealth.

古文：入蜀非全计也， 蹄涔不容尺鲤 ，公必悔之。 
现代文：到后蜀去不是万全之策， 牛马蹄印里的水，容不得尺长的鲤鱼 ，您一定会后悔。 
English: It is not a panacea to go to Shu after arrival. The water in the hoofprints of cows and horses does not tolerate long eels. You will surely regret it.

古文：匡赞乃遣恕奉表请入朝。
现代文：赵匡赞于是派李恕去后汉奉上降表请求入朝。
English: Zhao Kuangzang then sent Li Shu to Han to request entry into the imperial court.

古文：景崇等未行而恕至，帝问恕： 匡赞何为附蜀？ 
现代文：王景崇等人还没发兵李恕就到了。高祖问李恕： 匡赞为什么归附蜀？ 
English: Wang Jingsong and others had not yet sent their troops to Lishu when they arrived. Gaozhu asked Lishu: Why did Kuanzang return to Shu?

古文：对曰： 匡赞自以身受虏官，父在虏庭，恐陛下未之察，故附蜀求苟免耳。
现代文：答道：匡赞认为自己因为身受胡虏的官职，父亲又在胡虏朝廷，怕陛下不能详察，所以依附蜀国寻求苟且免杀。
English: He replied: Kuang Zan thought that because he was in the service of the Khurji and his father was also in the court of the Khurji, he was afraid that His Majesty would not be able to see everything, so he sought refuge in the State of Shu to avoid being killed.

古文：臣以为国家必应存抚，故遣臣来祈哀。 
现代文：臣认为国家一定应能收留抚慰，所以就派臣来祈求哀怜。 
English: The vassal thought that the country should be able to accept the consolation, so he sent a vassal to pray for pity.

古文：帝曰： 匡赞父子，本吾人也，不幸陷虏。
现代文：高祖说： 匡赞父子，本来就是我们的人，不幸身陷于胡虏之中。
English: Gao Zu said: Kuang Zan father and son, who are originally our people, are unfortunately trapped in the midst of the Khurik.

古文：今延寿方坠槛阱，吾何忍更害匡赞乎！ 
现代文：如今延寿刚落入胡虏的监狱，我又怎能忍心再加害于匡赞呢！ 
English: Now that Yan Shou has just fallen into the prison of Hu Rui, how can I bear to harm Kuang Zan again!

古文：即听其入朝。
现代文：立即让他入朝。
English: Let him come to the Imperial Court immediately.

古文：侯益亦请赴二月四日圣寿节上寿。
现代文：侯益也请求赶赴二月四日圣寿节恭贺高祖生日。
English: Hou Yi also requested to rush to celebrate Gao Zu's birthday on February 4th, the Day of the Immaculate Conception.

古文：景崇等将行，帝召入卧内，敕之曰： 匡赞、益之心，皆未可知。
现代文：王景崇等人要走，高祖召入卧室中，敕令道： 赵匡赞、侯益的心，都不可知。
English: Wang Jing Chong and others wanted to leave, Gao Zu was called into the bedroom, and Zou Ling said: Zhao Kuang Zan, Hou Yi's heart, are unknowable.

古文：汝至彼，彼已入朝，则勿问；若尚迁延顾望，当以便宜从事。 
现代文：你们兵到那里，他们已经入朝，就不再过问；如果他们还在迁延观望，应当随机从事。 
English: When your soldiers arrive there, they have already entered the country, they will no longer be questioned; if they are still waiting and watching, they should be randomly engaged.

古文：己未，帝更名暠。
现代文：己未，后汉高祖改名为。
English: Later, it was renamed as Han Gaozu.

古文：以前威胜节度使冯道为太师。
现代文：后汉高祖任命前威胜节度使冯道为太师。
English: Later, the founding fathers of the Han Dynasty appointed Feng Dao as Grand Master.

古文：壬戌，吴越王弘亻叔迁故王弘倧于衣锦军私第，遣匡武都头薛温将亲兵卫之。潜戒之曰： 若有非常处分，皆非吾意，当以死拒之。 
现代文：壬戌，吴越王钱弘把原来的吴越王钱弘迁到衣锦军的私宅，派匡武都头薛温领亲兵守卫，并悄悄告诫薛温： 如果有非常的处理，都不是我的意思，你应当拼死拒绝。 
English: At the same time, Wu Yue Wang Qianhong moved the original Wu Yue King Qianhong to the private residence of the Yi Jin Army, sent the commander of the capital, Xue Wen, to lead his soldiers to guard, and quietly warned Xue Wen: If there is a special treatment, it is not my intention, you should refuse desperately.

古文：帝自魏王承训卒，悲痛过甚。甲子，始不豫。
现代文：后汉高祖自从魏王刘承训去世，过于悲伤哀痛，甲子，开始发病。
English: Since the death of the Wei King Liu Chengxun, the later Han Emperor Gaozu was too sad and sorrowful, and he began to fall ill.

古文：赵匡赞不俟李恕返命，已离长安。丙子，入见。
现代文：赵匡赞没等李恕回长安述命，就离开长安去，丙子，入京朝见。
English: Zhao Kuangzan did not wait for Li Shou to return to Chang'an to report his life, he left Chang'an to go to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：王景崇等至长安，闻蜀兵已入秦川，以兵少，发本道及赵匡赞牙兵千馀人同拒之。
现代文：王景崇等来到长安时，听说后蜀军队已开入秦川，因为自己带的兵少，就起用本道兵马和赵匡赞的一千多名牙兵共同拒敌。
English: When Wang Jingsong and others came to Chang'an, they heard that the post-Shu army had entered the Qin River, and because they had fewer soldiers, they used local soldiers and horses and more than a thousand tooth soldiers from Zhao Kuanzang to jointly resist the enemy.

古文：景崇恐匡赞牙兵亡逸，欲文其面，微露风旨。军校赵思绾，首请自文其面以帅下，景崇悦。
现代文：王景崇恐怕赵匡赞的牙兵逃跑，想在他们的脸上刺字，稍微透露出一点风声；牙兵的军校赵思绾首先请求在自己脸上刺字来统率部下，王景崇很高兴。
English: Wang Jingsong was afraid that Zhao Kuanzan's tooth soldiers would escape and wanted to tattoo their faces, revealing a little bit of the rumor; Zhao Sijun, the military school of the tooth soldiers, first asked to tattoo his face to lead his subordinates, Wang Jingsong was very happy.

古文：齐藏珍窃言曰： 思绾凶暴难制，不如杀之。 
现代文：齐藏珍悄悄说： 赵思绾凶猛暴戾，难以制服，不如杀掉他。 
English: Qi Zangzhen said quietly: Zhao Siyu is ferocious and violent, it is difficult to subdue, it is better to kill him.

古文：景崇不听。
现代文：王景崇不听。
English: Wang Jingsong did not listen.

古文：思绾，魏州人也。
现代文：赵思绾是魏州人。
English: Zhao Sijian is a native of Weizhou.

古文：蜀李廷珪将至长安，闻赵匡赞已入朝，欲引归，王景崇邀之，败廷珪于子午谷。
现代文：后蜀李廷快到长安时，听说赵匡赞已向后汉皇帝朝拜，想率兵退回蜀地；王景崇拦击，在子午谷打败李廷。
English: After Shu, when Li Ting was approaching Chang'an, he heard that Zhao Kuanzang had bowed to the Emperor of the Later Han Dynasty and wanted to lead the troops back to Shu; Wang Jingsong intercepted and defeated Li Ting in Zi Wu Valley.

古文：张虔钊至宝鸡，诸将议不协，按兵未进。
现代文：张虔钊到达宝鸡，众将意见不一致，按兵不动。
English: When Zhang Qianqian arrived at Baoji, the generals disagreed and did not move.

古文：侯益闻廷珪西还，因闭壁拒蜀兵，虔钊势孤，引兵夜遁。
现代文：侯益听说李延向西返回，于是关闭壁垒抗拒后蜀军队。张虔钊见势力孤单，率领军队连夜逃跑。
English: Hou Yi heard that Li Yan was returning to the west, so he closed the barriers to resist the post-Shu army. Zhang Qianlong saw that the forces were alone and led the army to flee overnight.

古文：景崇帅凤翔、陇、邠、泾、鄜、坊之兵追败蜀兵于散关，俘将卒四百人。
现代文：王景崇率领凤翔、陇？泾？坊六州的兵马追击，在散关打败后蜀军队，俘虏兵将四百人。
English: Wang Jingsong led the troops and horses of Fengxiang, Zhisheng and Weifang in the pursuit of the six states. After defeating the Shu army in Sanguan, he captured four hundred soldiers.

古文：丁丑，帝大渐，杨邠忌侍卫马军都指挥使、忠武节度使刘信，立遣之镇。
现代文：丁丑，后汉高祖病危，杨妒忌侍卫马军都指挥使、忠武节度使刘信，立刻送他前往镇所。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the late Han Gao Zu was critically ill, Yang Zhengyi commanded the guards of the horse army, and Zhongwu Jiedu commanded Liu Xin, and immediately sent him to the town hall.

古文：信不得奉辞，雨泣而去。
现代文：刘信不能辞行，泪如雨下而离去。
English: Unable to resign, Liu Xin left in tears.

古文：帝召苏逢吉、杨邠、史弘肇、郭威入受顾命，曰： 余气息微，不能多言。
现代文：后汉高祖召苏逢吉、杨、史弘肇、郭威入宫接受遗嘱，说： 我气息微弱，不能多说。
English: Later, Han Gao Zu summoned Su Fengji, Yang, Shi Hongzhao and Guo Wei to the palace to accept the will, saying: I am weak and cannot say much.

古文：承祐幼弱，后事托在卿辈。 
现代文：刘承年幼弱小，一切后事拜托各位爱卿。 
English: Liu Cheng is too young and weak. Please take care of everything afterwards, my lords.

古文：又曰： 善防重威。 
现代文：又说： 妥善防范杜重威。 
English: He also said: Du Chongwei should be properly guarded against.

古文：是日，殂于万岁殿，逢吉等秘不发丧。
现代文：当天，在万岁殿去世。苏逢吉等人保密而不发布噩耗。
English: On the same day, he passed away in the Hall of Long Life. Su Fengji and others kept the news confidential and did not release it.

古文：庚辰，下诏，称： 重威父子，因朕小疾，谤议摇众，并其子弘璋、弘琏、弘璨皆斩之。
现代文：庚辰，传下皇帝诏书，声称： 杜重威父子，乘朕小病，毁谤诽议，动摇人心，连同他的儿子杜弘璋、杜弘琏、杜弘璨一起斩首。
English: Geng Chen issued an imperial edict, stating: Du Chongwei and his son, taking advantage of my minor illness, slandered and slandered, swayed people's hearts, and beheaded together with his son Du Hongtao, Du Hongtao, Du Hongtao.

古文：晋公主及内外亲族，一切不问。 
现代文：晋公主及内外亲族，一概不予追究。 
English: Princess Jin and her relatives at home and abroad will not be investigated.

古文：磔重威尸于市，市人争啖其肉，吏不能禁，斯须而尽。
现代文：将杜重威尸的肢体分裂于街市，市民争着咬吃他的肉，官吏不能禁止，一会儿尸体就被咬光了。
English: After splitting the limbs of Du Chongwei's corpse in the street market, citizens fought to bite and eat his flesh. Officials could not forbid it, and the corpse was chewed up in an instant.

古文：二月，辛巳朔，立皇子左卫大将军、大内都点检承祐为周王，同平章事。
现代文：二月辛巳朔，立皇子左卫大将军、大内都点检刘承为周王，同平章事。
English: In February, Prince Zuo, the general of the Imperial Guards, was appointed, and Liu Cheng, the king of Zhou, was inspected by the Imperial Household Agency, and the matter was settled.

古文：有顷，发丧，宣遗制，令周王即皇帝位。
现代文：不久，发布丧事，宣读遗制，命周王即皇帝位。
English: Soon after, the funeral notice was issued, the posthumous edict was read out, and King Zhou was proclaimed emperor.

古文：时年十八。
现代文：那年，刘承十八岁。
English: He was 18 years old at the time.

古文：蜀韩保贞、庞福诚引兵自陇州还，要何重建俱西。
现代文：后蜀韩保贞、庞福诚率兵从陇州返回，约何重建一起西行。
English: After Shu Han Baozhen and Pang Fucheng returned from Zhangzhou with their soldiers, they went west together to rebuild.

古文：是日，保贞等至秦州，分兵守诸门及衢路，重建遂入于蜀。
现代文：这天，韩保贞等到达秦州，分兵把守各城门及大路，何重建于是进入后蜀。
English: On this day, Han Baozhen and others arrived in Qinzhou, and the detachment of soldiers guarded the city gates and highways, and then entered Houshu.

古文：丁亥，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：丁亥，后汉尊皇后为皇太后。
English: Dinghai, the empress dowager of the Han Dynasty.

古文：朝廷知成德留后白再荣非将帅才，庚寅，以前建雄留后刘在明代之。
现代文：后汉朝廷知道成德留后白再荣不是将帅之才，庚寅，派前建雄留后刘在明前往取代他。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the imperial court knew that Chengde's staying and Bai Zairong's ascending was not the skill of a general, and sent the former Jianxiong to replace him with Liu Zaiming.

古文：癸巳，大赦。
现代文：癸巳，大赦天下。
English: On the 30th, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：吴越内牙指挥使何承训复请诛胡进思及其党。
现代文：吴越内牙指挥使何承训又请求诛杀胡进思及其党羽。
English: Wu Yue Neya commander sent He to receive training and asked him to kill Hu Jinshi and his followers.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔恶其反覆，且惧召祸，乙未，执承训，斩之。
现代文：吴越王钱弘厌恶他反复无常，而且怕召来祸患，乙未，把何承训抓起来斩首。
English: Qian Hong, the king of Wuyue, detested his fickleness and feared that he would bring misfortune, so he arrested He Chengxun and beheaded him.

古文：进思屡请杀废王弘倧以绝后患，弘亻叔不许。
现代文：胡进思屡次请求杀掉废王钱弘以绝后患，钱弘不允许。
English: Hu Jinshi repeatedly requested that Qian Hong, the former king, be killed as a last resort, but Qian Hong did not allow it.

古文：进思诈以王命密令薛温害之。温曰： 仆受命之日，不闻此言，不敢妄发。 
现代文：胡进思假称王命，密令薛温害死钱弘，薛温说； 我自受命守卫那天起，没有听到过这句话，不敢妄自行动。 
English: Hu Jinshi pretended to be the king's life and secretly ordered Xue Wen to kill Qian Hong, Xue Wen said; I have not heard this sentence since the day I was ordered to guard, and I dare not act rashly.

古文：进思乃夜遣其党方安等二人俞垣而入，弘倧阖户拒之，大呼求救；温闻之，率众而入，毙安等于庭中。
现代文：胡进思就在夜里派出他的党羽方安二人跳墙而入，钱弘关门抵抗，大喊求救；薛温听到，率众兵冲入，在院中杀死方安二人。
English: In the middle of the night, Hu Jinshi sent two of his henchmen, Fang'an, to jump over the wall. Qian Hong shut the door to resist and shouted for help; Xue Wen heard this and led the soldiers to rush in and kill the two Fang'ans in the hospital.

古文：入告弘亻叔，弘亻叔大惊，曰： 全吾兄，汝之力也。 
现代文：薛温到钱唐报告钱弘，钱弘大吃一惊，说： 保全我哥哥，全靠你的力量啊！ 
English: When Xue Wen went to Qiantang to report to Qian Hong, Qian Hong was taken aback and said, "Protect my brother, it's all up to you!"

古文：弘亻叔畏忌进思，曲意下之。
现代文：钱弘畏惧提防胡进思，极力对他低三下四。
English: Qian Hong was afraid of Hu Jinshi and tried his best to undermine him.

古文：进思亦内忧惧，未几，疽发背卒。
现代文：胡进思也心中担忧害怕，不久，背上恶疮发作而死。
English: Hu Jinshi was also worried and afraid in his heart. Soon, he died from the onset of sores on his back.

古文：弘倧由是获全。
现代文：钱弘因此得以保全。
English: Qian Hong was thus saved.

古文：诏以王景崇兼凤翔巡检使。
现代文：后汉隐帝刘承诏令王景崇兼凤翔巡检使。
English: Later, Emperor Liu Chengzhao of the Han Dynasty ordered Wang Jingsong and Fengxiang to serve as inspectors.

古文：景崇引兵至凤翔，侯益尚未行，景崇以禁兵分守诸门。
现代文：王景崇领兵到达凤翔，侯益还没有启程，王景崇让禁兵分守各个城门。
English: Wang Jingsong led the soldiers to arrive in Fengxiang, Houyi has not yet set off, Wang Jingsong let the forbidden soldiers guard the various gates.

古文：或劝景崇杀益，景崇以受先朝密旨，嗣主未之知，或疑于专杀，犹豫未决。
现代文：有人劝说王景崇杀掉侯益，王景崇说因接受先朝 便宜行事 的密旨，但新皇帝不知道，或许会怀疑擅自杀戮，所以犹豫不决。
English: Some people persuaded Wang Jingsong to kill Hou Yi. Wang Jingsong said that because he accepted the secret order of the previous government to act cheaply, but the new emperor did not know, perhaps he would suspect unauthorized killing, so he hesitated.

古文：益闻之，不告景崇而去，景崇悔，自诟。
现代文：侯益听到风声，不与王景崇告别而离去，王景崇十分后悔，骂自己。
English: When Hou Yi heard the rumor, he left without saying goodbye to Wang Jingsong. Wang Jingsong was very regretful and scolded himself.

古文：戊戌，益入朝，隐帝问： 何故召蜀军？ 
现代文：戊戌，侯益入朝谒见后汉隐帝。隐帝问： 为什么招蜀军？ 
English: When Emperor Wu of Wu and Emperor Hou Yi entered the imperial court, they met with Emperor Inti of Han. Emperor Inti asked: Why did you call in the Shu army?

古文：对曰： 臣欲诱致而杀之。 
现代文：回答道： 臣想把他们诱到凤翔而杀掉。 
English: He replied, "I want to lure them to Fengxiang and kill them."

古文：帝哂之。
现代文：隐帝微微一笑。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was not impressed.

古文：蜀张虔钊自恨无功。癸卯，至兴州，惭忿而卒。
现代文：后蜀张虔钊恨自己劳师无功，癸卯，到达兴州，惭愧忿闷而死。
English: After Shu, Zhang Qianqian hated his hard work, and arrived in Xingzhou. He was ashamed and angry, and died.

古文：侍卫马步都指挥使、同平章事史弘肇遭母丧，不数日，复出朝参。
现代文：后汉侍卫马步都指挥使、同平章事史弘肇因母去世在家居丧，但没过几天，又出来上朝参政。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the bodyguard Ma Bu Du commanded the envoy, Tongping Zhang Ji Shi Hong Zhao to mourn at home because of his mother's death, but after a few days, he came out to the court to participate in politics.

