古文：○哲宗二绍圣元年春正月癸酉朔，群臣诣西上阁门进名奉慰。丙申，夏人来贡。
现代文：绍圣元年春正月初一，大臣们到西上间门进名奉慰。二十四日，夏国来进贡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first month of the first year of Shaosheng, the ministers went to the West Upper Gate to offer consolation. On the 24th, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：辛丑，遣中书舍人吕希纯等行河。
现代文：二十九日，派遣中书舍人吕希纯等视察黄河。
English: On the 29th, Lu Xizhong, a Chinese scholar, was sent to inspect the Yellow River.

古文：罢河东大铜钱。
现代文：废罢河东大铜钱。
English: Abolition of the strike cost Hedong University a lot of money.

古文：二月丁未，以户部尚书李清臣为中书侍郎，兵部尚书邓润甫为尚书右丞。
现代文：二月初五，任命户部尚书李清臣为中书侍郎，兵部尚书邓润甫为尚书右承。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Li Qingchen, the household secretary, was appointed as the middle secretary, and Deng Runfu, the military secretary, was appointed as the right successor.

古文：己酉，葬宣仁圣烈皇后于永厚陵。
现代文：初七，将宣仁圣烈皇后葬在永厚陵。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the holy empress Xuanren was buried in Yonghu Mausoleum.

古文：己未，祔神主于太庙。
现代文：十七日，在太庙附祭宣仁圣烈皇后神主。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, at the temple's festival, the holy martyr, Empress Xuanren, was enthroned.

古文：癸亥，减两京、河阳、郑州囚罪一等，民缘山陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：二十一日，两京、河阳、郑州囚犯减罪一等，百姓为山陵服役者免除赋税。
English: On the 21st, the prisoners from Beijing, Heyang and Zhengzhou were given first-class reduction of crime, and the people were exempted from paying taxes for those serving in the mountains and mausoleums.

古文：甲子，诏依章献明肃皇后故事，罢避高遵惠讳。
现代文：二十二日，下诏按照章献明肃皇后惯例，罢废避高遵惠讳。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued in accordance with the custom of the Empress Zhenming Sui, abolishing and avoiding high-ranking officials.

古文：三月壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。初四，吕大防被罢免。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙亥，吕大防罢。庚辰，诏大学合格上舍生推恩免省试，附科场春榜。
现代文：初九，诏令大学合格上舍生施给恩惠免除省试，附在科举考试春榜上。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, the Imperial Edict ordered the university to grant students exemptions from provincial examinations, and it was attached to the spring list of the imperial examinations.

古文：乙酉，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：十四日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On the 14th, he went to Shuei-den to prepare for the entrance examination.

古文：丁亥，策武举。
现代文：十六日，策试武举。
English: On the 16th, the strategic military exercise began.

古文：戊子，以徐王颢为太师，徙封冀王。
现代文：十七日，以徐王赵颖为太师，改封为冀王。
English: On the 17th, Xu Wang Zhao Ying was appointed Grand Master, and his title was changed to Ji Wang.

古文：癸巳，诏振京东、河北流民，贷以谷麦种，谕使还业，蠲是年租税。
现代文：二十二日，诏令贩济京东、河北流民，贷给他们谷麦种子，让他们回到农业生产上，免除当年租税。
English: On the 22nd, merchants were ordered to donate grain and wheat seeds to the displaced people in East Beijing and Hebei Province, so that they could return to agricultural production and be exempted from the tax for that year.

古文：丁酉，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身九百七十五人。
现代文：二十六日，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身九百七十五人。
English: On the 26th, nine hundred and seventy-five people from various disciplines and backgrounds were awarded the title of "Celebrity Musicians of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies."

古文：苏辙罢。
现代文：苏辙被罢免。
English: Su Rong was removed from office.

古文：夏四月乙巳朔，阿里骨进狮子。
现代文：夏四月乙巳日，阿里骨进贡狮子。
English: In the summer of April, on April Fool's Day, Ali's bone went to the lion.

古文：丙午，以旱，诏恤刑。
现代文：初五，因早灾诏令慎用刑法。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict to use criminal law cautiously due to the early disaster.

古文：己酉，诏中外决狱。
现代文：初八，诏令朝廷内外处理狱讼案件。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued ordering the Imperial Court and beyond to handle prison cases.

古文：庚戌，诏有司具医药治京师民疾。
现代文：初九，诏令有关部门筹集医药治疗京城百姓患病者。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the relevant departments were ordered to raise medicine to treat the sick people in Beijing.

古文：壬子，苏轼坐前掌制命语涉讥讪，落职知英州。
现代文：十一日，苏轼因此前掌管知制浩语言涉及讥汕诽谤，被解职为知英州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Su Shi, who had previously been in charge of the language of Zhizhi and Hao, was involved in ridicule and slander, and was dismissed as the leader of Zhiyingzhou.

古文：癸丑，改元。
现代文：十二日，改元。
English: On the 12th, the era was changed.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：甲寅，以王安石配飨神宗庙庭。
现代文：十三日，以王安石神位配享神宗庙庭。
English: On the 13th, they enjoyed the temple garden of the Shinshu Sect with the Wang Anshi Shinto shrine.

古文：蔡确追复右正议大夫。
现代文：追复蔡确为右正议大夫。
English: The reinstatement of Cai Zhengyi is a victory for the right-wing doctors.

古文：戊午，复新城两厢。
现代文：十七日，恢复新城两厢。
English: On the 17th, the two compartments in Xincheng were restored.

古文：庚申，减四京囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：十九日，四京囚犯减罪一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 19th, the Sijing prisoner received a first-class reduction of his sentence and was released with a cane sentence or less.

古文：壬戌，以资政殿学士章惇为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：二十一日，任命资政殿学士章为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was appointed Shosho's left-hand servant and attendant.

古文：范纯仁罢。
现代文：范纯仁被罢免。
English: Fan Chunren was removed from office.

古文：丙寅，罢五路经、律、通礼科。
现代文：二十五日，废罢五路经、律、通礼科。
English: On the 25th, the five departments of classics, law and etiquette were abolished.

古文：丁卯，诏诸路复元丰免役法。
现代文：二十六日，诏令各路恢复元丰免役法。
English: On the 26th, the emperor issued an edict to restore the Yuanfeng exemption law.

古文：戊辰，同修国史蔡卞请重修《神宗实录》。
现代文：二十七日，同修国史蔡卞请重修件申宗实录。
English: On the 27th, the same practitioner, Cai Wei, asked to revise the application record.

古文：闰月壬申，复提举常平官。
现代文：闰四月初二，恢复提举常平官。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the leap year, the promotion of the regular civil servant was resumed.

古文：癸酉，罢十科举士法。
现代文：初三，废罢十科举士法。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the law abolishing the ten subjects to raise a scholar came into effect.

古文：甲申，以观文殿学士安焘为门下侍郎。
现代文：十四日，任命观文殿学士安煮为门下侍郎。
English: On the 14th, he appointed a scholar of the Confucian Academy, An Gui, as his chamberlain.

古文：丙戌，复义仓。
现代文：十六日，恢复义仓。
English: On the 16th, Yoshikura was restored.

古文：丁亥，诏神宗随龙人赵世长等迁秩、赐赍有差。
现代文：十七日，诏令神宗东宫官吏赵世长等迁秩赏赐不等。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Shichang, an official of the East Palace of the Shenzong Emperor, and other officials of the Eastern Palace of the Shenzong Emperor were awarded different ranks.

古文：戊子，诏在京诸司，所受传宣中批，并候朝廷覆奏以行。
现代文：十八日，下诏京城各司，所接受传达下来的旨令，一律等候朝廷详审事情，重行上奏后实行。
English: On the eighteenth day of the following month, all the departments of the capital city, which had accepted the order conveyed, all waited for the detailed examination of the matter by the imperial court, and implemented it after re-reporting.

古文：乙未，西南张蕃遣人入贡。
现代文：二十五日，西南张蕃派人来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Southwest Zhangye sent people to pay tribute.

古文：丙申，命左仆射章惇提举修《神宗国史》。
现代文：二十六日，命令左仆射章提举修撰件申宗国史。
English: On the 26th, he ordered his left-hand man, Shozhang, to raise and revise the manuscript of the national history of the Shenzong.

古文：丁酉，诏添差徐州兵马都监。
现代文：二十七日，下诏添差徐州兵马都监。
English: On the 27th, he issued an edict to dispatch Xuzhou's military governor.

古文：五月壬寅，罢修官制局。
现代文：五月初二，废罢修官制局。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, the State Administration for Religious Affairs was abolished.

古文：甲辰，罢进士习试诗赋，令专二经，立宏词科。
现代文：初四，罢除进士习试诗赋，命令专攻二经，立宏词科。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the students were removed from the poetry examination, and were ordered to specialize in the two scriptures and establish a comprehensive vocabulary.

古文：己酉，修国史曾布请以王安石《日录》载之《神宗实录》。太白昼见。
现代文：初九，修国史曾布请把王安石旧录载人件申宗实录。太白星白天出现。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Anshi's old record was recorded by Zengbu, a scholar of Chinese history. Taibai Xing appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛亥，刘奉世罢。
现代文：十一日，刘奉世被罢免。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Bongse was dismissed.

古文：癸丑，诏中外学官，非制科、进士、上舍生入官者并罢。
现代文：十三日，诏令朝廷内外学官，非制科、进士、上舍生人官者一律罢除。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict ordered the dismissal of all academic officials inside and outside the imperial court, as well as those who were not subject to the imperial examination system, those who had been promoted to higher ranks, and those who had been pardoned by the emperor.

古文：编类元祐群臣章疏及更改事条。
现代文：分类编辑元大臣章疏及更改事条。
English: The former minister's name has been removed from the list of classified editors and the article has been amended.

古文：甲寅，右正言张商英言先帝谓天地合祭非古，诏礼部、太常详议以闻。
现代文：十四日，右正言张商英说先帝曾说天地合祭不符合古礼，诏令礼部、太常寺详细讨论上报朝廷。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Shangying, a right-wing righteous person, said that the former emperor had said that the heaven and earth festival did not conform to the ancient rite, and ordered the ritual department and Taiji Temple to discuss it in detail and report it to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，邓润甫卒。
现代文：二十五日，邓润甫去世。
English: On the 25th, Deng Runfu passed away.

古文：丁卯，嗣濮王宗晖薨。
现代文：二十七日，嗣攫王赵宗晖逝世。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Zongyao, the heir to the throne, passed away.

古文：六月甲戌，来之邵等疏苏轼诋斥先朝，诏谪惠州。
现代文：六月初五，来之邵等上疏说苏轼低斥先朝，诏令贬滴惠州。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：丙子，罢制置解盐使。
现代文：初七，罢除制置解盐使。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, the elimination of the system and the establishment of the salt removal.

古文：壬午，封高密郡王宗晟为嗣濮王。
现代文：十三日，封高密郡王赵宗晨为嗣攫王。
English: On the 13th, the king of Gaomi County, Zhao Zonchen, was named the heir to the throne.

古文：癸未，以翰林学士承旨曾布同知枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命翰林学士承旨曾布为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, Hanlin Scholar Zengzhi Zengbu was appointed as a member of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：甲申，除进士引用王安石《字说》之禁。
现代文：十五日，废除进士引用王安石序泌的禁令。
English: On the 15th, the ban on Jin scholars quoting Wang Anshi's preface was abolished.

古文：秋七月丁巳，以御史黄履、周秩、谏官张商英言，夺司马光、吕公著赠谥，王岩叟赠官；贬吕大防为秘书监，刘挚为光禄卿，苏辙为少府监，并分司南京；梁焘提举舒州灵仙观。
现代文：秋七月十八日，采纳御史黄履、周秩和谏官张商英的主张，削夺司马光、吕公著赠溢，王岩雯赠官；贬吕大防为秘书监，刘挚为光禄卿，苏辙为少府监，都分司南京；梁煮贬为提举舒州灵仙观。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the proposal of the imperial historian Huang Li and the imperial magistrate and eunuch Zhang Shangying was adopted. Sima Guang and Lu Gong were stripped of their titles, and Wang Yanwen was given an official title; Lu Dabao was demoted to the position of secretary supervisor, Liu Cui was demoted to the position of Guangluqing, and Su Rut was demoted to the position of Shaofu supervisor, all of which were assigned to Nanjing; Liang Ni was demoted to the position of Shuzhou Lingxian.

古文：戊午，诏： 大臣朋党，司马光以下各轻重议罚，布告天下。
现代文：十九日，下诏： 大臣结为朋党，司马光以下分别受到轻重不同的处罚，特此布告全国。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: "Ministers have become friends of the party, and Sima Guang and those below have been punished with different degrees of severity, and this is hereby announced to the whole country."

古文：余悉不问，议者亦勿复言。 
现代文：其余的都不予追究，议者也不要重言此事。 
English: The rest will not be investigated, and the speaker should not repeat the matter.

古文：八月丙戌，召辅臣观稼后苑。
现代文：八月十七日，召辅臣到后苑观赏庄稼。
English: On August 17th, he summoned his aide-de-camp to the backyard to see the crops.

古文：日有五色云。
现代文：太阳表面出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: Five-colored clouds appear on the surface of the sun.

古文：壬辰，应制科赵天启以累上书狂妄黜。
现代文：二十三日，赵天启因多次上书妄说猖狂，应命罢默。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Tianqi was ordered to remain silent because he had repeatedly written a letter saying that the situation was out of control.

古文：九月癸卯，遣御史刘拯按河北水灾，振饥民。
现代文：九月初五，派遣御史刘拯视察河北水灾，贩济饥民。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, Liu Zheng, the imperial historian, was dispatched to inspect the floods in Hebei Province and sell food to the starving people.

古文：丙午，御集英殿，策贤良方正能直言极谏科。
现代文：初八，到集英殿，策试贤良方正能直言极谏科。
English: In the eighth year of his junior high school, he went to Shuei-den.

古文：庚戌，罢制科。
现代文：十二日，废罢制科。
English: On the 12th, the Department of Censorship was abolished.

古文：罢广惠仓。
现代文：废罢广惠仓。
English: Abolish Guanghui Cang.

古文：癸丑，令监司岁察守臣课绩优者以闻。
现代文：十五日，命令监司每年考察守臣政绩，把优秀者上报朝廷。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he ordered the inspector general to inspect the performance of the retainers every year and report the outstanding ones to the imperial court.

古文：甲寅，知广州唐义问坐弃渠阳砦，责授舒州团练副使。
现代文：十六日，广州知州唐义问因放弃渠阳寨获罪，降职贬为舒州团练副使。
English: On the 16th, Guangzhou Chizhou Tang Yimin was found guilty of abandoning Quyangzhai, demoted and demoted to the deputy envoy of Shuzhou Rehearsal.

古文：庚申，太白昼见。
现代文：二十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁卯，诏京东西、河北振恤流民。
现代文：二十九日，诏京东西路、河北路贩济抚恤流民。
English: On the 29th, vendors on East-West Road and Hebei Road in Beijing raised money for the displaced people.

古文：戊辰，流星出紫微垣。
现代文：三十日，流星出现在紫微垣。
English: On the 30th, a meteor appeared in Zi Weigaki.

古文：冬十月丙申，三佛齐遣使入贡。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，三佛齐派遣使臣来进贡。
English: In winter, on October 28th, the three Buddhas sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，河北流断绝。
现代文：二十九日，黄河北流断绝。
English: On the 29th, the north flow of the Yellow River was cut off.

古文：十一月己亥朔，复八路差官法。
现代文：十一月初一，恢复八路差官法。
English: On the first day of November, the eight-way police officer law was restored.

古文：壬子，以冬无雪，决系囚。
现代文：十四日，因冬季温暖没有降雪，处理关押的囚犯。
English: On the 14th, due to the warm winter and lack of snowfall, the prisoners were processed.

古文：蔡确特追复观文殿大学士。
现代文：蔡确特追复为观文殿大学士。
English: Cai Jizhong was reinstated as a member of the Academy of Confucianism.

古文：甲寅，开封男子吕安斥乘舆，当斩，贷之。
现代文：初六，开封男子吕安指斥皇上应当处斩，免罪。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Lu'an, a man from Kaifeng, pointed out that the emperor should be beheaded and was exonerated.

古文：丁己，诏河北振饥，诸路恤流亡，官吏有善状、才能显著者以闻。
现代文：十九日，诏令河北贩济饥民，各路抚恤流亡，官吏有才能显著、治绩突出者上报朝廷。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict ordered Hebei to sell food to the starving people, to give pensions to the exiles from all walks of life, and to report to the imperial court the officials with remarkable talents and outstanding performance.

古文：十二月辛未，申严铜钱出外界法。
现代文：十二月初四，重申严禁铜钱出外界法。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, it was reiterated that it is strictly forbidden to export copper coins.

古文：庚辰，命诸路祈雪。
现代文：十三日，命令各路祈祷降雪。
English: On the 13th, all roads were ordered to pray for snow.

古文：丙戌，滑州浮桥火。
现代文：十九日，滑州浮桥发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out on the pontoon bridge in Slum.

古文：己丑，漳河决溢，浸洺、磁等州，令计置堙塞。
现代文：二十二日，漳河决口，河水溢出，淹没洛州、滋州等地，命令想方法堵塞决口。
English: On the 22nd, at the mouth of the Min River, the river overflowed, flooding Lozhou, Shizhou and other places, and the order was given to find a way to block the mouth.

古文：甲午，范祖禹、赵彦若、黄庭坚坐史事责授散官，永、澧、黔州安置。
现代文：二十七日，范祖禹、赵彦若、黄庭坚因有人指斥修撰的件申宗实录低毁神宗被贬降为散官，分别安置永州、遭州、黔州。
English: On the 27th, Fan Zuyu, Zhao Yanruo, and Huang Tingjian were demoted to lower-ranking officials, and placed in Yongzhou, Xiangzhou, and Zhangzhou, respectively, due to some people's objection to the fact that they had edited the Shen Zong Shih Luo Rui Shen Zong.

古文：是岁，京师疫，洛水溢，太原地震，河北水，发京东粟振之。
现代文：这一年，京师发生疾疫，洛水溢出河道，太原发生地震，河北发生水灾，调集京东粮食进行贩济。
English: In the same year, an epidemic occurred in Beijing, Luo water overflowed the river, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan, and a flood occurred in Hebei, and the Jingdong grain was mobilized to sell.

古文：二年春正月甲辰，诏国史院增补先帝御集。
现代文：绍圣二年春正月初七，诏令国史院增补神宗御集。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Shoshen's reign, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the National Academy of History to supplement the Imperial Collection of the Shinto Religion.

古文：丙午，立宏词科。
现代文：初九，设立宏词科。
English: In the junior high school, a macro vocabulary class was established.

古文：己未，迁奉太平兴国寺三朝御容于天章阁。
现代文：二十二日，把太平兴国寺三朝皇帝画像迁奉安置在天章阁。
English: On the 22nd, the images of the emperors of the three dynasties in Taiping Xingguo Temple were relocated and placed in Tianzhangge.

古文：乙丑，殿前司奏狱空，诏赐缗钱。
现代文：二十八日，殿前司上奏狱空，诏赐络钱。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, the chief steward of the palace announced that the prison was empty, and issued an edict to give him money.

古文：二月乙亥，吕大防以监修史事贬秩，分司南京、安州居住。
现代文：二月初九，吕大防因监修史事贬官降职，分司南京，安州居住。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, Lv Dafo was demoted for supervising historical affairs, and he lived in Nanjing and Anzhou.

古文：辛巳，出内库钱帛二十万助河北振饥。
现代文：十五日，调出内库钱帛二十万帮助河北贩济饥民。
English: On the 15th, it transferred 200,000 yuan from its internal treasury to help the hungry people in Hebei Province.

古文：甲午，罢广文馆解额。
现代文：二十八日，罢除广文馆解送举人名额。
English: On the 28th, the number of people to be sent to the Guangwen Museum was cancelled.

古文：三月己亥，宗晟薨。
现代文：三月初四，赵宗晨逝世。
English: On March 4, Zhao Zongchen passed away.

古文：己未，试宏词黄符等五人各循一资。
现代文：二十四日，试宏词科黄符等五人分别按年资提升一级。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, five people, including Qihong Ci Xue Huang Fu, were promoted to the first level according to seniority.

古文：夏四月戊辰，诏职事官罢带职，朝请大夫以下勿分左右，易集贤院学士为集贤殿修撰，直集贤院为直秘阁，集贤校理为秘阁校理。
现代文：夏四月初三，诏令职事官罢除带职，朝请大夫以下官员不分左右，改集贤院学士为集贤殿修撰，直集贤院为直秘阁，集贤校理为秘阁校理。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the Emperor issued an edict to remove the officials from their posts, and asked the officials below the rank of doctor, regardless of their position, to change the collection of scholars from the Academy of the Wise to the collection of scholars, the collection of scholars from the Academy of the Wise to the collection of scholars, and the collection of scholars from the Academy of the Wise to the collection of scholars.

古文：壬申，封华容郡王宗愈为嗣濮王。
现代文：初七，封华容郡王赵宗愈为嗣攫王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhao Zongyu, the king of Huarong County, was named the heir to the throne.

古文：诏许将等七人，不限资格，各举才行堪备任使者二人。
现代文：诏令许将等七人，不限资格，分别推荐才能和品行可以作为候补官员者二人。
English: There are seven people waiting for the imperial edict, with unlimited qualifications, and two people who can be recommended as alternate officials for talent and character respectively.

古文：丁亥，诏依元丰条置律学博士二员。
现代文：二十二日，诏令按照元丰条例设置律学博士二名。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict set up two doctors of law in accordance with the Yuanfeng Regulations.

古文：五月乙巳，命蔡卞详定国子监三学及外州州学制。
现代文：五月十一日，命令蔡卞详细审定国子监三学及外州州学制度。
English: On May 11, he ordered Cai Jun to examine in detail the three-school system of the State Children's Supervision and the out-of-state education system.

古文：乙卯，六月壬辰，禁京城士人舆轿。
现代文：二十一日，上皇太妃宫名为圣瑞宫。六月二十八日，禁止京城士人乘轿。
English: On the 21st, the former Empress Dowager's palace was renamed Shengrui Palace, and on the 28th of June, it was forbidden for citizens of Beijing to travel by car.

古文：上皇太妃宫名曰圣瑞。秋七月丙辰，诏大理寺复置右治狱，仍依元丰例添置官属。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，诏令大理寺重置右治狱，仍按元丰条例添置官属。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the Emperor issued a decree to re-establish the right-hand prison in Dali Temple, and officials were still added in accordance with the Yuanfeng Regulations.

古文：八月壬申，命彰信军节度使宗景为开府仪同三司，封济阴郡王。
现代文：八月初九，命彰信军节度使赵宗景为开府仪同三司，封为济阴郡王。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Zhao Zongjing was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu ceremony and the king of Jiyin County.

古文：甲申，宗愈薨。
现代文：二十一日，赵宗愈逝世。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Zongyu passed away.

古文：乙酉，录赵普后希庄为阁门祗候。
现代文：二十二日，录用赵普后代赵希庄为阁门抵候。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Xizhuang, a descendant of Zhao Pu, was hired as a porter.

古文：九月甲午，以安定郡王宗绰为嗣濮王。
现代文：九月初二，任命安定郡王赵宗绰为嗣攫王。
English: On the second day of September, Zhao Zongyu, the Prince of the County of Anhui, was appointed as the heir to the throne.

古文：壬寅，告迁神宗神御于景灵宫显承殿。
现代文：初十，把神宗神主迁到景灵宫显承殿。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, the Shinshu shinju was moved to the Henshōden hall of the Keihin Palace.

古文：癸卯，诣景灵宫，行奉安礼。
现代文：十一日，到景灵宫行奉安礼。
English: On the 11th day, they went to Jingling Palace to pay their respects.

古文：戊申，加上神宗谥曰绍天法古运德建功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝。
现代文：十六日，加上神宗溢号为绍天法古运德建功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝。
English: On the 16th, with the addition of Shenzong's exclamation mark, it was Shao Tian Fa Gu Yun De Jian Gong English Martyr Qin Ren Sheng Xiao Emperor.

古文：己酉，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十七日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 17th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：庚戌，朝飨太庙。
现代文：十八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：辛亥，大飨明堂，赦天下。
现代文：十九日，大祀明堂，赦免全国。
English: On the 19th, the Great Memorial Hall was built, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：冬十月甲子，郑雍罢。
现代文：冬十月初二，郑雍被罢免。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Zheng Yong was dismissed.

古文：癸酉，告迁宣仁圣烈皇后神御于景灵宫徽音殿。
现代文：十一日，把育仁圣烈皇后神主迁到景灵宫徽音殿。
English: On the 11th day, the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress deity of the holy empress.

古文：甲戌，诣宫行奉安礼。
现代文：十二日，哲宗到景灵宫行奉安礼。
English: On the twelfth day, Zhezong went to Jingling Palace to pay respects.

古文：以吏部尚书许将为尚书左丞，翰林学士蔡卞为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命吏部尚书许将为尚书左承，翰林学士蔡卞为尚书右承。
English: Appointed cadre Shang Shuxu will be the left successor of Shang Shuxu, and Hanlin Scholar Cai Jun will be the right successor of Shang Shuxu.

古文：辛巳，进封冀王颢为楚王。
现代文：十九日，进封冀王赵颖为楚王。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Ying, King of Hebei, was enthroned as King of Chu.

古文：辛卯。河南府地震。
现代文：二十九日，河南府发生地震。
English: On the 29th, an earthquake occurred in Henan Province.

古文：十一月乙未，安焘罢知河南府。
现代文：十一月初三，安煮罢为河南知府。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Anqi became the capital of Henan Province.

古文：丙申，太白昼见。
现代文：初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊戌，范锷自转运使入对，言有捕盗功，乞赐章服。
现代文：初六，范愕从转运使任上人对，说自己有捕捉盗贼之功，请求赐给有图文标志等级的礼服。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Fan Zhen from Transshipment asked his superior to give him a ceremonial robe with a pictorial and textual mark, saying that he had the merit of catching a thief.

古文：帝曰： 捕盗，常职也，何足言功？ 黜知寿州。
现代文：哲宗说： 捕盗是转运使职责范围内的事情，哪里够得上立功呢了罢为寿州知州。
English: Tetsuzo said, "Catching a thief is a matter within the scope of the duties of the forwarding agent, where is the merit in doing so, let alone Shoushu Chishu."

古文：甲寅，梁惟简除名、全州安置。
现代文：二十二日，梁惟简被除名，全州安置。
English: On the 22nd, Liang Weijian was removed from the list and resettled across the state.

古文：丙辰，赠蔡确为太师，赐谥忠怀。
现代文：二十四日，贝曾蔡确为太师，赐给溢号为忠怀。
English: On the 24th, Pei Zeng Cai did become the Grand Master and was given the title of "loyalty."

古文：十二月乙丑，复置监察御史三人，分领六察，不言事。
现代文：十二月初三，重置监察御史三人，分别统领六察事务，不管言论事务。
English: On the third day of the 12th month, the three supervisors of supervision and inspection were reset, and they were in charge of six inspection affairs respectively, regardless of speech affairs.

古文：令翰林学士蔡京、御史中丞黄履各举御史二人。
现代文：命令翰林学士蔡京、御史中承黄履分别推荐御史二人。
English: Hanlin Scholar Cai Jing and Historian Zhongcheng Huang Li were ordered to recommend two historians respectively.

古文：壬申，白虹贯日。
现代文：初八，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：戊子，诏如元丰例，孟月朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十四日，下诏按元丰时期条例四季的第一个月祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 24th, according to the regulations of the Yuanfeng period, the first month of the four seasons will be dedicated to Jingling Palace.

古文：是岁，苏州夏、秋地震。
现代文：这一年，苏州夏秋发生地震。
English: This year, an earthquake occurred in Suzhou Xiaqiu.

古文：桂阳监庆云见。
现代文：桂阳监出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: A cloud of five colors appeared in Guiyang Observatory.

古文：出宫女九十一人。
现代文：放出九十一名宫女。
English: Release the ninety-one maids of honour.

古文：交阯、三佛齐、韦蕃、阿里骨入贡。
现代文：交趾、三佛齐、韦蕃、阿里骨来进贡。
English: Kojitsu, Sanfo Qi, Wei Wei, and Alibone came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月庚子，韩忠彦罢知真定府。
现代文：绍圣三年春正月初九，韩忠彦罢为真定知府。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the spring of the 3rd year of Shaosheng, Han Tadahiko became the chifu of Zhending.

古文：甲辰，朝献景灵宫，遍诣诸殿，如元丰礼。
现代文：十三日，酌酒敬祭景灵宫，依照元丰礼遍到各殿。
English: On the 13th, they drank wine to pay tribute to the Jingling Palace and went to all the halls in accordance with the Yuan Fengli.

古文：庚戌，引见蕃官包顺、包诚等，赐赍有差。
现代文：十九日，在大臣引导下，哲宗接见蕃官包顺、包诚等，赐给钱物不等。
English: On the 19th, under the guidance of the minister, Tetsuzo met with eunuchs such as Baosun and Baocheng, and gave them money and other things.

古文：诏鞫狱非本章所指而蔓求他罪者，论如律。
现代文：下诏：审讯案件非本章所指而节外生枝罗织罪名者以罪论处。
English: The following edict: Anyone who is found guilty of extraneous charges in a trial that does not fall within the scope of this chapter shall be found guilty.

古文：乙卯，诏户部尚书勿领右曹。
现代文：二十四日，诏令户部尚书不要管理右曹事务。
English: On the 24th, the emperor ordered the head of the household, Shosho, not to manage the affairs of Utso.

古文：戊午，诏罢合祭，间因大礼之岁，夏至日躬祭地祇于北郊。
现代文：二十七日，下诏罢除合祭，中间偶尔因明堂大礼之年，夏至日皇上在北郊亲祭地机。
English: On the 27th, an edict was issued to cancel the closing ceremony, and in the middle, due to the year of the Great Ceremony of the Ming Hall, the Emperor held the ceremony in the northern suburbs on the summer solstice.

古文：二月癸亥，出元丰库缗钱四百万于陕西、河东籴边储。
现代文：二月初二，调出元丰库四百万络钱在陕西、河东来买边储物资。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, four million rupees were transferred from the Yuanfeng Bank to buy and store materials in Shaanxi and Hedong.

古文：辛未，复元丰《恤孤幼令》。
现代文：初十，恢复元丰《恤孤幼令。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the "Order of Compassion for Orphans" of Yuanfeng was restored.

古文：癸酉，罢富弼配飨神宗庙庭。
现代文：十二日，罢废富弼神位配享神宗庙庭。
English: On the twelfth day, the abrogation of Fuxi's divinity and the sharing of the Shinshu temple garden.

古文：癸未，诏封濮王子未王者三人：宗楚为南阳郡王，宗祐为景城郡王，并开府仪同三司；宗汉为东阳郡王。
现代文：二十二日，下诏封攫王没有封王的三个儿子：赵宗楚为南阳郡王，赵宗祐为景城郡王、开府仪同三司，赵宗汉都为东阳郡王。
English: On the 22nd day of the following year, Emperor Gaozong did not have the three sons of Emperor Gaozong: Zhao Zongchu was the king of Nanyang County, Zhao Zongyu was the king of Jingcheng County, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Zhao Zonghan were all the kings of Dongyang County.

古文：乙酉，宗绰薨。
现代文：二十四日，赵宗绰逝世。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Zongchuo passed away.

古文：丙戌，诏三岁一取旨，遣郎官、御史按察监司职事。
现代文：二十五日，诏令三年一取旨，派遣郎官、御史考察监督监司职事。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict issued an order to dispatch vassals and officials to inspect and supervise the work of supervisors once every three years.

古文：丁亥，夏人寇义合砦。
现代文：二十六日，夏军攻打义合寨。
English: On the 26th, Xia's army attacked Yihe Village.

古文：三月壬辰，以禁中屡火，罢春宴及幸池苑，不御垂拱殿三日。
现代文：三月初二，因宫中多次发生火灾，罢废春宴和观赏池苑，三天不到垂拱殿。
English: On the second day of March, due to multiple fires in the palace, the spring banquet and the ornamental pond were cancelled, and the hanging arch hall could not be reached for three days.

古文：癸巳，夏人围塞门砦。
现代文：初三，夏军围攻塞门寨。
English: On the third day of the first month, Xia's army besieged Saimen Village.

古文：丁酉，尚书省火。
现代文：初七，尚书省发生火灾。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a fire broke out in Shangshu Province.

古文：戊午，剑南东川地震。
现代文：戊午日，剑南东川发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Dongchuan, Jianan.

古文：己亥，封宗楚为嗣濮王。
现代文：初九，封赵宗楚为嗣攫王。
English: In the early 9th century, Zhao Zongchu was named the heir to the throne.

古文：辛亥，封大宁郡王佖为申王，遂宁郡王佶为端王。
现代文：二十一日，封大宁郡王赵泌为申王，遂宁郡王赵估为端王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the king of Danning County, Zhao Xiu, was named the king of petition, and the king of Suining County, Zhao Ji, was named the king of endowment.

古文：丁巳，幸申王、端王府。
现代文：二十七日，到申王、端王府第。
English: On the 27th, they went to the King's palace in Shin.

古文：夏四月辛酉，罢宣徽使。
现代文：夏四月初二，废罢宣徽使。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the proclamation of the emblem was abolished.

古文：丙子，诏自今景灵宫四孟朝献，分为二日。
现代文：十七日，下诏：从今以后四季的头一个月祭祀景灵宫，分为二天。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: From now on, the first month of the four seasons will be divided into two days for the worship of Jingling Palace.

古文：五月壬子，太白昼见。
现代文：五月初三，太白星白天显现。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙辰，录囚。
现代文：二十七日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 25th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：六月癸亥，令真定立赵普庙。
现代文：六月初五，命令真定立赵普庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, the Zhao Pu Temple was ordered to be built.

古文：乙酉，立北郊斋宫于瑞圣园。
现代文：二十七日，在瑞圣园立北郊斋宫。
English: On the 27th, the Northern Suburbs Jamboree was established in Ruisheng Garden.

古文：秋七月庚戌，依元丰职事官以行、守、试三等定禄秩。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，依元丰职事官以行、守、试三等确定棒禄品级。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Yiyuanfeng, an official of the Ministry of Civil Service Affairs, determined the grade of Baoluo with the three grades of acting, guarding, and testing.

古文：罢元祐所增聚义钱。
现代文：废罢元所增聚议钱。
English: More money to be raised by scrapping strike committees.

古文：甲寅，令熙河立王韶庙。
现代文：二十七日，命令熙河设立王韶庙。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Xihe to set up the Wangye Temple.

古文：八月辛酉，夏人寇宁顺砦。
现代文：八月初四，夏军攻打宁顺寨。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth month, Xia's army attacked Ning Shunzhai.

古文：壬戌，日上有五色晕，下有五色气。
现代文：初五，太阳表面出现五种颜色的光圈，下面出现五种颜色的气体。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a five-color aperture appeared on the surface of the sun, and five colors of gas appeared below.

古文：己卯，复置检法官。
现代文：二十二日，重新设置检法官。
English: On the 22nd, the prosecutor was reinstated.

古文：庚辰，以范祖禹、刘安世在元祐中构造诬谤，祖禹责授昭州别驾、贺州安置，安世新州别驾、英州安置。
现代文：二十三日，因范祖禹、刘安节在元年间构造诽谤，范祖禹被贬为昭州别驾，贺州安置；刘安世被贬为新州别驾，英州安置。
English: On the 23rd, due to the structural slander of Fan Zuyu and Liu An Si in the first year of the year, Fan Zuyu was relegated to Zhaozhou and resettled in Hezhou; Liu Anshi was relegated to Xinzhou and resettled in Yingzhou.

古文：九月己亥，邈川首领阿里骨卒。
现代文：九月十三日，邀川首领阿里骨去世。
English: On September 13th, the leader of Yingchuan, Alibone, passed away.

古文：己酉，滁、沂二州地震。
现代文：二十三日，滁、沂二州发生地震。
English: On the 23rd, an earthquake occurred in Luzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：壬子，楚王颢薨。
现代文：二十六日，楚王赵颖逝世。
English: On the 26th, King of Chu Zhao Ying passed away.

古文：乙卯，废皇后孟氏为华阳教主、玉清妙静仙师，赐名冲真。
现代文：二十九日，废皇后孟氏为华阳教主，玉清妙静仙师，赐名冲真。
English: On the 29th, the deposed Empress Meng became Huayang's spiritual leader, and gave her the name Chongzhen.

古文：冬十月丁巳朔，以楚王薨，罢文德殿视朝。
现代文：冬十月初一，因楚王逝世，罢除上文德殿临朝听政。
English: On the first day of October in winter, due to the death of King Chu, the above-mentioned German court was removed from the imperial court to listen to politics.

古文：壬戌，夏人寇鄜、延，陷金明砦。
现代文：初六，夏军攻打、延，攻陷金明寨。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Xia army attacked, extended, and captured Jinmingzhai.

古文：戊辰，诏被边诸路相度城砦要害，增严守备。
现代文：十二日，诏令边境各路确定城寨要害，增强严密守备。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict ordered all roads along the border to determine the key points of the castle and strengthen the strict defense.

古文：辛未，西南方雷声，雨雹。
现代文：十五日，西南方向出现雷声，降冰雹。
English: On the 15th, thunder and hail occurred in the southwest.

古文：癸酉，钟传言筑汝遮，诏以为安西城。
现代文：十七日，钟传报告说修筑汝遮，诏令为安西城。
English: On the 17th, Zhong Chuan reported the construction of Juxia, and the edict was issued for Anxi City.

古文：十一月丁未，章惇上《神宗实录》。
现代文：十一月二十一日，章呈上件申宗实录。
English: On November 21, the chapter submitted a record of the petition.

古文：庚戌，宴修实录官。
现代文：二十四日，宴请修撰件申宗实录官员。
English: On the 24th, a banquet was held for officials responsible for compiling the petition.

古文：十二月辛酉，宗景坐以立妾罔上，罢开府仪同三司、判大宗正司事。
现代文：十二月初五，赵宗景因立妾同上罪罢免开府仪同三司衔，判大宗正司事。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month, Zhao Zongjing was removed from the post of Kaifu Yi with the rank of Third Secretary for the crime of setting up a concubine, and was sentenced to the position of Chief Secretary.

古文：癸酉，置施州铸钱广积监。
现代文：十七日，设置施州铸钱广积监。
English: On the 17th, the Shizhou Casting Money Accumulation Supervision Center was set up.

古文：甲戌，蔡京上《新修大学敕令式》、《详定重修敕令》。
现代文：十八日，蔡京呈上新修太学救令式、洋定重修救令。
English: On the 18th, Cai Jing submitted a new revision of the rescue order, and a revision of the rescue order.

古文：遗弃饥贫小儿三岁以下，听收养为真子孙。
现代文：被遗弃的三岁以下的饥贫小儿，允许收养为自己的真子孙。
English: Abandoned starving children under the age of three are allowed to be adopted as their own biological children.

古文：是岁，于阗、大食、龟兹师王国、西南蕃龙氏、罗氏入贡。
现代文：这一年，于闻、大食、龟兹师王国、西南蕃龙氏和罗氏来进贡。
English: In this year, Yuwen, Dashi, Guzishi Kingdom, Southwest Xiaolong Clan and Luo Clan came to pay tribute.

古文：宗室子授官者四十六人。
现代文：宗室子四十六人被授官。
English: Forty-six of Sonomuro's sons were promoted to higher posts.

古文：四年春正月丙戌朔，不受朝。
现代文：绍圣四年春正月初一，不受朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring Festival, Shaosheng was not subject to worship.

古文：群臣及辽使诣东上阁门拜表贺。
现代文：大臣们和辽朝使臣到东上阎门上奏庆贺。
English: The ministers and the envoys of the Liao Dynasty went to the East Shangyan Gate to celebrate.

古文：班内外学制。
现代文：颁布内外学制。
English: The internal and external education system was promulgated.

古文：庚寅，以阿里骨子瞎征袭河西军节度使、邈川首领。
现代文：初五，任命阿里骨儿子瞎征继承为河西军节度使、邀川首领。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Ali's eldest son, Xuanzheng, to succeed him as the commander of the Hexi Army and the leader of Yingchuan.

古文：甲午，泾原路钤辖王文振败夏人于没烟峡。
现代文：初九，径原路铃辖王文振在没烟峡打败夏军。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Wenzhen, commander of the Jingyuan Road Bell Corps, defeated the Xia Army at Mengyuxia Gorge.

古文：庚戌，李清臣罢。
现代文：二十五日，李清臣被罢免。
English: On the 25th, Li Qingcheng was dismissed.

古文：二月乙未，以三省言，追贬吕公著为建武军节度副使，司马光为清远军节度副使，王岩叟为雷州别驾，夺赵瞻、傅尧俞赠谥，追韩维致仕及孙固、范百禄、胡宗愈遗表恩。
现代文：二月初四，因三省报告，追贬吕公著为建武军节度副使，司马光为清远军节度副使，王岩雯为雷州别驾，削夺赵瞻、傅尧俞赠溢，追夺韩维退休及孙固、范百禄、胡宗愈遗表恩赏。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, due to the report of the three provinces, Lu Gongzhe was demoted as the deputy envoy of the Jianwu Army Festival, Sima Guang was demoted as the deputy envoy of the Qingyuan Army Festival, Wang Yanwen was demoted as the special envoy of the Leizhou Army Festival, Zhao Zhan and Fu Jun were demoted, Han Wei was demoted and Sun Gu, Fan Bailu and Hu Zongyu were demoted.

古文：诏江、淮巡检依旧法招置土兵。
现代文：诏令江、淮巡检依旧法招募士兵。
English: Zhao Lingjiang and Huai patrols still recruit soldiers by law.

古文：癸亥，于阗来贡，黑汗王攻夏人三州，遣其子以闻。
现代文：初八，于闻来进贡，黑汗王攻取夏国三州，派遣他的儿子上报朝廷。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Yu Wen came to pay tribute. King Hei Khan conquered the three states of Xia and sent his son to report to the imperial court.

古文：丙寅，夏人寇绥德城。
现代文：十一日，夏军攻打绥德城。
English: On the 11th day, Xia's army attacked Shunde City.

古文：庚午，诏国信使毋得以非例之物遗人使，仍著条禁。
现代文：十五日，诏令国信使不得把规定之外的物品送给外国使臣，并且著为条令，加以禁止约束。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Emperor decreed that the courier of the state should not send items other than the provisions to foreign envoys, and wrote a regulation to prohibit and restrict them.

古文：癸酉，诏申王佖、端王佶岁赐钱各六千五百缗。
现代文：十八日，下诏每年赐给申王赵泌、端王赵估钱六千五百。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the following edict was issued, awarding King Shen Zhaoxu and King Duan Zhaozhu with an annual sum of 6,500 yuan.

古文：丙子，进神宗婉仪宋氏为贤妃。
现代文：二十一日，进神宗婉仪宋氏为贤妃。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Jin Shen Zong Wan Yi of the Song Dynasty became a virtuous empress.

古文：己卯，复元丰榷茶法。
现代文：二十四日，恢复元丰榷茶法。
English: On the 24th, the method of brewing Yuanfeng tea was restored.

古文：庚辰，罢《春秋》科。
现代文：二十五日，废罢春秋科。
English: On the 25th, the spring and autumn exams were cancelled.

古文：癸未，以三省言，追贬吕大防为舒州团练副使，刘挚为鼎州团练副使，苏辙为化州别驾，梁焘为雷州别驾，范纯仁为武安军节度副使，安置于循、新、雷、化、永五州；刘奉世为光禄少卿、分司南京；黜韩维以下三十人轻重有差。
现代文：二十八日，采纳三省建议，追贬吕大防为舒州团练副使，刘挚为鼎州团练副使，苏辙为化州别驾，梁煮为雷州别驾，范纯仁为武安军节度副使，分别安置循州、新州、雷州、化州、永州。刘奉世贬为光禄少卿，被安置在南京；韩维以下三十人被罢默程度不等。
English: On the 28th, adopting the suggestions of the three provinces, they demoted Lu Dabao to the vice-envoy of Shuzhou Reunions, Liu Zhi to the vice-envoy of Dingzhou Reunions, Su Rut to the vice-envoy of Huazhou, Liang Gui to the vice-envoy of Leizhou, and Fan Chunren to the vice-envoy of the Wu'an Army, respectively, and placed them in Xuzhou, Xinzhou, Leizhou, Huazhou, and Yongzhou. Liu Bongshi was demoted to Guanglu Shaoqing, and was placed in Nanjing; the thirty people under Han Wei were

古文：甲申，降文彦博为太子少保。
现代文：二十九日，文彦博被降为太子少保。
English: On the 29th, Fumihiko was relegated to the position of Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：闰月丙戌朔，张天说坐上书诋讪先朝处死。
现代文：闰二月初一，张天说因上书低汕神宗获罪被处死。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, Zhang Tian said that he was sentenced to death for the crime of publishing a book about the Low Ying Sheng sect.

古文：壬寅，以曾布知枢密院事，许将为中书侍郎，蔡卞为尚书左丞，吏部尚书黄履为尚书右丞，翰林学士林希同知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，任命曾布为知枢密院事，许将为中书侍郎，蔡卞为尚书左承，吏部尚书黄履为尚书右承，翰林学士林希为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Zengbu was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, Xu was appointed as the Attendant of the Privy Council, Cai Jun was appointed as the Left Heir of the Privy Council, Li Bu was appointed as the Right Heir of the Privy Council, Huang Lu was appointed as the Right Heir of the Privy Council, and Lin Xi, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：癸卯，大雨雹。
现代文：十八日，大降冰雹。
English: On the 18th, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：甲辰，苏轼责授琼州别驾，移昌化军安置。
现代文：十九日，苏轼贬降为琼州别驾，改昌化军安置。
English: On the 19th, Su Shi was downgraded to Qiong Zhou Bei Jie, and was resettled by the Changhua Army.

古文：范祖禹移宾州安置，刘安世移高州安置，己酉，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：范祖禹改宾州安置，刘安世改高州安置。二十四日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: Fan Zuyu was resettled in Pennsylvania and Liu Anshi was resettled in Gaozhou. On the 24th, they went to the Shuei Palace for the entrance examination.

古文：庚戌，策武举。
现代文：二十五日，策试武举。
English: On the 25th, the strategic military exercise began.

古文：三月壬戌，夏人犯麟州神堂堡，出兵讨之，及进筑胡山砦。
现代文：三月初八，夏军攻打麟州神堂堡，朝廷出兵攻讨，进筑胡山寨。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, the summer army attacked the Linshou Shentang Fort, and the imperial court sent troops to attack and build the Hu Mountain Village.

古文：癸亥，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身六百九人。
现代文：初九，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身六百零九人。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, the Ministry of Ceremonies gave awards to 609 people from various disciplines and backgrounds.

古文：甲子，诏武举谢师古等以远人赐帛，李惟岳以高年赐帛。
现代文：初十，诏令武举谢师古因远人赐给帛，李惟岳以高年赐给帛。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wu decreed that Wu Zhi Xie Shigu would be given to Yao because he was far away, and Li Wei Yue would be given to Yao because he was old.

古文：丁卯，诏泸南安抚司、南平军毋擅诱杨光荣献纳播州疆土。
现代文：十三日，诏令沪南安抚司、南平军不要擅自劝诱杨光荣献纳播州疆土。
English: On the 13th, the emperor ordered the Shanghai-Nan Pacification Division and the Nanping Army not to persuade Yang Guangrong to annex the territory of Banzhou without authorization.

古文：庚午，夏人大至葭卢城下，知石州张构等击走之。
现代文：十六日，夏军大集霞卢城下，石州知州张构等击退夏军。
English: On the 16th, the Xia army was concentrated in the city of Xia Lu, and Zhang Jie from Shizhou and Zhizhou repelled the Xia army.

古文：甲戌，幸金明池。
现代文：二十日，到金明池。
English: On the 20th, to Kinmei Pond.

古文：丙子，剋胡山新砦成，赐名平羌砦。
现代文：二十二日，攻克胡山新寨筑成，赐名为平羌寨。
English: On the 22nd, the new village of Hu Mountain was conquered and built, and was given the name of Pingyao Village.

古文：辛巳，西上阁门使折克行破夏人于长波川，斩首二千余级，获牛马倍之。
现代文：二十七日，西上阎门使折克行在长波川攻破夏军，斩首二千多级，俘获牛马加倍。
English: On the 27th, Xijang Yanmen sent Erke line to defeat Xia's army in Changbo River, beheaded more than two thousand, and captured twice as many cattle and horses.

古文：壬午，命官编类司马光等改废法度论奏事状。
现代文：二十八日，命令官员分类编辑司马光等改废熙丰变法论奏事状。
English: On the 28th, it ordered the official classification editor Sima Guang and others to amend and abolish the Xifeng Law.

古文：夏四月丁亥，令诸狱置气楼凉窗，设浆饮荐席，杻械五日一浣，系囚以时沐浴，遇寒给薪炭。
现代文：夏四月初四，命令各监狱设置气楼凉窗，设浆饮荐席，上手铐脚镣刑具的五天洗澡一次，在押囚犯按时洗澡，遇到寒冷时供给薪炭。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, he ordered all prisons to set up air-conditioned windows, set up special tables for drinking syrup, and bathe the handcuffed and shackled prisoners once every five days. Detained prisoners should bathe on time, and when they are cold, they should be provided with firewood.

古文：甲午，熙河筑金城关。
现代文：十一日，熙河修筑金城关。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xihe built Jincheng Pass.

古文：丙申，诏发解省试添策一道。
现代文：十三日，诏令发解省试添策试一道。
English: On the 13th, the prefectural government issued an order to the provincial government to try one more measure.

古文：丁酉，进编臣僚章疏一百四十三帙。
现代文：十四日，进呈编辑臣僚章疏一百四十三秩。
English: On the 14th, the editor of the Minister's Diary was promoted to the 143rd rank.

古文：己亥，吕大防卒于虔州。
现代文：十六日，吕大防在虔州逝世。
English: On the 16th, Lv Dafo passed away in Gyeongju.

古文：庚子，知保安军李沂伐夏国，破洪州。
现代文：十七日，保安知军李沂攻打夏国，攻破洪州。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the military force led by Li Xi attacked Xia and broke through Hongzhou.

古文：壬寅，环庆钤辖张存入盐州，俘戮甚众，及还，夏人追袭之，复多亡失。
现代文：十九日，环庆铃辖张存进人盐州，俘斩甚多，在回军途中，夏军追袭，又丧亡甚多。
English: On the 19th, Huanqingling's Zhang Cunjun marched into Yanzhou, taking many prisoners. On his way back to the army, Xia's army pursued him, and many people were killed.

古文：甲辰，置克戎砦、平夏城，置灵平砦。
现代文：二十一日，设置克戎寨、平夏城，设置灵平寨。
English: On the 21st, Ke Rong Zhai, Ping Xia Cheng and Ling Ping Zhai were set up.

古文：丁未，以西边板筑有劳，曲赦陕西、河东路。
现代文：二十四日，因西部边境用板筑方法筑城寨有功，特赦免陕西路、河东路。
English: On the 24th, Shaanxi Road and Hedong Road were specially pardoned because the western border used the board construction method to build the walled city.

古文：追贬王珪为万安军司户参军。
现代文：追贬巨盖为万安军司户参军。
English: After the persecution and humiliation, Jia Jia joined the army as a steward of the Wan'an Army.

古文：己酉，复文德殿侍从转对。
现代文：二十六日，恢复文德殿侍从官转对。
English: On the 26th, he was reinstated as an attendant of the Emperor.

古文：五月丁巳，文彦博薨。
现代文：五月初四，文彦博逝世。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Fumihiko died.

古文：辛酉，以皇太妃服药及亢旱，决四京囚。
现代文：初八，因皇太妃患病服药和干早，审理四京囚犯。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, because the Empress Dowager was ill, she took medicine and died early, and the prisoners in Shijing were tried.

古文：壬戌，诏陕西添置蕃落马军十指挥。
现代文：初九，诏令陕西添置蕃落马军十指挥。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Shaanxi was ordered to add ten commanders to the horse army.

古文：丁卯，废卫州淇水第二马监、颍昌府单镇马监。
现代文：十四日，废除卫州淇水第二马监和颖昌府单镇马监。
English: On the 14th, the second horse inspector of Weizhou Qishui and the single-town horse inspector of Yingchang Prefecture were abolished.

古文：辛未，韩缜薨。
现代文：十八日，韩填逝世。
English: Han Jian died on the 18th.

古文：丁丑，贬韩维为崇信军节度副使。
现代文：二十四日，贬韩维为崇信军节度副使。
English: On the 24th, Han Wei was demoted to vice-envoy of the Chongxin Army.

古文：六月癸未朔，日明食之。丁亥，太白犯太微垣。
现代文：六月初一，日食。初五，太白星侵犯太微垣。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, a white star encroaches on a small hedge.

古文：戊子，宗楚薨。
现代文：初六，赵宗楚逝世。
English: At the age of six, Zhao Zongchu passed away.

古文：丙申，诏翰林学士、吏部尚书各举监察御史二人。
现代文：十四日，诏令翰林学士、吏部尚书分别举荐监察御史二人。
English: On the 14th, Hanlin, a bachelor, and Shangshu, a clerk, respectively recommended two supervisors.

古文：丁酉，环庆路安疆砦成，诏防托蕃汉官赐帛有差。
现代文：十五日，环庆路安疆寨筑成，诏令防托蕃汉官赐帛不等。
English: On the 15th, the Huanqing Road Anjiang Village was built, and the imperial edict to prevent embezzlement was issued by the Han officials.

古文：甲辰，熙河进筑青石峡毕工，赐名西平。
现代文：二十二日，熙河修筑青石峡完工，赐名西平。
English: On the 22nd, the construction of Xi River and the construction of Qingshi Gorge were completed, and the name Xiping was given.

古文：乙巳，保宁军观察留后宗汉为开府仪同三司，徙封安康郡王。
现代文：二十三日，保宁军观察留后赵宗汉为开府仪同三司，改封为安康郡王。
English: On the 23rd, after the observation of the Boryeong Army, Zhao Zonghan was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong and changed his title to the king of Ankang County.

古文：己酉，太原地震。
现代文：二十七日，太原发生地震。
English: On the 27th, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：秋七月壬子朔，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：八月乙酉，封湖州观察使世开为安定郡王。
现代文：八月初四，封湖州观察使赵世开为安定郡王。
English: On the 4th of August, the closure of Huzhou observation made Zhao Shikai the king of the stable county.

古文：丙戌，鄜延将王愍复宥州。
现代文：初五，延将领王憨收复肴州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the general Wang Yao took over the province of Fuxi.

古文：戊戌，封宗祐为嗣濮王。
现代文：十七日，封赵宗为嗣攫王。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Zong was named the heir to the throne.

古文：筑威戎城。
现代文：修筑威戎城。
English: Weirong Town will be rebuilt.

古文：己酉，彗出西方。
现代文：二十八日，彗星出现在西方。
English: On the 28th, the comet appeared in the west.

古文：九月壬子，以星变，避殿减膳，罢秋宴，诏公卿悉心修政，以辅不逮，求中外直言。
现代文：九月初二，因星变异，不上朝听政，减少饮食，废罢秋宴，诏令公卿大臣悉心修政，以辅不逮，寻访内外直言。
English: On the second day of September, due to the change of the stars, he did not go to the court to listen to politics, reduced his diet, cancelled the autumn banquet, ordered the Minister of Justice to conscientiously reform the government, and did not seek help, and spoke frankly at home and abroad.

古文：乙卯，赦天下，出元丰库缗钱四百万付陕西广籴，诏归明人未给田者舍以官舍。
现代文：初五，赦免全国，调出元丰库钱四百万给付陕西，广为来买，诏令归明人没有授给田地者先把官府屋舍供给他们居住。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the whole country was pardoned, and 4 million yuan of rich fund money was transferred to Shaanxi, which was widely used to buy, and the edict clarified that if the person did not grant the fields, the government house would be provided for them to live in.

古文：戊辰，彗灭。
现代文：十八日，彗星消失。
English: On the 18th, the comet disappeared.

古文：癸酉，谒中太一宫为民祈福。
现代文：二十三日，朝拜中太一宫，为百姓祈求福运。
English: On the 23rd, he paid homage to the Zhongtai Palace to pray for the people's good fortune.

古文：丙子，御殿复膳。
现代文：二十六日，开始上殿听政，恢复饮食。
English: On the 26th, he began to go to the palace to listen to the government and resume his diet.

古文：命宗景为开府仪同三司。
现代文：命赵宗景为开府仪同三司。
English: Zhao Zongjing was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：己卯，封婉仪刘氏为贤妃。
现代文：二十九日，封婉仪刘氏为贤妃。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that Ms. Liu would be crowned empress.

古文：冬十月戊戌，宗景薨。
现代文：冬十月初八，赵宗景逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, Zhao Zongjing passed away.

古文：壬寅，废安国、安阳淇水监及洛阳原武监。
现代文：十二日，废除安国、安阳、淇水监和洛阳、原武监。
English: On the 12th, the An Guo, Anyang, Qi water inspectors and Luoyang, the former military inspectors were abolished.

古文：十一月丁卯，诏谏议大夫以上各举监察御史一人。
现代文：十一月十七日，诏令谏议大夫以上官员分别举荐监察御史一人。
English: On November 17th, officials above the rank of doctor were separately recommended to supervise one person.

古文：癸酉，贬刘奉世为隰州团练副使、郴州安置。
现代文：二十三日，贬刘奉世为曝州团练副使，郴州安置。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Bongshi was demoted to the deputy envoy of the Zhanzhou Reunification and resettled in Ganzhou.

古文：丁丑，诏放归田里程颐涪州编管。
现代文：二十七日，诏令放归田里的程颐为涪州编管。
English: On the 27th, Cheng Qi, who was released to Tianli in accordance with the imperial edict, became the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月癸未，刘挚卒。
现代文：十二月初三，刘挚去世。
English: On the third day of December, Liu Zhengyi passed away.

古文：甲申，曲宴辽使于垂拱殿。
现代文：初四，在垂拱殿设宴款待辽朝使臣。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the envoys of the Liao Dynasty were entertained at a banquet in the Hanging Arch Hall.

古文：乙酉，侍御史董敦逸坐奏对不实，贬秩、知兴国军。
现代文：初五，侍御史董敦逸因奏对不实获罪，贬官降职，为兴国知军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the attendant of the historian, Dong Dunyi, was found guilty of making a false accusation, demoted and demoted, and became the leader of the Xing Guozhong Army.

古文：是岁，两浙旱饥，诏行荒政，移粟振贷。
现代文：这一年，两浙因早灾发生饥荒，诏令推行荒政，移粟贩济借贷。
English: In this year, due to the early disaster, famine occurred in the two Zhejiang provinces, and the imperial edict was issued to implement a despotic government, and the poppy traders were forced to borrow money.

古文：出宫女二十四人。
现代文：放出二十四名宫女。
English: Twenty-four maids of honour were released.

古文：宣城民妻一产四男子。
现代文：宣城百姓妻子一胎生下四个儿子。
English: The wife of a citizen of Xuancheng gave birth to four sons.

古文：于阗、西南蕃罗氏入贡。
现代文：于闻、西南蕃罗氏来进贡。
English: In Wen, the Southwest Qilao clan came to pay tribute.

古文：播州夷杨光荣等内附。
现代文：播州夷杨光荣等内附朝廷。
English: Banshu Yi Yang Guang Rong and others were annexed by the imperial court.

古文：户部主户一千三百六万八千七百四十一，丁三千三十四万四千二百七十四；客户六百三十六万六千八百二十九，丁三百六万七千三百三十二。
现代文：户部主户一千三百零六万八千七百四十一户，丁三千零三十四万四千二百七十四口；客户六百三十六万六千八百二十九户，丁三百零六万七千三百三十二口。
English: The number of head households was 1,368,741, or 3,034,472,744; the number of customers was 6,366,829, or 3,067,332.

古文：大辟三千一百九十二人。
现代文：处死罪者三千一百九十二人。
English: 3,192 people were executed for capital crimes.

古文：元符元年春正月庚戌朔，不视朝。
现代文：元符元年春正月初一，不上朝听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yuan, he did not go to the court to listen to politics.

古文：丙寅，咸阳民段义得玉印一纽。
现代文：十七日，咸阳百姓段义获得一纽玉印。
English: On the 17th, the people of Xianyang, Duan Yi, won a new jade seal.

古文：甲戌，幸瑞圣园，观北郊斋宫。
现代文：二十五日，到瑞圣园，观北郊宫斋。
English: On the 25th, they went to Rui Sheng Yuan to observe the Northern Suburbs Palace Feast.

古文：二月丙戌，白虹贯日。
现代文：二月初七，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On February 7th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：庚寅，诏建五王外第。
现代文：十一日，下诏修建五王宫外府邸。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a decree was issued for the construction of a residence outside the Five Kings' Palace.

古文：壬辰，复罢翰林侍读、侍讲学士。
现代文：十三日，又罢翰林侍读学士、翰林侍讲学士。
English: On the 13th, Hanlin's Bachelor of Arts in Attendance and Hanlin's Bachelor of Arts in Lectureship were also arrested.

古文：丁酉，宗祐薨。
现代文：十八日，赵宗逝世。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Zong passed away.

古文：戊申，知兰州王舜臣讨夏人于塞外。筑兴平城。
现代文：二十九日，兰州知州王舜臣在塞外攻讨夏军。修筑兴平城。
English: On the 29th, Lanzhou Chizhou Wang Xianchen attacked Xia's army outside of Tibet and built Xingping City.

古文：三月壬子，令三省、枢密吏三岁一试刑法。
现代文：三月初三，命令三省、枢密院吏三年考较一次刑法。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, he ordered the officials of the three provinces and the Privy Council to take a three-year criminal law examination.

古文：甲寅，开楚州通涟河。
现代文：初五，开凿楚州通涟河。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Chuzhou Tonglu River was excavated.

古文：丙辰，米脂砦成。
现代文：初七，米脂寨筑成。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the rice farm was built.

古文：丁巳，五王外第成，赐名懿亲宅。
现代文：初八，五王宫外邸舍修成，赐名为靓亲宅。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the residence outside the Five Kings' Palace was completed and given the name of the Imperial Family's Residence.

古文：戊午，封宗汉为嗣濮王。
现代文：初九，封赵宗汉为嗣攫王。
English: In the early 9th century, Zhao Zonghan was named the heir to the throne.

古文：杀朱崖流人陈衍。
现代文：诛杀朱崖流放者陈衍。
English: Chen Yan, the exile who fought and killed Zhu Ya, is in the lead.

古文：壬戌，申王佖、端王佶并为司空。
现代文：十三日，申王赵泌、端王赵估都任为司空。
English: On the 13th, Shen Wang Zhao Jie and Duan Wang Zhao Jie were both appointed as Siku.

古文：令太常寺与阁门修定刈麦仪。
现代文：命令太常寺与阎门修定割麦仪。
English: Taizhoji Temple and Yanmen were ordered to revise the ritual of cutting wheat.

古文：乙丑，诏翰林学士承旨蔡京等辩验段义所献玉玺，定议以闻。
现代文：十六日，诏令翰林学士承旨蔡京等辨别检验段义所献玉印，确定后上报朝廷。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict issued by Hanlin Bachelors, with the approval of Cai Jing and others, presented the imperial seal to distinguish the meaning of the inspection paragraph, and reported it to the imperial court after it was confirmed.

古文：戊辰，吏部郎中方泽等坐私谒后族宴聚，罚金补外。
现代文：十九日，吏部郎中方泽等因私自拜见后族聚会宴饮获罪，处以罚金，补为外任。
English: On the 19th of the month, the bureaucrats, such as the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, were found guilty of attending a party and drinking after the meeting, and were fined and removed from their posts.

古文：庚午，幸申王府。
现代文：二十一日，到申王府邸。
English: On the 21st, he went to the residence of King Shin.

古文：辛未，幸端王府。
现代文：二十二日，到端王府邸。
English: On the 22nd, they arrived at the residence of King Hao.

古文：甲戌，进封咸宁郡王俣为莘王，普宁郡王似为简王，祁国公偲为永宁郡王。
现代文：二十五日，进封咸宁郡王赵误为苹王，普宁郡王赵似为简王，祁国公赵为永宁郡王。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Wang Zhao of Xianning County was mistaken for King Ping, King Zhao of Puning County was mistaken for King Jian, and King Zhao of Shan State was mistaken for King Yongning.

古文：丙子，筑熙河通会关。
现代文：二十七日，修筑熙河通会关。
English: On the 27th, the construction of the Heihe Pass was completed.

古文：夏四月庚辰，世开薨。
现代文：夏四月初二，赵世开逝世。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, Zhao Shikai passed away.

古文：甲申，幸睿成宫及莘王、简王府。
现代文：初六，到睿成宫和苹王、简王府邸。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of junior high school, they went to Rui Chenggong Palace and the residences of King Ping and King Jian.

古文：丙戌，章惇等进《神宗帝纪》。
现代文：初八，章等进呈件申宗帝重己。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the chapter and so on submitted a petition to the emperor.

古文：梁焘卒于化州。
现代文：梁煮在化州去世。
English: Liang Ni passed away in Huazhou.

古文：壬辰，林希罢。
现代文：十四日，林希被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Lin Xi was dismissed.

古文：丙申，建显谟阁，藏《神宗御集》。
现代文：十八日，修建显漠阁，藏件申宗御集。
English: On the 18th, the Xianba Pavilion was built, and the collection of Shenzong's collection began.

古文：庚子，幸睿成宫。
现代文：二十二日，到睿成宫。
English: On the 22nd, to Ruicheng Palace.

古文：壬寅，学士院上《宝玺》、《灵光》、《翔鹤》乐章。癸卯，诏学官增习两经。
现代文：二十四日，学士院献上宝玺、灵为、翎昏乐章。二十五日，诏令学官增习两经。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the academy presented the music of Baozhuang, Lingwei and Xingwen. On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor ordered the scholars to study two more scriptures.

古文：丁未，曾布上《删修军马敕例》。
现代文：二十九日，曾布呈上删修军马救例。
English: On the 29th, Zeng Bu presented the case of rescuing and repairing war horses.

古文：五月戊申朔，御大庆殿，受天授传国受命宝，行朝会礼。
现代文：五月初一，到大庆殿，接受天授传国受命宝，行朝会礼。
English: On the first day of May, they went to the Daqing Palace to receive the treasure of the country's mission from heaven and perform the imperial ceremony.

古文：己酉，班德音于天下，减囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：初二，向全国颁降德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, a proclamation was issued to the whole country: prisoners would have their crimes reduced to the first class, and would be released after serving a prison sentence.

古文：癸丑，受宝，恭谢景灵宫。
现代文：初六，接受受命宝，恭谢景灵宫。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, I received the treasure I was ordered to receive, compliments of the Jingling Palace.

古文：戊午，宴紫宸殿。
现代文：十一日，在紫哀殿聚宴。
English: On the 11th day, a banquet was held at the Purple Shrine.

古文：庚申，诏献宝人段义为右班殿直，赐绢二百匹。
现代文：十三日，诏令献宝人段义为右班殿直，赐给二百匹绢。
English: On the 13th, it was decreed that the donor of the treasure, Duan Yi, would be the right-hand man, Dian Zhi, and he would be given 200 horses.

古文：六月戊寅朔，改元。
现代文：六月初一，改元。
English: On the first day of June, the era name was changed.

古文：丙戌，遣官分诣鄜延、泾原、河东、熙河按验所筑城砦。
现代文：初九，派遣官员分别到延、径原、河东、熙河视察所筑城寨。
English: On the first nine days of the month, officials were dispatched to Yancheng, Qianyuan, Hedong and Xihe inspection stations respectively.

古文：甲午，蔡京等上《常平免役敕令》。
现代文：十七日，蔡京等呈上付常平免役救令。
English: On the 17th, Cai Jing and others submitted an order to be exempted from military service.

古文：秋七月乙卯，诏增置大府丞一员。
现代文：秋七月初九，诏令增置大府承一名。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the imperial edict increased the number of daifu successors by one.

古文：乙丑，敕大礼五使自今并差执政官，定为令。
现代文：十九日，救令：明堂大礼五使，自今以后一律由执政官担任，确定为令。
English: On the 19th, the relief order was issued: the five grand envoys of Myeongdong Grand Ceremony will all be held by consuls from now on, which was confirmed as an order.

古文：丁卯，令学官试《三经》。
现代文：二十一日，命令学官试三经。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered the scholar to examine the Three Classics.

古文：庚午，诏范祖禹移化州安置，刘安世梅州安置，王岩叟、朱光庭诸子并勒停不叙。
现代文：二十七日，诏令范祖禹迁移化州安置，刘安世梅州安置，王岩雯、朱光庭各子一律勒令停职，不再录用。
English: On the 27th, Fan Zuyu was ordered to relocate and resettle in Chuzhou, Liu An was resettled in Shimei, and Wang Yanwen and Zhu Guangting were suspended and no longer employed.

古文：壬申，京师地震。
现代文：二十六日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 26th, the Chang'an earthquake.

古文：八月丙子朔，熙河兰岷路复为熙河兰会路。
现代文：八月初一，熙河兰崛路恢复为熙河兰会路。
English: On the first day of August, Xihe Lanhui Road was restored as Xihe Lanhui Road.

古文：庚辰，诏自今三省、枢密院进拟在京文臣、开封推判官、武臣横班使副及诸路监司、帅守，并取旨召对。
现代文：初五，下诏： 自从以后，三省、枢密院拟定在京文臣、开封推判官、武臣横班使副和各路监司、帅守的任命书进呈核准，一律要取旨召对。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: Since then, the three provinces and the Privy Council have drafted and submitted for approval the letters of appointment of civil servants in Beijing, Kaifeng magistrates, vice-ministers of war, and supervisors and marshals of various roads, all of which must be approved.

古文：丁亥，诏侍从中书舍人以上各举所知二人，权侍郎以上举一人，仍指言所堪职任。
现代文：十二日，下诏： 侍从中书舍人以上官员分别举荐所知二人，权侍郎以上官员举荐一人，并且要说明可以担任什么职务。 
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the following edict was issued: Two well-known officials at or above the rank of attendant and secretary were recommended separately, and one official at or above the rank of attendant and secretary was recommended, and it was necessary to explain what positions could be held.

古文：九月丁未，以霖雨，罢秋宴。
现代文：九月初二，因阴雨连绵废罢秋宴。
English: On the second day of September, the autumn banquet was cancelled due to continuous rain.

古文：庚戌，秦观除名，移雷州编管。
现代文：初五，秦观被除名，迁移雷州编管。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Qin Guan was removed from his post and transferred to the Leizhou editorial office.

古文：癸亥，赐王安石第于京师。
现代文：十八日，在京城赐给王安石府第。
English: On the 18th, Wang Anshi Prefecture was given to Cangzhou in Beijing.

古文：冬十月乙未，诏武官试换文资。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，诏令武官试换文资。
English: In the winter of October 21st, the imperial edict ordered the military attaché to try to exchange the money.

古文：丁酉，以河北、京东河溢，遣官振恤。
现代文：二十三日，因河北、京东黄河溢出河道，派遣官员贩济抚恤。
English: On the 23rd, due to the overflow of the Yellow River in Hebei and Jingdong, officials were dispatched to sell subsidies.

古文：乙亥，夏人寇平夏城。
现代文：二十五日，夏军攻打平夏城。
English: On the 25th, Xia's army attacked Pingxia City.

古文：癸卯，附马都尉张敦礼坐元祐初上疏誉司马光，夺留后，授环卫官。
现代文：二十九日，驹马都尉张敦礼因元初上疏赞誉司马光，削夺留后职掌，授为环卫官。
English: On the 29th, Captain Zhang Dunli, who was awarded the title of "Environmental Protection Officer" after winning the post, praised Sima Guang for his early success.

古文：十一月壬戌，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十一月十八日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On November 18th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：癸亥，朝飨太庙。
现代文：十九日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 19th, the memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲子，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：二十日，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the 20th, the god Haotian was sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：是岁，澶州河溢，振恤河北、京东被水者。
现代文：这一年，擅州段黄河水溢出河道，贩济抚恤河北、京东灾民。
English: In this year, the water of the Yellow River in the Zhouzhou section overflowed the river, and the merchants raised money for the victims in Hebei and Jingdong.

古文：真定府、祁州野蚕成茧。
现代文：真定府、祁州野蚕成茧。
English: Jindingfu and Zhangzhou wild silkworms grow into cocoons.

古文：泾原路禽夏国统军嵬名阿埋等，高丽、瞎征、西南蕃张氏、罗氏、程氏入贡。
现代文：径原路俘获夏国统军鬼名阿埋等。高丽、瞎征、西南蕃张氏和罗氏、程氏来进贡。
English: Jianyuan Road was captured by the Xia Guo-unification Army, including the ghost name of Abing. Goryeo, blindly, the Zhang and Luo clans in the southwest, and the Cheng clan came to pay tribute.

古文：西蕃首领李讹移、巴诎支、吕承信等内附。
现代文：西蕃首领李叱霏、巴拙支、吕承信等内附朝廷。
English: The leaders of Xicheng, such as Li Zhaojun, Bazhuozhi, and Lv Chengxin, were supported by the imperial court.

古文：二年春正月甲辰朔，御大庆殿，以雪罢朝，群臣及辽使诣东上阁门拜表贺。
现代文：元符二年春正月初一，到大庆殿，因降雪罢朝，大臣们和辽朝使者到东上阔门上奏祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Yuanfu Spring, the ministers and the emissaries of the Liao Dynasty went to Daqing Palace to congratulate the East Shangguo Gate due to the snowfall.

古文：群臣又诣内东门，贺如仪。
现代文：大臣又到内东门，按规定礼仪祝贺。
English: The minister also went to the inner east gate and congratulated them according to the prescribed etiquette.

古文：丁卯，出内金帛二百万，备陕西边储。
现代文：二十四日，拿出内库金帛二百万预备陕西边储物资。
English: On the 24th, it took out 2 million gold ingots from its internal treasury to prepare materials for storage in Shaanxi.

古文：二月甲戌朔，令监司举本路学行优异者各二人。
现代文：二月初一，命令监司推举本路学术品行优秀者各两人。
English: On the first day of February, the supervisors were ordered to nominate two persons each for outstanding academic performance.

古文：韦蕃入贡。
现代文：韦蕃来进贡。
English: Wei Wei came to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，诏许高丽国王遣士宾贡。
现代文：初六，下诏允许高丽国王派遣士人参加科举考试。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the king of Goryeo was allowed to send scholars to participate in the imperial examinations.

古文：辛巳，增置神臂弓，诏自今应被旨举官，所举不当，具举主姓名以闻。
现代文：初八，增置神臂弓。下诏： 从今以后应按圣旨推荐官员，举荐人才不哈当的，报上举荐人的姓名让皇上知道。 
English: The following edict was issued: From now on, officials should be recommended in accordance with the imperial edict, and if the person to be recommended is worthy, the name of the person to be recommended should be reported to the emperor.

古文：甲申，夏人以国母卒，遣使告哀，且谢罪，却其使不纳。
现代文：十一日，夏国因国母去世，派遣使臣报丧，并且谢罪朝廷，拒绝夏国使臣不予接待。
English: On the 11th day, due to the death of the mother of the country, Xia Guo sent an envoy to report the death, and thanked the court for refusing to receive the envoy of Xia Guo.

古文：戊子，鄜延钤辖刘安败夏人于神堆。
现代文：十五日，延铃辖刘安在神堆打败夏军。
English: On the fifteenth day, Liu An, the governor of Yanling, defeated Xia Jun in Shentuo.

古文：甲午，大食入贡。
现代文：二十一日，大食来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, a large meal came in tribute.

古文：乙未，诏吏部：守令课绩，从御史台考察，黜其不实者。
现代文：二十二日，下诏吏部：太守县令的政绩考核，随从御史台考察，免除课绩不实的官员。
English: On the 22nd day of the following year, the Imperial Household Agency: the performance appraisal of the governor of the county began, followed by the inspection of the Imperial History Station, exempting officials with false performance.

古文：三月丙辰，辽人遣签书枢密院事萧德崇来为夏人请缓师，仍献玉带。
现代文：三月十三日，辽朝派遣签书枢密院事萧德崇来为夏国请求朝廷缓迟出兵，并且献上玉带。
English: On March 13th, Liao Dynasty dispatched Xia De Chong Lai, a signer of the Privy Council, to request the Imperial Court to delay the dispatch of troops for Xia Province, and presented a jade belt.

古文：筑环庆路定边城。
现代文：进筑环庆路定边城。
English: The construction of Huanqing Road in Dingbiancheng.

古文：丁巳，秦凤经略司言吴名革率部族、孳畜归顺。
现代文：十四日，秦凤经略司报告说吴名革率领部族和孽畜归顺朝廷。
English: On the 14th, Qin Feng's editor-in-chief reported that Wu Mengge led the tribe and the animals to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：诏名革补内殿承制，首领李移补右侍禁，及赐钱帛有差。
现代文：诏令吴名革补为内殿承制，首领李啾补为右侍禁和赐钱帛不等。
English: The imperial edict ordered Wu Mingge Shu to be the heir of the Inner Court, and the leader Li Shuxu to be the right attendant and the bestowal of money.

古文：庚申，知府州折克行获夏国钤辖令王皆保。
现代文：十七日，府州知州折克行俘获夏国铃辖令王皆保。
English: On the 17th, Xia Guozhiling's subordinate Wang Minbo was captured in Fuzhou, Chizhou.

古文：乙丑，祈雨。
现代文：二十二日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 22nd, pray for rain.

古文：己巳，莘王俣为司空。
现代文：二十六日，命苹王赵误为司空。
English: On the 26th, Wang Zhao's life was mistaken for Siku.

古文：夏四月庚辰，幸莘王府。
现代文：夏四月初八，到苹王府第。
English: In the summer, on the eighth day of the fourth month, I went to Pingwang Palace.

古文：令广西提点刑狱司兼领盐事。
现代文：命令广西提点刑狱司兼管盐事。
English: He ordered Guangxi to appoint a new prison warden and salt administrator.

古文：丙戌，筑鄜延、河东路暖泉、乌龙砦。
现代文：十四日，筑延、河东路暖泉和乌龙寨。
English: On the 14th, warm springs and Wulongzhai in Chikuyan and Hedong Road will be launched.

古文：丁亥，以旱，减四京囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：十五日，因干早，四京囚犯减罪一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 15th, due to the dry morning, the prisoners in Shijing were given a first-class reduction in crime and released with a cane sentence or less.

古文：辛卯，诏鞫狱，徒以上须结案及录审覆奏，然后断遣，不如令者坐之。
现代文：十九日，下诏审讯狱案，徒刑以上需要结案和审录覆奏，然后断遣，不如令者连坐治罪。
English: On the 19th, the verdict of the trial of the prison case was announced. Those who have been sentenced to more than imprisonment need to complete the case and replay the trial, and then be dismissed. It is better to make them serve the sentence together.

古文：癸巳，封永嘉郡王偲为睦王。
现代文：二十一日，封永嘉郡王赵为睦王。
English: On the 21st, Yongjia County King Zhao was named King Mutsu.

古文：遣中书舍人郭知章报聘于辽。
现代文：派遣中书舍人郭知章回访辽朝。
English: Guo Zhizhang, a Chinese scholar, was dispatched to pay a return visit to the Liao Dynasty.

古文：丁酉，筑威羌城。
现代文：二十五日，进筑威羌城。
English: On the 25th, it entered the city of Weihai.

古文：五月甲辰，太白昼见。
现代文：五月初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚戌，筑鄜延路金汤城。
现代文：初八，进筑延路金汤城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Jinchuan Yan Road, Jintang City.

古文：癸亥，奉迁真宗神御于万寿观延圣殿。
现代文：二十一日，把真宗画像恭敬迁到万寿观延圣殿。
English: On the twenty-first day, the image of the True Sect was respectfully moved to the Manshukonen Shrine.

古文：曲赦陕西、河东路，减囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：特赦陕西、河东路，囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: Shaanxi and Hedong Road were amnestied, and the prisoners' crimes were reduced to the first class, and they were released after being exiled.

古文：建西安州及天都等砦。
现代文：修建西安州及天都等寨。
English: Xi'an and Tiandu Villages will be built.

古文：乙丑，进章惇官五等，曾布三等，许将、蔡卞、黄履皆二等。
现代文：二十三日，章升官五级，曾布三级，许将、蔡卞、黄履二级。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang was promoted to the 5th grade, Zengbu to the 3rd grade, and Xu Zheng, Cai Qi and Huang Li to the 2nd grade.

古文：辛未，诏莘王俣、睦王偲母进封婕妤。
现代文：二十九日，诏令苹王赵误、睦王赵母亲进封为婕好。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that Ping Wang Zhao Mei and Mutsu Wang Zhao's mother would be allowed to enter the territory.

古文：六月庚辰，赐兰、会州新砦名会川城。
现代文：六月初九，赐兰、会州新寨名为会川城。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Jilan and Hezhou Xinzhai became known as Heichuan City.

古文：甲午，赐环庆路之字平曰清平关。
现代文：二十三日，赐环庆路之字平为清平关。
English: On the 23rd, the word Ping on Huanqing Road was changed to Qingping Pass.

古文：戊戌，筑定边、白豹城讫工，阁门使张存等转官、赐金帛有差。
现代文：二十七日，进筑定边城，白豹城完工，间门使张存等转官，赐给金帛不等。
English: On the 27th, the border city of Dingcheng was built, and the White Leopard City was completed. In the meantime, Zhang Cun, the gatekeeper, and others were transferred to other posts, and were given to Jin Yu and others.

古文：秋七月乙巳，盛暑，中外决系囚。
现代文：秋七月初四，盛夏酷暑，中外审理在押囚犯。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month of autumn, at the height of the summer heat, prisoners in custody are being tried at home and abroad.

古文：丁未，放在京工役。
现代文：初六，释放在京工役。
English: At the age of six, he was released to work in Kyoto.

古文：庚戌，河北河涨，没民田庐，遣官振之。
现代文：初九，河北黄河涨溢，淹没民田庐舍，派官贩济。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the Yellow River in Hebei overflowed, flooding people's fields and houses, and sending officials to sell rice.

古文：甲子，知环州种朴获夏国监军讹勃啰。
现代文：二十三日，环州知州种朴俘获夏军监军讹勃缪。
English: On the 23rd, Huanzhou, Chizhou, and Zengpu captured Xia Junjunjun and Zou Bohmu.

古文：丙寅，洮西安抚使王赡复邈川城，西蕃首领钦彪阿成以城降。
现代文：二十五日，姚西安抚使王赡收复邀川城，西蕃首领钦彪阿成据城降附。
English: On the 25th, Yao Xi's pacification made Wang Yan recover Yingchuan City, and the leader of Xidi, Qin Biao Acheng, annexed the city.

古文：八月癸酉，章惇等进《新修敕令式》。
现代文：八月初三，章等进呈《新修救令鸯。
English: On the third day of August, the chapter submitted a "new repair and rescue order."

古文：惇读于帝前，其间有元丰所无而用元祐敕令修立者，帝曰： 元祐亦有可取乎？ 惇等对曰： 取其善者。 
现代文：章在哲宗面前进读，其中有元丰时没有而用元救令修立者，哲宗说： 元也有可取的吗了章回答说： 取其善者。 
English: The chapter was read in front of Zhezong. Among them, there was a person who did not have Yuanfeng at the time, but used Yuanfeng to save him. Zhezong said: Is Yuanfeng also desirable? The chapter replied: Take its good.

古文：甲戌，太原地震。
现代文：初四，太原发生地震。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan.

古文：戊寅，皇子生。
现代文：初八，皇子出生。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a prince was born.

古文：辛巳，降德音于诸路：减囚罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十一日，向各路颁布德音文告：囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 11th, a message was issued to all areas: prisoners will have their crimes reduced to the first degree, and will be released after serving their sentences.

古文：乙酉，赐熙河路缗钱百万抚纳部族。
现代文：十五日，赐熙河路钱一百万抚纳部族。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he gave a million dollars to the Funa tribe.

古文：丁亥，复修会州。
现代文：十七日，修复会州。
English: On the 17th, the restoration of the prefecture began.

古文：癸巳，太白昼见。
现代文：二十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：瞎征降。
现代文：瞎征投降。
English: Blindly marching to surrender.

古文：甲午，建葭芦戍为晋宁军。
现代文：二十四日，建霞芦戍为晋宁军。
English: On the 24th, Jianxia Lushan joined the Jin Ning Army.

古文：丙申，保宁军节度吕惠卿特授检校司空。
现代文：二十六日，保宁军节度使吕惠卿特授为检校司空。
English: On the 26th, the Baoding Military Festival made Lu Huiqing specially awarded as the inspector of the school.

古文：九月庚子朔，夏人来谢罪。
现代文：九月初一，夏国派人来谢罪。
English: On the first day of September, Xia Guo sent someone to apologize.

古文：癸卯，命御史点检三省、枢密院，并依元丰旧制。
现代文：初四，命令御史清理三省、枢密院，一律依照元丰旧制。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he ordered the Imperial Historian to clean up the three provinces and the Privy Council, all in accordance with the Yuanfeng old system.

古文：甲辰，幸储祥宫。
现代文：初五，到储样宫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I went to the Sample Storage Palace.

古文：乙巳，幸醴泉观。
现代文：初六，到醛泉观。
English: On my sixth day of junior high school, I went to see the aldehyde spring.

古文：丁未，立贤妃刘氏为皇后。
现代文：初八，立贤妃刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, Princess Liu became the empress.

古文：己未，青唐酋陇拶以城降。
现代文：二十日，青唐酋陇摺据城降附。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the Qing and Tang Dynasties Emperor Xuanzong was enthroned in the city.

古文：壬戌，雨，罢秋宴。
现代文：二十三日，降雨，废罢秋宴。
English: On the 23rd, it rained and the autumn banquet was cancelled.

古文：甲子，右正言邹浩论刘氏不当立，特除名勒停、新州羁管。
现代文：二十五日，右正言邹浩论刘氏不应当立为皇后，被除名，勒令停职，新州羁管。
English: On the 25th, Yu Zhengyan and Yu Hao argued that Liu should not be made empress, and were expelled, ordered to suspend their duties, and placed under the custody of Xinzhou.

古文：丙寅，御文德殿册皇后。
现代文：二十七日，到文德殿册封皇后。
English: On the 27th, she was enthroned as empress at the Winter Palace.

古文：闰月癸酉，置律学博士员。
现代文：闰九月初四，设置律学博士名额。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th lunar month, the number of law doctor positions will be increased.

古文：诏详议庙制。
现代文：诏令详细商讨庙制。
English: The edict discussed the temple system in detail.

古文：以青唐为鄯州、陇右节度。邈川为湟州，宗哥城为龙支城，俱隶陇右。
现代文：以青唐为都州，受陇右节度；邀川为惶州，宗哥城为陇支城，都隶属陇右。
English: Qing Tang is the capital city, and it is governed by the State Council of the People's Republic of China; Yingchuan is the county seat, and Zongge City is the county seat, all of which belong to the State Council.

古文：戊寅，以廓州为宁砦城。
现代文：初九，以廓州为宁寨城。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, Ningzhai City was established in Guozhou.

古文：丙戌，果州团练使仲忽进古方鼎，志曰 鲁公作文王尊彝 。
现代文：十七日，果州团练使仲忽进献古方鼎，铭文曰 鲁公作文王尊彝 。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the Guozhou group exercise sent Zhonghu to present the ancient square tripod, with the inscription saying "Lu Gong's composition Wang Zunyi."

古文：甲午，荧惑犯太微垣左执法。
现代文：二十五日，荧惑星侵犯太微垣左执法。
English: On the 25th, the fluorescent planet encroached too far from the law enforcement.

古文：己未，越王茂薨。
现代文：己未日，越王赵茂逝世。
English: Just a few days ago, Yue Wang Zhao Mao passed away.

古文：冬十月壬子，诏河北大名二十二州军置马步军指挥，以广威、保捷为名。
现代文：冬十月壬子日，诏令河北大名二十二州军设置马步军指挥，以广威、保捷为名。
English: In the winter of October, on Jinsi Day, Hebei Daimyo ordered the 22nd State Army to set up a horse-marching army command, named Guangwei and Porsche.

古文：甲寅，日有食之，既。
现代文：十六日，日食，食尽。
English: On the 16th, the solar eclipse, the food ran out.

古文：十一月丁亥，诏绥德城为绥德军。
现代文：十一月十九日，诏令绥德城为绥德军。
English: On November 19th, the imperial edict ordered the German troops to leave Shunde.

古文：壬辰，诏河北黄河退滩地听民耕垦，免租税三年。
现代文：二十四日，诏令河北地区黄河退滩地允许百姓耕垦，免除三年租税。
English: On the 24th, a decree was issued in Hebei to allow people to cultivate the Yellow River's beaching grounds, exempting them from taxes for three years.

古文：乙未，诏诸州置教授者，依太学三舍法考选生徒升补。
现代文：二十七日，诏令各州设置教授者，依太学三舍法考试选择生徒升补。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that all states should set up professors to select students for promotion according to the "three schools of learning" examination.

古文：是月，河中猗氏县民妻一产四男子。
现代文：这个月，河中琦氏县百姓妻子一胎生下四个儿子。
English: This month, the wife of a commoner in Jinshi County, Sichuan Province, gave birth to four sons.

古文：三年春正月辛未，帝有疾，不视朝。
现代文：元符三年春正月初四，哲宗患病不上朝听政。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of the Yuanfu era, Tetsuzo fell ill and did not go to the court to listen to politics.

古文：丁丑，奉安太宗皇帝御容于景灵宫大定殿。
现代文：初九，把太宗皇帝画像恭敬安放在景灵宫大定殿。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the image of Emperor Taizong was respectfully placed in the Great Hall of the Jingling Palace.

古文：戊寅，大赦天下，蠲民租。
现代文：初十，大赦全国，免除百姓租税。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the whole country was amnestied, and the people were exempted from taxes.

古文：己卯，帝崩。
现代文：十一日，哲宗逝世。
English: On the 11th day, Tetsuzo passed away.

古文：皇太后谕遗制，立弟端王即位于柩前，皇太后权同处分军国事。
现代文：皇太后宣布遗命，由弟端王在灵枢前即皇帝位，皇太后权同处分军国事。
English: The empress dowager announced her last will and testament, and her younger brother, Duan Wang, became the emperor in front of the spiritual center. The empress dowager also had the power to dispose of military affairs.

古文：四月己未，上谥曰钦文睿武昭孝皇帝，庙号曰哲宗。
现代文：四月二十三日，敬献哲宗溢号为钦文睿武昭孝皇帝，庙号为哲宗。
English: On April 23rd, Tetsuzo was honored with the posthumous name of Emperor Qin Wenrui Wu Zhaotiao and the temple name of Tetsuzo.

古文：七月丁卯，以谥号册宝奏告天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：七月初二，把溢号册宝奏告天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the second day of the first month of July, he announced the announcement to the world, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：八月壬寅，葬于永泰陵。
现代文：八月初八，葬在永泰陵。
English: He was buried in Yongtai Mausoleum on August 8.

古文：癸亥，祔太庙。
现代文：二十九日，在太庙附祭哲宗神主。
English: On the 29th, the Tetsuzo Shinto deity was enshrined in the temple.

古文：崇宁三年七月，加谥曰宪元继道世德扬功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
现代文：崇宁三年七月，加溢号为宪元继道世德扬功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
English: In July of the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongning, Emperor Xianyuan succeeded Emperor Yang Gong, Emperor Wenzhong, Emperor Wuzhong and Emperor Zhaozhong.

古文：政和三年，改谥宪元继道显德定功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
现代文：政和三年，改溢号为宪元继道显德定功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, the name of the emperor was changed to Emperor Kengen, succeeding Emperor Dao, Emperor Xiande, Emperor Jingsong, Emperor Wenrui, Emperor Wuqi, and Emperor Shengzhao.

古文：赞曰：折宗以冲幼践阼，宣仁同政。
现代文：评论说：哲宗幼年登上帝位，与宣仁圣烈皇后共同执政。
English: Comment: Tetsuzong ascended to the throne at a young age and ruled together with Empress Xuanren.

古文：初年召用马、吕诸贤，罢青苗，复常平，登俊良，辟言路，天下人心，翕然向治。
现代文：即位初年召用司马光、吕公著诸贤，废罢青苗法，恢复常平法，起用良才，广开言路，天下人心，都安稳地趋向大治。
English: In the first year of his enthronement, Sima Guang and Lyu Gong made use of all the sages, abolished the "young seedlings" method, restored the "ordinary level" method, appointed good talents, opened up the way to speak, and the hearts of the people all over the world are steadily moving towards great governance.

古文：而元祐之政，庶几仁宗。
现代文：从而使元年间的政治，几乎能与仁宗时期相比。
English: As a result, the politics in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty can almost be compared to the period of Emperor Renzong.

古文：奈何熙、丰旧奸枿去未尽，已而媒蘖复用，卒假绍述之言，务反前政，报复善良，驯致党籍祸兴，君子尽斥，而宋政益敝矣。
现代文：无奈神宗熙宁、元丰年间的旧奸驱除未尽，时间不长，构陷诬害，导致复用，最终假借继承神宗政治，务必推翻元政治，报复善良人士，渐渐导致兴起党籍之祸端，君子完全摈斥，于是赵宋王朝的政治局面更加败坏。
English: However, the expulsion of the old traitors in the years of Shensong Xining and Yuanfeng was not completed, the time was not long, the frame-up and slander led to multiple use, and finally, under the guise of inheriting the politics of Shensong, it was necessary to overthrow the politics of Yuan, take revenge on the good people, and gradually lead to the rise of the scourge of party membership, the gentleman completely rejected, so the political situation of the Zhao Song Dynasty was even more corrupt.

古文：吁，可惜哉！
现代文：唉，可惜呀！
English: What a shame!

