古文：魏公叔痤为魏将，而与韩、赵战浍北，禽乐祚。
现代文：公叔痤做魏国的将领，同韩国、赵国在浍水北岸交战，擒获了赵将乐祚。
English: As a general of the State of Wei, he fought against the Republic of Korea and the State of Zhao on the northern coast of Surabaya, and captured Zhao Zhele.

古文：魏王说，迎郊，以赏田百万禄之。
现代文：魏惠王大喜，到城郊迎接公叔痤，并赐田百万亩作为他的食禄。
English: Wei Hui Wang was overjoyed and went to the outskirts of the city to meet Gongshu Yao, and gave him a million mu of land as his stipend.

古文：公叔痤反走，再拜辞曰： 夫使士卒不崩，直而不倚，挠拣而不辟者，此吴起余教也，臣不能为也。
现代文：公叔痤反身退走，然后拜了两拜辞谢说： 能使士兵不溃散，勇往直前不躲避邪行，强敌压己而不退却的，是吴起留下的教导，臣下是做不到的。
English: Gongzhu Yao turned his back and retreated, then bowed twice and said: It is the teaching left by Wu Qi that can make soldiers not collapse, go forward bravely without avoiding evil deeds, and strong enemies suppress themselves without retreating, which cannot be done by subjects.

古文：前脉形地之险阻，决利害之备，使三军之士不迷惑者，巴宁、爨襄之力也。
现代文：在军队前踏察地形的险阻艰难，判断有利有害加以防备，使三军士卒不迷惑的，是巴宁、爨襄的功劳。
English: It is the merit of Baning and Xingxiang that they stepped in front of the army to observe the dangers and difficulties of the terrain, judge the benefits and harms, and prevent them, so that the three soldiers would not be confused.

古文：悬赏罚于前，使民昭然信之于后者，王之明法也。
现代文：在战前悬赏罚，战后使百姓明白无疑而信任的，是大王圣明的法度。
English: Before the war, rewards and punishments were offered, and after the war, the people were made to understand and trust without a doubt that it was the great king's sacred law.

古文：见敌之可也鼓之不敢怠倦者，臣也。
现代文：看见可以进攻敌人了，击鼓进军不敢懈怠的，那才是臣下。
English: It is the vassal who sees that it is time to attack the enemy and dares not slacken in beating the drum.

古文：王特为臣之右手不倦赏臣，何也?
现代文：大王只是因为臣下的右手不懈怠而赏赐臣下，为什么呢？
English: Why did the great king reward his vassals just because their right hands never slackened?

古文：若以臣之有功，臣何力之有乎? 王曰： 善。 
现代文：假如认为臣下有功，臣下有什么功劳呢？ 魏惠王说： 好。 
English: If it is considered that a vassal is meritorious, what is the merit of a vassal? Wei Hui Wang said: Good.

古文：于是索吴起之后，赐之田二十万。
现代文：因此寻找吴起的后人，赏赐土地二十万亩。
English: Therefore, he searched for Wu Zhi's descendants and rewarded them with 200,000 mu of land.

古文：巴宁、爨襄田各十万。
现代文：巴宁、爨襄受赏土地各十万亩。
English: The award-winning land in Baning and Qixiang is 100,000 mu each.

古文：王曰： 公叔岂非长者哉！
现代文：魏惠王说： 公叔痤难道不是一个有德行的人吗！
English: Wei Hui Wang said: Isn't Uncle Gong a virtuous person!

古文：既为寡人胜强敌矣，又不遗贤者之后，不掩能士之迹，公叔何可无益乎? 
现代文：已经替我战胜了强大的敌人，又不遗忘贤者的后代，不掩盖能士的功劳，公叔痤怎么能不得到好处呢？ 
English: Having already defeated a powerful enemy for me, without forgetting the descendants of the sages, without concealing the merits of the able men, how can Uncle Gong not get the benefit?

古文：故又与田四十万，加之百万之上，使百四十万。
现代文：所以又赏赐给他土地四十万亩，加上起初赏赐的土地一百万亩，使他拥有土地一百四十万亩。
English: Therefore, he was awarded an additional 400,000 mu of land, in addition to the one million mu of land initially awarded, making him the owner of 1.4 million mu of land.

古文：故《老子》曰： 圣人无积，尽以为人，己愈有；既以与人，己愈多。 
现代文：所以《老子》上说： 圣人没有积蓄，认为已经替别人做了，自己才更富有，认为已经给予别人了，自己的财富才更多。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The sage has no savings, thinks that he has already done for others, so he is richer, thinks that he has given to others, so his wealth is more.

古文：公叔当之矣。
现代文：公叔痤当是这样的人啊。
English: Uncle Gong is such a person.

