古文：徐邈字景山，燕国蓟人也。
现代文：徐邈，字景山，燕国蓟县人。
English: Xu Yao, Zhaojingshan, a native of Yao County, Yan Province.

古文：太祖平河朔，召为丞相军谋掾，试守奉高令，入为东曹议令史。
现代文：太祖平定河朔地区后，征召他担任丞相军谋掾，又尝试着担任奉高县令，又入京担任东曹议令史。
English: After the Emperor Taizu had subdued the area of Heshaku, he was called up to serve as the chancellor of the army, and he also tried to serve as the county magistrate of Bonggao County, and then he went to Beijing to serve as the chief magistrate of Dong Cao.

古文：魏国初建，为尚书郎。
现代文：魏国刚建立时，徐邈做为尚书郎。
English: When the State of Wei was first established, Xu Xi was Shang Shuro.

古文：时科禁酒，而邈私饮至於沈醉。
现代文：当时的律令禁酒，而徐邈私下饮酒一直于大醉。
English: At that time, alcohol was prohibited by law, but Xu Yao was always drunk when he drank in private.

古文：校事赵达问以曹事，邈曰： 中圣人。 
现代文：校事赵达询问政事，徐邈说是： 中圣人。 
English: School official Zhao Da asked about politics, and Xu Yao said: "He is a saint."

古文：达白之太祖，太祖甚怒。
现代文：赵达将这件事上告太祖，太祖很愤怒。
English: Zhao Da reported the matter to his great-grandfather, who was very angry.

古文：度辽将军鲜于辅进曰： 平日醉客谓酒清者为圣人，浊者为贤人，邈性脩慎，偶醉言耳。 
现代文：度辽将军鲜于辅进言说： 平时喝醉酒的人称清酒为圣人，浊酒为贤人，徐邈性情注重修养，行事谨慎，这只不过是偶尔喝醉的胡言罢了。 
English: General Du Liao said, "Usually, people who are drunk call sake a saint, gin a sage, and Xuxi a prudent person. This is just the nonsense of occasional drunkenness.

古文：竟坐得免刑。
现代文：最后徐邈因此得以免于刑罚。
English: In the end, Xu Rong was able to avoid punishment.

古文：后领陇西太守，转为南安。
现代文：后来徐邈兼任陇西太守，转任南安太守。
English: Later, Xu Jun concurrently served as the governor of Shaanxi Province and was transferred to the governor of Nan'an Province.

古文：文帝践阼，历谯相，平阳、安平太守，颍川典农中郎将，所在著称，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，徐邈曾担任过谯相，平阳、安平太守、颍川典农中郎将，所在的地方都有很好的声誉，被赐封关内侯的爵位。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Xu Xi served as the prime minister, and the provinces of Pingyang, Anping, and Luochuan had a good reputation, and he was given the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：车驾幸许昌，问邈曰： 颇复中圣人不？ 
现代文：文帝来到许昌，询问徐邈说： 还要再说中圣人吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen came to Xu Chang, asked Xu Xi and said, "Do you still want to talk about Chinese saints?

古文：邈对曰： 昔子反毙於谷阳，御叔罚於饮酒，臣嗜同二子，不能自惩，时复中之。
现代文：徐邈回复说： 过去子反在谷阳醉酒倒地，御叔因为饮酒被重罚，臣的嗜好和这二人相同，不能控制自己，所以有时还会喝醉。
English: Xu Wei replied: In the past, my son fell down drunk in Guyang, my uncle was heavily fined for drinking, my minister's hobby is the same as these two, he can't control himself, so sometimes he gets drunk.

古文：然宿瘤以丑见传，而臣以醉见识。 
现代文：但宿瘤因为丑陋被记录在史传中，而我因为醉酒得到赏识。 
English: But the hookworm went down in history for being ugly, and I went down for being drunk.

古文：帝大笑，顾左右曰： 名不虚立。 
现代文：文帝大笑，回头对身边人说： 这个名声没有虚传啊。 
English: Emperor Wen laughed loudly and turned to his entourage and said, "This reputation is not false.

古文：迁抚军大将军军师。
现代文：提升徐邈为抚军大将军军师。
English: Xu Xi was promoted to the rank of major general and became a military instructor.

古文：明帝以凉州绝远，南接蜀寇，以邈为凉州刺史，使持节领护羌校尉。
现代文：明帝因为凉州地处偏远，南面又和西蜀接壤，就任命徐邈为梁州刺史，让他持符节兼任护羌校尉。
English: Emperor Ming, because Liangzhou is located in a remote area, and it borders with West Shu to the south, appointed Xu Xi as the governor of Liangzhou, and let him hold the position of the commander of the garrison.

古文：至，值诸葛亮出祁山，陇右三郡反，邈辄遣参军及金城太守等击南安贼，破之。
现代文：徐邈到了凉州后，正遇上诸葛亮出兵祁山，陇右三郡接着反叛，徐邈就派参军和金城太守等人攻打南安的贼寇，击溃了他们。
English: After Xu Bei arrived in Liangzhou, he encountered Zhuge Liang leading his troops out of Lushan, and the three counties to the right of Lushan rebelled. Xu Bei sent soldiers and the governor of Jincheng to attack the bandits in Nan'an and defeated them.

古文：河右少雨，常苦乏谷，邈上脩武威、酒泉盐池以收虏谷，又广开水田，募贫民佃之，家家丰足，仓库盈溢。
现代文：河右地区雨水缺乏，经常因收成不好而苦恼，徐邈上书请求修筑武威、酒泉的盐池以收藏敌人的粮食，又大力开辟水田，招募贫穷的百姓来耕种，家家户户都粮食充足，官府仓库都堆满了。
English: Due to the lack of rain in the right bank of the river, and often suffering from poor harvests, Xu Xi wrote to request the construction of salt ponds to collect enemy grain. He also vigorously opened up paddy fields and recruited poor people to cultivate them. Every household had enough grain, and the government warehouses were full.

古文：乃支度州界军用之馀，以市金帛犬马，通供中国之费。
现代文：徐邈还支取州中剩余的军费，用来购买金帛犬马，以供应中原地区的使用。
English: Xu Wei also took out the remaining military expenses in the state and used it to purchase gold-plated dogs and horses to supply the Central Plains region.

古文：以渐收敛民间私仗，藏之府库。
现代文：徐邈还渐渐收集民间私藏的武器，收藏在府库中。
English: Xu Xi also gradually collected weapons that were privately owned by the people and stored them in the prefectural treasury.

古文：然后率以仁义，立学明训，禁厚葬，断淫祀，进善黜恶，风化大行，百姓归心焉。
现代文：然后以仁义做为百姓的表率，建立学校，明确教化，禁止厚葬，断绝过分的祭祀，奖赏善行惩罚恶行，教化被推广得很好，百姓都衷心归附。
English: Then, with benevolence and righteousness as the model for the people, schools were established, education was made clear, heavy burials were prohibited, excessive sacrifices were discontinued, good deeds were rewarded and bad deeds were punished. Education was well promoted, and the people wholeheartedly adhered to it.

古文：西域流通，荒戎入贡，皆邈勋也。
现代文：西域和中原地区连通，外邦民族入朝进贡，都是徐邈的功劳。
English: The Western Regions and the Central Plains were connected, and the foreign nations paid tribute to the dynasty, all of which were the work of Xu Xi.

古文：讨叛羌柯吾有功，封都亭侯，邑三百户，加建威将车。
现代文：徐邈因为征讨反叛的羌族部落柯吾有功，被封为都亭侯，食邑三百户，加官建威将军。
English: Xu Xi was awarded the title of Du Ting Hou (都亭侯), 300 households of Shuei (食邑) and the title of Jian Wei General (加官建威将军) for his contribution to the conquest of the rebellious Yi tribe.

古文：邈与羌、胡从事，不问小过；若犯大罪，先告部帅，使知，应死者乃斩以徇，是以信服畏威。
现代文：徐邈和羌人、胡人交往处事，不责问小的过失；如果犯了大醉，都先告知他们的首领，该死的就斩首示众，所以百姓对他都很信服并畏惧他的威势。
English: Xu Xi mingled with the Xiong people and the Hu people, and did not punish them for minor faults; if they got very drunk, they would first inform their leaders, and if they were found guilty, they would be beheaded in public, so the people were very convinced of him and were afraid of his power.

古文：赏赐皆散与将士，无入家者，妻子衣食不充；天子闻而嘉之，随时供给其家。弹邪绳枉，州界肃清。
现代文：徐邈将自己得到的赏赐都散发给将士们，没有拿回家的，家中妻子孩子衣食不足；天子得知后很少赞赏，经常给他家中提供物品、徐邈惩治邪恶，处置奸邪，州郡中就平静下来。
English: Xu Xi distributed all the rewards he received to the soldiers. If he did not take them home, his wife and children would not have enough food and clothing. When Tianzi learned about this, he did not appreciate it and often provided items to his family. Xu Xi punished evil and dealt with adultery, and the state and county calmed down.

古文：正始元年，还为大司农。
现代文：正始元年，徐邈回京担任大司农。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, Xu Xi returned to Beijing to serve as the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：迁为司隶校尉，百寮敬惮之。
现代文：后来升任为司隶校尉，朝臣们都敬重忌惮他。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of captain of the brigade, and his courtiers held him in high esteem.

古文：公事去官。
现代文：后来因为公事离开官位。
English: He later left the post for business reasons.

古文：后为光禄大夫，数岁即拜司空，邈叹曰： 三公论道之官，无其人则缺，岂可以老病忝之哉？ 
现代文：后来担任光禄大夫，几年后就任授命为司空，徐邈感叹说： 三公，是讨论大道的官位，没有合适的人选就空缺，我怎么可以以年老多病的状态忝列其中呢？ 
English: Later, he served as the Guanglu doctor, and a few years later, he was appointed as the secretary of the sky. Xu Wei sighed and said: "Three kings is an official position to discuss the avenue. If there is no suitable candidate, it will be vacant. How can I be listed as an old and sick state?

古文：遂固辞不受。
现代文：所以坚决推辞没有接受任命。
English: So he firmly declined to accept the appointment.

古文：嘉平元年，年七十八，以大夫薨于家，用公礼葬，谥曰穆侯。
现代文：嘉平元年，他七十八岁，以大夫的职位在家中去世，朝廷让他按照公的礼节下葬，谥号为穆侯。
English: In the first year of Jiaping, he was seventy-eight years old. He died at home as a doctor, and the court had him buried according to official etiquette. His nickname was Mu Hou.

古文：子武嗣。
现代文：他的儿子徐武承袭爵位。
English: His son Xu Wu inherited the title.

古文：六年，朝廷追思清节之士，诏曰： 夫显贤表德，圣王所重；举善而教，仲尼所美。
现代文：嘉平六年，朝廷追念清廉节义的士人，诏令说： 彰显贤能表明德行，是英明的君主所看重的；推举好的人来教化，是孔子所赞美的。
English: In the sixth year of Jiaping, the imperial court commemorated the scholars who were honest and virtuous, and the imperial edict said: To highlight virtue and show virtue is valued by a wise monarch; to select good people to educate is praised by Confucius.

古文：故司空徐邈、征东将军胡质、卫尉田豫皆服职前朝，历事四世，出统戎马，入赞庶政，忠清在公，忧国忘私，不营产业，身没之后，家无馀财，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：已故司空徐邈、征东将军胡质、卫尉田豫都在前朝任职，经过四朝，出征统率军队，入朝辅佐政事，忠诚和清廉都放在公事上，忧心天下不顾自己，不置办产业，在去世之后，家中没有多余的钱财，朕很赞赏他们。
English: The late Air Chief Marshal Xu Xi, East Conquest General Hu Qian, and Guard Lieutenant Tian Yu all served in the previous dynasty. After four dynasties, they went out to lead the army, entered the court to assist the government, and put their loyalty and integrity in public affairs. They were worried about the world and did not care about themselves, and did not buy property. After their death, there was no extra money in the family. I appreciate them very much.

古文：其赐邈等家谷二千斛，钱三十万，布告天下。 
现代文：现在赏赐徐邈等人的家中两千斛粮食，三十万钱，并昭告天下。 
English: Now reward the homes of Xu Wei and others with 2,000 baht of grain and 300,000 yuan, and announce it to the world.

古文：邈同郡韩观曼游，有鉴识器幹，与邈齐名，而在孙礼、卢毓先，为豫州刺史，甚有治功，卒官。
现代文：徐邈同郡的韩观曼游，有赏识人才的才干，和徐邈齐名，名声还在孙礼、卢毓的前面，担任豫州刺史时，治理百姓很有功绩，后来在官任上去世。
English: Xu Xi, who was a Han Guanman of the same county, had the talent of appreciating talents, and was as famous as Xu Xi. His reputation was still ahead of Sun Li and Lu Wei. When he served as a historian of Yuzhou, he had great achievements in governing the people. Later, he died in office.

古文：卢钦著书，称邈曰： 徐公志高行絜，才博气猛。
现代文：卢钦撰写书籍，称赞徐邈说： 徐公志向高远，行为连接，学问渊博，志气刚猛。
English: Luqin wrote a book praising Xu Rong, saying: Xu Rong aspires to great heights, his behavior is connected, his knowledge is profound, and his spirit is strong.

古文：其施之也，高而不狷，絜而不介，博而守约，猛而能宽。
现代文：他施行政策时，总是见识高远却不急躁，正直而不与人同谋，广博却能信守约定，刚猛却能宽恕他人。
English: In the execution of his policies, he was always far-sighted but not hasty, honest but not conniving, broad-minded but able to keep promises, tough but forgiving.

古文：圣人以清为难，而徐公之所易也。 或问钦： 徐公当武帝之时，人以为通，自在凉州及还京师，人以为介，何也？ 
现代文：圣人认为清廉很难，但对徐公来说很容易。 有人问卢钦： 徐公在武帝的时候，大家都以为他很通达，但自从在凉州任刺史到返回京城，大家又认为他和人同谋，为什么呢？ 
English: Some people asked Lu Qin, "When Xu Gong was Emperor Wu, everyone thought he was very knowledgeable, but since he was appointed as a historian in Liangzhou and returned to Beijing, everyone thought he was a conspirator. Why?

古文：钦答曰； 往者毛孝先、崔季珪等用事，贵清素之士，于时皆变易车服以求名高，而徐公不改其常，故人以为通。
现代文：卢钦回答说： 过去毛孝先、崔季珪等人主管事务，看重清廉素朴的士人，当时的人都改变车马服饰以求得好名声，而徐公没有改变平常的做法，所以众人都认为他和通达。
English: Lu Qin replied: In the past, Mao Xiaoxian, Cui Jizhen and others were in charge of affairs, and valued honest and simple scholars. At that time, people changed their car and horse costumes to gain a good reputation, but Xu Gong did not change the usual practice, so everyone thought he was clever.

古文：比来天下奢靡，转相仿效，而徐公雅尚自若，不与俗同，故前日之通，乃今日之介也。
现代文：近来天下奢靡成风，大家都转而现房，而徐公又风雅高尚，没有改变，不和世俗相同，所以之前的通达，就变成了现在的特立独行。
English: Recently, luxury has become a fashion all over the world, everyone has turned to existing houses, and Xu Gong is elegant and noble, has not changed, and is not the same as the world, so the previous access has become the present maverick.

古文：是世人之无常，而徐公之有常也。 
现代文：这是世人变化无常，而徐公一直坚守啊。 
English: This is the fickleness of the world, but Xu Gong has always adhered.

古文：胡质字文德，楚国寿春人也。
现代文：胡质，字文德，楚国寿春人。
English: Wu quality, the word of virtue, Chu Shouchun people.

古文：少与蒋济、朱绩俱知名於江、淮间，仕州郡。
现代文：年少时和蒋济、朱绩一同在江淮间闻名，在州郡中任职。
English: When he was young, he was famous in Jianghuai together with Jiang Ji and Zhu Pi, and served in Zhoushu County.

古文：蒋济为别驾，使见太祖。
现代文：蒋济担任别驾，出使拜见太祖。
English: Jiang Jie served as a special envoy to visit the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖问曰： 胡通达，长者也，宁有子孙不？ 
现代文：太祖问他说： 胡通达已经是年老长者了，他有子孙了吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked him, "Hutonda is already an old man, does he have any grandchildren?"

古文：济曰： 有子曰质，规模大略不及於父，至於精良综事过之。 
现代文：蒋济说： 有儿子叫胡质，言行举止大概比不上他的父亲，但在处理事务上超过他父亲。 
English: Jiang Jie said: There is a son named Hu Jie, whose words and deeds are probably not as good as his father's, but he surpasses his father in handling affairs.

古文：太祖即召质为顿丘令。
现代文：太祖随即征召胡质担任顿丘县令。
English: The great-grandfather immediately conscripted Wuxi to serve as the Dongqiu County magistrate.

古文：县民郭政通於从妹，杀其夫程他，郡吏冯谅系狱为证。
现代文：县中百姓郭政和堂妹通奸，杀害了堂妹的夫君程他，郡吏冯谅被关在监狱作证人。
English: Guo Zheng, a citizen of the county, committed adultery with his cousin and killed his cousin's husband, Jun Cheng; county official Feng Yu was imprisoned as a witness.

古文：政与妹皆耐掠隐抵，谅不胜痛，自诬，当反其罪。
现代文：郭政和堂妹都忍耐着拷问，抵赖罪行，冯谅不能忍受痛苦，就诬陷自己。
English: Guo Zheng and his cousin both endured the torture and denied the crime. Feng Peng could not bear the pain, so he framed himself.

古文：质至官，察其情色，更详其事，检验具服。
现代文：胡质到任之后，观察他们的神色，详细了解情况，查验案件，大家都很信服。
English: After the cops arrived at the scene, observing their expressions, learning more about the situation, and investigating the case, everyone was convinced.

古文：入为丞相东曹议令史，州请为治中。
现代文：胡质入朝担任丞相东曹议令史，州郡请他担任侍中。
English: Hu Jian entered the imperial court as the chancellor Dong Cao, and the county asked him to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：将军张辽与其护军武周有隙。
现代文：将军张辽与他的护军武周有嫌隙。
English: General Zhang Liao had a rift with his bodyguard, Wu Zhou.

古文：辽见刺史温恢求请质，质辞以疾。
现代文：张辽见到刺史温恢，请求征召胡质为官，胡质以生病为由推辞了。
English: Zhang Liao saw the assassin, Wen Weiwei, and requested that Hu Jian be conscripted as an official. Hu Jian declined on the grounds of illness.

古文：辽出谓质曰： 仆委意於君，何以相辜如此？ 
现代文：张辽出来后对胡质说： 我属意让你做官，你怎么这样辜负我？ 
English: After Zhang Liao came out, he said to Wu Qian: I intended to make you an official, how could you betray me like this?

古文：质曰： 古人之交也，取多知其不贪，奔北知其不怯，闻流言而不信，故可终也。
现代文：胡质说： 古人的交往，求取的多但知道他不贪婪，阵前逃跑但知道他不是胆怯，听到流言但是不相信，所以能有终生的交往。
English: Hu Qian said: The ancient people's contacts, seek more but know that he is not greedy, flee before the battle but know that he is not timid, hear rumors but do not believe, so they can have lifelong contacts.

古文：武伯南身为雅士，往者将军称之不容於口，今以睚眦之恨，乃成嫌隙。
现代文：武伯南是高雅之士，过去将军对他赞不绝口，现在因为一点小小的矛盾就生出了嫌隙。
English: Wubenan is an elegant man. In the past, the general had nothing but praise for him. Now, because of a small contradiction, a rift has emerged.

古文：况质才薄，岂能终好？
现代文：更何况我才学浅薄，又怎么能一直和你交好呢？
English: What's more, I'm a shallow learner, so how can I be friends with you all the time?

古文：是以不愿也。 
现代文：所以不愿意去你那里做官。 
English: That's why I don't want to work for you.

古文：辽感言，复与周平。
现代文：张辽有感于胡质的话，又和武周重新交好。
English: Zhang Liao was impressed by Wu Zhou's facial hair and became friends with him again.

古文：太祖辟为丞相属。
现代文：太祖征召他为丞相属。
English: The great-grandfather conscripted him as a subordinate of the prime minister.

古文：黄初中，徙吏部郎，为常山太守，迁任东莞。
现代文：黄初年间，胡质转任为吏部郎，担任常山太守，又调到东莞任职。
English: During the early years of the Yellow Emperor, Hu Qian was transferred to the position of secretary, served as the governor of Changshan, and was transferred to Dongguan.

古文：士卢显为人所杀，质曰： 此士无雠而有少妻，所以死乎！ 
现代文：士人卢县被人杀害，胡质说： 这个士人没有仇家，却有年轻的妻子，所以才被杀吗？ 
English: A scholar in Lu County was killed by someone, Hu Qian said: This scholar has no enemies, but he has a young wife, is that why he was killed?

古文：悉见其比居年少，书吏李若见问而色动，遂穷诘情状。
现代文：于是将跟卢显临近居住的年轻人都召见来，问到书吏李若，发现他神色变化，就深入追问情况。
English: As a result, the young people who lived near Lu Xianlu were summoned, and when they asked the librarian Li Ruo, they found that his appearance had changed, and they inquired further about the situation.

古文：若即自首，罪人斯得。
现代文：李若就自首了，罪人就抓住了。
English: If Li Rong surrenders, the criminal will be caught.

古文：每军功赏赐，皆散之於众，无入家者。
现代文：每次有军功赏赐，胡质都散发给众人，没有拿回家的。
English: Every time there is a military merit award, the whiskers are distributed to the people, who did not take them home.

古文：在郡九年，吏民便安，将士用命。
现代文：他在郡中任职九年，官吏百姓都很安定，将士都愿意誓死效命。
English: He has served in the county for nine years, officials and people are stable, and soldiers are willing to swear their lives.

古文：迁荆州刺史，加振威将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：后来胡质调任为荆州刺史，加官振威将军，赐封关内侯的爵位。
English: Later, Hu Jian was transferred to Jingzhou Jishi, promoted to General Zhenwei, and given the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：吴大将朱然围樊城，质轻军赴之。
现代文：吴国大将朱然围攻樊城，胡质率轻兵奔赴。
English: Zhu Ran, the general of the State of Wu, besieged Lucheng, and Hu Jizhong led light troops to the city.

古文：议者皆以为贼盛不可迫，质曰： 樊城卑下，兵少，故当进军为之外援；不然，危矣。 
现代文：商议的人都认为贼军强盛不能追击，胡质说： 樊城地处低下，兵力又少，所以应该出兵做为他们的外援；不这样做，樊城就危险了。 
English: The people who were deliberating thought that the invading army was too strong to pursue, and Hu Zheng said: Lucheng is in a low-lying area and has few troops, so we should send troops as their foreign aid; otherwise, Lucheng would be in danger.

古文：遂勒兵临围，城中乃安。
现代文：就率兵逼近重围，城中得知后才安定下来。
English: He and his soldiers approached the heavy siege, and only settled down after the city was informed.

古文：迁征东将军，假节都督青、徐诸军事。
现代文：胡质被提升为征东将军，持符节督领青州、徐州各项军事事务。
English: Hu Jian was promoted to General of the Expedition to the East, holding the title of Commander of the Military Affairs of Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：广农积谷，有兼年之储，置东征台，且佃且守。
现代文：他推广农业，储备粮食，仓库中有够吃好几年的储备，又修建了东征台，一面耕种一面守卫。
English: He promoted agriculture, stockpiled grain, and had enough reserves in warehouses to last for several years. He also built an eastward expedition platform, cultivating and guarding it at the same time.

古文：又通渠诸郡，利舟楫，严设备以待敌。
现代文：又将各郡的水道连通起来，有利于船只通行，做好准备等待敌军。
English: He also connected the waterways of the counties, facilitating the passage of ships, and prepared to wait for the enemy.

古文：海边无事。
现代文：海边一直没有什么事。
English: There's never anything going on at the beach.

古文：性沉实内察，不以其节检物，所在见思。
现代文：胡质性情沉稳实诚，会反省自己，不用自己的标准衡量事情，所在的地方都被人们拥戴。
English: Those with a calm, steady, and sincere disposition will reflect on themselves, and do not measure things by their own standards. They are loved by people wherever they are.

古文：嘉平二年薨，家无馀财，惟有赐衣书箧而已。
现代文：胡质在嘉平二年去世，家中没有什么财产，只有皇帝赏赐的衣物和书柜。
English: Hu Jian died in the second year of Jiaping. There was no property in the family, only clothes and bookcases given by the emperor.

古文：军师以闻，追进封阳陵亭侯，邑百户，谥曰贞侯。
现代文：军师将情况上报朝廷，朝廷追封他为阳陵亭侯，食邑一百户，谥号为贞侯。
English: The strategist reported the situation to the imperial court, and the imperial court awarded him the title of Yangling Tinghou (阳陵亭侯), a hundred households in the county, and the posthumous title of Zhenhou (貞侯).

古文：子威嗣。
现代文：他的儿子胡威承袭爵位。
English: Su Qiao's son Su Wei inherited the title.

古文：六年，诏书褒述质清行，赐其家钱谷。
现代文：嘉平六年，皇帝颁下诏书叙述赞赏胡质清正的品行，赏赐他的家属钱财和粮食。
English: In the sixth year of Jiaping, the emperor issued an edict describing and praising Hu Jian's virtuous conduct, and rewarded his family with money and grain.

古文：语在徐邈传。
现代文：这件事在《徐邈传》中另有记载。
English: This incident is also recorded in "The Biography of Xu Bei."

古文：威，咸熙中官至徐州刺史，有殊绩，历三郡守，所在有名。
现代文：胡威，咸熙年间曾担任徐州刺史，有特殊的功绩，曾担任过三郡的太守，所在的地方，他都很出名。
English: Hu Wei, during the reign of Emperor Xianxi, had served as the chief historian of Xuzhou, with special achievements. He had served as the governor of the three counties, and he was very famous in his place.

古文：卒於安定。
现代文：最后在安定去世。
English: He eventually died in a stable.

古文：王昶字文舒，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：王昶，字文舒，太原郡晋阳人。
English: Wang Yao, surnamed Wen Shu, from Jinyang, Taiyuan County.

古文：少与同郡王凌俱知名。
现代文：年少时和同郡的王凌都很出名。
English: When he was young, he was famous with Wang Ling from the same county.

古文：凌年长，昶兄事之。
现代文：王凌年纪比较大，王昶用侍奉兄长的礼节对待他。
English: Wang Ling was older, and Wang Yao treated him with the courtesy of serving his elder brother.

古文：文帝在东宫，昶为太子文学，迁中庶子。
现代文：文帝还在东宫为太子时，王昶担任太子文学，又转为中庶子。
English: When Emperor Wen was still crown prince in the East Palace, Wang Xi served as crown prince literature, and then became the middle child.

古文：文帝践阼，徙散骑侍郎，为洛阳典农。
现代文：文帝登基后，王昶被提升为散骑侍郎，为洛阳地区主持农事。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Wang Xi was promoted to the position of horseback riding attendant and presided over the agricultural affairs of Luoyang region.

古文：时都畿树木成林，昶斫开荒莱，勤劝百姓，垦田特多。
现代文：当时京城附近的土地树木繁盛，王昶开垦荒地，努力劝勉百姓，开垦了很多土地。
English: At that time, the land near the capital was rich in trees. Wang Xi opened up the wasteland, worked hard to persuade the people, and reclaimed a lot of land.

古文：迁兖州刺史。
现代文：后来王昶调任衮州刺史。
English: Later, Wang Hui was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：明帝即位，加扬烈将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，给王昶加官扬烈将军，赐封关内侯的爵位。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Wang Qi was given the additional post of General Yang Rong and the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：昶虽在外任，心存朝廷，以为魏承秦、汉之弊，法制苛碎，不大釐改国典以准先王之风，而望治化复兴，不可得也。
现代文：王昶虽然在外地任职，但心系朝廷，认为魏朝延续了秦朝、汉朝的弊端，法令严苛琐碎，很少修改国家法典以符合先王的风范，而希望政治教化都能兴盛起来，但最终没做到。
English: Although Wang Qian served abroad, his heart was set on the imperial court. He believed that the Wei Dynasty continued the shortcomings of the Qin Dynasty and the Han Dynasty. The laws were strict and trivial, and the national code was rarely amended to conform to the former king's style. He hoped that political enlightenment would flourish, but ultimately it did not.

古文：乃著治论，略依古制而合於时务者二十馀篇，又著兵书十馀篇，言奇正之用，青龙中奏之。
现代文：王昶就撰写了《治论》，大概依照古代制度，并且符合当前实际的有二十多篇，又撰写了十几篇《兵书》，讨论用兵交战的办法，在青龙年间上奏朝廷。
English: Wang Xi wrote "Ji Xuan" (The Treatise on Governance), which was probably written in accordance with the ancient system, and there are more than twenty articles that are in line with the current reality. He also wrote more than a dozen "Heishu" (Book of War), discussing the method of using soldiers to engage in war, and submitted it to the imperial court in the year of the dragon.

古文：其为兄子及子作名字，皆依谦实，以见其意，故兄子默字处静，沈字处道，其子浑字玄冲，深字道冲。
现代文：王昶为他兄长的孩子和自己的孩子起名字，都依照谦虚和实诚的想法，所以他兄弟的孩子，王默字处静，王沈字处道，自己的孩子一个叫王浑，字玄冲，一个叫王深，字道冲。
English: Wang Yao named his brother's children and his own children, all according to the idea of modesty and sincerity. Therefore, his brother's children, Wang Moji, Wang Shen, and his own children are called Wang Hun, Zha Xuanchong, and Wang Shen, Zha Daochong.

古文：遂书戒之曰：
现代文：他又写信劝戒他们说：
English: And he wrote unto them, exhorting them, saying,

古文：夫人为子之道，莫大於宝身全行，以显父母。
现代文：为人孩子方法，没有比看重自己保全品行更重要的，才得以彰显父母。
English: There's no more important way to honor your parents than by valuing your own integrity.

古文：此三者人知其善，而或危身破家，陷于灭亡之祸者，何也？
现代文：这三方面，每个人都知道其中的好处，但会有人身败名裂，家破人亡，并使家庭陷入危亡的境地，为什么呢？
English: Everyone knows the benefits of these three aspects, but some people will be ruined, their families will be destroyed, and their families will be in danger, why?

古文：由所祖习非其道也。
现代文：是因为他们家的传统不是正道。
English: It's because their family's tradition is not the right one.

古文：夫孝敬仁义，百行之首，行之而立，身之本也。
现代文：孝敬仁义，是各事业的首要要求，实行之后才能立身，也是立身的根本。
English: Filial piety, respect, and benevolence are the primary requirements of all undertakings. Only after they have been implemented can they stand on their own feet, and they are also the foundation for standing on one's own feet.

古文：孝敬则宗族安之，仁义则乡党重之，此行成於内，名著于外者矣。
现代文：讲求孝敬，那宗族中才能安定，讲求仁义，那邻里乡亲才会看重，这是从内心去施行，而在外部成就名声。
English: When it comes to seeking filial piety, stability can only be achieved within the clan, and when it comes to seeking benevolence and righteousness, it is only valued by the neighbors and townsfolk. This is done from the heart, while achieving fame externally.

古文：人若不笃於至行，而背本逐末，以陷浮华焉，以成朋党焉；浮华则有虚伪之累，朋党则有彼此之患。
现代文：人如果不坚持良好的品行，却舍弃道德根本追求末流东西，就会陷入浮华奢靡的生活，就会结成党羽；浮华奢靡，就会有虚伪名声的牵累，结党营私就会为彼此埋下祸患。
English: If people do not adhere to good conduct, but abandon morality and pursue low-end things, they will fall into a flashy and extravagant life, and will form a party; if they are flashy and extravagant, they will be affected by hypocrisy and fame, and if they form a party, they will bury misfortune for each other.

古文：此二者之戒，昭然著明，而循覆车滋众，逐末弥甚，皆由惑当时之誉，昧目前之利故也。
现代文：这两者的训诫，是昭然若揭的，而沿着失败的教训不断往前走，追求浮华更加严重，都是因为被一时的名誉迷惑，被眼前的利益欺骗。
English: The admonition of these two is very clear, and the pursuit of vanity is even more serious as we continue to follow the lesson of failure, all because we are confused by momentary reputation and deceived by immediate interests.

古文：夫富贵声名，人情所乐，而君子或得而不处，何也？
现代文：富贵名声，是人的感情所乐于取得的，但君子得到了却不要，为什么呢？
English: Fame and fortune are things that human feelings are happy to acquire, but gentlemen don't want them. Why is that?

古文：恶不由其道耳。
现代文：只是因为他们厌恶得到的方式不是正道。
English: Just because they hate the way they got it doesn't make it right.

古文：患人知进而不知退，知欲而不知足，故有困辱之累，悔吝之咨。
现代文：担心人知道前进却不知道收敛，知道追求欲望却不知道满足，所以才有困窘的牵累，有悔恨的想法。
English: Worry that people know how to advance but do not know how to converge, know how to pursue desires but do not know how to satisfy, so they have the embarrassment of entanglement and the idea of regret.

古文：语曰： 如不知足，则失所欲。 
现代文：俗话说： 如果不知道满足，就会失去想要的。 
English: As the saying goes: If you don't know satisfaction, you will lose what you want.

古文：故知足之足常足矣。
现代文：所以学会满足，那就会知足了。
English: So learn to be content, and you will be content.

古文：览往事之成败，察将来之吉凶，未有干名要利，欲而不厌，而能保世持家，永全福禄者也。
现代文：纵观往事的成败，探察将来的吉凶，那些追求名利，想要却不知满足的人，能保持家业，保全福气利禄，是没有过的。
English: Looking at the successes and failures of the past, exploring the fortunes of the future, those who pursue fame and fortune, want but do not know how to be satisfied, can maintain the family business, preserve the fortune and fortune, has never happened.

古文：欲使汝曹立身行己，遵儒者之教，履道家之言，故以玄默冲虚为名，欲使汝曹顾名思义，不敢违越也。
现代文：我希望你们立身行事，要遵循儒家的教化，践行道家的言论，所以才用玄默、冲虚做为你们的名字，我希望你们看到自己的名字就能想到这个意思，不敢违背。
English: I hope that you will stand up and act, that you will follow the enlightenment of Confucianism, and practice the words of Taoists. That is why I chose "Xuanmiao" and "Chonghu" as your names. I hope that when you see your names, you will think of this meaning and will not dare to go against it.

古文：古者盘杅有铭，几杖有诫，俯仰察焉，用无过行；况在己名，可不戒之哉！
现代文：从前盘子上有铭文，几杖上有诫文，是希望抬头低头都能看到这些，因此不要有过失的行为；更何况这是在自己的名字上，怎么能不慎重呢！
English: Once upon a time there were inscriptions on plates and commandments on staffs, and it was hoped that one could look up and down and see them all, so as not to commit a faultless act; moreover, it was in one's own name, how could one not be prudent!

古文：夫物速成则疾亡，晚就则善终。
现代文：事物成长得很快就会消亡得快，成就得晚就得到善终。
English: Things grow fast and die fast, achievements are late and end well.

古文：朝华之草，夕而零落；松柏之茂，隆寒不衰。
现代文：早上开花的草，下午就会凋零；松柏茂盛，在隆冬时节也不衰败。
English: Grass that blooms in the morning will wither in the afternoon; conifers are in full bloom and do not decay in midwinter.

古文：是以大雅君子恶速成，戒阙党也。
现代文：所以高雅的君子厌恶速成，对儒学很慎重。
English: Therefore, the refined gentleman abhors quick success and is very cautious about Confucianism.

古文：若范匄对秦客而武子击之，折其委笄，恶其掩人也。
现代文：就像范睺看不起秦客而武子用手杖击打他，折断他帽冠上的簪子，是因为厌恶他看不起人。
English: Just as Fan Ye looked down on Qin Ge, and the samurai beat him with a cane and broke the braid on the crown of his hat, it was out of disgust that he looked down on people.

古文：夫人有善鲜不自伐，有能者寡不自矜；伐则掩人，矜则陵人。
现代文：人有善行，很少有不自夸的，有才能的人很少有不夸耀的；自夸就会轻视他人，夸耀就会盛气凌人。
English: There are few men of merit who are not boastful. There are few men of ability who are not boastful. To boast is to despise others. To boast is to be arrogant.

古文：掩人者人亦掩之，陵人者人亦陵之。
现代文：轻视他人的，别人也会轻视他，盛气凌人的，也会有人在他之上。
English: If you look down on others, others will look down on you. If you are arrogant, others will be arrogant with you.

古文：故三郤为戮于晋，王叔负罪於周，不惟矜善自伐好争之咎乎？
现代文：所以晋大夫却锜、却犨、却至被晋国杀害，王叔因为和人争斗，成为周朝罪人，这些不都是夸耀善行，争权夺利的过错吗？
English: Therefore, Dr. Jin was killed by the State of Jin, and Uncle Wang became a criminal of the Zhou Dynasty because he fought with people. Aren't these all the faults of boasting of good deeds and competing for power and profit?

古文：故君子不自称，非以让人，恶其盖人也。
现代文：所以君子不自夸，不是要谦让他们，是厌恶凌驾在他人之上。
English: That's why gentlemen don't boast. It's not that they want to be humble, it's that they don't want to lord it over others.

古文：夫能屈以为伸，让以为得，弱以为强，鲜不遂矣。
现代文：将能低头看做不屈，将谦让看做获得，弱势看做强大，这样，很少有不能保全的。
English: Will be able to look down as unyielding, will be humble to see as a gain, weak to see as strong, so there is little that can not be preserved.

古文：夫毁誉，爱恶之原而祸福之机也，是以圣人慎之。
现代文：诋毁他人名誉，是祸事的根源，也是灾祸的开端，所以圣人很慎重。
English: Slandering the reputation of others is the root of evil and the beginning of evil, so the sage is very cautious.

古文：孔子曰： 吾之於人，谁毁谁誉；如有所誉，必有所试。 
现代文：孔子说： 我对于别人，诋毁过谁?
English: Confucius said: Whom have I slandered?

古文：又曰： 子贡方人。
现代文：赞美过谁?如有所赞美的，必须是曾经考验过他的。 
English: Who has praised? If there is praise, it must have tested him.

古文：赐也贤乎哉，我则不暇。 
现代文：又说： 子贡评论别人的短处。
English: He also said: Zigong comments on the shortcomings of others.

古文：以圣人之德，犹尚如此，况庸庸之徒而轻毁誉哉？
现代文：赐啊，你真的就那么贤良吗？我可没有闲暇去评论别人。 以圣人的品德，尚且这样子，更何况平庸之辈，又怎么能轻易诋毁他人名誉呢？
English: Come on, are you really so virtuous? I don't have time to comment on others. With the virtue of a saint, how can you, let alone a mediocre person, easily discredit others?

古文：昔伏波将军马援戒其兄子，言： 闻人之恶，当如闻父母之名；耳可得而闻，口不可得而言也。 
现代文：过去伏波将军马援劝诫他兄长的儿子说： 得知他人的恶行，应该像听到父母的名字一样；耳中听到就好了，口中不能说出去。 
English: In the past, General Ma Yuan of Fubo exhorted his brother's son, saying, "Learning about the evil deeds of others should be like hearing the names of one's parents; it is better to hear it with one's ears than to speak it out loud.

古文：斯戒至矣。
现代文：这个告诫真是细致了。
English: That's a pretty detailed admonition.

古文：人或毁己，当退而求之於身。
现代文：别人有时候诋毁自己，应该退下反省自己。
English: Others sometimes denigrate themselves, and should step back and reflect on themselves.

古文：若己有可毁之行，则彼言当矣；若己无可毁之行，则彼言妄矣。
现代文：如果自己确实有可以诋毁的地方，那他说的话是适当的；如果自己没有可以诋毁的言行，那他说的话就是虚妄的。
English: If he really has something to discredit, then what he says is appropriate; if he has nothing to discredit, then what he says is false.

古文：当则无怨于彼，妄则无害於身，又何反报焉？
现代文：如果说的话适当，就不应该埋怨他人，如果他的话是虚妄的，那对自己就没有什么损害，又为什么要报复呢？
English: If what he says is appropriate, he should not blame others, and if his words are false, there is no harm to himself, so why retaliate?

古文：且闻人毁己而忿者，恶丑声之加人也，人报者滋甚，不如默而自脩己也。
现代文：况且得知他人毁谤自己而愤怒的人，再把不好的名声推到他人身上，那别人的抱负就会更严重，不如默默修养自己。
English: Moreover, those who are angry when they learn that others have slandered them, and then push the bad reputation onto others, will make the ambitions of others more serious. It is better to cultivate oneself silently.

古文：谚曰： 救寒莫如重裘，止谤莫如自脩。 
现代文：谚语说： 拯救受冻的人，没有比厚毛皮衣更好的，停止毁谤，没有比修养自己更好的。 
English: A proverb says: There is nothing better than a thick fur coat to save someone from the cold, and there is nothing better than self-cultivation to stop slander.

古文：斯言信矣。
现代文：这话确实是对的啊。
English: That's exactly right.

古文：若与是非之士，凶险之人，近犹不可，况与对校乎？
现代文：如果和喜欢搬弄是非、凶狠阴险的人来往，靠近他们都尚且不好，更何况是和他们对比呢？
English: If you come into contact with people who like to play tricks and are vicious and insidious, it's not good to get close to them, let alone compare with them.

古文：其害深矣。
现代文：这个危害是很深的。
English: The harm is profound.

古文：夫虚伪之人，言不根道，行不顾言，其为浮浅较可识别；而世人惑焉，犹不检之以言行也。
现代文：那些虚伪的人，说话不依据道义，行为举止不顾及自己的言论，他们的肤浅还是能看出来的；但世人被迷惑，就不愿意检验他们的言行了。
English: The superficiality of those who are hypocrites, whose words are not based on morality, and whose behavior does not take into account their words, can still be seen; but the world is deceived and is not willing to examine their words and deeds.

古文：近济阴魏讽、山阳曹伟皆以倾邪败没，荧惑当世，挟持奸慝，驱动后生。
现代文：近代的阴魏讽、山阳曹伟都因为为人不正而失败身死，迷惑当时的人，扶持奸邪之人，扇动年轻人。
English: The modern Yin Wei irony and Shanyang Cao Wei all failed and died because they were unjust, confused the people at that time, supported the treacherous people, and incited the young people.

古文：虽刑於鈇钺，大为炯戒，然所汙染，固以众矣。
现代文：虽然最后被处以死刑，成为很明显的鉴戒，但他们所影响的人，已经很多了。
English: Although they were eventually sentenced to death as a clear warning, they have already influenced many people.

古文：可不慎与！
现代文：难道能不慎重吗！
English: How can you not be careful!

古文：若夫山林之士，夷、叔之伦，甘长饥於首阳，安赴火於绵山，虽可以激贪励俗，然圣人不可为，吾亦不愿也。
现代文：那些隐居山林的士人，像伯夷、叔齐这类人，甘愿在首阳山忍受饥饿，还有像介子推这样，宁愿再绵山被烧死，这样的行为虽然可以激励世俗之人，但圣人不会这样做，我也不愿意你们做这样的事。
English: Those scholars who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, such as Bo Yi and Shu Qi, are willing to endure hunger on Shouyang Mountain, and others, such as Jie Zi Tu, would rather be burned to death on Mianshan Mountain. Although such behavior can inspire secular people, saints will not do this, and I do not want you to do such a thing.

古文：今汝先人世有冠冕，惟仁义为名，守慎为称，孝悌於闺门，务学於师友。
现代文：现在你们的祖先，世代为官，将仁义看做重要的名声，谨受慎重，在家中讲求孝悌，对师友讲求学习。
English: Now your ancestors, generations of officials, regard benevolence and righteousness as an important reputation, are prudent, and emphasize filial piety at home and learning from teachers and friends.

古文：吾与时人从事，虽出处不同，然各有所取。
现代文：我和时人共事，虽然出身不一样，但是各有所求取的方面。
English: I worked with people at the time, and although we came from different backgrounds, we each had our own aspirations.

古文：颍川郭伯益，好尚通达，敏而有知。
现代文：颍川的郭伯益，崇尚通达，为人聪慧有学识。
English: Guo Bo Yi of Lu River is a man of wisdom and knowledge.

古文：其为人弘旷不足，轻贵有馀；得其人重之如山，不得其人忽之如草。
现代文：他的为人，心胸不够宽阔，但是轻视权贵；得到好的人，就很看重他们，得不到好的人，就像草一样忽视他们。
English: As a person, his heart is not broad enough, but he despises the powerful; those who get good, value them very much, and those who do not get good, ignore them like grass.

古文：吾以所知亲之昵之，不愿儿子为之。
现代文：我因为了解他们，所以亲近他们，但不希望你们也这样做。
English: I am close to them because I know them, but I don't want you to do the same.

古文：北海徐伟长，不治名高，不求苟得，澹然自守，惟道是务。
现代文：北海郡的徐伟长，不追求名声，不求取利益，淡然处世，坚守自我，只将正道看做要务。
English: Xu Weizang of Beihai County does not pursue fame, does not seek profits, is indifferent to the world, sticks to himself, and only regards the right path as an important task.

古文：其有所是非，则讬古人以见其意，当时无所褒贬。
现代文：他对人事有褒贬评价，就假托古人的话来表达自己的意见，对当时的人就没有褒贬评价。
English: He has praise and criticism for personnel, and expresses his opinions by pretending to be an ancient person. He has no praise or criticism for the people at that time.

古文：吾敬之重之，愿儿子师之。
现代文：我敬重他们，希望儿子能学习他们。
English: I respect them and I hope my son can learn from them.

古文：东平刘公幹，博学有高才，诚节有大意，然性行不均，少所拘忌，得失足以相补。
现代文：东平的刘公幹，博学多闻很有才干，节操忠诚，志向远大，但是性情和品行不相符，很少有拘束和顾忌，正负面足够相互弥补。
English: Dongping's Liu Gongkang is well-read, well-informed, talented, loyal, and ambitious, but his temperament and conduct do not match. He has few restraints and scruples, and the positive and negative are enough to make up for each other.

古文：吾爱之重之，不愿儿子慕之。
现代文：我喜欢并看重他，但不希望儿子仰慕他。
English: I like and respect him, but I don't want my son to look up to him.

古文：乐安任昭先，淳粹履道，内敏外恕，推逊恭让，处不避洿，怯而义勇，在朝忘身。
现代文：乐安的任昭先，淳厚质朴，践行正道，内心敏锐而外表宽和，谦逊恭敬，居处不避开洼地，看起来怯懦但是能见义勇为，在朝中为官能忘记自身得失。
English: Le An's Ren Zhaoxian, honest and simple, practicing the right path, sensitive inside but outwardly broad and gentle, humble and respectful, does not avoid the lowlands, looks cowardly but can be courageous, and forgets his own gains and losses in the DPRK.

古文：吾友之善之，愿儿子遵之。
现代文：我和他交好，希望儿子能遵循他为人处世的做法。
English: I'm friends with him and I hope my son will follow his example.

古文：若引而伸之，触类而长之，汝其庶几举一隅耳。
现代文：如果从这里引申出来，从相似事物来做，你们应该可以从这中间学习到一些东西。
English: If you extrapolate from here and do similar things, you should be able to learn something from this.

古文：及其用财先九族，其施舍务周急，其出入存故老，其论议贵无贬，其进仕尚忠节，其取人务实道，其处世戒骄淫，其贫贱慎无戚，其进退念合宜，其行事加九思，如此而已。
现代文：至于在使用钱财方面，应该以宗族为先，如果要施舍，应该关注那些急需的人，出入乡里朝廷一定要慰问老人，议论时不要贬低别人，作官时要崇尚忠诚节操，和人交往应该看重踏实正道，为人处世应该不要骄奢淫逸，贫贱的时候要慎重，不要哀戚，为人进退应该考虑合适的做法，做事时应该仔细思虑，这样罢了。
English: As for the use of money and wealth, the clan should be put first. If you want to give alms, you should pay attention to those who are in urgent need. When entering and leaving the countryside, the imperial court must console the elderly. When discussing, do not belittle others. When serving as an official, you should advocate loyalty and discipline. When interacting with people, you should attach importance to the down-to-earth and righteous way. When dealing with people, you should not be arrogant and lascivious. When you are poor, you should be cautious and not mourn. When advancing and retreating, you should consider the appropriate approach. When doing things, you should think carefully. That's

古文：吾复何忧哉？
现代文：我还担忧什么呢？
English: What am I worried about?

古文：青龙四年，诏 欲得有才智文章，谋虑渊深，料远若近，视昧而察，筹不虚运，策弗徒发，端一小心，清脩密静，乾乾不解，志尚在公者，无限年齿，勿拘贵贱，卿校已上各举一人 。
现代文：青龙四年，明帝下诏说 希望能得到有才智谋略，有文学才干，能预料时态发展，看到幽暗能有所明察，谋划事情不虚假，计策不白白实行，端正心思，清心修养，稳重安定，自强不息，一心为公的人，无论年龄长幼，不拘泥于身份贵贱，公卿校尉以上要各自举荐一个人。 
English: In the 4th year of the Qing Long, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying that he hoped to obtain people with talent for strategy, talent for literature, ability to anticipate the development of the times, ability to see the dark and see clearly, planning things without falsehood, implementing strategies without vain, correct mind, pure heart cultivation, steady and stable, self-improvement without rest, and a heart for the public, regardless of age or age, regardless of status, noble or lowly, and they should each recommend one person above the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：太尉司马宣王以昶应选。
现代文：太尉司马宣王推荐了王昶并被选中。
English: Second Lieutenant Sima Xuanwang recommended Wang Yao and was selected.

古文：正始中，转在徐州，封武观亭侯，迁征南将军，假节都督荆、豫诸军事。
现代文：正始年间，王昶转任到徐州，被封为武观亭侯，又提升为征南将军，持符节督领荆州、豫州各项军事事务。
English: At the beginning of the year, Wang Hui was transferred to Xuzhou, and was given the title of Wuguan Tinghou. He was also promoted to General of the Southern Expedition, and led the military affairs of Jingzhou and Yuzhou with the title of Commander-in-Chief.

古文：昶以为国有常众，战无常胜；地有常险，守无常势。
现代文：王昶认为国家的百姓总是会有的，但是战争不总是会胜利；地势总是有艰险的，但守卫的形势不总是能长久。
English: Wang Yao believed that the people of a country will always exist, but the war will not always be victorious; the terrain will always be difficult, but the guarding situation will not always be long-lasting.

古文：今屯宛，去襄阳三百馀里，诸军散屯，船在宣池，有急不足相赴，乃表徙治新野，习水军于二州，广农垦殖，仓谷盈积。
现代文：现在在宛城驻守，距离襄阳有三百多里，各军都分散着驻扎，船只又在宣吃，有紧急情况不能迅速赶到，王昶就上表将官署转移到新野，并在荆州和豫州操练水军，推广农业开垦土地，使仓库储备能充实。
English: Now he is stationed in Wancheng, which is more than three hundred miles away from Xiangyang. All the armies are scattered and stationed, and the ships are spreading. If there is an emergency and it is not possible to arrive quickly, Wang Hui will transfer the government office to Xinniu at the last minute, and train the navy in Jingzhou and Yuzhou, promote agricultural land reclamation, and make the warehouse reserves more abundant.

古文：嘉平初，太傅司马宣王既诛曹爽，乃奏博问大臣得失。
现代文：嘉平初年，太傅司马懿诛杀曹爽之后，就上奏向朝臣们询问政事得失。
English: In the first year of Jia Ping, after the murder of Cao Shuang by the Grand Master Sima Yu, he made a report to the courtiers to inquire about the merits and demerits of the government.

古文：昶陈治略五事：其一，欲崇道笃学，抑绝浮华，使国子入太学而脩庠序；其二，欲用考试，考试犹准绳也，未有舍准绳而意正曲直，废黜陟而空论能否也；其三，欲令居官者久於其职，有治绩则就增位赐爵；其四，欲约官实禄，励以廉耻，不使与百姓争利；其五，欲绝侈靡，务崇节俭，令衣服有章，上下有叙，储谷畜帛，反民於朴。
现代文：王昶陈述了五条治国方略：第一，想要崇尚正道，鼓励求学，抑制浮华的风气，就让学子进入太学并在各地修建学校；第二，想要进行考试制度，将考试成绩做为标准，没有过能舍弃标准却能衡量是非的，也没有过空谈一个人的才能，是能决定一个人的职位升降的；第三，想要让在官位上的人能长久处在官位上，如果有政绩就应该升官加爵；第四，想要减少官员的俸禄，用礼义廉耻来激励官员，不让他们和百姓争夺利益；第五，想要断绝奢侈的风气，根本在于推崇节俭，让服饰上有纹路，上下级之间有次序，储备粮食布帛，让百姓归于质朴。
English: Wang Qian stated five strategies for governing the country: First, if you want to advocate the right way, encourage studying, and curb the flashy culture, let students enter the academy and build schools in various places; second, if you want to carry out the examination system, use the examination results as the standard, there is no time to abandon the standard but can measure the right and wrong, and there is no time to talk about a person's talent, which can determine a person's promotion and demotion; third, if you want people in office to stay in office for a long time, if they have political achievements, they should be promoted and knighted; fourth, you want to reduce the salary of officials,

古文：诏书褒赞。
现代文：皇帝下诏书褒奖赞赏。
English: The Emperor's edict of commendation was highly appreciated.

古文：因使撰百官考课事，昶以为唐虞虽有黜陟之文，而考课之法不垂。
现代文：就命王昶撰写官员考核的事宜，王昶认为唐尧、虞舜时期虽然有降职的条文，但考核的法度没有流传下来。
English: On the matter of ordering Wang Hui to write an official assessment, Wang Hui believed that although there were provisions for demotion during the Tang and Yu Dynasties, the law of assessment had not been passed down.

古文：周制冢宰之职，大计群吏之治而诛赏，又无校比之制。
现代文：周朝设置了冢宰的职位，依据官员们的政绩而进行赏罚，但也没有可以做为对比的制度。
English: The Zhou Dynasty set up the position of the eunuch, and rewarded and punished officials according to their political achievements, but there was no system that could be used as a comparison.

古文：由此言之，圣主明於任贤，略举黜陟之体，以委达官之长，而总其统纪，故能否可得而知也。
现代文：从这里来看，圣明的君主因任用贤人而英明，大概确定职位升降的标准，并将官位委任给合适的人，然后让他总管这些事，那他能力高低就可以知道了。
English: From this point of view, the holy monarch is wise because he appoints wise men, roughly determines the standards for promotion and demotion, and assigns the post to the right person, and then let him be in charge of these matters, then his ability can be known.

古文：其大指如此。
现代文：应该大概是这样。
English: It should be something like this.

古文：二年，昶奏： 孙权流放良臣，適庶分争，可乘衅而制吴、蜀；白帝、夷陵之间，黔、巫、秭归、房陵皆在江北，民夷与新城郡接，可袭取也。 
现代文：嘉平二年，王昶上奏说： 孙权流放贤臣，朝中嫡子和庶子争斗，可以趁着他们的矛盾，出兵控制吴蜀两地；白帝与夷陵之间的地带，黔、巫、秭归、房陵等地都在江北，百姓和新城郡相接，可以偷袭并攻取下来。 
English: In the second year of Jiaping, Wang Xuan wrote: Sun Quan exiled the wise men, the legitimate son and the illegitimate son of the imperial court were fighting, and he could take advantage of their contradictions to send troops to control the two regions of Wushu; the area between the White Emperor and the Yiling Tombs, including the Tombs of the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager's Tombs, was in the north of the Yangtze River, and the people were adjacent to Xincheng County, so he could make a sneak attack and capture it.

古文：乃遣新城太守州泰袭巫、秭归、房陵，荆州刺史王基诣夷陵，昶诣江陵，两岸引竹縆为桥，渡水击之。
现代文：皇帝就派新城太守州泰攻打巫、秭、归、房陵，荆州刺史王基率军到夷陵，王昶率军到江陵，从两岸取竹子和粗绳做成桥索，然后渡水攻打敌军。
English: The emperor then sent Taizhou Tai, the governor of Xincheng, to attack the tombs of Wu, Quan, Gui, and Fang. Wang Ji, the governor of Jingzhou, led the army to Yiling, and Wang Yao led the army to Jiangling. They took bamboo and thick rope from both sides of the river to make a bridge, and then crossed the water to attack the enemy army.

古文：贼奔南岸，凿七道并来攻。
现代文：敌军逃奔向南岸，开凿了七条道路前来进攻。
English: The enemy fled to the south bank and cut seven roads to attack.

古文：於是昶使积弩同时俱发，贼大将施绩夜遁入江陵城，追斩数百级。
现代文：这时王昶让可以连续发射的弓弩同时发射，敌军的大将师绩连夜逃入江陵城中，王昶追击，斩杀了数百敌军。
English: At this time, Wang Hui let the bow and arrow, which could be fired continuously, be fired at the same time. The enemy's general escaped into the city of Gangneung overnight. Wang Hui chased and killed hundreds of enemy troops.

古文：昶欲引致平地与合战，乃先遣五军案大道发还，使贼望见以喜之，以所获铠马甲首，驰环城以怒之，设伏兵以待之。
现代文：王昶想要将敌军引诱到平地后再与之交战，就先派出五路军队从大路撤退，让敌军能望见并欣喜，王昶又带上所缴获的敌军的铠甲物资，骑着马围绕着城墙行走以激怒敌人，然后设下伏兵等待敌军。
English: In order to lure the enemy army to the plain and then fight with it, Wang Yao first sent the five-way army to retreat from the highway, so that the enemy army could see and rejoice. Wang Yao also took the captured enemy army's armor materials, rode around the city wall to irritate the enemy, and then set an ambush to wait for the enemy army.

古文：绩果追军，与战，克之。
现代文：施绩果然追击王昶的部队，王昶与他交战，大获全胜。
English: He successfully chased Wang Yao's troops, and Wang Yao fought with him and won a complete victory.

古文：绩遁走，斩其将锺离茂、许旻，收其甲首旗鼓珍宝器仗，振旅而还。
现代文：施绩逃走，王昶斩杀了他的部将钟离茂、许旻，并收缴了他部队的铠甲、战旗、战鼓、珍宝和武器，然后整顿军队回朝。
English: After making his escape, Wang Yao killed his subordinates Zhong Li Mao and Xu Yao, and confiscated the armor, battle flags, war drums, treasures and weapons of his troops, and then reorganized the army to return to the North.

古文：王基、州泰皆有功。
现代文：王基和州泰都作战有功。
English: Both Wang Ji and Zhou Tai have distinguished themselves in battle.

古文：於是迁昶征南大将军、仪同三司，进封京陵侯。
现代文：于是皇帝提升王昶为征南大将军、仪同三司，进封为京陵侯。
English: As a result, the emperor promoted Wang Qian to the General of the Southern Expedition, the Third Division of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the Prince of the Imperial Mausoleum.

古文：毌丘俭、文钦作乱，引兵拒俭、钦有功，封二子亭侯、关内侯，进位骠骑将军。
现代文：毋丘俭、文钦作乱，王昶率军抵御立下功劳，朝廷册封他的两个儿子为亭侯、关内侯有提升王昶为骠骑将军。
English: In spite of Qiu Qian and Wenqin's rebellion, Wang Xi led the army to resist and achieved great achievements. The imperial court awarded his two sons the title of prince, and the prince of Guanai promoted Wang Xi to the general of the cavalry.

古文：诸葛诞反，昶据夹石以逼江陵，持施绩、全熙使不得东。
现代文：诸葛诞反叛，王昶占据夹石进逼江陵，牵制施绩、全熙，让他们不能往东进军。
English: Zhuge Zheng rebelled, Wang Xi occupied Jianshi and forced Jiangling, restraining Shiji and Quanxi, so that they could not march eastward.

古文：诞既诛，诏曰： 昔孙膑佐赵，直凑大梁。
现代文：诸葛诞被诛杀后，皇帝下诏说： 过去孙膑辅佐赵国，直逼大梁。
English: After the assassination of Zhuge Zheng, the emperor issued a decree saying: In the past, Sun Yat-sen assisted Zhao Guo, but he was forced to follow Daliang.

古文：西兵骤进，亦所以成东征之势也。 
现代文：西面的部队迅速进军，也是能形成东征的形势的原因。 
English: The rapid advance of the troops in the west is also the reason for the situation that can form the eastward march.

古文：增邑千户，并前四千七百户，迁司空，持节、都督如故。
现代文：然后给王昶增加一千户食邑，连带之前的一共四千七百户，又升任为司空，还是像之前一样持符节、督领军事。
English: Then he added one thousand households to Wang Yao, bringing the previous total to four thousand seven hundred households. He was also promoted to the position of Siku, still holding the sign festival and supervising the military as before.

古文：甘露四年薨，谥曰穆侯。
现代文：王昶在甘露四年去世，谥号为穆侯。
English: Wang Yao died in the 4th year of the Kanlu era, and his posthumous name was Mu Hou.

古文：子浑嗣，咸熙中为越骑校尉。
现代文：他的儿子王浑承袭爵位，咸熙年间担任过越骑校尉。
English: His son, Wang Hun, inherited the title, and during the reign of Emperor Han, he served as a cavalry captain in Vietnam.

古文：王基字伯舆，东莱曲城人也。
现代文：王基，字伯舆，东莱郡曲城人。
English: Wang Ji, also known as Bo Myou, was from Qucheng, Donglai County.

古文：少孤，与叔父翁居。
现代文：年少时父亲就去世了，和叔父王翁住在一起。
English: His father died when he was young, and he lived with his uncle Wang Weng.

古文：翁抚养甚笃，基亦以孝称。
现代文：王翁抚养他很细致，王基也因为孝顺而闻名。
English: Wang Weng raised him very carefully, and Wang Ji is also famous for his filial piety.

古文：年十七，郡召为吏，非其好也，遂去，入琅邪界游学。
现代文：十七岁时，郡中征召王基做为吏役，但不是王基的喜好所在，所以他就离开了，进入了琅邪境内游学。
English: At the age of seventeen, Wang Qi was recruited by the county to serve as an official, but this was not Wang Qi's preference, so he left and went to study in Shiyan.

古文：黄初中，察孝廉，除郎中。
现代文：黄初年间，王基被推举为孝廉，被任命为郎中。
English: During the early years of the Yellow Emperor, Wang Ji was promoted to the highest position of filial piety and was appointed as a retainer.

古文：是时青土初定，刺史王凌特表请基为别驾，后召为秘书郎，凌复请还。
现代文：当时，青州刚平定，刺史王凌特别上表请求让王基担任别驾，后来又征召他为秘书郎，王凌又再次请求让王昶回来。
English: At that time, Qingzhou had just been pacified, and Wang Ling, the secretary, made a special request to let Wang Ji serve as a second driver. Later, he was conscripted as a secretary. Wang Ling once again asked Wang Qi to come back.

古文：顷之，司徒王朗辟基，凌不遣。
现代文：不久，司徒王朗征召王基，王凌没有让王基赴任。
English: Not long after, Wang Lang, the head of the Sifu, summoned Wang Ji, but Wang Ling did not allow Wang Ji to take up the post.

古文：朗书劾州曰： 凡家臣之良，则升于公辅，公臣之良，则入于王职，是故古者侯伯有贡士之礼。
现代文：王朗上疏弹劾王凌说： 家臣中凡是有贤良的，就应该升任到朝廷中，朝臣中有贤良的，就应该辅佐天子，所以古代的侯伯有贡士的礼节。
English: Wang Lang Shang Su impeached Wang Ling and said: If there are any good and virtuous vassals, they should be promoted to the imperial court. If there are any good and virtuous vassals, they should assist the Son of Heaven. Therefore, ancient courtiers had the etiquette of tribute-paying servants.

古文：今州取宿卫之臣，留秘阁之吏，所希闻也。 
现代文：但现在青州郡召走守卫的大臣，留下朝廷大臣，是很少听到的。 
English: However, it is rare to hear of Qingzhou County calling away the minister of guards and leaving the minister of the imperial court.

古文：凌犹不遣。
现代文：王凌仍然不放王基。
English: Wang Ling still won't let go of Wang Ji.

古文：凌流称青土，盖亦由基协和之辅也。
现代文：王凌能在青州得到称赞，大概也是因为王基的协助辅佐。
English: Wang Ling's ability to win praise in Qingzhou is probably also due to Wang Ji's assistance.

古文：大将军司马宣王辟基，未至，擢为中书侍郎。
现代文：大将军司马宣王征召王基，王基还没有到任，就被提升为中书侍郎。
English: The general Sima Xuanwang conscripted Wang Qi. Wang Qi had not yet arrived at his post when he was promoted to the position of the secretary.

古文：明帝盛脩宫室，百姓劳瘁。
现代文：明帝大力修建宫殿，百姓疲惫不堪。
English: Emperor Ming vigorously built palaces, and the people were exhausted.

古文：基上疏曰： 臣闻古人以水喻民，曰 水所以载舟，亦所以覆舟 。
现代文：王基上疏说： 臣听说古人用水来比喻百姓，说 水能载船行走，也能使船倾覆 。
English: Wang Jishangsu said: "I have heard that the ancients used water as a metaphor for the people, saying that water can carry a boat, but it can also capsize a boat.

古文：故在民上者，不可以不戒惧。
现代文：所以在百姓之上的天子，不能不警戒慎重。
English: Therefore, the Son of God, who is above the people, cannot but be cautious.

古文：夫民逸则虑易，苦则思难，是以先王居之以约俭，俾不至於生患。
现代文：百姓安逸，那思虑事情就容易，百姓困苦，事情就难以办成，所以先王们的居处都很简朴，使得天下不至于生出祸患。
English: When the people are at ease, it is easy to think about things. When the people are in distress, it is difficult to accomplish things. Therefore, the former kings lived in very simple places, so that there would be no disasters in the world.

古文：昔颜渊云东野子之御，马力尽矣而求进不已，是以知其将败。
现代文：过去颜渊说，东野子御马，马匹已经精疲力尽，但他却没有停止行进，所以知道他将要失败了。
English: In the past, Yanabuchi said, Higashino's horses were exhausted, but he did not stop marching, so he knew he would fail.

古文：今事役劳苦，男女离旷，愿陛下深察东野之弊，留意舟水之喻，息奔驷於未尽，节力役於未困。
现代文：现在百姓从事劳役，疲惫困苦，亲人离散，希望陛下能仔细考虑东野子的弊端，留心水和船的比喻，在马匹还没有穷尽力气的时候先停歇下来，在百姓的力量还没有耗尽时有所节制。
English: Now that the people are engaged in labor, tired and poor, and their relatives are scattered, I hope that His Majesty can carefully consider the drawbacks of Higashino, pay attention to the metaphor of water and ship, stop when the horses have not exhausted their strength, and restrain when the people's strength has not been exhausted.

古文：昔汉有天下，至孝文时唯有同姓诸侯，而贾谊忧之曰： 置火积薪之下而寝其上，因谓之安也。 
现代文：过去汉朝拥有天下，到了孝文帝时，天下诸侯只有同姓的，但贾谊担忧地说： 在堆积的柴火之下生火，然后在上面就寝，还说这样很安心。 
English: In the past, the Han Dynasty ruled the world. By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, only the princes of the world had the same surname. However, Jia Yi said with concern, "Make a fire under the pile of firewood, and then sleep on top of it." He also said that this was very reassuring.

古文：今寇贼未殄，猛将拥兵，检之则无以应敌，久之则难以遗后，当盛明之世，不务以除患，若子孙不竞，社稷之忧也。
现代文：现在贼寇还没有消灭，将领拥兵自重，要解决这些，但是难以应对，长久下去，那皇位难以传给后人，正当现在兴盛英明的时代，不努力消除祸患，如果子孙后代不够强大，那就是江山社稷的忧患了。
English: Now the banditry has not been eliminated, the generals and soldiers are self-respecting, it is necessary to solve these problems, but it is difficult to deal with them, and it will continue for a long time, and the throne is difficult to pass on to future generations. Just as now is a prosperous and wise era, if we do not work hard to eliminate the scourge, if future generations are not strong enough, that is the sorrow of the country and society.

古文：使贾谊复起，必深切于曩时矣。 
现代文：假使贾谊重生，一定会比当时更加忧虑。 
English: If the friendship is reborn, it will certainly be more worried than it was then.

古文：散骑常侍王肃著诸经传解及论定朝仪，改易郑玄旧说，而基据持玄义，常与抗衡。
现代文：散骑常侍王肃撰写各经典的注解，还有讨论朝中礼仪，改变了郑玄过去的说法，而王基依据郑玄的说法，经常和王肃争论。
English: Wang Qi, who often accompanied Wang Su on horseback, wrote commentaries on various classics, and also discussed the etiquette between the North and China, changing Zheng Xuan's past statement, while Wang Ji often argued with Wang Su according to Zheng Xuan's statement.

古文：迁安平太守，公事去官。
现代文：王基被调任为安平太守，因为公事而离职了。
English: Wang Ji was transferred to Anping Daju, but left the post because of business.

古文：大将军曹爽请为从事中郎，出为安丰太守。
现代文：大将军曹爽请求让王基担任从事中郎，王基就出京担任安丰太守。
English: The great general Cao Shuang asked Wang Ji to serve as a middle-ranking official, and Wang Ji went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Anfeng.

古文：郡接吴寇，为政清严有威惠，明设防备，敌不敢犯。
现代文：安丰郡跟吴国相接，王基理政清廉严明又有威势恩惠，明确地设立防御工事，敌军不敢前来进犯。
English: Anfeng County is adjacent to Wuzhou Province. Wang Jili, the leader of the Qing Dynasty, was a strict and honorable ruler, who clearly set up fortifications so that the enemy army would not dare to attack.

古文：加讨寇将军。
现代文：王基被加封为讨寇将军。
English: Wang Ji was appointed as the general of anti-piracy.

古文：吴尝大发众集建业，扬声欲入攻扬州，刺史诸葛诞使基策之。
现代文：吴国曾经征发很多部队集中到建业，宣称要攻进扬州，刺史诸葛诞派王基谋划。
English: The State of Wu once conscripted and dispatched a large number of troops to concentrate on Jianye, declaring that they wanted to invade Yangzhou, and instigated Wang Ji to plan the birth of Zhuge.

古文：基曰： 昔孙权再至合肥，一至江夏，其后全琮出庐江，朱然寇襄阳，皆无功而还。
现代文：王基说： 过去孙权两次进军合肥，一次到了江夏，这之后全琮出兵庐江，朱然进犯襄阳，都是没有什么成果就返回了。
English: Wang Ji said: In the past, Sun Quan marched into Hefei twice, once to Jiangxia, after which Quanzhang marched into Minjiang, and Zhu Ran marched into Xiangyang, but they both returned without any results.

古文：今陆逊等已死，而权年老，内无贤嗣，中无谋主。
现代文：现在陆逊等人已经去世，而孙权年老，国中没有贤能的继承人，朝中没有有谋略的主君。
English: Now that Lu Xun and others have passed away, and Sun Quan is old, there is no capable successor in the country, and there is no master with a strategy in the government.

古文：权自出则惧内衅卒起，痈疽发溃；遣将则旧将已尽，新将未信。
现代文：孙权亲自出征，就担心国中的矛盾突然爆发，生出祸乱；要派遣将领，但是旧日的部将已经去世了，新的将领还没有得到足够信任。
English: Sun Quan personally went to the front, he was worried that the contradictions in the country would suddenly break out and create a disaster; he wanted to send generals, but the old minister had passed away and the new generals had not yet gained enough trust.

古文：此不过欲补定支党，还自保护耳。 
现代文：现在的行为只不过是想要安排亲信，以保护自己罢了。 
English: The current action is nothing more than trying to arrange cronies to protect themselves.

古文：后权竟不能出。
现代文：后来孙权最终也没能出征。
English: Later, Sun Quan was not able to go to the front.

古文：时曹爽专柄，风化陵迟，基著时要论以切世事。
现代文：当时曹爽专政，国家的风俗教化衰败，王基撰写了《时要论》以贴合时事。
English: At the time of Cao Shuang's dictatorship, the country's customs and education were in a state of decline, and Wang Ji wrote "On the Importance of the Times" to keep up with current events.

古文：以疾徵还，起家为河南尹，未拜，爽伏诛，基尝为爽官属，随例罢。
现代文：王基因为生病被征召回京，又在家中被起用为河南尹，还没有上任，曹爽被诛杀，王基曾经是曹爽的下属，也随着旧例被罢免。
English: Wang Ji was called back to Beijing because of illness, and was appointed as Henan Yin at home. Before he took office, Cao Shuang was killed. Wang Ji was once a subordinate of Cao Shuang, and was also dismissed according to the old practice.

古文：其年为尚书，出为荆州刺史，加扬烈将军，随征南王昶击吴。
现代文：当年王基做为尚书，又出京担任荆州刺史，加官扬烈将军，跟随征南将军王昶攻打吴国。
English: At that time, Wang Ji was a Shangshu, and he went to Beijing to serve as a Jingzhou stabbing history, promoted Yang Rong, and followed the Southern Expeditionary General Wang Xi to attack Wu.

古文：基别袭步协於夷陵，协闭门自守。
现代文：王基另外率部在夷陵攻打步协，步协紧闭城门自守。
English: Wang Ji also led his troops to attack the Foot Guards Association in Yiling, and the Foot Guards Association closed the gate tightly to defend themselves.

古文：基示以攻形，而实分兵取雄父邸阁，收米三十馀万斛，虏安北将军谭正，纳降数千口。
现代文：王基做出要进攻的样子，但实际上派出部队夺取雄父粮仓，缴获粮食三十余万斛，俘虏了安北将军谭正，接纳投降的敌人有几千人。
English: Wang Ji made it look like he was going to attack, but in fact he sent troops to seize his father's granary, seized more than 300,000 mu of grain, captured Anbei General Tan Zheng, and accepted several thousand surrendering enemies.

古文：於是移其降民，置夷陵县。
现代文：于是王基迁移投降的百姓，设置了夷陵县。
English: As a result, Wang Ji moved the people who had surrendered and set up Yiling County.

古文：赐爵关内侯。
现代文：朝廷赐封王基的爵位为关内侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Kwanai.

古文：基又表城上昶，徙江夏治之，以偪夏口，由是贼不敢轻越江。
现代文：王基又上表给王昶，希望能将治所迁移到江夏，以进逼夏口，因此敌军就不敢轻易渡江进攻。
English: Wang Ji also sent a report to Wang Qi, hoping to relocate the treatment center to Jiangxia, so that the enemy would not dare to cross the river to attack.

古文：明制度，整军农，兼脩学校，南方称之。
现代文：明确制度，整顿军队农事，同时修建学校，南方地区都称赞他。
English: The southern region praised him for clarifying the system, rectifying the army's agricultural affairs, and building schools.

古文：时朝廷议欲伐吴，诏基量进趣之宜。
现代文：当时朝廷中商议要攻打吴国，朝廷下诏让王基商量进攻的事宜。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing attacking Wu, and the imperial court ordered Wang Ji to discuss the matter of the attack.

古文：基对曰： 夫兵动而无功，则威名折於外，财用穷於内，故必全而后用也。
现代文：王基回答说： 如果大军行动却无功无法，那在外部，军队的威名就会备注折损，在内部，就会耗费很多费用，所以一定要计划万全之后再出兵。
English: Wang replied: "If a large-scale military operation is ineffective, then the prestige of the army will be damaged externally, and internally, it will cost a lot of money. Therefore, it is necessary to plan everything before sending troops.

古文：若不资通川聚粮水战之备，则虽积兵江内，无必渡之势矣。
现代文：如果不做好开通河道，储备粮食，制造战船的准备，那即使在江山积聚士兵，也没有一定能渡江进攻的气势。
English: If you don't do a good job of opening the river, storing grain, and making warships, then even if you accumulate soldiers in the mountains, you won't be able to cross the river.

古文：今江陵有沮、漳二水，溉灌膏腴之田以千数。
现代文：现在江陵地区有沮水、漳水，灌溉的肥沃土地数以千计。
English: At present, there are thousands of irrigated fertile lands in the Jiangling area.

古文：安陆左右，陂池沃衍。
现代文：安陆郡的周围，也有很多良田。
English: There are also many good rice fields around Anlu County.

古文：若水陆并农，以实军资，然后引兵诣江陵、夷陵，分据夏口，顺沮、漳，资水浮谷而下。
现代文：如果陆上和水上都重视农耕，以充实军用物资，这样之后再率兵进逼江陵、夷陵，并分兵据守夏口，沿着沮水、漳水，通过水路往下运输军用物资。
English: If both the land and the water attach importance to agriculture to enrich military supplies, then after that, they will lead the troops into Jiangling and Yiling, and divide the troops to defend Xiakou, and transport military supplies down the waterway along Deshui and Surabaya.

古文：贼知官兵有经久之势，则拒天诛者意沮，而向王化者益固。
现代文：敌军知道我军有充足的准备，那他们据守天险的想法就会变得沮丧，而心向我朝的人信念会更加稳固。
English: If the enemy knows that our army is well prepared, then their thoughts of defending themselves will become depressed, and their belief in our people will become more solid.

古文：然后率合蛮夷以攻其内，精卒劲兵以讨其外，则夏口以上必拔，而江外之郡不守。
现代文：这样之后再联合少数民族攻打东吴的内部，并有精锐部队在外攻打，那夏口以上的地区就一定能攻克，同时江外各郡也不能据守。
English: After this, the ethnic minorities will jointly attack the interior of Dongwu, and elite troops will attack outside. The areas above Naxakou will surely be conquered, and the counties outside the Yangtze River cannot be defended.

古文：如此，吴、蜀之交绝，交绝而吴禽矣。
现代文：这样，吴国蜀国的交往就会断绝，交往断绝之后我军就能擒获吴国了。
English: In this way, the exchanges between Wushu and Shu will be cut off, and our army will be able to capture Wushu after the exchanges are cut off.

古文：不然，兵出之利，未可必矣。 
现代文：不这样的话，现在出兵的利处，不一定是有的。 
English: Otherwise, the advantages of sending troops now are not necessarily there.

古文：於是遂止。
现代文：于是这件事就停止了。
English: And then it stopped.

古文：司马景王新统政，基书戒之曰： 天下至广，万机至猥，诚不可不矜矜业业，坐而待旦也。
现代文：司马景王刚主持朝政，王基上书劝诫他说： 天下非常广阔，各项事务非常繁琐，实在不能不兢兢业业，工作认真负责直到完成。
English: Sima Jing Wanggang presided over the imperial government, and Wang Ji wrote to him to admonish him: The world is very vast, and various affairs are very cumbersome. It is really impossible not to be diligent and conscientiously responsible for the work until it is completed.

古文：夫志正则众邪不生，心静则众事不躁，思虑审定则教令不烦，亲用忠良则远近协服。
现代文：人的志向正直，那所有的邪念都不会滋生，心中平静，那处理所有的事情都不会烦躁，思虑细致肯定，那教化诏令就不会繁杂，亲近任用忠良之臣，那远近的百姓都会臣服。
English: If people's aspirations are honest, then all evil thoughts will not breed, their hearts will be calm, they will not be irritated when dealing with all things, their thoughts will be meticulously affirmed, their teachings and edicts will not be complicated, close and loyal subjects will be appointed, and the people near and far will be submissive.

古文：故知和远在身，定众在心。
现代文：所以知道和睦远方的人，在于自身，稳定百姓，在于用心。
English: Therefore, people who know that harmony in distant places lies in themselves, the stability of the people lies in their intentions.

古文：许允、傅嘏、袁侃、崔赞皆一时正士，有直质而无流心，可与同政事者也。 
现代文：许允、傅嘏、袁侃、崔赞等人都是当时的正直士人，有正直的品质却没有放纵的心性，是可以一起共事的人。 
English: Xu Yun, Fu Jun, Yuan Kan, Cui Zan and others were all honest people at that time. They had honest qualities but did not have an indulgent mentality. They were people who could work together.

古文：景王纳其言。
现代文：司马景王采纳了他的建议。
English: Sima Jingwang accepted his suggestion.

古文：高贵乡公即尊位，进封常乐亭侯。
现代文：高贵乡公曹髦登基，进封王基为常乐亭侯。
English: Gao Gui Xiang Gong Cao Xiang ascended to the throne, and Wang Ji, the prince of Changle Pavilion, was enthroned.

古文：毌丘俭、文钦作乱，以基为行监军、假节，统许昌军，適与景王会於许昌。
现代文：毋丘俭、文钦作乱，朝廷派王基担任行监军、持符节，统率许昌的部队，刚好和司马师的军队在许昌会合。
English: In spite of Qiu Qian and Wenqin's disturbance, the imperial court sent Wang Ji to serve as the army's marching overseer, to hold the festival of symbols, and to lead the troops of Xu Chang, who just happened to meet the army of Sima's division in Xu Chang.

古文：景王曰： 君筹俭等何如？ 
现代文：司马师说： 您认为毋丘俭等人怎么样？ 
English: Sima said: What do you think of those who are not frugal?

古文：基曰： 淮南之逆，非吏民思乱也，俭等诳胁迫惧，畏目下之戮，是以尚群聚耳。
现代文：王基说： 淮南地区的反叛，不是管理百姓想要作乱，是毋丘俭等人谎言胁迫，担心近在眼前的死罪，所以才聚集在一起罢了。
English: Wang Ji said: The rebellion in Huainan is not the result of the management of the people wanting to create turmoil, but rather the result of the lies and coercion of people such as Qiu Jian, and the fear of imminent capital punishment, which is why they gathered together.

古文：若大兵临偪，必土崩瓦解，俭、钦之首，不终朝而县於军门矣。 
现代文：如果大军逼近，一定会土崩瓦解，毋丘俭、文钦的首级，不用多久就会被悬挂在军营门口了。 
English: If the large army approaches, it will certainly collapse, and it will not take long for the heads of Qiu Jian and Wenqin to be hung at the gate of the military camp.

古文：景王曰： 善。 
现代文：司马师说： 好的。 
English: Sima said, "All right.

古文：乃令基居军前。
现代文：就让王基在军前开路。
English: and let Wang Ji lead the way.

古文：议者咸以俭、钦慓悍，难与争锋。
现代文：商议的人都认为毋丘俭、文钦的部队剽悍，很难和他们抗衡。
English: The negotiators all agreed that, rather than being frugal, Wenqin's troops were tough, and it would be difficult to compete with them.

古文：诏基停驻。
现代文：司马师就诏令王基暂停不前行。
English: Sima ordered Wang Ji to stop moving forward.

古文：基以为： 俭等举军足以深入，而久不进者，是其诈伪已露，众心疑沮也。
现代文：王基认为： 毋丘俭等人大举进军，就足以深入，但却很久没有前进，事因为他们的谎言已经被揭露，将士心中已经疑虑。
English: Wang Qi believed that: Even if people such as Qiu Jian and others marched into the army in a big way, it was enough to go deep, but they did not advance for a long time, because their lies had been exposed, and the soldiers already had doubts in their hearts.

古文：今不张示威形以副民望，而停军高垒，有似畏懦，非用兵之势也。
现代文：现在没有张扬示威以符合百姓的期望，却停军修建壁垒，就好像我军畏惧怯懦，这不是用兵的气势。
English: There is no demonstration to meet the expectations of the people, but the army has stopped building barriers. It is as if our army is afraid and cowardly. This is not the spirit of using soldiers.

古文：若或虏略民人，又州郡兵家为贼所得者，更怀离心；俭等所迫胁者，自顾罪重，不敢复还，此为错兵无用之地，而成奸宄之源。
现代文：如果他们劫掠百姓，又有州郡中的将士家属被他们收押的，那将士们就会更有叛离的想法；毋丘俭等人所胁迫的人，只是自认为自己罪行深重，不敢回来，这是没有地方用兵，就会成为奸邪的根源。
English: If they plunder the people, and the families of the soldiers in the state and county are detained by them, then the soldiers will have more thoughts of defection; those who are not coerced by the likes of the thrifty, but only think that they are guilty and dare not return, which is no place for soldiers, will become the root of evil.

古文：吴寇因之，则淮南非国家之有，谯、沛、汝、豫危而不安，此计之大失也。
现代文：吴国的敌寇趁机出兵，那淮南地区就不会在国家的统治之下，谯、沛、汝、豫等地就会危急而不安定，这是计策的大失误。
English: If the enemy corsairs of the State of Wu took advantage of the opportunity to send troops, then the Huainan region would not be under the rule of the state, and places such as Zhou, Pei, Ru and Yu would be critical and unstable. This was a big mistake in strategy.

古文：军宜速进据南顿，南顿有大邸阁，计足军人四十日粮。
现代文：我军应该迅速进军据守南顿，南顿又很大的粮仓，估计能足够大军四十天的食用。
English: Our army should quickly march into the stronghold of Nantong, which is also a large granary, estimated to be able to feed a large army for forty days.

古文：保坚城，因积谷，先人有夺人之心，此平贼之要也。 
现代文：保守坚固的城池，在别人之前有攻取的想法，这是平定贼军的要点。 
English: Maintaining a strong fortress and having the idea of attacking before others do is the key to pacifying the bandits.

古文：基屡请，乃听进据〈氵隱〉水。
现代文：王基多次请求，朝廷才允许他进军据守〈氵隱〉水。
English: Wang Ji repeatedly requested the imperial court to allow him to march into the waters where he was garrisoned.

古文：既至，复言曰： 兵闻拙速，未睹工迟之久。
现代文：王基率军到达之后，又上书说： 用兵看重速度，没有见过用用兵谨慎而造成的缓慢。
English: After the arrival of the army led by Wang Ji, he also wrote: The use of soldiers attaches great importance to speed. I have never seen the slowness caused by the cautious use of soldiers.

古文：方今外有强寇，内有叛臣，若不时决，则事之深浅未可测也。
现代文：现在外部有强大的敌寇，内部有叛乱的臣子，如果不能一时就解决，那事情的严重程度就不能预测了。
English: At present, there are powerful foreign invaders and rebellious courtiers inside the country. If it cannot be resolved immediately, the severity of the situation cannot be predicted.

古文：议者多欲将军持重。
现代文：商议的人大多希望将领能用兵稳重。
English: Most of the negotiators hope that the generals will be able to use troops steadily.

古文：将军持重是也，停军不进非也。
现代文：将领确实应该稳重，但驻军不前也是不正确的。
English: It is true that a general should be steady, but it is also not true that a garrison should not advance.

古文：持重非不行之谓也，进而不可犯耳。
现代文：稳重不是做不到，但是驻军不前就是错误的。
English: It is not impossible to maintain stability, but it is a mistake not to move forward with the garrison.

古文：今据坚城，保壁垒，以积实资虏，县运军粮，甚非计也。 
现代文：现在据守在坚固的城池，保守壁垒，将充足的粮食提供给敌人，自己却要从远处运输粮食，不是好计策。 
English: It is not a good strategy to defend a fortified city, maintain the walls, and provide sufficient grain to the enemy, while transporting grain from far away.

古文：景王欲须诸军集到，犹尚未许。
现代文：司马师想要等到各路人马都聚集完成，还是没有允准王基的意见。
English: Sima wanted to wait until all parties had gathered to complete the process, but still did not allow Wang Qi's opinion.

古文：基曰： 将在军，君令有所不受。
现代文：王基说： 将领在军中，皇上的命令也有不接受的。
English: Wang said, "Generals are in the army, and the emperor's orders are not acceptable.

古文：彼得则利，我得亦利，是谓争城，南顿是也。 
现代文：敌军得到城池是好处，我军得到，也是好处，所以才叫做夺取城池，现在就在于南顿了。 
English: It is good for the enemy to take the city, and it is also good for our army to take it. That is why it is called the capture of the city, and now it is in Nantong.

古文：遂辄进据南顿，俭等从项亦争欲往，发十馀里，闻基先到，复还保项。
现代文：于是司马师就进军据守南顿，毋丘俭等从项地发兵也想争夺南顿，大军出发十几里，得知王基先来到，就又返回保守项城。
English: As a result, Sima's division marched to defend Nantong. No matter how frugal, the troops sent from Xiangdi also wanted to compete for Nantong. The large army set out for more than ten miles, and when they learned that Wang Ji came first, they returned to protect Xiangcheng.

古文：时兖州刺史邓艾屯乐嘉，俭使文钦将兵袭艾。
现代文：当时衮州刺史邓艾在乐嘉驻守，毋丘俭派文钦率领部队攻打邓艾。
English: At that time, the governor of Zhangzhou, Deng Ai, was stationed in Lejia. However, he sent Wenqin to lead the troops to attack Deng Ai.

古文：基知其势分，进兵偪项，俭众遂败。
现代文：王基得知他们已经分散兵力，就出兵逼近项城，毋丘俭等人就败退了。
English: When Wang Ji learned that they had dispersed their forces, he sent troops to approach Xiangcheng, but they were defeated and retreated.

古文：钦等已平，迁镇南将军，都督豫州诸军事，领豫州刺史，进封安乐乡侯。
现代文：文钦等人被平定后，王基升任为镇南将军，督领豫州各项军事，兼任豫州刺史，进封爵位为安乐乡侯。
English: After Wen Qin and others were subdued, Wang Qi was promoted to the highest rank of Zhenan General, the commander of various military forces in Yuzhou, concurrently served as the governor of Yuzhou, and was awarded the title of Anle Township.

古文：上疏求分户二百，赐叔父子乔爵关内侯，以报叔父拊育之德。
现代文：王基上疏请求分出两百户食邑，赐封叔父的儿子王乔为关内侯，用以回报叔父抚养教育的恩德。
English: Wang Jishangsu requested that two hundred households be separated from each other, and that his uncle's son, Wang Qiao, be given the title of Guan Nei Hou, in return for his uncle's kindness in raising and educating him.

古文：有诏特听。
现代文：皇帝颁下诏令允准了。
English: The emperor issued a decree to allow it.

古文：诸葛诞反，基以本官行镇东将军，都督扬、豫诸军事。
现代文：诸葛诞反叛，王基以豫州刺史身份行镇东将军的职权，督领扬州、豫州各项军事事宜。
English: When Zhuge Zheng rebelled, Wang Ji, as the historian of Yuzhou, exercised the authority of the Zhendong General to supervise all military affairs of Yangzhou and Yuzhou.

古文：时大军在项，以贼兵精，诏基敛军坚垒。
现代文：当时大军正在项城，因为敌军将士精锐，朝廷诏令王基收兵，加固壁垒。
English: At that time, a large army was in Xiangcheng, because the enemy troops were elite, the imperial court ordered Wang Ji to recruit troops and strengthen the barriers.

古文：基累启求进讨。
现代文：王基多次上书请求进军征讨。
English: Wang Ji has repeatedly written to request the army to go and investigate.

古文：会吴遣朱异来救诞，军於安城。
现代文：刚好吴国派朱异来援救诸葛诞，在安城驻军。
English: It just so happened that the State of Wu sent Zhu Yi to rescue Zhuge Zi, and stationed troops in Ancheng.

古文：基又被诏引诸军转据北山，基谓诸将曰： 今围垒转固，兵马向集，但当精脩守备以待越逸，而更移兵守险，使得放纵，虽有智者不能善后矣。 
现代文：王基又收到诏令要率领各军转移到北山据守，王基对将领们说： 现在城中壁垒越来越坚固，兵马聚集，只当充分准备装备以等待敌军，如果再转移大军据守险要之地，时兵马得到党总，即使是有智谋的人也不能善后了。 
English: Wang Ji also received the imperial decree to lead the army to move to the Beishan to defend. Wang Ji said to the generals: Now that the city walls are getting stronger and stronger, and soldiers and horses are gathering, it is only necessary to fully prepare the equipment to wait for the enemy army. If the large army is transferred to defend the critical place, when the soldiers and horses get the party general, even those who are clever can not improve the situation.

古文：遂守便宜上疏曰： 今与贼家对敌，当不动如山。
现代文：于是就在合适的时候上疏说： 现在和敌军对峙，应该像山一样安稳。
English: So at the right time, Shang Zuo said: Now that we are facing the enemy, we should be as stable as a mountain.

古文：若迁移依险，人心摇荡，於势大损。
现代文：如果转移士兵倚仗险要之地，那人心摇动，对于气势是很大的损耗。
English: If the transfer of soldiers rests on a precarious place, that person's heart is shaken, it is a great loss to the momentum.

古文：诸军并据深沟高垒，众心皆定，不可倾动，此御兵之要也。 
现代文：各军一同据守坚固的壁垒，大家的心才能安定，不能动摇，这是统兵的要点啊。 
English: All the armies together hold fast to the solid barrier, everyone's heart can be stable and cannot be shaken, this is the main point of the unified army.

古文：书奏，报听。
现代文：书表上奏后，皇帝回复允准。
English: After the publication of the book, the emperor gave his approval.

古文：大将军司马文王进屯丘头，分部围守，各有所统。
现代文：大将军司马昭进兵驻守丘头，分各部包围据守，各自有所管理的地方。
English: General Sima Zhao marched in troops to garrison the hilltop, which was surrounded and defended by various departments, each of which had its own administration.

古文：基督城东城南二十六军，文王敕军吏入镇南部界，一不得有所遣。
现代文：王基督领城东城南二十六支部队，司马昭命令军吏进入镇南将军部界，一概不能派兵出击。
English: Sima Zhao ordered the military officials to enter the military boundary of the south of the town and not to send any soldiers to attack the twenty-six troops south of the east town of King Christ.

古文：城中食尽，昼夜攻垒，基辄拒击，破之。
现代文：城中粮食吃尽，敌军又不断进攻壁垒，王基就率军抵御，攻破敌军。
English: The grain in the city was exhausted, and the enemy army continued to attack the barriers. Wang Ji led the army to resist and defeat the enemy army.

古文：寿春既拔，文王与基书曰： 初议者云云，求移者甚众，时未临履，亦谓宜然。
现代文：寿春被攻占后，司马昭写信给王基说： 当初商议的人意见不一，请求转移部队的人很多，当时我没有能亲自到阵前，也认为应该是这样。
English: After Shouchun was occupied, Sima Zhao wrote to Wang Ji, saying: At first, the people who were deliberating had different opinions, and there were many people who requested the transfer of troops. At that time, I was not able to personally go to the front, and I also thought that this should be the case.

古文：将军深算利害，独秉固志，上违诏命，下拒众议，终至制敌禽贼，虽古人所述，不是过也。 
现代文：将军您深思熟虑其中的利害关系，自己秉持坚定的想法，对上违背诏令，对下抗拒众人的意见，最终得以击溃敌军，即使是古人叙述的战事，也没有超过这件事的。 
English: General, you have carefully considered the interests involved, you have upheld a firm idea, you have violated the edict on the one hand and resisted the opinions of many people on the other, and finally you have been able to defeat the enemy army, even if the war described by the ancients did not exceed this matter.

古文：文王欲遣诸将轻兵深入，招迎唐咨等子弟，因衅有荡覆吴之势。
现代文：司马昭想要派将领们率轻兵深入项城地区，并招揽唐咨等子弟，趁着矛盾，有颠覆吴国的气势。
English: Sima Zhao wanted to send generals and light soldiers deep into the Xiangcheng area, and recruit Tang Zhe and other sons and daughters, taking advantage of the contradiction and having the momentum to subvert the State of Wuxi.

古文：基谏曰： 昔诸葛恪乘东关之胜，竭江表之兵，以围新城，城既不拔，而众死者太半。
现代文：王基劝谏说： 过去诸葛恪趁着东关的胜利，竭尽江表地区的兵力来围攻新城，新城没有能攻克，而将士们死伤了一大半。
English: Wang Qi advised: In the past, Zhuge Ke took advantage of Dongguan's victory and made every effort to besiege Xincheng. Xincheng could not be conquered, and most of the soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：姜维因洮上之利，轻兵深入，粮饷不继，军覆上邽。
现代文：姜维趁着洮上胜利之势，轻兵深入，粮食供应来不及，大军在上邽覆没。
English: Jiang Wei took advantage of the momentum of victory on the raft, the light soldiers went deep, the grain supply was too late, and the large army was overrun on the raft.

古文：夫大捷之后，上下轻敌，轻敌则虑难不深。
现代文：大胜之后，上下的将士都轻视敌军，轻视敌军那思虑问题就不会深入。
English: After a great victory, all soldiers, high and low, despise the enemy army. If they despise the enemy army, the problem of thinking will not be deepened.

古文：今贼新败於外，又内患未弭，是其脩备设虑之时也。
现代文：现在敌军在外刚刚失败，内部的祸患又还没有解决，是他们修整装备，仔细考虑的时候。
English: Now that the enemy forces have just been defeated abroad and the internal calamity has yet to be resolved, it is time for them to refit their equipment and think carefully.

古文：且兵出逾年，人有归志，今俘馘十万，罪人斯得，自历代征伐，未有全兵独克如今之盛者也。
现代文：况且大军出兵已经超过一年，将士们都有回家的想法，现在俘虏了十万敌军，罪人们得到了出发，历代的征战以来，没有过像现在这样保全大军却能攻克敌军的盛势。
English: Moreover, it has been more than a year since the great army sent troops, and the soldiers all have the idea of returning home. Now they have captured a hundred thousand enemy troops, and the criminals have been sent out. Since the wars of all generations, there has never been such a situation of preserving the great army but being able to overcome the strength of the enemy.

古文：武皇帝克袁绍於官渡，自以所获已多，不复追奔，惧挫威也。 
现代文：武皇帝杂官渡攻克袁绍，自认为所缴获的已经很多，就不再追击，担心会挫败威势。 
English: Emperor Wu's non-commissioned officer Du attacked Yuan Shao, and since he thought that he had already captured a lot, he no longer pursued, fearing that he would defeat the momentum.

古文：文王乃止。
现代文：司马昭才停止了追击。
English: Only then did Sima Zhao stop the pursuit.

古文：以淮南初定，转基为征东将军，都督扬州诸军事，进封东武侯。
现代文：因为淮南地区刚平定，朝廷调任王基为征东将军，督领扬州各项军事，进封为东武侯。
English: Because the Huainan region had just been pacified, the imperial court transferred Wang Ji to be the general to conquer the East, to command the various military forces of Yangzhou, and to be the prince of Dongwu.

古文：基上疏固让，归功参佐，由是长史司马等七人皆侯。
现代文：王基上疏坚决推辞，将功劳都归于谋士和辅佐的部下，因此长史、司马等七人都被封为侯。
English: Wang Ji Shangsuo resolutely refused, attributing the credit to the subordinates of the adviser and assistant, so Changshi, Sima and other seven people were appointed as marquesses.

古文：是岁，基母卒，诏秘其凶问，迎基父豹丧合葬洛阳，追赠豹北海太守。
现代文：这一年，王基的母亲去世，朝廷下诏要保守这件丧事，把王基的父亲王豹的遗骨迁到洛阳与王基母亲合葬，追赠王豹为北海太守。
English: In the same year, Wang Qi's mother died, and the imperial court decreed that Wang Qi's father Wang Yao's remains should be moved to Luoyang to be buried with Wang Qi's mother, and that Wang Yao should be posthumously awarded the title of the governor of the North Sea.

古文：甘露四年，转为征南将军，都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：甘露四年，王基转任为征南将军，督领荆州各项军事。
English: Four years later, Wang Ji was transferred to the post of Southern Expeditionary General and became the commander of all military forces in Jingzhou.

古文：常道乡公即尊位，增邑千户，并前五千七百户。
现代文：常道乡公登基后，给王基增加一千户食邑，连带之前的一共五千七百户。
English: After the enthronement of King Jondogong, Wangji was given an additional 1,000 households, bringing the total to 5,700 households.

古文：前后封子二人亭侯、关内侯。
现代文：前后赐封他的两个儿子为亭侯、关内侯。
English: His two sons were successively given the titles of Tinghou (亭侯) and Guanaihou (关内侯).

古文：景元二年，襄阳太守表吴贼邓由等欲来归化，基被诏，当因此震荡江表。
现代文：景元二年，襄阳太守上表说吴国将领邓由等人想要来归顺，王基收到诏令，应在这时出兵震动江表。
English: In the second year of the Jingyuan, the Yangyang Daju issued a proclamation saying that the general of the State of Wu, Deng Yu, and others wanted to surrender, and Wang Ji received an imperial edict that he should send troops to shake the table of the river at this time.

古文：基疑其诈，驰驿陈状。
现代文：王基怀疑其中有诈，就派人骑快马沿驿站陈述情况。
English: Wang Ji suspected that there was fraud, so he sent someone to ride a fast horse along the railway station to report the situation.

古文：且曰： 嘉平以来，累有内难，当今之务，在于镇安社稷，绥宁百姓，未宜动众以求外利。 
现代文：并说： 嘉平年间以来，国家多次出现内乱，现在的要紧事务，在于安定国家，安抚百姓，还不应该兴师动众以求取外部的利益。 
English: He also said: Since the Jiaping era, the country has seen many civil disturbances. The most important thing now is to stabilize the country and pacify the people. It is not necessary to stir up the masses to seek external benefits.

古文：文王报书曰： 凡处事者，多曲相从顺，鲜能确然共尽理实。
现代文：司马昭回复书信说： 凡是和我共事的人，大多是曲意顺从，很少有能明确详尽地陈述事理情况的。
English: Sima Zhao replied to the letter, saying: All the people who work with me are mostly obedient, and few can clearly and exhaustively state the facts.

古文：诚感忠爱，每见规示，辄敬依来指。 
现代文：很感谢您的忠诚仁爱，每次有所规劝，都是按照您所说的来办。 
English: Thank you very much for your loyalty and benevolence. Every time you give me some advice, I do what you say.

古文：后由等竟不降。
现代文：后来邓由等人最终也没有投降。
English: Deng Yu and others did not surrender in the end.

古文：是岁基薨，追赠司空，谥曰景侯。
现代文：这一年王基去世，朝廷追赠他为司空，谥号为景侯。
English: Wang Ji died that year, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Siku, and his posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：子徽嗣，早卒。
现代文：儿子王徽继承爵位，但早年去世。
English: His son Wang Hui inherited the title, but died early.

古文：咸熙中，开建五等，以基著勋前朝，改封基孙廙，而以东武馀邑赐一子爵关内侯。
现代文：咸熙年间，朝廷开始设立五等爵位制度，因为王基在前朝功勋卓著，改封王基的孙子王廙为侯，并又将东武郡其余的城封给王基的另一儿子，赐关内侯爵。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanxi, the imperial court began to establish a five-class peerage system, because Wang Ji had distinguished himself in the previous dynasty. Wang Ji's grandson, Wang Qi, was given the title of marquis, and the remaining castles in Dongwu County were given to Wang Ji's other son, the Marquis of Guanai.

古文：晋室践阼，下诏曰： 故司空王基既著德立勋，又治身清素，不营产业，久在重任，家无私积，可谓身没行显，足用励俗者也。
现代文：晋朝建立以后，皇帝下诏说： 已故司空王基既修养德行建立功劳，又为人清正廉洁，不置办产业，长久处在重要职位上，家中没有私财，可以说是虽然去世，但德行显著，足以用来勉励世俗之人。
English: After the establishment of the Jin Dynasty, the emperor issued the following edict: The late Siku Wangji not only cultivated virtue and established merit, but also was a clean and honest person. He did not acquire property, was in an important position for a long time, and had no private wealth in his family. It can be said that although he passed away, his virtue was significant enough to be used to encourage secular people.

古文：其以奴婢二人赐其家。 
现代文：现在赏赐他家中两名奴婢。
English: Now give him two male and two female slaves from his household.

古文：评曰：徐邈清尚弘通，胡质素业贞粹，王昶开济识度，王基学行坚白，皆掌统方任，垂称著绩。
现代文：评曰：徐邈清廉高尚，宽宏通达，胡质操守清白，忠贞纯粹，王昶志向美好，有见识气度，王基学问德行都真实纯粹，他们都是主管一方重任的官员，百姓称赞，建立功绩。
English: The review said: Xu Xi is clean and honest, high-minded and broad-minded, Hu is honest and pure, loyal and pure, Wang Xi has a beautiful aspiration, insightful temperament, and Wang Ji's academic and moral conduct are true and pure. They are all officials with important responsibilities in charge of one side, praised by the people, and have established merits.

古文：可谓国之良臣，时之彦士矣。
现代文：真可以说是国家的贤臣，当时的俊杰之士啊。
English: Truly, he could be said to be a wise statesman, one of the most brilliant men of his time.

