古文：宋一鹤，宛平人。
现代文：宋一鹤，宛平人。
English: Song Yizhe, Wan Pingren.

古文：为诸生，见天下大乱，即究心兵事。
现代文：早年为童生时，他看到天下大乱就用心研究军事。
English: In his early childhood, when he saw the world in turmoil, he devoted himself to studying the military.

古文：崇祯三年举于乡。授教谕，以荐迁丘县知县，复以荐加东昌同知，仍知县事。
现代文：崇祯三年，他乡试中举，被任命为教谕，因别人推荐升为丘县知县，又因为别人推荐被加官东昌同知，仍然办理知县的事务。
English: In the third year of Chongzhen, he won the junior high school examination in his hometown and was appointed as a preceptor. Because others recommended him, he was promoted to the county magistrate of Qiu County, and because others recommended him to be the county magistrate of Dongchang, he still handled the affairs of the county magistrate.

古文：巡按御史禹好善以一鹤知兵，荐之。授兵部员外郎，寻擢天津兵备佥事，改饬汝南兵备，驻信阳。
现代文：巡按御史禹好善认为一鹤懂得军事，向朝廷推荐了他，朝廷就任命他为兵部员外郎，不久又提拔为天津兵备佥事，后来改派他去整顿汝南兵备，驻在信阳。
English: The inspector-general Yu Hao-shen thought that Ichikaku understood military affairs, and recommended him to the imperial court. The imperial court appointed him as a member of the military department, and soon he was promoted to the Tianjin Military Preparation Department. Later, he was reassigned to rectify the military preparation in Runan and stationed in Shinyang.

古文：时熊文灿总理南畿、河南、山西、陕西、湖广、四川军务，主抚议。
现代文：当时熊文灿总理南畿、河南、山西、陕西、湖广、四川军务，主张招安贼兵。
English: At that time, Premier Xiong Wencang was in charge of the military affairs of Nanki, Henan, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Hukang and Sichuan, and advocated the recruitment of peacekeepers.

古文：一鹤降其盗魁黄三耀，又降其死贼顺天王之党刘喜才。
现代文：一鹤收降了强盗首领黄三耀，又收降了死贼顺天王的同伙刘喜才。
English: One crane brought down the bandit leader Huang Sanyao, and also brought down Liu Xizai, the accomplice of the death thief Shun Tianwang.

古文：一鹤先后剿剧贼，斩首七百有奇。
现代文：他先后剿灭强大的贼兵，斩获七百多首级。
English: He successively annihilated the powerful bandits and captured more than seven hundred heads.

古文：从副将龙在田破贼固始，一鹤毒杀其贼千人。
现代文：他跟随副将龙在田在固始攻打贼兵时，毒死了那里的一千贼兵。
English: He poisoned a thousand bandits there when he and his second-in-command, Long Zetian, were attacking bandits in Gushi.

古文：左良玉降其贼李万庆，一鹤抚而定之数万。
现代文：左良玉收降了贼将李万庆，一鹤招安并稳住了几万贼兵。
English: Zuo Liangyu subdued the bandit general Li Wanqing, and brought peace and stability to tens of thousands of bandits.

古文：文灿屡上其功，荐之，进副使，调郧阳。
现代文：文灿屡次报上他的功劳，推荐他，一鹤晋升为副使，调到了郧阳。
English: Wen Can repeatedly reported on his merits and recommended him. He was promoted to vice-envoy and transferred to Shenyang.

古文：文灿诛，杨嗣昌代，以一鹤能，荐之，擢右佥都御史，代方孔召巡抚湖广。
现代文：文灿被斩掉后，杨嗣昌接任，认为一鹤有才干，也向朝廷推荐他，朝廷就提拔他为右佥都御史，让他接替方孔昭巡抚湖广。
English: After Wencan was beheaded, Yang Shichang took over the post. He thought that Yihe was talented and recommended him to the imperial court. The imperial court promoted him to the position of the right-hand governor of the capital and let him succeed Fang Kongzhao as the governor of Hukang.

古文：时湖广贼为诸将所逼，多窜入四川。
现代文：当时湖广一带的贼兵被官军诸将所逼，大多逃进了四川。
English: At that time, the bandits in the Huguang area were forced by the government army generals, and most of them fled to Sichuan.

古文：一鹤以云南军移镇当阳，中官刘元斌以京军移镇荆门，相掎角。
现代文：一鹤把云南部队移到当阳驻扎，中官刘元斌把京军移到荆门驻扎，互为掎角。
English: One crane moved the Yunnan troops to Dangyang and stationed them there, and Lieutenant Colonel Liu Yuanbin moved the Beijing troops to Jingmen and stationed them there. They were at loggerheads with each other.

古文：左良玉等大破贼于玛瑙山，一鹤叙功增俸。
现代文：左良玉等在玛瑙山把贼兵打得大败，一鹤也被记了功，增加了官俸。
English: Zuo Liangyu and others defeated the robber soldiers in Manau Mountain, and a crane was also credited with merit, and the official salary was increased.

古文：遣副将王允成、孙应元等大破贼汝才五大营于丰邑坪，斩首三千余级。
现代文：一鹤派副将王允成、孙应元等在丰邑坪把贼首汝才的五大营打得大败，斩获了三千多首级。
English: Wang Yuncheng and Sun Yingyuan, vice-generals of the Ichihaku faction, defeated the five battalions of the bandit chiefs in Fengyuping and won more than three thousand heads.

古文：嗣昌署一鹤荆楚第一功。
现代文：嗣昌给一鹤定为荆楚第一功。
English: Tsuchimasa gave the first merit to a crane.

古文：献忠陷襄阳，与革里眼、左金王等东萃黄州、汝宁间。一鹤移驻蕲州，焚舟，遏贼渡。
现代文：献忠打下襄阳后，与革里眼、左金王等向东集结到黄州、汝宁一带，一鹤便移驻蕲州，焚毁渡船，阻止贼兵渡江。
English: After Xian Zhong defeated Xiangyang, he and his allies, including Gu Lijian and Zuo Jinwang, marched eastward and gathered in the areas of Huangzhou and Yuning. They then moved to Zhangzhou, burned ferries, and prevented the bandits from crossing the river.

古文：贼移而北，一鹤又断横江，贼不敢渡。
现代文：贼兵向北移动，一鹤又截断横江，贼兵因此不敢渡江了。
English: The bandits moved north, and a crane cut off the river, so the bandits did not dare to cross the river.

古文：嗣昌卒，丁启睿代。
现代文：嗣昌死后，丁启睿来接任。
English: After Tsuchimasa's death, Ding Qirui took over.

古文：启睿破献忠于麻城，会一鹤及凤阳总督朱大典、安庆巡抚郑二阳蹙贼左金王、老回回等于潜山、怀宁山中。一鹤又督参将王嘉谟等追破左金王、争世王、治世王于灯草坪，斩首千八百级。
现代文：启睿在麻城打败张献忠后，联合一鹤及凤阳总督朱大典、安庆巡抚郑二阳到潜山、怀宁一带的山中进逼贼首左金王、老回回等，一鹤又带领参将王嘉谟等在灯草坪追逐、打败了左金王、争世王、治世王，斩获了一千八百多首级。
English: After Kai Rui defeated Zhang Xianzhong in Macheng, he joined a crane with Fengyang Governor Zhu Dadin and Anqing Inspector Zheng Eryang to go to the mountains around Guanshan and Huaining to chase the thieves, such as Zuo Jinwang and Lao Hui, and a crane led the general Wang Jia Mu to chase and defeat Zuo Jinwang, King of Contention and King of World, in the Lantern Lawn, and won more than 1800 first-class titles.

古文：十五年，遣部将陈治等合江北兵，破贼于桐城、舒城。
现代文：十五年又派部将陈治等联合江北部队，在桐城、舒城打败贼兵。
English: Fifteen years later, he sent General Chen Zhi and other officers to defeat the bandits in Tongcheng and Shucheng.

古文：一鹤起乡举，不十年秉节钺，廷臣不能无忮。
现代文：一鹤由举人出仕，不到十年就当上了大将军，廷臣不能不嫉妒他。
English: It took less than ten years for a crane to be promoted to the rank of general, and courtiers couldn't help but envy him.

古文：御史卫周允上疏丑诋一鹤。
现代文：御史卫周胤就曾上书恶毒攻击过他。
English: Goshi Wei Zhouyin once viciously attacked him in a letter.

古文：一鹤屡建功，然亦往往蒙时诟。
现代文：一鹤多次建立功勋，但也往往受到当时人们的嘲笑。
English: Ichizuru repeatedly established merit, but was often ridiculed by people at the time.

古文：嗣昌父名鹤，一鹤投揭，自署其名曰 一鸟 ，楚人传笑之。
现代文：嗣昌的父亲叫杨鹤，一鹤给嗣昌投揭文时，把自己的名字署成一鸟，湖北人把这传为笑话。
English: Tsz Chang's father was called Yang He. When a crane cast a letter to Tsz Chang, he signed his name as a bird. People in Hubei passed this on as a joke.

古文：一鹤亦连疏引疾，帝疑其伪，下所司严核。
现代文：一鹤自己也接连上书称病求退，庄烈帝怀疑他在说假话，交给有关部门严加核实。
English: Ichikaku himself also wrote in succession that he was ill and wanted to retire. Emperor Zhuang suspected that he was telling a lie and handed it over to the relevant departments for strict verification.

古文：先以襄阳陷，夺职戴罪，至是许解官候代。
现代文：以前因为襄阳失守，一鹤已经被解除职务，戴罪立功，到这时就批准他解除官职，等人来代。
English: Previously, because of the loss of Xiangyang, a crane had been relieved of his duties, and he was punished for his crimes. At this time, he was approved to be relieved of his duties, and others were appointed.

古文：趋救汝宁，汝宁城已陷。
现代文：一鹤尚未离去，战事发生了，他赶往援救汝宁，可是汝宁已经失守。
English: Ichikaku had not yet left when the war broke out. He rushed to rescue Runin, but Runin was already lost.

古文：十二月，襄阳、德安、荆州连告陷，一鹤趋承天护献陵。
现代文：十二月，襄阳、德安、荆州接连沦陷，一鹤开往承天去保护献陵。
English: In December, Xiangyang, De'an, and Jingzhou fell one after another, and a crane flew to Chengdu to protect and dedicate the mausoleum.

古文：陵军栅木为城，贼积薪烧之，烟窨纯德山。
现代文：守陵的部队树起木栅当城墙，贼兵堆了柴草放火焚烧，浓烟使纯德山变得昏暗不明。
English: The troops guarding the mausoleum erected wooden grates as city walls, the robbers piled up firewood and set it on fire, and the thick smoke made the Chunde Mountain dark and unclear.

古文：城穿，一鼓而登，犯献陵，毁禋殿。
现代文：城墙被打穿后，贼兵一鼓作气，登上了城墙。过后攻打献陵，毁坏了祭祀的大殿。
English: After the city wall was breached, the robber soldiers were so excited that they climbed the city wall. Afterwards, they attacked the mausoleum and destroyed the main hall for the ritual.

古文：守陵巡按御史李振声、总兵官钱中选皆降，遂攻承天，岁除，明年正月二日，有以城下贼者。
现代文：守陵的巡按御史李振声、总兵官钱中选都投降了。
English: Li Zhengsheng, the inspector of the guarding of the tomb, and Qian Ruo, the general officer, both surrendered.

古文：城陷，一鹤自经，故留守沈寿崇、钟祥知县萧汉俱死，分巡副使张凤翥走入山中。
现代文：贼兵接着就攻打承天府。这一年过去了，第二年正月初二，有人把城献给了贼兵。承天失陷后，一鹤上吊自杀了。原留守沈寿崇、钟祥知县萧汉都死掉了，分巡副使张凤翥逃进山中去了。
English: The year passed, and on the second day of the first month of the second year, someone dedicated the city to the bandits. After the fall of Chengdu, a crane hanged himself. The original guards, Shen Shuzong and Xiao Han of Zhongxiang County, both died, and the deputy inspector Zhang Fengya fled into the mountains.

古文：先是左良玉军扰襄、樊，一鹤疏纠之。
现代文：在此之前，左良玉的军队侵扰襄阳、樊城，一鹤上书检举了他。
English: Prior to this, Zuo Liangyu's army invaded Xiangyang and Lucheng, and he was denounced in writing.

古文：三边既陷，列城望风降，惟西宁卫固守不下。
现代文：后来，良玉从襄阳开赴承天，部队缺粮，士兵进行抢劫，良玉向一鹤索要粮饷，一鹤不答应。
English: Later, Liangyu drove from Xiangyang to Chengtian. The troops were short of grain and the soldiers were looting. Liangyu asked a crane for grain, but the crane did not agree.

古文：贼无后顾，乃长驱而东。
现代文：良玉怀恨在心。
English: A virtuous person does not hold grudges.

古文：福王时，赠日瑞兵部尚书，台太仆寺少卿，皆赐祭葬。蔡懋德，字维立，昆山人。
现代文：到这时一鹤打算把良玉的部队留驻在承天，良玉却开向武昌去了，所以一鹤遇难死了。蔡懋德，字维立，昆山人。
English: At this time, Ichikaku planned to keep Ryotama's troops stationed in Chengdu, but Ryotama went to Wuchang, so Ichikaku died in a shipwreck.

古文：少慕王守仁为人，著《管见》，宗良知之说。
现代文：从小仰慕王守仁的为人，写下《管见》一篇，以良知学说为主旨。
English: As a person who has admired Wang Shouren since childhood, he wrote down an article of "Judgment," with the principle of conscience doctrine.

古文：举万历四十七年进士，授杭州推官。
现代文：后来考中万历四十七年进士，做了杭州推官。
English: Later, in the 47th year of Wanli, he was admitted to the Middle School Examination and became a Hangzhou promoter.

古文：天启间，行取入都。
现代文：天启初年，吏部推荐召他进京。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was called to Beijing on the recommendation of the cadre department.

古文：同乡顾秉谦柄国，懋德不与通，秉谦怒，以故不得显擢。授礼部仪制主事，进祠祭员外郎。
现代文：他的同乡顾秉谦当时掌着大权，懋德却不跟他来往，秉谦对他很恼火，因此懋德得不到大的提升，被授官礼部仪制主事，后来又升为祠祭员外郎。
English: His fellow villager Gu Bingqian was in power at the time, but Yan De didn't associate with him. Bingqian was very angry with him. As a result, Yan De didn't get a big promotion. He was appointed as the head of the ceremonial department of the ceremonial department, and later he was promoted to the priest of the ancestral hall.

古文：尚书率诸司往谒魏忠贤祠，懋德托疾不赴。
现代文：礼部尚书带各司官员去魏忠贤的生祠参拜时，懋德推托生病不肯去。
English: When Shang Shuxu from the Ministry of Ceremonies took officials from various departments to visit Wei Zhongxian's ancestral shrine, he was ill and refused to go.

古文：崇祯初，出为江西提学副使，好以守仁《拔本塞源论》教诸生，大抵释氏之绪论。
现代文：崇祯初年，懋德出任江西提学副使，喜欢用王守仁的《拔本塞源论》教导学生，大概都是佛家的思想。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, Zande served as the deputy envoy of Jiangxi to promote learning, and he liked to teach students with Wang Shuren's "Theory of the Origin of the Saddle," which are probably Buddhist thoughts.

古文：迁浙江右参政，分守嘉兴、湖州。
现代文：此后，朝廷提升他为浙江右参政，让他负责守嘉兴、湖州。
English: After that, the imperial court promoted him to the right to participate in politics in Zhejiang, and made him responsible for the defense of Jiaxing and Huzhou.

古文：剧盗屠阿丑有众千余，出没太湖。懋德曰： 此可计擒也。 
现代文：大盗屠阿丑有一千多兵力，出没在太湖一带，懋德说： 这个家伙我可以定计捉拿住。 
English: There are more than a thousand soldiers of the great bandit Tuo Ugly who haunt the Taihu Lake area. Zou De said, "I can definitely catch and hold this guy."

古文：悉召濒湖豪家，把其罪，简壮士与同发，遂擒阿丑。
现代文：于是把沿湖一带的豪强召来，掌握了他们的罪证，选派壮士跟他们一同过去，马上就捉住了阿丑。
English: So he summoned the brave and the strong from the area along the lake, got hold of their incriminating evidence, sent strong men to go with them, and immediately captured Ah Chul.

古文：皆曰： 懋德知兵。 
现代文：这些人都说： 懋德可真懂军事。 
English: These people all said: "Zhongde can really understand the military.

古文：内艰，服除，起井陉兵备。
现代文：后来母亲去世，他照例回家守了三年丧。除丧后，他被起复为井陉兵备。
English: Later, when his mother died, he returned home to observe the three-year mourning period as usual. After the mourning period was over, he was reinstated as the leader of the Jingwu soldiers.

古文：旱，懋德祷，即雨。
现代文：遇到旱灾时，懋德一祷告老天就下了雨。
English: When faced with a drought, Zhengde prayed to the heavens for rain.

古文：他乡争迎以祷，又辄雨。
现代文：别的地方也争着请他去祷告，又总是求到雨水。
English: Other places also compete to invite him to pray, and always ask for rain.

古文：调宁远，以守松山及修台堡功，数叙赉。
现代文：后来懋德被调到宁远，因为守卫松山及修建望敌台、堡垒的功劳，几次得到封赏。
English: Later, Shunde was transferred to Ningyuan. He was awarded several times for his services in guarding Matsuyama and building watchtowers and fortresses.

古文：会灾异求言，懋德上《省过》、《治平》二疏，规切君相，一时咸笑为迂。
现代文：当朝廷碰上灾异下诏请提意见时，懋德递上《省过》、《治平》两篇奏疏，规劝君相，一时被大家讥笑为迂腐。
English: When the imperial court encountered a calamity and issued an edict asking for advice, Zheng De submitted two essays, "Saving the Past" and "Restoring Peace," to persuade the emperor and empress, which was ridiculed by everyone as pedantry.

古文：懋德好释氏，律身如苦行头陀。
现代文：懋德好佛，要求自己做得像个苦行头陀一样。
English: The virtuous Buddha asked himself to act like an ascetic.

古文：杨嗣昌谓其清修弱质，不宜处边地，改济南道。
现代文：杨嗣昌认为他修行清苦，体质较弱，不适于在边疆任职，就调他到济南道来。
English: Yang Shichang thought that his training was hard and his physical condition was weak, and he was not suitable to serve in the frontier, so he transferred him to Jinan Province.

古文：济南新残破，大吏多缺人，懋德摄两司及三道印。
现代文：济南刚刚受到过战争摧残，地方长官缺了很多人，懋德一个人就掌管了两司、三道的大印。
English: Jinan had just been devastated by war, and the local governors were short of many people. One person in Shunde was in charge of two or three daimyo.

古文：迁山东按察使、河南右布政使。
现代文：后来懋德又先后升任山东按察使、河南右布政使。
English: Later, Xingde was successively promoted to Shandong A-level inspector and Henan Ubu political envoy.

古文：田荒谷贵，民苦催科，贼复以先服不输租相煽诱。
现代文：当时田地多荒，米价昂贵，农民苦于征收地租，贼寇又用哪里先归顺哪里就不交租的话来煽动农民。
English: At that time, fields were barren, rice prices were high, farmers were struggling to collect land rent, and thieves and robbers incited farmers by saying that they would not pay rent if they surrendered first.

古文：懋德亟檄州县停征，上疏自劾，诏镌七级视事。
现代文：懋德马上传令各州县停止征收地租，然后上书自己弹劾自己，朝廷让他贬官七级，继续办事。
English: Shunde immediately ordered all prefectures and counties to stop levying land rent, and then wrote a letter to impeach himself. The court demoted him seven levels and let him continue to work.

古文：十四年冬，擢右佥都御史，巡抚山西。
现代文：十四年冬天，懋德被提升为右佥都御史，担任山西巡抚。
English: In the winter of the 14th year, Zhengde was promoted to the right-hand side of the capital, and served as the Shanxi governor.

古文：召对，赐酒馔、银币。
现代文：庄烈帝召见他，并给他酒馔、银币。
English: Zhuo Ledei summoned him and gave him a bottle of wine and a silver coin.

古文：明年春，抵任，讨平大盗王冕。
现代文：第二年春天，懋德到任，讨伐、平定了大盗王冕。
English: In the spring of the following year, Zhengde arrived at his post and fought against and subdued the crown thieves.

古文：十月，统兵入卫京师，诏扼守龙泉、固关二关。
现代文：十月，他统兵入卫京师，奉命扼守龙泉、固关两座关口。
English: In October, he led his troops into the Beijing Division and was ordered to guard the Longquan and Gu Guan Passes.

古文：李自成已陷河南，懋德御之河上。
现代文：李自成打下河南后，懋德在黄河岸上抵挡他。
English: After Li Zicheng defeated Henan, Shunde resisted him on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：十六年冬，自成破潼关，据西安，尽有三秦。
现代文：十六年冬天，自成打下潼关，占领西安，占领了整个三秦地带。
English: In the winter of the 16th year, they successfully captured Shaoguan, occupied Xi'an, and occupied the entire Sanqin region.

古文：十二月，懋德师次平阳，遣副将陈尚智扼守河津。
现代文：十二月，懋德的部队驻扎在平阳，派出副将陈尚智扼守河津。
English: In December, Shunde's troops were stationed in Pingyang and sent Vice Admiral Chen Shangzhi to defend Kawazu.

古文：山西、京师右背、蒲州北抵保德，悉邻贼，依黄河为险。
现代文：山西是京师右背，当时从蒲州向北直到保德，都和贼兵接壤，全仗着黄河作为险阻抵挡贼兵。
English: Shanxi was the right back of the Beijing division. At that time, from the north of Puzhou to Baode, there was a border with the bandits, and the Yellow River was used as a barrier to resist the bandits.

古文：然穷冬冰合，贼骑得长驱。
现代文：但是严冬季节黄河结了冰，贼寇的骑兵可以长驱直入。
English: However, in the severe winter season, the Yellow River froze, and the cavalry of the bandits could drive straight in.

古文：懋德连章告急，请禁旅及保定、宣府、大同兵疾赴河干合拒。
现代文：懋德接连上书告急，请派禁军与保定、宣府、大同部队赶快到黄河岸上来联合防守。
English: Shunde successively sent a letter to express urgency, and requested that the forbidden army be sent to join forces with the Baoding, Xuanfu and Datong troops to come up to the bank of the Yellow River for joint defense.

古文：中朝益积忧山西，言防河者甚众，然无兵可援。
现代文：朝廷里边当时也越发忧心山西了，说到防卫黄河的人很多，但是没有兵力可以派过来增援。
English: At that time, the imperial court was also increasingly worried about Shanxi. It was said that there were many people defending the Yellow River, but there were no troops to send reinforcements.

古文：懋德以疲卒三千，当百万狂寇。
现代文：懋德带领三千名弱卒，要抵挡的却是百万狂寇。
English: Zheng De led three thousand weak soldiers, but it was a million mad robbers who had to be resisted.

古文：时太原汹汹，晋王手教趣懋德还省。
现代文：当时太原人心惶惶，晋王用亲笔指示召懋德回去看护。
English: At that time, Taiyuan was in a state of panic, and Jin Wang used his own handwriting to instruct Gongde to return to look after him.

古文：十八日，懋德去平阳。
现代文：十八日，懋德离开了平阳。
English: On the 18th, Xingde left Pingyang.

古文：二十日，贼抵河津，自船窝东渡，尚智走还平阳。
现代文：二十日，贼兵开到河津，自船窝东渡，尚智跑回平阳。
English: On the 20th, the bandits drove to Kawazu, from the ship's lair to Dongdu, and Shang Zhi ran back to Pingyang.

古文：二十二日，贼攻平阳，拔之。尚智奔入泥源山中。
现代文：二十二日，贼兵来攻打平阳，打了下来，尚智逃进泥源山中。
English: On the twenty-second day, the bandits came to attack Pingyang, fought down, and Shang Zhi fled into the mud source mountain.

古文：二十八日，懋德还太原。
现代文：二十八日，懋德回到太原来了。
English: On the 28th, Xingde returned to Taiyuan.

古文：明年正月，自成称王于西安。
现代文：第二年正月，自成在西安称王。
English: In the first month of the second year, Zicheng became the king in Xi'an.

古文：贼既渡河，转掠河东，列城皆陷。
现代文：贼兵渡过黄河以后，在黄河东部地区辗转攻夺，所到各城都被占领了。
English: After the robber soldiers crossed the Yellow River, they went on a rampage in the eastern region of the Yellow River, and every city they came to was occupied.

古文：于是山西巡按御史汪宗友上言曰： 晋河二千里，平阳居其半。抚臣懋德不待春融冰泮，遽尔平阳返旆，贼即于明日报渡矣。
现代文：这时山西巡按御史汪宗友上书说 ：山西境内黄河有二千里长，平阳就占了一半，抚臣懋德不待春天到来冰雪融化就突然从平阳撤走了部队，贼兵第二天就渡过黄河来了。
English: At this time, the Shanxi inspector Wang Zongyou wrote: The Yellow River in Shanxi is two thousand miles long, and Pingyang accounts for half of it. Fuxin Shunde suddenly withdrew his troops from Pingyang before the snow and ice melted in the spring, and the bandits crossed the Yellow River the next day.

古文：随行马步千人，即时倍道西向，召集陈尚智叛卒，移檄各路防兵援剿，乃不发一兵。
现代文：他有随行骑、步兵一千人，本应该立即倍道西向，召集陈尚智的叛兵，传令各地驻守部队援剿，可是他却不发一兵一卒。
English: He was accompanied by a thousand cavalry and infantry, and he should have immediately marched westward, summoned Chen Shangzhi's rebels, and ordered the garrisons around the country to help, but he did not send a single soldier.

古文：岁终至省，臣言宜提一旅，星驰而前，张疑声讨，尚冀桑榆之收，无如不听何。
现代文：年底他来到省府，我说应当率领一支部队星夜奔赴前去，张疑兵，声讨贼寇，或许还有补救失误收取成功的希望，他不听我又怎样呢？
English: At the end of the year, he came to the provincial capital. I said that he should lead an army to rush forward in the starry night. Zhang suspected soldiers, denounced thieves and robbers, and perhaps there was hope of remedying mistakes and receiving success. He did not listen to me. What should I do?

古文：贼日遣伪官，匝月，余郡皆失，是谁之过欤！ 
现代文：就这样贼寇天天派遣伪官，一个月下来，余下的郡县都丢失了。这是谁的过错呢？ 
English: In this way, the bandits sent fake officials every day, and after a month, the remaining counties were lost. Whose fault was this?

古文：有诏夺官候勘，以郭景昌代之。
现代文：朝廷传下诏书把懋德剥夺官职，听候查处，让郭景昌接替他。
English: The imperial court issued an edict to deprive Xingde of his official post, pending investigation, and let Guo Jingchang succeed him.

古文：二十三日，尚智叛降于贼。
现代文：二十三日，尚智叛降投贼。
English: On the 23rd, Shang Zhi surrendered to the invaders.

古文：于是懋德誓师于太原，布政使赵建极，监司毛文炳、蔺刚中、毕拱辰，太原知府孙康周，署阳曲县事长史范志泰等官吏军民咸在。懋德哭，众皆哭。
现代文：这时懋德正在太原誓师，监司毛文炳、蔺刚中、毕拱辰，太原知府孙康周，代理阳曲县事务的长史范志泰等官吏军民都在场，懋德哭了，大家也都哭了。
English: At this time, Zhai De was in Taiyuan swearing-in ceremony, supervisors Mao Wenjuan, Zhai Gangzhong, Bi Gongchen, governor of Taiyuan Sun Kangzhou, acting Yangqu county affairs long history Fan Zhitai and other officials, soldiers and civilians were present, Zhai De cried, everyone cried.

古文：罢官命适至，或请出城候代。懋德不可，曰： 吾已办一死矣，景昌即至，吾亦与俱死。 
现代文：正好这时罢免懋德官职的诏命传来，有人请懋德到城外去等候替换，懋德不同意，他说 ：我已经做好一死的准备了，就是景昌到来，我也要和他一同赴死。 
English: It was at this time that the imperial decree to remove Xingde from his official position was issued. Someone asked Xingde to go outside the city to wait for a replacement. Xingde disagreed, saying, "I'm ready to die. When Jingchang comes, I'm going to die with him."

古文：调阳和兵三千协守东门。
现代文：接着，懋德调派阳和部队来协助把守东门。
English: Next, Shunde dispatched Yang and his troops to help guard the East Gate.

古文：刚中虑其内应，移之南关之外。遣部将张雄分守新南门，召中军副总兵应时盛入参谋议。
现代文：刚中怕他给贼兵当内应，把他换到南关外边，派部将张雄负责把守新南门，召中军副总兵应时盛到他的部队中当参谋。
English: In the middle of the Gang Dynasty, fearing that he would give orders to the robber soldiers, he was transferred to the outside of the South Gate. Zhang Xiong was assigned to guard the New South Gate, and the deputy commander of the Chinese army, Ying Shisheng, was summoned to his troops to serve as a staff officer.

古文：懋德等登城。
现代文：懋德等登上了城墙。
English: Shunde and others climbed the city wall.

古文：二月五日，贼至城下。
现代文：二月五日，贼兵打到太原城下来。
English: On February 5, the bandits came down to Taiyuan City.

古文：遣部将牛勇、朱孔训、王永魁出战，死之。
现代文：懋德派部将牛勇、朱孔训、王永魁出战，都牺牲了。
English: Niu Yong, Zhu Kongxun, and Wang Yongkui, the generals of the Shunde faction, all died in the battle.

古文：明日，自成具卤簿，督众攻城，阳和兵叛降贼。
现代文：第二天，自成准备了仪仗队，指挥部队攻城，阳和部队向贼兵投降了。
English: The next day, Zicheng prepared an honor guard and commanded the troops to attack the city. Yang and his troops surrendered to the bandits.

古文：又明日，昼晦，懋德草遗表。须臾大风起，拔木扬砂。
现代文：第三天，白天里天色阴暗下来，懋德起草了遗表，一会儿大风刮起来，树木都给拔了起来，风尘四起。
English: On the third day, as the sky darkened during the day, Zheng De drafted the will. A moment later, a gale blew up, trees were uprooted, and wind and dust were everywhere.

古文：调张雄守大南门，雄已缒城出降，语其党曰： 城东南角楼，火器火药皆在，我下即焚楼。 
现代文：懋德调张雄来把守大南门，可是张雄已经从城头上吊下，出去投降了，临走对他的同伙说： 城东南的角楼里装着全部的火药、火器，我下去后你们把楼烧了。 
English: Zhai De transferred Zhang Xiong to guard the Great South Gate, but Zhang Xiong had already been hanged from the top of the castle, went out and surrendered. Before leaving, he said to his companions: The corner tower in the southeast of the city contains all the gunpowder and firearms. After I go down, you will burn the building.

古文：夜中火起，风转烈，守者皆散。
现代文：夜间大火烧起来，风也越来越大，守城的人都逃散了。
English: During the night, a fire broke out and the wind got stronger. The defenders of the city fled.

古文：贼登城，懋德北面再拜，出遗表付友人贾士璋间道达京师，语人曰： 吾学道有年，已勘了死生，今日吾致命时也。 
现代文：贼兵登上城墙，懋德朝着北面拜了两拜，拿出遗表交给友人贾士璋，要他从小路上送往京师。对人说： 我学道多年，已经看破了生与死，今天就是我结束生命的时候了。 
English: When the robber soldiers climbed the city wall, Xingde bowed twice to the north, took out his watch and gave it to his friend Jia Shijun, asking him to take it to Beijing from the path. He said to the man: "I have been studying Tao for many years, I have seen through life and death, today is the time for me to end my life."

古文：即自刭，麾下持之。
现代文：接着就想自杀，部下抓着他的手臂阻止他。
English: He then tried to commit suicide and his men grabbed his arm to stop him.

古文：时盛请下城巷战，顾懋德曰： 上马。 懋德上马，时盛持矛突杀贼数十人。
现代文：时盛请他下城墙来进行巷战，回头叫他说 上马 ，懋德上了马，时盛手持长矛冲杀，杀了几十个贼兵。
English: Tokimori invited him to come down from the city wall to fight in the streets, and told him to get on a horse, so he did. Armed with a spear, Tokimori charged and killed dozens of bandits.

古文：至炭市口，贼骑充斥，时盛呼曰： 出西门。 懋德遽下马曰： 我当死封疆，诸君自去。 
现代文：到炭市口时，贼寇的骑兵充斥，时盛喊道 冲出西门 ，懋德突然下马说： 我应当为领土而死，你们自己走吧！ 
English: When they arrived at the mouth of the coal market, the cavalry of the bandits was in full swing. Shisheng shouted and rushed out of the West Gate. Xingde suddenly dismounted and said: I should die for the territory, you can go yourselves!

古文：众复拥懋德上马，至水西门。懋德叱曰： 诸君欲陷我不忠耶！ 
现代文：大家又拥着他上了马，走到水西门，懋德喝斥道： 你们想陷我于不忠吗！ 
English: They all hugged him again, mounted their horses, and walked to the West Gate of the Water Gate. Shun De shouted: "Do you want to trap me in infidelity?"

古文：复下马，据地坐。
现代文：又下马坐在地上不走了。
English: He dismounted again, sat on the ground and did not move.

古文：时盛已出城，杀妻子，还顾不见，复斫门入，语懋德曰： 请与公俱死。 
现代文：时盛已杀出了城门，杀掉了妻子、儿女，回头看时不见了懋德，又打开城门进来，对懋德说： 让我跟先生一起去死吧！ 
English: Tokimori had already broken down the city gate, killed his wife and children, and when he looked back, Shide was gone. He opened the city gate again and said to Shide, "Let me die with my master!"

古文：遂偕至三立祠。
现代文：于是他们一起来到三立祠。
English: So they came to the Three-tiered Ancestral Hall together.

古文：懋德就缢未绝，时盛释甲加其肩，乃绝。
现代文：懋德自缢没断气，时盛解下铠甲在他肩上砸了一下，懋德才断了气。
English: Xingde didn't give up his breath, but when Shengde took off his armor, the armor smashed him on the shoulder, and only then did Xingde lose his breath.

古文：时盛取弓弦自经。
现代文：时盛取下弓弦自缢死了。
English: Tokimori took off his bowstring and strangled himself to death.

古文：建极危坐公堂，贼拥之见自成，不屈，将斩之。
现代文：建极端坐在公堂之上，贼兵把他带去见自成，建极不肯屈服，自成打算斩他。
English: Jian Qi sat on the public hall, the robber soldiers took him to see Zicheng, Jian Qi refused to give in, Zicheng planned to behead him.

古文：下阶呼万岁者再，曰： 臣失守封疆，死有余罪。 
现代文：建极到阶下喊叫了两声万岁，说： 臣失守封疆，死有余罪。 
English: Jian Ji shouted "long live" twice to his subordinates, saying: "If a vassal fails to defend a fenced-in territory, he is guilty of death."

古文：自成以为呼己也，曳还。
现代文：自成还以为他是喊自己，又把他拖了回来。
English: Zicheng thought he was calling for him and dragged him back.

古文：建极瞋目曰： 我呼大明皇帝，宁呼贼耶！ 
现代文：建极圆睁双眼： 我是喊大明皇帝，难道我喊你这个贼吗？ 
English: Jian Jie opened his eyes wide. "I am calling for Emperor Daming, am I calling you a thief?"

古文：立射杀之。
现代文：自成立即射死了他。
English: Shot him in the foot from the start.

古文：时自成执晋王，据王宫云。
现代文：当时李自成活捉了晋王，占领了王宫。
English: At that time, Li Zicheng captured the king of Jin alive and occupied the royal palace.

古文：文炳被杀，妻赵、妾李亦投井死，子兆梦甫数岁，贼掠去。
现代文：文炳被杀，他的妻子赵氏、妾李氏也投井死了，他的儿子兆梦才几岁，也被贼兵抢走了。
English: Wen Rong was killed, his wife Zhao and his concubine Li also died in the well, and his son Zhao Meng, who was only a few years old, was also snatched away by the bandits.

古文：士民以其忠臣子也，赎而归之。
现代文：当地士绅、百姓认为他是忠臣之子，把他赎出来送回家乡去了。
English: The local gentry and people thought that he was the son of a loyal subject, so they ransomed him and sent him back to his hometown.

古文：欲降刚中，不从，杀之。首即堕，复跃起丈余，贼皆辟易。
现代文：贼寇想招降刚中，刚中不从，贼兵杀掉了他，刚中的人头被砍下后，又跳起一丈多高，贼兵都吓得赶快躲避。
English: The bandit wanted to recruit the middle-aged man, but the middle-aged man did not agree, so the bandit killed him. After the middle-aged man's head was cut off, he jumped as high as he could, and the bandit soldiers were so scared that they quickly hid.

古文：贼适得新刀，拱辰睨之。问： 何睨！ 
现代文：一个贼兵刚得到一把新刀，拱辰斜眼瞅着，贼兵问他 ：瞅什么？ 
English: A thief-soldier had just got a new knife, and he was squinting his eyes. The thief-soldier asked him: "What?

古文：曰： 欲得此斫头耳。 
现代文：拱辰说 ：想用它来砍下我的头。 
English: Gong Chen said, "I want to use it to cut off my head."

古文：遂取斩之。
现代文：贼兵于是拔刀杀了他。
English: The bandits then drew their swords and killed him.

古文：康周巷战死，志泰不食死。
现代文：康周在巷战中死去，志泰绝食死了。
English: Kang Zhou died in a street fight, and Zhitai died of starvation.

古文：自懋德而下，太原死事凡四十有六人，贼皆尸之城上。
现代文：从懋德往下，太原死难的官员共有四十六个人，贼兵把他们的尸体都挂在城墙上。
English: From Shunde downwards, there were a total of forty-six officials who died in Taiyuan. The robber soldiers hung their bodies on the city wall.

古文：自成恨懋德之不降也，验其尸，以刃断颈而去。
现代文：自成恨懋德不投降，检验他的尸体时用刀砍下他的头拿走了。
English: Since he did not surrender, he cut off his head with a knife and took it away when his body was examined.

古文：福王时，以懋德不守河为失策，乃谥忠襄，赐祭葬而不予赠荫，余赐恤有差。
现代文：福王在位时，朝廷认为懋德不守卫黄河是个失策，所以谥他为忠襄，赐予祭葬，但不给他追赠、荫封。
English: When King Fu was on the throne, the imperial court thought that it was a mistake for Zhengde not to guard the Yellow River, so they treated him as a loyal brother and gave him a funeral, but did not give him a posthumous gift or a shaded seal.

古文：州人祠祀之。
现代文：其他人程度不等地给予赏赐和抚恤。
English: Others give rewards and pensions to varying degrees.

