古文：晋侯使随会聘于周，定王享之肴烝，原公相礼。
现代文：晋景公派遣随会出使王室，周定王用肴烝宴请他，大臣原公作陪。
English: Prince Jinjing dispatched a royal envoy to attend the meeting. King Zhou Ding invited him to a banquet, and Minister Yuan Gong accompanied him.

古文：范子私于原公，曰： 吾闻王室之礼无毁折，今此何礼也？ 
现代文：随会私下对原公说： 我听说王室的礼宴是不毁折牲体的，现在这个事什么礼节呢？ 
English: Privately, a member of the entourage said to the former emperor: I heard that the royal banquet does not destroy animals, so what is the etiquette now?

古文：王见其语，召原公而问之，原公以告。
现代文：定王看到他们在交谈，便叫来原公询问，原公把随会说的话告诉了定王。
English: When King Sadao saw them talking, he called the former lord to inquire. The former lord told King Sadao what he had said.

古文：王召士季，曰： 子弗闻乎，褅郊之事则有全烝，王公立饫则有房烝，亲戚宴飨则有肴烝。
现代文：定王叫来随会，对他说： 您没有听过吗，褅郊祀典有全烝，王公宴享有房烝，招待亲戚则有肴烝。
English: King Sadao was called to attend the meeting and said to him, "Didn't you hear that the suburb's religious ceremony has a full banquet, the king's banquet has a banquet hall, and there is a banquet hall for inviting relatives.

古文：今女非他也，而叔父使士季实来修旧德，以奖王室。
现代文：今日您不是外人，是晋侯派来重申晋与王室的友好关系，辅助我们周王室。
English: Today, you are not an outsider, you are sent by the prince of Jin to reaffirm the friendly relationship between Jin and the royal family, and to assist us in the Zhou royal family.

古文：唯是先王之宴礼，欲以贻女。
现代文：所以用先王的宴饮之礼，来款待您。
English: Therefore, we will treat you with the hospitality of the former king's banquet.

古文：余一人敢设饫褅焉，忠非亲礼，而干旧职，以乱前好？
现代文：我怎么敢设全烝、房烝呢，它虽然丰富却不是亲戚宴享之礼，而且还违背了成例，损害了过去的友好关系。
English: How dare I set up a full table and a banquet table, which, although rich, is not a gift for relatives to enjoy, but also violates the precedent and damages the past friendly relations.

古文：且唯戎狄则有体荐。
现代文：王室只有招待戎狄之人时才用全牲。
English: The royal family only uses the full amount when they invite someone from the military.

古文：夫戎、狄，冒没轻儳，贪而不让。
现代文：戎狄之人轻率而不修边幅，贪心而不讲礼让。
English: The people of Eun Di are imprudent and not neat, greedy and not courteous.

古文：其血气不治，若禽兽焉。
现代文：这种人的素质如果不加以调教，就会像禽兽一般。
English: If the quality of this kind of person is not adjusted, it will be like an animal.

古文：其适来班贡，不俟馨香嘉味，故坐诸门外而使舌人体委与之。
现代文：他们来献纳贡赋时，不必用精致的酒食，所以让他们坐在门外而由舌人把全牲给他们食用。
English: When they came to pay tribute, they did not have to use fine wine and food, so let them sit outside the door and let the tongmen give them the whole animal to eat.

古文：女今我王室之一二兄弟，以时相见，将和协典礼，以示民训则，无亦择其柔嘉，选其馨香，洁其酒醴，品其百笾，修其簠簋，奉其牺象，出其樽彝，陈其鼎俎，净其巾幂，敬其祓除，体解节折而共饮食之。
现代文：现在你们晋国是王室的兄弟，按规定来朝见天子，所以要用适宜的典礼招待，以此给人们做个好榜样，因而择取了鲜美的牲肉，选用了芬香的配料，精制了甜醇的酒醴，配备了佐餐的果品，备下了簠簋，捧来了牺象，抬出了樽彝，安放了鼎俎，洗净了巾幂，恭敬地清扫了殿堂，切好了牲肉而一起来宴饮享用。
English: Now, you Jin are brothers of the royal family, and you have come to see the emperor according to regulations. Therefore, you should invite people with a suitable ceremony to set a good example for people. Therefore, you have selected delicious livestock meat, selected fragrant ingredients, refined sweet and sour wine, equipped with fruits to accompany the meal, prepared the yakitori, brought the sacrificial elephant, lifted out the barrel, placed the lid, washed the napkin, respectfully cleaned the hall, cut the livestock and come together to feast and enjoy.

古文：于是乎折俎加豆，酬币宴货，以示容合好，胡有孑然其郊戎狄也？
现代文：于是就有了待客的礼仪，酬宾的礼物，用以表示亲近友好，怎么能像对待戎狄那样把全牲端出来呢？
English: So there was the etiquette of hospitality, the gift of the honored guest, used to express closeness and friendship, how can you bring out the whole animal as you do with the soldiers?

古文： 夫王公诸侯之有饫也，将以讲事成章，建大德、昭大物也，故立成礼烝而已。
现代文： 宴请王公诸侯有房烝，是要解决军国大事，建立大功勋、表彰大事物，所以站着享用半牲而已。
English: The purpose of the banquet for princes and lords is to solve military and national affairs, establish great achievements, and commend great things, so it is only a half-sacrifice to stand and enjoy it.

古文：饫以显物，宴以合好，故岁饫不倦，时宴不淫，月会、旬修、日完不忘。
现代文：半牲表示具备礼仪，宴饮表示亲密融洽，所以每年一次聚会不觉厌倦，每季一次宴饮不觉过份，每月的统计、每旬的事务、每天的工作不致荒废。
English: Half-sacrifice indicates having etiquette, feasting indicates intimacy and harmony, so a gathering once a year does not feel tired, a banquet once a season does not feel excessive, monthly statistics, seasonal affairs, and daily work will not be wasted.

古文：服物昭庸，采饰显明，文章比象，周旋序顺，容貌有崇，威仪有则，五味实气，五色精心，五声昭德，五义纪宜，饮食可飨，和同可观，财用可嘉，则顺而德建。
现代文：服饰可以表明功绩，色彩可以显示德行，纹饰可以比拟物象，仪节可以序次尊卑，礼容具有尊严，威仪具有法度，肴食的五味充实气志，器物的五色净化心灵，乐舞的五声昭示道德，礼仪的五义纲纪行为，饮食可口，情谊可观，酬礼可嘉，法度得以推行而道德得以建立。
English: Clothing can show merit, color can show virtue, decoration can be compared to objects, ceremonies can be ranked in order of superiority and inferiority, etiquette has dignity, dignity has rules, the five flavors of food and drink enrich the spirit, the five colors of utensils purify the soul, the five voices of music and dance show morality, the five meanings of etiquette discipline behavior, food is delicious, friendship is admirable, reward is commendable, laws can be implemented and morality can be established.

古文：古之善礼者，将焉用全烝？ 
现代文：古代娴于礼仪的人，哪里要用全牲呢？ 
English: The ancient people who were obsessed with etiquette, where would they use the whole animal?

古文：武子遂不敢对而退。
现代文：随会于是不敢对答而告退。
English: The party then retreated, not daring to answer.

古文：归乃讲聚三代之典礼，于是乎修执秩以为晋法。
现代文：回国后讲习汇编夏、殷、周三代的典礼，恢复了晋文公所制订的执秩之法作为晋国的法度。
English: After returning to China, the workshop compiled the ceremonies of Xia, Yin, and the third generation, and restored the law of practicing rank as the law of the Jin Dynasty.

