古文：封敖韦温，字弘育，京兆人。
现代文：韦温字弘育，京兆人。
English: Wei Wen, also known as Hong Yu, was born in Beijing.

古文：祖肇，吏部侍郎。
现代文：祖父韦肇，吏部侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Wei Zhao, was a chamberlain in the cadre department.

古文：父绶，德宗朝翰林学士，以散骑常侍致仕。
现代文：父韦绶，德宗朝翰林学士，以散骑常侍官职退休。
English: His father Wei Wei, a scholar of the German School of Hanlin, retired as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：绶弟贯之，宪宗朝宰相，自有传。
现代文：韦绶之弟韦贯之，宪宗朝宰相，自己有传。
English: Wei Gangzhi, the younger brother of Wei Xuan, was the prime minister of the Qianzong Dynasty, and has a legend of his own.

古文：温七岁时，日念《毛诗》一卷。
现代文：韦温七岁时，每日念《毛诗》一卷。
English: When Wei Wen was seven years old, he read a volume of "Mao Poetry" every day.

古文：年十一岁，应两经举登第。释褐太常寺奉礼郎。
现代文：年十一岁，应两经科考登第，经吏部选拔授太常寺奉礼郎。
English: At the age of eleven, he passed two examinations in science and engineering, and was selected by the cadre department to be awarded the title of Bureiros of Daijo-ji Temple.

古文：以书判拔萃，调补秘书省校书郎。
现代文：以书、判两项出类拔萃，调补秘书省校书郎。
English: With the book and the sentence, the two are outstanding, and the secretary is the provincial school librarian.

古文：时绶致仕田园，闻温登第，愕然曰： 判入高等，在群士之上，得非交结权幸而致耶？ 
现代文：这时韦绶已归居田园，得知韦温登第，吃惊地说： 录入高等，在群士之上，莫非交结权贵而得中吗？ 
English: At this time, Wei Wei had returned to the countryside. When he learned of Wei Wen's ascension, he was surprised and said: Entering higher education, above the crowd, isn't it the intersection of power and nobility?

古文：令设席于廷，自出判目试两节。
现代文：令人在厅堂摆设宴席，亲自出判目试题两节。
English: He set up a banquet table in the hall and personally gave out two sections of the exam questions.

古文：温命笔即成，绶喜曰： 此无愧也！ 
现代文：韦温提笔即写成，韦绶高兴地说： 这就毫无愧色呀。 
English: When Wei Wen picked up the pen and started to write, Wei Yao said happily: This is nothing to be ashamed of.

古文：调授咸阳尉。
现代文：韦温调授咸阳尉。
English: Wei Wen transferred Lieutenant Xianyang.

古文：入为监察御史，以父在田里，宪府礼拘，难于省谒，不拜。
现代文：入朝授监察御史，因其父在家乡，御史府衙礼法谨严，难于回乡探望，便推辞不受。
English: Since his father was in his hometown and the etiquette of the Imperial Household Agency was very strict, it was difficult for him to visit his hometown, so he was not rejected.

古文：换著作郎，一谢即还。
现代文：改授著作郎，谢恩之后立即还乡，服侍患病的父亲。
English: He was reclassified as a writer, and immediately after Shane, he returned to his hometown to serve his ailing father.

古文：侍省父疾，温侍医药，衣不解带，垂二十年。
现代文：韦温亲自侍候医药，衣不解带，将近二十年。
English: Wei Wen has been personally serving medicine for nearly 20 years.

古文：父忧，毁瘠逾制。
现代文：父亲去世，韦温因忧伤过度而瘦弱不堪，以致超过请假期限。
English: When his father died, Waywin was so grief-stricken and exhausted that he overstayed his leave.

古文：免丧，久之为右补阙，忠鲠救时。
现代文：服丧期满，过了许久授为右补阙，为人忠诚鲠直，一心匡救时世。
English: At the end of the mourning period, after a long time, he was awarded the Right Complementary Medal, was loyal and upright, and was determined to save the world.

古文：宋申锡被诬，温倡言曰： 宋公履行有素，身居台辅，不当有此，是奸人陷害也。
现代文：宋申锡被诬告，韦温倡议道： 宋公行事素来有准则，身居台辅之位，不可能干这种事，是奸人陷害他。
English: Song Shensi was falsely accused, Wei Wen advocated: Song Gong has always acted according to the rules, he is a Taiwanese assistant, it is impossible to do such a thing, it is a trickster who set him up.

古文：吾辈谏官，岂避一时之雷电，而致圣君贤相蒙蔽惑之咎耶？ 
现代文：吾辈身为谏官，难道能够躲避一时之雷电，而听任圣君贤相遭受蒙蔽困惑的灾祸吗？ 
English: Can my generation, as eunuchs, escape the lightning of the moment, and suffer the blinding perplexity of the sage?

古文：因率同列伏阁切争之，由是知名。
现代文：于是率领同列众谏官伏阁极力争辩，因此而知名。
English: As a result, he led the eunuchs of the same rank to vigorously argue with Fukaku, and thus became famous.

古文：太和五年，太庙第四、第六室缺漏，上怒，罚宗正卿李锐、将作王堪，乃诏中使鸠工补葺之。
现代文：大和五年，太庙第四、第六室缺漏破损，皇上发怒，处罚宗正卿李锐、将作王堪，并诏令中使调集工匠修葺。
English: In the 5th year of the Yamato era, the 4th and 6th rooms of the Imperial Temple were damaged by leaks and cracks. The Emperor was angry and punished Zong Zhengqing, Li Rui, and Wang Kan, and ordered the middle envoy to recruit craftsmen to repair them.

古文：温上疏曰： 臣闻吏举其职，国家所以治；事归于正，朝廷所以尊。
现代文：韦温上疏道： 臣闻官吏各尽其职，国家因此太平；国事遵循正道，朝廷因此有威信。
English: Wei Wen Shangxiao said: The vassals and officials all do their duty, so the country is peaceful; the national affairs follow the right path, so the imperial court has prestige.

古文：夫设制度，立官司，事存典故，国有经费，而最重者，奉宗庙也。
现代文：设制度，立官署，行事依典章，治国有经费，而头等大事则是祭祀宗庙。
English: A system was set up, a government office was established, procedures were carried out according to regulations, state funds were administered, and the top priority was the worship of the ancestral temple.

古文：伏以太庙当修，诏下逾月，有司弛堕，曾不加诫。
现代文：臣俯首认为，太庙理当修葺，诏下一月有余，主管官员懈怠不办，朝廷不曾予以警告。
English: The vassal bowed his head and believed that the Great Temple should have been repaired, but it had been more than a month since the edict was issued, the officials in charge were too lazy to do it, and the imperial court had not been warned.

古文：宜黜慢官，以惩不恪之罪；择可任者，责以缮完之功。
现代文：应当罢黜简慢的官员，以惩罚其渎职之罪，挑选足以信任的人，责成他完成圆满修缮的任务。
English: Slow-moving officials should be ousted to punish them for dereliction of duty, and a trustworthy person should be selected to complete the task of successful renovation.

古文：此则事归于正，吏举其职也。而圣思不劳，百职无旷。
现代文：这样才算是国事归于正道，官吏各尽其职，而圣心不用劳苦，百官无人懈怠。
English: Only in this way can the affairs of state be considered to be on the right track, with officials fulfilling their duties, while the Sacred Heart does not have to work hard, and none of the officials slack off.

古文：今慢官不恪，止于罚俸，宗庙所切，便委内臣，是许百司之官，公然废职，以宗庙之重，为陛下所私，群官有司，便同委弃。
现代文：现在简慢的官员不守其职，只处以罚俸钱，宗庙急切之事，却委托内臣。这样便是允许百官公然弃职，认为宗庙之大事不过属于陛下的私事，群官及府署，便如同遭委弃。
English: Nowadays, officials who are slow to perform their duties are only punished with a fine. Urgent matters concerning the ancestral temple are entrusted to vassals. In this way, it is permissible for officials to openly abandon their duties, believing that the important matters of the ancestral temple are nothing more than His Majesty's private affairs. Government officials and government agencies are as if they have been abandoned.

古文：此臣窃为圣朝惜此事也。
现代文：这就是臣私下为圣朝惋惜的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why I personally feel sorry for the Holy Father.

古文：事关宗庙，皆书史策，苟非旧典，不可率然。
现代文：事关宗庙，史书皆有记载，随意违背典章的事，不可轻率为之。
English: There are records in the history books about the ancestral temple, and any violation of the regulations should not be taken lightly.

古文：伏乞更下诏书，得委所司营缮，则制度不紊，官业交修。 
现代文：伏乞陛下再降诏书，委托主管官员经营修缮之事，则制度不乱，官员职守和国家事务都上了正轨。 
English: If His Majesty abdicates the imperial edict again and entrusts the competent officials with the management of the renovation, the system will not be disturbed, and the officials' duties and national affairs will be on the right track.

古文：上乃止内使。
现代文：皇上便罢止内使修缮太庙一事。
English: The emperor then stopped the envoy from repairing the ancient temple.

古文：群臣上尊号，温上疏曰： 德如三皇止称皇，功如五帝止称帝。
现代文：群臣进献皇帝尊号，韦温上疏道： 德行如三皇只称皇，功劳如五帝只称帝。
English: The group of courtiers presented the honorary title of the emperor, and Wei Wen walked up the aisle: Virtue such as the three emperors is only praised by the emperor, and merit such as the five emperors is only praised by the emperor.

古文：徽号之来，乃圣王之末事。
现代文：徽号之由来，本是古代圣王之末流小事。
English: The origin of the crest was originally a trivial matter of the last of the ancient holy kings.

古文：今岁三川水灾，江淮旱歉，恐非崇饰徽称之时。 
现代文：今年三川闹水灾，江淮因旱歉收，恐怕不是崇奉修饰徽号的时候吧。 
English: This year's floods in the Sanchuan River and the poor harvest in the Huai River due to drought, I'm afraid it's not the time to worship the decoration of the emblem.

古文：帝深嘉之，乃止。
现代文：皇上深表赞同，事便罢止。
English: The Emperor expressed his deep approval, and the matter was dropped.

古文：改侍御史。
现代文：改韦温为侍御史。
English: He changed Wei Wen to Samurai gosho.

古文：李德裕作相，迁礼部员外郎。
现代文：李德裕为宰相，韦温升为礼部员外郎。
English: Li Deyu became the prime minister, and Wei Wen was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：或以温厚于牛僧孺，言于德裕。德裕曰： 此人坚正中立，君子也。 
现代文：有人将韦温受牛僧孺器重之事告诉李德裕，李德裕道： 此人坚正不偏颇，君子啊。 
English: Someone told Li Deyu that Wei Wen received the bull from the bull-tamer. Li Deyu said, "This man is upright and unbiased, a gentleman."

古文：郑注镇凤翔，自知不为所齿，求德门弟子为参佐，请温为副使。
现代文：郑注为凤翔节度使，自知为人所不齿，寻求德高望重人家的子弟做幕僚，请求韦温为副使。
English: Zheng Zhu, as Feng Xiang's deputy envoy, knew that he was a scoundrel, and sought a highly respected family member to be an aide, and asked Wei Wen to be the deputy envoy.

古文：或以为理不可拒，拒则生患。
现代文：有人认为于理不可拒绝，拒绝则生祸患。
English: Some people think that it is unreasonable to refuse, and refusal is a disaster.

古文：温曰： 择祸莫若轻。
现代文：韦温道： 选择灾祸不如避重就轻。
English: Wei Wen Dao: It is better to choose a disaster than to avoid a disaster.

古文：拒之止于远贬，从之有不测之祸。 
现代文：拒绝至多贬谪远郡，服从会有不测之祸。 
English: At most, refusing to demote Yuyuan County, obedience will bring misfortune.

古文：郑注诛，转考功员外郎。
现代文：后郑注被诛，韦温转任考功员外郎。
English: After Zheng Zhu was executed, Wei Wen was transferred to the post of examiner.

古文：寻知制诰，召入翰林为学士。
现代文：不久知制诰，召入翰林为学士。
English: Soon after, he received his bachelor's degree and was called to Hanlin.

古文：以父职禁廷，忧畏成病，遗诫不令居禁职，恳辞不拜。
现代文：因其父当年在宫禁内任职，忧惧成病，遗训不让韦温居宫内官职，故韦温恳切推辞不受。
English: Because his father served in the imperial court that year, fearing illness, Wei Wen was not allowed to serve in the imperial court. Therefore, Wei Wen earnestly refused to resign.

古文：俄兼太子侍读，每晨至少阳院，午见庄恪太子。
现代文：不久兼任太子侍读，每日清晨至少阳院，午时见庄恪太子。
English: Soon he also served as the prince's attendant, and every morning he would visit at least Yangin, and in the afternoon he would see Zhuang Ke, the prince.

古文：温曰： 殿下盛年，宜早起，学周文王为太子，鸡鸣时问安西宫。 
现代文：韦温道： 殿下正值盛年，应早起，学周文王为太子鸡鸣时便至西宫问安。 
English: Wei Wen said: His Royal Highness is in his prime, so he should get up early. When King Wen of the Zhou Dynasty was crowing for the crown prince, he went to the West Palace to say hello.

古文：太子幼，不能行其言。
现代文：太子年幼，不能依照他的话去做。
English: The prince is young and cannot do what he says.

古文：称疾。上不悦，改太常少卿。
现代文：于是韦温称病，皇上不悦，改授他太常少卿。
English: As a result, Wei Wen claimed to be ill, the emperor was displeased, and he was reclassified as a minor lord.

古文：未几，拜给事中。
现代文：没多久，拜给事中。
English: Not long after that, it was all over.

古文：王晏平为灵武，刻削军士，赃罪发，帝以智兴之故，减死，贬官。
现代文：王晏平镇守灵武，克扣军士粮饷，贪赃之罪被揭发，皇上因其父王智兴的缘故，免其死罪，贬官。
English: Wang Qiping kept the spirit of martial arts, defeated the sergeant Guan Yu, the crime of embezzlement was exposed, and the emperor, because of his father Wang Zhixing, was exempted from the death penalty and demoted.

古文：温三封诏书，文宗深奖之。
现代文：韦温三次封书上奏，文宗深为褒奖。
English: Wei Wen was awarded the prize for the third time, and Wen Zong Sheng was commended.

古文：庄恪得罪，召百僚谕之。温曰： 太子年幼，陛下训之不早，到此非独太子之过。 
现代文：庄恪太子获罪，皇上召集百官告知，韦温道： 太子年幼，陛下不早些训诫他，到这地步不只是太子的过错。 
English: When Prince Zhuang was found guilty, the emperor summoned a hundred officials to inform them, Wei Wen said: Prince is young, his majesty did not admonish him earlier, to this point is not only the fault of the prince.

古文：迁尚书右丞。
现代文：升尚书右丞。
English: He was promoted to Shoshu Ujo.

古文：吏部员外郎张文规父弘靖，长庆初在幽州为硃克融所囚；文规不时省赴，人士喧然罪之。
现代文：吏部员外郎张文规之父张弘靖，长庆初在幽州被朱克融囚禁，张文规不时前往探望，朝官舆论喧然以为此举有罪。
English: Zhang Hongjing, the father of Zhang Wenzhou, the younger brother of Zhang Wenzhou, was imprisoned by Zhu Ke Rong in Yuzhou at the beginning of the Qing Dynasty. Zhang Wenzhou visited him from time to time, and the public opinion of the imperial court loudly considered this move to be a crime.

古文：温居纲辖，首纠其事，出文规为安州刺史。
现代文：韦温身居主管职位，首先弹劾此事，结果张文规出任安州刺史。
English: Wei Wen, who was in charge of the post, first impeached the matter, and as a result, Zhang Wengui became the history of Anzhou.

古文：盐铁判官姚勖知河阴院，尝雪冤狱。盐铁使崔珙奏加酬奖，乃令权知职方员外郎。
现代文：盐铁判官姚勖掌管河阴院，曾昭雪冤狱，盐铁使崔珙奏请予以酬奖，于是诏令姚勖权知职方员外郎。
English: Salt Iron Judge Yao Jie was in charge of Heyin Prison, Zeng Zhaoxue was unjustly imprisoned, Salt Iron asked Cui Jiexiao to give him a reward, and then ordered Yao Jie Quan to know the outside party members.

古文：制出，令勖上省。温执奏曰： 国朝已来，郎官最为清选，不可以赏能吏。 
现代文：诏书发出，令姚勖上京入尚书省，韦温启奏道： 国朝以来，郎官最须精选，不可用作对于有才能的官吏的赏赐。 
English: An imperial edict was issued, ordering Yao Jun to go to Beijing and enter Shangshu Province. Wei Wen made a speech: Since the Qing Dynasty, the best officials must be carefully selected, and it cannot be used as a reward for talented officials.

古文：上令中使宣谕，言勖能官，且放入省。
现代文：皇上令中使宣谕，说姚勖善于做官，姑且放入尚书省。
English: In the imperial edict, the envoy announced that Yao Wei was good at being an official, so he was put in the Ministry of Education.

古文：温坚执不奉诏，乃改勖检校礼部郎中。
现代文：韦温固执不奉诏命，于是改授姚勖检校礼部郎中。
English: Wei Wen stubbornly disobeyed the imperial edict, so he was reclassified as a junior member of the etiquette department of Yao Jiejing School.

古文：翌日，帝谓杨嗣复曰： 韦温不放姚勖入省，有故事否？ 
现代文：次日，皇上对杨嗣复道： 韦温不放姚勖入省，有典章依据吗？ 
English: The next day, the emperor replied to Yang Zhi: Wei Wen did not let Yao Xuan enter the province, is there any legal basis?

古文：嗣复对曰： 韦温志在铨择清流。
现代文：杨嗣复回答道： 韦温志在选拔德高望重的清流之士。
English: Yang Zifu replied: Wei Wenzhi is in the process of selecting a highly respected person.

古文：然姚勖士行无玷，梁公元崇之孙，自殿中判盐铁案，陛下奖之，宜也。
现代文：然而姚勖作为士大夫品行无任何污点，又是梁公元崇之孙，在殿中省判盐铁案，陛下奖励他，是应该的。
English: However, Yao Wei, as a scholar-official, has no stain on his character, and he is also the grandson of Liang B.D. Chong, who was awarded the salt and iron case in the middle of the palace, and it is appropriate for His Majesty to reward him.

古文：若人有吏能，不入清流，孰为陛下当烦剧者？
现代文：假若一个人有做官的才干，而不让他入清流，那谁还愿替陛下承担烦琐艰巨的事务呢？
English: If a man has the ability to be an official, but does not let him go into the clear stream, then who would like to take on the tedious and arduous tasks for His Majesty?

古文：此衰晋之风也。 
现代文：这是衰微之晋国的风气呀。 
English: This is the culture of a declining Jin dynasty.

古文：上素重温，亦不夺其操，出为陕虢观察使。
现代文：皇上素来器重韦温，亦不强迫他改变意志，命他出任陕虢观察使。
English: The emperor always respected Wei Wen, and did not force him to change his will, and ordered him to serve as a Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：武宗即位，李德裕用事，召拜吏部侍郎，欲引以为相。
现代文：武宗即位，李德裕执政，召韦温入朝拜吏部侍郎，欲推荐他做宰相。
English: When Emperor Wu Zong ascended the throne and Li Deyu was in power, he invited Wei Wen to become an attendant of the Imperial Household Agency and wanted to recommend him as prime minister.

古文：时李汉以家行不谨，贬汾州司马。温从容白德裕曰： 李汉不为相公所知，昨以不孝之罪绌免，乞加按问。 
现代文：这时李汉因在家中行为不慎，贬为汾州司马，韦温从容禀告李德裕道： 李汉不为相公所了解，昨日因不孝之罪被黜免，乞请审察讯问。 
English: At this time, Li Han was demoted to Zhangzhou Sima because of his careless behavior at home. Wei Wen calmly told Li Deyu: Li Han is not understood by the public, he was pardoned yesterday for the crime of filial piety, please investigate and interrogate.

古文：德裕曰： 亲情耶？ 
现代文：李德裕问： 你同他有亲戚之情吗？ 
English: Li Deyu asked: Are you related to him?

古文：温曰： 虽非亲昵，久相知耳。 
现代文：韦温答道： 虽非十分亲密，也是久已相知了。 
English: Wei Wen replied: Although they are not very close, they have known each other for a long time.

古文：德裕不悦。
现代文：李德裕听了不高兴。
English: Li Deyu was not happy to hear this.

古文：居无何，出温为宣歙观察使，辟郑处诲为观察判官，德裕愈不悦。
现代文：过了不久，命韦温出任宣歙观察使，征聘郑处诲为观察判官。李德裕越发不高兴。
English: Soon after, Wei Wen was appointed as the Xuanwu observation envoy, and Zheng Shizhen was recruited as the observation judge. Li Deyu became more and more unhappy.

古文：池州人讼郡守，温按之无状，杖杀之。
现代文：池州人控告都守，韦温审讯未见证据，将告状人杖杀。
English: The people of Chizhou all kept their accusations, and the Weiwen trial found no evidence, and the accuser was killed.

古文：明年，疡生于首，谓爱婿张复鲁曰： 予任校书郎时，梦二黄衣人赍符来追，及浐，将渡，一人续至曰： 彼坟至大，功须万日。 
现代文：次年，韦温头部生痈疮，对爱婿张复鲁道： 我任校书郎时，梦见两个黄衣人持符来追，至水，正欲涉渡，一人追到身后说： 那座坟特别大，须费工万日。 
English: The following year, Wei Wen, who had acne on his head, said to his beloved son-in-law Zhang Fulu: When I was a school librarian, I dreamed of two yellow-clad people chasing me with flags. When I reached the water, I was about to wade across. One of them chased me and said: That grave is extraordinarily large. It will take a lot of work.

古文：遂不涉而寤。
现代文：于是未涉水便醒了。
English: As a result, he woke up without wading into the water.

古文：计今万日矣，与公诀矣。 
现代文：算来至今已是万日，要同你诀别了。 
English: It's been ten thousand days so far, and I have to say goodbye to you.

古文：明日卒，赠工部尚书，谥曰孝。
现代文：次日去世，追赠工部尚书，谥号为 孝 。
English: He died the next day and was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. His posthumous name was Xiao.

古文：温在朝时，与李珏、杨嗣复周旋。
现代文：韦温在朝时，同李珏、杨嗣复多打交道。
English: When Wei Wen was in the imperial court, he had more dealings with Li Xi and Yang Shifu.

古文：及杨、李祸作，叹曰： 杨三、李七若取我语，岂至是耶！ 
现代文：及至杨、李之祸发生，韦温叹息道： 杨三、李七若听我的话，怎会到这地步呢！ 
English: When the calamity of Yang and Li happened, Wei Wen sighed and said: Yang San and Li Qiye, if you listen to me, how did you get to this stage!

古文：初温以杨、李与德裕交怨，及居位，温劝杨、李征用德裕，释憾解愠。二人不能用，故及祸。
现代文：当初韦温因杨、李与李德裕结怨，至杨、李居相位，韦温劝杨、李召用李德裕，以化解怨恨，二人不能听取，所以遭祸。
English: At the beginning, Wei Wen had a grudge against Yang, Li and Li Deyu. When Yang and Li Ju met, Wei Wen advised Yang and Li to call Li Deyu to resolve the grudge. The two could not listen, so they were in trouble.

古文：温无子，女适薛蒙，善著文，续曹大家《女训》十二章，士族传写，行于时。
现代文：韦温无子，女儿嫁给薛蒙，善做文章，续写曹大家《女训》十二章，被士大夫传抄，流行于世。
English: Wei Wen without children, his daughter married to Xue Meng, good at writing articles, continued to write twelve chapters of Cao everyone's "Women's Discipline," which was copied by scholars and popular in the world.

古文：温刚肠寡合，人多疏简，唯与常侍萧祐善。
现代文：韦温心肠刚直很少与人交往，人们多疏远而怠慢他，惟独与常侍萧佑相友善。
English: Wei Wen, with a straightforward heart, rarely interacts with people. People often alienate and neglect him. However, he is friendly with his regular attendant Xiao Yu.

