古文：罗公远仆仆先生蓝采和
现代文：罗公远仆仆先生蓝采和
English: Luo Gongyuan's servant Mr. Lan Zhe and

古文：罗公远
现代文：罗公远
English: Luo Gongyuan

古文：罗公远，本鄂州人也。
现代文：罗公远本是鄂州人。
English: Luo Gongyuan is originally from Ezhou.

古文：刺史春设，观者倾郡。
现代文：鄂州刺史春天设宴，全郡的人都来观看。
English: Ezhou Zishi held a banquet in the spring, and people from all over the county came to watch.

古文：有一白衣人长丈余，貌甚异，随群众而至，门卫者皆怪之。
现代文：有一个一丈多高的穿白衣服的人，相貌很是与众不同，也随着人群来了。守门的人都认为他挺怪。
English: A man of great height, dressed in white, and very different in appearance, also came with the crowd, and the gatekeepers thought him very strange.

古文：俄有小童傍过，叱曰： 汝何故离本处，惊怖官司耶？
现代文：不一会儿有一个小童从旁边经过，呵斥道： 你为什么离开你的本处，来惊吓官吏们呢？
English: After a while, a little boy passed by and shouted: "Why did you leave your place to scare the officials?"

古文：不速去！ 
现代文：还不快离开！ 
English: Still not happy to leave!

古文：其人遂摄衣而走。
现代文：那人就提着衣服跑了。
English: The man took his clothes and ran away.

古文：吏乃擒小童至宴所，具白于刺史。
现代文：官吏就把小童捉住，送到举行宴会的地方，详细向刺史报告了。
English: The official caught the child, took him to the place where the banquet was held, and reported the details to the magistrate.

古文：刺史问其姓名。
现代文：刺史问小童的姓名。
English: Sashi asked the boy's name.

古文：云： 姓罗，名公远，自幼好道术，适见守江龙上岸看，某趣令回。 
现代文：小童说： 姓罗，名公远，从小喜好道术。刚才发现守江龙上岸来看热闹，我急忙赶来让他回去。 
English: The child said, "My family name is Luo, my father's name is Yuan, and I've been fond of Taoism since I was a child. I just found out that Guo Jianglong came ashore to watch the fun, so I hurried to let him go back.

古文：刺史不信曰： 须令我见本形。 
现代文：刺史不信，说： 必须让我看到他的原形我才相信。 
English: Tashi doesn't believe it, saying: I have to see him in his original form before I believe.

古文：曰： 请俟后日。 
现代文：罗公远说： 请等到后天。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said: Please wait until the day after tomorrow.

古文：至期，于水滨作一小坑，深才一尺，去岸丈余，引水入。
现代文：到了第三天，他在水边挖了一个小坑，才一尺深，离岸一丈多远。他把水引到坑里来。
English: On the third day, he dug a small hole at the water's edge, just a foot deep and about a foot from the shore, and diverted the water into the hole.

古文：刺史与郡人并看。
现代文：刺史和郡中的人都来看。
English: Tashi and everyone in the county came to see it.

古文：逡巡，有鱼白色，长五六寸，随流而至，腾跃渐大，青烟如线，起自坎中。
现代文：不长时间，有一条白色的鱼，五六寸长，随着水流来到，越腾跃越大。有一缕线一样的青烟从坑中升起。
English: Soon there was a white fish, five or six inches long, leaping higher and higher as the current came. A wisp of blue smoke rose from the pit like a thread.

古文：少顷，黑气满空，咫尺不辨。
现代文：一会儿，黑气满天，咫尺之间也看不清东西。
English: For a moment, the sky is black and you can't see anything clearly.

古文：公远曰： 可以上津亭矣。 
现代文：罗公远说： 大家可以到津亭上去了。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said: Everyone can go up to Tingting.

古文：未至，电光注雨如泻，须臾即定。
现代文：大家还没走到津亭，雷电大作，大雨如泻。
English: We haven't even made it to Tientsin yet, and there's thunder and lightning and torrential rain.

古文：见一大白龙于江心，头与云连，食顷方灭。
现代文：霎时便平定下来，有一条大白龙出现在江心，头和云相连接，一顿饭的功夫才消失。
English: At dusk, it calmed down. A large white dragon appeared in the middle of the river. Its head was connected to the clouds, and the effort of a meal disappeared.

古文：时玄宗酷好仙术。刺史具表其事以进。
现代文：那时玄宗非常喜欢仙术，刺史把这事详细写明禀报并把罗公远送到京城。
English: At that time, Xuanzong was very fond of magic, and Zishi wrote about it in detail and sent Luo Gong to the capital.

古文：时玄宗与张果、叶法善棋。
现代文：当时唐玄宗与张果、叶法善下棋。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong played chess with Zhang Guo and Ye Fao Shan.

古文：二人见之大笑曰： 村童事亦何解。 
现代文：张、叶二人见了罗公远大笑道： 小小村童，他怎知龙的事！ 
English: Zhang and Ye both laughed out loud when they saw Luo Gongyuan: Little village boy, how does he know about dragons!

古文：乃各握棋子十数枚，问曰： 此有何物？ 
现代文：二人就各握了十几个棋子，问道： 这手里有什么东西？ 
English: The two of them each grabbed a dozen pieces and asked, "What's in this hand?"

古文：曰： 空手。 
现代文：罗公远说： 是空手，什么也没有！ 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "It's empty-handed, it's nothing!"

古文：及开果无，并在公远处，方大骇异。
现代文：等张开手一看，果然什么也没有。棋子都到了罗公远那里。二人这才感到很惊异。
English: When they opened their hands, there was nothing. The pieces had all gone to Luo Gongyuan's place. The two of them were very surprised.

古文：令与张、叶等齿坐。
现代文：皇上让罗公远与张、叶二人平起平坐。
English: The emperor allowed Luo Gongyuan to sit on an equal footing with Zhang and Ye.

古文：剑南有果初进，名为日熟子，张与叶以术取，每过午必至。
现代文：那一天，天黑都没送到。张、叶二人互相看着说： 是不是罗公远干的？ 
English: On that day, it did not get dark. Zhang and Ye looked at each other and said: Did Luo Gong work far away?

古文：其日，暨夜都不到，相顾而语曰： 莫是罗君否。 时天寒围炉，公远笑，于火中素树一箸，及此除之，遂至。
现代文：当时天很冷，大家围着火炉。罗公远笑。在火中平常立着一根筷子，到这时拔掉它，于是日熟子就送来了。
English: At that time, it was very cold, and everyone was gathered around the stove. Luo Gong was far away, laughing. In the fire, there was usually a chopstick, and at this time, it was pulled out, so the sun-dried bean sprouts were sent.

古文：叶诘使者。
现代文：叶法善盘问使者。
English: Ye Fa-zen cross-examined the messenger.

古文：云欲到京，焰火亘天，无路可过；适火歇，方得度。
现代文：使者说，要到京的时候，焰火连天，无路可过，刚才火停了，才能过来。
English: The emissary said that when he wanted to get to Beijing, the fireworks would be going off all the time, and there was no way to get past them. The fire had just stopped before he could get here.

古文：从此众皆敬伏。
现代文：从此，众人都敬佩他，服气他。
English: From then on, everyone admired him and obeyed him.

古文：开元中，中秋望夜，时玄宗于宫中玩月。公远奏曰： 陛下莫要至月中看否。 
现代文：开元年间，八月十五的晚上，当时唐玄宗在宫中赏月，罗公远奏道： 陛下想不想到月中看看呢？ 
English: During the first year of the Republic of China, on the evening of August 15th, when Tang Xuan Zong was admiring the moon in the palace, Luo Gongyuan made a speech: Would Your Majesty like to see the moon?

古文：乃取拄杖，向空掷之，化为大桥，其色如银，请玄宗同登。约行数十里，精光夺目，寒色侵人，遂至大城阙。
现代文：于是就拿起手杖，向空中扔去。手杖变成大桥，桥的颜色像银。罗公远请玄宗一块登上大桥，大约走了几十里，感到精光耀眼，寒气侵人，就来到一个大城阙下。
English: So he picked up his cane and threw it into the air. The cane turned into a bridge, and the color of the bridge was like silver. Luo Gongyuan invited Xuan Zong to board the bridge together. After walking for about dozens of miles, feeling bright and dazzling, and feeling cold, he came to the foot of a big city.

古文：公远曰： 此月宫也。 
现代文：罗公远说： 这就是月宫。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "This is the Moon Palace."

古文：见仙女数百，皆素练宽衣，舞于广庭。
现代文：有几百位仙女，都穿白绢宽袖衣服，在广庭中跳舞。
English: There are hundreds of fairies, all dressed in white satin wide-sleeved clothes, dancing in the courtyard.

古文：玄宗问曰： 此何曲也？ 
现代文：玄宗问道： 这是什么乐曲？ 
English: Xuanzong asked, "What kind of music is this?"

古文：曰： 霓裳羽衣也。 
现代文：罗公远说： 是《霓裳羽衣曲》。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "It's "Song of the Feathers."

古文：玄宗密记其声调，遂回，却顾其桥，随步而灭。
现代文：玄宗暗中记下那乐曲的声调，于是就回来了。回头看那桥，随着脚步消逝。
English: Xuanzong secretly wrote down the melody of the song and then returned, looking back at the bridge as it disappeared with his footsteps.

古文：且召伶官，依其声调作霓裳羽衣曲。
现代文：玄宗召来乐官，按照他记下来的声调谱成了《霓裳羽衣曲》。
English: Xuanzong summoned a music official, and in accordance with the tone he wrote down, the score became the "Cloak and Feather Dance."

古文：时武惠妃尤信金刚三藏，玄宗幸功德院，忽苦背痒。
现代文：当时为惠妃尤其相信金刚三藏。玄宗来幸功德院，忽然因为背发痒而感到难受。
English: At that time, Hui Fei especially believed in the Three Kingdoms. When Xuanzong came to the Gongde Academy, he suddenly felt uncomfortable because his back was itchy.

古文：公远折竹枝，化七宝如意以进。玄宗大悦，顾谓三藏曰： 上人能致此乎？ 
现代文：罗公远折了一根竹枝，把它变成一个七宝如意送给玄宗，玄宗很高兴，看着金刚三藏说： 你能达到这种程度吗？ 
English: Luo Gong broke a bamboo branch far away and turned it into a treasure to give to Xuanzong. Xuanzong was very happy. Looking at the Three Treasures of King Kong, he said, "Can you reach this level?"

古文：曰： 此幻化耳。臣为陛下取真物。 
现代文：金刚三藏说： 这是幻化而已，我给陛下取真的来。 
English: Kongsanzang said, "This is just a hallucination. I'm going to make it real for Your Majesty."

古文：乃袖中出七宝如意以进。
现代文：他就从袖子里取出一个七宝如意交给皇上。
English: He took out a cloisonne from his sleeve and handed it to the emperor.

古文：公远所进者，即时化为竹枝耳。
现代文：罗公远进献的那个，当时就变成了竹枝。
English: The one presented by Luo Gong became a bamboo branch.

古文：及玄宗幸东洛，武妃同行，在上阳宫麟趾殿，方将修殿，其庭有大方梁数丈，经六七尺，时公远、叶尊师、金刚三藏皆侍从焉。
现代文：等到玄宗游幸东洛，武惠妃同行，住在上阳宫麟趾殿。当时正要修殿，那院中有一根几丈长大方梁，直径六七尺。当时罗公远、叶法善、金刚三藏，都侍候跟随在左右。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong visited Dongluo, Princess Wu Hui accompanied him and stayed at the Linti Palace of Shangyang Palace. At that time, the palace was about to be renovated. In that palace, there was a large square beam with a diameter of sixty-seven feet. At that time, Luo Gongyuan, Ye Fao Zhen, and King Kong Sanzo were all waiting to follow around.

古文：玄宗谓叶尊师曰： 吾方闲闷。可试小法以为乐也？师试为朕举此方木。 
现代文：玄宗对叶法善说： 我正闲闷，可以试作一些小法术为乐趣，你可以为我举起这根方木。 
English: Xuanzong said to Ye Fasen, "I'm bored. I can try some small spells for fun. You can lift this block for me."

古文：叶受诏作法，方木一头揭数尺，而一头不起。
现代文：叶法善受皇命作法，方木一头抬起来几尺，而另一头不起来。
English: Ye Fa was good at obeying the emperor's order. One end of the square tree was raised a few feet, but the other end did not rise.

古文：玄宗曰： 师之神力，何其失耶！ 
现代文：玄宗说： 你的神力，为什么丧失了呢？ 
English: Xuanzong said, "Why did you lose your divine power?

古文：叶曰： 三藏使金刚善神，众压一头，故不举。 
现代文：叶法善说： 三藏让金刚善神一起压在一头，所以抬不起来。 
English: Ye Fa-zen said, "San Zang let King Kong Good God press down on his head together, so he couldn't lift him up.

古文：时玄宗奉道，武妃宗释，武妃颇有悦色，三藏亦阴心自欢，惟公远低头微哂。
现代文：当时玄宗信奉道教，武惠妃信仰佛教，武惠妃很高兴。三藏也暗自高兴。只有罗公远低头露出一缕讥讽的微笑。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong believed in Taoism, and Empress Wu Hui believed in Buddhism. Empress Wu Hui was very happy, and Emperor San Zang was also secretly happy. Only Emperor Luo bowed his head and revealed a wry smile.

古文：玄宗谓三藏曰： 师神咒有功，叶不能及，可为朕咒法善入澡瓶乎？ 
现代文：玄宗对金刚三藏说： 你的神咒很有功力，叶法善比不上你，你能用咒语把叶法善弄到澡瓶里去吗？ 
English: Xuanzong said to the Three Jewels of the Three Kingdoms: Your divine spell is very powerful. Ye Fa-Sin is no match for you. Can you use the spell to get Ye Fa-Sin into the bathtub?

古文：三藏受诏置瓶，使法善敷座而坐，遂咒法大佛顶真言，未终遍，叶身欻欻就瓶；不三二遍，叶举至瓶嘴；遍讫，拂然而入瓶。
现代文：三藏得到皇上的命令，放好了澡瓶，让叶法善在座位上坐好，就开始念 法大佛顶真言 咒语，还没念完一遍，叶法善的身体就慢慢靠近瓶子。不到两三遍，叶法善的身体就举到了瓶口。
English: Sanso received the emperor's order, placed the bath bottle and let Ye Fa-shan sit on the seat, and began to recite the Dharma Great Buddha's True Words and Spells. Before he had finished, Ye Fa-shan's body slowly approached the bottle. Less than two or three times, Ye Fa-shan's body was lifted to the bottle's mouth.

古文：玄宗不悦。
现代文：念完咒语，叶法善轻轻地进到瓶中。
English: After chanting the mantra, Ye Fa-zen gently entered the bottle.

古文：良久谓三藏曰： 师之功力，当得自在，既使其入，能为出乎？ 
现代文：玄宗很不高兴，许久才对三藏说： 你的功力，应该能自由自在。既然能让他进去，还能让他出来吗？ 
English: Xuanzong was very unhappy. It took him a long time to say to Sanzang, "Your gong should be able to move freely. Since you can let him in, can you let him out?"

古文：三藏曰： 是僧之本法也。 
现代文：三藏说： 这是我基本的法术。 
English: Sanzo said, "This is my basic spell.

古文：即咒之。诵佛顶真言数遍，叶都不出。
现代文：于是就念咒，念 佛顶真言 念了好几遍，都没有把叶法善念出来。
English: As a result, I recited the mantra, read the Buddha's top sermon, and read it several times, but did not recite the leaf method.

古文：玄宗曰： 朕之法师，今为三藏所咒而没，不得见矣。 
现代文：唐玄宗说： 我的法师，现在被三藏咒没了，看不到了！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: My sorcerer, now disappeared by the three Tibetan curses, I can't see him!

古文：武妃失色。
现代文：武惠妃和三藏大惊失色。
English: Princess Wu Hui and San Zang were shocked and disgraced.

古文：三藏大惧。玄宗谓公远曰： 将若之何得法善旋矣。 
现代文：唐玄宗对罗公远说： 要怎么办才能让叶法善回来呢？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said to Luo Gongyuan, "What should I do to make Ye Fa Shan come back?"

古文：公远笑曰： 法善不远。 
现代文：罗公远说： 叶法善离此不远。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said: Ye Fa Shan is not far from here.

古文：良久，高力士奏曰： 叶尊师入。 
现代文：过了一会儿，高力士奏道： 叶尊师进来了！ 
English: After a while, Gao Lixi said, "Master Ye has come in!"

古文：玄宗大惊曰： 铜瓶在此，自何所来！ 
现代文：唐玄宗大惊道： 铜瓶在这里，他是从哪儿来的？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong was shocked: The copper bottle is here, where did it come from?

古文：引入问之。对曰： 宁王邀臣吃饭，面奏的不放，臣适宁王家食讫而来，不因一咒，何以去也。 
现代文：把叶法善领进来之后一问，叶法善回答说： 宁王请我吃饭，我如面奏，你一定不肯放我去。我刚在宁王家吃完饭而来，不因为他一咒，我怎么能去呢？ 
English: After bringing Ye Fa-shin in, he asked Ye Fa-shin a question, to which Ye Fa-shin replied, "Ning Wang invited me to dinner. I'm like a musician, you won't let me go. I just came back from dinner at Ning Wang's house. How can I go if he didn't put a curse on me?"

古文：玄宗大笑，武妃、三藏皆贺。
现代文：玄宗大笑，武惠妃和三藏都表示祝贺。
English: Xuanzong laughed loudly, and both Wu Huifei and Sanzang expressed their congratulations.

古文：已而使叶设法箓。
现代文：然后让叶法善设道家秘文。
English: Then let Ye Fa Shan set the Taoist secret text.

古文：于是取三藏金襕袈裟摺之，以盆覆之。
现代文：于是叶法善取三藏的金襕袈裟摺叠起来，把它用一个盆扣上。
English: So Ye Fa folded up the three treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures of the Three Treasures.

古文：叶禹步叩齿，绕三匝曰： 太上老君摄去。 
现代文：叶法善小步行走，叩动牙齿，绕盆三圈，说： 太上老君拽去！ 
English: Ye Fa Zhen walked a short distance, tapped his teeth, circled the basin three times, and said: "Go, old lady!

古文：盆下袈裟之缕，随色皆摄，各为一聚。
现代文：盆下袈裟的丝线，随着不同的颜色，各被拽得一堆一堆的。
English: The silk threads under the basin, with different colors, are each dragged into a pile.

古文：三藏曰： 惜哉金襕，至毁如此！ 
现代文：三藏说： 可惜这件金襕袈裟了，毁坏到这种程度！ 
English: Sanzang said, "It's a pity that this gold ingot has been damaged to such an extent!"

古文：玄宗曰： 可正乎？ 
现代文：玄宗说： 可以改正吗？ 
English: Xuanzong said: Can it be corrected?

古文：叶曰： 可。 
现代文：叶法善说： 可以。 
English: Ye Fazen said, "Yes."

古文：又覆之，咒曰： 太上老君正之。 
现代文：他又用盆扣上，念咒道： 太上老君改正它！ 
English: He fastened it again with a basin buckle, and recited a mantra: "Mother Superior, correct it!"

古文：启之，袈裟如故。
现代文：打开一看，袈裟像原来一样。
English: When opened, the cocoon looks the same as before.

古文：叶又取三藏钵，烧之烘赤，手捧以合三藏头，失声而走。
现代文：叶法善又取三藏的钵子，把它烧得通红，用手捧着往三藏头上戴，三藏失声而逃。
English: Ye Fa-zen also took Sanzang's hairpin, burned it red, held it in his hand and put it on Sanzang's head. Sanzang lost his voice and fled.

古文：玄宗大笑。
现代文：玄宗大笑。
English: Hyunjong laughed loudly.

古文：公远曰： 陛下以为乐，乃道之末法也，叶师何用逞之？
现代文：罗公远说： 陛下以此为乐，其实这是道术中末流的法术，叶法师何必显示它！ 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "Your Majesty takes pleasure in this. In fact, this is a low-level spell in Taoism. Why should Ye Mage show it?

古文：玄宗曰： 师不能为朕作一术以欢朕耶？ 
现代文：玄宗说： 你不能为我作一个法术，让我高兴高兴吗？ 
English: Xuanzong said, "Can't you do a spell for me to make me happy?"

古文：公远曰： 请更问三藏法术何如？ 
现代文：罗公远说： 请再问问三藏的法术怎么样。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "Please ask again about the magic of the Three Tibetans.

古文：三藏曰： 贫道请收固袈裟，试令罗公取，取不得则罗公输，取得则僧输。 
现代文：三藏说： 我把袈裟收放牢固，试让罗公取，不能取走那就是罗公输了；取走，则是我输了。 
English: Sanzang said: I put the anchor firmly, and try to let Luo Gong take it. If I can't take it, then Luo Gong loses; if I take it away, then I lose.

古文：于是令就道场院为之。
现代文：于是皇上让他们在道场院进行。
English: So the emperor had them perform the dance in the dojo.

古文：三藏结坛焚香，自于坛上跏趺作法，取袈裟贮之银合；又安数重木函，皆有封锁，置于坛上。
现代文：三藏法坛烧香，亲自在坛上作法，把袈裟存放在银盒子里，又安装在几层木匣子里，每层都上了锁，放在坛上。
English: He burned incense at the Three-Storied Dharma Altar, and practiced the Dharma on the altar himself. He stored the ashes in a silver box and installed them in several layers of wooden boxes. Each layer was locked and placed on the altar.

古文：玄宗与武妃、叶公，皆见中有一重菩萨，外有一重金甲神人，外以一重金刚围之，贤圣比肩，环绕甚严，三藏观守，目不暂舍。
现代文：玄宗和武惠妃、叶法善，都看到里面有一重菩萨，外面有一重金甲神人，再外面用一重金刚力士包围着。贤才圣人比踵接肩，包围得很严密。三藏看守在那里，眼睛一时也不离开。
English: Xuanzong, Wu Huifei, and Ye Faxian all saw that there was a heavy bodhisattva inside, a heavy gold-armored godman outside, and a heavy diamond wrestler outside. The sages and sages were shoulder to shoulder, surrounded very closely. The three guards were there, and their eyes did not leave for a moment.

古文：公远坐绳床，言笑自若。
现代文：罗公远坐在绳床上，谈笑自若。
English: Luo Gongyuan is sitting on a rope bed, chatting and laughing.

古文：玄宗与叶公皆视之。
现代文：玄宗和叶法善都看着他。
English: Both Xuanzong and Ye Faxun looked at him.

古文：数食顷，玄宗曰： 何太迟迟，得无劳乎！ 
现代文：几顿饭的时间过去了，玄宗说： 为什么这么慢呢？大概累了吧？ 
English: After a few meals, Xuanzong said, "Why are you so slow? Are you tired?"

古文：公远曰： 臣斗力，安敢自炫其能！
现代文：罗公远说： 我斗力，怎么敢显示自己能耐呢？
English: Luo Gongyuan said: I am a fighter, how dare I show my ability?

古文：但在陛下使三藏启观耳。 
现代文：只要陛下让三藏打开看看就知道了。 
English: Just ask His Majesty to open the Three Caves and you'll find out.

古文：令开函取袈裟，虽封锁依然，中已空矣。
现代文：玄宗让三藏打开匣子取出袈裟。虽然仍旧锁着，但是里边已经空了。
English: Xuanzong asked Sanso to open the box and take out the shovel. Although it was still locked, the inside was empty.

古文：玄宗大笑。
现代文：玄宗大笑。
English: Hyunjong laughed loudly.

古文：公远奏曰： 请令人于臣院内，敕弟子开柜取来。 
现代文：罗公远奏道： 请派人到我的院内，让弟子开柜拿来。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "Please send someone to my hospital and have a disciple open the cabinet and bring it to me."

古文：即令中使取之，须臾袈裟至。
现代文：玄宗立即派中使去取。不一会儿袈裟取来。
English: Xuanzong immediately sent an envoy to retrieve it. It was retrieved in a short time.

古文：玄宗问之。公远曰： 善萨力士，圣之中者，甲兵诸神，道之小者，皆可功参上界；至于太上至真之妙，非术士所知。
现代文：玄宗问这是怎么回事，罗公远说： 菩萨、力士，是圣贤中一般的；甲兵，诸神，是道术之中较小的，都有可以参与上界的功力，至于太古极真的奥妙，不是术士所能知道的。
English: When Xuanzong asked what was going on, Luo Gongyuan said: Bodhisattvas and wrestlers are common among sages; warriors and deities are minor in Taoism, and all of them have the ability to participate in the upper world. As for the ancient and extremely true mysteries, they are not known to sorcerers.

古文：适使玉清神女取之，则菩萨金刚不见其形，取若坦途，何碍之有。 
现代文：刚才我让玉清神女去取，那么菩萨和金刚也看不到她的形迹，去取就像走在坦途上，能有什么障碍呢？ 
English: Just now, I asked the Jade-Clear Goddess to fetch it, so Bodhisattva and King Kong can't see her shape. To fetch it is like walking on a muddy path, what obstacles can there be?

古文：玄宗大悦。赏赉无数。
现代文：玄宗非常高兴，赏赐无数。
English: Xuanzong was very happy and received countless rewards.

古文：而叶公、三藏然后伏焉。
现代文：而叶法善、三藏以后都很佩服罗公远。
English: However, both Ye Fazen and Sanzang admired Luo Gongyuan.

古文：时玄宗欲学隐遁之术。
现代文：当时玄宗要学隐遁之术，罗公远回答说： 陛下玉书金格已经记录在九清了，你是真人下凡，为的是叫你保国安民。
English: At that time, Xuanzong wanted to learn the art of invisibility, and Luo Gongyuan replied: "Your Majesty, the Golden Book has been recorded in the 9th Qing Dynasty. You are a real person who has descended to earth in order to protect the country and the people.

古文：对曰： 陛下玉书金格，以简于九清矣；真人降化，保国安人，诚宜习唐、虞之无为，继文、景之俭约，却宝剑而不御，弃名马而不乘，岂可以万乘之尊，四海之贵，宗庙之重，社稷之大，而轻狥小术，为戏玩之事乎？
现代文：实在应该学习唐尧虞舜的无为而治，继承文帝景帝的俭朴节约作风，放弃宝剑不佩带，放弃名马不乘坐。怎么可以凭着万乘的尊位、四海的富贵，如此重要的宗庙，如此之大的社稷，而轻率地去循蹈小术，做游戏玩耍的事呢？
English: It is really necessary to learn the do-nothing governance of the Tang Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty, to inherit the frugal and economical style of the Emperor Wen and the Emperor Jing, to give up the sword without wearing it, and to give up the famous horse without riding it. How can it be with the dignity of Manchuria, the richness of the four seas, such an important ancestral temple, such a large social prestige, and rashly follow the small tricks and do the things of games and play?

古文：若尽臣术，必怀玺入人家，困于鱼服矣。 
现代文：如果你学尽我的道术，必将揣着玉玺走进别人家，被困在平常人的服饰之中。 
English: If you learn all of my techniques, you will surely walk into other people's homes with a jade bracelet and be trapped in ordinary people's clothing.

古文：玄宗怒，骂之。
现代文：玄宗大怒，骂他。
English: Xuanzong flew into a rage and cursed him.

古文：遂走入殿柱中，数玄宗之过。
现代文：于是他就跑进殿柱子里，数落玄宗的过错。
English: So he ran into the pillar of the hall and counted the faults of Xuanzong.

古文：玄宗愈怒，易柱破之，复入玉磶中。
现代文：玄宗更怒，把殿柱打破，又换了一根柱子。
English: Even more angry, Xuanzong broke the pillar of the hall and replaced it with another pillar.

古文：又易磶。
现代文：他又进到柱脚石中。
English: He went into the cobbles again.

古文：破之为数十片，悉有公远之形。
现代文：玄宗又下令换了柱脚石，把换下来的柱脚石打碎成几十片，全都有罗公远的形迹。
English: Xuanzong also ordered to replace the column and foot stones, and the replaced column and foot stones were broken into dozens of pieces, all of which had traces of Luo Gongyuan.

古文：玄宗谢之，乃如故。
现代文：玄宗向他道歉，才恢复正常。
English: Xuanzong apologized to him before returning to normal.

古文：玄宗后又坚学隐形之术，强之不已，因而教焉。
现代文：玄宗后来又硬要学隐形之术，劝阻不了，就只好教他。
English: Later, Xuanzong insisted on learning the art of invisibility. Unable to dissuade him, he had no choice but to teach him.

古文：然托身隐，常有不尽，或露裾带，或见影迹，玄宗怒斩之。
现代文：然而玄宗隐身，常有隐不尽的地方，或者露出裙带来，或者露出形迹来。玄宗生气，把罗公远杀了。
English: However, Hyonjong's invisibility often has a hidden side, either revealing her skirts, or revealing her shape. Hyonjong got angry and killed Luo Gongyuan.

古文：其后数岁，中使辅仙玉，奉使入蜀，见公远于黑水道中，披云霞衲帔，策杖徐行。
现代文：此后过了几年，中使辅仙玉奉使进入蜀地，见到罗公远在黑水的道路上。他披着云霞缝补成的衣帔，拄着手杖慢慢行走。
English: A few years later, when the Chinese envoy Fu Xianyu entered Shu, he saw Luo Gong far away on the road of Heishui. He was wearing a robe made of clouds and haze and walking slowly with a cane.

古文：仙玉策马追之，常去十余步，竟莫能及。
现代文：仙玉策马追赶，常常只离他十几步，却不能追上他。
English: Sen Tama chased the horse, often only a dozen steps away from him, but could not catch up with him.

古文：仙玉呼曰： 天师云水适意，岂不念内殿相识耶！ 
现代文：仙玉喊道： 罗天师周游四方，心满意足，难道不记得在宫中相识的朋友吗？ 
English: Xianyu shouted: Luo Tianshi travels around the four directions and is satisfied with his life. Doesn't he remember the friends he met in the palace?

古文：公远方伫立顾之。
现代文：罗公远这才站下回头看着仙玉。
English: Luo Gongyuan just stood back and looked at Xianyu.

古文：仙玉下马拜谒讫，从行数里。官道侧俯临长溪，旁有巨石，相与渡溪据石而坐。
现代文：仙玉下马拜谒之后，二人一起走了几里，官道旁边有一条长长的溪流，溪旁有一块巨石，二人一起渡过溪流，坐到巨石上。
English: After Xianyu dismounted and paid homage, the two walked together for several miles. There was a long stream next to the official road, and there was a boulder next to the stream. The two crossed the stream together and sat on the boulder.

古文：谓仙玉曰： 吾栖息林泉，以修真为务，自晋咸和年入蜀，访师诸山，久晦名迹，闻天子好道崇玄，乃舍烟霞放旷之乐，冒尘世腥膻之路，混迹鸡鹜之群，窥阅蜉蝣之境，不以为倦者，盖欲以至道之贵，俯教于人主耳。
现代文：我从晋朝咸和年进入蜀地，在各大山之中访师求教，长期隐藏姓名和踪迹。听说皇上喜欢道教崇尚玄学，我就舍弃了山间美景和行动自由的乐趣，冒着尘世间又腥又膻又臭的道路，将行迹混以鸡鸭群中，窥视小虫子的处境。我之所以不知疲倦地这样做，是想要用最崇高的道理，教导皇帝罢了。
English: I came to Shoudi from Hamhung in the Jin Dynasty. I visited teachers in the mountains to seek advice, and hid my name and traces for a long time. Hearing that the emperor liked Taoism and advocated metaphysics, I abandoned the beauty of the mountains and the fun of freedom of movement, braved the dirty, dirty and smelly roads of the world, mixed my footsteps with flocks of chickens and ducks, and peered into the situation of small insects. The reason why I tirelessly did this was to teach the emperor with the most noble principle.

古文：圣上廷我于别殿，遽以灵药为索，我告以人间之腑脏，荤血充积，三田未虚，六气未洁，请俟他日以授之，以十年为限。
现代文：皇上把我迎到别殿，急忙向我索要灵药。我告诉他，人间的腑脏，充满荤血， 三田 还没虚， 六气 还没洁，请等到以后再给，以十年为期限。
English: The emperor welcomed me to his villa and hurriedly asked me for the elixir. I told him that the human body is dirty and full of blood, and that the mita is not flawed and the six qi is not pure. Please wait until later and give it to me, with a time limit of ten years.

古文：不能守此诚约，加我以丹颈之戮，一何遑遽哉！
现代文：但是他不守信用，砍了我的脑袋，多么可怕呀！
English: But he broke his promise and cut off my head. How terrible!

古文：然得道之人，与道气混合，岂可以世俗兵刃水火害于我哉！
现代文：然而就是得道成仙的人，我与道和气混合在一起，怎么能用世俗间的兵刃水火加害我呢？
English: However, even if I am a person who has attained immortality, I am mixed with the Tao and the qi, so how can I be harmed by the sword, water and fire of the world?

古文：但念主上列丹华之籍，有玉京交契之旧，躬欲度之，眷眷之情，不能已已。 
现代文：我只考虑到他毕竟是一代天子，又与我有一段旧交，想亲自引度他。这眷眷之情，一直不能了却。 
English: I only considered that he was, after all, a child of God, and that I had an old friendship with him, and I wanted to bring him to me in person.

古文：因袖中出书一缄，谓仙玉曰： 可以此上闻，云我姓维，名厶遠，静真先生弟子也，上必寤焉。 
现代文：于是，罗公远从袖中取出一封书信，对仙玉说： 可以把这信交给皇上，就说我姓维，名厶遠，是静真先生的弟子，皇上一定会明白的。 
English: Then Luo Gongyuan took out a letter from his sleeve and said to Xianyu: "You can give this letter to the emperor. Just say that my surname is Wei, my name is Yuanyuan, and I am a disciple of Mr. Jingzhen. The emperor will surely understand."

古文：言罢而去，仍以蜀当归为寄，遂失所在。
现代文：说完就离去。他还把蜀地的当归让仙玉捎给皇帝。
English: After saying this, he left. He also gave the emperor the duty of returning to Shu.

古文：仙玉还京师，以事及所寄之缄奏焉。
现代文：于是他就不见了。辅仙玉回到京中，把信和东西全交给皇帝。
English: Then he disappeared. Fu Xianyu returned to Beijing and handed the letter and everything over to the emperor.

古文：玄宗览书，惘然不怿。
现代文：玄宗看了信，惘然不乐。
English: Xuanzong read the letter and was very unhappy.

古文：仙玉出，公远已至，因即引谒。
现代文：辅仙玉退出去，罗公远已经来到，于是就领他去见皇上。
English: When Fu Xianyu left, Luo Gongyuan had already arrived, so he took him to see the emperor.

古文：玄宗曰： 先生何改名姓耶？ 
现代文：玄宗说： 先生为什么要改换姓名呢？ 
English: Xuanzong said: Why did you change your name?

古文：对曰： 陛下尝去臣头，固改之耳。
现代文：罗公远回答说： 陛下曾经砍去我的头，所以才改。
English: Luo Gongyuan replied, "Your Majesty once cut off my head, so I changed it."

古文：罗字去头，维字也；公字去头，厶字也；远字去头，遠字也。 
现代文：罗字去了头，是维字；公字去了头，是厶字；远字去了头，是遠字。 
English: Luo Zi went to the head, it is Wei Zi; Gong Zi went to the head, it is Zi Zi; Yuan Zi went to the head, it is Yuan Zi.

古文：玄宗稽首陈过，愿舍其尤。
现代文：玄宗点头承认了自己的过错，希望原谅他的罪过。
English: Xuanzong nodded and admitted his fault, hoping to forgive his sin.

古文：异日，玄宗复以长生为请。
现代文：罗公远高兴地说： 开个玩笑而已！
English: Luo Gongyuan said happily: It's just a joke!

古文：对曰： 经有之焉，我命在我，匪由于他。当先内求而外得也。
现代文：得道成仙的人，天塌地陷等自然灾害尚且不怕，何况兵刃之类，怎么能害了我呢？ 改日，玄宗又向罗公远请求长生不老之药。
English: Those who have attained immortality are not afraid of natural disasters such as the fall of the sky, let alone the sword, how can they harm me? Another day, Xuanzong asked Luo Gongyuan for the elixir of life.

古文：刳心灭智，草衣木食，非至尊所能。 
现代文：罗公远说： 经书里有这内心的杂念，穿草衣吃树叶，不是至高地位的人所能做到的。 
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "The sutras contain this inner thought that wearing a grass coat and eating leaves is not something that a person of the highest status can do.

古文：因以三峰歌八首以进焉，其大旨乃玄素黄赤之使，还婴溯流之事。
现代文：于是他把八首《三峰歌》献给唐玄宗。其大意是 玄素黄赤还婴溯流 方面的事。
English: So he dedicated his eight "Three Peaks Songs" to Tang Xuan Zong. The meaning of the eight songs is "the matter of tracing the flow of Xuan Su, Huang Qi, and Qi."

古文：玄宗行之逾年，而神逸气旺，春秋愈高，而精力不惫。
现代文：唐玄宗按照要求去做，一年多以后，神情飘逸，精气旺成，年龄更高了，精力却不减。
English: Tang Xuan Zong did what he was asked to do. More than a year later, his face was radiant and his energy was strong. He was older, but his energy had not diminished.

古文：岁余，公远去，不知所之。
现代文：一年多以后，罗公远离去，不知他去了什么地方。
English: More than a year later, Luo Gong went away, and I don't know where he went.

古文：天宝末，玄宗幸蜀，又于剑门奉迎銮辂，卫至成都，拂衣而去。
现代文：天宝年末，玄宗幸游蜀地避难，罗公远又在剑门迎接皇驾，护送到成都，然后拂衣而去。
English: At the end of the Tianbao year, Xuanzong Xingyu took refuge in Shu. Luo Gongyuan met the emperor at the Jianmen Gate, escorted him to Chengdu, and then whisked him away.

古文：乃玄宗自蜀还京，方悟蜀当归之寄矣。
现代文：等到玄宗从蜀地回京城，才明白他给自己送来蜀地当归的意思。
English: It was not until Xuanzong returned to Beijing from Shoudi that he understood the meaning of returning to Shoudi.

古文：仆仆先生
现代文：仆仆先生
English: Mr. Minion

古文：仆仆先生，不知何许人也，自云姓仆名仆，莫知其所由来。
现代文：不知道仆仆先生是什么地方人。他自己说姓仆名仆，没有人知道他从哪里来。
English: I don't know where Mr. Minion comes from. He says his surname is Minion, but no one knows where he comes from.

古文：家于光州乐安县黄土山，凡三十余年，精思饵杏丹，衣服饮食如常人，卖药为业。
现代文：他的家在光州乐安县黄土山。他共用去三十多年的时间，精心研制出一种叫做 杏丹 的药，自己食用。他穿衣吃饭与平常人一样，以卖药为业。
English: His home is in the Loess Mountains of Le'an County, Gwangju. He has spent more than 30 years to carefully develop a medicine called "Xingdan," which he consumes himself. He dresses and eats like an ordinary person, selling medicine as his business.

古文：开元三年，前无棣县令王滔寓居黄土山下，先生过之。
现代文：开元三年，以前的无棣县县令王滔住在黄土山下。
English: In the third year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Tao, the former prefect of Muxian County, lived under the Loess Mountain.

古文：滔命男弁为主，善待之。先生因授以杏丹术。
现代文：仆仆先生从王家门前经过，王滔让儿子王弁以主人的身份很好地款待了仆仆先生，仆仆先生就把杏丹术传授给王弁。
English: The servant passed in front of the king's house, and the king asked his son, Wang Ben, to treat the servant well as his master. The servant taught Wang Ben the art of making apricot jam.

古文：时弁舅吴明珪为光州别驾，弁在珪舍。
现代文：那时王弁的舅舅吴明珪是光州别驾，王弁住在吴明珪家里。
English: At that time, Wang Ben's uncle Wu Mingyao was the governor of Gwangju, and Wang Ben lived in Wu Mingyao's home.

古文：顷之，先生乘云而度，人吏数万皆睹之。
现代文：一会儿，仆仆先生乘着云朵而过，官吏百姓上万人都看到了。
English: After a while, the servant passed by on a cloud, and the officials and common people all saw it.

古文：弁乃仰告曰： 先生教弁丹术未成，奈何舍我而去。 
现代文：王弁仰脸对仆仆先生说： 先生教我杏丹术还没有教成，为什么弃我而去呢？ 
English: Wang Ben looked up at his servant and said, "Teacher, you haven't taught me the art of making apricot jam yet. Why did you abandon me?

古文：时先生乘云而度，已十五过矣，人莫测；及弁与言，观者皆愕。
现代文：那时仆仆先生乘着云朵已经走过十五次了，人们没有知道是怎么回事的。
English: By that time, Mr. Minion had ridden through the clouds fifteen times, and people didn't know what had happened.

古文：或以告刺史李休光。
现代文：等到王弁与他说话，见到的人都很惊愕，有人把这事报告给刺史李休光。
English: By the time Wang Ben spoke to him, everyone who saw him was stunned, and someone reported the matter to the judge Li Xuguang.

古文：休光召明珪而诘之曰： 子之甥乃与妖者友，子当执。 
现代文：李休光把吴明珪叫来问他说： 你的外甥居然和妖怪交朋友，你应该把他抓起来。 
English: Li Xuguang called Wu Mingyao and asked him, "Your nephew has actually made friends with a monster. You should arrest him."

古文：其舅因令弁往召之，弁至舍而先生至，具以状白。先生曰： 余道者，不欲与官人相遇。 
现代文：王弁的舅勇于是就让王弁把仆仆先生找来。王弁去到仆仆先生家中时，仆仆先生也回到家中。
English: Wang Ben's uncle then asked Wang Ben to find the servant. When Wang Ben went to the servant's house, the servant also returned home.

古文：弁曰： 彼致礼，便当化之；如妄动失节，当威之，使心伏于道。不亦可乎！ 先生曰： 善 。
现代文：王弁详细地说明了事情的经过。仆仆先生说： 我是道人，不想和当官的接触。 王弁说： 他们对你有礼貌，你就应该感化他们，他们如果失礼妄动，就应该给他们一点颜色看看，使他们对道家心服口服，不也很好吗？ 仆仆先生说： 也好。 
English: Wang Ben explained the incident in detail. Mr. Minion said, "I am a Taoist, and I don't want to come into contact with officials." Wang Ben said, "If they are polite to you, you should influence them. If they are impolite and act rashly, you should give them a bit of encouragement, so that they are convinced by the Taoists. Isn't that also good?" Mr. Minion said, "That's also good."

古文：乃诣休光府。
现代文：于是就来到李休光府中。
English: So he came to Li Xuguang Middle School.

古文：休光踞见，且诟曰： 若仙当遂往矣；今去而复来，妖也。 
现代文：李休光没有站起来接见他，而且还骂他说： 你如果是神仙应当立即就离去了，现在去而复返，一定是妖怪！ 
English: Li Xuguang did not stand up to meet him, but also scolded him: "If you are a fairy, you should have left immediately. If you leave now and come back, you must be a monster!"

古文：先生曰： 麻姑、蔡经、王方平、孔申、二茅之属，问道于余，余说之未毕，故止，非他也。 
现代文：仆仆先生说： 麻姑、蔡经、王方平、孔申、二茅等人，都向我请教道术，我没有讲完，就住下了，不是因为别的。 
English: The servant said: Ma Gu, Cai Jing, Wang Fangping, Kong Shen, Er Mao and others all asked me to teach them Taoism. I didn't finish, so I stayed, not because of anything else.

古文：休光愈怒，叱左右执之。
现代文：李休光更生气，喝令左右把他拿下。
English: Li Xuguang was even angrier, shouting orders left and right to take him down.

古文：龙虎见于侧，先生乘之而去，去地丈余，玄云四合，斯须雷电大至，碎庭槐十余株，府舍皆震坏。
现代文：这时候有龙虎出现在仆仆先生身边，他骑上去就离地而去。离地一丈多高的时候，黑云四起，顷刻间雷电大作，击碎院子里的十几棵槐树，房舍全都震坏，围观的人没有不奔逃的。
English: At this time, a dragon and tiger appeared next to Mr. Minion. He rode up and rode away from the ground. When he was as high as he could be from the ground, black clouds rose in all directions. In an instant, thunder and lightning erupted, shattering more than a dozen eucalyptus trees in the courtyard. The buildings were all shaken, and the onlookers had no choice but to flee.

古文：观者无不奔溃，休光惧而走，失头巾。直吏收头巾。引妻子跣出府，因徙宅焉。
现代文：李休光吓得逃跑，头巾都跑丢了。他让一个小官为他收起头巾，自己领着妻子儿女光着脚跑出府门。因此他搬家到别处去住了。
English: Li Xuguang was so scared that he ran away and lost his turban. He asked a minor official to put away his turban for him, and he led his wife and children out of the gate barefoot. Therefore, he moved to another place.

古文：休光以状闻。玄宗乃诏改乐安县为仙居县，就先生所居舍置仙堂观，以黄土村为仙堂府，县尉严正诲护营筑焉，度王弁为观主，兼谏议大夫，号通真先生。
现代文：李休光把这事儿写成奏章报给皇上，唐玄宗就下令改称乐安县为仙居县，在仆仆先生住的地方建了仙堂观，把黄土村改为仙堂村，让县尉严正诲看护营地施工建筑，让王弁做仙堂观观主兼谏议大夫，名号叫通真先生。
English: Li Xuguang reported this matter to the emperor in a report, and Tang Xuan Zong ordered to rename Le'an County to Xianju County, built Xiantang Temple in the place where the servant lived, changed the loess village to Xiantang Village, let the county lieutenant Yan Zhengren supervise the construction of the camp, and let Wang Ben be the Xiantang Temple's chief observer and deliberation doctor. His name was Mr. Tong Zhen.

古文：弁因饵杏丹却老，至大历十四年，凡六十六岁，而状可四十余，筋力称是。
现代文：王弁因为服用杏丹，推迟了衰老，到大历十四年，他已经六十六岁，而形貌还像四十多岁，力气也和四十多岁的人相当。
English: Wang Ben delayed aging by taking ginseng. By the fourteenth year of the lunar calendar, he was already sixty-six years old, but his appearance was like that of a man in his forties, and his strength was comparable to that of a man in his forties.

古文：其后果州女子谢自然，白日上升。
现代文：这以后有一位叫谢自然的果州女子，白日里升天成仙。
English: After this, there was a woman from Gouzhou named Xie Nianjun, who ascended to heaven during the day.

古文：当自然学道时，神仙频降，有姓崔者，亦云名崔，有姓杜者，亦云名杜，其诸姓亦尔，则与仆仆先生姓名相类矣。
现代文：当年谢自然学习道术的时候，众神仙频频下降。有一个姓崔的，也说名字叫崔；有一个姓杜的也说名字叫杜。其他各种姓氏的人也这样，这就和仆仆先生的姓名类似了。
English: When Xie Zicheng was learning Daoism, the gods and goddesses frequently descended. There was a man with the surname Cui, whose first name was also Cui; there was a man with the surname Du, whose first name was also Du. People with all kinds of surnames did the same, which was similar to the names of servants.

古文：无乃神仙降于人间，不欲以姓名行于时俗乎。
现代文：莫非神仙来到人间，不想把姓名留传在世俗间。
English: Perhaps the immortals came to the human world and did not want to leave their names in the secular world.

古文：后有人于义阳郊行者，日暮不达前村，忽见道旁草舍，因往投宿。
现代文：后来有一个在义阳郊外走路的人，天晚了还没走到前村，忽然见道旁有一所草房，就前去投宿。
English: Later, a person who was walking on the outskirts of Yiyang, but had not yet reached Qiancun when it was getting late, suddenly saw a grass hut next to the road and went to stay there.

古文：室中唯一老人，问客所以。
现代文：屋里只有一位老人。
English: There was only one old man in the room.

古文：答曰： 天阴日短，至此昏黑，欲求一宿。 
现代文：老人问他来干什么，他说： 天阴，白天的时间又短，走到这儿天就黑了，想借住一宿。 
English: The old man asked him what he had come for, and he said: It's cloudy and the day is short, and when you get here it's dark, and I'd like to spend the night.

古文：老人云： 宿即不妨，但无食耳。 
现代文：老人说： 宿是可以的，只是没有吃的东西。 
English: The old man said: "Accommodation is possible, but there is nothing to eat.

古文：久之，客苦饥甚。老人与药数丸，食之便饱。
现代文：过了挺长时间，这个投宿的客人饿得难受，老人就送给他几丸药，吃了就饱了，天亮后离去。
English: After a long time, the guest was so hungry that the old man gave him some pills. He ate until he was full and left after dawn.

古文：既明辞去，及其还也，忽见老人乘五色云，去地数十丈。客便遽礼，望之渐远。
现代文：等到他回来，忽然看到老人驾着五色的云朵，离地几十丈，他便急忙下拜行礼，望着老人渐渐飘远。
English: When he came back, he suddenly saw the old man riding on a five-colored cloud, dozens of meters above the ground. He hurriedly bowed down and watched the old man drift away.

古文：客至安陆，多为人说之，县官以为惑众，系而诘之。
现代文：他来到安陆，多次向人们说起这事，县官以为他是谣言惑众，把他捉去盘问。
English: He came to Anlu and told people about it many times. The county officials thought he was spreading rumors and took him in for questioning.

古文：客云： 实见神仙。 
现代文：他说他确实是看过神仙。
English: He said he had indeed seen the Immortal.

古文：然无以自免，乃向空祝曰： 仙公何事见，今受不测之罪。 
现代文：但是他没有办法解脱，他就向空中祷告说： 老神仙因为什么事让我看见了，如今让我受这意外的罪！ 
English: But he had no way to free himself, so he prayed to the sky, saying: "Old immortal, because of something I saw, now let me suffer this unexpected sin!"

古文：言讫，有五色云自北方来，老人在云中坐，客方见释，县官再拜。问其姓氏。
现代文：说完，有五色的云朵从北方飘来，老人就坐在那云中，他这才被释放。县官又向老人下拜，问老人的姓名。
English: After saying this, five-colored clouds floated in from the north, and the old man sat in the clouds until he was released. The county official bowed to the old man and asked his name.

古文：老人曰： 仆仆野人也，有何姓名。 
现代文：老人说： 我是仆仆野人，有什么姓名！ 
English: The old man said, "I am a wildling, what is my name?

古文：州司画图奏闻。敕令于草屋之所，立仆仆先生庙，今见在。
现代文：州中有关部门画图把这事报到皇帝那里，皇帝下令在那草屋的附近，建起了一座仆仆先生庙。这庙至今还在。
English: The relevant authorities in the state reported this to the emperor, who ordered the construction of a temple to his servant near the straw hut. This temple is still there.

古文：蓝采和
现代文：蓝采和
English: Blueberry picking and

古文：蓝采和，不知何许人也。
现代文：蓝采和不知是什么地方的人。
English: Blue-collar workers and people from I don't know where.

古文：常衣破蓝衫，六銙黑木腰带，阔三寸余。
现代文：他经常穿着一件破旧的蓝色衣衫，腰带带上有六块黑色的木质装饰物，腰有三寸多宽。
English: He often wore a tattered blue shirt with six black wooden ornaments on the belt, and his waist was more than three inches wide.

古文：一脚着靴，一脚跣行。
现代文：他一只脚穿着靴子，另一只脚光着走路。
English: He wears boots on one foot and walks barefoot on the other.

古文：夏则衫内加絮，冬则卧于雪中，气出如蒸。
现代文：夏天，他就在单衣里絮上棉絮；冬天，他就卧在雪地上，呼出的气像蒸出的气一样。
English: In summer, he lathers up his singlet; in winter, he lies on the snow and exhales like steam.

古文：每行歌于城市乞索，持大拍板，长三尺余，常醉踏歌。
现代文：他经常在城市里唱着歌乞讨，拿着一副三尺多长的大拍板。常常是醉着踏歌。
English: He often sings and begs in the city, holding a large clapperboard that is more than three feet long. He often sings drunkenly.

古文：老少皆随看之。机捷谐谑，人问，应声答之，笑皆绝倒。
现代文：老老少少都跟在他后边看，他机智敏捷，善于说些诙谐有趣的话。别人问他什么，他应声就答，逗得人们捧腹大笑。
English: People of all ages followed him. He had a quick wit and was good at saying witty and amusing things. If someone asked him a question, he would answer and make people laugh.

古文：似狂非狂，行则振靴唱踏歌： 踏歌蓝采和，世界能几何。
现代文：他似狂非狂，走路则踢踏着靴子唱踏歌： 踏歌蓝采和，世界能几何？
English: He may or may not be crazy, but when he walks, he kicks and stomps his boots to the beat of a song: What can the world do without the beat of a song?

古文：红颜一春树，流年一掷梭。
现代文：红颜一春树，流年一掷梭。
English: A rosy cheek is like a spring tree.

古文：古人混混去不返，今人纷纷来更多。
现代文：古人混混去不返，今人纷纷来更多。
English: The old hoodlums are gone forever, but more people are coming now.

古文：朝骑鸾凤到碧落，暮见苍田生白波。
现代文：朝骑鸾凤到碧落，暮见苍田生白波。
English: In the morning, I rode on a phoenix to the end of the world. In the evening, I rode on a white horse to the end of the world.

古文：长景明晖在空际，金银宫阙高嵯峨。 
现代文：长景明晖在空际，金银宫阙高嵯峨。 
English: Changjing shines brightly in the sky, and the Gold and Silver Palace stands tall.

古文：歌词极多，率皆仙意，人莫之测。
现代文：歌词极多，大体都是看破红尘的仙意，人不能明白它的意思。
English: There are a lot of lyrics, most of which are fairy tales, and people can't understand what they mean.

古文：但以钱与之，以长绳穿，拖地行。或散失，亦不回顾。或见贫人，即与之，及与酒家。
现代文：只要有人给他钱，他就用长绳穿起来，拖在地上走路，有时拖丢了，他也不回头看；有的时候看到穷人，他就把钱送给人家，以及送给酒家。
English: Whenever someone gave him money, he would put it on a long rope and drag it along the ground. Sometimes he would lose it and not look back. Sometimes, when he saw a poor person, he would give the money to that person's family and to the bar.

古文：周游天下，人有为儿童时至及斑白见之，颜状如故。
现代文：他周游天下，有的人从儿童时直到老了都见过他，见他脸色形貌始终一个样。
English: He travels all over the world, and some people have seen him from childhood to old age, and his face and appearance are always the same.

古文：后踏歌于濠梁间酒楼，乘醉，有云鹤笙箫声，忽然轻举于云中，掷下靴衫腰带拍板，冉冉而去。
现代文：后来他在濠梁间的一家酒楼上踏歌，趁着醉意，有云鹤笙箫的声音传来，他忽然轻轻抬身到云中去，把靴子、衣衫、腰带、拍板全扔下来，冉冉地升飘而去。
English: Later, he was singing in a tavern between the rafters, and, taking advantage of his intoxication, there was the sound of a cloud of cranes. Suddenly, he gently lifted himself up into the clouds, threw down his boots, clothes, belt, and clapperboard, and floated away.

