古文：张光奎，泽州人。仕至山东右参政。
现代文：张光奎，泽州人，官至山东右参政。
English: Zhang Guangkui, a Zezhou native, rose through the ranks of government to become a right-wing politician in Shandong.

古文：崇祯五年，流贼躏山西，监司王肇生以便宜署歙人吴开先为将，使击贼，战泽州城西。
现代文：崇祯五年，起义军进至山西，监司王肇生自作主张任歙县人吴开先为将，与起义军战于泽州城西。
English: In the fifth year of Chongzhen, the rebel army marched into Shanxi. Supervisor Wang Zhaosheng made his own proposal to appoint Wu Kaixian, a man from Linyi County, as commander, and fought against the rebel army in the west of the city of Zezhou.

古文：贼败去，从沁水转掠阳城。
现代文：义军放弃对泽州的进攻，转而从沁水攻阳城。
English: The rebels abandoned their attack on Zezhou and attacked Yangcheng from Surabaya instead.

古文：开先恃勇渡沁，战北留墩下，击斩数百人，炮尽无援，一军尽没。
现代文：开先恃其骁勇，渡过沁河，与义军战于北留墩下，后无援兵，为义军所败，全军覆没。
English: He was the first to fight bravely, crossed the Wei River, and fought against the rebels under the command of Bei Rui. After that, there were no reinforcements, the rebels were defeated, and the whole army was wiped out.

古文：贼陷夔州，他贼即以次日陷巫山，通江巡检郭缵化阵没，通江指挥王永年力战死。
现代文：义军回师再攻泽州。这时张光奎正告假居住家中，便与其兄守备张光玺、千总刘自安等，率众固守八个日夜，援兵不至，城陷战死。
English: At this time, Zhang Guangkui was on leave and living at home, so he and his brother Zhang Guangyao and the general Liu Zi'an led the people to hold out for eight days and nights. No reinforcements arrived, and the castle fell and he died in battle.

古文：至四月，守备郭震辰、指挥田实击贼百丈关，兵败被执，骂贼死。庞瑜，字坚白，公安人。
现代文：泽州是大州，远近皆为之震动。朝廷闻讯，赠光奎光禄寺卿，光玺等也受到封赠和抚恤。庞瑜，字坚白，湖广公安人。
English: The imperial court heard the news, and Guang Kui, Guang Lu, and Guang Yao were also presented with titles and pensions. Pang Yu, known as Jian Bai, was a public security officer in Hukang.

古文：家贫，躬耕自给。
现代文：家贫，世代以种田为业。
English: The family is poor and has been farming for generations.

古文：夏转水灌田，执书从牛后，朗诵不辍。
现代文：夏季赶牛拉水车灌田时，捧书在牛后朗读不辍。
English: In the summer, when driving the oxen and pulling the waterwheel to irrigate the fields, he would hold the book and read aloud after the oxen.

古文：由岁贡生授京山训导。
现代文：由贡生授京山训导。
English: Kyo-san's training was taught by Gonsho.

古文：崇祯七年擢陕西崇信知县。
现代文：崇祯七年升为陕西崇信县知县。
English: In the seventh year of Chongzhen, it was upgraded to Chixian, Chongxin County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：县无城，兵荒，贫民止百余户。
现代文：该县无城墙，有贫民百余户，闹兵荒。
English: There is no city wall in the county, and there are more than a hundred poor households, resulting in a shortage of soldiers.

古文：瑜知贼必至，言于监司陆梦龙，以无兵辞。
现代文：陕西农民起义爆发，瑜料定义军必来攻击崇信，对监司陆梦龙说明他的意见，梦龙认为无兵不能抵御。
English: Peasants' revolt broke out in Shaanxi, and the army was determined to attack Chongxin. He explained his opinion to the superintendent Lu Menglong, who believed that no soldiers could resist.

古文：瑜集士民筑土垣以守，流涕誓死职。
现代文：庞瑜召集士民修建土城墙以备防守，誓死抵抗。
English: Pang Yu gathered the scholars and commoners to build an earthen wall for defense and vowed to resist to the death.

古文：闰八月天大雨，土垣尽圮。贼掩至，瑜急解印遣家人赍送上官，端坐堂上以待。
现代文：这年闰八月，大雨，土墙倒塌，义军突然攻来，瑜无力抗拒，忙解县印派家人送往上级，自己端坐堂上。
English: In leap August of this year, heavy rain, the earth wall collapsed, and the rebels suddenly attacked. Yu was powerless to resist, and he hurriedly sent his family members from the county to the higher level, and sat in the hall.

古文：贼至，捽令跪。
现代文：义军攻至，他破口大骂不止。
English: When the rebels arrived, he ranted and raved.

古文：有宋绪汤者，耀州诸生，被获，大骂死。尹梦鳌，云南太和人。
现代文：义军将他绑赴野外，剖心裂尸。朝廷闻知，赠瑜为固原知州。尹梦鳌，云南太和人。
English: The rebel army tied him to the field and dissected his heart. The imperial court heard about it and gave Yu to Gubara Chizhou. Yin Mengyao, Yunnan Taihe people.

古文：万历时举于乡。崇祯中知颍州。
现代文：万历时中举。崇祯年间任颍州知州。
English: He was promoted to the middle rank in the Wanli era, and to the highest rank in the Chongzhen era in the Bozhou-Chizhou era.

古文：八年正月方谒上官于凤阳，闻流贼大至，立驰还。
现代文：八年正月，他正在凤阳拜谒上官，闻农民起义军至，立即赶回。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, he was in Fengyang to pay homage to his superior officer, and when he heard that the peasants had revolted, he immediately rushed back.

古文：贼已抵城下，乃偕通判赵士宽率民固守。
现代文：这时义军已至城下。梦鳌与通判赵士宽率民固守。
English: At this time, the rebels had already reached the outskirts of the city. Nightmare and the judge Zhao Shihang led the people to hold fast.

古文：城北有高楼瞷城中，诸生刘廷传请先据之，梦鳌以为然。
现代文：城北门外有座高楼，由此可窥视城中，生员刘廷传建议抢先占领，梦鳌颇为赞同。
English: There is a high-rise building outside the north gate of the city, from which you can see the city. Liu Tingchuan, a student, suggested the preemptive occupation, and Nightmare quite agreed.

古文：而廷传所统皆市人，不可用。
现代文：但廷传所统领的都是市民，不善作战，该楼为义军所占。
English: However, the leaders of the Tingchuans were all citizens, and they were not good at fighting, so the building was occupied by the rebels.

古文：龚元祥，字子祯，长洲人。
现代文：龚元祥，字子祯，长洲人。
English: He is a native of Cheung Chau.

古文：举于乡。崇祯四年为霍山教谕，厉廉隅，以名教自任，与训导姚允恭友善。
现代文：乡试中举，崇祯四年为霍山教谕，为人品行端正，以传授孔孟之教为己任，与训导姚允恭友善。
English: In the middle school of the township examination, he was a disciple of Huoshan for four years. He behaved well, took it as his duty to teach the teachings of Confucius and Mencius, and was friendly with his tutor, Yao Yunqong.

古文：八年，贼陷凤阳，元祥偕县令守御。
现代文：八年，农民起义军攻陷凤阳，元祥同县令共同守御。
English: In the eighth year, the Peasants' Revolt Army invaded Fengyang, and Yuan Xiangtong County was ordered to jointly defend it.

古文：贼掩至，令逸去，元祥督士民固守。
现代文：义军突然而至，县令逃跑，元祥督率士民坚守。
English: The rebels suddenly arrived, the county magistrate fled, and Governor Yuan Xiang and his officers and men held fast.

古文：或劝之避，元祥曰： 食禄而避难，不忠。临危而弃城，不义。
现代文：有人劝他逃避，他说： 食皇帝俸禄而临难逃脱，这是不忠；临危而弃城，这是不义。
English: Some people advised him to run away, but he said, "It is disloyal to eat the emperor's salary and escape in the face of difficulties; it is unjust to abandon the city in the face of danger."

古文：吾平日讲说者谓何？
现代文：我平日讲忠义之道是为了什么？
English: Why do I preach the way of faithfulness?

古文：倘不测，死尔。 
现代文：若有不测，死也是应当的。 
English: In the event of an accident, death is also appropriate.

古文：及贼陷城，元祥整衣冠危坐。
现代文：城陷，元祥整衣端坐。
English: The castle has fallen, and Genxiang is sitting in full dress.

古文：信大骂不从，断头剖腹而死。
现代文：义军至，他向义军讲明忠君大义。义军要他投降，他厉声道： 死就死，你们怎敢侮辱我！ 
English: When the rebels arrived, he told the rebels about the importance of loyalty to the emperor. When the rebels asked him to surrender, he snapped, "Death is death, how dare you insult me!"

古文：阅四日，其子来觅，犹舒指握子手。赠光禄丞，建祠奉祀。
现代文：终于遇害，临死还骂不绝口。朝廷闻知，赠元祥为国子监助教，建祠祭祀，其祠曰 忠孝祠 ，其子炳衡也入祠配祀。
English: He was finally killed, and on his deathbed he was still cursing. The imperial court heard that Yuan Xiang had been given the title of assistant tutor to the son of the emperor, and that a small shrine had been built and dedicated to him. His shrine was called the Zhongxiao Temple, and his son, Yu Heng, was also enshrined in the temple.

古文：史记言，字司直，当涂人。
现代文：史记言，字司直，当涂人。
English: Historiography, the word is straightforward, when painted people.

古文：崇祯中举人，由长沙知县迁知陕州。
现代文：崇祯年间中举，由长沙知县升陕州知州。
English: During the Chongzhen years, it was promoted from Changsha Zhixian to Shaanxi Zhixian.

古文：陕当贼冲，记言出私财募士，聘少室僧训练之。
现代文：陕西为农民起义发源之地，陕州为攻击目标。记言用自己的财产招募士兵，聘请少室僧人来训练。
English: Shaanxi was the birthplace of the peasants' uprising, and Shaanxi Province was the target of the attack. He used his own property to recruit soldiers and hired young monks to train them.

古文：八年冬十一月，流贼犯陕，记言御之，斩数十级，生擒二十余人。
现代文：崇祯八年十一月，义军进攻陕州，记言进行抵抗，斩数十人，生擒二十余人。
English: In November of the eighth year of Chongzhen, the rebel army attacked Shaanxi Province, and made a speech of resistance. Dozens of people were killed, and more than 20 people were captured alive.

古文：老回回愤，率数万人攻城，不克，乘雪夜来袭，而所练士方调他郡，城遂陷。
现代文：义军老回回愤慨，率数万人攻城，未克，又乘雪夜来袭。记言所练士兵刚调他郡，陕州被攻陷，记言纵火自焚。
English: Outraged, the rebel army attacked the city with tens of thousands of people, and attacked again in the snowy night. The soldiers trained by Ji Yan had just been transferred to another county, and Shaanxi was invaded. Ji Yan set fire to himself.

古文：记言纵火自焚，两僧掖之出曰： 死此，何以自明？ 
现代文：两个和尚把他扶出去，对他说： 死在这里谁知道？ 
English: Two monks carried him out and said to him, "Who knows if you will die here?"

古文：乃越女墙下。
现代文：越城墙而下，被义军捉住。
English: He climbed down over the city wall and was caught by the rebels.

古文：是月，贼陷卢氏，知县白楹自刭。
现代文：记言大声骂道： 有死知州，无降知州！ 
English: Memoirs loudly scolded: There is death in Zhizhou, there is no reduction in Zhizhou!

古文：十年九月陷渑池，知县李迈林死之。记言赠光禄少卿，余赠恤有差。梁志仁，南京人，保定侯铭之裔也。
现代文：终于被杀。指挥李君赐，训导王诚心，教谕张敏行、姚良弼，指挥杨道泰、阮我疆，镇抚陈三元皆死，记言赠光禄寺少卿。梁志仁，南京人，保定侯梁铭之后代。
English: Finally, he was killed. The conductor Li Junzhi, the instructor Wang Chengxin, the instructors Zhang Minxing and Yao Liangyao, the conductors Yang Daotai and Ruan Bajiang, and the tutor Chen Sanyuan all died, and their records were presented to the junior secretary of the Guanglu Temple. Liang Zhiren, a Nanjing native, was the successor of the Baoding lord Liang Ming.

古文：万历末年举于乡。
现代文：万历末年乡试中举。
English: Wanli year-end township examination middle school.

古文：崇祯六年授衡阳知县，调罗田。
现代文：崇祯六年授衡阳知县，后调罗田知县。
English: In the sixth year of Chongzhen, Hengyang County was awarded, and later Luotian County was transferred.

古文：贼大扰湖广，志仁日夕儆备。
现代文：农民起义军进入湖广，志仁日夜戒备。
English: The peasant uprising army entered Hukang, and Zhiren was on alert day and night.

古文：罗汝才谓左右曰： 罗田城小易克，然梁君长者，吾不忍加兵。
现代文：义军首领罗汝才对左右说： 罗田是个小城，容易攻克。然而梁君是个长者，我不忍与他刀枪相见。
English: Luo Rucai, the leader of the rebel army, said to both sides: Luotian is a small city, easy to conquer. However, Liang Jun is an elderly man, and I can't bear to face his sword and gun.

古文：俟其去，当取之。 
现代文：等他离开后我们再攻取。 
English: We'll take it after he's gone.

古文：会邑豪江犹龙与贼通，志仁捕下狱。
现代文：该县富豪江犹龙与义军有来往，志仁逮捕他下狱。
English: Jiang Yulong, a wealthy man in the county, had dealings with the rebels, and Zhirin arrested him and sent him to prison.

古文：犹龙知必死，潜导汝才别校来攻。
现代文：犹龙知道自己必死，暗中派人去引导汝才遣军来攻。
English: Knowing that he would die, Yulong secretly sent someone to lead his army to attack.

古文：八年二月猝攻城。志仁急偕典史单思仁、教谕吴凤来、训导卢大受督民守御。
现代文：八年二月，义军突然攻城，志仁急与典史单恩仁、教谕吴凤来、训导卢大受督民守御。
English: In February of the eighth year, the rebels suddenly besieged the city, and Shi Renqiu and the scribe Shan Enren, the preceptor Wu Fenglai, and the tutor Lu Da, the governor and the people guarded the city.

古文：城陷，志仁持长矛巷战，杀六贼。
现代文：城陷，志仁持长矛巷战，终于力穷被捕。
English: The city fell, and Zhirin fought in the streets with a spear, and was finally arrested.

古文：学正康正谏，祁门人，举人。
现代文：义军要他跪下，他骂道： 我是天子命官，岂肯屈膝于你们！ 
English: The rebels wanted him to kneel, and he scolded them: "I am an officer of God, how can I bend my knees to you!

古文：偕妻汪、子妇章赴水死，赠国子监丞。
现代文：义军大怒，肢解其身体，火焚致死。其妻也遇害。
English: Enraged, the rebels mutilated his body and burned it to death. His wife was also killed.

古文：训导赵世选不屈死，赠国子学录。
现代文：汝才这时正在英山，闻罗田城破，志仁被杀，赶至罗田，处决杀死志仁的别将，斥责他们： 为何擅自杀害长者！ 
English: You were just at that time in Yingshan, hearing that Luotian had fallen and that Zhirin had been killed, and you rushed to Luotian to execute the generals who had killed Zhirin, and you rebuked them: Why do you wantonly kill the elderly!

古文：马如蛟，字腾仲，州人。
现代文：以锦衣安葬志仁夫妇。马如蛟，字腾仲，和州人。
English: Zhiren and his wife were buried in brocade. Ma Ruzhen, Zi Tengzhong, and the people of Wuzhou.

古文：天启二年进士。授浙江山阴知县，有清操。
现代文：天启二年进士，授浙江山阴县知县，为官清廉，品行端正。
English: He was awarded the title of Zhixian of Shanyin County, Zhejiang Province, in the second year of the Apocalypse. He was a clean official with a good moral character.

古文：崇祯元年征授御史，劾罢魏忠贤党徐绍吉、张讷。
现代文：崇祯元年，朝廷召入朝授御史。他弹劾魏忠贤党羽徐绍吉、张纳，罢了他们的官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was summoned by the imperial court to be a member of the Imperial History Commission. He impeached Xu Shaoqi and Zhang Na, both members of the Wei Zhongxian Party, and dismissed them from their posts.

古文：出按四川，蜀中奸民悉以他人田产投势家，如蛟列上十事，永革其弊。
现代文：出朝巡按四川时，蜀中奸民把别人的田产投献给权势之家，如蛟为此上陈朝廷，要求永革其弊。
English: During his inspection tour of Sichuan, the Shu-Zhong ruffians donated other people's farm produce to the powerful family. For this reason, Rugao went to the court of Chen and asked for a permanent solution to the problem.

古文：还朝，监武会试。
现代文：回京监武举会考。
English: Back to Beijing for the junta examination.

古文：武举董姓者，以技勇闻于帝，及入试，文不中程，被黜。
现代文：武举董某，以其武艺为帝所知，但考试结果其文章不合格，未录取。
English: Wu Zhuo Dong Mou, known for his martial arts, but the examination results of his article failed and was not admitted.

古文：帝怒，黜考官，如蛟亦落职。
现代文：帝大怒，罢了考官的职，如蛟也落职。
English: The emperor was furious, and the post of examiner was abolished, and Rugao was also dismissed.

古文：八年论平邦彦功，复故官，以父忧未赴。
现代文：八年，他论平邦彦的功而恢复旧官，因父死服丧而未就任。
English: Eight years later, he was reinstated to his old post thanks to the efforts of TAIRA no Kunihiko, but did not take up the post due to the death of his father.

古文：贼将奔，会风雪大作，不辨人色，守者皆溃，贼遂入城。
现代文：农民起义军至，如蛟将其全部财产用来招募士卒，辅助黎弘业固守和州。他指挥壮士出击，两战皆捷。义军冒着风雪攻陷和州。
English: When the peasants revolted, Rugao used all of his wealth to recruit soldiers to help Li Hongye hold Wazhou. He commanded the strong men to attack, and both battles were successful. The rebels braved the snow and storm to capture Wazhou.

古文：如蛟急下令，能击贼者，予百金，须臾得百余人。
现代文：如蛟急忙下令：凡能抗敌者，赏银百两。一下子有百余人报名。
English: Rugao hastily ordered that anyone who could resist the enemy would be rewarded with a hundred taels of silver. More than a hundred people signed up at once.

古文：巷战，贼多伤，力屈，遂战死。兄盐运司判官如虬、诸生如虹及家属十四人皆死。
现代文：进行激烈的巷战，如蛟战死。其兄盐运判官如纠、生员如虹及家属十四人皆死。
English: A fierce street battle ensued, in which Rugao died, as well as his brother, the judge Rugao Shioyun, a survivor Rugao Hongzhu, and fourteen members of his family.

古文：事闻，赠太仆少卿，官一子。
现代文：朝廷赠太仆寺少卿，荫其一子为官。
English: The Imperial Court bestowed on him the title of Daju-ji Shokei, and one of his sons became an official.

古文：张绍登，字振夫，南城人。
现代文：张绍登，字振夫，南城人。
English: Zhang Shaodeng, alias Zhenfu, from Nancheng.

古文：国勋曰： 贼不一创，城不易守。 率壮士出击，力战一日夜，斩获甚众。
现代文：崇祯时举人，授应城知县。崇祯九年，农民起义军攻应城，绍登同训导张国勋、乡官饶可久全力抵御，力战一昼夜，斩获甚众。
English: In the ninth year of Chongzhen, when the Peasants' Revolt Army attacked the city, Shaodeng's fellow tutor Zhang Guohun and the township official Rao Keji resisted with all their might, fought hard for a day and night, and gained a lot.

古文：贼去，邑侍郎王瑊之子权结怨于族党，怨家潜导贼复来攻。
现代文：义军暂撤走。本县侍郎王蠨之子王权与本族有怨仇，怨家暗中引导义军再来攻城。
English: The rebel army temporarily withdrew. Wang Quan, the son of the county's steward Wang Quan, had a grudge against his own people, and secretly led the rebel army to attack the city again.

古文：国勋佐绍登力守，而乞援于上官。
现代文：国勋协助绍登坚守，并向上级官府求援。
English: The National Merit assisted Shaodeng to hold firm, and appealed to higher-level government offices for assistance.

古文：副将邓祖禹来救，守西南，国勋守东北，绍登往来策应。
现代文：副将邓祖禹率军来救援，守西南城，国勋守东北城，绍登往来策应。
English: Vice-commander Deng Zuyu led the army to come to the rescue, guarding the southwestern city, the national honor guarding the northeastern city, and the Shaodeng exchange strategy.

古文：会贼射书索权，权惧，斩北关以出，贼乘间登南城。
现代文：义军射书入城，要城内交出王权。王权惧怕，从北门突出，义军乘此机会从南面登城而入。
English: The rebels entered the city at gunpoint, demanding the surrender of the royal power. The royal power was afraid, and the rebels took advantage of this opportunity to enter the city from the south, protruding from the north gate.

古文：事闻，赠绍登尚宝少卿，国勋国子学正。
现代文：城破，绍登还至公署，端坐堂上。有义军入堂来，他挥拳打之，义军大部队至，杀死绍登。
English: After the city fell, Shoden returned to the public office and sat on the court. When the rebels entered the court, he punched them, and a large force of rebels arrived and killed Shoden.

古文：王焘，字浚仲，昆山人。
现代文：义军领袖叹他忠义，将他葬于公堂之侧。王焘，字浚仲，昆山人。
English: The leader of the rebel army lamented his loyalty and buried him on the side of the public hall. Wang Yao, surnamed Junzhong, was from Kunshan.

古文：少孤贫，九岁为人后。
现代文：年少无父，家境贫寒，九岁时过继与人。
English: Young, fatherless, from a poor family, he was adopted at the age of nine.

古文：族人有谋其产者，焘举以让之，迎养嗣祖母及母惟谨。
现代文：族中有人图他的财产，焘拱手让出，自己克勤克谨地奉养过继家的祖母和母亲。
English: Some members of the clan tried to take over his property, but he gave them up. He diligently supported his step-grandmother and step-mother.

古文：万历末，举于乡，由教谕历随州知州。
现代文：万历末年中乡举，由教谕官至随州知州。
English: At the end of the Wanli year, he was promoted from the position of teaching official to Suizhou Zhizhou.

古文：州经群盗焚掠，户不满千。焘训民兵，缮守具。
现代文：州遭战乱之后，户不满千，焘训练民兵，修缮守城器械。
English: After the state was ravaged by war, there were thousands of dissatisfied households, and the government had to train the militia and repair the city's defense equipment.

古文：土寇李良乔为乱，歼灭之。
现代文：当地人李良乔反叛，为他所镇压。
English: Local man Li Liangqiao rebelled and was put down.

古文：十年正月，大贼奄至。焘且守且战，击斩三百余人。
现代文：崇祯十年正月起义大军突然杀至，焘且战且守，斩杀三百余人。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of Chongzhen, the insurgent army suddenly arrived, fought and defended, and killed more than three hundred people.

古文：贼攻益力，相持二十余日。
现代文：起义军猛力攻击，双方相持二十余日。
English: The insurgents attacked vigorously, and the two sides held out for more than 20 days.

古文：天大风雪，守者多散。
现代文：严冬，风雪漫天，守城者多散。
English: Severe winter, wind and snow all over the sky, defenders scattered.

古文：已，觅州印，得之焘所立尺士下。
现代文：焘知必败，回到官衙自尽。义军焚烧官署，但焘的尸体却未烧焦。
English: Knowing that he would be defeated, Zou returned to Guanzhang and committed suicide. The rebels burned the government office, but Zou's body was not scorched.

古文：事闻，赠太常少卿。
现代文：朝廷赠太常少卿。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the title of Taijo Shokei.

古文：徐尚卿，南平人。
现代文：福王时赐谥烈愍，建双忠祠，与同邑蔡懋德并祀。徐尚卿，南平人。
English: When Fu Wang bestowed the title of "martyr" on him, he built the Shuangzhong Ancestral Shrine, and enshrined him together with his fellow townspeople Cai Xingde. Xu Shangqing, Nanping people.

古文：举于乡，知剑州。
现代文：乡试中举，授剑州知州。
English: He won the junior high school examination in his hometown, and was awarded the first place in Jianzhou and Chizhou.

古文：崇祯十年十月，李自成、惠登相等以数十万众入四川，大将侯良柱败殁于广元，遂攻陷昭化，知县王时化死之。
现代文：崇祯十年十月，李自成、惠登相等率数十万人马进入四川。明将军侯良柱在广元战死，义军攻陷昭化县，知县王时化战死。
English: In October of the 10th year of the Song Dynasty, Li Zicheng and Hui Deng led hundreds of thousands of horses into Sichuan. Ming General Hou Liangzhu died in Guangyuan, the rebels invaded Zhaohua County, and Wang Shihua of Zhixian died in battle.

古文：尚卿知贼必至，集士民泣曰： 城必不能守，若辈速去，吾死此。 
现代文：尚卿知义军必攻剑州，召集士民伤心地说 ：城必不能守。你们赶快走，吾与城共存亡。 
English: Lord Shang knew that the rebel army would attack Jianzhou, and he gathered the scholars and people and said sadly, "The city cannot be defended. You must leave immediately. I will die with the city."

古文：众泣，请偕去，尚卿不可。
现代文：士民要他一同走，尚卿不肯。
English: The senators asked him to go with them, but he refused.

古文：事定，赠尚卿右参议，时化光禄丞，应奇按察司知事，孟科将仕郎，并赐恤典。时化，湖广人，举乡试第一。
现代文：时化，湖光人。
English: It's time, Hukou people.

古文：阮之钿，字实甫，桐城诸生。
现代文：阮之钿，字实甫，桐城生员。
English: Ruan Zhiyao, surnamed Sifu, a Tongcheng resident.

古文：崇祯中，下诏保举人才，同郡谕德刘若宰以之钿应，授谷城知县。
现代文：崇祯年间，下诏举人才。同郡谕德刘若宰举荐之钿，中选，授谷城县知县。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, talent was selected by imperial edict, and Liu Ruo Zai, the county magistrate, was selected as the person to be recommended by imperial edict.

古文：十一年正月，之钿未至，张献忠袭陷其城，据以求抚。
现代文：崇祯十一年正月，之钿还未到任，张献忠已攻陷谷城，请求招安。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Zhang Xianzhong had already besieged Gucheng and asked for reinforcements.

古文：总理熊文灿许之，处其众数万于四郊，居民汹汹欲窜。
现代文：总理熊文灿准许了，将献忠部下数万置于谷城四郊，居民纷纷不安，都想逃走。
English: Prime Minister Xiong Wencang gave permission, placing tens of thousands of loyal subordinates in the four suburbs of Gu Cheng. Residents were uneasy and wanted to escape.

古文：之钿至，尽心调剂，民稍安，乃上疏言： 献忠虎踞邑城，其谋叵测。
现代文：之钿来到后，尽心调理，人民稍安。他上疏朝廷说 ：献忠虎踞谷城，其谋叵测。
English: After his arrival, he did his best to regulate the situation, and the people were a little calmer. He went to the imperial court and said, "I will be loyal to Shibuya Castle, and I will do my best."

古文：所要求之地，实兵饷取道咽喉，秦、蜀交会脉络，今皆为所据。
现代文：他所要求之地，实为兵饷供应的咽喉，秦、蜀交会的脉络，今都为他所占据。
English: The place he demanded is actually the throat of the supply of soldiers and cadres, and the veins of the Qin and Shu fairs are now occupied by him.

古文：奸民甘心效用，善良悉为迫胁。
现代文：一些奸民都甘心为他效力，善良都为他胁迫。
English: Some villains are willing to work for him, and good people are coerced by him.

古文：臣守土牧民之官，至无土可守，无民可牧。
现代文：臣是守土管民的官，结果是无土可守，无民可管。
English: The vassal is the official who guards the land and manages the people. As a result, there is no land to guard and no people to manage.

古文：库藏殚虚，民产被夺，无赋可征。
现代文：库藏空虚，民产被夺，田赋无处征取。
English: The treasury is empty, the people's property has been seized, and there is nowhere to requisition the rice fields.

古文：名虽县令，实赘员尔。
现代文：我名为县令，实际上是个多余的人。
English: My name is the county magistrate, and I am actually a superfluous person.

古文：乃庙堂之上专主抚议，臣愚妄谓抚剿二策可合言，未可分言，致损国威，而挫士气。 
现代文：而朝廷一心主张安抚，臣愚昧，妄自认为抚剿二策可以合言，不可分言，否则有损国威，挫败士气。 
English: However, the imperial court insisted on appeasement, and the vassals were ignorant and deluded into thinking that the two policies of appeasement and appeasement could go hand in hand and could not be separated. Otherwise, it would damage national prestige and demoralize morale.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：但这意见没被采用。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：贼众渐出野外行劫，之钿执之以告其营将，稍置之法。
现代文：义军中有些人渐到四乡行劫，之钿把他们抓起来并告诉所统领的将官，进行了一定的惩处。
English: Some of the rebels gradually went to rob the four townships, and the eunuchs arrested them and told the generals in charge, and carried out certain punishments.

古文：及再告，皆不应，曰： 官司不给饷耳，得饷自止。 
现代文：再告发义军有劫掠行为时，义军领袖再不做处理，对之钿说： 官府不给我们军饷，有了饷他们自然不会去劫掠了。 
English: When the rebels were again accused of looting, the rebel leaders did not do anything about it, but said to them, "The government won't give us military pay. If they had it, they wouldn't go looting."

古文：由是村民徙亡殆尽，遂掠及闤阓。
现代文：因此，四乡村民逃亡几尽。又来掠夺城内，若稍抗拒，即以刀棍相见。
English: As a result, the people of the four villages fled in droves. They came to plunder the city, and if there was the slightest resistance, they were met with swords and clubs.

古文：稍拒，辄挺刃相向，日有死者，一城大嚣。监军佥事张大经奉文灿令来镇抚，亦不能禁。
现代文：监军佥事张大经奉熊文灿之命来镇抚，也不能禁止。
English: Zhang Da Jing, the overseer of military affairs, was ordered by Xiong Wencang to pacify the situation, but he could not forbid it.

古文：明年，献忠反形渐露，之钿往说之曰： 将军始所为甚悖，今幸得为王臣，当从军立功，垂名竹帛。
现代文：崇祯十二年，张献忠反朝廷的形迹渐渐显露，之钿去企图说服献忠： 将军开始的作为是不对的，今幸而为朝廷之臣，应建立军功，垂名青史。
English: In the twelfth year of Chongzhen, the traces of Zhang Xianzhong's anti-imperialism were gradually revealed, and Zou Ye went to try to persuade Xianzhong: The general's initial actions were wrong, but now he is a courtier of the imperial court, he should establish military merit, and become famous in history.

古文：且不见刘将军国能乎？
现代文：难道未看到刘国能将军？
English: Didn't they see General Liu Guoneng coming?

古文：天子手诏进宫，厚赍金帛，此赤诚效也。将军若疑天朝有异论，之钿请以百口保。
现代文：由于他效忠朝廷，天子亲自下诏进他官爵，厚赏金帛。将军若怀疑天朝另有看法，之钿愿以百口为保。
English: Because of his loyalty to the Imperial Court, the Emperor personally made him a peer with a large reward. If the general suspects that the Emperor has a different opinion, he is willing to guarantee it with a hundred mouths.

古文：何嫌何疑，而复怀他志。 
现代文：还有什么可疑而怀有他志？ 
English: What else is suspicious about his intentions?

古文：献忠素衔之钿，遂恶言极骂之。
现代文：献忠素来对之钿心怀仇恨，对他以恶言辱骂。
English: The devotees have always harbored hatred towards him and abused him with foul language.

古文：之钿忧愤成病，题数语于壁，自誓以死，遂不视事。
现代文：之钿忧愤成疾，在壁上题辞表示自己忠于朝廷的决心，不视事。
English: On the wall, there was an inscription expressing his determination to be loyal to the imperial court, no matter what.

古文：旋纵火焚公署，骸骨为烬。
现代文：同年五月，献忠果然反叛朝廷，劫掠府库，释放囚徒，毁坏城池。
English: In May of the same year, Xian Zhong successfully rebelled against the imperial court, plundered the treasury, released prisoners, and destroyed the city.

古文：而大经为贼劫去，不能死。
现代文：之钿服毒自杀未死。献忠派人向他索取县印。之钿坚决不给，为张献忠所杀。
English: Zhi Yao committed suicide by taking poison before he died. Xian Zhong sent someone to ask him for the county seal. Zhi Yao resolutely refused to give it, and was killed by Zhang Xian Zhong.

古文：迨玛瑙山战败，偕贼将曹威等出降，士论丑之。
现代文：献忠纵火烧毁公署。
English: A loyalist set fire to a government office.

古文：之钿后赠尚宝少卿。
现代文：之钿后赠尚宝少卿。
English: After his death, it was given to Shobo Shokei.

古文：郝景春，字和满，江都人。
现代文：郝景春，字和满，江都人。
English: Gong Jingchun, character and full, Jiangdu people.

古文：举于乡，署盐城教谕，坐事罢归。
现代文：乡试中举，授盐城教谕，因犯过失而罢职归家。
English: He was awarded the title of "teacher of Yancheng" in the township junior high school examination, but resigned from his post due to misconduct and returned home.

古文：起陕西苑马寺万安监录事，量移黄州照磨，摄黄安县事。
现代文：启任陕西苑马寺万守监录事，后调为黄州照磨，代理黄安县事。
English: He was assigned to supervise the recording of the records of Shanxi Yuanma Temple, and was later transferred to Huangzhou Shoma, acting for Huang'an County.

古文：甫三日，群贼奄至，坚守八日夜，始解去。
现代文：到任刚三日，农民义军突然来攻城，景春等坚守八天八夜，义军撤走。
English: On the third day after his arrival, the peasant rebels suddenly attacked the city. Jingchun and others held out for eight days and eight nights, and the rebels withdrew.

古文：崇祯十一年，擢知房县。
现代文：崇祯十一年，升任房县知县。
English: In the eleventh year of Chongzhen, he was promoted to Fangxian Zhixian.

古文：罗汝才率九营之众请降于熊文灿，文灿受之。
现代文：农民起义军领袖罗汝才率九营之众向熊文灿请降，文灿同意受降，而汝才又犹豫起来。
English: Luo Rucai, the leader of the Peasants' Revolt Army, led the nine battalions to ask Xiong Wencang to surrender. Wencang agreed to surrender, but Rucai hesitated again.

古文：汝才犹豫，景春单骑入其营，偕汝才及其党白贵、黑云祥歃血盟。
现代文：景春单骑至义军兵营去劝说，并与汝才及其同党白贵、黑云祥歃血为盟。
English: Jingchun rode single-handedly to the barracks of the rebels to persuade them, and allied with Ru Cai and his fellow party members Bai Gui and He Yunxiang.

古文：汝才诣军门降，分诸营于竹谿、保康、上津，而自与贵、云祥居房县之野。
现代文：汝才到文灿军门投降，而所部诸营分驻于竹奚谷、保康、上津，自己与贵、云祥驻于房县城郊。
English: You only surrendered at the military gate of Wencang, while the battalions of the headquarters were stationed in Zhuye Valley, Baokang, and Shangjin, and he, Gui, and Yunxiang were stationed on the outskirts of Fang County.

古文：当是时，郧阳诸属邑，城郭为墟，独房赖景春拊循，粗可守。
现代文：当时，郧阳各县城墙都被破坏，只有房县有赖于景春安抚，大体上可以防守。
English: At that time, the city walls of all counties in Fenyang were destroyed, and only Fang County, which depended on Jingchun's pacification, was able to defend itself.

古文：及大众杂处，居民日惴惴。
现代文：然义军杂处其间，居民日夜不安。
English: But the rebels are everywhere, and the residents live in fear day and night.

古文：景春乃与主簿朱邦闻、守备杨道选修守具，辑诸营。
现代文：景春与主簿朱邦闻、守备杨道选一方面修理防御工事，一方面与义军诸营和睦相处。
English: On the one hand, Jingchun repaired the fortifications with the chief bookkeeper Zhu Bangwen and the guard Yang Daosen, and on the other hand, they lived in harmony with the rebel battalions.

古文：明年五月，张献忠反谷城，约汝才同反。
现代文：崇祯十二年五月，张献忠在谷城举兵反明，约汝才一同行动。
English: In May of the 12th year of Chongzhen, Zhang Xianzhong raised an army in Gucheng to oppose the Ming. It was not until around this time that they took action together.

古文：景春子鸣銮，诸生也，力敌万夫，谓父曰： 吾城当贼冲，而羸卒止二百，城何以守？ 
现代文：景春子郝鸣銮还是生员，有万夫不敌之勇，他对其父说： 房县城为敌攻击目标，仅疲惫瘦弱的士兵不过二百人，城何以守住？ 
English: Jingharu's son, Songtao, was still a freshman, and he was invincible. He said to his father, "Fangxian City is the target of the enemy's attack. There are only 200 tired and weak soldiers. How can the city be defended?

古文：乃擐甲诣汝才曰： 若不念香火盟乎？
现代文：便穿上铠甲去见汝才说 ：你难道不念曾与我父亲烧香盟誓之言吗？
English: Then he put on his armor and came to you and said, "Don't you remember when you made an oath to my father to burn incense?

古文：慎毋从乱。 
现代文：希望你慎重，不要与张献忠一同作乱。 
English: I hope you will be careful not to make trouble with Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：汝才佯诺。
现代文：汝才假意允诺。
English: You only pretend to promise.

古文：鸣銮觉其伪，归与道选授兵登陴，而献忠所遣前锋已至，击斩其将上天龙。遣使缒城乞援于文灿，凡十四往，不报。
现代文：鸣銮察觉出汝才的允诺并非真心诚意，回来与道选领兵登城防守，而献忠所遣前锋已至城下。鸣銮等斩义军将领上天龙，遣使向熊文灿求援，去了十四次，都未见到文灿。
English: Mingtang noticed that the promise of Ru Cai was not sincere. He came back with Daosen to lead the soldiers to defend the city, and the forward sent by dedication had already arrived at the city. Mingtang and other rebel generals led the dragon to heaven, and sent messengers to Xiong Wencang for help. They went fourteen times, but did not see Wencang.

古文：已而贼大至，献忠兵张白帜，汝才兵张赤帜，俄二帜相杂，环城力攻。
现代文：不久，义军大队人马至房县城下，献忠兵打白旗，汝才的队伍打红旗。忽然两军合在一起并力围攻。
English: Soon, the rebel brigade marched to Fang County, and the loyal soldiers raised a white flag, while the enemy team raised a red flag. Suddenly, the two armies joined forces and besieged.

古文：贵、云祥策马呼曰： 以城让我，保无他也。 
现代文：义军将领白贵、黑云祥向城上高呼： 把城让给我们，保证无事。 
English: The rebel generals Bai Gui and Hei Yun Xiang shouted to the city: Give us the city and guarantee that nothing will happen.

古文：乃用间入贼垒，阴识献忠所卧帐，将袭擒之。
现代文：献忠又令张大经来劝降。景春在城上大骂，鸣銮且守且战，坚持了五天五夜。义军损失不少，献忠左足受伤，其心爱战马也被杀死。
English: Xian Zhong also ordered Zhang Da Jing to come and persuade him to surrender. Jing Chun swore loudly on the castle, chanted and kept fighting, and persisted for five days and five nights. The rebels suffered a lot of losses, Xian Zhong's left foot was injured, and his beloved war horse was also killed.

古文：指挥张三锡启北门揖汝才入，道选巷战死。
现代文：守军指挥张三锡开北门放汝才入城，城被攻破，道选在巷战中牺牲。
English: The commander of the defending army, Zhang Sanxi, opened the north gate to let you enter the city. The city was breached, and Dosean was killed in the street battle.

古文：大经使汝才说景春降，怒不答。
现代文：大经促使汝才劝景春投降，景春不肯。
English: Du Cai urged Jingchun to surrender, but Jingchun refused.

古文：事闻，赠景春尚宝少卿，建祠奉祀，道选等亦赠恤。
现代文：又问他府库财物何在，景春厉声道 ：库藏若还有财物，你们也破不了城！ 
English: He also asked him where the property of the prefectural treasury was, and Jingchun snapped, "If there is still property in the treasury, you won't be able to break the city!"

古文：已，帝召见辅臣贺逢圣，备述其死事状，改赠太仆少卿。
现代文：义军杀一典史、一守备来恐吓他，景春终不屈服，与其子鸣銮一道被杀。其仆陈宜和朱邦闻一家都死。朝廷闻知，赠景春尚宝少卿，建祠奉祀，后又改赠太仆寺少卿。
English: The rebels threatened him by killing one of his generals and one of his guards, but Jing Chun did not give in and was killed together with his son, Mingtang. His servants, Chen Yi and Zhu Bangwen, both died. The imperial court heard of this and gave Jing Chun the title of Shangbao Shaoqing, built a small shrine in his honor, and later gave him the title of Dapoji Shaoqing.

古文：张克俭，字禹型，屯留人。
现代文：张克俭，字禹型，山西屯留人。
English: Zhang Kejian, Yu-type, from Shanxi.

古文：崇祯四年进士。授辉县知县。
现代文：崇祯四年进士，授辉县知县。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the rank of knight, and was awarded the title of Zhuxian Zhixian.

古文：六年春，贼犯武安，守备曹鸣鹗战死，遂犯辉县。
现代文：六年春，农民义军进攻武安，守备曹鸣战死。又进攻辉县，克俭固守。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the peasant rebels attacked Wu'an, and Cao Ming died in the battle. They also attacked Huixian, and Kejian held out.

古文：克俭乘城固守，贼不能下，屯百泉书院，三日而去。
现代文：义军屯于百泉书院，三日后撤去。
English: The rebels camped in the Hundred Springs Academy and withdrew three days later.

古文：迁兵部主事，被荐召对，称旨。十二年擢湖广佥事，监郧、襄诸军。
现代文：克俭升兵部主事。崇祯十二年，升湖广佥事，监郧阳、襄阳诸军。
English: In the 12th year of the Chongzhen Emperor, he was promoted to the position of commander of the general staff of the army, and was in charge of overseeing the armies of Shenyang and Xiangyang.

古文：杨嗣昌镇襄阳，深倚仗之。
现代文：杨嗣昌镇守襄阳，还多依仗于他。
English: Yang Shichang was a staunch defender of Xiangyang and relied heavily on him.

古文：张献忠、罗汝才之败也，小秦王、浑世王、过天星等皆降，嗣昌处之房、竹山中，命克俭安辑。
现代文：张献忠、罗汝才失败，小秦王、混世王、过天星等均降，嗣昌把他们安置在房县、竹山的山中，命克俭来安抚。
English: Zhang Xianzhong and Luo Rucai failed, Xiao Qin Wang, Jixi Wang, and Gu Tianxing all declined, and Tsuchang placed them in the mountains of Fang County and Zhushan to appease them.

古文：克俭深忧之，上书嗣昌曰： 襄阳自古要区，本朝筦钥献陵，视昔尤重。近两河饥民云集，新旧降丁逼处其间，一夫叫呼，即足致乱。
现代文：但义军并未解散，自择驻扎，连营数百里。这时大河南北发生饥荒，流民到襄、汉来就食的，每日数万人，义军多混入流民之中。克俭深以为忧，上书嗣昌说 ：襄阳自古就是重要地方。近两河饥民云集，新旧降卒杂处其间，一夫号召，立即反叛。
English: However, the rebel army did not disband, but stationed itself at its own choice, and marched hundreds of miles. At this time, there was a famine in the north and south of the Great River, and tens of thousands of refugees came to Xiang and Han to eat every day, and the rebel army was mostly mixed in with the refugees. Ke Jian was deeply worried, and said to Shangshu Zichang: Xiangyang has been an important place since ancient times. Nearly two rivers of starving people gathered, and the old and the new were scattered everywhere. One man called out and immediately rebelled.

古文：况秦兵以长、武之变，西归郧、房。
现代文：况秦兵以长、武之变，西归郧阳、房县。
English: In addition, the Qin soldiers went to Chang and Wuzhixuan, and the Western soldiers went to Shenyang and Fangxian.

古文：军府粗立，降营棋置，奚啻放虎自卫。
现代文：军总督府才建立，降卒兵营星罗棋布，如同放虎自卫。
English: The military governor's office had just been established, and the demobilized soldiers' barracks were scattered all over the place, as if they were defending themselves against a tiger.

古文：紫、汉、西、兴，初无重门之备，何恃不恐。 
现代文：紫、汉、西、兴没有重要守备，有何依恃而不恐。 
English: Zi, Han, Xi, and Xing do not have important defenses, so they are not afraid of attacks.

古文：嗣昌不以为意，报曰： 昔高仁厚六日降贼百万，迄擒阡能，监军何怯耶？ 
现代文：嗣昌不以为然，反而对他说 ：昔高仁厚六天内降贼百万，擒获阡能，监军为何胆怯？ 
English: Tsuchimasa didn't think so, and instead said to him: In the past, Gao Renhou surrendered a million soldiers in six days, and gained a great deal of power. Why was the supervisor of the army so timid?

古文：及嗣昌入蜀，委克俭以留务。
现代文：嗣昌入蜀后，委任克俭留襄阳主持军务。
English: After Tsuchimasa entered Shu, he appointed Ke Jian to remain in Xiangyang to preside over military affairs.

古文：录破贼功，加右参议，监军如故。
现代文：因破敌有功，加克俭为右参议，仍监军郧、襄。
English: Due to his achievements in defeating the enemy, Ga Ke Jian was appointed as the right councillor, and still supervised the military affairs of Xing and Xiang.

古文：及是，独鳌果从狱中起，承曾率众夺门走。
现代文：不久，命他移守下川南道，郧阳袁继咸奏请留襄。崇祯十四年二月，升右佥都御史，巡抚河南。
English: Soon, he was ordered to move to Shimokawa-south province, and Shanyang Yuan Jixianxiao asked him to stay. In February of the 14th year of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of the governor of Henan Province.

古文：事闻，命逮治。时河南亦大乱，久逮不至，未知所终。徐世淳，字中明，秀水人。
现代文：调令尚未到达，献忠令人来借督府军符以进入襄阳城，克俭不同意。夜间，义军发起进攻，焚毁襄王府。克俭急忙去援救，为义军所擒获，大骂而死。徐世淳，字中明，浙江秀水人。
English: The transfer order had not yet arrived, so Xian Zhong asked him to borrow the governor's army insignia to enter Xiangyang City, but Ke Jian did not agree. At night, the rebels launched an attack and burned the Xiangwang Palace. Ke Jian rushed to the rescue, was captured by the rebels, and died screaming. Xu Shijun, Zi Zhongming, Zhejiang Xiushui Ren.

古文：父必达，字德夫，万历二十年进士。知溧水县，筑石臼湖堤，奏除齐泰姻戚子孙军籍二十六家。
现代文：父徐必达，字德夫，万历二十年进士，曾任溧水县知县，筑石血湖堤，奏除齐泰姻戚子孙军籍二十六家。
English: His father, Xu Bida, surnamed Defu, had been a military officer for 20 years. He had served as a magistrate in Ershui County, built a stone blood lake dike, and had 26 relatives and descendants of military personnel in Qi Tai.

古文：累迁吏部考功郎中，与吏科给事中储纯臣同领察事。
现代文：升吏部考功郎中，与吏科给事中储纯臣共同进行官吏考核。
English: As a meritorious student in the examination for promotion to the cadre department, he conducted the official assessment together with the official in charge of the cadre department and the official in charge of the reserve department.

古文：纯臣受赃吏赇，当大计日，必达进状请黜纯臣，面揖之退，一座大惊。迁光禄丞，陈白粮利弊十一事，悉允行。
现代文：纯臣受贪官的贿赂，在考核京官时，必达奏报纯臣罪状，请革其职。调光禄寺丞，陈奏征收 白粮 的利弊十一事，均被采纳。
English: In the assessment of Beijing officials, it is necessary to report the crime of a pure minister who has been bribed by a corrupt official and ask him to resign from his post. The advantages and disadvantages of the eleven things of dimming the light of the temple and collecting the grain have all been adopted.

古文：进少卿，巡漕御史孙居相以船坏不治，请雇民船济运，必达争止之。
现代文：进为少卿，巡漕御史孙居相因船坏，奏请雇民船运输，必达力争而止。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shosho (Junior Lord), and the rowing goshi, Sun Ju Xiang, requested to hire a people's boat to transport him because his boat was broken.

古文：天启初，以右佥都御史督操江军。
现代文：天启初年，以右佥都御史督练江军。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he took the position of the right-hand governor of the capital to supervise and train the river army.

古文：白莲贼将窥徐州，必达募锐卒会山东兵击破之。
现代文：白莲教义军进攻徐州，必达募兵与山东军共同镇压。
English: The Bai Lian rebels attacked Xuzhou, and Bida recruited soldiers to suppress them together with the Shandong army.

古文：迁兵部右侍郎，以拾遗罢归，卒。
现代文：升兵部右侍郎，官至拾遗而罢职，死于家乡。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, but resigned from the position to collect the remains, and died in his hometown.

古文：世淳，崇祯中举人。
现代文：世淳为崇祯年间举人。
English: Shijun was a star performer during the reign of Emperor Chongzhen.

古文：十三年冬，历随州知州。
现代文：崇祯十三年冬，任随州知州。
English: In the winter of the thirteenth year of Chongzhen, he was appointed to Suizhou Chizhou.

古文：州尝被贼，居民萧然。
现代文：该州曾遭兵乱，居民不多。
English: The state was once plagued by war, and few residents remain.

古文：世淳知贼必复至，集士民誓以死守。
现代文：世淳料定农民起义军必来攻打，召集士民决心死守。
English: The peasants' insurgent army was sure to attack, and the people were determined to defend themselves.

古文：会岁大荒，士多就食粥厂，叹曰： 可使士以馁失礼乎？ 
现代文：这年闹荒灾，连一些读书人都靠施粥为生。世淳叹息道 ：难道能使这些读书人因饥饿而失礼？ 
English: This year has been a disaster, and even some readers are living on rice porridge. Shijun sighed, "Can these readers be made to lose their manners because they are hungry?"

古文：分粟振之。
现代文：对他们进行赈济。
English: They're being subsidized.

古文：溃兵过随索饷，世淳授兵登陴，而单骑入见军帅曰： 军食不供，有司罪也。杀我足矣，请械我以见督师。 
现代文：被农民起义军打败的官兵，路过随州时要供应他们的粮饷，世淳单骑去见他们统帅说： 军队粮饷不足，是地方官吏之罪，杀我就可以了，不要扰害百姓，把我押去见督师吧！ 
English: The officers and soldiers who were defeated by the peasants' uprising army wanted to supply them with grain when passing Suizhou. Shijun rode alone to see their commander and said: The army's shortage of grain is the fault of local officials. You can kill me. Don't disturb the people. Send me to the inspector!

古文：帅气夺，敛众去。
现代文：该败兵统帅无话可说，率领残兵败将而去。
English: The defeated commander had nothing to say, and led the defeated soldiers away.

古文：明年三月，张献忠自襄阳来犯，世淳寝食南城谯楼，晓夜固守，告急于巡抚宋一鹤。
现代文：崇祯十四年三月，张献忠自襄阳进攻随州，世淳日夜在南城谯楼上固守，并向巡抚宋一鹤告急。
English: In March of the 14th year of Chongzhen, Zhang Xianzhong attacked Suizhou from Xiangyang, and Shichun held fast to the South City Tower day and night, and was in a hurry to the governor Song Yihe.

古文：一鹤遣兵来援，为监司守承天者邀去。
现代文：一鹤派兵来援救。但半途为监司守承天截去。
English: Ichizuru sent soldiers to rescue them, but they were intercepted halfway by the overseer, Shou Jōten.

古文：世淳妾赵、王及臧获十八人皆死。
现代文：世淳固守月余，粮尽援绝，随州为义军攻破。
English: Shichun held out for more than a month, the grain was exhausted, and Suizhou was defeated by the rebels.

古文：后赠太仆少卿，建祠，以肇梁祔。
现代文：后赠太仆寺少卿，为他建祠纪念。
English: Later, he was given the title of Taichu-ji Shokei, and a small shrine was built in his memory.

