古文：李忽兰吉李忽兰吉，一名庭玉，陇西人。
现代文：李忽兰吉，一名庭玉，陇西人。
English: Li Hulanji, a garden ball, from Shaanxi.

古文：父节，仕金，岁乙未，自巩昌石门山从汪世显以城降。
现代文：父李节，曾在金朝为官，太宗七年，自巩昌石门山随汪世显降归蒙古军。
English: His father, Li Jie, had been an official in the Kim dynasty, and after seven years of reigning the throne, he followed Wang Shixian down from Shimen Mountain in Gongchang to join the Mongolian army.

古文：忽兰吉隶皇子阔端为质子，从征西川。
现代文：忽兰吉作为人质在皇子阔端属下服役，随蒙古军攻西川。
English: As a hostage, Hulanji served under the prince Kuokata, and followed the Mongol army to attack Saikawa.

古文：辛丑，以功为管军总领，兼总帅府知事，从征西番南涧有功。
现代文：太宗十三年，因有功升为管军总领，兼总帅府知事，随大军征西蕃南涧有功。
English: In the 13th year of Taizong's reign, he was promoted to the commander-in-chief of the army and the governor of the prefecture due to his meritorious service.

古文：癸丑，世祖在潜邸，用汪德臣言，承制命忽兰吉佩银符，为管军千户、都总领，佐汪惟正立利州。
现代文：宪宗三年，世祖为皇太子，采纳汪德臣的意见，按制度命忽兰吉佩银符，为管军千户、都总领，辅助汪德臣建立利州。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the dynasty was crown prince, and Wang Dezhen's opinion was adopted. According to the system, Wang Dezhen was ordered to pay a silver token to Hulanji, and he was the commander of a thousand households and the leader of the capital, and assisted Wang Dezhen in establishing Lishu.

古文：乙卯正月，将兵三万取合江大获山。
现代文：五年正月，领兵三万攻取合江大获山。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, he led 30,000 soldiers to conquer Mt.

古文：宋刘都统率众谋焚利州、沙市，次青山，忽兰吉以伏兵取之，俘获甚众。都元帅阿答忽以闻，升本帅府经历，兼军民都弹压。
现代文：宋刘都统计划烧毁利州、沙市，进军到青山遭到忽兰吉的伏击。都元帅阿答忽上报忽兰吉的战功，因而升为本帅府经历兼军民都弹压。
English: Song Liu Du Tong planned to burn Lizhou and Sha City, and marched to Aoyama, where he was ambushed by Hu Langji. Du Marshal A Ta suddenly reported on the war exploits of Hu Langji, and thus was promoted to the position of Generalissimo.

古文：丙辰，宪宗更赐金符，仍命为千户、都总领。
现代文：六年，宪宗赐他金符，仍命为千户、都总领。
English: Six years later, Emperor Xianzong gave him a gold medal, and he was still appointed as the head of a thousand households and the capital.

古文：戊午，忽兰吉以兵先趋剑门觇伺，宋兵运粮于长宁，追至运曲坝，夺之，俘将校五人而还。
现代文：八年，忽兰吉领兵探测剑门虚实，遇宋兵运粮于长宁，忽兰吉追至运曲坝，夺其军粮，俘将校五人而还。
English: In the eighth year, Hulanji led soldiers to probe the truth and falsity of Jianmen Gate. When Song soldiers were transporting grain in Changning, Hulanji chased them to Yunquba, seized their grain, captured five officers and returned.

古文：宪宗南征，忽兰吉掌桥道馈饷之事，有功，赐玺书。
现代文：宪宗南征，忽兰吉负责桥梁、道路及军需供应诸事。
English: Kenzong was in charge of the Southern Expedition, while Hulanji was in charge of bridges, roads, and military supplies.

古文：从攻苦竹隘山寨，先登，斩守将杨立，获都统张寔，招降长宁、清居、大获山、运山、龙州等寨。
现代文：蒙古大军攻苦竹隘山寨，忽兰吉为先锋，斩守将杨立，俘都统张宀是，招降长宁、清居、大获山、运山、龙州等山寨。
English: The Mongolian army attacked the Bamboo Narrows, with Hulanji as the vanguard, Yang Li as the commander-in-chief, Zhang Xie as the commander-in-chief, and the villages of Changning, Qingju, Dahuishan, Yunshan, and Longzhou as the conquered villages.

古文：一卒引入，甲士环立。忽兰吉下马，执大渊手，谓之曰： 上方宣论赐赏，不待而来，何也？ 
现代文：十一月，大获山守臣杨大渊投降，后又逃归。宪宗大怒，要屠杀大获山城。汪德臣对忽兰吉说： 大渊此去，后事难以预测，你马上去追回！ 于是忽兰吉单骑至城下，城门未闭，入城见大渊，握手问道： 皇上正宣布赏赐，你却跑回来为何？ 
English: In November, Yang Dayuan, the great mountain guardian, surrendered and then fled back. Kenzong was furious and wanted to massacre Dayuan Mountain City. Wang Dezhen said to Hulanji: "Daiyuan, this is where you are going, the aftermath is unpredictable, you should go back immediately!" So Hulanji rode alone to the bottom of the city, the city gate was not closed, he entered the city to see Dayuan, shook hands and asked: The emperor is announcing a reward, but why did you run back?

古文：大渊曰： 诚不知国朝礼体，且久出，恐城寨有他变，是以亟归，非敢有异谋也。 
现代文：大渊说 ：我真的不知道国朝的礼仪，因想到出来已久，怕城寨有不测之变，所以急忙回城，不敢有什么阴谋。 
English: Obuchi said, "I really don't know the etiquette of the Imperial Court, because I've been thinking about it for a long time, and I'm afraid that there will be unforeseen changes to the castle, so I hurried back to the castle, not daring to have any conspiracy.

古文：遂与偕来，一军皆喜。忽兰吉入奏，宪宗曰： 杨安抚反乎？ 
现代文：于是与忽兰吉一同来到蒙古军营。宪宗问忽兰吉： 杨安抚反叛吗？ 
English: So he came to the Mongolian military camp together with Khurangi. Kenzong asked Khurangi: Why did Yang pacify the rebels?

古文：对曰： 无也。 
现代文：忽兰吉回答 ：没有。 
English: Khurangi replied: No.

古文：宪宗曰： 汝何以知之？ 
现代文：宪宗又问 ：你何以见得？ 
English: Kenzong also asked: How do you know?

古文：对曰： 军马整肃，防内乱也；城门不闭，无他心也；一闻臣言，即抚绥军民，从臣以出，以是知之。 
现代文：忽兰吉回答说 ：他军马整肃，是防内乱；城门不闭，表示他无反叛之心；他一闻臣言，立即抚绥军民，随臣回来，由此可知他无反意。 
English: Hulanji replied: His army and horses were purged to prevent civil strife; the gates were not closed, indicating that he had no rebellious heart; as soon as he heard the minister's words, he immediately petted the soldiers and people and returned with the minister, from which we can see that he had no objection.

古文：大渊遂以故官侍郎、都元帅听命，而民得生全。
现代文：宪宗问 ：你独自一人去不怕吗？ 忽兰吉回答说： 臣恐上劳圣上忧虑，下苦诸军，担负着一郡百姓生命的安危之责，所以不知害怕。 
English: Xianzong asked, "Aren't you afraid to go alone?" Hulanji replied, "As a minister, I'm scared, I'm overworked, I'm worried, I'm working hard for the army, and I'm responsible for the safety and security of a county's people, so I don't know what to be afraid of."

古文：宪宗命忽兰吉与怯里马哥领战船二百艘掠钓鱼山，夺其粮船四百艘。
现代文：宪宗大喜，赐葡萄酒，任杨大渊为侍郎、都元帅。百姓也免于战乱之祸。忽兰吉与怯里马哥奉宪宗命领战船二百艘进攻钓鱼山，夺宋军粮船四百艘。
English: Kenzong was overjoyed, gave wine, and appointed Yang Dayuan as a steward and general. The people were also spared the scourge of war. Hulanji and Zhulimago led 200 warships to attack Diaoyu Mountain on the orders of Kenzong, and captured 400 grain ships of the Song Army.

古文：宪宗次钓鱼山，忽兰吉作浮梁，以通往来。
现代文：宪宗到钓鱼山后，忽兰吉建浮桥以便通行。
English: After Kenzong arrived at Diaoyu Mountain, Hulanji built a pontoon bridge to facilitate traffic.

古文：己未，与怯里马哥、紥胡打、鲁都赤、阔阔术领蒙古、汉军二千五百略重庆。
现代文：九年，与怯里马哥、扎胡打、鲁都赤、阔阔术领蒙古、汉军二千五百人进攻重庆。
English: In the ninth year, with the help of Zhulimago, Zakhuda, Rudouka, and the Mongolian general, the Han army of twenty-five hundred attacked Chongqing.

古文：六月，总帅汪德臣没于军，命忽兰吉以其军殿后。宋兵水陆昼夜接战，皆败之。
现代文：六月，总帅汪德臣死于军中，宪宗命忽兰吉率其军殿后，与宋水陆军日夜接战，打败宋军，占领青居山。
English: In June, the commander-in-chief Wang Deqin died in the army, and after the order of the Emperor of the Song Dynasty was given to Hu Lanji to lead his army, he fought with the Song Army day and night, defeated the Song Army, and occupied Qingji Mountain.

古文：部军皆青居人，赏赉独厚，遂与蒲察都元帅守青居，治城壁，储刍粮，招纳降附。宗王穆哥承制命忽兰吉佩金符，为巩昌元帅。中统元年，德臣子惟正袭总帅，至青居。
现代文：忽兰吉与都元帅钦察镇守青居山，修治城墙，储备粮草，招纳降附者。宗王穆哥按规定授忽兰吉金符，任巩昌元帅。中统元年，德臣之子惟正承袭其父总帅之职，至青居山。
English: Hulanji and Du Marshal Qincha guarded Qingju Mountain, repaired the city walls, stored grain and grass, and recruited subordinates. King Mu Ge awarded Hulanji the Golden Robe and appointed him Marshal Gongchang. In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the son of Decheng inherited his father's position as commander-in-chief and went to Qingju Mountain.

古文：五月，忽兰吉等赴上都。
现代文：五月，忽兰吉等去上都。
English: In May, Hulanji and others went to Shangdu.

古文：时浑都海据六盘山以叛，世祖遣忽兰吉亟还，与汪良臣发所统二十四州兵追袭之。
现代文：这时浑都海占据六盘山反叛，世祖遣忽兰吉迅速回青居山，与汪良臣征调二十四州兵追击。
English: At this time, Hunduhai occupied Liupanshan and rebelled. The ancestor, Yanhu Lanji, quickly returned to Qingji Mountain, and with Wang Liangcheng, recruited and dispatched 24 state soldiers to pursue the rebels.

古文：十月，从宗王哈必赤等次合纳忽石温之地，力战，杀浑都海等于阵，余党悉平。
现代文：十月，随宗王哈必赤等进军至合纳忽石温地方，与叛军力战，杀浑都海，余党都一一平定。
English: In October, he marched to the Henna-Kuseki-Wen region with King Habikkuk and others, and fought against the rebels, killing all of them. The rest of the rebels were all subdued.

古文：二年六月，以功授巩昌后元帅，赐金币、鞍马、弓矢。
现代文：二年六月，因功授忽兰吉为巩昌后元帅。九月，火都在西蕃之点西岭反叛，汪惟正率军进击，至怯里马地方，火都率五百人逃入西蕃。
English: In June of the second year, Hulanji was awarded the post of Gongchang rear marshal. In September, the Fuegians rebelled in Xiling at the point of Xiling, Wang Weizheng led the army to attack, and in the area of Zhulima, the Fuegians led 500 people to escape into Xiling.

古文：九月，火都叛于西蕃点西岭，汪惟正帅师袭之，至怯里马之地，火都以五百人遁入西蕃。诏宗王只必铁木儿，以答剌海、察吉里、速木赤将蒙古军二千，忽兰吉将总帅军一千，追袭火都于西蕃。
现代文：朝廷诏令宗王只必帖木儿统领答剌海、察吉里、速木赤所属之蒙古军二千，忽兰吉统领总帅军一千，追袭火都于西蕃。
English: The imperial court issued a decree ordering the patriarch to have Tamerlane lead the Mongol army of two thousand, which belonged to Danghae, Tsakiri, and Hayakawa, and Khurangi to lead the general's army of one thousand, and to pursue the fire in Xidi.

古文：十月，擒之。
现代文：十月，擒获火都。
English: In October, the capital was set on fire.

古文：四年，首将答剌海言忽兰吉功高，诏赐虎符。
现代文：四年，首将答剌海认为忽兰吉在这次战争中功高，世祖诏赐虎符。
English: In the fourth year, the head of the army, General Atsubo Erhai, thought that Hulanji had done a great service in this war, and the emperor gave him a tiger emblem.

古文：忽兰吉不受，问其故，对曰： 臣闻国制，将万军者佩虎符，若汪氏将万军，已佩之，臣何可复佩。 
现代文：忽兰吉不受，他说： 臣闻本朝制度，统帅万军者才佩虎符，如汪氏统领万军，已佩虎符，臣怎可再佩戴。 
English: Hulanji did not accept, he said: The vassal knows the system of this dynasty, and only the commander of the army can wear the tiger emblem. If the Wang clan commands the army, and has already worn the tiger emblem, how can the vassal wear it again.

古文：六月，答机叛于西蕃，帝命好里燕纳，与惟正追之松州，忽兰吉以千骑先往，执答机。
现代文：世祖认为此话有理。六月，答机在西蕃反叛，帝命好里燕纳与汪惟正追至松州，而忽兰吉已先率千骑去擒获了答机。
English: The ancestor believed this to be true. In June, the answering machine rebelled in Xidi, and Yanna and Wang Weizheng, who were in favor of the emperor's life, chased it to Songzhou, while Hulanji had already led a thousand horsemen to capture the answering machine.

古文：至元元年，入觐，命与同佥总帅汪良臣还蜀，守青居。
现代文：至元元年，忽兰吉入朝拜谒世祖。世祖命他与同佥总帅汪良臣回四川守青居。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hulanji entered the imperial court to pay homage to his ancestor. The ancestor ordered him and his fellow general Wang Liangcheng to return to Sichuan to guard the youthful residence.

古文：是时，国兵犹与宋兵相持于钓鱼山。
现代文：这时，元军与宋军正相持于钓鱼山。
English: At this time, the Yuan and Song armies were facing each other in the Diaoyu Mountains.

古文：三年，宋兵陷大梁平山寨。
现代文：三年，宋军攻陷大梁平山寨，平章赛典赤令忽兰吉领兵千余骑进攻。
English: In the third year, the Song Army attacked and captured the Daliang Ping Village, and Ping Zhang Saiten ordered Hu Lanji to lead more than a thousand soldiers to attack.

古文：平章赛典赤令忽兰吉领兵千余骑掠其境，先以七百人觇之，闻寨中拥老幼西去，追击之，斩首三百级，得马二百八十，都元帅钦察等家属百余口先为宋兵所得，亦夺还之。四年，以本职充阆蓬广安顺庆夔府等处蒙古汉军都元帅参议。
现代文：忽兰吉总队七百人去探测虚实，得知寨中宋军已拥老幼西去，便驱兵追击，斩首三百，得马二百八十匹，夺还原先被宋军俘虏去的都元帅钦察的家属百余口。四年，以本职充任阆、蓬、广安、顺庆、夔府等处蒙古汉军都元帅参议。
English: The seven hundred men of the Hulanji general team went to investigate the truth and falsehood, and learned that the Song army had gone to the west of the village, they chased the soldiers, beheaded three hundred, captured two hundred and eighty horses, and recaptured more than one hundred families of the capital marshal Qincha, who had been captured by the Song army. For four years, he served as the Mongolian Han army's marshal in charge of, Peng, Guang'an, Shunqing, and Shifu.

古文：六年，赐虎符，授昭勇大将军、夔东路招讨使，以军三千，立章广平山寨，置屯田，出兵以绝大梁平山两道。
现代文：六年，赐虎符，授昭勇大将军、夔东路招讨使。忽兰吉以三千人马建立章广平山寨，置屯田，出兵截断通往大梁平山的两条道路。
English: In the sixth year, he was awarded the Tiger Badge, given the title of General Zhaoyong, and sent an envoy to the East to solicit envoys. In no time, Lanki used three thousand horses to build the Zhangguangping Village, set up military camps, and dispatched troops to cut off the two roads leading to Daliangping Mountain.

古文：十年正月，成都失利，帝遣人问所以失之之故及今措置之方，忽兰吉附奏曰： 初立成都，惟建子城，军民止于外城，别无城壁。
现代文：至元十年正月，蒙军在成都失利，世祖派人去查问失败的原因及今后措施。忽兰吉请来使转告朝廷： 建立成都之初，只建内城，军民在内城之外，再无城墙保护。
English: By the first month of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Mongolian army had lost in Chengdu, and the patriarch sent someone to inquire about the reasons for the defeat and future measures. Hulanji invited him to convey to the imperial court: At the beginning of the establishment of Chengdu, only the inner city was built, and the military and civilians outside the inner city were no longer protected by the city wall.

古文：宋军乘虚来攻，失于不备，军官皆年少不经事之人，以此失利。
现代文：宋军乘虚进攻，而我又失于防备，加上军官皆年少，没有作战经验，因此失利。
English: The Song army took advantage of the situation to attack, and I lost my defense, plus the officers were young and had no combat experience, so I lost.

古文：西川地旷人稀，宜修置城寨，以备不虞；选任材智，广畜军储，最为急务。
现代文：四川地广人稀，应修建城寨以防不虞；而选任有才智的人，广蓄军备则是当前之急务。
English: Sichuan's vast territory is sparsely populated, and a walled city should be built as a precaution. However, the selection of talented people and the extensive stockpiling of armaments are the most urgent tasks at the moment.

古文：今蒙古、汉军多非正身，半以驱奴代，宜严禁之。
现代文：如今，蒙古、汉军多非自身入伍，而是用奴仆代替，应加严禁。
English: Today, Mongolian and Han soldiers mostly do not enlist themselves, but use slaves instead, which should be strictly prohibited.

古文：所谓修筑城寨、练习军马、措画屯田、规运粮饷、创造舟楫、完善军器，六者不可缺一；又当任贤远谗，信赏必罚，修内治外，战胜攻取，选用良将，随机应变，则边陲无虞矣。 
现代文：修筑城寨，训练军马，措划屯田、运输粮饷、建造舟船、修整军械，这六事缺一不可；还要任贤能，不听信谗言，信赏必罚，整肃内政，安抚周围百姓，选用良将，随机应变，如此则边疆无可忧虑。 
English: To build a walled city, to train horses, to plan the settlement of fields, to transport grain, to build boats, and to repair military equipment, these six things are indispensable. It is also necessary to appoint wise men, not to listen to slander, to reward and punish, to rectify domestic affairs, to pacify the surrounding people, to select good generals, and to respond to random changes. In this way, there is no need to worry about the frontier.

古文：六月，将兵赴成都，与察不花同权省事。
现代文：六月，领兵赴成都，与察不花共同暂管军政。
English: In June, he led the troops to Chengdu and temporarily took charge of the military and political affairs together with Zha Fuxia.

古文：十一月，复还守章广平山寨，前后七年，每战辄胜。
现代文：十一月又回到章广平山寨镇守，前后七年，每战必胜。
English: In November, he returned to guard the Zhangguangping Village, and for the past seven years, he has won every battle.

古文：十三年，引兵略重庆，复取简州。
现代文：十三年，引兵进攻重庆，再取简州。
English: In the thirteenth year, the army was led to attack Chongqing, and then to take Jianzhou.

古文：十四年，承制授延安路管军招讨使。
现代文：十四年授延安路管军招讨使。
English: He was awarded the Yan'an Road Administration Corps Recruitment Envoy for 14 years.

古文：入觐，赐虎符，授四川北道宣慰使。忽兰吉请以先受巩昌元帅之职及虎符与其弟庭望。二十年，改四川南道宣慰使。
现代文：十五年，秃鲁在六盘山反叛，忽兰吉率延安路军马，与别速台、赵炳及总帅府兵于六盘会师，大败秃鲁于武川。班师回来，授京兆、延安、凤翔三路管军都尉，兼屯田守卫事。十月，改任同知利州宣抚使，仍为夔东招讨。入朝参见世祖，赐虎符，授四川北道宣慰使。二十年，改授四川南道宣慰使。
English: In the fifteenth year, Zhang Lu rebelled in Liupanshan. Suddenly, Lanji led the Yan'an Road army and horses, and joined the division in Liupanshan with Bie Xidai, Zhao Wei and the commander-in-chief's soldiers, and defeated Zhang Lu in Wuchuan. The division came back and was awarded the Beijing, Yan'an and Fengxiang three-way management army captain, and also the Tunden guard. In October, he was reassigned to the Tongzhi and Lishu Proclamation Envoy, still recruiting for the east of Fujian. See the entry into the imperial court, awarded the tiger emblem, awarded the North Sichuan

古文：二十一年，奉旨与参政曲里吉思、佥省巴八、左丞汪惟正分兵进取五溪洞蛮。
现代文：二十一年，奉旨与参政曲里吉思、佥省巴八、左丞汪惟正，分兵进取五溪洞蛮。
English: In the twenty-first year, according to the order and the participation in politics, Qu Li Jisi, Zou Ba Ba, Zuo Wang Weizheng, and the detachment of soldiers entered Wuxi Cave.

古文：时思、播以南，施、黔、鼎、澧、辰、沅之界，蛮獠叛服不常，往往劫掠边民，乃诏四川行省讨之。
现代文：当时思州、播州以南，施、黔、鼎、澧、辰、沅的交界地区，少数民族叛服无常，朝廷诏命四川行省发兵征讨。
English: At that time, in the border areas of Shizhou, south of Banzhou, Shih, Handan, Ding, Handan, Chen and Handan, the ethnic minorities were rebellious and unstable, and the imperial court ordered Sichuan Province to send troops to investigate.

古文：曲里吉思、惟正一军出黔中，巴八一军出思、播，都元帅脱察一军出澧州，忽兰吉一军自夔门会合。
现代文：曲里吉思、惟正一军出黔中，巴八一军出思、播，都元帅脱察一军出澧州，忽兰吉一军自夔门出军与他们会合。
English: While the army of Qu Li Jisi and Wo Zheng was marching out, the army of Ba Ba I was marching out, and the army of Marshal Du Cha was marching out of Bozhou, and the army of Hulan Ji was marching out of Zhimen to join them.

古文：十一月，诸将凿山开道，绵亘千里，诸蛮设伏险隘，木弩竹矢，伺间窃发，亡命迎敌者，皆尽杀之。
现代文：十一月，诸军凿山开道，长达千里。诸蛮在险隘设伏，木弓竹箭伺机齐发，有不怕死者去进攻，皆被杀尽。
English: In November, the armies chiseled a path through the mountains that stretched for thousands of miles. The barbarians set up camp in the dangerous narrows, with wooden bows and bamboo arrows waiting for an opportunity to attack. Those who dared to attack were all killed.

古文：遣谕诸蛮酋长率众来降，独散毛洞潭顺走避岩谷，力屈始降。
现代文：朝廷遣使去告谕诸蛮酋长率众来降。只有散毛洞的覃顺逃到岩谷中，直到力竭时才降。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to tell the barbarian chieftains to come down with their troops. Only Shaoshun of the Shaggy Cave escaped into the rock valley and did not come down until he was exhausted.

古文：二十三年，入觐，以老病，乞归田里。
现代文：二十三年，忽兰吉朝见世祖，因老病请求回归家乡。
English: Twenty-three years later, Hulanji Chao met his ancestor and asked him to return to his hometown due to an old illness.

古文：帝悯之，得还巩昌。
现代文：世祖怜悯他，准回巩昌。
English: The patriarch took pity on him and allowed him to return to Gongchang.

古文：二十六年，行省列奏忽兰吉之功，请用范殿帅故事，商议本省军事。
现代文：二十六年行省奏报忽兰吉之功，请按照范殿帅之例，参与商议本省军事。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of the provincial report, please follow the example of General Fan and participate in the discussion of the province's military.

古文：二十七年，拜资善大夫，遥授陕西等处行尚书省左丞，商议军事，食左丞之禄。
现代文：二十七年，拜资善大夫，授陕西行尚书省左丞；参与军事，领左丞之俸禄。
English: In the 27th year, he was awarded the title of Baizhishan Doctor, and was awarded the title of Shaanxi Xinggang Shangshu Zojo; he participated in the military, and received the salary of Zojo.

古文：元贞二年，入觐，授资德大夫、陕西等处行中书省右丞，议本省公事，卒。
现代文：元贞二年，朝见皇帝，授资德大夫、陕西行中书省右丞，参预本省政务。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Zhen, he was granted the title of Doctor of German Literature by the emperor, and became the right-hand man of the Ministry of Education in Shaanxi Province, and participated in the government affairs of the province.

古文：泰定元年，谥襄敏。
现代文：卒于泰定元年，谥 襄敏 。
English: He died in the first year of Taiding, and was succeeded by Zou Xiangmin.

古文：李庭李庭，小字劳山，本金人蒲察氏，金末来中原，改称李氏。家于济阴，后徙寿光。
现代文：李庭，小字劳山，本金人，姓蒲察氏，金末来到中原，改姓李氏，家居洛阳，后迁至寿光。
English: Li Ting, Lao Shan, the principal, surnamed Pu Cha, came to the Central Plains, changed his surname to Li, lived in Luoyang, and later moved to Shouguang.

古文：至元六年，以材武选隶军籍，权管军千户。
现代文：至元六年，因有武才而入军，暂代理管军千户。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he entered the army due to his military talent, and temporarily acted as the governor of a thousand households.

古文：从伐宋，围襄阳。宋将夏贵率战船三千艘来援，泊鹿门山西岸，诸翼水军攻之，相持七日。
现代文：随元军伐宋，围攻襄阳，宋将夏贵率战船三千艘援救襄阳，泊于虎门山西岸。元水军进攻，相持七日。
English: Following the Yuan army's attack on Song and siege of Xiangyang, Song general Xia Gui led three thousand warships to rescue Xiangyang and camped on the west coast of Mount Humen. The Yuan navy attacked and held out for seven days.

古文：庭时将步骑，自请与水军万户解汝楫击之，斩其裨将王玘、元胜。
现代文：李庭率步骑军，请求与水军万户解汝楫共同出击，斩宋军副将王王巳、元胜。
English: Li Ting led the cavalry and requested the naval forces to attack together, and the vice-commanders of the Song Army, Wang Wang Si and Yuan Sheng, were killed.

古文：河南行省承制授庭益都新军千户。
现代文：河南行省授庭为益都新军千户。
English: Henan Province's accession to the Court of Arbitration benefits thousands of New Army households.

古文：八年春，真除益都军千户，赐号拔都儿。与宋兵战襄阳城下，追奔逐北，直抵城门，流矢中左股而止。
现代文：宋襄阳守将吕文焕以一万五千兵来攻万山堡，万户张弘范正与宋军交战，庭单骑杀入敌阵，虽身受创，亦奋力战斗，打败宋军。八年春，任为益都新军千户，赐号 拔都儿 ，与宋军战于襄阳城下，一直打到北门，左股中箭而止。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Lu Wenhuan, the commander of Song Xiangyang, attacked Wanshan Fort with fifteen thousand soldiers. Wanyu Zhang Hongfan was fighting with the Song army. He rode into the enemy line single-handed. Although he was injured, he also fought hard to defeat the Song army. In the spring of the eighth year, Ren Yidu's new army, called Ba Du'er, fought with the Song army under the city of Xiangyang. They fought all the way to the north gate, stopping with an arrow in the left groin.

古文：九年春，攻樊城外郛，炮伤额及左右手，夺其土城，遂进攻襄阳东堡，炮伤右肩，焚其楼，破一字城。文焕麾下有胖山王总管者，骁将也，庭设伏诱擒之，以功授金符。
现代文：九年春，攻樊城外城，虽被敌炮伤前额及左右手，仍夺其土城，进而攻襄阳东堡，破一字城。吕文焕麾下有员勇将叫胖山王总管，庭设埋伏将他擒获，因功授金符。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, he attacked the outer city of the city, and although he was wounded in the forehead and right and left hands by enemy artillery, he still captured his earthen city, and then attacked the East Fort of Xiangyang, breaking a city. There was a brave general under the command of Lü Wenhuan, called the Fat Mountain King, and he was caught in an ambush. He was awarded a gold medal for his service.

古文：十年春，大军攻樊城，庭运薪刍土牛填城壕，立云梯，城上矢石如雨，庭屡中炮，坠城下，绝而复苏，裹创再登，如是者数四，杀获甚多。
现代文：十年春，大军攻樊城，庭运柴草土牛填城壕，驾云梯而上。城上箭石如雨下，庭多次中炮而落于城下，醒来再攀登，如此四次，终攻破樊城，襄阳随即投降。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, the great army attacked the city of Handan, the yard transported firewood, grass and earthen oxen to fill the trenches, and drove up the ladder. The arrow stones on the city were rained down, the yard was hit by cannons many times and fell under the city, woke up and climbed again, and so on four times, finally defeated Handan, and Xiangyang immediately surrendered.

古文：樊城破，襄阳降，以功授金虎符，为管军总管。
现代文：庭因功授金虎符，任管军总管。
English: He was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge for meritorious service and was appointed as the commander-in-chief.

古文：十一年九月，从伯颜发襄阳，次郢州。
现代文：十一年九月，随伯颜从襄阳出发，进至郢州。
English: In September of the eleventh year, he set out from Xiangyang with Bo Yan and entered Zhangzhou.

古文：郢在汉水东，宋人复于汉水西筑新郢，以遏我军。
现代文：郢州城在汉水东岸，宋人又于汉水西岸筑新郢州城。以图阻遏元军前进。
English: Bozhou City is on the east bank of the Han River, and the Song people built a new Bozhou City on the west bank of the Han River in an attempt to stop the advance of the Yuan army.

古文：黄家湾有溪通藤湖，至汉水数里，宋兵亦筑堡设守备焉。
现代文：黄家湾有一溪通藤湖，至汉水数里，宋兵也在那里筑堡设防。
English: Huangjiawan has a creek running through the rattan lake, a few miles to the Han River, where Song soldiers also fortified the fort.

古文：庭与刘国杰先登，拔之，遂荡舟而进，攻沙洋、新城。
现代文：庭与刘国杰抢先拔除堡垒，乘舟前进，攻沙洋、新城。
English: Ni and Liu Guojie took the lead in pulling down the fortress, advancing by boat, attacking the sand and the ocean, and the new city.

古文：武矶堡四面皆水，庭决其水而攻之，大军渡江，武矶堡亦破。遂从阿术转战至鄂州，顺流而东。
现代文：用李庭及马福等人的计策，由沙芜口入江，攻下武矶堡。庭随阿术转战于鄂州，顺流东下。
English: With the strategy of Li Ting and Ma Fu and others, they entered the river from the mouth of the Shajing River and captured Wujie Fort. Ting followed Ah Shu to fight in Ezhou and went east along the river.

古文：十二年春，与宋将孙虎臣战丁家洲，夺船二十余，宋军溃，以功加宣威将军。
现代文：十二年春，庭与宋将孙虎臣战于丁家洲，夺船二十余只。宋军溃败，庭因功加宣威将军。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the court and the Song general Sun Huchen fought in Dingjiazhou, seizing more than twenty ships. The Song army was defeated, and the court promoted General Xuan Wei because of his merits.

古文：宋兵断真州江路，庭焚其船二百余，击斩其护岸军。
现代文：宋兵截断真州江路，庭焚烧敌船二百余艘，又败敌护岸军。
English: Song soldiers cut off the road of the Zhenzhou River, burned more than 200 enemy ships in the yard, and defeated the enemy coast guard.

古文：闻夏贵欲由太湖援临安，亟出兵逆战裕溪口，败之。
现代文：闻夏贵欲由太湖援救临安，庭赶紧出兵迎战，败宋援军于裕溪口。
English: Weng Xia Gui wanted to rescue Lin'an from Taihu Lake, while Ting quickly sent troops to fight, defeating the Song reinforcements at the mouth of the Yuxi River.

古文：诸军攻常州，庭鏖战，夺北门而入。
现代文：诸军攻常州，庭夺北门而入。
English: The armies attacked Changzhou, captured the north gate and entered.

古文：十三年春，至临安，宋主降，伯颜命庭等护其内城，收集符印珍宝，仍令庭与唐兀台等防护宋主赴燕。
现代文：十三年春，元军至临安，宋皇帝降，伯颜命庭等保护临安内城，收集宋朝廷的符印珍宝，与唐兀台等护送宋朝小皇帝和太后至燕京。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, the Yuan army went to Lin'an, the Song emperor fell, and Bo Yan Mingting protected the inner city of Lin'an, collected the precious treasures of the Song court, and escorted the small emperor and empress dowager of the Song dynasty to Yanjing with Tang Xingtai and others.

古文：世祖嘉其劳，大宴，命坐于左手诸王之下、百官之上，赐金百锭，金、珠衣各一袭，仍谕之曰： 刘整在时，不曾令坐于此，为汝有功，故加以殊礼，汝子孙宜谨志之勿忘。 
现代文：世祖嘉奖李庭的劳苦，在大宴群臣时，命他坐在左手诸王之下、百官之上，并对他说： 刘整在时，也不曾令坐于此。因你有功，故以特殊之礼优待。汝子孙要牢记不忘。 
English: The ancestor praised Li Ting's hard work, and ordered him to sit on the left hand of the kings, above the hundred officials, at the grand banquet of the courtiers, and said to him: Liu Tse, when he was here, was not ordered to sit here. Because you are meritorious, you are treated with special courtesy. Your children and grandchildren should remember this.

古文：继有旨： 汝在江南，多出死力，男儿立功，要在西北上也。
现代文：后又传旨告谕他 ：汝在江南多出死力，男儿立功要在西北。
English: Later, an order was sent to him, saying, "You have done more than your best in the south of the Yangtze River, so you should do more in the northwest."

古文：今有违我太祖成宪者，汝其往征之。 
现代文：今有违背太祖所定的典章制度者，你去征讨！ 
English: If there is anyone who is violating the system of rules and regulations established by the Great Ancestor, go and investigate!

古文：乃别降大虎符，加镇国上将军、汉军都元帅，仍命其次子大椿袭万户职。
现代文：于是特别授他大虎符，加镇国上将军、汉军都元帅。命其次子大椿承袭万户之职。
English: As a result, he was specially awarded the Great Tiger Badge, promoted to provincial general, and made a field marshal of the Chinese army. He ordered his second son, Otsubaki, to succeed him.

古文：庭至哈剌和林、晃兀儿之地，越岭北，与撒里蛮诸军大战，败之。移军河西，击走叛臣霍虎，追至大碛而还。
现代文：庭至哈剌和林、晃兀儿之地，越过岭北，大败撒里蛮诸军。又转至河西，击败叛臣霍虎，追至大漠而还。
English: He went from the garden to the land of Harbin and Lin, the land of the wandering children, crossed the northern part of the Ling, defeated the Saribaru army. He also went to the west of the river, defeated the traitor Huohu, chased him to the desert and returned.

古文：诸王昔里吉、脱脱木儿反，庭袭击，生获之，启皇子只必帖木儿赐之死。
现代文：诸王昔里吉、脱脱木儿反叛，庭率军袭击，生擒这些叛王，奏请皇子只必帖木儿处死他们。
English: The kings Shirikichi and Tokujin rebelled, the court led the army to attack, captured these traitors, and asked the prince to have Timur execute them.

古文：复引兵会诸王纳里忽，渡塔迷儿河，击走其余党兀斤末台、要术忽儿等，河西悉平。
现代文：又与诸王纳里忽会师，渡塔迷儿河，击溃叛王的余党兀斤末台、要木忽儿等人，河西全部平定。
English: In addition, with the kings of the Nari and Hui divisions, they crossed the tower and lost the river, defeated the remaining party of the rebel king, and subdued all the people in the west of the river.

古文：十四年，入朝，世祖劳之，赐以益都居第、单河官庄、钞万五千贯及弓矢诸物，拜福建行中书省参知政事。
现代文：十四年入朝，世祖慰劳其辛苦，赐益都府第、单河官庄钞一万五千贯及弓矢等物，拜福建行中书省参知政事。
English: In the 14th year of his accession to the throne, the ancestor consoled him for his hard work, bestowed him with 15,000 yuan worth of banknotes and bows and arrows from the prefectural capital and the provincial capital of Shanhe, and prayed for him to be able to participate in the political affairs of the prefectural government.

古文：改福建道宣慰使。
现代文：后为福建道宣慰使。
English: Later, he became the consoler of Fujian Province.

古文：召赴阙，备宿卫。
现代文：又召回朝廷为宿卫亲军。
English: He was also recalled to the imperial court to serve as a bodyguard for the imperial family.

古文：十七年，拜骠骑卫上将军、中书左丞，东征日本。
现代文：十七年，拜骠骑卫上将军、中书左丞，东征日本。
English: In the seventeenth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, General Baizhong of the Cavalry and Guards, and General Zojo of the Chinese Academy of Letters, left for the eastern expedition of Japan.

古文：十八年，军次竹岛，遇风，船尽坏，庭抱坏船板，漂流抵岸，下收余众，由高丽还京师。
现代文：十八年，元军渡海行至竹岛，遇到飓风，船尽打坏，庭抱一木板漂流抵岸，收拾残军由高丽还京。
English: In the 18th year, the Yuan army crossed the sea to Takeshima, encountered a hurricane, the ship was completely damaged, and drifted ashore with a plank of wood, collecting the remnants of the army from Korea and returning to Beijing.

古文：士卒存者十一二。
现代文：这次东征，士卒幸存者十之二三。
English: Of the soldiers who went on the Eastern Expedition, only two or three survived.

古文：继以父殁，归益都，召拜中书左丞、司农卿，不赴。
现代文：回国后，父亲去世，他归至益都。后召回京师拜中书左丞、司农卿。
English: After returning to China, his father passed away, and he returned to Yidu. Later, he was recalled to Beijing to study under Zhongshu Zuojo and the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：塔不台、金家奴来拒战，众号十万，帝亲麾诸军围之，庭调阿速军继进，流矢中胸贯胁，裹创复战，帝遣止之，乃已。
现代文：但都未就任。二十四年，宗王乃颜反叛，朝廷速召李庭至上都，令他统领诸卫汉军随帝亲征。乃颜部将塔不台、金家奴来抵抗，号称有十万兵卒。
English: However, both did not take office. In the 24th year, King Naien rebelled, and the imperial court quickly summoned Li Ting to the supreme capital and ordered him to lead the Chinese troops to follow the emperor. Naien's troops did not stand up, and the servants of the Jin family came to resist, claiming to have one hundred thousand soldiers.

古文：令军中备百弩，俟敌列阵，百弩齐发，乃不复出。帝问庭： 彼今夜当何如？ 庭奏： 必遁去。 
现代文：世祖亲自指挥诸军包围。庭调阿速军进攻，胸部中箭，仍裹伤战斗，帝阻止他，双方罢兵。帝问庭 ：今夜敌军会有何动向？ 庭奏 ：必逃走。 
English: The Emperor personally commanded the armies to encircle them. Niitsune ordered the Azov army to attack. Niitsune received an arrow in the chest and was still wounded in battle. The Emperor stopped him, and both sides withdrew. The Emperor asked Niitsune: "What will the enemy do tonight?" Niitsune: "We must flee."

古文：乃引壮士十人，持火炮，夜入其阵，炮发，果自相杀，溃散。
现代文：庭带领壮士十人，持火炮夜入敌阵，炮发，敌自相厮杀，败溃逃散。
English: Ting led ten strong men, entered the enemy lines at night with artillery, fired, the enemy fought with each other, defeated and fled.

古文：帝问何以知之，庭曰： 其兵虽多，而无纪律，见车驾驻此而不战，必疑有大军在后，是以知其将遁。 
现代文：帝问庭何以知道敌军要逃，庭曰： 其兵虽多而无纪律，见陛下驻此不战，必怀疑有大军在后，故知彼将要逃走。 
English: The emperor asked the court how it knew that the enemy army was about to flee. The court said: Although his soldiers were numerous and undisciplined, seeing that His Majesty did not fight when he stayed here, he must have suspected that there was a large army behind him, and therefore knew that he was about to flee.

古文：帝大喜，赐以金鞍良马。庭奏： 若得汉军二万，从臣便宜用之，乃颜可擒也。 
现代文：又奏道： 若得汉军二万，由臣自便调遣，乃颜可擒。 
English: He also said, "If we get 20,000 Han soldiers, I will dispatch them at my own discretion.

古文：帝难之，命与月儿鲁蒙古军并进，遂缚乃颜以献。
现代文：帝不大愿意，命与月儿鲁率蒙古军并进，生擒乃颜而还。
English: The emperor was reluctant to do so, and the Mongolian army, led by his son and grandson, marched forward, but they were repulsed.

古文：帝既南还，庭又亲获塔不台、金刚奴，以功加龙虎卫上将军，遥授中书省左丞。
现代文：帝南还之后，庭又亲获塔不台、金刚奴。因功加龙虎卫上将军，遥授中书省左丞。
English: After the fall of the Southern Dynasties, Ting was personally awarded the title of "Tang Wotai" and "King Kong Niu." For his achievements, he was awarded the title of "Longhu Wei Shangzheng" and was conferred the title of "Zajo" by the Central Government of China.

古文：庭因奏： 今汉军之力，困于北征，若依江南军，每岁二八放散，以次番上，甚便。 帝可其奏，令著为令。
现代文：二十五年，乃颜余部哈丹秃鲁干又在辽东反叛，朝廷诏令庭及枢密副使哈答去讨伐，大败叛军，哈丹秃鲁干逃往高丽。拜庭为资德大夫、尚书左丞，参与枢密院事。多次北征都是使用汉军，不免疲惫，庭建议轮流调用江南军，世祖同意并立为定制。
English: In the 25th year of the Heian period, Hattan Baldur-Gan, a member of the Yan Yu Department, rebelled again in Liaodong. The imperial court ordered the court and the vice-minister of the privy council, Hatta, to fight. The rebels were defeated and Hattan Baldur-Gan fled to Goryeo. He was a doctor of finance and economics, and a member of the privy council. Many northern expeditions were carried out by the Chinese army, which led to exhaustion. The court suggested that the troops from the south of the Yangtze River should be called up in rotation. The patriarch agreed and made it a custom.

古文：宗王海都将犯边，伯颜以闻，帝命月儿鲁与庭议所以为备，庭请下括马之令，凡得马十一万匹，军中赖其用。拜荣禄大夫、平章政事，商议枢密院事，提调诸卫屯田事。
现代文：宗王海都侵犯边境，世祖命月儿鲁与庭去预作防备。庭请下令征调马匹，共得十一万匹，足供军用。拜庭为荣禄大夫、平章政事，参与枢密院事，总管诸卫屯田的事。
English: Zong Wang Haidu invaded the border, and the patriarch ordered Yue Erlu and the court to prepare in advance. The court ordered the requisition of horses, a total of 110,000 horses, enough for military use. The court was the doctor of honor, Ping Zhang government affairs, participated in the Privy Council affairs, and was in charge of the affairs of the guards.

古文：三十一年春，世祖崩，月儿鲁与伯颜等定策立成宗，庭翊赞之功居多。
现代文：三十一年春，世祖驾崩，月儿鲁与伯颜议定立成宗为帝，庭则竭力赞助。
English: In the spring of the 31st year, after the death of the ancestor, Yue Rul and Bo Yan agreed to establish Chengzong as the emperor, and the court did its best to sponsor it.

古文：成宗与太后眷遇甚至，每进食，必分赐之，大宴仍命序坐于左手诸王之下、百官之上，赐以珠帽、珠半臂、金带各一，银六铤，庄田诸物称是。
现代文：成宗与太后待庭如同家人。帝大宴群臣，命庭坐于左手诸王之下、百官之上，赏赐金银珠宝、庄田等。庭奉旨整顿江浙军马五百三十所，回京后成宗亲授衣以示慰劳。
English: Chengzong and the empress dowager waited for the court as if they were family members. The imperial banquet was attended by a group of courtiers, and the court sat below the kings on the left hand and above the hundreds of officials, awarding gold, silver, jewels, shodata, etc. The court ordered the rectification of 530 military sites in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and after returning to Beijing, Chengzong himself presented clothes to show his consolation.

古文：奉旨整点江浙军马五百三十二所，还，入见，成宗亲授以衣，慰劳之。
现代文：武宗去镇守北部边疆，庭请示随行，皇帝见他年老，不准，仍居原职。
English: Wuzong went to the town to guard the northern border, and the court asked him to accompany him. The emperor saw that he was old and did not allow him to go, but he still remained in his original position.

古文：奉旨北征怀都，至野马川而还。
现代文：后奉旨北征怀都，至野马川而还。
English: Later, he was ordered to lead the Northern Expedition to Huadu and returned to Mustang River.

古文：俄有中使传旨拘汉军之马，以济北军，且令焚其鞍辔、行粮诸物。庭因感疾，诏内医二人诊视之，疾稍间，扈从上都，特降旨存护其家。
现代文：庭患病，诏御医二人诊治。
English: When Niwa fell ill, two doctors from the Imperial Palace came to treat her.

古文：大德八年二月卒。
现代文：大德八年八月卒。
English: He passed away in August, 1978.

古文：乃率乡人数百家，诣木华黎请降，木华黎书帛为符，遣还。
现代文：至大二年，赠推忠翊卫功臣、仪同三司、太保、上柱国，追封益国公，谥 武毅 。史弼，字君佐，一名塔剌浑，蠡州博野人。曾祖史彬，太师、国王木华黎兵南下时，率乡人数百家投降蒙古。
English: In the second year of his sophomore year, he bestowed the titles of Zhongxun (忠), Wei (卫) and meritorious vassal, Yi (儀同) and Sanji (三司), Taibo (太保), Shangzhuang (上柱) and the title of Yikokuko (益国公) on Wu Yi ( 武毅). Shi Yan (史), also known as Junza (君佐), was a member of the Tang dynasty and a native of Bozhou. Zengzu (曾祖) Shi Bin (史彬), Taishi (太师) and King Muhua Li (木华黎) led hundreds of villages to

古文：既而州破，独彬与同降者得免。
现代文：故蒙军破蠡州，杀戮百姓，唯彬与同降者幸免。
English: Therefore, the Mongolian army broke through Zhangzhou and killed the people. Only Bin and those who surrendered with him were spared.

古文：弼长通国语，膂力绝人，能挽强弓。里门凿石为狮，重四百斤，弼举之，置数步外。
现代文：史弼精通蒙古语言，臂力过人，能拉强弓，能将重四百斤的石狮举起放到数步以外地方。
English: Shi Yan is fluent in the Mongolian language, has superior arm strength, can pull a strong bow, and can lift a stone lion weighing four hundred pounds to a place a few steps away.

古文：潼关守将王彦弼奇其材，妻以女，又荐其材勇于左丞相耶律铸。
现代文：潼关守将王彦弼认为史弼是奇才，将其女嫁与他为妻，又把他举荐给左丞相耶律铸。
English: Wang Yanqi, the governor of Shiguan, thought that Shi Yan was a genius, married his daughter to him, and recommended him to the Minister of the Left, Yerutsu.

古文：弼从铸往北京，近侍火里台见弼所挽弓，以名闻世祖。
现代文：弼随铸往北京，侍臣火里台见弼所挽之弓，报告世祖。
English: Zou went to Beijing with the casting, and his attendant, Huiridai, saw the bow made by Zou and reported it to his ancestor.

古文：召之，试以远垛，连发中的，令给事左右，赐马五匹。
现代文：世祖召他去，以远垛考试弼的箭法，弼连发连中。令他在皇帝身边服务，赐马五匹。
English: The patriarch called him to go, and with the arrow of the far-sighted examination, made him serve at the emperor's side, and gave him five horses.

古文：中统末，授金符、管军总管，命从刘整伐宋。
现代文：中统末年，授弼金符、管军总管，命随刘整伐宋。
English: At the end of the Middle Reunification period, he was awarded the Gold Medal and the General Manager of the Central Military Commission. He followed Liu Zhefang Song.

古文：攻襄樊，尝出挑战，射杀二人，因横刀呼曰： 我史奉御也！ 
现代文：在攻襄樊的战争中，弼出阵挑战，射杀二人，横刀大呼 ：我史奉御也！ 
English: In the war against Xiangfan, he challenged the enemy, shot two of them, and shouted, "I also serve the emperor!"

古文：宋兵却退。
现代文：宋军闻声退却。
English: The Song Army was forced to retreat.

古文：事闻，赐金虎符。军至阳罗堡，伯颜誓众曰： 先登南岸者为上功。 
现代文：至元十年，元军分十二路围樊城，弼攻东北角，战斗进行了十四昼夜，攻破樊城，杀守将牛都统。襄阳降，弼因功升怀远大将军、副万户。随丞相伯颜南征，攻克沙洋堡。元军至阳罗堡，伯颜对将士们宣布： 先登南岸者为上功。 
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army was divided into twelve routes to encircle Shicheng and attack the northeast corner. The battle lasted for fourteen days and nights, breaking through Shicheng and killing the defending general, Niu Du Tong. Xiangyang fell, and because of his achievements, he was promoted to General Huaiyuan and Vice-Wanhu. He was followed by the Minister of War, Bo Yan, to march south and conquer the Shayang Fort. When the Yuan army reached the Yangluo Fort, Bo Yan announced to the soldiers: The first to reach the south bank was the one who achieved the greatest success.

古文：弼率健卒直前，宋兵逆战，奋呼击走之，伯颜登南岸，论弼功第一，进定远大将军。
现代文：弼率健卒勇往直前。宋兵迎战，被弼击退。伯颜登南岸，论弼为首功，进升为定远大将军。
English: Song soldiers went into battle and were repulsed by the hail. Bo Yan went to the south coast, and was promoted to the rank of General Dingyuan.

古文：鄂州平，进军而东，至大孤山，风大作，伯颜命弼祷于大孤山神，风立止。
现代文：平定鄂州后，大军继续东进，至大孤山，忽起大风，伯颜命弼上孤山祈祷神灵，风真的停止了。
English: After the pacification of Ezhou, the great army continued to march eastward to the Great Lonely Mountain. Suddenly, a strong wind arose. Bo Yan gave his life to climb the lonely mountain to pray to the gods. The wind really stopped.

古文：兵驻瓜洲，阿塔海言： 杨子桥乃扬州出入之道，宜立堡，选骁将守之。 
现代文：元军驻瓜洲，阿塔海提出： 扬子桥是扬州出入必经之路，应建城堡，选派骁勇将守御。 
English: The Yuan army was stationed in Guazhou, and Atahai proposed: Yangtze Bridge is the only way to enter and leave Yangzhou, a castle should be built, and a brave general should be selected to guard it.

古文：伯颜授弼三千人，立木堡，据其地。
现代文：于是伯颜授弼三千人马去建立木堡，据地防守。
English: So Bo Yan ordered three thousand horses to build a wooden castle and defend the stronghold.

古文：弼遽以数十骑抵扬州城。
现代文：弼突然领数十骑直奔扬州城。
English: He suddenly led dozens of horsemen straight to Yangzhou City.

古文：或止之曰： 宋将姜才倔强，未可易出。 
现代文：有人劝阻他说 ：扬州宋守将姜才倔强，不易攻破。 
English: Some people dissuaded him, saying that Yangzhou Song governor Jiang Cai was stubborn and difficult to break through.

古文：弼曰： 吾栅扬子桥，据其所必争之地，才乘未固，必来攻我，则我之利也。 
现代文：弼说： 我们在扬子桥立栅建堡，占据他所必争之地。姜才乘我们还未站稳，必来进攻，这对我们有利。 
English: Zou said, "We set up a barricade at the Yangzi Bridge and built a fortress to occupy the place he must fight for. Jiang Caixuan is not yet stable, he will attack, which is beneficial to us."

古文：及出围，追者尚数百骑，弼殿后，敌不敢近。会援兵至，大破之，才奔泰州。
现代文：果然姜才率兵万人乘夜来攻，每人都带一捆柴用以填平壕沟。弼令军中寂静无声，等到宋军至，檑木滚石齐下，发炮轰击，杀敌千余人，姜才急忙退兵，弼下令出击。这时相威、阿术的兵也赶到，大战一场，姜才败走，擒宋将张都统。
English: Sure enough, Jiang Cai led ten thousand soldiers to attack at night, each with a bundle of firewood to fill the trench. Zhai made the army silent, and when the Song army arrived, the camphor rolling stones came down in unison, fired artillery, and killed more than a thousand people, Jiang Cai hurriedly withdrew, and Zhai ordered a sortie. At this time, the soldiers of Xiang Wei and Ah Shu also arrived. After a big battle, Jiang Cai was defeated and left, and Zhai Song unified Zhang Du.

古文：及守将朱焕以扬州降，使麦术受其降于南门外，而弼从数骑，由保城入扬州，出南门，与之会，以示不疑。
现代文：十三年六月，姜才又乘夜进攻，弼三战三捷。天明，姜才见弼兵少，进行围攻，弼奋力砍杀，百数十人死于他的刀下，冲出重围。援军及时赶到，大破宋军，姜才逃奔泰州，扬州宋将朱焕降。
English: In June 13th, Jiang Cai attacked again at night, winning three battles and three victories. In the morning, when Jiang Cai saw that there were few soldiers, he carried out a siege and fought hard to cut and kill. Hundreds of people died under his sword and rushed out of the heavy siege. Reinforcements arrived in time, defeated the Song Army, Jiang Cai fled to Taizhou, and Yangzhou Song general Zhu Huan surrendered.

古文：制授昭勇大将军、扬州路总管府达鲁花赤，兼万户。
现代文：授弼为昭勇大将军、扬州路总管府达鲁花赤，兼万户。
English: The award was conferred on General Zhaoyong, Yangzhou Road General Administration Office Daruhana Chia, and 10,000 households.

古文：冬，迁黄州等路宣慰使。
现代文：是年冬，调黄州路宣慰使。
English: It was in the winter of the year, and Huangzhou Road was transferred to Xuan Yue.

古文：十五年，入朝，升中奉大夫、江淮行中书省参知政事，行黄州等路宣慰使。盗起淮西司空山，弼平之。
现代文：至元十五年，召回朝廷，升中奉大夫、江淮行中书省参知政事，行黄州路宣慰使之职，平定淮西司空山之盗贼。
English: In the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was recalled to the imperial court, promoted to the position of middle-ranking doctor, and became the political advisor of Jianghuai Province, and went to Huangzhou Road to promote him to the post, and subdued the thieves of Huaxi and Qingshan.

古文：江州宣课司税及民米，米商避去，民皆闭门罢市，弼立罢之。
现代文：十七年又平定南康都昌之盗贼。江州宣课司向百姓征收米税，米商逃避，百姓闭门罢市。弼立即废除米税。
English: In the seventeenth year, the thieves of South Kangtuchang were also defeated. The Jiangsu Provincial Administration of Education levied rice tax on the people, the rice merchants evaded, and the people went on strike behind closed doors. The rice tax was immediately abolished.

古文：十九年，改浙西宣慰使。
现代文：十九年，改任浙西宣慰使。
English: In 1919, he was reassigned to the West Zhejiang Xuan Yue Envoy.

古文：二十一年，黄华反建宁，春复霖雨，米价踊贵，弼即发米十万石，平价粜之，而后闻于省。
现代文：二十一年春，建宁阴雨连绵，米价腾贵，弼发放官米十万石，以平价卖与百姓，然后再报告行省。
English: In the spring of 2011, Jianning was hit by continuous rain and rain, rice prices soared, and the government issued 100,000 koku of rice to sell at parity with the people, and then reported to the province.

古文：省臣欲增其价，弼曰： 吾不可失信，宁辍吾俸以足之。 
现代文：省臣要增价，弼坚持不可，他说 ：我们不可失信于民，宁愿停我的薪俸来补足。 
English: He said, "We must not lose the trust of the people. I would rather stop my salary to make up for it."

古文：省不能夺，益出十万石，民得不饥。
现代文：行省不仅依了他，而且再以平价发放十万石，使百姓度过饥荒。
English: The provincial government not only followed his advice, but also distributed 100,000 koku at a flat rate to help the people get through the famine.

古文：改淮东宣慰使。
现代文：改任淮东宣慰使。
English: He was transferred to the post of Huaidong Consolation Envoy.

古文：弼凡三官扬州，人喜，刻石颂之，号《三至碑》。
现代文：弼在扬州地区做了三处的官，百姓刻碑歌颂他的德政，称为《三至碑》。
English: He served as an official in three places in the Yangzhou region, and the people carved a monument to praise his virtuous politics, known as the "Three Great Monuments."

古文：迁佥书沿江行枢密院事，镇建康。
现代文：后调任佥书沿江行枢密院事，镇守建康。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Privy Council of Yanshu along the Yangtze River, and became the town warden of Jiankang.

古文：二十六年，平台州盗杨镇龙，拜尚书左丞，行淮东宣慰使。
现代文：二十六年，弼平定台州杨镇龙的反叛，拜尚书左丞，行淮东宣慰使之职。
English: In twenty-six years, he put down the rebellion of Yang Zhenlong in Taizhou, and called on Shang Shuzhong to go to Huadong to offer consolation and give him a post.

古文：冬，入朝，时世祖欲征爪哇，谓弼曰： 诸臣为吾腹心者少，欲以爪哇事付汝。 
现代文：冬，入朝。世祖准备征爪哇，对弼说 ：诸臣为朕心腹者少，准备把征爪哇的事交给你。 
English: In the winter, at the beginning of the reign, the ancestor was preparing to conquer Java, and said to Yao, "My vassals are few, and I am ready to hand over the conquest of Java to you."

古文：对曰： 陛下命臣，臣何敢自爱！ 
现代文：弼说： 陛下命臣，臣怎敢自爱！ 
English: Zou said, "Your Majesty's vassal, how dare you love yourself!

古文：二十七年，遥授尚书省左丞，行浙东宣慰使，平处州盗。
现代文：二十七年，遥授尚书省左丞相，行浙东宣慰使之职，平定处州盗贼。
English: In the 27th year, he was awarded the title of Minister of the Left of Shangshu Province, and went to the east of Zhejiang Province to promote his duties and subdue the state thieves.

古文：二十九年，拜荣禄大夫、福建等处行中书省平章政事，往征爪哇，以亦黑迷失、高兴副之，付金符百五十、币帛各二百，以待有功。
现代文：二十九年，拜荣禄大夫、福建行中书省平章政事，统领大军征爪哇，以亦黑迷失、高兴为副都元帅。十二月，弼以五千人汇合诸军自泉州出发。
English: In the 29th year, Dr. Bai Ronglu went to Fujian Province in the middle of the Pingzhang political affairs of the Ministry of Literature, led a large army to conquer Java, and was lost in Yihe and happy to be the deputy marshal of the capital. In December, a total of five thousand people joined the army and set out from Quanzhou.

古文：十二月，弼以五千人合诸军，发泉州。风急涛涌，舟掀簸，士卒皆数日不能食。
现代文：风急浪大，战船颠簸，士卒皆数日不能食。
English: The storm was violent, the warship was tossed about, and the officers and men could not eat for several days.

古文：过七洲洋、万里石塘，历交趾、占城界，明年正月，至东董西董山、牛崎屿，入混沌大洋橄榄屿，假里马答、勾阑等山，驻兵伐木，造小舟以入。
现代文：航过七洲洋、万里石塘，经交趾、占城，于第二年正月到达东董山、西董山、牛崎屿，再入混沌大洋之橄榄屿、假里马答山、勾阑山，在那里暂时屯驻，伐木造小船，准备进军爪哇。
English: He sailed across the seven continents and seas, and through Wanli Shitang, Jiaozuo, and Zamcheng, and arrived at East Dongshan, West Dongshan, and Niuqi Islet in the first month of the second year, and then entered the chaotic ocean of Olive Islet, Mt.

古文：时爪哇与邻国葛郎构怨，爪哇主哈只葛达那加剌已为葛郎主哈只葛当所杀，其婿土罕必阇耶攻哈只葛当，不胜，退保麻喏八歇。闻弼等至，遣使以其国山川、户口及葛郎国地图迎降，求救。
现代文：这时爪哇与邻国葛郎不和，爪哇国王哈只葛达那加剌已为葛郎国王哈只葛当所杀。其驸马土罕必耶攻哈只葛当，未能取胜，退保麻喏八歇，闻史弼等至，遣使奉本国地图及户口向元军迎降，求救。
English: At this time, Java was at odds with its neighbor, Goryeo, and Java's king, Hatcho Kedarnath, had already been killed by Goryeo's king, Hatcho Kedang. His horse, Tu Hanbiya, attacked Hatcho Kedang, but failed to win. He sent envoys to the Yuan army with maps of his country and his household registration, asking for help.

古文：弼与诸将进击葛郎兵，大破之，哈只葛当走归国。
现代文：弼与诸将大败葛郎国军，哈只葛当逃回本国。
English: He and the other generals defeated Ge Lang's national army, and he had to flee back to his country.

古文：高兴言： 瓜哇虽降，倘中变，与葛郎合，则孤军悬绝，事不可测。 
现代文：高兴提出： 爪哇虽降，但若中途变化，与葛郎联合，而我军孤立海外，其后果难以预料。 
English: He happily pointed out: Although Java has fallen, if it changes midway and unites with Ge Lang, while our army is isolated overseas, the consequences are difficult to predict.

古文：弼遂分兵三道，与兴及亦黑迷失各将一道，攻葛郎。
现代文：于是弼分兵三路，自己与高兴、亦黑迷失各指挥一路，攻击葛郎国。
English: As a result, he divided his troops into three groups, losing himself in joy and sorrow, and leading each group to attack Ge Lang's country.

古文：至答哈城，葛郎兵十余万迎敌，自旦至午，葛郎兵败，入城自守，遂围之。
现代文：至答哈城，葛郎兵十余万来抵御，战斗自清晨进行到中午，葛郎兵败，入城固守。
English: When the time came to attack the city, more than a hundred thousand of Ge Lang's soldiers came to defend it. The battle lasted from early morning to noon. Ge Lang's soldiers were defeated and they entered the city to defend it.

古文：哈只葛当出降，并取其妻子官属以归。
现代文：元军围城，哈只葛当被迫投降。弼等取其妻、子、官属回国。
English: The ex-army besieged the city, and Hatsugatang was forced to surrender. He took his wife, son, and officials back to China.

古文：土罕必阇耶乞归易降表，及所藏珍宝入朝，弼与亦黑迷失许之，遣万户担只不丁、甘州不花以兵二百人护之还国。
现代文：爪哇之土罕必耶请求回本国更换降表，取所藏珍宝入朝进贡。弼与亦黑迷失同意，遣万户担只不丁、甘州不花率兵二百人护送。
English: The land of Java, Hanbiye, requested to return to his home country to replace the fallen watch, and to take the treasure he had hidden to pay tribute to the North. Zou and Yihe agreed to lose, and sent 10,000 households to bear only a few, and 200 soldiers from Ganzhou to escort.

古文：土罕必阇耶于道杀二人以叛，乘军还，夹路攘夺。
现代文：土罕必耶于半途杀元军二将反叛，回军攻史弼军。
English: In the middle of the way, Tu Han Biye killed the second general of the Yuan army, rebelled, and returned to attack the Shih army.

古文：弼自断后，且战且行，行三百里，得登舟。行六十八日夜，达泉州，士卒死者三千余人。
现代文：元军撤退，弼自断后，边战边撤，行三百里，又乘船行六十八日夜，到达泉州，士卒死三千余人，而所获金宝香布等，值五十余万。
English: The Yuan army retreated, and after breaking off the truce, they retreated on both sides of the battle, traveling three hundred miles, and traveling by ship for sixty-eight days and nights, reaching Quanzhou. More than three thousand soldiers died, and the gold treasure, such as fragrant cloth, was worth more than half a million.

古文：有司数其俘获金宝香布等，直五十余万，又以没理国所上金字表及金银犀象等物进，事具高兴及爪哇国传。于是朝廷以其亡失多，杖十七，没家赀三之一。
现代文：朝廷因这次征战损失大，杖弼十七，没收家财三分之一。
English: As a result of this campaign, the imperial court suffered heavy losses, the number of canes fell by seventeen, and one-third of the family's wealth was confiscated.

古文：元贞元年，起同知枢密院事，月儿鲁奏： 弼等以五千人，渡海二十五万里，入近代未尝至之国，俘其王及谕降傍近小国，宜加矜怜。 
现代文：至大三年，起任弼为同知枢密院事。月儿鲁奏： 弼等以五千人，渡海二十五万里，到达近代未曾到过的国家，俘其王并招降附近小国，对他应加怜恤。 
English: In the third year of his senior year, he began to serve as a member of the Privy Council of Tongzhi. From Yue'er Luo: I waited with five thousand people, traveled two hundred and fifty thousand miles across the sea, reached a country that has not been visited in modern times, captured its king and invited the surrender of a nearby small country. He should be pitied.

古文：遂诏以所籍还之，拜荣禄大夫、江西等处行中书省右丞。
现代文：于是诏令归还所没收的家产，拜弼为荣禄大夫、江西行中书省右丞。
English: As a result, the imperial edict ordered the return of the confiscated family property, and Baizhen became the doctor of honor, the governor of Shuzhou and the right-hand man of Jiangxi Province.

古文：三年，升平章政事，加银青荣禄大夫，封鄂国公。
现代文：延五年，升平章政事，加银青光禄大夫，封鄂国公。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to the post of political affairs, promoted to the post of Qingguanglu doctor, and appointed as the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：卒于家，年八十六。
现代文：卒于家，终年八十六岁。
English: He died at home at the age of 86.

古文：高兴高兴，字功起，蔡州人也。
现代文：高兴，字功起，蔡州人。
English: The people of Caizhou are happy.

古文：其先自蓟徙汴。曾祖拱之，祖子洵，世以农为业。
现代文：其祖先自蓟州迁到汴京，曾祖高拱之，祖父高子洵都以农为业。
English: His ancestors moved from Zhangzhou to Zhangjing. His great-grandfather Gao Gongzhi and grandfather Gao Ziqin were both farmers.

古文：金末兵乱，父青又徙蔡而生兴。
现代文：金末，其父高青因战乱又由汴迁到蔡州，生高兴。
English: At the end of the month, his father Gao Qing moved from Handan to Caizhou due to the war, and he was very happy.

古文：兴少慷慨，多大节，力挽二石弓。尝步猎南阳山中，遇虎，跳踉大吼，众皆惊走，兴神色自若，发一矢毙之。
现代文：兴年少时就慷慨大方，讲求气节，力大能挽强弓，曾在南阳山中打猎时遇虎，其他人都吓跑了，而兴神色自如，一箭射死老虎。
English: When he was young, Xing was generous and generous. He was always striving for perfection. He was able to bend his bow with great strength. Once, when he was hunting in the Nanyang Mountains, he encountered a tiger. Everyone else was scared away, but Xing looked at ease and shot the tiger with one arrow.

古文：至元十一年冬，挟八骑诣黄州，谒宋制置陈奕。
现代文：至元十一年冬，带着八骑到黄州投于宋制置陈奕麾下。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he went to Huangzhou with eight horsemen and joined the Song Dynasty under the command of Chen Yi.

古文：奕使隶麾下，且奇兴相貌，以甥女妻之。十二年，丞相伯颜伐宋，至黄州，兴从奕出降，伯颜承制授兴千户。
现代文：奕见兴相貌非凡，将甥女嫁他为妻。至元十二年，丞相伯颜伐宋，至黄州，兴随奕出降，伯颜授兴为千户。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the prime minister, Bo Yan, went to the Song Dynasty, and to Huangzhou. With the rise and fall of Xing, Bo Yan gave Xing to thousands of households.

古文：从战银墅，斩宋将三人、士卒二千人。
现代文：兴随大军攻破瑞昌之乌石堡、张家寨、南陵，有功，世祖命他专领一军常为先锋。
English: With the success of the great army to break through Ruichang's Wushi Fort, Zhangjiazhai, and Nanling, he made great contributions, and he was often the vanguard of the army led by his ancestor.

古文：拔建平，斩其总制二人，虏知县事黄君濯。
现代文：宋将张濡杀元军使者严忠范等于独松关，伯颜令兴去讨伐。兴率军攻克溧阳，斩敌七千人，授金符，任管军总管。
English: Song ordered Zhang Nude to kill Yan Zhong Fan, the emissary of the Yuan army, and sent Xing to the crusade. Xing led the army to conquer Fenyang, killed seven thousand enemies, was awarded a gold medal, and served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：由间道夺独松关，进至武康，擒张濡。
现代文：又随大军败宋军于银墅，攻克建平，俘知县黄君濯，由小道夺取独松关，进至武康，生擒张濡。
English: In addition, with the defeat of the Song Army in Yinzhu, the Song Army defeated Jianping, captured Huang Junmao in Zhixian County, captured Duosongguan from the trail, advanced to Wukang, and made Zhangwet.

古文：连战赤山、陈家山、江山县，斩首三千级，虏五百人，献魏福兴等七人于行省，余尽戮之，衢州平。追宋嗣秀王与綍入闽，与綍据桥，阵水南，兴率奇兵夺桥进战，杀其观察使李世达，斩首三千余级，擒与綍父子及其小王二、裨将二，获印五、马五百匹。
现代文：接着进军衢州。追击宋朝秀王赵与鉳入福建，杀宋观察使李世达，擒与鉳父子及小王二人、裨将二人，获印五颗、马五百匹。
English: Next, they marched into Bozhou. They chased the Song Dynasty's King Zhao and Emperor Gong into Fujian, and killed Li Shida, the father and son of Emperor Gong and Emperor Gong, and two generals, gaining five seals and five hundred horses.

古文：下兴化，降宋参知政事陈文龙、制置印德傅等百四十人，军三千，水手七千，获海舶七千余艘。
现代文：又攻下兴化，宋参知政事陈文龙、制置印德傅等一百四十人投降，得步兵三千、水手七千、海船七十余艘。
English: They also captured Xinghua. One hundred and forty people surrendered, including Chen Wenlong, the political leader of the Song Dynasty, and the governor of Yingdefu. They gained three thousand infantrymen, seven thousand sailors, and more than seventy ships.

古文：迁镇国上将军、管军万户。
现代文：兴因功升镇国上将军、管军万户。
English: He was promoted to the position of the town's commander-in-chief for his meritorious service.

古文：十四年春，还镇婺州，佩元降虎符，充衢婺招讨使。
现代文：十四年春，高兴回军镇守婺州，佩虎符，任衢婺招讨使。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, he was happy to return to the army to guard Zhangzhou, wear a tiger badge, and recruit envoys.

古文：东阳、玉山群盗张念九、强和尚等杀宣慰使陈佑于新昌，兴捕斩之。
现代文：东阳、玉山之张念九、强和尚等起兵抗元，杀宣慰使陈于新昌。兴平叛，捕杀二人。
English: Zhang Nianjiu and Qiang Monk of Dongyang and Yushan raised an army to resist Yuan, and killed and consoled Chen in Xinchang. Xing Ping rebelled, and captured and killed two people.

古文：复从都元帅忙古台平福、建、漳三州，破敏阳寨，屠福成寨。
现代文：又随都元帅忙古台平定福、建、漳三州，攻破敏阳寨和福成寨。
English: In addition, with the marshal of the capital, he occupied the ancient plateau, pacified the three states of Fufu, Jian and Qian, and broke through the Minyang Zhai and Fucheng Zhai.

古文：十五年夏，诏忙古台立行省于福建，兴立行都元帅府于建宁以镇之。
现代文：十五年，朝廷令忙古台建立福建行省，令兴立行都元帅府于建宁。
English: Fifteen years later, the imperial court ordered the establishment of Fujian Province and the establishment of the Marshal's Office in Jianning.

古文：政和人黄华，邵武人高日新、高从周聚众叛，皆讨降之，以招讨使行右副都元帅。
现代文：政和人黄华，邵武人高日新、高从周，聚众反元，兴发兵讨平，以招讨使行右副都元帅之职。
English: Huang Hua, the political peacemaker, and Gao Rixin and Gao Cong Zhou, the men of Shaowu, rallied the people against Yuan, raised an army to settle the dispute, and invited him to serve as the right vice-marshal of the capital.

古文：十六年秋，召入朝，侍燕大明殿，悉献江南所得珍宝，世祖曰： 卿何不少留以自奉。 
现代文：十六年秋，召高兴入朝。帝于大明殿设宴，兴进献在江南所获珍宝。世祖说 ：卿何不自己少留些？ 
English: In the autumn of the 16th year of the Shogun's reign, Shoko was summoned to the imperial court. The emperor held a banquet in the Daming Hall, and Shoko presented the precious treasures he had obtained in the south of the Yangtze River. Shiso said, "My lord, why don't you stay a little longer?"

古文：对曰： 臣素贫贱，今幸富贵，皆陛下所赐，何敢隐俘获之物！ 
现代文：兴忙说 ：臣素贫贱，今幸得富贵，都是陛下所赐，怎敢隐瞒俘获之物！ 
English: He said cheerfully, "Our vassals were once poor, but now they are fortunate to be rich, and it is all thanks to Your Majesty. How dare they hide what they have captured!"

古文：帝悦，曰： 直臣也。 
现代文：帝满意地说 ：真是耿直之臣。 
English: The emperor said with satisfaction, "He really is Geng Nao's vassal."

古文：迁兴浙东道宣慰使，赐西锦服、金线鞍辔。
现代文：兴奏所部将士战功，请朝廷授与官爵。世祖命他自定等级由朝廷授与。
English: He asked the Imperial Court to award him a title of nobility for his distinguished war service. The Emperor ordered that he be awarded a rank of his own choosing by the Imperial Court.

古文：奉省檄，讨处州、福建及温、台海洋群盗，平之。
现代文：调兴为浙东道宣慰使。兴奉行省命令讨平处州、福建及温州、台州的海盗。
English: He was sent as a consolation envoy from Zhejiang Province, and he carried out the provincial orders to fight against the pirates in Zhouzhou, Fujian, Wenzhou and Taizhou.

古文：十七年，漳州盗数万据高安寨，官军讨之，二年不能下。
现代文：十七年，漳州人民数万反元，占据高安寨，官军征讨，历时二年未平。
English: In the seventeenth year, the people of Zhangzhou spent tens of thousands of yuan to occupy Gao'an Village, and the government army was conscripted, which lasted for two years.

古文：诏以兴为福建等处征蛮右副都元帅。
现代文：朝廷诏以兴为福建征蛮右副都之帅，与都元帅完者都等人率军讨伐。
English: The imperial court decreed that Xing should be the marshal of Fujian to recruit the right deputy marshal of the capital, and those who finished with the marshal of the capital should lead the army to fight.

古文：兴与都元帅完者都等讨之，直抵其壁，贼乘高瞰下击之。兴命人挟束薪蔽身，进至山半，弃薪而退，如是六日，诱其矢石殆尽，乃燃薪焚其栅，遂平之，斩贼魁及其党首二万级。
现代文：元军进至寨下，兴命人负薪进至半山，弃薪而退，像这样一直进行了六天，寨上的箭石都用完了，兴命军士上山点燃薪柴，焚烧山寨，平定了反叛，斩为首者及其部属二万人。
English: The Yuan army marched to the foot of the castle, the Xing army marched to the middle of the mountain with pay, abandoned the pay and retreated. It went on like this for six days. The arrow stones on the castle were all used up. The Xing army went up the mountain to light the firewood and burn the castle, and quelled the rebellion, beheading 20,000 people and their subordinates.

古文：十八年，盗陈吊眼聚众十万，连五十余寨，扼险自固。
现代文：十八年，漳州又有陈吊眼聚众十万人反元，其寨五十余座，扼险固守。
English: In 18 years, Zhangzhou once again attracted hundreds of thousands of anti-Yuan, with more than 50 villages, and adhered to the danger.

古文：降人黄华复叛，有众十万，兴与战于铅山，获八千人。
现代文：兴先攻破十五寨。吊眼至行千壁岭，兴进至半山，诱杀吊眼，到这时漳州之乱才完全平息。
English: Xing first broke through the fifteenth walled city. Hanging eye to the line of Qianbei Ridge, Xing into the middle of the mountain, booby-trapping hanging eye, at this time, the Zhangzhou Rebellion was completely quelled.

古文：华急攻建宁，兴疾趋，与福建军合，获华将二人，华走江山洞。追至赤岩，华败走，赴火死。
现代文：十九年，改任浙西道宣慰使。原已降之建宁人黄华，又举兵反元，有众十万，兴与他战于铅山，俘获八千。华急攻建宁，兴与福建军合击，俘华将二人，追华至赤岩。华败走，赴火自焚。
English: In 1919, he was reassigned as a propaganda and consolation envoy of the West Zhejiang Province. Huang Hua, originally from Jianning, who had been demoted, raised an army of 100,000 to fight against Yuan. Xing fought against him in Lead Mountain and captured 8,000. Hua Qiu attacked Jianning, Xing clashed with the Fujian army, captured two Hua generals, and chased Hua to Chaiyan. Hua was defeated and left, setting himself on fire.

古文：二十一年，改淮东道宣慰使。
现代文：二十一年，改任淮东道宣慰使。
English: In the 21st year, he was reappointed as Huaijiao Tongxuan comfort envoy.

古文：二十三年，拜江淮行中书省参知政事，平婺州盗施再十。
现代文：二十三年，拜江淮行中书省参知政事，平定婺州施再十的反元之乱。
English: In the 23rd year, Bai Jianghuai was appointed as the vice-governor of Shuzhou Province, and successfully quelled the anti-Yuan Rebellion in Shizhou Province.

古文：改浙东道宣慰使。
现代文：又改任浙东道宣慰使。
English: He was also reappointed as the Consoler-in-Chief of Zhejiang Province.

古文：兴潜由青田捣其巢穴，战叶山，擒老鹞及雄等二百余人，斩于温州市。又奉省檄平徽州盗汪千十等。
现代文：二十四年，朝廷设置尚书省，拜高兴为浙江行尚书省参知政事。兴捕斩柳分司于婺州。母亲去世，归家服丧，期满，奉诏讨处州詹老鹞、温州林雄。兴由青田偷袭，在叶山大战，擒老鹞及雄等二百余人。又奉行省之命，平定徽州之汪千十等。
English: In 1924, the imperial court set up Shangshu Province, and it was a pleasure to serve as the governor of Shangshu Province for Zhejiang Province. Xing captured and killed Liu Branch in Ganzhou. His mother died, he returned home to mourn, and at the end of his term, he was ordered to deal with Zhan Laojun and Wenzhou Linxiong. Xing sneaked from Qingdao and killed more than 200 people such as Laojun and Xiong in the Battle of Mount Ye. He also followed the province's order to subdue thousands of Wang in Huizhou.

古文：二十八年，罢福建行省，以参知政事行福建宣慰使，谕漳州盗欧狗降之。
现代文：二十八年，朝廷废福建行省，兴以参知政事行福建宣慰使之职，招降漳州的欧狗。
English: In the 28th year, the imperial court abolished Fujian as a province, and promoted the European dogs from Ganzhou to the post of assistant governor of Fujian Province.

古文：召入朝，拜江西行省左丞。
现代文：后召入朝、拜江西行省左丞。
English: Later, he was called to the imperial court, and he went to the west of the Baijiang River to serve as the provincial secretary of the left.

古文：二十九年，复立福建行省，拜右丞。
现代文：二十九年，又恢复福建行省，兴拜为右丞。
English: In 1929, he was reinstated as governor of Fujian Province, with Xing Bai as his right-hand man.

古文：爪哇黥使者孟琪，诏兴为平章政事，与史弼、亦黑迷失帅师征之，赐玉带、锦衣、甲胄、弓矢、大都良田千亩。
现代文：爪哇国王对元使臣孟琪施以黥刑，世祖诏命兴为平章政事，与史弼、亦黑迷失帅军征讨。三十年春，元军浮海抵爪哇。亦黑迷失统领水军，兴统领步兵，会师于八节涧。
English: The king of Java punished the former envoy, Meng Qi, with flogging, and the founder of the dynasty, Emperor Zhao, ordered Xing to take up the government of Pingzhang, and to fight with Shi Yan and Yihe, the lost leaders of the army. In the spring of the 30th year, the former army floated to Java. Yihe lost the leadership of the navy, and Xing took the leadership of the infantry. They joined forces on the 8th day of the 8th month.

古文：进攻葛郎国，降其主哈只葛当，事见弼传。
现代文：爪哇国王女婿土罕必耶降。元军又进攻葛郎国，葛郎国王哈只葛当投降，详见《史弼传》。
English: The son-in-law of the king of Java, Tu Han Biya, surrendered. The Yuan army also attacked the country of Ge Lang, and King Ge Lang had to surrender, for details, see "History."

古文：又谕降诸小国。
现代文：又招降附近小国。
English: It also invited small countries in the vicinity to surrender.

古文：哈只葛当子昔剌八的、昔剌丹不合逃入山谷，兴独帅千人深入，虏昔刺丹不合。
现代文：哈只葛当之子昔剌八的和昔剌丹不合逃入山谷。兴独率千人深入，俘昔剌丹不合。
English: The son of Ge Dang, Xuxu Xinghachi, and Xuxu Xingdanfu fled into the valley. Xing Du led a thousand people deep into the valley and captured Xuxu Xingdanfu.

古文：还至答哈城，史弼、亦黑迷失已遣使护土罕必阇耶归国，具入贡礼。
现代文：高兴还至答哈城时，史弼、亦黑迷失已遣人护送土罕必耶归国去准备进贡的礼品。
English: When Gao was still in the city of Taha, Shi Yan and Ye Hei Wan had sent someone to escort Tu Han Biye back to the country to prepare a gift for tribute.

古文：兴深言其失计。
现代文：兴认为这是失策。
English: Xing thinks this is a mistake.

古文：土罕必阇耶果杀使者以叛，合众来攻，兴等力战，却之，遂诛哈只葛当父子以归。
现代文：果然土罕必耶杀护送使者反叛，并回军攻击元军。兴等力战，打退爪哇军，诛杀哈只葛当父子，撤回本国。
English: Sure enough, Tu Han Biye killed the escorting envoys, rebelled, and returned to attack the Yuan army. Xing fought back the Javanese army, killed Hadu Gedang and his son, and withdrew to his home country.

古文：改江浙行省平章政事，赐海东青鹘，命其子伯颜入宿卫。
现代文：诏治弼与亦黑迷失放回土罕必耶之罪，而兴因未参与其事，且功多，赐金五十两。成宗即位，拜兴为福建行省平章政事。大德三年，汀州总管府同知阿里为报私仇，告兴违法。
English: Zhao Zhiyao and Yi Hei lost and were sent back to the earth, and Xing, because he did not participate in the matter and did a lot of work, was given fifty-two gold. Chengzong ascended to the throne, and Bai Xing served as the governor of Fujian Province. In the third year of Dade, the Tingzhou General Administration Office knew Ali as a personal revenge, and told Xing to break the law.

古文：四年，遣使赐海东白鹘、蒲萄酒、良药。八年，授枢密副使。
现代文：经查证实为诬告，阿里伏诛。改兴为江浙行省平章政事，命其子伯颜入宿卫军。八年，授枢密副使。
English: After investigation, it was confirmed to be a false accusation, and Ali Fuxi changed his name to Pingzhang and became the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and ordered his son Bo Yan to join the Home Guard. In eight years, he was awarded the title of Vice-Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：十年，进同知枢密院事，皆兼平章。
现代文：十年进升同知枢密院事，兼任平章。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to Tongzhi Privy Councillor and concurrently held the title of Pingzhang.

古文：改河南行省平章政事。
现代文：后改任河南行省平章政事。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Henan Provincial Government of Pingzhang Province.

古文：武宗即位，召见，拜左丞相，商议河南省事，赐以先朝御服。
现代文：武宗即位，拜兴为左丞相，商议河南省事。仁宗对有功老臣十分宠信，赏赐尤厚。
English: Wu Zong ascended the throne, Bai Xing became the left minister, and discussed the affairs of Henan Province. Renzong was very fond of meritorious old ministers, and rewarded them particularly well.

古文：仁宗宠眷勋旧，赐与尤厚。皇庆二年秋九月，卒，年六十九。
现代文：兴于皇庆二年九月卒，终年六十九岁。
English: Xing died in September of the second year of the Emperor's reign, at the age of 69.

古文：赠太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封梁国公，谥武宣。
现代文：赠太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封梁国公，谥 武宣 。
English: He bestowed the title of daishi (Grand Master) and the title of kaifu (head of the provincial government) to the three officials, Shangzhu Guo, and posthumously conferred the title of Liang Guo Guo Guo, followed by Wu Xuan.

古文：刘国杰，字国宝，本女真人也，姓乌古伦，后入中州，改姓刘氏。
现代文：元统三年，加封南阳王。刘国杰，字国宝，本女真人，姓乌古伦，入中州后改姓刘氏。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Nanyang Wang, Liu Guojie, a national treasure, a real person, surnamed Ugulun, changed his surname to Liu after entering Zhongzhou.

古文：父德宁，为宗王斡臣必阇赤，授管领益都军民公事。
现代文：父德宁，为宗王斡臣之必赤，授管领益都军民公事。
English: His father, Denin, was the king's trusted advisor and was in charge of the military and civil affairs of the capital.

古文：至元六年，选其兵取襄阳，以益都新军千户从张弘范戍万山堡。
现代文：国杰体貌魁伟，善骑射，胆力过人。至元六年，元军攻襄阳，国杰作为益都新军千户随张弘范戍守万山堡。
English: Guojie had a great physique, was good at riding and shooting, and had great courage. In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army attacked Xiangyang, and Guojie, as a member of the Yidu New Army, accompanied Zhang Hongfan to defend Wanshan Fort.

古文：宋兵窥伺，众出取薪，大出兵来攻堡，国杰等以数百人败之，斩首四千余级，由是有名。
现代文：宋兵出大军来攻万山堡，国杰以数百人击败敌军，斩首四千余人，由是闻名。
English: Song soldiers sent a large army to attack Wanshan Fort. Guojie defeated the enemy army with hundreds of people and beheaded more than 4,000 people, which is famous.

古文：从略荆南，抵归峡，转战数千里，还，破宋兵襄阳下。
现代文：后又随大军攻夺荆南，直至归州、峡州，转战数千里，又回师破宋军于襄阳城下。
English: Later, he followed the large army to conquer Jingnan, until he returned to Guizhou and Xiaozhou, fought thousands of miles, and returned to the division to defeat the Song Army under the city of Xiangyang.

古文：襄阳降，世祖闻其勇，召见，迁武德将军、管军总管，赐银百两、锦衣、弓矢以宠之。
现代文：在进攻樊城的战斗中，国杰攻取外城，因功授武略将军，佩金符。破宋张贵兵于柜门关，再攻樊城，身伤数处，浴血奋战，攻破樊城，襄阳随即投降。世祖闻其勇，召见，升为武德将军、管军总管，赐银百两及锦衣、弓箭等物。
English: In the battle of attacking Lucheng, the national hero captured the outer city, and was awarded the general of martial arts and the gold medal for his meritorious service. He defeated the Song Zhang soldiers at the cabinet gate, and then attacked Lucheng. He was wounded in several places and fought hard. He defeated Lucheng, and Xiangyang immediately surrendered. The ancestors heard of his bravery, summoned him, and promoted him to the general of martial arts and the head of the army, and gave him one hundred and two silver and brocade clothes, bows and arrows and other things.

古文：从伯颜南征。十一年，次郢州。
现代文：随伯颜南征，十一年，进抵郢州。
English: With Bo Yan's Southern Expedition, eleven years, arrived in Ganzhou.

古文：宋兵扼汉水，不得下，伯颜谋取黄家湾堡以入汉，国杰先登，拔之，加武节将军。
现代文：宋军扼守汉水，元军不能南下。伯颜决计夺取黄家湾堡，打通入汉江的道路。国杰奉命夺取了黄家湾堡，因功加武节将军。
English: The Song Army guarded the Han River, and the Yuan Army could not go south. Bo Yan decided to seize the Hwangjiawan Fort and open the road to the Han River. The national hero was ordered to seize the Hwangjiawan Fort, and was awarded the Military Merit Medal for his efforts.

古文：从破沙洋、新城，败孙虎臣丁家洲，战甚力，进万户。
现代文：在攻破沙洋、新城及在丁家洲打败孙虎臣的战斗中，国杰都是奋力拼杀，因而进升万户。
English: In the battles of conquering Shayang and Xincheng and defeating Sun Huchen in Dingjiazhou, the national heroes fought hard and fought hard, and thus advanced to 10,000 households.

古文：复从阿术取淮南，别军扬子桥，扼宋兵道。
现代文：又从阿术攻取淮南，他分兵扼守扬子桥，截断宋兵通道。
English: He also captured Huainan from Ahshu, and his detachment guarded the Yangtze Bridge, cutting off the Song soldiers' passage.

古文：宋以万众夜夺堡，击走之，擒其都统张林。
现代文：宋军队万人乘夜攻夺扬子桥的桥头堡，被国杰击败，擒宋都统张林。
English: The Song army of ten thousand people took the night to capture the bridgehead of the Yangtze Bridge, was defeated by the national hero, and the Song Dynasty was unified.

古文：宋将张世杰盛兵出焦山来御师，施铁绳，联战船，碇江中，以示必死。
现代文：宋将张世杰以大量兵力出焦山来抵御元军，战船停泊江中，用铁绳相连，截断江面，决意死战。
English: Song sent Zhang Shijie out of Jiaoshan with a large number of troops to resist the Yuan army, anchored warships in the river, connected them with iron ropes, cut off the river, and decided to fight to the death.

古文：阿术率诸军进战，万户刘琛由江南绕其后，国杰与董文炳左右夹击之，焚其战船，世杰军大溃，追奔圌山，夺黄鹞船数百艘。
现代文：阿术率诸军进攻，万户刘琛由江南绕到宋军后方，国杰与董文炳率军分别从左右夹攻，焚敌战船。世杰军大败，元军追至山，夺得黄鹄白鹞船数百艘。
English: A Shuxu led the army to attack, Wanyu Liu Yi led the army from the south of the Yangtze River to the rear of the Song army, Guo Jie and Dong Wenyi led the army to attack from the left and right, respectively, and burned enemy warships. Shijie's army was defeated, and the Yuan army chased them to the mountain, and captured hundreds of ships of Huangpi Baiyao.

古文：帝壮之，诏加怀远大将军，赐号霸都，国杰行第二，因呼之曰刘二霸都而不名。
现代文：世祖大加赞赏，诏加国杰为怀远大将军，赐号拔都。国杰排行第二，因呼他为 刘二拔都 ，而不叫其名。
English: The ancestor greatly appreciated that Guo Jie was awarded the title of General Huaiyuan. Guo Jie ranked second, because he was called Liu Erbadu, but not his name.

古文：霸都，华言敢勇之士也。
现代文：拔都为蒙语，意思是勇敢之士。
English: "Batu" is a Mongolian word meaning "brave."

古文：宋亡，入朝，加佥书西川行枢密院事，选淮南兵，使将之平蜀。
现代文：宋亡后，国杰加佥书四川行枢密院事，选淮南兵令他统领去征讨四川。
English: After the death of Song, Guojie Jiaxuan wrote to Sichuan to go to the Privy Council, and selected Huainan soldiers to lead him to conquer Sichuan.

古文：未行，会北边有警，加镇国上将军、汉军都元帅，将卫兵定北方。
现代文：尚未起程，北边有警，于是又加国杰为镇国上将军、汉军都元帅，统领卫军平定北部叛乱。
English: He had not yet set off, but there were police on the north side, so he appointed Guojie as the commander-in-chief and marshal of the Han army, leading the guard to quell the northern rebellion.

古文：冬，召还，帝亲解衣加玉带赐之。
现代文：冬，召回京师，世祖亲手把自己的衣带赐予他。
English: In winter, when he was recalled to the capital, the patriarch gave him his own belt with his own hands.

古文：十五年，复将左、右、中三卫兵，戍北边，诏 有不用命者，斩之以闻 。
现代文：十五年，又统帅左、右、中三卫军戍守北部边疆，诏令： 有不听指挥者，先斩后奏。 
English: Fifteen years later, he commanded the Left, Right, and Middle Guards to defend the northern border, and issued the edict: If anyone disobeys the commander, he must be executed first.

古文：十六年，诸王脱脱木反，寇和林。国杰度其众悉至，营中必虚，选轻骑袭之，获其众万计。
现代文：十六年，亲王脱脱木反叛，侵犯和林，国杰料定脱脱木会率大军来进攻，其后方必然空虚，便选轻骑袭击敌后方，获其兵卒数以万计。
English: In the 16th year, Prince Dezhong rebelled and invaded He Lin. Guojie expected that Dezhong would lead a large army to attack, and his rear would be empty. He chose light cavalry to attack the enemy's rear, and gained tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：脱脱木屡战不利，又残暴，失众心，众杀之来降。
现代文：脱脱木屡战不利，又残暴，大失人心，其部众将他杀死后投降官军。
English: Zhu Degu repeatedly fought against, and brutally, greatly lost the hearts of the people. His subordinates killed him and then surrendered to the government army.

古文：十八年，加辅国上将军。
现代文：十八年，加国杰为辅国上将军。
English: In 18th year, Gao Guojie was promoted to vice admiral.

古文：十九年，征东兵无功而还，帝怒，将尽罢大小将校，召国杰为征东行省左丞。
现代文：十九年，东征日本无功而还，世祖大怒，将大小将校尽行罢职，召国杰为征东行省左丞。
English: In the 19th year, the eastward expedition of Japan was unsuccessful, and the ancestor was furious. He dismissed the officers of all ranks and called Guojie to be the provincial left-handed general for the eastward expedition.

古文：既至，帝语之故，国杰曰： 罪在元帅耳，倘蒙圣慈，复诸将之职，彼必人人思奋，以雪前耻矣。 
现代文：国杰回朝后，帝同他讲了东征失败的原因。国杰说： 罪在元帅，如果蒙圣上仁慈，复诸将之职，他们必人人发奋以雪前次失败的耻辱。 
English: After Guo Jie returned to the imperial court, the emperor told him the reasons for the failure of the Eastern Expedition. Guo Jie said: The crime is in the marshal, if they are blessed with divine mercy and reinstated as marshal, they will all work hard to shed the shame of the previous failure.

古文：帝从之。尽复其官，以属国杰征日本。
现代文：世祖听从，恢复被罢大小将校官职，委任国杰负责征日本的事。
English: The patriarch obeyed, reinstated the ousted high-ranking officers, and appointed Guo Jie to be in charge of recruiting in Japan.

古文：会黄华反建宁，乃命国杰以征东兵会江淮参政伯颜等讨之。
现代文：这时，建宁黄华起兵反元，朝廷命国杰将征东兵会同江淮参政伯颜一起讨伐。
English: At this time, Jianning Huanghua raised an army against Yuan, and the imperial court ordered Guojie to lead the Eastern Expeditionary Force together with Jianghuai and political participant Bo Yan.

古文：国杰破赤岩寨，黄华自杀，余众皆溃。
现代文：国杰攻破赤岩寨，黄华自杀，余众皆散。
English: Guojie broke through the red rock village, Huang Hua committed suicide, and the rest were scattered.

古文：福建行省左丞忽剌出将兵来会梧桐川，欲搜贼溃去者尽杀之，国杰曰： 首乱者，华也，余皆胁从，招谕不归，诛之未晚。 
现代文：福建行省左丞忽剌出领兵来到梧桐川，要搜索黄华余部而尽杀之。国杰劝阻说： 首乱是黄华，其余皆是胁从。若招谕不来，再杀不晚。 
English: The Fujian Provincial Provincial Left-Handed Warlord, Guo Jie, suddenly led his soldiers to Wu Tong River to search for the rest of Huang Hua and kill them. Guo Jie dissuaded him, saying, "Huang Hua is the instigator of the rebellion, and the rest are cowards. If the summons does not come, it is not too late to kill him again."

古文：未几，众果出降。
现代文：不久，这些人都出来投降。
English: Before long, these people all came out to surrender.

古文：二十二年，罢征东省，除佥书沿江行枢密院，改佥院。
现代文：二十一年，撤销征东省，任国杰为佥书沿江行枢密院，后改为佥院。
English: In 1921, the Eastern Expedition was revoked, and Guojie was appointed to the Privy Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council of the Grand Council.

古文：二十三年，朝廷以湖广重地，且多盗，拜本省左丞。
现代文：二十三年，朝廷认为湖广是重地，且多盗，而任命国杰为该行省左丞。
English: In 233, the imperial court considered Hukang to be an important region, and there was a lot of theft, and appointed Guojie as the provincial left jong.

古文：国杰至，首平湖南盗李万二。
现代文：国杰到任，首先平定湖南李万二。
English: When Guojie took office, the first thing he did was to pacify Hunan Province.

古文：二十五年，湖南盗詹一仔诱衡、永、宝庆、武冈人，啸聚四望山，官军久不能讨。
现代文：第二年又平定广东的邓太獠、刘太獠，因功加资德大夫。二十五年，湖南的詹一仔联合衡阳、永州、宝庆、武冈四路人民举兵反元，占据四望山，官军长期不能讨平。
English: In the following year, he subdued Deng Taibing and Liu Taibing in Guangdong, and was awarded the title of Doctor of Civil Engineering for his efforts. In the 25th year, Zhan Yizi of Hunan, together with the people of Hengyang, Yongzhou, Baoqing, and Wugang, raised an army and occupied Shifang Mountain, and the government army could not be leveled for a long time.

古文：国杰破之，斩首盗，余众悉降。将校请曰： 此辈久乱，急则降，降而有衅，复反矣，不如尽坑之。 
现代文：国杰讨平之。将校提出： 这些人长期叛乱，到危急时就降，降后又闹事，反复无常，不如全把他们活埋。 
English: The officer said, "These people have been rebelling for a long time, and in a time of crisis they surrender, and after they surrender they start trouble again. They are capricious. It would be better to bury them all alive."

古文：国杰曰： 多杀不可，况杀降耶！
现代文：国杰开导他们说： 多杀就不允许，何况要杀已降的人！
English: Guojie enlightened them, saying, "It is not allowed to kill more people, let alone kill those who have already surrendered!"

古文：吾有以处之矣。 
现代文：我自有办法处治。 
English: I have my own way of dealing with it.

古文：乃相要地为三屯：在衡曰清化，在永曰乌符，在武冈曰白仓，迁其众守之，每屯五百人，以备贼，且垦废田榛棘，使贼不得为巢穴。
现代文：选择了三处要地进行屯田：一在衡阳之清化，一在永州之乌符，一在武冈之白仓。把一部分兵卒分别驻于上述三地，每屯五百人，在那里一边守御，一边开垦荒田，清除荆棘，使作乱者不能以此为巢穴。
English: Three important places were selected for the cantonment: one in Hengyang's Qinghua, one in Yongzhou's Wufu, and one in Wookang's Baicang. A part of the soldiers were stationed in the above three places separately, five hundred people per cantonment, where they guarded and reclaimed wasteland, cleared thorns, so that the troublemakers could not use it as a nest.

古文：降者有故田宅，尽还之，无者，使杂耕屯中，后皆为良民。
现代文：降民原来的田地房屋都还给他们，原来一无所有的人，分别参入于屯田之中耕种，这些人后来都成为良民。
English: The original fields and houses of the surrendered people were returned to them. The people who originally had nothing entered the fields and cultivated them separately. These people later became good citizens.

古文：有诏讨江西诸盗，国杰趋赴之。十一月，破萧太獠于陈古水，斩数百人，进平怀集诸寨贼。
现代文：同年，国杰奉诏讨江西诸盗，十一月，破萧太獠于陈古水，斩首数百人，又平怀集诸寨。
English: In the same year, Guojie issued an edict to crack down on the bandits in Jiangxi Province. In November, he defeated Xiao Taishan in Chen Guoshui, beheaded hundreds of people, and peacefully gathered Zhuzhai.

古文：二十六年春，东入肇庆，攻闫太獠于清远，还攻萧太獠于怀集，擒之，复攻走严太獠。
现代文：二十六年春，东入肇庆路，攻阎太獠于清远，擒萧太獠于怀集，赶走了严太獠。四月把曾太獠赶出金林。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, the east entered Zhaoqing Road, the attack on Yan was in Qingyuan, the attack on Xiao was in Huaiji, and Yan was driven away. In April, Zeng was driven out of Jinlin.

古文：八月，永州盗李末子千七寇全州，败官兵，杀郡长官土鲁。
现代文：国杰深入山寨，传染疾病，移驻道州。广东的陈太獠攻道州，为国杰生擒。
English: Guojie went deep into the cottage, infectious diseases, moved to Daozhou. Guangdong's Chen Taiyi attacked Daozhou, for Guojie students.

古文：国杰进讨，擒之，枭首而还。
现代文：二十七年平定江西龙泉地方诸盗后，仍回镇道州。
English: In the 27th year, after subduing the bandits in the Longquan area of Jiangxi Province, he still returned to the town of Doushou.

古文：以前后功，加湖广右丞。
现代文：同年八月平定永州的李千七。朝廷因前后功，加国杰为湖广行省右丞。
English: In August of the same year, Li Qianqian of Yongzhou was pacified. Due to the success of the imperial court, the Canadian national hero became the right-hand man of Hukanghang Province.

古文：二十八年，置湖广等处行枢密院，迁副使，还军武昌。
现代文：二十八年，设立湖广行枢密院，以国杰为副使，还镇武昌。
English: In the 28th year, the Privy Council of Guangxing Lake was established, with Guojie as the deputy envoy, and Wuchang was restored.

古文：秋，广东盗再起，国杰复出道州。
现代文：是年，广东盗起，国杰仍镇守道州。
English: It was the year of Guangdong's rise to power, and Guojie was still the town guard of Daozhou.

古文：初，黔中诸蛮酋既内附复叛，又巴洞何世雄犯澧州，泊崖洞田万顷、楠木洞孟再师犯辰州，朝廷尝讨降之。
现代文：上思州的黄胜许，与交趾勾结扰乱边境。二十九年，朝廷诏令国杰发兵征讨。胜许逃入交趾，国杰三次去信向交趾索还胜许，交趾不肯交出。
English: In 1929, the imperial court ordered Guojie to send an army to collect troops. Guojie fled to Xizhou, and Guojie went to Xizhou three times to meet Xizhou, but Xizhou refused to surrender.

古文：升泊崖为施溶州，以万顷知州事。三十一年，万顷复叛，攻之，不能下。
现代文：是年夏回军本国，在庆远募壮族人民屯田。三十年入朝，世祖对朝臣说： 湖广重地，只有刘二拔都能够镇守，他人不能。 
English: It was in the summer of the year when the army returned to the motherland, and the Zhuang people were recruited in Qingyuan. Thirty years into the dynasty, the ancestor said to the courtier: Lake Guang heavy, only Liu Erba can keep the town, others can not.

古文：至是，帝即位，赦天下，并赦万顷等，亦不降，帝以命国杰。
现代文：下令不要调动国杰，并加湖广安南行平章事。奉命兴兵向交趾问罪，尚未出军，世祖驾崩，征交趾的事也就罢休。成宗即位，又置行枢密院于衡州，仍以国杰为副使。
English: He ordered not to transfer Guo Jie, and added the matter of Guo Jie going south to Guang'an. He was ordered to raise an army to interrogate Guo Jie, but he had not yet gone to the army, and when his ancestor died, the matter of recruiting Guo Jie was also suspended. When Cheng Zong ascended the throne, he also set up the Privy Council in Hengzhou, still with Guo Jie as deputy envoy.

古文：九月，国杰驰至辰，进攻明溪贼鲁万丑，拥众自上流而下，千户崔忠、百户马孙儿战死。
现代文：九月，国杰赶到辰州，率军自上流而下，进攻明溪之鲁万丑，千户崔忠、百户马孙儿战死。
English: In September, Guojie rushed to Chenzhou, led the army from upstream to downstream, attacked Lu Wanqiu of Mingxi, and a thousand families of Cui Zhong and a hundred families of Masun'er died in battle.

古文：十月，进兵桑木溪，万丑复以千人拒战，击却之。
现代文：十月，进兵桑木溪，万丑以千人来抵抗，被击退。
English: In October, when troops were sent to Mulberry Creek, Wanxiu resisted with a thousand men and was repulsed.

古文：明日，万丑倍众来攻，国杰鼓之，百户李旺率死士陷阵，众军齐奋，贼败，遂破其巢，焚之。
现代文：第二天，万丑以两千军进攻，百户李旺率敢死队陷阵，众军齐进，击败万丑并破其巢穴。
English: The next day, Wanxiu attacked with two thousand troops, and the hundred households of Li Wang led the death squads into battle. The troops marched in unison to defeat Wanxiu and break its lair.

古文：进攻施溶，部将田荣祖请曰： 施溶，万顷之腹心，石农次、三羊峰，其左右臂也，宜先断其臂，而后腹心乃可攻。 
现代文：接着进攻施溶州。部将田荣祖提出 ：施溶是泊崖洞田万顷的腹地，而石农次、三羊峰是万顷的左右臂，宜先断其臂，而后才可以攻其心腹。 
English: Next, they attacked Shiroyasu. The commander, Tian Rongzu, proposed: Shiroyasu is the hinterland of 10,000 hectares of Hokkedo, while Shikunoji and Samyangbong are the left and right arms of 10,000 hectares. It is better to break their arms first, and then attack their hearts and minds.

古文：复穷捕其党，攀崖缘木而进，凡千余里。
现代文：国杰采纳这意见，终于攻克施溶，生擒田万顷，斩首示众。
English: Guojie adopted this opinion, and finally conquered Shi Rong, creating tens of thousands of hectares of rice paddies, and beheading people.

古文：元贞元年，即军中加荣禄大夫、湖广行省平章政事。
现代文：元贞元年，加国杰荣禄大夫、湖广行省平章政事。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Zhen, Dr. Jie Ronglu of Canada and Dr. He Pingzhang of Guangxi Province came to power.

古文：辰、澧地接溪洞，宋尝选民立屯，免其徭役，使御之，在澧者曰隘丁，在辰者寨兵，宋亡，皆废，国杰悉复其制，班师。继又经画茶陵、衡、郴、道、桂阳，凡广东、江西盗所出入之地，南北三千里，置戍三十有八，分屯将士以守之，由是东尽交广，西亘黔中，地周湖广，四境皆有屯戍，制度周密，诸蛮不能复寇，盗贼遂息。
现代文：在平定湖广叛乱之后，国杰恢复宋代在这些地区的屯田制度，在茶陵、衡阳、郴州、道州、桂阳诸地屯田，凡广东、江西所谓盗贼出没之地，均设立屯田，南北三千里之内，置屯戍三十八处，分将士屯守。总之，东至交广，西到黔中，环湖广周围四境，皆有屯戍，制度周密，诸蛮不能入寇，盗贼平息。大德五年，罗鬼女子蛇节反元，乌撒、乌蒙、东川、芒部诸少数民族也反叛，攻陷贵州。
English: After quelling the Hukang Rebellion, Guo Jie restored the military garrison system in these regions during the Song Dynasty. Military garrisons were set up in the provinces of Chaling, Hengyang, Zhangzhou, Daozhou, and Guiyang, as well as in all the places in Guangdong and Jiangxi where thieves were said to haunt. Within 3,000 miles from north to south, 38 military garrisons were set up, and soldiers were assigned to guard the garrisons. In short, from east to Jiaogang, west to Yunnan, and around the four borders of Hukang, there were military garrisons. The system was elaborate, and thieves were not allowed

古文：且善推诚得士心，故能立功如此。讣闻，帝深悼惜，赠推忠效力定远功臣、光禄大夫、司徒、柱国，封齐国公，谥武宣。
现代文：国杰因久镇西南边疆，身染重病，于大德九年二月卒，年七十二岁。赠推忠效力定远功臣、光禄大夫、司徒、柱国，封齐国公，谥 武宣 。
English: Guo Jie was seriously ill due to the southwest border of Jiuzhou Town. He passed away in February of the ninth year of the Great German Empire, at the age of 72. He was given the titles of Dingyuan Hero, Guanglu Doctor, Szeto, Zhu Guo, Guo Qi Guo, and Wu Xuan.

