古文：黄帝问四辅曰：唯余一人，兼有天下。今余欲畜而正之，均而平之，为之若何？
现代文：黄帝问他手下的辅佐大臣说：现在我一人广有天下，我要教化臣民而使之端正，斟酌衡量而使之正定，具体应该怎样做呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked the assistant minister under his command, "Now that I am the sole ruler of the world, I want to educate my subjects and make them upright, and make them upright through careful measurement. What should I do specifically?"

古文：果童对曰：不险则不可平，不谌则不可正。
现代文：果童回答说：不严明法度人民便不得治理，不端正名分则贵贱尊卑不得其正。
English: The fruit boy replied: If the laws are not strict and clear, the people will not be governed, and if the names are not correct, the nobility and lowliness will not be correct.

古文：观天于上，视地于下，而稽之男女。夫天有恒干，地有恒常。合此干常，是晦有明，有阴有阳。夫地有山有泽，有黑有白，有美有恶。
现代文：应参照天地法则，再严正于人事。天地之间本就存在着永久不变的法则，比照于这个法则，可知晦明、阴阳、山泽、黑白、美恶等等矛盾对立体原就存在，人事也是如此。
English: We should refer to the laws of heaven and earth before being strict with people. There is a permanent and unchanging law between heaven and earth. According to this law, it can be known that contradictions such as twilight, yin and yang, mountains and rivers, black and white, and good and evil exist in the three-dimensional principle, and the same is true for people.

古文：地俗德以静，而天正名以作。静作相养，德虐相成。
现代文：自然法则是地以静的方式来养育其德，天以运动的方式来正定名分，动静、生杀相互涵养、相辅相成。
English: The law of nature is that the earth nurtures its virtue in a static way, and the sky determines its name in a movement way. Movement and stillness, life and death mutually nurture and complement each other.

古文：两若有名，相与则成。
现代文：这两组矛盾体是各有名分的，它们相互依赖、相辅相成。
English: These two sets of contradictions have their own merits. They are interdependent and mutually reinforcing.

古文：阴阳备物，化变乃生。
现代文：而阴、阳二气包含于万物之中，二者相互作用，便使得万物生生不已。
English: However, the yin and yang qi are contained in all things, and the interaction between the two makes all things continue to exist.

古文：有任一则重，任百而轻。
现代文：人的能力是不相同的，有的人委任一事还嫌太重，而有的人委任百事尚觉太轻。
English: People's abilities are not the same, some people think that the appointment is too heavy, while some people think that the appointment of Pepsi is too light.

古文：人有其中，物有其形，因之若成。
现代文：人的能力各有等差，就如同物的形制各有不同，顺应它们的这种特性，就能成就事功。
English: Human abilities are all different, just as the shapes of things are all different, and according to their characteristics, they can achieve great things.

古文：黄帝曰：夫民仰天而生，恃地而食，以天为父，以地为母。
现代文：黄帝问：人民仰仗天上而得以生存，依赖大地而得以有饭吃，人们因此而把天地看作自己的父母。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: The people depend on the sky to survive, and depend on the earth to eat. Therefore, people regard the sky and the earth as their parents.

古文：今余欲畜而正之，均而平之，谁适由始？
现代文：现在我要教化他们而使之端正，斟酌衡量而使之正定，那样应该从谁开始呢？
English: Now I'm going to educate them and straighten them out, measure them and set them right, so who should I start with?

古文：对曰：险若得平，谌若得正，贵贱必谌，贫富有等。
现代文：果童回答说：通过严明法度而使民得到治理，通过端正名分而使民归于正道，这样的话，贵与贱的等级就能得到正定，贫与富也就自然有了等差。
English: The fruit boy replied: Through strict laws, the people can be governed, and through correcting the name, the people can return to the right path. In this case, the high and low levels can be positively determined, and poverty and wealth will naturally have an equal difference.

古文：前世法之，后世既陨，由果童始。果童于是衣褐而穿，负缾而峦，营行乞食，周流四国，以示贫贱之极。
现代文：这种贵贱、贫富各有等差的等级制度，过去的时代一直是遵循的，而后来却遭到了破裂，要恢复这种制度，可以从我本人开始。果童于是穿着破旧的粗布衣，背着残损的瓦罐，到处流浪讨饭，周游四方，用以显示极度的贫贱。
English: This hierarchical system, in which there is an equal difference between the rich and the poor, and the rich and the poor, which has been followed in the past, has been broken, and I can start from myself to restore this system. The fruit boy then dressed in a worn-out coarse cloth, carrying a damaged pot, wandered around begging for food, and traveled around to show extreme poverty.

