古文：或问曰： 贤者行道，得尊官厚禄；矣何心为佞，以取富贵？ 
现代文：有人问： 贤能的人实行先王之道，能得到高官厚禄，人们为什么一定要去谄媚奉承，来取得富贵呢？ 
English: Some people have asked: If a virtuous person can practice the way of the forefathers and can obtain high-ranking officials and rich rewards, why do people have to flatter and flatter in order to get rich?

古文：曰：佞人知行道可以得富贵，必以佞取爵禄者，不能禁欲也；知力耕可以得谷，勉贸可以得货，然而必盗窃，情欲不能禁者也。以礼进退也，人莫之贵，然而违礼者众，尊义者希，心情贪欲，志虑乱溺也。
现代文：我说：谄媚奉承的人知道实行先王之道可以得到富贵，但却一定要以谄媚奉承来取得爵位和俸禄，是因为不能克制贪婪的欲望；人是知道努力耕作可以获得粮食，努力经商可以得到财富，然而一定要去盗窃，是因为私心得不到克制，以礼制来决定自己做官还是辞官，这样的人没有不被尊重的，然而违背礼制的人多，尊奉道义的人少，这是私心贪婪，神志昏乱而执迷不悟的缘故。
English: I said: People who flatter others know that they can get rich by practicing the way of the first king, but they must use flattery to get a knighthood and salary, because they can't restrain their greedy desires; people know that they can get food by hard work and wealth by hard work in business, but they must steal, because their selfishness can't be restrained, and they use etiquette to decide whether to be an official or a retired official. Such people are not disrespected, but there are many people who violate etiquette and few people who respect morality. This is because of selfish greed, confusion and stubbornness.

古文：夫佞与贤者同材，佞以情自败；偷盗与田商同知，偷盗以欲自劾也。
现代文：其实，谄媚奉承的人与贤能的人才智相同，只是谄媚奉承的人由于私心而自取灭亡；偷盗的人与种田的、经商的才智相同，只是偷盗的人由于贪心而自投法网。
English: In fact, a flatterer has the same intelligence as a wise person, but a flatterer is self-destructive because of selfishness; a thief is the same as a farmer and a businessman, but a thief is self-defeating because of greed.

古文：问曰： 佞与贤者同材，材行宜钧，而佞人曷为独以情自败？ 
现代文：有人问： 佞人与贤者才能相同，才能和操行应该是相称的。那么佞人为什么偏偏因为有私心而自取灭亡呢？ 
English: Some people have asked, "The talents of a lazy person are the same as those of a wise person, and talent and conduct should be commensurate. So why do lazy people destroy themselves just because they are selfish?"

古文：曰：富贵皆人所欲也，虽有君子之行，犹有饥渴之情。
现代文：我说：富贵是人共同的欲望，即使有君子的操行，还是会有饥渴的私欲。
English: I said: Wealth is a common human desire. Even if there is a gentleman's conduct, there will still be a hungry and thirsty lust.

古文：君子则以礼防情，以义割欲，故得循道，循道则无祸；小人纵贪利之欲，逾礼犯义，故进得苟佞，苟佞则有罪。
现代文：只是君子能用礼制来克制私心，用道义来抑制私欲，所以能够遵循先王之道，遵循了先王之道就没有灾祸。而小人则放纵贪利的欲望，违犯礼义，所以采取不正当的献媚讨好，不正当的献媚讨好就会招来罪过。
English: However, a gentleman can use etiquette to restrain selfishness and morality to restrain selfishness, so he can follow the way of the former king. If he follows the way of the former king, there will be no disaster. On the other hand, a villain will indulge greed and violate etiquette, so he will adopt improper flattery and flattery, and improper flattery and flattery will cause sin.

古文：夫贤者，君子也；佞人，小人也。
现代文：可见，贤者是君子，佞人是小人。
English: It can be seen that the wise man is a gentleman, and the scoundrel is a villain.

古文：君子与小人本殊操异行，取舍不同。
现代文：君子与小人本来操行就不同，行为取舍的标准也不一样。
English: The gentleman and the villain are different in their original behavior, and the standards of behavior are also different.

古文：问曰： 佞与谗者同道乎？
现代文：有人问： 谄媚奉承的人与说坏话陷害人的人一条道路的人？
English: Someone asked: A person who follows the path of the flatterer and the slanderer?

古文：有以异乎？ 
现代文：还是有区别呢？ 
English: Or is there a difference?

古文：曰：谗与佞，俱小人也，同道异材，俱以嫉妒为性，而施行发动之异。
现代文：我说： 谗人与佞人都是小人，一路货伎俩不同，都是以嫉妒为本性，但采取的行动与动机却不一样。
English: I said: Both the cheater and the cheated are villains, and all the tricks are different, all of them are based on jealousy, but the actions and motives are different.

古文：谗以口害人，佞以事危人；谗人以直道不违，佞人依违匿端；谗人无诈虑，佞人有术数。
现代文：谗人是用口害人，佞人是以事害人；谗人公开说不隐瞒自己的意见，佞人则模棱两可地隐藏自己的动机；谗人没有欺骗的心计，而佞人存有阴谋诡计。
English: A braggart uses words to hurt people, a braggart uses things to hurt people; a braggart openly says that he does not hide his opinions, a braggart ambiguously hides his motives; a braggart has no scheme to deceive, but a braggart has a scheme.

古文：故人君皆能远谗亲仁，莫能知贤别佞。
现代文：所以君主能疏远谗人而亲近仁人，不能识别贤人与佞人。
English: Therefore, the monarch can alienate the lazy people and be close to the benevolent people, and cannot distinguish the wise men from the lazy people.

古文：难曰： 人君皆能远谗亲仁，而莫能知贤别佞，然则佞人意不可知乎？ 
现代文：指责的人会说： 君主都只能疏远谗人亲近仁人，而不能识别贤人与佞人，那么佞人就不能识别了吗？ 
English: The accusers will say: Monarchs can only alienate the wicked and draw close to the benevolent, but cannot recognize the wise and the wicked, so can they not recognize the wicked?

古文：曰：佞可知，人君不能知。
现代文：我说： 佞人可以识别，而君主不能识别。
English: I said, "A eunuch can be recognized, but a monarch cannot."

古文：庸庸之君，不能知贤，不能知贤，不能知佞。
现代文：平庸的君主，不能识别贤人；不能识别贤人，就不能识别佞人。
English: A mediocre ruler cannot recognize a wise man; if he cannot recognize a wise man, he cannot recognize a lazy man.

古文：唯圣贤之人，以九德检其行，以事效考其言。
现代文：圣贤的人，用九条道德标准来检验人们的行为，根据办事的效果来考察人们的言论。
English: Sages and sages use the nine moral standards to examine people's behavior, and examine people's speech according to the effect of their actions.

古文：行不合於九德，言不验於事效，人非贤则佞矣。
现代文：行为不符合九条道德标准的，言论不被办事效果证明的，这种人就不是贤人而是佞人。
English: If one's behavior does not conform to the nine moral standards, and if one's speech is not proved by the results of one's actions, such a person is not a sage, but a scoundrel.

古文：夫知佞以知贤，知贤以知佞，知贤则贤智自觉，知贤则奸佞自得。
现代文：看来能识别佞人就可以识别贤人，能识别贤人就可以识别佞人；能识别佞人就自然会觉察到贤智的人，能识别贤人就会自然地发觉奸佞的人。
English: It seems that if you can identify a scoundrel, you can identify a wise man, and if you can identify a wise man, you can identify a scoundrel; if you can identify a scoundrel, you will naturally detect a wise man, and if you can identify a wise man, you will naturally detect a scoundrel.

古文：贤佞异行，考之一验；情心不同，观之一实。
现代文：贤人与佞人的操行不同，而考察他们的是同一个标准；他们私心不同，而看到的却是同一效果。
English: Wise men and scoundrels act differently, but they are judged by the same standard; they are selfishly different, but they see the same effect.

古文：问曰： 九德之法，张设久矣，观读之者，莫不晓见，斗斛之量多少，权衡之县轻重也。
现代文：有人问： 用九条道德标准检验行为的方法，已经设立很久了。读过《尚书·皋陶谟》的人，没有不知道的，这就好比用斗斛来量多少，用秤来称轻重一样。
English: Someone asked: The method of using the nine moral standards to test behavior has been established for a long time. People who have read "Shangshu Zhituo," there is nothing they do not know. It is like using a bucket to measure how much, and using a scale to weigh the weight.

古文：然而居国有土之君，曷为常有邪佞之臣与常有欺惑之患？ ：无患斗斛过，所量非其谷；不患无铨衡，所铨非其物故也。
现代文：但是在位拥有领土的君主，为什么在自己下边常常会有奸邪的佞臣和常常会有被欺骗受蒙蔽的祸害呢？ 我说：不怕没有斗斛，而是所量的不是谷物；不怕没有秤，而是所称的不是该称的东西的缘故。
English: But why is it that when a prince holds a territory, he often has treacherous vassals under him, and is often deceived and deceived? I said: I am not afraid that there is no fight, but that the measure is not grain; I am not afraid that there is no scale, but that what is called is not because of what it should be called.

古文：在人君位者，皆知九德之可以检行，事效可以知情，然而惑乱不能见者，则明不察之故也。
现代文：在君位的人，都知道用九条道德标准可以检验人的行为，办事的效果可以识别人的私心，然而被欺骗蒙蔽却不能看见，那是没有考察明白的缘故。
English: People in positions of authority all know that the nine moral standards can be used to examine people's behavior, and the effect of doing things can identify people's selfishness. However, they are blinded by deception and can't see it. That's because they haven't examined it clearly.

古文：人有不能行，行无不可检；人有不能考，情无不可知。
现代文：只有不善于考察的人，没有不可以检验的行为；只有不善于考察的人，没有不可以识别的私心。
English: Only those who are not good at observation do not have behavior that cannot be tested; only those who are not good at observation do not have selfishness that cannot be recognized.

古文：问曰： 行不合於九德，效不检於考功，进近非贤，非贤则佞。
现代文：有人问： 行为不符合九条道德标准，办事的效果经不起考核官吏功绩标准的检验，这种人很接近于不是贤人，不是贤人那就是佞人了。
English: Some people asked: the behavior does not conform to the nine moral standards, the effect of the work cannot stand the test of the appraisal of the merit standard of officials, this kind of person is very close to not being a sage, not a sage, that is, a scoundrel.

古文：夫庸庸之材，无高之知不能及贤。贤功不效，贤行不应，可谓佞乎？ 
现代文：平庸之材，没有高超的才智，够不上贤人，不能建立贤人的功绩，不具备贤人的操行，可以说是佞人吗？ 
English: A mediocre person, without a superb intellect, is not up to a wise man, cannot establish the merits of a wise man, does not have the conduct of a wise man, can it be said to be a lazy person?

古文：曰：材有不相及，行有不相追，功有不相袭。
现代文：我说：才能有够不上的，操行有赶不上的，功绩有比不上的。
English: I said: there are talents that can't be reached, behaviors that can't be caught up with, and achievements that can't be matched.

古文：若知无相袭，人材相什百，取舍宜同。
现代文：即使智慧比不上，才能相差十倍百倍，但是行为取舍的标准应该是相同的。
English: Even if the wisdom is not comparable, the talent is ten times or a hundred times different, but the standard of behavior choice should be the same.

古文：贤佞殊行，是是非非。
现代文：贤人与佞人的操行迥然不同，但好就是好，坏就是坏。
English: The actions of a wise man and a foolish man are very different, but good is good and bad is bad.

古文：实名俱立，而效有成败，是非之言俱当，功有正邪。
现代文：一个人的实际德行和名声即使都很不错，但他办事的结果有成功也会有失败；一个人对是非的评议即使很恰当，但他办事的效果有好的也会有坏的。
English: Even if a person's actual virtue and reputation are very good, the result of his work will have success and failure; even if a person's evaluation of right and wrong is very appropriate, the effect of his work will be good or bad.

古文：言合行违，名盛行废。问曰： 行合九德则贤，不合则佞。
现代文：只有那些言论符合先王之道而行为却违反先王之道，名声很大而操行败坏的人，才是佞人。有人问： 行为符合九条道德标准的就是贤人，不符合的就是佞人。
English: Only those who speak in accordance with the way of the ancients but act contrary to the way of the ancients, who have a great reputation but act corruptly, are eunuchs.Someone asked: If one's behavior conforms to the nine moral standards, he is a sage; if it does not conform, he is an eunuch.

古文：世人操行者可尽谓佞乎？ 
现代文：只有社会上一般人操行的人能全说是佞人吗？ 
English: Is it only those who behave like ordinary people in society who can be said to be lazy?

古文：曰：诸非皆恶，恶中之逆者，谓之无道；恶中之巧者，谓之佞人。
现代文：我说：凡是操行不好的都是恶人，恶人中犯上作乱的，称作 无道 ；恶人中善于伪装的，称作佞人。
English: I said: All those who do not behave well are evildoers. Among the evildoers, those who commit disorder are called madmen; among the evildoers, those who are good at camouflage are called ruffians.

古文：圣王刑宪，佞在恶中；圣王赏劝，贤在善中。
现代文：君主制定刑罚和法令，佞人被列在恶人中；君主奖赏和勉励，贤人被列在善人中。
English: The sovereign decrees punishments and decrees, and the wicked are numbered with the wicked; the sovereign rewards and encourages, and the wise are numbered with the good.

古文：纯洁之贤，善中殊高，贤中之圣也。中大佞，恶中之雄也。
现代文：善人中最好的，是贤人中的圣人；恶人中极坏的佞人，是恶人中的枭雄。
English: The best of the good is the sage of the wise; the worst of the wicked is the villain of the wicked.

古文：故曰：观贤由善，察佞由恶。
现代文：所以说： 由善人中可以观察出贤人，由恶人中可以观察出佞人。 
English: Therefore, it is said: From the good, one can observe the wise, and from the wicked, one can observe the wicked.

古文：善恶定成，贤佞形矣。
现代文：只要断定出善人与恶人，那么贤人与佞人就会显露出来了。
English: As long as the good and the wicked are determined, then the wise and the wicked will be revealed.

古文：问曰： 聪明有蔽塞，推行有谬误，今以是者为贤，非者为佞，殆不得贤之实乎？ 
现代文：有人问： 视听有看不清听不见的时候，做事难免有犯错误的时候。如今以这样的标准为贤人，做不到的为佞人，恐怕不符合贤人的实际情况吧？ 
English: Someone asked: In audio-visual, there are times when you can't see clearly or hear well, and there are times when you make mistakes in doing things. Nowadays, if you use such a standard as a wise man, and if you can't do it, you're a lazy person, I'm afraid it doesn't match the actual situation of a wise man, right?

古文：曰：聪明蔽塞，推行谬误，人之所歉也。
现代文：我说：视听难免会看不清听不见，做事难免犯错误，这是一般人的缺点。
English: I said: it is unavoidable to be unable to see or hear clearly when watching or listening, and it is unavoidable to make mistakes when doing things. This is a shortcoming of the average person.

古文：故曰：刑故无小，宥过无大。
现代文：所以说：明知故犯不论罪再小也要严惩，误犯的过失，不论多大也可以宽赦。
English: Therefore, it is said that knowingly committing a crime, no matter how small it is, should be severely punished, and inadvertent mistakes, no matter how big they are, can also be pardoned.

古文：圣君原心省意，故诛故贳误。
现代文：圣明的君主要考查犯罪的动机，所以能严惩明知故犯的人，宽赦误犯过失的人。
English: The all-wise king mainly examines the motives of crimes, so he can severely punish those who knowingly commit crimes, and pardon those who commit mistakes.

古文：故贼加增，过误减损，一狱吏所能定也，贤者见之不疑矣。
现代文：明知故犯就要加重惩罚，误犯过失可以减轻处理，这是所有狱吏都能决定的，贤者看见了是不会有疑惑的。
English: Knowingly committing a crime will increase the punishment, and committing a crime by mistake can reduce the treatment. This is something that all prison officers can decide, and the wise will not have any doubts when they see it.

古文：问曰： 言行无功效，可谓佞乎？ ：苏秦约六国为从，强秦不敢窥兵於关外。张仪为横，六国不敢同攻於关内。
现代文：有人问： 人的言论和行为没有效果，就能说是佞人吗？ 我说：苏秦联合齐、楚、燕、赵、韩、魏六国促成合纵，使得强大的秦国不敢趁机向关外发兵；张仪促成连横，使得六国不敢同时向关内进攻。
English: Some people asked: If a person's words and deeds have no effect, can he be said to be a tyrant? I said: The six states of Su Qin, Qi, Chu, Yan, Zhao, Han, and Wei united and promoted the merger, so that the powerful Qin state did not dare to take the opportunity to send troops to Guan; Zhang Yi promoted the succession, so that the six countries did not dare to attack Guan at the same time.

古文：六国约从，则秦畏而六国强；三秦称横，则秦强而天下弱。
现代文：六国联盟形成合纵，就使秦国畏惧六国强大；秦国促成连横，就使秦国强大天下弱小。
English: The formation of the Six-Nation Alliance made Qin afraid of the Six-Nation Alliance and made it strong. Qin's promotion of the Six-Nation Alliance made Qin strong and the world weak.

古文：功著效明，载纪竹帛，虽贤何以加之？
现代文：他俩功绩昭著效果明显，被记载在竹帛的史册上，即使是贤人又怎么能超过他们呢？
English: Their exploits are well-known and obvious, and have been recorded in the annals of bamboo shoots. How can even a wise man surpass them?

古文：太史公叙言众贤，仪、秦有篇，无嫉恶之文，功钧名敌，不异於贤。
现代文：司马迁叙说很多贤人的事迹，张仪与苏秦分别有传，并没有憎恶他们的文字，功绩和名声均相当，跟贤人没有两样。
English: Sima Qian recounts the deeds of many sages, Zhang Yi and Su Qin are separately passed down, and there is no hatred of their words, achievements and reputation are equivalent, no different from the sages.

古文：夫功之不可以效贤，犹名之不可实也。
现代文：其实，功绩不能用来证明一个人的贤德，就像名声不能用来断定人的实际品德一样。
English: In fact, merit cannot be used to prove a person's virtue, just as reputation cannot be used to determine a person's actual virtue.

古文：仪、秦，排难之人也，处扰攘之世，行揣摩之术。
现代文：张仪和苏秦是排难解忧的人，处于战乱社会，实行合纵与连横的主张。
English: Zhang Yi and Su Qin are people who solve problems, are in a war-torn society, and implement the proposition of vertical and horizontal integration.

古文：当此之时，稷、契不能与之争计，禹、睾陶不能与之比效。
现代文：在这种时候，稷和不契不可能与他们争比计谋，禹和皋陶不可能与他们比效果。
English: At such a time, it is impossible for Yan and Xie to compete with them in terms of strategy, and it is impossible for Yu and Juntao to compete with them in terms of effectiveness.

古文：若夫阴阳调和，风雨时适，五谷丰熟，盗贼衰息，人举廉让，家行道德之功，命禄贵美，术数所致，非道德之所成也。
现代文：至于说气候正常，风调雨顺，五谷丰收，盗贼减少甚至消灭，人人讲究廉洁谦让，家家推崇道德的功绩，禄命显贵美好，治国方略能做到的，这些都不是道德能促成的。
English: As for saying that the climate is normal, the wind and rain are favorable, the grain harvest is plentiful, the thieves are reduced or even eliminated, everyone pays attention to honesty and modesty, every family praises the moral merits, the fate is noble and beautiful, and the statecraft can be done, these are not things that can be promoted by morality.

古文：太史公记功，故高来祀，记录成则著效明验，揽载高卓，以仪、秦功美，故列其状。
现代文：司马迁记录功绩，是有意向后代推崇，因此在记录成就时就突出其效果，广泛收录卓越人物，因为张仪和苏秦的功绩值得赞美，所以列入了他们的事迹。
English: Sima Qian recorded achievements with the intention of promoting them to future generations. Therefore, when recording achievements, he highlighted their effects and extensively included outstanding figures. Because the achievements of Zhang Yi and Su Qin were worthy of praise, their deeds were included.

古文：由此言之，佞人亦能以权说立功为效。
现代文：由此说来，佞人也能用权术游说立功做出效果。
English: From this point of view, the power of the people can also use the power of the art of lobbying to make a difference.

古文：无效，未可为佞也。
现代文：即使没有效果，也不能把他们说成佞人。
English: Even if it doesn't work, you can't call them cowards.

古文：难曰： 恶中立功者谓之佞。
现代文：有人会质问说： 恶人中立功的称作佞人。
English: Some people may ask, "What is the name of the person who does good deeds while being a villain?"

古文：能为功者，材高知明。思虑远者，必傍义依仁，乱於大贤。
现代文：能做出功绩的人，才智一定高明；思虑深远的人，一定依靠仁义，可是他们都混杂在大贤之中。
English: Those who can perform feats must be highly intelligent; those who are far-sighted must rely on benevolence and righteousness, but they are all mixed among the sages.

古文：故《觉佞》之篇曰： 人主好辨，佞人言利；人主好文，佞人辞丽。 
现代文：所以 觉佞 篇说： 君主喜欢辩论，佞人便言语锋利；君主喜欢文章，佞人便文章华美。 
English: Therefore, Zhuge Liang said: The monarch likes debate, and the eunuch likes sharp speech; the monarch likes writing, and the eunuch likes beautiful writing.

古文：心合意同，偶当人主，说而不见其非，何以知其伪而伺其奸乎？ 
现代文：与君主心意相同，碰巧投合了君主的心意，君主由于喜欢就看不见他的错误，怎么还能知道他们作假并察觉他们的奸邪呢？ 
English: How can he know their guile and detect their treachery, who is of the same mind as the sovereign, who happens to be of the same mind as the sovereign, and who likes not to see his errors?

古文：曰：是谓庸庸之君也，材下知昬，蔽惑不见。
现代文：我说：这是说平庸的君主，才能低下头脑糊涂，才被蒙蔽迷惑看不见。
English: I said: This is to say that a mediocre monarch can only be low-minded and confused, and can only be blinded and confused.

古文：贤之君，察之审明，若视俎上脯，指掌中之理，数局上之棋，摘辕中之马。
现代文：要是圣贤的君主，就能考察清楚明白，像看砧板上的干肉，手掌中的纹理，数棋盘上的棋子，点车辕中的马一样。
English: If the sovereign were a sage, he would be able to examine clearly and distinctly, like looking at dry meat on a cutting board, texture in the palm of the hand, counting pieces on a chessboard, and horses in a chariot.

古文：鱼鳖匿渊，捕渔者知其源；禽兽藏山，畋猎者见其脉。
现代文：鱼鳖藏在深水潭里，捕渔的人知道它们生息的地方；禽兽躲在深山中，打猎的人看得见它们的行踪。
English: Fish lice hide in deep pools, so fishermen know where they live; animals hide in the deep mountains, so hunters can see where they go.

古文：佞人异行於世，世不能见，庸庸之主，无高材之人也。
现代文：佞人的操行不同于一般人，一般人不能看出来，可见平庸的君主，是没有高超才智的人。
English: An eunuch's behavior is different from that of the average person. The average person cannot see it, but a mediocre monarch can be seen, a person who does not have superior intelligence.

古文：难曰： 人君好辨，佞人言利；人主好文，佞人辞丽。
现代文：又会有人质问：  君主喜欢辩论，佞人就言语锋利；君主喜欢文章，佞人就文章华美。 
English: There will also be those who question: the monarch likes debate, while the eunuch is sharp-tongued; the monarch likes writing, while the eunuch writes beautifully.

古文：言操合同，何以觉之？ 
现代文：既然言论操行都相同，又怎么能察觉出他们呢？ 
English: Since their words and deeds are all the same, how can they be detected?

古文：曰：《文王官人法》曰：推其往行，以揆其来言，听其来言，以省其往行，观其阳以考其阴，察其内以揆其外。
现代文：我说：《大戴礼记·文王官人》上说： 根据他从前的话来衡量他后来的行动，听他后来的话来检查他过去的行动，看他公开的表现来考察他背地里的行为，观察他的内心来衡量他的外表。 
English: I said: "Dai Li Ji Wen Wang Guan Ren" said: Measure his later actions according to his former words, listen to his later words to check his past actions, look at his public performance to examine his behind-the-scenes behavior, observe his heart to measure his appearance.

古文：是故诈善设节者可知，饰伪无情者可辨，质诚居善者可得，含忠守节者可见也。
现代文：所以假装亲善故作清高的人就能识别，修饰伪装不真实的人就能辨别，质朴诚实为善的人就能知道，具有忠心保持气节的人就会显现出来。
English: Therefore, those who pretend to be kind and sincere can be recognized, those who pretend to be false can be distinguished, those who are simple and honest can be known, and those who are loyal and loyal can be revealed.

古文：人之旧性不辨，人君好辨，佞人学求合於上也。人之故能不文，人君好文，佞人意欲称上。
现代文：佞人原来的性格不善辩论，由于君主喜欢辩论，佞人便学着迎合君主；佞人本来的才能不会作文、由于君主喜欢文章，佞人就想去迎合君主。
English: The original character of the eunuch was not good at debate, because the monarch liked to debate, the eunuch learned to cater to the monarch; the original talent of the eunuch could not compose, because the monarch liked articles, the eunuch wanted to cater to the monarch.

古文：上奢，己丽服；上俭，己不饬。
现代文：君主奢侈，佞人自己就穿着华丽的服装；君主节俭，佞人自己就不修饰打扮。
English: If the monarch is extravagant, the eunuch himself will wear gorgeous clothes; if the monarch is frugal, the eunuch himself will not dress up.

古文：今操与古殊，朝行与家别。
现代文：现在的操行与过去的不一样，在朝廷上的行为与在家的不一样。
English: The way he behaves now is different from the way he behaved in the past, and his behavior at court is different from his behavior at home.

古文：考乡里之迹，证朝庭之行，察共亲之节，明事君之操，外内不相称，名实不相副，际会发见、奸为觉露也。
现代文：考察他们在乡里的行为，验证他们在朝廷上的行为，察看他们供养双亲的节操，弄清他们事奉君主的品德，要是内外互不相称，名声与实际互不符合，碰巧就会显现出来，奸邪的伪装就会被察觉和揭露出来。
English: Examine their behavior in the countryside, verify their behavior in the court, observe their integrity in supporting their parents, and clarify their character in serving the monarch. If they are not compatible with each other inside and outside, and their reputation does not match reality, it will happen to appear, and the disguise of treachery will be detected and exposed.

古文：问曰： 人操行无恆，权时制宜。信者欺人，直者曲挠。
现代文：有人问： 人的操行没有永恒不变的，可以斟酌形势制定适当的措施，因而诚实的人有时也会欺骗人，正直的人有时也会不公正。
English: Some people asked: Human behavior is not immutable, and appropriate measures can be taken according to the situation. Therefore, an honest person may sometimes deceive others, and an honest person may sometimes be unfair.

古文：权变所设，前後异操，事有所应，左右异语。
现代文：一个人斟酌形势变化有所安排，前后行动可以不一样；一件事为了适应需要，对周围的人可以说不同的话。
English: A person has made arrangements according to the changes in the situation, and the actions can be different; one thing can be said differently to the people around in order to meet the needs.

古文：儒书所载，权变非一。
现代文：儒者的书上记载，权宜之计不止一种。
English: There is more than one expedient measure recorded in the books of the Confucians.

古文：今以素故考之，毋乃失实乎？ 
现代文：现在用平素一贯的言行来考察他们，不是不符合实际情况了吗？ 
English: Isn't it out of step with reality to examine them with their usual words and deeds?

古文：曰：贤者有权，佞者有权。
现代文：我说：贤者有权宜之计，佞人也有权宜之计。
English: I said: A wise man has the right plan, and a scoundrel has the right plan.

古文：贤者之有权，後有应。佞人之有权，亦反经，後有恶。
现代文：贤者实行权宜之计，后来有好结果；佞人实行权宜之计，也违反常规，但后来得到坏的结果。
English: A wise man implements a makeshift plan and later gets a good result; a foolish man implements a makeshift plan, also against the rules, but later gets a bad result.

古文：故贤人之权，为事为国；佞人之权，为身为家。
现代文：所以贤人的权宜之计，是为了公事为了国家；佞人的权宜之计，是为了自己为了家庭。
English: Therefore, the wise man's expedient is for public affairs and for the country; the tyrant's expedient is for himself and for the family.

古文：观其所权，贤佞可论。察其发动，邪正可名。
现代文：观察他们所实行的权宜之计，就可以评论出贤人与佞人；观察他们的动机，就可以说出邪恶与正直了。
English: To observe the expedients they practice is to comment on the wise and the foolish; to observe their motives is to pronounce on the wicked and the just.

古文：问曰： 佞人好毁人，有诸？ 
现代文：有人问： 佞人喜欢诋毁人，有这事吗？ 
English: Some people asked, "Is there such a thing as a slanderer who likes to defame others?"

古文：曰：佞人不毁人。
现代文：我说：佞人不诋毁人。
English: I said: "People who slander don't slander people."

古文：如毁人，是谗人也。
现代文：如果诋毁人，这人就是谗人。
English: If you slander someone, that person is a slanderer.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：佞人求利，故不毁人。
现代文：因为佞人寻求利益，所以不诋毁人。
English: They do not slander because slanderers seek profit.

古文：苟利於己，曷为毁之？
现代文：如果对自己有利，为什么要诋毁他呢？
English: Why denigrate him if it's to your advantage?

古文：苟不利於，毁之无益。
现代文：如果不对自己有利，诋毁他也没有好处。
English: It's no good slagging him off if it's not to your advantage.

古文：以计求便，以数取利，利则便得。妒人共事，然後危人。
现代文：用计谋求得好处，用权术得到利益，利益和好处得到了，还要嫉妒别人与自己一起做官，然后危害别人。
English: Use tricks to seek benefits, use power tricks to get benefits, get benefits and benefits, but also envy others to work with themselves, and then endanger others.

古文：其危人也，非毁之；而其害人也，非泊之。
现代文：他们危害人并不诋毁人，而他们害人并不薄待人。
English: They don't harm people and they don't slander people, and they don't mistreat people and they don't harm people.

古文：誉而危之，故人不知；厚而害之，故人不疑。
现代文：他们称赞人而危害人，所以人不知道；厚待人而危害人，所以人不怀疑。
English: They praise people and harm people, so people do not know; they treat people well and harm people, so people do not doubt.

古文：是故佞人危而不怨；害人，之败而不仇，隐情匿意为之功也。
现代文：因此佞人危害人，人却不怨恨他；害人，人遭灾祸却不仇恨他，这是因为佞人隐藏自己的真情实意做得很巧妙的缘故。
English: For this reason, he who injures a man does not hate him, and he who injures a man does not hate him. This is because he is very clever at concealing his true feelings.

古文：如毁人，人亦毁之，众不亲，士不附也，安能得容世取利於上？
现代文：如果诋毁别人，别人也要诋毁他，弄得众人不亲近，士不依附，怎么能得到社会的承认而从君主那儿取得利益呢？
English: If you slander others, others will also slander him, so that people are not close to each other and do not cling to each other. How can you get social recognition and benefit from the monarch?

古文：问曰： 佞人不毁人於世间，毁人於将前乎？ 
现代文：有人问： 佞人不在一般人面前诋毁人，在郡将面前会诋毁人吗？ 
English: Some people asked: If you do not slander people in front of ordinary people, will you slander people in front of county generals?

古文：曰：佞人以人欺将，不毁人於将。 然则佞人奈何？ 
现代文：我说：佞人是利用别人去欺骗郡将，而不在郡将面前诋毁人。这人又问： 那么佞人是怎么做的呢？ 
English: I said, "He uses others to deceive the shire sheriff, but he doesn't slander people in front of the shire sheriff." The man then asked, "So how did he do it?"

古文：曰：佞人毁人，誉之；危人，安之。 毁危奈何？ 
现代文：回答是：佞人要诋毁人，就先赞扬他；要危害人，就先安稳他。怎样诋毁，怎样危害呢？
English: The answer is: If you want to defame someone, you should praise him first; if you want to harm someone, you should calm him down first. How to defame, how to harm?

古文：假令甲有高行奇知，名声显闻，将恐人君召问，扶而胜己，欲故废不言，常腾誉之。
现代文：假如甲有高尚的操行特殊的智慧，名声显赫，唯恐郡守召见询问甲，扶植提拔超过自己，佞人想故意使他被废置不用又不说他的坏话，就常常大加称赞他。
English: If A has noble behavior, special wisdom, and a distinguished reputation, he will often praise him loudly for fear that the county guard will be called to inquire about A, support and promote him more than himself, and if someone wants to deliberately make him obsolete without saying anything bad about him.

古文：荐之者众，将议欲用，问人，人必不对曰： 甲贤而宜召也。
现代文：推荐甲的人很多，郡守将打算用他，去问佞人，佞人肯定回答说： 甲很贤能应该召见他。
English: There are many people who recommend A. The county governor will plan to use him and ask the magistrate. The magistrate will surely answer: A is very capable and should summon him.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：甲意不欲留县，前闻其语矣，声望欲入府，在郡则望欲入州。志高则操与人异，望远则意不顾近。
现代文：甲的意思是不想留在县里，过去听他说过，声称希望进入郡府，在郡里则希望进入州府，由于志向很高那么操行就与一般人不同，只看远处的人，那么心思就不会关心近处。
English: A means that he does not want to stay in the county. I have heard him say in the past that he hopes to enter the county capital, and in the county he hopes to enter the state capital. Because he has high aspirations, his behavior is different from that of the average person. If he only looks at people in the distance, then his mind will not be concerned about the near.

古文：屈而用之，其心不满，不则卧病。贱而命之则伤贤，不则损威。
现代文：屈才而用他，他心里不满意，否则就装病不干；位低而使用他，就会伤害贤人，不这样就会损害长官的威信。
English: If you use him because he is talented, he will not be satisfied, otherwise he will pretend to be ill and not work; if you use him because he is inferior, you will hurt the sage, otherwise you will damage the authority of the chief.

古文：故人君所以失名损誉者，好臣所常臣也。自耐下之，用之可也。
现代文：所以郡守因此失去名声损害有声誉的人，是喜欢把可作部下的人都当作部下的缘故。
English: Therefore, the county magistrate loses his reputation and damages the reputation of others because he likes to treat people who can be subordinates as subordinates.

古文：自度不能下之，用之不便。
现代文：郡守自已能够迁就他，任用他是可以的；自己估计不能够迁就他任用他就没有好处。 
English: If the county magistrate is able to accommodate him, it is possible to appoint him; if he is unable to accommodate him, it is not beneficial to appoint him.

古文：夫用之不两相益，舍之不两相损。 人君畏其志，信佞人之言，遂置不用。
现代文：任用他，双方互相不会有好处；不任用他，双方互相不会有害处，郡守害怕甲的志向太高，就相信了佞人的话，于是放弃不任用甲。
English: If he is appointed, the two sides will not benefit each other; if he is not appointed, the two sides will not harm each other. The county magistrate was afraid that A's ambition was too high, so he believed the words of the eunuch and gave up not appointing A.

古文：问曰： 佞人直以高才洪知考上世人乎？将有师学检也？ 
现代文：有人问： 佞人只是以高超的才能和宏大的智慧观察和揣摩一般人呢，还是有老师作为学习的榜样呢？ 
English: Some people asked: Do deaf people just observe and figure out ordinary people with superb talent and great wisdom, or do they have a teacher as a role model for learning?

古文：曰：人自有知以诈人，及其说人主，须术以动上，犹上人自有勇威人，及其战斗，须兵法以进众，术则从横，师则鬼谷也。
现代文：我说：佞人自有才智可以欺骗人，但到他游说君主时，就需要权术来打动君主，就像名将自有勇敢来镇住敌人，但到他打仗的时候，就需要兵法来指挥军队进攻。他们的权术就是合纵和连横，老师就是鬼谷子。
English: I said: "The eunuch can deceive people with his own talent, but when he lobbies the monarch, he needs power techniques to impress the monarch, just as a famous general has the courage to calm down the enemy, but when he fights, he needs military tactics to command the army to attack. Their power techniques are vertical and horizontal, and the teacher is the devil.

古文：传曰： 苏秦、张仪从横习之鬼谷先生，掘地为坑，曰： 下，说令我泣出，则耐分人君之地。 
现代文：传书上说： 苏秦和张仪向鬼谷先生学习合纵与连横的权术，鬼谷先生挖地成了个坑，说： 能下来，说得使我哭出来，那么就能分到君主的封地。 
English: The biography said: Su Qin and Zhang Yi learned from Mr. Ghost Valley the power of vertical and horizontal. Mr. Ghost Valley dug the ground into a pit and said: If I can get down and cry, then I can be assigned to the monarch's fief.

古文：苏秦下，说鬼谷先生泣下沾襟，张仪不若。
现代文：苏秦跳下去，说得鬼谷子先生哭得眼泪流下来沾湿了衣襟。张仪也一样。 
English: Su Qin jumped down, and Mr. Grumpy cried so much that his tears ran down and wet his collar. Zhang Yi did the same.

古文：苏秦相赵，并相六国。
现代文： 苏秦辅助赵国，并且还辅助六国。
English: Su Qin aided Zhao and also aided the Six Kingdoms.

古文：张仪贫贱往归，苏秦座之堂下，食以仆妾之食，数让激怒，欲令相秦。仪忿恨，遂西入秦。
现代文：张仪贫困低贱地回来，苏秦让他坐在堂下，拿仆人吃的饭菜给他吃，又多次责备以激怒他，想使他去辅助秦国，张仪愤怒怨恨，于是向西去秦国。
English: Zhang Yi returned impoverished and lowly, Su Qin made him sit under the hall, gave him the meal eaten by the servants, and repeatedly rebuked him to provoke him, trying to make him go to assist Qin. Zhang Yi was angry and resentful, so he went west to Qin.

古文：苏秦使人厚送。
现代文：苏秦派人以厚礼相送。
English: Su Qin sent someone to send a gift.

古文：其後觉知，曰：此在其术中，吾不知也，此吾所不及苏君者。 
现代文：张仪后来察觉，说： 这次又落在他的圈套之中，我还不知道，这就是我赶不上苏君的地方。  
English: Zhang Yi later noticed and said: This time I fell into his trap again, I still don't know, this is where I can't catch up with Su Jun.

古文：知深有术，权变锋出，故身尊崇荣显，为世雄杰。
现代文：智谋深奥有权术，权宜之计高明得出奇，所以苏秦尊贵受人推崇，荣耀显赫，成为一代豪杰。
English: His wisdom and strategy were profound and powerful, and his expedient measures were surprisingly ingenious. Therefore, Su Qin was highly respected, his glory was prominent, and he became a generation of heroes.

古文：深谋明术，深浅不能并行，明暗不能并知。
现代文：计谋要奥妙，权术要高明，但它的舆妙与浅陋不能同时实行，明显与隐晦也是不能同时明白的。
English: The stratagem should be subtle, and the power technique should be clever, but its sophistication and shallowness cannot be implemented at the same time, and it cannot be obvious and obscure at the same time.

古文：问曰： 佞人养名作高，有诸？ 
现代文：有人问： 佞人修养名声抬高自己，有这事吗？ 
English: Some people asked: Is there such a thing as cultivating one's reputation and elevating one's self?

古文：曰：佞人食利专权，不养名作高。
现代文：我说：佞人贪图财利垄断权力，不修养名声抬高自己。
English: I said: Those who are greedy for money and profit monopolize power, and do not cultivate reputation and elevate themselves.

古文：贪权据凡，则高名自立矣。
现代文：因为取得权柄，占据要职，就会抬高名声自己树立起来。
English: Because they obtain power and occupy important positions, they will elevate their reputation and establish themselves.

古文：称於小人，不行於君子。
现代文：这种行为被小人称赞，而君子不这样做。
English: This kind of behavior is praised by villains, but not by gentlemen.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：利义相伐，正邪相反。
现代文：因为利与义相矛盾，正与邪刚好相反。
English: Because profit contradicts righteousness, it is just the opposite of evil.

古文：义动君子，利动小人。
现代文：道义能打动君子，利益能打动小人。
English: Morality can move a gentleman, profit can move a villain.

古文：佞人贪利名之显，君子不安。下则身危。
现代文：佞人贪图财利和名声显赫，君主感到不安，否则会自身难保。
English: People are greedy for money and fame, and the monarch is uneasy, otherwise he will be unable to protect himself.

古文：举世为佞者，皆以祸众。不能养其身，安能养其名？
现代文：察看世上的佞人，都由于遭灾祸而结束，可见不能保养住自己的身体，怎么能修养自己的名声呢？
English: Look at the world's famous people, all of them have ended due to disasters. It can be seen that they can't maintain their bodies, so how can they cultivate their reputation?

古文：上世列传弃养身，违利赴名，竹帛所载，伯成子高委国而耕，於陵子辞位灌园。
现代文：上古列叙臣民事迹，凡放弃尊贵地位而修养自身品德的，凡抛弃物质利益而追求声望的，都会在竹简帛书的史册上记载下来，像伯成子高放弃国事而耕地，於陵子辞去相位，给人浇灌菜园。
English: In ancient times, the civil status of the emperor was recorded. Those who gave up their noble status and cultivated their own moral character, and those who abandoned material interests and pursued fame, would be recorded in the history of Zhu Jian's book. Like Bao Chengzi Gao, who gave up state affairs and cultivated the land, he resigned from the tomb and watered the vegetable garden.

古文：近世兰陵王仲子、东昔庐君阳，寝位久病，不应上征，可谓养名矣。
现代文：近代兰陵的王仲子、东郡的昔庐君阳，放弃官职长期托病，不接受君主的征召，这些可以称得上修养名声了。
English: Wang Zhongzi of modern-day Lanling, and the former Zou Junyang of Dong County, who renounced their official positions, feigned illness for a long time, and did not accept the monarch's call-up, can be said to have cultivated reputations.

古文：夫不以道进，必不以道出身；不以义止，必不以义立名。
现代文：可见，君子不因为道义去做官，也必不因为道义去献身；不因为道义辞官不做，也必不因为道义来树立名声。
English: Thus, a gentleman does not become an official because of morality, nor does he dedicate his life because of morality; he does not become an official because of morality, nor does he establish a reputation because of morality.

古文：佞人怀贪利之心，轻祸重身，倾死为矣，何名之养？
现代文：佞人怀有贪图财利的心，看轻后患，只看重自身眼前的富贵，忘记生死和遭到杀身之祸，还谈什么名声的修养！
English: Some people are greedy for money and profit, look down on future troubles, only value their own immediate wealth, forget about life and death and being killed, and talk about the cultivation of reputation!

古文：义废德坏，操行随辱，何云作高？
现代文：道义被毁坏，操行从而被玷污，还说什么抬高自己！
English: Morality is destroyed, conduct is thereby tarnished, and what is self-exaltation!

古文：问曰： 大佞易知乎？小佞易知也？ 
现代文：有人问： 名声大的佞人容易识别呢，还是名声小的佞人容易识别呢？ 
English: Some people asked: Is it easy to identify a famous person, or is it easy to identify a less famous person?

古文：曰：大佞易知，小佞难知。
现代文：我说：名声大的佞人容易识别，名声小的佞人难以识别。
English: I said: It is easy to identify those with a great reputation, but it is difficult to identify those with a small reputation.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：大佞材高，其迹易察；小佞知下，其效难省。
现代文：名声大的佞人才智高超，他的行迹容易察觉；名声小的佞人才智低下，他的痕迹难于察觉。
English: A man of great fame is highly intelligent, and his movements are easy to detect; a man of little fame is less intelligent, and his traces are difficult to detect.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：成事，小盗难觉，大盗易知也。
现代文：已有的事例，小强盗难于察觉，大强盗容易发现。
English: In existing cases, small robbers are difficult to detect, and big robbers are easy to find.

古文：攻城袭邑，剽劫虏掠，发则事觉，道路皆知盗也。
现代文：攻打城池，抢劫虏掠，一旦发生则事情就会被发觉，众人都晓得有盗贼。
English: Attacking the city, robbing and plundering, once it happens, things will be discovered, and everyone knows that there are thieves.

古文：穿凿垣墙，狸步鼠窃，莫知谓谁。
现代文：挖墙打洞，像狸猫走步样敏捷，像老鼠偷吃样隐蔽，就不会知道是谁干的。
English: Dig a hole in the wall, walk as fast as a wildcat, hide like a rat, and no one will know who did it.

古文：曰： 大佞奸深惑乱其人如大盗易知，人君何难？ 
现代文：有人会反驳说： 名声大的佞人奸狡得很，能够迷惑扰乱人们，如果他们容易识别，君主又为什么难于识别呢？ 
English: It may be objected that if famous traitors are so cunning as to confuse and confound the people, and if they are so easy to recognize, why is it so difficult to recognize a prince?

古文：《书》曰： 知人则哲，惟帝难之。 
现代文：我说：《尚书·皋陶谟》上说： 能识别人才算明智，这连帝舜都难做到。 
English: "Shangshu" said: To be able to recognize people is to be a wise person, which is also very difficult for even a baboon.

古文：虞舜大圣，驩兜大佞。
现代文：虞舜是大圣人，驩兜是大佞人。
English: Gudang is a great sage, and Gundagal is a great sage.

古文：大圣难知大佞，大佞不忧大圣。
现代文：大圣人难于识别大佞人，大佞人不怕大圣人，怎么能说容易识别呢？
English: The great sage is difficult to recognize the great sage, and the great sage is not afraid of the great sage. How can it be said to be easy to recognize?

古文：何易之有？ ：是谓下知之，上知之。
现代文：这就是说，从下面来识别佞人，跟从上面来识别佞人是两回事。
English: That is to say, it is one thing to identify a lazy person from below, and another to identify a lazy person from above.

古文：上知之，大难小易，下知之，大易小难。
现代文：从上面来识别佞人，大的难于识别，小的容易识别；从下面来识别佞人，大的容易识别，小的难于识别。
English: From above, it is difficult to identify the big ones, and it is easy to identify the small ones; from below, it is easy to identify the big ones, and it is difficult to identify the small ones.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：佞人材高，论说丽美。
现代文：因为名声大的佞人才智高超，论说时辞句华美。
English: Because the well-known Zou talent is highly intelligent, and his speech is very beautiful.

古文：因丽美之说，人主之威，人心并不能责，知或不能觉。
现代文：凭看华美的辞句，已使君主折服，并不会责备他，才智有时也不能察觉他。
English: He will not reproach a prince who has won him over by his fine words, and sometimes his wit does not recognize him.

古文：小佞材下，对乡失漏，际会不密，人君警悟，得知其故。
现代文：名声小的佞人才智低下，对答时有谬误，碰巧不周密，君主就会警觉，能知道其中的原因。
English: If a low-ranking eunuch is unintelligent, answers incorrectly, or happens to be careless, the monarch will be alerted and will be able to find out why.

古文：大难小易也。
现代文：这就是大佞人难于识别而小佞人容易识别的缘故。
English: This is the reason why large-beaked egrets are difficult to identify and small-beaked egrets are easy to identify.

古文：屋漏在上，知者在下。
现代文：屋漏是在上面，知道屋漏的人是在下面。
English: The leak is above, the man who knows the leak is below.

古文：漏大，下见之著；漏小，下见之微。
现代文：漏的地方大，下面看见它就明显；漏的地方小，下面看见它就不明显。
English: If the leak is large, it is obvious when seen from below; if the leak is small, it is not obvious when seen from below.

古文：或曰： 雍也仁而不佞。 
现代文：有人对孔子说： 冉雍有仁德而不会花言巧语。 
English: Some people said: "This person, Ran Yong, has benevolence, but no eloquence.

古文：孔子曰： 焉用佞？
现代文：孔子说： 为什么要能说会道呢？
English: Confucius said: Why should one be able to speak Tao?

古文：御人以口给，屡憎於民。 
现代文：用狡辩来对付人，老招人讨厌。 
English: Using sophistry to deal with people is always a bad idea.

古文：误设计数，烦扰农商，损下益上，愁民说主。
现代文：错误地提出一些主张，烦扰农民和商人，老百姓受损害君主得好处，劳民悦主。
English: Some wrongly put forward some propositions, annoying farmers and merchants, harming the common people, benefiting the monarch, and pleasing the laborers.

古文：损上益下，忠臣之说也；损下益上，佞人之义也。
现代文：君主受损害老百姓得好处，是忠臣的主张；老百姓受损害君主得好处，是佞人的主张。
English: If the monarch is harmed, the people will benefit, is the opinion of loyal subjects; if the people are harmed, the monarch will benefit, is the opinion of tyrants.

古文：季氏富於周公，而求也为之聚敛而附益之。
现代文：季康子比周公旦富有，但冉求还为他搜括财物而使他更富有。
English: The Ji Sun clan was wealthier than the government of Lu, but Ran Kui helped him implement the rice field system to increase his wealth.

古文：小子鸣鼓而攻之可也。
现代文：孔子说： 弟子们应该敲起鼓去声讨他。 
English: Confucius said, "His disciples should beat their drums to denounce him."

古文：聚敛，季氏不知其恶，不知百姓所共非也。
现代文：搜括财物，季康子不知道那是罪恶，不知道是老百姓都反对的。
English: Ji Kangzi did not know that it was a crime to collect money and property, and did not know that the common people were opposed to it.

