古文：勖，字勉道。本名乌野，穆宗第五子。
现代文：完颜勖，字勉道，本名叫乌野，是穆宗的第五个儿子。
English: His real name was Uno, and he was the fifth son of Mu Zong.

古文：好学问，国人呼为秀才。
现代文：勖很有学问，国人都叫他秀才。
English: Zhai is very learned, and the Chinese people call him a genius.

古文：年十六，从太祖攻宁江州，从宗望袭辽主于石辇铎。
现代文：勖十六岁的时候，跟随太祖攻打宁江州，随从宗望袭击辽主到石辇铎。
English: When he was sixteen years old, he followed his great-grandfather to attack Ningjiang, and followed Zongwang to attack Liaozuo to Shizhuang.

古文：太宗嗣位，自军中召还，与谋政事。
现代文：太宗接继皇位，把勖从军队中召回朝廷，与他谋划政事。
English: Emperor Taizong succeeded to the throne, and he recalled Yao from the army to the imperial court to plan the political affairs with him.

古文：宗翰、宗望定汴州，受宋帝降。
现代文：宗翰、宗望攻克汴州，接受宋帝投降。
English: Zonghan and Zongwang conquered Zhangzhou and accepted Emperor Song's surrender.

古文：太宗使勖就军中往劳之。
现代文：太宗派勖前往军中去慰劳。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Yao to go to the army to work.

古文：宗翰等问其所欲。曰： 惟好书耳。 
现代文：宗翰等人问他有什么愿望，他说 ：我只喜好书。 
English: When Zonghan and the others asked him what he wanted, he said, "I just like books."

古文：载数车而还。
现代文：宗翰等给他装几车书送还。
English: Zonghan waited for him to return with several cartloads of books.

古文：女直初无文字，及破辽，获契丹、汉人，始通契丹、汉字，于是诸子皆学之。
现代文：女真族最初没有文字，及至破了辽国，俘获了契丹、汉人，才开始懂契丹字、汉字，于是诸子都学习契丹字或汉字。
English: At first, the Jurchens had no written language. It was not until they conquered Liao Province and captured Khitan and Han Chinese that they began to understand the Khitan and Chinese characters. Therefore, all the children learned the Khitan or Chinese characters.

古文：宗雄能以两月尽通契丹大小字，而完颜希尹乃依仿契丹字制女直字。
现代文：宗雄用两个月时间完全学懂了契丹的大、小字，而完颜希尹则模仿契丹字创制女真字。
English: It took Muneo two months to fully understand the large and small characters of Khitan, and then Yan Xiyin imitated the Khitan characters to create the female true characters.

古文：女直既未有文字，亦未尝有记录，故祖宗事皆不载。
现代文：女真族既然不曾有过文字，也就不曾有过什么记录，所以祖宗的事都没有记载。
English: Since the Jurchens never had a written language, they never had any records, so there are no records of their ancestors.

古文：宗翰好访问女直老人，多得祖宗遗事。
现代文：宗翰喜欢访问女真老人，从而获得了许多祖宗的遗事。
English: Zonghan likes to visit the elderly women, thus obtaining many ancestral relics.

古文：太宗初即位，复进士举，而韩昉辈皆在朝廷，文学之士稍拔擢用之。
现代文：太宗即位之初，恢复人才选拔制度，韩窻等人皆在朝廷，文学之士得到一定的提拔任用。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Taizong's accession to the throne, the talent selection system was restored. Han Yu and others were all in the imperial court, and literary figures received certain promotions and appointments.

古文：天会六年，诏书求访祖宗遗事，以备国史，命勖与耶律迪越掌之。
现代文：天会六年，下诏寻访祖宗遗事，用来准备修撰国史，命令勖与耶律迪越掌管修史的事。
English: Six years later, the Heavenly Assembly issued an edict to search for ancestral relics to prepare for the compilation of national history, and ordered Yao and Yeludiyue to be in charge of the compilation of history.

古文：勖等采摭遗言旧事，自始祖以下十帝，综为三卷。
现代文：完颜勖采集撷取流传的遗言旧事，自金始祖以下十位皇帝的事迹，综合编写为三卷。
English: After collecting and collecting the last words and old stories, the deeds of ten emperors since the founding fathers of Jin Dynasty have been comprehensively compiled into three volumes.

古文：凡部族，既曰某部，复曰某水之某，又曰某乡某村，以别识之。
现代文：凡是部族，既说某部，又说某水之某，又说某乡某村，以便于识别这些地方。
English: Each tribe speaks of a certain village, a certain river, a certain town, and a certain village in order to identify these places.

古文：凡与契丹往来及征伐诸部，其间诈谋诡计，一无所隐。
现代文：凡是与契丹国往来及互相征战攻伐的各部族，其间所使用的诈谋诡计，一概记叙没有隐瞒。
English: All the intrigues and stratagems used by the various tribes that had dealings with the Khitan state and fought against each other were recorded without concealment.

古文：事有详有略，咸得其实。
现代文：记事有详有略，都符合真实情况。
English: The details are sketchy, but they are consistent with the real situation.

古文：自太祖与高丽议和，凡女直入高丽者皆索之，至十余年，索之不已。
现代文：自从金太祖与高丽国议和以来，凡女真入高丽籍的，金朝都向高丽索要户口，至勖回朝已有十年，一直没停止。
English: Since the time of the peace treaty between King Taejo and Goryeo, the Kim dynasty has been asking Goryeo for the hukou of every Korean woman. It has been ten years since Kim Daejo returned to Korea, and this has not stopped.

古文：勖上书谏曰： 臣闻德莫大于乐天，仁莫先于惠下。
现代文：勖上书皇帝谏议说： 臣听说有这样的话：德莫大于乐天，仁莫先于惠下。
English: In the letter, the emperor said, "I have heard that there is a saying, 'Goodness is greater than happiness, and benevolence is greater than benevolence.'

古文：所索户口，皆前世奸宄叛亡，乌蠢、讹谟罕、阿海、阿合束之绪裔。
现代文：我朝多年来所索要的户口，都是前世犯法作乱和叛离逃亡的人，是乌蠢、讹谟罕、阿海、阿合束之流的绪裔。
English: The hukou that I have been requesting from the government for many years are all from people who broke the law and caused turmoil in their previous lives, and who defected and fled. They are descendants of the Ubu, Jumukhan, Ahai, and Ahagaku clans.

古文：先世绥怀四境，尚未宾服，自先君在与高丽通，闻我将大，因谓本自同出，稍稍款附。
现代文：先朝皇帝安抚怀柔四方，尚且不能使边远部族顺从，按时入贡朝见，自从先朝君王太祖与高丽勾通，他们听说我朝日益强大，又因为原本同出一宗，才稍稍诚心归附。
English: The previous emperor appeased Huairou in all directions, but was unable to make the outlying tribes obey and pay tribute to the imperial court on time. Since the previous emperor's great-grandfather colluded with Goryeo, they heard that my dynasty was becoming more and more powerful, and because they originally came from the same clan, they became a little sincere.

古文：高丽既不听许，遂生边衅，因致交兵，久方连和，盖三十年。
现代文：高丽从前不从我朝许诺，于是才发生边境的挑衅，因此导致双方交战，过了许久方才勾通议和，已有三十年了。
English: In the past, Goryeo did not keep its promise to the DPRK, which led to the border provocation, which led to the war between the two sides, and it took a long time to negotiate peace. It has been 30 years.

古文：当时壮者今皆物故，子孙安于土俗，婚姻胶固，征索不已，彼固不敢稽留，骨肉乖离，诚非众愿。
现代文：当时入高丽的壮年人现在都已经故去，他们的子孙已经习惯了当地的风俗，在那里落户，婚姻牢固，如果我们对他们的户口征索不已，他们固然不敢拖延停留，但骨肉分离，实在不符合众人的心愿。
English: The adults who came to Korea at that time have all passed away. Their children and grandchildren have become accustomed to the local customs, settled there, and married well. If we continue to ask for their residence permits, they will not hesitate to stay, but the separation of flesh and blood is really not in line with everyone's wishes.

古文：人情怨甚可愍者，而必欲求为己有，特彼我之蔽，非一视同仁之大也。
现代文：人们的情绪哀怨深重应该怜悯的，却一定要求为己有，这是我们政务上特殊的弊端，不是一视同仁的博大胸怀啊。
English: People's emotions are sorrowful and heavy, and they should be pitied, but they must demand for themselves. This is a special drawback in our government affairs, not a broad mind that does not treat everyone equally.

古文：国家民物繁夥，幅员万里，不知得此果何益耶。
现代文：国家民多物繁，幅员万里，不知即使得到所索取的户口又有何益处呢？
English: The country has a diverse population and a vast territory. I don't know what the benefits are even if I get the requested hukou.

古文：今索之不还，我以强兵劲卒取之无难。
现代文：今索要户口高丽不归还，我朝如果用强兵劲卒去取并无困难。
English: If I were to demand the return of Koryo's hukou right now, I would have no trouble getting it with a strong army.

古文：然兵凶器，战危事，不得已而后用。
现代文：然而兵携凶器，战争是危及人民生命财产的祸事，不得已才用。
English: However, soldiers carry deadly weapons, and war is a calamity that endangers people's lives and property. It is only used as a last resort.

古文：高丽称藩，职贡不阙，国且臣属，民亦非外。圣人行义，不责小过，理之所在，不俟终日。
现代文：高丽自称藩邦，赋税贡品不欠缺，国家尚且称臣相属，民众也不能见外，圣人行义，不责小过，公理之所在，不能等到国家终亡的时日。
English: Goryeo claims to be a feudal state. There is no shortage of taxes and tributes. Even though the country claims to be a vassal state, the people are not allowed to see the outside world. A saint acts justly, does not take offense, and where justice lies, it cannot wait until the day the country dies.

古文：臣愚以为宜施惠下之仁，弘乐天之德，听免征索，则彼不谓己有，如自我得之矣。 
现代文：愚臣认为应该施仁政以惠天下，弘扬乐天之德，听从免于征索户口的建议。那么虽说他们不是归己所有，却有如自己得到了他们一样啊！ 
English: Foolish ministers believe that benevolent policies should be implemented for the benefit of the world, the virtue of happiness should be promoted, and the proposal of exemption from household registration should be followed. Then, although they are not owned by themselves, it is as if they have obtained them!

古文：从之。
现代文：这个谏议被采纳了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十五年，为尚书左丞加镇东军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太宗天会十五年，完颜勖出任尚书左丞兼镇东军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Taizong Heavenly Society, Guan Yanjun served as the Vice-Commander of the Shoshu Left Wing and the Commander of the Eastern Zhenjun Army, and he was promoted to the position of the Vice-Commander of the Shoshu Middle Wing.

古文：预平宗磐之难，赐与甚多，加仪同三司，以 皇叔祖 字冠其衔。
现代文：因预见并平息了宗磐之难，太宗赐与他很多，加仪同三司，并以 皇叔祖 三字冠其衔。
English: Because he foresaw and calmed the difficulties of Soiwa, Emperor Taizong gave him many honors, including the title of "Imperial Uncle" and the title of "Three-character Crown Prince."

古文：勖皆力辞不受。
现代文：但是完颜勖坚持谢绝不接受。
English: However, she insisted that she would never accept it.

古文：皇统元年，撰定熙宗尊号册文。
现代文：皇统元年，完颜勖编撰的熙宗尊号册文定稿。
English: In the first year of imperial unification, the final draft of the anthology of He Zongjun compiled by Yan Xuan was completed.

古文：上召勖饮于便殿，以玉带赐之。
现代文：皇上召见勖在偏殿饮酒，拿玉带赐给他。
English: The emperor summoned Yao to drink alcohol in a side hall and gave him a jade belt.

古文：所撰《祖宗实录》成，凡三卷，进入，上焚香立受之，赏赉有差。
现代文：完颜勖所撰写的《祖宗实录》成书，共三卷，进宫呈上，皇上焚香站立接受了，赏赐赠送勖不同的礼物。
English: After completing the "Ancestor Record" written by Yan Xuan, it was made into a book, a total of three volumes, presented to the palace, the emperor burned incense and stood up to accept it, and rewarded and presented different gifts.

古文：制诏左丞勖、平章政事弈职俸外别给二品亲王俸傔。
现代文：皇上颁诏给予左丞勖、平章政事弈除职务俸禄外另给二品亲王俸禄。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to grant Zuojo and Taira no Shosho, in addition to their official salaries, an additional stipend to the second-ranked prince.

古文：旧制，皇兄弟、皇子为亲王给二品俸。宗室封一字王者给三品俸，勖等别给亲王俸，皆异数也。
现代文：按照旧的制度，皇兄皇弟、皇子是亲王的要给二品的俸禄，宗室亲眷中封一字王的给三品的俸禄，完颜勖等另给亲王俸，都属于特殊情况。
English: According to the old system, if the emperor's elder brother, younger brother, or prince is a prince, he or she will be given a second-class salary, if a member of the imperial family is a middle-ranking prince, he or she will be given a third-class salary, and if he or she is a commoner, he or she will be given a prince's salary. All of these are special cases.

古文：宴群臣于五云楼，勖进酒称谢。帝起立，宰臣进曰： 至尊为臣下屡起，于礼未安。 
现代文：皇上在五云楼宴群臣，完颜勖敬酒称谢，皇帝起立，宰臣进言道 ：皇上是至尊，却为臣下屡次起立，这于大礼不安。 
English: The emperor was holding a banquet for his courtiers at Wuyunlou, and after a toast of thanks, the emperor stood up, and the vice-minister said, "The emperor is supreme, but he repeatedly stands up for his courtiers, which is unsettling in a grand ceremony."

古文：上曰： 朕屈己待臣下，亦何害。 
现代文：皇上回答说： 朕屈己待臣下，有什么害处？ 
English: The emperor replied, "What's the harm in me bowing down and waiting for my subjects?

古文：是日，上及群臣尽欢。
现代文：当天，皇上与群臣尽情欢乐。
English: On that day, the Emperor and his courtiers enjoyed themselves to the full.

古文：俄同监修国史，进拜平章政事。
现代文：不久，完颜勖奉命监修国史，进拜平章政事。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to supervise the national history, and he was promoted to the post of political affairs.

古文：光懿皇后忌辰，熙宗将出猎，勖谏而止。
现代文：光懿皇后诞辰忌日，熙宗要出外打猎，勖劝谏并阻止了皇上出猎。
English: On the anniversary of the birth and death of Empress Guangyao, Emperor Hezong wanted to go hunting, but was dissuaded and prevented from doing so.

古文：熙宗猎于海岛，三日之间，亲射五虎获之。
现代文：熙宗在海岛打猎，三天时间，亲自射伤五只老虎并捕获了它们。
English: Xizong had been hunting on the island for three days when he personally shot and wounded five tigers and captured them.

古文：勖献《东狩射虎赋》，上悦，赐以佩刀、玉带、良马。
现代文：完颜勖向熙宗献上《东狩射虎赋》，皇上欢喜，赐给他佩刀、玉带、良马。
English: After Yan Xuan presented "Eastern Hunting and Shooting Tiger Fu" to Xi Zong, the emperor was delighted and gave him a sword, a jade belt and a good horse.

古文：能以契丹字为诗文，凡游宴有可言者，辄作诗以见意。
现代文：完颜勖能用契丹文字写诗文，凡出游或赴宴中有可感可说的，则做诗以表达自己的见解和情感。
English: Most of them can write poems in Khitan. Those who have something to say while traveling or attending a banquet write poems to express their opinions and emotions.

古文：时上日与近臣酣饮，或继以夜，莫能谏之。
现代文：当时皇上每日与近臣酣饮，有时甚至日以继夜，没有人能够劝谏他。
English: At that time, the emperor was drinking with his close advisers every day, sometimes even day and night, and no one could persuade him.

古文：勖上疏谏，乃为止酒。
现代文：完颜勖上书劝谏，皇上才停止这样饮酒。
English: It was only after he had written to the emperor to persuade him to stop drinking that the emperor stopped.

古文：进拜左丞相，兼侍中、监修如故。
现代文：完颜勖像在太宗时一样，仍进拜左丞相，兼任侍中、监修等职。
English: As was the case during the reign of Emperor Taizong, Kanyan Zang still held the position of Zojo (Minister of the Left) and concurrently served as a chamberlain and supervisor.

古文：八年，奏上《太祖实录》二十卷，赐黄金八十两，银百两，重彩五十端，绢百匹，通犀、玉钩带各一。
现代文：八年，完颜勖向皇帝呈上《太祖实录》二十卷，皇上赐给他黄金八十两，白银一百两，重彩五十端，绢一百匹，通犀、玉钩带各一个。
English: In the eighth year, after Yan Xuan presented the emperor with 20 volumes of "The True Record of the Great Ancestors," the emperor gave him 80 taels of gold, 100 taels of silver, 50 taels of heavy color, 100 horses, and one each of a rhinoceros horn and a jade hook.

古文：出领行台尚书省事，召拜太保，领三省、领行台如故，封鲁国王。
现代文：完颜勖出领行台尚书省事，奉召拜太保，统领三省、领行台一如既往，被熙宗封为鲁国王。
English: When he was finished leading the three provinces, Shang Shuxu was relieved of his duties and was summoned by Baitabao to lead the three provinces and lead the three provinces as usual. He was crowned the King of Lu by Xi Zong.

古文：勖刚正寡言。
现代文：完颜勖刚正寡言。
English: He's got a straight face and doesn't mince words.

古文：海陵方用事，朝臣多附之者。
现代文：海陵刚主事的时候，朝臣多数是附和他的。
English: When Hailing Gang was in charge, most of the courtiers followed his lead.

古文：一日，大臣会议，海陵后至，勖面责之曰： 吾年五十余，犹不敢后，尔少年强健，肪敢如此。 
现代文：一天，大臣会议，海陵后到，完颜勖当面指责他说 ：我五十多岁了，还不敢落后，你年少强健，竟敢如此。 
English: One day, after the ministerial meeting, Hailing arrived and accused Yan Xuan in person, saying, "I am more than fifty years old and dare not lag behind. You are young and strong, how dare you do so."

古文：海陵跪谢。
现代文：海陵跪下道歉。
English: Hailing knelt down and apologized.

古文：九年，进拜太师，进封汉国王。
现代文：九年，完颜勖又进拜太师，并进封汉国王。
English: Nine years later, after Yan Xuan died, he was promoted to Grand Master and crowned King of Han.

古文：海陵篡立，加恩大臣以收人望，封秦汉国王，领三省、监修如故。
现代文：海陵篡位以后，加封大臣以笼络人心，又封他为秦汉国王，统领三省并任监修与以前一样。
English: After the usurpation of the throne by Hailing, the Minister of Addition and Abolition lured the hearts of the people, and appointed him as the King of the Qin and Han dynasties, leading the three provinces and serving as the overseer, just as before.

古文：及宗本无罪诛，勖髭鬓顿白，因上表请老。
现代文：及至宗本无罪被杀，完颜勖鬓发胡髭顿时白了，因此上表请求告老离朝。
English: When Sohon was found not guilty and killed, his face turned white and his beard turned white. Therefore, he asked the court to order him to leave Korea.

古文：海陵不许，赐以玉带，优诏谕之。有大事令宰臣就第商议，入朝不拜。
现代文：海陵不准许，赐给他玉带，下诏对他优待：有大事命令宰相大臣到他府上商议，他入朝见君可以不拜。
English: Hailing was not allowed, he was given a jade belt, and the following edict was issued to give him preferential treatment: If there is a major order for the Prime Minister to come to his residence for discussion, he may not bow when entering the Imperial Court to see you.

古文：勖遂称疾笃不言，表请愈切，海陵不怿，从之。
现代文：于是勖声称自己病甚重而不发表意见，上表请求退休的言辞愈加迫切，海陵不高兴，依从了他。
English: As a result, Hao claimed that he was very ill and did not express his opinion. The above request for retirement became more urgent. Hailing was not happy and obeyed him.

古文：以本官致仕，进封周宋国王。
现代文：完颜勖以本官致仕，进封为周宋国王。
English: After Yan Xuan retired from his position, he was crowned King of Zhou and Song.

古文：正隆元年，与宗室俱迁中都。
现代文：正隆元年，完颜勖与宗室一起迁居中都。
English: In the first year of Zhenglong, Guan Yanqian moved to Zhongdu with his family.

古文：二年，例降封金源郡王。
现代文：二年，按照律例完颜勖被降封为金源郡王。
English: Two years later, in accordance with the law, Kanen Shizuku was demoted to King of Jinyuan County.

古文：薨，年五十九。
现代文：这一年，完颜勖逝世，享年五十九岁。
English: This year, Guan Yanjun died at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：撰定《女直郡望姓氏谱》及他文甚众。
现代文：完颜勖编撰审定《女直郡望姓氏谱》以及其他文集很多。
English: He completed the compilation and verification of "Mianzhong County Wang surname genealogy" and many other collections.

古文：大定二十年，诏曰： 太师勖谏表诗文甚有典则，朕自即位所未尝见。
现代文：大定二十年，金世宗下诏书说： 太师勖的谏表诗文很有典范法则，是朕即位以来所不曾见过的。
English: Twenty years ago, Kim Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "Grandmaster Kim's poetry is exemplary and has never been seen since I ascended the throne.

古文：其谏表可入《实录》，其《射虎赋》诗文等篇什，可镂版持之。 
现代文：他的谏表可以收入《实录》，他的《射虎赋》及诗文等篇章，可以镂版印刷发行。 
English: His enamel watch can be included in "Real Record," and his "Shooting Tigers" and poems can be printed and distributed by enamel printing.

古文：子宗秀。
现代文：完颜勖有儿子叫宗秀。
English: They eventually had a son named Munhide.

古文：宗秀，字实甫，本名撕里忽。
现代文：宗秀，字实甫，本名叫厮里忽。
English: Zongxiu, alias Sifu, whose real name was Bao Liguo.

古文：涉猎经史，通契丹大小字。
现代文：宗秀涉猎经史，通晓契丹大小字。
English: Zongxiu dabbles in the history of literature and is familiar with the characters of the Khitan language.

古文：善骑射，与平宗磐、宗隽之乱，授定远大将军，以宗磐世袭猛安授之。
现代文：他还善于骑马射箭，曾参与平定宗磐、宗隽之乱，被皇上授予定远大将军，并把宗磐世袭的猛安之地授予了他。
English: He was also good at riding a horse and archery. He took part in the suppression of the Sōban and Sōhaku uprisings. He was awarded the title of General by the Emperor, who also granted him the hereditary land of Motsuyasu in Sōban.

古文：宗弼复取河南，宗秀与海陵俱赴军前任使。
现代文：宗弼收复河南，宗秀和海陵一起去军前听候调遣。
English: Zonglu recovered Henan, Zongxiu and Hailing went to the front to await deployment.

古文：宋将岳飞军于亳、宿之间，宗秀率步骑三千扼其冲要，遂与诸军逆击败之。
现代文：宋朝将领岳飞的军队驻扎在亳、宿之间，宗秀率领步兵和骑兵三千扼住岳军的要害之地，然后与诸军共同反攻击败了岳军。
English: The Song Dynasty general stationed Yuefei's army between the capital and the capital. Zongxiu led three thousand infantry and cavalry to pin down Yuefei's key positions, and then defeated Yuefei's army in a joint counter-attack.

古文：师还，为太原尹，改婆速路统军使、不受。
现代文：班师还朝，被授予太原府尹，又改派为婆速路统军使，他不接受。
English: He did not accept the fact that he was awarded the title of Taiyuan Fu Yin, and was reassigned as a high-speed road unification envoy.

古文：高丽遣使以士产献，却之。
现代文：高丽派使者向他献土产品，他推辞了。
English: Goryeo sent emissaries to offer him earthenware, but he declined.

古文：入为刑部尚书，改御史中丞，授翰林学士。
现代文：后来宗秀入朝出任刑部尚书，改任御史中丞，并被授予翰林学士。
English: Later, when Mune Hide entered the court, he was appointed to the position of Shosho of the Penal Department, changed to the position of Goshi Chujo, and was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：天德初，转承旨，封宿国公，赐玉带。
现代文：天德初，宗秀转承海陵王旨意，被封为宿国公，并被授予玉带。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Zongxiu succeeded the will of King Hailing, was named the Prince of the host country, and was awarded the jade belt.

古文：历平阳尹、昭义军节度使，封广平郡王。
现代文：宗秀历任平阳府尹、昭义军节度使，被封为广平郡王。
English: Zongxiu successively served as the delegate to the festival of Yin and Shouyi armies of Pingyang Prefecture, and was named the king of Guangping County.

古文：正隆二年卒官，年四十二。
现代文：正隆二年终止当官，时年四十二岁。
English: Zhenglong was 42 years old when he left the post two years later.

古文：是岁，例降二品以上封爵，改赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：当年，按律例被降为二品以上封爵，改赠他为金紫光禄大夫。
English: In that year, according to the law, he was reduced to a knighthood of two or more prizes, and he was given the title of Golden Purple Light Doctor.

