古文：刘幽求，冀州武强人也。
现代文：刘幽求，冀州武强人。
English: Liu Yucu, Jizhou military strongman.

古文：圣历年，应制举，拜阆中尉，刺史不礼焉，乃弃官而归。
现代文：圣历初年，应试中举，拜闻中县尉。刺史不承接，便弃官而归家。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he passed the mid-term examination and was promoted to lieutenant of the county. However, he did not accept the promotion and resigned from the post to return home.

古文：久之，授朝邑尉。
现代文：过了相当一段时间，又授朝邑县尉。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the Asaichi County Lieutenant.

古文：初，桓彦范、敬晖等虽诛张易之兄弟，竟不杀武三思。
现代文：当初，桓彦范、敬晖等虽然杀了张易之兄弟，但未杀武三思。
English: At first, although Kuan Yan Fan, Jing Yi and others killed Zhang Yi's brother, they did not think twice about killing him.

古文：幽求谓桓、敬曰： 三思尚存，公辈终无葬地。
现代文：刘幽求对桓、敬二人说： 三思尚存，公等恐怕日后是死无葬身之地。
English: Liu Yucu said to Huan and Kei, "Three thoughts remain, and I'm afraid that in the future, public affairs will be dead and buried."

古文：若不早图，恐噬脐无及。 
现代文：如果不早考虑谋划，日后后悔就来不及了。 
English: If you do not consider planning early, it will be too late to regret it later.

古文：桓、敬等不从其言，后果为三思诬构，死于岭外。
现代文：桓、敬二人不听从他的话，后来果然被武三思诬陷，死于岭外。
English: Huan and Kei did not listen to his words, and later they were framed by Wu Sanshi and died outside the ridge.

古文：及韦庶人将行篡逆，幽求与玄宗潜谋诛之，乃与苑总监钟绍京、长上果毅麻嗣宗及太平公主之子薛崇暕等夜从入禁中讨平之。
现代文：到韦庶人将要篡权，刘幽求与玄宗谋划杀了韦氏，于是与苑总监钟绍京、长上果毅麻嗣宗和太平公主之子薛崇日柬等深夜入宫诛杀讨平了韦氏。
English: A commoner in Wei was about to usurp power, and Liu Yucu and Xuanzong plotted to kill the Wei clan, so they went to the palace in the middle of the night with the director of the garden, Zhong Shaojing, the elder Guo Yi, Ma Shizong, and Xue Chong, the son of the Taiping princess, to fight and kill the Wei clan.

古文：是夜所下制敕百余道，皆出于幽求。
现代文：这天夜晚皇上下圣旨百余道，都是刘幽求写的。
English: On this night, more than a hundred imperial edicts were written by Liu Yuxu.

古文：以功擢拜中书舍人，令参知机务，赐爵中山县男，食实封二百户。
现代文：凭他的功升任中书舍人，令参与主持机务，赐爵中山县男，食实封二百户。
English: With his merits, he was promoted to the position of the book keeper of Zhongshan County, ordered to participate in the chairmanship of the mechanism, awarded a knighthood to the man of Zhongshan County, and received a stipend of 200 households.

古文：翌日，又授其二子五品官，祖、父俱追赠刺史。
现代文：第二天，又授他的两个儿子五品官，祖父、父亲一同追赠刺史。
English: The next day, his two sons were also awarded the rank of five-star officers, and both his grandfather and father were posthumously awarded the title of sashimi.

古文：睿宗即位，加银青光禄大夫，行尚书右丞，仍旧知政事，进封徐国公，加实封通前五百户，赐物千段、奴婢二十人、宅一区、地十顷、马四匹，加以金银杂器。
现代文：睿宗即位，加荣誉之职银青光禄大夫，担任尚书右丞职务，仍主持政事，并晋封徐国公，加实封通前共五百户，赐彩千段，奴婢二十人，住宅一区，地十顷，马四匹，外加银杂器。
English: When Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, he was awarded the honorary title of "Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor," held the post of "Shang Shu Yu Rong," and still presided over political affairs. He was also promoted to "Xu Guogong," with a total of 500 households, 1,000 dowries, 20 slaves and maids, one residential area, 10 hectares of land, four horses, and silver utensils.

古文：景云二年，迁户部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：景云二年，刘幽求调任户部尚书，罢去主持政务的权力。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, Liu Yuqiu was transferred to the household department of Shangshu, and was stripped of the power to preside over government affairs.

古文：月余，转吏部尚书，擢拜侍中，降玺书曰： 顷者，王室不造，中宗厌代，外戚专政，奸臣擅国，将倾社稷，几迁龟鼎，朕躬与王公，皆将及于祸难。
现代文：一月有余，又调任吏部尚书，拜侍中。皇上降玺书说 ：过去，王室无作为，中宗厌世，外戚专政，奸臣把持朝政，国家处危亡之际，朕自己与王公，都险遭祸难。
English: The Emperor's letter of abdication said, "In the past, the royal family did nothing, the Chinese dynasty was world-weary, the maternal relatives ruled the country, and treacherous vassals controlled the government. When the country was in danger, I myself and the prince were in danger of disaster.

古文：又以卿忘躯徇难，宜有恩荣，故特免卿十死罪，并书诸金铁，俾传于后。
现代文：卿见危思奋，在变化的形势下能灵活变通。辅助太子，协调义士，共同歼灭元凶恶徒。国家的复存，全靠此举，所以现在委卿以重任，赐封爵位，加赐卿实封二百户，并原来的共七百户。使子子孙孙，永远相传。
English: The lord sees the danger, thinks hard, and can be flexible in changing situations. Assist the prince, coordinate the righteous, and jointly annihilate the original villains. The country's survival depends entirely on this move, so now the chairman of the committee has the important task of awarding knighthoods, and awarding the lord with two hundred households, and the original total of seven hundred households. Let the children and grandchildren pass it down forever.

古文：卿其保兹功业，永作国桢，可不美欤！ 
现代文：又因卿为国家不顾个人安危，故特免卿十死罪，并书于金铁券上，传于后代。 
English: In addition, because he served the country regardless of personal safety, he was specially exempted from ten capital crimes, and was written on a gold and iron certificate, which was passed down to future generations.

古文：先天元年，拜尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品，监修国史。
现代文：先天元年，刘幽求拜尚书右仆射，代理宰相，监修国史。
English: In the year before yesterday, the first year of the year, Liu Yuxu worshiped Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Zhao, acting prime minister, supervising the national history.

古文：幽求初自谓功在朝臣之右，而志求左仆射，兼领中书令。
现代文：他原自谓对朝廷有大功，超过朝臣，想到自己会任左仆射，兼中书令。
English: He originally considered himself to be of great service to the imperial court, surpassing the courtiers, and imagined that he would be appointed as a left-hand servant, and also as a middle secretary.

古文：俄而窦怀贞为左仆射，崔湜为中书令，幽求心甚不平，形于言色。湜又托附太平公主，将谋逆乱。
现代文：不久，窦怀贞被任命左仆射，崔任命中书令，幽求心中很是不平，在言语表情上流露出来，而崔又依附太平公主，将谋划叛乱。
English: Soon after, Dou Huai Zhen was appointed as Zuo Shuai, and Cui was appointed as Zhong Shuling. Yu Kuo was very uneasy in his heart, which was revealed in his words and facial expressions, and Cui also clung to Princess Taiping and planned a rebellion.

古文：幽求乃与右羽林将军张暐请以羽林兵诛之，乃令暐密奏玄宗曰： 宰相中有崔湜、崔羲，俱是太平公主进用，见作方计，其事不轻。
现代文：刘幽求便与右羽林将军张日韦请求用羽林兵诛杀他们，令张日韦密奏玄宗 ：宰相中有崔、岑羲，都是太平公主安插进来的，如果他们在内策应，不可小视。
English: Liu Yuqiu and Zhang Ribei, the general of Ulin, requested that they be killed with Ulin soldiers, and ordered Zhang Ribei to play the secret song of Xuanzong: There are Cui and Yao in the prime minister, and they are all inserted by Taiping Princess. If they are in the inner strategy, they should not be underestimated.

古文：殿下若不早谋，必成大患。
现代文：陛下如果不趁早处理，必成大患。
English: Your Majesty, if you don't deal with it soon, it's going to be a big problem.

古文：一朝事出意外，太上皇何以得安？
现代文：一旦事出意外，太上皇何以得安？
English: In the event of an accident, how can the Emperor be reassured?

古文：古人云： 当断不断，反受其乱。 
现代文：古人说： 当断不断，反受其乱。 
English: The ancients said, "If you are constantly criticized, you will be disturbed."

古文：唯请急杀此贼。
现代文：请求能尽快杀掉此贼。
English: The request will kill the thief as soon as possible.

古文：刘幽求已共臣作定谋计讫，愿以身正此事，赴死如归。
现代文：幽求已和朝臣定好计谋，愿以身正此事，赴死如归。
English: Yuxu has already made a plan with the courtier, and is willing to face the matter squarely and go to his death.

古文：臣既职典禁兵，若奉殿下命，当即除翦。 
现代文：臣既任职掌管禁兵，只要殿下下令，即剪除此贼。 
English: Since the vassal is in charge of the forbidden soldiers, as long as His Highness orders, the thief will be cut off.

古文：既殄群凶，方宣大化，期问政于经始，载登贤于萝卜。可依旧金紫光禄大夫，守尚书左仆射，知军国事，监修国史，上柱国、徐国公，仍依旧还封七百户，并赐锦衣一袭。 
现代文：一年多，太平公主伏诛，当天皇上下诏：嘉奖刘幽求的功劳，官复原职，依旧为金紫光禄大夫，任尚书左仆射，主管军国大事，监修国史，赐爵上柱国、徐国公，依旧还封七百户，并赐锦衣一袭。
English: For more than a year, Princess Taiping was in hiding, when the emperor issued an edict: to commend Liu Yuzhu's merits and reinstate him as an official, he was still the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu, appointed as Shang Shu Zuo Shu, in charge of military and national affairs, supervising national history, bestowing peerages on Shang Zhuo Guo and Xu Guogong, still sealing seven hundred households, and bestowing brocade clothes.

古文：开元初，改尚书左右仆射为左右丞相，乃授幽求尚书左丞相，兼黄门监。
现代文：开元初年，改尚书左右仆射为左右丞相。刘幽求授尚书左丞相，兼黄门监。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Shangshu's right and left flunkeys were changed to the left and right ministers. Liu Yuxu was awarded the title of Shangshu's left minister, as well as Huangmeng supervisor.

古文：未几，除太子少保，罢知政事。
现代文：不久，任太子少保，罢免宰相职务。
English: Soon after, he was appointed Crown Prince and Minor Protector, and dismissed from the post of Prime Minister.

古文：姚崇素嫉忌之，乃奏言幽求郁怏于散职，兼有怨言，贬授睦州刺史，削其实封六百户。
现代文：姚崇一向嫉妒刘幽求，便奏言刘幽求对现在的职务不满意，兼有怨言，于是被贬到崇州任刺史，削去实封六百户。
English: Yao Chong had always been jealous of Liu Yucui, so he made a speech saying that Liu Yucui was not satisfied with his current position and had some complaints. As a result, he was demoted to the position of secretary of state in Chongzhou, and his real estate holdings were reduced by 600 households.

古文：岁余，稍迁杭州刺史。
现代文：又过了一年多，调任杭州刺史。
English: After more than a year, he was transferred to the Hangzhou History Museum.

古文：三年，转桂阳郡刺史，在道愤恚而卒，年六十一，赠礼部尚书，谥曰文献，配享睿宗庙庭。
现代文：开元三年，转任桂阳郡刺史，在赴任途中忧愤而死，享年六十一岁，赠礼部尚书，谥号文献，配享睿宗庙廷。
English: Three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was transferred to the post of Guiyang County Chief Historian. On his way to the post, he died of grief and anger. He was 61 years old.

古文：建中三年，重赠司徒。
现代文：建中三年，重赠司徒。
English: Three years of junior high school, re-gifted to Stowe.

古文：钟绍京，虔州赣人也。
现代文：钟绍京，虔赣人。
English: Zhong Shaojing, a pious person.

古文：初为司农录事，以工书直凤阁，则天时明堂门额、九鼎之铭，及诸宫殿门榜，皆绍京所题。
现代文：最初，任司农录事，因为书法好调到凤阁。武则天时，明堂的门额、九鼎的铭文，以及各宫殿的门榜，都是钟绍京写的。
English: At first, Ren Siong recorded the events, because the calligraphy was good enough to be transferred to Fengge. At the time of Wu Zetian, the door frame of Ming Hall, the inscription of Jiuding, and the door panels of each palace were all written by Zhong Shaojing.

古文：景龙中，为苑总监。
现代文：景龙年中，钟绍京任苑总监。
English: In the middle of the Jinglong year, Zhong Shaojing was appointed as the director of the garden.

古文：玄宗之诛韦氏，绍京夜中帅户奴及丁夫以从。及事成，其夜拜绍京银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎，参知机务。
现代文：玄宗诛韦氏时，钟绍京深夜率领户奴和丁夫跟随，到事成，当天晚上玄宗就拜钟绍京为银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎，参与谋划机要事务。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong visited Wei, Zhong Shaojing led the household servants and Dingfu to follow him late at night to achieve success. That evening, Emperor Xuanzong paid tribute to Zhong Shaojing as the silver Qingguanglu doctor and the Chinese book waiter, and participated in the planning of important affairs.

古文：翌日，进拜中书令，加光禄大夫，封越国公，赐实封五百户，赐物二千段、马十匹。
现代文：第二天，进拜中书令，封越国公，赐实封五百户，赐彩绸二千段，马十匹。
English: The next day, he paid homage to the Chinese imperial edict, conferred the title of the Duke of Yue, bestowed 500 households with real seals, 2,000 pieces of colored silk, and ten horses.

古文：绍京既当朝用事，恣情赏罚，甚为时人所恶。
现代文：钟绍京既当权用事，赏罚随心所欲，全凭感情，深为当时的世人厌恶。
English: Since Zhong Shaojing was in power, he could reward and punish as he pleased, based entirely on his feelings, which was deeply repugnant to the world at that time.

古文：俄又抗疏让官，睿宗纳薛稷之言，乃转为户部尚书，出为蜀州刺史。
现代文：不久又上表让官，睿宗采纳薛稷的意见，便调他任户部尚书，又外调到蜀州任刺史。
English: Soon after, Ruizong accepted Xue Yao's opinion and transferred him to the household department of Shangshu, and then to Shuzhou to be appointed to the history department.

古文：玄宗即位，复召拜户部尚书，迁太子詹事。
现代文：玄宗即位，又召拜任户部尚书，迁任太子詹事。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he also summoned and appointed the household secretary, Shang Shu, and transferred him to the position of the prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：时姚崇素恶绍京之为人，因奏绍京发言怨望，左迁绵州刺史。
现代文：当时，姚崇一向就讨厌钟绍京的为人，因此上奏说钟绍京心怀不满，于是降职到绵州任刺史。
English: At that time, Yao Chong had always disliked Zhong Shaojing as a person, so the report said that Zhong Shaojing was dissatisfied, so he was demoted to Mianzhou.

古文：及坐事，累贬琰川尉，尽削其阶爵及实封。
现代文：到后来犯错误，贬到琰川任县尉，全部削去他的爵位和封地。
English: However, he later made a mistake and was demoted to the position of county lieutenant of Luochuan County, and his title and fiefdom were all taken away.

古文：俄又历迁温州别驾。
现代文：不久又迁任温州别驾。
English: Soon after, he moved to Wenzhou.

古文：开元十五年，入朝，因垂泣奏曰： 陛下岂不记畴昔之事耶？
现代文：开元十五年，调回到朝廷，向玄宗哭着上奏 ：陛下难道忘记了过去的事吗？
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the year, he was transferred back to the imperial court, and cried out to Emperor Xuanzong: "Has Your Majesty forgotten the past?

古文：何忍弃臣荒外，永不见阙庭。
现代文：怎么忍心弃臣于荒外，永不见宫廷。
English: How can you abandon your subjects in the wilderness and never see the court?

古文：且当时立功之人，今并亡殁，唯臣衰老独在，陛下岂不垂愍耶？ 
现代文：当时立功的人，现在死得差不多了，只有臣虽衰老还活在人世，陛下难道一点也不怜悯吗？ 
English: The people who made meritorious contributions at that time are almost dead now, and only the minister is still alive despite his old age. Doesn't your majesty have any pity at all?

古文：玄宗为之惘然，即日拜银青光禄大夫、右谕德。
现代文：玄宗为此恻然，当天授他银青光禄大夫、右谕德。
English: Xuanzong was stunned by this, and on the same day, he awarded him the title of Silver Qingguanglu Doctor, and the title of Right Scholar.

古文：久之，转少詹事。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，调任詹事。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to Zhanji.

古文：年八十余卒。
现代文：活到八十多岁才死。
English: He lived into his eighties before dying.

古文：绍京雅好书画古迹，聚二王及褚遂良书至数十百卷。
现代文：钟绍京雅好书画古迹，收集二王和褚遂良手迹达数十百卷。
English: Zhong Shao Jing Yaho calligraphy and painting monuments, the collection of the two kings and Sui Liang's handwriting amounted to tens of hundreds of volumes.

古文：建中元年，重赠太子太傅。
现代文：建中元年，加赠太子太傅。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, he was also given the title of Prince Taifu.

