古文：魏公子无忌者，魏昭王子少子而魏安釐王异母弟也。
现代文：魏公子叫无忌，是魏昭王的小儿子、魏安厘王的异母弟弟。
English: Wei Gongzi is the youngest son of Wei Zhao Wang and the half-brother of Wei Anli Wang.

古文：昭王薨，安釐王即位，封公子为信陵君。
现代文：昭王去世后，安厘王即位，封公子为信陵君。
English: After the death of King Zhao, King Anli ascended to the throne, and his son was named Xinlingjun.

古文：是时范睢亡魏相秦，以怨魏齐故，秦兵围大梁，破魏华阳下军，走芒卯。
现代文：当时范睢从魏国逃出到秦国任秦相，因为怨恨魏相魏齐屈打自己几乎致死的缘故，就派秦军围攻大梁，击败了魏国驻扎在华阳的部队，使魏将芒卯战败而逃。
English: At that time, Fan Kui fled from Wei to Qin as Qin's minister. Because he resented Wei's minister Wei Qi for beating him almost to death, he sent Qin troops to besiege Daliang, defeated Wei's troops stationed in Huayang, and defeated Wei's general Mengwu and fled.

古文：魏王及公子患之。
现代文：魏王和公子对这件事十分焦虑。
English: Wei Wang and his son were very anxious about this matter.

古文：公子为人仁而下士，士无贤不肖皆谦而礼交之，不敢以其富贵骄士。
现代文：公子的为人仁爱宽厚礼贤下士，士人无论有无才能或才能大小，他都谦恭有礼地同他们交往，从来不敢因为自己富贵而轻慢士人。
English: A nobleman's humanity is benevolence, love, generosity, courtesy, and courtesy. Regardless of whether a nobleman has talent or not, or whether his talent is small or large, he always interacts with them in a humble and courteous manner. He never dares to despise a nobleman because he is rich.

古文：士以此方数千里争往归之，致食客三千人。
现代文：因此方圆几千里的士人都争相归附于他，招来食客三千人。
English: As a result, nobles from thousands of miles around flocked to him, and he invited three thousand diners.

古文：当是时，诸侯以公子贤，多客，不敢加兵谋魏十馀年。
现代文：当时，诸侯各国因公子贤德，宾客众多，连续十几年不敢动兵谋犯魏国。
English: At that time, the princes of various countries did not dare to invade Wei for more than a dozen years due to the virtue of their sons and the large number of guests.

古文：公子与魏王博，而北境传举烽，言 赵寇至，且入界 。
现代文：有一次，公子跟魏王正在下棋，不想北边边境传来警报，说 赵国发兵进犯，将进入边境。 
English: On one occasion, he and Wei Wang were playing a game of chess, not wanting to hear an alarm coming from the northern border, saying that Zhao Guo had sent troops to attack and would enter the border.

古文：魏王释博，欲召大臣谋。
现代文：魏王立即放下棋子，就要召集大臣们商议对策。
English: The Wei king immediately put down his pieces and summoned his ministers to discuss countermeasures.

古文：公子止王曰： 赵王田猎耳，非为寇也。 
现代文：公子劝阻魏王说： 是赵王打猎罢了，不是进犯边境。 
English: He dissuaded Wei Wang by saying: Zhao Wang was just hunting, not invading the border.

古文：复博如故。
现代文：又接着跟魏王下棋如同没发生什么事一样。
English: He then proceeded to play chess with Wei Wang as if nothing had happened.

古文：王恐，心不在博。
现代文：可是魏王惊恐，心思全没放在下棋上。
English: But Wei Wang was terrified and did not put all his thoughts into playing chess.

古文：居顷，复从北方来传言曰： 赵王猎耳，非为寇也。 
现代文：过了一会儿，又从北边传来消息说： 是赵王打猎罢了，不是进犯边境。 
English: After a while, another message came from the north, saying: Zhao Wang was just hunting, not invading the border.

古文：魏王大惊，曰： 公子何以知之？ 
现代文：魏王听后大感惊诧，问道： 公子是怎么知道的？ 
English: Hearing this, Wei Wang was greatly surprised and asked: How did the prince know?

古文：公子曰： 臣之客有能深得赵王阴事者，赵王所为，客辄以报臣，臣以此知之。 
现代文：公子回答说： 我的食客中有个人能深入底里探到赵王的秘密，赵王有什么行动，他就会立即报告我，我因此知道这件事。 
English: The prince replied, "One of my diners can get to the bottom of Zhao Wang's secret, and if Zhao Wang does anything, he will immediately report to me, so I know about it.

古文：是後魏王畏公子之贤能，不敢任公子以国政。
现代文：从此以后，魏王畏惧公子贤能，不敢任用公子处理国家大事。
English: From then on, the Wei king feared the ability of nobles and did not dare to appoint nobles to deal with national affairs.

古文：魏有隐士曰侯嬴，年七十，家贫，为大梁夷门监者。
现代文：魏国有个隐士叫侯嬴，已经七十岁了，家境贫寒，是大梁城东门的看门人。
English: In Wei, there was a hermit named Hou Yu, already seventy years old, from a poor family, who was the gatekeeper of the east gate of Dalian City.

古文：公子闻之，往请，欲厚遗之。
现代文：公子听说了这个人，就派人去拜见，并想送给他一份厚礼。
English: When the prince heard about this man, he sent someone to pay him a visit and wanted to give him a generous gift.

古文：不肯受，曰： 臣脩身絜行数十年，终不以监门困故而受公子财。 
现代文：但是侯嬴不肯接受，说： 我几十年来修养品德，坚持操守，终究不能因我看门贫困的缘故而接受公子的财礼。 
English: However, Hou Yi refused to accept it, saying: I have cultivated my moral character for decades and insisted on integrity. After all, I cannot accept the prince's financial gift because of my poverty.

古文：公子於是乃置酒大会宾客。
现代文：公子于是就大摆酒席，宴饮宾客。
English: The nobleman then laid out a large banquet table and served the guests.

古文：坐定，公子从车骑，虚左，自迎夷门侯生。
现代文：大家来齐坐定之后，公子就带着车马以及随从人员，空出车子上的左位，亲自到东城门去迎接侯先生。
English: After everyone was seated, the young man took the carriage, horses and attendants, vacated the left seat on the carriage, and went to the East Gate to meet Mr. Hou in person.

古文：侯生摄敝衣冠，直上载公子上坐，不让，欲以观公子。
现代文：侯先生整理了一下破旧的衣帽，就径直上了车子坐在公子空出的尊贵座位，丝毫没有谦让的意思，想借此观察一下公子的态度。
English: Mr. Hou tidied up his shabby clothes and hat, and went straight to the car to sit in the noble seat vacated by the gentleman. He had no intention of making any concessions, and wanted to observe the gentleman's attitude.

古文：公子执辔愈恭。
现代文：可是公子手握马缰绳更加恭敬。
English: However, the prince's grip on the reins of the horse is more respectful.

古文：侯生又谓公子曰： 臣有客在市屠中，原枉车骑过之。 
现代文：侯先生又对公子说： 我有个朋友在街市的屠宰场，希望委屈一下车马载我去拜访他。 
English: Mr. Hou also said to his son: I have a friend in the slaughterhouse of the city market, I hope to be able to visit him.

古文：公子引车入巿，侯生下见其客朱亥，俾倪故久立，与其客语，微察公子。
现代文：公子立即驾车前往进入街市，侯先生下车去会见他的朋友朱亥，他斜眯缝着眼看公子，故意久久地站在那里，同他的朋友聊天，同时暗暗地观察公子。
English: The boy immediately drove to enter the street market. Mr. Hou got off the car to meet his friend Zhu Hai. He looked at the boy cross-eyed and deliberately stood there for a long time, chatting with his friend while secretly observing the boy.

古文：公子颜色愈和。
现代文：公子的面色更加和悦。
English: The face of the young man is more amiable.

古文：当是时，魏将相宗室宾客满堂，待公子举酒。
现代文：在这个时候，魏国的将军、宰相、宗室大臣以及高朋贵宾坐满堂上，正等着公子举杯开宴。
English: At this time, the generals, chancellors, family ministers, and high-ranking dignitaries of the State of Wei were sitting all over the hall, waiting for the prince to open the banquet with a toast.

古文：巿人皆观公子执辔。
现代文：街市上的人都看到公子手握缰绳替侯先生驾车。
English: People on the street market saw the prince holding the reins and driving for the lord.

古文：从骑皆窃骂侯生。
现代文：公子的随从人员都暗自责骂侯先生。
English: All of the prince's attendants secretly scolded Mr. Hou.

古文：侯生视公子色终不变，乃谢客就车。
现代文：侯先生看到公子面色始终不变，才告别了朋友上了车。
English: Mr. Hou said goodbye to his friend and got into the car when he saw that his face remained unchanged.

古文：至家，公子引侯生坐上坐，遍赞宾客，宾客皆惊。
现代文：到家后，公子领着侯先生坐到上位上，并向全体宾客赞扬地介绍了侯先生，满堂宾客无不惊异。
English: After arriving home, the prince led Mr. Hou to the upper table, and introduced Mr. Hou to all the guests with praise. All the guests were surprised.

古文：酒酣，公子起，为寿侯生前。
现代文：大家酒兴正浓时，公子站起来，走到侯先生面前举杯为他祝寿。
English: When everyone was getting drunk, the young man stood up, walked to Mr. Hou and raised his glass to wish him a happy birthday.

古文：侯生因谓公子曰： 今日嬴之为公子亦足矣。
现代文：侯先生趁机对公子说： 今天我侯嬴为难公子也够劲了。
English: Mr. Hou took the opportunity to say to his son: Today, my son is struggling, and he is strong enough.

古文：嬴乃夷门抱关者也，而公子亲枉车骑，自迎嬴於众人广坐之中，不宜有所过，今公子故过之。
现代文：我只是个城东门抱门插关的人，可是公子委屈车马，亲自在大庭广众之中迎接我，我本不该再去拜访朋友，今天公子竟屈尊陪我拜访他。
English: I'm just a person who holds the gate to the east of the city, but my husband took it upon himself to meet me in the middle of the crowd. I wasn't supposed to visit my friend again, but today my husband deigned to accompany me to visit him.

古文：然嬴欲就公子之名，故久立公子车骑巿中，过客以观公子，公子愈恭。
现代文：可我也想成就公子的名声，故意让公子车马久久地停在街市中，借拜访朋友来观察公子，结果公子更加谦恭。
English: But I also wanted to achieve my son's reputation. I purposely let my son stay in the market for a long time, visiting friends to observe him. As a result, my son became more humble.

古文：巿人皆以嬴为小人，而以公子为长者能下士也。 
现代文：街市上的人都以为我是小人，而认为公子是个高尚的人能礼贤下士啊。 
English: The people in the street market thought I was a villain, but they thought the noble man was a noble corporal.

古文：於是罢酒，侯生遂为上客。
现代文：在这次宴会散了后，侯先生便成了公子的贵客。
English: After the banquet was over, Mr. Hou became the prince's honored guest.

古文：侯生谓公子曰： 臣所过屠者硃亥，此子贤者，世莫能知，故隐屠间耳。 
现代文：侯先生对公子说： 我所拜访的屠夫朱亥，是个贤能的人，只是人们都不了解他，所以隐没在屠夫中罢了。 
English: Mr. Hou said to his son-in-law: Zhu Hai, the butcher I visited, is a wise man, but people don't know him, so he just disappeared among the butchers.

古文：公子往数请之，硃亥故不复谢，公子怪之。
现代文：公子曾多次前往拜见朱亥，朱亥故意不回拜答谢，公子觉得这个人很奇怪。
English: He had visited Zhu Hai many times. Zhu Hai deliberately did not return his thanks. He thought this man was very strange.

古文：魏安釐王二十年，秦昭王已破赵长平军，又进兵围邯郸。
现代文：魏安厘王二十年，秦昭王已经在长平大败赵国军队，接着进兵围攻邯郸。
English: In the 20th year of Wei Anli's reign, Qin Zhao had already defeated the Zhao army in Changping, and then marched into the city to besiege it.

古文：公子姊为赵惠文王弟平原君夫人，数遗魏王及公子书，请救於魏。
现代文：公子的姐姐是赵惠文王弟弟平原君的夫人，多次给魏王和公子送信来，向魏国请求救兵。
English: Gongzi's sister was the wife of Zhao Huiwen Wang's younger brother Pingyuan Jun. She sent messages to Wei Wang and Gongzi many times, asking for help from Wei.

古文：魏王使将军晋鄙将十万众救赵。
现代文：魏王派将军晋鄙带领十万之众的部队去救赵国。
English: The Wei king sent the general Jinnan to lead 100,000 troops to save Zhao.

古文：秦王使使者告魏王曰： 吾攻赵旦暮且下，而诸侯敢救者，已拔赵，必移兵先击之。 
现代文：秦昭王得知这个消息后就派使臣告诫魏王说： 我就要攻下赵国了，这只是早晚的事，诸侯中有谁敢救赵国的，拿下赵国后，一定调兵先攻打它。 
English: After learning this news, Qin Zhao Wang sent an envoy to warn Wei Wang, saying: I'm about to conquer Zhao, it's just a matter of time. If any of the princes dare to save Zhao, after conquering Zhao, they must first attack it.

古文：魏王恐，使人止晋鄙，留军壁鄴，名为救赵，实持两端以观望。
现代文：魏王很害怕，就派人阻止晋鄙不要再进军了，把军队留在邺城扎营驻守，名义上是救赵国，实际上是采取两面倒的策略来观望形势的发展。
English: The Wei king was very afraid, so he sent someone to stop the Jin and Qin armies from marching any further, and left the army camped in Lucheng. In name, it was to save Zhao, but in reality, it was to adopt a duplicitous strategy to wait and see how the situation developed.

古文：平原君使者冠盖相属於魏，让魏公子曰： 胜所以自附为婚姻者，以公子之高义，为能急人之困。
现代文：平原君使臣的车子连续不断地到魏国来，频频告急，责备魏公子说： 我赵胜之所以自愿依托魏国跟魏国联姻结亲，就是因为公子的道义高尚，能热心帮助别人摆脱危难。
English: The chariots of the envoys of the Prince of the Plain continuously came to Wei, frequently complained of urgency, and reproached Wei Gongzi, saying: The reason why I, Zhao Sheng, voluntarily relied on Wei to marry Wei is because of the noble morality of Gongzi and his eagerness to help others get out of danger.

古文：今邯郸旦暮降秦而魏救不至，安在公子能急人之困也！
现代文：如今邯郸危在旦夕，早晚就要投降秦国，可是魏国救兵至今不来，公子能帮助别人摆脱危难又表现在哪里！
English: Now that the danger is imminent, sooner or later the Qin State will surrender, but the Wei State rescuers have not come so far. How can a gentleman help others get out of danger?

古文：且公子纵轻胜，弃之降秦，独不怜公子姊邪？ 
现代文：再说公子即使不把我赵胜看在眼里，抛弃我让我投降秦国，难道就不可怜你的姐姐吗？ 
English: Besides, even if he does not regard me as Zhao Sheng, if he abandons me and lets me surrender to Qin, shouldn't he have pity on your sister?

古文：公子患之，数请魏王，及宾客辩士说王万端。
现代文：公子为这件事忧虑万分，屡次请求魏王赶快出兵，又让宾客辩士们千方百计地劝说魏王。
English: The prince was very worried about this matter. He repeatedly asked the Wei king to send troops as soon as possible, and let the guest debaters persuade the Wei king in every possible way.

古文：魏王畏秦，终不听公子。
现代文：魏王由于害怕秦国，始终不肯听从公子的意见。
English: Due to his fear of the Qin state, the Wei king always refused to listen to the nobleman's advice.

古文：公子自度终不能得之於王，计不独生而令赵亡，乃请宾客，约车骑百馀乘，欲以客往赴秦军，与赵俱死。
现代文：公子估计终究不能征得魏王同意出兵了，就决计不能自己活着而让赵国灭亡，于是请来宾客，凑集了战车一百多辆，打算带着宾客赶到战场上去同秦军拼一死命，与赵国人一起死难。
English: The prince estimated that he would not be able to obtain the consent of the Wei king to send troops after all, and decided that he would not be able to live and let Zhao perish. So he invited guests, gathered more than a hundred chariots, and planned to take the guests to the battlefield to fight for their lives with the Qin army and die with the people of Zhao.

古文：行过夷门，见侯生，具告所以欲死秦军状。
现代文：公子带着车队走过东门时，去见侯先生，把打算同秦军拼一死命的情况全都告诉了侯先生。
English: When he walked through the East Gate with the motorcade, he went to see Mr. Hou and told Mr. Hou everything about his intention to fight to the death with the Qin Army.

古文：辞决而行，侯生曰： 公子勉之矣，老臣不能从。 
现代文：然后向侯先生诀别准备上路，行前侯先生说： 公子努力干吧，老臣我不能随行。 
English: He then bade farewell to Mr. Hou and prepared to leave. Before leaving, Mr. Hou said, "Son, work hard, I can't accompany you.

古文：公子行数里，心不快，曰： 吾所以待侯生者备矣，天下莫不闻，今吾且死而侯生曾无一言半辞送我，我岂有所失哉？ 
现代文：公子走了几里路，心里不痛快，自语道： 我对待侯先生算是够周到的了，天下无人不晓，如今我将要死难可是侯先生竟没有一言半语来送我，我难道对待他有闪失吗？ 
English: The young man walked for several miles, his heart was not happy, he said to himself: I treated Mr. Hou thoughtfully enough, no one in the world does not know, now I am going to die, but Mr. Hou did not have a word or two to send me, did I treat him wrong?

古文：复引车还，问侯生。
现代文：于是又赶着车子返回来，想问问侯先生。
English: So I hurried back to the car, wanting to ask Mr. Hou.

古文：侯生笑曰： 臣固知公子之还也。 
现代文：侯先生一见公子便笑着说： 我本来就知道公子会回来的。 
English: Mr. Hou smiled at the sight of his son and said, "I knew he would come back.

古文：曰： 公子喜士，名闻天下。
现代文：又接着说： 公子好客爱士，闻名天下。
English: He went on to say: "He is a man of hospitality and is known all over the world.

古文：今有难，无他端而欲赴秦军，譬若以肉投馁虎，何功之有哉？
现代文：如今有了危难，想要去到秦的军队就像把肉扔给饥饿的老虎，有什么作用呢？
English: Now that there is a crisis, trying to go to Qin's army is like throwing meat to a hungry tiger, what is the effect?

古文：尚安事客？
现代文：如果这样的话，还用我们这些宾客干什么呢？
English: If that's the case, what's the use of us guests?

古文：然公子遇臣厚，公子往而臣不送，以是知公子恨之复返也。 
现代文：公子待我情深意厚，公子前往可是我不送行，因此知道公子恼恨我会返回来的。 
English: My husband treated me with deep affection. He went to see me off, but I didn't accompany him, so I knew he would resent my coming back.

古文：公子再拜，因问。
现代文：公子连着两次向侯先生拜礼，进而问对策。
English: The prince bowed to Mr. Hou twice in a row, and then asked for countermeasures.

古文：侯生乃屏人间语，曰： 嬴闻晋鄙之兵符常在王卧内，而如姬最幸，出入王卧内，力能窃之。
现代文：侯先生就让旁人离开，同公子秘密交谈，说： 我听说晋鄙的兵符经常放在魏王的卧室内，在妻妾中如姬最受宠爱，她出入魏王的卧室很随便，只要尽力是能偷出兵符来的。
English: Mr. Hou then asked the others to leave and had a secret conversation with the young man, saying, "I heard that the badge of the Jin Dynasty was often placed in the bedroom of the Wei King. Among the wives and concubines, Ruki was the most favored. She entered and left the bedroom of the Wei King very casually. As long as she did her best, she could steal the badge.

古文：嬴闻如姬父为人所杀，如姬资之三年，自王以下欲求报其父仇，莫能得。
现代文：我还听说如姬的父亲被人杀死，如姬报仇雪恨的心志积蓄了三年之久，从魏王以下的群臣左右都想为如姬报仇，但没能如愿。
English: I also heard that Rukhee's father was killed by someone. Rukhee's desire to avenge his father's death had been accumulating for three years. All the ministers from Wei Wang downwards wanted to avenge Rukhee's death, but were unable to do so.

古文：如姬为公子泣，公子使客斩其仇头，敬进如姬。
现代文：为此，如姬曾对公子哭诉，公子派门客斩了那个仇人的头，恭敬地献给如姬。
English: For this reason, Ruki had cried to the prince, and the prince sent a concubine to cut off the enemy's head and respectfully dedicate it to Ruki.

古文：如姬之欲为公子死，无所辞，顾未有路耳。
现代文：如姬要为公子效命而死，是在所不辞的，只是没有行动的机会罢了。
English: Ruki is willing to die to save her husband's life, but she has no chance to act.

古文：公子诚一开口请如姬，如姬必许诺，则得虎符夺晋鄙军，北救赵而西卻秦，此五霸之伐也。 
现代文：公子果真一开口请求如姬帮忙，如姬必定答应，那么就能得到虎符而夺了晋鄙的军权，北边可救赵国，西边能抵御秦国，这是春秋五霸的功业啊。 
English: If the prince really opened his mouth to ask Ruki for help, Ruki must have agreed, then he would be able to get the tiger charm and seize the military power of Jinnan. The north side could save Zhao Province, and the west side could resist Qin Province. This is the work of the Spring and Autumn Five Hegemons.

古文：公子从其计，请如姬。
现代文：公子听从了侯嬴的计策，请求如姬帮忙。
English: The prince listened to Hou Yi's strategy and asked Ruki for help.

古文：如姬果盗晋鄙兵符与公子。
现代文：如姬果然盗出晋鄙的兵符交给了公子。
English: As expected, Ruki steals the badge of honor and gives it to the prince.

古文：公子行，侯生曰： 将在外，主令有所不受，以便国家。
现代文：公子拿到了兵符准备上路，侯先生说： 将帅在外作战时，有机断处置的权力，国君的命令有的可以不接受，以有利于国家。
English: Mr. Hou said, "When a general is fighting abroad, he has the power to make decisions. Some of the orders of the sovereign may not be accepted in order to benefit the country.

古文：公子即合符，而晋鄙不授公子兵而复请之，事必危矣。
现代文：公子到那里即使两符相合，验明无误，可是晋鄙仍不交给公子兵权反而再请示魏王，那么事情就危险了。
English: When the prince arrives there, even if the two characters match and the verification is correct, but the prince still does not give the prince the military power, but asks the Wei king again, then the situation is dangerous.

古文：臣客屠者硃亥可与俱，此人力士。
现代文：我的朋友屠夫朱亥可以跟您一起前往，这个人是个大力士。
English: My friend, the butcher Zhu Hai, can go with you. He is a strong man.

古文：晋鄙听，大善；不听，可使击之。 
现代文：如果晋鄙听从，那是再好不过了；如果他不听从，可以让朱亥击杀他。 
English: If Jinnah obeyed, that would be the best; if he disobeyed, Zhuhai could kill him.

古文：於是公子泣。
现代文：公子听了这些话后，便哭了。
English: After listening to these words, the young man burst into tears.

古文：侯生曰： 公子畏死邪？
现代文：侯先生见状便问道： 公子害怕死呀？
English: When Mr. Hou saw the letter, he asked, "Is your husband afraid to die?

古文：何泣也？ 
现代文：为什么哭呢？ 
English: Why are you crying?

古文：公子曰： 晋鄙嚄唶宿将，往恐不听，必当杀之，是以泣耳，岂畏死哉？ 
现代文：公子回答说： 晋鄙是魏国勇猛强悍、富有经验的老将，我去他那里恐怕他不会听从命令，必定要杀死他，因此我难过地哭了，哪里是怕死呢？ 
English: The prince replied, "Jin is a brave, strong and experienced veteran of Wei. If I go to him, I'm afraid he won't follow orders and I'll have to kill him. Therefore, I cried sadly. Where is the fear of death?

古文：於是公子请硃亥。
现代文：于是公子去请求朱亥一同前往。
English: So he asked Zhu Hai to come with him.

古文：硃亥笑曰： 臣乃市井鼓刀屠者，而公子亲数存之，所以不报谢者，以为小礼无所用。
现代文：朱亥笑着说： 我只是个市场上击刀杀生的屠夫，可是公子竟多次登门问候我，我之所以不回拜答谢您，是因为我认为小礼小节没什么用处。
English: Zhu Hai said with a smile: I am just a butcher who kills with a knife in the market, but my husband has come to the door to greet me many times. The reason why I don't say thank you back is because I don't think it's useful to be polite.

古文：今公子有急，此乃臣效命之秋也。 
现代文：如今公子有了急难，这就是我为公子杀身效命的时候了。 
English: Now my son is in a desperate situation, and it is time for me to sacrifice my life for him.

古文：遂与公子俱。
现代文：就与公子一起上路了。
English: and went on the road with him.

古文：公子过谢侯生。
现代文：公子去向侯先生辞行。
English: He went to tender his resignation to Mr. Hou.

古文：侯生曰： 臣宜从，老不能。
现代文：侯先生说： 我本应随您一起去，可是老了心有余力不足不能成行。
English: Mr. Hou said, "I was supposed to go with you, but I'm too old and I don't have enough energy to go.

古文：请数公子行日，以至晋鄙军之日，北乡自刭，以送公子。 公子遂行。
现代文：请允许我计算您行程的日期，您到达晋鄙军部的那一天，我面向北刎颈而死，来表达我为公子送行的一片忠心。 
English: Please allow me to calculate the date of your trip, the day you arrived at the Jinshan Military Department, I died facing the North Neck, to express my loyalty to see my son off.

古文：至鄴，矫魏王令代晋鄙。
现代文：公子于是上路出发。到了邺城，公子拿出兵符假传魏王命令代替晋鄙担任将领。
English: Therefore, he set out on the road. When he arrived at Shicheng, he took out a military emblem and falsely transmitted the order of the Wei king to replace Jinnan as the general.

古文：晋鄙合符，疑之，举手视公子曰： 今吾拥十万之众，屯於境上，国之重任，今单车来代之，何如哉？ 
现代文：晋鄙合了兵符，验证无误，但还是怀疑这件事，就举着手盯着公子说： 如今我统帅着十万之众的大军，驻扎在边境上，这是关系到国家命运的重任，今天你只身一人来代替我，这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: Jin Hao matched the soldier's badge and verified it was correct, but he still doubted the matter. He raised his hand and stared at the young man and said, "Nowadays, I am in command of a hundred thousand-strong army, stationed on the border. This is an important task that is related to the fate of the country. Today, you are the only one to take my place. What is going on?"

古文：欲无听。
现代文：正要拒绝接受命令。
English: He was about to refuse the order.

古文：硃亥袖四十斤铁椎，椎杀晋鄙，公子遂将晋鄙军。
现代文：这时朱亥取出藏在衣袖里的四十斤铁椎，一椎击死了晋鄙，公子于是统帅了晋鄙的军队。
English: At this time, Zhu Hai took out a forty-kilo iron vertebra hidden in his sleeve. One of the vertebrae killed Jinnah, and the boy became the commander of Jinnah's army.

古文：勒兵下令军中曰： 父子俱在军中，父归；兄弟俱在军中，兄归；独子无兄弟，归养。 
现代文：然后整顿部队，向军中下令说： 父子都在军队里的，父亲回家；兄弟同在军队里的，长兄回家；没有兄弟的独生子，回家去奉养双亲。 
English: Then he reorganized the troops and issued an order to the troops, saying, "If both father and son are in the army, the father should return home; if a brother is in the army, the eldest brother should return home; if an only son has no brothers, he should return home to support his parents."

古文：得选兵八万人，进兵击秦军。
现代文：经过整顿选拔，得到精兵八万人。开跋前线攻击秦军。
English: After rectification and selection, 80,000 elite soldiers were obtained. The front line was attacked by the Qin Army.

古文：秦军解去，遂救邯郸，存赵。
现代文：秦军解围撤离而去，于是邯郸得救，保住了赵国。
English: The Qin army withdrew after the siege was lifted, so Zou was saved and Zhao Province was preserved.

古文：赵王及平原君自迎公子於界，平原君负籣矢为公子先引。
现代文：赵王和平原君到郊界来迎接公子。平原君替公子背着盛满箭支的囊袋走在前面引路。
English: Zhao Wang and Pingyuan Jun went to the suburbs to meet the prince. Pingyuan Jun led the way for the prince with a bag full of arrows on his back.

古文：赵王再拜曰： 自古贤人未有及公子者也。 
现代文：赵王连着两次拜谢说： 自古以来的贤人没有一个赶上公子的。 
English: Zhao Wang bowed twice in succession and said: Since ancient times, none of the sages have caught up with the prince.

古文：当此之时，平原君不敢自比於人。
现代文：在这个时候，平原君不敢再拿自己跟别人相比了。
English: At this time, Mr. Plains no longer dared to compare himself with others.

古文：公子与侯生决，至军，侯生果北乡自刭。
现代文：公子与侯先生诀别之后，在到达邺城军营的那一天，侯先生果然面向北刎颈而死。
English: After the boy and Mr. Hou said goodbye, on the day of arriving at the Lucheng military camp, Mr. Hou indeed died facing the north neck.

古文：魏王怒公子之盗其兵符，矫杀晋鄙，公子亦自知也。
现代文：魏王恼怒公子盗出了他的兵符，假传君令击杀晋鄙，这一点公子也是明知的。
English: The Wei king was angry that the prince had stolen his military insignia, and ordered the fake prince to kill the prince, which the prince also knew.

古文：已卻秦存赵，使将将其军归魏，而公子独与客留赵。
现代文：所以在打退秦军拯救赵国之后，就让部将带着部队返回魏国去，而公子自己和他的门客就留在了赵国。
English: Therefore, after defeating the Qin army and saving Zhao, he asked the minister to return to Wei with the troops, while the prince himself and his concubines remained in Zhao.

古文：赵孝成王德公子之矫夺晋鄙兵而存赵，乃与平原君计，以五城封公子。
现代文：赵孝成王感激公子假托君命夺取晋鄙军权从而保住了赵国这一义举，就与平原君商量，把五座城邑封赏给公子。
English: King Zhao Xiaocheng was grateful to his son for taking the military power of Jinshan on the pretext of entrusting his life to him, thus saving the state of Zhao. He discussed the matter with Pingyuan and rewarded his son with five towns.

古文：公子闻之，意骄矜而有自功之色。
现代文：公子听到这个消息后，产生了骄傲自大的情绪，露出了居功自满的神色。
English: After hearing this news, the young man was filled with pride and arrogance, revealing an air of self-satisfaction.

古文：客有说公子曰： 物有不可忘，或有不可不忘。
现代文：门客中有个人劝说公子道： 事物有不可以忘记的，也有不可以不忘记的。
English: One of his clients persuaded him: "There are things you can't forget, and things you can't help forgetting.

古文：夫人有德於公子，公子不可忘也；公子有德於人，原公子忘之也。
现代文：别人对公子有恩德，公子不可以忘记；公子对别人有恩德，希望公子忘掉它。
English: If others are kind to him, he must not forget it; if he is kind to others, he hopes they will forget it.

古文：且矫魏王令，夺晋鄙兵以救赵，於赵则有功矣，於魏则未为忠臣也。
现代文：况且假托魏王命令，夺取晋鄙兵权去救赵国，这对赵国来说算是有功劳了，但对魏国来说那就不算忠臣了。
English: Moreover, if the king of Wei ordered to seize the military power of Jin to save Zhao, this would be a credit to Zhao, but it would not be a loyal subject for Wei.

古文：公子乃自骄而功之，窃为公子不取也。 
现代文：公子却因此自以为有功，觉得了不起，我私下认为公子实在不应该。 
English: As a result, my husband considers himself to have made a great contribution and thinks it's amazing. Privately, I don't think my husband should have done that.

古文：於是公子立自责，似若无所容者。
现代文：公子听后，立刻责备自己，好像无地自容一样。
English: After listening to this, the young man immediately reproached himself, as if he was ashamed of himself.

古文：赵王埽除自迎，执主人之礼，引公子就西阶。
现代文：赵国召开盛大欢迎宴会，赵王打扫了殿堂台阶，亲自到门口迎接贵客，并执行主人的礼节，领着公子走进殿堂的西边台阶。
English: Zhao State held a grand welcome banquet. Zhao Wang cleaned the steps of the hall, went to the door to greet the guests in person, and carried out the host's etiquette, leading the prince into the west steps of the hall.

古文：公子侧行辞让，从东阶上。
现代文：公子则侧着身子走一再推辞谦让，并主动从东边的台阶升堂。
English: His son, on the other hand, walked sideways and repeatedly refused to give in, and took the initiative to climb the stairs from the east.

古文：自言罪过，以负於魏，无功於赵。
现代文：宴会上，公子称说自己有罪，对不起魏国，于赵国也无功劳可言。
English: At the banquet, the prince said that he was guilty, sorry Wei, and had no merit to speak of in Zhao.

古文：赵王侍酒至暮，口不忍献五城，以公子退让也。
现代文：赵王陪着公子饮酒直到傍晚，始终不好意思开口谈封献五座城邑的事，因为公子总是在谦让自责。
English: Zhao Wang accompanied the prince to drink until the evening, and was always embarrassed to open his mouth to talk about the dedication of the five cities, because the prince was always humbly blaming himself.

古文：公子竟留赵。
现代文：公子终于留在了赵国。
English: Kimiko finally stayed in Zhao.

古文：赵王以鄗为公子汤沐邑，魏亦复以信陵奉公子。
现代文：赵王把鄗邑封赏给公子，这时魏王也把信陵邑又奉还给公子。
English: King Zhao awarded the fief of Jieyi to the prince, while the king of Wei also returned the fief of Xinling to the prince.

古文：公子留赵。
现代文：公子仍留在赵国。
English: Kimiko remains in Zhao.

古文：公子闻赵有处士毛公藏於博徒，薛公藏於卖浆家，公子欲见两人，两人自匿不肯见公子。
现代文：公子听说赵国有两个有才有德而没有从政的人，一个是毛公藏身于赌徒中，一个是薛公藏身在酒店里，公子很想见见这两个人，可是这两个人躲了起来不肯见公子。
English: He heard that there were two virtuous people in Zhao who were not involved in politics. One was Mao hiding among gamblers, and the other was Xue hiding in a hotel. He really wanted to meet these two people, but they hid and refused to see him.

古文：公子闻所在，乃间步往从此两人游，甚欢。
现代文：公子打听到他们的藏身地址，就悄悄地步行去同这两个交往，彼此都以相识为乐事，很是高兴。
English: When the young man found out their hiding place, he quietly walked to meet the two, and they were very happy to get to know each other.

古文：平原君闻之，谓其夫人曰： 始吾闻夫人弟公子天下无双，今吾闻之，乃妄从博徒卖浆者游，公子妄人耳。 
现代文：平原君知道了这个情况，就对他的夫人说： 当初我听说夫人的弟弟魏公子是个举世无双的大贤人，如今我听说他竟然胡来，跟那伙赌徒、酒店伙计交往，公子只是个无知妄为的人罢了。 
English: When Mr. Hirahara learned of this situation, he said to his wife: At first I heard that Mrs. Hirahara's brother, Wei Gongzi, was a peerless sage, but now I've heard that he's been fooling around with that group of gamblers and hotel clerks. He's just an ignorant person.

古文：夫人以告公子。
现代文：平原君的夫人把这些话告诉了公子。
English: Mr. Hirahara's wife told these words to him.

古文：公子乃谢夫人去，曰： 始吾闻平原君贤，故负魏王而救赵，以称平原君。
现代文：公子听后就向夫人告辞准备离开这里，说： 以前我听说平原君贤德，所以背弃魏王而救赵国，满足了平原君的要求。
English: After listening to this, the prince said goodbye to his wife and prepared to leave, saying, "I had heard about Plainsman's virtue before, so I fulfilled Plainsman's request by turning my back on the Wei king and saving Zhao.

古文：平原君之游，徒豪举耳，不求士也。
现代文：现在才知道平原君与人交往，只是显示富贵的豪放举动罢了，他不是求取贤士人才啊。
English: It is only now that I know that when Mr. Plains interacts with people, he is just displaying the extravagant behavior of a rich man. He is not looking for a wise man.

古文：无忌自在大梁时，常闻此两人贤，至赵，恐不得见。
现代文：我从在大梁时，就常常听说这两个人贤能有才，到了赵国，我惟恐不能见到他们。
English: Since I was in Dalian, I had often heard that these two men were capable and talented. When I arrived in Zhao, I was afraid that I would not be able to see them.

古文：以无忌从之游，尚恐其不我欲也，今平原君乃以为羞，其不足从游。 
现代文：拿我这个人跟他们交往，还怕他们不要我呢，现在平原君竟然把跟他们交往看作是羞辱，平原君这个人不值得结交。 
English: Take me as a person, I socialize with them, but I'm afraid they don't want me. Now, Mr. Plains actually sees socializing with them as a humiliation. Mr. Plains is not worthy of friendship.

古文：乃装为去。
现代文：于是就整理行装准备离去。
English: So they packed up and prepared to leave.

古文：夫人具以语平原君。平原君乃免冠谢，固留公子。
现代文：夫人把公子的话全都告诉了平原君，平原君听了自感惭愧便去向公子脱帽谢罪，坚决地把公子挽留下来。
English: His wife told Mr. Plains all of his words, and Mr. Plains felt ashamed and went to apologize to him, resolutely keeping him.

古文：平原君门下闻之，半去平原君归公子，天下士复往归公子，公子倾平原君客。
现代文：平原君门下的宾客们听到这件事，有一半人离开了平原君归附于公子，天下的士人也都去投靠公子，归附在他的门下。
English: Upon hearing this, half of the guests at the door of the Plain Prince left the Plain Prince to join him, and all the nobles around the world also went to join him.

古文：公子留赵十年不归。
现代文：公子的为人使平原君的宾客仰慕而尽都到公子的门下来。
English: Kimiko's manners made the guests of Mr. Hirahara admire him, and they all came to his door.

古文：秦闻公子在赵，日夜出兵东伐魏。
现代文：公子留在赵国十年不回魏国。秦国听说公子留在赵国，就日夜不停地发兵向东进攻魏国。
English: Prince stayed in Zhao for ten years and did not return to Wei. When Qin heard that Prince stayed in Zhao, he sent troops to the east to attack Wei day and night.

古文：魏王患之，使使往请公子。
现代文：魏王为此事焦虑万分，就派使臣去请公子回国。
English: King Wei was very anxious about this and sent an envoy to invite the prince to return to China.

古文：公子恐其怒之，乃诫门下： 有敢为魏王使通者，死。 
现代文：公子仍担心魏王恼怒自己，就告诫门下宾客说： 有敢替魏王使臣通报传达的，处死。 
English: Still fearing that the Wei king would be angry with him, the prince warned his guests: Anyone who dared to inform and convey the Wei king's envoys would be put to death.

古文：宾客皆背魏之赵，莫敢劝公子归。
现代文：由于宾客们都是背弃魏国来到赵国的，所以没谁敢劝公子回魏国。
English: Since the guests had all abandoned Wei and come to Zhao, no one dared to persuade the prince to return to Wei.

古文：毛公、薛公两人往见公子曰： 公子所以重於赵，名闻诸侯者，徒以有魏也。
现代文：这时，毛公和薛公两人去见公子说： 公子所以在赵国受到尊重，名扬诸侯，只是因为有魏国的存在啊。
English: At this time, Mao Gong and Xue Gong both went to see the prince and said: The reason why the prince is respected in Zhao Province and is famous among princes is only because of the existence of Wei Province.

古文：今秦攻魏，魏急而公子不恤，使秦破大梁而夷先王之宗庙，公子当何面目立天下乎？ 
现代文：现在秦国进攻魏国，魏国危急而公子毫不顾念，假使秦国攻破大梁而把您先祖的宗庙夷平，公子还有什么脸面活在世上呢？ 
English: Now Qin is attacking Wei, and Wei is in a critical situation, but he is not concerned. If Qin breaks through and razes your ancestors' ancestral temple, what kind of face will he have in the world?

古文：语未及卒，公子立变色，告车趣驾归救魏。
现代文：话还没说完，公子脸色立即变了，嘱咐车夫赶快套车回去救魏国。
English: Before he had finished speaking, the young man's face immediately changed, and he ordered the driver to quickly return to the carriage to save Wei.

古文：魏王见公子，相与泣，而以上将军印授公子，公子遂将。
现代文：魏王见到公子，两人不禁相对落泪，魏王把上将军大印授给公子，公子便正式担任了上将军这个统帅军队的最高职务。
English: When Wei Wang saw his son, the two of them could not help but shed tears. Wei Wang conferred the Grand Seal of the General Staff on his son, and he officially assumed the highest position of the General Staff, the commander of the army.

古文：魏安釐王三十年，公子使使遍告诸侯。
现代文：魏安厘王三十年，公子派使臣把自己担任上将军职务一事通报给各个诸侯国。
English: In the thirtieth year of the reign of King Wei Anli, the prince sent envoys to inform the various principalities that he had assumed the post of general.

古文：诸侯闻公子将，各遣将将兵救魏。
现代文：诸侯们得知公子担任了上将军，都各自调兵遣将救援魏国。
English: When the lords learned that the prince had been made a general, they each sent their own troops to rescue Wei.

古文：公子率五国之兵破秦军於河外，走蒙骜。
现代文：公子率领五个诸侯国的军队在黄河以南地区把秦军打得大败，使秦将蒙骜败逃。
English: He led the armies of five principalities to defeat the Qin army in the area south of the Yellow River, causing the Qin general to flee in defeat.

古文：遂乘胜逐秦军至函谷关，抑秦兵，秦兵不敢出。
现代文：进而乘胜追击直到函谷关，把秦军压在函谷关内，使他们不敢再出关。
English: He then pursued the Qin army to the Hakodate pass, and kept the Qin army in the Hakodate pass, so that they would not dare to leave the pass.

古文：当是时，公子威振天下，诸侯之客进兵法，公子皆名之，故世俗称魏公子兵法。
现代文：当时，公子的声威震动天下，各诸侯国来的宾客都进献兵法，公子把它们合在一起签上自己的名字，所以世上俗称《魏公子兵法》。
English: At that time, the prestige of Gongzi shook the world. Guests from all over the world came to the military ceremony. Gongzi put them together and signed his name, so the world is commonly known as the "Wei Gongzi Military Ceremony."

古文：秦王患之，乃行金万斤於魏，求晋鄙客，令毁公子於魏王曰： 公子亡在外十年矣，今为魏将，诸侯将皆属，诸侯徒闻魏公子，不闻魏王。
现代文：秦王担忧公子将进一步威胁秦国，就使用了万斤黄金到魏行贿，寻找晋鄙原来的那些门客，让他们在魏王面前进谗言说： 公子流亡在外十年了，现在担任魏国大将，诸侯国的将领都归他指挥，诸侯们只知道魏国有个魏公子，不知道还有个魏王。
English: King Qin was worried that Gongzi would further threaten Qin, so he used ten thousand jin of gold to pay bribes to Wei to find Jin's former clients and have them say in front of King Wei: Gongzi has been in exile for ten years, now he is the general of Wei, the generals of the principalities are under his command, the principalities only know that there is a Wei Gongzi in Wei, but they don't know that there is a Wei king.

古文：公子亦欲因此时定南面而王，诸侯畏公子之威，方欲共立之。 
现代文：公子也要乘这个时机决定称王。诸侯们害怕公子的权势声威，正打算共同出面拥立他为王呢。 
English: The princes are afraid of his power and prestige, and are planning to come together to make him king.

古文：秦数使反间，伪贺公子得立为魏王未也。
现代文：秦国又多次实行反间，利用在秦国的魏国间谍，假装不知情地请他们向公子祝贺问是否已经立为魏王了。
English: Qin State repeatedly carried out countermeasures, using Wei spies in Qin State, pretending to unknowingly invite them to congratulate the prince and ask whether he had been appointed as the Wei king.

古文：魏王日闻其毁，不能不信，後果使人代公子将。
现代文：魏王天天听到这些毁谤公子的话，不能不信以为真，后来果然派人代替公子担任上将军。
English: The king of Wei heard these slanderous words about him every day and couldn't help but believe them to be true. Later, he sent someone to replace him as commander-in-chief.

古文：公子自知再以毁废，乃谢病不朝，与宾客为长夜饮，饮醇酒，多近妇女。日夜为乐饮者四岁，竟病酒而卒。其岁，魏安釐王亦薨。
现代文：公子自己明知这是又一次因毁谤而被废黜，于是就推托有病不上朝了，他在家里与宾客们通宵达旦地宴饮，痛饮烈性酒，常跟女人厮混，这样日日夜夜寻欢作乐度过了四年，终于因饮酒无度患病死亡，这一年，魏安厘王也去世了。
English: The prince himself knew that this was another case of being dethroned for slander, so he pretended that he was ill and would not go to the court. At home, he feasted all night with his guests, drank hard liquor, and often mingled with women. He spent four years day and night looking for fun, and finally died of illness due to excessive drinking. This year, King Wei Anli also died.

古文：秦闻公子死，使蒙骜攻魏，拔二十城，初置东郡。
现代文：秦王得到公子已死的消息，就派蒙骜进攻魏国，攻占了二十座城邑，开始设立东郡。
English: When King Qin received the news that his son had died, he sent Mengqi to attack Wei, captured twenty towns, and began to establish Dong County.

古文：其後秦稍蚕食魏，十八岁而虏魏王，屠大梁。
现代文：从此以后，秦国逐渐地像蚕食桑叶一样侵占魏国领土，过了十八年便俘虏了魏王假，屠杀大梁军民，毁掉了这座都城。
English: From then on, Qin gradually encroached on Wei's territory like eating mulberry leaves. Eighteen years later, it captured Wei Wangfu, massacred Dalian's soldiers and civilians, and destroyed the capital city.

古文：高祖始微少时，数闻公子贤。
现代文：汉高祖当初地位低贱时，就多次听别人说魏公子贤德有才。
English: When Han Gaozu's status was low at the beginning, he repeatedly heard others say that Wei Gongzi was virtuous and talented.

古文：及即天子位，每过大梁，常祠公子。
现代文：等到他即位做了皇帝后，每次经过大梁，常常去祭祀公子。
English: After he ascended the throne and became the emperor, every time he passed the girders, he often went to sacrifice his son.

古文：高祖十二年，从击黥布还，为公子置守冢五家，世世岁以四时奉祠公子。
现代文：汉高祖十二年，他从击败叛将黥布的前线归来，经过大梁时为公子安置了五户人家，专门看守他的坟墓，让他们世世代代每年按四季祭祀公子。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Gaozu's reign, when he returned from the front where he had defeated the traitor Zifu, he placed five families of people to guard his grave, so that they would offer sacrifices to him according to the four seasons every year for generations.

古文：太史公曰：吾过大梁之墟，求问其所谓夷门。
现代文：太史公说：我经过大梁废墟时，曾寻访那个所谓的夷门。
English: Taishikong said: When I passed the ruins of the girders, I once visited the so-called Yimen.

古文：夷门者，城之东门也。
现代文：原来夷门就是大梁城的东门。
English: Originally, Yimen was the east gate of Dalian City.

古文：天下诸公子亦有喜士者矣，然信陵君之接岩穴隐者，不耻下交，有以也。
现代文：天下诸多公子中也确有好客喜士的，但只有信陵君能够交结那些隐没在社会各个角落的人物，他不以交结下层贱民为耻辱，是很有道理的。
English: There are indeed hospitable people among many noblemen in the world, but only Noburyo-kun is able to make friends with those who have disappeared in all corners of society. It is very reasonable that he does not consider it a disgrace to make friends with low-class untouchables.

古文：名冠诸侯，不虚耳。
现代文：他的名声远远超过诸侯，的确不是虚传。
English: His reputation far exceeds that of the princes, and it is certainly not a false rumour.

古文：高祖每过之而令民奉祠不绝也。
现代文：因此，高祖每次经过大梁便命令百姓祭祀他不能断绝。
English: Therefore, every time Gao Zu passed the beam, he ordered the people to sacrifice to him.

