古文：张瀚，字子文，仁和人。
现代文：张瀚，字子文，仁和人。
English: Zhang Han, Zizi Wen, Ren He Ren.

古文：嘉靖十四年进士。授南京工部主事。
现代文：嘉靖十四年的进士，授职为南京工部主事。
English: After 14 years of Jiajing, he was promoted to be the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：历庐州知府，改大名。
现代文：历任庐州知府，后改任大名知府。
English: Successively served as governor of Bozhou, and was later appointed as daimyo governor.

古文：俺答围京师，诏遣兵部郎中征畿辅民兵入卫。
现代文：俺答围困京城，诏令派遣兵部郎中征召京郊的军民进行防卫。
English: In response to the siege of Kyoto, I ordered the dispatch of a military officer to call up soldiers and civilians from the suburbs of Kyoto to defend the city.

古文：瀚立阅户籍，三十丁简一人，而以二十九人供其饷，得八百人。
现代文：张瀚马上查阅户口，三十人中抽取一人，由二十九人供给他的粮饷，征到八百人。
English: Zhang Han immediately checked the household registration. He selected one person from the thirty people, and twenty-nine people provided him with grain baskets. Eight hundred people were selected.

古文：驰至真定，请使者阅兵，使者称其才。
现代文：骑马赶到真定，请使者检阅士兵，使者称赞他的才干。
English: He rode to Zhending and asked the envoy to inspect the soldiers. The envoy praised his ability.

古文：累迁陕西左布政使，擢右副都御史，巡抚其地。甫半岁，入为大理卿。
现代文：他升任陕西左布政使，担任右副都御史，巡抚这一地区才半年，又入京担任大理卿。
English: He rose to the post of Shaanxi Zuo Bu political envoy, served as the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of this region for only half a year, and went to Beijing to serve as the mayor of Dali.

古文：进刑部右侍郎，俄改兵部，总督漕运。
现代文：升任刑部右侍郎，不久改任兵部职，总管漕运。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and soon he was reassigned to the position of the Military Investigation Department, and became the head of rowing.

古文：隆庆元年，改督两广军务，时两广各设巡抚官，事不关督府。
现代文：隆庆元年他改为负责两广的军务。当时两广各设有巡抚，事务不与总督府相通。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was put in charge of the military affairs of the two provinces. At that time, each of the two provinces had an inspector general, and the affairs were not connected to the governor's office.

古文：瀚请如三边例，乃悉听节制。
现代文：张瀚请求仿效边关的事例，于是全部听从总督管辖。
English: Zhang Han requested to follow the example of the frontier, so he fully obeyed the governor's jurisdiction.

古文：大盗曾一本寇掠广州，诏切责瀚，停总兵官俞大猷、郭成俸。
现代文：大强盗曾一本掠夺了广州地区，诏令责备张瀚，停发总兵俞大猷、郭成的俸禄。
English: The great robber once plundered the Guangzhou area, and the imperial edict reprimanded Zhang Han, and suspended the salary of the commander-in-chief, Guo Cheng.

古文：已，一本浮海犯福建，官军迎击，大破之，赉银币。
现代文：此后，曾一本从海路进犯福建，官军迎头痛击，大败敌寇，朝廷赏赐他银币。
English: After that, he once invaded Fujian by sea. The government army met him head-on, defeated the enemy, and the court rewarded him with silver coins.

古文：已，复犯广东，陷碣石卫，叛将周云翔等杀雷琼参将耿宗元，与贼合。
现代文：此后，敌寇又进犯广东，攻陷碣石卫，叛将周云翔等人杀害了雷琼的参将耿宗元，与敌寇联合。
English: After that, the enemy raiders invaded Guangdong again, captured Jinshiwei, and the traitor Zhou Yunxiang and others killed Lei Qiong's general, Geng Zongyuan, and united with the enemy raiders.

古文：廷议镌瀚一秩调用。
现代文：朝廷商议降张瀚一级官职调往别处。
English: The imperial court deliberated to demote Zhang Han to a first-class official post and transfer him to another place.

古文：已而成大破贼，获云翔。
现代文：不久郭成大败敌寇，俘获周云翔。
English: Guo Chenggong soon defeated the enemy and captured Zhou Yunxiang.

古文：诏还瀚秩，即家俟召。再抚陕西。
现代文：诏令恢复了张瀚的官职，让他在家待命，再度巡抚陕西。
English: The imperial edict restored Zhang Han's official position, let him stand by at home, and became the governor of Shaanxi again.

古文：迁南京右都御史，就改工部尚书。
现代文：调任南京右都御史，改任工部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the post of Nanjing Uto Imperial Historian, and was reassigned to the post of the Ministry of Engineering.

古文：万历元年，吏部尚书杨博罢，召瀚代之。
现代文：万历元年，吏部尚书杨博罢职，召见张瀚代替。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Yangbo, resigned and was replaced by Zhang Han.

古文：秩满，加太子少保。
现代文：任期满，他被加封为太子少保。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：时廷推吏部尚书，首左都御史葛守礼，次工部尚书朱衡，次瀚。
现代文：当时朝廷推举吏部尚书，首先是左都御史葛守礼，其次是工部尚书朱衡，再次就是张瀚。
English: At that time, the imperial court selected the official of the Ministry of Personnel, first of all, Zuo Shi Ge Shouli, followed by Zhu Heng, the official of the Ministry of Industry, and then Zhang Han.

古文：居正恶守礼戆，厌衡骄，故特拔瀚。
现代文：张居正厌恶葛守礼憨厚，朱衡骄狂，所以特意提拔张瀚。
English: Zhang Juzheng disliked Ge Shouli's high-handedness and Zhu Heng's arrogance, so he specially promoted Zhang Han.

古文：瀚资望浅，忽见擢，举朝益趋事居正，而瀚进退大臣率奉居正指。
现代文：张瀚的声望和资历浅薄，忽然被提拔，全朝廷更加趋附张居正，但张瀚晋升或降责大臣都遵奉张居正的意思。
English: Zhang Han's reputation and qualifications were shallow, and he was suddenly promoted. The entire imperial court was more inclined to follow Zhang Jizheng, but Zhang Han's promotion or demotion to minister followed Zhang Jizheng's will.

古文：即出己意，舆论多不协。
现代文：即使出自自己的意见，舆论大都不协调。
English: Even from their own opinions, public opinion is mostly incongruous.

古文：以是为御史郑准、王希元所劾。
现代文：因此他被御史郑隼、王希元弹劾。
English: As a result, he was impeached by the Emperor Zheng He and Wang Xiyuan.

古文：居正顾之厚，不纳也。
现代文：张居正厚待他，不接纳奏章。
English: Zhang Jizheng treated him generously and did not accept the score.

古文：御史刘台劾居正，因论瀚抚陕狼籍，又唯诺居正状。
现代文：御史刘台弹劾张居正，趁势抨击张瀚巡抚陕西的混乱和对张居正唯唯诺诺的罪状。
English: Historian Liu Tai impeached Zhang Jizheng and took advantage of the situation to criticize Zhang Hanru, the governor of Shaanxi, for the chaos and the crime of Zhang Jizheng's acquiescence.

古文：比居正遭丧，谋夺情，瀚心非之。
现代文：等到张居正遇到丧事，打算夺情出仕，张瀚心中认为不可以。
English: When Zhang Ju met with a tragic event, he planned to take advantage of the situation, but Zhang Han didn't think he could.

古文：中旨令瀚谕留居正，居正又自为牍，风瀚属吏，以覆旨请。
现代文：宫中指令张瀚谕告挽留张居正，张居正又自己做文书，暗示张瀚交给吏部，神宗复旨请求留用。
English: The palace ordered Zhang Han to appeal to Zhang Juzheng to stay, and Zhang Juzheng himself wrote a letter, suggesting that Zhang Han be handed over to the personnel department, and the Shenzong complex request to be retained.

古文：瀚佯不喻，谓 政府奔丧，宜予殊典，礼部事也，何关吏部。 
现代文：张瀚假装不明白，称 阁员奔丧，应该授予特殊典制，是礼部的事情，与吏部有什么关系 。
English: Zhang Han pretended not to understand, saying that the death of a cabinet member should be awarded a special award system, which is a matter for the Ministry of Ceremonies, and has nothing to do with the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：居正复令客说之，不为动，乃传旨责瀚久不奉诏，无人臣礼。
现代文：张居正又派说客游说他，他没有动摇，于是传来旨令责备张瀚很久不遵从诏令，没有大臣的礼节。
English: Zhang Juzheng also sent a lobbyist to lobby him, but he did not waver, so an order came to reprimand Zhang Han for not complying with the edict for a long time, and for not having the etiquette of a minister.

古文：廷臣惴恐，交章留居正，瀚独不与，抚膺太息曰： 三纲沦矣！ 
现代文：朝廷大臣们惶恐，接连上奏挽留张居正，张瀚唯独没有上奏，抚胸叹息道： 三纲沦落了！ 
English: The ministers of the imperial court were panicked, and they successively delayed Zhang Juzheng's ascension to the throne. Zhang Han, however, did not ascend to the throne. He stroked his chest and sighed, "The three estates have fallen!

古文：居正怒，嗾给事中王道成、御史谢思启摭他事劾之，勒致仕归。
现代文：张居正恼怒，唆使给事中王道成、御史谢思启借其他的事情弹劾他，勒令他退休回家。
English: Zhang Juzheng was furious and instigated Wang Daocheng and Gu Shi Xieqi to impeach him for other matters and order him to retire and return home.

古文：帝遂怒，落职闲住。
现代文：张居正死了，神宗很怀念张瀚。
English: Zhang Jiusheng is dead. Shenzong misses Zhang Han very much.

古文：已，念其劳，命复官致仕。
现代文：诏令有司供给他每月的口粮，他八十岁时，神宗特意予以问候。
English: According to the imperial edict, a steward was to provide him with monthly rations, and when he was eighty years old, Shenzong gave him a special greeting.

古文：梁梦龙，字乾吉，真定人。
现代文：去世后，被赠封太子少保，谥号恭懿。梁梦龙，字乾吉，真定人。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Prince Junior Protector, posthumous name of Gong Liang, Liang Menglong, the name Qianji, and the name Zhending.

古文：嘉靖三十二年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年的进士，改任庶吉士。
English: He was promoted to Jinshi in the 32nd year of the Jiajing era, and was later appointed to Zongshi.

古文：授兵科给事中，首劾吏部尚书李默。
现代文：授职为兵科给事中，首次弹劾吏部尚书李默。
English: For the first time, Li Mo was impeached by the cadre department of the Military Science Research Institute.

古文：帝方顾默厚，不问。
现代文：世宗正好厚待李默，不做追究。
English: The Sejong treated Lim generously and did not pursue him.

古文：出核陕西军储。劾故延绥巡抚王轮、督粮郎中陈灿等，废斥有差。
现代文：他到陕西核查军事储备，弹劾以前的延绥巡抚王轮、督粮郎中陈灿等人，朝廷对诸人做罢免、责罚的不同处分。
English: He went to Shaanxi to check the military reserves, impeached the former Yancheng governor Wang Lun, the former governor Chen Can and others, and the imperial court dismissed and punished various people.

古文：历吏科都给事中。
现代文：历任吏科都给事中。
English: Successive officials are in the middle of things.

古文：帝怒礼部尚书吴山，梦龙恶独劾山得罪清议，乃并吏部尚书吴鹏劾罢之。
现代文：世宗恼怒礼部尚书吴山，梁梦龙厌恶单独弹劾吴山背上清议的罪名，于是与吏部尚书吴鹏一并弹劾罢免。
English: Shizong was irritated by the impeachment of Wu Shan, the ceremonial secretary, and Liang Menglong was disgusted by the impeachment of Wu Shan alone for the crime he had committed, so he impeached and dismissed him together with Wu Peng, the official secretary.

古文：尝上疏，言： 相臣贤否，关治道污隆。
现代文：曾经上奏说： 相臣是否贤明，关系到治政的好坏。
English: He once said, "Whether a vassal is wise or not is related to the quality of governance."

古文：请毋拘资格，敕在廷公举名德宿望之臣，以光圣治。 
现代文：请不要拘泥于资格，下令在朝廷公推富于名德宿望的大臣，以便光大圣上的治绩。 
English: Please do not stick to qualifications, and order the promotion of ministers who are rich in reputation and reputation in the imperial court, so that they can perform their duties brilliantly.

古文：帝疑诸臣私有所推引，责令陈状。
现代文：世宗怀疑众大臣私下有所举荐，责令陈述情况。
English: Sejong suspected that the ministers had made a recommendation in private and ordered them to explain the situation.

古文：梦龙惶恐谢罪，乃夺俸。擢顺天府丞。
现代文：梁梦龙惶恐地认错，于是被剥夺俸禄，升任顺天丞。
English: Liang Menglong admitted his mistake with trepidation, so he was deprived of his salary and promoted to Shuntian Rong.

古文：坐京察拾遗，出为河南副使。
现代文：因为京官考核中被人纠弹，出京担任河南副使。
English: Because he was reprimanded by Beijing officials, he went to Beijing to serve as deputy envoy of Henan Province.

古文：河决沛县，尚书朱衡议开徐、邳新河，梦龙董其役。
现代文：黄河在沛县决堤，尚书朱衡提议在徐、邳地区开挖新河，梁梦龙负责此工程。
English: The Yellow River broke through the dike in Pei County. Shangshu Zhuheng proposed to excavate a new river in the Xu and Handan areas. Liang Menglong was responsible for this project.

古文：三迁河南右布政使。
现代文：他三次调任后升为河南右布政使。
English: After being transferred three times, he was promoted to Henan Right Branch Political Envoy.

古文：隆庆四年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
现代文：隆庆四年他升任右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of the Right Hand of the Capital, the Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：是秋，河决宿迁，覆漕粮八百艘。
现代文：当年秋天，黄河在宿迁决堤，八百艘运漕粮的船舶翻沉。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Suqian, and eight hundred ships carrying grain capsized.

古文：朝议通海运，以属梦龙。
现代文：朝廷商议开通海运，以此交梁梦龙办理。
English: The imperial court deliberated on the opening of maritime transport, and this was handed over to Liang Menglong to handle.

古文：梦龙言： 海道南自淮安至胶州，北自天津至海仓，各有商艇往来其间。
现代文：梁梦龙说： 海上航线南部从淮安到胶州，北部从天津到海仓，各有商船往来。
English: Liang Menglong said: The southern sea route is from Huai'an to Jiaozhou, and the northern sea route is from Tianjin to Haicang. Both have merchant ship traffic.

古文：自胶州至海仓，岛人及商贾亦时出入。
现代文：从胶州到海仓，岛屿上的居民和商贾经常出没。
English: From Jiaozhou to Haicang, residents and merchants on the islands often come and go.

古文：臣等因遣人自淮安转粟二千石，自胶州转麦千五百石，入海达天津，以试海道，无不利者。
现代文：我们派人从淮安转运了二千石粟，从胶州转运了一千五百石麦，由海道到天津，试开海上航线，没有不利的。
English: We sent people from Huai'an to transport 2,000 kilos of millet and from Jiaozhou to transport 1,500 kilos of barley. We tried to open a sea route from the sea to Tianjin. There was nothing unfavorable.

古文：由淮安至天津，大要两旬可达。
现代文：从淮安到天津，大约需走三十天。
English: It takes about 30 days to travel from Huai'an to Tianjin.

古文：岁五月以前，风势柔顺，扬帆尤便。
现代文：每年五月以前，风势柔和，扬帆出航尤其便利。
English: Before May each year, the wind is gentle, and it is especially convenient to set sail.

古文：况舟由近洋，洋中岛屿联络，遇风可依。
现代文：况且航行近海，海中的岛屿相联络，遇上风暴可以倚靠。
English: Moreover, sailing offshore, the islands in the sea are connected, and you can rely on them in the event of a storm.

古文：苟船非朽敝，按占候以行，自可无虞。
现代文：如果船不是腐朽破败，预测气候时日出航，自然可以无忧虑。
English: If the ship is not rotten and dilapidated, and sails when the weather is forecast, there is naturally nothing to worry about.

古文：较元人殷明略故道，安便尤甚。
现代文：比较元代殷明略的旧航线，更加安全便利。
English: Compared with the old routes in the Yuan Dynasty, it is safer and more convenient.

古文：丘浚所称 傍海通运 ，即此是也。
现代文：丘浚所说的 傍海通运 ，就是如此。
English: That's what I mean by "coastal shipping."

古文：请以河为正运，海为备运。
现代文：请将河运作为正式运输线，海运为辅助运输线。
English: Please take river transportation as the official transportation line, and sea transportation as the auxiliary transportation line.

古文：万一河未易通，则海运可济，而河亦得悉心疏浚，以图经久。
现代文：万一河运不畅通，海运就可以接济，而且河道也可以全心去疏浚，以图长久。
English: In the event that river transport is not smooth, maritime transport can help, and the river can also be dredged wholeheartedly to make it last longer.

古文：又海防綦重，沿海卫所玩悽岁久，不加缮饬，识者有未然之忧。
现代文：又海防重要，沿海的卫所多年怠废，没有修缮整治，有见识的人深为忧虑。
English: Coastal defense is also important. Coastal health centers have been neglected for many years and have not been repaired. People with insight are deeply worried.

古文：今行海运兼治河防，非徒足裨国计，兼于军事有补。 
现代文：现在进行海运兼理河道，不是对国家没好处，且对军事防务也有所补助。 
English: It is not without benefit to the country to carry out maritime transport and canalization now, and it is also a subsidy to military defense.

古文：章下户部，部议海运久废，猝难尽复，请令漕司量拨粮十二万石，自淮入海以达天津。工部给银，为海艘经费。报可。已而海运卒不行，事具《王宗沐传》。明年冬，迁右副都御史，移抚河南。
现代文：第二年冬天，他调任右副都御史，辖治河南。
English: In the winter of the following year, he was transferred to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital to govern Henan Province.

古文：神宗初，张居正当国。
现代文：神宗初年，张居正掌权。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu sect, Zhang Ju was in power.

古文：梦龙其门下士，特爱之，召为户部右侍郎。
现代文：梁梦龙是他的门生，特别受宠爱，召见并委以户部右侍郎。
English: Liang Menglong was his protégé, especially beloved, summoned and appointed as the right-hand man of the household.

古文：寻改兵部，出赉辽东有功将士。
现代文：不久改任兵部，前往辽东赏赐有功的将士。
English: He was soon transferred to the military department and went to Liaodong to reward meritorious soldiers.

古文：五年，以兵部左侍郎进右都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：万历五年由兵部左侍郎升为右都御史，总管蓟、辽、保定的军务。
English: In the fifth year of Wanli, he was promoted from the left attendant of the military department to the right imperial historian, and was in charge of the military affairs of Min, Liao, and Baoding.

古文：李成梁大破土蛮于长定堡，帝为告庙宣捷，大行赏赉，官梦龙一子。
现代文：李成梁在长定堡大败土蛮，神宗向宗庙报捷，大加赏赐，将梁梦龙的一个儿子录入官籍。
English: Li Chengliang defeated the barbarians in Changding Fort. Shenzong reported the victory to the ancestral temple and gave a large reward. One of Liang Menglong's sons was registered with the government.

古文：已，给事中光懋言： 此乃保塞内属之部，游击陶承喾假犒赉掩袭之，请坐以杀降罪。 
现代文：此后，给事中光懋称： 这是保定塞内的部落，游击陶承喾假借犒赏袭击了他们，请按 杀害降人 的罪名处理他。 
English: After that, he said: "This is a tribe from Baoding and Senai. Guerrillas attacked them under the guise of a reward. Please charge him with the crime of killing a subordinate."

古文：兵部尚书方逢时曲为解，梦龙等亦辞免恩荫。
现代文：兵部尚书方逢时加以调和，梁梦龙等人也推辞了荫庇特权。
English: Shang Shufang of the Ministry of Military Affairs reconciled it at any time, and Liang Menglong and others also rejected the privilege of shade.

古文：及土蛮三万骑入东昌堡，成梁击败之。
现代文：等到土蛮的三万骑兵攻入东昌堡，李成梁击败了他们。
English: When the 30,000 cavalrymen of the barbarians entered Dongchang Fortress, Li Chengliang defeated them.

古文：宁前复警，梦能亲率劲卒三千出山海关为成梁声援，分遣两参将遮击，复移继光驻一片石邀之，敌引去。
现代文：宁前又出现警报，梁梦龙亲自率领三千名壮士出了山海关声援李成梁，分别派遣两员参将出击，又将戚继光调到一片石地区，敌人退走了。
English: There was another alarm in front of Ning. Liang Menglong personally led three thousand strong men out of Shanhaiguan to support Li Chengliang. He sent two staff officers to attack separately, and transferred Qi Jiguang to a rocky area. The enemy retreated.

古文：前后奏永奠堡、丁字泊、马兰峪、养善木、红土城、宽奠、广宁右屯、锦、义、大宁堡诸捷，累赐敕奖励，就加兵部尚书。
现代文：他先后报告永奠堡、丁字泊、马兰峪、养善木、红土城、宽奠、广宁石屯、锦、义、大宁堡的胜利，多次受嘉奖，被加封为兵部尚书。
English: He successively reported the victories of Yongding Fort, Dingzha Po, Malanluo, Yao Zhengmu, Hongducheng, Kuan Dian, Guangning Shitun, Jin, Yi, and Danying Fort, received many awards, and was awarded the title of Heibu Shangshu.

古文：以修筑黄花镇、古北口边墙，加太子少保，再荫子至锦衣世千户。
现代文：因为修筑黄花镇、古北口的边防墙，加封为太子少保，再次荫庇一个儿子任锦衣世袭千户。
English: Because of the construction of the border wall of Huanghua Town and Gubeikou, he was awarded the title of minor prince, and once again overshadowed a son, Ren Jin Yi, who inherited thousands of households.

古文：召入掌部务，疏陈军政四事。
现代文：召回朝廷负责兵部事务，上奏陈述四件军政事务。
English: He was recalled to the imperial court to be in charge of military affairs, and four military and political affairs were reported to the emperor.

古文：寻录防边功，加太子太保。
现代文：不久因为边防战功，加封为太子太保。
English: Soon, because of his border defense achievements, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：十年六月，居正殁，吏部尚书王国光劾罢，梦龙代其位。
现代文：万历十年六月，张居正去世，吏部尚书王国先被弹劾罢职，梁梦龙代替了他。
English: In June of the 10th year of Wanli, Zhang Juzheng passed away. Shang Shuxu Wang Guo was first impeached and removed from office, and Liang Menglong replaced him.

古文：逾月，御史江东之劾梦龙浼徐爵贿保得吏部，以孙女聘保弟为子妇，御史邓练、赵楷复劾之，遂令致仕。
现代文：过了一个月，御史江东之弹劾梁梦龙央求徐爵贿赂冯保谋得吏部职，将孙女嫁给冯保的弟弟，御史邓练、赵楷又弹劾他，于是神宗命令他退休。
English: A month later, the governor of Jiangdong impeached Liang Menglong for soliciting Xu Jie to bribe Feng Baomou to obtain the position of an official, and for marrying his granddaughter to Feng Baomou's younger brother. The governor of Jiangdong, Deng Ren, and Zhao Kai also impeached him, and Shenzong ordered him to retire.

古文：家居十九年卒。天启中，赵南星讼其边功，赠少保。
现代文：在家居住十九年后去世，天启年间，赵南星申述他的边防功绩，赠封少保。
English: After nineteen years of living at home, he passed away. In the year of the Apocalypse, Zhao Nansing recounted his border defense exploits and was awarded the title of Junior Protector.

古文：崇祯末，追谥贞敏。
现代文：崇祯末年，追赠谥号贞敏。
English: In the last years of his life, he posthumously received the posthumous name Zhenmin.

