古文：泰山老父巫炎刘凭栾巴左慈大茅君
现代文：泰山老父巫炎刘凭栾巴左慈大茅君
English: The old father of Mount Tai, the sorcerer Liu Bei, the mute Ba Zuo Ci, and the great Maojun

古文：泰山老父
现代文：泰山老父
English: Taishan Old Father

古文：泰山老父者，莫知姓字。
现代文：泰山有位老人，不知道姓名叫什么。
English: There is an old man in Mount Tai. I don't know his name.

古文：汉武帝东巡狩，见老翁锄于道旁，头上白光高数尺。
现代文：汉武帝刘彻东巡狩猎时，看见一个老人在道旁锄地，头上有几尺高的白光。
English: When Emperor Liu Chedong of the Han Dynasty was on a hunting tour, he saw an old man lying on the roadside with a white light several feet high on his head.

古文：怪而问之。老人状如五十许人，面有童子之色，肌肤光华，不与俗同。
现代文：老人看上去有五十多岁，但面貌红润像童子，皮肤也很有光泽，一看就不是凡俗的人。
English: The old man looks to be in his fifties, but his face is ruddy like a boy's, and his skin is also very shiny. At first glance, he is not an ordinary person.

古文：帝问有何道术。
现代文：武帝非常奇怪，就问老人有什么道术。
English: Emperor Wu was very puzzled and asked the old man what kind of martial arts he knew.

古文：对曰： 臣年八十五时，衰老垂死，头白齿落。
现代文：老人回答说： 我八十五岁那年，衰老得快要死了，头发白了牙也掉了。
English: The old man replied, "When I was eighty-five years old, my hair turned white and my teeth fell out.

古文：其三十二物中，有二十四物以当二十四气，八毒以应八风。
现代文：这时我遇见一个得道的人，让我不吃五谷，只吃白朮喝水，并给我做了个有神力的枕头，枕头里装着三十二件东西，其中二十四件顺应二十四个节气，还有八个玳瑁，抵挡八方来的邪风。
English: At this time, I met a man who had attained the Way. He told me not to eat grain, but only to eat egrets and drink water. He also made me a powerful pillow. The pillow contained thirty-two things, twenty-four of which corresponded to the twenty-four solar terms, and eight cocoons to resist the evil winds coming from all directions.

古文：臣行之，转老为少，黑发更生，齿落复出，日行三百里。臣今一百八十岁矣。 
现代文：我按照上面的办法去修行，就由老变少，白发变黑，掉了的牙又长出来了。我现在一百八十岁了。 
English: When I practiced according to the above method, I went from old to young, my white hair turned black, and my lost teeth grew back. I am now 180 years old.

古文：帝受其方，赐玉帛。
现代文：武帝要来他的药方，赏赐了老人很多东西。
English: Emperor Wu asked for his prescription and rewarded the old man with many things.

古文：老父后入岱山中。每十年五年，时还乡里。
现代文：老人后来进了泰山，隔十年五年回乡一次。
English: The old man later entered Mount Tai, returning to his hometown every ten years or five years.

古文：三百余年，乃不复还。
现代文：三百多岁后就再也没回来。
English: After more than three hundred years, it never came back.

古文：巫炎
现代文：巫炎
English: Witch fever

古文：巫炎字子都，北海人也，汉驸马都尉。
现代文：巫炎，字子都，北海郡人，曾在汉武帝时任驸马都尉。
English: Wu Yan, a native of Beihai County, once served as a captain of the imperial horse during the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：武帝出，见子都于渭桥，其头上郁郁紫气高丈余。
现代文：汉武帝有一次出巡，在临潼渭水桥上看见了巫炎，只见他头顶有几丈高的紫气。
English: Emperor Hanwu once went on a tour and saw Wu Yan on the Linyi Water Bridge. He saw that the top of his head was several feet high and purple.

古文：帝召问之，君年几何？所得何术，而有异气乎？ 
现代文：武帝就把巫炎召到面前，问他有多大年纪，修炼什么道术，怎么会头上冒出仙人的紫气。
English: Emperor Wu then summoned Wu Yan to his presence and asked him how old he was, what kind of Taoism he practiced, and how the purple aura of a fairy could appear on his head.

古文：对曰： 臣年已百三十八岁，亦无所得。 
现代文：巫炎说： 我已经一百三十八岁，并没得过什么道术。 
English: The sorcerer said, "I am one hundred and thirty-eight years old, and I haven't learned any Taoist skills.

古文：将行，诏东方朔，使相此君有何道术。
现代文：说完就要走。这时武帝又把东方朔召来，让他看看巫炎有什么道术。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu called Dongfang Shuo again to let him see what kind of martial arts Wuyan had.

古文：朔对曰： 此君有阴道之术。 
现代文：东方朔回答说： 这个人懂得男女的房事秘术。 
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "This man knows the secrets of men's and women's rooms.

古文：武帝屏左右而问之。
现代文：武帝就让左右回避，向巫炎请教。
English: Emperor Wu let the left and right sides avoid each other, and asked for advice from Wu Yan.

古文：子都对曰： 臣年六十五时，苦腰痛脚冷，不能自温。口干舌苦，渗涕出。百节四肢疼痛，又痹不能久立。
现代文：巫炎说： 臣六十五岁时，苦于腰疼脚凉，身体不暖，口干舌苦，鼻涕不断，四肢关节疼痛，腿部麻痹不能久站。
English: Wu Yan said: At the age of sixty-five, Min suffered from backache, cold feet, body not warm, dry mouth and tongue, constant runny nose, pain in limbs and joints, paralysis of the legs, and could not stand for a long time.

古文：得此道以来，七十三年，今有子二十六人。身体虽勇，无所疾患。气力乃如壮时，无所忧患。 
现代文：自从得了阴道之术，又活了七十三年，现在已生了二十六个儿子，身体强壮，从不得病，气力像年轻时一样，从来没有愁事。 
English: She has lived for seventy-three years since she had the vaginoplasty, and now she has given birth to twenty-six sons. Her body is strong, she never gets sick, her strength is the same as when she was young, and she never has any worries.

古文：帝曰： 卿不仁，有道而不闻于朕，非忠臣也。 
现代文：武帝说： 你真不够仁义，有道术不传给我，不是个忠臣。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "You really are not benevolent and righteous enough. You do not teach me the Taoist teachings. You are not a loyal subject."

古文：子都对曰： 臣诚知此道为真，然阴阳之事，宫中之利，臣子之所难言。
现代文：巫炎回答说： 我的确知道我得的道术是真的。但男女阴阳交接的事，宫中自有专门的人研究，作臣民的很难向皇上进言。
English: The sorcerer replied, "I do know that my Taoism is true. However, the matter of the male-female yin-yang transition is studied by special people in the palace, and it is difficult for a subject to advise the emperor.

古文：又行之皆逆人情，能为之者少。故不敢以闻。 帝曰： 勿谢，戏君耳。 
现代文：况且我的这种道术，实行起来都是些违反常情的办法，能按照我的方术实行的太少了，所以也不敢把这种方术奏闻皇上。 武帝说： 你不用告罪，我刚才是开玩笑。 
English: Moreover, my way of doing things is contrary to common sense. There are very few people who can follow my way of doing things, so I don't dare to report this way of doing things to the emperor. Emperor Wu said, "You don't have to plead guilty, I was just joking."

古文：遂受其法。
现代文：于是武帝学习了巫炎传授的阴道方术。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu learned the vaginal method taught by Wu Yan.

古文：子都年二百岁，服饵水银，白日升天。
现代文：巫炎二百岁时，服用水银，身体和灵魂一起升天。
English: When he was two hundred years old, he took mercury and ascended to heaven with his body and soul.

古文：武帝颇行其法，不能尽用之。然得寿最长于先帝也。
现代文：汉武帝照着巫炎的方术实行了不少，虽然没有都用上，仍然比以往的帝王寿命长很多。刘凭
English: Emperor Hanwu implemented many measures in accordance with the sorcery of witchcraft, and although not all of them were used, he still lived much longer than previous emperors.

古文：刘凭刘凭者，沛人也。有军功，封寿光金乡侯。
现代文：刘凭是江苏沛县人，由于有军功，被封为寿光金乡侯。
English: Liu Bian is a native of Peixian County, Jiangsu Province. Due to his military service, he was awarded the title of Shuguang Jin Township.

古文：学道于稷丘子，常服石桂英及中岳石硫黄，年三百余岁而有少容，尤长于禁气。
现代文：他跟着稷丘子学道，经常服用石桂英和中岳嵩山的石硫黄，已经活了三百多岁面貌还像少年人，尤其擅长闭气的功夫。
English: He followed the teachings of Zou Qiu Zi, and often took the stone sulfur of Shi Gui Ying and Zhongyue Songshan. He has lived for more than three hundred years and still looks like a young man. He is especially good at holding his breath.

古文：尝到长安，诸贾人闻凭有道，乃往拜见之。乞得侍从，求见祐护。
现代文：他曾到长安去，长安的很多商人听说他有道术，就去拜见他，有的请求学道，有的请他祐护。
English: He once went to Chang'an. Many merchants in Chang'an heard that he had Taoism, so they went to visit him. Some asked him to study Taoism, and some asked him to help them.

古文：凭曰： 可耳。 又有百余人随凭行，并有杂货，约直万金。
现代文：刘凭都答应下来，结果有一百多人跟着他走，还带着各种东西，价值万金。
English: Liu Biao agreed, and as a result, more than a hundred people followed him, taking with them all kinds of things worth thousands of dollars.

古文：乃于山中逢贼数百人，拔刃张弓，四合围之。
现代文：他们一行走到山里时，遇见了几百名强盗，强盗们拔刀张弓从四面包围上来。
English: As the group walked into the mountains, they were confronted by hundreds of bandits, who had drawn their swords and bows and surrounded them on all sides.

古文：凭语贼曰： 汝辈作人，当念温良。若不能展才布德，居官食禄，当勤身苦体。
现代文：刘凭对强盗们说： 你们应该善良地做人，如果没有做官的才学品德，就是出力气种田做工，也是干净人。
English: Liu Biao said to the robbers: You should be a kind person. If you don't have the ability to learn morality when you are an official, then you should work hard in the fields. You should also be a clean person.

古文：夫何有腆面目，豺狼其心。相教贼道，危人利己。
现代文：现在你们披着人皮，怀着狼心，白日抢劫，害人利己。
English: Now you are dressed in human skin, with a wolf's heart, looting in broad daylight, harming others and benefiting yourselves.

古文：此是伏尸都市，肉飨乌鸢之法。汝等弓箭。当何所用。 
现代文：告诉你们，这样做只能使你们变成一具具死尸去喂乌鸦老鹰，你们的弓箭一点也派不上用场！ 
English: I tell you, this will only turn you into corpses to feed the crows and eagles, and your bows and arrows will be of no use at all!

古文：于是贼射诸客，箭皆反着其身。
现代文：强盗们大怒，用弓箭射刘凭一行，结果箭都掉转头去射中了他们自己。
English: The robbers were so angry that they shot Liu Bei with a bow and arrow, but the arrows turned around and hit themselves.

古文：须臾之间，大风折木，飞沙扬尘。
现代文：片刻之间起了大风，刮倒了树木扬起漫天尘沙。
English: A gale blew up in an instant, knocking down trees and kicking up dust.

古文：凭大呼曰： 小物辈敢尔，天兵从头刺杀先造意者。 
现代文：刘凭大叫道： 你们这些畜牲竟如此胡作非为。天兵们给我先把那些强盗头目杀掉！ 
English: Liu Bei shouted, "You brutes, how dare you do such an outrageous thing! Heavenly soldiers, kill those bandit leaders first!"

古文：凭言绝，而众兵一时顿地，反手背上，不能复动，张口短气欲死。
现代文：刘凭话音刚落，就见强盗们一个个都倒在地上，双手被反绑在背后，一点也动不了，都张着大嘴急促地喘气，像要憋死了。
English: As soon as Liu Ping finished speaking, he saw the robbers fall to the ground one by one. Their hands were tied behind their backs. They couldn't move at all. They were all breathing rapidly with their mouths wide open, as if they were about to choke to death.

古文：其中首帅三人，即鼻中出血，头裂而死。
现代文：其中的三个头目鼻子流血脑袋开裂，当场就死了。
English: Three of the ringleaders suffered bloody noses, cracked skulls and died at the scene.

古文：余者或能语曰： 乞放余生，改恶为善。 
现代文：剩下的强盗中有那还能说话的就不断求饶，说今后一定改恶向善。
English: Among the remaining robbers, the one who could still speak kept begging for forgiveness, saying that he would definitely change for the better in the future.

古文：于是诸客或斫杀者，凭禁止之，乃责之曰： 本拟尽杀汝，犹复不忍。
现代文：这时和刘凭一起的客商要把强盗们全砍死，被刘凭制止了。刘凭斥责强盗们说： 本来该把你们全杀掉，但又不太忍心。
English: At this time, the merchant who was with Liu Biao wanted to hack all the robbers to death, but Liu Biao stopped him. Liu Biao scolded the robbers and said, "I should have killed you all, but I don't have much patience."

古文：今赦汝，犹敢为贼乎？ 
现代文：现在我放了你们，你们还敢再作强盗吗？ 
English: Now that I have set you free, will you dare to be robbers again?

古文：皆乞命曰： 便当易行，不敢复耳。 凭乃敕天兵赦之，遂各能奔走去。
现代文：强盗们都哀求饶命，表示今后一定改行决不再作强盗，刘凭就命令天兵赦免了他们，强盗们就赶快逃散了。
English: The robbers all begged for their lives, saying that they would definitely change their ways and never be robbers in the future. Liu Biao ordered the heavenly soldiers to pardon them, and the robbers quickly fled.

古文：尝有居人妻病邪魅，累年不愈。凭乃敕之，其家宅傍有泉水，水自竭，中有一蛟枯死。
现代文：有一次，一个人的妻子被妖邪缠住，多年治不好，刘凭就用道术让那家门旁的泉水干涸，结果发现一只蛟渴死在泉中了。
English: Once, when a man's wife was entangled by a demon and could not be cured for many years, Liu Biao used Taoism to dry up the spring water next to the door of the house. As a result, a dragonfly was found dead in the spring.

古文：又有古庙，庙间有树，树上常有光。人止其下，多遇暴死。禽鸟不敢巢其枝。
现代文：有一座古庙，庙旁有棵大树，树上常常发出奇光，人停在树下常常突然死去，鸟儿也不敢在树枝上作巢。
English: There is an ancient temple. There is a big tree next to the temple. Strange lights are often emitted from the tree. People who stop under the tree often die suddenly. Birds do not dare to build nests on the branches.

古文：凭乃敕之，盛夏树便枯死，有大蛇长七八丈，悬其间而死，后不复为患。
现代文：刘凭又施了道术，那树在盛夏时就干枯而死，有一条七八丈长的大蛇挂在树上死去，后来这棵树再也不害人了。
English: Liu Biao also used Taoism, and the tree withered and died at the height of summer. A seven or eight-meter-long snake hung on the tree and died. Later, the tree no longer harmed people.

古文：凭有姑子，与人争地，俱在太守坐。姑子少党，而敌家多亲助，为之言者四五十人。
现代文：刘凭姑母的儿子因为土地纠纷被抓进太守府，姑家亲友太少，而对手家中亲友很多，有四五十人在公堂上替对手作证说好话。
English: Liu Biao's aunt's son was arrested and taken to the governor's office because of a land dispute. The aunt's family has too few relatives and friends, while the opponent's family has many relatives and friends. Forty or fifty people testified in court to speak well of the opponent.

古文：凭反覆良久。忽然大怒曰： 汝辈敢尔。 
现代文：刘凭和他们争论了很久，忽然大怒说： 你们凭着人多就敢这样嚣张吗？ 
English: Liu Biao argued with them for a long time, and suddenly said angrily: Do you dare to be so arrogant with so many people?

古文：应声有雷电霹雳，赤光照耀满屋。于是敌人之党，一时顿地，无所复知。
现代文：话音未落，忽然满屋闪动着红光，空中电闪雷鸣，对手的同党亲友们顿时被殛倒在地上不省人事。
English: Before the words were out, suddenly the whole house was ablaze with red light, lightning flashed and thunder rumbled in the air, and the relatives and friends of the rival party members were suddenly knocked unconscious on the ground.

古文：太守甚怖。为之跪谢曰： 愿君侯少宽威灵，当为理断，终不使差失。 
现代文：太守也吓坏了，跪下来央求道： 求您别再大显神戚，我一定秉公而断，决不会偏向。 
English: Terrified, the Empress Dowager knelt down and begged, "Please don't make a big show of being a close relative of God. I will make a fair decision and will never be biased."

古文：日移数丈，诸人乃能起。
现代文：过了很久，倒在地上的人们才苏醒过来。
English: It took a long time for the people who had fallen to the ground to wake up.

古文：汉孝武帝闻之，诏征而试之，曰： 殿下有怪，辄有数十人，绛衣，披发持烛，相随走马，可效否？ 
现代文：汉武帝听说后，传诏让刘凭进宫，想试试他的道术。刘凭一进了金殿武帝就对他说： 我这金殿中有妖怪。常常有几十个妖怪，披着长发手持蜡烛，在大殿里骑着马转悠。你能制服他们吗？ 
English: Once Liu Biao entered the Golden Hall, Emperor Wu said to him, "There are monsters in this Golden Hall. There are often dozens of monsters, wearing long hair and holding candles, riding around on horses in the hall. Can you subdue them?"

古文：凭曰： 此小鬼耳。 
现代文：刘凭说： 这不过是一群小鬼而已。 
English: Liu Biao said, "It's just a group of kids.

古文：至夜，帝伪令人作之。
现代文：当天夜里，皇帝命人扮成几十个妖怪在大殿上转悠。
English: On the night of the same day, the emperor ordered people to dress up as dozens of monsters and walk around the main hall.

古文：凭于殿上，以符掷之，皆面抢地，以火淬口无气。
现代文：刘凭来到殿上，画了一道仙符投出去，那些伪装的 妖怪 立刻都摔在地上，用灯一照，都断气了。
English: Liu Biao came to the hall, drew a fairy tale and cast it out. Those camouflaged monsters immediately fell to the ground, and were extinguished with a light.

古文：帝大惊曰： 非此鬼也，朕以相试耳。 
现代文：皇帝这才大惊失色地说： 他们不是鬼，是我让他们装鬼来试验你的呀！ 
English: The emperor was shocked and said, "They are not ghosts, I made them pretend to be ghosts to test you!"

古文：乃解之，后入太白山中，数十年复归乡里，颜色更少。
现代文：刘凭就让那些人都复活了。后来刘凭进了太白山，几十年后又回了故乡，却更年轻了。
English: Liu Biao brought those people back to life. Later, Liu Biao entered Taibai Mountain, and returned to his hometown decades later, but he was even younger.

古文：栾巴
现代文：栾巴
English: Mute bass

古文：栾巴者，蜀郡成都人也。
现代文：栾巴是四川成都人，年轻时就爱好道术，不关心世间的事。
English: Zouba is from Chengdu, Sichuan. When he was young, he was fond of Taoism and did not care about worldly affairs.

古文：少而好道，不修俗事，时太守躬诣巴，请屈为功曹。待以师友之礼。
现代文：当时的太守很恭敬地来见栾巴，请他屈就功曹的职务，太守以老师、朋友的礼仪接待栾巴。
English: At that time, the daimyō very respectfully came to see Moba Maru and asked him to accept his duties as a meritorious person. The daimyō received Moba with the etiquette of a teacher and friend.

古文：巴到，太守曰： 闻功曹有道，宁可试见一奇乎？ 巴曰： 唯。 
现代文：栾巴上任以后，有一天太守对栾巴说： 我听说你有道术，能不能让我看见一件新奇的事呢？ 栾巴说： 可以。 
English: After Muba took office, one day the daimyō said to Muba, "I heard that you are a Daoist. Can you show me something new?" Muba said, "Yes."

古文：即平坐，却入壁中去，冉冉如云气之状。
现代文：说罢就端坐着退进墙壁里去了，墙上缓缓升起一团云气，片刻就看不见栾巴了。
English: As soon as he finished speaking, he sat down and retreated into the wall. A cloud of air slowly rose on the wall, and for a moment he could no longer see the mute man.

古文：须臾，失巴所在，壁外人见化成一虎，人并惊。
现代文：墙外的人则看见栾巴变成了一只虎，人们吓坏了。
English: People outside the wall saw that Muca had turned into a tiger, and they were terrified.

古文：虎径还功曹舍。人往视虎，虎乃巴成也。
现代文：只见那虎一直跑回栾巴的府宅，人们跑去看虎时，虎已经又变成了栾巴了。
English: The tiger ran all the way back to the mute man's mansion. When people ran to see the tiger, the tiger had turned into a mute again.

古文：后举孝廉，除郎中，迁豫章太守。
现代文：后来栾巴被举荐为孝廉，被任命为郎中，又升任为豫章郡的太守。
English: Later, Zouba was recommended as a filial son, was appointed as a retainer, and was promoted to the governor of Yuzhang County.

古文：庐山庙有神，能干帐中共外人语，饮酒，空中投杯。
现代文：当时庐山庙里有个神，能在帐子后面和人谈话，喝酒时只见空中出现酒杯。
English: At that time, there was a god in the Lushan Temple who could talk to people behind a curtain, and when drinking, only a wine glass appeared in the air.

古文：人往乞福。
现代文：人们都去庙中向这个神祈求佑护。
English: People go to the temple to pray to this god for protection.

古文：能使江湖之中，分风举帆，行各相逢。
现代文：这神能使江湖中兴起风来鼓动船帆，使分开走的船聚在一起。
English: This god can make the wind rise in the rivers and lakes to fan the sails and make the separated ships come together.

古文：巴至郡，往庙中，便失神所在。
现代文：栾巴听说后就到庙里去，那神就不在了。
English: Muteba heard about it and went to the temple, but the god was no longer there.

古文：巴曰： 庙鬼诈为天官，损百姓日久，罪当治之。
现代文：栾巴说： 哪有什么神，不过是一个鬼怪来到庙里冒充天上的仙官。这鬼祸害百姓这么久，应该惩治他。
English: The dumb man said, "What god is there, but a ghost who came to the temple pretending to be a heavenly angel? This ghost has plagued the people for so long, he should be punished."

古文：以事付功曹，巴自行捕逐，若不时讨，恐其后游行天下，所在血食，枉病良民。 
现代文：这件事就由我亲自来办。如果不及时去除这个鬼怪，只怕他以后到处流窜，到处吃人供奉的祭品，白白祸害老百姓。 
English: This matter will be handled by me personally. If this ghost is not removed in time, I am afraid that he will wander everywhere in the future, eat sacrifices offered by people everywhere, and harm the common people in vain.

古文：责以重祷，乃下所在，推问山川社稷，求鬼踪迹。
现代文：于是栾巴在神坛上诚心地祷告天神，遍查天下的山川国土，搜寻鬼怪的踪迹。
English: Therefore, Muba sincerely prayed to the gods on the shrine, and searched the mountains and rivers of the world, looking for traces of ghosts.

古文：此鬼于是走至齐郡，化为书生，善谈五经，太守即以女妻之。
现代文：那鬼怪就逃到齐郡，变成一个书生，善于谈论四书五经，迷惑了齐郡的太守，太守竟把女儿嫁给了他。
English: The ghost fled to Qi County and turned into a scholar, good at talking about the four books and five sutras. He confused the governor of Qi County, and the governor married his daughter to him.

古文：巴知其所在，上表请解郡守往捕，其鬼不出。
现代文：栾巴找到了这个鬼怪，就写了公文请太守捕住那个鬼怪。
English: When Muba found the ghost, he wrote a letter to the governor asking him to capture the ghost.

古文：巴谓太守： 贤婿非人也，是老鬼诈为庙神。今走至此，故来取之。 
现代文：那鬼吓得不敢露面，栾巴就对太守说： 你的女婿不是人，是个冒充庙神的鬼，现在他来到你家，所以我来抓他。 
English: The ghost was too scared to show his face, so Muba said to the governor: Your son-in-law is not a person, but a ghost pretending to be a temple god. Now he has come to your house, so I have come to catch him.

古文：太守召之不出。
现代文：太守叫他女婿出来，那鬼躲着不出来。
English: The daimyō called his son-in-law to come out, but the ghost could not escape.

古文：巴曰： 出之甚易。 
现代文：栾巴说： 让他出来还不容易吗？ 
English: The mute man said, "Isn't it easy to let him out?"

古文：请太守笔砚设案，巴乃作符。符成长啸，空中忽有人将符去，亦不见人形，一坐皆惊。
现代文：就让太守准备了笔砚和书桌，栾巴用笔写了一道符咒，写完后栾巴仰天长啸，空中忽然有人把符拿走，也看不见是谁拿走的，在场的人都十分惊讶。
English: He asked the abbot to prepare a quill and a desk, and the mute man wrote a spell with a pen. After he finished writing, the mute man shouted at the sky. Suddenly, someone took the spell away from him in the air, and he couldn't see who took it. Everyone present was very surprised.

古文：符至，书生向妇涕泣曰： 去必死矣。 
现代文：那道符来到书生面前，书生向他妻子哭泣说： 我这一去非死不可了！ 
English: That Taoist symbol came to Shousei. Shousei cried to his wife and said, "I have to die this time!"

古文：须臾，书生自赍符来至庭，见巴不敢前。
现代文：片刻间，书生自己拿着符来到院里，看见栾巴就不敢靠近了。
English: After a while, the scholar came to the courtyard with a token, and when he saw the mute, he did not dare to approach.

古文：巴叱曰： 老鬼何不复尔形。 
现代文：栾巴大喊一声： 老鬼还不现出原形来吗？ 
English: The mute cried out, "Hasn't the old ghost come to life yet?

古文：应声即便为一狸，叩头乞活，巴教杀之，皆见空中刀下，狸头堕地。
现代文：书生应声变成一只狸猫，不断地叩头求栾巴饶命。栾巴就命令把狸猫杀掉，只见空中落下一把刀把狸猫的头砍落在地上。
English: In response, the scholar turned into a civet cat, constantly bowing down and begging the mute to spare his life. The mute ordered the civet cat to be killed, only to see a knife fall from the sky and cut the head of the civet cat to the ground.

古文：太守女已生一儿，复化为狸，亦杀之。
现代文：太守的女儿已经生了个儿子，这时也现了原形变成一只狸猫，栾巴也把它杀掉了。
English: The governor's daughter had already given birth to a son, at which time the original form turned into a civet cat, which Muca also killed.

古文：巴去还豫章，郡多鬼，又多独足鬼，为百姓病。巴到后，更无此患，妖邪一时消灭。
现代文：栾巴回到豫章郡以后，郡里也在闹鬼，大多是独脚鬼，祸害百姓，栾巴一回本郡，郡里的鬼就都吓跑了，再也没有妖魔作怪。
English: After Muteba returned to Yuzhang County, the county was also haunted by ghosts, mostly one-legged ghosts, which plagued the people. Once Muteba returned to the county, the ghosts in the county were all scared away, and there were no more demons.

古文：后征为尚书郎，正旦大会，巴后到，有酒容，赐百官酒，又不饮而西南向噀之。
现代文：栾巴比别人到的晚，但已有些醉意。皇帝在宴会上赠给文武百官御酒，栾巴不喝，把酒向西南方向喷了出去。
English: Zouba arrived later than the others, but he was already a little drunk. At the banquet, the emperor presented wine to the civil and military officials. Zouba did not drink it, but sprayed the wine to the southwest.

古文：有司奏巴不敬。
现代文：有关的同衙向皇帝上奏说栾巴对皇上不敬。
English: Concerned peers reported to the emperor that Muba was disrespectful to the emperor.

古文：诏问巴。巴曰： 臣乡里以臣能治鬼护病，生为臣立庙。
现代文：皇帝就召栾巴询问，栾巴说： 臣的家乡因为臣能除鬼治病，为臣立了 生祠 祝福。
English: The emperor summoned the mute baboon to inquire. The mute baboon said, "The hometown of the retainer, because the retainer is able to exorcise ghosts and cure diseases, has set up a shrine to bless the life of the retainer.

古文：今旦有耆老，皆来臣庙中享，臣不能早饮之，是以有酒容。
现代文：今天早上有几位德高望重的老者到臣的庙中来约臣喝酒，臣实在不能推脱，所以有点喝醉了。
English: This morning, several respected elders came to my temple to drink with me. I couldn't resist, so I got a little drunk.

古文：臣适见成都市上火，臣故漱酒为尔救之。
现代文：臣刚才看见西南方千里外的成都街上发生了火灾，就喷了一口酒救火，绝不是对皇上不敬。
English: The minister had just seen a fire on a street in Chengdu, thousands of miles away in the southwest, and sprayed a sip of wine to extinguish the fire. This was by no means disrespectful to the emperor.

古文：非敢不敬，当请诏问，虚诏抵罪。 
现代文：皇上如不信就下诏询问成都是否失火，如果不是，臣愿抵罪。 
English: If the emperor did not believe him, he would issue an edict to inquire whether Chengdu was a misfire, and if not, the vassal would be willing to atone.

古文：乃发驿书问成都。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏让驿使到成都查问。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict to send an envoy to Chengdu to investigate.

古文：已奏言： 正旦食后失火，须臾，有大雨三阵，从东北来，火乃止，雨着人皆作酒气。
现代文：后来成都方面奏报说： 正月初一早饭后失火，不一会儿从东北来了三场大雨，火就灭了。雨落到人身上发出一股酒气。 
English: Later, the Chengdu side reported: On the first day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out after breakfast, and three heavy rains came from the northeast in a short time, and the fire was extinguished. The rain fell on people and emitted a breath of alcohol.

古文：后一旦，忽大风雨，天地晦冥，对坐不相见，因失巴所在。
现代文：后来有一天忽然风雨大作，天地昏暗，对面坐着也看不见人，栾巴也不知去了何处。
English: Then, one day, there was a sudden storm, the sky was dark, I couldn't see anyone sitting on the other side, and Muba didn't know where he was.

古文：寻闻巴还成都，与亲故别，称不更还。
现代文：不久听说栾巴回到成都，和亲朋好友告别，说以后不再回来了。
English: Soon after, I heard that Zouba had returned to Chengdu to say goodbye to his friends and relatives, saying that he would not be coming back.

古文：老幼皆于庙中送之。
现代文：家乡的男女老少都到他的 生祠 中送他。
English: Men, women and children from his hometown came to his birthplace to see him off.

古文：云：去时亦风雨晦冥。莫知去处也。
现代文：听说他离去时也是风雨交加天地昏暗，不知道去了哪里。
English: I heard that when he left, it was stormy and dark, and he didn't know where he was going.

古文：左慈
现代文：左慈
English: Zuo Ci

古文：左慈字元放，庐江人也。
现代文：左慈字元放，江西庐江人。
English: Zuo Ci Zi Yuan Fang, a native of Lijiang, Jiangxi Province.

古文：明五经，兼通星气，见汉祚将衰，天下乱起，乃叹曰： 值此衰乱，官高者危，财多者死。
现代文：他精通五经，也懂得占星术，从星象中预测出汉朝的气数将尽，国运衰落，天下将要大乱，就感叹地说： 在这乱世中，官位高的更难保自身，钱财多的更容易死。
English: He was well versed in the Five Classics and knew astrology. He predicted from the stars that the Han Dynasty would run out of gas, the national fortune would decline, and the world would be in chaos. He said with regret: In this chaotic world, it is more difficult for high-ranking officials to protect themselves, and it is easier to die if they have a lot of money.

古文：当世荣华，不足贪也。 
现代文：所以世间的荣华富贵绝不能贪图啊！ 
English: Therefore, one must not covet the glory and wealth of the world!

古文：乃学道，尤明六甲，能役使鬼神，坐致行厨。
现代文：于是左慈开始学道，对 奇门遁甲 也很精通，能够驱使鬼神，坐着变出美味佳肴。
English: So Zuo Ci began to study Taoism. He was also well versed in Qimen armor, able to drive ghosts and gods, and conjure up delicious dishes while sitting.

古文：精思于天柱山中，得石室中《九丹金液经》，能变化万端，不可胜记。
现代文：他在天柱山精修苦炼道术，在一个石洞中得到一部《九丹金液经》，学会了使自己变化万端的方术，法术很多记也记不过来。
English: In Tianzhu Mountain, he worked hard to refine the alchemy of Taoism, obtained a copy of "The Book of the Nine Treasures" in a stone cave, and learned the methods of changing himself, and he could not remember many spells.

古文：魏曹公闻而召之，闭一石室中，使人守视，断谷期年，及出之，颜色如故。
现代文：三国时魏国的曹操听说后，把左慈召了去，关在一个石屋里，派人监视，一年没给他饭吃，过了一年才把他放出来，见他仍是原来的模样。
English: When Cao Cao of Wei in the Three Kingdoms heard of this, he summoned Zuo Ci, locked him in a stone house, and sent guards to watch him. He did not give him any food for a year. After a year, he let him out and saw that he was still the same.

古文：曹公自谓生民无不食道，而慈乃如是，必左道也，欲杀之。
现代文：曹操认为世上的人没有不吃饭的道理，左慈竟然一年不吃饭，一定是妖邪的旁门左道，非要杀掉他。
English: Cao Cao believed that there was no reason for people in the world not to eat, and Zuo Ci's not eating for a year must have been a trick of evil spirits. They had no choice but to kill him.

古文：慈已知，求乞骸骨。曹公曰： 何以忽尔？ 
现代文：曹操一起了杀左慈的念头左慈就知道了，就向曹操请求放他一条老命，让他回家。曹操说： 为什么如此急着走呢？ 
English: Cao Cao got the idea of killing Zuo Ci together and Zuo Ci knew it, so he begged Cao Cao to let him live and let him go home. Cao Cao said, "Why are you in such a hurry to leave?

古文：对曰： 欲见杀，故求去耳。 
现代文：左慈说： 你要杀我，所以我请求你放我走。 
English: Zuo Ci said, "You are going to kill me, so I beg you to let me go."

古文：公曰： 无有此意，公却高其志，不苟相留也。 
现代文：曹操说： 哪里哪里，我怎么会杀你呢。既然你有高洁的志向，我就不强留你了。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Where, where, how can I kill you? Since you have noble aspirations, I will not force you to stay.

古文：乃为设酒，曰： 今当远旷，乞分杯饮酒。 
现代文：曹操为左慈设酒宴饯行，左慈说： 我就要远行了，请求和您分杯喝酒。 
English: Cao Cao held a banquet for Zuo Ci. Zuo Ci said, "I am going on a long journey. I would like to have a drink with you."

古文：公曰： 善。 
现代文：曹操同意了。
English: Ruding said: Well said!

古文：是时天寒，温酒尚热，慈拔道簪以挠酒，须臾，道簪都尽，如人磨墨。
现代文：当时天气很冷，酒正在火上浸着，左慈拔下头上的道簪搅和酒，片刻间道簪都溶在了酒中就像磨墨时墨溶入水中一样。
English: At that time, the weather was very cold, the wine was soaking in the fire, Zuo Ci pulled the straw off his head and stirred the wine. In a moment, the straw was dissolved in the wine, just like the ink dissolves into the water when rubbing ink.

古文：初，公闻慈求分杯饮酒，谓当使公先饮，以与慈耳，而拔道簪以画，杯酒中断，其间相去数寸。
现代文：一开始，曹操见左慈要求喝 分杯酒 ，以为是自己先喝半杯然后再给左慈喝自己剩的半杯，没想到左慈先用道簪把自己的酒杯划了一下，酒杯就分成了两半，两半中都有酒，相隔着好几寸。
English: At the beginning, Cao Cao saw Zuo Ci asking for a half glass of wine, thinking that he would drink half a glass first and then give Zuo Ci his remaining half glass. Unexpectedly, Zuo Ci first scratched his own glass with a dagger, and the glass was divided into two halves. There was wine in both halves, separated by several inches.

古文：即饮半，半与公。
现代文：左慈先喝了一半，把另一半杯子给了曹操。
English: Zuo Ci drank half of it first and gave the other half of the glass to Cao Cao.

古文：公不善之，未即为饮，慈乞尽自饮之。
现代文：曹操不太高兴，没有马上喝，左慈就向曹操要过来自己都喝了。
English: Cao Cao wasn't too happy. He didn't drink it right away, so Zuo Ci asked Cao Cao to come over and drank it himself.

古文：饮毕，以杯掷屋栋，杯悬摇动，似飞鸟俯仰之状，若欲落而不落，举坐莫不视杯，良久乃坠，既而已失慈矣。
现代文：喝完把杯子往房梁上一扔，杯子在房梁上悬空摇动，像一只鸟将向地上俯冲前的姿势，要落又不落，宴席上的客人都抬头看那酒杯，好半天杯子才落下来，但左慈也不见了。
English: After drinking, he threw the glass onto the beam of the room. The glass dangled and swayed on the beam of the room, like the posture of a bird before swooping down to the ground. The guests at the banquet looked up at the wine glass, and it took a long time for the glass to fall, but Zuo Ci was also gone.

古文：寻问之，还其所居。曹公遂益欲杀慈，试其能免死否。
现代文：一打听，说左慈已回了他自己的居处，这一来曹操更想杀掉左慈，想试试左慈能不能逃过一死。
English: Upon hearing that Zuo Ci had returned to his own residence, Cao Cao wanted to kill Zuo Ci even more, to see if Zuo Ci could escape death.

古文：乃敕收慈，慈走入群羊中，而追者不分，乃数本羊，果余一口，乃知是慈化为羊也。
现代文：曹操下令逮捕左慈，左慈钻进羊群中，追捕他的人分不清，就查羊的原数，果然多出了一只，知道左慈变成了羊。
English: Cao Cao ordered Zuo Ci's arrest. Zuo Ci wandered into the sheep herd, and his pursuers couldn't tell the difference. They checked the original number of sheep, and sure enough, there was an extra one. They knew that Zuo Ci had turned into a sheep.

古文：追者语主人意，欲得见先生，暂还无怯也。
现代文：追捕的人就传达曹操的意思，说曹操只是想见见左慈，请左慈不要害怕。
English: The pursuers conveyed Cao Cao's meaning, saying that Cao Cao just wanted to see Zuo Ci, please Zuo Ci do not be afraid.

古文：俄而有大羊前跪而曰： 为审尔否？ 
现代文：这时有一只大羊走上前跪着说： 你们看看我是不是呢？ 
English: Just then a large sheep came up, knelt down, and said: "Will you look at me?

古文：吏相谓曰： 此跪羊，慈也。 
现代文：追捕的人们互相说： 这个跪着的羊一定就是左慈了！ 
English: The hunted people said to each other, "This kneeling sheep must be Zuo Cixi!"

古文：欲收之。
现代文：就想把这羊抓走。
English: He wanted to take the sheep away.

古文：于是群羊咸向吏言曰： 为审尔否？ 
现代文：但这时所有的羊都跪下说： 你们看看我是不是呢？ 
English: But then all the sheep got down on their knees and said, "Will you look at me?"

古文：由是吏亦不复知慈所在，乃止。
现代文：这样一来追捕的人真弄不清哪只羊是左慈了，只好拉倒。
English: As a result, the huntsmen really couldn't figure out which sheep was which, and had to pull it down.

古文：后有知慈处者，告公，公又遣吏收之，得慈。
现代文：后来有知道左慈去处的人密告给曹操，曹操又派人去抓，一抓就抓到了。
English: Later, someone who knew Zuo Ci's whereabouts tipped off Cao Cao, and Cao Cao sent someone to catch Zuo Ci, who was caught as soon as he was caught.

古文：慈非不能隐，故示其神化耳。
现代文：其实并不是左慈不能隐遁脱逃，是故意要给曹操见识一下他的变化之术。
English: In fact, it wasn't that Zuo Ci couldn't hide and escape, but he deliberately wanted to show Cao Cao how he had changed.

古文：于是受执入狱。
现代文：于是左慈让抓他的人绑上投入监狱。
English: So Zuo Ci had his captors tied up and thrown into prison.

古文：狱吏欲拷掠之，户中有一慈，户外亦有一慈，不知孰是。
现代文：典狱官打算拷问左慈，却发现屋里有个左慈，屋外也有个左慈，不知哪一个是真左慈。
English: The warden plans to interrogate Zuo Ci, only to discover that there is a Zuo Ci in the room and a Zuo Ci outside, and he doesn't know which one is the real Zuo Ci.

古文：公闻而愈恶之，使引出市杀之。
现代文：曹操知道后更加怀恨，就命令把左慈绑到刑场杀掉。
English: Cao Cao became even more resentful after learning of this, and ordered Zuo Ci to be tied to the execution site and killed.

古文：须臾，忽失慈所在，乃闭市门而索。
现代文：左慈却突然在刑场上消失了。于是命令紧闭城门大肆搜埔。
English: Zuo Ci suddenly disappeared at the place of execution. Therefore, he ordered to close the gate and search the city.

古文：或不识慈者，问其状，言眇一目，著青葛巾青单衣，见此人便收之。
现代文：有些搜捕者说不认识左慈，官员就告诉说左慈一只眼是瞎的，穿着青色葛布衣扎着葛布头巾，见到这样的人就抓。
English: Some of the searchers said they didn't know Zuo Ci, so the officials told them that Zuo Ci was blind in one eye, wore a blue loincloth and wore a loincloth headscarf. If they saw such a person, they would arrest him.

古文：及尔，一市中人皆眇目，著葛巾青衣，卒不能分。
现代文：不一会儿，全城的人都变成了瞎一只眼穿青葛布衣扎葛巾的人，谁也无法分辨哪个是左慈。
English: In a short time, the whole city was blinded, and no one could tell which one was Zuo Ci.

古文：公令普逐之，如见便杀。
现代文：曹操就下令扩大搜捕的范围，只要抓住就杀掉。
English: Cao Cao ordered to expand the scope of the manhunt and kill anyone who was caught.

古文：后有人见知，便斩以献公，公大喜，及至视之，乃一束茅，验其尸，亦亡处所。
现代文：后来有人见到了左慈，就杀了献给曹操，曹操大喜，尸体运到一看，竟是一捆茅草，再到杀左慈的地方找尸体，已经不见了。
English: Later, someone saw Zuo Ci and killed a camel dedicated to Cao Cao. Cao Cao was overjoyed. When he saw the body being transported, it turned out to be a bundle of thatch. He then went to the place where Zuo Ci was killed to look for the body, but it was gone.

古文：后有人从荆州来，见慈。刺史刘表，亦以慈为惑众，拟收害之。
现代文：后来有人说在荆州看见了左慈，当时当荆州刺史的刘表也认为左慈是个惑乱人心的妖道，打算将他抓住杀掉。
English: Later, some people said that they had seen Zuo Ci in Jingzhou. At that time, Liu Table, who was a historian in Jingzhou, also thought that Zuo Ci was a bewitching demon, and planned to catch and kill him.

古文：表出耀兵，慈意知欲见其术，乃徐徐去，因又诣表云： 有薄礼，愿以饷军。 
现代文：刘表带着兵马出来炫耀，左慈知道刘表是想看看他有什么道术，就慢慢走到刘表面前说： 我有些微薄的礼物想犒劳你的军队。 
English: Zuo Ci knew that Liu Biao wanted to see what kind of martial arts skills he had, so he slowly walked up to Liu Biao and said, "I have some small gifts to reward your army."

古文：表曰： 道人单侨，吾军人众，安能为济乎？ 
现代文：刘表说： 你这个道士孤身一人，我的人马这么多，你能犒劳得过来吗？ 
English: Liu Table said, "You, a Taoist, are all alone, while I have so many people. Can you come here with so little effort?

古文：慈重道之，表使视之，有酒一斗，器盛，脯一束，而十人共举不胜。
现代文：左慈又重说了一遍，刘表就派人去看是什么礼物，见只有一斗酒和一小扎肉干，但十个人抬也没抬动。
English: Zuo Ci said it again, and Liu Biao sent someone to see what kind of gift it was. He saw that there was only a bucket of wine and a small piece of dried meat, but ten people did not lift it.

古文：慈乃自出取之，以刀削脯投地，请百人奉酒及脯，以赐兵士，酒三杯，脯一片，食之如常脯味，凡万余人，皆周足，而器中酒如故，脯亦不尽，坐上又有宾客千人，皆得大醉。表乃大惊，无复害慈之意。
现代文：肉干吃起来和平常的味道一样，一万多士兵都吃饱喝足，但酒器中的酒一点也没少，肉干也没吃光，刘表的一千多宾客也都喝得大醉。刘表大吃一惊，打消了杀害左慈的意思。几天后，左慈离开刘表走了。
English: The dried meat tasted the same as usual. More than ten thousand soldiers were well-fed and drunk, but the wine in the wine vessels was not a little, the dried meat was not eaten out, and more than one thousand guests of Liu Biao were also very drunk. Liu Biao was very surprised and canceled the intention to kill Zuo Ci. A few days later, Zuo Ci left Liu Biao and went away.

古文：数日，乃委表去，入东吴。有徐堕者，有道术，居丹徒，慈过之。
现代文：他到了东吴的丹徒县，听说丹徒有个有道术的人叫徐堕，就去登门拜访。
English: When he arrived in Dantu County, Dongwu, he heard that there was a Taoist in Dantu named Xu Piao, so he went to visit him.

古文：堕门下有宾客，车牛六七乘，欺慈云： 徐公不在。 
现代文：徐堕门前有六七个宾客，还停着六七辆牛车。宾客骗左慈说徐堕不在家。
English: There were sixty-seven guests and sixty-seven ox carts parked in front of Xu Furen's door. The guests lied to Zuo Ci and said that Xu Furen was not at home.

古文：慈知客欺之，便去。
现代文：左慈知道宾客骗他，就告辞走了。
English: Zuo Ci knew that his guest had lied to him, so he said goodbye and left.

古文：客即见牛在杨树杪行，适上树即不见，下即复见行树上。
现代文：左慈走后，宾客们就看见牛车在杨树梢上走，爬到树上再看，牛车却没有了。下了树，就见牛车又在树上走。
English: After Zuo Zi left, the guests saw the ox-drawn cart walking on the tops of poplar trees. They climbed up the tree and looked again, but the ox-drawn cart was gone. When they got down from the tree, they saw the ox-drawn cart walking on the tree again.

古文：又车毂皆生荆棘，长一尺，斫之不断，推之不动。
现代文：还有的牛车轮子中心的圆孔里长出了一尺长的荆棘，砍都砍不断，推车又推不动。
English: In another case, a foot-long thorn grew out of a round hole in the center of the wheel of an ox cart. The wheels were constantly being chopped, and the cart could not be pushed.

古文：客大惧，即报徐公，有一老翁眇目，吾见其不急之人，因欺之云： 公不在， 去后须臾，牛皆如此，不知何等意。
现代文：宾客们大惊失色，急忙跑去报告徐堕，说有一个瞎了一只眼的老头来访，我们见他是个凡俗之辈，就骗他说主人不在，老头走后，牛和车就发生了这种怪事，不知是怎么回事。
English: The guests were shocked and ran to report to Xu Peng that an old man who was blind in one eye had come to visit. When we saw that he was an ordinary person, we lied and said that the owner was not there. After the old man left, this strange thing happened to the cow and cart. I don't know what happened.

古文：后出游，请慈俱行，使慈行于马前，欲自后刺杀之。
现代文：左慈拜见了吴国君主孙策，孙策也想杀左慈。孙策有一次想从后面给他一刀。
English: Zuo Ci paid homage to Sun Ce, the monarch of Wu. Sun Ce also wanted to kill Zuo Ci. Sun Ce once wanted to stab him from behind.

古文：慈在马前，著木履，挂一竹杖，徐徐而行，讨逆着鞭策马，操兵逐之，终不能及。讨逆知其有术，乃止。
现代文：左慈穿着木鞋拿着个竹杖慢慢地走，孙策在后面手持兵器追赶却总也追不上，这才知道左慈有道术，不敢再杀他。
English: Zuo Ci wore wooden shoes and walked slowly with a bamboo cane. Sun Ce chased after him with a weapon in his hand, but he could not catch up with him. It was only then that he knew Zuo Ci had Taoism and did not dare to kill him again.

古文：后慈以意告葛仙公，言当入霍山，合九转丹，遂乃仙去。
现代文：后来左慈告诉葛仙公说他要进霍山炼九转丹，后来终于成仙而去。
English: Later, Zuo Ci told Ge Xiang that he wanted to go to Huoshan to practice the Nine Turnings, and then he finally became an immortal.

古文：大茅君
现代文：大茅君
English: Da Mao Jun

古文：大茅君盈。
现代文：大茅君，名叫盈。
English: Damaojun, named Ying.

古文：南至句曲之山。
现代文：曾南行到句曲山。
English: Zeng traveled south to Mount Guqu.

古文：汉元寿二年，八月己酉，南岳真人赤君、西城王君及诸青童并从王母降于盈室。
现代文：汉哀帝元寿二年八月己酉这天，南岳真人赤君、西城王君和诸多的仙童侍从着西王母降临到茅盈家。
English: On the day of Emperor Han's death in August of the second year of Emperor Han's first year of life, Nangyue Zhenren Aka-kun, Xicheng Wang-kun, and many fairy attendants came to Maoying's home from the West Queen Mother.

古文：顷之，天皇大帝遣绣衣使者冷广子期赐盈神玺玉章，大微帝君遣三天左宫御史管修条赐盈八龙锦与紫羽华衣，太上大道君遣协晨大夫叔门赐盈金虎真符流金之铃，金阙圣君命太极真人正一止玄、王郎、王忠、鲍丘等赐盈以四节咽胎流明神芝。
现代文：不一会儿，天皇大帝派了绣衣使者冷广、子期赐给茅盈一枚神玺玉制图章，大微帝君派任三天左官御史的管修条赐给茅盈八龙锦缎和紫羽做的华丽衣裳，太上大道君派任协晨大夫的叔门赐给茅盈一个铸有金虎真的流金铃，金阙圣君命太极真人、正一止玄、王郎、王忠、鲍丘等赐给茅盈一只四节咽胎流明神芝。
English: In a short time, the Emperor sent the Embroidered Messenger Lengguang and the Son to give Maoying a sacred jade seal, the Great Emperor sent the three-day plasterer to give Maoying gorgeous clothes made of eight-dragon brocade and purple feathers, the Grand Duke sent the uncle of the doctor of the morning to give Maoying a golden bell cast with the true flow of the golden tiger, and the saints of the holy life of the golden dragon, such as Taoji Zhenren, Zheng Yizhu Xuan, Wang Lang, Wang Zhong, and Baoqiu, gave Maoying a four-section pharyngeal flow of the

古文：四使者授讫，使盈食芝佩玺，服衣玉冠。带符握铃而立，四使者告盈曰： 食四节隐芝者，位为真卿；食金阙玉芝者，位为司命；食流明金英者，位为司禄；食长曜双飞者，位为司命真伯；食夜光洞草者，总主在左御史之任。
现代文：四位大神的使者授赏之后，让茅盈吃了灵芝，佩戴上玉玺，穿上紫羽绣衣戴上玉符，带上金虎真符握着金铃站好，告诉茅盈： 吃了四节灵芝的官位就可做到真卿，吃了金阙玉芝的就是司命，吃了流明金英的就是司禄，吃了长曜双飞的，官位就是司命真伯；吃了夜光洞草的，就会长期任左御史。
English: After the emissaries of the four great gods presented the awards, they told Mao Ying to eat Ganoderma lucidum, wear a jade bracelet, put on a purple embroidered dress, wear a jade badge, bring a gold tiger charm, hold a golden bell, and stand well. They told Mao Ying: If you eat four pieces of Ganoderma lucidum, you can achieve the official rank of Zhenqing. If you eat gold-leafed Ganoderma lucidum, you will achieve the official rank of Sifu. If you eat luming jinying, you will achieve the official rank of Siro. If you eat long-day double-

古文：子尽食之矣，寿齐天地，位为司命上真，东岳上卿，统吴越之神仙，综江左之山源矣。 
现代文：现在上面说的这些你都吃了，你将寿比天地，官位是司命上真兼东岳上卿。你将统领吴越的神仙，管辖江左的山脉河流。 
English: Now you have eaten all of the above, you will live longer than heaven and earth, and your official rank will be Shimin Shangzheng and Dongyue Shangqing. You will lead the immortals of Wuyue and govern the mountains and rivers to the left of the river.

古文：言毕，使者俱去。
现代文：说罢使者们都走了。
English: After saying this, the messengers left.

古文：五帝君各以方面车服降于其庭，传太帝之命，赐紫玉之版，黄金刻书九锡之文，拜盈为东岳上卿、司命真君、太元真人，事毕俱去。
现代文：五帝君又把大茅君应该穿的各种官服和应乘用的车马降在他院中，并传达泰山帝君的命令，赐给茅盈紫玉笏板和刻着君王赏给大臣九种器物目录的金板，拜茅盈为东岳上卿、司命真君和太元真人，然后也都走了。
English: The Fifth Emperor also lowered various official uniforms and chariots and horses that Da Mao Jun should wear into his courtyard, and conveyed the order of Emperor Taishan to give Mao Ying a purple and jade plate and a gold plate engraved with a catalog of nine kinds of goods awarded by the king to the minister, and called Mao Ying Dongyue Shangye, Siyou Zhenjun and Taiyuan Zhenren, and then they also left.

古文：王母及盈师西城王君，为盈设天厨酣宴，歌玄灵之曲。
现代文：西王母和茅盈的仙师西城王君为茅盈摆下天宫厨房做的美味佳肴和茅盈一同宴饮，席间还有仙人唱天宫的仙曲。
English: Xi Wangmu and Maoying's fairy master, Xi Cheng Wangjun, served Maoying delicious dishes made by the Heavenly Palace kitchen, and Maoying had a banquet together. Between the meals, there were also immortals singing the heavenly palace's fairy songs.

古文：宴罢，王母携王君及盈，省顾盈之二弟，各授道要。
现代文：宴会结束后，王母带着王君和茅盈看望茅盈的两个弟弟，向他俩传授了修炼道术的秘诀。
English: After the banquet, the Queen Mother took Wang Jun and Mao Ying to visit Mao Ying's two younger brothers and taught them the secret of cultivating Taoism.

古文：王母命上元夫人，授茅固、茅衷《太霄隐书》、《丹景道精》等四部宝经。
现代文：王母命上元夫人授给茅盈的弟弟茅固、茅衷《太霄隐书》、《丹景道精》等四部宝经。
English: At the behest of the Queen Mother, the former first lady bestowed four treasure sutras on Mao Ying's younger brother, Mao Gu and Mao Zhen, including "The Secret of the Sky" and "The Spirit of Danqing."

古文：王母执《太霄隐书》，命侍女张灵子执交信之盟，以授于盈、固及衷，事讫，西王母升天而去。
现代文：王母手拿着《太霄隐书》，命侍女张灵子拿着表明学道决心的盟约授给茅盈弟兄三人，然后西王母升天而去。
English: The Queen Mother held "The Secret of the Heavenly Mountain" in her hand, and the maid of honor, Zhang Lingzi, held a covenant that showed the determination to learn the Tao and awarded it to the three Mao Ying brothers. Then the West Queen Mother ascended to heaven and left.

古文：其后紫虚元君、魏华存夫人请斋于阳洛之山隐元之台，西王母与金阙圣君降于台中，乘八景之舆，同诣清虚上宫，传《玉清隐书》四卷，以授华存。
现代文：后来，紫虚元君和魏华存夫人请茅盈到阳洛山上的隐元台吃素宴，西王母和金阙圣君又降临到隐元台，他们乘着绘有八景图案的车一同到清虚上宫，把《玉清隐书》四卷授给魏华存夫人。
English: Later, Ziyu Yuanjun and Wei Huacun's wife invited Maoying to Hekuangtai on Yangluo Mountain to have a vegetarian banquet. Xi Wangmu and Jinlu Shengkun also descended to Hekuangtai. They took a car painted with the eight-view pattern to go to the Qinghuang Palace together, and gave four volumes of "Jade-Clear Hidden Book" to Wei Huacun's wife.

古文：是时三元夫人冯双珠、紫阳左仙公石路成、太极高仙伯、延盖公子、西城真人、王方平、太虚真人、南岳真人、赤松子、桐柏真人王乔等三十余真，各歌太极阴歌之曲。
现代文：当时，三元夫人冯双珠、紫阳左仙石路成、太极高仙伯、延盖公子、西城真人、王方平、太虚真人、赤松子、桐柏真人王乔等三十多位大仙都分别唱了太极太阴的歌曲。
English: At that time, more than 30 great sages, including the Third Yuan Lady Feng Shuangzhu, Ziyang Zuo Xianshi Lucheng, Taiji Gao Xianbo, Yan Gai Gongzi, Xicheng Zhenren, Wang Fangping, Taihu Zhenren, Akamatsu Zi, and Tongbai Zhenren Wang Qiao, all sang the songs of Taiji Zhenren respectively.

古文：王母为之歌曰： 驾我八景舆，欻然入玉清。
现代文：西王母也唱道， 驾我八景舆，欻然入玉清。
English: The Queen Mother of the West also sang, "Take me to the Eight Views of the World, and I will suddenly enter the Jade Palace."

古文：龙群拂霄上，虎斾挕朱兵。
现代文：龙群拂霄上，虎斾挕朱兵。
English: The dragons are flying high, the tigers are chasing the Zhu soldiers.

古文：逍遥玄津际，万流无暂停。
现代文：逍遥玄津际，万流无暂停。
English: There is no pause in the flow of the world.

古文：哀此去留会，劫尽天地倾。
现代文：哀此去留会，劫尽天地倾。
English: He regretted this and decided to stay at the club.

古文：当寻无中景，不死亦不生。
现代文：当寻无中景，不死亦不生。
English: When there is no middle ground, there is no life or death.

古文：体彼自然道，寂观合太冥。
现代文：体彼自然道，寂欢合太冥。
English: It is natural for body and mind to be different, and for happiness and sadness to be too different.

古文：南岳拟贞干，玉英耀颖精。
现代文：南岳拟贞干，玉英耀颖精。
English: Nangyue resembles Zhengan, and Jade Ying shines like a star.

古文：有任靡其事，虚心自受灵。
现代文：有任靡其事，虚心自受灵。
English: They have the power to do whatever they want, and are humble enough to accept whatever comes their way.

古文：嘉会降河曲，相与乐未央。 
现代文：嘉会降河曲，相与乐未央。 
English: Jia Hui's "Falling Down the River" is similar to "Le Wei Yang."

古文：王母歌毕，三元夫人答歌亦毕，王母及三元夫人、紫阳左公、太极仙伯、清灵王君，乃携南岳魏华存同去，东南行，俱诣天台、霍山，过句曲之金坛，宴太元真人茅升申于华易洞天。
现代文：西王母唱完后，三元夫人也答唱了一首。王母和三元夫人、紫阳左公、太极仙伯、清灵王君这些仙人就带着南岳的魏华存夫人一同向东南走去，到了天台山、霍山，经过句曲山的金坛时，宴请了太元真人茅升申，宴席设在华易洞天。
English: After Xi Wangmu finished singing, Lady Sanyuan also sang a song in reply. Wangmu and Lady Sanyuan, Ziyang Zagong, Taiji Xianbo, Qingling Wangkun, these immortals took Lady Wei Huacun from Nanyue together to the southeast, and when they reached Tiantai Mountain, Huoshan, and passed through the golden altar of Guqu Mountain, they invited Taiyuan Zhenren Maosheng, and the banquet was held in Huai Dongtian.

古文：留华存于霍山洞宫玉宇之下，众真皆从王母升还龟台矣。
现代文：后来把魏华存夫人留在霍山洞宫的玉宇下面，众位神仙就都跟着王母驾云返回龟台去了。
English: Later, he left Mrs. Wei Huacun under the Jade Mountain of the Hushan Cave Palace, and all the immortals followed the Queen Mother and drove back to Kameidai.

