古文：王正言，郓州人。
现代文：王正言，郓州人。
English: Wang Zhengyan, from Zhangzhou.

古文：父志，济阴令。
现代文：父亲王志，任济阴令。
English: His father, Wang Zhi, was appointed to the post of Jiyin.

古文：正言早孤贫，从沙门学，工诗，密州刺史贺德伦令归俗，署郡职。
现代文：王正言早年丧父贫穷，跟从和尚学佛，擅长写诗，密州刺史贺德伦令他还俗，担任郡职。
English: Wang Zhengyan lost his father at an early age and was poor. He followed a monk to learn Buddhism and was good at writing poetry. He was ordained as a layman and served as a county official by the governor of Meizhou Province, He Delun.

古文：德伦镇青州，表为推官；移镇魏州，改观察判官。
现代文：贺德伦镇守青州，推举他为推官，贺德伦移镇魏州后，王正言改任观察判官。
English: After He Delun moved to the town of Weizhou, Wang Zhengyan was reappointed as an observation judge.

古文：庄宗平定魏博，正言仍旧职任，小心端慎，与物无竞。
现代文：庄宗平定魏博后，王正言仍任旧职，小心谨慎，和别人不相竞争。
English: After Zhuangzong subdued Wei Bo, Wang Zhengyan still held his old post, being careful not to compete with others.

古文：尝为同职司空颋所凌，正言降心下之。
现代文：曾被同事司空廷页凌辱，王正言委屈忍受。
English: Wang Zhenggang was abused and humiliated by his colleague, the Secretary of the State Council.

古文：颋诛，代为节度判官。
现代文：司空廷页被杀，王正言代替他为节度判官。
English: Sikyong Jingshe was killed, and Wang Zhengyan replaced him as the judge of the festival.

古文：同光初，守户部尚书、兴唐尹。
现代文：同光初年，守户部尚书、兴唐尹。
English: In the first year of Tongguang, the governors of the household department, Shang Shu and Xing Tang Yin, were promoted.

古文：时孔谦为租庸副使，常畏张宪挺特，不欲其领使，乃白郭崇韬留宪于魏州，请宰相豆卢革判租庸。
现代文：这时孔谦任租庸副使，常畏惧张宪正直刚强，不想让他任租庸正使，便对枢密使郭崇韬说要他把张宪留在魏州，请宰相豆卢革主管租庸。
English: At this time, Kong Qian was appointed as the deputy envoy of Le Yong. He was often afraid of Zhang Xian, who was upright and strong, and did not want him to be appointed as the deputy envoy of Le Yong. Therefore, he said to the envoy of Guo Chongyi that he should keep Zhang Xian in Weizhou, and asked the chancellor of Doulu Ge, the head of Le Yong.

古文：未几，复以卢质代之。
现代文：没多久，又以卢质代替豆卢革。
English: It didn't take long before they substituted loin for bean loin.

古文：孔谦白云： 钱谷重务，宰相事多，簿籍留滞。 
现代文：孔谦说 ：钱谷是繁重事务，而宰相豆卢革事情多，恐怕簿册账本会没时间处理而耽误了。 
English: Kong Qiancheng said: Qiancheng is a heavy business, and Prime Minister Douluke has a lot of things to do. I am afraid that the bookkeeping will be delayed because there is no time to deal with it.

古文：又云： 卢质判二日，便借官钱，皆不可任。 
现代文：又说 ：卢质主管二天，租庸就借了官钱，都不可任用。 
English: He also said: "If the quality supervisor of Lu comes two days later, the lessee has borrowed government money and cannot be appointed.

古文：意谓崇韬必令己代其任，时物议未允而止，谦沮丧久之。
现代文：心想郭崇韬一定会要自己做租庸正使，因当时舆论不同意而作罢，孔谦沮丧了好长时间。
English: Thinking that Guo Chongyao would definitely want to be a rent-a-troll himself, Kong Qian was frustrated for a long time because the public opinion at that time did not agree with him.

古文：李绍宏曰： 邦计国本，时号怨府，非张宪不称职。 
现代文：李绍宏说 ：租庸是国家的根本，都称它是招积怨恨的地方，只有张宪才能称正职。 
English: Li Shaohong said: "Rent-a-yong is the foundation of the country. Everyone says that it is a place for the accumulation of resentment. Only Zhang Xian can be called a leader.

古文：即日征之。
现代文：当天就征召张宪。
English: Zhang Xian was called up the same day.

古文：孔谦、段徊白崇韬曰： 邦计虽重，在侍中眼前，但得一人为使即可。
现代文：而孔谦、段对郭崇韬说： 租庸虽然重要，在侍中眼前只要有一人充当此职就可以了。
English: However, Kong Qian and Duan said to Guo Chonglu: Although ten yong is important, as long as there is only one person in front of the chambermaid to act as this post, it is fine.

古文：魏博六州户口，天下之半，王正言操守有余，智力不足，若朝廷任使，庶几与人共事；若专制方隅，未见其可。
现代文：魏博六州户口占天下一半，王正言操守有余，智力不足，如果在朝任租庸使，还能与别人共同谋划，如果独自治理一方，就不行了。
English: Wei Bo and the six-state hukou account for half of the world. Wang Zhengyan has more than enough integrity, but not enough intelligence. If he is appointed as a mercenary in the government, he can still plan with others, but if he manages one side alone, it will not work.

古文：张宪才器兼济，宜以委之。 
现代文：张宪才能器量都兼备，适合在魏州独当一面。 
English: Zhang Xian is both talented and resourceful, and is suitable to be a leader in Weizhou.

古文：崇韬即奏宪留守魏州，征王正言为租庸使。
现代文：郭崇韬便奏报要张宪留守魏州，征王正言为租庸使。
English: Guo Chongyong then sent a report to Zhang Xian to stay in Weizhou, calling Wang Zhengyan a mercenary.

古文：正言在职，主诺而已，权柄出于孔谦。
现代文：王正言任职后，只是点头同意而已，权力掌握在孔谦手中。
English: After Wang Zhengyan took office, he only nodded in agreement, and the power was in the hands of Kong Qian.

古文：正言不耐繁浩，簿领纵横，触事遗忘，物论以为不可，即以孔谦代之，正言守礼部尚书。
现代文：王正言耐不住繁杂事物，簿册成堆，遇事容易忘，舆论认为他不适合任此职，就以孔谦代替他，王正言守礼部尚书。
English: Wang Zhengyan could not bear the complexity of things. He had piles of books and records. He easily forgot things. The public opinion thought that he was not fit to hold this post, so he was replaced by Kong Qian. Wang Zhengyan kept the etiquette.

古文：三年冬，代张宪为兴唐尹，留守鄴都。
现代文：同光三年冬天，王正言代替张宪任兴唐尹，留守邺都。
English: In the winter of the same year, Wang Zhengyan replaced Zhang Xian, Ren Xing and Tang Yin, and stayed in Shidu.

古文：时武德使史彦琼，监守鄴都，廪帑出纳，兵马制置，皆出彦琼，将佐官吏，颐指气使，正言不能以道御之，但趑趄听命。
现代文：这时武德使史彦琼监守邺都，钱物出纳，兵马设置，都由史彦琼决定，将佐官吏都由他任意指使，王正言不能用方法引导他，只是随从听命。
English: At this time, Wu De sent Shi Yan Qiong to supervise the capital, the cashier of money and goods, and the setting up of soldiers and horses were all decided by Shi Yan Qiong, and the adjutants were all arbitrarily directed by him. Wang Zhengyan could not guide him by means, but only followed his orders.

古文：至是，贝州戍兵乱，入魏州，彦琼望风败走，乱兵剽劫坊市。
现代文：到这时，贝州驻兵叛乱，进入魏州，史彦琼望风而逃，乱兵劫掠街市。
English: At this time, the Beizhou garrison mutinied and entered Weizhou, Shi Yanqiong fled to the wind, and the soldiers looted the streets.

古文：是日，正言引诸僚佐谒赵在礼，《通鉴》：正言索马，不能得，乃帅僚佐步出府门谒在礼。望尘再拜请罪。
现代文：王正言催促赶快叫书吏写奏章，家里人说： 贼兵已杀人放火，都城已被攻陷，还有什么上奏的！ 这一天，王正言带着各位僚佐谒见赵在礼，望着地下再拜请罪。
English: Wang Zhengyan urged the librarian to quickly write a report, and the family members said: The robber soldiers have killed and set fire, the capital has been captured, what else is there to report! On this day, Wang Zhengyan and his colleagues saw Zhao bowing and looked down at the ground to ask for forgiveness.

古文：在礼曰： 尚书重德，勿自卑屈，余受国恩，与尚书共事，但思归之众，仓卒见迫耳。 
现代文：赵在礼说： 尚书您德高望重，不要自己太卑屈了，我受国恩，与您共事，只不过是思乡的众兵逼迫您罢了。 
English: Zhao Zaili said: Shangshu, you are held in high esteem. Don't be too subservient. I've been blessed by the state to work with you. It's just that the soldiers who are homesick are persecuting you.

古文：因拜正言，厚加慰抚。
现代文：因而也拜王正言，厚言抚慰。
English: Therefore, they also worship Wang Zhengyan, and are comforted by his kind words.

古文：明宗即位，正言求为平卢军行军司马，因以授之，竟卒于任。
现代文：明宗即位，王正言请求任平卢军行军司马，明宗即授给他这个职务，王正言在任期间去世。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended the throne, Wang Zhengyan requested to be appointed as the Sima of the March of the Pinglu Army, and Emperor Mingzong granted him this position. Wang Zhengyan died during his term of office.

