古文：《左传》所载列国人语言书讯，其辞旨如出一手。
现代文：《左传》所收录各国的语言、记载、陈诉，遣词造句的意旨如出一人之手。
English: The languages, records, and complaints of each country included in "Zo Zhuan" are perfect, and the meaning of the words and sentences is like the hand of one person.

古文：说者遂以为皆左氏所作，予疑其不必然，乃若润色整齐，则有之矣。试以《诗》证之：《扬之水》三篇，一《周诗》，一《郑诗》，一《晋诗》，其二篇皆曰 不流束薪 ， 不流束楚 。
现代文：解释这种现象的人就以为都是左氏一人写的，我怀疑不见得如此，至于润色加工那是有的。试以《诗经》证明这一点：国风中《扬之水》有三篇，一在《王风》，一在《郑风》，一在《唐风》，其中两篇都有 不流束薪  不流束楚 。
English: People who try to explain this phenomenon assume that Zuo was the sole author. I suspect that this is not necessarily the case, as far as the polishing process is concerned. Let's try to prove this with the "Book of Songs": There are three pieces of "Yang's Water" in the national style, one in the "King Wind," one in the "Zheng Wind" and one in the "Tang Wind," and two of them have "No Flow" and "No Flow."

古文：《邶》之《谷风》曰 习习谷风，以阴以雨 ，《雅》之《谷风》曰 习习谷风，维风及雨 。 在南山之阳 ， 在南山之下 ， 在南山之侧 ； 在浚之郊 ， 在浚之都 ， 在浚之城 ； 在河之浒 ， 在河之漘 ， 在河之涘 ； 山有枢，隰有榆 ， 山有苞亻乐，隰有六驳 ， 山有蕨薇，隰有杞桋 ； 言秣其马 ， 言采其虻 ， 言观其旂 ， 言醿其弓。 
现代文：《邶风•谷风》有 习习谷风，以阴以雨 ，《小雅•谷风》有 习习谷风，维风及雨 。 在南山之阳  在南山之下  在南山之侧 ； 在浚之郊 ， 在浚之都 ， 在浚之城 ； 在河之浒 ， 在河之漘 ， 在河之涘 ； 山有枢，隰有榆 ， 山有苞亻乐，隰有六驳 ， 山有蕨薇，隰有杞桋 ； 言秣其马 ， 言采其虻 ， 言观其旂 ， 言醿其弓。
English: "The Wind in the Valley" has the wind in the valley, with the shade and rain; "The Wind in the Valley" has the wind in the valley, with the wind and rain; in the sun of the Nanshan Mountain, under the Nanshan Mountain, on the side of the Nanshan Mountain; in the suburbs of the Nanshan Mountain, in the capital of the Nanshan Mountain, in the city of the Nanshan Mountain; in the estuary of the river, in the estuary of the river, in the estuary of the river; the mountain has the pivot, the anchor, the mountain has the music, the anchor has the six barges, the

古文：皆杂出于诸诗，而兴致一也。
现代文：都分别出自各篇，可情致是一样的。
English: They are all from different articles, but the sentiment is the same.

古文：盖先王之泽未远，天下书同文，师无异道，人无异习，出口成言，皆止乎礼义，是以不谋而同尔。
现代文：原是先王的恩泽为时不远，天下人书写同样的文字，老师没有不同的学说，人们没有不同的风习，出口成言，都受礼义的制约，因此就不谋而合了。
English: Originally, the grace of the previous king was not far away, people all over the world wrote the same words, teachers did not have different doctrines, people did not have different customs, and idioms were subject to the constraints of etiquette, so they coincided.

