古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻九针于夫子，而行之于百姓，百姓之血气，各不同形，或神动而气先针行，或气与针相逢，或针已出气独行，或数刺乃知，或发针而气逆，或数刺病益剧。
现代文：黄帝问岐伯道：我从先生这里学习了九针，并在百姓身上运用，发现人们的血气盛衰是不一样的，对针刺的反应也有明显的差异：有的在进针之前神情就有了变化，精神高度紧张，并对针感有强烈的反应；有的进针后马上就有得气的感觉；有的在出针后才有反应；还有的很不敏感，经过数次针刺才有反应；有的针后就出现气逆、晕针等不良反应；有的经过几次针刺治疗后病情反而加重。
English: Huang Di asked Qibao: I learned nine needles from my master and applied them to the people. I found that people's blood gases rise and fall differently, and their reactions to acupuncture are also significantly different: some people's facial expressions change before the needle is inserted, their spirits are highly strained, and they have a strong reaction to the needle sensation; some people have a feeling of getting angry immediately after the needle is inserted; some people only have a reaction after the needle is released; others are very insensitive and only have a reaction after several needles are inserted; some people have adverse reactions such as qi inversion and needle dizziness after the needle is inserted; and some people

古文：凡此六者，各不同形，愿闻其方。
现代文：上述六种情况，表现各不相同，我想知道其中的道理。
English: I would like to know the reason for the different performance of the above six cases.

古文：岐伯曰：重阳之人，其神易动，其气易往也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：重阳类型的人，其精神易受触动，其气也易于行走来至。
English: Qi Bo replied, "A person of the heavy yang type, his spirit is easily touched, and his qi is also easy to come and go.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓重阳之人？
现代文：黄帝问：什么是重阳类型的人呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is a double yang type person?

古文：岐伯曰：重阳之人，熇熇高高，言语善疾，举足善高，心肺之脏气有余，阳气滑盛而扬，故神动而气先行。
现代文：岐伯答道：重阳类型人的神气禀性如同火一样轰轰烈烈，精力充沛，说话爽朗流利，走路时脚举得高，这种人的心、肺脏气有余，功能旺盛，阳气充盛滑利而升腾，所以精神一动，其气随针入而有反应。
English: Qi Bo replied, "A person of the double yang type has a vigorous energy and vitality like a fire. He is full of energy, speaks coolly and fluently, and walks with his feet held high. This kind of person's heart and lungs have more than enough qi, they have strong functions, and the yang qi is full, smooth, and soaring. Therefore, when the spirit moves, its qi reacts with the injection of the needle.

古文：黄帝曰：重阳之人而神不先行者，何也？
现代文：黄帝问：有些重阳类型的人，神情并不易激动，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Some people of the double sun type are not easily excited, what is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：此人颇有阴者也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这种人虽然阳气炽盛，但阴气也盛，阳中有阴。
English: Qi Bo replied: Although this kind of person is full of yang, he is also full of yin, and there is yin in the yang.

古文：黄帝曰：何以知其颇有阴者也？
现代文：黄帝又问：怎么知道这种人阳中有阴呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked again: How do you know that this kind of person has yin in his yang?

古文：岐伯曰：多阳者多喜，多阴者多怒，数怒者易解，故曰颇有阴。
现代文：岐伯答道：多阳的人情绪高涨，精神愉快，常喜形于色；多阴则精神抑郁，心情紧张，经常恼怒不快，好发脾气，但很容易缓解，根据上述特点说明这种人阳中有阴。
English: Qi Bo replied: People with more yang have a high mood, a happy spirit, and are often happy; people with more yin have a depressed spirit, a tense mood, are often angry and unhappy, and are prone to losing their temper, but it is easy to alleviate. According to the above characteristics, this kind of person has yang and yin.

古文：其阴阳之离合难，故其神不能先行也。
现代文：所以阳为阴滞，阴阳离合困难，神气就不易激动，反应也不那么强烈。
English: Therefore, the yang is stagnant, the yin and yang are difficult to fuse, the spirit is not easy to excite, and the reaction is not so strong.

古文：黄帝曰：其气与针相逢，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：有的患者对针刺很敏感，下针后很快得气，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Some patients are very sensitive to acupuncture, and they quickly get angry after the injection. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：阴阳和调，而血气淖泽滑利，故针入而气出疾而相逢也。
现代文：岐伯答道：这是因为人的阴阳均衡协调，气血濡润和畅，所以进针以后就很快出现得气的反应。
English: Qi Bo replied, "This is because people's yin and yang are balanced and coordinated, and their qi and blood are moist and smooth. Therefore, after the needle is inserted, the reaction of having too much qi will occur soon.

古文：黄帝曰：针已出而气独行者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝又问：有的人在起针以后，才出现反应，其内在的机制是什么呢？
English: Huang Di also asked: Some people only have a reaction after the needle is raised, what is the internal mechanism?

古文：岐伯曰：其阴气多而阳气少，阴气沉而阳气浮，者内藏，故针已出，气乃随其后，故独行也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：因为这种人多阴而少阳，阴的性质主沉降，阳的性质主升浮，阴偏盛则沉潜敛藏占优势，所以针刺时反应迟缓，当出针以后，阳气随其针而上浮，才出现反应。
English: Qibo replied: Because this kind of person is more yin and less yang, the nature of yin is mainly to sink, the nature of yang is mainly to rise and float, and the predominance of yin is mainly to sink and hide, so the reaction is slow when the needle is pricked. When the needle is released, the yang follows the needle and rises, and the reaction occurs.

古文：黄帝曰：数刺乃知，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝问：经过几次针刺治疗才出现反应，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the reason for the reaction after several acupuncture treatments?

古文：岐伯曰：此人之多阴而少阳，其气沉而气往难，故数刺乃知也。
现代文：岐伯答道：这是因为这种人多阴而少阳，其气机沉潜至深，反应低下而气难至，对针刺极不敏感，所以通过几次针刺后才出现反应。
English: Qi Bo replied: This is because this kind of person is more yin and less yang, his qi engine sinks to the depths, the reaction is low and the qi is difficult to reach, it is extremely insensitive to needling, so the reaction occurs only after several needling.

古文：黄帝曰：针入而气逆者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝问：有的人刚刚进针即出现气逆晕针的不良反应，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Some people have an adverse reaction to the gas reversal needle as soon as the needle is inserted. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：其气逆与其数刺病益甚者，非阴阳之气，浮沉之势也。此皆麤之所败，工之所失，其形气无过焉。
现代文：岐伯答道：进针后出现气逆晕针的不良反应，还有经过多次针刺治疗后病情反而加重恶化者，并不是患者的体质阴阳偏盛偏衰，以及气机的升浮沉降造成的，这都是治疗粗疏造成的不良后果，是医生治疗上的失误，与患者的形气体质无关。
English: Qi Bo replied: The adverse reactions of gas reversal needles after injection, as well as those whose condition worsened after multiple acupuncture treatments, were not caused by the patient's physical condition of yin and yang, as well as the rise and fall of the gas engine. These are all adverse consequences caused by rough treatment. It is a doctor's error in treatment, and has nothing to do with the patient's gas quality.

