古文：霍峻字仲邈，南郡枝江人也。
现代文：霍峻，字仲邈，是南郡枝江人。
English: Huo Jun, alias "Zhongyao," is from Nan County, Jiangsu Province.

古文：兄笃，於乡里合部曲数百人。
现代文：他的兄长霍笃，曾经在乡里聚集部众几百人。
English: His older brother, Hoduk, once gathered hundreds of followers in the countryside.

古文：笃卒，荆州牧刘表令峻摄其众。
现代文：霍笃去世后，荆州牧刘表令霍峻统帅他兄长的部队。
English: After the death of Huo Du, Jingzhou Mu Liu ordered Huo Jun to command his brother's troops.

古文：表卒，峻率众归先主，先主以峻为中郎将。
现代文：刘表去世后，霍俊率队伍归附刘备，刘备任命霍峻为中郎将。
English: After Liu Biao's death, the team led by Huo Jun was attached to Liu Bei, and Liu Bei appointed Huo Jun as the second in command.

古文：先主自葭萌南还袭刘璋，留峻守葭萌城。
现代文：刘备从葭萌往南回军袭击刘璋，留下霍峻守卫葭萌城。
English: Liu Bei attacked Liu Bei from Qimeng to the south, leaving Huo Jun to guard Qimeng City.

古文：张鲁遣将杨帛诱峻，求共守城，峻曰： 小人头可得，城不可得。 
现代文：张鲁派将领杨帛招诱霍峻，请求共同守城，霍峻说: 我的头能得到，但得不到这座城。 
English: Zhang Lu's general Yang Wei lured Ho Chun away and asked him to jointly defend the city. Ho Chun said: I can get my head, but I can't get this city.

古文：帛乃退去。
现代文：杨帛就退军离开。
English: Yang Hui withdrew from the army and left.

古文：后璋将扶禁、向存等帅万馀人由阆水上，攻围峻，且一年，不能下。
现代文：后来刘璋的将领扶禁、向纯等人率领一万多人沿着阆水而上围攻霍峻，将近一年的时间，没有能攻克。
English: Later, Liu Bei's generals Fuken, Xiang Jun, and others led more than ten thousand people along the Surabaya River to besiege Hozhun. For nearly a year, they were unable to conquer it.

古文：峻城中兵才数百人，伺其怠隙，选精锐出击，大破之，即斩存首。
现代文：霍峻城中兵卒只有几百人，趁着敌人松懈的时机，挑选精锐士卒出击，大破敌军，并斩杀了向存。
English: There were only a few hundred soldiers in the Hojun Castle. Taking advantage of the enemy's slack time, they selected elite soldiers to attack, defeated the enemy army, and killed Xuan Xuan.

古文：先主定蜀，嘉峻之功，乃分广汉为梓潼郡，以峻为梓潼太守、裨将军。
现代文：刘备平定蜀地，嘉奖霍峻的军功，就将广汉郡分出梓潼郡，任命霍峻为梓潼太守、裨将军。
English: Liu Bei subdued Shu and commended Huo Jun's military exploits. He then separated Guanghan County from Zizhi County and appointed Huo Jun as Zizhi's grand marshal and general.

古文：在官三年，年四十卒，还葬成都。
现代文：霍峻在官三年，四十岁就去世了，安葬在成都。
English: After three years in office, he died at the age of forty and was buried in Chengdu.

古文：先主甚悼惜，乃诏诸葛亮曰： 峻既佳士，加有功於国，欲行酹。 
现代文：刘备非常哀悼痛惜，就下诏对诸葛亮说: 霍峻是优秀的臣子，又加上对国家有功，我想亲自祭奠。 
English: Liu Bei was very sorrowful and deplored, so he issued an edict to Zhuge Liang saying: "Ho Jun is an excellent vassal, and he has made contributions to the country. I would like to personally pay tribute to him."

古文：遂亲率群僚临会吊祭，因留宿墓上，当时荣之。
现代文：于是亲自率领百官前去祭奠，并留宿墓地，当时的人都认为很荣耀。
English: As a result, he personally led hundreds of officials to pay their respects and stay at the cemetery, which was considered a great honor at the time.

古文：子弋，字绍先，先主末年为太子舍人。
现代文：霍峻的儿子霍弋，字绍先，在刘备末年担任太子舍人。
English: In the last years of Liu Bei's life, Huo Jun's son, Huo Tong, also known as Shao Xian, served as the prince's concubine.

古文：后主践阼，除谒者。
现代文：后主刘禅登基后，任命他为谒者。
English: After Emperor Liu Zhen ascended to the throne, he appointed him as regent.

古文：丞相诸葛亮北驻汉中，请为记室，使与子乔共周旋游处。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮往北驻守汉中，请任霍弋为记室，并让他与自己的儿子诸葛乔一起周游各地军营。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang was stationed in the north of Hanzhong, and asked Huo Tong to be his secretary, and let him travel around the military camps with his son Zhuge Qiao.

古文：亮卒，为黄门侍郎。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，霍弋担任黄门侍郎，刘禅册立太子刘叡，任命霍弋为中庶子。
English: After the death of Zhuge Liang, Huo Jia served as the Yellow Gate attendant, Liu Zenshuan appointed the crown prince Liu E, and appointed Huo Jia as the middle child.

古文：后主立太子璿，以弋为中庶子，璿好骑射，出入无度，弋援引古义，尽言规谏，甚得切磋之体。
现代文：刘睿喜好骑射，出入宫禁，没有节制，霍弋援引古代经典，进行规劝，言语方式很是得体。
English: Liu Rui is fond of riding and shooting. He is not allowed to enter or leave the palace. He is not restrained. Huo Yao quoted ancient classics to persuade him. His speech was very appropriate.

古文：后为参军庲降屯副贰都督，又转护军，统事如前。
现代文：后来霍弋担任参军怫降的屯副二都督，又转任护军，像过去一样管理事务。
English: Later, Hou Yi served as the deputy governor of the second capital, who joined the army and was demoted, and he was also transferred to the guard, managing affairs as in the past.

古文：时永昌郡夷獠恃险不宾，数为寇害，乃以弋领永昌太守，率偏军讨之，遂斩其豪帅，破坏邑落，郡界宁静。
现代文：当时永昌郡的少数民族仪仗天险很不臣服，多次侵犯边境，于是朝廷任命霍弋兼任永昌太守，率领部分军队征讨他们，最后斩杀了他们的首领，攻破了他们的部落，永昌郡边界自此安定下来。
English: At that time, the ethnic minorities of Yongchang County were very insubordinate to honor, nature and danger, and repeatedly violated the border. Therefore, the court appointed Huo Zhen as the Yongchang governor, led a part of the army to conquer them, and finally killed their leaders and broke through their tribe. The border of Yongchang County has been stable since then.

古文：迁监军翊军将军，领建宁太守，还统南郡事。
现代文：霍弋升任监军翊军将军，兼任建宁太守，后来返回管理南郡事务。
English: He was promoted to the post of inspector general of the Yunnan army, and concurrently served as the governor of Jianning. Later, he returned to manage the affairs of Nan County.

古文：景耀六年，进号安南将军。
现代文：景耀六年，霍弋进号为安南将军。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of King Gyeongsoo, General Annan became the new leader of North Korea.

古文：是岁，蜀并于魏。弋与巴东领军襄阳罗宪各保全一方，举以内附，咸因仍前任，宠待有加。
现代文：同年，蜀国归并魏国，霍弋与巴东领军，襄阳人罗宪各自保全一方，率众臣服魏朝，都得以担任之前的职位，朝廷对他们非常宠信。
English: In the same year, Shu was annexed to Wei, and the leaders of Houtong and Badong, as well as Luo Xian from Xiangyang, each kept one side and led their subjects to serve the Wei dynasty. They were able to hold their previous positions, and the imperial court was very fond of them.

古文：王连字文仪，南阳人也。
现代文：王连，字文仪，南阳郡人。
English: Wang Lian, a poet, is from Nanyang County.

古文：刘璋时入蜀，为梓潼令。先主起事葭萌，进军来南，连闭城不降，先主义之，不强偪也。
现代文：在刘璋时期进入蜀地，担任梓潼县令，刘备在葭萌起兵，进军南方，王连紧闭城门拒绝投降，刘备认为他很有大义，没有强迫他。
English: During Liu Bei's time, he entered Shu and served as the county magistrate of Zizhi County. Liu Bei raised an army in Qimeng and marched into the south. Wang Lian closed the city gate and refused to surrender. Liu Bei thought he was very righteous and did not force him.

古文：及成都既平，以连为什邡令，转在广都，所居有绩。
现代文：等到成都平定后，任命王连为什邡县县令，后又转任广都县，他所任官的地方都很有政绩。
English: After Chengdu was pacified, Wang Liankorou was appointed as the county magistrate of Shifang County, and later he was transferred to Guangdong County. The places where he served were very successful.

古文：迁司盐校尉，较盐铁之利，利入甚多，有裨国用，於是简取良才以为官属，若吕乂、杜祺、刘幹等，终皆至大官，自连所拔也。
现代文：王连升任司盐校尉，负责盐铁事业的经营，为国家谋取很多利益，有利于国家政务。于是挑选了一些优秀能人作为自己的部属，如吕乂、杜祺、刘干等人，这些人后来都做了大官，都是从被王连提拔开始的。
English: Wang Lian was promoted to Lieutenant of the Salt Division, responsible for the management of the salt and iron industry, seeking a lot of benefits for the country and conducive to national government affairs. Therefore, he selected some outstanding talents as his subordinates, such as Lv Ying, Du Ying, Liu Gan and others. These people later became high-ranking officials, all of whom started from being promoted by Wang Lian.

古文：迁蜀郡太守、兴业将军，领盐府如故。
现代文：后来王连升任蜀郡太守、兴业将军，仍像过去一样负责盐府事务。
English: Later, Wang Lian was promoted to Shuxi County Governor and General of Industry, and was still responsible for the affairs of Yanfu as in the past.

古文：建兴元年，拜屯骑校尉，领丞相长史，封平阳亭侯。
现代文：建兴元年，王连被任命为屯骑校尉，兼任丞相长史，被封为平阳亭侯。
English: In the first year of the Jianxing era, Wang Lian was appointed as a cavalry lieutenant, concurrently served as chancellor and minister of education, and was given the title of prince of Pingyang Pavilion.

古文：时南方诸郡不宾，诸葛亮将自征之，连谏以为 此不毛之地，疫疠之乡，不宜以一国之望，冒险而行 。
现代文：当时南方各郡不肯臣服，诸葛亮打算亲自率军征讨，王连上谏认为 这些是荒蛮之地，瘟疫盛行之乡，不值得以诸葛亮这样一国指望的人亲自冒险前往 。
English: At that time, the southern counties refused to submit, and Zhuge Liang planned to personally lead an army to conquer them. Wang Lian Shangyu thought that these were barbaric lands, plague-infested townships, and it was not worth the risk for someone who counted on a country like Zhuge Liang to personally go there.

古文：亮虑诸将才不及己，意欲必往，而连言辄恳至，故停留者久之。
现代文：诸葛亮考虑到将领们才能比不上自己，一定要前去，而王莲言辞恳切，所以停留了很长时间。
English: Zhuge Liang considered that the generals were no match for him, so he had to go, but Wang Lian was sincere, so he stayed for a long time.

古文：会连卒。子山嗣，官至江阳太守。
现代文：不久王连去世，他的儿子王山承袭爵位，官至江阳太守。
English: Wang Lian died soon after, and his son Wang Shan inherited the title and became the governor of Jiangyang.

古文：向朗字巨达，襄阳宜城人也。
现代文：向郎，字巨达，襄阳郡宜城人。
English: Xiang Lang, nicknamed "Giant," is from Yicheng, Yangyang County.

古文：荆州牧刘表以为临沮长。
现代文：荆州牧刘表任用他为临沮县县长。
English: Jingzhou Mu Liu table appointed him as the county governor of Linduo County.

古文：表卒，归先主。先主定江南，使朗督秭归、夷道、巫、夷陵四县军民事。
现代文：刘表去世后，向郎归附刘备，刘备平定江南，派向郎都领秭归、夷道、巫、夷陵四县的军政民事。
English: After Liu Biao's death, Liu Bei was assigned to his brother, and Liu Bei pacified the south of the Yangtze River, and sent his brother to lead the military, political and civil affairs of the four counties of Yugu, Yidu, Wuxi and Yiling.

古文：蜀既平，以朗为巴西太守，顷之转任牂牁，又徙房陵。
现代文：蜀地平定后，又任命向郎为巴西太守，不久转任为牂牁太守，又转到房陵任职。
English: After Shu was settled, he also appointed Xiang Lang as the governor of Brazil, and soon he was transferred to the governor of Yunnan, and then to Fangling.

古文：后主践阼，为步兵校尉，代王连领丞相长史。
现代文：后主刘禅登基后，向朗担任步兵校尉，接替王连担任丞相长史。
English: After Liu Zhen ascended to the throne, Xiang Lang served as an infantry lieutenant and succeeded Wang Lian as chancellor.

古文：丞相亮南征，朗留统后事。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮率军南征，向朗留下统领后方事宜。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang led the army to invade the south, leaving Xiang Lang in charge of the rear.

古文：五年，随亮汉中。
现代文：建兴五年，向郎跟随诸葛亮到汉中。
English: In the fifth year of Jianxing, Xiang Lang followed Zhuge Liang to Hanzhong.

古文：朗素与马谡善，谡逃亡，朗知情不举，亮恨之，免官还成都。
现代文：向郎向来与马谡交好，马谡兵败逃亡，向朗知情不报，诸葛亮心中怨恨他，将他免官贬回成都。
English: Xiang Lang had always been friendly with Ma Xun. Ma Xun was defeated and fled, but did not inform Xiang Lang. Zhuge Liang hated him in his heart and demoted him back to Chengdu.

古文：数年，为光禄勋，亮卒后徒左将军，追论旧功，封显明亭侯，位特进。
现代文：几年之后，担任光禄勋，诸葛亮去世后，他又调任为左将军，追录之前的功劳，被封为显明亭侯，赐位特进。
English: A few years later, he was awarded the Medal of Honor, and after the death of Zhuge Liang, he was transferred to the Left General, and his previous achievements were recorded. He was named the Prince of Xianming and given a special promotion.

古文：初，朗少时虽涉猎文学，然不治素检，以吏能见称。
现代文：当初，向郎年少时虽然涉猎文学，但是不能自我约束，所以做官的才能著称。
English: At first, although he dabbled in literature when he was young, he could not restrain himself, so he was famous for his ability to be an official.

古文：自去长史，优游无事垂三十乃更潜心典籍，孜孜不倦。
现代文：自从被撤掉长史职务后，他闲散无事将近二十年，于是更加潜心钻研经典，孜孜不倦。
English: Since he was removed from his long-term position, he has been idle for nearly two decades, so he has been studying the classics more intently and tirelessly.

古文：年逾八十，犹手自校书，刊定谬误，积聚篇卷，於时最多。
现代文：年过八十仍然自己亲自校对书刊，判定错误，他所收藏的书籍在当时是最多的。
English: Over the age of eighty, he still personally proofread books and periodicals, judging errors, and his collection of books was the largest at that time.

古文：开门接宾，诱纳后进，但讲论古义，不干时事，以是见称。
现代文：开门接待宾客，接纳后进门声，只谈论古书文义，不涉及时事，所以在当时被称赞。
English: He was praised at the time because he opened the door to receive guests and only talked about ancient literature and did not discuss current affairs.

古文：上自执政，下及童冠，皆敬重焉。
现代文：上自朝中官员，下到儿童少年，都非常敬重他。
English: From officials in the DPRK and China to children and adolescents, they all hold him in high regard.

古文：延熙十年卒。
现代文：向朗在延熙十年去世。
English: Xiang Lang died in the tenth year of Yanxi.

古文：子条嗣，景耀中为御史中丞。
现代文：他的儿子向条继承爵位，在景耀年间担任御史中丞。
English: His son, Mukojo, inherited the title of nobility and served as Goshi Chujo during the reign of Emperor Jingyao.

古文：朗兄子宠，先主时为牙门将。
现代文：向郎兄长的儿子向宠，在刘备时期担任牙门将。
English: The son of elder brother Xiang Lang, Xiang Daming, served as the goalkeeper during the Liu Bei period.

古文：秭归之败，宠营特完。
现代文：刘备秭归战败后，只有向宠的军营保持完整。
English: After Liu Bei's defeat, only Xiang Zhao's camp remained intact.

古文：建兴元年封都亭侯，后为中部督，典宿卫兵。
现代文：建兴元年，向宠被封为都亭侯，后来担任中部都，管理守卫宫廷的部队。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, Xiang Daming was named the prince of the capital, and later served as the central capital, managing the troops guarding the palace.

古文：诸葛亮当北行，表与后主曰： 将军向宠，性行淑均，晓畅军事，试用於昔，先帝称之曰能，是以众论举宠为督。
现代文：诸葛亮北行之前，上表给后主刘禅说: 将军向宠，性情温和晓畅，通晓军事，过去试用，先帝称赞他能干，所以大家都商议推举向宠为督领。
English: Prior to Zhuge Liang's trip to the north, the above table said to his successor Liu Zen: General Xiang Xiao, mild-tempered, fluent, knowledgeable about military affairs, tried in the past, the former emperor praised him for his ability, so everyone discussed nominating Xiang Xiao as the leader.

古文：愚以为营中之事，悉以咨之，必能使行陈和睦，优劣得所也。 
现代文：我认为军营中的事情都应该向他咨询，一定能使得军中和睦协调，优劣各得其所。 
English: I think that he should be consulted on matters in the military camp, which will certainly make the army harmonious and coordinated, and the advantages and disadvantages will be in their own place.

古文：迁中领军。
现代文：向冲被升任为中领军。
English: Xiangchong was promoted to the middle leader.

古文：延熙三年，征汉嘉蛮夷，遇害。
现代文：延熙三年，征讨汉嘉的少数民族时，向宠遇害身亡。
English: In the third year of Yanxi, when the ethnic minorities of Han and Jia were conquered, Xiang Diao was killed and died.

古文：宠弟充，历射声校尉尚书。
现代文：他的弟弟向充曾担任过射声校尉、尚书。
English: His younger brother, Xiangzhuang, once served as an ejection lieutenant, Shangshu.

古文：张裔字君嗣，蜀郡成都人也。
现代文：张裔，字君嗣，蜀郡成都人。
English: Zhang Zi, surnamed Junzi, from Chengdu, Shu County.

古文：治公羊春秋，博涉史、汉。
现代文：他钻研《公羊春秋》，广泛涉猎《史记》、《汉书》。
English: He studied "Ram Spring and Autumn" and extensively read "Histories" and "Chinese Classics."

古文：汝南许文休入蜀，谓裔幹理敏捷，是中夏锺元常之伦也。
现代文：汝南人许文休进入蜀地，认为张裔干练敏捷，是中原一带像钟繇一样的人。
English: The people from the south of the Ryukyus, Xu Wenzhu, who entered Shoudi, believed that the Zhang people were capable and agile, and that they were like clockwork in the Central Plains.

古文：刘璋时，举孝廉，为鱼复长，还州署从事，领帐下司马。
现代文：刘璋时期，张裔被推举为孝廉，担任鱼复县县长，返回州里担任州署从事，兼任帐下司马。
English: During Liu Bei's reign, Zhang Xuan was promoted to Xiaolian, served as the head of Yufu County, returned to the county to work for the county government, and also served as the secretary of the county government.

古文：张飞自荆州由垫江入，璋授裔兵，拒张飞於德阳陌下，军败，还成都。
现代文：张飞从荆州由垫江进入蜀地，刘璋给张裔派兵在德阳陌下抗击张飞，张裔战败，返回成都。
English: Zhang Fei entered Shu from Jingzhou by the Mat River. Liu Bei sent troops to Zhang He to fight against Zhang Fei in Deyang. Zhang He was defeated and returned to Chengdu.

古文：为璋奉使诣先主，先主许以礼其君而安其人也，裔还，城门乃开。
现代文：张裔作为刘璋的使节奉命拜见刘备，刘备答应他一定会礼待刘璋，并安抚他的部下，张裔回到成都后，打开城门迎接刘备。
English: As Liu Bei's envoy, Zhang Xiang was ordered to meet Liu Bei. Liu Bei promised that he would treat Liu Bei with courtesy and appease his subordinates. After Zhang Xiang returned to Chengdu, he opened the city gate to meet Liu Bei.

古文：先主以裔为巴郡太守，还为司金中郎将，典作农战之器。
现代文：刘备任命张裔为巴郡太守，回到成都后担任司金中郎将，主管农具，兵器的制造。
English: Liu Bei appointed Zhang Rong as the governor of Ba County, and after returning to Chengdu, he served as the secretary of the Ministry of Finance, in charge of the manufacture of agricultural tools and weapons.

古文：先是，益州郡杀太守正昂，耆率雍闿恩信著於南土，使命周旋，远通孙权。
现代文：在这之前，益州郡人杀害了太守正昂，有年老的首领雍凯，他的恩德信义在南方很有威望，就派人四处周旋，甚至联络到孙权。
English: Prior to this, the people of Yizhou County had killed the Tai Shou Zheng Aang, and an old leader, Yong Kai, whose benevolence and faithfulness were very prestigious in the south, sent people to look around and even contacted Sun Quan.

古文：乃以裔为益州太守，径往至郡。闿遂趑趄不宾，假鬼教曰： 张府君如瓠壶，外虽泽而内实粗，不足杀，令缚与吴。 
现代文：朝廷任命张裔为益州太守，他径直前往郡中赴任，雍凯就抗拒不臣服，假借鬼教说: 张府君像只葫芦，外面虽然光亮，但内里很粗糙，不值得杀，命令你们将他绑起来送到吴国。 
English: The imperial court appointed Zhang Rong as the governor of Yizhou. He went straight to Guanzhong to take up the post. Yong Kai refused to submit and said, using the ghost teaching: Zhang Fuchun is like a gourd. Although he is bright on the outside, he is very rough on the inside and is not worth killing. He ordered you to tie him up and send him to the State of Wu.

古文：於是遂送裔於权。
现代文：于是，郡中将张裔押送到孙权那里。
English: As a result, the county vice-governor escorted Zhang Xuan to Sun Quan.

古文：会先主薨，诸葛亮遣邓芝使吴，亮令芝言次可从权请裔。
现代文：适逢刘备去世，诸葛亮派邓芝出使吴国，诸葛亮教邓芝言谈之间可以向孙权请求放还张裔。
English: At the time of Liu Bei's death, Zhuge Liang sent Deng Zi as an envoy to Wu. Zhuge Liang told Deng Zi that he could request Sun Quan to release Zhang Zi.

古文：裔自至吴数年，流徙伏匿，权未之知也，故许芝遣裔。
现代文：张裔自从到了吴国数年，流放隐居，孙权并不知道他，所以答应了邓芝的请求，送回张裔。
English: Zhang Zi has been in exile and seclusion for several years since he arrived in Wu. Sun Quan did not know him, so he agreed to Deng Zi's request and sent Zhang Zi back.

古文：裔临发，权乃引见，问裔曰： 蜀卓氏寡女，亡奔司马相如，贵土风俗何以乃尔乎？ 
现代文：张裔临走前，孙权召见他，问他说: 蜀地卓家的寡妇，逃奔到司马相如，贵地的风俗怎么会是这样呢？ 
English: Before Zhang Rong's departure, Sun Quan summoned him and asked him: "Widow of Zhuo family in Shu, fled to Sima Xiangru, how can the custom of your land be like this?

古文：裔对曰： 愚以卓氏之寡女，犹贤於买臣之妻。 
现代文：张裔回答说: 我认为卓家守寡的女子，比朱买臣的妻子更贤惠。 
English: Zhang Rong replied, "I think that a widow with a distinguished family is more virtuous than Zhu's wife.

古文：权又谓裔曰： 君还，必用事西朝，终不作田父於闾里也，将何以报我？ 
现代文：孙权又对张裔说: 您回到蜀地后，一定为国家效劳，不会像个农夫呆在乡间小巷，你将用什么来报答我呢？ 
English: Sun Quan also said to Zhang Xuan: After you return to Shu, you will definitely serve the country and will not stay in the country lane like a farmer. What will you use to repay me?

古文：裔对曰： 裔负罪而归，将委命有司。若蒙徼倖得全首领，五十八已前父母之年也，自此已后大王之赐也。 
现代文：张裔回答说: 我负罪回国，将把自己的身家性命交付给朝廷，如果能侥幸保全性命，那我五十八岁以前是父母给的生命，自此以后就是大王您赐的寿命。 
English: Zhang Rong replied, "I have returned to China as a guilty man, and I will give my life and my family's life to the imperial court. If I can save my life by any chance, then my life before the age of fifty-eight was given to me by my parents, and from now on, it is the life you, the great king, have given me.

古文：权言笑欢悦，有器裔之色。
现代文：孙权言谈间欢笑自若，有赏识张裔才能的意思。
English: Sun Quan laughs cheerfully while talking, meaning that he appreciates the talent of the Zhang people.

古文：裔出閤，深悔不能阳愚，即便就船，倍道兼行。
现代文：张裔出了宫门后，很后悔自己没有假装愚钝，于是迅速登船，加倍前行。
English: After Zhang Rong left the palace gate, he regretted that he had not pretended to be stupid, so he quickly boarded the ship and doubled forward.

古文：权果追之，裔已入永安界数十里，追者不能及。
现代文：孙权果然派人追赶他，张裔已经进入永安界几十里，追的人赶不上他。
English: Sun Quan did indeed send someone to chase him. Zhang Xiang had already entered the Yongan area for dozens of miles, and the person chasing him could not catch up with him.

古文：既至蜀，丞相亮以为参军，署府事，又领益州治中从事。
现代文：回到蜀国后，丞相诸葛亮任用他为参军，主管相府事务，又兼任益州治中从事。
English: After returning to Shu, the chancellor Zhuge Liang appointed him to join the army, to be in charge of the affairs of the chancellery, and also to be engaged in the administration of Yizhou.

古文：亮出驻汉中，裔以射声校尉领留府长吏，常称曰： 公赏不遗远，罚不阿近，爵不可以无功取，刑不可以贵势免，此贤愚之所以佥忘其身者也。 
现代文：诸葛亮出军驻守汉中，张裔以射声校尉的身份兼任留府长史。经常称赞说: 丞相赏赐时，不遗漏关系远的人，惩罚时也不宽容关系亲近的人，爵位不可以在没有功劳的情况下取得，刑罚也不能因为身份贵重或势力得以免除，这是贤能之人和平凡之人都能舍身为国的原因。 
English: Zhuge Liang was stationed in Hanzhong when he left the army, and Zhang Rongru was concurrently appointed as the governor of Hanzhong as the captain of the firing squad. He often praised: When the prime minister rewards, he does not omit those who are far away, and when he punishes, he does not tolerate those who are close. The title of nobility cannot be obtained without merit, and the punishment cannot be exempted because of status or power. This is the reason why the virtuous people and ordinary people can sacrifice themselves for the country.

古文：其明年，北诣亮谘事，送者数百，车乘盈路，裔还书与所亲曰： 近者涉道，昼夜接宾，不得宁息，人自敬丞相长史，男子张君嗣附之，疲倦欲死。 
现代文：第二年，张裔往北拜见诸葛亮咨询事务，送行的人有数百，车马满路。张裔写信对亲人说: 前几天出发上路，昼夜接待宾客，不得安息，人们敬重的是丞相长史的职位，儿子君嗣在这一职位上，非常疲倦。 
English: In the second year, Zhang Xuan went north to visit Zhuge Liang's consulting business. There were hundreds of people to see him off, and the roads were full of cars and horses. Zhang Xuan wrote a letter to his relatives saying: I set off on the road a few days ago, receiving guests day and night, and I can't rest. People respect the position of Minister of Long History, and my son, Junzi, is very tired in this position.

古文：其谈啁流速，皆此类也。
现代文：他谈吐诙谐，流利幽默，都是这样的情况。
English: He speaks with wit, fluency and humour, all of which is the case.

古文：少与犍为杨恭友善，恭早死，遗孤未数岁，裔迎留，与分屋而居，事恭母如母。
现代文：张裔年少时，跟犍为人杨恭交好，杨恭早年去世，留下的孩子没有几岁，张译裔将他们迎到自己家中居住，并将房屋分给他们，像对待母亲一样侍奉杨恭的母亲。
English: When Zhang Zi Rong was young, he befriended Yang Jiong, who was also known as Yang Jiong. Yang Jiong passed away at an early age, leaving behind children who were only a few years old. Zhang Zi Rong welcomed them to live in his home and allocated the house to them, serving Yang Jiong's mother as if she were his own mother.

古文：恭之子息长大，为之娶妇，买田宅产业，使立门户。
现代文：杨公的儿子杨息长大后，又为他聘娶妻子，购买田宅产业，让他能自立门户。
English: After Mr. Yang's son, Yang Xi, grew up, he hired a wife for him and purchased a farm, so that he could become self-sufficient.

古文：抚恤故旧，振赡衰宗，行义甚至。
现代文：张裔安抚恤养故旧的家属，赈济衰落的家族，非常有道义。
English: It is very moral for the Zhangs to appease and support the old family members, and to help the declining family.

古文：加辅汉将军，领长史如故。
现代文：后来被加官为辅汉将军，像过去一样兼任长史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Fu Han general and, as in the past, concurrently held the post of Chang Shi.

古文：建兴八年卒。子毣嗣，历三郡守监军。
现代文：张裔在建兴八年去世，他的儿子张毣继承爵位，历任三个郡的郡守和监军。
English: Zhang Zi died in the eighth year of Jianxing, and his son Zhang Zi inherited the title and served as the county governor and military supervisor of three counties.

古文：毣弟都，太子中庶子。
现代文：张毣的弟弟张都，担任太子中庶子。
English: Zhang Tuo's younger brother, Zhang Du, served as the prince's middle child.

古文：杨洪字季休，犍为武阳人也。
现代文：杨洪，字季休，是犍为郡武阳人。
English: Yang Hong, also known as Ji Xiu, is a native of Wuyang County.

古文：刘璋时历部诸郡。
现代文：刘璋时，他在各郡任职。
English: During Liu Bei's time, he served in various counties.

古文：先主定蜀，太守李严命为功曹。严欲徙郡治舍，洪固谏不听，遂辞功曹，请退。
现代文：刘备平定蜀地后，太守李严任命他为功曹，李严想要将郡中治所转移，杨洪极力劝谏没有同意，于是杨洪辞去功曹职位，请求退居。
English: After Liu Bei subdued Shu, the grand marshal Li Yan appointed him as Gong Cao. Li Yan wanted to transfer the county's central government office, but Yang Hong did not agree. Therefore, Yang Hong resigned from the position of Gong Cao and requested to retire.

古文：严欲荐洪於州，为蜀部从事。
现代文：李严想要举荐杨洪到州府，担任蜀部从事。
English: Li Yan wanted to recommend Yang Hong to the prefectural government to work in the Shu Department.

古文：先主争汉中，急书发兵，军师将军诸葛亮以问洪，洪曰： 汉中则益州咽喉，存亡之机会，若无汉中则无蜀矣，此家门之祸也。
现代文：刘备争夺汉中时，发出急信要求朝中增兵，军师将军诸葛亮，用这事来问杨洪，杨洪说: 汉中是益州的咽喉之地，是我国存亡绝续的枢纽，如果没有汉中，那就没有蜀国，这是家门口的灾祸。
English: When Liu Bei was competing for Hanzhong, he sent an urgent letter requesting the DPRK and China to increase their troops, and the military division general Zhuge Liang used this matter to ask Yang Hong. Yang Hong said: Hanzhong is the throat of Yizhou, the hub of our country's continued existence. If there is no Hanzhong, then there is no Shu, which is a disaster at the doorstep.

古文：方今之事，男子当战，女子当运，发兵何疑？ 
现代文：现在的形势，男子参战，女子应当参与运输，发兵有什么疑虑的呢？ 
English: In the current situation, men go to war, women should be involved in transportation, what doubts are there about sending troops?

古文：时蜀郡太守法正从先主北行，亮於是表洪领蜀郡太守，众事皆办，遂使即真。
现代文：当时蜀郡太守法正跟随刘备北行，诸葛亮就上表请任杨洪兼任为蜀郡太守，他各项事理都处理得很好，于是让他担任正职。
English: At that time, Liu Bei was traveling north with Zhuge Liang, the grand marshal of Shu County, and Zhuge Liang asked Yang Hong to serve as the grand marshal of Shu County. Yang Hong handled all matters well, so Zhuge Liang appointed him as the grand marshal.

古文：顷之，转为益州治中从事。
现代文：不久，杨洪转任为益州治中从事。
English: Soon, Yang Hong was transferred to Yizhou to engage in middle management.

古文：先主既称尊号，征吴不克，还住永安。
现代文：刘备登基后征讨东吴，没有攻克，就返回永安驻守。
English: After Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he led a campaign to conquer Dongwu. When he failed to conquer it, he returned to Yongan to stay there.

古文：汉嘉太守黄元素为诸葛亮所不善，闻先主疾病，惧有后患，举郡反，烧临邛城。
现代文：汉嘉太守黄元向来是诸葛亮不喜欢的，得知刘备病重，担心以后会有灾祸，就率郡反叛，烧毁临邛城。
English: The Han imperial governor Huang Yuan was always disliked by Zhuge Liang. When he learned that Liu Bei was seriously ill, he feared that there would be a disaster in the future, so he led the county to rebel and burn down Linyi City.

古文：时亮东行省疾，成都单虚，是以元益无所惮。
现代文：当时诸葛亮正东行探望刘备病情，成都防守空虚，所以黄元更加无所畏惧。
English: At that time, Zhuge Liang was traveling east to visit Liu Bei's illness, and Chengdu's defense was empty, so Huang Yuan was more fearless.

古文：洪即启太子，遣其亲兵，使将军陈曶、郑绰讨元。
现代文：杨洪就上奏太子，派遣他的亲兵，让将军陈曶、郑绰征讨黄元。
English: Yang Hong played the role of the crown prince and sent his own soldiers to enlist the help of the generals Chen Qi and Zheng Yao to subdue Huang Yuan.

古文：众议以为元若不能围成都，当由越巂据南中，洪曰： 元素性凶暴，无他恩信，何能办此？
现代文：大家都认为黄元如果不能围困成都，应当会从越隽占据南中，杨洪说: 黄元一向性情凶狠，没有恩德信义，怎么能做成此事呢？
English: Everyone thinks that if Huang Yuan can't besiege Chengdu, he should occupy Nanzhong from Yuezhou, Yang Hong said: Huang Yuan has always had a fierce temperament, without Ende Xinyi, how can this be done?

古文：不过乘水东下，冀主上平安，面缚归死；如其有异，奔吴求活耳。
现代文：我们只需要顺水东下，希望主上平安，将他擒获处死，如果事情有异变，那他只会逃奔到吴国，以求活命罢了。 
English: We only need to sail eastward along the water, hope for the Lord's safety, capture him and put him to death. If things take a turn for the worse, he will only flee to the State of Wu in order to survive.

古文：敕曶、绰但於南安峡口遮即便得矣。 
现代文：就下令，陈曶、郑绰只需要在南安峡口堵截就可以了。
English: He ordered that Chen Qi and Zheng Cao only needed to block the mouth of Nan'an Gorge.

古文：曶、绰承洪言，果生获元。
现代文：陈曶、郑绰按照杨洪的话，果然擒获了黄元。
English: According to Yang Hong's words, Chen Qi and Zheng Cao successfully captured Huang Yuan.

古文：洪建兴元年赐爵关内侯，复为蜀郡太守、忠节将军，后为越骑校尉，领郡如故。
现代文：杨洪在建兴元年被赐封爵位为关内侯，又被任命为蜀郡太守、忠节将军，后来担任越骑校尉，依然管理郡中事务。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, Yang Hong was given a knighthood as the Marquis of Guan, and was also appointed the Governor of Shu County and the General of Zhongjie. Later, he served as the Captain of the Viet Cavalry and still managed the affairs of the county.

古文：五年，丞相亮北住汉中，欲用张裔为留府长史，问洪何如？
现代文：建兴五年，丞相诸葛亮往北驻守汉中，打算任用张裔担任留府长史，问杨洪怎么样。
English: In the fifth year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang went to the north to stay in Hanzhong, intending to appoint Zhang Zi as the governor of the province, and asked Yang Hong how it was.

古文：洪对曰： 裔天姿明察，长於治剧，才诚堪之，然性不公平，恐不可专任，不如留向朗。
现代文：杨洪回答说: 张裔天姿聪颖，善于治理繁杂之事，才能实在能担当此任，但是性情不太公平，恐怕不能让他单独任职，不如留下向郎。
English: Yang Hong replied: Zhang Zi is intelligent and good at managing complicated matters, so he can really take on this position. However, his temperament is not very fair, so I'm afraid I can't let him serve alone. It's better to leave Xiang Lang.

古文：朗情伪差少，裔随从目下，效其器能，於事两善。 
现代文：向郎性格中伪善的部分少，张裔跟随您，尽量发挥他的才能，也是两全其美的。 
English: The hypocrisy part of Xiang Lang's personality is less, and Zhang Zi follows you and tries to give full play to his talent, which is also the best of both worlds.

古文：初，裔少与洪亲善。裔流放在吴，洪临裔郡，裔子郁给郡吏，微过受罚，不特原假。
现代文：当初，张裔年少时跟杨洪很友好，张裔被流放在吴国时，杨鸿前往张裔所在的郡视察，张裔的儿子张郁在军中担任吏役，受到过微小的惩罚，也没有给予宽恕。
English: At first, when Zhang Zi was young, he was very friendly with Yang Hong. When Zhang Zi was exiled to Wu, Yang Hong went to Zhang Zi's county to inspect. Zhang Zi's son Zhang Yu served as an officer in the army. He received a small punishment and was not forgiven.

古文：裔后还闻之，深以为恨，与洪情好有损。
现代文：张裔返回后得知这件事，非常的怨恨，跟杨洪的友好关系就淡漠了。
English: After Zhang Xuan returned, he learned about this incident and was very resentful, and his friendly relationship with Yang Hong became indifferent.

古文：及洪见亮出，至裔许，具说所言。裔答洪曰： 公留我了矣，明府不能止。 
现代文：等到杨洪见诸葛亮出兵后，就到张裔那里，将自己和诸葛亮的话全部说给张裔，张裔回答杨洪说: 丞相已经决定留下我的话，您是不能阻止的。 
English: After Yang Hong saw Zhuge Liang leave the army, he went to Zhang Zi and told Zhang Zi everything he and Zhuge Liang had said. Zhang Zi replied to Yang Hong, "The prime minister has decided to keep my words, you can't stop it."

古文：时人或疑洪意自欲作长史，或疑洪知裔自嫌，不愿裔处要职，典后事也。
现代文：当时的人怀疑杨洪是想自己做长史，也有人怀疑杨洪知道张裔不满自己，不愿意让张裔身处要职，主管后方事务。
English: At that time, people suspected that Yang Hong wanted to make a long history himself, and some people suspected that Yang Hong knew that Zhang Xuan was dissatisfied with himself and did not want to let Zhang Xuan be in an important position, in charge of rear affairs.

古文：后裔与司盐校尉岑述不和，至于忿恨。亮与裔书曰： 君昔在陌下，营坏，吾之用心，食不知味；后流迸南海，相为悲叹，寝不安席；及其来还，委付大任，同奖王室，自以为与君古之石交也。
现代文：后来张裔跟司盐校尉岑述不和睦，以至于相互怨恨，诸葛亮给张裔写信说: 您过去在陌下的时候，军营毁坏，我心里很担忧，食不下咽，后来你被流放南海，我心中悲叹，寝不安席，等到你回来时，给您托付重任，共同为王室效力，自认为和您是古代的石交。
English: Later, Zhang Rong and Lieutenant Shi Yan recounted their discord, to the point of mutual resentment. Zhu Ge Liang wrote to Zhang Rong, saying: When you were a stranger in the past, the military camp was destroyed. My heart was very worried and I could not swallow. Later, you were exiled to the South China Sea. My heart lamented and I could not sleep. When you returned, I entrusted you with a heavy task and worked together for the royal family. I consider you an ancient stone friend.

古文：石交之道，举雠以相益，割骨肉以相明，犹不相谢也，况吾但委意於元俭，而君不能忍邪？ 
现代文：石交的道理，是相互间应该除掉仇人以得到利益，割下自己的骨肉来表明自己的诚心，即使这样也不会互相道谢，更何况我只是委托岑述，你就不能忍受了吗？ 
English: The principle of stone friendship is that each other should get rid of enemies to get benefits, and cut off their own flesh and blood to show their sincerity. Even if they do this, they will not thank each other, let alone I just commissioned to recite, can you not bear it?

古文：论者由是明洪无私。
现代文：议论的人都从这番话中得知杨洪没有私心。
English: Commentators learned from these words that Yang Hong has no selfishness.

古文：洪少不好学问，而忠清款亮，忧公如家，事继母至孝。
现代文：杨洪年少时不喜欢钻研学问，但忠心耿耿，心地清亮，担忧公事向自己的私事一样，侍奉继母非常孝顺。
English: When he was young, Yang Hong didn't like to study, but he was loyal, had a clear mind, worried about business as much as his private life, and served his stepmother very dutifully.

古文：六年卒官。
现代文：建兴六年，杨洪在任官上去世。
English: Six years after Jianxing, Yang Hong passed away in office.

古文：始洪为李严功曹，严未去至犍为而洪已为蜀郡。
现代文：开始时，杨洪担任李严的功曹，李严还没有离开到犍为，杨洪已经担任蜀郡太守。
English: At the beginning, Yang Hong served as the benefactor of Li Yan. Li Yan had not yet left for Shuwei, and Yang Hong had already served as the governor of Shu County.

古文：洪迎门下书佐何祗，有才策功幹，举郡吏，数年为广汉太守，时洪亦尚在蜀郡。
现代文：杨洪招揽门下的书佐何衹，何衹有才干谋略，杨洪任命他为郡吏，几年后就担任了广汉太守，当时杨洪还在蜀郡太守任上。
English: Yang Hong recruited his disciple's aide-de-camp He Jie, He Jie was a talented strategist, Yang Hong appointed him as a county official, and a few years later he served as the governor of Guanghan. At that time, Yang Hong was still the governor of Shu County.

古文：是以西土咸服诸葛亮能尽时人之器用也。
现代文：所以西部的百姓都佩服诸葛亮能竭尽人才而用。
English: Therefore, the people in the west all admire Zhuge Liang for his ability to exhaust talent.

古文：费诗字公举，犍为南安人也。
现代文：费诗，字公举，犍为郡南安人。
English: Fei Shi, Zi Gong Jiu, Zou are from Nan'an County.

古文：刘璋时为绵竹令，先主攻绵竹时，诗先举城降。
现代文：刘璋时期担任绵竹县令，刘备攻打绵竹时，费诗先率城投降。
English: When Liu Bei attacked Mianzhu, Feixian led the city to surrender.

古文：成都既定，先主领益州牧，以诗为督军从事，出为牂牁太守，还为州前部司马。
现代文：成都平定后，刘备兼任益州牧，任命费诗为督军从事，出京担任牂牁太守，又返回担任州前部司马。
English: After Chengdu was pacified, Liu Bei concurrently served as the governor of Yizhou, appointed Feishi to supervise the troops, went to Beijing to serve as the grand vizier, and returned to serve as the front section of the state.

古文：先主为汉中王，遣诗拜关羽为前将军，羽闻黄忠为后将军，羽怒曰： 大丈夫终不与老兵同列！ 不肯受拜。诗谓羽曰： 夫立王业者，所用非一。
现代文：刘备自立为汉中王后，派遣费诗前往荆州任命关羽为前将军，关羽得知黄忠为后将军，大怒说: 大丈夫始终不会与老兵同列！ 不肯接受任命，费诗对关羽说: 建立功业的人，所任用的人才不是一样的。
English: Liu Bei set herself up as the queen of the Han dynasty and sent Feishi to Jingzhou to appoint Guan Yu as the former general. When Guan Yu learned that Huang Zhong was to be the future general, he flew into a rage and said, "No matter what, my husband will never be ranked with the veterans!" Unwilling to accept the appointment, Feishi said to Guan Yu, "People who have built up their careers are not the same as those who are appointed.

古文：昔萧、曹与高祖少小亲旧，而陈、韩亡命后至，论其班列，韩最居上，未闻萧、曹以此为怨。
现代文：过去萧何，曹参跟汉高祖从小就是亲密好友，而陈平、韩信是后来亡命而来的，看他们的朝中位置，韩信在最上流，也没听说过萧何、曹参因此生怨。
English: In the past, Xiao He, Cao San and Han Gao Zu were close friends since childhood, while Chen Ping and Han Xin came from exile later. Looking at their position in the Middle Kingdom, Han Xin was at the top, and had never heard of Xiao He and Cao San, which caused resentment.

古文：今汉王以一时之功，隆崇於汉升，然意之轻重，宁当与君侯齐乎！
现代文：现在汉王因一时的功劳，对黄忠非常恩宠，但心里面的轻重看法真的会与您一样吗？
English: Now, because of his momentary merit, the king of Han has been very gracious to Huang Zhong, but will the weighty opinion in his heart really be the same as yours?

古文：且王与君侯，譬犹一体，同休等戚，祸福共之，愚为君侯，不宜计官号之高下，爵禄之多少为意也。
现代文：况且，汉中王和您就像是一体同生，休戚与共，祸福相当，我要是君侯，就不会因为计较官位的高下俸禄的多少而心中有想法了。
English: Moreover, it is as if the King of Han and you were the same person, sharing the same hardships and blessings. If I were a prince, I would not have any thoughts in my heart because of how much the high and low salaries of the official position are.

古文：仆一介之使，衔命之人，君侯不受拜，如是便还，但相为惜此举动，恐有后悔耳！ 
现代文：我是区区使臣，奉命而来，您不受命，那我就返回京城，只是为您的行为感到可惜，恐怕你会后悔罢了。 
English: I'm just an envoy. I came here under orders. If you don't accept my orders, then I'll return to the capital. I just feel sorry for your actions, and I'm afraid you'll regret it.

古文：羽大感悟，遽即受拜。
现代文：关羽立刻醒悟，立即接受了任命。
English: Guan Yu immediately came to his senses and immediately accepted the appointment.

古文：后群臣议欲推汉中王称尊号，诗上疏曰： 殿下以曹操父子偪主篡位，故乃羁旅万里，纠合士众，将以讨贼。今大敌未克，而先自立，恐人心疑惑。
现代文：后来大臣们商议，想要推举汉中王称帝号，费诗上疏说： 殿下您因为曹操父子逼迫献帝，谋朝篡位，所以才不远万里，招募士兵，讨伐逆贼，现在大敌还没有攻克，却先自己自立为皇帝，恐怕人们心中会产生疑惑。
English: Later, the ministers deliberated and wanted to promote Han Zhong Wang to the title of emperor. He said, "Your highness, because Cao Cao and his son persecuted Emperor Xian and plotted to usurp the throne, you are not far away from thousands of miles, recruiting soldiers, fighting against traitors. Now the great enemy has not yet been conquered, but you have first become an emperor yourself. I am afraid that people will have doubts in their hearts.

古文：昔高祖与楚约，先破秦者王。及屠咸阳，获子婴，犹怀推让，况今殿下未出门庭，便欲自立邪！
现代文：过去汉高祖跟楚霸王有约定，先破秦朝者可以称王，等到屠戮咸阳，抓获子婴，尚且怀着退让之心，更何况现在殿下您还没有出门庭，就想要自立为帝呢！
English: In the past, Han Gao Zu had an agreement with King Chu Bawang that the first to defeat the Qin Dynasty could be crowned king. However, after the slaughter of Xianyang and the capture of the infant, he still harbored a spirit of concession. What's more, now that Your Highness has not yet appeared in court, you want to become emperor yourself!

古文：愚臣诚不为殿下取也。 
现代文：我实在不认为陛下应该这样做。 
English: I really don't think Your Majesty should do this.

古文：由是忤指，左迁部永昌从事。
现代文：因此违背了刘备的想法，被贬职为永昌从事。
English: Therefore, he violated Liu Bei's idea and was demoted to Yongchang.

古文：建兴三年，随诸葛亮南行，归至汉阳县，降人李鸿来诣亮，亮见鸿，时蒋琬与诗在坐。鸿曰： 间过孟达许，適见王冲从南来，言往者达之去就，明公切齿，欲诛达妻子，赖先主不听耳。
现代文：建兴三年，费诗跟随诸葛亮南行，返回到汉阳县，投降人李鸿前来拜见诸葛亮，诸葛亮召见李鸿时，当时蒋琬和费诗都在坐，李鸿说: 路过孟达那里时，遇见王冲从南边而来，说到过去孟达去留的事情，您对他非常痛恨，想要诛杀孟达的妻子儿女，幸亏先主没有听从罢了。
English: In the third year of Jianxing, Fei Si followed Zhuge Liang to the south and returned to Hanyang County. Li Hong, the capitulator, came to see Zhuge Liang. When Zhuge Liang summoned Li Hong, Jiang Chen and Fei Si were both sitting at the time. Li Hong said: When you passed by Meng Da, you met Wang Chong coming from the south. When you talked about Meng Da going to stay in the past, you hated him very much and wanted to kill Meng Da's wife and children. Fortunately, the former master did not listen.

古文：达曰： 诸葛亮见顾有本末，终不尔也。 
现代文：孟达回答说: 诸葛亮了解其中的因由不会这样做的。 
English: Meng Da replied: Zhuge Liang understands the reasons for this and will not do so.

古文：尽不信冲言，委仰明公，无复已已。 
现代文：根本没有相信王冲的话，他信任仰赖您，无以复加。 
English: I don't believe Wang Chong's words at all. He trusts and relies on you more than I can say.

古文：亮谓琬、诗曰： 还都当有书与子度相闻。 
现代文：诸葛亮对蒋琬、费诗说: 回到京都应当给孟达写封信，让他知道这件事。 
English: Zhuge Liang said to Jiang Chen and Feshi: When you return to Kyoto, you should write a letter to Meng Da to let him know about this.

古文：诗进曰： 孟达小子，昔事振威不忠，后又背叛先主，反覆之人，何足与书邪！ 
现代文：费师说: 孟达这个人，过去侍奉刘璋就不够忠诚，后来又背叛先主，是个反复无常的人，怎么值得给他写信呢？ 
English: Feishi said, "This man Mengda, who was not loyal enough to serve Liu Bei in the past, and later betrayed his master, is a capricious person. How is it worth writing to him?

古文：亮默然不答。
现代文：诸葛亮沉默不回答。
English: Zhuge Liang remained silent and did not answer.

古文：亮欲诱达以为外援，竟与达书曰： 往年南征，岁末乃还，適与李鸿会於汉阳，承知消息，慨然永叹，以存足下平素之志，岂徒空讬名荣，贵为乖离乎！
现代文：诸葛亮想要招揽孟达作为外援，最后给孟达写信说: 过去南征，到年末才回来，之前跟李鸿在汉阳会合，得知您的消息，心中感叹，明白你的向来志向，怎么是只有功名虚荣，善于改变呢？
English: Zhuge Liang wanted to recruit Meng Da as foreign aid, and finally wrote a letter to Meng Da saying: I went to the south to fight, and I will not return until the end of the year. I met with Li Hong in Hanyang before, and when I learned your news, I sighed in my heart, and understood that your ambition has always been, how is it only fame and vanity, but good at changing?

古文：呜呼孟子，斯实刘封侵陵足下，以伤先主待士之义。又鸿道王冲造作虚语，云足下量度吾心，不受冲说。
现代文：孟达呀，那时确实是刘封欺凌于你，伤害了先帝宽仁待下的恩义，又有李鸿说王冲造假虚言，说你能猜测我的想法，不听王冲胡说。
English: Meng Da, at that time, it was indeed Liu Feng who bullied you and hurt the gratitude of the late Emperor Guangren, and Li Hong said that Wang Chong made up lies and said that you could guess my thoughts and not listen to Wang Chong's nonsense.

古文：寻表明之言，追平生之好，依依东望，故遣有书。 
现代文：想着你已表明的言论，回忆我们交好的过往，心里向东眺望，所以给你写下这封信。 
English: Thinking of what you have said, recalling the past of our friendship, and looking eastward in my heart, I write this letter to you.

古文：达得亮书，数相交通，辞欲叛魏。魏遣司马宣王征之，即斩灭达。
现代文：孟达得到诸葛亮的书信，多次与他来往，信中的言辞想要叛离魏朝，魏朝派司马懿前往征讨，不久，就斩杀了孟达。
English: Mengda received letters from Zhuge Liang and had many dealings with him. The words in the letter wanted to defect from the Wei Dynasty. The Wei Dynasty sent Sima Yi to investigate and soon killed Mengda.

古文：亮亦以达无款诚之心，故不救助也。
现代文：诸葛亮也因为孟达没有诚恳之心，所以没有救援。
English: Zhuge Liang also because Meng Da did not have a sincere heart, so there is no rescue.

古文：蒋琬秉政，以诗为谏议大夫，卒於家。
现代文：蒋琬执政后，任命费诗为谏议大夫，最后费诗在家中去世。
English: After Chiang Kai-shek came to power, he appointed Fei Si as the doctor of consultation, and finally Fei Si passed away at home.

古文：王冲者，广汉人也。
现代文：王冲，是广汉郡人。
English: Wang Chong is from Guanghan County.

古文：为牙门将，统属江州督李严。
现代文：担任牙门将，隶属于江州都督李严。
English: He served as a goalkeeper and was subordinate to the governor of Jiangsu Province, Li Yan.

古文：为严所疾，惧罪降魏。魏以冲为乐陵太守。
现代文：但被李严痛恨，担心有罪投降魏曹，魏朝任命王冲为乐陵太守。
English: However, Li Yan hated him and feared Wei Cao's guilty surrender. The Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Chong as the keeper of Le Ling.

古文：评曰：霍峻孤城不倾，王连固节不移，向朗好学不倦，张裔肤敏应机，杨洪乃心忠公，费诗率意而言，皆有可纪焉。
现代文：评曰：霍峻驻守孤城没有战败，王连坚守节操没有转移，向朗好学不倦，张毅随机应变，聪明敏捷，杨洪一心为公，忠诚不二，费诗率意而为，都有可以记录的地方。
English: The commentary said: Huo Jun stationed in the lonely city was not defeated, Wang Lian adhered to the discipline and did not transfer, Xiang Lang was eager to learn and tireless, Zhang Yi made random contingencies, was clever and agile, Yang Hong was dedicated to the public, loyal and faithful, and acted with poise, all of which can be recorded.

古文：以先主之广济，诸葛之准绳，诗吐直言，犹用陵迟，况庸后乎哉！
现代文：以刘备的心胸宽广，诸葛亮的公允英明，费诗吐露真言尚且不被善用，更何况是庸碌的后人呢。
English: With Liu Bei's broad-mindedness, Zhuge Liang's fairness and wisdom, Fei Si's truth-telling has not been well used, let alone the mediocre descendants.

