古文：张珪张珪，字公端，弘范之子也。
现代文：张珪字公端，张弘范之子。
English: Zhang Xizhong, the son of Zhang Hongfan.

古文：少能挽强命中，尝从其父出林中，有虎，珪抽矢直前，虎人立，洞其喉，一军尽哗。
现代文：年少时能挽强弓，百发百中。有一次，与其父打猎于林中，遇猛虎。珪抽箭往前，虎如人一样站起来扑向张珪，珪一箭射穿虎喉，全军无不为之欢腾，其勇敢如此。
English: When he was young, he was able to tie a strong bow and hit a hundred shots. Once, when he was hunting with his father in the forest, he met a fierce tiger. He drew an arrow forward, the tiger stood up like a man and rushed to Zhang Ye, and shot an arrow through the tiger's throat. The whole army was delighted, so brave was he.

古文：至元十六年，弘范平广海，宋礼部侍郎邓光荐将赴水死，弘范救而礼之，命珪受学。
现代文：至元十六年，弘范平定广东海南，宋礼部侍郎邓光荐赴水自尽，弘范救起并以礼相待，命珪以光荐为师。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hong Fan subdued Guangdong and Hainan, and Deng Guangxian, the attendant of the Song Ministry of Ceremonies, went to the water to commit suicide. Hong Fan rescued him and treated him with courtesy. He was instructed by Guangxian.

古文：光荐尝遗一编书，目曰《相业》，语珪曰： 熟读此，后必赖其用。 师还，道出江淮，珪年十六，摄管军万户。
现代文：光荐给珪一书，名《相业》，对他说： 熟读此书，后必有用。 元军北还，经江淮，命珪摄管军万户，这时年十六岁。
English: Guang Guang recommended a book to Zou, called "Philosophy," and said to him: "If you read this book well, it will be useful later." The former army officer Bei Ya, who was 16 years old at the time, was appointed to be the regent of the army of ten thousand households.

古文：十七年，真拜昭勇大将军、管军万户，佩其父虎符，治所统军，镇建康。
现代文：十七年，拜珪为昭勇大将军、管军万户，有实权，佩其父虎符，治理所统辖的元军，镇守建康。
English: In the seventeenth year, Baizhang became General Zhaoyong, in charge of the army of ten thousand households, with real power, wearing his father's tiger emblem, governing the Yuan army under his jurisdiction, and guarding Jiankang.

古文：未几，弘范卒，丧毕，世祖召见，亲抚之。
现代文：不久，其父弘范卒，丧事办完后，世祖召见张珪，亲加抚慰。
English: Soon after, his father, Hong Fan, died. After the funeral was over, the patriarch was summoned to see Zhang Ye, who consoled him personally.

古文：奏曰： 臣年幼，军事重，聂祯者，从臣父、祖，久历行阵，幸以副臣。 
现代文：珪奏称： 臣年幼肩此军务重任，诚恐能力不足。聂祯随我祖父、父亲久经征战，希望任命他为臣之辅佐。 
English: Zou Song said, "Since the minister is too young to shoulder such an important military duty, I am afraid that he lacks the ability. I have followed my grandfather and father to war for a long time, and I hope to appoint him as the minister's assistant."

古文：帝叹曰： 求老成自副，常儿不知出此。 
现代文：世祖称赞道 ：求老成者来辅佐自己，一般年青人还想不到这点。 
English: The founder praised, "Asking an adult to support you is something that the average young person would not even think of.

古文：厚赐而遣之，遍及其从者。十九年，太平、宣、徽群盗起，行省檄珪讨之，士卒数为贼所败，卒有杀民家豕而并伤其主者，珪曰： 此军之所以败也。 
现代文：至元十九年，太平、宣城、徽州群盗竞起，行省传令张珪出兵讨伐，其士卒为贼所败，有士卒杀民家牲畜并殴伤其主人。珪宣称： 这就是我军打败仗的原因。 
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Taiping, Xuancheng and Huizhou bandits began to compete, and the provincial envoy ordered Zhang Xuan to send troops to fight. Some of his soldiers were defeated by the thieves, and some soldiers killed people's livestock and injured their owners. Xuan declared: This is the reason why our army lost the war.

古文：斩其卒，悉平诸盗。
现代文：斩杀这些抢掠百姓的士卒，严肃军纪，诸盗悉平。
English: Kill these soldiers who robbed and plundered the people. Strict military discipline will be enforced and all thieves will be brought to justice.

古文：二十九年，入朝。
现代文：至元二十九年，张珪回到朝廷。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Ye returned to the imperial court.

古文：时朝廷言者谓天下事定，行枢密院可罢；江浙行省参知政事张瑄，领海道，亦以为言。
现代文：当时朝廷认为天下大局已定，行枢密院可以撤销，江浙行省参知政事张王宣也这样说。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that the overall situation of the world had been decided, and the appointment of the Privy Council could be revoked. Zhang Wangxuan, the political advisor to the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, also said so.

古文：枢密副使暗伯问于珪，珪曰： 见上当自言之。 
现代文：枢密副使暗问珪有何意见，珪说： 见皇上当陈述我的看法。 
English: The deputy privy councilor secretly asked the emperor what his opinion was, and the emperor said, "You should see the emperor to present my opinion."

古文：召对，珪曰： 纵使行院可罢，亦非瑄所宜言。 
现代文：一日皇帝召问，珪回答说 ：即使行院可撤销，也不应由张王宣出面提出。 
English: One day, the emperor summoned him for questioning, and Zhai replied: Even if the execution could be revoked, it should not be proposed by Zhang Wangxuan.

古文：遂得不罢。命为枢密副使。
现代文：结果不仅未撤，而且任命张珪为枢密副使。
English: As a result, not only was he not dismissed, but he was also appointed as a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：太傅月儿鲁那演言： 珪尚少，姑试以佥书，果可大用，请俟他日。 
现代文：太傅月儿鲁那演对皇帝说： 珪年纪尚轻，姑且任为佥书，果可大用，日后再任命为枢密副使不迟。 
English: Taifu Yue'er Lunayuan said to the emperor, "You are still young. Even if you are appointed as an envoy, you can be of great use. In the future, it will not be late to be appointed as a vice-envoy.

古文：帝曰： 不然，是家为国灭金、灭宋，尽死力者三世矣，而可吝此耶！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 不然，他家祖孙三代为我朝灭金灭宋，誓死效力，还要吝惜此枢密副使之一官职么！ 
English: The emperor said, "Otherwise, his family's three generations of ancestors and grandchildren will fight to the death for my dynasty. Do you want to begrudge this official position as one of the Privy Vice-Envoys?"

古文：拜镇国上将军、江淮行枢密副使。
现代文：拜珪为镇国上将军，江淮行枢密副使。
English: Bai Xuan was the commander-in-chief of the state, and Jiang Huaixing was the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：成宗即位，行院罢。
现代文：成宗即位，废行枢密院。
English: Chengzong ascended the throne, and the Privy Council was abolished.

古文：大德三年，遣使巡行天下，珪使川、陕，问民疾苦，赈恤孤贫，罢冗官，黜贪吏。
现代文：大德三年，遣使巡行天下，珪奉命巡行川陕，访问民间疾苦，赈恤孤贫，罢黜冗官贪吏。
English: In the three years of the Great Decrees, he sent envoys to tour the country, and was ordered to tour Sichuan and Shaanxi, to visit the people's sufferings, to sympathize with the poor, and to oust the corrupt officials.

古文：还，擢江南行御史台侍御史，换文阶中奉大夫，迁浙西肃政廉访使。
现代文：还京后升为江南行御史台侍御史，换为文官阶中奉大夫，又转任浙西肃政廉访使。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was promoted to the position of Jiangnan Gyoseishidai Jishi Gyoseishidai, changed to the civil servant rank of Zhong Bong Daifu, and was transferred to the post of Zhexi Su Zheng Lian envoy.

古文：劾罢郡长吏以下三十馀人、府史胥徒数百，征赃巨万计。
现代文：在任此职期间，弹劾罢免郡县地方长官以下三十余人，府史胥徒数百人，没收赃款巨万。
English: During his term of office, he impeached and removed from office more than 30 people below the rank of county magistrate, hundreds of prefectural officials, and confiscated huge amounts of stolen money.

古文：珪得盐司奸利事，将发之。
现代文：珪得悉盐司奸诈图利的事，打算揭发。
English: He learned of Yan Si's treachery and profiteering and planned to expose it.

古文：事干行省，有内不自安者，欲以危法中珪，赂遗近臣，妄言珪有厌胜事，且沮盐法。
现代文：此事涉及行省，有人为之不安，极力中伤张珪，同时贿赂皇帝近臣，妄言张珪以巫术制人，并阻碍盐法的施行。
English: This matter involved the provincial government, and some people were uneasy about it, and tried their best to slander Zhang Ye, and at the same time bribe the emperor's close vassals, make false accusations that Zhang Ye used witchcraft to control people, and obstruct the implementation of the salt law.

古文：帝遣官杂治之，得行省大小吏及盐官欺罔状，皆伏罪。
现代文：成宗遣官员共同审理此案，结果查出了行省大小官吏及盐官欺下罔上的许多罪状，对他们均按律治罪。
English: Chengzongyuan officials jointly tried the case, and as a result, many crimes of provincial officials and salt officials were found out, and they were all punished according to the law.

古文：召珪拜佥枢密院事，入见，赐只孙冠服侍宴，又命买宅以赐，辞不受。
现代文：帝召珪回京，拜为佥枢密院事，辞不受命。又拜为江南行台御史中丞。
English: The emperor summoned him back to Beijing, and he was appointed to be a member of the Privy Council, but he refused to resign. He was also appointed to be the Vice-Minister of History for the Southern Yangtze River.

古文：拜江南行台御史中丞，因上疏，极言天人之际、灾异之故，其目有修德行、广言路、进君子、退小人、信赏必罚、减冗官、节浮费，以法祖宗成宪，累数百言。
现代文：因上疏，详细论述天道与人道的关系及灾异发生的原因，其内容包括：修德行，广言路，进君子，退小人，信赏必罚，裁减不必要的官员，节制浪费，遵行祖宗的成法，共数百言。
English: Because of the above, the relationship between heaven and humanity and the reasons for the occurrence of disasters are discussed in detail. Its contents include: cultivating virtue, speaking widely, becoming a gentleman, becoming a villain, rewarding and punishing, reducing unnecessary officials, controlling waste, and following the law of the ancestors, a total of hundreds of words.

古文：劾大官之不法者，不报；并及近侍之荧惑者，又不报。
现代文：他还弹劾一些大官的不法行为，以及迷惑皇帝的左右小人。
English: He also impeached some high-ranking officials for misconduct, as well as the left and right villains who confused the emperor.

古文：入奏，帝悟，移仗大明。既即位，赐只孙衣二十袭、金带一。
现代文：他的这些奏章都被扣压，不上报皇帝，珪因而称病辞官归家。许久之后，拜为陕西行台中丞，而他辞不赴任。武宗即位，召拜张珪为太子谕德，几天后又相继拜为宾客、詹事，均辞不就任。
English: All these pieces of music were withheld from him and were not reported to the emperor. Therefore, Zou said that he was ill and resigned to return home. After a long time, he was given the title of Shaanxi Xingtai Junior Middle Officer, but he did not resign. When Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he called Zhang Zou to be the crown prince, and a few days later he was also given the title of guest and Zhanji, but they both resigned and did not take office.

古文：帝尝亲解衣赐珪，明日复召，谓之曰： 朕欲赐卿宝玉，非卿所欲。 
现代文：朝廷设立尚书省，全国上下议论纷纷。中丞之位久已空缺，正考虑适当人选。当时仁宗为太子，他提出： 要想得到一位才德兼备的中丞，非张珪莫属。 
English: The Imperial Court established the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the whole country discussed it. The position of chujo had been vacant for a long time, and the appropriate candidate was being considered. At that time, when Nishimune was crown prince, he proposed: If you want to get a chujo who is both talented and moral, you can't help but belong to Zhang Xuan.

古文：以帨拭面额，纳诸珪怀，曰： 朕泽之所存，朕心之所存也。 
现代文：于是当即拜珪为中丞。至大四年，武宗崩，仁宗即位，召张珪入宫面谕 ：朕本想赐卿宝玉，但这不是卿所希望的东西。 说毕，用手巾擦擦额上的汗，然后将汗巾送到珪怀中言道： 朕的汗水在哪里，朕的心也就在哪里。 
English: In the fourth year of his reign, after the death of Emperor Wuzong and the enthronement of Emperor Renzong, Zhang Ye was summoned to the palace and told, "I wanted to give you precious gems, but this is not what you wanted." He then wiped the sweat from his brow with a handkerchief, and then brought the handkerchief to his bosom, saying, "Where my sweat is, there is my heart."

古文：皇庆元年，拜荣禄大夫、枢密副使。
现代文：皇庆元年，拜珪为荣禄大夫、枢密副使。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Baizhang became a doctor of honor and vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：延祐二年，拜中书平章政事，请减烦冗还有司，以清政务，得专修宰相之职，帝从之，著为令。教坊使曹咬住拜礼部尚书，珪曰： 伶人为宗伯，何以示后世！ 力谏止之。
现代文：徽政院使失列门奏请将洪城军隶属于兴圣宫，而由他自己统领。此事以皇帝的名义发文给枢密院，枢密院官员惧怕失列门的权势，只得承命照办，而张珪坚决不同意，致使此事未能实现。皇庆二年拜为中书平章政事。教坊使曹咬住被任命为礼部尚书，张珪认为 让乐师为礼部尚书，对后人将如何交代 ，极力劝阻了。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, Emperor Xuanzong requested that the Hongcheng Army be subordinated to the Xing Sheng Palace, and that he himself should command it. This matter was sent to the Privy Council in the name of the emperor. The officials of the Privy Council were afraid of the power of Xuanzong, so they had to carry out the order, but Zhang Ye firmly disagreed, resulting in the failure of this matter to be realized. Emperor Xuanzong's second year of the Emperor's reign was the second year of the Emperor's reign. The minister of the church, Cao Niu, was appointed as the minister of ceremonies. Zhang Ye believed

古文：皇太后以中书右丞相铁木迭儿为太师，万户别薛参知行省政事，珪曰： 太师论道经邦，铁木迭儿非其人，别薛无功，不得为外执政。 
现代文：皇太后任命右丞相铁木迭儿为太师，万户别薛为参知行省政事。张珪奏道： 太师必须能经邦治国，而铁木迭儿不是这样的人才；别薛无功，不可为外省长官。 
English: The empress dowager appointed the Minister of the Right, Tie Mu Di'er, as the Grand Master, and Wanhu Beixue as the Sangchi to conduct provincial government affairs. Zhang Yuxuan said: The Grand Master must be able to govern the country, and Tie Mu Di'er is not such a talent; Beixue is useless, and cannot be the governor of a foreign province.

古文：车驾度居庸，失列门传皇太后旨，召珪切责，杖之。
现代文：珪随皇帝出居庸关，一天失列门传皇太后懿旨，谴责张珪反对任铁木迭儿为太师、别薛为参知行省政事，还对他施以杖刑。
English: He accompanied the emperor to live in Yongguan, and one day lost his place in the line of succession to transmit the empress dowager's imperial edict. He condemned Zhang Ye for opposing Ren Tiemu's appointment as grandmaster and Beixue's appointment to govern the province of Sanchi, and also punished him with a cane.

古文：珪创甚，舆归京师，明日遂出国门。
现代文：珪受伤甚重，被抬回京师，第二天就离开了京都。
English: Shiori was seriously injured and was carried back to Kyoto. He left Kyoto the next day.

古文：继丁母忧，庐墓寝苫啜粥者三年。
现代文：珪之子景元掌管皇帝符印，平时一天也未离开宿卫，这时因父病重，立即告假回家。
English: Shun's son, Jing Yuan, was in charge of the emperor's seal, and usually did not leave the palace guard for a single day. At this time, due to his father's serious illness, he immediately went home on leave.

古文：六年七月，帝忆珪生日，赐上尊、御衣。
现代文：仁宗大惊，问其原因，景元只是顿首哭泣，不敢讲明实情，仁宗忧郁好久，遣参议中书省事换住去赐张珪酒宴，并拜为大司徒。
English: Rinzong was shocked and asked the reason. Jingyuan just burst into tears and did not dare to tell the truth. Rinzong was depressed for a long time and sent his councilor, Zhongshuo, to give Zhangye a wine banquet, and worshiped him as a great disciple.

古文：至治二年，英宗召见于易水之上曰： 四世旧臣，朕将畀卿以政。 
现代文：珪托病推辞，居家调养。后因母亲去世，在墓旁守丧三年。至治二年，英宗召珪于易水，对他说 ：卿为四朝老臣，朕想请你执掌朝政。 
English: Later, due to his mother's death, he kept vigil at her grave for three years. Two years into his reign, Emperor Yingzong summoned him to Yishui and said to him, "Your Excellency is the senior vassal of the four dynasties, I would like to ask you to take charge of the imperial government."

古文：珪辞归。遣近臣设醴。
现代文：珪辞谢返乡，帝命侍臣设酒宴饯行。
English: After returning home, the emperor's attendants held a wine banquet.

古文：丞相拜住问珪曰： 宰相之体何先？ 
现代文：丞相拜住问珪： 作为宰相，首先应干什么？ 
English: The Prime Minister asked: As Prime Minister, what should I do first?

古文：珪曰： 莫先于格君心，莫急于广言路。 
现代文：珪回答说： 莫先于纠正君王的过失，莫急于广开言路。 
English: Zou replied, "Before correcting the faults of the king, we should not be in a hurry to broaden the way of speech.

古文：是年冬，起珪为集贤大学士。
现代文：这年冬，起任珪为集贤大学士。
English: In the winter of that year, he was appointed as a scholar of Jixian University.

古文：先是，铁木迭儿既复为丞相，以私怨杀平章萧拜住、御史中丞杨朵儿只、上都留守贺伯颜，大小之臣，不能自保。
现代文：在此之前，铁木迭儿复为丞相，为报私怨而杀平章萧拜住、御史中丞杨朵儿只、上都留守贺伯颜，弄得大小官员惶恐不安，不能自保。
English: Prior to this, Tekidiel was reinstated as chancellor, and in order to settle a personal grudge, Pingzhang Xiao Baizhu was killed, and only the vice-chancellor Yang Duer and the chancellor He Boyan were left behind, which made officials of all ranks panic and worry and unable to protect themselves.

古文：会地震风烈，敕廷臣集议弭灾之道，珪抗言于坐曰： 弭灾，当究其所以致灾者。
现代文：这时发生地震飓风，皇帝命廷臣商议消灾的办法，张珪直言不讳地说： 消灾，当追究灾异发生的原因。
English: At this time, an earthquake and hurricane occurred, and the emperor ordered courtiers to discuss disaster relief measures. Zhang Ye said bluntly: To eliminate disasters, it is necessary to investigate the causes of disasters.

古文：汉杀孝妇，三年不雨；萧、杨、贺冤死，非致沴之端乎！
现代文：昔汉代杀孝妇，以致三年不雨；萧、杨、贺冤死，难道不是导致灾祸发生吗？
English: Long ago, the Han Dynasty killed filial women, resulting in three years of no rain; Xiao, Yang and He died unjustly, didn't they cause the disaster to happen?

古文：死者固不可复生，而情义犹可昭白，毋使朝廷终失之也。 
现代文：死者固然不可复生，但公正的评论却可使沉冤昭雪，切不可使朝廷失去公正评论。 
English: It is true that the dead cannot be revived, but fair comment can make grievances disappear. The imperial court must not be deprived of fair comment.

古文：又拜中书平章政事，侍宴万寿山，赐以五带。
现代文：英宗拜珪为中书平章政事，命侍宴于万寿山。
English: Emperor Yingzong paid homage to the Chinese scholar Pingzhang Shiji, and ordered a banquet to be held at Mount Manshou.

古文：三年秋八月，御史大夫铁失既行杀逆，夜入都门，坐中书堂，矫制夺执符印，珪密疏言： 贼党罪不可逭。 
现代文：至治三年八月，御史大夫铁失谋反，刺杀英宗，夜入京城，夺中书省符印。珪密奏朝廷 ：贼党罪不可逃。 
English: In August of the third year of the Heian period, Mishi no daifu Tetsu lost his plot and rebelled, assassinated Yingzong, entered the capital at night, and seized the seal of the Chinese Ministry of Education.

古文：既皆伏诛，铁木迭儿之子治书侍御史锁南，独议远流，珪曰： 于法，强盗不分首从，发冢伤尸者亦死。
现代文：铁失等皆处死刑，唯独要把铁木迭儿之子治书侍御史锁南流放，珪抗争道 ：按照法律，强盗不分首恶胁从，凡掘墓伤尸者，均应处死。
English: Iron loss and so on are all subject to the death penalty, except that the son of Tiemu's second son, Zhishuzhizhi, should be exiled to the south of the lock, and the antagonism should be: according to the law, robbers do not distinguish between evil and evil, and all those who dig graves and injure corpses should be executed.

古文：锁南从弑逆，亲斫丞相拜住臂，乃欲活之耶！ 
现代文：锁南随从铁失杀害皇上，且砍断丞相拜住胳臂，还让他活着吗？ 
English: Did Lock-Nan kill the emperor with the help of an iron axe, and cut off the arm of the prime minister to worship him, and still let him live?

古文：遂伏诛。
现代文：终于治锁南死罪。
English: As a result, he was arrested.

古文：盗窃仁庙神主，时参知政事马剌兼领太常礼仪使，当迁左丞，珪曰： 以参政迁左丞，姑曰叙进。而太常奉宗祏不谨，当待罪，而反迁官，何以谢在天之灵！ 
现代文：仁宗的灵位牌被盗，当时参知政事马剌正兼领太常礼仪使，却拟升为左丞。珪上书说： 以参政升左丞可算为循序迁升，然而太常管宗庙不谨严，以致神位被盗，应当治罪，为何反而升官，这样怎能答谢仁宗在天之灵？ 
English: Rinzong's spiritual position card was stolen. At that time, the senator and political secretary Ma Jun was also in charge of the imperial etiquette, but he intended to be promoted to the left jongleur. The letter on the eulogy said: To join politics and become a left jongleur can be counted as a gradual promotion. However, the imperial governor of the ancestral temple was not prudent and strict, so that the divine position was stolen, which should be punished. Why was he promoted instead? How can Rinzong thank the spirit of heaven?

古文：命遂不下。
现代文：于是，迁升马剌的诏令停止下达。
English: As a result, the imperial edict to move the horse stables was no longer issued.

古文：泰定元年六月，车驾在上都。
现代文：泰定元年六月，泰定帝到上都。
English: In June of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taiding, Emperor Taiding went to Shangdu.

古文：先是，帝以灾异，诏百官集议，珪乃与枢密院、御史台、翰林、集贤两院官，极论当世得失，与左右司员外郎宋文瓒诣上都奏之。其议曰：
现代文：此前，帝为灾异事，诏令百官商议办法。珪与枢密院、御史台、翰林院、集贤院等各衙官员，详细讨论了当前政务之得失，与左右司员外郎宋文瓒至上都陈奏，其奏议如下：
English: Prior to this, the emperor had decreed by imperial edict that all officials should discuss the measures. He discussed in detail the gains and losses of the current government affairs with the officials of the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, the House of Hanlin, the House of Jiaxian, and other officials of the imperial court. He also discussed with Song Wenzhong, the son-in-law of the secretary of the left and right, and his report was as follows:

古文：国之安危，在乎论相。
现代文： 国之安危，在于相得其人。
English: The safety of the country lies in getting along with others.

古文：昔唐玄宗前用姚崇、宋璟则治，后用李林甫、杨国忠，天下骚动，几致亡国。
现代文：昔唐玄宗前用姚崇、宋王景则治，后用李林甫、杨国忠，天下骚动，几致亡国。
English: Long ago, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty used Yao Chong and Wang Jing of the Song Dynasty to rule the country, and later used Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong. The whole country was in turmoil, and the country was almost destroyed.

古文：虽赖子仪诸将，效忠竭力，克复旧物，然自是藩镇纵横，纪纲亦不复振矣。良由李林甫妒害忠良，布置邪党，奸惑蒙蔽，保禄养祸所致，死有余辜。
现代文：虽赖郭子仪诸将效忠竭力，恢复江山，然从此以后藩镇专横跋扈，纪纲不振，实由李林甫之流忌害忠良，布置奸党，蒙蔽圣听，保禄养祸所致，真死有余辜。
English: Although Guo Ziyi relied on the loyalty of the generals and made every effort to restore the country, from then on, the domain and town were tyrannical and the discipline was not strong. In fact, it was Li Linfu's lineage that harmed the loyal, arranged the traitors, blinded the saintly, and caused the misfortune of Paul. There is more to be sorry for.

古文：如前宰相铁木迭儿，奸狡险深，阴谋丛出，专政十年。
现代文：我朝前宰相铁木迭儿，奸狡巨猾，老谋深算，阴谋丛出。
English: I am the former prime minister, Tie Mu Di'er. I am a cunning and cunning person. I am a shrewd and calculating person. I am a conspirator.

古文：凡宗戚忤己者，巧饰危间，阴中以法，忠直被诛窜者甚众。
现代文：其专政十年内，凡宗戚有忤他意者，巧言离间，阴谋中伤，忠直之士被诛杀流窜者不知多少人。
English: During the ten years of his dictatorship, I don't know how many people who had relatives who had ill-will towards others, who were outspoken, who were hurt by conspiracies, and whose loyal and honest people were killed.

古文：始以赃败，谄附权奸失列门，及嬖幸也里失班之徒，苟全其生，寻任太子太师。
现代文：当其贪赃枉法之罪恶败露之时，又谄媚权奸失列门及为皇上宠爱的也里失班之徒，苟全其性命，且不久又任太子太师。
English: When the evils of his corrupt practices were exposed, he devoted his life to being the emperor's favorite, and was soon appointed crown prince and daishi.

古文：未几，仁宗宾天，乘时幸变，再入中书。当英庙之初，与失列门等恩义相许，表里为奸，诬杀萧、杨等，以快私怨。
现代文：仁宗升天后，他又得到英宗宠信，再任中书令，与失列门等相互勾结为奸，诬杀萧、杨等以报私怨。
English: After the ascension of Rinzong, he received Yingzong's favoured letter and was re-appointed as the Chinese envoy. He colluded with Shulimen and others to frame and kill Xiao and Yang to settle personal grudges.

古文：天讨元凶，失列门之党既诛，坐要上功，遂获信任，诸子内布宿卫，外据显要，蔽上抑下，杜绝言路，卖官鬻狱，威福己出，一令发口，上下股栗，稍不附己，其祸立至，权势日炽，中外寒心。
现代文：幸失列门之党徒被诛，而铁木迭儿又摇身一变，竟邀功请赏，获得信任，其诸子分布于宿卫，掌显要之职，欺上蒙下，杜绝言路，卖官鬻爵，作威作福，一令发出，上下恐惧不安，稍有不附和于他，大祸立至。其权势日炽，中外寒心。
English: The luckless party members were arrested, but Tie Mu Di'er changed his body again, he actually asked for merit and reward, gained trust, his sons were distributed in the palace guards, held important positions, deceived and deceived, cut off speech, sold officials and nobles, made threats and made blessings, issued an order, the upper and lower ranks were afraid and uneasy, slightly disagreed with him, and a great calamity arose. His power was blazing, and he was cold-hearted at home and abroad.

古文：由是群邪并进，如逆贼铁失之徒，名为义子，实其腹心，忠良屏迹，坐待收系。
现代文：因此一时群邪并进，如逆贼铁失之徒，名为义子，实为腹心。忠良之士逃避不迭，或坐以待捕。
English: Therefore, for a while, a group of evils go hand in hand, such as a traitor and a loser, who is called a loyal son, but is actually a confidant. A loyal person evades, or waits to be arrested.

古文：先帝悟其奸恶，仆碑夺爵，籍没其家，终以遗患，构成弑逆。
现代文：先皇帝已察其奸恶，夺其官爵，没其家产，但终因未做严厉处置，留下遗患，以致他敢于刺杀皇帝。
English: The former emperor had already discovered his treachery, stripped him of his title, and deprived him of his family property, but in the end, because he did not take harsh measures, he left a legacy of suffering, so that he dared to assassinate the emperor.

古文：其子锁南，亲与逆谋，所由来者渐矣，虽剖棺戮尸，夷灭其家，犹不足以塞责。
现代文：其子锁南，参与逆谋，罪恶昭彰，虽开棺戮其尸，灭其家族，还不足以抵其罪。
English: His son, Zonan, participated in the counter-plot, and his crimes were exposed. Even though they opened his coffin, killed his body, and killed his family, it was not enough to atone for his crimes.

古文：今复回给所籍家产，诸子尚在京师，夤缘再入宿卫。
现代文：但如今却交还其所收家产，诸子尚在京师，攀附权贵，再入宿卫。
English: But now he has returned the family property he received, and his sons are still teaching in Beijing, clinging to power, and re-entering the palace guards.

古文：世祖时，阿合马贪残败事，虽死犹正其罪，况如铁木迭儿之奸恶者哉！
现代文：世祖时，阿合马贪残之罪败露，人虽死但仍宣判其罪，何况如铁木迭儿这样的奸恶。
English: In the time of the patriarchs, the sins of Ahama's greed and cruelty were exposed, and people condemned his sins even though he was dead, not to mention the treachery of people like Tiemu Di'er.

古文：臣等议：宜遵成宪，仍籍铁木迭儿家产，远窜其子孙外郡，以惩大奸。
现代文：臣等认为：应遵循祖宗法制，仍没收铁木迭儿家产，将其子孙流放于外郡，以昭示惩此国家之大恶大奸。
English: The ministers and others believed that they should follow the ancestral legal system, confiscate the family property of Tiemu Di'er, and exile his children and grandchildren to other counties to show that they would punish the country's great evil and traitor.

古文：君父之仇，不共戴天，所以明纲常、别上下也。
现代文： 君父之仇，不共戴天，其所以如此，是要明纲常伦理，别上下之分。
English: The vengeance of the father is not shared by all, and this is why it is necessary to have a clear-cut code of ethics and to distinguish between the upper and lower classes.

古文：铁失之党，结谋弑逆，君相遇害，天下之人，痛心疾首，所不忍闻。
现代文：铁失之流结党谋反，皇帝丞相均遭毒害，天下之人，痛心疾首，皆不忍闻。
English: The iron-fisted party plotted a rebellion, the emperor and the prime minister were poisoned, and the people of the world were heartbroken. They could not bear to hear.

古文：比奉旨： 以铁失之徒既伏其辜，诸王按梯不花、孛罗、月鲁铁木儿、曲吕不花、兀鲁思不花，亦已流窜，逆党胁从者众，何可尽诛。
现代文：近奉朝旨 ：铁失之徒既然伏罪，诸王按梯不花、孛罗、月鲁铁木儿、曲吕不花、兀鲁思不花，亦已流放。逆党胁从众多，怎可尽诛。
English: According to a recent imperial edict: Since the traitors committed the crime of lying in ambush, all the kings have been banished to the mountains, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers and rivers.

古文：后之言事者，其勿复举。 
现代文：关于这件事，以后不必追问了。 
English: There is no need to pursue this matter any further.

古文：臣等议：古法，弑逆，凡在官者杀无赦。
现代文：臣等认为，按古法，凡官吏谋叛，均应杀无赦。
English: The vassals believed that, according to the ancient law, all officials who conspired to commit treason should be killed without mercy.

古文：圣朝立法，强盗劫杀庶民，其同情者犹且首从俱罪，况弑逆之党，天地不容，宜诛按梯不花之徒，以谢天下。
现代文：我圣朝立法，强盗劫杀百姓，同案犯无论首恶胁从，一并治罪，何况杀君谋反之党，天地不容，应该诛杀按梯不花之徒，以安民心。
English: I solemnly legislate that robbers who rob and kill the people and accomplices who commit the same crime shall be punished together, regardless of whether they were the instigators of the crime or the instigators of the crime. Moreover, the party that assassinated the emperor and plotted to overthrow the government is unacceptable to heaven and earth. It is necessary to fight and kill those who do not care about the people in order to keep the people's hearts safe.

古文：《书》曰：惟辟作福，惟辟作威。
现代文： 《书》曰： 只有君王能作福，只有君王能作威。 
English: "The Book" says: Only the king can bless, only the king can command.

古文：臣无有作福作威，臣而有作福作威，害于而家，凶于而国。
现代文：臣子不能作威作福，若有作威作福者，必有害于家，有危于国。
English: A vassal cannot be a tyrant. If there is a tyrant, it will be harmful to the family and dangerous to the country.

古文：盖生杀与夺，于子之权，非臣下所得盗用也。
现代文：生杀予夺之权操于天子，臣下不得盗用。
English: The power to give or take life and death belongs to the Son of Heaven, and a vassal may not usurp it.

古文：辽王脱脱，位冠宗室，居镇辽东，属任非轻，国家不幸，有非常之变，不能讨贼，而乃觊幸赦恩，报复仇忿，杀亲王妃主百余人，分其羊马畜产，残忍骨肉，盗窃主权，闻者切齿。
现代文：辽王脱脱，居宗室之首位，镇守辽东，其任不轻，然当国家不幸，有非常变故之时，非但不能讨贼，反而期望赦免，为报仇泄忿，杀亲王妃主百余人，瓜分羊马畜产。如此残害骨肉，盗窃君主权力，闻者莫不切齿。
English: Liao Wang escaped, lived in the first place of the family, and guarded Liaodong, which was not easy. However, when the country was unfortunate and there was a great change, instead of being able to catch the thief, he expected to be pardoned. In order to take revenge, he killed more than a hundred princes and princesses, and divided the sheep and horse livestock. In this way, he destroyed the flesh and bones, and stole the monarch's power. Those who heard about it would grind their teeth.

古文：今不之罪，乃复厚赐放还，仍守爵土，臣恐国之纪纲，由此不振。设或效尤，何法以治！
现代文：如今不仅不问罪，而且厚赐放还，让他仍守其爵土。臣恐国家纪纲，从此不振，如有效尤，将何以对付？
English: Today, not only is he not being charged with a crime, but he has also been generously released, so that he can still keep his noble land. If a vassal is afraid of the national discipline program, and it doesn't work out, what will be done about it?

古文：且辽东地广，素号重镇，若使脱脱久居，彼既纵肆，将无忌惮，况令死者含冤，感伤和气！
现代文：且辽东地广，素为重镇，若彼脱脱久居，彼更将肆无忌惮，何况令死者含冤九泉，有伤天地和祥之气。
English: Moreover, Liaodong is a vast area, and used to be an important town. If he gets away and lives for a long time, he will be unscrupulous. What's more, the death of the deceased has caused a lot of trouble, and has hurt heaven and earth and the spirit of good luck.

古文：臣等议：累朝典宪，闻赦杀人，罪在不原，宜夺削其爵土，置之他所，以彰天威。
现代文：臣等以为：我历朝法典规定，如赦免了杀人犯，其罪不可原谅。对于脱脱，应削夺其爵土，放到别处去，以显扬皇上之威严。
English: The courtiers thought, "According to the Code of Imperial Justice, if a murderer is pardoned, his crime is unforgivable. As for escaping, he should be stripped of his peerage and sent elsewhere to show the majesty of the emperor."

古文：刑以惩恶，国有常宪。
现代文： 刑以惩恶，国有常法。
English: Punish evil with punishment, the state has the common law.

古文：武备卿即烈，前太尉不花，以累朝待遇之隆，俱致高列，不思补报，专务奸欺，诈称奉旨，令鹰师强收郑国宝妻古哈，贪其家人畜产，自恃权贵，莫敢如何。
现代文：武备卿即烈、前太尉不花，我历代皇帝待他们至厚，均至高位。但他们不思报恩，专务奸欺，诈称奉旨，令鹰师强收郑国宝妻古哈，贪其家人畜产，自恃权贵，谁敢将他奈何。
English: Wu Beiqing is a martyr, and the former captain does not spend money. I have treated emperors throughout the ages very generously, and they are all of the highest rank. But they do not think about repaying favors, they are dedicated to deceit, fraudulently claiming to issue orders, forcing Ying Shi to forcibly take Zheng Guobao's wife Guha, coveting his family's livestock, and boasting of their power and nobility. Who would dare to resist him?

古文：事闻之官，刑曹逮鞫服实，竟原其罪。
现代文：刑部衙门审讯，如实供认，结果仍原谅其罪行。
English: He confessed truthfully during the interrogation by the Criminal Investigation Department, and was pardoned for his crime.

古文：辇毂之下，肆行无忌，远在外郡，何事不为！
现代文：在皇帝宫阙之下，尚敢肆行无忌，远在外郡者，是什么事也会干得出来的。
English: Under the emperor's imperial edict, there is nothing to be afraid of, and those who are far away from the county will be able to do anything.

古文：夫京师天下之本，纵恶如此，何以为政！
现代文：京师为天下之根本所在，纵恶如此，将何以为政？
English: The capital of China is the foundation of the world. Even if evil prevails, what will the government do?

古文：古人有言，一妇衔冤，三年不雨，以此论之，即非细务。
现代文：古人有言，一妇含冤，三年不雨，由此看来，以上诸事确非寻常政务。
English: The ancients said that if a woman has a grievance, it will not rain for three years. From this point of view, the above-mentioned things are indeed unusual government affairs.

古文：夫以经国有用之宝，而易此不济饥寒之物，又非有司聘要和买，大抵皆时贵与斡脱中宝之人，妄称呈献，冒给回赐，高其直且十倍，蚕蠹国财，暗行分用。如沙不丁之徒，顷以增价中宝事败，且存吏牍。
现代文：臣等以为：宜将即烈、不花交付刑部衙门收审。 官府收买宝物，世祖时不知有其事，自成宗以后，始有此弊。分珠寸石，价值数万，所付巨款，都是百姓膏血，而且是用鞭子棍棒强行搜括来的，挥霍无度，民怨沸腾，监察官员也交口阻止。以国家有用之宝钞，买此不济饥寒之物，大抵都非官府所需，而是一些达官权贵，假借呈献、回赐之名，将国家财钱私下瓜分。如沙不丁之徒就是这样，其败露事迹，有案可查。
English: The vassals thought that it would be better to have them executed immediately, without spending money, and hand them over to the criminal investigation department for trial. The government bought the treasures without the patriarch's knowledge, and this has been going on since the time of Chengzong. The pearl-sized stones, worth tens of thousands, and the huge sums of money were paid with the blood of the people, and they were forcibly collected with whips and clubs. It was extravagant, and the people's resentment was boiling, and the supervising officials also intervened to stop it. The country's valuable banknotes were used to buy these worthless things, which were not needed by the government,

古文：陛下即位之初，首知其弊，下令禁止，天下欣幸。
现代文：陛下即位之初，首知其弊，下令禁止，天下为之欢欣。
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, he was the first to know its drawbacks and ordered it to be banned. The whole world rejoiced.

古文：臣等比闻中书乃复奏给累朝未酬宝价四十余万锭，较其元直，利已数倍，有事经年远者三十余万锭，复令给以市舶番货，计今天下所征包银差发，岁入止十一万锭，已是四年征入之数，比以经费弗足，急于科征。
现代文：臣等近闻中书省仍奏请朝廷支付自成宗以来收买珠宝而未付价之款四十余万锭，比原来价值高出数倍。其中三十余万锭系应支付给市舶番货多年来所欠之款。如今国家每年所征金银，总计不过十一万锭，上述四十余万锭，相当于四年全国所征之金银。如今因国家经费不足，急于向民间征派。
English: According to recent reports, the Ministry of Education and Culture still requested the Imperial Court to pay more than 400,000 baht of the unpaid price of the jewelry purchased since Chengzong, which was several times higher than the original value. Of this amount, more than 300,000 baht should be paid to the city's shipping company. The total amount of gold and silver collected by the state each year is only 110,000 baht, and the above-mentioned 400,000 baht is equivalent to the gold and silver collected throughout the country for four years. Now, due to insufficient state funds, they are in a hurry to collect from the people.

古文：臣等议：番舶之货，宜以资国用、纾民力，宝价请俟国用饶给之日议之。
现代文：臣等以为：番舶之货，应用为国用，以减轻人民负担，所欠之价款，等国家财政充足后再说。
English: The courtiers thought: the goods of the Banzhong should be used for the state to reduce the burden on the people, and the price owed should be paid after the state's finances were sufficient.

古文：太庙神主，祖宗之所妥灵，国家孝治天下，四时大祀，诚为重典。
现代文： 太庙中的君王牌位，是祖宗神灵之所在。国家以孝治天下，四时祭祀，成为重典。
English: The king's throne in the Great Temple is where the ancestral deities reside. The country ruled the world with filial piety and held religious services at all hours, becoming a heavyweight.

古文：比者仁宗皇帝、皇后神主，盗利其金而窃之，至今未获。
现代文：近来仁宗皇帝、皇后的金质灵牌被盗，至今尚未破案。
English: Recently, the gold spiritual tablets of Emperor Renzong and Empress Dowager were stolen, and the case has yet to be solved.

古文：斯乃非常之事，而捕盗官兵，不闻杖责。
现代文：这样非常之事，捕盗官兵却不受惩罚。
English: Such an extraordinary thing, but officers and soldiers who catch thieves go unpunished.

古文：臣等议：庶民失盗，应捕官兵，尚有三限之法；监临主守，倘失官物，亦有不行知觉之罪。
现代文：臣等认为：百姓被盗，应捕官兵，尚有三限不获之罪；监察官吏和主管官员，若失官物，也有失于检点之罪。
English: In the opinion of the ministers and others: if a commoner is stolen, the arresting officers and soldiers are still guilty of the crime of not obtaining the three limits; if inspectors and competent officials lose official property, they are also guilty of losing the checkpoint.

古文：今失神主，宜罪太常，请拣其官属免之。
现代文：今帝后灵牌被盗，应治太常之罪，对于他们的属吏请予赦免。
English: Now that the Emperor's relics have been stolen, they should be punished for their crimes, and their subordinates should be pardoned.

古文：国家经赋，皆出于民，量入为出，有司之事。
现代文： 国家财赋，皆出于民，官府应量入为出。
English: The state's financial resources all come from the people, and the government should live within its means.

古文：比者建西山寺，损军害民，费以亿万计；刺绣经幡，驰驿江浙，逼迫郡县，杂役男女，动经年岁，穷奢致怨。
现代文：近来建立西山寺，损军害民，费财以亿万计。所用刺绣旗幡，系逼迫江浙郡县男女数年赶制而成，人民怨声载道。
English: Recently, the Xishan Temple was built, causing damage to the military and harming the people, costing hundreds of millions of yuan. The embroidered flags used were made by forcing men and women in Jiangsu and Zhejiang counties for several years, and the people complained.

古文：近诏虽已罢之，又闻奸人乘间奏请，复欲兴修，流言喧播，群情惊骇。
现代文：近虽已有明诏罢去，但仍闻奸人乘机奏请恢复，谣言四起，群情惊骇。
English: Although there has been a clear edict to abolish it recently, it is still rumored that the traitor took the opportunity to ask for its reinstatement. Rumors are flying everywhere, and the crowd is shocked.

古文：臣等议：宜守前诏，示民有信，其创造、刺绣事，非岁用之常者，悉罢之。
现代文：臣等以为：仍须遵行前诏，取信于民，凡建造、刺绣等事，不是日常所需者，一概罢除。
English: The courtiers thought that they still had to follow the previous edict and gain the people's trust, and that all construction, embroidery, and other things that were not needed on a daily basis should be abolished.

古文：人有冤抑，必当昭雪，事有枉直，尤宜明辨。
现代文： 人有冤情，必当昭雪，事有曲直，尤当明辨。
English: If one has a grievance, it must be clarified; if one has a matter that is crooked, it must be made clear.

古文：平章政事萧拜住、中丞杨朵儿只等，枉遭铁木迭儿诬陷，籍其家以分赐人，闻者嗟悼。
现代文：平章政事萧拜住、中丞杨朵儿只等，横遭铁木迭儿诬陷，没收其家产以分赐别人，闻者叹息。
English: The political affairs of Pingzhang Xiao Baiju, the middle-ranked Yang Duoer only waited, was framed by Tiemu Dier, confiscated his family property to distribute to others, and the listeners sighed.

古文：比奉明诏，还给元业，子孙奉祀家庙，修葺苟完，未及宁处，复以其家财仍赐旧人，止酬以直，即与再罹断没无异。
现代文：近奉明诏，归还原来财产。子孙奉祀的家庙修理草草完工，还未及安顿，却又以其家财仍赐予原来那些人，只给予物主少数钱，实与再度没收无异。
English: Recently, the imperial edict was issued to return the original property. The repair of the family temple of the descendants of the worshippers was gradually completed, but it was not yet settled, but they still gave the original people with their family wealth, only giving the owner a few money, which was actually the same as re-confiscation.

古文：臣等议：宜如前诏，以元业还之，量其直以酬后所赐者，则人无冤愤矣。
现代文：臣等以为：应如前诏，将家财归还原主，只给那些受赐者适当的赏钱，则必人无怨言。
English: The courtiers thought that they should return the family property to the original owner as previously decreed, and only give those who received the gift the appropriate reward, and then there would be no complaints.

古文：德以出治，刑以防奸。
现代文： 国家以德治天下，以刑防奸邪。
English: The country will rule the world with virtue, and prevent evil and adultery with punishment.

古文：若刑罚不立，奸宄滋长，虽有智者，不能禁止。
现代文：若刑罚不立，犯上作乱之人日多，虽有智士能人，亦不能禁止。
English: If the penalty is not set, the number of people who commit disorder will increase day by day. Although there are wise people, they cannot be banned.

古文：比者也先铁木儿之徒，遇朱太医妻女过省门外，强拽以入，奸宿馆所。
现代文：近来也先铁木儿之徒，遇朱太医妻女，强行与之奸宿馆所。
English: Recently, a former disciple of Tiemu's met Zhu Taiji's wife and daughter, and forcibly slept with them at the guesthouse.

古文：事闻，有司以扈从上都为解，竟弗就鞫。
现代文：被揭发后，有关衙门以他们正扈从皇帝至上都为辞，不加追究。
English: After being exposed, the relevant officials used the excuse that they were acting on behalf of the emperor, and did not pursue the matter.

古文：辇毂之下，肆恶无忌，京民愤骇，何以取则四方！
现代文：宫阙之下竟如此肆无忌惮，京师百姓又惊又愤。像这样京师何能为四方榜样？
English: Under the imperial edict, the people of Beijing were shocked and outraged at such wantonness. How could Beijing serve as a role model for the four directions?

古文：臣等议：宜遵世祖成宪，以奸人命有司鞫之。
现代文：臣等认为：应遵行世祖成法，令有关衙门将也先铁木儿之徒，以强奸罪审判处治。
English: In the opinion of the ministers, it is necessary to follow the law established by the ancestors and order the gatekeeper to be tried and punished for the crime of rape.

古文：臣等又议：天下囚系，冤滞不无，方今盛夏，宜命省台选官审录，结正重刑，疏决轻系，疑者申闻详谳。
现代文：臣等还以为：天下被囚禁的犯人中，难免有受冤屈者，方今盛夏之时，应命省台选官去逐一审查，重刑正法，轻者开导，疑案则评审上报。
English: The ministers also believed that among the prisoners in the world, there would inevitably be some who were wronged. At the height of the summer, Fang should have ordered the provincial and Taiwanese election officials to review the cases one by one. The heavy sentences should be corrected, the light ones should be enlightened, and the doubtful cases should be reviewed and reported.

古文：边镇利病，宜命行省、行台体究兴除，广海镇戍卒更病者，给粥食药；力死者，人给钞二十五贯，责所司及同乡者，归骨于其家。
现代文：边镇利病，宜命行省、行台查究，兴利除害。广东、海南守边士卒，病者给粥给药，为国捐躯者，每人给钞二十五贯，责令所在官府及同乡将其尸骨送回家乡。
English: In Guangdong and Hainan, the border guards give medicine to the sick, and those who died for the country give 25 yuan each, and order the local government and fellow villagers to send their bones back to their hometowns.

古文：岁贡方物有常制。
现代文： 每年各地岁贡有一定的制度。
English: Every year, there is a certain system of year-end tribute in various regions.

古文：广州东莞县大步海及惠州珠池，始自大德元年，奸民刘进、程连言利，分蜑户七百余家，官给之粮，三年一采，仅获小珠五两六两，入水为虫鱼伤死者众，遂罢珠户为民。
现代文：广州东莞县大步海及惠州珠池，自大德元年，在奸民刘进、程连花言巧语蒙骗下，分派户七百余家采珠，由官府给粮，三年一采，仅获小珠五两六两，而入水为虫鱼伤死者甚多，于是罢珠户为民户。
English: In Dabou Sea, Dongguan County, Guangzhou, and Zhuchi, Huizhou, since the first year of the Great Patriotic War, more than 700 households were assigned to collect pearls under the deception of the traitors Liu Jin and Cheng Lian. The government provided grain every three years, but only five or two or six small pearls were obtained, and there were many deaths caused by the worm fish entering the water. Therefore, the pearl-collecting households were private households.

古文：其后同知广州路事塔塔儿等，又献利于失列门，创设提举司监采，廉访司言其扰民，复罢归有司。
现代文：其后同知广州路事塔塔儿等，又怂恿失列门创设提举司监采，廉访司极称此举扰民，复罢提举司，仍由各地官府监采。
English: Later, the same thing happened with the Guangzhou Road Affairs Bureau and so on, and they lost the queue to create the Supervision Division of the Supervision Division. The Independent Investigation Division said that this move disturbed the people, and the Supervision Division of the Supervision Division was still supervised by the local government.

古文：既而内正少卿魏暗都剌，冒启中旨，驰驿督采，耗廪食，疲民驿，非旧制，请悉罢遣归民。
现代文：不久，内正少卿魏暗都剌假传圣旨，驰令广州督采，费财疲民。臣等建议：若非原来规定，请一概停止，遣民归家。
English: Not long after, Wei Andu, the Inner-Chancellor and Inner-Minor-Chancellor, issued a fake imperial edict, ordering Guangzhou to take control of the city, which cost a lot of money and exhausted the people. The vassals and others suggested that if it was not the original regulation, please stop it altogether and send the people back home.

古文：善良死于非命，国法当为昭雪。铁失弑逆之变，学士不花、指挥不颜忽里、院使秃古思皆以无罪死，未褒赠；铁木迭儿专权之际，御史徐元素以言事锁项死东平，及买秃坚不花之属，皆未申理。
现代文： 善良者死于非命，国法当为昭雪，铁失杀帝谋反，学士不花、指挥不颜忽里、院使秃古思，皆无罪而被处死，至今未受表彰及追赠官爵；铁木迭儿专权之时，御史徐元素及贾秃坚不花之属，惨遭杀害，其冤屈均未为之申辩昭雪。
English: The good man died a violent death, the law of the country should be Zhaoxue, the iron man failed to kill the emperor and plotted a rebellion, the scholar did not spend, the commander was not ashamed, and the imperial envoy Zhao Gu Si were all executed without guilt, and have not yet been commended and posthumously awarded a peerage; when Tiemu Di'er had exclusive power, Gu Shi Xu Xuan and Jia Zhaojian, who belonged to Zhaoxue, were brutally killed, and their grievances were not defended by Zhaoxue.

古文：臣等议：宜追赠死者，优叙其子孙，且命刑部及监察御史，体勘其余有冤抑者，具实以闻。
现代文：臣等以为：对死者应追赠官爵，对其子孙加以优待，且命刑部及监察御史调查其他受冤屈者，如实上报。
English: The vassals believed that the deceased should be posthumously granted a peerage, their descendants should be given preferential treatment, and the criminal investigation department and the inspector general of history should be ordered to investigate other wronged persons and report truthfully.

古文：政出多门，古人所戒。
现代文： 政出多门，自古以来都是要防备的，如今朝廷内外增设官署，官多俸多。
English: Since ancient times, it has been necessary to be prepared for the emergence of many governments. Today, government offices have been added inside and outside the Imperial Court, and officials are paid more.

古文：今内外增置官署，员冗俸滥，白丁骤升出身，入流壅塞日甚，军民俱蒙其害。夫为治之要，莫先于安民；安民之道，莫急于除滥费、汰冗员。
现代文：本一介平民，突然成为官吏，这样的事日益加多，军民俱受其害。治国首先在于安民，安民的办法，最紧要的是节省不必要的开支，裁汰多余的官员。
English: This kind of thing, where a civilian suddenly becomes a government official, is becoming more and more frequent, and both the military and the people are suffering from it. Governing the country is first and foremost about the safety of the people, and the way to keep the people safe. The most important thing is to save unnecessary expenses and eliminate superfluous officials.

古文：世祖设官分职，俱有定制。
现代文：世祖设官分职，俱有定制。
English: The founder set up the division of officials, and everything is customized.

古文：至元三十年已后，改升创设，日积月增，虽尝奉旨取勘减降，近侍各私其署，夤缘保禄，姑息中止。
现代文：自至元三十年以后，官员的迁升，官衙的创设，越来越多，虽曾奉旨审查，该减则减，该降则降，然侍卫各私设官署，攀附权贵以保俸禄，圣上旨令无端中止不行。
English: Since the 30th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the promotion of officials and the creation of official ranks have become more and more frequent. Although there was a review by order, the reduction was reduced, and the reduction was reduced, but the private government offices were guarded, the power was attached to the salary, and the holy order could not be suspended without reason.

古文：若复循常取勘，调虚文，延岁月，必无实效，即与诏旨异矣。
现代文：至英宗时决心裁撤崇祥院、寿福院所属之十三署，徽政院断事官及江淮财赋机构六十余署。不幸英宗被害，其他地方和部门未能按诏令裁撤减员。
English: At the time of Emperor Yingzong's death, he decided to abolish the 13 sub-departments of Chongxiang Academy and Shufu Academy, and the more than 60 sub-departments of the Huizhong Academy's adjudicator and the Jianghuai Foundation. Unfortunately, due to Emperor Yingzong's death, other places and departments were not able to reduce the number of employees in accordance with the imperial edict.

古文：臣等议：宜敕中外军民，署置官吏，有非世祖之制，及至元三十年已后改升创设员冗者，诏格至日，悉减并除罢之；近侍不得巧词复奏，不该常调之人亦不得滥入常选。
现代文：近又奉诏：一切均遵行世祖成法，若虚文敷衍，延误岁月，必无实效，有违圣旨。臣等建议：应明令朝廷内外军民，凡添增官员不合世祖规定者，及至元三十年以后迁升增加的冗员，自诏书送到之日起，一律裁并罢除；近侍之臣不得巧言奏免，不该升迁者不得随便升迁。
English: Recently, he also issued an edict: Everything should be done in accordance with the laws established by the ancestors. If the edict is perfunctory or delayed for years, it will not be effective and will violate the holy will. The ministers and others suggested that it should be made clear to the military and civilians inside and outside the imperial court that any additional officials who do not meet the requirements of the ancestors, as well as the redundant personnel who are promoted after the 30th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, should all be cut and removed from the day the edict was delivered; the ministers of the close attendants should not be allowed to make excuses, and those who should not be promoted should

古文：累朝斡耳朵所立长秋、承徽、长宁寺及边镇屯戍，别议处之。
现代文：历朝斡耳朵所设之长秋、承徽、长宁寺及边镇屯守机构及其官员，当另行议处。
English: The Changqiu, Chenghui, Changning Temple and Border Town garrison institutions and their officials established by successive dynasties should be discussed separately.

古文：自古圣君，惟诚于治政，可以动天地、感鬼神，初未尝徼福于僧道，以厉民病国也。
现代文： 自古圣君，只要全心全意致力于国事，便可感动天地鬼神，最初未曾求福于僧道，因为这样会有害于人民和国家。
English: Since ancient times, as long as a saint devoted himself wholeheartedly to the affairs of the state, he could move heaven and earth. At first, he did not seek blessings from the monks, because this would be harmful to the people and the country.

古文：且以至元三十年言之，醮祠佛事之目，止百有二。大德七年，再立功德使司，积五百有余，今年一增其目，明年即指为例，已倍四之上矣。
现代文：以至元三十年为例，打醮拜佛的事只有一百零二起；大德七年，再设功德使司，打醮拜佛达五百余次，今年又有增加，明年又援为例，共计已增至四倍以上。
English: As an example, in the 30th year of the Yuan Dynasty, there were only 102 cases of Buddha worship; in the 7th year of the Great Degenerate Era, another merit envoy was set up, and there were more than 500 cases of Buddha worship. This year there was another increase, and next year there will be another example of assistance. The total has increased more than fourfold.

古文：僧徒又复营干近侍，买作佛事，指以算卦，欺昧奏请，增修布施莽斋，自称特奉、传奉，所司不敢较问，供给恐后。
现代文：僧徒买通皇宫卫侍，举行佛事、算卦，欺蒙皇上，奏请增修庙宇，施舍财物，他们还自称侍奉、传奉，官府不敢过问，且争先向他们供给一切。
English: Monks and nuns bribed the palace guards, held Buddhist rituals and divination games, deceived the emperor, petitioned for more temples to be built, and gave away their possessions. They also claimed to serve and preach. The government did not dare to question them, and rushed to provide them with everything.

古文：况佛以清净为本，不奔不欲，而僧徒贪慕货利，自违其教，一事所需，金银钞币不可数计，岁用钞数千万锭，数倍于至元间矣。
现代文：佛教以清净为本，不追求世间财物，而僧徒贪图利益，自违教义，每办一件佛事，所费金银钞币不可数计，为此每年花费钞数千万锭，比至元时期增加数倍。
English: Buddhism is based on purity and does not pursue worldly wealth, while monks and nuns are greedy for profit and self-defeating doctrines. Every Buddhist service costs countless gold and silver banknotes. For this purpose, tens of millions of banknotes are spent every year, several times more than in the Yuan period.

古文：凡所供物，悉为己有，布施等钞，复出其外，生民脂膏，纵其所欲，取以自利，畜养妻子，彼既行不修洁，适足亵慢天神，何以要福！
现代文：凡所供之物，僧徒悉为己有，所施舍的钱钞，均为民脂民膏。而这些僧徒纵其所欲，用以畜养妻子，行为不正，亵渎天神，如何求福？
English: All the things that are offered are owned by the monks, and the money they give away is the people's money. But these monks do whatever they want, use animals to raise their wives, behave dishonestly, and blaspheme the gods. How can they seek blessings?

古文：比年佛事愈繁，累朝享国不永，致灾愈速，事无应验，断可知矣。
现代文：近年来佛事日繁，而历朝皇帝在位不久，以致灾祸连年，求佛不灵于此可见。
English: In recent years, Buddhism has become more and more popular, and the emperors of all dynasties have not been on the throne for long, so that disasters have occurred year after year. It can be seen that seeking Buddha is not effective.

古文：臣等议：宜罢功德使司，其在至元三十年以前及累朝忌日醮祠佛事名目，止令宣政院主领修举，余悉减罢，近侍之属，并不得巧计擅奏，妄增名目；若有特奉、传奉，从中书复奏乃行。
现代文：臣等以为：应罢除功德使司，凡在至元三十年以前，及历朝忌日打醮求佛的事，除宣政院主持者外，其余一概减免；皇帝侍卫之臣，不得巧言奏请，妄增名目，若有特奉、传奉，随中书省奏准后施行。
English: The courtiers thought that: the meritorious envoys should be abolished, and all the things that were done before the 30th year of the Yuan Dynasty, and the day of the death of the emperor, except for the presiding officer of the Xuan Zheng Yuan, should be exempted; the courtiers of the emperor's bodyguards should not be cleverly invited, and the number of names should be increased. If there is a special dedication or dedication, it will be implemented after the approval of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：古今帝王治国理财之要，莫先于节用，盖侈用则伤财，伤财必至于害民；国用匮而重敛生，如盐课增价之类，皆足以厉民矣。
现代文： 古今帝王治国理财，首先要讲求节用。侈用则必有损财政，财政损则必有害于民；国用不足则必多向人民征派，如盐课增价之类，皆为害民的措施。
English: In ancient and modern times, when emperors governed the country, the first thing they should do was to save money. If they spent too much, it would be detrimental to the finances, and if they spent too little, it would be harmful to the people; if they spent too little, they would have to collect more from the people, such as increasing the price of salt, all of which are harmful to the people.

古文：比年游惰之徒，妄投宿卫部属及宦者、女红、太医、阴阳之属，不可胜数，一人收籍，一门蠲复，一岁所请衣马刍粮，数十户所征入不足以给之，耗国损民为甚。
现代文：近年来许多游手好闲之徒，任意投身于京师警卫，有当宦官的，有做纺织刺绣的，有做太医的，有做阴阳先生的，不可胜数。一人投身于官府，全家免除徭役。这些人一年所花费的财物，向数十户征收的赋税还不足以供给，可见其耗国财损民利之甚。
English: In recent years, there have been innumerable idlers who have devoted themselves to guarding Beijing at will, including eunuchs, textile embroiderers, eunuch doctors, and yin and yang masters. One person devotes himself to the government, and the whole family is exempted from duty. The wealth spent by these people in a year, and the taxes levied on dozens of households, are not enough to supply, which shows that their consumption of national wealth is detrimental to the interests of the people.

古文：臣等议：诸宿卫宦女之属，宜如世祖时支请之数给之，余悉简汰。
现代文：臣等建议：宫廷宿卫所养的女婢，应按照世祖时所规定的人数，多余的全数裁汰。
English: The vassals suggested that the number of maidservants maintained by the palace guards should be in accordance with the number specified by the founder, and the excess number should be eliminated.

古文：阔端赤牧养马驼，岁有常法，分布郡县，各有常数，而宿卫近侍，委之仆御，役民放牧。始至，即夺其居，俾饮食之，残伤桑果，百害蜂起；其仆御四出，无所拘钤，私鬻刍豆，瘠损马驼。
现代文： 阔端赤牧养马驼，每年有规定，其分布于郡县亦各有定数。但宫廷宿卫近侍委交养马官役使百姓放牧，这帮人无所拘束，强占百姓房屋，令百姓供饮食，还残伤桑果，私卖饲料，以致瘠损马驼。
English: There are annual regulations for the red herdsmen of the broad end of the country to raise llamas, and their distribution in counties and counties also has a fixed number. However, the palace guards, close attendants of the palace committee, and the horse-raising officials make the people graze. These people are unrestrained, occupy the people's houses, make the people provide meals, and also injure mulberries and sell fodder illegally, resulting in the loss of llamas.

古文：大德中，始责州县正官监视，盖暖棚、团槽枥以牧之。
现代文：大德中始责令州县正官监视，盖暖棚，建马槽饲养。
English: At the beginning of the Great Patriotic War, the state and county officials were ordered to monitor, cover the warming shed, and build a manger for rearing.

古文：至治初，复散之民间，其害如故。
现代文：至治初又散于民间畜养，其害如前。
English: At the beginning of the epidemic, it spread to folk animal husbandry, and the damage is still occurring.

古文：监察御史及河间路守臣屡言之。
现代文：监察御史及河间路守臣多次报告下情。
English: Inspector Mishi and Kawamichi Moriomi repeatedly reported the situation.

古文：臣等议：宜如大德团槽之制，正官监临，阅视肥瘠，拘钤宿卫仆御，著为令。
现代文：臣等认为：应实行大德年间的设槽饲养之制，仍令州县正官监视，拘束宿卫所属之养马官，成为定制。
English: The ministers and others believed that the system of feeding horses in troughs set up during the Great Patriotic War should be implemented, and the state and county officials should still be monitored and the horse-breeding officials belonging to the guards should be restrained.

古文：兵戎之兴，号为凶器，擅开边衅，非国之福。蛮夷无知，少梗王化，得之无益，失之无损。
现代文： 兴兵打仗，不是好事，特别是擅开边衅，非国之福；蛮夷无知，缺乏圣王教化，得之无益，失之无损。
English: It is not a good thing to raise an army to fight a war. In particular, it is not a blessing for a country to arbitrarily start a border war. It is not beneficial to gain anything, and it is not harmful to lose anything.

古文：至治三年，参卜郎盗，始者劫杀使臣，利其财物而已。至用大师，期年不戢，伤我士卒，费国资粮。
现代文：至治三年，参卜郎为盗，其初不过是劫杀使臣，夺其财物而已，朝廷派大军征讨，为期整整一年，伤亡士卒，耗费资粮。
English: In the last three years of his reign, Senbulo committed theft. At first, it was nothing more than robbing and killing an envoy and seizing his property. The imperial court sent a large army to investigate, which lasted for a whole year. There were casualties and casualties, and money and grain were spent.

古文：臣等议：好生恶死，人之恒性。
现代文：臣等认为：好生恶死，人之常情。
English: The vassals believed that it is human nature to be indifferent to life and death.

古文：宜令宣政院督守将严边防，遣良使抵巢招谕。简罢冗兵，明敕边吏谨守御，勿生事，则远人格矣。
现代文：最好令宣政院一面督促守将严防边关，一面遣使招抚，裁减多余士兵，明令边吏守御疆土，勿生事端，如此则蛮夷必然臣服。
English: It is best to order the Xuan Zheng Yuan to, on the one hand, urge the guards to strictly guard the border, and, on the other hand, send envoys to appease them, reduce the surplus soldiers, and clearly order the border guards to guard the territory of the kingdom, and not to cause trouble. In this way, the barbarians will inevitably submit.

古文：天下官田岁入，所以赡卫士，给戍卒。
现代文： 天下官田的每年收入，用以赡养宫廷卫士，边关戍卒。
English: The annual income of the court officials under heaven is used to support the palace guards and border guards.

古文：自至元三十一年以后，累朝以是田分赐诸王、公主、驸马，及百官、宦者、寺观之属，遂令中书酬直海漕，虚耗国储。
现代文：但自至元三十一年以后，历朝皇帝将官田分赐给诸王、公主、驸马及百官、太监、寺观等，令中书省将自南方海运而来的粮食供赡养卫士戍卒之用，耗费国家储备。
English: However, since the year 31 of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperors of all dynasties have given the official fields to kings, princesses, horses and officials, eunuchs, temples, etc., and ordered the Ministry of Literature to use the grain shipped from the south to support the guards and soldiers, consuming national reserves.

古文：其受田之家，各任土著奸吏为庄官，催甲斗级，巧名多取；又且驱迫邮传，征求饩廪，折辱州县，闭偿逋负，至仓之日，变鬻以归。官司交忿，农民窘窜。
现代文：受赐田产之家，各任土著奸吏为庄官。这些征收租税的人称为催甲斗级，他们巧立名目向人民搜括；还差人向州县索取每月的俸禄，而自己应交纳而未交纳的国赋，不肯交纳，变卖归己，官府无不愤慨，农民被迫逃亡。
English: These tax-collectors, known as the Haku-dou class, cleverly set up a name to collect from the people; they also sent people to request monthly salaries from prefectures and counties, but refused to pay the national endowment that they should pay but did not pay, sold it to themselves, the government was outraged, and the peasants were forced to flee.

古文：臣等议：惟诸王、公主、驸马、寺观，如所与公主桑哥剌吉及普安三寺之制，输之公廪，计月直折支以钞，令有司兼令输之省部，给之大都；其所赐百官及宦者之田，悉拘还官，著为令。
现代文：臣等建议：诸王、公主、驸马、寺观等，均按照公主桑哥剌吉及普安等三寺所行的制度，将田地收入交付政府归仓，由官府计月折钞作为俸禄支给，其余由地方政府送交省部，输送于大都。所赐百官及太监的田地，一律还官，定为法令，永远执行。
English: The vassals suggested that the kings, princesses, emperors, and priests should, in accordance with the system of the three temples such as the princess Sanggokgyi and Pu'an, return the income from the fields to the government, and the government should pay monthly bills as salary, and the rest should be sent by the local government to the provincial department and transported to the capital. The fields given to the centurions and eunuchs should be returned to the officials, which was made into a law and implemented forever.

古文：国家经费，皆取于民。
现代文： 国家经费皆取于民。
English: All state funding comes from the people.

古文：世祖时，淮北内地，惟输丁税，铁木迭儿为相，专务聚敛，遣使括勘两淮、河南田土，重并科粮；又以两淮、荆襄沙碛作熟收征，徼名兴利，农民流徙。
现代文：世祖时，淮北内地只纳丁税，铁木迭儿为相，专务搜括，遣使丈量两淮、河南田地，重定赋税。又将两淮、荆襄的沙石地作为熟田征收赋税。致使农民逃亡。
English: At the time of the founder of the dynasty, only the Nading tax was levied on the inland areas of North Huaihai Province, and Tiemu Di'er was the official in charge of collecting the tax. He sent an envoy to measure the fields of South Huai Province and Henan Province to reassess the tax. He also levied the tax on the sand and stone fields of North Huaihai Province and Jingxiang Province as mature fields. This caused the farmers to flee.

古文：臣等议：宜如旧制，止征丁税，其括勘重并之粮，及沙碛不可田亩之税，悉除之。
现代文：臣等认为：应按旧制只征丁税，其勘察田亩而重定的税粮，以及沙石田地的税粮，一律取消。
English: The ministers and others held the view that only the ding tax should be levied according to the old system, and that the tax grain determined by surveying the mu of fields, as well as the tax grain of sand and stone fields, should be abolished.

古文：世祖之制，凡有田者悉役之，民典卖田，随收入户。
现代文： 世祖之制：凡有田者均服劳役，土地买卖，随土地征发劳役。
English: The ancestral system: all those who have rice fields are subject to labor service, land sales, and labor service with land requisition.

古文：铁木迭儿为相，纳江南诸寺贿赂，奏令僧人买民田者毋役之，以里正主首之属，逮今流毒细民。
现代文：铁木迭儿为相，受江南诸寺的贿赂，奏请令僧人买民田者，不服里正等职役，流毒至今。
English: Those who were bribed by the temples in the south of the Yangtze River and asked the monks to buy the people's fields, such as Tiemu Dier, were not satisfied with the position, and have been poisoned to this day.

古文：臣等议：惟累朝所赐僧寺田及亡宋旧业，如旧制勿征，其僧道典买民田及民间所施产业，宜悉役之，著为令。
现代文：臣等建议：除历朝所赐僧寺田产及亡宋旧业按旧制不征外，其他僧道所买民田及民间所施各产业，一律征派劳役，定为法令。
English: The vassals and others suggested that, in addition to the land grants to monks and monasteries granted by successive dynasties and the old estates of the late Song Dynasty, which were not levied according to the old system, all other estates purchased by monasteries and monasteries from the people and all estates donated by the people should be subject to conscription, which was made into a law.

古文：僧道出家，屏绝妻孥，盖欲超出世表，是以国家优视，无所徭役，且处之官寺；宜清净绝俗为心，诵经祝寿。
现代文： 僧道出家，别妻离子，是想超出红尘，所以受国家优待，不派劳役。出家僧道本应净绝凡俗之欲，一心诵经祝寿。
English: Monks and nuns who enter the priesthood should not marry. They want to be above the common people, so they receive preferential treatment from the state and are not assigned to labor service. Monks and nuns who enter the priesthood should purify themselves of worldly desires and devote themselves to chanting sutras and celebrating birthdays.

古文：比年僧道往往畜妻子，无异常人，如蔡道泰、班讲主之徒，伤人逞欲、坏教干刑者，何可胜数！俾奉祠典，岂不亵天渎神！
现代文：但近年来，僧道往往娶妻养子，无异常人，至于像蔡道泰、班讲主之徒，纵欲伤人，败坏风教，冒犯刑法者，不可胜数，让他们掌管祭祀大典，岂不亵渎神灵！
English: However, in recent years, monks and nuns have often married and raised children, and there are no abnormal people. As for the followers of the Lord like Cai Daotai and Ban Xuan, who indulge in hurting people, corrupting customs, and offending the criminal law, there are countless numbers. Let them be in charge of the sacrificial ceremony, it will not blaspheme the gods!

古文：臣等议：僧道之畜妻子者，宜罪以旧制，罢遣为民。
现代文：臣等认为：僧道凡娶妻育子者，均按律治罪，并令还俗为民。
English: The vassals believed that anyone who married and had children according to the Buddhist precepts would be punished according to the law, and would be forced to become a layman.

古文：赏功劝善，人主大柄，岂宜轻以与人。
现代文： 赏功劝善，君王之大权，岂能轻易与人。
English: Rewarding merit and exhorting goodness, the great power of the king, can it be easily with people.

古文：世祖临御三十五年，左右之臣，虽甚爱幸，未闻无功而给一赏者。
现代文：世祖在位三十五年，左右之臣虽甚受宠爱，但未闻有一人无功而给赏者。
English: During the thirty-five years of the Emperor's reign, although the left and right courtiers were greatly loved, it was unheard of for someone to be rewarded without merit.

古文：比年赏赐泛滥，盖因近侍之人，窥伺天颜喜悦之际，或称乏财无居，或称嫁女取妇，或以枝物呈献，殊无寸功小善，递互奏请，要求赏赐回奉，奄有国家金银珠玉，及断没人畜产业。
现代文：近年来赏赐泛滥，是因为近侍之人，乘皇上喜悦之时，或诈称贫困，或说要嫁女娶妇，或以物呈献，全无寸功善行，一个个都奏请赏赐，拥有国家金银珠玉及没收的奴婢、牲畜、田产。
English: The flood of rewards in recent years is due to the fact that close attendants, taking advantage of the emperor's pleasure, either falsely claim to be poor, or say that they want to marry a woman, or offer a gift, all of which are worthless merits and good deeds, and each one of them asks for a reward, owning the country's gold, silver, and precious stones and confiscated slaves, slaves, livestock, and farmland.

古文：似此无功受赏，何以激劝，既伤财用，复启幸门。
现代文：像这样无功而受赏，又何能激励那些真正为国效力为民行善的人，既损国家财力，又开侥幸之门。
English: How can those who truly work for the country and do good deeds for the people be inspired by such a worthless award, which not only damages the country's financial resources, but also opens the door to luck.

古文：臣等议：非有功勋劳效著明实迹，不宜加以赏赐，乞著为令。
现代文：臣等认为：非有明显的功勋劳绩的人，不宜赏赐，请定为法令。
English: In the opinion of the ministers and others, it is not appropriate to reward those who do not have obvious meritorious achievements. Please make it a law.

古文：臣等所言：弑逆未讨、奸恶未除、忠愤未雪、冤枉未理、政令不信、赏罚不公、赋役不均、财用不节、民怨神怒，皆足以感伤和气。惟陛下裁择，以答天意，消弭灾变。
现代文： 总之，臣等提出的：杀君谋反之贼未讨，奸恶未除，忠君忧国之士未得到昭雪，冤案未加审理，政令不信，赏罚不公，赋役不均，财用不节，民怨神怒，皆足以伤和祥之气，望陛下裁择，以答谢天意，消灭灾祸。 
English: To sum up, the following issues raised by the ministers: the traitors who killed the emperor and plotted against him have not been punished, the evils of treachery have not been eliminated, the patriots who were loyal to the emperor and worried about the country have not been cleared up, the unjust cases have not been tried, the government decrees are not believed, the rewards and punishments are not fair, the rewards and punishments are not equal, the use of money is not regular, and the people are angry with God. All of these are enough to hurt the spirit of harmony. I hope that His Majesty will make a decision in order to thank God and eliminate the disaster.

古文：帝不从。珪复进曰： 臣闻日食修德，月食修刑，应天以实不以文，动民以行不以言，刑政失平，故天象应之。
现代文：以上这些建议，泰定帝不加采纳，张珪又上书说： 臣闻日蚀应修德，月蚀应修刑，回报上天应求实在，不求表面，要以行为而不是以言论来感动人民。因刑政失平，故上天示警。
English: The above-mentioned suggestions were not accepted by Emperor Taiding, and Zhang Ye wrote again: "Subjects, eclipse should cultivate virtue, lunar eclipse should cultivate punishment. In return, heaven should seek reality, not the surface, and should move the people with behavior rather than speech. Because the criminal policy is unfair, heaven is warning.

古文：惟陛下矜察，允臣等议，乞悉行之。 
现代文：望陛下明察，准允臣等建议，请求全部施行。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will take a clear-sighted view, approve the suggestions made by his ministers, and request that they all be implemented.

古文：帝终不能从。
现代文：泰定帝始终不肯听从。
English: Emperor Taiding always refused to listen.

古文：未几，珪病增剧，非扶掖不能行。
现代文：不久，张珪病重，只能由别人搀扶行走。
English: Soon, Zhang Ye fell seriously ill and had to be helped to walk by others.

古文：有诏：常见免拜跪，赐小车，得乘至殿门下。
现代文：皇上诏令常见免行跪拜礼，赐小车乘坐至殿门下。
English: The Emperor's edict often exempts kneeling worship and gives a carriage ride to the entrance of the hall.

古文：帝始开经筵，令左丞相与珪领之，珪进翰林学士吴澄等，以备顾问。
现代文：帝开经筵，令左丞相与珪主持其事。珪荐举翰林学士吴澄等人为顾问。
English: Emperor Gaozong issued the edict, and ordered the Left Chancellors to preside over the matter. Gaozong recommended Hanlin Scholar Wu Cheng and others as advisers.

古文：自是辞位甚力，犹封蔡国公，知经筵事，别刻蔡国公印以赐。
现代文：从此以后，珪虽极力辞去职位，但还是封为蔡国公，主持经筵事，赐蔡国公印。
English: From then on, although he tried his best to resign from his post, he was still named Cai Guogong, presided over economic affairs, and bestowed the Cai Guogongxin.

古文：泰定二年夏，得旨暂归。
现代文：泰定二年夏，获准暂归故里。
English: In the summer of the second year of Taiding, he was allowed to temporarily return to his hometown.

古文：三年春，上遣使召珪，期于必见。珪至，帝曰： 卿来时，民间如何？ 
现代文：泰定三年，皇上遣使召见张珪。珪奉召至朝廷，帝问： 卿来时民间情形如何？ 
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taiding, the emperor sent an envoy to summon Zhang Ye. Ye was summoned to the imperial court, and the emperor asked: How was the situation of the people when you came?

古文：对曰： 臣老，少宾客，不能远知，真定、保定、河间，臣乡里也，民饥甚，朝廷虽赈以金帛，惠未及者十五六，惟陛下念之。 
现代文：珪回答说： 臣年老，宾客不多，离家很远的情形不能了解，真定、保定、河间是臣的故乡，这些地方民间饥荒严重，朝廷虽赈以金帛，但受惠者仅十之五六，望陛下垂怜。 
English: Zou replied, "I cannot understand the situation where a minister is old, has few guests, and is far away from home. Zhending, Baoding, and Hema are the minister's hometowns, and there is a serious famine in these areas. Although the imperial court has been lavished with gold ingots, only 56 out of every 100 people have benefited from them. I would like to express my deepest sympathy to Your Majesty.

古文：帝恻然，敕有司毕赈之。
现代文：帝为之忧伤，令官府完全赈济。
English: The emperor was saddened by this, and ordered the government to completely subsidize it.

古文：拜翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史，国公、经筵如故。
现代文：拜珪为翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史，仍为蔡国公，主持经筵如故。
English: He is still the Cai Guogong, presiding over the Council of Economic Experts as before.

古文：帝察其诚病，命养疾西山，继得旨还家。
现代文：帝知其真正有病，令在西山调养，接着又准予还家。
English: The court found that he was genuinely ill and ordered him to be raised in Xishan, after which he was allowed to return home.

古文：未几，起珪商议中书省事，以疾不起。
现代文：不久，召珪商议中书省事，珪因病不能奉召。
English: Not long after, the matter of summoning him was discussed, but he was unable to do so due to illness.

古文：四年十二月薨，遗命上蔡国公印。
现代文：泰定四年十二月逝世，遗嘱家人奉还蔡国公印。
English: When Taiding died in December of the fourth year, his family was given back the official seal of Cai Guo.

古文：珪尝自号曰淡庵。
现代文：珪曾自号 澹庵 。
English: He used to call himself Shuan.

古文：子六人。
现代文：有子六人。
English: They have six children.

古文：李孟李孟，字道复，潞州上党人。
现代文：李孟字道复，潞州上党人。
English: Li Mengzhe Dofu, a member of the Shang Party in Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖执，金末举进士。
现代文：曾祖李执，金末参加进士考试，但未中。
English: Zengzu Li Jie and Jinmai took the entrance examination, but did not pass.

古文：祖昌祚，归朝，授金符、潞州宣抚使。
现代文：祖父李昌祚归顺元朝，授金符，为潞州宣抚使。
English: Li Changyu's grandfather, Li Changyu, returned to the Shun Yuan Dynasty, was awarded a gold medal, and became an envoy of the Xizhou Proclamation.

古文：父唐，历仕秦、蜀，因徙居汉中。
现代文：父亲李唐，在秦、蜀一带做官，因此全家迁居汉中。
English: His father, Li Tang, was an official in the Qin and Shu regions, so the whole family moved to Hanzhong.

古文：孟生而敏悟，七岁能文，倜傥有大志，博学强记，通贯经史，善论古今治乱，开门授徒，远近争从之。
现代文：孟天资聪敏，七岁就能写文章，胸怀大志，博闻强记，经史皆通，对于古今治乱之事有他自己的见解。
English: Meng Tianzhi is intelligent, he can write articles at the age of seven, he has a great ambition in his heart, he is well-versed in history, and he has his own views on the past, present and future.

古文：一时名人商挺、王博文，皆折行辈与交。
现代文：开馆教授学生，远近子弟都来拜师求学。当时名人如商挺、王博文等长辈也同他交游。
English: He opened the museum and taught students, and children from near and far came to visit him to study. At that time, celebrities such as Shang Ting, Wang Bowen and other elders also traveled with him.

古文：郭彦通名能知人，尝语唐曰： 此儿骨相异常，宰辅之器也。 
现代文：郭彦通这位善于识别人才的有名人士，曾对李唐说： 此儿相貌异常，是做宰相的人才。 
English: Guo Yantong, a famous person who is good at identifying talent, once said to Li Tang: Here is an abnormal appearance, is the talent to be prime minister.

古文：至元十四年，随父入蜀，行省辟为掾，不赴；调晋原县主簿，又辞；行御史台交荐之，亦不就。
现代文：至元十四年，孟随父到了四川，四川行省召他去任职，他不去；调他任晋原县主簿，又推辞；行御史台多次推荐，他还是不肯做官。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Meng followed his father to Sichuan. The Sichuan Provincial Government called him to serve, but he did not go; he was transferred to be the chief accountant of Jinyuan County, but he declined; he was repeatedly recommended by the History Channel, but he still refused to be an official.

古文：后以事至京师，中书右丞杨吉丁一见奇之，荐于裕宗，得召见东宫。
现代文：后来因事到京师，中书右丞杨吉丁一见就很看重他，向裕宗举荐。裕宗在东宫召见了他。
English: Later, due to the fact that he came to Beijing to teach, Yang Jiding, the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, thought highly of him at first sight and recommended him to Emperor Yuzong. Emperor Yuzong summoned him to the East Palace.

古文：未几，裕宗薨，不及擢用。
现代文：不久，裕宗去世，来不及任用李孟。
English: Soon after, Yu Zong died, too late to appoint Li Meng.

古文：成宗立，首命采访先朝圣政，以备史官之纪述，陕西省使孟讨论编次，乘驿以进。
现代文：成宗即位，下令采访先朝的圣政，以备史官著述历史，陕西省令李孟将所收集的材料分类编纂，进呈朝廷。
English: When Chengzong ascended the throne, he ordered an interview with the holy government of the previous dynasty to prepare for the historian to write a history, and ordered Li Meng of Shaanxi Province to classify and compile the collected materials and submit them to the imperial court.

古文：时武宗、仁宗皆未出阁，徽仁裕圣皇后求名儒辅导，有荐者曰： 布衣李孟有宰相才，宜令为太子师傅。 
现代文：当时武宗、仁宗都在皇宫，徽仁裕圣皇后访求名儒来辅导两位皇子的学习。有人推荐说 ：平民李孟，有宰相之才，适于做太子师傅。 
English: At that time, both Emperor Wuzong and Emperor Nianzong were in the imperial palace, and Empress Hui Ren Yousheng visited to solicit famous Confucian scholars to tutor the two princes. Some people recommended that Li Meng, a commoner, had the talent of a prime minister and was suitable to be the prince's teacher.

古文：大德元年，武宗抚军北方，仁宗留宫中，孟日陈善言正道，多所进益。
现代文：大德元年，武宗领兵镇戍北部边疆，仁宗留在宫中，李孟每天给他讲圣人之道，进步很大。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, Wu Zong led the troops to the northern border, while Ren Zong stayed in the palace. Li Meng taught him the way of a saint every day, and he made great progress.

古文：成宗闻而嘉之，诏授太常少卿，执政以孟未尝一造其门，沮之不行，改礼部侍郎，命亦中止。
现代文：成宗非常高兴，诏令授孟为太常少卿。但当政者因孟不曾一次去登门拜访他，不执行成宗的诏令，改孟为礼部侍郎。
English: Chengzong was very pleased, and the imperial edict awarded Meng the title of Taichang Shaoqing. However, because Meng had never once visited him, the political leaders did not carry out Chengzong's imperial edict and changed Meng into a ceremonial attendant.

古文：仁宗侍昭献元圣皇后降居怀州，又如官山，孟常单骑以从。
现代文：仁宗侍奉昭献元圣皇后居于怀州，以后又到官山。李孟常常单骑随从。
English: Emperor Zhenzong served the Holy Empress Zhaochen Yuan, who lived in Huai Zhou and later moved to Guanshan. Li Meng often accompanied her on horseback.

古文：在怀州四年，诚节如一，左右化之，皆有儒雅风，由是上下益亲。
现代文：在怀州四年，始终如一，左右随从也都受到他的影响，有儒士风度。
English: During his four years in Huizhou, he was always consistent, and his followers on both sides were also influenced by him, with a Confucian demeanor.

古文：每进言曰： 尧、舜之道，孝悌而已矣。
现代文：孟与仁宗的关系更加亲密。他对仁宗说： 尧舜之道，在于孝悌二字。
English: Meng's relationship with Rinzong was even closer. He said to Rinzong: "The way to be filial is to be filial."

古文：今大兄在朔方，大母有居外之忧，殿下当迎奉意旨以娱乐之，则孝悌之道皆得矣。 
现代文：今大兄在北方，太后被迁居外地，内心也不舒畅，殿下当顺着太后的意思，使她老人家高兴些，这就尽了孝悌之心。 
English: Now that the eldest brother is in the north and the empress dowager has been moved to another place, her heart is not at ease. Your highness should follow the empress dowager's wishes and make her old man happier. This will fulfill your filial duty.

古文：仁宗深纳其言，日问安视膳，婉容愉色，天下称孝焉。
现代文：仁宗深以为然，每天去向太后问安，注意调节太后饮食，太后感到高兴，天下人称仁宗为孝子。
English: Renzong was deeply impressed. He went to greet the empress dowager every day, and paid attention to adjusting the empress dowager's diet. The empress dowager was pleased, and the whole world called Renzong a filial son.

古文：尝与群臣语，握拳示之曰： 所重乎儒者，为其握持纲常，如此其固也。 
现代文：孟在闲暇时，向仁宗讲解古代帝王治国得失和战败的经验教训，以及君臣父子之义。孟特别善于论事，忠心恳切地讲解，将治天下的大经大法讲得深透明白。其后，仁宗入朝平定内难，拥戴武宗即位，孝顺母后，辅助武宗治理国家，建立典章制度，成为极盛时代。
English: In his spare time, Meng explained to Renzong the experience and lessons of the ancient emperors' gain and loss in governing the country and the lessons of defeat, as well as the righteousness of the father and son of the monarch. Meng was particularly good at discussing things, and explained them faithfully and earnestly. He explained the great science and law of ruling the world in a profound and clear way. After that, Renzong entered the court to settle internal difficulties, supported the enthronement of Wuzong, and after being obedient to his mother, assisted Wuzong to govern the country and establish the award system, which became the golden age.

古文：其讲学之功如此者，实孟启之也。
现代文：这一切都是与李孟的讲学对仁宗的启发分不开的。
English: All of this is inseparable from the inspiration of Li Meng's lectures to Rinzong.

古文：成宗崩，安西王阿难答谋继大统，成后为之主，丞相、枢密同声附和。
现代文：成宗崩，安西王阿难答图谋篡位，成宗皇后为主谋，丞相、枢密都同声附和。
English: Chengzong passed away, Anxi King Ananda responded by plotting to usurp the throne, with Chengzong's empress as the main plotter, and the prime minister and privy council all echoed in unison.

古文：中书右丞相哈剌哈孙答剌罕密使来告，仁宗疑而未行。
现代文：中书右丞相哈剌哈孙答剌罕秘密遣使来告。仁宗还迟疑不决。
English: The chancellery's right-hand man, Haruhasun Dagon, secretly sent an envoy to complain. Rinzong was still hesitant.

古文：孟曰： 支子不嗣，世祖之典训也。
现代文：李孟劝道 ：非嫡子孙不能继承皇位，这是世祖遗训。
English: Li Meng advised: Illegitimate children and grandchildren cannot inherit the throne, this is the ancestral teaching.

古文：今宫车晏驾，大太子远在万里，宗庙社稷危疑之秋，殿下当奉大母，急还宫庭，以折奸谋、固人心。
现代文：今皇上晏驾，大太子远在北方，相距万里，宗庙社稷已处于危亡之时，殿下应当奉太后急速回宫，以挫败奸人的阴谋，巩固人心。
English: Now that the Emperor has passed away, the Grand Prince is far away in the north, thousands of miles apart, and the family temple and shrine are already in danger of dying, His Imperial Highness should quickly return to the palace after the Empress Dowager, in order to defeat the treacherous plot and consolidate the hearts of the people.

古文：不然，国家安危，未可保也。 
现代文：不然，国家安危就很难说了。 
English: Otherwise, it is difficult to say whether the country is safe.

古文：仁宗悦，曰： 先生之言，宗庙社稷之福。 乃奉太后还都。
现代文：仁宗还是犹豫不定。孟再次进言说 ：奸谋如果得逞，以一纸诏书召殿下回京，那时殿下母子尚不能自保安全，哪里还谈得上宗族。 仁宗终于醒悟，立即奉太后回到京都。
English: Ninso still hesitated. Meng said again, "If the plot succeeds, I will summon Your Imperial Highness back to Kyoto with an imperial edict. At that time, Your Imperial Highness's mother and son will not be able to keep themselves safe, so how can we even talk about the clan?" Ninso finally came to his senses and immediately returned to Kyoto to serve as empress dowager.

古文：时哈剌哈孙称病坚卧，仁宗遣孟往问之，适成后使人问疾，络绎不绝。
现代文：这时，哈剌哈孙称病卧床不起。仁宗遣孟去问候。恰逢成宗皇后也遣人来探病，来往不绝。
English: At this time, Hachihasun said that he was bedridden. Rinzong sent Meng to greet him. It happened that Empress Chengzong also sent people to visit him, and they kept coming and going.

古文：孟入，长揖而坐，已而前引其手，诊其脉，众以为医，乃不疑之。
现代文：孟入哈剌哈孙卧室，向来看望病人的人施以长揖，一旁坐下，过了一会儿，他去为病人诊脉，大家都以为他是来治病的医生，故不怀疑。
English: Meng entered the bedroom of Haji Hasun, who used to visit the sick with a long cane, and sat down. After a while, he went to check the pulse of the patient. Everyone thought he was a doctor who came to treat the sick, so they did not doubt.

古文：既得知安西王即位有日，还告曰： 事急矣！先发者制人，后发者制于人，不可不早图之。 
现代文：孟得知安西王不日即将即位，忙回去告诉仁宗： 事情紧急，先发者制人，后发者受制于人，不可不早做打算。 
English: Meng learned that King Anxi would soon ascend to the throne, and he hurried back to tell Rinzong: The matter is urgent. The first mover controls the people, and the second mover is controlled by the people. It is necessary to make plans early.

古文：左右之人皆不能决，惟曲出、伯铁木儿劝其行。
现代文：左右人皆不知如何是好，只有曲出、伯铁木儿劝仁宗立即行动。
English: People on both sides didn't know what to do, and only Qiu De and Bo Tiemu'er urged Rinzong to take immediate action.

古文：或曰： 皇后深居九重，八玺在手，四卫之士，一呼而应者累万；安西王府中从者如林。殿下侍卫寡弱，不过数十人，兵仗不备，奋赤手而往，事未必济。
现代文：有人还有所顾虑，提出： 皇后深居九重，皇帝玉玺在她手中，周围都是卫士，一呼百应。安西王府中随从他的人如林，殿下侍卫不过数十人，兵器也不多，赤手空拳，未必能成大事。
English: Some people still have concerns, saying: The empress is in the ninth rank, the emperor's jade scepter is in her hand, the guards are all around her, and they are ready to respond. The people who follow him in the Anxi royal palace are like a forest, but there are only dozens of guards for his highness, and there are not many weapons. With empty hands, he may not be able to achieve great things.

古文：不如静守，以俟阿合之至，然后图之，未晚也。 阿合，中国称兄，谓武宗也。
现代文：不如静待阿合到来，那时动手也不晚。 阿合是蒙古语，意思是兄长，也就是武宗。
English: It's better to wait for the arrival of Aho, then it's not too late to start.Aho is Mongolian, meaning elder brother, that is, Wuzong.

古文：孟曰： 群邪违弃祖训，党附中宫，欲立庶子，天命人心，必皆弗与。
现代文：孟坚决反对，他说： 这些奸邪小人，抛弃了祖宗的遗训，依附皇后，欲立庶子，天命人心都是不允许的。
English: Meng was adamantly opposed, saying, "These treacherous villains, who have abandoned the teachings of their ancestors, cling to the empress, and want to have an illegitimate child, are all impermissible.

古文：殿下入造内庭，以大义责之，则凡知君臣之义者，无不舍彼为殿下用，何求而弗获！
现代文：殿下进入内廷，以大义斥责他们，凡知君臣之义的人，无不舍弃奸邪投向殿下，何求大事不成！
English: His Imperial Highness entered the Inner Court and rebuked them with great righteousness. Anyone who knows the righteousness of princes and ministers must abandon treachery and evil and turn to His Imperial Highness. Nothing great can be achieved!

古文：克清宫禁，以迎大兄之至，不亦可乎！
现代文：清除宫廷，迎接大兄到来，不是也可以吗？
English: Isn't it possible to clear the court and welcome the arrival of the big brother?

古文：且安西既正位号，纵大太子至，彼安肯两手进玺，退就藩国；必将斗于国中，生民涂炭，宗社危矣。
现代文：如果让安西王登上皇位，纵使大太子到京，他怎肯两手奉进国玺，退居藩国；必将进行战斗，使生民涂炭，宗社危急。
English: If King Anxi is allowed to ascend to the throne, even if the grand prince comes to Beijing, how would he like to enter the imperial palace with both hands and retire to the country of the domain; he will certainly fight, make the people suffer, and the society will be in danger.

古文：且危身以及其亲，非孝也；遗祸难于大兄，非悌也；得时弗为，非智也；临机不断，无勇也。
现代文：而且使母后受到生命危险，这是不孝；遗祸难于大兄，这是不悌；能取得时不去取得，这是不智；当机立断时而不断，这是无勇。
English: Moreover, it is not filial piety to put the life of one's mother-in-law at risk; it is not chivalrous to leave a difficult legacy for one's elder brother; it is unwise not to acquire when one can; it is not courageous to persist when one can.

古文：仗义而动，事必万全。 
现代文：如果仗义而动，什么事也都办得到。 
English: If you are motivated by justice, you can do anything.

古文：仁宗曰： 当以卜决之。 
现代文：仁宗还是犹豫不定，提出让算命者卜卦来做出抉择，命人去召卜算先生来。
English: Renzong still hesitated, suggesting that the fortune-teller Bu Gua should make a choice, and ordered someone to call Mr. Bu Gua.

古文：命召卜人，有儒服持囊游于市者，召之至，孟出迎，语之曰： 大事待汝而决，但言其吉。 
现代文：有个身穿儒服手持布袋的从大街走过。孟出去迎来，途中对卜算先生说： 大事等你来决定，你只言吉。 
English: A man wearing a Confucian robe and holding a cloth bag passed by on the main street. Meng went out to meet him, and on the way said to Mr. Buchan: Wait for you to decide the important things, you only say good luck.

古文：乃入筮，遇乾三五皆九，立而献卦曰： 是谓乾之睽。乾，刚也；睽，外也。
现代文：这人进来便卜卦，卜的是乾卦，解释说：乾就是刚，以刚对外，可以定内。
English: When this person came in, he said, "Dai" means "gang" and "bang" means "dry" and explained, "Dai" means "gang" and "gang" means "external" and "internal."

古文：以刚处外，乃定内也。
现代文：李孟也进一步说这是天意，机不可失。
English: Li Meng also further said that this was God's will and the opportunity should not be lost.

古文：君子乾乾，行事也。
现代文：于是仁宗与孟及诸臣自延春门入宫。
English: As a result, Ninsong, Meng and all the courtiers entered the palace through the Yanchun Gate.

古文：飞龙在天，上治也。舆曳牛掣，其人耏且劓，内兑废也。厥宗筮肤，往必济也。
现代文：哈剌哈孙从宫廷东边来接应，在殿廊逮捕了那班阴谋篡位的人，把他们送入大牢，然后奉皇帝玉玺，等候武宗自北边回京即位。
English: Haji Hasun came from the east side of the palace to meet him, arrested the group of those who plotted to usurp the throne in the hallway, sent them to prison, and then waited for Emperor Wu Zong to return to Beijing from the north to take the throne.

古文：哈剌哈孙自东掖来就之，至殿廊，收首谋及同恶者，悉送都狱；奉御玺，北迎武宗，中外翕然，随以定。
现代文：朝廷内外一致拥护武宗即位。
English: Both inside and outside the Imperial Court unanimously supported the enthronement of Emperor Takemune.

古文：仁宗监国，使孟参知政事。
现代文：一场皇位继承的斗争就这样确定下来了。武宗回京即位前，由仁宗监国，以李孟为参知政事。
English: A struggle for succession to the imperial throne was thus settled. Prior to Emperor Takemune's return to the capital and his accession to the throne, the political affairs were overseen by Emperor Ninso, with Li Meng serving as co-premier.

古文：孟久在民间，备知闾阎幽隐，损益庶务，悉中利病，远近无不悦服，然特抑绝侥幸，群小多不乐，孟不为变。
现代文：孟久在民间，深知民间一切情形，对政务的处理，哪些该办，哪些不办，如何办有利，否则无利，这一切无不符合实际，远近士民无不心悦诚服。而对于那些侥幸之徒则特加抑制，故奸邪小人都不喜欢他，孟也不因此改变自己的态度去迎合他们。
English: Meng has been in the people's circle for a long time. He is well aware of all the circumstances of the people, the handling of government affairs, what should be done, what should not be done, how to do it is beneficial, otherwise it is not beneficial. All of this is not inconsistent with reality, and the far and near people are very pleased with it. And for those who are lucky, he is particularly restrained. The evil villains do not like him, and Meng does not change his attitude to cater to them.

古文：事定，乃言于仁宗曰： 执政大臣，当自天子亲用，今鸾舆在道，孟未见颜色，诚不敢冒当重任。 
现代文：大局已定之后，孟上书仁宗说： 执政大臣，应当由天子亲自选定，今天子已在回京途中，孟未见天子旨意，诚不敢冒昧当此重任。 
English: After the overall situation had been decided, Meng Shangshu Renzong said: The ruling minister should be selected by the heavenly son himself. Today, the heavenly son is already on his way back to Beijing. Meng did not see the heavenly son's will, and he did not dare to take on this important task.

古文：固辞弗许，遂逃去，不知所之。
现代文：再三辞职，仁宗不准，他便隐退走了，不知在何处。
English: Repeatedly resigned, Rinzong did not allow, he then retired, I do not know where.

古文：夏五月，武宗即位，有言于帝曰： 内难之初定也，李孟尝劝皇弟以自取，如彼言，岂有今日！ 
现代文：是年五月，武宗即位。有人对武宗说 ：内难初定之时，李孟曾劝皇弟自己登基，如果依照孟的话，哪有今日！ 
English: In May of that year, Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne. Someone said to Emperor Wuzong, "At the time of the initial determination of internal difficulties, Li Meng had advised the younger brother of the emperor to ascend to the throne himself. If he had followed Meng's words, there would be no today!"

古文：武宗察其诬，弗听，仁宗亦不敢复言孟。
现代文：武宗察知这是要挑拨他与仁宗的关系，不听，仁宗也不敢再提李孟。
English: Wu Zong sensed that this was to provoke his relationship with Ren Zong. He did not listen, and Ren Zong did not dare to mention Li Meng again.

古文：至大二年，仁宗为皇太子，尝侍帝同太后内宴，饮半，仁宗深思，戚然改容。
现代文：至大二年，仁宗为皇太子，曾与武宗和太后在内宫饮宴，席间仁宗若有深思。
English: By the second year of his sophomore year, Ninso was crown prince and had a banquet in the inner palace with Emperor Takemune and Empress Dowager. During the meal, Ninso was deep in thought.

古文：帝顾语曰： 吾弟今日不乐，何所思邪？ 
现代文：皇帝问道： 吾弟今日不愉快，是在想什么？ 
English: The emperor asked: My brother is unhappy today, what is he thinking about?

古文：仁宗从容起谢曰： 赖天地祖宗神灵，神器有归，然成今日母子兄弟之欢者，李道复之功为多。
现代文：仁宗从容回答 ：赖天地祖宗神灵的保佑，皇位终有所归，然能使今日我们母子兄弟之欢乐者，李道复的功最多。
English: Rinzong calmly replied, "Thanks to the blessings of the gods and ancestors of heaven and earth, the imperial throne has finally returned, but the one who can make our mother and son brothers happy today is Li Daofu.

古文：适有所思，不自知其变于色也。 
现代文：我正想到这些，不知不觉地显露出来。 
English: I was just thinking about this, and it came out of nowhere.

古文：帝甚友爱，感其言，即命搜访之，得之许昌陉山，遣使召之。
现代文：武宗对仁宗很友爱，为他的话所感动，即命搜访李孟，终于在许昌陉山找到了，遣使召他入京。
English: Wu Zong was very friendly to Ren Zong and was moved by his words. He immediately ordered a search for Li Meng and finally found him in Xuchang Lushan. He sent an envoy to summon him to Beijing.

古文：三年春正月，入见武宗于玉德殿，帝指孟谓宰执大臣曰： 此皇祖妣命为朕宾师者，宜速任之。 
现代文：至大三年正月，李孟入见武宗于玉德殿。帝指着孟对执政宰相说 ：这人是祖宗派来为朕之师的，速委以重任。 
English: In the first month of the third year of his reign, Li Meng went to see Emperor Wuzong at the Jade Palace. The emperor pointed to Meng and said to the ruling prime minister, "This man was sent by the patriarch to be my teacher. The fast-track committee has an important task.

古文：三月，特授荣禄大夫、中书平章政事、集贤大学士，同知徽政院事。
现代文：三月，特授孟荣禄大夫、中书平章政事、集贤大学士、同知徽政院事。
English: In March, Dr. Meng Ronglu, Chinese scholar Pingzhang Zhengji, Jixian University scholar and Tongzhi Hui Zhengji were specially awarded.

古文：贵戚近臣，恶其不便于己，而心服其公，无间言焉。
现代文：后仁宗即位，拜中书平章政事，晋升为光禄大夫，并加恩于三代，希望他尽力辅助皇帝料理国事。
English: After Emperor Renzong ascended to the throne, Emperor Pingzhang of Baizhong wrote a book on government affairs, was promoted to the position of Guanglu doctor, and was supported by three generations of emperors, who hoped that he would do his best to assist the emperor in handling state affairs.

古文：司空、司徒、太尉，古之三公，自大德以来，封拜繁多；释、老二教，设官统治，权抗有司，挠乱政事，僧道尤苦其扰。
现代文：孟感激皇上的知遇之恩，竭力以国事为己任。贵戚近臣虽感到李孟执政于他们不利，但对他一切出于公心则口服心服。司空、司徒、太尉为古代三公，自大德年间以来，封拜太多。佛教、道教设官统治，与行政官府抗衡，扰乱政事。
English: Meng was grateful to the emperor for his wisdom, and tried his best to take state affairs as his own responsibility. Although the noble relatives and courtiers felt that Li Meng's reign was unfavorable to them, they were verbally obedient to everything he did out of a sense of justice. Siku, Sito, and Taiyi were the three princes in ancient times, and there had been too much worship since the reign of Emperor Taede. Buddhism and Taoism set up officials to rule, compete with the administrative authorities, and disrupt political affairs.

古文：孟言： 人君之柄，在赏与刑，赏一善而天下劝，罚一恶而天下惩，柄乃不失。所施失当，不足劝惩，何以为治！
现代文：孟上书说 ：皇帝的权力在于赏与罚，赏一善而鼓励天下人为善，罚一恶而警戒天下人为恶，这样才不失皇帝之大权，如果赏罚不当，则不能起到鼓励与惩戒的作用，又如何治理国家！
English: Meng's letter said: The power of the emperor lies in rewarding and punishing, rewarding a good and encouraging the world to be good, punishing an evil and warning the world to be evil, so as not to lose the emperor's great power. If the reward and punishment is improper, it cannot play the role of encouragement and discipline, and how to govern the country!

古文：僧、道士既为出世法，何用官府绳治！ 
现代文：僧道既为出世人，用不着官府来管。 
English: Since monasticism is for the world, it does not need to be managed by the government.

古文：乃奏雪冤死者，复其官荫；滥冒名爵者，悉夺之；罢僧道官。
现代文：奏请将冤死者，恢复其官爵，让子孙继承；冒名封爵者，夺其爵位；僧道为官者，罢其官。
English: It is requested that the unjustly deceased be restored to their peerage so that their descendants can inherit it; those who have been knighted under false names should lose their peerage; those who have been ordained as monks should lose their title.

古文：天下称快。仁宗初出居怀，深见吏弊，欲痛刬除之。
现代文：由于世道太平，风俗逐渐奢侈，在车马服装等方面，违背了等级制度，弄得上下不分。一些近臣，由于受到皇帝恩宠贪求无厌，损公肥私。
English: Due to the peacefulness of the world, the customs gradually became extravagant. In terms of chariots, horses, clothing and other aspects, they violated the hierarchy system and made it so that there was no distinction between the upper and lower ranks. Some courtiers, due to the emperor's favor, were insatiable and selfish.

古文：又图其像，敕词臣为之赞，及御书 秋谷 二字，识以玺而赐之。
现代文：孟上书请求加以限制，皇帝听从。李孟在朝廷虽做了许多事，但总感到自己能力有限，请求辞职让贤。仁宗不肯，对他说： 朕在位，卿必须在中书省，朕与卿相始终，以后再不要说辞职的话了。 
English: Meng wrote a letter asking for restrictions, and the emperor complied. Although Li Mengran had done a lot of things in the court, he always felt that his ability was limited and asked to resign. Rinzong refused, saying to him: I am in power, my lord must be in the Central Literature Department, I am with my lord all the time, don't say anything about resigning in the future.

古文：入见，必赐坐，语移时，称其字而不名，其见尊礼如此。
现代文：赐孟为秦国公，亲授印章，还令人为他画像，做赞美之词等等。还为他御书 秋谷 二字。每次召见时必赐坐，且只呼其字，而不呼其名，可以说对他尊重到了极点。
English: He gave Meng the title of the Prince of Qin, personally awarded him the seal, had people draw pictures of him, write words of praise, and so on. He also gave him the title of Akitani. Every time he was summoned, he would be given a seat, and he would only be called by his title, not his name. It can be said that he was respected to the extreme.

古文：帝尝语近臣曰： 道复以道德相朕，致天下蒙泽。 赐之钞十万贯，令将作为治第。
现代文：仁宗认为，李孟用道德辅佐他，使天下人受惠，又赐他钞十万贯，作为建造府第之用。
English: Rinzong believed that Li Meng supported him with morality, benefiting the people of the world, and gave him 100,000 yuan in banknotes for the construction of the palace.

古文：孟辞曰： 臣布衣际遇，所望于陛下者，非富贵之谓也。 
现代文：孟辞谢说 ：臣以一介平民受陛下重用，我所希望的不是富贵。 
English: Meng Jiexie said, "As a commoner, I am of great use to Your Majesty. What I hope for is not wealth.

古文：悉辞不受。皇庆元年正月，授翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史，仍平章政事。
现代文：皇庆元年正月，授孟为翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史，同时仍为中书平章政事。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Emperor's reign, Meng was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate, the title of intellectual discipline and the title of national history, and he was still a member of the Central Government.

古文：未几，请告归葬其父母，帝劳饯之曰： 事讫，宜速还，毋久留，孤朕所望！ 
现代文：不久，请假归家安葬父母。帝设宴送行，叮嘱说： 丧事办完立即回来，切勿久留，负朕所望！ 
English: Soon after, he asked for leave to return home to bury his parents. The emperor held a banquet to see him off, and told him: Come back as soon as the funeral is over. Don't stay too long. You've disappointed me!

古文：十二月，入朝，帝大悦，慰劳甚至，因请谢事，优诏不允；请益坚，乃命以平章政事议中书省事，承旨翰林。
现代文：十二月就回到朝廷，仁宗大喜。孟再次提出辞职，皇帝不许，只命他以平章政事参议中书省事，承旨翰林。
English: In December, he returned to the imperial court, and Emperor Nanzong was overjoyed. Meng Miao once again offered to resign, but the emperor did not allow him to do so. He only ordered him to use the title of "Councillor of State Affairs" to keep a low profile.

古文：二年夏，乞还国公印，奏三上，始如所请。
现代文：皇庆二年夏，三次上书请求归还秦国公印，皇帝只得答应他的请求。
English: In the summer of the second year of the Emperor's reign, he wrote three times to request the return of the official seal of Qin. The emperor had no choice but to agree to his request.

古文：帝每与孟论用人之方，孟曰： 人材所出，固非一途，然汉、唐、宋、金，科举得人为盛。
现代文：仁宗与他讨论用人之道，孟提出： 人才的选拔，固然不只一条途径，然汉、唐、宋，全都是从科举中选拔了大量人材。
English: Nanzong discussed with him the way of employing people, and Meng said: Of course, there is more than one way to select talents, but the Han, Tang and Song dynasties all selected a large number of talents from the imperial examinations.

古文：今欲兴天下之贤能，如以科举取之，犹胜于多门而进；然必先德行经术而后文辞，乃可得真材也。 
现代文：如今要选拔天下贤能，如采用科举制，要比其他途径好得多。但是实行科举，必须先考察德行经术，然后才是文辞，这样可得到有真才实学的人。 
English: Nowadays, it is necessary to select the world's talents. If the examination system is adopted, it will be much better than other methods. However, to implement the examination, it is necessary to first examine the virtue and practice of the scriptures, and then the literature, so that people with real talent and real learning can be obtained.

古文：帝深然其言，决意行之。
现代文：仁宗很同意他的意见，决定恢复科举取士制度。
English: Nanzong agreed with his opinion and decided to restore the system of collecting a diploma.

古文：延祐元年十二月，复拜平章政事。
现代文：延元年十二月，再度拜为平章政事。
English: In December of the following year, he was once again appointed to a government post.

古文：二年春，命知贡举，及廷策进士，为监试官。七月，进金紫光禄大夫、上柱国，改封韩国公，职任如故。
现代文：二年，命他负责科举的事。七月，进升金紫光禄大夫、上柱国，改封韩国公，其他原职不变。其后，因病不能办理公务，请求解职归乡，仁宗不得已同意他的要求，但仍居翰林学士承旨之职。
English: Two years later, he was appointed to be in charge of the imperial examinations. In July, he was promoted to Jin Ziguanglu Doctor and Shangzhu Guo, and was given the title of Korean official, but his other original duties remained unchanged. After that, he was unable to carry out official duties due to illness and requested to be relieved of his duties and return to his hometown. Rinzong had no choice but to agree to his request, but he still held the position of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：孟拜命欣然，适翰林学士刘赓来慰问，即与同入院。
现代文：延七年，仁宗崩，英宗即位，以太师铁木迭儿为相。铁木迭儿因孟以前不肯依附于他，对他进行诽谤，收回前后对孟封爵拜官的一切诏令，降为集贤侍讲学士、嘉议大夫。
English: Seven years later, Emperor Nianzong died, Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, and the ethereal teacher Tie Mu Di'er became the emperor. Tie Mu Di'er, because Meng had previously refused to cling to him, slandered him, revoked all previous and subsequent imperial decrees on Meng's knighthood, and was reduced to a scholar, a lecturer, and a doctor.

古文：宣徽使以闻曰： 李孟今日供职，旧例当赐酒。 帝愕然曰： 李道复乃肯俯就集贤耶？ 
现代文：估计孟不肯接受，因此藉口害他。没想到孟欣然接受，连皇帝也不禁感到吃惊，问道： 李道复肯俯就集贤侍讲学士之职？ 
English: He thought Meng would not accept, so he used this as an excuse to harm him. Unexpectedly, Meng readily accepted, and even the emperor couldn't help but be surprised and asked: Li Daofu, are you willing to accept the post of a scholar?

古文：时铁木迭儿子八尔吉思侍帝侧，帝顾谓曰： 尔辈谓彼不肯为是官，今定何如！ 
现代文：当时铁木迭儿的儿子八尔吉思在旁，帝对他说： 你们总说他不会接受这官职的，现在怎么样？ 
English: At that time, Tiemudiere's son, Balgis, was by his side, and the emperor said to him: You always said that he would not accept this official post, but what about now?

古文：由是谗不得行。
现代文：铁木迭儿对李孟的暗害不能得逞。
English: Tiemu Dier can't succeed in undermining Li Meng.

古文：尝语人曰： 老臣待罪中书，无补于国，圣恩宽宥，不夺其禄，今老矣，其何以报称！ 
现代文：孟曾对别人说 ：老臣待罪在中书办事，对于国家并没有多大好处，而皇恩宽大，不夺我的俸禄。如今我老了，如何才能报答？ 
English: Meng once said to others: "It does not do much good for the country for an old minister to do paperwork in the middle of a crime, but the emperor is generous and does not take away my salary. Now that I am old, how can I repay?

古文：帝闻而善之，恩意稍加。
现代文：英宗闻知，连连称善。至治元年卒。
English: Eizong Wenzhi, repeatedly praised as a good person. Graduated in 1981.

古文：至治元年卒。
现代文：御史多次上书为他申辩铁木迭儿对他的诬陷。
English: Goshi repeatedly wrote to him to defend the frame-up of him by Tiemu Dier.

古文：御史累章辨其诬，诏复元官。
现代文：朝廷诏令恢复李孟原来的官爵。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree to restore Li Meng's original official title.

古文：至治中，赠旧学同德翊戴辅治功臣、太保、仪同三司、上柱国，追封魏国公，谥文忠。
现代文：至正八年，赠旧学同德翊戴辅治功臣、太保、仪同三司、上柱国，追封魏国公，谥 文忠 。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he bestowed the titles of meritorious vassal, eunuch, eulogist, three-star general, and high-ranking official of the State of Wei on the old disciple.

古文：孟宇量闳廓，材略过人，三入中书，民间利害，知无不言，引古证今，务归至当。
现代文：孟气度宏大，才略超人。三入中书省，关于民间利害知无不言，引古论今，言无不当。
English: Meng has a magnificent temperament and is slightly superhuman. He has been admitted to the Ministry of Education and Culture for the third time, and he has nothing but good things to say about the interests of the people, and it is not improper to quote the ancients to discuss the present.

古文：士无贵贱，苟贤矣，不进拔不已。
现代文：对于士人，无论贵贱，只要是贤材，他必加提拔。
English: For the scholar, no matter how high or low, as long as he is a virtuous person, he must be promoted.

古文：游其门者，后皆知名。
现代文：与他交游的人，后来都是知名之士。
English: The people he befriended later became famous.

古文：为文有奇气，其论必主于理，其献纳谋议，常自毁其稿，家无几存。
现代文：生活俭朴。文章有奇气，其议论有理有据。上朝廷的奏章，自己不留底稿。
English: He lived a simple and frugal life. His articles were witty, and his arguments were well-founded. He did not leave a draft of the musical scores for the imperial court.

古文：父元长，有学行，官至太常博士。
现代文：皇庆、延年间，政务中每一点错误，人们都认为是铁木迭儿所造成的；有一点好的地方，都归功于李孟。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Qing and Emperor Yan, people believed that every mistake in government affairs was caused by Tie Mu Di'er, and every good thing was attributed to Li Meng.

古文：俨其仲子也，幼不为嬉戏事，长嗜学，善属文，御史中丞郭良弼荐为殿中知班，著宪章若干卷。
现代文：敬俨字威卿，祖籍河东，后迁居易水。俨自幼不贪玩，好读书，会写文章，御史中丞郭良弼推荐他为殿中知班。
English: He was originally from Hedong, but later moved to Yeosu. From a young age, he was not greedy for fun, loved to read, and could write articles. Guo Liangyao, the Vice-Minister of History, recommended him as a scholar.

古文：受知于广平王月吕禄那演，连辟太傅、太师两府掾，调高邮县尹，未赴，选充中书省掾。
现代文：广平王月吕禄那演连续两次召他为太傅、太师两府的官员。调任高邮县知县，还未去就任就被选入中书省任职。
English: Guangping Wang Yue Lulu was called twice in succession to be the official of Taifu and Taishi in two prefectures. He was transferred to Gaoyou County and Zhixian County, and was elected to the Ministry of Literature before he took office.

古文：朱清、张瑄为海运万户，豪纵不法，适俨典其文牍，尝致厚赂，俨怒拒之，二人以罪伏诛。权贵多以贿败连坐，独俨不与。
现代文：在此期间，海运万户朱清、张王宣二人违法乱纪，贿赂敬俨，遭到严厉拒绝。后来二人犯罪处死，那些接受朱、张贿赂的权贵多被株连，只有俨与他们无关，保持其廉洁。
English: During this period, Zhu Qing and Zhang Wang Xuan, two of the shipping merchants, broke the law and violated discipline, bribed and treated others with contempt, and were severely rebuffed. Later, the two of them were executed for their crimes. Those powerful people who accepted the bribes from Zhu and Zhang were mostly punished, but Zou had nothing to do with them and maintained his integrity.

古文：大德二年，授吏部主事，改集贤司直。
现代文：大德二年，授任为吏部主事，后又改任集贤司直。
English: In the second year of the Great Emperor's reign, he was appointed as the head of the personnel department, and later he was reappointed as Shixian Sizhi.

古文：时省臣有既黜而复收用者，参预官巧佞，与相比周，以黩货挠法，即日劾去之。
现代文：这时湖湘动乱不安，丞相哈剌哈孙答剌罕奏请派俨奉诏去抚恤百姓，藉以观察当地动乱形势。他很好地完成了这次使命。六年，晋升为礼部员外郎。七年，拜监察御史。
English: At this time, Hunan was in turmoil and uneasy, and the chancellor, Ha Sun Dhanso, asked him to send a messenger to the people to observe the local turmoil situation. He fulfilled this mission well. In six years, he was promoted to the member of the ceremonial department, and in seven years, he became the inspector of history.

古文：江浙行省与浙西宪司交章相攻击，事闻，命省台遣官往治之，俨与阿思兰海牙偕行，议多不合，两上之，朝廷是俨议。
现代文：当时中书省中有一些官员是原被罢黜后又起用的，他们结党营私，贪污违法。俨对他们进行弹劾，又罢了他们的官。江浙行省与浙西道行御史台相互攻击，朝廷闻知，命中书省和御史台遣官去处理，俨与阿思兰海牙奉命同往，在处理该事中二人意见不一致，各自上报，朝廷以俨的意见为是。
English: At that time, there were some officials in the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy who were originally dismissed and then reinstated. They formed a party for private gain and committed corruption and illegal acts. They were impeached and their officials were dismissed. The People's Republic of China's Jiangsu Province and the People's Republic of China's Western Zhejiang Province attacked each other. The imperial court heard about this and ordered the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy and the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's Calligraphy and Calligraphy to dispatch officials to deal with the matter. The imperial court

古文：七月，迁中书左司都事，扈从上京。
现代文：同年七月，调任中书左司都事，扈驾至上京开平。
English: In July of the same year, he was transferred to the post of the left-hand secretary of the Central Government of the People's Republic of China, and went to Beijing Kaiping.

古文：西京贾人有以运粮供饷北边而得官者，盗用至数十万石，以利啗主者，匿不发，俨按征之以输边。
现代文：西京商人中有因运粮供北部边防军饷而得官的，盗用官粮数十万石来贿赂上司，俨去查处，以其粮输送到边疆供应守军。
English: Among the merchants in Xijing, there were some who were promoted to official positions because they transported grain for the Northern Frontier Defense Force. They used the stolen grain to bribe their superiors with hundreds of thousands of guilders, and then sent the stolen grain to the frontier to supply the defending army.

古文：九年，授吏部郎中，以父病辞。
现代文：大德九年，授吏部郎中，因父病而辞职。
English: In the ninth year of the Taide era, he resigned from his post as a junior member of the Ministry of Education and Culture due to his father's illness.

古文：已而父卒，既终丧，复入御史台为都事。
现代文：父亲去世后他守丧期满，被起用入御史台为都事。
English: After his father's death, his mourning period expired, and he was appointed to the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：中丞何某与执政有隙，省议欲核台选之当否，俨曰： 迩者省除吏千余人，台亦当分别之邪？ 
现代文：中丞何某与执政者不和，中书省要审核御史台的人选，俨指出 ：近来中书省任命官吏千余人，难道御史台也要去一一审核吗？ 
English: Vice-Chairman He is at odds with the ruling party, and the Ministry of Education and Culture should review the candidates for the Historiography Office. Zou pointed out: Recently, the Ministry of Education and Culture has appointed more than a thousand officials, should the Historiography Office also go to review them one by one?

古文：语闻，议遂寝。
现代文：中书省再也不提这件事了。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture never mentioned the matter again.

古文：江南行御史台与江浙省争政，事闻，俨曰： 省台政事，风化本原，各宜尽职，顾乃以小故忿争，而渎上听乎！ 
现代文：江南行御史台与江浙行省在一些政务上有争执，上报朝廷，俨指责他们 ：行省与御史台政事都是要以教化天下为根本任务，应各尽其职，在一些小事上的争执还要报告朝廷，是要烦扰皇上的视听吗？ 
English: The Southern Jiangsu Provincial History Station and the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial History Station had a dispute over some government affairs, and reported it to the imperial court. He accused them: Both the provincial government and the Provincial History Station's government affairs are to educate the world as the fundamental task, and they should each do their duty. The dispute over some minor matters should also be reported to the imperial court. Is it to bother the emperor's audio-visual?

古文：建康路总管侯珪，贪纵事败，俨亟遣官决其事，及其夤缘近幸，奏请原之，命下，已无及矣。
现代文：建康路总管侯王圭，贪婪纵欲，事情被揭露后，俨立即遣官去处理。一些巴结这个总管的人奏请朝廷原谅其罪行，但是惩处的令已下。
English: Hou Wang Gui, the general manager of Jiankang Road, was greedy and debauched. After the matter was revealed, Zou immediately sent officials to deal with it. Some people who fawned over this general manager asked the court to forgive his crime, but the punishment order has been issued.

古文：武宗抚军北边，成宗升遐，宰臣有异谋者，事定，命俨预鞫问之，悉得其情。
现代文：武宗领军镇戍北部边疆时，成宗崩，宰臣中有人图谋另立皇帝。这阴谋被粉碎后，命俨去审问，从而得知其全部实情。
English: When Emperor Wuzong was leading his army along the northern border, Emperor Chengzong died, and some of his vassals plotted to set up another emperor. After this plot was crushed, he was ordered to be interrogated to learn the whole truth.

古文：除山北廉访副使，入为右司郎中。
现代文：任命俨为山北廉访副使，后回朝任右司郎中。
English: He was appointed as the vice envoy of Shanbei Lianyong, and later returned to the imperial court as the junior secretary of the Right Division.

古文：且死者不可复生，宜在所矜贷。 
现代文：武宗即位，湖广省臣别有用心地向朝廷谎报有警，俨当面责问： 你镇守一方，既然有警岂能擅离职守，必是谎报。 
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, the minister of Huguang Province, with ulterior motives, falsely reported to the imperial court that there was a police presence. He was directly rebuked and asked: As you are the guardian of the town, since a police presence cannot leave without permission, it must be a false report.

古文：用是得减死者甚众。
现代文：经询问果然是谎报。
English: Upon inquiry, it turned out to be a false report.

古文：至大元年，授左司郎中，擢江南诸道行御史台治书侍御史。
现代文：至大元年，授左司郎中，后升为江南诸道行御史台治书侍御史。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he was awarded the title of Zuosiro Junior High School, and later he was promoted to Gangnam-do Gyoshi-dai Jisho-sama Goshi.

古文：先是，俨以议立尚书省，忤宰臣意，适两淮盐法久滞，乃左迁俨为转运使，欲以陷之。
现代文：在此以前，俨在讨论设立尚书省的事情上与宰相意见不合，这时两淮盐法不能施行，于是调俨为转运使，企图用盐法不行的事来坑害他。
English: Prior to this, Zou had disagreed with the prime minister in discussing the establishment of Shangshu Province. At this time, the two Huai salt method could not be implemented, so Zou was transferred to the transfer envoy and attempted to use the salt method to undermine him.

古文：俨以亭户凋弊已甚，以羡为额，民力将殚，病人以为己，非宰臣事，事遂止。
现代文：俨到任后，首先揭发了盐场场官的贪污，结果不仅盐法大行，而增加盐课至二十五万引。
English: After Zou took office, he first exposed the corruption of the salt field officials. As a result, not only the salt method was carried out, but the salt class was increased to 250,000.

古文：仁宗践阼，召为户部尚书，廷议欲革尚书省弊政，俨言： 遽罢钱不用，恐细民失利。 
现代文：河南行省参政提出，要把此增加的盐课作为每年征收的常额，俨又极力反对，认为这样会使盐户更加贫困。仁宗即位，召俨为户部尚书。朝廷提出要革除尚书省的弊政，其中包括废除尚书省所铸造的铜钱。俨认为 ：突然废除已通行的钱不用，百姓会受到损害。 
English: Henan Province proposed to make this increase in the salt tax a fixed amount to be levied each year, but Yu strongly objected, arguing that this would make salt households more impoverished. When Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, he called Yu to be the head of the household department. The imperial court proposed to eliminate the maladministration of the household department, including the abolition of the copper money minted by the household department. Yu believed that the sudden abolition of the money that was already in circulation was unnecessary, and the people would be harmed.

古文：不从，以疾辞。
现代文：这意见未被采纳，他便称病辞职。
English: When this was not accepted, he resigned, saying he was ill.

古文：皇庆元年，除浙东道廉访使。
现代文：皇庆元年，任命俨为浙东道廉访使。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed as a visiting envoy to Zhejiang.

古文：有钱塘退卒，诈服僧衣，称太后旨，建婺州双谿石桥，因大兴工役以病民。
现代文：钱塘有一退伍兵卒，伪装和尚，假传太后懿旨，建婺州双奚谷石桥，大兴土木，劳民伤财。
English: In Qiantang, there is a veteran soldier, disguised as a monk, falsely transmitted the empress dowager's edict, built the Shuangye Valley Stone Bridge in Zhangzhou, and carried out large-scale civil engineering. The laborers and the people suffered financial losses.

古文：旧俗，民有争，往往越诉于省，吏得并缘为奸利，讼以故繁。
现代文：俨命官府追查，揭发贪赃行为，奏请停止其工程。该郡大火焚烧了数千家，俨开仓赈济贫民。
English: He urged the government to investigate and expose the corrupt practices, and requested that the project be stopped. Thousands of houses in the county were burned in the fire, and the poor people were forced to open their barns.

古文：俨令下省府，非有司，不得侵民，讼事遂简。
现代文：在该郡建立孔庙。皇庆二年，拜江西行中书省参知政事。在该省，他简化诉讼程序，使官吏不能从中舞弊。
English: He established a Confucius Temple in the county. In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he went to the west of the Baijiang River to serve as a political advisor to the governor of Shuzhong Province. In the province, he simplified the proceedings so that officials could not commit fraud.

古文：诏设科举，俨荐临川吴澂、金陵杨刚中为考试官，得人为多。
现代文：朝廷诏行科举制，俨举荐临川的吴、金陵的杨刚中为考试官，从而得到不少有真才实学的人才。
English: The imperial court decreed the implementation of the examination system, and Wu of Linchuan and Yang Gang Middle School of Jinling were recommended as examiners. As a result, many talented people with real talent were obtained.

古文：其年冬，移疾退居真州。
现代文：是年冬，因病退居真州。
English: He retired to Jeonju due to illness in the winter of 2004.

古文：除江南诸道行御史台侍御史，不赴。
现代文：后起任他为江南诸道行御史台侍御史，他没有赴任。
English: Later, he was appointed to serve as the governor of the Southern Jiangsu Province, but he did not take up the post.

古文：四年春，诏促就前职，以疾辞。
现代文：延四年春，朝廷督促他就任前职，他仍称病辞谢。
English: In the spring of the following year, the Imperial Court urged him to take up his previous post, but he still said he was too ill to do so.

古文：七月，召为侍御史；十月，迁太子副詹事，御史大夫脱欢答剌罕奏留之，制曰 可 。
现代文：七月，召回朝任侍御史。十月，要调他为太子副詹事，为御史大夫脱欢答剌罕所挽留。
English: In July, he was recalled to the Imperial Court to serve as the Imperial Historian. In October, he was to be transferred to the position of the Prince's Vice-Chamberlain, but he was kept on as the Imperial Historian because he was unpopular.

古文：湖广省臣以赃败，俨一日五奏，卒正其罪。
现代文：湖广省臣贪赃枉法，俨一天五次上书，终使贪赃者认罪伏法。
English: Huguang provincial minister of corruption and bribery, five times a day, finally made the corrupt person plead guilty to bribery.

古文：台臣有劾去而复职者，御史复劾之，章再上，有旨命丞相、枢密共决之。
现代文：御史台臣僚中有被弹劾罢官而又复职者，御史再弹劾，朝廷命丞相与枢密共同决定。
English: Among the ministers of the Imperial Historian's Office, those who were impeached and dismissed but reinstated, the Imperial Historian will re-impeach, and the Imperial Court will jointly decide between the Prime Minister and the Privy Council.

古文：俨曰： 如是，则台事去矣。 
现代文：俨提出 ：像这样则御史台无事可做了。 
English: Zou said, "As it is, there is nothing the History Channel can do."

古文：遂即帝前奏黜之，因伏殿上，叩头请代。
现代文：他自己上朝向皇帝当面要求罢除那复职的官员。
English: He himself went to the emperor and demanded in person that the reinstated official be dismissed.

古文：俨以名爵当慎惜，会台臣亦以为言，乃奏请悉追夺之，遂著为令。
现代文：五年五月，拜中书参知政事，御史台挽留，他自己也推辞，皇帝不允，赐他《大学衍义》书一部及犀牛皮带。
English: In May of the fifth year, the emperor refused to grant him a copy of the book "University Derivation" and a rhinoceros leather belt.

古文：六年，告病，赐衣一袭，遣医视疗。
现代文：每次入见，皇帝叫他威卿，而不呼其名。
English: At each of his audiences, the emperor called him Wei Jing without mentioning his name.

古文：俨以其乡在近圻，恐复征用，乃徙居淮南，虽亲故皆不接见。
现代文：有的富民买通当权者在诸院及寺、监得到官职，甚至有当大官的。俨认为官爵的授予应当慎重，台臣也有这样的意见，于是奏请追夺那些用钱买的官爵并规定以后不得卖爵。六年，告病返家，迁居到淮南，不接见任何人。
English: Some rich people bought their way into positions of power in the courts, temples, and prisons, and even became high-ranking officials. Zou thought that the awarding of official titles should be done carefully, and the Tai court officials also had such an opinion, so he requested that those official titles that were bought with money be pursued and stipulated that they should not be sold in the future. After six years, he fell ill, returned home, moved to Huainan, and did not receive anyone.

古文：至治元年，除陕西诸道行御史台中丞。
现代文：至治元年，任命为陕西省行御史台中丞。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the acting governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：泰定元年，改江南诸道行御史台中丞。
现代文：泰定元年，改为江南诸道行御史，他都未去上任。
English: In the first year of the Tai Ding era, it was changed to the history of the Southern Jiangsu Province, but he did not take office.

古文：皆不赴。
现代文：年六十五岁即告老还乡，朝廷不允。
English: Returning to his hometown at the age of sixty-five was frowned upon by the imperial court.

古文：年六十五，即告老，朝廷虽命其子自强为安庆总管府判官，而未从其请。四年春，遣使赐酒，征为集贤大学士、荣禄大夫，商议中书省事。
现代文：四年春，遣使召俨为集贤大学士、荣禄大夫，商议中书省事。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, he sent an envoy to summon him as a scholar of Jixian University and a doctor of Ronglu, and discussed how to handle the matter.

古文：俨令使者先返，而挈家归易水。
现代文：俨让使者先回朝，自己却带着家眷回易水去了。
English: He let the messenger go back to the morning, but he took his family back to Yishui.

古文：汝曹当清白守恒业，无急仕进。 正冠帻，端坐而逝。
现代文：九月，皇帝又特任命他为中政院使，派轿子接回朝廷，同月，拜为中书平章政事，他始终以年老多病为辞，不肯受任。天历元年，朝廷欲将在上都开平的朝臣一律诛杀。
English: In September, the emperor specially appointed him as the envoy of the Central Government, and sent a palanquin to take him back to the imperial court. In the same month, he was appointed to the government of Pingzhang of the Central Government, but he always refused to accept the appointment, saying that he was too old and sick. In the first year of the heavenly calendar, the imperial court wanted to kill all the courtiers who were fighting in Shangdu.

古文：赠翰林学士承旨、光禄大夫、柱国，封鲁国公，谥文忠。
现代文：俨抗争不可，这些人才得幸免。俨在京住了一月便告假归家，在家十余年，虽病不能行走，但还是勤奋读书。临终告诫子弟说 ：你们要清白守业，不要急着去做官。 
English: These talented people were spared from having to fight for their lives. Zou Yuan lived in Beijing for one month and then returned home on leave. He was at home for more than ten years, and although he was unable to walk, he still studied diligently. On his deathbed, he admonished his children, saying, "You must keep your profession pure and not rush to become an official."

古文：自强，朝散大夫、礼部员外郎。
现代文：去世后，朝廷赠翰林学士承旨、光禄大夫、柱国，封鲁国公，谥号文忠。
English: After his death, the imperial court presented Hanlin with the titles of B.C.C.C.C.C., Guanglu Doctor, Jiu Guo, Hlu Guo, and the nickname of Wenzhong.

古文：俨有诗文若干卷，藏于家。
现代文：俨有诗文若干卷，藏于家。
English: He has several volumes of poetry and prose, which he keeps at home.

