古文：唐世赦宥，推恩于老人绝优。
现代文：唐代赦免罪人宽肴过失，对老人施及的恩惠非常优厚。
English: The Tang Dynasty pardoned sinners and forgave faults, and the favors extended to the elderly were very generous.

古文：开元二十三年，耕籍田。
现代文：开元二十三年，皇帝亲行籍田礼。
English: In the 23rd year of the first month of the year, the emperor himself performed the registration ceremony.

古文：侍老百岁以上，版授上州刺史；九十以上，中州刺史；八十以上，上州司马。
现代文：侍奉老人百岁以上的，封给上州刺史的头衔；九十岁以上的，封中州刺史；八十以上的，封上州司马。
English: Those who serve the elderly over 100 years old will be awarded the title of Shangzhou Sima; those over 90 years old will be awarded the title of Zhongzhou Sima; and those over 80 will be awarded the title of Shangzhou Sima.

古文：二十七年，赦。
现代文：开元二十七年，赦免天下。
English: On the 27th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the lunar calendar, the world was pardoned.

古文：百岁以上，下州则史，妇人郡君；九十以上，上州司马，妇人县君；八十以上，县令，妇人乡君。
现代文：百岁以上的老人，封下州史，百岁以上的妇女，封为郡君；九十岁以上的老人，封上州司马，妇女封为县君；八十岁以土的，封县令，妇女封乡君。
English: Elderly people over the age of one hundred are given the title of county historian, and women over the age of one hundred are given the title of county magistrate. Elderly people over the age of ninety are given the title of county magistrate, and women are given the title of county magistrate. People over the age of eighty are given the title of county magistrate and women are given the title of township magistrate.

古文：天宝七载，京城七十以上，本县令；六十以上，县丞；天下侍老除官与开元等。
现代文：唐天宝七年，京城里七十以上的老人，依照县令的待遇；六十以上的，按县丞对待；京城外全国侍奉老人安排官衔跟开元年间一样。
English: In the seventh year of Tang Tianbao, the elderly over 70 in Beijing will be treated according to the county ordinance; the elderly over 60 will be treated according to the county chancellor; the national service arrangement for the elderly outside Beijing will have the same rank as in the first year of the year.

古文：国朝之制，百岁者始得初品官封，比唐不侔矣。淳熙三年，以太上皇帝庆寿之故，推恩稍优，遂有增年诡籍以冒荣命者。
现代文：我们朝的制度，百岁的人才能得到初品官的封衔，跟唐代就不相等了，淳熙三年，因为太上皇帝庆寿的缘故，施加恩惠稍为优厚，于是有虚加岁数谎报籍贯来冒领光荣任命的人。
English: In the system of our dynasty, a centenarian can only obtain the title of the first grade official, which is not equal to that of the Tang Dynasty. In the three years of Junxi, because of the birthday celebration of the Emperor, the favors were a little generous, so there were people who falsely claimed to be born at a later age and pretended to receive the honorable appointment.

古文：使如唐日，将如何哉？
现代文：如果象唐代那样，将会怎么样呢？
English: If it is like the Tang Dynasty, what will happen?

