古文：元和七年春正月辛酉朔，己巳，以刑部尚书赵宗儒检校吏部尚书、兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：宪宗本纪元和七年春，正月初一为辛酉日。正月初九，任命刑部尚书赵宗儒为检校吏部尚书、兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: In the spring of the 7th year of the present era, the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 9th month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the year, Zhao Zongru, the inspector of the Ministry of Justice, was appointed as the inspector of the Ministry of Education, Xingyuan Yin, and the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：庚午，以兵部尚书王绍判户部事。
现代文：正月初十，命兵部尚书王绍掌管户部的事务。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Wang Shao was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of the household department.

古文：辛未，以京兆尹元义方为鄜州刺史、鄜坊丹延观察使，以司农卿李銛为京兆尹。
现代文：正月十一日，任命京兆尹王义方为州刺史？坊、丹、延等州观察使，任命司农卿李钅舌为京兆尹。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Jing Zhaoying Wang Yifang as the state observation envoy for the provinces of Zhifang, Dan and Yan, and appointed the Secretary of Agriculture Li Xizhe as Jing Zhaoying.

古文：是夜，月掩荧惑。
现代文：当夜，月亮掩蔽荧惑星。
English: That night, the moon occulted the fluorescent planet.

古文：壬申，废信州永丰县、越州山阴县、衢州盈川县。
现代文：正月十二日，撤销信州的永丰县、越州的山阴县、衢州的盈川县。
English: On the 12th day of the first month, Yongfeng County in Shinshu, Sanyin County in Yuezhou, and Yingchuan County in Ganzhou were revoked.

古文：癸酉，振武河溢，毁东受降城。
现代文：正月十三日，振武地区的黄河泛滥，冲毁东受降城。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, the Yellow River in Zhenwu area overflowed and washed away Dongshuangcheng.

古文：二月庚寅朔。
现代文：二月初一为庚寅日。
English: The first day of February is Go-in Day.

古文：壬辰，诏以去秋旱歉，赈京畿粟三十万石；其元和六年春赈贷百姓粟二十四万石，并宜放免。
现代文：二月初三，诏令：因为去年秋天干旱歉收，赈济京畿地区三十万石粮食；其元和六年春季赈济、借贷给百姓的二十四万石粮食，全部应当免于收回。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month, the imperial edict was issued: due to the poor harvest caused by the drought last autumn, the 300,000 koku of grain in the Gyeonggi region should be collected; the 240,000 koku of grain that was collected and loaned to the people in the spring of the 2nd and 6th years should all be exempted from collection.

古文：辛丑，尚书省重定左、右仆射上事仪注。
现代文：二月十二日，尚书省重新确定左、右仆射上奏的礼节。
English: On February 12th, the Ministry of Education and Culture re-determined the etiquette of the left and right minions shooting up.

古文：壬寅，以兵部侍郎许孟容为河南尹。
现代文：二月十三日，任命兵部侍郎许孟容为河南尹。
English: On February 13th, he appointed the secretary of the Military Department, Xu Meng Rong, as Henan Yin.

古文：辛亥，山南西道节度使裴玢卒。
现代文：二月二十二日，山南西道节度使裴玢去世。
English: On February 22nd, the Shannan West Road Festival made Pei Yao pass away.

古文：癸丑，入蕃使不得与私觌正员官，量别支给以充私觌。
现代文：二月二十四日，入蕃使不得参与收贽礼私卖正员官，或用别项支出充作私卖的贽礼。
English: On February 24th, officials of the Ministry of Civil Affairs were not allowed to participate in the private sale of gifts, or use other expenditures as private gifts.

古文：旧使绝域者，许卖正员官十余员，取货以备私觌，虽优假远使，殊非典法，故革之。
现代文：原来出使极远地方的使臣允许卖放正员官十余名，用实物以充作私卖的贽礼，虽然这只是从宽优待出使远地的使臣，却完全不合法令制度，故予以革除。
English: Originally, envoys sent to faraway places were allowed to sell and free more than ten officials, using the goods as gifts for private sale. Although this was just a courtesy to envoys sent to faraway places, it was completely illegal, so they were expelled.

古文：敕： 钱重物轻，为弊颇甚，详求适变，将以便人。
现代文：敕令 ：铜钱贵重，实物轻贱，是很严重的弊端。周到地寻求适当的变化，将会有利于百姓。
English: Executive Order: It is a very serious drawback that copper money is valuable, but physical goods are cheap. Thoughtfully seeking appropriate changes will benefit the people.

古文：所贵缗货通行，里闾宽恤。
现代文：重要的是缗钱通行，百姓们能够宽裕，有所助济。
English: What's important is that the money gets through, so that the people can be comfortable and have some help.

古文：宜令群臣各随所见利害状以闻。 
现代文：应当令群臣将各自所见到的利弊情况奏闻朝廷。 
English: The ministers should be ordered to report the advantages and disadvantages they have seen to the Imperial Court.

古文：三月己未。
现代文：三月初一为己未日。
English: The first day of March is the last day of the year.

古文：辛酉，以惠昭太子葬，罢曲江上巳宴。
现代文：三月初三，因为惠昭太子下葬，停止在曲江亭上巳日的宴会。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：庚午，以旱，敕诸司疏决系囚。
现代文：三月十二日，因为发生旱灾，敕令各司从宽判处在押的囚犯。
English: On March 12, because of the drought, the State Council ordered all departments to give lenient sentences to prisoners in custody.

古文：夏四月戊子朔。
现代文：夏，四月初一为戊子日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is Boshi Day.

古文：癸巳，敕天下州府民户，每田亩，种桑二树，长吏逐年检计以闻。
现代文：四月初六，敕令天下各州府的民户，每亩田种两株桑树，由地方的长官逐年检查统计以奏闻朝廷。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the year, the emperor ordered the households of all prefectures in the country to plant two mulberry trees per mu of land, and the local governors would check the statistics year by year to report to the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，盐铁使王播奏元和六年卖盐铁，除峡内井盐外，计收六百八十五万九千二百贯。
现代文：四月二十四日，盐铁使王播上奏说，元和六年所卖的盐铁，除去峡州以内的井盐之外，共计收入六百八十五万九千二百贯钱。
English: On April 24th, Wang Wang, the envoy of salt iron, reported that the salt iron sold in yuan and six years, excluding the well salt within the canyon, had a total income of 6.859.2 million yuan.

古文：五月戊午朔。
现代文：五月初一为戊午日。
English: The first day of May falls on Friday afternoon.

古文：庚申，上谓宰臣曰： 卿等累言吴越去年水旱，昨有御史自江淮回，言不至为灾，人非甚困。 
现代文：五月初三，皇上对宰臣说 ：你们多次说吴越地区去年发生水灾和旱灾，昨日有御史从江淮地区回来，说没有达到灾害的程度，百姓并不十分贫困。 
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the Emperor said to the Vice-Minister, "You have said many times that floods and droughts occurred in Wuyue District last year. Yesterday, an official came back from Jianghuai District and said that the extent of the disasters had not been reached and the people were not very poor.

古文：况推诚之道，君人大本，任大臣以事，不可以小臣言间之。
现代文：李绛回答说： 臣得知两浙、淮南的情况，才接着上奏这些地方因旱灾而荒歉。每个地区授任的官员，都是朝廷依赖、重视的大臣。御史如果心怀不善，说不定企图取媚于皇上，这正是奸邪佞幸之臣。
English: Li Qiye replied: The minister learned about the situation in Zhejiang and Huainan, and only then apologized for the drought in these regions. The officials appointed in each region are ministers who are trusted and valued by the imperial court. If the minister is not good at heart, he may try to flatter the emperor. This is exactly the traitorous and unlucky minister.

古文：伏望明示御史姓名，正之典刑。 
现代文：希望明白披露这个御史的姓名，以将其诉诸刑律。 
English: It is hoped that the name of this magistrate will be clearly disclosed so that he can be prosecuted.

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。
现代文：皇上说： 你的话是对的。
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：朝廷大体，以恤人为本，一方不稔，即宜赈救，济其饥寒，况可疑之也！
现代文：朝廷最重要的，是以救助百姓为根本，一处地方不丰收，就应当赈济，救助他们的饥寒，情况有什么值得怀疑的呢？
English: The most important thing for the imperial court is to help the people. If there is not a good harvest in a certain area, it is necessary to provide relief and help them with hunger and cold. What is questionable about the situation?

古文：向者不思而有此问，朕言过矣。 
现代文：先前没有思索而提出这个疑问，朕的话说错了。 
English: I made a mistake when I asked this question without thinking.

古文：绛等拜贺。
现代文：李绛等向皇上拜贺。
English: Li Qiye and others offered their congratulations to the emperor.

古文：癸亥，荧惑近太微右执法。
现代文：五月初六，荧惑星靠近太微垣右执法星。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, the fluorescent planet is close to the star of law enforcement on the right.

古文：六月丁亥朔，舒州桐城梅天陂内，有黄白二龙，自陂中乘风雷跃起，高二百尺，行六里，入浮塘陂。
现代文：六月初一，舒州桐城县的梅天陂内，有一黄一白的两条龙，从陂中乘着风雷跃起，高二百尺，飞行了六里，落入浮塘陂。
English: On the first day of June, in Mei Tianyu, Tongcheng County, Shuzhou, there were two dragons, one yellow and one white. They leapt from the raft with the wind and thunder. They were 200 feet high, flew six miles, and fell into the pond.

古文：癸巳，以金紫光录大夫、守司徒、同平章事、崇文馆大学士，太清宫使、上柱国、岐国公杜佑为光禄大夫，守太保致仕，宜朝朔望，佑累表恳请故也。
现代文：六月初七，任命金紫光禄大夫、暂署司徒、同平章事、崇文馆大学士、太清宫使、上柱国、岐国公杜佑为光禄大夫、署理太保，离任退休，应在每月朔日和望日上朝觐见皇上，这是杜佑多次恳请退休的缘故。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, he appointed Du You, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Acting Sito, Tongping Zhangji, Chongwen Academy Scholar, Taiqing Palace Envoy, Shangzhu Guo, and Qigong Guo, as Guanglu Doctor and Acting Taipo, and retired from his post. Du You should see the emperor at the Imperial Court on the New Year's Day and the Day of the Dead every month. This is the reason why Du You repeatedly implored him to retire.

古文：己亥，月近南斗魁第四星。
现代文：六月十三日，月亮靠近斗宿魁星的第四星。
English: On June 13th, the moon is close to the fourth star of the Quixote constellation.

古文：镇州甲仗库一十三间灾，兵仗都尽。
现代文：镇州的十三间甲仗库发生火灾，武器甲仗全部焚毁。
English: A fire broke out in thirteen armouries in Zhenzhou, and all the armouries were destroyed.

古文：王承宗常蓄叛谋，至是始惧天罚，凶气稍夺，仍杀主库吏百余人。
现代文：王承宗常常怀着叛乱的阴谋，到这时才畏惧遭到天罚，凶暴之气逐渐收敛，但仍旧杀死主管的库吏一百余人。
English: Wang Chengzong often harbored plans for rebellion, but only at this time did he fear divine punishment. His violent temper gradually subsided, but he still killed more than a hundred of the responsible treasurers.

古文：乙丑，以兵部员外郎王涯知制诰。
现代文：七月九日，任命兵部员外郎执掌制诰之事。
English: On July 9, Gairo, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed to take charge of the command.

古文：乙亥，制立遂王宥为皇太了，改名恆。
现代文：七月十九日，决定立遂王李宥为皇太子，改名为李恒。
English: On July 19th, it was decided to make Wang Liyu the crown prince and change his name to Li Heng.

古文：己卯，以新罗大宰相金彦升为开府仪同三司、检校太尉、使持节、大都督鸡林州诸军事、鸡林州刺史，兼宁海军使、上柱国，封新罗国王；仍册彦升妻贞氏为妃。
现代文：七月二十三日，任命新罗国大宰相金彦日升为开府仪同三司、检校太尉、使持节、大都督鸡林州诸军事、鸡林州刺史，兼任宁海军使、上柱国，晋封为新罗国王；并册封金彦日升之妻贞氏为王妃。
English: On July 23, the Grand Chancellor of Silla, Kimihiko Rissho, was appointed as Kaifu Ritsudon Sanji, Kengyo Taifu, Shihosetsu, Grand Governor of Jilin Province Military and Jilin Province Military History, concurrently appointed as Ning Naval Envoy and Shangzhuo, and promoted to King of Silla; and Kimihiko Rissho's wife, Sadauji, was appointed as Princess.

古文：八月丁亥朔，新除新罗国大宰相金崇斌等三人，宜令本国准例赐戟。
现代文：八月初一，新授任的新罗国大宰相金崇斌等三人，应当令其本国按照先例赐予门戟。
English: On the first day of August, the newly-appointed Grand Chancellor of Silla, Kim Chongbin, and three others should make their country follow the precedent of bestowing the title.

古文：戊戌，魏博节度使田季安卒。
现代文：八月十二日，魏博节度使田季安去世。
English: On August 12th, Tian Jian passed away.

古文：辛丑，废蓬州宕渠县。
现代文：八月十五日，撤销蓬州的宕渠县。
English: On August 15th, Pengzhou's Tagoqu County was revoked.

古文：甲辰，宣歙观察使房式卒。
现代文：八月十八日，宣歙观察使房式去世。
English: On August 18th, Xuan Yu's observation caused Fang Shi to pass away.

古文：丙午，以苏州刺史范传正为宣歙观察使。
现代文：八月二十日，任命苏州刺史范传正为宣歙观察使。
English: On August 20th, Suzhou official Fan Chuanzheng was appointed as the Xuanwu observation envoy.

古文：戊申，制： 诸州府五品已上官替后，委本道长官量其才行、官业、资历，每年冬季一度闻荐。
现代文：八月二十二日，制令： 各州府五品以上的官员免职后，委托本道的长官衡量其才德、政绩、资历，每年冬季奏闻举荐一次。
English: August 22nd, issued an order: After the removal of officials above the fifth grade from various prefectures, the chiefs of these provinces will be entrusted to measure their talents, political achievements, and seniority, and will be recommended once a year in the winter report.

古文：其罢使郎官、御史，许朝臣每年冬季准此闻荐，诸使府参佐、检校官，从元授官月日计，如是五品已上官及台省官，经三十个月外，任与转改；余官经三十六个月奏转改。
现代文：那些被免职的郎官、御史，允许朝臣每年冬季按照这个原则奏闻举荐。各使府的参佐官、检校官，从最初授职的时间算起，如果是五品以上的官员及中书、门下、尚书省和御史台的官员，经过三十个月以后，任其转调改授他职；其余的官员则经过三十六个月以后上奏转调改任。
English: Those vassals and imperial historians who have been removed from their posts are allowed to be recommended by courtiers in accordance with this principle every winter. Counsellors and inspectors of embassies, from the time of the initial appointment, if they are officials of the Fifth Rank or higher and officials of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, their subordinates, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Imperial Historian's Office, after 30 months, they will be transferred to another post; the remaining officials will be transferred to another post after 36 months.

古文：如未经考便有事故及停替官，本限之外更加十个月，即任申奏。 
现代文：如果未经考核即发生事故，以及停职的官员，除了原来的限期之外再加十个月，即任其申奏转调改任。 
English: If there is an accident without evaluation, and the suspended official has ten months added to the original deadline, he can apply for transfer and reassignment.

古文：辛亥，以左龙武大将军薛平为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：八月二十五日，任命左龙武大将军薛平为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: On August 25th, General Xue Ping of the Zalongwu Army was appointed as the official representative of the Yicheng Army.

古文：冬十月乙未，魏博三军举其衙将田兴知军州事。
现代文：冬季，十月初十，魏博节镇三军推举其偏将田兴执掌军州事务。
English: In the winter, at the beginning of October, the three armies of Weibo Festival Town elected their partial commander Tian Xing to take charge of military affairs.

古文：时田季安死，子怀谏年十一，为副大使、知军府事，军政一决于家僮蒋士则，数易大将，军情不安。
现代文：当时田季安死去，儿子田怀谏年方十一岁，担任节度副使，执掌军府的事务，军政大事全部由其家僮蒋士则决定，几次更换大将，军心不安定。
English: At that time, Tian Ji'an died, and his son, Tian Huai'en, was eleven years old. He served as the deputy envoy of the festival and was in charge of the affairs of the military government. All military and political events were decided by his family member, Jiang Shizhe. The general was changed several times, and the military spirit was unstable.

古文：因田兴入衙，兵环而劫请，兴顿仆于地，军众不散。
现代文：因田兴进入府衙，士兵们围着他而强行请他主持军务，田兴立即仆倒在地推辞，士兵们不肯散去。
English: Because Tian Xing entered the capital, the soldiers surrounded him and forcibly asked him to preside over military affairs. Tian Xing immediately fell to the ground and refused. The soldiers refused to disperse.

古文：兴曰： 欲听吾命，勿犯副大使。 
现代文：田兴说： 要想让我听从你们的要求，就不要伤害副大使。 士兵们说 ：可以。 
English: Tian Xing said, "If you want me to obey your demands, don't hurt the deputy ambassador." The soldiers said, "Okay."

古文：众曰： 诺。 但杀蒋士则等十数人而止。
现代文：只杀了蒋士则等十几个人就罢休了。
English: After killing only Chiang Shih, they waited for more than a dozen people to come and then stopped.

古文：即日移怀谏于外，令朝京师。
现代文：当天就把田怀谏搬迁到府衙外，令他到京师朝见皇上。
English: On the same day, he moved Tian Huaiyao outside the capital and ordered him to go to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：甲辰，以魏博都知兵马使、兼御史中丞、沂国公田兴为银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书，兼魏州大都督府长史，充魏博节度使。
现代文：十月十九日，任命魏博都知兵马使、兼御史中丞、沂国公田兴为银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书，兼任魏州大都督府长史，充任魏博节度使。
English: On October 19th, he appointed Wei Bo Du Zhi Terracotta Warriors and Horses Envoy, concurrently appointed as the Vice-Minister of History, and appointed Gongguo Kuntian Xing as the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu, the inspector of the school inspection department, concurrently appointed as the governor of the capital of Wei Zhou, and appointed as the Wei Bo Festival Envoy.

古文：庚戌，澧王宽改名恽，深王察改名忭，洋王寰改名忻，绛王寮改名悟，建王审改名恪。
现代文：十月二十五日，澧王李宽改名为李恽，梁王李察改名为李，洋王李寰改名为李忻，绛王李寮改名为李悟，建王李审改名为李恪。
English: On October 25th, Gong Wang Li Guang changed his name to Li Wei, Liang Wang Li Cha changed his name to Li, Yang Wang Li Meng changed his name to Li Wei, Gong King Li Liu changed his name to Li Guo, and Jian Wang Li Jian changed his name to Li Ke.

古文：以郑滑节度使袁滋为户部尚书。
现代文：任命郑滑节度使袁滋为户部尚书。
English: The appointment of Zheng Niu as the head of the festival made Yuan Zi the head of the household.

古文：十一月丙辰朔。乙丑，诏： 田兴以魏博请命，宜令司封郎中、知制诰裴度往彼宣慰，赐三军赏钱一百五十万贯，以河阴院诸道合进内库物充。六州诸县宣达朝旨。辛未，太保致仕杜祐卒。
现代文：及至裴度抵达魏州，田兴的礼遇非常恭敬，并请裴度到六州的各县去传达朝廷的圣旨。
English: When Pei Du arrived in Weizhou, Tian Xing treated him very respectfully, and asked Pei Du to go to the counties of the six states to convey the sacred will of the imperial court.

古文：东川观察使潘孟阳奏龙州武安县嘉禾生，有麟食之。
现代文：十一月十六日，以太保衔离任退休的杜佑去世。东川观察使潘孟阳奏报龙州武安县长出嘉禾，有麒麟来吃嘉禾。
English: On November 16th, Du You, who retired from the position of ether protector, passed away. Dongchuan Observation made Pan Mengyang report that Jiahe was grown in Wu'an County, Longzhou, and Kirin came to eat Jiahe.

古文：麟食来，群鹿环之，光彩不可正视。
现代文：麒麟来到的时候，群鹿环绕着它，其光彩照耀，不能正眼相看。
English: When the unicorn comes, the deer surround it, its brilliance shines, and it is impossible to look directly at each other.

古文：使画工图之以献。
现代文：命画工画成图献上。
English: The life-painting craftsman drew a picture to present.

古文：乙亥，以给事中李逢吉、司勋员外郎李巨并充皇太子诸王侍读。
现代文：十一月二十日，命令给事中李逢吉、司勋员外郎李巨共同担任皇太子诸侯王侍读。
English: On November 20th, Li Fengji and his younger brother Li Jiu, who was a member of the Honor Guard, were ordered to jointly serve as the attendants of the crown prince.

古文：戊寅，吏部尚书郑余庆请复置吏部考官三员，吏部郎中杨于陵执奏以为不便。
现代文：十一月二十三日，吏部尚书郑余庆请求再设置吏部的考官三名，吏部郎中杨於陵坚持上奏认为不妥。
English: On November 23, Zheng Yuqing, the secretary of the Personnel Department, requested that three examiners of the Personnel Department be re-established. Yang Yuling, the son-in-law of the Personnel Department, insisted that it was not appropriate.

古文：乃诏考官韦顗等三人祇考及第科目人，其余吏部侍郎自定，己卯，江西观察伎崔芃卒。
现代文：于是下诏令考官韦岂页等三人只考察进士及第科目的人，其余的由吏部侍郎自定。十一月二十四日，江西观察使崔艹凡去世。
English: So he ordered the examiner Wei Xizhe and three other examiners to examine only those who had been promoted and those who had passed the first subject, and the rest would be decided by the clerk of the personnel department. On November 24, Cui Yifan, the Jiangxi observer, died.

古文：辛巳前魏情节度副使田怀谏为右监门卫将军，赐宅一区、刍粟等。
现代文：十一月二十六日，任命前魏博节度副使田怀谏为右监门卫将军，赐予住宅一所、粮草等。
English: On November 26th, Tian Huaiyao, the former deputy envoy of the Weibo Festival, was appointed as the right supervisor and gatekeeper general, and was given a house, grain and grass, etc.

古文：甲申，以同州刺史裴堪为江西观察使。
现代文：十一月二十九日，任命同州刺史裴堪为江西观察使。
English: On November 29, Tongzhou Zhi Shi Pei Kan was appointed as the Jiangxi Observation Envoy.

古文：十二月丙戌朔，以吏部尚书郑余庆为太子少傅。
现代文：十二月初一，任命吏部尚书郑余庆为太子少傅。
English: On the first day of December, Zheng Yuqing was appointed as the prince's younger brother.

古文：丙辰，左拾遗杨归厚以自娶妇，进状借礼会院，贬国子主簿分司。
现代文：十二月十一日，左拾遗杨归厚因自己娶妇，进呈诉状借会院以成礼，贬职为国子主簿分司。
English: On December 11th, Zuo Zhi Yi Yang Gui Hou was demoted to the position of the chief bookkeeper of the country because he married a woman and filed a complaint with the court.

古文：戊戌，以京兆尹裴向为同州防御使。
现代文：十二月十三日，任命京兆尹裴向为同州防御使。
English: On December 13th, he appointed Jing Zhaoyin Peixiang as the defense envoy of the state.

古文：己亥，魏博奏管内州县官员二百五十三员，请吏部铨注。
现代文：十二月十四日，魏博上奏说，辖区内州县的官员二百五十三名，请吏部铨选授官入籍。
English: On December 14th, Wei Bo reported that two hundred and fifty-three officials from counties within the jurisdiction requested the Ministry of Civil Affairs to naturalize them.

古文：八年春正月乙卯朔。
现代文：元和八年春，正月初一为乙卯日。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the first day of the first month was the first day of the second month.

古文：庚午，册大言义为渤海国王，授秘书监、忽汗州都督。
现代文：正月十六日，册封大言义为渤海国王，授予秘书监、忽汗州都督。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the year, Dagenyi was crowned as the king of the Bohai Sea and was awarded the title of secretary and governor of Khukhan Prefecture.

古文：辛未，制以正议大夫、守礼部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、扶风郡开国公权德舆守礼部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：正月十七日，决定任命正议大夫、署理礼部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、扶风郡开国公权德舆暂署礼部尚书，停止执掌政务。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint Shang Shu, the chief of the ceremonial department, Tongping Zhangji, Shangzhuang Province, and Fufeng County, as the chief of the ceremonial department of the provisional government of the founding of the People's Republic of China, and to stop taking charge of government affairs.

古文：癸未，以山南东道节度使李夷简检校户部尚书、成都尹，充剑南西川节度使。
现代文：正月二十九日，任命山南东道节度使李夷简为检校户部尚书、成都尹、充任剑南西川节度使。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the year, Li Yijan, the host of the festival in Shannan, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and Chengdu Yin was appointed as the inspector of the festival in Jian'an and Xichuan.

古文：以户部尚书袁滋检校兵部尚书、襄州刺史，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：任命户部尚书袁滋为检校兵部尚书、襄州刺史，充任山南东道节度使。
English: He appointed Yuan Zhi, the secretary of the Household Department, as the secretary of the Inspection Department of the Military and the secretary of the History Department of Xiangzhou, and served as the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：二月乙酉朔。
现代文：二月初一为乙酉日。
English: The first day of February is Acetylene Day.

古文：辛卯，田兴改名弘正。
现代文：二月初七，田兴改名为田弘正。
English: On February 7th, Tian Xing changed his name to Tian Hong Zheng.

古文：宰相李吉甫进所撰《元和郡国图》三十卷，又进《六代略》三十卷，又为《十道州郡图》五十四卷。
现代文：宰相李吉甫进呈所编撰的《元和郡国图》十三卷，又进呈《六代略》三十卷，又著《十道州郡图》五十四卷。
English: Prime Minister Li Jifu submitted 13 volumes of the "Map of Yuan and County," 30 volumes of the "Outline of the Six Dynasties," and 54 volumes of the "County Map of the Ten Provinces."

古文：宰相于頔男太常丞敏专杀梁正言奴，弃溷中。
现代文：宰相于由页的儿子太常丞于敏杀死梁正言家的奴仆，弃尸在厕所中。
English: Prime Minister Yu Yu-pai's son, Taejongjo Yu-min, killed a servant of the Liang family and dumped his body in a toilet.

古文：事发，頔与男季友素服待罪。
现代文：事发之后，于由页和儿子于季友穿着素服等着治罪。
English: After the incident, Yu Yufei and his son, Yu Jiyou, wore plain clothes as they waited to be punished.

古文：贬頔恩王傅。
现代文：将于由页贬职为恩王太傅。
English: He will be demoted from page to the position of Enwang Taifu.

古文：于敏长流雷州，锢身发遣。
现代文：于敏发配到雷州，戴着刑具发遣。
English: Yu Min was sent to Leizhou wearing a torture device.

古文：殿中少监、驸马都尉于季友诳罔公主，藏隐内人，转授凶兄，移贮外舍，伤风黩礼，莫大于兹，宜削夺所任官，令在家修省。
现代文：殿中少监、驸马都尉于季友欺骗公主，藏匿宫女，转交给犯罪的兄长，转移隐藏到外宅；伤风败俗轻侮礼教，没有比这更严重的了，应当削除其所任的官职，令他在家中修身反省。
English: There is nothing more serious than the junior warden of the palace, Lieutenant Yuima, deceiving the princess, hiding the courtesan, handing her over to the brother who committed the crime, transferring her and hiding her in an outhouse; there is nothing more serious than this, and he should be removed from the official position he holds, so that he can improve himself at home.

古文：赞善大夫于正、秘书丞于方并停见任，皆頔禄之子也。
现代文：赞善大夫于正、秘书丞于方均罢免现任官职一一一他们都是于由页的儿子。
English: Dr. Zanzan Yu Zheng and Secretary Zheng Yu Fang have both resigned from their current posts. They are both sons of Yu Yuyao.

古文：捕获受于頔赂为致出镇人梁正言，及交构权贵僧鉴虚，并付京兆府杖死。
现代文：逮捕接受于由页贿赂，为其罗致出任镇将者的梁正言，以及结交权贵的僧人鉴虚，均交给京兆府以杖刑处死。
English: Liang Zhengyan, who was arrested for accepting a bribe from Yu Shek, for which he was promoted to the post of town marshal, and the monk Jian Hu, who had powerful friends, were both handed over to the Beijing Zhao Prefecture to be executed with a cane.

古文：甲子，以剑南西川节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、临淮郡开国公、食邑二千户武元衡复入中书知政事，兼崇玄馆大学士、太清宫使。
现代文：三月十一日，任命剑南西川节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、临淮郡开国公，食邑二千户武元衡重新进入中书省执掌政务，兼崇玄馆大学士、太清宫使。
English: On March 11, he appointed Jiannan Nishikawa Seto envoy, Yin Qing Guanglu doctor, Shangshu of the school inspection department, and his attendant, Tongping Zhangji, Shangzhuo Province, Linhuai County Kaigong, and 2,000 households of Wuyuan He re-entered the Chinese Literature Ministry to take charge of government affairs, and also served as a scholar of Chongyuan University and an envoy to the Taiqing Palace.

古文：辛未，上以久旱，亲于禁中求雨，是夜，澍雨沾足。
现代文：三月十八日，皇上因为久旱不雨，亲自在宫禁中求雨，当夜，落下充足的雨水。
English: On March 18th, due to the long drought, the emperor personally asked for rain during the palace ban. That night, plenty of rain fell.

古文：丙子，大风坏崇陵寝殿鸱尾，折门戟六。
现代文：三月二十三日，大风损坏崇陵寝殿屋顶上的鸱尾，折断门戟六支。
English: On March 23rd, high winds damaged the lintel on the roof of the mausoleum, breaking six lintels.

古文：夏四月癸未朔。
现代文：夏，四月初一为癸未日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is a leap day.

古文：乙酉，以邕管经略使房启为桂管观察使，以开州刺史窦群为邕管经略使。
现代文：四月初三，任命邕管经略使房启为桂管观察使，任命开州刺史窦群为邕管经略使。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the lunar calendar, Fangqi was appointed as the Guizhong observation envoy, and Kaizhou Jishi Douqun was appointed as the Guizhong envoy.

古文：丙戌，以钱重货轻，出库钱五十万贯，令两常平仓收市布帛，每段匹于旧估加十之一。
现代文：四月初四，因为钱的价值重，物的价值轻，从内库拨出缗钱五十万贯，令两处常平仓收购布帛，每段匹在旧价的基础上加价十分之一。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, because the value of money is heavy and the value of things is light, 500 thousand yuan of money was allocated from the internal treasury to purchase cloth bags from two regular warehouses, and each piece of cloth was increased by one-tenth on the basis of the old price.

古文：鄜坊观察使元义方卒，辛卯，以将作监薛伾为鄜坊观察使。
现代文：坊观察使元义方去世。四月初九，任命将作监薛亻丕为坊观察使。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 3rd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2

古文：乙未，长安西市豕生三耳八足二尾。
现代文：四月十三日，长安西市的一头猪生有三耳、八足、二尾。
English: On April 13, a pig in West Chang'an City was born with three ears, eight legs and two tails.

古文：僧鉴虚为高崇文纳赂四万五千贯与宰相杜黄裳，共引致人永乐县仿吴凭，付钱与黄裳男载。
现代文：僧人鉴虚为高崇文向宰相杜黄裳交纳贿赂四万五千贯钱，共同引荐吴凭任永乐县令，把钱付给杜黄裳的儿子杜载。
English: The monk Gao Chongwen paid a bribe of 45,000 yuan to the prime minister Du Huangxiang, jointly recommended Wu to be appointed as the Yongle County magistrate, and paid the money to Du Huangxiang's son Du Zai.

古文：敕吴赁配流昭州，黄裳、崇文已薨殁，所用钱不须勘问，杜载释放。
现代文：敕命将吴凭发配，流放到昭州，当时杜黄裳、高崇文已经死亡，所用的钱不必查问，杜载释放。
English: He ordered Wu Biao to be exiled to Zhaozhou. At that time, Du Huangxiang and Gao Chongwen had already died. The money used did not need to be investigated, and Du Zai was released.

古文：辛亥，赐魏博田弘正钱二十万贯，收市军粮。
现代文：四月二十九日，赐给魏博节度使田弘正二十万贯钱，用于收购军粮。
English: On April 29th, the Wei Bo Festival gave the envoy Tian Hongzheng 200,000 yuan for the purchase of military grain.

古文：庚申，河中尹张弘靖奏修古舜城。
现代文：五月初九，河中尹张弘靖上奏修建古舜城。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, Yin Zhang Hongjing of the Central Military Commission of the Chinese People's Liberation Army started the construction of Guzheng Castle.

古文：六月辛巳朔。
现代文：六月初一为辛巳日。
English: The first day of June is Shinshi Day.

古文：时积雨，延英不开十五日。
现代文：当时连日下雨，延英殿有十五日未开。
English: At that time, it rained for days on end, and Yan Ying Dian did not open for fifteen days.

古文：是日，上谓宰臣曰： 今后每三日，雨亦对来。 
现代文：这一天，皇上对宰臣说： 今后每隔三天，下雨也要听取奏对。 
English: On this day, the emperor said to the vice-minister: From now on, every three days, even if it rains, you must listen to the music.

古文：乙酉，工部尚书致仕裴佶卒。
现代文：六月初五，离任退休的工部尚书裴佶去世。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, the outgoing and retiring head of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Shangshu Peiyao, passed away.

古文：丙戌，以东都留守韩皋检校吏部尚书，兼许州刺史，充忠武军节度使。
现代文：六月初六，任命东都留守韩皋为检校吏部尚书，兼任许州刺史，充任忠武军节度使。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：庚寅，京师大风雨，毁屋飘瓦，人多压死。
现代文：六月初十，京师大风雨，房屋被毁，屋瓦飘落，许多人被压死。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, there was a big storm in Beijing. Houses were destroyed, roof tiles fell down, and many people were crushed to death.

古文：所在川渎暴涨，行人不通。
现代文：各处的河川猛涨，行人的道路不通。
English: Rivers everywhere are surging and roads are impassable for pedestrians.

古文：辛丑，出宫人二百车，任从所适，以水灾故也。
现代文：六月二十一日，放出宫女二百车，任凭她们到何处去，这是因为水灾的缘故。
English: On the 21st of June, 200 carts of maids of honour were sent out, and they were allowed to go wherever they wanted. This was due to the floods.

古文：壬寅，宰臣武元衡李吉甫李绛、旧相郑余庆权德舆各奉诏令进旧诗。
现代文：六月二十二日，宰臣武元衡、李吉甫、李绛，前宰相郑余庆、权德舆，各奉诏令进呈旧作诗赋。
English: On June 22nd, the Vice-Minister Wu Yuanheng, Li Jifu, Li Jun, the former Vice-Minister Zheng Yuqing, and Quan Demu, all submitted their old poems to the emperor.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔。
现代文：秋，七月初一为辛亥日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is Xinhai Day.

古文：癸丑，以权德舆检校吏部尚书、东都留守。
现代文：七月初三，任命权德舆为检校吏部尚书、东都留守。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, the appointment of Quan Deyi as the inspector of the school was announced, but Shang Shu and Dong Du stayed behind.

古文：丁卯，以振武节度使李光进为灵州大都督府长史、灵武节度使。
现代文：七月十七日，任命振武军节度使李光进为灵州大都督府长史、灵武节度使。
English: On July 17th, the Zhenwu Military Festival appointed Li Guangjin as the governor of Lingzhou and the Lingwu Festival envoy.

古文：癸酉，命中尉彭中献修兴唐观，壮其规制，北拒禁城，开复道以通行幸。
现代文：七月二十三日，命中尉彭中献修建兴唐观，扩大其规模体制，北面与紫禁城相隔，开通复道以便于皇上通行、临幸。
English: On July 23rd, Lieutenant Peng Zhongxian dedicated himself to building Xing Tangguan, expanding its scale and system, separating the north side from the Forbidden City, and opening a double road to facilitate the emperor's passage and happiness.

古文：是夜，月近五诸侯。
现代文：当夜，月亮靠近五诸侯星。
English: That night, the moon was close to the Five Sovereign Stars.

古文：丁丑，新授桂管观察使房启降为太仆少卿。
现代文：七月二十七日，新授职的桂管观察使房启降职为太仆寺少卿。
English: On July 27th, the newly-appointed Gui Guan Observers demoted Fang Qi to the position of Junior Secretary of Taipu Temple.

古文：启初拜桂管，启吏赂吏部主者，私得官告以授启。
现代文：房启初被授予桂管观察使时，房启的属吏贿赂吏部的主管官员，私下里得到职务的委任状而交给房启。
English: When Fangqi was initially awarded the post of Gui Guan observation envoy, Fangqi's subordinate officials bribed the competent officials of the personnel department to secretly obtain the letter of appointment and hand it over to Fangqi.

古文：俄有诏命中使赍告牒与启，曰： 受之五日矣。 
现代文：接着有诏令，命中使把委任的文书交给房启，房启说 ：拿到已经五天了。 
English: Then there was a decree, and the messenger was ordered to hand over the document of appointment to Fouchi. Fouchi said: It's been five days since I got it.

古文：上怒，杖吏部令史，罚郎官，启亦即降之。
现代文：皇上发怒，杖责吏部的令史官，处分郎官，房启也就降了职。
English: The emperor was furious, and the historical officer, the disciplinary officer, and the official in charge of the Imperial Household Agency were all demoted.

古文：以安南都护马总为桂管观察使，以江州刺史张勔为安南都护、本管经略招讨使。
现代文：任命安南都护马总为桂管观察使，任命江州刺史张面力为安南都护、本管区经略招讨使。
English: Annan was appointed as the Guizhou observation envoy, and Jiangzhou was appointed as the Annan protection envoy and the region's economic recruitment envoy.

古文：鄜坊观察使薛伾卒。
现代文：坊观察使薛亻丕去世。
English: Observation led to Xue Yao's death.

古文：八月辛巳朔。
现代文：八月初一为辛巳日。
English: The first day of August is Shinshi Day.

古文：癸未，以蕲州刺史裴行立为安南都护、本管经略招讨使，以张勔耄年也。
现代文：八月初三任命蕲州刺史裴行立为安南都护、本管区经略招讨使，因为张面力的年龄太老了。
English: At the beginning of August 3rd, Zhangzhou Jishi Pei Xingli was appointed as the guardian of Annan and the economic envoy of this region, because the age of the tension force was too old.

古文：丁亥，以司农卿裴武为鄜坊观察使。
现代文：八月初七，任命司农卿裴武为坊观察使。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, he appointed Pei Wu, the Secretary of Agriculture, as the observation envoy.

古文：庚寅，诏毁家徇国故徐州刺史李洧等一十家子孙，并宜甄奖。
现代文：八月初十，诏令：毁家殉国的已故徐州刺史李洧等十家的子孙都应当甄选、奖赏。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, the imperial edict was issued: the descendants of the ten families of the deceased Xuzhou Jishi Li Wei, who destroyed his family and died for the country, should be selected and rewarded.

古文：甲午，太白近轩辕。
现代文：八月十四日，太白金星靠近轩辕星座。
English: On August 14th, the too-white Venus nears the constellation of Regulus.

古文：辛丑，以东川节度使潘孟阳为户部侍郎、判度支，卢坦为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
现代文：八月二十一日，任命东川节度使潘孟阳为户部侍郎，掌管度支事务。任命卢坦为梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
English: On August 21, the Dongchuan Provincial Party Committee appointed Pan Mengyang as the household attendant, in charge of the household affairs, and appointed Lu Tan as the Azusa prefect and the Jianan Dongchuan Provincial Party Committee.

古文：乙巳，废天武军，并入神策军。
现代文：八月二十五日，撤销天武军建制，合并入神策军。
English: On August 25th, the Tianwu Army was abolished and merged into the Shensha Army.

古文：九月庚戌朔。
现代文：九月初一为庚戌日。
English: The first day of September is Geng Zi Day.

古文：丙辰，淄青李师道进鹘十二，命还之。
现代文：九月初七，淄青的李师道进献十二只鹘鹰，皇上命退还给他。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the indestructible Li Shidao presented twelve eagles to the emperor, and the imperial command was returned to him.

古文：戊午，赐群臣宴于曲江。
现代文：九月初九，在曲江亭向群臣赐宴。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the emperor gave a banquet to his retainers at Qujiangting.

古文：乙丑，诏： 比闻岭南五管并福建、黔中等道，多以南口饷遗，及于诸处博易，骨肉离析，良贱难分。
现代文：九月十六日，诏令： 近来听说岭南五管以及福建、黔中等道，很多以南方的人口作为礼物赠送，甚至于各地以人口进行赌博、交易，致使骨肉分离，良莠难分。
English: September 16, edict: Recently, it was heard that in the five provinces of Lingnan, as well as Fujian and Shandong provinces, many people from the south were given as gifts, and even people from all over the country were used for gambling and trading, resulting in the separation of flesh and blood, and the good and the bad could not be separated.

古文：此后严加禁止，如违，长吏必当科罚。 
现代文：从此以后应严加禁止，如有违犯，当地长官必定按刑律处罚。 
English: From now on, it should be strictly prohibited, and if there is a violation, the local magistrate will certainly be punished according to the criminal law.

古文：淮西吴少阳献马三百匹。
现代文：淮西的吴少阳进献三百匹马。
English: Wu Shaoyang from Huaxi donated 300 horses.

古文：丙寅，诏： 减死戍边，前代美政，量其远迩，亦有便宜。
现代文：九月十七日，诏令： 将死囚减免死罪派去戍守边境是前代的善政，酌量其戍边的远近以施行，也有好处。
English: September 17th, edict: Sending death row prisoners to guard the border is the good policy of the previous generation, and it is also beneficial to measure the distance and proximity of the border.

古文：今后两京、关内、河南、河东、河北、淮南、山南东西道州府，除大辟罪外，轻犯不得配流天德五城， 戊辰，以给事中窦易直为陕虢防御使，仍赐金紫。
现代文：今后东西两京、关内、河南、河东、河北、淮南、山南东道、山南西道等州府，除了处死刑的大罪之外，轻犯不得发配流放到天德军五城。 九月十九日，任命给事中窦易直为陕虢防御使，并赐予金章紫绶。
English: In the future, the state capitals of East and West Beijing, Guanzhong, Henan, Hedong, Hebei, Huainan, Shannan Host, and Shannan West Road, in addition to the capital crime, the minor crime shall not be sent to the five cities of the German army. On September 19, Dou Yizhi was appointed as the defense envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian, and was awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon.

古文：壬申，以恩王傅于頔为太子宾客。
现代文：九月二十三日，任命恩王的太傅于由页为太子宾客。
English: On September 23rd, Yu Yuehai, the king's great-great-grandfather, was appointed as the prince's guest.

古文：以前朔方灵盐节度使王佖为右卫将军。
现代文：任命前朔方灵盐节度使王亻必为右卫将军。
English: The appointment of the former Shuo Fangling salt festival made Wang Xuan must be the right guard general.

古文：将相出入，翰林草制，谓之白麻。
现代文：将相任免的诏书，由翰林院起草，称为 白麻 。
English: The imperial edict appointing and dismissing officials, drafted by the Hanlin Academy, is called Bai Ma.

古文：至佖，奏罢中书草制，因为例也。
现代文：到王亻必时，上奏罢除由中书省起草的制度，并以此作为先例。
English: At the time of Wang Xizhe's death, Shangso revoked the system drafted by the Ministry of Literature, and used this as a precedent.

古文：太常习乐，始复用大鼓。
现代文：太常寺演习音乐，开始重新用大鼓。
English: Taejoji Temple rehearsed the music and began to use the large drums again.

古文：冬十月庚辰朔。
现代文：冬，十月初一为庚辰日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is Geng Chen Day.

古文：己丑，荧惑近太微西垣南首星。
现代文：十月初十，荧惑星接近太微西垣南首星。
English: At the beginning of October, the fluorescent planet was close to the faint star Nishigaki Minamiboshi.

古文：庚寅，以湖南观察使柳公绰为岳、鄂、沔、蕲、安、黄观察使。
现代文：十月十一日，任命湖南观察使柳公绰为岳、鄂、沔、蕲、安、黄等州观察使。
English: On October 11, Liu Gongqiao, the Hunan observation envoy, was appointed as the state observation envoy for Yue, Hubei, Fujian, Fujian, An and Huangshan.

古文：辛卯，泾原节度使硃忠亮卒。
现代文：十月十二日，泾原节度使朱忠亮去世。
English: On October 12th, Zhu Zhongliang passed away.

古文：壬辰，汴州韩弘进所撰《圣朝万岁乐谱》，共三百首。
现代文：十月十三日，汴州的韩弘进呈其所撰写的《圣朝万岁乐谱》，共有三百首。
English: On October 13th, Han Hongjin from Ganzhou presented his "Music Score for the Long Life of the Holy Temple," a total of three hundred pieces.

古文：己巳，以宗正少卿李道古为黔中观察使，以苏州刺史张正甫为湖南观察使。
现代文：十月十四日，任命宗正少卿李道古为黔中观察使，任命苏州刺史张正甫为湖南观察使。
English: On October 14th, Zong Zheng Shaoqing Li Daogu was appointed as the observation envoy of Yunnan Province, and Zhang Zhengfu of Suzhou Province was appointed as the observation envoy of Hunan Province.

古文：丙申，以大雪放朝，人有冻踣者，雀鼠多死。
现代文：十月十七日，因天降大雪而停止上朝，有冻死的人，鸟雀老鼠大多冻死。
English: On October 17th, due to the heavy snowfall, it stopped in the morning. Some people froze to death, and most birds and mice froze to death.

古文：戊戌，以神策普润镇使苏光荣为泾州刺史、四镇北庭行军泾原节度使。
现代文：十月十九日，任命神策军普润镇使苏光荣为泾州刺史、四镇北庭行军泾原节度使。
English: On October 19th, Su Guang Rong, the commander of the Jinze Army in Purun Town, was appointed as the secretary of the state of Zhangzhou and the secretary of the four towns of the North Court of Zhangyuan.

古文：翰林学士、司封员外郎韦弘景守本官，以草光荣诏漏叙功勋故也。
现代文：翰林学士、司封员外郎韦弘景暂署本职，这是因为起草任命苏光荣的诏书漏叙了他功勋的缘故。
English: Wei Hongjing, the younger brother of Hanlin Baccalaureate and Sifu member Wei Hongjing, temporarily resigned from his post, because the imperial edict drafting the appointment of Su Guangrong omitted his merits.

古文：壬辰，振武奏回纥千骑至鹈泉。
现代文：十月十三日，振武军奏报回纥千名骑兵来到辟鸟鹈泉。
English: On October 13th, the Zhenwu army reported back that three thousand cavalrymen had come to Paijiaoquan.

古文：十一月庚戌朔。
现代文：十一月初一为庚戌日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is the Day of the Rooster.

古文：丙辰，以福建观察使裴次元为河南尹。
现代文：十一月初七，任命福建观察使裴次元为河南尹。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar month, the Fujian observation envoy, Pei Dimen, was appointed as the Henan Yin.

古文：丙寅，以盐州隶夏州。
现代文：十一月十七日，把盐州隶属于夏州。
English: On November 17th, Yanzhou was subordinated to Xiazhou.

古文：自夏州至丰州，初置八驿。
现代文：从夏州到丰州，开始设置八处驿站。
English: From Xiazhou to Fuzhou, eight stations have been set up.

古文：丁卯，以泗州刺史薛謇为福建观察使。
现代文：十一月十八日，任命泗州刺史薛謇为福建观察使。
English: On November 18th, Xue Jun, an official from Zhangzhou, was appointed as the Fujian Observer.

古文：右龙武统军刘昌裔卒。
现代文：右龙武统军刘昌裔去世。
English: Liu Changxiong, leader of the Right Dragon United Front Army, passed away.

古文：癸酉，昭义郗士美奏诸军就食于临洺。
现代文：十一月二十四日，昭义军的郗士美奏请各军到临氵名去就食。
English: On November 24th, the commander of the Shouyi Army, Song Shimei, invited all the armies to go to Linyi for a meal.

古文：京畿水、旱、霜，损田三万八千顷。
现代文：京畿地区的水灾、旱灾、霜灾，损害庄稼三万八千顷。
English: Floods, droughts and frosts in the Gyeonggi region have damaged 38,000 hectares of crops.

古文：十二庚辰朔，以京兆尹李銛为鄜坊观察使，以代裴武入为京兆尹。
现代文：十二月初一，任命京兆尹李钅舌为坊观察使，以代替裴武，使其入京任京兆尹。
English: On the first day of December, he appointed Jing Zhaoyun Li Xizhe as the observation envoy to replace Pei Wu, and sent him to Beijing to serve as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：辛巳，敕： 应赐王公、公主、百官等庄宅、碾硙、店铺、车坊、园林等，一任贴典货卖，其所缘税役，便令府县收管。 
现代文：十二月初二，敕令： 所有赐给王公、公主、百官等人的庄院住宅、碾盘磨坊、店铺、车坊、园林等，全部任其典当买卖，其随分的赋税徭役，即令府县署衙收管。 
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the imperial decree: All the manor houses, grinding mills, shops, car workshops, gardens, etc. given to princes, princesses, and dignitaries, all of which were allowed to be pawned and traded, and the tax collectors assigned to them, were ordered to be collected by the prefectural and county offices.

古文：敕： 张茂昭立功河朔，举族归朝，义烈之风，史册收载。
现代文：敕令 ：张茂昭在河朔立下功劳，全族归顺朝廷，其节义忠烈的风范，载入史册。
English: The imperial edict: Zhang Maozhao has made great contributions to the establishment of the state in Hexuo, the whole family has become obedient to the imperial court, and his virtuous and loyal demeanor has been recorded in history.

古文：如闻身殁之后，家无余财，追怀旧勋，特越常典，宜岁赐绢二千匹，春秋二时支给。 
现代文：听说他去世之后家无余财，追念他旧日的功勋，应当超越通常的典则予以优恤，每年应赐给绢二千匹，分春、秋两季支付。 
English: It was said that his family had no spare money after his death, and in memory of his past achievements, they should go beyond the usual rules and give him special treatment. They should give him two thousand horses every year, to be paid in the spring and autumn.

古文：群臣上表，请立德妃郭氏为皇后。
现代文：群臣奉上表章，请求立德妃郭氏为皇后。
English: The courtiers were presented with a watch badge and requested that the Empress Tefui Guo be made empress.

古文：丙戌，以桂官观察使马总为广州刺史、岭南节度使，以邕管经略使崔咏为桂管观察使。
现代文：十二月初七，任命桂管观察使马总为广州刺史、岭南节度使，任命邕管经略使崔讠永为桂管观察使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of December, Ma Zong, the Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou

古文：庚寅，以夔州刺史马平阳为邕管经略使。
现代文：十二月十一日，任命夔州刺史马平阳为邕管经略使。
English: On December 11th, Ma Pingyang, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the vice-minister of finance.

古文：振武军乱，逐其帅李进贤，屠其家。
现代文：振武军发生动乱，士兵们驱逐其主帅李进贤，屠杀他的家人。
English: Riots broke out in the Zhenwu army. The soldiers expelled their commander, Li Jinxian, and massacred his family.

古文：乃以夏州节度使张煦代进贤，率兵二千赴镇，许便宜击断。
现代文：即任命夏州节度使张煦代替李进贤，率两千名士兵前往振武军节镇，允许其自行攻杀处置叛逆。
English: That is to say, Xiazhou Jiedu was appointed to replace Li Jinxian with Zhang Xuan, who led two thousand soldiers to Zhenwu Junjie Town and allowed them to attack and kill the rebels on their own.

古文：丙午，以金吾卫将军田进为夏州刺史、夏绥银节度使。
现代文：十二月二十七日，任命金吾卫将军田进为夏州刺史、夏绥银节度使。
English: On December 27th, Tian Jin, the general of King Wuwei, was appointed as the governor of Xiazhou and the governor of Xiazhuang.

古文：以河溢浸滑州羊马城之半，滑州薛平、魏博田弘正征役万人，于黎阳界开古黄河道南北长十四里，东西阔六十步，深一丈七尺，决旧河水势，滑人遂无水患。
现代文：因为黄河泛滥，淹没滑州羊马城的一半，滑州的薛平、魏博的田弘正征发民亻夫一万人，在黎阳界内开通黄河的故道，南北长十四里，东西宽六十步，深一丈七尺，疏导黄河原来的水势，滑州人便没有水患了。
English: Because the Yellow River flooded and submerged half of Yangma City in Lishu, Xue Ping of Lishu and Tian Hongzheng of Weibo recruited and dispatched ten thousand people to open the old path of the Yellow River within the Liyang boundary. It was fourteen miles long from north to south, sixty paces wide from east to west, and seven feet deep. It diverted the original water potential of the Yellow River, and the people of Lishu had no flooding.

古文：九年春正月己酉朔。
现代文：元和九年春，正月初一为己酉日。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the first day of the first month was the first day of the second month.

古文：乙卯，大雾而雪。
现代文：正月初七，大雾却又降雪。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the fog lifted but snow fell again.

古文：李吉甫累表辞相位，不许。
现代文：李吉甫多次上表请求辞去相位，皇上不许。
English: Li Jifu repeatedly petitioned the emperor to resign, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：乙亥，张煦入单于都护府，诛作乱军士苏国珍等二百五十二人。
现代文：正月二十七日，张煦进入单于都护府，将作乱的士兵苏国珍等二百五十二人处死。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, Zhang Ye entered the capital city of Shan Yu and executed 252 soldiers, including the rebel soldier Su Guozhen.

古文：二月巳卯朔，户部侍郎、判度支潘孟阳兼京北五城营田使。
现代文：二月初一，户部侍郎、掌度支事潘孟阳兼任京北五城营田使。
English: On the first day of February, Pan Mengyang, the head of the Household Division, concurrently held the position of the Beijing North Five Cities Yingtaishi.

古文：丁丑，贬前振武节度使顾进贤为通州刺史，监军路朝见配役于定陵。
现代文：二月初九，将前振武军节度使李进贤贬职为通州刺史，监军路朝见发配到定陵服役。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, Li Jinxian was demoted to the post of Tongzhou military historian, and the military supervisor Lu Chaomi was sent to Dingling for military service.

古文：丁未，诏以岁饥，放关内元和八年己前逋租钱粟，赈常平义仓粟三十万石。
现代文：二月二十九日，诏令：因年岁荒歉饥馑，免征关内元和八年以前拖欠未交的租钱粮食，用常平义仓的粮食三十万石赈济饥民。
English: On February 29th, the imperial edict: due to years of famine, the Guan Nai Yuan and the rent money grain that had not been paid eight years ago were exempted from taxation, and the grain from the Changping Yiguang was used to feed the hungry with 300,000 kilos of grain.

古文：丙申，赐振武军绢二万匹。
现代文：二月十八日，赐给振武军二万匹绢。
English: On February 18, he gave 20,000 horses to the Zhenwu army.

古文：丁酉，月近心大星。
现代文：二月十九日，月亮靠近心宿的大星。
English: On February 19th, the moon is close to the great star of the heart.

古文：癸卯，制朝议大夫、守中书侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、高邑男李绛守礼部尚书，累表辞相位故也。
现代文：二月二十五日，决定朝议大夫、署理中书侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、高邑男李绛署理礼部尚书，这是因为他多次上表要求辞去相位的缘故。
English: On February 25th, it was decided to remove the doctor of the Imperial Court Council, the acting secretary of the Central Secretariat, Tongping Zhangji, Shangzhu Guo, and Gaoyuan Li Yan, the acting secretary of the Ceremonial Department, because he had repeatedly requested to resign from the position.

古文：三月己酉朔。
现代文：三月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of March is a national holiday.

古文：丙辰，巂州地震，昼夜八十震，压死者百余人。
现代文：三月初八，辒州发生地震，一昼夜震八十次，压死一百多人。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, an earthquake occurred in Zhangzhou. There were 80 tremors in one day and night, and more than 100 people were crushed to death.

古文：庚申，妖人梁叔高自广州来，授书与吏部侍郎杨于陵，使为己辅。
现代文：三月十二日，妖人梁叔高从广州来，把书授给吏部侍郎杨於陵，让他作自己的助手。
English: On March 12th, the demon Liang Shugao came from Guangzhou and gave the book to the clerk's servant Yang Yuling, asking him to be his assistant.

古文：于陵执之以告，杀之。
现代文：杨於陵把他抓起来并报告了朝廷，将其处死。
English: Yang Yuling arrested him and reported him to the imperial court, and he was executed.

古文：辛酉，以太子少傅郑余庆检佼右仆射、兴元尹、山南西道节度使，代赵宗儒为御史大夫。
现代文：三月十三日，任命太子少傅郑余庆为检校右仆射、兴元尹、山南西道节度使，代替赵宗儒任御史大夫。
English: On March 13th, Zheng Yuqing, the prince's younger brother, was appointed as the school inspector's right-hand man, Xing Yuanyin, and the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, replacing Zhao Zongru as the chief historian.

古文：丁卯，陨霜杀桑。
现代文：三月十九日，降严霜冻死桑树。
English: On the 19th, the frost damaged the mulberry leaves.

古文：召大理卿裴棠棣男损、前昭应令杜式方男忭见于麟德殿前，各赐绯，许尚公主。
现代文：在麟德殿前召见大理寺卿裴棠棣的儿子裴损、前昭应令杜式方的儿子杜，各赐绯鱼袋，许诺他们娶公主为妻。
English: In front of the Linde Palace, the Lord of the Dalian Temple, Pei Tangjun's son, Pei Jia, and the former Shao Ye's son, Du Shikfang's son, Du, were summoned, each given a codfish bag, and promised to marry the princess.

古文：夏四月戊寅朔。
现代文：夏，四月初一为戊寅日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is "Wu Yin Day."

古文：庚寅，诏赠太师咸宁王浑瑊宜配享德宗庙庭。
现代文：四月十三日，下诏追赠太师、咸宁王浑王咸应配享于德宗的庙庭。
English: On April 13th, the emperor posthumously bestowed the title of Grand Master to King Hamnin, and King Hamn was given the right to enjoy the grounds of the temple of the German Sect.

古文：五月丁未朔，以岭南节度使郑絪为工部尚书。
现代文：五月初一，任命岭南节度使郑纟因为工部尚书。
English: On the first day of May, the appointment of the Lingnan Festival made Zheng Yuanzhong write a letter to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：庚申，移宥州于经略军，郭下置延恩县，隶夏州观察使。
现代文：五月十四日，把宥州移归经略军管下，州治之下设置延恩县，隶属于夏州观察使。
English: On May 14, Yuzhou was transferred to the control of the Central Military Commission, and Yan'en County was set up under the administration of the state, and subordinated to the Xiazhou Observer.

古文：是月旱，谷贵，出太仓粟七十万石，开六场粜以惠饥民。
现代文：当月发生旱灾，谷价贵，拨出太仓的粮食七十万石，开辟六处场所卖粮以施惠于饥民。
English: A drought occurred that month, grain prices were high, and 700,000 koku of grain from Taicang was allocated, and six places were opened to sell grain to benefit the hungry.

古文：乙丑，桂王纶薨。
现代文：五月十九日，桂王李纶去世。
English: On May 19, Gui Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：以旱，免京畿夏税十三万石、青苗钱五万贯。
现代文：因为发生旱灾，免除京畿地区的夏税十三万石粮食，青苗钱五万贯。
English: As a result of the drought, 130,000 koku of grain was exempted from the summer tax in the Gyeonggi region, and the seedling money was increased to 50,000 kan.

古文：六月丙子朔。
现代文：六月初一为丙子日。
English: The first day of June is Cixi Day.

古文：戊寅，以天德军经略使周怀乂卒，废朝一日。
现代文：六月初三，因为天德军经略使周怀去世，停止上朝一日。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, because Zhou Huai was killed by a German air raid, it was suspended the next morning.

古文：经略使废朝，自怀乂始也。
现代文：因经略使去世而停止上朝，是从周怀开始的。
English: It was Zhou Huai who started the process of ending the Shang Dynasty due to his untimely death.

古文：庚辰，以义武军节度副使浑镐检校式工尚书，兼定州大都督府长史，充义武军节度使、易定观察使、北平军等使。
现代文：六月初五，任命义武军节度副使浑镐为检校工部尚书，兼定州大都督府长史，充任义成军节度使、易定观察使、北平军使等。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, the deputy festival envoy of the Yicheng Army, Hun Rong, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and also the governor of Dingzhou, and was appointed as the festival envoy of the Yicheng Army, the observation envoy of the Yicheng Army, and the military envoy of the Beiping Army.

古文：丙戌，以在龙武将军燕重旰为丰州刺史、天德军丰州西城中城都防御押蕃落等使。
现代文：六月十一日，任命左龙武将军燕重旰为丰州刺史、天德军丰州西城中城都防御使、押蕃落使等。
English: On June 11th, Yan Jiuyong, general of the Zalongwu army, was appointed as the military governor of Fengzhou, and the Tiande army was appointed as the defense envoy of the western and middle cities of Fengzhou, and the escorting and landing envoy.

古文：乙未，置礼宾院于长兴里之北。
现代文：六月二十日，在长兴里之北设置礼宾院。
English: On June 20, a protocol center was set up in the north of Changxingli.

古文：丙申，以左丞孔戣为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：六月二十一日，任命左丞孔癸戈为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使等。
English: On June 21st, he appointed Leo Kong Rongguo as the governor of Huazhou, the defense envoy of Shaoguan, and the military envoy of Zhenguo.

古文：壬寅，制河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使张弘靖守刑部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月二十七日，决定河中、晋、绛、慈、隰等州节度使张弘靖暂署刑部尚书、中书门下省同平章事。
English: On June 27th, it was decided to make Zhang Hongjing temporarily sign the criminal department's Shangshu, Zhongshu's subordinate province's Tongping chapter.

古文：秋七月丙午朔。
现代文：秋，七月初一为丙午日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is C noon.

古文：乙未，以御史大夫赵宗儒检校尚书右仆射，兼河中尹、河中晋绛等州节度使。
现代文：七月十四日，任命御史大夫赵宗儒为检校尚书右仆射，兼任河中尹、河中、晋、绛等州节度使。
English: On July 14, Zhao Zongru, the imperial historian, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and concurrently served as the provincial festival envoy of Yin, Jin, and Jie.

古文：戊辰，以太子司议郎杜忭为银青光禄大夫、殿中少监、驸马都尉，尚岐阳公主。
现代文：七月二十三日，任命太子司议郎杜为银青光禄大夫、殿中少监、驸马都尉，娶岐阳公主为妻。
English: On July 23rd, he appointed his son, the Crown Prince, Heirong Du, to the posts of Yinqingguanglu doctor, palace junior superintendent, and grand steward, and married Princess Qiyang.

古文：闰八月乙巳朔。
现代文：闰八月初一为乙巳日。
English: The first day of the leap month of August is the first day of spring.

古文：辛酉，以河阳节度使乌重胤兼汝州刺史。
现代文：闰八月十七日，以河阳节度使乌重胤兼任汝州刺史。
English: On the 17th day of the 8th lunar month, Wu Chung-yin was also appointed as the governor of Ruzhou on the occasion of the Heyang Festival.

古文：壬戌，以中书舍人王涯、屯田郎中韦绶为皇太子诸王侍读。
现代文：闰八月十八日，任命中书舍人王涯、屯田郎中韦绶为皇太子诸王侍读。
English: On the 18th day of the 8th month of the leap year, Wang Ya, the tutor of the middle school, and Tun Tian, the tutor of the middle school, Wei Wei, were appointed as the attendants of the crown princes.

古文：己巳，加田弘正检校右仆射，赏三军钱二十万贯。
现代文：闰八月二十一日，加授田弘正为检校右仆射，赏赐其三军二十万贯钱。
English: On the 21st day of the 8th month of the leap year, Ta Hong Zheng was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the inspection of the school, and his three armies were awarded 200,000 yuan.

古文：九月甲戌朔，以洺州刺史李光颜为陈州刺史、忠武军都知兵马使。
现代文：九月初一，任命氵名州刺史李光颜为陈州刺史、忠武军都知兵马使。
English: On the first day of September, Li Guangyan, the aide-de-camp of Yanming Prefecture, was appointed as the aide-de-camp of Chen Prefecture and the aide-de-camp of the loyal armed forces in Sichuan.

古文：丙戌，以山南东道节度使袁滋检校兵部尚书，兼江陵尹、荆南节度使。
现代文：九月十三日，任命山南东道节度使袁滋为检校兵部尚书，兼任江陵尹、荆南节度使。
English: On September 13th, Yuan Zhi, the host of the festival in Shannan, was appointed as the inspector of the military department of the school, and also served as the inspector of the festival in Jiangling Yin and Jingnan.

古文：以荆南节度使严绶检校司空、襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
现代文：任命荆南节度使严绶为检校司空、襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
English: The Jingnan Festival appointed Yan Qi as the inspector of the school, the Xiangzhou Festival appointed Yan Qi as the inspector of the school, and the Shannan Festival appointed Yan Qi as the host of the festival.

古文：己丑，月掩轩辕。
现代文：九月十六日，月亮掩蔽轩辕星座。
English: On September 16th, the moon covers the constellation of Regulus.

古文：淮西节度使吴少阳卒，其子元济匿丧，自总兵柄乃焚劫舞阳等四县。
现代文：淮西节度使吴少阳去世，他的儿子吴元济隐瞒丧事，自己执掌兵权，竟然焚烧、抢劫舞阳等四县。
English: Huaxi Festival caused the death of Wu Shaoyang, his son Wu Yuanji concealed the funeral and took military power himself, even burning and looting Wuyang and other four counties.

古文：朝廷遣使吊祭，拒而不纳。
现代文：朝廷派遣使臣前去吊唁祭奠，吴元济拒绝而不接纳。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to offer condolences and pay tribute, but Wu Yuanji refused and did not accept.

古文：壬辰，真腊国朝贡。
现代文：九月十九日，真腊国向朝廷进贡。
English: On September 19, Jinra Province paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：戊戌，加河东节度使王锷检校司空、同平章事，以给事中孟简为越州刺史、浙东观察使。赠吴少阳尚书右仆射。
现代文：九月二十五日，加授河东节度使王锷为检校司空、同平章事，任命给事中孟简为越州刺史、浙东观察使，追赠吴少阳为尚书右仆射。
English: On September 25th, the awarding of the Hedong Festival made Wang Yao the inspector of the school and Tongping, appointed Meng Jian as the inspector of Yuezhou and the observer of East Zhejiang, and posthumously awarded Wu Shaoyang as the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：冬十月甲辰朔。
现代文：冬，十月初一为甲辰日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is Jiaxing Day.

古文：丙午，金紫光录大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤大学士、监修国史、上柱国、赵国公李吉甫卒。
现代文：十月初三，金紫光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、监修国史、上柱国、赵国公李吉甫去世。
English: At the beginning of October 3rd, Li Jifu, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the attendant of Chinese classics, Tongping Zhangji, the scholar of Jixianden University, the supervisor of national history, Shangzhu Guo, and Zhao Guogong passed away.

古文：甲寅，以刑部员外郎令狐楚为职方员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：十月十一日，任命刑部员外郎令狐楚为职方员外郎，执掌诏令文书。
English: On October 11th, Wei Rongling, a member of the Criminal Law Department, was appointed as Wei Rongling, a member of the Civil Law Department, to take charge of the official documents.

古文：壬戌，以忠武军节度使韩皋为吏部尚书，以忠武军节度副使兼陈州刺史李光颜为许州刺史、忠武军节度使。
现代文：十月十九日，任命忠武军节度使韩皋为吏部尚书，任命忠武军节度副使兼陈州刺使李光颜为许州刺史、忠武军节度使。
English: On October 19th, Han Wei was appointed as the leader of the Loyalty Army Festival, and Li Guangyan was appointed as the deputy leader of the Loyalty Army Festival and the leader of the Loyalty Army Festival.

古文：甲子，制： 朕嗣膺宝位，于兹十年。
现代文：十月二十一日，制令： 朕继承皇帝的宝位，到现在已经十年了。
English: On October 21st, he issued a decree: I have been the heir to the throne of the emperor for ten years now.

古文：每推至诚，以御方夏，庶以仁化，臻于太和，宵衣旰食，意属于此。
现代文：每每推出最大的诚心，以统驭我们的国家，希望用仁厚的教化，达到太平和谐的境界，日夜操劳，目的就在于此。
English: Every time, I put forth my utmost sincerity to govern our country, hoping to use benevolent education to achieve a state of peace and harmony. I work day and night, and this is the goal.

古文：今淮西一道，未达朝经。擅自继袭，肆行寇掠。
现代文：如今淮西这一道，没有通达朝廷的纪纲，未经朝命擅自继承袭职，放肆地进行抢劫。
English: Nowadays, Huaxi has no access to the imperial court's disciplinary system, inherits posts without permission from the imperial court, and brazenly carries out robberies.

古文：将士等迫于受制，非是本心。
现代文：将士们被迫受其控制，并不是出于本心。
English: The soldiers are forced to be under his control, not out of their own will.

古文：思去三面之罗，庶遵两阶之义。
现代文：想要除去三面的罗网，以遵循朝臣的节义。
English: He wanted to remove the nets on three sides to comply with the courtier's edict.

古文：宜以山南东道节度使严绶兼充申光蔡等州招抚使。 
现代文：应当以山南东道节度使严绶兼充申、光、蔡等州招抚使。 
English: It is necessary to use Shannan as the host of the festival to make strict and full representations, light, Cai and other states to invite and invite.

古文：仍命内常侍崔潭峻为监军。
现代文：并任命内侍崔潭峻为监军。
English: He also appointed his chamberlain, Cui Tanjun, to supervise the troops.

古文：戊辰，以尚书左丞吕元膺检校工部尚书、东都留守。
现代文：十月二十五日，任命尚书左丞吕元膺为检校工部尚书、东都留守。
English: On October 25th, Shangshu Zuoying appointed Shangshu Zuoying as the inspection department of the school, and Dongdu was left behind.

古文：旧例，命留守赐旗甲，与方镇同，及元膺受命，不赐。
现代文：按照原先的成例，任命为留守的官员，与节度使同样地赐予旌旗甲仗，待到吕元膺得到任命时未予赐给。
English: According to the original precedent, the officials who were appointed to stay behind were awarded the same as the governor, but they were not awarded until Lv Yuanpi was appointed.

古文：谏官援华、汝、寿三州例有赐，居守之重，不宜独阙，上曰： 此三处亦宜停赐。 
现代文：谏官援引华州、汝州、寿州三州授任时照例赐予旌旗甲仗的先例，处于守土大员的重任，不宜单独缺少，皇上说： 这三处也就应当停止赐予。 
English: The eunuch cited the precedent of awarding the three provinces of Huazhou, Ruzhou and Shoushou with the banner and armor as usual when awarding the three provinces, saying that it was an important duty of the soil protection officer and should not be lacking alone. The emperor said: These three places should also stop awarding.

古文：十一月甲戌朔。
现代文：十一月初一为甲戌日。
English: The first day of November is Armor Day.

古文：甲申，以吏部尚书韩皋为太子宾客。
现代文：十一月十一日，任命吏部尚书韩皋为太子宾客。
English: On November 11th, Shangshu Han Rong, the director of the Personnel Department, was appointed as the prince's guest.

古文：甲午，以御史中丞胡证为单于大都护、振武麟胜等军节度使。
现代文：十一月二十一日，任命御史中丞胡证为单于大都护、振武军、麟胜军等军节度使。
English: On November 21st, Gu Shizhongzheng Hu Sheng was appointed as the military envoy of the Great Capital Protection, Zhenwu Army, Lin Sheng Army and other armies.

古文：丁酉，太子太傅范希朝卒。
现代文：十一月二十四日，太子太傅范希朝去世。
English: On November 24th, Prince Taifu Fan Xichang passed away.

古文：戊戌，以中书舍人裴度为御史中丞；以左金吾大将军郭钊检校工部尚书、邠州刺史，充邠宁节度使；以职方员外郎、知制诰令狐楚为翰林学士。
现代文：十一月二十五日，任命中书舍人裴度为御史中丞；任命左金吾大将军郭钊为检校工部尚书、州刺史、充任宁节度使；任命职方员外郎，掌诏令文书的令狐楚为翰林学士。
English: On November 25th, Pei Du, the person in charge of school books, was appointed as the vice-president of history; Guo Jun, the general of Zuo Kingu University, was appointed as the inspector of school books, the state inspector of history, and appointed as the secretary of Ning Festival; Wei Rong, a member of the staff, was appointed as the vice-president of history; and Ling Xuchu, the person in charge of school books, was appointed as the scholar of Hanlin.

古文：十二月甲辰朔。
现代文：十二月初一为甲辰日。
English: The first day of December is the first day of the year.

古文：丁未，振武节度使张煦卒。
现代文：十二月初四，振武军节度使张煦去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the Zhenwu Army Festival caused Zhang Ye to die.

古文：辛亥，邠宁节度使、检校右仆射阎巨源卒。
现代文：十二月初八，宁节度使、检校右仆射阎巨源去世。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, Ning Jidu's envoy and right-hand man at the inspection of schools, Yan Jigen, passed away.

古文：癸丑，兵部尚书王绍卒。
现代文：十二月初十，兵部尚书王绍去世。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, Wang Shao, the head of the Military Department, passed away.

古文：己未，右羽林统军孟元阳卒。
现代文：十二月十六日，右羽林统军孟元阳去世。
English: On December 16th, Meng Yuanyang, the leader of the Right Feather Forest United Army, passed away.

古文：丙寅，太子少保赵昌卒。
现代文：十二月二十三日，太子少保赵昌去世。
English: On December 23, the youngest son of the crown prince, Zhao Zhaochang, passed away.

古文：戊辰，制以中大夫、守尚书右丞、上骑都尉、赐紫金鱼袋韦贯之本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月二十五日，决定任命中大夫、署理尚书右丞、上骑都尉、赐紫金鱼袋韦贯之以本职任中书门下同平章事。
English: On December 25th, it was decided to appoint Dr. Chung, Acting-in-charge Shang Shuju, Captain of the Cavalry, and Custodian of the Purple and Gold Fish Bag Wei Gang to carry out their duties under the supervision of Dr. Chung.

古文：十年春正月癸酉朔。
现代文：元和十年春，正月初一为癸酉日。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the first day of the first month was a leap day.

古文：乙酉，宣武军节度使韩弘守司徒，平章事并如故。
现代文：正月十三日，宣武军节度使韩弘署理司徒，并如原来一样任平章事。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, the Xuanwu Army Festival made Han Hong the deputy leader of the soldiers, and he was appointed to the post of general as before.

古文：丙申，严绶帅师次蔡州界。
现代文：正月二十四日，严绶率师屯驻于蔡州界内。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the year, Yan Xuan and his division were stationed in Caizhou.

古文：己亥，制削夺吴元济在身官爵。
现代文：正月二十七日，下令削除吴元济在职的官爵。
English: On the 27th day of the first month, he ordered the removal of Wu Yuanji's official title.

古文：庚子，桂管奏移富州治于故城。
现代文：正月二十八日，桂管奏请把富州治所迁移到原来的城市。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the year, Gui Guanzo requested that the Fuzhou government office be relocated to the original city.

古文：二月癸卯朔。
现代文：二月初一为癸卯日。
English: The first day of February is a leap day.

古文：甲辰，严绶军为贼所袭，败于磁丘，退守唐州。
现代文：二月初二，严绶的军队被贼军袭击，兵败于磁丘，退守唐州。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Yan Yan's army was attacked by the bandits, defeated by the magnetic hill, and retreated to Tangzhou.

古文：田弘正子布、韩弘子公武各率师隶李光颜讨贼。
现代文：田弘正的儿子田布、韩弘的儿子韩公武各率领军队隶属于李光颜讨伐贼军。
English: Tianbu, the son of Tian Hongzheng, and Hankongwu, the son of Han Hongzheng, each led an army under the command of Li Guangyan to fight the bandits.

古文：辛亥，以礼部尚书李绛为华州潼关防御镇军等使。
现代文：二月初九，任命礼部尚书李绛为华州潼关防御使、镇军使。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, Li Xi, the secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, was appointed as the defense envoy of Huazhou Shiguan and the town envoy.

古文：壬戌，河东防秋将刘辅杀丰州刺史燕重旰。
现代文：二月二十日，河东防秋将刘辅杀死丰州刺史燕重旰。
English: On February 20th, the ringleader of the Hedong Anti-Autumn Festival, Liu Fu, killed the Fuzhou assassin, Yan Jiuyong.

古文：己巳，以羽林将军李汇为泾原节度使。
现代文：二月二十七日，任命羽林将军李为泾原节度使。
English: On February 27th, General Li Yulin was appointed as the chief envoy of the Shenyuan Festival.

古文：三月壬申朔，以右金吾将军李奉仙为丰州刺史、天德军西城中城都防御使。
现代文：三月初一，任命右金吾将军李奉仙为丰州刺史、天德军西城中城都防御使。
English: On the first day of March, he appointed Li Fengxian, the Right Kingu General, as the chief historian of Fengzhou and the defense envoy of the West Midtown of the Tiande Army.

古文：己卯，以剑南西川节度行军司马李程为兵部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：三月初八，任命剑南西川节度行军司马李程为兵部郎中，掌诏令文书。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, Ma Li Cheng, the military secretary of the Jianan West River Festival, was appointed as the vice-minister of the military department, and was in charge of the official documents.

古文：乙酉，以虔州司马韩泰为漳刑刺史，以永州司马柳宗元为柳州刺史、饶州司马韩晔为汀州刺史，朗州司马刘禹锡为播州刺史，台州司马陈谏为封州刺史。
现代文：三月十四日，任命虔州司马韩泰为漳州刺史，任命永州司马柳宗元为柳州刺史，任命饶州司马韩晔为汀州刺史，任命朗州司马刘禹锡为播州刺史，任命台州司马陈谏为封州刺史。
English: On March 14, Han Tai, secretary of Qianzhou, was appointed as the secretary of Zhangzhou, Liu Zongyuan, secretary of Yongzhou, was appointed as the secretary of Liuzhou, Han Wei, secretary of Raozhou, was appointed as the secretary of Dingzhou, Liu Yuxi, secretary of Langzhou, was appointed as the secretary of Banzhou, and Chen Qi, secretary of Taizhou, was appointed as the secretary of Fengzhou.

古文：御史中丞裴度以禹锡母老，请移近处，乃改授连州刺史。
现代文：御史中丞裴度因为刘禹锡的母亲年老，请求任命他移到近处，于是任命他为连州刺史。
English: Because Liu Yuxi's mother was old, the chief historian Baidu asked him to move to a nearby place, so he was appointed as the chief historian of Lianzhou.

古文：赠故太常卿崔邠礼部尚书。
现代文：追赠已故太常寺卿崔为礼部尚书。
English: A posthumous gift from the late Choi, the chief priest of Taejō-ji Temple, is a book on etiquette.

古文：李光颜破贼于南顿。
现代文：李光颜在南顿击败贼军。
English: Li Guangyan defeats the Kleptocrats in Nantong.

古文：辛亥，盗焚河阴转运院，凡烧钱帛二十万贯匹、米二万四千八百石、仓室五十五间。
现代文：四月初十，盗贼焚毁河阴转运院，共烧毁钱帛二十万贯匹、米二万四千八百石、仓屋五十五间。
English: On the 10th day of April, thieves set fire to the Hexin Transportation Center, burning a total of 200,000 pieces of money, 24,800 cubic meters of rice and 55 warehouses.

古文：防院兵五百人营于县南，盗火发而不救，吕元膺召其将杀之。
现代文：防守转运院的五百名士兵驻扎在县南，盗贼放火烧起来时却不救，吕元膺召来防军的将官，将其杀死。
English: Five hundred soldiers of the Defense Transfer Hospital were stationed in the south of the county, but when the thieves set fire to it, they did not save it. Lu Yuanqi summoned the general of the defense army and killed him.

古文：自盗火发河阴，人情骇扰。
现代文：自从河阴发生盗贼放火的事以后，人心惊骇扰攘。
English: Since the incident of thieves setting fire to the river, people have been shocked and disturbed.

古文：壬戌，以长安县令徐俊为邕管经略使。
现代文：四月二十一日，任命长安县令徐俊为邕管经略使。
English: On April 21st, Xu Jun, the governor of Chang'an County, was appointed as the special envoy of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：五月辛未朔。
现代文：五月初一为辛未日。
English: The first day of May is the last day of the year.

古文：辛巳，御史中丞裴度兼刑部侍郎。
现代文：五月十一日，御史中丞裴度兼任刑部侍郎。
English: On May 11th, Goshi Chujo Baidu was also appointed as a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：时度自淮西行营宣慰还，所言军机，多合上旨，故以兼官宠之。
现代文：当时裴度从淮西前线行营慰劳军队返回，所谈的军机要务，大多符合皇上的意图，故而以兼任官职对他表示优宠。
English: At that time, Pei Du returned from the Huaixi front to the camp of the comfort troops, and the military aircraft tasks he talked about were mostly in line with the emperor's intention, so he expressed his favor to him by concurrently serving as an official.

古文：丙申，李光颜大破贼党于洄曲。
现代文：五月二十六日，李光颜在洄曲将贼党打得大败。
English: On May 26th, Li Guangyan defeated the Kleptocrats in Xingqu.

古文：自征兵讨贼，凡十余镇之师，环于申、蔡，未立战功。
现代文：自从征调军队讨伐贼军以来，共用了十余处节镇的军队，环驻于申州、蔡州，未曾立下战功。
English: Since the enlistment of the army to fight against the Kleptocracy, the army of more than ten towns have been used, stationed in Shenzhou and Caizhou, and have not made any war achievements.

古文：裴度使还，奏曰： 臣观诸将，惟光颜见义能勇，必能立功。 
现代文：裴度出使前线回来，上奏说： 我看各个将军，只有李光颜见义勇为，一定能够立下战功。 
English: When Pei Du returned from the front, he said, "In my opinion, of all the generals, only Li Guangyan was brave enough to fight bravely.

古文：至是告捷，京师相贺，上尤赏度之知人。
现代文：这时奏告捷报，京师君臣互相祝贺，皇上特别赞赏裴度能够识别人才。
English: At this time, the news of the victory was announced, and the princes and ministers of Beijing congratulated each other. The emperor especially appreciated Pei Du's ability to recognize talent.

古文：六月辛丑朔。
现代文：六月初一为辛丑日。
English: The first day of June is always a bad day.

古文：癸卯，镇州节度使王承宗盗夜伏于靖安坊，刺宰相武元衡，死之；又遣盗于通化坊刺御史中丞裴度，伤首而免。
现代文：六月初三，镇州节度使王承宗派盗贼夜间埋伏在靖安坊，行刺宰相武元衡，杀死了武元衡；又派盗贼在通化坊行刺御史中丞裴度，裴度伤了头部却没有死。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the Zhenzhou Festival sent thieves from the Wangcheng sect to lie in wait at night in Jing'an Square to assassinate the prime minister, Wu Yuanheng, and killed Wu Yuanheng; they also sent thieves to assassinate the historian Baidu in Tonghua Square. Baidu injured his head but did not die.

古文：是日，京城大骇，自京师至诸门加卫兵；宰相导从加金吾骑士，出入则彀弦露刃，每过里门，诃索甚諠；公卿持事柄者，以家僮兵仗自随。
现代文：这一天，京城中人极惊骇，从京师的城门到宫禁各门都增加了卫兵；宰相的前导和随从都增加了金吾卫骑士，出入的时候则箭上弦、刀出鞘，每经过里坊的大门，卫兵们吆喝、搜索十分喧闹；公卿大臣带着公务出行，都以家仆带着武器跟着自己。
English: On this day, people in the capital were extremely alarmed. Guards were increased at every gate from the gate of the capital division to the palace. The vanguard and entourage of the prime minister were increased by the knights of the Golden Guard. When entering and leaving, arrows were strung and swords were unsheathed. Every time they passed the gate of the Li Fang, the guards shouted and searched very noisily. The noble ministers traveled with official duties, and they all followed themselves with their servants and weapons.

古文：武元衡死数日，未获贼。
现代文：武元衡死了好几天，没有抓获盗贼。
English: Wu Yuanheng died for several days without catching the thief.

古文：兵部侍郎许孟容请见，奏曰： 岂有国相横尸路隅，不能擒贼！ 
现代文：兵部侍郎许孟容请求觐见皇上，上奏说： 哪有一国的宰相尸体横陈在路边，而不能抓住盗贼的呢！ 
English: The attendant of the military department, Xu Meng Rong, requested an audience with the emperor, and said in his report: Which country has the body of the prime minister lying on the roadside, but cannot catch the thief?

古文：因洒泣极言，上为之愤叹。
现代文：随即流着眼泪极力陈说，皇上也为此而愤恨叹息。
English: Then, with tears streaming down his face, he tried his best to explain, and the Emperor also sighed with indignation.

古文：乃诏京城诸道，能捕贼者赏钱万贯，仍与五品官，敢有盖藏，全家诛戮。
现代文：于是下诏给京城各道，能够捕获盗贼的赏钱一万贯，并授予五品官，敢有隐瞒藏匿盗贼的，全家处死。
English: Therefore, an edict was issued to all districts of the capital, offering a reward of ten thousand yuan to anyone who could capture the thief, and awarding him five court ranks. If anyone dared to conceal or hide the thief, his whole family would be executed.

古文：乃积钱二万贯于东西市。
现代文：便在京城的东、西两市积钱二万贯。
English: He then accumulated 20,000 kan in the two cities east and west of the capital.

古文：京城大索，公卿节将复壁重者皆搜之。
现代文：京城中展开了大规模搜捕，连公卿大臣和节镇将帅的夹墙、屋梁都搜到了。
English: A large-scale manhunt was launched in the capital, and even the walls and roof beams of court nobles, ministers, and commanders were searched.

古文：庚戌，神策将士王士则、王士平以盗名上言，且言王承宗所使，乃捕得张晏等八人诛之。
现代文：六月初十，神策军的将士王士则、王士平把盗贼的名字报告上去，并且说是王承宗所主使，于是捕获张晏等八人，处以死刑。
English: At the beginning of June 10th, Wang Shizhe and Wang Shiping, officers of the Shenshao Army, reported the name of the thief, and said that it was Wang Chengzong's chief envoy, so they captured Zhang Ye and eight others and sentenced them to death.

古文：乙丑，制以朝议郎、守御史丞、兼刑部侍郎、飞骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋裴度为朝请大夫、守刑部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月二十五日，决定任命朝议郎、署理御史中丞、兼刑部侍郎、飞骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋裴度为朝请大夫、署理刑部侍郎、中书门下同平章事。
English: On June 25th, it was decided to appoint Choheiro, acting Goshi Chujo, concurrently serving as an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, Fei Jiao, and Zi Zijin Yuebukuro Pei Du to be the doctor of the morning, the acting attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and the disciple of Zhongshu.

古文：秋七月庚午朔，灵武节度使李光进卒。
现代文：秋，七月初一，灵武节度使李光进去世。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the Lingwu Festival caused the death of Li Guangjin.

古文：辛未，以神策军长武城使杜叔良为朔方、灵盐、定远城节度观察使。
现代文：七月初二，任命神策军长武城使杜叔良为朔方、灵、盐、定远城节度使、观察使。
English: On the second day of the first month of July, Du Shuliang, the envoy to Changwu City of the Divine Strategy Army, was appointed as the messenger of the party, the spirit, the salt, the festival of Dingyuan City and the observer.

古文：甲戌，诏： 成德军节度使王承宗，自涤瑕疵，累加奖拔，列在维籓之任，待以忠正之徒。
现代文：七月初五，诏令说： 成德军节度使王承宗，因能自己涤除过错，因而多次给以奖掖提拔，将他列名于藩镇大将的职位上，以忠诚正直的人来看待他。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, the imperial edict said: Wang Chengzong was promoted to the German military festival because he was able to clean up his own mistakes, so he was repeatedly rewarded and promoted, and he was listed in the position of the general of the province and town, and he was regarded as a loyal and honest person.

古文：谓怀君父之恩，克励人臣之节。
现代文：本以为念及君王的恩宠，能够尽到人臣的节操。
English: Originally, I thought that by considering the grace of the monarch, I would be able to do my best to preserve the dignity of the people.

古文：而动思弃命，恣逞非心，傲狠反常，横辱无畏。
现代文：他却动不动就想弃绝皇命，恣意地表现着非礼之心，傲慢狠毒非同一般，横辱君命无所畏惧。
English: He, on the other hand, wanted to renounce the emperor's life at every turn, arbitrarily showed his disrespectful heart, his arrogance and viciousness were out of the ordinary, and he had no fear of insulting the emperor's life.

古文：以其先祖，尝立忠动，每念含容，庶闻悛革。
现代文：因为他的先祖曾经建立了功勋，每想到这一点就宽容了他，希望听到他有悔过自新的表现。
English: Because his ancestors had built a merit, every time he thought about it, he tolerated him and hoped to hear him show remorse and self-restraint.

古文：曾不知阴谋逆状，久则逾彰；凶德祸机，盈而自覆。
现代文：然而竟不知道他阴谋叛逆的行为，时间一长就更加明显；凶恶的德性，深藏的祸心，满盈之后就会自取灭亡。
English: However, he does not know that his conspiratorial and rebellious behavior will become more obvious as time goes on; the vicious virtue, the deep-seated evil heart, will self-destruct after it is full.

古文：乃敢轻肆指斥，妄陈表章，潜遣奸人，内怀兵刃，贼杀元辅，毒伤宪臣，纵其凶残，无所顾望。
现代文：他竟敢轻率地放肆指斥朝臣，狂妄地陈奏表章，暗中派遣奸徒，身藏武器，刺杀朝廷的元老辅相，狠毒地伤害台宪大臣，放纵他的凶恶残忍，无所顾忌。
English: How dare he flippantly and impudently denounce courtiers, arrogantly display his insignia, secretly dispatch traitors, hide weapons, assassinate senators and ministers of the imperial court, viciously injure the constitutional minister of Taiwan, and indulge his vicious cruelty without any scruples.

古文：推穷事迹，罪状昭明，周览谳词，良用惊叹。
现代文：穷究他的事实，罪状十分明显，细看有关案卷，实在令人发指。
English: After exhaustively investigating his facts, the charges are very obvious, and a close look at the relevant case file is truly appalling.

古文：宜令绝其朝贡，其所部博野、乐寿两县本属范阳，宜却隶刘总。
现代文：应当命令断绝他朝贡的资格，他所控辖的博野、乐寿两县本来就属于范阳，应当退还给刘总统辖。
English: He should be ordered to sever his tributary status, and the two counties under his control, Bono and Leju, which originally belonged to Fanyang, should be returned to the jurisdiction of President Liu.

古文：驸马都尉王承系、太子赞善王承迪、丹王府司马王承荣等，并宜远郡安置。 
现代文：驸马都尉王承系、太子赞善王承迪、丹王府司马王承荣等，都应当派到远地去安置。 
English: Prince Wang Chengzhe, Prince Zanzan Wang Chengdi, Prince Dan Wang Chengrong, and so on, should be sent to distant places for resettlement.

古文：先是，承宗上表怨咎武元衡，留中不报。
现代文：当初，王承宗上表怨恨、怪罪武元衡，表章留在宫中未予答复。
English: At first, Wang Chengzong expressed his resentment and blamed Wu Yuanhei, and the medal was left in the palace without a reply.

古文：又肆指斥，上使持其表以示百官，群臣皆请问罪。
现代文：王承宗又放肆地进行指责，皇上派人拿着他的表章让百官看，群臣都请求向他问罪。
English: Wang Chengzong also impudently made accusations. The emperor sent someone to take his badge and show it to hundreds of officials, and the ministers all asked to question him.

古文：丙戌，泾原节度使李汇卒，以将作监王潜为泾州刺史、四镇北庭泾原节度使。
现代文：七月十七日，泾原节度使李去世，任命将作监王潜为泾州刺史、四镇、北庭、泾原节度使。
English: On July 17th, the governor of Zhangyuan died, and the governor of Zhangyuan, Shizhi, Shizhen, Beiting and Zhangyuan was appointed.

古文：乙未，以京兆尹裴武为司农卿，以捕贼弛慢故也。
现代文：七月二十六日，任命京兆尹裴武为司农卿一一一这是因为他捕贼怠惰迟缓的缘故。
English: On July 26th, he appointed Jingzhao Yin Peiwu as the Secretary of Agriculture - this was because of his laziness and slowness in catching thieves.

古文：八月己亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八月初一，发生日蚀。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丙寅，诃陵国遣使献僧祗僮及五色鹦鹉、频伽鸟并异香名宝。
现代文：八月二十八日，诃陵国派遣使臣进献僧祗的僮仆，以及五色鹦鹉、频伽鸟和异香名宝等物。
English: On August 28th, the envoys of the State of Fuling were dispatched to present the eunuchs of the monks, as well as the five-colored parrots, the black-crowned nightingale and the exotic incense treasures.

古文：丁未，淄青节度使李师道阴与嵩山僧圆净谋反，勇士数百人伏于东都进奏院，乘洛城无兵，欲窃发焚烧宫殿而肆行剽掠。
现代文：八月二十九日，淄青节度使李师道暗中与嵩山的僧人圆净谋反，数百名勇士埋伏在东都的进奏院，乘洛城没有军队的机会，想要暗中起事，焚烧宫殿并肆行劫掠。
English: On August 29th, the Qing Dynasty's Qing Festival made Li Shidao secretly plot a rebellion with the monks of Songshan. Hundreds of warriors lay in ambush at the Eastern Capital's Qinsao Academy, taking advantage of the fact that there was no army in the city of Luo. They wanted to secretly rise up, burn the palace and loot.

古文：小将场进、李再兴告变，留守吕元膺乃出兵围之，贼突围而出，入嵩岳，山棚尽擒之。
现代文：小将杨进、李再兴报告变故，东都留守使派兵去包围他们，贼兵突围出城，进入嵩山，山上棚楼的哨兵将他们全部捕获。
English: Young generals Yang Jin and Li Zaixing reported the incident. Dongdu stayed behind and sent soldiers to surround them. The bandits broke out of the city and entered Songshan. The sentries in the shacks on the mountain captured them all.

古文：讯其首，僧圆净主谋也。
现代文：审讯其中为首的，原来是僧人圆净主谋的。
English: One of the leaders of the trial turned out to be the mastermind, the monk Yuanqing.

古文：僧临刑叹曰： 误我事，不得使洛城流血！ 
现代文：僧人临刑时叹息说 ：误了我的事，不能使洛城流血了。 
English: When the monk was about to be executed, he sighed and said, "I made a mistake, I can't make Los Angeles bleed."

古文：九月癸酉，以宣武军节度使韩弘充淮西行营兵马都统。
现代文：九月初五，任命宣武军节度使韩弘充淮西行营兵马都统。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the year, Han Hongzhen was appointed as the commander of the Xuanwu Army.

古文：丁酉，以太子宾客韩皋为兵部尚书。
现代文：九月二十九日，任命太子宾客韩皋为兵部尚书。
English: On September 29th, the guest of the crown prince, Han Zheng, was appointed as the secretary of the military department.

古文：冬十月庚子，始析山南东道为两节度，以户部侍郎李逊为襄州刺史，充襄、复、郢、均、房节度使；以右羽林将军高霞寓为唐州刺史，充唐、随、邓节度使。
现代文：冬，十月初三，开始把山南东道分为两个节度使管领，任命户部侍郎李逊为襄州刺史，充任襄、复、郢、均、房节度使；任命右羽林将军高霞寓为唐州刺史，充任唐、随、邓节度使。
English: In winter, on the third day of October, the Shannan Host began to be divided into two festival leaders. Li Xun, the head of the Household Division, was appointed as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, and served as the chief historian of Xiang, Fu, He, Jun, and Fang; Gao Xiaye, the general of the Right Uhlin, was appointed as the chief historian of Tangzhou, and served as the chief historian of Tang, Su, and Deng.

古文：刑部尚书权德舆奏请行用新删定《敕格》三十卷，从之。
现代文：刑部尚书权德舆奏请实行新删定的《敕格》三十卷，皇上允从。
English: The Ministry of Justice requests that the newly-deleted 30 volumes of "Sheng Ge" be implemented, and the Emperor agrees.

古文：壬子，以太子宾客于頔为户部尚书。
现代文：十月十五日，任命太子宾客于由页为户部尚书。
English: On October 15th, the guests of the Crown Prince were appointed as the household staff.

古文：十一月戊辰，诏出内库缯绢五十五万匹供军。
现代文：十一月初一，诏令拨出内库的缯绢五十五万匹供给军用。
English: On the first day of November, the Emperor's edict allocated a total of 550,000 horses from the treasury to supply the military.

古文：乙亥，以山南东道节度使严绶为太子少保。
现代文：十一月初八，任命山南东道节度使严绶为太子少保。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the host of the Shannan Festival was appointed to make Yan Qi the youngest prince.

古文：戊寅，盗焚献陵寝宫。
现代文：十一月十一日，盗贼焚烧献陵的寝庙。
English: On the 11th day, thieves set fire to the mausoleum.

古文：诏发振武兵二千，会义武军以讨王承宗。
现代文：诏令遣发振武军的二千名士兵，会同义武军以讨伐王承宗。
English: The imperial edict dispatched two thousand soldiers of the Zhenwu army to join the Yiwu army to fight Wang Chengzong.

古文：十二月壬寅夜，太白犯镇星。
现代文：十二月初五夜间，太白金星干犯土星。
English: On the night of the 5th day of the first month of December, Venus transits Saturn.

古文：甲辰，李愿击败李师道之众九千，斩首二千级。
现代文：十二月初七，李愿击败李师道的部众九千人，斩敌首二千级。
English: On the seventh day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, Li Xiang defeated the nine thousand members of Li Shidao's army and cut off the heads of two thousand of his enemies.

古文：壬子，东都留守吕元膺请募置三河子弟以卫宫城。
现代文：十二月十五日，东都留守吕元膺请求招募三河地区的子弟以护卫宫城。
English: On December 15th, Dongdu stayed behind to ask Lu Yuanjun to recruit children from the Sanhe area to guard the palace.

古文：甲寅，越州复置山阴县。
现代文：十二月十七日，越州重新设置山阴县。
English: On December 17th, Yuezhou re-established Shanyin County.

古文：庚申，新造指南车、记里鼓。
现代文：十二月二十三日，重新制造指南车、记里鼓。
English: On December 23rd, the compass car and the clavichord were remade.

古文：出宫人七十二人置京城寺观，有家者归之。
现代文：遣出宫人七十二人安置在京城的寺观中，有家的让他们回家。
English: Seventy-two people who were sent out of the palace were placed in a temple in the capital, and those who had families were allowed to return home.

古文：乙丑，河东节度使王锷卒。
现代文：十二月二十八日，河东节度使王锷去世。
English: On December 28th, the Hedong Festival caused the death of Wang Qi.

古文：是岁，渤海、新罗、奚、契丹、黑水、南诏、牂柯并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，渤海、新罗、奚、契丹、黑水、南诏、柯均派遣使臣前来进贡。
English: In this year, Bohai, Silla, Min, Khitan, Heishui, Nanzhao and Ke all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十一年春正月丁卯朔，以宿师于野，不受朝贺。
现代文：元和十一年春，正月初一，因为正在打仗，军队露宿在野外，皇上不接受群臣朝贺。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Yuan and the first day of the first month of the year, because there was a war going on, the army was sleeping out in the open, and the emperor did not accept the morning greetings from his retainers.

古文：己巳，以中书侍郎、平章事张弘靖检校吏部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：正月初三，任命中书侍郎、平章政事张弘靖为检校吏部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Hongjing, the attendant of Zhongshu and the political officer of Pingzhang, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of Shangshu, as well as Taiyuan Yin, the Hokuto left-behind, and the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：戊寅，诏群臣曰： 今用兵已久，利害相半。
现代文：正月十二日，皇上下诏给群臣说： 现在打仗已经很久，好处与害处各占一半。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month, the emperor issued an imperial edict to his courtiers, saying: The war has been going on for a long time now, and the benefits and harms each account for half.

古文：其攻守之宜，罚宥之要，宜各具议状以闻。 
现代文：其中正确的进攻和防守，必要的惩罚和宽赦，希望各具本章分析奏闻。 
English: Among them, the correct offense and defense, the necessary punishment and clemency, I hope that this chapter will analyze the report.

古文：庚辰，翰林学士钱徽、萧俯各守本官，以上疏请罢兵故也。
现代文：正月十四日，命翰林学士钱徽、萧亻免各自暂署本职一一一这是因为他们上疏请求罢兵休战的缘故。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the year, Lin Qianhui and Xiao Yao were ordered to temporarily relinquish their posts - this was because they had requested Shangsu to call a truce.

古文：癸未，削夺王承宗在身官爵，所袭封邑赐武俊子金吾将军士平。
现代文：正月十七日，削除王承宗现任的官爵，他所袭取的封邑赐给王武俊的儿子金吾将军王士平。
English: On the 17th day of the first month, Wang Chengzong, the current official peer, was removed, and the fiefs he seized were given to Wang Wujun's son, Kingu General Wang Shiping.

古文：令河东、河北道诸镇加兵进讨。
现代文：命令河东、河北道各藩镇增派军队进行讨伐。
English: He ordered the provinces and towns of Hedong and Hebei provinces to send more troops to fight.

古文：甲申，盗断建陵门戟四十七竿。
现代文：正月十八日，盗贼折断建陵的门戟四十七根。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the year, the thieves broke 47 locks on the gate of the mausoleum.

古文：甲子，李光颜奏破贼。
现代文：正月二十八日，李光颜奏报击败贼军。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the year, Li Guangyan defeated the bandits.

古文：二月癸卯，吐蕃赞普卒。
现代文：二月初七，吐蕃的赞普去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, Zhang Pu of Tubo passed away.

古文：以中书舍人、权知礼部贡举、赐绯鱼袋李逢吉为门下侍郎、同平章事，赐紫金鱼袋。
现代文：任命中书舍人、暂掌礼部贡举事、赐绯鱼袋李逢吉为门下侍郎、同平章事，赐紫金鱼袋。
English: He appointed Zhong Shuxue Ren (中書舍人), Temporarily Handed the Ministry of Ceremonies (暂掌礼部) to hold a tribute ceremony, and gave a carp fish bag (鱼袋) to Li Fengji (李逢吉) as a servant of his disciple, Tongping (同平章事), and gave a purple gold fish bag.

古文：以内库绢四万匹赏幽、魏将士。
现代文：以内库的绢四万匹赏赐幽州、魏州的将士。
English: The soldiers of Yuzhou and Weizhou were rewarded with 40,000 yakitori from the treasury.

古文：甲寅，以华州刺史李绛为兵部尚书。
现代文：二月十八日，任命华州刺史李绛为兵部尚书。
English: On February 18th, Li Yan, a military historian from Huazhou, was appointed as the secretary of the military department.

古文：丙辰，月掩心。
现代文：二月二十日，月亮掩蔽心宿。
English: On February 20th, the moon occluded my heart.

古文：戊午，南诏蛮酋龙蒙盛卒。
现代文：二月二十二日，南诏蛮的酋长龙蒙盛去世。
English: On February 22nd, Long Mengsheng, the chieftain of Nanzhao, passed away.

古文：三月庚午，皇太后崩于兴庆宫之咸宁殿。
现代文：三月初四，皇太后在兴庆宫的咸宁殿驾崩。
English: On the 4th of March, the Empress Dowager passed away at Xianning Palace in Xingqing Palace.

古文：是日，群臣发丧于西宫两仪殿，以宰臣裴度为礼仪使，吏部尚书韩皋为大明宫留守，设次于中书。
现代文：当天，在西宫的两仪殿向群臣宣告丧事，任命宰臣裴度为礼仪使，吏部尚书韩皋为大明宫留守，在中书省设立办理丧事的地方。
English: On the same day, the funeral was announced to the courtiers in the Two Ceremonial Hall of the West Palace, and the vice-minister Pei Du was appointed as the ceremonial envoy. The clerk, Shangshu Han Qi, stayed behind at the Daming Palace, and a place to handle the funeral was set up in Zhongshu.

古文：辛未，敕诸司公事，宜权取中书门下处分。
现代文：三月初五，敕令各司署的公务，暂时由中书、门下省处理。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the lunar calendar, the official duties of each department were ordered to be temporarily handled by Zhongshu and its subordinate provinces.

古文：癸酉，分命朝臣告哀于天下。
现代文：三月初七，分别派遣朝臣向全国各地报告哀信。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, courtiers were separately dispatched to report the letter of condolence to all parts of the country.

古文：甲戌，见群臣于紫宸门外庑下。
现代文：三月初八，皇上在紫宸门外的庑下接见群臣。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, the emperor received a group of courtiers at the foot of the Shishimen Gate.

古文：己卯，以宰臣李逢吉充大行皇太后山陵使。出内库缯帛五万匹充奉山陵。
现代文：三月十三日，任命宰臣李逢吉充任已故皇太后的山陵使，拨出内库的缯帛五万匹充作陵墓丧葬之用。
English: On March 13th, he appointed his aide-de-camp Li Fengji to act as the late empress dowager's envoy to the mountain, and allocated 50,000 horses from the treasury to be used for the funeral of the mausoleum.

古文：己丑，月近镇星。
现代文：三月二十三日，月亮靠近土星。
English: On March 23rd, the Moon is close to Saturn.

古文：夏四月壬寅，西川节度使李夷简遣使告哀于南诏。
现代文：夏，四月初七，西川节度使李夷简派使者向南诏告知哀信。
English: In the summer, on the 7th day of the 4th month, the West River Festival made Li Yijian send an envoy to Nanzhao to inform him of the letter of condolence.

古文：后丧，边镇告四夷，旧制也。
现代文：皇后去世，由边疆的镇将告知四夷，这是原有的制度。
English: After the death of the empress, the border town will inform Shiyi, which is the original system.

古文：庚戌，贬户部侍郎、判度支杨于陵为郴州刺史，坐供军有阙也。
现代文：四月十五日，将户部侍郎、掌度支事杨於陵贬职为郴州刺史一一一因为其供给军饷有过失。
English: On April 15th, Yang Youling, the head of the Household Division, was demoted to the rank of "Shanzhou Shishi" because of his negligence in supplying military supplies.

古文：丁巳，以徐、宿饥，赈粟八万石。
现代文：四月二十二日，因为徐州、宿州发生饥馑，赈济八万石粮食。
English: On April 22, due to the famine in Xuzhou and Suzhou, 80,000 kilos of grain were donated.

古文：五月丁卯夜，辰、岁二宿合于东井。
现代文：五月初二夜间，水星、木星二星在井宿天区相合。
English: On the night of the second day of the fifth month, the two stars Mercury and Jupiter meet in the constellation of Aquarius.

古文：宥州军乱，逐刺史骆怡。
现代文：宥州军队发生动乱，驱逐宥州刺史骆怡。
English: Riots broke out in the Yuzhou army, and the Yuzhou magistrate Luo Yi was expelled.

古文：壬申，李光颜破贼于凌云栅。
现代文：五月初七，李光颜在凌云栅击败贼军。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Li Guangyan defeated the bandits at Lingyunzhao.

古文：六月甲辰，高霞寓败于铁城，退保新兴栅，是日人情悚骇，宰相奏对，多请罢兵。
现代文：六月初十，高霞寓在铁城战败，退守于新兴栅，这天人心惶惧惊骇，宰相奏对皇上时，大多请求罢兵休战。
English: At the beginning of June, the 10th, Gao Xia was defeated in Tiecheng and retreated to Xinxingzha. On this day, people were terrified. When the prime minister played against the emperor, most of them asked for a truce.

古文：上曰： 胜负兵家常势，不可以一将失利，便沮成计。
现代文：皇上说： 胜败乃是带兵者的常事，不能够因为某个将领失利，就终止既定的策略计划。
English: The emperor said, "Victory and defeat are common occurrences for those who lead troops. It is not possible to terminate the established strategic plan because of the defeat of a certain general.

古文：今但议用兵方略，朝廷庶务，制置可否耳。 
现代文：如今只讨论用兵的方略，朝廷日常事务，制令安排是否可行而已。 
English: Nowadays, only the strategy of using troops, the daily affairs of the imperial court, and whether the order-making arrangement is feasible are discussed.

古文：是夜，月掩心后星。
现代文：当夜，月亮掩蔽心后星。
English: That night, the moon covered the stars behind the heart.

古文：庚戌，田弘正军讨王承宗，次于南宫。
现代文：六月十六日，田弘正军讨伐王承宗，驻扎在南宫。
English: On June 16th, Tian Hongzheng's army went to fight Wang Chengzong and was stationed at the Southern Palace.

古文：辛酉，群臣上大行皇太后谥曰庄宪。
现代文：六月二十七日，群臣向已故皇太后敬献谥号为庄宪。
English: On June 27th, a group of courtiers presented the late empress dowager with the honorary title of Zhuo Xian.

古文：秋七月丁丑，贬随、唐节度使高寓为归州刺史。
现代文：秋，七月十三日，将随唐节度使高霞寓贬职为归州刺史。
English: In autumn, on July 13th, the Gaoxia Apartment will be demoted to the status of a historical monument of returning to the state.

古文：以河南尹郑权为襄州刺史，充山南东道节度使；以荆南节度使袁滋为唐州刺史、彰义军节度使、申光唐蔡随邓州观察使，权以唐州理为所；以华州刺史裴武为江陵尹，充荆南节度使。
现代文：任命河南尹郑权为襄州刺史，充任山南东道节度使；任命荆南节度使袁滋为唐州刺史、彰义军节度使、申、光、唐、蔡、随、邓等州观察使，暂时以唐州为治所；任命华州刺史裴武为江陵尹，充任荆南节度使。
English: Appointed Yin Zhengquan of Henan Province as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, acting as the host festival envoy of Shannan Province; appointed Yuan Zhi of Jing Province as the chief historian of Tang Province, the chief historian of Zhangyi Army, and the observation envoys of Shen, Guang, Tang, Cai, Sui, and Deng Provinces, with Tang Province as the temporary headquarters; appointed Pei Wu of Huazhou Province as the chief historian of Jiangling Province, acting as the chief historian of Jing Province.

古文：戊寅，以随州刺史杨旻为唐州刺史，充行营都知兵马使。
现代文：七月十四日，任命随州刺史杨为唐州刺史，充任行营都知兵马使。
English: On July 14th, Yang Suizhou was appointed as the Tang Zhou Zhi Shi, and served as the commander of the Tang Zhi Terracotta Army.

古文：以滋儒者，故复以旻将其兵。壬午，宣武军奏破贼。
现代文：因为袁滋是个读书人，因而另派杨率领他的军队，七月十八日，宣武军上奏说击败贼军。
English: Because Yuan Zi was a scholar, he sent Yang to lead his army, and on July 18, the Xuanwu army was dispatched to defeat the Kleptocracy.

古文：八月壬寅，以宰臣韦贯之为吏部侍郎，罢知政事。
现代文：八月初九，任命宰臣韦贯之担任吏部侍郎，停止执掌政务。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, he appointed Vice-Minister Wei Gangzhi to serve as the secretary of the personnel department, and ceased to be in charge of government affairs.

古文：贯之以淮西、河北两处用兵，劳于供饷，请缓承宗而专讨元济，与裴度争论上前故也。
现代文：这是因为韦贯之认为淮西、河北两地同时打仗用兵，疲于供应军饷，请求暂缓进攻王承宗而专门讨伐吴元济，在皇帝面前与裴度争论的缘故。
English: This was because Wei Jianzhi thought that both Huaixi and Hebei were at war at the same time, and he was tired of supplying military supplies. He asked for a delay in attacking Wang Chengzong and specifically fought against Wu Yuanji, and argued with Pei Du in front of the emperor.

古文：戊申，容州奏飓风海水毁州城。
现代文：八月十五日，容州奏称飓风使海水倒流冲毁州城。
English: On August 15th, Yeongju reported that the hurricane caused the seawater to backwash and wash away the city.

古文：甲申，祔庄宪皇后于丰陵。
现代文：八月二十一日，将庄宪皇太后附葬于丰陵。
English: On August 21, Empress Dowager Zhuoxian was buried in Fengling.

古文：九月丁卯，饶州奏浮梁、乐平二县，五月内暴雨水溢，失四千七百户，溺死者一百七十人。
现代文：九月初五，饶州奏称，浮梁、乐平二县五月内暴雨成灾，洪水泛滥，流失民户四千七百户，溺死一百七十人。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the year, the Raozhou report said that the heavy rains in May in the two counties of Fu Liang and Leping caused disasters, flooding, loss of 4,700 households, and 170 people drowned.

古文：丙子，新除吏部侍郎韦贯之再贬湖南观察使。
现代文：九月十四日，新授任的吏部侍郎韦贯之再贬为湖南观察使。
English: On September 14th, Wei Gangzhi, the newly appointed secretary of the cadre department, was relegated to the post of Hunan observation envoy.

古文：辛未，贬吏部侍郎韦顗为陕州刺史，刑部郎中李正为金州刺史，度支郎中薛公干为房州刺史，屯田郎中李宣为忠州刺史，考功郎中韦处厚为开州刺史，礼部员外郎崔韶为果州刺史，并为补阙张宿所构，言与贯之朋党故也。
现代文：九月初九，将吏部侍郎韦岂页贬职为陕州刺史，刑部郎中李正辞贬为金州刺史，度支郎中薛公干贬为房州刺史，屯田郎中李宣贬为忠州刺史，考功郎中韦处厚贬为开州刺史，礼部员外郎崔韶贬为果州刺史，他们都是被补缺的张宿所构陷，说是和韦贯之结成朋党的缘故。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, he demoted Wei Xizhe, the servant of the Ministry of Personnel, to the position of the secretary of the State of Shaanxi, Li Zhengji, the servant of the Ministry of Justice, to the position of the secretary of the State of Jin, Xue Gonggan, the servant of the Ministry of Finance, to the position of the secretary of the State of Fang, Li Xuan, the servant of the Ministry of Education, to the position of the secretary of the State of Chung, Cao Zhongwei, the servant of the Ministry of Education, to the position of the secretary of the State of Kaizhou, and C

古文：乙酉，蔡州军前奏拔凌云栅。
现代文：九月二十三日，蔡州前线的军中奏报攻占凌云栅。
English: On September 23rd, the military report of the Caizhou front captured Lingyun Grate.

古文：冬十月丁巳，以刑部尚书权德舆检校吏部尚书，兼兴元尹，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：冬，十月二十五日，任命刑部尚书权德舆为检校吏部尚书，兼任兴元尹，充任山南西道节度使。
English: In winter, on October 25th, he appointed Shang Shuquan Demu of the Criminal Investigation Department as Shang Shu of the School Inspection Department, concurrently serving as Xing Yuanyin, and acting as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：丙寅，幽州刘总加平章事，郓州李师道加检校司空。
现代文：十一月初五，幽州的刘总加授平章政事，郓州的李师道加授检校司空。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Liu Chongga of Yuzhou was awarded the title of Pingzhang, and Li Shidao of Zhangzhou was awarded the title of Jiankuo.

古文：师道闻拔凌云栅，乃惧，伪贡款诚，故有是令。
现代文：李师道听说官兵攻占了凌云栅，便感到害怕，假装表示忠诚，因而有这项任命。
English: When Li Shidao heard that the officers and soldiers had captured Lingyun Grate, he felt scared and pretended to show his loyalty, which led to this appointment.

古文：庚午，以司农卿王遂为宣州刺史、宣歙池观察使，以京兆尹要翛为润州刺史、浙西观察使。
现代文：十一月初九，任命司农卿王遂为宣州刺史、宣、歙、池州观察使，任命京兆尹李袺为润州刺史、浙西观察使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of November, Wang Sui, Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, was appointed as the observation envoy of Xuanzhou, Xuancheng, Shandong and Chizhou, and Jing Zhaoyin Lijun was appointed as the observation envoy of Runzhou and West Zhejiang.

古文：以遂、翛常历计司，能聚敛，方藉供军，故有斯授。
现代文：因为王遂、李袺常常任职于财政部门，能够聚敛钱财，正要依靠他们供应军饷，因而有这项授职。
English: Because Wang Sui and Li Qian often served in the financial department, they were able to accumulate money, and it was necessary to rely on them to supply military pay, which led to this appointment.

古文：壬申，敕诸道奏事官，非急切不得乘驿马。
现代文：十一月十一日，敕令各道的奏事官，不是紧迫的事务不得乘坐驿马。
English: On November 11th, the Emperor ordered the officials in charge of the report of each province not to ride the horse-drawn carriage unless it was an urgent matter.

古文：丁丑，出内库钱五十万贯供军。
现代文：十一月十六日，拨出内库钱五十万贯供给军用。
English: On November 16th, 500 thousand yuan of treasury money was allocated for military supplies.

古文：戊寅夜，月犯岁。
现代文：十一月十七日夜，月亮干犯木星。
English: On the night of November 17th, the moon collided with Jupiter.

古文：辛巳，命内常侍梁守监淮西行营诸军。仍以空名告身五百通及金帛付之。
现代文：十一月二十日，派内常侍梁守谦监督淮西行营各军，并以空白委任状五百张及钱款绢帛交付给他。
English: On November 20, Liang Shouqian, a regular attendant of the faction, was sent to supervise the troops marching to the west of Huai, and he was given a blank power of attorney of 500 pieces and a money order.

古文：戊子夜，土、火合于虚、危。
现代文：十一月二十七日夜，土星、火星会合于虚宿、危宿天区。
English: On the evening of November 27th, Saturn and Mars will meet in the sky in the sector of false and dangerous planets.

古文：十二月丙午，以易州刺史陈楚为定州刺史、义武军节度使。
现代文：十二月十五日，任命易州刺史陈楚为定州刺史、义武军节度使。
English: On December 15th, Chen Chu, the chief historian of Yizhou, was appointed as the chief historian of Dingzhou and the chief envoy of the festival of the volunteer army.

古文：丁未，以翰林学士、尚书工部侍郎、知制诰王涯为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：十二月十六日，任命翰林学士、尚书工部侍郎、知制诰王涯为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On December 16th, Han Lin Bao, Shang Shu Rong, and Zhizhi Qian Wangya were appointed as the Secretary of the Middle School of Calligraphy and the Secretary of Tongping.

古文：甲寅，以闲厩宫苑使李醖检校左散骑常侍，兼邓州刺史，充唐、随、邓等州节度使。
现代文：十二月二十三日，任命闲厩宫苑使李朔心为检校左散骑常侍，兼任邓州刺史，充任唐、随、邓等州节度使。
English: On December 23rd, Li Shuo Xin, an envoy of the Idle Stables Palace and Garden, was appointed as the left rider of the inspection of the school, and also served as the chief historian of Dengzhou, and served as the state festival envoy of Tang, Su, and Deng.

古文：初置颍水运使。运扬子院米，自淮阴溯流至寿州，四十里入颍口，又溯流至颍州沈丘界，五百里至于项城，又溯流五百里入溵河，又三百里输于郾城。
现代文：开始设置淮、颍水运使，运送扬子院的米，从淮阴逆流而上至寿州，再过四十里入颍口，又逆流而上至颍州的沈丘界，经过五百里而抵达项城，再逆流而上五百里进入氵殷河，又经三百里运到郾城。
English: They began to set up Huai and Surabaya water transport companies to transport the rice of Yangziin, from Huaiyin upstream to Shoushou, and then forty miles into Hukou, and then upstream to the Shenqiu area of Shoushou, after five hundred miles to Xiangcheng, and then upstream for five hundred miles into the Yuyin River, and then transported to Shoushou after three hundred miles.

古文：得米五十万石，茭一千五百万束。
现代文：共得五十万石米，干草一千五百万捆。
English: A total of 500,000 koku of rice and 15 million bales of hay were produced.

古文：省汴运七万六千贯。
现代文：节省汴州运费七万六千贯钱。
English: saving 76,000 Korean won in shipping costs in Luzhou.

古文：己未，邕管奏黄洞贼屠岩州。
现代文：十二月二十八日，邕管上奏说黄洞贼寇屠杀岩州城。
English: On December 28th, it was reported that the Yellow Cave Thieves and Robbers had massacred Iwakuni City.

古文：未央宫及飞龙草场火。
现代文：未央宫及飞龙草场发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at the Wenyang Palace and the Fei Long Grassland.

古文：京畿水害田，润、常、湖、衢、陈、许大水。
现代文：京畿地区水灾损害田亩，润州、常州、湖州、衢州、陈州、许州也发生大水。
English: Floods in the Gyeonggi region have damaged tens of thousands of acres of farmland, and floods have also occurred in Rongju, Changju, Huzhou, Yeongju, Chenzhou, and Huzhou.

古文：是岁冬雷，桃、杏花。
现代文：这年冬季鸣雷，桃杏开花。
English: This year, the winter thundered, and the peach and apricot blossomed.

古文：回鹘、奚、契丹、牂柯、渤海等朝贡。
现代文：回鹘？奚、契丹、柯、渤海等国前来朝贡。
English: Countries such as Guizhou, Qingdao, Qidan, Ke and Bohai came to pay tribute.

古文：十二年春正月辛酉朔，以用兵不受朝贺。
现代文：元和十二年春，正月初一，因为正在打仗用兵，不接受群臣朝贺。
English: In the spring of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of

古文：癸未，贬义武军节度使浑镐为循州刺史，坐讨贼失律也。
现代文：正月二十三日，将义武军节度使浑镐贬职为循州刺史，因为其讨伐贼军的军队行军不守纪律而获罪。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, he demoted Hunhyun from the volunteer army to the provincial history, because he was found guilty of marching in an undisciplined manner.

古文：甲申，贬唐、邓节度袁滋为抚州刺史，以上疏请罢兵故也。
现代文：正月二十四日，将唐邓节度使袁滋贬职为抚州刺史一一一因为他上疏请求罢兵休战的缘故。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the year, Tang Deng Jiedu demoted Yuan Zhi to the position of Fuzhou Shishi for the reason that he went to Shang Su to request a truce.

古文：乙酉夜，星见而雨。
现代文：正月二十五日夜，天上出现星辰却下着雨。
English: On the night of the 25th day of the first month, stars appeared in the sky but it rained.

古文：戊子夜，彗出毕南，长丈余，指西南，凡三日，南近参旗而没。
现代文：正月二十八日夜，彗星出现在毕宿南面，长一丈有余，指向西南方，一共三日，向南靠近参旗座而消失。
English: On the evening of the 28th day of the first month, the comet appeared to the south of Bi-suk, grew more than a foot tall, pointed to the southwest, and disappeared for a total of three days, moving southward near the constellation of the Star-Spangled Banner.

古文：二月壬申，以内库绢布六十九万段匹、银五千两，付度支供军。
现代文：二月初二，拨出内库的绢布六十九万匹、白银五千两，交付给度支司供给军用。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, 690,000 yakitori and 5,000 taels of silver from the treasury were delivered to the governor for military supplies.

古文：庚子，敕京城居人五家相保，以搜奸慝。
现代文：二月初十，敕令京城的居民五家连保，以搜寻隐匿的奸徒。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, he ordered the residents of the capital to search for the hidden traitor.

古文：时王承宗、李师道欲阻用兵之势，遣人折陵庙之戟，焚刍藁之积，流矢飞书，恐骇京国，故搜索以防奸。
现代文：当时王承宗、李师道想要阻止朝廷用兵的势头，派人去折断陵墓寝庙的门戟，焚烧积存的草料，以流矢射来书信，使京都人恐惧惊骇，故而在城门搜索以防止奸徒。
English: At that time, Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao wanted to stop the momentum of the imperial army, and sent people to break the lintel of the mausoleum and temple, burn the accumulated grass, and shoot the letters with a stream of arrows, which made the people of Kyoto afraid and shocked, so they searched at the city gate to prevent the traitors.

古文：及贼平，复得淄青簿领，中有赏蒲、潼关吏案，乃知容奸者关吏也，搜索不足以为防。
现代文：及至贼军平定，重新得到淄青节镇衙署的簿册文书，其中有赏赐蒲州、潼关关吏的案卷，才知道容纳奸徒进京的正是关吏，搜索不足以防备奸徒。
English: It was only when the bandits were subdued and the documents of the National Youth Day Township Administration were retrieved, including the case files of rewarding the customs officers of Puzhou and Shaoguan, that it became clear that it was the customs officers who accommodated the ruffians entering Beijing, and the search was not enough to prevent the ruffians.

古文：庚申，敕宜于许汝行营侧近置行郾城，以处贼中归降人户。
现代文：二月三十日，敕令应当在许州、汝州行营的附近设置行郾城，以安置贼军中归降的民户。
English: On February 30th, the imperial edict was issued to set up a transit camp in the vicinity of the transit camps in Huzhou and Ruzhou to resettle the civilians who had surrendered from the rebel army.

古文：甲寅，岳鄂团练使李道古师攻申州，克罗城，贼力战，道古之众大败。
现代文：二月二十四日，岳鄂团练使李道古的军队进攻申州，攻占罗城，贼军奋力作战，李道古的部众大败。
English: On February 24th, Yue Huan led Li Daogu's army to attack Shenzhou and capture Luo City. The rebel army fought hard, and Li Daogu's army was defeated.

古文：三月壬戌，昭义郗士美兵败于柏乡，兵士死者千人。
现代文：三月初三，昭义军郗士美的军队在柏乡战败，战死的士兵达一千人。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the troops of the Shouyi Army led by Shimei were defeated in Baoxiang, with a thousand soldiers killed in battle.

古文：戊辰，沧州程执恭改名权。
现代文：三月初八，沧州程执恭改名为程权。
English: On the eighth day of March, Cangzhou Cheng Zhengyong changed its name to Cheng Quan.

古文：太常定李吉甫谥曰 敬宪 ，度支郎中张仲方非之，上怒，贬为遂州司马。
现代文：太常寺确定李吉甫的谥号为敬宪，度支郎中张仲方认为不妥。皇上发怒，将张仲方贬为遂州司马。
English: Taizho-ji Temple determined that Li Jifu's posthumous name was Jing Xian, and Zhang Zhongfang, a member of Duozhiro, thought it was inappropriate. The emperor was angry and relegated Zhang Zhongfang to Suizhou Sima.

古文：赐吉甫谥曰忠。
现代文：赐给李吉甫谥号为忠。
English: Li Jifu was given the honorary title of "Loyal."

古文：丁丑，月犯心后星。
现代文：三月十七日，月亮干犯心宿的后星。
English: On the 17th of March, the moon was the culprit.

古文：癸未，贼将吴秀琳以文城栅兵三千降李醖。
现代文：三月二十三日，贼将吴秀琳率领文城栅的三千名士兵投降李朔心。
English: On March 23rd, the thief Wu Xiulin led 3,000 soldiers of the Wencheng Gate to surrender to Li Shuoxin.

古文：夏四月辛卯，李光颜破贼三万于郾城，杀其卒什二三，获马千匹、器甲三万。
现代文：夏，四月初二，李光颜在郾城击败三万贼兵，杀死贼军士卒十之二三，缴获战马千匹、武器甲杖三万件。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, Li Guangyan defeated thirty thousand bandits in Lucheng, killed ten out of twenty-three bandits, and captured a thousand horses and thirty thousand weapons.

古文：辛丑，驸马都尉于季友居嫡母丧，与进士刘师服欢宴夜饮。
现代文：四月十二日，驸马都尉于季友在亲生母亲去世的居丧期间，与进士刘师服一起欢宴夜饮。
English: On April 12th, during the period of mourning for the death of Ji You's biological mother, Captain Zouma had dinner and drinks with Liu Shifu.

古文：季友削官爵，苔四十，忠州安置；师服笞四十，配流连州；于頔不能训子，削阶。
现代文：于季友被削除官爵，受笞刑四十下，安置去忠州；刘师服受笞刑四十下，发配流放到连州；于由页不能管教儿子，削除阶官。
English: Yu Ji You was stripped of his title of nobility, sentenced to forty strokes of the cane and sent to Chungju; Liu Shi served forty strokes of the cane and was sent to Lianzhou; Yu Yu Page could not discipline his son and was stripped of his title of nobility.

古文：己酉，出太仓粟二十五万石粜于西京，以惠饥民。
现代文：四月二十日，发放太仓的粮食二十五万石在西京出售，以施惠于饥民。
English: On April 20, 250,000 koku of grain from Taicang was distributed and sold in West Beijing to benefit the hungry.

古文：庚戌，敕改蔡州吴房县为遂平县，移置于文城栅南新城内。
现代文：四月二十一日，敕令把蔡州的吴房县改名为遂平县，把治所迁移到文城栅南边的新城内。
English: On April 21, the imperial edict changed the name of Wufang County in Caizhou to Suiping County, and moved the government office to Xincheng, south of Wencheng.

古文：丁卯，贼郾城守将邓怀金与县令董昌以郾城降。
现代文：五月初八，贼军的郾城守将邓怀金与县令董昌龄以郾城投降。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth lunar month, Deng Huaijin, the garrison commander of Lucheng, and Dong Changling, the county magistrate, surrendered Lucheng to the bandits.

古文：甲戌，渭南雨雹，中人有死者。
现代文：五月十五日，渭南降雨和冰雹，宫中人有死的。
English: On May 15th, rain and hailstorms hit southern Anhui Province, causing the death of a person in the palace.

古文：丙子，诏权罢河北行营，专讨淮、蔡。
现代文：五月十七日，下诏暂时撤销河北的行营，以专门讨伐淮西蔡州的吴元济。
English: On May 17th, the next edict temporarily revoked the camp in Hebei to specifically attack Wu Yuanji in Caizhou, Huaxi.

古文：五月庚寅朔。
现代文：闰五月初一为庚寅日。
English: The first day of the leap month of May is Geng Yin Day.

古文：癸巳，随唐节度使李醖奏败贼于吴房，获贼将李祐。
现代文：闰五月初四，随唐节度使李朔心奏报在吴房击败贼军，俘获贼将李佑。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, with the Tang festival, Li Shuo sent a report to report that he had defeated the thief army in Wufang and captured the thief Li You.

古文：己亥，以尚书左丞许孟容为东都留守，充都畿防御使。
现代文：闰五月初十，任命尚书左丞许孟容为东都留守，充任都畿防御使。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the leap year, he appointed Shangshu Zuojo Xu Meng Rong to stay in Dongdu and serve as the defense envoy of Donggui.

古文：时东畿民户供军尤苦，车数千乘相错于路，牛皆馈军，民户多以驴耕。
现代文：当时东畿的民户供应军用特别艰苦，几千辆车在路上相错，耕牛都送给了军队，民户大多用驴耕地。
English: At that time, it was particularly difficult for private households in Donggi to supply the military. Several thousand vehicles collided on the road. Cattle were given to the military, and most private households used donkeys to cultivate the land.

古文：己酉，作蓬莱池周廊四百间。
现代文：闰五月二十日，在蓬莱池的四周建造廊庑四百间。
English: On the 20th day of leap May, four hundred corridors were built around Penglai Pond.

古文：六月己未朔，以卫尉卿程异为盐铁使，代王播。
现代文：六月初一，任命卫尉卿程异为盐铁使，以代替王播。
English: On the first day of June, he appointed Lieutenant General Cheng Yixing as Envoy of Salt and Iron to replace Wang Bo.

古文：时异为盐铁使副，自江南收拾到供军钱一百八十五万以进，故得代播。
现代文：当时程异任盐铁副使，从江南收取到供给军用的钱一百八十五万进奉朝廷，故能够取代王播。
English: At that time, Cheng Yi was the vice-envoy of Yan Tie and received from the south of the Yangtze River 1.85 million yuan for military supplies to the imperial court, so he was able to replace Wang Biao.

古文：壬戌，贼吴元济上表，请束身归朝。
现代文：六月初四，贼将吴元济奉上表章，请求自缚其身归降朝廷。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the thief presented Wu Yuanji with a badge and asked him to surrender himself to the imperial court.

古文：时连破三栅，贼势迫蹙，实欲归朝，而制于左右，故不果行。
现代文：当时官军连破贼军三处寨栅，贼军的形势紧迫艰困，确实想要归降朝廷，却因为受制于身边的将佐，故而终究没有实行。
English: At that time, the government army even broke the three fortresses of the Kleptocratic army. The situation of the Kleptocratic army was urgent and difficult. They really wanted to surrender to the imperial court, but because they were constrained by the generals around them, they ultimately did not implement it.

古文：乙酉，京师大雨，含元殿一柱倾，市中水深三尺，坏坊民二千家。
现代文：六月二十七日，京师降下大雨，含元殿一根殿柱倾斜，市街中水深达三尺，损坏了市坊民宅二千家。
English: On June 27th, heavy rain fell in Beijing, including the tilting of a pillar of the Yuan Dynasty, and the water depth in the city reached three feet, damaging two thousand homes in the city.

古文：秋七月戊子朔。
现代文：秋，七月初一为戊子日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is the first day of spring.

古文：壬辰，诏以定州饥，募人入粟受官及减选、超资。
现代文：七月初五，诏令：因为定州饥馑，招募捐纳粮食以换取官职的人，并减少铨选的名额，放宽资历的限制。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, the imperial decree was issued: because of the famine in Dingzhou, people who donated grain in exchange for official positions were recruited, and the number of candidates for election was reduced, and the restrictions on seniority were relaxed.

古文：河北水灾，邢、洺尤甚，平地或深二丈。
现代文：河北发生水灾，邢州、氵名州尤其严重，有些地方平地水深二丈。
English: Floods occurred in Hebei, particularly in Zhangzhou and Zhangye, with some areas being flooded to a depth of two meters.

古文：甲辰，户部尚书于頔请致仕，不允。
现代文：七月十七日，户部尚书于由页请求离任退休，皇上不准。
English: On July 17th, Shosho, the head of the household, requested retirement from his post, but the Emperor did not allow it.

古文：岭南节度使崔咏卒。
现代文：岭南节度使崔讠永去世。
English: The Lingnan Festival caused the death of Cui Bingyong.

古文：乙酉，敕： 今后左降官及责授正员官等，宜从到任经五考满，许量移；如未满五考遇恩赦者，从节文处分；如犯十恶大逆、赃贿缘坐，奏取进止。 
现代文：七月二十三日，敕令： 今后降职的官员以及受到朝廷责难的正员官，应当从到任时开始，经过五次考核届满，才允许酌量调职；如果未满五次考核而遇到恩赦，则按照法令文书处理；如果犯下十恶不赦的大罪，贪赃受贿而监押，应奏闻朝廷决定去向。 
English: On July 23, the imperial edict was issued: In the future, officials who are demoted and regular officials who are reprimanded by the imperial court should be allowed to be transferred at their discretion only after five evaluations have been completed, starting from the time they take office; if they are pardoned before the five evaluations are completed, they will be dealt with in accordance with the legal documents; if they commit the unpardonable crime of corruption and bribery and are imprisoned, they should report to the imperial court to decide where to go.

古文：庚戌，以国子祭酒孔戣为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：七月二十三日，任命国子祭酒孔癸戈为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On July 23rd, he was appointed as the Guangzhou chief historian and the Lingnan festival envoy for the National Children's Festival.

古文：丙辰，制以中书侍郎、平章事裴度守门下侍郎同平章事、使持节蔡州诸军事、蔡州刺史，充彰义军节度、申光蔡观察处置等使，仍充淮西宣慰处置使。
现代文：七月二十九日，决定任命中书侍郎、平章政事裴度署理门下侍郎、同平章事、使持节蔡州诸军事、蔡州刺史，充任彰义军节度使、申、光、蔡等州观察处置使，并充任淮西宣慰处置使。
English: On July 29, it was decided to appoint Zhongshu Zhilang, Pingzhang Zhengji Peidu Acting Subordinate Zhilang, Tongping Zhilang, Zhi Jixi Caizhou Zhu Military, Caizhou Zhi Shi, Zhangyi Army Zhilang Envoy, Shen, Guang, Cai and other state observation and disposition envoys, and Huaixi Xuan comfort disposition envoys.

古文：以朝散大夫、守尚书户部侍郎、上护军、赐紫金鱼袋崔群为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命朝散大夫、署理尚书户部侍郎、上护军、赐紫金鱼袋崔群为中书侍郎、中书门下同平章事。
English: Appointed Dr. Chosan, Acting Secretary Shang Shuxu, Attendant of the Household Department, Shang Guojun, and conferred the Purple Gold Fish Bag to Cui Qun as the Attendant of the Middle School and the disciple of the Middle School.

古文：以刑部侍郎马总兼御史大夫，充淮西行营诸军宣慰副使；以太了右庶子韩愈兼御史中丞，充彰义军行军司马；以司勋员外郎李正封、都官员外郎冯宿、礼部员外郎李宗闵皆兼侍御史，为判官书记：从度出征。
现代文：任命刑部侍郎马总兼任御史大夫，充任淮西行营诸军宣慰副使；任命太子庶子韩愈兼任御史中丞，充任彰义军行军司马；任命司勋员外郎李正封、都官员外郎冯宿、礼部员外郎李宗闵均兼任侍御史，任判官书记：随从裴度出征。
English: He appointed the head of the Department of Justice, Ma Jun, to serve as the Grand Historian and the Vice-Minister of Consolation for the troops marching to Huaxi; he appointed the Prince's son-in-law, Han Yu, to serve as the Grand Historian and the Vice-Minister of Consolation for the troops marching to Huaxi; he appointed the Grand Marshal of the Shouyi Army, Ma Jun, to serve as the Grand Marshal of the Shouyi Army; he appointed the Grand Marshal of the Department of Decorations, Li Zhengfeng, the Grand Marshal of the Capital, Feng Shu, the Grand Marshal of the Capital, and

古文：诏以郾城为行蔡州治所。
现代文：下诏以郾城作为行蔡州的治所。
English: The following edict uses Lucheng as the administrative center for traveling to Caizhou.

古文：八月戊午朔。
现代文：八月初一为戊午日。
English: The first day of August is a leap day.

古文：庚申，裴度发赴行营，敕神策军三百人卫从，上御通化门劳遣之。
现代文：八月初三，裴度出发前往前线军营，皇上敕令三百名神策军士兵护卫随从，皇上临幸通化门慰劳、送行。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Pei Du set off for the front-line military camp. The emperor ordered three hundred soldiers of the Shen Zhao Army to escort him, and the emperor sent Lin Xing to the Huamen Gate to offer consolation and see him off.

古文：度望门再拜，衔涕而辞，上赐之犀带。
现代文：裴度出发之时望着宫门两次下拜，含着眼泪辞别皇上，皇上赐给他犀牛皮袍带。
English: At the time of Pei Du's departure, he looked at the palace gate, bowed twice, and bid farewell to the emperor with tears. The emperor gave him a rhinoceros leather robe and belt.

古文：以河南尹辛秘为潞府长史、昭义军节度使，代郗士美。
现代文：任命河南尹辛秘为潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度使，以取代郗士美。
English: Appointed Yin Xinpi of Henan Province as the governor of Zhangzhou, the chief historian, and the delegate of the Shao Yi Army to the festival, to replace Gong Shimei.

古文：以士美为工部尚书，孟简为户部侍郎。
现代文：任命郗士美为工部尚书，孟简为户部侍郎。
English: He appointed Gong Shimei as the secretary of the engineering department and Meng Jian as the secretary of the household department.

古文：戊辰，以同州刺史张正甫为河南尹。
现代文：八月十一日，任命同州刺史张正甫为河南尹。
English: On August 11, Zhang Zhengfu, the chief historian of the same prefecture, was appointed Henan Yin.

古文：甲申，裴度至郾城。
现代文：八月二十七日，裴度抵达郾城。
English: On August 27th, Baidu arrived in Handan.

古文：九月丁亥朔。
现代文：九月初一为丁亥日。
English: The first day of September is Dinghai Day.

古文：戊子，出内库罗绮、犀玉、金带之具，送度支估计供军。
现代文：九月初二，取出内库的罗绮、犀玉、金带等物，送往度支司估算价值以供给军用。
English: On the second day of September, the lozenges, rhinestones, gold bands and other items in the vault were taken out and sent to the Department of Supply for an estimated value to be supplied to the military.

古文：甲午，御史台奏； 同制除官，承前以名字高下为班位先后。
现代文：九月初八，御史台上奏说： 同一道制命授职的官员，秉承前制，按照名字的先后作为上朝时班列位次的先后。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3

古文：或名在前身在外，及到，却在旧人之上。
现代文：有的人名字在前，而人本身却在外地，及至到京，却列在旧人前面。
English: Some people's names are at the front, but the people themselves are in other places, and when they arrive in Beijing, they are listed in front of the old people.

古文：今请以上日为先后。 
现代文：从现在起请以上任的日子作为班列位次的先后。 
English: From now on, please use the day of your appointment as the order of your class rank.

古文：敕曰： 名在前，上日在后，未逾月，不在此限。
现代文：敕令说： 名字在前，上任的日子在后，没有超过一个月的，不在此限。
English: The imperial edict said: the name should be first, the day of taking office should be last, and no more than one month, except in this case.

古文：行立班次，即宜以敕内前后为定。 
现代文：上朝时行走站立的班列位次，就应当按照敕令内名字的前后顺序作为定准。 
English: In the morning, the order of the standing trains should be determined according to the order of the names in the imperial edict.

古文：戊戌，剑南东川节度卢坦卒。
现代文：九月十二日，剑南东川节度使卢坦去世。
English: On September 12th, the Jianan Dongchuan Festival caused Lutan's death.

古文：己亥，贬京兆尹窦易直为金州刺史，以鞫狱得赃不实故也。
现代文：九月十三日，将京兆尹窦易直贬职为金州刺史一一一因为他审讯狱囚所得赃物不真实的缘故。
English: On September 13th, he demoted Jing Zhao Yin Dou Yi Zhi to Jinzhou Zhi Shi because the stolen goods he obtained from interrogating prisoners were not true.

古文：辛丑，以御史中丞为京兆尹。
现代文：九月十五日，任命御史中丞为京兆尹。
English: On September 15, Goshi Chujo was appointed as Keizhoin.

古文：壬寅，以湖南观察使韦贯之为太子詹事分司。
现代文：九月十六日，任命湖南观察使韦贯之为太子詹事分司。
English: On September 16th, Hunan Observation appointed Wei Guanzhong as the sub-branch of Prince Zhan's Affairs.

古文：乙巳，以刑部郎中知杂崔元略为御史中丞。
现代文：九月十九日，任命掌管杂务的刑部郎中崔元略为御史中丞。
English: On September 19th, Choi Won-yul, a vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice in charge of miscellaneous affairs, was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：丁未，以朝议大夫、门下侍郎、同平章事李逢吉检校兵部尚书、使持节梓州诸军事、梓州刺史，充剑南东川节度副大使，知节度事。
现代文：九月二十一日，任命朝议大夫、门下侍郎、同平章事李逢吉为检校兵部尚书、使持节梓州诸军事、梓州刺史，充任剑南东川节度副大使，执掌节度使事务。
English: On September 21st, he appointed Li Fengji, the doctor of the Imperial Court Council, the attendant of his disciple, and the successor of Tongping Zhangji, to be the inspector of the military department of the school, to hold the festival of the military of Zizhou and the history of Zizhou, to serve as the deputy ambassador of the Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival, and to take charge of the festival affairs.

古文：庚子，以抚州刺史袁滋为湖南观察使。
现代文：九月十四日，任命抚州刺史袁滋为湖南观察使。
English: On September 14th, Fuzhou's top diplomat, Yuan Zhi, was appointed as the Hunan Observation Envoy.

古文：冬十月壬申，裴度往沲口观板筑五沟，贼遽至，注弩挺刃将及度，面李光颜，田布扼其归路，大败之。
现代文：冬，十月十六日，裴度前往沲口观看修筑五处护城河，贼军突然来到，上弦的箭和出鞘的刀几乎伤及裴度，而李光颜、田布守住了贼军的归路，将贼军打得大败。
English: In winter, on October 16th, Baidu went to Hekou to watch the construction of five moats. The thief army suddenly came. The wound arrow and the unsheathed knife almost hurt Baidu, while Li Guangyan and Tianbu guarded the way back for the thief army and defeated the thief army.

古文：是日，度几陷。
现代文：这天，裴度几乎陷入贼手。
English: On this day, Pei Du almost fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：癸酉，内出《元和辩谤略》三卷付史馆。
现代文：十月十七日，内府拿出《元和辩谤略》三卷交付给史馆。
English: On October 17th, the prefectural government took out the three volumes of "Outline of Yuan and Debate" and delivered them to the history museum.

古文：甲申，以淮南节度使、检校左仆射李鄘为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，以左丞卫次公代鄘为淮南节度使。
现代文：十月十八日，任命淮南节度使、检校左仆射李庸阝为门下侍郎、中书门下同平章事、任命左丞卫次公代替李庸阝任淮南节度使。
English: On October 18th, the Huainan Festival Delegate, the left-hand man of the inspection of the school, Li Yongkang, was appointed as the attendant of the door, the subordinate of the Chinese school, Tongping Zhangji, and the left-hand man, Wei Zikong, was appointed to replace Li Yongkang as the Huainan Festival Delegate.

古文：己卯、随、唐节度使李醖率师入蔡州，执吴元济以献，淮西平。
现代文：十月二十三日，随唐节度使李朔心率军攻入蔡州，俘获吴元济献给朝廷，淮西平定。
English: On October 23, with the Tang Dynasty's festival, Li Shuo led the army into Caizhou, captured Wu Yuanji and presented him to the imperial court, and subdued Huaixi.

古文：甲申诏： 淮西立功将出，委韩弘、裴度条疏奏闻。
现代文：十月二十八日，诏令： 在淮西立下战功的将士，委托韩弘、裴度分列条款奏闻朝廷。
English: On October 28th, the imperial edict was issued: Han Hong and Pei Du, the soldiers who distinguished themselves in the war in Huaxi, were entrusted to report the terms to the imperial court.

古文：淮西军人，一切不问。
现代文：淮西的军人，一概不予追究。
English: Huaxi soldiers will not be prosecuted at all.

古文：宜准元敕给复二年。 
现代文：应当按照原来的敕令免征两年赋税。 
English: It should be exempted from tax for two years in accordance with the original royal decree.

古文：十一月丙戌朔，御兴安门受淮西之俘。
现代文：十一月初一，皇上驾临兴安门接受淮西的战俘。
English: On the first day of November, the emperor arrived at the Xing'an Gate to receive the prisoners of war from Huaxi.

古文：以吴元济徇两市，斩于独柳树；妻沈氏，没入掖庭；弟二人、子三人，配流，寻诛之；判官刘协等七人处斩。
现代文：让吴元济在京师的东、西两市游街示众，在独柳树斩首；吴元济之妻沈氏打入掖庭为奴婢；兄弟二人，儿子三人，发配流放，不久也都被斩首；判官刘协等七人也被斩首。
English: Wu Yuanji was made to parade through the streets of the two cities in the east and west of Beijing, and his head was beheaded in the willow tree; Wu Yuanji's wife, Shen, was forced into the courtyard as a slave; two brothers and three sons were exiled and soon beheaded; seven people, including the judge Liu Xie, were also beheaded.

古文：录平淮西功：随唐节度使、检校左散骑常侍李醖检校尚书左仆射、襄州刺史，充山南东道节度、襄邓随唐复郢均房等州观察等使；加宣武军节度使韩弘兼侍中；忠武军节度使李光颜、河阳节度使乌重胤并检校司空。
现代文：记载平定淮西的功劳：随唐节度使、检校左散骑常侍李朔心任检校尚书左仆射、襄州刺史，充任山南东道节度使、襄、邓、随、唐、复、郢、均、房等州观察使；加授宣武节度使韩弘兼任侍中；忠武军节度使李光颜、河阳节度使乌重胤均任检校司空。
English: Records of the merits of Huaxi's pacification: Li Shuoxin, a regular attendant of the Tang Dynasty, was appointed as the inspecting officer of the festival, the inspecting officer of the inspection of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the

古文：以宣武军都虞候韩公武检校左散骑常侍、鄜坊丹延节度使，以魏博行营兵马使田布为右金吾卫将军，皆赏破贼功也。
现代文：任命宣武军都虞候韩公武为检校左散骑常侍、州刺史？坊、丹、延等州节度使；任命魏博行营兵马使田布为右金吾卫将军一一一都是为了赏赐击败贼军的功劳。
English: The appointment of Han Gongwu, the commander of the Xuanwu army, as the left rider of the inspection of the school, and the state festival envoys such as Shifang, Dan and Yan as the state festival envoys; the appointment of Wei Bo, the battalion of soldiers and horses, as the general of the right King Wu, and the appointment of Tianbu as the general of the right King Wu, are all to reward the merits of defeating the thief army.

古文：甲午，恩王连薨。
现代文：十一月初九，恩王李连去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, King En-Wang Lilian passed away.

古文：以蔡州郾城为溵，析上蔡、西平、遂平三县隶焉。
现代文：把蔡州的郾城作为氵殷州，分出上蔡、西平、遂平三县隶属于该州。
English: The city of Shicheng in Caizhou was designated as Shiyan Prefecture, and the three counties of Shangcai, Xiping, and Suiping were identified as belonging to this prefecture.

古文：戊申，以淮西宣慰副使、门下侍郎、同平章事裴度守本官，赐上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户；以蔡州留后马总检校工部尚书、蔡州刺史、彰义军节度使、溵州颍陈许节度使。
现代文：十一月二十三日，任命淮西宣慰副使、刑部侍郎马总为彰义军节度留后。十二月初七，以彰义军节度使、淮西宣慰处置使、门下侍郎、同平章事裴度署理本职，赐予上柱国、晋国公，食邑三千户；任命蔡州留后马总为检校工部尚书、蔡州刺史、彰义军节度使、氵殷、颍、陈、许等州节度使。
English: On the 23rd of November, the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Huaixi Province and the General Secretary of the Criminal Investigation Department, Ma Rui, were appointed as the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Huaixi Province, and the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Huaixi Province, Ma Rui, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Huaixi Province, and the General Secretary of Criminal Investigation Department, Ma Rui, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Huaixi Province. On the 7th of December, the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Consolation of Huaixi

古文：丙子，以右庶子韩愈为刑部侍郎。
现代文：十二月二十一日，任命右庶子韩愈为刑部侍郎。
English: On December 21st, he appointed his son-in-law, Han Yu, as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：是岁，河南、河北水。
现代文：这年，河南、河北发生水灾。
English: This year, flooding occurred in Henan and Hebei.

古文：十三年春正月己酉朔，御含元殿受朝贺，礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：元和十三年春，正月初一，皇上驾临含元殿接受群臣朝贺，仪式完毕，皇上临幸丹凤楼，诏令大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor came to the Hall of the Yuan Dynasty to receive the morning greetings from the courtiers. After the ceremony, the emperor went to the Danfeng Building and issued a decree to pardon the whole world.

古文：己丑，以文宣王三十八代孙孔惟晊袭文宣公。
现代文：正月初五，以文宣王的第三十八代孙孔惟日至袭任文宣公。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the 38th generation grandson of King Munsun, Kong Wewei-tzu, assumed the post of King Munsun.

古文：庚寅，敕李师道频献表章，披露恳诚，宜令谏议大夫张宿往彼宣慰。
现代文：正月初六，敕令：因李师道多次奉献表章，表露恳切、忠诚的心迹，应当派谏议大夫张宿前往该地宣布勉慰之意。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued: because Li Shidao had repeatedly donated medals, revealing a sincere and loyal heart, he should send Zhang Shuku, the doctor of the imperial court, to the place to announce the intention of consolation.

古文：辛亥，以礼部尚书王播为成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：正月二十七日，任命礼部尚书王播为成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Rites appointed Shang Shuxu Wang Bo as the Chengdu Yin and Jianan Nishikawa Setsudou envoy.

古文：二月乙亥，御麟德殿，宴群臣，大合乐，凡三日而罢，颁赐有差。
现代文：二月二十一日，皇上驾临麟德殿，宴饮群臣，举行盛大音乐演奏，共三天才停止，向群臣颁行不同数量的赏赐。
English: On February 21st, the emperor arrived at the Lin De Palace, banqueted a group of ministers, held a grand musical performance, and stopped for a total of three days, awarding a different amount of rewards to the ministers.

古文：三月庚寅，以前剑南西川节度使李夷简为御史大夫。
现代文：三月初七，任命前剑南西川节度使李夷简为御史大夫。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, the former Jiannan Nishikawa Setsudou appointed Li Yijian as goshi taifu.

古文：两丙，以同州刺史郑絪为东都留守、都畿汝防御使。
现代文：三月十三日，任命刺史郑纟因为东都留守、都畿、汝州防御使。
English: On March 13th, he appointed Zheng Jian as the defense envoy to Dongdu, Donggi and Ruzhou because Dongdu was away.

古文：庚子，以御史大夫李夷简为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：三月十七日，任命御史大夫李夷简为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: On March 17th, Li Yijian, Goshi Daifu, was appointed as a subordinate attendant and Tongping Shangji.

古文：宰相李鄘守户部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：宰相李庸阝署理户部尚书，停止执掌政务。
English: Prime Minister Li Yongkang, acting as the head of the Household Department, resigned and ceased to be in charge of government affairs.

古文：丁未，以太子少师郑余庆为左仆射。
现代文：三月二十四日，任命太子少师郑余庆为左仆射。
English: On March 24th, Zheng Yuqing, the young master of the crown prince, was appointed as a left-hand man.

古文：辛亥，诏： 百司职田，多少不均，为弊日久，宜令逐司各收职田草粟都数，自长官以下，除留阙官物外分给。 
现代文：三月二十八日，诏令： 各个司署的职分田，多少不平均，形成弊端已经很久，应当派人逐个司署收取职分田所出产的草料、粮食总数，除了停官缺职的人以外，分给长官以下所有的人。 
English: On March 28th, the imperial edict was issued: The amount of rice produced in the duty stations of the various departments was uneven, and the defects had been formed for a long time. A person should be sent to collect the total amount of grass and grain produced by the duty stations one by one, and distribute it to all people below the chief, except for those who were suspended from duty.

古文：至银台待罪，请献德、棣二州，兼入管内租税。
现代文：王承宗派他的儿子和偏将到银台门待罪，请求将德州、棣州二州献给朝廷，并交纳辖区内的租税。
English: Wang Chengzong sent his son and the general to the Yintai Gate to plead guilty, requesting that the two states of Texas and Zhangzhou be given to the imperial court, and that taxes within the jurisdiction be paid.

古文：壬戌，前东都留守许孟容卒。
现代文：四月初九，前东都留守许孟容去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, Xu Meng Rong, the former governor of Dongdu, passed away.

古文：庚辰，诏复王承宗官爵。
现代文：四月二十七日，下诏恢复王承宗的官爵。
English: On April 27th, Wang Chengzong's official title was restored.

古文：以华州刺史郑权为德州刺史、横海军节度、德棣沧景等州观察使。
现代文：任命华州刺史郑权为德州刺史、横海军节度使、德、棣、沧、景等州观察使。
English: Appointed Zheng Quan, the chief historian of Huazhou, as the chief historian of Texas, the chief naval historian, and the chief observer of the states of De, Min, Cang and Jing.

古文：五月乙酉，凤翔节度使李惟简卒。
现代文：五月初二，凤翔节度使李惟简去世。
English: On the second day of the first lunar month of May, Li Wei Jian passed away at the Fengxiang Festival.

古文：乙未，月近心后星。
现代文：五月十二日，月亮靠近心宿的后星。
English: On the 12th of May, the moon passes close to the planet of the heart.

古文：丙辰，以忠武军节度使李光颜为滑州刺史、义成军节度使，以彰义军节度使马总为许州刺史、忠武军节度使、陈许溵蔡观察使。
现代文：五月十三日，任命忠武军节度使李光颜为滑州刺史、义成军节度使，任命彰义军节度使马总为许州刺史、忠武军节度使、陈、许、氵殷、蔡等州观察使。
English: On May 13, Li Guangyan was appointed as the secretary of the festival of the Loyalist Army and the secretary of the festival of the Yicheng Army, and Ma Zong was appointed as the secretary of the festival of the Loyalist Army and the secretary of the festival of the Loyalist Army, and Chen, Xu, Yu Yin, Cai and other state observation envoys.

古文：戊戌，以山南东道节度使李醖为凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使，辛丑，知渤海国务大仁秀检校秘书监、忽汗州都督，册为渤海国王。
现代文：五月十五日，任命山南东道节度使李朔心为凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使。五月十八日，执掌渤海国政务的大仁秀任检校秘书监、忽汗州都督，册封其为渤海国王。
English: On May 15th, Li Shuoxin was appointed as the host of the festival in Shannan, and Feng Xiangyin and Feng Xiangyu were appointed as the right-hand festival envoys. On May 18th, Dairenxiu, who was in charge of the government affairs of Bohai, was appointed as the secretary-supervisor of the school inspection and the governor of Hohangan, and was crowned as the king of Bohai.

古文：丙午，以户部侍郎孟简检校工部尚书、襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
现代文：五月二十三日，任命户部侍郎孟简为检校工部尚书、襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
English: On May 23rd, Meng Jian, the attendant of the Household Department, was appointed as the inspector of the School Inspection Department, the inspector of Xiangzhou, and the inspector of the Shannan Host Festival.

古文：六月癸丑朔，日有食之。乙丑，湖南观察使袁滋卒。
现代文：六月初一，发生日蚀。六月十三日，湖南观察使袁滋去世。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse occurred. On June 13, Yuan Zi, the chief observer of Hunan Province, passed away.

古文：丁丑，以沧景节程权为邠州刺史、邠宁节度使。
现代文：六月十五日，任命沧景节度使程权为州刺史、宁节度使。
English: On June 15th, Cheng Quan, the chief of the Cangjing Festival, was appointed as the provincial chief historian and Ning Festival chief.

古文：出内库绢三十万匹、钱三十万贯，付度支供军。
现代文：拨出内库绢三十万匹、钱三十万贯，交给度支司供给军用。
English: Three hundred thousand horses and three hundred thousand cords of money were allocated from the treasury and handed over to the governor to be supplied to the military.

古文：秋七月癸未，以新除凤翔节度使李醖为徐州刺史、武宁军节度使。
现代文：秋，七月初一，任命新授职的凤翔节度使李朔心为徐州刺史、武宁军节度使。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, the newly-appointed Fengxiang Festival envoy Li Shuoxin was appointed as the Xuzhou Military Historian and the Wu Ning Military Festival envoy.

古文：甲申，以田弘正检校司空。
现代文：七月初二，任命田弘正为检校司空。
English: On the second day of the month of July, Tian Hongzheng was appointed as the school inspector.

古文：乙酉，诏削夺淄青节度使李师道在身官爵，仍令宣武、魏博、义成、武宁、横海等五镇之师，分路进讨。
现代文：七月初三，下诏削除淄青节度使李师道现任官爵，并令宣武军、魏博军、义成军、武宁军、横海军等五处节镇的军队，对其分路进行讨伐。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of the lunar calendar, Li Shidao was made an official peer by the cancellation of the Jiaqing Festival, and the armies of five festival towns, including the Xuanwu Army, the Wei Bo Army, the Yicheng Army, the Wu Ning Army, and the Heng Navy, were ordered to crack down on their branches.

古文：辛丑，以门下侍郎、同平章事李夷简检校左仆射、同平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：七月十九日，任命门下侍郎、同平章事李夷简为检校左仆射、同平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
English: On July 19th, Li Yijian, a subordinate attendant and Tongping Zhangji, was appointed as the left attendant of the school inspection, Tongping Zhangji, the governor of Yangzhou, and the Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：己酉，诏诸道节度使先带度支营田使名者，并罢之。
现代文：七月二十七日，诏令各道节度使，原先带有度支使、营田使名义的，全部予以免除。
English: On July 27th, the imperial edict exempted all the provincial festival envoys, originally bearing the names of provincial chief envoys and camp envoys.

古文：庚戌，以左仆射郑余庆为凤翔陇右节度使。
现代文：七月二十八日，任命左仆射郑余庆为凤翔陇右节度使。
English: On July 28th, he appointed his left-hand man, Zheng Yuqing, as Fengxiang's right-hand festival envoy.

古文：八月壬子，以中书侍郎平章事王涯为兵部侍郎，罢知政事。
现代文：八月初一，任命中书侍郎、平章政事王涯为兵部侍郎，停止掌管政务。
English: On the first day of August, he appointed Zhongshu Zirong and Pingzhang Zirong Wangya as Zirong of the Military Department, and ceased to be in charge of government affairs.

古文：戊午，以尚书右丞崔从为兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：八月初七，任命尚书右丞崔从为兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the year, he appointed Shangshu Rongcheng Cui Cong as Xingyuan Yin and Shannan West Road Festival Envoy.

古文：甲戌，太白近左执法。
现代文：八月二十三日，太白金星靠近左执法星。
English: On August 23rd, the too-white Venus is close to the left law enforcement star.

古文：乙亥，敕应同司官有大功已上亲者，但非连判及勾检之官并官长，则不在回避改换之限。
现代文：八月二十四日，敕令：所有在同一司署任职，未除五服的亲属，只要不是连续兼任，以及勾稽、检校一类的官员和官长，就不在回避、改任他职的限定之内。
English: August 24th, the royal decree: all relatives who work in the same department and have not completed their five-year service, as long as they do not work continuously, as well as officials and superintendents such as inspectors and inspectors, are not within the scope of avoidance and reassignment to other positions.

古文：时刑部员外郎杨嗣复以父于陵除户部侍郎，遂以近例避嫌，请出省，不从，因有是敕。
现代文：当时刑部员外郎杨嗣复因为父亲杨於陵被授予户部侍郎，便援引近亲应当避嫌的先例，请求调出中书省，朝廷不同意，因而发布这道敕令。
English: At that time, Yang Shifu, the younger brother of the member of the Ministry of Justice, invoked the precedent that close relatives should be avoided and requested to be transferred out of the Ministry of Literature because his father, Yang Youling, had been awarded the title of Household Attendant. The Imperial Court did not agree and thus issued this edict.

古文：丁丑，木、金、水、三宿聚于轸。
现代文：八月二十六日，木星、金星、水星，三星会集在轸宿天区。
English: On August 26th, Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, and the three stars will gather in the Pleiades.

古文：戊寅，前山南西道节度使权德舆卒。
现代文：八月二十七日，前山南西道节度使权德舆去世。
English: On August 27th, the former Shannan Xi Dao festival leader Jianzhong Deyi passed away.

古文：九月甲申，以左卫将军高霞寓为单于大都护，振武麟胜节度使。
现代文：九月初三，任命左卫将军高霞寓为单于大都护、振武、麟胜军节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, General Gao Xiaye of the Left Division was appointed as the chief envoy of the Dadu, Zhenwu and Lin Sheng armies.

古文：甲辰，以户部侍郎、判度支皇甫镈同中书门下平章事，依前判度支。
现代文：九月二十三日，任命户部侍郎、掌度支事皇甫钅甫寸为中书门下同平章事，照旧掌管度支事务。
English: On September 23rd, the Household Attendant of the Household Department and the Handing of the Affairs of the Imperial Household to the Imperial Household were appointed as the subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：以卫尉卿充诸道盐铁转运使程异为工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，依前充使。
现代文：任命卫尉卿、充任诸道盐铁转运使程异为工部侍郎、中书门下同平章事，照旧充任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: He was appointed Captain of the Guards, and was appointed as the salt and iron transportation envoy to various provinces. He was also appointed as the attendant of the engineering department, and was appointed as the salt and iron transportation envoy to various provinces.

古文：是时，上切于财赋，故用聚敛之臣居相位。
现代文：当时，皇上为财赋的问题很着急，因此任用聚敛赋税的大臣居于宰相之位。
English: At that time, the emperor was very anxious about the issue of financial endowment, so the minister of tax collection was appointed to the position of prime minister.

古文：诏下，群情惊骇，宰臣裴度、崔群极谏，不纳。
现代文：诏书一下，人们心中十分惊骇，宰臣裴度、崔群极力劝谏，皇上不予采纳。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, people were very shocked. Vice-ministers Pei Du and Cui Qun tried their best to persuade the emperor not to accept it.

古文：二人请退。
现代文：二人请求退休。
English: Two have asked to retire.

古文：荧惑近哭星。
现代文：荧惑星接近哭星。
English: Fluorescent planet nears Weeping Star.

古文：丁未，出内库绢十万匹给东军。
现代文：九月二十六日，拨出内库的绢帛十万匹交给东路的军队。
English: On September 26th, a total of 100,000 horses from the treasury were given to the troops on the East Road.

古文：冬十月甲寅，吐蕃寇宥州。
现代文：冬，十月初四，吐蕃进犯宥州。
English: In winter, on the fourth day of October, the Tibetan mastiff invaded Yuzhou.

古文：壬戌，灵武奏破吐蕃二万于定远城。
现代文：十月十二日，灵武奏报，在定远城击败吐蕃军二万人。
English: On October 12th, Lingwu Song Pao defeated 20,000 Tu Wei troops in Dingyuan City.

古文：癸亥，前淮南节度使卫次公卒。
现代文：十月十三日，前淮南节度使卫次公去世。
English: On October 13th, the former Huainan governor Wei Zikong passed away.

古文：甲子，平凉镇遏兵马使郝玼奏收复原州，破吐蕃二万。
现代文：十月十四日，平凉镇遏兵马使郝王此奏报收复原州，击败吐蕃军二万人。
English: On October 14th, Pingliang's soldiers and horses sent this report to the king of Tuo to recover the original state, defeating the Tuo's army of twenty thousand.

古文：是夜，月近昴。
现代文：当夜，月亮靠近昴宿。
English: That night, the moon passed close to Shuku.

古文：丙子，以左金吾卫大将军薛平检校刑部尚书、滑州刺史，充义成军节度使；以义成军节度使李光颜为许州刺史，充忠武军节度使、陈许观察等使。
现代文：十月二十六日，任命左金吾卫大将军薛平为检校刑部尚书、滑州刺史，充任义成军节度使；任命义成军节度使李光颜为许州刺史，充任忠武军节度使、陈、许州观察使。
English: On October 26th, General Xue Ping of Zuo Kinguwei was appointed as the inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department of Shangshu and the inspector of Slanting, and was appointed as the inspector of the Yicheng Army; Li Guangyan was appointed as the inspector of the Yicheng Army, and was appointed as the inspector of Xuzhou, and was appointed as the inspector of the Loyalist Army, and the observer of Chen and Xuzhou.

古文：十一月辛巳朔，夏州破吐蕃五万。
现代文：十一月初一，夏州击败五万名吐蕃军。
English: On the first day of November, Xiazhou defeated fifty thousand Tubo troops.

古文：灵武奏攻破吐蕃长乐州罗城。
现代文：灵武奏报攻破吐蕃长乐州的罗城。
English: Lingwuso Bo defeated Luocheng of Tuoyang-Changle Prefecture.

古文：丁亥，以山人柳泌为台州刺史，为上于天台山采仙药故也。
现代文：十一月初七，任命隐居的处士柳泌为台州刺史一一一这是因为他替皇上在天台山采仙药的缘故。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the reclusive official Liu Xuan was appointed as Taizhou's magistrate - this was because he collected immortals on behalf of the emperor on Mount Tiantai.

古文：制下，谏官论之，不纳。
现代文：制命下达，谏官分辩这事，皇上不接受。
English: The emperor did not accept the fact that the eunuchs were divided into two groups after the command was issued.

古文：壬寅，以河阳节度使鸟重胤为沧州刺史、横海军节度、沧景德棣观察等使。
现代文：十一月二十二日，任命河阳节度使乌重胤为沧州刺史、横海军节度使、沧、景、德、棣等州观察使。
English: On November 22, Wu Shigetian, the chief of the Heyang Festival, was appointed as the chief historian of Cangzhou, the chief of the Hengyang Naval Festival, and the chief observer of Cangzhou, Jing, De and Handan.

古文：丁未，以华州刺史令狐楚为怀州刺史，充河阳三城、怀、孟节度使。
现代文：十一月二十七日，任命华州刺史令狐楚为怀州刺史，充任河阳三城、怀、孟节度使。
English: On November 27th, he appointed Huazhou Zhi Shi Ling Xuchu as the Waizhou Zhi Shi, and served as the Heyang Sancheng, Huai and Meng Jiedu Envoy.

古文：十二月辛亥，敕左右龙武军六军及威远营应纳课户共一千八百人衣粮并停，仍付府县收管。
现代文：十二月初二，敕令：左右龙武军六军及威远营，收取税户共一千八百人的所有衣粮，均应停止征收，并交付给府县衙收管。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th lunar month, the imperial edict: all the clothing and grain collected from the six armies of the Left and Right Longwu Armies and the Weiyuan Battalion, with a total of 1,800 tax-paying households, should be stopped and handed over to the prefectural government for collection.

古文：戊寅，军前擒到李师道将夏侯澄等四十七人，诏并释付魏博及义成军收管，要还贼中者，则量事优给放还。
现代文：十二月二十九日，在前线俘获李师道的部将夏侯澄等四十七人，诏令全部释放，交给魏博及义成军收管，想要返回贼军中的，则权衡其事优待放其返回。
English: On December 29th, Xia Houcheng, the general of Li Shidao and 47 others who were captured at the front, were all released by imperial order and handed over to Wei Bo and the Yicheng Army. If they wanted to return to the bandit army, they would have to weigh the matter and wait for their return.

古文：上顾谓宰臣曰： 人臣事君，但力行善事，自致公望，何乃好树朋党。 
现代文：皇上环顾，对宰臣们说道： 做臣子的为君王办事，只要尽力行善事，自然会得到众望，为什么喜欢树立朋党呢？
English: The emperor looked around and said to his vassals: As a vassal, you work for the king. As long as you do your best to do good deeds, you will naturally gain popularity. Why do you like to establish a party?

古文：上曰： 他人之言，亦与卿等相似，岂易辩之哉？ 
现代文：朕非常厌恶这种人。 裴度回答说： 君子和小人，都不会没有的。
English: I detest such people very much.Pei Du replied, "Neither a gentleman nor a villain can be without it.

古文：度曰： 君子小人，观其所行，当自区别矣。 上曰： 凡好事口说则易，躬行则难。
现代文：君子一类人，总是同心同德地办事；小人一类人，就结成朋党。 皇上说： 凡属好的事情，口说则容易，亲自实行则困难。
English: Nobles always act in the same spirit and in the same way; villains form cliques.The emperor said, "In all good matters, it is easy to talk about them, but difficult to carry them out.

古文：卿等即言之，须行之，勿空口说。 
现代文：卿等既这样说了，就必须这样做，不要说空话。 
English: Sir, having said this, we must do this, do not say empty words.

古文：度等谢曰： 陛下处分，可谓至矣，臣等敢不激励。
现代文：裴度等感谢说 ：陛下的处理，可以说正确到极点了，臣等怎敢不激励自己呢！
English: Pei Du and others thanked and said: Your Majesty's handling can be said to be correct to the extreme, how dare you not motivate yourself!

古文：然天下之人，从陛下所行，不从陛下所言，臣等亦愿陛下每言之则行之。 
现代文：然而天下的人，都是照着陛下所行而行，不照着陛下所言而行，臣等也希望陛下每说过的话都能照着实行。 
English: However, people all over the world act according to what His Majesty does, not according to what His Majesty says. His ministers also hope that everything His Majesty says can be put into practice.

古文：上颇欣纳。
现代文：皇上非常高兴地接受了。
English: The Emperor accepted with great pleasure.

古文：是岁，回纥、南诏蛮、渤海、高丽、吐蕃、奚、契丹、诃陵国并朝贡。
现代文：这一年，回纥、南诏蛮、渤海、高丽、吐蕃、奚、契丹、诃陵国等都前来朝贡。
English: In that year, the provinces of Yunnan, Nanzhao, Bohai, Goryeo, Tubo, Yunnan, Khitan, and Fuling all came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：十四年春正月庚辰朔，以东师宿野，不受朝贺。
现代文：元和十四年春，正月初一，因为东路的军队正在打仗，露宿于野外，不接受群臣的朝贺。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, because the troops on the East Road were fighting, they camped out in the open and did not accept the morning greetings from the ministers.

古文：壬午，复置仗内教坊于延政里。丁亥徐州军破贼二万于金乡。
现代文：正月初三，在延政里重新设置兵仗卫内的教坊。正月初八，徐州军队在金乡击败二万贼军。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the army re-established a training school in Yancheng. On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Xuzhou army defeated 20,000 thieves in Jinxiang.

古文：迎凤翔法门寺佛骨至京师，留禁中三日，乃送诣寺，王公士庶奔走舍施如不及。
现代文：把凤翔法门寺的佛骨迎至京师，留在宫禁中三日，再送回寺中，王公官员百姓奔跑着向佛寺施舍，如同来不及似的。
English: When the Buddha's bones from the Fengxiang Famen Temple were brought to the capital, kept in the palace for three days, and then returned to the temple, officials and commoners rushed to give alms to the Buddhist temple, as if it were too late.

古文：刑部侍郎韩愈上疏极陈其弊。
现代文：刑部侍郎韩愈上疏极力陈奏其弊端。
English: Han Yu Sang-soo, the head of the criminal investigation department, tried his best to expose its shortcomings.

古文：癸巳，贬愈为潮州刺史。
现代文：正月十四日，将韩愈贬为潮州刺史。
English: On the 14th day of the first month, Han Yu was relegated to a footnote in the history of Chaozhou.

古文：丙申，魏博军破贼五万于东阿。
现代文：正月十七日，魏博军在东阿击败五万贼军。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month, the Wei Bo army defeated fifty thousand thieves in East Africa.

古文：辛巳，斩前沧州刺史李宗奭于独柳树。
现代文：正月二十二日，在独柳树将前沧州刺史李宗斩首。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the year, former Cangzhou assassin Li Zong was beheaded in the Willow Tree.

古文：朝廷初除郑权沧州，宗奭拒诏不受代，既而为三军所逐，乃入朝，故诛之。
现代文：朝廷当初授予郑权沧州刺史，李宗抗拒诏命，不接受郑权取代他，后来被三军所驱逐，才入朝，因此将他处死。
English: At first, the imperial court awarded Zheng Quan the right to write the history of Cangzhou, but Li Zong resisted the imperial order and refused to accept Zheng Quan to replace him. Later, he was expelled by the three armies before he could enter the imperial court, so he was put to death.

古文：癸卯夜，月近南斗魁。
现代文：正月二十四日夜，月亮靠近斗宿的魁星。
English: On the night of the 24th day of the first month of the year, the moon was close to the Qui Xing of the Duxing.

古文：丙午，魏博军破贼万人于阳谷。
现代文：正月二十七日，魏博军在阳谷击败万名贼军。
English: On the 27th day of the first month, the Wei Bo army defeated ten thousand thieves in Yanggu.

古文：二月己酉朔，以商州刺史严谟为黔中观察使。
现代文：二月初一，任命商州刺史严谟为黔中观察使。
English: On the first day of February, Shangzhou Jinshi Yanmou was appointed as the middle school observation envoy.

古文：乙卯，敕淄青行营诸军，所至收下城邑，不得妄行伤杀，及焚烧庐舍，掠夺民财，开发坟墓，宜严加止绝。
现代文：二月初七，敕令淄青行营的各军，所到收复城邑之处，不得随意进行杀戮、伤害人口，以及焚烧屋舍，掠夺民财，开掘坟墓。上述行为应当严加禁止。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the year, the Emperor issued an order to the armies of the Qing Dynasty, which had arrived to recapture the towns, that they should not kill and injure people at will, burn houses, plunder people's wealth, and dig graves. The above-mentioned acts should be strictly prohibited.

古文：以镇、冀水灾，赐王承宗绫绢万匹。
现代文：因为镇州、冀州发生水灾，赐给王承宗绫绢一万匹。
English: Because floods occurred in Zhenzhou and Jizhou, Wang Chengzong was given ten thousand horses.

古文：辛酉，襄阳节度使孟简举郧乡镇遏使赵洁为郧乡县令，有亏常式，罚一月俸料。
现代文：二月十三日，因襄阳节度使孟简举荐郧乡镇遏使赵洁为郧乡县令，有损于常规，罚一个月的职俸津贴钱。
English: On February 13th, because of the Xiangyang Festival, Meng Jian recommended that the Xiangxiang Township prevent Zhao Jie from becoming the Xiangxiang County magistrate, which was against the rules, and he was fined one month's salary allowance.

古文：壬戌，田弘正奏，今月九日，淄青都知兵马使刘悟斩李师道并男二人首请降，师道所管十二州平。
现代文：二月十四日，田弘正上奏说，本月九日，淄青都知兵马使刘悟，砍下李师道及其两个儿子的首级请求投降，李师道所管辖的十二个州平定。
English: On February 14th, Tian Hongzheng reported that on the 9th of this month, Liu Wou, the military envoy of the Qing Dynasty, cut off the heads of Li Shidao and his two sons and asked them to surrender. The twelve provinces under the jurisdiction of Li Shidao were pacified.

古文：甲了，上御宣政殿受贺。
现代文：二月十六日，皇上驾临宣政殿接受朝贺。
English: On February 16, the Emperor arrived at the Imperial Palace to receive the morning greetings.

古文：己巳，上御兴安门受田弘正所献贼俘，群臣贺于楼下。
现代文：二月二十一日，皇上临幸兴安门接受田弘正所献的贼军俘虏，群臣在门楼下向皇上道贺。
English: On February 21st, Emperor Linxing opened the Xing'an Gate to accept the Thieves' Army prisoners presented by Tian Hongzheng. A group of courtiers congratulated the Emperor at the foot of the gate.

古文：庚午，制以淄青兵马使、金紫光录大夫、试殿中监、兼监察御史刘悟检校工部尚书、滑州刺史，充义成军节度使，封彭城郡王，食邑三千户，赐钱二万贯、庄宅各一区。
现代文：二月二十二日，决定任命淄青兵马使、金紫光禄大夫、试殿中监、兼监察御史刘悟为检校工部尚书、滑州刺史，充任义成军节度使，封彭城郡王，食邑三千户，赐钱二万贯、庄院住宅各一所。
English: On February 22nd, it was decided to appoint Liu Wugu, the inspector of the inspection of schools, as the inspector of the inspection of schools, and Liu Wugu, the inspector of the inspection of schools, as the inspector of the inspection of schools, and Liu Wugu, the inspector of the inspection of schools, as the inspector of schools, and Liu Wugu, the inspector of schools, as the inspector of schools, and Liu Wugu, the inspector of schools, as the inspector of schools, and Liu Wugu, the inspector of schools, as the inspector of schools, and Liu Wugu, the inspector of schools, as the inspector of

古文：癸酉，田弘正加检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月二十五日，田弘正加授检校司徒、中书门下同平章事。
English: On February 25th, Tian Hongzheng was awarded the title of inspector of the school, and the students of the Chinese school were awarded the same title.

古文：三月己卯朔。
现代文：三月初一为己卯日。
English: The first day of March is a holiday.

古文：丁酉，上以齐、鲁初平，宴群臣于麟德殿，赐物有差。
现代文：三月十九日，皇上因为齐鲁地区刚被平定，在麟德殿宴请群臣，赐予不同数目的物品。
English: On March 19th, because the Qilu region had just been pacified, the emperor invited a group of courtiers to a banquet at the Lin De Palace and gave them a different number of items.

古文：戊子，以华州刺史马总郓、濮、曹等州观察等使；己丑，以义成军节度使薛平为青州刺史，充平卢军节度、淄青齐登莱等州观察等使；以淄青四面行营供军使王遂为沂州刺史，充沂、海、兗、密等州都团练观察等使：析李师道所据十二州为三镇也。
现代文：三月初十，任命华州刺史马总为郓、濮、曹等州观察使；三月十一日，任命义成军节度使薛平为青州刺史，充任平卢军节度使、淄、青、齐、登、莱等州观察使；任命淄青四面行营供军使王遂为沂州刺史，充任沂、海、兖、密等州都团练使、观察使；这是把李师道所占据的十二个州分成三个节镇。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month of the year, Hua Zhi Ma, the general of Huazhou, was appointed as the observation envoy for the states of Yao, Shao and Cao; on the 11th day of the 3rd month, Xue Ping, the commander of the Yicheng Army, was appointed as the observation envoy for the state of Qingzhou; he served as the observation envoy for the states of Pinglu, Yao, Qing, Qi, Deng and Lai; Wang, the general of the Qing Army, was appointed as the observation envoy for the state of Shao; he served as the regimental training envoy and observation envoy for the

古文：庚寅，浙西观察使李翛卒。
现代文：三月十二日，浙西观察使李袺去世。
English: On March 12th, the Western Zhejiang Observation Center announced that Li Yao had passed away.

古文：辛卯，李师道妻魏氏并男没入掖庭，堂弟师贤师智、侄弘巽配流。
现代文：三月十三日，李师道之妻魏氏和儿子被打入掖庭为奴，堂弟李师贤、李师智，侄儿李弘巽发配流放。
English: On March 13th, Li Shidao's wife Wei and his son were forced into slavery, while his cousins Li Shixian and Li Shizhi and his nephew Li Hongtao were exiled.

古文：乙未，以中书舍人卫中行华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：三月十七日，任命中书舍人卫中行为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使等。
English: On March 17th, he appointed Zhongshushe Renwei Zhongzhong as the official of Huazhou, Shaoguan Defense, and Zhenguo Military.

古文：辛丑，上顾谓宰臣曰： 听受之间，大是难事。
现代文：三月二十三日，皇上顾视宰臣们说： 听取别人的意见，是一件很难的事。
English: On the 23rd of March, Emperor Gu said to his aides-de-camp: "It is difficult to listen to the opinions of others.

古文：推诚选任，所谓委寄，必合尽心；及至所行，临事不无偏党。
现代文：出于至诚地选官任职，即所谓委命寄托，必须要竭尽心力；但待到实行起来，做事就难免偏袒。
English: It is necessary to make every effort to sincerely select and appoint officials, that is, the so-called entrustment of commission; but until it is implemented, it is inevitable to do things favorably.

古文：朕临御已来，岁月斯久，虽不明不敏，然渐见物情，每于行为，务欲详审。
现代文：朕自从登基统御天下以来，岁月已经很久了，虽然不明智不敏锐，但是也逐渐看到了人情，每当采取什么行动的时候，务必仔细审察。
English: It has been a long time since I ascended to the throne. Although I am not wise or perceptive, I have gradually seen the human condition. Whenever I take any action, I must carefully examine it.

古文：比令学士集前代昧政之事，为《辩谤略》，每欲披阅，以为鉴诫耳。 
现代文：最近令学士们搜集前代政令暗昧不明的事实，编为《辩谤略》一书，每次翻阅，总是把它作为自己的鉴戒。 
English: Recently, the academicians were ordered to collect obscure facts from the previous government and compile them into a book entitled "Defamation," and every time they turn it over, they always take it as their warning.

古文：崔群对曰： 无情曲直，辩之至易；稍怀欺诈，审之实难。
现代文：崔群回答说： 不带个人感情地面对是非曲直，辨识起来很容易；稍怀欺诈不诚之心，要想认清确实很难。
English: Cui Qun replied, "It's easy to recognize a person who faces the rights and wrongs without personal feelings, but it's really hard to recognize a person who is deceptive and dishonest.

古文：故孔子有众好众恶之论，浸润肤受之说，盖以暧昧难辩故也。
现代文：因此孔子才有众好众恶难辨的议论，谗言会逐渐被接受的说法，大概都是因为暧昧不明难以认清的缘故。
English: This is why Confucius was able to make the argument that all good and all evil are indistinguishable, and the argument that criticism will gradually be accepted, probably because ambiguity is unclear and difficult to recognize.

古文：若择贤而任之，待之以诚，纠之以法，则人自归公，孰敢行伪？
现代文：如果选择贤明而任用，以诚心对待他们，以法律检察他们，则人心自然会归于公正，谁又敢进行诈伪呢？
English: If you choose wisely and appoint them, treat them with sincerity, and prosecute them with the law, then people's hearts will naturally return to justice. Who would dare to commit fraud?

古文：陛下详观载籍，以广聪明，实天下幸甚。 
现代文：陛下详细地阅读书籍，以增加聪明才智，实在是天下极大的幸福。 
English: It is a great blessing for His Majesty to read books in detail in order to increase his intelligence.

古文：以抚州司马令狐通为右卫将军。
现代文：三月二十九日，任命抚州司马令狐通为右卫将军。
English: On March 29th, Fuzhou Sima Ling Xutong was appointed as the General of the Right Division.

古文：给事中崔植封还制书，言通前刺史寿州，用兵失律，未宜奖用。
现代文：给事中崔植把任命令狐通的敕令加封退回，说令狐通先前任寿州刺史时，用兵不守纪律，不宜于优奖任用。
English: In the case, Cui Zhi ordered that the imperial order to add a seal to the appointment of Jutong be returned, saying that when Jutong was previously appointed as the governor of Shoushu, the soldiers were undisciplined and were not suitable for the award appointment.

古文：上令宰臣谕植，以通父彰有功，不忍遂弃其子，其制方行。
现代文：皇上令宰臣告诉崔植：因为令狐通的父亲令狐彰有功于国，不忍心就这样抛弃了他的儿子。这道敕令才得以执行。
English: The Emperor's order to the Vice-Minister told Cui Zhi that because Ling Fuxiong's father, Ling Fuxiang, had served the country, he could not bear to abandon his son in this way. This imperial order was carried out.

古文：夏四月戊申朔。
现代文：夏，四月初一为戊申日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is the first day of spring.

古文：乙卯，太白顺行近东井。
现代文：四月初八，太白金星顺天而行靠近井宿天区。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month, the too-white Venus moves along the sky close to the well-sleeping celestial region.

古文：戊午，以刑部尚书李愿为凤翔尹，充凤翔、陇右节度使。
现代文：四月十一日，任命刑部尚书李愿为凤翔尹，充任凤翔陇右节度使。
English: On April 11, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Li, was appointed as Feng Xiangyin, acting as Feng Xiangjun's right-hand minister.

古文：丙寅，诏： 诸道节度、都团练、防御、经等使所管支郡，除本军州外，别置镇遏、守捉、兵马者，并合属刺史。
现代文：四月十九日，诏令： 各道的节度使、都团练使、防御使、经略使等使职所管辖的支郡，除了本军州之外，另行设置镇遏使、守捉使、兵马使的，全都属于刺史管辖。
English: On April 19, it was decreed that the sub-districts under the jurisdiction of each province's ceremonial envoys, regimental drill envoys, defense envoys, economic envoys, and other envoys, in addition to their own military prefectures, should set up separate garrisons, garrisons, and garrisons, all of which should be under the jurisdiction of Zhishi.

古文：如刺史带本州团练、防御、镇遏等使，其兵马额便隶此使。
现代文：如果刺史带本州团练使、防御使、镇遏使等职，其兵马员额便隶属于该使职。
English: If a person's record includes the posts of Honshu regimental drill sergeant, defense sergeant, and counterinsurgency sergeant, his or her soldier and horse post will be subordinate to that post.

古文：如无别使，即属军事。
现代文：如果没有设置别的使职，即属于军队的事务。
English: If there is no other assignment, it is the business of the army.

古文：其有边于溪洞连接蕃蛮之处，特建城镇，不关州郡者，不在此限。 
现代文：那些边境地区，和溪洞的蕃蛮部族相连的地方，不与州郡有关的特建城镇则不在此限。 
English: Those border areas where there is a connection with the barbaric tribes of Xidong are not limited to the special towns that are not related to the county.

古文：辛未，工部侍郎、同平章事、诸道盐铁转运等使程异卒。
现代文：四月二十四日，工部侍郎、同平章事、诸道盐铁转运等使程异去也。
English: On April 24th, the attendants of the engineering department, Tongping Zhangji, and the salt and iron transporters of all roads also left Chengyuan.

古文：丙子，制金紫光录大夫、门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，兼弘文馆大学士、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户裴度可检校左仆射，兼门下侍郎、平章事、太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度、观察、处置等使。
现代文：二十九日，制令金紫光禄大夫、门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事兼弘文馆大学士、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户裴度仍任检校左仆射，兼任门下侍郎、平章政事、太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使、观察处置使等。
English: On the 29th, the order was issued that Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor, his attendant, the same middle school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school, the same junior high school,

古文：五月戊寅朔，以刑部侍郎柳公绰充盐铁转运等使。
现代文：五月初一，任命刑部侍郎柳公绰充任盐铁转运使。
English: On the first day of May, Liu Gongqiao, an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：庚辰，以楚州刺史李听为夏州刺史、夏绥银宥等州节度使。
现代文：五月初三，任命楚州刺史李听为夏州刺史、夏、绥、银、宥等州节度使。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the year, Li Xun, the Chuzhou chief historian, was appointed as the provincial chief historian of Xiazhou, Xia, Handan, Yin, Yu and other provinces.

古文：丙戌，以河东节度使、检校吏部尚书、同平章事张弘靖为吏部尚书；以忠武军节度使李光颜为邠、宁、庆节度使，仍以忠武军六千人赴镇。
现代文：五月初九，任命河东节度使、检校吏部尚书、同平章事张弘靖为吏部尚书；任命忠武军节度使李光颜为、宁、庆等州节度使，并率领忠武军的六千名士卒前往新任节镇。
English: On the 9th day of the fifth lunar month, he appointed Li Guangyan, Ning, Qing and other provincial festival envoys for the Loyalty Army Festival, and led 6,000 soldiers of the Loyalty Army to Xinren Festival Town.

古文：庚寅，以工部尚书郗士美检校刑部尚书、许州刺史，充忠武军节度使。
现代文：五月十三日，任命工部尚书郗士美为检校刑部尚书、许州刺史，充任忠武军节度使。
English: On May 13th, Shang Shuxuan Shi Mei of the Engineering Department was appointed as Shang Shuxuan and Xu Zhou Shishi of the Inspection and Punishment Department, and served as the festival envoy of the loyal military.

古文：是夜，月近心大星。
现代文：当夜，月亮靠近心宿的大星。
English: That night, the moon was close to the great star.

古文：己亥，置临海监牧，命淮南节度使兼之。
现代文：五月二十二日，设置临海监牧，命淮南节度使兼任。
English: On May 22nd, he set up the supervision of the coastal pastoral, and ordered the Huainan section to serve concurrently.

古文：敕李师古妻裴氏、女宜娘于邓州安置，李宗奭妻韦氏放出掖庭：坐李师道族人籍没，上愍之，宥以轻典。
现代文：敕令将李师古之妻裴氏、女儿宜娘安置在邓州，将李宗之妻韦氏放出掖庭，她们因为是李师道的族人，受株连而获罪，被抄没家产充公为奴，皇上怜悯她们，以轻刑予以宽赦。
English: The imperial edict placed Li Shigu's wife, Pei, and his daughter, Yi Niang, in Dengzhou, and released Li Zong's wife, Wei, from the imperial court. Because they were members of Li Shigu's clan, they were convicted by the imperial court and had their property confiscated and were enslaved. The emperor took pity on them and pardoned them with a light sentence.

古文：以宣歙观察使窦易直为润州刺史，充浙西观察使韩弘进助平淄青绢二十万匹，女乐十人。
现代文：任命宣歙观察使窦易直为润州刺史，充任浙西观察使。韩弘进献协助平定淄青所获的二十万匹绢，另献女乐伎十人。
English: The appointment of Xuancheng observation made Dou Yizhi as the historian of Rongzhou and served as the western Zhejiang observation envoy. Han Hongjin donated the two hundred thousand yakitori obtained by assisting in the suppression of indigo, and also donated ten female yakitori players.

古文：女乐还之。
现代文：女乐伎还给了他。
English: The female musician gave him back the ring.

古文：六月丁未朔。
现代文：六月初一为丁未日。
English: The first day of June is a Sunday.

古文：癸丑，以福建观察使元锡为宣州刺史、宣歙池观察使。
现代文：六月初七，任命福建观察使元锡为宣州刺史、宣、歙、池州观察使。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, the Fujian observation envoy, Yuan Xi, was appointed as the observation envoy of Xuanzhou, Zhishi, Xuan, Handan and Chizhou.

古文：庚申，以户部侍郎归登为工部尚书。
现代文：六月十四日，任命户部侍郎归登为工部尚书。
English: On June 14th, he was appointed to the post of Shosho of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：以郑州刺史裴乂为福州刺史、福建观察使。
现代文：任命郑州刺史裴为福州刺史、福建观察使。
English: Zhengzhou chief historian Pei was appointed Fuzhou chief historian and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：辛酉，敕定州大都督府复上州。
现代文：六月十五日，敕令将定州大都督府恢复为上州。
English: On June 15th, the imperial edict restored the status of Dingzhou Dadu Fu to Shangzhou.

古文：甲子，以前兵部尚书李绛检校吏部尚书、河中尹，充河中晋张慈隰观察使。
现代文：六月十八日，任命前兵部尚书李绛为检校吏部尚书、河中尹，充任河中、晋、绛、慈、隰等州观察使。
English: On June 18th, he appointed former officers of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangshu and Li Yan, as inspectors of the Ministry of Education, and appointed officers of the Ministry of Education, Shangshu and Kechu Yin, as inspectors of the provinces of Kechu, Jin, Shan, Cixi and Shan.

古文：癸酉，诏左金吾大将军胡证充京西北巡边使，所经镇戍，与守将审量利害，具事实奏闻。
现代文：六月二十七日，诏令左金吾大将军胡证充任京西北巡边使，所经过的戍守军镇，与守将一起审察、估量利弊情况，具列事实奏闻朝廷。
English: On June 27th, the Great General of the Left Kingu, Hu Sheng, was appointed as the Beijing Northwest Patrol Envoy, and together with the garrison commander, he inspected and assessed the advantages and disadvantages of the garrison towns he passed through, and reported the facts to the imperial court.

古文：秋七月丁丑。
现代文：秋，七月一日为丁丑日。
English: In autumn, July 1st is Dingwuxi Day.

古文：戊寅，汴州韩弘来朝。
现代文：七月初二，汴州的韩弘前来朝见。
English: On the second day of July, Han Hong from Ganzhou came to see me in the morning.

古文：己卯，左散骑常侍致仕薛苹卒。
现代文：七月初三，以左散骑常侍离任退休的薛苹去世。
English: On the third day of July, Xue Ping, who retired from the position of left-handed riding attendant, passed away.

古文：乙酉夜，月掩心大星。
现代文：七月初九夜，月亮掩蔽心宿的大星。
English: On the ninth night of early July, the moon hides the great star of the heart.

古文：辛巳，群臣上尊号曰元和圣文神武法天应道皇帝。
现代文：七月初五，群臣向皇上敬献尊号为元和圣文神武法天应道皇帝。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, a group of courtiers paid tribute to the emperor with the honorifics of "For Yuan" and "Shenwen Shenwu Faten Yingdao Emperor."

古文：是日，御宣政殿受册，礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：当天，皇上驾临宣政殿接受册书，仪式完毕，临幸丹凤楼，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the same day, the emperor arrived at the Xuancheng Palace to receive the record book. After the ceremony, he went to the Dangfeng Building to issue the edict of amnesty.

古文：京畿今年秋税、青苗、榷酒等钱，每贯量放四百文；元和五年已前逋租赋并放。
现代文：京畿地区今年的秋税、青苗、榷酒等钱，每贯酌量减免四百文；元和五年以前拖欠未交的租税也都免征。
English: In Gyeonggi Province, this year's autumn tax, young seedlings, wine and other money will be reduced and exempted by four hundred mon for each discretionary amount; yuan and tax arrears outstanding five years ago will also be exempted.

古文：甲午，韩弘进纟也绢二十八万匹，银器二百七十事。
现代文：七月十八日，韩弘进献绢二十八万匹，银器二百七十件。
English: On July 18, Han Hongjin donated 280,000 horses and 270 pieces of silverware.

古文：丁酉，以河阳三城怀州节度使、朝议郎、使持节怀州诸军事、守怀州刺史、兼御史大夫、赐紫金鱼袋令狐楚可朝议大夫、过中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月二十一日，任命河阳三城、怀州节度使、朝议郎、使持节怀州诸军事、署理怀州刺史、兼御史大夫、赐紫金鱼袋令狐楚仍任朝议大夫、署理中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On July 21st, he appointed Heyang Sanzhong, Waizhou Festival Delegate, Morning Deliberator, Delegate to Hold the Waizhou Military Festival, Acting Waizhou Historian, and Assistant Historian, and gave the Purple Gold Fish Bag to the Fox to remain as the Morning Deliberation Doctor, Acting Junior Secretary, and Junior Secretary of the same.

古文：壬寅，以永州刺史韦正武为邕管经略使。
现代文：七月二十六日，任命永州刺史韦正武为邕管经略使。
English: On July 26th, he appointed the Yongzhou official, Shi Wei Zhengwu, as the vice-minister of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：癸卯，以前黔中观察使魏义通为怀州刺史、河阳三城怀孟节度使。
现代文：七月二十七日，任命前黔中观察使魏义通为怀州刺史、河阳三城、怀、孟等州节度使。
English: On July 27th, Wei Yitong, who had been appointed as a prefectural middle school observation envoy, was appointed as a state festival envoy for the three cities of Huayang, Huai, and Meng.

古文：沂州军乱，杀节度使王遂。
现代文：沂州军人动乱，杀死节度使王遂。
English: Zhangzhou soldiers rioted, killing Wang Sui.

古文：甲辰，以棣州刺史曹华为沂州刺史，充沂、海、兗密等州都团练观察使。
现代文：七月二十八日，任命棣州刺史曹华为沂州刺史，充任沂、海、兖、密等州都团练观察使。
English: On July 28th, Cao Huahua, the chief historian of Luzhou, was appointed as the chief historian of Luzhou, and served as the observation envoy for the group training in the capital cities of Luzhou, Haiyang, Handan and Myitkyina.

古文：乙巳，罢晋州防御使。
现代文：七月二十九日，撤销晋州防御使。
English: On July 29, the Jinzhou Defense Envoy was revoked.

古文：八月丁未朔。
现代文：八月初一为丁未日。
English: The first day of August is a Sunday.

古文：乙酉，制宣武军节度副大使、知节度事、汴宋亳颍等州观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、守司徒、兼侍中、汴州刺史、上柱国、许国公、食邑三千户韩弘可守司徒、兼中书令，宣武军节度使。
现代文：八月初三，决定宣武军节度副大使、掌节度使事务、汴、宋、亳、颍等州观察处置使、开府仪同三司、署理司徒、兼侍中、汴州刺史、上柱国、许国公、食邑三千户韩弘仍署司徒，兼中书令，这是因为韩弘坚决辞去戎镇职务的缘故。
English: At the beginning of August 3, it was decided that Han Hong, the deputy ambassador of the Xuanwu Army, the deputy of the Xuanwu Army, the chief of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of the affairs of

古文：甲寅，于襄州谷城县置临汉监以牧马，仍令山南东道节度使兼充监牧使。
现代文：八月初七，任命吏部尚书张弘靖为检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。八月初八，在襄阳的谷城县设置临汉监以放牧马匹，并令山南东道节度使兼充监牧使。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the year, Zhang Hongjing, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the

古文：戊午，王承宗进位检校左仆射。
现代文：八月十二日，王承宗晋职为检校左仆射。
English: On August 12th, Wang Chengzong was promoted to the position of school inspector.

古文：己未，田弘正来朝。
现代文：八月十三日，田弘正前来朝见。
English: On August 13th, Tian Hongzheng came to see me in the morning.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 天下事重，一日不可旷废。
现代文：皇上对宰臣说 ：国家的事情很重要，一天都不可荒废。
English: The Emperor said to the Vice-Minister, "The affairs of state are very important, and not a single day should be wasted."

古文：若遇连假不坐，有事即诣延英请对。 
现代文：如果碰到我连日休假不上朝，有事就到延英殿来请求奏对。 
English: If I happen to be on vacation for several days and do not get up in the morning, I will go to Yan Ying Dian to ask for a match.

古文：崔群以残暑方甚，目同列将退。
现代文：崔群因为残暑正厉害，以目向同列的朝臣示意，准备退下。
English: Because of the lingering heat, Cui Qun signaled with his eyes to the courtiers in the same row that he was ready to retreat.

古文：上止之曰： 数日一见卿等，时虽暑热，朕不为劳。 
现代文：皇上制止他说 ：数日才见到你们一次，时令虽然处于暑热之中，朕不觉得疲劳。 
English: The Emperor stopped him and said, "I have only seen you once in several days, and although it is the middle of the heat of the season, I do not feel tired.

古文：久之方罢。
现代文：过了好久才罢朝。
English: It was a long time before I left.

古文：丁亥，宴田弘正与大将判官二百人于麟德殿，赐物有差。
现代文：八月二十一日，在麟德殿宴请田弘正和大将、判官等二百人，赐予不同数量的物品。
English: On August 21st, 200 people including Tian Hongzheng, generals, and judges were invited to a banquet at the Lin De Palace, where they were given different amounts of items.

古文：戊辰，陈许节度使、检校刑部尚书郗士美卒。
现代文：八月二十二日，陈许节度使、检校刑部尚书郗士美去世。
English: On August 22nd, Chen Xu Jiedu's envoy, Shang Shuxuan Shimei of the school inspection and punishment department passed away.

古文：九月丙子朔。
现代文：九月初一为丙子日。
English: The first day of September is Cixi Day.

古文：戊寅，考功郎中萧祐进古画、古书二十卷。
现代文：九月初三，考功郎中萧进献古画、古书二十卷。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, Xiao Jin, the winner of the examination, presented 20 volumes of ancient paintings and books.

古文：斩沂州乱首王弁于东市。
现代文：将沂州作乱的首领王弁斩首于东市。
English: Wang Ben, the leader of the Bozhou Rebellion, was beheaded in Dongshi.

古文：癸未，以国子祭酒李逊检校礼部尚书、许州刺史、忠武军节度、陈许溵蔡等观察使。
现代文：九月初八，任命国子祭酒李逊为检校礼部尚书、许州刺史、忠武军节度使、陈、许、氵殷、蔡等州观察使。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, Li Xun, the son of the state, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection.

古文：庚寅，贬右卫大将军田缙为衡王傅。
现代文：九月十五日，将右卫大将军田缙贬职为衡王太傅。
English: On September 15th, he demoted the right guard general Tian Qi to Heng Wang Taifu.

古文：缙前镇夏州，私用军粮四万石，强取党项羊马，致党项引吐蕃入寇故也。
现代文：这是因为田缙先前镇守夏州之时，私用军粮四万石，又强取党项部的羊马，致使党项带领吐蕃人入侵的缘故。
English: This was because, when Tian Xuan was in charge of the defense of Xia Prefecture, he used 40,000 koku of grain as private military supplies, and also forcibly took the sheep and horses of the party leader, which led to the invasion of the Tubo people by the party leader.

古文：甲午，以太子少师郑余庆兼判国子祭酒。
现代文：九月十九日，任命太子少师郑余庆兼署国子祭酒。
English: On September 19th, Zheng Yuqing, the prince's junior teacher, was appointed as the head of the party.

古文：辛丑，以田弘正兄相州刺史田融检校刑部尚书，兼太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：九月二十六日，任命田弘正之兄，相州刺史田融为检校刑部尚书，兼任太子宾客，分管东都。
English: On September 26th, Tian Rong, the elder brother of Tian Hiromasa, was appointed as the inspector of the school's criminal investigation department, and also served as the prince's guest, in charge of Dongdu.

古文：甲辰，以魏博节度使、光禄大夫、检校司徒、同平章事、兼魏州大都督长史、上柱国、沂国公、食邑三午户田弘正依前检校司徒、兼侍中，赐实封三百户。
现代文：九月二十九日，任命魏博节度使、光禄大夫、检校司徒、同平章事、兼魏州大都督府长史、上柱国、沂国公、食邑三千户田弘正仍旧为检校司徒、兼侍中，赐食邑实封三百户。
English: On September 29th, Wei Bo's festival delegate, Guanglu's doctor, school inspector, Tongping's secretary, Wei Prefecture's governor, Shangzhuo's governor, Xiangguo's governor, and 3,000 households of food villages were appointed. Tian Hongzheng was still a school inspector and a chamberlain, and 300 households of food villages were given.

古文：时弘正三上表乞留阙庭，不许。
现代文：当时田弘正三次上表请求留在朝中，皇上不许。
English: At that time, Tian Hongzheng petitioned the emperor three times to stay in the imperial court, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：乙巳，上顾谓宰臣曰： 朕读《玄宗实录》，见开元初锐意求理，至十六年已后，稍似懈倦，开元未又不及中年，何也？ 
现代文：九月三十日，皇上顾视着宰臣们说： 朕读《玄宗实录》，见开元初年时玄宗锐意追求治理国家，至开元十六年以后，似乎逐渐松懈倦怠，开元末年又不及中期，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: On September 30, the emperor looked at his aides-de-camp and said: "I have read "The True Record of Xuanzong" and see that in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Xuanzong was determined to pursue the governance of the country. After the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, it seems that he gradually relaxed and became tired. At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was not in the middle period. What is the reason for this?

古文：崔群对曰： 玄宗少历民间，身经迍难，故即位之初，知人疾苦，躬勤庶政。加之姚崇、宋璟、苏颋、卢怀慎等守正之辅，孜孜献纳，故致治平。
现代文：崔群回答说 ：玄宗年轻时接触过民间，亲身经历过艰难，因此即位的初期，懂得百姓的疾苦，亲自处理日常政务，再加上姚崇、宋王景、苏廷页、卢怀慎等坚守正道的辅弼之臣，孜孜不倦地献纳诚款，因此能达到太平盛世。
English: Cui Qun replied: When he was young, Xuanzong came into contact with the people and personally experienced hardships. Therefore, in the early days of his accession to the throne, he understood the hardships of the people and personally handled the daily affairs of government. In addition, Yao Chong, Song Wangjing, Su Tingzhe, Lu Huaixin and other auxiliary vassals who adhered to the right path, tirelessly donated sincere funds, so they could achieve peace and prosperity.

古文：及后承平日久，安于逸乐，渐远端士，而近小人。
现代文：到了后来，因为承平日久，安于舒适享乐，逐渐疏远端方正直的人而亲近小人。
English: Later, because of the long-term peace, comfortable enjoyment, gradually alienated the honest people and close to the villain.

古文：宇文融以聚敛媚上心，李林甫以奸邪惑上意，加之以国忠，故及于乱。
现代文：宇文融靠着聚敛财富来取媚皇帝的欢心，李林甫以奸邪蛊惑皇帝的心意，再加上杨国忠的原因，因此导致于祸乱。
English: Yu Wenyong relied on amassing wealth to win the Emperor's favor, while Li Linfu used treachery and evil to seduce the Emperor's heart. Together with Yang Guozhong's reasons, this led to the calamity.

古文：愿陛下以开元初为法，以天宝未为戒，即社稷无疆之福也。 
现代文：希望陛下以开元初期为楷模，而以天宝末年为鉴戒，这就是社稷无限的幸福了。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will take the early years of the founding of the People's Republic of China as a model, and the last years of Tianbao as a warning. This is the infinite happiness of the society.

古文：时皇甫镈以谄刻欺蔽在相位，故群因奏以讽之。
现代文：当时皇甫钅甫寸靠着谄媚、刻毒、欺骗、蒙蔽居于宰相之位，因此崔群趁上奏的机会进行讽喻。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager was in the position of prime minister by means of flattery, vitriol, deceit, and deception, so Cui Qunlu took the opportunity to make an allegory.

古文：冬十月丙午朔。
现代文：冬，十月初一为丙午日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is C noon.

古文：壬戌，安南军乱，杀都护李象古并家属，部曲千余人皆遇害。
现代文：十月十七日，安南军人作乱，杀死安南都护李象古，包括家属、部下一千多人都遭到杀害。
English: On October 17, Annan's soldiers mutinied and killed Annan's tutor Li Xianggu. More than 1,000 people, including Annan's family members and subordinates, were killed.

古文：丙寅，以唐州刺史桂仲武为安南都护，潮州刺史韩愈为袁州刺史。
现代文：十月二十一日，任命唐州刺史桂仲武为安南都护，潮州刺史韩愈为袁州刺史。
English: On October 21st, Gui Zhongwu, Tangzhou's chief historian, was appointed as Annan's guardian, and Han Yu, Chaozhou's chief historian, was appointed as Yuanzhou's chief historian.

古文：是月，吐蕃寇盐州。
现代文：当月，吐蕃进犯盐州。
English: In the same month, Tubo invaded Yanzhou.

古文：十一月乙亥朔，以户部尚书李鄘为太子宾客、东都留守。
现代文：十一月初一，任命户部尚书李庸阝为太子宾客、东都留守。
English: On the first day of November, Li Yongkang, the head of the household, was appointed as the prince's guest, and Dongdu stayed behind.

古文：辛卯，灵武大将史敬奉破吐蕃于盐州城下，赐敬奉实封五十户赏之。
现代文：十一月十七日，灵武大将史敬奉在盐州城下击败吐蕃，赐给史敬奉实封食邑五十户以奖赏他。
English: On November 17th, Lingwu General Shi Jingbong defeated Tu Wei at the foot of Yanzhou Castle, and rewarded him with fifty households in Shi Jingbong's fief.

古文：丁酉，以原王傅郑权为右金吾大将军，充右街使。
现代文：十一月二十三日，任命原王的太傅郑权为右金吾大将军，充作右街使。
English: On November 23rd, Zheng Quan, the grand tutor of the former king, was appointed as the Right Kingu General, and served as the Right Street Envoy.

古文：上服方士柳泌金丹药，起居舍人裴濆上表切谏，以 金石含酷烈之性，加烧炼则火毒难制。若金丹已成，且令方士自服一年，观其效用，则进御可也。 
现代文：皇上服用方士柳泌的金丹药，起居舍人裴氵上表恳切地劝谏，认为 金石包含着酷烈的性质，再加以烧炼则火毒难以控制，如果金丹已经炼成，暂且令方士自己服用一年，观察其效果，再进奉给皇上才可以。 
English: The emperor took the ambergris secreted by the sorcerer Liu, and Pei Xuan, who lived there, earnestly advised the emperor that the ambergris contained a fierce nature, and if it was burned, the fire poison would be difficult to control. If the ambergris had been refined, the sorcerer would have to take it for a year to observe its effect, and then it could be given to the emperor.

古文：上怒。
现代文：皇上发怒。
English: The Emperor was furious.

古文：己亥，贬裴濆为江陵令。
现代文：十一月二十五日，将裴氵贬职为江陵县令。
English: On November 25th, Pei Jun was demoted to the position of Gangneung County Governor.

古文：十二月乙巳朔。
现代文：十二月初一为乙巳日。
English: The first day of December.

古文：庚戌，国子祭酒郑余庆奏见任文官一品至九品，外使兼京正员官者，每月于所请秋钱每贯抽十文，修国子监，从之。
现代文：十二月初六，国子祭酒郑余庆上奏说，现任一品至九品的文官，外地的使职兼京师正员官的，每月从他们所请求的津贴钱中，每贯抽取十文，用以修国子监，皇上允从。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month of the year, Zheng Yuqing, the head of the National Children's Festival, announced that the civil servants who are currently in the 1st grade to the 9th grade, and those who work abroad and are also the official members of the Beijing Division, will be deducted 10 yuan each month from the allowance money they requested, which will be used to repair the national children's prison. The emperor agreed.

古文：乙卯，以谏议大夫、守中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔群为潭州刺史、兼御史大夫，充湖南观察使。
现代文：十二月十一日，任命谏议大夫、暂署中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔群为潭州刺史，兼御史大夫，充任湖南观察使。
English: On December 11, Cui Qun was appointed as the chief historian of Tanzhou Province, and also as the chief historian, and served as the observer of Hunan Province.

古文：为皇甫镈所谮。
现代文：这是因为遭到皇甫钅甫寸谗毁的缘故。
English: This is because it was destroyed by the emperor.

古文：及群被贬，人皆切齿于镈。
现代文：及至崔群被贬谪，人们都切齿痛恨皇甫钅甫寸。
English: By the time Cui Qun was dethroned, people hated him with a vengeance.

古文：十五年春正月甲戌朔，上以饵金丹小不豫，罢元会。
现代文：元和十五年春，正月初一，皇上因为服用金丹身体小有不适，停止元日的朝会。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor stopped the New Year's Day imperial meeting because he felt a little unwell after taking the jade.

古文：庚辰，镇冀观察使王承宗奏镇冀深等州，每州请置录事参军一员，判司三员，每县请置令一员，从之。
现代文：正月初七，镇冀观察使王承宗上奏：镇、冀、深、赵等州，每州请设置录事参军一名，判司三名，每县请设置县令一名，皇上允从。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang Chengzong made a report to the town of Hebei: Towns, Hebei, Shen, Zhao and other states, each state should set up a record to join the army, three judges, each county should set up a county magistrate, and the emperor will obey.

古文：壬午，以前湖南观察使崔倰权知户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：正月初九，任命前湖南观察使崔俊暂署户部侍郎、掌管度支。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the former Hunan observation envoy, Cui Jun, was appointed as the temporary assistant of the household department and in charge of the branch.

古文：丙戌，沂、海四州观察使府移置于兗州，改观察使曹华为兗州刺常阴晦，微雨雪，夜则晴明，凡十七日方霁。
现代文：正月十三日，沂海四州观察使府迁移到兖州安置，观察使曹华改任兖州刺史。正月二十二日，命宁节度使李光颜修筑盐州城。本月七日以后，白昼常常阴晦，有微雨雪，夜间则天气晴朗，共十七天才澄澈天晴。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, the observation envoys of the four states in the Bohai Sea were relocated to and resettled in Bozhou, and Cao Hua, the observation envoy, was appointed as the historian of Bozhou. On the 22nd day of the first month, Li Guangyan was ordered to build Yanzhou City. After the 7th day of this month, the daytime is often cloudy with light rain and snow, and the weather is fine at night, and it is clear and sunny for a total of 17 days.

古文：丙申，月犯心大星，光彩相及。
现代文：正月二十三日，月亮干犯心宿的大星，光芒互相达到。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month, the moon interfered with the great star of the heart, and the light reached each other.

古文：废齐州丰齐县入长清，废全节县入历城，废亭山县入章丘县。
现代文：废除齐州的丰齐县，划入长清；废除全节县，划入历城；废除亭山县，划入章丘县。
English: Fongqi County of Qizhou was abolished and transferred to Changqing; Quanzhi County was abolished and transferred to Licheng; Tingshan County was abolished and transferred to Zhangqiu County.

古文：义成军节度使刘悟来朝。
现代文：义成军节度使刘悟前来朝见。
English: The festival of the Yicheng Army made Liu Weng come to see the emperor.

古文：戊戌，上对悟于麟德殿。
现代文：正月二十五日，皇上在麟德殿召对刘悟。
English: On the 25th day of the first month, the emperor summoned Liu Gou to the Lin De Palace.

古文：上自服药不佳，数不视朝，人情恟惧，及悟出道上语，京城稍安。
现代文：皇上自从服药以后身体不适，几天没有上朝，人们恐惧不安，直到刘悟出宫谈了关于皇上的话，京城中才稍微安定。
English: The Emperor had been unwell since taking medicine, and had not been to the Imperial Palace for several days. People were afraid and uneasy. It was not until Liu Gou came out of the palace and spoke about the Emperor that the situation in the capital became somewhat stable.

古文：庚子，以少府监韩璀为鄜州刺史、鄜坊丹延节度使。
现代文：正月二十七日，任命少府监韩璀为州刺史？坊、丹、延等州节度使。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, Han Zheng, the minor prefectural inspector, was appointed as the state secretary of the state.

古文：是夕，上崩于大明宫之中和殿，享年四十三。
现代文：这天傍晚，皇上驾崩于大明宫的中和殿，享年四十三岁。
English: On the evening of that day, the Emperor passed away in the Nakagawa-den Hall of the Daming Palace, at the age of forty-three.

古文：时以暴崩，皆言内官陈弘志弑逆，史氏讳而不书。
现代文：当时因为是暴死，都说是宦官陈弘志弑君谋逆，然而史官却隐讳而不提此事。
English: At that time, because it was a violent death, it was said that the eunuch Chen Hongzhiqun plotted a rebellion, but the historian was secretive and did not mention the matter.

古文：辛丑，宣遗诏。
现代文：正月二十八日，宣布皇上的遗诏。
English: On the 28th day of the first month, the Emperor's last will and testament was announced.

古文：壬寅，移仗西内。
现代文：正月二十九日，将仪仗移至西内。
English: On the 29th day of the first month, the ceremonial battle was moved to the west.

古文：五月丁酉，群臣上谥曰圣神章武孝皇帝，庙号宪宗。
现代文：五月十六日，群臣奉上谥号为圣神章武孝皇帝，庙号 宪宗 。
English: On May 16th, the group of ministers received the posthumous name of Emperor Wu Xiao of the Holy Spirit, and the temple name of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：庚申，葬于景陵。
现代文：五月十九日，葬于景陵。
English: He was buried in Jingling Mausoleum on May 19.

