古文：商君者，卫之诸庶孽公子也，名鞅，姓公孙氏，其祖本姬姓也。
现代文：商君，是卫国国君姬妾生的公子。名鞅，姓公孙，他的祖先本来姓姬。
English: The merchant was the son of a concubine of Emperor Hezekiah. He was a great-great-grandson of Emperor Hezekiah, and his ancestor was originally surnamed Hezekiah.

古文：鞅少好刑名之学，事魏相公叔痤为中庶子。
现代文：公孙鞅年轻时就喜欢刑名法术之学，侍奉魏国国相公叔座，担任中庶子。
English: When he was young, Gongsun Rong liked the study of criminal magic, served as the uncle of the Wei Minister of State, and served as the middle child.

古文：公叔痤知其贤，未及进。
现代文：公叔座知道他贤能，还没来得及向魏王推荐。
English: Guncle Zhao knew that he was capable, but he did not have time to recommend him to Wei Wang.

古文：会痤病，魏惠王亲往问病，曰： 公叔病有如不可讳，将柰社稷何？ 
现代文：正赶上公叔座得了病，魏惠王亲自去看望他，说： 你的病倘有不测，国家将怎么办呢？ 
English: He was catching up with his uncle when he fell ill. Wei Hui Wang went to visit him in person and said, "What will the country do if anything happens to you because of your illness?"

古文：公叔曰： 座之中庶子公孙鞅，年虽少，有奇才，原王举国而听之。 
现代文：公叔座回答说： 我的中庶子公孙鞅，虽然年轻，却有奇才，希望大王能把国政全部交给他，由他去治理。 
English: The paternal uncle replied: My middle illegitimate son, Gongsun Yong, although young, is a prodigy. I hope that the great king can entrust him with all the affairs of state and let him govern.

古文：王嘿然。
现代文：魏惠王听后默默无言。
English: Wei Hui Wang was speechless after listening to the song.

古文：王且去，座屏人言曰： 王即不听用鞅，必杀之，无令出境。 
现代文：当魏惠王打算离开时，公叔座屏退左右随侍人员，说： 大王假如不任用公孙鞅，就一定要杀掉他，不要让他走出国境。 
English: When Wei Hui Wang was about to leave, his uncle screened off the attendants on his right and left, saying: If the great king does not appoint Gongsun Yao, he must kill him and not let him leave the country.

古文：王许诺而去。
现代文：魏王答应了他的要求就离去了。
English: Wei Wang agreed to his request and left.

古文：公叔痤召鞅谢曰： 今者王问可以为相者，我言若，王色不许我。
现代文：公叔座召来公孙鞅，道歉说： 刚才大王询问能够出任国相的人，我推荐了你。看大王的神情不会同意我的建议。
English: His uncle summoned Gongsun Yao and apologized, saying, "Just now, the great king asked who could serve as minister of state, and I recommended you. From the look on the great king's face, he would not agree to my suggestion.

古文：我方先君後臣，因谓王即弗用鞅，当杀之。
现代文：我当先忠于君后考虑臣的立场，因而劝大王假如不任用公孙鞅，就该杀掉他。
English: I should first be loyal to the prince and then consider the position of the vassal, so I advised the great king that if he did not appoint Gongsun Yao, he should kill him.

古文：王许我。
现代文：大王答应了我的请求。
English: The king agreed to my request.

古文：汝可疾去矣，且见禽。 
现代文：你赶快离开吧，不快走马上就要被擒。 
English: You'd better leave quickly. If you don't, you'll be arrested immediately.

古文：鞅曰： 彼王不能用君之言任臣，又安能用君之言杀臣乎？ 
现代文：公孙鞅说： 大王既然不能听您的话任用我，又怎么能听您的话来杀我呢？ 
English: Gongsun Yao said, "Since the Great King cannot listen to your words and appoint me, how can he listen to your words and kill me?"

古文：卒不去。
现代文：终于没有离开魏国。
English: Finally, he did not leave Wei.

古文：惠王既去，而谓左右曰： 公叔病甚，悲乎，欲令寡人以国听公孙鞅也，既又劝寡人杀之，岂不悖哉！ 
现代文：惠王离开后，对随侍人员说： 公叔座的病很严重，真是让人悲伤，他想要我把国政全部交给公孙鞅掌管，完了又劝我将他杀死，这岂不是很糊涂吗？ 
English: After Hui Wang left, he said to the attendants: "Gongzhuo's illness is very serious, it is really sad. He wants me to hand over all the affairs of state to Gongsun Yao, and then he advises me to kill him. Isn't this very confused?

古文：公叔既死，公孙鞅闻秦孝公下令国中求贤者，将修缪公之业，东复侵地，乃遂西入秦，因孝公宠臣景监以求见孝公。
现代文：公叔座死后不久，公孙鞅听说秦孝公下令在全国寻访有才能的人，要重整秦穆公时代的霸业，向东收复失地，他就西去进入秦国，依靠孝公的宠臣景监求见孝公。
English: Shortly after the death of his uncle, Gongsun Zhao heard that Qin Xiaogong had ordered a search for talented people throughout the country to reorganize the hegemony of the Qin Mu era and recover the lost land to the east. He went west to enter Qin and relied on Xiaogong's favorite vassal, Jingyan, to meet with Xiaogong.

古文：孝公既见卫鞅，语事良久，孝公时时睡，弗听。
现代文：孝公召见卫鞅，让他谈论了很长时间的国家大事，孝公一边听一边打瞌睡，一点也听不进去。
English: Xiaogong called him to see Wei Wei, and let him talk about national affairs for a long time. Xiaogong dozed off while listening, and could not listen at all.

古文：罢而孝公怒景监曰： 子之客妄人耳，安足用邪！ 
现代文：事后孝公迁怒景监说： 你的客人是大言欺人的家伙，这种人怎么能任用呢！ 
English: After the fact, the filial piety inspector became angry and said: Your guest is a deceitful fellow, how can such a person be appointed!

古文：景监以让卫鞅。
现代文：景监又用孝公的话责备卫鞅。
English: The superintendent also used the words of filial piety to reproach Wei Xuan.

古文：卫鞅曰: 吾说公以帝道，其智不开悟矣。
现代文：卫鞅说： 我用尧、舜治国的方法劝说大王，他的心志不能领会。 
English: Wei Wei said, "I tried to persuade the great king by using the methods of governing the country, but he couldn't understand my intentions.

古文：后五日，复求见鞅。 
现代文：过了几天，景监又请求孝公召见卫鞅。
English: A few days later, the superintendent again requested that Takako be summoned to the palace.

古文：鞅复见孝公，益愈，然而未中旨。
现代文：卫鞅再见孝公时，把治国之道说的淋漓尽致，可是还合不上孝公的心意。
English: When Wei Xuan said goodbye to Xiaogong, he spoke of the way of governing the country as eloquently as possible, but it still did not meet the heart of Xiaogong.

古文：罢而孝公复让景监，景监亦让鞅。
现代文：事后孝公又责备景监，景监也责备卫鞅。
English: Afterwards, Xiaogong also reproached the scenic supervisor, and the scenic supervisor also reproached Wei Xuan.

古文：鞅曰： 吾说公以王道而未入也。
现代文：卫鞅说： 我用禹、汤、文、武的治国方法劝说大王而他听不进去。
English: Wei Wei said: I used the methods of governance of Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu to persuade the great king, but he would not listen.

古文：请复见鞅。 
现代文：请求他再召见我一次。 
English: Ask him to call me again.

古文：鞅复见孝公，孝公善之而未用也。
现代文：卫鞅又一次见到孝公，孝公对他很友好，可是没任用他。
English: Wei Yao saw Xiao Gong again. Xiao Gong was very friendly to him, but did not appoint him.

古文：罢而去。孝公谓景监曰： 汝客善，可与语矣。 
现代文：会见退出后，孝公对景监说： 你的客人不错，我可以和他谈谈了。 
English: After leaving the meeting, Xiao Gong said to the supervisor: Your guest is good, I can talk to him.

古文：鞅曰： 吾说公以霸道，其意欲用之矣。
现代文：景监告诉卫鞅，卫鞅说： 我用春秋五霸的治国方法去说服大王，看他的心思是准备采纳了。
English: The inspector of scenery told Wei Zheng, and Wei Zheng said: I used the methods of governance of the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties to persuade the great king, and I saw that his mind was ready to adopt.

古文：诚复见我，我知之矣。 
现代文：如果再召见我，我就知道该说些什么啦。 
English: If you call me again, I'll know what to say.

古文：卫鞅复见孝公。公与语，不自知跶之前於席也。语数日不厌。
现代文：于是卫鞅又见到了孝公，孝公跟他谈的非常投机，不知不觉地在垫席上向前移动膝盖，谈了好几天都不觉得厌倦。
English: So Wei Wei met with Xiaogong again. Xiaogong's conversation with him was very opportunistic. He unconsciously moved his knee forward on the cushion. They talked for several days and did not feel bored.

古文：景监曰： 子何以中吾君？
现代文：景监说： 您凭借什么能合上大王的心意呢？我们国君高兴极了。 
English: The overseer said, "What can you do to win the king's heart? Our sovereign is overjoyed."

古文：吾君之驩甚也。 鞅曰： 吾说君以帝王之道比三代，而君曰： 久远，吾不能待。且贤君者，各及其身显名天下，安能邑邑待数十百年以成帝王乎？ 
现代文：卫鞅回答说： 我劝大王采用帝王治国的办法，建立夏、商、周那样的盛世，可是大王说： 时间太长了，我不能等，何况贤明的国君，谁不希望自己在位的时候名扬天下，怎么能叫我默默无闻地等上几十年、几百年才成就帝王大业呢？ 
English: Wei Wei replied: I advised the great king to adopt the imperial method of governing the country and establish a prosperous era like Xia, Shang and Zhou, but the great king said: The time is too long, I can't wait, let alone a wise sovereign, who doesn't want to be famous when he is on the throne, how can I wait for decades and hundreds of years in obscurity to achieve the great cause of the emperor?

古文：故吾以彊国之术说君，君大说之耳。
现代文：所以，我用富国强兵的办法劝说他，他才特别高兴。
English: That's why he was so happy when I convinced him to become rich and powerful.

古文：然亦难以比德於殷周矣。 
现代文：然而，这样也就不能与殷、周的德行相媲美了。 
English: However, this cannot be compared to the virtues of Yin and Zhou.

古文：孝公既用卫鞅，鞅欲变法，恐天下议己。
现代文：秦孝公任用卫鞅后不久，打算变更法度，又担心天下人议论自己。
English: Soon after Qin Xiaogong was appointed to the garrison, he planned to change the law, and he was worried that people around the world would talk about him.

古文：卫鞅曰： 疑行无名，疑事无功。
现代文：卫鞅说： 行动犹豫不决，就不会成名，办事犹豫不决就不会成功。
English: Wei Wei said: If you hesitate to act, you will not become famous, and if you hesitate to act, you will not succeed.

古文：且夫有高人之行者，固见非于世；有独知之虑者，必见敖於民。
现代文：况且超出常人的行为，本来就常被世俗非议；有独道见解的人，一定会被普通人嘲笑。
English: What's more, actions that go beyond ordinary people are often criticized by the world; people who have their own opinions are sure to be ridiculed by ordinary people.

古文：愚者闇於成事，知者见於未萌。
现代文：愚蠢的人事成之后都弄不明白，聪明的人事先就能预见将要发生的事情。
English: Stupid people don't know what's going to happen until it happens. Smart people know what's going to happen before it happens.

古文：民不可与虑始而可与乐成。
现代文：不能和百姓谋划新事物的创始而可以和他们共享成功的欢乐。
English: You can't plan the founding of a new thing with the people, but you can share the joy of success with them.

古文：论至德者不和於俗，成大功者不谋於众。
现代文：探讨最高道德的人不与世俗合流，成就大业的人不与一般人共谋。
English: Those who explore the highest morality do not merge with the mundane, and those who achieve great things do not conspire with ordinary people.

古文：是以圣人苟可以彊国，不法其故；苟可以利民，不循其礼。 孝公曰： 善。 
现代文：因此，圣人只要能够使国家强盛，就不必沿用旧的成法；只要能够利于百姓，就不必遵循旧的礼制。 孝公说： 说得好。 
English: Therefore, as long as a sage is able to make the country prosperous, he does not have to follow the old law; as long as he is able to benefit the people, he does not have to follow the old etiquette.

古文：甘龙曰： 不然。
现代文：甘龙说： 不是这样。
English: Ganlong said, "That's not true.

古文：圣人不易民而教，知者不变法而治。
现代文：圣人不改变民俗而施以教化，聪明的人不改变成法而治理国家。
English: The sages do not change the folk customs but enlighten the people, and the clever people do not change the laws but govern the country.

古文：因民而教，不劳而成功；缘法而治者，吏习而民安之。 
现代文：顺应民风民俗而施教化，不费力就能成功；沿袭成法而治理国家，官吏习惯而百姓安定。 
English: It is not difficult to succeed if you conform to the folkways and customs and carry out indoctrination; if you follow the established laws and govern the country, the officials will be accustomed and the people will be stable.

古文：卫鞅曰： 龙之所言，世俗之言也。
现代文：卫鞅说： 甘龙所说的，是世俗的说法啊。
English: Wei Wei said: What Ganlong said is a worldly saying.

古文：常人安於故俗，学者溺於所闻。
现代文：一般人安于旧有的习俗，而读书人拘泥于书本上的见闻。
English: Ordinary people are content with the old customs, while readers stick to what they read in books.

古文：以此两者居官守法可也，非所与论於法之外也。
现代文：这两种人奉公守法还可以，但不能和他们谈论成法以外的改革。
English: It's fine for these two types of people to be law-abiding, but you can't talk to them about reforms other than passing laws.

古文：三代不同礼而王，五伯不同法而霸。
现代文：三代礼制不同而都能统一天下，五伯法制不一而都能各霸一方。
English: Three generations of different etiquette can unify the world, and five different legal systems can dominate each other.

古文：智者作法，愚者制焉；贤者更礼，不肖者拘焉。 
现代文：聪明的人制定法度，愚蠢的人被法度制约；贤能的人变更礼制，寻常的人被礼制约束。 
English: Wise men make laws, fools are governed by them; men of power change manners, but common men are governed by them.

古文：杜挚曰： 利不百，不变法；功不十，不易器。
现代文：杜挚说： 没有百倍的利益，就不能改变成法；没有十倍的功效，就不能更换旧器。
English: Du Zhizhi said: Without a hundredfold benefit, it is impossible to change the method; without a tenfold effect, it is impossible to replace the old equipment.

古文：法古无过，循礼无邪。 
现代文：仿效成法没有过失，遵循旧礼不会出偏差。 
English: There is no fault in imitating the law, and there will be no deviation in following the old rituals.

古文：卫鞅曰： 治世不一道，便国不法古。
现代文：卫鞅说： 治理国家没有一成不变的办法，有利于国家就不仿效旧法度。
English: Wei Wei said: There is no immutable way to govern the country. If it is beneficial to the country, it will not follow the old laws.

古文：故汤武不循古而王，夏殷不易礼而亡。
现代文：所以汤武不沿袭旧法度而能王天下，夏殷不更换旧礼制而灭亡。
English: Therefore, Tang Wu was able to rule the world without following the old laws, and Xia Yin perished without replacing the old etiquette.

古文：反古者不可非，而循礼者不足多。 孝公曰： 善。 
现代文：反对旧法的人不能非难，而沿袭旧礼的人不值得赞扬。 孝公说： 讲的好。 
English: Those who oppose the old law cannot be blamed, while those who follow the old ritual are not worthy of praise.

古文：以卫鞅为左庶长，卒定变法之令。
现代文：于是任命卫鞅为左庶长，终于制定了变更成法的命令。
English: As a result, Wei Wei was appointed as the left subordinate commander, and finally formulated an order to change the law.

古文：令民为什伍，而相牧司连坐。
现代文：卫鞅下令把百姓十家编成一什，五家编成一伍，互相监视检举，一家犯法，十家连带治罪。
English: Wei Wei ordered the people to form ten families into one, and five families into one team, to monitor and report each other, one family to violate the law, and ten families to be punished together.

古文：不告奸者腰斩，告奸者与斩敌首同赏，匿奸者与降敌同罚。
现代文：不告发奸恶的处以拦腰斩断的刑罚，告发奸恶的与斩敌首级的同样受赏，隐藏奸恶的人与投降敌人同样的惩罚。
English: Those who do not denounce treachery will be punished with amputation; those who denounce treachery will receive the same reward as those who cut off the heads of their enemies; those who hide treachery will receive the same punishment as those who surrender to the enemy.

古文：民有二男以上不分异者，倍其赋。
现代文：一家有两个以上的成年男子不分立门户，赋税加倍。
English: If there are more than two adult males in a family, the tax will be doubled.

古文：有军功者，各以率受上爵；为私斗者，各以轻重被刑大小。
现代文：有军功的人，各按标准升爵受赏；为私事斗殴的，按情节轻重分别处以大小不同的刑罚。
English: Those who have military merits will be rewarded with a knighthood according to the standard; those who fight for private affairs will be punished with different punishments according to the severity of the circumstances.

古文：僇力本业，耕织致粟帛多者复其身。
现代文：致力于农业生产，让粮食丰收、布帛增产的免除自身的劳役或赋税。
English: Committed to agricultural production, so that the grain harvest, the increase in production of cloth and straw are exempt from their own labor or taxation.

古文：事末利及怠而贫者，举以为收孥。
现代文：因从事工商业及懒惰而贫穷的，把他们及其妻子全都没收为官奴。
English: Those who are poor because of business and idleness, they and their wives will all be confiscated as slaves.

古文：宗室非有军功论，不得为属籍。
现代文：王族里没有军功的，不能列入家族的名册。
English: Members of the royal family who do not have military merit cannot be included in the family register.

古文：明尊卑爵秩等级，各以差次名田宅，臣妾衣服以家次。
现代文：明确尊卑爵位等级，各按等级差别占有土地、房产，家臣奴婢的衣裳、服饰，按各家爵位等级决定。
English: Clarify the rank of nobility, each according to the difference of rank will occupy land, real estate, and the clothes and clothing of vassals and slaves will be determined according to the rank of each family.

古文：有功者显荣，无功者虽富无所芬华。
现代文：有军功的显赫荣耀，没有军功的即使很富有也不能显荣。
English: Those who have military merit can enjoy great glory, while those who do not have military merit, even if they are very rich, cannot enjoy great glory.

古文：令既具，未布，恐民之不信，已乃立三丈之木於国都市南门，募民有能徙置北门者予十金。
现代文：新法已经准备就绪，但还没公布，担心百姓不相信，卫鞅就在国都后边市场的南门竖起一根三丈长的木头，招募百姓中能把木头搬到北门的人赏给十金。
English: The new law has been prepared, but has not yet been announced. Worried that the people would not believe it, Wei Wei erected a three-meter-long tree at the south gate of the market behind the capital, and recruited people who could move the tree to the north gate to be rewarded with ten gold.

古文：民怪之，莫敢徙。
现代文：百姓觉得这件事很奇怪，没人敢动。
English: The people thought it was very strange, and no one dared to move.

古文：复曰 能徙者予五十金 。
现代文：又宣布 能把木头搬到北门的人赏五十金 。
English: He also announced that anyone who could move the wood to the north gate would be rewarded with fifty gold coins.

古文：有一人徙之，辄予五十金，以明不欺。
现代文：有一个人把它搬走了，当下就给了他五十金，借此表明令出必行，绝不欺骗。
English: A man took it away and immediately gave him fifty gold coins, thereby making it clear that the order had to be carried out and that he would never cheat.

古文：卒下令。
现代文：事后就颁布了新法。
English: A new law was promulgated after the fact.

古文：令行於民期年，秦民之国都言初令之不便者以千数。
现代文：新法在民间施行了整一年，秦国老百姓到国都说新法不适宜的人数以千计。
English: The new law has been implemented for a whole year among the people, and the number of Qin people who have come to the capital to say that the new law is inappropriate is in the thousands.

古文：於是太子犯法。
现代文：正当这时，太子触犯了新法。
English: It was at this time that the crown prince violated the new law.

古文：卫鞅曰： 法之不行，自上犯之。 
现代文：卫鞅说： 新法不能顺利推行，是因为上层人触犯它。 
English: Wei Wei said: The new law cannot be implemented smoothly because the upper-class people violate it.

古文：将法太子。
现代文：将依新法处罚太子。
English: The crown prince will be punished according to the new law.

古文：太子，君嗣也，不可施刑，刑其傅公子虔，黥其师公孙贾。
现代文：太子，是国君的继承人，又不能施以刑罚，于是就处罚了监督他行为的老师公子虔，以墨刑处罚了给他传授知识的老师公孙贾。
English: The crown prince, who is the heir of the sovereign, could not impose a penalty, so he punished the teacher who supervised his behavior, Gongzi Qian, and punished the teacher who taught him knowledge, Gongsun Jia, with ink.

古文：明日，秦人皆趋令。
现代文：第二天，秦国人就都遵照新法执行了。
English: The next day, the people of Qin were all in compliance with the new law.

古文：行之十年，秦民大说，道不拾遗，山无盗贼，家给人足。
现代文：新法推行了十年，秦国百姓都非常高兴，路上没有人拾别人丢的东西为己有，山林里也没了盗贼，家家富裕充足。
English: The new law has been implemented for ten years, and the people of Qin are very happy. On the road, no one picks up things lost by others for their own, there are no thieves in the mountains and forests, and every family is rich enough.

古文：民勇於公战，怯於私斗，乡邑大治。
现代文：百姓都勇于为国家打仗，不敢为私利争斗，乡村、城镇都秩序安定。
English: The people are brave enough to fight for the country, and dare not fight for their own interests. The order in villages and towns is stable.

古文：秦民初言令不便者有来言令便者，卫鞅曰 此皆乱化之民也 ，尽迁之於边城。
现代文：当初说新法不适宜的秦国百姓又有来说法令适宜的，卫鞅说： 这都是扰乱教化的人 ，于是把他们全部迁到边疆去。
English: At first, the people of Qin, who said that the new law was not appropriate, said that the law was appropriate. Wei Wei said: These are all people who disturb enlightenment, so they were all moved to the frontier.

古文：其後民莫敢议令。
现代文：此后，百姓中再没有人敢议论新法了。
English: After that, no one in the public dared to talk about the new law.

古文：於是以鞅为大良造。
现代文：于是卫鞅被任命为大良造。
English: As a result, Wei Wei was named the Great Builder.

古文：将兵围魏安邑，降之。
现代文：率领着军队围攻魏国安邑，使他们屈服投降。
English: He led the army to besiege An'yun, Wei Province, and forced them to surrender.

古文：居三年，作为筑冀阙宫庭於咸阳，秦自雍徙都之。
现代文：过了三年，秦国在咸阳建筑宫廷城阙，把国都从雍地迁到咸阳。
English: After three years, the Qin Dynasty built a palace city in Xianyang and moved the capital from Yongdi to Xianyang.

古文：而令民父子兄弟同室内息者为禁。
现代文：下令禁止百姓父子兄弟同居一室。
English: The order prohibits people from living in the same room with their parents and siblings.

古文：而集小乡邑聚为县，置令、丞，凡三十一县。
现代文：把零星的乡镇村庄合并成县，设置了县令、县丞，总共合并划分为三十一个县。
English: Sporadic townships and villages were merged into counties, and county ordinances and county magistrates were set up. In total, the mergers were divided into 31 counties.

古文：为田开阡陌封疆，而赋税平。
现代文：废除井田重新划分田塍的界线，鼓励开垦荒地，而使赋税平衡。
English: Abolish the redistribution of fields and fields, encourage the reclamation of wasteland, and make the tax balanced.

古文：平斗桶权衡丈尺。
现代文：统一全国的度量衡制度。
English: The national system of weights and measures was unified.

古文：行之四年，公子虔复犯约，劓之。
现代文：施行了四年，公子虔又犯了新法，被判处劓刑。
English: Four years after the new law went into effect, Gongzi Qian broke the new law again and was sentenced to caning.

古文：居五年，秦人富彊，天子致胙於孝公，诸侯毕贺。
现代文：过了五年，秦国富强，周天子把祭肉赐给秦孝公，各国诸侯都来祝贺。
English: Five years later, when Qin was rich and powerful, Zhou Tianzi gave the sacrificial meat to Qin Xiaogong, and princes from all over the world came to congratulate him.

古文：其明年，齐败魏兵於马陵，虏其太子申，杀将军庞涓。
现代文：第二年，齐国的军队在马陵打败了魏国的军队，俘获了魏国的太子申，杀死了将军庞涓。
English: The next year, the Qi army defeated the Wei army in Maling, captured the Wei prince Shen, and killed the general Pang Yong.

古文：其明年，卫鞅说孝公曰： 秦之与魏，譬若人之有腹心疾，非魏并秦，秦即并魏。
现代文：又过了一年，卫鞅劝说秦孝公说： 秦国和魏国的关系，就如同人得了心腹疾病，不是魏国兼并了秦国，就是秦国吞并了魏国。
English: A year later, Wei Xuan persuaded Qin Xiaogong to say: The relationship between Qin and Wei is like that of a person with a mental illness. Either Wei annexed Qin, or Qin annexed Wei.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这么说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：魏居领厄之西，都安邑，与秦界河而独擅山东之利。
现代文：魏国地处崇山峻岭的西面，都城在安邑，与秦国以黄河为界而独占了崤山以东的地利。
English: The State of Wei was located in the west of the high mountains and the capital was in An'yun. It had the Yellow River as its border with the State of Qin and monopolized the land east of Mount Lushan.

古文：利则西侵秦，病则东收地。
现代文：在形势有利的情况下就会向西进犯秦国，在形势不利的情况下就向东扩展领地。
English: If the situation is favorable, it will invade Qin to the west, and if the situation is unfavorable, it will expand its territory to the east.

古文：今以君之贤圣，国赖以盛。
现代文：如今凭借大王的贤能圣明，秦国得以繁荣昌盛。
English: Today, thanks to the great king's wisdom, Qin has been able to flourish.

古文：而魏往年大破於齐，诸侯畔之，可因此时伐魏。
现代文：而魏国去年被齐国打得大败，诸侯们纷纷背叛了它，可以趁这个机会攻打魏国。
English: But Wei was defeated by Qi last year, and the princes betrayed it one after another, so they could take advantage of this opportunity to attack Wei.

古文：魏不支秦，必东徙。
现代文：魏国抵挡不住秦国，必定会向东撤退。
English: If Wei could not resist Qin, it would certainly retreat to the east.

古文：东徙，秦据河山之固，东乡以制诸侯，此帝王之业也。 
现代文：一旦它向东撤退，秦国就占据了黄河和华山的险要地势，向东可以控制诸侯各国，这可是统一天下的帝王伟业啊。 
English: Once it retreated to the east, Qin occupied the Yellow River and Mount Huashan, a precarious position. To the east, it could control the vassal states. This was the great cause of the emperor to unify the country.

古文：孝公以为然，使卫鞅将而伐魏。
现代文：秦孝公认为很对，派遣卫鞅率领军队攻打魏国。
English: Qin Xiaogong thought it was right to send Wei Jun to lead the army to attack Wei.

古文：魏使公子卬将而击之。
现代文：魏国派公子卬领兵迎击秦军。
English: Wei sent Gongzi Shao to lead the troops to meet the Qin army.

古文：军既相距，卫鞅遗魏将公子卬书曰： 吾始与公子驩，今俱为两国将，不忍相攻，可与公子面相见，盟，乐饮而罢兵，以安秦魏。 
现代文：两军相遇对峙，卫鞅派人给魏军的将领公子卬送来一封信，写道： 我当初与公子相交甚好，如今你我同为敌对两国的将领，不忍心相互攻伐，是否可以与公子当面相见，缔结盟约，痛痛快快地喝几杯后各自撤兵，使秦国和魏国都相安无事。 
English: When the two armies met and confronted each other, Wei Wei sent a letter to the general of the Wei army, Gong Zixuan, writing: At first, I had a very good relationship with Gong Zixuan. Now that you and I are both generals of two hostile countries, we can't bear to attack each other. Can you meet with Gong Zixuan face to face, make an alliance, have a few drinks, and then withdraw your troops, so that Qin and Wei can live in peace?

古文：魏公子卬以为然。
现代文：魏公子卬认为卫鞅说的对。
English: Wei Gongzixuan thought that Wei Zixuan was right.

古文：会盟已，饮，而卫鞅伏甲士而袭虏魏公子卬，因攻其军，尽破之以归秦。
现代文：两人订立了盟约，然后设宴饮酒，然而卫鞅事先埋伏下的穿着盔甲的武士突然袭击并俘虏了魏公子卬，趁机攻打他的军队，将魏国军队彻底打败后，押着公子卬班师回国。
English: The two made a covenant, then had a banquet and drank alcohol. However, the armor-clad samurai ambushed by Wei Wei suddenly attacked and captured Wei Gongzixuan, took the opportunity to attack his army, completely defeated the Wei army, and escorted Wei Gongzixuan's squadron back to the country.

古文：魏惠王兵数破於齐秦，国内空，日以削，恐，乃使使割河西之地献於秦以和。
现代文：魏惠王的军队因为多次被齐国、秦国打败，致使国内空虚，魏国一天比一天衰弱了，魏惠王非常恐慌，于是派遣使者割让河西地区献给秦国，以求得和解。
English: Wei Hui's army was repeatedly defeated by Qi and Qin, leaving the country empty. Wei was getting weaker day by day. Wei Hui was very panicked, so he sent an envoy to cede the Hexi region to Qin in order to seek reconciliation.

古文：而魏遂去安邑，徙都大梁。
现代文：魏国于是撤离安邑，迁都大梁。
English: As a result, Wei withdrew from Anyi and moved the capital to Daliang.

古文：梁惠王曰： 寡人恨不用公叔座之言也。 
现代文：魏惠王说： 我真后悔当初没有采纳公叔座的建议。 
English: Wei Hui Wang said: I really regret that I didn't take the advice of my uncle at the beginning.

古文：卫鞅既破魏还，秦封之於、商十五邑，号为商君。
现代文：卫鞅打败魏军回来以后，秦孝公把于、商一带的十五个邑封给了他，封号是商君。
English: After Wei Xuan defeated the Wei army and returned, Qin Xiaogong gave him fifteen township fiefs in and around Shang. His fief number was Shangjun.

古文：商君相秦十年，宗室贵戚多怨望者。
现代文：商君出任秦相十年，很多王公贵族都怨恨他。
English: The merchant served as the Qin Emperor for ten years, and many princes and nobles resented him.

古文：赵良见商君。
现代文：赵良去见商君。
English: Zhao Liang went to see the merchant.

古文：商君曰： 鞅之得见也，从孟兰皋，今鞅请得交，可乎？ 
现代文：商君说： 我能见到你，是由于孟兰皋的介绍，现在我请求与您结交，可以吗？ 
English: The merchant said, "I was able to meet you because I was introduced to you by Meng Lanjuan, and now I would like to make friends with you, is that okay?"

古文：赵良曰： 仆弗敢原也。
现代文：赵良回答说： 鄙人不敢奢望。
English: Zhao Liang replied, "I don't dare to hope.

古文：孔丘有言曰： 推贤而戴者进，聚不肖而王者退。 
现代文：孔子说过： 推荐贤能，受到人民拥戴的人才会前来；聚集不肖之徒，即使能使成王业的人也会引退。 
English: Confucius once said: Only those who are recommended by the people will come forward; even those who can make themselves kings will retire.

古文：仆不肖，故不敢受命。
现代文：鄙人不才，所以不敢从命。
English: I'm not good at it, so I don't dare to do it.

古文：仆闻之曰： 非其位而居之曰贪位，非其名而有之曰贪名。 
现代文：鄙人听到过这样的说法： 不该占有的职位而占有它叫做贪位，不该享有的名声而享有它叫做贪名。 
English: I have heard it said that to hold an office which one ought not to hold, and yet hold it, is called avarice; to enjoy a reputation which one ought not to enjoy, and yet enjoy it, is called fame.

古文：仆听君之义，则恐仆贪位贪名也。
现代文：鄙人要是接受了您的情谊，恐怕那就是鄙人既贪位又贪名了。
English: If I were to accept your friendship, I am afraid it would mean that I am both greedy for position and fame.

古文：故不敢闻命。 
现代文：所以不敢从命。 
English: That's why they don't dare take their own lives.

古文：商君曰： 子不说吾治秦与？ 
现代文：商鞅说： 您对我这样治理秦国感到不高兴吗？ 
English: Shangyu said: Are you unhappy with the way I have governed Qin?

古文：赵良曰： 反听之谓聪，内视之谓明，自胜之谓强。
现代文：赵良说： 能够听从别人的意见叫做聪，能够自我省察叫做明，能够自我克制叫做强。
English: Zhao Liang said: Being able to listen to others' opinions is called "cong," being able to self-reflect is called "ming," and being able to exercise self-restraint is called "qiang."

古文：虞舜有言曰： 自卑也尚矣。 
现代文：虞舜曾说过： 自我谦虚的人被人尊重。 
English: Yu Yao once said: A self-effacing person is respected by others.

古文：君不若道虞舜之道，无为问仆矣。 
现代文：您不如遵循虞舜的主张去做，无须问我了。 
English: You might as well follow the suggestion of the gourd to do it, there is no need to ask me.

古文：商君曰： 始秦戎翟之教，父子无别，同室而居。
现代文：商鞅说： 当初，秦国的习俗和戎狄一样，父子不分开，男女老少同居一室。
English: Shangyu said: At the beginning, the custom of Qin was the same as that of Yongdi, father and son were not separated, and men and women, old and young, lived together in the same room.

古文：今我更制其教，而为其男女之别，大筑冀阙，营如鲁卫矣。
现代文：如今我改变了秦国的教化，使他们男女有别，分居而住，大造宫廷城阙，把秦国营建的像鲁国、魏国一样。
English: Now I have changed the education of Qin, so that men and women are separated, live separately, and build a large palace city, building Qin like Lu and Wei.

古文：子观我治秦也，孰与五羖大夫贤？ 
现代文：您看我治理秦国，与五羖大夫比，谁更有才干？ 
English: You see, who is more capable of governing Qin than I am, and who is more capable of governing Qin than Dr. Wu?

古文：赵良曰： 千羊之皮，不如一狐之腋；千人之诺诺，不如一士之谔谔。
现代文：赵良说： 一千张羊皮比不上一领狐腋贵重，一千个随声附合的人比不上一个人正义直言。
English: Zhao Liang said, "A thousand sheepskins are not as valuable as a whole fox, and a thousand followers are not as valuable as one person who speaks the truth."

古文：武王谔谔以昌，殷纣墨墨以亡。
现代文：武王允许大臣们直言谏诤，国家就昌盛，纣王不喜大臣进谏，因而灭亡。
English: King Wu allowed his ministers to speak their minds, and the country prospered. King Gong did not like his ministers to speak their minds, and the country perished.

古文：君若不非武王乎，则仆请终日正言而无诛，可乎？ 
现代文：您如果不反对周武王的做法，那么，请允许鄙人诗中直言而不受责备，可以吗？ 
English: If you do not object to King Zhou Wu's actions, then please allow me to speak frankly in the poem without reproach, okay?

古文：商君曰： 语有之矣，貌言华也，至言实也，苦言药也，甘言疾也。
现代文：商君说： 俗话说，外表上动听的话好比是花朵，真实至诚的话如同果实，苦口相劝、听来逆耳的话是治病的良药，献媚奉承的话是疾病。
English: The merchant said: As the saying goes, words that are beautiful on the outside are like flowers, words that are true and sincere are like fruits, words of bitter persuasion and words that are contrary to the ear are good medicine for curing diseases, and words of flattery are diseases.

古文：夫子果肯终日正言，鞅之药也。
现代文：您果真肯终日正义直言，那就是我治病的良药了。
English: If you are really willing to speak the truth all day long, that will be a good medicine for my illness.

古文：鞅将事子，子又何辞焉！ 
现代文：我将拜您为师，您为什么又拒绝与我结交呢！ 
English: I will be your teacher, why do you refuse to make friends with me!

古文：赵良曰： 夫五羖大夫，荆之鄙人也。
现代文：赵良说： 那五羖大夫，是楚国偏僻的乡下人。
English: Zhao Liang said, "Dr. Wujing is a villager from a remote area of Chu.

古文：闻秦缪公之贤而原望见，行而无资，自粥於秦客，被褐食牛。
现代文：听说秦穆公贤明，就想去当面拜见，要去却没有路费，就把自己卖给秦国人，穿着粗布短衣给人家喂牛。
English: Hearing that Qin Muxong was a wise man, he wanted to visit him in person, but there was no fare to go, so he sold himself to the Qin people, wearing a coarse cloth shirt to feed cattle.

古文：期年，缪公知之，举之牛口之下，而加之百姓之上，秦国莫敢望焉。
现代文：整整过了一年，秦穆公知道了这件事，把他从牛嘴下面提拔起来，凌驾于万人之上，秦国人没有谁不满意。
English: Exactly one year later, Qin Mu Gong found out about this matter and promoted him from the bottom of the cow's mouth, surpassing everyone. No one in Qin was dissatisfied.

古文：相秦六七年，而东伐郑，三置晋国之君，一救荆国之祸。
现代文：他出任秦相六七年，向东讨伐过郑国，三次拥立晋国的国君，一次出兵救楚。
English: He served as the Qin emperor for 67 years, fought against Zheng Guo to the east, supported the sovereign of Jin Guo three times, and once sent troops to rescue Chu.

古文：发教封内，而巴人致贡；施德诸侯，而八戎来服。
现代文：在境内施行德化。巴国前来纳贡；施德政于诸侯，四方少数民族前来朝见。
English: Dedication was carried out in the territory. Pakistan came to pay tribute; Dedication was carried out in the provinces, and the ethnic minorities from the four directions came to see the emperor.

古文：由余闻之，款关请见。
现代文：由余听到这种情形，前来敲门投奔。
English: When Yu Yu heard the situation, he came to knock on the door and rushed in.

古文：五羖大夫之相秦也，劳不坐乘，暑不张盖，行於国中，不从车乘，不操干戈，功名藏於府库，德行施於後世。
现代文：五羖大夫出任秦相，劳累不坐车，酷暑炎热不打伞，走遍国中，不用随从的车辆，不带武装防卫，他的功名载于史册，藏于府库，他的德行施教于后代。
English: Dr. Wu Qian served as Qin's minister of foreign affairs. He did not travel by car due to exhaustion, nor did he take an umbrella in the scorching heat. He traveled all over the country. He did not need a vehicle to accompany him, and he did not carry armed guards. His exploits are recorded in the annals of history and stored in the government treasury, and his virtues are taught to future generations.

古文：五羖大夫死，秦国男女流涕，童子不歌谣，舂者不相杵。
现代文：五羖夫死时，秦国不论男女都痛哭流涕，连小孩子也不唱歌谣，正在舂米的人也因悲哀而不发出相应的呼声。
English: When the fifth widower died, both men and women in Qin cried bitterly, even children did not sing ballads, and people who were eating rice did not make corresponding cries because of sadness.

古文：此五羖大夫之德也。
现代文：这就是五羖大夫的德行啊。
English: This is the virtue of Dr. Wuchang.

古文：今君之见秦王也，因嬖人景监以为主，非所以为名也。
现代文：如今您得以见秦王，靠的是秦王宠臣景监推荐介绍，这就说不上什么名声了。
English: Now you can see the Qin King, relying on the recommendation of the Qin King's favorite vassal, the overseer, which is not a great reputation.

古文：相秦不以百姓为事，而大筑冀阙，非所以为功也。
现代文：身为秦国国相不为百姓造福而大规模地营建宫阙，这就说不上为国家建立功业了。
English: As the Qin Minister of the State, he did not build the palace on a large scale for the benefit of the people, which can not be said to build a career for the country.

古文：刑黥太子之师傅，残伤民以骏刑，是积怨畜祸也。
现代文：惩治太子的师傅，用严刑酷法残害百姓，这是积累怨恨、聚积祸患啊。
English: Punishing the prince's teacher and using harsh punishments to brutalize the people is the accumulation of resentment and the accumulation of evil.

古文：教之化民也深於命，民之效上也捷於令。
现代文：教化百姓比命令百姓更深入人心，百姓模仿上边的行为比命令百姓更为迅速。
English: Indoctrinating the people is more popular than ordering the people, and the people imitate the behavior of the upper side more quickly than ordering the people.

古文：今君又左建外易，非所以为教也。
现代文：如今您却违情背理地建立权威变更法度，这不是对百姓施行教化啊。
English: Now, however, you have established the authority change law in violation of the situation and contrary to reason. This is not to educate the people.

古文：君又南面而称寡人，日绳秦之贵公子。
现代文：您又在商於封地南面称君，天天用新法来逼迫秦国的贵族子弟。
English: You are also trading in the southern part of the fiefdom, and every day you use the new law to persecute the noble children of Qin.

古文：诗曰： 相鼠有体，人而无礼，人而无礼，何不遄死。 
现代文：《经》上说： 相鼠还懂得礼貌，人反而没有礼仪，人既然失去了礼仪，为什么不快快地死呢。 
English: "The sutra" said, "Mating mice still know how to be polite, but people have no etiquette. Since people have lost etiquette, why not die quickly?"

古文：以诗观之，非所以为寿也。
现代文：照这句诗看来，实在是不能恭维您了。
English: According to this poem, I really can't compliment you.

古文：公子虔杜门不出已八年矣，君又杀祝懽而黥公孙贾。
现代文：公子虔闭门不出已经八年了，您又杀死祝欢而用墨刑惩处公孙贾。
English: It's been eight years since Xiongzi Qian didn't close the door, and you killed Zhu Huan and punished Gongsun Jia with ink.

古文：诗曰： 得人者兴，失人者崩。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 得到人心的振兴，失掉人心的灭亡。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "To gain the hearts of the people is a revival, to lose the hearts of the people is a downfall."

古文：此数事者，非所以得人也。
现代文：这几件事，都不是得人心的呀。
English: These few things are not popular.

古文：君之出也，後车十数，从车载甲，多力而骈胁者为骖乘，持矛而操闟戟者旁车而趋。
现代文：您一出门，后边跟着数以十计的车辆，车上都是顶盔贯甲的卫士，身强力壮的人做贴身警卫，持矛操戟的人紧靠您的车子奔随。
English: As soon as you go out, you are followed by dozens of vehicles, all of which are guarded by armor-plated guards, able-bodied people as bodyguards, and people with spears running alongside your car.

古文：此一物不具，君固不出。
现代文：这些防卫缺少一样，您必定不敢出门。
English: If these defences are lacking, you will not dare to go out.

古文：书曰： 恃德者昌，恃力者亡。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 凭靠施德的昌盛，凭靠武力的灭亡。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Prosperity by virtue, destruction by force.

古文：君之危若朝露，尚将欲延年益寿乎？
现代文：您的处境就好象早晨的露水，很快就会消亡一样危险，您还打算要延年益寿吗？
English: Your situation is as perilous as the morning dew, and you will soon die. Do you want to prolong your life?

古文：则何不归十五都，灌园於鄙，劝秦王显岩穴之士，养老存孤，敬父兄，序有功，尊有德，可以少安。
现代文：那为什么不把商於十五邑封地交还秦国，到偏僻荒远的地方浇园自耕，劝秦王重用那些隐居山林的贤才，赡养老人，抚育孤儿，使父兄相互敬重，依功序爵，尊崇有德之士，这样才可以稍保平安。
English: So why not hand over the merchants in the fiefdoms of fifteen counties back to Qin, go to remote and desolate places to plant gardens and cultivate, and advise the Qin King to reuse the talents of those who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, support the elderly, raise orphans, make fathers and brothers respect each other, rely on merit, and respect virtuous people, so that we can keep a little peace.

古文：君尚将贪商於之富，宠秦国之教，畜百姓之怨，秦王一旦捐宾客而不立朝，秦国之所以收君者，岂其微哉？
现代文：您还要贪图商於的富有，以独揽秦国的政教为荣宠，聚集百姓的怨恨，秦王一旦舍弃宾客而不能当朝，秦国所要拘捕您的人难道能少吗？
English: You also want to covet the wealth of merchants, take the honor of monopolizing the politics and religion of Qin as a favorite, and gather the resentment of the people. Once the Qin king abandons his guests and cannot be the emperor, can Qin arrest fewer people?

古文：亡可翘足而待。 
现代文：您丧身的日子就象抬起足来那样迅速地到来。 
English: The day of your death will come as quickly as you can lift your foot.

古文：商君弗从。
现代文：但商君没有听从赵良的劝告。
English: But the businessman did not listen to Zhao Liang's advice.

古文：後五月而秦孝公卒，太子立。
现代文：五个月之后，秦孝公去世，太子即位。
English: Five months later, Qin Xiaogong died, and the crown prince ascended to the throne.

古文：公子虔之徒告商君欲反，发吏捕商君。
现代文：公子虔一帮人告发商君要造反，国君派人去逮捕商君。
English: Nobuko Kiyoshi and a group of people denounced the merchant as a rebel, and the sovereign sent someone to arrest the merchant.

古文：商君亡至关下，欲舍客舍。
现代文：商君逃跑到边境关口，想住旅店。
English: The businessman fled to a border crossing and wanted to stay in a hotel.

古文：客人不知其是商君也，曰： 商君之法，舍人无验者坐之。 
现代文：旅店的主人不知道他就是商君，说： 商君有令，住店的人没有证件店主要连带判罪。 
English: The owner of the hotel did not know that he was the merchant, saying: The merchant has an order, the people who live in the store have no documents. The store is mainly jointly convicted.

古文：商君喟然叹曰： 嗟乎，为法之敝一至此哉！ 
现代文：商君长长地叹息说： 唉！制定新法的遗害竟然到了这样的地步！ 
English: The merchant said with a long sigh: Alas! The damage caused by the enactment of the new law has reached such a level!

古文：去之魏。
现代文：离开秦国潜逃到魏。
English: He left Qin and fled to Wei.

古文：魏人怨其欺公子卬而破魏师，弗受。
现代文：魏国人怨恨他欺骗公子卬而打败魏军，拒绝收留他。
English: The Wei people resented him for deceiving his son and defeating the Wei army, and refused to accept him.

古文：商君欲之他国。
现代文：商君打算到别的国家。
English: The businessman plans to move to another country.

古文：魏人曰： 商君，秦之贼。秦彊而贼入魏，弗归，不可。 
现代文：魏国人说： 商君，是秦国的逃犯，秦国强大，而它的逃犯跑到魏国来，不把他送还，是不行的。 
English: The Wei people said, "The merchant is a fugitive from the Qin State. The Qin State is powerful, and its fugitive has come to the Wei State. It is impossible not to send him back."

古文：遂内秦。
现代文：于是把商君送回秦国。
English: So he sent the merchant back to Qin.

古文：商君既复入秦，走商邑，与其徒属发邑兵北出击郑。秦发兵攻商君，杀之於郑黾池。
现代文：商君再回到秦国后，就潜逃到他的封地商邑，和他的部属发动邑中的士兵，向北攻击郑国谋求生路，秦国出兵攻打商君，把他杀死在郑国黾池。
English: After the merchant returned to Qin, he absconded to his fief, the merchant town of Meng, and his subordinates mobilized the soldiers in the town and attacked Zheng to the north to seek a way of survival. Qin sent troops to attack the merchant and killed him in Zheng's Dianchi.

古文：秦惠王车裂商君以徇，曰： 莫如商鞅反者！ 
现代文：秦惠王把商君五马分尸示众，说： 不要像商鞅那样谋反！ 
English: Qin Hui Wang divided the merchant's body into five horses and showed it to the public, saying: "Don't plot a rebellion like Shang Kui!

古文：遂灭商君之家。
现代文：于是就诛灭了商君全族。
English: So he wiped out the merchant's entire family.

古文：太史公曰：商君，其天资刻薄人也。迹其欲干孝公以帝王术，挟持浮说，非其质矣。
现代文：太史公说：商君，他的天性就是个残忍少恩的人，考察他当初用帝王之道游说孝公，凭借着虚饰浮说，不是他自身的资质。
English: Tai Shikong said: The merchant, his nature is a cruel and ungrateful person, considering that he initially lobbied for filial piety with the emperor's way, relying on false ornaments, is not his own qualification.

古文：且所因由嬖臣，及得用，刑公子虔，欺魏将卬，不师赵良之言，亦足发明商君之少恩矣。
现代文：再说凭靠着国君宠臣景监的推荐，等到被任用，就刑罚公子虔，欺骗魏将公子卬，不听赵良的规劝，足以证明商君残忍少恩了。
English: Moreover, by relying on the recommendation of the king's favorite vassal Jingjun Ram, when he was appointed, he punished Gongzi Qian, deceived Wei general Gongzi Yao, and did not listen to Zhao Liang's exhortation, which is enough to prove that the merchant was cruel and ungrateful.

古文：余尝读商君开塞耕战书，与其人行事相类。
现代文：我曾经读过商君开塞耕战的书籍，其内容和他本身的作为相类似。
English: I once read a book about a merchant who started a ploughing war, the content of which was similar to his own actions.

古文：卒受恶名於秦，有以也夫！
现代文：但最终还是在秦国落得个谋反的恶名，这是有缘故的呀！
English: But in the end, it was the Qin State that gained the notoriety of plotting a rebellion. There is a reason for this!

