古文：◎河渠二
现代文：河渠二
English: Canal Two

古文：○黄河下
现代文：黄河下
English: Under the Yellow River

古文：万历元年，河决房村，筑堤洼子头至秦沟口。
现代文：万历元年，黄河在房村决堤，在洼子头至秦沟口筑堤。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Fangcun, and the dike was built from Waizi Tou to Qin Goukou.

古文：明年，给事中郑岳言： 运道自茶城至淮安五百馀里，自嘉靖四十四年河水大发，淮口出水之际，海沙渐淤，今且高与山等。
现代文：第二年，给事中郑岳说： 漕运之道从茶城至淮安五百余里，自嘉靖四十四年开始河水大发，淮口出水之处，海水沉沙渐渐淤积，今将近与山等高。
English: In the second year, Zheng Yue said in a report: The rowing route is more than 500 miles from Cha Cheng to Huai'an. Since the 44th year of Jiajing, the river has been flooded, and where the water comes out of Huaikou, the seawater sediment has gradually silted up, and is now nearly as high as the mountain.

古文：自淮而上，河流不迅，泥水愈淤。
现代文：自淮以上，河流不快，泥水更加淤积。
English: Above the Huai River, the river is not pleasant, and the muddy water is more silted up.

古文：於是邳州浅，房村决，吕、梁二洪平，茶城倒流，皆坐此也。
现代文：于是邳州水浅，房村决堤，湍急的上吕梁洪和下吕梁洪水面相平，茶城河河水倒流，都是因为海沙淤积所致。
English: As a result, the shallow water in Luzhou, the bursting of the dike in Fangcun, the rapid flooding of the Upper Luliang and Lower Luliang floods, and the backward flow of the Chacheng River were all caused by the silting of the sea.

古文：今不治海口之沙，乃日筑徐、沛间堤岸，桃、宿而下，听其所之。
现代文：现在如果不治理海口的淤沙，而天天在徐、沛之间修筑堤岸，桃、宿以下，听任其所流。
English: Now, if we do not control the silting of the estuary, but build a dike between Xu and Pei every day, the peach and the inn below will be left to flow.

古文：民之为鱼，未有已时也。 
现代文：百姓遭受水灾，没有停止的时候。 
English: When the people were flooded, they didn't stop.

古文：因献宋李公义、王令图浚川爬法。
现代文：于是进献宋李公义、王令图疏通河道的爬梳法。
English: As a result, Song Li Gongyi and Wang Lingtu introduced the method of combing river channels.

古文：命河臣勘奏，从其所言。
现代文：命河臣勘察上奏，依从其意见。
English: He ordered Kawatomi to investigate and report, and obeyed his opinion.

古文：而是年秋，淮、河并溢。
现代文：而逭年秋天，淮河、黄河一齐泛滥。
English: However, in the autumn of 2000, the Huaihe River and the Yellow River both flooded.

古文：明年八月河决砀山及邵家口、曹家庄、韩登家口而北，淮亦决高家堰而东，徐、邳、淮南北漂没千里。
现代文：第二年八月，黄河在踢山及邵家口、曹家庄、韩登家口以北决堤，淮河也在高家堰以束决堤，徐、邳、淮南北冲毁淹没千里。
English: In August of the following year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kishan and north of Shaojiakou, Caojiazhuang and Handenjiakou. The Huai River also broke through the dike at Gaojia Weir with a bundle, and flooded thousands of kilometers in the north and south of Xu, Handan and Huai.

古文：自此桃、清上下河道淤塞，漕艘梗阻者数年，淮、扬多水患矣。
现代文：从此，桃、清上下河道淤塞，漕逗船只受阻数年，淮、扬多水患。
English: Since then, the upper and lower river channels of the Peach and Qing Dynasties have been silted up, rowing boats have been blocked for several years, and floods have occurred in the Huai and Yang Dynasties.

古文：总河都御史傅希挚改筑砀山月堤，暂留三口为泄水之路。
现代文：总河都御史傅希挚改筑殇山月形堤，暂时保留三口为泄水之路。
English: The governor of Sichuan Province, Gu Shi Fu, earnestly proposed to build a crescent-shaped dike on Shaoshan Mountain, temporarily reserving three dikes as a spillway.

古文：其冬，并塞之。
现代文：这年冬天，一齐被堵塞。
English: This winter, they were all blocked.

古文：四年二月，督漕侍郎吴桂芒言： 淮、扬洪潦奔冲，盖缘海宾汊港久堙，入海止云梯一径，致海拥横沙，河流泛溢，而盐、安、高、宝不可收拾。
现代文：万历四年二月，督漕侍郎吴桂芳奏道： 淮、扬大水奔流冲刷，是因海滨汊港长久堵塞，入海只有云梯一条小水道，致使海水聚沙堵塞，河水泛滥，而盐、安、高、实不可治理。
English: In February of the fourth year of Wanli, Wu Guifang, the conductor of the rowing boat, sang: The rushing water of the Huai and Yang rivers is due to the long-term blockage of the seashore of Da Nang, and only a small waterway enters the sea. As a result, the seawater is blocked by sand, the river floods, and the salt, safety, high, and real are not controllable.

古文：国家转运，惟知急漕，而不暇急漕，而不暇急民，故朝廷设官，亦主治河，而不知治海。
现代文：朝廷的物资转运，祇知道急于漕运，而无暇为百姓着急，所以朝廷设立官职，也主张治河，而不知治海。
English: The imperial court's material transshipment, only to know that it was in a hurry to row, but had no time to worry about the people, so the imperial court set up an official position, and also advocated river management, but did not know how to manage the sea.

古文：请设水利佥事一员，专疏海道，审度地利，如草湾及老黄河皆可趋海，何必专事云梯哉？ 
现代文：请设立水利余事一员，专门疏通海道，勘测地形，如草湾和老黄河都可以直奔大海，何必专门治理云梯呢？ 
English: Please set up a member of the water conservancy department to specially clear the sea route and survey the terrain. For example, Caowan and the old Yellow River can go straight to the sea. Why do we need to specially manage the cloud ladder?

古文：帝优诏报可。
现代文：皇帝以优礼诏书回复同意。
English: The emperor replied with an Imperial Rescript.

古文：桂芳复言： 黄水抵清河与淮合流，经清江浦外河，东至草湾，又折而西南，过淮安、新城外河，转入安东县前，直下云梯关入海。
现代文：吴桂芳又奏道： 黄河水直抵清河与淮河合流，流经清江浦外河，柬至草湾，又转折而向西南，经过淮安、新城外河，转入安柬县前，直下云梯关入海。
English: Wu Guifang also played: The Yellow River flows straight to the confluence of the Qing River and the Huai River, flows through the Pujiang Outer River of the Qing River, Cambodia to Caowan, and then turns to the southwest, passes through Huai'an and Xincheng Outer River, turns into the front of Angkham County, and goes straight down to Yuntiguan into the sea.

古文：近年关口多壅，河流日浅，惟草湾地低下，黄河冲决，骎骎欲夺安东入海，以县治所关，屡决屡塞。
现代文：近年关口多壅塞，河流一天天变浅，只有草湾地势低下，黄河冲决，欲迅疾地直夺安束入海，因为关系到县治所在地，多次溃决多次堵塞。
English: In recent years, the gate is often blocked, the river is getting shallower day by day, only Caowan has a low terrain, the Yellow River has burst, and it wants to rush directly into the sea, because it is related to the county seat, it has been blocked many times.

古文：去岁，草湾迤东自决一口，宜於决口之西开挑新口，以迎埽湾之溜，而於金城至五港岸筑堤束水。
现代文：去年，草湾以束自决一口，应当在决口之西开挖新口，以迎埽湾之急流，而在金城至五港岸筑堤束水。
English: Last year, Caowan made a self-determination that a new mouth should be dug to the west of the breach to meet the rapids of the Bohai Bay, and a dike should be built to collect water from the coast of Jincheng to Wugang.

古文：语云： 救一路哭，不当复计一家哭。 
现代文：俗语说： 救一路哭，不应当又计较一家哭。
English: As the saying goes: If you cry all the way to the rescue, you shouldn't cry for the whole family.

古文：今淮、扬、凤、泗、邳、徐不啻一路矣。
现代文：今进、扬、凤、泗、邳、徐不止一路了。
English: Imjin, Yang, Feng, Yao, Yao and Xu have more than one way to go.

古文：安东自众流汇围，只文庙、县署仅存椽瓦，其势垂陷，不如委之，以拯全淮。 
现代文：安东由于众水汇合，只有文庙、县官署仅存椽瓦，其情势已快被淹没，不如舍弃，以拯救整个淮河流域。 
English: Due to the confluence of many waters in Andong, only the Wen Temple and the county government office are left with only shingle. The situation is almost submerged. It is better to abandon it in order to save the entire Huaihe River basin.

古文：帝不欲弃安东，而命开草湾如所请。
现代文：皇帝不想舍弃安柬，而命令如所奏请的那样开凿草湾。
English: The emperor did not want to give up Cambodia, and ordered the Bay of Grass to be excavated as requested.

古文：八月，工竣，长万一千一百馀丈，塞决口二十二，役夫四万四千。
现代文：八月，工程竣工，长一万一千一百余丈，堵塞决口二十二处，用工四万四千。
English: In August, the project was completed, with a length of 11,100 m, 22 blockages, and 44,000 workers.

古文：帝以海口开浚，水患渐平，赉桂芳等有差。
现代文：皇帝认为海口开通，水患逐渐平息，赐予吴桂芳等不同的奖赏。
English: The emperor believed that Haikou had been opened and the flood had gradually subsided, and gave Wu Guifang various awards.

古文：未几，河决韦家楼，又决沛县缕水堤，丰、曹二县长堤，丰、沛、徐州、睢宁、金乡、鱼台、单、曹田庐漂溺无算，河流啮宿迁城。
现代文：不久，黄河在韦家楼决堤，又在沛县缕水堤决口，丰、曹二县长堤，丰、沛、徐州、睢宁、金乡、鱼台、单、曹良田房舍淹没不可计算，河水侵蚀宿迁城。
English: Soon, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Weijialou, and at the break of the dike in Pei County, the long dike in Feng, Cao II County, Feng, Pei, Xuzhou, Huning, Jinxiang, Yutai, Shan, Cao Liang, the houses were flooded beyond calculation, and the river water eroded the relocation city.

古文：帝从桂芳请，迁县治、筑土城避之。
现代文：皇帝依从吴桂芳的奏请，迁移县治、筑土城防止水患。
English: The emperor complied with Wu Guifang's request to relocate the county seat and Tsukudocho to prevent flooding.

古文：於是御史陈世宝请复老黄河故道，言： 河自桃源三义镇历清河县北，至大河口会淮入海。
现代文：于是御史陈世童请求恢复老黄河故道，说： 黄河从桃源三义镇经过清河县北，到大河口汇合淮入海。
English: Therefore, the historian Chen Shidong requested the restoration of the old way of the Yellow River, saying: The Yellow River flows from Taoyuan Sanyi Town through the north of Qinghe County to the confluence of the Huai River and the sea at the mouth of the Great River.

古文：运道自淮安天妃庙乱淮而下，十里至大河口，从三义镇出口向桃源大河而去，凡七十馀里，是为老黄河。
现代文：漕运之道从淮安天妃庙横渡淮而下，十里到大河口，从三义镇出口向桃源大河而去，一共七十余里，这一段称为老黄河。
English: The rowing route from Huai'an Temple of Heaven's Princess across the Huai and down, ten miles to the estuary, from the exit of Sanyi Town to the Taoyuan River, a total of more than seventy miles, this section is called the Old Yellow River.

古文：至嘉靖初，三义镇口淤，而黄河改趋清河县南与淮会，自此运道不由大河口而径由清河北上矣。
现代文：到嘉靖初年，三义镇河口淤塞，而黄河改道直奔清河县南与淮汇合，从此，漕运之道不经由大河口而直接经由清河北上。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the estuary of Sanyi Town was silted up, and the Yellow River was diverted to go straight to the south of Qinghe County to meet the Huai River. From then on, the paddling route did not go through the large estuary, but directly through the north of Qinghe.

古文：近者，崔镇屡决，河势渐趋故道。
现代文：近来，崔镇屡次决堤，河势逐渐直奔故道。
English: Recently, Cui Town has repeatedly breached the dike, and the river is gradually heading straight for the old road.

古文：若仍开三义镇口引河入清河北，或令出大河口与淮流合，或从清河西别开一河，引淮出河上游，则运道无恐，而淮、泗之水不为黄流所涨。 
现代文：假若仍然开辟三义镇口引河流入清河北，或者让其出大河口与淮水汇合，或者从清河西另开一河，引淮出河上游，那么，漕运之道就没有使人担心的事发生，而淮、泗之水也不会因为黄河水而泛滥。 
English: If the Sanyi Township is still opened up to lead the river into the northern part of the Qing River, or to let the large estuary of the Qing River merge with the Huai River, or to open another river from the west of the Qing River to lead the Huai River upstream, then there will be nothing to worry about in the way of rowing, and the water of the Huai River and the Yangtze River will not flood because of the Yellow River water.

古文：部覆允行。
现代文：工部回复允许施行。
English: The Ministry of Works replied that it was permissible.

古文：桂芳言： 淮水向经清河会黄河趋海。
现代文：吴桂芳说： 淮水向来是经清河汇于黄河直奔大海。
English: Wu Guifang said: Huai Shui has always been through the Qinghe confluence in the Yellow River straight to the sea.

古文：自去秋河决崔镇，清江正河淤淀，淮口梗塞。
现代文：从去年秋天黄河在崔镇决堤，清江正河淤积，淮口梗塞。
English: Since last autumn, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Cui Town, the Qingjiang Zhenhe River was silted up, and the Huaikou River was blocked.

古文：於是淮弱河强，不能夺草湾入海之途，而全淮南徙，横灌山阳、高、宝间，向来湖水不逾五尺，堤仅七尺，今堤加丈二，而水更过之。
现代文：于是淮水弱黄河水强。不能夺得草湾入海的去路，而全淮向南迁，横灌山阳、高、宝之间，向来湖水不超过五尺，而湖堤仅仅七尺，今湖堤加高一丈二尺，而水更加超过湖堤。
English: As a result, the Huai River water is weak and the Yellow River water is strong. It is not possible to win the way for Caowan to enter the sea, but the whole Huai River has moved to the south, filling the mountains and mountains, high and low, and the lake water has always been no more than five feet, but the lake wall is only seven feet. Now the lake wall is one foot higher, and the water is even more than the lake wall.

古文：宜急护湖堤以杀水势。 
现代文：应当赶快保护湖堤以控制水势。 
English: It is urgent to protect the lake's dike to control the water level.

古文：部议以为必淮有所归，而后堤可保，请令桂芳等熟计。
现代文：工部商议认为一定要让淮水有所归向，然后湖堤纔可保住，请让吴桂芳等仔细策划。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Commerce deliberated that the Huai Water must be redirected, and then the lake dike can be preserved. Please let Wu Guifang and others plan carefully.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：开河、护堤二说未定，而河复决崔镇，宿、沛、清、桃两岸多坏，黄河日淤垫，淮水为河所迫，徙而南，时五年八月也。
现代文：开辟河道、保护湖堤两种主张没有确定，而黄河又在崔镇决堤，宿、沛、清、桃两岸多被冲坏，黄河河床一天天淤塞增高，淮水被黄河所逼迫，改道向南流，当时是万历五年八月。
English: The two propositions of opening up the river channel and protecting the lake dike were not determined, and the Yellow River broke through the dike in Cui Town, and most of the banks of the Ying, Pei, Qing and Peach Rivers were washed away. The silting of the Yellow River bed increased day by day, and the Huai River was forced by the Yellow River to change its course to the south. It was August in the fifth year of the Wanli calendar.

古文：希挚议塞决口，束水归漕。
现代文：傅希挚主张堵塞决口，束水归于漕河。
English: Fu Xi earnestly advocated the plugging of the breach, and the water was attributed to the Caohe River.

古文：桂芳欲冲刷成河，以为老黄河入海之路。
现代文：吴桂芳欲冲刷现成河道，以作为老黄河入海之路。
English: Wu Guifang wants to scour the existing river channel as a way for the old Yellow River to enter the sea.

古文：帝令急塞决口，而俟水势稍定，乃从桂芳言。
现代文：皇帝命令赶快堵塞决口，而等水势稍为平定，然后依从吴桂芳的主张。
English: The emperor ordered to quickly plug the breach, and wait for the water to calm down a bit, and then follow Wu Guifang's suggestion.

古文：时给事中汤聘尹议导淮入江以避黄，会桂芳言： 黄水向老黄河故道而去，下奔如驶，淮遂乘虚涌入清口故道，淮、扬水势渐消。 
现代文：当时，给事中汤聘尹主张引导淮水入长江以避黄河，正逢吴桂芳说： 黄水向老黄河故道流去，下游奔流如脱缰之马，淮水于是乘虚涌入清口故道，淮、扬水势渐渐减退。 
English: At that time, in the middle of the matter, Tang Binyin advocated guiding the Huai Shui into the Yangtze River to avoid the Yellow River, just as Wu Guifang said: The yellow water flows towards the old Yellow River, and the downstream rushes like a runaway horse. Therefore, the Huai Shui took advantage of the false influx into the Qingkou old road, and the Huai and Yangtze water potential gradually decreased.

古文：部议行勘，以河、淮既合，乃寝其议。
现代文：工部商议进行勘察，因为河、淮已经汇合，就搁置了这个主张。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Trade discussed to carry out a survey, but since the Huai River and the Huai River had already merged, they shelved this proposal.

古文：管理南河工部郎中施天麟言： 淮、泗之水不下清口而下山阳，从黄浦口入海。
现代文：管理南河工部郎中施天麟说：淮、泗的水不流往清口而流住山阳，从黄浦口入海。
English: Shi Tianlin, vice-minister of the South River Engineering Department, said: The water of the Huai River and the Yangtze River does not flow to the Qingkou, but flows to the Shanyang, and enters the sea from the Huangpu mouth.

古文：浦口不能尽泄，浸淫高、宝邵伯诸湖，而湖堤尽没，则以淮、泗本不入湖，而今入湖故也。
现代文：浦口不能完全排泄，渐渐浸入高、宝邵伯各湖，而湖堤尽被淹没，就是因为淮、泗之水本来不入湖，而今入湖的缘故。
English: Pukou can not be completely drained, gradually immersed in the lakes of Gao and Bao Shao Bo, and the lake embankment was completely flooded, because the water of Huai and Zou originally did not enter the lake, but now it is entering the lake.

古文：淮、泗之入湖者，又缘清口向未淤塞，而今淤塞故也。
现代文：淮、泗之水入湖的原因，又是因为清口从未淤塞，而今淤塞的缘故。
English: The reason why water from the Huai River and the Yangtze River enters the lake is also because the clearings have never been silted up, but are now silted up.

古文：清口之淤塞者，又缘黄河淤塞日高，淮水不得不让河而南徙也。
现代文：清口之所以淤塞的原因，又正是因为黄河的淤塞一天天增高，淮水不得不避让黄河而改道向南。
English: The reason why the Qingkou is silted up is precisely because the silting of the Yellow River is increasing day by day, and the Huai Shui has to avoid the Yellow River and divert to the south.

古文：盖淮水并力敌黄，胜负或亦相半，自高家堰废坏，而清口内通济桥、朱家等口淮水内灌，於是淮、泗之力分，而黄河得以全力制其敝，此清口所以独淤於今岁也。
现代文：淮水合力抗黄，胜负也许各半，自从高家堰废坏，而清口内通济桥、朱家等口淮水向内灌注，于是淮、泗的力量分散，而黄河能够全力抑制它的弱势，这就是清口所以惟独在今年淤塞的原因。
English: Since Gaojia Weir has been damaged, and the clearings of Tongji Bridge and Zhuji Bridge and other mouths of the clearings have been filled with water, the power of the Huai River and the Yangtze River has been dispersed, and the Yellow River can do its best to suppress its weakness. This is the reason why the clearings are only blocked this year.

古文：下流既淤，则上流不得不决。
现代文：下游已经淤塞，上游就不得不决堤。
English: The lower reaches have been silted up and the upper reaches have had to be broken up.

古文：每岁粮艘以四五月毕运，而堤以六七月坏。
现代文：每年，运粮之船于四五月运完，而堤岸在六七月溃决。
English: Every year, the grain ships are completed in April and May, and the embankment is breached in June and July.

古文：水发之时不能为力，水落之后方图堵塞。
现代文：水发之时没有办法，水落之后纔设法堵塞。
English: At the time of the flood, there was nothing we could do, but after the flood, we tried to plug it up.

古文：甫及春初，运事又迫，仅完堤工，於河身无与。
现代文：刚到春初，漕运之事又迫近，仅仅完成筑堤工程，对于河床没有治理。
English: At the beginning of spring, the matter of rowing transport was again imminent. Only the dike-building project was completed, and there was no regulation of the riverbed.

古文：河身不挑则来年益高。
现代文：河床淤泥不挑挖，来年又会增高。
English: If the riverbed silt is not dredged, it will rise again next year.

古文：上流之决，必及於徐、吕，而不止於邳、迁；下流之涸，将尽乎邳、迁，而不止於清、桃。
现代文：上游的溃决，必定殃及于徐、旦，而不会停止于邳、迁；下游的堵塞，将完全在邳、迁，而不只是在清、桃。
English: The upstream blockage will certainly affect Xu and Dan, and will not stop at Zou and Qian; the downstream blockage will be completely in Zou and Qian, and not just in Qing and Peach.

古文：须不惜一年粮运，不惜数万帑藏，开挑正河，宽限责成，乃为一劳永逸。
现代文：必须不惜一年的粮运，不惜数万的库藏，开挖正河，放宽完成时间，然后成为一劳永逸的工程。
English: It is necessary to excavate the Zhenghe River at the cost of a year of grain transportation and tens of thousands of storage, relax the completion time, and then become a once and for all project.

古文：至高家堰、朱家等口，宜及时筑塞，使淮、泗并力足以敌黄，则淮水之故道可复，高、宝之大患可减。
现代文：至于高家堰、朱家等口，应当及时筑堤堵塞，使淮、泗合力足以抗黄，那么淮水的故道就可以恢复，高、宝的大患就可减少。
English: As for the Gaojia weir, Zhujia and other mouths, it is necessary to build a dike and block it in time to make the Huai and Huai forces strong enough to resist yellowing, then the old way of Huai water can be restored, and the great danger of Gao and Bao can be reduced.

古文：若兴、盐海口堙塞，亦宜大加疏浚。
现代文：如果兴、盐海口堵塞，也应当大加疏通。
English: If the Xing and Yanhai entrances are blocked, they should also be greatly unblocked.

古文：而湖堤多建减水大闸，堤下多开支河。
现代文：而于湖堤应多建减水大闸，堤下应多开挖支河。
English: However, more sluice gates should be built on the lake embankment, and more tributaries should be excavated under the embankment.

古文：要未有不先黄河而可以治淮，亦未有不疏通淮水而可以固堤者也。 
现代文：总之，没有不先治黄河而可以治淮，也没有不疏通淮水而可以使堤防牢固之事。
English: In short, there is no way to control the Yellow River without first controlling the Huai River, and there is no way to make the dike strong without dredging the Huai River.

古文：事下河漕诸臣会议。
现代文：此事下交到管理河漕诸臣聚会商议。
English: The matter was referred to a meeting of the vassals who manage the river for discussion.

古文：淮之出清口也，以黄水由老黄河奔注，而老黄河久淤，未几复塞，淮水仍涨溢。
现代文：淮出于清口之时，因黄河水由老黄河奔注，而老黄河长久淤塞，不久又堵塞，淮水仍然泛滥。
English: When the Huaihe emerged from the Qingkou, because the Yellow River water poured from the old Yellow River, and the old Yellow River was silted up for a long time, it was soon blocked again, and the Huaihe still flooded.

古文：给事中刘铉请亟开通海口，而简大臣会同河漕诸臣往治。
现代文：给事中刘铉请求赶快开通海口，而选择大臣会同管理河漕诸臣前往治理。
English: During the incident, Liu Bei requested that the estuary be opened as soon as possible, and selected the minister to go to the government together with the ministers who managed the river.

古文：乃命桂芳为工部尚书兼理河漕，而裁总河都御史官。
现代文：然后命吴桂芳为工部尚书兼管理河漕，而裁减总河都御史官。
English: Then, Wu Guifang was appointed as the head of the engineering department and the management of the river, and the chief historian of the capital was reduced.

古文：桂芳甫受命而卒。
现代文：吴桂芳刚刚接受任命便死去。
English: Wu Guifang died just after being appointed.

古文：六年夏，潘季驯代。时给事中李涞请多浚海口，以导众水之归。
现代文：六年夏季，潘季驯代替吴桂芳当时，给事中李涑请求多疏通海口，以便引导众水流归大海。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, when Pan Ji Tame replaced Wu Guifang, Li Xi asked for more dredging of the estuary in order to guide the flow of water to the sea.

古文：给事中王道成则请塞崔镇决口，筑桃、宿长堤，修理高家堰，开复老黄河。
现代文：给事中王道成则请求堵塞崔镇决口，修筑桃、宿长堤，修理高家堰，恢复老黄河。
English: In the middle of the matter, Wang Daocheng requested to block the outlet of Cui Town, build peach and innkeeper embankments, repair Gaojia Weir, and restore the old Yellow River.

古文：并下河臣议。
现代文：一齐下交河臣商议。
English: Let's all go to Kawatomi for discussion.

古文：季驯与督漕侍郎江一麟相度水势，言：
现代文：潘季驯与督漕侍郎江一麟测量水势，说：
English: Pan Ji Tame and his overseer, Langjiang Yilin, measuring the water level, said:

古文： 海口自云梯关四套以下，阔七八里至十馀里，深三四丈。
现代文：海口从云梯关第四道弯以下，宽七八里甚至十余里不等，深三四丈。
English: Haikou from the fourth bend of Yundiguan, the width varies from seven to eight miles or even more than ten miles, and the depth is three to four meters.

古文：欲别议开凿，必须深阔相类，方可注放，工力甚难。
现代文：要想另外选择地方开凿入海口，必须深宽相似，纔可注入和排放，工程用人力非常艰难。
English: In order to choose another place to excavate the entrance to the estuary, the depth and width must be similar, the straw can be injected and discharged, and the manpower for the project is very difficult.

古文：且未至海口，乾地犹可施工，其将入海之地，潮汐往来，与旧口等耳。
现代文：而且未到海口，干地还可以施工，其快要入海之处，潮水涨落，与旧口一样了。
English: Moreover, before reaching the estuary, dry land can still be constructed, and where it is about to enter the sea, the tides rise and fall, just like the old estuary.

古文：旧口皆系积沙，人力虽不可浚，水力自能冲刷，海无可浚之理。
现代文：旧口都是积沙，人力虽不可疏通，水力自能冲刷，海口无可疏通之理。
English: The old estuaries are all sand deposits, and although they cannot be cleared by manpower, they can be washed away by water power, and there is no reason why the estuaries cannot be cleared.

古文：惟当导河归海，则以水治水，即浚海之策也。
现代文：只应当刊导河水归入大海，即以水治水，造就是疏通海口的办法。
English: The only thing that should be done is to channel the river water into the sea, that is, to control the water with water, which is the way to clear the estuary.

古文：河亦非可以人力导，惟当缮治堤防，俾无旁决，则水由地中，沙随水去，即导河之策也。
现代文：河水也不可以用人力引导，只应当整治堤防，不让河堤溃决，即水由地中，沙随水去，这就是引导河水的办法。
English: River water can not be guided by human power, only the dike should be repaired, and the dike should not be broken, that is, the water should go from the ground, and the sand should follow the water. This is the way to guide the river water.

古文：频年以来，日以缮堤为事，顾卑薄而不能支，迫近而不能容，杂以浮沙而不能久。
现代文：连年以来，每天都把修整堤防作为大事，祇是低矮单薄而不能支撑，水迫近而不能容纳，掺合细沙而不能持久。
English: For years, the repair of the dike has been a major event every day, but it is low and thin and cannot be supported, the water is approaching and cannot be accommodated, and it is mixed with fine sand and cannot last.

古文：是以河决崔镇，水多北溃，为无堤也。
现代文：所以河在崔镇决口，水多向北溃流，因为没有堤防。
English: Therefore, the river breaks at Cui Town, and the water mostly flows northward, because there is no dike.

古文：淮决高家堰、黄浦口，水多东溃，堤弗固也。
现代文：淮水在高家堰、黄浦口决口，水多向东溃流，堤防也就不牢固了。
English: The Huai River broke through the Gaojia Weir and the Huangpu Estuary, and the water mostly broke to the east, making the dike unstable.

古文：不咎制之未备，而咎筑堤为下策，岂通论哉！
现代文：不追究规划的不完备，而追究修筑堤防为下策，这哪里是宏通的议论呢！
English: Not investigating the incompleteness of the plan, but investigating the construction of a dike as the next step, where is the discussion of Hongtong!

古文：上流既旁溃，又岐下流而分之，其趋云梯入海口者，譬犹强弩之末耳。
现代文：上游已经旁溃，下游又分成几条支流，其直奔云梯入海口的河水，就像强弩所发的箭已经飞到末端一样。
English: The upstream has broken off, and the downstream is divided into several tributaries, which go straight to the water at the mouth of the sea, just as the arrow sent by the strong dragonfly has flown to the end.

古文：水势益分则力益弱，安能导积沙以注海？
现代文：水势更加分散，则水力就更加减弱，怎么能把积沙引导入大海泥？
English: If the water potential is more dispersed, then the hydraulic force is more weakened. How can the accumulated sand be guided into the sea mud?

古文：故今日浚海急务，必先塞决以导河，尤当固堤以杜决，而欲堤之不决，必真土而勿杂浮沙，高厚而勿惜钜费，让远而勿与争地，则堤乃可固也。
现代文：所以，今天疏通海口的紧急事务，必须首先堵塞决口以引导河水，尤其应当加固堤防以杜绝溃塌，而要想堤防不演决，必须全用泥土而不掺合细沙，建高加厚而不惜巨资，速离水道而不与水争地，则堤防纔可牢固。
English: Therefore, in the urgent matter of dredging the estuary today, it is necessary to first block the breach to guide the river water. In particular, the dike should be strengthened to prevent collapse. If the dike is not to fail, it is necessary to use all the soil without mixing fine sand, build high and thicken at great expense, and quickly leave the waterway without competing with the water, then the dike can be firmly anchored.

古文：沿河堤固，而崔镇口塞，则黄不旁决而冲漕力专。
现代文：沿河堤防牢固，而崔镇口堵塞，则黄水就不再旁决而专力冲刷漕道。
English: If the embankment along the river is well protected, but the entrance to Cui Town is blocked, then the yellow water will no longer stand by and concentrate on washing the canal.

古文：高家堰筑，朱家口塞，则淮不旁决而会黄力专。
现代文：高家堰筑堤，朱家口堵塞，则淮水就不再旁决而专汇于黄水之力。
English: If the Gaojia Weir is built and the Zhujiakou is blocked, then the Huai Water will no longer be a bystander and will concentrate on the power of the Yellow Water.

古文：淮、黄既合，自有控海之势。
现代文：淮、黄已经汇合，自然就有控制海口之势。
English: Huai and Huang have converged, and there is a natural tendency to control Haikou.

古文：又惧其分而力弱也，必暂塞清江浦河，而严司启闭以防其内奔。
现代文：又害怕其水势分散而水力减弱，必须暂时堵塞清江浦河口，而严格掌管开关以防其内流。
English: Fearing that its water potential will be dispersed and its hydraulic power will be weakened, it is necessary to temporarily block the mouth of the Qingjiangpu River and strictly control the switch to prevent its inflow.

古文：姑置草湾河，而专复云梯以还其故道。
现代文：姑且放弃草湾诃，而专力恢复云梯以还其故道。
English: Let's abandon the grass embankment, and concentrate on restoring the cloud ladder to return it to its former way.

古文：仍接筑淮安新城长堤，以防其末流。
现代文：然后接续修筑淮安新城长堤，以防止下游分流。
English: Then, the long embankment of Huai'an New Town was successively repaired to prevent downstream diversion.

古文：使黄、淮力全，涓滴悉趋於海，则力强且专，下流之积沙自去，海不浚而辟，河不挑而深，所谓固堤即以导河，导河即以浚海也。 
现代文：使黄、淮水力集于一体，涓滴之水全都直奔于海，则水力强大而且专一，下游的积沙自然就会被冲去，海口用不着疏浚而自会开辟，河床用不着深挖而自会加深，这就是所说的加固堤防就能引导河水，引导河水就能疏通海口。
English: If the Huanglong and Huaihe hydropower are integrated and the trickling water all goes straight to the sea, then the hydropower is powerful and specific. The downstream sediment will naturally be washed away. The estuary does not need to be dredged and will open itself, and the riverbed does not need to be dug deep and will deepen itself. This is the so-called reinforced dike can guide the river water, and guide the river water can dredge the estuary.

古文：又言： 黄水入徐，历邳、宿、桃、清，至清口会淮而东入海。
现代文：又说：黄水流入徐州，经过邳、宿、桃、清，到清口汇合于淮水而往东流入大海。
English: He also said: "The Yellow Water flows into Xuzhou, passing through Handan, Shunde, Taobao and Qing, and flows into the sea in the east at Qingkou, where it meets Huai Shui.

古文：淮水自洛及凤，历盱、泗，至清口会河而东入海。
现代文：淮水从洛到凤，经过盱、泗，到清口汇合于河水而往东流入大海。
English: The Huai Shui flows from Luo to Feng, passing through Handan and Handan, and merges with the river at Qingkou before flowing into the sea in the east.

古文：此两河故道也。
现代文：这是两条河的故道。
English: This is a tale of two rivers.

古文：元漕江南粟，则由扬州直北庙湾入海，未尝溯淮。
现代文：元时漕运江南的粮食，则由扬州直接往北在庙湾流入海口，不曾逆流往淮。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, the grain that was rowed south of the Yangtze River flowed directly north from Yangzhou into Haikou at Miaowan, and did not flow back to Huai.

古文：陈瑄始堤管家诸湖，通淮为运道。
现代文：从陈逭开始筑堤于管家诸湖，接通淮水为运道。
English: From the time of Chen Xi, dikes were built in the Butler Lakes to connect the Huai River as a transportation route.

古文：虑淮水涨溢，则筑高家堰堤以捍之，起武家墩，经大、小涧至阜宁湖，而淮不东侵。
现代文：担心淮水泛滥，则筑高家堰堤来护卫，起于武家墩，经过大、小涧到阜宁湖，而使淮水不往东流。
English: Worried about the flooding of the Huai River, they built the Gaojia Weir to protect it, starting from Bujiayuan, passing through the large and small rivers to Funing Lake, so that the Huai River would not flow to the east.

古文：又虑黄河涨溢，则堤新城北以捍之，起清江浦，沿钵池山、柳浦湾迤东，而黄不南侵。
现代文：又担心黄河泛滥，则筑堤于新城之北来护卫，起于清江浦，沿着钵池山、柳浦湾往东，而使黄水不往南流。
English: Worried about the Yellow River flooding, they built a dike to the north of Xincheng to protect it, starting from Qingjiangpu and going east along Dianchi Mountain and Liupu Bay, so that the yellow water would not flow south.

古文：其后，堤岸渐倾，水从高堰决入，淮郡遂同鱼鳖。
现代文：这以后，堤岸逐渐倾斜，水从高堰决口流入，淮郡于是淹没如同鱼鳖。
English: After that, the embankment gradually tilted, water flowed in from the Gaoyan breach, and Huai County was submerged like a fish bait.

古文：而当事者未考其故，谓海口壅闭，宜亟穿支渠。
现代文：而当事者没有考察其原因，认为海口堵塞，应当赶快开凿支渠。
English: However, the parties concerned did not examine the cause of the blockage and believed that the estuary was blocked and that a branch canal should be dug as soon as possible.

古文：讵知草湾一开，西桥以上正河遂至淤阻。
现代文：哪知草湾一开，西桥以上正河道于是淤塞。
English: As soon as Cochiso Bay was opened, the main river above West Bridge was blocked.

古文：夫新河阔二十馀丈，深仅丈许，较故道仅三十之一，岂能受全河之水？
现代文：新河宽二十余丈，深仅一丈左右，与故道相比只有三十分之一，哪里能容纳全河之水呢？
English: The new river is more than twenty meters wide and only about one meter deep, which is only one-thirtieth of the old road. Where can the water of the whole river be contained?

古文：下流既壅，上流自溃，此崔镇诸口所由决也。
现代文：下游已经堵塞，上游自然就会演决，这是崔镇诸口决堤的原因。
English: The downstream has been blocked, the upstream will naturally play out, which is the reason for the break of the embankment in Zhukou, Cui Town.

古文：今新河复塞，故河渐已通流，虽深阔未及原河十一，而两河全下，沙随水刷，欲其全复河身不难也。
现代文：今新河又被堵塞，旧河逐渐通流，虽深宽不及原河的十分之一，而两河一齐下奔，积沙随水冲刷，想要完全恢复其河床就不难了。
English: Now the new river is blocked again, the old river is gradually flowing, although the depth and width are less than one-tenth of the original river, and the two rivers run down together, the sediment is washed away with the water, and it is not difficult to completely restore its riverbed.

古文：河身既复，阔者七八里，狭亦不下三四百丈，滔滔东下，何水不容？
现代文：河床已经恢复，宽的地方七八里，窄的地方也不少于三四百丈，滔滔之水向东流下，还有什么水不能容纳呢？
English: The bed of the river has been restored, the width is seven or eight miles, the narrowness is no less than three or four hundred meters, the gushing water flows eastward, what other water can not be accommodated?

古文：匪惟不必别凿他所，即草湾亦可置勿浚矣。
现代文：不只是不必另外开凿支渠，即使草弯也可以放弃不去疏通。
English: Not only do you not have to dig another branch canal, even the grass bend can be abandoned without dredging.

古文：故为今计，惟修复陈瑄故迹，高筑南北两堤，以断两河之内灌，则淮、扬昏垫可免。
现代文：所以，现在的计策，只有修复陈管故道，高筑南北两堤，以截断两河内灌，则淮、扬的水灾就可免除。
English: Therefore, the current strategy, only by repairing the old way of Chen Guan and building high north-south two dikes to cut off the two rivers, can the floods of Huai and Yang be exempted.

古文：塞黄浦口，筑宝应堤，浚东关等浅，修五闸，复五坝，则淮南运道无虞。
现代文：堵塞黄浦口，修筑宝应堤防，疏通束关等淤泥，修建五处水闸门，修复五处堤坝，则淮水的南部运道就没有忧虑了。
English: If the Huangpu estuary is blocked, the Baoying dike is built, the silt such as the Shuangguan dike is cleared, five sluice gates are built, and five dikes are repaired, then there will be no worries about the southern transport channel of Huai Shui.

古文：坚塞桃源以下崔镇口诸决，则全河可归故道。
现代文：牢固地堵塞桃源以下崔镇口的各个决口，则全河的水就可以回到故道。
English: If the various outlets of the Cui Zhenkou below Taoyuan are firmly blocked, the water of the whole river can return to its former path.

古文：黄、淮既无旁决，并驱入海，则沙随水刷，海口自复，而桃、清浅阻，又不足言。
现代文：黄、淮河堤都不再溃决，一齐奔入大海，则积沙随水冲刷，海口自然就会恢复，而桃、清的淤塞，又不足以议论。
English: If the Yellow and Huaihe dikes are no longer breached and rush into the sea at the same time, the accumulated sand will be washed away with the water, and the estuary will naturally recover, while the silting of the Peach and Qing rivers is not enough to discuss.

古文：此以水治水之法也。
现代文：这就是以水治水的办法。
English: This is the method of using water to control water.

古文：若夫爬捞之说，仅可行诸闸河，前入屡试无功，徒费工料。 
现代文：至于爬梳的说法，只可用之于闸河，前人多次试用都没成功，白白地耗费工料。
English: As for the saying of climbing comb, it can only be used in the sluice, the predecessors have tried many times without success, wasting resources in vain.

古文：於是条上六议：曰塞决口以挽正河，曰筑堤防以杜溃决，曰复闸坝以防外河，曰创滚水坝以固堤岸，曰止浚海工程以省糜费，曰寝开老黄河之议以仍利涉。
现代文：于是，分条上奏六种主张：堵塞决口以挽回正河，筑堤防以杜绝溃塌，修复闸门堤坝以防外河之水，创建滚水坝以使堤岸牢固，停止疏通海口工程以省去耗费，搁置开通老黄河的主张以便依然利于渡水。
English: As a result, six proposals were presented in the article: block the breach to save the main river, build a dike to prevent collapse, repair the gate dam to prevent the water of the outside river, create a rolling dam to make the embankment strong, stop the dredging of the estuary project to save costs, and put aside the idea of opening the old Yellow River so that it is still convenient to cross the water.

古文：帝悉从其请。
现代文：皇帝全部听从这些请求。
English: The emperor complied with all of these requests.

古文：七年十月，两河工成，赉季驯、一麟银币，而遣给事中尹瑾勘实。
现代文：万历七年十月，两河治理工程完成，赐给潘季驯、江一麟银两彩帛，而派遣给事中尹瑾勘测核实。
English: In October of the seventh year of Wanli, the two rivers governance project was completed, and Pan Jitai and Jiang Yilin were awarded the silver and gold medals, while Yin Qi was sent to survey and verify the situation.

古文：八年春进季驯太子太保工部尚书，荫一子。
现代文：八年春，进升潘季驯为太子太保、工部尚书，封荫一子。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the promotion of Pan Ji Tame to the Prince Taibo, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and the sealing of a son.

古文：一麟等迁擢有差。
现代文：江一麟等升迁有差等。
English: Jiang Yilin and others have been promoted and demoted.

古文：是役也，筑高家堰堤六十馀里，归仁集堤四十馀里，柳浦湾堤东西七十馀里，塞崔镇等决口百三十，筑徐、睢、邳、宿、桃、清两岸遥堤五万六千馀丈，砀、丰大坝各一道，徐、沛、丰、砀缕堤百四十馀里，建崔镇、徐升、季泰、三义减水石坝四座，迁通济闸於甘罗城南，淮、扬间堤坝无不修筑，费帑金五十六万有奇。
现代文：这次工程，修筑高家堰堤六十余里，归仁集堤四十余里，柳浦湾堤东西七十余里，堵塞崔镇等决口一百三十处，修筑徐、睢、邳、宿、桃、清两岸在缕堤之外，距河岸较远的防洪堤五万六干余丈，殇、丰大坝各一道，徐、沛、丰、碣的临河小堤一百四十余里，建立崔镇、徐升、季泰、三义碱水石坝四座，迁通济闸于甘罗城南，淮、扬之间的堤坝也全都修筑，耗费府库黄金五十六万余两。
English: This time, the project included the construction of more than 60 miles of the Gaojia weir, more than 40 miles of the Guiren embankment, more than 70 miles of the Liupu Bay embankment from east to west, and the blocking of 130 breaches such as Cui Town, the construction of the banks of the Xu, Ying, Ying, Ying, Peach, and Qing rivers outside the dike, the construction of a flood control dike of more than 56,000 m from the riverbank, the construction of the Ying and Feng dams, and the construction of more than 140 miles of small levees along the Xu, Pei, Feng, and Ying rivers

古文：其秋擢季驯南京兵部尚书。
现代文：这年秋，提升潘季驯为南京兵部尚书。
English: In the autumn of that year, Pan Ji Tame was promoted to the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：季驯又请复新集至小浮桥故道，给事中王道成、河南巡抚周鉴等不可而止。
现代文：潘季驯又请求修复新集到小浮桥的故道，给事中王道成、河南巡抚周鉴等认为不可而停止。
English: Pan Jitai also requested the restoration of the old road from Xinji to Xiaowuqiao, and Wang Daocheng and Henan Inspector Zhou Jian considered it impossible to stop.

古文：自桂芳、季驯时罢总河不设，其后但以督漕兼理河道。
现代文：从吴桂芳、潘季驯时起罢去总河之职不设，其后祇以督漕兼管河道。
English: From the time of Wu Guifang and Pan Ji's tutelage, the post of chief river was not set up, and later it was only a supervisor and a river channel.

古文：高堰初筑，清口方畅，流连数年，河道无大患。
现代文：高堰之堤刚刚建成，清口正畅通，流连敷年，河道没有大的水患发生。
English: The embankment of the high weir has just been built, the clearing is flowing smoothly, and there has been no major flooding in the river for many years.

古文：至十五年，封丘、偃师、东明、长垣屡被冲决。
现代文：到了十五年，封丘、偃师、束明、长垣之堤多次被冲决。
English: By the fifteenth year, the dikes at Fongqiu, Shishi, Sokming, and Nagakaki had been breached multiple times.

古文：大学士申时行言： 河所决地在三省，守臣画地分修，易推委。
现代文：大学士申时行奏道： 黄河决口之地在三省交界之处，守臣划地分别修筑，容易互相推诿。
English: Shen Shigong, a university scholar, said: The place of the Yellow River's mouth is at the junction of the three provinces. It is easy to push and shove each other.

古文：河道未大坏，不必设都御史，宜遣风力老成给事中一人行河。 
现代文：河道没有大量毁坏，不必设立都御史，应当派遣有气概魄力老成持重的给事中一人去治理河道。 
English: If there is not a lot of damage to the waterway, there is no need to set up a metropolitan government, and one person should be sent to govern the waterway.

古文：乃命工科都给事中常居敬往。
现代文：于是命工科都给事中常居敬前往。
English: As a result, the life sciences industry is often in the middle of things.

古文：居敬请修筑大社集东至白茅集长堤百里。
现代文：常居敬请求修筑大社集束到白茅集长堤一百里。
English: The request for the construction of a grand shrine came from a long embankment a hundred miles away.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：初，黄河由徐州小浮桥入运，其河深且近洪，能刷洪以深河，利於运道。
现代文：当初，黄河由徐州小浮桥流入运河，其河水深而且接近两河交汇处，能冲刷河道以使河床加深，利于漕运之道。
English: Originally, the Yellow River flowed into the canal from the Xuzhou Small Floating Bridge. The river was deep and close to the confluence of the two rivers, which could wash the river channel to deepen the riverbed and facilitate the way of rowing.

古文：后渐徙沛县飞云桥及徐州大、小溜沟。
现代文：后来，渐渐改道沛县飞云桥和徐州大、小溜沟。
English: Later, Feiyun Bridge in Peixian County and the large and small gullies in Xuzhou County were gradually rerouted.

古文：至嘉靖末，决邵家口，出秦沟，由浊河口入运，河浅，迫茶城，茶城岁淤，运道数害。
现代文：到了嘉靖末年，在邵家口决堤，在秦沟流出，由浊河口流入运河，河水浅，迫近茶城河，茶城河一年年淤塞，漕运之道多次受妨害。
English: At the end of the Jiajing period, the dike broke at Shaojiakou, flowing out of Qin Ditch, and flowing into the canal from the mouth of the Min River. The river was shallow, approaching the Cha Cheng River. The Cha Cheng River was silted up every year, and the way of rowing was obstructed many times.

古文：万历五年冬，河复南趋，出小浮桥故道，未几复堙。
现代文：万历五年冬，河水又向南奔流，从小浮桥故道流出，不久又堵塞。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of Wanli, the river flowed south again, flowing out of the old path of the small pontoon bridge, and was soon blocked.

古文：潘季驯之塞崔镇也，厚筑堤岸，束水归漕。
现代文：潘季驯堵塞崔镇决口时，厚筑堤岸约束河水回到漕河。
English: When Pan Ji Tame blocked the mouth of Cui Town, a thick embankment was built to restrict the river water back to Caohe.

古文：嗣后水发，河臣辄加堤，而河身日高矣。
现代文：随后河水上涨，河臣就加高堤岸，而河床一天天增高。
English: Then the river rose, the embankment was raised, and the riverbed rose day by day.

古文：於是督漕佥都御史杨一魁欲复黄河故道，请自归德以下丁家道口浚至石将军庙，令河仍自小浮桥出。
现代文：于是督漕愈都御史杨一魁想恢复黄河故道，请求从归德以下丁家道口疏通到石将军庙，让河水依然从小浮桥流出。
English: As a result, the governor of the capital, Shi Yang Yikai, wanted to restore the old way of the Yellow River, and requested that the entrance of the Ding family be dredged from the Gui De to the Stone General Temple, so that the river would still flow out from the small pontoon bridge.

古文：又言： 善治水者，以疏不以障。
现代文：又说： 善于治水的人，用疏通不用堵塞。
English: He also said: Those who are good at water control should use dredging and not blockage.

古文：年来堤上加堤，水高凌空，不啻过颡。
现代文：近年以来，堤上加堤，水高凌空，不仅超过额头。
English: In recent years, levees have been added to the levees, and the water has soared high into the air, not only exceeding the forehead.

古文：滨河城郭，决水可灌。
现代文：滨河城郭，决水可灌注。
English: Riverside castle, the water can be poured.

古文：宜测河身深浅，随处挑浚，而於黄河分流故道，设减水石门以泄暴涨。 
现代文：应当测量河床深浅，随处疏凿，而在黄河分流故道，设立碱水石门以泄暴涨河水。 
English: It is necessary to measure the depth of the riverbed, dredge everywhere, and in the old path of the Yellow River diversion, set up a alkaline water stone gate to release the surging river water.

古文：给事中王士性则请复老黄河故道。
现代文：给事中王士性则请恢复老黄河故道。
English: If you want to be a hero, please restore the old way of the Yellow River.

古文：大略言： 自徐而下，河身日高，而为堤以束之，堤与徐州城等。
现代文：大略说：从徐州城以下，黄河河床一天天增高，而用修筑堤防来约束它，堤防与徐州城一样高。
English: Roughly speaking, from Xuzhou City down, the Yellow River bed is getting higher and higher every day, and it is constrained by building a dike, which is as high as Xuzhou City.

古文：束益急，流益迅，委全力於淮而淮不任。
现代文：约束更加急迫，水流更加迅速，放全力于淮而淮不能承担。
English: The constraint is more urgent, the water flow is more rapid, and it is impossible to give full play to Huaihuai.

古文：故昔之黄、淮合，今黄强而淮益缩，不复合矣。
现代文：所以，以前黄、淮汇合，现在黄强而淮更加退缩，不再汇合了。
English: Therefore, in the past, Huang and Huai converged, but now Huang Qiang and Huai have retreated even more, and no longer converge.

古文：黄强而一启天妃、通济诸闸，则灌运河如建瓴。
现代文：黄强而一打开天妃、通济诸闸门，那么，灌注于运河，水势就像高屋建瓴。
English: As soon as Huang Qiang opened the gates of Tianfei and Tongji, the water flowed into the canal, and the water potential was like that of a skyscraper.

古文：高、宝一梗，江南之运坐废。
现代文：高、童一旦被阻塞，江南的漕运因此就会废弃。
English: Once Gao and Tong are blocked, the southern part of the canal will be abandoned.

古文：淮缩则退而侵泗。
现代文：淮水退缩则退而侵入泗水。
English: The Huai Shui retreated and invaded the Shao Shui.

古文：为祖陵计，不得不建石堤护之。堤增河益高，根本大可虞也。
现代文：为了祖陵的安全考虑，不得不修筑石堤来保护它，堤岸加高河水就更高，从根本上说很值得忧虑。
English: For the sake of the safety of the ancestral mausoleum, it was necessary to build a stone embankment to protect it. The higher the embankment, the higher the river water, which is fundamentally worrisome.

古文：河至清河凡四折而后入海。
现代文：黄河到清河一共四道转折然后流入大海。
English: From the Yellow River to the Qing River, there are a total of four turns before it flows into the sea.

古文：淮安、高、宝、盐、兴数百万生灵之命托之一丸泥，决则尽成鱼暇矣。
现代文：淮安、高、宝、盐、兴数百万百姓的生命寄托于一丸泥土，一旦溃决就全部成鱼虾了。
English: The lives of millions of people in Huai'an, Gao, Bao, Yan and Xing are entrusted to a lump of earth. Once it is broken, they will all become fish and shrimp.

古文：纷纷之议，有欲增堤泗州者，有欲开颜家、灌口、永济三河，南甃高家堰、北筑滚水坝者。
现代文：众多的主张，有的想茌泗州加高堤岸，有的想开通颜家、灌口、永济三河，南边修治高家堰、北边修筑滚水坝。
English: There are many proposals, some want to raise the embankment in Luzhou, some want to open the Yanjia, Gankou and Yongji Three Rivers, repair the Gaojia Weir in the south, and build a rolling dam in the north.

古文：总不如复河故道，为一劳永逸之计也。
现代文：总的不如恢复黄河故道，成为一劳永逸的办法。
English: In general, it is better to restore the ancient way of the Yellow River and become a once-and-for-all solution.

古文：河故道由三义镇达叶家冲与淮合，在清河县北别有济运河，在县南盖支河耳。
现代文：黄河故道由三义镇到达叶家冲与淮水汇合，在清河县北另有济运河，在县南只是支河而已。
English: The old route of the Yellow River from Sanyi Town to Yejiachong merged with Huai Shui. In the north of Qinghe County, there was another canal, but in the south of the county, it was just a tributary.

古文：河强夺支河，直趋县南，而自弃北流之道，然河形固在也。
现代文：黄河强力争夺支河，直奔县南，而自己舍弃北流的河道，然而河床本来存在。
English: The Yellow River vigorously competes for tributaries, heading straight to the south of the county, while abandoning the north-flowing river channel, but the riverbed still exists.

古文：自桃源至瓦子滩凡九十里，洼下不耕，无室庐填墓之碍，虽开河费钜，而故道一复，为利无穷。 
现代文：从桃源到瓦子滩共九十里，地势低下不耕种，没有房舍坟墓的障碍，虽然开凿河道耗费巨大，然而故道一旦恢复，带来的便利没有穷尽。
English: It is a total of ninety miles from Taoyuan to Wazi Beach. The terrain is low and not cultivated, and there are no obstacles to building tombs. Although it costs a lot to excavate the river, once the old road is restored, there is no end to the convenience it brings.

古文：议皆未定。
现代文：主张都没有确定。
English: None of the claims have been determined.

古文：居敬及御史乔璧星皆请复专设总理大臣。
现代文：常居敬及御史乔璧星都请求恢复专设总理大臣。
English: Both Mr. Tsuneyoshi and Mr. Gishi have called for the reinstatement of a dedicated prime minister.

古文：乃命潘季驯为右都御史总督河道。
现代文：于是又命潘季驯为右都御史总督河道。
English: As a result, he also ordered Pan Ji Tame to become the governor of the right capital, He Dao.

古文：时帝从居敬言，罢老黄河议，而季驯抵官，言： 亲集故道，故老言 铜帮铁底 ，当开，但岁俭费繁，未能遽行。 
现代文：当时，皇帝听从常居敬的意见，停止恢复老黄河的主张，而潘季驯到达任所，说： 新集故道，年老的人说如 铜帮铁底 ，非常坚固，应当开通，但今年费用不足，耗费又很多，不能匆忙进行。 
English: At that time, the emperor listened to the opinions of the old residents and stopped the idea of restoring the old Yellow River, and Pan Jitai arrived at the office and said: "The new set of old ways, the old people say, is like copper and iron, very strong, it should be opened, but this year the cost is insufficient, the cost is a lot, and it can't be rushed.

古文：又言： 黄水浊而强，汶、泗清且弱，交会茶城。
现代文：又说： 黄河水浑浊而强大，汶、泗的水清澈而弱小，交汇于茶城。
English: He also said: "The Yellow River is turbid and powerful, while the Wen and Lu are clear and weak. They meet at Cha Cheng.

古文：伏秋黄水发，则倒灌人漕，沙停而淤，势所必至。
现代文：夏秋之季黄水上涨，则倒灌入漕河，泥沙沉下而淤积，势必造成堵塞。
English: When the yellow water rises in the summer and autumn, it will pour into the Caohe River, and the silt will sink and accumulate, which is bound to cause blockage.

古文：然黄水一落，漕即从之，沙随水去，不浚自通，纵有浅阻，不过旬日。
现代文：然而黄水一旦下落，漕水立即跟从，泥沙随水冲去，不必疏浚而自通，即使有的地方阻塞，也不过十天左右。
English: However, once the yellow water falls, the canal water immediately follows, and the sediment rushes away with the water. There is no need to dredge and it flows by itself. Even if there is a blockage in some places, it will only take about ten days.

古文：往时建古洪、内华二闸，黄涨则闭闸以遏浊流，黄退则启闸以纵泉水。
现代文：以前修建古洪、内华二闸门，黄水上涨就关闭闸门以阻止浊流，黄水下落就打开闸门以放纵泉水。
English: Previously, Guhong and Nevada two sluice gates were built. When the yellow water rose, the gate was closed to prevent turbulence, and when the yellow water fell, the gate was opened to allow spring water.

古文：近者居敬复增建镇口闸，去河愈近，则吐纳愈易。
现代文：近来，常居敬又增建镇口闸，距河愈近，则排放或阻止愈容易。
English: Recently, the town gates have been added. The closer to the river, the easier it is to discharge or stop.

古文：但当严闸禁如清江浦三闸之法，则河渠永赖矣。 
现代文：但是，应当严格开关闸门的法令如同清江浦三闸门之法，则是河渠永久的依靠。 
English: However, the law that the gates should be strictly opened and closed, like the law of the three gates of Qingjiangpu, is a permanent dependence of the canal.

古文：帝方委季驯，即从其言，罢故道之议。
现代文：皇帝正委任潘季驯，即刻依从他的意见，停止恢复故道的主张。
English: The emperor is appointing Pan Ji Tame to immediately follow his advice and stop advocating the restoration of the old way.

古文：未几，水患益甚。
现代文：不久，水患更加严重。
English: Soon, the flooding got worse.

古文：十七年六月，黄水暴涨，决兽医口月堤，漫李景高口新堤，冲入夏镇内河，坏田庐，没人民无算。
现代文：万历十七年六月，黄河水暴涨，在兽医口半月形堤决口，漫过李景高口新堤，冲入夏镇内河，毁坏良田房舍，淹役百姓不计其敷。
English: In June of the seventeenth year of Wanli, the Yellow River water surged, broke through the half-moon-shaped levee at Veterinarian's Mouth, overflowed the new levee at Li Jing Gaokou, and rushed into the Xiazhen Inner River, destroying the houses of good fields and flooding the people regardless of their contribution.

古文：十月，决口塞。
现代文：十月，决口被堵塞。
English: In October, the outlet was blocked.

古文：十八年，大溢，徐州水积城中者逾年。
现代文：十八年，更加泛滥，徐州河水积在城中一年多。
English: Eighteen years, more flooding, the Xuzhou River has accumulated in the city for more than a year.

古文：众议迁城改河。
现代文：许多人主张迁移川城改变黄河水道。
English: Many people advocate the relocation of Sicheng to change the Yellow River waterway.

古文：季驯浚魁山支河以通之，起苏伯湖至小河口，积水乃消。
现代文：潘季驯疏凿魁山支河以使畅通，从苏伯湖到小河口，积水纔消退。
English: Pan Ji Tame dredged a tributary of the Kuishan River to make it flow smoothly, and from Lake Suibo to the small estuary, the waterlogging subsided.

古文：十九年九月，泗州大水，州治淹三尺，居民沉溺十九，浸及祖陵。
现代文：十九年九月，泗州发生大水，州治所淹没三尺，居民十分之九被淹死，渐渐殃及祖陵。
English: In September 19th, the flood occurred in Zhangzhou, the government office was flooded by three feet, and nine out of ten residents were drowned, gradually affecting the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：而山阳复河决，江都、邵伯又因湖水下注，田庐浸伤。
现代文：而黄河又在山阳决口，江都、邵伯又因湖水下注，良田房舍被淹没损坏。
English: However, the Yellow River broke through in Shanyang, Jiangdu and Shao Bo were submerged by the lake water, and Liang Tian's house was flooded and damaged.

古文：工部尚书曾同亨上其事，议者纷起。
现代文：工部尚书曾同亨上奏其事，议论的人纷纷而起。
English: Shang Shuxu of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce had raised the issue with Heng, and people started to discuss it.

古文：乃命工科给事中张贞观往泗州勘视水势，而从给事中杨其休言，放季驯归，用舒应龙为工部尚书总督河道。
现代文：于是，命工科给事中张贞观前往泗州勘测水势，而依从给事中杨其休的主张，放潘季驯退休归家，任用舒应龙为工部尚书总理河道。
English: As a result, Zhang Zhenguan was ordered by the Ministry of Engineering to go to Zhangzhou to survey the water potential, and in accordance with the proposal of Yang Qixiu, he retired and returned home, and appointed Shu Yinglong as the Prime Minister of the Ministry of Engineering.

古文：二十年三月，季驯将去，条上辨惑者六事，力言河不两行，新河不当开，支渠不当浚。
现代文：万历二十年三月，潘季驯将要离任，撰文向上陈述辨别疑惑的六件事，极力申说黄河不能在两条河道中流，新河不应当开凿，支渠不应当疏通。
English: In March of the 20th year of the Wanli calendar, when Pan Jitai was about to leave office, the author of the article stated the six things that were in doubt, and insisted that the Yellow River could not flow in the middle of two rivers, that a new river should not be dug, and that the branch canal should not be dredged.

古文：又著书曰河防一览，大旨在筑堤障河，束水归漕；筑堰障淮，逼淮注黄。
现代文：又著书叫做《河防一览》，大意在于筑堤阻障黄河，约束河水流归漕河；筑堰阻挡淮水，迫使淮水注入黄河。
English: He also wrote a book called "An Overview of River Protection," the gist of which is that building a dike to block the Yellow River restricts the flow of the river to the Caohe River; building a dam to block the Huai Shui forces the Huai Shui to flow into the Yellow River.

古文：以清刷浊，沙随水去。
现代文：让清水冲刷浊水，泥沙随水而去。
English: Let the clear water wash away the turbid water, and the mud and sand will go away with the water.

古文：合则流急，急则荡涤而河深；分则流缓，缓则停滞而沙积。
现代文：合流则水流急速，急速则能清除淤泥而使河床加深；分流则水流缓慢，缓慢则停滞不畅而使泥沙淤积。
English: At the confluence, the water flow is rapid, and rapid can remove silt and deepen the riverbed; at the divergence, the water flow is slow, and slow is stagnant and causes siltation.

古文：上流既急，则海口自辟而无待於开。
现代文：上游水流湍急之后，那磨，海口自然就会打开而不需要对其进行开凿。
English: After the upstream water flow is rapid, then the sea mouth will naturally open without the need to excavate it.

古文：其治堤之法，有缕堤以束其流，有遥堤以宽其势，有滚水坝以泄其怒。
现代文：他的治理河堤的办法，有修筑缕水堤以约束其水流，有修建逼堤以缓和其水势，有建立滚水坝以减弱其怒涛。
English: His methods of managing the river dike included the construction of a dike to restrict its flow, the construction of a dike to moderate its water potential, and the establishment of a rolling dam to weaken its fury.

古文：法甚详，言甚辩。
现代文：办法很详备，说得很明白周到。
English: The method is very detailed, and the words are very clear and thoughtful.

古文：然当是时，水势横溃，徐、泗、淮、扬间无岁不受患，祖陵被水。
现代文：然而，正当遭时，河水横流，徐、泗、淮、扬之间没有哪年不遭受水灾，祖陵也遭受水害。
English: However, when the right time comes, the river flows sideways, and there is no year in which Xu, Zou, Huai and Yang are not flooded, and the ancestral mausoleum is also flooded.

古文：季驯谓当自消，已而不验。
现代文：潘季驯说水必定会自行消退，随后没有证验。
English: Pan Ji Tame said that the water would definitely recede on its own, and then there was no verification.

古文：於是季驯言诎，而分黄导淮之议由此起矣。
现代文：于是潘季驯无话可说，主张不得通行，从而分流黄河引导淮水的主张由此兴起。
English: As a result, Pan Ji Tame had nothing to say, and his proposal was not allowed to pass. As a result, the idea of diverting the Yellow River to guide the Huai Shui arose.

古文：贞观抵泗州言： 臣谒祖陵，见泗城如水上浮盂，盂中之水复满。
现代文：张贞观到达泗州后说： 臣去拜祭祖陵，看见泗州城如同水上漂浮的器皿，器皿中的水又满。
English: After arriving in Zhangzhou, Zhang Zhenguan said: "The minister went to worship the ancestral mausoleum, and saw that Zhangzhou City was like a vessel floating on the water, and the water in the vessel was full.

古文：祖陵自神路至三桥、丹墀，无一不被水。
现代文：祖陵从神路到三桥、丹墀，没有哪一处不遭受水害。
English: There is no part of the ancestral mausoleum from Shenlu to Sanqiao and Danlu that has not been affected by the flood.

古文：且高堰危如累卵，又高、宝隐祸也。
现代文：而且高堰的危险如堆积的鸡蛋，又是高、宝隐藏的祸害。
English: Moreover, the danger of the high weir is like the accumulation of eggs, and it is the hidden scourge of the high weir.

古文：今欲泄淮，当以辟海口积沙为第一义。
现代文：现在想排泄淮水，应当把排除海口的泥沙作为第一事宜。
English: Now, if you want to drain the brine, you should remove the sediment from the estuary as the first matter.

古文：然泄淮不若杀黄，而杀黄於淮流之既合，不若杀於未合。但杀於既合者与运无妨，杀於未合者与运稍碍。
现代文：然而，排泄淮水还不如减缓黄河之水水势，而在黄河之水与淮水汇合处碱缓水势，不如在没有汇合之前减缓水势，但是，在汇合处碱缓水势与运河没有妨碍，在没有汇合之前减缓水势对运河稍有妨碍。
English: However, it is better to reduce the water potential of the Yellow River than to drain the Huai River, and at the confluence of the Yellow River and the Huai River, it is better to reduce the water potential before there is no confluence. However, at the confluence, the alkaline water potential does not interfere with the canal, and reducing the water potential before there is no confluence slightly interferes with the canal.

古文：别标本，究利害，必当杀於未合之先。
现代文：区别标与本，明白利与害，一定应当在没有汇合之前减缓水势。
English: Differentiate between the target and the target, understand the benefits and harms, and must slow down the water potential before there is no confluence.

古文：至於广入海之途，则自鲍家口、黄家营至鱼沟、金城左右，地势颇下，似当因而利导之。 
现代文：至于扩大入海的河道，则从鲍家口、黄家营到鱼沟、全城左右，地势很低，似乎应当因势而利导它。 
English: As for the widening of the river channel into the sea, from Baojiakou and Huangjiaying to Uigu, the whole city is very low, and it seems that it should be guided according to the situation.

古文：贞观又会应龙及总漕陈於陛等言： 淮、黄同趋者惟海，而淮之由黄达海者惟清口。
现代文：张贞观又同舒应龙和总漕陈于陛等说： 淮、黄共同奔趋的地方祇有大海，而淮水经由黄河到达大海的通道只有清口。
English: Zhang Zhenguan also said with Shu Yinglong and the chief oarsman Chen Yuqing: Where Huai and Huang are rushing together, there is only the sea, and the channel for Huai water to reach the sea through the Yellow River only has a clear mouth.

古文：自海沙开浚无期，因而河身日高；自河流倒灌无已，因而清口日塞。
现代文：自从海口淤沙疏通没有一定的期限，因而河床一天天增高；自从河水倒灌不停，因而清口一天天被堵塞。
English: Since the dredging of the estuary silt did not have a certain period of time, the river bed has been rising day by day; since the river water has been continuously poured, the outlet has been blocked day by day.

古文：以致淮水上浸祖陵，漫及高、宝，而兴、泰运堤亦冲决矣。
现代文：所以造成淮水上淹祖陵，漫流到高、童，而兴、泰漕运河道的堤岸也被冲决了。
English: As a result, the embankment of the Gao, Tong, Da Xing and Taizhao Canal was washed away, causing the flooding of the ancestral mausoleum on the Huai Shui.

古文：今议辟清口沙，且分黄河之流於清口上流十里地，去口不远，不至为运道梗。
现代文：现在建议排除清口的淤沙，并且在清口上游十里处分出黄河的支流，离口不远，不至于造成运道阻堵。
English: It is now proposed to remove the silt from the clearing, and to separate the tributaries of the Yellow River ten miles upstream from the clearing, not far from the mouth, so as not to cause blockage of the transport channel.

古文：分於上，复合於下，则冲海之力专。
现代文：分支流于上，又汇合于下，则冲刷海口之力就集中。
English: When the branching streams flow upstream and converge downstream, the power to wash the estuary is concentrated.

古文：合必於草湾之下，恐其复冲正河，为淮城患也。
现代文：汇合一定在草湾之下，恐怕它又会冲坏主河，成为淮城的祸患。
English: The confluence must be under Caowan, I'm afraid it will wash away the main river and become the scourge of Huai'an.

古文：塞鲍家口、黄家营二决，恐横冲新河，散溢无归。
现代文：堵塞鲍家口、黄家营二决堤，又担心会横冲新河，散流不能归入河道。
English: Baojiakou and Huangjiaying are blocked by two levees, and it is feared that the new river will be flooded, and the diversion cannot be classified as a river.

古文：两岸俱堤，则东北清、沭、海、安洼下地不虞溃决。
现代文：两岸都有堤防，则东北清、沭、海、安低下之处就不担心溃决了。
English: There are dykes on both sides of the river, so there is no need to worry about the river bursting its banks in the Northeast Qing, Min, Hai and An regions.

古文：计费凡三十六万有奇。
现代文：总计耗费一共三十六万多。
English: The total cost was more than 360,000 yuan.

古文：若海口之塞，则潮汐莫窥其涯，难施畚锸。
现代文：假若海口的堵塞，则不能看到潮汐的边际，难以施用箕畚铁锹挑挖。
English: If the estuary is blocked, the margin of the tide cannot be seen, and it is difficult to dig with a pickaxe.

古文：惟淮、黄合流东下，河身涤而渐深，海口刷而渐辟，亦事理之可必者。 
现代文：只有淮、黄合流东下，河床纔能被冲刷而渐渐加深，海口纔能被冲刷而逐渐打开，也是事理所必然的结果。 
English: It is only when the Huai and Huang confluence flows eastward that the creek bed can be washed away and gradually deepened, and the estuary can be washed away and gradually opened, which is also the inevitable result of the matter.

古文：帝悉从其请。乃议於清口上流北岸，开腰铺支河达於草湾。
现代文：皇帝完全依从他们的请求，于是选择在清口上游的北岸，开通腰铺支河达于草湾。
English: The emperor fully complied with their request, so he chose the north bank upstream of Qingkou to open the Waipu tributary to Cao Wan.

古文：既而淮水自决张福堤。
现代文：不久，淮水自决于张福堤。
English: Soon, Huai Shui decided to build the Zhangfu Dike.

古文：直隶巡按彭应参言： 祖陵度可无虞，且方东备倭警，宜暂停河工。 
现代文：直隶巡按彭应参说： 祖陵，估计是没有忧虑了，但边境之东正防备倭寇，应当暂时停止治河工程。 
English: Peng Yingxuan, a member of the Zhili patrol, said: "As far as the ancestral mausoleum is concerned, there is no need to worry, but the eastern part of the border is being guarded against Japanese piracy, and the river control project should be temporarily suspended.

古文：部议令河臣熟计。
现代文：工部商议让河臣仔细谋划。
English: Kawatomi was asked to carefully plan the project after consultation with the Ministry of Works.

古文：应龙、贞观言： 为祖陵久远计，支河实必不容已之工，请候明春倭警宁息举行。 
现代文：舒应龙、张贞观说： 为了祖陵长远考虑，支河实在是不能允许停下的工程，请求等到明年春天倭寇警报停息再进行。 
English: Shu Yinglong and Zhang Zhenguan said: For the sake of the long-term consideration of the ancestral mausoleum, the branch river is really a project that cannot be allowed to stop, and it is requested to wait until the wokou alarm stops next spring.

古文：其事遂寝。
现代文：这件事情于是停止。
English: The matter then came to a halt.

古文：二十一年春，贞观报命，议开归、徐达小河口，以救徐、邳之溢；导浊河入小浮桥故道，以纾镇口之患。
现代文：二十一年春，张贞观回朝报告职任完成情况，建议开通归、徐到小河口河道，以拯救徐、邳的泛滥；引导浊河流入小浮桥故道，以排除镇口的水患。
English: In the spring of 21st, Zhang Zhenguan returned to the DPRK to report on the completion of his duties. He proposed to open the Hui and Xu rivers to the small estuary to save the flooding of the Xu and Yangtze rivers, and guide the Yangtze River into the old path of the small pontoon bridge to eliminate the flood in the town.

古文：下总河会官集议，未定。
现代文：下发到总河会官集中商议，没有议定。
English: It was sent down to the officials of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan for collective discussion, but no agreement was reached.

古文：五月，大雨，河决单县黄堌口，一由徐州出小浮桥，一由旧河达镇口闸。
现代文：五月，天下大雨，黄河在单县黄蝈口决堤，一从徐州出小浮桥，一从旧黄河到达镇口闸。
English: In May, under heavy rain, the Yellow River broke through the dike at the mouth of the Yellow River in Shan County. A small floating bridge was built from Xuzhou, and a sluice gate was built from the old Yellow River to Zhenkou.

古文：邳城陷水中，高、宝诸湖堤决口无算。
现代文：邳城陷于水中，高、宝诸湖堤决口不计其数。
English: Lucheng is submerged in water, and there are countless breaches of the high and treasure lakes.

古文：明年，湖堤尽筑塞，而黄水大涨，清口沙垫，淮水不能东下，於是挟上源阜陵诸湖与山溪之水，暴浸祖陵，泗城淹没。
现代文：第二年，湖堤决口完全堵塞，而黄河水大涨，清口泥沙淤积，淮水不能束流，于是挟带上游阜陵谙湖水与山溪之水，突然淹没祖陵，泗城被淹没。
English: In the second year, the break of the lake dike was completely blocked, and the Yellow River water rose sharply, the clear mouth was silted up, and the water could not be diverted. Therefore, the water of the lake and the water of the mountain stream upstream of Fuling suddenly flooded the ancestral mausoleum, and the city of Fuling was flooded.

古文：二十三年，又决高邮中堤及高家堰、高良涧，而水患益急矣。
现代文：二十三年，又决堤于高邮中堤及高家堰、高良涧，而水患更加紧急了。
English: In 2003, levees were breached at Gaoyou Middle Levee, Gaojia Weir and Gaoliang Reservoir, and the flood situation became more urgent.

古文：先是，御史陈邦科言： 固堤束水未收刷沙之利，而反致冲决。
现代文：在比之前，御史陈邦科说： 加固堤防约束河水没有收到冲刷泥沙之利，而反倒导致冲决河堤。
English: Prior to the comparison, Chen Bangke, the chief historian, said: Strengthening the dike to restrict the river did not receive the benefit of washing away the mud and sand, but on the contrary led to the bursting of the river dike.

古文：法当用浚，其方有三。
现代文：应当采用疏通的方法，其方法有三。
English: The method of dredging should be adopted, and there are three methods.

古文：冬春水涸，令沿河浅夫乘时捞浅，则沙不停而去，一也。
现代文：冬春时节河水枯竭，令沿河捞浅民工趁这时捞浅，则泥沙不停而去，这是其一。
English: During the winter and spring seasons, the river water is depleted, so the migrant workers along the river take advantage of this time to make shallow dredges, and the silt keeps going away. This is one of them.

古文：官民船往来，船尾悉系钯犁，乘风搜涤，则沙不宁而去，二也。
现代文：官船民船往来，船尾全都系上铝犁，趁着风势清除，则泥沙不停而去，这是其二。
English: This is the second reason. When government ships and private boats come and go, the sterns of the ships are all tied to aluminum anchors. When the wind clears, the sands keep moving away.

古文：仿水磨、水碓之法，置为木机，乘水滚荡，则沙不留而去，三也。
现代文：仿效水磨、水碓之法，设置为木机，趁着水势滚荡，则泥沙不停而去，这是其三。
English: Imitating the method of water milling and dredging, it is set up as a wooden machine, taking advantage of the water potential rolling, the mud and sand keep going away, which is the third.

古文：至淮必不可不会黄，故高堰断不可弃。
现代文：至于淮河，一定不可不汇于黄河，所以高堰绝对不可舍弃。
English: As for the Huaihe River, it must not fail to merge with the Yellow River, so the high weir must not be abandoned.

古文：湖溢必伤堤，故周家桥溃处断不可开。
现代文：湖水溢出必然会损害堤防，所以周家桥溃决之处一定不可打开。
English: The overflow of lake water will inevitably damage the embankment, so the place where the Zhoujia Bridge breaks must not be opened.

古文：已弃之道必淤满，故老黄河、草湾等处断不可。 
现代文：已经舍弃的河道必然淤满泥沙，所以老黄河、草湾等处一定不可恢复。 
English: The abandoned river channels will inevitably be filled with silt, so the old Yellow River, Caowan and other places must not be restored.

古文：疏下所司议。
现代文：奏章下到所司商议。
English: We'll discuss it with the director of music.

古文：户部郎中华存礼则请复黄河故道，并浚草湾。
现代文：户部郎中华存礼则请求恢复黄河故道，并且疏通草湾。
English: On the other hand, Mr. Zhongchuang Cunli, the head of the household, requested the restoration of the old Yellow River and the dredging of Caowan.

古文：而是时腰铺犹未开，工部侍郎沈节甫言： 复黄河未可轻议，至诸策皆第补偏救弊而已，宜概停罢。 
现代文：然而这时，腰铺还没有开通，工部侍郎沈节甫说： 恢复黄河故道不可轻率议论，至于其它各种办法都仅仅是补偏救弊罢了，应当全部停止。 
English: However, at this time, the waist shop had not yet been opened, and Shen Jifu, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, said: The restoration of the Yellow River's old way should not be discussed lightly. As for all other methods, they are merely supplementary remedies, and should all be stopped.

古文：乃召应龙还工部，时二十二年九月也。
现代文：于是召舒应龙返回工部，这时是万历二十二年九月。
English: Therefore, Shu Yinglong was summoned to return to the engineering department in September of the 22nd year of Wanli.

古文：既而给事中吴应明言： 先因黄河迁徙无常，设遥、缕二堤束水归漕，及水过沙停，河身日高，徐、邳以下居民尽在水底。
现代文：不久，给事中吴应明说： 以前因黄河改道无常，修筑迁、缕二堤束水归入漕河，等到水过沙停，河床一天天增高，徐、邳以下居住的百姓完全在水下面。
English: Not long after, Wu Yingming said in his report: Previously, due to the instability of the Yellow River diversion, construction and relocation, the water of the two dike bundles was classified into the Caohe River. When the water passed the sand stop, the riverbed increased day by day, and the people living below Xu and Zou were completely under water.

古文：今清口外则黄流阻遏，清口内则淤沙横截，强河横灌上流约百里许，淮水仅出沙上之浮流，而潴蓄於盱、泗者遂为祖陵患矣。
现代文：今清口以外则是黄水被阻拦，清口以内则是淤沙拦阻，迫使河水横灌上游大约一百里左右，淮水只是在沙上的浮水，而堵塞蓄积在盱、泗之处的就成为祖陵的祸患了。
English: The yellow water is blocked outside the current mouth, and the silting sand is blocked inside the mouth, forcing the river to flood about a hundred miles upstream. The silting water is just floating water on the sand, and the blockage accumulating in the reeds and reeds has become the scourge of the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：张贞观所议腰铺支河归之草湾，或从清河南岸别开小河至骆家营、马厂等地，出会大河，建闸启闭，一遇运浅，即行此河，亦策之便者。 
现代文：张贞观所主张腰铺支河应归入草湾，或者从清河南岸另开一条小河到骆家营、马厂等地，流出汇合于大河，修建闸门适时开关，一遇运道水浅，就航行于这绦河，也是办法中的最便捷的一种。 
English: Zhang Zhenguan advocated that the Waipu tributary should be included in Caowan, or another small river should be opened from the south bank of the Qing River to Luo Jiaying, Maquan and other places, and the outflow should converge with the big river, and the gate should be built in a timely manner. If the transport channel is shallow, it will sail in this river, which is also the most convenient method.

古文：至治泗水，则有议开老子山，引淮水入江者。
现代文：至于治理泗水，则有主张开通老子山，引导淮水流入大江的。
English: As for the management of the Surabaya River, there is a proposal to open the Laozi Mountain and guide the Huai River into the Yangtze River.

古文：宜置闸以时启闭，拆张福堤而堤清口，使河水无南向。
现代文：应当设置闸门按时开关，拆除张福堤然后筑堤于清口，使黄河水不向南流。
English: It is necessary to set the gate to switch on time, dismantle the Zhangfu dike and then build a dike at the mouth of the dike, so that the Yellow River water does not flow southward.

古文：部议下河漕诸臣会勘。
现代文：工部商议下达到河漕诸臣会同勘测。
English: Under the consultation of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the river was surveyed jointly by the ministers.

古文：直隶巡按牛应元因谒祖陵，目击河患，绘图以进，因上疏言：
现代文：直隶巡按牛应元因去拜祭祖陵，亲眼见到河水的祸患，绘成地图呈上，于是上疏说：
English: Zhili patrolman Niu Yingyuan went to worship the ancestral mausoleum, saw the disaster of the river with his own eyes, drew a map and presented it, so Shangsuo said:

古文： 黄高淮壅，起於嘉靖末年河臣凿徐、吕二洪巨石，而沙日停，河身日高，溃决由此起。
现代文：黄河增高，淮河淤塞，开始于嘉靖末年，河臣开凿徐、吕州百步洪、吕梁上下二洪的巨石，而泥沙一天天淤积，河床一天天增高，河堤溃决从此开始。
English: The Yellow River is getting higher and the Huai River is silting up. It started in the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, when the emperors of the rivers excavated the huge boulders of Xu, Luzhou, Baibuhong, and Luliang. The silt accumulated day by day, the riverbed rose day by day, and the breaking of the river dike began.

古文：当事者计无复之，两岸筑长堤以束，曰缕堤。
现代文：主持治河的人没有计划恢复它，只在两岸修筑长堤来约束，这叫做缕堤。
English: The people in charge of managing the river have no plans to restore it, only to build a long dike on both banks to restrict it, which is called a weir dike.

古文：缕堤复决，更於数里外筑重堤以防，曰遥堤。
现代文：缕堤又溃决，又在数里之外修筑重堤来防御，这甽做迁堤。
English: The weir dike was breached again, and a heavy dike was built a few miles away to defend it. This was the beginning of the dike relocation.

古文：虽岁决岁补，而莫可谁何矣。
现代文：虽然年年决堤年年修补，但是谁也没有什么更好的办法了。
English: Although the levee breaks and is repaired every year, no one has a better solution.

古文：黄、淮交会，本自清河北二十里骆家营，折而东至大河口会淮，所称老黄河是也。
现代文：黄河、淮河互相汇合，原来始于清河北二十里的骆家营，又转而向东到大河口汇合于淮河，这就是所说的老黄河。
English: The confluence of the Yellow River and the Huai River, which originally began in Luo Jia Ying, 20 miles north of the Qing River, and then turned east to the mouth of the Great River and merged with the Huai River, is the so-called Old Yellow River.

古文：陈瑄以其迂曲，从骆家营开一支河，为见今河道，而老黄河淤矣。
现代文：陈管顺着它的迂回曲折，从骆家营开通一条支河，成为现在的河道，而老黄河就被淤塞了。
English: Chen Guan followed its twists and turns and opened a tributary from Luo Jia Ying to become the current river channel, while the old Yellow River was silted up.

古文：万历间，复开草湾支河，黄舍故道而趋，以致清口交会之地，二水相持，淮不胜黄，则窜入各闸口，淮安士民於各闸口筑一土埂以防之。
现代文：万历年间，又开通草湾支河，黄河舍弃故道而直奔新河，以致清口互相汇合之地，二水互相对抗，淮水不能胜过黄水，则流入各闸门口，淮安军民在各闸门口修筑一道土堤来防御它。
English: During the Wanli years, the Caowan tributary was opened, and the Yellow River abandoned its old path and went straight to the new river, so that where the clear mouths converged, the two waters resisted each other, and the Huai Water could not beat the Yellow Water, but flowed into each gate, and the Huai'an soldiers and civilians built an earthen dike at each gate to defend it.

古文：嗣后黄、淮暴涨，水退沙停，清口遂淤，今称门限沙是也。
现代文：随后黄水、淮水突然大涨，水退沙停，清口于是淤塞，现在所说的门限沙就是这里。
English: Subsequently, the yellow water and brine water suddenly surged, the water retreated to the sand stop, and the clear mouth was blocked, and now the so-called threshold sand is here.

古文：当事者不思挑门限沙，乃傍土埂筑高堰，横亘六十里，置全淮正流之口不事，复将从旁入黄之张福口一并筑堤塞之，遂倒流而为泗陵患矣。
现代文：主持治河的人不想挑挖门限沙，就沿着土堤修筑高堰，东西绵延六十里，舍弃整个淮河正流之口不治理，又将从旁边流入黄河的张福口一起筑堤堵塞它，于是河水倒流而成为泗陵的水患了。
English: The person in charge of managing the river did not want to dig up the sand, so he built a high weir along the earth embankment, stretching sixty miles from east to west, abandoning the entire mouth of the main stream of the Huai River without management, and building a dike to block it together with the Zhangfu mouth that flows into the Yellow River from the side. As a result, the river flowed backwards and became a flood in Fuling.

古文：前岁，科臣贞观议辟门限沙，裁张福堤，其所重又在支河腰铺之开。
现代文：前年，科臣张贞观主张开辟门限沙，裁去张福堤，他的重点又在支河腰铺的开凿上。
English: In the previous year, Zhang Zhenguan, a scholar of science, advocated the opening of the threshold sand and the cutting of Zhangfu embankment. He also focused on the excavation of the branch river waist.

古文：总之，全口淤沙未尽挑辟，即腰铺工成，淮水未能出也，况下流鲍、王诸口已决，难以施工。
现代文：总之，整个河口的淤沙没有完全挖开，即使腰铺工程完成，淮水也不能流出。何况下游鲍、王谙口已经溃决，难以施工。
English: In short, the silt of the entire estuary has not been completely excavated, and even if the waist-paving project is completed, the silt water cannot flow out. Moreover, the downstream Bao and Wangyu estuaries have been breached, making construction difficult.

古文：岂若复黄河故道，尽辟清口淤沙之为要乎？
现代文：哪里比得上恢复黄河故道，完全开辟清口的淤沙作为首要之事呢？
English: What can be compared to the restoration of the Yellow River and the complete opening of the silt mouth as the first priority?

古文：且疏上流，不若科臣应明所议，就草湾下流浚诸决口，俾由安东归五港，或於周家桥量为疏通，而急塞黄堌口，挑萧、砀渠道，浚符离浅阻。
现代文：并且祇疏通上游，不如选择科臣昊应明的主张，就在草湾下游疏通诸决口，使水从安东回到五港，或在周家桥酌量为其疏通，并且赶快堵塞黄蝈口，挖深萧、踢渠道，疏通符离浅阻。
English: Moreover, it is not enough to dredge the upstream, it is better to choose the idea of Kosen Hao Yingming, to dredge the outcrops in the lower reaches of Cao Wan, so that the water from Anton returns to Wugang, or to dredge it in Zhoujiaqiao, and quickly block the Huangpi mouth, dig deep channels, and dredge shallow obstacles.

古文：至宿迁小河为淮水入黄正路，急宜挑辟，使有所归。 
现代文：到宿迁小河为淮水入黄正道，应当赶快疏通，使有所归附。
English: To Suqian Xiaohe is Huai Shui into Huang Zheng Road, it should be dredged quickly, so that it can be attributed.

古文：应龙言： 张福堤已决百馀丈，清口方挑沙，而腰铺之开尤不可废。 
现代文：舒应龙说： 张福堤已经溃决百余丈，清口正在挖除淤沙，然而腰铺分流处的开通尤其不可停止。 
English: Shu Yinglong said: Zhangfu Dam has been breached more than a hundred times, and the clearings are being excavated to remove silt. However, the opening of the Waipu diversion site in particular cannot be stopped.

古文：工部侍郎沈思孝因言： 老黄河自三义镇至叶家冲仅八千馀丈，河形尚存。
现代文：工部侍郎沈思孝于是接着说： 老黄河从三义镇到叶家冲只有八千余丈，河道轮廓还存在。
English: Shen Sihiao, the secretary of the engineering department, then went on to say: The old Yellow River from Sanyi Town to Yejiachong is only eight thousand meters long, and the river contour still exists.

古文：宜亟开浚，则河分为二，一从故道抵颜家河入海，一从清口会淮，患当自弭。
现代文：应当赶快开通，则黄河可分为二，一从故道直达颜家河入海，一从清口汇合于淮，水患必定会自行停止。
English: If it should be opened as soon as possible, then the Yellow River can be divided into two, one from the old road straight to the Yanjia River into the sea, and one from the Qingkou confluence to Huai, the flood will certainly stop on its own.

古文：请遣风力科臣一人，与河漕诸臣定画一之计。 
现代文：请派遣有气概与魄力出科臣一人，与河漕诸臣确定一个治理的统一计划。 
English: Please send a scientist with courage and boldness to determine a unified plan for governance with the riverboat ministers.

古文：乃命礼科给事中张企程往勘。
现代文：于是命礼科给事中张企程前去勘测。
English: As a result, the etiquette department ordered Zhang Qicheng to investigate.

古文：而以水患累年，迄无成画，迁延糜费，罢应龙职为民，常居敬、张贞观、彭应参等皆谴责有差。
现代文：然而因水患连续多年，终于没有完成计划，拖延时日，耗费巨大，罢去舒应龙的官职而为百姓，常居敬、张贞观、彭应参等都受到不同程度的申斥。
English: However, due to floods for many years in a row, they finally did not complete the plan, delayed the time, and spent a lot of money. Shu Yinglong was removed from his official position and became a commoner. Chang Ju Kei, Zhang Zhenguan, and Peng Ying San were all criticized to varying degrees.

古文：御史高举请 疏周家桥，裁张福堤，辟门限沙，建滚水石坝於周家桥、大小涧口、武家墩、绿杨沟上下，而坝外浚河筑岸，使行地中。
现代文：御史高举奏请： 疏通周家桥，裁去张福堤，开辟门限沙，建滚水石坝于周家桥、大小涧口、武家墩、绿杨沟上下，而在坝外疏通河道修筑堤岸，使水流行于地平面以下。
English: Gu Shigao made the following request: dredge the Zhoujiaqiao Bridge, cut down the Zhangfu dike, open the gate to the sand, build the boulders dam on the Zhoujiaqiao Bridge, the large and small estuaries, the bujiawei, and the green Yanggu, and dredge the river outside the dam to build the embankment, so that the water flows below the ground level.

古文：改塘埂十二闸为坝，灌闸外十二河，以辟入海之路。
现代文：修改塘埂十二闸为坝，灌注闸外十二河，以便开辟入海水道。
English: Modify the twelve locks of Tanggu as a dam and fill the twelve rivers outside the locks in order to open up the seawater channel.

古文：浚芒稻河，且多建滨江水闸，以广入江之途。
现代文：疏通芒稻河，并且在靠近江边多建拦水闸，以扩大入江的水道。
English: Dredge the Mangdai River, and build more sluice gates near the river to expand the waterway into the river.

古文：然海口日壅，则河沙日积，河身日高，而淮亦不能安流。
现代文：这样，入海口一天天壅塞，则河中的泥沙一天天淤积，河床一天天增高，然而淮水也不能安流。
English: In this way, the entrance to the sea is blocked day by day, the sediment in the river is silted up day by day, the river bed is getting higher day by day, but the water cannot flow smoothly.

古文：有灌口者，视诸口颇大，而近日所决蒋家、鲍家、畀家三口直与相射，宜挑浚成河，俾由此入海。 
现代文：有灌口这个地方，比各口都大得多，而近日所溃决的蒋家、鲍家、畀家三口直接与其相合，应当深挖成河，使水从此处入海。 
English: There is a gully here, which is much larger than all the other gullys, and the three that have been breached recently, the Jiang family, the Bao family, and the Xing family, are directly connected to it. They should dig deep into the river, so that the water can enter the sea from here.

古文：工部主事樊兆程亦议辟海口，而言： 旧海口决不可浚，当自鲍家营至五港口挑浚成河，令从灌口入海。 
现代文：工部主事樊兆程也主张开辟入海口，于是说： 以前的入海口决不可以疏通，应当从鲍家营到五港口挖掘成河，让水从灌口入海。 
English: Gong Zhaocheng, the head of the engineering department, also advocated opening up the entrance to the sea, and said: The previous entrance to the sea should never be dredged, and rivers should be excavated from Baojiaying to the five ports, so that water can enter the sea from the mouth.

古文：俱下工部。
现代文：全都下发到工部。
English: All of them were sent to the Ministry of Works.

古文：请并委企程勘议。
现代文：请一起委托张企程勘测商议。
English: Please entrust Zhang Becheng with the survey and discussion.

古文：是时，总河工部尚书杨一魁被论，乞罢，因言： 清口宜浚，黄河故道宜复，高堰不必修，石堤不必砌，减水闸坝不必用。 
现代文：这时，总管治理黄河的工部尚书杨一魁被弹劾，请求罢免，于是说： 清口应当疏通，黄河故道应当恢复，高堰不必修，石堤不必砌，减水闸坝不必用。 
English: At this time, Yang Yikai of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, who was in charge of managing the Yellow River, was impeached and asked to be removed. He then said: Clearings should be cleared, the Yellow River should be restored to its former course, high weirs do not need to be repaired, stone dikes do not need to be built, and sluice dams should not be used.

古文：帝不允辞，而诏以尽心任事。
现代文：皇帝没有允许他辞官，而诏令他把全部心思用于办事。
English: The emperor did not allow him to resign, but ordered him to devote all his attention to his duties.

古文：御史夏之臣则言： 海口沙不可劈，草湾河不必浚，腰铺新河四十里不必开，云梯关不必辟，惟当急开高堰，以救祖陵。 
现代文：御史夏之臣则说： 海口的泥沙不能劈开，草湾河道不必疏通，腰铺新河四十里不必开通，云梯关不必开辟，祇应当赶快挖开高堰，以拯救祖陵。 
English: The Minister of History Xia said: The sands of Haikou cannot be split, the Caowan River does not need to be dredged, the 40 li of the Waipu New River does not need to be opened, and the Yunli Pass does not need to be opened, but the high weir should be quickly excavated to save the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：且言： 历年以来，高良涧土堤每遇伏秋即冲决，大涧口石堤每遇汹涌即崩溃。
现代文：又说： 历年以来，高良涧土堤每遇夏秋之季就被冲决，大涧口石堤每遇汹涌之水就垮塌。
English: He also said: Over the years, the Gaoliangyu earthen dike has been breached every summer and autumn, and the Daxigou stone dike has collapsed every time the water surged.

古文：是高堰在，为高、宝之利小；而高堰决，则为高、宝之害大也。
现代文：这是高堰存在，给高、宝带来的便利小；而高堰溃决，则给高、宝带来的危害大。
English: This is the existence of the high weir, which brings little convenience to the high and treasure; while the collapse of the high weir brings great harm to the high and treasure.

古文：孰若明议而明开之，使知趋避乎？ 
现代文：哪里比得上区分不同的主张而有区分地开通它，使其知道趋利避害呢？ 
English: What can be compared to distinguishing different propositions and opening it up in a differentiated way, so that it knows how to benefit and avoid harm?

古文：给事中黄运泰则又言： 黄河下流未泄，而遽开高堰、周桥以泄淮水，则淮流南下，黄必乘之，高、宝间尽为沼，而运道月河必冲决矣。
现代文：给事中黄运泰则又说： 黄河下游不通畅，就仓猝开挖高堰、周桥以泄淮水，则淮水南下，黄水必定乘机追逐，高、宝之间完全成为池沼，然而，漕运河道中的月河必定被冲决。
English: Huang Yun Tai also said in the report: The lower reaches of the Yellow River are not smooth. If the high weir and the surrounding bridge are suddenly excavated to release the floodwater, the floodwater will go south. The yellow water must take the opportunity to chase. The area between the high and the treasure has completely become a pond. However, the Moon River in the canal path must be washed out.

古文：不如浚五港口，达灌口门，以入於海之为得也。 
现代文：倒不如疏通五港口，直达灌口闸门，以便流入大海为有利。 
English: It would be better to dredge the five ports, right up to the sluice gate, so that it flows into the sea.

古文：诏并行勘议。
现代文：诏令一起进行勘测商议。
English: The imperial edict called for a joint survey and discussion.

古文：企程乃上言： 前此河不为陵患，自隆庆末年高、宝、淮、扬告急，当事狃於目前，清口既淤，又筑高堰以遏之，堤张福以束之，障全淮之水与黄角胜，不虞其势不敌也。
现代文：张企程于是上奏说： 原先，黄河没有给陵园带来祸患，从隆庆末年高、宝、淮、扬报告紧急情况，主持这事的人安于目前情势，清口已经淤塞，又筑高堰加以阻止，筑张福堤加以约束，阻挡整个淮河之水与黄河水比试高下，不料其水势不能抵挡。
English: Zhang Qicheng then said in his report: Originally, the Yellow River did not bring any disaster to the cemetery. From the end of the Longqing, Gao, Bao, Huai and Yang reported an emergency. The person in charge of this matter was satisfied with the current situation. The clearing has been blocked, and a high weir has been built to prevent it. A Zhangfu dike has been built to restrict it and block the entire Huai River. When the water of the Huai River is higher than that of the Yellow River, it is not surprising that its water potential cannot be resisted.

古文：迨后甃石加筑，堙塞愈坚，举七十二溪之水汇於泗者，仅留数丈一口出之，出者什一，停者什九。
现代文：等到后来用砖石加筑，淤塞更加坚实，整个七十二溪之水汇合于泅水，只保留数丈宽的一个决口为流出的通道，流出的只有十分之一，停留的十分之九。
English: Later, masonry was added, and the silting became more solid. The water of the entire 72 streams converged on Surabaya, leaving only a few feet wide opening for the outflow channel. Only one-tenth of the water flowed out, and nine-tenths remained.

古文：河身日高，流日壅，淮日益不得出，而潴蓄日益深，安得不倒流旁溢为泗陵患乎？
现代文：河床一天天增高，流水一天天被壅塞，淮水一天天更加不能流出，然后积聚之水一天天逐渐加深，怎磨能不倒流向侧面泛滥成为泗州陵墓的灾害呢？
English: The riverbed is rising day by day, the flowing water is being blocked day by day, and the whitewater cannot flow out day by day, and then the accumulated water gradually deepens day by day. How can it not flow back to the side and become a disaster for the mausoleum in Zhangzhou?

古文：今议疏淮以安陵，疏黄以导淮者，言人人殊。
现代文：今主张疏通淮河以使陵墓安全，疏通黄河以引导淮河的人，谈论这事每人主张不相同。
English: Those who now advocate dredging the Huaihe River to make the mausoleum safe, and dredging the Yellow River to guide the Huaihe River, have different opinions on this matter.

古文：而谓高堰当决者，臣以为屏翰淮、扬，殆不可少。
现代文：然而有人认为高堰应当溃决，臣认为是保护淮、扬的屏障，必定不可缺少。
English: However, some people believe that the high weir should be breached, and the minister believes that the barrier to protect Huai and Yang is indispensable.

古文：莫若於其南五十里开周家桥注草子湖，大加开浚，一由金家湾入芒稻河注之江，一由子婴沟入广洋湖达之海，则淮水上流半有宣泄矣。
现代文：不如在其南五十里开通周家桥注于草子湖，大量加以开凿疏通，一从金家湾流入芒稻河注入到长江，一从子婴沟流入广洋湖到达大海，则淮水上游一半就有排泄之处了。
English: It would be better to open the Zhoujia Bridge 50 miles south of it and pour it into the Caozi Lake. A large amount of dredging would be carried out. Once the water from Jinjia Bay flows into the Mangdai River and into the Yangtze River, and once it flows into the Guangyang Lake from the Ziyinggou and reaches the sea, there would be a place for excretion in the upper half of Huai Shui.

古文：於其北十五里开武家墩，注永济河，由窑湾闸出口直达泾河，从射阳湖入海，则淮水下流半有归宿矣。
现代文：在其北十五里开通武家墩，注入永济河，从审湾闸出口直到泾河，从射阳湖流入大海，那么，淮水下游一半就有归宿之处了。
English: Fifteen miles to the north, the Bujiakou Canal is opened, feeding the Yongji River, from the exit of the Jiwan Gate to the Minhe River, and from the Sheyang Lake into the sea, then, the lower half of Huai Shui has a place to return to.

古文：此急救祖陵第一义也。 
现代文：这是尽快拯救祖陵的最适宜的办法。 
English: This is the best way to save the ancestral mausoleum as soon as possible.

古文：会是时，祖陵积水稍退，一魁以闻，帝大悦，仍谕诸臣急协议宣泄。
现代文：恰好在这时，祖陵的积水已经消退，杨一魁上报，皇帝非常高兴，依然诏令诸臣赶快协调商议排泄的办法。
English: Just at this time, the accumulated water in the ancestral mausoleum had subsided, Yang Yikai reported, the emperor was very happy, and still ordered the ministers to quickly coordinate and discuss the method of excretion.

古文：於是企程、一魁共议欲分杀黄流以纵淮，别疏海口以导黄。
现代文：于是，张企程、杨一魁共同商量想分流减缓黄河水流以放纵淮水，另外疏通入海口以引导黄河水。
English: As a result, Zhang Qicheng and Yang Yikui jointly discussed the idea of diversion to slow down the flow of the Yellow River to indulge the Huai River, and in addition to dredge into the estuary to guide the Yellow River water.

古文：而督漕尚书褚鈇则以江北岁祲，民不堪大役，欲先泄淮而徐议分黄。
现代文：然而，督漕尚书褚鈇则以长江之北每年有灾祸，百姓不能承担大的劳役，想首先排泄淮河之水然后慢慢地商量分流黄河之水。
English: However, the governor, Shang Shuxuan, said that there were disasters every year in the north of the Yangtze River, and the people could not bear the heavy labor. He wanted to first drain the water of the Huaihe River and then slowly discuss the diversion of the Yellow River water.

古文：御史应元折衷其说，言： 导淮势便而功易，分黄功大而利远。
现代文：御史应元折衷他们的主张，说： 引导淮河形势有利而容易成功，分流黄河工程浩大而获利久远。
English: Gu Shih Ying Yuan compromised their views, saying: Guiding the Huai River situation is favorable and easy to succeed, diversion of the Yellow River project is vast and profitable for a long time.

古文：顾河臣所请亦第六十八万金，国家亦何靳於此？ 
现代文：但是河臣所奏请也仅仅六十八万金，国家又何必吝惜于这些钱财呢？ 
English: But only 680,000 gold was requested by Kawatomi, so why should the state be stingy with this money?

古文：御史陈煃尝令宝应，虑周家桥既开，则以高邮、邵伯为壑，运道、民产、盐场交受其害，上疏争之，语甚激，大旨分黄为先，而淮不必深治。
现代文：御史陈烟曾经命令宝应，又担心周家桥已经开通，就把高邮、邵伯作为深壑，漕运河道、百姓财产和盐场全都遭受其害，上疏谏争，话语很激烈，大致意见是分流黄河为首要之事，而淮河不必过分治理。
English: Grand Historian Chen Yan once ordered Bao Ying, and worried that the Zhoujia Bridge had been opened, he regarded Gaoyou and Shao Bo as deep rivers, and the canal road, the people's property and the salt farm all suffered from it. The words were very heated, and the general opinion was that the diversion of the Yellow River was the most important thing, and the Huai River did not need to be over-governed.

古文：且欲多开入海之路，令高、宝诸湖之水皆东，而后周家桥、武家墩之水可注。
现代文：并且想多开通入海水道。让高、宝等湖的水全部束流，然后周家桥、武家墩的水可以注入。
English: And they want to open up more access to the seaway. Let the water of Gao, Bao and other lakes all be drained, and then the water from Zhoujiaqiao and Wujiayuan can be injected.

古文：而淮安知府马化龙复进分黄五难之说。
现代文：然而，淮安知府马化龙又进献分流黄河的五难之说。
English: However, Ma Hualong, the governor of Huai'an Prefecture, also put forward the five difficulties of diversion of the Yellow River.

古文：颍州兵备道李弘道又谓宜开高堰。
现代文：颖州兵备道李弘道又说应当开通高堰。
English: Yingzhou Bei Bei Road Li Hong Dao also said that the high weir should be opened.

古文：鈇遂据以上闻。
现代文：褚鈇于是根据这些上报。
English: It was on the basis of these reports that action was taken.

古文：给事中林熙春驳之，言： 淮犹昔日之淮，而河非昔日之河，先是河身未高，而淮尚安流，今则河身既高，而淮受倒灌，此导淮固以为淮，分黄亦以为淮。 
现代文：给事中林熙春驳斥他，说： 淮河还是从前的淮河，而黄河不是从前的黄河。在此之前，河床没有增高，而淮河还安静地流动，现在的河床已经增高，而淮河遭受倒灌之害，此引导淮河固然是为了淮河，分流黄河也是为了淮河。 
English: In response, Lin Xichun refuted him, saying: The Huai River is still the former Huai River, and the Yellow River is not the former Yellow River. Before this, the riverbed did not rise, and the Huai River still flowed quietly. Now the riverbed has risen, and the Huai River has suffered from backwashing. This guiding of the Huai River is certainly for the Huai River, and the diversion of the Yellow River is also for the Huai River.

古文：工部乃覆奏云： 先议开腰铺支河以分黄流，以倭儆、灾伤停寝，遂贻今日之患。
现代文：工部于是覆奏说： 首先主张开通腰铺支河以分流黄河，因为倭寇的警报和天灾伤害而停止，于是留下今日之祸患。
English: The Ministry of Works then replied: First of all, we advocated the opening of the Waipu tributary to divert the Yellow River, which was stopped due to the warning of wako and natural disasters, leaving behind today's disaster.

古文：今黄家坝分黄之工若复沮格，淮壅为害，谁职其咎？
现代文：今黄家坝分流黄河的工程如果又终止，淮河就会壅塞为害，谁承担其罪过？
English: If the project of diverting the Yellow River by the Huangjiaba Dam is terminated, the Huaihe River will be obstructed. Who will bear the blame?

古文：请令治河诸臣导淮分黄，亟行兴举。 
现代文：请命令治河诸臣引导淮河分流黄河，赶快行动。 
English: Please order the river governors to guide the diversion of the Huaihe River to the Yellow River, and act quickly.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：二十四年八月，一魁兴工未竣，复条上分淮导黄事宜十事。
现代文：万历二十四年八月，杨一魁动工，工役没有完成，又备文上奏分流淮河引导黄河事宜十件事情。
English: In August of the 24th year of Wanli, Yang Yikai started the construction, but the work was not completed. He also wrote down ten things about the diversion of the Huaihe River and the guidance of the Yellow River.

古文：十月，河工告成，直隶巡按御史蒋春芳以闻，复条上善后事宜十六事。
现代文：十月，治河工程宣告完成，直隶巡按御史蒋春芳上报，又备文上奏善后事宜十六件事情。
English: In October, the completion of the river control project was announced, and the report of Jiang Chunfang, the direct subordinate of the inspector general, was reported, and 16 matters concerning the aftermath were recorded in the document.

古文：乃赏赉一魁等有差。
现代文：于是赏赐杨一魁等人各有差别。
English: As a result, the rewards given to Yang Yikai and others varied.

古文：是役也，役夫二十万，开桃源黄河坝新河，起黄家嘴，至安东五港、灌口，长三百馀里，分泄黄水入海，以抑黄强。
现代文：这次工程，使用民工二十万，开通桃源黄河坝新河，起于黄家嘴，到达安束五港、灌口，全长三百余里，分泄黄河之水流入大海，以便抑制黄河强大的水势。
English: This project, using 200,000 migrant workers, will open the Taoyuan Yellow River Dam and the New River, starting from Huangjiazui and reaching Anzuk Wuhang and Gankou, with a total length of more than 300 miles. The water of the Yellow River will be diverted into the sea in order to suppress the strong water potential of the Yellow River.

古文：辟清口沙七里，建武家墩、高良涧、周家桥石闸，泄淮水三道入海，且引其支流入江。
现代文：排除清口淤沙七里，建置武家墩、高良涧、周家桥石闸门，分流淮水三道流入大海，并且引其支流入江。
English: Remove seven miles of silt from the mouth of the estuary, build the stone sluice gates of Bujiayuan, Gaoliayuan and Zhoujiaqiao, and divert the flow of water into the sea in three ways, and lead its tributaries into the river.

古文：於是泗陵水患平，而淮、扬安矣。
现代文：于是泗州陵墓的水患平息，而且淮、扬也安定了。
English: As a result, the flooding of the Bozhou Mausoleum subsided, and the Huai and Yang dynasties also stabilized.

古文：然是时一魁专力桃、清、淮、泗间，而上流单县黄堌口之决，以为不必塞。
现代文：然而这时，杨一魁集中精力于桃、清、淮、泗之间，而上游支流单县黄蝈口的决口，认为不必堵塞。
English: However, at this time, Yang Yikui concentrated his energy on the peach, Qing, Huai, and gourd, and the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of the upstream tributary of

古文：鈇及春芳皆请塞之。
现代文：褚鈇及蒋春芳都请求堵塞它。
English: Both Zhai and Jiang Chunfang asked for it to be blocked.

古文：给事中李应策言： 漕臣主运，河臣主工，各自为见。
现代文：给事中李应策说： 漕运之臣主管运粮，治河之臣主管工程，各人有各人的见解。
English: During the presentation, Li Yingze said: "The oarsmen are in charge of transporting grain, and the oarsmen are in charge of engineering. Everyone has their own opinions.

古文：宜再令析议。 
现代文：应当再让他们分析商议。 
English: They should be allowed to analyse the negotiations again.

古文：一魁言： 黄堌口一支由虞城、夏邑接砀山、萧县、宿州至宿迁，出白洋河，一小支分萧县两河口，出徐州小浮桥，相距不满四十里。
现代文：杨一魁说： 黄蝈口一支从虞城、夏邑连接殇山、萧县、宿州到达宿迁，出于白洋河，一小支分流萧县两河口，出于徐州小浮桥，相距不到四十里。
English: Yang Yikai said: "The Huanghuagou line runs from Yucheng and Xiayi, connecting Lushan, Xiaoshan and Suzhou, to Suqian. From the Baiyang River, a small branch flows to the Xiaoshan estuary, and from the Xuzhou small floating bridge, the distance is less than forty miles.

古文：当疏浚与正河会，更通镇口闸里湖之水，与小浮桥二水会，则黄堌口不必塞，而运道无滞矣。 
现代文：应当疏通与正河相汇，再使镇口闸裹湖的水畅通，与小浮桥二水汇合，则黄垌口就不必堵塞，而且漕运之道没有阻滞了。 
English: It should be dredged to meet the Zhenghe River, and then the water from the Zhenkou sluice to the lake should be smooth, and the two waters should meet with the small pontoon bridge, then the Huangpi mouth does not have to be blocked, and the paddling way is not blocked.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从化的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：於是议浚小浮桥、沂河口、小河口以济徐、邳运道，以泄砀、萧漫流，掊归仁堤以护陵寝。
现代文：于是，议定疏通小浮桥、沂河口、小河口以拯济徐、邳漕运河道，以排泄殇、萧漫流之水，垒好归仁堤以护卫皇陵。
English: As a result, it was agreed to dredge the small pontoon bridge, the estuary of the Min River, the small estuary to save lives, and the canal road to drain the turbulent and turbulent water, and to build the Guiren dike to protect the imperial mausoleum.

古文：是时，徐、邳复见清、泗运道不利，鈇终以为忧。
现代文：这时，徐、邳又显露出清、泗漕运之道不畅通，褚鈇终究以此焉忧。
English: At this time, Xu and Zou again appeared to be clear, but the path of Zou's rowing was not smooth, and Zou was finally worried about this.

古文：二十五年正月，复极言黄堌口不塞，则全河南徙，害且立见。
现代文：二十五年正月，又极力建议黄蝈口不进行堵塞，则整个黄河就会改道南流，灾害又会立即出现。
English: In the first month of the 25th year, it was also strongly recommended that the mouth of the Yellow River should not be blocked, otherwise the entire Yellow River would be diverted to the south, and disasters would immediately occur.

古文：议者亦多恐下啮归仁，为二陵患。
现代文：谈论此事的人也多害怕向下吞没归仁，带给二陵墓水患。
English: Many people who talk about this are also afraid of swallowing Guiren downwards and bringing flooding to the two mausoleums.

古文：三月，小浮桥等口工垂竣，一魁言：
现代文：三月，小浮桥等决口补筑治理工程将近竣工，杨一魁说：
English: In March, Yang Yikui said that the bridge repair project was nearing completion.

古文： 运道通利，河徙不相妨，已有明验。
现代文：漕运河道畅通，黄河改道不会互相妨碍，已经有了明显的证验。
English: The smooth passage of the Cao Canal and the diversion of the Yellow River will not interfere with each other, which has been clearly verified.

古文：惟议者以祖陵为虑，请徵往事折之。
现代文：只有议论此事的人以祖陵焉忧虑，请收求以前的事例来折服他们。
English: Only those who are talking about it are worried about their ancestral tombs. Please ask for previous cases to convince them.

古文：洪武二十四年，河决原武，东南至寿州入淮。
现代文：洪武二十四年，黄河在原武决堤，往东南流到达寿州流入淮河。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Yuanwu and flowed southeast to Shoushou and into the Huai River.

古文：永乐九年，河北入鱼台。未几复南决，由涡河经怀远入淮。
现代文：永乐九年，黄河向北流入鱼台不久，又在南边决口，从涡河经过怀速流入淮河。
English: In the ninth year of Yongle, the Yellow River flowed northward into the Yutai shortly, and then broke out in the south, flowing from the Turbulent River through Huaihuang into the Huaihe River.

古文：时两河合流，历凤、泗以出清口，未闻为祖陵患。
现代文：这时两河合流，经过凤、泗从清口流出，没有听说带给祖陵水患。
English: At this time, the confluence of the two rivers, after the phoenix and dragonfly flowed out of the clearing, and it was not heard that it brought flooding to the ancestral tomb.

古文：正统十三年，河北冲张秋。
现代文：正统十三年，黄河向北直冲张秋。
English: In the 13th year of the orthodoxy, the Yellow River rushed northward to Zhangqiu.

古文：景泰中，徐有贞塞之，复由涡河入淮。
现代文：景泰年间，徐有贞将其堵塞，一又从涡河流入淮河。
English: During the Jing-Tai era, Xu Youzhen blocked it, and it flowed from the Vortex River into the Huai River.

古文：弘治二年，河又北冲，白昂、刘大夏塞之，复南流，一由中牟至颍、寿，一由亳州至涡河入淮，一由宿迁小河口会泗。
现代文：弘治二年，黄河又向北冲注，白昂、刘大夏将其堵塞，又向南流，一处从中牟到颖、寿，一处从毫州到涡河流入淮河，一处从宿迁小河口汇合于泅水。
English: In the second year of the Hongzhi era, the Yellow River flowed north again, and Bai'ang and Liu Daxia blocked it, and it flowed south again, from Zhongmou to Ying and Shou, from Maozhou to the vortex river into the Huai River, and from the Suqian small estuary to the confluence in Surabaya.

古文：全河大势纵横颍、亳、凤、泗间，下溢符离、睢、宿，未闻为祖陵虑，亦不闻堤及归仁也。
现代文：整个黄河大量水势纵横于颖、亳、凤、泗之间，往下泛滥于符离、睢、宿，没有听说带给祖陵忧虑，也没有听说筑堤殃及归仁。
English: Throughout the Yellow River, a large amount of water flowed vertically and horizontally between Ying, Fen, Feng and Fen, and flooded down to Fuyuan, Fen and Shukou. It was not heard that it brought worries to the ancestral mausoleum, nor was it heard that the construction of the dike would affect Guiren.

古文：正德三年后，河渐北徙，由小浮桥、飞云桥、谷亭三道入漕，尽趋徐、邳，出二洪，运道虽济，而泛溢实甚。
现代文：正德三年以后，黄河逐渐改道向北，从小浮桥、飞云桥、谷亭三道流入漕河，全都直奔徐、邳，出于二河，漕运河道虽然流通，但是泛滥实际上更加严重。
English: Three years after Zhengde, the Yellow River gradually changed its course to the north. From the small floating bridge, the flying cloud bridge, and the valley pavilion, three roads flowed into the Caohe River, all of which went straight to Xu and Lu. From the two rivers, although the Caohe Canal was in circulation, the flooding was actually more serious.

古文：嘉靖十一年，朱裳始有涡河一支中经凤阳祖陵未敢轻举之说。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，朱裳开始纔有涡河一条支流中间经过凤阳祖陵不敢轻率行动的说法。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Zhu Xiang began to say that there was a tributary of the Turbulent River passing through the middle of the Fengyang Ancestral Mausoleum and did not dare to act rashly.

古文：然当时犹时浚祥符之董盆口、宁陵之五里铺、荥泽之孙家渡、兰阳之赵皮寨，又或决睢州之地丘店、界牌口、野鸡冈，宁陵之杨村铺，俱入旧河，从亳、凤入淮，南流未绝，亦何尝为祖陵患？
现代文：然而当时，仍然时而疏通祥符的董盆口、宁陵的五里铺、荣泽的孙家渡、兰阳的赵皮寨，而且有的决堤于睢州的地丘店、界牌口、野鸡冈，宁陵的杨村铺，全都流入旧河，从毫、凤流入淮河，南流的水没有断流，又何曾带给祖陵水患？
English: However, at that time, the Dong Basin estuary, the Wuliangpu in Ningling, the Sunjiadu in Rongze, the Zhao Pizhai in Lanyang, which were still intermittently dredged, and some levees in the Dechu store, the Jiepai mouth, the Pheasant Hill, and the Yangcun shop in Ningling, all flowed into the old river, from the mill and the phoenix into the Huai River, and the water of the south stream was not interrupted, and what brought flooding to the ancestral tomb?

古文：嘉靖二十五年后，南流故道始尽塞，或由秦沟入漕，或由浊河入漕。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年以后，向南流的故道开始完全堵塞，有的从秦沟流入漕河，有的从浊河流入漕河。
English: After the 25th year of Jiajing, the old path of the southward flow began to be completely blocked, some flowing into the Caohe River from the Qin Ditch, and some flowing into the Caohe River from the Fen River.

古文：五十年来全河尽出徐、邳，夺泗入淮。
现代文：五十年以来，整个黄河完全出于徐、邳，直冲泗水流入淮河。
English: Over the past 50 years, the entire Yellow River has been flowing into the Huaihe River from the Xujiang and Yangtze Rivers.

古文：而当事者方认客作主，日筑堤而窘之，以致河流日壅，淮不敌黄，退而内潴，遂贻盱、泗祖陵之患。
现代文：然而，主持这事的人正把次要的当作主要的，每天筑堤来限制它，从而致使河流一天天壅塞，淮水对抗不过黄水，返回向内蓄积，于是留下盱、泗祖陵之水患。
English: However, the people in charge of this matter are treating the minor as the major, building dikes every day to restrict it, thus causing the river to be blocked day by day, and the brackish water can only resist the yellow water and return to the inner accumulation, thus leaving the flooding of the ancestral tombs of the ancestors.

古文：此实由内水之停壅，不由外水之冲射也。
现代文：这实际上是由于内永的蓄积，不是因为受外水的冲注。
English: This is actually due to the accumulation of internal water, not because of the impact of external water.

古文：万历七年，潘季驯始虑黄流倒灌小河、白洋等口，挟诸河水冲射祖陵，乃作归仁堤为保障计，复张大其说，谓祖陵命脉全赖此堤。
现代文：万历七年，潘季驯开始担心黄水倒灌入小河、白洋等河口，挟带各河水冲注祖陵，于是修筑归仁堤作为保护的办法，又夸大其主张，称祖陵的命脉完全依赖于此堤。
English: After seven long years, Pan Jitai began to worry about the yellow water pouring into the estuaries of small rivers, the White Ocean, and so on, and the rivers rushing into the ancestral mausoleum, so he built the Guiren dike as a protection method, and exaggerated his claim, saying that the lifeblood of the ancestral mausoleum was completely dependent on this dike.

古文：习闻其说者，遂疑黄堌之决，下啮归仁，不知黄堌一决，下流易泄，必无上灌之虞。
现代文：经常听到他的主张的人，就怀疑黄蝈的溃决，向下侵蚀归仁，不知黄蝈一旦溃决，下游容易排泄，一定没有向上灌注的忧虑。
English: People who often listen to his ideas doubt the eradication of yellow rust, erode downwards and return to the core. They do not know that once yellow rust is eradicated, it is easy to excrete downstream, and there must be no worries about perfusion upwards.

古文：况今小河不日竣工，引河复归故道，云归仁益远，奚烦过计为？ 
现代文：何况今小河不久就会竣工，引导河水再回故道，离开归仁更远，怎么还为不必要的忧虑担心呢？
English: Besides, now that the small river will soon be completed, guiding the river back to its former course, further away from Guiren, why worry about unnecessary worries?

古文：报可。
现代文：回报许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：一魁既开小浮桥，筑义安山，浚小河口，引武沂泉济运。
现代文：杨一魁已经开通小浮桥，在义安山筑堤，疏通小河口，引武沂泉拯济运河。
English: Yang Yikui has opened a small floating bridge, built a dike on Mount Yi'an, dredged a small estuary, and diverted the Wuquan Lifesaving Canal.

古文：及是年四月，河复大决黄堌口，溢夏邑、永城，由宿州府离桥出宿迁新河口入大河，其半由徐州入旧河济运。
现代文：直到这年四月，黄河又在黄蝈口大决口，泛滥于夏邑、永城，从宿州符离桥流出到宿迁新河口流入大河，其中一半从徐州流入旧河拯济运河。
English: Until April of this year, the Yellow River began to overflow at the Huanghuagou Great Breakthrough, flooding Xiayi and Yongcheng. It flowed from the Fuli Bridge in Suizhou to the Suqian New Estuary and flowed into the big river. Half of it flowed from Xuzhou into the Old River Zhengji Canal.

古文：上源水枯，而义安束水横坝复冲二十馀丈，小浮桥水脉微细，二洪告涸，运道阻涩。
现代文：上游水枯竭，然而，义安约束河水的横坝又被冲毁二十余丈，小浮桥水流细小，徐州百步洪、吕梁洪之水宣告干枯，漕运河道阻塞。
English: The upstream water is exhausted, however, the horizontal dam that constrains the river water in Yian has been washed out for more than 20 meters, the water flow of the small pontoon bridge is small, the water of Xuzhou Baibuhong and Lulianghong has been declared dry, and the canal road is blocked.

古文：一魁因议挑黄堌口迤上埽湾、淤嘴二处，且大挑其下李吉口北下浊河，救小浮桥上流数十里之涸。
现代文：杨一魁因而主张挖通黄蝈口向上到埽湾、淤嘴二处，并且大量挖深其下游李吉口北以下的浊河，拯救小浮桥上游敷十里的干枯河道。
English: As a result, Yang Yikui advocated digging through the mouth of the Yellow River up to the mouth of the Bohai Bay, and digging deep into the lower reaches of the Bohai River north of the Liji River to save the dry riverbed ten miles upstream of the small pontoon bridge.

古文：复上言： 黄河南旋至韩家道、盘岔河、丁家庄，俱岸阔百丈，深逾二丈，乃铜帮铁底故道也。
现代文：又上奏说： 黄河向南迂回到韩家道、盘岔河、丁家庄，全都河岸宽一百丈，深超过二丈，就是铜帮铁底故道。
English: He also said: The Yellow River detours to the south and returns to Hanjia Road, Panyu River and Dingjia Township. All the riverbanks are one hundred meters wide and more than two meters deep, which is the old way of copper and iron.

古文：至刘家洼，始强半南流，得山西坡、永涸湖以为壑，出溪口入符离河，亦故道也。
现代文：到刘家洼，然后多半往南流，到山西坡、永涸湖而成为深河，出于溪口流入符离河，也是故道。
English: It flows to Liujiahua, and then mostly to the south, to the Shanxi slope, Lake Yongxiao, and becomes a deep river. It flows from the mouth of the stream into the Fuxiang River, which is also the old way.

古文：惟徐、邳运道浅涸，所以首议开小浮桥，再加挑辟，必大为运道之利。
现代文：只有徐、邳漕运河道之水浅少，所以首先主张开通小浮桥，再加以挖宽，一定会大大地为漕运河道带来便利。
English: Only the water of the canal roads of Xu and Bao Cao is shallow. Therefore, it is first advocated to open a small floating bridge, and then dig it wider, which will greatly bring convenience to the canal road.

古文：乃欲自黄堌挽回全河，必须挑四百里淤高之河身，筑三百里南岸之长堤，不惟所费不赀，窃恐后患无已。 
现代文：于是想从黄垌挽回整个河道，必须挖深四百里淤塞的河床，修筑三百里南岸的长堤，不仅历耗费的钱财不能供给，私下担心后患不会停止。 
English: Therefore, in order to recover the entire river from the Yellow River, it is necessary to excavate the silted river bed four hundred miles deep and build a long embankment three hundred miles south of the bank. Not only can the money spent not be supplied, but it is privately feared that the after-effects will not stop.

古文：御史杨光训等亦议挑埽湾直渠，展济浊河，及筑山西坡归仁堤，与一魁合，独鈇异议。
现代文：御史杨光训等也主张挖深埽湾直渠，扩大拯济浊河的水流，和修筑山西坡归仁堤，与杨一魁的主张相合，惟独褚鈇有不同的主张。
English: Yang Guangxun, the governor of Shishi, and others also advocated digging a straight canal in the deep Bohai Bay, expanding the water flow of the Zhengji River, and building a mountain west slope Guiren dike, which is in line with Yang Yikai's proposal, but Yu alone has a different proposal.

古文：帝命从一魁言。
现代文：皇帝命令依从杨一魁的主张。
English: The emperor ordered to follow Yang Yikai's suggestion.

古文：一魁复言： 归仁在西北，泗州在东南，相距百九十里，中隔重冈叠嶂。
现代文：杨一魁又说： 归仁在西北，泗州在东南，相距一百九十里，中间隔有重重山冈层层险峰。
English: Yang Yikai also said: Guiren is in the northwest, Luzhou is in the southeast, one hundred and ninety miles apart, separated by mountains and dangerous peaks.

古文：且归仁之北有白洋河、朱家沟、周家沟、胡家沟、小河口泄入运河，势如建瓴，即无归仁，祖陵无足虑。
现代文：而且归仁之北有白洋河、朱家沟、周家沟、胡家沟、小河口泄入运河，水势如高屋建瓴，不可阻挡，即使没有归仁，祖陵也不值得忧虑。
English: Moreover, the Baiyang River, Zhujiagou, Zhoujiagou, Hujiagou and the small estuary spill into the canal in the north of Guiren. The water potential is like a high-rise building, it is unstoppable. Even if there is no Guiren, the ancestral mausoleum is not worth worrying about.

古文：浊河淤垫，高出地上，曹、单间阔一二百丈，深二三丈，尚不免横流，徐、邳间仅百丈，深止丈馀，徐西有浅至二三尺者，而夏、永、韩家道口至符离，河阔深视曹、单，避高就下，水之本性，河流所弃，自古难复。
现代文：浊河淤塞，高出地面，曹、单之间宽一二百丈，深二三丈，尚且不可避免河水泛滥，徐、邳之间祇有一百丈，深只一丈多，徐州西面有浅到二三尺的地方，而夏、永、韩家道口到符离，河的宽深与曹、单相当，避高就下，是水的本性，河流所舍弃的地方，自古以来难以恢复。
English: The Li River is silted up. It is higher than the ground. Between Cao and Shan, the width is 1200 meters and the depth is 23 meters. It is still unavoidable that the river floods. Between Xu and Shan, there is only 100 meters, and the depth is only one meter more. There are places in the west of Xuzhou that are shallow to 23 meters. And from Xia, Yong and Hanjiagou to Fuyuan, the width and depth of the river are equivalent to Cao and Shan. Avoiding high and going down is the nature of water. The places abandoned by rivers have been difficult to recover since ancient times.

古文：且运河本籍山东诸泉，不资黄水，惟当仿正统间二洪南北口建闸之制，於镇口之下，大浮桥之上，吕梁之下洪，邳州之沙坊，各建石闸，节宣汶、泗，而以小浮桥、沂河口二水助之，更於镇口西筑坝截黄，开唐家口而注之龙沟，会小浮桥入运，以杜灌淤镇口之害，实万全计也。 
现代文：况且运河本是凭藉山东诸泉水，不凭借黄河之水，只是应当仿照正统年间在徐州百步洪、吕梁洪的南北口修建闸门的做法，在镇口以下，大浮桥以上和吕梁下洪，以及邳州的沙坊，各修建石闸门，控制和排泄汶、泗之水，并且用小浮桥、沂河口二水帮助它，另外在镇口西筑坝拦截黄河，打开唐家口而注入龙沟，汇合于小浮桥流入运河，以断绝淤塞镇口的祸害，实为万全的计策。 
English: Moreover, the canal was originally built with the help of the springs of Shandong, not with the help of the Yellow River water. However, it should be modeled on the practice of building gates at the north and south entrances of Xuzhou Baibuhong and Lulianghong in the orthodox years. Below the town entrance, above the large floating bridge and Luliang lower Hong, and in the sandbox of Luzhou, stone gates should be built to control and drain the water of Wen and Lu, and use the small floating bridge and the two waters of the mouth of the Lu River to help it. In addition, dam the Yellow River at the west entrance of the town, open the mouth of

古文：报可。
现代文：回报许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：二十六年春，从杨光训等议，撤鈇，命一魁兼管漕运。
现代文：万历二十六年春，依从杨光训等的主张，撤去褚鈇的职务，命令杨一魁兼管漕运。
English: In the spring of the 26th year of the Wanli calendar, in accordance with Yang Guangxun's and other people's opinions, Yang Yikui was removed from the post of commander and ordered to take charge of rowing.

古文：六月，召一魁掌部事，命刘东星为工部侍郎，总理河漕。
现代文：六月，召回杨一魁掌管工部，命令刘束星为工部侍郎，总理河漕。
English: In June, Yang Yikui, who was in charge of the Ministry of Industry, was recalled and Liu Sok Xing was ordered to serve as the Minister of Industry, the Prime Minister's second-in-command.

古文：二十七年春，东星上言： 河自商、虞而下，由丁家道口抵韩家道口、赵家圈、石将军庙、两河口，出小浮桥下二洪，乃贾鲁故道也。
现代文：万历二十七年春，刘东星上奏说： 黄河从商、虞以下，经由丁家道口直到韩家道口、赵家圈、石将军庙、两河口，出于小浮桥下徐、旦二洪，就是贾鲁故道。
English: In the spring of the 27th year of the Wanli calendar, Liu Dongxing said: The Yellow River flows from Shang and Yu below, through the mouth of the Ding family to the mouth of the Han family, the Zhao family circle, the Stone General Temple, the two estuaries, and from the small pontoon bridge to Xu and Tan Erhong, which is the old way of Jialu.

古文：自元及我朝行之甚利。
现代文：从元开始到我明朝水流束行非常顺利。
English: From the beginning to my morning, the water flow was very smooth.

古文：嘉靖三十七年北徙浊河，而此河遂淤。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年，浊河改道向北，而此河便淤塞。
English: In the 37th year of Jiajing, the Min River was diverted to the north, and the river became silted up.

古文：潘季驯议复开之，以工费浩繁而止。
现代文：潘季驯主张再开通它，因为工程耗费太大而停止。
English: Pan Ji Tame advocated reopening it, but stopped because the project was too expensive.

古文：今河东决黄堌，由韩家道口至赵家圈百馀里，冲刷成河，即季驯议复之故道也。
现代文：今黄河向东在黄蝈决堤，经由韩家道口到赵家圈一百余里，冲刷成为河道，就是潘季驯主张恢复的故道。
English: At present, the Yellow River breaks through the dike at Huangpi to the east, and flows for more than a hundred miles from the mouth of the Han Family Road to the Zhao Family Circle, and is scoured to become a river channel. This is the old road that Pan Jitai advocated to restore.

古文：由赵家圈至两河口，直接三仙台新渠，长仅四十里，募夫五万浚之，逾月当竣，而大挑运河，小挑浊河，俱可节省。
现代文：从趟家圈到两河口，直通三仙台新渠，长只有四十里，征召民工五万人来疏通它，一个多月就会竣工，然后大部分人挖通运河，小部分人挖通浊河，都可以节省人力物力。
English: The Sendai New Canal is only 40 miles long and runs directly from Wajia Circle to the mouths of the two rivers. Fifty thousand migrant workers will be recruited to dredge it. It will be completed in more than a month. After that, most people will dig through the canal, and a small number of people will dig through the Minhe River, which can save manpower and material resources.

古文：惟李吉口故道尝挑复淤，去冬已挑数里，前功难弃，然至镇口三百里而遥，不若赵家圈至两河口四十里而近。
现代文：只有李吉口故道曾经挖通又被淤寒，去年冬天已经挖通数里，前面的功劳难以舍弃，然而到镇口三百里如此遥远，不如赵家圈到两河口四十里这样近。
English: Only the Li Jikou Ancient Road has been excavated and silted up. Last winter, several miles have been excavated, and it is difficult to abandon the previous achievements. However, it is so far away from the town of 300 miles that it is not as close as Zhao Jia Hui to the two estuaries of 40 miles.

古文：况大浮桥已建闸蓄汶、泗之水，则镇口济运亦无藉黄流。 
现代文：何况大浮桥已经建立闸门蓄积汶、泗之水，则镇口拯济运河也就不凭借黄河之水。 
English: Besides, the Great Floating Bridge has already built a sluice gate to accumulate the water of the Wen and Lu, so the Zhenkou Rescue Canal will not rely on the water of the Yellow River.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十月，功成，加东星工部尚书，一魁及馀官赏赉有差。
现代文：十月，治理成功，加封刘束星工部尚，书，杨一魁及其余官员也有不同的赏赐。
English: In October, the governance was successful, and Liu Shuxing, Shang Shu, Yang Yikai and other officials of the Ministry of Industry and Trade were also rewarded with different rewards.

古文：初，给事中杨廷兰因黄堌之决，请开泇河，给事中杨应文亦主其说。
现代文：起初，给事中杨廷兰因为黄蝈的溃决，请求开通洳河，给事中杨应文也主张他的说法。
English: At first, Yang Tinglan requested the opening of the Minhe River because of Huang Qi's defeat in the case, and Yang Yingwen also advocated his view in the case.

古文：既而直隶巡按御史佴祺复言之。
现代文：随后，直隶巡按御史佴祺又说到这件事。
English: Later, the Vice-Governor of Jilin Province also mentioned the matter.

古文：东星既开赵家圈，复采众说，凿泇河，以地多沙石，工未就而东星病。
现代文：刘东星已经开通赵家圈，又采纳大家的主张，开通洳河，因为地面多是沙石，工程没有完成而刘柬星生病。
English: Liu Dongxing has opened the Zhao family circle, and adopted everyone's idea to open the Fenhe River, because the ground is mostly sand and stone, the project is not completed and Liu Camxing is sick.

古文：河既南徙，李吉口淤氵殿日高，北流遂绝，而赵家圈亦日就淤塞，徐、邳间三百里，河水尺馀，粮艘阻塞。
现代文：黄河已经改道向南，李吉口淤积一天天增高，北面分支完全断流，而且赵家圈也一天天逐渐淤塞，徐、邳之间三百里，河水只有一尺多深，运粮船只被阻塞。
English: The Yellow River has been diverted to the south. The siltation in Lijikou is increasing day by day. The north branch is completely cut off. Moreover, the Zhao family circle is gradually silting up day by day. Three hundred miles between Xu and Handan, the river water is only more than one foot deep. Grain transport vessels are blocked.

古文：二十九年秋，工科给事中张问达疏论之。
现代文：万历二十九年秋，工科给事中张问达上疏陈述这事。
English: In the autumn of the 29th year of the Wanli calendar, Zhang Qiaodang stated this in the engineering department.

古文：会开、归大水，河涨商丘，决萧家口，全河尽南注。
现代文：适逢开、归发生大水，黄河水涨到商丘，在萧家口决堤，整个黄河完全往南流。
English: The flood occurred at the opening and return of the year. The water of the Yellow River rose to Shangqiu and broke through the dike at Xiaojiakou, and the entire Yellow River flowed completely southward.

古文：河身变为平沙，商贾舟胶沙上。
现代文：河床变成平坦的沙地，商人的船只在沙上搁浅。
English: The riverbed became a flat sandy plain, and the merchant ships ran aground on the sand.

古文：南岸蒙墙寺忽徙置北岸，商、虞多被淹没，河势尽趋东南，而黄堌断流。
现代文：南岸蒙墙寺忽然迁移到北岸，商、虞之地大多被淹没，水势完全直奔东南，而黄蝈断流。
English: Mengwu Temple on the south bank was suddenly moved to the north bank, and most of the commercial and strategic areas were flooded. The water completely went straight to the southeast, and the Huangpi River was cut off.

古文：河南巡抚曾如春以闻，曰： 此河徙，非决也。 
现代文：河南巡抚曾如春上报，说： 这是黄河改道，不是决堤。 
English: The Henan governor once reported in the spring, saying: This is a diversion of the Yellow River, not a dam break.

古文：问达复言： 萧家口在黄堌上流，未有商舟不能行於萧家口而能行於黄堌以东者，运艘大可虑。 
现代文：张问达又说： 萧家口在黄蝈上游，没有经商船只不能行驶于萧家口却能行驶于黄蝈以束的情况，漕运船只很值得忧虑。 
English: Zhang Qinda also said: Xiao Jia Kou is in the upper reaches of Huangpi, no commercial vessels can not travel in Xiao Jia Kou but can travel in Huangpi Bund, rowing vessels are very worrying.

古文：帝从其言，方命东星勘议，而东星卒矣。
现代文：皇帝依从他们的见解，将命刘束星勘查商议，然而刘束星已死了。
English: The emperor followed their opinion and discussed Liu Shuxing's death, but Liu Shuxing was already dead.

古文：问达复言： 运道之坏，一因黄堌口之决，不早杜塞；更因并力泇河，以致赵家圈淤塞断流，河身日高，河水日浅，而萧家口遂决，全河奔溃入淮，势及陵寝。
现代文：张问达又说： 漕运之道之所以被毁坏，一是因为黄蝈口的溃决，没有及时堵塞；更因为集中力量开通洳河，以致造成趟家圈淤塞断流，河床一天天增高，河水一天天浅少，而萧家口完全溃决，整个黄河冲破堤防流入淮河，水势殃及皇陵。
English: Zhang Qinda also said: The reason why the rowing route was destroyed was, firstly, because of the breaching of the Yellow River estuary, which was not blocked in time; moreover, because of the concentrated efforts to open the Min River, which resulted in the blockage and interruption of the flow of the Wujia Circle, the riverbed increased day by day, the river water became shallower day by day, and the Xiao Jia Kou was completely breached, the entire Yellow River broke through the dike and flowed into the Huai River, and the water potential affected the imperial mausoleum.

古文：东星已逝，宜急补河臣，早定长策。 
现代文：刘东星已经去世，应赶快增补治河之臣，及早商定长久之策。 
English: Liu Dongxing has passed away, it is necessary to quickly add a minister to deal with the river, and agree on a long-term strategy as early as possible.

古文：大学士沈一贯、给事中桂有根皆趣简河臣。
现代文：大学士沈一贯、给事中桂有根都催促挑选治河之臣。
English: Shen, a university scholar, has consistently urged the selection of a minister to govern the river.

古文：御史高举献三策。
现代文：御史高举进献三个方法。
English: There are three ways to make a donation to the Imperial Historical High School.

古文：请浚黄堌口以下旧河，引黄水注之东，遂塞黄堌口，而遏其南，俟旧河冲刷深，则并塞新决之口。
现代文：请疏通黄堌口以下旧河道，引黄河水注入到它的束边，完全堵塞黄堌口，又阻止它南流，等到旧河道被冲刷加深，则一起堵塞新决之口。
English: Please dredge the old river channel below the Yellow River estuary, divert the Yellow River water and inject it into the edge of its bund, completely block the Yellow River estuary, and prevent it from flowing south. When the old river channel is washed and deepened, block the mouth of the new decision together.

古文：工部尚书一魁酌举崇礼之议，以开直河、塞黄堌口、浚淤道为正策，而以泇河为旁策，胶莱为备策。
现代文：其二耕是请开通洳河及胶莱河，而建议治河漕运不应该都委于一人，应当选择人分别担任其事。江北巡按御史昊崇礼则请从蒙墙寺西北黄河弯曲的地方，开挖成直河，引水向东流。工部尚书杨一魁选取昊崇礼的主张，而开挖直河、堵塞黄蝈口、疏通淤塞水道为主要的方法，而把开通洳河作为辅助方法，开通胶莱河为备用方法。
English: The second is to open the Min River and Jiaolai River, and it is suggested that the river navigation should not be entrusted to one person, and people should be selected to take charge of it separately. Jiangbei Junpo Goshi Hao Chongli asked to dig a straight river from the place where the Yellow River bends northwest of Mengwu Temple, and divert the water to the east. Shangshu Yang of the Ministry of Works selected Hao Chongli's idea, and the main method is to dig a straight river, block the Huangpi mouth, and clear the silted waterway, while the opening of the Min River is an auxiliary method, and the opening of the Jiaol

古文：帝命急挑旧河，塞决口，且兼挑泇河以备用。
现代文：皇帝命令赶快挖通旧河，堵塞决口，又同时挖通洳河以备用。
English: The emperor ordered to quickly dig through the old river, block the outlet, and at the same time dig through the Wei River as a backup.

古文：下山东抚按勘视胶莱河。
现代文：下交山东巡抚巡按勘察胶莱河。
English: The Shandong Provincial Inspector was dispatched to survey the Jiaolai River.

古文：三十年春，一魁覆河抚如春疏言： 黄河势趋邳、宿，请筑汴堤自归德至灵、虹，以障南徙。
现代文：万历三十年春，杨一魁回复河抚曾如春的奏疏说： 黄河水势直奔邳、宿，请求从归德到灵、虹修筑汴堤，以阻止向南改道。
English: In the spring of the 30th year of the Wanli era, Yang Yikui replied to the spring-like call of the river governor, saying: The Yellow River's water potential is heading straight for Shandong and Shandong, and it is requested to build a dike from Gui De to Ling and Hong to prevent the southward diversion.

古文：且疏小河口，使黄流尽归之，则弥漫自消，祖陵可无患。 
现代文：并且疏通小河口，使黄河水全部返归河道，则泛滥之水自会消失，祖陵可以无忧患。 
English: And dredge the small estuary, so that all the Yellow River water returns to the river, then the flooding water will disappear, and the ancestral mausoleum can be worry-free.

古文：帝喜纳之。
现代文：皇帝赞许并采纳了他的主张。
English: The emperor approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：已而言者再疏攻一魁。
现代文：不久，谈论此事的人再次上疏攻击杨一魁。
English: Soon, people who were talking about the matter went online again to attack Yang Yikai.

古文：帝以一魁不塞黄堌口，致冲祖陵，斥为民。
现代文：皇帝认为杨一魁不堵塞黄蝈口，导致洪水直冲祖陵，被罢斥为民。
English: The emperor believed that Yang Yikui did not block the Huangluokou, resulting in a flood that directly hit the ancestral mausoleum, and he was expelled from the people.

古文：复用崇礼议，分设河漕二臣，命如春为工部侍郎，总理河道。
现代文：又采用昊崇礼的主张，分别设立河漕二臣，命令曾如春为工部侍郎，总理河道。
English: He also adopted Hao Chongli's proposal to set up two ministers of river navigation separately, and ordered Zeng Ruchun to be the chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and the prime minister of river navigation.

古文：如春议开虞城王家口，挽全河东归，须费六十万。
现代文：曾如春主张开通虞城王家口，引导整个黄河东流归海，需要耗费六十万钱财。
English: Zeng Ruchun advocated the opening of the Wangjiakou of Yucheng to guide the entire eastward flow of the Yellow River to the sea, which required the expenditure of 600,000 yuan.

古文：三十一年春，山东巡抚黄克缵言： 王家口为蒙墙上源，上流既达，则下流不可旁泄，宜遂塞蒙墙口。 
现代文：万历三十一年春，山东巡抚黄克缜说： 王家口是蒙墙上游，上游已经畅通，则下游就不可往旁边排泄，应当及时堵塞蒙墙口。 
English: In the spring of the 31st year of the lunar calendar, Huang Kegui, the inspector of Shandong Province, said: Wangjiakou is the upstream of the wall, the upstream has been unblocked, then the downstream can not be excreted to the side, and the wall should be blocked in time.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的奏请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时蒙墙决口广八十馀丈，如春所开新河未及其半，塞而注之，虑不任受。
现代文：这时，蒙墙决口宽八十余丈，萱塑春所开通的新河不及它的一半，堵塞蒙墙然后注入新河，担心不能承受。
English: At this time, the break in the wall is more than eighty meters wide, and the new river opened by the plastic spring is less than half of it, blocking the wall and then injecting the new river. I am worried that I can't bear it.

古文：有献策者言： 河流既回，势若雷霆，藉其势冲之，浅者可深也。 
现代文：有进献计策的人说： 黄河水流既已回流，势若雷霆，藉其水势冲刷新河，浅的地方可以加深。 
English: Some people with suggestions said: Since the Yellow River has started to flow back, it is like a thunderstorm, and the new river can be washed away by its water potential, and the shallow places can be deepened.

古文：如春遂令放水，水皆泥沙，流少缓，旋淤。
现代文：曾如春就下令放水，水襄全是泥沙，水流少而缓慢，随即淤塞。
English: Zeng Ruchun ordered the release of water, but the water was all mud and sand, the water flow was small and slow, and then silted up.

古文：夏四月，水暴涨，冲鱼、单、丰、沛间，如春以忧卒。
现代文：夏初四月，河水突然上涨，直冲鱼、单、丰、沛之间，曾如春因为忧虑而死。
English: At the beginning of summer in April, the river water suddenly rose, and directly hit the fish, the single, the rich, and the poor. Zeng Ruchun died because of anxiety.

古文：乃命李化龙为工部侍郎，代其任。
现代文：于是命李化龙为工部侍郎，替代他的职位。
English: As a result, he appointed Li Hualong as the chamberlain of the engineering department, replacing his position.

古文：给事中宋一韩言： 黄河故道已复，陵、运无虞。
现代文：给事中宋一韩说： 黄河故道已经恢复，皇陵、运河没有忧虑。
English: Regarding the matter, Song Yihan said: The ancient way of the Yellow River has been restored, and the imperial tombs and canals are not worried.

古文：决口惧难塞，宜深浚坚城以上浅阻，而增筑徐、邳两岸，使下流有所容，则旧河可塞。 
现代文：决口恐怕难以堵塞，应当深挖坚城以上水浅之处，又增筑徐、邳两岸河堤，使下游有地方容纳，则旧河可以堵塞。 
English: I am afraid that the breach will be difficult to block. The shallow places above Jiancheng should be dug deep, and the embankments on both sides of the river should be built, so that there is room to accommodate the downstream. Then the old river can be blocked.

古文：给事中孟成己言： 塞旧河急，而浚新河尤急。 
现代文：给事中孟成己说： 堵塞旧河紧急，然而疏通新河更加紧急。 
English: On the matter, Meng Chengji said: It is urgent to block the old river, but it is even more urgent to clear the new river.

古文：化龙甫至，河大决单县苏家庄及曹县缕堤，又决沛县四铺口太行堤，灌昭阳湖，入夏镇，横冲运道。
现代文：李化龙刚到来，黄河在单题蓝塞庄及曹县的缕堤大溃决，又在沛县四铺口太行堤溃决，注入昭阳湖，流入夏镇，横冲漕运河道。
English: Just after Li Hualong's arrival, the Yellow River broke through the main dike in Lansaizhuang and Cao County, and broke through the Taihang Dike at Shipugou in Peixian County, flowing into Zhaoyang Lake, flowing into Xia Town, and rushing through the canal.

古文：化龙议开泇河，属之邳州直河，以避河险。
现代文：李化龙主张开通洳河，连接到邳州直河，以避黄河决堤之险。
English: Li Hualong advocated opening the Min River and connecting it to the Minzhou Straight River to avoid the risk of the Yellow River bursting its banks.

古文：给事中侯庆远因言： 泇河成，则他工可徐图，第毋纵河入淮。
现代文：给事中侯庆远于是说： 洳河开通成功，则其它工程可以慢慢地谋划，只是不要放纵黄河流入淮河。
English: In the middle of the matter, Hou Qingyuan then said: If the opening of the Min River is successful, then other projects can be planned slowly, but do not indulge the Yellow River into the Huai River.

古文：淮利则洪泽水减，而陵自安矣。 
现代文：淮河通畅则洪泽之水减少，而陵墓自然会安宁了。 
English: If the Huaihe River is smooth, the flood water will decrease, and the mausoleum will naturally become peaceful.

古文：三十二年正月，部覆化龙疏，大略言： 河自归德而下，合运入海，其路有三：由兰阳道考城至李吉口，过坚城集，入六座楼，出茶城而向徐、邳，是名浊河，为中路；由曹、单经丰、沛，出飞云桥，泛昭阳湖，入龙塘，出秦沟而向徐、邳，是名银河，为北路；由潘家口过司家道口，至何家堤，经符离，道睢宁，入宿迁，出小河口入运，是名符离河，为南路。
现代文：万历三十二年正月，工部回复李化龙的上疏，大致是说： 黄河从归德以下，汇合运河流入大海，其路有三：从兰阳取道考城，到达李吉口，经过坚城集，流入六座楼，到茶城然后流向徐、邳，这叫做浊河，是入海的中路；从曹、单经过丰、沛，到飞云桥，泛滥于昭阳湖，流入龙塘，到秦沟然后流向徐、邳，这叫做银河，是入海的北路；从潘家口经过司家道口，到达何家堤，经过符离，取道睢宁，流入宿迁，到小河口流入运河，这叫做符离河，是入海的南路。
English: In the first month of the 32nd year of the Wanli calendar, the Ministry of Industry replied to Li Huilong's Shangso, roughly saying: There are three ways for the Yellow River to flow into the sea from Gui De and below, the confluence of the transport rivers: from Lanyang, it takes the road to Kaocheng, reaches Li Jikou, passes through Jiancheng, flows into the six buildings, to Chaecheng, and then flows to Xu and Jiu, which is called the Jiu River, which is the middle way into the sea; from Cao and Shan, it passes through Feng and Pei, to Feiyun Bridge, floods the Z

古文：南路近陵，北路近运，惟中路既远於陵，且可济运，前河臣兴役未竣，而河形尚在。 
现代文：南路接近皇陵，北路接近运河，只有中路既远离皇陵，又可以增加运河水，从前，管河之臣兴起开凿河道没有竣工，而河道的轮廓尚在。 
English: The south road is close to the imperial mausoleum, the north road is close to the canal, only the middle road is far away from the imperial mausoleum, and can increase the canal water. In the past, the courtiers of the river had not been completed, but the outline of the river was still there.

古文：因奏开泇有六善。
现代文：于是，奏请开通洳河有六条好处。
English: As a result, there are six benefits to opening the Min River.

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：皇帝依从他的主张。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：工部尚书姚继可言： 黄河冲徙，河臣议於坚城集以上开渠引河，使下流疏通，复分六座楼、苑家楼二路杀其水势，既可移丰、沛之患，又不至沼砀山之城。
现代文：工部尚书姚继可说： 黄河冲击改道，管河之臣主张在坚城集以上开通沟渠引导黄河，使下游疏通，又分出六座楼、苑家楼二路减缓其水势，既可以转移丰、沛的水患，又不至于使殇山之城成为沼泽。
English: Shangshu Yao Jike of the Ministry of Works said: The Yellow River has been impacted and rerouted. The minister in charge of the river advocated opening a ditch above the Jiancheng set to guide the Yellow River, so that the downstream could be dredged, and six buildings and the second road of Yuanjia Lou were separated to slow down its water potential. It can not only divert abundant and vigorous floods, but also prevent the city of Lushan from becoming a swamp.

古文：开泇分黄，两工并举，乞速发帑以济。 
现代文：开通洳河分流黄河，两大工程一起进行，请求赶快发放库金资助工程。 
English: The diversion of the Min River to the Yellow River was opened, and two major projects were carried out at the same time. It was requested that the treasury fund be issued as soon as possible to support the project.

古文：允之。
现代文：允许他的请求。
English: The great-grandfather agreed.

古文：八月，化龙奏分水河成。
现代文：八月，李化龙上奏分流之河挖成。
English: In August, Li Huadong went upstream to dig the diversion of the river.

古文：事具《泇河志》中。
现代文：其事全载于《洳河志》中。
English: The whole story is recorded in the "History of the Li River."

古文：加化龙太子少保兵部尚书。
现代文：加封李化龙为太子少保兵部尚书。
English: Li Hualong was added to the Prince's Young Guard.

古文：会化龙丁艰候代，命曹时聘为工部侍郎，总理河道。
现代文：适逢李化龙遭亲丧等候代替，命曹时聘为工部侍郎，总管河道。
English: At the right time, Li Hualong was replaced by a relative who was waiting for his death, and he was appointed as a waiter of the engineering department and the chief manager of the river.

古文：是秋，河决丰县，由昭阳湖穿李家港口，出镇口，上灌南阳，而单县决口复溃，鱼台、济宁间平地成湖。
现代文：这年秋，黄河在丰县决堤，从昭阳湖通过李家港口，到镇口，往上注于南阳，而单县以前的决口又溃塌，鱼台、济宁之间平地成湖。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Feng County, flowing from Zhaoyang Lake, through Lijia Port, to the township, and flowing up to Nanyang. The previous break in Shan County collapsed, and the flat land between Yutai and Jining became a lake.

古文：三十三年春，化龙言： 丰之失，由巡守不严，单之失，由下埽不早，而皆由苏家庄之决。
现代文：万历三十三年春，李化龙说： 丰地的溃决，是由于巡枧防守不严密，单地的溃决，是由于没有及早下埽护岸，然而全都是由于苏家庄的溃决而刊起。
English: In the spring of the 33rd year of the lunar calendar, Li Hualong said: The rout of Fengdi was due to the fact that the patrol defense was not tight, and the rout of the single place was due to the fact that the coast guard was not lowered early, but all of them were published due to the rout of Sujiazhuang.

古文：南直、山东相推诿，请各罚防河守臣。
现代文：南直、山东互相推诿，请分别惩罚各地防御河堤的守臣。
English: Nan Zhi and Shandong are pushing and shoving each other. Please punish the guards of the river dikes in each region separately.

古文：至年来缓堤防而急挑浚，堤坏水溢，不咎守堤之不力，惟委浚河之不深。
现代文：至于近年以来放慢修筑堤防而加紧疏通河道，河堤毁坏洪水泛滥，不责怪守堤的人不得力，祇是归结给挖河的人挖得不深。
English: As for the fact that in recent years the construction of dikes has been slowed down while the dredging of river channels has been intensified, the river dikes have been destroyed and floods have occurred, it is not the fault of the people guarding the dikes that they are not strong, but the fault of the people digging the river that they are not digging deep enough.

古文：夫河北岸自曹县以下无入张秋之路，南岸自虞城以下无入淮之路，惟由徐、邳达镇口为运道。
现代文：黄河北岸从曹县以下没有流入张秋的水道，南岸从虞城以下没有流入淮河的水道，只有从徐、邳到达镇口成为漕运之道。
English: The north bank of the Yellow River from Cao County and below did not flow into the waterway of Zhangqiu, and the south bank from Yucheng and below did not flow into the waterway of Huai River. Only from Xu and Handan to the township became the paddling way.

古文：故河北决曹、郓、丰、沛间，则由昭阳湖出李家口，而运道溢；南决虞、夏、徐、邳间，则由小河口及白洋河，而运道涸。
现代文：所以，黄河在北面的曹、郫、丰、沛之间决堤，则是从昭阳湖出于李家口，而漕运河道泛滥；南面在虞、夏、徐、邳之间决堤，黄河则是从小河口流到北洋河，而使漕运河道干枯。
English: Therefore, the Yellow River broke the dike between Cao, Xia, Feng and Pei in the north, and the canal road was flooded from Zhao Yang Lake to Lijiakou. In the south, the river broke the dike between Yu, Xia, Xu and Pei, and the Yellow River flowed from Xiaokou to Beiyang River, and the canal road was dried up.

古文：今泇河既成，起直河至夏镇，与黄河隔绝，山东、直隶间，河不能制运道之命。
现代文：今洳河已经修成，起于直河到达夏镇，与黄河隔绝，山东、直隶之间，黄河不能控制漕运河道的命运。
English: Now that the Lancang River has been built, starting from Zhihe and reaching Xiazhen, it is isolated from the Yellow River. Between Shandong and Zhili, the Yellow River cannot control the fate of the canal.

古文：独朱旺口以上，决单则单沼，决曹则曹鱼，及丰、沛、徐、邳、鱼、砀皆命悬一线堤防，何可缓也？
现代文：惟独朱旺口以上，决堤于单地则单地成为池沼。决堤于曹地则曹地被水淹没，到丰、沛、徐、邳、鱼、殇，全部命运系于一道堤防，怎么可以暂缓修筑呢？
English: However, above Zhuwangkou, if the levee breaks in a single place, the single place will become a pond. If the levee breaks in Cao, Cao will be flooded. If the levee breaks in Feng, Pei, Xu, Yao, Yu and Yao, all the fates are linked to a single levee. How can construction be suspended?

古文：至中州荆隆口、铜瓦厢皆入张秋之路，孙家渡、野鸡冈、蒙墙寺皆入淮之路，一不守，则北坏运，南犯陵，其害甚大。
现代文：到达中州剂隆口、铜瓦厢，全都是流入张秋的水道，孙家渡、野鸡冈、蒙墙寺全都是流入淮河的水道，一旦不可防守，则往北毁坏运河，往南侵犯皇陵，其危害甚大。
English: When reaching Zhongzhou, the Jialongkou and the Tongwakan are all waterways that flow into the Zhangqiu River, and the Sunjiadu, the Pheasant Hill, and the Mengwu Temple are all waterways that flow into the Huai River. Once they are not defensible, they will destroy the canal to the north and invade the imperial mausoleum to the south, which is very harmful.

古文：请西自开封，东至徐、邳，无不守之地，上自司道，下至府县，无不守之人，庶几可息河患。 
现代文：请求向西从开封，向东到徐、邳，处处设防，上从司道，下到府县，个个参与防守，差不多可以平息黄河水患。 
English: Request to the west from Kaifeng, to the east to Xu and Handan, to set up defenses everywhere, to the east from the road, to the county, to participate in the defense, almost to quell the Yellow River flood.

古文：乃敕时聘申饬焉。
现代文：于是，敕令曹时聘再去整治。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Cao Shihai to rectify the situation.

古文：其秋，时聘言： 自苏庄一决，全河北注者三年。
现代文：这年秋，曹时聘说： 自从苏庄一溃决，整个黄河向北流三年。
English: In the autumn of that year, Cao Shihai said: "Since the defeat of Suzhou, the entire Yellow River has been flowing northward for three years.

古文：初泛丰、沛，继沼单、鱼，陈灿之塞不成，南阳之堤尽坏。
现代文：开初泛滥于丰、沛，随后使单、鱼变成池沼，陈灿进行堵塞没有成功，南阳的河堤全被毁坏。
English: At the beginning of the flood, it spread to Feng and Pei, and then the single fish and fish turned into a pond. Chen Can did not succeed in blocking it, and the river dike in Nanyang was completely destroyed.

古文：今且上灌全济，旁侵运道矣。
现代文：今又往上灌注于整个济水，从侧面侵犯运河之道。
English: Now it is pouring water all over Jishui, encroaching on the canal path from the side.

古文：臣亲诣曹、单，上视王家口新筑之坝，下视朱旺口北溃之流，知河之大可忧者三，而机之不可失者二。
现代文：臣亲自前往曹、单，上看王家口新筑之坝，下看朱旺口北溃的水流，知道黄河很值得担忧的地方有三，而机会不可失去的地方有二。
English: The minister personally went to Cao and Shan to see the newly built dam in Wangjiakou and the water flow in the northern part of Zhuwangkou. He knew that there were three areas of concern in the Yellow River, and two areas where opportunities should not be lost.

古文：河决行堤，泛溢平地，昭阳日垫，下流日淤，水出李家口者日渐微缓，势不得不退而上溢。
现代文：黄河行堤溃决，水在平地泛滥，昭阳湖一天天淤垫，下游一天天淤塞，水从李家口流出一天天细小缓慢，水势不得不退却而向上泛滥。
English: The Yellow River has broken through the dike, the water is flooding on the flat land, Zhaoyang Lake is silted up day by day, the downstream is silted up day by day, the water flows out of Lijiakou day by day slowly, the water potential has to retreat and flood upwards.

古文：溢於南，则孙家渡、野鸡冈皆入淮故道，毋谓蒙墙已塞，而无忧於陵。
现代文：泛滥于南，则孙家渡、野鸡冈都进入淮河故道，不能说蒙墙已经堵塞，而对皇陵没有忧患。
English: If flooding occurs in the south, then both Sunjiadu and Pheasant Hill will enter the old path of the Huai River. It cannot be said that the Mongolian Wall has been blocked, but there is no concern for the imperial mausoleum.

古文：溢於北，则芝麻庄、荆隆口皆入张秋故道，毋谓泇役已成，而无忧於运。
现代文：泛滥于北，则芝麻庄、剂隆口都流入张秋故道，不能说洳河治理已经完成，而对运河没有忧虑。
English: If the flood spreads to the north, then Zhimazhuang and Jialongkou will all flow into Zhangqiu Old Road. It cannot be said that the management of the Wei River has been completed, but there is no concern about the canal.

古文：且南之夏、商，北之曹、濮，其地益插，其祸益烈，其挽回益不易，毋谓灾止鱼、济，而无忧于民。
现代文：况且南边的夏、商，北边的曹、濮，其地更加低矮，其祸更加厉害，将其挽回更加不容易，不能说灾害只及鱼、济，而对百姓没有忧患。
English: Moreover, Xia and Shang in the south, and Cao and Handan in the north, are more low-lying, their disasters are more severe, and it is more difficult to recover them. It cannot be said that the disasters only affect fish and economy, but there is no sorrow for the people.

古文：顾自王家口以达朱旺，新导之河在焉。
现代文：从王家口到达朱旺，新疏通的河道尚在。
English: From Wangjiakou to Zhuwang, the newly dredged channel is still there.

古文：疏其下流以出小浮桥，则三百里长河畅流，机可乘者一。
现代文：疏通其下游而从小浮桥流出，则三百里长河畅通，这是玎以利用的一个机会。
English: Dredging its downstream and flowing out from the small pontoon, the three-hundred-mile-long river is smooth, which is an opportunity to take advantage of.

古文：自徐而下，清黄并行，沙随水刷，此数十年所未有，因而导水归徐，容受有地，机可乘者二。
现代文：从徐州以下，清水黄水一起流动，泥沙随水冲刷，这种情况数十年来还没有出现过，因而引导河水回到徐州，容纳承受有地方，这是可以利用的第二个机会。
English: From below Xuzhou, the clear water and yellow water flow together, and the mud and sand are washed away with the water, which has not occurred for decades. Therefore, guiding the river back to Xuzhou to accommodate the bearing place is a second opportunity that can be used.

古文：臣与诸臣熟计，河之中路有南北二支：北出浊河，尝再疏再壅；惟南出小浮桥，地形卑下，其势甚顺，度长三万丈有奇，估银八十万两。
现代文：臣与诸臣仔细商议，黄河的中路有南北二支：往北出于浊河，曾经两次疏通又两次壅塞，只有往南到小浮桥，地形低下，其水势非常顺畅，测量长三万丈有余，估计耗银八十万两。
English: After careful deliberation between the minister and the ministers, the middle of the Yellow River has two branches, north and south: northward from the Min River, it has been dredged twice and blocked twice, only southward to the small floating bridge, the terrain is low, the water potential is very smooth, the measured length is more than 30,000 feet, and the estimated silver consumption is 800,000 taels.

古文：公诸虚耗，乞多方处给。 
现代文：公家储备空虚，请求多方面供给。 
English: Public reserves are empty, and supply is required from many sources.

古文：疏上留中。
现代文：奏疏呈上，留在宫中。
English: The imperial edict was not carried out and remained in the imperial palace.

古文：时聘乃大挑朱旺口。
现代文：曹时聘于是大规模地挑挖朱旺口。
English: Cao Shihai then excavated Zhu Wangkou on a large scale.

古文：十一月兴工，用夫五十万。
现代文：十一月动工，共享民工五十万。
English: Construction began in November, with a total of 500,000 migrant workers.

古文：三十四年四月，工成，自朱旺达小浮桥延袤百七十里，渠广堤厚，河归故道。
现代文：三十四年四月，工程竣工，从朱旺到达小浮桥绵延一百七十里，渠宽堤厚，黄河返归故道。
English: In April of 2004, the project was completed. From Zhuwang to Xiaowu Bridge, it stretches for 170 miles, the canal is wider and the embankment is thicker, and the Yellow River has returned to its original course.

古文：六月，河决萧县郭暖楼人字口，北支至茶城、镇口。
现代文：六月，黄河在萧县郭暖楼人字口决堤，向北的支流到茶城、镇口。
English: In June, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Guo Nuan Lou Ren Zhi Kou, Xiao County, and the northward tributary flowed to Cha Cheng and Zhenkou.

古文：三十五年，决单县。
现代文：三十五年，在单县决堤。
English: Thirty-five years ago, a levee broke in Shan County.

古文：三十九年六月，决徐州狼矢沟。
现代文：三十九年六月，在徐州狼矢沟决堤。
English: In June of the year thirty-nine, a levee broke at Wolya ditch in Xuzhou.

古文：四十年九月，决徐州三山，冲缕堤二百八十丈，遥堤百七十馀丈，梨林铺以下二十里正河悉为平陆，邳、睢河水耗竭。
现代文：四十年九月，在徐州三山决堤，冲毁缕堤二百八十丈，遥堤一百七十余丈，盘林铺以下二十里主河道完全成为平坦的陆地，邳、睢河水干枯。
English: In September of the 40th year, in Xuzhou Sanzhan, the dike was broken, and 280 meters of the ridge dike and more than 170 meters of the far dike were washed away, and the main river channel 20 miles below Panlinpu completely became a flat land, and the water of the Wei and Wei rivers dried up.

古文：总河都御史刘士忠开韩家坝外小渠引水，由是坝以东始通舟楫。
现代文：总河都御史刘士忠打开韩家坝外的小渠引导河水，因此，坝以束开始通行船只。
English: Liu Shizhong, the Grand Historian of the River Capital, opened a small canal outside the Hanya Dam to guide the river water, so the dam began to pass ships in bundles.

古文：四十二年，决灵璧陈铺。
现代文：四十二年，在灵璧陈铺决堤。
English: In forty-two years, a levee was broken at Lingbi Chenpu.

古文：四十四年五月，复决狼矢沟，由蛤鳗、周柳诸湖入泇河，出直口，复与黄会。
现代文：四十四年五月，又在狼矢沟决堤，从蛤鳗、周柳等湖流入洳河，到直口流出，又与黄河相汇。
English: In May of 1944, the dike was breached again in Wolya Ditch, and the Lijiang River flowed from the Lijiang, Zhouliu and other lakes into the Lijiang River, flowed out to the straight mouth, and then merged with the Yellow River.

古文：六月，决开封陶家店、张家湾，由会城大堤下陈留，入亳州涡河。
现代文：六月，在开封陶家店、张家銮决堤，从会城大堤流下陈留，流入毫州涡河。
English: In June, it broke through the dike at Kaifeng Pottery Shop and Zhangjiakou, and flowed down from the large dike of Huicheng to Chenlu, and then flowed into the Maozhou Turbulent River.

古文：四十七年九月，决阳武脾沙堽，由封丘、曹、单至考城，复入旧河。
现代文：四十七年九月，在阳武脾沙埕决堤，从封丘、曹、单到考城，又流入旧河道。
English: In September of the 47th year, the Yangwuzhen sand barge broke through the dike, from Fengqiu, Cao, Shan to Kaocheng, and then flowed into the old river.

古文：时朝政日驰，河臣奏报多不省。
现代文：这时，朝廷政事一天天松弛，治河之臣的上书报告多不省阅。
English: At this time, the political affairs of the imperial court were becoming more and more slack, and the reports submitted by the ministers in charge of the river could not be skipped.

古文：四十二年，刘士忠卒，总河阅三年不补。
现代文：四十二年，刘士忠死，总河之职经历三年没有补上。
English: In forty-two years, Liu Shizhong died, and the experience of the total river did not make up for three years.

古文：四十六年闰四月，始命工部侍郎王佐督河道。
现代文：四十六年闰四月，纔命令工部侍郎王佐督管治理河道。
English: In April of the 46th year of the Heian period, the shogun ordered the steward of the Ministry of Works, Wang Satoku, to manage the river.

古文：河防日以废坏，当事者不能有为。
现代文：黄河堤防一天天毁坏，主持这事的人不能有所治理。
English: The Yellow River's dikes are deteriorating day by day, and those who preside over this cannot do anything about it.

古文：天启元年，河决灵譬双沟、黄铺，由永姬湖出白洋、小河口，仍与黄会，故道湮涸。
现代文：天启元年，黄河在灵璧双沟、黄铺决堤，经由永姬湖从白洋、小河口流出，依然与黄河相汇，故道阻塞干涸。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Lingbi Shuanggou and Huangpu, and flowed out of Baiyang and Xiaohekou through Yonghui Lake. It still meets the Yellow River, so the road was blocked and dried up.

古文：总河侍郎陈道亨役夫筑塞。
现代文：总河侍郎陈道亨役使民工进行筑堤堵塞。
English: Chen Daoheng, the general river steward, was instrumental in getting the migrant workers to build a dam.

古文：时淮安霪雨连旬，黄、淮暴涨数尺，而山阳里外河及清河决口汇成巨浸，水灌淮城，民蚁城以居，舟行街市。
现代文：适时，淮安久雨连续十天，黄河、淮河之水突然上涨数尺，而且山阳里外之河及清河决口汇成巨大的湖泽，洪水灌入淮城，百姓像蜗蚁一样在城墙上居住，船只在街市航行。
English: At the right time, Huai'an has been raining for ten days in a row. The water of the Yellow River and Huai'an River suddenly rose several feet. Moreover, the rivers in and out of the mountains and the cleft of the Qing River merged into huge lakes. Floods poured into Huai'an City. People lived on the city wall like ants, and ships sailed in the city market.

古文：久之始塞。
现代文：遇了很久，纔堵塞决堤。
English: It took a long time, but the dam broke.

古文：三年，决徐州青田大龙口，徐、邳、灵、睢河并淤，吕梁城南隅隐，沙高平地丈许，双沟决口亦满，上下百五十里悉成平陆。
现代文：三年，在徐州青田大龙口决堤，徐、邳、灵、睢河一并淤塞，吕梁城南边溃陷，淤沙高出平地一丈左右，双沟决口淤沙也满，上下一百五十里全部成为平坦的陆地。
English: Three years ago, a dike broke at Dalongkou in Qingtian, Xuzhou, silting up the Xu, Min, Ling, and Min Rivers. The south side of Luliang City collapsed, and the silt was about one level higher than the flat land. The silt at Shuanggou Breach was also full of silt, and the upper and lower 150 miles all became flat land.

古文：四年六月，决徐州魁山堤，东北灌州城，城中水深一丈三尺，一自南门至云龙山西北大安桥入石狗湖，一由旧支河南流至邓二庄，历租沟东南以达小河，出白洋，仍与黄会。
现代文：四年六月，在徐州魁山堤决堤，从东北灌入州城，城中水深一丈三尺，一从南门到云龙山西北大安桥流入石狗湖，一从旧支河往南流到邓二庄，经过租沟向东南到达小河，从白洋流出，仍然与黄河相汇。
English: In June of the fourth year, in Xuzhou, the Kuishan dike broke through the dike and poured into the city from the northeast. The water depth in the city was one and three feet. One flowed into Shigou Lake from the South Gate to the northwest Da'an Bridge of Yulong Mountain, and one flowed south from the old tributary to Deng Erzhuang. It passed through the rented ditch to the southeast to reach the small river. It flowed out of the White Ocean and still met the Yellow River.

古文：徐民苦淹溺，议集赀迁城。
现代文：徐州百姓遭受淹溺之苦，谋议集资迁城。
English: The people of Xuzhou suffered from drowning and tried to raise funds to move the city.

古文：给事中陆文献上徐城不可迁六议。
现代文：给事中陆文献上奏徐城不可迁的六条意见。
English: In this regard, six opinions on the non-transferability of Zhonglu Literature were raised by Xu Cheng.

古文：而势不得已，遂迁州治於云龙，河事置不讲矣。
现代文：然而情势迫不得已，于是迁州治于云龙，黄河治理一事暂搁置不过问了。
English: However, the situation was unavoidable, so the relocation was ruled by Yunlong, and the governance of the Yellow River was temporarily shelved.

古文：六年七月，河决淮安，逆入骆马湖，灌邳、宿。
现代文：六年七月，黄河决堤于淮安，逆流入骆马湖，注入邳、宿。
English: In July of the sixth year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Huai'an and flowed back into the Luoma Lake, injecting water into the city and the county.

古文：崇祯二年春，河决曹县十四铺口。
现代文：崇祯二年春，黄河在曹县十四铺口决堤。
English: In the spring of the second year of Chongzhen, the Yellow River broke through the dike at the junction of 14 pubs in Cao County.

古文：四月，决睢宁，至七月中，城尽圮。
现代文：四月，决堤于睢宁，到七月中旬，城墙全部垮塌。
English: In April, the dike broke in Suining, and by mid-July, all the city walls had collapsed.

古文：总河侍郎李若星请迁城避之，而开邳州坝泄水入故道，且塞曹家口匙头湾，逼水北注，以减睢宁之患。
现代文：总河侍郎李若星请求迁县城以避免水害，而打开邳州坝泄水注入故道，并且堵塞曹家口匙头湾决口，逼迫河水往北流，以减轻睢宁的水患。
English: The general river steward Li Ruoxing requested to move the county seat to avoid water damage, and opened the Bozhou Dam to inject water into the old road, and blocked the mouth of Cao Jiakou Key Head Bay, forcing the river to flow northward to alleviate flooding in Huning.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四年夏，河决原武湖村铺，又决封丘荆隆口，败曹县塔儿湾大行堤。
现代文：四年夏，黄河在原武湖村铺决堤，又在封丘剂隆口决堤，毁坏曹县塔儿湾大行堤。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in the original Wuhu village, and also broke through the dike at the foot of the hill, destroying the large dike of Tar Bay in Cao County.

古文：六月黄、淮交涨，海口壅塞，河决建义诸口，下灌兴化、盐城，水深二丈，村落尽漂没。
现代文：六月，黄河、淮河之水一起上涨，入海口壅塞，黄河在建义诸口决堤，往下灌注于兴化、盐城，水深二丈，村落全部被淹没。
English: In June, the waters of the Yellow River and the Huaihe River rose together and blocked the entrance to the sea. The Yellow River broke through the dike at various points in Jianyi and poured down to Xinghua and Yancheng. The water was two meters deep, and all the villages were flooded.

古文：逡巡逾年，始议筑塞。
现代文：拖延了一年，纔商议筑堤堵塞。
English: After a year's delay, negotiations on building a dike resulted in a blockage.

古文：兴工未几，伏秋水发，黄、淮奔注，兴、盐为壑，而海潮复逆冲，坏范公堤。
现代文：动工不久，夏秋洪水发生，黄河、淮河奔流，兴、盐成为沟壑，而海潮又逆流冲击，毁坏范公堤。
English: Not long after construction began, the summer and autumn floods occurred, the Yellow River and the Huai River rushed, the Xing and the salt became gullies, and the sea tides hit the countercurrent, destroying the Fan Gong Dike.

古文：军民及商灶户死者无算，少壮转徙，丐江、仪、通、泰间，盗贼千百啸聚。
现代文：兵士百姓及经商的煮盐的人家被淹死的不计其敷，年青力壮的流亡各地，乞讨于江、仪、通、泰之间，盗贼成千成百的互相呼召聚集。
English: Soldiers, civilians, and the families of salt-cooking merchants were drowned without a second thought. The young and strong fled to all parts of the country, begging between the rivers Yi, Tong, and Tai. Thieves gathered by the thousands, calling out to each other.

古文：至六年，盐城民徐瑞等言其状。
现代文：到崇祯六年，盐城百姓徐瑞等陈说悲惨的状况。
English: By the sixth year of Chongzhen, Yancheng people such as Xu Rui Chen said that the situation was tragic.

古文：帝悯之，命议罚河曹官。
现代文：皇帝哀怜他们，命令惩治治理黄河的职官。
English: The emperor took pity on them and ordered the officials in charge of the Yellow River to be punished.

古文：而是时，总河朱光祚方议开高堰三闸。
现代文：而这时，总河朱光祚正谋议打开高堰三闸门。
English: At this time, Zhu Guangyao, the head of the river, was planning to open the three gates of the high weir.

古文：淮、扬在朝者合疏言： 建义诸口未塞，民田尽沉水底。
现代文：籍贯淮、扬的在朝官员联合上奏说： 建义诸决口没有堵塞，民田全部被淹没在水下。
English: The officials of Huai and Yang ethnic groups in the DPRK jointly reported that: Jianyi and other outlets were not blocked, and all the people's fields were submerged under water.

古文：三闸一开，高、宝诸邑荡为湖海，而漕粮盐课皆害矣。
现代文：三座闸门一旦被打开，高、宝等城荡涤成为湖海，而漕运粮盐赋税都遭受其害。
English: Once the three gates were opened, Gao, Bao and other cities were washed into the lake, and the transportation of grain and salt tax suffered from it.

古文：高堰建闸始於万历二十三年，未几全塞。
现代文：高堰建置闸门开始于万历二十三年，不久就全被堵塞。
English: The construction of the gates of the high weir began in the 23rd year of Wanli, and soon they were all blocked.

古文：今高堰日坏，方当急议修筑，可轻言开浚乎？ 
现代文：今高堰一天天毁坏，正应尝赶快谋议进行修筑，可以轻率地说疏浚吗？ 
English: Now that the high weir is deteriorating day by day, it is time to try to quickly make plans for construction. Can we blithely say dredging?

古文：帝是其言，事遂寝。
现代文：皇帝认为他们说得对，开闸之事就被停止。
English: The emperor thought they were right, and the opening of the gates was stopped.

古文：又从御史吴振缨请，修宿、宁上下西北旧堤，以捍归仁。
现代文：又依从御史昊振缨的奏请，修筑宿、宁上下西北的旧堤，以护卫归仁。
English: He also complied with the request of Emperor Gaozong to build an inn and the old embankment in the northwest of Ningxia to escort him back to Jin.

古文：七年二月，建义决口工成，赐督漕尚书杨一鹏、总河尚书刘荣嗣银币。
现代文：七年二月，建义决口工程竣工，赐给督漕尚书杨一鹏、总河尚书刘荣嗣银两彩帛。
English: In February of the seventh year, the construction of the Jianyi culvert project was completed, and Yang Yipeng, the governor, and Liu Rongzi, the general manager, were awarded two silver medals.

古文：八年九月，荣嗣得罪。
现代文：八年九月，刘荣嗣获罪。
English: In September 2006, Liu Rongshi was found guilty.

古文：初，荣嗣以骆马湖运道溃淤，创挽河之议，起宿迁至徐州，别凿新河，分黄水注其中，以通漕运。
现代文：原先，刘荣嗣因骆马湖运道演决淤塞，首创引流黄河的主张，从宿迁到徐州，另外开凿新河，分流黄水注入其中，使漕运畅通。
English: Originally, Liu Rongzi was the first to propose the diversion of the Yellow River from Suqian to Xuzhou due to the silting up of the Luoma Lake transport channel. In addition, a new river was excavated and the diversion of yellow water was injected into it to make the river transport smooth.

古文：计工二百馀里，金钱五十万。
现代文：总计工程二百余里，耗费金钱五十万。
English: The total project is more than two hundred miles, costing half a million dollars.

古文：而其所凿邳州上下，悉黄河故道，浚尺许，其下皆沙，挑掘成河，经宿沙落，河坎复平，如此者数四。
现代文：然而，其所凿邳州上下，全部是黄河故道，深一尺左右，其下完全是沙，挖掘成河，经过一夜泥沙沉下，河道低处又被填平，像这样挖掘河道多次。
English: However, the upstream and downstream of Luzhou, all of which were dug by him, were the old Yellow River channels. They were about one foot deep, and the bottom was completely sand. They were excavated into rivers, and after a night of sinking mud and sand, the lower parts of the river channels were filled, and the river channels were excavated like this many times.

古文：迨引黄水入其中，波流迅急，沙随水下，率淤浅不可以舟。
现代文：等到引来黄河水注入其中，水流急速，泥沙随水而下，大都淤塞水浅不可以行船。
English: Wait until the Yellow River water is attracted and injected into it, the water flow is rapid, the sediment will go down with the water, and the water is mostly silted and shallow, and it is not possible to sail.

古文：及漕舟将至，而骆马湖之溃决适平，舟人皆不愿由新河。
现代文：等到漕运船只到来，而骆马湖的溃决刚刚填平，行船之人都不愿意经由新河。
English: By the time the rowing boats arrived, the Luoma Lake had just been filled in, and boatmen were reluctant to pass through the new river.

古文：荣嗣自往督之，欲绳以军法。
现代文：刘荣嗣自己前去督促他们，想用军法来约束。
English: Liu Rongzhi himself went to urge them and wanted to use military law to restrain them.

古文：有入者辄苦淤浅，弁卒多怨。
现代文：有进入的船只总是苦于淤塞水浅，运粮军大都埋怨。
English: Vessels that do enter always suffer from silting and shallowness, and most of the grain transport troops complain about it.

古文：巡漕御史倪於义劾其欺罔误工，南京给事中曹景参复重劾之，逮问，坐赃，父子皆瘐死。
现代文：巡漕御史倪于义弹劾他欺骗误工，南京给事中曹景参又严厉弹劾他，于是被逮捕问罪，因贪赃获罪，父子都病死在狱中。
English: Patrol officer Ni Yuyi impeached him for cheating and missing work, and Cao Jingshan severely impeached him in Nanjing, so he was arrested and convicted for corruption. Both father and son died of illness in prison.

古文：郎中胡琏分工独多，亦坐死。
现代文：郎中胡理分工特多，也获罪而死。
English: His second-in-command, Hu Li, was also convicted and sentenced to death.

古文：其后骆马湖复溃，舟行新河，无不思荣嗣功者。
现代文：这以后，骆马湖又溃决，船只行驶于新河，没有不思念刘荣嗣功劳的人。
English: Since then, the Luoma Lake has once again burst its banks, and ships are sailing on the Xinhe River. There is no one who does not think of Liu Rongzi's achievements.

古文：当是时，河患日棘，而帝又重法惩下，李若星以修浚不力罢官，朱光祚以建义苏嘴决口逮系。
现代文：正当这时，黄河水患一天天严重，而皇帝又用重法严惩下级官吏，李若星因为修筑河堤疏浚河道不力而被免去官职，朱光祚因为建义苏嘴二处决口而被逮捕拘囚。
English: Just at this time, the Yellow River was flooding more and more seriously, and the emperor used heavy-handed methods to severely punish lower-level officials. Li Ruoxing was removed from his official post because he was unable to build a river dike and dredge the river, and Zhu Guangyao was arrested and detained because he was the executioner of Jianyi Suzi.

古文：六年之中，河臣三易。
现代文：六年之中，治河之臣换了多次。
English: Over the course of six years, the minister in charge of the river changed several times.

古文：给事中王家彦尝切言之。
现代文：给事中王家彦曾经直率地谈论遇此事。
English: At the time of the incident, Wang Jiahiko spoke candidly about the incident.

古文：光祚亦竟瘐死。
现代文：朱光祚也最终病死在狱中。
English: Zhu Guangyao eventually died of illness in prison.

古文：而继荣嗣者周鼎修泇利运颇有功，在事五年，竟坐漕舟阻浅，用故决河防例，遣戍烟瘴。
现代文：而接续刘荣嗣职位的周鼎治理洳河便利于漕运很有功绩，在职五年，最终因为漕运船只受阻碍而获罪，采用原先决开黄河堤的旧例，被贬谪戍守南方姻瘴之地。
English: However, Zhou Ding, who succeeded Liu Rongzi, made great achievements in managing the Minhe River to facilitate rowing. After five years in office, he was eventually found guilty of obstructing rowing boats, and was demoted to guarding the southern part of the river, using the old example of breaking through the Yellow River dike.

古文：给事中沈胤培、刑部侍郎惠世扬、总河侍郎张国维各疏请宽之，乃获宥免云。
现代文：给事中沈胤培、刑部侍郎惠世扬、总河侍郎张国维各自上疏朝廷请求饶恕周鼎，纔获得赦免。
English: During the incident, Shen Yimpei, Ke Shiyang, the attendant of the criminal investigation department, and Zhang Guowei, the attendant of the general river department, each went to the imperial court to ask for forgiveness of Zhou Ding, and they were pardoned.

古文：十五年，流贼围开封久，守臣谋引黄河灌之。
现代文：崇祯十五年，流贼包围开封很久，守臣谋划引来黄河水淹没敌人。
English: In the 15th year of Chongzhen, Kaifeng was besieged by bandits for a long time. The guards plotted to flood the enemy with water from the Yellow River.

古文：贼侦知，预为备。
现代文：贼寇探听到了消息，预先做了防备。
English: The Kleptocrat Detectives heard the news and prepared in advance.

古文：乘水涨，令其党决河灌城，民尽溺死。
现代文：趁水涨之时，令其党羽决开黄河淹没开封城，百姓全都被淹死。
English: Taking advantage of the rising water, he ordered his followers to break open the Yellow River to flood Kaifeng City, and all the people were drowned.

古文：总河侍郎张国维方奉诏赴京，奏其状。
现代文：总河侍郎张国维刚刚奉诏赴京，将情况上奏。
English: Zhang Guowei, the general river steward, had just been sent to Beijing to report the situation.

古文：山东巡抚王永吉上言： 黄河决汴城，直走睢阳，东南注鄢陵、鹿邑，必害亳、泗，侵祖陵，而邳、宿运河必涸。 
现代文：山东巡抚王永吉上奏说： 黄河决堤于汴城，直达睢阳，往东南注于鄢陵、鹿邑，必然危害于亳、泅，侵犯祖陵，而邳、宿运河必然干涸。 
English: Wang Yongji, the governor of Shandong Province, said in his report: The Yellow River broke through the dike in Lucheng, reaching as far as Poyang, and flowed southeast to Fuling and Lugu, inevitably harming Lucheng and Lugu, encroaching on the ancestral tombs, and the Lucheng and Shuku canals will inevitably dry up.

古文：帝令总河侍郎黄希宪急往捍御，希宪以身居济宁不能摄汴，请特设重臣督理。
现代文：皇帝令总河侍郎黄希宪赶快前去护卫，黄希宪因为身居济宁不能管辖汴地，请特别设置重臣督理。
English: The emperor ordered the general river steward Huang Xixian to hurry to escort. Since Huang Xixian lived in Jining, he could not govern Shantian. Therefore, he asked the emperor to specially set up a senior minister to supervise him.

古文：命工部侍郎周堪赓督修汴河。
现代文：命工部侍郎周堪赓督修汴河。
English: The attendant of the Ministry of Works, Zhou Kansheng, and the superintendent of the Ministry of Works, Shuhe.

古文：十六年二月，堪赓上言： 河之决口有二：一为朱家寨，宽二里许，居河下流，水面宽而水势缓；一为马家口，宽一里馀，居河上流，水势猛，深不可测。
现代文：崇祯十六年二月，周堪赓上奏说： 黄河的决口有二：一为朱家寨，宽二里左右，居于黄河下游，水面宽阔而水势平缓；一为马家口，宽一里多，居于黄河上游，水势汹猛，深不可测。
English: In February of the 16th year of the Chongzhen Emperor, Zhou Kanjun made the following report: There are two mouths of the Yellow River: one is Zhujiazhai, about two miles wide, located in the lower reaches of the Yellow River, with a wide water surface and moderate water potential; the other is Majiakou, more than one mile wide, located in the upper reaches of the Yellow River, with violent water potential and unfathomable depth.

古文：两口相距三十里，至汴堤之外，合为一流，决一大口，直冲汴城以去，而河之故道则涸为平地。
现代文：两决口相距三十里，到了汴堤之外，合为一条水流，决为一大口，直冲汴城而去，而黄河故道则干涸成为平地。
English: The two breakwaters are 30 miles apart, and when they reach the other side of the dike, they merge into a single stream. The breakwater becomes a large mouth and rushes straight towards Shicheng, while the old path of the Yellow River dries up and becomes flat land.

古文：怒涛千顷，工力难施，必广浚旧渠，远数十里，分杀水势，然后畚锸可措。
现代文：怒涛千顷，人力难以施行，必须大力疏浚旧渠，远达数十里，分别减缓水势，然后挖土运土纔可施行。
English: Thousands of hectares of angry waves, manpower is difficult to implement, it is necessary to vigorously dredge the old canal, up to dozens of miles away, respectively, to slow down the water potential, and then excavate the earth and carry the earth can be implemented.

古文：顾筑浚并举，需夫三万。
现代文：但是，筑堤挖河一齐施行，需要民工三万。
English: However, if all the dike-building and river-digging were to be carried out at the same time, it would require 30,000 migrant workers.

古文：河北荒旱，兖西兵火，竭力以供，不满万人，河南万死一生之馀，未审能应募否，是不得不借助於抚镇之兵也。 
现代文：河北发生旱灾，兖州西面发生战乱，竭力供给，不满万人，河南万死一生的幸存者，不知道能否响应招募。这不得不藉助抚镇的军队。 
English: A drought in Hebei Province and a war in the west of Ganzhou Province. Efforts were made to supply, but there were not enough people. The survivors in Henan Province, who had been dead for a lifetime, did not know whether they could respond to the recruitment. They had to help the army in Fuzhou.

古文：乃敕兵部速议，而令堪赓刻期兴工。
现代文：于是敕令兵部迅速议决，又令周堪赓限期动工。
English: Therefore, he ordered the military department to make a quick decision, and ordered Zhou Kanjun to start construction within a time limit.

古文：至四月，塞朱家寨决口，修堤四百馀丈。
现代文：到四月，已堵塞朱家寨决口，修堤四百余丈。
English: By April, the Zhujiazhai breach had been plugged, and the embankment had been repaired to a length of more than 400 meters.

古文：马家口工未就，忽冲东岸，诸埽尽漂没。
现代文：马家口工程没有完，河水忽然冲东岸，诸护堤之埽尽被冲走。
English: Before the Majiakou project was completed, the river suddenly rushed to the east bank, and all the berms were washed away.

古文：堪赓请停东岸而专事西岸。
现代文：周堪赓奏请停止东岸工程而专力治理西岸。
English: Please stop the east coast project and concentrate on managing the west coast.

古文：帝令急竣工。
现代文：皇帝令赶快竣工。
English: The emperor ordered that it be completed as soon as possible.

古文：六月，堪赓言： 马家决口百二十丈，两岸皆筑四之一，中间七十馀丈，水深流急，难以措手，请俟霜降后兴工。 
现代文：六月，周堪赓说： 马家决口一百二十丈，两岸都筑堤四分之一，中间间隔七十余丈，水深流急，难以施工，请等到霜降之后动工。 
English: In June, Zhou Kansui said: the Ma Jia breach is one hundred and twenty meters high, the embankment on both sides is a quarter of the embankment, the middle interval is more than seventy meters, the water depth is rapid, it is difficult to construct, please wait until after the frost.

古文：已而言： 五月伏水大涨，故道沙滩壅涸者刷深数丈，河之大势尽归於东，运道已通，陵园无恙。 
现代文：随后又说： 五月伏水大涨，故道沙滩堵塞处冲刷加深数丈，黄河水流的大势尽归于束，运道已通畅，皇陵无忧。 
English: He then said, "In May, the water level rose sharply, and the beach blockage along the road was washed away and deepened several meters. The great potential of the Yellow River's water flow has been fully harnessed, the transportation route has been smooth, and the imperial mausoleum is worry-free.

古文：疏甫上，决口再溃。
现代文：奏章刚送上，决口再次溃决。
English: As soon as the score was submitted, the tiebreaker was broken again.

古文：帝趣鸠工，未奏绩而明亡。
现代文：皇帝催促聚集民工，没有等到取得成绩而明朝灭亡。
English: The emperor urged the gathering of migrant workers, but did not wait for the results to be obtained, and the Ming Dynasty perished.

