古文：腾越密迩近诸彝，实滇西藩屏。
现代文：腾越附近地区的各族彝民，实际上是滇西的屏障。
English: Tengyue is actually a barrier to the west of Shaanxi for the people of all ethnic groups in the nearby areas.

古文：而滇境大势，北近吐蕃，南皆彝缅，郡邑所置，介于其间，不过以声教羁縻而已。
现代文：而滇省边境的大体形势，北边接近吐蕃，南面全是缅甸的彝人，设置府县的地区，介于其间，不过是用声威教化约束而已。
English: However, the general situation of the border of Handan Province, the north side is close to Tubo, the south side is all Myanmar's Handan people, and the prefectural and county regions are set up in between, but they are only constrained by sound and reason.

古文：正统以来，经略南彝者，设宣慰司六，御彝府二，宣抚司三，州四，安抚司一，长官司二。
现代文：正统年间以来，经营谋划南部彝人的人，设置了六个宣慰司，两个御彝府，三个宣抚司，四个州，一个安抚司，两个长官司。
English: Since the orthodox years, those who have been operating and planning the Southern Han people have set up six comfort stations, two imperial residences, three relief stations, four prefectures, one pacification station, and two administrative stations.

古文：如孟养阻负于西，最为荒僻，而缅甸、八百、老挝，地势濒海，木邦、车里、孟密，又在其内，业非羁縻所可制驭，而近听约束者，惟南甸、干崖、陇川而已。
现代文：如像孟养，在西面依仗险阻，最为荒凉偏僻，而缅甸、八百、老挝，地势濒海，木邦、车里、孟密，又在它们以内，已不是靠羁糜政策可以制服驾驭的了，而近处听约束的，唯有南甸、干崖、陇川而已。
English: For example, Mengye, in the west, relying on perilous obstacles, is the most desolate and remote, while Myanmar, the eight hundred, Laos, the land on the coast, Mubang, Cheli, Mengmi, and within them, can no longer be controlled by the policy of restraint, and the only places subject to restraint are Nandian, Dry Cliff, and Luochuan.

古文：数十年频为缅患，如刁落参以南甸近彝，夺刁落宁之官，尚构缅内讧，为兵备胡公心忠所歼；岳凤父子以陇川舍目谋主多思顺之地，造逆犯顺，为参将刘綎所擒，边境赖以安。
现代文：数十年来缅人频频为边患，例如刁落参因为南甸靠近彝人，夺了刁落宁的官位，还造成缅人内江，被兵备道胡心忠歼灭；岳凤父子以陇川头目的身份图谋掌管多思顺的领地，造反作乱，被游击将军刘蜓擒获，边境赖以安宁。
English: For decades, the Burmese have frequently been a problem on the border. For example, because of Nandian's proximity to the Burmese, the Burmese seized the official position of the Burmese in Nanning, and also caused the Burmese in Neijiang to be annihilated by the soldiers of Hu Xinzhong; Yuefeng and his son, as the leader of the Minchuan River, attempted to control the territory of Doshun, rebelled, and were captured by the guerrilla general Liu Ying. The border depends on peace.

古文：其后阿瓦日强，蚕食日多。
现代文：那以后阿瓦日渐强盛，蚕食边疆的事日渐多起来。
English: Since then, the Awá have grown stronger and stronger, encroaching more and more on the frontier.

古文：幸抚彝同知漆文昌、知州余懋学，请大司马陈公用宾檄暹罗以弱缅，而腾获稍康。
现代文：幸好主张安抚彝人的同知漆文昌、知州余愁学，请大司马陈用宾发檄文给退罗得以削弱缅甸，而腾越稍微获得平安。
English: Fortunately, his acquaintances, Urushi Wenchang and Chizhou Yu Xuexue, who advocated appeasing the Xiongnu, asked the Grand Master Ma Chen to use Bingfa Xiongwen to weaken Myanmar by withdrawing from Luo, while Tengyue gained a little peace.

古文：迨思正就戮，瓦酋猖獗，命思华据迤西，思礼据木邦，思绵据蛮莫，而内地渐为逆缅所窃。
现代文：到思正被斩时，瓦酋猖撅，命令思华占据巡西，思礼占据木邦，思绵占据蛮莫，而且内地逐渐被叛逆的缅人所窃据。
English: By the time Si Zheng was beheaded, Hua Hui was rampant, ordering Si Hua to occupy the west, Si Li to occupy Mubang, and Si Mian to occupy Xuan Mo, and the inland was gradually stolen by the rebellious Burmese.

古文：至若多俺席麓川之旧，附缅而叛天朝，参将胡显忠平之。
现代文：至于多俺席是麓川的旧部，归附缅人而反叛天朝，参将胡显忠平定了他。
English: As far as the former part of Lukawa, which was annexed by the Burmese and rebelled against the imperial court, was concerned, he was subdued by the general Hu Xianzhong.

古文：多安民藉安酋、瓦酋之援，负固以拒天兵，兵备黄公文炳、参将董献策取之，腾之获存者，幸也！
现代文：多安民凭借安酋、瓦酋的援助，依仗险要的地势以抗拒天朝的大军，兵备道黄文炳、参将董献策攻下了他，腾越得以存在，侥幸呀！
English: With the help of An Hui and Hua Hui, Doan Min relied on the precarious situation to resist the great army of the Heavenly Dynasty. Huang Wenyu, the military commander, and Dong Xian Cao, the general officer, captured him, and Tengyue was able to exist, fortunately!

古文：目今瓦酋枭悍称雄，诸彝悉听号召，倘经略失驭ｙù失去统驭的办法，其造乱者，尤有甚于昔也。
现代文：如今瓦酋强悍称雄，各族彝人全听他的号召，倘若经营谋划丧失驾驭的办法，那些制造叛乱的人，更有比从前厉害的，为腾越谋划的人对这种形势要慎重！
English: Today, the tile chief is so powerful that people of all ethnic groups listen to his call. If the management and planning methods are out of control, those who create rebellions will be more powerful than before. Those who plan for the rise of the country should be cautious about this situation!

古文：为腾计者慎之，外芒市虽属府，近于猛稳为木邦辖，藏贼劫掠，腾境不安，所恃放廷臣防御之，而反罹其害。
现代文：外边的芒市虽然隶属府中，近来把猛稳作为木邦的辖地，窝藏盗贼抢劫掳掠，腾越境内不得安宁，所依赖的是选择朝廷大臣防御他，但反而遭到他的祸害。
English: Although the outlying city of Mang is subordinate to the prefectural government, it has recently made Mengyuan the jurisdiction of Mokbang, harboring thieves, robbing and plundering. There is no peace in the territory. It relies on the choice of the imperial minister to defend it, but it has been harmed by him.

古文：自后当重其责以弭ｍǐ变消除变乱，庶于腾少安云。
现代文：自此以后应当加重镇边大臣们的责任以便消除变乱，差不多腾越能稍获安宁。
English: From now on, the responsibility of the town's border ministers should be increased in order to eliminate the turmoil, and it is almost impossible to get a little peace.

