古文：畏死远难，降北之民也，而世尊之曰 贵生之士 。
现代文：害怕死亡，逃避危难，本是投降败逃的人，世俗却称誉他们是珍惜生命的雅士。
English: Those who are afraid of death and run away from danger are those who surrender and run away, but the world praises them as aristocrats who cherish life.

古文：学道立方，离法之民也，而世尊之曰 文学之士 游居厚养，牟食之民也，而世尊之曰 有能之士 。
现代文：学做神仙，设立方术，本是违反法治的人，世俗却称誉他们是大有学问的文士。游手好闲，给养丰厚，本是社会的寄生虫；世俗却称誉他们是有能耐的人。
English: Those who learn to be gods and devise strategies are people who violate the rule of law, but the secular world praises them as highly educated scribes. Those who are idle and well-fed are social parasites; the secular world praises them as capable people.

古文：语曲牟知，伪诈之民也。而世尊之曰 辩智之士 。
现代文：歪理诡辩，玩弄智巧，本是虚伪巧诈的人，世俗却称誉他们是辩士智士。
English: Those who distort reason and sophistry, and play with cleverness, are actually hypocritical and cunning people, but the world praises them as debaters and wise men.

古文：行剑攻杀，暴憿之民也，而世尊之曰 磏勇之士 。
现代文：行侠舞剑，喜斗好杀，本是凶暴而冒险的人，世俗却称誉他们是刚强威武的勇士。
English: They are fierce and adventurous people, but the world praises them as strong and powerful warriors.

古文：活贼匿奸，当死之民也，而世尊之曰 任誉之士 。
现代文：包庇大盗，隐藏坏人，本是该判死刑的人，世俗却称誉他们是仗义舍身的名士。
English: Those who cover up for robbers and hide bad people should be sentenced to death, but the world praises them as heroes who sacrifice themselves for the sake of righteousness.

古文：此六民者，世之所誉也。
现代文：这六种人，是社会舆论所赞美的。
English: These six types of people are the most praised by public opinion.

古文：赴险殉诚，死节之民，而世少之曰 失计之民 也。
现代文：奔赴国难，献身君主，本是舍生取义的人，世俗却贬斥他们是失多得少的人。
English: Those who rush to a country in distress and devote themselves to the monarch are people who sacrifice their lives to gain justice, but the world disparages them as people who have lost more and gained less.

古文：寡闻从令，全法之民也，而世少之曰 朴陋之民 也。
现代文：见闻很少，服从命令，本是保全法令的人，世俗却贬斥他们是浅薄愚昧的人。
English: Those who have seen and heard very little, who obey orders, and who are the guardians of the law, are denounced by the world as shallow and stupid.

古文：力作而食，生利之民也，而世少之曰 寡能之民 也，嘉厚纯粹，整谷之民也，而世少之曰 愚戆之民 也。
现代文：尽心耕作，自食其力，本是创造财富的人，世俗却贬斥他们是没有才能的人。品德优异，单纯朴实，本是正派善良的人，世俗却贬斥他们是蠢笨呆板的人。
English: People who cultivate with all their heart and make their own efforts are people who create wealth, but the world denounces them as talentless people. People with excellent moral character, simple and unpretentious, are decent and kind people, but the world denounces them as stupid and dull people.

古文：重命畏事，尊上之民也，而世少之曰 怯慑之民 也。
现代文：重视命令，谨慎办事，本是尊重君主的人，世俗却贬斥他们是胆小伯事的人。
English: Those who pay attention to orders and act prudently are people who respect the monarch, but the world denounces them as timid people.

古文：挫贼遏奸，明上之民也，而世少之曰 謟谗之民 也。
现代文：打击贼人，止住奸人，本是提醒君主的人，世俗却贬斥他们是奉承讨好的人。
English: Those who fight against thieves and stop traitors are people who remind the monarch, but the world denounces them as people who flatter and please.

古文：此六民者，世之所毁也。
现代文：这六种人，是社会舆论所诋毁的。
English: These six types of people have been slandered by public opinion.

古文：奸伪无益之民六，而世誉之如彼；耕战有益之民六，而世毁之如此：此之谓 六反 。
现代文：奸诈虚伪而无益于国家的六种人，社会上是那样地赞美他们；努力耕战而有益于国家的六种人，社会上却这样地诋毁他们：这就叫做六反。
English: Six kinds of people who are treacherous and hypocritical, but do not benefit the country, are praised by the society in such a way; six kinds of people who work hard to cultivate and benefit the country, but are denigrated by the society in such a way: this is called "six anti."

古文：布衣循私利而誉之，世主听虚声而礼之，礼之所在，利必加焉。
现代文：平民从私利出发称赞前六种人，当代的君主听到虚名而尊重这些人，而得到尊重的，一定会得到好处。
English: The common people praise the first six kinds of people out of self-interest. The contemporary monarch hears the false name and respects these people, and those who are respected will certainly benefit.

古文：百姓循私害而訾之，世主壅于俗而贱之，贱之所在，害必加焉。
现代文：百姓从私害出发话毁后六种人，当代的君主受世俗蒙蔽而鄙视他们，而受到鄙视的，一定会受到迫害。
English: There are six kinds of people whom the people despise because of their selfishness, and the contemporary monarchs despise them because they are blinded by the world. If they are despised, they will certainly be persecuted.

古文：故名赏在乎私恶当罪之民，而毁害在乎公善宜赏之士，索国之富强，不可得也。
现代文：结果声誉和赏赐归于私下干坏事、应当判罪的人，而诋毁和迫害却给了为国家做好事、应当奖赏的人。这样还想求得国家的富强，是不可能的事。
English: As a result, reputation and reward are given to those who privately do bad things and should be condemned, while slander and persecution are given to those who do good things for the country and should be rewarded. It is impossible to seek the country's wealth and strength in this way.

古文：古者有谚曰： 为政犹沐也，虽有弃发，必为之。 
现代文：古代有句谚语说： 执政好比洗头一样，即使会有一些头发掉落，仍是必须洗头的。 
English: An ancient proverb says: Governing is like washing one's hair. Even if some hair falls out, it is still necessary to wash one's hair.

古文：爱弃发之费而忘长发之利，不知权者也。
现代文：看重掉头发的损耗而忘记促使头发生长的好处，是不懂得权衡利弊的人。
English: People who do not know how to weigh the pros and cons value the loss of hair loss and forget the benefits of promoting hair growth.

古文：夫弹痤者痛，饮药者苦，为苦惫之故不弹痤饮药，则身不活，病不已矣。
现代文：针刺痈疮是痛的，吃药是苦的；因为苦痛的缘故就不刺痈和吃药，就救不了命，治不了病。
English: Acne is painful, and taking medicine is painful; if you don't take medicine because of the pain, you can't save your life or cure the disease.

古文：今上下之接，无子父之泽，而欲以行义禁下，则交必有郄矣。
现代文：现在君臣相交，没有父子间的恩泽，却想用施行仁义去控制臣下，那么君臣之间的交往必定会出现裂痕。
English: Now that the prince and the vassal are in a relationship, there is no favor between father and son, but they want to use benevolence and righteousness to control the vassal, then the interaction between the prince and the vassal is bound to have cracks.

古文：且父母之于子也，产男则相贺，产女则杀之。
现代文：况且父母对于子女，生了男孩就互相祝贺，生了女孩就把她杀了。
English: Moreover, parents congratulated each other on the birth of a boy, but killed a girl.

古文：此俱出父母之怀衽，然男子受贺，女子杀之者，虑其后便，计之长利也。
现代文：子女都出自父母的怀抱，然而是男孩就受到祝贺，是女孩就杀了的原因，是考虑到今后的利益，从长远利益打算的。
English: Children are born from the arms of their parents, but it is the boy who is congratulated, it is the girl who is the reason for killing, it is the future benefits that are considered, and the long-term benefits are planned.

古文：故父母之于子也，犹用计算之心以相待也，而况无父子之泽乎？
现代文：所以父母对于子女，尚且用计算利弊相对待，何况是对于没有父子间恩泽的人呢？
English: Therefore, parents still use the calculation of pros and cons to treat their children, let alone for those who do not have the favor of the father and son?

古文：今学者之说人主也，皆去求利之心，出相爱之道，是求人主之过父母之亲也，此不熟于论恩，诈而诬也，故明主不受也。
现代文：现在学者游说君主，都要君主抛弃求利的打算，而采用相爱的原则，这是要求君主有超过父母对于子女的亲情，也就属于不善于谈论恩泽问题的谎言和欺诈了，所以明君是不接受的。
English: Now scholars are lobbying the monarch to abandon the intention of seeking profit and adopt the principle of mutual love. This requires the monarch to have more affection for his children than parents. It is also a lie and fraud that is not good at talking about the issue of grace, so the prince does not accept it.

古文：圣人之治也，审于法禁，法禁明著，则官法；必于赏罚，赏罚不阿，则民用。
现代文：圣人治理国家，一是能详细地考察法律禁令，法律禁令彰明了，官府事务就会得到妥善治理；二是能坚决地实行赏罚，赏罚不出偏差，民众就会听从使唤。
English: For a saint to govern the country, firstly, he must be able to examine the legal prohibitions in detail. Once the legal prohibitions are clarified, the government affairs will be properly governed. Secondly, he must be able to resolutely implement rewards and punishments. If the rewards and punishments do not deviate, the people will obey.

古文：官治则国富，国富则兵强，而霸王之业成矣。
现代文：民众听从使唤，官府事务得到妥善处理，国家就富强；国家富强，兵力就强盛。结果，统一天下的大业也就随之完成了。
English: The people obeyed the call, government affairs were properly handled, and the country became rich and strong; the country became rich and strong, and the military became strong. As a result, the great cause of unification was completed.

古文：霸王者，人主之大利也。
现代文：统一天下，是君主最大的利益。
English: Unification is in the best interests of the monarchy.

古文：人主挟大利以听治，故其任官者当能，其赏罚无私。
现代文：君主怀着统一天下的目的来治理国家，所以他根据能力任用官员，实行赏罚没有私心。
English: The monarch governs the country with the aim of unifying the country, so he appoints officials according to ability, and there is no selfishness in the implementation of rewards and punishments.

古文：使士民明焉，尽力致死，则功伐可立而爵禄可致，爵禄致而富贵之业成矣。
现代文：要让士人民众明白，为国家尽力拼死，功劳就可建立，爵禄就可获得；获得爵禄，富贵的事业就完成了。
English: It is necessary to let the masses of the people understand that if you work hard and die for the country, your merit can be established and you can get a peerage; if you get a peerage, your rich career will be completed.

古文：富贵者，人臣之大利也。
现代文：富贵是臣子最大的利益。
English: Being rich is the best interest of a vassal.

古文：人臣挟大利以从事，故其行危至死，其力尽而不望。
现代文：臣子怀着取得富贵的目的来办事，所以他们会冒着生命危险力、事，竭尽全力。死而无怨。
English: The courtiers do things with the aim of getting rich, so they will risk their lives, do their best, and do their best. There is nothing wrong with death.

古文：此谓君不仁，臣不忠，则可以霸王矣。
现代文：这叫做君主不讲仁爱，臣下不讲忠心，就可以因此统一天下了。
English: This is called the monarch does not speak of benevolence, the vassal does not speak of loyalty, it can therefore be unified.

古文：夫奸必知则备，必诛则止；不知则肆，不诛则行。
现代文：奸人在一定能被察觉的情况下，才会戒惧；在一定要受惩罚的情况下，才不敢再犯。在不能被察觉的情况下，他就会放肆；在不会受惩罚的情况下，他就要横行。
English: A traitor is only afraid when he is sure to be discovered; when he is sure to be punished, he does not dare to commit the crime again. When he is not discovered, he will be reckless; when he is not punished, he will run amok.

古文：夫陈轻货于幽隐，虽曾、史可疑也；悬百金于市，虽大盗不取也。
现代文：把廉价的东西放在冷僻之处，即使是曾参、史这样有修养的人也有偷窃的嫌疑；把百金放置在闹市中，即使出名的盗贼也不敢取走。
English: If you put cheap things in a secluded place, even a cultured person like Zeng Zhan and Shi will be suspected of stealing; if you put hundred-dollar bills in a busy city, even a famous thief will not dare to take them.

古文：不知，则曾、史可疑于幽隐；必知，则大盗不取悬金于市。
现代文：不被察觉，曾参、史绍就可能在暗处于坏事；一定察觉；大盗就不敢在闹市上取走放置的百金。
English: Without being detected, Zengsang and Shishao may be secretly involved in bad things; they must be detected; the big thief will not dare to take away the one hundred gold coins left in the busy market.

古文：故明主之治国也，众其守而重其罪，使民以法禁而不以廉止。
现代文：所以明君治理国家，多设耳目，重罚罪犯，使民众由于法令而受到约束，不靠廉洁的品德而停止作恶。
English: Therefore, Mingjun governs the country, sets up more ears and eyes, severely punishes criminals, so that the people are constrained by laws and regulations, and stop doing evil without relying on incorruptible character.

古文：母之爱子也倍父，父令之行于子者十母；吏之于民无爱，令之行于民也万父。
现代文：母亲爱护子女要倍于父亲，然而父亲严令子女的效果更十倍于母亲；官吏对于民众没有爱心，然而对于民众发号施令，其效果更要万倍于父亲。
English: A mother loves and protects her children twice as much as a father, but a father's strict orders to his children are ten times more effective than a mother's; officials have no love for the people, but their orders to the people are ten thousand times more effective than a father's.

古文：母积爱而令穷，吏威严而民听从，严爱之策亦可决矣。
现代文：母亲过分宠爱子女，命令就行不通；官吏运用刑罚的威严，命令就能让人服从。采用威严的策略好，还是仁爱的策略好，由此也就可以决断了。
English: If a mother is too fond of her children, orders will not work; if officials use the majesty of punishment, orders can be obeyed. Whether it is better to use the strategy of majesty or the strategy of benevolence can also be decided.

古文：且父母之所以求于子也，动作则欲其安利也，行身则欲其远罪也。
现代文：况且父母寄希望于子女的，行动上是想让他们安全有利，做人上是想他们不去犯罪。
English: Moreover, when parents pin their hopes on their children, they want them to be safe and beneficial in their actions, and they want them not to commit crimes in their lives.

古文：君上之于民也，有难则用其死，安平则尽其力。
现代文：君主对于民众，危难时就要他们拼死作战，安定时就要他们尽力耕作。
English: As far as the people are concerned, the monarch wants them to fight to the death in times of danger, and to do their best to farm in times of stability.

古文：亲以厚爱关子于安利而不听，君以无爱利求民之死力而令行。
现代文：父母怀着深厚的爱，把子女安排在安全有利的环境中，但子女却不听父母的话；君主在不用爱与利的条件下要求民众为自己出死力，命令却能行得通。
English: Parents, with deep love, place their children in a safe and favorable environment, but the children do not listen to their parents; the monarch, without love and benefit, asks the people to do their best for themselves, but the order can work.

古文：明主知之，故不养恩爱之心而增威严之势。
现代文：明君懂得这些，所以不培养仁爱之心而加强威严之势。
English: Emperor Ming knew this, so instead of cultivating benevolence, he strengthened the power of authority.

古文：故母厚爱处，子多败，推爱也；父薄爱教笞，子多善，用严也。
现代文：所以母亲对子女厚爱，子女多数不好，是因为宠爱的结果；父亲不偏爱，常用体罚，子女多数，很好，是因为严厉的结果。
English: Therefore, the mother is kind to her children, the majority of children are not good, because of the result of favoritism; the father does not prefer, often uses corporal punishment, the majority of children are good, because of the result of severity.

古文：今家人之治产也，相忍以饥寒，相强以劳苦，虽犯军旅之难，饥馑之患，温衣美食者，必是家也；相怜以衣食，相惠以佚乐，天饥岁荒，嫁妻卖子者，必是家也。
现代文：现在普通人家治理产业，用忍受饥寒来相互勉励，用吃苦耐劳来相互督促，即使遭到战争的灾难，荒年的祸患，仍然能吃饱穿暖的，一定是这种人家；用吃好穿好来相互爱怜，用安逸享乐来相互照顾，遇到灾荒年月，卖妻卖儿的，一定是这种人家。
English: Nowadays, ordinary people govern the industry, encourage each other by enduring hunger and cold, and urge each other by enduring hardship and labor. Even if they are subjected to the disasters of war and the calamities of the lean years, they can still eat enough and wear warm clothes. They must be such people. They must love and pity each other by eating well and dressing well, and take care of each other by enjoying comfort and pleasure. They must be such people when they encounter years of disaster and famine, and sell their wives and children.

古文：故法之为道，前苦而长利；仁之为道，偷乐而后穷。
现代文：所以把法作为治国原则，虽在开始时艰苦，日后定得长远益处；把仁作为治国原则，虽有一时的快乐，日后必定困苦交迫。
English: Therefore, taking the law as the principle of governing the country, although it is difficult at the beginning, it will bring long-term benefits in the future; taking benevolence as the principle of governing the country, although there is a moment of happiness, it will certainly be difficult in the future.

古文：圣人权其轻重，出其大利，故用法之相忍，而弃仁人之相怜也。
现代文：圣人权衡法和仁的轻重，选择利益最大的一方，所以用法来相互强制，而抛弃仁人的相互怜爱。
English: The saints weigh the importance of the law and benevolence, and choose the side with the greatest benefit. Therefore, they use the law to coerce each other, and abandon the mutual love of the benevolent.

古文：学者之言皆曰 轻刑 ，此乱亡之术也。
现代文：学者的话都说要减轻刑罚，这是乱国亡身的方法。
English: The words of scholars are all about reducing the punishment, which is the way to ruin the country.

古文：凡赏罚之必者，劝禁也。
现代文：大凡赏罚坚决，是为了鼓励立功和禁止犯罪。
English: Great rewards and punishments are resolute in order to encourage meritorious service and prohibit crime.

古文：赏厚，则所欲之得也疾；罚重，则所恶之禁也急。
现代文：赏赐优厚，想要的东西就会迅速得到；刑罚重，厌恶的东西就能很快禁止。
English: If the reward is good, the desired thing will be obtained quickly; if the punishment is heavy, the disgusting thing will be prohibited quickly.

古文：夫欲利者必恶害，害者，利之反也。
现代文：要想得到利益的人必然厌恶祸害，祸害是和利益相反的东西。
English: He who would gain profit must necessarily abhor vice; vice is the opposite of profit.

古文：反于所欲，焉得无恶？
现代文：违反自己的欲望，怎能不厌恶呢？
English: How can one not be disgusted by violating one's own desires?

古文：欲治者必恶乱，乱者，治之反也。
现代文：要想治理好国家的人必然厌恶动乱，动乱是安定的反面。
English: If you want to govern a country well, you must hate turmoil. Turmoil is the opposite of stability.

古文：是故欲治甚者，其赏必厚矣；其恶乱甚者，其罚必重矣。
现代文：因此迫切希望治理好国家的人，赏赐一定优厚；非常厌恶动乱的人，刑罚一定很重。
English: Therefore, those who earnestly hope to govern the country well will be rewarded with certain benefits; those who are very averse to turmoil will be severely punished.

古文：此非特无术也，又乃无行。
现代文：现在主张轻刑的人，不太厌恶动乱，也不太想治理好国家。
English: Those who now advocate light sentences do not really abhor unrest, nor do they really want to govern the country well.

古文：是故决贤、不肖、愚、知之美，在赏罚之轻重。
现代文：这种人不但不懂策略，也不懂道理。因此判断一个人贤与不贤、笨与智的方法，在于他对赏罚轻重的看法。
English: This kind of person not only does not understand strategy, but also does not understand reason. Therefore, the way to judge a person's virtue and vice, stupidity and wisdom, lies in his view of the importance of reward and punishment.

古文：且夫重刑者，非为罪人也。
现代文：况且重刑，不单是为的惩罚人。
English: Moreover, the heavy sentence is not just for punishment.

古文：明主之法，揆也。
现代文：明君的法度是供人度量行为的准则。
English: Ming Jun's law is a standard by which to measure one's behavior.

古文：治贼，非治所揆也；所揆也者，是治死人也。
现代文：惩治大盗，不只是惩治大盗本身；如果只是惩治大盗本身，那不过是惩治了一个死囚。
English: If you punish the thief, you don't just punish the thief; if you just punish the thief, you've just punished a death row inmate.

古文：刑盗，非治所刑也；治所刑也者，是治胥靡也。
现代文：对小偷用刑，不只是惩治小偷本身；如果只是惩治小偷本身，那不过是惩治了一个苦役犯。
English: To punish a thief is not only to punish the thief himself, but to punish the thief himself is to punish a convict.

古文：故曰：重一奸之罪而止境内之邪，此所以为治也。
现代文：所以说：严惩一个坏人的罪行来禁止境内的奸邪，这才是惩治的目的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the purpose of punishment is to severely punish the crime of a bad person to prohibit adultery in the territory.

古文：重罚者，盗贼也；而悼惧者，良民也。
现代文：受到重罚的是盗贼，因而害怕犯罪的是良民。
English: It is the thieves who are severely punished, and it is the good people who are afraid of committing crimes.

古文：欲治者奚疑于重刑名！
现代文：想治理好国家的人对重刑还有什么可顾忌的呢！
English: People who want to govern the country well have nothing to fear from heavy sentences!

古文：若夫厚赏者，非独赏功也，又劝一国。
现代文：至于优厚的赏赐，不只是奖赏功劳，还可以勉励全国民众。
English: As for the generous reward, it is not only to reward merit, but also to encourage the people of the whole country.

古文：受赏者甘利，未赏者慕业，是报一人之功而劝境内之众也，欲治者何疑于厚赏！
现代文：受到赏赐的乐于得利，未得赏赐的羡慕受赏者的功业。这是酬劳一个人的功业而勉励了国内民众。想治理好国家的人对厚赏还有什么可顾忌的呢!
English: Those who have been rewarded are happy to make a profit, and those who have not been rewarded are envious of the work of those who have been rewarded. This is the reward of a person's work and encourages the people of the country. People who want to govern the country well have nothing to fear from a rich reward!

古文：今不知治者皆曰： 重刑伤民，轻刑可以止奸，何必于重哉？ 
现代文：现在不懂治国的人都说： 重刑会伤害民众，如果轻刑已能制止奸邪了，何苦定要实行重刑呢？ 
English: People who don't know how to run a country are now saying, "Heavy punishment will hurt the people. If light punishment can stop adultery, why do we have to impose heavy punishment?"

古文：此不察于治者也。
现代文：这是不懂得治理国家的言论。
English: This is the speech of someone who does not know how to govern the country.

古文：夫以重止者，未必以轻止也；以轻止者，必以重止矣。
现代文：用重刑能制止的，用轻刑未必能制止；用轻刑能制止的，用重刑一定能制止。
English: What can be stopped with a heavy sentence may not be stopped with a light sentence; what can be stopped with a light sentence can definitely be stopped with a heavy sentence.

古文：是以上设重刑者而奸尽止，奸尽止，则此奚伤于民也？
现代文：因此君主设置重刑的条件下，奸邪全能得到制止；奸邪全能得到制止，这怎么会伤害民众呢？
English: Therefore, under the condition that the monarch sets a heavy sentence, the evil of treason can be stopped; the evil of treason can be stopped, how can this hurt the people?

古文：所谓重刑者，奸之所利者细，而上之所加焉者大也。
现代文：所谓重刑，是要使奸人得到的利益小，而君主给予的惩罚重。
English: The so-called heavy punishment is to make the benefit of the traitor small, and the punishment given by the monarch heavy.

古文：民不以小利加大罪，故奸必止者也。
现代文：人们不想因小利而蒙受大罪，所以奸邪必被制止。
English: People don't want to commit a big crime for a small gain, so adultery must be stopped.

古文：所谓轻刑者，奸之所利者大，上之所加焉者小也。
现代文：所谓轻刑，是要使奸人得到的利益大，而君主给予的惩罚轻。
English: The so-called light punishment is to make the benefit of the traitor greater, while the punishment given by the monarch is light.

古文：民慕其利而傲其罪，故奸不止也。
现代文：人们向往大利而不怕犯罪，所以奸邪制止不了。
English: People yearn for Italy and are not afraid of crime, so treachery cannot be stopped.

古文：故先圣有谚曰： 不踬于山，而踬于垤。 
现代文：所以先圣有句谚语说： 人不会被高山绊倒，却会被小土堆绊倒。 
English: That's why the ancients had a saying: People don't trip over mountains, but they do trip over small piles of earth.

古文：山者大，故人顺之；垤微小，故人易之也。
现代文：山大，所以人们会小心遵循；土堆小，所以人们粗心大意。
English: Mountains are big, so people will be careful to follow; mounds are small, so people are careless.

古文：今轻刑罚，民必易之。
现代文：要是实行轻刑，民众一定忽视它。
English: If a light sentence is imposed, the public is bound to ignore it.

古文：犯而不诛，是驱国而弃之也；犯而诛之，是为民设陷也。
现代文：民众犯了罪而不处罚，等于驱使国人犯罪而抛弃他们；让人犯了罪再加以惩罚，等于给民众设置了陷阱。
English: If the people commit crimes and are not punished, it is tantamount to driving the Chinese people to commit crimes and abandoning them; if people commit crimes and are punished, it is tantamount to setting a trap for the people.

古文：是故轻罪者，民之垤也。
现代文：因此，轻刑正如会使民众不经意而摔跤的小土堆。
English: Therefore, a light sentence is like a small mound that will make people inadvertently wrestle.

古文：是以轻罪之为民道也，非乱国也，则设民陷也，此则可谓伤民矣！
现代文：因而把轻刑作为治理民众的原则，不是导致国家混乱，就是为民众设置陷阱，这才叫伤害民众啊！
English: Therefore, taking light punishment as the principle of governing the people, either leads to chaos in the country or sets a trap for the people, which is called harming the people!

古文：今学者皆道书策之颂语，不察当世之实事，曰： 上不爱民，赋敛常重，则用不足而下恐上，故天下大乱。 
现代文：现在的学者都称引典籍中歌功颂德的话，而不考察当代的实际情况，说什么： 君主不爱民众，赋税总是很重，于是民众因用度不足而怨恨君主，所以导致天下大乱。 
English: Present-day scholars are fond of quoting the praises and eulogies of classic books, without examining the actual contemporary situation, saying: the monarch does not love the people, taxes are always heavy, so the people resent the monarch because of insufficient expenditure, thus leading to chaos in the world.

古文：此以为足其财用以加爱焉，虽轻刑罚，可以治也。
现代文：这是认为使百姓财用富足并施加仁受，即使减轻刑罚，国家也可以治理好。
English: This is to believe that the country can be governed well even if the punishment is mitigated by enriching the people with wealth and imposing benevolence.

古文：此言不然矣。
现代文：这话就不对了。
English: That's not right.

古文：凡人之取重赏罚，固已足之之后也；虽财用足而后厚爱之，然而轻刑，犹之乱也。
现代文：大凡受到严惩的人，本来就是在财用富足后才犯罪的；即使财用富足后君主加以厚爱，并进而使用轻刑，还是会走向混乱的。
English: People who are severely punished usually commit crimes after they have become rich; even if the monarch is kind to them after they have become rich, and then uses light punishment, it will still lead to chaos.

古文：夫当家之爱子，财货足用，货财足用则轻用，轻用则侈泰。亲爱之则不忍，不忍则骄恣。
现代文：母亲溺爱子女，提供的财货足够他们花用了；财货足够花用，他们就会滥用；一旦滥用，就会挥霍无度，溺爱子女，就不能坚决加以约束；不能坚决加以约束，就会使他们骄横放纵。
English: A mother spoils her children and provides enough goods for them to spend; if the goods are spent enough, they will abuse them; if they are abused, they will spend too much; if they are spoiled, they cannot be firmly restrained; if they cannot be firmly restrained, they will become arrogant and indulgent.

古文：侈泰则家贫，骄恣则行暴。
现代文：挥霍无度，家境就会贫困；骄横放纵，行为就会暴虐。
English: Excessive spending, the family will be impoverished; arrogant indulgence, the behavior will be tyrannical.

古文：此虽财用足而爱厚，轻利之患也。
现代文：这就是财用富足并加以厚爱、使用轻刑造成的祸患。
English: This is the evil that comes from being rich and generous and using light punishments.

古文：凡人之生也，财用足则隳于用力，上懦则肆于为非。
现代文：大凡人的本性，财用富足了，就会懒于劳作；君主软弱了，就会放肆地干坏事。
English: It is the nature of mortals to be idle when they are rich, and to do evil when they are weak.

古文：财用足而力作者，神农也；上治懦而行修者，曾、史也，夫民之不及神农、曾、史亦明矣。
现代文：财用富足还努力劳作的，只有古代的神农；君主治国手段软弱而自己行为保持美好的，只有曾参、史。民众比不上神农、曾参、史绍是很清楚的。
English: Only the Shennong in ancient times used their wealth and worked hard; only the Zengsans and Shisho were monarchs who used their wealth and worked hard; only the Zengsans and Shisho were monarchs who used their wealth and worked hard; and only the Zengsans and Shisho were monarchs who used their wealth and worked hard; only the Zengsans and Shisho were monarchs who used their wealth and worked hard; only the Zengsans and Shisho were monarchs who used their wealth and worked hard; and only the Zengsans and Shisho were monarchs who used their wealth and worked hard.

古文：老聃有言曰： 知足不辱，知止不殆。 
现代文：老子有话说： 知道满足就不会受到耻辱，知道适可而止就不会有危险。 
English: Lao Tzu said: "If you know how to be satisfied, you will not be humiliated; if you know how to be moderate, you will not be in danger."

古文：夫以殆辱之故而不求于足之外者，老聃也。
现代文：因为危险和耻辱的缘故，在满足之后不再要求什么的人，只有老子。
English: Because of the danger and shame, the only one who does not ask for anything after satisfaction is Lao Zi.

古文：今以为足民而可以治，是以民为皆如老聃。
现代文：现在认为使民众富足就可以治理好国家，这是把民众都看作老子了。
English: It is now believed that a country can be well governed if the people are well-off, which means that the people are seen as laozi.

古文：故桀贵在天子而不足于尊，富有四海之内而不足于宝。
现代文：所以夏桀贵为天子而不满足于自己的尊贵，富有四海而不满足于自己的财宝。
English: Therefore, Xia Qian Gui is the son of heaven and is not satisfied with his dignity, and is rich in the four seas and is not satisfied with his treasure.

古文：君人者虽足民，不能足使为君天子，而桀未必为天子为足也，则虽足民，何可以为治也？
现代文：做君主的纵然使民众富足，但不能使他们富足得像天子一样，而夏桀也未必以天子为满足；那么纵然使民众富足，又怎么能用来作为治国的原则呢？
English: Even if a monarch enriches the people, he cannot make them as rich as the Son of Heaven, and even if the Son of Heaven is satisfied, how can it be used as a principle for governing the country even if the people are enriched?

古文：故明主之治国也，适其时事以致财物，论其税赋以均贫富，厚其爵禄以尽贤能，重其刑罚以禁奸邪，使民以力得富，以事致贵，以过受罪，以功致赏，而不念慈惠之赐，此帝王之政也。
现代文：所以，明君治理国家，顺应时务来获得财物，确定赋税来调节贫富；厚赏爵禄使人们竭尽才能，加重刑罚来禁止奸邪；使民众依靠出力得到富裕，依靠功业获得尊贵。因犯罪受到惩罚，因立功获得奖赏，而不考虑仁慈恩惠的赏赐，这是通往帝王大业的政治措施。
English: Therefore, it is a political measure leading to the emperor's great cause that the emperor governs the country, obtains wealth in accordance with the needs of the times, and fixes taxes to regulate the rich and the poor; that the rich reward the people to the best of their ability, that the punishment is increased to prohibit evil-doing; that the people are enriched by their efforts, and that they are honored by their merits; that they are punished for crimes, and rewarded for their meritorious deeds, without considering the reward of benevolence and grace.

古文：人皆寐，则盲者不知；皆嘿，则喑者不知。
现代文：人都睡着了，就不知道谁是瞎子；都不说话，就不知道谁是哑巴。
English: If people are asleep, they don't know who is blind; if they aren't talking, they don't know who is mute.

古文：觉而使之视，问而使之对，则喑盲者穷矣。
现代文：睡醒后让他们看东西，提问题让他们来回答，那么哑巴、瞎子就原形毕露了。
English: After waking up, let them see things, ask questions and let them answer, then the mute and blind will be revealed.

古文：不听其言也，则无术者不知；不任其身也，则不肖者不知。
现代文：不听他言语，没有本领的人就不能发现；不让他任职，没有德才的人就不能发现。
English: If you don't listen to his words, you can't find out who has no ability; if you don't let him serve, you can't find out who has no virtue.

古文：听其言而求其当，任其身而责其功，则无术不肖者穷矣。
现代文：听他说话而责求他有相应行动，让他任职而责求他能把事办成，那么没有本领、德才不好的人就原形毕露了。
English: If you listen to him and ask him to act accordingly, if you put him in charge and ask him to get things done, then a person with no ability and bad morals will be revealed.

古文：夫欲得力士而听其自言，虽庸人与乌获不可别也；授之以鼎俎，则罢健效矣。
现代文：要想得到大力士，却光凭自己介绍，普通人和乌获就无法加以区别。把巨鼎大案交给他们举，是疲弱还是勇健就表现出来了。
English: If you want to get a strong man, you can't distinguish between an ordinary person and a strong man just by introducing yourself. If you give them a big case, it shows whether you are weak or brave.

古文：故官职者，能士之鼎俎也，任之以事而愚智分矣。
现代文：所以官职是试验人们才能的巨鼎大案，让他们办事，是愚蠢还是聪明就区别出来了。
English: Therefore, the official position is a huge test of people's talents, let them do things, whether they are stupid or smart will be distinguished.

古文：故无术者得于不用，不肖者得于不任。
现代文：所以没有本领的人从君主不检查自己言论中取利，德才不好的人从君主不任用自己办事中取利。
English: Therefore, those who are incompetent take advantage of the fact that the monarch does not check their words, and those who are not virtuous take advantage of the fact that the monarch does not appoint them to do things.

古文：言不用而自文以为辩，身不任者而自饰以为高。
现代文：君主不检查他的言论，他就自吹善辩；君主不任用他办事，他就自命高明。
English: If the sovereign does not check his words, he boasts of being a good debater; if the sovereign does not appoint him to do things, he claims to be clever.

古文：世主眩其辩、滥其高而尊贵之，是不须视而定明也，不待对而定辩也，喑盲者不得矣。
现代文：当代君主迷惑于他的善辩，轻易相信他的高明，从而尊重他们；这是不等看东西就断定他眼明，不等说话就判定他口才好，这样，哑巴和瞎子就无从得知了。
English: The princes of the present day are bewitched by his eloquence, and easily believe in his wisdom, and so esteem him; for it is not necessary to see to judge of his sight, nor to speak to judge of his eloquence, so that the dumb and the blind cannot be known.

古文：明主听其言必责其用，观其行必求其功，然则虚旧之学不谈，矜诬之行不饰矣。
现代文：明君听取言论一定要责求实用，观察行为一定要责求功效，这样，虚伪陈腐的学说就没有人再谈了，虚妄自大的行为就掩饰不住了。
English: Mingjun listening to speech must be practical, observing behavior must be effective. In this way, no one will talk about the hypocritical and stale doctrine, and the false and arrogant behavior will not be able to hide.

