古文：于休烈，河南人也。
现代文：于休烈，河南人氏。
English: Yu Xuelie, from Henan Province.

古文：高祖志宁，贞观中任左仆射，为十八学士。
现代文：高祖于志宁，贞观年间任左仆射，为十八学士之一。
English: Gao Zu Yu Zhining, Zhenguan years as a left-handed shot, is one of the eighteen bachelor.

古文：父默成，沛县令，早卒。
现代文：父于默成，任沛县令，早逝。
English: His father, Yu Mucheng, was the county magistrate of Renpei County and died young.

古文：休烈至性贞悫，机鉴敏悟。
现代文：于休烈天性忠诚，机警聪慧。
English: Yu Xuereng is loyal by nature, alert and clever.

古文：自幼好学，善属文，与会稽贺朝、万齐融、延陵包融为文词之友，齐名一时。
现代文：自幼好学，善做文章，与会稽贺朝、万齐融及延陵包融为文词朋友，一时都很著名。
English: Since childhood, he was eager to learn and good at writing articles. The participants of the meeting, He Cha, Wan Qi Rong and Yan Ling Bao Rong, were friends of writing, and they were all famous for a while.

古文：举进士，又应制策登科，授秘书省正字。
现代文：应举进士，又应制策考试登科，授秘书省正字之职。
English: It is necessary to promote young scholars, and it is also necessary to set up a policy examination to enter a university, and to assign the post of secretary to the provincial official.

古文：累迁右补阙、起居郎、集贤殿学士，转比部员外郎，郎中。
现代文：屡次升迁至右补阙、起居郎、集贤殿学士，调任比部员外郎、郎中。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Utsubo no jo, Kijiro, Shikenden no hakase, and reassigned to the position of hibu member, gairo, and roju.

古文：杨国忠辅政，排不附己者，出为中部郡太守。
现代文：杨国忠任宰相时，排挤不依附自己的人，于休烈被调出京师任中部郡太守。
English: When Yang Guotong was appointed prime minister, he ousted those who did not cling to him, and Yu Xuelie was transferred from the Beijing Division to the position of Chubu County Governor.

古文：值禄山构难，肃宗践祚，休烈自中部赴行在，擢拜给事中。
现代文：时值安禄山叛乱，肃宗即位，于休烈自中部奔赴皇上行宫，被擢升拜给事中。
English: At the time of the An Lushan Rebellion, Su Zong ascended to the throne, and Yu Xue Liang rushed from central China to the emperor's palace, and was promoted to the middle echelon.

古文：迁太常少卿，知礼仪事，兼修国史。
现代文：又调任太常少卿，知礼仪事，兼修国史。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing, learned etiquette and ceremonial, and also studied national history.

古文：肃宗自凤翔还京，励精听受，尝谓休烈曰： 君举必书，良史也。
现代文：肃宗自凤翔还京，振作精神，听纳谏议，曾对于休烈说道： 君主的一举一动必定记录，是杰出的史官。
English: Su Zong, who returned to Beijing from Fengxiang, kept his spirits up and listened to the discussion. He once said to Hurel: The monarch's every move must be recorded. He is an outstanding historian.

古文：朕有过失，卿书之否？ 
现代文：如果朕有过失，卿是否要记录？ 
English: If I am at fault, sir, do you want a record?

古文：对曰： 禹、汤罪己，其兴也勃焉。
现代文：于休烈回答道： 禹、汤能批评自己的过失，因此勃然兴盛。
English: Yu Xue Lie replied: Yu and Tang were able to criticize their own mistakes, so they prospered.

古文：有德之君，不忘规过，臣不胜大庆。 
现代文：有德行的君主，不忘规劝己身过失，臣极力庆贺不已。 
English: The virtuous monarch did not forget to admonish himself for his mistakes, and the vassal celebrated as hard as he could.

古文：时中原荡覆，典章殆尽，无史籍检寻。
现代文：此时中原动荡颠覆，典章丧失殆尽，无史籍文献可供检寻。
English: At this time, the Central Plains was in a state of upheaval and subversion, all of the official documents were lost, and there were no historical documents to be found.

古文：休烈奏曰： 《国史》一百六卷，《开元实录》四十七卷，起居注并余书三千六百八十二卷，并在兴庆宫史馆。
现代文：于休烈启奏道： 《国史》一百零六卷，《开元实录》四十七卷，《起居注》连同其他书籍三千六百八十二卷，一并收藏在兴庆宫史馆。
English: "National History" 106 volumes, "Record of the Founding of the People's Republic of China" 47 volumes, and "Annotation on Living" 3682 volumes, along with other books, are all collected in the Xingqing Palace History Museum.

古文：京城陷贼后，皆被焚烧。
现代文：京城被贼攻陷后，尽遭焚烧。
English: After the capital was captured by thieves, it was burned to the ground.

古文：且《国史》、《实录》，圣朝大典，修撰多时，今并无本。
现代文：而且《国史》、《实录》，皆圣朝重大典籍，编撰已久，如今并无刻本。
English: Moreover, "National History" and "Real Record," both important classics of the Holy Dynasty, have been compiled for a long time, and now there is no engraved book.

古文：伏望下御史台推勘史馆所由，令府县招访。
现代文：伏望下诏御史台查勘史馆藏书之来源，令府县征收寻访。
English: The prefectural government ordered the Imperial Historical Research Station to investigate the source of the books in the museum's collection.

古文：有人别收得《国史》、《实录》，如送官司，重加购赏。
现代文：有人从别处收得《国史》、《实录》，如送交官府，重金收购并赏赐。
English: Some people have obtained "National History" and "Real Record" from other places, such as sending them to the government, purchasing them with a large sum of money and rewarding them.

古文：若是史官收得，仍赦其罪。
现代文：若是史官收得，则赦免其渎职之罪。
English: If a historian receives it, his crime of dereliction of duty will be pardoned.

古文：得一部，超授官资，得一卷赏绢十匹。 
现代文：得一部者越级授给官位，得一卷者赏绢十匹。 
English: One of the winners will be promoted to a higher rank, and one of the winners will be awarded ten horses.

古文：数月之内，唯得一两卷。
现代文：数月之内，仅收得一两卷。
English: Within a few months, only one or two volumes were collected.

古文：前修史官工部侍郎韦述陷贼，入东京，至是以其家藏《国史》一百一十三卷送于官。
现代文：前任编修史官工部侍郎韦述陷入贼中，滞留东京，到这时便将其家所藏《国史》一百一十三卷呈送官府。
English: The previous editor-in-chief of the history, Wei Shu, a chamberlain of the engineering department, fell into the hands of thieves and was stranded in Tokyo. At this time, he presented the 113 volumes of "National History" from his home to the government.

古文：肃宗以太常钟磬，自隋已来，所传五音，或有不调，乾元初谓休烈曰： 古者圣人作乐，以应天地之和，以合阴阳之序，则人不夭扎，物不疵疠。
现代文：肃宗因太常寺钟磬自隋代以来，所传送五音，有时不协调，乾元初年对于休烈说： 古时圣人创作演奏音乐，用以应合天地之和谐、阴阳之顺序，则人不夭折，物不疵疠。
English: In the first year of the Qianyuan era, Su Zong said to Hurei, "In ancient times, saints created and performed music to match the harmony of heaven and earth and the order of yin and yang, so people did not die young and things were not flawed.

古文：且金石丝竹，乐之器也。
现代文：而金石丝竹，是演奏音乐的器具。
English: Kinseki silk bamboo, on the other hand, is a musical instrument.

古文：比亲享郊庙，每听悬乐，宫商不备，或钟磬失度。
现代文：近来亲自祀郊庙，每听悬乐演奏，皆觉宫商五音不全，有时钟磬之音失调。
English: Recently, I have personally worshipped a suburban temple, and every time I listen to a hanging music performance, I always feel that the five tones of the palace merchant are incomplete, and sometimes the tone of the bell is out of tune.

古文：可尽将钟磬来，朕当于内自定。 
现代文：可尽将钟磬送来，朕当在宫内亲自校正。 
English: You can send me the gongs, but I have to calibrate them myself in the palace.

古文：太常集乐工考试，数日审知差错，然后令别铸造磨刻。
现代文：太常寺集合乐工检验调试数日，审察了解乐器之差错，然后命人重新铸造磨刻。
English: Taizhoji gathered musicians to inspect and debug for several days, examine and understand the errors of musical instruments, and then ordered people to re-cast and re-grind.

古文：及事毕，上临殿亲试考击，皆合五音，群臣称庆。
现代文：及至制作完毕，皇上临殿亲自试验敲击，皆合于五音，群臣称贺。
English: When the work was completed, the Emperor Rinden personally tested the strokes, and they were all in five tones, and the courtiers congratulated him.

古文：休烈寻转工部侍郎、修国史，献《五代帝王论》，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：于休烈随即调任工部侍郎、修国史，进献《五代帝王论》，皇上甚为称赞。
English: Yu Xiurei was immediately transferred to the position of a chamberlain in the Ministry of Works and National History, and presented "The Five Emperors," which was highly praised by the emperor.

古文：宰相李揆矜能忌贤，以休烈修国史与己齐列，嫉之，奏为国子祭酒，权留史馆修撰以下之。
现代文：宰相李揆恃才自夸而嫉妒贤能，因于休烈修撰国史与自己平列，便嫉恨他，奏请他任国子祭酒，暂且留在史馆从事修撰以贬低他。
English: The prime minister, Li Jiecai, was boastful and envious of the virtuous. He was jealous of Xu Rong's ability to write a national history equal to his own, so he invited him to serve as the national son's sacrificial wine, and temporarily stayed at the history museum to write a national history in order to belittle him.

古文：休烈恬然自持，殊不介意。
现代文：于休烈安然自处，毫不介意。
English: Yu Shulei is at peace with himself and doesn't mind.

古文：旧仪，元正冬至，百官不于光顺门朝贺皇后，乾元元年，张皇后遂行此礼。
现代文：传统礼仪，改元之初年冬至，百官不在光顺门朝贺皇后，乾元元年，张皇后要行接受百官朝贺之礼。
English: According to the traditional etiquette, in the winter solstice of the first year of the new era, the officials were not present at the Guangshun Gate to greet the empress. In the first year of the new era, the Empress Zhang had to receive the greetings of the officials.

古文：休烈奏曰： 《周礼》有命夫朝人主，命妇朝女君。
现代文：于休烈奏道： 《周礼》有受封之男子朝拜人主、受封之妇人朝拜女君的规定。
English: Yu Xiurei said, "In the Weekly Ritual, there is a rule that men who have been ordained must worship the Lord, and women who have been ordained must worship the Empress.

古文：自显庆已来，则天皇后始行此礼。
现代文：自显庆以来，则天皇后开始实行这一礼仪。
English: Since the enthronement, the empress has begun to practice this etiquette.

古文：其日，命妇又朝光顺门，与百官杂处，殊为失礼。 
现代文：当天，命妇又朝拜于光顺门，与百官混杂相处，极为失礼。 
English: On the same day, the lady-in-waiting again paid homage at the Guangshun Gate and mingled with hundreds of officials, which was extremely rude.

古文：肃宗诏停之。
现代文：肃宗便下诏停止这次朝贺。
English: Sozong then issued an edict to stop this morning greeting.

古文：代宗即位，甄别名品，宰臣元载称之，乃拜右散骑常侍，依前兼修国史，寻加礼仪使。迁工部侍郎。
现代文：代宗即位，审察鉴定官员之优者，宰臣元载称赞于休烈，于是拜于休烈为右散骑常侍，仍旧兼修国史，随即又加授礼仪使，调任工部侍郎。
English: When the daimyō ascended to the throne, Zaisei Motonari, who was in charge of examining and appraising officials, praised Shurei. So, he promoted Shurei to the position of the right-hand cavalryman, while continuing to study the history of the country. He was also awarded the position of the etiquette officer and transferred to the position of the chamberlain of the work department.

古文：又改检校工部尚书，兼判太常卿事，正拜工部尚书，累封东海郡公，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：又改任检校工部尚书，兼判太常卿事，正式拜工部尚书，接着又封东海郡公，加授金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was also appointed as the inspector of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and concurrently awarded the title of "Grand Marshal of the People's Republic of China" and "Grand Marshal of the People's Republic of China." He was also officially awarded the title of "Grand Marshal of the People's Republic of China."

古文：在朝凡三十余年，历掌清要，家无提石之蓄。
现代文：在朝前后三十余年，历任清要之职，家中没有些微积蓄。
English: For more than 30 years before and after the rise of the North Korean regime, the successive holders of important posts did not have any savings at home.

古文：恭俭温仁，未尝以喜愠形于颜色。
现代文：为人恭俭温良仁慈，从未以喜怒形于颜色。
English: He is modest and frugal, good-natured and benevolent, and has never been angry or angry.

古文：而亲贤下士，推毂后进，虽位崇年高，曾无倦色。
现代文：而亲贤下士，提携后进，虽位崇年高，却无半点厌倦之意。
English: However, Corporal Kinshien, a latecomer to the alliance, was not the least bit bored, despite his seniority.

古文：笃好坟籍，手不释卷，以至于终。
现代文：一心沉浸于研习古代典籍，手不释卷，直至生命终结。
English: He immersed himself in the study of ancient classics, never letting go of a book, until the end of his life.

古文：大历七年卒，年八十一。
现代文：大历七年去世，年八十一。
English: He died in the seventh year of the lunar calendar, in the eighty-first year.

古文：有集十卷行于代。
现代文：有文集十卷刊行于世。
English: Ten volumes of his collected works have been published.

古文：嗣子益，次子肃，相继为翰林学士。
现代文：嗣子于益，次子于肃，相继任翰林学士。
English: His heir, Yu Yi, and his second son, Yu Su, successively served as Hanlin scholars.

古文：是岁春，休烈妻韦氏卒。
现代文：当年春天，于休烈之妻韦氏去世。
English: In the spring of that year, Wu Wei, the wife of Xu Rong, passed away.

古文：上以休烈父子儒行著闻，特诏赠韦氏国夫人，葬日给卤簿鼓吹。
现代文：皇上因于休烈父子儒雅著称，特别降诏追赠韦氏为国夫人，下葬日派给仪仗鼓吹。
English: The emperor was famous for the elegance of his son and son-in-law, especially for the posthumous gift of the imperial rescript to the Wei family as the wife of the country. On the day of the funeral, he was sent to the ceremonial war to preach.

古文：及闻休烈卒，追悼久之，褒赠尚书左仆射，赙绢百匹、布五十端，遣谒者内常侍吴承倩就私第宣慰。
现代文：及至听说于休烈去世，追思痛悼许久，褒奖追赠尚书左仆射，赐给助丧用绢百匹，布五十段，派遣谒者内常侍吴承倩去宅第宣旨慰问。
English: When it was learned that Yu Hulie had passed away, there was a long period of reminiscence and mourning, and a reward was given to Shang Shuxu Zuojiao, a hundred yakitori and fifty pieces of cloth were given to the mourners, and Wu Chengyi, a regular attendant of the emperor, was sent to the emperor's residence to offer condolences.

古文：儒者之荣，少有其比。
现代文：儒者所受之恩宠，少有能与之相比的。
English: Confucians have received a grace that few can match.

古文：肃官至给事中。
现代文：于肃官至给事中。
English: He was in the process of being demoted to sergeant.

古文：肃子敖。
现代文：于肃之子名敖。
English: Yu Su's son is a famous singer.

