古文：余与仲昭兄游天台，为壬申三月。
现代文：我和族兄徐仲昭游天台山时，是壬申年三月。
English: It was March in the year of Jinshin when my elder brother Xu Zhongzhao and I toured Mount Tiantai.

古文：至四月二十八日，达黄岩，再访雁山。
现代文：到四月二步八日，抵达黄岩县，又第二次游雁宕山。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of April, he arrived in Huangyan County and visited the Wild Goose Mountain for the second time.

古文：觅骑出南门，循方山十里，折而西南行，三十里，逾秀岭，饭于岩前铺。
现代文：找到马后从县城南门骑马出发，沿方山行十里，转向西南行，三十里，翻越秀岭，在岩前铺吃饭。
English: After finding a horse, he rode from the south gate of the county seat, rode along Fangshan Mountain for ten miles, turned to the southwest, rode for thirty miles, crossed Xiuling, and ate at Iwamae.

古文：五里，为乐清界，五里，上盘山岭。
现代文：走五里，进入乐清县境内，又走五里，登上盘山岭。
English: Walk five miles to enter the territory of Yueqing County, and then walk another five miles to climb Pan Mountain.

古文：西南云雾中，隐隐露芙蓉一簇，雁山也。
现代文：西南边的云雾之中，隐隐约约地露出一簇荷花似的山峰，那就是雁宕山。
English: Amidst the clouds in the southwest, a cluster of lotus-like peaks looms into view. That is Mt. Gantago.

古文：十里，郑家岭，十里，大荆驿。
现代文：走十里，名郑家岭，又走十里，名大荆骚。
English: If you walk ten miles, you will be called Zhengjialing, and if you walk another ten miles, you will be called Da Jingsao.

古文：渡石门涧，新雨溪涨，水及马腹。
现代文：渡过石门涧，因刚下过雨、溪水猛涨，水淹到马腹。
English: After crossing the stone gate, because it had just rained, the stream water surged, and the water flooded to the horse's belly.

古文：五里，宿于章家楼，是为雁山之东外谷。
现代文：又走五里，在章家楼住宿，章家楼在雁宕山的东外谷。
English: I walked another five miles and stayed at Zhangjia Lou. Zhangjia Lou is located in the eastern valley of the Yangtze River.

古文：章氏盛时，建楼以憩山游之屐即供游客栖息，今旅肆旅馆寥落，犹存其名。
现代文：章家兴盛的时代，专门建楼给登山的游客休息，如今旅馆空虚，店铺衰落，只有章家楼的名称还照旧保存。
English: In Zhangjiajie's heyday, a special building was built to give climbing tourists a break. Nowadays, the hotel is empty, the shops are in decline, and only the name of Zhangjiajie is still preserved.

古文：二十九日西入山，望老僧岩而趋。
现代文：二十九日往西进雁宕山，眺望着老僧岩朝前赶。
English: On the 29th, he went west into the Wild Goose Mountains, looking at the old monk Iwacho as he hurried forward.

古文：二里，过其麓。
现代文：行二里，经过老僧岩山麓。
English: Go two miles and pass the foot of the Old Monk Rock.

古文：又二里，北渡溪，上石梁洞。
现代文：又行二里，往北渡过溪水；登上石梁洞。
English: Walked another two miles, crossed the stream to the north, and ascended Shiliang Cave.

古文：仍还至溪旁，西二里，逾谢公岭。
现代文：从石梁洞又返回到溪旁，往西走二里，翻越谢公岭。
English: From Shiliang Cave, return to the stream and walk west for two miles, crossing Xie Gongling.

古文：岭以内是为东内谷。
现代文：谢公岭以内被称为东内谷。
English: Xie Gongling is also known as Dong Nai Valley.

古文：岭下有溪自北来，夹溪皆重岩怪峰，突兀无寸土，雕镂百态。
现代文：岭下有一条从北边流来的溪水，溪水两岸全是重叠的岩石和奇形怪状的石峰，峰岩光秃秃地高耸着，上面连一寸泥土也没有，但却像雕刻过一样千悠百态。
English: Below the ridge there is a stream that flows from the north. Both banks of the stream are full of overlapping rocks and strangely shaped stone peaks. The peak rock is bare and high, and there is not even an inch of soil on it, but it looks like it has been carved.

古文：渡溪，北折里许，入灵峰寺。
现代文：渡过溪水，往北转，走一里多，进入灵峰寺。
English: Cross the stream, turn north, walk more than a mile, enter Lingfeng Temple.

古文：峰峰奇峭，离立满前。
现代文：一座座奇异陡峭的山峰，各自独立地布满寺前。
English: One after another, the peaks of the strangely steep mountain covered the area in front of the temple.

古文：寺后一峰独耸，中袭一璺è裂缝，上透其顶，是名灵峰洞。
现代文：寺后一座山峰单独耸起，山峰正中裂开一道缝隙，往上通到峰顶，这就是灵峰洞。
English: Behind the temple, a mountain peak stands alone. A gap opens in the middle of the mountain peak, leading upwards to the peak. This is Lingfeng Cave.

古文：蹑千级而上，石台重整，洞中罗汉像俱更新。
现代文：踏着千级石阶而上，石台十分整齐，洞中的罗汉塑像都更新过了。
English: Stepping up the thousand stone steps, the stone platform is very neat, and the statues of Arhat in the cave have all been updated.

古文：下饭寺中。
现代文：从灵峰洞下到灵峰寺中吃饭。
English: From Lingfeng Cave to Lingfeng Temple to eat.

古文：同僧自照胆潭越溪左，观风洞。
现代文：同僧人沿照胆潭越到溪水左岸，去观览风洞。
English: He and the monk walked along Zhaoji Lake to the left bank of the stream to see the wind tunnel.

古文：洞口仅半规，风蓬蓬出射数步外。
现代文：风洞口只是半圆形，洞内的风蓬蓬地吹出洞数步之外。
English: The mouth of the wind tunnel is only a semicircle, and the wind inside the tunnel blows out of the hole a few steps away.

古文：遂从溪左历探崖间诸洞。
现代文：于是沿着溪水左岸一一地探寻崖上的各个洞穴。
English: So they explored the caves on the cliff one by one along the left bank of the stream.

古文：还寺，雨大至，余乃赤足持伞溯溪北上。
现代文：返回灵峰寺后，下起了大雨，我便光着脚撑起伞溯溪水往北上。
English: After returning to Lingfeng Temple, it rained heavily, so I propped up an umbrella with my bare feet and followed the stream water northward.

古文：将抵真济寺，山深雾黑，茫无所睹，乃还过溪东，入碧霄洞。守愚上人精舍在焉。
现代文：快要到真济寺时，山谷深邃，云雾浓黑，茫然一片，什么也看不见，于是返回来走到溪水东面，进入碧霄洞，高僧守愚的精舍就在这里。
English: When he was about to arrive at Shingiji Temple, the valley was deep, the clouds thick and dark, and he was dazed, unable to see anything. So he walked back to the east side of the stream and entered Bijiao Cave, where the high priest Shouyu's retreat was located.

古文：余觉其有异，令僮还招仲昭，亦践流而至，恨相见之晚，薄暮，返宿灵峰。
现代文：我觉得守愚不同常人，让仆人回去叫徐仲昭来，他也踩着水而来，与守愚有相见恨晚之感将近傍晚时，返回灵峰寺住宿。
English: I felt that Shouwu was different from ordinary people. He asked his servant to go back and tell Xu Zhongzhao to come. He also walked on water to come and had a feeling of hatred towards Shouwu. When it was almost evening, he returned to Lingfeng Temple to stay.

古文：三十日冒雨循流，西折二里，一溪自西北来合，其势愈大。
现代文：三十日冒雨沿溪流走，往西转二里，一条溪水从西北流过来汇合，水势越加大了。
English: On the 30th, I walked along the stream in the rain and turned west for two miles. A stream flowed from the northwest and merged, and the water level increased.

古文：渡溪而西，溯而西北行，三里，入净名寺。雨益甚，云雾中仰见两崖，重岩夹立，层叠而上，莫辨层次。
现代文：渡过溪流往西走，又溯溪流往西北行，三里，进了净名寺，雨更加大了，抬头看笼罩在云雾中的两边山崖，重重岩石相对而立，层层往上叠起，但分不清层次。
English: I crossed the stream to the west, and traced the stream to the northwest. Three miles later, I entered the Jingmei Temple. The rain became heavier. Looking up, I saw the cliffs on both sides shrouded in clouds and fog. Heavy rocks stood opposite each other, piled up in layers, but the layers were indistinguishable.

古文：衣履沾透，益深穷西谷，中有水帘谷、维摩石室、说法台诸胜。
现代文：衣服鞋子都湿透了，却更要往深处去穷究西谷，谷中有水帘谷、维摩石室、说法台等名胜。
English: My clothes and shoes were soaking wet, but I still wanted to go deeper into the West Valley. There are famous places in the valley, such as the Water Curtain Valley, the Verma Stone Room, and the Tell Tower.

古文：二里，至响岩。
现代文：走了二里，来到响岩。
English: Walked two miles, came to the ringing rock.

古文：岩右有二洞，飞瀑罩其外，余从榛荆棘莽中履险以登。
现代文：响岩右边有二个洞，飞流的瀑布罩住了洞门，我从丛密的荆棘荒草中冒险攀登。
English: There are two caves on the right side of the cliff. A cascading waterfall covers the entrance, and I venture up from the thorny undergrowth.

古文：其洞一名龙王，一名三台。
现代文：两个洞一个叫龙王洞，另一个叫三台洞。
English: There are two caves, one is called Longwang Cave and the other is called Sandai Cave.

古文：二洞之前，有岩突出，若露台然，可栈而通也。
现代文：在两洞的前面，有块突出的岩石，像露天的舞台一样，可以从栈道上过去。
English: In front of the two holes, there is a protruding rock, like an open-air stage, which can be passed from the walkway.

古文：出洞，返眺响岩之上，一石侧耳附峰头，为 听诗叟 。
现代文：走出洞后，返回的路上眺望响岩上面，有一块石头像人侧着耳朵贴在峰头上，取名为 听诗史 石。
English: After coming out of the cave, on the way back to the top of the cliff, there is a stone like a man with his ear next to the peak, named the Listening to Poetry Stone.

古文：又西二里，入灵岩。
现代文：又往西走二里，进入灵岩寺。
English: Walk another two miles west to Lingyan Temple.

古文：自灵峰西转，皆崇岩连幛，一开而为净名，一璺直入，所称一线天也；再开而为灵岩，叠嶂回环，寺当其中。
现代文：从灵峰寺往西转，一路都是高大的岩石连成屏障，屏障裂开的第一处是净名寺，有一条缝隙径直深人进去，所以称为一线天；屏障裂开的第二处就是灵岩寺，层峦叠嶂回旋环绕，灵岩寺位于正中。
English: Turning from Lingfeng Temple to the west, all the way are tall rocks connected into a barrier. The first place where the barrier is cracked is Jingmei Temple. There is a gap that people can go straight into, so it is called the first line of heaven. The second place where the barrier is cracked is Lingyan Temple. The layers of rock are circling around, and Lingyan Temple is located in the middle.

古文：五月朔初一仲昭与余同登天聪洞。
现代文：五月初一日徐仲昭和我一同登上天聪洞。
English: On the first day of May, Xu Zhongzhao and I went up to Tiancong Cave.

古文：洞中东望圆洞二，北望长洞一，皆透漏通明，第峭石直下，隔不可履。
现代文：在洞中往东望去有两个圆洞，往北望去有一个长洞，都是透亮通明的洞，只是洞壁陡峭地直立而下，道路隔绝，无法行走。
English: In the cave, there are two round holes looking to the east, and a long hole looking to the north. Both are bright and transparent holes, but the cave wall stands straight up and down steeply, the road is cut off, and it is impossible to walk.

古文：余乃复下至寺中，负梯破莽，率僮逾别坞，直抵圆洞之下，梯而登；不及，则斫木横嵌夹石间，践木以升；复不及，则以绳引梯悬石隙之树。
现代文：我于是又下到灵岩寺中，扛起梯子往草丛中穿行，率领仆人从另一道山坞越过去，直达圆洞下面，搭起梯子就往上登；梯子到不了洞口，就砍来树枝横插在岩石夹缝中，再踩着树枝而上；还是没到洞口，就用绳索把梯子吊上来，悬挂在石缝中的树上。
English: So I went down to Lingyan Temple again, picked up the ladder and walked through the bushes. I led the servant over from another dock, straight to the bottom of the round hole, set up the ladder and climbed up. When the ladder couldn't reach the hole, I cut branches and stuck them in the cracks in the rock, and then stepped on the branches to climb up. When I still couldn't reach the hole, I used a rope to hang the ladder up and hung it on the tree in the stone crevice.

古文：梯穷济连接以木，木穷济以梯，梯木俱穷，则引绳揉树，遂入圆洞中，呼仲昭相望而语。
现代文：爬完梯子就踩着树枝而上，树枝踩完了又爬梯子，梯子、树枝都不能用了，则把绳索拴挂到树上，拉着绳索攀登，终于进到了圆洞中，呼唤徐仲昭，两人相望而语。
English: After climbing the ladder, he stepped on the branches and climbed up. After stepping on the branches, he climbed the ladder again. Both the ladder and the branches could not be used. Then he hung the rope to the tree, pulled the rope and climbed. Finally, he entered the round hole, called Xu Zhongzhao, and the two looked at each other.

古文：复如法蹑长洞而下，已日中矣。
现代文：我又用同样的方法登入长洞后才下山，已经到中午了。
English: I used the same method to enter the long cave before descending, and it was already noon.

古文：西抵小龙湫之下，欲寻剑泉，不可得。
现代文：往西走到小龙揪下面，想探寻剑泉，没有找到。
English: I went west to the foot of Xiaolongyi to look for Jianquan, but I couldn't find it.

古文：踞石碛而坐，仰视回嶂逼天，峭峰倒插，飞流挂其中，真若九天曳帛者像天上挂下的绸练。
现代文：盘坐在沙石堆上，抬头仰望，回旋高峻的险峰逼近天际，陡峭的山峰往下倒插，飞流悬挂在峰峦上，真像从九天之上飘曳而下的丝帛。
English: Sitting on the sandstone heap, looking up, the swirling towering peaks are approaching the sky, the steep peaks are upside down, and the flying stream is hanging on the peak, really like a silk cocoon floating down from the nine heavens.

古文：西过小剪刀峰，又过铁板嶂。
现代文：往西走过小剪刀峰，又经过铁板嶂。
English: Walk west past the small scissors peak, and then pass the iron plate raft.

古文：嶂方展如屏，高插层岩之上，下开一隙如门，惟云气出没，阻绝人迹。
现代文：铁板嶂呈方形，伸展如同屏风，高高地插在层叠的岩石上面，下面裂开一道像门一样的缝隙，只有云气在缝隙中出没，人迹断绝。
English: The square-shaped iron plate pier, stretched like a screen, is inserted high above the cascading rocks, and a gap like a door opens below. Only clouds appear in the gap, and there are no traces of people.

古文：又过观音岩，路渐西，岩渐拓，为犁尖，复与常云并峙，常云南下，跌而复起，为戴辰峰。
现代文：又从观音岩经过，道路渐渐往西去，岩壁渐渐拓开，这是犁尖峰，还是和常云峰并排峙立。从常云峰往南下，地势下跌后再次高起，名戴辰峰。
English: Passing through Guanyin Rock, the road gradually went west, and the rock wall gradually widened. This is the highest peak, still standing side by side with Changyun Peak. From Changyun Peak southward, the terrain fell and rose again, named Dai Chen Peak.

古文：其跌处有坳，曰马鞍岭，内谷之东西分者，以是岭为界。
现代文：下跌处有山坳，名马鞍岭，雁宕山东、西内谷的区分，就是以马鞍岭为界。
English: There are mountains and ridges at the fall, and the famous Ma'anling, Yantang Shandong, and Xinai Valley are separated by Ma'anling.

古文：从灵岩至马鞍岭凡四里，而崇峦屼嵲，应接不暇。
现代文：从灵岩寺到马鞍岭一共四里路程，但高大的山峦却耸立不断，让人应接不暇。
English: It's a total of four miles from Lingyan Temple to Ma'anling, but the tall mountains continue to rise, making it difficult for people to get around.

古文：逾岭，日色渐薄崦嵫。
现代文：越过马鞍岭，太阳渐渐西下。
English: The sun was setting over the Ma'anshan Mountains.

古文：二里，西过大龙湫溪口，又二里，西南入宿能仁寺。
现代文：走二里，往西经过大龙漱溪口，又走二里，往西南进入能仁寺住宿。
English: Walk two miles west past the mouth of Dalongsuo Creek, then walk another two miles southwest to Nongren Temple for accommodation.

古文：初二日从寺后坞觅方竹，无佳者。
现代文：初二日顺着能仁寺后的山坞寻找方竹，没有好的。
English: On the first two days, I walked along the docks behind Nohin-ji Temple, looking for square bamboos. There were no good ones.

古文：上有昙花庵，颇幽寂。
现代文：往上去有昙花庵，很幽静。
English: There is a flower garden on the way up, which is very secluded.

古文：出寺右，观燕尾泉，即溪流自龙湫来者，分二股落石间，故名。
现代文：从寺右出来，观览燕尾泉，燕尾泉就是从大龙揪流来的溪水，分成二股落入石中，所以取名燕尾。
English: Come out from the right side of the temple and observe Yanwei Spring. Yanwei Spring is a stream that flows from Dalongyi. It is divided into two streams and falls into the stone, hence the name Yanwei.

古文：仍北溯流二里，西入龙湫溪口。
现代文：又往北溯流走两里，往西进入大龙漱溪口。
English: I followed the stream for another two miles to the north and entered the mouth of Dalongsuo Creek to the west.

古文：更西二里，由连云嶂入，大剪刀峰矗然立涧中，两崖石壁回合，大龙湫之水从天下坠。
现代文：再往西走二里，顺连云嶂进去，大剪刀峰矗然耸立在涧中，两边山崖石壁环绕，大龙漱的水从天而降。
English: Two miles further to the west, along with the clouds, the Great Scissors Peak stands tall in the clouds, surrounded by cliffs and stone walls on both sides, and the water of the Great Dragon falls from the sky.

古文：坐看不足亭，前对龙滩，后揖剪刀，身在四山中也。
现代文：坐在不足亭中环视周围，前面正对大龙揪，后面拱起大剪刀峰，我置身在四周群山的包围中了。
English: Sitting in the pavilion, looking around, facing the Great Dragon Bridge in front and the Great Scissors Peak arching behind, I found myself surrounded by mountains.

古文：出连云嶂，逾华岩岭，共二里，入罗汉寺。
现代文：走出连云嶂，翻越华岩岭，一共走了二里，进入罗汉寺。
English: I walked out of Lianyungang, over Huayangling, walked a total of two miles, and entered Luohan Temple.

古文：寺久废，卧云师近新最近重新修葺之。
现代文：罗汉寺荒废了很久，卧云法师最近才使它焕然一新。
English: Luohan Temple had been abandoned for a long time, and it was only recently that Master Guoyun renovated it.

古文：卧云年八十余，其相与飞来石罗汉相似，开山巨手也。
现代文：卧云有八十多岁了，他的相貌和飞来石罗汉相似，是雁宕山的开山巨手。
English: Crouching Cloud is more than eighty years old. His appearance is similar to Luo Han, the flying stone, and he is the giant who opened the mountains of the Wild Goose Mountains.

古文：余邀师穷顶，师许同上常云，而雁湖反在其西，由石门寺为便。
现代文：我邀约法师一齐穷究山顶，法师答应一同登常云峰，因为雁湖反而在罗汉寺西，从石门寺去更为方便。
English: I invited the mages to explore the top of the mountain together, and the mages agreed to climb the Changyun Peak together, because the Wild Goose Lake is west of the Luohan Temple, and it is more convenient to go from the Shimen Temple.

古文：时已下午，以常云期之后日，遂与其徒西逾东岭，至西外谷，共四里，过石门寺废址。
现代文：此时已是下午，便把登常云峰的日子定在后天，然后和法师的徒弟往西越过东岭，来到西外谷，一共走了四里，经过石门寺遗址。
English: At this time, it was already afternoon, so they set the day of climbing the Changyun Peak for the day after tomorrow. Then, together with the mage's apprentice, they went west across the East Ridge and came to the West Valley, walking a total of four miles and passing the Shimen Temple ruins.

古文：随溪西下一里，有溪自西来合，即凌云、宝冠诸水也，二水合而南入海。
现代文：顺着溪水往西下一里，有一条溪从西边流来汇合，就是凌云寺和宝冠寺的溪流了，两股溪水汇合后往南流入海。
English: Following the stream to the west for one mile, there is a stream flowing from the west to the confluence, which is the stream of Lingyun Temple and Baoguan Temple. After the confluence of the two streams, it flows south into the sea.

古文：乃更溯西来之溪，宿于凌云寺。
现代文：于是又溯从西边来的溪水行走，在凌云寺住宿。
English: So he followed the stream coming from the west and stayed at Lingyun Temple.

古文：寺在含珠峰下，孤峰插天，忽裂而为二，自顶至踵，仅离咫尺，中含一圆石如珠，尤奇绝。
现代文：凌云寺建在含珠峰下，含珠峰独自插入云天后，忽然又裂开成两峰，裂隙从头到脚，相隔仅咫尺宽，其中含着一块像珠一样圆的石头，显得特别奇妙绝伦。
English: Lingyun Temple is built under Mount Everest. Mount Everest is inserted into the cloud layer, and suddenly it splits into two peaks. The crack is only a few feet wide from head to toe. It contains a stone that is round like a bead, which is particularly amazing.

古文：循溪北入石夹，即梅雨潭也。
现代文：沿溪水往北走进石夹缝，就是梅雨潭了。
English: Along the stream to the north into the stone cracks, is the Meiyu Lake.

古文：飞瀑自绝壁下激，甚雄壮，不似空濛雨色而已。
现代文：飞泻的瀑布从险峻的陡壁上往下冲击，气势十分雄伟壮观，和雨色迷茫的景致并不相似啊。
English: The cascading waterfall crashes down from the precipitous cliff, the momentum is very majestic and spectacular, and it is not similar to the rain-colored confused landscape.

古文：初三日仍东行三里，溯溪北入石门，停担于黄氏墓堂。
现代文：初三日仍然往东行三里，溯溪流往北进人石门寺，把行李担停放在黄氏墓堂。
English: On the third day of the first lunar month, I still went three miles to the east, followed the stream to the north, entered the Shimen Temple, and parked the luggage carrier in the Huang Clan Cemetery.

古文：历级北上雁湖顶，道不甚峻。
现代文：沿着石阶一级一级地往北登雁湖顶，道路不算很陡。
English: Along the stone steps step by step to the north to the top of the Wild Goose Lake, the road is not very steep.

古文：直上二里，向山渐伏，海屿来前，愈上，海辄逼足下。
现代文：一直往上走了二里，对面的山渐渐低伏，海中的小山浮现在前面。越往上走，海就离脚下越近。
English: I walked two miles straight up, the mountain on the opposite side gradually sank, and the hill in the sea emerged in front of me. The higher I walked, the closer the sea was to my feet.

古文：又上四里，遂逾山脊。
现代文：又往上走了四里，终于翻过山脊。
English: He walked another four miles uphill and finally climbed over the ridge.

古文：山自东北最高处迤逦即曲折连绵而来，播分散为四支，皆易石而土。
现代文：山从东北边最高处曲折连绵地往西延伸，分为四道支脉，都由石山变成土山。
English: The mountain stretches from the highest point in the northeast to the west with twists and turns. It is divided into four branches, all of which turn from stone mountains into earthen mountains.

古文：四支之脊，隐隐隆起，其夹处汇而成洼者三，每洼中复有脊，南北横贯，中分为两，总计之，不止六洼矣。
现代文：四道支脉的山梁，隐隐约约隆起，支脉与支脉之间形成三处洼地，每处洼地中又有山脊，从南向北横贯，把洼地从中间一分为二，总起来计算，不止六处洼地了。
English: The mountain beams of the four branches are vaguely uplifted, and three depressions are formed between the branches and the branches. In each depression, there are ridges that cross from south to north, dividing the depression into two from the middle. In total, there are more than six depressions.

古文：洼中积水成芜草生之地，青青弥望满眼，视野所及处，所称雁湖也。
现代文：洼中积着水，形成丛草繁生的地方，视野所到之处，一片青翠碧绿，这就是所说的雁湖。
English: Water accumulates in the depression, forming a place where grass grows luxuriantly. Wherever the field of vision reaches, there is a verdant expanse of green. This is the so-called Wild Goose Lake.

古文：而水之分堕于南者，或自石门，或出凌云之梅雨，或为宝冠之飞瀑；其北堕者，则宕阴诸水也，皆与大龙湫风马牛无及云。
现代文：雁湖往南分流下堕的水，有的从石门寺流出，有的从凌云寺的梅雨潭流出，有的形成宝冠寺的飞瀑；往北分流下堕的水，则是雁宕山北面的各条溪水，都和大龙漱的水风马牛不相及。
English: The water that flows down from the south of the Wild Goose Lake flows from the Shimen Temple, the Meiyutan of Lingyun Temple, and the flying waterfall of Baoguan Temple. The water that flows down from the north is the water of the streams on the north side of the Wild Goose Mountain. They are all different from the water of the Great Dragon.

古文：既逾冈，南望大海，北瞰南閤之溪，皆远近无蔽，惟东峰尚高出云表。
现代文：翻过山冈后，往南眺望大海，往北俯瞰南阁溪，远近都没有任何遮挡，唯有东峰还是高出天外。
English: After turning over the mountains and hills, looking south to the sea and north to the Nankaku Creek, there is no obstruction in the distance, only the east peak is still high above the sky.

古文：余欲从西北别下宝冠，重岩积莽，莫可寄足。
现代文：我想往西北另找一条路下宝冠寺，但岩石重叠、荒草茂密，完全没有落脚的地方。
English: I wanted to find another road to Baoguan Temple in the northwest, but the rocks were overlapping, the grass was thick, and there was no place to land.

古文：复寻旧路下石门，西过凌云，从含珠峰外二里，依涧访宝冠寺。
现代文：又寻找原路下到石门寺，往西经过凌云寺，沿含珠峰往外走二里，顺着山涧去探访宝冠寺。
English: He also searched for the original path down to Shimen Temple, went west past Lingyun Temple, walked two miles along Mount Everest, and followed the ridge to visit Baoguan Temple.

古文：寺在西谷绝坞中，已久废，其最深处，石崖回合，磴道俱绝。
现代文：宝冠寺在西谷深坞中，已经荒废了很久，山坞最深处，崖石环绕，石阶和道路都没有。
English: Baoguan Temple in the West Valley deep dock, has been abandoned for a long time, the deepest dock, surrounded by cliffs, there are no stone steps and roads.

古文：一洞高悬崖足，斜石倚门。
现代文：一个洞高高地挂在悬崖脚下，倾斜的岩石紧靠洞门。
English: A cave hangs high at the foot of the cliff, the sloping rock clinging to the entrance.

古文：门分为二，轩豁透爽，飞泉中洒，内多芭蕉，颇似闽之美人蕉；外则新箨ò竹笋之皮高下，渐已成林。
现代文：门分成两边，高大、宽阔、透亮、清爽，瀑布从其中飞洒而下。内有很多芭蕉，形状很像福建省的美人蕉；外面则有刚刚长出的竹笋，高高低低地已经渐渐地形成竹林。
English: The door is divided into two sides, tall, wide, translucent, and refreshing, with a waterfall cascading down from it. There are a lot of plantains inside, shaped like a canna bean from Fujian Province; on the outside, there are bamboo shoots that have just sprouted, and bamboo forests have gradually formed in the highlands and lowlands.

古文：至洞，闻瀑声如雷，而崖石回掩，杳不可得见。
现代文：来到洞口，只听到瀑布声如雷灌耳，但洞中崖石曲折掩蔽，又很深，什么也看不见。
English: When I came to the mouth of the cave, I only heard the thunderous sound of the waterfall, but the twists and turns of the cliff in the cave were so deep that I couldn't see anything.

古文：乃下山涉溪，回望洞之右胁，崖卷成罅，瀑从罅中直坠，下捣于圆坳，复跃出坳成溪去。
现代文：于是下山，渡过溪水，回头眺望洞的右侧凹处，崖石翻卷，形成裂缝，瀑布从裂缝中垂直坠落，往下冲向圆形的坳地，然后又从坳地中跃起，形成溪水流去。
English: So I went down the mountain, crossed the stream, and looked back at the right side of the cave. The cliff rock rolled over, forming a crack. The waterfall fell vertically from the crack, rushed down to the round mound, and then jumped up from the mound to form a stream.

古文：其高亚龙湫，较似壮胜，故非宕山第二流也。
现代文：瀑布的高度亚于大龙揪，但比较起来，这瀑布壮观处似乎更胜一筹，所以不能说只是雁宕山第二瀑布。
English: The height of the waterfall is less than that of the Great Dragon's Beak, but in comparison, the spectacular place of this waterfall seems to be superior, so it cannot be said that it is only the second waterfall of the Wild Goose Mountain.

古文：东出故道，宿罗汉寺。
现代文：从原路往东出去，在罗汉寺住宿。
English: Go east from the original road and stay at Luohan Temple.

古文：初四日早，望常云峰白云濛翳，然不为阻，促卧云同上。
现代文：初四日一清早，远看常云峰上白云茫茫，什么也看不清楚，但却不因此而止步不前，催促卧云一同登山。
English: In the early morning of the fourth day of the first lunar month, I saw the white clouds on the Changyun peak far away, and I could not see anything clearly. However, I did not stop moving forward because of this, and urged Guoyun to climb the mountain together.

古文：东逾华岩二里，由连云嶂之左，道松洞之右，跻级而上，共三里，俯瞰剪刀峰已在屐底。
现代文：往东越过华岩走了二里，便从连云嶂的左侧、道松洞的右侧，踏着石阶往西上，一共上了三里，俯瞰剪刀峰，已经在脚底。
English: He walked two miles to the east across Huayan Rock, and then from the left side of Lianyungang and the right side of Daosong Cave, he walked up the stone steps to the west, a total of three miles, overlooking Scissors Peak, already at the bottom of his feet.

古文：一里，山回溪出，龙湫上流也。
现代文：走一里，山峦回旋，溪水流出，这是大龙揪的上游。
English: Walk one mile, the mountains revolve, the streams flow out, this is the upper reaches of the Great Dragon Bridge.

古文：渡溪，过白云、云外二庐，又北入云静庵。
现代文：渡过溪水，经过白云庐和云外庐，又往北进入云静庵。
English: Crossing the stream, passing through Baiyunlu and Yundailu, and heading north to enter Yunjingan.

古文：庵庐与登山径，修整俱异昔时，卧云令其徒采笋炊饭。
现代文：云静庵、白云庐、云外庐以及山路都修整过，和从前不一样了。卧云叫他的徒弟采来竹笋做饭。
English: Yunjing's hermitage, Baiyun's cocoon, the cocoon outside the cloud, and the mountain road have all been repaired and are different from before. Guoyun asked his apprentice to collect bamboo shoots to cook with.

古文：既饭，诸峰云气倏尽，仲昭留坐庵中，余同卧云直跻东峰。
现代文：吃过饭后，各山峰上的云气突然散尽，徐仲昭留在静云庵中休息，我和卧云一同直上东峰。
English: After eating, the clouds on the peaks suddenly dissipated. Xu Zhongzhao stayed in Jingyun's hermitage to rest, and I and Guoyun went straight up the East Peak together.

古文：又二里，渐闻水声，则大龙湫从卷崖中泻下。水出绝顶之南、常云之北，夹坞中即其源也。
现代文：又上了二里，渐渐听到水声，是大龙揪从卷崖中往下泻落，大龙漱水从雁宕山绝顶南面、常云峰的北面流出，两峰之间的山坞就是它的发源地。
English: After another two miles, I gradually heard the sound of water. It was the great dragon's roar falling down from the rolling cliff, and the great dragon's water flowing out from the south of the peak of the Wild Goose Mountain and the north of the Changyun Peak. The dock between the two peaks was its birthplace.

古文：溯水而上，二里，水声渐微。
现代文：溯大龙揪水而上，二里，水声渐渐微弱。
English: The sound of the water gradually faded as I hiked two miles upstream of Dalonglu Waterfall.

古文：又二里，逾山脊。
现代文：又走二里，越过山脊。
English: Another two miles and over the ridge.

古文：此脊北倚绝顶，南出分为两支，东支为观音岩，西支为常云峰，此其过脉处也。
现代文：这道山脊北靠雁宕山绝顶，南面分成两支延伸，东边的一支是观音岩，西边的一支是常云峰，这里正是两支山脉分开延伸的地方。
English: This ridge north of the peak of the Wild Goose Mountain, the south is divided into two branches extending, the east one is the Guanyin Rock, the west one is the Changyun Peak, here is where the two mountains extend separately.

古文：正脊之东为吴家坑。
现代文：正中山脊的东部是吴家坑。
English: To the east of the Zhengzhong ridge is the Wujia pit.

古文：其峰之回列者，近为铁板嶂，再绕为灵岩，又再绕为净名，又再绕为灵峰，外为谢公岭而尽。
现代文：那回环绕列的山峰，近处是铁板嶂，第二层环绕处是灵岩寺，再绕出去是净名寺，再绕去又是灵峰寺，最外层尽头处是谢公岭。
English: At that time, the surrounding peaks of the row were the nearby iron plate ridge, the second layer of the surrounding area was Lingyan Temple, and then it was the Jingmei Temple, and then it was the Lingfeng Temple, and the outermost end was Xie Gongling.

古文：脊之西，其坑即龙湫背。其峰之回列者，近为龙湫之对崖，再绕为芙蓉峰，又再绕为凌云，又再绕为宝冠，上为李家山而止。
现代文：山脊西部，那坑凹处就是大龙漱背后，那回环绕列的山峰，近处是与大龙揪相对的山崖，第二层环绕处是芙蓉峰，再绕出去是凌云寺，又再绕为宝冠寺，最后到李家山为止。
English: In the western part of the ridge, the depression of the pit is the back of the Great Dragon, and the surrounding peaks are the peaks of the column, the nearby is the cliff opposite the Great Dragon, the second layer is the Hibiscus Peak, and then the Lingyun Temple, and then the Baoguan Temple, and finally to the Li Jia Shan.

古文：此雁山之南面诸峰也。
现代文：这些就是雁宕山南部众山峰的概貌。
English: This is a general view of the peaks in the southern part of Mt.

古文：而观音、常云二峰，正当其中，已伏杖履下，惟北峰若负扆然，犹屏立于后。
现代文：而观音岩和常云峰，正好位于群峰之中，都已经低伏在我的杖下、脚下了，只有北峰像帝王背靠的屏风，仍然屏立在后面。
English: But the Guanyin Rock and the Changyun Peak, which are right in the middle of the group of peaks, have already fallen under my cane, under my feet. Only the North Peak, like the screen behind the emperor, still stands behind.

古文：北上二里，一脊平峙，狭如垣墙，两端昂起、北颓然直下，即为南閤溪横流界，不若南面之环互矣。
现代文：往北上三里，一座山脊平行峙立，狭窄得如同一道墙，两端高高昂起，北面像崩塌一样地直落下去，就是南阁溪横着流过去的分界，不像南面那样回环交错。
English: Three miles to the north, a ridge stands parallel, narrow like a wall, high at both ends, falling straight down like a collapse on the north side. It is the dividing line of the Nanko Creek flowing past, unlike the interlaced loops on the south side.

古文：余从东巅跻西顶，倏踯躅声大起，则骇鹿数十头也。
现代文：我从东顶往西顶攀登，突然响起一阵来回走动的声音，原来是受到惊骇的几十头鹿。
English: I climbed from the east summit to the west summit, and suddenly there was a sound of walking back and forth, which turned out to be dozens of deer that had been startled.

古文：其北一峰，中剖若斧劈，中则石笋参差，乱崖森立，深杳无底。
现代文：鹿群北边有一座山峰，像被斧头从中剖开一样，中间是参差不齐的石笋，乱石林立、崖壁阴森，深邃得看不到底。
English: There is a mountain to the north of the deer herd. It looks as if it has been cut open by an axe. In the middle is a jagged rocky outcrop. The rocks are jumbled and the cliffs are gloomy. It is so deep that you can't see the bottom.

古文：鹿皆奔堕其中，想有陨死亡堑者。
现代文：鹿群全向其中奔下去，想来有的鹿跌进了堑沟中。
English: All the deer ran into it, and some fell into the ditch.

古文：诸僧至，复以石片掷之，声如裂帛，半响始沉，鹿益啼号不止。
现代文：众僧人来到，又用石片扔下去，只听到响起一阵如同布帛撕裂的声昔，好一阵才沉静下去，鹿群更加不住的啼鸣。
English: All the monks came and threw stones at the deer. All they heard was a loud noise, like the tearing of a piece of cloth. It was quiet for a while, and then the deer howled even louder.

古文：从此再西，则石脊中断，峰亦渐下，西北眺雁湖，愈远愈下。
现代文：从这里再往西走，石脊就从中断开了，山峰也渐渐地低下去，往西北眺望雁湖，距离越远、位置就越低。
English: From here, if you walk further west, the ridge breaks away and the peak gradually sinks. You can look out over the Wild Goose Lake to the northwest. The farther you go, the lower the location.

古文：余二十年前探雁湖，东觅高峰，为断崖所阻，悬绠绳索而下，即此处也。
现代文：我二十年前探寻雁湖，往东寻找高峰，被断绝的崖壁阻止，于是坠着绳索而下，坠下来的地方就是这里。
English: Twenty years ago, I was exploring the Wild Goose Lake, looking for the peak to the east. I was stopped by a broken cliff, so I fell down the rope. The place where I fell down is here.

古文：昔历其西，今东出其上，无有遗憾矣。
现代文：从前游历了雁湖西部，这一次往东出到雁湖高处，再也没有遗憾了。
English: I have traveled to the western part of the Wild Goose Lake before, but this time I went east to the highlands of the Wild Goose Lake, and I have no regrets.

古文：返下云静庵，循溪至大龙湫上，下瞰湫底龙潭，圆转夹崖间，水从卷壁坠潭，跃而下喷，光怪不可迫视。
现代文：往下返回静云庵，顺溪流走到大龙揪边，往下俯视揪底的龙潭、圆圆地环绕在山崖夹缝之间，水从卷壁上坠入潭中，腾跃、喷洒着水花而下，光怪陆离，不能近看。
English: Back down to Jingyun's hermitage, walk along the stream to the edge of the Great Dragon Pool, look down at the Dragon Pool at the bottom of the cliff, roundly surrounded between the cracks of the cliff, the water falls into the pool from the roll wall, prancing, spraying with water and flowers, the light is strange, and it cannot be seen up close.

古文：遂逾溪西上，南出龙湫之对崖，历两峰而南，其岭即石门东，罗汉之西，南出为芙蓉峰，又南下为东岭者也。
现代文：于是越过溪水往西走，往南出到大龙揪正对的山崖上，越过两座山峰往南走，那座岭就是石门寺东边，罗汉寺西边，往南伸出去形成芙蓉峰，再往南延伸为东岭的山岭。
English: So he walked westward across the stream, southward to the cliff on the opposite side of the Great Dragon Bridge, and southward across the two peaks. That ridge is the east side of Shimen Temple and the west side of Luohan Temple. It stretches out to the south to form Furong Peak, and then extends southward to form the Dongling Mountains.

古文：芙蓉峰圆亘特立，在罗汉寺西南隅。
现代文：芙蓉峰圆圆地耸立在罗汉寺西南边。
English: Hibiscus Peak rises in a circle to the southwest of Luohan Temple.

古文：既至其下，始得路。
现代文：来到芙蓉峰下，才有正路。
English: Only when you come to the foot of Hibiscus Peak can you find the right path.

古文：东达于寺，日已西，仲昭亦先至矣。
现代文：往东走到罗汉寺时，太阳已经偏西，徐仲昭也先回到寺中了。
English: When he walked east to the Luohan Temple, the sun had already turned west, and Xu Zhongzhao returned to the temple first.

古文：初五日别卧云出罗汉寺，循溪一里，至龙湫溪口。
现代文：初五日和卧云告别后出了罗汉寺，沿着溪岸走一里，来到大龙揪溪口。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, after bidding farewell to Jiaoyun, he left Luohan Temple, walked one mile along the riverbank, and came to the mouth of Dalongluo Creek.

古文：凡四里，逾马鞍而下。
现代文：一共走了四里，越过马鞍岭，然后下去。
English: We walked a total of four miles, over the Ma On Shan ridge, and then down.

古文：北望观音峰下，有石璺è裂口若门，层列非一。
现代文：往北远望观音峰下，石壁上裂出像门一样的石隙，层层排列，不止一道。
English: Looking to the north, under the Guanyin Peak, there is a gap like a door on the stone wall, arranged in layers, more than one.

古文：仲昭已前向灵岩。
现代文：徐仲昭已经朝前去灵岩寺了。
English: Xu Zhongzhao has gone to Lingyan Temple in the morning.

古文：余挟一僮北抵峰下，循樵路西转二里，直抵观音、常云之麓，始知二峰上虽遥峙，其下石壁连亘成城。
现代文：我带着一个仆人往北来到观音峰下，沿着砍柴的小路往西转二里，直达观音峰、常云峰的山脚，才知道这两座山峰虽然山顶遥遥对峙，但山脚的石壁却是连贯的，如同一道墙壁。
English: I took a servant to the north to the foot of Guanyin Peak, and then turned west along the wood-cutting path for two miles, straight to the foot of Guanyin Peak and Changyun Peak. Only then did I know that although the two peaks are far away from each other, the stone walls at the foot of the mountain are coherent, like a single wall.

古文：又循崖东跻里许，出石璺之上，丛木密荫，不能悬裂，皆可扪而通也。
现代文：在巨石上面坐了很久，又往下沿着石缝往里走，崖壁上层层裂开的石缝，都可以摸索着走通。
English: I sat on the boulder for a long time, and then went down along the stone cracks. The cracks in the upper layers of the cliff wall can be explored.

古文：璺外一峰特起，薄齐片云，圆顶拱袖，高若老僧岩，严若小儿拱立。
现代文：石缝外面有一座山峰挺拔耸立，逼近云层，山峰形状为圆顶拱袖，有老僧岩那么高，很像一个拱手而立的小儿。
English: Outside the stone gap, there is a towering mountain, approaching the clouds. The shape of the mountain is a domed arch, as high as the old monk rock, very much like a child standing up.

古文：出路隅，居多吴氏，有吴应岳者留余餐。
现代文：出到路边，有很多姓吴的人家住在这里，有个叫吴应岳的留我吃饭。
English: When I got to the roadside, there were many families with the surname Wu living here. One family, called Wu Yingyue, let me stay for dinner.

古文：余挟之溯溪入，即绝顶所望吴家坑溪也，在铁板、观音之间。
现代文：我拉着他一齐溯溪流往里走，就是在绝顶上远远看到的吴家坑溪，位置在铁板嶂和观音岩之间。
English: I pulled him all together to follow the stream and go inside, that is, the Wujiakeng Creek, which can be seen far away at the top, is located between the teppanyaki and the Guanyin Rock.

古文：欲上溪左黄崖层洞，崖在铁板嶂之西，洞在崖之左，若上下二层者。
现代文：我准备攀登溪水左岸的黄崖层洞，黄崖位于铁板嶂西，洞在黄崖左侧，像分成上下两层一样。
English: I am preparing to climb the Yellow Cliff Cave on the left bank of the stream. The Yellow Cliff is located on the west side of the iron plate, and the cave is on the left side of the Yellow Cliff. It is like it is divided into two levels.

古文：抵其下，不得上，出其上，洞又在悬崖间，无可下也。
现代文：来到崖下，上不去，从崖上出去，洞又悬挂在崖壁间，没有路下去。
English: Came to the cliff, do not go up, go out from the cliff, the hole is suspended between the cliff walls, there is no way down.

古文：乃循崖东行，又得一石璺，望其上，层叠可入，计非构木悬梯不能登。
现代文：于是顺崖往东行，又找到一道石缝，仰望石缝年面。层层叠叠的可以深入，但估计不搭木悬梯就上不去。
English: So I walked along the cliff to the east, and found a stone crevice, looking up at the stone crevice. The layers can go deeper, but I don't think I can go up without a wooden ladder.

古文：从此下一小峰，曰莺嘴岩，与吴别。
现代文：从这里下一座小峰，名莺嘴岩，和吴应岳告别。
English: From here, the next small peak, Mingzhu Rock, bids farewell to Wu Yingyue.

古文：东过铁板嶂下，见其中石璺更大，下若有洞流而成溪者。
现代文：往东经过铁板嶂下，看见其中的石缝更大，下面好像有溪水从洞中流出来。
English: Passing under the iron fence to the east, I saw a larger gap in the stone. It looked like a stream was flowing out of the hole below.

古文：亟溯流入，抵洞下，乱石窒塞，而崖左有路直上，凿坎悬崖间，垂藤可攀。
现代文：我急忙溯流往里走，来到洞下，乱石堵塞，但左边的岩壁有路直直上去，是凿在崖壁间的石坎，扯着藤条可以攀登。
English: I hurriedly followed the stream inside and came to the bottom of the cave. The rocks were jammed, but the rock wall on the left had a path straight up. It was a stone ridge hewn between the cliffs, which could be climbed by pulling the rattan.

古文：遂奋勇上，衣碍则解衣，杖碍则弃杖，凡直上一崖，复横历一崖，如是者再，又栈木为桥者再，遂入石璺中。
现代文：于是奋勇往上攀登，衣服碍事就脱掉衣服，手杖碍事就扔掉手杖，凡是直上一道崖，就又横穿一道崖，像这样走了两回，又两次穿过桥一样的栈道，于是才进到石缝中。
English: So he bravely climbed up, took off his clothes if they got in the way, threw away his cane if it got in the way, and if he went straight up a cliff, he crossed another cliff, walked twice like this, and twice crossed the bridge-like footbridge, and then entered the stone crevice.

古文：石对峙如门，中宽广，得累级以升。
现代文：两旁的岩石好像门相对，当中很宽广，能够一顺着层叠的石阶攀登。
English: The rocks on either side look like doors, and the middle one is so wide that it is possible to climb it along the cascading stone steps.

古文：又入石门两重，仰睇其上，石壁环立，青天一围，中悬如井。
现代文：文往里穿过两道石门，抬头斜视上面，石壁环形耸立，围住一块青天，中间像深陷的井。
English: Wen walked through the two stone doors and looked up at the top. The stone wall stood in a ring shape, surrounding a piece of blue sky, with the middle resembling a deep well.

古文：壁穷，透入洞中。
现代文：走完石壁，穿入洞中。
English: After walking along the stone wall, we entered the cave.

古文：洞底日光透处有木梯，猱升像猿一样爬上其上，若楼阁然。
现代文：洞底阳光透亮的地方有木梯，像猿猴似地从木梯爬上去，如同登楼阁一样。
English: At the bottom of the cave, where the sun is shining brightly, there is a wooden ladder. Like a monkey, it climbs up from the ladder, just like climbing into a castle.

古文：从阁左转，复得平墟大丘，后即铁板嶂高列，东西危崖环绕，南面石璺下伏，轩敞回合，真仙灵所宅矣！
现代文：从洞左边转过去，又到了平缓的大丘，后面是高高耸列的铁板嶂，东西两面陡崖环绕，南面石缝遍布的岩石低伏，山丘宽大开阔，曲折盘旋，真是神仙居住的好地方啊！
English: Turning from the left side of the cave, we came to a gentle hill, behind which was a high-pitched iron fence, surrounded by steep cliffs on both sides of the east and west, low-lying rocks with crevices all over the south, wide and open hills, twists and turns circling, really a good place for immortals to live!

古文：内有茅屋一楹，虚无人居。隙地上多茶树，故坎石置梯，往来其间耳。
现代文：里面有一排茅屋，空空的没人居住，空地上有很多茶树，所以凿石坎搭梯子，往来于石洞、山丘之间。
English: Inside there is a row of huts, empty and uninhabited, there are a lot of tea trees in the open space, so he cut a stone ridge and set up a ladder to travel between the caves and hills.

古文：下至溪旁，有居民。
现代文：下到溪旁，有人居住了。
English: Down by the stream, there are people living.

古文：遂越小剪刀峰而东，二里，人灵岩，与仲昭会。
现代文：于是翻越小剪刀峰往东走，二里，进灵岩寺，与徐仲昭会合。
English: So he climbed over the Little Scissors Peak to the east, walked two miles, entered Lingyan Temple, and met with Xu Zhongzhao.

古文：初六日挟灵岩僧为屏霞嶂之游。
现代文：初六日邀约灵岩寺的僧人去游屏霞嶂。
English: On the 6th day of the first lunar month, the monks of Yolingyan Temple were invited to visit Pingxia.

古文：由龙鼻洞右攀石罅上，半里，得一洞甚奇。
现代文：从龙鼻洞右边攀越石缝而上，半里，看到一个很奇妙的洞。
English: From the right side of Dragon's Nose Cave, climb over the stone gap and climb up, half a mile, to see a very strange hole.

古文：又上半里，崖穹路绝，有梯倚崖端，盖烧炭者所遗。
现代文：又上半里，崖壁高耸道路断绝，有梯子靠着崖边，大概是烧炭人留下来的。
English: In the first half, the cliff wall is high and the road is broken. There is a ladder leaning against the edge of the cliff, probably left by a charcoal burner.

古文：缘梯出其上，三巨石横叠两崖间，内覆石成室，跨其外者为仙桥。
现代文：爬梯子走到崖上，三块巨石横着层叠在两座山崖之间，内部搭石成屋，跨在外部的是仙桥。
English: Climb the ladder to the cliff. Three huge boulders are stacked horizontally between two cliffs. Inside is a stone house, and on the outside is the Fairy Bridge.

古文：其室空明幽敞，蔽于重岩之侧，虽无铁板嶂、石门之奇瑰攒合，而幽邃自成一天。
现代文：石屋空旷明亮、幽静宽敞，隐蔽在重叠的岩石侧边，虽然不如铁板嶂、石门那样聚集了奇丽的景色，但幽静深远，自成一片天地。
English: The stone house is open and bright, quiet and spacious, hidden in the side of the overlapping rocks. Although it is not as beautiful as the iron plate gate and the stone gate, it is quiet and far-reaching, and it is a world of its own.

古文：复透洞左上，攀藤历栈，遂出屏霞嶂之中层，盖龙鼻顶也。
现代文：又穿洞往左上，攀援藤条，越过栈道，就出到屏霞嶂的中层，大概是龙鼻洞顶。
English: Then go through the hole to the upper left, climb the rattan cane, cross the boardwalk, and go out to the middle level of Pingxia, probably the top of the dragon's nose cave.

古文：崖端亦宽垲可庐建房，后嶂犹上倚霄汉，嶂右有岩外覆，飞泉落其前。
现代文：崖端也很宽阔，地势高而干燥，可以建房居住，背后的屏霞嶂仍然往上连接云天，屏霞障右有岩石往外覆盖，瀑布落在岩石前面。
English: The cliff edge is also very wide, the terrain is high and dry, it is possible to build a house to live in, the screen behind is still connected to the sky, the screen barrier is covered with rocks on the right, and the waterfall falls in front of the rocks.

古文：由右复攀跻崖石，几造嶂顶，为削石所阻。
现代文：从右边又攀登崖石，快到屏霞嶂顶时，被陡峭的岩石所阻拦。
English: From the right, I climbed up the cliff, and when I was about to reach the top of Pingxia, I was blocked by steep rocks.

古文：其侧石隙一缕，草木缘附，可以着足，遂随之下。
现代文：岩石侧边有一缕石缝，草木顺着石缝生长，可以落脚，于是从石缝下去。
English: On the side of the rock, there is a stone seam. Grasses grow along the stone seam, and they can land on their feet, so they go down from the stone seam.

古文：崖间多修藤垂蔓，各采而携之。
现代文：崖壁间悬挂着很多长藤蔓草，都能够抓采和拉扯。
English: Between the cliff walls hang many long vines, all of which are capable of grasping and pulling.

古文：当石削不受树，树尽不受履处，辄垂藤下。
现代文：当行到岩石陡峭而没有树、没有树则无法落脚的地方时，就垂挂着藤蔓而下。
English: When you go to a place where the rock is steep and there are no trees, and you can't land without trees, the vines hang down.

古文：如是西越石冈者五重，降升不止数里，始下临绝涧，即小龙湫上游也。
现代文：像这样往西穿越了五重石冈，升降了不止数里，才下到最深的涧中，就是小龙揪上游。
English: In this way, I crossed the Wujie Ishioka Mountains to the west, ascending and descending more than a few miles before descending to the deepest part of the reeds, which is the upper reaches of the Xiaolongyi.

古文：其涧发源雁顶之东南，右即铁板，左即屏霞，二嶂中坠为绝壑，重崖亏蔽，上下无径，非悬绠不能飞度也。
现代文：涧水发源于雁宕山顶东南，右边是铁板嶂，左边是屏霞嶂，两嶂之中坠陷为十分陡峻的壑谷，重重叠叠的崖壁掩蔽了山谷，上下都没有路，如果不用绳索悬空而度就无法穿越。
English: The stream originates in the southeast of the peak of the Yangtze River, with the Tiepantu Pass on the right and the Pingxia Pass on the left. Between the two passes, it falls into a very steep valley. The overlapping cliffs cover the valley, and there is no road up or down. If you do not use a rope to hang in the air, you will not be able to cross.

古文：入涧，践石随流，东行里许，大石横踞涧中，水不能越，穴石下捣，两旁峭壁皆斗立，行者路绝。
现代文：进入涧中，踩着岩石随水流走，往东走了一里左右，一块巨石横挡在涧中，水流不过去，直捣石下的洞穴，两旁的峭壁都陡直地耸立着，行人无路可走。
English: Entered the reeds, stepped on the rock to follow the water flow, walked about a mile to the east, a boulder stood in the reeds, the water flow could not pass, the cave under the stone, the cliffs on both sides stood straight up, and there was no way for pedestrians to walk.

古文：乃缚木为梯升崖端，复缒ì用绳向下吊入前涧下流，则横石之下，穹然中空，可树十丈旗。
现代文：于是捆扎树木作为梯子爬上崖端，又坠到巨石前面的涧水下游，而横挡沟涧的巨石下面，中间是十分高大的空洞，可以树立十丈高的旗帜。
English: So they tied trees together to use as ladders to climb up the cliff edge, and then fell down to the lower reaches of the Surabaya River in front of the boulder. Underneath the boulder that blocked the ravine, there was a very tall hollow in the middle, where they could erect a 10-foot-tall flag.

古文：水从石后建瓴下注，汇潭漾碧，翛然沁人。
现代文：水从巨石背后居高临下地往下倾注，汇集成碧波荡漾的深潭，无拘无束、自由自在的气势给人以清新、爽朗的感觉。
English: Water pours down from behind the huge rock, pooling into a deep pool with rippling waves. The unrestrained, free-wheeling momentum gives people a fresh and refreshing feeling.

古文：左右两崖，俱有洞高峙。
现代文：左右两边的崖壁上，都有洞高高对峙。
English: On both sides of the cliff wall, there are holes high up.

古文：由此而前，即龙湫下坠处也。
现代文：从这往前走，就是小龙揪落下去的地方。
English: Walk forward from here and you will find the place where the dragonfly landed.

古文：余两次索剑泉，寺僧辄云： 在龙湫上，人力鲜达。 
现代文：我两次寻求剑泉，寺中的僧人总是说： 在龙揪上面，人力很少能到达。 
English: Twice I sought the Jianquan, and the monks in the temple always said: Above the dragon's beak, manpower can rarely reach.

古文：今仍杳然，知沦没已久。
现代文：这次仍然杳无音信，知道已经消失了很久。
English: This time there was still no sign of her, and I knew she had been gone for a long time.

古文：欲从此横下两峰，遂可由仙桥达石室，乃斫木缚梯，盘绝岘者数四，俯视独秀、双鸾诸峰，近在屐底。
现代文：准备从这里横穿两座山峰而下，就可能经过仙桥到达石室，于是砍树木捆成梯子，四次盘旋陡峰，俯视独秀、双莺等峰，近在脚下。
English: In order to cross the two peaks from here, it is possible to pass through the Fairy Bridge to reach the stone room. Therefore, trees were cut and bundled into ladders, and the steep peaks were circled four times to look down on the Duxiu, Shuangtao and other peaks, close to the foot.

古文：既逼仙桥，隔崖中断，日已西，疲甚，乃返觅前辙，复经屏霞侧石室返寺，携囊过净名，投宿灵峰。
现代文：已经离仙桥很近了，被隔着的山崖从中断开，太阳已偏西，感到十分疲劳，于是寻找原路返回，又从屏霞嶂侧边经过石室返回灵岩寺，携带行李过了净名寺，到灵峰寺投宿。
English: It was already very close to Xianqiao. The mountain cliff that separated them had been broken off, and the sun had moved to the west. I felt very tired, so I looked for the original route back, and returned to Lingyan Temple from the side of Pingxia He, passing through the stone room. I carried my luggage past Jingmei Temple and stayed at Lingfeng Temple.

古文：初七日溯寺前溪，观南碧霄冈，轩爽高阔开朗无他奇。
现代文：初七日溯灵峰寺前的溪流而上，观赏南碧霄冈，冈高大开阔，没有其它新奇的地方。
English: On the first seven days, we followed the stream in front of Lingfeng Temple and climbed up to see Nan Bixiao Hill. The hill is tall and wide, and there is no other novel place.

古文：又三里，西转，望真济寺在溪北坞中。
现代文：又走三里，往西转，看到真济寺位于溪北的山坞中。
English: Walk another three miles, turn west, and you'll see Shingiji Temple in the docks north of the creek.

古文：是溪西由断崖破峡而来，峡南峰为 五马朝天 ，峥嵘尤甚。
现代文：这条溪从西边沿断崖破峡流来，峡谷南面的峰名 五马朝天 ，山势显得特别高峻。
English: This stream flows from the west along the cliff-broken canyon. The peak on the south side of the canyon is called "Wu Ma Asatien" (五馬朝天), and the mountain appears to be particularly high.

古文：两旁逼仄石蹊，内无居民，棘茅塞路。
现代文：峡谷两边的小路十分狭窄，谷中没人居住，荆棘茅草堵塞道路。
English: The paths on both sides of the canyon are very narrow, no one lives in the valley, and thorny thatch blocks the road.

古文：行里许，甚艰，不可穷历。
现代文：走了一里左右，走得非常艰难，不能一一穷究峡谷风光。
English: After walking for about a mile, it was very difficult to walk, and it was impossible to exhaustively explore the canyon scenery.

古文：北过真济寺，寺僻居北谷，游屐旅游者足迹不到。
现代文：往北过真济寺，寺位于偏僻的北面山谷中，游人的足迹很少去到。
English: Head north past Shingiji Temple, which is located in the remote northern valley and is rarely visited by tourists.

古文：寺右溯小溪三里，登马家山岭，路甚峻。
现代文：从寺右溯小溪走了三里，攀登马家山岭，山路很陡。
English: I walked three miles from the right side of the temple to the creek and climbed the Majia Mountains. The mountain road was very steep.

古文：登巅，望雁顶棱簇如莲花状，北瞰南閤，已在屐底。
现代文：登上岭顶，遥望雁宕山顶峰岩石棱角分明，簇拥成莲花形状，往北俯瞰南阁，已经落在脚下了。
English: Climbing to the top of the ridge, looking far and wide at the peak of Geantang Mountain, the rocks are angular and clear, clustered into a lotus shape, overlooking the South Pavilion to the north, has fallen at the foot.

古文：飞舄而下即飞奔而下，舄音ì鞋的通称。四里余，得新庵，弛担于中，溯南閤溪，探宕阴诸胜。
现代文：脚步飞快地下山，四里多，到一座新庵，把行李放在庵中，溯南阁溪而上，探访雁宕山北面的各处胜景。
English: We walked rapidly down the mountain, more than four miles, to a new hermitage, put our luggage in the hermitage, hiked up Nanko Creek, and visited various scenic spots on the north side of Mt.

古文：南閤溪发源雁山西北之箬岭，去此三十余里，与永嘉分界。
现代文：南阁溪发源于雁宕山西北的答袅岭，距离这里三十多里，和永嘉县分界。
English: Nankou Creek originates in the northwestern part of Yandang Mountain, more than 30 miles from here, and marks the border with Yongjia County.

古文：由岭而南，可通芙蓉，入乐清；由岭而西，走枫林，则入瓯郡道也。
现代文：沿岭往南去，可以通到芙蓉，进入乐清县境，沿岭往西去，从枫林走，则是去温州府的路。
English: If you go south along the ridge, you can go to Furong and enter the territory of Yueqing County. If you go west along the ridge and walk from Fenglin, it is the road to Wenzhou.

古文：溪南即雁山之阴，山势崇拓，竹木蓊茸，不露南面嶻嵲态。
现代文：溪水南边就是雁宕山的北面，山势高耸开拓，竹林树木茂密，但显不出山南面那种高峻的形态。
English: The south side of the stream is the north side of the Wild Goose Mountain. The mountain is towering and open, the bamboo forest is dense with trees, but it does not show the lofty form of the southern side of the mountain.

古文：溪北大山，自箬袅迤逦而来，皆层崖怪峰，变换阖辟，与云雾争幻，至閤而止。
现代文：溪水北边的大山，从答袅岭曲折连绵地延伸过来，都是层崖叠石和奇异之峰，山势分开合拢、变化莫测，和云雾竞相争奇，一直到南阁而止。
English: The mountains on the north side of the stream, extending from the Tujia Mountains, are all crags and strange peaks. The mountains are separated and closed, unpredictable, and compete with clouds and fog, all the way to the South Pavilion.

古文：又一山北之溪，自北閤来会，俱东下石门潭。
现代文：雁宕山北面还有一条溪水，从北阁流来与南阁溪会合后，一齐往东流下石门潭。
English: There is also a stream on the north side of Mt.Gentago. It flows from Beikaku to join with Nankaku Stream, and then flows together eastward down to Shimen Lake.

古文：门内平畴千亩，居人皆以石门为户牖窗，此閤所由名，而南北则分以溪也。
现代文：石门内有上千亩平整的良田，住在这里的都把石门作为门户，这就是 石门 名称的来由，而南北则是以溪水划分。
English: There are thousands of acres of flat good fields in Shimen. People who live here use Shimen as a gateway, which is the origin of the name Shimen. The north and south are divided by streams.

古文：南閤有章恭毅宅，西入有石佛洞、散水岩、洞仙岩诸胜。
现代文：南阁有章恭毅宅，往西深入有石佛洞、散水岩、洞仙岩等名胜。
English: In the south pavilion, there is Zhang Gongyi's house, and in the west, there are famous places such as the Stone Buddha Cave, Waterfall Rock, and Dongxian Rock.

古文：北閤有白岩寺旧址，更西有王子晋仙桥为尤奇。
现代文：北阁有白岩寺旧址，再往西有王子晋仙桥，尤为奇特。
English: The North Pavilion has the old site of Shiraiwa-ji Temple, and further west there is Oji Jinsen Bridge, which is particularly peculiar.

古文：余冒雨穷南閤，先经恭毅宅，聚族甚盛。
现代文：我冒雨穷尽南阁，先过章恭毅宅，聚居这里的家族十分兴盛。
English: I braved the rain to exhaust the South Pavilion, passing the Zhang Gongyi House first. The families living here are very prosperous.

古文：溯溪五里，过犁头庵，南即石佛洞，以路芜不能入。
现代文：溯溪走五里，经过犁头庵，往南就是石佛洞，因道路荒草丛生而不能进去。
English: After five miles of tracing the stream, passing Shantouan, the south is the Stone Buddha Cave, which cannot be entered due to the road being overgrown with weeds.

古文：西十里至庄坞，夹溪居民皆叶姓。
现代文：往西走十里到庄坞，住在溪流两岸的人都姓叶。
English: If you walk ten miles west to Zhuang dock, people living on both sides of the stream are surnamed Ye.

古文：散水岩在北坞中，石崖横亘，飞瀑悬流，岩左登岭有小庵。
现代文：散水岩在北边坞中，石崖横贯，瀑布悬空飞流，往岩左登上岭，有座小庵。
English: The water-spreading rock is in the northern dock, the stone cliff runs across, the waterfall hangs in the air, the rock climbs up the ridge to the left, and there is a small hermitage.

古文：时暮雨，土人留宿庄坞，具言洞仙院之胜。
现代文：此时天色已晚，又下雨，当地人留我住在庄坞，详细地谈论洞仙院的胜景。
English: By this time it was late in the day and raining again, so the locals left me in the village dock to talk in detail about the beauty of Dongxianyuan.

古文：初八日雨未止。
现代文：初八日雨没停。
English: The rain didn't stop on the eighth day of the first month.

古文：西溯溪行三里，山涧愈幽。
现代文：往西溯溪走了二里，山涧越来越深。
English: I walked two miles westward along the stream, and the mountains became deeper and deeper.

古文：随溪转而北，又二里，隔溪小径破云磴而入。
现代文：尾随溪流转向北走，又二里，溪对岸有条小路，穿过直通云霄的石阶深入进去。
English: Following the stream, we turned north and walked another two miles. On the other side of the stream, there was a path that led through stone steps that led straight up into the clouds.

古文：东渡溪从之，忽峰回溪转，深入谷中，则烟峦历乱。
现代文：往东渡过溪从小路走，忽然山峰环绕、溪水倒流，往里进到山谷中，则是云烟笼罩的山峦凌乱分散。
English: Crossing the stream to the east, walking along the path, suddenly the mountain peaks are surrounded, the stream water flows backwards, and goes into the valley, and the mountains shrouded in cloud smoke are disorderly scattered.

古文：峰从庄坞之后连亘至此，又开一隙，现此瑰异。
现代文：山峰从庄坞背后连绵不断地延律到这里，又敞开一道空隙，显现出这瑰丽奇异的景色。
English: The mountain peaks stretch endlessly from the back of the manor house to here, and a gap opens up, revealing this magnificent and bizarre landscape.

古文：执土人问之，曰： 此小纂厝也，洞仙尚在其外大溪上流。 
现代文：拉住当地人询问，当地人说： 这里名小纂借，洞仙院还在小纂膺外的大溪上游。 
English: He asked the local people, and they said, "This place is called Xiao Zuo Lai. Dong Xian Yuan is still in the upper reaches of the creek outside Xiao Zuo Lai."

古文：复出而渡溪，里许。有溪自东来入，即洞仙坞溪矣。
现代文：又走出去渡过溪流，走了一里左右，有条小溪从东边流来汇合，就是洞仙坞的溪流了。
English: I went out again and crossed the stream. After walking for about a mile, a stream came from the east and joined us. It was the stream of Dongxian Dock.

古文：渡大溪，溯小溪东上，其中峰峦茅舍，与前无异。
现代文：渡过大溪，溯小溪往东上，溪谷中峰峦茅屋掩映，和先前没有什么不同。
English: Crossing the stream, tracing the stream to the east, the peaks in the valley are covered with thatched huts, and there is no difference from before.

古文：洞仙即在其内崖，倚峰北向，层篁翳之。乃破莽跻石隙而入，初甚隘，最上渐宽。
现代文：洞仙院就在溪谷内崖壁上，背靠山峰、面向北，被层层的竹林掩蔽着，于是穿越杂草，从石缝中攀登而上，石缝一开始很狭窄，最上面渐渐宽阔。
English: Dongsian Temple is on the cliff wall in the valley, backed by mountains, facing north, hidden by layers of bamboo forest, so it climbs through the weeds and climbs up through the stone gap, which is narrow at the beginning and gradually widens at the top.

古文：仍南出庄坞，东还犁头庵，终不得石佛洞道。
现代文：仍然往南出到庄坞，往东返回犁头庵，最终没有找到去石佛洞的路。
English: He still went south to Zhuang dock and east to return to Shantouan, but in the end he did not find the way to the Stone Buddha Cave.

古文：遂出过南閤，访子晋仙桥，在北閤底尚二十里。
现代文：于是从犁头庵出来，经过南阁，询问王子晋仙桥，得知在北阁底，还有二十里路程。
English: So he came out of Shantouan, passed through the South Pavilion, inquired about the Prince Jinxian Bridge, and learned that at the bottom of the North Pavilion, there was still twenty miles to go.

古文：念仲昭在新庵甚近，还晤庵中。
现代文：想到这里离徐仲昭所在的新庵很近了，就回庵和他相会。
English: Thinking that it was very close to the new hermitage where Xu Zhongzhao was staying, I went back to the hermitage to meet him.

古文：日已晡，竟不及为北閤游，东趋大荆而归。
现代文：天色已黄昏，最终没来得及去游北阁，往东奔赴大荆骚然后返程。
English: It was already dusk, and in the end I didn't have time to visit Beigak, so I headed east to Daejeon and then headed back.

