古文：一曰：事多似倒而顺，多似顺而倒。
现代文：似顺事情有很多似乎悖理其实是合理的，有很多似乎合理其实是悖理的。
English: There are many things that seem to be reasonable that seem to be irrational, and there are many things that seem to be reasonable that are actually irrational.

古文：有知顺之为倒、倒之为顺者，则可与言化矣。
现代文：如果有人知道表面合理其实悖理、表面悖理其实合理的道理，就可以跟他谈论事物的发展变化了。
English: If someone knows the truth that what seems reasonable on the surface is actually absurd, and what seems absurd on the surface is actually reasonable, you can talk to him about the development and change of things.

古文：至长反短，至短反长，天之道也。
现代文：白天到了最长的时候就要反过来变短，到了最短的时候就要反过来变长，这是自然的规律。
English: When the day is at its longest, it should in turn become shorter, and when it is at its shortest, it should in turn become longer, this is the law of nature.

古文：荆庄王欲伐陈，使人视之。
现代文：楚庄王打算进攻陈国，派人去探查陈国的情况。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang planned to attack Chen Guo and sent people to investigate the situation in Chen Guo.

古文：使者曰： 陈不可伐也。 
现代文：派去的人回来说： 不能进攻陈国。 
English: The person who was sent came back and said, "You can't attack Chen Guo."

古文：庄王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：庄王说： 什么原因呢？ 
English: Zhuo Wang said: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 城郭高，沟洫深，蓄积多也。 
现代文：回答说： 陈国城墙很高，护城河很深，蓄积的粮食财物很多。 
English: He replied, "Chen Guo's city wall is very high, its moat is very deep, and it has accumulated a lot of grain and property.

古文：甯国曰: 陈可伐也。
现代文：宁国说： 照这样说，陈国是可以进功的。
English: Ning Guo said: According to this, Chen Guo can make progress.

古文：夫陈，小国也，而蓄积多，赋敛重也，则民怨上矣。
现代文：陈国是个小国，蓄积的粮食财物却很多，说明它的赋税繁重，那么人民就怨恨君主了。
English: Chen Guo is a small country, but it has accumulated a lot of grain and property, which indicates that its taxes are heavy, so the people resent the monarch.

古文：城郭高，沟洫深，则民力罢矣。
现代文：城墙高，护城河深，那么民力就凋敞了。
English: If the city walls are high and the moat is deep, the people's power will wither away.

古文：兴兵伐之，陈可取也。 
现代文：起兵进攻它，陈国是可以攻取的。 
English: Raise an army to attack it, and Chen Guo can be conquered.

古文：庄王听之，遂取陈焉。
现代文：庄王听从了宁国的意见，于是攻取了陈国。
English: Zhuang Wang listened to the advice of Ning Guo and conquered Chen Guo.

古文：田成子之所以得有国至今者，有兄曰完子，仁且有勇。
现代文：田成子所以能够享有齐国直至今天，原因是这样的。他有个哥哥叫完子，仁爱而且勇敢。
English: The reason why Tian Cheng Zi has been able to enjoy Qi Guo to this day is that he has an older brother named Xuan Zi, who is benevolent and brave.

古文：越人兴师诛田成子，曰： 奚故杀君而取国？ 
现代文：越国起兵讨伐田成子，说： 为什么杀死国君而夺取他的国家？ 
English: Viet Nam raised an army to fight against Nariko Wada, saying: Why kill the sovereign and seize his country?

古文：田成子患之。
现代文：田成子对此很忧虑。
English: Nariko Tanaka is worried about this.

古文：完子请率士大夫以逆越师，请必战，战请必败，败请必死。
现代文：完子请求率领士大夫迎击越军，并且要求准许自己一定同越军交战，交战还要一定战败，战败还要一定战死。
English: Gan Zi requested to lead the scholar-doctor to attack the Vietnamese army, and asked to be allowed to fight with the Vietnamese army, to fight and to be defeated, and to be defeated and to be killed.

古文：田成子曰： 夫必与越战可也，战必败，败必死，寡人疑焉。 
现代文：田成子说， 一定同越国交战是可以的，交战一定要战败，战败还要一定战死，这我就不明白了。 
English: I don't understand why, said Tian Cheng Zi, it's okay to engage in a war with Vietnam, but you must lose the war, and if you lose the war you must die in the war.

古文：完子曰： 君之有国也，百姓怨上，贤良又有死之臣蒙耻。
现代文：完子说： 你据有齐国，百姓怨恨你，贤良之中又有敢死之臣认为蒙受了耻辱。
English: His eldest son said: You have conquered the whole country, the people hate you, and among the wise and good, there are ministers who dare to die because they think they have been humiliated.

古文：以完观之也，国已惧矣。
现代文：据我看来，国家已经令人忧惧了。
English: As far as I'm concerned, the country is already a scary place.

古文：今越人起师，臣与之战，战而败，贤良尽死，不死者不敢入于国。
现代文：如今越国起兵，我去同他们交战，如果交战失败，随我去的贤良之人就会全部死掉，即使不死的人也不敢回到齐国来。
English: Now, Viet Nam has raised an army, and I am going to fight with them. If the battle fails, all the virtuous people who follow me will die, and even those who do not die will not dare to return to Qi.

古文：君与诸孤处于国，以臣观之，国必安矣。 
现代文：你和他们的遗孤居于齐国，据我看来，国家一定会安定了。 
English: You and their bereaved families live in Qi Province. In my opinion, the country will definitely become stable.

古文：完子行，田成子泣而遣之。
现代文：完子出发，田成子哭着为他送别。
English: After all the children had left, Ms. Tanaka cried as she said goodbye to them.

古文：夫死败，人之所恶也，而反以为安，岂一道哉？
现代文：死亡和失败，这是人们所厌恶的，而完子反使齐国借此得以安定。
English: Death and defeat are abhorred by the people, but the end result is that the country has been stabilized.

古文：故人主之听者与士之学者，不可不博。
现代文：做事情岂止有一种方法呢！所以听取意见的君主和学习道术的士人，所听所学不可不广博。
English: There is more than one way to do things! Therefore, the monarch who listens to opinions and the scholar who studies Taoism must listen and learn widely.

古文：尹铎为晋阳，下，有请于赵简子。
现代文：尹铎治理晋阳，到新绛向简子请示事情。
English: Yin Xi governed Jinyang and went to Xinyi to ask Janzi for instructions.

古文：简子曰： 往而夷夫垒。
现代文：简子说： 去把那些营垒拆平。
English: "Go and level those barracks," she said.

古文：我将往，往而见垒，是见中行寅与范吉射也。 
现代文：我将到晋阳去，如果去了看见营垒，这就象看见中行寅和范吉射似的。 
English: I will go to Jinyang. If I go there and see the camp, it will be like seeing Zhong Xingyin and Fan Jizhe.

古文：铎往而增之。
现代文：尹铎回去以后，反倒把营垒增高了。
English: On the contrary, after Yin Xi returned, he increased the height of the camp.

古文：简子上之晋阳，望见垒而怒曰： 嘻！
现代文：简子上行到晋阳，望见营垒，生气地说： 哼！
English: Jian went up to Jinyang, saw the camp, and angrily said, "Ha!

古文：铎也欺我！ 
现代文：尹铎欺骗了我！ 
English: Yin Ye deceived me!

古文：于是乃舍于郊，将使人诛铎也。
现代文：于是住在郊外，要派人把尹锋杀掉。
English: So he lived in the suburbs and wanted to send someone to kill Yin Feng.

古文：孙明进谏曰: 以臣私之，铎可赏也。
现代文：孙明进谏说； 据我私下考虑，尹铎是该奖赏的。
English: Sun Ming Jinjun said; According to my private consideration, Yin Jun is the winner of the award.

古文：铎之言固曰：见乐则淫侈，见忧则诤治，此人之道也。
现代文：尹锋的意思本来是说：遇见享乐之事就会恣意放纵，遇见忧患之事就会励精图治，这是人之常理。
English: Yin Feng's original meaning was to say: when encountering pleasure, one will indulge in wanton indulgence, and when encountering sorrow, one will work hard to deal with it. This is human common sense.

古文：今君见垒念忧患，而况群臣与民乎？
现代文：如交君主见到营垒就想到了忧患，又何况群臣和百姓呢！
English: If the emperor saw the camp, he would think of sorrow, let alone the ministers and the people!

古文：夫便国而利于主，虽兼于罪，铎为之。
现代文：有利于国家和君主的事，即使加倍获罪，尹锋也宁愿去做。
English: Yin Feng would rather do things that are beneficial to the country and the monarch, even if he is doubly punished.

古文：夫顺令以取容者，众能之，而况铎欤？
现代文：顺从命令以取悦于君主，一般人都能做到，又何况尹铎呢！
English: Obeying orders to please the monarch is something that ordinary people can do, let alone Yin Qi!

古文：君其图之！ 
现代文：希望您好好考虑一下。 
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：简子曰： 微子之言，寡人几过。 
现代文：简子说； 如果没有你这一番话，我几乎犯了错误。 
English: "Without your words, I almost made a mistake," she said.

古文：于是乃以免难之赏赏尹铎。
现代文：于是就按使君主免于患难的赏赐赏了尹铎。
English: So he rewarded Yin Zang according to the reward of saving the monarch from suffering.

古文：人主太上喜怒必循理，其次不循理，必数更，虽未至大贤，犹足以盖浊世矣。简子当此。
现代文：德行最高的君主，喜怒一定依理而行，次一等的，虽然有时不依理而行，但一定经常改正。这样的君主虽然还没有达到大贤的境地，仍足以超过乱世的君主了，简子跟这类人相当。
English: The monarch with the highest virtue must act according to reason in his or her emotions, and the next highest, although sometimes not acting according to reason, must always correct himself or herself. Although such a monarch has not yet reached the status of a great sage, he or she is still enough to surpass the monarchs of the chaotic world. Janzi is comparable to this type of person.

古文：世主之患，耻不知而矜自用，好愎过而恶听谏，以至于危。
现代文：当今君主的弊病，在于把不知当作羞耻，把自行其是当作荣耀，喜欢坚持错误而厌恶听取规谏之言，以至于陷入危险的境地。
English: The malady of the modern prince is to regard ignorance as a shame, to regard self-deception as a glory, to love to persist in error and hate to listen to correction, and thus to fall into danger.

古文：耻无大乎危者。
现代文：耻辱当中没有比使自己陷入危险再大的。
English: There is no greater shame than putting yourself in harm's way.

古文：二曰：知不知，上矣。
现代文：别类知道自己有所不知，就可说是高明了。
English: Others know what they don't know, so they can be said to be clever.

古文：过者之患，不知而自以为知。
现代文：犯错误人的弊病，正在于不知却自以为知。
English: The fault of those who make mistakes is that they do not know, but think they know.

古文：物多类然而不然，故亡国僇民无已。夫草有莘有藟，独食之则杀人，合而食之则益寿。
现代文：很多事物都是好象如此其实并不如此，很多人也是似乎很聪明其实并不聪明，所以国家被灭亡、百姓被杀戮的事情才接连不断地发生。药草有莘有藟，单独服用会致死，合在一起服用却会益寿。
English: Many things appear to be so, but are not, and many people seem to be very clever, but are not, and that is why countries are destroyed and people are killed one after the other.Herbs have their pros and cons. Taken separately, they can cause death, but taken together, they can prolong life.

古文：万堇不杀。
现代文：蝎子和紫堇都是毒药，配在一起反倒毒不死人。
English: Scorpion and alfalfa are both poisons, but together they are invincible.

古文：漆淖水淖，合两淖则为蹇，湿之则为干。
现代文：漆是流体，水也是流体，漆与水相遇却会凝固，越是潮湿就干得越快。
English: Paint is a fluid, water is also a fluid. When paint meets water, it solidifies. The more it is wet, the faster it dries.

古文：金柔锡柔，合两柔则为刚，燔之则为淖。
现代文：铜很柔软，锡也很柔软，二者熔合起来却会变硬，而用火焚烧又会变成流体。
English: Copper is very soft, tin is also very soft, but when the two are fused, they become hard, and when burned with fire, they become a fluid.

古文：或湿而干，或燔而淖，类固不必，可推知也？
现代文：有的东西弄湿反倒变得干燥，有的东西焚烧反倒变成流体，物类本来就不是固定不变的，怎么能够推知呢？
English: Some things get wet but become dry, some things are incinerated but turn into a fluid, things are not fixed and unchanging, how can we deduce it?

古文：小方，大方之类也；小马，大马之类也；小智，非大智之类也。
现代文：小的方形跟大的方形是同类的，小马跟大马是同类的，小聪明跟太聪明却不是同类的。
English: A small square is of the same kind as a large square, a small horse is of the same kind as a large horse, and a small clever one is not of the same kind as a too clever one.

古文：鲁人有公孙绰者，告人曰： 我能起死人。 
现代文：鲁国有个叫公孙绰的人，告诉别人说； 我能使死人复活。 
English: In the country of Lu, there was a man named Gongsun Zhuo, who told others, "I can bring the dead back to life."

古文：人问其故，对曰： 我固能治偏枯，今吾倍所以为偏枯之药，则可以起死人矣。 
现代文：别人问他是什么缘故，他回答说： 我本来就能治疗偏瘫，现在我把治疗偏瘫的药加倍，就可以使死人复活了。 
English: When asked why, he replied, "I used to be able to cure hemiplegia, but now if I double the medicine for hemiplegia, I can bring the dead back to life."

古文：物固有可以为小，不可以为大，可以为半，不可以为全者也。
现代文：公孙绰并不懂得，有的事物本来就只能在小处起作用却不能在大处起作用，只能对局部起作用却不能对全局起作用。
English: Gongsun Zhuo does not understand that some things can only work in small places but cannot work in large places, and can only work locally but cannot work globally.

古文：相剑者曰: 白所以为坚也，黄所以为牣也，黄白杂则坚且牣，良剑也。 
现代文：相剑的人说； 白色是表示剑坚硬的，黄色是表示剑柔韧的，黄白相杂，就表示既坚硬又柔韧，就是好剑。 
English: People who are familiar with swords say that white indicates that the sword is hard, yellow indicates that the sword is flexible, and yellow and white mixed means that it is both hard and flexible, which is a good sword.

古文：难者曰: 白所以为不牣也，黄所以为不坚也，黄白杂则不坚且不牣也。
现代文：反驳的人说； 白色是表示剑不柔韧的，黄色是表示剑不坚硬的，黄白相杂，就表示既不坚硬又不柔韧。
English: The rebuttal says; white means the sword is not flexible, yellow means the sword is not hard, yellow and white mixed means neither hard nor flexible.

古文：又柔则锩，坚则折。剑折且锩，焉得为利剑？ 
现代文：而且柔韧就会卷刃，坚硬就会折断，剑既易折又卷刃，怎幺能算利剑？ 
English: Moreover, the flexible will curl the blade, the hard will break, the sword is both easy to fold and curl the blade, how can it be considered a sharp sword?

古文：剑之情未革，而或以为良，或以为恶，说使之也。
现代文：剑的实质没有变化，而有的认为好，有的认为不好，这是人为的议论造成的。
English: The essence of the sword has not changed, but some people think it is good, while others think it is bad. This is the result of artificial discussions.

古文：故有以聪明听说，则妄说者止；无以聪明听说，则尧、桀无别矣。
现代文：所以，如果能凭耳聪目明来听取议论，那么胡乱议论的人就得住口；不能凭耳聪目明听取议论，就会连议论的人是尧是桀也分辨不清了。
English: Therefore, if you can listen to the discussion with your ears and eyes, then the person who is talking nonsense will have to shut up; if you can't listen to the discussion with your ears and eyes, you won't even be able to tell whether the person who is talking is deaf or not.

古文：此忠臣之所患也，贤者之所以废也。
现代文：这正是忠臣对君主感到忧虑的地方，也是贤人被废弃不用的原因。
English: This is what worries loyal subjects about their monarchs, and why sages are discarded.

古文：义，小为之则小有福，大为之则大有福。
现代文：符合道义的事，小做就得小福，大做就得犬福。
English: When it comes to doing things that are in line with morality, it is better to do small things well, and to do big things well.

古文：于祸则不然，小有之不若其亡也。
现代文：灾祸则不是这样，稍有灾祸也不如没有好。
English: This is not the case with calamity; a little calamity is better than no calamity.

古文：射招者欲其中小也，射兽者欲其中大也。
现代文：射靶子的人希望射中的目标越小越好，射野兽的人则希望射中的野兽越大越好。
English: Target shooters want to hit the target as small as possible, while animal shooters want to hit the animal as big as possible.

古文：物固不必，安可推也？
现代文：事物本来就不是固定不变的，怎么能够推知呢？
English: Things are not fixed and unchanging in the first place, so how can they be inferred?

古文：高阳应将为室家，匠对曰: 未可也。
现代文：高阳应打算建造房舍，术匠答复说。 现在还不行。
English: Gaoyang should plan to build a house, the magician replied.

古文：木尚生，加涂其上，必将挠。
现代文：木料还湿，上面再加上泥，一定会被压弯。
English: The wood is still wet, and with mud on top of it, it will definitely be bent.

古文：以生为室，今虽善，后将必败。 
现代文：用湿木料盖房子，现时虽然很好，以后一定要倒坍。 
English: If you build a house with wet wood, even if it is good at the moment, it is bound to collapse in the future.

古文：高阳应曰： 缘子之言，则室不败也。
现代文：高阳应说： 照你所说，房子恰恰不会倒坍。
English: Gao Yang Ying said: According to what you said, the house will not fall down.

古文：木枯则益劲，涂干则益轻，以益劲任益轻，则不败。 
现代文：木料越干就会越结实有力，泥越干就会越轻，用越来越结实的东西承担越来越轻的东西，肯定不会倒坍。 
English: The drier the wood, the stronger and more powerful it will be. The drier the mud, the lighter it will be. If you use something stronger and stronger to carry something lighter and lighter, it will definitely not collapse.

古文：匠人无辞而对，受令而为之。
现代文：木匠无言以对，只好奉命而行。
English: The carpenter was speechless and had to do as he was told.

古文：室之始成也善，其后果败。
现代文：房子刚落成时很好，后来果然倒坍了。
English: The house was fine when it was first built, but then it fell down.

古文：高阳应好小察，而不通乎大理也。
现代文：高阳应是喜在小处明察，却不懂得大道理啊！
English: Gaoyang should be pleased to see clearly in small places, but does not understand the big picture!

古文：骥、骜、绿耳背日而西走，至乎夕则日在其前矣。
现代文：骥、骜、绿耳等良马背朝太阳向西奔跑，到了傍晚，太阳仍在它们的前方。
English: The rooster, the partridge, the lark and other good horses ran westward with their backs to the sun, and in the evening the sun was still in front of them.

古文：目固有不见也，智固有不知也，数固有不及也。
现代文：眼睛本来就有看不到的东西，智慧本来就有弄不明白的道理，道术本来就有解释不了的地方。
English: The eyes already have things that cannot be seen, wisdom already has principles that cannot be understood, and Taoism already has places that cannot be explained.

古文：不知其说所以然而然，圣人因而兴制，不事心焉。
现代文：人们不知道一些事物的所以然，但它们确实就是这样。圣人就顺应自然创制制度，不在一时不懂的地方主观判断。
English: People do not know the reason for some things, but they are really like that. The sage conforms to the natural creation system, and does not subjectively judge where he does not understand for a while.

古文：三曰：贤主有度而听，故不过。
现代文：有度贤明的君主坚持一定的准则听取议论，所以不犯错误。
English: A moderately wise monarch adheres to a certain code of listening to arguments, so as not to make mistakes.

古文：有度而以听，则不可欺矣，不可惶矣，不可恐矣，不可喜矣。
现代文：坚持一定的准则并依据它来听取议论，就不可以欺骗了，不可以疑惧了，不可以恐吓了，不可以取悦了。
English: Adhere to a certain standard and listen to the discussion according to it, you can't deceive, you can't be afraid, you can't intimidate, and you can't please.

古文：以凡人之知，不昏乎其所已知，而昏乎其所未知，则人之易欺矣，可惶矣，可恐矣，可喜矣，知之不审也。
现代文：普通人的智慧，对于自己已经了解的不胡涂，对于自己还不了解的却是胡涂的。如果凭着这种智慧听取议论，就容易被别人欺骗了，就可以疑惧了，可以恐吓了，可以取悦了。这是了解得不清楚造成的。
English: The wisdom of the common people is that they do not fool themselves about what they already know, but they do fool themselves about what they do not yet know. If you listen to others with this kind of wisdom, you will be easily deceived by others, you can be suspicious, you can be intimidated, and you can be pleased. This is caused by unclear understanding.

古文：客有问季子曰: 奚以知舜之能也？ 
现代文：有个客人问季子说： 根据什么知道舜有才能？ 
English: A guest asked Tokiko, "How do you know if you have talent?"

古文：季子曰： 尧固已治天下矣，舜言治天下而合己之符，是以知其能也。 
现代文：季子说： 尧本来已经治理好天下了，舜谈论治理天下符合尧的想法，因此知道他有才能。 
English: Ji Zi said: "I have already governed the world well, and talking about governing the world is in line with my thoughts, so I know he has talent.

古文： 若虽知之，奚道知其不为私？ 
现代文：客人问： 你虽然知道他有才能，又根据什么知道他不会谋求私利呢？ 
English: The guest asked: Although you know that he has talent, how do you know that he will not seek personal gain?

古文：季子曰： 诸能治天下者，固必通乎性命之情者，当无私矣。 
现代文：季子说； 那些能治理天下的人，一定是通晓生命本性的人，应该是没有私心的了。 
English: Those who can govern the world must be people who understand the nature of life and should not be selfish, Ji Zi said.

古文：夏不衣裘，非爱裘也，暖有余也。
现代文：夏天不穿皮裘，并不是爱惜皮裘，而是因为温暖有余。
English: If you don't wear fur coats in summer, it's not because you don't like fur coats, it's because it's too warm.

古文：冬不用，非爱也，清有余也。
现代文：冬天不用扇子，并不是爱惜扇子，而是因为寒凉有余。
English: If you don't use a fan in winter, it's not because you don't care about fans, but because it's too cold.

古文：圣人之不为私也，非爱费也，节乎己也。
现代文：圣人不谋求私利，并不是爱惜财货，而是因为要节制自己。
English: The sage does not seek personal gain, not because he is a hoarder, but because he restrains himself.

古文：节己，虽贪污之心犹若止，又况乎圣人？
现代文：如能节制自己，贪心浊欲尚且能够抑止，又何况圣人呢？
English: If you can control yourself, you can restrain greed and covetousness, and how much more a saint?

古文：许由非强也，有所乎通也。
现代文：许由辞让天下并不是勉强做出来的，而是因为对生命本性有所通晓。
English: The concession was not made reluctantly, but because of an understanding of the nature of life.

古文：有所通则贪污之利外矣。
现代文：有所通晓，就会屏弃不义不洁之利了。
English: If you know what is right, you will reject what is wrong and unclean.

古文：孔墨之弟子徒属充满天下，皆以仁义之术教导于天下，然而无所行。
现代文：孔丘墨翟的弟子门徒布满天下，他们都用仁义之道教导天下的人，但是他们的主张在哪个地方也得不到推行。
English: The disciples of Confucius spread all over the world. They all taught the people of the world with the way of benevolence and righteousness, but their ideas could not be implemented anywhere.

古文：教者术犹不能行，又况乎所教？
现代文：教导他们的孔丘墨翟尚且不能使自己的主张得到推行，又何况这些被教导的弟子？
English: Their teacher, Confucius Miao, has not yet been able to put his ideas into practice, and what about these disciples who have been taught?

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是什么缘故呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：仁义之术外也。
现代文：因为仁义之道是外在的。
English: Because the path of benevolence and righteousness is external.

古文：夫以外胜内，匹夫徒步不能行，又况乎人主？
现代文：用外在的仁义克服内在的私心，平民百姓尚且做不到，又何况君主！
English: Using external benevolence to overcome internal selfishness, the common people still cannot do it, let alone the monarch!

古文：唯通乎性命之情，而仁义之术自行矣。
现代文：只要通晓生命本性，仁义之道自然就能得以推行了。
English: As long as one understands the nature of life, the path of benevolence and righteousness can be naturally promoted.

古文：先王不能尽知，执一而万物治。
现代文：先王不能无所不知，他们坚守根本之道，就把天下万物治理好了。
English: The ancients could not know everything. They adhered to the fundamental way and governed everything in the world well.

古文：使人不能执一者，物感之也。
现代文：使人不能执守根本之道的原因，是外物的扰动。
English: The reason why people cannot adhere to the fundamental way is the disturbance of external things.

古文：故曰：通意之悖，解心之缪，去德之累，通道之塞。
现代文：所以说，要弄通思想上的惑乱，解开心志上的纠结，去掉德行上的拖累，打通大道上的阻塞。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to sort out the confusion in the mind, solve the tangle in the mind, remove the drag on the virtue, and break through the obstruction on the avenue.

古文：贵富显严名利，六者悖意者也。
现代文：高贵、富有、显荣，威严、声名、财利，这六种东西是惑乱思想的。
English: Honor, riches, glory, majesty, fame, and gain, these six are the things that ensnare the mind.

古文：容动色理气意，六者缪心者也。
现代文：容貌、举止、神情、辞理、意气，情意，这六种东西是缠绕心志的。
English: Appearance, manners, countenance, speech, spirit, affections, these six things are entangled in the mind.

古文：恶欲喜怒哀乐，六者累德者也。
现代文：嫌恶、爱恋、欣喜、愤怒、悲伤、欢乐，这六种东西是拖累德行的。
English: Hatred, love, joy, anger, sorrow, and happiness are the six things that drag down virtue.

古文：智能去就取舍，六者塞道者也。
现代文：智慧、才能、背离、趋就、择取、含弃，这六种东西是阻塞大道的。
English: Wisdom, talent, deviation, convergence, selection, abandonment, these six things are the roadblocks.

古文：此四六者不荡乎胸中则正。
现代文：这四类东西不在心中扰动，思想就纯正了。
English: If these four kinds of things are not disturbed in the mind, the mind will be pure.

古文：正则静，静则清明，清明则虚，虚则无为而无不为也。
现代文：纯正就会平静，平静就会清净明彻，清净明彻就会虚无，做到虚无就会无所不为了。
English: Pure will be calm, calm will be clean and clear, clean and clear will be nothing, do nothing will do anything.

古文：四曰：先王用非其有如己有之，通乎君道者也。
现代文：分职先王使用不是自身所有的东西就象自己所有的一样，这是因为他们通晓为君之道。
English: Former kings used what they did not own as if they owned it, because they knew how to rule.

古文：夫君也者，处虚服素而无智，故能使众智也。
现代文：君主这种人，居于清虚，执守素朴，看来没有什么智慧，所以能使用众人的智慧。
English: A person like the monarch, who lives in purity and simplicity, seems to have little wisdom, so he can use the wisdom of many people.

古文：智反无能，故能使众能也。
现代文：智慧回归到无所能的境地，所以能使用众人的才能。
English: Wisdom is turned back into impotence, so that the talents of many may be put to use.

古文：能执无为，故能使众为也。
现代文：能执守无所作为的原则，所以能使用众人的作为。
English: Able to adhere to the principle of inaction, so can use the actions of others.

古文：无智无能无为，此君之所执也。
现代文：这种无智、无能、无为，是君主所执守的。
English: This kind of stupidity, incompetence and inaction is what monarchs cling to.

古文：人主之所惑者则不然。
现代文：君主中的胡涂人却不是这样。
English: This is not the case with the jester among monarchs.

古文：以其智强智，以其能强能，以其为强为。
现代文：他们硬凭自己有限的智慧逞聪明，硬凭自己有限的才能逞能干，硬凭自己有限的作为做事情。
English: They rely on their limited wisdom to be clever, on their limited talents to be competent, and on their limited actions to do things.

古文：此处人臣之职也。
现代文：这是使自己处于人臣的职位。
English: That's putting yourself in the position of a vassal.

古文：处人臣之职，而欲无壅塞，虽舜不能为。
现代文：使自己处于人臣的职位，又想不耳目闭塞；就是舜也办不到。
English: To put oneself in the position of a vassal, and not to close one's ears and eyes; that is not possible.

古文：武王之佐五人，武王之于五人者之事无能也，然而世皆曰取天下者武王也。
现代文：周武王的辅佐大臣有五个人，武王对于这五个人的职事一样也做不来，但世上都说取天下的是武王。
English: There are five assistant ministers of King Zhou Wu, and King Wu cannot do the same for the duties of these five people, but it is King Wu who is said to be the best in the world.

古文：故武王取非其有如己有之，通乎君道也。
现代文：武王取用不是他自身所有的东西就象自己所有的一样，这是通晓为君之道啊！
English: King Wu uses things that are not his own as if they were his own. This is the way of knowing how to be king!

古文：通乎君道，则能令智者谋矣，能令勇者怒矣，能令辩者语矣。
现代文：通晓为君之道，就能让聪明的人谋划了，就能让勇武的人振奋了，就能让善于言辞的人议论了。
English: Being familiar with the way of being a king can let clever people plan, can let brave people be inspired, and can let people who are good at speech talk.

古文：夫马者，伯乐相之，造父御之，贤主乘之，一日千里。
现代文：马，伯乐这种人相察它，造父这种人驾御它，贤明的君主乘坐马车，可以日行千里。
English: People like Ma and Bo Le look after it, people like the founding fathers drive it, and wise monarchs ride in carriages and can travel thousands of miles in a day.

古文：无御相之劳而有其功，则知所乘矣。
现代文：没有相察和驾御的辛劳，却有一日千里的功效，这就是知道乘马之道了。
English: This is the way to know how to ride a horse, without the hard work of observing and driving, but with the effect of a thousand miles a day.

古文：今召客者，酒酣，歌舞鼓瑟吹竽，明日不拜乐己者，而拜主人，主人使之也。
现代文：譬如召请客人，饮酒酣畅之际，倡优歌舞弹唱。第二天，客人不拜酣使自己快乐的倡优，而拜酣主人，因为是主人命他们这样做的。
English: For example, if a guest is invited to sing and dance while drinking, the next day the guests will not bow to the guest who made them happy, but to the host, because the host told them to do so.

古文：先王之立功名有似于此。使众能与众贤，功名大立于世，不予佐之者，而予其主，其主使之也。
现代文：先王建立功名与此相似，使用各位能人和贤人，在世上功名卓著，人们不把功名归干辅佐他的人，而归于君主，因为是君主使辅臣这样做的。
English: In the same way, the achievements of the previous king in establishing and using all able men and wise men are outstanding in the world. People do not attribute the achievements to those who assisted him, but to the monarch, because it was the monarch who made the assistants do so.

古文：譬之若为宫室，必任巧匠，奚故？
现代文：这就象建造官室一定要任用巧匠一样什幺缘故呢？
English: What is the reason for this, just as the construction of government offices requires the appointment of skilled craftsmen?

古文：曰：匠不巧则宫室不善。
现代文：回答是；工匠不巧，宫室就造不好。
English: The answer is: If the craftsman is not skillful, the palace cannot be built well.

古文：夫国，重物也，其不善也岂特宫室哉！
现代文：国家是极重要的东西，如果国家治理不好，所带来的危害岂止象官室建造不好那样呢！
English: The state is a very important thing. If the state is not well governed, the harm brought about is no more than if the government office is not well built!

古文：巧匠为宫室，为圆必以规，为方必以矩，为平直必以准绳。
现代文：巧匠建造宫室的时候，划圆一定要用圆规，划方一定要用矩尺，取平直一定要用水准墨线。
English: When craftsmen build a palace room, they must use a compass to draw a circle, a ruler to draw a square, and a standard ink line to draw a straight line.

古文：功已就，不知规矩绳墨，而赏巧匠也。
现代文：事情完成以后，主人不知圆规、矩尺和水准墨线，只是赏埸巧匠。
English: After the matter is completed, the master does not know the compass, the scale and the standard ink line, but only admires the craftsman.

古文：宫室已成，不知巧匠，而皆曰： 善，此某君、某王之宫室也。 
现代文：官室造好以后，人们不知巧匠，而都说： 造得好，这是某某君主、某某帝王的官室。 
English: After the official residence is built, people do not know the craftsman, but all say: Well built, this is the official residence of so-and-so monarch, so-and-so emperor.

古文：此不可不察也。
现代文：这个道理是不可不体察的。
English: This principle cannot be ignored.

古文：人主之不通主道者则不然。
现代文：君主中不通晓为君之道的人则不是这样。
English: Not so the prince who does not know how to be a prince.

古文：自为之则不能，任贤者则恶之，与不肖者议之。
现代文：自己去做做不了，任用贤者又对他们不放心，跟不肖的人议论他们。
English: They can't do it on their own, they don't trust the people who appointed them, and they talk about them with shady people.

古文：此功名之所以伤，国家之所以危。
现代文：这是功名所以毁败、国家所以倾危的原因。
English: This is the reason for the ruin of the reputation and the peril of the country.

古文：枣，棘之有；裘，狐之有也。
现代文：枣子是酸枣树结的，皮裘是狐皮做的。
English: The jujube is made from the fruit of the sour jujube tree, and the fur is made from fox fur.

古文：食棘之枣，衣狐之皮，先王固用非其有而己有之。
现代文：而人们吃酸枣树结的枣子，穿狐皮做的皮裘，先王当然也要把不是自身所有的当作自己所有来使用。
English: But people eat dates from sour jujube trees and wear fur coats made of fox skin. Of course, the first king had to use what he did not own as his own.

古文：汤武一日而尽有夏商之民，尽有夏商之地，尽有夏商之财。
现代文：商汤、周武王在短短的时间内就完全占有了夏商的百姓，完全占有了夏商的土地，完全占有了复商的财富。
English: Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang in a short period of time completely occupied the people of Xia Shang, completely occupied the land of Xia Shang, and completely occupied the wealth of the double merchants.

古文：以其民安，而天下莫敢之危；以其地封，而天下莫敢不说；以其财赏，而天下皆竞。
现代文：他们凭惜夏商的百姓安定自身，天下没有人敢惫害他们，他们利用夏商的土地分封诸侯，天下没有人敢表示不悦；他们利用夏商的财富赏赐臣下，天下就都争相效力。
English: They rely on the people who cherish Xia merchants to stabilize themselves, and no one in the world dares to wear them down. They use the land of Xia merchants to divide the feudal lords, and no one in the world dares to express displeasure. They use the wealth of Xia merchants to reward their vassals, and the whole world competes for effectiveness.

古文：无费乎郼与岐周，而天下称大仁，称大义，通乎用非其有。
现代文：没有耗费自己一点东西，可是天下都称颂他们大仁，称颂他们大义，这是因为他们通晓了使用不是自身所有东西的道理。
English: They didn't use up a single thing of their own, but the whole world praises them for their generosity and magnanimity. This is because they understood the principle of using things that are not their own.

古文：白公胜得荆国，不能以其府库分人。
现代文：白公胜作乱，控制了楚国，舍不得把楚国仓库的财物分给别人。
English: Bai Gongsheng made a mess, controlled the state of Chu, and was reluctant to give the property of the Chu warehouse to others.

古文：七日，石乞曰: 患至矣，不能分人则焚之，毋令人以害我。 
现代文：事发七天，石乞说： 祸患就要到了，舍不得分给别人就把它烧掉，不要让别人利用它来危害我们。 
English: Seven days after the incident, the stone mendicant said, "The disaster is coming. If you don't want to give it to others, burn it. Don't let others use it to harm us."

古文：白公又不能。
现代文：白公胜又舍不得这样做。
English: Bai Gongsheng was reluctant to do so.

古文：九日，叶公入，乃发太府之货予众，出高库之兵以赋民，因攻之。
现代文：到了第九天，叶公进入国都，就发放太府的材物给予民众，拿出高库的兵器分配给百姓，借以进攻白公。
English: On the ninth day, when Ye Gong entered the capital, he distributed materials from Taifu to the people, and took out weapons from the high storehouse to distribute to the people, using them to attack Baigong.

古文：十有九日而白公死。
现代文：事发十九天白公就失败而死。
English: Nineteen days after the incident, Baikong failed and died.

古文：国非其有也，而欲有之，可谓至贪矣。
现代文：国家不是自己所有的，却想占有它，可以说是贪婪到极点了。
English: The country is not their own, but they want to possess it, which can be said to be greed to the extreme.

古文：不能为人，又不能自为，可谓至愚矣。
现代文：占有了国家，不能用来为别人谋利，又不能用来为自己谋利，可以说是愚蠢到极点了。
English: To take possession of a country and not to be able to use it for the benefit of others, and not to be able to use it for one's own benefit, can be said to be the height of stupidity.

古文：譬白公之啬，若枭之爱其子也。
现代文：给白公的吝啬打个比喻，就好象猫头鹰疼爱自己的子女最后反被子女吃掉一样。
English: To use a metaphor for the avarice of the white-tailed eagle, it is as if the owl loves its children and is eventually eaten by them.

古文：卫灵公天寒凿池，宛春谏曰: 天寒起役，恐伤民。 
现代文：卫灵公让民众在天冷时挖池，宛春劝谏说： 天冷时兴办工程，恐怕损害百姓。 
English: Wei Ling Gong asked the people to dig a pond when it was cold, and Wan Chun advised them to say: I am afraid that it will harm the people to start the project when it is cold.

古文：公曰： 天寒乎？ 
现代文：曼公说： 天冷吗？ 
English: Man Kung said: Is it cold?

古文：宛春曰： 公衣狐裘，坐熊席，陬隅有灶，是以不寒。
现代文：宛春说； 您穿着狐皮裘，坐着熊皮席，屋角又有火灶，所以不觉得冷。
English: You don't feel cold because you are wearing a fox fur coat, sitting on a bear skin seat, and there is a stove in the corner of the roof, said Wanchun.

古文：今民衣弊不补，履决不组，君则不寒矣，民则寒矣。 公曰： 善。 
现代文：如今百姓衣服破旧不得缝补，鞋子坏了不得编织，您是不冷了，百姓可冷呢！ 灵公说： 你说得好。 
English: Nowadays, people's worn-out clothes cannot be mended, and broken shoes cannot be knitted. You are not cold, but people can be cold! Ling Gong said: You said it well.

古文：令罢役。
现代文：就下令停止工程。
English: He ordered the work to be stopped.

古文：左右以谏曰： 君凿池，不知天之寒也，而春也知之。
现代文：侍从们劝谏说： 您下令挖池，不知道天冷，宛春却知道。
English: The attendants advised him, "You ordered the pond to be dug, but you didn't know it would be cold, but Wanchun did.

古文：以春之知之也而令罢之，福将归于春也，而怨将归于君。 
现代文：因为宛春知道就下令停止工程，好处将归于宛春，而怨恨将归于您。 
English: Because Wanchun knew and ordered to stop the project, the benefits will go to Wanchun, and the resentment will go to you.

古文：公曰： 不然。
现代文：灵公说； 不是这样。
English: Ling Gong said, "It's not like that.

古文：夫春也，鲁国之匹夫也，而我举之，夫民未有见焉。
现代文：宛春只是鲁国的一个平民，我举用了他，百姓对他还没有什么了解。
English: Wanchun is just a commoner in the State of Lu. I used him as an example, but the common people still don't know much about him.

古文：今将令民以此见之。
现代文：现在要让百姓通过这件事了解他。
English: Now he wants the public to get to know him through this.

古文：且春也有善于寡人有也，春之善非寡人之善欤？ 
现代文：而且宛春有善行就如同我有一样，宛春的善行不就是我的善行吗？ 
English: Moreover, Wanchun has good deeds just as I do. Isn't Wanchun's good deed my good deed?

古文：灵公之论宛春，可谓知君道矣。
现代文：灵公这样议论宛春，可算是懂得为君之道了。
English: Ling Gong's discussion of Wanchun in this way can be regarded as knowing the way to be a king.

古文：君者固无任，而以职受任。
现代文：做君主的人，本来就没有具体职责，而是要根据臣下的职位委派他们责任。
English: Monarchs do not have specific duties, but delegate responsibilities to their subjects according to their positions.

古文：工拙，下也；赏罚，法也；君奚事哉？
现代文：事情做得好坏，由臣下负责，该赏该罚，由法律规定。君主何必亲自去做呢？
English: If something is done well or badly, it is the responsibility of the vassal, and the reward and punishment should be determined by law. Why does the monarch have to do it himself?

古文：若是则受赏者无德，而抵诛者无怨矣，人自反而已。
现代文：只要规定臣下的职分就够了。这样，受赏的人就无须感激谁，被处死的人也无须怨恨谁，人人都反躬自省就够了。
English: It is enough to prescribe the duties of the vassals, so that the one who is rewarded does not have to be grateful to anyone, and the one who is executed does not have to hate anyone, and it is enough for everyone to reflect on themselves.

古文：此治之至也。
现代文：这是治理国家的最高明的做法。
English: This is the best way to govern a country.

古文：五曰：凡为治必先定分：君臣父子夫妇。
现代文：处方凡治国一定要先确定名分，使君臣父子夫妇名实相副。
English: The prescription for governing the country must first determine the name, so that the monarchs and ministers and the father and son can match the name with the reality.

古文：君臣父子夫妇六者当位，则下不逾节而上不苟为矣，少不悍辟而长不简慢矣。
现代文：君臣父子夫妇六种人备居其位，那么地位低下的就不会超越礼法、地位尊贵的就不会随意而行了，晚辈就不会凶暴邪僻、长者就不会怠惰轻忽了。
English: If six kinds of people, including princes, ministers, fathers and sons, and their spouses, were to occupy the throne, then the low-ranking people would not exceed the etiquette, the high-ranking people would not act arbitrarily, the younger generation would not be violent and perverse, and the elders would not be lazy and careless.

古文：金木异任，水火殊事，阴阳不同，其为民利一也。
现代文：金木功用各异，水火用途有别，阴阳性质不同，但它们作为对人们有用之物则是相同的。
English: Gold and wood have different functions, different uses for water and fire, and different yin and yang properties, but they are all the same as things that are useful to people.

古文：故异所以安同也，同所以危异也。
现代文：所以说，差异是保证同一的，同一是危害差异的。
English: Therefore, the difference is the guarantee of the same, and the same is the harm of the difference.

古文：同异之分，贵贱之别，长少之义，此先王之所慎，而治乱之纪也。
现代文：同一和差异的区分，尊贵和卑贱的区别，长辈和晚辈的伦理，这是先王所慎重的，是国家太平或者混乱的关键。
English: The distinction between the same and the different, the distinction between the noble and the lowly, the ethics of elders and juniors, this is what the former king was careful about, and it is the key to national peace or chaos.

古文：今夫射者仪毫而失墙，画者仪发而易貌，言审本也。
现代文：而今射箭的人，仔细观察毫毛就会看不见墙壁；画画的人，仔细观察毛发就会忽略容貌。这说明要弄清根本。
English: But now, people who shoot arrows can't see the wall if they look closely at the hairs; people who paint can't see the face if they look closely at the hairs. This shows that we need to clarify the fundamentals.

古文：本不审，虽尧舜不能以治。
现代文：根本的东西不弄清，即使尧舜也不能治理好天下。
English: If the fundamental things are not made clear, even a baboon cannot govern the world well.

古文：故凡乱也者，必始乎近而后及远，必始乎本而后及末。
现代文：所以凡是祸乱，一定先从身边产生而后延及远处，一定先从根本产生而后延及微未。
English: Therefore, any calamity must first arise from the side and then extend to the distance, must first arise from the root and then extend to the near future.

古文：治亦然。
现代文：国家太平也是如此。
English: The same is true for Taiping.

古文：故百里奚处乎虞而虞亡，处乎秦而秦霸；向挚处乎商而商灭，处乎周而周王。
现代文：百里奚处在虞国而虞国灭亡，处在秦国而秦国称霸。向挚处在殷商而殷商覆灭，处在周国而周国称王。
English: Bai Lijun was in the State of Yu and the State of Yu was destroyed, he was in the State of Qin and the State of Qin was dominant, he was in the State of Yin and the State of Yin was destroyed, he was in the State of Zhou and the State of Zhou was dominant.

古文：百里奚之处乎虞，智非愚也；向挚之处乎商，典非恶也：无其本也。
现代文：百里奚处在虞国的时候，他的才智并不低下，向挚处在殷商的时候，他所掌管的典籍并不是不好。
English: When Bai Lijuan was in the state of Yu, his intelligence was not low. When Xiang Xin was in the state of Yin, the classics he was in charge of were not bad.

古文：其处于秦也，智非加益也；其处于周也，典非加善也：有其本也。
现代文：虞、商所以灭亡，是因为没有治国之本。百里奚处在秦国的时侯，他的才智并没有进一步增加；向挚处在周国的时候，他的典籍并没有进一步完善。秦、周所以兴盛，是因为具有治国之本。
English: When Yu and Shang died, it was because they did not have the foundation for governing the country. When Bai Lijuan was in Qin, his talent did not further increase; when Xiang Jing was in Zhou, his classics did not further improve. Qin and Zhou prospered because they had the foundation for governing the country.

古文：其本也者，定分之谓也。
现代文：所谓治国之本，说的就是确定名分啊！
English: The so-called foundation for governing the country is all about determining one's place!

古文：齐令章子将而与韩魏攻荆，荆令唐篾将而应之。
现代文：齐王命令章子率兵同韩魏两国攻楚，楚命唐篾率乓应敌。
English: King Qi ordered Zhang Zi to lead the troops to attack Chu with Han and Wei, and Chu Sheng led the troops to fight against the enemy.

古文：军相当，六月而不战。
现代文：两军对峙，六个月不交战。
English: The two armies confronted each other and did not fight for six months.

古文：齐令周最趣章子急战，其辞甚刻。
现代文：齐王命周最催促章子迅速开战，言辞非常峻切。
English: Qi Wang Mu Zhou urged Zhang Zi to go to war quickly, and his words were very harsh.

古文：章子对周最曰： 杀之免之，残其家，王能得此于臣。不可以战而战，可以战而不战，王不能得此于臣。 
现代文：章子回答周最说： 杀死我，罢免我，杀戮我的全族，这些齐王对我都可以做到，不可交战硬让交战，可以交战不让交战，这些，齐王在我这里办不到。 
English: Zhang Zi replied to Zhou Chao: "Kill me, depose me, kill my whole family, all of these Qi kings can do this to me. You can't engage in war, you can engage in war, you can engage in war, you can't engage in war, you can engage in war, you can't engage in war, you can't engage in war.

古文：与荆人夹沘水而军。
现代文：齐军与楚军隔沘水驻军对垒。
English: The Qi army and the Chu army were separated by a barricade.

古文：章子令人视水可绝者，荆人射之，水不可得近。
现代文：章子派人察看河水可以横渡之处，楚军放箭，齐军的侦察兵无法靠近河边。
English: Zhang Zi sent people to inspect where the river could be crossed, the Chu army shot arrows, and the Qi army's scouts could not get close to the river.

古文：有刍水旁者，告齐候者曰: 水浅深易知。
现代文：有一个人在河边割草，告诉齐军侦察兵说； 河水的深浅很容易知道。
English: A man cutting grass by the river told the Qi scouts that it was easy to know the depth of the river.

古文：荆人所盛守，尽其浅者也；所简守，皆其深者也。 
现代文：凡是楚军防守严密的，都是水浅的地方；防守粗疏的，都是水深的地方。 
English: Wherever the Chu army has a tight defense, it is a place with shallow water; where the defense is rough, it is a place with deep water.

古文：候者载刍者，与见章子。
现代文：齐军侦察兵让割草的人坐上车，和他一起来见章子。
English: The reconnaissance soldiers of the Qi Army let the man who cut the grass get on the car and came with him to see Zhang Zi.

古文：章子甚喜，因练卒以夜奄荆人之所盛守，果杀唐篾。
现代文：章子非常高兴，于是就乘着黑夜用精兵突袭楚军严密防守的地方，果然大胜，杀死了唐篾。
English: Zhang Zi was very happy, so he took advantage of the darkness to use elite soldiers to raid a place closely guarded by the Chu army, and won a great victory, killing Tang Xuan.

古文：章子可谓知将分矣。
现代文：章子可算是知道为将的职分了。
English: Akira can be said to know the position of commander.

古文：韩昭釐侯出弋，靷偏缓。
现代文：韩昭釐侯外出射猎，边马拉车盼皮带有一侧松了。
English: Han Zhaohong went out to shoot, and one side of the horse-drawn cart's belt was loose.

古文：昭釐侯居车上，谓其仆: 靷不偏缓乎？ 
现代文：昭釐侯在车上，对他的车夫说： 皮带不是有一侧松了吗？ 车夫说： 是的。 
English: Zhaohui Hou was in the car and said to his driver: Isn't one side of the belt loose? The driver said: Yes.

古文：其仆曰： 然。 至，舍，昭釐侯射鸟，其右摄其一靷，适之。
现代文：到了猎场，车停了下来，昭釐侯去射鸟，他的车右把那侧松了的皮带重新拴紧，使它长短适宜。
English: When they arrived at the hunting ground, the car stopped, and Zhaojun went to shoot birds. His car right re-tightened the loose belt on the other side, making it the right length.

古文：昭釐侯已射，驾而归。
现代文：昭釐侯射猎结束以后，套好车回去。
English: After the end of the shooting, Zhaojun drove back to his car.

古文：上车，选间，曰： 乡者靷偏缓，今适，何也？ 
现代文：昭麓侯上了车，过了一会儿，说； 先前皮带有一侧松了，现在长短适宜，这是怎么回事？ 
English: Zhaoluo got on the bus, and after a while, said, "Previously, one side of the belt was loose, but now the length is appropriate. What's going on?"

古文：其右从后对曰： 今者臣适之。 
现代文：他的车右从身后回答说； 刚才我把它拴合适了。 
English: His car right behind answered; I just got it hooked up.

古文：昭釐侯至，诘车令，各避舍。
现代文：昭釐侯回到朝中，就此事责问车令，车令和车右都惶恐地离开住室请罪。
English: Zhaohui returned to the center of the court and interrogated Cha Rong about the matter. Cha Rong and Cha Zui both left the room in fear and pleaded guilty.

古文：故擅为妄意之道，虽当，贤主不由也。
现代文：所以，擅自行动、凭空猜测的做法，即使恰当，贤主也不照此而行。
English: Therefore, the practice of acting without authorization and guessing from thin air, even if it is appropriate, is not followed by the wise.

古文：今有人于此，擅矫行则免国家，利轻重则若衡石，为方圜则若规矩，此则工矣巧矣，而不足法。
现代文：假如有这样一个人，擅自假托君命行事可使国家免于祸患，确定轻重可以象衡器那样准确，画方圆可以象用圆规矩尺那样标准，这种人精巧是很精巧，但是不值得效法。
English: If there were such a person, who could save the country from disaster by acting on behalf of the emperor without authorization, who could determine weight and weight as accurately as a weighing machine, and who could draw a square circle as accurately as a ruler, such a person would be very skillful, but not worth emulating.

古文：法也者，众之所同也，贤不肖之所以其力也。
现代文：所谓法，是众人共同遵守的，是使贤与不肖都竭尽其力的。
English: The so-called law is for everyone to abide by, and it is for both the virtuous and the wicked to do their best.

古文：谋出乎不可用，事出乎不可同，此为先王之所舍也。
现代文：计谋想出来不能采用，事情做敞出来不能普遍推行，这是先王所舍弃的。
English: Schemes thought out cannot be adopted, things done openly cannot be universally implemented, this was abandoned by the former king.

古文：六曰：上尊下卑。
现代文：慎小主上地位尊贵，臣下地位低贱。
English: Prudence and modesty make the superior superior and the subordinate inferior.

古文：卑则不得以小观上。
现代文：地位低贱就不能通过小事观察了解主上。
English: It is not possible to understand a lowly position through observation of trifles.

古文：尊则恣，恣则轻小物，轻小物则上无道知下，下无道知上。
现代文：地位尊贵就会骄恣，骄恣就会忽视小事，忽视小事，主上就没有途径了解臣下，臣下也没有途径了解主上。
English: If one's position is noble, he will be arrogant; if he is arrogant, he will ignore trifles; if he ignores trifles, there is no way for the master to know the vassal, and there is no way for the vassal to know the master.

古文：上下不相知，则上非下，下怨上矣。
现代文：上下互相不了解，主上就会责怪臣下，臣下就会怨恨主上了。
English: If superiors and subordinates do not understand each other, superiors will blame subordinates, and subordinates will resent superiors.

古文：人臣之情，不能为所怨；人主之情，不能爱所非。
现代文：就人臣的常情来说，不能为自己所怨恨的君主尽忠竭力；就君主的常情来说，也不能喜爱自己所责怪的臣下。
English: It is not in the nature of a subject to be loyal to a prince whom he detests; it is not in the nature of a prince to love a subject whom he detests.

古文：此上下大相失道也。
现代文：这是造成上下严重隔膜的原因。
English: This is the reason for the severe separation of the upper and lower diaphragm.

古文：故贤主谨小物以论好恶。
现代文：所以贤明的君主慎重对待小事，以表明自己的爱憎。
English: That is why wise monarchs are careful with trifles in order to show their love and hatred.

古文：巨防容蝼，而漂邑杀人；突泄一熛，而焚宫烧积；将失一令，而军破身死；主过一言，而国残名辱，为后世笑。
现代文：大堤中伏藏一只蝼蛄，就会引起水灾，冲毁城邑，淹死民众。烟囱里漏出一个火星，就会引起大火，焚毁宫室，烧掉积聚。将领下错一道命令，就会召致兵败身死。君主说错一句话，就会导致国破名辱，被后世讥笑。
English: If a maggot is hidden in the dike, it will cause a flood, destroy the city, and drown the people. If a firecracker leaks from the chimney, it will cause a fire, burn the palace, and burn the accumulation. If the general gives a wrong order, he will call the soldiers to their death. If the monarch says a wrong word, it will lead to the country's disgrace and be ridiculed by future generations.

古文：卫献公戒孙林父、甯殖食。
现代文：卫献公约孙林父、宁殖吃饭。
English: Sun Lin's father, Ning Xuan, eats in accordance with the Wei Xuan Convention.

古文：鸿集于囿，虞人以告，公如囿射鸿。
现代文：正巧有雁群落在苑囿，虞人把它报告给献公，献公就去苑囿射雁。
English: It just so happened that there was a flock of geese in the garden. The rich man reported it to the sacrificial offering, and the sacrificial offering went to the garden to shoot the geese.

古文：二子待君，日晏，公不来至。
现代文：孙林父、宁殖两个人等待国君，天色已晚，献公还不回来。
English: Sun Lin's father and Ning Xuan were waiting for the king, but it was too late and the prince did not return.

古文：来，不释皮冠而见二子。
现代文：回来以后，又连皮冠也不摘就与二人见礼。
English: When he came back, he did not even take off his leather cap to greet the two.

古文：二子不说，逐献公，立公子黚。
现代文：孙林父和宁殖很不高兴，就驱逐了献公，立公子甜为君。
English: Sun Lin's father and Ning Xuan were very unhappy, so they expelled the offering and made the prince the king.

古文：卫庄公立，欲逐石圃。
现代文：卫庄公立为国君，打算驱逐石圃。
English: Weizhuang Guozhong is the ruler of the country and intends to expel the stone garden.

古文：登台以望，见戎州，而问之曰： 是何为者也？ 
现代文：有一次，他登上高台远望，看到了戎州，就问道； 这是做什么的？ 
English: Once, he climbed to the top of a hill to look far and wide, saw Ebisuchu, and asked, "What is it for?"

古文：侍者曰： 戎州也。 
现代文：侍从说： 这是戎州。 
English: The waiter said, "This is Ebisucho."

古文：庄公曰： 我姬姓也，戎人安敢居国？ 
现代文：庄公说： 我和周天子同为姬姓，戎人怎么敢住在我的国家？ 
English: Zhuang Gong said: I and Zhou Tianzi are both surnamed Ji, how dare the Eunuchs live in my country?

古文：使夺之宅，残其州。
现代文：派人抢夺戎人的住宅，毁坏他们的州邑。
English: They plundered the houses of the soldiers and destroyed their towns.

古文：晋人适攻卫，戎州人因与石圃杀庄公，立公子起。
现代文：这时恰好晋国攻卫，戎州人乘机跟石圃一起攻杀庄公，立公子起为君。
English: At this time, Jin Province happened to be on the defensive, and the people of Ebisuchu took the opportunity to attack and kill Zhuang Gong together with Shihpu, and set up Gongzi as their leader.

古文：此小物不审也。
现代文：这是由于对小事不谨慎造成的。
English: It was caused by carelessness in small matters.

古文：人之情，不蹶于山而蹶于垤。
现代文：人之常情都是如此，谁也不会被高山绊倒，却往往会被蚁封绊倒。
English: This is how people usually are. No one will be tripped up by a mountain, but they will often be tripped up by an ant mound.

古文：齐桓公即位，三年三言，而天下称贤，群臣皆说：去肉食之兽，去食粟之鸟，去丝罝之网。
现代文：齐桓公做了国君，三年只说了三句话，天下就称颂他的贤德，群臣也都很高兴。这三句话是：去掉苑囿中吃肉的野兽，去掉宫廷中吃粮食的鸟雀，去掉用丝编织的兽网。
English: When Prince Qi Huan became the ruler of the country, he only said three sentences in three years, and the whole world praised his virtue, and the courtiers were also very happy. These three sentences are: remove the beasts that eat meat in the garden, remove the birds and sparrows that eat grain in the court, and remove the animal net woven with silk.

古文：吴起治西河，欲谕其信于民，夜日置表于南门之外，令于邑中曰： 明日有人偾南门之外表者，仕长大夫。 
现代文：吴起治理西河，想向百姓表明自己的信用，就派人前一天在南门外树起一棵木柱，对全喊百姓下令说： 明天如果有人能把南门外的木柱扳倒，就让他做长大夫。 
English: Wuqi governed the West River, and wanted to show his trust to the people, so he sent someone to erect a wooden post outside the south gate the day before, and ordered the shouting people: "Tomorrow, if someone can pull down the wooden post outside the south gate, let him be the mayor."

古文：明日日晏矣，莫有偾表者。
现代文：第二天直到天黑，也没有入去扳倒木柱。
English: The next day, until dark, he did not go in to pull down the wooden post.

古文：民相谓曰： 此必不信。 
现代文：人们一起议论说； 这些话一定不是真的。 
English: People say things together; they can't be true.

古文：有一人曰： 试往偾表，不得赏而已，何伤？ 
现代文：有一个人说： 我去把木柱扳倒试试，最多得不到赏赐罢了，有什么妨害？ 
English: One man said, "I'll try to pull down the pillar, but I won't get a reward. What's the harm?"

古文：往偾表，来谒吴起。
现代文：这个人去扳倒了木柱，来禀告吴起。
English: This person went and pulled down the wooden post to sue Wu Qi.

古文：吴起自见而出，仕之长大夫。
现代文：吴起亲自接见他，把他送出来，任他为长大夫。
English: Wu Qi personally received him, sent him out, and appointed him as the headman.

古文：夜日又复立表，又令于邑中如前。
现代文：而后又在前一天立起木柱，象前一次一样又对全城百姓下了命令。
English: Then, on the previous day, a wooden post was erected, and, as before, orders were given to the entire population of the city.

古文：邑人守门争表，表加植，不得所赏。
现代文：全城人都围在南门争相去扳木柱，木柱埋得很深，谁也没有得到赏赐。
English: The whole town gathered around the south gate to fight over the stake. The stake was buried very deep, and no one was rewarded.

古文：自是之后，民信吴起之赏罚。
现代文：从此以后，百姓相信了吴起的赏罚。
English: From then on, the people believed in Wu Zheng's reward and punishment.

古文：赏罚信乎民，何事而不成，岂独兵乎？
现代文：赏罚取信于百姓，做什么做不成？岂止是用兵呢！
English: Rewarding and punishing and gaining the trust of the people, what can't be done? It's more than just using soldiers!

