古文：宗夬，字明扬，南阳涅阳人也，世居江陵。
现代文：宗央字明歜，是南阳郡涅阳县人，世代居住在江陵。
English: Zongyang Zi Mingqi is from Nanyang County, Neiyang County, and has lived in Gangneung for generations.

古文：祖炳，宋时征太子庶子不就，有高名。
现代文：他的祖父叫宗炳，被南朝宋征召为太子庶子，他不接受任命，有很高的名望。
English: His grandfather was called Zong Yao. He was summoned by the Southern Song Dynasty to be the illegitimate son of the crown prince. He did not accept the appointment and had a high reputation.

古文：父繁，西中郎谘议参军。
现代文：宗央的父亲宗繁，任西中郎谘议参军。
English: Munenaka's father, Muneshige, appointed Nishinakuro to advise him on joining the army.

古文：夬少勤学，有局干。
现代文：宗央幼年时勤于学习，有度量和才干。
English: When he was a child, Zongyang was diligent in his studies, and had a great sense of proportion and talent.

古文：弱冠，举郢州秀才，历临川王常侍、骠骑行参军。
现代文：二十岁时，就考中郢州秀才，当过临王的常侍、骠骑行参军。
English: At the age of twenty, he passed the middle school entrance examination as a talented person from Bozhou, and served as the king's equerry and rode into the army.

古文：齐司徒竟陵王集学士于西邸，并见图画，夬亦预焉。
现代文：南齐司徒竟陵王把学士们集中到西邸，并给他们画像，宗央也在其中。
English: In fact, the King of the Mausoleum of the Southern Qi Emperor concentrated the scholars in the West Residence and gave them pictures, including Zongyang.

古文：永明中，与魏和亲，敕夬与尚书殿中郎任昉同接魏使，皆时选也。
现代文：永明年间，南齐与魏和亲，皇帝命令宗央与尚书殿中郎任防一同接待魏国使者，他们都是当时选出的人才。
English: In the eternal year between Nanqi and Wei, the emperor ordered Zongyang to receive the Wei envoys together with Shang Shudong and Renfen. They were all the talents selected at that time.

古文：武帝嫡孙南郡王居西州，以夬管书记，夬既以笔札被知，亦以贞正见许，故任焉。
现代文：齐武帝的嫡孙南郡王居住在西州，他让宗央掌管书记，宗央已经因为善书法被大家所认识，也因他的为人忠贞正直而受到人们的赞许，所以才有此任命。
English: Emperor Qiwu's great-great-grandson, Nangun Wang, lived in Xizhou, and he put Zongyang in charge of the secretary. Zongyang was already known for his good calligraphy, and was also praised by people for his loyalty and honesty, so this appointment was made.

古文：俄而文惠太子薨，王为皇太孙，夬仍管书记。
现代文：不久，文惠太子去世，南郡王当上了皇太孙，宗央仍然掌管书记。
English: Not long after, Prince Wen Hui died, and the king of Nan County became the emperor's grandson, while Zong Yang was still in charge of the secretary.

古文：及太孙即位，多失德，夬颇自疏，得为秣陵令，迁尚书都官郎。
现代文：等到皇太孙即皇帝位后，有很多失德的地方，宗央就自动疏远了他，得任秣陵县令，迁任尚书都官郎。
English: After the emperor's great-grandson, the emperor, came to the throne, there were a lot of moral lapses, and Zongyang automatically distanced himself from him. He was appointed the governor of Fuling County and transferred to the post of Shangshudu's official retainer.

古文：隆昌末，少帝见诛，宠旧多罹其祸，惟夬及傅昭以清正免。
现代文：隆昌末年，少帝被诛杀，过去被宠信的旧官员大多遭到祸害，衹有宗央和傅昭因本身清正而免遭祸害。
English: In the last years of Longchang, the young emperor was assassinated, and most of the old officials who had been favored in the past suffered from the scourge. Only Zongyang and Fu Zhao were spared from the scourge because they were honest.

古文：明帝即位，以夬为郢州治中，有名称职，以父老去官还乡里。
现代文：明帝即位后，任命宗央为郢州治中，以工作称职而有名，后因父亲年老而辞官回到乡里。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he appointed Zongyang as the provincial governor of Zhangzhou, who was famous for his work competence. Later, he resigned from the post due to his father's old age and returned to the countryside.

古文：南康王为荆州刺史，引为别驾。
现代文：南康王当荆州刺史时，把宗央当作自己的别驾。
English: When King Nankang of Jingzhou died, he took Zongyang as his second home.

古文：义师起，迁西中郎谘议参军，别驾如故。
现代文：梁高祖起义师后，宗央迁任西中郎谘议参军，别驾之职仍旧。
English: After Liang Gaozu's uprising, Soyang was transferred to Nishinakuro to advise him on joining the army, but his other duties remained the same.

古文：时西土位望，惟夬与同郡乐蔼、刘坦为州人所推信，故领军将军萧颖胄深相委仗，每事谘焉。
现代文：当时西边国家论地位名望，衹有宗央和同乡乐蔼、刘坦为州人所推重信任，所以领军将军萧颖胄对他非常信任和依重，每件事都要向他征询意见。
English: At that time, the state-oriented status and reputation in the west, including Zongyang and fellow townsman Leyi, Liu Tan was highly trusted by the people of the state, so the leading general Xiao Yingyao trusted and relied on him very much, and asked him for advice in every matter.

古文：高祖师发雍州，颖胄遣夬出自杨口，面禀经略，并护送军资，高祖甚礼之。
现代文：高祖的义师从雍州出发，颖胄派宗央从杨出去，当面禀告筹划谋略，并护送军用物资，高祖对他非常有礼。
English: Gao Zu's mentor set out from Yongzhou, Ying Zi sent Zongyang from Yang to go out, face-to-face obituary planning strategy, and escort military supplies, Gao Zu was very polite to him.

古文：中兴初，迁御史中丞，以父忧去职。
现代文：中兴初年，宗央迁任御史中丞，因父亲去世而离职。
English: In the first year of ZTE, Zongyang was transferred to the position of Vice President of History, but left the position due to his father's death.

古文：起为冠军将军、卫军长史。
现代文：服丧期满，起用为冠军将军、卫军长史。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the champion general and the head of the Guards.

古文：天监元年，迁征虏长史、东海太守，将军如故。
现代文：天监元年，宗央迁任征虏长史、束海郡太守，将军之职照旧。
English: In the first year of Tianjing, Zongyang was transferred to the post of Conscript Changshi, the governor of Sokhai County, and his duties as a general remained unchanged.

古文：二年，征为太子右卫率。
现代文：二年，被召任太子右卫率。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the prince's right guard.

古文：是冬，迁五兵尚书，参掌大选。
现代文：这年冬季，宗央迁任五兵尚书，参加掌管官员的大选。
English: In the winter of that year, Zongyang was transferred to the Five Soldiers of Shangshu and participated in the general election of the officials in charge.

古文：三年，卒，时年四十九。
现代文：三年，宗央去世，终年四十九岁。
English: Three years later, Zonan passed away, at the age of 49.

古文：子曜卿嗣。
现代文：他儿子宗曜卿继嗣。
English: His son, Soyo-kyo, became his successor.

古文：夬从弟岳，有名行，州里称之，出于夬右。
现代文：宗央的堂弟宗岳，名声和行为举止都很好，州裹人交称赞他，比宗央还有名。
English: Zongyang's cousin, Zongyue, had a good reputation and good manners. He was praised by people in the prefecture and was even more famous than Zongyang.

古文：仕历尚书库部郎，郢州治中，北中郎录事参军事。
现代文：官作过尚书库部郎，郢州治中，北中郎录事参军事。
English: His official works include Shang Shukuburō, 州治中, and 北中郎录事参军事.

古文：刘坦，字德度，南阳安众人也，晋镇东将军乔之七世孙。
现代文：刘坦字德度，是南阳郡安众县人，晋朝镇束将军刘乔的第七代孙子。
English: Liu Tan Zi De Du, a native of Anzhu County, Nanyang County, is the seventh-generation grandson of the Jin Dynasty general Liu Qiao.

古文：坦少为从兄虬所知。
现代文：刘坦少年时为堂兄刘虬所了解。
English: When Liu Tan was a boy, he was known by his cousin Liu Yao.

古文：齐建元初，为南郡王国常侍，寻补孱陵令，迁南中郎录事参军，所居以干济称。
现代文：南朝齐建元初年，刘坦当了南郡王的国常侍，不久，补任孱陵县令，迁任南中郎录事参军，在所任宫职中以办事干练著称。
English: In the first year of the Southern Dynasty of Qi Jianyuan, Liu Tan became the national equerry of the king of Nan County. Soon, he was appointed as the governor of Fuling County, and transferred to the position of the Southern Middle Lord to join the army. He was known for his efficiency in his duties.

古文：南康王为荆州刺史，坦为西中郎中兵参军，领长流。
现代文：南康王当荆州刺史时，刘坦任他的西中郎中兵参军，兼任长流。
English: When King Nankang was assassinated in Jingzhou, Liu Tan was appointed as his West Middle Soldier to join the army, and also served as a long-distance runner.

古文：义师起，迁谘议参军。
现代文：高祖义师兴起后，刘坦迁任谘议参军。
English: After the rise of Gao Zu Yishi, Liu Tan was transferred to an advisory position to join the army.

古文：时辅国将军杨公则为湘州刺史，帅师赴夏口，西朝议行州事者，坦谓众曰： 湘境人情，易扰难信。
现代文：当时辅国将军杨公则任湘州刺史，他统率队伍赶赴夏口，西部国家商议管理州事的人，型坦对他们说： 迩业境内的民情，是易被骚扰难得信任。
English: At that time, Yang Gong, the general of the Auxiliary Province, was appointed as the historian of Hunan Province. He led the team to rush to Xiakou, the western country to discuss the management of state affairs. He said to them: The people's situation in the territory of Xinye is easy to be harassed and difficult to trust.

古文：若专用武士，则百姓畏侵渔；若遣文人，则威略不振。
现代文：如果专派武士去，那么老百姓害怕被侵吞掠夺财物；如果派遣文人去，则威望不够。
English: If samurai are sent, then the common people are afraid of being devoured and plundered; if literati are sent, then prestige is not enough.

古文：必欲镇静一州城，军民足食，则无逾老臣。
现代文：如果一定要安定这一州城，使得军民有足够的衣食的话，那么最好的人选莫过于老臣了。
English: If this prefecture-level city must be stabilized so that the military and civilians have enough food and clothing, then there is no better candidate than Lao Zhen.

古文：先零之役，窃以自许。 
现代文：先雯之役后，我私下以为自己还可以胜任。 
English: After the role of Xianwen, I secretly thought I was still competent.

古文：遂从之。
现代文：于是产担听从了他的话。
English: So the midwife followed his advice.

古文：乃除辅国长史、长沙太守，行湘州事。
现代文：就授予他辅国长史、长沙太守，管理迩事务。
English: He was awarded the title of assistant to the governor of the country and the governor of Changsha to manage the affairs of the state.

古文：坦尝在湘州，多旧恩，道迎者甚众。
现代文：型担曾经在翅业待遇，有很多老朋友，他们中有很多人都前来夹道欢迎刘坦。
English: There are a lot of old friends, many of whom have come to welcome Liu Tan.

古文：下车简选堪事吏，分诣十郡，悉发人丁，运租米三十余万斛，致之义师，资粮用给。
现代文：塑匹到任后，挑选能够胜任做事的人当官吏，分别到十个郡去，发动所有人丁。运送租米三十多万斛，送给起义队伍，充当军需物资。
English: After Shupi took office, he selected people who could do things competently as officials, went to ten counties respectively, mobilized all the men, transported more than 300,000 baht of rent rice, and sent it to the uprising team to serve as military supplies.

古文：时东昏遣安成太守刘希祖破西台所选太守范僧简于平都，希祖移檄湘部，于是始兴内史王僧粲应之。
现代文：当时束昏侯派遣安成郡太守刘希祖，在平都击败了西台所选的太守范僧简，刘希祖给湘州下了战书，于是蛆堡登内史王坦垦响应。
English: At that time, the dowager empress sent Liu Xizu, the governor of Ancheng County, to Pingdu, where he defeated the elected governor of Xidai, Fan Sengjian. Liu Xizu sent a letter of battle to Hunan, and Wang Tianzhu responded by entering the fortress.

古文：邵陵人逐其内史褚洊，永阳人周晖起兵攻始安郡，并应僧粲。
现代文：巫陆人驱逐了他们的内史褚溶，永阳人周晖起兵进攻始安蹙，他们都来响应王僧塞。
English: The people of Wuling expelled their Inner History Sect, and the people of Yongyang, Zhou Sect, raised an army to attack Shi'an Sect. They all came to respond to Wang Sangse.

古文：桂阳人邵昙弄、邓道介报复私仇，因合党亦同焉。
现代文：挂堕入竖昙差、邓道立为了报私仇，也一起参加进来。
English: Hanging and falling into the gap between the pillars, Deng Daoli, in order to take revenge, also joined in.

古文：僧粲自号平西将军、湘州刺史，以永阳人周舒为谋主，师于建宁。
现代文：王僧粲自己号称平西将军、湘州刺史，任永阳人周舒为谋主，在垩婆兴师。
English: Wang Sengyu himself was known as the general of Pingxi and the historian of Hunan. He appointed the Yongyang man Zhou Shu as his mentor, and became a teacher at Shao Pu.

古文：自是湘部诸郡，悉皆蜂起；惟临湘、湘阴、浏阳、罗四县犹全。
现代文：从此渔业境内的各郡，全都蜂拥而起；衹有堕捆、挝壁、塑避、罗四个县还算完整。
English: Since then, all the counties in the fishery territory have flocked together; the four counties of Zou You Fallen Bundles, Lao Wall, Plastic Avoidance, and Luo are still complete.

古文：州人咸欲泛舟逃走，坦悉聚船焚之，遣将尹法略距僧粲，相持未决。
现代文：挝业人民都想乘船逃走，刘坦把船都集中起来放火烧掉了，他派大将尹法略抵抗王僧粲，两军相持不下。
English: The Laotian people all wanted to escape by boat. Liu Tan gathered all the boats together and set them on fire. He sent General Yin Faliao to resist Wang Sangyao. The two armies couldn't stand each other.

古文：前湘州镇军钟玄绍潜谋应僧粲，要结士庶数百人，皆连名定计，刻日反州城。
现代文：前迩业镇军钟宝题暗地裹计划响应王僧粲，他邀集士庶数百人，连名制定计划，约定日期反叛州城。
English: In response to Wang Sangyao, the former Jingye Town Army secretly wrapped up the plan with the theme of Zhongbao. He invited hundreds of soldiers to jointly formulate a plan and set a date to rebel against the state capital.

古文：坦闻其谋，伪为不知，因理讼至夜，而城门遂不闭，以疑之。
现代文：刘坦听说了他们的密谋，却假装不知道，他故意处理案件直到深夜，城门也因此而不关闭，故意迷惑他们。
English: Liu Tan heard about their conspiracy, but pretended not to know. He deliberately handled the case until late at night, and the gate was not closed for this reason, deliberately confusing them.

古文：玄绍未及发，明旦诣坦问其故。
现代文：钟玄绍还未发动反叛，第二天到型坦那裹询问不关城门的原因。
English: Zhong Xuan Shao had not yet launched a rebellion, and the next day he went to Nainan to inquire about the reasons for not closing the city gate.

古文：坦久留与语，密遣亲兵收其家书。
现代文：刘担一面留他作长谈，一面秘密派遣亲信士兵到钟宝趋家裹搜找书信。
English: While leaving him to have a long talk, Liu Dang secretly sent his trusted soldiers to Zhong Bao's home to search for letters.

古文：玄绍在坐未起，而收兵已报具得其文书本末，玄绍即首伏，于坐斩之。
现代文：钟室题在玺匹这裹坐谈，还未起身，而派出去的亲兵已经回来报告说拿到玄趋文书的经过，钟玄题赶忙伏首，塑匹在座位上把他杀死了。
English: Zhong Xuan Tie was sitting and chatting in his armchair, he had not yet got up, but the soldiers he had sent out had already returned to report on the process of getting the mysterious document. Zhong Xuan Tie quickly bowed his head, and the statue killed him on the seat.

古文：焚其文书，其余党悉无所问，众愧且服，州部遂安。
现代文：型坦焚烧了那张文书，其余党全都不过问，众人感到羞愧，并且很服从刘坦，境内于是得到安宁。
English: When Liu Tan burned the document, the rest of the party didn't ask any questions. Everyone felt ashamed and obeyed Liu Tan, and the country was at peace.

古文：法略与僧粲相持累月，建康城平，公则还州，群贼始散。
现代文：尹法略与王僧垦相互对峙几个月后，建尘球被平定了，壬周回到渔业，群贼开始散去。
English: A few months after the confrontation between Yin Faliu and Wang Sangyao, the construction dust ball was leveled, Ren Zhou returned to the fishery, and the bandits began to disperse.

古文：天监初，论功封荔浦县子，邑三百户。
现代文：天监初年，玺些因功被封为艺遒墅爵，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervisor, some of them were awarded the title of Artistic Villages for their achievements, and the number of restaurants increased to 300.

古文：迁平西司马、新兴太守。
现代文：迁任平西司马、新兴郡太守。
English: He was transferred to Pingxi Sima and became the new county governor.

古文：天监三年，迁西中郎长史，卒，时年六十二。
现代文：天监三年，迁任西中郎长史，去世，时年六十二岁。
English: After three years as celestial overseer, he was transferred to the post of Nishinakuro Choshi, and died at the age of sixty-two.

古文：子泉嗣。
现代文：他儿子刘泉继嗣。
English: He is succeeded by his son Liu Quan.

古文：乐蔼，字蔚远，南阳淯阳人，晋尚书令广之六世孙，世居江陵。
现代文：碧迈字蓝违，是尘墨郡渣堕人，置塑尚书令碧瞳的第六代孙，世代居住在江陵。
English: Bi Mai Zi Lan Rong, is the sixth generation grandchild of Bi Mi, the sixth generation grandchild of Bi Mi, the sixth generation grandchild of Bi Mi, who lives in Gangneung.

古文：其舅雍州刺史宗悫，尝陈器物，试诸甥侄。
现代文：乐蔼的舅舅壅蛆刺史塞整，曾经摆了一些器物，试探他的几个外甥和侄子。
English: The amiable uncle, Zou Zhanshi, once set out some utensils to test several of his nephews and nieces.

古文：蔼时尚幼，而所取惟书，悫由此奇之。
现代文：乐蔼当时的年纪还很小，而他却衹取书，塞墨因此对他感到惊奇。
English: Laoyan was very young at the time, and Saimo was surprised when he took out a book.

古文：又取史传各一卷授蔼等，使读毕，言所记。
现代文：又取来史书和传记各一卷交给碧邑垄等人，让他们读完后，说一说书上的内容。
English: They also took a history book and a biography and handed them to Bi Yulong and others. After reading, they were asked to talk about the content of the book.

古文：蔼略读具举，悫益善之。
现代文：碧迈略微一读，就能把内容全都说出来，宗慇对他更加喜爱了。
English: As soon as Bi Mai read it, he was able to tell the whole story, which made Zong Yao like him even more.

古文：宋建平王景素为荆州刺史，辟为主簿。
现代文：那时齐豫章王嶷为武陵太守，雅善蔼为政，及嶷任荆州刺史时，碧迈被征召为主簿。
English: At that time, when Qi Yu Zhang Wang Ye was the governor of Wuling, Ya Xianyi was the political leader, and Yu served as the chief historian of Jingzhou, Bi Mai was called up as the chief accountant.

古文：景素为南徐州，复为征北刑狱参军，迁龙阳相。
现代文：星塞在直途业做官时，又召乐蔼为征北刑狱参军，迁任垄荡相。
English: When Xing Ce was working as an official in Zhitongye, he also summoned Le Ai to join the army for the Northern Expeditionary Prison, and he was transferred to the position of the roving minister.

古文：以父忧去职，吏民诣州请之，葬讫起焉。
现代文：后因父亲去世而离职。当地的官员和百姓到州襄去请求他安葬好父亲就再回来任官。
English: After he left office due to his father's death, local officials and citizens went to the state to ask him to bury his father and then come back to take office.

古文：时齐豫章王嶷为武陵太守，雅善蔼为政，及嶷为荆州刺史，以蔼为骠骑行参军、领州主簿，参知州事。
现代文：当时亩齐的豫章王萧嶷当武陵邓太守，他非常欣赏銮茎的为政，所以当萧嶷任荆州刺史时，便让乐蔼当骠骑行参军、兼任州主簿，参知州事。
English: At that time, Yu Zheng Wang Xiao Jie, who was the governor of Wuling, was very appreciative of Xingzi's politics. Therefore, when Xiao Jie was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, he asked Le Ai to join the army riding on a donkey, and also served as the chief accountant of the state, and was in charge of state affairs.

古文：嶷尝问蔼风土旧俗，城隍基寺，山川险易，蔼随问立对，若按图牒，嶷益重焉。
现代文：萧嶷有一次向乐蔼询问风土旧俗，城壕基础的位置，山川的险易等事，乐蔼张口就答，就像看着地图谱牒一样。萧嶷对他更加器重了。
English: Xiao Yao once asked Le Aine about the customs and traditions, the location of the foundation of the trench, the dangers of the mountains and rivers, etc. Le Aine opened his mouth to answer, just like looking at a map. Xiao Yao became more important to him.

古文：州人嫉之，或谮蔼廨门如市，嶷遣觇之，方见蔼闭阁读书。
现代文：州裹有人嫉妒乐蔼，造谣说他的官署门前热闹如市场，萧嶷派人偷偷侦察，看见乐蔼正闭门读书。
English: Some people in the prefecture were jealous of Le Aire and spread rumors that the front of his government office was as busy as a market. Xiao Yu sent someone to secretly investigate and found that Le Aire was studying behind closed doors.

古文：嶷还都，以蔼为太尉刑狱参军，典书记，迁枝江令。
现代文：萧嶷回到京都，就让乐蔼当太尉刑狱参军，主管书记，又迁任枝江县令。
English: When Xiao Yao returned to Kyoto, he asked Le Ai to join the army as a lieutenant of the prison, the secretary in charge, and he was transferred to the position of the county magistrate of Yejiang County.

古文：还为大司马中兵参军，转署记室。
现代文：回来后任大司马中兵参军，代管署记室。
English: After returning, he joined the army as the major general Ma Zhongfei, and entered the registration office of the Administration Office.

古文：永明八年，荆州刺史巴东王子响称兵反，既败，焚烧府舍，官曹文书，一时荡尽。
现代文：永明八年，荆州刺史巴东王子响起兵反叛，失败后，就焚烧政府官舍，一时间，官署裹的文书档案都被烧得干干净净。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, Prince Spadong of Jingzhou rebelled, and after the failure, he burned the government's official residence. For a while, the documents and files wrapped in the government office were all burned cleanly.

古文：武帝引见蔼，问以西事，蔼上对详敏，帝悦焉。
现代文：武帝召见乐蔼，向他询问梁的事情，乐蔼作了详细而敏捷的回答，皇帝对他非常满意。
English: Emperor Wu summoned Le'ai and asked him about Liang. Le'ai gave a detailed and quick answer, and the emperor was very pleased with him.

古文：用为荆州治中，敕付以修复府州事。
现代文：任用他为荆州治中，命令把修复府州官署的事交付给他。
English: He appointed him as Jingzhou's vice-governor and ordered that the restoration of the prefectural government office be handed over to him.

古文：蔼还州，缮修廨署数百区，顷之咸毕，而役不及民。
现代文：乐蔼回到州裹，修缮宫署敷百所，很快就全部完工了，而且没有拉百姓作为工役。
English: He happily returned to the state and repaired hundreds of palace buildings, which were all completed soon, and he did not hire commoners as laborers.

古文：荆部以为自晋王悦移镇以来，府舍未之有也。
现代文：荆州人认为这是自从晋王忱把州治所迁移到这裹来以后从未有过的府舍。
English: The people of Jingzhou believe that this is a house that has never existed since Jin Wangzhen moved the provincial government office here.

古文：九年，豫章王嶷薨，蔼解官赴丧，率荆、湘二州故吏，建碑墓所。
现代文：九年，豫章王萧嶷去世，乐蔼辞官奔丧，他率领荆、湘二州的旧官员们，在豫章王的墓前立碑。
English: In the ninth year, Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui died, and he led the old officials of Jing and Hunan two states to erect a monument in front of Yu Zhang Wang's tomb.

古文：累迁车骑平西录事参军、步兵校尉，求助戍西归。
现代文：乐蔼以后历任车骑平西录事参军、步兵校尉，要求帮助戍守边境回到西部。
English: After Lai Er, successive Chuxing Pingxi Records joined the army, infantry lieutenant, and asked for help to defend the border and return to the west.

古文：南康王为西中郎，以蔼为谘议参军。
现代文：南康王任西中郎时，让乐蔼担任谘议参军。
English: When Nankang Wang was appointed as the West Middle Lord, he asked Le Ai to serve as an advisor to join the army.

古文：义师起，萧颖胄引蔼及宗夬、刘坦，任以经略。
现代文：梁高祖起义军兴起后，芦盏噎带引碧迈以及塞去、刘坦加入义师，任他们为经略。
English: After the uprising of Liang Gaozhu's rebel army, Lu Zhengyi led Bi Mai and Sai to go, and Liu Tan joined Yishi, and let them be the strategists.

古文：梁台建，迁镇军司马、中书侍郎、尚书左丞。
现代文：梁朝建国后，乐蔼迁任镇军司马、中书侍郎、尚书左丞。
English: After the founding of the Liang Dynasty, Le Er was transferred to the post of the town's military secretary, the secretary of the middle secretary, and the secretary of the left secretary.

古文：时营造器甲，舟舰军粮，及朝廷仪宪，悉资蔼焉。
现代文：当时诸如营造武器盔甲，舟舰军粮，以及朝廷的礼仪宪法等等事情，全都要向乐蔼询问。
English: At that time, things such as the construction of weapons and armor, ships and war provisions, and the etiquette of the imperial court, all had to be asked of Le An.

古文：寻迁给事黄门侍郎，左丞如故。
现代文：不久，乐蔼迁任给事黄门侍郎，左丞之职依旧。
English: Soon after, Le Ai was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, while the position of Zuo remained the same.

古文：和帝东下，道兼卫尉卿。
现代文：和帝东下途中，乐蔼兼任卫尉卿。
English: On his way to the East with the emperor, Le Aine also served as a lieutenant of guards.

古文：天监初，迁骁骑将军、领少府卿；俄迁御史中丞，领本州大中正。
现代文：天监初年，乐蔼迁任骁骑将军、兼任少府卿；不久迁任御史中丞，兼任本州大中正。
English: In the first year of the celestial inspector, Le-Ai was transferred to the post of cavalry general and concurrently held the post of minor prefect; he was soon transferred to the post of goshi chujo and concurrently held the post of Honshu University junior high school vice-president.

古文：初，蔼发江陵，无故于船得八车辐，如中丞健步避道者，至是果迁焉。
现代文：当初，乐蔼从江陵出发，无缘无故地在船上得到八根车辐条，就像中丞健步避道一样，今天果然得到升迁。
English: At first, Le'ai started from Gangneung and got eight car spokes on the boat for no reason, just like Zhongzheng Jian avoiding the road, and today he was promoted.

古文：蔼性公强，居宪台甚称职。
现代文：乐蔼秉性公正刚强，官居宪台非常称职。
English: He is cheerful, fair-minded and strong-willed. He is a very competent official.

古文：时长沙宣武王将葬，而车府忽于库火油络，欲推主者。
现代文：当时长沙宣武王将要下葬，而逭时车府官却忽然丢失了车上的丝绳网，正要追究主管官的责任。
English: At that time, King Xuanwu of Changsha was about to be buried, but at the last minute, the Chefu officials suddenly lost the silk rope net on the car, and they were about to investigate the responsibility of the competent officials.

古文：蔼曰： 昔晋武库火，张华以为积油万石必然。
现代文：乐蔼说： 当年晋朝的武器库失火，张华认为是存积油料万石所必然引起的。
English: Le A said: Zhang Hua believed that the fire in the arsenal of the Jin Dynasty that year was inevitably caused by the accumulation of oil.

古文：今库若有灰，非吏罪也。 
现代文：现在如果发现库裹有灰，那么就不是车府官的罪遇了。 
English: Now, if it is found that the storehouse is covered with ashes, then it is not the crime of the Chefu official.

古文：既而检之，果有积灰。时称其博物弘恕焉。
现代文：之后经过检查车库，果然发现有积灰，于是人们纷纷称赞銮蔼的博闻广识、宽宏大度。
English: After that, after inspecting the garage, it was found that there was accumulated dust, so people praised the amiable erudition and magnanimity.

古文：二年，出为持节、督广、交、越三州诸军、冠军将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：二年，圣茵出任持节、督卢丛、玄、堃业三州诸军事、冠军将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: In the second year, Sheng Yin served as the military commander of Jishie, the governor of Luzhu, Xuan, and Xingye of the three states, the champion general, the general of Pingyue, and the history of Guangzhou.

古文：前刺史徐元瑜罢归，道遇始兴人士反，逐内史崔睦舒，因掠元瑜财产。
现代文：前卢业刺史涂五逾罢官回乡，路途上遇到蛆兴人士反叛，驱逐内史崔睦舒，并抢掠了徐元瑜的财产。
English: The former Lu Ye stabbed more than five years of history and returned to his hometown. On the way, he encountered the rebellion of the people of Fuxing, expelled Neishi Cui Moushu, and looted the property of Xu Yuanyu.

古文：元瑜走归广州，借兵于蔼，托欲讨贼，而实谋袭蔼。
现代文：途丞逾赶忙回到卢业，向叠迈借兵，藉是要讨伐盗贼，而实际上是想袭击乐蔼。
English: Tu Zhengyou hurriedly returned to Lüye and borrowed soldiers from Shemai, pretending to fight against the thieves, but actually wanted to attack Le A.

古文：蔼觉之，诛元瑜。
现代文：乐蔼察觉到了他的企图，就把徐元瑜给杀了。
English: Le'an sensed his intention and killed Xu Yuanyu.

古文：寻进号征虏将军，卒官。
现代文：不久，碧迈进封号为征虏将军，他在官任上去世。
English: Soon after, Bimai was given the title of Conscript General, and he died in office.

古文：蔼姊适征士同郡刘虬，亦明识有礼训。
现代文：碧迈的姐姐嫁给了同郡老乡征士刘虬，她也是一个明白事理、有见识有礼训的人。
English: Bi Mai's sister married a fellow county villager, Liu Yao, a conscript. She is also a person who understands things, has insight and etiquette.

古文：蔼为州，迎姊居官舍，参分禄秩，西土称之。
现代文：乐蔼任州官时，接迎姐姐住在官府中，把自己的官俸分三分之一给她，西部的人民很称道这件事情。
English: When Le Aine was a state official, he welcomed his sister to live in the government office and gave her one-third of his official salary, which was highly praised by the people in the west.

古文：子法才，字元备，幼与弟法藏俱有美名。
现代文：碧迈的儿子叫乐这左，字亘备，幼年时与他弟弟送蓖都有很好的名声。
English: Bimai's son is named Le Cudao, pronounced "Wang Bei," and he and his younger brother had a good reputation when they were young.

古文：少游京师，造沈约，约见而称之。
现代文：少年时在京师游学，拜访过选垫，选钓见了他后十分赞赏。
English: When he was a boy, he went to study in Beijing, visited the mat, and was very appreciative when he saw the mat.

古文：齐和帝为相国，召为府参军，镇军萧颖胄辟主簿。
现代文：齐和帝当相国时，召銮茎丈任相国府参军，镇军萧颖胄又召他任主簿。
English: When Emperor Qihe became the head of the State Council, he called Xingzijo to join the army as the head of the State Council, and Xiao Yingyao, a town soldier, also called him to be the chief accountant.

古文：梁台建，除起部郎。
现代文：銮建国后，銮迭左被授予起部郎。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, Zou Tie Zuo was awarded the title of Commendation.

古文：天监二年，蔼出镇岭表，法才留任京邑，迁金部郎，父忧去官。
现代文：越二年，碧迈出外镇守：莹壶，洼左在京邑留任，迁任金部郎，因父亲去世而辞官。
English: In the second year of Yue, Bimei became the town guard outside the town: Yingjue, Wa Zuo remained in Beijing, moved to the position of Kanebo, and resigned due to the death of his father.

古文：服阕，除中书通事舍人，出为本州别驾。
现代文：服丧期满后，被授予中书通事舍人，出任本州别驾。
English: After the expiration of the period of mourning, he was awarded the title of Chinese Calligrapher, and served as the Honshu Distinguished Driver.

古文：入为通直散骑侍郎，复掌通事，迁尚书右丞。
现代文：后召入任通直散骑侍郎，再次掌管通事，迁任尚书右丞。
English: Later, he was called to the post of Tsuchida Sanzhijijijiro, once again in charge of Tsuchida affairs, and was transferred to the post of Shoshu Ujo.

古文：晋安王为荆州，重除别驾从事史。
现代文：晋安王任职型业时，重又授予法才为别驾从事史。
English: When King Jinan was in office, he was again granted the right to make history.

古文：复征为尚书右丞，出为招远将军、建康令。
现代文：后又被召入任尚书右丞，出任招遗将军、谜令。
English: Later, he was called to the post of Shoshu Ujo, and served as a general for recruiting legacies and a riddler.

古文：不受俸秩，比去任，将至百金，县曹启输台库。
现代文：迭立没有接受的薪俸，攒到他离职时，已将近一百金，县官把这笔钱送进了国库。
English: By the time he left office, Tsering Li had saved nearly one hundred gold coins from the salary he did not receive. The county official sent this money to the national treasury.

古文：高祖嘉其清节，曰： 居职若斯，可以为百城表矣。 
现代文：高祖嘉奖迭丈高洁的节操，说： 当官的能做到这样，可以成为地方官的表率了。 
English: Gao Zu commended the steadfastness and chastity of the officials, saying, "If officials can do this, they can set an example for local officials."

古文：即日迁太府卿。
现代文：当天法才就迁任太舟卿。
English: It was only on the same day that he was transferred to the position of Tai Zhouqing.

古文：寻除南康内史，耻以让俸受名，辞不拜。
现代文：不久授予他亩尘郡内史，但他觉得因退让薪俸而当官出名是一种耻辱，就不肯接受拜官。
English: He was soon awarded a mu of the county's history, but he felt it was a shame to be famous for giving up his salary and refused to accept the title.

古文：俄转云骑将军、少府卿。
现代文：不久选才转为云骑将军、少府卿。
English: It was not long before he was selected to become General Yunji and Shofu-kyo.

古文：出为信武长史、江夏太守。
现代文：又出任信武长史、江夏郡太守。
English: He also held the posts of Nobutake Nagashi and Jiangxia County Governor.

古文：因被代，表便道还乡。
现代文：因被代，上表请求顺道回家。
English: Due to being substituted, the above table requested to go home.

古文：至家，割宅为寺，栖心物表。
现代文：到家后，这立把家宅划出一部分当作寺庙，超然物外。
English: After arriving at home, he set up a part of the house as a temple, detached from the outside world.

古文：皇太子以法才旧臣，累有优令，召使东下，未及发而卒，时年六十三。
现代文：皇太子因念迭立是老臣，屡次下达优待命令，召他东下任官，法才还未出发就去世了，终年六十三岁。
English: The crown prince, thinking that he was an old minister, repeatedly issued orders for preferential treatment and called him to go to the east to take office. However, he died before he could leave, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：萧颖胄起大州之众以会义，当其时，人心未之能悟。
现代文：南朝陈吏部尚书姚察说：萧颖胄发动全州大众来会合起义队伍，当时的人心还不能领悟。
English: Shangshu Yao, a member of the Southern Dynasties Chen Li Department, said: Xiao Yingyao launched the whole state to gather the uprising team. At that time, the human heart could not understand.

古文：此三人者，楚之镇也。
现代文：这三个人，是楚地的镇慑力量。
English: These three people are the deterrent force of Chu.

古文：经营缔构，盖有力焉。
现代文：在经营缔构梁朝上，他们都是有力之人。
English: They are all powerful people who have been the driving force behind the company.

古文：方面之功，坦为多矣；当官任事，蔼则兼之。
现代文：在某一方面的军政事务上，刘坦的功劳要多些；在当官任事方面，乐蔼要强一些。
English: In a certain aspect of military and political affairs, Liu Tan's merit is more outstanding; in terms of serving as an official, he is more amiable.

古文：咸登宠秩，宜乎！
现代文：他们最后都登上了受宠信的官位，这是理所应当的啊！
English: In the end, they all ascended to the position of favoured confidant, and rightly so!

