古文：王肃宋弁王肃，字恭懿，琅邪临沂人，司马衍丞相导之后也。父奂，萧赜尚书左仆射。
现代文：王肃，字恭懿，琅笽临沂人，司马衍的丞相王导的后人。父王奂，为萧赜尚书左仆射。
English: Wang Su, also known as Guanzhong, was a descendant of Wang Du, the prime minister of Sima Yan. Wang Du's father, Wang Zhen, was a left-hand servant of Xiao Zhen Shangshu.

古文：肃少而聪辩，涉猎经史，颇有大志。
现代文：王肃少时即聪慧善辩，涉猎经史，颇有大志。
English: When Wang Su was young, he was clever and good at debate, dabbled in history, and had great ambitions.

古文：仕萧赜，历著作郎、太子舍人、司徒主簿、秘书丞。
现代文：出仕萧赜政权，历任著作郎、太子舍人、司徒主簿、秘书丞。
English: He served in the Xiaoqi regime, and successively served as the author's son, the prince's son-in-law, the main bookkeeper, and the secretary.

古文：肃自谓《礼》、《易》为长，亦未能通其大义也。
现代文：王肃自称擅长《礼》、《易》，其实也未能通其大义。
English: Wang Su claimed to be good at "Li" and "Yi," but in fact, he was not able to understand their meaning.

古文：父奂及兄弟并为萧赜所杀，肃自建业来奔。是岁，太和十七年也。
现代文：父王奂及兄弟都被萧赜杀害，王肃从建业投奔朝廷，这一年是太和十七年。
English: His father Wang Xuan and his brothers were all killed by Xiao Xuan, and Wang Su ran from Jianye to the imperial court. This year was the 17th year of Tahe.

古文：高祖幸鄴，闻肃至，虚襟待之，引见问故。
现代文：魏高祖到邺城，听说王肃来了，虚襟以礼待之，引见他问其原因。
English: When Wei Gao Zu went to Shicheng, he heard that Wang Su was coming. He treated him with courtesy and asked him the reason.

古文：肃辞义敏切，辩而有礼，高祖甚哀恻之。
现代文：王肃辞义敏切，善辩也有礼节，高祖很是哀怜他。
English: Wang Suen was eloquent, eloquent and courteous. Gao Zu was very sorry for him.

古文：遂语及为国之道，肃陈说治乱，音韵雅暢，深会帝旨。
现代文：又谈到治理国家的道理，王肃陈说治乱，辞正意切，深合帝意。
English: He also talked about the principle of governing the country. Wang Su Chen said that it was necessary to control chaos, and his words were sincere and deeply in line with the emperor's will.

古文：高祖嗟纳之，促席移景，不觉坐之疲淹也。
现代文：高祖嗟叹接纳他的意见，二人促膝交谈，忘记了时间，不觉久坐的疲劳困乏。
English: Gao Zu sighed and accepted his opinion, and the two had a quick conversation, forgetting the time and not noticing the fatigue of sitting for a long time.

古文：因言萧氏危灭之兆，可乘之机，劝高祖大举。
现代文：王肃又述说萧氏政权的危殆灭亡征兆，可乘之机，劝说高祖大举进攻。
English: Wang Su also said that the signs of the imminent demise of the Xiao regime could be used as an opportunity to persuade Gaozu to attack vigorously.

古文：于是图南之规转锐。器重礼遇日有加焉，亲贵旧臣莫能间也。
现代文：从此以后，朝廷图取南方的机锋转锐，王肃的礼遇日有加授，亲贵旧臣也不能从中做什么手脚。
English: From then on, the imperial court's tactic of taking advantage of the south became more and more acute. Wang Su's courtesy was reinforced day by day, and the dear old minister could not do anything about it.

古文：或屏左右相对谈说，至夜分不罢。
现代文：帝或者摈退左右与他相对谈话，到夜半都不肯罢休。
English: The emperor or the empress would talk to him and refuse to stop until the middle of the night.

古文：肃亦尽忠输诚，无所隐避，自谓君臣之际犹玄德之遇孔明也。
现代文：王肃尽忠输诚，知无不言，自称君臣之际犹如当年刘玄德之遇孔明一般。
English: On the occasion of Wang Su's loyalty and sincerity, knowing nothing and saying nothing, he claimed to be a monarch and a minister, just like Liu Xuande's encounter with Confucius.

古文：寻除辅国将军、大将军长史，赐爵开阳伯；肃固辞伯爵，许之。
现代文：不久就被授为辅国将军、大将军长史，赐爵开阳伯，王肃坚决辞谢伯爵之位，帝答应了。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of General of the Auxiliary State, General of the Long History, and given the title of Count of Kaiyang. Wang Su resolutely declined the title of count, and the emperor agreed.

古文：诏肃讨萧鸾义阳。
现代文：帝诏王肃到义阳讨伐萧鸾。
English: Emperor Wang Su went to Yiyang to fight against Xiao Yu.

古文：听招募壮勇以为爪牙，其募士有功，赏加常募一等；其从肃行者，六品已下听先拟用，然后表闻；若投化之人，听五品已下先即优授。
现代文：听任王肃招募壮士以为爪牙，因其募士有功，赏加常募一等；跟随王肃前行的，六品以下官职听其先行拟用，然后报帝；如是投顺之人，听其五品以下优先擢用。
English: Those who were appointed by Wang Su to recruit able-bodied men were considered to be his minions, and were rewarded with the first rank of regular recruitment because of their achievements in recruiting soldiers; those who followed Wang Su's footsteps were given the first-priority use of official posts below the sixth grade, and then reported to the emperor; those who were loyal to Wang Su were given the first-priority use of official posts below the fifth grade.

古文：于是假肃节，行平南将军。
现代文：这时，朝廷授假王肃持节，行平南将军之职。
English: At this time, the imperial court granted Wang Su Jizhe a leave of absence, and he assumed the post of General Pingnan.

古文：肃至义阳，频破贼军，降者万余。
现代文：王肃到义阳，频频攻破敌军，投降者万余人。
English: Wang Su went to Yiyang, frequently broke through the enemy army, and more than 10,000 people surrendered.

古文：高祖遣散骑侍郎劳之，以功进号平南将军，赐骏马一匹，除持节、都督豫囗东郢三州诸军事、本将军、豫州刺史、扬州大中正。
现代文：高祖派散骑侍郎慰劳他，因功进号平南将军，赐给他骏马一匹，除授持节、都督豫、东豫、东郢三州诸军事、本将军、豫州刺史、扬州大中正。
English: Gao Zu sent a horseback-riding attendant to console him, and gave him a fine horse for his meritorious service to General Pingnan, in addition to conferring the festival, the military of the three states of Du Du Yu, Dong Yu and Dong Xi, the general, the Yuzhou scribe, and the Yangzhou high school.

古文：肃善于抚接，治有声称。
现代文：王肃善于抚慰百姓，治绩卓然。
English: Wang Su was good at soothing the people, and his performance was outstanding.

古文：寻征肃入朝，高祖手诏曰： 不见君子，中心如醉；一日三岁，我劳如何？
现代文：不久征王肃入朝，高祖下诏说： 不见君子，中心如醉，一日三岁，我劳如何。
English: Soon after the accession of King Su to the throne, Gao Zu issued an edict saying: "I see no gentleman, my heart is drunk, I am three years old every day, how can I work?

古文：饰馆华林，拂席相待，卿欲以何日发汝坟也？
现代文：饰馆华林，拂席相待，爱卿打算何日发汝州坟冢呢？
English: How should I comfort you? In Warim, the halls are decorated, the seats are wiped clean, waiting for your arrival, but when will you return from your grave?

古文：故复此敕。 
现代文：故有此诏。 
English: Therefore, this edict was issued.

古文：又诏曰： 肃丁荼虣世，志等伍胥，自拔吴州，膺求魏县，躬操忘礼之本，而同无数之丧，誓雪怨耻，方展申复，穷谕再期，蔬缊不改。诚季世之高风，末代之孝节也。
现代文：又下诏说： 王肃勇敢果决无当，志向可比比伍胥，自拔吴州，膺求魏县，躬操忘礼之本，而同无数之丧，誓雪冤耻，方展复仇之举，朕再行谕示，不改蔬，真可称得上是季世之高风，末代之孝节也。
English: He also issued the following edict: Wang Su's bravery is by no means unworthy, his ambition is comparable to that of Wu Wu, from Wuzhou to Wei County, he is the epitome of forgetfulness, but with countless mourning, swearing the wrongs and shame, and carrying out the act of revenge, I will continue to instruct, do not change the vegetables, can truly be said to be the high wind of the season, and the filial piety festival of the last generation.

古文：但圣人制礼，必均愚智；先王作则，理齐盈虚。
现代文：但是圣人制礼，必考虑到愚智的差别；先王作则，理齐盈虚。
English: However, the sage's ritual must take into account the difference between the foolish and the wise; the former king's example is logical and perfect.

古文：过之者俯而就之，不及者企而行之。
现代文：超过的俯而就之，不及的企而行之。
English: What is more than can be done, what is less than can be done.

古文：曾参居罚，宁其哀终；吴员处酷，岂闻四载？
现代文：曾参居罚，宁其哀终；吴员处酷，岂闻四载。
English: He was sentenced to house arrest, but he preferred to end his life in sorrow; Wu's punishment was so harsh that it went unheard of for four years.

古文：夫三年者，天下之达丧，古今之所一。其虽欲过礼，朕得不制之以礼乎？
现代文：大凡守丧三年，是天下的通行丧制，古今都是一致的，他想过于其礼，朕岂能不以礼制止他吗？
English: The three-year mourning period is the universal mourning system, which is consistent from ancient times to the present. If he wants to be too polite, can I stop him without being polite?

古文：有司可依礼谕之，为裁练禫之制。 
现代文：有关部门可以依礼晓谕，为裁丧祭之制。 
English: The relevant departments may, in accordance with the regulations, adopt a system of funeral rites.

古文：二十年七月，高祖以久旱不雨，辍膳三旦，百僚诣阙，引在中书省。
现代文：太和二十年七月，高祖因久旱不雨，停食三天，群官诣阙，集中在中书省。
English: In July of the 20th year of the Taihe, Gao Zu, because of the long drought and no rain, fasted for three days, and was beaten by officials. He was concentrated in the province of Zhongshu.

古文：高祖在崇虚楼，遣舍人问曰： 朕知卿等至，不获相见，卿何为而来？ 
现代文：魏高祖在崇虚楼，派舍人问询说： 朕知道卿等来了，却不被接见，卿等为何而来？ 
English: Wei Gaozu was in the lofty mansion, and sent a messenger to inquire: "I know that you have come, but you have not been received. Why have you come?

古文：肃对曰： 伏承陛下辍膳已经三旦，群臣焦怖，不敢自宁。
现代文：王肃回答说： 听说陛下停食已经三天，群臣惶恐不安，不敢自宁。
English: Wang Su replied, "I heard that Your Majesty has been fasting for three days, and the courtiers are panicked and anxious, and dare not calm down.

古文：臣闻尧水汤旱，自然之数，须圣人以济世，不由圣以致灾。
现代文：臣听说尧时水灾，汤时旱灾，这都是自然的运数，我们需要圣人以救世，但有灾不是由圣人招致的。
English: The minister heard that floods in the rainy season and droughts in the dry season are all natural numbers. We need saints to save the world, but disasters are not caused by saints.

古文：是以国储九年，以御九年之变。
现代文：因此国家储备九年的粮食，以备九年之变。
English: Therefore, the state reserves nine years of grain to prepare for the change of nine years.

古文：臣又闻至于八月不雨，然后君不举膳。
现代文：臣又听说，老天爷到了八月仍不降雨，然后君不举膳。
English: The minister also heard that if it doesn't rain in August, then you won't have a meal.

古文：昨四郊之外已蒙滂澍，唯京城之内微为少泽。
现代文：而昨天京城四郊之外已降喜雨，只是京城之内还少滋润。
English: It rained in the suburbs yesterday evening, but there was less rain in the capital.

古文：蒸民未阙一餐，陛下辍膳三日，臣庶惶惶，无复情地。 
现代文：百姓也未缺一餐，而陛下停食三日，臣僚百姓惶惶不安，不知怎么办才好。 
English: The people did not lack a single meal, but His Majesty fasted for three days, and his ministers and the people were so worried that they did not know what to do.

古文：高祖遣舍人答曰： 昔尧水汤旱，赖圣人以济民，朕虽居群黎之上，道谢前王，今日之旱，无以救恤，应待立秋，克躬自咎。
现代文：高祖派舍人回答说： 过去尧水汤旱，依仗圣人以拯救百姓，而朕今虽居万民之上，道不及前王，今日之旱，无以救恤，朕应待立秋之后，躬身引咎。
English: Gao Zu replied, "In the past, we had to rely on sages to save the people from the drought. But now, although I am above all people, I am not as good as the former king. Today's drought cannot be saved. I should wait until after the beginning of autumn to bow down and take the blame.

古文：但此月十日已来炎热焦酷，人物同悴，而连云数日，高风萧条。虽不食数朝，犹自无感，朕诚心未至之所致也。 
现代文：但是这个月初十以来，炎热焦酷，人物同悴，而近几天连云数日，高风劲吹，虽然朕数日不食，但苍天仍无感应，这是朕诚心未至所导致的。 
English: However, since the tenth day of this month, the heat has been scorching, people have been quarreling, and in recent days there have been clouds for several days, and the wind has been blowing hard. Although I have not eaten for several days, the sky still has no response, which is caused by my sincerity.

古文：肃曰： 臣闻圣人与凡同者五常，异者神明。
现代文：王肃说： 为臣听说圣人与凡人相同的是身体器官，不同的是神明智慧。
English: Wang Su said, "As a minister, I have heard that what makes a saint and an ordinary person alike is their body organs, but what makes them different is their divine wisdom.

古文：昔姑射之神，不食五谷，臣常谓矫。
现代文：过去姑射之神，不食五谷，臣常说那是矫妄之辞。
English: In the past, the goddess of archery did not eat grain, and the vassal often said that it was a pretentious word.

古文：今见陛下，始知其验。
现代文：今日见到陛下，才知此话不假。
English: It was only when I saw His Majesty today that I knew this to be true.

古文：且陛下自辍膳以来，若天全无应，臣亦谓上天无知，陛下无感。
现代文：况且陛下停膳以来，如若上天全无应许，臣也可说上天无知，陛下无感。
English: Moreover, since His Majesty stopped eating, if there is no promise from heaven, I can also say that heaven is ignorant and His Majesty is insensitive.

古文：一昨之前，外有滂泽，此有密云，臣即谓天有知，陛下有感矣。 
现代文：昨天之前，外已下雨，京城也是密云四布，臣即说苍天有知，陛下也有感应了。 
English: Before yesterday, it had been raining outside, and the capital was covered with thick clouds. The minister said that heaven knows, and His Majesty also felt it.

古文：高祖遣舍人答曰： 昨内外贵贱咸云四郊有雨，朕恐此辈皆勉劝之辞。三覆之慎，必欲使信而有征。
现代文：高祖派舍人回答说： 昨天内外贵贱都说四郊有雨，朕担心这些人说的都是宽解朕的话，三覆之慎，必须使之信而有征。
English: Gaozupai replied, "Yesterday, everyone, both high and low, said that there was rain in the four suburbs. I am worried that these people are saying things to appease me. I have to be very careful not to believe them.

古文：比当遣人往行，若果雨也，便命大官欣然进膳。
现代文：应当派人查看，假如果然下雨了，便命厨官欣然进膳。
English: Someone should be sent to check, and if it does rain, the chef will be happy to prepare a meal.

古文：岂可以近郊之内而慷慨要天乎？
现代文：怎么能让近郊以内还要天慷慨呢？
English: How can we make the suburbs even more generous?

古文：若其无也，朕之无感，安用朕身以扰民庶！
现代文：如果没有此事，就是朕不能感天，安用朕身以劳扰百姓！
English: If there were no such thing, I would not be able to feel the heavens and use my body to disturb the people!

古文：朕志确然，死而后已。 
现代文：朕今志确然已定，死而后已。 
English: I've made up my mind, I'm going to die.

古文：是夜澍雨大降。
现代文：这天夜里大雨滂沱。
English: It rained heavily that night.

古文：以破萧鸾将裴叔业功，进号镇南将军，加都督豫、南兗、东荆、东豫四州诸军事，封汝阳县开国子，食邑三百户，持节、中正、刺史如故。
现代文：王肃以破萧鸾将裴叔业的功劳，进号为镇南将军，加授都督豫、南兖、东荆、东豫四州诸军，封汝阳县开国子，食邑三百户，持节、中正、刺史官职依旧。
English: Wang Su, with the merit of defeating Xiao Jie, promoted Pei Shidi to the post of Zhenan General, awarded the four armies of Du Du Yu, Nan Jie, Dong Jing, and Dong Yu to the armies of the four states, sealed the founding of the country in Ryuyang County, 300 households in food villages, and the official positions of holding festivals, being in the middle of the country, and writing history are still the same.

古文：肃频表固让，不许，诏加鼓吹一部。
现代文：王肃频频上表推辞，帝不许，下诏加鼓吹一部。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen died, he left an imperial edict, appointing Wang Su as Shang Shuling (尚書令), and together with Xianyang Wang Yuanxi and others as Zhaisuo (宰輔) to manage the imperial government.

古文：二十二年，既平汉阳，诏肃曰： 夫知己贵义，君臣务恩，不能矜灾恤祸，恩义焉措？
现代文：太和二十二年，平定汉阳之后，帝下诏王肃说： 大凡知己贵义，君臣务恩，而不能消灾灭祸，恩义何指？
English: In the 22nd year of the Taihe era, after the pacification of Hanyang, the emperor Wang Su said: Great friends are valuable, and princes and ministers are benevolent, but they cannot eliminate disasters. What does benevolence mean?

古文：卿情同伍员，怀酷归朕，然未能翦一仇人，馘彼凶帅，何尝不兴言愤叹，羡吴闾而长息。
现代文：卿情同伍员，身怀大恨归附于朕，然而却不能除一仇人，杀彼凶帅，何尝不兴言愤叹，羡吴闾而长叹息。
English: You are a comrade-in-arms, and you are attached to me with great hatred. However, you can't get rid of an enemy and kill him. How can you not express your indignation and sigh with envy?

古文：比获萧鸾辅国将军黄瑶起，乃知是卿怨也。
现代文：前获萧鸾辅国将军黄瑶起，朕乃知是卿的仇人。
English: Formerly, he was awarded the title of General Huang Xizhi of Xiao Yuxuo, and I knew that he was an enemy of my lord.

古文：寻当相付，微望纾泄，使吾见卿之日，差得缓怀。 
现代文：朕很快将他交付给卿，希望能稍泄仇恨，使朕当初见卿时的愁云，稍能释怀。 
English: I quickly handed him over to my lord, hoping to vent my hatred a little, so that the sorrow I felt when I first saw my lord would lift a little.

古文：初，赜之收肃父奂也，司马黄瑶起攻奂杀之，故诏云然。
现代文：当初，萧赜收捕王肃父亲王奂，司马黄瑶起攻奂杀之，所以帝下诏如是说。
English: At first, Xiao Xi arrested Wang Su's father, Wang Qi, and Sima Huang Qi attacked and killed him, so the emperor said so.

古文：高祖之伐淮北，令肃讨义阳，未克，而萧鸾遣将裴叔业寇涡阳。
现代文：魏高祖讨伐淮北，令王肃讨征义阳，没等克城，萧鸾便派将裴叔业侵犯涡阳。
English: Wei Gao Zu fought against Huaibei, ordered Wang Su to fight against Yiyang, and without waiting for Kecheng, Xiao Wei sent Pei Shiye to invade Wuyang.

古文：刘藻等救之，为叔业所败。
现代文：刘藻等救之，被裴叔业打败。
English: Liu Cao and others saved him, but he was defeated by Pei Shuhe.

古文：肃表求更遣军援涡阳。
现代文：王肃上表请求另派军援救涡阳。
English: Wang Su made a request to send another army to rescue Wuruyang.

古文：诏曰： 得表览之怃然。观卿意非专在水，当是以藻等锐兵新败于前，事往势难故也。
现代文：帝下诏说： 得表，看完后内心黯然，朕观卿意不是专在水，当是因刘锐等精兵新败于前，事往势难的缘故。
English: Emperor Xuanzang said: "I am saddened after seeing the result of the game. I did not watch the game because of the water, but because Liu Rui and other elite soldiers were newly defeated, and the situation was difficult.

古文：朕若分兵，遣之非多，会无所制，多遣则禁旅难阙。
现代文：朕如分兵，派的不多，则会无所制，多派则禁旅难阙。
English: If there are only a few detachments, there will be no restraint, but if there are many detachments, it will be difficult to enforce the travel ban.

古文：今日之计，唯当作必克之举，不可为狐疑之师，徒失南兗也。
现代文：今天的计策，只有当作必克之举，不可为迟疑之师，以免白白失却南兖一州。
English: Today's strategy can only be regarded as a necessary move, not a delaying tactic, so as not to lose Nanxun and Yizhou in vain.

古文：卿便息意停彼，以图义阳之寇。
现代文：卿便息意停彼，以图义阳之寇。
English: The lord then decided to stop him, with the intention of invading Yiyang.

古文：宜止则止，还取义阳；宜下则下，镇军淮北。
现代文：宜止则止，还取义阳；宜下则下，镇军淮北。
English: If the situation is favorable, Yiyang will be taken; if the situation is unfavorable, Huaibei will be taken.

古文：深量二途，勿致重爽。
现代文：卿当深察两种举措，不要导致双重失误。
English: Sir, you should carefully consider the two measures, so as not to make a double mistake.

古文：若孟表粮尽，军不及至，致失涡阳，卿之过也。 
现代文：如若孟表粮尽，军队来不及到那里，以致丢失涡阳，是卿你的过失。 
English: If the Meng watch runs out of grain, the army will not be able to get there in time, resulting in the loss of the vortex sun, it is your fault.

古文：肃乃解义阳之围，以赴涡阳，叔业乃引师而退。
现代文：王肃于是解除义阳之围，率军奔赴涡阳，裴叔业于是引师退去。
English: Wang Su then lifted the siege of Yiyang and led the army to Turbuyang, whereupon Pei Shuye led his division to retreat.

古文：肃坐刘藻等败，黜为平南将军，中正、刺史如故。
现代文：王肃因刘藻等战败，黜为平南将军，中正、刺史官职仍旧。
English: As a result of the defeat of Wang Su by Liu So and others, he was demoted to the rank of General Pingnan, but he still held the posts of Zhongzheng and Zhishi.

古文：高祖崩，遗诏以肃为尚书令，与咸阳王禧等同为宰辅，征肃会驾鲁阳。
现代文：高祖去世，遗诏任王肃为尚书令，与咸阳王元禧等同为宰辅，征召王肃在鲁阳会驾。
English: Gaozu died, and his last will and testament appointed Wang Su as Shang Shuling, the same as Xianyang Wang Yuanxi as Zai Fu, and summoned Wang Su to join him in Luyang.

古文：肃至，遂与禧等参同谋谟。
现代文：王肃到后，便与元禧等一同参与谋略。
English: After Wang Su arrived, he participated in the strategy together with Yuan Xie and others.

古文：自鲁阳至于京洛，行途丧纪，委肃参量，忧勤经综，有过旧戚。
现代文：从鲁阳至于京洛，路上丧制之事，朝廷委王肃参与处理，他忧勤密密，谨慎安排，有过旧戚。
English: From Luyang to Jingluo, Wang Su, a member of the Imperial Court Committee, was involved in dealing with the death of the emperor on the road. He was diligent and careful, and had old relatives.

古文：禧兄弟并敬而昵之，上下称为和辑。
现代文：元禧兄弟都与他亲近而且敬重他，上下称为和睦。
English: Yuanxi's brothers were all close to him and respected him, which was called "harmony" from top to bottom.

古文：唯任城王澄以其起自羁远，一旦在己之上，以为憾焉。
现代文：只有任城王元澄觉得王肃被启用于边远之地，一旦他位处自己之上，觉得很有缺憾。
English: Only the king of the city, Yuancheng, felt that Wang Su was inspired to go to a remote place, and once he was on top of himself, he felt very sorry.

古文：每谓人曰： 朝廷以王肃加我上尚可。从叔广陵，宗室尊宿，历任内外，云何一朝令肃居其右也？ 
现代文：每每对人说： 朝廷把王肃安排在我上面还可以，而从叔广阳，是宗室尊宿，历职内外，为什么忽然间让王肃位居其右呢？ 
English: Everyone said to each other: It's okay for the imperial court to place Wang Su above me, but since Uncle Guangyang is the ancestral home, both in and out of office, why suddenly put Wang Su in his right?

古文：肃闻其言，恆降而避之。
现代文：王肃听说这话，坚决不就职以避嫌隙。
English: When Wang Su heard this, he resolutely refused to take up his post to avoid any backlash.

古文：寻为澄所奏劾，称肃谋叛，言寻申释。
现代文：不久被元澄奏劾，称王肃谋反，这话不久就被申释化解。
English: He was soon impeached by Yuancheng, saying that Wang Su was plotting a rebellion, but this was soon explained away.

古文：诏肃尚陈留长公主，本刘昶子妇彭城公主也，赐钱二十万、帛三千匹。
现代文：帝诏王肃与陈留长公主成亲，本是让他与刘昶的媳妇彭城公主成亲的，帝赐钱二十万、帛三千匹。
English: The emperor decreed that Wang Su marry the eldest princess Chen Liu, which meant that he would marry Liu Ye's daughter-in-law, Princess Pengcheng. The emperor gave him 200,000 yuan and 3,000 horses.

古文：肃奏： 考以显能，陟由绩著，升明退暗，于是乎在。
现代文：王肃启奏说： 考课是为检查才能，升职是由政绩显著，提升明达退却弱，就在这里。
English: Wang Suqi said: The examination is to check the ability, the promotion is marked by the political performance, the promotion is clear and the retreat is weak, it is here.

古文：自百僚旷察，四稔于兹，请依旧式，考检能否。 
现代文：自从百官旷缺考察，到今已经四年，臣请求依照旧式考检群官能否胜任。 
English: It has now been four years since the examination of the shortage of centaurs, and the minister requested that the old-style examination be carried out to see whether the centaurs were competent.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝接受了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：裴叔业以寿春内附，拜肃使持节、都督江西诸军事、车骑将军，与骠骑大将军、彭城王勰率步骑十万以赴之。
现代文：裴叔业以寿春内附朝廷，朝廷拜授王肃为使持节、都督江西诸军事、车骑将军，与骠骑大将军、彭城王元勰率领骑步兵十万人奔赴寿春。
English: Pei Xiuye attached the imperial court to Shouchun, the imperial court awarded Wang Su as the envoy festival, the governor of Jiangxi Province, the military, the cavalry general, and the cavalry general, Pengcheng Wangyuan, led 100,000 cavalry infantry to rush to Shouchun.

古文：萧宝卷豫州刺史萧懿率众三万屯于小岘，交州刺史李叔献屯合肥，将图寿春。
现代文：萧宝卷的豫州刺史萧懿率众三万人屯驻小岘，交州刺史李叔献屯军合肥，准备图取寿春。
English: According to Xiao Bao's scroll, the Henan statesman Xiao Yao led 30,000 people to settle in Xiao Yao, and the Henan statesman Li Shu dedicated troops to Hefei to prepare for the Battle of Shuchun.

古文：懿遣将胡松、李居士等领众万余屯据死虎。
现代文：萧懿派将胡松、李居士等领兵万余屯驻死虎。
English: Xiao Yu sent Hu Song, Li Kui Si and other leaders to lead more than ten thousand soldiers stationed in Shituo.

古文：肃进师讨击，大破之，擒其将桥珉等，斩首数千。
现代文：王肃挥师打击，大破敌军，擒拿其将桥珉等人，斩首数千。
English: Wang Su waved his sword at the enemy, defeated the enemy army, captured the bridge piers and other people, and beheaded thousands.

古文：进讨合肥，生擒叔献，萧懿弃小岘南走。
现代文：进讨合肥，生擒叔献，萧懿放弃小岘南逃。
English: Hefei was discussed, Zhouzhuang was offered, Xiaoqi gave up Xiaoqi and fled south.

古文：肃还京师，世宗临东堂引见劳之，又问江左有何息耗，肃曰： 如闻崔慧景已死。
现代文：王肃还归京城，世宗亲临东堂引见慰劳王肃，帝又问： 江左有什么消息？ 王肃说： 听说崔慧景已死。
English: Wang Su also returned to Beijing. Shizong personally came to the East Hall to introduce Wang Su to the emperor. The emperor also asked: What is the news from Jiang Zuo? Wang Su said: I heard that Cui Huijing had died.

古文：宝卷所仗，非邪即佞。
现代文：萧宝卷所凭仗的，非邪即佞。
English: What Xiao Baozhuan relied on was not evil, but good.

古文：天殆以此资陛下，廓定之期，势将不久。 
现代文：老天爷殆以此资陛下，平定江南的日期，将会不远。 
English: The day will not be far off when the Almighty will use this resource to pacify the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：以肃淮南累捷，赏帛四千七百五十匹，进位开府仪同三司，封昌国县开国侯，食邑八百户，余如故。
现代文：帝以王肃淮南屡屡获捷，赏赐缣帛四千七百五十匹，进位开府仪同三司、封昌国县开国侯，食邑八百户，其余官职照旧。
English: The emperor rewarded Wang Su Huainan with a total of 4,750 horses, the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, the title of Fongchang Guoxian Kaifu Guoxian, 800 households in food villages, and the rest of the official posts as before.

古文：寻以肃为散骑常侍、都督淮南诸军事、扬州刺史、持节，余官如故。
现代文：不久以王肃为散骑常侍、都督淮南诸军事，扬州刺史、持节，余官照旧。
English: Soon, Wang Su was appointed as the strolling equerry, the military governor of Huainan Province, the Yangzhou prefectural governor, and the other officials remained as before.

古文：肃频在边，悉心抚接，远近归怀，附者若市，以诚绥纳，咸得其心。
现代文：王肃连年在边，悉心抚接人士，远近怀归，归附之人门庭若市，王肃以诚相待，大得归附人的心。
English: Wang Su has been on the sidelines for years, conscientiously caressing people, from far and near to home, and the door of the attached person is small, Wang Su treats each other with sincerity, and the heart of the attached person is big.

古文：清身好施，简绝声色，终始廉约，家无余财。
现代文：王肃清身好施，省减声色之好，始终以廉洁约身，家中竟无余财。
English: Wang Suqing is well-dressed, well-spoken, always clean-shaven, and there is no spare money in the family.

古文：然性微轻佻，颇以功名自许，护疵称伐，少所推下，高祖每以此为言。
现代文：然而性格微显轻佻，颇以功名自许，护掩瑕疵称伐己功，很少推许部下，高祖经常谈到这点。
English: However, his personality is slightly frivolous, he praises himself for his achievements, praises himself for covering up his flaws, and rarely praises his subordinates. Gaozu often talked about this.

古文：景明二年薨于寿春，年三十八。
现代文：景明二年在寿春去世，享年三十八岁。
English: Jingming died two years later in Shuchun at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：世宗为举哀。诏曰： 肃奄至不救，痛惋兼怀，可遣中书侍郎贾思伯兼通直散骑常侍抚慰厥孤，给东园秘器、朝服一袭、钱三十万、帛一千匹、布五百匹、蜡三百斤，并问其卜迁远近，专遣侍御史一人监护丧事，务令优厚。 
现代文：魏世宗亲自为他举哀，下诏说： 王肃突然溘逝，朕痛苦惋惜兼填于怀，可派中书侍郎贾思伯兼通直散骑常侍抚慰其孤，给东园秘器、朝服一袭、钱三十万、帛一千匹、布五百匹、蜡三百斤，并问其卜迁坟冢远近，专派侍御史一人监护丧事，务令优厚。 
English: Wei Shizong personally mourned for him, and said in the following edict: Wang Su passed away suddenly, I am filled with pain and regret, I can send the secretary of the Central Committee, Jiasu Bo and Tongzhi Sanzhong, to comfort his orphan, to give the East Garden secret utensils, the morning dress, 300,000 yuan, 1,000 cormorants, 500 cloths, and 300 catties of wax, and ask him to move the tomb far and near, and to send one attendant to the funeral, which is a good order.

古文：又诏曰： 死生动静，卑高有域，胜达所居，存亡崇显。
现代文：又下诏说： 死生动静，卑高有域，胜达所居，存亡崇显。
English: The next edict said, "Death is vivid and still, high and low have their own spheres, the victorious attain their abode, and those who survive and perish are revered."

古文：故杜预之殁，窆于首阳；司空李冲，覆舟是托。
现代文：所以杜预死后，葬于首阳；司空李冲，托冢覆舟。
English: Therefore, after the death of Du Yuanyuan, he was buried in Shouyang; Sikuo Li Chong, asked for a coffin to cover the boat.

古文：顾瞻斯所，诚亦二代之九原也。
现代文：朕顾瞻那里，诚为二代的九原。
English: I'm looking forward to going there, and I'm a second-generation descendant of the Kuwahara family.

古文：故扬州刺史肃，诚义结于二世，英惠符于李杜，平生本意，愿终京陵，既有宿心，宜遂先志。
现代文：已故扬州刺史王肃忠诚大义结于二世，英达惠敏比于李杜，平生本意，愿终京陵，既有此心，应遂素志。
English: The late Yangzhou Prince Wang Su, who was the second generation of loyalty and righteousness, and Yingda Huimin, who was the second generation of loyalty and righteousness, had a lifelong intention to end up in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：永安元年冬卒，年三十七。
现代文：可让其葬于李冲、杜预两坟之间，使他能与二人神游相交。 
English: He can be buried between the two tombs of Li Chong and Du Yu, so that he can intersect with the two gods.

古文：赠侍中、卫将军、司空公、徐州刺史。
现代文：赠他为侍中、司空公，本官如故。有司启奏王肃忠心大度，应谥为匡公，帝诏谥为宣简。
English: He was presented to him as an attendant, a steward of King Kong, and his position remains the same. The steward praised the king's loyalty and magnanimity, and he was awarded the title of Kuanggong and the imperial title of Xuanjian.

古文：子渊，武定中，仪同开府记室参军。宋弁，字义和，广平列人人也。
现代文：肃宗初，帝诏为王肃树建碑铭。子王绍袭爵。宋弁，字义和，广平列人人。
English: At the beginning of the Su Zong Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong built a monument for King Su Shu. His son, King Shao, inherited the title. Song dialect, the characters Yiwu and Guangping ranked everyone.

古文：祖愔，与从叔宣、博陵崔建俱知名。
现代文：祖宋愔，与堂叔宋宣、博陵崔建都很出名。
English: The ancestor Song Xi, his uncle Song Xuan, and Boling Cui Jian are all famous.

古文：世祖时，历位中书博士、员外散骑常侍，使江南，赐爵列人子，还拜广平太守。
现代文：魏世祖时，历职中书博士、员外散骑常侍，出使江南，朝廷赐爵为列人子，还拜广平太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei, he was a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, a non-commissioned officer, a horseback rider, an envoy to the south of the Yangtze River, was knighted by the imperial court, and also paid homage to Emperor Guangping.

古文：兴安五年卒，赠安远将军、相州刺史，谥曰惠。
现代文：兴安三年去世，朝廷赠为安远将军、相州刺史，谥称惠。
English: Xing'an died three years later, and the imperial court presented him with the titles of General Anyuan, Sangzhou Sashihi, and Zongxing Hui.

古文：长子显袭爵。
现代文：长子宋显袭其爵位。
English: His eldest son Song Xian succeeded to his title.

古文：弁伯父世显无子，养弁为后。
现代文：宋弁伯父宋世显没有子嗣，养弁为后。
English: Song Ben's uncle Song Shixian had no children, so he raised Ben as his heir.

古文：弁父叔珍，李敷妹夫，因敷事而死。
现代文：宋弁父宋叔珍，是李敷妹夫，因李敷的事情而死。
English: Song Ben's father, Song Shuzhen, was Li Shiji's brother-in-law and died because of Li Shiji's affair.

古文：弁才学俊赡，少有美名。
现代文：宋弁才学俊杰，少有美名。
English: Song Bencai was a brilliant scholar, but he did not have a good reputation.

古文：高祖初，曾至京师，见尚书李冲，因言论移日。
现代文：高祖初年，曾经来到京师，见尚书李冲，交谈移日。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, he once came to Beijing to see Shangshu Li Chong, and the conversation moved day by day.

古文：冲竦然异之，退而言曰： 此人一日千里，王佐才也。 
现代文：李大觉惊异，退而言曰： 此人一日千里，是王佐之才。 
English: Surprised, Li Da Jue retreated and said, "This person travels thousands of miles a day. He is a genius.

古文：显卒，弁袭爵。
现代文：宋显死后，宋弁袭其爵位。
English: After the death of Song Xian, Song Ben inherited his title.

古文：弁与李彪州里，迭相祗好。
现代文：宋弁与李彪同乡，两人交情很好。
English: Song Ben and Li Biao are both from the same village and have a good relationship.

古文：彪为秘书丞，弁自中散。彪请为著作佐郎，寻除尚书殿中郎中。
现代文：李彪任秘书丞，宋弁自中散李彪推荐为著作佐郎后，不久又被任命为尚书殿中郎中。
English: Li Biao served as secretary-general, and Song Ben was recommended by Li Biao, the chancellor of the middle school, to be a scholar-sorcerer. Soon after, he was appointed as a junior scholar-sorcerer of the palace.

古文：高祖曾因朝会之次，历访治道，弁年少官微，自下而对，声姿清亮，进止可观，高祖称善者久之。
现代文：魏高祖曾在群臣朝会的时候，历访治国之道，宋弁年少官微，自下而对，声音容姿清亮，行止可观，高祖称赞了好长时间。
English: When Wei Gao Zu was at the time of the imperial court meeting of the courtiers, Gao Zu praised the way of governing the country for a long time. Song Ben was a minor official, and he was right from the bottom. His voice was clear, his appearance was bright, and his behavior was impressive.

古文：因是大被知遇，赐名为弁，意取弁和献玉、楚王不知宝之也。
现代文：因此宋弁大被皇上知遇，赐名宋弁，意取卞和献玉，楚王不知宝的典故。
English: As a result, Song Ben was known to the emperor, and was given the name Song Ben, meaning to take the scepter and give the ball, an allusion to the king of Chu not knowing the treasure.

古文：迁中书侍郎，兼员外常侍，使于萧赜。
现代文：迁任中书侍郎，兼任员外郎，出使萧赜。
English: He was transferred to the post of middle secretary, concurrently serving as a member of the outer circle, and dispatched Xiao Yao.

古文：赜司徒萧子良、秘书丞王融等皆称美之，以为志气謇谔不逮李彪，而体韵和雅、举止闲邃过之。
现代文：萧赜的司徒萧子良、秘书丞王融等都称其美仪，认为志气刚烈不及李彪，而体韵和雅、举止闲适则超过了他。
English: Xiao Yao's tutor, Xiao Ziliang, and secretary, Zhao Wang Rong, all praised his beauty, saying that he was not as strong-willed as Li Biao, but his body, elegance, and leisurely demeanor surpassed him.

古文：转散骑侍郎，时散骑位在中书之右。
现代文：转任散骑侍郎，当时散骑位在中书之上。
English: He was transferred to the position of Sanzhi waiter. At that time, the position of Sanzhi was higher than that of Zhongshu.

古文：高祖曾论江左事，因问弁曰： 卿比南行，入其隅隩，彼政道云何？
现代文：高祖曾与他讨论江南事宜，帝问宋弁说： 卿此番南行，入其堂奥，他们那边政道如何？
English: Gao Zu had discussed the Southern Yangtze River issue with him, and the emperor asked Song Ben: Sir, this time you are going to the south, you are going to the back of the hall, how is the political situation over there?

古文：兴亡之数，可得知不？ 
现代文：兴亡气数能够知晓吗？ 
English: Is it possible to know the rise and fall of the qi?

古文：弁对曰： 萧氏父子，无大功于天下，既以逆取，不能顺守。
现代文：宋弁回答说： 萧氏父子无大功于天下，既以逆取，不能顺利守据。
English: Song Ben replied: Xiao's father and son have not made any great contribution to the world. Even if they take the opposite side, they cannot successfully defend the evidence.

古文：德政不理，徭役滋剧；内无股肱之助，外有怨叛之民。以臣观之，必不能贻厥孙谋，保有南海。
现代文：不理德政，徭役繁剧，内无股肱之助，外有怨叛之民，由臣看来，肯定不能遗福到孙子辈，保有南海。
English: In the opinion of the minister, it is certainly not possible to preserve the South China Sea by neglecting the moral government, playing the role of a great drama, without the help of the shareholders inside and the rebellious people outside.

古文：若物惮其威，身免为幸。 
现代文：如果人们惧怕其威，最后他能保全性命就是庆幸了。 
English: If people are afraid of him, it is fortunate that he was able to save his life in the end.

古文：后车驾南征，以弁为司徒司马、曜武将军、东道副将。
现代文：后来皇帝车驾南征，任命宋弁为司徒司马、曜武将军、东道副将。
English: Later, the emperor drove the car to the south, and appointed Song Ben as Stus Sima, General Youwu, and Host Vice-General.

古文：军人有盗马靽者，斩而徇之。于是三军振惧，莫敢犯法。
现代文：军队中有人盗窃马谺，给他抓起来斩杀示众，于是三军震动畏慑，无人再敢犯法。
English: Someone in the army steals a horse and carriage, has him arrested and publicly beheaded. As a result, the three armies are shocked and deterred, and no one dares to break the law again.

古文：黄门郎崔光荐弁自代，高祖不许，然亦赏光知人。
现代文：黄门郎崔光举荐宋弁代其官职，高祖不答应，但也欣赏崔光知人。
English: Huangmen Lang Cui Guang recommended Song Ben to replace his official position, Gao Zu did not agree, but he also appreciated Cui Guang's acquaintance.

古文：未几，以弁兼黄门，寻即正，兼司徒左长史。
现代文：没多久，任宋弁兼任黄门，不久正除，兼任司徒左长史。
English: Not long after, he was appointed Song Ben and concurrently appointed Huang Men, and shortly after, he was removed from his post and concurrently appointed as Sidu Zuo Changshi.

古文：时大选内外群官，并定四海士族，弁专参铨量之任，事多称旨。
现代文：当时朝廷大选内外群官，并确定海内士族，宋弁充当铨量之任，处理事务十分恰当。
English: At that time, the imperial court elected a group of officials from inside and outside the country, and decided that Song Ben, a native of Hainan, would serve as the representative of the imperial court, and deal with affairs very appropriately.

古文：然好言人之阴短，高门大族意所不便者，弁因毁之；至于旧族沦滞，人非可忌者，又申达之。
现代文：但他好说别人隐私缺点，高门大族不与他交好的，宋弁都出言诋毁；至于那些旧族沦滞之人，只要他们不用忌惮的，又申荐他们。
English: But he likes to talk about other people's private shortcomings, the high-ranking elites do not make friends with him, and the Song Dynasty all speak out to denigrate him; as for those who have fallen behind in the old race, as long as they do not have to be afraid, they also recommend them.

古文：弁又为本州大中正，姓族多所降抑，颇为时人所怨。
现代文：宋弁又任本州大中正，豪门姓族多被降抑，颇被时人怨愤。
English: Song Ben was also appointed as the vice-chancellor of Honshu University, and most of the wealthy families were suppressed, which was quite resented by the people at the time.

古文：从驾南讨，诏弁于豫州都督所部及东荆领叶，皆灭戍士营农，水陆兼作。
现代文：宋弁跟从皇驾南讨，帝诏宋弁在豫州都督部众及东荆州领叶，皆减戍士让他们经营农事，水陆兼作。
English: Song Ben followed the emperor to the south, and the emperor decreed that Song Ben should be the governor of Yuzhou and the territorial governor of East Jingzhou, and they all reduced their staffs to let them manage agricultural affairs, both land and water.

古文：迁散骑常侍，寻迁右卫将军，领黄门。
现代文：迁任散骑常侍，不久迁任右卫将军，领黄门。
English: He was transferred to the position of straggler, and soon he was transferred to the position of General of the Right Guard, leading the Yellow Gate.

古文：弁屡自陈让，高祖曰： 吾为相知者，卿亦不可有辞。岂得专守一官，不助朕为治？
现代文：宋弁屡屡陈求让职，高祖说： 朕想要你做的，卿不可推辞，哪能专守一官，而不帮助朕处理政务的？
English: Song Ben repeatedly asked Chen Rong to give up his post. Gao Zu said, "What I want you to do, sir, you must not refuse. How can you exclusively hold a post without helping me to deal with government affairs?

古文：且常侍者黄门之粗冗，领军者二卫之假摄，不足空存推让，以弃大委。 
现代文：况且常侍是黄门中粗冗之职，领军只不过是二卫的假摄，不足以空存推让，以弃朕之大任。 
English: Moreover, the standing attendant is the most cumbersome position in the yellow gate, and the leader is just a fake photo of the second guard, which is not enough to keep the vacancy, so as to abandon my great responsibility.

古文：其被知遇如此。
现代文：其被皇帝知遇可见一斑。
English: It can be seen that the emperor knew about it.

古文：始，高祖北都之选也，李冲多所参预，颇抑宋氏。
现代文：开始，高祖在北都选官，李冲参预很多，很是排抑宋氏。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu was an election official in Beijing, and Li Chong participated in many elections, which was very much to suppress the Song Dynasty.

古文：弁有恨于冲，而与李彪交结，雅相知重。
现代文：宋弁心恨李冲，而与李彪交结，雅相知重。
English: Song Ben hated Li Chong with all his heart, but when he crossed paths with Li Biao, they had a mutual respect for elegance.

古文：及彪之抗冲，冲谓彪曰： 尔如狗耳，为人所嗾。 
现代文：及李彪冲撞李冲，李冲对李彪说： 你如狗一般，被人驱使。 
English: When Li Biao bumped into Li Chong, Li Chong said to Li Biao: You are like a dog, driven by people.

古文：及冲劾彪，不至大罪，弁之力也。
现代文：但等到李冲弹劾李彪，终而没被治成大罪，宋弁从中出了力。
English: However, it was not until Li Chong impeached Li Biao that he was finally punished for his crime, and Song Ben took advantage of this.

古文：彪除名为民，弁大相嗟慨，密图申复。
现代文：李彪被除名为民，宋弁大相嗟叹感慨，暗暗决心报复。
English: Li Biao was expelled from the name of the people, Song Ben Dazang lamented, secretly determined to take revenge.

古文：高祖在汝南不豫，大渐。旬有余日，不见侍臣，左右唯彭城王勰等数人而已。小瘳，乃引见门下及宗室长幼诸人，入者未能知，致悲泣。弁独进及御床，嘘唏流涕曰： 臣不谓陛下圣颜毁瘠乃尔！ 
现代文：高祖在汝南得病，病重，前后十几天，不见侍臣，左右只有彭城王元勰等数人而已，稍稍转好，便引见门下以及宗室长幼诸人，进来的人未能尽其悲泣之节，宋弁独独进到御床边，欷流泪说： 为臣没想到陛下圣颜如此的憔悴毁坏！ 
English: Gao Zu fell ill in the south of the country. He was seriously ill for about ten days. He did not see any attendants, only a few people around him, such as Pengcheng Wangyuanqian. When he was a little better, he introduced his disciples and the children of the head of the family. Those who came in were unable to make the most of their sorrowful day. Song Ben went to the bedside alone and shed tears and said, "As a minister, I did not expect His Majesty's sacred face to be so badly damaged!

古文：由是益重之。
现代文：从此皇上更加器重他。
English: From then on, the Emperor valued him even more.

古文：车驾征马圈，留弁以本官兼祠部尚书，摄七兵事。
现代文：帝车驾征讨马圈，留下宋弁以本官兼任祠部尚书，摄管七兵事务。
English: The imperial carriage drove to collect the horse ring, leaving Song Ben as the official to concurrently serve as the priest of the ancestral hall, and take charge of the seven soldiers.

古文：及行，执其手曰： 国之大事，在祠与戎。故令卿绾摄二曹，可不自勉。 
现代文：临行时，皇上握着宋弁的手说： 国家大事，在于祭祀征战，所以朕让你总摄二曹，卿不能不自勉。 
English: As he was about to leave, the emperor held Song Ben's hand and said, "The national event lies in the sacrificial war, so I'll let you take all the photos. You can't help yourself."

古文：弁顿首辞谢。
现代文：宋弁顿首辞谢。
English: Song Bengton was the first to resign.

古文：弁劬劳王事，夙夜在公，恩遇之甚，辈流莫及，名重朝野，亚于李冲。
现代文：宋弁勤勉务公，早晚在衙，他受到的恩泽，同僚中无人可以赶得上，名重朝野，仅次于李冲。
English: Song Ben diligently served the public, and was in Xing in the morning and evening. The grace he received, which none of his colleagues could match, was second only to that of Li Chong.

古文：高祖每称弁可为吏部尚书。
现代文：高祖经常说宋弁可任吏部尚书。
English: Gao Zu often said that Song Ben could be appointed as the official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：及崩，遗诏以弁为之，与咸阳王禧等六人辅政，而弁已先卒，年四十八。
现代文：等到驾崩时，遗诏让宋弁任吏部尚书，与咸阳王元禧等六人一起辅政，但弁已先去世，享年四十八岁。
English: At the time of his death, the emperor bequeathed to Song Ben the post of secretary to Shang Shu, and he supported the government together with six people including Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, but Ben died first, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：诏赐钱十万、布三百匹，赠安东将军、瀛州刺史，谥曰贞顺。
现代文：帝诏赐给他钱十万、布三百匹，赠官安东将军、瀛州刺史，谥称贞顺。
English: Emperor Zhao gave him 100,000 yuan in money and 300 horses of cloth, and bestowed him with the titles of General Anton, Zhangzhou Sashimi, and Zhenshun.

古文：弁性好矜伐，自许膏腴。
现代文：宋弁生性喜欢自夸，自己往自己脸上贴金。
English: Song Bensheng likes to boast and put gold on his face.

古文：高祖以郭祚晋魏名门，从容谓弁曰： 卿固应推郭祚之门也。 
现代文：高祖因郭祚家是晋、魏名门，从容对宋弁说： 卿理所当然地推举郭祚一门。 
English: Gao Zu said to Song Ben calmly that the Guo Dai family was famous in the Jin and Wei dynasties. He said, "It is natural for the lord to choose the Guo Dai family."

古文：弁笑曰： 臣家未肯推祚。 
现代文：宋弁笑着说： 臣家未肯推举郭祚。 
English: Song Ben said with a smile: The vassals were not willing to nominate Guo Gan.

古文：高祖曰： 卿自汉魏以来，既无高官，又无俊秀，何得不推？ 
现代文：高祖说： 卿家自汉魏以来，既无高官，又无隽秀，凭什么不推郭祚？ 
English: Gao Zu said: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, there have been no high-ranking officials and no outstanding leaders, so why not promote Guo Yu?

古文：弁曰： 臣清素自立，要尔不推。 
现代文：宋弁说： 为臣清素自立，就是不推郭祚。 
English: Song Ben said, "If you want to be a self-reliant, pure and chaste vassal, don't push the boundaries."

古文：侍臣出后，高祖谓彭城王勰曰： 弁人身良自不恶，乃复欲以门户自矜，殊为可怪。 
现代文：侍臣出去之后，高祖对彭城王说： 宋弁这个人本身并不坏，却偏偏要自矜家族门户，真是非常奇怪。 
English: After the courtier left, Gao Zu said to Pengcheng Wang: Song Ben is not a bad person, but it is very strange that he wants to make himself the family portal.

