古文：杜裴李韦杜黄裳，字遵素，京兆万年人。
现代文：杜黄裳字遵素，京兆府万年县人。
English: Du Huang Xiang Zi Zun Su, a resident of Wan Nian County, Beijing.

古文：擢进士第，又中宏辞。
现代文：先中进士，又考中宏辞科。
English: An advanced junior high school student, he also passed the junior high school entrance examination in macro-diction.

古文：郭子仪辟佐朔方府，子仪入朝，使主留事。
现代文：郭子仪征召他到朔方节度使府当辅助官。郭子仪回京朝见皇帝，派他主持留后事务。
English: Guo Ziyi conscripted him to work as an auxiliary officer at the Shuo Fang Festival. Guo Ziyi returned to Beijing to see the emperor and sent him to preside over the affairs of the emperor.

古文：李怀光与监军阴谋矫诏诛大将等，以动众心，欲代子仪。
现代文：李怀光与监军阴谋假托皇帝诏书杀大将等人，以此动摇军心，想取代郭子仪的职位。
English: Li Huaiguang conspired with the supervisors of the army to kill the general and others under the pretext of the emperor's edict, in order to shake the army and replace Guo Ziyi's position.

古文：黄裳得诏，判其非，以质怀光，怀光流汗服罪。
现代文：黄裳得诏书，认出那是假的，用它质问怀光，怀光吓得流汗，承认犯了罪。
English: Huang Xiang obtained the imperial edict, recognized that it was false, used it to question Huai Guang, Huai Guang was scared and sweated, and confessed to committing a crime.

古文：于是诸将狠骄难制者，黄裳皆以子仪令易置，众不敢乱。
现代文：当时诸将中凶狠骄横难管制的将领，黄裳都以郭子仪的命令调动职务，安排到别的地方，士兵不敢骚乱。
English: At that time, the generals who were fiercely arrogant and difficult to control were all transferred to other places by the order of Guo Ziyi. The soldiers did not dare to riot.

古文：入为侍御史，为裴延龄所恶，十期不迁。
现代文：黄裳回朝任侍御史，因为裴延龄不喜欢他，十年没有升官。
English: Huang Xiang returned to the imperial court to serve as an attendant to the emperor, but because Pei Yanling did not like him, he was not promoted for ten years.

古文：贞元末，拜太子宾客，居韦曲。
现代文：贞元末年，任命为太子宾客，住在韦曲。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, she was appointed as a guest of the crown prince and lived in Weiqu.

古文：时中人欲请其地赐公主，德宗曰： 城南杜氏乡里，不可易。 
现代文：当时宦官想请求皇帝把韦曲的田地赐给公主，德宗皇帝说： 城南是杜氏家族的故乡，不能动。 
English: At that time, the eunuch wanted to ask the emperor to give the princess Weiqu's fields. Emperor Dezong said, "Chengnan is the hometown of the Du family, it cannot be moved.

古文：迁太常卿。
现代文：升太常卿。
English: He was promoted to Taijo-kyo.

古文：时王叔文用事，黄裳未尝过其门。
现代文：这时王叔文当权，杜黄裳不曾拜访他的家门。
English: At this time, Wang Shouwen was in power, and Du Huangxiang never visited his home.

古文：婿韦执谊辅政，黄裳劝请太子监国，执谊曰： 公始得一官，遽开口议禁中事！ 
现代文：女婿韦执宜辅佐朝政，杜黄裳劝说他们请太子代行处理国政，韦执宜说： 您才升了官，就开口谈论皇宫中的事。 
English: His son-in-law Wei Xiyi assisted the imperial government, and Du Huangxiao persuaded them to ask the crown prince to handle state affairs on their behalf. Wei Xiyi said, "You have just been promoted to a higher position, and you start talking about things in the imperial palace.

古文：黄裳怒曰： 吾受恩三朝，岂以一官见卖！ 
现代文：杜黄裳生气地说 ：我受三朝的恩惠，怎么会为了一个官职就把自己卖了！ 
English: Du Huangxiang said angrily, "I was favored by three dynasties, how could I sell myself for a government post!"

古文：即拂衣出。
现代文：立即拂袖而去。
English: He immediately whisked away.

古文：皇太子总军国事，擢黄裳门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：皇太子统管国家军政大权，升杜黄裳任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The crown prince presided over the country's military and political power, with Sheng Duhuangmo serving as his footman, and Tongzhongshumen serving as his subordinate.

古文：于是，夏绥银节度使韩全义憸佞无功，因其来朝，白罢之。
现代文：在这时，夏绥银节度使韩全义谄媚奸邪没有功劳，趁他回京朝见皇帝，杜黄裳报告皇帝罢免了他。
English: At this time, Xia Yuxin, the governor of the Qing Dynasty, did not do any good to make Han Quanyi fall in love with her, and took advantage of his return to Beijing to see the emperor. Du Huangxiang reported that the emperor dismissed him.

古文：俄而刘辟叛，议者以辟恃险，讨之或生事，唯黄裳固劝不赦，因奏罢中人监军，而专委高崇文。
现代文：不久刘辟反叛，谏议官认为刘辟占据了险要，征讨他有人会制造事端，只有黄裳坚持劝说皇帝不赦免他，趁机上奏要求罢免宦官监军，委任高崇文负专责指挥。
English: Soon after, Liu Bi rebelled, and the magistrate thought that Liu Bi was in a precarious position, and that someone would make trouble to solicit him. Only Huang Xiang insisted on persuading the emperor not to pardon him, and took the opportunity to request the dismissal of the magistrate supervising the army, and appointed Gao Chongwen as the special commander.

古文：凡兵进退，黄裳自中指授，无不切于机。
现代文：凡是军队的进攻退守，杜黄裳亲自居中指点授计，没有不切合作战关键的。
English: Whenever the army attacked and retreated, Du Huangxiao personally took the lead in giving instructions. There was no doubt that cooperation was the key to the war.

古文：崇文素惮刘澭，黄裳使人谓曰： 公不奋命者，当以澭代。 
现代文：高崇文一向怕刘氵雍，黄裳派人对他说 ：你如果不奋勇效命就用刘氵雍替你为帅！ 
English: Gao Chongwen had always been afraid of Liu Qianyong. Huang Xi sent someone to say to him: "If you don't work hard, Liu Qianyong will be your replacement!"

古文：崇文惧，一死力缚贼以献。
现代文：崇文害怕，尽全力拼死作战，活捉了叛贼刘辟，献俘朝廷。
English: Afraid, Chongwen did his best to fight to the death, captured the traitor Liu Bi alive and offered him as a prisoner to the imperial court.

古文：蜀平，群臣贺，宪宗目黄裳曰： 时卿之功。 
现代文：四川叛乱平定了，群臣向皇帝祝贺，宪宗皇帝看着杜黄裳说 ：这是你的功劳。 
English: The Sichuan rebellion was quelled, and the courtiers congratulated the emperor. Emperor Xianzong looked at Du Huangxiang and said, "This is your achievement."

古文：始，德宗创艾多难，务姑息籓镇，每帅臣死，遣中人伺其军，观众所欲立者，故大将私金币结左右，以求节制，晏年尤甚，方镇选不出朝廷。
现代文：当初，德宗遭逢多次战难的创伤而心怀畏惧，一味姑息藩镇，每当藩镇统帅死了，就派宦官到他军中探听，看将士想立谁当统帅，所以大将拿出自己的金银珠宝巴结宦官，用这手段求官当节度使，德宗皇帝的晚年，这现象更加厉害，藩镇的长官没有谁是由朝官担任的。
English: At first, Emperor Dezong suffered from the trauma of many wars and suffered from fear. He always tolerated the feudal towns. Whenever the commander of a feudal town died, he would send eunuchs to his army to find out who the general wanted to appoint as commander. Therefore, the general would take out his gold, silver and jewelry to find an eunuch and use this means to find an official to be the regent. In Emperor Dezong's later years, this phenomenon was even more severe. None of the governors of the feudal towns were appointed by the imperial officials.

古文：黄裳每从容具言： 陛下宜鉴贞元之弊，整法度，晙损诸侯，则天下治。 
现代文：杜黄裳常利用空闲时向皇帝建议 ：陛下应该以贞元年间的弊病做鉴诫，整肃法律制度，削弱诸侯，天下就会太平。 
English: Du Huangxiao often used his free time to suggest to the emperor: His Majesty should use the ills of the Zhenyuan period as a warning, clean up the legal system, weaken the princes, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：帝尝问前古王者所以治乱云云，黄裳知帝锐于治，恐不得其要，因推言： 王者之道，在修己任贤而已。操执纲领，要得其大者，至簿书狱讼，百吏能否，本非人主所自任。
现代文：宪宗皇帝曾经向杜黄裳询问历代帝王使国家达到太平或导致混乱的原因。杜黄裳了解宪宗皇帝专心一意致力于国家太平，怕他不得要领，因而推演阐述说： 帝王治理国家的途径，在于修养自身和任用贤才，抓住大纲要领、掌握其中的关键，至于掌管档案、审决案件、百官胜任与否，本来不是皇帝应亲自做的事。
English: Emperor Xianzong once asked Du Huangxiang about the reasons for the successive emperors to achieve peace in the country or cause chaos. Du Huangxiang understood that Emperor Xianzong was single-mindedly committed to the country's peace, fearing that he would not be able to grasp the essentials, so he deduced and explained: The way for the emperor to govern the country lies in cultivating himself and appointing talents, grasping the outline and grasping the key. As for controlling archives, adjudicating cases, and whether or not all officials are competent, it is not something that the emperor should do personally.

古文：昔秦始皇帝亲程决事，见嗤前世；魏明帝欲按尚书事，陈矫不从；隋文帝日昃听政，卫士传餐，太宗笑之。
现代文：古代秦始皇帝亲自处理具体事务，被历代耻笑；魏明帝要查问尚书的事务，陈矫不同意；隋文帝太阳西斜还在朝处理政务，卫士传送饮食，太宗皇帝嘲笑他。
English: In ancient times, Emperor Qin Shihuang personally handled specific affairs and was ridiculed by successive dynasties; Emperor Ming of Wei wanted to inquire about the affairs of Shangshu, but Chen Jiao did not agree; Emperor Sun Xixi of Sui and Wen dynasties was still handling government affairs in the DPRK, and guards delivered meals, but Emperor Taizong ridiculed him.

古文：故王者择人任而责成，见功必赏，有罪信罚，孰敢不力？
现代文：所以帝王的任务是选拔贤才，任命大臣，督促他们做好自己本职工作，有功劳一定奖赏，有罪过必定惩罚，谁敢不努力？
English: Therefore, the emperor's task is to select talents, appoint ministers, and urge them to do their job well. There is a certain reward for merit, and a certain punishment for guilt. Who would dare not to work hard?

古文：孔子之称帝舜恭己南面，以其能举十六相，去四凶，而至无为。
现代文：孔子赞扬舜用端正严肃的态度约束自己，故被推举称帝，因为他能选用十六个有才能的大臣，流放四个凶恶的人，达到无为而治的境界。
English: Confucius praised him for using a proper and serious attitude to restrain himself, so he was elected as an emperor, because he could choose sixteen talented ministers, exile four vicious people, and reach the realm of non-action.

古文：岂必刓神疲体，劳耳目之察，然后为治哉？ 
现代文：哪里一定要皇帝使自己的精神和身体困乏，让耳目疲劳了，然后才能使国家太平呢？ 
English: Why must the emperor exhaust himself mentally and physically, and make his ears and eyes tired, before he can pacify the country?

古文：帝以黄裳言忠，嘉纳之。
现代文：宪宗皇帝认为杜黄裳说的话忠心耿耿，称赞他，采纳他的意见。
English: Emperor Xianzong thought that Du Huangxiang was loyal to what he said, praised him, and adopted his opinion.

古文：由是平夏、翦齐、灭蔡、复两河，以机秉还宰相，纪律设张，赫然号中兴，自黄裳启之。
现代文：因此平定了夏州叛乱，扫灭了齐、蔡叛军，收复了两河一带，把权柄交还宰相，纲纪整肃，法律完备，声威盛大，号称中兴。这个局面，来自杜黄裳对皇帝的启发。
English: Therefore, he quelled the rebellion in Xiazhou, wiped out the Qi and Cai rebels, recovered the area around the two rivers, returned power to the prime minister, rectified the system of discipline, perfected the law, had a great reputation, and was known as ZTE. This situation was inspired by Du Huangxiang to the emperor.

古文：黄裳达权变，有王佐大略。
现代文：杜黄裳通达机变，有辅佐帝王的远大谋略。
English: Du Huangxiao was a shrewd and resourceful person, and assisted the emperor in his grand strategy.

古文：性雅澹，未始忤物。
现代文：性情淡雅，不曾得罪人。
English: She has a gentle disposition and has never offended anyone.

古文：初不为执谊所礼，及败，悉力营救；既死，表还其柩葬焉。
现代文：当初不被韦执宜尊敬，到韦执宜失败，全力营救；韦执宜死后，上表朝廷请求把他的灵柩运回安葬。
English: He was not respected by Wei Xiyi at first, but when Wei Xiyi failed, he tried his best to rescue him; after Wei Xiyi died, the imperial court requested that his coffin be transported back for burial.

古文：尝被疾，医者误进药，疾遂甚，终不怒谴。
现代文：他曾经生病，医生用错了药，病加重，他始终不生气，不责怪医生。
English: He was once ill, the doctor used the wrong medicine, the illness worsened, he was never angry, he did not blame the doctor.

古文：然除吏不甚别流品，通馈谢，无洁白名。
现代文：但任用官吏不很分辨他们品质的好坏，接受贿赂，没有清白的名声。
English: But appointed officials are not very discerning about their quality, accept bribes, and do not have a clean reputation.

古文：当大政未久，不究其才，及处外，天下常所属意。
现代文：掌握朝廷大权的时间不长，没能全部施展才能，到京城外做官后，天下的人常怀念他。
English: He did not have a long time to master the power of the imperial court, and was not able to fully display his talents. After he became an official outside the capital, people around the world often miss him.

古文：卒后数年，御史劾奏黄裳纳邠宁节度使高崇文钱四万五千缗，按故吏吴凭及黄裳子载，辞服。帝念旧功，但流凭昭州，原载不问。
现代文：死后几年，御史弹劾杜黄裳接受宁节度使高崇文的四万五千纟昏钱的贿赂，审问他原来的属官吴冯心和黄裳的儿子杜载，口供服罪，皇帝怀念杜黄裳原来的功劳，只流放吴冯心到昭州，宽恕杜载，没治罪。
English: A few years after her death, the emperor impeached Du Huangxiang for accepting a bribe of forty-five thousand baht from Ning Chengdu to make Gao Chongwen faint. He interrogated his former subordinate Wu Fengxin and Du Zai, Huangxiang's son, and they confessed to the crime. The emperor missed Du Huangxiang's original achievements and only exiled Wu Fengxin to Zhaozhou. He pardoned Du Zai and did not punish the crime.

