古文：魏虏魏虏，匈奴种也，姓托跋氏。
现代文：魏虏，是匈奴种族，姓托跋氏。
English: Wei Krup, is a Hun ethnic group, surname Toba.

古文：晋永嘉六年，并州刺史刘琨为屠各胡刘聪所攻，索头猗卢遣子曰利孙将兵救琨于太原，猗卢入居代郡，亦谓鲜卑。
现代文：晋朝永嘉六年，并州刺史刘琨遭屠各胡刘聪攻打，索头猗卢派遣儿广日利孙率领兵士到太原救援刘琨，猗卢迁入代郡居住，也称作鲜卑。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yongjia of the Jin Dynasty, Liu Bei, the statesman of the Jin Dynasty, was attacked by Hu Liu Cong of the Tu Gu, and Sotou Bei Lu sent his son Guangri Li Sun to lead soldiers to Taiyuan to rescue Liu Bei. Liu Bei moved to live in Dai County, also known as Xianbei.

古文：被发左衽，故呼为索头。
现代文：因披着头发衣襟向左开，所以被称为索头。
English: Because he wears his hair and his collar turned to the left, he is known as "Cable Head."

古文：猗卢孙什翼犍，字郁律旃，后还阴山为单于，领匈奴诸部。
现代文：猗卢的孙子什翼犍，字郁律旃，后来回到阴山做单于，统领匈奴各部落。
English: Shilou's grandson Shifeng Yao, also known as Yu Lu Yao, later returned to Yinshan to become the ruler of the Xiongnu tribes.

古文：太元元年，苻坚遣伪并州刺史苻洛伐犍，破龙庭，禽犍还长安，为立宅，教犍书学。
现代文：太元元年，苻坚派遣所属并州刺史苻洛征伐什翼犍，攻下单于统治中心，擒获什翼犍回到长安，为他建房舍，教给什翼犍书籍学问。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, He Jian sent his subordinate and annexed state Zhi Shi Luo to invade Shifang, capture the center of the ruling center, capture Shifang and return to Chang'an, build a house for him, and teach him books and culture.

古文：分其部党居云中等四郡，诸部主帅岁终入朝，并得见犍，差税诸部以给之。
现代文：分割他的部落在云中等四个郡居住，各部落主帅年终入朝觐见，都能见到什翼犍，向各部落征税来供给他。
English: He divided his tribe into four counties, living in the middle of the clouds. At the end of the year, the leaders of each tribe went to the imperial court, where they could see Shifeng Yao and collect taxes from each tribe to provide for him.

古文：坚败，子圭，字涉圭，随舅慕容垂据中山，还领其部，后稍强盛。
现代文：苻坚失败，什翼犍的儿子托跋珪，字涉圭，跟随舅父慕容垂占据中山，返回统领部落，后来逐渐强盛。
English: When Shijian failed, Shijian's son, Tobasong, also known as Wabegui, followed his uncle Murongtli to occupy Zhongshan, returned to lead the tribe, and later gradually prospered.

古文：隆安元年，圭破慕容宝于中山，遂有并州，僭称魏，年号天赐。追谥犍烈祖文平皇帝。
现代文：隆安元年，托跋珪在中山打败了慕容宝，于是拥有并州，僭越称魏国，年号为天赐追谧什翼犍为烈祖文乎皇帝。
English: In the first year of the Longan era, Tobaseki defeated Murongbao in Zhongshan, and then had a unified state, which was called Wei, and the year was given to Emperor Wenhu as a gift from heaven.

古文：圭死，谥道武皇帝。子木末立，年号太常，死，谥明元皇帝。
现代文：托跋珪死，谧号为道武皇帝，儿子木末登位，年号为太常，死后，谧号为明元皇帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Tobaku, his posthumous name was Emperor Daowu, and his son Emperor Kimatsu ascended to the throne. His era name was Taejong, and after his death, his posthumous name was Emperor Mingyuan.

古文：子寿，字佛狸，代立，年号太平真君。
现代文：儿子托跋焘，字佛狸接替登位，年号为太平真君。
English: His son, Tokubetsu, succeeded to the throne. His era name was Taiping Zhenjun.

古文：宋元嘉中，伪太子晃与大臣崔氏、寇氏不睦，崔、寇谮之。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，伪太子托跋晃和大臣崔氏、寇氏不和睦，崔氏、寇氏诬陷他。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, the pseudo-prince Tobaku and the ministers Cui and Kou did not get along well, and Cui and Kou framed him.

古文：玄高道人有道术，晃使祈福七日七夜，佛狸梦其祖父并怒，手刃向之曰： 汝何故信谗欲害太子！ 
现代文：玄高道人有道术，托跋晃命他祈祷了七天七夜，佛狸梦见他的祖父和父亲都发怒，手中拿刀对他说： 你为什么相信谗言要加害太子! 
English: He prayed for seven days and seven nights. He dreamed that his grandfather and father were angry, and they held a knife in their hands and said to him, "Why do you believe the rumors about harming the crown prince?"

古文：佛狸惊觉，下伪诏曰： 王者大业，纂承为重，储宫嗣绍，百王旧例。
现代文：佛狸惊醒觉察，下诏书说： 帝王大业，承继是重大的事，储宫继位，是百代帝王的旧例。
English: The Buddha beetle woke up, and the following edict was issued: The emperor is a great cause, succession is an important matter, and the succession of the imperial palace is an old example of hundreds of emperors.

古文：自今已往，事无巨细，必经太子，然后上闻。 
现代文：从今以后，事情无论大小，必须经由太子，然后上报。 
English: From now on, no matter how big or small the matter is, it must go through the crown prince and then be reported.

古文：晃后谋杀佛狸见杀。
现代文：托跋晃后来谋杀佛狸被杀。
English: Toba Akira was later killed for murdering a beaver.

古文：寿死，谥太武皇帝。
现代文：托跋焘死。谧号为太列传弟三十八魏虏武皇帝。
English: Tobaso died. His posthumous name was Tai Li, the younger brother of the 38th Emperor of Wei.

古文：立晃子浚，字乌雷直勤，年号和平。
现代文：立托跋晃的儿子托跋浚，字乌雷掌权，年号为和平。
English: The son of Lituo Bawang, Lituo Bawang, was in power, and the era name was Heping.

古文：追谥晃景穆皇帝。
现代文：追谧托跋晃为景穆皇帝。
English: Emperor Jingmu was crowned after the battle.

古文：浚死，谥文成皇帝。
现代文：托跋浚死，谧号为文成皇帝。
English: Todawase died, and his posthumous name was Emperor Wencheng.

古文：子弘，字万民，立，年号天安。
现代文：儿子托跋弘字万民登位，年号为天安。
English: His son, Tobakuhiro, was enthroned as Emperor of Japan in the year of Cheonan.

古文：景和九年，伪太子宏生，改年为皇兴。
现代文：景和九年，伪太子元宏出生，改年号为皇兴。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of King Jing, the pseudo-prince Motohiro was born, and the year name was changed to Emperor Xing.

古文：什翼圭始都平城，犹逐水草，无城郭，木末始土著居处。
现代文：什翼珪开始建都平城，还是追逐水草游牧，没有城郭，木末登位时开始定居。
English: Shi Yingtao began to build the capital Pingcheng, still chasing the water and grass nomadic, without a castle, and began to settle when the end of the tree ascended the throne.

古文：佛狸破梁州、黄龙，徙其居民，大筑郭邑。
现代文：佛狸攻下梁州、黄龙，迁移那衷的居民，大连城郭。
English: The beetle conquered Liangzhou and Huanglong, displaced the inhabitants of Naxian, and conquered the city of Dalian.

古文：截平城西为宫城，四角起楼，女墙，门不施屋，城又无堑。
现代文：截断平城西部为宫城，四角建楼，城墙上面呈凹凸形，门内不设屋，城墙又没有壕沟。
English: The western section of Heijo is called Miyagi, with four-cornered buildings, a concave-convex shape on the top of the city wall, no houses inside the gate, and no trenches on the city wall.

古文：南门外立二土门，内立庙，开四门，各随方色，凡五庙，一世一间，瓦屋。
现代文：南门外竖两个土门，裹面设庙，开四个门，各随每个方向的色彩，共有五个庙，一代一间，是瓦屋。
English: Outside the south gate, there are two earthen gates, a shrouded face temple, and four open doors, each with a color in each direction. There are a total of five temples, one for each generation. It is a tile house.

古文：其西立太社。
现代文：西面设立太社。
English: Taisha Shrine was established on the west side.

古文：佛狸所居云母等三殿，又立重屋，居其上。
现代文：佛狸所居住的云母等三殿。又建多层的楼，住在上面。
English: Mica, where the beaver lives, is in the third floor. A multi-storey building has been built, and they live above it.

古文：饮食厨名 阿真厨 ，在西，皇后可孙恒出此厨求食。
现代文：进食的厨房叫 阿真厨 ，在西面，皇后可孙总是到这个厨房要求进餐。
English: The kitchen where they eat is called Ah Zhen Cuisine. In the west, Empress Kesun always went to this kitchen to ask for a meal.

古文：初，姚兴以塞外虏赫连勃勃为安北将军，领五部胡，屯大城，姚泓败后，入长安。
现代文：当初，姚兴任命塞外人赫连勃勃为安北将军，统领五个部落的胡人，驻守在大城，姚泓失败后，勃勃进入长安。
English: At first, Yao Xing appointed the foreigner Herlian Gong to be the general of Anbei, commanding the five tribes of Hu people and stationed in the big city. After Yao Xing's defeat, Gong entered Chang'an.

古文：佛狸攻破勃勃子昌，娶勃勃女为皇后。
现代文：佛狸打败勃勃的儿子赫连昌，娶勃勃的女儿为皇后。
English: Beowulf defeats Genki's son, Herenchan, and takes Genki's daughter as his queen.

古文：义熙中，仇池公杨盛表云 索虏勃勃，匈奴正胤 是也。
现代文：义熙年间，仇池公杨盛奏表中所说 索虏勃勃，是匈奴嫡系 便是指这事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, it was said that the sorcerer Sorukurong was a direct descendant of the Xiongnu.

古文：可孙昔妾媵之。
现代文：可孙从前曾把勃勃的女儿当作侍妾。
English: In the past, however, Sun treated his spirited daughter as a concubine.

古文：殿西铠仗库屋四十余间，殿北丝绵布绢库土屋一十余间。
现代文：宫殿西的鳢甲兵器库房有四十多间，宫殿北面的丝绵布绢库房土屋有十多问。
English: There are more than forty armored weapons warehouses west of the palace, and more than ten earthen houses north of the palace.

古文：伪太子宫在城东，亦开四门，瓦屋，四角起楼。
现代文：太子宫在宫城束，也开四个门，是瓦屋，四角建楼台。
English: Prince Consort's palace in Miyagi-zoku also has four doors. It is a brick house with a four-cornered building platform.

古文：妃妾住皆土屋。
现代文：妃子侍妾住的都是上屋。
English: The concubines live in the upper house.

古文：婢使千余人，织绫锦贩卖，酤酒，养猪羊，牧牛马，种菜逐利。
现代文：婢女佣人有一千多人，纺织绫锦贩卖、卖酒、养猪羊、放牧牛马、种菜来谋取利润。
English: There are more than a thousand maidservants, selling textiles and brocades, selling alcohol, raising pigs and sheep, herding cattle and horses, and growing vegetables to make a profit.

古文：太官八十余窖，窖四千斛，半谷半米。
现代文：太官有八十多个地窖，每窖可装四千斛，一半谷一半米。
English: The eunuch has more than eighty cellars, each of which can hold four thousand cormorants, half trough and half rice.

古文：又有悬食瓦屋数十间，置尚方作铁及木。
现代文：又有悬挂食品的瓦屋几十问，放置尚方署所制作的铁器和木器。
English: There are also dozens of shingle houses hanging food, placing ironware and wooden utensils made by the Shangfang Department.

古文：其袍衣，使宫内婢为之。
现代文：长衣服，命宫内婢女缝制。
English: Long clothes were sewn by maids of honour.

古文：伪太子别有仓库。
现代文：太子另外有仓库。
English: The prince also has a warehouse.

古文：其郭城绕宫城南，悉筑为坊，坊开巷。坊大者容四五百家，小者六七十家。
现代文：郭城围绕在宫城的南面，都建筑为街市，每个街市铺道路大的街市容纳四五百家，小的容纳六七十家。
English: Guocheng is surrounded by the south side of Miyagi, and all the buildings are markets. Each market has paved roads and can accommodate four or five hundred large markets and sixty or seventy small ones.

古文：每南坊搜检，以备奸巧。
现代文：经常在南街搜查，以防备奸猾机巧的人。
English: There are frequent searches on South Street to be on the lookout for tricky people.

古文：城西南去白登山七里，于山边别立父祖庙。
现代文：城西南离白登山七里，在山边另外建立父亲祖父的庙。
English: My father's grandfather's temple was also built on the mountain side, seven miles southwest of the city, away from Mount Bai.

古文：城西有祠天坛，立四十九木人，长丈许，白帻、练裙、马尾被，立坛上，常以四月四日杀牛马祭祀，盛陈卤簿，边坛奔驰奏伎为乐。
现代文：城西有祭天坛，竖立四十九个木人，长一丈多，穿戴为白头巾、熟绢裙、马尾披肩，站在祭坛上，常在四月四日杀牛马祭祀，陈列盛大的仪仗，围绕祭坛奔驰演奏歌舞取乐。
English: On the west side of the city, there is an altar of the altar of heaven. Forty-nine wooden figures, each more than a foot tall, are dressed in white headscarves, pleated skirts, and ponytail capes. Standing on the altar, they often slaughter cattle and horses on the fourth day of April, display grand ceremonial battles, and perform songs and dances around the altar.

古文：城西三里，刻石写《五经》及其国记，于邺取石虎文石屋基六十枚，皆长丈余，以充用。
现代文：在城西三里的地方，刻石写《五经》以及国家的历史，从邺搬来石虎有纹理的石块屋基六十枚，都长一丈多，来供石刻之用。
English: In a place three miles west of the city, the "Five Classics" and the history of the country were carved in stone. Sixty stone roof bases with textured stone tigers were brought from Handan. They were more than a meter long and were used for stone carving.

古文：国中呼内左右为 直真 ，外左右为 乌矮真 ，曹局文书吏为 比德真 ，檐衣人为 朴大真 ，带仗人为 胡洛真 ，通事人为 乞万真 ，守门人为 可薄真 ，伪台乘驿贱人为 拂竹真 ，诸州乘驿人为 咸真 ，杀人者为 契害真 ，为主出受辞人为 折溃真 ，贵人作食人为 附真 。
现代文：国内称呼宫内左右的人为 直真 ，外朝左右的人为 乌矮真 ，各宫署管文书的吏员为 比德真 ，负荷衣服的人为 朴大真 ，带兵器的人为 胡洛真 ，通报事务的人为 乞万真 ，守门的人为 可薄真 ，台合所设驿站的卑贱人员为 拂竹真 ，各州驿站的人为 咸真 ，刽子手为 契害真 ，为主人出面接受言辞的人为 折溃真 ，贵人家的厨师为 附真 。
English: People in and around the Imperial Court were called Naozhen in China, those in and around the Outer Court were called Wuzhongzhen, clerks in charge of documents at the various palace departments were called Bi Dezhen, those who loaded clothes were called Pak Dazhen, those with weapons were called Hulozhen, those who reported affairs were called Qian Wanzhen, those who guarded the gate were called Bo Zhen, the lowly staff at the post station set up by the Taigao were called Fu Zhu Zhen, those at the post stations in various states were called Ham Zhen, the executioners were called Ji Xian Zhen, those who came forward to accept the words of the

古文：三公贵人，通谓之 羊真 。
现代文：三公贵人，统统称作 羊真 。
English: The three noblemen are all called Yang Zhen.

古文：佛狸置三公、太宰、尚书令、仆射、侍中，与太子共决国事。
现代文：佛狸设置三公、太宰、尚书令、仆射、侍中，和太子共同决定国家政事。
English: The Buddha set up the three princes, Dazai, Shang Shurong, Pusha, and Jizhong, and the prince to jointly decide on national affairs.

古文：殿中尚书知殿内兵马仓库，乐部尚书知伎乐及角史伍柏，驾部尚书知牛马驴骡，南部尚书知南边州郡，北部尚书知北边州郡。
现代文：殿中尚书掌管殿内的兵马仓库，乐部尚书掌管歌舞音乐以及军乐人员，驾部尚书掌管牛马驴骡，南部尚书掌管南方边境州郡，北部尚书掌管北方边境州郡。
English: The General Secretary of the Central Military Commission is in charge of the storehouse of soldiers and horses in the palace, the General Secretary of the Central Military Commission is in charge of the singing and dancing music and the military music personnel, the General Secretary of the Central Military Commission is in charge of the oxen, horses and donkeys, the General Secretary of the Southern Military Commission is in charge of the southern border counties, and the General Secretary of the Northern Military Commission is in charge of the northern border counties.

古文：又有俟勤地何，比尚书；莫堤，比刺史；郁若，比二千石；受别官比诸侯。
现代文：又有俟勤地何，相当于尚书；莫堤，相当于刺史；郁若，相当于二千石；外族人受任其他宫职相当于诸侯。
English: There are also 勤地何, which is equivalent to Shangshu; Motsi, which is equivalent to Shishi; Ikuro, which is equivalent to two thousand koku; foreigners who are appointed to other palace posts are equivalent to princes.

古文：诸曹府有仓库，悉置比官，皆使通虏、汉语，以为传驿。
现代文：各官署有仓库，都设置比官，都使通晓夷人语言和汉语，以便翻译。
English: All government departments have warehouses, have set up bishops, and have made themselves fluent in both the barbarian language and Chinese for the purpose of translation.

古文：兰台置中丞御史，知城内事。
现代文：兰台设置中丞御史，掌管城内事务。
English: The Landai set up the Chujo-goshi, which was in charge of affairs within the city.

古文：又置九豆和官，宫城三里内民户籍不属诸军戍者，悉属之。
现代文：又设置九豆和官，宫城三里内民众的户籍不隶属各军事据点的，都隶属于他。
English: In addition, a nine-bean warlord was set up, and the household registration of the people within three miles of Miyagi did not belong to the military strongholds, but all belonged to him.

古文：其车服，有大小辇，皆五层，下施四轮，三二百人牵之，四施絙索，备倾倒。
现代文：车马服饰，有大车小车，都是五层，下设四个轮子，有二三百入牵引，四周设有粗索，防备跌倒。
English: The chariot and horse costumes, with carts and carriages, are all five-storey, with four wheels underneath, with two or three hundred in traction, surrounded by ropes to prevent falls.

古文：轺车建龙旗，尚黑。
现代文：辊车竖龙旗，崇尚黑色。
English: The car hoisted the dragon flag, advocating black.

古文：妃后则施杂彩宪，无幢络。
现代文：妃子皇后则罩上各种彩色的帐幔，没有旌旗上下垂的网状物。
English: On the other hand, the queen of the concubines is covered with various colored curtains, and there is no net hanging from the flagpole.

古文：太后出，则妇女著铠骑马近辇左右。虏主及后妃常行，乘银镂羊车，不施帷幔，皆偏坐垂脚辕中，在殿上亦跂据。
现代文：太后出行，妇女就穿上镗甲骑着马在车左右保护他们的君丰和皇后妃子经常出行，乘坐银镂羊车，不设帐幔，都偏坐在一边把脚垂在车辕中；在殿堂上，也垂脚而坐。
English: When the empress dowager traveled, the women put on armor and rode around the carriage to protect them. The prince and princess often traveled in a silver-plated carriage without a curtain, sitting on one side with their feet dangling in the carriage; they also sat with their feet dangling in the hall.

古文：正殿施流苏帐，金博山，龙凤朱漆画屏风，织成幌。
现代文：正殿布置五彩帐，金博山，龙凤朱漆画屏风，织成帷幔座位上铺毛织的垫具。
English: The main hall is decorated with a five-colored curtain, Jinbo Mountain, dragon and phoenix red lacquer screen, woven into curtains, and woolen cushions on the seats.

古文：坐施氍毹褥。前施金香炉，琉璃钵，金碗，盛杂食器。设客长盘一尺，御馔圆盘广一丈。
现代文：面前摆上金香炉，琉璃钵，金碗，陈列各种食器。设置客人长盘一尺，君主食用的圆盘周围一丈。
English: A gold incense burner, a glazed urn, a gold bowl, and a variety of tableware are displayed in front of him. A foot-long dish for guests is set up, and a round dish used by the monarch is around him.

古文：为四轮车，元会日六七十人牵上殿。
现代文：造四轮车，元旦朝会的日子，六七十人拉上殿。
English: On the day of the New Year's Day morning meeting, sixty or seventy people pulled up to the hall.

古文：蜡日逐除，岁尽，城门磔雄鸡，苇索桃梗，如汉仪。
现代文：腊月击鼓驱疫，除夕，城门杀公鸡，用蒲苇编绳索桃木雕木偶，如同汉人的仪式。
English: The waxing moon beating a drum to drive away the plague, New Year's Eve, the city gate killing a rooster, and using a pooh to weave a rope to carve a peach wood puppet, are just like the rituals of the Han people.

古文：自佛狸至万民，世增雕饰。
现代文：自佛狸到万民，逐代增加雕饰。
English: From the Buddha to the people, the carvings have increased from generation to generation.

古文：正殿西筑土台，谓之白楼。
现代文：正殿以西建筑土台，称为白楼。
English: The building foundation to the west of the main hall is called the White Building.

古文：万民禅位后，常游观其上。
现代文：万民禅让帝位后，经常在台上游览。
English: After Emperor Wanming abdicated, he often visited the stage.

古文：台南又有伺星楼。
现代文：台南面有伺星楼。
English: On the south side of Tainan, there is a star-gazing tower.

古文：正殿西又有祠屋，琉璃为瓦。宫门稍覆以屋，犹不知为重楼。
现代文：正殿的西面又有祭祀的屋，用琉璃做瓦，宫门逐渐用屋覆盖，但还不知做多层的楼。
English: On the west side of the main hall, there is also a sacrificial building, made of glazed tiles, and the palace gate is gradually covered with a building, but it is not yet known to be a multi-storey building.

古文：并设削泥采，画金刚力士。
现代文：都设置泥塑，画上金刚力士。
English: They were all set up with mud sculptures and painted with a diamond wrestler.

古文：胡俗尚水，又规画黑龙相盘绕，以为厌胜。
现代文：胡人习俗崇尚水，又筹划画上黑龙互相盘绕，来压服灾殃。
English: Hu people's customs advocate water, and they also plan to draw black dragons coiling around each other to overcome disasters.

古文：泰始五年，万民禅位子宏，自称太上皇。
现代文：泰始五年，万民惮让帝位给儿子元宏，自称太上皇。
English: In the first five years of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the people of the nation gave the imperial throne to his son, Yuanhong, who claimed to be the last emperor.

古文：宏立，号延兴元年。
现代文：元宏登位，称延兴元年。
English: Yuan Hong ascended to the throne, calling the first year of Yanxing.

古文：至六年，万民死，谥献文皇帝。改号为承明元年，是岁元徽四年也。
现代文：到六年，万民死，谧号为献文皇帝改年号为承明元年，这一年是元徽四年。
English: By the sixth year, all the people had died, and the name of the year was changed to the first year of the Ming Dynasty. This year was the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：祖母冯氏，黄龙人，助治国事。初，佛狸母是汉人，为木末所杀，佛狸以乳母为太后。自此以来，太子立，辄诛其母。
现代文：元宏的祖母冯氏，黄龙人，协助治理国家事务、当初，佛狸的母亲是汉族人，被木末杀害，佛狸以乳母为太后，从那时以来，太子确立，就杀他的母亲。
English: Yuanhong's grandmother, Ms. Feng, a Yellow Dragon, assisted in the governance of state affairs. At first, the mother of the Beaver was a Han Chinese and was killed with wood. The Beaver took the nanny as the empress dowager. Since then, the prince established that he would kill his mother.

古文：一云冯氏本江都人，佛狸元嘉二十七年南侵，略得冯氏，浚以为妾，独得全焉。
现代文：一说冯氏本来是江都人，佛狸在元嘉二十七年向南侵伐，掳到冯氏，托跋浚把她作为侍妾，独自得以保全。
English: It is said that Ms. Feng was originally from Jiangdu. In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, the beaver invaded the south and captured Ms. Feng. He kept her as his concubine and was able to keep her safe.

古文：明年丁巳岁，改号太和。
现代文：第二年是丁巳年，改年号为太和。
English: The following year was the Year of the Snake, and the name of the year was changed to Taihe.

古文：宋明帝末年，始与虏和好。
现代文：宋明帝末年，开始同魏国和好。
English: In the last years of the Song and Ming Dynasties, he began to make peace with the Wei Dynasty.

古文：元徽升明之世，虏使岁通。
现代文：元徽升明年间，魏国使者每年前来。
English: Yuan Hui ascended to the throne in the next year, and the emissaries of the State of Wei came every year.

古文：建元元年，伪太和三年也。
现代文：建元元年，是魏国太和三年。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, it was the third year of Taihe in Wei.

古文：宏闻太祖受禅，其冬，发众遣丹阳王刘昶为太师，寇司、豫二州。
现代文：元宏听说太祖接受惮让，这年冬天，调发民众派遣丹阳王刘昶为太师，侵犯司、豫二州。
English: Yuanhong heard that the great-grandfather accepted the offer, and this winter, he ordered the people to send Danyang King Liu Bei to be the great-grandfather, invading Shishi and Henan two states.

古文：明年，诏遣众军北讨。
现代文：次年，太祖诏令派遣各军向北讨伐。
English: The following year, Emperor Taizu ordered all the armies to march north.

古文：宏遣大将郁豆眷、騕长命攻寿阳及钟离，为豫州刺史垣崇祖、右将军周盘龙、徐州刺史崔文仲等所破。
现代文：元宏又派遣大将郁豆眷、睱长命攻打寿阳和钟离，被豫州刺史垣崇祖、右将军周盘龙、徐少刺史崔文仲等人打败。
English: Yuanhong also dispatched the generals Yu Douzhong and Zou Longsheng to attack Shouyang and Zhongli, and they were defeated by the Yuzhou general Shigaki Chongzu, the right-wing general Zhou Panlong, and the Xu Shaoshan general Shi Cui Wenzhong.

古文：宏又遣伪南部尚书托跋等向司州，分兵出兖、青界，十万众围朐山，戍主玄元度婴城固守。
现代文：元宏又派遣所属南部尚书托跋等人攻司州，分兵到兖州、青州境内，以十万军队包围朐山，戍守头领玄元度环城固守。
English: Yuanhong also dispatched his Southern Shangshutoba and others to attack Shizhu, and sent troops to Bozhou and Qingzhou to encircle Shaoshan with 100,000 troops, while the garrison leader, Xuan Yuandu, kept a tight grip on the city.

古文：青冀二州刺史卢绍之遣子奂领兵助之。
现代文：青、冀二州刺史卢绍之派遣儿子卢奂率领兵士援助他。
English: Lu Xun, the son of Lu Shao, the governor of Qing and Hebei Provinces, sent soldiers to help him.

古文：城中无食，绍之出顿州南石头亭，隔海运粮柴供给城内。
现代文：城中没有粮食，绍之出兵驻扎在州南的石头亭，隔海运送粮食柴禾供给城内。
English: There was no grain in the city, so Shao sent troops to be stationed in the southern part of the state, transporting grain and firewood across the sea to supply the city.

古文：虏围断海道，缘岸攻城，会潮水大至，虏褭溺，元度出兵奋击，大破之。
现代文：魏军包围断绝海上通道，缘岸攻打城池，遇潮水大涨，魏军遭淹没，元度出兵反击，大败魏军。
English: The Wei army encircled and cut off the sea passage, attacked the city from the shore, and when the tide rose, the Wei army was flooded. The Yuan Dynasty sent troops to fight back and defeated the Wei army.

古文：台遣军主崔灵建、杨法持、房灵民万余人从淮入海，船舰至夜各举两火，虏众望见，谓是南军大至，一时奔退。
现代文：朝廷派遣军主崔灵建、杨法持、房灵民率领一万多人从淮水入海，船舰到夜晚各举两个火把，魏军望见，以为是南方军队大规模到来，一时之间逃跑撤退。
English: The imperial court dispatched more than ten thousand people from Huai Shui to the sea, led by the military leaders Cui Lingjian, Yang Fajing, and Fang Lingmin, and the ships held two torches at night. The Wei army saw it and thought it was a large-scale arrival of the southern army, and fled and retreated for a while.

古文：初，元度自云臂上有封侯志，宋世以示世祖，时世祖在东宫，书与元度曰： 努力成臂上之相也。 
现代文：当初，元度自己说臂上有封侯的痣，宋世显示给世祖，这时世祖在束宫，写信给元度说： 努力达到臂上的吉相。 
English: At first, Yuan Tuo himself said that there was a seal of a feudal lord on his arm, and Song Shi showed it to Shizu. At that time, Shizu was at the Palace of the Grand Dukes and wrote to Yuan Tuo, saying, "Work hard to achieve the auspicious appearance on your arm."

古文：虏退，上议加封爵，元度归功于绍之，绍之又让，故并见寝。上乃擢绍之为黄门郎。郁州呼石头亭为平虏亭。
现代文：魏军撤退，皇帝商议加授封爵，元度把功劳归于绍之，绍之又推让，所以都未获封，皇帝于足提拔绍之为黄门郎，郁州人把石头亭称作平虏亭。
English: The Wei army retreated, the emperor deliberated on awarding a knighthood, the Yuan Dynasty attributed the credit to Shao, and Shao gave in, so they were not awarded. The emperor promoted Shao to Huangmenlang, and the people of Yuzhou called the stone pavilion Pingrui Pavilion.

古文：绍之字子绪，范阳人，自云卢谌玄孙。宋大明中，预攻广陵，勋上，绍之拔迹自投，上以为州治中，受心腹之任。
现代文：绍之字子绪，范阳人，自称是卢谌的玄孙宋朝大明年间，参与攻打广陵，功绩呈上，绍之超越突出并且自荐，皇帝任命他为州治中，得到心腹重用。
English: Shao Zhi Zixu, Fan Yang people, claimed to be the great-great-grandson of Lu Yao during the Song Dynasty, participated in the attack on Guangling, and his achievements were presented. Shao Zhi was outstanding and recommended himself. The emperor appointed him as a provincial governor, and he was used as a confidant.

古文：官至光禄大夫。
现代文：官至光禄大夫。
English: His official title is Doctor Guanglu.

古文：永明八年卒。
现代文：永明八年，去世。
English: Yongming eight years, passed away.

古文：三年，领军将军李安民、左军将军孙文显与虏军战于淮阳，大败之。初，虏寇至，缘淮驱略，江北居民犹惩佛狸时事，皆惊走，不可禁止。
现代文：三年，领军将军李安民、左军将军孙文显同魏军在淮阳交战，大败他们起初，魏军到来，沿着淮水驱驰掳掠，江北的居民还记得佛狸南侵时的惩戒，都惊扰逃跑，不能禁止。
English: Three years ago, the leading army general Li Anmin and the left army general Sun Wenxian fought with the Wei army in Huaiyang and defeated them. At first, the Wei army arrived and drove and plundered along Huai Shui. The residents of the northern part of the river still remember the punishment of the beaver when it invaded the south. They all panicked and fled, and could not be banned.

古文：乃于梁山置一军，南置三军，慈姥置一军，洌州置二军，三山置二军，白沙洲置一军，蔡州置五军，长芦置三军，菰浦置二军，徐浦置一军，内外悉班阶赏，以示威刑。
现代文：于是在梁山设置二军，南面设置三军，慈姥设置一军，洌州设置二军，三山设置二军，白沙洲设置一军，蔡州设置五军，长芦设置三草，菰浦设置二军，徐浦设置一军，内外都颁授品级赏赐，来显示威严的刑赏。
English: Therefore, the Second Army was set up in Liangshan, the Third Army was set up in the south, the First Army was set up in Cibao, the Second Army was set up in Zhangzhou, the Second Army was set up in Sanshan, the Second Army was set up in Baishazhou, the Fifth Army was set up in Caizhou, the Second Army was set up in Sancao, the Second Army was set up in Jianpu, and the First Army was set up in Xupu. Both at home and abroad, rewards were awarded to show the majesty of the punishment.

古文：伪昌黎王冯莎向司州，荒人桓天生说莎云： 诸蛮皆响应。 
现代文：魏昌黎王冯莎攻向司州，边境的人桓天生游说冯莎说： 各蛮族都会响应。 
English: Feng Shao, the king of Wei, Chang and Li, attacked Sizhou. People on the border naturally lobbied Feng Shao, saying: All barbarians will respond.

古文：莎至，蛮竟不动。
现代文：冯莎到来，蛮人却不出动。
English: When Feng Sha arrived, the savage did not move.

古文：莎大怒，于淮边猎而去。
现代文：冯莎大怒，在淮水边狩猎后离去。
English: Feng Sha flew into a rage and left after hunting near Huai Shui.

古文：及寿春摧败，朐山不拔，虏主出定州，大治道路。声欲南行，不敢进。
现代文：等到寿春摧毁，朐山不能攻下，魏君主出行到定州，大举修理道路，扬言要向南行动，但不敢前进。
English: When Shouchun was destroyed and Lushan could not be conquered, the Wei monarch traveled to Dingzhou, repaired the road in a big way, and threatened to move south, but did not dare to advance.

古文：乃与伪梁郡王计曰： 兵出彭、泗间，无复斗志，要当一两战得还归。 
现代文：于是和所属梁郡王商议说： 军队出动到彭城、泗水之间，不再有斗志，应当一两次交战得胜后返回。 
English: Therefore, he discussed with his subordinate Liang Guo Wang and said: The army has been sent to Pengcheng and Surabaya, there is no more fighting spirit, and they should return after one or two battles.

古文：既于淮阳被破，一时奔走。
现代文：既在淮阳被打败，一时之间便逃走。
English: After being defeated in Huaiyang, he fled in a moment.

古文：青、徐间赴义民，先是或抄虏运车，更相杀掠，往往得南归者数千家。
现代文：青州、徐州中起义的民众，在这之前有的抄掠魏军运输车辆，这时进一步与魏军相互攻杀，往往有几千家得以回到南方。
English: The people of Qingzhou and Xuzhou revolted in the middle of the day. Before this, some of them had plundered the transport vehicles of the Wei army. At this time, they further attacked and killed each other with the Wei army. Often, several thousand families were able to return to the south.

古文：上未遑外略，以虏既摧破，且欲示以威怀，遣后军参军车僧朗北使。
现代文：皇帝顾不上对外拓展，因魏军已被打败，而且想显示军威恩德，派遣后军参军车僧朗出使北方。
English: The emperor could not expand abroad, because the Wei army had been defeated, and he wanted to show his military prowess by sending his second-in-command, Che Zenglang, to the north.

古文：虏问僧朗曰： 齐辅宋日浅，何故便登天位？ 
现代文：魏人间： 齐国辅佐宋国的时间短，为什么便登上帝位? 
English: Wei Ren Zi: Qi Guo Fu Zi Song Guo's time was short, why did he ascend to the throne?

古文：僧朗曰： 虞、夏登庸，亲当革禅；魏、晋匡辅，贻厥子孙。
现代文：僧朗说： 虞舜、夏禹登位，身逢改朝禅让；魏、晋辅佐，恩德留传后人。
English: Monk Lang said, "Yu Yao and Xia Yu ascended the throne, but were forced to abdicate; Wei and Jin Zuo were the successors, and Nderu was left behind.

古文：岂二圣促促于天位，两贤谦虚以独善？
现代文：这哪裹是二位圣人急切获取帝位，两位贤人谦虚而独善其身?
English: Are these two saints eager to obtain the throne, two wise men humble and self-sufficient?

古文：时宜各异，岂得一揆？
现代文：形势各不相同，哪能用一个标准?
English: Situations vary, so how can one standard be used?

古文：苟曰事宜，故屈己应物。 
现代文：如果合于事宜，就委屈自己顺应众人。 
English: If it suits your purpose, you can bend over backwards to accommodate everyone.

古文：虏又问： 齐主悉有何功业？ 
现代文：魏人又问： 齐主都有什么功劳业绩? 
English: Wei Ren also asked: What are the merits and achievements of Qi Lord?

古文：僧朗曰： 主上圣性宽仁，天识弘远。少为宋文皇所器遇，入参禁旅。
现代文：僧朗说： 主上禀性宽厚仁慈，见识远大、年轻时为宋文皇帝所器重，入宫掌管禁卫军。
English: Monk Lang said: The Lord is benevolent, kind, and far-sighted. When he was young, he was the favorite of Emperor Songwen. When he entered the palace, he was in charge of the imperial guard.

古文：泰始之初，四方寇叛，东平刘子房、张淹，北讨薛索儿，兼掌军国，豫司顾命。
现代文：泰始初年，四方作乱反叛，上上向东平定刘子房、张淹，向北讨伐薛索儿，兼管军队国家大事，参与辅佐幼主。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the four quarters revolted, and Liu Zifang and Zhang Dun were subdued in the east, and Xue Sol was subdued in the north. He was also in charge of the national affairs of the army and participated in assisting the young master.

古文：宋桂阳、建平二王阻兵内侮，一麾殄灭。
现代文：宋桂阳、建平二王拥兵攻向京城，主上举将他们消灭。
English: The two kings Song Guiyang and Jianping led their troops to attack the capital, and they were annihilated.

古文：苍梧王反道败德，有过桀、纣，远遵伊、霍，行废立之事。
现代文：苍梧王违背道德，超过夏桀、商纣，主上远遵伊尹、霍光的做法，实行废立的事。
English: Cangwu Wang violated morality, exceeded Xia Yao and Shang Yao, and mainly followed the practice of Yi Yin and Huo Guang to implement the abolition of the establishment.

古文：袁粲、刘秉、沈攸之同恶相济，又秉旄杖钺，大定凶党。
现代文：袁粲、刘秉、沈攸之作恶的人互相帮忙，主上又举旌旗杖斧铁，大力平定凶恶的党羽。
English: The evil-doers of Yuan Qi, Liu Bing, and Shen You helped each other. The Lord also raised the banner, the staff, and the axe to vigorously subdue the evil party members.

古文：戮力佐时，四十余载，经纶夷险，十五六年，此功此德，可谓物无异议。 
现代文：努力辅佐时政，四十多年，在艰难险阻中治理国家，十五六年，此功此德，可以说是人们没有不同意见。 
English: Efforts to assist the current government, more than forty years, to govern the country in the face of difficulties and obstacles, 156 years, this achievement, this virtue, it can be said that people do not have different opinions.

古文：虏又问： 南国无复齐土，何故封齐？ 
现代文：魏人又问： 南方没有齐地，为什么封为齐国? 
English: Wei people also asked: the south does not have a unified territory, why is it called a unified country?

古文：僧朗曰： 营丘表海，实为大国。
现代文：僧朗说： 营丘靠近海边，确实是大国。
English: The monk said: Yingqiu is close to the sea, it is indeed a big country.

古文：宋朝光启土宇，谓是吕尚先封。
现代文：宋朝开拓境土，认为是吕尚先前所封。
English: The Song Dynasty explored the territory, which is believed to have been previously sealed by Lushang.

古文：今淮海之间，自有青、齐，非无地也。 
现代文：现在淮水海洋之间，本来有青州、齐州，不是没有齐地。 
English: Now, between Huai Shui and the ocean, there were originally Qingzhou and Qizhou, but not without Qizhou.

古文：又问： 苍梧何故遂加斩戮？ 
现代文：魏人又问： 苍梧王为什么竞遭杀害? 
English: Wei people also asked: Why was Cangwu Wang killed?

古文：僧朗曰： 苍梧暴虐，书契未闻，武王斩纣，悬之黄钺，共是所闻，何伤于义？ 
现代文：僧朗说： 苍梧王暴虐无道，有史书记载以来没有听说过，武王斩杀商纣王，悬挂在黄钝，是众所周知的，哪裹损伤道义? 
English: Monk Lang said: Cangwu Wang's tyrannical and senseless behavior has not been heard of since it was recorded in historical records. King Wu's beheading of Shangwu Wang and hanging him in Huangpu is well known. What kind of damage to morality?

古文：升明中，北使殷灵诞、苟昭先在虏，闻太祖登极，灵诞谓虏典客曰： 宋魏通好，忧患是同。
现代文：升明年间，前后北方的使者殷灵诞、苟昭先在魏国，听说太祖登位，灵诞对魏国的典客说： 宋魏交往友好，忧患共同承受。
English: Between the years of the Song and the Wei dynasties, the messengers of the north, Yin Lingxiao and Guo Zhao, were first in Wei. Hearing that the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, Lingxiao said to the guests of Wei: Song and Wei are friendly to each other, and they will jointly bear the sorrow.

古文：宋今灭亡，魏不相救，何用和亲？ 
现代文：宋圃现在灭亡，魏国不相救援，要议和结亲做什么? 
English: Now that the Song Dynasty has perished, and the Wei Dynasty has not come to the rescue, what are we to do?

古文：及虏寇豫州，灵诞因请为刘昶司马，不获。僧朗至北，虏置之灵诞下，僧朗立席言曰： 灵诞昔是宋使，今成齐民。
现代文：等到魏国侵犯豫州，灵诞因之请求担任刘昶的司马，没被准许僧朗到北方，魏国把他安排在灵诞的下位，僧朗站在席位上说： 灵诞从前是宋国使者，现在成为齐国平民。
English: When Wei invaded Yuzhou, Ling Xizhe requested to serve as Liu Xuan's Sima, but he was not allowed to go to the north. Wei placed him in Ling Xizhe's subordinate position, and the monk stood on the seat and said: Ling Xizhe was once an envoy of the Song Dynasty, but now he has become a commoner of Qi.

古文：实希魏主以礼见处。 
现代文：实在希望魏主按礼节接待。 
English: I really hope that Lord Wei will receive us with proper etiquette.

古文：灵诞交言，遂相忿詈，调虏曰： 使臣不能立节本朝，诚自惭恨。 
现代文：灵诞争论，竞至互相怨恨责骂，嘲笑魏人说： 使臣不能在本朝树立节操，实在自己惭愧遗憾。 
English: During the debate on the anniversary of Lingzhu's birth, the contest turned into mutual resentment and scolding, and the Wei people said with derision: The envoys cannot establish discipline in this dynasty, and they are really ashamed and regretful.

古文：刘昶赂客解奉君于会刺杀僧朗，虏即收奉君诛之，殡敛僧朗，送丧随灵诞等南归，厚加赠赙。
现代文：刘昶贿赂客人解奉君在会见时刺杀了僧朗，魏人当即逮捕奉君杀了他，收殓僧朗，送丧车随灵诞等人回到南方，厚重地加以赠送。
English: Liu Bei bribed the guests to explain that Fengjun had assassinated the monk Lang in the meeting, Wei people immediately arrested Fengjun and killed him, collected the monk Lang, sent the funeral car back to the south with the spirit of Christmas and others, and presented it generously.

古文：世祖践阼，昭先具以启闻，灵诞下狱死，赠僧朗散骑侍郎。
现代文：世祖登位，昭先将情况奏报，灵诞被捕入狱而死，追赠僧朗为散骑侍郎。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, Zhao first reported the situation, Ling Xing was arrested and died in prison, and posthumously awarded the monk Lang as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：永明元年冬，遣骁骑将军刘缵、前军将军张谟使虏。明年冬，虏使李道固报聘，世祖于玄武湖水步军讲武，登龙舟引见之。
现代文：永明元年冬，派遣骁骑将军割缆、前军将军张谟出使魏国次年冬，魏国使者李道固报答回访，世祖在玄武湖指挥水军步兵练兵，登上龙舟接见他。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Yongming era, he dispatched the cavalry general to cut the cable, and the former army general Zhang Moo sent an envoy to Wei in the winter of the following year. Li Daogu, the envoy of Wei, paid a return visit. The ancestor commanded the naval infantry training soldiers in the Xuanwu Lake and boarded the dragon boat to meet him.

古文：自此岁使往来，疆场无事。
现代文：自此以后每年使者来来往往，边境没有战争。
English: Since then, envoys have come and gone every year, and there has been no war on the border.

古文：三年，初令邻里党各置一长，五家为邻，五邻为里，五里为党。
现代文：三年，魏国开始下令邻、里、党各设一个头领，五家为一邻，五邻为一里，五里为一党。
English: In the third year, the State of Wei began to order the establishment of a leader for each neighborhood, village, and party, five families for one neighborhood, five neighbors for one mile, and five miles for one party.

古文：四年，造户籍。分置州郡，雍州、凉州、秦州、沙州、泾州、华州、岐州、河州、西华州、宁州、陕州、洛州、荆州、郢州、北豫州、东荆州、南豫州、西兖州、东兖州、南徐州、东徐州、青州、齐州、济州二十五州在河南；相州、怀州、汾州、东雍州、肆州、定州、瀛州、朔州、并州、冀州、幽州、平州、司州十三州在河北。凡分魏、晋旧司、豫、青、兖、冀、并、幽、秦、雍、凉十州地，及宋所失淮北为三十八州矣。
现代文：四年，编制户籍划分设置州郡，雍州、凉州、秦州、沙州、泾州、华州、岐州、河州、西华州、宁州、陕州、洛州、荆州、郢州、北豫州、东荆州、南豫州、西兖州、束兖州、南徐州、东徐州、青州、齐州、济州二十五个州在黄河以南；相州、怀州、汾州、柬雍州、肆州、定州、瀛州、朔州、并州、冀州、幽州、平州、司州十三个州在黄河以北共分割魏、晋旧曰的司、豫、青、充、冀、并、幽、秦、雍、凉十州地域，以及宋国所丧失的淮北为三十八个州。
English: In the fourth year, the establishment of the household registration division was divided into prefectures and counties. Twenty-five prefectures including Yongzhou, Liangzhou, Qinzhou, Shazhou, Quzhou, Huazhou, Qizhou, Hezhou, West Huazhou, Ningzhou, Shaanxi, Luozhou, Jingzhou, Quanzhou, North Yuzhou, East Jingzhou, South Yuzhou, West Quanzhou, Sokou, South Xuzhou, East Xuzhou, Qingzhou, Qizhou, and Jeju are located south of the Yellow River; and thirteen prefectures including Xiangzhou, Huizhou, Quanzhou,

古文：明年，边人桓天生作乱，虏遣步骑万余人助之，至比阳，为征虏将军戴僧静等所破。
现代文：第二年，边境上的人桓天生作乱，魏国派遣步兵骑兵一万多人协助他，到达比阳，被征虏将军戴僧静等打败。
English: In the second year, the people on the border Huan Tian Rong made a riot, Wei dispatched more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry to assist him, arrived in Biyang, and was defeated by the conscript general Dai Sang Jing.

古文：荒人胡丘生起义悬瓠，为虏所击，战败南奔。
现代文：边地民众翅丘生在墨趣发动义军，被魏军打败，战败后向南逃奔。
English: The people of Fengqiu, a border area, launched a rebel army in the Ming Dynasty, were defeated by the Wei army, and fled to the south after the defeat.

古文：伪安南将军辽东公、平南将军上谷公又攻舞阴，舞阴戍主辅国将军殷公愍拒破之。
现代文：魏安南将军辽东公、干南将军上谷公又攻打舞阴，舞阴戍守头领辅国将军殷公愍抵御打败了他们。
English: The Southern Wei general Liaodong Gong and the Southern Gansu general Shanggu Gong attacked and defeated the Muyin, and the Muyin's garrison leader Fu Guo's general Yin Gongyi resisted and defeated them.

古文：六年，虏又遣众助桓天生，与辅国将军曹虎战，大败于隔城。
现代文：六年，魏国又派遣军队援助桓天生，和辅国将军萱虚交战，在隔城大败。
English: In the sixth year, the State of Wei sent troops to aid Huan Tian Sheng, and fought against the general of the Auxiliary State, Zou Qiao, and suffered a crushing defeat in the next city.

古文：至七年，遣使邢产、侯灵绍复通好。
现代文：到七年，魏国派遣使者邢产、侯灵绍重新通问和好。
English: In the seventh year, Wei dispatched envoys Xizang and Hou Lingshao to renew the peace talks.

古文：先是刘缵再使虏，太后冯氏悦而亲之。
现代文：在这之前刘缵再度出使魏国，太后冯氏喜欢而亲近他。
English: Prior to this, Liu Bei once again sent an envoy to Wei, and the Empress Dowager Feng liked him and became close to him.

古文：冯氏有计略，作《皇诰》十八篇，伪左仆射李思冲称史臣注解。
现代文：冯氏有计策谋略，撰《皇诰》十八篇，魏左仆射李思冲自称史臣加以注解。
English: Feng's strategy was to write 18 "Imperial Decrees" and Wei's right-hand man Li Sichong, who called himself a historian, would annotate them.

古文：是岁，冯氏死。
现代文：这年，巡死去。
English: This year, 巡 passed away.

古文：八年，世祖还隔城所俘获二千余人。
现代文：八年，世但归还匝球所俘获的二千多人。
English: Eight years later, the world returned more than two thousand people captured by the Korean War.

古文：佛狸已来，稍僭华典，胡风国俗，杂相揉乱。宏知谈义，解属文，轻果有远略。
现代文：佛狸以来，逐渐僭用华夏典章，胡人风尚华夏习俗，混杂揉合元宏能了解谈论义理，懂得作文章，轻捷果敢有远大的谋略。
English: Since the time of the Buddha, people have gradually mixed and mingled the Chinese ceremonial, the Chinese customs and the Chinese customs of the Hu people. Yuan Hong can understand and talk about the principles of righteousness, know how to write articles, and have a bold strategy.

古文：游河北至比干墓，作《吊比干文》云： 脱非武发，封墓谁因？
现代文：巡游河北到比王墓前，撰《吊比干文》说： 如果不是武发，靠谁增土于墓?
English: He toured Hebei to the tomb of King Bi, and wrote "Hanging Bi Gan" saying: If it is not Wu Fa, who will increase the soil in the tomb?

古文：鸣呼介士，胡不我臣！ 
现代文：呜呼耿直之士，何不臣服于我! 
English: Why don't you submit to me?

古文：宏以己巳岁立圆丘、方泽，置三夫人、九嫔。
现代文：五塞在己巳年设立圆丘、方泽，设置三位夫人、九位妃嫔。
English: In the 5th year of the 7th month of the 5th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9

古文：平城南有干水，出定襄界，流入海，去城五十里，世号为索干都。
现代文：芒越南面有一条王水，经过定襄境内，流入大海，离城五十里，世人称作索干都。
English: On the south side of Mengcheng, there is a king's river, which flows through the territory of Dingxiang and flows into the sea, fifty miles away from the city. The world is called Sogangdu.

古文：土气寒凝，风砂恒起，六月雨雪。
现代文：地气寒冷，总是风沙吹动，六月降雪。
English: The climate is cold, the wind and sand are always blowing, and it snows in June.

古文：议迁都洛京。
现代文：商议迁都。
English: Negotiations on moving the capital have ended.

古文：九年，遣使李道固、蒋少游报使。
现代文：九年，差困派遣使者李道固、蒋少游回访。
English: In the ninth year, Li Daogu and Jiang Shaoyou, emissaries sent by the poor, returned to visit.

古文：少游有机巧，密令观京师宫殿楷式。
现代文：尘游机智灵巧，秘密派人观察京城宫殿的样式。
English: With a deft wit, Dust Wanderer secretly sent someone to observe the style of the palace in the capital.

古文：清河崔元祖启世祖曰 少游，臣之外甥，特有公输之思。
现代文：遣回人崔元祖启奏世但说： 尘游是臣下的外甥，特别有公鲍逛的才智。
English: The repatriated person, Cui Yuanzu, said: Chen You is the nephew of a vassal, and he is especially talented in public entertainment.

古文：宋世陷虏，处以大匠之官。
现代文：塞世陷落于敌寇手中，委任大匠的官职。
English: When Sesze fell into the hands of the invaders, he was appointed to the post of master craftsman.

古文：今为副使，必欲模范宫阙。
现代文：现在任副使，必定会仿造宫殿。
English: Now he is a vice-envoy, he will surely build a replica palace.

古文：岂可令毡乡之鄙，取象天宫？
现代文：怎可让生产毛毡的边地，模仿建造皇宫?
English: How can the production of felt be allowed to mimic the construction of a royal palace?

古文：臣谓且留少游，令使主反命。 
现代文：臣下以为可姑且留下少游，命主要使者回去覆命。 
English: His vassals thought that they could leave Shao Yu alone and ordered the main messenger to go back and ask for his life.

古文：世祖以非和通意，不许。
现代文：世祖以为不合友好交往的意闽，不准许。
English: The patriarch thought it was not in keeping with the spirit of friendly interaction and did not allow it.

古文：少游，安乐人。
现代文：少游，是安乐人。
English: Those who travel less are happier people.

古文：虏宫室制度，皆从其出。
现代文：魏国的宫室制度，都是由他制定。
English: The imperial household system in Wei was established by him.

古文：初，佛狸讨羯胡于长安，杀道人且尽。
现代文：当初，佛狸在长安讨伐羯胡，把僧人差不多杀光了。
English: At the beginning, the chinchillas fought with the mongoose in Chang'an and almost killed all the monks.

古文：及元嘉南寇，获道人，以铁笼盛之。
现代文：等到元嘉年问向南侵犯，获取僧人，用铁笼关住他们。
English: Wait until the Yuan Dynasty invades the south, captures the monks, and imprisons them in iron cages.

古文：后佛狸感恶疾，自是敬畏佛教，立塔寺浮图。
现代文：后来佛狸患痛苦难治的疾病，从此敬畏佛教，建造佛塔寺院。
English: Later, he suffered from a painful and incurable disease. From then on, he revered Buddhism and built a stupa temple.

古文：宏父弘禅位后，黄冠素服，持戒诵经，居石窟寺。
现代文：元宏的父亲托跋弘惮让后，戴黄帽穿僧衣，坚持斋戒诵读佛经，住在石窟寺。
English: After the death of Motohiro's father, Tokubasuhiro, he wore a yellow hat and monk's robes, insisted on fasting and reciting Buddhist scriptures, and lived in a cave temple.

古文：宏太和三年，道人法秀与苟儿王阿辱佩玉等谋反，事觉，囚法秀，加以笼头铁锁，无故自解脱，虏穿其颈骨，使咒之曰： 若复有神，当令穿肉不入。 
现代文：元宏太和三年，僧人法秀和苟儿王阿辱瑰王等人谋反，事情被察觉，囚禁法秀，加上笼头铁锁，无缘无故自行解脱，魏人戳穿他的颈骨，派人诅咒他说： 如还有神灵，应使肉穿不进。 
English: In the third year of Yuan Hongtao's reign, the monk Faxiu plotted a rebellion with King Guo'er, King A Rong, and others. The plot was discovered, and Faxiu was imprisoned and locked in a cage. He freed himself for no reason. The Wei people pierced his neck bone and sent someone to curse him, saying, "If there are still gods, they should not be able to penetrate the flesh."

古文：遂穿而殉之，三日乃死。
现代文：于是戳穿颈骨而杀他，三日才死。
English: So they pierced his neck and killed him, and he died three days later.

古文：伪咸阳王复欲尽杀道人，太后冯氏不许。
现代文：魏咸阳王又想杀尽僧人，太后冯氏不准许。
English: King Hamyang of Wei also wanted to kill all the monks, but Empress Dowager Feng did not allow it.

古文：宏尤精信，粗涉义理，宫殿内立浮图。
现代文：元宏尤其信仰佛法，粗通佛理，宫殿内建立佛塔。
English: In particular, Yuanhong believed in Buddhism, and established a pagoda in the palace.

古文：宏既经古洛，是岁下伪诏尚书思慎曰： 夫覆载垂化，必由四气运其功，曦曜望舒，亦须五星助其晖。
现代文：元宏经营洛阳后，这年下诏书给尚书思慎说： 天地化育，必由四季温热冷寒之气运动功力；太阳月亮，也必须五星协助照耀。
English: After Yuanhong ran Luoyang, the following year he issued an edict to Shang Shuxu, saying: The four seasons, hot and cold, must be the driving force for the transformation of heaven and earth; the sun and the moon must also shine with the help of the five stars.

古文：仰惟圣母，睿识自天，业高旷古，将稽详典范，日新皇度。
现代文：仰惟圣母太皇太后，聪明见识出白天赋，功业高于远占，将考察典章范式，更新法度。
English: Looking up to the Virgin Mary, the great empress dowager, she cleverly discerned that the day is endowed, and the work is higher than the far, and will examine the paradigm of the code and update the law.

古文：不图罪逆招祸，奄丁穷罚，追惟罔极，永无逮及。
现代文：不希望因罪过招来祸殃，忽然遭遇最大的惩罚，追念无限，永远不能达到。
English: I don't want to incur misfortune because of my sins, suddenly encounter the greatest punishment, and my remorse is infinite and can never be achieved.

古文：思遵先旨，敕造明堂之样。
现代文：思虑遵循先人旨意，颁布建造明堂的样式。
English: Thoughtfully following the will of the ancestors, the style of building Myeongdong was promulgated.

古文：卿所制体含六合，事越中古，理圆义备，可轨之千载。
现代文：你所制定的方案规矩包含天地四方之理，事情超越中古以来规模，义理圆通周备，可为千年法度。
English: The rules of the scheme you have formulated include the principle of the four directions of heaven and earth, the scale of things beyond the Middle Ages, the comprehensiveness of the principles, and can be a thousand-year law.

古文：信是应世之材，先固之器也。
现代文：的确是应运而生的才能，先世固有的器识。
English: Indeed, it is a talent born of the times, the inherent knowledge of the previous generation.

古文：群臣瞻见模样，莫不佥然欲速造，朕以寡昧，亦思造盛礼。
现代文：群臣瞻仰样式后，无不全想迅速建成，我以微薄的德才，也思虑建造盛大的礼乐场所。
English: After the courtiers viewed the style, they all wanted to build it quickly. With my meager talent, I also thought about building a grand ceremonial place.

古文：卿可即于今岁停宫城之作，营建此构。兴皇代之奇制，远成先志，近副朕怀。 
现代文：你可就在今年停止宫城的建造，营建这个工程，兴起皇朝的神奇制作，远说可实现先人的志向，近论则可满足我的心意。 
English: You can stop the construction of Miyagi this year, build this project, and bring about the magical production of the imperial dynasty. Far from being able to realize the aspirations of our predecessors, the recent theory can satisfy my heart.

古文：又诏公卿参定刑律。
现代文：又诏令公卿参与制定刑律。
English: He also ordered court nobles to participate in the formulation of criminal laws.

古文：又诏罢臈前傩，唯年一傩。又诏： 季冬朝贺，典无成文，以袴褶事非礼敬之谓，若置寒朝服，徒成烦浊，自今罢小岁贺，岁初一贺。 又诏： 王爵非庶姓所僭，伯号是五等常秩。
现代文：又诏令罢除腊月前驱除疫鬼的仪式，一年仅一次，又下诏： 冬末的朝贺，法典中没有现成的记载，因穿军服朝贺不合礼敬之意，如设置寒季朝服，徒然造成烦琐礼节，从现在起罢除小年的朝贺，仅年初一次朝贺， 又下诏： 王爵不是异姓所能僭越使用的，伯号是五等平常品级。
English: It was also decreed that the ceremony to drive out the pestilent ghosts before the waxing of the moon should be abolished, and that it should be held only once a year. It was also decreed that there was no ready-made record of the morning greeting at the end of winter in the legal code, because wearing a military uniform for the morning greeting was not in keeping with the meaning of courtesy and respect. For example, the setting up of a morning greeting in the cold season was in vain and caused a tedious and formal festival. From now on, morning greetings for children should be abolished, and morning greetings should be held only once at the beginning of the year. It was also decreed that the

古文：烈祖之胄，仍本王爵，其余王皆为公，公转为侯，侯即为伯，子男如旧。
现代文：祖先的后代，仍为王爵，其余的王都为公，公改为侯，侯改为伯，子男照旧。
English: The descendants of the ancestors are still dukes, the remaining kings are dukes, dukes are changed to marquesses, marquesses are changed to dukes, sons and grandsons are the same.

古文：虽名易于本，而品不异昔。
现代文：虽然名号对原来有改变，而品级同从前没有差异。
English: Although the name has changed, the grade is the same as before.

古文：公第一品，侯第二品，伯第三品，子第四品，男第五品。
现代文：公为第一品，侯为第二品，伯为第三品，子为第四品，男为第五品。 
English: Gong is the first dish, Hou is the second dish, Bo is the third dish, Zi is the fourth dish, and Meng is the fifth dish.

古文：十年，上遣司徒参军萧琛、范云北使。
现代文：十年，皇帝派遣司徒参军萧琛、范云出使北方。
English: Ten years later, the emperor dispatched Szu Tzu to join the army, Xiao Yao and Fan Yun to the north.

古文：宏西郊，即前祠天坛处也。
现代文：元宏的西郊，就是从前祭天坛的地方。
English: The western suburb of Motohiro is where the Altar of Heaven used to be.

古文：宏与伪公卿从二十余骑戎服绕坛，宏一周，公卿七匝，谓之蹋坛。
现代文：元宏和公卿率二十多个骑兵穿军服环绕祭天坛，元宏一圈，公卿七圈，称为蹋坛。
English: Motohiro and Kugyo led more than twenty cavalrymen in military uniforms around the altar of sacrifice. Motohiro made one circle and Kugyo made seven circles, which is called the altar of burnt offering.

古文：明日，复戎服登坛祠天，宏又绕三匝，公卿七匝，谓之绕天。
现代文：又穿军服登坛祭天，元宏又环绕三圈，公卿七圈，称为绕天。
English: He also wore a military uniform to go up to the altar to offer sacrifices to heaven, and he encircled three circles around Yuan Hong, and seven circles around the nobles, which is called encircling heaven.

古文：以绳相交络，纽木枝枨，覆以青缯，形制平圆，下容百人坐，谓之为伞，一云 百子帐 也。
现代文：用绳子相连接，揉木支起帐幔，盖上青缯，形制平整而圆，下面容得下一百人坐，称为 伞 ，一说是 百子帐 。
English: They are connected with a rope, the rubbed wood supports the curtain, and the curtain is covered with green felt. The shape is flat and round, and the bottom can accommodate a hundred people. It is called an umbrella, and it is said to be a hundred children's account.

古文：于此下宴息。
现代文：就在这个帐幔下宴饮休息。
English: It was under this canopy that they feasted and rested.

古文：次祠庙及布政明堂，皆引朝廷使人观视。
现代文：其次祭庙以及在明堂宣布政事，都引入朝廷让人观看。
English: Secondly, the festival temple as well as the proclamation of political affairs in Myeongdong were introduced to the imperial court for people to watch.

古文：每使至，宏亲相应接，申以言义。
现代文：每当使者到来，元宏亲自接见应对，发表言论义理。
English: Whenever the envoy arrived, Yuanhong personally received the response and made a speech.

古文：甚重齐人，常谓其臣下曰： 江南多好臣。 
现代文：他十分看重齐人，常对他的臣下说： 江南的能臣多。 
English: He highly valued Qi people and often said to his vassals, "There are many capable vassals in the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：伪侍臣李元凯对曰： 江南多好臣，岁一易主；江北无好臣，而百年一主。 
现代文：所属侍臣李元凯回答说： 江南能臣多，每年换一个君主；江北没有能臣，而百年一个君主。 
English: His attendant Li Yuankai replied, "There are many able ministers in the south of the Yangtze River, and one monarch changes every year; there are no able ministers in the north of the Yangtze River, but one monarch every hundred years.

古文：宏大惭，出元凯为雍州长史，俄召复职。
现代文：元宏大为惭愧，贬元凯担任雍州长史，不久征召恢复原职。
English: Embarrassed, Yuan Hongda demoted Yuan Kai to the post of governor of Yong, and soon called him back to his original post.

古文：世祖初，治白下，谓人曰： 我欲以此城为上顿处。 
现代文：世祖初年，修治白下城，对别人说： 我想把这座城作为皇帝停留的地方。 
English: In the first year of his reign, Shizuo Shiraishi said to others, "I want to use this city as a place for the emperor to stay.

古文：后于石头造露车三千乘，欲步道取彭城，形迹颇著。
现代文：后来在石头城造露车三千辆，想从陆路攻取彭城，形迹颇为明显。
English: Later, three thousand trolleys were built in Stone Town, and they wanted to conquer Pengcheng by land. The signs are quite obvious.

古文：先是八年北使颜幼明、刘思敩反命，伪南部尚书李思冲曰： 二国之和，义在庇民。
现代文：在这之前永明八年北方使者颜幼明、思敩覆命，魏南部尚书李思冲说： 两圃的和好，意义在于庇护民众。
English: Prior to this, in the eighth year of the Yongming Dynasty, Yan Youming, the messenger of the north, thought about his life, and Li Sichong, the ambassador of the southern Wei Dynasty, said: The meaning of the reconciliation of the two is to protect the people.

古文：如闻南朝大造舟车，欲侵淮、泗，推心相期，何应如此？ 
现代文：近来听说南朝大造车船，想侵犯淮水、泅水地区，推心置腹地互相期待，哪应这样? 
English: Recently, I heard that the Southern Dynasties big car-making ships want to encroach on the Huai Shui and Surabaya regions, and sincerely look forward to each other. Why should this be?

古文：幼明曰： 主上方弘大信于天下，不失臣妾。
现代文：幼明说： 主上正弘扬大信义于天下，不遗漏臣妾。
English: Xiao Ming said: The Lord is promoting great faith and righteousness in the world, and will not leave out his vassals.

古文：既与辑和，何容二三其德？
现代文：既和南朝和好，哪容三心二意?
English: If you are at peace with the Southern Dynasty, how can you be half-hearted?

古文：疆场之言，差不足信。
现代文：边境上的传言，大体上不值得相信。
English: Rumours on the border are generally not to be believed.

古文：且朝廷若必赫怒，使守在外，亦不近相淮濆。 
现代文：而且朝廷如一定要发怒，派人在外守卫，他们也不能接近淮水边。 
English: Moreover, if the imperial court must get angry and send people to guard outside, they can't get close to Huai Shui's edge.

古文：思冲曰： 我国之强，经略淮东，何患不荡海东岳，政存于信誓耳。且和好既结，岂可复有不信？
现代文：思冲说： 我国的疆域，规划据有淮束，哪裹担心不能荡涤海滨东岳，衹有诚信的誓言而已而且和好既已缔结，哪可再有不诚信的行为?
English: Sychong said: Our country's territory and planning are based on the Huai Zhou, so why worry about not being able to clean up the Dong Yue coastline? There is only an oath of good faith, and since the reconciliation has been concluded, how can there be any dishonest behavior?

古文：昔华元、子反，战伐之际，尚能以诚相告，此意良慕也。 
现代文：从前华元、子反，在交战之际，还能以实况相告，这种诚意实在令人羡慕。 
English: Once upon a time, Huayuan and Zibang, when they were at war, could tell each other the truth. This sincerity is truly enviable.

古文：幼明曰： 卿未有子反之急，讵求登床之请？ 
现代文：幼明说： 您没有子反的畏惧，为什么有华元夜晚登上子反之床的求情? 
English: Youming said: You are not afraid of Zifan. Why did Hua Yuan climb onto Zifan's bed at night to plead for mercy?

古文：是后宏亦欲南侵徐、豫，于淮、泗间大积马刍。
现代文：此后元宏也想向南侵犯徐州、豫州，在淮水、泅水间大量积蓄马匹草料。
English: After that, Yuanhong also wanted to invade Xuzhou and Yuzhou to the south, accumulating a large amount of horse grass between Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：十一年，遣露布并上书，称当南寇。
现代文：十一年，派人张贴公告并上书，称将要向南进犯。
English: In the eleventh year, they sent someone to post an announcement and submit a letter, saying that they would attack the south.

古文：世祖发扬、徐州民丁，广设召募。
现代文：世祖征发扬州、徐州的民众壮丁，广泛设点招募。
English: The ancestor's enlistment promoted the young men of the people of Yangzhou and Xuzhou, and recruited extensively.

古文：北地人支酉聚数千人，于长安城北西山起义。
现代文：北地人支酉，聚集几千人，在长安城北面的西山起义。
English: Several thousand northerners gathered in Xishan, north of Chang'an City, to stage an uprising.

古文：遣使告梁州刺史阴智伯。
现代文：派遣使者告诉梁州刺史阴智伯。
English: Send an emissary to tell Liang Zhou to assassinate Yin Zhibo.

古文：秦州人王度人起义应酉，攻获伪刺史刘藻，秦、雍间七州民皆响震，众至十万，各自保壁，望朝廷救其兵。
现代文：秦州人王度人起义响应支酉，攻打擒获魏国刺史刘藻，秦、雍之间七州民众都响应震动，人数达到十万，各自建筑堡垒，盼望朝廷救援他们的兵士。
English: The Qin people's uprising was supported and supported by the Wangdu people's uprising, and the attack was led by the Wei state's attack on Liu Miao. The people of the seven states between Qin and Yong responded to the shock, reaching 100,000 in number, each building a fortress, hoping that the imperial court would rescue their soldiers.

古文：宏遣弟伪河南王干、尚书卢阳乌击秦、雍义军，干大败。
现代文：元宏派遣弟弟河南王元干、尚书卢阳乌攻打秦州、雍州的起义军，元干大败。
English: Yuanhong sent his younger brother, Henan Wang Yuangan, and Shangshu Lu Yangwu to attack the rebel army in Qinzhou and Yongzhou. Yuangan suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：酉迎战，进至咸阳北浊谷，围伪司空长洛王缪老生，合战，又大破之，老生走还长安。
现代文：支酉迎战，推进到咸阳北面的浊谷，包围魏司空长洛王缪老生，交战，又大败老生，老生逃回长安。
English: Zhangye met the battle, advanced to Shugu, north of Xianyang, encircled Wei Sikuang, Luo Wangmu, the old man, fought, and defeated the old man, the old man fled back to Chang'an.

古文：梁州刺史阴智伯遣军主席德仁、张弘林等数千人应接酉等，进向长安，所至皆靡。
现代文：梁州刺史阴智伯派遣军主席德仁、张弘林等几千人接应支酉等人，攻向长安，所到之处都望风披靡。
English: The chairman of the dispatching army of Liangzhou Zhishi Yinzhibo, De Ren, Zhang Honglin and other thousands of people responded to Shijun and others and attacked Chang'an. Everywhere they went, they were overwhelmed by the wind.

古文：会世祖崩，宏闻关中危急，乃称闻丧退师。
现代文：遇世祖逝世，元宏听说关中危急，就称说听到丧事而退兵。
English: When his ancestor passed away, Yuanhong heard that Guanzhong was in a critical situation, so he said that he heard about the funeral and left the army.

古文：太和十七年八月，使持节、安南大将军、都督徐青齐三州诸军事、南中郎将、徐州刺史、广陵侯府长史、带淮阳太守鹿树生移齐兖州府长史府： 奉被行所尚书符腾诏：皇师电举，摇旆南指，誓清江祲，志廓衡霭。
现代文：太和十七年八月，使持节、安南大将军、都督徐青齐三州诸军事、南中郎将、徐州刺史、广陵侯府长史、兼淮阳太守鹿树生送文书给齐国兖州府长史府： 接到行所尚书所录诏书： 国家军队如雷霆般出动，挥舞旌旗指向南方，发誓肃清长江的不祥云气，立志廓开衡山的迷雾。
English: In August of the 17th year of the Tahe era, on the occasion of the National Day, General Annan, the military of the three prefectures of Qi, the governor of Xuqing and Qi, the vice-governor of the south, the governor of Xuzhou, the governor of Guangling, and the governor of Huaiyang sent a document to the governor of Quzhou, the governor of Quzhou: Received the edict recorded by the guild of Shangshu: The national army moved out like thunder, waved the banner of the banner to the south, vowed to clear the ominous clouds of the Yangtze River, and determined to clear the fog of Hengshan

古文：以去月下旬，济次河洛。
现代文：在上月下旬，驻扎在黄河、洛水之滨。
English: At the end of last month, it was stationed on the banks of the Yellow River, Luoshui.

古文：前使人邢峦等至，审知彼有大艾。
现代文：遇先前的使者邢峦等人到来，确知对方有大丧事。
English: When the previous emissaries, Zou and others, arrived, they knew for certain that the other side was in great mourning.

古文：以《春秋》之义，闻丧寝伐。
现代文：按《春秋》的义理，听到丧事停止征伐。
English: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," when the funeral is heard, the conquest is stopped.

古文：爰敕有司，辍銮止轫，休马华阳，戢戈嵩北。
现代文：于是命令有关官员，停止车辆前进，在华阳休养战马，在嵩山北平息战事。
English: He then ordered the relevant officials to stop the advance of vehicles, rest the war horses in Huayang, and quell the fighting in Songshan North.

古文：便肇经周制，光宅中区，永皇基于无穷，恢盛业乎万祀。
现代文：以便遵循周代制度，在中原定居，奠定无穷尽的皇室根基，光大万代的盛大事业。
English: In order to follow the system of generations, to settle in the Central Plains, to lay an inexhaustible foundation for the imperial family, and to carry out the grand cause of magnificence for all generations.

古文：宸居重正，鸿化增新，四海承休，莫不铭庆。故以往示如律令。 
现代文：帝王之居庄重端正，宏大的教化增添新彩，四海承受美好政令，无不铭记庆祝，所以前往昭示按法令执行。 
English: The emperor's residence is dignified and dignified, the grand edification adds a new color, the four seas receive a beautiful decree, all bearing in mind the celebration, so I went to Zhaoxi to carry out according to the law.

古文：并遣使吊国讳。
现代文：并派遣使者吊唁齐国丧事。
English: and sent an envoy to offer condolences on the national funeral.

古文：遣伪大将杨大眼、张聪明等数万人攻酉，酉、广等并见杀。
现代文：派遣所属大将杨大眼、张聪明等几万人攻打支酉，支酉、度人等人都被杀死。
English: He dispatched tens of thousands of his generals, such as Yang Dajian and Zhang Miao, to attack Shijiazhuang. Shijiazhuang, Duodu and others were all killed.

古文：隆昌元年，遣司徒参军刘敩、车骑参军沈宏报使至北。宏称字玄览。
现代文：隆昌元年，派遣司徒参军、车骑参军回访到北方。远塞称呼选塞的表字客鉴。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he sent Sito to join the army, and rode back to the north to join the army.

古文：其夏，虏平北将军鲁直清率众降，以为督洛州军事，领平戎校尉、征虏将军、洛州刺史。
现代文：这年夏天，毯子北将军鲁直清率领部众归附，任命他为督盗州军事，兼平戎校尉、征虏将军、洛州刺史。
English: In the summer of that year, General Lu Zhiqing of the Northern Blanket Army led his subordinates in the annexation, and appointed him as the military governor of the rogue state, as well as the lieutenant of the Ping Rong, the conscript general, and the history of the rogue state.

古文：是岁，宏徙都洛阳，改姓元氏。
现代文：这一年，元宏迁都到洛阳，改姓为元。
English: That year, Yuan Hong moved the capital to Luoyang and changed his surname to Yuan.

古文：初，匈奴女名托跋，妻李陵，胡俗以母名为姓，故虏为李陵之后，虏甚讳之，有言其是陵后者，辄见杀，至是乃改姓焉。
现代文：当初，匈奴女子名叫托跋，嫁给李陵为妻，胡人习俗以母亲的名为姓，所以魏人是李睦的后代，魏人十分忌讳这一点，有说是李陵后代的，就被杀死，到这时才改变姓氏。
English: At first, the Xiongnu woman's name was Toba, and she married Liling as her wife. The Hu people customarily took their mother's name as their surname, so the Wei people are descendants of Li Mu. The Wei people are very taboo about this. Some people who were said to be descendants of Liling were killed, and only then did they change their surname.

古文：宏闻高宗践阼非正，既新移都，兼欲大示威力，是冬，自率大众分寇豫、徐、司、梁四州。
现代文：元宏听说高宗登位不是正嫡，在刚迁都之后，便想大显军威。这年冬天，亲自率领大军分别侵犯豫、徐、司、梁四州。
English: Motohiro heard that Emperor Gaozong's accession to the throne was not legitimate, and after the capital was just moved, he wanted to show his military power. This winter, he personally led a large army to invade four prefectures: Yu, Xu, Si, and Liang.

古文：遣伪荆州刺史薛真度、尚书郗祁阿婆出南阳，向沙堨，筑垒开沟，为南阳太守房伯玉、新野太守刘思忌所破。
现代文：派遣所属荆州刺史薛真度、尚书郗祁阿婆出兵到南阳，攻向沙竭，筑营垒开沟渠，被南阳太守房伯玉、新野太守刘思忌打败。
English: He dispatched his subordinates, Jingzhou Jishi Xue Zhendu and Shang Shuxuan Aba, to send troops to Nanyang, attack the sand dunes, build barracks and open ditches, and were defeated by Nanyang Daju Fangboyu and Nyno Daju Liu Siqi.

古文：建武二年春，高宗遣镇南将军王广之出司州，右仆射沈文季出豫州，左卫将军崔慧景出徐州。
现代文：建武二年春，高宗派遣镇南将军王广之出兵到司州，右仆射沈文季出兵到豫州，左卫将军崔慧景出兵到徐州。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianwu, Gaozong dispatched Zhennan General Wang Guangzhu to Sizhou, his right-hand man Shen Wenzhi to Yuzhou, and his left-hand general Cui Huijing to Xuzhou.

古文：宏自率众至寿阳，军中有黑毡行殿，容二十人坐，辇边皆三郎曷刺真，槊多白真毦，铁骑为群，前后相接。
现代文：元宏率领部众到寿阳，军中有黑毡临时殿堂，可容纳二十人坐，车辆旁边都是三郎曷剌真，长矛多用白羽毛装饰，骑兵成群，前后相连接。
English: Motohiro led the troops to Shouyang. The army had a temporary hall of black horses, which could accommodate twenty people. Next to the vehicles were sabers, spears decorated with white feathers, and cavalry in groups, connected in front and behind.

古文：步军皆乌盾槊，缀接以黑虾蟆幡。
现代文：步兵都用乌盾长矛，用黑虾蟆旗连缀。
English: The infantrymen all used black shields and spears, and decorated with black shrimp and flags.

古文：牛车及驴、骆驼载军资妓女，三十许万人。
现代文：牛车和驴、骆驼运载军用物资和歌舞女子，共三十来万人。
English: Cattle carts, donkeys, and camels carry military supplies and dancing girls, a total of three hundred and thirty thousand people.

古文：不攻城，登八公山，赋诗而去。
现代文：不攻打城池，登上八公山，赋诗后离去。
English: Do not attack the castle, climb the eight mountains, leave after the poem.

古文：别围钟离城，徐州刺史萧惠休、辅国将军申希祖拒守，出兵奋击，宏众败，多赴淮死。
现代文：另外包围钟离城，徐州刺史萧惠休、辅国将军申希祖抗拒守卫，出兵奋力反击，元宏的军队失败，大多投入淮水死去。
English: In addition, they besieged Zhongli City. Xiao Huixiu, the governor of Xuzhou, and Shen Xizu, the general of the auxiliary state, resisted the guards and sent troops to fight back. Yuanhong's army failed, and most of them died in Huai Shui.

古文：乃分军据邵阳州，栅断水路，夹筑二城。
现代文：元宏的军队于是分兵占据邵阳州，以栅栏截断水路，构筑二座城池。
English: As a result, Yuanhong's troops occupied Shaoyang Prefecture, cut off the waterway with a fence, and built two fortresses.

古文：右卫将军萧坦之遣军主裴叔业攻二城，拔之。
现代文：右卫将军萧坦之派遣军主裴叔业攻打二城，攻下来了。
English: The right guard general Xiao Tan dispatched the commander Pei Shuye to attack the two cities, and they were attacked.

古文：惠休又募人出烧虏攻城车，虏力竭不能克。
现代文：惠休又招募人出城烧毁魏军的攻城车，魏军力量用尽不能攻克。
English: Huiyu also recruited people to go out of the city to burn the siege car of the Wei army. The Wei army was exhausted and could not be defeated.

古文：王奂之诛，子肃奔虏，宏以为镇南将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：王奂被诛杀，儿子王肃投奔魏国，元宏任命他为镇南将军、南豫州刺史。
English: Wang Yao was killed, his son Wang Su fled to Wei, and Yuan Hong appointed him as the general of Zhenan and the chief historian of South Yuzhou.

古文：遣肃与刘昶号二十万众，围义阳。
现代文：派遣王肃和刘昶号称二十万兵士，包围义阳。
English: Wang Su and Liu Ye sent 200,000 soldiers to surround Yiyang.

古文：司州刺史萧诞拒战，虏筑围堑栅三重，烧居民净尽，并力攻城，城中负盾而立。
现代文：司州刺史萧诞抵御，魏军构筑包围的沟堑栅栏三层，把居民房屋差不多烧光了，全力攻城，城中人背着盾牌站立。
English: In order to resist, the Wei army built a three-layered ditch fence, almost burned down the residents' houses, and attacked the city with all their might. People in the city stood with shields behind them.

古文：王广之都督救援，虏遣三万余人逆攻太子右率萧季敞于下梁，季敞战不利。
现代文：王广之总领军队救援，魏人派遣三万多人在下梁迎击太子右率萧季敞，季敞作战失败。
English: Wang Guangzhi's army led the rescue, and the Wei people sent more than 30,000 people to meet the prince's right-hand man Xiao Jichang in the lower beam, and the battle of Jichang failed.

古文：司州城内告急，王广之遣军主黄门侍郎梁王间道先进，与太子右率萧诔、辅国将军徐玄庆、荆州军主鲁休烈据贤首山，出虏不备。
现代文：司州城内紧急求救，王广之派遣军主黄门侍郎粱王从小路先进发，和太子右率萧诛、辅国将军徐玄庆、荆州军主鲁休烈占据贤首山，出乎魏人的意料之外。
English: Sizhou urgently called for help in the city, and Wang Guangzhi dispatched the commander Huangmen's servant Wang Qian from the path ahead, and the prince's right-hand man Xiao Qian, the auxiliary general Xu Xuanqing, and the commander of the Jingzhou army, Lu Xuryi, occupied the top of the mountain, which was unexpected by the Wei people.

古文：城内见援军至，萧诞遣长史王伯瑜及军主崔恭祖出攻虏栅，因风放火，梁王等众军自外击之，昶、肃弃围引退，追击破之。
现代文：城内见救援军队到来，萧诞派遣长史王伯瑜和军主崔恭祖出兵攻打魏军的栅栏，趁风放火，梁王等各军从外面攻打，刘昶、王肃放弃包围而撤退，齐军追击打败了他们。
English: When the city saw the arrival of the rescue army, Xiao Guo dispatched the commander Shi Wang Bo Yu and the commander Cui Gong Zu to attack the fence of the Wei army, taking advantage of the wind to set fire, Liang Wang and other armies attacked from the outside, Liu Wei and Wang Su abandoned the siege and retreated, and the Qi army chased and defeated them.

古文：辅国将军桓和出西阴平，伪鲁郡公郯城戍主带莫楼、伪东海太守江道僧设伏路侧，和与合战，大败之。
现代文：辅国将军桓和出兵到西阴平，魏鲁郡公郯城戍守头领带莫楼、东海太守江道僧在道路旁设置埋伏，桓和同他们交战，大败他们。
English: Auxiliary General Huan He dispatched troops to Xiyinping, Gongyi Town, Weilu County, set up an ambush on the side of the road, Huan He fought with them and defeated them.

古文：青、徐民降者百余家。
现代文：青州、徐州民众投降的有一百多家。
English: More than a hundred people from Qingzhou and Xuzhou surrendered.

古文：青、冀二州刺史王洪范遣军主崔延攻虏纪城，并拔之。
现代文：青、冀二州刺史王洪范派遣军主崔延攻打魏国的纪城，都攻下来了。
English: In the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, Wang Hongfan dispatched the army commander Cui Yan to attack Jicheng in Wei, and all of them were attacked.

古文：宏先又遣伪尚书卢阳乌、华州刺史韦灵智攻赭阳城，北襄城太守成公期拒守。
现代文：元宏原先又派遣所属尚书卢阳乌、华州刺史韦灵智攻打赭阳城，北襄城太守成公期抵御守卫。
English: Originally, Yuanhong also dispatched his subordinates Shangshu Lu, Yangwu, and Huazhou Zhishu, Wei Lingzhi to attack Fenyang City, and Beiyang City Taishu Chenggong to resist the guards.

古文：虏攻城百余日，设以钩冲，不舍昼夜，期所杀伤数千人。
现代文：魏军攻打城池一百多天，用兵车攻打，日夜不停，成公期杀伤的有几千人。
English: The Wei army attacked the city for more than a hundred days, attacking with chariots, day and night, and killing and wounding several thousand people.

古文：台又遣军主垣历生、蔡道贵救援，阳乌等退，官军追击破之。夏，虏又攻司州栎城二戍，戍主魏僧岷、朱僧起拒败之。
现代文：朝廷又派遣军主垣历生、蔡道贵救援，阳乌等人撤退，宫军追击打败他们夏季，魏军又攻打司州和梁城两个据点，戍守头领魏僧岷、朱僧起抵御打败他们。
English: The imperial court also sent the army chiefs Gaki Lisheng and Cai Daogui to rescue, Yang Wu and others to retreat, the palace army chased and defeated them in the summer, the Wei army also attacked two strongholds in Shizhou and Liangcheng, and the garrison leaders Wei Sangyu and Zhu Sangqi resisted and defeated them.

古文：伪安南将军、梁州刺史魏郡王元英十万余人通斜谷，寇南郑。
现代文：魏安南将军、梁州刺史魏郡王元英率领十万多人通过斜谷，侵犯南郑。
English: General Wei Annan and Wang Yuanying of Liangzhou Zhishi Wei County led more than 100,000 people through the valley and invaded Nan Zheng.

古文：梁州刺史萧懿遣军主姜山安、赵超宗等数军万余人，分据角弩、白马、沮水拒战，大败。
现代文：刺史萧懿派遣军主姜山安、赵超宗等各军一万多人，分别占据角弩、白马、沮水抵御，大败。
English: Zhang Shi Xiaohui dispatched more than ten thousand people from each army, including the army commander Jiang Shan'an and Zhao Chaozong, to occupy Jiaozuo, Baima, and Depu, respectively, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：英进围南郑，土山冲车，昼夜不息。
现代文：元英进军包围南郑，堆积土山车辆冲锋，日夜不停。
English: Yuan Ying marched to encircle Nan Zheng, piling up earth and mountain vehicles to charge, day and night non-stop.

古文：懿率东从兵二千余人固守拒战，随手摧却。
现代文：萧懿率领东方随从的兵士二千多人固守抗拒随手摧毁进攻。
English: Xiao Wei led more than two thousand soldiers from the East to resist and destroy the attack.

古文：英攻城自春至夏六十余日不下，死伤甚众，军牛粮尽，捣曲为食，畜菜叶直千钱。
现代文：元英攻打城池从春季到夏季六十多天攻不下，死伤的人很多，军中粮食用光，捣碎酒曲做饭食，牲畜吃的菜叶价格一千钱。
English: Yuan Ying attacked the city for more than sixty days from spring to summer, but was unable to conquer it. Many people were killed and injured. The army ran out of grain. They had to make meals by pounding liquor, and the price of vegetable leaves eaten by livestock was one thousand yuan.

古文：懿先遣军主韩嵩等征獠，回军援州城，至黄牛川，为虏所破。
现代文：萧懿原先派遣军主韩嵩等人征讨僚人，回师增援州城，到达黄牛川，被魏军打败。
English: Xiao Yao originally sent the commander Han Song and others to recruit his colleagues, returned to reinforce Shuzhen, reached Huang Niu River, and was defeated by the Wei army.

古文：懿遣氐人杨元秀还仇池，说氐起兵断虏运道，氐即举众攻破虏历城、崿兰、骆谷、仇池、平洛、苏勒六戍。
现代文：萧懿派遣氐人杨元秀回仇池，游说氐人起兵截断魏军运输道路，氏人当即用全部人马攻下魏国的历城、睾兰、骆谷、仇池、平洛、苏勒六处据点。
English: Xiao Yu sent his man Yang Yuanxiu back to Qiuchi, and lobbied his men to raise an army to cut off the transport route of the Wei army. His men immediately used all their men and horses to capture the six strongholds of the Wei state: Lecheng, Xiulan, Luogu, Qiuchi, Pingluo and Sule.

古文：伪尚书北梁州刺史辛黑末战死。
现代文：魏尚书北梁州刺史辛黑末战死。
English: Wei Shangshu was killed at the end of the war in Northern Liangzhou by Shi Xin.

古文：英遣军副仇池公杨灵珍据泥公山，武兴城主杨集始遣弟集朗与归国氐杨馥之及义军主徐曜甫迎战于黄亘，大败奔归。
现代文：元英派遣军中副将仇池公杨灵珍占据泥公山，武兴城主杨集始派遣弟弗集朗和归附国家的氏人杨馥之以及起义军头领徐曜甫在黄亘迎战，大败逃回。
English: Yuan Ying dispatched the vice-commander of the army, Qiu Chikong Yang Ling Zhen, to occupy Mud Gong Mountain, and the lord of Wuxing City, Yang Jishi, sent his brother, Fujilang, and his vassal, Yang Xizhi, as well as the leader of the rebel army, Xu Youfu, to fight in Huangwu, but they were defeated and fled back.

古文：时梁州土豪范凝、梁季群于家请英设会，伏兵欲杀英，事觉，英执季群杀之，凝窜走。
现代文：当时梁州土豪范凝、梁季群在家中请元英赴宴，埋伏兵士想杀元荚，事情被察觉，元英捉住季群杀了他，范凝逃走。
English: At that time, Liangzhou local strongmen Fan Geng and Liang Ji Qun invited Yuan Ying to a banquet at their home. The ambush soldiers wanted to kill Yuan Jun, and the matter was discovered. Yuan Ying caught Ji Qun and killed him, and Fan Geng fled.

古文：英退保浊水，闻氐众盛，与杨灵珍复俱退入斜谷，会天大雨，军马含渍，截竹煮米，于马上持炬炊而食，英至下辨，灵珍弟婆罗阿卜珍反，袭击，英众散，射中英颊。
现代文：元英后撤据守浊水，听说氐人军队强盛，和杨灵珍又一起退入斜谷，遇天降大雨，兵马遭渍水，截断竹子煮米，在马上持火把烧饭吃。元英到达下辨，灵趁的弟弟婆罗阿卜珍反叛，偷袭毯军，亘墓的部众溃散，五垄的面颊被射中。
English: After Yuan Ying withdrew to defend Surabaya, he heard that the Surabaya army was strong, and he and Yang Ling Zhen retreated to the valley together. When it rained heavily, the soldiers and horses were soaked with water, cut off the bamboo to cook rice, and cooked rice with torches. Yuan Ying arrived at the lower court, and his younger brother, Bora Abzhen, rebelled, attacked the blanket army, the tomb's followers dispersed, and Wu Rong's cheek was shot.

古文：伪陵江将军悦杨生领铁骑死战救之，得免。
现代文：魏陵江将军悦圭苏率领骑兵拼命作战救援亘甚，元垄得以免死。
English: Wei Lingjiang General Yue Guisu led the cavalry in a desperate battle and rescue, and Yuan Rong was spared from death.

古文：梁、汉平。
现代文：梁州、篷中平定。
English: Liangzhou was pacified in the middle of the curtain.

古文：武都太守杜灵瑗、奋武将军望法憘、宁朔将军望法泰、州治中皇甫耽并拒虏战死。
现代文：逮都太守丝玺昼、奋武将军望迭惶、宁朔将军望送童、州治中皇重巫都因抗拒瑟军而战死。
English: Utsuto Taishu Shiju Ryo, Tengwu Gen. Mochidetsu, Ningshuo Gen. Mochidetsu, and Shujitsu Chuko Shigemitsu all died in battle for resisting the Siberian army.

古文：追赠灵瑗、法憘羽林监，法泰积射将军。
现代文：追赠灵瑗、法僖为羽林监，法泰为积射将军。
English: Ling Tao was posthumously awarded the title of Ling Tao, Fa Tao was appointed as Ulin Supervisor, and Fatai was awarded the title of Zeshi General.

古文：时伪洛州刺史贾异寇甲口，为上洛太守李静所破。
现代文：当时魏国洛州刺史买异侵犯甲口，被上洛太守李静打败。
English: At that time, Luozhou of Wei invaded Jiakou and was defeated by Li Jing, the governor of Shangluo.

古文：三年，虏又攻司州栎城，为戍主魏僧岷所拒破。
现代文：三年，魏军又攻打司州的梁城，被戍守头领魏僧岷所抵御打败。
English: Three years later, the Wei army attacked Liangcheng in Shizhou again, and was defeated by Wei monk Zang, the leader of the garrison.

古文：秋，虏遣军袭涟口，东海太守郑延祉弃西城走，东城犹固守，台遣冠军将军兖州刺史徐玄庆救援，虏引退，延祉伏罪。
现代文：秋季，魏人派遣军队袭击涟，东海太守郑延祉放弃西城逃跑，束城仍然固守，朝廷派遣冠军将军兖州刺史徐玄庆救援，魏军撤退，延祉受死刑。
English: In the autumn, the Wei people sent troops to attack Handan, the East China Sea governor Zheng Yanqi abandoned the West City and fled, the Shou City still held fast, the imperial court sent the champion general Zhangzhou Zishi Xu Xuanqing to rescue, the Wei army retreated, and Yanqi was sentenced to death.

古文：初，伪太后冯氏兄昌黎王冯莎二女，大冯美而有疾，为尼；小冯为宏皇后，生伪太子询。
现代文：当初，魏太后冯氏的哥哥昌黎王冯莎有两个女儿，人冯美丽而有病，做尼姑，小冯成为元宏的皇后，生太子元询。
English: At first, Chang Li Wang Feng Sha, the elder brother of the Wei Empress Dowager Feng, had two daughters. Feng was beautiful and sick, and she was a nun. Xiao Feng became the empress of Yuanhong and gave birth to Prince Yuancheng.

古文：后大冯疾差，宏纳为昭仪。宏初徙都，询意不乐，思归桑乾。
现代文：后来大冯疾病痊愈，元宏娶为昭仪元宏起初迁都，元询心中不乐意，思虑回到桑干。
English: Later, after Da Feng recovered from his illness, Yuan Hong married Zhao Yi. At first, Yuan Hong moved the capital, but he was not happy about it and returned to Sangan with misgivings.

古文：宏制衣冠与之，询窃毁裂，解发为编服左衽。
现代文：元宏缝制衣帽给他，元询私下毁坏，解开头发而结发为辫衣襟向左开。
English: Yuan Hong sewed a cap for him, Yuan En privately destroyed it, untied the hair and tied the hair to the collar of the coat.

古文：大冯有宠，日夜谗询。宏出邺城马射，询因是欲叛北归，密选宫中御马三千匹置河阴渚。皇后闻之，召执询，驰使告宏，宏徙询无鼻城，在河桥北二里，寻杀之，以庶人礼葬。
现代文：大冯受宠幸，夜诋毁元询元宏外出到邺城骑马射箭，元询利用这个时机想背叛回到北方秘密挑选宫中御用的马三千匹放在河阴渚皇后听说后，召唤并捉住元询，派使者飞奔报告元宏，元宏把元询迁到无鼻城，在河桥以北二里的地方，不久杀了他，以平民的礼仪安葬。
English: Dafeng was favored, and at night he slandered Yuancheng Yuanhong for going out to Shicheng to ride horses and shoot arrows. Yuancheng took advantage of this opportunity to betray him and return to the north to secretly select three thousand horses for use in the palace and place them in Heyinzhu. After the queen heard about this, she summoned and caught Yuancheng and sent an envoy to report to Yuanhong. Yuanhong moved Yuancheng to the city of Nose, two miles north of Heqiao, and soon killed him and buried him with the etiquette of a commoner.

古文：立大冯为皇后，便立伪太子恪，是岁，伪太和二十年也。
现代文：立大冯为皇后，同时立太子元恪，这一年，是魏太和二十年。
English: It was the 20th year of the reign of Empress Dowager Feng and the 20th year of the reign of Crown Prince Yuan Ke.

古文：伪征北将军恒州刺史钜鹿公伏鹿孤贺鹿浑守桑乾，宏从叔平阳王安寿戍怀栅，在桑乾西北。
现代文：魏征：化将军恒州刺史钜鹿公伏鹿孤贺鹿浑守卫桑干，元宏的堂叔平阳王安寿戍守怀栅，在桑干西北。
English: Wei Zheng: the general of Hengzhou, Zishi, Menglu, Gongfu, Lu, Guohe, Hun guarded Sangan, and Yuanhong's uncle Pingyang, Wang Anshou, guarded Huairou, in the northwest of Sangan.

古文：浑非宏任用中国人，与伪定州刺史冯翊公目邻、安乐公托跋阿干儿谋立安寿，分据河北。
现代文：贺鹿浑责难元宏任用中原人，和魏定州刺史冯翊公目邻、安乐公托跋阿干儿密谋立安寿，分别据守河北。
English: The Central Plains people were appointed by He Lu, and they conspired with Wei Dingzhou, Shishi, Feng Yu, his neighbor, and An Le, his tutor, to establish a peaceful life, respectively, in Hebei.

古文：期久不遂，安寿惧，告宏。杀浑等数百人，任安寿如故。
现代文：期望很久没有实现，安寿畏惧，报告元宏杀死贺鹿浑等几百人，任用安寿如同往日。
English: Expectations have not been fulfilled for a long time, Anshu is afraid, reports that Yuanhong killed several hundred people such as He Lugu, and Anshu is appointed as before.

古文：先是伪荆州刺史薛真度、尚书郄祁阿婆为房伯玉所破，宏怒，以南阳小郡，誓取灭之。
现代文：在追之前魏荆州刺史薛真度、尚书郄祁阿婆被房伯玉打败，元宏发怒，以为南阳是个小郡，发誓攻取屠灭。
English: Before the chase, Wei Jingzhou stabbed Shi Xue Zhendu and Shang Shuxuan's grandmother was defeated by Fang Boyu. Yuan Hong was angry, thought that Nanyang was a small county, and vowed to conquer and exterminate.

古文：四年，自率军向雍州。
现代文：建武四年，亲自率领军队攻向雍州。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he personally led the army to attack Yongzhou.

古文：宏先至南阳，房伯玉婴城拒守。
现代文：元宏先到南阳，房伯玉环城固守。
English: Yuan Hong went to Nanyang first, but Fang Bo held on to Yuhuan City.

古文：宏从数万骑，罩黄伞，去城一里。
现代文：元宏随行的有几万骑兵，罩着黄伞，离城一里。
English: Yuanhong is accompanied by tens of thousands of cavalry, covered with yellow umbrellas, one mile from the city.

古文：遣伪中书舍人公孙云谓伯玉曰： 我今荡一六合，与先行异。
现代文：派遣所属中书舍人公孙云对伯玉说： 我现在统一天地四方，和先前出兵不同。
English: Sun Yun, a member of the middle school who was dispatched, said to Bo Yu: I am now unifying the four directions, which is different from the previous dispatch of troops.

古文：先行冬去春还，不为停久；今誓不有所克，终不还北，停此或三五年。
现代文：先前出兵冬天离开春天返回，不作长久停留；现在立誓不有所攻占，绝不回方，停留在此或许三至五年。
English: Previously, soldiers were sent in the winter to leave the spring and return, not to stay for a long time; now they vow not to occupy anything, never to return, and stay here for perhaps three to five years.

古文：卿此城是我六龙之首，无容不先攻取。
现代文：你这座城是我所驾六龙的头，容不得不先攻取。
English: This city of yours is the head of the six dragons I am riding, and I have to capture it first.

古文：远一年，中不过百日，近不过一月，非为难殄。
现代文：远则一年，中则不过一百天，近则不过一个月，不算是难以消灭。
English: If it's far away, it's a year, if it's in the middle of the year, it's only a hundred days, and if it's near, it's only a month.

古文：若不改迷，当斩卿首，枭之军门。
现代文：如果不改变迷途，当斩下你的头，悬挂在军门前示众。
English: If you don't change your ways, I'll cut off your head and hang it in front of the military gate for all to see.

古文：阖城无贰，幸可改祸为福。
现代文：全城无二心，可庆幸改祸为福。
English: The whole city has no second thoughts, and can celebrate the good fortune of changing the bad luck into good luck.

古文：但卿有三罪，今令卿知。
现代文：不过你有三个罪过，现在使你得知。
English: But you have committed three sins. Now you shall know them.

古文：卿先事武帝，蒙在左右，不能尽节前主，而尽节今主，此是一罪。
现代文：你原先侍奉武帝，蒙受恩典位居左右，不能对从前君主尽节操，而对现在君主尽节操，这是第一个罪过。
English: You originally served Emperor Wu, and by grace, you are now in the middle. You cannot be loyal to the former monarch, but you are loyal to the current monarch. This is the first sin.

古文：前岁遣偏师薛真度暂来此，卿遂破伤，此是二罪。
现代文：前年派遣偏师薛真度暂时来到这裹，你竟然大加杀伤，这是第二个罪过。
English: The previous year, you sent the deviant teacher Xue Zhendu to come here temporarily, and you actually inflicted heavy casualties. This is the second sin.

古文：武帝之胤悉被诛戮，初无报效，而反为今主尽节，违天害理，此是三罪。
现代文：武帝的后代全被杀害，你毫无报效之心，却反而为现在君主尽节操，违背天意损害义理，这是第三个罪过。
English: Emperor Wu's descendants were all killed. You have no desire to repay the favor, but on the contrary, you are doing everything for the current monarch, violating God's will and harming righteousness. This is the third sin.

古文：不可容恕，听卿三思，勿令阖城受苦。 
现代文：不可宽恕。准许你反复思索，不要使全城遭受痛苦。 
English: Unforgivable. Allow yourself to reflect, and don't make the whole city suffer.

古文：伯玉遣军副乐稚柔答曰： 承欲见攻围，期于必克，卑微常人，得抗大威，真可谓获其死所。
现代文：伯玉派遣副将乐稚柔回答说： 承蒙您打算攻打围困我，期望一定攻克，我一个低微的平常人，得以对抗大声威，真可以说是获得了值得一死的地方。
English: "Thanks to your plan to attack and besiege me, expecting to be defeated, I, a lowly, ordinary person, have been able to stand up to the bully, and I can truly say that I have gained a place worth dying for.

古文：先蒙武帝采拔，赐预左右，犬马知恩，宁容无感。
现代文：我原先蒙受武帝的提拔，受赐位居他左右，犬马尚且知道报恩，哪能没有感念。
English: I was originally promoted by Emperor Wu and given a place at his side. Even though I know the reward, I can't help but be impressed.

古文：但隆昌、延兴，昏悖违常，圣明纂业，家国不殊。
现代文：不过隆昌和延兴年间的君主，昏庸狂悖违背伦常，当今君主以圣明继承大业，国家没有不同。
English: However, the monarchs in the years of the Longchang and Yanxing dynasties were foolish and immoral. Today's monarchs inherit the great cause with the Holy Light, and the country is no different.

古文：此则进不负心，退不愧幽。前岁薛真度导诱边氓，遂见陵突，既荷国恩，聊尔扑扫。
现代文：这就进不辜负良心，退不愧对幽魂前年薛真度引诱边境民众，我们遭到侵犯，既身受国家恩典，姑且扑灭他。
English: This is to live up to our conscience, and we are not ashamed to say that the ghost of the previous year, Xue Zhendu, lured the border people, and we were violated, and since we were blessed by the state, we had to extinguish him.

古文：回已而言，应略此责。 
现代文：反思而言，应免去这个责难。 
English: On reflection, it should be spared this censure.

古文：宏引军向城南寺前顿止，从东南角沟桥上过，伯玉先遣勇士数人著斑衣虎头帽，从伏窦下忽出，宏人马惊退，杀数人，宏呼善射将原灵度射之，应弦而倒。宏乃过。
现代文：元宏率领军队到城南寺院前停留，从东南角的沟桥上通过，原先派遣勇士几人穿戴着虎纹衣虎头帽，从埋伏的孔道中忽然冲出，元宏的人马受惊退却，杀死几人，元宏呼唤善射将领原灵度射击埋伏的人，那几人随弦声而倒下元宏于是通过。
English: Motohiro led the army to stop in front of the temple in the south of the city, and passed through the ditch bridge in the southeast corner. Originally, several warriors wearing tiger stripes and tiger hats were sent, and they suddenly rushed out of the ambushed tunnel. Motohiro's men were frightened and retreated, killing several people. Motohiro called for a good shot to shoot the ambushed people. Those people fell down with the sound of the strings. Motohiro passed through.

古文：宏时大举南寇，伪咸阳王元憘、彭城王元勰、常侍王元嵩、宝掌王元丽、广陵侯元燮、都督大将军刘昶、王肃、杨大眼、奚康生、长孙稚等三十六军，前后相继，众号百万。
现代文：元宏当时大举向南进犯，彭城王元勰、常侍王元嵩、宝掌王元丽、广陵侯元燮、都督大将军刘昶、王肃、杨大眼、奚康生、长孙稚等三十六军，前后相连接，人数号称一百万。
English: At that time, Yuanhong made a large-scale attack to the south. Thirty-six armies, including Pengcheng Wangyuan, the regular attendant Wangyuan Song, Baoshu Wangyuan Li, Guangling Houyuan Li, the governor general Liu Yu, Wang Su, Yang Dajian, Zou Kangsheng, and the eldest grandson, were connected in front and behind, with a number of one million.

古文：其诸王军朱色鼓，公侯绿色鼓，伯子男黑色鼓，并有鼙角，吹唇沸地。
现代文：各王的军队都是大红色的鼓，公侯是绿色的鼓，伯子男是黑色的鼓，并有鼙角，口哨声沸腾大地。
English: The armies of the kings are great red drums, the dukes are green drums, the nobles are black drums, and have horns, whistles boil the earth.

古文：宏留伪咸阳王憘围南阳，进向新野，新野太守刘思忌亦拒守。
现代文：留下所属咸阳王盈瞎包围，围南阳，进军到新野，新野太守也抵御守卫。
English: He left his subordinate, Xianyang Wang Ying, to be blindly encircled, encircled Nanyang, and marched into Nino. The Nino daimyō also resisted the guards.

古文：台先遣军主直阁将军胡松助北襄城太守成公期守赭阳城，军主鲍举助西汝南、北义阳二郡太守黄瑶起戍舞阴城。宏攻围新野城，战斗不息。
现代文：朝廷原先派遣军丰直合将军蛆松协助刘思忌太守盛壬蝈守卫赭阳城，军主鲍举协助西汝南、北义阳二郡太守黄瑶迤戍守舞阴城攻打新野，战斗不停息。
English: Originally, the imperial court dispatched the troops of Feng Zhihe General Yu Song to assist Liu Si Ji, the governor of Sheng Ren, to guard the city of Shenyang, and the commander Bao Jue to assist the governor of the two counties of Xi Runan and North Yiyang, Huang Zhi, to attack the city of Muyin, and the battle did not stop.

古文：遣人谓城中曰： 房伯玉已降，汝南为何独自取糜碎？ 
现代文：派人对城中说： 房伯玉已经投降，汝南为什么偏偏自取灭亡? 
English: The dispatchers said to the city: "Fang Bo-yu has already surrendered. Why did Runan destroy itself?

古文：思忌令人对曰： 城中兵食犹多，未暇从汝小虏语也。 
现代文：思忌命人回答说： 城中兵士粮食还多，没时间同你这小敌寇谈话。 
English: "There is still plenty of food for the soldiers in the city. I don't have time to talk to you, my little enemy."

古文：雍州刺史曹虎遣军至均口，不进。
现代文：雍州刺史曹虎派遣军队到均口，不的进。
English: Yongzhou assassin Cao Hu dispatched troops to Jiankou, but failed to advance.

古文：永泰元年，城陷，缚思忌，问之曰： 今欲降未？ 
现代文：永泰元年，城池沦陷，捆住思忌，问他说： 现在想投降吗? 
English: In the first year of Yongtai, when the city fell, he tied up Sihui and asked him, "Do you want to surrender now?"

古文：思忌曰： 宁为南鬼，不为北臣。 
现代文：思忌说： 宁做南方鬼，不做北方臣。 
English: Siyi said, "I'd rather be a ghost of the south than a minister of the north."

古文：乃死。
现代文：于是被杀。
English: As a result, Tangguo died in the battle.

古文：赠冠军将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：齐追赠他为冠军将军、梁州刺史。
English: Qi posthumously awarded him as the champion general, Liangzhou stabbing history.

古文：于是沔北大震，湖阳戍主蔡道福、赭阳城主成公期及军主胡松、舞阴城主黄瑶起及军主鲍举、顺阳太守席谦并弃城走。
现代文：这时沔北大为震动，湖阳戍守头领蔡道福、赭阳城主成公期和军主胡松、舞阴城主黄瑶起和军主鲍举、从阳太守席谦都放弃城池逃跑。
English: At this time, the northern part of Handan was greatly shaken. Cai Daofu, the leader of the Hoyang city guards, Cheng Gongji, the lord of Handan city, Hu Song, the lord of Muyin city, Huang Xingqi, the lord of the army, Bao Jiu, and Zong Yangta, the guardian of the seat, all abandoned the city and fled.

古文：虏追军获瑶起，王肃募人脔食其肉。
现代文：魏国追赶的军队擒获瑶起，王肃招募人切碎吃他的肉。
English: Wei's pursuing army was defeated, and Wang Su's recruiters chopped up and ate his flesh.

古文：追赠冠军将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：齐追赠瑶起为冠军将军、兖州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of champion general, and became the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：数日，房伯玉以城降。
现代文：几天后，房伯玉献城投降。
English: A few days later, Fang Bo Yuping surrendered the city.

古文：伯玉，清河人。
现代文：伯玉，是清河人。
English: Horyu is from Qinghe.

古文：既降，虏以为龙骧将军，伯玉不肯受。
现代文：投降后，魏国任命他为龙骧将军，伯玉不肯接受。
English: After the capitulation, Wei appointed him as the general of Longjing, but Baiyu refused to accept it.

古文：高宗知其志，月给其子希哲钱五千，米二十斛。
现代文：高宗知道他的志向，每月供给他的儿子希哲钱五千文，米二十斛。
English: Gaozong knew of his ambition and provided his son Xizhe with 5,000 yuan and 20 baht of rice every month.

古文：后伯玉就虏求南边一郡，为冯翊太守。生子幼，便教其骑马，常欲南归。
现代文：后来伯玉向魏人求取南方边境的一个郡，担任冯翊太守，生下儿子幼小，就教他骑马，常常想回到南方。
English: Later, she asked the Wei people for a county on the southern border, and served as the empress dowager of Fenghuang. When she gave birth to a young son, she taught him to ride a horse, and often wanted to return to the south.

古文：永元末，希哲入虏，伯玉大怒曰： 我力屈至此，不能死节，犹望汝在本朝以报国恩。
现代文：永元末年，希哲进入魏国，伯玉大发脾气说： 我力量衰竭到了这个地步，不能守节义而死，仍希望你在本朝报答国家恩典。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, when Xizhe entered the Wei Dynasty, Bai Yu Da lost his temper and said: I have exhausted my strength to this point, I can not keep the festival and die, I still hope that you will repay the grace of the country in this morning.

古文：我若从心，亦欲间关求反。
现代文：我如能如愿，也要越过关口寻求返回。
English: If I could, I would also cross the pass and seek to return.

古文：汝何为失计？ 
现代文：你为什么如此失策? 
English: Why did you fail so miserably?

古文：遂卒虏中。
现代文：伯玉终于死在魏国。
English: Finally, she died in Wei.

古文：虏得沔北五郡。
现代文：魏人攻取沔北五郡。
English: The Wei people conquered the five counties in northern Shandong.

古文：宏自将二十万骑破太子率崔慧景等于邓城，进至樊城，临沔水而去。
现代文：元宏亲自率领二十万骑兵在邓城打败太子率崔慧景等人，进军到樊城，临近沔水而离去。
English: Yuanhong personally led two hundred thousand cavalry in Dengcheng to defeat the prince led by Cui Huijing and others, marched to Lucheng, and left near Surabaya.

古文：还洛阳，闻太尉陈显达经略五郡，围马圈，宏复率大众南攻，破显达而死。
现代文：回到洛阳，听说太尉陈显达筹划夺取五郡，包围马圈，元宏又率领大军向南进攻，打败显达而死去。
English: Back in Luoyang, he heard that Second Lieutenant Chen Xianda planned to seize the five counties and encircle the stables. Yuanhong led a large army to attack the south, defeated Xianda and died.

古文：丧还，未至洛四百余里，称宏诏，征伪太子恪会鲁阳。
现代文：丧车返回，在距洛阳四百多里的地方，称说元宏的诏令，征召魏太子元恪到鲁阳相会。
English: After the funeral car returned, in a place more than four hundred miles away from Luoyang, it was said that Yuanhong's edict called for Wei Prince Yuan Guo to meet in Luoyang.

古文：恪至，勰以宏伪法服衣之，始发丧。
现代文：元恪到达，元勰把元宏的衣服给他穿上，才发布丧事。
English: When Yuan Ke arrived, Yuan Xuan put Yuan Hong's clothes on him before announcing the funeral.

古文：至洛，乃宣布州郡，举哀制服，谥孝文皇帝。
现代文：到达洛阳，就向州郡宣布，举办丧事穿丧服，谧号为孝文皇帝。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he announced to the prefectural government that he would hold a funeral, wear mourning clothes, and take the posthumous name Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：是年，王肃为虏制官品百司，皆如中国。
现代文：这一年，王肃为魏国确定官品官署，都如同中原。
English: In the same year, Wang Su established the Office of Official Ethics for the State of Wei, just like Zhongyuan.

古文：凡九品，品各有二。
现代文：共九品，每品各有二级。
English: A total of nine dishes, each dish has two levels.

古文：肃初奔虏，自说其家被诛事状，宏为之垂涕。
现代文：王肃当初投奔魏国，自述家族被诛杀的情形，元宏为之流泪。
English: Wang Su initially fled to Wei, and when he recounted the circumstances of his family being killed, Yuan Hong shed tears.

古文：以第六妹伪彭城公主妻之。
现代文：把第六个妹妹彭城公主嫁给他。
English: to marry his sixth sister, Princess Pengcheng, to him.

古文：封肃平原郡公。
现代文：封王肃为平原郡公。
English: Wang Su was made the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：为宅舍，以香涂壁。
现代文：建房舍，用香料涂墙壁。
English: Build houses, paint the walls with spices.

古文：遂见信用。
现代文：王肃于是受到信任重用。
English: Wang Su was therefore trusted and reused.

古文：恪立，号景明元年，永元二年也。
现代文：元恪登位，称景明元年，时为齐永元二年。
English: Yuan Ke ascended the throne in the first year of the reign of King Jingming, and it was the second year of the reign of King Qi Yongyuan.

古文：豫州刺史裴叔业以寿春降虏。
现代文：豫州刺史裴叔业献出寿春投降魏国。
English: Yu Zhou stabbed Shi Pei Shuhei and offered Shou Chun to surrender to Wei.

古文：先是伪东徐州刺史沈陵率部曲降。陵，吴兴人，初以失志奔虏，大见任用，宏既死，故南归，频授徐、越二州刺史。时王肃为征南将军、豫州都督。朝延既新失大镇，荒人往来，诈云肃欲归国。少帝诏以肃为使持节、侍中、都督豫徐司三州、右将军、豫州刺史，西丰公，邑二千户。
现代文：在逭之前魏东徐州刺史沈陵率领部众投降沈陵，是吴兴人，起初因不得志投奔魏国，大受信任重用，元宏死后，所以回到南方，接连授任徐、越二州刺史当时王肃任魏国征南将军、豫州都督朝廷刚失去大 杠镇，荒远地带的入来往，诈称王肃要回归南方、少帝下诏委任王肃为使持节、侍中、都督豫徐司三州、右将军、豫州刺史，封西丰公，食邑二：千户。
English: It was Wu Xing who led the troops to surrender Shenling before the end of the Eastern Wei Dynasty. At first, because he was unable to go to Wei, he was greatly trusted and used. After the death of Yuan Hong, he returned to the south and successively awarded Xu and Yue two-state scribes. At that time, Wang Su was the general of Wei's Southern Expedition and the governor of Yuzhou. The imperial court had just lost Dabaizhen, the entry and exit of the desolate area. It was fraudulently said that Wang Su would return to the south. The young emperor appointed Wang Su as the envoy, the vice-president, the governor of Yuzhou

古文：虏既得淮南，其夏，遣伪冠军将军南豫州刺史席法友攻北新蔡、安丰二郡太守胡景略于建安城，死者万余人，百余日，朝廷无救，城陷，虏执景略以归。其冬，虏又遣将桓道福攻随郡太守崔士招，破之。
现代文：魏国得到淮南后，这年夏天，派遣所属冠军将 单南豫州刺史席法友在建安城攻打北新蔡、安丰二郡太守胡景略，死亡的有一万多人，一百多天后，朝廷没有救援，城池陷落，魏人擒获景略而返回、这年冬天，魏国又派遣将领桓道福攻打随郡太守崔士招，打败了他。
English: After Wei gained Huainan, in the summer of that year, it dispatched its champion general, Yan Nan Yu Zhou Shi Shi Fa You, to attack Beixin Cai and Hu Jingliao, the governor of Anfeng County, in Jian'an City. More than ten thousand people died. More than a hundred days later, the imperial court did not rescue, the city fell, Wei people captured Jingliao and returned. In the winter of that year, Wei also dispatched general Huan Daofu to attack the governor of the county, Cui Shizhao, and defeated him.

古文：后伪咸阳王憘以恪年少，与氐杨集始、杨灵祐、乞佛马居及虏大将支虎、李伯尚等十余人，请会鸿池陂，因恪出北芒猎，袭杀之。憘犹豫不能发，欲更克日。
现代文：后来魏咸阳王元惶因元恪年纪小，和氏人杨集始、杨灵佑、乞佛马居以及魏国大将支虎、李伯尚等十多人，请求在鸿池陂集会，趁元恪外出打猎，偷袭杀了他元僖犹豫不敢发难，想另择时间。
English: Later, more than a dozen people, including Wei Xianyang King Yuan Rong and his followers Yang Jizhi, Yang Lingyou, and Beggar Buddha Ma Ju, as well as Wei generals Zhihu and Li Boshang, requested a meeting in Hongchi, took advantage of Yuan Rong going out to hunt, and attacked and killed him. Yuan Rong hesitated and did not dare to attack, and wanted to choose another time.

古文：马居说憘曰： 殿下若不至北芒，便可回师据洛城，闭四门。
现代文：马居劝元僖说： 殿下如不到北芒，就可回师占据洛城，关上四个城门。
English: Ma Ju advised Yuan Shao, "If your highness does not reach the North Star, you can return to your division to occupy Los Angeles and close the four gates.

古文：天子闻之，必走向河北桑乾，仍断河桥，为河南天子。
现代文：天子听说后，必定逃到河北桑干，殿下便断绝河桥，做河南天广。
English: After hearing this, Tianzi must have fled to Sanggan in Hebei Province. His royal highness then cut off the bridge across the river and became Henan Tianguang.

古文：隔河而治，此时不可失也。 憘又不从。
现代文：分隔黄河而治理，这个时机不可失去一 元僖又不听从。
English: Separate the Yellow River and govern it. This opportunity must not be lost and not obeyed.

古文：灵祐疑憘反己，即驰告恪。
现代文：灵佑怀疑元愤改变主意，就赶去报告元恪。
English: Ling You suspected that Yuan Rong had changed his mind, so he rushed to report to Yuan Ke.

古文：憘闻事败，欲走渡河，而天雨暗迷道，至孝义驿，恪已得洛城。
现代文：元僖听说事情败露，想逃跑渡过黄河，而天下雨夜色昏暗迷失道路，到达孝义驿，元恪已得到洛城。
English: When Yuan Kuo heard the news, he wanted to run away. He crossed the Yellow River, but it was raining and the night was dark. He lost his way and arrived in Xiaoyicheng. Yuan Kuo had already reached Los Angeles.

古文：遣弟广平王领数百骑先入宫，知无变，乃还。
现代文：派遣弟弟广平王率领几百骑兵先进入宫中，知道没有变故，才回宫。
English: He sent his brother Guangping Wang to lead a few hundred cavalry into the palace first, and only returned to the palace when he knew that nothing had changed.

古文：遣直卫三郎兵讨憘，执杀之。
现代文：派遣直卫三郎的兵士讨伐元僖，捉住后杀了他。
English: He sent the soldiers of Tadasaburo to fight Genroku, caught him and killed him.

古文：虏法，谋反者不得葬，弃尸北芒。
现代文：魏国法律，谋反的人不能安葬，把元馆的尸体抛弃到北芒。
English: According to the laws of the State of Wei, those who conspired to rebel could not be buried, and the bodies of the Yuan Pavilion were dumped in Beimang.

古文：王肃以疾卒。
现代文：王肃因病去世。
English: Wang Su died of illness.

古文：史臣曰：齐、虏分，江南为国历三代矣。
现代文：史臣曰：齐国、魏国割据，江南建国经历三代了。
English: Shichen said: Qi and Wei states were divided, and three generations of Jiangnan nation-building have passed.

古文：华夏分崩，旧京幅裂，观衅阻兵，事兴东晋。
现代文：华夏分崩离析，旧都割裂，观察裂痕而出动兵马，事情起于束晋。
English: Huaxia fell apart, the old ones were split, the soldiers and horses went out to observe the cracks, and the matter began in Sokjin.

古文：二庾藉元舅之盛，自许专征，元规临邾城以覆师，稚恭至襄阳而反旆。
现代文：二庾凭藉皇帝舅父的权势，以征伐为己任，元规到邾城而覆灭军队，稚恭到襄阳而倒转旌旗。
English: The two brothers took advantage of the power of the emperor's uncle to take the conquest as their own responsibility. Yuan Zi went to Shicheng and destroyed the army, and Zhi Gong went to Xiangyang and reversed the banner.

古文：褚裒以徐、兖劲卒，壹没于邹、鲁。
现代文：褚哀率领徐州、兖州强劲的兵士，全部丧失在邹、鲁地区。
English: The strong soldiers of Xuzhou and Ganzhou led by Mu Aye were all lost in the Zhengzhou and Lu regions.

古文：殷浩驱杨、豫之众，大败于山桑。桓温弱冠雄姿，因平蜀之声势，步入咸关，野战洛、邺。
现代文：殷浩驱使杨州、豫州的军队，在山桑大败桓温成年后雄姿英发，利用平定蜀地的声势，步行进入咸关，在洛阳、邺城的旷野交战。
English: Yin Hao drove the armies of Yangzhou and Yuzhou, and after the great defeat of Huanwen in Shanshan, he took advantage of the momentum of pacifying Shu to enter Hamguan on foot and fight in the wilderness of Luoyang and Lucheng.

古文：既而鲜卑固于负海，羌、虏割有秦、代，自为敌国，情险势分，宋武乘机，故能以次而行诛灭。
现代文：随之鲜卑靠近海滨固守，羌人、魏人割据三秦、代北，成为敌对国家，依仗险阻分开势力，宋武帝趁着时机，所以能依次加以消灭。
English: Subsequently, the Xianbei clung to the coast, and the Jurchens and the Wei separated into the Three Qin Dynasties and the Northern Dynasty, and became hostile countries. They separated their forces according to the dangers and obstacles, and Emperor Songwu took advantage of the opportunity, so he could eliminate them in turn.

古文：及魏虏兼并，河南失境，兵马土地，非复曩时。
现代文：等到魏虏兼并北方，南朝丧失河南疆域，兵马土地，不如往日。
English: Wait until Wei Rui annexes the north, the Southern Dynasty loses the territory of Henan Province, and the land of soldiers and horses is not as good as in the past.

古文：宋文虽得之知己，未能料敌，故师帅无功，每战必殆。
现代文：宋文帝虽然能够了解自己，却不能估量敌人，所以出兵没有功绩，每战必败。
English: Although Emperor Songwen could understand himself, he could not estimate the enemy, so there was no merit in sending troops, and every battle would be a defeat.

古文：泰始以边臣外叛，遂亡淮北，经略不振，乃议和亲。
现代文：泰始年问因守边官员背叛，竟至丧失淮北，攻取不能济事，于是商议和好结亲。
English: At the beginning of the year, because of the betrayal of the border guard officials, Thailand lost Huaibei and was unable to conquer it, so they negotiated and made friends.

古文：太祖创命，未及图远。戎尘先起，侵暴方牧，淮、豫克捷，青、海摧奔，以逸待劳，坐微百胜。
现代文：太祖创业，没来得及长远策划，战事先起，魏军侵犯各地，在淮南、豫州取胜，对青州、海州摧毁追击，齐国以逸待劳，安坐没有胜绩。
English: The great-grandfather started his business before he had time for long-term planning. Before the war began, the Wei army invaded various regions, winning in Huainan and Yuzhou, destroying and pursuing Qingzhou and Haizhou. The Qing Dynasty waited for labor, and there was no victory for sitting quietly.

古文：自四州沦没，民恋本朝，国祚惟新，歌奉威德，提戈荷甲，人自为斗，深垒结防，想望南旗。
现代文：自从四州沦陷，民众思念本朝，国运革新，歌颂声威恩德，拿起兵器穿上销甲，人自为战，筑深垒加固守卫，盼望南方的旌旗。
English: Since the fall of the four prefectures, the people have been thinking about this morning, the national movement has been innovated, the song of praise has been sung, weapons have been picked up, armor has been put on, people have fought for themselves, deep fortifications have been built to strengthen the guards, and the flag of the south has been hoped for.

古文：天子习知边事，取乱而授兵律，若前师指日，远扫临、彭，而督将逗留，援接稽晚，向义之徒，倾巢尽室。既失事机，朝议北寝，偃武修文，更思后会。
现代文：天子熟悉边境事务，乘乱攻取而授予用兵法度，先头部队几天之间，远扫临淄、彭城，然而统率的将领停留不进，援助延缓，仰慕道义的人，全家被杀失去时机后，朝廷商议停止北伐， 武备提倡文教，今后再思考进取。
English: The Son of Heaven was familiar with border affairs. He took advantage of the chaos to grant the use of military tactics. The leading troops swept far away from Linyi and Pengcheng in a few days. However, the generals in charge did not stay, the assistance was delayed, and the people who admired morality lost the opportunity after the whole family was killed. The imperial court discussed stopping the Northern Expedition, the armed forces advocated literature and education, and thought about the future.

古文：永明之世，据已成之策，职问往来，关禁宁静。
现代文：永明年间，依据既定策略，聘问来往，边关安宁。
English: In the years to come, according to the established strategy, there will be frequent visits and exchanges, and the border will be peaceful.

古文：疆埸之民，并安堵而息窥觎，百姓附农桑而不失业者，亦由此而已也。
现代文：边境的民众，都相安无事而平息窥伺之心，百姓从事农桑而不失本业，也是由于这个原因。
English: This is also the reason why the people at the border are all at peace with each other and have calmed their prying hearts. People are engaged in farming mulberry without losing their jobs.

古文：夫荆棘所生，用武之弊，寇戎一犯，伤痍难复，岂非此之验乎？
现代文：荆棘滋生，是用武的弊害，战事一起，创伤难以恢复，这难道不是验证吗?
English: Thorns are bred, the evils of war are used, the war is together, the trauma is difficult to recover, is this not a verification?

古文：建武初运，獯雄南逼，豫、徐强镇，婴高城，蓄士卒，不敢与之校武。
现代文：建武初受国运，獯狁强劲向南进逼，豫州、徐州的边镇，筑起高城，积蓄兵士，不敢和他们抗衡。
English: At the beginning of Jianwu's history, it was affected by the National Movement, and was strongly pushed southward. The border towns of Yuzhou and Xuzhou built high-rises and accumulated soldiers, and did not dare to compete with them.

古文：胡马蹈藉淮、肥，而常自战其地。
现代文：胡人马匹践踏淮水、肥水地区，而常常成为争战之地。
English: Hu people and horses trampled Huai Shui and Fertile Water areas, which often became battlefields.

古文：梯冲之害，鼓掠所亡，建元以来，未之前有。
现代文：云梯冲车的伤害，击鼓掳掠的死亡，建元以来，前所未有。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there has never been a case of injury caused by a ladder crashing into a car, or a death caused by drum beating.

古文：兼以穹庐华徙，即礼旧都，雍、司北部，亲近许、洛，平涂数百，通驿车轨，汉世驰道，直抵章陵，镳案所鹜，晨往暮返。
现代文：加上魏国从草原迁到华夏，依照旧都礼仪，雍州、司州的北部，邻近许昌、洛阳，平路几百里，驿站车马通行，汉世的驰道，直接抵达章陵，战马奔驰，清晨前往晚上返回。
English: In addition, Wei moved from the grasslands to Huaxia, and according to the etiquette of the old capital, the northern part of Yongzhou and Shizhou, near Xuchang and Luoyang, had hundreds of miles of flat roads, horse-drawn carriages and horse-drawn carriage roads, and direct access to Zhangling, horse-drawn carriages, and went to Zhangling in the morning and returned in the evening.

古文：虏怀兼弱之威，挟广地之计，强兵大众，亲自凌殄，旍鼓弥年，矢石不息。
现代文：魏人怀有兼并弱小的威严，胸藏拓展土地的计谋，强人的军队，亲自出征侵逼消灭，旌旗战鼓连年出动，战事不停息。
English: The Wei people cherished the dignity of annexing the weak and small, concealing the strategy of expanding the land in their chests, the army of the strong man, personally went to war to invade and exterminate, and the banner and war drums were sent out year after year, and the war did not stop.

古文：朝规懦屈，莫能救御，故南阳覆垒，新野颓隍，民户垦田，皆为狄保。
现代文：朝廷规划怯懦屈服，不能救助抵御，所以南阳倾覆营垒，新野倒塌城壕，民众所垦土地，都为狄人拥有。
English: The imperial court planned to give in to cowardice, unable to help and resist, so Nanyang overturned the camp, Niino collapsed the trench, and the land seized by the people was all owned by the Di people.

古文：虽分遣将卒，俱出淮南，未解沔北之危，已深涡阳之败。
现代文：虽然分派将领士兵，都出兵淮南，却没有解除沔北的危难，已经加深涡阳的失败。
English: Although the dispatched generals and soldiers have all sent troops to Huainan, they have not lifted the peril of north Anhui, and have deepened the failure of Wuyang.

古文：征赋内尽，民命外殚，比屋骚然，不聊生矣。
现代文：兵役赋税在内用尽，民众在外畏惧丧命，家家骚扰，无法生存下去。
English: The military service tax has been exhausted inside, the people are afraid of death outside, they are harassed at home, and they cannot survive.

古文：夫休颓之数，诚有天机，得失之迹，各归人事，岂不由将率相临，贪功昧赏，胜败之急，不相救护？
现代文：善恶的命运，诚然有天机，得失的轨迹，各归于人们的行事。难道不是由于将帅临事，贪图功劳昧于赏赐，胜败的紧急时刻，不互相救助相让?
English: The fate of good and evil, indeed, has a celestial opportunity, the trajectory of gain and loss, each attributed to people's actions. Isn't it due to the fact that they are good at things, covet merit rather than reward, win or lose in an emergency, and do not help each other?

古文：号令不明，固中国之所短也。
现代文：号令不明确，本来是中原国度的短处。
English: The announcement is not clear, which is a shortcoming of the Central Plains countries.

古文：赞曰：天立勍胡，窃有帝图。
现代文：赞曰：上天扶立强大的胡人，窃据帝王之位。
English: Praise be to God: He has raised up a powerful Hu person to usurp the throne of the emperor.

古文：即安诸夏，建号称孤。
现代文：定居在华夏区域，建国号称孤王。
English: Settled in the Huaxia region, the founding of the country is known as the lonely king.

古文：齐民急病，并邑焚刳。
现代文：百姓遭遇患难，连城被烧毁屠灭。
English: The people suffered hardships, and even the city was burned down and destroyed.

