古文：二十二年，公子重耳出亡，及柏谷，卜适齐、楚。
现代文：晋献公在位的第二十二年，公子重耳被迫出逃。到了柏谷这个地方，占卜求问去齐国或楚国的吉凶。
English: In the 22nd year of Emperor Jinxian's reign, Prince Chong Er was forced to flee. When he arrived in Kashi Valley, he asked a fortune-teller about the fortunes of Qi or Chu.

古文：狐偃曰： 无卜焉。
现代文：狐偃说： 不用占卜了。
English: The fox cub said, "There is no need for divination.

古文：夫齐、楚道远而望大，不可以困往。
现代文：那齐、楚两个国家离晋国很遥远，而且奢望很大，不能在困厄的情势下投奔它们。
English: The two countries of Naxi and Chu are very far away from Jin, and their expectations are very high. It is not possible to run to them under the difficult situation.

古文：道远难通，望大难走，困往多悔。
现代文：道路遥远难以抵达，奢望很大又难以投奔，我们在困厄中去投奔它们肯定会后悔。
English: The road is far and difficult to reach, the hope is great and difficult to run, we will surely regret running into them in the face of adversity.

古文：困且多悔，不可以走望。
现代文：令我们困厄而且后悔的国家，不能指望投奔后得到帮助。
English: A country that makes us suffer and regret cannot expect to be helped when we run to it.

古文：若以偃之虑，其狄乎！
现代文：若按我考虑，还是去狄国吧！
English: If you ask me, it's better to go to Di Guo.

古文：夫狄近晋而不通，愚陋而多怨，走之易达。
现代文：狄国靠近晋国，但与晋国没有交往。这个国家愚昧落后，和邻国结怨甚多，投奔它很容易到达。
English: Di Province is close to Jin Province, but there is no contact with Jin Province. This country is stupid and backward, and has a lot of grudges with its neighbors. It is easy to get to it.

古文：不通可以窜恶，多怨可与共忧。
现代文：狄国与晋国不交往我们正好可以隐蔽下来，与邻国结怨多我们可以与它共担忧患。
English: If Di and Jin do not interact, we can just hide, and if we have a lot of grudges with our neighbors, we can share our worries with them.

古文：今若休忧于狄，以观晋国，且以监诸侯之为，其无不成。 
现代文：如今我们如果能在狄国获得休整并为它分忧，从这里静观晋国政局的变化，而且密切注视诸侯国的行动，那么成就大事没有不成功的。 
English: Today, if we can get a rest in Di and take care of it, watch the changes in Jin's political situation from here, and keep a close eye on the actions of the vassal states, then we will not be unsuccessful in achieving great things.

古文：乃遂之狄。
现代文：于是重耳就逃亡到了狄国。
English: As a result, Chong Er fled to Di Province.

古文：处一年，公子夷吾亦出奔，曰： 盍从吾兄窜于狄乎？ 
现代文：重耳到狄国一年以后，公子夷吾也被迫出逃，说： 何不跟随我哥哥隐蔽在狄国呢？ 
English: A year after Chong Er's arrival in Di, Gongzi Yiguo was also forced to flee, saying: Why not follow my brother and hide in Di?

古文：冀芮曰： 不可。
现代文：他的师傅冀芮说： 不行。
English: His master, Jizhe, said, "It's impossible.

古文：后出同走，不免于罪。
现代文：你出逃在后却跟他住在同一个国家，难免有合谋之罪。
English: If you live in the same country with him after you have fled, you will inevitably be guilty of conspiracy.

古文：且夫偕出偕入难，聚居异情恶，不若走梁。
现代文：再说一起进出也不方便，生活在一处你和重耳性格也合不来，不如投奔梁国。
English: Besides, it is not convenient to go in and out together. Living in one place is not compatible with your heavy-eared personality. It is better to go to Liangguo.

古文：梁近于秦，秦亲吾君。
现代文：梁国亲近秦国，秦国又和我们国君很亲善。
English: Liang Guo is close to Qin Guo, and Qin Guo is also very friendly with our sovereign.

古文：吾君老矣，子往，骊姬惧，必援于秦。
现代文：我们国君已年迈，你去梁国，骊姬害怕，必定以为我们会向秦国求援。
English: Our sovereign is very old. If you go to Liang and Huanji are afraid, they must think we are going to ask Qin for help.

古文：以吾存也，且必告悔，是吾免也。 
现代文：由于我们在梁国可以依靠秦的庇护，她必定很后悔，这样我们也就有免罪的可能了。 
English: Since we can rely on Qin's protection in Liang Province, she must have regretted it very much, so we also have the possibility of being exonerated.

古文：乃遂之梁。
现代文：于是夷吾逃亡到了梁国。
English: As a result, Igo fled to Ryang Province.

古文：居二年，骊姬使奄楚以环释言。
现代文：在梁国寄住的第二年，骊姬派奄楚送来玉环，表达愿意让夷吾还国的意思。
English: In the second year of his sojourn in Liang Province, Yan Ji sent an emissary to bring him a jade ring, expressing his willingness to let the Empress return to the country.

古文：四年，复为君。
现代文：夷吾在梁国呆了四年后，回国当了国君。
English: After staying in Liang for four years, I returned to China and became the country's ruler.

