古文：形不正者，德不来；中不精者，心不冶。
现代文：外表不端正的人，是因为德没有养成；内里不专一的人，是因为心没有治好。
English: People who are not decent on the outside are because they have not developed virtue; people who are not single-minded on the inside are because their hearts have not been healed.

古文：正形饰德，万物毕得，翼然自来，神莫知其极，昭知天下，通于四极。
现代文：端正形貌，整饬内德，使万物都被掌握理解。这种境界好象是飞鸟自来，神都不知道它的究竟。这样就可以明察天下，达到四方极远的地域。
English: This realm is like a bird's home, and even the gods do not know where it comes from. In this way, it is possible to survey the entire world and reach regions that are far away in all directions.

古文：是故曰：无以物乱官，毋以官乱心，此之谓内德。
现代文：所以说，不让外物扰乱五官，不让五官扰乱心，这就叫作 内得 。
English: Therefore, not to let the external things disturb the five senses, not to let the five senses disturb the mind, this is called the inner attainment.

古文：是故意气定，然后反正。
现代文：因此，先作到意气安定，然后才能使行为端正。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to first stabilize one's spirit and then correct one's behavior.

古文：气者身之充也，行者正之义也。
现代文：气是充实身体的内容，行为是立身持正的仪表。
English: The qi is the content that fills the body, and the behavior is the instrument that keeps the body upright.

古文：充不美则心不得，行不正则民不服。
现代文：内容不美则心意不安，行为不正则民众不服。
English: If the content is not beautiful, people will feel uneasy, and if the behavior is improper, people will not accept it.

古文：是故圣人若天然，无私覆也；若地然，无私载也。
现代文：所以，圣人总是象天一样。不为私被覆万物；像地一样，不为私载置万物。
English: Therefore, a saint is always like the sky, which does not cover all things for me; like the earth, which does not contain all things for me.

古文：私者，乱天下者也。
现代文：私，是乱天下的根源。
English: I am the root cause of the chaos in the world.

古文：凡物载名而来，圣人因而财之，而天下治。
现代文：事物都是带着它的名称而来到世间的。圣人就是根据它本身的情况来裁定它，天下便治理好了。
English: All things come into the world with their names. The sage judges them according to their own conditions, and the world is governed accordingly.

古文：实不伤，不乱于天下，而天下治。
现代文：定名无害于实际，使它不在天下发生混乱，天下便治理好了。
English: The designation is harmless to reality, so that it does not cause chaos in the world, and the world will be governed well.

古文：专于意，一于心，耳目端，知远之证。能专乎？
现代文：专心一意，耳目端正，那就知远事如在近旁。能专心么？
English: If you concentrate and keep your eyes and ears straight, you will be able to see things far away as if they were right next to you. Can you concentrate?

古文：能一乎？
现代文：能一意么？
English: Can you be unique?

古文：能毋卜筮而知凶吉乎？
现代文：能做到不用占卜而知吉凶么？
English: Is it possible to know good and evil without divination?

古文：能止乎？
现代文：能做到要止就止么？
English: Is it possible to stop at nothing?

古文：能已乎？
现代文：能做到要完就完么？
English: Can it be done when it's done?

古文：能毋问于人而自得之于己乎？
现代文：能做到不求于人而靠自己解决问题么？
English: Can you solve problems on your own without asking for help?

古文：故曰，思之。
现代文：所以说，必须进行思考。
English: So you have to think about it.

古文：思之不得，鬼神教之。
现代文：思考不得，鬼神将给予教导。
English: Don't think about it, the gods will teach you.

古文：非鬼神之力也。其精气之极也。
现代文：这不是鬼神的力量，而是精气的最高作用。
English: This is not the power of ghosts and gods, but the highest function of the spirit.

古文：一气能变曰精、一事能变曰智。
现代文：一概听任于物而能掌握其变化叫 精 ，一概听任于事而能掌握其变化叫 智 。
English: It is called refinement to be able to control the changes of things, and it is called wisdom to be able to control the changes of things.

古文：慕选者，所以等事也；极变者，所以应物也。
现代文：广求而加以选择，仅是给事物分分等类；善于改变方法，仅是为适应事物特点。
English: To seek and select is only to classify; to be good at changing methods is only to adapt to the characteristics of things.

古文：慕选而不乱，极变而不烦，执一之君子执一而不失，能君万物，日月之与同光，天地之与同理。
现代文：广加选择而自己不可陷于混乱，善于改变而自己不可陷于烦扰。一个坚持专一的君子，坚持专一而不放松，就能够统率万物，使日月与之同光，天地与之同理了。
English: A gentleman who sticks to single-mindedness, sticks to single-mindedness and does not relax, can lead all things, make the sun and moon shine with it, and the heaven and earth have the same reason with it.

古文：圣人裁物，不为物使。
现代文：圣人裁定事物，不受事物所支配。
English: The sage adjudicates things, and is not governed by them.

古文：心安，是国安也；心治，是国治也。
现代文：保持心安，国也安定；保持心治，国也治理。
English: Keep peace of mind, and the country will be stable; keep peace of mind, and the country will be governed.

古文：所以操者非刑也，所以危者非怒也。民人操，百姓治，道其本至也，至不至无，非所人而乱。
现代文：治理在于内心，安定也在于内心。内里有一个治理好的心，口里说的就会是 治言 ，加于民众的就会是 治事 ，因而事业振兴而人民顺服，百姓就算治理好了。用来掌握百姓的不应当是刑罚，用来忧惧百姓的不应当是发怒。掌握人民，治理百姓，道是最根本的。道，最伟大又最虚无，不是什么人能够败坏它的。
English: Governance lies in the heart, stability also lies in the heart. If there is a heart of good governance in the heart, what is said in the mouth will be "governance," and what is added to the people will be "governance." Therefore, if the cause is revitalized and the people are obedient, the people will be governed well. It should not be punishment to control the people, and it should not be anger to fear the people. The way to control the people and govern the people is the most fundamental. The way, the greatest and the most nothing, is not what people can corrupt it.

古文：凡在有司执制者之利，非道也。圣人之道，若存若亡，援而用之，殁世不亡。
现代文：凡是官府各部门所实行的制度办法，并不是道。圣人的道，若有若无，拿过来运用，永世也用不完。
English: All the systems and methods implemented by various departments of the government are not the way. The way of the saints, if there is any, should be used, and it will never run out.

古文：与时变而不化，应物而不移，日用之而不化。
现代文：它帮助时世变化，而自身并不改变；允许万物发展，而自身并不转移。人们天天使用它都不会有所损耗。
English: It helps the times change, but does not change itself; it allows all things to develop, but does not transfer itself. People use it every day without any loss.

古文：人能正静者，筋肕而骨强；能戴大圆者，体乎大方；镜大清者，视乎大明。
现代文：人如能进到正和静的境界，身体也就筋韧而骨强，进而能顶天立地，目视如同清水，观察如同日月。
English: If a person can enter the realm of positive harmony and tranquility, the body will also be tough and strong, and then it will be able to stand on top of the sky, look like clear water, and observe like the sun and the moon.

古文：正静不失，日新其德，昭知天下，通于四极。
现代文：只要不失掉这正与静，其德行将与日俱新，而且能遍知天下事物，以至四方极远的地域。
English: As long as he does not lose this uprightness and tranquility, his virtue will be renewed day by day, and he will be able to know things all over the world, even in regions far away.

古文：金心在中不可匿，外见于形容，可知于颜色。
现代文：内里有一个完整周全的心是不可能掩蔽的，这将表现在形体容貌上，也能在颜色上看得出来。
English: It's impossible to hide a complete and well-rounded heart inside, and this will be reflected in the shape and appearance, and can also be seen in the color.

古文：善气迎人，亲如弟兄；恶气迎人，害于戈兵。
现代文：善气迎人，相亲如同兄弟，恶气迎人，相害如同刀兵。
English: Greet one another with a good spirit, as brothers. Greet one another with an evil spirit, as swordsmen.

古文：不言之言，闻于雷鼓。
现代文：这种不用自己说出来的语言，比打雷击鼓还响亮震耳。
English: This language, which you don't have to say yourself, is louder and more deafening than the thunderous drums.

古文：全心之形，明于日月，察于父母。
现代文：这完整周全的心的形体，比日月还更光亮，体察事情比父母了解子女还更透彻。
English: This complete and well-rounded form of mind is brighter than the sun and moon, and perceives things more thoroughly than parents understand their children.

古文：昔者明王之爱天下，故天下可附；暴王之恶天下，故天下可离。
现代文：从前，明君的心爱天下，故天下归附；暴君的心恶天下，故天下叛离。
English: Once upon a time, the emperor's heart was loved by the world, so the world followed him; the tyrant's heart was hated by the world, so the world rebelled against him.

古文：故货之不足以为爱，刑之不足以为恶。
现代文：所以，光是赏赐不足以代表爱护，光是刑罚不足以代表厌恶。
English: Therefore, reward alone is not enough to represent love, and punishment alone is not enough to represent aversion.

古文：货者爱之末也，刑者恶之末也。
现代文：赏与罚不过是爱与恶的微末表现而已。
English: Reward and punishment are but the tiniest manifestations of love and evil.

古文：凡民之生也，必以正平；所以失之者，必以喜乐哀怒，节怒莫若乐，节乐莫若礼，守礼莫若敬。
现代文：人的生命，一定要依靠中正和平。其所以有所差失，必然是由于喜乐哀怒。制止忿怒，什么都比不上音乐；控制享乐，什么都比不上守礼；遵守礼仪，什么都比不上保持敬慎。
English: A man's life must depend on the peace between China and Japan. If anything goes wrong, it must be due to joy and sorrow. Nothing is better than music to control anger; nothing is better than etiquette to control pleasure; and nothing is better than being cautious to observe etiquette.

古文：外敬而内静者，必反其性。
现代文：外守敬而内虚静，那就一定能恢复精气。
English: If you are respectful on the outside, but quiet on the inside, then you will definitely be able to restore your energy.

古文：岂无利事哉？
现代文：怎么说没有好事呢？
English: How can you say there are no good things?

古文：我无利心。岂无安处哉？
现代文：只怕自己没有好心；怎么说没有安宁之处呢？
English: I'm just afraid that I don't have a good heart; how can I say that there is no place for peace?

古文：我无安心。
现代文：只怕是自己没有安宁之心。
English: Even if you don't have a peaceful heart.

古文：心之中又有心。
现代文：心之中又有心，这个心先生意识，再说出话来。
English: There is also a heart in the heart, and this heart is conscious, and then it speaks.

古文：意以先言，意然后形，形然后思，思然后知。
现代文：因为有了意识然后有具体的形象，有了具体形象然后就据以思考，经过思考然后才有了知识。
English: Because with awareness comes concrete image, with concrete image comes thought, with thought comes knowledge.

古文：凡心之形，过知失生。
现代文：大凡心的形体，求知过多则失其生机。
English: The body of an ordinary mind, if it seeks to know too much, loses its vitality.

古文：是故内聚以为原。
现代文：因此，内部的聚集才是泉源。
English: Therefore, the inner gathering is the source of the spring.

古文：泉之不竭，表里遂通；泉之不涸，四支坚固。
现代文：泉源不枯竭，表里才能通达；泉源不干枯，四肢才能坚固。
English: If the spring is not exhausted, the surface can be reached; if the spring is not dry, the limbs can be strengthened.

古文：能令用之，被及四固。
现代文：能使人们运用这个道理，就有益于四面八方了。
English: If we can get people to apply this principle, it will be beneficial to all sides.

古文：是故圣人一言解之，上察于天，下察于地。
现代文：因此，圣人对于道有一个字的解释，就是能上通于天，下达于地的。
English: Therefore, the sages have an explanation for the word Tao, which is to be able to ascend to heaven and descend to earth.

