古文：陆俟陆俟，代人也。曾祖干，祖引，世领部落。
现代文：陆俟，代郡人，曾祖父陆干，祖父陆引，两代人都是部落首领。
English: Lu Hao, deputy county resident, great-grandfather Lu Gan, grandfather Lu Bing, both generations are tribal leaders.

古文：父突，太祖时率部民随从征伐，数有战功，拜厉威将军、离石镇将。
现代文：他的父亲陆突，太祖在位时率领部族之人随从皇帝东征西讨，屡建战功，被任命为厉威将军、离石镇将。
English: His father, Lu Tu, who led the tribe to follow the emperor on the east and west campaigns when the great-grandfather was on the throne, repeatedly made war exploits and was appointed as General Li Wei and General Li Shizhen.

古文：天兴中，为上党太守、关内侯。
现代文：天兴年间，陆突任上党太守，赐爵为关内侯。
English: During the years of Tianxing, Lu Tujun was appointed as the party's first governor, and was given the title of Kuanai marquis.

古文：俟少聪慧，有策略。
现代文：陆俟年少时即非常聪慧，颇有谋略。
English: When he was young, Lu Wei was very clever and had a lot of strategies.

古文：太宗践阼，拜侍郎，迁内侍，袭爵关内侯，转龙骧将军、给事中，典选部兰台事。
现代文：太宗即位后，任侍郎，又迁任内侍，承袭父亲的爵位为关内侯，转任龙骧将军、给事中，掌管吏部和御史台之事。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he was appointed as a chamberlain, and then moved to the position of an inner chamberlain, inheriting his father's title of Kwanai marquis, and was transferred to the position of Longjing general, and in charge of the personnel department and the imperial history department.

古文：当官而行，无所屈桡。
现代文：为官时认真履行其职守，从不退缩屈服。
English: When he was an official, he conscientiously fulfilled his duties and never flinched or gave in.

古文：世祖亲征赫连昌，诏俟督诸军镇大碛，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：世祖亲自率军征讨赫连昌，令陆俟督率诸军镇守大沙漠，以防备蠕蠕部入侵。
English: Shizu personally led the army to conquer Helianchang, and ordered the army led by Governor Lu Xun to guard the great desert in order to prevent the invasion of the enemy.

古文：车驾还，复典选部兰台事。
现代文：皇帝回朝之后，再次授任他掌管吏部和御史台。
English: After the emperor's return to the imperial court, he was again appointed to be in charge of the personnel department and the imperial history department.

古文：与西平公安颉督诸军攻虎牢，克之，赐爵建业公，拜冀州刺史，仍本将军。
现代文：陆俟奉命与西平公安颉督率诸军进攻虎牢，攻占了该镇。世祖赐给爵位为建业公，授任为冀州刺史，仍为龙骧将军。
English: Lu Wei was ordered to lead the troops to attack the Tiger's Stronghold with the Xiping Public Security Commissar and captured the town. The ancestor gave him the title of Jianye Gong, appointed him as the historian of Jizhou, and he was still the general of Longyi.

古文：时考州郡治功，唯俟与河内太守丘陈为天下第一。
现代文：当时考核所有州郡官员治理的功绩，惟独陆俟与河内太守丘陈为全国第一。
English: At that time, the performance of all state and county officials in governance was assessed, but only Lu Ye and Hanoi Taizhu Qiu Chen ranked first in the country.

古文：转都督洛豫二州诸军事、本将军、虎牢镇大将。
现代文：陆俟转任为都督洛、豫二州诸军事、龙骧将军、虎牢镇大将。
English: Lu Yao was appointed as the governor of Luo, the military of the two states of Henan, the general of Longyao and the general of Huyao Town.

古文：平凉休屠金崖、羌狄子玉等叛，复转为使持节、散骑常侍、平西将军、安定镇大将。
现代文：平凉休屠人金崖、羌人狄子玉叛乱，又授陆俟为使持节、散骑常侍、平西将军、安定镇大将。
English: Ping Liang Xiu butchered Jin Yap, and the Hsiang people rebelled against Di Ziyu. He was also given the title of "Envoy of the Year," "Frequent Cavalryman," "General of Pingxi" and "General of Anding Town."

古文：既至，怀柔羌戎，莫不归附。
现代文：陆俟到任之后，德威并举安抚当地羌戎，没有人不来归附的。
English: After Lu Xun took office, Dewey also moved to appease the local Xiong Rong, and no one refused to join him.

古文：追讨崖等，皆获之。
现代文：又率兵追讨金崖等人，将他们全部生擒。
English: He also led his soldiers to pursue Jin Yap and others, capturing them all alive.

古文：徵还，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：陆俟奉召回朝，被授任为散骑常侍。
English: Lu Yao was recalled to the imperial court and appointed as a samurai.

古文：出为平东将军、怀荒镇大将。
现代文：陆俟由京官出任平东将军、怀荒镇大将。
English: Lu Yao was promoted from Beijing official to General Pingdong and General Huairaozhen.

古文：未期，诸高车莫弗讼俟严急，待下无恩，还请前镇将郎孤。
现代文：没过多久，各高车部头领向朝廷状告陆俟治政严酷，对待属下毫无恩惠，请求让前任镇将郎孤回来。
English: Not long after, the heads of the high-ranking chariot units complained to the imperial court that Lu Xun was harsh in his governance and treated his subordinates without favor, and requested that his predecessor, Zhengyang Langluo, be allowed to return.

古文：世祖诏许之，徵俟还京。
现代文：世祖诏令批准其请求，征召陆俟回到京都。
English: The Emperor's edict approved his request and called him back to Kyoto.

古文：既至朝见，言于世祖曰： 陛下今以郎孤复镇，以臣愚量，不过周年，孤身必败，高车必叛。 
现代文：陆俟回京后朝见皇帝，对世祖说道： 陛下现在让郎孤再去任镇将，凭我愚昧的估计，不过一年，郎孤必然失败，高车人必然叛乱。 
English: After returning to Beijing, Lu Yao went to see the emperor and said to his ancestor: Your majesty has now asked Lang Guo to be appointed town marshal again. According to my foolish estimation, in one year, however, Lang Guo will inevitably fail, and the people of Gaochao will inevitably rebel.

古文：世祖疑谓不实，切责之，以公归第。
现代文：世祖对此有怀疑，认为他言过其实，对他深加谴责，解除他的所有官职，仅仅保留公的爵位回到自己府第。
English: The patriarch had doubts about this and thought he was exaggerating, so he denounced him, dismissed him from all official positions, and returned to his own palace, retaining only his official title.

古文：明年，诸莫弗果杀郎孤而叛。
现代文：第二年，高车族各头领果然杀死了郎孤而反叛。
English: The following year, the Takecha tribe of Zhu Mofo did indeed kill Lang Guo, betraying the imperial court.

古文：世祖闻之，大惊，即召俟，问其知败之意。
现代文：世祖听说此事，大惊失色，立即召来陆俟，问他郎孤必败的道理。
English: When the patriarch heard about this, he was so shocked that he immediately summoned Lu Yao and asked him the reason why a lone person would always be defeated.

古文：俟曰： 夫高车上下无礼。无礼之人，难为其上。
现代文：陆俟说道： 高车人对上对下都不讲礼法，无礼之人，谁也难以作他的上司。
English: Lu Yao said: The high-speed train people do not talk about etiquette, and it is difficult for a rude person to be his boss.

古文：臣所以莅之以威严，节之以宪纲，欲渐加训导，使知分限。
现代文：我之所以到任之后就以威严相加，用法律制裁来加以节制，是想要对其逐渐加以训导，使其明白分寸和法度。
English: The reason why, after I took office, I used authority and legal sanctions to restrain them is that I wanted to gradually discipline them and make them understand the proportion and legality.

古文：而恶直丑正，实繁有徒，故讼臣无恩，称孤之美。
现代文：但他们中间厌恶和嫉恨刚直正理的，实在是大有人在，所以就状告我不讲恩惠，而赞美郎孤。
English: But there are many among them who hate and envy the upright and righteous, and they accuse me of showing favoritism and praising the wicked.

古文：孤获还镇，欣其名誉，必加恩于百姓，讥臣为失，专欲以宽惠治之，仁恕待之。
现代文：郎孤得以恢复为镇将之后，喜欢别人对他的称誉，必然只顾给百姓施以恩惠，讥笑我施政有过失，一味想以宽容和恩惠来治理他们，以仁慈恩恕来对待他们。
English: After Lang Guo was reinstated as town marshal, he liked others' praise of him, inevitably only cared about giving favors to the people, ridiculed my mistakes in governance, and wanted to govern them with tolerance and grace, and treat them with mercy and forgiveness.

古文：无礼之人，易生陵傲，不过期年，无复上下。然后收之以威，则人怀怨怼，怨怼既多，败乱彰矣。 
现代文：这样一来，本是无礼之人，更容易产生轻慢骄傲之心，不过一年，更无上下之分，在这种情况下再用威严来进行整肃，那么人们就会对他产生怨愤，怨愤越积越多，败乱就表现出来了。 
English: In this way, it is easier for an impolite person to have a proud and proud heart, but in a year, even more so, in this case, if he uses majesty to rectify, then people will resent him, and the more resentment accumulates, the more defeat is manifested.

古文：世祖笑曰： 卿身乃短，虑何长也？ 
现代文：世祖听了后笑着说： 你个子矮小，为何谋虑如此深长啊。 
English: After listening, the ancestor smiled and said, "You are short, why are you so thoughtful?"

古文：即日，复除散骑常侍。
现代文：当天，再次授任陆俟为散骑常侍。
English: On the same day, Lu Yao was reappointed as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：世祖征蠕蠕，破凉州，常随驾别督辎重。
现代文：世祖征讨蠕蠕，攻破凉州，陆俟经常跟随皇帝出征，督率辎重。
English: The Ancestor's conquest of Crum Crum, the conquest of Liangzhou, Lu Wei often followed the emperor to go to war, and he was in charge of the leadership.

古文：又与高凉王那渡河南，略地至济南东平陵，徙其民六千家于河北。
现代文：他又与高凉王拓跋那率军渡过黄河南下，占领广大地域直至济南东平陵，把那里的民户六千家迁徙到黄河以北。
English: He also crossed the Yellow River to the south with Gaolang Wang Tuobana and his army, occupied a vast area as far as Dongpingling in Jinan, and moved six thousand households there to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：又以俟都督秦雍二州诸军事、平西将军、长安镇大将。
现代文：世祖又授予陆俟以都督秦雍二州诸军事、平西将军、长安镇大将等职。
English: The founder of the dynasty also bestowed upon Lu Xun the positions of military governor of the two states of Qin and Yong, general of Pingxi, and general of Chang'an.

古文：与高凉王那击盖吴于杏城，大破之。
现代文：陆俟与高凉王拓跋那在杏城攻击盖吴，大败敌军。
English: Lu Wei and Gao Liang Wang Tuobana attacked Gai Wu in Ancheng, defeating the enemy army.

古文：获吴二叔，诸将欲送京师，俟独不许，曰： 夫长安一都，险绝之土，民多刚强，类乃非一。
现代文：擒获了盖吴的两个叔父，诸将想要把他们送到京师去，惟独陆俟不同意，他说： 长安这一带，乃是险要阻隔之地，百姓大多刚强猛悍，且各族杂居。
English: Having captured the two uncles of Gui Wu, the generals wanted to send them to Beijing Division, but Lu Yao disagreed. He said: This area of Chang'an is a place that is almost cut off. Most of the people are strong and fierce, and people of all ethnic groups live together.

古文：清平之时，仍多叛动，今虽良民，犹以为惧，况其党与乎？
现代文：天下清平之时，仍多有叛乱发生，如今即使是普通百姓，还足以为惧，何况他们结成死党呢？
English: When the world was at peace, there were still many rebellions. Nowadays, even ordinary people are afraid enough, not to mention that they have formed a deadly party.

古文：若不斩吴，恐长安之变未已。
现代文：倘若不斩除盖吴，恐怕长安之变不会停止。
English: If we don't get rid of Gai Wu, I'm afraid the changes in Chang'an won't stop.

古文：吴一身藏窜，非其亲信，谁能获之？
现代文：盖吴只身逃窜藏匿，除了他的亲信，还有谁能找到他？
English: Gai Wu has fled and gone into hiding. Apart from his close friends, who else can find him?

古文：若停十万之众以追一人，非上策也。
现代文：如果把十万大军滞留在这里用来追剿盖吴一个人，这不是上策。
English: It is not a good idea to keep a hundred thousand troops here to chase Gui Wu alone.

古文：不如私许吴叔，免其妻子，使自追吴，擒之必也。 
现代文：不如私下许诺盖吴的叔父，对他的妻子儿女免于治罪，让他们自己去追寻盖吴，必然会将其擒获。 
English: It would have been better if Gai Wu's uncle had privately promised his wife and children immunity from prosecution, and told them to go after Gai Wu themselves. They would surely capture him.

古文：诸将咸曰： 今来讨贼，既破之，获其二叔，唯吴一人，何所复至？ 
现代文：诸将都说道： 如今我们前来征讨贼人，已经把他们打败，又抓住了他的两个叔父，仅剩盖吴一个人，他怎么能够再来作乱呢。 
English: The generals all said: Now that we have come to recruit thieves, defeated them, and caught his two uncles, only Ga Wu is left, how can he make trouble again?

古文：俟曰： 吴之悖逆，本自天性，今若获免，必诳惑愚民，称王者不死，妄相扇动，为患必大。
现代文：陆俟说： 盖吴之所以叛逆，本是出自他的天性，现在如果他得以幸免，必然又会欺骗蛊惑那里的百姓，声称自己是不死的王者，狂妄地进行煽动，必定造成极大的祸患。
English: Lu Yao said: The reason why Gai Wu rebelled originally came from his nature. Now, if he is spared, he will inevitably deceive and mislead the people there, claim to be an immortal king, and arrogantly carry out incitement, which will certainly cause great disaster.

古文：诸君不见毒蛇乎？
现代文：诸君不见毒蛇吗？
English: Don't you see the viper?

古文：断其头犹能为害，况除腹心疾，而曰必遗其类，其可乎？ 
现代文：砍断它的头还能害人，况且要除掉朝廷的心腹之患，而说要留下祸根，这样做可以吗？ 
English: Cutting off its head can still harm people, moreover, it is necessary to remove the heart of the court, but to leave a bane, is it okay to do so?

古文：诸将曰： 公言是也。
现代文：诸将说： 你说的有道理。
English: The generals said: You are quite right.

古文：但得贼不杀，更有所求，遂去不返，其如罪何？ 
现代文：但是抓到了贼人而不杀掉，又对他有所求，假如他们去了而不回来，那罪责谁来承担？ 
English: But if they caught the thief and did not kill him, but asked him for something, and if they went away and did not return, who would bear the blame?

古文：俟曰： 此罪我与诸君当之。 
现代文：陆俟说： 这个罪责我替诸君承当。 
English: Lu Wei said, "I will take the blame for all of you.

古文：高凉王那亦从俟计，遂遣吴二叔，与之期。
现代文：高凉王拓跋那也同意陆俟的计谋，于是就遣返盖吴的两个叔父，并给他们规定了期限。
English: Gao Liang Wang Tuobana also agreed to Lu Yao's scheme, so he repatriated the two uncles of Gui Wu and set a deadline for them.

古文：及吴叔不至，诸将各咎于俟。
现代文：到了日期却不见盖吴的叔父回来，诸将都归咎于陆俟。
English: When the date arrived, however, Gui Wu's uncle did not return, and everyone blamed Lu Yao.

古文：俟曰： 此未得其便耳，必不背也。 
现代文：陆俟说： 这是由于他们还没有得到方便的机会，他们一定不会违背诺言的。 
English: Lu Wei said: This is because they have not yet been given a convenient opportunity, they will not break their promise.

古文：后数日，果斩吴以至，皆如其言。
现代文：过了几天，两人果然斩了盖吴而来，全都像陆俟所说的那样。
English: A few days later, the two did indeed kill Ge Wu and return, just as Lu Yao said.

古文：俟之明略独决，皆此类也。
现代文：陆俟的谋略明智、决策果断，都表现在这类事情上面。
English: It can be seen from this that Lu Wei is a master of materials and a shrewd decision-maker.

古文：迁内都大官。
现代文：不久他迁任内都大官。
English: He was later promoted to the post of Inner Capital Official.

古文：安定卢水刘超等聚党万馀以叛，世祖以俟威恩被于关中，诏以本官加都督秦雍诸军事，镇长安。
现代文：安定卢水人刘超等集合万余人叛乱。世祖因为陆俟以恩威并举享誉于关中一带，令他以现有的官职加授都督秦雍诸军事之职，镇守长安。
English: Liu Chao, an Anding Lu Shui man, and others rallied more than ten thousand people to rebel. The ancestor, because Lu Yao was renowned for his benevolence in the Guanzhong area, ordered him to use his existing official position to award the military position of the governor Qin Yong, the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：世祖曰： 秦川险绝，奉化日近，吏民未被恩德，故顷年已来，频有叛动。
现代文：世祖说： 秦川险峻阻绝，接受教化的时间短，那里的官吏和百姓没有受到朝廷恩德，所以近年以来，多次发生反叛动乱。
English: Shizu said: The Qin River is steep and steep, the time to accept enlightenment is short, and the officials and people there have not been rewarded by the imperial court, so in recent years, there have been many rebellions and riots.

古文：今超等恃险，不顺王命，朕若以重兵与卿，则超等必合而为一，据险拒战，未易攻也；若以轻兵与卿，则不制矣。
现代文：如今刘超等人凭借着险要地势，不顺从王命，朕如若把重兵派给你，那么刘超等人必然会集合于一处，据险顽抗，不容易攻下他们；倘若只派给你少量的军队，那么就不能制服他们。
English: Now Liu Chao and others are taking advantage of the dangerous situation and not obeying the king's order. If I send you heavy troops, then Liu Chao and others will inevitably gather in one place. According to the danger, it is not easy to capture them. If only a small number of troops are sent to you, then they cannot be subdued.

古文：今使卿以方略定之。 
现代文：现在只能让你凭自己的方法谋略去安定那个地方。 
English: You're on your own now.

古文：于是俟单马之镇，超等闻之大欣，以为无能为也。
现代文：于是陆俟就单骑到镇所上任，刘超等人听说以后大为欣喜，认为陆俟不会有什么作为。
English: As a result, Lu Wei rode alone to the town hall to take office. Liu Chao and others were very pleased to hear that, and thought that Lu Wei would not do anything.

古文：既至，申扬威信，示以成败，诱纳超女，外若姻亲。
现代文：陆俟到了镇所，向刘超等人申扬朝廷的威信，晓示其成败得失，并诱说要娶刘超之女，外表上像是要结为姻亲。
English: When Lu Yao arrived at the town hall, he praised the prestige of the imperial court to Liu Chao and others, told them of his successes and failures, and enticed them to marry Liu Chao's daughter. On the surface, it looked as if they were going to become in-laws.

古文：超犹自警，初无降意。
现代文：刘超依然十分警惕，一点也没有归降的意思。
English: Liu Chao is still very alert and has no intention of surrendering.

古文：俟乃率其帐下，往见超，观其举措，设掩袭之计。
现代文：陆俟就带领他帐下的人，前去会见刘超，借机观察他的举措安排，以设下偷袭的计划。
English: Lu Wei led his subordinates to meet with Liu Chao, taking the opportunity to observe his measures and arrangements in order to set up a sneak attack plan.

古文：超使人逆曰： 三百人以外，适当以弓马相待，三百人以内，当以酒食相供。 
现代文：刘超派人回答说： 你带领的人如果超过三百人，到时我就以弓马相待，如果在三百人以下，我当以酒食相供。 
English: Liu Chao sent a man to reply: "If the number of people you lead exceeds three hundred, then I will treat them with bows and horses. If the number is less than three hundred, then I should provide them with food and drink.

古文：俟乃将二百骑诣超，超设备甚严。
现代文：于是陆俟只带了二百名骑兵到刘超那里去，刘超设置防备非常森严。
English: As a result, Lu Wei only brought two hundred cavalrymen to Liu Chao, and Liu Chao set up a very strict defense.

古文：俟遂纵酒尽醉而还。
现代文：陆俟在席间放纵饮酒尽醉而还。
English: Lu Wei indulged in drinking between meals and got drunk.

古文：后谓将士曰： 超可取也。 
现代文：后来他对属下的将士说： 刘超完全可以被我们打败。 
English: Later, he said to his subordinate soldiers: Liu Chao can be completely defeated by us.

古文：乃密选精兵五百人，陈国恩德，激厉将士，言至恳切。
现代文：于是秘密挑选精兵五百人，向他们陈述国家的恩德，激励将士的斗志，言语至为恳切。
English: So he secretly selected 500 elite soldiers, told them about the country's benevolence, and inspired the fighting spirit of the soldiers. His words were very sincere.

古文：士卒奋勇，各曰： 以死从公，必无二也。 
现代文：士卒为之奋勇，各自表态说： 冒死听从主帅之令，决无二心。 
English: The soldiers fought bravely for it, and each of them said, "I will risk my life to obey the orders of the commander-in-chief, and I have no second thoughts."

古文：遂伪猎而诣超，与士卒约曰： 今会发机，当以醉为限。 
现代文：陆俟于是伪称出外打猎而去见刘超，事先同手下的士卒约定说： 今天是行动的好时机，你们在饮宴中应当以不喝醉为限。 
English: Lu Wei then pretended to go out hunting and went to see Liu Chao. In advance, he agreed with his subordinates: Today is a good time to act. You should not get drunk at the banquet.

古文：俟于是诈醉，上马大呼，手斩超首。
现代文：陆俟就诈称自己酒醉，翻身上马大声呼喊，亲手斩下刘超的首级。
English: Lu Yao falsely claimed that he was drunk, rolled over on his horse, shouted loudly, and cut off Liu Chao's head with his own hands.

古文：士卒应声纵击，杀伤千数，遂平之。
现代文：魏军士卒应声而起奋力攻击，杀伤千余人，平定了刘超的叛乱。
English: In response, Wei soldiers attacked vigorously, killing more than a thousand people, and put down Liu Chao's rebellion.

古文：世祖大悦，徵俟还京师，转外都大官，散骑常侍如故。
现代文：世祖闻讯大为高兴，征召陆俟回到京师，转授他为外都大官，仍任散骑常侍之职。
English: The ancestor was very pleased to hear the news. He conscripted Lu Yao to return to Beijing as a teacher and transferred him to be a foreign capital official. He still held the position of straggler's attendant.

古文：高宗践阼，以子丽有策立之勋，拜俟征西大将军，进爵东平王。
现代文：高宗即位以后，因陆俟之子陆丽策立皇帝继位有功，授予陆俟征西大将军之职，晋爵为东平王。
English: After Gao Zong ascended the throne, he awarded Lu Xun the position of General of the Western Expedition and the title of King of Dongping to Lu Xun's son, Lu Lize, for his success in establishing the succession of the emperor.

古文：太安四年薨，年六十七，谥曰成。
现代文：太安四年，陆俟去世，终年六十七岁，定谥号为成。
English: In the fourth year of the Taian era, Lu Yao passed away at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：有子十二人。
现代文：陆俟有儿子十二人。
English: Ye Yan had twelve sons.

