古文：曲思明马游秦萧华一行术士杜鹏举李栖筠杜思温柳及韦泛
现代文：曲思明马游秦萧华一行术士杜鹏举李栖筠杜思温柳及韦泛
English: Qiu Siming, Ma You, Qin Xiaohua, a group of magicians, Du Peng, Li Qian, Du Si, Wen Liu and Wei Pan

古文：曲思明
现代文：曲思明
English: Qu Siming

古文：赵冬曦任吏部尚书。
现代文：赵冬曦任吏部尚书。
English: Zhao Dongxi was appointed as the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：吏部参选事例，每年铨曹人吏，旧例各合得一员外。
现代文：吏部参与选拔官员的事情，每年选拔官员的府署，按照贯例可以各选拔一个员外。
English: The Personnel Department participates in the selection of officials, and the prefectural offices that select officials each year can select one member from outside, in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：及论荐亲族，众人皆悉论请。
现代文：等到议论推荐自己的亲族，大家都请求推荐。
English: When it comes to recommending their own relatives, everyone asks for a recommendation.

古文：有令史曲思明一人，二年之内，未尝有言。
现代文：有一个令史叫曲思明的人，二年之内，没听说他推荐自己或别人。
English: There is a historical person named Qu Siming, within two years, I did not hear him recommend himself or others.

古文：冬曦谓曰： 铨曹往例。 
现代文：冬曦对他说： 选拔官员的惯例。
English: Dongxi said to him: It is the practice of selecting officials.

古文：各合得一官，或荐他人亦得。 
现代文：各府署应该得到一个官位，或者推荐别人也有些好处。 
English: Each prefectural office should get an official position, or there are some benefits to recommending others.

古文：思明又不言，但唯而退。
现代文：思明还是不说，只亨呵答应着就退出了。
English: Simin still didn't say anything, but Heng Oh agreed and withdrew.

古文：冬曦益怪之。
现代文：冬曦更加奇怪。
English: Winter is even stranger.

古文：一日又召而谓曰： 以某今日之势，三千余人选客，某下笔，即能自贫而富，舍贱而贵，饥之饱之，皆自吾笔。人人皆有所请，而子独不言何也？ 
现代文：有一天又召他来对他说： 凭我现在的权势，在三千多人的选客中，只要我动动笔，就能从贫到富，丢弃贫贱得到富贵，或饥或饱，都决定在我这支笔上，每个人都有所请求，然而唯独你不说话，是什么原因呢？ 
English: One day he summoned him again and said to him: "With my present power, among more than three thousand chosen guests, as long as I move my pen, I can go from poor to rich, discard the poor and get rich, or hungry or full, are all decided on my pen, everyone has a request, but you alone do not speak, what is the reason?

古文：思明曰： 夫人生死有命，富贵关天。官职是当来之分，未遇何以怅然？
现代文：思明说： 人的生死是由命运来决定的；富贵是由天定的，官职应该来就来了，没有当上何必惆怅呢？
English: Siming said: A person's life and death are decided by fate; wealth is determined by heaven, and the official post should come when it comes, why should it be shunned if it is not given?

古文：三千之人，一官一名，皆是分定，只假尚书之笔。
现代文：三千多人，一官一名，这都是命运决定的，只是借尚书您的笔。
English: More than three thousand people, one official and one person, this is all determined by fate, just by borrowing your pen.

古文：思明自知命未亨通，不敢以闲事挠于尚书。 
现代文：我自己知道我的命运还没亨通，所以不敢拿闲事来打扰您了。 
English: I myself know that my fate has not yet succeeded, so I dare not disturb you with anything.

古文：冬曦曰： 如子之言，当贤人也，兼能自知休咎耶？ 
现代文：冬曦说： 如果像你说的那样，你真是个贤人，能不能知道自己的祸福呢？ 
English: Dongxi said: If, as you said, you really are a wise man, can you know your own good and bad fortune?

古文：思明曰： 贤不敢当。思明来年，始合于尚书下授一官，所以未能有请也。 
现代文：思明说： 贤人不敢当，思明来年，才应当在尚书下被授予一官，所以一直也没有请求。 
English: Siming said, "A wise man would not dare to do that. Next year, Siming should be awarded an official title under the Imperial Rescript, so he has never asked for it."

古文：冬曦曰： 来年自授何官？ 
现代文：冬曦说： 来年将当什么官？ 
English: Dongxi said, "What kind of official will you be next year?"

古文：思明曰： 此乃忘之矣！ 
现代文：思明说： 这个事我忘了。 
English: Siming said: I forgot about this.

古文：冬曦曰： 如何？ 
现代文：冬曦说： 为什么这样？ 
English: Dongxi said: Why is that?

古文：思明曰： 今请于阶下书来年于尚书下授官月日，及请授俸料多少，亦请尚书同封记。
现代文：思明说： 现在请让我在这里写下来年在尚书手下授官的月日，以及授俸禄多少，再请尚书一同封存。
English: Siming said, "Now, please let me write down here the month and day of the year when I was promoted under Shang Shu, as well as how much salary I was awarded, and then ask Shang Shu to seal it together."

古文：请坏厅上壁，内书记，却泥封之。若来年授官日，一字参差，请死于阶下。 
现代文：请你把客厅的墙上挖开一小块，在里面藏上这些字记，再找泥封上，假如来年授官的日期有一字之差，我就死在这阶下。 
English: Please dig out a small piece of the living room wall, hide these words in it, and then find a clay seal. If there is a one-word difference in the date of next year's investiture, I will die under this step.

古文：乃再拜而去。
现代文：就拜辞走了。
English: He resigned and left.

古文：冬曦虽不言，心常怪之要诞，常拟与注别异一官。
现代文：冬曦嘴上没说什么，可心里却怪他太狂妄荒诞了。常常想要另外批注别人作官。
English: Dongxi did not say anything on his lips, but in his heart he blamed him for being too arrogant and absurd. He often wanted to criticize other officials.

古文：忽一日，上幸温泉，见白鹿升天，遂改会昌县为昭应，敕下吏部，令注其官。冬曦遂与思明注其县焉。
现代文：忽然有一天，皇上到温泉来了。看见白鹿升天，于是改会昌县为昭应县，敕令下达到吏部，令批注那里的官，冬曦马上就给思明批注到那个县去了。
English: Suddenly, one day, the emperor came to the hot spring. Seeing the white deer ascending to heaven, he changed the name of Chang County to Zhaoying County. The imperial order reached the cadre department, the order was approved by the officials there, and Dongxi immediately gave the approval to Siming and went to that county.

古文：及事毕，乃召而问之曰： 昨上幸温泉，白鹿升天，改其县为昭应，其县与长安万年不殊，今为注其官。子且妄语，岂能先知此乎？ 
现代文：等到这事完结，就召思明来问他说： 昨天皇上去温泉，白鹿升天，改那里的县名叫昭应。那个县和长安一万年也不会相同，现在我已经为你登记到那里当官，你说的话不是瞎话吗，怎么能预先知道呢？ 
English: When this matter was over, he summoned Simeon and asked him: "Yesterday the emperor went to a hot spring, the white deer ascended to heaven, and the name of the county there was changed to Zhaoying. That county will not be the same as Chang'an for ten thousand years. Now that I have registered as an official there for you, is what you said not a lie? How can you know in advance?

古文：思明拜谢曰： 请尚书坏壁验之。 
现代文：思明拜谢说 请尚书你把墙挖开检验一下吧！ 
English: Summing up, Bai Xie said, "Please Shang Shu, you should dig up the wall and check it out!"

古文：遂乃拆壁开封，看题云：来年某月日，上幸温泉，改其县为昭应，蒙注授其官，及所请俸料。
现代文：立刻拆了墙上封记打开验看，只见思明写道： 来年某月日，皇上到温泉，改其县为昭应，蒙注授其官，还有所授的俸禄。
English: He immediately tore down the seal on the wall, opened it for inspection, and saw that Siming wrote: On a certain day next year, the emperor went to a hot spring, changed his county to Zhao Ying, and was awarded his official, as well as the salary awarded.

古文：一无差谬。
现代文：无一字之差。
English: There's not a word out of place.

古文：冬曦甚惊异之。自后凡有事，皆发使问之，莫不神验。
现代文：冬曦非常惊异，从这以后有什么事，都派人问思明，没有不像神灵那样应验的。
English: Dongxi was very surprised. From then on, whenever anything happened, she would send someone to inquire about it, but nothing was fulfilled like the gods.

古文：冬曦罢吏部，差人问思明，当更得何官。
现代文：冬曦被免去吏部尚书的职务，派人去问思明，该再当什么官。
English: Dongxi was removed from the post of the secretary of the cadre department, and sent someone to ask Siming what kind of official he should be.

古文：思明报云：向西得一大郡。
现代文：思明回报说：向西将在一个大郡作官。
English: Siming replied: Xiang Xi will work as an official in a large county.

古文：且却后旬日，上召冬曦，问江西风土。冬曦奏对称旨，乃曰： 冬曦真豫章父母。
现代文：过了十多天，皇上召见冬曦，问他江西地方的风土人情，冬曦回答很附合皇上的心意，就说： 冬曦真是豫章的父母啊。 
English: After more than ten days, the emperor summoned Dongxi and asked him about the customs and people of Jiangxi. Dongxi's answer was very much in line with the emperor's heart, and he said: Dongxi is really the parents of Yuzhang.

古文：遂除江南观察使。
现代文：于是提升他作江南观察史。
English: As a result, his work on the history of observation in the south of the Yangtze River was promoted.

古文：到郡之后，有事发使问之，无不克应。
现代文：到郡府之后，有事还要派使臣去问思明，没有一次不应验的。
English: After arriving at the county government, there was still something to send envoys to ask Siming about, and there was not a single time that he did not pass the test.

古文：却后二年，疾病危笃。差人问之，思明报云： 可部署家事。
现代文：又过了二年，冬曦得病很重，派人问思明，思明回报说： 可以部署安排家事了。 
English: Two years later, when Dongxi fell seriously ill, he sent someone to ask Siming. Siming replied, "It's okay to make arrangements for household chores."

古文：冬曦知其不免，其疾危困而卒。
现代文：冬曦知道自己不会好了，直到疾病越加严重而死。
English: Dongxi knew that she would not get better until the disease worsened and she died.

古文：马游秦
现代文：马游秦
English: Ma Youqin

古文：吏部令史马游秦，开元中，以年满当选。
现代文：吏部令史马游秦，开元年间，因在任年满应当另选官。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the new year, the cadre department ordered Shima You Qin to be removed from his post, as he had reached the end of his term of office.

古文：时侍郎裴光庭，以本铨旧吏。
现代文：当时的侍郎裴光庭，按老规矩从旧官吏中选拔。
English: Pei Guangting, the chamberlain at that time, was selected from the old officials according to the old rules.

古文：问其所欲，游秦不对。固问之，曰： 某官已知矣，不敢复有所闻。 
现代文：问马游秦有什么要求，游秦不回答，裴光庭一再追问，游秦才说： 我已经知道自己要当什么官了，不敢再说什么了。 
English: Asked Ma Youqin what requirements he had, Youqin did not answer, Pei Guangting repeatedly asked, Youqin only said: I already know what kind of official I want to be, I dare not say anything else.

古文：光庭曰： 当在我，安得之？ 
现代文：光庭说： 你当什么官由我决定，你怎么会知道。 
English: Guangting said: I will decide what kind of official you will be. How would you know?

古文：游秦不答，亦无惧色。
现代文：游秦不回答，也没有害怕的神色。
English: You Qin did not answer, nor did he look scared.

古文：光庭怒曰： 既知可以言乎。
现代文：光庭气愤地说： 既然知道，可以说说吗？ 
English: Guangting said angrily: Since you know, can you say it?

古文：游秦曰： 此可誌之，未可言之。 
现代文：游秦说： 这事可以记下来，不能说出来。 
English: You Qin said, "You can write it down, but you can't say it."

古文：乃命疏其目，藏于楹栋之间，期注唱后而发之。
现代文：于是就让他写出作什么官等有关的事，收藏在楹栋之间，等到批注宣布之后再拿出来。
English: So he asked him to write down what kind of official and other related matters he did, and store them between the two buildings, and wait until the approval was announced before taking them out.

古文：后老君见于骊山，銮舆亲幸其地，因改会昌县为昭应县。
现代文：后来太上皇到骊山，銮驾车马亲到那个地方，就改会昌县为昭应县。
English: Later, when the emperor came to Lushan, he drove Maqian to that place and changed the name of Chang County to Zhaoying County.

古文：光庭以旧无昭应之名，谓游秦莫得而知也，遂补其县录事。
现代文：光庭认为以前没有昭应县的名，游秦没有办法知道，就补游秦为昭应县录事。
English: Guangting thought that there was no name of Zhaoying County before, and Yu Qin had no way to know, so he added Yu Qin as a record of Zhaoying County.

古文：及唱官之日，发栋间所誌之书，则如其言尔。
现代文：等到公布任命官职敕令那天，把藏在楹栋里所记下来的文书打开一看，则与马游秦所说的完全相同。
English: On the day of the announcement of the imperial edict on the appointment of officials, it was exactly the same as what Ma Youqin said when he opened the document that was hidden in the courtyard.

古文：萧华
现代文：萧华
English: Xiao Hua

古文：萧华虽陷贼中，李泌尝荐之。
现代文：萧华虽然陷入贼人的队伍中反抗过朝廷，但李泌曾经推荐他到朝廷作官。
English: Although Xiao Hua fell into the ranks of thieves and rebelled against the imperial court, Li Xiu once recommended him to the imperial court as an official.

古文：后泌归山，肃宗终相之。唯举薛胜掌纶诰，终不行。
现代文：后来李泌上山隐居，肃宗终于请萧华作了宰相，萧华只推举薛胜掌管吏部，始终没有用。
English: Later, Li Xiu went to live in seclusion on the mountain, and Su Zong finally asked Xiao Hua to be the prime minister. Xiao Hua only nominated Xue Sheng to be in charge of the cadre department, which was always useless.

古文：或问于泌，泌云： 胜官卑，难于发端。 
现代文：有一次萧华去问李泌，李泌说： 薛胜官运太低，很难作大官。 
English: Once, Xiao Hua went to ask Li Zhi, and Li Zhi said: Xue Sheng's official rank is too low, it is difficult to be a high-ranking official.

古文：乃置其《拔河赋》于案，冀肃宗览之，遂更荐。
现代文：后来萧华就把他写的《拔河赋》放在书案上，希望肃宗能看到，就再一次推荐。
English: Later, Xiao Hua put his book "Tug of War" on the bookcase, hoping that Su Zong could see it and recommend it again.

古文：肃宗至，果读之，不称旨，曰： 天子者君父。 而以天子玉齿对金钱荧煌乎？ 
现代文：肃宗来了，果然读了《拔河赋》，可是不符合皇帝的心意，说： 天子好比你们的父亲，而天子的玉齿怎么能听凭你们这些人的摆布呢？ 
English: Su Zong came and read "Tug of War," but it did not meet the emperor's wishes. He said, "The Son of Heaven is like your father, but how can the Son of Heaven be at the mercy of people like you?

古文：他日复荐，终不得。信命也。
现代文：以后又一次推荐，最终还是不同意，于是信命了。
English: After another recommendation, he finally disagreed, so he trusted his fate.

古文：一行
现代文：一行
English: One line

古文：沙门一行，开元中，尝奏玄宗云： 陛下行幸万里，圣祚无疆。 
现代文：一个和尚叫一行，在开元年间曾经上奏玄宗说： 陛下如果走到万里，就会圣福无疆。 
English: A monk called I Xing, in the first year of the year, once said to Xuanzong: If your majesty walks ten thousand miles, he will be blessed with boundless happiness.

古文：故天宝中，幸东都，庶盈万数。及上幸蜀，至万里桥，方悟焉。
现代文：所以在天宝年间，到了东都，百姓达到上万，等他到了蜀地，走到万里桥，才领悟了一行的话。
English: Therefore, in the Tianbao years, when he arrived in Dongdu, the people reached tens of thousands, and when he arrived in Shu and walked to Wanli Bridge, he only understood one line of words.

古文：术士
现代文：术士
English: Warlocks

古文：玄宗时，有术士，云： 判人食物，一一先知。 
现代文：玄宗在位的时候，有一个术士，有一种特殊技能。他说： 判断别人吃什么东西，全都能预先知道。 
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was on the throne, there was a sorcerer who had a special skill. He said, "When judging what others eat, you can know everything in advance."

古文：公卿竞延接。
现代文：宫中的公卿大人们都争着请他。
English: The nobles and great men of the court were all vying to invite him.

古文：唯李大夫栖筠不信，召至谓曰： 审看某明日餐何物。 
现代文：只有大夫李栖筠不信他的话。把术士召来问他说： 你看看我明天吃什么东西？ 
English: Only the doctor, Li Qichen, did not believe him. He called the sorcerer and asked him, "Can you see what I am going to eat tomorrow?"

古文：术者良久曰： 食两盘糕糜，二十碗桔皮汤。 
现代文：术士思考了半天才说： 你吃两盘粘糕。二十碗桔皮汤。 
English: The sorcerer thought for half a day before he said: You eat two plates of sticky cake. Twenty bowls of orange peel soup.

古文：李笑，乃遣厨司具馔，明日会诸朝客。
现代文：李大夫笑了，就让厨师准备饭菜，第二天请朝中大臣作客。
English: Dr. Li smiled and asked the chef to prepare the meal. The next day, he invited the Minister of the Korean Peninsula to be his guest.

古文：平明，有教召对。
现代文：第二天天一亮，有诏书下来让李大夫进宫。
English: At dawn the next day, an imperial edict was issued to allow Dr. Li to enter the palace.

古文：上谓曰： 今日京兆尹进新糯米，得糕糜，卿且唯吃。 
现代文：皇上对他说： 今天京兆尹刚进献了新糯米，做了粘糕，你只管吃吧。 
English: The emperor said to him: Today, Jing Zhaoyun just presented new glutinous rice and made sticky cakes, you just eat it.

古文：良久，以金盘盛来。李拜而餐，对御强食。
现代文：好半天，用金盘盛来了，李大夫拜谢就吃，面对皇上勉强吃下去。
English: For a long time, it was served on a golden plate. Dr. Li thanked the emperor and ate it. He could barely eat it in front of the emperor.

古文：上喜曰： 卿吃甚美，更赐一盘，又尽。 
现代文：皇上很高兴，说： 我看你吃得挺香，再给你一盘。 又吃光了。
English: The emperor was very pleased and said, "I think you had a delicious meal, I'll give you another plate.

古文：既罢归，腹疾大作，诸物绝口，唯吃桔皮汤，至夜半方愈。
现代文：吃完回府，肚子痛得很厉害，什么东西也吃不下去，只有喝桔皮汤才行，直到半夜才好。
English: After eating, I came back to my house with severe stomach pain. I couldn't eat anything. The only thing I could do was drink orange peel soup. I couldn't eat anything until midnight.

古文：忽记术士之言，谓左右曰： 我吃多少桔皮汤？ 
现代文：突然想起术士的话，对左右侍奉的人说： 我喝了多少桔皮汤？ 
English: Suddenly remembering the words of the sorcerer, she said to the attendants around her: "How much orange peel soup did I drink?

古文：曰： 二十碗矣。 
现代文：回答说： 二十碗了。 
English: And he said, Twenty measures are lacking.

古文：嗟叹久之，遽邀术士，厚与钱帛。
现代文：李大夫长吁短叹了很长时间，命令马上邀请术士，送给了他很多财物。
English: Dr. Li sighed for a long time, ordered to invite the sorcerer immediately, and gave him a lot of wealth.

古文：杜鹏举
现代文：杜鹏举
English: Du Penghu

古文：杜相鸿渐之父名鹏举，父子而似兄弟之名，盖有由也。
现代文：宰相杜鸿渐的父亲名叫鹏举。父子的名像兄弟的名，这是有缘由的。
English: Prime Minister Du Hongqian's father was named Pengju. There is a reason why the names of the father and son resemble the names of brothers.

古文：鹏举父尝梦有所之，见一大碑，云是宰相碑，已作者金填其字，未者刊名于柱上。
现代文：鹏举的父亲曾作过一个梦，在梦中他要出门，出去后看见一个大碑，说是宰相碑，已经被作者填上了金字，碑文和末尾写了很多姓名。
English: Pengzhu's father once had a dream. In the dream, he wanted to go out. After he went out, he saw a large monument, which was said to be the Prime Minister's monument. It had been filled with gold lettering by the author, and many names had been written on the inscription and at the end.

古文：有杜家儿否？
现代文：他就问： 有杜家的子弟吗？ 
English: He then asked: Are there any children of the Tu family?

古文：曰： 有。 
现代文：回答说： 有。 
English: And he said, I have.

古文：任自看之。视之，记得姓下有鸟偏旁曳脚，而忘其字，乃名子为鹏举。
现代文：让他自己随便看，他就看起来，只记得姓的下面有鸟，偏旁拽脚，但忘了是什么字，这个名的儿子是鹏举。
English: Let him look at it casually, he will look, only remember that there is a bird under the surname, pull the foot aside, but forget what the word is, the son of this name is Pengju.

古文：而谓之曰： 汝不为相，即世世名字，当鸟旁而曳脚也。 
现代文：那人就对他说： 你不是宰相，这是代代流传的名字，应该是鸟字旁边有拽脚。 
English: The man said to him, "You are not the prime minister. This is a name that has been passed down from generation to generation. There should be a dragging foot next to the bird.

古文：鹏举生鸿渐，而名字亦前定矣，况其官与寿乎？
现代文：鹏举生下鸿渐。然而连名字也是以前定下来的，况且官职和寿命呢？
English: Peng Jiu gave birth to Hong Qian. However, even the name was previously set, and what about the official position and life expectancy?

古文：李栖筠
现代文：李栖筠
English: by Li Jiechi

古文：李大夫栖筠未达，将赴选。
现代文：大夫李栖筠还没有作官时，将要进京参加选官。
English: When Dr. Li Qisheng was not yet an official, he was going to go to Beijing to participate in the selection of officials.

古文：时扬州田山人，烟霞之士也，颇有前知。
现代文：当时扬州有个姓田的山人，是很出名的隐士，很有预见的能力。
English: At that time, there was a mountain man surnamed Tian in Yangzhou. He was a well-known hermit and had great foresight.

古文：往见之，问所得官。
现代文：李栖筠就去拜访他。问他自己将得到什么官职。
English: Li Qisheng went to visit him and asked him what post he would get.

古文：答曰： 宣州溧阳尉。 
现代文：田隐士回答他说： 可作宣州溧阳县县尉。 
English: Tian Ying replied to him, "You can be the Xuanzhou Xinyang County Lieutenant."

古文：李公曰： 某朝列之内，亦有亲故。所望之官，实不至此。 
现代文：李栖筠说： 我在朝廷的大臣里面也有亲戚和朋友，所希望得到的官职，实在不仅仅是这么个小官。 
English: Li Qisheng said: I have relatives and friends among the ministers of the imperial court, and the official position I hope to obtain is really not just such a minor official.

古文：良久曰： 胜则不可。
现代文：田隐士好半天才说： 官太大不行。
English: It took the hermit only half a day to say: "You can't be too high-ranking."

古文：某亦未审，将一书与楚州白鹤观张尊师，师当知矣。 
现代文：不过我也没有仔细思考，我写封信给楚州白鹤观的张师父，师父能知道。 
English: However, I didn't think about it carefully. I wrote a letter to Master Zhang of the White Crane Temple in Chuzhou. Master can know.

古文：李公至，寻得观院，蒿蓁塞径，若无人居。扣门良久，方有应者，乃引入，见张生甚古。
现代文：李栖筠到了楚州找到白鹤观，那里蒿草和榛柴堵塞了道路，好像没有人住似的，敲门敲了半天，才有人答应，开门人把李栖筠领进去，见张师父是个年岁很大的老人。
English: Li Qichen arrived in Chuzhou to find Baihaku, where weeds and firewood blocked the road, as if no one lived there. After knocking on the door for half a day, someone agreed. The person who opened the door led Li Qichen inside and saw that Master Zhang was a very old man.

古文：叟曰： 田子无端，妄相告郎君语。郎君岂不要知官否，彼云何？ 
现代文：老人说： 姓田的无缘无故，胡乱讲了一些话；你不是要知道将当什么官吗？他怎么说的？ 
English: The old man said, "Tan, surnamed Tian, said some things out of nowhere; don't you want to know what kind of official he will be? What did he say?

古文：曰： 宣州溧阳尉。 
现代文：李栖筠说： 他说我将当宣州溧阳县尉。 
English: Li Qisong said: He said that I would be the first lieutenant of Xuanzhou and Shenyang.

古文：曰： 否，魏州馆陶主簿。然已后任贵，声华煊赫，无介意于此也。 
现代文：老人说： 不对。将作魏州馆陶主簿，但是以后就会当大官，声名显赫，不要介意现在的小官。 
English: The old man said, "That's not right. I will be the chief bookkeeper of the Weizhou Museum of Ceramics, but in the future, I will be a high-ranking official with a great reputation. Don't mind the current low-ranking official.

古文：及到京，授溧阳尉，李公惊异，以为张道士之言不中。
现代文：等到了京城，被授予溧阳县尉。李栖筠惊奇怪异，以为张道士的话不准。
English: When he arrived in the capital, he was awarded the title of commander of Shenyang County. Li Qisheng was surprised and surprised, thinking that Zhang Daoshi's words were not allowed.

古文：数日，敕破铨注，改馆陶主簿，乃知田张相为发明。
现代文：过了几天，皇上下敕令废除以前的批注，改为馆陶主簿。这才明白田张两个都有道理。
English: A few days later, the Emperor issued an imperial edict abolishing the former annotation and replacing it with the main catalogue of the museum's ceramics. It was then that it became clear that there was a reason for both of these changes.

古文：后两人皆不知所之。
现代文：后来两个人都不知道去向。
English: After that, neither of them knew where they were going.

古文：田生弟作江州司马，名士颙。
现代文：田的弟弟作江州司马，名叫士颙。
English: Tian's younger brother was named Jiangzhou Sima, and his name was Shizeng.

古文：杜思温
现代文：杜思温
English: Du Siwen

古文：贞元初，有太学生杜思温，善鼓琴。
现代文：贞元初年，有一个太学生叫杜思温。很擅长弹琴。
English: In the first year of Zhenyuan, there was a student named Du Siwen. He was very good at playing the piano.

古文：多游于公侯门馆，每登临宴，往往得与。
现代文：多半时间都在公侯门馆里游乐。每次在宴会上弹奏，都得到赞赏。
English: He spent most of his time playing at the Prince's Gate, and was praised every time he played at a banquet.

古文：尝从宾客夜宿城苟家觜。
现代文：有一回曾随着宾客们在城外的苟家觜夜宿，夜晚山林幽静月光如银，真是美丽如画。
English: Once, I stayed with guests at a guesthouse outside the city. At night, the mountains and forests were quiet and the moonlight was like silver. It was really beautiful.

古文：中夜山月如画，而游客皆醉，思温独携琴临水闲泛。
现代文：这时游客们都醉了，唯独思温带着琴在水边弹琴。
English: By this time, all the tourists were drunk, except for Siwen, who was playing the harp by the water's edge.

古文：忽有一叟支颐来听。
现代文：忽然有一个老人手支面颊来听。
English: Suddenly, an old man put out his hand and cheek to listen.

古文：思温谓是座客，殊不回顾。及曲罢，乃知非向者同游之人，遽置琴而起。
现代文：思温以为是以前听琴的游客，根本不回头看，等到曲子弹完，才知道那老人并不是以前的游客。马上放下琴站起来。
English: Sween thought it was a tourist who used to listen to the piano, and didn't look back at all. It wasn't until he finished playing the tune that he realized the old man wasn't a former tourist. He immediately put down the piano and stood up.

古文：老人曰： 少年勿怖，余是秦时河南太守梁陟也，遭难，身没于此中。
现代文：老人说： 少年不要慌，我是秦朝时的河南太守梁陟。遭遇祸患，隐没在这里。
English: The old man said, "Young man, don't panic. I am Liang Qi, the Henan governor during the Qin Dynasty. When disaster struck, I disappeared here.

古文：平生好鼓琴，向来闻君抚琴，弦轸清越，故来听耳。
现代文：我这一生也喜欢弹琴，以前听你弹琴，声音清新悦耳，所以才来听。
English: I've also loved playing the piano all my life. I used to listen to you play the piano, and the sound was fresh and pleasant, so I came to listen.

古文：知音难遇，无辞更为我弹之。 
现代文：人这一生很难遇到知音，请不要推辞再给我弹奏一曲。 
English: It's hard to meet a soulmate in this life, please don't refuse to play me another song.

古文：思温奏为《沉湘》。
现代文：思温又给他弹了一首《沉湘》。
English: Si Wen also played him a rendition of "Shen Xiang."

古文：老人曰： 此弄初成，吾尝寻之，其间音指稍异此。 
现代文：老人说： 这支曲子刚写成时，我也曾试着弹过，其中有些音符指法和你弹的稍有不同。 
English: The old man said, "When this piece was first written, I also tried to play it, and some of the notes are slightly different from the way you play them.

古文：思温因求其异。
现代文：思温就请他指出不同的地方，接着就纠正了。
English: Shwin asked him to point out the difference, and then corrected him.

古文：随而正之，声韵涵古，又多怨切，时人莫之闻也。
现代文：这支曲古朴曲雅，又含有凄怨的情调，当时的人是没有听到过的。
English: This piece is quaint, elegant, and contains a melancholy mood, which was unheard of at the time.

古文：叟因谓思温曰： 君非太学诸生乎？ 
现代文：老人就问思温说： 你不是太学生吗？ 回答说： 是。 
English: The old man asked Sween, "Aren't you too much of a student?" and he replied, "Yes."

古文：曰： 然。 叟曰： 君何不求于名誉，而常为王门之伶人乎？ 
现代文：老人说： 你为什么不求点功名，反而常常给王侯们演奏呢？ 
English: The old man said, "Why don't you seek some fame and play for kings and queens instead?

古文：思温竦然曰： 受教。
现代文：思温显出恭敬的样子说： 请指教。 
English: Si Wen showed a respectful look and said, "Please advise me."

古文：且问穷达之事。 
现代文：然后又问有关穷富官运等事。
English: Then he asked about the movement of the rich and the poor.

古文：叟曰： 余之少子，主管人间禄籍，当为君问之。 此后二日，当再会于此。
现代文：老人说： 我的小儿子主管人间俸禄名册。我应该给你问问，这以后二天，咱们再在这儿相会。 
English: The old man said, "My youngest son is in charge of the human salary register. I should ask you, we will meet here again two days from now."

古文：然有假禄在巴蜀，一十九年，俸入不绝。然慎勿为武职，当有大祸，非禳所免。
现代文：到了那天。思温去会见，老人也到了，就告诉他说： 太可惜了，你最终不能成名，也当不上真正的官，但是有假俸禄在巴蜀。共十九年，收入不断，但要小心不要作武官，该当有大祸，并不是祈祷就能免除的。
English: When the day came, Siwen went to meet him, and the old man also arrived, and told him: "It's too bad that you can't become famous in the end, and you can't become a real official, but there is a fake salary in Bashu. A total of nineteen years, income continues, but be careful not to be a military officer, there should be a big disaster, it's not a prayer that can be exempted.

古文：誌之誌之。 
现代文：记住记住！ 
English: Remember, remember!

古文：言讫，遂不见。
现代文：说完，立刻就不见了。
English: After saying this, he immediately disappeared.

古文：思温明年又下第，遂罢举，西游抵成都，以所艺谒韦令公。
现代文：思温第二年又没考中，于是不考了，往西游览到达成都。凭他弹琴的技艺拜见了韦令公。
English: In the second year, Si Wen did not pass the middle school entrance examination, so he did not take the exam, and went on a tour to the west to reach the capital. With his skill of playing the piano, he met Wei Ling Gong.

古文：公甚重之，累署要籍，随军十七八年，所请杂俸，月不下二万。
现代文：韦令公很看重他，多次把他的名写在主要官员的名册上，随军十七八年，所得到的各种俸禄，每月都不少于二万。
English: Emperor Wei valued him very highly, and repeatedly wrote his name on the roster of key officials. He joined the army in 178 and received a monthly salary of no less than 20,000 yuan.

古文：又娶大将军女，车马第宅甚盛。
现代文：又娶了大将军的女儿，车马房子都很多。
English: He also married the daughter of a high-ranking general. There are many cars, horses and houses.

古文：而妻父尝欲思温在辕门，思温记老人之言，辄辞不就。
现代文：但他的妻父常想让思温在军队里谋个职务，思温牢记老人的话，坚决推辞不干。
English: But his wife and father often wanted Siwen to seek a position in the army. Bearing in mind the old man's words, Siwen firmly refused to do so.

古文：后二日，密请韦令公，遂补讨击使。牒出方告，不敢复辞。
现代文：过了两天，大将军偷偷地请求韦令公，于是就给思温补了个讨击使的职务，公文已经发出了才告诉思温。
English: Two days later, the general secretly asked Wei Lingguang, so he gave Siwen the post of a counterattack envoy, and only told Siwen after the official document had been issued.

古文：而常惧祸至，求为远使，竟不果。
现代文：思温也不敢再推辞了，但他还是常常害怕大祸到来。要求作远方的讨击使，竟不答应。
English: Sween did not dare to refuse again, but he was still often afraid of a great calamity coming. He did not agree to the request to act as a distant messenger.

古文：及刘辟反叛时，思温在鹿头城。城陷，为官军所杀。家族不知所在也。
现代文：等到刘辟反叛朝廷时候，思温正好在鹿头城，城被攻陷，思温也被官军所杀，家属也不知道在什么地方。
English: When Liu Bei rebelled against the imperial court, Siwen happened to be in Shitou City. The city was captured, and Siwen was also killed by the government army. His family members did not know where he was.

古文：柳及
现代文：柳及
English: Willow and

古文：柳及，河南人，贞元中进士登科殊之子也。
现代文：柳及是河南人，贞元年间的登科进士柳殊的儿子。
English: Liu Ji is from Henan Province. He is the son of Liu Shu, a scholar who entered the University of Science in the Zhenyuan era.

古文：家于澧阳。尝客游至南海。元帅以其父有名于缙绅士林间，俾假掾于广。
现代文：家在澧阳，曾经到南海游览，元帅因为他父亲在官僚绅士中很有名望，就让他在广州作了个假署员。
English: He was from Shenyang and had been to the South China Sea. Because his father was a well-known bureaucrat, the marshal had him work as a fake clerk in Guangzhou.

古文：未几，娶会长岑氏之女。
现代文：不久，娶了会长岑家的女儿。
English: Not long after, he married the daughter of the president, Tsuchiya.

古文：生一男，名甑甑。
现代文：生了一个男孩，取名甑甑。
English: She gave birth to a boy and named him Tsuru.

古文：及以亲老家远，不克迎候，乃携妻子归宁于澧阳。
现代文：柳及以亲戚老人离家太远，不能接来一起住的名义，带着妻和子回到澧阳安居。
English: Liu Yi took his wife and son back to Poyang to live in peace under the pretext that his elderly relatives were too far away from home to live with him.

古文：未再岁后，以家给不足，单车重游南中，至则假邑于蒙，于武仙再娶沈氏。
现代文：还没过第二年，又以家里供给不足的名义，自己乘一辆车重游南海。到了以后谎说家在蒙山。在武仙又娶了沈氏。
English: Before the second year was over, she took a car to travel back to Nanhai, claiming that there was not enough food at home. Later, she lied and said that her home was in Mengshan. In Wuxian, she married Shen.

古文：会公事之郡，独沈氐与母孙氏在县廨。
现代文：柳及在郡府作会计，独有沈氏和她的母亲在县里的公馆住。
English: Liu Yi works as an accountant in the county government, while Shen Yi and her mother live in a mansion in the county.

古文：时当秋，夜分之后，天晴月皎。
现代文：当时正是秋天，夜幕降临之后，天晴月皎。
English: It was autumn, after nightfall, the sky was clear and the moon was full.

古文：忽于牖中见一小儿，手招沈氏曰： 无惧无惧，某几郎子也。 
现代文：忽然在窗户里看见一个小孩，用手招呼沈氏说： 不要怕，不要怕，我是你丈夫的孩子。 
English: Suddenly, she saw a child in the window. She waved to Shen and said, "Don't be afraid, don't be afraid, I am your husband's child."

古文：告说事状，历然可听。
现代文：他说的话和表情态度，都清清楚楚。
English: His words and facial expressions are crystal clear.

古文：沈氏以告其母。
现代文：沈氏把这事告诉了他的母亲。
English: Mr. Shen told his mother about it.

古文：母乃问是何人，有何所请。
现代文：她母亲就问那小孩是什么人，有什么要求。
English: Her mother asked who the child was and what he wanted.

古文：答曰： 某甑甑也，以去年七月身死，故来辞别。 
现代文：小孩回答说： 我叫甑甑，去年七月死的，所以来辞别。
English: The child answered: My name is Zou, I died last July, so I came to say goodbye.

古文：凡人夭逝，未满七岁者，以生时未有罪状，不受业报。
现代文：凡是未成年死的人，没有满七岁，因为活着的时候没有什么罪过，就不受什么报应。
English: And if any one die before he is seven years old, he shall not be punished, because he hath done nothing amiss while he lived.

古文：纵使未即托生，多为天曾权禄驱使。
现代文：即使不能马上托生，大多数被天曹有权势的人所驱使。
English: Even if they can't give birth right away, most of them are driven by powerful people.

古文：某使当职役，但送文书来往地府耳。天曹记人善恶，每月一送地府，其间有暇，亦得闲行。 
现代文：我也当了差役，只送文书来往于地府间，天曹记录人间的善和恶，每月都送给地府一次。这其间有空暇的时间，也可以闲溜一会儿。
English: I also worked as an errand boy, only delivering documents to and from the underworld. Tenso recorded the good and evil in the world and sent them to the underworld once a month. During this time, I had free time and could also relax for a while.

古文：沈氏因告曰： 汝父之郡会计，亦当即至。 
现代文：沈氏就告诉他说： 你父亲在郡里当会计，马上就要回来了。 
English: Mr. Shen told him, "Your father works as an accountant in the county and will be back soon.

古文：俄尔及归，沈氏具告。
现代文：不一会柳及回来，沈氏就把事情全都告诉了柳及。
English: As soon as Liu Yi returned, Mr. Shen told him everything.

古文：及固不信，曰： 荒徼之地，当有妖怪，假托人事，殆非山精木魅之所为乎？ 
现代文：柳及不信，说： 荒郊野外，该是有妖怪假托人事，怎么知道不是山精鬼魅干的事呢？ 
English: Willow, incredulous, said, "Outside the wild countryside, there must be yokai pretending to be people. How do you know it's not the mountain spirit that's doing the attracting?

古文：其夕，即又于牖间以手招及。
现代文：有天晚上，又在窗户里看见那小孩用手招呼柳及。
English: One evening, he saw the child in the window, beckoning to Liu Yi with his hand.

古文：及初疑，尚正辞诘之，乃闻说本末，知非他鬼，乃歔欷涕泗，因询其夭横之由。
现代文：柳及开始还怀疑，一本正经地盘问他，等那小孩把来龙去脉都说出来，才知道他不是别的鬼，就哽咽涕泣，又问他夭折的原因。
English: At first, Liu Yi was still suspicious and questioned him seriously. When the child told him the whole story, he knew that he was not another ghost. He choked back tears and asked him the reason for his premature death.

古文：答曰： 去年七月中，戏弄得痢疾，医药不救，以致于此，亦命也。
现代文：回答说： 去年七月，我玩耍得了痢疾。医药都没有用，所以才死了。
English: He replied, "Last July, I got dysentery while playing. The medicine didn't work, so I died.

古文：今为天曹收役，亦未有托生之期。 
现代文：这也是命啊。现在被天曹收我作差役，也不知道什么时候能托生。 
English: This is also life. Now I'm on duty, and I don't know when I'll be able to give birth.

古文：及曰： 汝既属冥司，即人生先定之事可知也，试为吾检穷达性命，一来相告。 答云： 诺。 
现代文：柳及说： 你既然属于冥司，那么人生先定的事就会知道了，能不能给我检看一下穷富命运生死的事，知道了就来告诉我。 小孩回答说： 好。 
English: Liu Ji said, "Since you belong to Meizu, then you will know the predetermined things in life. Can you give me a review of the fate of the rich and the poor, and the fate of life and death? If you know, come and tell me." The child replied, "Good."

古文：后夕乃至，曰： 冥官有一大城，贵贱等级，咸有本位，若棋布焉。
现代文：后来一天晚上小孩来了。说： 冥府有一座大城，贵贱等级，都有自己的位置，好像棋子那样分布。
English: Then one evening a child came and said, "There is a great city in the Underworld, and each level has its own place, like pieces of a chess set.

古文：世人将死，或半年，或数月内，即先于城中呼其名。时甑甑已闻呼父名也，辄绐而对。 
现代文：世间的人将要死时，或者半年，或者几个月内，就先在城中招呼他的名，当时我已经听到呼叫父亲你的名了。 
English: When a man of the world is about to die, or within six months, or within a few months, he first calls out his name in the city. At that time I have already heard you call out your father's name.

古文：既而私谓沈氏曰： 阿爷之名，已被呼矣，非久在人间。
现代文：就哄骗他走了。
English: They tricked him into leaving.

古文：他日有人求娶沈氏者，慎勿许之。若有姓周，职在军门者，即可许之，必当偕老，衣食盈羡。 
现代文：然后小孩偷偷地对沈氏说： 我父亲的名已经在冥府里被招呼了，不能在人间活多长时间，以后有人求娶你的人，特别小心不要答应，如果有姓周的，职务在军队里，就可以答应，一定会白头偕老，衣食充足美好。 
English: Then the child secretly said to Shen, "My father's name has already been called out in the underworld. I cannot live long on earth. If someone asks to marry you in the future, be especially careful not to agree. If you have the surname Zhou and a position in the army, you can agree. You will certainly live to a ripe old age and have plenty of food and clothing.

古文：其余所述近事，无不征验。
现代文：小孩所说的近来的事，没有不应验的。
English: There is nothing untoward in what the child says about recent events.

古文：后一夕又来曰： 某以拘役有限，不得到人间，从此永诀矣。 
现代文：后来有一天晚上又来说： 我已经拘役有限，不能再到人间来了，从此永别了。 
English: Later, one evening, he said again: "I have been sentenced to a limited term of criminal detention, I can no longer come to the human world, and I will say goodbye forever."

古文：言词凄怆，歔欷而去。
现代文：言语凄惋悲怆，哽咽着走了。
English: He choked up and walked away, his words full of sadness.

古文：后四月，及果卒。
现代文：过了四个月以后，柳及果然死了。
English: Four months later, Liu Yi died.

古文：沈氏寻亦萍泊南海。或有求纳者，辄不就。
现代文：沈氏也在不久后漂泊在南海一带，有时也有求婚的，都没有答应。
English: Soon after, Shen also drifted around the South China Sea, sometimes proposing marriage, but none of them accepted.

古文：后有长沙小将姓周者，部本郡钱帛，货殖于广州，求娶沈氏。一言而许之。
现代文：后来长沙有个小将姓周，拿本郡部队的钱财，在广州作买卖，请求娶沈氏，一说就同意了。
English: Later, there was a young general surnamed Zhou in Changsha who took the money and wealth of the county's troops to do business in Guangzhou. He asked to marry Shen, and Shen agreed.

古文：至今在焉。
现代文：到现在还在。
English: It's still there.

古文：平昌孟弘微与及相识，具录其事。
现代文：平昌的孟弘微与柳及认识。把他的事都记录下来了。
English: PyeongChang's Meng Hongwei and Liu Jian know each other. They have recorded everything about him.

古文：韦泛
现代文：韦泛
English: Wei Pan

古文：韦泛者，不知其所来。
现代文：韦泛，不知道他从哪里来。
English: Wei Pan, I don't know where he came from.

古文：大历初，罢润州金坛县尉。
现代文：大历初年，罢去润州金坛县尉的职务，到吴兴来游览。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, he left the post of the County Lieutenant of Runzhou Jintan County and came to Wu Xing for a tour.

古文：客游吴兴，维舟于兴国佛寺之水岸。时正月望夜，士女繁会。
现代文：在兴国佛寺水边缆了船。当时正是正月十五，善男信女们都来聚会。
English: At the waterside of the Xingguo Buddhist Temple, a boat was moored. At that time, it was the 15th day of the first month, and all the good men and women came to the party.

古文：泛方寓目，忽然暴卒。
现代文：韦泛刚要游览一番，忽然死去。
English: Wei Pan was about to take a tour when he died suddenly.

古文：县吏捕验，其事未已，再宿而苏。
现代文：县吏和捕快来验尸，但还有气息，过了一宿苏醒了。
English: County officials and the police came to examine the corpse, but there was still breath, and he woke up after one night.

古文：云： 见一吏持牒来，云： 府司追。 
现代文：他说：看见一个官吏拿着公文来到，说： 府司让你去。 
English: He said: "I saw an official arrive with an official document and say: "The governor wants you to go."

古文：遂与之同行。约数十里，忽至一城，兵卫甚严，入见多是亲旧往还。泛惊问吏曰： 此何许也？ 
现代文：于是就和他同行，估计走了十多里地，忽然来到一座城市，兵士警卫很严，进城以后见到的大多是亲戚旧友来来去去，韦泛吃惊地问那官吏说： 这是什么地方啊？ 
English: So he walked with him, an estimated distance of more than ten miles, and suddenly came to a city, with soldiers guarding it very closely. After entering the city, he saw mostly relatives and old friends coming and going. Surprised, Wei Pan asked the official, "What kind of place is this?"

古文：吏曰： 此非人间也。 
现代文：官吏说； 这不是人间。 
English: "This is not the real world," the official said.

古文：泛方悟死矣。
现代文：韦泛才明白自己已经死了。
English: It was only then that Wei Pan realized that he was dead.

古文：俄见数骑呵道而来，中有一人，衣服鲜华，容貌甚伟。
现代文：不一会儿见到几个骑马的人呵斥着跑过来，其中有一个人衣服新鲜华丽，容貌高大英俊，韦泛走上前一看，原来是老朋友。
English: After a while, he saw several horseback riders running towards him, shouting at him. One of them was a tall, handsome man in fresh and gorgeous clothes. Wei Pan walked up to him and saw that he was an old friend.

古文：泛前视之，乃故人也，惊曰： 君何为来此？ 
现代文：那人吃惊不小，说： 你来到这儿干什么？ 
English: The man was taken aback and said, What are you doing here?

古文：曰：  为吏所追。 
现代文：韦泛说： 被官吏所追。 
English: Wei Pan said: Being chased by officials.

古文：其人曰： 某职主召魂，未省追子。
现代文：那人说： 我的职务是主管召魂。怎么不知道追你？ 
English: The man said, "My job is to be in charge of summoning spirits. Why didn't I know to look for you?"

古文：因思之曰： 嘻，误矣！
现代文：就思考了一会儿说： 哈！
English: I thought about it for a moment and said: Ha!

古文：所追者非追君也，乃兖州金乡县尉韦泛也！ 
现代文：错了！要追的人并不是你，是兖州金乡县尉韦泛。 
English: Wrong! The person to be chased is not you, but Wei Pan, the lieutenant of Jinxiang County, Zhangzhou.

古文：遽叱吏送之归。
现代文：马上呵斥官吏赶快送韦泛回去。
English: He immediately yelled at the officials to send Wei Pan back immediately.

古文：泛既喜得返，且恃其故人，因求其禄寿。
现代文：韦泛很高兴能返回，并倚仗他是老朋友，就趁机要求他说说自己的官禄和寿命怎样。
English: Wepang was delighted to be back and, believing him to be an old friend, took the opportunity to ask him about his salary and longevity.

古文：其人不得已，密谓一吏，引于别院，立泛于门。
现代文：那人没办法，告诉一个官吏，把韦泛带到另一个院落，让韦泛站在门边。
English: The man had no choice but to tell an official to take Wei Pan to another courtyard and let Wei Pan stand by the door.

古文：吏入，持一丹笔来，书其左手曰： 前杨复后杨，后杨年年强。七月之节归玄乡。 
现代文：一个官吏进来，拿着一枝红笔，在韦泛的左手写道： 前杨复后杨，后杨年年强，七月之节归玄乡。 
English: A government official came in, holding a red pen, and wrote on Wei Pan's left hand: "Before Yang Fu, after Yang, after Yang Nian Nian Qiang, the July festival returns to the countryside."

古文：泛既出，前所追吏亦送之。 
现代文：写完后韦泛就出来，以前追韦泛的那个官吏又送他回来。
English: After he finished writing, Wei Pan came out, and the official who had chased Wei Pan sent him back again.

古文：既醒，具述其事。
现代文：醒了以后，韦泛就把他经历的事一一叙述出来。
English: Soon after, Xue Shaoyin woke up and told others about the dream.

古文：沙门法宝好异事，尽得其实，因传之。
现代文：一个和尚叫法宝很喜欢听怪事，这些事他都听全了，就传开来。
English: A monk named Magbo liked to hear strange things, and when he had heard them all, they were passed on to others.

古文：后六年，以调授太原杨曲县主簿，秩满至京师。适遇所亲与盐铁使有旧，遂荐为杨子县巡官。
现代文：六年后，韦泛被调授太原杨曲县作主簿。十年任满回到京城，正好遇到自己的亲属同盐铁使有老交情，就推荐韦泛作了杨子县巡官。
English: Six years later, Wei Pan was transferred to Yangqu County in Taiyuan to be the chief inspector. After ten years of service, he returned to Beijing. He happened to meet his relatives who had a long-standing friendship with Yan Tiecai, and he recommended Wei Pan to be the Yangzi County inspector.

古文：在职五年。建中元年，六月二十八日，将赴选，以暴疾终于广陵旅舍，其日乃立秋日也。
现代文：在职五年，建中元年六月二十八日，准备赴京选官，因为得了急病死在广陵旅舍。那天正好是立秋。
English: After five years in office, on June 28, 1861, he was preparing to go to Beijing to select officials, but he died in Guangling Hostel due to a sudden illness. That day was the beginning of autumn.

