古文：裴冕，河东人也，为河东冠族。
现代文：裴冕，河东人，是河东的望族。
English: Fei Guan, a native of Hedong, is a member of a prestigious family in Hedong.

古文：天宝初，以门廕再迁渭南县尉，以吏道闻。
现代文：天宝初年，凭藉门荫关系再升为渭南县尉，以精明强干闻名。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, with the help of patronage, he was promoted to the highest rank of Shennan County lieutenant. He was known for his shrewdness and strength.

古文：御史中丞王鉷充京畿采访使，表为判官。
现代文：御史中丞王钅共充任京畿采访使，上奏任他为判官。
English: Wang Xi, the Vice-Minister of History, served as the envoy to Gyeonggi Province, and was appointed as the judge.

古文：迁监察御史，历殿中侍御史。
现代文：升为监察御史，担任殿中侍御史。
English: He was promoted to the position of inspector of history and served as the attendant of history in the palace.

古文：冕虽无学术，守职通明，果于临事，鉷甚委之。
现代文：冕虽然不学无术，但恪守职责通晓明达，处事果断，钅共非常信任他。
English: Although Guan Yu was uneducated and unskilled, he abided by his duties, was well-informed, and dealt with matters decisively. The Kuomintang trusted him very much.

古文：及鉷得罪伏法，时宰臣李林甫方窃权柄，人咸惧之，鉷宾佐数百，不敢窥鉷门。
现代文：到了钅共获罪伏法，此时宰臣李林甫窃取大权，人们都很怕他，钅共有宾客及辅佐之士数百人，都不敢偷看钅共的住宅。
English: When the Kuomintang was caught red-handed and Li Linfu, the vice-minister of the Kuomintang, stole power, people were very afraid of him. There were hundreds of guests and assistants in the Kuomintang, and they dared not peep into the Kuomintang's residence.

古文：冕独收鉷尸，亲自护丧，瘗于近郊，冕自是知名。
现代文：冕只身一人收拾钅共的尸体，亲自护丧，埋葬在近郊，冕由于此事而知名。
English: Guan Guan was the only one to clean up the bodies of the victims, personally attended the funerals, and buried them in the suburbs. Guan Guan is famous for this.

古文：河西节度使哥舒翰表为行军司马，累迁员外郎中。
现代文：河西节度使哥舒翰奏表任他为行军司马，多次升为员外郎中。
English: The Hexi Festival made his brother Shuhang Song watch him as a marching steed, and he was repeatedly promoted to a member of the foreign rowers.

古文：玄宗幸蜀，至益昌郡，遥诏太子充天下兵马元帅，以冕为御史中丞兼左庶子，为之副。
现代文：玄宗幸驾到蜀，走到益昌郡时，遥诏太子担任天下兵马元帅，任冕为御史中丞兼任左庶子，为他的副职。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong traveled to Shu and came to Yichang County, Prince Yaozhao served as the marshal of the world's horses and chariots, and he was also crowned as the middle son of the emperor and the second son of the emperor, which was his vice.

古文：是时，冕为河西行军司马，授御史中丞，诏赴朝廷。
现代文：此时，冕担任河西行军司马，授予御史中丞，诏令赶赴朝廷。
English: At this time, Guan served as the commander of the troops marching to Hexi, and was awarded the title of Imperial Historian, and was ordered to rush to the imperial court.

古文：遇太子于平凉，具陈事势，劝之朔方，亟入灵武。
现代文：在平凉遇见太子，陈述当时的形势，劝他到朔方去，赶快进入灵武。
English: He met the prince in Pingliang, described the situation at that time, and advised him to go to Shuofang and quickly enter Lingwu.

古文：冕与杜鸿渐、崔漪等劝进曰： 主上厌勤大位，南幸蜀川，宗社神器，须有所归，天意人事，不可固违。
现代文：冕与杜鸿渐、崔漪等人劝说道： 自主上在大位上静心管理，现在幸驾到蜀，宗社神器必须有所归宿，天意人事不能固持违反。
English: Guan Guan and Du Hongqian, Cui Wei and others persuaded him, saying, "Self-reliance, great rank, and meditative management. Now I am lucky enough to be in Shu. The sacred treasures of the sect must have a home, and people cannot persist in violating the will of Heaven.

古文：若逡巡退让，失亿兆心，则大事去矣！
现代文：如果徘徊退让，将失去众多人心，那么大事将去了！
English: If you linger and concede, you will lose a lot of people's hearts, then things will go wrong!

古文：臣等犹知之，况贤智乎！ 
现代文：我们做臣的都知道这些，何况贤人智者呢！ 
English: All of us who are ministers know this, let alone the sages and wise men!

古文：太子曰： 南平寇逆，奉迎銮舆，退居储贰，侍膳左右，岂不乐哉！
现代文：太子说： 在南方平定贼寇，迎接皇上，然后退让仍做太子，侍膳左右，不是很快乐吗？
English: The prince said, "Isn't it a great joy to subdue the bandits in the south, greet the emperor, and then concede to still be a prince and wait on tables?

古文：公等何言之过也？ 
现代文：你们为什么说这样不好呢？ 
English: Why do you say this is not good?

古文：冕与杜鸿渐又进曰： 殿下藉累圣之资，有天下之表。
现代文：冕和杜鸿渐又进言说： 殿下凭借多年圣贤的资历，有统治天下的仪表。
English: Guan and Du Hongqian also said: His Royal Highness, with his many years of experience as a sage, has the appearance of ruling the world.

古文：元贞万国，二十余年，殷忧启圣，正在今日。
现代文：元贞万国，二十多年，忧虑启望圣贤，正在今日。
English: The original chastity of all nations, more than twenty years, is now anxiously looking up to the sages.

古文：所从殿下六军将士，皆关辅百姓，日夜思归。
现代文：殿下手下的六军将士，都是百姓，日夜思念还乡。
English: The soldiers of the Six Armies under the command of His Imperial Highness are all commoners who miss their hometown day and night.

古文：大军一散，不可复集，不如因而抚之以从众，臣等敢以死请。 
现代文：大军一旦离散，不可能再聚集，不如因此抚慰随从众心，我们都愿以死相恳求。 
English: Once a large army is dispersed, it is impossible to gather again. Therefore, it is better to soothe the hearts of the followers. We are willing to plead with each other with death.

古文：凡劝进五上，乃依。
现代文：大约向殿下进言奉劝五次，于是依从。
English: He consulted His Imperial Highness about five times and followed his advice.

古文：肃宗即位，以定策功，迁中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，倚以为政。
现代文：肃宗即位，来评定策略功劳，冕升为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，依靠他来从政。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne, to evaluate the strategic merits, crowned as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and subordinated to the Chinese Academy of Letters, relying on him to engage in politics.

古文：冕性忠勤，悉心奉公，稍得人心。
现代文：冕性格忠诚勤勉，全身心奉公逐渐取得人心。
English: The crowned character is loyal and diligent, devoting himself to public service, and gradually wins the hearts of the people.

古文：然不识大体，以聚人曰财，乃下令卖官鬻爵，度尼僧道士，以储积为务。
现代文：却不识大体，由于聚集钱财，于是命令卖官封爵，规定尼僧道士，以储积钱财为事务。
English: However, he did not know the general situation. Because of the accumulation of money and wealth, he ordered the officials to be knighted and the nuns to be ordained as nuns, with the purpose of accumulating money and wealth.

古文：人不愿者，科令就之，其价益贱，事转为弊。
现代文：有不愿意者，以法制处理，其官爵价格越来越低，此事变成了坏事。
English: Those who did not want to do so were dealt with by the legal system, and the price of their official titles became lower and lower, and the matter turned into a bad thing.

古文：肃宗移幸凤翔，罢冕知政事，迁右仆射。
现代文：肃宗幸驾凤翔，罢免了冕的职务，任右仆射。
English: Su Zong happily rode the phoenix soaring, dismissed the crown's duties, and was appointed as the right-hand man.

古文：两京平，以功封冀国公，食实封五百户。
现代文：两京平定后，以功劳封为冀国公，实封五百户。
English: After the subjugation of the two capitals, he was awarded the title of Hebei Governor for his services, and 500 households were actually sealed.

古文：寻加御史大夫、成都尹，充剑南西川节度使。
现代文：不久加授御史大夫、成都尹，充任剑南西川节度使。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Imperial Historian, Chengdu Yin, and served as the Jianan Nishikawa Setsudo envoy.

古文：又入为右仆射。
现代文：又入朝廷任右仆射。
English: He also entered the Imperial Court as a right-hand man.

古文：永泰元年，与裴遵庆等并集贤待制。
现代文：永泰元年，与裴遵庆等人一并在集贤院待制。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, together with Pei Zunqing and others, he was detained at Jixian Prison.

古文：代宗求旧，拜冕兼御史大夫，充护山陵使。
现代文：代宗需求旧臣，升冕兼任御史大夫，充任护山陵使。
English: The daimyō demanded the former vassal, who was promoted to the post of goshi taifu (chief historian) and appointed to the post of keeper of the mountains and tombs.

古文：冕以幸臣李辅国权盛，将附之，乃表辅国亲昵术士中书舍人刘烜充山陵使判官。
现代文：由于宠臣李辅国权势很大，冕准备依附于他，于是上表推荐与辅国所亲善的术士中书舍人刘火亘充任山陵使判官。
English: Since his favorite, Li Shuo Guo, was very powerful, and the crown was about to be attached to him, the table above recommended Liu Huowatong, a magus who was a close friend of Shuo Guo, to be the magistrate of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：烜坐法，冕坐贬施州刺史。
现代文：火亘获罪伏法，冕因受牵连贬为施州刺史。
English: Huiwu was found guilty of subversion, and Guan was demoted to the status of Shizhou assassin because he was implicated.

古文：数月，移澧州刺史，复征为左仆射。
现代文：几个月后，移任他为澧州刺史，又升为左仆射。
English: A few months later, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou stabbing history, and was promoted to the left hand shot.

古文：元载秉政。载为新平县尉，王鉷辟在巡内，冕常引之，载颇德冕。
现代文：元载掌权，当初载任新平县尉时，王钅共将此辟为巡视范围内，冕经常推荐载，载非常感激冕。
English: Yuan Zhao was in power. When Yuan Zhao was appointed as the Xinping County Lieutenant, Wang Zhe kept this as the inspection range. The crown often recommended Yuan Zhao, and he was very grateful to Yuan Zhao.

古文：会宰臣杜鸿渐卒，载遂举冕代之。
现代文：适逢宰臣杜鸿渐死了，载于是推荐冕替代他。
English: At the right time, the vice-minister Du Hongqian died, and he recommended Guan Yu to replace him.

古文：冕时已衰瘵，载以其顺己，引为同列。
现代文：冕此时已经衰老，载由于是冕顺从自己，引荐他为自己同列。
English: The crown by this time had aged, and since it was the crown deferring to itself, it recommended him for its own enrolment.

古文：受命之际，蹈舞绝倒，载趋而扶起，代为谢词。
现代文：在受职的时候，冕高兴得跌倒在地，载快步扶起他，代他向皇上谢恩。
English: When he was appointed to the post, Korona was so happy that he fell to the ground. He quickly picked him up and thanked the emperor on his behalf.

古文：冕兼掌兵权留守之任，俸钱每月二千余贯。
现代文：冕兼任掌管兵权留守之任，俸禄每月二千多贯。
English: He was also in charge of the military's right to stay at home, with a salary of more than 2,000 yuan per month.

古文：性本侈靡，好尚车服及营珍馔，名马在枥，直数百金者常十数。
现代文：性情爱好奢侈，喜好豪华车服及山珍海味，在枥的名马，价值数百金的有十几匹。
English: He has a penchant for luxury, likes luxury car clothing and mountain seafood, and owns more than a dozen famous horses worth hundreds of gold.

古文：每会宾友，滋味品数，坐客有昧于名者。
现代文：每次宴请宾客朋友，滋味品数，坐客中间有的人根本不知道馔肴的名称。
English: Each banquet invites guests and friends, the number of delicacies is large, and some people among the guests do not know the name of the dish at all.

古文：自创巾子，其状新奇，市肆因而效之，呼为 仆射样 。
现代文：自己创建的头巾，其形状新奇，而在市场被仿效，称为 仆射样 。
English: The self-created headscarf, with its novel shape, has been imitated in the market and is known as "Pu Xie Sheng."

古文：初代鸿渐，小吏以俸钱文簿白之，冕顾子弟，喜见于色，其嗜利若此。
现代文：当初替代鸿渐时，小吏将俸禄文本念给他听时，冕对子弟们喜形于色，其好钱财大多如此。
English: At the beginning, when he replaced Hung Chien, when the clerk read the salary text to him, Guan was delighted with his children, which was mostly the case with his good money.

古文：拜职未盈月，卒，大历四年十二月也。
现代文：任职不满月，在大历四年便死了。
English: He was dissatisfied with his month in office and died in the fourth year of the lunar calendar.

古文：上悼之，辍朝三日，赠太尉，赙制五百匹、粟五百石。
现代文：皇上悼念他，辍朝三天，赠予太尉，赠帛五百匹、粟五百石。
English: In memory of him, the emperor abdicated the throne for three days, and presented him with the rank of captain, five hundred horses, and five hundred koku of millet.

古文：裴遵庆，绛州闻喜人也。代袭冠冕，为河东著族。
现代文：裴茂，凭借门荫关系做官，多次升为京兆府司录参军。
English: Pei Mao, who became an official by virtue of his family connections, was promoted to the post of Keizhao prefectural secretary and joined the army several times.

古文：遵庆志气深厚，机鉴敏达，自幼强学，博涉载籍，谨身晦迹，不干当世之务。
现代文：来王真镇守陕州，推荐他为判官，王真转到襄州，又任为行军司马，王真待他非常看重。
English: Wang Zhen came to guard Shaanxi and recommended him as a judge. Wang Zhen was transferred to Xiangzhou and appointed as a marshal. Wang Zhen valued him very much.

古文：以门廕累授潞府司法参军，时年已老，未为人所知。
现代文：等到王真在淮西战败，茂不能留在其军，茂于是以密表上奏。朝廷认为王真掌握重兵，不喜欢他，下密诏由茂替代王真任襄州刺史，充当防御使。
English: When Wang Zhen was defeated in Huaxi, Mao could not stay in his army, so Mao played a secret table. The court thought that Wang Zhen had a heavy army and did not like him. The next secret table was to replace Wang Zhen with Mao as the governor of Xiangzhou and serve as a defense envoy.

古文：随调吏部，授大理寺丞，剖断刑狱，举正纲条，理行始著。
现代文：茂原来镇守城，等到接受密令后，率部下二千人赶赴襄阳。
English: Mao originally guarded the city, but after receiving the secret order, he and two thousand of his subordinates rushed to Yangyang.

古文：迁司门员外、吏部员外郎，专判南曹。
现代文：此时王真也奉诏仍然担任旧职，王真于是在江边渡口设置酒席等待他。
English: At this time, Wang Zhen was also ordered to still hold his old position, so Wang Zhen set up a bar at the river crossing to wait for him.

古文：天宝中，海内无事，九流辐辏会府，每岁吏部选人，动盈万数。
现代文：茂开始说借道入朝廷，等见到王真，马上说奉命替代他的职位，并且想马上处理事务。王真告诉他说： 王真已经奉皇上的命令又在此地复职。 茂迷惑不解，对他的手下人说： 此话荒谬。 
English: Mao began to say that he had entered the imperial court by taking a side road, and when he saw Wang Zhen, he immediately said that he had been ordered to replace his position and wanted to deal with the matter immediately. Wang Zhen told him: Wang Zhen has been reinstated here by order of the emperor. Mao was puzzled and said to his subordinates: This is absurd.

古文：遵庆敏识强记，精核文簿，详而不滞，时称吏事第一，由是大知名。
现代文：于是指挥人马向王真的军队射箭，由此两军相互交战，茂大败，士卒几乎全部歼灭。
English: So the commander shot arrows at Wang Zhen's army, and the two armies fought against each other, losing heavily, and almost all the soldiers were annihilated.

古文：天宝末，杨国忠当国，出不附己者例为外官，遵庆亦出为郡守。
现代文：茂逃回城旧营，調追过来抓住了他。朝廷想安定汉南，于是将此事归咎于茂。宝应元年七月，下敕令说：茂度量狭小，刚开始起兵便没成功，行事却无符节。
English: The imperial court wanted to stabilize Hannan, so it blamed Mao for the incident. In July of the first year of Baoying, the imperial edict said: "Mao was too narrow-minded. He did not succeed in raising an army at the very beginning, but his actions were without merit."

古文：肃宗即位，征拜给事中、尚书右丞、吏部侍郎。
现代文：等到失败被俘后，却又迟迟不赴召，快到京师时，皇上敕命下达。
English: After waiting for the defeat and being captured, he did not go to call, but when he was about to arrive in Beijing, the emperor issued the order.

古文：恭俭克己，迟重谨密，颇有时望。
现代文：茂被流放上路后，到了蓝田驿，赐予自尽。
English: After being banished to the road, Mao went to Lantian and was given permission to commit suicide.

