古文：斩衰，括发以麻；为母，括发以麻，免而以布。
现代文：孝子为父亲服丧穿斩衰丧服，未成服前，用麻括发。母亲死，先用麻括发，然后改用麻布免。
English: When a filial son mourns the death of his father, he puts on mourning clothes, and before he's done, he braids his hair. When his mother dies, he braids his hair first, and then changes it to linen.

古文：齐衰，恶笄以终丧。男子冠而妇人笄，男子免而妇人髽。
现代文：媳妇为公婆服丧穿齐衰丧服，用榛木的枝条作发笄，并系上麻带，一直到服丧结束才除掉。成年人平时的装束，男人有冠，妇女有笄。到服丧的时候，男子用 免 ，女子用 髽 。
English: The daughter-in-law puts on mourning clothes for her father-in-law, using the branches of the birch tree as a hair band and tying a hemp ribbon, which is not removed until the end of the mourning. The usual attire for adults, men have crowns, women have wigs. At the time of mourning, men use 免, women use.

古文：其义：为男子则免，为妇人则髽。
现代文：它们的具体含义是:作为男子就用 免 ，作为妇女就用 髽 ，以示区别。
English: Their specific meaning is: as a man, use "ram," and as a woman, use "" to show the difference.

古文：苴杖，竹也；削杖，桐也。
现代文：为父亲服丧用的哭丧棒叫苴杖，是竹子做的；为母亲服丧用的哭丧棒叫削杖，是桐木削成的。
English: The mourning stick used to mourn the death of the father is called the reed stick and is made of bamboo; the mourning stick used to mourn the death of the mother is called the whittling stick and is made of paulownia wood.

古文：祖父卒，而后为祖母后者三年。
现代文：祖父先死，而后祖母又死，在这种情况下，承重的嫡孙要为祖母服丧三年。
English: The grandfather died first, and then the grandmother died, in which case the burden-bearing grandchild would have to mourn the grandmother for three years.

古文：为父母，长子稽颡。大夫吊之，虽缌必稽颡。
现代文：父母丧失长子，或长子失去父母，在宾客来吊孝时，丧主都要行稽颗之礼。
English: When the parents lose their eldest son, or the eldest son loses his parents, when the guests come to pay their respects, the mourners must perform the ceremony.

古文：妇人为夫与长子稽颡，其余则否。男主必使同姓，妇主必使异姓。为父后者为出母无服。
现代文：由父亲往上，血缘关系愈远，亲情愈薄，丧服愈轻；由儿子往下，血缘关系愈远，亲情愈薄，丧服愈轻；在旁系亲属中，和自己血缘关系愈远，亲情愈薄，丧服愈轻。
English: From the father upwards, the more distant the blood relationship, the thinner the kinship, the lighter the mourning clothes; from the son downwards, the more distant the blood relationship, the thinner the kinship, the lighter the mourning clothes; among collateral relatives, the more distant the blood relationship with oneself, the thinner the kinship, the lighter the mourning clothes.

古文：亲亲，以三为五，以五为九。上杀，下杀，旁杀，而亲毕矣。
现代文：这样向上逐代减损，向下逐代减损，向旁逐代减损，亲情关系就完结了。
English: In this way, the relationship of kinship will be terminated if the relationship of kinship is diminished up generation by generation, diminished down generation by generation, and diminished aside generation by generation.

古文：王者禘其祖之所自出，以其祖配之，而立四庙。
现代文：按照礼的规定，不是天子就不能举行谛祭。天子举行谛祭，是祭诞生其始祖的天帝，并且以其始祖配享，立四亲庙。
English: According to the rules of the rite, if you are not the son of Heaven, you cannot hold the Wuji Festival. If the son of Heaven holds the Wuji Festival, it is the festival of the Heavenly Emperor who gave birth to his forefathers, and it is shared by his forefathers to establish the Four-Parent Temple.

古文：庶子王，亦如之。
现代文：即令是庶子继承王位，其祭天、立庙之礼也是如此。
English: Even if an illegitimate child succeeds to the throne, the ceremony of dedicating a shrine and building a temple will also take place.

古文：别子为祖，继别为宗，继祢者为小宗。
现代文：别子为其后裔之始祖，继承别子的嫡长子是大宗，继承别子之庶子的是小宗。
English: Betsuko was the progenitor of his descendants. The eldest legitimate son who succeeded Betsuko was Taizo, and the illegitimate son who succeeded Betsuko was Kozu.

古文：有五世而迁之宗，其继高祖者也。
现代文：有五世而迁之宗，即小宗，因为小宗四世亲尽，不可能继续祭祀高祖之父。
English: There is a sect that has moved five generations, that is, a small sect, because the fourth generation of the small sect is exhausted, it is impossible to continue to worship the father of Gao Zu.

古文：是故，祖迁于上，宗易于下。
现代文：因此，高祖的庙迁动于上，而继你的宗同时变易于下。
English: Therefore, Gaozhu's temple moved to the top, and it became easier to move down after your dzong.

古文：尊祖故敬宗，敬宗所以尊祖祢也。
现代文：因为尊祖，所以才尊敬嫡长子，而尊敬嫡长子正是尊重祖称的具体表现。
English: To respect the eldest son is to respect the father, and to respect the eldest son is to respect the name of the father.

古文：庶子不祭祖者，明其宗也。
现代文：庶子之所以不祭祖，就是要表明这件事该由嫡长子来做。
English: The reason why the illegitimate son does not offer sacrifice to the patriarch is to indicate that this matter should be done by the eldest son.

古文：庶子不为长子斩，不继祖与祢故也。
现代文：作父亲的是庶子，就不能为其长子服丧三年，道理就在于庶子不是祖称的正体。
English: If the father is an illegitimate child, it is not possible to mourn for three years for his eldest son, the reason being that the illegitimate child is not the true identity of the ancestor.

古文：庶子不祭殇与无后者，殇与无后者从祖祔食。庶子不祭祢者，明其宗也。
现代文：庶子不祭祀未成年而死者与没有后嗣者，因为这两种人都是附属在祖庙中受食，而庶子没有资格祭祀祖庙。
English: An illegitimate child does not offer sacrifice to a minor who has died and has no heirs, because both of these people are attached to the ancestral temple to receive food, and the illegitimate child is not eligible to offer sacrifice to the ancestral temple.

古文：亲亲尊尊长长，男女之有别，人道之大者也。从服者，所从亡则已。属从者，所从虽没也服。
现代文：凡从服的，如果所跟从的人已经死了，就不需要从服了。但如果是有间接亲属关系的从服，即使所跟从的人已死，仍然要服丧。
English: Whoever obeys, if the follower is dead, there is no need to obey, but if there is an indirect relationship of obedience, even if the follower is dead, he still has to mourn.

古文：妾从女君而出，则不为女君之子服。
现代文：如果媵妾随着主妇被遗弃而离开夫家，就不再为主妇的儿子服丧。
English: If the concubine leaves her husband's house with the abandonment of the housewife, she no longer mourns for the housewife's son.

古文：礼不王不禘。
现代文：依照礼的规定，不是天子就不能举行禘礼。
English: According to the rules of the ceremony, if you are not the son of heaven, you cannot hold the ceremony.

古文：世子不降妻之父母；其为妻也，与大夫之适子同。
现代文：诸侯的嫡长子不因地位高贵而减轻为岳父母的丧服；如果是为自己的妻子服丧，所用丧服与大夫的嫡子为妻所服丧服相同。
English: The eldest son of a vassal does not, because of his high position, wear less mourning clothes for his parents-in-law; if he is mourning for his wife, he wears the same mourning clothes as the doctor's eldest son wears for his wife.

古文：父为士，子为天子诸侯，则祭以天子诸侯，其尸服以士服。
现代文：父亲生前的爵位是士，而儿子却当了天子或诸侯，那就可以用天子或诸侯的祭礼祭祀父亲，但尸还是穿士的服饰。
English: If the father was a nobleman when he was alive, but his son became a prince or vassal, then the father can be honored with a prince or vassal sacrifice, but the corpse will still wear a nobleman's attire.

古文：父为天子诸侯，子为士，祭以士，其尸服以士服。
现代文：父亲是天子或诸侯，而儿子只是个士，就只能用士礼祭祀，尸的服饰也是士服。
English: If the father was the son of heaven or a vassal, but the son was only a vassal, then only the vassal rite could be used for the sacrifice, and the clothing of the corpse was also vassal clothing.

古文：妇当丧而出，则除之。为父母丧，未练而出，则三年。
现代文：反过来，父亲生前贵为天子或诸侯，而儿子今天却沦落为士，那就应该以士礼来祭祀其父，而代替亡父受祭的尸也只能穿士服。
English: On the other hand, if the father was a prince or a vassal during his lifetime, but the son is now a samurai, then the father should be sacrificed according to the samurai rites, and the body that is sacrificed in place of the deceased father can only wear samurai clothes.

古文：既练而出，则已。未练而反，则期；既练而反，则遂之。再期之丧，三年也；期之丧，二年也。
现代文：作为媳妇，在为公婆服丧期间被丈夫休弃，因为恩断义绝，所以也就不再继续为公婆服丧。
English: As a daughter-in-law, she was abandoned by her husband during the mourning period for her parents-in-law, and because of her refusal, she no longer continued to mourn for her parents-in-law.

古文：九月七月之丧，三时也；五月之丧，二时也；三月之丧，一时也。故期而祭，礼也；期而除丧，道也。祭不为除丧也。三年而后葬者必再祭，其祭之间不同时而除丧。
现代文：如果是为娘家的父母服丧，有下列几种情况：如果是在练祭之前被丈夫休弃，那就应该和自己的娘家兄弟一样服丧三年；如果是在练祭之后被丈夫休弃，因为本应服的期丧已经服满，就不须要再为父母服丧；如果是在练祭之前又被丈夫召回，那就按常规为父母服期？
English: In the case of mourning for the parents of one's daughter's family, there are the following situations: If one's husband abandons one's family before the ritual, one should mourn for three years like one's brothers; if one's husband abandons one's family after the ritual, there is no need to mourn for one's parents because the period of mourning that should have been performed has been completed; if one's husband calls one back before the ritual, one should perform the period of mourning for one's parents as usual?

古文：大功者主人之丧，有三年者，则必为之再祭。
现代文：如果是在练祭之后才被丈夫召回，那就要像未出嫁的闺女那样，为父母服满三年。服丧满两年，就算三年。服丧满一年，就算两年。
English: If she is called back by her husband after the ritual, she should serve her parents for three years like an unmarried girl. If she serves for two years, it will be counted as three years. If she serves for one year, it will be counted as two years.

古文：朋友，虞祔而已。
现代文：服丧九个月或七个月，都算三个季节。
English: Nine months of mourning or seven months are considered three seasons.

古文：士妾有子，而为之缌，无子则已。
现代文：服丧五个月，就算两个季节。服丧三个月，算一个季节。
English: For five months of mourning, count two seasons; for three months of mourning, count one season.

古文：生不及祖父母诸父昆弟，而父税丧，己则否。降而在缌小功者，则税之。为君之父母、妻、长子，君已除丧而后闻丧，则不税。
现代文：这是说服丧的长短与岁时之气是相应的。所以服满一年或者两年的时候，都要祭祀死者，这是依礼行事；祭祀后可以逐渐出去丧服，妇人可以除去腰纽，这是合乎道义的事情，不能认为是因为要除丧服才祭祀的。
English: This is to ensure that the length of mourning is in accordance with the age of the deceased. Therefore, when one or two years have passed, the deceased should be sacrificed, which is a ceremonial act. After the sacrifice, the mourning clothes can be gradually removed, and the woman can remove the waist tie. This is a moral thing, and it cannot be considered that the sacrifice is made because the mourning clothes are removed.

古文：近臣，君服斯服矣；其余，从而服，不从而税。
现代文：如果孝子未能及时葬亲，是在停枢三年以后才举行埋葬，那也要按规矩举行小祥、大祥之祭，而且小祥、大祥之祭要隔开，不可放在同一个月，然后才除去丧服。
English: If the filial son fails to bury his relative in time, and the burial is held only after three years of suspension, then the small auspicious and great auspicious festivals should also be held according to the rules, and the small auspicious and great auspicious festivals should be separated, and they should not be placed in the same month, and then the funeral clothes should be removed.

古文：君虽未知丧，臣服已。虞，杖不入于室；祔，杖不升于堂。为君母后者，君母卒，则不为君母之党服。
现代文：如果自己与死者是大功之亲而为之主持丧事，而死者尚留有遗婿及幼子这些服三年丧的亲属，那就要在为死者举行了二祥之祭以后才除去丧服。如果为朋友主持丧事，因为朋友不是亲属，只有同道的情谊，所以可以在虞祭、衬祭之后就除去丧服。对于士来说，如果妾为其生有儿子，就为她服细麻之丧，不然的话就不为她服丧。
English: If you and the deceased are relatives of great merit and preside over the funeral, and the deceased still has a son-in-law and a young son who are relatives who have been mourning for three years, then you should remove the mourning clothes only after the Er Xiang Festival has been held for the deceased. If you preside over the funeral for a friend, because the friend is not a relative, but only a fellow traveler, you can remove the mourning clothes after the Yu Festival and the lining festival. For a gentleman, if his concubine has a son, he will mourn for her, otherwise he will not mourn for her.

古文：绖杀五分而去一，杖大如绖。妾为君之长子与女君同。除丧者，先重者；易服者，易轻者。
现代文：父亲仕于他邦，自己也生于他邦，由于路途遥远，从未在生前见到过住在本国的祖父母、伯父和叔父、叔伯兄弟，等到这些亲属去世的噩耗传来时，已经过了丧期，在这种情况下，父亲应该追服丧服，而自己就可不必了。如果本来是齐衰、大功之亲，因故降为小功、绍麻丧服者，则应追服丧服。
English: The father served in another country, he was also born in another country. Due to the long distance, he had never seen his grandparents, uncles and uncles who lived in his home country. By the time the bad news of the death of these relatives came, the mourning period had passed. In this case, the father should wear mourning clothes, but he does not have to. If he was originally a relative of great merit, but was reduced to a relative of small merit, then he should wear mourning clothes.

古文：无事不辟庙门。
现代文：作为臣子，应为国君的父亲、母亲、嫡妻、长子服丧，但由于臣子出使他国，久留未归，等到臣子得知国君上述亲属凶讯时，国君本人早已除丧，在这种情况下，臣子就不再追服丧服。
English: As a vassal, he should mourn for the father, mother, legitimate wife, and eldest son of the sovereign. However, since the vassal went to another country and did not return for a long time, by the time the vassal learned of the above-mentioned relatives of the sovereign, the sovereign himself had already died. In this case, the vassal would no longer wear mourning clothes.

古文：哭皆于其次。
现代文：如果国君出访久而未归，等到回国后才闻知上述亲属凶讯，在这种情况下，国君要迫服丧服，国君的随从之臣也要跟着追服丧服；至于其他臣子，在丧期之内就跟着服丧，过了丧期的就不再跟着追服。
English: If the sovereign visits abroad for a long time and does not return, and it is only after returning to the country that he hears the bad news about the above-mentioned relatives, in this case, the sovereign must be forced to wear mourning clothes, and the sovereign's subordinate vassals must also follow suit with mourning clothes; as for other vassals, they will follow suit with mourning within the mourning period, and will no longer follow suit after the mourning period.

古文：复与书铭，自天子达于士，其辞一也。
现代文：至于昼夜无时之哭，则皆在倚庐之中。
English: As for the constant crying day and night, everyone is in a state of shock.

古文：男子称名，妇人书姓与伯仲，如不知姓则书氏。
现代文：招魂时所喊的和明族上所写的，自天子至于士，其文辞都是一样的：男的，称呼其名；女的写上她的姓与排行，如不知姓，就写上她的氏。
English: The words shouted during the invocation and written in the Ming Dynasty, from Tianzi to Shi, are all the same: for a man, say his name; for a woman, write her surname and rank, and if you don't know her surname, write her family name.

古文：斩衰之葛与齐衰之麻同。
现代文：斩衰丧服在卒哭后要改服的葛绖，其粗细与齐衰丧服在卒哭前所服的麻绖相同。
English: The thickness of the kudzu to be replaced by the mourning clothes after the mourning period is the same as that of the mochi served by the mourning clothes before the mourning period.

古文：齐衰之葛与大功之麻同。
现代文：齐衰丧服卒哭后所服的葛绖，其粗细与大功丧服卒哭前所服麻绖相同。
English: The kudzu served after the mourning period is the same thickness as the mochi served before the mourning period.

古文：麻同，皆兼服之。报葬者报虞，三月而后卒哭。
现代文：葛绖、麻绖的宽度相同，所表示的丧服轻重也相同，所以遭双重丧事的人兼服麻绖与葛绖。提前入葬就要提前举行虞祭，但必须等到三个月之后才举行卒哭祭祀。
English: The width of kudzu and mochi is the same, and the weight of the mourning clothes is the same, so people who have suffered a double funeral also wear mochi and mochi. If the funeral is held ahead of time, the state festival will be held ahead of time, but the wailing ritual must be held after three months.

古文：父母之丧偕，先葬者不虞祔，待后事。
现代文：如果父母同时死亡，应先埋葬母亲，但葬后不举行虞祭和祔祭，要等父亲入葬以后，再先为父后为母举行虞祭和祔祭。
English: If both parents die at the same time, the mother should be buried first, but after the funeral, the state and wreath-laying ceremonies should not be held. After the father is buried, the state and wreath-laying ceremonies should be held for the father and mother.

古文：其葬，服斩衰。
现代文：葬母时因父亲未葬，仍须服斩衰丧服。
English: When burying his mother, because his father was not buried, he still had to wear mourning clothes.

古文：大夫降其庶子，其孙不降其父。
现代文：大夫为他的庶子服丧要降为大功丧服；但庶子的儿子为父亲服丧不能降低等级。
English: A doctor's mourning for his son-in-law should be downgraded to a great achievement; but the son of a son-in-law mourning for his father cannot be downgraded.

古文：大夫不主士之丧。
现代文：大夫不为士主持丧事，因为二者尊卑悬殊。
English: The doctor does not preside over the funeral for the man, because of the disparity between the two.

古文：为慈母之父母无服。
现代文：不为慈母的父母服丧。
English: Not to mourn the death of my mother's parents.

古文：夫为人后者，其妻为舅姑大功。
现代文：如果丈夫过继给别人为后嗣，那么他的妻子就只能为其本生父母服大功。
English: If a husband passes on his inheritance to someone else, then his wife can only be a great credit to her natural parents.

古文：士祔于大夫则易牲。继父不同居也者；必尝同居。皆无主后。同财而祭其祖祢为同居；有主后者为异居。
现代文：继父没有大功的亲属，随母改嫁而来到继父家的儿子也没有大功亲属，继父以其货财为此子建造庙宇，使他可以按时祭祀自己的生身父祖，这才叫同居；如果继父有大功以上的亲属为之主持后事，那就叫异居。
English: If the stepfather has no relatives who have made great contributions, and the son who comes to the stepfather's family after his mother remarries has no relatives who have made great contributions, and the stepfather uses his wealth to build a temple for the son so that he can sacrifice his own ancestors on time, this is called living together; if the stepfather has relatives who have made great contributions or more to preside over the succession, it is called living apart.

古文：哭朋友者于门外之右南面。
现代文：哭吊朋友时，应站在朋友寝门外的西边，面朝南。
English: When crying for a friend, you should stand on the west side outside your friend's bedroom door, facing south.

古文：祔葬者不筮宅。士大夫不得祔于诸侯，祔于诸祖父之为士大夫者，其妻祔于诸祖姑，妾祔于妾祖姑；亡则中一以上而祔。祔必以其昭穆。
现代文：柑葬于祖莹时用不着再占览墓地的吉凶，因为当初已经卜笙过了。士、大夫不能衬葬于曾经做过诸侯的祖父的墓旁，只能柑葬在做过士、大夫的叔伯祖父墓旁；士夕、大夫的妻子也只能衬葬在做过士、大夫的叔伯祖父的妻子的墓旁，士、大夫的妾也只能柑葬在做过士、大夫的叔伯祖父的妾的墓旁。如果没有适于衬葬的祖辈，就可以间隔一辈而上柑于高祖，其道理就在于柑葬一定要按照昭穆顺序。
English: When buried in Zu Ying, it is no longer necessary to read the cemetery's fortunes and misfortunes, because they have already been divined. The priest and doctor cannot be buried next to the tomb of the grandfather who once served as a vassal, but can only be buried next to the tomb of the priest and doctor's great-uncle; the wife of the priest and doctor can only be buried next to the tomb of the wife of the priest and doctor's great-uncle, and the concubine of the priest and doctor can only be buried next to the tomb of the concubine of the priest and doctor's great-uncle. If there are no ancestors suitable for

古文：诸侯不得祔于天子，天子、诸侯、大夫可以祔于士。
现代文：诸侯不能衬葬于当过天子的祖父，但天子、诸侯、大夫能够柑葬于当过士的祖父。
English: Princes cannot be buried next to grandfathers who were princes, but princes, princes, and doctors can be buried next to grandfathers who were warriors.

古文：为母之君母，母卒则不服。宗子，母在为妻禫。
现代文：如果生母是外祖父的庶出之女，自己要跟着生母为外祖父的正妻服丧；但如生母已死，自己就不再为之服丧。如果身为宗子，那么尽管母亲健在，也可为妻服丧三年。
English: If the birth mother is the stepdaughter of the maternal grandfather, he should follow the birth mother to mourn for the legal wife of the maternal grandfather; but if the birth mother is dead, he will no longer mourn for her. If he is the son-in-law, then although the mother is alive, he can also mourn for his wife for three years.

古文：为慈母后者，为庶母可也，为祖庶母可也。
现代文：《丧服》上说可以为慈母服齐衰三年，那么根据同样道理，为庶母服齐衰三年也可以，为祖庶母服齐衰三年也可以。
English: According to "Funeral Costume," it is possible to wear the mother's clothes for three years, then according to the same principle, it is also possible to wear the mother-in-law's clothes for three years, and it is also possible to wear the mother-in-law's clothes for three years.

古文：为父母、妻、长子禫。
现代文：为父亲、为母亲、为妻子、为长子，都可以服丧三年。
English: For a father, for a mother, for a wife, for an eldest son, it can be three years of mourning.

古文：慈母与妾母，不世祭也。丈夫冠而不为殇，妇人笄而不为殇。
现代文：对于慈母和庶母，为其服丧的只限于受其抚育的妾子本人，妾子的下一代就不再为之服丧。
English: For the loving mother and stepmother, the mourning is limited to the concubine herself who was raised by her, and the next generation of concubines will no longer mourn for her.

古文：为殇后者，以其服服之。
现代文：男子行过冠礼而死就不算疡，女子行过筹礼而死就不算荡。
English: If a man dies after performing the coronation rite, his death is not counted as election, and if a woman dies after performing the pre-ceremony rite, her death is not counted as election.

古文：久而不葬者，唯主丧者不除；其余以麻终月数者，除丧则已。
现代文：被立为荡者的后嗣，只须按照与荡者的本来亲属关系服丧。因故而长期停枢不葬者，只有丧主本人一直穿着丧服，其余的亲属则服麻，服满自己应服的月数就可以除丧。
English: The heirs of the deceased only need to follow the original family relationship with the deceased. For those who have not been buried for a long time, only the deceased himself has been wearing the funeral clothes, while the rest of the relatives have been wearing the mourning clothes. If they have served the full number of months, they can remove the mourning.

古文：箭笄终丧三年。
现代文：未出阁的女子要以箭异插发、麻经缠腰为父服丧三年。
English: Women who did not go out of the palace had to wear their hair in braids and wrap themselves around their father's waist in mourning for three years.

古文：齐衰三月与大功同者，绳屦。
现代文：齐衰三月的丧服，与大功九月的丧服有相同的部分，那就是都穿麻绳编成的展。
English: The mourning clothes of Qi Sheng in March have the same part as the mourning clothes of Da Gong in September, that is, they are all made of hemp rope.

古文：练，筮日筮尸，视濯，皆要绖杖绳屦。
现代文：小祥之祭，主人在事前要通过占笙选择吉日及作尸的人，要亲自检察祭器的洗涤情况，在做这些事情时都要腰缠葛经、手执丧杖、脚穿绳展。
English: For the small auspicious festival, the host should choose the auspicious day and the person who will make the corpse through divination in advance, and should personally inspect the washing of the sacrificial utensils. When doing these things, the waist should be wrapped in the Ge Jing, the hands should hold the funeral staff, and the feet should be tied with ropes.

古文：有司告具，而后去杖。
现代文：等到有关执事报告一切准备就绪，然后才丢开丧杖开始行礼。
English: Wait until the relevant deacon reports that everything is ready, and then throw away the cane and begin to salute.

古文：筮日筮尸，有司告事毕而后杖，拜送宾。
现代文：通过占笙选择吉日及作尸的人时，有来宾参加，等到有关执事报告占签结束时，主人又拿起丧棒拜送宾客。
English: When selecting the auspicious day and the person who made the corpse through divination, there were guests to participate, and when the relevant deacon's report was completed, the owner picked up the funeral baton to see off the guests.

古文：大祥，吉服而筮尸。庶子在父之室，则为其母不禫。
现代文：到了大祥之祭，主人还要通过占签来选择吉日和作尸的人，只是已经换为吉服。妾子如与父亲同宅而居，就不能为生母举行谭祭。
English: When it comes to the great auspicious festival, the master still has to choose the auspicious day and the person who will make the corpse through the lottery, but it has been changed to auspicious clothing. If the concubine lives with her father, she cannot hold a Tan festival for her birth mother.

古文：庶子不以杖即位。
现代文：庶子不可手执丧杖就朝夕哭位。
English: An illegitimate child cannot hold a cane in his hand, so he cries in the morning and evening.

古文：父不主庶子之丧，则孙以杖即位可也。
现代文：如果父亲不为庶子主丧，那么庶子之子手执丧杖就朝夕哭位是可以的。
English: If the father does not mourn for his son-in-law, then it is permissible for the son-in-law to weep in the morning and evening, holding his mourning staff in his hand.

古文：父在，庶子为妻以杖即位可也。
现代文：父在，但不为庶子之妻主丧，而由庶子本人主丧，在这种情况下庶子手执丧杖就朝夕哭之位也是可以的。
English: The father is present, but does not lead the mourning for the wife of the son-in-law, but the son-in-law himself leads the mourning. In this case, it is also possible for the son-in-law to hold the mourning stick and cry in the morning and evening.

古文：诸侯吊于异国之臣，则其君为主。
现代文：诸侯出访他国，恰遇该国大臣去世，在往此大臣家里吊丧时，该国的国君应该代替死者之子为丧主。
English: When princes visit a foreign country and a minister of that country passes away, and the minister's family is in mourning, the sovereign of that country should act as the mourner in place of the deceased's son.

古文：诸侯吊，必皮弁锡衰。
现代文：诸侯到臣子家里吊丧时，头上戴的是弃纽，身上穿的是锡衰。
English: When princes went to the homes of their vassals to pay their last respects, they wore an amulet on their heads and tin wreaths on their bodies.

古文：所吊虽已葬，主人必免。
现代文：国君所吊的死者即令已经下葬，丧主也一定要用麻布束发。
English: Even if the deceased who was hanged by the sovereign has already been buried, the mourners must also wear a linen bundle.

古文：主人未丧服，则君于不锡衰。
现代文：如果主人还未成服，国君于此时来吊，就也不穿锡衰。
English: If the master is not yet fully dressed, and the sovereign comes to hang at this time, he will not wear tin.

古文：养有疾者不丧服，遂以主其丧。
现代文：侍奉有病的人不宜身穿丧服，等到病人死了，就为他主持丧事。
English: It is not fitting for those who serve the sick to put on sackcloth; but when the sick person dies, they should bury him.

古文：非养者入主人之丧，则不易己之丧服。
现代文：如果不是侍奉有病的人来为别人主持丧事，就不改换自己原来的丧服。
English: If you don't serve the sick and preside over the funerals of others, you won't change your original mourning clothes.

古文：养尊者必易服，养卑者否。
现代文：侍奉尊长辈病人一定要换下丧服，对于卑幼辈病人则可不必。
English: Elderly patients must change out of their mourning clothes, but it is not necessary for younger patients.

古文：妾无妾祖姑者，易牲而祔于女君可也。
现代文：妾无妾祖姑可衬，又无高祖之妾可衬，在这种情况下只好柑于嫡祖姑，但衬祭使用的牺牲得换一下，由原来的特牲改为少牢。
English: A concubine without a concubine's great-grandmother can be a foil, and there is no great-grandfather's concubine to be a foil. In this case, it is necessary to use the great-grandmother as a foil, but the sacrifice used for the foil had to be changed, from the original special sacrifice to a lesser sacrifice.

古文：妇之丧、虞、卒哭，其夫若子主之。祔，则舅主之。
现代文：媳妇辈的丧事，虞祭和卒哭之祭，可以由她的丈夫或儿子来主持；但在将她衬祭于祖姑之庙时，则应由她的公爹来主持。
English: Her husband or son can preside over the funerals of her daughter-in-laws, the State Festival and the Weeping Festival, but her father-in-law should preside when she is sacrificed in the ancestral temple.

古文：士不摄大夫。士摄大夫，唯宗子。
现代文：大夫死而无后，其亲属中之为士者不得代为主丧，因为大夫与士尊卑悬殊；只有宗子才可以以士的身份代为大夫主丧。
English: After the death of a doctor, those of his relatives who were nobles were not allowed to mourn for the doctor, because of the disparity between the doctor and the nobles; only the eldest son could mourn for the doctor as a nobleman.

古文：主人未除丧，有兄弟自他国至，则主人不免而为主。
现代文：在主人尚未除去丧服时，倘有他的兄弟从国外奔丧回来，主人可以不免而为主。
English: When the master has not yet removed his mourning clothes, if his brother returns from abroad in mourning, the master can inevitably become the master.

古文：陈器之道，多陈之而省纳之可也；省陈之而尽纳之可也。
现代文：陈列明器的原则是：宾客馈赠的明器要全部陈列出来，但不必全部放入墓中；主人自备的明器不必全部陈列出来，但可以全部放入墓中。
English: The principle of exhibiting the candelabra is: the candelabra given by the guests should be fully displayed, but they do not all have to be put into the tomb; the candelabra provided by the owner do not have to be fully displayed, but they can all be put into the tomb.

古文：奔兄弟之丧，先之墓而后之家，为位而哭。
现代文：从国外奔赴兄弟之丧，可以先到墓地去哭，然后再往丧家对着丧主而哭。
English: If you go to a brother's funeral from abroad, you can first go to the cemetery to cry, and then go to the funeral home to cry for the deceased.

古文：所知之丧，则哭于宫而后之墓。
现代文：奔赴朋友之丧，则应先哭于殡宫，然后再到墓地去哭。
English: If you go to a friend's funeral, you should first cry at the funeral home, and then go to the cemetery to cry.

古文：父不为众子次于外。
现代文：庶子之丧，作父亲的就不在中门外设丧次。
English: For the funeral of an illegitimate child, the father should not set up a funeral procession outside the middle gate.

古文：与诸侯为兄弟者服斩。
现代文：与诸侯是兄弟关系，虽在他邦仍服斩衰。
English: He had a brotherly relationship with the princes, even though he was still a subordinate in his own state.

古文：下殇小功，带，澡麻不绝本，诎而反以报之。
现代文：下荡小功这种丧服，其腰经是用连根漂白的麻制成，其下垂部分要挽起来搭到腰纷上。
English: This kind of mourning dress, the waistline of which is made of bleached hemp, its hanging part should be tied up and put on the waistline.

古文：妇祔于祖姑，祖姑有三人，则祔于亲者。
现代文：媳妇死后附葬于丈夫的祖母之墓，如果有几个祖母，应该附葬于关系最亲的祖母。
English: After the death of a daughter-in-law, she should be buried next to her husband's grandmother. If there are several grandmothers, they should be buried next to the closest grandmother.

古文：其妻为大夫而卒，而后其夫不为大夫，而祔于其妻则不易牲；妻卒而后夫为大夫，而祔于其妻，则以大夫牲。
现代文：妻子是在丈夫做大夫的时候死的，而丈夫后来又不是大夫，那么合葬的绖祭礼就不改换祭牲，仍用一只猪；如果丈夫在妻子死后才做大夫的，那他死后与妻子合葬的绖祭要用大夫的绖祭礼，用少牢。
English: If the wife died when the husband was a doctor, but the husband later became a non-doctor, then the burnt offering for the joint funeral would not be changed, and a pig would still be used. If the husband became a doctor after his wife's death, then the burnt offering for the joint funeral of his wife after his death would be the burnt offering for the doctor, with a lesser penalty.

古文：为父后者，为出母无服。
现代文：留在父亲身边做继承人的儿子，不为已被父亲休弃的生母服丧。
English: The son who remains at his father's side as heir does not mourn for the birth mother who has been abandoned by his father.

古文：无服也者，丧者不祭故也。
现代文：其所以不服丧，是因为生母已成为别家人，不当祭祀。
English: The reason why they are not satisfied with the funeral is because the birth mother has become a member of a different family and is not worthy of being sacrificed.

古文：妇人不为主而杖者：姑在为夫杖，母为长子削杖。女子子在室为父母，其主丧者不杖，则子一人杖。
现代文：妇人不做丧主但仍要拿丧棒的情况是:夫之母在世而丈夫死，妻子要用丧棒；母亲为长子服丧时要用桐木削成的丧棒；女儿出嫁前父母死亡，又无兄弟做丧主，别的亲属代做丧主但不用丧棒，那么长女要用丧棒。
English: If a woman is not the chief mourner, but still has to carry the baton, it is as follows: if the husband's mother is alive and the husband dies, the wife should use the baton; if the mother is mourning for the eldest son, she should use a baton made of paulownia wood; if the daughter's parents die before she is married, and there is no brother to be the chief mourner, other relatives should act as chief mourners but not use the baton, then the eldest daughter should use the baton.

古文：缌小功，虞卒哭则免。
现代文：服缌麻和小功丧服的亲属，到虞祭和卒哭祭时要戴免。
English: Relatives who wear nettle and minor meritorious and funerary attire should be exempted from wearing them when they go to the Yu Festival and the Wailing Festival.

古文：既葬而不报虞，则虽主人皆冠，及虞则皆免。
现代文：葬后不随即举行虞祭的，即使是丧主也可以和其他亲属一样戴冠，等到举行虞祭时再全体去冠戴免。
English: If the state festival is not held immediately after the funeral, even the bereaved can wear a crown like other relatives, and wait until the state festival is held before everyone goes to wear a crown.

古文：为兄弟既除丧已。及其葬也，反服其服。
现代文：为兄弟服丧的人，有的在死者入葬前已经除去丧服，但到下葬的时候，还要穿上原先的丧服。
English: Some of the mourners for the brothers had already removed their mourning clothes before the burial of the deceased, but at the time of burial, they still had to put on the original mourning clothes.

古文：报虞卒哭则免。如不报虞则除之。
现代文：葬后随即举行虞祭和卒哭祭，要戴免；如果不随即举行虞祭，就把丧服除掉。
English: If the state festival and the wailing ceremony are held immediately after the funeral, the mourning clothes should be removed; if the state festival is not held immediately, the mourning clothes should be removed.

古文：远葬者比反哭者皆冠，及郊而后免反哭。
现代文：死者葬在郊外远处，亲属送葬及送葬回来的路上都戴冠；走到城与郊的交界处，才去冠戴免，回到庙中哭泣。
English: The dead were buried far away in the suburbs. Relatives wore crowns on the way to the funeral and on the way back. When they reached the junction between the city and the suburbs, they went to wear crowns and returned to the temple to cry.

古文：君吊，虽不当免时也，主人必免，不散麻。
现代文：国君来吊丧，即使是不该戴免的时候，丧主也要戴免、系麻腰绖，腰带的末稍不下垂。
English: When a national leader comes to pay his respects, even if it is not appropriate to wear a loincloth, the mourner should also wear a loincloth, wear a hemp loincloth, and the end of the belt should not sag.

古文：虽异国之君，免也。亲者皆免。
现代文：即使是别国的国君来吊丧，全体亲属都要戴免。
English: Even if the head of state of another country comes to the funeral, all the relatives have to be present.

古文：除殇之丧者，其祭也必玄。除成丧者，其祭也朝服缟冠。
现代文：为未成年而死的人服丧，到除丧的祭祀时穿戴黑色的衣冠；为成年人服丧，在除丧的祭祀时穿黑色朝服，戴白色的冠。
English: Those who mourn the death of a minor should wear a black robe and crown at the memorial service; those who mourn the death of an adult should wear a black robe and white crown at the memorial service.

古文：奔父之丧，括发于堂上，袒降踊，袭绖于东方。
现代文：父亲死，从别国来奔丧的儿子，到家后应在堂上用麻把头发束起来，脱衣露出左臂，走下台阶，边哭边跺脚，然后在庭东边把衣服穿起来，系上麻绖。
English: After the death of the father, the son who has come from another country to mourn should tie up his hair with a twine in the hall after arriving home, strip off his clothes to reveal his left arm, walk down the steps, stomp his feet while crying, and then put on his clothes on the east side of the yard and tie it with a twine.

古文：奔母之丧，不括发，袒于堂上，降踊，袭免于东方。绖即位成踊，出门哭止。
现代文：如果是为母亲奔丧，就不束头发，而在堂上脱衣露出左臂，走下台阶，边哭边跺脚，然后在庭东边穿好衣服，用麻布条束住头发，系好腰带，走到哭位上边哭边跺脚，但出了殡宫门就停止哭泣。
English: If you are grieving for your mother, you do not tie your hair, but undress in the hall to expose your left arm, walk down the steps, cry and stomp your feet, then get dressed on the east side of the yard, tie your hair with a linen strip, tie a belt, walk to the crying place and cry and stomp your feet, but stop crying outside the funeral home.

古文：三日而五哭三袒。
现代文：孝子为父母奔丧，头三天内哭踊五次，脱衣露臂三次。
English: The filial son mourned for his parents, cried and danced five times in the first three days, and stripped naked three times.

古文：适妇不为舅后者，则姑为之小功。
现代文：嫡长子如果有废疾或无子，就不能做父亲的继承人，那么他的妻子死后，丈夫的母亲只为她服小功丧服。
English: If the eldest son has a wasting disease or is childless, he cannot be his father's heir, so after his wife's death, the husband's mother will only pay a small tribute to her.

