古文：严安者，临菑人也。
现代文：严安，临苗人。
English: Yan'an, Lin Miao people.

古文：以故丞相史上书，曰：
现代文：以故丞相史的身份上书说：
English: In his capacity as the late prime minister, he wrote:

古文：臣闻《邹子》曰： 政教文质者，所以云救也，当时则用，过则舍之，有易则易之，故守一而不变者，未睹治之至也。 
现代文：臣间《邹子》上说： 政令教化具有时代特点，是用来匡正时弊的，符合当时社会实际的就使用，过时了就舍弃它，有应该改变的就改变它，所以固守一定的政令教化而不加以变更，是没有看到政治的至要。 
English: In "The Cripple," the courtiers said: "Decree-enforced education has the characteristics of the times. It is used to rectify the shortcomings of the times. It is used in accordance with the social reality at that time. If it is outdated, it is abandoned. If there is something that should be changed, it is changed. Therefore, adhering to a certain decree-enforced education without changing it is not to see the political importance.

古文：今天下人民用财侈靡，车马衣裘宫室皆竞修饰，调五声使有节族，杂五色使有文章，重五味方丈于前，以观欲天下。
现代文：现在天下的富民使用财物过分奢侈，车马衣裘宫室都比着修饰，调整宫、商、角、征、羽五声使有进止抑扬，杂以青、赤、黄、白、黑五色使有文采，调和五味陈列于方丈之前，夸耀显示想让天下人羡慕。
English: Nowadays, the rich people of the world use extravagant luxury goods. The carriage and horse clothes of the Qiu palace are all compared to the decoration. The five tones of the palace, merchant, horn, levy and feather are adjusted to make it more advanced and restrained, and the five colors of blue, red, yellow, white and black are mixed to make it more artistic and harmonious. They are displayed in front of the abbot, showing that they want to be envied by the world.

古文：彼民之情，见美则愿之，是教民以侈也。
现代文：那些民众的情趣是看见好的东西就希望享有，这是用奢侈来教导人民呀。
English: The taste of the people is to see what is good and to desire it. This is teaching the people with luxury.

古文：侈而无节，则不可赡，民离本而徼末矣。
现代文：奢侈而没有节制财物就会不满足，民众就会背离本业而去追求末业了。
English: If there is no restraint on luxury and wealth, people will not be satisfied, and people will deviate from their main occupation to pursue their secondary occupation.

古文：未不可徒得，故搢绅者不惮为诈，带剑者夸杀人以矫夺，而世不知愧，故奸轨浸长。
现代文：末业的丰厚利润不可能白白得到，所以官吏不怕违法敲诈钱财，带剑的武人竞相杀人诈伪豪夺，而世人却不知道羞愧，所以奸诈邪恶的行为逐渐滋长。
English: It is impossible to get the rich profits of the last business in vain, so officials are not afraid of illegal extortion of money, and warriors with swords compete to kill, swindle and plunder, but the world does not know shame, so treacherous and evil behavior is gradually growing.

古文：夫佳丽珍怪固顺于耳目，故养失而泰，乐失而淫，礼失而采，教失而伪。
现代文：美丽珍奇的东西本来就看着，听了悦耳，所以失去修养就会骄纵，没有健康的音乐就会淫乱，丧失礼义就会文过其实，放弃教化就会诈伪。
English: Beautiful and rare things are originally looked at and listened to with pleasant ears, so if you lose self-cultivation, you will be arrogant, if there is no healthy music, you will be lewd, if you lose etiquette, you will be exaggerated, and if you give up enlightenment, you will be fraudulent.

古文：伪、采、淫、泰，非所以范民之道也。
现代文：奸邪诈伪、文过其实、淫乱、骄纵，这些都是不能用来立法教化人民的行为啊。
English: Treachery, deception, exaggeration, debauchery, and arrogance are all behaviors that cannot be used to legislate and educate the people.

古文：是以天下人民逐利无已，犯法者众。
现代文：所以天下人民追逐名利没有止息，违法作乱的人就一定多。
English: Therefore, the pursuit of fame and fortune by people around the world has not stopped, and there must be more people who break the law and cause trouble.

古文：臣愿为民制度以防其淫，使贫富不相耀以和其心。
现代文：臣希望给百姓制定法令制度来防止他们奢侈，使贫富不再互相夸耀来和缓人们羡慕奢侈的思想。
English: The minister hoped to establish a legal system for the people to prevent them from being extravagant, so that the rich and poor would no longer boast of each other to ease people's envy of luxury.

古文：心既和平，其性恬安。
现代文：思想已经和顺，他们的性情就会变得恬静安逸。
English: Their thoughts have become harmonious, and their disposition will become calm and comfortable.

古文：恬安不营，则盗贼销，盗贼销，则刑罚少；刑罚少，则阴阳和，四时正，风雨时，草木畅茂，五谷蕃孰，六畜遂字，民不夭厉，和之至也。 
现代文：性情恬静安逸不营私诈财，那么盗贼就会消；盗贼消除，刑罚就会减少；刑罚减少，就会阴阳调和，四时端正，风雨及时，草木茂盛，五谷丰登，六畜繁衍，民无疾病，和顺达到顶点。
English: If one's disposition is calm and at ease, and does not engage in personal and financial fraud, then the thieves will disappear; if the thieves are eliminated, the punishment will be reduced; if the punishment is reduced, the yin and yang will be reconciled, the four times will be correct, the wind and rain will be timely, the grass will be lush, the grain will be abundant, the six animals will reproduce, the people will be free from disease, and the harmony will reach its peak.

古文：臣闻周有天下，其治三百余岁，成、康其隆也，刑错四十余年而不用。
现代文：臣听说周朝统治天下，其治世有三百多年，成王、康王两代是盛世，刑罚搁置四十多年没有使用。
English: The minister heard that the Zhou Dynasty ruled the world for more than three hundred years, and the two generations of King Cheng and King Kang were prosperous. The punishment was suspended for more than forty years and was not used.

古文：及其衰，亦三百余年，故五伯更起。
现代文：到周朝走向衰落，也经历了三百多年，所以春秋五霸相继兴起。
English: By the Zhou Dynasty's decline, it had also experienced more than three hundred years, so the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties emerged one after another.

古文：伯者，常佐天子兴利除害，诛暴禁邪，匡正海内，以尊天子。
现代文：霸主，就是经常辅佐天子兴利除害，诛暴禁邪，在海内匡扶正道，用这些尊崇天子。
English: The overlord, that is, often assists the heavenly son in eliminating harm, suppressing violence and prohibiting evil, and upholding the righteous path in the sea, and using these to honor the heavenly son.

古文：五伯既没，贤圣莫续，天子孤弱，号令不行。
现代文：五霸去世以后，没有贤君圣主继承他们的事业，天子孤立衰弱，号令不行。
English: After the death of the five overlords, there was no successor to the sages and saints, leaving the heavenly son in an isolated and weak position, unable to issue orders.

古文：诸侯恣行，强陵弱，众暴寡。
现代文：诸侯恣意妄为，以强凌弱，以众欺寡。
English: Princes act arbitrarily, using force to dominate the weak, and deceiving the many.

古文：田常篡齐，六卿分晋，并为战国，此民之始苦也。
现代文：田常篡夺了齐国的权柄，智、范、中行、韩、趟、魏六卿瓜分了晋国大权，都成为好战的国家，这是百姓困苦的开端。
English: Tian Chang usurped the power of Qi, and the six princes Zhi, Fan, Zhong Xing, Han, Wai, and Wei divided the power of Jin and became warlike countries. This was the beginning of the people's hardships.

古文：于是强国务攻，弱国修守，合从连衡，驰车毂击，介胄生虮虱，民无所告诉。
现代文：在这时，强国致力于进攻，弱国修整守备合纵连横，使者车马驰骋，往来相撞，士兵的错甲长满蠛虱，老百姓无处诉苦。
English: At this time, the strong countries are committed to the offensive, the weak countries are preparing and preparing, the messengers are galloping and colliding, the soldiers' armor is full of defects, and the common people have nowhere to complain.

古文：及至秦王，蚕食天下，并吞战国，称号皇帝，一海内之政，坏诸侯之城。
现代文：待至秦王嬴政，蚕食天下，并吞列国，建称号为 皇帝 ，统一海内的政令，拆毁诸侯的城郭。
English: Wait until the Qin King seizes power, encroaches on the world, and engulfs the countries, establishes the title of Emperor, unifies the decrees of the sea, and demolishes the castles of the princes.

古文：销其兵，铸以为钟虡，示不复用。
现代文：销毁缴获来的兵器，铸成钟虞，表示不再使用。
English: The captured weapons were destroyed and cast into a bell, indicating that they would no longer be used.

古文：元元黎民得免于战国，逢明天子，人人自以为更生。
现代文：庶民得以免除战国动乱的痛苦，人人自以为遇上了圣明的天子，获得了新的生命。
English: Ordinary people were able to avoid the pain of the turmoil of the Warring States period. Everyone thought they had met the Son of Heaven and gained a new life.

古文：乡使秦缓刑罚，薄赋敛，省繇役，贵仁义，贱权利，上笃厚，下佞巧，变风易俗，化于海内，则世世必安矣。
现代文：假如秦朝宽缓刑罚，减轻赋敛，省减徭役，看重仁义，贱视权利，崇尚忠厚，鄙弃佞巧，移风易俗，使教化在海内推行，那么秦朝的天下就会世世代代平安。
English: If the Qin Dynasty were to relax punishments, lighten the burden of punishment, reduce the number of laborers, attach importance to benevolence and righteousness, despise power, advocate loyalty, despise cleverness, change customs, and promote enlightenment at sea, then the world of the Qin Dynasty would be safe for generations to come.

古文：秦不行是风，循其故俗，为知巧权利者进，笃厚忠正者退，法严令苛，谄谀者众，日闻其美，意广心逸。
现代文：秦朝不倡导推行这样的社会风气，却沿用其旧俗，玩弄智巧权利的人得到进用，笃厚忠信正直的人被斥退，法律严酷，政令苛暴，谄媚阿谀之徒众多，皇帝天天听他们花言巧语，歌功颂德，志得意满，想入非非。
English: The Qin Dynasty did not advocate the implementation of such a social ethos, but continued to use its old customs. Those who played with clever power were used, those who were loyal and honest were rejected, the laws were harsh, the decrees were harsh, and there were many flattering flatterers. The emperor listened to their rhetoric, praise of achievements, self-satisfaction, and fantasy every day.

古文：欲威海外，使蒙恬将兵以北攻强胡，辟地进境，戍于北河，飞刍挽粟以随其后。
现代文：想在海外逞强，就派蒙恬带兵北击匈奴，开拓疆土，在北河戍守，令百姓急速运送粮草，跟在军队后面。
English: If he wanted to be brave overseas, he would send Mengniu and his soldiers to attack the Huns in the north, to explore the territory, to hold out in the North River, to make the people rapidly transport grain and grass, and to follow behind the army.

古文：又使尉屠睢将楼船之士攻越，使监禄凿渠运粮，深入越地，越人遁逃。
现代文：又派郡都尉屠睢率楼船士兵攻打百越，派御史禄开凿灵渠运粮，深入越地，越人遁逃。
English: He also sent the county captain Tu Youyou and the soldiers of the ro-ship to attack Bai Yue, and sent Goshiro to excavate a spiritual canal to transport grain, go deep into the country, and the Vietnamese fled.

古文：旷日持久，粮食乏绝，越人击之，秦兵大败。
现代文：旷持久，粮食供应不上，越人发动袭击，秦兵大败。
English: It was protracted, food supplies were inadequate, the Viets launched an attack, and the Qin soldiers were soundly defeated.

古文：秦乃使尉佗将卒以戍越。当是时，秦祸北构于胡，南挂于越，宿兵于无用之地，进而不得退。
现代文：秦朝于是派尉佗率兵戍守越地，那时，秦朝的祸患是北边构怨于匈奴，南面结仇于越人，驻军于无用之地，前进而不能退守。
English: The Qin Dynasty then sent soldiers to defend Yue. At that time, the evil of the Qin Dynasty was that the north side harbored grudges against the Xiongnu, the south side harbored grudges against the Yue, and the garrison was in a useless place, advancing but unable to retreat.

古文：行十余年，丁男被甲，丁女转输，苦不聊生，自经于道树，死者相望。
现代文：这样过了十几年，丁男当兵打仗，丁女运输，苦不聊生，吊死自杀在路边大树上，死者相望。
English: After more than ten years of this, Ding Man was a soldier in the war, Ding Woman was a transporter, they were bored with life, and hanged themselves on a large tree by the roadside. The dead looked at each other.

古文：及秦皇帝崩，天下大畔。
现代文：等到秦始皇崩，天下大叛。
English: When Qin Shi Huang died, the whole country rebelled.

古文：陈胜、吴广举陈，武臣、张耳举赵，项梁举吴，田儋举齐，景驹举郢，周市举魏，韩广举燕，穷山通谷，豪士并起，不可胜载也。
现代文：陈胜、吴广取陈，武臣、张耳取赵，项梁克吴，田儋夺齐，景驹下郢，周市陷魏，韩广举燕，满山豪杰并起，不可胜记。
English: Chen Sheng, Wu Guang took Chen, Wu Zhen, Zhang Er took Zhao, Xiang Liang took Wu, Tian Zhe took Qi, Jing Zhe took Xiao, Zhou Shizhen took Wei, Han Guang took Yan, and Manshan Gao Jie all started at the same time, it is impossible to win.

古文：然本皆非公侯之后，非长官之吏，无尺寸之势，起闾巷，杖棘矜，应时而动，不谋而俱起，不约而同会，壤长地进，至乎伯王，时教使然也。
现代文：然而，这些人都不是公侯的后代，也不是地方长官，没有丝毫权势，起于阎巷，手持矛戟之柄，顺应时势一动，不谋而合同时起事，不约而同聚会风云，攻城掠地，直到称王，这是当时的教化造成了这样的结果啊。
English: However, these people are not the descendants of princes, nor are they local governors, they do not have the slightest power, they started from the alley of hell, holding the handle of a spear, conforming to the trend of the times, rising up at the time of the contract, gathering together by chance, storming the city and seizing the land, until they were crowned king. This was the result of the enlightenment at that time.

古文：秦贵为天子，富有天下，灭世绝祀，穷兵之祸也。
现代文：秦朝皇帝贵为天子，富有天下，灭绝世系断绝祭祀，这是穷兵黩武造成的祸患啊。
English: Emperor Qin of the Qin Dynasty was regarded as the Son of Heaven and was rich beyond measure. He cut off sacrificial rites and exterminated the lineage. This was a calamity caused by his excessive military spending.

古文：故周失之弱，秦失之强，不变之患也。
现代文：所以周朝的过失是衰弱，秦朝的过失是强大，都是因不能因时变通而造成了亡国的灾难。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty's fault is weak, and the Qin Dynasty's fault is strong, both of which are unable to adapt to the times and have caused the disaster of losing the country.

古文：今徇南夷，朝夜郎，降羌僰，略薉州，建城邑，深入匈奴，燔其龙城，议者美之。
现代文：现在汉廷想招抚南夷，使夜郎来朝，降服羌焚、菱州，在那裹修城邑，又想深入匈奴，燔烧他们的龙城，议事者赞美这些计划。
English: Now Hanting wants to woo the Nanyi, make the Yelang come to the North, and subjugate the Xuanqin and Lingzhou, and rebuild the cities there. He also wants to go deep into the Xiongnu and burn their Dragon City. The councilors praise these plans.

古文：此人臣之利，非天下之长策也。
现代文：这是人臣的利欲，不是治理天下的长久之策。
English: This is the greed of vassals, not a long-term strategy for governing the world.

古文：今中国无狗吠之警，而外累于远方之备，靡敝国家，非所以子民也。
现代文：现在中国境内连狗叫的警报都没有，却受牵累于境外的防备，使国家凋敝衰败，这不是养育人民的做法呀。
English: At present, there is not even a dog barking alarm in China, but it is affected by foreign precautions, causing the country to wither and decay. This is not the way to nurture the people.

古文：行无穷之欲，甘心快意，结怨于匈奴，非所以安边也。
现代文：为了实现无止境的欲望，衹图甘心快意，和匈奴结怨，这不是安定边境的办法。
English: In order to realize the endless desire, Zangtu is willing to be happy, and the Xiongnu is resentful. This is not a way to stabilize the border.

古文：祸挐而不解，兵休而复起，近者愁苦，远者惊骇，非所以持久也。
现代文：祸患不解决，战争停息又重新挑起，使近处的人愁苦，远处的人害怕，这不是持久的办法。
English: It is not a long-term solution if the disaster is not resolved and the war is halted and then restarted, causing the people nearby to suffer and the people far away to be afraid.

古文：今天下锻甲摩剑，矫箭控弦，转输军粮，未见休时，此天下所共忧也。
现代文：现在天下百姓都要锻打盔甲，磨砺刀剑，矫正箭镞，引拉弓弦，转运军粮，看不到休止的时候，这是人所共同忧苦的事情。
English: Nowadays, people all over the world have to forge armor, sharpen swords, straighten arrowheads, draw bowstrings, and transport military supplies. When there is no end in sight, this is a common sorrow for people.

古文：夫兵久而变起，事烦而虑生。
现代文：用兵时间过久就会引起变乱，事情烦多就会使人产生疑虑。
English: That war lasts a long time, accidents will occur, things are complicated, and doubts will arise.

古文：今外郡之地或几千里，列城数十，形束壤制，带胁诸侯，非宗室之利也。
现代文：现在外郡的土地有的将近千里，连城数十，山川形势足以挟制其郡内百姓，威胁附近诸侯，这不是汉朝宗室的利益啊。
English: At present, there are nearly a thousand miles of land outside the county, even dozens of cities, and the mountain and river situation is enough to constrain the people in the county and threaten the nearby princes. This is not the interest of the Han Dynasty family.

古文：上观齐、晋所以亡，公室卑削，六卿大盛也；下览秦之所以灭，刑严文刻，欲大无穷也。
现代文：上观齐、晋两国灭亡的原因，是因为公室衰弱，六卿太强；下察秦国覆灭的原因，在于刑严法酷，欲望太大而且没有穷尽。
English: The reasons for the demise of Shangguan Qi and Jin were that the government was weak and the six nobles were too strong; the reasons for the downfall of Qin were that the punishment was severe and the law was harsh, and the desire was too great and inexhaustible.

古文：今郡守之权非特六卿之重也，地几千里非特闾巷之资也，甲兵器械非特棘矜之用也，以逢万世之变，则不可胜讳也。
现代文：现在，郡守掌握的权力，不衹是当年晋国六卿那么重；土地千里，也不衹是闾巷那么点凭藉；甲兵器械，更不衹是矛戟那么点作用，凭这些有利条件，万一碰上天下变乱，会有什么局面出现，那就不可讳言了。
English: At present, the power held by county magistrates is not as heavy as that of the six nobles of the Jin Dynasty; the land of a thousand miles is not as small as that of a lane; the armored weapons are not as small as that of a spear. With these favorable conditions, if there is a world turmoil, what situation will appear, then it can not be concealed.

古文：后以安为骑马令。
现代文：后以严安为骑马令。
English: After that, Yan'an became the riding order.

古文：终军字子云，济南人也。
现代文：终军，字子云，济南郡人。
English: The last army, Ziziyun, came from Jinan County.

古文：少好学，以辩博能属文闻于郡中。
现代文：年轻时爱好学习，因为善辩博闻会写文章而在郡中闻名。
English: An avid learner in his youth, he was well known in the county for being an articulate and well-read writer.

古文：年十八，选为博士弟子。
现代文：十八岁时，被选举为博士弟子。
English: At the age of eighteen, he was elected as a doctoral disciple.

古文：至府受遣，太守闻其有异材，召见军。甚奇之，与交结。
现代文：选送他去京城，到太守府报到时，太守听说他才能出众，就召见了他，认为他很奇异，就和他结为好友。
English: He was selected to go to Kyoto, and when he reported to the daimyō, the daimyō heard that he was outstanding, summoned him, thought he was very strange, and became friends with him.

古文：军揖太守而去，至长安上书言事。武帝异其文，拜军为谒者给事中。
现代文：终军辞别太守赴京，到长安上书言事，武帝看后，认为他的文辞与众不同，就任命终军为谒者给事中。
English: At the end of the war, the commander-in-chief left for Beijing and went to Chang'an to deliver a speech. Emperor Wu saw his speech and thought it was unique, so he appointed the commander-in-chief as the one to deliver the speech.

古文：从上幸雍祠五畤，获白麟，一角而五蹄。
现代文：终军跟随武帝到雍县祭祀五峙，武帝捕获了一只白色的麒麟，长着一只角，五只脚。
English: The last army followed Emperor Wu to Yong County for the Five-Sided Ritual. Emperor Wu captured a white unicorn with one horn and five legs.

古文：时又得奇木，其枝旁出，辄复合于木上。
现代文：当时又发现一棵奇树，树枝向旁边伸出，然后又弯过来附合在树上。
English: At that time, they also found a strange tree, the branches of which stretched out to the side, and then bent over to attach to the tree.

古文：上异此二物，博谋群臣。
现代文：武帝感到这两个动植物很奇，广泛地询问群臣对它们的看法。
English: Emperor Wu felt that these two animals and plants were very strange and extensively asked the courtiers for their opinions.

古文：军上对曰：
现代文：终军上书回答说：
English: The final petitioner replied:

古文：臣闻《诗》颂君德，《乐》舞后功，异经而同指，明盛德之所隆也。
现代文：我听说《诗经》歌颂君主的德行，《乐经》赞美帝王的功绩，经书不同而旨意相同，都是显明大德的隆盛啊。
English: I have heard that the "Book of Songs" praises the virtues of the monarch, and the "Song of Songs" praises the merits of the emperor. The scriptures are different, but the intention is the same. Both show the prosperity of great virtue.

古文：南越窜屏葭苇，与鸟鱼群，正朔不及其俗。
现代文：南越逃窜隐藏在芦苇丛中，与鸟鱼作伴，汉朝的教化影响不到他们的风俗。
English: Hidden in the reed thickets, the South Vietnamese peregrine falcon keeps company with birds and fish. The Han Dynasty's indoctrination did not affect their customs.

古文：有司临境，而东瓯内附，闽王伏辜，南越赖救。
现代文：有关官员率兵屯驻边境，束瓯归附汉朝，闽王服罪，南越赖救。
English: Relevant officials and soldiers stationed at the border, Sokcho was annexed by the Han Dynasty, Shao Wang served his sentence, and South Vietnam came to the rescue.

古文：北胡随畜荐居，禽兽行，虎狼心，上古未能摄。
现代文：北地匈奴随畜牧经常迁移住处，行同禽兽，心如虎狼，从上古时就没有能够降服。
English: The northern Xiongnu often migrate with their livestock, live with animals, and have hearts like tigers and wolves. Since ancient times, they have never been able to surrender.

古文：大将军秉钺，单于奔幕；票骑抗旌，昆邪右衽。
现代文：大将军卫青手持斧铁，匈奴单于逃奔漠北；骠骑将军霍去病高举战旗，乌孙昆邪归化中国。
English: General Wei Qing held an axe and iron in his hand, the Xiongnu fled to the north of the desert alone; General Huo went to the sick to hold high the battle flag, and Wusong Kun was naturalized in China.

古文：是泽南洽而威北畅也。
现代文：德泽分布南疆而威武通达北国。
English: Dezhe is distributed in southern Xinjiang, while Weiwu is widespread in the north.

古文：若罚不阿近，举不遗远，设官俟贤，县赏待功，能者进以保禄，罢者退而劳力，刑于宇内矣。
现代文：如果惩罚不偏袒亲近的人，举荐不遣漏远处的人，设官悬赏等待贤士前来立功，有才能的就进升而保有俸禄，不称职的就退免而归乡务农，形成法令推行全国。
English: If punishment does not favor those who are close, if recommendation does not send away those who are far away, if officials are set up and rewards are offered to wait for sages to come and make contributions, if talented, they will be promoted and retain their salaries, if incompetent, they will be dismissed and return to their hometowns to work in agriculture, and laws will be formed and implemented across the country.

古文：履众美而不足，怀圣明而不专，建三宫之文质，章厥职之所宜，封禅之君无闻焉。
现代文：身兼众美而不满足，心怀圣明而不专制，建立明堂、辟雍、灵台三宫的制度，文字与内容都符合要求，而且长期适用，表彰那些做事认真称职的人，前代封惮之君也没听说有像这样美好的德行。
English: It is not enough to be beautiful, it is not enough to be holy, it is not enough to be despotic, and it is not enough to establish a system of Ming-tang, Biyong, and Ling-tai Three Palaces. The text and content meet the requirements and are applicable for a long time. It commends those who are serious and competent in their work. The previous generation of Fuzhuangzhuijun had never heard of such a beautiful virtue.

古文：夫天命初定，万事草创，及臻六合同风，九州共贯，必待明圣润色，祖业传于无穷。
现代文：最初接受天命的君主，万事草创，要达到六合之内风化相同，九州大地系统一致，必须等待圣明的君主光大润饰，把祖宗的功业永久地传下去。
English: The monarch who originally accepted the mandate of heaven, the originator of all things, to achieve the same weathering within the six counties and the same earth system in Kyushu, must wait for the monarch of the Holy Light to polish the work and pass on the work of the ancestors forever.

古文：故周至成王，然后制定，而休征之应见。
现代文：所以周朝到周成王时，制度才确定，然后嘉美的证验响应出现。
English: Therefore, it was not until the Zhou Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty that the system was determined, and then Jiamei's authentication response appeared.

古文：陛下盛日月之光，垂圣思于勒成，专神明之敬，奉燔瘗于郊官，献享之精交神，积和之气塞明，而异兽来获，宜矣。
现代文：陛下兴隆曰月之光，垂布圣明的思虑进行封禅；专心敬事神明，去泰峙祭天，到后土祭地，奉献酒食的精气感动了神明，祥和之气充塞天地，曰月所照之处无不到达，因而异兽出现而被捕获，这是应该的啊。
English: His majesty Xinglong said that the light of the moon, the thoughts of spreading the holy light, and the practice of sealing the zen; concentrating on honoring the gods, going to Thailand to sacrifice to the heavens, to the back soil festival, the essence of the dedication of wine and food moved the gods, and the atmosphere of peace filled the heavens and the earth. He said that the place illuminated by the moon could not be reached, so a strange beast appeared and was captured. This is right.

古文：昔武王中流未济，白鱼入于王舟，俯取以燎，群公咸曰 休哉！ 
现代文：从前周武王讨伐商纣，行至黄河中流，白鱼跃进周武王乘坐的船中，武王俯身拾取，用火烧烤，众人都说： 吉祥啊！ 
English: From the time when King Wu of Zhou fought against the merchants and went to the middle of the Yellow River, a white fish jumped into the boat that King Wu of Zhou was riding. King Wu bent down to pick it up and grilled it over a fire. Everyone said, "How auspicious!"

古文：今郊祀未见于神祇，而获兽以馈，此天之所以示飨，而上通之符合也。
现代文：如今在郊外祭祀天地没有看见天地之神，却获得异兽来祭祀，这是天用它来显示享受了祭献，而且与精诚上通于天的祥瑞相合。
English: Nowadays, the gods of heaven and earth are worshipped in the suburbs, but the gods of heaven and earth are not seen. Instead, strange beasts are obtained to be worshipped, which is used by heaven to show that it has enjoyed the sacrifice, and is also consistent with the virtuousness of being able to communicate with heaven.

古文：宜因昭时令曰，改定告元，苴白茅于江、淮，发嘉号于营丘，以应缉熙，使著事者有纪焉。
现代文：应该选择吉祥的时曰，更改年号，纺织席子，上面铺放白茅，浮于长江、淮河，登泰山封惮，以应和光明，使史官有所记载。
English: The auspicious time should be selected, the year should be changed, the textile mat should be rolled up, the white maple should be laid on the top, the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River should be floated, and the Mount Tai should be ascended, so that the historian can record it with harmony and brightness.

古文：盖六皃鸟退飞，逆也；白鱼登舟，顺也。
现代文：六鹉退飞，象征诸侯叛逆；白鱼登舟，象征诸侯归顺武王。
English: The six cockatoos fly back, symbolizing the rebellion of the princes; the white fish enters the boat, symbolizing the submission of the princes to King Wu.

古文：夫明暗之征，上乱飞鸟，下动渊鱼，各以类推。
现代文：明暗的征兆，使天上的飞鸟变乱，水下的游鱼惊动，其他以此类推。
English: The light and dark omens cause the birds in the sky to become confused, the fish in the water to be alarmed, and so on.

古文：今野兽并角，明同本也；众支内附，示无外也。
现代文：现在白麒麟头长独角，表明本源相同；奇木的树枝内附，显示没有外向。
English: Now the head of the white unicorn has a single horn, indicating the same origin; the branches of the strange tree are attached inside, showing no extroversion.

古文：若此之应，殆将有解编发、削左衽、袭冠带、要衣裳而蒙化者焉。
现代文：像这种现象的应验，大概将有周边少数民族解开束起的头发，抛弃前襟左掩的服装，戴帽束带子，穿着汉族的衣裳，来接受中原的教化。
English: The fulfillment of this phenomenon will probably have the surrounding ethnic minorities untie their hair, discard the clothes that cover the front, wear a hat with a band, and wear Han clothes to accept the enlightenment of the Central Plains.

古文：斯拱而俟之耳！
现代文：这些不过是拱手等待他们到来罢了！
English: This is just waiting for them to come!

古文：对奏，上甚异之，由是改元为元狩。
现代文：对策上呈给武帝，武帝看了认为不同寻常，因此改年号为元狩。
English: The countermeasure was presented to Emperor Wu, who thought it was unusual, so the year name was changed to Yuanhan.

古文：后数月，越地及匈奴名王有率众来降者，时皆以军言为中。
现代文：几个月以后，越地及匈奴名王有率众来归降汉朝的，当时人们都认为终军说中了。
English: A few months later, the Viet and Hun kings led their people to surrender to the Han Dynasty. At that time, people thought that the final army was right.

古文：元鼎中，博士徐偃使行风俗。
现代文：元鼎年间，博士徐偃奉命出使巡视郡国的风俗教化。
English: During the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, Dr. Xu Rong was ordered to send an envoy to inspect the county's customs and education.

古文：偃矫制，使胶东、鲁国鼓铸盐铁，还，奏事，徙为太常丞。
现代文：徐偃假托朝廷命令行事，让胶东国、鲁国铸铁晒盐。回京后，汇报了所做的事，调任太常丞。
English: Xu Xi acted under the pretense of an order from the imperial court, and let the cast iron of Jiaodong Province and Lu Province be salted. After returning to Beijing, he reported what he had done and was transferred to Tai Changzheng.

古文：御史大夫张汤劾偃矫制大害，法至死。
现代文：御史大夫张汤弹劾徐偃假托朝廷命令行事，是国家的大害，依照法律应该处死。
English: Historian Zhang Tang's impeachment of Xu Xi for acting under the orders of the imperial court is a great harm to the country and should be executed according to the law.

古文：偃以为《春秋》之义，大夫出疆，有可以安社稷，存万民，颛之可也。
现代文：徐偃认为根据《春秋》之义，大夫出了疆界，遇有能够安定社稷，抚慰万民的事情，可以专断处理。
English: Xu Wei believes that according to the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," doctors have gone beyond the boundaries, and if there are things that can stabilize the society and comfort the people, they can be dealt with arbitrarily.

古文：汤以致其法，不能诎其义，有诏下军问状，军诘偃曰： 古者诸侯国异俗分，百里不通，时有聘会之事，安危之势，呼吸成变，故有不受辞造命颛己之宜；今天下为一，万里同风，故《春秋》 王者无外 。
现代文：张汤衹能根据法律判定徐偃的罪名，却不能驳倒他用来辩护的《春秋》之义。武帝下韶命终军审问案情，终军诘问徐偃说： 古时候的诸侯国，国家不同风俗有别，百里之间不能相通，时常有朝聘会盟的事情，安定或危亡的形势，在呼吸之间就会发生变化，所以有不经请示假托朝廷命令而专断行事的议论，如今天下统一，万里之内风俗相同，所以《春秋》上说 王者无外 。
English: Zhang Tongyu could judge Xu Xi's crime according to the law, but he could not refute the righteousness of "Spring and Autumn," which he used to defend himself. Emperor Wu decreed that the last army would interrogate the case, and the last army interrogated Xu Xi and said: In ancient times, princely states, countries had different customs, and they could not communicate with each other for hundreds of miles. There were often things involving the imperial court, and the situation of stability or peril would change in the space of a breath. Therefore, there were discussions about acting arbitrarily without asking for permission and entrusting the imperial court with orders. If unification is achieved today, the customs will be the same

古文：偃巡封域之中，称以出疆何也？
现代文：你在疆域内巡视，说出了疆界是为什么呢？
English: Why are you patrolling within the borders and talking about the borders?

古文：且盐铁，郡有余臧，正二国废，国家不足以为利害，而以安社稷存万民为辞，何也？ 
现代文：况且，盐铁郡裹都有余藏，纵使废掉胶束、鲁国的盐铁，也无关于国家的利害，而你却以安定社稷抚慰万民为说辞，又是为什么呢？ 
English: Moreover, there is more than enough salt and iron in the county, and even if the micelles and the salt and iron in the country are scrapped, there is no national interest, but you are talking about a stable society to comfort the people. Why is that?

古文：又诘偃： 胶东南近琅邪，北接北海，鲁国西枕泰山，东有东海，受其盐铁。
现代文：终军又诘问徐偃说： 胶东国南近琅邪郡，北接北海郡，鲁国西邻泰山郡，束有束海郡，受用它们的盐铁。
English: The final troops also asked Xu Xi, saying, "Jiaodong Province is close to Shiyan County in the south, Beihai County in the north, and Taishan County and Sokhai County in the west, and their salt and iron are used.

古文：偃度四郡口数、田地，率其用器食盐，不足以并给二郡邪？
现代文：你估计琅邪、北海、泰山、东海四郡的人口、田地，总计它们的铁制用具、食盐，不足以供给胶束、鲁国吗？
English: Do you estimate that the population and farmland of the four counties of Yanzhao, Beihai, Taishan and Donghai, and the total of their iron utensils and table salt, are not enough to supply the state of Micronesia and Russia?

古文：将势宜有余，而吏不能也？
现代文：还是实际上应该有多余的盐铁，而官吏不能供给呢？
English: Or should there actually be a surplus of salt and iron, which officials cannot supply?

古文：何以言之？
现代文：你怎样解释这个问题呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：偃矫制而鼓铸者，俗及春耕种赡民器也。
现代文：你假托朝廷命令，让它们铸造铁器，是想赶上春天耕种保证百姓有铁器使用。
English: You are relying on a fake order from the imperial court to have them cast ironware, in order to catch up with spring farming and ensure that the people have ironware to use.

古文：今鲁国之鼓，当先具其备，至秋乃能举火。
现代文：如今鲁国铸铁，应当先做好各种准备，到秋季才能点火冶铸。
English: Nowadays, all kinds of preparations should be made for the Lu Guo cast iron, and the smelting and casting can only be ignited in the autumn.

古文：此言与实反者非？
现代文：这和实际需要岂不是不一致吗？
English: Isn't this inconsistent with actual needs?

古文：偃已前三奏，无诏，不惟所为不许，而直矫作威福，以从民望，干名采誉，此明圣所必加诛也。 枉尺直寻 ，孟子称其不可；今所犯罪重，所就者小，偃自予必死而为之邪？
现代文：你三次奏请胶束、鲁国经营盐铁，朝廷都没有答覆的诏令，不思想所要做的事没有批准，却直接假托朝廷命令作威作福，来顺从下民的愿望，求取名誉，这是圣明的君王必定加以诛罚的行为啊。 屈一尺而伸直八尺，孟子就说这样不行；如今你所犯的罪重，所成就的事小，你是自认为必死而这样做呢？
English: You three times asked for the supply of micelles, the salt and iron business of the State of Lu, and the Imperial Court did not reply to the edict, did not think about what you wanted to do and did not approve, but directly assumed the order of the Imperial Court to be arrogant and blessed, to obey the wishes of the people, and to seek fame. This is an act that the holy king must punish. If you bend one foot and straighten eight feet, Mencius said that this is not possible; now you have committed a serious crime, and the things you have accomplished are small. Do you think that you will die doing this?

古文：将幸诛不加，欲以采名也？ 
现代文：还是侥幸不被诛罚而以此博取名誉呢？ 
English: Or was it a fluke that he wasn't punished and used this to gain fame?

古文：偃穷诎，服罪当死。
现代文：徐偃辞穷理屈，服罪该死。
English: Xu Xuan's resignation is unreasonable, and he should be sentenced to death.

古文：军奏 偃矫制颛行，非奉使体，请下御史征偃即罪。 
现代文：终军奏报审问的情况说： 徐偃假托朝廷命令专权行事，违反了奉使巡视的制度，请下诏给御史召徐偃立即服罪。 
English: The situation of the interrogation of the final army report said: Xu Yiming acted with the authority of the imperial court and violated the system of inspection by envoys. Please issue an edict to the imperial court to summon Xu Yiming to immediately serve his sentence.

古文：奏可。
现代文：终军的奏请得到批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：上善其诘，有诏示御史大夫。
现代文：武帝很欣赏终军对徐偃的诘难，下韶让把终军的诘难拿给御史大夫张汤看。
English: Emperor Wu appreciated the hardships of the last army against Xu Xi, and asked Xi Jinping to show the hardships of the last army to the imperial historian Zhang Tang.

古文：初，军从济南当诣博士，步入关，关吏予军繻。
现代文：当初，终军从济南赴京城谒见博士时，步行通过函谷关，守关的官吏交给终军一块用帛边制成的符信。
English: At first, when the last army from Jinan went to Beijing to see the doctor, they passed through the Hanyu Pass on foot, and the officials guarding the pass handed the last army a piece of letter made of ruffles.

古文：军问： 以此何为？ 
现代文：终军问： 用这干什么？ 
English: The last soldier asked: What do you use this for?

古文：吏曰： 为复传，还当以合符。 
现代文：官吏回答说： 回来时作路证，经过这裹拿它合符。 
English: The official replied, "When you come back, take it as a proof of passage and pass it through this wrapper to get it stamped."

古文：军曰： 大丈夫西游，终不复传还。 
现代文：终军说： 大丈夫西游，终不须凭它作回来的路证。 
English: The last troops said: "It's okay to travel west, we don't have to rely on it as a proof of return."

古文：弃繻而去。
现代文：扔下帛制的符信走了。
English: He threw down the sealed letter and left.

古文：军为谒者，使行郡国，建节东出关，关吏识之，曰： 此使者乃前弃繻生也。 
现代文：终军被任命为谒者后，奉使巡视郡国，执持符节出函谷关东巡，守关的官吏记得他，说： 这位使者就是以前抛弃帛制符信的儒生。 
English: After the final army was appointed as the winner, he was sent to inspect the county and the country, and he went on a tour of the eastern part of the Hakodate pass, holding the sign festival. The official guarding the pass remembered him and said: This messenger was a Confucian who had previously abandoned the seal.

古文：军行郡国，所见便宜以闻。
现代文：终军巡视郡国，遇见适宜的事情就上书报告朝廷。
English: The last army patrols the county, and reports to the imperial court in writing when it comes across something suitable.

古文：还奏事，上甚说。
现代文：出使回来以后，向武帝汇报下作，武帝听了很高兴。
English: After returning from the mission, he reported his next work to Emperor Wu, who was very pleased to hear it.

古文：当发使匈奴，军自请曰： 军无横草之功，得列宿卫，食禄五年。
现代文：时逢朝廷派使者出使匈奴，终军自己请求担任出使任务，说： 我连使草倒伏的功劳都没有，得以列为宿卫之臣，拿了五年俸禄。
English: Whenever the imperial court sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, the Xiongnu themselves requested to serve as an envoy, saying: I did not even have the merit of making the grass fall down, I was able to be classified as a vassal of the guards and received a five-year salary.

古文：边境时有风尘之警，臣宜被坚执锐，当矢石，启前行。
现代文：边境上不时有战乱的警报，我应该披坚甲执锐器，面矢石箭雨，开路前行。
English: On the border, there are war alerts from time to time. I should put on my armour and go ahead.

古文：驽下不匀金革之事，今闻将遣匈奴使者，臣愿尽精厉气，奉佐明使，画吉凶于单于之前。
现代文：可是我不熟悉冲锋陷阵之事，现在听说准备派使者出使匈奴，我愿意竭尽精神激励气势，辅助贤明的使者，在匈奴单于面前筹划吉凶。
English: However, I am not familiar with the storming of the battle, and now I hear that they are preparing to send an envoy to the Huns. I am willing to do my best to encourage the momentum, assist the wise envoy, and plan the fortunes in front of the Huns alone.

古文：臣年少材下，孤于外官，不足以亢一方之任，窃不胜愤懑。 
现代文：我年纪轻才能低下，辜负所愿，不能任官于外而捍卫边境，不足以独挡一面，私下感到烦闷难禁。 
English: I am too young to be humiliated, to fail in my wish, to be unable to defend the border while serving as an official abroad, to be unable to stand alone, and to feel bored in private.

古文：诏问画吉凶之状，上奇军对，擢为谏大夫。
现代文：武帝下韶询问终军要求出使匈奴筹划吉凶的内容，武帝认为终军的回答不同一般，提拔他为谏大夫。
English: Emperor Wu inquired about the content of the final army's request to send the Huns to plan for good or bad luck. Emperor Wu thought that the final army's answer was different from the general, and promoted him to be a doctor.

古文：南越与汉和亲，乃遣军使南越，说其王，欲令入朝，比内诸侯。
现代文：南越与汉和亲，于是武帝派终军出使南越，游说南越王，让他入京朝见，待遇比照内地的诸侯王。
English: South Vietnam made peace with the Han, so Emperor Wu sent the last troops to South Vietnam to lobby the king of South Vietnam to allow him to visit the imperial court in Beijing. The treatment was comparable to that of the princes of the inland.

古文：军自请： 愿受长缨，必羁南越王而致之阙下。 
现代文：终军自告奋勇说： 希望陛下给我一条长缨，我一定缚住南越王，把他带到阙下。 
English: The last soldier volunteered and said, "I hope Your Majesty will give me a long halter. I will surely tie up the King of South Vietnam and bring him under the halter."

古文：军遂往说越王，越王听许，请举国内属。
现代文：军就前往南越游说越王，越王听了终军的话，同意率领全部越人内附，归属汉朝。
English: The army went to South Vietnam to lobby King Yue, who listened to the final words of the army and agreed to lead all the Yue people to annexation and belong to the Han Dynasty.

古文：天子大说，赐南越大臣印绶，一用汉法，以新改其俗，令使者留填抚之。
现代文：武帝非常高兴，赐给南越大臣印绶，让南越王统一使用汉朝的法令制度，来改变越人的风俗习惯，令使者终军留下来安定抚慰南越。
English: Emperor Wu was very pleased and gave the seal of approval to the minister of South Vietnam, and let the king of South Vietnam uniformly use the legal system of the Han Dynasty to change the customs and habits of the Viet people, so that the envoy would stay and comfort South Vietnam.

古文：越相吕嘉不欲内属，发兵攻杀其王及汉使者，皆死。
现代文：南越相吕嘉不愿意归属汉朝，发兵攻杀南越王，还把汉朝使者终军等人全都杀死了。
English: The South Vietnamese Minister Lyu Jia did not want to belong to the Han Dynasty, so he sent troops to attack and kill the king of South Vietnam, and also killed all the Han Dynasty emissaries and other people.

古文：语在《南越传》。
现代文：语在《南越传》。
English: in the "South Vietnam Story."

古文：军死时年二十余，故世谓之 终童 。
现代文：终军死的时候才二十多岁，所以世人都叫他 终童 。
English: He was only in his twenties when he died, so people called him "the last child."

古文：王褒字子渊，蜀人也。
现代文：王褒字子渊，是蜀郡人。
English: Wang Baozhi Ziyuan is from Shu County.

古文：宣帝时修武帝故事，讲论六艺群书，博尽奇异之好，征能为《楚辞》九江被公，召见诵读，益召高材刘向、张子侨、华龙、柳褒等侍诏金马门。
现代文：皇童时编撰丞直时的旧事，讲论《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》、《易》、《春秋》等书，广泛而详尽地搜罗奇异的玩好，征召精通《楚辞》的九江郡人被公，宣帝召见他，让他诵读《楚辞》。又征召才能出众的刘向、张子侨、华龙、柳褒等人待诏金马门。
English: Wang Tong compiled the old stories of Zheng Zhi, lectured on "Poetry," "Book," "Rite," "Music," "Ease," "Spring and Autumn" and other books, extensively and exhaustively collected strange games, conscripted Jiujiang County people who were proficient in "Chu Ci" to the public, summoned Xuan Di to see him and let him recite "Chu Ci." Liu Xiang, Zhang Ziqiao, Hualong, Liu Bao and others with outstanding talents were also conscripted.

古文：神爵、五凤之间，天下殷富，数有嘉应。
现代文：神爵、五凤年间，天下殷实富足，多次出现吉祥的征兆。
English: During the years of Jingzhe and Wufeng, the world was prosperous, and there were many auspicious signs.

古文：上颇作歌诗，欲兴协律之事，丞相魏相奏言知音善鼓雅琴者渤海赵定、梁国龚德，皆召见待诏。
现代文：宣帝喜欢作诗唱歌，准备兴办校正音乐律吕而使之和谐的事业。丞相魏相奏举懂得音乐善于弹奏雅琴的渤海郡人趟定、梁国人龚德，宣帝都召见他们，让他们待诏。
English: Emperor Xuan liked to write poems and sing, and was preparing to set up a business of correcting musical rhythms to make them more harmonious. Emperor Xuan summoned people from Bihai County and Liang Province who knew music and were good at playing the harpsichord. Emperor Xuan summoned them and asked them to wait for the edict.

古文：于是益州刺史王襄欲宣风化于众庶，闻王褒有俊材，请与相见，使褒作《中和》、《乐职》、《宣布》诗，选好事者令依《鹿鸣》之声习而歌之。
现代文：在这时益州制史王襄想在百姓当中宣扬风俗教化，听说王裹有贤才，请来王裹相见，让王裹作《中和》、《乐职》、《宣布诗》，挑选热心做事的人依照《鹿鸣》的乐曲歌唱。
English: At this time, Wang Xiang, the governor of Yizhou, wanted to promote the custom and enlightenment among the people. He had heard that Wang Huai was a wise man. He invited Wang Huai to meet him, and asked Wang Huai to write "Zhonghe," "Music" and "Announcement Poem." He selected enthusiastic people to sing according to the music of "Deer Song."

古文：时，汜乡侯何武为僮子，选在歌中。
现代文：当时泛乡侯何武还是未成年的男子，被选上参加歌唱。
English: At that time, Pan Township Hou He Wu was still an underage male and was selected to participate in the singing.

古文：久之，武等学长安，歌太学下，转而上闻。
现代文：过了很久，何武等人到长安学习声乐，在太学唱歌，事情传到皇帝那裹。
English: After a long time, He Wu and others went to Chang'an to study vocal music and sing in Taishu, and the matter was reported to the emperor.

古文：宣帝召见武等观之，皆赐帛，谓曰： 此盛德之事，吾何足以当之！ 
现代文：宣帝召见何武等人，对他们说： 这是兴隆德教的事，我怎么能够阻挡他们！ 
English: Emperor Xuan summoned He Wu and the others and said to them, "This is a matter of Xinglundism, how can I stop them!"

古文：褒既为刺史作颂，又作其传，益州刺史因奏褒有轶材。
现代文：王褒给益州刺史王襄写作颂歌以后，又为他写作传记，王襄于是上书给宣帝，说王褒才智出众。
English: After Wang Bao wrote an ode to Yizhou poet Wang Xiang, he also wrote a biography for him. Wang Xiang then sent a letter to Emperor Xuan, saying that Wang Bao's intelligence was outstanding.

古文：上乃征褒。
现代文：宣帝就征召王褒。
English: Emperor Xuanzong conscripted Wang Bo.

古文：既至，诏褒为圣主得贤臣颂其意。
现代文：王褒到达京城后，宣帝下诏让王褒以圣明的君主得到贤臣为内容写作歌。
English: After Wang Bo arrived in Beijing, Emperor Xuan decreed that Wang Bo should write a song with the theme of a saintly monarch gaining a wise minister.

古文：褒对曰：
现代文：王褒的颂歌说：
English: Wang Bo's hymn says:

古文：夫荷旃被毳者，难与道纯绵之丽密；羹藜含糗者，不足与论太牢之滋味。
现代文：肩扛羊毛毡身披乌兽细毛的人，很鸡跟他说丝绵的丽密；食用粗劣饭菜的人，不值得和他谈牛、羊、猪三牲全备的太牢的滋味。
English: People who carry wool on their shoulders and wear the fine hair of the black beast are very unlikely to tell him about the silky lime; people who eat coarse food are not worth talking to about the strong taste of the complete cattle, sheep and pigs.

古文：今臣辟在西蜀，生于穷巷之中，长于蓬茨之下，无有游观广览之知，顾有至愚极陋之累，不足以塞厚望，应明指。
现代文：如今我僻居西蜀，生在贫穷的街巷之中，长在芦苇、苇草为盖的房屋之下，没有游观广览的知识，反有极其愚昧浅陋的拖累，不能够满足殷切的厚望，应答圣明的意旨。
English: Now I live in remote West Shuxu. I was born in the midst of impoverished streets and alleys, and grew up under houses covered with reeds and rushes. I do not have the knowledge of extensive sightseeing, but I have the extremely stupid and shallow drag. I am unable to meet the ardent high expectations and respond to the will of the Holy Light.

古文：虽然，敢不略陈愚而抒情素！
现代文：虽然如此，怎敢不概略陈述愚见，抒发衷诚！
English: Nevertheless, how dare you not outline your stupidity and express your sincerity!

古文：记曰： 共惟《春秋》法五始之要，在乎审已正统而已。
现代文：记事的书上说：恭敬地思考《春秋》奉为规范的 元年春王正月 ，这五始的要旨在于审视自己端正系统而已。
English: The record book said: Respectfully think about the "Spring and Autumn" as the norm in the first year of the Spring King's first month, this five-beginning must be aimed at examining one's own neat system.

古文：夫贤者，国家之器用也。
现代文：贤能是指国家中有才可用的人。
English: A meritorious person is one who is of use to the country.

古文：所任贤，则趋舍省而功施普；器用利，则用力少而就效众。
现代文：所任用的人贤能，就会善于取舍而功效普遍；用具便利，就会用力少而成效多。
English: If the person appointed is capable, he will be good at choosing and the effect will be universal; if the equipment is convenient, the effort will be less and the effect will be more.

古文：故工人之用钝器也，劳筋苦骨，终日矻矻。
现代文：所以，工人使用钝器，就劳筋苦骨，终日勤奋不懈。
English: Therefore, when workers use blunt tools, they work hard and diligently all day long.

古文：及至巧冶铸干将之朴，清水焠其锋，越砥敛其咢，水断蛟龙，陆剸犀革，忽若彗泛画涂。
现代文：等到巧匠冶铸干将剑时，用清水淬剑锋，用越地出产的砥石磨利剑刃，这把剑在水中能斩断蛟龙，在陆上能截开犀牛皮，就像用扫帚去扫洒过水的地面，用刀在泥中划动一样容易。
English: By the time the craftsman has forged the sword, he will have used clear water to sharpen the blade, and a grinding stone produced in Yueji to sharpen the blade. This sword can cut the dragon in the water, and cut the rhinoceros skin on land, just as easily as using a broom to sweep the water-splashed ground, and using a knife to scratch in the mud.

古文：如此，则使离娄督绳，公输削墨，虽崇台五增，延袤百丈，而不溷者，工用相得也。
现代文：这样，如果让视力极佳的离娄看线，巧匠公输班削墨，即使建筑五层高台，宽广百丈，也不混乱，是因为工匠和器用相配啊。
English: In this way, if you let a person with excellent eyesight see the line, and a skilled craftsman cuts ink on a public conveyor, even if the building is five stories high, wide and tall, it will not be chaotic, because the craftsman and the skill match.

古文：庸人之御驽马，亦伤吻敝策而不进于行，匈喘肤汗，人极马倦。
现代文：平庸的驭手驾驭驽马，弄伤了马嘴，打坏了马鞭，还是跑不快，气喘吁吁，皮肤出汗，人困马倦。
English: A mediocre charioteer drives a lame horse, injures the horse's mouth, breaks the whip, but still can't run fast, is breathless, has sweaty skin, and is sleepy and tired.

古文：及至驾啮膝，骖乘旦，王良执靶，韩哀附舆，纵驰骋骛，忽如景靡，过都越国，蹶如历块；追奔电，逐遗风，周流八极，万里一息。
现代文：等到驾驭良马，让王良执辔，韩哀作御，纵驰骋骛，快得就像摇摆飘荡的阳光的影子一样，过城越国，就像经历一块土；追奔电，快逾风，周游八方极远的地方，万里之遥呼吸之间就可到达。
English: Wait until you drive a good horse, let Wang Liang hold the reins, Han Ai be in charge of the reins, gallop fast, as fast as the shadow of the swaying sun, cross the city and the country, like experiencing a piece of land; chase electricity, quickly pass the wind, travel around the farthest places in all directions, and can reach a place thousands of miles away between breaths.

古文：何其辽哉？
现代文：为什么能跑得那么远呢？
English: How is it possible to run so far?

古文：人马相得也。
现代文：这是人马相配啊。
English: It's a perfect match.

古文：故服絺绤之凉者，不苦盛暑之郁燠；袭貂狐之暖者，不忧至寒之凄怆。
现代文：所以，身穿凉爽葛布衣的人，不愁苦盛暑的闷热；外罩貂狐皮袄的人，不担忧严冬的寒冷。为什么呢？
English: Therefore, a person wearing a cool loincloth is not worried about the sweltering heat of the summer; a person wearing a fox fur coat is not worried about the cold of the winter. Why?

古文：何则？有其具者易其备。
现代文：因为他们有应付暑寒的衣服，容易做好度夏过冬的准备。
English: Because they have clothes to cope with the heat and cold, it is easy to prepare for the summer and winter.

古文：贤人君子，亦圣王之所以易海内也。
现代文：贤人君子也是圣明的君王所凭藉来变易天下的重要力量。
English: Wise men and gentlemen are also an important force that the kings of wisdom rely on to transform the world.

古文：是以呕喻受之，开宽裕之路，以延天下英俊也。
现代文：因此君王和悦地接受他们，为他们广开宽适富饶之路，以此延揽天下的英才俊杰。
English: Therefore, the king accepted them with pleasure and opened up a broad and rich path for them, in order to attract the world's talented people.

古文：夫竭知附贤者，必建仁策；索人求士者，必树伯迹。
现代文：竭尽自己的智慧去依附贤明的人，必定会提出仁义的策谋；用心访贤求士的人，必定能建立霸主的功绩。
English: Those who try their best to rely on sages will surely come up with benevolent and righteous strategies; those who diligently seek sages will surely be able to establish the merits of the overlord.

古文：昔周公躬吐捉之劳，故有圉空之隆；齐桓设庭燎之礼，故有匡合之功。
现代文：从前周公一饭三吐哺，一沐三捉发，礼贤下士，所以天下大治，刑罚措置不用，监狱空虚；齐桓公用庭燎之礼接待进献九九算法的人，不久，贤人竞相而来，桓公终于一匡天下，九合诸侯，成就霸业。
English: From the previous Zhou Gong, there was one meal, three spit-ups, one bath, three arrests, and a corporal's salute. Therefore, there was no need for punitive measures, and the prison was empty. Qi Huan used the courtesy of the court to receive the people who presented the 99 algorithms. Soon, the wise men competed with each other. Finally, Huan Gong won the world and the nine provinces, and achieved hegemony.

古文：由此观之，君人者勤于求贤而逸于得人。
现代文：由此看来，为人君者勤劳于访求贤才却因得人辅佐而安逸。
English: From this point of view, people who are diligent in seeking talents are at ease because they are assisted by others.

古文：人臣亦然。
现代文：人臣也是这样。
English: It's the same with ministers.

古文：昔贤者之未遭遇也，图事揆策则君不用其谋，陈见悃诚则上不然其信，进仕不得施效，斥逐又非其愆。
现代文：从前贤才未遭遇明主时，出谋划策而君王不采用他的议论，陈述见解表达忠诚而主上不相信他们，进身为官不能发挥效用，斥逐免官又不是他的过错。
English: In the past, when a wise man did not encounter a clear master, he made suggestions and the king did not use his arguments, stated opinions and expressed loyalty but the master did not believe them, entered the office and could not play a role, and it was not his fault that he was dismissed.

古文：是故伊尹勤于鼎俎，太公困于鼓刀，百里自鬻，甯子饭牛，离此患也。
现代文：所以伊尹背着烹调用的鼎和俎，图谋辅助商汤，姜太公受困朝歌，屠牛谋生，百里奚自卖，宁子喂牛，都遭遇了不同的磨难。
English: Therefore, Yi Yin carried the cooking tongs and tongs on his back, attempted to supplement the soup, Jiang Taigong was trapped by morning song, butchered cattle to make a living, sold the yakitori, and fed the cattle to Ning Zi, all suffered different hardships.

古文：及其遇明君遭圣主也，运筹合上意，谏诤即见听，进退得关其忠，任职得行其术，去卑辱奥渫而升本朝，离疏释蹻而享膏粱，剖符锡壤而光祖考，传之子孙，以资说士。
现代文：等到遇上明君遭逢圣主，运筹策划合乎上意，规劝谏静就被听取，进退都能贯通自己的忠心，任职得以施展自己的策略，离开卑辱污浊之地而升登朝廷大臣，离开粗疏的食物，脱去木屐，享用膏粱美食剖符分封而光宗耀祖，传之子孙，谈说之上传以为资。
English: Wait until you meet Ming Jun and meet the Holy Lord, the operational planning is in line with the wishes of the Supreme Leader, the exhortation of Jing Jing is listened to, you can penetrate your loyalty in advance and backward, and you can carry out your own strategy, leave the place of humiliation and disgrace and rise to the Minister of the Imperial Court, leave the rough food, take off the rafts, enjoy the delicious food, cut the symbols, divide the seals and glorify the ancestors, the sons and grandsons, and talk about the inheritance.

古文：故世必有圣知之君，而后有贤明之臣。
现代文：所以，世上必须先有圣智之君，然后才有贤明之臣。
English: Therefore, there must first be a prince of holy wisdom in the world, and then there will be a wise minister.

古文：故虎啸而风冽，龙兴而致云，蟋蟀俟秋吟，蜉蝤出以阴。
现代文：因此，虎啸而冽冽生风，龙腾而冉冉起云，蟋蟀至深秋而闭口，蜉蝣朝生而夕死。
English: Therefore, the tiger roars and the wind is born, the dragon soars and the clouds rise, the dragonfly is silent until late autumn, and the dragonfly is born in the morning and dies in the evening.

古文：《易》曰： 飞龙在天，利见大人。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 飞龙在天，利见大人。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: "The dragon is flying in the sky.

古文：《诗》曰： 思皇多士，生此王国。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 美好而众多的贤士，生在周王的国家。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "Many excellent sages were born in the country of King Zhou."

古文：故世平主圣，俊艾将自至，若尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之君，获稷、契、皋陶、伊尹、吕望，明明在朝，穆穆列布，聚精会神，相得益章。
现代文：所以世上太平君主圣明，贤能的人将会自己到来，就像尧、舜、禹、汤、文王、武王等君主，获得稷、契、皋陶、伊尹、吕望等贤臣一样，明察者在朝，俊美者列布，聚精会神，君臣相得益彰。
English: Therefore, the world's peaceful monarchs, sages, and wise men will come of their own accord, just as the monarchs of Yu, Zou, Yu, Tang, King Wen, King Wu, and other emperors, and the wise ministers such as Zou, Ji, Zang Tao, Yi Yin, and Lü Wang, have gained recognition. The clear-sighted person is in the government, the handsome person is in Lebu, and the diligent person is in the gods. The monarchs and ministers are mutually beneficial.

古文：虽伯牙操递钟，逢门子弯乌号，犹未足以喻其意也。
现代文：即使足伯牙演奏编钟，逢门子弯射乌号弓，仍然不足以比喻上述景象。
English: Even if Fubo Fang plays the chimes and the door bends and shoots the cuckoo bow, it is still not enough to compare the above-mentioned scene.

古文：故圣主必待贤臣而弘功业，俊士亦俟明主以显其德。
现代文：所以圣主必待贤臣而弘大功业，俊才雅士也俟明君来显扬自己的德能。
English: Therefore, the holy Lord must wait for the wise men and women to carry out great feats, and the talented and noble men and women should also come to Mingjun to show their abilities.

古文：上下俱欲，驩然交欣，千载一合，论说无疑，翼乎如鸿毛过顺风，沛乎如巨鱼纵大壑。
现代文：君臣上下都实现了自己的愿望，交相欢欣，千载一会，君论臣言互无猜疑，展翅翱翔如鸿毛过顺风，水流湍急而巨鱼跃大壑。
English: The lords and gentlemen have all fulfilled their wishes, they are happy to meet each other, for the first time in a thousand years, the lords and gentlemen have no suspicion of each other, they fly like a feather in the wind, the water is swift and the giant fish leaps.

古文：其得意若此，则胡禁不止，曷令不行？
现代文：如果君臣间像这样称心如意，那么还有什么不能禁止，有什么命令不能执行？
English: If there is such harmony between princes and ministers, then what cannot be prohibited, what orders cannot be carried out?

古文：化溢四表，横被无穷，遐夷贡献，万祥毕溱。
现代文：教化漫及四表，溢于无穷，远方少数民族前来贡献，万种祥瑞全部到来。
English: Enlightenment and civilization spread to the four directions, overflowing into infinity, far-off ethnic minorities came to contribute, and all kinds of auspiciousness came.

古文：是以圣王不遍窥望而视已明，不单顷耳而听已聪；恩从祥风翱，德与和气游，太平之责塞，优游之望得；遵游自然之势，恬淡无为之场，休征自至，寿考无疆，雍容垂拱，永永万年，何必偃卬诎信若彭祖，呴嘘呼吸如侨、松，眇然绝俗离世哉！
现代文：因此圣明的君王不用四处观望就已看得明白，不用倾耳就已听得清楚，恩泽跟从祥风翱翔，德惠伴随和气游荡，太平的责任完成，优游的愿望达到；遵循漫游于自然之势，徜徉于恬淡无为之场，美好的征兆自己到来，高寿无疆，从容不迫，垂拱无为，永世万年，何必像彭祖那样俯仰屈伸，像王侨、赤松子那样响嘘呼吸，眇然绝俗离世呢！
English: Therefore, the kings of the holy light do not need to look around to see clearly, do not need to listen to hear clearly, the grace follows the auspicious wind, the virtue accompanies the harmony, the responsibility of peace is completed, and the desire of good travel is achieved; follow the trend of nature, linger in the bleakness, the beautiful signs of their own arrival, the high life is boundless, the leisurely is not forced, the hanging arch is not done, and the eternal life is forever and ever. Why do you have to bend down like Peng Zu, breathe loudly like the royal family and the red pine tree, and leave the world in a very worldly way!

古文：《诗》云 济济多士，文王以宁 ，盖信乎其以宁也！
现代文：《诗经》上说 济济一堂人才多，文王因此得安宁 ，原来是相信君王因为得到贤士而安宁呀！
English: "The Book of Songs" says that there are many talented people in the world, and King Wen has peace of mind as a result. Originally, it was believed that the king had peace of mind because he had a wise man!

古文：是时，上颇好神仙，故褒对及之。
现代文：这时，皇上很喜欢神仙之术，所以王裹作颂歌时谈及神仙之事。
English: At this time, the emperor was very fond of the magic of the immortals, so the king talked about the immortals when he composed the ode.

古文：上令褒与张子侨等并待诏，数从褒等放猎，所幸宫馆，辄为歌颂，第其高下，以差赐帛。
现代文：宣帝命王裹与张子侨等人一起待诏，多次让王裹等人作为侍从参加大规模的游猎，所至宫馆，就让他们作赋歌颂，评定文章的高下，按等级赐帛。
English: Wang Wai and Zhang Ziqiao and others waited for the imperial edict to be issued, and Wang Wai and others were allowed to participate in large-scale hunting as attendants many times. When they arrived at the palace, they were allowed to make fu songs, evaluate the quality of the articles, and award them according to their level.

古文：议者多以为淫靡不急，上曰：  不有博弈者乎，为之犹贤乎已！ 
现代文：议事者多认为这是淫靡不急之事，宣帝说：  不是有弈棋的吗？
English: Most of the councilors thought that this was a matter of no great urgency. Emperor Xuan said: Isn't there a game of chess?

古文：辞赋大者与古诗同义，小者辩丽可喜。
现代文：没事下下棋，也是高雅的活动，辞赋中的上品与古诗具有同样的意义，其次也智辩华丽可喜。
English: To play chess without incident is also an elegant activity. The sublimity in rhetoric has the same meaning as ancient poetry, followed by the gorgeousness of intellectual debate.

古文：辟如女工有绮縠，音乐有郑、卫，今世俗犹皆以此虞说耳目，辞武比之，尚有仁义风谕，鸟兽草木多闻之观，贤于倡优博弈远矣。 顷之，擢褒为谏大夫。
现代文：譬如纺织刺绣有罗绮绉纱，音乐有郑、卫民歌，如今世俗之人仍然都用这些来娱悦耳目，辞赋和这些相比，还有仁义讽谕，可以多观闻鸟兽草木，比侣优弈棋好得多啊。 不久，宣帝提拔王褒为谏大夫。
English: For example, textile embroidery has Luo Gan yarn, music has Zheng and Wei Min songs, and nowadays secular people still use these to entertain their ears and eyes. Compared with these, there are also benevolent and righteous irony, you can observe more birds, animals and plants, which is much better than the game of chess. Soon, Emperor Xuan promoted Wang Bo to be the doctor of Qi.

古文：其后太子体不安，苦忽忽善忘，不乐。
现代文：在这之后，太子身体不好，恍恍惚惚，很健忘，精神不愉快。
English: After this, the crown prince was in poor health, in a daze, very forgetful and unhappy.

古文：诏使褒等皆之太子宫虞侍太子，朝夕诵读奇文及所自造作。
现代文：宣帝下韶让王褒等人都去太子宫服侍太子，想办法让他高兴，王裹等人早晚诵读奇文及自己写的得意之作。
English: Emperor Xuan decreed that Wang Bao and the others should all go to the prince's palace to serve the prince and find a way to make him happy. Wang Bao and the others read strange texts and their own masterpieces in the morning and evening.

古文：疾平复，乃归。
现代文：太子的病痊愈了，王裹等人才离开。
English: When the prince recovered from his illness, Wang Wai and the others were the only ones to leave.

古文：太子喜褒所为《甘泉》及《洞箫》颂，令后宫贵人左右皆诵读之。
现代文：太子喜欢王褒写的《甘泉》和《洞箫颂》，让后宫贵人和左右侍从都诵读这两篇作品。
English: The prince liked "The Sweet Spring" and "Song of the Cave Maiden" written by Wang He, and had the nobles of the harem and the attendants on both sides read these two works.

古文：后方士言益州有金马碧鸡之宝，可祭祀致也，宣帝使褒往祀焉。
现代文：后来方士说益州有金马碧鸡等宝物，可以祭祀招来它们。宣帝派王裹去益州祭祀求取这些宝物。
English: Later, the Fang people said that there were treasures in Yizhou such as the golden horse and the green chicken, and that they could be brought by sacrifice. Emperor Xuan sent the king to Yizhou to offer sacrifice to obtain these treasures.

古文：褒于道病死，上闵惜之。
现代文：王褒在赴益州的路上生病死去，皇上很怜惜他。
English: Wang Bo fell ill and died on his way to Yizhou. The emperor was very sorry for him.

古文：贾捐之字君房，贾谊之曾孙也。
现代文：贾捐之，字君房，贾谊的曾孙。
English: Jia Dongzhi, also known as Junfang, is Jia Yi's great-grandson.

古文：元帝初即位，上疏言得失，召待诏金马门。
现代文：元帝刚即位时，他上疏谈论政事的得失，受征召在金马门待诏。
English: When the Yuan Emperor had just ascended to the throne, he rarely talked about the merits and demerits of politics, and was conscripted to wait for the imperial edict at the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：初，武帝征南越，元封元年立儋耳、珠厓郡，皆在南方海中洲居，广袤可千里，合十六县，户二万三千余。
现代文：当初，武帝征伐南越，元封元年设置儋耳郡、珠匡郡，这两个郡都处在南方海中的洲上，宽广约千里，合计十六个县，二万三千多户。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu conquered South Vietnam, and in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he set up Mule County and Zhu Kuang County. Both counties are located on a continent in the South China Sea, with a width of about a thousand miles, a total of 16 counties, and more than 23,000 households.

古文：其民暴恶，自以阻绝，数犯吏禁，吏亦酷之，率数年一反，杀吏，汉辄发兵击定之。
现代文：那裹的百姓性情暴躁爱闸事，自认为和汉朝阻绝，多次违犯官吏的禁令，官吏也残酷对待他们，大约几年就反叛一次，杀死官吏，汉朝政府就发兵攻打安定他们的叛乱。
English: The people there were hot-tempered and quarrelsome. They considered themselves to be against the Han Dynasty. They repeatedly violated the ban of officials, who also treated them cruelly. They rebelled once in a few years and killed officials. The Han Dynasty government sent troops to attack and stabilize their rebellion.

古文：自初为郡至昭帝始元元年，二十余年间，凡六反叛。
现代文：从开始置郡到昭帝始元元年，二十多年裹，总共反叛六次。
English: From the beginning of the county to the first year of Emperor Zhao's reign, more than 20 years, there were a total of six rebellions.

古文：至其五年，罢儋耳郡并属珠厓。
现代文：到始元五年，罢儋耳郡并属珠匡郡。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the fifth century, Zhuji County was abolished and became Zhukuang County.

古文：至宣帝神爵三年，珠厓三县复反。
现代文：至宣帝神爵三年，珠匡郡的三个县又发生反叛。
English: Three years into the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, three counties in Zhukuang County rebelled again.

古文：反后七年，甘露元年，九县反，辄发兵击定之。
现代文：这次反叛后过了七年，甘露元年，又有九个县反叛，汉朝政府发兵平定了这两次叛乱。
English: Seven years after this rebellion, in the first year of Kamloops, another nine counties rebelled, and the Han government sent troops to quell these two rebellions.

古文：元帝初元元年，珠厓又反，发兵击之。
现代文：元帝初元元年，珠厘郡又发生了反叛，汉廷发兵攻打。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhu Li County rebelled again, and Hanting sent troops to attack.

古文：诸县更叛，连年不定。
现代文：各县更相反叛，连年不定。
English: The counties are even more rebellious, and the succession of years is uncertain.

古文：上与有司议大发军，捐之建议，以为不当击。
现代文：元帝与有关大臣商议出动大部队镇压，贾捐之建议，认为不应该攻打。
English: Emperor Yuan and the relevant ministers discussed the idea of mobilizing a large force to suppress the rebels, and Jia Deng's suggestion was that they should not attack.

古文：上使侍中、驸马都尉、乐昌侯王商诘问捐之曰： 珠厓内属为郡久矣，今背畔逆节，而云不当击，长蛮夷之乱，亏先帝功德，经义何以处之？ 
现代文：皇上派侍中驸马都尉乐昌侯王商诘问贾捐之说： 珠厘内属为郡已经很久了，现在背叛违抗朝廷命令，你却说不应该攻打，助长蛮夷的叛乱，有亏先帝的功德，在《六经》之内，应属哪一科条？ 
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Lieutenant of Horse Cavalry, Lechang Hou Wang, to ask Jia Tongzhi: Zhu Li Nei has been a county for a long time, now it is a betrayal and defiance of the imperial order, but you say that it should not be attacked, it is conducive to the rebellion of barbarians, it has the merits of the previous emperor, in the "Six Classics," which subject should it belong to?

古文：捐之对曰：
现代文：买捐之回答说：
English: The buyer replied:

古文：臣幸得遭明盛之朝，蒙危言之策，无忌讳之患，敢昧死竭卷卷。
现代文：我幸好得遭明盛之朝，蒙直言之策，无忌讳之患，愿冒死以尽拳拳之心。
English: Fortunately, I was born in the morning of the Ming and Qing Dynasties. I have the courage to speak my mind, and I am willing to fight to the death.

古文：臣闻尧、舜，圣之盛也，禹入圣域而不优，故孔子称尧曰 大哉 ，《韶》曰 尽善 ，禹曰 无间 。
现代文：我听说尧和舜是最圣明的君主，禹的功德才进入圣人区域，衹不过不能优游康泰罢了。所以孔子称颂尧说 伟大啊 ，《韶》乐称赞尧 尽善 ，《禹》乐说 没有差别 。
English: I heard that Yu and Zou are the most saintly monarchs, and Yu's merits have entered the saint area, but Zou can't surpass Kangtai. Therefore, Confucius praised Zou saying "Great," "Zou" Le praised "Perfect," "Yu" Le said "No difference."

古文：以三圣之德，地方不过数千里，西被流沙，东渐于海，朔南暨声教，迄于四海，欲与声教则治之，不欲与者不强治也。
现代文：凭尧、舜、禹三位圣明的君主，国土不过数千里，西及沙漠，柬流入海，声威教化传至南北，达到四海，想接受声威教化的就治理他们，不想接受声威教化的就不治理他们。
English: According to the Three Wise Monarchs, the land is only thousands of miles long, with the West and deserts, and Cambodia flowing into the sea. The influence of vocal teaching has spread to the north and south, reaching the four seas. If you want to accept vocal teaching, you should govern them. If you don't want to accept vocal teaching, you shouldn't govern them.

古文：故君臣歌德，含气之物各得其宜。
现代文：所以君臣都有德行可供歌颂，含气的生物各得其宜。
English: Therefore, all princes and ministers have virtues that can be sung about, and all creatures that contain air are suitable.

古文：武丁、成王，殷、周之大仁也，然地东不过江、黄，西不过氐、羌，南不过蛮荆，北不过朔方。
现代文：武丁、成王是殷朝和周朝最仁德的君主，然而土地东不超过长江、黄河，西不过氏、羌，南不过荆蛮，北不过朔方。
English: Wuding and Chengwang were the most benevolent monarchs of the Yin and Zhou dynasties. However, the land to the east did not exceed the Yangtze River and the Yellow River, the west did not exceed the Yangtze River and the Yellow River, the west did not exceed the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River, the south did not exceed the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River, and the north did not exceed the Yellow River.

古文：是以颂声并作，视听之类咸乐其生，越裳氏重九译而献，此非兵革之所能致。
现代文：所以颂声并起，有眼睛长耳朵的生物全都乐于自己的生活，越裳氏派使者前来贡献，言语翻译九次才通，这不是战争所能招引来的。
English: Therefore, the eulogies began at the same time, the creatures with eyes and long ears were all happy with their lives, the Yue Clan sent emissaries to contribute, and the words were translated nine times, which was not caused by the war.

古文：及其衰也，南征不还，齐桓救其难，孔子定其文。
现代文：到周朝衰微时，昭王南征溺水而死，齐桓公助周襄王定太子之位，孔子作《春秋》，夷狄之国虽大，自称王者皆贬为于。
English: By the time of the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, Zhao Wang Nanzheng died of drowning, Qi Kuan Gong assisted Zhou Xiang Wang to set the position of the crown prince, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," and although the country of Yidi was large, those who claimed to be kings were all relegated to it.

古文：以至乎秦，兴兵远攻，贪外虚内，务欲广地，不虑其害。然地南不过闽越，北不过太原，而天下溃畔，祸卒在于二世之末，《长城之歌》至今未绝。
现代文：到秦朝时，兴兵远攻，贪外虚内，致力于开拓疆土，不考虑这样做的害处，然而疆土南不过闽越，北不过太原郡，而天下溃散叛乱，祸患在秦二世末年结束。《长城之歌》至今未绝。
English: By the time of the Qin Dynasty, soldiers were sent to attack from afar, coveting what was foreign and coveting what was domestic, and devoting themselves to exploring the territory, without considering the harm of doing so. However, the southern part of the territory was no more than Suiyue, and the northern part was no more than Taiyuan County, and the rebellion was dispersed all over the world. The disaster ended in the last years of Qin II. "Song of the Great Wall" has not ended yet.

古文：赖圣汉初兴，为百姓请命，平定天下。
现代文：幸亏圣明的汉朝兴起，为百姓解除疾苦，平定天下。
English: Fortunately, the Han Dynasty of Shengming arose to relieve the suffering of the people and pacify the world.

古文：至孝文皇帝，闵中国未安，偃武行文，则断狱数百，民赋四十，丁男三年而一事。
现代文：到孝文帝时，怜惜中国没有安定，停止武备，兴办礼教，每年全国处理的案件衹有几百起，老百姓每年交纳赋税四十钱，丁男三年服一次徭役。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, he felt sorry for China's lack of stability, halted military preparations, and set up etiquette education. Every year, there were hundreds of cases handled across the country. The common people paid forty yuan in taxes every year, and Dingan served as a bailiff once every three years.

古文：时有献千里马者，诏曰： 鸾旗在前，属车在后，吉行日五十里，师行三十里，朕乘千里之马，独先安之？ 
现代文：当时有来献千里马的，文帝下韶说： 饰有羽毛、上绣鸾鸟的红色旗帜在前，侍从车辆在后，条件好时一天走五十里，有军队随行一天走三十里，我乘千里马，独自跑在前面到哪襄去呢？ 
English: At that time, there were people who came to offer chariots of a thousand horses, and Emperor Wen said: "The red flag adorned with feathers and embroidered ostriches is in front, and the attendant vehicles are behind. In good conditions, I walk fifty miles a day, and the army accompanies me to walk thirty miles a day. I am riding a chariot of a thousand horses, and I am running alone in front. Where am I going?

古文：于是还马，与道里费，而下诏曰： 朕不受献也，其令四方毋求来献。 
现代文：于是退还千里马，并给了送马人回去的路费，又下诏说： 我不接受贡献，命令四方不要请求前来贡献。 
English: So he returned the horse and gave the person who sent it back the travel expenses. He also said: I do not accept contributions, and ordered the Quartet not to ask for contributions.

古文：当此之时，逸游之乐绝，奇丽之赂塞，郑、卫之倡微矣。
现代文：在这个时候，逸游之乐禁止，奇丽的绩赠杜绝，演唱郑、卫民歌的伶人减少了。
English: At this time, the music of wandering was prohibited, the performance of extraordinary feats was put an end to, and the number of singers of Zheng and Wei folk songs decreased.

古文：夫后宫盛色则贤者隐处，佞人用事则诤臣杜口，而文帝不行，故谥为孝文，庙称太宗。
现代文：后宫美女众多而贤士隐居，奸佞之人专权而谏诤之臣闭，可是文帝时不是这样，所以谧号称作孝文，庙号称为太宗。
English: There were many beautiful women in the harem, but the sages lived in seclusion, and the traitors had exclusive power, while the vassals were shut up. However, this was not the case during the reign of Emperor Wen, so the posthumous name was called Xiaowen, and the temple name was called Taizong.

古文：至孝武皇帝元狩六年，太仓之粟红腐而不可食，都内之钱贯朽而不可校。
现代文：到孝武皇帝元狩六年，太仓的粟多得吃不完，以致腐烂变红而不能吃，都城内库拴钱的绳子都朽断了，散钱多得无法计算。
English: By the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Motokari, there was so much millet in Taicang that it was impossible to eat all of it. The rotting millet turned red and could not be eaten. The ropes used to carry money in the treasury of the capital had rotted away, and there was too much loose money to count.

古文：乃探平城之事，录冒顿以来数为边害，厉兵马，因富民以攘服之。西连诸国至于安息，东过碣石以玄菟、乐浪为郡，北却匈奴万里，更起营塞，制南海以为八郡，则天下断狱万数，民赋数百，造盐、铁、酒榷之利以佐用度，犹不能足。
现代文：于是追究高祖刘邦被围困在平城的旧事，总计匈奴自冒顿单于以来侵扰边境所造成的损害，聚兵备马，取资富民以供兵用，攻打匈奴，疆土西连西域诸国至于安息，束过碣石山设置玄菟郡、乐浪郡，北却匈奴于大漠以北，兴修营塞守卫，南边制服南海设置八郡，可是全国每年处理的案件有上万起，老百姓的口赋多达几百钱，经营盐铁酒榷之利用来增加财政开支，还是不能满足。
English: Therefore, the old story of Liu Bang, the great ancestor, being besieged in Pingcheng, was investigated. In total, the damage caused by the Huns since the invasion of the border, the soldiers were gathered, the rich people were funded for military use, the Huns were attacked, the west of the territory was connected to the countries in the western region, as for the rest, the Huns set up Xuanlu County and Lelang County across the Jinshi Mountain, the Huns set up camp guards north of the desert, and the South Sea was set up in eight counties. However, there are tens of thousands of cases handled every year across the country, and the people have several hundred

古文：当此之时，寇贼并起，军旅数发，父战死于前，子斗伤于后，女子乘亭障，孤儿号于道，老母寡妇饮泣巷哭，遥设虚祭，想魂乎万里之外。
现代文：在这个时候，寇贼同时蜂起，军队经常出动，父亲在前面战死，儿子在后面斗伤，女子防守亭鄣，孤儿号哭于道，老母寡妇在街巷饮泣而哭，遥望苍天，虚设灵位，祭奠亡灵，思念死在万里之外的孤魂。
English: At this time, the bandits rise up at the same time, the army is often dispatched, the father dies in the front, the son is wounded in the back, the woman defends the pavilion, the orphan cries in the road, the old widow cries in the streets, looks at the sky, sets up a shrine, pays tribute to the dead, and misses the lonely soul who died thousands of miles away.

古文：淮南王盗写虎符，阴聘名士，关东公孙勇等诈为使者，是皆廓地泰大，征伐不休之故也。
现代文：淮南王刘安盗取调兵虎符，暗中招聘名士，关东公孙勇等诈为使者，这些都是扩张领土太大，征伐不休的原因啊。
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, stole the tiger emblem for troop transfer, secretly recruited celebrities, and tricked Guandong Gongsun Yong and others into becoming emissaries. These are all reasons why the expansion of territory is too large and the conquest is incessant.

古文：今天下独有关东，关东大者独有齐、楚，民众久困，连年流离，离其城郭，相枕席于道路。
现代文：如今天下独有关东，关东最大的衹有齐郡、楚国，老百姓贫困已经很久了，连年转徙离散，离开他们居住的城郭故土，在道路上纵横相枕而卧。
English: For example, in today's independent Guandong, the largest counties in Guandong are Qi County and Chu Province. The people have been poor for a long time. They have been migrating and dispersing for years. They have left the castle they live in and their native land, and are lying on the roads.

古文：人情莫亲父母，莫乐夫妇，至嫁妻卖子，法不能禁，义不能止，此社稷之忧也。
现代文：人的感情中，亲密没有超过父母的，欢乐没有超过夫妻的，贫困到嫁妻卖子的程度，法令不能禁止，情义不能控制，这是社稷的忧患啊。
English: In people's feelings, intimacy does not exceed that of parents, joy does not exceed that of husband and wife, poverty to the extent of marrying a wife and selling a son, laws cannot be prohibited, and feelings cannot be controlled. This is the sorrow of society.

古文：今陛下不忍悁悁之忿，欲驱士众挤之大海之中，快心幽冥之地，非所以救助饥馑，保全元元也。
现代文：现在陛下不忍恫。旧之忿，要驱使士众堕于大海之中，到阴暗险隘之地去寻找快乐，逭不是用来救助饥荒，保全人民的办法呀。
English: Now your majesty cannot bear to be frightened. The old indignation, to drive the soldiers to fall into the sea, to seek happiness in a dark and dangerous land, is not a method used to relieve famine and preserve the people.

古文：《诗》云 蠢尔蛮荆，大邦为仇 ，言圣人起则后服，中国衰则先畔，动为国家难，自古而患之久矣，何况乃复其南方万里之蛮乎！
现代文：《诗经》上说： 荆州的少数民族蠢蠢欲动，要与大国为仇敌。 造就是说圣人出现，然后制服周边少数民族；中原衰落，周边少数民族就会先发生反叛，动乱是国家的灾难，自古以来就担心这个问题，何况又加上荆州南面万里之外的蛮族呢！
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Jingzhou's ethnic minorities are on the move, and they want to be enemies with the great powers. "Creation" means that a saint appears, and then subdues the surrounding ethnic minorities; if the Central Plains decline, the surrounding ethnic minorities will first rebel. Turmoil is a national disaster. People have been worried about this problem since ancient times, not to mention the barbarians thousands of miles away in the south of Jingzhou!

古文：骆越之人父子同川而浴，相习以鼻饮，与禽兽无异，本不足郡县置也。
现代文：骆越地区的越人父子同一条河洗浴，习惯用鼻子饮水，与禽兽没有什么不同，本来就不值得在那里设置郡县。
English: The father and son of the Viet people in the Luo Yue area bathe in the same river and are accustomed to drinking water with their noses. They are no different from animals. It is not worth setting up a county there.

古文：颛颛独居一海之中，雾露气湿，多毒草虫蛇水土之害，人未见虏，战士自死，又非独珠厓有珠犀玳瑁也，弃之不足惜，不击不损威。
现代文：区区独居一海之中，雾露气湿，多有毒草、虫、蛇、水土之害，越人还没有被俘虏，派去的战士就已经自己死了。又不衹是珠臣郡出产珍珠、犀牛、玳瑁，抛弃它不值得惋惜，不攻打它也不损伤威信。
English: The Yue people had not yet been captured, and the soldiers who had been sent had already died themselves. Moreover, Pearl, rhinoceros and dragonfly were produced in Zhu Chen County, so it was not worth regretting to abandon it, and it would not damage the prestige of the county if it was not attacked.

古文：其民譬犹鱼鳖，何足贪也！
现代文：那裹的民众如同鱼鳖，怎么值得占有呢！
English: The people there are like fish bait, how can they be worth possessing!

古文：臣窃以往者羌军言之，暴师曾未一年，兵出不逾千里，费四十余万万，大司农钱尽，乃以少府禁钱续之。
现代文：我私自拿以往攻打羌人的军事行动来说一说，出师还没有一年，军队还没走一千里，就用掉了四十多万万钱，大司农的钱用完了，就拿少府的钱接济。
English: Personally, I would take the military operations of attacking and defeating the enemy in the past and say that it has not been a year since the division was dispatched, the army has not traveled a thousand miles, but it has spent more than four hundred million yuan, and when the money of the farmers has been used up, they will take the money of the shofu to help.

古文：夫一隅为不善，费尚如此，况于劳师远攻，亡士毋功乎！
现代文：处于一隅之地的羌人行为不善，费用尚且如此多，何况是劳师远攻珠厘，将士死亡而无功呢！
English: In a corner of the world, the Xiongnu behaved badly, the cost was still so much, and what's more, the laborer attacked Zhuli from far away, and the soldier died in vain!

古文：求之往古则不合，施之当今又不便。
现代文：求证于往古而不符合，施行于当今又不便利。
English: Seeking evidence in the past is not consistent, and it is not convenient to implement in the present.

古文：臣愚以为非冠带之国，《禹贡》所及，《春秋》所治，皆可且无以为。
现代文：我愚昧地认为珠厘郡并非戴帽系带子的文明地区，《禹贡》记载所及，《春秋》谈论治理，都认为可以暂且置之不理。
English: I foolishly thought that Zhuli County was not a civilized area where people wore hats and belts. As far as the records of "Yugong" were concerned, and "Spring and Autumn" talked about governance, I thought that I could temporarily ignore it.

古文：愿遂弃珠厓，专用恤关东为忧。
现代文：希望就放弃珠压郡，把钱财专门用来救恤关东的流民。
English: It is hoped that Zhu County will be abandoned, and the money will be used exclusively to rescue the displaced people in Kanto.

古文：对奏，上以问丞相御史。
现代文：贾捐之的回答上呈以后，皇上看后就此事询问丞相和御史大夫。
English: After Jia Dongzhi's answer was submitted, the emperor looked at it and asked the prime minister and the chief historian about the matter.

古文：御史大夫陈万年以为当击；丞相于定国以为： 前日兴兵击之连年，护军都尉、校尉及丞凡十一人，还者二人，卒士及转输死者万人以上，费用三万万余，尚未能尽降。
现代文：御史大夫陈万年认为应当攻打珠臣郡的反叛；丞相于定国认为 以前连年发兵攻打珠匡郡的叛兵，领兵的护军都尉、校尉及丞共十一人，祇回来了两个人，士兵及转运粮草者死了一万多人，军事费用三万万多钱，还没有能迫使叛兵全部投降。
English: Chief Historian Chen Wannian believed that the rebellion in Zhuxian County should be attacked; Vice-Minister Yu Dingguo believed that in the past, troops had been sent to attack the rebels in Zhukang County for years. There were eleven escort captains, lieutenants and lieutenants, and only two returned. More than ten thousand soldiers and grain and grass transporters died, and the military cost was more than thirty million yuan. It has not yet been able to force all the rebels to surrender.

古文：今关东困乏，民难摇动，捐之议是。 
现代文：现在关东地区困乏，百姓遭难，人心摇动，贾捐之的建议是对的。 
English: Now the Kanto region is in need, the people are suffering, and people's hearts are shaking. Jia Dongru's suggestion is right.

古文：上乃从之。
现代文：皇上就听从了贾捐之的意见。
English: The emperor listened to Jia Dongzhi's opinion.

古文：遂下诏曰： 珠厓虏杀吏民，背畔为逆，今廷议者或言可击，或言可守，或欲弃之，其指各殊。
现代文：于是下诏说： 珠匡郡叛兵掳掠杀害官吏和百姓，背叛朝廷违抗命，现在朝廷议事大臣有的说可以出兵攻打，有的说可以派兵镇守，有的主张放弃珠压郡，他们的意见各不相同。
English: Therefore, the following edict was issued: The rebel soldiers in Zhukuang County captured and killed officials and people, betrayed the imperial court and disobeyed orders. Now, some ministers of the Imperial Court said that they could send troops to attack, some said that they could send soldiers to defend the town, and some advocated abandoning Zhukuang County. Their opinions vary.

古文：朕日夜惟思议者之言，羞威不行，则欲诛之；孤疑辟难，则守屯田；通于时变，则忧万民。
现代文：我日夜深思议事大臣的议论，羞愧威信不能推行，就想诛讨珠压；犹豫而回避困难，就想镇守边境，派兵屯田；通达于时事变化，又忧虑万民。
English: Day and night, I pondered over the speech of the Minister of the State Council. Ashamed that my prestige could not be carried out, I wanted to ask for pressure; hesitant to avoid difficulties, I wanted to guard the border and send troops to occupy the land; aware of the changes in current affairs, and worried about the people.

古文：夫万民之饥饿，与远蛮之不讨，危孰大焉？
现代文：广大百姓的饥饿，与不讨伐远方的蛮人，哪一个危害更大呢？
English: Which is more harmful, the hunger of the broad masses of the people, or the barbarians who do not fight in distant lands?

古文：且宗庙之祭，凶年不备，况乎辟不嫌之辱哉！
现代文：而且宗庙的祭祀，遇上荒年就没有费用准备，何况还能躲避没有嫌疑的屈辱呢！
English: Moreover, the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple, in the event of a bad year, there is no cost preparation, not to mention being able to avoid the humiliation without suspicion!

古文：今关东大困，仓库空虚，无以相赡，又以动兵，非特劳民，凶年随之。
现代文：现在关东十分贫困，仓库空虚，没有什么可以用来救济，又加上有军事行动，不但劳苦百姓，还有灾荒跟在后面。
English: Now Kanto is very poor, warehouses are empty, there is nothing that can be used for relief, plus there are military operations, not only the people are working hard, but also the disaster is following behind.

古文：其罢珠厓郡。
现代文：罢置珠臣郡。
English: Suspension of Suisun County.

古文：民有慕义欲内属，便处之；不欲，勿强。 
现代文：那裹的百姓有仰慕仁义想归附内地的，要求到哪里，就安置到哪裹；不愿意归附的，不要勉强。 
English: The people of that country have a yearning for righteousness and want to return to the inland. Wherever they ask, they should be resettled. If they don't want to return, don't force them.

古文：珠厓由是罢。
现代文：珠匡郡从此罢置。
English: Zhukuang County has been suspended since then.

古文：捐之数召见，言多纳用。
现代文：贾捐之多次受到皇上接见，他提的意见大多被采用。
English: Jia Dongzhi was repeatedly received by the emperor, and most of his suggestions were adopted.

古文：时，中书令石显用事，捐之数短显，以故不得官，后稀复见。
现代文：当时中书令石显专权，贾捐之多次议论石显的短处，因此没有得到官做，后来皇上召见他的次数逐渐减少。
English: At that time, the imperial edict gave Shixian exclusive power, and Jia Dangzhi repeatedly discussed Shixian's shortcomings. As a result, he did not get an official post. Later, the number of times the emperor summoned him gradually decreased.

古文：而长安令杨兴新以材能得幸，与捐之相善。
现代文：长安令杨兴最近因为才能出众得到皇上宠幸，他和买捐之很要好。
English: Chang'an's Yang Xing has recently been favored by the emperor because of his outstanding talent, and he is very good at buying and donating.

古文：捐之欲得召见，谓兴曰： 京兆尹缺，使我得见，言君兰，京兆尹可立得。 
现代文：贾捐之想得到皇上召见，就对杨兴说： 京兆尹空缺，如果我得见皇上，我就推荐您，京兆尹马上就会落在您身上。 
English: Jia Dongzhi wanted to be summoned by the emperor, so he said to Yang Xing: Jing Zhaoyun is vacant, if I have to see the emperor, I will recommend you, Jing Zhaoyun will fall on you immediately.

古文：兴曰： 县官尝言兴愈薛大夫，我易助也。
现代文：杨兴说： 皇上曾经说我胜过御史大夫薛广德，帮助我很容易。
English: Yang Xing said, "The Emperor once said that I was better than Grand Historian Xue Guangde, and it was easy to help me.

古文：君房下笔，言语妙天下，使君房为尚书令，胜五鹿充宗远甚。 
现代文：您写的文章，言语妙天下，让您做尚书令，远远胜遇五鹿充宗。 
English: The article you wrote, the words are wonderful, let you do Shang Shuling, far better than Wugang Chongsong.

古文：捐之曰： 令我得代充宗，君兰为京兆，京兆，郡国首，尚书，百官本，天下真大治，士则不隔矣。
现代文：买捐之说： 让我得以代替五鹿充宗，您做京兆尹，京兆位居郡国之首，尚书令是百官的根本，天下就会真的大治，贤士也就不会和仕途隔离了。
English: Buy donation said: Let me be able to replace the five deer chongzong, you do Jing Zhaoyun, Jing Zhaoyun ranks first in the county, Shang Shuling is the foundation of a hundred officials, the world will be really great, and the wise men will not be separated from the career.

古文：捐之前言平恩侯可为将军，期思侯并可为诸曹，皆如言；又荐谒者满宣，立为冀州刺史；言中谒者不宜受事，宦者不宜入宗庙，立止。
现代文：我前不久向皇上进言平恩侯许嘉可以做将军，思侯并可为诸曹，都被皇上采用；又举荐谒者满宣，马上被任命为冀州刺史；又进言中谒者不应专权，宦官不应进入宗庙，皇上就下令立即制止。
English: Not long ago, I suggested to the emperor that Ping'en Prince Xu Jia could be a general, and that Si Hou could be Zhu Cao, both of which were accepted by the emperor. I also suggested that the person who recommended him should be fully announced and immediately appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou. I also suggested that the person who recommended him should not have exclusive power and that the eunuch should not enter the ancestral temple, and the emperor ordered to stop it immediately.

古文：相荐之信，不当如是乎！ 
现代文：我荐举您的效果，不应当像前面所言诸事被皇上采纳吗？ 
English: I commend you for your efforts. Shouldn't all the above-mentioned matters be accepted by the Emperor?

古文：兴曰： 我复见，言君房也。 
现代文：杨兴说： 等我再进见皇上，就举荐您。 
English: Yang Xing said, "When I see the emperor again, I will recommend you."

古文：捐之复短石显。
现代文：买捐之又抨击石显的短处。
English: "Buy and donate" is another way of criticizing the shortcomings of Shixian.

古文：兴曰： 显鼎贵，上信用之。
现代文：杨兴说： 石显正在贵幸，皇上信任、重用他。
English: Yang Xing said, "Shi Xian is very fortunate. The emperor trusts and reuses him.

古文：今欲进，弟从我计，且与合意，即得人矣。 
现代文：如今想进身为官，您听从我的建议，暂且和石显保持一致，就能入朝为官了。 
English: Now, if you want to become an official, you should follow my advice and be consistent with Shi Xian for the time being, and you will be able to become an official in the imperial court.

古文：捐之即与兴共为荐显奏，曰： 窃见石显本山东名族，有礼义之家也。
现代文：贾捐之便和杨兴共同上书荐举称颂石显说： 我们私下看到石显本是山东的名门望族，是有礼义之家。
English: Jia Dongzhi and Yang Xing jointly wrote a letter recommending and praising Shixian, saying: We privately saw that Shixian was a famous and prestigious family in Shandong, a family with courtesy and righteousness.

古文：持正六年，未尝有过，明习于事，敏而疾见，出公门，入私门。
现代文：主持公道六年，没有发生过错，明了熟悉政事，敏捷而反应迅速，从公庭出来，就回自己家，不随便交游。
English: He has presided over justice for six years, no mistakes have occurred, he is clearly familiar with political affairs, he is agile and quick to react, and when he comes out of the court, he returns to his own home, and does not casually travel.

古文：宜赐爵关内侯，引其兄弟以为诸曹。 
现代文：应该赐给他关内侯的爵位。并引用他的兄弟担任诸曹。 
English: He should be given the title of Marquis of Guanzhong, and his brothers should be cited as Zhu Cao.

古文：又共为荐兴奏，曰： 窃见长安令兴，幸得以知名数召见。
现代文：两人又共同起草了荐举杨兴的奏书，由买捐之上奏，说： 我私下看见长安令杨兴，很荣幸地得以聪智而多次被召见。
English: The two also jointly drafted Yang Xing's recommendation letter, which was played by buying and donating, saying: I saw Chang Anling Yang Xing in private, and I was honored to be called to see him many times.

古文：兴事父母有曾氏之孝，事师有颜、闵之材，荣名闻于四方。
现代文：杨兴侍奉父母有曾参那样的孝行，服侍老师有颜回闵子骞那样的才能，美好的名声闻于四方。
English: Yang Xing served his parents with the filial piety of Zeng Zhan, and his serving teacher had the talent of Yan Hui, and his good reputation was known in all directions.

古文：明诏举茂材，列侯以为首。
现代文：皇上下明韶举荐茂材，列侯都以杨兴为首。
English: Emperors and empresses recommended Shigeru, and all vassals followed Yang Xing's lead.

古文：为长安令，吏民敬乡，道路皆称能。
现代文：杨兴担任长安令，得到官吏和百姓的敬服、拥护，行路之人都称颂他的才能。
English: Yang Xing served as the Changanling, and received the respect and support of officials and people. People on the road praised his talent.

古文：观其下笔属文，则董仲舒；进谈动辞，则东方生；置之争臣，则汲直；用之介胄，则冠军侯；施之治民，则赵广汉；抱公绝私，则尹翁归。
现代文：看他下笔作文，就像董仲舒；举动言谈，如同东方朔；直言静谏，如同汲黯；让他领兵打仗，则如冠军侯；让他治民，就是趟广汉；奉公绝私，正如尹翁归。
English: His next composition is like that of Dong Zhongshu; his actions and words are like those of Dongfangshuo; his forthrightness and calmness are like those of Qiu Ying; if he leads the army to war, he is like a champion; if he governs the people, he is like Guanghan; if he serves the public and forsakes his private life, he is like Yin Wengui.

古文：兴兼此六人而有之，守道坚固，执义不回，临大节而不可夺，国之良臣也，可试守京兆尹。 
现代文：杨兴身兼六人之长，守道坚固，执义不枉，临大节而志不可夺，是国家的良臣啊，可以试任京兆尹。 
English: Yang Xing is the eldest of the six, he is a firm guardian of the path, upholds justice, and is invincible. He is a good minister of the state, and can be appointed as Jing Zhaoyun on a trial basis.

古文：石显闻知，白之上。
现代文：石显得知贾捐之和杨兴互相荐举的事，报告给皇上。
English: Shi appeared to know that Jia Dongzhi and Yang Xing had recommended each other, and reported this to the emperor.

古文：乃下兴、捐之狱，令皇后父阳平侯禁与显共杂治，奏 兴、捐之怀诈伪，以上语相风，更相荐誉，欲得大位，漏泄省中语，罔上不道。
现代文：皇上下诏将杨兴、买捐之关进监狱，令皇后的父亲阳平侯王禁和石显共同审理，二人奏称： 杨兴、贾捐之心怀狡诈邪伪，拿皇上说的话相互暗示，又互相举荐称誉，想做大官，泄露宫禁中的语言，欺君罔上，大逆不道。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to imprison Yang Xing and Buy Duan, and ordered the queen's father, Yang Ping Hou Wang Kan, and Shi Xian to be tried together. The two said: Yang Xing and Jia Duan harbor cunning and wickedness in their hearts, take the words said by the emperor to insinuate each other, recommend and praise each other, want to be a high-ranking official, divulge the language in the palace, and bully the prince, which is a great treason.

古文：《书》曰： 谗说殄行，震惊朕师。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 谗巧之说，灭绝君子的德行，震惊众人。 
English: "Shangshu" said: It is said that the virtuous act of exterminating a gentleman shocked everyone.

古文：《王制》： 顺非而泽，不听而诛。 
现代文：《王制》上说： 文过饰非，言辞滑泽无滞，不用听审，就可以诛杀。
English: "Kingdom System" said: "Writing and embellishing is wrong, words are smooth and smooth, and you can fight and kill without a hearing."

古文：请论如法。 
现代文：请按法治罪。 
English: Please follow the rule of law.

古文：捐之竟坐弃市。
现代文：贾捐之最后被处以弃市死刑。
English: Jia Dangzhi was finally sentenced to death for abandoning the city.

古文：兴减死罪一等，髡钳为城旦。
现代文：杨兴减死罪一等，髡钳为城旦。
English: Yang Xing's death sentence was reduced to first-degree murder, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：成帝时，至部刺史。
现代文：成帝时，杨兴官至部刺史。
English: When he became emperor, Yang Xingguan was at the forefront of history.

古文：赞曰：《诗》称 戎狄是膺，荆舒是惩 ，久矣其为诸夏患也。
现代文：赞曰：《诗经》上说 鲁僖公和齐桓公举义兵，北面抵挡戎狄，南边重创荆蛮 ，戎、狄、荆蛮很久以来就是中原华夏各族的忧患。
English: Zang said: "In the Book of Songs, it is said that King Lu Xun and King Qi Huan raised a volunteer army, the north side resisted the Eun Di, and the south side dealt a heavy blow to the Jing Man. The Eun, Di, and Jing Man have long been the worries of all ethnic groups in Central Plains China.

古文：汉兴，征伐胡越，于是为盛。
现代文：汉朝兴起，征伐匈奴、南越，在这时是重要的事。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty and the conquest of the Huns and South Vietnam were important events at this time.

古文：究观淮南、捐之、主父、严安之义，深切著明，故备论其语。
现代文：仔细研究淮南王刘安、买捐之、主父偃、严安的议论，深刻明白而最著名，所以详细记载他们的言辞。
English: Carefully study the discussions of Liu An, King of Huainan, Buy and Donate, Master and Father, and Yan An, the most famous ones, which are profound and clear, so record their words in detail.

古文：世称公孙弘排主父，张汤陷严助，石显谮捐之，察其行迹，主父求欲鼎亨而得族，严、贾出入禁门招权利，死皆其所也，亦何排陷之恨哉！
现代文：世人说公孙弘排挤主父偃，张汤陷害严助，石显谗毁贾捐之，考察他们的行为事迹，主父偃追求五鼎烹而落得灭族的结果，严助、买捐之出入宫禁而谋求权利，都是死得其所，有什么排挤、陷害的遗憾呢！
English: The world said that Gongsun Hong ousted his master and father, Zhang Tang framed Yan Sui, Shi Xian Rong destroyed Jia Dui, and examined their deeds and deeds. The master and father pursued the Five Great Cooks and achieved the result of exterminating the people, and Yan Sui and Buy Dui were banned from entering and leaving the palace and sought the right. They all died in their place. What is the regret of ousting and framing?

