古文：二十日早餐，随担夫出平坝南门，循西山麓南行。
现代文：二十日早餐后，跟随挑夫出了平坝南门，沿着西山山麓往南行。
English: After breakfast on the 20th, I followed the porter out of the South Gate of Pingba and headed south along the foot of the West Mountain.

古文：二里，有石坊当道，其南丛山横列，小溪向东峡去，路转西峡入。
现代文：二里地，有座石牌坊位于道中，牌坊南面重重山峦横列，小溪流向东面峡谷，道路转入西边的山峡。
English: Two miles away, there is a stone archway in the middle of the road. To the south of the archway, there is a row of mountains. The stream flows to the east of the canyon, and the road turns into the canyon on the west.

古文：三里，又随峡南转。
现代文：三里，又顺着峡谷往南转。
English: Three miles, and then turn south along the canyon.

古文：又二里，上石子岭，逾岭为石子哨。
现代文：又行二里，登上石子岭，翻过岭是石子哨。
English: Walk another two miles, climb Shizi Ridge, and climb over the ridge to Shizi Whistle.

古文：又七里，过水桥屯。
现代文：又走七里，路过水桥屯。
English: I walked another seven miles and passed Shui Qiao Tun.

古文：又五里，为中火铺。
现代文：又是五里，是中火铺。
English: It's another five miles to the fire station.

古文：又二里，西上坳，从坳夹行一里，为杨家关。
现代文：又二里，向西登上山坳，从山坳峡谷中前行一里，是杨家关。
English: Another two miles, westward up the ridge, and one mile from the middle of the ridge canyon, is Yangjiaguan.

古文：又西三里，为王家堡，乃南转四里，为石佛洞。
现代文：又往西行三里，是王家堡，于是转向南走四里，是石佛洞。
English: Another three miles to the west is Wangjiapu, and then four miles to the south is the Stone Buddha Cave.

古文：洞门西向，不深，有九石佛，甚古。
现代文：洞口向西，不深，有九尊石佛，十分古老。
English: The mouth of the cave faces west and is not deep. There are nine stone Buddhas, which are very ancient.

古文：其处西抵大茅河为安酋界，约五十里。又南五里，平坞间水分南北流，是为老龙过脊。
现代文：又向南走五里，平敞的山坞间水流分为南北两种流向，这里是主峰延伸而过的山脊。
English: Another five miles to the south, the water flow between the spacious docks is divided into two directions, north and south. Here is the ridge where the main peak extends.

古文：又南五里，为头铺。
现代文：又向南五里，是头铺。
English: Another five miles to the south is the top bunk.

古文：又南二里，西入山坳。
现代文：又往南二里，西向走入山坳。
English: Another two miles to the south and west into the foothills.

古文：逾之，出其西，又南行三里，过一堡，又二里上陇，入普定北门。
现代文：穿越山坳，到了山坳西端，又往南行三里，经过一处土堡，又行二里登上土垄，进入普定卫城北门。
English: Through the mountains, to the western end of the mountains, and then three miles to the south, through a mud castle, and then two miles up the dirt ridge, into the north gate of the Puding Acropolis.

古文：一岐自东北来者，广顺道；一岐自西北来者，大茅河诸关隘道。
现代文：一条岔道自东北方向来，是到广顺州的路；一条岔道自西北方向来，是通往大茅河各关隘的路。
English: A branch road coming from the northeast is the road to Guangshunzhou; a branch road coming from the northwest is the road leading to each pass of Dayu River.

古文：普定城垣峻整，街衢宏阔；南半里，有桥；又南半里，有层楼跨街，市集甚盛。
现代文：普定城的城墙高峻整齐，街道宏伟宽阔。往南走半里，有座桥。又往南走半里，有一层层楼房跨在街道上，集市十分兴旺。
English: The city walls of Puding are tall and neat, and the streets are grand and wide. Half a mile to the south, there is a bridge. Another half mile to the south, there are multi-storey buildings across the streets, and the market is very prosperous.

古文：二十一日出南门，西南行十五里，为杨家桥，有堡为杨桥堡。
现代文：二十一日出了南门，往西南行十五里，是杨家桥，有座桥头堡是杨桥堡。
English: On the twenty-first day out of the south gate, fifteen miles to the southwest, is Yangjia Bridge, and there is a bridgehead is Yangqiao Fort.

古文：又南十里，为中火铺。
现代文：又向南十里，是中火铺。
English: Another ten miles to the south is the Mid-Fire Shop.

古文：又南一里，抵龙潭山下，转入西峡。
现代文：又向南走一里，到了龙潭山下，转人西面的山峡。
English: Another mile to the south, to the foot of Longtan Mountain, and then to the western side of the gorge.

古文：西八里，有哨。
现代文：往西八里，有个哨卡。
English: Eight miles to the west, there's a checkpoint.

古文：转南七里，为龙井铺。
现代文：转向南行七里，是龙井铺。
English: Turn southbound seven miles and it's Longjing.

古文：又南七里，过哑泉，大路从东南下山，绕山南入安庄东门；小路越岭西而南下，度小桥，抵安庄西门。
现代文：又往南七里，路过哑泉，大路从东南方向下山，绕着山向南进入安庄卫城东门；小路越到岭西后往南下山，过了小桥，到达安庄卫城西门。
English: Another seven miles to the south, passing Dumb Spring, the main road descends the mountain from the southeast, circling the mountain to the south to enter the east gate of Anzhuang Acropolis; the small road crosses the west ridge and descends the mountain to the south, passes the small bridge, and reaches the west gate of Anzhuang Acropolis.

古文：安庄后倚北峰，前瞰南陇，而无南北门，惟东西两门出入。
现代文：安庄城后面靠着北峰，前方俯瞰着南面的山垄，而南北两面没有城门，只有东西两道门供人出入。
English: Anzhuang Castle is backed by the North Peak, and the front overlooks the ridge to the south. There are no city gates on the north and south sides, only two doors to the east and west for people to enter and exit.

古文：西门外多客肆，余乃入憩焉。
现代文：西门外客店很多，我便入店休息。
English: There are many guesthouses outside the West Gate, so I went inside to rest.

古文：遂入西门，遇伍、徐二卫舍，为言： 此间为安邦彦所荼毒荼音ｔú荼毒即毒害、残害，残害独惨，人人恨不洗洗劫、讨伐其穴。
现代文：于是进入西门，遇上安庄卫的伍、徐两位门客，对我说： 这一带被安邦彦所毒害，残害得特别惨，人人都恨不得血洗他的巢穴。
English: Entering the West Gate, I met two of An Zhuangwei's guests, Wu and Xu, who said to me: "This area was poisoned by An Bangyan, and the damage was so terrible that everyone wanted to wash his lair in blood.

古文：然以天兵临之，荡平甚易，而部院朱独主抚，以致天讨不行，而叛逆不戢ｊí收敛。
现代文：如果用朝廷的大军镇压他，非常容易荡平，可朱部院唯独主张安抚，以致朝廷没有实行讨伐，但叛逆没有收敛。
English: If the imperial army was used to suppress him, it would be very easy to pacify him, but Zhu Buin insisted on appeasement, so that the imperial court did not carry out a crusade, but the rebellion did not abate.

古文：今正月终，犹以众窥三汊河，以有备而退。 
现代文：今年正月末，他还率领人马窥探三汉河，因为事先有防备才退兵。 
English: At the end of the first month of this year, he also led people to spy on the Sanhan River, because he had prepared in advance before leaving the army.

古文：三汊河者，去安庄西五十里，一水西北自乌撒，一水西南自老山中，合并东北行，故曰 三汊 ；东经大、陆广、乌江，与安限为天堑者、惟此；今设总兵官驻其地。
现代文：三汉河这地方，西距安庄卫五十里，一条河从西北方自乌撒府流来，一条河从西南自老山中流来，合流后向东北流去，所以叫做 三汉 ；往东经过大茅河、陆广河、乌江一线，与安邦彦分界成为天堑的，唯有此河；现在设置了总兵官驻扎在此地。
English: This place, the Sanhan River, is located 50 miles west of Anzhuangwei. A river flows from Usa Prefecture in the northwest, a river flows from the middle of Laoshan in the southwest, and flows to the northeast after the confluence. This is why it is called Sanhan. To the east, it passes through the lines of the Damao River, the Lukang River, and the Wujiang River. It is only this river that separates Anbangyan from Anbangyan. Now, the chief military officer is stationed here.

古文：时朱总督已毙，舆用车载尸还越，而按君冯士晋，为四川人，余离贵省日，亦亲临陆广，巡历三汊，将由安庄抵安南。
现代文：此时朱总督已死，用车载着尸体返回浙东，而巡按大人冯士晋是四川人，我离开贵州省城时，他也亲临陆广河，巡视经过三汉河，将要经由安庄卫到安南卫去。
English: At this time, Governor Zhu had died and returned to East Zhejiang by car with the body, while the adult inspector Feng Shijin was from Sichuan. When I left the city of Guizhou Province, he also personally visited Lu Guanghe, inspected through the Sanhan River, and will go through Anzhuangwei to Annanwei.

古文：伍君曰： 按君此行，亦将巡察要害，分布士卒，为剿除之计，非与朱为比者。 
现代文：伍君说： 巡按大人此次出行，也将巡察军事要地，部署士卒，为剿除安邦彦作准备，不是能与朱相比的人。 
English: Wu Jun said: "The adults on this trip will also inspect important military sites, deploy officers and men, and prepare for the removal of An Bangyan. They are not people who can be compared to Zhu.

古文：不识然否？
现代文：不知是不是这样？
English: I wonder if that's the case?

古文：云南普名胜叛，踞阿迷州，段统兵征之，死于难，故州人立祠祀之，而招魂葬于望水亭之西。
现代文：普定卫城内，就是安顺府的驻地。我先前听说安顺只设土知州，而仕宦出身的有知府节制下的推官，来到这里才知道是驻在普定。
English: I had previously heard that Anshun only consisted of Tochi Prefecture, and that there were governors who had come from the governor's office, but when I came here, I found out that they were stationed in Puting.

古文：今普名胜之子，犹据阿迷州。湫敝殊甚十分低矮破烂。
现代文：安庄卫城内，就是镇宁州的驻地洲衙门在南城内段公祠的东边，十分低矮破烂。
English: In Anzhuang Weicheng, that is, Zheningzhou's resident Zhouzhuang Gate is on the east side of the public shrine in the inner section of Nancheng, very low and tattered.

古文：庭有古衫四株，大合两人抱，岂亦国初之遗耶？
现代文：庭院中有四棵古杉树，大处须两人合抱，莫非也是开国初期的遗物吗？
English: There are four old cedar trees in the courtyard, and two people have to hug each other in most places. Isn't this also a relic from the early days of the founding of the People's Republic?

古文：安南卫城内，即永宁州所驻。
现代文：安南卫城内，便是永宁州的驻地。
English: In Annan Acropolis, it is the residence of Yongning State.

古文：考《一统志》，三卫三州，旧各有分地，卫俱在北，州俱在南。
现代文：查看《一统志》，三个卫三个州，旧时各自划分有辖地，三个卫都在北面，三个州都在南边。
English: According to the "History of the Three Kingdoms," the three kingdoms were divided into three provinces in the old days. The three kingdoms were in the north, and the three provinces were in the south.

古文：今州卫同城，欲以文辖武，实借武卫文也。
现代文：今天州和卫同在一个城中，打算用文官来管辖武官，实际上是借武官之力来护卫文官。
English: Today, the prefectural government and the city of Weidong are in the same city, and they plan to use civilian officials to govern the military attaché. In fact, they are using the military attaché to protect the civilian officials.

古文：但各州之地，俱半错卫屯，半沦苗孽，似非当时金瓯无缺金瓯即金杯，金瓯无缺指保持某种好东西的完美矣。三卫之西，为水西所苦，其东又诸苗杂据，惟中一道通行耳。
现代文：但各州的属地，全都有一半错杂着卫所的屯田，一半沦丧在苗族叛民的手中，似乎不是当年完整无缺的疆土了。三卫的西面，被水西所苦害，它们的东面又杂乱盘踞着各支苗族，唯有中间一条道路可以通行罢了。
English: However, the territories of each prefecture were all half mixed with the garrison fields of the Imperial Guard, and half lost in the hands of the Miao rebels, so it seems that they were not the complete territory of that year. The west side of the Sanwei was afflicted by the water west, and the east side of them was cluttered with various Miao tribes. Only one road in the middle was passable.

古文：二十二日五鼓，大雨达旦，余少憩逆旅。
现代文：二十二日五更时，大雨通宵达旦，我住在旅店中稍作休息。
English: At 5 a.m. on the 22nd, it rained all night long. I stayed in a hotel to take a short break.

古文：下午霁，独南遵大路，一里逾岭，由岐东下半里，入双明洞。
现代文：下午夭转晴，独自一人顺着大路往南走，一里越过山岭，由岔道往东下行半里，进了双明洞。
English: In the early afternoon, as the weather cleared, I walked south along the main road, one mile over the mountains, half a mile east from the main road, and entered the Shuangming Cave.

古文：此处山皆回环成洼，水皆下透穴地。
现代文：此处的山都是呈环形回绕成洼地，水流都是向下流入地穴中去。
English: The mountains here are all loops that wind around to form depressions, and the water flows down into the sinkhole.

古文：将抵洞，忽坞中下裂成坑，阔三尺，长三丈，深丈余，水从其东底溢出，即从其下北去。
现代文：将到洞中时，忽然见山坞从中下陷裂成深坑，宽有三尺，长三丈，深一丈有余，水从坑东头底部溢出，随即从坑下边往北流去。
English: When he reached the cave, he suddenly saw that the dock had collapsed from the middle to the bottom into a deep pit, three feet wide, three feet long, and more than one foot deep. Water overflowed from the bottom of the east end of the pit, and then flowed north from the bottom of the pit.

古文：溢穴之处，其上皆环塍为田，水盈而不渗，亦一奇也。
现代文：溢水的坑穴之处，坑上面都是田埂环绕成的水田，盛满水却不渗漏，也是一个奇观。
English: Where there are pits with overflowing water, there are paddy fields surrounded by rice paddies on top of the pits. It is also a wonder that the pits are full of water but do not leak.

古文：从此西转，则北山遂南削为崖，西山亦削崖北属之，崖环西北二面，如城半规。
现代文：从此地转向西，就见北山的南面是陡削的悬崖，西山也是陡削的悬崖与北山相连，悬崖环绕在西北两面，如城墙一样呈半圆形。
English: From here, turning to the west, you can see that the south face of the north mountain is a steep cliff, and the west mountain is also a steep cliff connected to the north mountain. The cliff is surrounded on both sides in the northwest, and is semicircular like a city wall.

古文：先抵北崖下，崖根忽下嵌成洞，其中贮水一塘，渊碧深泓，即外自裂坑中潜透而汇之者。
现代文：首先来到北面悬崖之下，忽见悬崖根部下陷成一个洞，洞中贮着一塘水，一片碧绿渊深，这就是从外面裂坑中潜流渗透而汇积在此的水。
English: First of all, I came under the cliff on the north side and suddenly saw a hole at the base of the cliff. There was a pond of water stored in the hole, a deep green abyss. This was the water that had accumulated here by infiltration of the undercurrent from the outer rift.

古文：从崖外稍西，即有一石自崖顶南跨而下，其顶与崖并起，而下辟为门，高阔约俱丈五，是为东门。
现代文：从悬崖外稍向西走，马上有一块岩石从悬崖顶端往南跨下来，岩石顶部与崖顶平齐，可下部裂为石门，高处宽处都约有一丈五尺，这是东门。
English: From the outside of the cliff a little to the west, there is a rock straddling from the top of the cliff to the south. The top of the rock is level with the top of the cliff, but the lower part is split into a stone gate. The height and width are about five feet. This is the east gate.

古文：透门而西，其内北崖愈穹，西崖之环驾而属者，亦愈合。
现代文：钻过门往西走，石门以内北面的山崖愈加隆起，西面山崖环绕奔驰而来的连接之处，也越加合拢。
English: Drilling through the gate to the west, the mountain cliff on the north side of the stone gate became more and more uplifted, and the junction where the mountain cliff on the west side encircled the Mercedes also became more and more closed.

古文：西山之南，复分土山一支，掉臂而前，与东门外崖夹坑而峙。
现代文：西山的南边，又分出一座土山，掉臂往前，与东门外的山崖夹住深坑对峙。
English: On the south side of the West Mountain, a dirt hill is separated from the East Mountain and faces the cliff outside the East Gate with a deep pit.

古文：昔有结高垣，垒石址，架阁于上，北与东门崖对，以补东向之隙，而今废矣。
现代文：从前有人在上面构建了高墙，砌了石头房基，架设了楼阁，面朝北与东门所在的山崖相对，用来填补东面的空隙，可现在已倒塌了。
English: Once upon a time, high walls were built on it, stone foundations were laid, towers were erected, facing north against the cliff where the east gate is located, to fill the gap in the east, but now it has collapsed.

古文：由东门又数十步，低西崖下。
现代文：由东门又走了几十步，到达西面山崖下。
English: I walked a few dozen steps from the east gate and arrived at the foot of the cliff on the west side.

古文：其崖自南山北属于北崖，上皆削壁危合，下则中辟而西通，高阔俱三倍于东门，是为西门。
现代文：这里的山崖自南山往北接到北面的山崖，上边都是险峻四合的削壁，下面却从中分开通到西面，高处宽处都是东门的三倍，这便是西门。
English: The cliffs here are connected to the cliffs to the north from Nanshan to the north. The upper side is a steep four-way wall, but the lower side is separated from the middle and leads to the west. The height and width are three times that of the east gate, which is the west gate.

古文：此洞外之 双明 也。
现代文：这就是山洞外的 双明 了。
English: This is Shuangming outside the cave.

古文：一门而中透已奇，两门而交映尤异。
现代文：一个石门中间相通已很奇特了，而两个石门交相辉映就格外奇异了。
English: For a stone gate to communicate with another stone gate is very strange, but for two stone gates to communicate with each other is even stranger.

古文：其西门之外山，复四环成洼，高若列城。
现代文：那西门以外的山，重又四周环绕成洼地，高高地好像排列着的城墙。
English: And the mountains were heavy round about beyond the entering in of the gate of Nahshon; and the high places were as a city wall round about.

古文：水自东门外崖北渊泓间，又透石根溢出西门之东，其声淙淙，从西门北崖，又透穴西出。
现代文：水流从东门外北面山崖下的深塘中，又渗过石山根部溢出西门的东边，水声涂徐，从西门北边的山崖，又透过洞穴向西流出。
English: The water flowed from the deep pond under the cliff on the north side of the mountain outside the east gate, seeped through the root of the stone mountain and overflowed the east side of the west gate. The water flowed slowly from the cliff on the north side of the west gate and flowed westward through the cave.

古文：门之东西，皆有小石梁跨之，以入北洞。
现代文：石门的东西两侧，都有小石桥横跨溪流，以便进入北洞。
English: On both the east and west sides of the stone gate, there are small stone bridges across the stream to enter the North Cave.

古文：水由桥下西行环洼中，又透西山之下而去。
现代文：溪水由桥下往西流在环状的洼地中，又透过西山之下而去。
English: From under the bridge, the stream flows westward in a circular depression, passing under the West Mountain.

古文：西门之下，东映重门，北环坠壑，南倚南山，石壁氤氲，结为龛牖，置观音大士像焉。
现代文：西门之下，东面两个石门互相掩映，北边环绕着深坠的壑谷，南方紧靠着南山，石壁上云气氰氯，建造了一个带有窗户的佛完，里边供着观音菩萨的像。
English: Under the west gate, the two stone gates on the east face each other, the north side is surrounded by the deep Shibuya Valley, the south is close to Nanshan, and there is cyanogen chloride on the stone wall. A Buddha hall with windows was built, with a statue of Guanyin Bodhisattva inside.

古文：由其后透穴南入，石窍玲珑，小而不扩，深可十余丈而止。
现代文：由佛完后面钻过洞穴向南深入，石洞小巧玲珑，洞小而不宽，深处约有十多丈便到了头。
English: From the back of the Buddha, drill through the cave to the south, the stone cave is small and exquisite, the hole is small but not wide, the depth is about ten feet, and then it reaches the head.

古文：此门下南壁之奇也。
现代文：这是石门下南面石壁间的奇景。
English: This is the marvelous scenery between the stone walls on the south side below the stone gate.

古文：北接北崖，石屏中峙，与南壁夹而为门。
现代文：北面接着北面的山崖，岩石像屏风样矗立在中央，与南面的石壁相夹成石门。
English: The cliff to the north is followed by the cliff to the north, the rock stands like a screen in the center, and the stone wall to the south forms a stone gate.

古文：屏后则北山中空盘壑，极其宏峻，屏之左右，皆有小石梁以分达之。
现代文：石头屏风后面就是北山从高空盘绕而下的深壑，极其宏伟险峻，石头屏风的左右两侧，都有小石桥能够分别到达那里。
English: Behind the stone screen is the deep, extremely magnificent precipice where the North Mountain coils down from the sky. On both sides of the stone screen, there are small stone bridges that can reach there separately.

古文：屏下水环石壑，盘旋如带。
现代文：石头屏风下方水流环绕着石壑，盘旋着有如带子。
English: Beneath the stone screen, the water flows around the stalagmite, circling it like a ribbon.

古文：此门下北壁之奇也。
现代文：这是石门下北面石壁间的奇观。
English: This is the wonder between the stone walls on the north side under the stone gate.

古文：北壁一屏，南界为门，北界为洞，洞门南临。
现代文：北面石壁上的一道石屏风，把南边分隔成门，北边分隔成洞，洞口面临南方。
English: A stone screen on the north-facing stone wall divides the south side into a door, the north side into a cave, and the cave entrance faces south.

古文：此屏中若树塞，遂东西亦分两门，南向。
现代文：此石屏居于中央好像照壁一样堵塞着，便又分为东西两道门，面向南。
English: This stone screen is located in the center as if blocking the wall, then it is divided into east and west doors, facing south.

古文：水自东门下溢穴而出，漱屏根而入，则循屏东而架为东桥，而东门临之；又溢穴出西门下，循屏西而架为西桥，而西门临之。
现代文：有水自东门下的洞穴中溢出来，冲刷着石屏风的根部流进去，便沿着石屏东边架桥，这是东桥，而东门下临此桥；西门下又有水自洞穴中溢出，顺着石屏西边架了桥，那是西桥，而西门下临此桥。
English: Water overflowed from the cave under the east gate, washed the roots of the stone screen and flowed in, and then a bridge was built along the east side of the stone screen. This is the east bridge, and the east gate is next to this bridge. Water also overflowed from the cave under the west gate, and a bridge was built along the west side of the stone screen. That is the west bridge, and the west gate is next to this bridge.

古文：此又洞内之 双明 也。
现代文：这些又是洞内的 双明 了。
English: These are the Twin Lighthouses inside the cave.

古文：先从西门度桥入，洞顶高十余丈，四旁平覆如幄；而当门独旋顶一规，圆盘而起，俨若宝盖中穹；其下有石台，中高而承之；上有两圆洼，大如铜鼓，以石击之，分清浊声，土人诧为一钟一鼓云。
现代文：首先从西门过桥走进去，洞顶高十多丈，四周平滑地覆盖下来如同帷慢；而当门之处只有一个旋绕状的圆顶，圆圆地盘绕着凸起，俨然若珍宝装饰着的伞盖一样中空弯隆；它下方有个石台，在中央高高地托着它；台上有两处圆形的洼坑，大处如铜鼓，用石块敲击它们，声音分为一清一浊，当地人诧异地认为是一口钟一个鼓。
English: First of all, walk in from the west gate over the bridge. The top of the cave is more than ten meters high, and it is smoothly covered all around like a curtain. But at the door, there is only one winding dome, roundly coiled with a bulge, and it is as hollow and curved as an umbrella cover decorated with precious stones. There is a stone platform below it, holding it high in the center. There are two round depressions on the platform, large areas like copper drums, and they are struck with stones. The sound is divided into a clear and a hoarse, and the locals are surprised to think that it is a bell and a drum.

古文：洞西北盘亘，亦多垂柱裂隙，俱回环不深。
现代文：洞向西北方弯弯曲曲地延伸进去，也有许多下垂的石柱和裂缝，全都弯弯绕绕，不深。
English: The cave extends crookedly to the northwest, and there are also many sagging stone pillars and cracks, all crooked and not deep.

古文：东南裂隙下，高迥高远亦如西门，而掩映弥深，水流其前，潆洄回环缠绕作态，崆峒这里泛指山清冷，各极其趣。
现代文：东南面的裂缝卞，高远也如西门一样，可相互掩映更加幽深，流水流过它的前边，流转回旋娇美作态，山洞空阔泉水清凉，各自极尽情趣。
English: The south-eastern side of the fissure, high and far, like the west gate, can cover each other more deeply. Flowing water flows across its front, flowing and swirling in a delicate manner. The cave is empty, the spring water is cool, and each of them is extremely interesting.

古文：遂逾东桥，仍出西门下，由其前南向而上，直跻崖根，复有洞东向，高阔俱三丈，而深十丈。
现代文：于是越过东桥，仍旧出来到西门下，由它前边向南上爬，一直登上山崖脚下，又有个洞面向东方，高宽都有三丈，而深处有十丈。
English: So he crossed the East Bridge, still came out under the West Gate, climbed southward from the front of it, and climbed all the way to the foot of the cliff. There was another hole facing the east, with a height and width of three meters and a depth of ten meters.

古文：洞后北转，遂上穹而黑，然不甚深矣。
现代文：进洞后往北转，于是顶上隆起，又很黑，然而不太深。
English: After entering the cave, turn north, so the top rises, it is very dark, but not too deep.

古文：洞中干朗，有僧栖之，而中置金仙像。
现代文：洞中干燥明亮，有僧人住在这里，而中央供着如来佛像。
English: The cave is dry and bright, with monks living here and a Buddha statue in the centre.

古文：乃叩僧索笔携炬，同下穷西门大士后小穴，并录壁间诗。
现代文：于是拜见和尚，要了纸笔带上火把，一同下去穷究西门观音菩萨后边的小洞，并抄录了石壁上的题诗。
English: So he visited the monk, asked for a pen and paper, took a torch with him, and together they went down to investigate the small cave behind the West Gate of Guanyin Bodhisattva, and copied the poem on the stone wall.

古文：返寓已暮。
现代文：返回寓所时天已经黑了。
English: It was dark by the time we got back to the apartment.

古文：二十三日雇短夫遵大道南行。
现代文：二十三日雇了个短途挑夫后顺着大道往南行。
English: On the 23rd, I hired a short-distance driver and drove south along the avenue.

古文：二里，从陇头东望双明西岩，其下犹透明而东也。
现代文：二里路，从陇头向东望双明洞的西岩，其下仍然向东透着亮光。
English: Erli Road, looking eastward from Shantou to the west rock of Shuangming Cave, there is still light shining eastward under it.

古文：洞中水西出流壑中，从大道下复入山麓，再透再入，凡三穿岩腹，而后注于大溪。
现代文：洞中的水向西淌出流到壑谷之中，从大道下方再向西流人山麓，两次渗出两次流入，总共三次穿流过石山腹，然后注入大溪中。
English: The water in the cave flowed westward to the middle of the valley, and then flowed westward from the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot.

古文：盖是中洼壑，皆四面山环，水必透穴也。
现代文：大概是这里中间下洼成壑谷，四面都是山环绕，水流必得透过洞穴才能外泄。
English: There is probably a depression in the middle of the valley, surrounded by mountains on all sides, and the water must flow through the cave before it can leak out.

古文：又南逾阜，四升降，共四里，有堡在南山岭头。
现代文：又向南越过山阜，四次上登四次下降，共走四里，有土堡在南山岭头。
English: They also went south across the mountains, climbing four times and descending four times, walking a total of four miles. There is an earthen fort at the head of the Nanshan Ridge.

古文：路从北岭转而西下，又二里，有草坊当路，路左有茅铺一家。
现代文：路从北岭转向西下走，又行二里，有座茅草牌坊位于路中，路左边有一家茅草店铺。
English: The road turned westward from Beiling, and after another two miles, there was a thatched signboard in the middle of the road and a thatched shop on the left side of the road.

古文：又西下，升陟陇壑，共七里，得聚落定居一年以上的村落一坞，曰白水铺，已为中火铺矣。
现代文：又向西下走，登涉在土垄壑谷之间，共七里，遇到一个在山坞中的村落，叫白水铺，已经是中火铺了。
English: Walking westward again, I walked a total of seven miles between the earth ridge and the valley, and encountered a village in the docks, called Baishuibu, which was already a mid-fire village.

古文：又西二里，遥闻水声轰轰，从陇隙北望，忽有水自东北山腋泻崖而下，捣入重渊，但见其上横白阔数丈，翻空涌雪，而不见其下截，盖为对崖所隔也。
现代文：又往西行二里，远远听见水声轰轰隆隆响，从山垄的缺缝朝北望去，忽见有河水自东北山窝往山崖下倾泻，捣入重重－的深渊，只见它上半截横着白色的水流，宽有数丈，如涌雪翻空，却见不到它的下半截，因被对面的山崖挡住了。
English: Another two miles to the west, I heard the roar of the water in the distance. Looking north from the gap in the ridge, I suddenly saw a river pouring down from the northeastern mountain range to the cliff, crashing into the deep abyss. I only saw its upper half cut across the white water flow, wide with several heights, like snow pouring into the sky, but I could not see its lower half, because it was blocked by the opposite cliff.

古文：复逾阜下半里，遂临其下流，随之汤汤西去，还望东北悬流，恨不能一抵其下。担夫曰： 是为白水河。
现代文：再越过山阜下走半里，便面临瀑布的下游，顺着浩浩荡荡的水流向西走去，回头望东北方悬挂着的激流，我恨不得到它下面去看一看。挑夫说： 这是白水河。
English: After another half-mile walk under the mountain pines, I was facing the lower reaches of the waterfall. I walked west along the vast water flow. I looked back at the torrent hanging in the northeast, and I wished I could get under it to take a look. The porter said, "This is the White Water River."

古文：前有悬坠处，比此更深。 
现代文：前边有河水从高处悬空下坠的地方，比这里更深。 
English: Up ahead, where the river drops from a great height, it is deeper than here.

古文：余恨不一当其境，心犹慊慊遗憾。
现代文：我恨不能亲临其境一次，心里仍很遗憾。
English: I wish I could be there in person, but I still regret it.

古文：随流半里，有巨石桥架水上，是为白虹桥。
现代文：顺着水流走了半里，有座巨大的石桥架在永上，这是白虹桥。
English: After walking half a mile along the stream, there is a huge stone bridge in Yongxing, which is Baihong Bridge.

古文：其桥南北横跨，下辟三门，而水流甚阔，每数丈，辄从溪底翻崖喷雪，满溪皆如白鹭群飞， 白水 之名不诬矣。
现代文：此桥呈南北向横跨河上，下面开有三个桥洞，可水流十分宽阔，每个桥洞有几丈宽，流水时时从河底越过石崖溅起雪白的浪花，满河都似白色的鹭鸳成群飞翔， 白水 的名字不假啊。
English: This bridge spans the river in a north-south direction. There are three bridge holes below, but the water flow is very wide. Each bridge hole is several feet wide. The flowing water always splashes snow-white waves from the bottom of the river across the cliff. The whole river looks like white pelicans flying in groups. The name of the white water is not false.

古文：度桥北，又随溪西行半里，忽陇箐亏蔽，复闻声如雷，余意又奇景至矣。
现代文：过到桥北，又沿河水向西行半里，忽然山垄亏缺，探警蔽日，又听见如雷的水声，我料想又到了一处奇景。
English: After passing to the north of the bridge and traveling half a mile along the river to the west, suddenly there was a shortage of ridges, searchers covered the sun, and I heard the thunderous sound of water. I thought I had arrived at another wonderland.

古文：透陇隙南顾，则路左一溪悬捣，万练飞空，溪上石如莲叶下覆，中剜三门，水由叶上漫顶而下，如鲛绡万幅，横罩门外，直下者不可以丈数计，捣珠崩玉，飞沫反涌，如烟雾腾空，势甚雄厉，所谓 珠帘钩不卷，匹练挂遥峰 ，俱不足以拟其壮也。
现代文：透过山垄的缺缝回头南望，只见道路左边有一条河流悬空冲捣而下，如万条白色的丝绢飞舞在空中，河上的岩石如荷叶一样下覆，中部似刀刻的三个洞，水流从荷叶上漫过顶部泄下，如千万匹薄纱，横罩在洞外，一直下泻的距离不能用丈来计算，似冲捣珍珠，如玉屑崩溅，水沫飞溅，波涛回涌，如烟雾腾空，气势极其雄壮迅猛，所谓 珠帘钩不卷，匹练挂遥峰 的诗句，都不足以用来比拟它的壮观。
English: Looking back to the south through the gap in the mountain ridge, I saw a river on the left side of the road rushing down in the air, like thousands of white silk cocoons flying in the air. The rocks on the river were covered like lotus leaves. The three holes in the middle were like knives. The water flowed over the top of the lotus leaves and leaked, like thousands of gauze, covering the outside of the hole. The distance of the downpour could not be calculated by length. It was like rushing pearls, like jade chips, splashing water droplets, waves surging back, like smoke rising into the air. The momentum was extremely strong and

古文：盖余所见瀑布，高峻数倍者有之，而从无此阔而大者，但从其上侧身下瞰，不免神悚。
现代文：大体上我所见过的瀑布，比它高峻几倍的有过，却从没见过这样又宽又大的，仅从瀑布上方侧身向下俯瞰，就不免神魄惊然。
English: In general, I have seen waterfalls that are several times higher and steeper than this one, but I have never seen one that is so wide and large. Just looking down from the top of the waterfall sideways, I was stunned.

古文：而担夫曰： 前有望水亭，可憩也。 瞻其亭，犹在对崖之上，遂从其侧西南下，复度峡南上，共一里余，跻西崖之巅。
现代文：而挑夫说： 前面有个望水亭，可以休息  远望那亭子，还在对面山崖上，便从曝布侧边往西南下走，再越过峡底往南上山，共走一里多，登上西面山崖的顶端。
English: But the porter said, "There is a pavilion in front of us, where you can rest. Look far and wide for that pavilion. While it is still on the opposite cliff, walk southwest from the exposed side of the cloth, then cross the bottom of the gorge and walk south up the mountain. In total, walk more than a mile and climb to the top of the western cliff.

古文：其亭乃覆茅所为，盖昔望水亭旧址，今以按君道经，恐其停眺，故编茅为之耳。
现代文：这亭子是茅草盖成的，大概是从前望水亭的旧址，现在因为巡按大人要路过，恐怕他要停下来眺览，所以用茅草搭成亭子。
English: This pavilion is covered with thatch, probably from the former site of the former watchtower. Now, because the patrolling adults want to pass by, I'm afraid he will stop to look around, so I built a pavilion with thatch.

古文：其处正面揖拱手致礼书飞流，奔腾喷薄之状，令人可望而不可即也。
现代文：此处正可面对着飞流致礼，奔腾喷薄的样子，令人可望而不可即。
English: At this point, it is possible to salute in the face of the flying current, and the appearance of the rushing spray is promising.

古文：停憩久之，从亭南西转，涧乃环山转峡东南去，路乃循崖石级西南下。
现代文：停留休息了很久，从亭子南向西转、山涧绕山转峡往东南方流去，路则沿着山崖上的石阶往西南下山。
English: We stopped and rested for a long time. From the pavilion, we turned south to west, and the stream flowed around the mountain to the southeast, and the road went down the mountain along the stone steps on the cliff to the southwest.

古文：又升陟陇壑四里，西上入坞，有聚落一区在东山下，曰鸡公背。
现代文：又跋涉在山垄壑谷间四里，向西上坡走入一个山坞，有一片村落在东山下，叫鸡公背。
English: He also trekked four miles between mountain ridges and valleys, walked uphill to the west into a dock, and there was a village at the foot of the east mountain, called Jigongbei.

古文：土人指其东南峰上，有洞西北向，外门如竖而内可容众，有 鸡公 焉，以形似名也。
现代文：当地人指点在村东南的山峰上，有个朝向西北的山洞，外边的洞口如一道竖缝，而洞内可以容纳许多人，其中有 鸡公 ，因为形状相似起的名。
English: Locals pointed out that on the peak in the southeast of the village, there is a cave facing the northwest. The outer opening of the cave is like a vertical slit, and the cave can accommodate many people, including Chicken, because of the similar shape of the name.

古文：其洞东透前山，而此坞在其后，故曰 背 。余闻之，乃贾勇先登，冀一入其内。
现代文：此洞往东通到前山，而这个山坞在洞后，所以叫 背气我听说这话，便鼓足勇气率先登山，希望进洞去一次。
English: This cave leads to the east to the front of the mountain, and this dock is behind the cave, so I was angry. When I heard this, I mustered the courage to take the lead in climbing, hoping to go into the cave once.

古文：比登，只有一道西南上，随之迤逦攀跻，竟无旁岐。
现代文：登山只有西南面一条路，顺着这条路曲曲折折地攀登，两旁竟然没有岔道。
English: There is only one road in the south-west for mountaineering, and climbing along this road is tortuous, with no off-ramps on either side.

古文：已一里，登岭头矣，是为鸡公岭。
现代文：走了一里，便登上岭头，这就是鸡公岭。
English: After walking for a mile, they reached the top of the ridge, which is the Jiko Ridge.

古文：坳中有佛宇。
现代文：山坳中有佛寺。
English: There are Buddhist temples in the foothills.

古文：问洞何在？
现代文：询间洞在哪里？
English: Where is the inquiry hole?

古文：僧指在山下村南，已越之而上矣。
现代文：僧人指点在山下村子的南边，我们已经超过山洞走上来了。
English: The monk points to the south of the village below the mountain, and we have already climbed up past the cave.

古文：担夫亦至，遂逾岭西向下，半里，抵壑中。
现代文：挑夫也来到了，子是越过山岭向西下山，半里，到了壑谷中。
English: The porter also came, and the son went over the mountains to the west down the mountain, half a mile, to the middle of the valley.

古文：又半里，有堡在南陇，曰太华哨。
现代文：又走半里，有堡在南边的山垄上，叫太华哨。
English: Half a mile further on, there is a castle on the ridge to the south, called Taihua Sentinel.

古文：又四上岭，逾而西，又一里，乃迤逦西南下，甚深。
现代文：又向西上岭，越岭往西走，又是一里，便弯弯曲曲地向西南下山，山谷很深。
English: I walked westward up the ridge and westward across the ridge for another mile, and then I bent and curved my way down the mountain to the southwest. The valley was very deep.

古文：始望见西界遥峰，自北而南，屏立如障，与此东界为夹，互相颉颃，彼此抗衡；中有溪流，亦自北而南，下嵌壑底。
现代文：这才望见西面远处的一列山峰，自北往南，如屏障一样矗立着，与这边东面一列山相夹而立，互相抗衡；其中有溪流，也是自北往南流，镶嵌下边在壑谷底。
English: It was then that I saw a distant line of mountains to the west, stretching from north to south, standing like a barrier, competing with a line of mountains to the east; among them was a stream, also flowing from north to south, at the bottom of the valley.

古文：望之而下，一下三里，从桥西度，是为关岭桥。
现代文：遥望澳流下山，一下就是三里，从桥上过到西边，这就是关岭桥。
English: Looking down the mountain from the distant Wangao stream, it is three miles at once. Passing from the bridge to the west, this is the Guanling Bridge.

古文：越桥，即西向拾级上，其上甚峻。
现代文：过了桥，马上向西沿石阶上登，石阶非常陡峻。
English: After crossing the bridge, immediately head west up the stone steps, which are very steep.

古文：二里，有观音阁当道左，阁下甃石池一方，泉自其西透穴而出，平流池中，溢而东下，是为马跑泉，乃关索之遗迹也。
现代文：二里，有观音阁位于路左，阁下边用石块砌成一个方形池塘，泉水自池塘西头透过小孔流出，平缓地流于池中，溢出水池往东流下去，这是马跑泉，是关索的遗迹。
English: Two miles away, there is a Guanyin Pavilion on the left side of the road. On your right side, a square pond has been built with stones. The spring water flows from the west end of the pond through a small hole, flows smoothly in the pond, and the overflow pond flows eastward. This is Ma Lanquan Spring, a relic of Guanso.

古文：阁南道右，亦有泉出穴中，是为哑泉，人不得而尝焉。
现代文：阁南边路右侧，也有泉水从小孔中流出，这是哑泉，人不能喝这水。
English: On the right side of the road on the south side of the pavilion, there is also spring water flowing out of a small hole. This is a dumb spring, and people cannot drink this water.

古文：余勺马跑，甘冽次于惠，而高山得此，故自奇也，但与哑泉相去不数步，何良之异如此！
现代文：我舀了马跑泉水喝，甘甜清凉的滋味比惠泉差一点，然而高山上能有这泉水，本来就是奇事了，但是与哑泉相距不到几步远，为何好坏相差如此之大！
English: I sipped the Ma Rong spring water, and the sweet and cool taste was a little worse than the Hui spring. However, it was a miracle to have this spring water on the mountain, but it was only a few steps away from the dumb spring. Why was there such a big difference between good and bad?

古文：由阁南越一亭，又西上者二里，遂耻岭脊，是为关索岭。
现代文：由观音阁往南走过一个亭子，又往西上山二里，随即登上岭脊，这就是关索岭。
English: From the Guanyin Pavilion, walk south past a pavilion and west up the mountain for two miles, then ascend the ridge, which is Guanso Ridge.

古文：索为关公子，随蜀丞相诸葛南征，开辟蛮道至此。
现代文：关索是关公的儿子，跟随蜀国承相诸葛亮南征，开辟蛮区的道路来到此地。
English: Guanso is the son of Guan Gong, who followed Shu's successor Zhuge Liang to the south and opened up the road to the wilderness to come here.

古文：有庙，肇自国初，而大于王靖远，至今祀典不废。
现代文：建有神庙，始建于开国初期，而由王靖远扩建，至今祭祀之礼没有废除。
English: There is a temple, which was built in the early days of the founding of the country, and expanded by Wang Jingyuan, and the ritual has not been abolished.

古文：越岭西下一里，有大堡在平坞中，曰关岭铺，乃关岭守御所所在也。
现代文：越过山岭向西下行一里，有个大堡在平坦的山坞中，叫关岭铺，是关岭守御所的所在地。
English: After crossing the mountains and traveling one mile to the west, there is a large castle in a flat dock, called Guanlingpu, which is the location of the Guanling Imperial Palace.

古文：计其地犹在山顶，虽下，未及三之一也。
现代文：估计此地还在山顶，虽然地势低下，但到山脚还不到三分之一呢。
English: It is estimated that this place is still at the top of the mountain. Although the terrain is low, it is less than a third of the way to the foot of the mountain.

古文：至才过午，夫辞去，余憩肆中。
现代文：到关岭铺才过中午，挑夫告辞走了，我在旅店歇息。
English: It was just after noon when I arrived at the Guanling shop. The porter had left, and I was resting at the hotel.

古文：二十四日晨起，以乏夫为虑。
现代文：二十四日清晨起床，为没有挑夫忧虑。
English: On the morning of the 24th, I got up, worried that I hadn't provoked my husband.

古文：忽有陀骑马帮至，尚余其一，遂倩之，议至交水。
现代文：忽然间有马帮来到，还空余着一匹马，便请代驮行李，议妥到交水。
English: All of a sudden, a group of horses arrived, and there was one horse left over, so they asked me to carry their luggage, and we came to an agreement to hand over the water.

古文：以筐囊装马上，令之先行，余饭而后往。
现代文：用筐子把行李装在马上，让马帮先走，我吃了饭才动身。
English: I put my luggage in a basket on the horse, let the horse go first, and only left after I had eaten.

古文：西南七里，上北斗岭。
现代文：往西南行七里，登上北斗岭。
English: Go southwest for seven miles and climb the Beidou Ridge.

古文：一里，西逾其脊，有亭跨其上。
现代文：一里，向西越过北斗岭岭脊，有个亭子跨在岭脊上。
English: One mile west across the ridge of the Beidou Ridge, there is a pavilion straddling the ridge.

古文：自关岭为镇中、永宁分界，而安庄卫之屯，直抵盘江，皆犬牙相错，非截然各判者。
现代文：往西望去，崇山环列，葱翠青绿，又自北边似屏风样排列向南，与东面一列山互相抗衡，形成峡谷，峡谷中也有小河向南流去。从岭上往西下行二里，到达两山相夹的山坞中，有村落紧靠着山麓，这是北斗铺。
English: Looking to the west, the lofty mountains are ringed, verdant and green, and from the north they are arranged like a screen to the south, competing with a row of mountains to the east, forming a canyon. In the canyon, there is also a small river flowing south. From the ridge, it is two miles down to the west to reach the dock between the two mountains. There is a village close to the foot of the mountain, which is Beidoupu.

古文：又西上峰峡中三里，崖木渐合，曰安笼辅，又永宁属。按志有安笼箐山、安笼箐关，想即此。
现代文：由铺西横截山坞而过有二里路，于是向西沿台阶上登。弯弯曲曲走在峰头，五里，越过一个山坳，向东眺望关岭，已在脚底。有座牌坊横跨在道上，题为 安普封疆 ，这便是安庄哨。又向西登上峰头的峡谷中走三里，山崖林木渐渐合扰，叫安笼铺，根据志书，有安笼著山、安笼著关，想来就是此地。
English: There is a two-mile road across the mountain dock from the west of the shop, so I climbed up the steps to the west. I walked along the top of the peak, five miles, crossed a ridge, looked eastward at Guanling, and was at the bottom of my feet. There is a signboard across the road, entitled Anpu Fenjiang, which is Anzhuang Sentinel. I walked three miles westward into the canyon at the top of the peak, and the mountain cliffs and trees gradually interfered, called Ancheng. According to the book, there is Ancheng mountain, Ancheng, and I want to come here.

古文：问所谓安笼守御所，土人云： 在安南东南三日程。 
现代文：打听所谓的安笼守御所，当地人说： 在安南卫东南，有三天的路程。 
English: When inquiring about the so-called An Nuan Shou Imperial Palace, the local people said: "It is in the southeast of Annanwei, three days away.

古文：此属普州，又非此矣。
现代文：此地属普安州，又不是这里了。
English: This is Pu'an County, not here.

古文：按此地在昔为安氏西南尽境，故今犹有安庄、安笼、安顺、安南诸名。
现代文：据考察，此地在昔日是安氏的西南边境，所以今天仍有安庄、安笼、安顺、安南各种地名。
English: According to the investigation, this place used to be the southwest border of An, so today there are still various place names such as Anzhuang, Ancun, Anshun and Annan.

古文：盖安氏之地，昔以盘江为西堑，而今以三汊为界，三汊以南，盘江以东，为中国旧卫者仅此耳。
现代文：大概安氏的地盘，往昔以盘江作为西面的天堑，而今日以三汉河为界，三汉河以南，盘江以东，是朝廷以军队奋力保卫的唯一的地方了。
English: Probably An's territory, in the past with the Pan River as the western skyline, and today with the Sanhan River as the boundary, south of the Sanhan River, east of the Pan River, is the only place that the imperial court defends with the army.

古文：由铺西更南上一里，逾岭稍下，有坞中洼。
现代文：由铺西再往南上行一里，越过岭头微微下走，有个山坞中央下洼。
English: From the west to the south, go up one mile, go slightly down over the ridge, and there is a depression in the middle of the dock.

古文：又西半里，则重峰夹坑，下坠北去。
现代文：又往西半里，就有两重山峰夹住一个坑谷，向北下坠而去。
English: Another half-mile to the west, there are two mountain peaks sandwiching a valley, plunging northward.

古文：盘岭侧，西度坑坳半里，复拾级上二里，有庵跨道，是为象鼻岭。
现代文：绕过岭侧，往西越过坑谷中的山坳走半里，再沿台阶上行二里，有座寺庵跨在道中，这是象鼻岭。
English: Go around the side of the ridge, walk half a mile west across the ridge in the valley, and then walk two miles up the steps. There is a temple and hermitage straddling the road. This is Elephant Trunk Ridge.

古文：由其西度脊，甚狭，南北俱削壁，下而成坑，其上仅阔五六尺，如度堵墙壁。
现代文：由它西面越过岭脊，十分狭窄，南北两面都是陡削的石壁，下垂形成深坑，脊上仅宽五六尺，如走过墙头。
English: From the west, it crosses the ridge, which is very narrow. Both the north and south sides are steep-cut stone walls, sagging to form a deep pit. The ridge is only five or six feet wide, as if walking over a wall.

古文：乃望之西北下，共二里半，而税驾逆旅赵店。
现代文：又宛宛转转向北上登，再次路过一道山脊，共走二里，登上岭头，就是这一带最高之处了。
English: After another turn to the north, we passed a ridge again and walked a total of two miles to the top of the ridge, which is the highest point in this area.

古文：江西人。时驼骑犹放牧中途，余小酌肆中，入观于城，而返憩肆间。
现代文：往东下瞰关岭，向西俯视盘江以西，两境之山全似屏风排列在下方，如一个 川 字分成行簇拥着北岭，岭西又有山坞回绕成坪坝，坝中建了座城池，这是查城，就是所谓的鼎站了。
English: Looking down Guanling to the east, looking down Panjiang to the west, the mountains of the two frontiers are arranged below like a screen. Like a river, the word divided into lines, they cluster around the North Ridge. On the west side of the ridge, there are docks circling around Chengping Dam. In the middle of the dam, there is a city pond. This is Chacheng, the so-called Ding Station.

古文：其地为盘江以东老龙第一枝南分之脊，第二枝为关岭，第三枝为鸡公背。
现代文：于是望着查城向西北下山，共走二里半，便住宿在赵姓客店中。此时马帮还在中途放牧，我在店中小饮，进城中去观览，而后返回客店中休息。此地是盘江以东主峰的第一条支脉向南分出的山脊，第二条支脉是关岭，第三条支脉是鸡公背。
English: So I looked at Chacheng and went down the mountain to the northwest, walking a total of two and a half miles, and stayed at the Zhao surname inn. At this time, the horse gang was still grazing halfway, I had a small drink at the inn, went to the city to watch, and then returned to the inn to rest. This place is the ridge of the first branch of the main peak east of Panjiang to the south, the second branch is Guanling, and the third branch is Rooster's Back.

古文：三枝南下，形如 川 字，而西枝最高，然其去俱不甚长，不过各尽于都泥江以北。
现代文：三条支脉往南下延，形状如同一个，  字，而西边一条最高，然而它们延伸的距离都不太长，各自都只不过在都泥江以北就到头了。
English: Three branches stretch southward, shaped like a crane, while the one on the west is the highest. However, the distance they extend is not very long, and each of them ends just north of the Dudong River.

古文：西北为沙营长官司，沙姓。时沙土官初故，其妻即郎岱土酋之妹，郎岱率众攻之，人民俱奔走于鼎站。沙营东北为狼代土酋，东北与水西接界，与安孽表里为乱，攻掠邻境；上官惟加衔饵，不敢一问也。
现代文：那隔在都泥江以北而走向多灵山的山脉，又从新添卫东南境，分出支脉下延到都匀府南部，环绕过独山州北面后向西延，又往东南经过鸡公关向下延伸。此地东南是慕役长官司，东北是顶营长官司，西北是沙营长官司。沙营东北是狼代头领的辖地，东北方与水西接壤，与安贼里应外合作乱，进攻抢劫邻近区域；上面的官僚只会用升官来引诱他，不敢查问一下。
English: It stretches from the mountains north of the Duoling River to the Doling Mountains, and from the southeast border of Xinzhangwei, the branch extends down to the south of Duyunfu, around the north of Duoshan Prefecture and then westward, and extends down to the southeast through Jipingguan. The southeast of this place is the Muyuan Chief Official, the northeast is the top battalion chief official, and the northwest is the sand camp chief official. The northeast of the sand camp is the jurisdiction of the wolf leader, the northeast is bordered by the west of the water, and it is in external cooperation with the Ankuri, attacking and robbing the neighboring area; the

古文：按是岭最高，西为查城，东为安笼箐，皆绝顶回环而成坞者，在众山之上也。
现代文：据考察，此岭最高，西边是查城，东边是安笼著，都是高山绝顶上环绕成山坞的地方，位于群山之上。
English: According to the investigation, this ridge is the highest, with Chacheng on the west side and Ancai on the east side. Both are places surrounded by docks at the very top of the mountain, located on top of the mountains.

古文：《一统志》永宁之安笼箐关，正指此。
现代文：《一统志》上永宁州的安笼著关，正是指此地。
English: It is this place that is referred to as "Yongningzhou's safe haven" in "Isshongzhi."

古文：普安之安笼千户所，在安南东南三日程者，即与广西之安隆长官司接界，乃田州白隘所由之道。
现代文：普安州的安笼千户所，在安南卫东南方要走三天路程的地方，就是与广西省的安隆长官司交界，是去田州白隘经由的通道。
English: The Ancheng thousand households in Pu'an Prefecture, which is a three-day journey to the southeast of Annan, is the border with Anlong, Guangxi Province, and is the passage to Tianzhou Baiyao.

古文：在普安安笼千户所，当作安隆，与广西同称，不当作安笼，与永宁相溷也。
现代文：在普安州的安笼千户所，应当作安隆，与广西的安隆名称相同，不应当作 安笼 ，与永宁州的 安笼 互相混淆。
English: An Lone Thousand Households in Pu'an should be called Anlong, which is the same name as Anlong in Guangxi, and should not be confused with An Nian in Yongning.

古文：鼎站之峡，从东北向西南，其东南即大山之脊，而查城倚其西北，亦开一峡而去，乃沙营土司道也。
现代文：鼎站的山峡，从东北延向西南，它的东南方就是大山的山脊，而查城紧靠着大山的西北麓，也裂开一条峡谷延伸而去，是通往沙营土司的道路。
English: The mountain gorge of Ding Station stretches from the northeast to the southwest, and the southeast of it is the ridge of Dashan. And Chacheng, which is close to the northwest foot of Dashan, also splits a canyon and extends. It is the road leading to Shaying Tusi.

古文：其泉源亦自东北脊下，穿站街而西，南坠峡底，西南峡脊亦环接无隙，遂从其底穿山腹西去，当西注盘江者矣。
现代文：这里的水源也是从东北的山脊上流下去，穿流过鼎站的街道而后往西去，向南坠入峡底，西南方峡谷侧边的山脊也是连环相接没有缺口，水便从峡底穿流过山腹往西流去，应该是往西注入盘江中去了。
English: The water source here also flows down from the northeast ridge, flows through the streets of Ding Station and then goes west, falling south to the bottom of the canyon. The ridges on the side of the southwest canyon are also contiguous without gaps, and the water flows from the bottom of the canyon through the mountainside to the west, and should be injected into the Panjiang River to the west.

