古文：夫棋边不如角，角不如腹。
现代文：说到围棋，占边不如占角，挂角不如拥有腹地。
English: When it comes to Go, it is better to occupy a corner than a side, and it is better to have a hinterland than a corner.

古文：约轻于捺，捺轻于避。
现代文：遮拦不如抑制，抑制不如紧压。
English: Concealment is not as good as suppression, suppression is not as good as pressure.

古文：夹有虚实，打有情伪。
现代文：夹有虚实，打有真假。
English: There is the false and the true, and there is the true and the false.

古文：逢绰多约，遇拶多粘。
现代文：遇到对手侵占我方棋路则加以遮拦阻挡，遇到对手压迫我方虚眼则粘上一子。
English: When an opponent encroaches on our chess path, we will block it, and when an opponent oppresses us, we will stick to one eye.

古文：大眼可赢小眼，斜行不如正行。
现代文：大眼可胜过小眼，斜行比不上正行。
English: The big eye can be better than the small eye, and the oblique line is not as good as the straight line.

古文：两关对直则先觑，前途有碍则勿征。
现代文：两关正对则先察看情形，前面的路上有障碍就不要征子。
English: If the two gates are facing each other, check the situation first. If there is an obstacle on the road ahead, do not collect the child.

古文：施行未成，不可先动。
现代文：如果还未实行，万不可先动。
English: If it has not yet been implemented, it must not be done first.

古文：角盘曲四，局终乃亡。
现代文：曲四位于角端，到棋局结束才会失去。
English: The fourth piece is at the end of the corner and is not lost until the end of the game.

古文：直四扳六，皆是活棋，花聚透点，多无生路。
现代文：直四、板六，都是活棋。花聚透点，大多没有生路。
English: The straight four and the board six are all live games. The flowers are concentrated to a certain point, and most of them have no way out.

古文：十字不可先纽，势子在心，勿打角图。
现代文：四角的十字，不能先纽。势子位于中心，不要在角上多打主意。
English: The cross in the four corners should not be fastened first. The yoke should be in the center, and should not be fastened at the corners.

古文：弈不欲数，数则怠，怠则不精。弈不欲疏，疏则忘，忘则多失。
现代文：下棋不应太频繁，频繁就不免倦怠，倦怠则棋艺不精；下棋也不应次数太少，太少就容易忘记，忘记则失误较多。
English: One should not play chess too often. If you play frequently, you will get tired. If you get tired, your chess is not good. You should not play too few times. If you play too few times, you will forget easily. If you forget often, you will make more mistakes.

古文：胜不言，败不语。振廉让之风者，君子也；起忿怒之色者，小人也。
现代文：胜了不多话，败了不唠叨，发扬清廉、礼让之风的，才是君子；因输棋而怒形于色的，不过是小人。
English: He is a gentleman who does not talk much when he wins, does not nag when he loses, and promotes a clean and courteous style; he is only a villain when he loses a game of chess.

古文：高者无亢，卑者无怯。
现代文：棋艺高的不要傲慢，棋艺低的不要怯懦。
English: Don't be arrogant if your chess skill is high, and don't be cowardly if your chess skill is low.

古文：气和而韵舒者，喜其将胜也。心动而色变者，忧其将败也。
现代文：气韵温和而舒展，这是为即将取胜而高兴；心跳加速而脸上的表情发生变化，这是为即将失败而忧虑。
English: The breath is mild and stretched, which is the joy of imminent victory; the heartbeat accelerates and the facial expression changes, which is the worry of imminent failure.

古文：赧莫赧于易，耻莫耻于盗。妙莫妙于用松，昏莫昏于复劫。
现代文：最令人惭愧的事莫过于悔子，最令人耻辱的事莫过于偷子，最为美妙的棋莫过于宽纵不逼，最为糊涂的棋莫过于反复打劫。
English: The most shameful thing is nothing more than regret, the most shameful thing is nothing more than stealing, the most wonderful chess is nothing more than broad-mindedness, and the most confused chess is nothing more than repeated robbery.

古文：凡棋直行三则改，方聚四则非。
现代文：凡是下棋，直行三着就要改变，正方小块达到四子便是错误。
English: In any game of chess, a straight line with three ends must be changed, and it is a mistake for a square piece to reach four.

古文：胜而路多，名曰赢局；败而无路，名曰输筹。
现代文：胜而路多名为赢局，败而无路名为输筹。
English: The winning way is called winning, and the losing way is called losing.

古文：皆筹为溢，停路为芇。
现代文：全是筹嫌多余，停路则属于和棋。
English: All of this is superfluous, and the shutdown is a game of chess.

古文：打筹不得过三，淘子不限其数。
现代文：打筹不得超过三次，淘子不应限其数目。
English: There shall be no more than three rounds of fundraising, and the number of Taozi shall not be limited.

古文：劫有金井、辘轳，有无休之势，有交递之图。弈棋者不可不知也。
现代文：劫的名目颇多，有所谓金井辘轳，有所谓无休之势，有所谓交递之图，下棋的人不可不知。
English: There are quite a lot of names of Ka, there is the so-called Kanai, there is the so-called non-stop momentum, there is the so-called delivery chart, people who play chess must know.

古文：凡棋有敌手，有半先，有先两，有桃花五，有北斗七。
现代文：棋的名目也很多，有所谓敌手，有所谓半先，有所谓先两，有所谓桃花五，有所谓北斗七。
English: There are also many names for the game of chess. There is the so-called opponent, the so-called half-ahead, the so-called first two, the so-called peach blossom five, and the so-called Big Dipper seven.

古文：夫棋者有无之相生，远近之相成，强弱之相形，利害之相倾，不可不察也。
现代文：说到下棋，有与无相互赖以生存，远与近相互补充促进，强与弱相互映衬烘托，利与害相互倾斜移动，下棋的人不可不察。
English: When it comes to playing chess, those who play chess must be aware that those who have and those who have not depend on each other for survival, those who are far and those who are near complement and promote each other, those who are strong and those who are weak contrast and support each other, and those who are advantageous and harmful are inclined to move against each other.

古文：是以安而不泰，存而不骄。
现代文：因此棋局安稳但并不大意，取得优势但并不骄傲。
English: Therefore, the chess game is stable but not careless, and it is advantageous but not proud.

古文：安而泰则危，存而骄则亡。
现代文：棋局安稳而大意就会也现危险，取得优势而骄傲就会导致输棋。
English: When the chessboard is stable, there will be danger, and pride will lead to losing when gaining an advantage.

古文：《易》曰﹕ 君子安而不忘危，存而不忘亡。 
现代文：《易·系辞下》说： 君子在太平或安定时不忘危难，在生存时不忘灭亡的危险。 
English: "Yi·Keizhong" said: A gentleman does not forget the peril when it is peaceful or stable, and does not forget the danger of death when he is alive.

