古文：太宗上太宗孝武惠文皇帝，讳德光，字德谨，小字尧骨，太祖第二子。
现代文：太宗孝武惠文皇帝，名德光，字德谨，乳名尧骨。太祖第二个儿子，母亲是淳钦皇后萧氏。
English: Emperor Taizong Xiaowu Huiwen, his name was De Guang, his name was De Jing, and his nickname was Shibo. He was the second son of Emperor Taizong, and his mother was Empress Xiao of Junqin.

古文：母淳钦皇后萧氏，唐天复二年生，神光异常，猎者获白鹿、白鹰，人以为瑞。
现代文：唐天复二年生，出生时神光异常，与此同时猎人打到了白鹿、白鹰，人们都认为这是吉兆。
English: Tang Tianfu, a second-year student, was born with an abnormal light. At the same time, a hunter shot a white deer and a white eagle, which was considered to be a good omen.

古文：及长，貌严重而性宽仁，军国之务，多所取决。
现代文：待到成年，相貌端庄厚重、秉性宽厚仁慈，军国大事多由他来裁决。
English: When he became an adult, his appearance was dignified and dignified, and his disposition was generous and benevolent. He mostly adjudicated military affairs.

古文：天赞元年，授天下兵马大元帅，寻诏统六军南徇地。
现代文：天赞元年，被授为天下兵马大元帅，不久诏令统帅六军往南攻城略地。
English: In the auspicious first year of the year, he was awarded the title of grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and soon he ordered the commander of the six armies to attack the south of the city.

古文：明年，下平州，获赵思温、张崇。
现代文：次年，攻下平州，俘虏赵思温、张崇。
English: The following year, Pingzhou was captured, and Zhao Siwen and Zhang Chong were taken prisoner.

古文：回破箭笴山胡逊奚，诸部悉降。
现代文：回军攻破箭舘山胡逊奚，诸部均降顺。
English: The Hui army broke through the Hu Xun's siege of Jialing Mountain, and all the troops were forced to surrender.

古文：复以兵掠镇、定，所至皆坚壁不敢战。
现代文：又率军掠地于镇州、定州一带，兵锋所向，敌人均坚守壁垒不敢出战。
English: He also led the army to seize land in the areas of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou, and the enemy did not dare to go to war because of the strong front.

古文：师次幽州，符存审拒于州南，纵兵邀击，大破之，擒裨将裴信等数十人。
现代文：驻军于幽州，符存审拒战于州南，太宗纵兵拦击，大败符军，擒获其裨将裴信等数十人。
English: The garrison was stationed in Yuzhou, the court of record refused to fight in the south of the state, the Taizong longitudinal army intercepted and defeated the army of the court, and dozens of people such as Pei Xin were captured.

古文：及从太祖破于厥里诸部，定河壖党项，下山西诸镇，取回鹘单于城，东平渤海，破达卢古部，东西万里，所向皆有功。
现代文：待到跟从太祖破于厥里诸部，平定河党项，攻下山西诸镇，夺取回鹘单于城，在东平定渤海，攻破达卢古部，东西万里驱驰，均立下赫赫战功。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather to break into various parts of Jüri, pacify the Dinghe region, capture towns in Shanxi, recapture Shantan in the city, pacify the Bohai Sea in the east, break through the ancient part of Dalu, and drive thousands of miles from east to west, all of which made great achievements in the war.

古文：天显元年七月，太祖崩，皇后摄军国事。
现代文：天显元年七月，太祖崩逝，皇后暂时摄理军国大事。
English: In July of the first year of Tian Xian, the great-grandfather passed away, and the empress temporarily took charge of military affairs.

古文：明年秋，治祖陵毕。
现代文：次年秋，修治祖陵完毕。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the construction of the ancestral mausoleum was completed.

古文：冬十一月壬戌，人皇王倍率群臣请于后曰： 皇子大元帅勋望，中外攸属，宜承大统。 
现代文：冬十一月十五日，人皇王耶律倍率领群臣请示皇后说： 皇子大元帅有功绩和声望，为国内外众望所归，应该继承皇位。 
English: On the 15th day of the 11th month of winter, the human emperor, King Yerut, led a group of courtiers to petition the empress, saying, "The prince grand marshal has achievements and reputation, is highly respected both at home and abroad, and should succeed to the imperial throne.

古文：后从之，是日即皇帝位。
现代文：皇后答应了他们的请求。同日太宗即皇帝位。
English: The empress agreed to their request, and on the same day, Taizong became emperor.

古文：癸亥，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十六日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 16th, he visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：丙寅，行柴册礼。
现代文：十九日，举行柴册礼。
English: On the 19th, a firecracker ceremony was held.

古文：戊辰，还都。
现代文：二十一日，回都城。
English: On the twenty-first day, I returned to the capital.

古文：壬申，御宣政殿，群臣上尊号曰嗣圣皇帝。
现代文：二十五日，驾临宣政殿，群臣奉上尊号为嗣圣皇帝。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, arriving at the Xuan Zheng Palace, the group of courtiers were given the honorific title of Heir Holy Emperor.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：有司请改元，不许。
现代文：有司请求改元，不许。
English: If a division requests a name change, it is not allowed.

古文：十二月庚辰，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为应天皇太后，立妃萧氏为皇后。
现代文：十二月初三，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为应天皇太后，立妃萧氏为皇后。
English: On the third day of the twelfth lunar month, the revered empress dowager became the great empress dowager, the empress dowager became the empress dowager, and the princess Xiao became the empress.

古文：礼毕，阅近侍班局。
现代文：行礼结束，察看近侍班局。
English: After the salute, inspect the aides de camp.

古文：辛巳，诸道将帅辞归镇。
现代文：初四，诸道将帅辞别新皇回镇。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the new emperor returned to the town.

古文：己丑，祀天地。
现代文：十二日，祭祀天地。
English: On the twelfth day, the sacrifice to heaven and earth began.

古文：庚寅，遣使谕诸国。
现代文：十三日，派使者晓谕各国。
English: On the thirteenth day, he sent messengers to all the nations.

古文：辛卯，阅群牧于近郊。戊戌，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十四日，在近郊检阅地方官员。二十一日，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the 14th, local officials were inspected in the suburbs. On the 21st, Nyoman sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬寅，谒太祖庙。
现代文：二十五日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 25th, he paid homage at the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：甲辰，阅旗鼓、客省诸局官属。
现代文：二十七日，检阅旗鼓、客省诸局官属。
English: On the 27th, officials from various bureaus in the guest provinces and regions came to inspect the flag and drum.

古文：丁未，诏选遥辇氏九帐子弟可任官者。
现代文：三十日，下诏挑选遥辇氏九帐子弟中能够胜任官职者。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued to select from among the nine sons and sons of the Haruka clan those who were capable of holding official positions.

古文：三年春正月己酉，阅北克兵籍。
现代文：三年春正月初二，查阅南克士兵名籍。
English: On the second day of the first month of the third year of spring, the names of Nank soldiers were checked.

古文：庚戌，阅南克兵籍。丁巳，阅皮室、拽剌、墨离三军。
现代文：初十，视察皮室、拽剌、墨离三军。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, inspect the leather room, dragging shackles, and leaving the three armies.

古文：己未，黄龙府罗涅河女直、达卢古来贡、庚午，以王郁为兴国军节度使，守中书令。
现代文：十二日，黄龙府罗涅河女真、达卢古前来进贡。二十三日，以王郁为兴国军节度使，守中书令。
English: On the 12th, the Rhone River maidens of Huanglong and Dalugu came to pay tribute. On the 23rd, Wang Yu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xingguo Army and kept the middle letter.

古文：二月，幸长泺。
现代文：二月，驾幸长泊。
English: In February, I had the pleasure of staying for a long time.

古文：己亥，惕隐涅里衮进白狼。
现代文：二十三日，惕隐涅里衮进献白狼。
English: On the twenty-third day, Ti Ying Nyeri entered the white wolf.

古文：辛丑，达卢古来贡。
现代文：二十五日，达卢古前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Dalugu came to pay tribute.

古文：三月乙卯，东蒐。
现代文：三月初九，东巡。
English: March 9th, Eastern Tour.

古文：癸亥，猎羖历山。
现代文：十七日，在礗山狩猎。十九日，在松山狩猎。
English: On the 17th, they went deer hunting in Shaoshan. On the 19th, they went deer hunting in Matsuyama.

古文：乙丑，猎松山。唐义武军节度使王都遣人以定州来归。
现代文：唐义武军节度使王都派人举定州前来降附。
English: The festival of the Tang volunteer army caused the king to send people to come and annex Dingzhou.

古文：唐主出师讨之，使来乞援，命奚秃里铁剌往救之。
现代文：唐主出兵讨伐王都，王派使者前来求援，命奚秃里铁剌前往援救。
English: The lord of Tang dispatched troops to fight the royal capital, the king sent an envoy to come for help, and the vultures came to the rescue.

古文：四月戊寅，东巡。
现代文：四月初三，东巡。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, the Eastern Tour began.

古文：己卯，祭麃鹿神。
现代文：初四，祭祀鹿神。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, the deer god is worshipped.

古文：丁亥，于猎所纵公私取羽毛革木之材。
现代文：十二日，允许官府私人在围猎场所取用羽毛、皮革、木材等物。
English: On the 12th, the government and private individuals were allowed to use feathers, leather, wood and other items at hunting grounds.

古文：甲午，取箭材赤山。丙申，猎三山。
现代文：十九日，在赤山取用箭材。二十一日，狩猎于三山。
English: On the 19th, arrows were used in Akayama, and on the 21st, hunting took place in Sanzan.

古文：铁剌败唐将王晏球于定州。唐兵大集，铁剌请益师。
现代文：铁剌在定州击败唐将王晏球，唐兵大集，铁剌请求增兵。
English: The Anvil defeated the Tang general Wang Shuguang in Dingzhou, the Tang soldiers gathered in large numbers, and the Anvil asked for more soldiers.

古文：辛丑，命惕隐涅里衮、都统查剌赴之。
现代文：二十六日，太宗命惕隐涅里衮、都统查剌前往增援。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong gave the order to retreat to Nin'e-ri, and Toutong-chao went to reinforce.

古文：五月丙午，建天膳堂。
现代文：五月初二，建造天膳堂。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, the Tienzen-do hall was built.

古文：猎索剌山。
现代文：初四，自猎所回宫。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, I went back to the palace from the hunting lodge.

古文：戊申，至自猎。丁卯，命林牙突吕不讨乌古部。己巳，女直来贡。
现代文：二十三日，命林牙突吕不讨伐乌古部。二十五日，女真前来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, Lin Yat Lue was ordered not to attack Wu Gu Bu. On the 25th, Nien Zhen came to pay tribute.

古文：六月己卯，行瑟瑟礼。
现代文：六月初六，举行瑟瑟礼。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month.

古文：秋七月丁未，突吕不献讨乌古捷。
现代文：秋七月初四，突吕不献上讨伐乌古部所得战利品。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Turks presented the spoils of the conquest of Ugube.

古文：壬子，王都奏唐兵破定州，铁剌死之，涅里衮、查剌等数十人被执。
现代文：初九，王都奏告唐兵破定州，铁剌战死，涅里衮、查剌等数十人被俘。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Wang Du sent a report to Tang soldiers to break Dingzhou. Tie Qi was killed in the battle, and dozens of people including Nieriya and Zhaqi were captured.

古文：上以出师非时，甚悔之，厚赐战殁将校之家。
现代文：皇上因为出兵不合时机，十分后悔，厚赏战死将士家属。
English: The emperor regretted sending troops at the wrong time and rewarded the families of the soldiers who died in the war.

古文：庚午，有事于太祖庙。
现代文：二十七日，祭祀太祖庙。
English: On the 27th, the ceremony was held at Taizu Temple.

古文：八月丙子，突厥来贡。
现代文：八月初四，突厥前来进贡。
English: On the 4th of August, the Turks came to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，诏建《应天皇太后诞圣碑》于仪坤州。
现代文：初八，下诏修建《应天皇太后诞圣碑》于仪坤州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the "Monument to the Birth of the Empress Dowager" would be built in Yi Kunzhou.

古文：九月己卯，突吕不遣人献讨乌古俘。
现代文：九月初七，突吕不派人献上讨伐乌古所获俘虏。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Turks did not send anyone to present the prisoners captured in the battle of Ugu.

古文：癸未，诏分赐群臣。
现代文：十一日，诏令将俘虏分赐给群臣。
English: On the 11th, the imperial edict distributed the prisoners among the ministers.

古文：己丑，幸人皇王倍第。
现代文：十七日，驾幸人皇王府第。
English: On the 17th, the lucky driver arrived at the Imperial Palace.

古文：庚寅，遣人使唐。
现代文：十八日，派人出使唐。
English: On the 18th, he sent an envoy to Tang.

古文：辛卯，再幸人皇王第。
现代文：十九日，再幸人皇王府第。
English: On the 19th, the lucky winner was sent to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：癸巳，有司请以上生日为天授节，皇太后生日为永宁节。
现代文：二十一日，有司请求以皇上生日作为天授节，皇太后生日为永宁节。
English: On the twenty-first day, there was a request for the birthday of the emperor to be celebrated as Tianju Festival, and the birthday of the empress dowager to be celebrated as Yongning Festival.

古文：冬十月癸卯朔，以永宁节，上率群臣上寿于延和宫。
现代文：冬十月初一，是永宁节，皇上率群臣到延和宫祝寿。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the Yongning Festival, the emperor led a group of courtiers to Yanhe Palace to celebrate his birthday.

古文：己酉，谒太祖庙。
现代文：初七，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 13th, I visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：唐遣使遗玉笛。
现代文：唐派使者赠送玉笛。
English: The emissaries of the Tang Dynasty sent a jade flute as a gift.

古文：甲子，天授节，上御五鸾殿受群臣及诸国使贺。
现代文：二十二日，为天授节，皇上在五鸾殿接受群臣及各国使者朝贺。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor received morning greetings from a group of ministers and emissaries from various countries at the Palace of the Five Immortals on the occasion of the Emperor's Birthday.

古文：十一月丙子，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：十一月初二，祭祀天地。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the sacrifice of heaven and earth begins.

古文：辛丑，自将伐唐。十二月癸卯，祭天地。
现代文：初八，得悉唐主又派使者来访，皇上问左右，都说： 唐每次派使者来，实际上是惧怕天威。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, learning that the Tang Lord had sent another envoy to visit, the emperor asked around and said: Every time Tang sends an envoy, he is actually afraid of heaven.

古文：庚戌，闻唐主复遣使来聘，上问左右，皆曰： 唐数遣使来，实畏威也，未可轻举，观衅而动可也。 
现代文：我们不要轻举妄动，应该等到有可趁之机时再动干戈。 
English: We should not act rashly, we should wait until there is an opportunity to take advantage of before waging war.

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇上觉得有理。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：甲寅，次杏埚，唐使至，遂班师。
现代文：十二日，驻扎在杏埚，唐使到，于是班师回朝。
English: On the twelfth day, stationed in Xinglu, Tang envoys arrived, so the team returned to China.

古文：时人皇王在皇都，诏遣耶律羽之迁东丹民以实东平。
现代文：当时人皇王在皇都，诏令耶律羽之迁徙东丹民户以充实东平。
English: At that time, the human king was in the imperial capital, and he ordered the migration of Dongdan residents to enrich Dongping.

古文：其民或亡入新罗、女直，因诏困乏不能迁者，许上国富民给赡而隶属之。
现代文：东丹居民有的逃亡到新罗、女真，于是诏令对于贫穷不能迁移者，准许我国富民接济他们并使之隶其名下。
English: Some residents of Dongdan fled to Silla and Jianzhen, so the edict allowed the rich people of our country to help those who were too poor to move and make them subordinate to them.

古文：升东平郡为南京。
现代文：升东平郡为南京。
English: Shengdongping County is the capital of Nanjing.

古文：四年春正月壬申朔，宴群臣及诸国使，观俳优角戏。
现代文：四年春正月初一，宴饮群臣及各国使者，观看俳优角抵戏。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, a group of courtiers and emissaries from various countries feasted and watched the haiku contest.

古文：己卯，如瓜埚。
现代文：初八，到瓜埚。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I went to the melon field.

古文：二月庚戌，阅遥辇氏户籍。
现代文：二月初十，查阅遥辇氏户籍。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, the family register of the Haruka clan was inspected.

古文：三月甲午，望祀群神。
现代文：三月十二日，从瓜埚回宫。
English: On March 12th, he returned to the palace from the melon festival.

古文：夏四月辛亥，至自瓜埚。壬子，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十三日，拜谒太祖庙。十四日，拜谒太祖行宫。
English: On the 13th, visit the Ancestral Temple. On the 14th, visit the Ancestral Palace.

古文：癸丑，谒太祖行宫。甲寅，幸天城军，谒祖陵。
现代文：十五日，驾幸天城军，拜谒祖陵。
English: On the fifteenth day, the lucky Tiancheng army came to pay homage to the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：辛酉，人皇王倍来朝，癸亥，录囚。
现代文：二十二日，人皇王耶律倍前来朝见。二十四日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 22nd, the human king, Jeroboam, came to see the emperor, and on the 24th, he inspected the prisoners.

古文：五月癸酉，谒二祖殿，宴群臣。
现代文：五月初五，拜谒二仪殿，宴饮群臣。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month

古文：女直来贡。
现代文：女真前来进贡。
English: Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：戊子，射柳于太祖行宫。
现代文：二十日，射柳于太祖行宫。
English: On the 20th, Shoryu arrived at the Imperial Palace.

古文：癸巳，行瑟瑟礼。
现代文：二十五日，举行瑟瑟礼。
English: On the 25th, a solemn ceremony was held.

古文：六月丙午，突吕不献乌古俘。
现代文：六月初九，突吕不进献乌古俘虏。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Tu Lv did not advance to present the prisoners to Wu Gu.

古文：戊申，分赐将士。
现代文：十一日，分别赏赐将士。
English: On the 11th, awards were given to soldiers.

古文：己酉，西巡。己未，选轻骑数千猎近山。癸亥，驻跸凉陉。
现代文：十二日，选轻骑数千田猎于近山。二十六日，车驾暂驻于凉陉。
English: On the 12th, the light cavalry was selected to hunt in thousands of fields near the mountain. On the 26th, the vehicle was temporarily stationed in Liangyao.

古文：秋七月庚辰，观市，曲赦系囚。
现代文：秋七月十三日，观看集市，特赦在押囚犯。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, watch the fair and pardon the prisoners in custody.

古文：甲午，祠太祖而东。
现代文：二十七日，祭祀太祖后东行。
English: On the 27th, they left for the east after the ceremony.

古文：八月辛丑，至自凉陉，谒太祖庙。
现代文：八月初五，自凉陉回宫，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, he returned to the palace from Liangshan and paid homage to the Great Ancestor's Temple.

古文：癸卯，幸人皇王第。
现代文：初七，临幸人皇王府第。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of the year, the lucky winner will be the first to leave the Imperial Palace.

古文：己酉，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十三日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 13th, I visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：九月庚午，如南京。
现代文：九月初四，到南京。
English: On the fourth day of the ninth month, I arrived in Nanjing.

古文：戊寅，祠木叶山。
现代文：十二日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the twelfth day, the worship of Mujiyama ended.

古文：己卯，行再生礼。
现代文：十三日，行再生礼。
English: On the 13th, a rebirth ceremony was held.

古文：癸巳，至南京。
现代文：二十七日，到南京。
English: On the 27th, they arrived in Nanjing.

古文：冬十月壬寅，幸人皇王第，宴群臣。
现代文：冬十月初七，临幸人皇王府第，宴饮群臣。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, a group of courtiers were having a banquet at the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲辰，幸诸营，阅军籍。
现代文：初九，临幸诸营，查阅士兵名籍。
English: On the morning of the ninth day of the first month, the soldiers' names and nationalities were inspected.

古文：庚戌，以云中郡县未下，大阅六军。
现代文：十五日，因云中郡县未攻下，大举检阅六军。
English: On the 15th, because Yunzhong County and County were not captured, the six armies were extensively inspected.

古文：甲子，诏皇弟李胡帅师趣云中，讨郡县之未附者。
现代文：二十九日，诏令皇弟李胡率兵直奔云中讨伐未降附的郡县。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict ordered the emperor's younger brother, Li Hu, to lead an army straight to the middle of the clouds to fight the counties that had not been annexed.

古文：十一月丙寅朔，以出师告天地。
现代文：十一月初一，以出师事祭告天地。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the world was announced with the Teacher's Day Festival.

古文：丁卯，饯皇弟李胡于西郊。
现代文：初二，在西郊为皇弟李胡饯行。
English: On the second day of junior high school, the younger brother of the emperor, Li Hui, went to the western suburbs.

古文：壬申，命大内惕隐告出师于太祖行宫。
现代文：初七，命大内惕隐到太祖行宫陈告出师事宜。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, I was summoned to the Grand Ancestor's Palace to report the matter to my teacher.

古文：甲申，观渔三叉口。
现代文：十九日，在三叉口观看捕鱼。
English: On the 19th, watch the cormorants fishing in the Three Forks.

古文：十二月戊申，女直来贺。
现代文：十二月十三日，女真前来进贡。
English: On December 13th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：戊午，至自南京。
现代文：二十三日，从南京回宫。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to the Imperial Palace from Nanjing.

古文：五年春正月庚午，皇弟李胡拔寰州捷至。
现代文：五年春正月初五，皇弟李胡攻占寰州之捷报传来。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the news of the victory of the imperial brother Li Hu in conquering Zhangzhou came.

古文：甲午，朝皇太后。
现代文：二十九日，朝见皇太后。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：二月己亥，诏修南京。
现代文：二月初五，诏令修治南京。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the imperial edict was issued to govern Nanjing.

古文：癸卯，李胡还自云中，朝于行在。
现代文：初九，李胡自云中回，在行宫朝见皇上。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Li Hu returned from the clouds to see the emperor at the imperial court.

古文：丙午，以先所俘渤海户赐李胡。
现代文：十二日，以先前所俘渤海民户赐给李胡。
English: On the 12th, Li Hu was given the previously captured Bohai households.

古文：丙辰，上与人皇王朝皇太后。
现代文：二十二日，皇上与人皇王朝见皇太后。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后以皆工书，命书于前以观之。
现代文：太后因二人均擅长书法，命他们当场写给自己看。
English: Since both of them were good at calligraphy, the Empress Dowager ordered them to write it on the spot for her to see.

古文：辛酉，召群臣议军国事。
现代文：二十七日，召见群臣商议军国大事。
English: On the 27th, the ministers were summoned to discuss military affairs.

古文：三月丙寅，朝皇太后。
现代文：三月初三，朝见皇太后。
English: On the third day of March, the Emperor met the Empress Dowager.

古文：丁卯，皇弟李胡请赦宗室舍利郎君以罪系狱者，诏从之。
现代文：初三，皇弟李胡请求赦免因犯罪入狱的宗室舍利郎君，诏令从之。
English: On the third day of the new year, the emperor's younger brother, Li Hu, requested a pardon for his father-in-law, Xie Lirong, who had been imprisoned for a crime, and the imperial edict complied.

古文：己巳，幸皇叔安端第。
现代文：初五，临幸皇叔安端府第。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the school year, Rincheng Wangshu Anduan Prefecture was established.

古文：辛未，人皇王献白纻。
现代文：初七，人皇王献白苎。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, the King of Men presents the egret.

古文：乙亥，册皇弟李胡为寿昌皇太弟，兼天下兵马大元帅。
现代文：十一日，册封皇弟李胡为寿昌皇太弟，兼任天下兵马大元帅。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the younger brother of the emperor, Li Hu, was named the younger brother of the empress dowager of Shouchang, and also served as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：壬午，以龙化州节度使刘居言同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，以龙化州节度使刘居言为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th, the Dragon Festival of Huazhou made Liu Juyan a peerage in the same school.

古文：乙酉，宴人皇王僚属便殿。
现代文：二十一日，宴饮人皇王僚属于便殿。
English: On the twenty-first day, the banqueters, the king's attendants, came to the hall.

古文：庚寅，驾发南京。
现代文：二十六日，从南京起驾。
English: On the 26th, the train departed from Nanjing.

古文：夏四月乙未，诏人皇王先赴祖陵谒太祖庙。
现代文：夏四月初二，诏令人皇王先赴祖陵拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the imperial edict ordered the emperor to go to the ancestral mausoleum to visit the ancestral temple.

古文：丙辰，会祖陵。
现代文：二十三日，相会于祖陵。
English: On the 23rd, they met at the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：人皇王归国。
现代文：人皇王回国。
English: The human king returns to his country.

古文：五月戊辰，诏修褭潭离宫。
现代文：五月初五，诏令修治袅潭离宫。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, the imperial edict to rectify Shitan left the palace.

古文：乙酉，谒太祖庙。
现代文：二十二日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 22nd, he visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：六月己亥，射柳于行在。
现代文：六月初七，在行宫所在射柳。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, at the Imperial Palace, there is a willow tree.

古文：乙卯，如沿柳湖。
现代文：二十三日，到沿柳湖。
English: On the 23rd, I went to the area along Liuhe Lake.

古文：丁巳，拜太祖御容于明殿。
现代文：二十五日，拜太祖御容于明殿。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Emperor Taizu was received at Myoden.

古文：己未，敌烈德来贡。
现代文：二十七日，敌烈德前来朝贡。
English: On the 27th, the enemy martyrs came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月壬申，乌古来贡。
现代文：秋七月十一日，乌古前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, Ugu came to pay tribute.

古文：戊子，荐时果于太祖庙。
现代文：二十七日，献时令鲜果于太祖庙。
English: On the 27th, fresh seasonal fruits were offered at Taizu Temple.

古文：八月丁酉，以大圣皇帝、皇后宴寝之所号日月宫，因建《日月碑》。
现代文：八月初六，将大圣皇帝、皇后饮食起居之居所命名为日月宫，并修建《日月碑》。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the residence of the Emperor and Empress was named the Sun and Moon Palace, and the "Sun and Moon Monument" was built.

古文：丙午，如九层台。
现代文：十五日，到九层台。
English: On the 15th, to the 9th floor.

古文：九月己卯，诏舍利普宁抚慰人皇王。
现代文：九月十九日，诏令舍利普宁前往抚慰人皇王。
English: On September 19th, the emperor ordered Sheripunin to go to comfort the emperor.

古文：庚辰，诏置人皇王仪卫。
现代文：二十日，诏令设置人皇王仪卫。
English: On the 20th, the Emperor issued a decree to set up the Emperor Wang Yiwei.

古文：丁亥，至自九层台，谒太祖庙。
现代文：二十七日，自九层台回宫，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the palace from the ninth floor to visit the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：冬十月戊戌，遣使赐人皇王胙。
现代文：冬十月初八，派使者赐给人皇王祭祀用的酒肉。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month in winter, an envoy was sent to give the people wine and meat for the king's ritual.

古文：癸卯，建《太祖圣功碑》于如迂正集会埚。
现代文：十三日，建《太祖圣功碑》于如迂正集会埚。
English: On the 13th, the "Monument to the Sacred Merits of the Great Ancestors" was erected at the Ru Yuanzheng Assembly Hall.

古文：甲辰，人皇王进玉笛。
现代文：十四日，人皇王进献玉笛。
English: On the 14th, the human king presented the jade flute.

古文：十一月戊寅，东丹奏人皇王浮海适唐。
现代文：十一月十九日，东丹奏称人皇王渡海至唐。
English: On November 19th, the Eastern Danzo Emperor crossed the sea to Tang.

古文：六年春正月甲子，西南边将以慕化辖戛斯国人来。
现代文：六年春正月初五，西南守边将领引领向慕教化的辖戛斯国人前来。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the sixth year of the spring, the general of the southwestern garrison led the Chinese people of Jiaxing to come.

古文：乙丑，敌烈德来贡。
现代文：初六，敌烈德前来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the enemy came to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，如南京。
现代文：初八，皇上到南京。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month, the emperor arrived in Nanjing.

古文：三月辛未，召大臣议军国事。
现代文：三月十三日，召集大臣商议军国大事。
English: On March 13, the ministers were summoned to discuss military affairs.

古文：丁亥，人皇王倍妃萧氏率其国僚属来见。
现代文：二十九日，人皇王耶律倍妃萧氏率东丹国僚属前来朝见。
English: On the 29th, the human king, Ye Lu, accompanied by his consort, Baifei Xiao, and Dongdan's vassals came to see the emperor.

古文：夏四月己酉，唐遣使来聘。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，唐派使来访。
English: On April 21st, Tang envoys came to visit.

古文：是月置中台省于南京。
现代文：同日设置中台省于南京。
English: On the same day, Zhongtai Province was established in Nanjing.

古文：五月乙丑，祠木叶山。
现代文：五月初八，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the 8th day of the 5th lunar month, the ritual of Mt. Koba begins.

古文：乙亥，至自南京。
现代文：十八日，自南京回宫。
English: On the 18th, he returned to the Imperial Palace from Nanjing.

古文：壬午，谒太祖陵。
现代文：二十五日，拜谒太祖陵墓。
English: On the 25th, they visited the mausoleum of Emperor Taizu.

古文：闰月庚寅，射柳于近郊。六月壬申，如凉陉。
现代文：闰五月初三，在近郊射柳。六月十六日，到凉泾。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, shoot willows in the suburbs. On the 16th of June, go to Liangyao.

古文：壬午，乌古来贡。
现代文：二十六日，乌古前来进贡。
English: On the 26th, Ugu came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月丁亥，女直来贡。
现代文：秋七月初二，女真前来进贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：己酉，命将校以兵南略。
现代文：二十四日，命将士派兵往南攻战。
English: On the 24th, it was ordered to send troops to the south to attack.

古文：壬子，荐时果于太祖庙。
现代文：二十七日，进献时令鲜果于太祖庙。
English: On the 27th, the fresh seasonal fruits were presented to Taizu Temple.

古文：东幸。
现代文：东幸。
English: East happiness.

古文：八月庚申，皇子述律生，告太祖庙。
现代文：八月初五，皇子述律出生，陈告于太祖庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Prince Shuritsu was born, and the announcement was made at Taizu Temple.

古文：辛巳，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：二十六日，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he came to pay tribute.

古文：九月甲午，诏修京城。
现代文：九月初十，诏令修治京城。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, the imperial edict to repair the capital city was issued.

古文：冬十月丁丑，铁骊来贡。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: In the winter, on October 23rd, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月乙酉，唐遣使来聘。
现代文：十一月初二，唐派使者来访。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Tang sent an envoy to visit.

古文：十二月甲寅朔，祭太祖庙。
现代文：十二月初一，祭祀太祖庙。
English: On the first day of December, the ritual at Taizu Temple ended.

古文：丙辰，遣人以诏赐唐卢龙军节度使赵德钧。
现代文：初三，派人将诏书赐给唐卢龙军节度使赵德钧。
English: On the third day of the first month, someone was sent to give the edict to Tang Lulong's military commander Zhao Deyu.

古文：七年春正月壬辰，征西将军课里遣拽剌铎括奏军事。
现代文：七年春正月初十，征西将军课里派拽剌铎括奏告军事。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the general of the Western Expedition sent a group of soldiers to report to the military.

古文：己亥，唐遣使来聘。
现代文：十七日，唐派使者来访。
English: On the 17th, Tang sent an envoy to visit.

古文：癸卯，遣人使唐。
现代文：二十一日，派人出使唐。
English: On the 21st, he sent an envoy to Tang.

古文：戊申，祠木叶山。
现代文：二十六日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the worship of Mt. Koba ended.

古文：二月壬申，拽剌迪德使吴越还，吴越王遣使从，献宝器。
现代文：二月二十日，拽剌迪德出使吴越回国，吴越国派使者同来，进献宝器。
English: On February 20, Wu Yue, who was sent by Emperor Zhaodid, returned to China. Wu Yue sent an envoy with him to present the treasure.

古文：复遣使持币往报之。
现代文：皇上又派使者带着礼物前往回访。
English: The emperor also sent an envoy with gifts to pay a return visit.

古文：三月己丑，林牙迪离毕指斥乘舆，囚之。
现代文：三月初七，林牙迪离毕指名直呼皇上，被拘囚。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Lin Yadi left the palace and was taken into custody.

古文：丁未，遣使诸国。
现代文：二十五日，派使者出使各国。
English: On the 25th, envoys were sent to all countries.

古文：戊申，上率群臣朝于皇太后。
现代文：二十六日，皇上率群臣朝见皇太后。
English: On the 26th, the Emperor led a group of courtiers to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：夏四月甲戌，唐遣使来聘，致人皇王倍书。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，唐派使者来访，送来人皇王耶律倍之书信。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, Tang sent an envoy to pay a visit, bringing with him a letter from King Jeroboam.

古文：己卯，女直来贡。
现代文：二十七日，女真前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：五月壬午朔，幸祖州，谒太祖陵。
现代文：五月初一，临幸祖州，拜谒太祖陵。
English: On the first day of May, Linxing Zuzhou paid homage to the Great Ancestor's Mausoleum.

古文：六月戊辰，御制《太祖建国碑》。
现代文：六月十七日，皇上自制《太祖建国碑》。
English: On June 17th, the Emperor's self-made "Great Ancestor's Monument to the Founding of the People" was unveiled.

古文：戊寅，乌古、敌烈德来贡。
现代文：二十七日，乌古、敌烈德前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Ugu and Zhiride came to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，观角戏。
现代文：二十九日，观看角抵戏。
English: On the 29th, watch the horns clash.

古文：秋七月辛巳朔，赐中外官吏物有差。
现代文：秋七月初一，赐给内外官吏物品各若干。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, a number of items were given to officials at home and abroad.

古文：癸未，赐高年布帛。
现代文：初三，赐给年高者布帛。
English: In the third year of junior high school, cloth caps are given to the seniors.

古文：丙戌，召群臣耆老议政。
现代文：初六，召集群臣及年老德劭者商议政事。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the year, he convened a group of ministers and elders to discuss political affairs.

古文：壬辰，唐遣使遗红牙笙。
现代文：十二日，唐派使者馈赠红牙笙。
English: On the 12th, the Tang Dynasty emissary presented red gums to the emperor.

古文：癸巳，使复至，惧报定州之役也。
现代文：十三日，因为惧怕我国为定州之役行报复之举，唐又派使者来访。
English: On the 13th, fearing that China would retaliate for the Dingzhou Campaign, Tang sent another envoy to visit.

古文：壬寅，唐卢龙军节度使赵德钧遣人进时果。
现代文：二十二日，唐卢龙军节度使赵德钧派人进献时令果品。
English: On the 22nd, the Tang Lulong Army Festival made Zhao Deyu send people to donate seasonal fruits.

古文：丁未，荐新于太祖庙。
现代文：二十七日，以时鲜食品祭献于太祖庙。
English: On the 27th, a fresh food offering was held at Taizu Temple.

古文：八月壬戌，捕鹅于沿柳湖，风雨暴至，舟覆，溺死者六十馀人，命存恤其家，识以为戒。
现代文：八月十三日，在沿柳湖捕鹅，暴风雨骤然而至，船翻，溺死六十余人，皇上诏令抚恤死者家属，将此事记载下来引以为鉴戒。
English: On August 13th, while goose-hunting along Liuhe Lake, a sudden storm caused the boat to capsize, drowning more than 60 people. The emperor ordered that the families of the deceased be compensated, and the matter was recorded as a warning.

古文：戊辰，林牙迪离毕逸囚，复获而鞫之，知其事本诬构，释之。
现代文：十九日，林牙迪离毕越狱，被再次抓获，审讯时发现他是被诬陷而入狱，便释放了他。
English: On the 19th, Lin Yadi escaped from prison and was caught again. During the interrogation, it was found that he had been framed and imprisoned, and he was released.

古文：九月庚子，阻卜来贡。
现代文：九月二十一日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On September 21st, Zibo came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月乙卯，唐遣使来聘。
现代文：冬十月初七，唐派使者来访。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the winter, an envoy from Tang Dynasty China came to visit.

古文：己巳，遣使云中。
现代文：二十一日，派人出使云中。
English: On the 21st, he sent an envoy to Yunzhong.

古文：十一月丁亥，遣使存问获里国。
现代文：十一月初九，派使者慰问获里国。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, an envoy was sent to offer condolences to Huli Province.

古文：丁未，阻卜贡海东青鹘三十连。
现代文：二十九日，阻卜贡献海东青鹘三十连。
English: On the 29th, the 30th company of the East China Sea Qingcheng contributed to the blockade.

古文：十二月辛亥，以叛人泥离衮家口分赐群臣。
现代文：十二月初四，将叛臣泥离衮家口分赐给群臣。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month, the traitor mud was given to the ministers from the mouth of the Xing family.

古文：丁巳，西狩，驻跸平地松林。
现代文：初七，西狩，暂驻于平地松林。
English: 7th year of junior high school, Nishikari, temporarily stationed in Pingchi pine forest.

古文：八年春正月戊子，女直来贡。
现代文：八年春正月十一日，女真前来进贡。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，命皇太弟李胡、左威卫上将军撒割率兵伐党项。
现代文：二十三日，命皇太弟李胡、左威卫上将军撒割率兵讨伐党项。
English: On the 23rd, Li Hu, the emperor's younger brother, and General Zuo Wei were ordered to disband and lead the army to fight against the Party.

古文：癸卯，上亲饯之。
现代文：二十六日，皇上亲自为他们饯行。
English: On the 26th, the Emperor himself went on a pilgrimage for them.

古文：二月辛亥，吐谷浑、阻卜来贡。
现代文：二月初五，吐谷浑、阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Tugu Hun and Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：乙卯，克实鲁使唐还，以附献物分赐群臣。
现代文：初九，克官实鲁出使唐回国，将附献之物品分赐给群臣。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Kekanshiro sent an envoy to Tang to return to the country, and distributed the attached items to the ministers.

古文：三月辛卯，皇太弟讨党项胜还，宴劳之。
现代文：三月十五日，皇太弟讨伐党项得胜还朝，设宴犒劳之。
English: On March 15th, the crown prince's younger brother returned to the imperial court after winning the battle against the Party, and a banquet was held in his honor.

古文：丙申，唐遣使请罢征党项兵，上以战捷及党项已听命报之。
现代文：二十日，唐派使者前来请求停派出征党项之军队，皇上以作战获胜及党项已俯首听命之情况回复唐。
English: On the 20th, Tang sent an envoy to request the emperor to stop sending troops to conscript the party cadres. The emperor replied to Tang that the war had been won and the party cadres had bowed their heads and obeyed his orders.

古文：夏四月戊午，党项来贡。
现代文：夏四月十二日，党项前来进贡。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：五月己丑，猎独牛山，惕隐迪辇所乘内厩骝马毙，因赐名其山曰骝山。
现代文：五月十四日，出猎于独牛山，惕隐迪辇所乘坐的内厩骝马倒毙，于是赐此山名为骝山。
English: On May 14th, on a hunting trip to Duk Niu Mountain, the horse of the inner stable on which Yin Diyao was riding fell down and died, so this mountain was given the name Lushan.

古文：戊戌，如沿柳湖。
现代文：二十三日，至沿柳湖。
English: On the 23rd, it reached the area along Liuhe Lake.

古文：六月甲寅，阻卜来贡。
现代文：六月初九，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, the tributes came from all over the country.

古文：甲子，回鹘阿萨兰来贡。
现代文：十九日，回鹘阿萨兰前来进贡。
English: On the 19th, the Uighur Asarans came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月戊寅，行纳后礼。
现代文：秋四月初四，举行纳后大礼。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of autumn, the post-admission ceremony was held.

古文：癸未，皇子提离古生。
现代文：初九，皇子提离古出生。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Prince Ti Yigu was born.

古文：丁亥，铁骊、女直、阻卜来贡。
现代文：十三日，铁骊、女真、阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 13th, Tie Diao, Niang Zhen and Diao Bu came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月乙巳，阻卜来贡。
现代文：冬十月初二，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, tributes came from as far away as Sobo.

古文：丙午，至自沿柳湖。
现代文：初三，自沿柳湖回宫。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he returned to the palace from along Liuhe Lake.

古文：辛亥，唐遣使来聘。
现代文：初八，唐派使者来访。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay a visit.

古文：己未，遣拔剌使唐。
现代文：十六日，派拔剌出使唐。
English: On the 16th, he sent an envoy to Tang.

古文：辛未，乌古吐鲁没来贡。
现代文：二十八日，乌古吐鲁没前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Uguturu did not come to pay tribute.

古文：十一月辛丑，太皇太后崩，遣使告哀于唐及人皇王倍。
现代文：十一月二十九日，太皇太后崩逝，派使者告哀于唐及人皇王耶律倍。
English: On November 29, the great empress dowager passed away, and an envoy was sent to mourn Tang and the human king Jerubba.

古文：是月，唐主嗣源殂，子从厚立。
现代文：同月，唐主李嗣源崩殂，子李从厚继立。
English: In the same month, the Tang ruler Li Siyuan died, and his son Li Conghu succeeded him.

古文：十二月丁卯，党项来贡。
现代文：十二月二十五日，党项前来进贡。
English: On December 25th, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：九年春正月癸酉，渔于土河。
现代文：九年春正月初二，在土河捕鱼。
English: On the second day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, I went fishing in the Tu River.

古文：丙申，党项贡驼、鹿。
现代文：二十五日，党项贡献骆驼、鹿。
English: On the 25th, camels and deer were donated to the party.

古文：己亥，南京进白獐。
现代文：二十八日，南京进献白獐。
English: On the 28th, Nanjing presented egrets.

古文：闰月戊午，唐遣使告哀，即日遣使吊祭。
现代文：闰正月十七日，唐派使者前来报丧，皇上于当日派使者去吊唁祭祀。
English: On the seventeenth day of the leap month, Tang sent an envoy to report the death, and the emperor sent an envoy to offer condolences on the same day.

古文：壬戌，东幸。
现代文：二十一日，东幸。
English: On the twenty-first day, Dongxing.

古文：女直来贡。
现代文：女真前来进贡。
English: Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：二月壬申，祠木叶山。
现代文：二月初二，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month.

古文：戊寅，葬太皇太后于德陵。
现代文：初八，葬太皇太后于德陵。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the funeral of the great empress dowager was held in Deling.

古文：前二日，发丧于菆涂殿，上具衰服以送。
现代文：此前二日，发丧于涂殿，皇上身着衰服送葬。
English: On the previous two days, the funeral was held in Tuiden, and the emperor was dressed in his old clothes for the funeral.

古文：后追谥宣简皇后，诏建碑于陵。
现代文：后将太皇太后追谥为宣简皇后，诏令建碑于陵墓前。
English: Later, the Empress Dowager was crowned as Empress Xuanjian, and a monument was erected in front of the mausoleum.

古文：三月癸卯，女直来贡。
现代文：三月初三，女真前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月，唐李从珂弑其主自立。
现代文：夏四月，唐李从珂弑其君自立。
English: In the summer of April, Tang Li became independent from Ke Yu Qi Jun.

古文：人皇王倍自唐上书请讨。
现代文：人皇王耶律倍自唐上书请求讨伐。
English: The human king, Yerutube, sent a letter to Tang requesting a crusade.

古文：五月甲辰，如沿柳湖。
现代文：五月初五，至沿柳湖。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month, it will be along Liuhu.

古文：癸丑，女直来贡，大星昼陨。
现代文：十四日，女真前来进贡。大星于白天陨落。
English: On the 14th, Nyoshin came to pay tribute. Daisei fell during the day.

古文：六月己巳朔，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：六月初一，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the first day of June, people came to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，唐李从厚谢吊祭所遣使初至阙。
现代文：初三，唐李从厚为感谢吊祭所派遣之使者初次到宫阙。
English: On the third day of the first month, the messenger sent by Tang Li from Hou to thank the hanging ceremony came to Gonglu for the first time.

古文：秋八月壬午，自将南伐。
现代文：秋八月十四日，皇上亲自率军南伐。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month of the autumn, the Emperor personally led the army in the Southern Expedition.

古文：乙酉，拽剌解里手接飞雁，上异之，因以祭天地。
现代文：十七日，拽剌解里举手之间射落飞雁，皇上认为奇异，于是祭祀了天地。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor thought it was strange to shoot down a flying goose between raising his hands, so he sacrificed heaven and earth.

古文：九月庚子，西南星陨如雨。
现代文：九月初三，西南有星陨落如雨。
English: On the third day of September, the stars fell like rain in the southwest.

古文：乙卯，次云州。
现代文：十八日，驻军云州。
English: On the 18th, the Yunnan garrison left.

古文：丁巳，拔河阴。
现代文：二十日，攻下河阴。
English: On the 20th, they captured Heyin.

古文：冬十月丁亥，略地灵丘，父老进牛酒犒师。
现代文：冬十月二十日，略地于灵丘，父老进献牛酒犒劳我军。
English: On the 20th day of October in winter, at Lingqiu, Father Laojin offered oxen and wine to reward our troops.

古文：十一月辛丑，围武州之阳城。
现代文：十一月初五，包围武州之阳城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the siege of Wuzhou's Yangcheng City began.

古文：壬寅，阳城降。
现代文：初六，阳城降。
English: Sixth year of junior high school, dropped out of Yangcheng.

古文：癸卯，洼只城降，括所俘丁壮籍于军。
现代文：初七，洼只城降，在军中检括所俘丁壮名籍。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Wada was demoted to the castle, and Ding Zhuang, who had been captured, was enrolled in the army.

古文：十二月壬辰，皇子阿钵撒葛里生，皇后不豫。
现代文：十二月二十六日，皇子阿钵撒葛里出生，皇后染病。
English: On the 26th of December, the Crown Prince Agatha was born, and the Empress fell ill.

古文：是月驻跸百湖之西南。
现代文：同月，皇上歇驾于百湖之西南。
English: In the same month, the emperor rested in the southwest of the Hundred Lakes.

古文：十年春正月戊申，皇后崩于行在。
现代文：十年春正月十三日，皇后崩逝于行宫所在。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, the Empress passed away at the Imperial Palace.

古文：二月戊寅，百僚请加追谥，不许。
现代文：二月十三日，百官请求追加谥号，不许。
English: On February 13th, the centurion asked for an additional number, which was denied.

古文：辛巳，宰相涅里衮谋南奔，事觉，执之。
现代文：十六日，宰相涅里衮图谋南逃，事情败露，被拘执。
English: On the 16th, the prime minister, Nyerere, attempted to flee to the south, but the plot was uncovered and he was arrested.

古文：三月戊午，党项来贡。
现代文：三月二十四日，党项前来进贡。
English: On March 24th, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月，吐谷浑酋长退欲德率众内附。
现代文：夏四月，吐谷浑酋长退欲德率众内附。
English: In the summer of April, the chief of the Tugu Hun clan, Taishi Takeda, led the crowd.

古文：丙戌，皇太后父族及母前夫之族二帐并为国舅。以萧缅思为尚父领之。
现代文：二十二日，皇太后父族及母亲前夫之族二帐均为国舅，任命萧缅思为尚父总领二帐。
English: On the 22nd, the two accounts of the paternal family of the Empress Dowager and the family of the former husband of the mother were both the uncle of the country, and Xiao Mingsi was appointed as the head of the two accounts of his father.

古文：己丑，录囚。
现代文：二十五日，查看犯人口供。
English: On the 25th, the inmate's confession was examined.

古文：五月甲午朔，始制服行后丧。
现代文：五月初一，开始制作衰服为皇后发丧。
English: On the first day of May, production of mourning clothes for the death of the empress began.

古文：丙午，葬于奉陵。
现代文：十三日，葬于奉陵。
English: On the 13th, he was buried in Fengling.

古文：上自制文，谥曰彰德皇后。
现代文：皇上为之亲自写了祭文，谥曰彰德皇后。
English: The emperor personally wrote a dedication for her, which read "Empress Jangde."

古文：癸丑，以舍利王庭鹗为龙化州节度使。
现代文：二十日，任命舍利王庭鹗为龙化州节度使。
English: On the 20th, Wang Tingtao of Sheli was appointed as the Dragonhua State Festival Envoy.

古文：六月乙丑，吐浑来贡。
现代文：六月初二，吐浑前来进贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the people of Tuban came to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，幸品不里淀。
现代文：初八，临幸品不里淀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Lin's lucky charms will be sent to Buryatia.

古文：秋七月乙卯，猎南赤山。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，出猎于南赤山。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in South Akayama.

古文：冬十一月丙午，幸弘福寺，为皇后饭僧，见观音画像，乃大圣皇帝、应天皇后及人皇王所施，顾左右曰： 昔与父母兄弟聚观于此，岁时未几，今我独来！ 
现代文：冬十一月十五日，临幸弘福寺为皇后斋僧，见到观音画像，乃是大圣皇帝、应天皇后及人皇王所布施，回头对左右说 ：先前我与父母兄弟一道在这里观看礼拜，时间没隔几年，现在就剩我一个人只身前来！ 
English: On the 15th day of November in winter, Linxing Gongfu Temple's empress serving monk, seeing the Guanyin image, which was donated by the great saint emperor, the empress and the human king, turned around and said, "Previously, I watched the worship here with my parents and brothers. Time has not passed for several years, now I am left alone to come!

古文：悲叹不已。
现代文：悲叹不已。
English: They lamented endlessly.

古文：乃自制文题于壁，以极追感之意。
现代文：于是自做文字题于壁上，以表达追思感叹之意。
English: So he wrote a self-made inscription on the wall to express his remorse.

古文：读者悲之。
现代文：读的人也觉得悲伤。
English: Those who read it also feel sad.

古文：十二月庚辰，如金瓶泺，遣拽剌化哥、窟鲁里、阿鲁扫姑等捉生敌境。
现代文：十二月十九日，到金瓶泊，派拽剌化哥、窟鲁里、阿鲁扫姑等到敌境捕捉俘虏。
English: On December 19th, they went to Jinbei's camp, and sent the troops to drag Xinghua's brother, Wu Luli, and Aru Saigu to the enemy's border to capture prisoners.

古文：十一年春正月，钓鱼于土河。
现代文：十一年春正月，在土河钓鱼。
English: In the first month of spring of the eleventh year, I went fishing in the Tu River.

古文：庚申，如潢河。
现代文：三十日，到潢河。
English: On the 30th, I arrived in Luohe.

古文：三月庚寅朔，女直来贡。
现代文：三月初一，女真前来进贡。
English: On the first day of March, Nyoshin came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月庚申，谒祖陵。
现代文：夏四月初二，拜谒祖陵。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, visit the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：戊辰，还都，谒太祖庙。
现代文：初十，回京城，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, he returned to Beijing to visit the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：辛未，燕民之复业者陈汴州事宜。
现代文：十三日，恢复常业的燕地百姓奏陈汴州情况。
English: On the 13th, the people of Yan'an who resumed their regular jobs reported on the situation in Chen'anzhou.

古文：癸酉，女直诸部来贡。
现代文：十五日，女真各部前来进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, Nyoshin's various departments came to pay tribute.

古文：癸未，赐回鹘使衣有差。
现代文：二十五日，赐给回鹘使者衣装各若干。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he gave each of the envoys a number of garments.

古文：五月戊戌，清暑沿柳湖。
现代文：五月初十，在沿柳湖消夏。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month, I spent the summer along Liuhe Lake.

古文：六月戊午朔，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：六月初一，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the first day of June, people came to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，吐谷浑来贡。
现代文：二十八日，吐谷浑前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Tugu Hun came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月辛卯，乌古来贡。
现代文：秋七月初五，乌古前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month of autumn, Ugu came to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，蒲割〈宁页〉公主率三河乌古来朝。
现代文：初六，蒲割宁页公主率领三河乌古前来朝见。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Princess Puwari Ningye led the three rivers Ugu to come to see the emperor.

古文：丙申，唐河东节度使石敬瑭为其主所讨，遣赵莹因西南路招讨卢不姑求救，上白太后曰： 李从珂弑君自立，神人共怒，宜行天讨。 
现代文：初十，唐河东节度使石敬瑭被其国主讨伐，派赵莹通过西南路招讨卢不姑向我国求救，皇上告知太后说： 李从珂弑君自立，人神共愤，我们应该替天行道加以讨伐。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Eastern Festival of the Tang Dynasty caused Shi Jingyao to be defeated by his sovereign, and sent Zhao Ying to solicit Lu Buku to seek help from our country through the southwest road. The emperor told the empress dowager: "Li has become independent from Ke Yu Jun, and both humans and gods are indignant. We should fight for Tian Xingdao."

古文：时赵德钧亦遣使至，河东复遣桑维翰来告急，遂许兴师。
现代文：当时赵德钧也派使者前来，河东又派桑维翰前来告急，于是皇太后便答应出兵。
English: At that time, Zhao Deyu also sent an envoy to come, and Hedong also sent San Weihan to come to help, so the Empress Dowager agreed to send troops.

古文：八月己未，遣萧辖里报河东师期。
现代文：八月初三，派遣萧辖里向河东通报出师日期。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Xiao Jiali was dispatched to inform Hedong of the date of graduation.

古文：丙寅，吐谷浑来贡。
现代文：初十，吐谷浑前来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Hun came to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，自将以援敬瑭。
现代文：十四日，皇上亲自统军援救石敬瑭。
English: On the 14th, the emperor personally led a unified army to rescue Shi Jingyao.

古文：九月癸巳，有飞抃自坠而死，南府夷离堇曷鲁恩得之以献。
现代文：九月初七，有飞礘自己坠地而死，南府夷离堇曷鲁恩得到后献给皇上。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, A Fei Yao fell to the ground and died. Nanfu Yixing Yao Ruan was later dedicated to the emperor.

古文：卜之，吉。
现代文：为之占卜，得吉兆。
English: For this, divination brings good omens.

古文：上曰： 此从珂自灭之兆也！ 
现代文：皇上说： 这是李从珂自取灭亡的征兆！ 
English: The emperor said, "This is a sign of Li Congke's self-destruction!"

古文：丁酉，入雁门。
现代文：二十一日，军队进入雁门。
English: On the 21st, the army entered the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：戊戌，次忻州，祀天地。
现代文：二十二日，驻扎于忻州，祭祀天地。
English: On the 22nd, he was stationed in Zhangzhou, where he offered sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：己亥，次太原。
现代文：二十三日，驻扎于太原。
English: On the 23rd, it was stationed in Taiyuan.

古文：庚子，遣使谕敬瑭曰： 朕兴师远来，当即与卿破贼！ 
现代文：二十四日，派使者晓谕石敬瑭说： 我远道兴师而来，会当立即替你打败贼人。 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he sent an envoy to tell Shi Jingyao: "I have come all the way from far away to raise an army. I will immediately defeat the thieves for you."

古文：会唐将高行周、符彦卿以兵来拒，遂勒兵陈于太原。
现代文：适逢唐将高行周、符彦卿率兵前来拒战，于是皇上在太原操练兵马。
English: At the right time, Tang sent Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing to lead the troops to oppose the war, so the emperor trained soldiers and horses in Taiyuan.

古文：及战，佯为之却。
现代文：待到交战时，假装退却。
English: Wait until you're engaged, then pretend to retreat.

古文：唐将张敬达、杨光远又阵于西，未成列，以兵薄之。
现代文：唐将张敬达、杨光远又在西边列阵，未及成列，我以兵逼近之。
English: Tang ordered Zhang Jingda and Yang Guangyuan to form a line in the west, but before they could form a line, I approached them with soldiers.

古文：而行周、彦卿为伏兵所断，首尾不相救。
现代文：而高行周、符彦卿为伏兵截断，首尾不能相顾。
English: However, Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing were cut off by the ambush and could not see each other.

古文：敬达、光远大败，弃仗如山，斩首数万级。
现代文：张敬达、杨光远大败，丢弃的兵仗堆积如山，斩首数万级。
English: Zhang Jingda and Yang Guangyuan suffered a crushing defeat, and the abandoned wars piled up like a mountain, with tens of thousands of heads cut off.

古文：敬达走保晋安寨，夷离堇的鲁与战，死之。
现代文：张敬达逃走，拒守于晋安寨，夷离堇的鲁与之交战，战死。
English: Zhang Jingda ran away and refused to stay in Jin'an Village. Lu, who had been exiled from Shan, fought against him and was killed.

古文：敬瑭率官属来见，上执手抚慰之。
现代文：石敬瑭率官员下属来见，皇上握住他的手抚慰他。
English: Shi Jingyao led officials and subordinates to see him, and the emperor held his hand to comfort him.

古文：癸卯，围晋安。
现代文：二十七日，包围晋安。
English: On the 27th, Jinan was surrounded.

古文：甲辰，以的鲁子徒离骨嗣为夷离堇，仍以父字为名，以旌其忠。
现代文：二十八日，以的鲁之子徒离骨继为夷离堇，仍以其父字为名，以表彰的鲁的忠义。
English: On the 28th, the son of Ilu, Tu Liangcang, became Ili Ying, still using his father's name, in recognition of Lu's loyalty.

古文：南宰相鹘离底、奚监军寅你已、将军陪阿临阵退懦，上召切责之。
现代文：南宰相鹘离底、奚监军寅你已、将军陪阿临阵胆怯退缩，皇上召见他们给予严辞责备。
English: The Southern Vice-Chancellor,, left the palace,, the military overseer,, and the general,, accompanied by Arin, timidly retreated, and the emperor summoned them to give a stern rebuke.

古文：冬十月甲子，封敬瑭为晋王，幸其府。
现代文：冬十月初九，封石敬瑭为晋王，临幸其府第。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, King Jin was enthroned, and Linxing became his capital.

古文：敬瑭与妻李率其亲属捧觞上寿。
现代文：石敬瑭与妻李氏率其亲属举杯为皇上祝寿。
English: Shi Jingyao and his wife Li Zhi led their relatives in raising a glass to celebrate the emperor's birthday.

古文：初围晋安，分遣精兵守其要害，以绝援兵之路。
现代文：当初包围晋安时，已分别派遣精兵扼守其要害，以断绝援兵之路。
English: At the time of the initial encirclement of Jin'an, elite soldiers were dispatched separately to guard its key points in order to cut off the road for reinforcements.

古文：而李从珂遣赵延寿以兵二万屯团柏谷，范延广以兵二万屯辽州，幽州赵德钧以所部兵万馀由上党趋延寿军，合势进击，知此有备，皆逗留不进。
现代文：李从珂派赵延寿率兵二万屯驻于团柏谷，范延广率兵二万驻于辽州，幽州赵德钧率所部兵万余人由上党直趋赵延寿军，合力进击。几路援兵知我方有防备，均逗留不进。
English: Li sent Zhao Yanshou with 20,000 soldiers from Ke to stay in Tuanba Valley, Fan Yanguang with 20,000 soldiers to stay in Liaozhou, and Yuzhou Zhao Deyu with more than 10,000 soldiers from the upper party to go straight to Zhao Yanshou's army and advance together. Several reinforcements knew that we were prepared, but they did not stay.

古文：从珂遂将精骑三万出次河阳，亲督诸军。
现代文：李从珂只好率精骑三万出汴京驻于河阳，亲自监督各路兵马。
English: Li Zongke led 30,000 horsemen out of Beijing and stationed them in Kheyang, personally supervising the soldiers and horses on their way.

古文：然知其不救，但日酣饮悲歌而已。
现代文：然而他知道大家都不来相救，唯有每天一个劲地饮酒悲歌而已。
English: However, he knew that no one would come to his rescue, and he would just drink hard every day.

古文：丁卯，召敬瑭至行在所，赐坐，上从容语之曰： 吾三千里举兵而来，一战而胜，殆天意也，观汝雄伟弘大，宜受兹南土，世为我藩辅。 
现代文：十二日，皇上召石敬瑭到行宫所在，赐坐。皇上从容地对他说 ：我从三千里外统兵前来，一交战便得胜，这大概是天意吧。我看你身材魁伟，气魄弘大，应当受理南土，世代为我国之藩篱辅弼。 
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor summoned Shi Jingyao to the palace where he was traveling, and gave him a seat. The emperor calmly said to him: I came from three thousand miles away to lead the troops, and I won a battle. This is probably the will of heaven. I think you are a great figure, with a great spirit, and should accept the southern land. For generations, you have been a supporter of our country.

古文：遂命有司设坛晋阳，备礼册命。
现代文：于是下令有司在晋阳设坛，以完备之礼仪举行册命。
English: Therefore, he ordered a priest to set up an altar in Jinyang and hold the ordination ceremony with perfect etiquette.

古文：十一月丁酉，册敬瑭为大晋皇帝。
现代文：十一月十二日，册封石敬瑭为大晋皇帝。
English: On November 12th, Shi Jingjun was officially crowned as the Emperor of the Great Jin Dynasty.

古文：自戊戌至戊申，候骑两奏南有兵至，复奏西有兵至。
现代文：从十三日到二十三日，侦骑两度奏称南方有军队前来，又奏西边有军队到来。
English: From the 13th to the 23rd, the reconnaissance and cavalry twice reported that an army was coming from the south, and also reported that an army was coming from the west.

古文：命惕隐迪辇洼拒之。
现代文：命惕隐迪辇洼拒战。
English: It is imperative to resist war.

古文：敬达在围八十馀日，内外隔绝，军储殆尽，至濯马粪、屑木以饲马，马饥至自相啖其鬓尾，死则以充食。
现代文：唐张敬达在包围圈中过了八十余天，内外隔绝，军中粮食储备消耗殆尽，以至于清洗马粪、屑木来喂马，马匹饿得互相啖食鬃尾，死了便被人用来充饥。
English: Tang Zhang Jingda spent more than eighty days in the encirclement, cut off from the outside and the inside, and the grain reserves in the army were exhausted, so much so that horse manure and waste wood were cleaned to feed the horses. The horses were so hungry that they ate each other's appendixes, and when they died, they were used to satisfy their hunger.

古文：光远等劝敬达出降，敬达曰： 吾有死而已。
现代文：光远等人劝张敬达出降，敬达说： 我有死而已。
English: Guangyuan and others urged Zhang Jingda to surrender. Jingda said, "I'm only dead.

古文：尔欲降，宁斩吾首以降。 
现代文：你如想投降，何不杀了我去投降。 
English: If you want to surrender, why don't you kill me and surrender.

古文：闰月甲子，杨光远、安审琦杀敬达以降。
现代文：闰十一月初九，杨光远、安审琦杀掉张敬达投降。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of the leap year, Yang Guangyuan and Zhang Jinda surrendered after being killed by the security court.

古文：上闻敬达至死不变，谓左右曰： 凡为人臣，当如此也！ 
现代文：皇上听说张敬达至死不改节操，对左右说： 凡是做人臣的，都应该这样！ 
English: When the emperor heard that Zhang Jingda would not change his principles until his death, he said to the right and left, "Everyone who is a vassal should be like this!"

古文：命以礼葬。
现代文：下令以礼葬之。
English: A ceremonial burial was ordered.

古文：所降军士及马五千匹以赐晋帝。
现代文：将所降附的军士及马一千匹赐给晋帝。
English: Emperor Jin was given the attached soldiers and a thousand horses.

古文：丙寅，祀天地以告成功。
现代文：十一日，祭祀天地以奏告成功。
English: On the 11th day, the worship of heaven and earth was reported to be a success.

古文：庚午，仆射萧酷古只奏赵德钧等诸援兵将遁，诏夜发兵追击。
现代文：十五日，仆射萧酷古只奏称赵德钧等各路援兵准备逃遁，诏令连夜发兵追击。
English: On the fifteenth day, Xiao Kugu's servant only reported that Zhao Dejun and other reinforcements were preparing to flee, and the imperial command sent troops to pursue them at night.

古文：德钧等军皆投戈弃甲，自相蹂践，挤于川谷者不可胜纪。
现代文：赵德钧等军全都丢盔弃甲，自相践踏，拥挤于山谷溪流的人马不可胜数。
English: Zhao Deyao and all the other soldiers threw away their armor and trampled on each other, crowding the countless people and horses in the valley streams.

古文：仍命皇太子驰轻骑据险要，追及步兵万馀，悉降之。
现代文：皇上又命皇太子火速率轻骑据守险要之处，追赶到步兵万余人，尽数降服之。
English: The emperor also ordered the crown prince to ride lightly at the speed of fire to defend the key points, catch up to more than 10,000 infantrymen, and surrender as many as possible.

古文：辛未，兵度团柏谷，以酒肴祀天地。
现代文：十六日，大军通过团柏谷，用酒菜祭祀天地。
English: On the 16th, a large army marched through the Kashiwagaya Valley, using wine and vegetables to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：俄追及德钧父子，乃率众降。
现代文：不久又追上赵德钧父子，二人便率众投降。
English: Soon they caught up with Zhao Deyao and his son, and the two of them led the crowd to surrender.

古文：次潞州，召诸将议，皆请班师，从之。
现代文：军队驻于潞州，皇帝集众将商议，都请求班师回国，从之。
English: The army was stationed in Zhangzhou, and the emperor called for a meeting to discuss the matter. They all requested that the squadron return to China and obey him.

古文：命南宰相解领、鹘离底、奚监军寅你已、将军陪阿先还。
现代文：命南府宰相解领、鹘离底、奚监军寅你已、将军陪阿先行回国。
English: He ordered the Southern prefectural prime minister to be relieved of his command, and the commander of the Southern prefectural army to accompany the general back to the country.

古文：壬申，惕隐洼、林牙迪离毕来献俘。
现代文：十七日，惕隐洼、林牙迪离毕前来献俘。
English: On the seventeenth day, Ti Jingwa and Lin Yadi left and came to offer sacrifice.

古文：晋帝辞归，上与宴饮，酒酣，执手约为父子。
现代文：晋帝辞别回去，皇上与他宴饮。酒至半酣，牵手相约为父子。
English: When Emperor Jin left to go back, the emperor had a banquet with him. The wine was half drunk, and they were holding hands like father and son.

古文：以白貂裘一、厩马二十、战马千二百饯之。
现代文：以白貂裘一件、厩马二十匹、战马一千二百匹为之饯行。
English: With one white stallion, twenty stable horses, and twelve hundred war horses.

古文：命迪离毕将五千骑送入洛。
现代文：命迪离毕率五千骑送入洛阳。
English: Five thousand horsemen were sent to Luoyang.

古文：临别，谓之曰： 朕留此，候乱定乃还耳。 
现代文：临别，对他说： 我留在这里，等战乱平息了才会回去。 
English: Before leaving, he said to him: I will stay here until the war calms down.

古文：辛巳，晋帝至河阳，李从珂穷蹙，召人皇王倍同死，不从，遣人杀之，乃举族自焚。
现代文：二十六日，晋帝到河阳，李从珂无路可走，召人皇王耶律倍与他同死，人皇王不肯，李从珂派人杀了人皇王，并举族自焚。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Emperor Jin went to Kheyang. Li Congke had no choice but to go. He summoned the human king, Yerubi, to die with him. The human king refused. Li Congke sent a man to kill the human king, and the whole tribe set themselves on fire.

古文：诏收其士卒战殁者瘗之汾水上，以为京观。
现代文：皇上下诏令收集唐军战死士兵尸体埋葬于汾水上，筑为京观。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to collect the bodies of the dead soldiers of the Tang army and bury them on the Surabaya River to build the Beijing outlook.

古文：晋命桑维翰为文，纪上功德。
现代文：晋命桑维翰撰文，纪载皇上之功德。
English: Sang Weihan was appointed to write an article to record the emperor's merits.

古文：十二月乙酉朔，遣近侍挞鲁存问晋帝。
现代文：十二月初一，派遣近侍挞鲁问讯晋帝。
English: On the first day of December, he sent his close attendant, Jilu, to inquire about Emperor Jin.

古文：丙戌，以晋安所获分赐将校。
现代文：初二，将在晋安所获物品分赐给将领。
English: On the second day of junior high school, the items won in Jin'an will be given to generals.

古文：戊子，遣使驰奏皇太后，及报诸道师还。
现代文：初四，派使者急速奏告皇太后，又告知各路兵马还朝。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to make a quick report to the empress dowager, and also informed all the soldiers and horses to return to the imperial court.

古文：庚寅，发太原。
现代文：初六，从太原出发。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, I set out from Taiyuan.

古文：辛卯，闻晋帝入洛，遣郎君解里德抚问。
现代文：初七，得悉晋帝进入洛阳，派郎君解里德前往慰问。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he learned that Emperor Jin had entered Luoyang, and sent his son-in-law to go to Luoyang to offer condolences.

古文：壬辰，次细河，阅降将赵德钧父子兵马。
现代文：初八，驻扎于细河检阅降将赵德钧父子兵马。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Deya and his son were stationed in Xiaohe to inspect the soldiers.

古文：戊戌，次雁门，以沙太保所部兵分隶诸将。
现代文：十四日，驻于雁门，将沙太保所部兵马分隶于诸将。
English: On the 14th, stationed in the Wild Goose Gate, the soldiers and horses of the Sateibosho were assigned to the generals.

古文：庚戌，幸应州。
现代文：二十六日，临幸应州。
English: On the 26th, Linxing went to Yingzhou.

古文：癸丑，唐大同、彰国、振武三节度使迎见，留之不遣。
现代文：二十九日，唐大同、彰国、振武三节度使迎接皇上，被羁留。
English: On the 29th, Tang Datong, Zhang Guo and Zhenwu, the three emissaries sent to welcome the emperor, were detained.

古文：十二年春正月丙辰，次堆子口。唐大同军节度判官吴峦闭城拒命，遣崔廷勋围其城。
现代文：十二年春正月初三，驻军于堆子口，唐大同军节度判官吴峦闭城拒绝听命，派崔廷勋包围其城。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, the garrison was stationed at Hezikou. Wu Gan, the judge of the festival of the Tang Datong Army, refused to obey orders and sent Cui Tingxun to encircle his city.

古文：庚申，上亲征，至城下谕之，峦降。
现代文：初七，皇上亲征，至城下晓谕，吴峦降。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor himself marched to the city to announce that Wu Xi had surrendered.

古文：辛酉，射鬼箭于云州北。
现代文：初八，射鬼箭于云州北。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, shooting arrows at ghosts in the north of Yunnan.

古文：壬戌，祀天地。
现代文：初九，祭祀天地。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the heavens and the earth are sacrificed.

古文：癸亥，遣国舅安端发奚西部民各还本土。
现代文：初十，派国舅安端遣散奚西部百姓各回本土。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, he sent his uncle An Duan to dismiss the people in the west of the country and send them back to the mainland.

古文：丙寅，皇太后遣侍卫实鲁趣行，是夕，率轻骑先进。
现代文：十三日，皇太后派侍卫实鲁促行，当晚，皇上率轻骑先走。
English: On the 13th, the empress dowager sent the attendant Wei Shilu to promote the procession, and that evening, the emperor led the light horse to go first.

古文：丁丑，皇子述律迎谒于滦河，告功太祖行宫。
现代文：二十四日，皇子述律在滦河迎接皇上，皇上告功于太祖行宫。
English: On the 24th, Prince Suryu met the emperor in the Li River, and the emperor praised the great-grandfather's journey to the palace.

古文：戊寅，朝于皇太后，进珍玩为寿。
现代文：二十五日，朝见皇太后，进献珍玩以祝寿。
English: On the 25th, the emperor met with the empress dowager and presented her with precious toys to celebrate her birthday.

古文：二月丁亥，以军前所获俘叛入幽州者皆斩之。
现代文：二月初四，将被俘虏的叛降幽州者全部斩首。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, all the captured Yuzhou rebels were beheaded.

古文：壬寅，诏诸部休养士卒。
现代文：十九日，诏令诸部休养士卒。
English: On the 19th, all ministries were ordered to rest and recuperate.

古文：癸卯，晋遣唐所掠郎君剌哥、文班吏萧掞里还朝。
现代文：二十日，晋将被唐俘掠的郎君剌哥、文班吏萧礙里送回我国。
English: On the 20th, Jin was sent back to China by his brother-in-law, who had been captured by the Tang Dynasty, and the clerk, Xiaoying Li.

古文：三月庚申，晋遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初七，晋派使者前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, Jin sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，晋天雄军节度使范延广潜遣人请内附，不纳。
现代文：十四日，晋天雄军节度使范延广暗中派人请求内附，不予接纳。
English: On the 14th, the arrival of Jin Tian's strong army caused Fan Yanguang to secretly send someone to request an attachment, which was not accepted.

古文：己巳，遣郎君的烈古、梅里迭烈使晋。
现代文：十六日，派郎君的烈古、梅里迭烈出使晋。
English: On the 16th, the emissaries sent by Ryoko and Meri were dispatched.

古文：壬午，晋使及诸国使来见。
现代文：二十九日，晋使者及各国使者前来朝见。
English: On the 29th, the envoys of the Jin Dynasty and the envoys of various countries came to see the emperor.

古文：夏四月甲申，地震。
现代文：夏四月初二，地震。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, there was an earthquake.

古文：幸平地松林，观潢水源。
现代文：皇上临幸平地松林，察看潢水源头。
English: The emperor went to the flat pine forest to inspect the source of the water.

古文：五月甲寅，幸频跸淀。
现代文：五月初三，皇上驾幸频跸淀。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the emperor frequently came to Shandong.

古文：壬申，震开皇殿。
现代文：二十一日，雷击开皇殿。
English: On the 21st, lightning struck the Imperial Palace.

古文：六月甲申，晋遣户部尚书聂延祚等请上尊号，及归雁门以北与幽、蓟之地，仍岁贡帛三十万匹，诏不许。
现代文：六月初三，晋派户部尚书聂延祚等请求给皇上奉上尊号，且请求归还雁门以北与幽、蓟之地，每年仍贡献帛三十万匹。诏不许。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th month of the year, the Jin Dynasty sent the head of the household, Shang Shuxuan, Yan Xing, and others to request that the emperor be given the title of honor, and requested that the land north of the Wild Goose Gate be returned, and that 300,000 yakitori be contributed each year.

古文：庚戌，侍中烈率言范延广叛晋，引兵南向。
现代文：二十九日，侍中列率奏报，范延广叛晋，领兵南下。
English: On the 29th, the attendants led the report, and Fan Yanguang rebelled against Jin and led the soldiers south.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔，诏诸部治兵甲。
现代文：秋七月初一，诏令诸部修治武器军备。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, he ordered all ministries to repair and control weapons and armaments.

古文：癸丑，幸怀州，谒奉陵。
现代文：初三，临幸怀州，拜谒奉陵。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, I was fortunate enough to visit Huai Zhou and pay my respects at the Fengling Mausoleum.

古文：甲子，晋遣使来告范延广反。
现代文：十四日，晋派使者前来报告范延广反叛。
English: On the 14th, Jin sent an envoy to report Fan Yanguang's rebellion.

古文：庚午，遣耶律褭古里使晋议军事。
现代文：二十日，派耶律袅古里出使晋商议军事。
English: On the 20th, he sent an envoy to Jin to discuss military affairs.

古文：八月癸未，晋遣使复请上尊号，不许。
现代文：八月初三，晋派使者请求奉上尊号，不许。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, Jin sent an envoy to request the honorific title, but it was not allowed.

古文：庚寅，晋及太原刘知远、南唐李蒨各遣使来贡。
现代文：初十，晋及太原刘知远、南唐李升分别派使者前来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Jin and Taiyuan Liu Zhiyuan and Southern Tang Li Sheng separately sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，晋遣使以都汴及范延广降来告。
现代文：二十日，晋派使者以建都汴梁及范延广投降事来告知。
English: On the 20th, Jin sent an emissary to inform Fan Yanguang and Jian Du Xuan Liang of the surrender.

古文：九月壬子，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：九月初三，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, people came to pay tribute.

古文：庚申，遣直里古使晋及南唐。
现代文：十一日，派直里古出使晋及南唐。
English: On the 11th day, he dispatched his envoy to Jin and Southern Tang.

古文：癸亥，术不姑、女直来贡。
现代文：十四日，术不姑、女真前来进贡。
English: On the 14th, Zhubugu and Nanzhen came to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，遣使高丽、铁骊。
现代文：二十二日，派人出使高丽、铁骊。
English: On the 22nd, he sent envoys to Goryeo and Taejon.

古文：癸酉，回鹘来贡。
现代文：二十四日，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Hui came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月庚辰朔，皇太后永宁节，晋及回鹘、敦煌诸国皆遣使来贺。
现代文：冬十月初一，皇太后永宁节，晋及回鹘、敦煌各国均派使者前来祝贺。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the Empress Dowager Yongning Festival, envoys from all countries in Jin, Huizhou and Dunhuang came to congratulate.

古文：壬午，诏回鹘使胡离只、阿剌保，问其风俗。
现代文：初三，下诏给回鹘使者胡离只、阿剌保，问其风俗。
English: On the third day of the first month, he issued an edict to Hu Yizhong's emissaries, Hu Yizhong and Ao Bao, to inquire about their customs.

古文：丁亥，诸国使还，就遣蒲里骨皮室胡末里使其国。
现代文：初八，各国使者回国，就便派遣蒲里骨皮室胡末里出使其本国。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, when the envoys of various countries returned to their home countries, they dispatched Puribone Hamadori to their home countries.

古文：十一月己未，遣使求医于晋。
现代文：十一月初十，派使者向晋求要医士。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, an envoy was sent to Jin to ask for a doctor.

古文：丁卯，铁骊来贡。
现代文：十八日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 18th, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月甲申，东幸，祀木叶山。
现代文：十二月初六，东幸，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th lunar month, Dongxing, the worship of Mount Muji is over.

古文：己丑，医来。
现代文：十一日，晋国医士来我国。
English: On the 11th day, a doctor from Jin Province came to China.

