古文：关羽简文李密刘文静李金才李靖郭齐宗唐休璟李尽忠封常清李光弼
现代文：关羽简文李密刘文静李金才李靖郭齐宗唐休璟李尽忠封常清李光弼
English: Guan Yu Jianwen, Li Mi, Liu Wenjing, Li Jincai, Li Jingguo, Qizong, Tang Xiuquan, Li Jianzhong, Feng Changqing, Li Guangyao

古文：关羽
现代文：关羽
English: Guan Yu

古文：蜀将关羽善抚士卒而轻士大夫；张飞敬礼士大夫而轻卒伍。
现代文：西蜀大将关羽善抚慰士卒而轻视士大夫，张飞则尊重士大夫而轻视士兵，他俩的作法都有些偏颇。
English: Guan Yu, the general of Western Shu, was good at comforting soldiers and despised doctors, while Zhang Fei respected doctors and despised soldiers. Both of their methods were somewhat biased.

古文：二将俱不得其中，亦不得其死。
现代文：他俩的死，就是因为他俩的偏颇作法而促成的。
English: Their biased actions contributed to their deaths.

古文：简文
现代文：简文
English: Simplified Chinese

古文：晋简文道光武云：汉世祖雄豪之中，最有俊令之体，贤达之风。
现代文：东晋简文帝司马昱评论汉光武刘秀说，汉朝历代皇帝之中，他才智出众。具有贤能通达之风。
English: East Jin Emperor Sima Jian commented on Han Guangwu Liu Xiu, saying that among all the emperors of the Han Dynasty, he was outstanding in intelligence. He had the ability to communicate.

古文：高祖则倜傥疏达，魏武则猜忌狭吝。
现代文：汉高祖刘邦也卓越不俗，通明畅达。魏武帝曹操则多疑嫉妒，心胸狭窄而且吝啬。
English: Liu Bang, the progenitor of the Han Dynasty, was also outstanding and lucid. Cao Cao, the Emperor of Wei and Wu, was suspicious and jealous, narrow-minded and stingy.

古文：李密
现代文：李密
English: Li Mi

古文：唐高祖报李密书曰：天生蒸人，必有司牧。当今为牧，非子而谁？
现代文：李渊复李密书中说：天生众民，必须有人治理他们，这治理人，不是你是谁！
English: Li Yuanfu said in his book Li Miwu: People are innately numerous, and someone must govern them. This governing person is not who you are!

古文：老夫年余知命，愿不及此。
现代文：我已年过五十，想也做不到了。
English: I'm in my fifties and I can't do it.

古文：欣戴大弟，攀鳞附翼。唯冀早膺图箓，以宁兆庶。
现代文：我高兴地依附你，唯一希望你早日接受上天的安排，以使万民安宁。
English: I gladly cling to you. My only hope is that you will accept God's arrangement as soon as possible, so that all people can live in peace.

古文：宗盟之长，属籍见容。复封于唐，斯荣足矣。
现代文：当年由于弟兄们的拥戴，我作了宗盟之长。你受封于唐，也是很荣耀的。
English: That year, thanks to the support of my brothers, I became the head of the patriarchal alliance. It is also a great honor for you to be enthroned in Tang.

古文：殪商辛於牧野，所不忍言；执子婴于咸阳，非敢闻命。
现代文：李密得书很高兴。把李渊给他的信让大家看说，唐公推举我。
English: Li Mi was very happy to receive the letter. Let everyone read Li Yuan's letter to him, Tang Gong nominated me.

古文：密得书甚悦，示其部下曰：唐公见推，天下不足可定。后密兵败，王伯当保河阳，密以轻骑归之，谓伯当曰：兵败矣，久苦诸君。我今自刎，请以谢众。
现代文：天下不愁不安定。后来李密兵败，当时王伯当正保卫河阳。李密领几个随从归了王伯当。他对王说，我失败了，这几年连累了你们，我今天自刎，感谢你们，向众位谢罪！
English: The world is not without instability. Later, Li Mi was defeated, when Wang Botang was defending Kheyang. Li Mi led several followers to Wang Botang. He said to the king, I have failed, these years have burdened you, I commit suicide today, thank you, thank you to everyone!

古文：伯当抱密号叫。
现代文：王伯当抱着李密痛苦号叫。
English: Wang Bodong cried out in pain as he held Li Mi.

古文：密复曰：诸公幸不相弃，当共归关中。
现代文：李密又说，感谢你们没有嫌弃我，我们还应该同归关中，重建大业。
English: Li Mi also said, thank you for not abandoning me, we should return to Guanzhong together and rebuild the great cause.

古文：密身虽愧无功，诸君必保富贵。
现代文：李密虽然无功，感觉很惭愧，但众人保他富贵。
English: Although Li Mi was a failure, he felt very ashamed, but everyone thought he was rich.

古文：伯当赞其计。
现代文：王伯当很赞许他的计谋。
English: Wang Bodang very much approves of his strategy.

古文：从入关者尚二万人。
现代文：重入关中的人马还有两万多。
English: There are still more than 20,000 people who have been re-imprisoned.

古文：高祖遣使迎劳，相望于道。密大喜，谓其徒曰：吾虽举事不成，而恩结百姓。
现代文：李渊派使者前去迎接慰劳，在大道上相见，李密很高兴，对手下人说，我虽然举事不成，兵败了，但百姓还是拥护我的。
English: Li Yuan sent an emissary to meet the consolation, and they met on the main road. Li Mi was very happy, and his opponent said, "Although I did not achieve anything and was defeated, the people still supported me."

古文：山东连城数百，知吾至，尽当归唐。
现代文：山东几百个城镇，知道我来了，也都能归顺唐朝。
English: Hundreds of towns in Shandong knew that I was coming, and they could all submit to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：比于窦融，勋亦不细。岂不以一台司见处乎？
现代文：我与东汉的窦融相比，功劳也不小，岂能给我一个台司小官当呢。
English: Compared with Dou Rong of the Eastern Han Dynasty, my merit is not small. Can you give me a minor official as a secretary?

古文：及至京，礼数益薄，执政者又来求财，意甚不平。
现代文：等李密到京后，待遇逐渐差了，有权势的官，又向他勒索财物，他很不服气。
English: After Li Mi arrived in Beijing, his treatment gradually deteriorated, and powerful officials extorted property from him. He was very unconvinced.

古文：寻拜光禄卿，封邢国公。
现代文：不久，授他为光禄卿，封为邢国公。
English: Soon, he was given the title of Guangluqing and the title of Duke of Shandong.

古文：未几，闻其所部将帅，皆不附世充。
现代文：不久，听说他的旧部将帅，都不听王世充的指挥。
English: Soon after, he heard that his old division commanders did not listen to Wang Shizhong's orders.

古文：高祖复使密领本兵往黎阳，招其将士敌时者。
现代文：李渊又派李密领兵去黎阳，招蓦他旧部的将士，来限制管辖王世充。
English: Li Yuan also sent Li Mi to lead an army to Liyang to recruit soldiers from his old department to restrict the jurisdiction of Wang Shichong.

古文：以经略王充，王伯当为左武卫，亦令副密。
现代文：王伯当任左武卫，辅佐李密。
English: Wang Bo served as the left guard, assisted by Li Mi.

古文：行至桃林，高祖复征之。
现代文：走到了桃林，李渊又令李密回去。
English: When they reached Taolin, Li Yuan ordered Li Mi to go back.

古文：密惧，谋叛。伯当止密，不从。
现代文：李密心怀恐惧，想谋叛，王伯当劝止，李密拒绝了。
English: Li Mi, with fear in his heart, wanted to plot a rebellion. Wang Bodang tried to dissuade him, but Li Mi refused.

古文：密据桃林县城，驱掠畜产，直趋南山，乘险而东。
现代文：李密占据了桃林县城，抢掠牲畜粮食，驱赶马匹，直奔南山，而后又东去，派人告诉张善相让他接应。
English: Li Mi occupied the county seat of Taolin, looted livestock grain, drove horses, went straight to Nanshan, and then went east, sent someone to tell Zhang Shansheng to let him respond.

古文：遣人使告张善相，令应接，时史万宝留镇熊州，遣盛彦师率步骑数十追蹑。
现代文：当时，史万宝镇守熊州，派盛彦师率数十名步骑追赶。
English: At that time, Shi Wanbao, who was in charge of guarding Kumashu, sent Morihiko and dozens of foot cavalry to catch up.

古文：至陆浑县南七十里，彦师伏兵山谷。密军半度，横出击之，遂斩密。年三十七。
现代文：在陆浑县南七十里，彦师在山谷中设有伏兵，李密的军队走过一半，彦师拦腰出击，斩杀了李密，李密时年三十七岁。
English: Seventy miles south of Lukhun County, Hikonshi set up an ambush in the valley. Li Mi's army was halfway through its march. Hikonshi attacked from behind and killed Li Mi. Li Mi was thirty-seven years old at the time.

古文：时徐勣在黎阳，为密坚守。
现代文：当时，徐勣为李密坚守黎阳。
English: At that time, Xu Yao was Li Mijian's subordinate in Liyang.

古文：高祖遣使将密首以招之，勣发丧行服，备君臣之礼，表请收葬，大具威仪。
现代文：李渊派使者持李密首级。
English: Li Yuan sent an envoy to hold Li Mi's head.

古文：三军皆缟素，葬于黎阳山南五里。故人哭之，多有呕血者。刘文静
现代文：去招降徐勣。徐勣为李密发丧，用君臣大礼，上表请求李渊答应收葬李密，丧仪规模很大，军士都穿白衣戴孝，将李密葬在黎阳山南五里处。李密的旧部都大哭，有很多人哭得呕了血。刘文静
English: To recruit and demote Xu Yao. Xu Yao held a funeral for Li Mi, and with great courtesy, he asked Li Yuan to agree to bury Li Mi. The funeral ceremony was large-scale. The sergeants all wore white coats and buried Li Mi five miles south of Liyang Mountain. Li Mi's old unit was in tears, and many people cried until they vomited blood. Liu Wenjing

古文：刘文静者为晋阳令，坐与李密连姻，隋炀帝系于郡狱。
现代文：晋阳县令刘文静因与李密连姻获罪，被隋炀帝囚禁在郡狱中。
English: Liu Wenzhing, the ruler of Jinyang County, was found guilty of marrying Li Milian and was imprisoned in the county jail by the Sui Dynasty.

古文：太宗以文静可与谋议，入禁所视之。
现代文：李世民认为可以和刘文静计议大事，便到狱中看他。
English: Li Shimin thought he could discuss important matters with Liu Wenzhing, so he went to see him in prison.

古文：文静大喜曰：天下大乱，非汤、武、高、光之才，不能定也。
现代文：刘文静非常高兴地说：现在天下大乱，没有成汤、武王、高祖刘邦、光武帝刘秀那样的人才，是不能安定的。
English: Liu Wenzhing said with great pleasure, "Nowadays, the world is in turmoil. Without talents like Cheng Tang, King Wu, Emperor Gaozhu Liu Bang, and Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu, it is impossible to be stable.

古文：太宗曰：卿安知无人？
现代文：李世民说：你怎么知道无人？
English: Li Shimin said: How do you know there is no one?

古文：禁所非儿女之情相忧而已。
现代文：监狱不是谈儿女情长的地方。
English: Prison is not the place to discuss children and lovers.

古文：故来与君图举大计。
现代文：我是来和你商议大事的。
English: I'm here to discuss something important with you.

古文：文静曰：乘虚入关，号令天下，不盈半岁，帝业可成。
现代文：刘文静说：乘虚入关，号令天下，不用半年，帝业可成。
English: Liu Wenzhing said: take advantage of the false entry, call out to the world, do not need half a year, the empire can be achieved.

古文：太宗笑曰：尹言正合人意。
现代文：李世民笑着说：你说的正合乎大家的意见。
English: Li Shimin said with a smile: What you said is in line with everyone's opinion.

古文：后使于突厥，文静谓曰：愿与可汗兵马同入京师，人众土地入唐公，财帛金宝入突厥。
现代文：后来，让刘文静出使突厥，对突厥人说，我愿和可汗的兵马一同去京城，土地百姓归入唐朝，金银财宝突厥可以随便去拿。
English: Later, he asked Liu Wenjing to send an envoy to the Turks, saying to the Turks, "I am willing to go to the capital together with the Khan's soldiers and horses, the land and people will be incorporated into the Tang Dynasty, and the Turks can take the gold, silver and treasure as they please."

古文：即遣骑二千，随文静而至。
现代文：突厥立刻派二千骑兵随刘文静进京。
English: The Turks immediately sent two thousand cavalrymen to accompany Liu Wenzhing to Beijing.

古文：高祖每引重臣同座共食。文静奏曰：宸极位尊，帝座严重，乃使太阳俯同万物，臣下震恐，无以措身。
现代文：高祖李渊每次和大臣们同座共饮时，刘文静便上奏说，皇帝的尊位，是至高无上的，您就象太阳一样，哪能屈尊混同于一般事物？臣下感到震恐，都无法措手足了。
English: Every time the great ancestor Li Yuan and his ministers were drinking together, Liu Wenzhing would say, "The emperor's dignity is supreme. You are just like the sun. How can you condescend to be confused with ordinary things? Your subjects were shocked and could not keep up."

古文：李金才
现代文：李金才
English: Li Jincai

古文：太宗尝进白高祖曰：代传李氏姓膺图箓，李金才位望崇贵，一朝族灭，大人受命讨捕，其可得乎？
现代文：李唐掌权之前，李世民曾对李渊说：相传李氏上应天命。当年李金才地位显赫，声望很高，却受到灭族之祸。大人你现在奉命征讨追捕，能得到什么呢？
English: Before Li Tang took power, Li Shimin once said to Li Yuan, "Legend has it that the Li clan obeyed the will of heaven. At that time, Li Jincai had a prominent position and high reputation, but suffered from the scourge of extermination. My lord, you are now ordered to collect and pursue, what can you get?

古文：诚能平贼，即又功当不赏。
现代文：就是你能平定了叛贼，有功也不一定赏你。
English: Even if you are able to subdue the traitors, you will not necessarily be rewarded for your efforts.

古文：以此求免，其可得乎？
现代文：用此来免除灾祸，能得到么？
English: Can you use this to get rid of the plague?

古文：高祖曰：我一夜思量，汝言大有理。今日破家灭身亦由汝，化家为国亦由汝。
现代文：李渊说：我思量了一个晚上，你说的很有道理，从今天起，家破人亡由你，国家兴旺也靠你。
English: Li Yuan said, "I thought about it one night. What you said makes a lot of sense. From now on, it's up to you to break up the family, and it's up to you to make the country prosperous."

古文：李靖
现代文：李靖
English: Li Jing

古文：贞观十四年，侯君集、薛万钧等破高昌，降其王曲智盛，执之，献捷于观德殿。
现代文：唐太宗贞观十四年，侯君集、薛万钧等破高昌，虏高昌王曲智盛，绑送至京，在观德殿献俘。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Prince Junji, Xue Wanli and others defeated Gaochang, captured Gaochang King Qu Zhiming, and took him to Beijing, where he was sacrificed at the Kuangde Hall.

古文：以其地为西州，置交河、柳中等县。
现代文：改高昌为西州，设交河、柳中等县。
English: Gaochang was changed to Xizhou, and Jiaohe and Liuzhong counties were established.

古文：其界东西八百里，南北五百里。
现代文：其面积为东西八百里，南北五百里。
English: Its area is 800 li from east to west and 500 li from north to south.

古文：汉戊巳校尉之地。
现代文：汉时此地即为戊巳校尉之地。
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, this place was the home of Captain Wu Si.

古文：初突厥屯兵浮图城，与高昌为影响。
现代文：最初，突厥在浮图城屯兵，与高昌城相呼应，后来，由于惧怕才投降了。
English: At first, the Turks garrisoned themselves in the city of Ftou, echoing the city of Gaochang, but later, out of fear, they surrendered.

古文：突厥颉利可汗使执失思力入朝谢罪，请为蕃臣。
现代文：其地为延州，突厥人颉利可汗派执失思力入朝谢罪，请求做唐朝的蕃臣。
English: The place was Yanzhou, and the Turks of the Qili Khan faction lost their will to persevere, fell into the sin of thanking the Tang Dynasty, and asked to be the vassals of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：太宗遣唐俭等持节出塞安抚之。
现代文：唐太宗派遣唐俭等人持使者印信出塞安抚。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty sent Tang Jian and others with an envoy's seal letter to pacify Tibet.

古文：李靖、张公谨于定襄谋曰：诏使到彼，虏必自宽。
现代文：李靖、张公谨在定襄核计，说，朝庭的使者到了那里，突厥的戒备必然松驰，我们选精良的骑兵，带二十天的给养，乘机出击。
English: Li Jing and Zhang Gongyi said that the imperial court's envoys had arrived there, and the Turks' alertness would inevitably be loosened. We selected excellent cavalry, brought twenty days of supplies, and took the opportunity to attack.

古文：选精骑，赍二十日粮，乘间掩袭，遇其斥候，皆以俘随，奄到纵击。
现代文：在路上遇到一个侦察兵，被俘虏了。
English: He met a scout on the road and was captured.

古文：遂灭其国。
现代文：接近延州突然发起进攻。
English: They suddenly launched an attack as they neared Yanzhou.

古文：获义城公主，虏男女十万，颉利乘千里马奔于西偏。灵州行军张宝相，擒之以献。
现代文：灭了突厥国，抓获了义城公主。虏男女十万人。可汉颉利乘日行千里的好马跑到西偏，被灵州行军张宝相抓获后，献给了朝庭。
English: They annihilated the Turkic state, captured the princess of Yicheng, and carried off 100,000 men and women. However, Han Xili rode a good horse thousands of miles to the west and was captured by Zhang Baoxiang, who was marching from Lingzhou, and presented to the imperial court.

古文：郭齐宗
现代文：郭齐宗
English: Guo Qizong

古文：高宗问：兵书所云，天阵、地阵、人阵，各何谓也？
现代文：唐高宗问群臣：兵书上说的天阵、地阵、人阵是指什么说的？
English: Tang Gaozong asked the group of courtiers: What does "heavenly array," "earthly array" and "human array" mean in the military manual?

古文：员半千越次对曰：臣睹载籍，此事多矣。
现代文：员半千超越顺序回答说：臣看典籍上所载，这方面事很多。
English: Half a thousand members beyond the order replied: "Minister, look at the classics, there are a lot of things in this regard.

古文：或谓天阵、星宿孤虚也；地阵、山川向背也；人阵、编伍弥缝也。
现代文：有的说天阵，指星宿是否合宜；地阵，指山川向背；人阵，指军伍布置是否严密。
English: Some say that the heavenly phalanx refers to whether the stars are appropriate; the earthly phalanx refers to whether the mountains and rivers are backward; and the human phalanx refers to whether the army is strictly arranged.

古文：郭齐宗对曰：以臣愚见则不然。
现代文：郭齐宗回答说：以臣的愚见，不是这样。
English: Guo Qizong replied, "This is not the foolish view of a minister.

古文：夫师出以义，有若时雨，得天阵也；兵在足食足兵，且耕且战，得地之利，此地阵也；卒乘轻利，将帅和睦，此人阵也。
现代文：出师要正义，象天上降下的及时雨，才能得天阵；队伍中要有足够的粮食和士兵，能耕能战，得地之利，这是地阵；士卒轻利，将师和睦，这就是人阵。
English: To win the heavenly phalanx, it is necessary to be righteous in dispatching the division, just like the timely rain falling from the sky; to have enough grain and soldiers in the team, to be able to cultivate and fight, to gain the benefit of the land, this is the ground phalanx; the soldiers are light, and the division is harmonious, this is the human phalanx.

古文：若用兵，使三者去一，其何以战？
现代文：若是用兵，三者缺一，就没法作战。
English: If you are a soldier, if you lack one of the three, you can't fight.

古文：高宗嗟赏之，擢拜左卫胄曹也。
现代文：高宗听后很有感触，奖赏了郭齐宗，提升郭齐宗为左卫胄曹。
English: Gao Zong was very impressed after listening, rewarded Guo Qizong, and promoted Guo Qizong to the left guard.

古文：唐休璟
现代文：唐休璟
English: Tang Xiuyong

古文：西突厥诸蕃不和，举兵相攻。安西道绝，表奏相继。
现代文：西突厥少数民族各个部落不和，经常用兵互相攻击，使安西的交通中断，奏章上表的很多。
English: The various tribes of the West Turkic ethnic minorities are at odds with each other, and often attack each other with soldiers, causing traffic in Anxi to be interrupted.

古文：天后命唐休璟与宰相商度事势。
现代文：武则天命令唐休璟和宰相计议此事。
English: Wu Zetian ordered Tang Xiuqi and the prime minister to discuss the matter.

古文：俄顷间草奏，使施行。
现代文：唐休璟顷刻之间写完了有关西突厥问题的奏章。武则天派他按计划施行。
English: Tang Xiuzhen finished writing the musical composition on the Western Turkic issue in an instant. Wu Zetian sent him to implement it as planned.

古文：后十余日，安西诸州表奏兵马应接程期，一如休璟所画。
现代文：十几天后，安西各州上奏说，兵马应接按期而到。正象唐休璟计划的那样。
English: A dozen days later, the states of Anxi reported that the soldiers and horses should arrive on schedule, just as Tang Xiuqi had planned.

古文：天后谓休璟曰：恨用卿晚。
现代文：武则天对休璟说，恨我重用你晚了。
English: Wu Zetian said to Hume, "I hate to have to use you again, but it's too late."

古文：因任之为相。
现代文：因此，唐休璟被任为宰相。
English: Therefore, Tang Xiuqi was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：李尽忠
现代文：李尽忠
English: Li Jianzhong

古文：唐天后中，契丹李尽忠，万荣之破营府也，以地牢囚汉俘数百人。
现代文：唐则天皇后中期，契丹人李尽忠、万荣是这样攻破荣府的。
English: In the middle of the second half of the Tang Dynasty, the Khitan Li Jianzhong and Wan Rong attacked Rongfu in this way.

古文：闻麻仁节等诸军欲至，乃令守囚璟等绐之曰：家口饥寒，不能存活。求待国家兵到，吾等即降。
现代文：先是在地牢里囚禁了汉族的俘虏数百人，听说麻仁节等人要来此地，李尽忠便命令看守囚犯的狱卒欺骗囚犯们说：我们家里人忍饥挨饿，很难活命，等到大唐的兵一到，我们就投降。
English: First, he imprisoned hundreds of Han prisoners in a dungeon. When he heard that people would come to the dungeon for the Ma Ren Festival, Li Jianzhong ordered the prison guards to deceive the prisoners, saying: "Our family members are starving, it is difficult to survive, and as soon as the soldiers from the Great Tang arrive, we will surrender."

古文：其囚日别与一顿粥，引出安慰曰：吾此无饮食养汝，又不忍杀汝，总放归若何？
现代文：每天给囚犯加了一顿粥，又放出来安慰说，我们这里没有粮食养活你们，又不忍心杀了你们，现在把你们都放回去。
English: Every day, they added a bowl of porridge to the prisoners, and then let them out to comfort them, saying, "We don't have the food to feed you here, and we don't have the heart to kill you, so let us send you all back now."

古文：众皆拜伏乞命。乃绐放去。
现代文：众囚犯跪拜感谢不杀之恩，便把他们假意释放了。
English: The prisoners knelt down and thanked him for not killing them, and he released them on the pretext.

古文：至幽州，具说饥冻逗留。
现代文：到了幽州，囚犯们纷纷述说忍饥挨饿的情形。
English: When they arrived at Yuzhou, the prisoners told one after another about how they had to endure starvation.

古文：兵士闻之，争欲先入。
现代文：兵士们听到后，很同情他们，让他们进去了。
English: Hearing this, the soldiers took pity on them and let them in.

古文：至黄獐峪，贼又令老者投官军，送遗老牛瘦马于道侧。
现代文：他们也就争先恐后地蜂拥而入。麻仁节率军至黄獐峪。李尽忠又命令老年人投官军，并把老牛瘦马放在道旁。
English: They also swarmed in one after another. Asahin led the army to Huangpi. Li Jianzhong also ordered the elderly to join the army, and put the old cow and thin horse on the side of the road.

古文：麻仁节等三军，弃步卒，将马先争入，被贼设伏横截。军将被索搨之，生擒节等。
现代文：麻仁节等率军来到这里，不步行都争骑道旁老马，被贼预设的埋伏截击，军将被绳索套住，活捉了麻仁节等人。
English: The army led by Ma Renjie and others came here, not on foot but on horseback, and was ambushed and intercepted by the thieves. The army would be roped in, and Ma Renjie and others were captured alive.

古文：死者填山谷，罕有一遗。
现代文：死者都填进山谷中，很少有一个遗漏的。
English: The dead are all crammed into the valley, rarely is one left out.

古文：封常清
现代文：封常清
English: Fong Changqing

古文：封常清细瘦目颣，脚短而跛。
现代文：封常清，细瘦、斜眼、脚短，而且有些瘸。
English: The seal is clear, slender, cross-eyed, short-legged, and somewhat emaciated.

古文：高仙芝为夫蒙灵察都知兵马使，常清为仙芝傔。
现代文：高仙芝任夫蒙灵察都知兵马使。封常清为他的副将。
English: Gao Xianzhi appointed his husband, Meng Lingcha, as an envoy to the Imperial Japanese Army. He appointed Changqing as his vice-general.

古文：会达览部落皆叛，自黑山北向，西趋碎叶。使仙芝以骑二千邀截之。
现代文：这时正赶上达览部落叛乱，从黑山以北，直到碎叶，派高仙芝率二千骑兵截击。
English: At this time, it was catching up with the Dazhan tribal rebellion, from the north of Montenegro to the broken leaves, and sent Gao Xianzhi with two thousand cavalry to intercept.

古文：常清于幕中潜作捷书，仙芝所欲言，无不周悉。
现代文：封常清在军幕中作报捷书。高仙芝想说的，他在报捷书中都写出来了。
English: Feng Changqing wrote a report on the victory in the military curtain. What Gao Xianzhi wanted to say, he wrote in the report on the victory.

古文：仙芝异之。
现代文：高仙芝很惊异。
English: Gao Xianzhi was surprised.

古文：军回，仙芝见判官刘眺、独孤峻等，遂问曰：前者捷书，何人所作？
现代文：军队回来后，仙芝见到判官刘眺、独孤峻等人，他们问高仙芝先前那报捷书，是谁作的？
English: After the army returned, Xianzhi saw the judges Liu Zhan, Du Guojun and others. They asked Gao Xianzhi who had written the previous report.

古文：副大使何得有此人？
现代文：副手中哪有这样的人才？
English: What deputy has such talent?

古文：仙芝曰：即傔人封常清也，见在门外马边。
现代文：高仙芝说，是我的副手封常清，他现在门外马旁。
English: Gao Xianzhi said that it was my deputy, Fong Changqing, who was now standing outside the gate.

古文：眺等揖仙芝，命常清进坐与语，如旧相识。
现代文：刘眺等人求仙芝，命封常清进来坐，并互相谈话，谈得很投机，好象旧相识似的。
English: Liu Zhan and the others begged Xianzhi to let Changqing come in and sit down, and they talked to each other, very opportunistically, as if they were old acquaintances.

古文：后仙芝为安西节度使，奏常清为节度判官。
现代文：后来，高仙芝当了安西节度使，奏请封常清为节度使判官。
English: Later, Gao Xianzhi became the Anxi Festival Commissioner, and asked Feng Changqing to be the judge of the Festival Commissioner.

古文：仙芝每出征讨，常令常清知留后事。
现代文：仙芝每次出去征讨，常令常清留守管事。
English: Whenever Xian Zhi went out to collect money, he often ordered Changqing to stay behind to supervise.

古文：常清有才学，果决。
现代文：常清有才学，办事果断。
English: Changqing has the ability to learn and act decisively.

古文：仙芝乳母子郑德铨已为郎将，威望动三军。德铨见常清出其门，素易之，走马突常清而去。
现代文：高仙芝的乳母之子郑德铨已当了郎将，军中威望很高，德铨经常见常清从仙芝门下出出进进，郑就很轻视常清。
English: Zheng Deyu, the son of Gao Xianzhi's wet nurse, had already become the general's son-in-law. He was highly respected in the army. Deyu often saw Changqing coming and going from under Xianzhi's door. Zheng despised Changqing.

古文：常清至使院，命左右密引至厅，经数重门，皆随后闭之。
现代文：有一次郑骑马从常清身旁走过去。常清到了使院，命令手下人秘密把郑德铨引进大厅，经过好几道门。每过一道门，就把门关上。
English: Once, Zheng rode past Changqing on horseback. When Changqing arrived at the Legation, he ordered his subordinates to secretly bring Zheng Deyao into the hall, passing through several doors. Every time they passed a door, they closed the door.

古文：常清案后起谓之曰：常清起自细微，预中丞傔，中丞再不纳，郎将岂不知乎？
现代文：封常清从案后站起来对他说，我封常清出身贫贱，我想当中丞的副手，中丞再三不采纳，郎将你怎么会不知道呢？
English: Fong Changqing stood up after the case and said to him, "I, Fong Changqing, come from a poor background. I think that the vice-chairman of Zhongzheng, Zhongzheng repeatedly refused to adopt, how could you not know?

古文：今中丞过听，以常清为留后使，郎将何得无礼，对中使相凌。
现代文：现在中丞不听谄言，任我为留后使，郎将你怎能无礼，对我进行凌辱。
English: Now, Nakajo doesn't listen to my advice and allows me to stay on as his envoy, so how can you be so rude and insult me?

古文：因叱之，命勒回，即杖六十，面仆地曳出。
现代文：因此，斥责了德铨，并命绑起来，打了六十板子，爬在地上拽出去。
English: Therefore, he reprimanded Dehong and ordered him to tie him up, beat him with sixty boards, crawl on the ground and drag him out.

古文：仙芝妻及乳母，于门外号哭救之，不得。
现代文：仙芝的妻子和乳母在门外号哭求情，也没行。
English: Senshi's wife and nanny were crying and pleading outside the door, but it was no use.

古文：后仙芝见常清，遂无一言，常清亦不之谢。
现代文：后来，仙芝见到常清，一句话也不说，常清也不请求谢罪。
English: Later, when Xianzhi saw Changqing, he did not say a word, nor did Changqing ask for forgiveness.

古文：后充安西节度使。
现代文：后来，封常清充任安西节度使。
English: Later, he was appointed as the envoy to the Anxi Festival.

古文：天宝十四载，朝于华清宫。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十四年，在华清宫朝见皇帝。
English: In the 14th year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, he met the emperor at the Huaqing Palace.

古文：玄宗问以凶逆之事，计将安出？
现代文：玄宗问起安禄山谋叛之事，让封常清出个主意。
English: Xuanzong asked about the Anlu Mountain treason plot and let Feng Changqing come up with an idea.

古文：常清乃大言以慰玄宗之意曰：臣请挑马棰渡河，计日取逆胡首，悬于阙下。
现代文：封常清为安慰玄宗，大言不惭地说：臣请策马渡河，按计算的时间，取来安禄山的首级，悬于朝门。
English: In order to comfort Xuanzong, Fong Changqing said boldly: "Minister, please arrange for the horse to cross the river, according to the calculated time, take the head of Anlu Mountain, and hang it on the imperial gate."

古文：玄宗忧而壮其言。
现代文：玄宗李隆基尽管很忧心。
English: Xuanzong Li Longji is nevertheless very worried.

古文：至东都，旬朔，召募六万。
现代文：但是还夸奖了他。封常清到了东都洛阳，半月后召募了六万士兵。
English: However, he also praised him. Feng Changqing arrived in the eastern capital Luoyang, and half a month later he recruited sixty thousand soldiers.

古文：频战不利，遂与高仙芝退守潼关。
现代文：多次交战不利遂与高仙芝退守潼关。
English: After several unsuccessful battles, he and Gao Xianzhi retreated to Shaoguan.

古文：仙芝副荣王琬领五万人进击。
现代文：仙芝给荣王李琬做副手领五万人进击。
English: Xian Zhi made Rong Wang Lijun his deputy to lead 50,000 people to attack.

古文：十二月十日至陕州，十一日常清败于东京，十三日禄山入东京。
现代文：十二月十日到陕州，十一日常清在东京失败，十三日安禄山入东京。
English: On December 10th, he went to Shaanxi, on the 11th, he failed in Tokyo, and on the 13th, he entered Tokyo.

古文：常清奔至陕州。以贼锋不可当，乃烧太原仓，引兵退趋潼关，缮修守具。
现代文：常清奔至陕州，叛贼的锋芒锐不可挡，烧掉了太原仓，领兵退入潼关，修缮了防守工事。
English: Changqing rushed to Shaanxi, the traitor's sharp edge was unstoppable, burned down the Taiyuan warehouse, led the troops to retreat into Shaoguan, and repaired the defensive works.

古文：贼寻至关，不能入，仙芝之力。
现代文：叛贼又很快地追到潼关，由于高仙芝率众奋力抵抗，叛贼没能攻入。
English: The rebels soon chased them to Shaoguan. Due to Gao Xianzhi's strenuous resistance, the rebels were unable to break in.

古文：乃削常清官爵，令白衣于仙芝军效力。
现代文：后来，因封常清多次败兵被削掉了官职，以普通百姓的身份在高仙芝军中效力。
English: Later, he was stripped of his official position due to his many defeats in the siege of Changqing, and served in the Gao Xianzhi Army as an ordinary citizen.

古文：监军边令诚每事干之，仙芝多不从。
现代文：监军边令诚对军中之事每每干涉介入，仙芝多不服从。
English: The military overseer, the border marshal, interfered in the affairs of the army from time to time, and Senchi often disobeyed.

古文：令诚入奏事，具言奔败之状。
现代文：边令诚便把高仙芝、封常清兵败的情况向皇上奏了一本。
English: As a result, Bianlingcheng reported to the emperor the circumstances of the defeat of Gao Xianzhi and Feng Changqing.

古文：玄宗怒，遣令诚斩之。
现代文：唐玄宗大怒，派令诚斩高、封二人。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was furious and ordered Cheng Cheng to be beheaded and two others to be imprisoned.

古文：常清临刑上表。既刑，陈其尸于蘧蒢之上。
现代文：封常清临刑上过奏表，但被斩了，将其尸体放在芦席上。
English: Changqing Lin was sentenced to death, but he was beheaded and his body was placed on the gurney.

古文：令诚谓仙芝曰：大夫亦有恩命。
现代文：边令诚又对高仙芝说：皇上对你也有恩命。
English: Bian Rongcheng also said to Gao Xianzhi: The emperor also has a boon for you.

古文：仙芝遽下至常请所刑处。
现代文：仙芝很快走到常清受刑的地方。
English: Xian Zhi quickly walked to the place where Changqing was imprisoned.

古文：仙芝曰：我退罪他，死不敢辞。然以我为减截兵粮及赐物，则诬我也。
现代文：仙芝说：我退兵有罪，死不敢辞，说我截扣军饷和恩赐之物，则是诬陷我。
English: Xianzhi said, "I am guilty of deserting the army, and I dare not die. To say that I cut off the military pay and gifts is to frame me.

古文：谓令诚曰：上是天，下是地，兵士皆在，岂不知乎？
现代文：他又对边令诚说：上有天。下有地，兵士都在，他们能不知道吗？
English: He also said to the border guard: "Above is heaven, below is earth, soldiers are everywhere, can they not know?

古文：兵士齐呼曰：枉，其声殷地。
现代文：兵士齐呼冤枉，喊声震地。
English: The soldiers called out in unison, their shouts shaking the ground.

古文：仙芝目常清尸曰：封二，子从微至著，我引拔子，代我为节度。今日又与子同死于此，岂命也乎？
现代文：仙芝看着常清尸体说：封二，你从贫贱到显赫，是我提拔你的，代我为节度使，我今天又和你同死在这里，这是命中注定的么？
English: Xianzhi looked at Changqing's corpse and said, "Feng Er, you have risen from poverty to prominence. It was I who promoted you and arranged the festival on my behalf. Today, I am dying here with you. Is this fate?

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：说完，他也被斩了。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：李光弼
现代文：李光弼
English: Lee Kuan Yew

古文：李光弼讨史思明，师于野水渡，既夕还军，留其卒一千人。
现代文：李光弼在野水渡地方征讨史思明，到了晚上，军队撤回，只留了一千多人。
English: In the evening, the army withdrew, leaving only more than a thousand people.

古文：谓雍颢曰：贼将高晖、李日越、喻文景，皆万人敌也。思明必使一人劫我。
现代文：李光弼对雍颢说：贼将高晖、李日越、喻文景，都是万人才能抵挡的人，史思明必然派一人来劫我。
English: Li Guangyao said to Yongyao: Thieves will rob Gao Yao, Li Riyue and Yu Wenjing, all of whom can be resisted by tens of thousands of people. Shi Siming will certainly send someone to rob me.

古文：我且去之，子领卒待贼于此。至勿与战，降则俱来。
现代文：我先走了，你领士兵在这等他们，不准和他们交战；他们若是投降，就和他们一起来。
English: I'll go first. Have your soldiers wait for them here. Don't fight them. If they surrender, come with them.

古文：其日，思明召日越曰：李君引兵至野水，此成擒也。汝以铁骑宵济，为我取之。
现代文：这天，史思明召李日越说：你领兵去野水渡，这次一定能抓住他，你派铁骑晚上渡过去，为我抓来。
English: On this day, Shi Siming called Li Yue and said, "You lead the soldiers to the Wild Water Crossing, and this time you will surely be able to catch him. You should send the cavalry to cross the river at night and capture him for me."

古文：命曰：必获李君，不然无归！
现代文：又下命令，必须抓到李光弼，否则，你就别回来。
English: He also ordered that Li Guangyao must be caught, otherwise, don't come back.

古文：日越引骑五百，晨压颢军。
现代文：李日越率领五百骑兵，早晨接近了雍颢的军队。
English: In the morning, Li Riyue led 500 cavalry and approached Yongzheng's army.

古文：颢阻濠休卒，吟啸相视。
现代文：雍颢的士兵在护城河边，只是互相看着喊叫。
English: Yongxing's soldiers stand at the edge of the moat, just looking at each other and shouting.

古文：日越怪之，问曰：太尉在乎？
现代文：李日越感觉很奇怪，问太尉在吗？
English: Li Riyue felt very strange and asked if the captain was there.

古文：曰：夜去矣。
现代文：回答说，夜间走了。
English: He replied that he had left in the night.

古文：兵几何？
现代文：又问，你们有多少兵？
English: He also asked, how many soldiers do you have?

古文：曰：千人，将谓谁？曰雍颢也。
现代文：回答说，一千人。又问，将领是谁，答，是雍颢。
English: And he answered, A thousand. And he said, Who is the captain? And he said, A young lion.

古文：日越沉吟久，谓其下曰：我受命必得李君，今获颢，不塞此望，必见害，不如降之。
现代文：李日越沉思良久，对他部下说，我接受的命令是必须抓到李光弼，现在抓到雍颢不能满足史思明的愿望，回去我必死，不如投降。
English: Li Rixue pondered for a long time and said to his subordinates, "The order I received was that Li Guangyao must be captured. Now, capturing Yongzheng cannot satisfy Shi Siming's wish. If I go back, I will surely die. It is better to surrender."

古文：遂请降。颢与之俱至。
现代文：于是李日越便投降了，和雍颢一起到了唐营。
English: As a result, Li Nichiyue surrendered and went to the Tang camp with Yong Xuan.

古文：光弼悉又尝伏军守河阳，与史思明相持经年。
现代文：李光弼曾经领兵守河阳，与史思明对持了一年。
English: Li Guangyao once led the troops to guard Kheyang, and he and Shi Siming fought for a year.

古文：思明有战马千匹，每日洗马于河南，以示其多。
现代文：史思明有一千多匹战马，每天在河南边洗马，用来显示他的马多兵强。
English: Shi Siming has more than a thousand war horses. He washes them every day on the south side of the river to show how strong his horses are.

古文：光弼乃于诸营检获牝马五百匹，待思明马至水际，尽驱出之。
现代文：李光弼便在诸营中选出母马五百匹，等史思明的马下河时，他把母马赶下河，因为母马都有马驹在城内，所以母马不间断地嘶鸣。
English: Li Guangyao then selected five hundred mares from the battalions, and when Shi Siming's horse went down the river, he drove the mare down the river, because the mare had foals in the city, so the mare hissed uninterruptedly.

古文：洛城无粮，又不可守。
现代文：思明的战马听着母马嘶叫，便渡过河束，李光弼都赶进了军营。
English: Siming's warhorse listened to the mare's neighing and crossed the river, and Li Guangyao rushed into the military camp.

古文：公计若何？陟曰：加兵陕州，退守潼关。
现代文：又，李光弼在河阳时，听说史思明已过了黄河，便从远道迂回赶到了东能守，你怎么想的？韦陟说：增兵陕州，退守潼关。
English: In addition, when Li Guangya was in Heyang, he heard that Shi Siming had crossed the Yellow River, so he took a detour from the long road and rushed to Dongneng. What do you think? Wei Wei said: Increase troops in Shaanxi and retreat to Shaoguan.

古文：光弼曰：此盖兵家常势，非用奇之策也。
现代文：李光弼说，你这是用兵的常规，不是奇妙之策。
English: Li Guangyao said, "This is the routine of using soldiers, not a strange strategy.

古文：不若移军河阳，北阻泽潞，据三城以抗之。胜即擒之，败即自守。表里相应，使贼不敢西侵，此则猿臂之势也。
现代文：不如移军河阳北边在泽潞阻击，据守三城与他对抗，胜了就可抓住他；败了，则可据城自守，内外呼应，使贼不敢西侵，这就叫猿臂之势。
English: It would be better to move the army to the north of Heyang to resist in Zeyu, defend the three cities against him, and if you win, you can catch him; if you lose, you can defend yourself according to the city, echo inside and outside, so that the thief does not dare to invade the west, this is called the situation of the monkey arm.

古文：思明至偃师，光弼令将士赴河阳，独以麾下五百余骑为殿军，当石桥路，秉烛徐行，贼不敢逼。
现代文：史思明到了偃师。李光弼命令将士赴河阳，以他的五百多骑兵殿后。用石头挡住路和桥，只能打着灯笼慢慢走。
English: Li Guangyao ordered his generals to march to Heyang, with more than five hundred cavalry behind him. They blocked the roads and bridges with stones, and had to walk slowly with lanterns.

古文：乙夜达城。
现代文：贼不敢逼近，晚间到达城内。
English: The thieves did not dare to approach and reached the city in the evening.

古文：迟明，思明悉众来攻，诸将决死而战，杀贼万余众，生擒八十人，器械粮储万计。
现代文：第二天黎明，史思明率众来攻城，诸将拼死而战，杀贼一万多。活捉了八十人，缴获的器械粮食上万，并抓住了大将徐璜、王李秦。
English: At the dawn of the next day, Shi Siming led the crowd to attack the city. The generals fought to the death, killing more than 10,000 thieves. They captured 80 people alive, seized tens of thousands of pieces of equipment and grain, and captured generals Xu Yao and Wang Liqin.

古文：擒其大将徐璜、王李秦思明大惧，退筑城以相拒。
现代文：史思明很惊慌，只好退回去筑城对抗。
English: Shi Siming panicked and had to retreat back to the city to fight.

古文：光弼将战，谓左右曰：凡战危事，胜负击之。光弼位为三公，不可死于贼手。事之不捷，誓投于河。
现代文：李光弼又要出战，对他的部下说：凡是战争到了最后的时候，都关系到胜利与失败的问题，我李光弼身为三公，决不能死在敌人之手，若是失败了，我决心投河。
English: Li Guangyao wanted to go to war again, and said to his subordinates: "Whenever a war comes to an end, the question of victory and defeat is involved. I, Li Guangyao, as the Three Wise Men, must not die at the hands of the enemy. If I fail, I am determined to throw myself into the river."

古文：适城上见河稍远，恐或急事难至，遂置剑于靴中，有必死之志。
现代文：可是城与河离的稍远，怕到时候难到河边，他便把短剑放在靴中，他下定了必死的决心。
English: But the city was a little far from the river, and fearing that it would be difficult to reach the river at that time, he put his dagger in his shoe and made a fatal decision.

古文：光弼之未至河南也，田神功平刘展后，逗留于杨府，尚衡、殷仲卿相攻于兖郓，来瑱旅拒而还襄阳。
现代文：这一仗打胜了。他在城西向西方拜舞。军中将士大为感动。后来军队转移到临淮镇守，李光弼带病而行，兵士们抬着他直接到了泗州，李光弼没有到达河南。田神功打败刘展后，逗留在杨府；尚衡、殷仲卿二人攻打兖、郓；来瑱军拒贼回到襄阳。
English: This battle was won. He bowed to the west in the west of the city. The lieutenant general Shida was moved. Later, the army was transferred to the Linhuai Town Guard. Li Guangya was sick and walked. The soldiers carried him directly to Luzhou. Li Guangya did not reach Henan. After Tian Sheng defeated Liu Zhan, he stayed in Yangfu; Shang Heng and Yin Zhongqing two fought and fought; came to fight the army to refuse the thieves to return to Xiangyang.

古文：朝廷患之。及光弼至徐州，史朝义退走，田神功遽归河南。尚衡、殷仲卿、来瑱皆惧其威名，相继赴关。
现代文：朝廷深患叛贼未除，令光弼到徐州，史朝义退走了。田神功也很快地归回河南，尚衡、殷仲卿、来瑱都惧怕光弼，相继赴关。
English: The imperial court was still plagued by traitors, so Guang Xuan went to Xuzhou, and Shi Chao Yi retreated. Tian Sheng Gong also quickly returned to Henan. Shang Heng, Yin Zhongqing, and Lai Ye were all afraid of Guang Xuan and went to Guan one after another.

古文：吐蕃将犯上都，手诏追光弼率众赴长安。
现代文：吐蕃进犯京都，皇上下手诏催李光弼速率兵赴长安。
English: When the Tubo invaded Kyoto, the emperor ordered Li Guangyao to speed up his troops to Chang'an.

古文：光弼与程元振不协，观天下之变，迁延不至。
现代文：李光弼与程元振二人不和睦，观察局势的变化，迟迟不到京城。
English: Li Guangyao and Cheng Yuan Zhen are two people who are not in harmony, observe the changes in the situation, and are late to Beijing.

古文：初光弼用师严整，天下服其威名。凡所号令，诸将不敢仰视。
现代文：起初，光弼治军很严，威名震天下，凡是他下的命令，诸将不敢不服。
English: At first, Guang Xuan ruled the army very strictly, and his prestige shook the world. The generals did not dare to disobey any of his orders.

古文：及其有田神功等诸军，皆不受其制。因此不得志，愧耻成疾，薨于徐州，年五十七。
现代文：后来，有田神功等诸军，都不受他的控制，因此，光弼很不得志，感到很耻辱，很惭愧，忧郁成疾，死于徐州，时年五十七岁。
English: Later, the armies of Arita Shingong and others were not under his control. Therefore, Guangyao was very disappointed, felt very humiliated, very ashamed, and became depressed. He died in Xuzhou at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：其母衰老，庄宅使鱼朝恩吊问。
现代文：他的母亲很衰老了。朝廷派庄宅使鱼朝恩去吊唁。
English: His mother was very old, and the imperial court sent the manor house to make Yu Chaon go to offer condolences.

