古文：诸侯之大夫盟于宋，楚令尹子木欲袭晋军，曰： 若尽晋师而杀赵武，则晋可弱也。 
现代文：各诸侯国的大夫在宋国会盟，楚国的令尹子木想偷袭晋军，说： 如果消灭晋军，杀了赵武，那么晋国就可以削弱了。 
English: The doctors of the various states were in the Song National League, and Yin Zimu, the commander of Chu, wanted to make a surprise attack on the Jin army, saying, "If we eliminate the Jin army and kill Zhao Wu, then Jin can be weakened."

古文：文子闻之，谓叔向曰： 若之何？ 
现代文：赵武听说后，对叔向说： 怎么办？ 
English: After hearing this, Zhao Wu said to his uncle, "What should we do?

古文：叔向曰： 子何患焉。
现代文：叔向回答说： 你担心什么呢？
English: Xiang Xiang replied, "What are you worried about?

古文：忠不可暴，信不可犯，忠自中，而信自身，其为德也深矣，其为本也固矣，故不可抈也。
现代文：忠诚就不会被侵暴，信义就不怕别人陵犯。忠诚出自内心，信义出于自身，它们作为道德来说够深厚的了，作为根基来说够坚固的了，所以是不可动摇的。
English: Loyalty will not be violated by violence, and faithfulness is not afraid of other people's gravediggers. Loyalty comes from the heart, and faithfulness comes from oneself. They are deep enough as morals, and strong enough as a foundation, so they are unshakable.

古文：今我以忠谋诸侯，而以信覆之，荆之逆诸侯也亦云，是以在此。
现代文：现在我们忠心为诸侯作打算，用守信义去证明我们的忠诚，楚国迎接诸侯时也是这么说的，因此在这里结盟。
English: Now we are loyally making plans for the lords, proving our loyalty by keeping faith, which is what Chu said when it welcomed the lords, so we are allied here.

古文：若袭我，是自背其信而塞其忠也。
现代文：如果楚国偷袭我们，那就自己违背了信义而自绝了忠诚。
English: If the State of Chu attacks us unannounced, then they will have broken their word of trust and renounced their loyalty.

古文：信反必斃，忠塞无用，安能害我？
现代文：背弃信义必然垮台，自绝忠诚诸侯就不能为其所用，怎么能对我们造成危害呢？
English: Betraying one's faith is bound to lead to one's downfall. Self-denying loyalty cannot be used by princes. How can it harm us?

古文：且夫合诸侯以为不信，诸侯何望焉。
现代文：况且会合诸侯而不讲信义，那诸侯们还指望什么呢？
English: Moreover, if princes come together and do not speak of faithfulness, what else can princes expect?

古文：为此行也，荆败我，诸侯必叛之，子何爱于死，死而可以固晋国之盟主，何惧焉？ 
现代文：这一次前去，即使楚国打败了我们，诸侯们也一定会背叛他们，你何必如此贪恋生命呢。如果死了可以巩固晋国的盟主地位，有什么可害怕的呢？ 
English: This time, go forward. Even if the State of Chu defeats us, the princes will surely betray them. Why should you be so greedy for life? If you die, you can consolidate the status of Jin's ally, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：是行也，以藩为军，攀辇即利而舍，候遮扞卫不行，楚人不敢谋，畏晋之信也。
现代文：在这次行动中，晋军只设藩篱为营，牵引战车到水草便利的地方驻扎，白天不用瞭望和掩蔽，夜里不设岗哨捍卫，楚国没敢图谋晋军，是因为害怕晋军讲信义。
English: In this operation, the Jin army only set up a fence as a camp, and stationed the towed chariots in a place convenient for water and grass. During the day, there was no need to look out and cover up, and there was no guard post to defend at night. Chu did not dare to conspire with the Jin army because he was afraid that the Jin army would be loyal.

古文：自是没平公无楚患。
现代文：从这之后直到晋平公死，始终没有楚国挑起的战患。
English: From then until the death of Emperor Jinping, there was never a war provoked by the State of Chu.

