古文：芮良夫之诗云∶ 自有肺肠，俾民卒狂。 
现代文：相传为芮良夫的《桑柔》诗里说： 昏君自有歹心肠，逼得百姓要发狂。 
English: In the poem "Mulberry Melody," which is said to have been composed by Gong Liangfu, it says: "Dim Jun has a wicked heart, forcing the people to go mad."

古文：夫心险如山，口壅若川，怨怒之情不一，欢谑之言无方。
现代文：国君的心比高山还险恶，人民群众的嘴却像江河那么难于堵塞；群众怨恨的心情各不相同，他们嘲笑讽刺的话也是各种各样的。
English: The heart of the sovereign is more treacherous than a mountain, but the mouths of the people are like rivers that are difficult to block; the resentment of the masses is different, and their ridicule and sarcasm are also various.

古文：昔华元弃甲，城者发睅目之讴；臧纥丧师，国人造侏儒之歌；并嗤戏形貌，内怨为俳也。
现代文：从前宋国华元为郑国所败，筑城的人就作 睅其目 的歌来嘲笑他；鲁国臧纥为邾国所败，鲁国人就作 侏儒侏儒 的歌来讽刺他。
English: When the Song Dynasty's Emperor Huayuan was defeated by the Zheng Dynasty, the people who built the city mocked him with a song called "The Dwarf's Eyes"; when the Song Dynasty's Emperor Lu was defeated by the Han Dynasty, the people of Lu made a song called "The Dwarf's Dwarf" to satirize him.

古文：又蚕蟹鄙谚，狸首淫哇，苟可箴戒，载于礼典，故知谐辞讔言，亦无弃矣。
现代文：这些例子都是因为有教育别人的作用，所以就记载在《礼记》里面。由此可见， 谐 和 隐 是不应该被忽视的。
English: These examples are recorded in the "Li Ji" because they have the effect of educating others. It can be seen that harmony and concealment should not be ignored.

古文：谐之言皆也，辞浅会俗，皆悦笑也。
现代文： 谐 的意义和 皆 相近，是一种语言浅显，适合于一般人，大家听了会发笑的作品。
English: The meaning of "harmonious" is similar to that of "hilarious." It is a simple language, suitable for ordinary people, and everyone can laugh when listening to the work.

古文：昔齐威酣乐，而淳于说甘酒；楚襄宴集，而宋玉赋好色。
现代文：战国时齐威王过度地饮酒作乐，淳于髡就用喝酒的坏处来说服他；楚襄王常常召集宴会，宋玉就写《登徒子好色赋》来讽刺他。
English: During the Warring States period, King Qi Wei drank excessively to amuse himself, and Jun Yurong used the bad effects of drinking to persuade him; King Chu Xiang often held banquets, and Song Yu wrote "Deng Tu Zi Lustful Fu" to satirize him.

古文：意在微讽，有足观者。
现代文：这些都是存心婉讽对方，颇有可取之处。
English: All of this is a deliberate attempt to make fun of the other side, which is quite commendable.

古文：及优旃之讽漆城，优孟之谏葬马，并谲辞饰说，抑止昏暴。
现代文：还有秦代优旃谏阻二世在城墙上涂漆，楚国优孟谏阻庄王厚葬他的爱马：这些都是用曲曲折折加以修饰的话，来阻止昏君暴主的倒行逆施。
English: There is also the Qin Dynasty's Emperor Qianlong II painting the city wall, and the Chu Kingdom's Emperor Mengyuan Zhuang Wang burying his beloved horse: these are all words that are embellished with twists and turns to prevent the tyrant from going backwards.

古文：是以子长编史，列传滑稽，以其辞虽倾回，意归义正也。
现代文：所以司马迁写《史记》，就编入《滑稽列传》；因为他们的话虽然不太正常，但用意还是很好的。
English: Therefore, when Sima Qian wrote "Histories," it was compiled into "Comical Chronicles"; because although their words were not normal, their intention was still good.

古文：但本体不雅，其流易弊。
现代文：不过这类事情本身不是正面直说，所以其末流很容易出毛病。
English: However, this kind of thing is not straightforward in itself, so it is easy to go wrong in the end.

古文：于是东方、枚皋，餔糟啜醨，无所匡正，而诋曼媟弄，故其自称 为赋，乃亦俳也，见视如倡 ，亦有悔矣。
现代文：如汉代东方朔、枚皋等人，不过在朝廷里混饭吃，并不能纠正统治者的错误，仅仅是说些俏皮话，给人开开心而已。所以他们自己也说， 写赋只能嘲弄，结果被当做倡优看待。 可见他们也有点后悔了。
English: For example, in the Han Dynasty, Dongfang Shuo, Mian Ye and others, but eating in the imperial court can not correct the mistakes of the rulers, but only say some witticisms to make people happy. Therefore, they themselves also said that writing can only be mocked, and as a result, it was regarded as advocating excellence. It can be seen that they also regret a little.

古文：至魏人因俳说以著笑书，薛综凭宴会而发嘲调，虽抃笑衽席，而无益时用矣。
现代文：后来曹丕搜集谐谈，编成《笑书》。吴国薛综善于在筵席上说笑话，虽能娱乐在座的人，不过对当时政事并无好处。
English: Later, Cao Pi collected the witticisms and compiled them into "The Book of Jokes." Wu Guoxue was very good at telling jokes at banquets. Although he could entertain the people present, it was not good for the political affairs at that time.

古文：然而懿文之士，未免枉辔；潘岳丑妇之属，束皙卖饼之类，尤而效之，盖以百数。
现代文：可是后来的文人，却常常绕道到这种写作中来。如潘岳的《丑妇》、束皙的《卖饼》等等，明知故犯地来学写这种作品的，不下百余人。
English: Later writers, however, often took a detour into this kind of writing. For example, Pan Yue's "Ugly Woman," Sokcho's "Selling Pies," etc. There were no less than a hundred people who knowingly learned to write this kind of work.

古文：魏晋滑稽，盛相驱扇，遂乃应瑒之鼻，方于盗削卵；张华之形，比乎握舂杵。
现代文：到魏晋时期，讲滑稽话的风气很盛行；于是有人嘲笑应玚的鼻子好像被削的蛋，有人嘲笑张华的外貌好像舂槌等，都是些无聊的话，有损于谐辞的意义。
English: By the Wei and Jin dynasties, the culture of telling jokes was very popular; therefore, some people mocked Ying Yao's nose as if it were a shaved egg, some people mocked Zhang Hua's appearance as if it were a hammer, and so on. These are all boring words that detract from the meaning of witticisms.

古文：曾是莠言，有亏德音，岂非溺者之妄笑，胥靡之狂歌欤？
现代文：这不等于落水的人还在笑，犯罪的人还唱歌吗？ 讔 的意义就是隐藏，用隐约的言辞来暗藏某种意义，用曲折的譬喻来暗指某件事物。
English: Doesn't that mean that people who have fallen into the water are still laughing, and people who have committed crimes are still singing? The meaning of  is to hide, to use vague words to hide a certain meaning, and to use tortuous metaphors to allude to something.

古文：讔者，隐也。遁辞以隐意，谲譬以指事也。昔还社求拯于楚师，喻眢井而称麦麹；叔仪乞粮于鲁人，歌珮玉而呼庚癸；伍举刺荆王以大鸟，齐客讥薛公以海鱼；庄姬托辞于龙尾，臧文谬书于羊裘。
现代文：从前萧国还无社向楚国大夫求救，用 废井 和 麦鞠 做隐喻；吴国申叔仪向鲁军借粮，用 佩玉 为歌辞，以 庚癸 为呼号；楚国伍举用三年不飞不鸣的 大鸟 做比喻，来讽刺楚庄王；齐国有人讲海同鱼的关系，来讽谏薛公；楚国的庄姬用无尾的龙，来启发襄王注意后嗣；鲁国臧文仲假托 羊裘 等话，来暗示准备应付齐国的进攻。
English: In the past, Xiao Guo had no one to ask for help from the doctor of Chu Guo, using the waste well and the wheat ball as metaphors; Wu Guo Shen Shu Yi borrowed grain from the Lu army, using Peiyu as a song and Geng Yao as a call sign; Chu Guo Wu used the metaphor of a big bird that does not fly or sing for three years to satirize the king of Chu Zhuang; some people in Qi talked about the relationship between the sea and the fish to satirize Xue Gong; Zhuo Ji of Chu Guo used a tailless dragon to inspire the king of Xiang to pay attention to the heir; Lu Gu

古文：隐语之用，被于纪传。大者兴治济身，其次弼违晓惑。
现代文：这些讔语的作用，都记载在史书里面；大的可以振兴政治，并且有助于自身的显达；其次也可纠正某些错误，让迷惑的人明白过来。
English: The effects of these slang words are recorded in the history books; big ones can invigorate politics and help one's own enlightenment; secondly, they can also correct certain mistakes and make confused people understand.

古文：盖意生于权谲，而事出于机急，与夫谐辞，可相表里者也。
现代文：它们的用意虽然产生于权变狡诡，但常常是出于某种机要迫切的事情。讔语和谐辞，是可以相辅相成，互为表里的。
English: Although their intentions are born of power and cunning, they are often motivated by something urgent. Slang and harmonious speech can complement each other and are a mirror image of each other.

古文：汉世《隐书》，十有八篇，歆、固编文，录之赋末。
现代文：汉代的《隐书》有十八篇，刘歆和班固编目录的时候，把它们附在赋的后面。
English: The "Hidden Book" of the Han Dynasty has eighteen articles. When compiling the catalogue, Liu Xuan and Ban Gui attached them to the back of the Fu.

古文：昔楚庄、齐威，性好隐语。
现代文：从前楚庄王和齐威王都喜爱讔语。
English: In the past, the kings of Chuzhuang and Qiwei were both fond of slang.

古文：至东方曼倩，尤巧辞述。但谬辞诋戏，无益规补。
现代文：东方朔在这方面更是擅场；不过他常常用怪话来开玩笑，对于匡正过失毫无补益。
English: Dongfang Shuo is even better in this respect; however, he often jokes with strange words, which is of no help in correcting mistakes.

古文：自魏代以来，颇非俳优，而君子嘲隐，化为谜语。
现代文：从魏代以后，倡优不为人所喜爱，所以士大夫们就把讔语变为谜语。
English: Since the Wei Dynasty, advocating excellence has not been popular, so scholars have turned slang into riddles.

古文：谜也者，回互其辞，使昏迷也。
现代文：所谓 谜 ，就是用改头换面的辞句来迷糊对方。
English: The so-called riddle is to use disguised words to confuse the other party.

古文：或体目文字，或图象品物，纤巧以弄思，浅察以衒辞，义欲婉而正，辞欲隐而显。
现代文：有的是离文拆字，有的是刻划事物的形状；常常是用小聪明来卖弄才思，凭肤浅的见解来夸耀文辞。其实在内容方面应婉转而正确，在文辞方面应该含蓄而恰切。
English: Some of them take words out of the text, some of them describe the shape of things; they often use small cleverness to show off their talents, and boast their words with superficial opinions. In fact, they should be subtle and correct in terms of content, and subtle and appropriate in terms of words.

古文：荀卿《蚕赋》，已兆其体。至魏文、陈思，约而密之。高贵乡公，博举品物，虽有小巧，用乖远大。
现代文：从前荀卿的《赋篇》已开了端，到曹丕、曹植弟兄俩，便写得更为精练而周密；曹髦广泛地描绘事物，虽然有点小巧，可是并没有大的用处。
English: The "Fu Zhan" of the former Lord Zou had already begun, and by the time of the brothers Cao Zheng and Cao Zhi, it was written more concisely and thoroughly; Cao Xiang extensively described things, although it was a bit small, but it was not very useful.

古文：观夫古之为隐，理周要务，岂为童稚之戏谑，搏髀而忭笑哉！
现代文：试看古代的讔语，其中的道理都与重要事务有关，哪能像儿童的游戏，只是拍腿称快呢？
English: Try the ancient slang, the truth of which is related to important matters, which can be like a children's game, just patting the legs and saying fast?

古文：然文辞之有谐讔，譬九流之有小说，盖稗官所采，以广视听。若效而不已，则髡朔之入室，旃孟之石交乎？
现代文：文章中的谐辞讔语，就像各种学派中的小说一派。这种作品由低级官吏收集起来，可以使人扩大眼界，多知道些事理；如果不断学习这些，就可成为淳于髡等人的高徒、优旃等人的知友了。总结：
English: The witticisms and slang in the article are like novels from various schools. This kind of work, collected by low-level officials, can make people expand their horizons and know more facts; if you continue to learn these, you can become a high-level disciple of Jun Yu and others, and a friend of excellent scholars and others. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶古之嘲隐，振危释惫。
现代文：古代的谐辞讔语，可以挽救危机，解除困难。
English: The ancient humorous slang can save the crisis and relieve the difficulties.

古文：虽有丝麻，无弃菅蒯。
现代文：即使有了丝和麻，也不应抛弃野草。
English: Even with silk and flax, weeds should not be abandoned.

古文：会义适时，颇益讽诫。
现代文：谐讔合于大义而又用在恰当的时机，那是很有讽谏作用的。
English: It is very ironic when humour fits in with the greater good and is used at the right time.

古文：空戏滑稽，德音大坏。
现代文：如果仅仅是游戏滑稽，那就是很不好的谐讔了。
English: If it's just a joke, it's a bad joke.

