古文：凡战，若彼为客、我为主，不可轻战。
现代文：凡是与敌交战，如果敌方入侵我境，我方在本土实施防御作战时，不要轻率出击。
English: Whenever you are at war with the enemy, if the enemy invades our territory and we carry out defensive operations on our own soil, do not attack rashly.

古文：为吾兵安，士卒顾家，当集人聚谷，保城备险，绝其粮道。
现代文：为使我军安全无危，鉴于士兵恋乡易散，应当征集丁壮，囤积粮食，据守险要位置保卫城池，切断敌人的粮道。
English: In order to keep our army safe and sound, in view of the fact that soldiers fall in love with their hometowns and are easily dispersed, we should recruit Ding Zhuang, hoard grain, defend the city according to the critical position, and cut off the enemy's grain route.

古文：彼挑战不得，转输不至，俟其困敝而击之，则无不胜矣。
现代文：从而使敌人欲战不能，粮草不济，等它完全陷入困境和疲惫的时候再攻击他，再出兵反击它，必定能胜利。
English: In this way, the enemy will not be able to fight, and the enemy will not have enough grain and grass. When it is completely in trouble and exhausted, it will attack it again, and when it sends troops to counterattack it, it will surely be able to win.

古文：法曰： 自战其地为散地。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 在本国境内作战的地区叫做 散地 。 
English: As it is said in the art of war, the area in which the war is fought within the country is called the battlefield.

古文：《晋书》：后魏武帝，亲征后燕慕容德于邺地，前军大败绩。
现代文：《晋书》记载：北魏道武帝拓跋珪亲率大军进攻驻守邺城的后燕大将慕容德，魏前军拓跋章部被后燕军所击败。
English: "Jin Shu" records: Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba's relatives led a large army to attack Houyan General Murongde, who was stationed in Handan, and the former Wei army's Tuoba chapter was defeated by Houyan's army.

古文：德又欲攻之，别驾韩进曰： 古人先决胜庙堂，然后攻战。
现代文：慕容德打算乘胜再攻击北魏军，他的别驾韩淖进谏说： 古人用兵打仗，都是首先商讨好战略谋划，然后再出兵攻战。
English: Murongde intends to take advantage of the victory to attack the Northern Wei Army again. His accomplice, Han Xunjin, said: The ancients fought with soldiers, first discussing strategic planning, and then sending troops to fight.

古文：今魏不可击者四，燕不宜动者三。 
现代文：现在，对魏军不能攻击的原因有四条，而我军不宜轻易出兵的原因有三条。 
English: Now, there are four reasons why the Wei army cannot be attacked, and there are three reasons why our army should not easily send troops.

古文：德曰： 何故？ 
现代文：慕容德问道： 是什么原因？ 
English: Murong De asked: What is the reason?

古文：曰： 魏军远入，利在野战，一不可击也。深入近畿，致其死地，二不可击也。前锋既败，后阵必固，三不可击也。彼众我寡，四不可击也。
现代文：韩淖回答说： 魏军远离本土入侵我境，利于在平原旷野与我速战速决，这是不宜攻击的第一条理由；魏军深入我京都附近，这就将他的军队置于死地他必定拼死作战，这是魏军不宜攻击的第二条理由；魏军前锋遭到挫败，其后续部队必然固守阵地，这是魏军不可攻击的第三条理由；魏军众多，我军寡少，这是魏军不可攻击的第四条理由。
English: Han Zheng replied: The Wei army invaded our territory far away from the mainland, which is conducive to a quick battle with me on the plains and deserts. This is the first reason why it is not appropriate to attack; the Wei army penetrated into the vicinity of my Kyoto, which will put his army to death. He must fight to the death. This is the second reason why the Wei army is not appropriate to attack; the Wei army's forwards were defeated, and their follow-up troops must hold their positions. This is the third reason why the Wei army cannot be attacked; the Wei army is numerous, and our army is few. This is the fourth reason why the Wei army cannot be attacked.

古文：官军自战其地，一不宜动。动而不胜，众心难固，二不宜动。城隍未修，敌来未备，三不宜动。
现代文：而我军是在自己国土上作战，士兵恋乡容易逃散，这是我军不宜轻易出击的第一条理由；倘若出击而不胜，军心势必动摇，这是我军不宜轻易出击的第二条理由；我们的护城壕尚未修好，敌人来攻，我无法防守，这是我军不宜轻易出击的第三条理由。
English: On the other hand, our army is fighting on its own territory, and soldiers fall in love with their hometowns and easily disperse, which is the first reason why our army should not easily attack; if the attack is not successful, the military spirit is bound to be shaken, which is the second reason why our army should not easily attack; our moat has not yet been repaired, the enemy is attacking, I can not defend, which is the third reason why our army should not easily attack.

古文：此皆兵家所忌，不如深沟高垒，以佚待劳。
现代文：上述诸点，都是兵家所忌讳的问题。因此，不如凭据深沟高垒，固守防御，以逸待劳。
English: The above-mentioned points are all problems that are taboo for soldiers. Therefore, it is better to rely on deep trenches and high walls, adhere to defense, and wait for labor.

古文：彼千里馈粮，野无所掠，久则三军靡费，攻则士卒多毙，师老衅生，起而图之，可以捷也。 
现代文：魏军从千里之外运送军粮自然困难异常，而就地解决则现在野外又无粮食可以掠夺。这样，时间一长，就会因为消耗过大，而使士兵困毙增多。魏军长时间出征在外，其弱点就会逐渐暴露无遗，那时我军乘机奋起攻击它，便可以取得胜利了。 
English: It is naturally extremely difficult for the Wei army to transport military food from thousands of miles away, and there is no food to loot in the field to solve the problem on the spot. In this way, over time, the number of soldiers will increase due to excessive consumption. If the Wei army is away for a long time, its weaknesses will gradually be exposed, and then our army will take the opportunity to attack it and can win victory.

古文：德曰： 别驾之言，真良、平策也。 
现代文：慕容德听了韩的一席话后，十分赞赏地说道： 你的妙计，同张良、陈平一样，真是良好的计策！ 
English: After listening to Han Yu's speech, Mu Rongde said with great appreciation: Your brilliant plan, like Zhang Liang and Chen Ping, is really a good strategy!

