古文：十有九年春，王三月，宋人执滕子婴齐。
现代文：十九年春季，周历正月，宋人抓住了滕宣公。
English: In the spring of the 19th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, the Song people captured Teng Xuan Gong.

古文：夏六月，宋公、曹人、邾人盟于曹南。
现代文：夏季六月，宋公、曹人、邾人在曹南会盟。
English: In the summer of June, Song Gong, Cao Ren, and Yao Ren joined the Cao Nan Association.

古文：鄫子会盟于邾。
现代文：鄫子在邾国会盟。
English: Zou Zi is a member of the National League for Democracy.

古文：己酉，邾人执鄫子，用之。
现代文：己酉日，邾文公抓住了鄫子，利用其达到目的。
English: On the day of his death, he grabbed a pair of pliers and used them to achieve his goal.

古文：秋，宋人围曹。
现代文：秋季，宋国围困曹国。
English: In autumn, Song besieged Cao.

古文：卫人伐邢。
现代文：卫国攻打曹国。
English: The defenders of the country attacked Cao.

古文：冬，会陈人、蔡人、楚人、郑人盟于齐。
现代文：冬季，僖公与陈人、蔡人、楚人、郑人在齐国会盟。
English: In winter, Zeng Gong allied with Chen Ren, Cai Ren, Chu Ren and Zheng Ren in the Qing Dynasty.

古文：梁亡。
现代文：梁国灭亡。
English: Liang died.

古文：十九年春，遂城而居之。
现代文：十九年春季，秦国人就筑了城而移民居住在新里。
English: In the spring of the 19th year, the people of Qin built a city and immigrated to live in Xinli.

古文：夏，宋公使邾文公用鄫子于次睢之社，欲以属东夷。
现代文：宋人抓住了滕宣公。夏季，宋襄公让邾文公杀死鄫子来祭祀次睢的土地神，想因此使东夷来降附。
English: The Song people captured Teng Xuan Gong. In the summer, Song Xiang Gong asked Xuanwen Gong to kill a mule to sacrifice to the land god of the second mule, hoping to make the Eastern Yi come to the annexation.

古文：司马子鱼曰： 古者六畜不相为用，小事不用大牲，而况敢用人乎？
现代文：司马子鱼说： 古时候六种畜牲不能相互用来祭祀，小的祭祀不杀大牲口，何况敢于用人作牺牲呢？
English: Sima Zi Yu said: In ancient times, the six kinds of animals could not be used for mutual sacrifice. Small sacrifices did not kill large animals. How dare they use human beings as sacrifices?

古文：祭祀以为人也，民，神之主也，用人，其谁飨之？
现代文：祭祀是为了人。百姓，是神的主人。杀人祭祀，有什么神来享用？
English: Sacrifices are for people. The people are the masters of the gods. Murderous sacrifices, what gods are there to enjoy?

古文：齐桓公存三亡国以属诸侯，义士犹曰薄德。今一会而虐二国之君，又用诸淫昏之鬼，将以求霸，不亦难乎？
现代文：齐桓公恢复了三个被灭亡的国家以使诸侯归附，义士还说他薄德，现在一次会盟而侵害两个国家的国君，又用来祭祀邪恶昏乱的鬼神，要拿这个来求取霸业，不也是很难吗？
English: Lord Qi Huan restored three countries that had been destroyed in order to gain the allegiance of the princes. The righteous also said that he lacked virtue. Now, he has once made an alliance and infringed upon the sovereigns of two countries, and used it to sacrifice evil and confused ghosts and gods. Is it not also difficult to use this to seek hegemony?

古文：得死为幸！ 
现代文：得以善终就算幸运了。 
English: You're lucky if it ends well.

古文：秋，卫人伐邢，以报菟圃之役。
现代文：秋季，卫军进攻邢国，以报复菟圃这一役。
English: In the autumn, the Imperial Guards attacked Shikoku to avenge the Battle of Shibutsu.

古文：于是卫大旱，卜有事于山川，不吉。
现代文：这时卫国大旱，为祭祀山川而占卜，不吉利。
English: At this time, the Great Drought of the Great Patriotic War, divination for the purpose of sacrificing mountains and rivers began, which was unlucky.

古文：甯庄子曰： 昔周饥，克殷而年丰。
现代文：甯庄子说： 从前周室发生饥荒，打败了商朝就丰收。
English: Zou Zhuangzi said: "There was a famine in Zhouzhuang before, but after defeating the Shang Dynasty, there was a bumper harvest.

古文：今邢方无道，诸侯无伯，天其或者欲使卫讨邢乎？ 
现代文：现在正当邢国无道，诸侯没有领袖，上天或者是要让卫国进攻邢国吧！ 
English: Right now, the country has no way out, and the princes have no leader. Heaven may want to let the motherland attack the country!

古文：从之，师兴而雨。
现代文：听从了他的话，征集军队就下了雨。
English: After listening to his words, it started to rain.

古文：宋人围曹，讨不服也。
现代文：宋军包围曹国，为了讨伐曹国的不肯顺服。
English: The Song army encircled Cao, in order to fight against Cao's refusal to submit.

古文：子鱼言于宋公曰： 文王闻崇德乱而伐之，军三旬而不降，退修教而复伐之，因垒而降。
现代文：子鱼对宋公说： 文王听到崇国德行昏乱而去攻打，打了三十天，崇国不投降。退兵回国，修明教化，再去攻打，文王就驻扎在过去所筑的营垒里，崇国就投降了。
English: Zi Yu said to Song Gong, "Wen Wang heard that Chong Guo's moral conduct was confused and went to attack. He fought for thirty days, but Chong Guo did not surrender. He withdrew his troops and returned to China, where he reformed and educated himself, and then went to attack. King Wen was stationed in the camp he had built in the past, and Chong Guo surrendered.

古文：《诗》曰： 刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御于家邦。 
现代文：《诗》说： 在嫡妻面前作出示范，由此而作为兄弟们的表率，以此来治理一家一国。 
English: "Poetry" said: To set an example in front of the legitimate wife, thereby leading the brothers as an example, in order to govern a family and a country.

古文：今君德无乃犹有所阙，而以伐人，若之何？
现代文：现在君王的德行恐怕还有所欠缺，而以此攻打曹国，能把它怎么办？
English: Now the virtue of the emperor is probably still lacking, and what can we do to attack Cao with it?

古文：盍姑内省德乎？无阙而后动。 
现代文：何不姑且退回去自己检查一下德行，等到没有欠缺了再采取行动。 
English: Why not go back and check your own virtue, and wait until there is no deficiency before taking action.

古文：陈穆公请修好于诸侯以无忘齐桓之德。
现代文：陈穆公请求在诸侯间重新建立友好关系，表示不忘齐桓公的德行。
English: Chen Mu Gong asked for the re-establishment of friendly relations between the princes, saying that he would not forget the moral conduct of Qi Huan Gong.

古文：冬，盟于齐，修桓公之好也。
现代文：冬季，在齐国会盟，重新建立齐桓公时代的友好关系。
English: In the winter, at the Qing National Congress, they re-established the friendly relations of the Qigong era.

古文：梁亡。不书其主，自取之也。
现代文：梁国灭亡了，《春秋》没有记载灭亡梁国的是谁，是因为祸害是梁国自己找取的。
English: Liang Guo perished. "Spring and Autumn" did not record who was responsible for Liang Guo's demise, because Liang Guo sought out the disaster himself.

古文：初，梁伯好土功，亟城而弗处，民罢而弗堪，则曰： 某寇将至。 
现代文：当初，梁伯喜好大兴土木，屡次筑城而无人居住，百姓疲倦得不能忍受，就说： 某某敌人要来了。 
English: At the beginning, Liang Bo was fond of large-scale civil engineering. He repeatedly built cities without people living in them. The people were so tired that they could not bear it. They said: "An enemy is coming."

古文：乃沟公宫，曰： 秦将袭我。 
现代文：于是在国君的宫室外挖沟，说： 秦国将要袭击我国。 
English: So he dug a trench outside the palace of the sovereign and said, "Qin is about to attack our country."

古文：民惧而溃，秦遂取梁。
现代文：百姓害怕而溃散，秦国就趁机占取了梁国。
English: The people were afraid and scattered, and Qin took the opportunity to occupy Liang.

