古文：○神宗一神宗绍天法古运德建功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝，讳顼，英宗长子，母曰宣仁圣烈皇后高氏。
现代文：神宗绍天法古运德建功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝，名项，英宗长子，母亲是宣仁圣烈皇后高氏。
English: Emperor Shenzong of Shao Tien, the founder of the Shao Tien Law, the founder of the Shao Tien Movement, and the founder of the Jian Gong, the first son of Emperor Yingzong, and the mother of Empress Gao of the Xuanren Holy Martyrs.

古文：庆历八年四月戊寅生于濮王宫，祥光照室，群鼠吐五色气成云。
现代文：庆历八年四月十日，生于攫王宫，当时样光照室，老鼠喷吐出来的五色气形成盘云。
English: He was born on April 10th, 8th year of the lunar calendar, in the Shao Wang Palace. At that time, in the sample light room, the five-colored gas ejected by the mouse formed a disk cloud.

古文：八月，赐名仲钅咸。
现代文：八月，赐名仲喊。
English: In August, the naming ceremony began.

古文：授率府副率，三迁至右千牛卫将军。
现代文：授率府副率，三迁至右千牛卫将军。
English: He was given the post of vice-governor of Gifu Prefecture, and was transferred to the post of general of the Right Division of Gifu Prefecture three times.

古文：嘉祐八年，侍英宗入居庆宁宫，尝梦神人捧之登天。
现代文：嘉八年，跟从英宗进人庆宁宫，曾经梦到神人把自己捧到天上。
English: In the eighth year of the Jia dynasty, when he followed Yingzong into the Qingning Palace, he once dreamed that the godman lifted himself up to the sky.

古文：英宗即位，授安州观察使，封光国公。
现代文：英宗即帝位，授为安州观察使，封光国公。
English: Emperor Yingzong was enthroned, and he was awarded the title of Anzhou Observer, and crowned as the Prince of the State.

古文：是年五月壬戌，受经于东宫。
现代文：这年五月二十五日，在东宫接受经艺教育。
English: On May 25th of that year, he received his education in the East Palace.

古文：帝隆准龙颜，动止皆有常度。
现代文：神宗皇帝高鼻龙颜，行为举止都符合礼仪规范。
English: Emperor Shenzong has a high nose and a long face, and his behavior is in line with etiquette norms.

古文：而天性好学，请问至日晏忘食，英宗常遣内侍止之。
现代文：天性好学，请教学问有时到天晚忘了吃饭，英宗常派内侍去制止他。
English: Naturally eager to learn, he sometimes forgot to eat late in the day, and Ying Zong often sent a servant to stop him.

古文：帝正衣冠拱手，虽大暑，未尝用扇。
现代文：皇上穿得整整齐齐，拱手站立，即使酷暑天也从未用过扇子。
English: The emperor, neatly dressed and standing with his hands folded, never used a fan, even on very hot days.

古文：侍讲王陶入侍，帝率弟颢拜之。
现代文：侍讲官王陶人内宫侍读，神宗皇帝带着弟弟赵颖一起拜见他。
English: The courtier Wang Tao attended the reading in the inner palace. Emperor Shenzong brought his brother Zhao Ying to visit him.

古文：九月，加忠武军节度使、同中书门下平章事，封淮阳郡王，改今讳。
现代文：九月，加封忠武军节度使、同中书门下平章事，双封淮阳郡王，改今名。
English: In September, he was awarded the title of the Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and the title of the King of Huaiyang County, and changed his current name.

古文：治平元年六月，进封颍王。
现代文：治平元年六月，进封颖王。
English: In June of the first year of the Heian period, he entered the court of King Ying.

古文：三年三月，纳故相向敏中孙女为夫人。
现代文：三年三月，娶故相向敏中孙女为夫人。
English: In March of the third year, he married the granddaughter of his old friend Min.

古文：十月，英宗不豫，帝引仁宗故事，请两日一御迩英阁讲读，以安人心。
现代文：十月，英宗染病，皇上引用仁宗故事，请英宗两天一次到迩英阁讲读，来安定人心。
English: In October, when Yingzong fell ill, the emperor quoted the story of Rinzong and asked Yingzong to come to Shunying Pavilion once every two days to give a lecture to calm people's minds.

古文：十二月壬寅，立为皇太子。
现代文：十二月二十二日，被立为皇太子。
English: On December 22, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：四年正月丁巳，英庙崩，帝即皇帝位。
现代文：治平四年正月初八，英宗逝世，神宗即皇帝位。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fourth year of the Heian period, Emperor Eiso died, and Emperor Shinso ascended to the throne.

古文：戊午，赦天下常赦所不原者。
现代文：初九，赦免按常规得不到赦免的人。
English: On the ninth day of the month, pardon those who cannot be pardoned according to the rules.

古文：遣冯行己告哀于辽。
现代文：派冯行己向辽报告英宗逝世的消息。
English: He sent Feng Xing to report the news of Yingzong's death to Liao.

古文：己未，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：初十，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the revered empress dowager became the great empress dowager, and the empress dowager became the empress dowager.

古文：命宰相韩琦为山陵使。
现代文：任命宰相韩琦为山陵使。
English: The prime minister, Han Min, was appointed as the envoy to the tomb.

古文：辛酉，遣孙坦等告即位于辽，以大行皇帝诏赐夏国主及西蕃唃厮啰。
现代文：十二日，派孙坦等人向辽报告神宗即皇帝位的消息。以大行皇帝的身份诏赐夏国主及西蕃确厮缪。
English: On the 12th, he sent Sun Tan and others to report to Liao the news of Shensong, the emperor's enthronement. He gave the imperial edict to Xia Guozhong and Xizhong Zhicheng as the emperor.

古文：丙寅，群臣表三上，始御迎阳门幄殿听政。
现代文：十七日，群臣再三上表请求，神宗才到迎阳门幌殿听政。
English: On the 17th, after repeated requests from the ministers, Shinso finally came to the Yingyang Gate Porch to listen to the government.

古文：内医侍先帝疾者，皆坐不谨贬之。
现代文：给英宗看病的内医，因为不谨慎，都遭到贬斥。
English: The internal medicine doctors who treated Yingzong were all reprimanded for their carelessness.

古文：诏东平郡王允弼、襄阳郡王允良朝朔望。
现代文：下诏东平君王允弼、襄阳郡王允良朔望朝拜。
English: The following is the imperial edict: Dongping King Yunxuan and Yangyang County King Yunliang went to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：以吴奎终丧，复授枢密副使。
现代文：吴奎因守丧完毕，重新授给枢密副使的官职。
English: After Wu Quynh's funeral, he was re-assigned to the post of Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：戊辰，以韩琦守司空兼侍中，曾公亮行门下侍郎兼吏部尚书、进封英国公，文彦博行尚书左仆射、检校司徒兼中书令，富弼改武宁军节度使、进封郑国公，曹佾改昭庆军节度使、检校太傅，张昪改河阳三城节度使，宗谔同中书门下平章事，改集庆军节度使、检校尚书左仆射，欧阳修、赵概并加尚书左丞，仍参知政事，陈升之为户部侍郎，吕公弼为刑部侍郎，允弼、允良并加守太保，弟东阳郡王颢进封昌王，鄠国公頵进封乐安郡王。
现代文：十九日，任命韩琦守司空兼侍中；曾公亮行门下侍郎兼吏部尚书，进封英国公；文彦博行尚书左仆射、检校司徒兼中书令；富弼改武宁军节度使，进封郑国公；曹情改昭庆军节度使、检校太傅；张改河阳三城节度使；宗愕同中书门下平章事，改集庆军节度使、检校尚书左仆射；欧阳修、赵概并加尚书左承，仍为参知政事；陈升之为户部侍郎；吕公弼为刑部侍郎；允弼、允良并加守太保；神宗弟东阳郡王赵颖进封昌王，国公茜页进封乐安郡王。
English: On the 19th, Han Xun, the governor, was appointed as the deputy commander and the middle-ranking officer; Zeng Gongliang, Zeng Gongliang's subordinate, was appointed as the second-ranking officer and the third-ranking officer, and became the second-ranking officer; Fenyang Bo Xing, Zeng Gongliang's subordinate, was appointed as the second-ranking officer and the third-ranking officer; Fenyang Bo Xing, Zeng Gongliang's subordinate, was appointed as the second-ranking officer and the third-ranking officer; Fuxi, Fenyang's subordinate, was appointed as the second-ranking officer

古文：群臣进秩有差。
现代文：群臣不同程度地都进官加爵。
English: All the ministers were promoted to higher ranks to varying degrees.

古文：二月乙酉，初御紫宸殿。
现代文：二月初六，第一次到紫宸殿。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, I went to Shishinden for the first time.

古文：立向氏为皇后。
现代文：立向氏为皇后。
English: Rissuko is the empress.

古文：丁亥，诏入内内侍省、皇城司合覆奏事并执条覆奏。
现代文：初八，下诏进人内宫的内侍省、皇城司合覆奏事并执条覆奏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Imperial Household Agency and the Imperial Household Agency of the Imperial Household entered the Imperial Palace with the imperial edict and held a re-enactment.

古文：戊子，进封交阯郡王李日尊为南平王。
现代文：初九，进封交趾郡王李日尊为南平王。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 1st year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 18th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 20th year of the 20th year of the 20

古文：加邈川首领董毡检校太保。
现代文：加邀川首领董毡检校太保。
English: In addition, the leader of the river, Dong Ye, was invited to inspect the school.

古文：诏山陵所须，应委三司、转运司计置，毋辄扰民。
现代文：下诏英宗皇帝山陵所需，应委托三司、转运司设法措置，不要动不动就骚扰民众。
English: According to the following edict, the Three Departments and the Transportation Department should be entrusted with the necessary measures for the Emperor Yingzong's Mausoleum, and the people should not be harassed at any time.

古文：诏提举医官院试堪诊御脉者六人。
现代文：下诏提举医官经过考试可以为皇帝看病的共有六人。
English: The following edict raised a total of six doctors who could see the emperor after passing the examination.

古文：庚寅，以四月十日为同天节。
现代文：十一日，下诏以四月十日为同天节。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict declared April 10 as the same day's festival.

古文：辛卯，白虹贯日。
现代文：十二日，一道白色的虹横贯天空。
English: Xinwu said that a halo appeared around the sun.

古文：壬辰，诏公主下嫁者行见舅姑礼。
现代文：十三日，下诏公主下嫁要行见舅姑礼。
English: On the 13th, it was announced that the princess would marry her uncle and aunt.

古文：甲辰，西蕃首领拽罗钵、鸠令结二人诱蕃部三百余帐投夏国，捕获，斩之以徇。
现代文：二十五日，西蕃首领拽罗钵、鸿令结二人诱拐蕃部三百多帐投奔夏国，被宋捕获，斩杀示众。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the leader of Xidi dragged Luo Gan and Hong Ling Jie to kidnap more than three hundred people from Xibe and rushed to Xia Province. He was captured by Song and killed in front of the public.

古文：三月壬子，曹佾加检校太尉兼侍中。
现代文：三月初四，曹情加官为检校太尉兼侍中。
English: On the fourth day of March, Cao Jie was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of inspection and chamberlain.

古文：赐礼部进士及第、出身四百六十一人。
现代文：赐礼部进士及第、出身四百六十一人。
English: There are four hundred and sixty-one members of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：甲寅，陕西宣抚使郭逵讨蕃部党令征等，平之。
现代文：初六，陕西宣抚使郭连征讨蕃部党令征等，平定党令征等人的叛乱。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Guo Liansei was sent by the Shaanxi Procuratorate to investigate the party's order to recruit and suppress the rebellion of the party's order to recruit.

古文：赐昌王颢公使钱岁万缗，半给之。
现代文：赐昌王赵颖公使钱每年一万络，给他一半。
English: He gave Zhao Ying, the Prince of Chang, ten thousand rupees a year and gave him half of it.

古文：丙辰，昌王颢、乐安郡王頵乞解官行服，不许。
现代文：初八，昌王赵颖、乐安郡礴睛求解官行服，神宗不允许。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Chang Wang Zhao Ying and Le'an County's Yao Jing asked for permission to wear official attire, which was not allowed by Shen Zong.

古文：癸亥，诏入内内侍省官已经寿圣节任子者，同天节权罢奏荐。
现代文：十五日，下诏进人内宫的侍省官在寿圣节已经录用其子者，同天节不要上奏推荐。
English: On the fifteenth day, if the attendant provincial official who enters the inner palace has already hired his son on his birthday, do not play the recommendation on the same day.

古文：壬申，欧阳修罢知亳州。
现代文：二十四日，欧阳修罢知毫州。
English: On the 24th, Ouyang Xiu went to Wanzhou.

古文：癸酉，吴奎参知政事。
现代文：二十五日，吴奎为参知政事。
English: On the 25th, Wu Kui was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：乙亥，允良薨。
现代文：二十七日，允良逝世。
English: On the 27th, Unryo passed away.

古文：闰月癸未，太白昼见。
现代文：闰三月初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month of the leap year, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲申，夏国主谅祚遣使谢罪。
现代文：初六，夏国主谅柞派使臣前来谢罪。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, Xia Guozhong sent an envoy to apologize.

古文：辛卯，诏齐、密、登、华、邠、耀、鄜、绛、润、婺、海、宿、饶、歙、吉、建、汀、潮等十八州知州，庆、渭、秦、延四州通判，其选并从中书，毋以恩例奏授。
现代文：十三日，下诏齐、密、登、华？耀？绛、润、姿、海、宿、饶、款、吉、建、汀、潮等十八州知州，庆、渭、秦、延四州通判，这些官职的人选一律依从中书省，不搞恩例奏授。
English: On the 13th, the 18 states of Chizhou, Qing, Liaoning, Qin and Yan including Zhaozhuqi, Min, Deng, Huayou, Yangtze, Run, Zhi, Hai, Shuku, Rao, Sheng, Ji, Jian, Ting and Chaozhou, as well as the four states of Qing, Liaoning, Qin and Yan, passed a general election. The candidates for these official positions will all be selected in accordance with the Central Literature Department, and will not engage in graceful example teaching.

古文：乙未，张昪以太子太师致仕。
现代文：十七日，张以太子太师身份退休。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Yizi retired as grandmaster.

古文：庚子，诏求直言。
现代文：二十二日，下诏要求各级官员直言朝政得失。
English: On the 22nd, the next edict required officials at all levels to speak frankly about the gains and losses of the government.

古文：御史中丞王陶乞许举知县资序人为御史里行，从之。
现代文：御史中承王陶请求允许举荐知县中有一定资序的人任御史里行，神宗听从了这个建议。
English: Wang Tao, the heir to the throne in the imperial history, asked for permission to recommend someone from Zhixian County with a certain amount of wealth to be appointed to the imperial history, and Shenzong followed this suggestion.

古文：癸卯，王安石出知江宁府。
现代文：二十五日，王安石出知江宁府。
English: On the 25th, Wang Anshi went to Jiangning.

古文：甲辰，诏诸路帅臣及副总管或有移易，依庆历故事。
现代文：二十六日，下诏诸路帅臣及副总管，如果有更换调动的，依照庆历时的制度办。
English: On the 26th, it was decreed that the generals and vice-governors and vice-governors, if there is a replacement, should be transferred according to the system at the time of the celebration.

古文：乙巳，诏以孟夏农劳之时，令监司戒饬州县省事，劝民力田，民有艰食者振之。
现代文：二十七日，下诏夏季的第一个月正值农作的大好时机，各路监司要所属州县务必减少烦事，劝民力田，民众缺食者，要及时予以贩济。
English: On the 27th day of the following month, the first month of summer is a great opportunity for farming, and the supervisors of all roads must reduce the troubles in their states and counties, and advise the people to sell their rice fields in time, and the people who are short of food.

古文：夏四月庚戌，请大行皇帝谥于南郊。
现代文：夏四月初三，请大行皇帝溢于南郊。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the Emperor Da Xing poured into the southern suburbs.

古文：辛酉，诏内外所上封事，令张方平、司马光详定以闻。
现代文：十四日，下诏内外官员写给皇帝的书信，命令张方平、司马光详细审定后再报告皇上。
English: On the 14th, officials at home and abroad sent a letter to the emperor, ordering Zhang Fangping and Sima Guang to report to the emperor after detailed verification.

古文：丙寅，录囚。
现代文：十九日，讯察囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 25th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：御史中丞王陶、侍御史吴申、吕景以过毁大臣，陶出知陈州，申、景各罚铜二十斤。
现代文：御史中承王陶、侍御史吴申和吕景因过份低毁大臣，王陶出知陈州，吴申、吕景各罚铜二十斤。
English: Wang Tao, the successor of Wang Tao, Wu Shen, the attendant of Wang Tao, and Lu Jing, the minister of Lu Jing, were destroyed for being too low. Wang Tao was expelled from Chenzhou, and Wu Shen and Lu Jing were each fined twenty catties of copper.

古文：吴奎罢知青州。
现代文：吴奎罢知青州。
English: Wu Kuei knows Qingzhou.

古文：遣使循行陕西、河北、京东、京西路，体量安抚。
现代文：派使臣巡视陕西、河北、京东、京西路；考察安抚。
English: Send envoys to inspect Shaanxi, Hebei, Jingdong, and West Beijing Roads; investigate and pacify.

古文：壬申，奎复位。
现代文：二十五日，吴奎复官。
English: On the 25th, Wu Kui was reinstated.

古文：罢州郡岁贡饮食果药。
现代文：罢除州郡岁贡饮食果药。
English: Eliminate the state and county New Year's tribute diet and fruit medicine.

古文：癸酉，诏陕西、河东经略、转运司察主兵臣僚怯懦老病者以闻。
现代文：二十六日，诏陕西、河东经略转运司，辨察带兵的臣僚怯懦老病的人，报告朝廷。
English: On the 26th, the Shaanxi and Hedong Economic and Transportation Departments reported to the imperial court that the ministers who led the troops were cowardly and sick.

古文：五月辛巳，以久旱，命宰臣祷雨。
现代文：五月初四，因干早太久，命宰臣祈祷降雨。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, because it had been so dry for so long, he ordered his aides-de-camp to pray for rain.

古文：乙巳，宝文阁成，置学士、直学士、待制官。
现代文：二十八日，宝文阁修成，设置学士、直学士、待制官员。
English: On the 28th, the construction of Baowen Pavilion was completed, with the establishment of a bachelor, a direct bachelor, and a waiting official.

古文：六月己酉，辽遣萧余庆等来吊祭。
现代文：六月初三，辽朝派萧徐庆等人前来祭奠。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Xuqing and others to pay tribute.

古文：己未，振河北流民。
现代文：十三日，贩济河北流民。
English: On the 13th, traffickers came to help the Hebei refugees.

古文：辛未，诏天下官吏有能知徭役利病可议宽减者以闻。
现代文：二十五日，诏天下官吏有知道摇役利害可以进行减免的人报告朝廷。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that government officials around the world should report to the imperial court those who knew that the interest of shakyo could be reduced or waived.

古文：乙亥，诏中书、枢密细务归之有司。
现代文：二十九日，诏中书省、枢密院的细小事务归有关部门管理。
English: On the 29th, the small affairs of the Ministry of Letters and the Privy Council were transferred to the management of relevant departments.

古文：秋七月庚辰，诏察富民与妃嫔家婚姻夤缘得官者。
现代文：秋七月初四，下诏察报富民与妃殡家联姻从而攀附获取官职的人。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the next imperial edict announced the marriage of Fumin and the princess mortician, thereby attaching the person who obtained the official post.

古文：甲申，石蕃来贡。
现代文：初八，石蕃前来进贡。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, Shih Chien came to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，命尚书户部郎中赵抃、刑部郎中陈荐同详定中外封事。
现代文：十三日，命令尚书户部郎中赵林、刑部郎中陈荐一起详细审定内外官员写给皇帝的书信。
English: On the 13th, he ordered Zhao Lin, Vice-Minister of the Household Department, and Chen Qi, Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, to work together to review the letters written by domestic and foreign officials to the emperor.

古文：辛卯，告英宗宪文肃武宣孝皇帝谥于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十五日，英宗溢号为宪文肃武宣孝皇帝，并向天地、宗庙、社翟祷告。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Yingzong proclaimed himself Emperor Xuanwu Xuanxiao, and prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：壬辰，上宝册于福宁殿。
现代文：十六日，在福宁殿进上宝册。
English: On the 16th, it was entered into the treasure book at Fukuning-den.

古文：丙午，文州曲水县令宇文之邵上书指陈得失。
现代文：三十日，文州曲水县令宁文之邵上书指明陈述政事得失。
English: On the 30th, the Shao Shangshu of the Order of Ningwen of Qushui County, Wenzhou, clearly stated the political gains and losses.

古文：八月丁未朔，太白昼见。
现代文：八月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of August, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊午，复西夏和市。
现代文：十二日，恢复与西夏和市。
English: On the 12th, it resumed negotiations with Xi Xiahe.

古文：己巳，京师地震。
现代文：二十三日，京城地震。
English: On the 23rd, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：癸酉，葬英宗于永厚陵。
现代文：二十七日，英宗皇帝葬于永厚陵。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Yingzong was buried in Yong Hou Mausoleum.

古文：九月丁丑，诏减诸路逃田税额。
现代文：九月初二，下诏减轻各路逃田税额。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, it was decided to reduce the amount of tax evaded by each road.

古文：壬午，祧僖祖及文懿皇后。
现代文：初七，祭祀嘻祖及文靓皇后。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, a ceremony is held to celebrate Hip So and Empress Wenyi.

古文：乙酉，祔英宗神主于太庙，乐曰《大英之舞》。
现代文：初十，奉英宗神主于太庙，乐定名为伏英之舞。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the deity of the Bongyeong Sect was worshipped in the Great Temple, and the music was called the Bongyeong Dance.

古文：戊子，减两京、畿内、郑、孟州囚罪一等，民役山陵者蠲其赋。
现代文：十三日，减两京、京郊、郑州和孟州囚犯罪行一等，民众服役山陵者，镯除其赋。
English: On the 13th, the first-class prisoners of the two capitals, the suburbs of Beijing, Zhengzhou and Mengzhou were reduced, and those who served the people were removed.

古文：辛卯，徙封颢为岐王，頵为高密郡王。
现代文：十六日，徙封赵颖为岐王，茜页为高密郡王。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Ying was crowned the King of Qi, and Qian Ye was crowned the King of Gaomi County.

古文：富弼为尚书左仆射。
现代文：富弼为尚书左仆射。
English: Togashi is a left-handed shot for Shoshu.

古文：遣孙思恭等报谢于辽，且贺生辰、正旦。
现代文：派孙思恭等人答谢辽朝，并祝贺生辰、正旦。
English: He sent Sun Sikyong and others to thank the Liao Dynasty, and congratulated them on their birthdays and birthdays.

古文：壬辰，录周世宗从曾孙贻廓为三班奉职。
现代文：十七日，录用周世宗从曾孙柴贻廓为三班奉职。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Shizong was recruited from his great-grandson, Chai Xuanku, to serve in three shifts.

古文：甲午，辽遣耶律好谋等来贺即位。
现代文：十九日，辽朝派耶律好谋等人来祝贺神宗即皇帝位。
English: On the 19th, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Luo He Rong and others to congratulate Shenzong on his accession to the throne.

古文：戊戌，以王安石为翰林学士。
现代文：二十三日，任命王安石为翰林学士。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Anshi was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：辛丑，韩琦罢为司徒、镇安武胜军节度使、判相州。
现代文：二十六日，韩琦罢为司徒、镇安武胜军节度使、相州通判。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Han Zheng was appointed as the delegate to the Spring Festival of Szeto, Zhen'an and Wu's victorious army, and the judge of Xiangzhou.

古文：吴奎、陈升之罢。
现代文：吴奎、陈升之罢职。
English: Wu Kui and Chen Sheng resign.

古文：枢密副使吕公弼为枢密使，张方平、赵抃并参知政事，邵亢为枢密副使。
现代文：枢密副使吕公弼为枢密使，张方平、赵打一起参知政事，邵亢为枢密副使。
English: The vice-secretary of the privy council, Lv Gongyao, was the secretary of the privy council, Zhang Fangping and Zhao Du jointly participated in the government affairs, and Shao Jun was the vice-secretary of the privy council.

古文：壬寅，以曾公亮为尚书左仆射，文彦博为司空。
现代文：二十七日，任命曾公亮为尚书左仆射，文彦博为司空。
English: On the 27th, Zeng Gongliang was appointed as Shang Shuzo's second-in-command, and Fumihiko Bo as his subordinate.

古文：潮州地震。
现代文：潮州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Chaozhou.

古文：癸卯，以权御史中丞司马光为翰林学士。
现代文：二十八日，任命代理御史中承司马光为翰林学士。
English: On the 28th, Ma Guang, Acting Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：冬十月丙午，漳、泉诸州地震。
现代文：冬十月初一，漳、泉等州发生地震。
English: On the first day of October in winter, an earthquake occurred in Min, Quan and other prefectures.

古文：丁未，富弼罢判河阳。
现代文：初二，富弼罢官，通判河阳。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Fusao was dismissed from his post, and Kayan was sentenced.

古文：戊申，建州、邵武、兴化军地震。
现代文：初三，建州、邵武军、兴化军发生地震。
English: On the third day of the first month, an earthquake occurred in Jianzhou, Shaowu Army and Xinghua Army.

古文：己酉，初御迩英阁，召侍臣讲读经史。
现代文：初四，神宗第一次到迩英阁，召集侍臣讲读经史。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Shenzong went to Fenying Pavilion for the first time and summoned his attendants to give a lecture on the history of scripture.

古文：以右谏议大夫、权御史中丞滕甫考诸路监司课绩。
现代文：任命右谏议大夫、权御史中承滕甫考核各路监司政绩。
English: Appointed the doctor of the Right Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and appointed Cheng Tengfu as the leader of the examination of the political performance of the supervisors.

古文：张方平以父忧去位。
现代文：张方平因父亲去世离职。
English: Zhang Fangping resigned from his post due to the death of his father.

古文：庚戌，给陕西转运司度僧牒。令籴谷振霜旱州县。
现代文：初五，颁给陕西转运司度僧碟，命令来买粮谷贩济霜早灾害州县的民众。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Shaanxi Transportation Department was awarded a monk disk and ordered to buy grain and grain traders to help the people of the pre-disaster counties.

古文：癸丑，诏翰林学士、御史中丞、侍御史知杂事举材堪御史者各二人。
现代文：初八，诏令翰林学士、御史中承、侍御史知杂事荐举能担任御史者各二人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the school year, Hanlin, a history major, a junior history major, and an attendant history major were each recommended to serve as history majors.

古文：诏将作监主簿常秩赴阙。
现代文：诏令将作监主簿常秩赶往皇宫。
English: The imperial edict sent the overseer, Jochitsuro, to the imperial palace.

古文：甲寅，制《资治通鉴序》赐司马光。
现代文：初九，撰写资治通鉴序赐给司马光。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Sima Guang was given the task of writing the preface to the book.

古文：癸酉，知青涧城种谔复绥州。
现代文：二十八日，知青涧城种愕收复绥州。
English: On the 28th, Zhicheng, Qingcheng, Shanzhou recovered from the earthquake.

古文：十一月丁丑，诏近臣各举才行可任使者一人。
现代文：十一月初三，诏令近臣各举荐才行可以任使者一人。
English: On the third day of the eleventh month of the year, the emperor decreed that each of his close vassals had to make a recommendation before they could be appointed as an envoy.

古文：戊寅，诏求直言。
现代文：初四，诏求直言。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, let's speak frankly.

古文：丙戌，诏二府各举所知。
现代文：十二日，诏中书省、枢密院各举荐所知人才。
English: On the 12th, the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Privy Council each recommended known talents.

古文：丁亥，令考课院详定诸州所上县令治状。
现代文：十三日，命令考课院详细审定各州送上来的县令政绩考核情况。
English: On the 13th, the examination institute was ordered to verify in detail the status of the county government performance assessment sent by each state.

古文：戊子，分命宰臣祈雪。
现代文：十四日，分别命令宰臣祈祷降雪。
English: On the 14th, he separately ordered his vice-ministers to pray for snow.

古文：置马监于河东交城县。
现代文：在河东交城县置马监。
English: A horse inspector was set up in Jiaocheng County, Hedong Province.

古文：庚寅，诏近臣以举官不当，经三劾者，中书别奏取旨。
现代文：十六日，下诏： 近臣因举官不当，连续三次被弹勃，中书省可另行举荐，听候命令。 
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: A close retainer was fired three times in a row due to improper promotion. The Ministry of Education and Culture may recommend another promotion and await orders.

古文：乙未，诏令内外文武官各举有材德行能者。
现代文：二十一日，诏令内外文武官员分别举荐德才兼备的人。
English: On the twenty-first day, the imperial edict ordered the civil and military officials at home and abroad to separately nominate people with both virtue and talent.

古文：十二月丙辰，西南龙蕃来贡。
现代文：十二月十二日，西南龙蕃前来进贡。
English: On December 12th, Southwest Longyan came to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，以来岁日食正旦，自乙丑避殿、减膳、罢朝贺。
现代文：十七日，以第二年正月初一，恰是日食，从二十一日起决定避殿减膳，罢除朝拜和祝贺。
English: On the 17th, with the first day of the first month of the second year, which coincided with the solar eclipse, it was decided to withdraw from the temple, reduce meals, and cancel worship and congratulations from the 21st.

古文：壬戌，诏起居日增转对官二人。
现代文：十八日，诏令起居日增转对官二人。
English: On the 18th, the Imperial edict increased the daily number of residents to two.

古文：丙寅，诏州县吏并缘为奸，致狱多瘐死，岁终会死者多寡，以制其罪。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：州县官吏并缘为奸，造成犯人在监狱中因饥寒而死，岁终会总，以死者多少，定官吏的罪行。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: If a state or county official conspires to cause a prisoner to die of cold and hunger in prison, the court will determine the official's crime based on the number of deaths.

古文：著为令。
现代文：写为法令条文。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：己巳，辽遣萧杰等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，辽朝派萧杰等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 25th, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Jie and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：熙宁元年春正月甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：熙宁元年春正月初一，日食。下诏改元。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15

古文：诏改元。丁丑，以旱，减天下囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：初四，因早灾减轻全国囚犯罪行一等，杖以下释放。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, due to the early disaster, the national prisoner crime was reduced to the first class, and the cane was released.

古文：壬午，令州县掩暴骸。
现代文：初九，命令州县掩埋暴露在外的尸骨。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, ordered the county to bury the exposed bones.

古文：丁亥，命宰臣曾公亮等极言阙失。
现代文：十四日，命令宰臣曾公亮等最大限度地说出朝政缺失。
English: On the 14th, he ordered Zeng Guoliang, the Vice-Minister of the State Council, and others to say as much as possible about the shortcomings of the imperial government.

古文：庚寅，御殿复膳。
现代文：十七日，亲临宫殿并恢复平常的膳食。
English: On the 17th, he visited the palace and resumed his usual diet.

古文：壬辰，幸寺观祈雨。
现代文：十九日，到寺观祈祷降雨。
English: On the 19th, I went to the temple to pray for rain.

古文：丙申，赵概罢知徐州，三司使唐介参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，赵概罢知徐州，三司使唐介参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Zizhi visited Xuzhou, and the three departments sent Tang Jie to participate in the political affairs.

古文：丁酉，诏修《英宗实录》。
现代文：二十四日，下诏修撰英宗实录。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued.

古文：壬寅，增太学生百人。
现代文：二十九日，增加太学生一百人。
English: On the 29th, an additional 100 students were enrolled.

古文：二月辛亥，令诸路每季上雨雪。
现代文：二月初八，命令各路每季祈求雨雪。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, all roads are ordered to pray for rain and snow every season.

古文：乙卯，孔若蒙袭封衍圣公。
现代文：十二日，孔若蒙袭封衍圣公。
English: On the 12th, Kong Ruo Meng received the title of Yang Sheng Gong.

古文：壬戌，贷河东饥民粟。
现代文：十九日，贷给河东饥民粮食。
English: On the 19th, grain was loaned to the hungry people in Hedong.

古文：三月庚辰，夏主谅诈卒，遣使来告哀。
现代文：三月初八，夏主谅柞逝世，派遣使臣来报告这个消息。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Emperor Xia died and sent an envoy to report the news.

古文：丙戌，诏恤刑。
现代文：十四日，下诏慎用刑法。
English: On the 14th, the Criminal Law was issued.

古文：戊子，作太皇太后庆寿宫、皇太后宝慈宫。
现代文：十六日，修筑太皇太后庆寿宫、皇太后宝慈宫。
English: On the 16th, the Grand Empress Dowager Qing Shou Palace and the Grand Empress Dowager Baozi Palace were built.

古文：丁酉，简州木连理，潭州雨毛。
现代文：二十五日，简州树木枝干连生，盘桓交错。潭州天空降毛。
English: On the 25th, the branches and trunks of the trees in Jianzhou were intertwined and interlaced. The sky of Tanzhou was ablaze.

古文：夏四月乙巳，诏翰林学士王安石越次入对。
现代文：夏四月初四，诏令翰林学士王安石越级人对。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6

古文：戊申，命宰臣祷雨。
现代文：初七，命令宰臣祈祷降雨。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered his aides-de-camp to pray for rain.

古文：以枢密直学士李参为尚书右丞、判西京留守司御史台。
现代文：任命枢密直学士李参为尚书右承，判西京留守司御史台。
English: He appointed the Privy Councilor Li San as the rightful successor to Shang Shuxu, and appointed the West Beijing Remaining Division as the History Department.

古文：辛亥，同天节，群臣及辽使初上寿于紫宸殿。
现代文：初十，同天节，群臣及辽朝使臣第一次在紫哀殿为神宗祝寿。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, on the same day of the festival, a group of ministers and envoys from the Liao Dynasty celebrated Shinshu's birthday for the first time at the Purple Shrine.

古文：五月甲戌，募饥民补厢军。
现代文：五月初三，招募饥民补充厢军。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, hungry people were recruited to supplement the van army.

古文：庚辰，诏两制及国子监举诸王宫学官。
现代文：初九，诏令两制及国子监推举诸王宫学官。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued the edict of the two systems and the Imperial Procurator selected the palace academicians.

古文：戊戌，废庆成军。
现代文：二十七日，废罢庆成军。
English: On the 27th, the strike was called off.

古文：六月癸卯，录唐魏征、狄仁杰后。
现代文：六月初三，录用唐朝魏征、狄仁杰后代。
English: On the third day of June, the descendants of Wei Zheng and Di Renjie of the Tang Dynasty were hired.

古文：丁未，占城来贡。
现代文：初七，占城来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the city of Zhan came to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，诏诸路兴水利。
现代文：十一日，诏令各地兴修水利。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Emperor issued an order for the construction of water conservancy in various regions.

古文：乙亥，河决枣强县。
现代文：乙亥日，黄河在枣强县决堤。
English: On Boxing Day, the Yellow River burst its banks in Zaoqiang County.

古文：丙寅，命司马光、滕甫裁定国用。
现代文：二十六日，命令司马光、滕甫裁定国家开支。
English: On the 26th, Sima Guang and Teng Fu were ordered to adjudicate on state expenditure.

古文：秋七月癸酉，诏谋杀已伤，案问欲举自首者，从谋杀减二等。
现代文：秋七月初三，下诏：谋杀已伤人命，在立案时能自首者，根据谋杀罪减轻二等处理。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: murder has already caused loss of life, and those who can turn themselves in at the time of filing the case will be given a second-class treatment according to the crime of murder.

古文：乙亥，名秦州新筑大甘谷口砦曰甘谷城。
现代文：初五，称秦州新近修筑的大甘谷口碧为甘谷城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he said that the newly built Great Ganjugu Mouth of Qinzhou was Ganjugu City.

古文：丁丑，诏诸路帅臣、监司及两制、知杂御史已上，各举武勇谋略三班使臣二名。
现代文：初七，诏令各路帅臣、监司及两制、知杂御史以上的官员，各自推举武勇谋略具备的三班使臣两人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it was decreed that all officers and ministers, supervisors, and officials above the two systems and knowledge of miscellaneous history should each nominate three groups of two envoys with military strategy.

古文：赐布衣王安国进士及第。
现代文：赐布衣王安国进士及第。
English: He bestowed the title of Wang An Guo Jin Shi and the first rank on Bu Yi.

古文：己卯，群臣三表请上奉元宪道文武仁孝之号，不许。
现代文：初九，群臣三次上书请求封号 奉元宪道文武仁孝 ，神宗没有答应。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the ministers sent letters three times requesting that the seal be changed to "奉元憲道文武仁孝," but Shinshu did not agree.

古文：陈升之知枢密院事。
现代文：陈升之知枢密院事。
English: Chen Shengzhi is a Privy Councillor.

古文：给濮州雷泽县尧陵守户。
现代文：免除攫州雷泽县尧陵守户的摇役。
English: The role of the governor of Fuling, Leize County, Zhangzhou, was exempted.

古文：壬午，以恩、冀州河决，赐水死家缗钱及下户粟。
现代文：十二日，因恩州、冀州黄河决口，赐给淹死者家庭络钱及下户粮食。
English: On the 12th, because the Yellow River in Enzhou and Jizhou was breached, the families of the drowned people were given money and grain.

古文：甲申，京师地震。
现代文：十四日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 14th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：乙酉，又震，大雨。
现代文：十五日，再次发生地震，天降大雨。
English: On the 15th, another earthquake occurred and heavy rain fell.

古文：辛卯，以河朔地大震，命沿边安抚司及雄州刺史候辽人动息以闻。
现代文：二十一日，因河朔地区发生大地震，命令沿边安抚司及雄州刺史注意观察辽人动静，随时报告朝廷。
English: On the 21st, due to a major earthquake in the Hexuo region, he ordered the Border Reassurance Division and the Xiongzhou History Bureau to pay attention to the movement of the Liao people and report to the imperial court at any time.

古文：赐压死者缗钱。京师地再震。
现代文：赐给压死者家庭络钱&;;京城又一次发生地震。
English: Family of crushed to death given emergency money; Another earthquake hits Beijing.

古文：壬辰，遣御史中丞滕甫、知制诰吴充安抚河北。
现代文：二十二日，派御史中承滕甫、知制浩吴充安抚河北。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Taizong dispatched Zongcheng Tengfu and Zhizhi Hao Wuchong to pacify Hebei.

古文：癸巳，疏深州溢水。
现代文：二十三日，疏导深州洪水。
English: On the 23rd, the Shenzhou flood was diverted.

古文：甲午，减河北路囚罪一等。
现代文：二十四日，减轻河北路囚犯罪行一等。
English: On the 24th, the first-class crime of prisoners in Hebei Province was mitigated.

古文：丁酉，赐河北安抚司空名诰敕，募民入粟。
现代文：二十七日，赐给河北安抚司空白的官吏受封救书，招募富民纳粟。
English: On the 27th, the official who gave the blank to the Hebei Pacification Division was sealed with a rescue letter and recruited rich people to harvest poppies.

古文：己亥，回鹘来贡。
现代文：二十九日，回鹊前来进贡。
English: On the 29th, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：八月壬寅，诏京东、西路存恤河北流民。京师地震。
现代文：八月初二，诏令京东、西路慰问抚恤河北流民，京城发生地震。
English: On the second day of the first month of August, an earthquake occurred in Beijing after the imperial edict was issued to send condolences to the displaced people in Hebei via the eastern and western routes of Beijing.

古文：甲辰，又震。
现代文：初四，再次发生地震。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, another earthquake occurred.

古文：乙卯，赐河东及鄜延路转运司空名诰敕，募民入粟实边。
现代文：十五日，赐给河东及延路转运司空白的官吏受封救书，招募富民纳粟充实边防。
English: On the fifteenth day, the officials who gave blank letters to the Hedong and Yanlu Transportation Departments were sealed and rescued, and the rich people were recruited to donate poppies to strengthen the border defense.

古文：甲子，诏中书门下，考属近行尊者一人，王之。
现代文：二十四日，诏令中书门下省，考察所属官吏经历受人尊敬者，为王。
English: On the 24th, according to the imperial edict, the provincial government under Shumen inspected the officials who had been respected and became the king.

古文：丙寅，罢宗谔平章事。
现代文：二十六日，罢宗愕平章事。
English: On the 26th, the strike was called off.

古文：丁卯，遣张宗益等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：二十七日，派张宗益等人祝贺辽主生辰和新春。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Zongyi and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday and the new year.

古文：九月辛未，太祖曾孙舒国公从式进封安定郡王。
现代文：九月初二，太祖曾孙舒国公从式进封安定郡王。
English: On the second day of September, the great-great-grandson of the great-grandfather, Shu Guogong, ascended the throne as the King of Jinfeng and Ding'an County.

古文：丁亥，减后妃臣僚荐奏推恩。
现代文：十八日，减少后妃臣僚在举荐中施恩惠于他人。
English: On the 18th, a number of ministers who had been recommended by their wives did favors for others.

古文：戊子，莫州地震，有声如雷。
现代文：十九日，莫州发生地震，声音如雷。
English: On the 19th, an earthquake occurred in Mozhou, the sound was like thunder.

古文：丁酉，诏三司裁定宗室月料，嫁娶、生日、郊礼给赐。
现代文：二十八日，诏令三司裁定宗室每月的开销，嫁娶、生日、郊礼的开支由朝廷供应。
English: On the 28th, the three departments of the imperial edict decided that the monthly expenses of the family would be provided by the family, and the expenses of marriage, birthday, and suburban ceremony would be provided by the imperial court.

古文：冬十月辛丑，给天下系囚衣食薪炭。
现代文：冬十月初二，供应全国监狱关押囚犯衣食和柴炭。
English: On the second day of October in winter, it supplied clothing, food and charcoal to prisoners in prisons across the country.

古文：乙卯，出奉宸库珠，付河北买马。
现代文：十六日，拿出奉哀库储藏的珠子，拨付河北买马。
English: On the 16th, he took out the beads stored in the memorial library and allocated them to Hebei Province to buy a horse.

古文：戊辰，禁销金服饰。
现代文：二十九日，禁止用金或金色丝线装饰衣服。
English: On the 29th, it was forbidden to decorate clothes with gold or golden thread.

古文：十一月癸酉，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸未，命宰臣祷雪。
现代文：十四日，命令宰臣祈祷降雪。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the vice-minister to pray for snow.

古文：丙戌，朝飨太庙，遂斋于郊宫。
现代文：十七日，神宗朝祭太庙，并在郊宫设斋供。
English: On the 17th, the Shinshu Morning Festival was held at the Imperial Temple, and a fast offering was held at the Suburban Palace.

古文：废青城后苑。
现代文：废罢青城皇后苑囿。
English: Qingcheng Queen's Garden Bridge to be demolished.

古文：丁亥，祀天地于圜丘，大赦，群臣进秩有差。
现代文：十八日，设置圆形高坛，祭祀天地。大赦天下，群臣不同程度地进官加爵。
English: On the 18th, a round high altar was set up to worship heaven and earth. The emperor pardoned the whole country, and a group of ministers were promoted to higher ranks to varying degrees.

古文：乙未，京师及莫州地震。
现代文：二十六日，京城和莫州发生地震。
English: On the 26th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing and Mozhou.

古文：十二月己亥朔，命宰臣祷雪。
现代文：十二月初一，命令宰臣祈祷降雪。
English: On the first day of December, he ordered his vassals to pray for snow.

古文：癸卯，瀛州地大震。
现代文：初五，赢州发生大地震。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a major earthquake occurred in Yingzhou.

古文：庚戌，赐夏国主秉常诏，许纳塞门、安远二砦归其绥州。
现代文：十二日，赐给夏国主秉常诏书，答应接纳塞门、安远二碧，把绥州归还西夏。
English: On the twelfth day, he issued an imperial edict to the lord of Xia, Bingzhang, promising to accept Saimen, Anyuan and Erbi, and to return Zhangzhou to Western Xia.

古文：辛亥，录唐段秀实后。
现代文：十三日，录用唐段秀实后代。
English: On the 13th, the descendants of Tang Duan Xiushi were hired.

古文：癸丑，祷雪于郊庙、社稷。
现代文：十五日，在郊庙、社翟祈祷降雪。
English: On the 15th, they prayed for snowfall at the suburban temples and shrines.

古文：庚申，以判汝州富弼为集禧观使，诏乘驿赴阙。
现代文：二十二日，任命汝州通判富弼为集禧观使，诏令乘马车赶赴朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, Ruzhou Tongzhan Fuxi was appointed as the envoy to collect the jubilee, and he was ordered to rush to the imperial court by carriage.

古文：壬戌，雪。
现代文：二十四日，降雪。
English: Snow fell on the 24th.

古文：甲子，辽遣耶律公质等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派耶律公质等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Gongqing and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：二年春正月甲午，奉安英宗神御于景灵宫英德殿。
现代文：熙宁二年春正月二十六日，英宗遗像迁到景灵宫英德殿。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the second year of Xining, the remains of Yingzong were moved to the Yingde Hall of the Jingling Palace.

古文：二月己亥，以富弼同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月初二，任命富弼为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Fuxi was appointed as the next chapter of the book of the same school.

古文：庚子，以王安石参知政事。
现代文：初三，任命王安石参知政事。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Wang Anshi was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：命翰林学士吕公著修《英宗实录》。
现代文：命令翰林学士吕公著撰修涣宗实录。
English: Hanlin Scholar Lv Gong was ordered to write a book on the actual records of the Jurchen Sect.

古文：乙巳，帝以灾变避正殿，减膳彻乐。
现代文：初八，神宗因发生灾变不到正殿，减少饮食，撤除乐舞。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Shinshu sect was not able to enter the main hall due to a disaster, reducing meals and removing music and dance.

古文：甲子，陈升之、王安石创置三司条例，议行新法。
现代文：二十七日，陈升之、王安石创置三司条例司，商议推行新法。
English: On the 27th, Chen Shengzhi and Wang Anshi set up three departments of regulations to discuss the implementation of the new law.

古文：三月乙酉，诏漕运、盐铁等官各具财用利害以闻。
现代文：三月十八日，诏令主管槽运和盐铁的官员各自陈述财用利害，报告朝廷。
English: On March 18th, the officials in charge of tank transport and salt railway were ordered to state their financial interests and report to the imperial court.

古文：丙戌，命宰臣祷雨。
现代文：十九日，命令宰臣祈祷降雨。
English: On the 19th, he ordered his aides-de-camp to pray for rain.

古文：戊子，秉常上誓表，纳塞门、安远二砦，乞绥州，诏许之。
现代文：二十一日，秉常递来誓表，请求以塞门、安远二碧换回绥州，神宗下诏答应了这件事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Bing Chang handed in his oath and requested that he be allowed to return to Zhangzhou in exchange for Saimen and Anyuan Erbi. Shenzong agreed to this with an imperial edict.

古文：乙未，以旱虑囚。
现代文：二十八日，因早灾讯察全国囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 28th, due to the early disaster, the crimes of prisoners across the country were investigated.

古文：四月丁酉朔，群臣再上尊号，不许。
现代文：四月初一，群臣再次敬上尊号，神宗没有答应。
English: On the first day of April, the courtiers once again paid homage to Shinso, but Shinso did not agree.

古文：戊戌，省内外土木工。
现代文：初二，减省朝廷内外土木工役。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was reduced to working as a civil engineer inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，辽遣耶律昌等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派耶律昌等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Luchang and others to congratulate the same day's festival.

古文：丁未，唐介薨，临其丧。
现代文：十一日，唐介逝世，神宗亲临吊丧。
English: On the 11th day, Tang Jie died, and Shenzong attended the funeral in person.

古文：戊申，宰臣富弼、曾公亮以旱上表待罪，诏不允。
现代文：二十日，宰臣富弼、曾公亮因早灾上奏自勃，等待治罪，神宗下诏不必如此。
English: On the 20th, because of the early disaster, the Vice-Minister Fushun and the Vice-Minister Zeng Gu Liang had to wait to be punished. The Emperor did not have to do so.

古文：癸丑，命曾公亮为西京奏安仁宗、英宗御容礼仪使。
现代文：十七日，命令曾公亮为西京恭敬安置仁宗、英宗遗像礼仪使。
English: On the 17th, Zeng Guoliang issued an order to respectfully relocate the statues of Ninsong and Yingzong to West Beijing.

古文：丁巳，遣使诸路，察农田水利赋役。戊午，外任大使臣年七十以上，令监司体量，直除致仕者，更不与子孙推恩。
现代文：二十一日，派遣使者到全国各地视察农田、水利、赋役情况&;;二十二日，在外地任职的大使臣，超过七十岁的，命令监司认真考核，该退休的，不给他的子孙施加恩惠。
English: On the twenty-first day, an envoy was sent to all parts of the country to inspect the situation of farmland, water conservancy, and forced labor; on the twenty-second day, the ambassador minister, who was more than seventy years old, ordered the supervisor to carefully assess the retired person and not to impose favors on his descendants.

古文：甲子，御殿复膳。
现代文：二十八日，上殿并恢复饮食。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the palace and resumed eating and drinking.

古文：免河北归业流民夏税。
现代文：免除河北回到土地上的流民的夏税。
English: Exempt the summer tax of the displaced people in Hebei who returned to the land.

古文：五月辛未，宴紫宸殿，初用乐。
现代文：五月初六，设宴紫哀殿，开始用乐。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, they held a banquet at the Purple Shrine and began to play music.

古文：己卯，赐河北役兵特支钱。
现代文：十四日，赐给河北服役士兵特支钱。
English: On the 14th, special money was given to the soldiers serving in Hebei Province.

古文：癸未，翰林学士郑獬罢知杭州，宣徽北院使王拱辰罢判应天府，知制诰钱公辅罢知江宁府。
现代文：十八日，翰林学士郑搬罢知杭州，宣徽北院使王拱辰罢职通判应天府，知制浩钱公辅罢职改知江宁府。
English: On the 18th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng was transferred to Hangzhou, Wang Gongchen was transferred to Yingtianfu by Xuanhui North Academy, and He Qianjun Public Assistant was transferred to Jiangningfu.

古文：丁亥，奉安仁宗、英宗御容于会圣宫及应天院。甲午，减西京囚罪一等。
现代文：二十二日，在会圣宫和应天院恭敬安置仁宗、英宗遗像。二十九日，减轻西京囚犯罪行一等。
English: On the 22nd, the relics of Ninsong and Yingzong were respectfully placed in the Holy Palace and Yingtian Temple. On the 29th, the crime of the prisoners in West Beijing was mitigated to the first degree.

古文：台州民延赞等九人，年各百岁以上，并授本州助教。
现代文：台州百姓延赞等九人，年纪都在百岁以上，一起授给台州助教。
English: Taizhou citizen Yanzan and nine others, all over 100 years old, were awarded Taizhou teaching assistants.

古文：六月丁巳，右谏议大夫、御史中丞吕诲以论王安石，罢知邓州。
现代文：六月二十二日，右谏议大夫、御史中承吕诲因为议论王安石而罢为邓州知州。
English: On June 22nd, the right-wing dissident and historian, Zhongcheng Lyu, was removed from his post as Dangzhou chizhou for speaking out against Wang Anshi.

古文：以翰林学士吕公著为御史中丞。
现代文：任命翰林学士吕公著为御史中承。
English: Hanlin Scholar Lv Gongzhu was appointed as a member of the Imperial Historian Council.

古文：命龙图阁直学士张掞兼编排录用勋臣子孙。
现代文：命令龙图阁直学士张淡兼编排录用勋臣子孙。
English: Longtu directly ordered Zhang Tan, a bachelor, to hire the sons and grandsons of the noblemen as actors and choreographers.

古文：壬戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，日当食，云阴不见。
现代文：秋七月初一，应为日食，因阴云密布没有出现。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of July, there should have been a solar eclipse, but it did not appear because of the thick overcast.

古文：庚午，诏御史中丞举推直官及可兼权御史者。
现代文：初六，下诏御史中承举荐正直官员及可以兼任代理御史的人。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, the honorable officials and those who can concurrently serve as acting historians are listed in the following Imperial Rescript.

古文：甲戌，东平郡王允弼薨。
现代文：初十，东平郡王允弼逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Wang Yunyao of Dongping County passed away.

古文：辛巳，立淮、浙、江、湖六路均输法。
现代文：十七日，确立淮、浙、江、湖六路均输法。
English: On the 17th, the six-way transmission method of Huai, Zhejiang, Jiangsu and Hubei was established.

古文：壬午，振恤被水州军，仍蠲竹木税及酒课。
现代文：十八日，贩济抚恤遭受水灾的州军，继续免除竹木税和酒课。
English: On the 18th, the state army, which suffered from floods, continued to be exempted from bamboo and wood tax and liquor class.

古文：癸未，诏自今文臣换右职者，须实有谋勇，曾著绩效，即得取旨。
现代文：十九日，下诏： 从今往后，文臣调任重要职位，必须实实在在有谋有勇，并曾经有过显著的政绩，才能上报朝廷批准。 
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: From now on, in order to be reported to the Imperial Court for approval, the appointment of a civil minister to an important post must be truly courageous and have had significant political achievements.

古文：甲申，日下有五色云。
现代文：二十日，太阳下有五种颜色的云。
English: On the 20th, there were clouds of five colors under the sun.

古文：己丑，韩琦上《仁宗实录》，曾公亮上《英宗实录》。
现代文：二十五日，韩琦献上推宗实录，曾公亮献上英宗实录。
English: On the 25th, Han Zheng presented a real record of promoting Buddhism, and Zeng openly presented a real record of Ying Zong.

古文：八月癸卯，侍御史刘琦贬监处州盐酒务，御史里行钱顗贬监衢州盐税，亦以论安石故。
现代文：八月初九，侍御史刘琦被贬监处州盐酒务，御史里行锡领被贬监瞥州盐税，也是因为议论王安石的缘故。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the year, the waiter Liu Wei was demoted to the supervision of the State Salt and Wine Office, and the tin collar was demoted to the supervision of the State Salt Tax, also because of the discussion of Wang Anshi.

古文：乙巳，殿中侍御史孙昌龄以论新法，贬通判蕲州。
现代文：十一日，殿中侍御史孙昌龄因为议论新法，贬为薪州通判。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Sun Changling, the palace chamberlain, was demoted to the rank of general magistrate because of his discussion of the new law.

古文：丙午，同修起居注范纯仁以言事多忤安石，罢同知谏院。
现代文：十二日，同修起居注范纯仁因为言事多抵触王安石，罢为同知谏院。
English: On the 12th, fellow practitioner and resident Chuan Fan Chunren was expelled from Tongzhiya Temple because his words and deeds contradicted those of Wang Anshi.

古文：戊申，河徙东行。
现代文：十四日，黄河改道东行。
English: On the 14th, the Yellow River was diverted to the east.

古文：夏国请从旧蕃仪，诏许之。
现代文：夏国请求依照原来的礼仪，神宗下诏允许。
English: In accordance with the original etiquette, Xia Guo requested permission from Shenzong.

古文：己酉，范纯仁知河中府。
现代文：十五日，范纯仁到河中府做知府。
English: On the 15th, Fan Chunren went to serve as the prefectural governor of Hechu Prefecture.

古文：甲寅，朝神御殿。
现代文：二十日，朝拜神主殿。
English: On the 20th, morning worship of the main shrine begins.

古文：辛酉，以秘书省著作佐郎程颢、王子韶并为太子中允、权监察御史里行。
现代文：二十七日，任命秘书省著作佐郎程颖、王子韶同为太子中允、代理监察御史里行。
English: On the 27th, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Saro Cheng Ying, and the prince, Xing Tong, were appointed as the prince's middle assistant and the acting inspector.

古文：壬戌，待御史知杂事刘述、同判刑部丁讽坐受刑名敕不即下，述贬知江州，讽贬通判复州。
现代文：二十八日，侍御史知杂事刘述、同判刑部丁讽因救书没下就擅定刑名，分别被贬为江州知州、复州通判。
English: On the 28th, Liu Shu, the attendant of the History Department, and Ding Liao, the same sentencing department, did not have the right to determine the name of the sentence because they did not have the rescue letter, and were respectively reduced to Jiangzhou Zhizhou and Fuzhou General Sentencing.

古文：审刑院详议官王师元坐言许遵所议刑名不当，贬监安州税。
现代文：审刑院详议官王师元因言许遵所议刑名不当，被贬监安州税。
English: Wang Shiyuan, a detailed deliberation officer of the Sentencing and Punishment Court, was demoted to Anzhou Tax Supervisor for improperly saying that he would abide by the sentence.

古文：九月甲子朔，交州来贡。
现代文：九月初一，交州来进贡。
English: On the first day of September, Jiaozhou came to pay tribute.

古文：乙丑，以古勿峒效顺首领侬智会为右千牛卫大将军。
现代文：初二，任命古勿酮效顺首领侬智会为右千牛卫大将军。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, the leader of the ancient Besu Keto-Hyo-Shun, Nonchi-Kai, was appointed as the general of the Right Chigusa-Wei.

古文：壬辰，以秘书省著作佐郎吕惠卿为太子中允、崇政殿说书。
现代文：初四，确定常平给敛法。初五，拿出内库络钱一百万来买河北常平粟。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he determined the method of reducing the amount of money given to Changping. In the fifth year of junior high school, he took out one million rupees from the treasury to buy the Hebei Changping millet.

古文：冬十月丙申，富弼罢为武宁军节度使、判亳州。
现代文：十四日，派孙固等人祝贺辽主生辰和新春。冬十月初三，富弼罢为武宁军节度使、毫州通判。
English: On the 14th, he sent Sun Gu and others to congratulate Liao on his birthday and the new year. On the 3rd day of October in winter, Fuxi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wu Ning Army and the general magistrate of Wuzhou.

古文：曾公亮、陈升之并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：曾公亮、陈升之一起被任为同中书门下平章事。
English: Zeng Guoliang and Chen Sheng have been appointed as the next chapter of the book of the same school.

古文：城绥州，命郭逵选将置守具。
现代文：在绥州修城，命令郭连选择守将，准备守城所需器械。
English: In the construction of the city in Zhangzhou, Guo Lian was ordered to choose a commander and prepare the equipment needed to defend the city.

古文：逵遣赵禼交夏人所纳安远、塞门二砦，就定地界。
现代文：郭连派赵交割夏人所纳安远、塞门二案事宜，同时与西夏划定国界。
English: Guo Lian sent Zhao to hand over the Xia people's Nanyuan and Saimen II cases, and at the same time to delineate the national border with Western Xia.

古文：夏人渝初盟，禼请城绥州，不以易二砦，因改名绥德城。
现代文：夏人背弃初衷，无意交还二寨，赵请求在绥州建城，不用它交换安远、塞门二碧，绥州因而改名绥德城。
English: Xia Ren abandoned his original intention and had no intention of returning Erzhai, Zhao requested to build a city in Ganzhou, without exchanging it for Anyuan, Saimen and Erbi, and Ganzhou thus changed its name to Shunde City.

古文：戊戌，以蕃官礼宾使折继世为忠州刺史，左监门卫将军嵬名山为供备库使，仍赐姓名赵怀顺。
现代文：初五，任命蕃官礼宾使折继世为忠州刺史；左监门卫将军鬼名山为供备库使，并赐姓名为赵怀顺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the eunuch protocol envoy, Ori, was appointed as the successor of the history of Chungju; the left guard gatekeeper, General Kinmeizan, was appointed as the envoy for the preparation of the library, and was given the name Zhao Huai Shun.

古文：丙辰，诏御史请对，并许直由阁门上殿。
现代文：二十三日，下诏御史请对并允许径直由阁门上殿。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Go-Shi asked for permission to enter the palace directly from the gate.

古文：戊午，宗谔复平章事。
现代文：二十五日，宗愕复官平章事。
English: On the 25th, Zong Zhen was relieved of his post.

古文：己未，夏人来谢封册。
现代文：二十六日，夏人来感谢朝廷封册。
English: On the 26th, Xia Rong came to thank the court for sealing the record.

古文：辛酉，录杨承信曾孙立、田重进曾孙章为三班借职。
现代文：二十八日，录用杨承信曾孙杨立、田重进曾孙田章为三班借职。
English: On the 28th, Yang Chengxin's great-grandson Yang Li and Tian Chongjin's great-grandson Tian Zhang were hired as third-shift loan officers.

古文：十一月乙丑，命韩绛制置三司条例。
现代文：十一月初二，命令韩绛制置三司条例。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Han Yu ordered the establishment of three departments.

古文：甲戌，诏祖宗之后世袭补外官，非袒免亲罢赐名授官。
现代文：十一日，下诏：祖宗的后代因袭递补外官，不是五服之亲的人，免除赐名授官。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Descendants of the ancestors of the foreign minister who are not relatives of the five-clothed officials are exempted from the naming and awarding of officials.

古文：丙子，罢诸路提刑武臣。
现代文：十三日，罢除各路提刑武臣。
English: On the thirteenth day, all military tribunes were dismissed.

古文：颁《农田水利约束》。
现代文：颁布浓田水利约束。
English: Enacted the Nobata Water Conservancy Restriction.

古文：壬午，御迩英阁听讲。
现代文：十九日，到迩英阁听侍臣讲读。
English: On the 19th, he went to Su Yingge to listen to the courtier's lecture.

古文：赐汴口役兵钱。
现代文：赐给汁口服役兵士钱。
English: Give the money to the furloughed service members.

古文：己丑，减天下囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十六日，减轻全国囚犯罪行一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 26th, the first-class crime of prisoners nationwide was mitigated, and they were released from prison.

古文：闰月庚子，浚御河。
现代文：闰十一月初七，疏浚御河。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the dredging of the Okawa River began.

古文：壬子，置交子务。
现代文：十九日，设置交子务。
English: On the 19th, the delivery service was set up.

古文：是月，差官提举诸路常平广惠仓，兼管勾农田水利差役事。
现代文：这个月，陆续派遣官员提举各路常平、广惠仓，兼管勾农田水利差役事宜。
English: This month, officials were successively dispatched to raise the issues of Changping and Guanghui Cang of various roads, as well as the management of farmland water conservancy.

古文：十二月癸亥朔，复减后妃公主及臣僚推恩。
现代文：十二月初一，又一次减少后妃公主及臣僚所享受的恩惠。
English: On the first day of December, the benefits enjoyed by the Empress Dowager and her ministers were once again reduced.

古文：癸酉，增失入死罪法。
现代文：十一日，增失人死罪法。
English: On the 11th, the Law on the Crime of Causing the Death of Another Person came into force.

古文：丙戌，增三京留司御史台、国子监及宫观官，以处卿监、监司、知州之老者。
现代文：二十四日，增加三京留御史台、国子监及宫观官员，以便安排卿监、监司、知州中年岁大的。
English: On the 24th, the number of officials of the Imperial Historian's Office, the Imperial Household Agency, and the Imperial Household Agency who stayed in Beijing was increased, in order to arrange for the appointment of the Imperial Household Agency, the Imperial Household Agency, and the Chishu Middle-aged and Elderly Officials.

古文：戊子，辽遣萧惟禧来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派萧惟禧来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Weixi to congratulate the New Year.

古文：是岁，交州来贡。
现代文：这一年，交州前来进贡。
English: This year, Jiaozhou came to pay tribute.

