古文：古之人目短于自见，故以镜观面；智短于自知，故以道正己。
现代文：古人的眼睛看不见自己，所以要用镜子来观照自己的面容；才智不足以认识自己，所以用法术来修正自己。
English: The eyes of the ancients could not see themselves, so they used mirrors to observe their faces; their intelligence was not enough to know themselves, so they used magic to correct themselves.

古文：故镜无见疵之罪，道无明过之恶。
现代文：因此镜子没有照出毛病的罪过，法术没有暴露过失引起的怨恨。
English: Therefore, the mirror does not reflect the sin of the fault, and the spell does not expose the resentment caused by the fault.

古文：目失镜，则无以正须眉；身失道，则无以知迷惑。
现代文：眼睛离开镜子，就不能修整胡子眉毛；人们离开法术，就无法辨别是非。
English: Without a mirror, people can't trim their beards and eyebrows; without magic, they can't tell right from wrong.

古文：西门豹之性急，故佩韦以缓已；董安于之心缓，故佩弦以自急。
现代文：西门豹性情急躁，所以佩带柔韧的皮带来时刻提醒自己要从容；董安于性情迟缓，所以佩带绷紧的弓弦来鞭策自己敏捷。
English: Western leopards are quick-tempered, so they always wear a flexible leather strap to remind themselves to be calm; Dong An is slow-tempered, so he wears a tight bowstring to spur himself to be agile.

古文：故以有余补不足，以长绩短，之谓明主。
现代文：所以用多余补充不足；用长的接续短的就叫做英明的君主。
English: Therefore, with the superfluous to supplement the insufficient; with the long succession of short is called a wise monarch.

古文：天下有信数三：一曰智有所有不能立，二曰力有所不能举，三曰强有所有不能胜。
现代文：天下有三种定数：一是智者也有办不成的事情，二是力士也有举不起的物件，三是勇士也有无法战胜的对手。
English: There are three kinds of constants in the world: one is that the wise also have things that cannot be done, the second is that wrestlers also have objects that cannot be lifted, and the third is that warriors also have opponents that cannot be defeated.

古文：故虽有尧之智而无众人之助，大功不立；有乌获之劲而不得人助，不能自举；有贲、育之强而无法术，不得长胜。
现代文：所以即使有唐尧的智慧，却没有众人的辅佐，就无法建立大功；有乌获的力气，却得不到别人帮助，也不可能自己举起自己；有孟贲、夏育的勇猛，却没有法术作为保障，仍不能长久取胜。
English: Therefore, even if you have the wisdom of Tang Xuan, without the support of many people, you will not be able to build a great achievement; if you have the strength gained from Wu, you will not get help from others, and you will not be able to lift yourself up; if you have the bravery of Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, but you do not have magic as a guarantee, you still cannot win for a long time.

古文：故势有不可得，事有不可成。
现代文：所以形势总有不具备的，事情总有办不成的。
English: Therefore, there are always situations that are not available, and there are always things that cannot be done.

古文：故乌获轻千钧而重其身，非其重于千钧也，势不便也。
现代文：所以乌获以千钧为轻而以自身为重，不是他的身体比千钧重，而是客观条件不允许他举起自己。
English: Therefore, Wu Guo took the weight of a thousand flies as light and himself as heavy. It was not that his body was heavier than a thousand flies, but that the objective conditions did not allow him to lift himself.

古文：离硃易百步而难眉睫，非百步近而眉睫远也，道不可也。
现代文：离朱易于看清百步之外的毫毛，却难以看看到自己的眉毛和睫毛，不是百步之外的距离近而眉毛和睫毛远，而是条件不允许。
English: It is easy to see a millimeter of hair a hundred paces away from Zhu, but it is difficult to see one's own eyebrows and eyelashes. It is not that the distance is close and the eyebrows and eyelashes are far away, but the conditions are not allowed.

古文：故明主不穷乌获以其不能自举，不困离硃以其不能自见。
现代文：所以明君不因乌获不能自举而为难他，不因离朱不能自见而刁难他。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun did not make difficulties for Wu Guotong because he could not lift himself up, nor did he make difficulties for Zhu Liang because he could not see for himself.

古文：因可势，求易道，故用力寡而功名立。
现代文：顺应可获成功的形势，寻找容易成功的条件，所以力少而功名成。
English: Comply with the situation that can be successful, look for conditions that are easy to succeed, so the effort is small and the achievement is great.

古文：时有满虚，事有利害，物有生死，人主为三者发喜怒之色，则金石之士离心焉。
现代文：季节有盛有衰，事情有利有害，万物有生有死，君主对这三种变化表现出喜怒之颜色，那么忠贞人士就会离心离德，聪明的人就会摸到君主底细了。
English: Seasons have their ups and downs, things have their benefits and drawbacks, everything has its life and death, and the monarch shows the color of joy and anger to these three changes, then the loyal people will be alienated from morality, and the clever people will touch the bottom of the monarch.

古文：古明主观人，不使人观己。
现代文：所以明君观察别人，而不让别人观察自己。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun observes others, but does not allow others to observe himself.

古文：明于尧不能独成，乌获之不能自举，贲育之不能自胜，以法术则观行之道毕矣。
现代文：明白唐尧不能单独成功，乌获不能举起自己，孟责、夏育不能胜过自我，运用法术则观察臣下行为的道理就尽在其中了。
English: He understood that Tang Xuan could not succeed alone, Wu Guo could not lift himself up, Meng Gui and Xia Yu could not surpass themselves, and the use of magic to observe the behavior of his vassals was all in it.

