古文：胡叟，字伦许，安定临泾人也。
现代文：胡叟，字伦许，安定临泾人。
English: Hu Rong, Zhi Rong Xu, and Ding Linyi.

古文：世有冠冕，为西夏著姓。
现代文：家中世代为官，胡氏家族为西夏著名的姓氏。
English: Generations of the family have been officials, and the Hu family is a famous surname in Western Xia.

古文：叟少聪敏，年十三，辨疑释理，知名乡国。其意之所悟，与成人交论，鲜有屈焉。
现代文：胡叟少年时即聪慧敏捷，十三岁时就能辨别疑难，解释义理，名传乡国，他所明白的义理，即使与成人交手辩论，也很少有屈服的。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was able to distinguish between doubt and difficulty, explain the principles, and pass on the name of his hometown. The principles he understood, even when debating with adults, rarely yielded.

古文：学不师受，友人劝之，叟曰： 先圣之言，精义入神者，其唯《易》乎？
现代文：他不从师，完全凭自学掌握义理，朋友劝他还是从师的好，他说： 先圣之言，精辟大义进入神境，哪是仅指一部《易经》呢？
English: He did not follow a teacher, but mastered the principles of righteousness entirely through self-study. A friend advised him that it would be better to follow a teacher. He said: "The words of the ancients, the incisive great righteousness into the realm of the gods, which is only one part of the "I Ching"?

古文：犹谓可思而过半。
现代文：即使《易经》，我也能通过自己的思考理解一半以上的义理。
English: Even in the I Ching, I can understand more than half of the principles through my own thinking.

古文：末世腐儒，粗别刚柔之位，宁有探赜未兆者哉？
现代文：而那些末世腐儒，仅能粗粗辨别刚柔的卦位，哪有能够探寻深义、推测未显之精理的能耐呢。
English: However, those corrupt Confucian scholars of the last days could only roughly distinguish between the strong and the weak, and did not have the ability to explore the deep meaning and speculate on the hidden essence.

古文：就道之义，非在今矣。 
现代文：我从师学习的事情，不是在今天就能实现的。 
English: What I learned from my mentor is not something that can be achieved today.

古文：及披读群籍，再阅于目，皆诵于口。
现代文：胡叟阅读的各种书籍，等到再次过目时，就都能背诵书的内容了。
English: Hu Yao can recite the contents of all the books he has read when he looks at them again.

古文：好属文，既善为典雅之词，又工为鄙俗之句。
现代文：胡叟喜欢写文章，既善于典雅的词章，又工于乡语粗言。
English: Hu Yao likes to write articles. He is not only good at writing elegant phrases, but also at writing local slang.

古文：以姚政将衰，遂入长安观风化，隐匿名行，惧人见知。
现代文：因姚氏政权将要灭亡，他便来到长安观察世态，隐姓埋名，怕被人知道。
English: As the Yao regime was about to fall, he came to Chang'an to observe the situation. He went incognito for fear of being discovered.

古文：时京兆韦祖思，少阅典坟，多蔑时辈，知叟至，召而见之。
现代文：当时，京城有个叫韦祖思的人，少时就开始阅读典籍，很轻视当时的人，知道胡叟来了，便召见他。
English: At that time, there was a man in Beijing named Weizhu Si, who began to read classics at a young age, despised the people at that time, knew that Hu Yao was coming, and summoned him.

古文：祖思习常，待叟不足，叟聊与叙温凉，拂衣而出。
现代文：祖思很随便，对待胡叟不大周到，胡叟只与他聊了几句家常，便拂袖而出。
English: Zu Si was very casual, and his treatment of Hu Yao was not very thoughtful. Hu Yao only chatted with him about a few household chores, and then he whipped out his sleeve.

古文：祖思固留之，曰： 当与君论天人之际，何遽而反乎？ 
现代文：祖思执意挽留他，说： 还没与您讨论天人之际的大事呢，为什么这么快就要回去？ 
English: Zu Si insisted on keeping him and said, "I haven't discussed the important matters of the day with you yet. Why do you want to go back so soon?"

古文：叟对曰： 论天人者，其亡久矣。与君相知，何夸言若是也。 遂不坐而去。
现代文：胡叟回答说： 讨论天人之事的人死了已经很久了，与你相知，怎能如此奢言呢。 于是不坐而去。
English: Hu Yao replied, "The person who discussed the matter of gods and mortals has been dead for a long time. Knowing you, how could he say such a thing? So he left without sitting down.

古文：至主人家，赋韦杜二族，一宿而成，时年十有八矣。
现代文：到了主人家中，作赋描述韦、杜两族，一夜写成，当时年仅十八。
English: When he arrived at his master's house, he was only 18 years old, and he wrote a work describing the Wei and Du clans in one night.

古文：其述前载无违旧美，叙中世有协时事，而末及鄙黩。
现代文：描述两家前辈，不违背他们旧时美况，中世与时事相协，赋尾写其卑鄙黩暗。
English: Describe the two predecessors, do not contradict their old-time beauty, the Middle Ages and current affairs, and finally write their meanness and darkness.

古文：人皆奇其才，畏其笔。
现代文：世上之人都认为他是当世奇才，也很害怕他的笔触。
English: People around the world consider him to be a modern-day genius and are afraid of his brushstrokes.

古文：世犹传诵之，以为笑狎。
现代文：他所写的也为世人所传诵，成为人们谈笑的材料。
English: What he wrote was also recited by the world and became the material of people's conversation.

古文：叟孤飘坎壈，未有仕路，遂入汉中。
现代文：胡叟孤零漂泊坎坷多折，无法进入仕途，于是辗转到了汉中。
English: Hu Yao wandered lonely and bumpy, unable to find a job, so he transferred to Hanzhong Middle School.

古文：刘义隆梁秦二州刺史冯翊吉翰，以叟才士，颇相礼接。
现代文：刘义隆政权的梁、秦两州刺史冯翊、吉翰，觉得胡叟是个才子，对待他礼节很是周全。
English: Liang, Qin and two states of Liu Yilong's regime stabbed Feng Xi and Ji Han, thought that Hu Xi was a talent, and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：授叟末佐，不称其怀。
现代文：让胡叟在自己幕府当个小参谋，胡叟不以为然。
English: Hu Yao was not impressed when he was asked to serve as a minor staff officer in his own shogunate.

古文：未几，翰迁益州，叟随入蜀，多为豪俊所尚。
现代文：没多久，吉翰调任益州，胡叟也跟着入川，胡叟又被当地豪俊之士所推崇。
English: Not long after, Jihan was transferred to Yizhou, Hu Yao also followed into the river, and Hu Yao was also respected by the local magnates.

古文：时蜀沙门法成，鸠率僧旅，几于千人，铸丈六金像。
现代文：当时蜀中和尚法成，率领僧人几乎一千人，铸造一丈六尺多的佛身金像。
English: At that time, Shuzhong monk Fa Cheng led almost a thousand monks to cast a more than six-foot-tall gold Buddha statue.

古文：刘义隆恶其聚众，将加大辟。
现代文：刘义隆很讨厌他聚集如此众多和尚的行为，准备判以极刑。
English: Liu Yilong hated the fact that he had gathered so many monks and was about to be sentenced to death.

古文：叟闻之，即赴丹阳，启申其美，遂得免焉。
现代文：胡叟听说，立即赶赴丹阳，在刘面前申述法成的各种好处，屠刀之下救出法成。
English: Upon hearing of this, Hu Yao immediately rushed to Danyang to plead the various benefits of Falun Gong in front of Liu, and rescued Falun Gong under the butcher's knife.

古文：复还于蜀。
现代文：事情完后，胡叟回到蜀中。
English: After the incident, Hu Yao returned to Shuzhong.

古文：法成感之，遗其珍物，价直千余匹。
现代文：法成感激他的救命之恩，送给他许多珍贵的财宝，价值可达千余匹锦帛。
English: Fa Cheng was grateful to him for saving his life and gave him many precious treasures, worth up to more than a thousand brocade horses.

古文：叟谓法成曰： 纬萧何人，能弃明珠？
现代文：胡叟对法成说： 纬萧何人，能弃明珠？
English: Hu Yao said to Fa Cheng: How many people can abandon the pearl?

古文：吾为德请，财何为也？ 
现代文：我为佛德请命，不是为钱财驱使，你给我钱财干什么？ 
English: I'm running for my life, not for money. Why are you giving me money?

古文：一无所受。
现代文：什么也不要。
English: I don't want anything.

古文：在益土五六载，北至杨难当，乃西入沮渠，牧犍遇之不重。
现代文：胡叟在益州呆了五六年，又北上到了杨难当那里，后又西进到沮渠牧犍帐下，沮渠牧犍不怎么重视他。
English: Hu Yao stayed in Yizhou for five or six years, and then went north to Yang Nan Dang, and then west to Deqiao herdsmen. Deqiao herdsmen did not pay much attention to him.

古文：叟亦本无附之之诚，乃为诗示所知广平程伯达。
现代文：胡叟也没有诚心归附他们，于是写诗给了解任用他的广平程伯达。
English: Hu Yao also did not sincerely adhere to them, so he wrote a poem to understand the appointment of his Guangping Cheng Boda.

古文：其略曰： 群犬吠新客，佞暗排疏宾。
现代文：大意是说： 群犬吠新客，佞暗排疏宾。
English: To wit: A pack of dogs will bark at a new guest, while a pack of dogs will bark at an absent guest.

古文：直途既以塞，曲路非所遵。
现代文：直途既以塞，曲路非所遵。
English: The direct route is blocked, and the curved route is not followed.

古文：望卫惋祝鮀，眄楚悼灵均。
现代文：望卫惋祝鈟，眄楚悼灵均。
English: Wang Wei, Zhu Xi, and Zhu Chu mourned Ling Jun.

古文：何用宣忧怀，托翰寄辅仁。 
现代文：何用宣忧怀，托翰寄辅仁。 
English: What's the use of publicizing one's worries, if one doesn't send help.

古文：伯达见诗，谓叟曰： 凉州虽地居戎域，然自张氏以来，号有华风。
现代文：程伯达看了他写的诗，对胡叟说： 凉州虽然地处战事频起的边关，但自张氏据守以来，这里风俗渐变，也有中土华风。
English: Cheng Baoda read the poem he wrote and said to Hu Yao: Although Liangzhou is located on the border of frequent wars, since the Zhang family has been in charge, the customs here have gradually changed, and there is also a Middle-earth style.

古文：今则宪章无亏，曷祝鮀之有也？ 
现代文：而今则中土各种制度法规在这里畅行无阻，哪是当年被人误解的祝鈟之世所有的呢？ 
English: But now, all kinds of systems and laws of the Middle Kingdom are running smoothly here. What is the misunderstood world of Zhu Xi all about?

古文：叟曰： 古人有言：君子闻鞞鼓之声，则思战争之士。
现代文：胡叟说： 古人说：君子听到鍸鼓的声音，就想到从事战争的将士。
English: Hu Yao said: The ancients said: When a gentleman hears the sound of drums, he thinks of soldiers engaged in war.

古文：贵主奉正朔而弗淳，慕仁义而未允，地陋僻而僭徽号。
现代文：而贵主奉举家国却不心诚，慕仰仁义而不允实行，地处偏僻而僭立帝号。
English: However, your lord is not sincere in serving his country, he admires benevolence but does not allow it to be practiced, he is located in a remote area and holds the title of emperor.

古文：居小事大，宁若兹乎？
现代文：地小野心却大，大概就像你这样吧？
English: Small country, big ambitions, just like you, right?

古文：徐偃之辙，故不旋踵矣。
现代文：当年徐偃前车之迹，很快就是你的结局。
English: If you follow the footsteps of Xu Xuan in the past, you will soon meet your end.

古文：吾之择木，夙在大魏，与子暂违，非久阔也。 
现代文：我如鸟择木而居，早就心归大魏，与你只是暂时离别，不是久不相见。 
English: I am like a bird choosing a tree to live in. My heart has long since returned to Wei. I am only temporarily parting with you. It is not a long time since we last saw each other.

古文：岁余，牧犍破降。
现代文：一年多以后，沮渠牧犍被魏破灭，牧犍本人也降服魏国了。
English: A little more than a year later, Wei shattered the disheartened herdsmen, and the herdsmen themselves also surrendered to Wei.

古文：叟既先归国，朝廷以其识机，拜虎威将军，赐爵始复男。
现代文：胡叟本人在沮渠投降之前即已到了魏国，魏朝廷以他有先见之明，拜授他为虎威将军，赐始复男爵位。
English: Hu Yao himself had already arrived in Wei before the defeat and surrender, and the Wei court took him as a prescient leader, bestowing him with the title of General Hu Wei and giving Shi Fu the title of baron.

古文：家于密云，蓬室草筵，惟以酒自适。
现代文：胡叟在密云定居，家境贫寒，草室陋居，胡叟本人只以薄酒度日，自娱自乐。
English: Hu Yao settled in Miyun. His family was poor and lived in a shabby grass hut. Hu Yao himself only drank wine to amuse himself.

古文：谓友人金城宗舒曰： 我此生活，似胜焦先，志意所栖，谢其高矣。 
现代文：胡叟对友人金城人宗舒说： 我这样的生活，看起来比焦先还强些。本人天性乐此，不愿再往高处发展了。 
English: Hu Yao said to his friend Jincheng Zongshu: My life seems to be better than Jiaoxian's. I enjoy it by nature and do not want to develop to a higher level.

古文：后叟被征至，谢恩，并献诗一篇。
现代文：后来胡叟被朝廷征拜为官，胡叟谢恩不往，并献上辞官诗一篇。
English: Later, Hu Yao was recruited by the imperial court as an official, Hu Yao did not go to thank him, and presented a dictation poem.

古文：高宗时召叟及舒，并使作檄刘骏、蠕蠕文。
现代文：魏高宗时朝廷征召胡叟及徐舒，让他们都写讨伐刘骏、蠕蠕的檄文。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Wei, the imperial court conscripted Hu Yao and Xu Shu, and asked them to write an imperial edict to crack down on Liu Yao and Cun Cun.

古文：舒文劣于叟，舒寻归家。
现代文：徐舒的文字比胡叟差，于是徐舒很快又回家去了。
English: Xu Shu's writing was worse than Hu Yao's, so Xu Shu quickly went home again.

古文：叟不治产业，常苦饥贫，然不以为耻。
现代文：胡叟不治家产，常常遭受饥饿贫困之苦，但他却不觉得有什么耻辱。
English: Hu Yao lost his family fortune and often suffered from hunger and poverty, but he did not feel any shame.

古文：养子字螟蛉，以自给养。
现代文：养子叫螟蛉，也自食其力。
English: The adopted son is called Zou, and he is also self-supporting.

古文：每至贵胜之门，恆乘一牸牛，敝韦袴褶而已。
现代文：胡叟每每到高官显贵家里拜访，总是坐着一头母牛，衣裳破败不堪，也不在乎。
English: Whenever Hu Yao visited the homes of high-ranking officials and dignitaries, he always sat with a cow, his clothes were in tatters, and he didn't care.

古文：作布囊，容三四斗，饮啖醉饱，便盛余肉饼以付螟蛉。
现代文：自己缝制一条布袋子，袋子大概能装三、四斗的样子，在富人家吃得酒醉饭饱，便把吃剩下的肉菜饭粟带回来给螟蛉。
English: She sewed a cloth bag by herself. The bag could probably hold three or four buckets of rice. When she got drunk at a rich man's house, she brought the leftover meat and vegetable rice cake back to the baboon.

古文：见车马荣华者，视之蔑如也。
现代文：胡叟见到那些车马华丽的达官贵人，也从不正眼相看，轻蔑得很。
English: When Hu Yao saw those gorgeous dignitaries, he also looked at them with disdain.

古文：尚书李敷，尝遗之以财，都无所取。
现代文：尚书李敷，曾经送给他一些财物，胡叟一点也没要。
English: Shang Shuxu Li Jiki, once gave him some property, and did not ask for anything.

古文：初，叟一见高允，曰： 吴郑之交，以纟宁缟为美谈；吾之于子，以弦韦为幽贽。以此言之，彼可无愧也。 
现代文：当初胡叟第一眼见到高允，说道： 吴、郑两地之交，以粗衣淡食为美谈的，你我之间，以朋友规劝为幽隐之志，就这而言，你当无愧于此。 
English: When Hu Yao saw Gao Yun for the first time, he said, "Wu and Zheng are friends from the two places, and you and I are friends who like to talk about coarse clothing and light food, and you and I are friends who like to persuade each other. In this respect, you deserve to be here.

古文：于允馆见中书侍郎赵郡李璨，璨被服华靡，叟贫老衣褐，璨颇忽之。
现代文：胡叟在高允居所见到中书侍郎赵郡人李璨，李璨穿着华丽的衣服，而胡叟贫穷衰老身穿粗布衣裳，李璨很是瞧不起他。
English: At Gao Yun's residence, Hu Yao met Li Yao, a waiter from Zhao County, who served Chinese books. Li Yao was dressed in gorgeous clothes, while Hu Yao was poor and old and wore coarse cloth. Li Yao looked down on him.

古文：叟谓之曰： 老子今若相许，脱体上袴褶衣帽，君欲作何计也？ 
现代文：胡叟对他说： 老子今天若是愿意，脱下身上的衣裤帽子，你该作何打算？ 
English: Hu Yao said to him: Lao Zi, if you want to take off your trousers and hat today, what should you do?

古文：讥其惟假盛服。
现代文：以此来讥讽李璨的衣冠华贵，意气自得。
English: With this, he mocked Li Yao's luxurious clothes, and his spirit was elated.

古文：璨惕然失色。
现代文：李璨一听，大吃一惊，顿失颜色。
English: Li Yao was taken aback and lost his composure.

古文：叟少孤，每言及父母，则泪下，若孺子之号。
现代文：胡叟少小便成了孤儿，每每谈到自己父母，就潸然泪下，像小孩子一样悲哀地哭泣。
English: Hu Yingxiao became an orphan, and whenever he talked about his parents, he burst into tears and cried sadly like a child.

古文：春秋当祭之前，则先求旨酒美膳，将其所知广宁常顺阳、冯翊田文宗、上谷侯法俊，携壶执榼，至郭外空静处，设坐奠拜，尽孝思之敬。
现代文：每逢春秋两季应当祭祀父母之前，他就弄到好酒好菜，领着知心朋友广宁常顺阳、冯翊田文崇、上谷侯法隽，提壶带杯，到郊外空旷僻静的地方。设置祭坛，奠拜父母，尽自己思念孝顺之情。
English: Every spring and autumn, before he was supposed to offer sacrifices to his parents, he would get good wine and food, and lead his close friends Guangning Changshunyang, Feng Yutian Wenzong, and Shangguo Hou Fa Jun, carrying a jug and a cup, to a secluded place in the suburbs. Set up an altar, pay tribute to his parents, and do his best to remember his filial piety.

古文：时敦煌汜潜，家善酿酒，每节，送一壶与叟。
现代文：当时，敦煌汜潜家里善于酿造美酒，每到节日，便送上一壶酒给胡叟。
English: At that time, the Dunhuang diving family was good at brewing fine wine. Every time there was a festival, they would send a pot of wine to Hu Rong.

古文：著作佐郎博陵许赤虎、河东裴定宗等谓潜曰： 再三之惠，以为过厚。
现代文：著作佐郎博陵人许赤虎、河东人裴定宗等人对汜潜说： 送给人东西，送上两三回，便是很大的恩惠了，而你送给胡叟酒，却持之以恒，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Writings by Sarangboling's Xu Chakhu, Hedong's Pei Dingzong, and others said to Xuanqian: Giving something to someone two or three times is a great favor, but why do you persist in giving wine to Hu Yao?

古文：子惠于叟，何其恆也？ 潜曰： 我恆给祭者，以其恆于孝思也。 
现代文：汜潜说： 我持之以恒地拿酒给祭祀的人，是因为他孝心常在也。 
English: Xuanqian said: I persistently brought wine to the sacrificial person because his filial piety was always there.

古文：论者以潜为君子矣。
现代文：评论的人说汜潜真是位君子。
English: Reviewers said the diver was a true gentleman.

古文：顺阳等数子，禀叟奖示，颇涉文流。
现代文：顺阳这地方有几个后生，承蒙胡叟提携，很快进入文人之林。
English: There are several descendants of Shunyang in this area, who, thanks to Hu Yao's alliance, soon entered the literary world.

古文：高闾曾造其家，值叟短褐曳柴，从田归舍，为闾设浊酒蔬食，皆手自办集。
现代文：高闾曾经到他家拜访，正值胡叟光着膀子拽着柴火，从田畈中往家走。归家之后，为高闾办了些薄酒蔬食，都是他自己下厨弄的。
English: Gao Yao once visited his home, just as Hu Yao was walking home from the paddy fields, bare-armed and dragging firewood. After returning home, Gao Yao prepared some wine and vegetables for Gao Yao, all of which he cooked himself.

古文：其馆宇卑陋，园畴褊局，而饭菜精洁，醯酱调美。
现代文：他居住的房子十分矮小简陋，房前屋后都是田园菜地，而胡叟弄出的饭菜却十分精致整洁，味道鲜美。
English: The house he lives in is very small and simple, and the front and back of the house are all rural vegetable fields, but the dishes made by Hu Yao are very delicate, neat and delicious.

古文：见其二妾，并年衰跛眇，衣布穿敝。
现代文：高闾看到他的两个老婆，都年老体衰，而且脚跛眼瞎，衣裳破旧。
English: Gao Yao saw his two wives, both of whom were old and frail, and both of whom were lame and blind, and their clothes were worn out.

古文：闾见其贫约，以物直十余匹赠之，亦无辞愧。闾作《宣命赋》，叟为之序。
现代文：高闾看到他家实在太寒酸了，送给他大约十余匹布的东西，胡叟也就不推辞地收下了。高闾作《宣命赋》，胡叟为他作序。
English: Gao Yao saw that his family was really too poor, and gave him about ten pieces of cloth, which Hu Yao accepted without hesitation. Gao Yao wrote "Xuan Mu Fu" and Hu Yao wrote the preface for him.

古文：密云左右，皆祗仰其德，岁时奉以麻布谷麦，叟随分散之，家无余财。
现代文：密云这个地方的人，都十分敬仰胡叟的人品德行，每年都给他送些布匹粮食来，胡叟转手就分给了别人，家中什么都没留下。
English: People in Miyun greatly admire Hu Yao's character and virtue. Every year, they send him some cloth and grain. Hu Yao then passes it on to others, leaving nothing at home.

古文：年八十而卒。
现代文：胡叟活到八十多岁死去。
English: Hu Yao lived to be more than eighty years old and died.

古文：浩诛，承根与宗钦等俱死。
现代文：胡叟原配敦煌宋氏。先死了，没留下孩子，后娶的所生养的，又都过早去世，他竟绝了后代。
English: Originally a member of the Song Dynasty in Dunhuang, Hu Yao died first, leaving no children, and his children by his second wife also died prematurely, leaving him with no descendants.

古文：承根外孙长水校尉南阳张令言，美须髯，言谈举止，有异武人。李琰之、李神俊，一时名士，并称美之。
现代文：胡叟死后，没有家里的人主持丧礼，胡始昌把他的灵柩迎接殡置在自己家里，下葬时，将自己的一个弟弟过继给他，袭他的爵位始复男、虎威将军。胡叟与始昌虽然为同一宗室中人，但是两人脾气、性格相差很远，合不来，胡叟在世时，两人来往就很少，等到胡叟死了，胡始昌收葬他的礼节十分周全。
English: After the death of Hu Jintao, there was no one in the family to preside over the funeral. Hu Shichang placed his coffin in his own home to welcome the funeral. When he was buried, he gave one of his younger brothers to succeed him, succeeding his title, First Fuzon, General Hu Wei. Although Hu Jintao and First Chang were from the same family, their temperaments and personalities were far apart and could not be reconciled. When Hu Jintao was alive, the two had little contact. When Hu Jintao died, Hu Shichang received his funeral with perfect etiquette.

古文：阚骃，字玄阴，敦煌人也。祖倞，有名于西土。
现代文：人们都议论，这是不是胡始昌想得到胡叟的爵位品秩，而不是出于同宗族的哀悯之心才这样做的。阚骃，字玄阴，敦煌人。祖阚亻京，在西域很出名。
English: People are debating whether Hu Shichang wanted to get the peerage and rank of Hu Yao, rather than doing so out of the compassion of the same clan., character Xuan Yin, Dunhuang people. Zu Yingjing, is very famous in the western region.

古文：父玖，为一时秀士，官至会稽令。
现代文：父亲阚玟，为当时秀杰之士，官做到会稽令。
English: My father, who was a hero at the time, was ordered by the government to do so.

古文：骃博通经传，聪敏过人，三史群言，经目则诵，时人谓之宿读。
现代文：阚骃博通经传，聪明敏捷超过常人，三史浩瀚群言，过目成诵，当时人称他为宿读。
English: Zou Bo passed on the classics, he was more intelligent and agile than ordinary people, the three histories were a vast group of words, and he was able to recite them by sight. At that time, people called him a late reader.

古文：注王朗《易传》，学者藉以通经。
现代文：注释王朗《易传》，学子们借助此书学通经书。
English: Commentary on Wang Lang's "Easy Transmission." Students can use this book to study the scriptures.

古文：撰《十三州志》，行于世。
现代文：又撰写《十三州志》，流行于世。
English: He also wrote "The History of the Thirteen States," which became popular in the world.

古文：蒙逊甚重之，常侍左右，访以政治损益。
现代文：蒙逊很重视他，让他跟随左右，经常与他讨论政治上损益的事情。
English: Monson held him in high regard, had him follow him left and right, and often discussed the pros and cons of politics with him.

古文：拜秘书考课郎中，给文吏三十人，典校经籍，刊定诸子三千余卷。
现代文：朝廷拜授阚骃为秘书考课郎中，配给他文吏三十人，让他典校经籍，修定诸子书籍三千多卷。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of secretary and assigned him 30 clerks to help him classify and revise more than 3,000 volumes of books.

古文：加奉车都尉。
现代文：加授他为奉车都尉。
English: He was promoted to lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：牧犍待之弥重，拜大行，迁尚书。
现代文：从此以后，牧犍待他更为厚重，拜他为接待宾客的官员，迁任尚书。
English: From then on, he was treated more generously by the herdsmen, who revered him as an official who received guests, and he was transferred to the post of Shangshu.

古文：姑臧平，乐平王丕镇凉州，引为从事中郎。
现代文：姑臧平定之后，乐平王元丕镇守凉州，引任他为从事中郎。
English: After the suppression of Gushan, Leping Wangyuanqian guarded Liangzhou, and he was appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：王薨之后，还京师。
现代文：乐平王死后，阚骃又回到京城。
English: After the death of King Leping, Yao returned to Beijing.

古文：家甚贫敝，不免饥寒。
现代文：家境贫困破败，常受饥寒之苦。
English: His family was impoverished and dilapidated, and he often suffered from cold and hunger.

古文：性能多食，一饭至三升乃饱。
现代文：而阚骃又生性能吃，一顿饭常常要吃上三升米才能吃饱。
English: Gao Yao's younger brother, Meiyue, was a dedicated student with a penchant for reading. He had a better reputation than Gao Yao, but he passed away long ago.

古文：卒，无后。
现代文：死后，也没有后代为他收葬。
English: After his death, there were no descendants to bury him.

古文：刘昞，字延明，敦煌人也。
现代文：刘昞，字延明，敦煌人氏。
English: Liu Wei, Zi Yanming, Dunhuang people.

古文：父宝，字子玉，以儒学称。
现代文：父亲刘宝，字子玉，以儒学见长。
English: Her father's prized possession, a jade figurine. She is known for her mastery of Confucianism.

古文：昞年十四，就博士郭瑀学。
现代文：刘昞十四岁时，从师博士郭蠫。
English: At the age of fourteen, Liu Yao was apprenticed to Dr. Guo Yao.

古文：时瑀弟子五百余人，通经业者八十余人。
现代文：当时郭蠫的弟子达五百多人，精通经业的也有八十多人。
English: At that time, there were more than five hundred disciples of Guo Wei, and more than eighty people were proficient in business.

古文：瑀有女始笄，妙选良偶，有心于昞。
现代文：郭蠫有个女儿刚刚成年，郭蠫想从弟子中挑选乘龙快婿，心里想到了刘昞。
English: Guo Yao has a daughter who has just come of age. Guo Yao wants to choose a son-in-law from among his disciples, and Liu Yao comes to mind.

古文：遂别设一席于坐前，谓诸弟子曰： 吾有一女，年向成长，欲觅一快女婿。谁坐此席者，吾当婚焉。 
现代文：于是在他自己的座位前面另外设下一个座席，对弟子们说： 我有一个姑娘，已经长大成人，想找一位乘龙快婿，谁前来坐这张凳子，我就把女儿嫁给谁。 
English: So he placed another seat in front of his own and said to his disciples, "I have a daughter who has grown up and is looking for a husband. Whoever comes to sit on this stool, I will marry her to him."

古文：昞遂奋衣来坐，神志肃然，曰： 向闻先生欲求快女婿，昞其人也。 
现代文：刘昞一听，毫不犹豫地抢上前来，坐在凳子上，神情严肃，说： 听说先生您想找乘龙快婿，我刘昞就是。 
English: Upon hearing this, Liu Ye did not hesitate to rush forward, sat down on a stool, looked serious, and said: I heard that you are looking for a son-in-law, I am Liu Ye.

古文：瑀遂以女妻之。
现代文：郭蠫于是就把女儿嫁给了他。
English: Guo Yao married his daughter to him.

古文：昞后隐居酒泉，不应州郡之命，弟子受业者五百余人。
现代文：刘昞后来隐居酒泉，不接受州郡邀请他为官的旨命，开门授业，聚集在他门下受业的弟子有五百余人。
English: Liu Ye later lived in seclusion in Jiuquan. He did not accept the order of the state and county to invite him as an official, but opened the door to teaching. More than five hundred disciples gathered under his door to receive training.

古文：李暠私署，征为儒林祭酒、从事中郎。
现代文：李詗另立政权，征拜他为儒林祭酒、从事中郎。
English: Li Hongzhi established a separate political regime, recruited him to brew the wine for the Junlin Festival, and engaged him as a middle-man.

古文：暠好尚文典，书史穿落者亲自补治，昞时侍侧，前请代暠。
现代文：李詗喜爱文书典籍，书史当中有脱落文字的，他必定亲自补上，刘昞当时侍奉左右，上前请求代替李詗做这事。
English: Li Qian loved classic literature. If there was a lost text in the history of books, he would make it up himself. Liu Qian, who was in the service at the time, came forward to ask Li Qian to do this instead of him.

古文：暠曰： 躬自执者，欲人重此典籍。
现代文：李詗说： 我亲自来做这种事情，是想让别人重视此类典籍。
English: Li Wei said: I personally came to do this kind of thing, I want others to pay attention to such classics.

古文：吾与卿相值，何异孔明之会玄德。 
现代文：我与卿相逢，和孔明与刘备相逢又有什么区别？ 
English: What is the difference between my meeting with you and the meeting between Confucius and Liu Bei?

古文：迁抚夷护军，虽有政务，手不释卷。
现代文：又迁任抚夷护军，刘昞虽然每天都有政务在身，但仍是手不释卷。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Fuxi Garrison. Although he was busy with government affairs, his hands were tied.

古文：暠曰： 卿注记篇籍，以烛继昼。
现代文：李詗说： 爱卿你注释篇籍，常常夜以继日，以烛继昼。
English: Li Yao said, "Dear Sir, you often work day and night, day and night, to annotate books.

古文：白日且然，夜可休息。 
现代文：我说你白天这样做还可以，晚上就应该休息了。 
English: I said you can do this during the day, but you should rest at night.

古文：昞曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣，不知老之将至，孔圣称焉。
现代文：刘昞说： 朝闻道，夕死可矣，不知人将老矣，所以孔子才成为圣人，为人称道。
English: Liu Yao said: Hearing the Tao in the morning, you can die at dusk, and you never know how old you will be. That is why Confucius became a saint and was praised by people.

古文：昞何人斯，敢不如此。 
现代文：而我刘昞是什么人，怎敢停止下来。 
English: But who am I, Liu Ye, how dare I stop.

古文：昞以三史文繁，著《略记》百三十篇、八十四卷，《凉书》十卷，《敦煌实录》二十卷，《方言》三卷，《靖恭堂铭》一卷，注《周易》、《韩子》、《人物志》、《黄石公三略》，并行于世。
现代文：刘昞考虑三史文字太繁多，便撰写《略记》一百三十篇、共八十四卷，又著《凉书》十卷、《敦煌实录》二十卷、《方言》三卷、《靖恭堂铭》一卷、又注释《周易》、《韩子》、《人物志》、《黄石公三略》，这些书都流传于世。
English: Considering that the texts of the three histories were too numerous, Liu Bei wrote the "Summary" of one hundred and thirty pieces, a total of eighty-four volumes, and also wrote the "Cool Book" of ten volumes, the "Dunhuang Record" of twenty volumes, the "Dialect" of three volumes, the "Jing Kuan Doming" of one volume, and also annotated "Zhou Yi," "Han Zi," "Character Biography," and "Three Sketches of Huang Shi Gong," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：蒙逊平酒泉，拜秘书郎，专管注记。
现代文：蒙逊平定酒泉，拜授他为秘书郎，专门负责注记之类的事情。
English: After Meng Song leveled Jiuquan, he appointed Liu Yanming as his secretary, specifically responsible for the annotation of books.

古文：筑陆沉观于西苑，躬往礼焉，号 玄处先生 ，学徒数百，月致羊酒。
现代文：刘昞在西苑建起陆沉观，亲自前往礼敬诸圣，自号 玄处先生 ，学徒达数百人，每个月都送给他一些羊酒。
English: Liu Wei began to meditate in the West Courtyard and personally went to pay homage to all the saints. He called himself Mr. Xuanzhu, and had hundreds of apprentices. Every month, they sent him some sheep wine.

古文：牧犍尊为国师，亲自致拜，命官属以下皆北面受业焉。
现代文：牧犍尊他为国师，亲自拜之以礼，命令所有官员都北面受业于他。
English: The Patriarch revered him as the national teacher, bowed to him in person, and ordered all officials to learn from him.

古文：时同郡索敞、阴兴为助教，并以文学见举，每巾衣而入。
现代文：当时，同郡的索敞、阴兴为他的助教，两人都以文学见长，每次都以民间学者的身份出入。
English: At that time, Sorochan and Yin Xing from the same county were his teaching assistants. Both of them were good at literature, and each time they came and went as folk scholars.

古文：世祖平凉州，士民东迁，夙闻其名，拜乐平王从事中郎。
现代文：魏世祖平定凉州，百姓东迁，朝廷久闻刘昞大名，拜授他为乐平王从事中郎。
English: Emperor Wei settled down Liangzhou, and the people moved eastward. The imperial court had long heard of Liu Ye as a daimyo, and he was given the title of middle servant to King Leping.

古文：世祖诏诸年七十以上听留本乡，一子扶养。
现代文：魏世祖下诏让年纪七十岁以上的乡老留在本乡，身边留下一个儿子奉养。
English: The founding father of the Wei Dynasty issued an edict to let village elders over the age of seventy stay in their hometowns, leaving a son to look after them.

古文：昞时老矣，在姑臧。岁余，思乡而返，至凉州西四百里韭本或作悲，亦作匪
现代文：刘昞当时已经太老了，身在姑臧，一年多后，思乡返归，到了凉州西面四百里的韭谷窟，染上疾病，死了。
English: Liu Yao was already too old at the time. He was in Guzheng, and more than a year later, after returning home, he went to Shugu Grottoes, four hundred miles west of Liangzhou, contracted the disease, and died.

古文：谷窟，遇疾而卒。
现代文：刘昞有六个儿子。
English: Liu Ye has six sons.

