古文：南山经之首曰䧿山。
现代文：南方首列山系叫做䧿山山系。
English: The first line of mountains in the south is called the Lushan Mountains.

古文：其首曰招摇之山，临于西海之上，多桂，多金玉。
现代文：䧿山山系的头一座山是招摇山，它位于西海岸边，山上生长着许多桂树，又蕴藏着丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: The first mountain in the Lushan Mountain Range is Zhaojing Mountain, which is located on the west coast. Many cassia trees grow on the mountain, and it is also rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：有草焉，其状如韭而青华，其名曰祝馀，食之不饥。
现代文：山中有一种草，外形很像韭菜却开着青色的花朵，这种草名叫祝馀，人吃了它就不感到饥饿。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains that looks like a leek but has blue flowers. This grass is called Zhuyu, and people don't feel hungry when they eat it.

古文：有木焉，其状如榖而黑理，其华四照。其名曰迷榖，佩之不迷。
现代文：山上又有一种树木，外形像构树却呈现黑色的纹理，它的花会发光，光华照耀四方，这种树的名字叫迷榖，人如果把它佩戴在身上就不会迷失方向。
English: There is another kind of tree on the mountain. It is shaped like a tree but has a black texture. Its flowers emit light, and its radiance shines in all directions. The name of this tree is "muzhuang," and if you wear it on your body, you will not lose your way.

古文：有兽焉，其状如禺而白耳，伏行人走，其名曰狌狌，食之善走。
现代文：山中还有一种野兽，外形像猿猴但长着一双白色的耳朵，既能匍伏爬行，又能像人一样直立行走，名字叫狌狌，吃了它的肉可以使人走路飞快。
English: There is also a beast in the mountains. It looks like an ape but has a pair of white ears. It can both crawl and walk upright like a human. Its name is the baboon. If you eat its meat, you can walk faster.

古文：丽麂之水出焉，而西流注于海，其中多育沛，佩之无瘕疾。
现代文：丽麂水从这座山发源，然后往西流入大海，水中有许多叫做育沛的植物，人如果把它佩戴在身上就不会生蛊胀病。
English: The mountain is the source of the Lijiang Water, which flows westward into the sea. The water contains many plants that are called "fertile," and if you wear it on your body, you won't get bloating disease.

古文：又东三百里，曰堂庭之山。多棪木，多白猿，多水玉，多黄金。
现代文：再往东三百里，有一座堂庭山，山上生长着茂密的棪木，有许多白色猿猴，还蕴藏着丰富的水晶石及黄金。
English: Three hundred miles further east, there is a hill called Dongting Mountain, which is covered with lush eucalyptus trees, has many white monkeys, and is also rich in crystal stones and gold.

古文：又东三百八十里，曰猨翼之山，其中多怪兽，水多怪鱼。多白玉，多蝮虫，多怪蛇，多怪木，不可以上。
现代文：再往东三百八十里，有一座猨翼山，山上生长着许多怪异的野兽，水中生长着许多怪异的鱼，这里蕴藏着丰富的白玉，有很多蝮虫、奇怪的蛇、奇怪的树木，因此人是不能随便上去的。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further east, there is a mountain called Winged Serpent Mountain. Many strange beasts grow on the mountain, many strange fish grow in the water, there is a rich supply of white jade, there are many maggots, strange snakes, and strange trees, so people can't just go up there.

古文：又东三百七十里，曰杻阳之山，其阳多赤金，其阴多白金。
现代文：再往东三百七十里，有一座杻阳山，山的南面盛产黄金，山北面盛产白银。
English: Three hundred and seventy miles further east, there is a Poyang Mountain. The south side of the mountain is rich in gold, and the north side of the mountain is rich in silver.

古文：有兽焉，其状如马而白首，其文如虎而赤尾，其音如谣，其名曰鹿蜀，佩之宜子孙。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，头部是白色的，长得像马，身上的斑纹像老虎，尾巴是红色的，吼叫的声音好像人在唱歌，名叫鹿蜀，人如果把它的毛穿在身上，就可以多子多孙。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, its head is white, it looks like a horse, the stripes on its body are like a tiger's, its tail is red, and its roar sounds like someone singing. It is called Deer Shu. If you wear its hair on your body, you can have more children and grandchildren.

古文：怪水出焉，而东流注于宪翼之水。
现代文：怪水从这座山发源，然后向东流入宪翼之水。
English: Strange water springs from this mountain and then flows eastward into the waters of the Constitutional Wing.

古文：其中多玄龟，其状如龟而鸟首虺尾，其名曰旋龟，其音如判木，佩之不聋，可以为底。
现代文：怪水里有很多暗红色的龟，形状像普通乌龟，却长着鸟一样的头和蛇一样的尾巴，名叫旋龟，叫声像木头被劈开时发出的响声，佩带上它就能使人的耳朵不聋，还可以治愈脚底老茧。
English: There are many dark red turtles in the strange water. They are shaped like ordinary turtles, but they have a bird-like head and a snake-like tail. They are called whirling turtles. Their call is like the sound made when wood is split. Wearing it can make people's ears not deaf, and can also cure calluses on the soles of the feet.

古文：又东三百里，曰柢山，多水，无草木。
现代文：再往东三百里，有一座柢山，山间多水流，没有花草树木。
English: Three hundred miles further east, there is a barren mountain. There are many streams in the mountains, but no flowers or trees.

古文：有鱼焉，其状如牛，陵居，蛇尾有翼，其羽在魼下，其音如留牛，其名曰鯥，冬死而夏生。食之无肿疾。
现代文：水里有一种鱼，外形像牛，栖息在山坡上，长着蛇一样的尾巴，有翅膀，而翅膀长在胁骨上，鸣叫的声音像犁牛，名叫鯥，它冬天蛰伏休眠如同死亡，而夏天又苏醒，吃了它的肉人就不会患痈肿疾病。
English: There is a fish in the water, shaped like a cow, perched on a hillside, with a snake-like tail, with wings, and the wings grow on the stapes, and the sound of singing is like a snail, called a cormorant. It lies dormant in winter like death, and wakes up in summer. People who eat its flesh will not suffer from abscess disease.

古文：又东四百里，曰亶爰之山，多水，无草木，不可以上。
现代文：再往东四百里，有一座亶爰山，山间多水流，没有花草树木，人无法爬上去。
English: Four hundred miles further east, there is a steep mountain, with many streams between the mountains, no flowers or trees, and people cannot climb it.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狸而有髦，其名曰类，自为牝牡，食者不妒。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像野猫却长着像人一样的长头发，名叫类，这种野兽雌雄共体，人只要吃了它的肉就不会产生妒忌心。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a wild cat but has long hair like a human. Its name is Kuni. This beast is a male-female community. As long as people eat its meat, they won't feel jealous.

古文：又东三百里，曰基山，其阳多玉，其阴多怪木。
现代文：再往东三百里，有一座基山，山的南面盛产玉石，山的北面有很多奇形怪状的树木。
English: Three hundred miles further east, there is a base mountain. The south side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the north side of the mountain has many strangely shaped trees.

古文：有兽焉，其状如羊，九尾四耳，其目在背，其名曰猼訑，佩之不畏。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像羊，长着九条尾巴和四只耳朵，眼睛也长在背上，名称是猼訑，人只要将它的皮毛穿在身上，就会不产生恐惧心。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a sheep, with nine tails and four ears, with eyes on its back. It is called a baboon, and if you wear its fur, you will not be afraid.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸡而三首六目、六足三翼，其名曰，食之无卧。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，外形像鸡却长着三个脑袋、六只眼睛，六只脚、三只翅膀，名叫尚付，吃了它的肉人就不会瞌睡。
English: There is another kind of bird in the mountains. It looks like a chicken, but it has three heads, six eyes, six feet, and three wings. It is called Shangfu, and people who eat its meat will not fall asleep.

古文：又东三百里，曰青丘之山，其阳多玉，其阴多青䨼。
现代文：再往东三百里，有一座青丘山，山的南面盛产玉石，山的北面多出产青雘。
English: Three hundred miles further east, there is a Qingqiu Mountain. The south side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the north side of the mountain produces more jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狐而九尾，其音如婴儿，能食人；食者不蛊。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像狐狸却长着九条尾巴，吼叫的声音如婴儿啼哭，能吞食人；人如果吃了它的肉就不会中妖邪毒气。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a fox but has nine tails. It roars like a baby crying and can devour people. If you eat its meat, you won't be poisoned by the evil gas.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸠，其音如呵，名曰灌灌，佩之不惑。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像斑鸠，鸣叫的声音如同人在吵架，名称是灌灌，人如果把它的羽毛插在身上就不会受迷惑。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a turtledove, which chirps like a man in a quarrel. Its name is the gourd, and if you put its feathers on your body, you won't be bothered.

古文：英水出焉，南流注于即翼之泽。
现代文：英水从这座山发源，然后向南流入即翼泽。
English: The mountain is the source of the Yingshui River, which flows south into the Yingze River.

古文：其中多赤鱬，其状如鱼而人面，其音如鸳鸯，食之不疥。
现代文：泽中有很多赤鱬，形状像普通的鱼却有一副人的面孔，发出的声音如同鸳鸯鸟在叫，吃了它的肉就能使人不生疥疮。
English: There are many red snapper in the lake. It is shaped like an ordinary fish, but it has a human face. The sound it makes is similar to the call of an ostrich. Eating its meat can prevent people from getting scabies.

古文：又东三百五十里，曰箕尾之山，其尾踆于东海，多沙石。
现代文：再往东三百五十里，有一座箕尾山，山的尾端坐落于东海岸边，很多沙石。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further east, there is a Shanwei Mountain. The tail end of the mountain is located on the east coast, with a lot of sand and stones.

古文：汸水出焉，而南流注于淯，其中多白玉。
现代文：汸水从这座山发源，然后向南流入淯水，水中多产白玉。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain, and then flows south into Surabaya, producing a lot of white jade.

古文：凡䧿山之首，自招摇之山，以至箕尾之山，凡十山，二千九百五十里。
现代文：总计鹊山山系之首尾，从招摇山起，到箕尾山止，一共是十座山，途经二千九百五十里。
English: In total, there are ten mountains at the beginning and end of the Lushan Mountain System, from the beginning of the Shocking Mountain to the end of the Shanwei Mountain, a total of 2950 miles.

古文：其神状皆鸟身而龙首。
现代文：诸山山神都是鸟身龙头的样子。
English: The shapes of all the mountain deities are birds with dragon heads.

古文：其祠之礼：毛用一璋玉瘗，糈用稌米，一壁，稻米、白菅为席。
现代文：祭祀山神的典礼是：把畜禽和璋一起埋入地下，祀神的米用稻米，用白茅草来做神的座席。
English: The ceremony of worshiping the mountain god is: burying the livestock and poultry together with the trout into the ground, using rice to worship the god, and using white thatch to make the god's seat.

古文：南次二山之首，曰柜山，西临流黄，北望诸𣬈，东望长右。
现代文：南方第二列山系的第一座山是柜山，它的西边临近流黄酆氏国和流黄辛氏国，往北可以望见许多山水，向东可以望见长右山。
English: The first mountain of the second line of mountains in the south is Jianshan. Its west side is close to the Huangpi River and the Huangxin River. Many landscapes can be seen to the north, and Changyu Mountain can be seen to the east.

古文：英水出焉，西南流注于赤水，其中多白玉，多丹粟。
现代文：英水从这座山发源，向西南流入赤水，水中蕴藏着丰富的白色玉石，还有很多粟粒般大小的丹砂。
English: Yingshui flows from the source of this mountain to the southwest into Chashui. The water contains abundant white jade and a lot of millet-sized Tanzanite.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豚，有距，其音如狗吠，其名曰狸力，见则其县多土功。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像普通的小猪，长着一双鸡爪，叫的声音如同狗叫，名叫狸力，哪里出现狸力而那里就一定会大兴土木。
English: There is a kind of beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary piglet, with a pair of chicken claws, calling like a dog, called a raccoon dog. Wherever there is a raccoon dog, there will definitely be heavy construction.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸱而人手，其音如痺，其名曰鴸，其名自号也，见则其县多放士。
现代文：山中还有一种鸟，形状像鹞鹰却长着人手一样的爪子，啼叫的声音如同痹鸣，名称是鴸，哪里出现鴸，哪里就有文士被流放。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a vulture but with claws like human hands, the howling sound is like a cicada, the name is cicada. Wherever there is a cicada, there are scribes being exiled.

古文：东南四百五十里，曰长右之山，无草木，多水。
现代文：从柜山往东南四百五十里，有一座长右山，山上没有花草树木，但有很多水流。
English: Four hundred and fifty miles to the southeast from Jianshan, there is a long right mountain. There are no flowers and trees on the mountain, but there are many streams.

古文：有兽焉，其状如禺而四耳，其名长右，其音如吟，见则郡县大水。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像猿猴却长着四只耳朵，名叫长右，叫的声音如同人在呻吟，任何郡县一出现长右就会发生大水灾。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like an ape but has four ears. It is called the long right, and its call sounds like a person moaning. Whenever the long right appears in any county, there will be a major flood.

古文：又东三百四十里，曰尧光之山，其阳多玉，其阴多金。
现代文：再往东三百四十里，有一座尧光山，山的南面多产玉石，山的北面多产金。
English: Three hundred and forty miles further east, there is a bright mountain, the south side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the north side of the mountain is rich in gold.

古文：有兽焉，其状如人而彘鬣，穴居而冬蛰，其名曰猾褢，其音如斫木，见则县有大繇。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像人却长有猪那样的鬣毛，冬季蛰伏在洞穴中，名叫猾褢，叫声如同砍木头时发出的响声，哪个地方出现猾褢那里就会有繁重的徭役。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a man but has a mane like a pig. In winter, it hides in a cave. It is called the cunning lynx. Its call is like the sound made when chopping wood. Wherever the cunning lynx appears, there will be a heavy guard.

古文：又东三百五十里，曰羽山，其下多水，其上多雨，无草木，多蝮虫。
现代文：再往东三百五十里，有一座羽山，山下有很多水流，山上经常下雨，没有花草树木，蝮虫很多。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further east, there is a mountain called Hasan. There are many streams under the mountain, it often rains on the mountain, there are no flowers and trees, and there are many aphids.

古文：又东三百七十里，曰瞿父之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往东三百七十里，有一座瞿父山，山上没有花草树木，但有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Three hundred and seventy miles to the east, there is a mountain called Xuchu Mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but it is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：又东四百里，曰句汸之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往东四百里，有一座句余山，山上没有花草树木，但有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Four hundred miles further east, there is a mountain called Zuoyang. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but it is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：又东五百里，曰浮玉之山，北望具区，东望诸。有兽焉，其状如虎而牛尾，其音如吠犬，其名曰彘，是食人。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座浮玉山，在山上向北可以望见具区泽，向东可以望见诸水，山中有一种野兽，外形长得像老虎却长着牛的尾巴，发出的叫声如同狗叫，名叫彘，会吃人。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a floating jade mountain. On the mountain to the north can be seen a large lake, and to the east can be seen many waters. In the mountain, there is a beast that looks like a tiger but has a cow's tail, and its cry is like that of a dog. It is called a dragonfly, and it can eat people.

古文：苕水出于其阴，北流至于具区，其中多鮆鱼。
现代文：苕水从这座山的北麓发源，向北流入具区泽。它里面生长着很多鮆鱼。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source at the northern foot of the mountain and flows northward into the lake. Many eels grow in it.

古文：又东五百里，曰成山，四方而三坛，其上多金玉，其下多青雘。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座成山，形状四四方方，是三层土坛，山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，山下多产青雘。
English: Another five hundred miles to the east, there is a mountain, the shape of which is square, it is a three-layered earthenware jar. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the mountain is rich in barley.

古文：水出焉，而南流注于虖勺，其中多黄金。
现代文：𨴯水从这座山发源，然后向南流入虖勺水，水中有丰富的黄金。
English: Surabaya's water springs from this mountain and then flows south into Surabaya's waters, which are rich in gold.

古文：又东五百里，曰会稽之山，四方，其上多金玉，其下多砆石。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座会稽山，呈现四方形，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产晶莹透亮的砆石。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a square-shaped Mount Kechi, which is rich in metallic minerals and jade, and under the mountain is rich in crystal clear zircon.

古文：勺水出焉，而南流注于湨。
现代文：勺水从这座山发源，然后向南流入湨水。
English: A spoonful of water springs from this mountain and then flows south into the Surabaya.

古文：又东五百里，曰夷山，无草木，多沙石，湨水出焉，而南流注于列涂。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座夷山，山上没有花草树木，很多沙石。湨水从这座山发源，然后向南流入列涂水。
English: Five hundred miles further to the east, there is a mountain called Yishan. There are no plants or trees on the mountain, just a lot of sand and stones. Surge water originates from this mountain, and then flows south into the Tuishui River.

古文：又东五百里，曰仆勾之山，其上多金玉，其下多草木，无鸟兽，无水。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座仆勾山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有繁茂的花草树木，没有禽鸟野兽，也没有水。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a mountain called Fuguo. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there are lush flowers and trees at the foot of the mountain. There are no birds, beasts, or water.

古文：又东五百里，曰咸阴之山，无草木，无水。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座咸阴山，山上没有花草树木，也没有水。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a salty and gloomy mountain. There are no flowers, plants, trees or water on the mountain.

古文：又东四百里，曰洵山。其阳多金，其阴多玉。
现代文：再往东四百里，有一座洵山，山的南面盛产金属矿物，山的北面多出产玉石。
English: Four hundred miles further east, there is a Lushan Mountain. The southern side of the mountain is rich in metal minerals, and the northern side of the mountain produces more jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如羊而无口，不可杀也，其名曰䍺。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的羊却没有嘴巴，不吃东西也不会死，名叫䍺。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary sheep, but it has no mouth and cannot die without eating. It is called a baboon.

古文：洵水出焉，而南流注于阏之泽，其中多茈蠃。
现代文：洵水从这座山发源，然后向南流入阏泽，水中有很多紫色螺。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows south into the city of Heze. There are many purple snails in the water.

古文：又东四百里，曰虖勺之山。其上多梓枏，其下多荆杞。
现代文：再往东四百里，有一座虖勺山，山上有很多梓树和楠木树，山下生长着许多牡荆树和苟杞树。
English: Four hundred miles further to the east, there is a mountain of camphor, on the mountain there are many azusa trees and camphor trees, under the mountain there are many bauhinia trees and gourd trees.

古文：滂水出焉，而东流注于海。
现代文：滂水从这座山发源，然后向东流入大海。
English: Surabaya's water springs from the mountain and flows east to the sea.

古文：又东五百里，曰区吴之山，无草木，多沙石。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座区吴山，山上没有花草树木，有很多沙石。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a district of Wushan. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but there is a lot of sand and stones.

古文：鹿水出焉，而南流注于滂水。
现代文：鹿水从这座山发源，然后向南流入滂水。
English: Deer water originates from this mountain, and then flows south into Surabaya.

古文：又东五百里，曰鹿吴之山，上无草木，多金石。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座鹿吴山，山上没有花草树木，但有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a Luwu Mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but it is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：泽更之水出焉，而南流注于滂水。
现代文：泽更水从这座山发源，然后向南流入滂水。
English: The mountain is the source of the Zego River, which flows south into the Surabaya River.

古文：水有兽焉，名曰蛊雕，其状如雕而有角，其音如婴儿之音，是食人。
现代文：水中有一种野兽，名叫蛊雕，外形像普通的雕鹰却头上长角，发出的声音好似婴儿啼哭，会吃人。
English: There is a beast in the water, called the eagle owl. It looks like an ordinary eagle owl, but it has long horns on its head and makes a sound like a baby crying. It can eat people.

古文：又东五百里，曰漆吴之山，无草木，多博石，无玉。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座漆吴山，山中没有花草树木，多出产可以用作棋子的博石，不产玉石。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a Chuxwu Mountain. There are no flowers or trees in the mountain. It produces more bauxite, which can be used as chess pieces, but not jade.

古文：处于东海，望丘山，其光载出载入，是惟日次。
现代文：这座山位于东海之滨，在山上远望是片丘陵，有光影忽明忽暗，那是太阳停歇之处。
English: This mountain is located on the coast of the East China Sea. In the distance, it looks like a hill, with light and shadow flickering in and out. That is where the sun stops.

古文：凡南次二山之首，自柜山至于漆吴之山，凡十七山，七千二百里。
现代文：总计南方第二列山系之首尾，从柜山起到漆吴山止，一共十七座山，途经七千二百里。
English: In total, there are seventeen mountains at the end of the second line of mountains in the south, from Jianshan to Chuxwu Mountain, covering a distance of 7,200 miles.

古文：其神状皆龙身而鸟首。
现代文：诸山山神的形状都是龙身鸟头。
English: All the gods of the mountains are in the shape of a dragon with a bird's head.

古文：其祠：毛用一壁瘗，糈用稌。
现代文：祭祀山神是：把畜禽和玉璧一起埋入地下，祀神的米用稻米。
English: The ritual for the mountain god is: bury the livestock and poultry together with the jade gems in the ground, and use the rice to worship the god.

古文：南次三山之首，曰天虞之山。其下多水，不可以上。
现代文：南方第三列山系的第一座山，是座天虞山，山下到处是流水，人无法爬上去。
English: The first mountain in the third row of mountains in the south is Mount Tianyu. There is running water everywhere under the mountain, and people cannot climb it.

古文：东五百里，曰祷过之山，其上多金玉，其下多犀兕，多象。
现代文：从天虞山往东五百里，有一座祷过山，山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，山下到处是犀牛与兕，还有很多大象。
English: Five hundred miles east of Tianyu Mountain, there is a prayer mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade. Under the mountain, there are rhinos and baboons everywhere, as well as many elephants.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鵁，而白首、三足、人面，其名曰瞿如，其鸣自号也。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，外形像䴔，脑袋是白色的，长着三只脚，人一样的脸，名叫瞿如，它的鸣叫声就是自身名称的读音 瞿如 。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains, its shape is like a dragonfly, its head is white, it has three legs and a human-like face. It is called a dragonfly, and its song is the pronunciation of its name, 如.

古文：泿水出焉，而南流注于海。
现代文：泿水从这座山发源，然后向南流入大海。
English: Surabaya's water springs from the mountain and flows south to the sea.

古文：其中有虎蛟，其状鱼身而蛇尾，其音如鸳鸯，食者不肿，可以已痔。
现代文：水里有一种虎蛟，外形像普通鱼，却拖着一条蛇一样的尾巴，叫声与鸳鸯相似，人如果吃了它的肉就不会生痈肿疾病，还能治愈痔疮。
English: There is a tiger salamander in the water. It looks like an ordinary fish, but it drags a snake-like tail. Its call is similar to that of a toad. If you eat its meat, you will not get abscess disease, and you can cure hemorrhoids.

古文：又东五百里，曰丹穴之山，其上多金玉。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座丹穴山，山上盛产金属矿物和玉石。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a mountain called Dan'an Mountain, which is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：丹水出焉，而南流注于渤海。
现代文：丹水从这座山发源，然后向南流入渤海。
English: The mountain is the source of the Dan River, which flows south into the Bohai Sea.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸡，五采而文，名曰凤皇，首文曰德，翼文曰义，背文曰礼，膺文曰仁，腹文曰信。
现代文：山中有一种鸟，外形像普通的鸡，全身上下是五彩羽毛，名叫凤凰，头上的花纹是 德 字的形状，翅膀上的花纹是 义 字的形状，背部的花纹是 礼 字的形状，胸部的花纹是 仁 字的形状，腹部的花纹是 信 字的形状。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains. It looks like an ordinary chicken, with multicolored feathers all over its body. It is called a phoenix. The pattern on its head is the shape of the German word, the pattern on its wings is the shape of the word "義," the pattern on its back is the shape of the word "礼," the pattern on its chest is the shape of the word "仁," and the pattern on its abdomen is the shape of the word "信."

古文：是鸟也，饮食自然，自歌自舞，见则天下安宁。
现代文：这种鸟吃喝很自然从容，常常是自个儿边唱边舞，它一出现天下就会太平。
English: This bird eats and drinks very naturally and calmly, often singing and dancing on its own. As soon as it appears, the world will be peaceful.

古文：又东五百里，曰发爽之山，无草木，多水，多白猿。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座发爽山，山上没有花草树木，到处都是水流，有很多白色的猿猴。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a hair-raising mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, there are streams everywhere, and there are many white monkeys.

古文：汎水出焉，而南流注于勃海。
现代文：泛水从这座山发源，然后向南流入渤海。
English: The floodwaters originate from this mountain and then flow south into the Bohai Sea.

古文：又东四百里，至于旄山之尾，其南有谷，曰育遗，多怪鸟，凯风自是出。
现代文：再往东四百里，便到了旄山的尾端。此处的南面有一峡谷，叫做育遗，生长着许多奇怪的鸟，南风就是从这里吹出来的。
English: Four hundred miles further east, at the end of Lushan Mountain, there is a canyon to the south, called Yuye, where many strange birds grow and the south wind blows.

古文：又东四百里，至于非山之首，其上多金玉，无水，其下多蝮虫。
现代文：再往东四百里，便到了非山的顶部。山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，没有水，山下到处是蝮虫。
English: Four hundred miles further east, we reached the top of the non-mountain, the mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, there is no water, and there are maggots everywhere under the mountain.

古文：又东五百里，曰阳夹之山，无草木，多水。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座阳夹山，没有花草树木，到处都是水流。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a sun-drenched mountain, with no flowers or trees, and water flowing everywhere.

古文：又东五百里，曰灌湘之山，上多木，无草。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座灌湘山，山上到处是树木，但没有花草。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a mountain called Guanxiang Mountain. The mountain is full of trees, but there are no flowers or plants.

古文：多怪鸟，无兽。
现代文：山中有许多奇怪的禽鸟，却没有野兽。
English: There are many strange birds in the mountains, but no wild animals.

古文：又东五百里，曰鸡山，其上多金，其下多丹雘。
现代文：再往东五百里，有一座鸡山，山上有丰富的金属矿物，山下盛产丹雘。
English: Five hundred miles further east, there is a chicken mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals, and the lower part of the mountain is rich in salamanders.

古文：黑水出焉，而南流注于海。
现代文：黑水从这座山发源，然后向南流入大海。
English: Black water springs from the mountain and flows south to the sea.

古文：其中有鱄鱼，其状如鲋而彘毛，其音如豚，见则天下大旱。
现代文：水中有一种鲭鱼，外形像鲫鱼却长着猪毛，发出的声音如同小猪叫，它一出现天下就会大旱。
English: There is a kind of eel in the water. It looks like an eel but has pig hair. The sound it makes is like a piglet crying. As soon as it appears, there will be a drought in the world.

古文：又东四百里，曰令丘之山，无草木，多火。
现代文：再往东四百里，有一座令丘山，山上没有花草树木，到处是野火。
English: Four hundred miles further east, there is a mountain called Lingqiu Mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, and wildfires are everywhere.

古文：其南有谷焉，曰中谷，条风自是出。
现代文：山的南边有一峡谷，叫做中谷，东北风就是从这里吹出来的。
English: On the south side of the mountain there is a canyon called the Middle Valley, from which the northeast wind blows.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如枭，人面四目而有耳，其名曰顒，其鸣自号也，见则天下大旱。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，外形像猫头鹰，却长着一副人脸和四只眼睛而且有耳朵，名叫颙，它发出的叫声就是自身名称的读音 颙 ，它一出现天下就会大旱。
English: There is a bird in the mountains that looks like an owl, but has a human face, four eyes and ears. It is called the quail, and the call it emits is the pronunciation of its name, quail. Whenever it appears, there is a drought.

古文：又东三百七十里，曰仑者之山，其上多金玉，其下多青雘。
现代文：再往东三百七十里，有一座仑者山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下盛产青雘。
English: Three hundred and seventy miles further east, there is a mountain called Lunzha Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and the lower part of the mountain is rich in camphor.

古文：有木焉，其状如榖而赤理，其汗如漆，其味如饴，食者不饥，可以释劳，其名曰白䓘，可以血玉。
现代文：山中有一种树木，外形像一般的构树却有红色的纹理，枝干流出的汁液似漆，味道是甜的，人吃了它就不感到饥饿，还可以解除忧愁，名称是䓘，可以用它将玉石染得鲜红。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountain. It looks like a normal tree, but it has a red texture. The sap flowing from the branches is like lacquer. The taste is sweet. If you eat it, you won't feel hungry, and you can relieve your sadness. The name of the tree is yakitori. It can be used to dye the jade red.

古文：又东五百八十里，曰禺槀之山，多怪兽，多大蛇。
现代文：再往东五百八十里，有一座禺槀山，山中有很多奇怪的野兽，还有很多大蛇。
English: Five hundred and eighty miles further east, there is a mountain called Lushan. There are many strange beasts in the mountains, as well as many large snakes.

古文：又东五百八十里，曰南禺之山，其上多金玉，其下多水。
现代文：再往东五百八十里，有一座南禺山，山上盛产金属矿物和玉石，山下到处都是流水。
English: Five hundred and eighty miles further east, there is a Nanlu Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there is running water everywhere under the mountain.

古文：有穴焉，水出辄入，夏乃出，冬则闭。
现代文：山中有一个洞穴，水在春天就流入洞穴，在夏天便流出洞穴，在冬天则闭塞不通。
English: There is a cave in the mountain. Water flows into the cave in spring, flows out of the cave in summer, and is blocked in winter.

古文：佐水出焉，而东南流注于海，有凤皇、鵷雏。
现代文：佐水从这座山发源，然后向东南流入大海，佐水流经的地方有凤凰和鹓雏栖息。
English: The sediment originates from this mountain and then flows south-east into the sea, where phoenixes and pupae roost.

古文：凡南次三山之首，自天虞之山以至南禺之山，凡一十四山，六千五百三十里。
现代文：总计南方第三列山系之首尾，从天虞山起到南禺山止，一共十四座山，途经六千五百三十里。
English: In total, there are fourteen mountains at the end of the third line of mountains in the south, from Tianyu Mountain to Nanluoshan, a total of 6,530 miles.

古文：其神皆龙身而人面。
现代文：诸山山神都是龙的身子人的脸面。
English: All the gods and goddesses are dragons with human faces.

古文：其祠皆一白狗祈，稰用稌。
现代文：祭祀山神全部是用一条白色的狗作供品祈祷，祀神的米用稻米。
English: A white dog is used as an offering to the mountain god, and rice is used to worship the god.

古文：右南经之山志，大小凡四十山，万六千三百八十里。
现代文：以上是南方经历之山的记录，大大小小总共四十座，一万六千三百八十里。
English: The above is a record of the mountains experienced in the south, a total of forty large and small, 16,380 miles.

