古文：中宗睿宗中宗大和圣昭孝皇帝讳显，高宗第七子，母曰则天顺圣皇后。显庆元年十一月乙丑，生于长安。
现代文：中宗大和圣昭孝皇帝名显，高宗的第七个儿子，母亲是则天大圣皇后，显庆元年十一月五日，在长安出生。
English: Emperor Mingxian, the seventh son of Emperor Gaozong and Empress Zetian, was born in Chang'an on the 5th day of the 11th month in the first year of Xianqing.

古文：明年封周王，授洛州牧。
现代文：第二年封为周王，授命为洛州牧。
English: In the second year, he was given the title of Zhou Wang and was appointed as the governor of Lozhou.

古文：仪凤二年，徙封英王，改名哲，授雍州牧。
现代文：仪凤二年，改封为英王，改名为哲，授命为雍州牧。
English: In the second year of Yi and Feng, he was given the title of Yingwang, changed his name to Zhe, and was appointed as Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：永隆元年，章怀太子废，其年立为皇太子。
现代文：永隆元年，章怀太子被废弃，当年被立为皇太子。
English: In the first year of Yonglong, Prince Zhang Huai was abandoned, and that year he was appointed crown prince.

古文：弘道元年十二月，高宗崩，遗诏皇太子柩前即帝位。
现代文：弘道元年十二月，高宗去世，遗诏令皇太子在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: In December of the first year of Hongdao, Gaozong died, and his last will and testament decreed that the crown prince would ascend to the throne before the coffin.

古文：皇太后临朝称制，改元嗣圣。
现代文：皇太后武则天临朝代行国政，改元为嗣圣。
English: The Empress Dowager Wu Zetian carried out state affairs on behalf of the Imperial Court, and the era was changed to the Heir Apparition.

古文：元年二月，皇太后废帝为庐陵王，幽于别所。
现代文：嗣圣元年二月，皇太后废中宗为庐陵王，幽禁在其他地方。
English: In February of the following year, Empress Dowager Huizhong became the King of Fuling and was confined elsewhere.

古文：其年五月，迁于均州，寻徙居房陵。
现代文：这年五月，迁居到均州，不久，又改迁到房陵。
English: In May of this year, he moved to Junzhou, and soon after, he moved to Fangling.

古文：圣历元年，召还东都，立为皇太子，依旧名显。时张易之与弟昌宗潜图逆乱。
现代文：圣历元年，召还东都，立为皇太子依旧名显，当时张易之与弟弟张昌宗暗中图谋叛乱。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, when the eastern capital was called back and the crown prince was still prominent, Zhang Yizhi and his brother Zhang Changzong secretly plotted a rebellion.

古文：神龙元年正月，凤阁侍郎张柬之、鸾台侍郎崔玄暐、左羽林将军敬晖、右羽林将军桓彦范、司刑少卿袁恕己等定策率羽林兵诛易之、昌宗，迎皇太子监国，总司庶政。大赦天下。
现代文：神龙元年正月，凤阁侍郎张柬之、鸾台侍郎崔玄日韦、左羽林将军敬晖、右羽林将军桓彦范、司刑少卿袁恕己等人定策略率领羽林兵杀张易之、张昌宗，迎立皇太子代理国政，总领政务，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year of the Dragon God, Fengge's chamberlain Zhang Han Zhi, Xingtai's chamberlain Cui Xuan Rong Wei, Left Hualin's general Jing Zi, Right Hualin's general Quan Yan Fan, and Chief Constable Yuan Shouji led Hualin's soldiers to kill Zhang Yi and Zhang Chang Zong, and welcomed the crown prince as the acting head of state, the leader of state affairs, and pardoned the world.

古文：凤阁侍郎韦承庆、正谏大夫房融、司礼卿崔神庆等下狱。
现代文：风阁侍郎韦承庆、正谏大夫房融、司礼卿崔神庆等人被捕下狱。
English: Fengge's chamberlain Wei Chengqing, Zhengqi's doctor Fang Rong, and the secretary Cui Shenqing were arrested and jailed.

古文：甲辰，命地官侍郎樊忱往京师告庙陵。
现代文：二十三日，命令地官侍郎樊忱前往京师向太庙陵寝报告。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered the local official, Jiro Shuzhen, to go to Beijing to report to the imperial mausoleum.

古文：司刑少卿兼相王府司马袁恕己为凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：司刑少卿兼相王府司马袁恕己为凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Ma Yuan Shuxi, the chief magistrate and the secretary of the King's Court, was the chief magistrate of Fengtaiping in Fengge.

古文：乙巳，则天传位于皇太子。
现代文：二十四日，武则天传位给皇太子。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Wu handed over the throne to the crown prince.

古文：丙午，即皇帝位于通天宫，大赦天下，唯易之党与不在原限。
现代文：二十五日，李显在通天宫即皇帝位，大赦天下，惟有张易之、张昌宗的党羽不在赦免限内。
English: On the 25th, Li Xian was enthroned as emperor in the Tongtian Palace, and was pardoned by the emperor. Only Zhang Yi and Zhang Changzong's followers were not pardoned.

古文：为周兴、来俊臣所枉陷者，咸令雪免。
现代文：被周兴、来俊臣所冤枉陷害者，都让他们洗雪冤枉。
English: Those who were wronged and framed by Zhou Xing and Lai Junshin, let them wash the snow.

古文：内外文武官加两阶，三品已上加爵二等，入五品等特减四考。
现代文：内外文武官员加两阶，三品以上官员加爵位二等，特许天下百姓大宴饮五天。
English: Foreign and domestic civil and military officials will be given two ranks, officials with more than three ranks will be given a second-class knighthood, and the general public will be treated to a five-day grand banquet.

古文：大酺五日。以并州牧相王旦及太平公主有诛易之兄弟功，相王加号安国相王，进拜太尉、同凤阁鸾台三品；公主加号镇国太平公主，仍赐实封，通前满五千户。
现代文：因为并州牧相王李旦及太平公主有诛杀张易之兄弟之功劳，相王加号为安国相王，晋升任命为太尉，任同凤阁鸾台三品；太平公主加号为镇国太平公主，又赐给她实际封户，连先前满五千户。
English: Because Wang Li-tan and Princess Taiping, the pastoral ministers of Anzhou, had the merit of fighting and killing Zhang Yi's brother, Wang Li-tan was given the additional title of An Guo Xiang Wang, promoted to the rank of captain, and was appointed to the third grade of Fengtai; Princess Taiping was given the additional title of Zhenguo Taiping Princess, and she was also given the actual number of households, which had previously reached five thousand.

古文：皇亲先被配没者，子孙令复属籍，仍量叙官爵。
现代文：皇亲国戚先前被发配流落的人，让他们的子孙恢复家族的名册，仍然量才授予官职爵位。
English: Imperial relatives and relatives of the people who were previously sent to exile, let their children and grandchildren restore the family register, and still only grant official titles and ranks.

古文：出宫女三千。
现代文：放宫女三千人出宫。
English: Three thousand women were released from the palace.

古文：丁未，天后徙居上阳宫。
现代文：二十六日，天后迁居上阳宫。
English: On the 26th, the Empress Dowager moved to Shangyang Palace.

古文：庚戌，凤阁侍郎同凤阁鸾台平章事张柬之为夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品，封汉阳郡公；鸾台侍郎兼检校太子右庶子、同凤阁鸾台平章事崔玄暐为守内史，封博陵郡公；袁恕己同凤阁鸾台三品，封南阳郡公；敬晖为纳言、平阳郡公；桓彦范为纳言、谯郡公：并加银青光禄大夫，赐实封五百户。
现代文：二十九日，凤阁侍郎同凤阁鸾台平章事张柬之任夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品，封为汉阳郡公；鸾台侍郎兼检校太子右庶子、同凤阁鸾台平章事崔玄日韦为试用内史、封博陵郡公；袁恕己同凤阁鸾台三品，封为南阳郡公；敬晖为纳言、平阳郡公；桓彦范为纳言、谯郡公：都给予银青光禄大夫的加官，赐给各人实封五百户。
English: On the 29th, Xia Guan Shangshu and Tong Feng Guan Xingtai Sanpin were appointed as Hanyang County officials; Xingtai's chamberlain, Tong Feng Guan Xingtai Pingzhang, was appointed as Xia Guan Shangshu and Tong Feng Guan Xingtai Sanpin; Xingtai's chamberlain, Tong Feng Guan Xingtai Pingzhang, was appointed as Xingtai County official; Xingtai's chamberlain, Tong Feng Guan Xingtai Pingzhang, was appointed as Xingtai County official; Xingtai's chamberlain, Tong Feng Guan Xingtai Pingzhang, was appointed as Xia

古文：右羽林大将军、辽国公李多祚进封辽阳郡王，赐实封六百户；内直郎、驸马都尉王同皎为云麾将军、右千牛将军、琅邪郡公，食实封五百户。
现代文：右羽林大将军、辽国公李多祚晋封为辽阳郡王，赐给实封六百户；内直郎、驸马都尉王同皎为云麾将军、右千牛将军、琅笽郡公，食邑实封五百户。
English: General Yuehulin and Liao Guo Gong Li Dorong were promoted to the position of Liaoyang County King, and 600 households were given actual fiefs; while Naoru Uchida and Ma Duyi Wang were promoted to the positions of General Yun Xi, General Yu Qian Niu, and Guo Guo Gong, and 500 households were given actual fiefs.

古文：并赏诛张易之兄弟功。
现代文：都赏赐的是诛杀张易之兄弟的功劳。
English: They were all rewarded for their efforts in killing Zhang Yi's brother.

古文：其余封各有差。
现代文：其余的人分封各有等级差别。
English: The rest of the people have different ranks.

古文：上天后尊号为则天大圣皇帝。
现代文：上天后尊号为则天大圣皇帝。
English: The queen's honorary title is Heavenly Great Holy Emperor.

古文：二月甲寅，复国号，依旧为唐。
现代文：二月四日，恢复国号，依旧为唐。
English: On February 4, the country's name was restored, still Tang.

古文：社稷、宗庙、陵寝、郊祀、行军旗帜、服色、天地、日月、寺宇、台阁、官名，并依永淳已前故事。
现代文：社稷、宗庙、帝王陵墓、郊外祭祀天地、行军旗帜、服色、天地、日月、寺庙、台阁、官名，都依照唐高宗永淳年的老例。
English: The shrine, the ancestral temple, the imperial mausoleum, the suburban worshipping heaven and earth, the marching flag, the clothing color, the heaven and earth, the sun and the moon, the temple, the platform, and the official name all follow the old example of Tang Gao Zong Yong Jun.

古文：神都依旧为东都，北都为并州大都督府，老君依旧为玄元皇帝。
现代文：神都依旧为东都，北都为并州大都督府，太上老君依旧为玄元皇帝。
English: Shintō is still the eastern capital, Kitadō is still the unified prefectural capital, and Daijo Laojun is still Emperor Hyakugen.

古文：诸州百姓免今年租税，房州百姓给复三年。
现代文：各州百姓免除今年租税，房州百姓免除徭役三年。
English: The people of all provinces are exempt from tax this year, and the people of Fangzhou are exempt from corvee service for three years.

古文：改左右肃政台为左右御史台。
现代文：改左右肃政台为左右御史台。
English: The Left and Right Political Bureau was changed to the Left and Right Historical Bureau.

古文：韦承庆贬高要尉，房融配流钦州。
现代文：韦承庆贬降为高要县尉，房融发配流放到钦州。
English: Wei Chengqing was demoted to a high-ranking county lieutenant, and Fang Rongfa was exiled to Qinzhou.

古文：中书令杨再思为户部尚书、同中书门下三品、京留守；太仆卿、同中书门下三品姚元之出为亳州刺史。
现代文：中书令杨再思为户部尚书，同中书门下三品、东京留守；太仆卿、同中书门下三品姚元之由京师外调为亳州刺史。
English: Yang Zhaisi was assigned to the Household Division of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and remained in Tokyo as the third grade of the Chinese Academy of Letters; and Yao Yuan, the third grade of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was transferred from the Beijing division to the Zhangzhou division of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：己未，封堂兄左金吾将军、郁林郡公千里为成纪郡王、左金吾卫大将军，实封五百户。
现代文：九日，封堂兄左金吾将军、郁林郡公千里为成纪郡王、左金吾大将军，实封五百户。
English: On the 9th, the cousins of General Zuo Kingu and Gong Qianli of Yulin County were named as the county king of Chengji County and General Zuo Kingu, and 500 households were sealed.

古文：令贡举人停习《臣轨》，依旧习《老子》。
现代文：命令科举考试之人停止学习《臣轨》，依旧学习《老子》。
English: He ordered those taking the imperial examinations to stop studying "Submission" and continue to study "Laozi."

古文：甲子，立妃韦氏为皇后，大赦天下，内外官陪位者赐勋一转，大酺三日。
现代文：十四日，立妃韦氏为皇后，大赦天下，内外官员陪席的人赐给勋位一等，特许群臣大宴饮三日。
English: On the 14th, Empress Dowager Cixi ascended to the throne and granted a general amnesty to the whole country. Those who were present at the banquet of officials at home and abroad were given the first class of the order, and a grand banquet was held for the ministers for three days.

古文：后父故豫州刺史玄贞为上洛郡王，后母崔氏赠上洛郡王妃。
现代文：韦皇后父、已去世之豫州刺史玄贞为上洛郡王，韦皇后母崔氏赠给上洛郡王妃。
English: Emperor Wei's father, the deceased Emperor Xuanzhen of Yuzhou, was the king of Shangluo County, and Empress Wei's mother, Empress Cui, was the queen of Shangluo County.

古文：初，韩王元嘉、霍王元轨等自垂拱以来皆遭非命，是日追复官爵，令备礼改葬，有胤嗣者即令承袭，无胤嗣者听取亲为后。
现代文：当初，韩王元嘉、霍王元轨等从垂拱以来都遭到残杀，这天追认恢复官职爵位，命令具备礼仪改葬，有后嗣的人就令他们承袭官职爵位，没有后嗣者听任他们取亲族为后人。
English: At the beginning, Han Wangyuanjia, Huo Wangyuanlu and others had been brutally killed since the hanging of the arch. On this day, they recognized the restoration of official titles and ordered to have a ceremonial reburial. Those who had heirs were asked to inherit official titles and titles. Those who did not have heirs were allowed to take relatives as descendants.

古文：诏九品已上及朝集使极言朝政得失，兼举贤良方正直言极谏之士。
现代文：诏令九品以上官员及朝集使尽力陈述朝政得失，并且举荐贤良方正直言劝谏的士人。
English: The imperial edict ordered officials of nine grades and above, as well as imperial envoys, to do their best to explain the gains and losses of the imperial government, and to recommend virtuous and honest scholars.

古文：丙寅，左散骑常侍、谯王重福贬濮州员外刺史，不知州事。
现代文：十六日，左散骑常侍、谯王重福贬为濮州员外刺史，不主持州郡政事。
English: On the 16th, Zuo Sanzhijie's equerry, Zou Wang Shifu, was demoted to the status of an outside member of Zhou, and did not preside over the affairs of the county.

古文：特进、太子宾客、梁王武三思为司空、同中书门下三品，加实封五百户，通前一千五百户。
现代文：特进、太子宾客、梁王武三思为司空、同中书门下三品，加给实际食封五百户，连先前食邑共一千五百户。
English: The special promotion, the prince's guests, and Liang Wangwu's three thoughts as the secretary of the sky, and the three products under the same middle school, added to the actual food seal of 500 households, and the total of 1,500 households including the previous food villages.

古文：丁卯，右散骑常侍、定安郡王、驸马都尉武攸暨封定王，为司徒，更加实封四百户，通前一千户。
现代文：十七日，右散骑常侍、安定郡王、驸马都尉武攸暨封为定王，任命为司徒，又增加实际封邑四百户，连先前的食邑共一千户。
English: On the seventeenth day, the right horseman, the stable county king, and the horse captain, Wu Youcai, were appointed as the appointed king, and the actual fiefs were increased by 400 households, with a total of 1,000 households including the previous food villages.

古文：辛未，上往观风殿朝天后。
现代文：二十一日，皇上前往观风殿朝见天后。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor went to the observation hall in the morning to see the queen.

古文：太尉、安国相王旦固让太尉及知政事，遂从其请。
现代文：太尉、安国相王李旦坚决请求辞去太尉及知政事，皇上终于答应了他的请求。
English: The captain and minister of national security, Wang Lidan, firmly requested to resign as captain and chancellor, and the emperor finally agreed to his request.

古文：甲戌，国子祭酒祝钦明同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十四日，国子祭酒祝钦明任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Kinming was awarded the third prize at the Kuniko Festival.

古文：黄门侍郎、知侍中事韦安石为刑部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：黄门侍郎、主持侍中事韦安石任刑部尚书，罢免知政事。
English: Huangmen waiter, presided over the vice-minister of Wei Anshi, appointed the secretary of the criminal department, and dismissed the secretary of the government.

古文：丙子，诸州置寺、观一所，以 中兴 为名。
现代文：二十六日，各州设置寺、观各一所，以 中兴 作为寺、观的名称。
English: On the 26th, each prefecture set up a temple and a temple, with ZTE as the name of the temple and the temple.

古文：丁丑，武三思固让司空、同中书门下三品，武攸暨固让司徒、封王，许之。
现代文：二十七日，武三思坚决辞去司空和同中书门下三品的职务，武攸暨坚决辞去司徒和安王的职务，皇上同意了。
English: On the 27th, Wu Sansi resolutely resigned from the posts of Siku and Tongzhong Shumen, and Wu Youcai resolutely resigned from the posts of Sito and An Wang. The emperor agreed.

古文：改封义兴郡王重俊为卫王，北海郡王重茂为温王。
现代文：改封义兴郡王重俊为卫王，北海郡王重茂为温王。
English: Wang Chongjun of Yixing County was changed to Wei Wang, and Wang Chongmao of Beihai County was changed to Wen Wang.

古文：三月辛巳，追复故司空、英国公李勣官爵，令所司为起坟改葬。
现代文：三月二日，追认恢复已去世之司空、英国公李责力的官职爵位，命令有关官员为他起坟改葬。
English: On March 2, he posthumously recognized the restoration of the official title of the deceased Siku, the British public Li Guoli, and ordered the relevant officials to dig a grave for him.

古文：甲申，制文明已来破家臣僚所有子孙，并还资廕。
现代文：五日，诏令从文明年间以来被残害之家以及臣属的所有子孙，都还给他们门第资望和先代官职爵位。
English: On the fifth day, the imperial edict restored to the family and all the descendants of the vassals who had been mutilated since the era of civilization, their lineage and prestige as well as the official titles and ranks of the previous generation.

古文：其扬州构逆徒党，唯徐敬业一房不在免限，余并原宥。
现代文：那些扬州叛逆党徒，惟有徐敬业一家不在赦免范围之内，其余都饶恕宽免。
English: Those Yangzhou traitor party members, except for the Xu Jingye family, are not included in the scope of the pardon, and the rest are pardoned and forgiven.

古文：丁亥，废左右司员外郎。
现代文：八日，废除左右司员外郎。
English: On the 8th, the left and right secretary, Wairo, was abolished.

古文：其酷吏刘光业、王德寿、王处贞、屈贞筠、刘景阳等五人，虽已身死，官爵并宜追夺；景阳见在，贬禄州乐单尉。
现代文：那些酷吏刘光业、王德寿、王处贞、屈贞筠、刘景阳等五个人，死了的，他们原来的官爵都应追夺。刘景阳仍然活着，贬为禄州乐单县尉。
English: Those cruel officials Liu Guangye, Wang Deshou, Wang Zhenzhen, Qu Zhengyi, Liu Jingyang and other five people who died should be pursued for their former official titles. Liu Jingyang is still alive and was demoted to Luzhou Letan County Lieutenant.

古文：丘神勣、来子珣，万国俊、周兴、来俊臣、鱼承晔、王景昭、索元礼、傅游艺、王弘义、张知默、裴籍、焦仁亶、侯思立、郭霸、李敬仁、皇甫文备、陈嘉言等虽已身死，并宜除名。
现代文：丘神责力、来子王旬、万国俊、周兴、来俊臣、鱼承晔、王景昭、索元礼、傅游艺、王弘义、张知默、裴籍、焦仁、侯思立、郭霸、李敬仁、皇甫文备、陈嘉言等人尽管已经身死，都应除去官职名籍。
English: Qiu Shenreili, Lai Zi Wang Shun, Wan Guo Jun, Zhou Xing, Lai Juntong, Yu Chengtao, Wang Jingzhao, Suo Yuanli, Fu Youyi, Wang Hongyi, Zhang Zhiming, Pei Ji, Jiao Ren, Hou Sili, Guo Ba, Li Jingren, Wang Fu Wenbi, Chen Jiayin and others should be removed from the official title and register, even though they have died.

古文：唐奉一配流，李秦授、曹仁哲并改与岭南远恶处。
现代文：唐奉一发配流放，李秦授、曹仁哲都改为发配到岭南边远险恶去处。
English: After Tang Bong was exiled, Li Qinju and Cao Renzhe were both exiled to faraway and dangerous places in the southern part of Lingnan.

古文：己丑，中书侍郎兼检校相王府长史、南阳郡公袁恕己为中书令，兼检校安国相王府长史。
现代文：十日，中书侍郎兼检校相王府长史、南阳郡公袁恕己为中书令，兼检校安国相王府长史。
English: On the 10th, Wang Fu Changshi, the chancellor's attendant and the minister of inspection of schools, and Nanyang County public official Yuan Shixin, the chancellor's attendant and the minister of inspection of schools, Wang Fu Changshi.

古文：诏曰： 君臣朝序，贵贱之礼斯殊；兄弟大伦，先后之仪亦异。
现代文：诏令曰： 君臣朝拜的次序，贵贱的礼仪很有区别；兄弟间的大小的伦常关系，先后的仪礼也不同。
English: The imperial edict said: The order of courtly worship for princes and ministers, and the etiquette of nobility and lowliness are very different; the ethical relationship between brothers and sisters is different, and the ceremonies are also different.

古文：圣人之制，率由斯道。
现代文：圣人的制度，都由于这条礼仪之道。
English: The institution of sainthood is all due to this liturgical practice.

古文：朕临兹宝极，位在崇高。
现代文：朕登临皇帝宝座，地位崇高。
English: I ascended to the throne of the emperor, which is a lofty position.

古文：负扆当阳，虽受宗枝之敬；退朝私谒，仍用家人之礼。
现代文：背靠南面，向阳而治，虽然接受宗支亲族的敬爱；退朝以后，私下会见，仍应用家人的礼节。
English: With his back to the south, he ruled the country facing the sun, although he received the love of his family; after the abdication of the emperor, he still applied the etiquette of his family when meeting in private.

古文：近代以来，罕遵轨度，王及公主，曲致私情，姑叔之尊，拜于子侄，违法背礼，情用恻然。
现代文：近代以来，很少人遵循法度，王及公主，被曲折地致以私情，姑姑、叔父的尊贵，却对子、侄跪拜，违法背礼，令人感情悲哀。
English: Since modern times, few people have followed the law. Kings and princesses have been tortuously given their private affections, and respected aunts and uncles have bowed down to their sons and nephews, breaking the law and disobeying the law, which is emotionally saddening.

古文：自今已后，宜从革弊。
现代文：自今以后，应该听从改革旧的弊端。
English: From now on, reforming the old evils should be obeyed.

古文：安国相王某及镇国太平公主更不得辄拜卫王重俊兄弟及长宁公主姊妹等。
现代文：安国相王李旦及镇国太平公主更不能动不动就跪拜卫王重俊兄弟及长宁公主姊妹等人。
English: Wang Li Dan, Minister of the State of An, and Princess Taiping of Zhenguo could not help but kneel down and bow to the brothers of Wei Wang Chongjun and the sisters of Princess Changning.

古文：宜告宗属，知朕意焉。 
现代文：应该告知宗支亲属，知朕之意。 
English: It is necessary to inform the relatives of the branch of the family, to know what I mean.

古文：先是，诸王及公主皆以亲为贵，天子之子，诸姑叔见之必先致拜，若致书则称为启事。
现代文：先前，诸王及公主都因为是皇上亲属而尊贵，天子的儿子，所有姑姑、叔父见他必先行跪拜致礼，若要送书信就称为启事。
English: Previously, all kings and princesses were respected because they were relatives of the emperor. The son of the son of heaven, all aunts and uncles would kneel and bow before him. If you wanted to send a letter, it was called a notice.

古文：上志欲敦睦亲族，故下制革之。
现代文：皇上的意思是想和睦亲族，故下诏令改革它。
English: The emperor meant that he wanted to reconcile the relatives, so he issued a decree to reform it.

古文：庚寅，卫王重俊上洛州牧。
现代文：十一日，卫王重俊上任为洛州牧。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wei Wang Chongjun took up the post of Loshou herdsman.

古文：王乘驷马车，卤簿从；诸王公已下、中书门下五品已上及诸亲并祖送，礼仪甚盛。
现代文：王乘四匹马拉的车，仪仗队跟从；所有王公以下官员、中书门下五品以上官员及所有亲族都来饯行，礼仪非常隆重。
English: The king rode in a four-horse carriage, followed by a guard of honour. All officials below the rank of prince and above the rank of vice-premier and all relatives came to the procession. The etiquette was very grand.

古文：事毕，赐物有差。
现代文：送行已毕，赐给物品各有等级差别。
English: The procession is over, and the items given out vary in rank.

古文：辛卯，以故司仆少卿徐有功执法平恕，追赠越州都督，并授一子官。
现代文：十七日，因为故世的司仆少卿徐有功执法公平宽缓，追赠为越州都督，并且授予他一个儿子官职。
English: On the seventeenth day, because the deceased's servant, Shaoqing Xu Yigong, enforced the law fairly and leniently, he posthumously became the governor of Yuezhou, and granted him a son official position.

古文：戊戌，左右千牛卫各置大将军一员。
现代文：十九日，左右千牛卫各设置大将军一名。
English: On the 19th, one general was assigned to each of the left and right Qian Niu Wei.

古文：罢奉宸府官员。
现代文：撤销奉宸府官员。
English: Revoke the post of Fengyuan official.

古文：以安北大都护、安国相王旦为左右千牛大将军，每大朝会内供奉。
现代文：以安北大都护、安国相王旦为左右千牛大将军，每次大朝会内供奉。
English: An Bei Daduo and An Guo Xiang Wangdan are the left and right Qian Niu grand generals, and they are worshipped in every grand morning assembly.

古文：丙午，改秋社依旧用仲秋。
现代文：二十七日，改秋天祭祀土神庆丰收为秋天的第二个月。
English: On the 27th, the autumn festival "Toshinqing Harvest" was changed to the second month of autumn.

古文：戊申，相王旦于太常上。王公诸亲祖送，卫尉张设，光禄造食。
现代文：二十九日，相王旦在太常厅上，王公诸亲前来饯别，卫尉张乐设饮，光禄寺造宴会食物。
English: On the 29th, the king's relatives came to bid farewell to the king in the hall of the Great Hall of the People. Guardsman Zhang Le served drinks, and Guanglu Temple made banquet food.

古文：礼毕，赐物如卫王上洛州牧之仪。
现代文：礼毕，赐百官亲属的物品如同卫王上任洛州牧之仪礼。
English: After the ceremony, the items given to the relatives of the hundred officials were like the ceremony of Wei Wang taking up the post of Luozhou herdsman.

古文：夏四月乙丑，端州尉魏元忠为卫尉卿、同中书门下三品。
现代文：夏四月十六日，端州之县尉魏元忠任卫尉卿、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wei Yuanzhong, the county official of Danzhou, was appointed to the position of lieutenant of the guard, and was promoted to the third grade of the same school.

古文：甲戌，左庶子韦安石为吏部尚书，太子宾客李怀远为右散骑常侍，右庶子唐休璟为辅国大将军，右庶子崔玄暐为特进、检校益州大都督府长史、判都督事，右庶子、西留守、户部尚书、弘农郡公杨再思为检校扬州大都督府长史、判都督事，少詹事兼侍读、国子祭酒祝钦明为刑部尚书：并依前知政事，以上在春宫故僚也。
现代文：二十五日，左庶子韦安石为吏部尚书，太子宾客李怀远为右散骑常侍，右庶子唐休王景为辅国大将军，右庶子崔玄日韦为特进、检校益州大都督府长史，并兼任都督事，右庶子、西京留守、户部尚书、弘农郡公杨再思为检校扬州大都督府长史，兼任都督事，少詹事兼侍读、国子祭酒祝钦明为刑部尚书：都依照以前主持政事，以上诸人都是中宗在东宫时之旧僚属。
English: On the 25th, the left illegitimate son, Wei Anshi, was the secretary of the cadre department, the prince's guest, Li Huaiyuan, was the right cavalry attendant, the right illegitimate son, Tang Xiu Wangjing, was the assistant general of the country, the right illegitimate son, Cui Xuanri Wei, was the special envoy, the head of the governor of Yizhou, and also served as the governor of the city, the right illegitimate son, the West Beijing left-behind, the head of the household department, and the Gong Yang Zaisi of Hongnong County were the head of the governor of the Yangzhou, and also

古文：乙亥，张柬之为中书令。
现代文：二十六日，张柬之为中书令。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Kamming received the order of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：戊寅，追赠邵王重润为懿德太子。
现代文：二十九日，追赠已故邵王重润为懿德太子。
English: On the 29th, the late Shao Wang Chongrun was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Gongde.

古文：同官县大雨雹，燕雀多死，漂溺居人四百家，遣使赈给。
现代文：同官县下大雨和冰雹，燕子、麻雀大多冻死，大水冲走淹死居民四百家，皇上派使者发粮救济。
English: Heavy rain and hail fell in Dongguan County. Most of the swallows and sparrows froze to death. The floodwaters swept away and drowned 400 residents. The emperor sent an envoy to distribute grain relief.

古文：五月壬午，迁武氏七庙神主于西京崇尊庙。
现代文：五月四日，将武氏七庙神主迁到西京崇尊庙。
English: On May 4th, the deities of the seven temples of the Takeshi clan were moved to the Sanzon Temple in Saikyo.

古文：东都创置太庙社稷。
现代文：东都创立太庙社稷。
English: To the east, Taimyo Shrine was founded.

古文：戊子，制依旧以周、隋为二王后。
现代文：十日，皇上诏令依旧以周、隋为二王后代。
English: On the 10th, the imperial edict still listed Zhou and Sui as the descendants of the two kings.

古文：壬辰，封成纪郡王千里为成王。
现代文：十四日，封成纪郡王千里为成王。
English: On the 14th, Feng Cheng Ji Gu Wang Qianli was crowned king.

古文：癸巳，侍中敬晖封为平阳郡王；侍中桓彦范扶阳郡王，赐姓韦氏；中书令张柬之汉阳郡王；中书令袁恕己南阳郡王；特进崔玄暐海陵郡王；并加授特进，罢知政事。
现代文：十五日，侍中敬晖被封为平阳郡王；侍中桓彦范为扶阳郡王，赐姓为韦氏；中书令张柬之为汉阳郡王；中书令袁恕己为南阳郡王；特进崔玄日韦为海陵郡王：以上诸人都授以特进的加官，而罢免知政事。
English: On the 15th, the chamberlain Jing Yi was named the king of Pingyang County; the chamberlain Kuan Yan Fan was named the king of Fuyang County and given the surname Wei; the Chinese scholar Zhang Kam was named the king of Hanyang County; the Chinese scholar Yuan Shuxi was named the king of Nanyang County; and the special envoy Cui Xuan Rong Wei was named the king of Hailing County. All of the above were given the additional post of special envoy and dismissed from the post of governor.

古文：吏部尚书韦安石为兼中书令，兵部尚书魏元忠为兼侍中。
现代文：吏部尚书韦安石兼中书令，兵部尚书魏元忠兼侍中。
English: Wei Anshi, a member of the cadre, was also a middle-ranking official, and Wei Yuanzhong, a member of the military, was also a middle-ranking official.

古文：丙申，皇后表请天下士庶为出母为三年服，年二十二成丁，五十九免役。
现代文：十八日，皇后上奏章请求，天下士子和庶民百姓为了母亲出殡服丧三年，男子二十二岁为成年，五十九岁可免除徭役。
English: On the 18th, the empress issued a proclamation requesting that the world's nobles and commoners should wear funeral attire for three years in honor of her mother. Men who are 22 years old are considered adults, and those who are 59 years old can be exempted from military service.

古文：癸卯，降梁王武三思为德静郡王，定王武攸暨为乐寿郡王，河内王武懿宗等十余人并降为国公。
现代文：二十五日，降梁王武三思为德静郡王，定王武攸暨为乐寿郡王，河内王武懿宗等十多人都降为国公。
English: On the 25th, more than ten people, including Liang Wang Wusan Si as the king of Dejing County, Ding Wang Wuyuan Cai as the king of Leju County, and Hanoi King Wusong Zong, were reduced to the status of princes.

古文：甲辰，特进、芮国公豆卢钦望为尚书左仆射，辅国大将军、酒泉郡公唐休璟为尚书右仆射：依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十六日，特进、芮国公豆卢钦望为尚书左仆射，辅国大将军、酒泉郡公唐休王景为尚书右仆射：两人依旧任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 26th, Lu Qinwang, a special envoy and a public official of the State of Shandong, served as Shang Shu's right-hand man, and Tang Xiuwangjing, a vice-general of the State of Shandong and a public official of Jiuquan County, served as Shang Shu's left-hand man. Both of them remained in the same position as the third grade of the middle school.

古文：丙午，制以邹鲁之邑百户为太师、隆道公宣尼采邑，用供荐享。
现代文：二十八日，诏命用邹、鲁城镇一百户作为太师、隆道公宣尼收取租税食邑的地方，以作为供给祭祀的来源。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict ordered that one hundred households in the towns of Yunnan and Shandong be used as a place for the Grand Master and the Grand Duchess to collect taxes and food, and as a source of supply for the sacrificial rites.

古文：又授裔孙褒圣侯崇基朝散大夫，仍许子孙传袭。
现代文：另外授给孔子后代孙褒圣侯崇基朝散大夫，仍旧允许子子孙孙继承世袭。
English: In addition, it was awarded to the descendants of Confucius, the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of Confucius.

古文：六月丁巳，河北十七州大水，漂没人居。
现代文：六月九日，河北七州大水，漂没了居住人户。
English: On June 9, Hebei's seven prefectures were inundated with floodwaters, wiping out entire households.

古文：癸亥，尚书左仆射豆卢钦望，军国重事中书门下可共平章；检校中书令韦安石中书令，兼检校吏部尚书；检校侍中魏元忠兼检校兵部尚书；杨再思兼户部尚书，兼检校中书令。
现代文：十五日，尚书左仆射豆卢钦望，任军国重事中书门下的职务，而且可以共同担任平章事；检校中书令韦安石任中书令，兼检校吏部尚书；检校侍中魏元忠兼检校兵部尚书；杨再思兼户部尚书，兼检校中书令。
English: On the 15th, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shozo Lu Qinwang, was appointed to the important military and national affairs under Shang Shuxu, and could also jointly serve as Ping Zhang; Wei Anshi, the inspector of the school, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and also the inspector of the school's personnel department; Wei Yuanzhong, the inspector of the school, and also the inspector of the school's military department; Yang Zaisi, the inspector of the school, and also the inspector of the school's personnel department.

古文：丁卯，祔孝敬皇帝神主于太庙。庙号义宗，非礼也。
现代文：十九日，把孝敬皇帝神主附到太庙附祭，庙号义宗，不合乎礼法。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the emperor's deity was attached to the temple's festival, and the temple's name was changed to Yizong, which was not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：戊辰，洛水暴涨，坏庐舍二千余家，溺死者甚众。
现代文：二十日，洛水猛涨，冲坏茅屋房子二千多家，淹死的人很多。
English: On the 20th, the water in Luo surged, destroying more than 2,000 huts and houses, and many people drowned.

古文：秋七月辛巳，太子宾客韦巨源同中书门下三品。
现代文：秋七月四日，太子宾客韦巨源任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wei Jiuyuan, the prince's guest, was appointed as the third grade of Zhongshumen.

古文：乙未，以特进、汉阳郡王张柬之为襄州刺史，仍不知州事。
现代文：十八日，以特进、汉阳郡王张柬之为襄州刺史，仍然不主持襄州事务。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Kamming, the King of Xiangzhou and Hanyang County, was appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou. However, he still did not preside over the affairs of Xiangzhou.

古文：八月戊申，以水灾，令文武官九品以上直言极谏。
现代文：八月一日，因为水灾，皇上命令文武官九品以上官员尽力提出严正的劝谏。
English: On August 1st, due to the floods, the emperor ordered civil and military officers of nine grades and above to do their best to put forward serious advice.

古文：河南洛阳百姓被水兼损者给复一年。
现代文：河南百姓被水灾加倍损害的人免除一年徭役。
English: The people of Henan who have been doubly damaged by the floods will be exempted from forced labor for one year.

古文：甲子，追册故妃赵氏为恭皇后，尊孝敬妃裴氏为哀皇后。
现代文：十七日，追认册封已故赵氏为恭皇后，尊已故孝敬裴氏为哀皇后。
English: On the 17th, the late Zhao was posthumously recognized as the Queen of Regards, and the late Takaaki Pei was recognized as the Queen of Sorrows.

古文：乙亥，上亲祔太祖景皇帝、献祖光皇帝、世祖元皇帝、高祖神尧皇帝、皇祖太宗文武皇帝、皇孝高宗天皇大帝、皇兄义宗孝敬皇帝神主于太庙。
现代文：二十八日，皇上亲自把太祖景皇帝、献祖光皇帝、世祖元皇帝、高祖神尧皇帝、皇祖太宗文武皇帝、皇考高宗天皇大帝、皇兄义宗孝敬皇帝神主附祭于太庙。
English: On the 28th, the emperor personally enshrined Emperor Taizu, Emperor Kenzo, Emperor Shigenoto, Emperor Gaozu, Emperor Monmu, Emperor Koka, Emperor Gaozu the Great, and Emperor Yoshimune's elder brother, Emperor Shinshu, in the Imperial Temple.

古文：皇后庙见。
现代文：皇后到太庙拜见祖先。
English: The empress went to the Imperial Temple to visit her ancestors.

古文：丁丑，御洛城南门观斗象。
现代文：三十日，皇上驾到洛城南门观看斗象。
English: On the 30th, the emperor drove to the south gate of Los Angeles to watch the elephant fight.

古文：九月壬午，亲祀明堂，大赦天下。
现代文：九月五日，皇上亲自祭祀明堂，大赦天下。
English: On September 5th, the Emperor himself dedicated Myeongdong and granted amnesty to the world.

古文：禁《化胡经》及婚娶之家父母亲亡停丧成礼。
现代文：禁止《化胡经》以及婚娶之家如果父母亲亡故停止办丧事而先完成婚礼。
English: It is forbidden to perform the wedding ceremony before the funeral of the deceased's parents, if the deceased's parents have passed away.

古文：天下大酺三日。
现代文：允许天下人大聚饮三天。
English: The world is allowed to gather and drink for three days.

古文：戊戌，太子宾客韦巨源为礼部尚书，依旧知政事。
现代文：二十一日，太子宾客韦巨源为礼部尚书，依旧主持政事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wei Jiuyuan, the prince's guest, became the ceremonial secretary and continued to preside over government affairs.

古文：冬十月癸亥，幸龙门香山寺。
现代文：冬十月十七日，皇上驾到龙门香山寺。
English: On the winter 17th of October, the emperor drove to the Longmen Xiangshan Temple.

古文：乙丑，幸新安。改弘文馆为修文馆。
现代文：十九日，皇上驾到新安，改弘文馆为修文馆。
English: On the 19th, the emperor drove to Xin'an and changed the Hongwen Museum to the Xiuwen Museum.

古文：辛未，魏元忠为中书令，杨再思为侍中。
现代文：二十五日，魏元忠为中书令，杨再思为侍中。
English: On the 25th, Wei Yuanzhong was appointed as the middle secretary, and Yang Jiasi was appointed as the assistant secretary.

古文：十一月戊寅，加皇帝尊号曰应天，皇后尊号曰顺天。
现代文：十一月二日，加皇帝尊号曰应天，皇后尊号曰顺天。
English: On November 2nd, the Emperor's honorific title was changed to Ying Tian, and the Empress' honorific title to Shun Tian.

古文：壬午，皇帝、皇后亲谒太庙，告受徽号之意，大赦天下，赐酺三日。
现代文：六日，皇帝、皇后亲自晋见太庙，禀告接受徽号之意，大赦天下，赐给臣下大宴饮三天。
English: On the sixth day, the emperor and empress personally visited the Imperial Temple and announced that they accepted the emblem, pardoned the world, and gave their subjects a grand banquet for three days.

古文：己丑，御洛城南门楼观泼寒胡戏。
现代文：十三日，皇上驾到洛城南门楼观看泼寒胡戏。
English: On the 13th, the emperor drove to the South Gate of Los Angeles to watch the cold play.

古文：辛丑，卫王重俊为左卫大将军，遥领扬州大都督；温王重茂为右卫大将军，遥领并州大都督。
现代文：二十五日，卫王重俊为左卫大将军，任命为扬州大都督但不到任；温王重茂为右卫大将军，任并州大都督但不到任。
English: On the 25th, Wei Wang Shigetun became the left guard general and was appointed Yangzhou grand governor but did not take office; Wen Wang Shigemo became the right guard general and was appointed the state grand governor but did not take office.

古文：十二月壬寅，则天皇太后崩。
现代文：十一月二十六日，则天皇太后去世。
English: On November 26, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：二年春正月丙申，护则天灵驾还京。
现代文：神龙二年春正月二十一日，皇上护武则天灵驾回京。
English: On the twenty-first day of the first month of the second year of the Chinese lunar calendar, Emperor Wu Zetian returned to Beijing.

古文：戊戌，吏部尚书李峤同中书门下三品，中书侍郎于惟谦同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，吏部尚书李峤任同中书门下三品，中书侍郎于惟谦任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd day of the month, the secretary, Shangshu Li Jian, was appointed as the third-ranked disciple of Zhongshu, and the attendant of Zhongshu, Yu Wei Qian, was appointed as the second-rank disciple of Zhongshu.

古文：闰月丙午朔，置公主府官员。
现代文：闰二月一日，设置公主府官员。
English: On February 1, officials of the Princess's Household were established.

古文：乙卯，以特进敬晖、桓彦范、袁恕己等三人为滑、洺、豫刺史。
现代文：十日，以特进敬晖、桓彦范、袁恕己等三人为滑、氵名、豫三州刺史。
English: On the 10th, three people, including the special envoys Jing Yi, Kan Yan Fan, and Yuan Shuji, made a history of the three states of Nanning, Xi'an, and Henan.

古文：二月乙未，刑部尚书韦巨源同中书门下三品。
现代文：二月二十一日，刑部尚书韦巨源任同中书门下三品。
English: On February 21st, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuwei Jiuyuan, was appointed to the Third Class of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：遣十使巡察风俗。
现代文：派遣十个使者巡察风俗。
English: Send ten emissaries to observe their customs.

古文：丙申，僧会范、道士史崇玄等十余人授官封公，以常赏圣善寺功也。
现代文：二十二日，僧人会范、道士史崇玄等十多人授给官职并封为公爵，以赏赐他们建造圣善寺之功劳。
English: On the 22nd, more than ten people, including the leader of the Monks' Association Fan and the Taoist priest Shi Chongxuan, were given official positions and made dukes as a reward for their contribution to the construction of Shuzenji Temple.

古文：三月甲辰，中书令韦安石为户部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：三月一日，中书令韦安石为户部尚书，罢免知政事。
English: On March 1st, the Chinese government decreed that Wei Anshi was the head of the household, and removed him from the position of chancellor.

古文：户部尚书苏瑰为侍中、京留守。
现代文：户部尚书苏瑰为侍中，京都留守。
English: The head of the household, Shosho Suzuki, was away in Kyoto as a chamberlain.

古文：乙巳，黄雾四塞。
现代文：二日，黄色雾气四面堵塞。
English: On the second day, the yellow fog was blocked on all sides.

古文：唐休璟请致仕，许之。
现代文：唐休王景请求辞官，皇上同意了。
English: Tang Xiu Wang Jing asked to resign, and the emperor agreed.

古文：庚戌，杀光禄卿、驸马都尉王同皎。
现代文：七日，皇上杀光禄卿、驸马都尉王同皎。
English: On the seventh day, Emperor Shiguang Luqing and Prince Ma Duyi Wang Tongyi departed.

古文：壬子，洛阳城东七里许，地色如水，侧近树木、往来车马历历影见水中，经月余乃灭。
现代文：九日，洛阳城东七里多地，地色如水，旁边树木、往来车马清清楚楚的影子显现在水中，经过一个多月才灭。
English: On the 9th, more than seven miles east of Luoyang City, the color of the land was like water. Next to the trees, the clear shadow of the traffic appeared in the water, and it took more than a month to disappear.

古文：是月，大置员外官，自京诸司及诸州佐凡二千余人，超授阉官七品已上及员外者千余人。
现代文：这月，大大设置员外官，从京中各司以及各州辅佐官员总计二千多人，超越提拔授给太监七品以上及员外官的一千多人。
English: This month, there were more than 2,000 foreign officials from various departments in Beijing and the provinces, and more than 1,000 eunuchs and foreign officials were promoted.

古文：壬戌，赠后父韦玄贞太师、益州都督。
现代文：十九日，赠韦后父韦玄贞太师、益州都督。
English: On the 19th, Wei's father, Wei Xuanzhen, was given the title of Grand Master and Governor of Yizhou.

古文：夏四月甲戌，又赠玄贞为酆王，玄贞弟四人并赠郡王。
现代文：夏四月一日，又赠韦玄贞为酆王，玄贞弟四人都赐以郡王爵位。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Wei Xuan Zhen was also given the title of the king of Shao, and all four of Xuan Zhen's brothers were given the title of the county king.

古文：己卯，左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品李怀远请致仕，许之。
现代文：六日，左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品李怀远请求辞官，皇上同意了。
English: On the sixth day, Zuo Sanzhijie, a regular attendant, and Li Huaiyuan, the third grade of the same middle school, requested to resign, and the emperor agreed.

古文：辛巳，洛水暴涨，坏天津桥。
现代文：八日，洛水猛涨，破坏了天津桥。
English: On the 8th, the Luo River surged, destroying the Tianjin Bridge.

古文：六月戊寅，特进、朗州刺史、平阳郡王敬晖贬崖州司马，特进、毫州刺史、扶阳郡王桓彦范泷州司马，特进、郢州刺史袁恕己窦州司马，特进、均州刺史、博陵郡王崔玄暐白州司马，特进、襄州刺史、汉阳郡王张柬之新州司马，并员外置，长任，旧官封爵并追夺。
现代文：六月六日，特进、朗州刺史、平阳郡王敬晖贬降为崖州司马，特进、亳州刺史、扶阳郡公桓彦范贬为泷州司马，特进、郢州刺史袁恕己贬为窦州司马，特进、均州刺史、博陵郡王崔玄日韦贬为白州司马，特进、襄州刺史、汉阳郡王张柬之贬为新州司马，都作为员外官安置，长期任职，旧的官职和封的王爵一律夺去。
English: On June 6, Wang Jingyao of Tejin, Langzhou, and Pingyang County was demoted to Jiaozhou Sima, Gong Huan Yanfan of Tejin, Zhangzhou, and Fuyang County was demoted to Zhangzhou Sima, Yuan Shuxi of Tejin, and Zhangzhou Sima was demoted to Douzhou Sima, Cui Xuan Rongwei of Tejin, Junzhou, and Boling County was demoted to Baizhou Sima, and Wang Zhangjia of Tejin, Xiangzhou, and Hanyang County was demoted to Xinzhou Sima. They were all placed as foreign officials and served for a long time, and the old

古文：秋七月丙午，立卫王重俊为皇太子。
现代文：秋七月五日，皇上立卫王重俊为皇太子。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Emperor appointed Wei Wang Chongjun as the Crown Prince.

古文：丙寅，中书令兼检校兵部尚书齐国公魏元忠为尚书右仆射兼中书令，仍知兵部事；吏部尚书李峤为中书令；刑部尚书韦巨源为吏部尚书，依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十五日，中书令兼检校兵部尚书齐国公魏元忠为尚书左仆射兼中书令，仍然主持兵部事；吏部尚书李峤为中书令；刑部尚书韦巨源为吏部尚书，依旧是同中书门下三品。
English: On the 25th, Wei Yuanzhong, the Clerk of the Great Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the Clerk of the Inspection of Schools and the Clerk of the Great Office of the People's Commissariat of War, was still the Clerk of the Great Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the Clerk of the Great Office of the People's Commissariat of War and the Clerk of the Inspection of Schools and the Clerk of the Great Office of the People's Commissariat of War, and still presided over the Clerk of the Great Office of the People's Commissariat

古文：庚午，礼部尚书祝钦明为中丞萧至忠所劾。
现代文：二十九日，礼部尚书祝钦明被中丞萧至忠所弹劾。
English: On the 29th, the head of the ceremonial department, Shangshu Zhu Qinming, was impeached by the middle-ranking general Xiao Zhizhong.

古文：前左散骑常侍李怀远为左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品、东都留守。
现代文：前左散骑常侍李怀远为左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品、东都留守。
English: The front left strolling attendant Li Huaiyuan is the left strolling attendant, the same middle school student is the third grade, and Dongdu is absent.

古文：九月，祝钦明贬青州刺史。
现代文：九月，祝钦明被贬为青州刺史。
English: In September, Zhu Qinming was relegated to a footnote in the history of Qingzhou.

古文：壬寅，幸白马寺。
现代文：一日，皇上驾到白马寺。
English: One day, the emperor drove to the White Horse Temple.

古文：戊午，左散骑常侍李怀远卒。
现代文：设置户部侍郎一名。十七日，左散骑常侍李怀远去世。
English: On the 17th, Li Huaiyuan, a regular attendant of the left horseback, passed away.

古文：壬寅，置户部侍郎一员。
现代文：冬十月九日，车驾返回京师。
English: In the winter, on October 9th, I drove back to Beijing.

古文：冬十月己卯，车驾还京师。
现代文：二十八日，皇上从东都回来。
English: On the 28th, the emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：戊戌，至自东都。十一月乙巳，大赦天下，行从文武官赐勋一转。
现代文：十一月五日，大赦天下，跟从皇上出行的文武官员勋位升一等。
English: On November 5th, he was pardoned by the emperor and was promoted to the first class of the Order of Civil and Military Officials.

古文：改河南为合宫，洛阳为永昌，嵩阳为登封，阳城为告成。
现代文：改河南为合宫，洛阳为永昌，嵩阳为登封，阳城为告成。
English: Rename Henan as Hegu, Luoyang as Yongchang, Songyang as Dengfeng, and Yangcheng as Xuancheng.

古文：戊午，兼秘书郑普思坐妖逆配流儋州，其党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十八日，兼秘书郑普思犯妖逆之罪发配到儋州，他的党羽都被杀。
English: On the 18th, Zheng Pu Si, who was also the secretary, was sent to Zhangzhou for committing the crime of treason, and his followers were all killed.

古文：十二月己卯，突厥默啜寇灵州鸣沙县，灵武军大总管沙吒忠义逆击之，官军败绩，死者三万。
现代文：十二月九日，突厥王默啜入侵灵州鸣沙县，灵武军大总管沙吒忠义率军迎击，官军大败，死亡三万人。
English: On December 9th, the Turk King Mokusu invaded Mingsha County, Lingzhou. The Lingwu army's commander-in-chief, Shajian Zhongyi, led the army to counterattack. The government army was defeated, and 30,000 people died.

古文：丁巳，突厥进寇原、会等州，掠陇右牧马万余而去。
现代文：不久，突厥进攻原、会等州，掳掠陇右牧马一万多匹而去。
English: Soon after, the Turks attacked Yuan, Hui and other prefectures, taking more than ten thousand horses from the right herd.

古文：甲申，募能斩默啜者，封授诸大卫大将军。
现代文：十四日，皇上招募能够斩默啜的人，封给他诸卫大将军之职。
English: On the 14th, the emperor recruited someone who could break the silence and appointed him to the post of General of the Guards.

古文：丙戌，以突厥犯边，京师亢旱，令减膳彻乐。
现代文：十六日，因为突厥侵犯边境，京师干旱，皇上命令减少膳食，撤去音乐。
English: On the 16th, because of the Turkish invasion of the border and the drought in Beijing, the emperor ordered to reduce meals and remove music.

古文：河北水，大饥，命侍中苏瑰存抚赈给。
现代文：河北大水，大饥荒，皇上命令侍中苏瑰慰问救济。
English: Hebei floods, great famine, the emperor ordered the attendant Su Jiu condolences and relief.

古文：丙申，特进、尚书左仆射、兼安国相王府长史、芮国公豆卢钦望为开府仪同三司，依旧平章军国重事；尚书右仆射兼中书令、知兵部事、齐国公魏元忠为尚书左仆射兼中书令，仍兼知兵部事。
现代文：二十六日，特进、尚书左仆射、兼安国相王府长史、芮国公豆卢钦望为开府仪同三司，依旧任平章军国重事；尚书右仆射兼中书令、主持兵部事、齐国公魏元忠为尚书左仆射兼中书令，仍旧兼管兵部事。
English: On the 26th, Tejin, Shang Shuxi's left-hand servant Sha, Wang Fu Chang Shi, also the Minister of State Security, and Lu Qinwang, the public servant of the State of Qi, were appointed as the head of the ceremony and the three departments, and still served as the important matters of the military state; Shang Shuxi's right-hand servant Sha and the middle secretary, presided over the affairs of the military department, and Wei Yuanzhong, the public servant of the State of Qi, was the left-hand servant Sha and the middle secretary, and still took charge of the affairs of the military department.

古文：是冬，牛大疫。
现代文：这年冬天，牛发生瘟疫。
English: This winter, there was an outbreak of rinderpest in cattle.

古文：三年春正月庚子朔，不受朝会，丧未再期也。
现代文：神龙三年春正月一日是朔日，皇上不接受群臣朝会之礼，因为丧事未到两周年。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 3rd year of the Dragon is the new moon day. The emperor did not accept the courtesy of the courtiers of the imperial court, because the funeral did not reach the second anniversary.

古文：庚戌，以默啜寇边，制募猛士武艺超绝者，各令自举，内外群官各进破灭突厥之策。
现代文：十一日，因为突厥默啜入侵边界，诏令招募勇猛之士、武艺超群者，可自荐，内外群官各个进献破灭突厥的策略。
English: On the 11th day, because the Turks were about to invade the border, the emperor ordered the recruitment of brave men, martial arts superiors, who could recommend themselves, and various officials at home and abroad offered strategies to destroy the Turks.

古文：丙辰，以旱，亲录囚徒。
现代文：十七日因为干旱，皇上亲自审查并记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the seventeenth day, because of the drought, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：己巳，遣武攸暨、武三思往乾陵祈雨于则天皇后，既而雨降，上大感悦。
现代文：三十日，派武攸暨、武三思前往乾陵向武则天皇后求雨，不久降雨，皇上大为感动、喜悦。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Wu was greatly moved and pleased when he sent Wu Youcum and Wu Sansi to the Qianling Mausoleum to pray for rain for Empress Wu Zetian. Rain soon fell.

古文：二月辛未，制武氏崇恩庙依旧享祭，仍置五品令、七品丞，其昊陵、顺陵置令、丞如庙。
现代文：二月二日，诏令武氏崇恩庙依旧祭祀，仍旧设置五品的令和七品的丞，其他的昊陵、顺陵设置令、丞和崇恩庙一样。
English: On February 2nd, the imperial edict ordered the Wu Clan's Chong'en Temple to continue to offer sacrifices, and the five-tiered order and seven-tiered joist were still set up. Other Haoling and Shunling mausoleums were set up in the same way as Chong'en Temple.

古文：壬午，赠太师、酆王庙号褒德，陵号荣先，置六品令、八品丞。
现代文：十三日，赠予太师、酆王庙号为褒德，陵墓号为荣光，设置六品的令，八品的丞。
English: On the 13th, he was given the title of Daishi and the temple name of Shao Wang as a reward for virtue, and the tomb name as a glory, and the order of six prizes and the title of eight prizes were set.

古文：庚寅，改中兴寺、观为龙兴，内外不得言 中兴 。
现代文：二十七日，改中兴寺、中兴观为龙兴寺、龙兴观，内外官员不能再说 中兴 二字。
English: On the 27th, Zhongxing Temple and Zhongxing Temple were changed to Longxing Temple and Longxing Temple, and officials at home and abroad could no longer say the word "Zhongxing."

古文：辛卯，幸安乐公主宅。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驾到安乐公主住宅。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor drove to Princess Anle's residence.

古文：三月丙子，吐蕃赞普遣大臣悉董热献方物。
现代文：三月，吐蕃赞普派遣大臣悉董热贡献土特产。
English: In March, the minister dispatched by Tubo Zampu, Siyi Dongre, made a contribution of local special products.

古文：是春，自京师至山东疾疫，民死者众。
现代文：这年春天，从京师到山岳瘟疫流行，人民死亡很多。
English: In the spring of that year, the plague spread from Beijing to the mountains, and many people died.

古文：河北、河南大旱。
现代文：河北、河南大旱灾。
English: Hebei and Henan are suffering from a severe drought.

古文：夏四月辛巳，以嗣雍王守礼女为金城公主，出降吐蕃赞普。
现代文：夏四月十四日，以嗣雍王守礼之女儿为金城公主，下嫁给吐蕃王赞普。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, the daughter of King Shurei of Ise, King of Yong, became Princess Kinjo and married King Zamp of Tubo.

古文：庚寅，幸荐福寺，曲赦雍州。
现代文：二十三日，皇上驾到荐福寺，特别赦免雍州囚犯。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor drove to Jianfu Temple to grant a special pardon to the Yongzhou prisoners.

古文：五月戊戌，左屯卫大将军兼检校洛州长史张仁亶为朔方道大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：五月一日，左屯卫大将军兼检校洛州长史张仁为朔方道大总管，以防备突厥。
English: On May 1, General Zuotunwei and the governor of the inspection school of Luo Province, Shi Zhangren, became the chief administrator of Shuofang University to prevent the Turks from coming.

古文：丙午，突厥默啜杀我行人臧思言。
现代文：九日，突厥默啜杀唐使者臧思言。
English: On the 9th, the Turks silently killed the Tang emissary.

古文：六月丁卯逆，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月一日，有日蚀。
English: On June 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：戊子，姚嶲道讨击使、侍御史唐九征击姚州叛蛮，破之，俘虏三千计，遂于其处勒石纪功焉。
现代文：二十二日，姚辒道讨击使、侍御史唐九征打击姚州反叛的蛮夷，攻破了他们，俘虏了三千人，于是在当地刻石记功。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, Yao Xingdao sent his envoy and attendant Shi Tang Jiu Zheng to fight against the rebellious barbarians in Yaozhou, defeated them, captured three thousand people, and then carved a stone in the local area to record the achievement.

古文：是夏，山东、河北二十余州旱，饥馑疾疫死者数千计，遣使赈恤之。
现代文：这年夏天，山东、河北二十多州大旱灾，饿死和瘟疫死亡的人数千，皇上派使者赈济抚恤他们。
English: In the summer of that year, more than 20 provinces in Shandong and Hebei suffered from a severe drought, and thousands of people died of starvation and plague. The emperor sent emissaries to provide relief for them.

古文：秋七月庚子，皇太子重俊与羽林将军李多祚等，率羽林千骑兵三百余人，诛武三思、武崇训，遂引兵自肃章门斩关而入。
现代文：秋七月五日，皇太子重俊与羽林将军李多祚等人率领羽林军一千骑兵中的三百多人，杀了武三思、武崇训，于是引兵从萧章门斩关锁进入。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the crown prince Chongjun and the general Li Daojun led more than 300 cavalrymen out of the 1,000 cavalrymen of the Ulin Army, killed Wu Sanshi and Wu Chongxun, and then the lead soldiers entered from the Xiaozhang Gate.

古文：帝惶遽登玄武楼，重俊引兵至下，上自临轩谕之，众遂散去，杀李多祚。
现代文：皇上惶恐急速登玄武楼，重俊带兵到玄武楼下，皇上亲自在殿堂前檐下的平台上告诉众兵不要反叛，众军于是散去，皇上杀李多祚。
English: Panicked, the emperor hurriedly went up to the Genbu Building, and Shigetoshi led the soldiers down to the Genbu Building. The emperor personally told the soldiers not to rebel on the platform in front of the hall, and the troops dispersed. The emperor killed Li Duan.

古文：重俊出奔至鄠县，为部下所杀。癸卯，大赦天下。
现代文：重俊出逃到县，被部下所杀。八日，大赦天下。
English: Chongjun fled to the county and was killed by his subordinates. On the 8th, he was pardoned.

古文：八月丙子，改玄武门为神武门，楼为制胜楼。
现代文：八月十一日，改玄武门为神武门，玄武楼改名为制胜楼。
English: On August 11, the Xuanwu Gate was renamed the Shenwu Gate, and the Xuanwu Building was renamed the Victory Building.

古文：丙戌，左仆射兼中书令魏元忠请致仕，授特进。
现代文：二十一日，左仆射兼中书令魏元忠请求辞官，皇上授给特进的加官。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wei Yuanzhong was asked to resign by his left-hand man, Sha Jian, and the emperor gave him a special promotion.

古文：九月丁酉，兵部尚书、郢国公宗楚客，左卫将军兼太府卿纪处讷并同中书门下三品；吏部侍郎兼左御史台中丞萧至忠为黄门侍郎兼左御史中丞、同中书门下三品；中书侍郎、东海郡公于惟谦国子祭酒，罢知政事。
现代文：九月二日，兵部尚书、郢国公宗楚客，左卫将军兼太府卿纪处讷都任同中书门下三品；吏部侍郎兼左御史台中丞萧至忠为黄门侍郎兼左御史中丞、同中书门下三品；中书侍郎、东海郡公于惟谦任国子祭酒，罢免知政事。
English: On September 2nd, Hyobusho Shoshu, Shikokokuko Chukaku, Sahi Shogun and Daifukyo Kishidokoro were all appointed to the same rank as Chushimon Sanbon; Rikibu Jiro and Sogoshidai Chujo were appointed to the same rank as Hokumen Jiro and Sogoshidai Chujo and Chushimon Sanbon; Chushimon Jiro and Tokaigun Kimi were appointed to the same rank as Kuniko Matsuzake and removed from the post of chancellor.

古文：庚子，上皇帝尊号曰应天神龙，皇后尊号曰顺天翊圣，大赦天下，改元为景龙。
现代文：五日，上皇帝尊号曰应天神龙，皇后尊号曰顺天翊圣，大赦天下，改元为景龙。
English: On the fifth day, the Emperor's honorific title was changed to Jinglong, and the Empress' honorific title was changed to Shun Tianshun Sheng, and the Emperor's honorific title was changed to Jinglong.

古文：两京文武官，三品已上赐爵一级，四品已下加一阶，外官赐勋一转。
现代文：东、西两京文武官员，三品以上官员爵加一级，四品以下官员加一阶，外官勋位升一等。
English: East and West Beijing civil and military officials, officials with three or more pins plus one grade, officials with four or fewer pins plus one grade, and foreign officials with one grade.

古文：景龙元年九月甲辰，特进魏元忠左授务川尉，言与重俊通谋也。
现代文：景龙元年九月九日，特进魏元忠降职为务川县尉，说他与重俊串通阴谋谋反。
English: On September 9th of the first year of Jinglong, Wei Yuanzhong, a special envoy, was demoted to lieutenant of Muxuan County, saying that he and Chongjun had conspired and plotted a rebellion.

古文：庚辰，侍中兼左御史台大夫杨再思为中书令，吏部尚书韦巨源、太府卿纪处讷并为侍中，侍中苏瑰为吏部尚书。
现代文：二十五日，侍中兼左御史台大夫杨再思为中书令，吏部尚书韦巨源、太府卿纪处讷都任侍中，侍中苏瑰为吏部尚书。
English: On the 25th, Yang Zaisi, a chamberlain and doctor of the Left Grand Historian's Office, became the chief clerk, Wei Jigen, the chief clerk of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Na Na, the chief clerk of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, both became the chief clerk, and Su Gui, the chief clerk of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, became the chief clerk.

古文：壬戌，改左右羽林卫千骑为万骑，仍分为左右。
现代文：二十七日，改左右羽林卫兵一千骑兵为一万骑兵，仍然分为左羽林卫与右羽林卫。
English: On the 27th, the 1,000 cavalry of the left and right guards were changed to 10,000 cavalry, still divided into the left and right guards.

古文：冬十月壬午，彗见于西，月余而灭。
现代文：冬十月十八日，彗星出现在西方，一月多才熄灭。
English: In winter, on October 18th, the comet appeared in the west, and did not go out for more than a month.

古文：壬午，皇后上《神武颂》，令两京及四大都督府皆刻之于石。
现代文：皇后奉上《神武颂》，命令东、西两京四大都督都雕刻在石碑上。
English: The empress presented the "Song of Shenwu" and ordered the four great governors of East and West Beijing to be carved on the stone monument.

古文：十二月乙丑朔，日有蚀之。丁丑，京师雨土。
现代文：十二月一日，有日蚀。十三日，京师的天上下了土。
English: On December 1st, there was a solar eclipse. On the 13th, the earth fell from the sky over Kyoto.

古文：二年春正月丙申，沧州雨雹，大如鸡卵。
现代文：景龙二年春正月二日，沧州下冰雹，大得像鸡蛋。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of Jinglong Spring, Cangzhou was hit by a hailstorm as big as an egg.

古文：二月辛未，幸左金吾大将军、陈国公陆颂宅。
现代文：二月八日，皇上驾到左金吾大将军、陈国公陆颂的住宅。
English: On February 8th, the emperor drove to the residence of the Great General of the Left Kingu, Chen Guogong Lussong.

古文：皇后自言衣箱中裙上有五色云起，令画工图之，以示百僚，乃大赦天下。
现代文：韦皇后自己说，衣箱中的裙子有五色云飘起，皇上命令图工画出来给百官观看，于是大赦天下。
English: Empress Wei herself said that the skirt in the wardrobe had five-colored clouds floating up, and the emperor ordered the artist to draw it out for the officials to see, so she pardoned the world.

古文：癸未夜，天保星坠西南，有声如雷，野雉皆雊。
现代文：二十日，天保星坠落到西南方，响声如雷，野鸡都叫。
English: On the 20th, Tianbo Xing fell to the southwest, the noise was thunderous, and the pheasants were crowing.

古文：乙酉，帝以后服有庆云之瑞，大赦天下。
现代文：二十二日，皇上因为皇后衣裙上云的吉兆，大赦天下。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor pardoned the world because of the auspicious cloud on the queen's dress.

古文：内外五品已上母妻各加邑号一等，无妻者听授女；天下妇人八十已上，版授乡、县、郡等君。
现代文：内外五品以上官员的母亲和妻子各加邑君称号，没有妻子者听任他们将邑君称号给予女儿；天下妇人八十岁以上的人，授予乡君、县君、郡君等虚衔，以示荣宠。
English: The mothers and wives of officials with five or more court ranks at home and abroad were each given the title of "yokojun," and those who did not have wives allowed them to give the title of "yokojun" to their daughters; women over the age of eighty were awarded the fictitious titles of "sokojun," "kenjun" and "gunjun" to show their honor and favor.

古文：三月丙子，朔方道大总管张仁亶筑受降城于河上。
现代文：三月十三日，朔方道大总管张仁在河上建筑受降城。
English: On March 13th, Zhang Ren, the general manager of Shuo Fang Dao, built a city on the river.

古文：夏四月庚午，左散骑常侍、乐寿郡王、驸马都尉武攸暨让郡王，改封楚国公。
现代文：夏四月八日，左散骑常侍、乐寿郡王、驸马都尉武攸暨辞让郡王，改封为楚国公。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zuo Sanzhijie Changzhi, Le Shou Gu Wang, and Xi Ma Du Fu Wu Yu Cum Zhen Gu Wang were promoted to Duke of Chu.

古文：癸未，修文馆增置大学士八员，直学士十二员。
现代文：二十一日，修文馆增设大学士八名，直学士十二名。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Shubun Museum added eight university scholars and twelve direct bachelors.

古文：己丑，幸长乐公主庄，即日还宫。
现代文：二十七日，皇上驾到长乐公主的庄园，当天回宫。
English: On the 27th, the emperor drove to Princess Changle's estate and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：六月丁亥，改太史局为太史监，罢隶秘书省。
现代文：六月二十六日，改太史局为太史监，不再隶属于秘书省。
English: On June 26, the Office of Naval History was renamed the Office of Naval History Supervisor, and was no longer affiliated with the Ministry of the Secretariat.

古文：秋七月辛卯，台州地震。
现代文：秋七月一日，台州地震。
English: Autumn On July 1, the Taizhou earthquake occurred.

古文：癸巳，左屯卫大将军、摄右御史台大夫、朔方道行营大总管、韩国公张仁亶同中书门下三品。
现代文：三日，左屯卫大将军、摄右御史台大夫、朔方道行营大总管、韩国公张仁任同中书门下三品。
English: On the third day, General Zuotunwei, the Director of the General History Department of the People's Republic of China, the General Manager of the Shuo Fang Road Camp, and the South Korean official Zhang Ren were appointed as the three prizes of the school.

古文：有赤气竟天，其光烛地，经三日乃止。
现代文：有赤色气布满整个天空，光采照耀大地，经过三天才止。
English: A reddish atmosphere filled the entire sky, shining brightly on the earth. It lasted for three days.

古文：冬十一月庚申，突厥首领娑葛叛，自立为可汗，遣弟遮弩率众犯塞。
现代文：九月，黄雾昏暗。冬十一月二日，突厥首领娑葛背叛，自立为突厥可汗，派遣弟弟遮弩率领众军侵犯边塞。
English: On November 2nd, the winter, the Turkic leader, Zangge, turned traitor and declared himself the Turkic Khan, sending his brother, Zhaojun, to invade the border fortress at the head of his army.

古文：己卯，以安乐公主出降，假皇后仗出于禁中，以盛其仪，帝及后御安福楼以观之。
现代文：二十一日，因为安乐公主下嫁，借助于皇后的仪仗从宫禁中出发，以使公主的礼仪更为盛大，皇上及皇后驾到安福楼而观看。
English: On the twenty-first day, because Princess Anle was getting married, with the help of the empress's ceremonial, they set out from the palace to make the princess's etiquette more grand. The emperor and empress drove to Anfu Tower to watch.

古文：礼毕，大赦天下，赐酺三日。
现代文：礼毕，大赦天下，赐给臣下大宴饮三天。
English: Come, let's have a general amnesty and give our vassals a grand feast for three days.

古文：癸未，安西都护牛师奖与娑葛战于火烧城，师奖败绩，没于阵。
现代文：二十五日，安西都护牛师奖在火烧城与娑葛作战，师奖大败，死在阵战之中。
English: On the 25th day of the month, An Xidu's Cowherd Shih Huan fought with the Grasshopper in the Burning City. Shih Huan was defeated and died in the battle.

古文：是冬，西京吏部置两侍郎铨试，东都又置两铨，恣行嘱请。
现代文：这年冬天，西京吏部设置两个侍郎来选拔考试官员，东都又设两个侍郎来考试选拔官员，随意请托、关说。
English: This winter, the West Beijing Cadre Department set up two attendants to select exam officials, and the East set up two attendants to select exam officials. Please feel free to ask.

古文：又有斜封授官，预用秋阙。
现代文：又有皇上不经外廷官员下达，自己亲笔书写命令封官的，预先就使用秋天科举考试选官的名额。
English: In addition, some emperors issued their own written orders to seal officials without the approval of officials from the Outer Court, and used the autumn imperial examinations to select officials in advance.

古文：三年春正月丁卯，黄雾四塞。
现代文：景龙三年春正月九日，黄雾四面堵塞。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the third year of Jinglong, the yellow fog was blocked on all sides.

古文：癸酉，幸荐福寺。
现代文：十五日，皇上驾到荐福寺。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor drove to Jianfu Temple.

古文：乙亥，宴侍臣及近亲于梨园亭。
现代文：十七日，皇上在梨园亭宴请侍臣及近亲。
English: On the 17th, the emperor held a banquet for his courtiers and close relatives at the Pear Garden Pavilion.

古文：二月己丑，幸玄武门，与近臣观宫女大酺，既而左右分曹，共争胜负。
现代文：二月二日，皇上驾到玄武门，与近侍之臣观看宫女们大宴饮，不久，又让宫女们分为左右两班，共同来竞争喝酒谁胜谁负。
English: On February 2nd, the emperor drove to the Xuanwu Gate to watch the grand banquet of the courtesans with the courtiers. Soon, the courtesans were divided into two groups, left and right, to compete against each other in drinking.

古文：上又遣宫女为市肆，鬻卖众物，令宰臣及公卿为商贾，与之交易，因为忿争，言辞猥亵。上与后观之，以为笑乐。
现代文：皇上又派遣宫女在宫中设立买卖市场，命令大臣及公卿等人做商人，与宫女交易。因为买卖双方忿怒争论，双方言辞丑恶低下，皇上与韦皇后观看，以资欢笑快乐。
English: The emperor also sent his concubine to set up a trading market in the palace, and ordered ministers and nobles to act as merchants and trade with the concubine. Because the buyers and sellers were angry and argued, and the words of both sides were ugly and low, the emperor and the Queen of Wei watched and laughed with joy.

古文：壬寅，侍中、舒国公韦巨源为尚书左仆射，并同中书门下三品。
现代文：十五日，侍中、舒国公韦巨源为尚书左仆射，并任同中书门下三品。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wei Jiuyuan, Shuguo's chamberlain, was appointed as Shang Shu's second-in-command, and he was also appointed as the third-in-command of Zhong Shu.

古文：戊午，兵部尚书、郢国公宗楚客中书令，中书侍郎、酂国公萧至忠为侍中，太府卿韦嗣立为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品，中书侍郎、检校吏部侍郎崔湜同中书门下平章事，兵部侍郎赵彦昭为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月一日，兵部尚书、郢国公宗楚客为中书令；中书侍郎、赞阝国公萧至忠为侍中；太府卿韦嗣立为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品；中书侍郎、检校吏部侍郎崔氵是任同中书门下平章事；兵部侍郎赵彦昭为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On March 1st, Hyobu Shosho and Shikokokukongosong Chukak were appointed as Chusho Rei; Chusho Jiro and Zangokukongosong Xiao Zhitong were appointed as Jiro; Dafu-kyo Wei Xi was appointed as Hyobu Shosho and Shikokongosong Sanpon; Chusho Jiro and Kengaku Rikibu Jiro were appointed as Shikokongosong Taira; Hyobu Jiro Zhao Hikosho was appointed as Shikokong Taira and Shikokong Taira.

古文：庚申，日赤紫色，无光。
现代文：三月，日光赤紫色，无光。
English: In March, the sunlight is reddish-purple and there is no light.

古文：戊寅，礼部尚书兼扬州大都督、曹国公韦温为太子少保兼扬州大都督、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十一日，礼部尚书兼扬州大都督、曹国公韦温为太子少保兼扬州大都督、同中书门下三品。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shang Shuxu of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Yangzhou Grand Governor, and Wei Wen, the Prince of Cao Guoguo and Yangzhou Grand Governor, were promoted to the third grade.

古文：太常少卿兼检校吏部侍郎郑愔同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太常少卿兼检校吏部侍郎郑忄音任同中书门下平章事。
English: Zheng Yuyin, who was also a junior high school vice-principal and an attendant of the inspection and inspection department, was appointed as the vice-principal of the school.

古文：夏五月丙戌，崔湜、郑愔坐赃，湜贬襄州刺史，愔贬江州司马。
现代文：夏五月，崔氵是、郑忄音贪赃犯法，崔氵是被贬为襄州刺史，郑忄音被贬为江州司马。
English: In the summer of May, Cui Wei and Zheng Yuyin were convicted of corruption, Cui Wei was relegated to the history of Xiangzhou, and Zheng Yuyin was relegated to the Sima of Jiangzhou.

古文：六月癸丑，太白昼见于东井。
现代文：六月八日，太白星白昼在东井星座出现。
English: On June 8th, the Taibai Star appeared in the daytime in the constellation of the East Well.

古文：庚子，以经籍多缺，使天下搜括。
现代文：十五日，因为经籍大多缺乏，命令天下搜取。
English: On the fifteenth day, because most of the scriptures were missing, he ordered the whole country to be searched.

古文：壬寅，以旱，避正殿，减膳，亲录囚徒。
现代文：十七日，因为旱灾，皇上避开正殿，减少膳食，亲自审查并记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 17th, because of the drought, the emperor avoided the main hall, reduced meals, and personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' crimes.

古文：癸卯，尚书右仆射杨再思薨。
现代文：十八日，尚书右仆射杨再思去世。
English: On the 18th, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Yang Jiasi passed away.

古文：秋七月乙卯朔，镇军大将军、右骁卫将军、兼知太史事迦业至忠配流柳州。
现代文：秋七月一日，镇军大将军、右骁卫将军、兼主持太史事的迦业至忠发配到柳州。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the general of the town army, the general of the right guard, and the presiding officer of the historical event, Ka Ye Zhizhong, were sent to Liuzhou.

古文：丙辰，娑葛遣使来降。
现代文：二日，娑葛派使者前来投降。
English: On the second day, the envoys of the Zhang Ge faction came to surrender.

古文：辛酉，幸梨园亭，宴侍臣学士。
现代文：七日，皇上驾到梨园亭，宴请侍臣学士。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor drove to the Pear Garden Pavilion and held a banquet for the courtier and scholar.

古文：皇后表请诸妇人不因夫子而加邑号者，许同见任职事官，听子孙用廕，从之。
现代文：皇后上表章请求，所有妇人不凭借丈夫、儿子而加封邑君称号者，同意她们与现任职事官相同，听任子孙庇荫，皇上同意了。
English: At the request of the Empress on the table, all women who do not rely on their husbands and sons to add the title of prince agreed that they would be the same as the current officials and would be allowed to patronize their children and grandchildren. The Emperor agreed.

古文：壬戌，安福门外设无遮斋，三品已上行香。
现代文：八日，在安福门外设立布施斋饭的佛教法令，三品以上官员行香。
English: On the 8th, a Buddhist decree was issued to set up a sacrificial meal outside the Anfu Gate, and more than three officials carried incense.

古文：癸亥，御承庆殿，录囚徒。
现代文：九日，皇上驾到承庆殿，亲自审查并记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 9th, the emperor drove to Chengqing Palace to personally review and record the prisoners' charges.

古文：壬午，遣使册骁卫大将军、兼卫尉卿、金河王突骑施守忠为归化可汗。
现代文：二十八日，皇上派遣使者册封骁卫大将军、兼卫尉卿、金河王突骑施守忠为归化可汗。
English: On the 28th, the emperor sent an envoy to confer the titles of Grand Admiral of the Imperial Guards, Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and King of the Jin River on Shishou Zhong as the naturalized khan.

古文：八月乙酉，特进、行中书令、赵国公李峤为特进、同中书门下三品，侍中、酂国公萧至忠为中书令，特进、郧国公韦安石为侍中。
现代文：八月一日，特进、兼代中书令、赵国公李峤为特进、同中书门下三品；侍中、赞阝国公萧至忠为中书令；特进、郧国公韦安石为侍中。
English: On August 1st, Zhao Guogong Li Yao was promoted to special envoy and acting chancellor, and became a special envoy and the third-ranked chancellor; Zhan Guogong Xiao Zhizhong was promoted to special envoy and acting chancellor; Wei Anshi was promoted to special envoy and the third-ranked chancellor.

古文：庚寅，诸州各置司田参军一员。
现代文：六日，各州各设置司田参军一名。
English: On the 6th, one person from each prefecture volunteered to join the army.

古文：吐蕃赞普遣使勃禄星奉进国信、赞普祖娑进物，及上中宫、安国相王、太平公主有差。
现代文：吐蕃赞普派遣使者勃禄星奉上作为凭证的符节文书、赞普祖娑献上宝物，对上中宫、安国相王、太平公主都有等级差别。
English: There is a difference in rank between the Upper Middle Palace, the An Guoxiang King, and the Taiping Princess.

古文：壬辰，遣十使巡察天下。
现代文：八日，皇上派遣十位使者巡察天下。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor sent ten emissaries to inspect the country.

古文：有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：命令特进佩带鱼符。
English: Order the special advance to wear fish charms.

古文：令特进佩鱼。
现代文：散官佩带鱼符，从此开始。
English: San official wearing fish charms, from now on.

古文：散职佩鱼，自此始也。乙未，亲送朔方军总管、韩国公张仁亶于通化门外，上制序赋诗。
现代文：十一日，皇上亲自送朔方军总管、韩国公张仁到通化门外，皇上亲自作序赋诗。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor personally sent the commander-in-chief of the army of the Shuo side, the Korean public Zhang Ren, to Tonghua Gate, and the emperor personally composed the prelude.

古文：乙巳，幸安乐公主山亭，宴侍臣、学士，赐缯帛有差。
现代文：二十一日，皇上驾到安乐公主山亭，宴请侍臣、学士，赐给他们绸缎各有等级差别。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor drove to the mountain pavilion of Princess Anle, invited courtiers and scholars to a banquet, and gave them silk and satin with different grades.

古文：九月壬戌，幸九曲亭子，宴侍臣、学士。
现代文：九月九日，皇上驾到九曲亭子，宴请侍臣和学士。
English: On September 9, the emperor drove to the Jiuqu Pavilion and held a banquet for courtiers and scholars.

古文：戊辰，吏部尚书、怀县公苏瑰为尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十五日，吏部尚书、怀县公苏瑰为尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 15th, Shang Shuxu from the cadre department and Su Gui from Huai County were appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and the two were promoted to the third grade.

古文：冬十月庚寅，幸安乐公主金城新宅，宴侍臣、学士。
现代文：冬十月八日，皇上驾到安乐公主金城新住宅，宴请侍臣及学士。
English: In the winter of October 8th, the emperor drove to the new residence of Princess Anle in Jincheng, where he held a banquet for courtiers and scholars.

古文：十一月乙丑，亲祀南郊，皇后登坛亚献，左仆射舒国公韦巨源为终献。
现代文：十一月十三日，皇上亲到南郊祭祀天地，皇上祭完后，皇后登坛祭祀，最后由左仆射舒国公韦巨源祭祀。
English: On November 13th, the emperor's relatives went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth. After the emperor's sacrifice was over, the empress ascended the altar to offer sacrifices, and finally, the left-hand servant, Eshokukongwei Jigen, offered sacrifices.

古文：大赦天下，见系囚徒及十恶咸赦除之，杂犯流人并放还。
现代文：大赦天下，被关押囚犯以及十恶不赦的大罪囚犯都加以赦免，其他各类犯人都放他们归家。
English: The whole country was amnestied, prisoners and prisoners of heinous crimes were pardoned, and other types of prisoners were allowed to return home.

古文：京文武三品已上赐爵一等，四品已下加一阶，京官及应袭岳牧入三品五品减考，高年版授。
现代文：京中文武官员三品以上赐爵位一等，四品以下加爵一阶，京官及应该承袭的州牧三品、五品的减去考核，高龄的人授予职衔而不实授官职。
English: Beijing civil and military officials with three or more pins were awarded a first-class knighthood, and those with four or fewer pins were awarded a first-class knighthood. Beijing officials and provincial pastors who should inherit three pins and five pins were subtracted from the assessment, and senior people were awarded titles without actually being awarded official positions.

古文：大酺三日。
现代文：大聚饮三天。
English: Three days of partying and feasting.

古文：壬申，幸见子陵。
现代文：二十日，皇上驾到见子陵。
English: On the 20th, the emperor drove to see his son's mausoleum.

古文：甲戌，开府仪同三司、芮国公豆卢钦望薨。
现代文：二十二日，开府仪同三司、芮国公豆卢钦望去世。
English: On the 22nd, Lu Qinwang, the leader of the Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji and the Gongzu of Shan State, passed away.

古文：吐蕃赞普遣其大臣尚赞吐来逆女。
现代文：吐蕃赞普派遣大臣尚赞吐来迎娶安乐公主。
English: Tubo Zampu sent his minister Shang Zampu to marry Princess Anle.

古文：十二月壬戌，前尚书右仆射、宋国公唐休璟为太子少师、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十二月十日，前尚书右仆射、宋国公唐休王景为太子少师、同中书门下三品。
English: On December 10th, Wang Jing, the former right-hand man of Shang Shuxu and the prince of the Song Dynasty, became the prince's apprentice, and was awarded the third prize in the same school.

古文：甲子，上幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：十二日，皇上驾到新丰之温汤。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor drove to the hot spring of Xinfeng.

古文：庚子，幸兵部尚书韦嗣立庄，封嗣立为逍遥公，上亲制序赋诗，便游白鹿观。
现代文：十八日，皇上驾到兵部尚书韦嗣立的庄园，封韦嗣立为逍遥公，皇上亲自作序言赋诗，顺便游玩了白鹿观。
English: On the 18th, the emperor drove to the manor of the military commander, Shang Shuhe Weizhong, and appointed Weizhong as the procurator. The emperor personally wrote the preface to the poem, and also visited the White Deer View.

古文：甲辰，曲赐新丰县，百姓给复一年，行从官赐勋一转。
现代文：二十二日，特别恩赐新丰县百姓免除一年赋税徭役，随行陪从官员赐勋升一等。
English: On the 22nd, the people of Xinfeng County were granted a one-year exemption from tax and service, and the accompanying officials were awarded first-class honors.

古文：是日幸骊山。
现代文：这天皇上驾到骊山。
English: The emperor rode up to Shaoshan.

古文：乙巳，至自温汤。
现代文：二十三日，皇上从温泉回来。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：乙酉，令诸司长官向醴泉坊看泼胡王乞寒戏。
现代文：二十七日，命令各司长官到醴泉坊看泼胡王乞寒戏。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the directors of all departments to go to Shuxenfang to watch the cold play of the beggar.

古文：四年春正月乙卯，于化度寺门设无遮大斋。
现代文：四年春正月三日，皇上在化度寺门前设立布施斋饭的佛教大法会。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Spring, the Emperor established a Buddhist grand puja for offering meals in front of the gate of Kado-ji Temple.

古文：丙寅上元夜，帝与皇后微行观灯，因幸中书令萧至忠之第。
现代文：十四日上元的夜晚，皇帝与皇后穿着便服私下在民间看花灯，顺便驾到中书令萧至忠的府第。
English: On the evening of the 14th day of the lunar month, the emperor and empress, dressed in casual clothes, privately watched the lanterns among the people, and drove to the residence of the Chinese scholar Xiao Zhizhong.

古文：是夜，放宫女数千人看灯，因此多有亡逸者。
现代文：这夜，放宫女数千人在外面看灯，因此有不少逃跑的人。
English: On this night, thousands of courtesans were watching the lanterns outside, so there were many people who ran away.

古文：丁卯夜，又微行看灯。
现代文：正月十五日夜，皇上与皇后又穿便服私下在民间看花灯。
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day of the first month, the Emperor and Empress put on civilian clothes and went to see the lanterns in private.

古文：丁丑，命左骁卫大将军、河源军使杨矩为送金城公主入吐蕃使。
现代文：二十五日，命令左骁卫大将军、河源军使杨矩为朝廷送金城公主入吐蕃的使节。
English: On the 25th, he ordered General Zuo Jianwei and the commander of the Heyuan Army, Yang Rui, to send an envoy for the Imperial Court to escort the Jincheng Princess to Tubo.

古文：己卯，幸始平，送金城公主归吐蕃。
现代文：二十七日，皇上驾到始平，送金城公主下嫁吐蕃。
English: On the 27th, the emperor drove to Shiheping to see off the Jincheng Princess to be married.

古文：二月壬午，曲赦咸阳、始平，改始平为金城县。
现代文：二月一日，特别赦免咸阳、始平的赋税。改始平县为金城县。
English: On February 1, Xianyang and Xiping were granted a special tax amnesty, and Xiping County was renamed Jincheng County.

古文：便幸长安令王光辅马嵬北原庄。
现代文：皇上顺便驾到长安令王光辅马嵬北原庄。
English: By the way, the emperor drove to Chang'an to order Wang Guangfu's horse-drawn carriage to the Beiyuan Village.

古文：癸未，至自金城。
现代文：二日，皇上从金城回来。
English: On the second day, the emperor returned from Jincheng.

古文：庚戌，令中书门下供奉官五品已上、文武三品已上并诸学士等，自芳林门入，集于梨园球场，分朋拔河，帝与皇后、公主亲往观之。
现代文：二十九日，命令中书门下供奉官五品以上、文武三品以上官员及所有学士等人，从芳林门进入在梨园球场集合，分成两队来拔河，皇上与皇后、公主亲自前往观看拔河比赛。
English: On the 29th, it was ordered that the officials of the Fifth Rank and above, the officials of the Third Rank and above, and all the bachelors and other people under the Book Gate should enter the Pear Garden Stadium from the Fanglin Gate and divide into two teams to play the tug-of-war. The Emperor, the Empress and the Princess personally went to watch the tug-of-war.

古文：三月甲寅，幸临渭亭修禊饮，赐群官柳棬以辟恶。
现代文：三月三日，皇上驾到临渭亭水边嬉游采兰，饮酒以驱除不祥，并赐给群官柳木条以避邪。
English: On March 3, the emperor drove to the water's edge of Linyi Pavilion, swam with cranes, drank alcohol to drive away bad luck, and gave willow strips to officials to ward off evil.

古文：丙辰，游宴桃花园。
现代文：五日，皇上在桃花园游玩宴饮。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor had a banquet in the peach garden.

古文：庚申，京师雨木冰，井溢。
现代文：九日，京师雨雪凝结成冰粘附在树上，井水漫涨溢出井外。
English: On the 9th, the rain and snow of the Beijing Division condensed into ice and adhered to the trees, and the well water rose and overflowed outside the well.

古文：壬戌，赐宰臣已下内样巾子。
现代文：十一日，皇上赐给从宰相以下官员内样巾子。
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor gave officials from the Prime Minister downwards a sample handkerchief.

古文：夏四月丁亥，上游樱桃园，引中书门下五品已上诸司长官学士等入芳林园尝樱桃，便令马上口摘，置酒为乐。
现代文：夏四月六日，皇上游樱桃园，带领中书省、门下省五品以上各司长官、学士等人进入芳林园品尝樱桃，并命令百官在马上用口摘樱桃，设酒宴为乐。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, in the upstream of the emperor's visit to the cherry orchard, he led the heads of departments and academicians from the Ministry of Chinese Literature and the five or more subordinate provinces to enter the Fanglin Orchard to taste the cherries, and ordered the officials to immediately pick the cherries with their mouths and set up a wine banquet for fun.

古文：乙未，幸隆庆池，结彩为楼，宴侍臣，泛舟戏乐，因幸礼部尚书窦希宅。
现代文：十四日，皇上驾到隆庆池，在楼上结各色彩花，宴请侍臣，在池中泛舟游戏快乐，并顺便驾到礼部尚书窦希的住宅。
English: On the 14th, the emperor drove to the Longqing Pool, tied flowers of various colors on the upper floor, invited courtiers to a banquet, enjoyed a game of rafting in the pool, and drove to the residence of the etiquette official, Shang Shu Douxi.

古文：五月辛酉，秘书监、赐虢王邕改封汴王。
现代文：五月十一日，秘书监、嗣虢王邕改封为汴王。
English: On May 11th, the post of secretary supervisor and successor of the king of the eunuchs was changed to the king of the eunuchs.

古文：乙丑，皇后请加嗣王三品。
现代文：十五日，皇后请求加给嗣虢王邕为三品。
English: On the fifteenth day, the empress requested that the heir be given the title of "King of the Three Kingdoms."

古文：丁卯，前许州司兵参军燕钦融上书，言皇后干预国政，安乐公主、武延秀、宗楚客等同危宗社。
现代文：十七日，前任许州司兵参军燕钦融上书，说皇后干预朝政，安乐公主、武延秀、宗楚客等人共同危害宗社国家。
English: On the 17th, Yan Qin Rong, a former Xuzhou sergeant who joined the army, wrote a letter saying that the empress had interfered in court politics, and that Princess Anle, Wu Yanxiu, Zong Chu and others had jointly harmed the Soshe country.

古文：帝怒，召钦融廷见，扑杀之。
现代文：皇上大怒，召燕钦融在朝廷相见，用鞭打死。
English: The emperor was furious, summoned Yan Qin Rong to meet him at the court, and whipped him to death.

古文：时安乐公主志欲皇后临朝称制，而求立为皇太女，自是与后合谋进鸩。
现代文：当时安乐公主想要皇后代管朝政，而自己可立为皇太女，从此与皇后合谋进鸩毒杀皇上。
English: At that time, Princess Anle wanted the descendants of the emperor to be in charge of the government, and she wanted to be crown princess. From then on, she conspired with the empress to poison and kill the emperor.

古文：六月壬午，帝遇毒，崩于神龙殿，年五十五。
现代文：六月二日，皇上被毒，死在神龙殿，享年五十五岁。
English: On June 2, the emperor was poisoned and died in the Dragon Hall at the age of fifty-five.

古文：秘不发丧，皇后亲总庶政。
现代文：皇后保密，不发布丧事，皇后亲自统领朝政。
English: The Empress keeps everything confidential, does not release information about funerals, and personally leads the government of the dynasty.

古文：癸未，以刑部尚书裴谈、工部尚书张锡并同中书门下三品，依旧东都留守。
现代文：三日，以刑部尚书裴谈、工部尚书张锡同任同中书门下三品，依旧任东都留守。
English: On the third day, with the Penal Department's Shang Shu Pei Tuan and the Ministry of Industry's Shang Shu Zhang Xi serving as the same person and the three products under the middle school's door, they were still left behind.

古文：吏部尚书张喜福、中书侍郎岑羲、吏部侍郎崔湜并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：吏部尚书张嘉福、中书侍郎岑羲、吏部侍郎崔氵是都任同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhang Jiafu, the official secretary of the General Office, the attendant of the General Office, and the attendant of the General Office, Cui Wei, were all appointed as the subordinates of the General Office.

古文：又命左右金吾卫大将军赵承恩、右监门大将军薛简帅兵五百人往均州，备谯王重福。
现代文：又命令左右金吾大将军赵承恩、右监门大将军薛简率兵五百人前往均州，以防备谯王重福。
English: He also ordered General Zhao Cheng'en and General Xue Jian to lead 500 soldiers to Junzhou to prepare for the attack.

古文：立温王重茂为皇太子。
现代文：立温王重茂为皇太子。
English: Wen Wang Shigemo was appointed crown prince.

古文：甲申，发丧于太极殿，宣遗制。
现代文：四日，在太极殿发布丧事，宣告皇上遗诏。
English: On the 4th, a memorial service was held at the Taiji Temple, and the Emperor's last will and testament was announced.

古文：皇太后临朝，大赦天下，改元为唐隆。
现代文：皇太后临朝掌管朝政，大赦天下，改年号为唐隆。
English: The Empress Dowager Lintong took charge of the imperial government, granted amnesty to the whole country, and changed the era name to Tanglong.

古文：见系囚徒常赦所不免者咸赦除之，长流任放归田里，负犯痕瘕咸从洗涤。
现代文：被关押囚犯，凡是一向不能赦免者一律都加以赦免，长期流放外任官员放回故乡，犯法囚徒脸上有痕迹刻印者都让他们洗涤掉。
English: All prisoners who have never been pardoned will be pardoned, foreign officials who have been exiled for a long time will be sent back to their hometowns, and prisoners who have marks on their faces will have them washed off.

古文：内外官三品已上赐爵一级，四品已下加一阶。
现代文：内外官员三品以上者赐爵一级，四品以下官员加一阶。
English: Foreign and domestic officials with three or more pins are awarded a first-class knighthood, and officials with four or fewer pins are awarded an additional rank.

古文：以安国相王旦为太子太师。
现代文：以安国相王旦为太子太师。
English: With Wang Dan, the Minister of State Security, as the prince's teacher.

古文：进封雍王守礼为邠王，寿春郡王成器为宋王，宗正卿晋封新兴王。
现代文：晋封雍王守礼为王，寿春郡王成器为宋王，宗正卿李晋封新兴王。
English: Yong Wang Shurei was crowned king, Wang Chengqi of Shuchun County was crowned king of Song, and Zong Zhengqing Li Jinfeng was crowned emerging king.

古文：丁亥，皇太子即帝位于柩前，时年十六。
现代文：七日，皇太子重茂在先帝灵柩前即皇帝位，时年十六岁。
English: On the seventh day, Crown Prince Shigemo ascended the throne in front of the former emperor's coffin, at the age of sixteen.

古文：皇太后韦氏临朝称制，大赦天下，常赦所不原者咸赦除之。
现代文：皇太后韦氏代理朝政，大赦天下，长时间不能赦免者都一概加以赦免。
English: The Empress Dowager Dowager Wei, acting as regent, pardoned the whole country, and those who could not be pardoned for a long time were all pardoned.

古文：内外兵马诸亲掌，仍令韦温总知。
现代文：内外兵马由所有韦氏亲族掌握，又命令韦温总管主持。
English: The troops and horses at home and abroad were controlled by all relatives of the Wei clan, and Wei Wen was ordered to preside over them.

古文：时召诸府折冲兵五万人分屯京城，列为左右营，诸韦子侄分统之。
现代文：当时太后又诏令各州府折冲兵五万人分别驻扎在京城，列为左营、右营，所有韦氏子、侄们分别统率。
English: At that time, the empress dowager also decreed that 50,000 soldiers from all prefectures should be stationed in the capital separately, classified as the left battalion and the right battalion, and all Wei's sons and nephews should lead them separately.

古文：壬辰，遣使诸道巡抚，纪处讷关内道，张嘉福河北道，岑羲河南道。
现代文：十二日，派使者到各道巡抚慰问，纪处讷到关内道，张嘉福到河北道，岑羲到河南道。
English: On the 12th, an envoy was sent to the provincial governors of each province to offer condolences, and the disciplinary authority sent a delegation to Guanei Province, Zhang Jiafu to Hebei Province, and Zou to Henan Province.

古文：庚子夜，临淄王讳举兵诛诸韦、武，皆枭首于安福门外，韦太后为乱兵所杀。
现代文：二十日夜晚，临淄王李隆基发兵诛杀所有姓韦的、姓武的宗族，都把这些韦太后、武则天的亲族在安福门外斩首，韦太后被乱兵所杀。
English: On the evening of the 20th, Linyi King Li Longji sent soldiers to kill all surnamed Wei and surnamed Wu, and they all beheaded these Empress Dowager Wei and relatives of Emperor Wu Zetian outside the Anfu Gate. Empress Dowager Wei was killed by the soldiers.

古文：九月丁卯，百官上谥曰孝和皇帝，庙号中宗。
现代文：九月十九日，百官奉上谥号曰孝和皇帝，庙号中宗。
English: On September 19th, hundreds of officials were given the posthumous names of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Zhongzong.

古文：睿宗玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝，讳旦，高宗第八子，中宗母弟。龙朔二年六月己未，生于长安。
现代文：十一月二日，葬在定陵。天宝十三年二月，改谥号曰大和大圣大昭孝皇帝。睿宗玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝名旦，高宗的第八个儿子，中宗同母的弟弟，龙朔二年六月一日，出生在长安。
English: He was buried in Dingling Mausoleum on November 2nd. In February of the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasures, his name was changed to Dai and Dasheng Dazhao Xiao Emperor. Ruizong Xuan Zhen Da Da Sheng Daxing Xiao Emperor Mingtan, the eighth son of Gao Zong and the younger brother of Zhong Zong, was born in Chang'an on June 1st of the 2nd year of the Long Shuo.

古文：其年封殷王，遥领冀州大都督、单于大都护、右金吾卫大将军。
现代文：这一年封为殷王，被任命为冀州大都督、单于大都护、右金吾卫大将军，但不到任。
English: In this year, he was given the title of Yin Wang, and was appointed as Jizhou Grand Governor, Shan Yu Grand Protector, and U Kingu Wei Grand General, but he did not take office.

古文：及长，谦恭孝友，好学，工草隶，尤爱文字训诂之书。
现代文：等到年长，谦恭而孝敬父母友爱兄弟，好学习，擅于草书和隶书，尤其喜欢文字训诂之书。
English: When they are older, they are humble and filial, respect their parents, love their brothers and sisters, are good at learning, good at cursive and cursive, and especially like the book of the text.

古文：乾封元年，徙封豫王。
现代文：乾封元年，改封为豫王。
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, it was renamed Henwang.

古文：总章二年，徙封冀王。
现代文：总章二年，改封为冀王。
English: In the second year of the general chapter, he was renamed Ji Wang.

古文：上初名旭轮，至是去 旭 字。
现代文：皇上初名为旭轮，至此去掉 旭 字，单名轮。
English: The Emperor's first name was "Asahiro," so the "Asahiro" was removed, and it became a single-name wheel.

古文：上元二年，徙封相王，拜右卫大将军。
现代文：上元二年，改封为相王，任命为右卫大将军。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of King of the Three Kingdoms, and was appointed as the General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：仪凤三年，迁洛牧；改名旦，徙封豫王。
现代文：仪凤三年，任为洛牧；改名为旦，改封为豫王。
English: In the third year of Yi Feng, he was appointed as Luo Mu; his name was changed to Dan, and his title was changed to Yu Wang.

古文：嗣圣元年，则天临朝，废中宗为庐陵王，立豫王为皇帝，仍临朝称制。
现代文：嗣圣元年，武则天临朝代行朝政，废中宗为庐陵王，立豫王旦为皇帝，武则天仍旧临朝代行国政。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Wuzetentian became the representative of the imperial court to carry out the imperial government, the abolished Zhongzong became the king of Huling, and the established Yu Wangdan became the emperor. Wuzetentian was still the representative of the imperial court to carry out the national government.

古文：及革命，改国号为周，降帝为皇嗣，令依旧名轮，徙居东宫，其具仪一比皇太子。
现代文：等到武则天革了唐朝的命，改国号为周，把皇帝李旦降为皇嗣，令他依旧名为轮，移居东宫，其仪仗完全同皇太子一样。
English: Wait until Wu Zetian revoked the order of the Tang Dynasty, changed the country name to Zhou, reduced the emperor Li Dan to the imperial heir, so that he was still called Ren, moved to the East Palace, and his ceremonial battle was completely the same as the crown prince.

古文：圣历元年，中宗自房陵还。
现代文：圣历元年，中宗从房陵还朝。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, Zhong Zong returned to China from Fangling.

古文：帝数称疾不朝，请让位于中宗。
现代文：皇上李旦屡次称病不上朝，请求让位给中宗。
English: Emperor Li Dan repeatedly said that he would not ascend to the throne due to illness, and requested to give way to Zhongzong.

古文：则天遂立中宗为皇太子，封帝为相王，又改名旦，授太子右卫率。
现代文：武则天于是立中宗为皇太子，封帝为相王，又改名为旦，授予太子右卫率之职。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu Zetian made Zhongzong the crown prince, enthroned him as Emperor So Wang, changed his name to Emperor Dan, and granted him the position of the prince's right guard.

古文：长安中，拜司徒、右羽林卫大将军。
现代文：长安年间，任命为司徒、右羽林卫大将军。
English: During the Chang'an era, he was appointed as the general of the Sutu and the right wing Linwei.

古文：自则天初临朝及革命之际，王室屡有变故，帝每恭俭退让，竟免于祸。
现代文：从武则天开始临朝听政以及革唐命之时，唐王室多次发生被屠杀等变故，皇帝常常恭俭谦让，终于免祸。
English: From the time of Emperor Wu Zetian's accession to the throne and the overthrow of the Tang dynasty, the Tang royal family was repeatedly slaughtered. The emperor was often humble and courteous, and was finally spared from disaster.

古文：神龙元年，以诛张易之昆弟功，进号安国相王，迁太尉，加实封。
现代文：神龙元年，因为诛杀张易之、张昌宗兄弟的功劳，晋号为安国相王，升为太尉，加给实际封邑。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, because of the merit of killing Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong brothers, Jin's title was An Guoxiang Wang, he was promoted to the rank of Taiyi, and he was added to the actual fief.

古文：其年立为皇太弟，固辞不受。
现代文：这年立他为皇太弟，他坚决辞退而不接受。
English: This year, he was appointed as the younger brother of the crown prince, but he resolutely declined and did not accept.

古文：景龙四年夏六月，中宗崩，韦庶人临朝，引用其党，分握政柄，忌帝望实素高，潜谋危害。
现代文：景龙四年夏六月，中宗去世，韦庶人临朝代行国政，引用她的宗族党羽，分别掌握权柄，却猜忌皇帝李旦道德名望平素很高，暗中图谋加害。
English: In the summer and June of Jinglong's fourth year, Zhongzong died, and Wei's vassal, Wei Zhongzong, carried out state affairs on behalf of the imperial court, citing her clan's party feathers and seizing power separately, but suspected that Emperor Li Dan's moral reputation was very high, and secretly plotted to cause harm.

古文：庚子夜，临淄王讳与太平公主子薛崇简、前朝邑尉刘幽求、长上果毅麻嗣宗、苑总监钟绍京等率兵入北军，诛韦温、纪处讷、宗楚客、武延秀、马秦客、叶静能、赵履温、杨均等，诸韦、武党与皆诛之。
现代文：二十日夜，临淄王李隆基与太平公主之子薛崇简、前任朝邑尉刘幽求、长上果毅麻嗣宗、苑总监钟绍京等人率兵进入北军，杀了韦温、纪处讷、宗楚客、武延秀、马秦客、叶静能、赵履温、杨均等人，所有韦太后、武则天宗族党羽都被诛杀掉。
English: On the evening of the 20th, Li Longji, the king of Linyi, together with Xue Chongjian, the son of Princess Taiping, Liu Yucui, the former lieutenant of Chaoyu, Ma Shizhong, the eldest son of Guo Yi, and Zhong Shaojing, the superintendent of the garden, led the soldiers into the Northern Army and killed Wei Wen, Ji Xuanna, Zong Chu, Wu Yanxiu, Ma Qin, Ye Jingneng, Zhao Ruiwen, Yang Jun and others. All the Wei Empress and Wu Zetian clan were killed.

古文：辛丑，帝挟少帝御安福门楼慰谕百姓，大赦天下，见系囚徒常赦所不免者咸赦除之。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝李旦扶持少帝重茂驾到安福门楼慰问晓谕百姓，大赦天下，被关押囚犯凡是通常不能赦免者都加以赦免。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Li Dan, supported by the Young Emperor Shigemo, drove to the Anfu Gate Tower to console and tell the people that the world would be amnestied, and that all prisoners who could not normally be pardoned would be pardoned.

古文：内外文武官三品已上赐爵一级，四品已下加一阶，亲皇三等已上加两阶，四等已下及诸亲赐勋三转，天下百姓免今年田租之半。
现代文：内外文武官三品以上官员赐爵一级，四品以下加一阶，皇亲三等以上加两阶，皇亲四等以下及所有皇亲赐勋三等，天下百姓免除今年田租的一半。
English: Civil and military officers at home and abroad with three or more court ranks will be given a first-class knighthood, those with four or fewer court ranks will receive a second-class knighthood, imperial relatives with three or more ranks will receive a second-class knighthood, imperial relatives with four or fewer ranks and all imperial relatives will receive a third-class decoration, and the people of the world will be exempted from paying half of this year's field rent.

古文：进封临淄王为平王，以薛崇简为立节郡王。
现代文：晋封临淄王为平王，以薛崇简为立节郡王。
English: Linyi King was promoted to Ping King, and Xue Chongjian was promoted to Lijie County King.

古文：钟绍京为中书侍郎，刘幽求为中书舍人，并参知机务，加实封。
现代文：钟绍京为中书侍郎，刘幽求为中书舍人，都参加主持政务，加给实际封户。
English: Zhong Shaojing was the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Liu Youqiu was the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters. Both of them took part in presiding over government affairs, as well as in the actual sealing of households.

古文：其余封赏有差。
现代文：其余的人的封赏，各有等级差别。
English: The rest of the people's awards have different levels.

古文：遣使分行诸道宣谕，仍令往均州慰劳谯王。
现代文：皇上又派使者分行各道安抚宣告，仍然命令前往均州慰问谯王。
English: The emperor also sent an envoy to announce the pacification of each branch, and still ordered to go to Junzhou to console the king.

古文：壬寅，左千牛中郎将、宋王成器为左卫大将军，司农少卿同正员、衡阳王成义为右卫大将军，太府少卿同正员、巴陵王隆范为左羽林卫大将军，太仆少卿同正员、彭城王隆业为右羽林卫大将军。
现代文：二十二日，左千牛中郎将、宋王成器为左卫大将军，司农少卿同于正员、衡阳王成义为右卫大将军，太府少卿同于正员、巴陵王隆范为左羽林卫大将军，太仆少卿同于正员、彭城王隆业为右羽林卫大将军。
English: On the 22nd, Zuo Qian Niu Zhong Rong was promoted to General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, Song Wang Cheng Ji was promoted to General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, Sino Shaoqing was promoted to General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, Hengyang Wang Cheng Yi was promoted to General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, Taifu Shaoqing was promoted to General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, Baling Wang Long Fan was promoted to General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, Taifu Shaoqing was promoted to General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, Pengcheng Wang Longye was promoted to General of

古文：黄门侍郎李日知同中书门下三品。
现代文：黄门侍郎李日知任同中书门下三品。
English: The Yellow Gate waiter, Li Ritchi, was appointed as the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：癸卯，殿中兼知内外闲厩、检校龙武右军、仍押左右厢万骑平王讳同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十三日，殿中监兼主管内外车马、检校龙武右军、仍统领左右厢一万骑兵平王李隆基任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 23rd, the palace supervisor and supervisor of the chariots and horses inside and outside the palace, the inspection of the Longwu Right Army, and the 10,000 cavalrymen of the left and right wings of the 10,000 cavalry, Ping Wang Li Longji, were appointed as the third grade of the middle school.

古文：中书侍郎、颍川郡公钟绍京为中书令。
现代文：中书侍郎、颍川郡公钟绍京为中书令。
English: Chusho-jiro, Shibukawa-gun Gongjong Sho-kyo is Chusho-rei.

古文：王先圣旧意，苍生推仰，龙光紫宸，贵允系望。
现代文：中书令、赞阝国公萧至忠为许州刺史，逍遥公韦嗣立为宋州刺史，中书侍郎赵彦昭为绛州刺史，萧、韦、赵三人，为他们特别设置中书令、中书侍郎、兵部尚书的虚衔地位。
English: Xiao Zhizhong, the Clerk of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of

古文：请遵前旨，勿或推让。 
现代文：杀了吏部尚书张嘉福于怀州。
English: Zhang Jiafu, the secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, was killed in Huizhou.

古文：于是少帝逊于别宫。是日即皇帝位，御承天门楼，大赦天下，常赦所不免并原之。
现代文：这一天，王公百官上表，都认为国家多难，应该立年长之君主，因皇帝李旦是众望所归，请立即登皇帝位。二十四日，少帝在别宫让位。这天李旦即皇帝位，驾到承天门楼，大赦天下，通常不能赦免者都加以赦免。
English: On this day, all the princes and officials agreed that the country was in a difficult situation, and that an elderly monarch should be appointed. Since Emperor Li Dan was highly regarded, he should immediately ascend to the throne. On the 24th, the young emperor abdicated in the palace. On this day, Li Dan, the emperor, drove to the Gate of Heaven, and pardoned the whole world. Usually, those who could not be pardoned were pardoned.

古文：内外官四品已上加一阶，相王府官吏加两阶。
现代文：内外官四品以上加一阶，相王府官吏加两阶。
English: For officials of the Ministry of the Interior and Foreign Affairs with four or more court ranks, one rank is added, and for officials of the Imperial Household Agency, two ranks are added.

古文：流人长流、长任未还者并放还。
现代文：流放的包括长期流放、长期流放到边远地区任职者都放他们回来。
English: Those who were exiled, including long-term exiles and those who were exiled to remote areas for a long time, were allowed to return.

古文：立功人王承晔已下千余人，赐爵秩有差。
现代文：立功人王承晔以下一千多人，赐给爵位俸禄都各有等级差别。
English: There are more than a thousand people below the meritorious person Wang Chengyao, and the salaries given to the peerage are all different in rank.

古文：封少帝为温王。
现代文：皇上封少帝为温王。
English: The emperor crowned the young emperor as King Wen.

古文：其日，景云见。
现代文：这天，吉祥云彩出现。
English: On this day, auspicious clouds appear.

古文：乙巳，中书令钟绍京为户部尚书、越国公，实封五百户；中书舍人刘幽求为尚书左丞、徐国公，实封五百户：并依前知政事。
现代文：二十五日，中书令钟绍京为户部尚书、越国公，实际封户是五百户；中书舍人刘幽求为尚书左丞、徐国公，实封五百户：都依照先前主持政事。
English: On the 25th, Zhong Shaojing was appointed as the head of Shangshu and Yue Guogong, and the actual number of households was 500; Liu Yuqiu, the head of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was appointed as the head of Shangshu and Xue Guogong, and the actual number of households was 500: they all presided over the government affairs in accordance with the previous.

古文：左卫大将军、宋王成器为太子太师、雍州牧、扬州大都督，加实封二百户。
现代文：左卫大将军、宋王成器为太子太师、雍州牧、扬州大都督，加实封二百户。
English: General Zuo Wei, Prince Song Wangcheng, the Grand Duke of Yongzhou and Yangzhou, and more than 200 households were sealed.

古文：宫人比来取百姓子女入宫者，放还其家。
现代文：宫人近来取百姓子女入宫者，放她们回家。
English: The palace guards recently removed the children of commoners who had entered the palace and let them go home.

古文：丙午，新除太常少卿薛稷为黄门侍郎，参知机务。
现代文：二十六日，新任命太常少卿薛稷为黄门侍郎，参加朝政机务。
English: On the 26th, the newly appointed Taizhang Shaoqing Xue Qi became the Yellow Gate Chamberlain and took part in the imperial government.

古文：丁未，许州刺史、梁县侯姚元之为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品，兵部尚书韦嗣立为中书令。
现代文：二十七日，许州刺史、梁县侯姚元之为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品，兵部尚书韦嗣立为中书令。
English: On the 27th, Xu Zizhi of Xuzhou and Hou Yao Yuan of Liang County were promoted to the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class.

古文：追削武三思、武崇训官爵。
现代文：追夺削除武三思、武崇训以前的官职爵位。
English: The pursuit of the official title of nobility before the removal of Wu Sanshi and Wu Chongxun.

古文：戊申，萧至忠、韦嗣立、赵彦昭、崔湜并停刺史。
现代文：二十八日，撤销萧至忠、韦嗣立、赵彦昭、崔氵是刺史职务。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Zhizhong, Wei Shili, Zhao Yanzhao, and Cui Jun were removed from their posts.

古文：衡阳王成义封申王，巴陵王隆范封岐王，彭城王隆业封薛王。
现代文：衡阳王成义封为申王，巴陵王隆范封为岐王，彭城王隆业封为薛王。
English: Hengyang King Chengyi was named King Shen, Baling King Long Fan was named King Qi, and Pengcheng King Longye was named King Xue.

古文：己酉，镇国太平公主加实封五百户，通前一万户。
现代文：二十九日，镇国太平公主加实封五百户，连先前共一万户。
English: On the 29th, the township of Taiping Princess added 500 households, bringing the total to 10,000.

古文：秋七月癸丑，兵部侍郎兼知雍州长史崔日用为黄门侍郎，参知机务。
现代文：秋七月四日，兵部侍郎兼主管雍州长史崔日用为黄门侍郎，参加主管朝政机务。
English: On the 4th of July in autumn, the attendant of the military department and the head of the Yong governor, Shi Cui, was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate and participated in the head of the government affairs.

古文：丙辰，则天大圣皇后依旧号为天后。
现代文：七日，则天大圣皇后依旧号为天后。
English: On the seventh day, the Heavenly Great Saint Empress was still called the Queen of Heaven.

古文：追谥雍王贤为章怀太子，庶人重俊曰节愍太子。
现代文：追加谥雍王贤为章怀太子，庶人重俊谥曰节愍太子。
English: Add Yong Wangxian as Prince Zhang Huai, and the commoner Chong Junxuan as Prince Jiexuan.

古文：复敬晖、桓彦范、崔玄暐、张柬之、袁恕己、成王千里、李多祚等官爵。
现代文：恢复敬晖、桓彦范、崔玄日韦、张柬之、袁恕己、成王千里、李多祚等官爵。
English: He restored the titles of courtier such as Jing Qi, Kan Yan Fan, Cui Xuan Rong Wei, Zhang Qian Zhi, Yuan Shou Ji, Cheng Wang Qianli, and Li Dorong.

古文：丁巳，河南、洛阳、华州并依旧名。
现代文：八日，河南、洛阳、华州都依照旧的名称。
English: On the 8th, Henan, Luoyang, and Huazhou all reverted to their old names.

古文：以洛州长史宋璟为检校吏部尚书、同中书门下三品，中书侍郎岑羲为右散骑常侍。
现代文：以洛州长史宋王景为检校吏部尚书、同中书门下三品，中书侍郎岑羲为右散骑常侍。
English: With the governor of Luo, Shi Song Wangjing, as the inspector of the school, Shang Shu, and the three subordinates of the same middle school, and the middle school attendant, Lang Yu, as the right rider.

古文：壬戌，以萧至忠为晋州刺史，韦嗣立为许州刺史，赵彦昭为宋州刺史，兵部尚书姚元之兼太子右庶子，吏部尚书宋璟兼太子左庶子。
现代文：十三日，以萧至忠为晋州刺史，韦嗣立为许州刺史，赵彦昭为宋州刺史，兵部尚书姚元之兼太子右庶子，吏部尚书宋王景兼太子左庶子。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Zhizhong was appointed as the Jinzhou chief historian, Wei Zili was appointed as the Xuzhou chief historian, Zhao Yan Zhao was appointed as the Songzhou chief historian, Yao Yuan Zhi, the prince's son-in-law, was appointed as the military secretary, and Song Wang Jing, the prince's son-in-law, was appointed as the public official.

古文：癸亥，吏部侍郎崔湜为尚书右丞，罢知政事。
现代文：十四日，吏部侍郎崔氵是为尚书右丞，罢免知政事。
English: On the 14th, Choe Heon, the chamberlain of the cadre department, was removed from his post as secretary of state.

古文：甲子，右仆射许国公苏瑰、兵部尚书姚元之、吏部尚书宋璟、右常侍判刑部尚书岑羲并充使册定陵。
现代文：十五日，右仆射许国公苏瑰、兵部尚书岑羲姚元之、吏部尚书宋王景、右常侍判刑部尚书都充任使者在定陵册封。
English: On the fifteenth day, the right-hand man of Emperor Xu, Su Gui, the military secretary, Yao Yuanzhi, the official secretary, Song Wangjing, and the right-hand man of the minister of justice, Shang Shu, all served as envoys to seal the tomb.

古文：丙寅，姚元之兼中书令。
现代文：十七日，姚元之兼任中书令。
English: On the seventeenth day, Yao Yuanzhi also served as a middle-ranking official.

古文：丁卯，苏瑰为尚书左仆射，仍旧同中书同下三品。
现代文：十八日，苏瑰为尚书左仆射，仍旧任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 18th, Su Gui was promoted to Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, but was still allowed to serve as the third-ranked disciple of Shang Shuxi.

古文：宋国公唐休璟致仕。
现代文：宋国公唐休王景辞官。
English: Prince Song of the Song Dynasty and King Hui of the Tang Dynasty resign from their posts.

古文：右武卫大将军、摄右御史大夫、同中书门下三品、韩国公张仁亶右卫大将军。
现代文：右武卫大将军、代理右御史大夫、同中书门下三品、韩国公张仁任右卫大将军。
English: General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Acting Doctor of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, Third Class of the Middle Palace Guards, and South Korean official Jang In as General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：戊辰，崔日用为雍州长史，薛稷为右散骑常侍，并停知机务。
现代文：十九日，崔日用为雍州长史，薛稷为右散骑常侍，一并停止主持朝政机务。
English: On the 19th, Cui Rijian was appointed as the governor of Yong and Xue Yao as the right cavalryman, and they stopped presiding over the political affairs of the dynasty.

古文：特进、同中书门下三品、赵国公李峤为怀州刺史。
现代文：特进、同中书门下三品、赵国公李峤为怀州刺史。
English: Zhao Guogong Li Yao was awarded the special prize and the third prize in the book of the same school for his history of Waizhou.

古文：废司田参军。
现代文：朝廷废除了司田参军一职。
English: The imperial court abolished Sida's post of military attaché.

古文：己巳，册平王为皇太子。
现代文：二十日，册封平王为皇太子。
English: On the 20th, Heiwang was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：大赦天下，改元为景云。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号为景云。
English: He was granted amnesty and changed his era name to Jingyun.

古文：内外官九品已上及子为父后者各加勋一转，自神龙以来直谏枉遭非命者咸令式墓，天下州县名目天授以来改为 武 字者并令复旧。
现代文：内外官九品以上以及儿子成为父亲的继承人者各加勋一等，向从神龙年间以来由于直言劝谏惨遭杀害的人的坟墓表示敬仰，天下州县名称从天授年以来改为 武 字的都命令它们恢复旧名。
English: The nine-rank and above officials of the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as well as the sons who became the heirs of their fathers, each of whom was awarded the first class, expressed their respect to the graves of those who had been brutally killed due to their outspoken advice since the years of the Dragon God. Those who had changed the names of counties in the world to the word "Wu" since the year of the Consecration of Heaven ordered them to restore their old names.

古文：废武氏崇恩庙，其昊陵、顺陵并去陵名。
现代文：废弃武氏的崇恩庙，武氏的昊陵、顺陵都取消 陵 的名称。
English: The Takeshi's Chong'en Temple was abandoned, and the names of the Takeshi's Hao Mausoleum and Shun Mausoleum were cancelled.

古文：景云元年七月己巳，制自今授左右仆射、侍中、中书令、六尚书已上官听让，其余停让。
现代文：景云元年七月二十日，诏令从今以后，授予左右仆射、侍中、中书令、六部尚书以上官员听凭他们辞让，其余官员停止辞让。
English: On July 20th of the year of Jingyun, the imperial edict was issued that from now on, officials above the rank of left and right attendants, middle attendants, middle attendants, and six senior attendants would be granted their resignations, and the remaining officials would stop resigning.

古文：追废皇后韦氏为庶人，安乐公主为悖逆庶人。
现代文：废皇后韦氏，追称为庶人，安乐公主追废为悖逆庶人。
English: The disgraced Empress Wei was called a commoner, and Princess Anle was disgraced as a rebellious commoner.

古文：丁丑，改太史监为太史局，隶秘书省。
现代文：二十八日，改太史监为太史局，隶属于秘书省。
English: On the 28th, the Office of the Superintendent of Archives was renamed the Office of the Superintendent of Archives, and was subordinated to the Ministry of Secretaries.

古文：八月癸巳，新除集州刺史、谯王重福潜入东都构逆，州县讨平之。
现代文：八月十五日，新任命的集州刺史、谯王重福暗中潜入东都谋反，由州县讨伐平定了他们。
English: On August 15th, the newly appointed Jizhou Zhishi and Zou Wang Chongfu secretly sneaked into Dongdu to plot a rebellion, and they were defeated by the states and counties.

古文：先是，中宗时官爵渝滥，因依妃、主墨敕而授官者，谓之斜封，至是并令罢免。
现代文：先前，唐中宗时官职爵位十分混乱没有节制，因为依靠妃子、公主用毛笔签署不经朝廷而授予官职者，叫做斜封，至此都令罢免。
English: Previously, when the Tang Dynasty was in power, official titles and ranks were very chaotic and unrestrained. Because those who relied on concubines and princesses to sign official positions with a brush without the approval of the imperial court were called oblique seals, they were all ordered to be removed.

古文：癸卯，改门下坊为左春坊，典书坊为右春坊，左右羽林卫依旧为左右羽林军。
现代文：二十五日，改门下坊为左春坊，典书坊为右春坊，左右羽林卫依旧为左右羽林军。
English: On the 25th, the lower gate was changed to the left spring gate, the bookstore was changed to the right spring gate, and the left and right egrets were still the left and right egrets.

古文：九月庚戌，封皇太子男嗣贞为许昌郡王，嗣谦为真定郡王。
现代文：九月二日，封皇太子男嗣直为许昌郡王，嗣谦为真定郡王。
English: On September 2, the Crown Prince Fong's son Sujong became the King of Xuchang County, and Sujian became the King of Jinding County.

古文：冬十月甲申，诏孝敬皇帝神主先祔太庙，有违古义，于东都别立义宗庙。
现代文：冬十月七日，诏令曰，孝敬皇帝的神主很早就附在太庙附祭，违背古义，在东都另外立义宗庙。
English: On the 7th day of October in winter, the imperial edict said that the deity of the emperor had been attached to the temple's festival for a long time, violating the ancient meaning and establishing a separate temple in Dongdu.

古文：丁未，姚元之为中书令，兼检校兵部尚书。
现代文：三十日，姚元之为中书令，兼检校兵部尚书。
English: On the 30th, Yao Yuanzhong was awarded the Order of the People's Republic of China, and was also awarded the Order of the People's Republic of China.

古文：十一月己酉，葬孝和皇帝于定陵。
现代文：十一月二日，在定陵安葬孝和皇帝。
English: On November 2nd, Emperor Xiaowa was buried in Dingling.

古文：辛亥，太子太师、宋王成器为尚书左仆射。
现代文：四日，太子太师、宋王成器为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 4th, the prince's great-grandfather, Song Wangcheng, played the role of Shang Shuxi's left-hand man.

古文：苏瑰为太子少傅，侍中、郧国公韦安石为太子少保，改封郇国公，并罢知政事。
现代文：苏瑰为太子少傅，侍中、郧国公韦安石为太子少保，改封为郇国公，都罢免知政事。
English: Su Gui was appointed as the prince's junior tutor, and Wei Anshi, a chamberlain and the prince of Shandong Province, was appointed as the prince's junior tutor and changed his title to the prince of Shandong Province.

古文：戊辰，宋王成器为司徒，兼领扬州大都督。
现代文：三日，宋王成器为司徒，兼领扬州大都督。
English: On the third day, Song Wangcheng was appointed as the leading disciple and Yangzhou's grand governor.

古文：庚午，太子少傅苏瑰薨。
现代文：二十三日，太子少傅苏瑰去世。
English: On the 23rd, the prince's younger brother Su Gui passed away.

古文：是岁，韦庶人、悖逆庶人并以礼改葬，武三思父子剖棺戮尸。
现代文：这年，韦庶人、悖逆庶人都用皇家仪礼改葬，武三思父子都被剖开棺材杀戮他们的尸体。
English: In this year, Wei's commoners and rebellious commoners were all reburied with royal rites, and both Wu Sansi and his son had their coffins opened and their bodies killed.

古文：二年春正月丁未朔，以山陵日近，不受朝贺。
现代文：景云二年春正月一日，因为祭祀帝王坟墓日期已近，不接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Jingyun, because the date of the ritual of the emperor's tomb was near, morning greetings were not accepted.

古文：癸丑，改泉州为闽州，置都督府，改武荣州为泉州。
现代文：七日，改泉州为闽州，设置都督府，改武荣州为泉州。
English: On the seventh day, Quanzhou was changed to Zhangzhou, a prefectural government was set up, and Wu Rongzhou was changed to Quanzhou.

古文：突厥默啜遣使请和亲，许之。
现代文：突厥默啜派遣使者请求与唐王结亲，皇上同意了。
English: The Turks sent an envoy to request a marriage with the Tang king, and the emperor agreed.

古文：己未，太仆卿郭元振、中书侍郎张说并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，太仆卿郭元振、中书侍郎张说都任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the thirteenth day, Guo Yuan Zhen, the eunuch of the eunuch, and Zhang He, the servant of the eunuch, said that they would both be appointed to the eunuch of the eunuch.

古文：甲子，改封温王重茂为襄王，迁于集州。
现代文：十八日，改封温王重茂为襄王，迁徙到集州。
English: On the 18th, Wen Wang Shigemo was changed to Xiang Wang and moved to Jizhou.

古文：乙丑，追尊皇后刘氏为肃明皇后，墓曰惠陵；德妃窦氏为昭成皇后，墓曰靖陵。
现代文：十九日，追尊皇后刘氏为肃明皇后，墓曰惠陵；德妃窦氏为昭成皇后，墓曰靖陵。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the tomb of Liu, the respected empress, was named Su Ming Empress, and the tomb was named Huiling; the tomb of Defe Dou, the empress of Zhaoxing, was named Jingling.

古文：二月丁丑，令皇太子监国。
现代文：二月二日，命令皇太子代理国政。
English: On February 2, he ordered the crown prince to take over state affairs.

古文：甲辰，姚元之左授申州刺史，宋璟左授楚州刺史。
现代文：九日，姚元之降职为申州刺史，宋王景降职为楚州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Yao Yuanzhi was demoted to the post of Shenzhou chief historian, and Song Wangjing was demoted to the post of Chuzhou chief historian.

古文：韦安石为侍中。
现代文：韦安石任侍中。
English: Wei Anshi became a chamberlain.

古文：丙戌，刘幽求为户部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：十一日，刘幽求为户部尚书，罢免知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Yuqiu was appointed as the head of the household and removed from office.

古文：戊子，诏中宗时斜封官并许依旧。
现代文：十三日，诏令中宗时由皇帝、后妃、公主随意用毛笔签署而不经朝廷任命的官员同意他们依旧任原职。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor, the Empress Dowager, and the Princess signed the Imperial Edict of Zhongzheng at will with a brush pen, without the consent of the officials appointed by the Imperial Court, and they still held their original positions.

古文：庚申，复置太子左右谕德、太子左右赞善，各置两员。
现代文：十五日，再次设置太子左右谕德、太子左右赞善，各设置两员。
English: On the fifteenth day, the prince once again set up the left and right oracle, and the prince set up the right and left praise, each setting up two members.

古文：戊戌，郭元振为兵部尚书，仍依旧同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，郭元振为兵部尚书，仍然依旧任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Yuan Zhen was promoted to the position of military secretary, but he was still allowed to be a subordinate of the general secretary.

古文：己未，改修文馆为昭文馆。
现代文：二十四日，改修文馆为昭文馆。
English: On the 24th, the renovated library became the Shouwen Library.

古文：甲申，韦安石为中书令；宋王成器为太子宾客，仍依旧遥领扬州大都督。
现代文：黄门侍郎李日知为御史大夫，依旧任同中书门下三品。夏四月五日，张说为兵部侍郎，依旧任同中书门下平章事。八日，分瀛州而设置莫阝州。九日，韦安石为中书令；宋王成器为太子宾客，仍旧兼任扬州大都督，但不到任。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhang said that he was the attendant of the military department, and he was still appointed as the subordinate general of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general secretary of the general

古文：丙申，李日知为侍中。
现代文：二十一日，李日知为侍中。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li Rizhi became a chamberlain.

古文：壬寅，大赦天下，重福徒党放雪。
现代文：二十七日，大赦天下，重福的党羽释放或昭雪。
English: On the 27th, the world was amnestied, and the blessed party members were released or pardoned.

古文：京官四品已下加一阶，外官赐勋一转，三品已上各赐爵一级。
现代文：京官四品以上加一阶，外官赐勋升一等，三品以上各赐爵一级。
English: Beijing officials with four or more pins were awarded one rank, foreign officials were awarded one rank, and those with three or more pins were awarded one rank.

古文：天下滥度僧尼、道士、女冠并依旧。
现代文：天下无节制引度的和尚、尼姑、道士、女道士都依旧出家。
English: Monks, nuns, Taoists, and Taoist nuns, who are attracted by the world's unrestrained attraction, are still entering the priesthood.

古文：又令内外官依上元元年九品已上文武官，咸带手巾算袋，武官咸带七事占鞢并足。
现代文：又命令内外官员依照上元元年九品以上文武官员规定都携带手巾算袋，武官都带七事革占閟并足。
English: He also ordered officials at home and abroad to carry handkerchiefs and counting bags in accordance with the provisions of civil and military officials above the ninth grade in the first year of the last century, and military officers to carry seven things at the same time.

古文：其腰带一品至五品并用金，六品七品并用银，八品九品并用鍮石。
现代文：他们的腰带一品至五品都用金；六品七品官员都用银，八品九品官员都用钅俞石。
English: And their girdles, from the first to the fifth, were of gold; and their officers, from the sixth to the seventh, of silver; and their officers, from the eighth to the ninth, of brass.

古文：鱼袋着紫者金装，着绯者银装。
现代文：紫鱼袋金装；绯鱼带银装。
English: Purple fish bag in gold; herringbone bracelet in silver.

古文：景龙三年已前逋悬并放免。
现代文：景龙三年以前拖欠的租税都加以免除。
English: All of Jinglong's tax arrears from three years ago will be waived.

古文：天下大酺五日。
现代文：天下大聚饮五天。
English: Five days of great feasting.

古文：五月庚戌，复武氏昊陵、顺陵，仍量置官属，太平公主为武攸暨请也。
现代文：五月六日，恢复武氏的昊陵、顺陵，仍然酌情设置官属，这是由于太平公主替武攸暨请求的原因。
English: On May 6, the Hao Mausoleum and the Shun Mausoleum of the Wu Clan were restored, and officials were still set up as appropriate. This was due to the request of the Taiping Princess to replace the Wu Clan.

古文：庚申，韦安石加开府仪同三司。
现代文：十六日，韦安石加开府仪同三司。
English: On the 16th, Wei'an Shi Jia Kaifu ceremony with three divisions.

古文：辛丑，改西城公主为金仙公主，昌隆公主为玉真公主，仍置金仙、玉真两观。
现代文：改西城公主为金仙公主，昌隆公主为玉真公主，又设置金仙观和玉真观。
English: The princess of Xicheng was changed to Princess Jinxian, the princess of Changlong was changed to Princess Yuzhen, and the conceptions of Princess Jinxian and Princess Yuzhen were established.

古文：壬戌，殿中监窦怀贞为左台御史大夫、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，殿中监窦怀贞为左台御史大夫、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th, the supervisor of the hall, Dou Huai Zhen, was appointed as the left-desk superintendent of history, and the book keeper of the same school, Xia Ping, was appointed.

古文：六月壬午，依汉代故事，分置二十四都督府。
现代文：六月八日，按照汉代旧制，分别设置二十四都督府。
English: On June 8th, in accordance with the old system of the Han Dynasty, 24 governorates were separately established.

古文：闰六月，初置十道按察使。
现代文：闰六月，开始设置十道按察使。
English: In mid-June, the establishment of ten inspectorates began.

古文：秋七月，新置都督府并停。
现代文：秋七月，新设置的都督府都撤销。
English: In autumn and July, the newly established prefectural governments were all abolished.

古文：唯雍洛州长史、扬益荆并四大都督府长史阶为三品。
现代文：惟有雍、洛州长史，扬、益、荆、并四大都督府长史为三品官阶。
English: Only the governors of Yong and Luo, and the governors of Yang, Yi and Jing, as well as the governors of the four prefectures, were of the three official ranks.

古文：八月乙卯，诏以兴圣寺是高祖旧宅，有柿树，天授中枯死，至是重生，大赦天下。
现代文：八月十三日，皇上诏令，因为兴圣寺是高祖刘邦的旧住宅，有柿子树，天授年间枯死，到现在重又复活，大赦天下。
English: On August 13th, the emperor issued a decree, because the Xingsheng Temple was the old residence of the great ancestor Liu Bang, and there was a persimmon tree, which withered and died during the years of Tianju, and now it has been revived again, and the world has been pardoned.

古文：其谋杀、劫杀、造伪头首并免死配流岭南，官典受赃者特从放免。
现代文：那些谋杀、打劫杀人、作伪出首告发人者都免死发配充军岭南，违犯官制贪赃者特别加以赦免。
English: Those who committed murder, robbery and homicide, and those who falsified the first whistleblower were all exempted from death and sentenced to military service in Lingnan, and those who violated the official system of corruption were specially pardoned.

古文：天下大酺三日。
现代文：允许天下大聚饮三天。
English: The world is allowed to gather and drink for three days.

古文：丁巳，皇太子释奠于太学。
现代文：十五日，皇太子在太学设酒食祭祀先圣先师。
English: On the fifteenth day, the crown prince held a wine and food sacrificial ceremony for the forerunner at Taigaku.

古文：己巳，韦安石为尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品兼太子宾客，礼部尚书窦希玠为太子少傅。
现代文：二十七日，韦安石为尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品兼太子宾客，礼部尚书窦希为太子少傅。
English: On the 27th, Wei Anshi was Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and the prince's guest, and Shang Shuxu was the prince's young tutor.

古文：庚午，改左右屯卫为左右威卫，左右宗卫率府为左右司御府，浑仪监为太史监。
现代文：二十八日，改左右屯卫为左右威卫，左右宗卫率府为左右司御府，浑仪监为太史监。
English: On the 28th, the Left and Right Tunwei was changed to the Left and Right Weiwei, the Left and Right Zongwei Leadership Office was changed to the Left and Right Sifu, and the Hunyi Supervisor was changed to the Taishi Supervisor.

古文：九月丁卯，窦怀贞为侍中。
现代文：九月三日，窦怀贞为侍中。
English: On September 3, Dou Huai Zhen became a chamberlain.

古文：冬十月甲辰，吏部尚书刘幽求为侍中，散骑常侍魏知古同中书门下三品，太子詹事崔湜为中书侍郎、同中书门下三品，中书侍郎陆象先同中书门下平章事。
现代文：冬十月三日，吏部尚书刘幽求为侍中，散骑常侍魏知古任同中书门下三品，太子詹事崔氵是为中书侍郎、同中书门下三品，中书侍郎陆象先任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 3rd day of October in winter, Liu Yucui, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a chamberlain, Wei Chigu, the horseback riding attendant, was appointed as the third grade of the same middle school, the prince Zhan Shih Cui Wei was appointed as the third grade of the same middle school, and Lu Xiang, the first grade of the same middle school, was appointed as the second grade of the same middle school.

古文：韦安石为尚书左仆射、东都留守，侍中李日知为户部尚书，兵部尚书郭元振为吏部尚书，侍中兼检校左台御史大夫窦怀贞为左台御史大夫，兵部侍郎兼左庶子张说为尚书左丞：罢知政事。
现代文：韦安石为尚书左仆射、东都留守，侍中李日知为户部尚书，兵部尚书郭元振为吏部尚书，侍中兼检校左台御史大夫窦怀贞为左台御史大夫，兵部侍郎兼左庶子张说为尚书左丞：以上四人都罢免知政事。
English: Wei Anshi is Shangshu's left-hand man, Dongdu is absent, Li Rizhi, a chamberlain, is Hube's left-hand man, Guo Yuan Zhen, a chamberlain and inspector of the Left Division, Dou Huai Zhen, a chamberlain and inspector of the Left Division, is the Left Division's left-hand man, and Zhang Xian, a chamberlain and the left-hand man's son, is Shangshu's left-hand man: all of the above four were removed from the position of chancellor.

古文：十一月戊寅，改太史监为太史局，依旧隶秘书省。改王师为傅。
现代文：十一月八日，改太史监为太史局，依旧隶属于秘书省，改王师为王傅。
English: On November 8th, the Taishi Supervisor was changed to the Taishi Bureau, still subordinate to the Ministry of Secretaries, and Wang Shi was changed to Wang Fu.

古文：三年春正月辛未朔，亲谒太庙。
现代文：景云三年春正月一日，皇上亲自晋谒太庙。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Jingyun, the emperor personally entered the Great Temple.

古文：癸酉，上始释惨服，御正殿受朝贺。
现代文：三日，皇上才开始除去丧服，驾到正殿接受朝贺。
English: On the third day, the emperor only began to remove his mourning clothes and drove to the main hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：甲戌，并、汾、绛三州地震，坏人庐舍。
现代文：四日，并州、汾州、绛州地震，塌坏了人们的房屋。
English: On the 4th, the earthquake in Bozhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou caused the collapse of people's houses.

古文：辛巳，南郊。
现代文：十一日，皇上到南郊祭祀天地。
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：戊子，躬耕籍田。
现代文：十八日，皇上亲自耕种籍田。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor personally cultivated his home field.

古文：己丑，大赦天下，改元为太极。
现代文：十九日，大赦天下。改年号为太极。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty. The name of the year was changed to Taiji.

古文：内外官四品已下加一阶，三品已上加爵一级。
现代文：内外官四品以下加一阶，三品以上加爵一等。
English: For officers of the Ministry of the Interior and Foreign Affairs, one rank is added below the fourth grade, and one grade is added above the third grade.

古文：孔宣父祠庙，本州取侧近三十户以供洒扫。
现代文：孔宣父的祠庙，本州取附近三十户人家来供应洒扫之责任。
English: The ancestral temple of Kong Xuan's father, Honshu took the responsibility of supplying sprinkling and sweeping to thirty households in the vicinity.

古文：天下大酺五日，特赐老人九十已上绯衫牙笏，八十已上绿衫木笏。
现代文：允许天下大宴饮五天。特别赐给老人九十岁以上者绯红色长衫和牙制的手版，赐给八十岁以上老人绿色长衫和木制的手版。
English: The five-day grand banquet is allowed. In particular, the elderly over the age of ninety are given a crimson long-sleeved shirt and a handprint made of teeth, and the elderly over the age of eighty are given a green long-sleeved shirt and a wooden handprint.

古文：乙未，户部尚书岑羲、左台御史大夫窦怀贞并同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十五日，户部尚书岑羲、左台御史大夫窦怀贞都任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 25th, the head of the household, Shang Shuxuan, and the secretary of the Left Division, Dou Huai Zhen, were both appointed to the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：二月丁酉，秘书增少监一员，光禄、大理、鸿胪、太府、卫尉、宗正各增置少卿一员，少府监、将作监增置少监一员，国子监增置司业一员，左右台各增置中丞一员。
现代文：二十七日，秘书监增加少监一名，光禄、大理、鸿胪、太府、卫尉、宗正各增加少卿一员，少府监、将作监增设少监一员，国子监增加司业一员，左右台各增加中丞一员。
English: On the 27th, the superintendent of secretaries was increased by one junior superintendent, the superintendents of Guanglu, Dali, Honglu, Dafu, Weiwei, and Zongzheng were each increased by one junior secretary, the superintendents of Shofu and Zongzheng were each increased by one junior superintendent, the superintendents of provincial governors were each increased by one secretary, the superintendents of provincial governors were each increased by one secretary, the superintendents of provincial governors were each increased by one junior secretary, the superintendents of provincial governors were each increased by one junior secretary,

古文：雍洛二州、并益荆扬四大都督府各增置司马一员，仍分为左右司马。
现代文：雍、洛二州，并、益、荆、扬四大都督府各增加司马一员，仍然分为左右司马。
English: The two prefectures of Yong and Luo, as well as the four prefectures of Yixi, Jing and Yang, have each added a Sima member, and are still divided into left and right Sima.

古文：丁亥，皇太子释奠于国学。
现代文：二月十八日，皇太子在国子监设酒食祭奠先圣先师。
English: On February 18th, the Crown Prince presided over a wine and food festival in Kuniko to lay a wreath in memory of the saint.

古文：追赠颜回为太子太师，曾参为太子太保。
现代文：追赠颜回为太子太师，曾参为太子太保。
English: After the gift, Yan Hui became the prince's teacher, and was once the prince's tutor.

古文：辛未，大赦天下，改元为延和。桓彦范、敬晖、崔玄暐、张柬之、袁恕己等，特还其子孙实封二百户。天下大酺五日。
现代文：桓彦范、敬晖、崔玄日韦、张柬之、袁恕己等人，特别发还给他们的子孙实际封邑二百户。允许天下大宴饮五天。
English: Kuan Yan Fan, Jing Xi, Cui Xuan Rong Wei, Zhang Xizhi, Yuan Shouqi and others, specially returned to their descendants 200 households in the actual fief. Allowed the world to have a grand banquet for five days.

古文：六月癸丑，户部尚书岑羲为侍中。
现代文：六月十五日，户部尚书岑羲为侍中。
English: On June 15th, the head of the household, Shang Shuxuan, became a chamberlain.

古文：乙卯，追奠则天皇后曰天后圣帝。
现代文：十七日，追尊则天皇后曰天后圣帝。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the emperor's empress dowager was named the "Holy Empress."

古文：庚申，幽州都督孙俭率左骁卫将军李楷洛、左威卫将军周以悌等，将兵三万，与奚首领李大辅战于硎山，为贼所败，俭没于阵。
现代文：二十二日，幽州都督孙俭率领左骁卫将军李楷洛、左威卫将军周以悌等率兵三万，与奚首领李大辅在硎山大战，被贼人击败，孙俭在阵战中死去。
English: On the 22nd, Sun Jian, the governor of Yuzhou, led 30,000 soldiers led by Zuo Wei Wei general Li Kai Luo and Zuo Wei general Zhou Yixuan, and fought with Zou leader Li Daisuke in Lushan Mountain. He was defeated by thieves, and Sun Jian died in the battle.

古文：壬戌，魏知古为户部尚书，仍依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十四日，魏知古为户部尚书，仍依旧任同中书门下三品。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Wei Zhi Gu was promoted to the household department of Shangshu, still remaining under the third grade of Zhongshu.

古文：秋七月庚午，窦怀贞为尚书右仆射，平章军国重事。
现代文：秋七月三日，窦怀贞为尚书右仆射，平章军国重事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Dou Huai Zhen became Shangshu's right-hand man, and Pingzhang was in charge of military affairs.

古文：己卯，上观乐于安福门，以烛继昼，经日乃止。
现代文：十二日，皇上在安福门观看音乐舞蹈，用烛照耀，从晚上一直看到天亮，看了一整夜才停止。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor watched the music and dance at the Anfu Gate, shined with candles, and saw the dawn from the evening, and watched the whole night before stopping.

古文：八月庚子，帝传位于皇太子，自称太上皇帝，五日一度受朝于太极殿，自称曰朕，三品已上除授及大刑狱，并自决之，其处分事称诰、令。
现代文：八月三日，皇帝传位给皇太子，称太上皇帝，五天一次在太极殿接受朝贺，自称曰朕，三品以上官员任命及大案要案的刑罚，都由自己决断，关于处置各事都称作诰或令。
English: On August 3, the emperor passed the throne to the crown prince, called himself the emperor, received morning greetings once every five days in the Taiji Hall, and claimed to be "I." The appointment of more than three officials and the punishment of major cases were all decided by himself. All matters concerning the disposition were called "decree" or "order."

古文：皇帝每日受朝于武德殿，自称曰予，三品已下除授及徒罪并令决之，其处分事称制、敕。
现代文：皇帝每天在武德殿接受朝拜，自称曰予，三品以下官员的任免以及徒刑罪案都让皇帝决断，皇帝处置事情称作制或敕。
English: The emperor receives worship every day at the Wude Hall, and claims to be supreme. The appointment and removal of officials below the third grade, as well as cases of imprisonment, are all decided by the emperor. The emperor's handling of the matter is called the system or the system.

古文：甲辰，大赦天下，改元为先天。
现代文：七月，大赦天下，改元为先天。
English: In July, there was a general amnesty, and the era was changed to the previous day.

古文：八月戊申，皇帝子许昌王嗣直改封郯王，真定王嗣谦为郢王。
现代文：八月十一日，皇帝之子许昌王嗣直改封为郯王，真定王嗣谦为郢王。
English: On August 11th, the emperor's son, Xu Chang Wang Zhi, changed his title to the king of Zhai, and Zhending Wang Zhi Qian became the king of Zhai.

古文：己酉，以宋王成器为司空，依旧遥领扬州大都督。
现代文：十二日，以宋王成器为司空，依旧兼任扬州大都督，但不到任。
English: On the 12th, with Song Wangcheng as the governor, he still concurrently served as the Yangzhou grand governor, but did not take office.

古文：庚戌，窦怀贞为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品，仍兼御史大夫；刘幽求为尚书右仆射，依旧同中书门下三品；魏知古为侍中；崔湜为中书令；并监修国史。
现代文：十三日，窦怀贞为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品，仍旧兼任御史大夫；刘幽求为尚书右仆射，依旧任同中书门下三品；魏知古为侍中；崔氵是为中书令：以上窦、刘、魏都监修国史。
English: On the 13th, Dou Huai Zhen was Shangshu's left-hand servant and the third grade of the same middle school, and still concurrently served as the chief historian; Liu Yukui was Shangshu's right-hand servant and was still the third grade of the same middle school; Wei Zhigu was a waiter; Cui Yao was a middle school teacher: the above Dou, Liu, and Wei all supervised the national history.

古文：丁巳，立皇帝妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：二十日，立皇帝妃王氏为皇后。
English: On the 20th, Empress Dowager Cixi was enthroned as empress.

古文：癸亥，刘幽求配流封州。
现代文：二十六日，刘幽求发配充军到封州。
English: On the 26th, Liu Yuqiu sent reinforcements to Fenzhou.

古文：九月丁卯朔，日有蚀之。甲申，封皇帝子嗣升为陕王。
现代文：九月一日，日蚀。十八日，封皇帝之子嗣升为陕王。
English: September 1st, solar eclipse. On the 18th, Emperor Fong's son and heir ascended to the throne of Shaanxi.

古文：冬十月庚子，皇帝亲谒太庙，礼毕，御延喜门，大赦天下。
现代文：冬十月四日，皇帝亲自晋谒太庙，礼毕，驾到延喜门，大赦天下。
English: On the 4th day of October in winter, the emperor personally entered the Great Temple, bowed, drove to the Yanxi Gate, and granted amnesty to the world.

古文：壬寅，祔昭成皇后、肃明皇后神主于仪坤庙。
现代文：六日，把昭成皇后、肃明皇后的神主灵牌附到仪坤庙去。
English: On the sixth day, the shinju spirit plaques of Empress Zhao Cheng and Empress Su Ming were attached to the Yi Kun Temple.

古文：癸卯，皇帝幸新丰之温汤，校猎于渭川。
现代文：七日，皇帝驾到新丰之温汤，到渭川设大木栅栏遮拦野兽来打猎。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor drove to Xinfeng's warm soup and set up a large wooden fence to block the beast from hunting.

古文：十二月丁未，诰禁人屠杀犬鸡。
现代文：十二月十二日，太上皇下诏诰，禁止人民屠杀鸡犬。
English: On December 12th, Emperor Taizong issued an edict prohibiting people from slaughtering chickens and dogs.

古文：戊午，改箕州为仪州。
现代文：二十三日，改箕州为仪州。
English: On the 23rd, it was changed from Bozhou to Jizhou.

古文：二年春正月，敕河北诸州团结兵马，皆令本州刺史押掌。
现代文：先天二年春正月，皇上命令江北各州团练兵马，都归本州刺史监管执掌。
English: The day before yesterday, in the first month of the second year of the Spring, the emperor ordered the regiments of all the states in the northern part of the Yangtze River to train soldiers and horses.

古文：乙亥，吏部尚书兼太子右谕德、酂国公萧至忠为中书令。
现代文：十一日，吏部尚书兼太子右谕德、赞阝国公萧至忠为中书令。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the officials, Shang Shuxu, the prince's right-hand man, and Zhanqi Guogong Xiao Zhizhong, were promoted to the position of middle secretary.

古文：上元日夜，上皇御安福门观灯，出内人连袂踏歌，纵百僚观之，一夜方罢。
现代文：正月十五日的夜晚，太上皇驾到安福门观看花灯，让宫女们携手而出踏着节拍唱歌跳舞，让百官尽情观赏，玩了一夜才结束。
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day of the first month, the emperor drove to the Anfu Gate to watch the lanterns, let the court ladies go out hand in hand to sing and dance to the beat, and let the dignitaries enjoy the view. They played for one night before ending.

古文：二月丙申，改隆州为阆州，始州为剑州。
现代文：二月三日，改隆州为阆州，始州为剑州。
English: On February 3, Longzhou was changed to Shanzhou and Shizhou to Jianzhou.

古文：分冀州置深州。
现代文：分冀州而设置深州。
English: He divided Jizhou and set up Shenzhou.

古文：初，有僧婆陀请夜开门然灯百千炬，三日三夜。
现代文：先前，有和尚婆请求夜晚开城门点花灯上百上千个蜡烛，点三天三夜。
English: Earlier, there was a request from a Buddhist nun to open the city gate at night and light hundreds of thousands of candles for three days and three nights.

古文：皇帝御延喜门观灯纵乐，凡三日夜。
现代文：皇帝驾到延喜门观看花灯，纵情欢乐，总计三天三夜。
English: The emperor drove to Yanxi Gate to watch the lanterns, indulging in pleasure for a total of three days and three nights.

古文：左拾遗严挺之上疏谏之，乃止。
现代文：左拾遗严挺之上奏章劝谏，这才停止。
English: It only stopped when the left picked up the remains of Yan Ting and played a song to persuade him.

古文：三月辛卯，皇后祀先蚕。
现代文：三月二十八日，皇后祭祀蚕神。
English: On March 28th, the empress held a ceremony to worship the silkworm god.

古文：癸巳，制敕表状、书奏、笺牒年月等数，作一十、三十、四十字。
现代文：三十日，皇帝诏令，凡是表状、书奏、片戋牒年月等字数，应作一十、三十、四十等字样。
English: On the thirtieth day, the emperor issued a decree that the number of characters in the form, the calligraphy, and the date should be ten, thirty, and forty.

古文：夏六月丙辰，兵部尚书、朔方道行军大总管郭元振加同中书门下三品。
现代文：夏六月二十四日，兵部尚书、朔方道行军大总管郭元振任同中书门下三品的加官。
English: On the 24th day of the 6th month of the summer, Guo Yuan Zhen, the general manager of the military department of Shangshu and Shuo Fangdao, was appointed as an additional officer of the third grade under the same middle school.

古文：秋七月甲子，太平公主与仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲、中书令萧至忠、左羽林大将军常元楷等谋逆，事觉，皇帝率兵诛之。
现代文：秋七月三日，太平公主与仆射窦怀贞、侍中岑羲、中书令萧至忠、左羽林大将军常元楷等阴谋造反，事被发觉，皇帝李隆基率兵将他们杀死。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Taiping Princess and her attendants Dou Huai Zhen, Zhi Zhong, Xiao Zhizhong, and Zuo Yulin Da Gen Changyuan Kai conspired to rebel, and the matter was discovered, and Emperor Li Longji and his soldiers killed them.

古文：穷其党与，太子少保薛稷、左散骑常侍贾膺福、右羽林将军李慈李钦、中书舍人李猷、中书令崔湜、尚书左丞卢藏用、太史令傅孝忠、僧惠范等皆诛之。
现代文：然后穷究他们的党羽，太子少保薛稷、左散骑常侍贾膺福、右羽林将军李慈、李钦、中书舍人李猷、中书令崔氵是、尚书左丞卢藏用、太史令傅孝忠、和尚惠范等人都被杀。
English: After that, their party members were thoroughly investigated. Prince Shao Bao Xuejun, Left Cavalryman Jia Yifu, Right Cavalryman Lin Li Ci, Right Cavalryman Lin Li Qin, Chinese calligrapher Li Jun, Chinese calligrapher Cui Junye, Chinese calligrapher Zuo Ruzangyong, Grand Historian Fu Xiaozhong, and monk Hui Fan were all killed.

古文：兵部尚书郭元振从上御承天门楼，大赦天下，自大辟罪已下，无轻重咸赦除之。
现代文：兵部尚书郭元振跟从皇上驾到承天门楼，大赦天下，从死刑罪以下，不论轻重都加以赦免。
English: The military commander Guo Yuan Zhen followed the emperor to the Gate of Heaven, where he granted amnesty to the whole world, pardoning all crimes from capital punishment on down, regardless of their severity.

古文：翌日，太上皇诰曰： 朕将高居无为，自今后军国刑政一事以上，并取皇帝处分。 
现代文：第二天，太上皇下诰曰： 朕将高居安乐不再主持政事，从今以后的军国刑律政令一切大事，都由皇帝处理。 
English: The next day, Emperor Taizong said, "I will no longer preside over political affairs. From now on, all major military, criminal, and political affairs will be handled by the emperor."

古文：开元四年夏六月甲子，太上皇帝崩于百福殿，时年五十五。
现代文：开元四年夏六月二十日，太上皇在白福殿去世，时年五十五岁。
English: On the 20th of June in the summer of the 4th year of the first century, the Emperor died at the age of fifty-five in Baifu Palace.

古文：秋七月己亥，上尊谥曰大圣贞皇帝，庙曰睿宗。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，上尊显的谥号曰大圣贞皇帝，庙号曰睿宗。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, the posthumous name of the Supreme Patriarch was called the Great Emperor Shenzhen, and the temple name was Ruizong.

古文：冬十月庚午，葬于桥陵。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，安葬在桥陵。
English: In winter, on October 28th, he was buried in the bridge mausoleum.

古文：天宝十三载二月，改谥曰玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝十三年二月，改谥号曰玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝。
English: In February of the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasure, Emperor Xuan Zhen Da Sheng Da Xing Xiao changed his name to Emperor Xuan Zhen Da Sheng Da Xing Xiao.

古文：赞曰：孝和、玄真，皆肖先人。率情背礼，取乐于身。
现代文：赞曰：孝和皇帝、玄真皇帝，都像他们的先人高宗皇帝一样，为了本身取乐，却任性而违背礼法。
English: Zang said: Emperor Xiaowa and Emperor Xuanzhen, like their forefathers Emperor Gaozong, are capricious and violate the etiquette in order to amuse themselves.

古文：夷涂不履，覆辙攸遵。
现代文：平坦的大道不走，却循着倾覆的道路前进。
English: They do not take the smooth road, but follow the rough road.

古文：扶持圣嗣，赖有贤臣。
现代文：幸亏有贤能之臣，扶持辅助圣明的皇位继承人。
English: Fortunately, there are capable courtiers to support the heir to the throne of the auxiliary saint.

