古文：孔范夫鲍鱼芳兰，在于所习，中人之性，可以上下。
现代文：人是像鲍鱼那样腥臭，还是像兰花那样芳香，全在于他日常积累所致。就一般人而言，可以学好也可以变坏。
English: Whether a person is as smelly as an abalone or as fragrant as an orchid depends entirely on his daily accumulation. As far as the average person is concerned, he can learn well or become bad.

古文：然则谋于管仲，齐桓有邵陵之师，迩于易牙，小白掩阳门之扇。
现代文：那么齐桓公信任管仲，就可以兴邵陵的霸主之师，亲近易牙，就被囚死宫内。
English: If Qi Kuan Gong trusted Guanzhong, then he would be able to get close to Yiga, the master of Xing Shao Ling, and he would be imprisoned in the palace.

古文：夫以霸者一身，且有洿隆之别，况下于此，胡可胜言者乎。
现代文：同是作为霸主的齐桓公，前后尚有如此高下之别，何况低于他的人，多得怎能说得过来呢。
English: As the same overlord, Lord Qi Huan, there is still such a difference between the high and the low, not to mention those who are lower than him, how can it be said that there are so many.

古文：故古之哲王，莫不斯慎。
现代文：所以古时的圣明君主，莫不对此小心谨慎。
English: Therefore, the ancient sage monarchs had to be careful about this.

古文：自汉氏以来，年且千祀，而近习用事，无乏于时，莫不官由近亲，情因狎重。
现代文：自汉代以来，将近千年，而国君亲近人执掌大权的事，无时不有，这些人无不是由于职务接近国君而被亲信，因陪国君玩乐而感情加深。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, nearly a thousand years ago, there has never been a time when a person close to the sovereign held power. These people were trusted due to their positions being close to the sovereign, and their feelings were deepened as a result of having fun with the sovereign.

古文：至如中书所司，掌在机务。
现代文：至于像中书令这样的官职，本掌管朝廷的机要文书。
English: As for official positions such as the Chushoryo, they were in charge of the important documents of the imperial court.

古文：汉元以令、仆用事，魏明以监、令专权，在晋中朝，常爲重寄，故公曾之叹，恨于失职。
现代文：汉元帝用令、仆执政，魏明帝让监、令专权，在晋朝时，这些人常被委以重任。因此荀不满于大臣失去职权而叹息。
English: Emperor Hanyuan ruled with the use of decrees and servants, while Emperor Wei Ming gave prisoners and decrees absolute power. During the Jin Dynasty, these people were often entrusted with important tasks. Therefore, he was dissatisfied with the minister's loss of authority and sighed.

古文：于时舍人之任，位居九品，江左置通事郎，管司诏诰，其后郎还爲侍郎，而舍人亦称通事。
现代文：当时中书舍人的官职，不过位居九品，晋朝在江左设置通事郎，掌管诏令诰命。后来通事郎又改为侍郎，而舍人也称为通事。
English: At that time, the official position of the secretary was in the 9th grade, but the Jin Dynasty set up a secretary in Jiangzu, who was in charge of the imperial edict. Later, the secretary was changed to a servant, and the secretary was also called the secretary.

古文：元帝用琅邪刘超，以谨慎居职。
现代文：晋元帝任用琅笽刘超为此职，他居官谨慎。
English: Emperor Jin Yuan appointed Gong Liu Chao to this post, and he was cautious in his duties.

古文：宋文世，秋当、周赳并出寒门。
现代文：宋文帝时，秋当、周纠都出身寒门。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Qutang and Zhou Ordu were born in the capital.

古文：孝武以来，士庶杂选，如东海鲍照以才学知名，又用鲁郡巢尚之，江夏王义恭以爲非选。帝遣尚之送尚书四十余牒，宣敕论辩，义恭乃叹曰： 人主诚知人。 
现代文：宋孝武帝以来，所用人选士族庶族混杂，如东海鲍照是以才学知名任此职。又用鲁郡巢尚之，江夏王刘义恭认为选用不当，孝武帝便派尚之给尚书呈上四十多份文牒，并宣布敕令让他们论辩，义恭于是叹息说： 君主真是了解人啊。 
English: Since Emperor Song Xiaowu, the candidates he used were a mixture of nobles and commoners, such as Baozhao of the East China Sea, who was famous for his academic ability. He also used Shang Zhi of Lu County, but the King of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, thought that the choice was inappropriate. Emperor Xiaowu then sent Shang Zhi to present more than forty documents to Shang Shu, and announced the imperial order to let them argue. Yigong then sighed and said: The monarch really understands people.

古文：及明帝世，胡母颢、阮佃夫之徒，专爲佞幸矣。
现代文：到了宋明帝年间，胡母颢、阮佃夫一类人，就成了纯粹被恩幸的佞人了。
English: During the Song and Ming dynasties, people like Hu Muxuan and Ruan Yifu became purely privileged.

古文：齐初亦用久劳及以亲信，关谳表啓，发署诏敕，颇涉辞翰者，亦爲诏文，侍郎之局复见侵矣。
现代文：齐朝初年也任用那些多年效力的人，以及亲信之人。朝廷的各类公文诏诰，一些舞弄文墨的人，也都参与撰写，侍郎的职权，也被侵夺。
English: In the first year of the Qi dynasty, those who had served for many years were also appointed, as well as close confidants. Various official documents of the imperial court, some people who danced with ink, were also involved in writing, and the authority of the chamberlain was also usurped.

古文：建武世，诏命始不关中书，专出舍人。
现代文：建武年间，诏命已不归中书省长官起草，专门由舍人负责。
English: During the Jianwu period, the imperial edict was no longer drafted by the governor of Zhongshu Province, but was exclusively the responsibility of the censor.

古文：省内舍人四人，所直四省，其下有主书令史，旧用武官，宋改文吏，人数无员，莫非左右要密。
现代文：中书省内设舍人四人，负责四省的事务，舍人下边有主书令史，以前用武官，宋代改用文吏，人数没有定额，都是左右亲近之人。
English: In Zhongshuo Province, there are four officials in charge of the affairs of the four provinces. There is a history of the principal officials below the officials. In the past, military officers were used, but in the Song Dynasty, civil servants were used. There is no quota for the number of officials, and they are all close to the left and right.

古文：天下文簿板籍，入副其省，万机严秘，有如尚书外司。
现代文：天下的文书户口，都把副本归中书省，他们谋事机密，外人不知，俨然有如尚书省的外司。
English: The world's clerical accounts all send their copies to the Central Book Ministry. They do confidential work, which is unknown to outsiders. They are like the secretaries of the Central Book Ministry.

古文：领武官有制局监、外监，领器仗兵役，亦用寒人。
现代文：掌管武职的有制局监、外监，管理器械甲仗兵丁役夫的，也用出身寒微的人。
English: In charge of military duties, there are system inspectors and outside inspectors, and those who manage equipment, armour, soldiers, and officers are also people from humble backgrounds.

古文：爰及梁、陈，斯风未改。
现代文：直到梁、陈，这种风气也没改过来。
English: Until Liang and Chen, this culture did not change.

古文：其四代之被恩幸者，今立以爲篇，以继前史之作云尔。
现代文：如今把四朝被恩幸者，写进书中，以承续前代的史书。
English: Nowadays, the beneficiaries of the four dynasties are written into the book to continue the history book of the previous generation.

古文：戴法兴，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：戴法兴是会稽山阴人。
English: Dai Faxing is a member of the Shanshin Association.

古文：家贫，父硕子以贩紵爲业。
现代文：家贫，父亲戴硕子以贩卖纟宁麻为业。
English: His family was poor, and his father, Dai Shuo Zi, was in the business of selling ningxia hemp.

古文：法兴二兄延寿、延兴并修立，延寿善书，法兴好学。
现代文：法兴的两个哥哥延寿、延兴都学有所成，延寿字写得好，法兴好读书。
English: Fa Xing's two brothers, Yan Shou and Yan Xing, have both achieved academic success. Yan Shou can write well, while Fa Xing is good at reading.

古文：山阴有陈戴者，家富有钱三千万，乡人或云： 戴硕子三儿敌陈戴三千万钱。 
现代文：山阴有个陈戴，家境富裕，有钱三千万，当地有人说： 戴硕子三个儿子抵得上陈戴三千万钱。 
English: There is a Chen Dai in Shanyin. His family is well-off and has 30 million yuan in wealth. Some local people said: "Daishuo Zi's three sons are worth 30 million yuan.

古文：法兴少卖葛山阴市，后爲尚书仓部令史。
现代文：法兴年少时在山阴集市卖葛布，后来作尚书仓部令史。
English: When he was young, he sold georgette cloth at the Sanyin Fair, and later wrote a history of the Shang Book Depository Department.

古文：大将军彭城王义康于尚书中觅了了令史，得法兴等五人，以法兴爲记室令史。
现代文：大将军彭城王刘义康在尚书省挑选聪明能干的令史，选中了法兴等五人，任法兴为记室长史。
English: General Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, selected five clever and capable historians in Shangshu Province, including Fa Xing, and appointed him as the chief historian.

古文：义康败，仍爲孝武征虏抚军记室掾。
现代文：义康被杀后，法兴仍担任孝武帝征虏抚军记室掾。
English: After the death of Yikang, Fa Xing still served as the secretary of the military record office of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：及徙江州，仍补南中郎典签。
现代文：调任江州后，补南中郎典签。
English: After he was transferred to Jiangzhou, he signed his name as Mianan Zhongro.

古文：帝于巴口建义，法兴与典签戴明宝、蔡闲俱转参军督护。
现代文：孝武帝刘骏在巴口起兵讨伐刘劭，法兴和典签戴明宝、蔡闲都转任参军督护。
English: Emperor Xiaowu Liu Bei raised an army to fight Liu Bei in Bakou, and Fa Xing, Dai Mingbao and Cai Liang were transferred to join the army to supervise and protect him.

古文：上即位，并爲南台侍御史，同兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：孝武帝即位后，他们都作了南台侍御史，也一同兼任中书通事舍人。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, they both served as Nantai attendants to the Emperor, and also concurrently served as courtiers.

古文：法兴等专管内务，权重当时。
现代文：法兴等人专管朝廷内务，在当时权力很大。
English: Hoxing and others were in charge of the internal affairs of the imperial court, and they wielded great power at the time.

古文：孝建元年，爲南鲁郡太守，解舍人，侍太子于东宫。
现代文：孝建元年，他任南鲁郡太守，免去舍人职务，在东宫侍奉太子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Xiao Jian, he was appointed as the governor of Nanlu County. He was relieved of his duties and served the crown prince in the East Palace.

古文：大明二年，以南下预密谋，封法兴吴昌县男，明宝湘乡县男。
现代文：大明二年，因为曾南下江州参与孝武帝起事的密谋，孝武帝封法兴为吴昌县男，明宝为湘乡县男。
English: In the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, because he had gone south to Jiangzhou to participate in the conspiracy of Emperor Xiaowu's uprising, Emperor Xiaowu made Fa Xing the man of Wuchang County and Ming Bao the man of Xiangxiang County.

古文：闲时已卒，追加爵封。
现代文：蔡闲当时已死，追加他爵位封号。
English: Cai Xian was already dead at the time, and his title was added.

古文：法兴转太子旅贲中郎将。
现代文：法兴又转任太子旅贲中郎将。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of vice-commander of the prince's brigade.

古文：孝武亲览朝政，不任大臣，而腹心耳目不得无所委寄。
现代文：孝武帝亲自主持朝政后，不信任大臣，但不能不依靠一些心腹耳目。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu personally presided over the government, he did not trust the minister, but he had to rely on some confidants.

古文：法兴颇知古今，素见亲待，虽出侍东宫，而意任隆密。
现代文：法兴颇通古今，一向受皇帝宠爱，虽然在东宫太子处任职，然而仍受皇上信任重用。
English: It has been favored by emperors from ancient times to the present. Although it serves in the East Palace Prince's Office, it is still trusted and reused by the emperor.

古文：鲁郡巢尚之，人士之末，元嘉中，侍始兴王浚读书，亦涉猎文史，爲上所知。
现代文：鲁郡的巢尚之，出身寒微，元嘉年间，侍奉始兴王刘氵睿读书，也因通晓文史，被孝武帝所赏识。
English: He was born in a poor family in Lu County. During the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, he served Liu Xuanrui, the first emperor of the Qing Dynasty, and was appreciated by Emperor Xiaowu for his knowledge of literature and history.

古文：孝建初，补东海国侍郎，仍兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：孝建初年，补东海国侍郎，仍兼中书通事舍人。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian's reign, he was still the assistant of the East China Sea state, and also the secretary of the Central Government.

古文：凡选授迁转诛赏大处分，上皆与法兴、尚之参怀。
现代文：凡是对官吏的选拔调动诛罚赏赐等重大处置，孝武帝都和法兴、尚之商议。
English: For all major dispositions such as the selection, transfer, punishment and reward of officials, Emperor Xiaowu consulted with Faxing and Shang.

古文：内外诸杂事多委明宝。
现代文：朝廷内外的各种杂事多交给明宝。
English: All kinds of miscellaneous matters inside and outside the imperial court were mostly handed over to Mingbao.

古文：上性严暴，睚眦之间，动至罪戮。
现代文：孝武帝性情苛刻暴戾，为一点儿小事，就会杀人。
English: Emperor Xiaowu is harsh and violent, and will kill for the smallest of things.

古文：尚之每临事解释，多得全免，殿省甚赖之。
现代文：尚之每到有事就给获罪的官员们开脱，使他们大多得以幸免，官员们多亏了他。
English: In addition, he always exonerated officials who were found guilty, and they were mostly spared, and the officials were grateful to him.

古文：而法兴、明宝大通人事，多纳货贿，凡所荐达，言无不行，天下辐凑，门外成市，家产并累千金。
现代文：而法兴、明宝深通人事关系，广收贿赂。凡经他们推荐，没有不被任用的，于是天下人云集而来，他们门外像集市一样热闹，家产都积有千金之巨。
English: However, Faxing and Mingbao were deeply involved in personnel relations and widely accepted bribes. No one who was recommended by them was not appointed, so people from all over the world gathered. Outside their doors, it was as lively as a market, and their family assets accumulated huge amounts of money.

古文：明宝骄纵尤甚，长子敬爲扬州从事，与上争买御物。
现代文：明宝尤其骄横放纵，他的长子戴敬作扬州刺史从事，竟和皇帝争购物品。
English: Mingbao was particularly arrogant and indulgent. His eldest son, Dai Jing, was engaged in the history of Yangzhou and even competed with the emperor to purchase items.

古文：六宫尝出，敬盛服骑马，于车左右驰骤去来。
现代文：皇帝后妃出宫，戴敬盛装骑马，在后妃车骑左右跑来跑去。
English: When the emperor's empress came out of the palace, Dai Jing dressed up and rode a horse, riding around in the carriage.

古文：上大怒，赐敬死，系明宝尚方。
现代文：皇上大怒，赐戴敬死，把明宝押到朝廷作坊作苦役。
English: The emperor was furious and sentenced Dai Jie to death, and sent Mingbao to do hard labor in the imperial workshop.

古文：寻被原释，委任如初。
现代文：不久皇上原谅并释放了明宝，又像当初一样任用他。
English: Soon after, the emperor pardoned and released Ming Bao, and appointed him as before.

古文：孝武崩，前废帝即位，法兴迁越骑校尉。
现代文：宋孝武帝驾崩，前废帝即位，法兴升迁越骑校尉。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu passed away, the former deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and Fa Xing was promoted to the rank of cavalry lieutenant.

古文：时太宰江夏王义恭录尚书事，任同总己，而法兴、尚之执权日久，威行内外，义恭积相畏服，至是慑惮尤甚。
现代文：当时太宰江夏王刘义恭掌管尚书省事务，居于摄政的地位；但是法兴、尚之掌权日久，威势风行朝廷内外，义恭一向畏惧他们，这时更为害怕。
English: At that time, Liu Yigong, the Dazaifu of Jiangxia, was in charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province and held the position of regent. However, Fa Xing and Shang had been in power for a long time, and their power was popular both inside and outside the court. Yigong had always been afraid of them, and he was even more afraid now.

古文：废帝未亲万机，凡诏敕施爲，悉决法兴之手，尚书中事无大小专断之，顔师伯、义恭守空名而已。
现代文：废帝还未亲政，凡是朝廷颁布的诏令措施，都取决于法兴之手，尚书省内事无论大小都是他说了算，颜师伯、义恭只是徒有虚名而已。
English: The deposed emperor was not yet in power, and all the imperial edicts and measures issued by the imperial court depended on the hand of Fa Xing. He was in charge of all the internal affairs of Shangshu Province, no matter how big or small. Yan Shi Bo and Yi Qiong were only fictitious.

古文：尚之甚聪敏，时百姓欲爲孝武立寺，疑其名。
现代文：尚之非常聪明敏捷，当时百姓想为孝武帝立寺，但寺名定不下来。
English: Shang Zhi was very clever and agile. At that time, the people wanted to build a temple for Emperor Xiaowu, but the name of the temple could not be decided.

古文：尚之应声曰： 宜名天保。
现代文：尚之应声回答说： 应该叫 天保 。
English: Shang Zhi replied in response: It should be called Tian Bao.

古文：诗云： 天保，下报上也。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 天保，下报上也。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "Heaven's protection, it's also in the newspaper."

古文：时服其机速。
现代文：时人都佩服他的机敏。
English: At the time, people admired his astuteness.

古文：废帝年已渐长，凶志转成，欲有所爲，法兴每相禁制。
现代文：废帝年龄渐大，凶狠的本性显露出来，总想随心所欲行事，法兴屡次进行制约。
English: As the old emperor grew older, his ferocious nature was revealed. He always wanted to do whatever he wanted, and Fa Xing repeatedly restrained him.

古文：谓帝曰： 官所爲如此，欲作营阳邪？ 
现代文：对他说： 皇上这样干，想当营阳王吗？ 
English: and said to him, "How can the emperor do such a thing? Does he want to become the king of the sun?"

古文：帝意稍不能平。
现代文：废帝心里便越来越不满。
English: The deposed emperor became more and more dissatisfied.

古文：所爱幸阉人华愿儿有盛宠，赐与金帛无算。
现代文：废帝很宠幸一个宦官华愿儿，赏赐他金帛无数。
English: The deposed emperor was very fortunate to have a eunuch, Hua Xian'er, and rewarded him with countless gold ingots.

古文：法兴常加裁减，愿儿甚恨之。
现代文：法兴常从中裁减，愿儿很是恨他。
English: Fa Xing was often cut from it, and I really hated him.

古文：帝尝使愿儿出入市里，察听风谣，而道路之言，谓法兴爲真天子，帝爲贋天子。
现代文：废帝曾派愿儿走街串巷，打听民间都在说些什么，而街上有传言，说法兴是真天子，废帝是假天子。
English: The deposed emperor once sent his son to walk the streets and alleys to find out what the people were saying, and there were rumors on the streets that Xing was the true godson and the deposed emperor was the false godson.

古文：愿儿因此告帝曰： 外间云宫中有两天子，官是一人，戴法兴是一人。
现代文：愿儿就把这话告诉了废帝说： 外边说宫里有两个天子，皇上是一个，戴法兴是一个。
English: Jian'er told this to Emperor Wuzhong and said, "It is said outside that there are two heavenly sons in the palace, the emperor is one, and Dai Faxing is one.

古文：官在深宫中，人物不相接，法兴与太宰、顔、柳一体，往来门客恒有数百，内外士庶无不畏服之。
现代文：皇上住在深宫里，不接触外界；而法兴和太宰、颜师伯、柳元景结成一党，家中往来的门客常有数百人，朝廷内外上下之人没有不怕他的。
English: The emperor lived in a deep palace and did not come into contact with the outside world; while Fa Xing and Dazai, Yan Shi Bo, and Liu Yuanjing formed a party. There were often hundreds of guests coming and going in the family, and people inside and outside the court were not afraid of him.

古文：法兴是孝武左右，复久在宫闱，今将他人作一家，深恐此坐席非复官许。 
现代文：法兴本是孝武帝亲信，又在宫中日久，如今皇上把外人当自家人，恐怕这位置就不再是皇上的了。 
English: Fok Hing was originally a close confidant of Emperor Xiaowu, and he was in the palace for a long time. Now the emperor treats foreigners as his own family. I'm afraid this position is no longer the emperor's.

古文：帝遂免法兴官，徙付远郡，寻于家赐死。
现代文：于是废帝就罢免了法兴的官职，把他流放到边远州郡，不久又派人到他家赐死。
English: As a result, the deposed emperor removed Fa Xing from his official post, exiled him to a remote prefecture, and soon sent someone to his home to have him killed.

古文：法兴临死，封闭库藏，使家人谨录钥牡。
现代文：法兴临死时，把仓库封上，让家里人管好钥匙。
English: When Fa Xing was about to die, he sealed the warehouse and asked his family members to take good care of the keys.

古文：建武二年，卒官。茹法亮，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：法兴死后过了一夜，废帝又杀了他两个儿子。把法兴棺材两头截断，没收其家产。法兴能写文章，在世上颇为流行。茹法亮是吴兴武康人。
English: One night after Fa Xing's death, the emperor killed his two sons. He cut off both ends of Fa Xing's coffin and confiscated his family property. Fa Xing could write articles and was quite popular in the world. Ru Fa Liang was a Wu Xing Wu Kang person.

古文：宋大明中，出身爲小史。
现代文：宋代大明年间，开始入仕做小吏，又做过书僮。
English: During the second year of the Song Dynasty, he began to serve as a minor official and worked as a clerk.

古文：历斋干扶侍。
现代文：孝武帝末年，残暴严苛，鞭罚过度。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaowu, he was cruel and harsh, with excessive whipping.

古文：孝武末年，鞭罚过度，校猎江右，选白衣左右百八十人，皆面首富室，从至南州，得鞭者过半。
现代文：孝武帝到江右围猎，挑选小吏一百八十人侍从左右，都是富家出身仪表出众的人，跟从孝武帝到南州，被鞭打的超过半数。
English: Emperor Xiaowu went hunting around the Yangtze River and selected 180 minor officials as attendants, all of whom were from rich families and had excellent appearance. More than half of those who followed Emperor Xiaowu to Nanzhou were whipped.

古文：法亮忧惧，因缘啓出家得爲道人。
现代文：法亮害怕，托人介绍出家当了和尚。
English: Frightened, Fa Liang asked someone to introduce him to becoming a monk.

古文：明帝初，罢道，结事阮佃夫，累至齐高帝冠军府行参军。
现代文：宋明帝初年，还俗，结交逢迎阮佃夫，渐次升迁作到齐高帝冠军府行参军。
English: In the first year of Emperor Song Ming, he returned to secular life, made friends with Nguyn Văn Thiệu, and was gradually promoted to Qigong Emperor's champion palace to join the army.

古文：及武帝镇盆城，须旧驱使人，法亮求留爲武帝江州典签，除南台御史，带松滋令。
现代文：到齐武帝萧赜镇守盆城，要用原来用过的旧人，法亮请求留下作武帝江州典签，任南台御史之职，出任松滋县令。
English: When he arrived at Emperor Wu's Xiaoqi Town to defend the basin city, he had to use the old man who had been originally used, and asked Fa Liang to remain as Emperor Wu's Jiangzhou signature, to serve as Nantai's imperial historian, and to serve as Songzhi County's governor.

古文：法亮便僻解事，善于承奉，稍见委信。
现代文：法亮乖巧懂事，善于逢迎，逐渐受到重用。
English: Fa Liang is well-behaved and sensible, good at meeting and greeting, and is gradually being reused.

古文：建元初，度东宫主书，除奉朝请，补东宫通事舍人。
现代文：建元初年，改任东宫主书，任奉朝请，补东宫通事舍人。
English: In the first year after the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the chief clerk of the East Palace, and was asked by the emperor to supplement the East Palace.

古文：武帝即位，仍爲中书通事舍人，除员外郎，带南济阴太守。
现代文：齐武帝即位，官作中书通事舍人，拜员外郎，兼任南济阴太守。
English: Emperor Qiwu ascended to the throne, the official work of the scribe was abandoned, the worshiper was removed, and he also served as the governor of Nanjing.

古文：与会稽吕文度、临海吕文显并以奸佞谄事武帝。
现代文：和会稽吕文度、临海吕文显都以奸诈谄媚侍奉武帝。
English: Lu Wentu of He Hui and Lu Wenxian of Linhai both served Emperor Wu with treachery and flattery.

古文：文度爲外监，专制兵权，领军将军守虚位而已。
现代文：文度掌外监，把持兵权，领军将军只是徒有虚名而已。
English: Mundo is in charge of foreign affairs, he has the right to hold troops, and the general leading the army is just a false name.

古文：天文寺常以上将星占文度吉凶。
现代文：天文寺经常用上将星来占卜文度的吉凶。
English: The Temple of Heaven often uses the General Star to tell fortunes.

古文：文度尤见委信，上尝云： 公卿中有忧国如文度者，复何忧天下不宁。 
现代文：文度特别受信任重用，武帝曾说： 公卿中有像文度这样为国操劳的，还何愁天下不太平。 
English: Emperor Wu once said, "If there are court nobles who have worked so hard for the country like King Mundu, then there is no reason to worry that the world is not peaceful."

古文：文度既见委用，大纳财贿，广开宅宇，盛起土山，奇禽怪树，皆聚其中，后房罗绮，王侯不能及。
现代文：文度既被信任重用，便大肆收受贿赂，广建宅第，多修土山，里边搜集了很多奇禽怪树，后房姬妾所穿着的绫罗纨绮，王侯都赶不上。
English: Since he was trusted to be of great use, he accepted bribes lavishly, built a large number of residences, repaired the soil and mountains, collected a lot of strange birds and trees, and could not keep up with the royal concubines who wore brocade and satin.

古文：又啓上籍被却者悉充远戍，百姓嗟怨，或逃亡避咎。
现代文：他又启奏武帝，把除去了户籍的人全都发配戍边。百姓怨恨，有的便逃亡避祸。
English: He also appealed to Emperor Wu, and all those who had their household registrations removed were issued shackles. The people resented this, and some fled to avoid the disaster.

古文：富阳人唐宇之因此聚党爲乱，鼓行而东，乃于钱唐县僭号，以新城戍爲僞宫，以钱唐县爲僞太子宫，置百官皆备。
现代文：富阳人唐繢之便趁机聚众作乱，大张声势向东进攻，在钱塘自称天子，把新城戍作为伪皇宫，把钱塘县作为伪太子宫，所有百官设置齐备。
English: Tang Xizhi, a native of Fuyang, took advantage of the opportunity to gather a crowd to make a disturbance. He attacked the east with great fanfare. In Qiantang, he claimed to be the son of heaven. He used New Chengdu as a pseudo-royal palace, and Qiantang County as a pseudo-princess's womb. All the necessary officials were in place.

古文：三吴却籍者奔之，衆至三万。
现代文：三吴地区失去户籍者都去投奔，部众达三万人。
English: Those who lost their household registration in the Sanwu area have all fled, and the number of defectors has reached 30,000.

古文：窃称吴国，僞年号兴平。
现代文：称国号为吴，建伪年号为兴平。
English: The name of the country is Wu, and the name of the year is Xingping.

古文：其源始于虞玩之，而成于文度，事见虞玩之传。
现代文：这场祸乱之源始于虞玩之，而最终促成在于文度，事见于《虞玩之传》。
English: The source of this calamity began with Yu Yuanzhi, and ultimately contributed to the literary style, as seen in "The Legend of Yu Yuanzhi."

古文：法亮、文度并势倾天下，太尉王俭常谓人曰： 我虽有大位，权寄岂及茹公。 
现代文：法亮、文度权势压倒天下，太尉王俭常对别人说： 我虽然居于高位，权力怎能比得上茹公。 
English: The influence of the Fa Liang and the Wen Du overpowers the world, and the Tai Liang Wang Jian often said to others: Although I am in a high position, how can my power be compared to Ru Gong?

古文：永明二年，封望蔡县男。
现代文：永明二年，法亮封为封蔡县男。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, Fa Liang was appointed as the man of Cai County.

古文：七年，除临淮太守，转竟陵王司徒中兵参军。
现代文：七年，任临淮太守，又转任竟陵王司徒中兵参军。
English: In the seventh year, he was appointed as the governor of Linhuai, and then he was transferred to the army as a soldier in the army of King Jingling.

古文：巴东王子响于荆州杀僚佐，上遣军西上，使法亮宣旨安抚子响。
现代文：巴东王萧子响在荆州杀害向朝廷密告他的僚佐，武帝派兵西上，让法亮宣布圣旨安抚子响。
English: Xiao Zixing, the king of Padang, was killed in Jingzhou for betraying his aide-de-camp to the imperial court. Emperor Wu sent soldiers to the west to have Fa Liang proclaim the holy will to pacify Zixing.

古文：法亮至江津，子响呼法亮，疑畏不肯往。又求见传诏，法亮又不遣。故子响怒，遣兵破尹略军。
现代文：法亮到江津后，子响叫法亮去见他，法亮害怕不肯去；子响又请求看看诏书，法亮也不派人送去，因此子响发怒，派兵击败尹略带来的朝廷军队。
English: After Fa Liang arrived in Jiangjin, Zixing called Fa Liang to see him, but Fa Liang was afraid and refused to go. Zixing also asked to see the imperial edict, but Fa Liang did not send anyone, so Zixing became angry and sent soldiers to defeat the imperial army brought by Yin Liang.

古文：事平，法亮至江陵，诛赏处分，皆称敕断决。
现代文：后来平定了子响，法亮到江陵，一切赏罚处置，都借用皇帝的名义。
English: Later, Zi Xuan was pacified, Fa Liang went to Jiangling, and all rewards and punishments were carried out in the name of the emperor.

古文：军还，上悔诛子响，法亮被责，少时亲任如旧。
现代文：军队还都后，武帝后悔不该杀子响，法亮被责备，不久又信任如故。
English: After the army returned to the capital, Emperor Wu regretted that he should not have killed his son, Fa Liang was reproached, and soon the trust was still there.

古文：广开宅宇，杉斋光丽，与延昌殿相埒。
现代文：法亮广建宅第，他的杉斋光彩华丽，与延昌殿不相上下。
English: His residence was built by Horyo Hiroshi, and its cedar beams are magnificent, on a par with those of Yanchang-den.

古文：延昌殿，武帝中斋也。
现代文：延昌殿是武帝的中斋。
English: Yanchang Palace was the imperial palace of Emperor Wu.

古文：宅后爲鱼池钓台，土山楼馆，长廊将一里。
现代文：在宅后修建鱼池钓台，土山楼馆，建长廊将近一里。
English: In the back of the house, a fish pond and fishing platform were built, as well as an earthen building and a promenade nearly a mile long.

古文：答曰： 夫径寸之珠，非不宝也，而蚌之所病，云何不疗之哉，此道刚所以死也。 
现代文：其中竹林花草的美丽，王侯的园林也比不上。郁林王萧昭业即位后，任命他作步兵校尉。
English: Among them, the beauty of the bamboo forest flowers and plants, the prince's garden is also incomparable. After the enthronement of Yu Lin Wang Xiao Zhaoye, he was appointed as an infantry captain.

古文：明帝即位，高、武旧人鲜有存者，法亮以主署文事，故不见疑，位任如故。
现代文：齐明帝即位，高帝、武帝时的旧人很少有留用的。法亮因为掌管文事，所以不被怀疑，还像以往一样任职受信任。
English: When Emperor Qiming ascended to the throne, few of the old people from the time of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu remained. Because Fa Liang was in charge of literature, he was not suspected, and he continued to serve and be trusted as before.

古文：先是延昌殿爲武帝阴室，藏诸服御，二少帝并居西殿。
现代文：起先延昌殿作了武帝死后的私室。收藏他生前所穿用的物品，两位少帝都住在西殿。
English: At first, Yanchang-den became Emperor Wu's private room after his death. Items worn during his lifetime were collected, and both young emperors lived in the West Hall.

古文：及明帝居东斋，开阴室，出武帝白纱帽、防身刀，法亮歔欷流涕。
现代文：等明帝即位后居于东斋，打开延昌殿，清理出来武帝的白纱帽、防身刀，法亮见了不禁泪下。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he stayed in Tosa, opened the Yanchang Hall, and cleaned out Emperor Wu's white gauze hat and self-defense knife. When he saw it, he couldn't help but shed tears.

古文：永泰元年，王敬则事平，法亮复受敕宣慰诸郡，无所纳受。
现代文：永泰元年，王敬则谋叛被平定，法亮又领受旨意去抚慰诸郡，没有接受任何贿赂。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Wang Jing's rebellion was put down, and Fa Liang was ordered to appease the counties, without accepting any bribes.

古文：东昏即位，出法亮爲大司农。中书权利之职，法亮不乐去，固辞不受。
现代文：东昏侯即位，改任法亮为大司农，中书通事舍人是有权势的位置，法亮不愿意放弃，便一再推辞大司农之职。
English: When Dong Xiu Hou ascended the throne, he was reappointed as Fa Liang as the chief farmer. The position of the chief farmer was a powerful one, and Fa Liang did not want to give it up, so he repeatedly declined the position of the chief farmer.

古文：既而代人已到，法亮垂涕而出，卒官。
现代文：不久中书舍人继任者到了，法亮只得流泪而退出，后来死在任上。
English: Soon after, Shushe's successor arrived. Fa Liang had to withdraw in tears and later died in office.

古文：吕文显，临海人也。
现代文：吕文显是临海人。
English: Lü Wenxian is a man of the sea.

古文：升明初，爲齐高帝录尚书省事，累迁殿中侍御史。后爲秣陵令，封刘阳县男。
现代文：宋顺帝升明初年，为齐高帝萧道成录尚书省事，屡次升迁为殿中侍御史，后来作秣陵县令，封刘阳县男。
English: When Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he did not have to worry about the record of Emperor Qigong and Emperor Xiao Dao, and he was repeatedly promoted to the position of palace attendant and imperial historian. Later, he became the magistrate of Fuling County and the man of Liuyang County.

古文：永明元年，爲中书通事舍人。
现代文：齐武帝永明元年，任中书通事舍人。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, Emperor Qiwu was appointed to the post of General Secretary.

古文：文显临事以刻核被知。三年，带南清河太守，与茹法亮等叠出入爲舍人，并见亲幸。
现代文：文显办理公事以严苛认真而被赏识，永明三年，兼领南清河太守，和茹法亮等人轮流入朝担任舍人，都受到皇帝的宠幸。
English: Wen Xian was appreciated for his strictness and conscientiousness in handling public affairs. For three years, Yongming, concurrently the governor of the South Qinghe River, and Ruo Faryang, who took turns to serve as courtiers, were favored by the emperor.

古文：多四方饷遗，并造大宅，聚山开池。时中书舍人四人各住一省，世谓之四户。
现代文：各地都给他们送礼，他们各人都堆山挖池修造了大片宅第，当时中书舍人四人分住尚书、中书、门下、秘书四省，世人称之为 四户 。
English: Gifts were sent to them from all over the country, and each of them built a large house by heaping up mountains and digging ponds. At that time, there were four people who lived in the four provinces of Shangshu, Zhongshu, Tongzhu and Secretary, and the world called them the four households.

古文：既总重权，势倾天下。
现代文：他们把持大权，势压天下。
English: They hold great power and exert pressure on the world.

古文：晋、宋旧制，宰人之官，以六年爲限，近世以六年过久，又以三周爲期，谓之小满。
现代文：晋、宋时代的旧制，地方守宰，以六年为期限；后来认为六年时间太长，又规定以三年为期，称为 小满 。
English: Under the old system in the Jin and Song dynasties, local governors were appointed for a term of six years. Later, it was thought that six years was too long, and a three-year term was set, which was called Koman.

古文：而迁换去来，又不依三周之制，送故迎新，吏人疲于道路。
现代文：但实际上变换迁调，并不遵守三年之制，因此官吏们送旧迎新，在道路上疲于奔命。
English: However, in reality, the three-year system is not observed in the process of change and relocation, so the officials send off the old and welcome the new, and are exhausted on the road.

古文：四方守宰饷遗，一年咸数百万。
现代文：四方守宰向中书舍人馈赠的礼物，每年都有数百万。
English: There are millions of gifts given by the governor of Shifang to Chinese scholars every year.

古文：舍人茹法亮于衆中语人曰： 何须觅外禄，此一户内年办百万。 
现代文：舍人茹法亮曾在公众场合对别人说： 何须求作地方官，光这一户一年就收入百万。 
English: Jufaliao, the donor, once said to someone in a public setting: "Why do you want to be a local official? This family alone earns millions a year.

古文：盖约言之也。
现代文：这还是只说了个约数。
English: This is still only a rough estimate.

古文：其后玄象失度，史官奏宜修祈禳之礼。
现代文：后来天象反常，史官奏称应祭天以消灾。
English: Later, the celestial phenomenon was abnormal, and the historian reported that it was necessary to sacrifice the heavens to eliminate the disaster.

古文：王俭闻之，谓上曰： 天文乖忤，此祸由四户。 
现代文：王俭听说后，对皇上说： 天象失常，祸源就在四户。 
English: After hearing this, Wang Jian said to the emperor: The celestial phenomenon is abnormal, and the source of the disaster is in the four households.

古文：仍奏文显等专擅愆和，极言其事。
现代文：于是上奏文显等人专断朝政，破坏人际关系，极力奏明他们所作的坏事。
English: As a result, people such as Wen Xian and others arbitrarily dictated the government, destroyed interpersonal relationships, and tried their best to report the bad things they had done.

古文：上虽纳之而不能改也。
现代文：皇帝虽然听取了他的意见却不能改变对他们的信任。
English: Although the emperor listened to his opinion, he could not change his trust in them.

古文：文显累迁左中郎将，南东莞太守。
现代文：文显屡次升迁到左中郎将，南东莞太守。
English: Wen Xian was repeatedly promoted to General of the Left Middle Palace Guards and Governor of South Dongguan.

古文：故事，府州部内论事，皆签前直叙所论之事，后云谨签，日月下又云某官某签，故府州置典签以典之。
现代文：按旧时惯例，州府内商讨公事，都要记录下来。前边直接记录所议之事，后边写上 谨签 ，日月下边又写上某官某签，因此府州设置典签一职来掌管此事。
English: According to the old practice, all discussions of public affairs within prefectures and prefectures should be recorded. The matter under discussion should be recorded directly on the front side, the signature should be written on the back side, and the signature of a certain official should be written on the bottom side of the date and month. Therefore, prefectures and prefectures set up a signature authority to take charge of this matter.

古文：本五品吏，宋初改爲七职。
现代文：典签本是五品官，宋初改为七品。
English: The signature of the author is the fifth grade, but it was changed to the seventh grade at the beginning of the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋氏晚运，多以幼少皇子爲方镇，时主皆以亲近左右领典签，典签之权稍重。
现代文：宋代末年，多派年幼皇子出任刺史，皇帝都派自己的左右亲信作典签，典签的权力逐渐大起来。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, many young princes were sent to serve as censors, and the emperor sent his right and left cronies to make the signature. The power of the signature gradually increased.

古文：大明、泰始，长王临蕃，素族出镇，莫不皆出内教命，刺史不得专其任也。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明、明帝泰始年间，成年皇子或庶族出任州刺史的，也都莫不遇事要请示典签，刺史不能按自己的意见行事。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Da Ming and Emperor Taizu of the Song and Xiaowu dynasties, adult princes or commoners who served as state magistrates also had to ask for a signature in some cases, and magistrates could not act according to their own opinions.

古文：宗悫爲豫州，吴喜公爲典签。
现代文：宗悫作豫州刺史时，吴喜公作典签。
English: When Zonglu made the history of Yuzhou, Wu Xigong made the signature.

古文：悫刑政所施，喜公每多违执。
现代文：宗悫施行什么行政措施，喜公总要违命行事。
English: No matter what administrative measures Zonglu implemented, Xi Gong always disobeyed his orders.

古文：悫大怒曰： 宗悫年将六十，爲国竭命，政得一州如斗大，不能复与典签共临！ 
现代文：宗悫大怒道： 我年近六十，一辈子为国尽力卖命，才得到斗大的一个州，不能再和典签共同治理！ 
English: Zonglu said angrily, "I am nearly sixty years old, and I have been working hard for the country all my life, only to get a state that is too big. I can no longer co-govern with Dianzi!"

古文：喜公稽颡流血乃止。
现代文：喜公请罪叩头直到流血宗悫才作罢。
English: Xi Gong pleaded guilty to kowtowing until the bloodshed of Zong Xuan was over.

古文：自此以后，权寄弥隆，典签递互还都，一岁数反，时主辄与闲言，访以方事。
现代文：从此以后，皇上给予典签的权力越来越大。各地典签们轮流回京，一年都往返几趟，皇帝常与他们闲聊，询问地方上的事情。
English: From then on, the power given by the emperor to the legatees became greater and greater. The legatees from various regions took turns to return to Beijing, making several trips a year. The emperor often chatted with them and asked about local affairs.

古文：刺史行事之美恶，系于典签之口，莫不折节推奉，恒虑不及。
现代文：刺史办事是好是坏，全在典签一张嘴，因此诸王刺史们无不对典签卑躬屈节小心侍奉，常怕有什么不周到之处。
English: Historiographers, whether good or bad, are all in the business of signing. Therefore, the kings of historiographers all serve with servility and caution, and are often afraid of being careless.

古文：于是威行州郡，权重蕃君。
现代文：于是典签的威风风行州郡，权力大于藩王刺史。
English: As a result, the power of the signature of the author is greater than that of the king of the clan.

古文：刘道济、柯孟孙等奸慝发露，虽即显戮，而权任之重不异。
现代文：典签刘道济、柯孟孙等人因恶迹暴露，虽被明令处死，但典签们的权力之重却仍旧不减。
English: Although Liu Daoji, Ke Mengsun and others who signed the edict were sentenced to death after their evil deeds were exposed, the authority of the signers of the edict remained undiminished.

古文：明帝辅政，深知之，始制诸州急事宜密有所论，不得遣典签还都，而典签之任轻矣。
现代文：宋明帝辅政时，深知典签的弊端，才开始规定各州的紧要事务应秘密商讨，上奏朝廷，不得派典签还京，典签的权力才被削弱。
English: When Emperor Song Ming assisted the government, he was well aware of the drawbacks of the signature, and only began to stipulate that the important affairs of each state should be discussed in secret, reported to the imperial court, and the signature should not be sent back to Beijing, and the power of the signature was weakened.

古文：后以文显守少府，见任使，历建武、永元之世，至尚书右丞，少府卿，卒官。
现代文：后来又让吕文显掌少府，受到重用，经历明帝建武、东昏侯永元之世，官至尚书右丞，少府卿，死在任上。
English: Later, Lu Wen was appointed to the post of Shaofu, and was given important positions. During the reigns of the Ming Emperor Jianwu and the Eastern Dynast Yongyuan, he served as Shaofu's right-hand man and died in office.

古文：茹法珍，会稽人，梅虫儿，吴兴人，齐东昏时并爲制局监，俱见爱幸。
现代文：茹法珍是会稽人，梅虫儿是吴兴人，齐东昏侯时都在制局监任职，也都受到宠幸。
English: Ru Fazhen is the auditor of the association, Mei Zuer is Wu Xingren, and Qi Dong served as the supervisor of the Bureau of Statistics when he was in his twilight, and they were also favored.

古文：自江祏、始安王遥光等诛后，及左右应敕捉刀之徒并专国命，人间谓之刀敕，权夺人主。
现代文：自从江衤石、始安王萧遥光被处死后。皇上左右传达旨意和替皇上代笔的人都掌握了国家大权，民间称这些人为 刀敕 ，权力有时比君主还大。
English: Ever since the execution of Jiang Yanshi and Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang, the people who conveyed the emperor's will and wrote for the emperor have held the power of the state. People call these people "swordsmen," and their power is sometimes greater than that of the monarch.

古文：都下爲之语曰： 欲求贵职依刀敕，须得富豪事御刀。 
现代文：京城里有一句口号说： 欲求贵职依刀敕，须得富贵侍御刀。 
English: There is a slogan in the capital that says, "If you want to be a high-ranking official, you must be rich enough to serve the Emperor."

古文：时又有新蔡人徐世檦，尤见宠信，自殿内主帅爲直合骁骑将军。
现代文：当时又有新蔡人徐世木剽，尤其被宠信，从殿内主帅升任直阁骁骑将军。
English: At that time, there was also a new Cai person, Xu Shijun, who was especially favored, and he was promoted from the head coach of the palace to the general of the Zhiakou cavalry.

古文：凡诸杀戮，皆世檦所劝。
现代文：凡是东昏侯杀人，都是受世木剽的怂恿。
English: Anyone who kills in a state of intoxication is under the yoke of the world.

古文：杀徐孝嗣后，封临汝县子。
现代文：杀了徐孝嗣以后，世木剽被封为临汝县子。
English: After he killed Xu Xiaozhi, Shemu Xi was given the title of the son of Lin Ru County.

古文：陈显达事起，加辅国将军。
现代文：陈显达举兵反，世木剽又加封辅国将军。
English: Chen Xianda raised an army and rebelled, and Shijiazhuang was also given the title of vice-governor.

古文：虽用护军崔慧景爲都督，而兵权实在世檦，当时权势倾法珍、虫儿。
现代文：朝廷虽用崔慧景为都督，而兵权实际在世木剽手里。当时他的权势压过法珍、虫儿。
English: Although the imperial court used Cui Huijing as the governor, the military power was actually in the hands of Shemu Xi. At that time, his power overpowered that of Fa Zhen and Zuer.

古文：又谓法珍、虫儿曰： 何世天子无要人，但阿侬货主恶耳。 
现代文：他又对法珍、虫儿说： 哪一朝天子手下没有显要人物，只是你们的货主不好罢了。 
English: He also said to Fa Zhen and Worm, "There is no important person under the Son of Heaven, but your cargo owner is not good.

古文：法珍等与之争权，遂以白帝，帝稍恶其凶强。
现代文：法珍他们和他争权，于是把这话告诉了东昏侯，东昏侯便渐渐讨厌他的凶暴强悍。
English: They fought with him for power, so they told this to Dongdimou, who gradually came to hate his ferocity.

古文：世檦窃欲生心，左右徐僧重密知之，发其事，收得千馀人仗及咒诅文，又画帝十馀形像，备爲刑斩刻射支解之状；而自作己像着通天冠衮服，题云徐氏皇帝。
现代文：世木剽暗生篡逆之心，东昏侯左右徐僧重暗地了解到，告发了他，搜出来千余人的兵器和咒诅文，还有十几幅东昏侯的画像，全都是被斩杀箭射肢解的形状，而为自己画的像戴着通天冠身穿衮服，上面题字 徐氏皇帝 。
English: The world secretly harbored a rebellious heart, and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties and the Eastern Dynasties

古文：永元二年事发，乃族之。
现代文：永元二年事情败露后，被灭族。
English: After the events of the second year of the Yongyuan era were exposed, they were exterminated.

古文：自是法珍、虫儿并爲外监，口称诏敕，中书舍人王咺之与相唇齿，专掌文翰。
现代文：从此法珍、虫儿都任外监，皇帝诏敕由他们口出。中书舍人王口亘之和他们相互勾连，专门掌管朝廷文书。
English: From then on, Hozhen and Zushi'er were appointed as foreign inspectors, and the emperor's edicts were issued from their mouths. Wang Guoqi, who was in charge of the imperial documents, colluded with them, and was in charge of the imperial documents.

古文：其馀二十馀人，皆有势力。
现代文：其余二十余人，都很有势力。
English: The remaining twenty-odd people are all very powerful.

古文：崔慧景平后，法珍封馀干县男，虫儿封竟陵县男。
现代文：崔慧景被平定后，法珍受封余干县男，虫儿受封竟陵县男。
English: After Cui Huiqing was subdued, Fuzhen was given the title of Yugang County Man, and Zhu'er was given the title of Jingling County Man.

古文：崔慧景之平，曲赦都下及南兖州，本以宥贼党，而群凶用事，刑辟不依诏书。
现代文：崔慧景平定，特赦京城及南兖州，本来要宽宥贼党，然而一帮凶残小人把持大权，并不依照诏书进行刑罚。
English: Cui Huijing was pacified and Beijing and Nanluozhou were pardoned. Originally, the Kuomintang was to be pardoned, but a gang of thugs seized power and did not carry out the punishment in accordance with the edict.

古文：无罪家富者，不论赦令，莫不受戮，籍其家产；与慧景深相关爲尽力而家贫者，一无所问。
现代文：无罪的人只要家中富有，便不管赦令，无不被杀，没收家产；然而与慧景关系很深，为他出大力而家贫的人，便一个也不问。
English: Innocent people, as long as their families are rich, do not care about pardons, do not want to be killed, and confiscate their family property; however, they have a deep relationship with Huijing, and they do not ask anyone who is poor and works hard for him.

古文：始安、显达时亦已如此，至慧景平复然。
现代文：处置始安王萧遥光、陈显达的时候已经是这样了，到慧景又是如此。
English: This was already the case when dealing with Shi'an kings Xiao Yaoguang and Chen Xianda, and it is still the case with Huijing.

古文：或说王咺之云： 赦书无信，人情大恶。 
现代文：有人对王口亘之说： 赦免令没有信用，恐怕引起人心怨恨。 
English: Someone said to Wang Guanzhong: "The pardon order has no credibility, I'm afraid it will arouse resentment.

古文：咺之曰： 政当复有赦耳。 
现代文：口亘之说： 只能等以后再有赦令再说吧。 
English: "We'll just have to wait and see if there's a pardon later," he said.

古文：复赦，群小诛戮亦复如先。
现代文：后来碰上这种事再有赦令，一帮小人照样还像以前一样杀人。
English: Later, when this kind of thing happened, there was a pardon order, and a gang of villains still killed people as before.

古文：帝自群公诛后，无复忌惮，无日不游走。
现代文：东昏侯自几位大臣被杀后，更无所顾忌，无一天不到处游玩。
English: Since several ministers were killed, Dongdimou has been even more reckless, never missing a day to play around.

古文：所幸潘妃本姓俞名尼子，王敬则伎也。
现代文：他所宠幸的潘妃本来姓俞名尼子，是王敬则的乐伎。
English: His favorite princess, Panfei, whose original family name was Shimei Nishi, was a pupil of Wang Jingzhe.

古文：或云宋文帝有潘妃，在位三十年，于是改姓曰潘，其父宝庆亦从改焉。
现代文：有人说宋文帝有潘妃，在帝位上坐了三十年，于是把她改姓潘，她父亲俞宝庆也随着改姓潘。
English: It is said that Emperor Songwen had a consort, Panfei, who sat on the throne for thirty years, so he changed her surname to Pan, and her father, Zou Baoqing, also changed his surname to Pan.

古文：帝呼宝庆及法珍爲阿丈，虫儿及东冶营兵俞灵韵爲阿兄。
现代文：东昏侯称宝庆和法珍为阿丈，虫儿、东冶营兵俞灵韵为阿兄。
English: Dongdimou called Baoqing and Fuzhen as Ajo, and Worms and Dongye Battalion Soldier Lingyun as Ae.

古文：帝与法珍等俱诣宝庆，帝躬自汲水，助厨人作膳，爲市中杂语以爲谐谑。
现代文：东昏侯和法珍等人一块到宝庆家里，东昏侯亲自去打水，帮厨子作饭，说着市井中粗言俗语来开玩笑。
English: Dongdimou and Fazhen and others went to Bao Qinglong's home together. Dongdimou himself went to fetch water, helped the cook to make meals, and joked about the vulgarities in the market.

古文：又帝轻骑戎服往诸刀敕家游宴，有吉凶辄往庆吊。
现代文：东昏侯还轻骑戎装到那些亲信小人家中玩耍吃喝，有了喜事丧事也总是去庆贺吊丧。
English: Dongwu Hou also rode lightly dressed in armor to the homes of those trusted villains to play, eat and drink, and always went to celebrate funerals and funerals.

古文：奄人王宝孙年十三四，号爲伥子，最有宠，参预朝政，虽王咺之、虫儿之徒亦下之。
现代文：宦官王宝孙十三四岁，称作 伥子 ，最受宠爱，参与朝政，即使王口亘之、梅虫儿之徒也都居他之下。
English: The eunuch Wang Baosun was thirteen or fourteen years old. He was called Zangzi, and he was the most beloved. He took part in court politics. Even the king's favorite, Mei Zueri, was inferior to him.

古文：控制大臣，移易敕诏，乃至骑马入殿，诋诃天子。
现代文：他控制大臣，改变皇上诏令，以至于骑马上殿，斥责天子。
English: He controlled the ministers, changed the imperial edict, and even rode into the palace to rebuke the emperor.

古文：公卿见之，莫不慑息。
现代文：公卿大臣见了他，无不大气儿也不敢出。
English: When the Lord Chancellor saw him, he almost didn't dare to come out.

古文：其佐成昏乱者：法珍、虫儿及王咺之、俞宝庆、俞灵韵、祝灵勇、范亮之、徐僧重、时崇济、芮安泰、刘文泰、吕文庆、胡辉光、缪买养、章道之、杨敬子、李粲之、周管之、范昙济、石昙悦、张恶奴、王胜公、王怀藻、梅师济、邹伯儿、史元益、王灵范、席休文、解滂及太史令骆文叔、大巫朱光尚，凡三十一人。
现代文：助成朝廷昏乱的人有：法珍、虫儿和王口亘之、俞宝庆、俞灵韵、祝灵勇、范亮之、徐僧重、时崇济、芮安泰、刘文泰、吕文庆、胡辉光、缪买养、章道之、杨敬子、李粲之、周管之、范昙济、石昙悦、张恶奴、王胜公、王怀藻、梅师济、邹伯儿、史元益、王灵范、席休文、解氵旁以及太史令骆文叔、大巫朱光尚，共计三十一人。
English: There were a total of thirty-one people who aided in the confusion of the imperial court: Fa Zhen, Zhou Er and Wang Kou, Zi Baoqing, Zi Ling Yun, Zhu Ling Yong, Fan Liang, Xu Soong Chung, Shi Chongji, Zi Antai, Liu Wentai, Lu Wentai, Hu Huiguang, Miao Baizhang, Zhang Daozhi, Yang Keizi, Li Yuanzhi, Zhou Guanzhi, Fan Yuanzhi, Shi Yuetsu, Zhang Xiongnu, Wang Sheng Gong, Wang Huaijiao, Mei Shiji, Zibo Er, Shi Yuan Yi, Wang Ling Fan,

古文：又有奄官王宝孙、王法昭、许朗之、许伯孙、方佛念、马僧猛、盛劭、王竺儿、随要、袁系世等十人。
现代文：又有宦官王宝孙、王法昭、许朗之、许伯孙、方佛念、马僧猛、盛劭、王竺儿、随要、袁系世等十人。
English: There were also ten eunuchs, including Wang Baosun, Wang Fa Zhao, Xu Langzhi, Xu Bo Sun, Fang Bu Nian, Ma Xiangmeng, Sheng Yao, Wang Yuer, Zuyao, and Yuan Kisei.

古文：梁武平建邺，皆诛。
现代文：梁武帝平定建邺后，把他们全部杀死。
English: Emperor Liangwu killed all of them after the battle.

古文：又朱兴光爲茹法珍所疾，得罪被系，丰勇之与王珍国相知，行杀皆免。
现代文：又有朱兴光被茹法珍仇视，得罪他被他抓过，丰勇之和梁武帝的人王珍国关系好，因此行将被杀时都获赦免。
English: In addition, Zhu Xingguang was hated by Zhu Fazhen, who was offended that he had been arrested by him. Fengyong had a good relationship with Wang Zhenguo, the man of Emperor Liangwu, so he was pardoned when he was about to be killed.

古文：初，左右刀敕之徒悉号爲鬼，宫中讹云： 赵鬼食鸭歗，诸鬼尽着调。 
现代文：起初，东昏侯左右刀敕之徒，都被称为鬼，宫中谣传说： 赵鬼食鸭肃刂，诸鬼尽著调。 
English: At first, all the swordsmen around Dongwenhou were called ghosts, and the palace rumor said: Zhao ghosts eat ducks, and all the ghosts are in tune.

古文：台城失守，隋晋王以客卿重赋厚敛，以悦于上，与文庆、暨慧景、阳惠朗等，俱斩于石阙前。
现代文：当时无人能解其意。梁武帝平定建邺，东昏侯死，一帮小人一齐被诛灭，故称他们为诸鬼。
English: At that time, no one could figure out what he meant. Emperor Liangwu conquered Jianye, Dongwu died, and a group of villains were annihilated together, so they were called ghosts.

古文：徐哲，不知何许人，施文庆引爲制局监，掌刑法，亦与客卿同诛。孔范字法言，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：民间把剁碎的肉末拌上姜桂叫作肃刂，那句话的意思是那帮恶徒都该剁碎煮了他们。孔范字法言，会稽山阴人。
English: The people called the minced minced meat mixed with ginger and cinnamon "Shuyu," which means that the gang of villains should have minced and boiled them.

古文：曾祖景伟，齐散骑常侍。
现代文：曾祖父孔景伟，是齐朝的散骑常侍。
English: His great-grandfather, Kong Jingwei, was an equestrian of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：祖滔，梁海盐令。
现代文：祖父孔滔，是梁朝海盐县令。
English: His grandfather, Kong Tao, was the governor of Haiyan County in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父岱，历职清显。
现代文：父亲孔岱，历任清雅显要之职。
English: His father, Confucius, held a succession of elegant and important posts.

古文：范少好学，博涉书史。
现代文：孔范从小好学，博览史籍。
English: Kong Fan has been eager to learn since childhood, and is well-versed in history.

古文：陈太建中，位宣惠江夏王长史。
现代文：陈太建年间，任宣惠将军江夏王陈伯义长史。
English: During the reign of Chen Taijian, Chen Bo Yi, the King of Jiangxia, was appointed as the General of Propaganda and Benevolence.

古文：后主即位，爲都官尚书，与江总等并爲狎客。
现代文：陈后主即位后，作都官尚书，和江总等人都是后主的狎日匿小人。
English: After Empress Chen's accession to the throne, the governor of the capital, Shang Shu, and the general of the Yangtze River were all puppets of the empress.

古文：范容止都雅，文章赡丽，又善五言诗，尤见亲爱。
现代文：孔范仪表出众，举止高雅，文章丰沛华丽，又善作五言诗，故尤其被后主宠爱。
English: Kong Fan's appearance was outstanding, his manners were elegant, his articles were rich and gorgeous, and he was good at composing five-character poems, so he was especially loved by the queen mother.

古文：后主性愚狠，恶闻过失，每有恶事，范必曲爲文饰，称扬赞美。
现代文：后主生性愚笨狠毒，不愿别人说自己的过失。每做什么坏事，孔范必定为他曲意文饰，称扬赞美。
English: Later, the main character was stupid and cruel, and did not want others to talk about his mistakes. Whenever he did something bad, Kong Fan would certainly write about him and praise him.

古文：时孔贵人绝爱幸，范与孔氏结爲兄妹，宠遇优渥，言听计从。
现代文：当时孔贵人顶受宠爱，孔范与她结为兄妹，因而宠幸恩遇更加优厚，后主对他言听计从。
English: At that time, Kong Guizhen was the most favored, and Kong Fan married her as a brother and sister, so the favored treatment was more generous, and the heir obeyed him.

古文：朝廷公卿咸畏范，范因骄矜，以爲文武才能举朝莫及。
现代文：朝廷公卿都怕他，他因此便骄矜自大，认为他的文武才能整个朝廷无人能比得上。
English: Court nobles were afraid of him, which made him arrogant, believing that his literary and military talents were unmatched by anyone else in the entire court.

古文：从容白后主曰： 外间诸将，起自行伍，匹夫敌耳。
现代文：孔范怂恿后主说： 外面诸将领出身行伍，只不过匹夫之勇。
English: The empress dowager Kong Fan Rong said, "Outside, all generals come from the army, but they are all brave.

古文：深见远虑，岂其所知。 
现代文：深谋远虑之事，他们怎么能懂。 
English: What do they know about forethought?

古文：后主以问施文庆，文庆畏范，益以爲然。
现代文：后主拿这话问施文庆，文庆怕孔范，便曲意附和，后主更认为孔范说的对。
English: Later, the master asked Shi Wenqing about this, Wenqing was afraid of Kong Fan, so he agreed with the meaning of the song, and the master thought that what Kong Fan said was right.

古文：自是将帅微有过失，即夺其兵，分配文吏。
现代文：从此将帅只要小有过失，就夺去兵权，分派他们去作下级文吏。
English: From then on, generals deprived soldiers of their military powers for minor faults and assigned them to work as lower-ranking clerks.

古文：隋师将济江，群官请爲备防，文庆沮坏之，后主未决。
现代文：隋军将要渡江，群臣请后主设置防御，施文庆从中阻挠，后主因此迟疑未决。
English: The Sui army is about to cross the river, the courtiers ask the lord to set up a defense, and Shi Wenqing obstructs them, so the lord hesitates and is undecided.

古文：范奏曰： 长江天堑，古来限隔，虏军岂能飞度？
现代文：孔范上奏说； 长江天堑，自古隔断南北，敌寇岂能飞渡？
English: Kong Fan said at the top of his speech; The Yangtze River has been a natural barrier since ancient times, separating the north and the south. Can enemy pirates fly across it?

古文：边将欲作功劳，妄言事急。
现代文：都是边将想立功，谎报军情紧急。
English: It was the generals who wanted to take credit and falsely reported that the military situation was urgent.

古文：臣自恨位卑，虏若能来，定作太尉公矣。 
现代文：我自恨职位低下。敌寇如果能来，我一定能立功作太尉公了。 
English: I hate myself for my low position. If the enemy invaders can come, I will surely be able to make a contribution as a captain.

古文：或妄言北军马死，范曰： 此是我马，何因死去。 
现代文：有人瞎传说北军的马死了，孔范却说： 它们早晚得是我们的马，为什么死了呢。 
English: Some people gossiped that the horses of the Northern Army had died, but Kong Fan said, "Sooner or later, they must be our horses. Why did they die?"

古文：后主笑以爲然，故不深备。
现代文：后主笑了，认为他说得好，因此并不认真防备。
English: Afterward, the host smiled and thought he spoke well, so he didn't take precautions seriously.

古文：寻而隋将贺若弼陷南徐州，执城主庄元始，韩擒陷南豫州，败水军都督高文泰。
现代文：不久隋将贺若弼攻陷南徐州，俘获守将庄元始。韩擒虎攻陷南豫州，打败水军都督高文泰。
English: Soon after, the Sui conquered He Ruoqi in South Xuzhou and captured the garrison commander Zhuang Yuanxi. Han Xunhu invaded South Yuzhou and defeated the naval governor Gao Wentai.

古文：范与中领军鲁广达顿于白塔寺。
现代文：孔范与中领军鲁广达屯兵白塔寺。
English: Kong Fan and the middle leader of the army, Lu Guangda, are stationed at the White Pagoda Temple.

古文：后主多出金帛，募人立功，范素于武士不接，莫有至者，唯负贩轻薄多从之，高丽、百济、昆仑诸夷并受督。
现代文：后主拿出许多金银丝绸，招募人去立功，孔范平时不与武人交往，所以没有人肯来，只有不少商贩和轻薄子弟来跟随他，高丽、百济、昆仑等外国军队受他指挥。
English: His successor took out a lot of gold, silver and silk and recruited people to perform meritorious deeds. Kong Fan did not usually associate with warriors, so no one was willing to come. Only a lot of merchants and light-skinned children came to follow him. Foreign armies such as Goryeo, Baekje and Kunlun were commanded by him.

古文：时任蛮奴请不战，而己度江攻其大军。
现代文：当时任蛮奴请求不要出战，而由自己率兵渡江攻击隋大军侧后。
English: At that time, the barbarian asked not to go to war, but to cross the river and attack the rear of the Sui army.

古文：又司马消难言于后主曰： 弼若登高举烽，与韩擒相应，鼓声交震，人情必离。
现代文：又有司马消难对后主说： 贺若弼如果登高点起烽火，与韩擒虎相互呼应，鼓声连成一片，人心必然溃散。
English: Another disciple, Sima Qidang, said to his successor: "If He Ruoqian climbs up and starts a bonfire, it will resonate with Han Yuhu, and the drums will become one, and people's hearts will inevitably break apart."

古文：请急遣兵北据蒋山，南断淮水，质其妻子，重其赏赐。
现代文：请赶紧调兵北面占据蒋山，南面截断淮水，扣留出战将士的妻儿作人质，多给他们赏赐。
English: Please quickly dispatch troops to occupy Jiangshan in the north, cut off Huai Shui in the south, detain the wives and children of the soldiers as hostages, and give them more rewards.

古文：陛下以精兵万人，守城莫出。
现代文：陛下带精兵万人，坚守城中不要出战。
English: Your majesty, with ten thousand of your best soldiers, do not go to war, but stay in the city.

古文：不过十日，食尽，二将之头可致阙下。 
现代文：不超过十天，隋军粮尽，贺若弼、韩擒虎的人头便可献进宫内。 
English: Not more than ten days after the Sui army ran out of food, the heads of He Ruoqi and Han Yuhu could be presented to the palace.

古文：范冀欲立功，志在于战，乃曰： 司马消难狼子野心，任蛮奴淮南伧士，语并不可信。 
现代文：孔范想立功，决意出战，就对后主说： 司马消难狼子野心，任蛮奴是淮南粗鄙之人，他们的话都不可信。 
English: Confucius Fan wanted to make meritorious deeds and was determined to go to war, so he said to his descendant: Sima eliminated the ambition of the wolf, let the barbarians be the rude people of Huainan, and their words cannot be trusted.

古文：事遂不行。
现代文：他们的建议便都未能实行。
English: Things came to a halt.

古文：隋军既逼，蛮奴又欲爲持久计，范又奏： 请作一决，当爲官勒石燕然。 
现代文：隋军逼近以后，蛮奴又想作持久战，孔范又上奏说： 请速决一战，我要像窦宪破匈奴那样为皇上建功立业。 
English: After the Sui army approached, the barbarians again wanted to wage a protracted war, and Kong Fan again made a speech, saying: Please end the war quickly. I want to make contributions to the emperor like Dou Xian defeated the Xiongnu.

古文：后主从之。
现代文：后主听从了他。
English: His successor obeyed him.

古文：明日，范以其徒居中，以抗隋师，未阵而北，范脱身遁免。
现代文：第二天，孔范带着招募来的那帮人居于队伍中间，去迎击隋军，还未布阵便都逃跑了，孔范脱身而逃免于被俘。
English: The next day, Kong Fan took the recruited group of residents in the middle of the team to meet the Sui army, and they all fled before the formation was set up. Kong Fan escaped and escaped from being captured.

古文：寻与后主俱入长安。
现代文：不久国亡，和后主作为俘虏被带到长安。
English: Soon after, the country fell, and he and his heir were taken as captives to Chang'an.

古文：初，晋王广所戮陈五佞人，范与散骑常侍王瑳、王仪、御史中丞沈瓘，过恶未彰，故免。
现代文：当初，晋王杨广杀了陈朝五个奸佞之人，而孔范与散骑常侍王王差、王仪、御史中丞沈馞罪恶没被揭露，因此幸免。
English: At first, King Yang Guang of Jin killed the five traitors of the Chen Dynasty, but the crimes of Kong Fan and his horseback riding attendants Wang Zha, Wang Yi, and Wang Shizhongzheng were not revealed, so they were spared.

古文：及至长安，事并露，隋文帝以其奸佞谄惑，并暴其过恶，名爲四罪人，流之远裔，以谢吴、越之人。
现代文：等到长安后，他们所作坏事败露，隋文帝因他们奸佞谄媚，欺惑君主，全部公布他们的罪恶，称为 四罪人 ，流放到边远地区，来向吴、越之人谢罪。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, the bad things they had done were exposed. Because of their deceitful flattery and deception of the monarch, the Sui Emperor announced all their sins, called the Four Sinners, and exiled them to remote areas to thank the people of Wu and Yue for their sins.

古文：瑳、仪并琅邪人。
现代文：王王差、王仪都是琅笽人。
English: Wang Wangzha and Wang Yi are both Han people.

古文：瑳刻薄贪鄙，忌害才能。
现代文：王王差刻薄贪婪卑鄙，忌才害能。
English: Kings and queens are mean, greedy, and despicable.

古文：仪候意承顔，倾巧侧媚，又献其二女，以求亲昵。
现代文：王仪专门揣摸君主心思，察颜观色，曲意谄媚，又把两个女儿献给后主，以求亲近。
English: Wang Yi specially pondered the monarch's thoughts, observed the color of the face, the charm of the melody, and dedicated the two daughters to the heir, in order to be close.

古文：瓘险惨苛酷，发言邪谄，故同罪焉。
现代文：沈馞阴险毒辣，苛刻残酷，说话奸邪谄媚，因此将他们一起治罪。
English: Shen Yao was sinister, harsh and cruel, and his words were seductive, so he punished them together.

