古文：孙觉，字莘老，高邮人。
现代文：孙觉字莘老，高邮人。
English: Sun Jue is an old man, a high-ranking postman.

古文：甫冠，从胡瑗受学。
现代文：刚刚二十岁，跟从胡瑗受学。
English: He was just twenty years old when he started to study under Hu Yao.

古文：瑗之弟子千数，别其老成者为经社，觉年最少，俨然居其间，众皆推服。
现代文：胡瑗的弟子千数，区分其老成者为经社，孙觉年纪最轻，俨然居于其间，大家都对他推重佩服。
English: There are thousands of disciples of Hu Jintao, and the most mature one is Jing She. Sun Jue is the youngest and lives among them. Everyone respects and admires him.

古文：登进士第，调合肥主簿。
现代文：登进士第，调任合肥主簿。
English: He was promoted to the third grade and transferred to the Hefei main office.

古文：岁旱，州课民捕蝗输之官，觉言： 民方艰食，难督以威。
现代文：有一年发生旱灾，州府劝课百姓捕蝗虫输纳给官府，孙觉说： 正是吃饭艰难之时，难以用威权去督责。
English: One year, there was a drought, and the prefectural government advised the people to catch locusts and donate them to the government. Sun Jue said, "It is precisely when it is difficult to eat that it is difficult to use authority to supervise.

古文：若以米易之，必尽力，是为除害而享利也。 守悦，推其说下之他县。
现代文：如果用米交换，百姓必定尽力，这是除害享利。 州太守听后感到高兴，把孙觉的建议推广传发其他县。
English: If rice is exchanged, the people will surely do their best, which is to eliminate the harm of henry. The state eunuch felt happy after listening, and spread Sun Jue's suggestion to other counties.

古文：嘉祐中，择名士编校昭文书籍，觉首预选，进馆阁校勘。
现代文：嘉年间，朝廷挑选名士编校昭文馆书籍，孙觉第一个被预选，进为馆阁校勘。
English: During the Jia years, the imperial court selected famous people to edit and proofread the books of the Shouwen Library. Sun Jie was the first to be pre-selected and entered the library as a proofreader.

古文：神宗即位，直集贤院，为昌王记室，王问终身之戒，为陈诸侯之孝，作《富贵二箴》。
现代文：神宗即皇帝位，孙觉任直集贤院，为昌王记室。昌王向他询问终身之戒，孙觉为之陈述诸侯之孝，作《富贵二箴》。
English: Shenzong is the emperor's throne, and Sun Jue is the record keeper of the Zhiji Xianyuan, which is the record office of King Chang. King Chang asked him about the lifelong precepts, and Sun Jue stated the filial piety of the princes, and wrote the "Two Precepts of Wealth."

古文：擢右正言。
现代文：被提拔为右正言。
English: He was promoted to the post of the Right Chief Counselor.

古文：神宗将大革积弊，觉言： 弊政固不可不革，革而当，其悔乃亡。 神宗称其知理。
现代文：神宗将要大力革除积弊，孙觉说： 弊政固不可不革除，如果革除过当，后悔就来不及。 神宗称赞他懂得事理。
English: Shenzong will make great efforts to eliminate accumulated defects, Sun Jue said: Bad policies must be eliminated, if they are eliminated too quickly, it will be too late to regret. Shenzong praised him for understanding the facts.

古文：尝从容语及知人之难，觉曰： 尧以知人为难，终享其易。
现代文：曾经从容地谈到知人之难，孙觉说： 唐尧以知人为难，终于享其易。
English: Sun Jue once calmly talked about the difficulty of making acquaintances, saying: Tang Xuan found it difficult to make acquaintances, and finally enjoyed it.

古文：盖知人之要，在于知言。
现代文：大抵知人的要旨，在于知言。
English: Most of the time, the gist of an acquaintance is in the advice.

古文：人主用臣之道，任贤使能而已。
现代文：人君任用大臣的办法，是任贤使能而已。
English: The method of appointing ministers by the ruler of men is nothing more than appointing the most capable.

古文：贤能之分既殊，任使之方亦异。
现代文：贤能的区分既不同，那么任用使用的方法也就不同。
English: Since the distinction of merit is different, the method of appointment is also different.

古文：至于所知有限量，所能有彼此，是功用之士也，可以处外而不可以处内，可以责之事而不可责之言。
现代文：至于所知有限度，所能有彼此，这是功用之士，可以安排在外而不可以安排在内，可以让他负责具体事务而不可以让他负责言论。
English: As far as the limits of knowledge are concerned, they can have each other, they are functionaries, they can be placed outside but not inside, they can be put in charge of concrete affairs but not speech.

古文：陛下欲兴太平之治，而所擢数十人者，多有口才，而无实行。
现代文：陛下想要兴太平之治，但所提拔的几十人，大多有口才，却没有务实的才能。
English: His Majesty wants to establish the rule of peace, but the dozens of people he has promoted mostly have eloquence, but no pragmatic talent.

古文：臣恐日浸月长，汇征墙进，充满朝廷之上，则贤人日远，其为患祸，尚可以一二言之哉。
现代文：我担心日浸月长，类聚征聘进用，充满朝廷之上，那么贤人日益被疏远，其为祸患，这不是一二句话可以说完的。
English: I am afraid that the days and months are getting longer, the recruitment of similar groups is being used, and the imperial court is full of them, so the wise men are increasingly alienated, which is a disaster. This is not something that can be said in one or two sentences.

古文：愿观《诗》、《书》之所任使，无速于小利近功，则王道可成矣。 
现代文：希望观看《诗》、《书》之所任使，不要招致于小利近功，那么帝王之道可成。 
English: I hope that watching "Poetry" and "Book" will not cause Xiao Li's near-success, then the emperor's way can be achieved.

古文：邵亢在枢府，无所建明，神宗语觉，欲出之，用陈升之以代。
现代文：邵亢在枢密院，无所建树，神宗告诉孙觉，打算让邵亢去地方任职，用陈升之代替他。
English: Shenzong told Sun Jue that he planned to let Shao Jun take a local post and replace him with Chen Shengzhi.

古文：觉退，即奏疏如所言。神宗以为希旨，夺官两级。
现代文：孙觉退朝，立即按神宗所说的话上奏分条陈述；神宗认为他迎合旨意，夺官两级。
English: When Sun Jie retired from the throne, he immediately made a speech in accordance with the words of Shenzong; Shenzong believed that he met the will and won two levels of officials.

古文：执政曰： 谏官有出外，无降官之理。 神宗曰： 但降官，自不能住。 觉连章丐去云： 去岁有罚金御史，今兹有贬秩谏官，未闻罚金贬秩，而犹可居位者。 乃通判越州，复右正言，徙知通州。
现代文：执政大臣说： 谏官有过失，没有降官的道理。 神宗说： 只是降官，自然不能停职。 孙觉接连上奏章乞求去职说 ：去年有罚金御史，今年有贬秩谏官，没有听说被罚金贬秩，而还可以居其位的。 于是为越州通判，恢复右正言，迁任通州知州。
English: The ruling minister said: the eunuch was at fault, there was no reason to demote him. Shentong said: it was just a demotion, of course, he could not be suspended. Sun Jue successively made a petition to leave the post, saying: last year there was a fine history, this year there was a demotion of the eunuch, I did not hear that he was demoted by a fine, but he could still stay in his place. So he was sentenced to Yuezhou, restored to the right, and transferred to Tongzhou Chizhou.

古文：熙宁二年，诏知谏院，同修起居注，知审官院。
现代文：熙宁二年，诏令他任知谏院、同修起居注、知审官院。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed to Chihaku-in, Tonghakujuchu, and Chishikan-in.

古文：王安石早与觉善，骤引用之，将援以为助。
现代文：王安石早年与孙觉交好，迅速引用他，打算援用为助手。
English: Wang Anshi befriended Sun Jue in his early years and quickly quoted him, intending to use him as an assistant.

古文：时吕惠卿用事，神宗询于觉，对曰： 惠卿即辩而有才，过于人数等，特以为利之故，屈身于安石，安石不悟，臣窃以为忧。 神宗曰： 朕亦疑之。 其后王、吕果交恶。
现代文：当时吕惠卿当权，神宗向孙觉询问，回答说： 吕惠卿善辩而有才能，超过他人几等，只是因为利益的原故，屈身于王安石，王安石不悟，我私下认为值得忧虑。 神宗说 ：我也怀疑他。 其后王、吕果然互相憎恨仇视。
English: At that time, Lyu Huixing was in power, and Shenzong asked Sun Jue about him, and replied: "Lyu Huixing is good at arguing and has talent, several times more than others, but it is only for the reason of profit that he succumbs to Wang Anshi. Wang Anshi does not understand, and I privately think it is worth worrying about." Shenzong said: "I also doubt him." After that, the king and Lyu really hated and hated each other.

古文：青苗法行，首议者谓： 《周官》泉府，民之贷者，至输息二十而五，国事之财用取具焉。 觉奏条其妄，曰： 成周赊贷，特以备民之缓急，不可徒与也，故以国服为之息。
现代文：青苗法颁行，首议者认为： 《周官》泉府，百姓借贷的，至交纳息钱二十而五，国事的财政开支取用备办于此。 孙觉上奏条陈此说荒谬，说： 成周赊贷，只是以此备民之缓急，不可以白白地给与，所以以国家为之息。
English: When the Law on Young Seedlings was promulgated, the chief legislator held that: "Zhou official" Quanfu, where the people borrow money, pays interest at 25%, and the state's financial expenditure is prepared here. Sun Jue said that this was absurd, saying: Cheng Zhou's loan is only to prepare for the people's priorities, and cannot be given in vain, so the state is the interest.

古文：然国服之息；说者不明。
现代文：但国家的息钱，说者不明白。
English: But the interest of the state, the speaker does not understand.

古文：郑康成释经，乃引王莽计羸受息，无过岁什一为据，不应周公取息，重于莽时。
现代文：郑康成解释经义，就引王莽计赢受息，不过每年什一为根据，不料周公取息，比王莽时还重。
English: Zheng Kangcheng explained the meaning of the sutra, and induced Wang Mangshi to win interest, but the annual tithe was the basis, but Zhou Gong's interest was heavier than Wang Mangshi's.

古文：况载师所任地，漆林之征特重，所以抑末作也。
现代文：况且载师所按照土地的不同情况制定赋税，漆林的赋税特别沉重，这是抑制工商末业。
English: What's more, the tax authorities set the tax according to the different conditions of the land, and the tax on the lacquer forest is particularly heavy, which is to restrain the development of industry and commerce.

古文：今以农民乏绝，将补耕助敛，顾比末作而征之，可乎？
现代文：现在因农民困乏，打算补耕助敛，但比照工商业而征赋税，可以吗？
English: Now, due to farmers' poverty, it is planned to supplement farming and aid austerity, but is it okay to levy taxes according to industry and commerce?

古文：国事取具，盖谓泉府所领，若市之不售，货之滞于民用，有买有予，并赊贷之法而举之。
现代文：国事取给备办，大概认为是泉府所统领，好像市之不卖，货物阻滞于民用，有买有予，并同赊贷之法而举用。
English: State affairs were taken over and prepared for, presumably under the leadership of Quanfu, as if the city did not sell, goods were blocked for civilian use, there was buy and give, and it was used with the method of usury.

古文：倘专取具于泉府，则冢宰九赋，将安用邪？
现代文：倘若专门取给于泉府，那么执宰九赋，将起什么作用呢？
English: If it is specifically given to Quanfu, then what will be the effect of administering nine provinces?

古文：圣世宜讲求先王之法，不当取疑文虚说以图治。
现代文：圣明之世应讲求先王之法，不应取疑文虚说来图治。
English: In the age of enlightenment, we should seek to follow the law of the previous king, and should not use doubtful and false words to govern.

古文：今老臣疏外而不见听，辅臣迁延而不就职，门下执正而不行，谏官请罪而求去。
现代文：现在年老的大臣疏远外任而不被听纳，辅佐大臣逍遥自在而不任职，门下省执行公正而不行，谏官请罪而求去职，我实在担心奸恶邪佞之人，结党连伍，乘众情喧扰，动摇朝廷，诱取直名求取声誉，这不是国家的福运。 
English: Now that the old ministers are alienated from their posts and are not listened to, the assistant ministers are free and easy and do not hold office, the subordinate provinces do not enforce justice, and the eunuchs plead guilty and seek to leave their posts, I am really worried about those who are treacherous and evil, join forces, take advantage of the hustle and bustle of the public, shake the imperial court, and seduce the name to gain reputation. This is not the good fortune of the country.

古文：臣诚恐奸邪之人，结党连伍，乘众情之汹汹，动摇朝廷，钓直干誉，非国家之福也。 安石览之，怒，觉适以事诣中书，安石以语动之曰： 不意学士亦如此！ 始有逐觉意。
现代文：王安石看到奏章后，发怒，孙觉正好因事拜访中书省，王安石用话打动他说： 想不到学士也这样！ 
English: After Wang Anshi saw the score, he became angry. Sun Jue happened to visit the Ministry of Education and Culture because of the matter. Wang Anshi impressed him with his words and said: I didn't expect the same from a scholar!

古文：会曾公亮言畿县散常平钱，有追呼抑配之扰，安石因请遣觉行视虚实。
现代文：开始有贬逐孙觉的意思。恰逢曾公亮言京畿县散发常平钱，有追呼抑配之扰，王安石因而请求派孙觉前去查究虚实。
English: At the beginning, there was an intention to disparage Sun Jue. It coincided with the time when Wang Anshi publicly said that Gyeonggi County was distributing ordinary money, and there were calls to suppress the interference. Therefore, Wang Anshi requested that Sun Jue be sent to investigate the facts.

古文：觉既受命，复奏疏辞行，且言： 如陈留一县，前后晓示，情愿请钱，卒无一人至者，故陈留不散一钱。
现代文：孙觉既然受命，又上奏疏陈辞行，且说： 例如陈留一县，前后明白谕示，情愿请贷钱，终无一人来请，所以陈留不散一钱。
English: Since Sun Jue had received the order, he also reported Chen Zuo's resignation, and said: For example, Chen Rui I County, made it clear before and after that he would like to ask for a loan, but in the end no one came to ask, so Chen Rui did not lose a penny.

古文：以此见民实不愿与官中相交。
现代文：由此可见百姓实际上不愿意与官府相来往。
English: This shows that the people are actually reluctant to interact with the government.

古文：所有体量，望赐寝罢。 遂以觉为反覆，出知广德军，徙湖州。
现代文：所有体量，希望陛下赐令逐渐废除。 于是认为孙觉反复无常，出任知广德军，移知湖州。
English: I hope that His Majesty will issue an order to gradually abolish all of them. Therefore, I think that Sun Jie is capricious, and he will serve as the commander of the German army in Zhiguang and move to Zhiguang Huzhou.

古文：松江堤没，水为民患。
现代文：松江堤防溃决，水成为百姓祸患。
English: The dike of the Songjiang River has been breached, and water has become a scourge for the people.

古文：觉易以石，高丈余，长百里，堤下化为良田。
现代文：孙觉改用石头筑堤，高一丈多，长一百里，堤下变为良田。
English: Instead, Sun Ce used stone to build an embankment, which was more than a meter high and a hundred miles long. The land under the embankment was turned into good farmland.

古文：徙庐州，改右司谏。
现代文：移任庐州，改任右司谏。
English: He was transferred to Bozhou and appointed to the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards.

古文：以祖母丧求解官，下太常议，不可。
现代文：因祖母去世请求解除官职，传送太常寺讨论，没有得到同意。
English: His request to be relieved of his official duties due to his grandmother's death and to be transferred to Taejō-ji Temple for discussion was not approved.

古文：诏知润州，觉已持丧矣。
现代文：诏命知润州，而孙觉已经服丧了。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to visit Renzhou, but Sun Jue had already passed away.

古文：服除，知苏州，徙福州。
现代文：丧期满，任苏州知州，移任福州。
English: After the period of mourning, he was appointed to Suzhou, Chizhou, and transferred to Fuzhou.

古文：闽俗厚于婚丧，其费无艺。
现代文：闽地风俗对婚姻丧事重视，其费用无数。
English: The local customs attach great importance to the marriage and funeral, and the expenses are countless.

古文：觉裁为中法，使资装无得过百千。
现代文：孙觉裁量为适中之法，使费用不得超过百千钱。
English: Sun Jue's discretion is a moderate method, so that the cost should not exceed one hundred thousand yuan.

古文：令下，嫁娶以百数，葬埋之费亦率减什伍。
现代文：命令下达，嫁娶之费以百钱计算，殡葬的费用也减少十分之五。
English: According to the order, the wedding fee will be calculated at 100 yuan, and the funeral fee will be reduced by five-tenths.

古文：连徙亳、扬、徐州。
现代文：接连移任亳、扬、徐州。
English: He was successively transferred to Min, Yang and Xuzhou.

古文：徐多盗，捕得杀人者五，其一仅胜衣，疑而讯之，曰： 我耕于野，与甲遇，强以梃与我，半夜挟我东，使候诸门，不知其他也。 问吏： 法何如？ 曰： 死。 觉止诛其首，后遂为例。
现代文：徐州多盗贼，捕捉杀人犯五人，其中一人仅承受得住衣服的重量，孙觉怀疑而审讯他，此人说 ：我在野外耕地，与甲相遇，强行把梃杖给我，半夜挟持我向东走，要我在诸门等候，其他事我不知道。 孙觉询问官吏： 依照法令该怎么办？ 说： 该处死。 孙觉制止杀此人的头，以后于是成为惯例。
English: In Xuzhou, there were many thieves, and five murderers were caught, one of whom could only bear the weight of his clothes. Sun Jue interrogated him with suspicion. This person said: I was ploughing in the field, met A, forcibly gave me a cane, took me east in the middle of the night, and asked me to wait at the gate. I don't know anything else. Sun Jue asked the officials: What should be done according to the law? Said: He should be put to death. Sun Jue stopped the killing of this person's head, and later it became customary.

古文：知应天府，入为太常少卿，易秘书少监。
现代文：任应天知府，入为太常少卿，改任秘书少监。
English: He was appointed to Tenchifu, promoted to Taijo Shokei, and reassigned to secretary and junior supervisor.

古文：哲宗即位，兼侍讲，迁右谏议大夫。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，孙觉兼侍讲，升任右谏议大夫。
English: Tetsuzong is the emperor, Sun Jue is also the attendant speaker, and has been promoted to the doctor of right speech.

古文：时谏官、御史论事有限，毋得越职。
现代文：当时谏官、御史论事有限制，不得超越职权。
English: At that time, there were restrictions on eunuchs and ministers of history, and they were not allowed to exceed their authority.

古文：觉请申《唐六典》及天禧诏书，凡发令造事之未便，皆得奏陈。
现代文：孙觉请求申明《唐六典》以及天禧诏书，凡是发出命令制造事端不便，都必须上奏陈述。
English: Sun Jue requested that the "Tang Six Classics" and the Imperial Rescript be affirmed, and that any order that causes inconvenience must be reported.

古文：论宰相蔡确、韩缜进不以德，确自讼有功无罪，觉随所言折之，确竟去。
现代文：论宰相蔡确、韩缜不是因德进用，蔡确自讼有功无罪，孙觉针对蔡确所说的予以驳斥，蔡确最终去相位。
English: On the subject of Prime Minister Cai Jizhi and Han Zheng, Han Zheng is not used because of Germany, Cai Jizhi has merit and is not guilty, Sun Jue refutes what Cai Jizhi said, and Cai Jizhi finally goes out of phase.

古文：缜白迁觉给事中，辞曰： 间者，执政畏人议己，则迁官以饵之，愿与缜俱罢。 逾月，缜去。
现代文：韩缜建议提升孙觉为给事中，孙觉辞谢说： 近来，执政大臣害怕别人议论自己，就以升官来引诱，希望与韩缜一起免职。 过了一个月，韩缜去相位。
English: When Han Kuo suggested that Sun Jue be promoted, Sun Jue declined, saying, "Recently, the ruling minister was afraid of others talking about him, so he lured them with a promotion, hoping to be dismissed together with Han Kuo.

古文：进吏部侍郎，领右选，在选万五千员，阙才五之二，至有三年不得调者。
现代文：升任吏部侍郎，掌领右选，在候选的有一万五千员，但缺额仅仅五分之二，以致有三年不能调任的。
English: There are 15,000 candidates for the post of secretary of the personnel department, but only two-fifths of the posts are vacant, so there are three years in which candidates cannot be transferred.

古文：觉请自军功、保甲进者补指使，宗室袒免从员外置，一日得阙数千。
现代文：孙觉请求从军功、保甲进官者补指使，宗室及服丧的从员外置，一天得空缺几千。
English: Sun Jue asked those with military merit and military awards to fill the posts, and outsourced the posts of family members and mourners, resulting in thousands of vacancies a day.

古文：改主左选，请磨勘岁以百人为限。
现代文：改主掌左选，请求磨勘转官以一百人为限额。
English: Change the head of the left-hand selection, request the mill surveyor to increase the quota to one hundred people.

古文：擢御史中丞，数月，以疾请罢，除龙图阁学士兼侍讲，提举醴泉观，求舒州灵仙观以归。
现代文：提升为御史中丞，几个月后，因病请求免职，被任命为龙图阁学士兼侍讲，提举醴泉观，求提举舒州灵仙观以归家。
English: He was promoted to goshi chujo, and a few months later, due to illness, he requested to be relieved of his duties, and was appointed as a Longtuge scholar and assistant lecturer, and promoted the view of the spring, and sought to promote the view of the Shuzhou Lingxian to return home.

古文：哲宗遣使存劳，赐白金五百两。
现代文：哲宗派使臣慰劳，赐给银子五百两。
English: The envoys of the Zhe sect consoled him and gave him five hundred taels of silver.

古文：卒，年六十三。
现代文：孙觉去世，终年六十三岁。
English: Sun Jue died at the age of sixty-three.

古文：觉有德量，为王安石所逐。
现代文：孙觉有德量，被王安石所贬逐。
English: Sun Jue was a virtuous man, but he was ostracized by Wang Anshi.

古文：安石退居钟山，觉枉驾道旧，为从容累夕；迨其死，又作文以诔，谈者称之。
现代文：王安石退居钟山，孙觉屈驾叙旧，二人作了几夜的长谈；到王安石死，又写文章以致哀悼，谈论的人称赞他。
English: Wang Anshi retired to Zhongshan, and Sun Ce bowed down to talk about the past. The two had a long conversation for several nights. When Wang Anshi died, he wrote an article to mourn, and the people who talked about him praised him.

古文：绍圣中，以觉为元祐党，夺职追两官。
现代文：绍圣年中，以孙觉为元党人，削夺职务追两官。
English: In the middle of the Shaoxing Year, Sun Jue, a former member of the Party, was stripped of his post and chased by two officials.

古文：辞不行，降为宝文阁待制。卒，年五十九。
现代文：徽宗即皇帝位，恢复官职。有《文集》、《奏议》六十卷，《春秋传》十五卷。
English: Huizong, the emperor, resumed his official duties. There are 60 volumes of "Collected Works" and "Proposal," and 15 volumes of "Spring and Autumn Annals."

古文：李常，字公择，南康建昌人。
现代文：弟弟孙览。李常字公择，南康建昌人。
English: His younger brother Sun Zhan. Li Chang Zi Gong Zi, Nan Kang Jian Chang Ren.

古文：少读书庐山白石僧舍。
现代文：年青时在庐山白石僧舍读书。
English: When he was young, he studied at the Lushan Baishi Monastery.

古文：既擢第，留所抄书九千卷，名舍曰李氏山房。
现代文：既登进士第，留下所抄书九千卷，给僧舍取名叫李氏山房。
English: After he entered the priesthood, he left behind nine thousand volumes of copied books, and named the monastery Li's Mountain House.

古文：调江州判官、宣州观察推官。
现代文：调任江州判官、宣州观察推官。
English: He was transferred to the post of Jiangzhou adjudicator and Xuanzhou observation officer.

古文：发运使杨佐将荐改秩，常推其友刘琦，佐曰： 世无此风久矣。 并荐之。
现代文：发运使杨佐打算推荐他改官秩，李常推荐他的朋友刘琦，杨佐说： 世间没有此种风气很久了。 一起推荐他们。
English: The shipment made Yang Zuo plan to recommend him to change his official rank, Li Chang recommended his friend Liu Wei, Yang Zuo said: The world has not had such a tradition for a long time.

古文：熙宁初，为秘阁校理。
现代文：熙宁初年，为秘阁校理。
English: In the first year of Xi Ning, he became the schoolmaster of Hikou.

古文：王安石与之善，以为三司条例检详官，改右正言、知谏院。
现代文：王安石与李常友好，以他为三司条例司检详官，改任右正言、知谏院。
English: Wang Anshi was friendly with Li Chang and appointed him as the inspector general of the Third Division of the Department of Regulations, and he was appointed to the posts of the Right Chief Councilor and the Privy Councillor.

古文：安石立新法，常预议，不欲青苗收息。至是，疏言： 条例司始建，已致中外之议。
现代文：王安石立新法，李常参与讨论，不想青苗收取息钱，到这时，分条开列说： 三司条例司刚建立时，已导致中外议论。
English: Wang Anshi established the new law, Li Chang took part in the discussion, and did not want the young seedlings to collect interest. At this time, the articles were listed as follows: When the Third Division of the Department of Regulations was first established, it had already led to domestic and foreign discussions.

古文：至于均输、青苗，敛散取息，傅会经义，人且大骇，何异王莽猥析《周官》片言，以流毒天下！ 安石见之，遣所亲密谕意，常不为止。
现代文：至于均输、青苗法，敛散取息，附会经义，人们又大为惊骇，无异于王莽琐碎离析《周官》片言，以流毒天下！ 王安石看到后，派亲信晓谕大意，李常不为此而停止。
English: As for the equalization of losses, the young seedlings method, the concentration and dispersion of interest, and the addition of the meeting of the sutra, people were greatly shocked, which was tantamount to Wang Mang's trivial dissection of the "Zhou Guan" fragment to poison the world! After Wang Anshi saw it, he sent his relatives to explain the gist, and Li Chang did not stop for this.

古文：又言： 州县散常平钱，实不出本，勒民出息。 神宗诘安石，安石请令常具官吏主名，常以非谏官体，落校理，通判滑州。
现代文：又说： 州县散常平钱，实际上不出本钱，勒索百姓出息钱。 神宗询问王安石，王安石请命令李常出具官吏主犯，李常认为这不符合谏官体制，落职校理，通判滑州。
English: He also said: The prefectural and county governments often distribute flat money, in fact, they do not give out the principal money, but extort the people to pay interest money. Shenzong asked Wang Anshi, Wang Anshi asked Li Chang to order the officials to identify the main criminal, Li Chang thought that this was not in line with the eunuch system, the reason for dismissal, and the verdict was given to Lishu.

古文：岁余复职，知鄂州，徙湖、齐二州。
现代文：一年多后复职，任鄂州知州，移任湖、齐二州。
English: More than a year later, he was reinstated, appointed to Ezhou Zhizhou, and transferred to Hubei and Qi Erzhou.

古文：齐多盗，论报无虚日。
现代文：齐州多盗贼，论报没有虚日。
English: There are many thieves in Chizhou, and the report is not false.

古文：常得黠盗，刺为兵，使在麾下，尽知囊括处，悉发屋破柱，拔其根株，半岁间，诛七百人，奸无所匿。
现代文：李常捉到狡黠的盗贼，刺为兵士，使其在部下，尽知盗贼聚居的地方，全部发屋破柱，拔掉他们的基根，半年间，杀七百人，奸恶无处藏身。
English: Li often caught cunning thieves, stabbed them as soldiers, made them subordinates, knew where the thieves lived, broke all the houses, uprooted their roots, killed seven hundred people in half a year, and there was nowhere for the evil to hide.

古文：徙淮南西路提点刑狱。
现代文：移任淮南西路提点刑狱。
English: He was transferred to Huainan West Road Detention Center.

古文：元丰六年，召为太常少卿，迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：元丰六年，召为太常少卿，升任礼部侍郎。
English: In the sixth year of Genpo's reign, he was called to the position of Taijo Shokei (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs) and was promoted to the position of Reibu Jiro.

古文：哲宗立，改吏部，进户部尚书。或疑其少干局，虑不胜任，质于司马光。
现代文：哲宗即位，李常改任吏部侍郎，升户部尚书，有人怀疑他缺少才干气度，担心不能胜任，哲宗询问于司马光。
English: When Tetsuzong ascended to the throne, Li Chang was changed to the steward of the cadre department and promoted to the secretary of the household department. Some people suspected that he lacked talent and temperament and feared that he was not competent. Tetsuzong asked Sima Guang.

古文：光曰： 用常主邦计，则人知朝廷不急于征利，聚敛少息矣。 常转对，上七事，曰崇廉耻，存乡举，别守宰，废贪赃，审疑狱，择儒师，修役法。
现代文：司马光说 ：使用李常主管国家财政，那么人们知道朝廷不急于征利，聚敛可稍稍平息了。 李常入对，上书七事，叫崇廉耻，存乡举，别守宰，废贪赃，审疑狱，择儒师，修役法。
English: Sima Guang said: If Li Changzhang is put in charge of the national finance, then people will know that the imperial court is not in a hurry to collect profits, and the concentration can be calmed down a little. Li Changzhang is right, and seven things are written on the letter, which are called "reverence and shame," "save the township," "don't guard the slaughterhouse," "abolish corruption," "examine and question the prison," "choose a Confucianist," and "improve the service method."

古文：时役法差、免二科未定，常谓： 法无新陈，便民者良；论无彼己，可久者确。
现代文：当时役法差、免二科没有决定，李常认为 ：法无新旧，方便百姓的就好；论无他我，可长久的就正确。
English: At that time, there was no decision on whether to abolish the old and new laws, but Li Chang believed that the old and new laws should be convenient for the people, and the long-term laws should be correct.

古文：今使民俱出赀则贫者难办，俱出力则富者难堪，各从其愿，则可久尔。 乃折衷条上之。
现代文：现在如果百姓都出资，那么贫困的人难办；如果都出力，那么富裕的人难堪。各从其愿，那么可以长久。 于是折衷分条开列上呈。
English: Now, if the people all contribute funds, it will be difficult for the poor; if they all contribute, it will be embarrassing for the rich; if everyone follows their own wishes, it can last for a long time.

古文：赦恩，蠲市易逋负不满二百缗者，常请息过其数亦勿取。
现代文：皇帝赦恩，免除市易逃欠不满二百缗的人，李常请求息钱超过二百缗也不收取。
English: The emperor pardoned and exempted the people who owed less than 200 baht, and Li Chang requested that the interest of more than 200 baht would not be collected.

古文：拜御史中丞，兼侍读，加龙图阁直学士。
现代文：被授予御史中丞，兼任侍读，加龙图阁直学士。
English: He was awarded the title of goshi chujo, concurrently served as an attendant, and received a bachelor's degree from the University of Tokyo.

古文：论取士，请分诗赋、经义为两科，以尽所长。
现代文：李常论取士，请分诗赋、经义为两科，以尽其所长。
English: Li Chang discussed the selection of scholars, please divide poetry and literature into two subjects, so as to make the best of their strengths.

古文：初，河决小吴，议者欲自孙村口导还故处，及是，役兴，常言： 京东、河北饥困，不宜导河。 诏罢之。
现代文：开始，黄河在小吴决口，议者打算从孙村口疏导黄河归还旧河道，到这时，工役兴起，李常说： 京东、河北饥饿困乏，不宜疏导黄河。 诏命解除工役。
English: At the beginning, the Yellow River was at the Xiaowu Junction, and the speaker planned to divert the Yellow River from the Suncun Junction to return the old river channel. At this time, the labor service arose, and Li Chang said: Jingdong and Hebei are hungry and poor, and it is not appropriate to divert the Yellow River. The edict ordered to lift the labor service.

古文：谏官刘安世以吴处厚缴蔡确诗为谤讪，因力攻确。
现代文：谏官刘安世以吴处厚交付蔡确诗中有毁谤朝政之处，因而极力攻击蔡确。
English: The eunuch Liu Anshi, with the help of Wu Chenghou, delivered to Cai Jicheng a poem that slandered the imperial government, thus vigorously attacking Cai Jicheng.

古文：常上疏论以诗罪确，非所以厚风俗。
现代文：李常上疏论以诗治罪蔡确，这不是用来敦厚风俗的办法。
English: Li Changzheng's argument that poetry is the best way to deal with crime is not the way to strengthen customs.

古文：安世并劾常，徙兵部尚书，辞不拜，出知邓州。
现代文：刘安世一同弹劾李常，移任兵部尚书，辞谢不就职，出任邓州知州。
English: Liu Anshi impeached Li Chang together, transferred to the military department of Shangshu, resigned and did not take office, and took the post of Dengzhou Zhizhou.

古文：徙成都，行次陕，暴卒，年六十四。
现代文：移任成都，在走到陕西途中，突然去世，终年六十四岁。
English: Transferred to Chengdu, he died suddenly on his way to Shaanxi at the age of 64.

古文：有文集、奏议六十卷，《诗传》十卷，《元祐会计录》三十卷。
现代文：有文集、奏议六十卷，《诗传》十卷，《元会计录》三十卷。
English: There are sixty volumes of collections of essays and speeches, ten volumes of "Poetic Biography," and thirty volumes of "Record of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：常长孙觉一岁，始与觉齐名，俱受知于吕公著。
现代文：李常比孙觉大一岁，开始与孙觉齐名，都被吕公著赏识。
English: Li Chang was one year older than Sun Jue and began to be as famous as Sun Jue. Both were appreciated by Lü Gong.

古文：其论议趣舍，大略多同；所终官职又同；其死，先后一夕云。
现代文：他们的议论趣舍，大致多相同，所担任的最后官职也相同，二人死亡，先后只差一晚。
English: Their conversations were more or less the same, their final positions were the same, and they both died within a night of each other.

古文：孔文仲，字经父，临江新喻人。
现代文：孔文仲字经父，临江新喻人。
English: Kong Wenzhong, the father of Confucianism, was the founder of Linjiang Xinyu.

古文：性狷直，寡言笑，少刻苦问学，号博洽。
现代文：性情洁身自好，很少言笑。年青时刻苦问学，号称广博洽闻。
English: His disposition is clean and self-possessed, and he rarely laughs. When he was young, he was always eager to learn, and he is known for his extensive knowledge.

古文：举进士，南省考宫吕夏卿，称其词赋赡丽，策论深博，文势似荀卿、杨雄，白主司，擢第一。
现代文：考中进士，南省考官吕夏卿，称赞他的词赋清澹秀丽，策论深博，文章气势类似荀卿、扬雄，建议主管部门，拔为第一。
English: Lu Xiaqing, the examiner of the Southern Province, praised his words as clear, beautiful, and profound. The article was similar to that of Yuqing and Yangxiong, and was recommended by the competent department. It was ranked first.

古文：调余杭尉。
现代文：调任余杭县尉。
English: Transferred to Yuhang County Lieutenant.

古文：恬介自守，不事请谒。
现代文：恬静正直自守，不事请托求见。
English: Hao Jing is honest and self-disciplined. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to ask.

古文：转运使在杭，召与议事，事已，驰归，不诣府。
现代文：转运使在杭州，召他参与议事，议事完毕后，马上回县，不去州府。
English: The transshipment envoy was in Hangzhou, and he was called to participate in the deliberation. After the deliberation, he immediately returned to the county, and did not go to the state capital.

古文：人问之，曰： 吾于府无事也。 再转台州推官。
现代文：有人问他，他说 ：我在州府没事。 又转任台州推官。
English: When asked, he said, "I'm fine at the prefectural government, and I've been transferred to the Taizhou magistrate's office."

古文：熙宁初，翰林学士范镇以制举荐，对策九千余言，力论王安石所建理财、训兵之法为非是，宋敏求第为异等。
现代文：熙宁初年，翰林学士范镇以制举荐举他，应对策论九千余言，力论王安石所建立的理财、训兵之法为不对，宋敏求列他为特等。
English: In the first year of Xi's reign, Hanlin Scholar Fan Zhen recommended him as a member of the standing committee. He wrote more than nine thousand words on policy and argued that the methods of financial management and military training established by Wang Anshi were wrong. Song Min asked for him to be listed as a special grade.

古文：安石怒，启神宗，御批罢归故官。
现代文：王安石发怒，告诉神宗，御批罢归原官。
English: Wang Anshi became angry and told Shenzong to resign from his post.

古文：齐恢、孙固封还御批，韩维、陈荐、孙永皆力言文仲不当黜，五上章，不听。
现代文：齐恢、孙固封还御批，韩维、陈荐、孙永都极力上言孔文仲不应黜退，五次上奏章，没有得到同意。
English: Qi Guofang and Sun Guofeng also received royal approval, and Han Wei, Chen Xian and Sun Yong all insisted that Kong Wenzhong should not back down. Five times, they did not get approval.

古文：范镇又言： 文仲草茅疏远，不识忌讳。
现代文：范镇又说： 孔文仲低贱疏远，不知忌讳。
English: Fan Zhen also said: Kong Wenzhong is lowly and distant, and does not know the taboo.

古文：且以直言求之，而又罪之，恐为圣明之累。 亦不听。
现代文：而且以直言求之，却又怪罪他，恐怕为圣明之累。 也不听从。
English: And though he sought the Lord earnestly, he found him not, neither would he hearken unto him, lest he should be a burden to the saints.

古文：苏颂叹曰： 方朝廷求贤如饥渴，有如此人而不见录，岂其论太高而难合邪，言太激而取怨邪？ 
现代文：苏颂叹息说 ：朝廷正求贤才如饥渴，有这样的人才而不被录用，岂不是议论太高远而难以符合邪佞，言词太偏激而取怨吗？ 
English: Su Song sighed and said, "The imperial court is so hungry and thirsty for talents. If there are such talents and they are not hired, isn't the discussion too lofty and difficult to conform to evil, and the words too extreme and cause resentment?"

古文：吴充为相，欲置之馆阁，又有忌之者，仅得国子直讲。
现代文：吴充为宰相，想要把孔文仲安排在馆阁，又有人嫉妒，仅得国子直讲。
English: Wu Chong, as the prime minister, wanted to place Kong Wenzhong in the cabinet, and some people were jealous, but Kuniko had to speak directly.

古文：学者方用王氏经义进取，文仲不习其书，换为三班主簿，出通判保德军。
现代文：求学的人正用王氏经义上进，孔文仲不研习王氏书，换为三班主簿，出任保德军通判。
English: The students were using Wang's Classic of Confucianism to advance, but Kong Wenzhong did not study Wang's book, but changed to the main book of the three classes and served as the judge of the German army.

古文：时征西夏，众数十万皆道境上，久不解，边人厌苦。文仲陈三不便，曰： 大兵未出，而丁夫预集；河东顾夫，劳民而损费；诸路出兵，首尾不相应。
现代文：当时征伐西夏，几十万人都到边境上，很久不解散，边地人厌倦困苦，孔文仲陈述三不便说： 大部队没有出动，而丁夫预先集中；河东雇民夫，劳民伤财；各路出兵，首尾不相应。
English: At that time, there was a campaign to conquer Western Xia. Hundreds of thousands of people went to the border and did not disband for a long time. The people in the border areas were tired of hardship. Kong Wenzhong said that there were three inconveniences: the large army did not go out, but Dingfu concentrated in advance; the people in Hedong employed people, and the labor of the people hurt the wealth; the soldiers were sent out in all directions, and they did not correspond to each other.

古文：虞、夏、商、周之盛，未尝无外侮，然怀柔制御之要，不在彼而在此也。 
现代文：虞、夏、商、周的强盛，未尝没有外侮，但怀柔制御的要旨，不在彼而在此。 
English: The prosperity of the states of Gu, Xia, Shang, and Zhou has not been without external abuse, but the essence of Huairou control is not there.

古文：元祐初，哲宗召为秘书省校书郎，进礼部员外郎。
现代文：元祐初年，哲宗召用孔文仲为秘书省校书郎，升礼部员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Genyu era, Tetsuzo summoned Kong Wenzhong to serve as secretary, secretary of the provincial school, and secretary of the promotion department.

古文：有言： 皇族唯杨、荆二王得称皇叔，余宜各系其祖，若唐人称诸王孙之比。 文仲曰： 上新即位，宜广敦睦之义，不应疏间骨肉。 议遂寝。
现代文：有人说： 皇族只有杨、荆二王能称皇叔，其余应各系其祖宗，好像唐代人称诸王孙之比。 孔文仲说 ：皇帝刚即位，应广敦厚和睦之义，不应疏远离间骨肉。 议论于是平息。
English: Some people said: Only the two kings of Yang and Jing can be called the uncle of the emperor, and the rest should be their respective ancestors, as if the Tang Dynasty people called the ratio of kings and grandsons. Kong Wenzhong said: The emperor has just ascended the throne, and should have a broad and deep sense of harmony, and should not alienate the flesh and blood. The discussion then subsided.

古文：迁起居舍人，擢左谏议大夫。
现代文：升任起居舍人，提拔为左谏议大夫。
English: He was promoted to the position of a resident, and promoted to the position of a doctor of the Left Division of the Supreme Court.

古文：日食七月朔，上疏条五事，曰邪说乱正道，小人乘君子，远服侮中国，斜封夺公论，人臣轻国命，宜察此以消厌兆祥。
现代文：七月初一发生日食，孔文仲上疏条陈五事，叫邪说乱正道，小人欺凌君子，外族人欺侮中国，邪论剥夺公论，人臣轻视国命，应觉察这些以消去灾兆。
English: On the first day of July, a solar eclipse occurred, and Kong Wenzhong scribbled down five things, calling the evil theory to disrupt the righteous path, the villain to bully the gentleman, the foreigner to bully China, the evil theory to deprive the public opinion, and the vassal to despise the national life, and should be aware of these to eliminate the signs of disaster.

古文：论青苗、免役，首困天下，保甲、保马、茶盐之法，为遣螫留蠹。
现代文：论青苗、免役法，首先困敝天下，保甲、保马、茶盐法，是遗留祸患。
English: As for the young seedlings and exempted-from-service method, first of all, the world is in trouble, and the armour-preserving, horse-preserving and tea-salt-preserving methods are left-over disasters.

古文：改中书舍人。
现代文：改任中书舍人。
English: He was reassigned to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：三年，同知贡举。
现代文：元祐三年，孔文仲同知贡院。
English: In the third year of Yuan Yu, Kong Wenzhong and Zhigongin retired.

古文：文仲先有寒疾，及是，昼夜不废职。
现代文：孔文仲先患寒病，到这时，日夜不废职责。
English: When Kong Wenzhong first fell ill with a cold, he did not give up his duties day and night.

古文：同院以其形瘵，劝之先出，或居别寝。
现代文：同事以其身体病弱，劝他先出去，或者住在其他寝室。
English: Colleagues advised him to go out first, or stay in another bedroom, as he was physically weak.

古文：谢曰： 居官则任其责，敢以疾自便乎！ 于是疾益甚，还家而卒，年五十一。
现代文：孔文仲感谢说 ：居官则任其职责，不敢因病自便！ 于是病愈加沉重，回家而去世，终年五十一岁。
English: Kong Wenzhong expressed his gratitude, saying, "The resident officials, on the other hand, did not dare to take advantage of their illness by abandoning their duties! As a result, his illness became more and more severe, and he returned home and passed away at the age of fifty-one.

古文：士大夫哭之皆失声。
现代文：士大夫都哭之失声。
English: The scholar-bureaucrats all burst into tears.

古文：苏轼拊其柩曰： 世方嘉软熟而恶峥嵘，求劲直如吾经父者，今无有矣！ 诏厚恤其家，命弟平仲为江东转运判官，视其葬。
现代文：苏轼拍着他的灵柩说 ：现在正嘉许懦弱而厌恶深邃，寻求像我孔经父这样刚直的人，现在没有了！ 诏令优厚抚恤孔家，任命他的弟弟孔平仲为江东转运判官，办理孔文仲的丧事。
English: Su Yao patted his coffin and said, "Nowadays, they are praising the cowardly and detesting the profound, and they are looking for someone who is as upright as my father, Confucius, but there is no one now!" He issued an edict to generously support the Confucius family, and appointed his brother, Confucius Pingzhong, as the judge of the east river transportation, to handle the funeral of Confucius Wenzhong.

古文：薛向使三司，欲辟为属，及相见，卒不敢言，退而叹曰： 若人未易屈也。 以是不偶于世。鲜于侁，字子骏，阆州人。
现代文：开始，孔文仲与弟弟武仲、平仲都以文章声名起于江南，当时号称 三孔 。后来追贬文仲为梅州别驾。元符末年，恢复他的官位。有文集五十卷。鲜于侁字子骏，阆州人。
English: At the beginning, Kong Wenzhong and his brothers Wenzhong and Pingzhong were all famous for their articles in the south of the Yangtze River. At that time, they were known as the Three Kongs. Later, Wenzhong was relegated to Meizhou. At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he resumed his official rank. There are fifty volumes of anthologies. Less than a hundred characters, a hundred people.

古文：唐剑南节度使叔明裔孙也。
现代文：他是唐代剑南节度使鲜于叔明的裔孙。
English: He is the descendant and grandson of Jiannan Jiedu in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：性庄重，力学。
现代文：性情庄重，肆力于学。
English: He has a dignified disposition and is eager to learn.

古文：举进士，为江陵右司理参军。
现代文：考中进士，为江陵右司理参军。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination and joined the army as the right secretary of Gangneung Province.

古文：庆历中，天下旱，诏求言。
现代文：庆历年中，天下发生旱灾，诏令求言。
English: In the middle of the year of the lunar calendar, droughts occurred all over the world, and the imperial edict asked for advice.

古文：侁推灾变所由兴，又条当世之失有四，其语剀切。
现代文：鲜于侁推究灾变所兴起的原因，又条陈当时的过失有四条，他的话切中事理。
English: Rarely did he inquire into the reasons for the rise of the cataclysm. He also said that Chen had committed four faults at that time. His words were right on the mark.

古文：唐介与同乡里，称其名于上官，交章论荐。
现代文：唐介与他同乡同里，向上级长官称赞他的名字，相互上奏章议论推荐。
English: Tang Jie and his fellow villagers praised his name to their superiors and recommended him to each other.

古文：侁盛言左参军李景阳、枝江令高汝士之美，乞移与之，介益以为贤。
现代文：鲜于侁大肆说左参军李景阳、枝江县令高汝士的好话，请求移荐他们，唐介越加认为他贤能。
English: He often spoke highly of Li Jingyang, a left-wing general, and Gao Ru, the governor of Yangtze River County, and asked for their recommendation. Tang Jie Yue Jia thought he was a good man.

古文：调黟令，摄治婺源。
现代文：调任黟县县令，代理治理婺源县。
English: He was transferred to the post of county magistrate of Jixian County and became the acting governor of Jiyuan County.

古文：奸民汪氏富而狠，横里中，因事抵法，群吏罗拜曰： 汪族败前令不少，今不舍，后当诒患。 侁怒，立杖之，恶类屏迹。
现代文：奸民汪氏富裕而凶狠，横行乡里，因事触犯法令，众吏四面围绕着鲜于侁下拜说： 汪氏家族败坏不少前任县令，现在不赦免，以后当遗下祸患。 鲜于侁愤慨，立即对汪氏施以杖击，奸恶之人销声匿迹。
English: The villainous Wang family is rich and fierce, they are rampant in the countryside, they have violated the law due to the incident, all the officials around them bowed down and said: The Wang family has corrupted many former county magistrates, they will not be pardoned now, and they should be left as a scourge in the future.

古文：通判绵州。
现代文：任绵州通判。
English: Appointed as Mianzhou magistrate.

古文：绵处蜀左，吏狃贪成风，至课卒伍供薪炭、刍豆，鬻果蔬多取赢直。
现代文：绵州地处蜀州西部，官吏贪污成风，以致征用军队供输柴火木炭、草把豆类，卖水果蔬菜求取更多的赢利。
English: Mianzhou is located in the western part of Shuzhou, and official corruption is rampant. As a result, the army is requisitioned to transport firewood, charcoal, straw and beans, and fruits and vegetables are sold to make more profit.

古文：侁一切弗取，郡守以下效之。
现代文：鲜于侁一切不取，郡守以下都效法这一做法。
English: Fewer than a dozen did not take anything, and the county governors and below followed suit.

古文：赵抃使蜀，荐于朝，未及用。
现代文：赵忭出使蜀州，向朝廷推荐鲜于侁，没有及时任用。
English: Zhao Jun sent an envoy to Shuzhou and recommended Xian Yu Jun to the imperial court, but he was not appointed in time.

古文：从何郯辟，签书永兴军判官。
现代文：应何郯的征召，为永兴军签书判官。
English: He was called up by He Zhen and became a judge for signing documents for the Yongxing Army.

古文：万年令不任职，系囚累百，府使往治，数日，空其狱。
现代文：万年县令不称职，拘系囚犯几百人，军府派鲜于侁前去整治，几天时间，监狱为之一空。
English: The county magistrate is incompetent, hundreds of prisoners are detained, the military government sends soldiers to the front to rectify, and the prison is empty for a few days.

古文：神宗诏求直言，侁为蔡河拨发，应诏陈十六事，神宗爱其文。
现代文：神宗下诏书求直言，鲜于侁任蔡河拨发官，应诏陈述十六件事，神宗喜爱他的文章。
English: Shenzong made an imperial edict to be outspoken. He was rarely appointed to the post of Caihe dispatching officer. He made an imperial edict to state 16 things. Shenzong loved his article.

古文：诏近臣举所知，范镇以亻先应选，除利州路转运判官。
现代文：诏命亲近大臣荐举所知的人，范镇以鲜于侁应选，被任命为利州路转运判官。
English: According to the imperial edict, people who are familiar with the minister's recommendation should be close to the minister, and Fan Zhen was appointed as the judge of Lizhou Road Transshipment.

古文：初，王安石居金陵，有重名，士大夫期以为相。
现代文：开始，王安石居住金陵，享有盛名，士大夫希望以他为宰相。
English: At the beginning, Wang Anshi lived in Jinling and enjoyed a high reputation. The scholar-officials hoped to make him the prime minister.

古文：侁恶其沽激要君，语人曰： 是人若用，必坏乱天下。 至是，乃上书论时政，曰： 可为忧患者一，可为太息者二，其他逆治体而召民怨者，不可概举。 其意专指安石。
现代文：鲜于侁讨厌他沽名钓誉讨好皇帝，告诉他人说： 此人如果被任用，必定会坏乱天下。 到这时，就上书议论时政，说 ：令人担忧的有一事，令人叹息失望的有二事，其他违背治体而招致百姓怨恨的，不可一一列举。 他的意思是专门指向王安石。
English: At this time, he wrote a book discussing the current political situation, saying: There is one thing that is worrying, there are two things that are sighing and disappointing, and other things that are contrary to the rule of law and arouse the resentment of the people cannot be enumerated.

古文：安石怒，毁短之。神宗曰： 侁有文学，可用。 安石曰： 陛下何以知之？ 神宗曰： 有章奏在。 安石乃不敢言。
现代文：王安石愤怒，毁谤攻击他，神宗说： 鲜于侁有文学之才，可以任用。 王安石说： 陛下怎么知道呢？ 神宗说： 有奏章在这里。 王安石才不敢说话。
English: Wang Anshi was furious and attacked him with slander. Shenzong said, "It is rare for a eunuch to have literary talent, so he can be appointed." Wang Anshi said, "How does your majesty know?" Shenzong said, "There is a musical score here." Wang Anshi did not dare to speak.

古文：初，助役法行，诏诸路各定所役缗钱。
现代文：开始，助役法颁行，诏令各路各自决定所役缗钱。
English: At the beginning, the Auxiliary Service Law was promulgated, and each road was ordered to decide on its own.

古文：利州转运使李瑜定四十万，侁争之曰： 利州民贫地瘠，半此可矣。 瑜不从，各以其事闻。
现代文：利州转运使李瑜定为四十万，鲜于侁争论说： 利州百姓贫困土地贫瘠，二十万可以了。 李瑜不同意，各自以其事报告朝廷。
English: Lizhou transshipment caused Li Yu to set it at 400,000, which was a little higher than the argument that: the people of Lizhou are poor and the land is barren, and 200,000 is fine. Li Yu disagreed, and each of them reported to the imperial court.

古文：时诸路役书皆未就，神宗是侁议，谕司农曾布使颁以为式。
现代文：当时各路役书都没有到，神宗肯定鲜于侁的建议，谕告司农曾布把它作为定式颁行。
English: At that time, all the road service books had not arrived, and Shenzong was sure that it was less than the suggestion, and ordered Sino Zengbu to issue it as a standard form.

古文：因黜瑜，而升侁副使，仍兼提举常平。
现代文：因而贬退李瑜，而提升鲜于侁为转运副使，仍兼提举常平。
English: As a result, Li Yu was demoted, while Shun Yu was promoted to vice-envoy of transit, but he was still promoted to vice-premier.

古文：部民不请青苗钱，安石遣吏廉按，且诘侁不散之故。
现代文：所属百姓不请贷青苗钱，王安石派官吏查访按察，并且询问鲜于侁不散发青苗钱的原因。
English: Wang Anshi sent officials to investigate and inquire about the reasons why the villagers did not ask for the loan of seedling money and why they did not distribute seedling money.

古文：侁曰： 青苗之法，愿取则与，民自不愿，岂能强之哉！ 
现代文：鲜于侁说： 按青苗法，愿意求取就给与，百姓自己不愿意，怎能强迫他们呢！ 
English: Sheng Yu said: According to the seedling method, if you are willing to ask for it, you will be given it. If the people themselves are not willing, how can you force them?

古文：左藏库使周永懿守利州，贪虐不法，前使者畏其凶，莫敢问。
现代文：左藏库使周永懿镇守利州，贪残不法，以前的使者害怕他的凶狠，不敢过问。
English: Zuo Zangke made Zhou Yongzheng the governor of Lishu, who was greedy and lawless. The former emissaries were afraid of his ferocity and did not dare to question him.

古文：侁捕械于狱，流之衡湘，因请更以文臣为守，并易班行领县事。
现代文：鲜于侁把他逮捕戴上脚镣手铐关进监狱，流放衡湘，因而请求改以文臣为太守，一并更换在朝做官的位次领县事。
English: Mian Yu arrested him, handcuffed him, put him in prison, and exiled him to Hengxiang. As a result, he requested that Wenshen be changed to Dazhu, and the position of deputy county magistrate, who was an official in the government, be changed as well.

古文：凡居部九年，治所去阆中近，姻戚旁午，待之无所私，各得其欢心。
现代文：鲜于侁在利州转运司共九年，官府所在地距阆中很近，姻朋亲戚交错，对待他们无所私情，各自得其欢心。
English: Shanzhong has been in the Lizhou Transportation Department for a total of nine years. The location of the government office is very close to Shanzhong. In-laws and relatives are intertwined. They are treated with selflessness, and each has their own favor.

古文：苏轼称侁上不害法，中不废亲，下不伤民，以为 三难 。
现代文：苏轼称赞鲜于侁上不妨害法令，中不废弃亲戚，下不伤害百姓，认为是 三难 。
English: Su Qian praised the fact that he did not harm the law, did not abandon relatives, and did not harm the people, which was considered to be the three difficulties.

古文：二税输绢绵，侁奏听民以畸零纳直。
现代文：二税输纳绢绵，鲜于侁奏请听任百姓以畸零钱交纳钱数。
English: The second tax payment is slow, but it's better than nothing. Please listen to the people and pay the amount of money with odd change.

古文：其后有李元辅者，辄变而多取之，父老流涕曰： 老运使之法，何可改？ 盖侁之侄师中亦居是职，故称 老 以别之。
现代文：其后有叫李元辅的人，就改变而多取求，父老乡亲流泪说： 老运使的办法，怎么可以改变呢？ 原来鲜于侁的侄子鲜子师中也担任这一职务，所以称 老 来区分。
English: Later, a man named Li Yuanfu changed his position and asked for more. His father and fellow villagers shed tears and said, "How can we change the old way of doing things? Originally, Xiangzi's nephew Xiangzi, who was younger than Xing, also held this position, so he was called old to distinguish.

古文：徙京东西路。
现代文：移任京东西路转运副使。
English: Transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of East-West Transportation in Beijing.

古文：河决澶渊，议欲勿塞，侁言： 东州汇泽惟两泺，夏秋雨淫，犹溢而害，若纵大河注其中，民为鱼矣。 作《议河书》上之，神宗嘉纳。
现代文：黄河在澶渊决口，议论打算不加堵塞，鲜于侁说： 东州汇聚水的洼地只有两个湖泊，夏秋雨多，还是溢满为害，如果放纵大河流入其中，百姓将成为鱼了。 写《议河书》上呈，神宗称许采纳。
English: The Yellow River is at the mouth of the Qianyuan, and the discussion is about not adding a blockage, but Shen Zong said: There are only two lakes in the delta of the Dongzhou confluence, and there is a lot of rain in summer and autumn, but it is harmful to overflow. If the large river is allowed to flow into it, the people will become fish. It was presented in the "Book of River Discussion," and Shen Zong praised the adoption.

古文：后两路合为一，以侁为转运使。
现代文：后来两路合为一路，以鲜于侁为转运使。
English: Later, the two routes were merged into a single route, with Sheng than Handan as the transfer agent.

古文：时王安石、吕惠卿当路，正人多不容。
现代文：当时王安石、吕惠卿当权，正直的人多不被容纳。
English: At that time, Wang Anshi and Lü Huiqing were in power, and many honest people were not accepted.

古文：侁曰： 吾有荐举之权，而所列非贤，耻也。 故凡所荐如刘挚、李常、苏轼、苏辙、刘攽、范祖禹，皆守道背时之士。
现代文：鲜于侁说： 我有荐举的权力，但所列举的不贤能，这是我的耻辱。 所以凡是所荐举如刘挚、李常、苏轼、苏辙、刘颁、范祖禹，都是遵守道德背离时政的士人。
English: "I have the power to recommend candidates, but the incompetence I have listed is my shame," said Mian Yuqi. Therefore, all the recommended candidates, such as Liu Zhen, Li Chang, Su Xi, Su Rug, Liu Ji, and Fan Zuyu, are scholars who abide by morality and deviate from current politics.

古文：元丰二年召对，命知扬州。
现代文：元丰二年，皇帝召对，任命他知扬州。
English: In the second year of Yuanfeng, the emperor summoned him and appointed him as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：神宗曰： 广陵重镇，久不得人，今朕自选卿往，宜善治之。 苏轼自湖州赴狱，亲朋皆绝交。道扬，侁往见，台吏不许通。
现代文：神宗说： 广陵重镇，很久以来没有适合的人选，现在朕亲自选你前去，应好好治理。 苏轼从湖州赴狱，亲戚朋友都与他绝交，路过扬州，鲜于侁前去会见，御史台官吏不准许通过。
English: Shenzong said: Guangling heavy town, there has been no suitable candidate for a long time, now I personally choose you to go, you should govern it well. Su Shi went to prison from Huzhou, relatives and friends have broken off relations with him, passing through Yangzhou, he rarely went to meet before Zhai, officials of the State Historian's Office did not allow him to pass.

古文：或曰： 公与轼相知久，其所往来书文，宜焚之勿留，不然，且获罪。 侁曰： 欺君负友，吾不忍为，以忠义分谴，则所愿也。 为举吏所累，罢主管西京御史台。
现代文：有人说： 您与苏轼相知的时间长，所有往来书信文章，应焚烧掉不要保留，不然的话，就要获罪。 鲜于侁说： 欺骗君主背叛朋友，我不忍心做，以忠义分谴，这是我所希望的。 被检举的官吏所害，罢为主管京西御史台。
English: Some people said: You and Su Shi have known each other for a long time, all the letters and articles exchanged should be burned, do not keep them, otherwise, you will be guilty.Ming Yu said: Deceiving the monarch and betraying a friend, I can't bear to do it, and I hope to be punished with loyalty.Officials who have been reported to the procuratorate have been harmed, so I will be the head of the Beijing West Imperial History Station.

古文：哲宗立，念东国困于役，吴居厚掊敛虐害，窜之，复以侁使京东。
现代文：哲宗即位，念及东国被赋役所困，吴居厚掊克聚敛残害百姓，把他流窜，再次以鲜于侁为京东转运使。
English: When Zhezong ascended to the throne, he thought that the eastern country was trapped by the forced labor, and Wu Ju Houxuan gathered together to harm the people, exiled him, and once again used Xiang Yu as the transfer envoy to Beijing.

古文：司马光言于朝曰： 以侁之贤，不宜使居外。
现代文：司马光向朝廷建议说 ：以鲜于侁的贤能，不应让他在外朝做官。
English: Sima Guang suggested to the imperial court that he should not be allowed to work as an official outside the imperial court with his ability being less than that of an eunuch.

古文：顾齐鲁之区，凋敝已甚，须侁往救之，安得如侁百辈，布列天下乎？ 士民闻其重临，如见慈父母。
现代文：看齐鲁之地，已是非常凋敝，需要鲜于侁前去挽救，怎样才能得到像鲜于侁这样的一百人，分布在天下呢？ 士人百姓听说他重新来到的消息，就像见到慈父慈母。
English: Looking at Qilu's land, it is already very withered, and it needs more than a hundred people to come forward to save it. How can we get a hundred people like more than a hundred, distributed all over the world? When the people heard the news that he had come back, it was like seeing a loving father and mother.

古文：召为太常少卿。
现代文：召为太常太卿。
English: Appointed as Taijo Shokei.

古文：侍从议神宗庙配享，有欲用王安石、吴充者，侁曰： 先朝宰相之贤，谁出富弼右？ 乃用弼。
现代文：侍从建议神宗庙配享祭，有人打算用王安石、吴充，鲜于侁说： 先朝宰相的贤能，有谁超过富弼呢？ 
English: An attendant suggested that the Shensong Temple should hold the festival. Some people planned to use Wang Anshi, Wuchong, and Xian Yu to say: Who is more capable than Fuxi, the prime minister of the previous dynasty?

古文：拜左谏议大夫。
现代文：授任左谏议大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Zuo Jianli Doctor.

古文：侁见哲宗幼冲，首言君子小人消长之理甚备。
现代文：鲜于侁看哲宗年幼，首先说对哲宗言君子小人势力的一消一长的道理很详备。
English: It is rare to see Tetsuzo at such a young age. First of all, the reason why Tetsuzo is a gentleman and villain is very detailed.

古文：又言： 制举，诚取士之要，国朝尤为得人。
现代文：又说： 制举，确实是选取士人的重要方法，本朝制举之制，尤为利于得人。
English: He also said: The promotion system is indeed an important method for selecting scholars, and the system of promotion system of this dynasty is particularly beneficial for selecting scholars.

古文：王安石用事，讳人诋訾新政，遂废其科。
现代文：王安石用事当权，忌讳他人诋毁骂新政，于是废除制举这一科目。
English: Wang Anshi took advantage of his position of power to discourage others from slandering the New Deal, and thus abolished this subject.

古文：今方搜罗俊贤，廓通言路，宜复六科之旧。 又乞罢大理狱，许两省、谏官相往来，减特奏名举人，严出官之法，京东盐得通商，复三路义勇以宽保甲，罢戎、泸保甲以宽民力，事多施行。
现代文：现在正搜罗俊杰贤能，清除打通言路，应恢复六科的旧制。 又请求废除大理狱，允许两省、谏官互相往来，减少特奏名举人，严格出官的制度，京东盐必须通商，恢复三路义勇以宽保甲，废除戎、泸保甲以宽民力，这些事大多施行。
English: At present, Luo Junjie's talents are being sought, the way to open up communication is being cleared, and the old system of six subjects should be restored. It is also requested to abolish the Dali Prison, allow the two provinces and eunuchs to interact with each other, reduce the number of special envoys, strictly implement the system of officials, Jingdong salt must be traded, restore the three ways of righteousness and courage with broad armor protection, and abolish the army and eunuchs with broad armor protection with broad people's power. Most of these things have been implemented.

古文：在职三月，以疾求去。
现代文：在职三个月，因病请求去职。
English: After three months on the job, he asked to be relieved of duty due to illness.

古文：除集贤殿修撰、知陈州。
现代文：被授予集贤殿修撰、陈州知州。
English: He was awarded the Jixianden Shuxian and Chenzhou Zhizhou.

古文：诏满岁进待制。
现代文：诏满一年升为待制。
English: At the end of one year, it will be upgraded to a pending system.

古文：居无何，卒，年六十九。
现代文：闲居不久，去世，终年六十九岁。
English: He did not stay idle for long and died at the age of sixty-nine.

古文：徽宗初，提举河东常平。
现代文：鲜于侁用心于经术，著《诗经》、《易断》，被范镇、孙甫所推重称许。
English: Xian Yuqian was dedicated to the art of writing, and wrote "Poetic Classic" and "Easily Broken," which were highly praised by Fan Zhen and Sun Fu.

古文：坐为范纯仁遗表，作行状，编管太平，遂居姑熟，久之，徙唐州，终朝请大夫。之仪能为文，尤工尺牍，轼谓入刀笔三昧。
现代文：孙复与他讨论《春秋》，认为现在求学的人不能像他这样。作诗平淡深远精粹，尤其擅长于《楚辞》，苏轼读《九诵》，认为其风格近似屈原、宋玉，自认为其水平为自己所不能及。
English: Sun Fu discussed "Spring and Autumn" with him, and thought that people who are studying now can't be like him. His poetry is plain and profound, and he is especially good at "Chu Ci," and Su Xi reads "Nine Recitations," and thinks that his style is similar to Qu Yuan and Song Yu, and thinks that his level is beyond his own.

古文：王觌，字明叟，泰州如皋人。第进士。
现代文：王觌字明叟，泰州如皋人。考中进士。
English: Wang Xizhi is an alum, and Taizhou is an alum. He passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：熙宁中，为编修三司令式删定官。
现代文：熙宁年中，为编修三司令式删定官。
English: In the middle of the year of Xi Ning, he was appointed as the editor of the three-command style.

古文：不乐久居职，求润州推官。
现代文：不喜欢长久居一职，求任润州推官。
English: He did not like to stay in one position for a long time, so he applied for the post of Rongzhou magistrate.

古文：二浙旱，郡遣吏视苗伤，承监司风旨，不敢多除税。
现代文：二浙旱灾，州郡派官吏视察苗稼灾情，按照监司发布的旨令，不敢多免除赋税。
English: Second, due to the drought in Zhejiang, the state and county sent officials to inspect the situation of seedling production. According to the order issued by the supervisor, they did not dare to exempt more taxes.

古文：觌受檄覆按，叹曰： 旱势如是，民食已绝，倒廪赡之，犹惧不克济，尚可责以赋邪？ 行数日，尽除之。
现代文：王觌承受檄命重新按察，叹息说： 像这样的旱灾势头，百姓粮食已断绝，倾尽粮仓供给，犹恐怕不能救济他们，还能以赋税督责他们吗？ 
English: Wang Yao sighed and said, "With such a drought, the people have run out of food and have exhausted the supply of granaries. I'm afraid I can't help them. Can I punish them with taxes?"

古文：监司怒，捃摭百出。
现代文：过了几天，全部免除。监司愤怒，搜集百出。
English: A few days later, all of them were exempted. The supervisor was furious and collected a lot of complaints.

古文：会朝廷遣使振贷，觌请见，为言民间利病。
现代文：恰逢朝廷派使臣赈济借贷，王觌求见，对使臣诉说民间利弊。
English: At the same time, the imperial court sent envoys to lend money and borrow money. Wang Xi asked to see the envoys and told them about the advantages and disadvantages of the private sector.

古文：使者喜，归荐之，除司农寺主簿，转为丞。
现代文：使臣感到高兴，回朝推荐王觌，被任命为司农寺主簿，转任司农寺丞。
English: The envoy was pleased and recommended Wang Yao back to the imperial court. Wang Yao was appointed as the chief secretary of the Sino-Tibetan Agricultural University, and later as the secretary of the Sino-Tibetan Agricultural University.

古文：司农时为要官，进用者多由此选。
现代文：司农当时是清要官职，升官的人多经由这个职位。
English: At that time, the post of farmer was a high-ranking official post, and most people were promoted through this post.

古文：觌拜命一日，即求外，韩绛高其节，留检详三司会计。
现代文：王觌委任一天，就求外任，韩绛认为他节义高尚，把他留任检详三司会计。
English: One day after the appointment, Wang Yao asked to be transferred to another position. Han Wei thought he was noble and left him in charge of inspecting the accounting of the three departments.

古文：绛出颍昌，辟签书判官。
现代文：韩绛出任颍昌，征召他为签书判官。
English: Han Yu took up the post of Yuchang and was called up to be the judge of signature.

古文：坐在润公阙免，屏居累年，起为太仆丞，徙太常。
现代文：因在润州公免一事牵连，退居多年，起用为太仆丞，移任太常寺丞。
English: Due to the implication of the public exemption in Renzhou, he retired for many years, was appointed as Daju Rojo, and transferred to Dajuji Rojo.

古文：哲宗立，吕公著、范纯仁荐其可大任，擢右正言，进司谏。
现代文：哲宗即位，吕公著、范纯仁推荐他可当大任，提升为右正言，升司谏。
English: When Tetsuzong ascended the throne, he was recommended by Lü Gong and Fan Chunren to be given important positions, and he was promoted to the Right Zhengde and then to the Third Rank.

古文：上疏言： 国家安危治乱，系于大臣。
现代文：王觌上疏说： 国家安危治乱，与大臣相关联。
English: Wang Xuan Shangsu said: national security and anti-riot are closely related to the minister.

古文：今执政八人，而奸邪居半，使一二元老，何以行其志哉？ 因极论蔡确、章惇、韩缜、张璪朋邪害正。
现代文：现在八个执政大臣，而奸恶邪佞占了一半，让一二个元老大臣，如何实行他的志向呢？ 因而极论蔡确、章、韩缜、张以邪佞为朋党危害正直。
English: Now there are eight ministers in power, and the treacherous and evil ones account for half of them. How can one or two veteran ministers carry out his ambition? Therefore, it is extremely dangerous for Cai Zhengyi, Zhang, Han Zheng and Zhang to be friends with the evil ones.

古文：章数十上，相继斥去。
现代文：奏章几十次上呈，四人相继被贬斥离朝。
English: The score was submitted dozens of times, and the four were successively expelled from the court.

古文：又劾窜吕惠卿。
现代文：又弹劾流窜吕惠卿。
English: He also impeached Lü Huixing.

古文：朝论以大奸既黜，虑人情不安，将下诏慰释之，且戒止言者。
现代文：朝廷舆论认为大的奸臣既已被贬退，担心人情不安定，打算下诏书慰问释放他们，并且告戒制止言事的人。
English: The public opinion of the imperial court thought that the great treacherous vassals had already been degraded, worried about the instability of the human condition, planned to issue an edict of condolence to release them, and admonish those who stopped the speech.

古文：觌言： 诚出于此，恐海内有识之士，得以轻议朝廷。
现代文：王觌说 ：如果真的出于此，恐怕海内有识之士，得以轻议朝廷。
English: Wang Zhe said: If this is really the reason, I am afraid that people with insight in the country will be able to despise the imperial court.

古文：舜罪四凶而天下服，孔子诛少正卯而鲁国治。
现代文：舜治罪四大凶人而天下顺服，孔子杀少正卯而鲁国得以治理。
English: Confucius killed the four major criminals and the world obeyed. Confucius killed the minor criminals and the country was governed.

古文：当是之时，不闻人情不安，亦不闻出命令以悦其党也。
现代文：在这个时候，没有听说人情不安，也没有听说发出命令以取悦他们的党羽。
English: At this time, there are no reports of unrest or of orders being issued to please their supporters.

古文：盖人君之所以御下者，黜陟二柄而已。
现代文：大抵人君所以用来驾御臣下的，只是升降进退二权而已。
English: Most of the time, the people's lord is used to drive the vassal, but it is only the promotion and demotion of the second power.

古文：陟一善而天下之为善者劝，黜一恶而天下之为恶者惧。
现代文：提升进用一个好人而天下为好人劝勉，贬退一个奸恶而天下为奸恶恐惧。
English: Exhort a good man and the whole world praises him, scorn an evil man and the whole world fears him.

古文：岂以为恶者惧而朝廷亦为之惧哉？
现代文：难道认为奸恶恐惧而朝廷也为之恐惧吗？
English: Do you think that treachery is to be feared, and that the court is to be feared?

古文：诚为陛下惜之。 觌言虽切，然不能止也。
现代文：实在替陛下痛惜。 王觌的话虽然恳切，但不能阻止诏书下达。
English: I really feel sorry for His Majesty. Although Wang Yao's words were earnest, they could not stop the imperial decree from being issued.

古文：夏主新立，有轻中国心。
现代文：西夏主刚即位，有轻视中国的心意。
English: Emperor Xixia had just ascended to the throne, and he had the intention to despise China.

古文：觌曰： 小羌窥我厌兵，故桀骜若是。
现代文：王觌说： 小小的羌人窥伺我厌恶打仗，所以这样桀骜不驯。
English: Wang Yao said, "I hate fighting because of the little eunuchs who spy on me. That's why I'm so rebellious."

古文：然所当忧者，不在今秋而在异日，所当谨者，不在边备而在庙谟。
现代文：但所应忧虑的是，不在今天而在将来，所应谨慎的是，不在边备而在皇帝的谋略。
English: But what is to be feared is not to-day, but to-morrow; what is to be guarded against is not to-morrow, but the emperor's stratagem.

古文：翕张取予之权，必持重而后可。 洮东擒鬼章，槛至阙下，觌曰： 老羌虽就擒，其子统众如故，疆土种落未减于前，安可遽戮以贾怨。
现代文：敛缩张大取予之权，一定要持重而后可。 洮东擒获鬼章，用笼子关住送到朝廷，王觌说： 老羌虽然就擒，他的儿子统帅众属依旧，疆土种落不比以前减少，怎么可以急忙杀戮以致怨恨。
English: The right to restrict and restrict the expansion and acquisition of power must be respected and followed. When Shandong Yao was awarded the Ghost Badge and sent to the imperial court in a cage, Wang Yao said: Although Lao Yao was bedridden, his son was still the commander of all his subordinates, and the territory and ethnic groups were no less than before, how could he rush to kill and cause resentment?

古文：宜处之洮、岷、秦、雍间，以示含容好生之德，离其石交而坏其死党。 又言： 今民力凋瘵，边费亡极，不可不深为之计。 于是疏将帅非其人者请易之，茶盐之害民者请革之，至逋债、振瞻、赋敛、科须，皆指陈其故。
现代文：应把他安置在洮、岷、秦、雍州之间，以表示含容好生之德，离间其交谊坚固的朋友而破坏他的死党。 又说 ：现在民力损伤，边地费用没有限制，不可不深为之计议。 于是分条开列将帅非其人的请求更换，茶盐危害百姓的请求革除，至于欠债、赈济赡给、赋税聚敛、科须，都指出陈述其利弊得失。
English: He should be placed between Zhai, Zhai, Qin, and Yongzhou, to show his tolerance and the virtue of a good life, and to break up his firm friends and destroy his dead party. He also said: Now the people's power is damaged, there is no limit to the cost of the border, and it is necessary to consider it deeply. Therefore, the request to replace the handsome person who is not a person, the request to eliminate the tea salt that harms the people, and the request to eliminate the tea salt that harms the people, as for the debt, the subsistence support, the tax collection, and the science, all pointed out the advantages and disadvantages.

古文：差役法复行，觌以为： 朝廷意在便民，而议者遂谓免役法无一事可用。
现代文：差役法重新实行，王觌认为朝廷意在方便百姓，但议论的人就认为免役法无一事可用。
English: After the reintroduction of the draft law, Wang Xi believed that the imperial court intended to facilitate the people, but the commentators believed that the draft exemption law was useless.

古文：夫法无新旧，惟善之从。 因采掇数十事于差法有助可以通行者上之。
现代文：法无新旧之分，惟善者是从。因而采摘对差役法有帮助可以通行的几十条事上呈。
English: There is no distinction between the old and the new law, only between the good and the good. Therefore, there are dozens of things that can be done that are helpful and feasible for the law.

古文：遂论青苗之害，乞尽罢新令，而复常平旧法，曰： 聚敛之臣，惟知罔利自媒，不顾后害。
现代文：于是论青苗法的危害，请求废除新令，而恢复常平旧法，说： 聚敛大臣，只知侵欺财利自己酿成罪恶，不顾以后的危害。
English: He then discussed the harms of the Young Seedlings Law, and requested that the new regulation be abolished and the old law be restored, saying, "Ministers of agglomeration, they only know how to abuse, cheat, and benefit themselves, regardless of future harms.

古文：以国家之尊，而与民争锥刀之利，何以示天下？ 又言： 刑罚世轻世重。
现代文：以国家的尊严，却与百姓争夺微小的利益，怎么来告示天下呢？ 又说 ：刑罚时轻时重。
English: With the dignity of the country, but competing with the people for small profits, how to announce it to the world? He also said: the punishment is sometimes light and sometimes heavy.

古文：熙宁大臣，谓刑罚不重，则人无所惮。
现代文：熙宁时的大臣，认为刑罚不重，那么人无所惧惮。
English: The minister at the time of Xi Ning thought that the punishment was not heavy, so people had nothing to fear.

古文：今法令已行，可以适轻之时，愿择质厚通练之士，载加芟正。 于是置局编汇，俾觌预焉。
现代文：现在法令已实行，是可以适当放轻的时候，希望挑选质朴厚道通达干练的士人，再加以删正。 于是设置机构编汇法令，使王觌参与其中。
English: Now that the decree has been implemented, when it is possible to appropriately lighten it, it is hoped to select a simple, kind and capable scholar, and then to correct it. Therefore, an organization was set up to compile the decree, so that Wang Qian participated in it.

古文：大抵皆用中典，《元祐敕》是也。
现代文：大抵都用中典，这就是《元敕》。
English: Most of them use the Chinese version, which is "Yuan Zang."

古文：神宗复唐制，谏官分列两省。
现代文：神宗恢复唐代制度，谏官分列于两省。
English: Shenzong restored the Tang Dynasty system, and eunuchs were divided into two provinces.

古文：至是，大臣议徙之外门，而以其直舍为制敕院，名防漏泄，实不欲使与给舍相通。
现代文：到这时，大臣建议迁到外门，而以其直舍人院为制敕院，名义上是防止泄漏，实际上是不想使其与给舍相通。
English: At this time, the minister proposed to move to the outer gate, but to use the people's hospital as the control hospital, nominally to prevent leakage, but in fact did not want to make it connected to the housing.

古文：觌争之曰： 制敕院，吏舍也。
现代文：王觌争辩说： 制敕院，是吏舍。
English: Wang Yao argued, "Sesheyuin is an official residence.

古文：夺谏省以广吏舍，信胥吏而疑诤臣，何示不广也。 乃不果徙。
现代文：剥夺谏院二省以扩大吏舍；相信胥吏而怀疑忠臣，何示不广。 于是最终没有迁移。
English: He deprived the imperial court of two provinces in order to enlarge the officials' residences; he believed the officials but doubted the loyal vassals, which did not go over well.

古文：觌在言路，欲深破朋党之说。
现代文：王觌在谏院任职，想大破朋党之说。
English: Wang Hui, who holds a post in the Privy Council, wants to "smash the cronyism of the Party," he said.

古文：朱光庭讦苏轼试馆职策问，吕陶辩其不然，遂起洛、蜀二党之说。
现代文：朱光庭攻击苏轼试馆职策问，吕陶辩析其不然，于是兴起洛、蜀二党的说法。
English: Zhu Guangting attacked the Su Shi Examination Center's vocational policy, and Lu Tao argued that it was not, thus giving rise to the view that Luo and Shu were two parties.

古文：觌言： 轼之辞，不过失轻重之体尔。
现代文：王觌说 ：苏轼的言辞，不过是有失轻重之体而已。
English: Wang Yao said: Su Yao's words are nothing but empty words.

古文：若悉考同异，深究嫌疑，则两岐遂分，党论滋炽。
现代文：如果全部考究同异，深究嫌疑，那么两种歧见于是区分，党论更烈。
English: If we all look for similarities and differences, and deeply investigate suspicions, then the two differences will be distinguished, and the party theory will be stronger.

古文：夫学士命词失指，其事尚小；使士大夫有朋党之名，大患也。 帝深然之，置不问。
现代文：学士命词有失旨意，这件事还小；假使士大夫有朋党的名声，那么就是大患了。 皇帝很赞同，搁置不加追究。
English: It was a minor matter, but if the scholar-doctor had the reputation of being a party member, it would be a big problem. The emperor was very supportive, and the matter was shelved without further investigation.

古文：寻改右司员外郎，未几，拜侍御史、右谏议大夫。
现代文：不久改任右司员外郎，没有多久，被授官侍御史、右谏议大夫。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of right secretary, and before long, he was given the posts of chamberlain, historian, and right councilor.

古文：坐论尚书右丞胡宗愈，出知润州，加直龙图阁、知苏州。
现代文：因议论尚书右丞胡宗愈，出任润州知州，加封直龙图阁、知苏州。
English: Hu Zongyu, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed as the governor of Renzhou and Chizhou, and was also given the fiefs of Zhilongtu Pavilion and Chizhou.

古文：州有狡吏，善刺守将意以挠权，前守用是得讥议。
现代文：苏州有狡黠胥吏，善于探听郡守将帅的意思来屈权，前任太守因此得讥议。
English: There are cunning officials in Suzhou who are good at listening to the intentions of the county governor to yield power. The former governor was ridiculed for this.

古文：觌穷其奸状，置于法，一郡肃然。
现代文：王觌查究他的奸恶情状，依法处理，一郡肃然。
English: Wang Qi investigated his treachery and dealt with it according to law, and the whole county was stunned.

古文：民歌咏其政，有 吏行水上，人在镜心 之语。
现代文：百姓歌颂王觌的廉政，有 吏行水上，人在镜心 的话。
English: The people sing the praises of Wang Yao's clean government. There is a saying that officials walk on water, but the people walk on mirrors.

古文：徙江、淮发运使，入拜刑、户二部侍郎，与丰稷偕使辽，为辽人礼重。
现代文：移任江、淮发运使，入授刑、户二部侍郎，与丰稷一起出使辽国，被辽人所礼遇尊重。
English: Transferred to the post of Jiang, Huai dispatched envoys, entered the office of punishment, and served as the second chamberlain of the household, and dispatched to Liao Province together with Fengqi, and was respected by the Liao people.

古文：绍圣初，以宝文阁直学士知成都府。
现代文：绍圣初年，以宝文阁直学士的身份任成都知府。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, he was appointed as the governor of Chengdu with the status of the direct bachelor of Baowenge.

古文：蜀地膏腴，亩千金，无闲田以葬，觌索侵耕官地，表为墓田。
现代文：蜀地肥沃，每亩千金，没有闲田来葬人，王觌索还侵耕官地，标记为墓田。
English: Shu land is fertile, with thousands of gold per mu, and there are no idle fields to bury people. Wang Yinsao has also encroached on official land and marked it as a cemetery.

古文：江水贯城中为渠，岁久湮塞，积苦霖潦而多水灾，觌疏治复故，民德之，号 王公渠 。
现代文：江水横贯城中为渠，因年岁久远水道堵塞，积聚久下成灾的雨而多水灾，王觌疏通治理恢复原样，百姓对他感德，号称 王公渠 。
English: The water of the river runs through the middle of the city as a canal. Due to the long-standing waterway blockage, the accumulation of rain that has been a disaster for a long time and many floods, the Wangye dredging management has been restored to its original state, and the people are impressed by him, known as the Wang Gong Canal.

古文：徙河阳，贬少府少监，分司南京，又贬鼎州团练副使。
现代文：移任河阳，贬为少府少监，分掌南京，又贬为鼎州团练副使。
English: He was transferred to Kheyang, demoted to the position of minor prefectural inspector, put in charge of Nanjing, and demoted to the deputy envoy of the Dingzhou Rehearsal Corps.

古文：徽宗即位，还故职，知永兴军。
现代文：徽宗即皇帝位，恢复旧职，知永兴军。
English: Huizong, that is, the emperor's throne, restored the old post, known as Yongxing Army.

古文：过阙，留为工部侍郎，迁御史中丞。
现代文：经过朝廷，留任为工部侍郎，升任御史中丞。
English: After passing through the imperial court, he remained as a chamberlain of the engineering department and was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：改元诏下，觌言：  建中 之名，虽取皇极。
现代文：改年号的诏书下达，王觌说：  建中 之名，虽然取自皇极，但重复承袭前代纪年年号，不对，应以德宗作为劝戒。 
English: When the edict to change the era name was issued, Wang Xi said: Although the name Jianzhong is taken from the imperial era, it is not right to repeat the era name of the previous generation. It should be Tezong as a warning.

古文：然重袭前代纪号，非是，宜以德宗为戒。 时任事者多乖异不同，觌言： 尧、舜、禹相授一道，尧不去四凶而舜去之，尧不举元凯而舜举之，事未必尽同；文王作邑于丰而武王治镐，文王关市不征，泽梁无禁，周公征而禁之，不害其为善继、善述。
现代文：当时执政大臣彼此意见多相乖异，王觌说： 尧、舜、禹相传一道，尧没有除去四凶但舜除去了，尧不荐举元凯但舜荐举他，事情未必完全相同；周文王在丰地建造都邑但武王以镐地为都城，周文王关市不征，山川桥梁无禁，周公征收赋税而禁泽梁，这些都不危害他们很好继承、很好绍述前代。
English: At that time, the ruling ministers had different opinions from each other. Wang Qian said: Zhou, Zhou and Yu passed down the same tradition. Zhou did not remove the four evils, but Zhou removed them. Zhou did not recommend Yuan Kai, but Zhou recommended him. Things may not be exactly the same. Zhou Wenzhong built the capital city in Fengdi, but Wang Wucheni used Zhangdi as the capital city. Zhou Wenzhong did not levy taxes on the city of Guan, and there was no restriction on bridges in mountains and rivers. Zhou collected taxes and prohibited Ze Liang. These did not harm their good inheritance and good history of

古文：神宗作法于前，子孙当守于后。
现代文：神宗在以前建立制度，子孙应遵守在后。
English: Shenzong established the system in the past, and the descendants should abide by it in the future.

古文：至于时异事殊，须损益者损益之，于理固未为有失也。 当国者忿其言，遂改为翰林学士。
现代文：至于时代不同事情也不同，需要损益的就加以损益，这于理本来没有什么过失。 执掌国政的人对他的话怀有怨恨，于是改任翰林学士。
English: As far as different times and different things are concerned, if there is a need for profit and loss, profit and loss will be made, which is no fault of reason. The person in charge of state affairs harbored resentment against his words, so he changed his position to Hanlin Scholar.

古文：日食四月朔，帝下诏责躬，觌当制，有 惟德弗类，未足以当天心 之语，宰相去之，乃力请外。
现代文：四月初一日食，皇帝下诏书责罚自己，王觌值班起草制书，有 惟德弗类，未足以当天心 的话，宰相去掉了这句话，王觌就极力请求外任。
English: On the first day of the eclipse in early April, the emperor issued an edict to punish himself. Wang Xi was on duty to draft the edict, but there was no Defoe class, which was not enough for the heart of the day. The prime minister removed this sentence, and Wang Xi strongly requested an external appointment.

古文：以龙图阁学士知润州，徙海州，罢主管太平观，遂安置临江军。
现代文：以龙图阁学士的身份知润州，罢免为主管太平观，于是指定在临江军居住。
English: He was appointed as the head of the Taiping Academy, and was assigned to live in the Linjiang Military District.

古文：觌清修简澹，人莫见其喜愠。
现代文：王觌清修简淡，人们没有看见他有喜怒之色。
English: Wang Qianqing was simple-minded, and people did not see his emotions.

古文：持正论始终，再罹谴逐，不少变。
现代文：坚持正确的意见自始至终，一再遭到贬逐，没有一点改变。
English: Adhering to the correct opinion from beginning to end, he was repeatedly disparaged, and did not change a bit.

古文：无疾而卒，年六十八。
现代文：无病而去世，终年六十八岁。
English: He died without illness, aged sixty-eight.

古文：绍兴初，追复龙图阁学士。
现代文：绍兴初年，追认恢复龙图阁学士。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, the recognition of the restoration of Longtuge Academy.

古文：从子俊义。
现代文：侄子王俊义。
English: Nephew Wang Junyi.

