古文：惟王建国，辨方正位，体国经野。
现代文：王建立国都，辨别方向并确定宗庙和朝廷所在位置，划分都城与郊野的界限。
English: The king established the national capital, discerned the direction and determined the location of the ancestral temple and the imperial court, and delineated the boundaries between the capital city and the countryside.

古文：设官分职，以为民极。
现代文：分设官职，来作为民众的榜样。
English: To set an example to the public by holding public office.

古文：乃立天官冢宰，使帅其属，而掌邦治，以佐王均邦国。
现代文：于是设立天官冢宰，让他率领下属，而掌管天下的治理，辅佐王使天下百姓各自安守本分。
English: As a result, he set up the Celestial Officer and Vice-regent, letting him lead his subordinates, and in charge of the governance of the world, assisting the king to make the people of the world keep their duties safely.

古文：治官之属：大宰，卿一人；小宰，中大夫二人；宰夫，下大夫四人；上士八人，中士十有六人，旅下士三十有二人，府六人，史十有二人，胥十有二人，徒百有二十人。
现代文：治官的属官有：大宰，由卿一人担任；小宰，由中大夫两人担任；宰夫，由下大夫四人担任；另外还配有上士八人，中士十六人，下士三十二人，府六人，史十二人，胥有十二人、徒有一百二十人。
English: The subordinate officers of the magistrates are: Dazai, held by one chieftain; Kozai, held by two junior doctors; Zafu, held by four junior doctors; in addition, there are eight staff sergeants, sixteen sergeants, thirty-two corporals, six officers, twelve historians, twelve clerks, and one hundred and twenty apprentices.

古文：宫正，上士二人、中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、胥四人、徒四十人。
现代文：宫正，由上士二人担任，中士四人为副手，还另外配有下士八人，府二人，史四人，胥四人，徒四十人。
English: The palace guard is manned by two staff sergeants, four sergeants are second lieutenants, and there are also eight corporals, two officers, four historians, four sergeants, and forty apprentices.

古文：宫伯，中士二人、下士四人、府一人、史二人、胥二人、徒二十人。
现代文：宫伯，由中士二人担任，下士四人为副手，另外还配有府一人，史二人，胥二人，徒二十人。
English: The post of palace guard was held by two sergeants, with four corporals as deputies. In addition, there was one palace guard, two historians, two eunuchs, and twenty apprentices.

古文：膳夫，上士二人、中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、胥十有二人、徒百有二十人。
现代文：膳夫，由上士二人担任，中士四人为副手，另外还配有下士八人，府二人，史四人，胥十二人，徒一百二十人。
English: The kitchen staff is manned by two staff sergeants, with four sergeants as assistants. In addition, there are eight corporals, two officers, four historians, thirty-two clerks, and one hundred and twenty apprentices.

古文：庖人，中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、贾八人、胥四人、徒四十人。
现代文：庖人，由中士四人担任，下士八人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，贾八人，胥四人，徒四十人。
English: Four sergeants served as officers, eight corporals served as deputies, and there were also two officers, four historians, eight clerks, four sergeants, and forty apprentices.

古文：内饔，中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、胥十人、徒百人。
现代文：内饔，由中士四人担任，下土八人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，胥十人，徒一百人。
English: The Inner Palace was manned by four sergeants, the Lower Palace by eight lieutenants, and the Outer Palace by two officers, the Inner Palace by four officers, the Outer Palace by thirty officers, and the Inner Palace by one hundred officers.

古文：外饔，中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、胥十人、徒百人。
现代文：外饔，由中士四人担任，下士八人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，胥十人，徒一百人。
English: The outpost was manned by four sergeants, with eight corporals as deputies. In addition, there were two officers, four historians, thirty people, and a hundred soldiers.

古文：亨人，下士四人、府一人、史二人、胥五人、徒五十人。
现代文：亨人，由下士四人担任，另外还配有府一人，史二人，胥五十人，徒五十人。
English: Four corporals served as henchmen, and there was also a prefect, two historians, thirty-five people, and fifty apprentices.

古文：甸师，下士二人、府一人、史二人、胥三十人、徒三百人。
现代文：甸师，由下士二人担任，另外还配有府一人，史二人，胥三十人，徒三百人。
English: The division was headed by two corporals, and was also staffed by a prefect, two historians, thirty clerks, and three hundred apprentices.

古文：兽人，中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、胥四人、徒四十人。
现代文：兽人，由中士四人担任，下士八人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，胥四人，徒四十人。
English: Four sergeants served as orcs, eight corporals served as deputies, and there were also two officers, four historians, four eunuchs, and forty apprentices.

古文：渔人，中士四人、下士四人、府二人、史四人、胥三十人、徒三百人□
现代文：渔人，由中士二人担任，下士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，胥三十人，徒三百人。
English: Two sergeants served as fishermen, four corporals were deputies, and there were also two officers, four historians, thirty fishermen, and three hundred apprentices.

古文：鳖人，下士四人、府二人、史二人、徒十有六人。
现代文：鳖人，由下士四人担任，另外还配有府二人，史二人，徒十六人。
English: Four corporals were in charge of the eunuchs, and there were also two courtiers, two historians, and sixteen apprentices.

古文：腊人下士四人、府二人、史二人、徒二十人。
现代文：腊人，由下士四人担任，另外还配有府二人，史二人，徒二十人。
English: There were four corporals, two officers, two historians, and twenty apprentices.

古文：医师，上士二人、下士四人、府二人、史二人、徒二十人。
现代文：医师，由上士二人担任，下士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史二人，徒二十人。
English: Physician, by two staff sergeants, four corporals are deputies, in addition, there are two prefects, two historians, and twenty apprentices.

古文：食医，中士二人。
现代文：食医，由中士二人担任。
English: Two sergeants serve as gourmets.

古文：疾医，中士八人。
现代文：疾医，由中士八人担任。
English: Eight sergeants served as doctors.

古文：疡医，下士八人。
现代文：疡医，由下士八人担任。
English: Eight corporals were chosen to be doctors.

古文：兽医，下士四人。
现代文：兽医，由下士四人担任。
English: Four corporals are veterinarians.

古文：酒正，中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史八人、胥八人、徒八十人。
现代文：酒正，由中土四人担任，下土八人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史八人，胥八人，徒八十人。
English: Four people from the middle land were in charge of sake, eight people from the lower land were deputies, and there were also two people from the prefecture, eight people from the history department, eight people from the administration department, and eighty people from the apprenticeship department.

古文：酒人，奄十人、女酒三十人、奚三百人。
现代文：酒人，由奄十人担任，另外还配有女酒三十人，奚三百人。
English: The bartenders are made up of 10 men, 30 women, and 300 women.

古文：浆人，奄五人、女浆十有五人、奚百有五十人。
现代文：浆人，由奄五人担任，另外还配有女浆十五人，奚一百五十人。
English: There are five men to serve as milkers, with an additional 15 women milkers, for a total of 150 people.

古文：凌人，下士二人，府二人、史二人、胥八人、徒八十人。
现代文：凌人，由下士二人担任，另外还配有府二人，史二人，胥八人，徒八十人。
English: In addition, there are also two officers, two historians, thirty-eight people, and eighty apprentices.

古文：笾人，奄一人、女笾十人、奚二十人。
现代文：笾人，由奄一人担任，另外还配有女笾十人，奚二十人。
English: In addition, there are ten female magistrates and twenty male magistrates.

古文：醢人，奄一人、女醢二十人、奚四十人。
现代文：醢人，由奄一人担任，另外还配有女醢二十人，奚四十人。
English: In addition, there are twenty female magistrates and forty male magistrates.

古文：醯人，奄二人、女醯二十人、奚四十人。
现代文：醯人，由奄二人担任，另外还配有女醯二十人，奚四十人。
English: In addition, there are 20 female magistrates and 40 male magistrates.

古文：盐人，奄二人、女盐二十人、奚四十人。
现代文：盐人，由奄二人担任，另外还配有女盐二十人，奚四十人。
English: Salt people, by the election of two people, in addition, also equipped with female salt twenty people,  forty people.

古文：幂人，奄一人、女幂十人、奚二十人。
现代文：冪人，由奄一人担任，另外还配有女幕十人，奚二十人。
English: In addition, there are ten female actors and twenty male actors.

古文：宫人，中士四人、下士八人、府二人、史四人、胥八人、徒八十人。
现代文：宫人，由中士四人担任，下士八人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史二人，胥八人，徒八十人。
English: Four sergeants served as palace guards, and eight corporals served as deputies. In addition, there were two palace guards, two historians, thirty-eight soldiers, and eighty apprentices.

古文：掌舍，下士四人、府二人、史四人、徒四十人。
现代文：掌舍，由下士四人担任，另外还配有府二人，史四人，徒四十人。
English: Four corporals were in charge of the palm house, and there were also two officers, four historians, and forty apprentices.

古文：幕人，下士一人、府二人、史二人、徒四十人。
现代文：冪人，由下士一人担任，另外还配有府二人，史二人，徒四十人。
English: A corporal was in charge of the eunuchs, and there were also two courtiers, two historians, and forty apprentices.

古文：掌次，下士四人、府四人、史二人、徒八十人。
现代文：掌次，由下士四人担任，另外还配有府二人，史四人，徒八十人。
English: Of the officers, four were corporals, two were officers, four were historians, and 80 were apprentices.

古文：大府，下大夫二人、上士四人、下士八人、府四人、史八人、贾十有六人、胥八人、徒八十人。
现代文：大府，由下大夫二人担任，上士四人为副手，另外还配有下士八人，府四人，史八人，贾十六人，胥八人，徒八十人。
English: In addition, there are eight corporals, four officers, eight clerks, 16 assistants, eight clerks and 80 apprentices.

古文：玉府，上士二人、中士四人、府二人、史二人、工八人、贾八人、胥四人、徒四十有八人。
现代文：玉府，由上士二人担任，中士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史二人，工八人，贾八人，胥四人，徒四十八人。
English: Tamafu was manned by two staff sergeants, with four sergeants as deputies. In addition, there were two officers, two historians, eight workers, eight clerks, four porters, and forty-eight apprentices.

古文：内府，中士二人、府一人、史二人、徒十人。
现代文：内府，由中士二人担任，另外还配有府一人，史二人，徒十人。
English: Naifu, which is manned by two sergeants, is also staffed by one fu, two shi, and ten uchi.

古文：外府，中士二人、府一人、史二人、徒十人。
现代文：外府，由中士二人担任，另外还配有府一人，史二人，徒十人。
English: Gaifu, held by two sergeants, additionally equipped with one Fu, two Shi, ten acolytes.

古文：司会，中大夫二人、下大夫四人、上士八人、中士十有六人、府四人、史八人、胥五人、徒五十人。
现代文：司会，由中大夫二人担任，下大夫四人为副手，另外还配有上士八人，中土十六人，府四人，史八人，胥五人，徒五十人。
English: The secretariat is headed by two junior doctors, with four junior doctors as deputies. In addition, there are eight staff sergeants, sixteen junior doctors, four administrators, eight historians, thirty-five assistants, and fifty apprentices.

古文：司书，上士二人、中士四人、府二人，史四人、徒八人。
现代文：司书，由上士二人担任，中士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，徒八人。
English: The librarian is held by two staff sergeants, four sergeants are deputies, and there are also two prefects, four historians and eight apprentices.

古文：职内，上士二人、中士四人、府四人、史四人、徒二十人。
现代文：职内，由上士二人担任，中四人为副手，另外还配有府四人，史四人，徒二十人。
English: In the post, two staff sergeants are in charge, four junior officers are deputies, and there are also four prefects, four historians, and twenty apprentices.

古文：职岁，上士四人、中士八人、府四人、史八人、徒二十人。
现代文：职岁，由上士四人担任，中士八人为副手，另外还配有府四人，史八人，徒二十人。
English: In terms of seniority, there are four staff sergeants, eight sergeants are deputies, and there are also four officers, eight historians, and 20 apprentices.

古文：职币，上士二人、中士四人、府二人、史四人、贾四人、胥二人、徒二十人。
现代文：职币，由上士二人担任，中士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，贾四人，胥二人，徒二十人。
English: The ranks were manned by two staff sergeants, four sergeants were second lieutenants, and there were also two officers, four historians, four clerks, two sergeants, and twenty apprentices.

古文：司裘，中士二人、下士四人、府二人、史四人、徒四十人。
现代文：司裘，由中士二人担任，下士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，徒四十人。
English: Two sergeants served as judges, four corporals were deputies, and there were also two prefects, four historians, and forty apprentices.

古文：掌皮，下士四人、府二人、史四人、徒四十人。
现代文：掌皮，由下士四人担任，另外还配有府二人，史四人，徒四十人。
English: In addition, there were two officers, four historians, and forty apprentices.

古文：内宰，下大夫二人、上士四人、中士八人、府四人、史八人、胥信人、徒八十人。
现代文：内宰，由下大夫二人担任，上士四人为副手，另外还配有中士八人，府四人，史八人，胥八人，徒八十人。
English: In addition, there are eight sergeants, four officers, eight historians, eight clerks, and eighty apprentices.

古文：内小臣，奄上士四人、史二人、徒八人。
现代文：内小臣，由奄上士四人担任，另外还配有史二人，徒八人。
English: Inner vassals, served by four senior officers, in addition, there are two historians and eight apprentices.

古文：阍人，王宫每门四人。
现代文：阍人，王宫每个门设四人，御苑中离宫也每个门设四人。
English: For example, there are four people at each gate of the royal palace, and four people at each gate of the imperial garden.

古文：囿游亦如之。
现代文：寺人，在王的正内，一共五人。
English: There are a total of five temple members in Wang's inner circle.

古文：寺人，王之正内五人。
现代文：内竖，人数比寺人多一倍。
English: Inside, there are twice as many people as in the temple.

古文：内竖倍寺人之数。九嫔、世妇、女御、女祝四人、奚八人、女史八人、奚十有六人。
现代文：嫔九人、世妇，女御，女祝四人，另外还配有奚八人，女史八人，另外还配有奚十六人。
English: There are thirty-nine people, the world's women, the empress dowager, and the empress dowager, four people, in addition, there are thirty-eight people, eight people of women's history, and thirty-six people.

古文：典妇功，中士二人、下士四人、府二人、史四人、工四人、贾四人、徒二十人。
现代文：典妇功，由中士二人担任，下士四人为副手，另外还配有府二人，史四人，工四人，贾四人，徒二十人。
English: Two sergeants served as maids of honor, four corporals served as deputies, and there were also two officers, four historians, four workers, four clerks, and twenty apprentices.

古文：典丝，下士二人、府二人、史二人、贾四人、徒十有二人。
现代文：典丝，由下士二人担任，另外还配有府二人，史四人，贾四人，徒十二人。
English: Denshi, held by two corporals, and also equipped with two Fu, four Shi, four Jia, and twelve acolytes.

古文：典枲，下士二人、府二人、史二人、徒二十人。
现代文：典枲，由下士二人担任，另外还配有府二人，史二人，徒二十人。
English: It was manned by two corporals, two officers, two historians, and twenty apprentices.

古文：内司服，奄一人、女御三人、奚八人。
现代文：内司服，由奄一人担任，女御二人，另外还配有奚八人。
English: The Naishi uniform is worn by one cho, two nyogo, and is also worn by thirty-eight kuru.

古文：缝人，奄二人、女御八人、女工八十人、奚三十人。
现代文：缝人，由奄二人担任，女御八人，另外还配有女工八十人，奚三十人。
English: There were two seamstresses and eight maids of honour, as well as 80 female workers and 30 servants.

古文：染人，下士二人、府二人、史二人、徒二十人。
现代文：染人，由下土二人担任，另外还配有府二人，史二人，徒二十人。
English: The dyeing staff consisted of two people from Shitaji, two people from Fuchu, two people from Shi, and twenty apprentices.

古文：追师，下士二人、府一人、史二人、工二人、徒四人。
现代文：追师，由下士二人担任，另外还配有府一人，史二人，工二人，徒四人。
English: Pursuit division, manned by two corporals, also equipped with one prefect, two historians, two workers, and four apprentices.

古文：屦人，下士二人、府一人、史一人、工八人、徒四人。
现代文：屦人，由下士二人担任，另外还配有府一人，史一人，工八人，徒四人。
English: Two corporals were in charge of the eunuchs, and there was also a prefect, a historian, eight workers, and four apprentices.

古文：夏采，下士四人、史一人、徒四人。
现代文：夏采，由下士四人担任，另外还配有史一人，徒四人。
English: Xia Cai, held by four corporals, also equipped with a historian and four apprentices.

