古文：子罕言利，与命与仁。
现代文：孔子很少谈到利益，却相信天命、赞许仁德。
English: Confucius rarely talked about profit, but believed in the destiny of heaven and praised benevolence.

古文：达巷党人曰： 大哉孔子！
现代文：达巷这个地方有人说： 孔子真是伟大啊！
English: Da Xiang is a place where some people say: Confucius is really great!

古文：博学而无所成名。 
现代文：他学识渊博，可惜没有使他树立名声的专长。 
English: He was a learned man, but he did not have the expertise for which he was famous.

古文：子闻之，谓门弟子曰： 吾何执？
现代文：孔子听说了，对他的学生说： 我应该要做什么好呢？
English: When Confucius heard this, he said to his students, "What should I do?

古文：执御乎，执射乎？
现代文：是去驾车呢？还是射箭呢？
English: Are you going to drive? Or go archery?

古文：吾执御矣。 
现代文：我还是去驾车吧。 
English: I'll just drive.

古文：子曰： 麻冕，礼也；今也纯，俭，吾从众。
现代文：孔子说： 用麻线来做礼帽，这是合乎礼的；如今用丝来制作礼帽，这样省俭些，我赞成大家的做法。
English: Confucius said: It is proper to use hemp thread to make a ceremonial hat; nowadays, silk is used to make a ceremonial hat, so be thrifty. I agree with everyone's practice.

古文：拜下，礼也；今拜乎上，泰也；虽违众，吾从下。 
现代文：臣见君，先在堂下行跪拜之礼，然后升堂行跪拜之礼，这是合乎礼节的；现在大家都只是升堂行跪拜之礼，这是倨傲的表现。虽然违反了大家的做法，我还是主张要先在堂下跪拜之礼。 
English: It is proper etiquette for a vassal to kneel first in the hall and then go up to the hall to kneel; now everyone just goes up to the hall to kneel, which is a sign of arrogance. Although it violates everyone's practice, I still advocate kneeling in the hall first.

古文：子绝四：毋意、毋必、毋固、毋我。
现代文：孔子杜绝了四种弊病：不凭空猜疑，不绝对肯定，不固执拘泥，不惟我独尊。
English: Confucius eliminated four kinds of maladies: no unfounded suspicion, no absolute certainty, no stubbornness, and no self-esteem.

古文：子畏于匡，曰： 文王既没，文不在兹乎？
现代文：孔子在匡地被人们围困时，他说： 周文王死了以后，周代的礼乐文化不是保存在我这里吗？
English: When Confucius was besieged by people in Kuangdi, he said: After the death of King Zhouwen, isn't the ceremonial music culture of Zhou Dynasty preserved here?

古文：天之将丧斯文也，后死者不得与于斯文也；天之未丧斯文也，匡人其如予何？ 
现代文：上天如果想要消灭这种文化，那我就不可能掌握这种文化了；上天如果不想灭除这种文明礼乐，匡地的人能把我怎么样呢？ 
English: If God wants to eliminate this culture, then I can't master this culture; if God doesn't want to eliminate this civilization and ritual, what can the people of Kuang Di do to me?

古文：太宰问于子贡曰： 夫子圣者与，何其多能也？ 
现代文：太宰问子贡说： 孔夫子是圣人吗？为什么他如此博学多才呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager asked Zi Gong, "Is Confucius a saint? Why is he so knowledgeable and talented?"

古文：子贡曰： 固天纵之将圣，又多能也。 
现代文：子贡说： 这本是上天想让他成为圣人，所以使他博学多才。 
English: Zigong said, "It was God's will to make him a saint, so He made him a scholar.

古文：子闻之，曰： 太宰知我乎？
现代文：孔子听到后说： 太宰怎么会了解我呢？
English: Upon hearing this, Confucius said, "How could Dazai understand me?

古文：吾少也贱，故多能鄙事。君子多乎哉？不多也。 
现代文：我小时候生活艰难，所以会做很多粗活。君子会有这么多的技艺吗？不会有很多的。 
English: When I was a child, life was hard, so I did a lot of menial jobs. Would a gentleman have so many skills? There wouldn't be many.

古文：牢曰： 子云： 吾不试，故艺。  
现代文：子牢说： 孔子说过， 我年轻时没有去做官，所以会许多技艺 。 
English: Zi Du said: Confucius said, I did not become an official when I was young, so I know a lot of skills.

古文：子曰： 吾有知乎哉？
现代文：孔子说： 我有知识吗？
English: Confucius said: Do I have knowledge?

古文：无知也。
现代文：也会有没有知识的时候。
English: There are also times when there is no knowledge.

古文：有鄙夫问于我，空空如也。
现代文：曾经有个乡下人向我提问，我对他的问题无以应答。
English: A villager once asked me a question, and I couldn't answer his question.

古文：我叩其两端而竭焉。 
现代文：我从首尾两头开始反过来叩问他，一步步问到穷竭处，问题就不解自明了。 
English: I asked him questions from the beginning to the end, step by step to the point of exhaustion, and the questions became self-evident.

古文：子曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：孔子说： 凤凰不来，黄河不出现瑞图。我这一生也就完了吧！ 
English: Confucius said, "If the phoenix does not come and the yellow river does not appear, my life will be over."

古文：子见齐衰者、冕衣裳者与瞽者，见之，虽少，必作，过之必趋。
现代文：孔子对于穿丧服的人、穿礼服戴礼帽的人和盲人，相见的时候，哪怕他们很年轻，也一定会站起身来；经过这些人身边时，怀有敬意地快步走过。
English: Confucius would always stand up when he saw a person in mourning clothes, a person in a ceremonial robe and cap, and a blind person, even if they were very young; when he passed by these people, he would walk quickly with respect.

古文：颜渊喟然叹曰： 仰之弥高，钻之弥坚。
现代文：颜渊感叹地说： 对于老师的知识与道德，愈仰望愈觉得其崇高；越钻研越觉得其艰深。
English: Yan Yuan said with admiration: The more you look up to the teacher's teaching, the more sublime it feels; the more you delve into it, the more you can appreciate its solidity and depth.

古文：瞻之在前，忽焉在后。
现代文：看它好像在前面，忽然间又像在后面。
English: It looks like it's in front, and suddenly it looks like it's behind.

古文：夫子循循然善诱人，博我以文，约我以礼，欲罢不能。
现代文：老师善于有步骤地引导我们，用各种文献来丰富我们的知识，用礼来约束我们的行为，我们想要停止学习都不可能。
English: Teachers are good at systematically inducing people, using literature to enrich our knowledge, and using etiquette to restrict our words and deeds. Even if you want to stop learning, you can't.

古文：既竭吾才，如有所立卓尔，虽欲从之，末由也已。 
现代文：我已经竭尽全力，但它仍在面前高高地耸立着，虽想攀从，却觉无路可走。 
English: I have done my best, but it still stands tall in front of me, and although I want to climb, I feel that there is no way to go.

古文：子疾病，子路使门人为臣。
现代文：孔子生了重病，子路让孔子的门徒充当家臣准备料理丧事。
English: When Confucius was seriously ill, Zilu asked a disciple of Confucius to serve as his vassal to prepare the funeral meal.

古文：病间，曰： 久矣哉，由之行诈也！
现代文：后来，孔子的病好了一些，他说： 仲由很久以来就干这种弄虚作假的事情。
English: Later, when Confucius was better, he said, "It's been a long time since I've done this kind of trickery.

古文：无臣而为有臣，吾谁欺？
现代文：仲由做这种欺诈的事情很久啦！我没有家臣而冒充有家臣。我骗谁呢？
English: It's been a long time since I've done such a deceitful thing! I don't have a vassal, but I pretend to have one. Who am I deceiving?

古文：欺天乎？
现代文：骗上天吧？
English: Fooling the heavens, huh?

古文：且予与其死于臣之手也，无宁死于二三子之手乎！
现代文：与其在家臣的侍候下死去，我宁可在你们这些学生的侍候下死去，这样不是更好吗？
English: Would it not be better for me to die in the company of you students than to die in the company of my vassals?

古文：且予纵不得大葬，予死于道路乎？ 
现代文：而且即使我不能以大夫之礼来安葬，难道会死在路上吗？ 
English: And even if I can't be buried with a doctor's gift, will I die on the road?

古文：子贡曰： 有美玉于斯，韫椟而藏诸？
现代文：子贡说： 这里有一块美玉，是藏在柜子里呢？
English: Zigong said, "There is a precious stone here. Is it hidden in the cupboard?"

古文：求善贾而沽诸？ 
现代文：还是寻求那些识货的商人把它卖掉呢？ 
English: Or do you look for knowledgeable merchants to sell it to?

古文：子曰： 沽之哉，沽之哉！
现代文：孔子回答说： 卖掉吧，卖掉吧！
English: Confucius replied, "Sell it, sell it!

古文：我待贾者也。 子欲居九夷。
现代文：我是等待着那些识货的人来，等到那些真正认得美玉的人来买啊。 孔子想要搬到九夷地方去居住。
English: I'm waiting for those who know the goods to come, and wait until those who really know the gems come to buy.Confucius wants to move to the Wuyi area to live.

古文：或曰： 陋，如之何？ 
现代文：有人说： 那里非常落后闭塞，怎么能住呢？ 
English: Some people say: It's very backward and closed, how can you live there?

古文：子曰： 君子居之，何陋之有！ 
现代文：孔子说： 有君子住在那儿，怎么会鄙陋呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If a gentleman lives there, how can he be a scoundrel?"

古文：子曰： 吾自卫反鲁，然后乐正，《雅》《颂》各得其所。 
现代文：孔子说： 我从卫国回到鲁国以后，才把音乐进行了整理，《雅》和《颂》都有了适当的位置。 
English: Confucius said, "It was only after I returned to Lu that I sorted out the music. Both "Ya" and "Ode" have their proper places.

古文：子曰： 出则事公卿，入则事父兄，丧事不敢不勉，不为酒困，何有于我哉？ 
现代文：孔子说： 在外便侍公卿，入门便侍奉父兄，有丧事，不敢不勉力去办，不被酒所困扰，这些事我做到了哪些呢？ 
English: Confucius said: When I was out, I served nobles; when I was just starting out, I served my parents and brothers; when there was a funeral, I dared not do it without effort; when I was troubled by alcohol, what of these things did I accomplish?

古文：子在川上曰： 逝者如斯夫！不舍昼夜。 
现代文：孔子在河边说： 时间就像这奔流的河水一样，不分白天黑夜不停地流逝。 
English: Confucius said by the river: Time, like this rushing river, flows ceaselessly, day and night.

古文：子曰： 吾未见好德如好色者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我没有见过像好色那样好德的人。 
English: Confucius said, "I have never seen a man so virtuous as a lecher.

古文：子曰： 譬如为山，未成一篑，止，吾止也；譬如平地，虽覆一篑，进，吾往也。 
现代文：孔子说： 比如用土堆山，只差一筐土就完成了，这时候停下来，那是我自己要停下来的；比如在平地上堆山，虽然只倒下一筐，如果决心继续，还是要自己去干的。 
English: Confucius said, "For example, when making a mound of earth, if there is only one basket of earth missing, it is finished. If I stop at this time, it is because I want to stop. For example, when making a mound of earth on a flat land, even if only one basket is needed, if I decide to continue, I still have to do it myself."

古文：子曰： 语之而不惰者，其回也与！ 
现代文：孔子说： 听我说话而能毫不懈怠的，只有颜回一个人吧！ 
English: Confucius said: If there is only one person who can listen to me without slacking off, it should be Yanbei.

古文：子谓颜渊，曰： 惜乎！
现代文：孔子谈到颜渊，说： 可惜呀！
English: Confucius said of Yan Yuan: What a pity!

古文：吾见其进也，未见其止也。 
现代文：我只见他不断前进，从来没有看见他停止过。 
English: I just saw him keep going, I never saw him stop.

古文：子曰： 苗而不秀者有矣夫，秀而不实者有矣夫。 
现代文：孔子说： 庄稼有只长苗而不开花的吧！有开了花却不结果实的吧。 
English: Confucius said: There are crops that grow only seedlings and do not bloom. There are crops that bloom but do not bear fruit.

古文：子曰： 后生可畏，焉知来者之不如今也？
现代文：孔子说： 年轻人是可敬畏的，怎么知道他们将来赶不上现在的人呢？
English: Confucius said: Young people are to be feared. How do you know that they will not be able to keep up with the current generation?

古文：四十、五十而无闻焉，斯亦不足畏也已。 子曰： 法语之言，能无从乎？
现代文：一个人如果到了四五十岁的时候还没有什么名望，这样的人也就不值得敬畏了。 孔子说： 合乎礼法原则的话，能够不听从吗？
English: If a person does not have any reputation by the time he is forty or fifty years old, such a person is not worthy of fear.Confucius said: If it is in accordance with the principle of etiquette, can you not obey?

古文：改之为贵。
现代文：但只有按它来改正错误才是可贵的。
English: But it is only valuable if it is used to correct mistakes.

古文：巽与之言，能无说乎？
现代文：恭顺赞许的话，听了能够不高兴吗？
English: Can you be unhappy after listening to words of praise?

古文：绎之为贵。
现代文：但只有分析鉴别以后才是可贵的。
English: However, it is only valuable after analysis and identification.

古文：说而不绎，从而不改，吾末如之何也已矣。 
现代文：只顾高兴而不加以分析，表面听从而不加以改正，我也没有什么办法来对付这种人了。 
English: There's nothing I can do about this kind of person, who takes pleasure without analyzing it, who listens without correcting it.

古文：子曰： 主忠信。毋友不如己者，过，则勿惮改。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子应该亲近忠诚和讲信义的人，不和自己不相似的人做朋友，有了过错不要害怕改正。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman should be close to those who are loyal and trustworthy, and not be friends with those who are not similar to him. If you make a mistake, don't be afraid to correct it.

古文：子曰： 三军可夺帅也，匹夫不可夺志也。 
现代文：孔子说： 军队的首领可以被改变，但是有志气的人的志向是不能被改变的。 
English: Confucius said: The leader of an army can be changed, but the aspiration of a person with ambition cannot be changed.

古文：子曰： 衣敝缊袍，与衣狐貉者立而不耻者，其由也与！ 不忮不求，何用不臧？  
现代文：孔子说： 穿着破旧的丝棉袍子，与穿着狐貉裘皮衣服的人站在一起而不觉得羞耻，大概只有仲由吧。《诗经》上说： 不嫉妒，不贪求，为什么说不好呢？  
English: Confucius said: Wearing a worn silk cotton robe, standing with a person wearing a fox fur coat without feeling ashamed, there is probably only one reason. "Song of Songs" said: Not jealous, not greedy, why is it not good?

古文：子路终身诵之，子曰： 是道也，何足以臧？ 
现代文：子路听了，从此常常念着这句话。孔子又说： 仅仅做到这个样子，又怎么算得上好呢？ 
English: Zilu listened to this and often recited this sentence from then on. Confucius also said: How can it be considered good just to be like this?

古文：子曰： 岁寒，然后知松柏之后凋也。 
现代文：孔子说： 一年之中最寒冷的季节，这样才知道松树和柏树是不会凋谢的。 
English: Confucius said: The coldest season of the year is the time to know that the pine and cypress trees will not wither.

古文：子曰： 知者不惑，仁者不忧，勇者不惧。 
现代文：孔子说： 不断求取知识的人就不会被遇到的事情所迷惑；真诚的待人如己，以至于不再为个人得失而忧愁；勇敢的实践前行以至于不再畏惧任何困难。 
English: Confucius said: Those who constantly seek knowledge will not be confused by the things they encounter; sincerely treat others as themselves, so that they no longer worry about personal gains and losses; bravely practice moving forward so that they are no longer afraid of any difficulties.

古文：子曰： 可与共学，未可与适道；可与适道，未可与立；可与立，未可与权。 
现代文：孔子说： 可以一起学习的人，未必能走共同的道路；能走共同的道路的人，未必可以和他事事依礼而行；可以和他事事依礼而行，未必可以和他一起变通灵活处事。 
English: Confucius said: "Those who can learn together may not be able to walk a common path; those who can walk a common path may not be able to act with courtesy with others; those who can act with courtesy may not be able to work flexibly with others.

古文： 唐棣之华，偏其反而。岂不尔思？
现代文：古代有一首诗这样写道： 唐棣树的花，翩翩地摇摆，难道不思念你吗？
English: There is an ancient poem that reads as follows: Don Juan's flowers, swaying gently, do they not miss you?

古文：室是远尔。 
现代文：只是由于家住的地方太远了。 
English: It's just that home is so far away.

古文：子曰： 未之思也，夫何远之有。 
现代文：孔子说： 他还是没有真的想念，如果真的想念，有什么觉得遥远呢？ 
English: Confucius said: He still does not really miss, if he really misses, what do you think is far away?

