古文：袁天纲张冏藏张柬之陆景融程行谌魏元忠
现代文：袁天纲张冏藏张柬之陆景融程行谌魏元忠
English: Yuan Tiangang, Zhang Xizang, Zhang Kam, and Wei Yuanzhong

古文：袁天纲
现代文：袁天纲
English: Yuan Tiangang

古文：袁天纲，蜀郡成都人。
现代文：袁天纲四川成都人。
English: Yuan Tiangang is from Chengdu, Sichuan.

古文：父玑、梁州司仓。祖嵩，周朝历犍为蒲阳蒲江二郡守、车骑将军。
现代文：父亲袁玑，任梁州司仓，祖父袁嵩，周朝时先后担任犍为地区浦阳、蒲江二郡的郡守和车骑将军。
English: His father, Yuan Qi, served as the secretary of Liangzhou, and his grandfather, Yuan Song, successively served as the county governor and chariot and cavalry general of the two counties of Poyang and Pujiang in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：曾祖达，梁朝江黄二州刺史，周朝历天水怀仁二郡守。
现代文：曾祖袁达，梁朝时做过江、黄二州的刺史，周朝时连续担任过天水、怀仁二郡的郡守。
English: Zeng Zu Yuan Da, during the Liang Dynasty, served as the governor of Jiang and Huang two states, and during the Zhou Dynasty, he served as the governor of Tianshui and Huairen two counties.

古文：天纲少孤贫，好道艺，精于相术。
现代文：袁天纲是在孤独与贫穷中度过他的少年时代。他喜欢作学问和学习技艺，精通相术。
English: Yuan Tiangang spent his boyhood in loneliness and poverty. He liked to study and learn skills, and was proficient in physiognomy.

古文：唐武德年中为火井令，贞观六年秩满入京。
现代文：唐高祖武德年间担任过火井令。唐太宗贞观六年任期届满来到京城长安。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong held the post of Huaijing. Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty came to the capital Chang'an at the end of his six-year term.

古文：太宗召见，谓天纲曰：巴蜀古有严君平，朕今有尔，自顾何如？
现代文：太宗召见袁天纲。对他说：巴蜀古时候有个严君平擅长占卜，我现在有你，你自己看怎么样？
English: Emperor Taizong summoned Yuan Tiangang and said to him: In ancient times in Bashu, there was a certain Yan Junping who was good at divination. Now that I have you, what do you think?

古文：对曰：彼不逢时，臣遇圣主，臣当胜也。
现代文：袁天纲回答说：严君平生不逢时，我遇到了圣明的皇上，我应该胜过他。
English: Yuan Tiangang replied: Yan Jun was born at an inopportune time, I met the emperor of Shenming, I should be better than him.

古文：隋大业末，窦轨客游剑南德阳县，与天纲同宿。
现代文：隋炀帝大业末年，窦轨寄居在剑南德阳县，跟袁天纲住在一起。
English: In the last years of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, Douluo lived in Deyang County, Jianan Province, together with Yuan Tiangang.

古文：以贫苦问命，天纲曰：公额上伏犀贯玉枕，辅角又成就。
现代文：窦轨当时的境遇困苦不堪，于是，让袁天纲给他看看面相，预卜一下未来的命运。袁天纲说：你前额到发际骨骼隆起，一直连到脑后的玉枕处，你的下巴浑圆肥大。
English: At that time, Douluo was in a very difficult situation. Therefore, Yuan Tiangang asked him to look at his face and predict his future fate. Yuan Tiangang said: "Your forehead is raised from the hairline to the jade pillow behind your head, and your chin is round and fat.

古文：从今十年，后必富贵，为圣朝良佐。
现代文：今后十年之内，你一定会富贵的，成为朝廷的贤臣良将。
English: Within the next ten years, you will certainly be rich and become a wise general of the imperial court.

古文：右辅角起，兼复明净，当于梁益二州分野，大振功名。
现代文：你的右侧下巴隆起，而且明洁光亮，应当以梁、益二州为分界线，树立显赫的功名。
English: Your right side of the chin is uplifted, and it is clear and bright. You should take Liang and Yixing as the dividing line and establish a distinguished reputation.

古文：轨曰：诚如此言，不敢忘德。
现代文：窦轨说：如果真象你说的那样，不敢忘你的大德。
English: Dou Liao said: If it is as you say, I dare not forget your great virtue.

古文：初为益州行台仆射，既至，召天纲谓曰：前于德阳县相见，岂忘也。
现代文：开始，窦轨官任益州行台仆射，到任后，召请袁天纲，对他说：从前你我在德阳县相见，怎么能忘啊！
English: At the beginning, the Dou rail official appointed Yizhou Xingtaibuxi. After taking office, he summoned Yuan Tiangang and said to him: Once upon a time, you and I met in Deyang County, how can I forget it!

古文：深礼之，更请为审。
现代文：说完，深施一礼，又请袁天纲为自己相面。
English: After saying this, he bowed deeply and asked Yuan Tiangang to meet him face to face.

古文：天纲瞻之良久曰：骨法成就，不异往时。然目色赤贯童子，语浮面赤，为将多杀人，愿深自诫。
现代文：袁天纲望了他许久，说：你的面相和过去没有什么不同，然而眼睛色红连着瞳人，说话浮躁，面色赤红，做了武将怕是要多杀人的啊，但愿你要警戒自己。
English: Yuan Tiangang looked at him for a long time and said, "Your face is no different from the past. However, your eyes are red with pupils, your speech is impetuous, and your face is red. If you become a general, I'm afraid you'll have to kill more people. I hope you'll watch out for yourself."

古文：后果多行杀戮。
现代文：唐高祖武德九年，窦轨被召前往京城。
English: In the ninth year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Dou Liao was summoned to Beijing.

古文：武德九年，轨被征诣京，谓天纲曰：更得何官。
现代文：临行前，他问袁天纲，说：我这次应召进京，还能得什么官？
English: Before leaving, he asked Yuan Tiangang, saying, "I have been summoned to Beijing this time, what other post can I get?

古文：对曰：面上佳人，坐位不动。辅角右畔光泽，更有喜色。
现代文：袁天纲回答说：看你脸，面上佳人，坐位不动，下巴右侧有光泽，看来是又有好消息等着你。
English: Yuan Tiangang replied, "Look at your face. You are a beautiful woman. You are sitting still. The right side of your chin is shiny. It seems that there is good news waiting for you."

古文：至京必蒙圣恩，还来此任。
现代文：到了京城一定会得到皇上的恩遇，还将回到本地任职。
English: When he arrives in the capital, he is sure to receive the emperor's favor, and he will also return to the local post.

古文：其年果重授益州都督。
现代文：这一年窦轨果然被授于益州都督，重新回到益州。
English: This year, Dou Jiao was indeed awarded the governorship of Yizhou and returned to Yizhou.

古文：天纲初至洛阳，在清化坊安置。朝野归凑，人物常满。
现代文：袁天纲初到洛阳时，在清化坊安顿下来，无论是朝庭中的高官显贵，还是民间的各等人士都往他那里跑，家中常常聚满了人。
English: When Yuan Tiangang first arrived in Luoyang, he settled down in Qinghua Square. Both high-ranking dignitaries in the imperial court and people from all walks of life ran to him, and his home was often full of people.

古文：是时杜淹、王珪、韦挺三人来见，天纲谓淹曰：兰台成就，学堂宽广。
现代文：当时，杜淹、王珪、韦挺三个人来见袁天纲，请他给看相。袁天纲对杜淹说：这位官人，鼻子的左侧饱满分明，脸盘宽阔。
English: At that time, three people, Du Ruan, Wang Qian and Wei Ting, came to see Yuan Tiangang and asked him to show his face. Yuan Tiangang said to Du Ruan: This official, the left side of his nose is full and clear, and his face is broad.

古文：谓珪曰：公法令成就，天地相临。
现代文：对王珪说：这位官人从鼻翼经嘴角的两条纵理纹清晰，而且天庭与地阁直临。
English: He said to Wang Yao, "This official's two longitudinal lines from the nostrils through the corners of the mouth are clear, and the heavenly court and the earthly court are right next to each other.

古文：从今十年，当得五品要职。
现代文：从现在算起，十年之内，一定能荣任五品的显要官职。
English: From now on, within ten years, I will definitely be able to be appointed to a prominent official position of the Fifth Rank.

古文：谓挺曰：公面似大兽之面，文角成就，必得贵人携接。
现代文：对韦挺说：这位官人脸象大兽的脸。文角清晰，一定会得到贵人的提携。
English: To Wei Ting, he said, "This official's face is like the face of a great beast. His writing is clear, and he is sure to get the cooperation of the nobles."

古文：初为武官。
现代文：刚开始时任武官。
English: At the beginning, he was a military attaché.

古文：复语杜淹曰：二十年外，终恐三贤同被责黜，暂去即还。
现代文：又对杜淹说：二十年以后，恐怕三位贤士要同时被责罚贬黜，但是是暂时的，很快又会被召回恢复官职的。
English: He also said to Du Yun: Twenty years later, I am afraid that the three sages will be punished and demoted at the same time, but it is temporary, and they will soon be recalled to resume their official duties.

古文：淹寻迁侍御史，武德中为天策府兵曹文学馆学士。
现代文：不久，杜淹升迁侍御史。唐高祖武德年间，又任天策府兵曹文字馆学士。
English: Not long after, Du Yun was promoted to the position of imperial secretary. During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, he was also appointed as a military officer of Tianze Prefecture and a scholar of the Literature Museum.

古文：王珪为隐太子中允。
现代文：王珪任隐太子中允。
English: Wang Xuan was appointed as the second-in-command to the crown prince.

古文：韦挺自隋末，隐太子引之为率更。
现代文：韦挺在隋朝末年由隐太子李世民引荐做了率更。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Wei Ting was recommended by the Hidden Prince Li Shimin.

古文：武德六年，俱配流隽州。
现代文：武德六年三人都被发配，流放到隽州。
English: After six years of martial arts, all three of them were exiled to Zhangzhou.

古文：淹等至益州，见天纲泣曰：袁公前于洛阳之言，皆如高旨。
现代文：杜淹三人经过益州时，见了袁天纲哭泣着说：袁公从前在洛阳说的话全都象神明的预示啊！
English: When the three of them were passing through Yizhou, Du Hun saw Yuan Tiangang weeping and said, "What Yuan Gong once said in Luoyang was like a divine omen!

古文：今日形势如此，更为一看。
现代文：今天的情况如此，再给我们看一看相吧。
English: That's the situation today, so let's have another look.

古文：天纲曰：公等骨法，大胜往时。不久即回，终当俱享荣贵。
现代文：袁天纲说：各位的骨法，大大胜过以往不久就会回来的，最终必定能享受荣华富贵的。
English: Yuan Tiangang said: Your bone method is much better than before, you will be back soon, and you will finally be able to enjoy the glory and wealth.

古文：至九年六月，俱追入。
现代文：到了武德九年六月，三人都被召回京城。
English: In June of the ninth year of Wude, all three were recalled to Beijing.

古文：又过益州，造天纲。
现代文：回来时，又经过益州，三人造访了袁天纲。
English: When they came back, they passed through Yizhou again, and the three of them visited Yuan Tiangang.

古文：天纲曰：杜公至京，既得三品要职，年寿非天纲所知。
现代文：袁天纲说：杜公到京城，就能得到三品要职。年寿我就不知道了。
English: Yuan Tiangang said: "If Du Gong comes to Beijing, he can get three important posts. I don't know his age.

古文：王韦二公，在后当得三品，兼有寿。然晚途皆不深遂，韦公尤甚。
现代文：王、韦二公，在这以后应该到得三品官，又都能长寿，但到了晚年在仕途上不能有太大的发展了。
English: Wang and Wei Er Gong, after this, should be able to get the third grade official, and can live a long life, but in their later years, they can't have too much development on the way.

古文：及淹至京，拜御史大夫，检校吏部尚书。
现代文：韦公可能更明显一些。杜淹到了京城，就被授予了御史大夫，检校吏部尚书。
English: Wei Gong may be more obvious. When Du Duan arrived in Beijing, he was awarded the title of Imperial Historian and the title of Inspector of Schools.

古文：赠天纲诗曰：伊吕深可慕，松乔定是虚。
现代文：他赠诗给袁天纲：伊尹、吕尚那样的名相深深让人敬慕，赤松子、王子乔等传说中的得道仙人纯属无有子虚。
English: He gave poems to Yuan Tiangang: the names like Yi Yin and Lushang are deeply admirable, and the legendary sages such as Red Pine and Prince Qiao are pure.

古文：系风终不得，脱屣欲安如。
现代文：扑风捉影的事情终究不能成为现实，将一切看成象脱掉鞋子一样随便就会得到安宁。
English: After all, things that are caught in the wind cannot become reality. If you take everything as casually as taking off your shoes, you will get peace.

古文：且珍绔素美，当与薜萝疏。
现代文：应当象珍惜洁白美丽的白绢一样珍重我们自己吧，让我们象疏离薜萝那样与恶运远离。
English: Let us cherish ourselves like the white beauty of the egret, and shun ill fortune as we shun the dill.

古文：既逢杨得意，非复久闲居。
现代文：君既然遇上杨得意这样的人且已相知相识，那么，你也一定能升达腾飞而不会久久闲居。
English: Since you have met such a person as Yang Rongli and have already known each other, then you will surely be able to fly up and not stay idle for a long time.

古文：王珪寻为侍中，出为同州刺史。
现代文：王珪不久任侍中，出任同州刺史。
English: Wang Yao was soon appointed as a chamberlain, and served as the governor of the same province.

古文：韦挺历蒙州刺史，并卒于官，皆如天纲之言。
现代文：韦挺担任了好几年蒙州刺史，并且病死在任上。这一切全都和袁天纲当年说的一样。
English: Wei Ting served as the Mengzhou chief historian for several years, and died of illness while in office. All of this is the same as what Yuan Tiangang said that year.

古文：贞观中，敕追诣九成宫。于时中书舍人岑文本，令视之。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，皇帝下诏书令袁天纲到九成宫，当时中书舍人岑文本让袁天纲给看相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Yuan Tiangang was sent to the Jiu Chenggong Palace by imperial decree. At that time, the Chinese government allowed Yuan Tiangang to see the emperor.

古文：天纲曰：舍人学堂成就，眉复过目，文才振于海内。
现代文：袁天纲说：舍人的脸面宽大，眼眉又长过眼睛，你的文才可在海内名声大振。
English: Yuan Tiangang said, "If your face is broad and your eyebrows are longer than your eyes, your writing can make you famous at home.

古文：头有生骨，犹未大成。
现代文：但是你头有生骨，不可能有太大的成就。
English: But you have a raw bone in your head, so you can't achieve much.

古文：后视之全无三品，前视三品可得。
现代文：从后面看完全没有得到三品官的命相，从前面看可以得到三品官。
English: Viewed from the back, you don't get the life of a third-class officer at all. Viewed from the front, you can get a third-class officer.

古文：然四体虚弱，骨肉不相称，得三品，恐是损寿之征。
现代文：但是你四肢虚弱，骨与肉不相称，如果得到三品位，恐怕是折寿的征兆。
English: But if your limbs are weak and your bones don't match your flesh, if you get three grades, it's probably a sign of premature aging.

古文：后文本官至中书令，寻卒。
现代文：后来，岑文本升任中书令后，不久就死了。
English: Later, he died not long after he was promoted to the position of Zhongshuling.

古文：房玄龄与李审素同见天纲，房曰：李恃才傲物。君先相得何官。
现代文：房玄龄与李审素一同来见袁天纲。房玄龄说：审素恃才傲物，你先给他看相，看他能得个什么官？
English: Fang Xuanling came to see Yuan Tiangang together with Li Qiusu. Fang Xuanling said: Qiusu is a great talent, you should first show him your face to see what position he can get?

古文：天纲云：五品未见，若六品已下清要官有之。
现代文：袁天纲说：五品看不出来。如果是六品以下比较重要的官职还有可能。
English: Yuan Tiangang said, "I can't see the fifth grade. If it's below the sixth grade, it's possible that it's a more important official post."

古文：李不复问，云：视房公得何官。
现代文：李审素不再问他自己的事，说：看看房公可以做到什么官职？
English: Li Xiuxu no longer asked him about himself, but said, "Let's see what kind of official position the landlord can do."

古文：天纲云：此人大富贵，公若欲得五品，即求此人。
现代文：袁天纲说：这位官人大富大贵，你要想得到五品官职就求他吧。
English: Yuan Tiangang said, "This official is very rich and valuable. If you want to get a five-grade official post, you should ask him."

古文：李不之信。
现代文：李审素不信袁天纲的话。
English: Li Qingsu did not believe Yuan Tiangang's words.

古文：后房公为宰相，李为起居舍人卒。
现代文：后来，房玄龄任宰相，李审素任起居舍人，死在任上。
English: Later, Fong Xuanling served as prime minister, while Li Xiusu served as his deputy and died in office.

古文：高宗闻往言，令房赠五品官，房奏赠谏议大夫。
现代文：唐高宗听说了袁天纲给房玄龄看相时说过的这些话后，让房玄龄赠封给袁天纲五品官职，房玄龄奏请圣上赠封他为谏议大夫。
English: After Tang Gaozong heard these words that Yuan Tiangang said to Fong Xuanling when they were seeing each other, he asked Fong Xuanling to present Yuan Tiangang with the title of five-ranked official, and Fong Xuanling then asked the saint to present him with the title of doctor of consultation.

古文：申公高士廉为天纲曰：君后更得何官。
现代文：申国公高士廉对袁天纲说：你今后还能得到什么官职？
English: Shen Guoguang Gao Shilian said to Yuan Tiangang: What official position can you get in the future?

古文：天纲曰：自知相禄已绝，不合更有，恐今年四月大厄。
现代文：袁天纲说：我知道我的官运已经到头了，不会再有了。恐怕我今年四月要有大难。
English: Yuan Tiangang said, "I know that my official movement has come to an end and will not continue. I am afraid that I will have a great difficulty in April this year.

古文：不过四月而卒也。
现代文：果然，四月还没过完，袁天纲就去世了。
English: Sure enough, before April was over, Yuan Tiangang passed away.

古文：蒲州刺史蒋俨，幼时，天纲为占曰：此子当累年幽禁。后大富贵，从某官位至刺史。
现代文：蒲州刺史蒋严，幼年时袁天纲给他预测说：这孩子该受多年的牢狱之苦，以后能大富大贵，跟随某人，官能做到刺史。
English: When he was a child, Yuan Tiangang gave him a prediction: "This child should suffer many years of prison, and in the future he will be very rich and noble. If he follows someone, he will be able to make history."

古文：年八十三。其年八月五日午时禄终。
现代文：八十三岁之年八月五日午时，俸禄就终止了。
English: At the age of eighty-three, on the afternoon of August 5th, his salary was terminated.

古文：俨后征辽东，没贼，囚于地阱七年。
现代文：后来，蒋严在征伐辽东时，被敌人擒获，在地牢中被囚禁了七年，平定高丽后方得归来。
English: Later, Jiang Yan was captured by the enemy during the conquest of Liaodong Province, and was imprisoned in a dungeon for seven years. He had to return home after he had pacified Korea.

古文：高丽平定归，得官一如天纲所言，至蒲州刺史。八十三，谓家人曰：袁公言我八月五日禄绝，其死矣。
现代文：完全象袁天纲说的那样，官做到蒲州刺史。八十三岁时，他对家中人说：袁公说我八十三岁禄绝，这是死啊！
English: At the age of 83, he told his family: "Yuan Gong said that I would die at the age of 83, this is death!

古文：设酒馔，与亲故为别。
现代文：于是置酒食与亲朋故友告别。
English: So they had a meal and a drink to say goodbye to their friends and relatives.

古文：果有敕至，放致任，遂停禄。
现代文：这时，果然传来皇帝的圣旨：革职放遂，立既停发俸禄。
English: At this time, the emperor's sacred edict came to pass: he was dismissed from his post, and his salary was suspended.

古文：后数年卒。
现代文：以后又过了好几年，他才去世。
English: He died several years later.

古文：李义府侨居于蜀，天纲见而奇之曰：此郎贵极人臣，但寿不长耳。
现代文：李义府客居在四川，袁天纲看见他时，惊奇地说：这小伙子贵极人臣，但寿命不长。
English: Li Yifu lived as a guest in Sichuan. When Yuan Tiangang saw him, he said in surprise, "This young man is an extremely valuable minister, but his life expectancy is not long."

古文：因请舍之，讬其子谓李曰：此子七品相，愿公提挈之。
现代文：于是留他在家中住下，把自己的儿子托付给他，说：这孩子有七品的命相，希望你今后多照顾。
English: So she let him stay in her home and entrusted her son to him, saying, "This child has seven birthmarks. I hope you will take better care of him in the future."

古文：义府许诺。因问天纲寿几何，对曰：五十二外，非所知也。
现代文：李义府答应了，又问袁天纲自己的寿命有多长？袁天纲回答说：五十二岁往后，我就不知道了。
English: Li Yifu agreed and asked Yuan Tiangang how long he would live. Yuan Tiangang replied, "After the age of fifty-two, I don't know."

古文：义府后为安抚使李大亮、侍中刘洎等连荐之。
现代文：后来，李义府被安抚使李大亮、侍中刘洎等联名推荐。
English: Later, Li Yifu was recommended jointly by the pacifying envoy Li Dayang and the chamberlain Liu Ye.

古文：召见，试令《詠乌》。
现代文：唐太宗召见了他，并出了一道试题，让李义府作一首《咏乌》诗。
English: Tang Taizong summoned him and gave him a test question, asking Li Yifu to compose a poem called "Xiu Wu."

古文：立成。其诗曰：日里扬朝采，琴中伴夜啼。
现代文：李义府当场写出一首《咏乌》诗：日里扬朝采，琴中伴夜啼。
English: On the spot, Li Yifu wrote a poem of "Xiu Wu": the sun rises in the morning, accompanied by the nightingale.

古文：上林多少树，不借一枝栖。
现代文：上林多少树，不借一枝栖。
English: No matter how many trees there are in the forest, not a single one can be used as a perch.

古文：太宗深赏之曰：我将全树借汝，岂但一枝。
现代文：唐太宗非常赏识他说：我将全树借你，岂只一枝！
English: Emperor Taizong was very appreciative of him and said, "I will lend you the whole tree, but only one branch!

古文：自门下典仪，超拜监察御史。
现代文：从门下典仪起全越过去，你为监察御使。
English: From the beginning of the ceremony under the gate to the end, you are the supervising envoy.

古文：其后寿位，皆如天纲之言。
现代文：后来李义府的官位，寿数全如袁天纲所说的那样。
English: Later, the official rank of Li Yifu, the number of years of life is as Yuan Tiangang said.

古文：赞皇公李峤幼有清才，昆弟五人，皆年不过三十而卒，唯峤已长成矣。
现代文：赞皇人李峤，年幼时就显露出卓越的才能。他家兄弟五人全不到三十岁就都死去了，只有李峤自己长大成人。
English: The emperor's favorite, Li Xuan, showed remarkable talent at a young age. All five of his brothers died before the age of thirty, and only Li Xuan himself became an adult.

古文：母忧之益切，诣天纲。
现代文：李峤的母亲，一天比一天提心儿子会夭亡，就到袁天纲那里去，让给李峤看看面相。
English: Li Yao's mother, more and more worried that her son would die young, went to Yuan Tiangang to show Li Yao his face.

古文：天纲曰：郎君神气清秀，而寿苦不永，恐不出三十。
现代文：袁天纲说：小伙子神气清秀，可惜寿命不长，恐怕活不到三十岁。
English: Yuan Tiangang said, "This young man has a radiant appearance. Unfortunately, his life expectancy is not long. I'm afraid he won't live to be thirty.

古文：其母大以为戚。
现代文：李母听了后大为悲伤。
English: After hearing this, Li Mu was very sad.

古文：峤时名振，咸望贵达，闻此言不信。
现代文：李峤这时已经很有名气。家中人都希望他显贵发达，听了袁天纲的话，都不愿意相信。
English: At that time, Li Yao was already very famous. Everyone in his family hoped that he would be distinguished and developed. When they heard Yuan Tiangang's words, they did not want to believe it.

古文：其母又请袁生，致馔诊视。
现代文：李母又请袁天纲。
English: Li Mu also invited Yuan Tiangang.

古文：云：定矣。又请同于书斋连榻而坐寝。
现代文：并且安排饭食招待他，让他再给儿子仔细观察。袁天纲说：肯定是这样的。李母请袁天纲到书斋和李峤在一张床上同睡。
English: She also arranged a meal for him so that he could observe his son carefully. Yuan Tiangang said: "It must be so. Li's mother asked Yuan Tiangang to go to the study and sleep with Li Yao on the same bed.

古文：袁登床稳睡，李独不寝。
现代文：袁天纲上床就睡得很安稳，李峤依然不睡，到五更时分忽然睡去。
English: Yuan Tiangang went to bed and slept very soundly, Li Yao still did not sleep, and suddenly fell asleep at 5:00 a.m.

古文：至五更忽睡，袁适觉，视李峤无喘息，以手候之，鼻下气绝。
现代文：这时，袁天纲正巧醒来，看李峤没有呼吸，用手试一下，鼻下已经断气。
English: At this time, Yuan Tiangang just happened to wake up and saw that Li Yao was not breathing. He tried it with his hand and found that he was out of breath under his nose.

古文：初大惊怪，良久侦候，其出入息乃在耳中。
现代文：起初，袁天纲大吃一惊，察看了许久，发现李峤是用耳朵呼吸。
English: At first, Yuan Tiangang was taken aback. He watched for a long time and found that Li Yao was breathing with his ears.

古文：抚而告之曰：得矣。
现代文：袁天纲推醒李峤，告诉他说：我找到了答案。
English: Yuan Tiangang woke up Li Yao and told him: I have found the answer.

古文：遂起贺其母曰：数候之，皆不得。
现代文：于是起身去向李母道贺，说：看了好几次面相，全都没有找到问题的所在。
English: So he got up and went to congratulate Li Mu and said, "I've looked at your face several times, but I can't find what the problem is."

古文：今方见之矣，郎君必大贵寿。
现代文：今天才看见，你儿子必定大贵长寿，原来他是像龟一样呼吸啊！
English: Today I saw that your son will certainly live a long life. Turns out he breathes like a turtle!

古文：是龟息也，贵寿而不富耳。后果如其言。
现代文：虽大贵长寿，却不能富。后来，果然像袁天纲说的那样。
English: Although he lived a long and noble life, he could not get rich. Later, as Yuan Tiangang said.

古文：则天朝拜相，而家常贫。
现代文：武则天执政期间，李峤官拜宰相，但是家中仍然很贫困。
English: During the reign of Wu Zetian, Li Yiguan was the prime minister, but his family was still very poor.

古文：是时帝数幸宰相宅，见峤卧青絁帐。帝叹曰：国相如是，乖大国之体。
现代文：这期间，高宗皇帝多次到过宰相府，看见李峤睡觉用的帐子是用像布一样的粗绸做的时，感叹地说：一国的宰相用这样的帐子，有损我大国的体面。
English: During this period, Emperor Gaozong visited the Prime Minister's Office many times, and when he saw that the curtain used by Li Yan to sleep was made of coarse silk like cloth, he said with regret: If the Prime Minister of a country uses such a curtain, it will damage the dignity of our great country.

古文：赐御用绣罗帐焉。
现代文：我赐你宫中御用的绣罗帐。
English: I have given you an embroidered scroll for your use in the palace.

古文：峤寝其中，达晓不安，觉体生疾。
现代文：李峤在皇上赐给的绣罗帐里面睡觉，一宿到天明也没有睡安稳，觉得身体好象生了病似的，极不自在。
English: Li Yao slept in the embroidered bed sheet given to him by the emperor. He did not sleep peacefully until dawn. He felt as if he were ill and very uncomfortable.

古文：遂自奏曰：臣少被相人云，不当华。故寝不安焉。
现代文：于是自己奏报皇上说：臣年轻时，看相的人对我说过，不应该侈华，所以睡不安稳。
English: So he reported to the emperor, saying, "When I was young, someone who looked after my eyes told me that I shouldn't be extravagant, so I slept fitfully.

古文：帝叹息久之，任意用旧者。
现代文：高宗叹息了许久，任由他用他的旧帐子。
English: Gaozong sighed for a long time and let him use his old curtain.

古文：峤身体短小，鼻口都无厚相，时意不以重禄待之。
现代文：李峤身体短小，鼻子、嘴都没有厚相。按当时人的观念，不应当给他高官厚禄。
English: Li Xuan was short and short, and his nose and mouth were not thick. According to people's ideas at the time, he should not be given a high-ranking official's generous salary.

古文：其在润州也，充使宣州山采银。
现代文：他在润州期间，派他担任宣州山采银的官吏。
English: During his time in Runzhou, he was sent to serve as an official of the Xuanzhou Mountain Silver Mine.

古文：时妄传其暴亡，举朝伤叹。
现代文：这时胡乱传出李峤突然死亡的消息，全朝上下没有一个人不哀伤叹息的。
English: At this time, the news of Li Yao's sudden death was randomly spread, and there was not a single person up and down the country who did not mourn and sigh.

古文：冬官侍郎张询古，峤之从舅也。闻之甚忧，使诸亲访候其实。适会南使云：亡实矣。
现代文：冬官侍郎张询古，是李峤的堂舅，听到这一噩耗后特别忧伤，让许多亲戚去探访这个消息的真伪，正好遇到从南边来的使臣，说：李峤是真的死了。
English: Zhang Zenggu, the winter official's valet, was Li Qian's cousin. He was particularly saddened after hearing this bad news. He asked many relatives to investigate the truth or falsity of this news, and just happened to meet an envoy from the south, saying: Li Qian is really dead.

古文：询古潸然涕泗，朝士多相慰者。
现代文：张询古痛哭流涕，朝中的许多官员都来安慰他。
English: Zhang Yinggu cried bitterly, and many officials from the central government came to comfort him.

古文：时有一人，称善骨法，颇得袁天纲之术，朝贵多窃问之。
现代文：当时有一个人，自称擅长相骨法，特别学到了袁天纲的相术。许多朝中位居显贵的官员，都私下来问这个人关于李峤的事。
English: At that time, there was a person who claimed to be good at the bone phase method and had specially learned Yuan Tiangang's phase technique. Many high-ranking officials in the dynasty privately came to ask this person about Li Xuan.

古文：其人曰：久知李舍人禄位稍薄。
现代文：这个人说：早就知道李峤舍人奉禄稍薄的面相。
English: This person said: I have long known that Li Yanshe is a person with a slightly thin face.

古文：诸人竦听。
现代文：去问的人，都洗耳恭听。
English: Those who asked questions listened attentively.

古文：其人又曰：李舍人虽有才华，而仪冠耳目鼻口，略无成就者。
现代文：这个人又说：李舍人虽然很有才华，但是从相貌上看，他的耳朵、眼睛、嘴和鼻子全都没有富贵相。
English: This person also said: Although Lishen is very talented, his ears, eyes, mouth and nose are not rich in appearance.

古文：顷见其加朝散，已忧之矣。
现代文：不久前见他做了朝散大夫，就替他担心了。
English: Not long ago, I saw that he had become a morning sickness doctor, and I was worried about him.

古文：众皆然之。
现代文：去问的人异口同声地说：是阿！
English: Those who asked said in unison: "Yes!

古文：峤竟三秉衡轴，极人臣之贵。
现代文：李峤竟然三次出任执掌中枢的要职，地位在众位朝臣之上。
English: On three occasions, Li Hong took on the important position of being in charge of the center, a position higher than that of many courtiers.

古文：然则峤之相难知，而天纲得之。
现代文：由此说来李峤的骨相难以预测，然而袁天纲却能预测出来。
English: From this, it is difficult to predict Li Yao's bone condition, but Yuan Tiangang's can be predicted.

古文：又陕州刺史王当有女，集州县文武官，令天纲拣婿。
现代文：又，陕州刺史王当有个女儿，他将州县文武官员都召集到一块儿，让袁天纲给他女儿选位女婿。
English: Moreover, Wang Dang, the governor of Shaanxi Province, had a daughter. He called together all the provincial and county civil and military officials and asked Yuan Tiangang to choose a son-in-law for his daughter.

古文：天纲曰：此无贵婿，唯识果毅姚某者，有贵子。
现代文：袁天纲说：这地方没有你女儿的女婿。我只知道有位统帅府兵的姚某人，有一位贵公子。
English: Yuan Tiangang said, "There is no son-in-law of your daughter in this place. I only know that there is a Yao person who is the commander-in-chief of the troops, and there is a noble young man.

古文：可嫁之。
现代文：你可以将女儿嫁给他。
English: You can marry your daughter to him.

古文：中必得力，当从其言嫁之。
现代文：选中他一定能借力的。
English: If selected, he can certainly lend a hand.

古文：时人咸笑焉，乃元崇也。时年二十三，好猎，都未知书。
现代文：王当听信了袁天纲的话，把女儿嫁给了这位姚果毅的儿子，当时的人都觉得好笑。姚果毅的儿子就是姚元崇，当时二十三岁，喜欢打猎，没有读过书。
English: Wang Dang believed Yuan Tiangang's words and married his daughter to the son of Yao Guoyi, whose son was Yao Yuan Chong, 23 years old at the time, who liked hunting and had never read a book.

古文：常诣一亲表饮，遇相者谓之曰：公后富贵。
现代文：姚元崇一次到表亲家饮酒，遇到一位相人对他说：你以后能富贵。
English: Yao Yuan Chong once went to a cousin's house to drink alcohol. He met a friend who said to him: "You can be rich and noble in the future."

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：姚追而问之，相者曰：公甚贵，为宰相。
现代文：姚元崇追上去问他，相人说：你能大富大贵，能当宰相。
English: Yao Yuan Chong chased after him and asked him, and his friend said: "You can be very rich and very valuable, and you can be the prime minister."

古文：归以告其母，母劝令读书。
现代文：姚元崇回家后将这件事情告诉了母亲，母亲劝他读书。
English: After returning home, Yao Yuan Chong told his mother about the incident, and his mother advised him to study.

古文：崇遂割放鹰鹞，折节勤学。以挽郎入仕，竟位至宰相。
现代文：于是姚元崇不再架鹰打猎了，一改过去的志向和行为，勤奋读书，以挽郎之职入朝做官，一直升到宰相。
English: As a result, Yao Yuan Chong no longer hunted with an eagle, changed his past aspirations and behavior, studied diligently, entered the imperial court as a groomsman, and rose to the position of prime minister.

古文：天纲有子客师，传其父业，所言亦验。
现代文：袁天纲有个儿子叫袁客师，继承父业，他给人相面，说的话也很灵验。
English: Yuan Tiangang had a son named Yuan Keshi, who followed in his father's footsteps. He was friendly to everyone, and his words were very effective.

古文：客师官为廪牺令。
现代文：袁客师官任廪牺令。
English: Yuan Ke's divisional officer was appointed by the order of the emperor.

古文：显庆中，与贾文通同供奉。
现代文：唐高宗显庆年间，袁客师凭着他的相术与贾文通一起去侍奉皇帝。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, Yuan Keshi served the emperor together with Jia Wentong by virtue of his physiognomy.

古文：高宗以银合合一鼠，令诸术数人射之，皆言有一鼠。
现代文：高宗用银盒装一只老鼠，让在场的几位相、卜术人猜里面是什么。这些术人都说是一只老鼠。
English: Gao Zong put a mouse in a silver box and asked several magicians and fortune-tellers to guess what was inside. These magicians all said it was a mouse.

古文：客师亦曰鼠也，然入一出四。
现代文：袁客师也说：是老鼠，然而放里面一只，拿出来是四只。
English: Yuan Keshi also said, "It's a mouse, but if you put one inside, four will come out."

古文：其鼠入合中，已生三子，果有四矣。
现代文：那只老鼠放入盒中后，已生下三只小老鼠。
English: The mouse had given birth to three mice after being put in the box.

古文：客师尝与一书生同过江。
现代文：打开盒，里面果然是四只老鼠。袁客师曾与一位书生一同过江。
English: Opening the box, there were indeed four mice inside. Master Yuan once crossed the river with a student.

古文：登舟，遍视舟中人颜色，谓同侣曰：不可速也。
现代文：上了船。看遍了船中人的气色，对同伴说：不能着急！
English: And when he was come into the ship, he beheld the persons that were in the ship, and said unto his shipmates, Let there be no haste.

古文：遂相引登岸。私语曰：吾见舟中数十人，皆鼻下黑气，大厄不久。
现代文：于是二人相挽着下船上岸，偷偷地说：我看见船上几十个人，全部都鼻子下有黑气，不久就要有大难。
English: So the two of them went ashore on the boat, arm in arm, and secretly said: "I saw dozens of people on the boat, all with black gas under their noses, and soon there will be great trouble.

古文：岂可知而从之，但少留。
现代文：既然已经知道了，干吗还跟他们一起去呢？
English: Now that you know, why would you still go with them?

古文：舟未发间，忽见一丈夫。神色高朗，跛一足，负担驱驴登舟。
现代文：过了一会儿，船没开，忽然看见一位男人神色高朗不凡，跛一只脚，挑着担子，赶着驴上船。
English: After a while, when the boat had not yet set sail, they suddenly saw a tall, handsome man with one foot in the water, carrying a load and driving a donkey onto the boat.

古文：客师见此人，仍谓侣曰：可以行矣，贵人在内，吾侪无忧矣。
现代文：袁客师看这个人上船，就对同伴说：我们可以走了，贵人在里面，不用担忧了。
English: When Master Yuan saw this man get on the boat, he said to his companions, "We can go now. Your excellency is inside. Don't worry."

古文：登舟而发，至中流，风涛忽起，危惧虽甚，终济焉。
现代文：上船后，船就开走了。到了中流，风涛忽然大作，虽然危险惊惧，最后还是安全渡过了江。
English: After getting on the boat, the boat drove away. At the middle of the stream, the wind and waves suddenly made a big splash. Although frightened by the danger, the cows finally crossed the river safely.

古文：询驱驴丈夫，乃是娄师德也。
现代文：询问赶驴的男人。他就是娄师德。
English: Ask the man driving the donkey. He is Gong Shi De.

古文：后位至纳言焉。
现代文：后来，娄师德担任了门下省纳言的官职。
English: Later, Gong Shide held the official post of provincial councilor under his disciple.

古文：张冏藏张冏藏善相，与袁天纲齐名。
现代文：成为执掌朝政的三位宰相之一。张冏藏张冏藏擅长相术，与袁天纲齐名。
English: He became one of the three chancellors in charge of the imperial government. Zhang Shizang Zhang Shizang excelled in the art of physiognomy and was as famous as Yuan Tiangang.

古文：有河东裴某，年五十三为三卫。
现代文：河东有位裴某人，已经五十三岁了，才在禁卫军中担任三卫的官职。
English: In the east of the river, there was a man named Pei, who was 53 years old when he took up the official post of Sanwei in the Imperial Guard.

古文：当夏季番，入京至浐水西店买饭。同坐有一老人谓裴曰：贵人。
现代文：这年的夏末，他进京走到浐水西店买饭，和他同座的一位老人对他说：你是贵人啊！
English: At the end of the summer of that year, he went to Beijing to buy rice at the Surabaya West Store, and an old man sitting with him said to him: "You are a noble!

古文：裴因对曰：某今年五十三，尚为三卫，岂望官爵，老父奈何谓仆为贵人。
现代文：裴某回答说：我今年都五十三岁了，才是一个三卫，怎么能指望什么官呀爵的，老先生您为什么叫我 贵人 呀？
English: Pei replied: I am fifty-three years old this year, only a three-guard, how can I expect any official, sir, old gentleman, why do you call me a noble?

古文：老父笑曰：君自不知耳，从今二十五日，得三品官。
现代文：老人笑着说： 你自己不知道罢了，从今天算起二十五天内，便能得到三品官。 
English: The old man smiled and said, "You don't know it yourself, but within twenty-five days from today, you will be promoted to Third Rank.

古文：言毕便别。
现代文：说完就离开了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：乃张冏藏也。
现代文：这位老人就是张冏藏。
English: This old man is Zhang Xizang.

古文：裴至京，当番已二十一日，属太宗气疾发动。良医名药，进服皆不效，坐卧寝食不安。
现代文：裴某到了京城，当时已过去二十一天了。正赶上太宗皇帝哮喘病发作，请来良医，进服妙药，都不见效，终日坐卧不宁，寝食不安。
English: When Pei arrived in Beijing, it had already been 21 days. He was just in time for Emperor Taizong to have an asthma attack. He called in a good doctor and took a miracle drug, but they had no effect. He was restless all day and had trouble sleeping and eating.

古文：有召三卫已上，朝士已下，皆令进方。
现代文：太宗皇帝颁下诏书，三卫以上，朝官以下，都可以进献医治此病的药方。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict, and people above the rank of Sanwei and below the rank of court officials were allowed to donate their prescriptions for the treatment of this disease.

古文：裴随例进一方，乳煎荜拨而服，其疾便愈。
现代文：裴某按此例进献一方：用奶煎荜拨，服用后太宗的病就好了。
English: According to this example, Mr. Pei presented one side: use milk to fry ginger, and after taking it, Mr. Taizong's illness would be cured.

古文：敕付中书，使与一五品官。
现代文：太宗皇帝命令中书省，给裴某授任一个五品官职。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the Central Book Ministry to assign Pei a five-grade official post.

古文：宰相逡巡，未敢进拟。
现代文：宰相犹豫不决，没敢拟制任职令呈报皇上。
English: The prime minister hesitated, not daring to draw up an order of appointment and present it to the emperor.

古文：数日，太宗气疾又发，又服荜拨差。
现代文：过了几天，太宗的哮喘病又发作了。又服用奶煎荜拨止住了哮喘。
English: A few days later, Mr. Taizong's asthma flared up again, and he stopped it by taking milk thistle.

古文：因问前三卫得何官？
现代文：因此询问前几天那个进献药方的人授予了什么官？
English: Therefore, I asked the person who gave out the prescription a few days ago, what kind of official was he?

古文：中书云。未审与五品文官武官。
现代文：中书令说：没有审定好是给五品文官，还是五品武官。
English: The edict said: It has not been decided whether it is better to give the award to five civilian officers or five military officers.

古文：太宗怒曰：治一拨乱天子得活，何不与官？
现代文：太宗听后生气地说：救一位治国安邦平天下的天子活命的人，为什么不授予官职？
English: After listening to him, Emperor Taizong said angrily, "Why not grant an official post to a person who saved the life of a heavenly son who ruled the country peacefully?

古文：向若治宰相病可，必当日得官。
现代文：假若治好了你宰相的病，一定当天就能得到官职了！
English: If your Prime Minister's illness is cured, he will surely be able to get an official post the same day!

古文：其日，特恩与三品正员京官，拜鸿胪卿。
现代文：这天，太宗皇帝特殊恩赐裴某三品正员京官。官拜鸿胪卿。
English: On this day, Emperor Taizong gave a special gift to Pei, a three-ranked official in Beijing. The official paid homage to Hongyuqing.

古文：累迁至本州刺史。
现代文：以后，裴某多次升迁，一直升任到本州刺史。
English: Since then, Pei has been promoted many times and has been promoted to the post of Honshu chief historian.

古文：刘仁轨，尉氏人。
现代文：刘仁轨，尉氏人。
English: Liu Renzhong, a lieutenant.

古文：年七八岁时，冏藏过其门见焉。谓其父母曰：此童子骨法甚奇，当有贵禄。宜保养教诲之。
现代文：七、八岁时，张冏藏从他家门前经过看见他，对他父母说：这孩子骨相特别奇异，将来能做高官，要好好地培养教育他。
English: When he was seven or eight years old, Zhang Yuzang passed in front of his house and saw him. He said to his parents, "This child has a particularly strange bone structure. He will be able to become a high-ranking official in the future. We must properly train and educate him."

古文：后仁轨为陈仓尉，冏藏时被流剑南，经岐州过。
现代文：后来刘仁轨做了陈仓县尉。这时，张冏藏被流放到剑南，经过歧州。
English: Later, Liu Renzhong became the lieutenant of Chencang County. At this time, Zhang Xizang was exiled to Jian'nan, passing through Gwanzhou.

古文：冯长命为歧州刺史，令看判司已下，无人至五品者。
现代文：冯长命任歧州刺史，让张冏藏给判司以下的属员看相，里面没有人能任到五品官职的。
English: Feng Changmei was appointed to write the history of Gwanzhou, and let Zhang Xizang look at the subordinates below the judge. There was no one who could be appointed to the fifth grade official position.

古文：出逢仁轨，凛然变色。却谓冯使君曰：得贵人也。
现代文：张冏藏出来时遇见刘仁轨，他突然变得非常严肃，对冯刺史说： 得见贵人了！ 
English: When Zhang Ye came out of hiding, he met Liu Renluo, who suddenly became very serious and said to Feng Zhishi: "I'm so glad to see you!

古文：遂细看之，后至仆射。
现代文：于是仔细相看刘仁轨。
English: So they carefully looked at each other and then at Liu Ren.

古文：谓之曰：仆二十年前，于尉氏见一小儿，其骨法与公相类，当时不问姓名，不知谁耳。
现代文：后来，刘仁轨升到仆射，张冏藏对他说： 二十年前，我在尉氏看见过一个小孩，他的骨相与你类似，当时没有问姓名，不知是谁。 
English: Later, when Liu Renzhong was promoted to Fusha, Zhang Yizang said to him, "Twenty years ago, I saw a child in Guizhou whose bone structure was similar to yours. At that time, I didn't ask his name, I didn't know who he was.

古文：轨笑曰：尉氏小儿，仁轨是也。
现代文：刘仁轨笑着说： 尉氏小儿就是我啊！ 
English: Liu Renluo smiled and said, "I am the son of a lieutenant!"

古文：冏藏曰：公不离四品，若犯大罪，即三品已上。
现代文：张冏藏说： 你离不开四品，若犯大罪，就能升任三品以上。 
English: Zhang Yuzang said, "You can't do without the fourth grade. If you commit a serious crime, you can be promoted to the third grade or higher."

古文：后从给事中出为青州刺史，知海运，遭风失船，被河间公李义府谮之。
现代文：后来，刘仁轨从给事中出任青州刺史，主持海上运输的工作，出航时遇到大风，船沉海中，被河间人李义府进言上告。
English: Later, Liu Renzhong served as the Qingzhou chief historian and presided over the work of maritime transport. When sailing, he encountered a gale, the ship sank in the sea, and was appealed by Li Yifu, a man from Hawa.

古文：差御史袁异式推之，大理断死，特敕免死除名。
现代文：朝庭派遣御史袁异式推究审理这一案子，经大理院判处刘仁轨死刑。
English: The imperial court sent Yuan Yixing to investigate the case, and the court sentenced Liu Renlu to death.

古文：于辽东效力，入为大司宪，竟位至左仆射。
现代文：皇上特别下达一份诏书，免去刘仁轨的死刑。
English: In particular, the emperor issued an imperial edict exempting Liu Renzhao from the death penalty.

古文：卢嘉瑒有庄田在许州，与表丈人河清张某邻近。
现代文：皇上将他从官册上除名。后来刘仁轨在辽东效力，并且调回京城任大司宪，竟然一直升任到左仆射。卢嘉瑒在许州有一座庄园，与表丈人河清张某人邻近。
English: The emperor removed his name from the official register. Later, Liu Renzhong served in Liaodong and was transferred back to Beijing to serve as the Grand Secretary of the Constitution, and he was even promoted to the position of the Left Footman. Lu Jiayu has a manor in Huzhou, which is close to his father-in-law, He Qingzhang.

古文：张任监察御史，丁忧。
现代文：张某人任监察御史，父母去世在家守孝。
English: Someone named Zhang was appointed to supervise the history, and his parents died at home.

古文：及终制，携嘉瑒同诣张冏藏，其时嘉瑒年尚龆齓，张入见冏藏。
现代文：待到守孝期满后，这位张御史，有一天带着卢嘉瑒一同去张冏藏家。这时的卢嘉瑒尚在刚刚换牙的年龄。
English: After the expiration of the period of filial piety, this Zhang Youshi, one day, took Lu Jiayu to Zhang Ye's collector. At this time, Lu Jiayu was still at the age of just changing his teeth.

古文：立嘉瑒于中门外。
现代文：张某人进里面去见张冏藏，把卢嘉瑒留在中门外面。
English: Zhang someone went inside to see Zhang Yuzang, leaving Lu Jiayu outside the middle gate.

古文：张谓冏藏曰：服终欲见宰执，不知何如？
现代文：张御史对张冏藏说：服完孝后想去见见宰相等朝中的重臣，不知怎么样？
English: Zhang Mishi said to Zhang Xizang: After serving the filial piety, I want to meet the chancellor and other senior officials of the dynasty. I don't know what to do.

古文：冏藏曰：侍御且得本官。纵迁，不过省郎。
现代文：张冏藏说：你这次回京还是官任原职，纵然能升迁，也不过是入省为郎。
English: Zhang Yuzang said: This time, when you return to Beijing, you will still hold your original post. Even if you can be promoted, you will only become a provincial official.

古文：言毕，冏藏相送出门。忽见嘉瑒。谓张曰：侍御官爵不及此儿，此儿甚贵而寿，典十郡以上。
现代文：说完，张冏藏送张御史出门，忽然看见卢嘉瑒，张冏藏对张御史说：你的官爵还不如这个小孩，这孩子的面相特别显贵，而且长寿，能掌管十郡以上。
English: Having said that, Zhang Yizang sent Zhang Youshi out of the house, and suddenly saw Lu Jiayu. Zhang Yizang said to Zhang Youshi: "Your official title is not as good as this child's. This child's face is particularly distinguished, and he has a long life, and can manage more than ten counties."

古文：后嘉瑒历十郡守，寿至八十。
现代文：后来卢嘉瑒历任十个郡的郡守，活到八十岁。
English: Later, Lu Jiayu served as the county governor of ten counties in succession, and lived to the age of eighty.

古文：魏齐公元忠少时，曾谒冏藏，冏藏待之甚薄。
现代文：齐国公魏元忠年轻时，曾经拜见过张冏藏。张冏藏待他特别冷淡。
English: When Wei Yuanzhong, the prince of Qi, was young, he once met Zhang Yizang. Zhang Yizang treated him very coldly.

古文：就质通塞，亦不答也。
现代文：魏元忠问张冏藏自己的命运如何，他不回答。
English: Wei Yuanzhong asked Zhang Xizang about his fate, but he did not answer.

古文：公大怒曰：仆不远千里裹粮，非徒行耳，必谓明公有以见教。
现代文：魏元忠大怒，说：我不远千里带着干粮来到你这里，要知道我不是空着手走路啊！
English: Wei Yuanzhong was furious and said, "I didn't come thousands of miles to bring you dry grain. You should know that I didn't come empty-handed!"

古文：而含木舌，不尽勤勤之意耶。
现代文：以为你一定能给予我指教，而你却闭口不语，仿佛你那舌头是木头做的。你完全没有诚意啊！
English: You thought you could give me advice, but you kept your mouth shut, as if your tongue was made of wood. You have no sincerity at all!

古文：且穷通贫贱，自属苍苍，何预公焉。
现代文：但是人的困厄显达，富贵贫贱都是上天旨意，你能预测出什么呢？
English: But people's hardships and misfortunes are obvious, rich and poor are all God's will, what can you predict?

古文：因拂衣而去。
现代文：于是拂衣而去。
English: So he ran away.

古文：冏藏遽起言曰：君之相录，正在怒中。
现代文：张冏藏慌忙站起身，说：你的相禄，正在发怒中才能看出来。
English: Zhang Yuzang stood up hurriedly and said, "Your character is revealed only when you are angry."

古文：后当位极人臣。
现代文：以后，你一定位极人臣，官任当朝宰相。
English: In the future, you will surely be a highly respected minister, and you will be appointed prime minister.

古文：高敬言为雍州法曹，冏藏书之云：从此得刑部员外郎中给事中果州刺史。
现代文：高敬言任雍州法曹，张冏藏写信给他说：你从此以后能得到刑部员外郎中、给事中、果州刺史等官职。
English: Gao Jingyan was appointed as a Yongzhou law clerk, and Zhang Yuzang wrote to him: "From now on, you can get the official positions such as the deputy of the criminal investigation department, the deputy of the criminal investigation department, the deputy of the criminal investigation department, and the deputy of the criminal investigation department.

古文：经十年，即任刑部侍郎吏部侍郎。
现代文：过了十年，你就可以任刑部侍郎、吏部侍郎。
English: After ten years, you will be able to serve as a correctional officer and an officer.

古文：二年患风，改虢州刺史。
现代文：二年后患风疾，改任虢州刺史，是你的归宿。
English: Two years later, suffering from rheumatism, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, which is your home.

古文：为某乙本部，年七十三。
现代文：这时你已经七十三岁了。
English: You are now seventy-three years old.

古文：及为给事中，当直，则天顾问高士廉云：高敬言卿何亲？
现代文：待到高敬言任给事中时，一天他值班，则天皇后问高士廉，说：高敬言是你什么亲戚？
English: When Gao Jingyan was in the middle of something, one day he was on duty, the empress asked Gao Shiliang, saying: Gao Jingyan, what kind of relative are you?

古文：士廉云：是臣侄。
现代文：高士廉说：是我侄儿。
English: "He's my nephew," Mr. Gao said.

古文：后则天问敬言，敬言云：臣贯山东，士廉勋贵，与臣同宗，非臣近属。
现代文：后来，武则天问高敬言。高敬言说：我籍贯山东，高士廉是功臣权贵，和我是同宗，不是近亲。
English: Later, Wu Zetian asked Gao Jingyan. Gao Jingyan said: I am from Shandong, Gao Shilian is a meritorious and powerful person, and I am from the same clan, not a close relative.

古文：则天向士廉说之，士廉云：敬言甚无景行，臣曾嗔责伊，乃不认臣。
现代文：则天皇后向高士廉说了这件事。高士廉说：高敬言特别没有高尚的德行，我曾怒斥过他，所以就不认我这个本家。
English: Then the empress said this to Gao Shiliang. Gao Shiliang said: Gao Jingyan is particularly devoid of noble virtues. I once scolded him, so I do not recognize my own family.

古文：则天怪怒，乃出为果州刺史。
现代文：则天皇后怪怒高敬言，就降职让他出京改任果州刺史。
English: However, the Empress Dowager was so enraged that she demoted him to the post of Goshu sashimi.

古文：士廉公主犹在，敬言辞去，公主怒而不见。
现代文：当时高士廉、太平公主尚在，临行前高敬言向太平公主辞行，公主生气不见高敬言。
English: At that time, Gao Shilian and Princess Taiping were still alive. Before leaving, Gao Jingyan told Princess Taiping to resign. The princess was not angry with Gao Jingyan.

古文：遂更不得改。
现代文：于是出任果州刺史的命令。更不能改变了。
English: Therefore, it was an order from the chief of Guozhou, and it could not be changed.

古文：经九年，公主士廉皆亡，后朝廷知屈，追入为刑部侍郎。
现代文：过了几年，太平公主、高士廉都去世了。后来，朝庭知道高敬言冤屈，将他请回京城升任刑部侍郎。
English: A few years later, both Princess Taiping and Gao Shiren passed away. Later, the Imperial Court knew of Gao Jing's grievances and invited him back to the capital to be promoted to the position of a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：至吏部侍郎。
现代文：不久，忽然患风疾。
English: Soon after, he suddenly fell ill with a cold.

古文：忽患风，则天命与一近小州养疾，遂除虢州刺史，卒年七十三。
现代文：则天皇后让给他就近安排在一个小州上养病，于是改任为虢州刺史，病逝那年七十三岁。
English: The empress then arranged for him to recuperate in a small prefecture nearby, and he was appointed as the prefect of Gansu Province. He died of illness that year at the age of seventy-three.

古文：皆如冏藏之言。
现代文：全都和张冏藏当年说的相同。
English: It's all the same as what Zhang Yizang said that year.

古文：姚元崇、李迥秀、杜景佺三人，因选同诣冏藏。
现代文：姚元崇、李迥秀、杜景佺三人，一次在朝廷选拔官史时，一同到张冏藏那儿求问官运。
English: The three actors, Yao Yuan Chong, Li Yuxiu, and Du Jingyao, once went to Zhang Yizang to inquire about the official movement when the official history was selected at the imperial court.

古文：冏藏云：公三人并得宰相，然姚最富贵，出入数度为相。
现代文：张冏藏说：你们三人都能任宰相。然而姚元崇最富贵，能多次为相。
English: Zhang Yuzang said, "All three of you can be prime minister. However, Yao Yuan Chong is the richest and can be prime minister many times."

古文：后皆如言张柬之
现代文：后来，这三个人都象张冏藏所预言的那样。张柬之
English: Later, all three of them were just as Zhang Yizang had predicted.

古文：张柬之任青城县丞，已六十三矣。
现代文：张柬之任青城县丞时，已经六十三岁了。
English: Zhang Khamzhi was 63 years old when he was appointed as the Qingcheng County magistrate.

古文：有善相者云：后当位极人臣。
现代文：有位擅长相术的人说：以后你能够位极人臣，成为一朝的宰相。
English: A person who is good at the art of physiognomy said: "In the future, you can be an extremely important minister and become the prime minister of a dynasty."

古文：从莫之信。
现代文：众人都不相信他的话。
English: Many people didn't believe him.

古文：后应制策被落。
现代文：后来，张柬之应制策选官落了榜。
English: Later, Zhang Khamzhi was downgraded to a policy-making and selection official.

古文：则天怪中第人少，令于所落人中更拣。
现代文：武则天责备被选中的人太少，命令从落选的人中重新挑选。
English: Wu Zetian reproached that the number of people selected was too small, and ordered to re-select from those who were not selected.

古文：有司奏一人策好，缘书写不中程律，故退。
现代文：有司上报武则天说：有一位应选的官员，策对得很好，因为书写不合规范，所以未被选中。
English: A superior officer reported to Zetian: "There was an official who should have been elected, but he was not chosen because his handwriting was not up to standard.

古文：则天览之，以为奇才。召入，问策中事，特异之。既收上第，拜王屋县尉。
现代文：张柬之回答得与别人特别不一样，有自己独道的见解。武则天立刻选张柬之为第一名，授任他为王屋县尉。
English: Zhang Kamzhi's answer was particularly different from others, and he had his own opinion. Wu Zetian immediately selected Zhang Kamzhi as the first, and appointed him as the Wangya County Lieutenant.

古文：后至宰相，封汉阳王
现代文：后来，张柬之一直升任到当朝宰相，封汉阳王。
English: Later, one of the Zhang brothers was quickly appointed prime minister of the dynasty and named Hanyang Wang.

古文：陆景融
现代文：陆景融
English: Lu Jing Rong

古文：陆景融为新郑令。有客谓之曰：公从今三十年，当为此州刺史，然于法曹厅上坐。
现代文：陆景融任新郑县令时，有位门客对他说：您从现在起三十年，应该任这个州的刺史，却在法曹堂上办公。
English: When Lu Jing Rong was appointed as the governor of Xinzheng County, one of his clients said to him: "Thirty years from now, you should have been appointed as the history of this state, but you are working in a law office."

古文：陆公不信。时陆公记法曹厅有桐树。
现代文：陆景融不信，当时，他记住了法曹堂有棵桐树。
English: Lu Jing was incredulous. At that time, he remembered that there was a paulownia tree in the law office.

古文：后果三十年为郑州刺史，所坐厅前有桐树。
现代文：果然三十年后，陆景融任郑州刺史，他坐的大堂前边有棵桐树。
English: Sure enough, thirty years later, Lu Jingyong was appointed as the first president of Zhengzhou. There was a paulownia tree in front of the lobby where he was sitting.

古文：因而问之，乃云：此厅本是法曹厅，往年刺史嫌宅窄，遂通法曹厅为刺史厅。
现代文：陆景融询问了这个问题，有人回答说：这儿本来是法曹堂，前任刺史嫌办公的地方窄小就将它打通了。做为刺史的大堂。
English: Lu Jingyong asked this question, and someone answered: This was originally a law court hall, but the former judge's office was too small, so it was opened up as a judge's lobby.

古文：方知言应。程行谌
现代文：陆景融这才知道，当年那位门客说的话果然应验了。程行谌
English: It was only then that Lu Jing Rong knew that what that doorkeeper had said that year had indeed come true.

古文：程行谌年六十任陈留县尉，同僚以其年高位卑，尝侮之。
现代文：程行谌六十岁那年任陈留县尉。同僚们因为他年岁大职位低，常常欺侮他。
English: At the age of 60, Cheng Xingyao served as Chen Liu County Lieutenant. Colleagues often bullied him because of his age and low position.

古文：后有一老人造谒，因言其官寿。
现代文：后来，有一位老人拜见他，谈话中谈起了他的官运与寿禄。
English: Later, an old man paid him a visit, and in the course of the conversation, he talked about his career and longevity.

古文：俄而县官皆至，仍相侮狎。
现代文：不一会儿县里的官员也都来了。
English: Soon, officials from the county also arrived.

古文：老人云：诸君官寿，皆不如程公。
现代文：这些人还象往常一样争相欺侮、捉弄程行谌。老人说： 你们这些人的官运与寿禄都不如程县尉。
English: As usual, these people also competed with each other to bully and tease Cheng Xingyao. The old man said: "You people are not as good as Cheng Xianfei in terms of official performance and longevity.

古文：程公从今已后，有三十一政官，年九十已上。
现代文：从今往后，他有三十一任官运，能活九十岁以上。
English: From now on, he will have thirty-one official movements and can live for more than ninety years.

古文：官至御史大夫，乃仆射有厄。
现代文：他会一直升任到御史大夫，待到任仆射时，将有大难。 
English: He'll be promoted all the way up to chief historian, and he'll be in big trouble when he's fired.

古文：皆不之信。
现代文：所有的人都不信老人的这种预测。
English: No one believed him.

古文：于时行谌妹夫新授绛州一县令，妹欲赴夫任，令老人占其善恶。
现代文：当时，程行谌的妹夫新近被授任绛州一个县的县令，他妹妹想要到丈夫任职的地方去，让老人预测一下吉凶。
English: At that time, Cheng Xingyao's younger brother-in-law was newly appointed as the county magistrate of a county in Ganzhou. His sister wanted to go to the place where her husband worked and ask the old man to predict the fortunes.

古文：老人见云：夫人婿今已病，去绛州八十里，必有凶信。
现代文：老人见到程行谌的妹妹时说： 夫人的丈夫现在已经有病了，当你走到离降州八十里路的时候，一定会得到凶信的。 
English: When the old man saw Cheng Xingyao's younger sister, he said, "Mrs. Cheng's husband is already ill. When you come to the eighty-mile road from Fuzhou, you will definitely get bad news.

古文：其妹忧闷便发，去州八十里，凶问果至。
现代文：程行谌的妹妹忧郁烦闷地起程上路了。走到离绛州八十里时，果然传来她丈夫的凶信。
English: Cheng Xingyao's sister set off on her journey in a gloomy mood. When she was eighty miles away from Zhangzhou, her husband's sinister letter arrived.

古文：程公后为御史大夫，九十余卒。后赠仆射右相，果如所言。
现代文：程行谌后来任御史大夫，活了九十多岁才去世，死后被追赠为仆射右丞相。
English: Cheng Xingyao was later appointed as a doctor of history, lived for more than ninety years before he died, and was posthumously awarded the title of Minister of the Right.

古文：魏元忠相国魏元忠，与礼部尚书郑惟忠皆宋人。
现代文：这一切，果然都像老人当年预测的那样。魏元忠丞相魏元忠与礼部尚书郑惟忠，都是宋人，都很有才气，从小就很要好。
English: All of this turned out to be as the old man had predicted. Wei Yuanzhong, Wei Yuanzhong and Zheng Weizhong, both from the Song Dynasty, were very talented and had been very good since childhood.

古文：咸负材器，少相友善。
现代文：年近三十岁了，两人都未有成就功名。
English: Nearly thirty years old, neither of them has achieved much.

古文：年将三十，而名未立。有善相者见之，异礼相接。
现代文：有位擅长相术的人看见他们后，用特殊的礼节接待他们。
English: After seeing them, a person skilled in the art of physiognomy received them with special courtesy.

古文：自谓曰：古人称方以类聚，信乎？
现代文：一开始对魏元忠说：古人说，同类的事物聚在一起，信不信？
English: At the beginning, he said to Wei Yuanzhong: The ancients said that similar things come together, believe it or not?

古文：魏公当位极人臣，声名烜赫。
现代文：魏官人官能做到为人臣子的最高一级，声名显赫。
English: Wei officials were able to achieve the highest level of being a vassal, and became famous.

古文：执心忠謇，直谅不回，必作栋干，为国元辅。
现代文：你为官一定是忠诚正直，诚信而不行邪僻，一定能成为国家的栋梁，朝中的重臣，你的面相贵是贵啊，然而你命运多曲折，时有忧患。
English: As an official, you must be loyal and honest, honest and not devious, and you must be able to become the pillar of the country, the chief minister of the central government. Your face is precious, but your fate is tortuous and sometimes troublesome.

古文：贵则贵矣，然命多蹇剥，时有忧惧，皆是登相位以前事，不足为虞。
现代文：这些都是登上宰相高位以前的事，不必担心。但是，遇事就要去做，听着话就要应和。
English: These are all things that happened before he ascended to the high position of prime minister, so you don't have to worry about them. However, when things happen, you have to act, and when you hear something, you have to respond.

古文：但可当事便行，闻言则应。谓郑公曰：足下金章紫绶，命禄无涯。既入三品，亦升八座。
现代文：这位相士又对郑惟忠说：您将来金章紫绶命中注定福寿无边，既能进入三品高官的行列，也能升任到八位重臣之一。
English: The comrade-in-arms also said to Zheng Weizhong, "You will be awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon in the future, and you are destined to have a long and prosperous life. You can not only enter the ranks of three-star high-ranking officials, but also be promoted to one of the eight senior ministers."

古文：官无贬黜，寿复遐长。
现代文：你做官一直不会被贬职，你的寿数也长久。
English: You will never be demoted in your career, and you will live a long life.

古文：元忠复请曰：禄始何岁？
现代文：魏元忠又请教说：我的俸禄从什么时候开始，为官任到什么职位结束。
English: Wei Yuanzhong also asked: "When does my salary start, and what is the end of my official position?"

古文：秩终何地？对曰：今年若献书，禄斯进矣。
现代文：相士回答说：你今年如果向皇上上书进言，俸禄就来了。
English: The comrade-in-arms replied, "If you write a letter to the emperor this year, your salary will come.

古文：罢相之后，出巡江傲，秩将终矣。遂以其年，于凉宫上书陈事。
现代文：于是，魏元忠就在这一年，在凉宫上书陈事，却好长时间没有回音。
English: As a result, Wei Yuanzhong wrote to the Liangong Palace in the same year, but there was no reply for a long time.

古文：久无进止，粮尽却归。
现代文：这时盘缠已经用完了，他就往回去。
English: By this time the coils had been used up and he went back.

古文：路逢故人，惠以缣帛，却至凉宫，已有恩敕召入。拜校书，后迁中丞大夫。
现代文：路上遇到了一位熟人，送给他丝和绢等，他又返回了凉宫。这时，皇上已经降下诏书，召魏元忠进宫，授予他校书的官职，后来改任中丞大夫。
English: On the way, he met an acquaintance, who gave him silk and reeds, and he returned to the Summer Palace. At this time, the emperor had issued an imperial decree, calling Wei Yuanzhong into the palace, awarding him the official post of school book, and later he was reappointed as Chujo doctor.

古文：中间忤旨犯权，累遭谴责，下狱穷问。
现代文：这期间因违逆圣命，触犯了权贵，多次遭到责罚，下狱追究。
English: During this period, he was punished many times for violating the sanctity of life, offending the powerful and noble, and was sent to prison for investigation.

古文：每欲引决，辄忆相者之言，复自宽解。但益骯脏言事，未尝屈其志而抑其辞，终免于祸，而登宰辅焉。
现代文：每当他想自杀时，就回忆起当年相士说过的话，才又自己宽慰自己，但是越来越刚直不阿地抨击时政，从未动摇过自己的志向，收敛自己的言辞，最后还是免除了祸患，登上了宰相的高位。
English: Whenever he wanted to commit suicide, he would recall what his soulmate had said that year, and then he would console himself. However, he became more and more forthright in his criticism of the current government. He never wavered in his ambition, restrained his words, and finally avoided the disaster and ascended to the high position of prime minister.

古文：自仆射窜谪于南郡，江行数日，病困。
现代文：后来，魏元忠从仆射降职被贬到南郡任刺史。沿江巡行中，几天后病势沉重。
English: Later, Wei Yuanzhong was demoted from the position of minion and was relegated to the position of deputy governor of Nan County. A few days later, he fell seriously ill during a parade along the river.

古文：乃曰：吾终此乎。
现代文：魏元忠说：我就死在这里了吗？
English: Wei Yuanzhong said: Did I die here?

古文：果卒。
现代文：果然他就死了。
English: Sure enough, he died.

