古文：张耳者，大梁人也。
现代文：张耳，是魏国大梁人。
English: Zhang Er was from Daliang, Wei.

古文：其少时，及魏公子毋忌为客。
现代文：他年轻的时候，曾在魏公子无忌门下作宾客。
English: When he was young, he was a guest at the home of Wei Gongzi.

古文：张耳尝亡命游外黄。
现代文：张耳曾被消除本地名籍，逃亡到外黄。
English: Zhang Er was stripped of his local citizenship and fled to Waigaoqiao.

古文：外黄富人女甚美，嫁庸奴，亡其夫，去抵父客。
现代文：外黄有一富豪人家的女儿，长得非常的美丽，却嫁了一个愚蠢平庸的丈夫，她因此逃离了她的丈夫，投奔到父亲的老朋友家中。
English: The daughter of a wealthy family in Waifang, who was very beautiful but married a stupid and mediocre husband, ran away from her husband and went to the home of an old friend of her father.

古文：父客素知张耳，乃谓女曰： 必欲求贤夫，从张耳。 
现代文：她父亲的朋友平素就了解张耳，于是对女子说： 如果你一定要嫁个有才能的丈夫，就嫁给张耳吧。 
English: Her father's friend, who knew Zhang Er well, told her: "If you must marry a talented husband, marry Zhang Er."

古文：女听，乃卒为请决，嫁之张耳。
现代文：女子听从了他的意见，终于断绝了同她丈夫的关系，改嫁给张耳。
English: The woman listened to his advice and finally broke off the relationship with her husband and married Zhang Er.

古文：张耳是时脱身游，女家厚奉给张耳，张耳以故致千里客。
现代文：张耳这时从困窘中摆脱出来，广泛交游，女家给张耳供给丰厚，张耳因此可以招致千里以外的宾客。
English: At this time, Zhang Er got out of the predicament and traveled widely. The woman's family provided Zhang Er with abundant supplies, so Zhang Er could invite guests from thousands of miles away.

古文：乃宦魏为外黄令。
现代文：于是在魏国外黄做了县令。
English: Therefore, Huang made the county order outside Wei.

古文：名由此益贤。
现代文：他的名声越来越盛。
English: His reputation is on the rise.

古文：陈馀者，亦大梁人也，好儒术，数游赵苦陉。
现代文：陈馀，也是魏国大梁人，爱好儒家学说，曾多次游历赵国的苦陉。
English: Chen Yu, also a member of the Great Liang Dynasty of the Wei Dynasty, was fond of Confucianism, and had traveled to the bitterns of Zhao Province many times.

古文：富人公乘氏以其女妻之，亦知陈馀非庸人也。
现代文：一位很有钱的公乘氏把女儿嫁给他，因为知道陈馀不是一般平庸无为的人。
English: A very rich merchant married his daughter to him, because he knew that Chen Yu was not an ordinary mediocre person.

古文：馀年少，父事张耳，两人相与为刎颈交。
现代文：陈馀年轻，他就像对待父亲一样侍奉张耳，两人建立了生死无悔的患难情谊。
English: Chen Yu is young, he serves Zhang Er as if he were his father, and the two of them have established a life-and-death friendship.

古文：秦之灭大梁也，张耳家外黄。高祖为布衣时，尝数从张耳游，客数月。
现代文：秦国灭亡大梁时，张耳家住在外黄，汉高祖还是普通平民百姓的时候，曾多次跟张耳来往交游，在张耳家一住就是几个月。
English: At the time of the fall of the Qin Dynasty, Zhang Er's family lived in Waigaoqiao. When Han Gao Zu was an ordinary commoner, he traveled back and forth with Zhang Er many times. He lived in Zhang Er's family for several months at a time.

古文：秦灭魏数岁，已闻此两人魏之名士也，购求有得张耳千金，陈馀五百金。
现代文：秦国灭亡魏国几年后，已经听说这两个人是魏国的名士，就悬赏拘捕，有捉住张耳的人赏千金，捉住陈馀的人赏给五百金。
English: A few years after the fall of the Qin Dynasty and the fall of the Wei Dynasty, it was already known that these two men were famous figures in the Wei Dynasty, and a reward was offered for their arrest. Those who caught Zhang Er were rewarded with a thousand gold, and those who caught Chen Yu were rewarded with five hundred gold.

古文：张耳、陈馀乃变名姓，俱之陈，为里监门以自食。两人相对。
现代文：张耳、陈馀就改名换姓，一块儿逃到陈地，充当里正卫维持生活，两人相对而处。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu changed their names and fled to Chen Di together, acting as Li Zhengwei to sustain their lives. The two of them lived opposite each other.

古文：里吏尝有过笞陈馀，陈馀欲起，张耳蹑之，使受笞。吏去，张耳乃引陈馀之桑下而数之曰： 始吾与公言何如？
现代文：里中小吏曾因陈馀犯了小的过失鞭打他，陈馀打算起来反抗，张耳赶快用脚踩他，示意他不要动接受鞭打，小吏走后，张耳就把陈馀带到桑树下，责备他说： 当初怎么和你说的？
English: In the village, the middle and junior officials had whipped Chen Yu for a minor offense. Chen Yu planned to rise up and resist, and Zhang Er quickly stepped on him with his foot, indicating that he should not accept the whipping. After the officials left, Zhang Er took Chen Yu to the mulberry tree and scolded him, saying: "What did you say to me at the beginning?

古文：今见小辱而欲死一吏乎？ 
现代文：如今遭到小小的屈辱，就要死在里吏身上吗？ 
English: Now that you have suffered a small humiliation, do you want to die in the hands of the magistrates?

古文：陈馀然之。
现代文：陈馀认为他说的对。
English: Chen Yu thought he was right.

古文：秦诏书购求两人，两人亦反用门者以令里中。
现代文：秦国发出命令文告，悬赏拘捕他两人，他俩也利用里正卫的身份向里中的居民传达上边的命令。
English: The State of Qin issued an order announcement, offering a reward for the arrest of the two of them. They also used the identity of Li Zhengwei to convey the above order to the residents of the village.

古文：陈涉起蕲，至入陈，兵数万。
现代文：陈涉在蕲州起义，攻入陈地时，军队已扩充到几万人。
English: Chen dabbled in the Zhangzhou Uprising, and when he invaded Chen's territory, the army had expanded to tens of thousands.

古文：张耳、陈馀上谒陈涉。
现代文：张耳、陈馀求见陈涉。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu asked to see Chen Tang.

古文：涉及左右生平数闻张耳、陈馀贤，未尝见，见即大喜。
现代文：陈涉和他的亲信们平时多次听说张耳、陈馀有才能，只是未曾见过面，见面后非常高兴。
English: Chen Zhan and his relatives often heard that Zhang Er and Chen Yu had talent, but they had never met before. They were very happy to meet.

古文：陈中豪杰父老乃说陈涉曰： 将军身被坚执锐，率士卒以诛暴秦，复立楚社稷，存亡继绝，功德宜为王。
现代文：陈地的豪杰父老就劝说陈涉道： 将军身穿坚固的铠甲，手拿锐利的武器，率领着士兵讨伐暴虐的秦国，重立楚国的政权，使灭亡的国家得以复存，使断绝的子嗣得以延续，这样的功德，应该称王。
English: Chen's heroic fathers and grandfathers persuaded Chen Wudao: The general, wearing strong armor and holding sharp weapons, led the soldiers to fight the tyrannical Qin State, re-establish the power of Chu State, so that the destroyed country could be restored, and so that the severed descendants could be continued. Such a merit should be praised by the king.

古文：且夫监临天下诸将，不为王不可，原将军立为楚王也。 
现代文：况且还要督察、率领天下各路的将领，不称王是不行的，希望将军立为楚王。 
English: Moreover, it is necessary to supervise and lead the generals of all roads in the world. It is not possible without calling the king. I hope that the general will be appointed as the king of Chu.

古文：陈涉问此两人，两人对曰： 夫秦为无道，破人国家，灭人社稷，绝人後世，罢百姓之力，尽百姓之财。
现代文：陈涉就此征求陈馀、张耳的看法，他二人回答说： 秦国无道，占领了人家的国家，毁灭了人家的社稷，断绝了人家的后代，掠尽百姓的财物。
English: Chen Zhan asked Chen Yu and Zhang Er for their views on this, and they both replied: Qin was a lawless state that occupied other people's countries, destroyed other people's communities, cut off other people's descendants, and plundered the people's property.

古文：将军瞋目张胆，出万死不顾一生之计，为天下除残也。
现代文：将军怒目圆睁，放开胆量，不顾万死一生，是为了替天下人除残去暴。
English: In order to eliminate cruelty and brutality for the people of the world, the general was furious and dared to let go, regardless of life and death.

古文：今始至陈而王之，示天下私。
现代文：如今刚刚打到陈地就称王，在天下人面前显示出自己的私心。
English: Now, just after the battle of Chenchi, they claim to be the king, showing their selfishness in front of the world.

古文：原将军毋王，急引兵而西，遣人立六国後，自为树党，为秦益敌也。
现代文：希望将军不要称王。赶快率兵向西挺进，派人去拥立六国的后代，作为自己的党羽，给秦国增加敌对势力。
English: It is hoped that the general will not claim to be the king. He should hasten to advance westward with his soldiers and send people to support the descendants of the six kingdoms as his own followers, and increase the hostile forces to Qin.

古文：敌多则力分，与众则兵彊。如此野无交兵，县无守城，诛暴秦，据咸阳以令诸侯。
现代文：给它树敌越多，它的力量就越分散，我们的党羽越多，兵力就越强大，如果这样，就用不着在辽阔的旷野荒原上互相厮杀，也不存在坚守强攻的县城，铲除暴虐的秦国，就可以占据咸阳向诸侯发号施令。
English: The more enemies we make for it, the more its power will be dispersed. The more our party feathers we have, the more powerful our troops will be. If this is the case, there will be no need to fight each other on the vast wilderness wasteland, and there will be no county towns that insist on forceful attacks. By eradicating the tyrannical Qin State, we can occupy Xianyang and issue orders to the princes.

古文：诸侯亡而得立，以德服之，如此则帝业成矣。
现代文：各诸侯国在灭亡后又得以复立，施以恩德感召他们，如能这样，那么帝王大业就成功了。
English: The various vassal states were able to be restored after their demise, and they were inspired by grace. If this can be done, then the emperor's great cause will be successful.

古文：今独王陈，恐天下解也。 
现代文：如今只在陈地称王，恐怕天下的诸侯就会懈怠不相从了。 
English: Nowadays, kings are only crowned in Chen, and I'm afraid that the princes of the world will slack off and not follow suit.

古文：陈涉不听，遂立为王。
现代文：陈涉没听从他们的意见，于是自立称王。
English: Chen Zhu did not listen to their advice, so he declared himself king.

古文：陈馀乃复说陈王曰： 大王举梁、楚而西，务在入关，未及收河北也。臣尝游赵，知其豪桀及地形，原请奇兵北略赵地。 
现代文：陈馀再次规劝陈王说： 大王调遣梁、楚的军队向西挺进，当务之急是攻破函谷关，来不及收复黄河以北的地区，我曾遍游赵国，熟悉那里的杰出人物和地理形势，我自愿请求率领一支军队，向北出其不意地夺取赵国的土地。 
English: Chen Yu once again advised Chen Wang, saying: The great king has dispatched Liang and Chu's army to advance westward. The urgent task is to break through the Hanzhong Pass. It is too late to recover the area north of the Yellow River. I have traveled all over Zhao Province and am familiar with the outstanding figures and geographical situation there. I voluntarily request to lead an army to the north to unexpectedly seize the land of Zhao Province.

古文：於是陈王以故所善陈人武臣为将军，邵骚为护军，以张耳、陈馀为左右校尉，予卒三千人，北略赵地。
现代文：于是，陈王任命自己的老朋友，陈地人武臣为将军，邵骚为护军，张耳、陈馀担任左右校尉，拨给三千人的军队，向北夺取赵国的土地。
English: As a result, Chen Wang appointed his old friend, the Chen people, Wu Chen, as the general, Shao Shao as the escort, Zhang Er and Chen Yu as the left and right lieutenants, and assigned them to an army of three thousand people to seize the land of Zhao to the north.

古文：武臣等从白马渡河，至诸县，说其豪桀曰： 秦为乱政虐刑以残贼天下，数十年矣。
现代文：武臣等人从白马津渡过黄河，到各县对当地豪杰游说道： 秦国的乱政酷刑残害天下百姓，已经几十年了。
English: Wu Zhen and others crossed the Yellow River from Baima Jin and went to each county to visit the local heroes and heroines, saying: The chaotic politics and torture of Qin State have been crippling the people of the world for decades.

古文：北有长城之役，南有五岭之戍，外内骚动，百姓罢敝，头会箕敛，以供军费，财匮力尽，民不聊生。
现代文：北部边境有修筑万里长城的苦役，南边广征兵丁戍守五岭，国内国外动荡不安，百姓疲惫不堪，按人头收缴谷物，用簸箕收敛，来供应军队的费用，财尽力竭，民不聊生。
English: On the northern border, there is the hard labor of building the Great Wall, on the southern border, there is the widespread conscription of soldiers to guard the Five Ridges, there is domestic and foreign turbulence, the people are exhausted, the grain is collected according to the number of people, and the money is used to supply the expenses of the army, the money is exhausted, and the people are not happy.

古文：重之以苛法峻刑，使天下父子不相安。
现代文：加上严重的苛法酷刑，致使天下的父子不得安宁。
English: In addition to severe harsh legal torture, the father and son of the world have no peace.

古文：陈王奋臂为天下倡始，王楚之地，方二千里，莫不响应，家自为怒，人自为斗，各报其怨而攻其雠，县杀其令丞，郡杀其守尉。
现代文：陈王振臂而起，首先倡导天下，在楚地称王，方圆两千里，没有不响应的，家家义愤填膺，人人斗志旺盛，有怨的报怨，有仇的报仇，各县杀死他们的县令县丞，各郡杀了他们的郡守郡尉。
English: Chen Wang raised his arm and first advocated the world. He was proclaimed king in Chu, with a radius of two thousand miles. There was no one who did not respond. Every family was filled with righteous indignation. Everyone was full of fighting spirit. There were grudges to be repaid, and there were vendettas to be avenged. Counties killed their county magistrates, and counties killed their county governors and county lieutenants.

古文：今已张大楚，王陈，使吴广、周文将卒百万西击秦。
现代文：如今已经建立了大楚国，在陈地称王，派吴广、周文率领百万大军向西攻击秦军。
English: Now the Great Chu Kingdom has been established, claiming the throne in Chen, and sending Wu Guang and Zhou Wen to lead a million-strong army to attack the Qin army in the west.

古文：於此时而不成封侯之业者，非人豪也。
现代文：在这时还不能成就封侯的功业，那就不是人中的豪杰了。
English: At this time, if you can't accomplish the work of a feudal lord, then you're not a hero among men.

古文：诸君试相与计之！
现代文：请诸位互相筹划一番！
English: Please make plans with each other!

古文：夫天下同心而苦秦久矣。
现代文：天下所有的人一致认为苦于秦国的暴政已经很久了。
English: All the people in the world agreed that they had suffered from the tyranny of Qin for a long time.

古文：因天下之力而攻无道之君，报父兄之怨而成割地有土之业，此士之一时也。 
现代文：凭着天下人的力量攻打无道昏君，报父兄的怨仇，而完成割据土地的大业，这是有志之士不可错过的时机啊。 
English: With the power of the world's people, we should attack the wayward and weak-willed prince, avenge the father and brother, and complete the great cause of separating the land. This is an opportunity that people with ambition should not miss.

古文：豪桀皆然其言。
现代文：所有的豪杰都认为这话说得很对。
English: All the greats think that's very true.

古文：乃行收兵，得数万人，号武臣为武信君。
现代文：于是一边行军作战，一边收编队伍，军队扩充到几万人，武臣自己立号称武信君。
English: So on the one hand marching to battle, on the other hand assembling the team, the army expanded to tens of thousands of people, and the samurai himself became known as Takenobu.

古文：下赵十城，馀皆城守，莫肯下。
现代文：攻克赵国十座城池，其余的都据城坚守，没有肯投降的。
English: He conquered ten cities in Zhao Province, and the rest of them held fast to the city and refused to surrender.

古文：乃引兵东北击范阳。
现代文：于是带兵朝东北方向攻击范阳。
English: So he led his troops to the northeast to attack Fanyang.

古文：范阳人蒯通说范阳令曰： 窃闻公之将死，故吊。
现代文：范阳人蒯通规劝范阳令说： 我私下听说您快要死了，所以前来表示哀悼慰问。
English: Fan Yangling was advised by Fan Yangling: I heard in private that you were about to die, so I came to express my condolences.

古文：虽然，贺公得通而生。 
现代文：虽然如此，但是还要恭贺您因为有了我蒯通而能获得复生。 
English: Even so, I would like to congratulate you on being able to be revived thanks to me.

古文：范阳令曰： 何以吊之？ 
现代文：范阳令说： 为什么对我哀悼慰问？ 
English: Fan Yangling said, "Why do you offer condolences to me?

古文：对曰： 秦法重，足下为范阳令十年矣，杀人之父，孤人之子，断人之足，黥人之首，不可胜数。
现代文：蒯通回答说： 秦国的法律非常严酷，您做了十年的范阳县令，杀死多少父老，造成多少孤儿寡母，砍断人家脚的，在人家脸上刺字的，数也数不清。
English: Zhaotong replied, "The laws of Qin are very harsh. You have been the leader of Fanyang County for ten years. How many fathers and grandfathers have you killed, how many orphans and widows have you caused, how many feet have you cut off, how many faces have you tattooed?

古文：然而慈父孝子莫敢倳刃公之腹中者，畏秦法耳。
现代文：然而慈祥的父辈孝顺的子女没有人敢把刀子插入您肚子里，只是因为畏惧秦朝的法律罢了。
English: However, no one dares to stick a knife into your stomach, just because they are afraid of the laws of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今天下大乱，秦法不施，然则慈父孝子且倳刃公之腹中以成其名，此臣之所以吊公也。
现代文：如今天下大乱。秦国的法令不能施行了，既然这样，那些慈父孝子就会把利刃插进您肚子而成就他们的名声，这就是我来哀悼慰问您的原因啊。
English: If there is a big riot today, the decrees of the Qin State cannot be enforced. In this case, those fatherly sons and daughters will stick a sharp blade into your stomach and achieve their reputation. This is why I come to mourn and console you.

古文：今诸侯畔秦矣，武信君兵且至，而君坚守范阳，少年皆争杀君，下武信君。
现代文：如今，各路诸侯都背叛了秦廷，武信君的人马即将到来，您却要死守范阳，年轻的人都争先要杀死您，投奔武信君。
English: Nowadays, all the princes have betrayed the Qin Dynasty, Wu Xinjun's men are about to arrive, but you have to defend Fan Yang, young people are scrambling to kill you and join Wu Xinjun.

古文：君急遣臣见武信君，可转祸为福，在今矣。 
现代文：您应该马上派我去面见武信君，可以转祸为福就在而今了。 
English: You should send me to meet Takenobu right away. I can turn my misfortune into a blessing right now.

古文：范阳令乃使蒯通见武信君曰： 足下必将战胜然後略地，攻得然後下城，臣窃以为过矣。
现代文：范阳令就派蒯通去见武信君说： 您一定要打了胜仗而后夺取土地，攻破了守敌然后占领城池，我私下认为这样做是错误的。
English: Fan Yangling sent a messenger to Wu Xinjun and said: You must win the battle and then seize the land, break through the enemy's defense and then occupy the city. I privately think that doing so is wrong.

古文：诚听臣之计，可不攻而降城，不战而略地，传檄而千里定，可乎？ 
现代文：您如果能听从我的计策，就可以不去攻打而使城邑降服，不通过战斗就能夺取土地，只要发出征召文告就让您平定广阔的土地，可以吗？ 
English: If you can follow my strategy, you can subdue the cities without attacking, seize the land without fighting, and let you pacify the vast land as long as you issue a conscription notice, okay?

古文：武信君曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：武信君说： 你指的是什么呢？ 
English: Takenobu said, "What are you referring to?"

古文：蒯通曰： 今范阳令宜整顿其士卒以守战者也，怯而畏死，贪而重富贵，故欲先天下降，畏君以为秦所置吏，诛杀如前十城也。
现代文：蒯通回答说： 如今范阳令应当整顿他的人马用来坚守抵抗，可是他胆小怕死，贪恋财富而爱慕尊贵，所以他要率先来投降，但又害怕您认为他是秦国任命的官吏，像以前被攻克的十座城池的官吏一样被杀死。
English: Zhaotong replied, "Nowadays, Fan Yang Rong should rectify his men and horses to maintain resistance, but he is timid and afraid of death, greedy for wealth and loves nobility, so he wants to surrender first, but he is afraid that you think he is an official appointed by the Qin State and will be killed like the officials of the ten cities that were conquered before.

古文：然今范阳少年亦方杀其令，自以城距君。
现代文：而现在范阳城里的年轻人也正想杀掉他，自己据守城池来抵抗您。
English: And now the young people in Fanyang City are trying to kill him, and they are defending the city to resist you.

古文：君何不赍臣侯印，拜范阳令，范阳令则以城下君，少年亦不敢杀其令。
现代文：您为什么不把侯印让我带去，委任范阳令，范阳令就会把城池献给您，年轻人也就不敢杀他们的县令了。
English: Why don't you let me take the Hou's seal with me and appoint Fan Yangling, Fan Yangling will dedicate the city to you, and young people will not dare to kill their county magistrate.

古文：令范阳令乘硃轮华毂，使驱驰燕、赵郊。
现代文：让范阳令坐着彩饰豪华的车子，奔驰在燕国、赵国的郊野。
English: Let Fan Yangling sit in a richly decorated car and drive in the countryside of Yan and Zhao.

古文：燕、赵郊见之，皆曰此范阳令，先下者也，即喜矣，燕、赵城可毋战而降也。
现代文：燕国、赵国郊野的人们看见他，都会说这就是范阳令，他是率先投降的人，马上就得到如此优厚的待遇了，燕、赵的城池就可以不用攻打而投降了。
English: When people in the countryside of Yan and Zhao saw him, they would all say that this was the order of Fan Yang. He was the first to surrender and immediately received such generous treatment. Yan and Zhao's cities could surrender without fighting.

古文：此臣之所谓传檄而千里定者也。 
现代文：这就是我说的一声令下就可以平定千里之地的计策。 
English: This is what I call a strategy that can pacify thousands of miles of land with a single order.

古文：武信君从其计，因使蒯通赐范阳令侯印。
现代文：武信君听从了他的计策，派遣蒯通赐给范阳令侯印。
English: Wu Xinjun listened to his strategy and sent the imperial seal to Fan Yangling.

古文：赵地闻之，不战以城下者三十馀城。
现代文：赵国人听到这个消息后，不战而降的城池有三十余座。
English: After the people of Zhao heard this news, more than 30 cities and towns surrendered without a fight.

古文：至邯郸，张耳、陈馀闻周章军入关，至戏卻；又闻诸将为陈王徇地，多以谗毁得罪诛，怨陈王不用其筴不以为将而以为校尉。
现代文：到达邯郸，张耳、陈馀听说周章的部队已经进入关中，到戏水地区又败下阵来；又听说为陈王攻城略地的各路将领，多被谗言毁谤，获罪被诛，又怨恨陈王不采纳他们的计谋，不晋升他们为将军，而让他们做校尉。
English: Arriving in Handan, Zhang Er and Chen Yu heard that Zhou Zhang's troops had entered the middle of the pass, and were defeated in the watering area. They also heard that the generals who attacked the city for Chen Wang were often slandered and arrested, and they also resented that Chen Wang did not adopt their strategy, did not promote them to general, and let them be lieutenant.

古文：乃说武臣曰： 陈王起蕲，至陈而王，非必立六国後。
现代文：于是就规劝武臣说： 陈王在蕲县起兵，到了陈地就自立称王，不一定要拥立六国诸侯的后代。
English: Therefore, he advised his vassals, saying, "King Chen raised an army in Jixian County, and when he arrived in Chen, he declared himself king. It is not necessary to support the descendants of the princes of the Six Kingdoms.

古文：将军今以三千人下赵数十城，独介居河北，不王无以填之。
现代文：如今，将军用三千人马夺取了几十座城池，独自据有河北广大区域，如不称王，不足以使社会安定下来。
English: Today, the military has captured dozens of cities with three thousand horses, and alone has a vast area of Hebei Province. If it is not praised, it is not enough to stabilize society.

古文：且陈王听谗，还报，恐不脱於祸。
现代文：况且陈王听信谗言，若是有人回去报告，恐怕难免祸患。
English: Moreover, Chen Wang listened to the advice, and if someone went back to report, I'm afraid it would be a disaster.

古文：又不如立其兄弟；不，即立赵後。
现代文：还不如拥立其兄弟为王；否则，就拥立赵国的后代。
English: It would be better to support his brother as king; otherwise, support the descendants of Zhao.

古文：将军毋失时，时间不容息。 
现代文：将军不要失掉机会，时机紧迫，不容喘息。 
English: General, don't lose the opportunity, the time is pressing, there is no time to breathe.

古文：武臣乃听之，遂立为赵王。
现代文：武臣听从了他们的劝告，于是，自立为赵王。
English: The samurai heeded their advice and set out to become King Zhao.

古文：以陈馀为大将军，张耳为右丞相，邵骚为左丞相。
现代文：任用陈馀做大将军，张耳做右丞相，邵骚做左丞相。
English: He appointed Chen Yu as grand general, Zhang Er as minister of the right and Shao Shao as minister of the left.

古文：使人报陈王，陈王大怒，欲尽族武臣等家，而发兵击赵。
现代文：派人回报陈王，陈王听了大发雷霆，想要把武臣等人的家族杀尽，而发兵攻打赵王。
English: He sent someone to return the favor to King Chen. Hearing this, King Chen flew into a rage, wanted to kill all the families of the warriors and others, and sent troops to attack King Zhao.

古文：陈王相国房君谏曰： 秦未亡而诛武臣等家，此又生一秦也。
现代文：陈王的国相房君劝阻说： 秦国还没有灭亡而诛杀武臣等人的家族，这等于又树立了一个像秦国一样强大的敌人。
English: Chen Wang's Minister of State Fang Jun dissuaded him, saying, "Qin State has not yet perished, and killing the families of warriors and others is tantamount to setting up an enemy as powerful as Qin State.

古文：不如因而贺之，使急引兵西击秦。 
现代文：不如趁此机会向他祝贺，让他火速带领军队向西挺进，攻打秦国。 
English: It is better to take this opportunity to congratulate him and let him lead the army to advance westward and attack Qin.

古文：陈王然之，从其计，徙系武臣等家宫中，封张耳子敖为成都君。
现代文：陈王认为他说的对，听从了他的计策，把武臣等人的家属迁移到宫里，软禁起来。并封张耳的儿子做了成都君。
English: Chen Wang thought that what he said was right, heeded his strategy, moved the families of warriors and other people to the palace, put them under house arrest, and made Zhang Er's son Chengdu Jun.

古文：陈王使使者贺赵，令趣发兵西入关。
现代文：陈王派使者向赵王祝贺，让他火速调动军队向西进入关中。
English: Chen Wang sent an envoy to congratulate Zhao Wang and asked him to quickly mobilize the army to the west and enter Guanzhong.

古文：张耳、陈馀说武臣曰： 王王赵，非楚意，特以计贺王。
现代文：张耳、陈馀规劝武臣说： 大王在赵地称王，这并不是楚国的本意，只不过是将计就计来祝贺大王。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu Ji advised the warrior to say: The great king was crowned in Zhao. This was not the original intention of the state of Chu, but it was just a trick to congratulate the great king.

古文：楚已灭秦，必加兵於赵。
现代文：楚王灭掉秦国之后，一定会加兵于赵。
English: After King Chu eliminated the Qin state, he would definitely increase the number of soldiers in Zhao.

古文：原王毋西兵，北徇燕、代，南收河内以自广。
现代文：希望大王不要向西进军，要向北发兵夺取燕、代，向南进军收缴河内，扩充自己的势力范围。
English: It is hoped that the Great King will not march to the west, but send troops to the north to seize Yan and Dai, and march to the south to seize Hanoi and expand his sphere of influence.

古文：赵南据大河，北有燕、代，楚虽胜秦，必不敢制赵。 
现代文：这样，赵国向南依靠大河，向北拥有燕、代，楚王即使战胜秦国，也一定不敢强制赵国。 
English: In this way, Zhao relied on the great rivers to the south and had Yan and Dai to the north. Even if King Chu defeated Qin, he would not dare to force Zhao.

古文：赵王以为然，因不西兵，而使韩广略燕，李良略常山，张黡略上党。
现代文：赵王认为他们讲的对，因而，不向西发兵，而派韩广夺取燕地，李良夺取常山，张黡夺取上党。
English: Zhao Wang thought they were right, so he did not send troops to the west, but sent Han Guang to seize Yan's land, Li Liang to seize Changshan, and Zhang Ye to seize Shangdang.

古文：韩广至燕，燕人因立广为燕王。
现代文：韩广的军队到达燕地，燕人趁势拥立韩广做燕王。
English: Han Guang's army arrived in Yan's land, and Yan people took advantage of the situation to support Han Guang to become the king of Yan.

古文：赵王乃与张耳、陈馀北略地燕界。
现代文：赵王就和张耳、陈馀向北进攻燕国的边境。
English: King Zhao, together with Zhang Er and Chen Yu, went north to attack the border of Yan.

古文：赵王间出，为燕军所得。
现代文：赵王曾在空闲的时候外出，被燕军抓获。
English: Zhao Wang once went out in his spare time and was captured by Yan's army.

古文：燕将囚之，欲与分赵地半，乃归王。
现代文：燕国的将领把他囚禁起来，要求同他瓜分赵国一半土地，才释放赵王。
English: Yan's generals imprisoned him and demanded that he share half of Zhao's land with them before releasing Zhao Wang.

古文：使者往，燕辄杀之以求地。
现代文：赵国派使者前去交涉，燕军就把他们杀死，要求分割土地。
English: Zhao sent envoys to negotiate, but Yan's army killed them and demanded that the land be divided.

古文：张耳、陈馀患之。
现代文：张耳、陈馀为这件事忧虑重重。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu are very worried about this.

古文：有厮养卒谢其舍中曰： 吾为公说燕，与赵王载归。 
现代文：有一个干勤杂的士兵对他同宿舍的伙伴说： 我要替张耳、陈馀去游说燕军，跟赵王一同坐着车回来。 
English: A diligent soldier said to his roommate Wu: I will go to lobby the Yan army for Zhang Er and Chen Yu, and come back with Zhao Wang in the car.

古文：舍中皆笑曰： 使者往十馀辈，辄死，若何以能得王？ 
现代文：同住的伙伴们都讥笑他说： 使臣派去了十几位，去了就立即被杀死，你有什么办法能救出赵王呢？ 
English: His roommates all laughed at him and said, "A dozen envoys were sent, but they were immediately killed. What can you do to save King Zhao?"

古文：乃走燕壁。
现代文：于是，他跑到燕军的大营。
English: So he ran to the main camp of Yan's army.

古文：燕将见之，问燕将曰： 知臣何欲？ 
现代文：燕军的将领见到他，他却问燕将说： 知道我来干什么？ 
English: When the general of Yan's army saw him, he asked Yan: "Do you know what I've come to do?

古文：燕将曰： 若欲得赵王耳。 曰： 君知张耳、陈馀何如人也？ 
现代文：燕将回答说： 你打算救出赵王： 他又问： 您知道张耳、陈馀是什么样的人吗？ 
English: Yan Zheng replied, "Do you plan to rescue King Zhao?" He also asked, "Do you know what kind of people Zhang Er and Chen Yu are?"

古文：燕将曰： 贤人也。 
现代文：燕将说： 是贤明的人。 
English: Yan Zheng said: He is a wise man.

古文：曰： 知其志何欲？ 
现代文：他继续问： 您知道他们的意图是什么？ 
English: He went on to ask: Do you know what their intentions are?

古文：曰： 欲得其王耳。 
现代文：燕将回答说： 不过是要救他们的赵王罢了。 
English: Yan Zheng replied: It was just Zhao Wang who wanted to save them.

古文：赵养卒乃笑曰： 君未知此两人所欲也。
现代文：赵国的勤杂兵就笑着说： 您还不了解这两个人的打算。
English: Zhao Guo's diligent soldier smiled and said: You still don't understand the intention of these two people.

古文：夫武臣、张耳、陈馀杖马箠下赵数十城，此亦各欲南面而王，岂欲为卿相终己邪？
现代文：武臣、张耳、陈馀手执马鞭指挥军队攻克了赵国几十座城池，他们各自也都想面南而称王，难道甘心终身做别人的卿相吗？
English: Wu Zhen, Zhang Er and Chen Yuanzhong led the army with horsewhips and conquered dozens of cities in Zhao. Each of them also wanted to face the south and become a king. Would they be willing to be someone else's lord for life?

古文：夫臣与主岂可同日而道哉，顾其势初定，未敢参分而王，且以少长先立武臣为王，以持赵心。
现代文：臣子和国君难道可以相提并论吗？只是顾虑到大势刚定，不敢三分天下，各立为王，权且按年龄的大小为序先立武臣为王，用以维系赵国的民心。
English: Is it possible to compare a vassal with a sovereign? However, considering the fact that the general situation was just about settled, they did not dare to divide the world into three parts, each of which would be king, and according to the order of their ages, they first made the vassal king, in order to maintain the people's hearts of Zhao.

古文：今赵地已服，此两人亦欲分赵而王，时未可耳。
现代文：如今赵地已经平定，百姓已经归服，这两个人也要瓜分赵地自立称王，只是时机还没成熟罢了。
English: Now that Zhao has been pacified and the people have been subdued, these two men want to divide up Zhao and declare themselves kings, but the time is not yet ripe.

古文：今君乃囚赵王。此两人名为求赵王，实欲燕杀之，此两人分赵自立。
现代文：如今，您囚禁了赵王，这两个人名义上是为了救赵王，实际上是想让燕军杀死他，这样他们两人就能瓜分赵地自立为王了。
English: Now that you have imprisoned King Zhao, these two people, in the name of saving King Zhao, actually want Yan Jun to kill him, so that the two of them can carve up Zhao and become kings.

古文：夫以一赵尚易燕，况以两贤王左提右挈，而责杀王之罪，灭燕易矣。 
现代文：以原来一个赵国的力量就能轻而易举地攻下燕国，何况两位贤王相互支持，以杀害赵王的罪名来讨伐，灭亡燕国就更容易了。 
English: With the strength of the original Zhao Kingdom, Yan Kingdom could be easily conquered. What's more, the two wise kings supported each other and fought with the accusation of killing Zhao King. The destruction of Yan Kingdom would be easier.

古文：燕将以为然，乃归赵王，养卒为御而归。
现代文：燕国将领认为他说的有道理，就释放了赵王，勤杂兵就替赵王驾着车子，一同归来。
English: Yan Guo's generals thought his words were reasonable and released Zhao Wang. The diligent soldiers drove the car for Zhao Wang and returned together.

古文：李良已定常山，还报，赵王复使良略太原。
现代文：李良平定常山以后，回来报告，赵王再派李良夺取太原。
English: After Li Liang conquered Changshan, he came back to report that Zhao Wang sent Li Liang to conquer Taiyuan.

古文：至石邑，秦兵塞井陉，未能前。
现代文：李良的部队到了石邑，秦国的军队已经严密地封锁了井陉，无法前进。
English: When Li Liang's troops arrived at Shiyi, the Qin troops had already sealed off the well and were unable to advance.

古文：秦将诈称二世使人遗李良书，不封，曰： 良尝事我得显幸。
现代文：秦国的将领慌称二世皇帝派人送给李良一封信，没有封口，信中说： 李良曾经侍奉我得到显贵宠幸。
English: The generals of Qin panicked and said that the second emperor sent a letter to Li Liang, without a seal. The letter said: Li Liang once served me and was favored by dignitaries.

古文：良诚能反赵为秦，赦良罪，贵良。 
现代文：李良如果能弃赵归秦，就饶恕李良的罪过。使李良显贵。 
English: If Li Liang can abandon Zhao and return to Qin, he will forgive Li Liang's sins and make Li Liang prominent.

古文：良得书，疑不信。
现代文：李良接到这封信，心中怀疑。
English: Li Liang received this letter with doubts in his heart.

古文：乃还之邯郸，益请兵。
现代文：于是回到邯郸，请求增加兵力。
English: So he returned to Shao and asked for more troops.

古文：未至，道逢赵王姊出饮，从百馀骑。
现代文：还没回到邯郸，路上遇到赵王的姐姐外出赴宴而归，跟着一百多随从的人马。
English: Before returning to Handan, he met Zhao Wang's sister on the way back from a banquet, followed by more than a hundred attendants.

古文：李良望见，以为王，伏谒道旁。王姊醉，不知其将，使骑谢李良。
现代文：李良远远望见如此气魄，认为是赵王，便伏在地上通报姓名，赵王姐姐喝醉了，也不知他是将军，只是让随从的士兵答谢李良。
English: Li Liang saw such courage from afar and thought it was Zhao Wang, so he lay down on the ground to announce his name. Zhao Wang's sister was drunk and did not know that he was a general, but asked the soldiers to thank Li Liang.

古文：李良素贵，起，惭其从官。
现代文：李良一向显贵，从地上站起来，在部署面前感到很羞愧。
English: Li Liang has always been dignified. He stood up from the ground and felt very ashamed in front of the deployment.

古文：从官有一人曰： 天下畔秦，能者先立。且赵王素出将军下，今女兒乃不为将军下车，请追杀之。 
现代文：随行官中有一个人说： 天下人都背叛暴秦，有本领的人便先立为王，况且赵王的地位一向在将军之下，而今，一个女儿家竟不为将军下车行礼，请让我追上去杀了她。 
English: One of the attendants said, "Everyone in the world is a traitor to the tyrannical Qin Dynasty. Those who have the ability become kings first. Moreover, the status of King Zhao has always been below that of the general. Now, a daughter of the family does not get out of the car to salute the general. Please let me chase her and kill her."

古文：李良已得秦书，固欲反赵，未决，因此怒，遣人追杀王姊道中，乃遂将其兵袭邯郸。
现代文：李良已经收到秦王的书信，本来就想反赵，尚未决断，又遇上这件事，因而发怒，派人追赶上去，将赵王的姐姐杀死在路上，于是就率领着他的军队袭击邯郸。
English: Li Liang had already received a letter from King Qin. He originally wanted to rebel against Zhao, but had not yet made up his mind. When this happened, he became angry and sent someone to chase after him. He killed King Zhao's sister on the road, and then led his army to attack Yao.

古文：邯郸不知，竟杀武臣、邵骚。
现代文：邯郸不了解情况，武臣、邵骚竟被杀死。
English: Unaware of the situation, Wu Zhen and Shao Shao were killed.

古文：赵人多为张耳、陈馀耳目者，以故得脱出。
现代文：赵人很多是张耳、陈馀的耳目，因此能够逃脱。
English: A lot of Zhao people are open-eared and shy-eyed, so they can escape.

古文：收其兵，得数万人。
现代文：他们收编武臣的残破军队，得到五万人。
English: They collected the remnants of the samurai army and got fifty thousand men.

古文：客有说张耳曰： 两君羁旅，而欲附赵，难；独立赵後，扶以义，可就功。 
现代文：有的宾客劝告张耳说： 你们俩都是外乡人，客居在此，要想让赵国人归附，很困难；只有拥立六国时赵王的后代，以正义扶持，才能成就大业。 
English: Some guests advised Zhang Er and said, "You are both from out-of-towners, living here as guests. It is very difficult to get the people of Zhao to join us. Only if the descendants of King Zhao, who supported the Six Kingdoms, support us with justice, can we achieve great things.

古文：乃求得赵歇，立为赵王，居信都。
现代文：于是寻访到赵歇，拥立为赵王，让他住在信都。
English: So he visited Zhao Xie and supported Zhao Wang, allowing him to live in Xindu.

古文：李良进兵击陈馀，陈馀败李良，李良走归章邯。
现代文：李良进兵攻击陈馀，陈馀打败了李良，李良只好逃回去，投奔秦将章邯。
English: Li Liang marched into the army and attacked Chen Yu. Chen Yu defeated Li Liang. Li Liang had no choice but to flee back and join Qin general Zhang Ye.

古文：章邯引兵至邯郸，皆徙其民河内，夷其城郭。
现代文：章邯领兵到邯郸，把城里的百姓都迁到河内，摧毁了城郭，荡平了所有的建筑物。
English: Zhang Ye led the troops to Handan, moved the people in the city to Hanoi, destroyed the city walls, and leveled all the buildings.

古文：张耳与赵王歇走入钜鹿城，王离围之。
现代文：张耳和赵王歇逃入钜鹿城，被秦将王离团团围住。
English: Zhang Er and Zhao Wang Xie fled to Elk City and were surrounded by the Qin generals.

古文：陈馀北收常山兵，得数万人，军钜鹿北。
现代文：陈馀在北边收编了常山的残余部队几万人，驻扎在钜鹿城以北。
English: Chen Yu gathered tens of thousands of remaining troops from Changshan in the north and stationed them north of Elk City.

古文：章邯军钜鹿南棘原，筑甬道属河，饷王离。
现代文：章邯的军队驻扎在钜鹿城以南的棘原。修筑甬道与黄河接连，给王离运送军粮。
English: Zhang Ye's army was stationed in Spine Plains, south of Elk City. They built a causeway to connect with the Yellow River to transport military supplies to Wang Li.

古文：王离兵食多，急攻钜鹿。
现代文：王离兵多粮足，急攻钜鹿。
English: Wang Li's soldiers had more food than they needed, so they rushed to attack Menglu.

古文：钜鹿城中食尽兵少，张耳数使人召前陈馀，陈馀自度兵少，不敌秦，不敢前。
现代文：钜鹿城内粮食已尽，兵力很弱，张耳多次派人召陈馀前来救援，陈馀考虑到自己的兵力不足，敌不过秦军，不敢前往。
English: The grain in Elk City was exhausted and the troops were very weak. Zhang Er repeatedly sent people to summon Chen Yu to come to the rescue. Chen Yu, considering his own lack of troops, could not defeat the Qin Army and dared not go.

古文：数月，张耳大怒，怨陈馀，使张黡、陈泽往让陈馀曰： 始吾与公为刎颈交，今王与耳旦暮且死，而公拥兵数万，不肯相救，安在其相为死！
现代文：相持了几个月，不见救兵，张耳大怒，怨恨陈馀，派张黡、陈泽前去责备陈馀说： 当初我和您结下生死与共的情谊，如今赵王和我旦夕之间便可能死亡，而您拥兵数万，不肯相救，那同生共死的情谊在哪儿呢？
English: They held each other for several months, no rescuers were to be seen, Zhang Er was furious and held a grudge against Chen Yu. He sent Zhang Ye and Chen Ze to reproach Chen Yu, saying: At first, I forged a life-and-death friendship with you, but now King Zhao and I could die at any moment, and you have tens of thousands of soldiers and are not willing to save each other. Where is that life-and-death friendship?

古文：苟必信，胡不赴秦军俱死？
现代文：假如您要信守诺言，为什么不和秦军决一死战？
English: If you want to keep your promise, why not fight the Qin army to the death?

古文：且有十一二相全。 
现代文：或许还有十分之一二获胜的希望。 
English: Maybe there's a one-in-two chance of winning.

古文：陈馀曰： 吾度前终不能救赵，徒尽亡军。
现代文：陈馀说： 我考虑即使向前进军，最终不光救不成赵，还要白白地全军覆没。
English: Chen Yu said: I consider that even if I advance towards the advancing army, in the end I will not only fail to save Zhao, but I will also destroy the entire army in vain.

古文：且馀所以不俱死，欲为赵王、张君报秦。
现代文：况且我不去同归于尽，是想着以后还要为赵王、张君向秦国报仇。
English: Moreover, I do not want to die together, thinking that I will have to take revenge for King Zhao and Zhang Jun to Qin in the future.

古文：今必俱死，如以肉委饿虎，何益？ 
现代文：如今一定要去同归于尽，就如同把肉送给饥饿的猛虎，有什么好处呢？ 
English: Now we must go to our deaths together, just like giving meat to a hungry tiger, what is the benefit?

古文：张黡、陈泽曰： 事已急，要以俱死立信，安知後虑！ 
现代文：张黡、陈泽说： 事已迫在眉睫，需要以同归于尽来确立诚信，哪里还顾得上以后的事呢！ 
English: Zhang Ye and Chen Ze said: The matter is imminent, we need to work together to establish good faith, how can we worry about the future!

古文：陈馀曰： 吾死顾以为无益。
现代文：陈馀说： 我死没什么顾惜的，只是死而无益，但是我一定按照二位的话去做。 
English: Chen Yu said, "I have nothing to regret about dying, it's just that it's useless, but I'll definitely do what you two say."

古文：必如公言。 乃使五千人令张黡、陈泽先尝秦军，至皆没。
现代文：就派了五千人马让张黡、陈泽带领着试攻秦军，到了前线便全军覆没了。
English: He sent five thousand horsemen led by Zhang Ye and Chen Ze to attack the Qin army. When they reached the front line, the entire army was wiped out.

古文：当是时，燕、齐、楚闻赵急，皆来救。
现代文：正当这时，燕、齐、楚听说赵国危急，都来救援。
English: Just then, Yan, Qi and Chu heard that Zhao Guo was in danger and came to the rescue.

古文：张敖亦北收代兵，得万馀人，来，皆壁馀旁，未敢击秦。
现代文：张敖也向北收聚代地的兵力一万多人赶来，都在陈馀旁边安营扎寨，不敢进攻秦军。
English: Zhang Ye also went north to gather more than ten thousand troops from the place, and they all camped next to Chen Yu, not daring to attack the Qin army.

古文：项羽兵数绝章邯甬道，王离军乏食，项羽悉引兵渡河，遂破章邯。
现代文：项羽的军队多次截断了章邯的甬道，王离的军粮缺乏，项羽率领全部军队渡过黄河，打败了章邯。
English: Xiang Yu's army repeatedly cut off Zhang Ye's supply routes, and Wang Li's army was short of food. Xiang Yu led the entire army across the Yellow River and defeated Zhang Ye.

古文：章邯引兵解，诸侯军乃敢击围钜鹿秦军，遂虏王离。
现代文：章邯带兵溃退，各国诸侯的军队才敢攻击围困钜鹿的秦国军队，最后俘虏了王离。
English: Zhang Ye's troops retreated in disarray, and only then did the armies of the princes of various countries dare to attack the Qin troops besieging Yangtze, finally capturing Wang Li.

古文：涉间自杀。
现代文：秦将涉间自杀身亡。
English: Qin Zheng committed suicide in the meantime.

古文：卒存钜鹿者，楚力也。
现代文：最终保全钜鹿的，是楚国啊。
English: Ultimately, it is the state of Chu that will preserve the elk.

古文：於是赵王歇、张耳乃得出钜鹿，谢诸侯。
现代文：这时赵王歇、张耳才得以出钜鹿城，感谢各国诸侯。
English: At this time, Zhao Wangxie and Zhang Er were able to leave Elk City and thank the princes of various countries.

古文：张耳与陈馀相见，责让陈馀以不肯救赵，及问张黡、陈泽所在。陈馀怒曰： 张黡、陈泽以必死责臣，臣使将五千人先尝秦军，皆没不出。 
现代文：张耳和陈馀相见，就责备陈馀不肯救赵以及追问张黡、陈泽的下落，陈馀恼怒地说： 张黡、陈泽以同归于尽责备我，我派他们带领五千人马先尝试着攻打秦军，结果全军覆没，没有一人幸免。 
English: When Zhang Er and Chen Yu saw each other, they reproached Chen Yu for not wanting to save Zhao and inquired about the whereabouts of Zhang Ye and Chen Ze. Chen Yu angrily said: Zhang Ye and Chen Ze both reproached me. I sent them to lead five thousand people to try to attack the Qin army first. As a result, the entire army was destroyed, and no one was spared.

古文：张耳不信，以为杀之，数问陈馀。
现代文：张耳不信，认为陈馀把他们杀了，多次追问陈馀。
English: Zhang Er didn't believe it and thought that Chen Yu had killed them. He questioned Chen Yu many times.

古文：陈馀怒曰： 不意君之望臣深也！
现代文：陈馀大怒，说： 没有料到您对我的怨恨是如此深啊！
English: Chen Yu was furious and said, "I didn't expect your grudge against me to be so deep!

古文：岂以臣为重去将哉？ 
现代文：难道您以为我舍不得放弃这将军的职位吗？ 
English: Do you really think that I am reluctant to give up my position as commander of this army?

古文：乃脱解印绶，推予张耳。
现代文：就解下印信，推给张耳。
English: Just open the sealed letter and give it to Zhang Er.

古文：张耳亦愕不受。
现代文：张耳也感到惊愕不肯接受。
English: Zhang Er was also surprised and refused to accept it.

古文：陈馀起如厕。
现代文：陈馀站起身来上厕所了。
English: Chen Yu got up and went to the toilet.

古文：客有说张耳曰： 臣闻 天与不取，反受其咎 。
现代文：有的宾客规劝张耳： 我听说 天上的赐予不接受，反而会遭到祸殃 。
English: Some guests advised Zhang Er: "I heard that if you don't accept the blessings of heaven, you will suffer misfortune.

古文：今陈将军与君印，君不受，反天不祥。
现代文：如今，陈将军把印信交给您，您不接受，违背天意不吉祥。
English: Now, General Chen has given you the sealed letter, but you do not accept it. It is not auspicious to go against God's will.

古文：急取之！ 
现代文：赶快接收它！ 
English: Hurry and receive it!

古文：张耳乃佩其印，收其麾下。
现代文：张耳就佩带了陈馀的大印，接收了他的部下。
English: Zhang Er put on Chen Yu's great seal and received his subordinates.

古文：而陈馀还，亦望张耳不让，遂趋出。
现代文：陈馀回来，也怨恨张耳不辞让就收缴了大印，于是疾步走出去。
English: When Chen Yu came back, he also resented Zhang Er for not giving in, so he confiscated the seal and walked out at full speed.

古文：张耳遂收其兵。
现代文：张耳就收编了他的军队。
English: Zhang Er then reorganized his army.

古文：陈馀独与麾下所善数百人之河上泽中渔猎。
现代文：陈馀独自和他部下亲信几百人到黄河边的湖泽中打鱼捕猎去了。
English: Chen Yu alone and several hundred of his subordinates went fishing and hunting in the lakes along the Yellow River.

古文：由此陈馀、张耳遂有卻。
现代文：从此，陈馀、张耳就在感情上产生了裂痕。
English: From then on, Chen Yu and Zhang Er developed emotional rifts.

古文：赵王歇复居信都。张耳从项羽诸侯入关。
现代文：赵王歇又回到信都居住，张耳跟随着项羽和其他诸侯进入关中。
English: Zhao Wangxie returned to live in Xindu, and Zhang Er followed Xiang Yu and other princes into Guanzhong.

古文：汉元年二月，项羽立诸侯王，张耳雅游，人多为之言，项羽亦素数闻张耳贤，乃分赵立张耳为常山王，治信都。信都更名襄国。
现代文：汉元年二月，项羽分封诸侯王，张耳向来交游很广，很多人替他说好话，项羽平常也听说张耳有才能，于是分割赵国的土地封张耳做常山王，设立信都，并把信都改名为襄国。
English: In February of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu was given the title of prince, and Zhang Er had a wide circle of friends. Many people spoke well of him, and Xiang Yu often heard that Zhang Er was talented. Therefore, he divided the land of Zhao, made Zhang Er the king of Changshan, established Xindu, and renamed Xindu Xiangguo.

古文：陈馀客多说项羽曰： 陈馀、张耳一体有功於赵。 
现代文：陈馀旧有的宾客中很多人规劝项羽说： 陈馀、张耳同样对赵国有功。 
English: Many of Chen Yu's former guests urged Xiang Yu to say: Chen Yu and Zhang Er have also made contributions to Zhao Guozhong.

古文：项羽以陈馀不从入关，闻其在南皮，即以南皮旁三县以封之，而徙赵王歇王代。
现代文：可是项羽因为陈馀没有跟随他进入关中，又听说陈馀在南皮，就把南皮周围的三个县封给他，把赵王歇迁都代县，改封为代王。
English: However, because Xiang Yu did not follow Chen Yu into Guanzhong, and because he heard that Chen Yu was in Nanpi, he gave him the three counties around Nanpi, and moved Zhao Wang Xie to the capital county, and changed his title to acting king.

古文：张耳之国，陈馀愈益怒，曰： 张耳与馀功等也，今张耳王，馀独侯，此项羽不平。 
现代文：张耳到他的封国去，陈馀更加恼怒，说： 张耳和我功劳相等，张耳封王，只有我封侯，这是项羽不公平。 
English: Zhang Er went to his vassal state, Chen Yu became even more angry, saying: Zhang Er and I are equal in merit, Zhang Er, the vassal king, is only vassalized by me, which is unfair to Xiang Yu.

古文：及齐王田荣畔楚，陈馀乃使夏说说田荣曰： 项羽为天下宰不平，尽王诸将善地，徙故王王恶地，今赵王乃居代！
现代文：待到齐王田荣背叛楚国，陈馀便派夏说去游说田荣道： 项羽做为天下的主宰，却不公平，把好地方都分封给将军们去称王，把原来称王的都迁到坏地方，如今竟然把赵王迁居代县！
English: When Tian Rong, the king of Qi, betrayed the state of Chu, Chen Yu sent Xia Xia to lobby Tian Rong: Xiang Yu, as the ruler of the world, was unfair, he assigned the good places to the generals to praise the king, moved the original king to the bad places, and now he even moved the king of Zhao to Dai County!

古文：原王假臣兵，请以南皮为扞蔽。 
现代文：希望大王借给我军队，以南皮作为您遮挡防卫的屏障。 
English: I hope that the Great King will lend me an army to serve as a barrier to block your defense.

古文：田荣欲树党於赵以反楚，乃遣兵从陈馀。
现代文：田荣打算在赵国树立党羽用以反对楚国，就派遣了军队听从陈馀的指挥。
English: Tian Rong planned to establish a faction in Zhao to oppose Chu, so he sent an army under the command of Chen Yu.

古文：陈馀因悉三县兵袭常山王张耳。
现代文：因此，陈馀调动了所属三个县的全部军队袭击常山王张耳。
English: Therefore, Chen Yu mobilized the entire army of his three counties to attack Changshan King Zhang Er.

古文：张耳败走，念诸侯无可归者，曰： 汉王与我有旧故，而项羽又彊，立我，我欲之楚。 
现代文：张耳败逃，想到各诸侯之中没有可以投奔的，便说： 汉王虽然和我有老交情，可是项羽的势力强大，又是他分封的我，我想投奔楚国。 
English: Zhang Er was defeated and fled, thinking that there was no one among the princes who could run away, he said: Although King Han and I have an old friendship, but Xiang Yu's power is strong, and I am his vassal, I want to run away to Chu.

古文：甘公曰： 汉王之入关，五星聚东井。
现代文：甘公说： 汉王入关，五星会聚于井宿天区。
English: Gankong said, "When the Han king enters the customs, the five stars will gather in the well-sleeping area.

古文：东井者，秦分也。
现代文：井宿天区是秦国的分星。
English: Jingduk Tian Qu is a star in the constellation of Qin.

古文：先至必霸。
现代文：先到的，一定功成霸业。
English: Whoever gets there first is sure to succeed.

古文：楚虽彊，後必属汉。 
现代文：即使现在楚国强大，今后一定归属于汉。 
English: Even if Chu is powerful now, it will definitely belong to Han in the future.

古文：故耳走汉。
现代文：所以，张耳决定奔汉。
English: Therefore, Zhang Er decided to run away.

古文：汉王亦还定三秦，方围章邯废丘。
现代文：汉王也回师平定了三秦，正在废丘围攻章邯的军队。
English: Han Wang also returned to the division and leveled Sanqin, the army that was besieging Zhangye on the waste hill.

古文：张耳谒汉王，汉王厚遇之。
现代文：张耳晋见汉王，汉王以优厚的礼遇接待了他。
English: Zhang Erjin met the Han king, who received him with great courtesy.

古文：陈馀已败张耳，皆复收赵地，迎赵王於代，复为赵王。赵王德陈馀，立以为代王。
现代文：陈馀打败张耳以后，全部收复了赵国的土地，把赵王从代县接回来，又做了赵国的国君，赵王对陈馀感恩戴德，分封陈馀为代王。
English: After Chen Yu defeated Zhang Er, he recovered all the land of Zhao, brought back King Zhao from Dai County, and became the sovereign of Zhao. King Zhao was grateful to Chen Yu and appointed Chen Yu as acting king.

古文：陈馀为赵王弱，国初定，不之国，留傅赵王，而使夏说以相国守代。
现代文：陈馀因为赵王软弱，国内局势刚刚稳定，不到封国去，留下来辅佐赵王，而派夏说以国相的身份驻守代国。
English: Chen Yu, because Zhao Wang was weak and the domestic situation had just stabilized, did not go to seal the country, but stayed to assist Zhao Wang, while Pai Xia said that he would stay in the country as the minister of state.

古文：汉二年，东击楚，使使告赵，欲与俱。
现代文：汉二年，汉王向东进击楚国，派使者告知赵国，要和赵国共同伐楚。
English: In the second year of the Han Dynasty, the king of Han marched eastward to attack the state of Chu and sent an envoy to inform the state of Zhao that he wanted to attack Chu together with Zhao.

古文：陈馀曰： 汉杀张耳乃从。 
现代文：陈馀说： 只要汉王杀掉张耳，赵国就从命。 
English: Chen Yu said: As long as Han Wang kills Zhang Er, Zhao Guo will obey.

古文：於是汉王求人类张耳者斩之，持其头遗陈馀。
现代文：于是汉王找到一个和张耳长得相像的人斩首，派人拿着人头送给陈馀。
English: So the king of Han found a man who looked like Zhang Er and beheaded him. He sent someone to take the head and give it to Chen Yu.

古文：陈馀乃遣兵助汉。
现代文：陈馀这才发兵助汉。
English: It was only then that Chen Yu sent troops to help Han.

古文：汉之败於彭城西，陈馀亦复觉张耳不死，即背汉。
现代文：汉王在彭城以西打了败仗，陈馀又觉察到张耳没死，就背叛了汉王。
English: The Han king was defeated in a battle west of Pengcheng, and Chen Yu, sensing that Zhang Er was not dead, betrayed the Han king.

古文：汉三年，韩信已定魏地，遣张耳与韩信击破赵井陉，斩陈馀泜水上，追杀赵王歇襄国。
现代文：汉三年，韩信平定魏地不久，就派张耳和韩信打破了赵国的井陉，在泜水河畔杀死了陈馀，并追到襄国杀赵王歇。
English: In the third year of the Han Dynasty, not long after Han Xin had pacified Wei, he sent Zhang Er and Han Xin to break the well of Zhao, kill Chen Yu on the banks of the Surabaya River, and chase him to Xiang to kill Zhao Wang Xie.

古文：汉立张耳为赵王。
现代文：汉封张耳为赵王。
English: Zhang Er of Han Dynasty is Zhao Wang.

古文：汉五年，张耳薨，谥为景王。
现代文：汉五年，张耳逝世，谥号叫景王。
English: In the fifth year of the Han Dynasty, Zhang Er passed away, and his posthumous name was Jing Wang.

古文：子敖嗣立为赵王。高祖长女鲁元公主为赵王敖后。
现代文：张耳的儿子张敖接续他父亲做了赵王，汉高祖的大女儿鲁元公主嫁给赵王敖做王后。
English: Zhang Er's son Zhang Rong succeeded his father as King Zhao, and Princess Lu Yuan, the eldest daughter of Emperor Gaozu, married King Zhao Rong as his queen.

古文：汉七年，高祖从平城过赵，赵王朝夕袒韝蔽，自上食，礼甚卑，有子婿礼。
现代文：汉七年，高祖从平城经过赵国，赵王脱去外衣，戴上袖套，从早到晚亲自侍奉饮食，态度很谦卑，颇有子婿的礼节。
English: In the seventh year of the Han Dynasty, Gao Zu passed from Pingcheng to Zhao. Zhao Wang took off his coat, put on sleeves, and personally served meals from morning to night. His attitude was very humble, and he had the etiquette of a son-in-law.

古文：高祖箕踞詈，甚慢易之。
现代文：高祖却席地而坐，两脚像簸箕一样伸开大骂赵王，对他非常傲慢。
English: Gao Zu, however, sat on the floor with his feet stretched out like a yakitori and shouted at Zhao Wang, being very arrogant towards him.

古文：赵相贯高、赵午等年六十馀，故张耳客也。生平为气，乃怒曰： 吾王孱王也！ 
现代文：赵国国相贯高、赵午等人都已六十多岁了，是张耳从前的门客，他们生性豪爽、易于冲动，就愤怒地说： 我们的王是懦弱的王啊！ 
English: Zhao Guo Guo Xuan Gao, Zhao Wu and others are all over sixty years old, and are Zhang Er's former customers. They are naturally bold and impulsive, and angrily said: Our king is a cowardly king!

古文：说王曰： 夫天下豪桀并起，能者先立。
现代文：就规劝赵王说： 当初天下豪杰并起，有才能的先立为王。
English: On exhorting Zhao Wang, he said: At the beginning, the world's heroes arose simultaneously, and the talented were the first to become kings.

古文：今王事高祖甚恭，而高祖无礼，请为王杀之！ 
现代文：如今您侍奉高祖那么恭敬，而高祖却傲慢无礼，请让我们替您杀掉他！ 
English: Now you serve Gaozu so respectfully, but Gaozu is arrogant and rude, please let us kill him for you!

古文：张敖齧其指出血，曰： 君何言之误！
现代文：张敖听了，便把手指咬出血来，说： 你们怎么说出这样的错话！
English: After listening, Zhang Ye bit his finger until it bled and said, "How can you say such a wrong thing!

古文：且先人亡国，赖高祖得复国，德流子孙，秋豪皆高祖力也。原君无复出口。 
现代文：况且先父亡国之后，全靠高祖才能够复国，恩德泽及子孙，所有一丝一毫都是高祖出的力啊，希望你们不要再开口。 
English: Moreover, after my father's death, it was all thanks to Gao Zu that the country was able to be restored. Ndeze and his children and grandchildren are all the power of Gao Zu. I hope you don't open your mouth again.

古文：贯高、赵午等十馀人皆相谓曰： 乃吾等非也。
现代文：贯高、赵午等十多人都相互议论说： 都是我们的不对。
English: More than ten people, including Guan Gao and Zhao Wu, argued with each other and said, "It's all our fault."

古文：吾王长者，不倍德。
现代文：我们的王有仁厚长者的风范，不肯背负恩德。
English: Our king has the demeanor of a benevolent elder, unwilling to be burdened with charity.

古文：且吾等义不辱，今怨高祖辱我王，故欲杀之，何乃汙王为乎？
现代文：况且我们的原则是不受悔辱，如今怨恨高祖悔辱我王，所以要杀掉他，又何必玷污我们的王呢？
English: Moreover, our principle is not to be humiliated, and now we resent our great-grandfather for humiliating our king, so we want to kill him, and why should we defile our king?

古文：令事成归王，事败独身坐耳。 
现代文：假使事情成功了，功劳归王所有，失败了，我们自己承担罪责！ 
English: If it succeeds, the credit goes to the king, if it fails, we take the blame!

古文：汉八年，上从东垣还，过赵，贯高等乃壁人柏人，要之置厕。
现代文：汉八年，皇上从东垣回来，路过赵国，贯高等人在柏人县馆舍的夹壁墙中隐藏武士，想要拦截杀死他，放到隐蔽的地方。
English: In the eighth year of the Han Dynasty, when the emperor was returning from Donggaki and passing through Zhao Province, a high-ranking person hid a samurai in the wall of the Baer County Hall, wanted to intercept and kill him, and put him in a hidden place.

古文：上过欲宿，心动问曰： 县名为何？ 
现代文：皇上经过那里想要留宿，心有所动，就问道： 这个县的名称叫什么？ 
English: The Emperor was passing through and wanted to stay there. He was moved and asked, "What is the name of this prefecture?"

古文：曰： 柏人。 
现代文：回答说： 柏人。 
English: He answered, "From the people of Pak.

古文： 柏人者，迫於人也！ 
现代文： 柏人，是被别人迫害啊！ 
English: The Baha'is are being persecuted by others!

古文：不宿而去。
现代文：没有留宿就离开了。
English: They left without a place to stay.

古文：汉九年，贯高怨家知其谋，乃上变告之。
现代文：汉九年，贯高的仇人知道了他的计谋，就向皇上秘密报告贯高谋反。
English: In the ninth year of the Han Dynasty, the enemies of Guan Gao learned of his plot and secretly reported to the emperor that Guan Gao was plotting a rebellion.

古文：於是上皆并逮捕赵王、贯高等。十馀人皆争自刭，贯高独怒骂曰： 谁令公为之？
现代文：于是把赵王、贯高等人同时逮捕，十多人都要争相刎颈自杀，只有贯高愤怒地骂道： 谁让你们自杀？
English: As a result, Zhao Wang and Guan Gao were arrested at the same time, and more than ten people tried to commit suicide. Only Guan Gao angrily scolded: Who made you commit suicide?

古文：今王实无谋，而并捕王；公等皆死，谁白王不反者！ 
现代文：如今这事，大王确实没有参与，却要一块被逮捕；你们都死了，谁替大王辩白他没有谋反呢！ 
English: Now it is true that the great king did not take part in this affair, but he is to be arrested all together; you are all dead, and who will argue for the great king that he did not conspire?

古文：乃轞车胶致，与王诣长安。
现代文：于是贯高被囚禁在栅槛密布而又坚固的囚车里和赵王一起押送到长安。
English: As a result, Guan Gao was imprisoned and transported to Chang'an together with Zhao Wang in a sturdy prisoner's wagon covered with bars.

古文：治张敖之罪。
现代文：审判张敖的罪行。
English: The trial of Zhang Ye's crime has begun.

古文：上乃诏赵群臣宾客有敢从王皆族。
现代文：皇上向赵国发布文告说群臣和宾客有追随赵王的全部灭族。
English: The Emperor issued a proclamation to the State of Zhao, saying that the courtiers and guests had followed the King of Zhao to exterminate all the tribes.

古文：贯高与客孟舒等十馀人，皆自髡钳，为王家奴，从来。
现代文：贯高和宾客孟舒等十多人，都自己剃掉头发，用铁圈锁住脖子，装作赵王的家奴跟着赵王来京。
English: More than ten people, including Guan Gao and the guest Meng Shu, all shaved their hair, locked their necks with iron rings, and pretended to be Zhao Wang's slaves to follow Zhao Wang to Beijing.

古文：贯高至，对狱，曰： 独吾属为之，王实不知。 
现代文：贯高一到，出庭受审，说： 只有我们这些人参予了，赵王确实不知。 
English: Once he arrived at the high school, he appeared in court for trial and said: Only we participated, Zhao Wang really did not know.

古文：吏治榜笞数千，刺剟，身无可击者，终不复言。
现代文：官吏审讯，严刑鞭打几千下，用烧红的铁条去刺，身上没有一处是完好的，但始终再没说话。
English: He was interrogated by officials, severely beaten with thousands of lashes, and stabbed with red-hot iron bars. Not a single part of his body was intact, but he never spoke again.

古文：吕后数言张王以鲁元公主故，不宜有此。上怒曰： 使张敖据天下，岂少而女乎！ 
现代文：吕后几次对高祖说到，赵王因为鲁元公主的缘故，不会有这种事，皇上愤怒地说： 若是让张敖占据了天下，难道还会考虑你的女儿吗！ 
English: Lv Hou said to Gao Zu several times that King Zhao would not do such a thing because of Lu Yuan's princess, and the emperor said angrily: If you let Zhang Ye occupy the world, will you still consider your daughter?

古文：不听。
现代文：他不听吕后的劝告。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：廷尉以贯高事辞闻，上曰： 壮士！
现代文：廷尉把审理贯高的情形和供词报告皇上，皇上说： 真是壮士啊！
English: The court lieutenant reported the circumstances of the trial and the confession to the emperor, and the emperor said: What a strong man!

古文：谁知者，以私问之。 
现代文：谁了解他，私下去问问他。 
English: If anyone knows anything about him, go and ask him in private.

古文：中大夫泄公曰： 臣之邑子，素知之。
现代文：中大夫泄公说： 我和他是同乡，一向了解他。
English: "I'm from the same town as him, so I've always known him," said Dr. Teukong.

古文：此固赵国立名义不侵为然诺者也。 
现代文：他本来就是为赵国树名立义、不肯背弃承诺的人。 
English: He was originally the one who stood up for Zhao Guoshu and refused to renege on his promise.

古文：上使泄公持节问之箯舆前。
现代文：皇上派泄公拿着符节到舆床前问他。
English: The emperor sent Le Gong to go to the bed of the emperor with the festival to ask him.

古文：仰视曰： 泄公邪？ 
现代文：贯高仰起头看看说： 是泄公吗？ 
English: Look up from your head and say: Is it a sacking?

古文：泄公劳苦如生平驩，与语，问张王果有计谋不。
现代文：泄公慰问、寒喧，像平常一样和他交谈，问张敖到底有没有参予这个计谋。
English: He talked with him as usual, and asked Zhang Ye whether he was involved in this scheme.

古文：高曰： 人情宁不各爱其父母妻子乎？
现代文：贯高说： 人的感情，有谁不爱自己的父亲妻子呢？
English: Guan Gao said: Human emotions, who doesn't love his father and wife?

古文：今吾三族皆以论死，岂以王易吾亲哉！
现代文：如今我三族都因为这件事已被判处死罪，难道我会为了赵王而牺牲自己的亲人吗！
English: Now that all three of my clans have been sentenced to death for this matter, will I sacrifice my relatives for the sake of King Zhao?

古文：顾为王实不反，独吾等为之。 
现代文：但是赵王确实没反，只有我们这些人参予了。 
English: But Zhao Wang really did not object, and only we participated.

古文：具道本指所以为者王不知状。
现代文：他详细地说出了所以要谋杀皇上的本意，和赵王不知内情的情状。
English: He explained in detail why he intended to murder the emperor, and how Zhao Wang did not know the inside story.

古文：於是泄公入，具以报，上乃赦赵王。
现代文：于是泄公进宫，把了解的情况详细地作了报告，皇上便赦免了赵王。
English: As a result, Deguang entered the palace and made a detailed report on the situation. The emperor then pardoned King Zhao.

古文：上贤贯高为人能立然诺，使泄公具告之，曰： 张王已出。 
现代文：皇上赞赏贯高是讲信义的人，就派泄公把赦免赵王的事告诉他，说： 赵王已从囚禁中释放出来。 
English: The emperor appreciated that Guan Gao was a person who spoke truth and justice, so he sent the magistrate to tell him about the pardon of Zhao Wang, saying: Zhao Wang has been released from imprisonment.

古文：因赦贯高。
现代文：因此也赦免贯高。
English: That's why he pardoned Kang Gao.

古文：贯高喜曰： 吾王审出乎？ 泄公曰： 然。 
现代文：贯高喜悦地说： 我们赵王确实被释放了吗？ 泄公说： 是。 
English: Guan Gao said with joy, "Are we Zhao Wang really released?" Ge Gong said, "Yes."

古文：泄公曰： 上多足下，故赦足下。 
现代文：泄公又说： 皇上称赞您，所以赦免了您。 
English: Deguang also said: The emperor praised you, so he pardoned you.

古文：贯高曰： 所以不死一身无馀者，白张王不反也。今王已出，吾责已塞，死不恨矣。
现代文：贯高说： 我被打得体无完肤而不死的原因，是为了辩白张敖王确实没有谋反，如今张王已被释放，我的责任已得到补救，死了也不遗憾啦。
English: Kuang Gao said, "The reason why I was beaten so badly that I did not die was to prove that King Zhang Ye did not rebel. Now that King Zhang has been released, my responsibility has been remedied, and I do not regret my death."

古文：且人臣有篡杀之名，何面目复事上哉！
现代文：况且为人臣子有了篡杀的名声，还有什么脸面再侍奉皇上呢！
English: Moreover, as a courtier with a reputation for murder, how could he serve the emperor any longer?

古文：纵上不杀我，我不愧於心乎？ 
现代文：纵然是皇上不杀我，我的内心不惭愧吗？ 
English: Even if the Emperor doesn't kill me, won't my heart be ashamed?

古文：乃仰绝肮，遂死。
现代文：于是仰起头来卡断咽喉而死。
English: As a result, he died with his head up and his throat cut.

古文：当此之时，名闻天下。
现代文：这个时候，他已经在天下闻名了。
English: By this time, he was famous all over the world.

古文：张敖已出，以尚鲁元公主故，封为宣平侯。
现代文：张敖被释放不久，因为娶鲁元公主的缘故，被封为宣平侯。
English: Not long after Zhang Ye was released, he was given the title of Prince of Xuanping because of his marriage to Princess Lu Yuan.

古文：於是上贤张王诸客，以钳奴从张王入关，无不为诸侯相、郡守者。
现代文：于是，皇上称赞张敖的宾客，凡是以钳奴身份跟随张王入关的，没有不做到诸侯、卿相、郡守的。
English: As a result, the emperor praised Zhang Ye's guests. All the guests who entered the customs with Zhang Ye as slaves were princes, ministers and county governors.

古文：及孝惠、高后、文帝、孝景时，张王客子孙皆得为二千石。
现代文：一直到孝惠、高后、文帝、孝景时，张王宾客的子孙们都做到二千石俸禄的高官。
English: Until the time of Xiao Hui, Gao Guo, Wen Di, and Xiao Jing, the descendants of Zhang Wang's guests were all high-ranking officials with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：张敖，高后六年薨。
现代文：张敖，在高后六年逝世。
English: Zhang Yao died six years after graduating from high school.

古文：子偃为鲁元王。
现代文：张敖的儿子张偃被封为鲁元王。
English: Zhang Ye's son Zhang Ye was crowned the King of Luyuan.

古文：以母吕后女故，吕后封为鲁元王。
现代文：又因张偃的母亲是吕后女儿的缘故，吕后封他做鲁元王。
English: Also, because Zhang Ye's mother was the daughter of Queen Lyu, Queen Lyu made him the King of Luyuan.

古文：元王弱，兄弟少，乃封张敖他姬子二人：寿为乐昌侯，侈为信都侯。
现代文：元王弱，兄弟小，就分封张敖其他姬妾生的两个儿子：张寿为乐昌侯，张侈为信都侯。
English: Yuan Wang was weak and his brothers were small, so he divided the two sons born to Zhang Ye's other concubines: Zhang Shou was the Marquis of Lechang, and Zhang Liang was the Marquis of Xindu.

古文：高后崩，诸吕无道，大臣诛之，而废鲁元王及乐昌侯、信诸侯。
现代文：高后逝世后，吕氏族人为非作歹，不走正道，被大臣们诛杀了，而且废掉了鲁元王以及乐昌侯、信都侯。
English: After Gao Guo's death, the Lv clan was accused of doing evil and not following the right path, and they were killed by the ministers, and King Lu Yuan and the governors of Lechang and Xindu were deposed.

古文：孝文帝即位，复封故鲁元王偃为南宫侯，续张氏。
现代文：孝文帝即位后，又分封原来鲁元王张偃为南宫侯，延续张氏的后代。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, the descendants of the original Luyuan King Zhang Ye, who were the descendants of the Zhang clan, were assigned to the Southern Court.

古文：太史公曰：张耳、陈馀，世传所称贤者；其宾客厮役，莫非天下俊桀，所居国无不取卿相者。
现代文：太史公说：张耳、陈馀在世间传说中都是贤能的人；他们的宾客奴仆，没有不是天下的英雄豪杰，在所居国，没有不取得卿相地位的。
English: Taishigong said: Zhang Er and Chen Yu are both sages in the world's legends; their guests and servants are not heroes of the world, and in the country where they live, they have not obtained the status of nobles.

古文：然张耳、陈馀始居约时，相然信以死，岂顾问哉。
现代文：然而，当初张耳、陈馀贫贱不得志时，彼此信任，誓同生死，难道不是义无反顾的吗？
English: However, at the beginning, when Zhang Er and Chen Yu were too poor to aspire, they trusted each other and swore to live and die together. Wasn't there no turning back?

古文：及据国争权，卒相灭亡，何乡者相慕用之诚，後相倍之戾也！
现代文：等他们有了地盘，争权夺利的时候，最终还是相互残杀，恨不是把对方消灭。
English: When they have a territory and compete for power and profit, they will eventually kill each other.

古文：岂非以势利交哉？名誉虽高，宾客虽盛，所由殆与大伯、延陵季子异矣。
现代文：为什么以前是那样真诚地相互倾慕、信任，而后来又相互背叛，彼此的态度是那样的乖张、暴戾呢？难道不是为了权势、利害相互交往吗？虽然他们的名誉高、宾客多，而他们的作为恐怕和吴太伯、延陵季子相比，就大相径庭了。
English: Why did they sincerely admire and trust each other in the past, but later betrayed each other, and their attitudes toward each other were so perverse and violent? Wasn't it for the sake of power and interests that they interacted with each other? Although their reputation was high and they had many guests, their actions were probably quite different from those of Wu Tai Bo and Yanling Qizi.

