古文：黄帝曰：余以小针为细物也，夫子乃言上合之于天，下合之于地，中合之于人，余以为过针之意矣，愿闻其故。
现代文：黄帝说：我以为用小针治疗疾病是微小的事务，先生却说它上合于天，下合于地，中合于人，我觉得这是过分夸大了它的作用，我想知道其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said, "I thought that using a small needle to treat a disease was a small matter, but my teacher said that it fits the sky, the earth, and the people. I think this is an exaggeration of its role. I want to know the reason.

古文：岐伯曰：何物大于天乎？
现代文：岐伯道：天能包罗万物，还有什么能够比天更大呢？
English: Qibao: Heaven can contain all things. What else can be greater than heaven?

古文：夫大于针者，惟五兵者焉。五兵者，死之备也，非生之具。
现代文：对于人体的作用而言，大于针的，只有五种兵器，但五种兵器都是在战争中用来杀人的，而不是治病救人的。
English: As far as the role of the human body is concerned, there are only five weapons greater than the needle, but all five weapons are used in war to kill people, not to cure people.

古文：且夫人者，天地之镇也，其不可不参乎？
现代文：而人是天地间最可宝贵的，针刺能够治病活人，小针难道还不能与天、地相参合吗？
English: But human beings are the most precious things in the world. A pinprick can cure a living person. Can't a small pin still be compatible with heaven and earth?

古文：夫治民者，亦唯针焉。
现代文：在治疗人们疾病的过程中，唯有小针不可缺少。
English: In the process of treating people's diseases, only small needles are indispensable.

古文：夫针之与五兵，其孰小乎？
现代文：从这种意义上讲，针和五种兵器的作用，谁大谁小不是很清楚了吗？
English: In this sense, the role of the needle and the five weapons, who is bigger and who is smaller, is not very clear?

古文：黄帝曰：病之生时，有喜怒不测，饮食不节，阴气不足，阳气有余，营气不行，乃发为痈疽。
现代文：黄帝问道：疾病的发生，或因为喜怒无常，或因为饮食没有节制，造成人体阴气不足，阳气有余，使营气的运行阻滞，便会形成痈疽病。
English: Huangdi asked: the occurrence of the disease, either because of temperament, or because the diet is not controlled, causing the human body to have insufficient yin and excess yang, blocking the operation of ying qi, will form gangrene.

古文：阴阳不通，两热相搏，乃化为浓，小针能取之乎？
现代文：由于阴阳之气阻滞不通，体内有余的阳热与气机郁滞产生的热邪互相搏结，熏蒸肌肤而化为脓，这样的病症能用小针治疗吗？
English: Because the yin and yang qi blockage is not through, the excess yang heat in the body and the heat evil caused by the stagnation of the qi machine fight each other, fumigate the skin and turn into pus, can such a disease be treated with a small needle?

古文：岐伯曰：圣人不能使化者，为之邪不可留也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：高明的医生发现这种病症的迹象就进行早期治疗，使病邪不能停留在体内而发生病变。
English: Qi Bo replied, "A clever doctor will find the signs of this disease and treat it at an early stage, so that the disease cannot stay in the body and cause lesions.

古文：故两军相当，旗帜相望，白刃陈于中野者，此非一日之谋也。
现代文：这就如同两军作战，旌旗相望，刀光剑影遍于旷野，绝不是一天的谋划。
English: This is like two armies fighting, waving flags at each other, swords and swords all over the wilderness, it is by no means a one-day plan.

古文：能使其民，令行禁止，士卒无白刃之难者，非一日之教也，须臾之得也。
现代文：能够使百姓服从政令，做到令行禁止，国力强大则可使士卒在境内免于蒙受兵戈、战乱的苦难，这局面也并非是顷刻之间或一时一日教化的结果。
English: It is possible to make the people obey the government order and prohibit the order, and if the national strength is strong, it can make the soldiers free from the sufferings of war and war in the territory. This situation is not the result of instant or one-day enlightenment.

古文：夫至使身被痈疽之病，脓血之聚者，不亦离道远乎？
现代文：治病如同治国，等到身体已经患了痈疽之病，以致大脓恶血已经形成，这时再用小针治疗，这不是离为医之道太远了吗？
English: Treating a disease is like governing a country. Wait until the body has suffered from the disease of gangrene, so that the large boil of bad blood has formed, and then treat it with a small needle. Isn't this too far from the way of being a doctor?

古文：夫痈疽之生，脓血之成也，不从天下，不从地出，积微之所生也。故圣人自治于未有形也，愚者遭其已成也。
现代文：从痈疽的产生直到脓血的生成，既不是从天而降，也并非从地而生，而是病邪侵犯机体后，没有得到及时的治疗而逐渐积累形成的。
English: From the emergence of gangrene to the formation of blood stasis, it is neither from the sky nor from the earth, but it is gradually accumulated after the disease invades the body and is not treated in time.

古文：黄帝曰：其已形，不予遭；脓已成，不予见，为之奈何？
现代文：所以高明的医生能够防微杜渐，早期治疗，不使疾病发展；愚笨的医生，不懂得早期防治，在病患已经形成之后才面对它。黄帝问：痈疽已经形成，而未予重视；已经化脓，却没有发现，这该怎么办呢？
English: Therefore, a clever doctor can prevent micro-tuquan, treat early, and prevent the disease from developing; a stupid doctor does not understand early prevention and control, and only faces it after the disease has formed. Huang Di asked: Gangrene has formed, but it has not been paid attention to; it has become infected, but it has not been found, what should I do?

古文：岐伯曰：脓已成，十死一生，故圣人弗使已成，而明为良方，著之竹帛，使能者踵而传之后世，无有终时者，为其不予遭也。
现代文：岐伯答道：痈疽已经化脓，常是十死一生。所以高明的医生能早期诊断，不等疾病形成就消灭在萌芽状态，并将一些好的疗法，记载在竹简、锦帛之上，使有才能的人能够继承下来，世代相传，使医生不再犯上述类似的错误。
English: Qibo replied, "The gangrene is already infected, and it is often a matter of life and death. Therefore, a clever doctor can diagnose it at an early stage, eliminate it in the bud as soon as the disease is formed, and record some good treatments on bamboo slips and brocade, so that talented people can inherit it and pass it down from generation to generation, so that doctors will no longer make similar mistakes as mentioned above.

古文：黄帝曰：其已有脓血而后遭乎？不导之以小针治乎？
现代文：黄帝问：痈疽已有了脓血之后才治疗，可不可以用小针刺治呢？
English: Huang Di asked: the treatment of anthrax is done after the blood has been collected. Can it be treated with a small needle prick?

古文：岐伯曰：以小治小者，其功小；以大治大者，多害，故其已成脓血者，其唯砭石、铍锋之所取也。
现代文：小针能做引流、排脓治疗吗？岐伯说：用小针刺治小痈疽，功效小；用大针刺治大痈疽，又可能会产生不良后果。所以对已经形成脓血的，只能用砭石，或用铍针、锋针及时排脓来进行治疗。
English: Can small needles be used for drainage and drainage treatment? Qi Bo said: small needles are used to treat small gangrene, and the effect is small; large needles are used to treat large gangrene, and may have adverse consequences. Therefore, for those who have formed blood stains, they can only be treated with vermiculite, or with hooks and needles for timely drainage.

古文：黄帝曰：多害者其不可全乎？
现代文：黄帝问：有些痈疽病已经向恶化方面发展，还能治愈吗？
English: Huang Di asked: some of the gangrene has developed to the worse, can it be cured?

古文：岐伯曰：其在逆顺焉。
现代文：岐伯答道：这主要根据病症的逆顺来决定。
English: Qi Bo replied: This is mainly determined according to the sequence of the disease.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻逆顺。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道病症的逆顺。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know the cause of the disease.

古文：岐伯曰：以为伤者，其白眼青，黑眼小，是一逆也；内药而呕者，是二逆也；腹痛，渴甚，是三逆也；肩项中不便，是四逆也；音嘶，色脱，是五逆也。
现代文：岐伯道：痈疽为害，有五种逆症：白眼球显青色，黑眼球缩小是逆症之一；服药后即呕吐是逆症之二；腹痛并且口渴剧烈是逆症之三；肩背颈项转动受限是逆症之四；声音嘶哑，面无血色是逆症之五。
English: Qibo said: There are five kinds of contraindications caused by anthrax: the white eyeball is cyanotic, and the shrinking of the black eyeball is one of the contraindications; vomiting after taking medicine is the second contraindication; abdominal pain and severe thirst is the third contraindication; limited shoulder, back and neck rotation is the fourth contraindication; hoarse voice, bloodless face is the fifth contraindication.

古文：除此五者，为顺矣。
现代文：除此五种逆症外，其他便是顺症了。
English: In addition to these five contraindications, the others are concomitant diseases.

古文：黄帝曰：诸病皆有逆顺，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝问道：各种病都有逆顺，能让我知道吗？
English: Huang Di asked: All kinds of diseases have ups and downs, can you let me know?

古文：岐伯曰：腹胀、身热、脉大，是一逆也；腹鸣而满，四肢清泄，其脉大，是二逆也；衄而不止，脉大，是三逆也；咳而溲血脱形，其脉小劲，是四逆也；咳，脱形，身热，脉小以疾，是谓五逆也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：腹胀满、身发热、脉大，为邪盛正虚，是一逆；腹满而肠鸣、四肢厥冷、脉大，为阴证得阳脉，是二逆；鼻出血不止、脉大，为阴虚而邪实，是三逆；咳嗽、小便尿血、形体消瘦、脉小而急劲，是四逆；咳嗽、形体消瘦而脱陷、身热、脉小而急疾，为正气衰而出现真脏脉，是五逆。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Bloated belly, feverish body, and large pulse are the inverse of evil and prosperity, respectively; full belly and rumbling bowels, cold limbs, and large pulse are the inverse of yin and yang; nosebleed without stopping, large pulse are the inverse of yin and poverty, respectively; cough, blood in urine, thin body, small and rapid pulse are the inverse of four; cough, thin body and collapse, feverish body, small and rapid pulse are the inverse of five.

古文：如是者，不过十五日而死矣。
现代文：如果出现上述五逆症，十五、六天之内就会死亡。
English: If the above-mentioned five contrarieties occur, they will die within fifteen to six days.

古文：其腹大，胀，四末清，脱形，泄甚，是一逆也；腹胀便血，其脉大时绝，是二逆也；咳，溲血，形肉脱，脉搏，是三逆也；呕血，胸满引背，脉小而疾，是四逆也；咳，呕，腹胀，且飧泄，其脉绝，是五逆也。
现代文：腹大而胀、四肢厥冷、形体非常消瘦、泄泻不止，为脾阳已败，是一逆；腹胀满、大便下血、脉大而有间歇，为孤阳将脱，是二逆；咳嗽、小便溺血、形体极度消瘦、脉坚搏指，为胃气已绝，是三逆；呕血、胸部满闷连及背部、脉小而疾速，为真元大亏而邪气仍盛，是四逆；上有咳嗽、呕吐，中有腹胀，下有完谷不化的泄泻，脉伏似绝，为邪气独盛、真元已脱，是五逆。
English: Bloated and distended abdomen, cold limbs, very thin body, continuous diarrhea, the spleen and yang have been defeated, is the opposite; bloated belly, blood in the stool, large and intermittent pulse, the sun will be removed, is the second reverse; cough, urine and blood, extremely thin body, strong pulse, the stomach is exhausted, is the third reverse; vomit blood, chest full of congestion and back, small and rapid pulse, the evil spirit is still strong, is the fourth reverse; there is coughing, vomiting, there is bloating, there is persistent diarrhea, the pulse seems to be exhausted, is the evil spirit

古文：如是者，不及一时而死矣。
现代文：若出现这五种逆症的，一天之内就会死亡。
English: If you have these five adverse conditions, you will die within a day.

古文：工不察此者而刺之，是谓逆治。
现代文：医生对这些危象，若不详加审察而妄加针刺治疗，就称为逆治。
English: If the doctor does not examine these critical conditions in detail, but instead opts for acupuncture treatment, this is referred to as inverse treatment.

古文：黄帝曰：夫子之言针甚骏，以配天地，上数天文，下度地纪，内别五脏，外次六腑，经脉二十八会，尽有周纪。
现代文：黄帝问道：先生你说针刺的作用很大，能与天地相配，上取法于天文，下取法于地理，内联五脏，外通六腑，并能疏通经脉而宣导气血，使二十八脉的循行畅通。
English: Huang Di asked: Sir, you said that acupuncture has a great effect, can match the heaven and earth, take the upper method from astronomy, take the lower method from geography, connect the five internal organs and the six external organs, and can dredge the meridians and promote qi and blood, so that the twenty-eight meridians can flow smoothly.

古文：能杀生人，不能起死者，子能反之乎？
现代文：但是，针刺误用就会伤害人的性命，而针刺不能救治生命垂危的人，先生你有用针刺逆转生命的方法吗？
English: However, the misuse of acupuncture can harm a person's life, and acupuncture cannot save the life of a dying person, sir, do you have a way to use acupuncture to reverse life?

古文：岐伯曰：能杀生人，不能起死者也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：错误的针刺的确会伤害人的性命，正确的针刺也不能救活死人。
English: Qi Bo replied, "A wrong needle prick can indeed harm a person's life, and a correct needle prick cannot save a dead person.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻之则为不仁，然愿闻其道，弗行于人。
现代文：黄帝说：我听到这些，感到太缺乏仁爱了，我想知道其中的道理，以免再错施于人。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "When I heard this, I felt that there was too little benevolence. I want to know the reason for this, so that I don't treat people wrongly again."

古文：岐伯曰：是明道也，其必然也，其如刀剑之可以杀人，如饮酒使人醉也，虽勿诊，犹可知矣。
现代文：岐伯道：这是非常明显的道理，出现这种情况是用针不当的必然结果。就好像刀剑可以杀人，饮酒可以醉人一样，即使不加诊察，也可明白其中的道理。
English: Qi Bo said: This is a very obvious reason. This situation is the inevitable result of improper use of needles. Just as a sword can kill people and alcohol can intoxicate people, even without a medical examination, you can understand the reason.

古文：黄帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：请让我立即知道其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know everything immediately."

古文：岐伯曰：人之所受气者，谷也。
现代文：岐伯道：人身所受之气，是由谷物化生而成的。
English: Qibao: The qi that the human body receives is created from the transformation of grain.

古文：谷之所注者，胃也。胃者，水谷气血之海也。
现代文：谷物聚集的地方是胃，胃就像是水谷气血的大海。
English: The place where the grains gather is the stomach. The stomach is like a trough, a sea of qi and blood.

古文：海之所行云气者，天下也。
现代文：海水蒸发上升形成为云气，云气在广阔的天空浮游。
English: Seawater evaporates and rises to form clouds, which float in the vast sky.

古文：胃之所出气血者，经隧也。
现代文：在人体，胃所化生的气血，则随着十二经脉流动。
English: In the human body, the qi and blood generated by the stomach flow with the twelve meridians.

古文：而隧者，五脏六腑之大络也，迎而夺之而已矣。
现代文：经脉，是联络五脏六腑的通道，如果在这些通道的要害部位，运用逆着经气运行的方向进行针刺，就会泻真气而导致死亡。
English: The meridians are the channels that connect the internal organs and the external organs. If acupuncture is performed in the direction opposite to the direction of the meridians in the critical parts of these channels, it will cause death due to diarrhea.

古文：黄帝曰：上下有数乎？
现代文：黄帝问：经脉的要害部位在人体上下有一定的数目和部位吗？
English: Huang Di asked: Are there a certain number and parts of the key parts of the meridians in the human body?

古文：岐伯曰：迎之五里，中道而止。
现代文：岐伯答道：如果用迎而夺之的泻法，误刺了手阳明大肠经的手五里穴，就会使脏气运行到中途而停止。
English: Qi Bo replied, "If you use the laxative method, you will mistakenly pierce the five-mile hole through the large intestine, which will cause the dirty gas to run halfway and stop.

古文：五至而已，五往而脏之气尽矣。
现代文：某一脏的真气，一般是误刺五次便会竭尽，所以如果连续误治五次就会使某一脏的真气泻尽。
English: The true qi of a certain filth is usually exhausted after five times of mis-pricking, so if it is mis-treated five times in a row, the true qi of a certain filth will be exhausted.

古文：故五五二十五而竭其输矣，此所谓夺其天气者也。
现代文：如果误刺五五二十五次，五脏的真气都会竭绝，此所谓劫夺了人的天真之气，而使人气绝而死。
English: If a person is stabbed 5525 times by mistake, the true qi of the five internal organs will be exhausted. This so-called robbery of a person's innocent qi will cause the person to die of exhaustion.

古文：非能绝其命而倾其寿者也。
现代文：所以，不是针刺本身能够损伤人的性命，而是不知针刺治疗禁忌的人，误刺而劫夺天真之气的结果。
English: Therefore, it is not acupuncture itself that can damage a person's life, but the result of robbing the innocence of those who do not know the taboo of acupuncture treatment.

古文：岐伯曰：窥门而刺之者，死于家中；入门而刺之者，死于堂上。
现代文：岐伯道：在气血出入的要害部位妄行针刺，如果误刺较轻，病人能回到家中而死亡；如果误刺较重，病人会当即死在医生的诊疗室。
English: Qibao said: If the needling is done at the critical point where qi and blood enter and exit, if the mis-sting is minor, the patient can return home and die; if the mis-sting is serious, the patient will die immediately in the doctor's clinic.

古文：黄帝曰：善乎方，明哉道，请著之玉版，以为重宝，传之后世，以为刺禁，令民勿敢犯也。
现代文：黄帝说：你讲得这些针刺方法很好，道理也很明确，请把它刻录在玉版上，作为最珍贵的文献，留传后世，作为针刺治疗的戒律，使医生们不敢再触犯。
English: Huangdi said: You have explained these acupuncture methods very well, and the reason is very clear. Please engrave it on the jade plate, as the most precious document, and pass it down to future generations, as a precept of acupuncture treatment, so that doctors dare not violate it again.

