古文：李纲下绍兴二年，除观文殿学士、湖广宣抚使兼知潭州。
现代文：绍兴二年，李纲被任命为观文殿学士、湖广宣抚使兼知潭州。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, Li Gang was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and the envoy of Hukang and Zhitanzhou.

古文：是时，荆湖江、湘之间，流民溃卒群聚为盗贼，不可胜计，多者至数万人，纲悉荡平之。
现代文：当时，在荆湖、江湘等路，流民和从前线溃散下来的士兵群起变为盗贼，其数量不可胜计，多的达到几万人，李纲将他们全部剿灭了。
English: At that time, in Jinghu, Jiangxiang and other roads, the displaced people and soldiers scattered from the front line flocked to become thieves, and their number was incalculable, reaching tens of thousands. Li Gang annihilated them all.

古文：上言： 荆湖、国之上流，其地数千里，诸葛亮谓之用武之国。
现代文：李纲上书说： 荆湖，是国家形势的上游，其面积几千里，诸葛亮说 ：它是军事战略要地。 
English: Li Gang said in the letter: Jinghu is the upstream of the national situation, its area is several thousand miles, Zhuge Liang said: it is a military strategic place.

古文：今朝廷保有东南，控驭西北。
现代文：现在朝廷保有东南，控制、驾驭西北。
English: Now the imperial court holds the southeast and controls the northwest.

古文：加鼎、澧、岳、鄂若荆南一带，皆当屯宿重兵，倚为形势，使四川之号令可通，而襄、汉之声援可接，乃有恢复中原之渐。 议未及行，而谏官徐俯、刘斐劾纲，罢为提举西京崇福宫。
现代文：像鼎、澧、岳、鄂以及荆南一带，都应屯驻重兵，以占领有利地势，使朝廷的号令可以通达四川，使襄、汉可以得到声援，这样才可以慢慢恢复中原。 李纲的意见还来不及施行，谏官徐俯、刘斐又弹劾李纲，李纲被罢为提举西京崇福宫。
English: Like the areas of Ding, Lu, Yue, Hubei, and Jingnan, they should station heavy troops to occupy advantageous positions, so that the imperial order can reach Sichuan, so that Xiang and Han can receive solidarity, so that the Central Plains can be slowly restored. Li Gang's opinion was too late to be implemented, and eunuchs Xu Di and Liu Fei also impeached Li Gang, and Li Gang was dismissed for elevating the West Beijing Chongfu Palace.

古文：四年冬，金人及伪齐来攻，纲具防御三策，谓： 伪齐悉兵南下，境内必虚。傥出其不意，电发霆击，捣颍昌以临畿甸，彼必震惧还救，王师追蹑，必胜之理，此上策也。
现代文：绍兴四年冬，金人和伪齐兵南侵，李纲提出三条防御敌人的策略，他说： 伪齐倾兵南下，其境内一定空虚，倘若出其不意，如电闪雷鸣般攻占颍昌，逼近京城一带，伪齐一定会感到惊恐而回兵救援，宋军趁势跟踪追击，必定会取得胜利，这是上策。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Shaoxing, when the Jin and the pseudo-Qi soldiers invaded the south, Li Gang proposed three strategies to defend against the enemy. He said: The pseudo-Qi soldiers went south, and their territory must be empty. If they were caught unawares, and they captured Fuchang like lightning and thunder and approached the Beijing area, the pseudo-Qi would surely be frightened and return to rescue the soldiers. The Song Army would take advantage of the situation to pursue and pursue, and they would certainly win. This is the best strategy.

古文：若驻跸江上，号召上流之兵，顺流而下，以助声势，金鼓旌旗，千里相望，则敌人虽众，不敢南渡。
现代文：如果陛下停驻在长江边上，号令上游的军队，顺流而下，增加声势，使千里之间，旌旗相望，战鼓之声相闻，则敌人虽然多，也不敢南渡长江。
English: If His Majesty were to stop at the edge of the Yangtze River and order the troops upstream to march down the river and raise their voices, so that for thousands of miles, flags would wave and the sound of war drums would be heard, then although there would be many enemies, they would not dare to cross the Yangtze River to the south.

古文：然后以重师进屯要害之地，设奇邀击，绝其粮道，俟彼遁归，徐议攻讨，此中策也。
现代文：然后以重兵进屯战略要地，用计进行拦击，断绝其粮道，等他们往回逃跑后，再慢慢商议发动进攻，进行讨伐，这是中策。
English: Then, with heavy troops, they enter strategic places, use strategies to intercept, cut off their food supply, wait for them to flee back, and then slowly discuss launching an attack and carrying out a crusade. This is the middle strategy.

古文：万一借亲征之名，为顺动之计，使卒伍溃散，控扼失守，敌得乘间深入，州县望风奔溃，则其患有不可测矣。
现代文：如果陛下只是借亲征的名义而不积极措置，任形势发展，使军队溃散，所占据的要地失守，则敌人可以乘机深入，各州县望风溃逃，其祸患将不可测料。
English: If His Majesty merely borrows the name of his relatives and does not take active measures, allows the situation to develop, causes the army to break up, and loses the important places occupied, then the enemy can take the opportunity to go deeper, and the states and counties will watch the wind and flee, and the disaster will be immeasurable.

古文：往岁，金人利在侵掠，又方时暑，势必还师，朝廷因得以还定安集。
现代文：往年，敌人主要为了劫掠财物，又正当夏天，所以必定会撤兵，朝廷因而得以回复安宁、团聚。
English: In previous years, the enemy was mainly to loot property, and it was summer, so they would certainly withdraw their troops, so the imperial court was able to restore peace and reunion.

古文：今伪齐导之而来，势不徒还，必谋割据。
现代文：现在由伪齐人引导金人而来，其势不会空手返回，必定会图谋割占土地。
English: Now the pseudo-Qi people are leading the Jin people to come, and they will not return empty-handed, but will certainly try to occupy the land.

古文：奸民溃卒从而附之，声势鸱张，苟或退避，则无以为善后之策。
现代文：一些奸民溃兵加以附从，扩张声势，如果退避，则将无法对付金人的割地要求。
English: Some traitors and routed soldiers followed them, expanding their influence. If they retreated, they would not be able to deal with Jin's land-cutting demands.

古文：昔苻坚以百万众侵晋，而谢安以偏师破之。
现代文：过去苻坚率百万人侵略晋，谢安以一支小部队将他们打败了。
English: In the past, Yan Jian led a million people to invade Jin, but Xie An defeated them with a small army.

古文：使朝廷措置得宜，将士用命，安知北敌不授首于我？
现代文：如果朝廷措置得当，将士服从命令，怎么知道金和伪齐将不向我们投降呢？
English: If the imperial court takes proper measures and the soldiers obey orders, how do we know that Kim and Phu Quy will not surrender to us?

古文：顾一时机会所以应之者如何耳。
现代文：只是看一时的机会如何利用罢了。
English: It's just a matter of seeing how to take advantage of a temporary opportunity.

古文：望降臣章与二三大臣熟议之。 诏：纲所陈，今日之急务，付三省、枢密院施行。
现代文：希望将臣的奏章交给二、三个大臣好好讨论一下。 高宗下诏：李纲所陈述的，是当今的急务，将它交给三省、枢密院施行。
English: Gao Zong issued the following edict: What Li Gang stated is today's urgent business, and it should be handed over to the three provinces and the Privy Council for implementation.

古文：时韩世忠屡败金人于淮、楚间，有旨督刘光世、张浚统兵渡河，车驾进发至江上劳军。
现代文：当时韩世忠在淮、楚之间多次打败金人，朝廷传旨督促刘光世、张俊统兵渡过黄河，皇上到长江边上慰劳军队。
English: At that time, Han Shizhong repeatedly defeated the Jin between Huai and Chu, and the imperial court issued an order to urge Liu Guangxi and Zhang Jun to cross the Yellow River, and the emperor went to the edge of the Yangtze River to comfort the troops.

古文：五年，诏问攻战、守备、措置、绥怀之方，纲奏：
现代文：绍兴五年，高宗下诏询问攻战、守备、措置、安抚的策略，李纲上奏：
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Gao Zong issued an edict inquiring about the strategy of attack, defense, measures, and appeasement. Li Gang recited:

古文：愿陛下勿以敌退为可喜，而以仇敌未报为可愤；勿以东南为可安，而以中原未复、赤县神州陷于敌国为可耻；勿以诸将屡捷为可贺，而以军政未修、士气未振而强敌犹得以潜逃为可虞。
现代文： 希望陛下不要因为敌人退兵而感到高兴，而要为敌仇未报感到愤恨；不要将东南作为安身之所，而要为中原没有恢复、神州大地沦陷于敌国感到可耻；不要以诸将屡奏捷报为可贺，而要为军政未修、士气未振、强敌仍然可以撤逃感到忧虑。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not feel happy because the enemy has withdrawn, but will feel resentment for the enemy's failure to repay; will not regard the Southeast as a place of refuge, but will feel shame for the failure to recover the Central Plains and the fall of the Mainland of China into the enemy's country; will not congratulate the generals for their repeated reports of success, but will be worried that the military and political situation has not been repaired, morale has not been boosted, and a strong enemy can still escape.

古文：则中兴之期，可指日而俟。
现代文：能够如此，则中兴之期，指日可待。
English: If this can be done, ZTE's time will come.

古文：议者或谓敌马既退，当遂用兵为大举之计，臣窃以为不然。
现代文： 有人认为敌人已经退兵，应当马上用兵进行讨伐，臣个人不这样认为。
English: Some people thought that the enemy had withdrawn and that the army should be used immediately for a crusade, but the vassal personally did not think so.

古文：生理未固，而欲浪战以侥幸，非制胜之术也。
现代文：国家的根本没有稳固就轻率地进行讨伐想侥幸取胜，这不是制胜的方法。
English: The country is not stable at all, and it is not the way to win if you want to win by a fluke.

古文：高祖先保关中，故能东向与项籍争。
现代文：汉高祖先保有关中，所以才能向东与项籍争天下。
English: Henkel's ancestral home is in the middle of the country, which is why it is able to compete for the world with other companies in the East.

古文：光武先保河内，故能降赤眉、铜马之属。
现代文：汉光武帝先保住河内，所以才能让赤眉、铜马等归服。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu saved Hanoi first, which is why he was able to subdue the Red Eyebrows, Bronze Horses, and others.

古文：肃宗先保灵武，故能破安、史而复两京。
现代文：唐肃宗先保有灵武，所以才能打败安禄山、史思明而恢复两京。
English: Tang Su Zong preserved the spirit of martial arts, so he was able to defeat Anlu Shan and Shi Siming and restore the two capitals.

古文：今朝廷以东南为根本，将士暴露之久，财用调度之烦，民力科取之困，苟不大修守备，痛自料理，先为自固之计，何以能万全而制敌？
现代文：现在朝廷以东南作为根本，将士在野外劳累时间长，财用调度频繁，百姓被赋役困扰，如果不认真修整守备，深刻地进行国内的自我治理，先使自己的根本稳固，则怎么能够确保安全而克敌制胜呢？
English: At present, the imperial court takes the southeast as the foundation, the soldiers are tired in the field for a long time, the financial scheduling is frequent, and the people are plagued by enlistment. If you do not seriously improve the defense, profoundly carry out domestic self-governance, and first make your own foundation stable, how can you ensure safety and defeat the enemy?

古文：议者又谓敌人既退，当且保据一隅，以苟目前之安，臣又以为不然。秦师三伐晋，以报殽之师；诸葛亮佐蜀，连年出师以图中原，不如是，不足以立国。
现代文： 又有人认为敌人已经撤退，应该暂且占据东南一隅，以求得目前的苟安，臣又不表示赞同，秦军三次讨伐晋，以报在肴殳地一战之仇；诸葛亮辅佐西蜀，连年出兵以图中原，因为不这样，不能立国。
English: Others thought that the enemy had already retreated, and that they should temporarily occupy a corner of the southeast in order to obtain the current peace, but the minister did not agree. The Qin army fought three times in Jin to avenge the first battle in Shanhaiguan; Zhuge Liang assisted Sosa and Xishu, and sent troops to the Central Plains year after year, because otherwise, the country could not be established.

古文：高祖在汉中，谓萧何曰： 吾亦欲东。
现代文：汉高祖在汉中，对萧何说： 我也想向东去。 
English: In Hanzhong, Han Gaozu said to Xiao He: I also want to go to the east.

古文：光武破隗嚣，既平陇，复望蜀。
现代文：汉光武帝攻破隗嚣，平定了陇地，又将视线投向蜀。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu broke through the clamor, leveled the badlands, and set his sights on Shu.

古文：此皆以天下为度，不如是，不足以混一区宇，戡定祸乱。
现代文：这些都是从天下整体考虑，不这样，不能够统一国家，平定祸乱。
English: These are considered from the perspective of the world as a whole. Otherwise, it is impossible to unify the country and quell the calamity.

古文：况祖宗境土，岂可坐视沦陷，不务恢复乎？
现代文：何况祖宗的疆土，怎么能够坐视其被敌人占领，而不致力于恢复呢？
English: Moreover, how can we sit back and watch our ancestral territory be occupied by the enemy and not work to restore it?

古文：今岁不征，明年不战，使敌势益张，而吾之所纠合精锐士马，日以损耗，何以图敌？
现代文：今年不征讨，明年不进攻，使敌人的力量更加增大，而我们所召集的精锐兵马，日益损耗，怎么能够打败敌人？
English: If we don't wage war this year and don't attack next year, the enemy's strength will increase even more. But how can we defeat the enemy if the elite soldiers and horses we have gathered are increasingly depleted?

古文：谓宜于防守既固、军政既修之后，即议攻讨，乃为得计。
现代文：主张在防守稳固、军政修治之后，即发动进攻，才是得计。
English: It is only prudent to launch an attack after the defense is solid and the military and political situation has been rectified.

古文：此二者，守备、攻战之序也。
现代文：这两者，是守备、攻战的顺序。
English: These two are the order of defense and attack.

古文：至于守备之宜，则当科理淮南、荆襄，以为东南屏蔽。
现代文： 至于守备的合适地方，则应当经营和治理淮南、荆襄，以作为东南的屏障。
English: As for the suitable place for defense, Huainan and Jingxiang should be managed and governed to serve as a barrier to the southeast.

古文：夫六朝之所以能保有江左者，以强兵巨镇，尽在淮南、荆襄间。
现代文：六朝之所以保有江南，是因为其强兵重镇，都在淮南和荆襄之间。
English: The reason why the Six Dynasties kept the southern part of the Yangtze River was because their strongest military strongholds were between Huainan and Jingxiang.

古文：故以魏武之雄，苻坚、石勒之众，宇文、拓拔之盛，卒不能窥江表。
现代文：因此凭魏武的雄武，苻坚、石勒的众多，宇文、拓拔氏的强盛，最终仍不能窥视江南。
English: Therefore, it is still impossible to see the south of the Yangtze River with the strength of Weiwu, Shujian and Shile, and the prosperity of Uwen and Tuoba.

古文：后唐李氏有淮南，则可以都金陵，其后淮南为周世宗所取，遂以削弱。
现代文：后唐李氏占有淮南，则可以定都金陵，后来淮南被周世宗占据，其势力便因此而削弱。
English: After the Tang Li clan occupied Huainan, it could set its capital in Jinling. Later, Huainan was occupied by Zhou Shizong, and its power was weakened as a result.

古文：近年以来，大将拥重兵于江南，官吏守空城于江北，虽有天险而无战舰水军之制，故敌人得以侵扰窥伺。
现代文：近年以来，大将拥重兵在江南，官吏在江北守着空城，虽然有天险却没有配置战舰和水军，所以敌人才能够进行侵扰并窥伺江南。
English: In recent years, generals have been holding heavy troops in the south of the Yangtze River, and officials have been guarding the empty city in the north of the Yangtze River. Although there are natural hazards, warships and naval forces have not been deployed, so the enemy can only intrude and spy on the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：今当于淮之东西及荆襄置三大帅，屯重兵以临之，分遣偏师，进守支郡，加以战舰水军，上运下接，自为防守。
现代文：现在应该在淮河的东西以及荆襄设置三大帅，屯驻重兵以把守，并分别派遣小股军队驻守周围一些小郡，增加战舰和水军，使他们上下连接，各自防守。
English: It is now necessary to set up three major commands on the east and west of the Huaihe River and in Jingxiang, station heavy troops to guard, and separately dispatch small units of troops to guard some small counties around, increase warships and naval forces, so that they are connected up and down and defend themselves.

古文：敌马虽多，不敢轻犯，则藩篱之势盛而无穷之利也。
现代文：敌骑虽然多，也不敢轻易进犯，这样就使得作为江南屏障的淮南和荆襄的势力强大而国家可以获无穷之利。
English: Although there are many enemy horsemen, they do not dare to attack easily. This makes the forces of Huainan and Jingxiang, which are the southern barrier of the Yangtze River, strong and the country can gain infinite benefits.

古文：有守备矣，然后议攻战之利，分责诸路，因利乘便，收复京畿，以及故都。
现代文：有了守备，然后议讨攻战，分别责令各路，因利乘便，收复京畿和原来的都城。
English: Once the defense was in place, the offensive was discussed and ordered separately, with each side taking advantage of opportunities to recapture Gyeonggi and the former capital.

古文：断以必为之志而勿失机会，则以弱为强，取威定乱于一胜之间，逆臣可诛，强敌可灭，攻战之利，莫大于是。
现代文：心怀一定要完成中兴大业的志向，当机立断而不失去机会，则可以由一战之胜而从弱变强，建立威望，平定祸乱，诛杀叛臣，清灭强敌，攻战之利，没有比这更大的了。
English: Bearing in mind the aspiration of completing the great cause of ZTE, taking the opportunity without losing the opportunity, it is possible to change from weak to strong from the victory of the First World War, establish prestige, quell the calamity, fight and kill traitors, eliminate strong enemies, and win the war. There is nothing greater than this.

古文：若夫万乘所居，必择形胜以为驻跸之所，然后能制服中外，以图事业。
现代文： 说到皇上的居留之所，则一定要选择地理位置优越的地方以供驻跸，然后才能制服中外，图谋大业。
English: When it comes to the emperor's place of residence, it is necessary to choose a place with a superior geographical location to be stationed, and then to subdue China and other countries, and plan a great cause.

古文：建康自昔号帝王之宅，江山雄壮，地势宽博，六朝更都之。
现代文：建康自古号称帝王之都，江山雄伟，地势宽阔，六朝先后在这里建都。
English: Jiankang has been known as the imperial capital since ancient times. The country is majestic and the terrain is broad. Six dynasties successively built capitals here.

古文：臣昔举天下形势而言，谓关中为上，今以东南形势而言，则当以建康为便。
现代文：臣以前认为，就整个天下形势而言，以皇上居留关中为上策，现在就东南的形势而言，则应当以建康为合适。
English: Previously, the minister believed that as far as the overall situation of the country was concerned, it was best for the emperor to stay in Guanzhong, but now, as far as the situation in the southeast was concerned, it was appropriate to build Kang.

古文：今者，銮舆未复旧都，莫若且于建康权宜驻跸。
现代文：现在，皇上没有回到故都城，不如暂且在建康驻跸以作权宜之计。
English: Now that the emperor has not returned to the former capital, it is better to temporarily stay in Jiankang as a stopgap measure.

古文：愿诏守臣治城池，修宫阙，立官府，创营壁，使粗成规模，以待巡幸。
现代文：希望陛下诏令建康的官员整治城池，修造宫殿，设立官府，兴建营垒，大概形成规模，等待皇上巡幸。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will order the officials of Jiankang to rectify the city, build a palace, establish a government office, build a camp, and roughly form a scale, waiting for the emperor's inspection tour.

古文：盖有城池然后人心不恐，有官府然后政事可修，有营垒然后士卒可用，此措置之所当先也。
现代文：因为有了城池人心才不害怕，有了官府才能主持政事，有了营垒才能屯驻士兵，这些是朝廷应该先进行措置的。
English: The imperial court should take measures first, because it is not afraid to have the hearts of the people in the city, it is able to preside over political affairs with a government office, and it is able to station soldiers with a fortress.

古文：至于西北之民，皆陛下赤子，荷祖宗涵养之深，其心未尝一日忘宋。
现代文： 至于西北的百姓，都是陛下的赤子，深受祖宗养护之恩，他们的心未尝一天忘宋。
English: As for the people in the northwest, they are all His Majesty's babies, deeply protected by their ancestors, and their hearts have never forgotten the Song Dynasty.

古文：特制于强敌，陷于涂炭，而不能以自归。
现代文：只是被强敌控制，陷于困境，才不能归服朝廷。
English: It was only when it was controlled by a powerful enemy and was in a difficult situation that it was unable to submit to the imperial court.

古文：天威震惊，必有结纳来归、愿为内应者。
现代文：金人侵宋，上天震怒，西北臣民之中肯定会有人结伙归附朝廷，愿意作为内应。
English: The Jin invaded the Song Dynasty, provoking the wrath of Heaven. Among the subjects of Northwest China, there would certainly be people who would band together to attach themselves to the imperial court, and would be willing to act as a middleman.

古文：宜给之土田，予以爵赏，优加抚循，许其自新，使陷溺之民知所依怙，莫不感悦，益坚戴宋之心，此绥怀之所当先也。
现代文：应该给他们以田土，对他们进行封赏，用厚礼加以抚慰。允许他们弃旧从新，使沦陷区的臣民知道有所依靠，无不感激和高兴，更加坚定他们对宋的拥戴之心，这些是在安抚方面应该先行的。
English: They should give them land, reward them, and comfort them with gifts. Allow them to abandon the old and start anew, so that the subjects in the fallen area know that they have something to rely on, are grateful and happy, and strengthen their support for Song. These should be the first in terms of appeasement.

古文：臣窃观陛下有聪明睿智之姿，有英武敢为之志，然自临御，迨今九年，国不辟而日蹙，事不立而日坏，将骄而难御，卒惰而未练，国用匮而无赢余之蓄，民力困而无休息之期。
现代文： 臣观察到陛下聪明睿智，英武敢为，然而自从陛下即位以来，至今九年，国土没有开辟却一天天减少，国事没有建立却一天天变坏，将帅骄奢而难以驾御，士卒懒惰而没有训练，国家财用匮乏而没有多余的积蓄，百姓被困扰而没有休息之日。
English: The minister observed that His Majesty is clever, wise and brave, but in the nine years since His Majesty ascended the throne, the land has not been opened up but has been decreasing day by day, the national affairs have not been established but have been deteriorating day by day, the generals are arrogant and difficult to control, the soldiers are lazy and have no training, the country is short of money and has no extra savings, and the people are troubled and have no day of rest.

古文：使陛下忧勤虽至，而中兴之效，邈乎无闻，则群臣误陛下之故也。
现代文：陛下虽然忧虑勤苦，可中兴大业，毫无建树，这是群臣误害陛下的缘故。
English: Although His Majesty was anxious and diligent, he was able to carry out great undertakings, but nothing was accomplished. This was due to the ministers misleading His Majesty.

古文：陛下观近年以来所用之臣，慨然敢以天下之重自任者几人？
现代文： 陛下看近年来所任用的大臣，慨然敢以拯救天下为自己重任者有几人？
English: Your Majesty, looking at the ministers appointed in recent years, how many of them have dared to save the world?

古文：平居无事，小廉曲谨，似可无过，忽有扰攘，则错愕无所措手足，不过奉身以退，天下忧危之重，委之陛下而已。
现代文：国家平常无事时，为人恭谨，注意点廉洁，似乎找不出有什么过错，但突然间国家遭受侵扰需要抵御，就惊慌不知所措，最多不过是奉身以去职，将忧虑和拯救天下的重担，推给陛下罢了。
English: When the country is normally at ease, it is respectful, pays attention to integrity, and seems to find no fault, but when the country is suddenly attacked and needs to be defended, it panics and is at a loss. At best, it is nothing more than abdication of duty, pushing worries and the burden of saving the world to His Majesty.

古文：有臣如此，不知何补于国，而陛下亦安取此？
现代文：有这样的大臣，不知对国家有什么补益，而陛下也安于保持这种状况？
English: With such a minister, I do not know what benefits the country, and His Majesty is content to maintain this situation?

古文：夫用人如用医，必先知其术业可以已病，乃可使之进药而责成功。
现代文：任用大臣就如同用医生，必须先知道其医术可以治病，才能让他用药以求得成功。
English: The appointment of a minister is like the appointment of a doctor. One must first know that his medicine can cure the disease before he can use it to achieve success.

古文：今不详审其术业而姑试之，则虽日易一医，无补于病，徒加疾而已。
现代文：现在不仔细了解其医生的医术水平就姑且加以试用，虽然一天换一个医生，对于治病也没有什么补益，只是白白加重病情罢了。
English: If you do not carefully understand the medical level of your doctor, you can still try it, although changing a doctor every day has no benefit to the treatment of the disease, but only aggravates the disease in vain.

古文：大概近年，闲暇则以和议为得计，而以治兵为失策，仓卒则以退避为爱君，而以进御为误国。
现代文：就近年来总的情况来看，平常时就将讲求和议当成是得计，而将治兵看成是失策；突然间国家遇到变故，就将退职去位当成是爱君，而将挺身而出积极御敌看成是误国。
English: As far as the general situation in recent years is concerned, in ordinary times, the pursuit of peace and negotiation is regarded as a good strategy, while military management is regarded as a blunder; when the country suddenly encounters a change, the resignation and deposition is regarded as the love of the king, and it is regarded as a mistake to stand up and actively resist the enemy.

古文：上下偷安，不为长久之计。
现代文：上上下下，苟且偷安，不作长久打算。
English: Up and down, carefully steal the peace, do not make long-term plans.

古文：天步艰难，国势益弱，职此之由。
现代文：天下艰难，国势日益衰弱，其原因就在于如此的用人状况。
English: The reason why the world is difficult and the country is getting weaker and weaker is because of this employment situation.

古文：今天启宸衷，悟前日和议退避之失，亲临大敌。
现代文： 现在陛下受到上天的启发，省悟到以前对金人和议退避为不当，亲临前线号召御敌。
English: Now, inspired by the heavens, His Majesty has come to realize that it was wrong to retreat from the Jin people and their demands, and has come to the front line to call out against the enemy.

古文：天威所临，使北军数十万之众，震怖不敢南渡，潜师宵奔。
现代文：陛下的天威所至，使金军几十万人，惊恐不敢南渡长江，偷偷趁黑夜撤逃了。
English: When His Majesty's heavenly power arrived, hundreds of thousands of the Chinese army, terrified and afraid to cross the Yangtze River to the south, secretly took advantage of the darkness to flee.

古文：则和议之与治兵，退避之与进御，其效概可睹矣。
现代文：对金人和议与用兵，退避与抵御，其结果由此大概可见。
English: Negotiations and the use of troops, retreat and resistance against Kim Jong-un, the results of which can be roughly seen.

古文：然敌兵虽退，未大惩创，安知其秋高马肥，不再来扰我疆埸，使疲于奔命哉？
现代文：然而敌兵虽然已经撤退，但没有受到大的创伤，怎么知道他们在秋高气爽、战马肥壮之时，不再来侵扰我疆土，使我们疲于奔命呢？
English: However, although the enemy soldiers have retreated, they have not suffered major trauma. How do we know that they will no longer invade our territory and make us run for our lives when the autumn is high and the war horses are fat?

古文：臣夙夜为陛下思所以为善后之策，惟自昔创业、中兴之主，必躬冒矢石，履行阵而不避。故高祖既得天下，击韩王信、陈豨、黥布，未尝不亲行。
现代文： 臣日夜为陛下考虑如何制定善后策略，臣想到自古创业、中兴之君主，必须亲冒矢石，亲临战阵而不躲避，汉高祖得天下后，攻打韩王信、陈、黥布，未尝不是亲自领兵前行。
English: Day and night, vassals considered how to formulate a recovery strategy for His Majesty. Vassals thought that since ancient times, the monarch of entrepreneurship and ZTE must personally take the initiative, personally come to the battlefield and not avoid it. After Henkel's ancestor won the world, he attacked Han Wangxin, Chen, and Zibo, and did not personally lead the troops forward.

古文：光武自即位至平公孙述，十三年间，无一岁不亲征。
现代文：汉光武帝从即位到平定公孙述，十三年之间，没有一年不亲自出征。
English: According to Emperor Han Guangwu's grandson, there was not a single year in the thirteen years from his accession to the throne when he did not personally go to war.

古文：本朝太祖、太宗，定维扬，平泽、潞，下河东，皆躬御戎辂；真宗亦有澶渊之行，措天下于大安。
现代文：本朝的太祖、太宗，攻占惟扬，平定泽州、潞州，攻陷河东，都是亲自驾御战车前行。真宗也曾有澶渊之行，使天下得以安定。
English: The great ancestors of this dynasty, the Taizong, conquered Weiyang, pacified Zezhou and Zhangzhou, and conquered the eastern part of Hedong, all of which were personally driven by chariots. The Zhenzong also went to the abyss, so that the world could be stable.

古文：此所谓始忧勤而终逸乐也。
现代文：这就是所谓开始忧虑勤苦而最终安逸快乐。
English: This is the so-called beginning of worry and hard work and eventually ease and happiness.

古文：若夫退避之策，可暂而不可常，可一而不可再，退一步则失一步，退一尺则失一尺。
现代文： 至于退避的策略，可以作暂时打算而不能作经常打算，可以有一次，而不能有第二次，退一步则失去一步，退一尺则失去一尺。
English: As for the strategy of retreat, you can make a temporary plan but not a regular plan, you can have one time but not a second time, step back will lose a step, step back will lose a foot.

古文：往时自南都退而至维扬，则关陕、河北、河东失矣；自维扬退而至江、浙，则京东、西失矣。
现代文：以前从南都退到惟扬，于是失掉了关陕、河北、河东；自惟扬退到江、浙，于是失掉了京东、京西。
English: Previously, it retreated from Nandu to Weiyang, and lost Guanshan, Hebei, and Hedong; it retreated from Weiyang to Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and lost East Beijing and West Beijing.

古文：万有一敌骑南牧，复将退避。不知何所适而可乎？
现代文：万一有敌人再次南侵，又将退避，不知退到哪里才行？
English: In the unlikely event that the enemy invades the south again, we will retreat again, but I don't know where to retreat to?

古文：航海之策，万乘冒风涛不测之险，此又不可之尤者也。
现代文：航海躲避金人，皇上冒风浪不测的风险，这是最不能行的。
English: It is most unfeasible for the emperor to sail to avoid the gold man and take the risk of the storm.

古文：惟当于国家闲暇之时，明政刑，治军旅，选将帅，修车马，备器械，峙糗粮，积金帛。
现代文：只应当在国家平常无事时，严明政治法律，整治军旅，选择将帅，修造车马，准备器械，屯聚粮食，积聚金帛。
English: However, when the country is normally calm, political laws should be strictly enforced, military brigades should be reorganized, generals should be selected, chariots and horses should be repaired, equipment should be prepared, grain should be stockpiled, and gold should be accumulated.

古文：敌来则御，俟时而奋，以光复祖宗之大业，此最上策也。
现代文：敌人来就抵御，等待时机进行讨伐，以光复国土，实现祖宗的大业，这是最上策。
English: It is the best policy to resist the enemy when he comes, and wait for the opportunity to carry out the crusade to recover the land and realize the great cause of the ancestors.

古文：臣愿陛下自今以往，勿复为退避之计，可乎？
现代文：臣希望陛下自今以后，不要再作退避的打算，行吗？
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty not to make any plans to retreat from now on. Is that okay?

古文：臣又观古者敌国善邻，则有和亲，仇雠之邦，鲜复遣使。
现代文： 臣还看到在古代一国与敌国改善相邻关系，一般是通过和亲的方式，而在结有仇怨的国家之间，则很少有再派遣使者的。
English: The minister also saw that in ancient times, when a country improved its relations with an enemy country, it was usually by means of friendship, while between countries with enmity, it was rare to send another envoy.

古文：岂不以衅隙既深，终无讲好修睦之理故耶？
现代文：这难道不是因为仇怨已深，最终不能讲好修睦的缘故吗？
English: Isn't this because the enmity is already deep and it is impossible to talk about reconciliation in the end?

古文：东晋渡江，石勒遣使于晋，元帝命焚其币而却其使。
现代文：东晋渡过长江，石勒派遣使者到晋，晋元帝命令将其送来的钱币烧毁，并遣回其使者。
English: When Eastern Jin crossed the Yangtze River, Shi Le sent an envoy to Jin. Emperor Jin Yuan ordered the money to be burned and sent the envoy back.

古文：彼遣使来，且犹却之，此何可往？
现代文：对方派遣使者来，尚且还拒绝他，这样怎么能派使者去呢？
English: If the other side sends a messenger and rejects him, how can the messenger be sent?

古文：假道僣伪之国，其自取辱，无补于事，祗伤国体。
现代文：假借名义僭立之国，其自讨屈辱，对事情没有什么补益，而只会伤害国体。
English: A country that stands up under a false name, and humiliates itself, does not add anything to the situation, but only harms the national body.

古文：金人造衅之深，知我必报，其措意为何如？
现代文：金人制造仇怨已深，知道我们一定会报复，他该作怎样的打算呢？
English: The goldsmith has created a deep grudge, knowing that we will certainly retaliate, what should he plan to do?

古文：而我方且卑辞厚币，屈体以求之，其不推诚以见信，决矣。
现代文：可我们还卑辞厚礼，屈膝相求，金人不会对我们以诚相待，这是肯定的。
English: However, we also bow our heads and bend our knees in supplication. The Chinese will not treat us with sincerity, this is certain.

古文：器币礼物，所费不赀，使轺往来，坐索士气，而又邀我以必不可从之事，制我以必不敢为之谋，是和卒不成，而徒为此扰扰也。
现代文：送给金人的器币礼物，耗费了不少，使者往来之间，使我们坐失士气，可金人还向我们强求我们一定不能依从之事，强制我们以我们必不敢为之谋。像这样最终达不成和议，而只是白白给我们增加烦扰。
English: The gifts of money and utensils given to the goldsmiths took a lot of time, and the messengers' interactions made us lose our morale. However, the goldsmiths also forced us to do things that we couldn't possibly comply with, and forced us to do things that we wouldn't dare to do. In the end, this didn't lead to a peaceful discussion, but only added to our troubles for nothing.

古文：非特如此，于吾自治自强之计，动辄相妨，实有所害。
现代文：不仅如此，金人还对我们自治自强的行为，动辄加以妨碍，确实对我们有所损害。
English: Not only that, but the Kim people also frequently interfere with our self-governance and self-reliance, which is really harmful to us.

古文：金人二十余年，以此策破契丹、困中国，而终莫之悟。
现代文：金人在二十多年之间，用这种方法灭亡了契丹，困扰着中国，而我们仍没有醒悟。
English: In the space of more than twenty years, the Chinese have used this method to destroy the Khitans and plague China, and we still haven't woken up.

古文：夫辨是非利害者，人心所同，岂真不悟哉？
现代文：对于是非利害的辨别，人心都是相同的，难道是真的没有醒悟吗？
English: When it comes to distinguishing between right and wrong, people's hearts are all the same. Is it true that people have not woken up?

古文：聊复用此以侥幸万一，曾不知为吾害者甚大，此古人所谓几何侥幸而不丧人之国者也。臣愿自今以往，勿复遣和议之使，可乎？
现代文：为什么还用这种方法以图万一的侥幸？曾不知这对我们损害很大？
English: Why are we still using this method as a fluke? Didn't we know that it was very harmful to us?

古文：二说既定，择所当为者，一切以至诚为之。
现代文：这就是古人所说的凡存侥幸之心者必定丧失国家吧。
English: That's what the ancients said about those who have a predisposition to be lucky, they will surely lose their country.

古文：俟吾之政事修，仓廪实，府库充，器用备，士气振，力可有为，乃议大举，则兵虽未交，而胜负之势已决矣。
现代文：臣希望陛下从今以后，不要再派遣使者去讲求和议，好吗？ 这两个主张已经确定，就应该选择应当实施的，以至诚之心加以实施。等到我们治理好政事，使仓廪丰实，府库充足，器用得到准备，士气得到振奋，国家的力量可以用来有所作为之时，即考虑大举进行讨伐，则虽然双方还没有交兵，而胜负的局势已经确定了。
English: The minister hopes that Your Majesty will not send any more envoys to plead for peace from now on, okay? These two propositions have been determined, so we should choose the one that should be implemented, and implement it with sincerity. When we govern well, make the barns rich, the treasury sufficient, the dexterity is prepared, the morale is invigorated, and the power of the country can be used to make a difference, that is, when we consider a large-scale crusade, although the two sides have not yet exchanged troops, the situation of victory and defeat has been determined.

古文：抑臣闻朝廷者根本也，藩方者枝叶也，根本固则枝叶蕃，朝廷者腹心也，将士者爪牙也，腹心壮则爪牙奋。
现代文： 臣还知道朝廷是国家的根本，藩镇是国家的枝叶，根本稳固则枝叶茂盛。朝廷是国家的腹心，将士是国家的爪牙，腹心健壮则爪牙振作。
English: The minister also knew that the imperial court is the foundation of the country, the towns of the domain are the branches of the country, and if the foundation is stable, the branches will flourish. The imperial court is the confidant of the country, the soldiers are the minions of the country, and if the confidant is strong, the minions will work hard.

古文：今远而强敌，近而伪臣，国家所仰以为捍蔽者在藩方，所资以致攻讨者在将士，然根本腹心则在朝廷。
现代文：现在远方有强敌，在近处有伪臣，国家所依赖进行捍卫和防御者在藩镇，所借以进行攻讨者在将士，然而根本和腹心则在于朝廷。
English: Now there are strong enemies in the distance, and there are false ministers in the vicinity. The state relies on the defense and defenders in the towns, and the soldiers to attack, but the foundation and the confidant are in the imperial court.

古文：惟陛下正心以正朝廷百官，使君子小人各得其分，则是非明，赏罚当，自然藩方协力，将士用命，虽强敌不足畏，逆臣不足忧，此特在陛下方寸之间耳。
现代文：只要陛下通过正自己之心以正朝廷百官，使君子小人界线清楚，则是非分明，赏罚得当，各藩镇自然齐心协力，将士自然听从命令，敌人虽然强大也不值得害怕，对逆臣也不值得担忧，这只取决于陛下的心胸之间罢了。
English: As long as His Majesty, through rectifying his own heart, rectifies the officials of the imperial court, and makes the demarcation line between the gentleman and the villain clear, then the rights and wrongs are clear, the rewards and punishments are appropriate, the provinces and towns naturally work together, the soldiers naturally obey orders, the enemy, although powerful, is not worth fearing, and the rebellious ministers are not worth worrying about. This only depends on His Majesty's heart.

古文：臣昧死上条六事：一曰信任辅弼，二曰公选人材，三曰变革士风，四曰爱惜日力，五曰务尽人事，六曰寅畏天威。
现代文： 臣冒死呈上六件事：一是信任辅弼，二是公选人材，三是变革士风，四是爱惜日力，五是务尽人事，六是寅畏天威。
English: The minister risked his life to present six things: one is to trust assistants, the second is publicly elected personnel, the third is the reformist style, the fourth is to cherish Japan's strength, the fifth is to do everything possible, and the sixth is to fear heaven.

古文：何谓信任辅弼？
现代文： 什么是信任辅弼？
English: What is the Trust Assistant?

古文：夫兴衰拨乱之主，必有同心同德之臣相与有为，如元首股肱之于一身，父子兄弟之于一家，乃能协济。
现代文：大凡振兴国家、清除祸乱的君主，必有同心同德的大臣相辅佐，就如同一个人身上的头脑和手足，一个家庭中的父子和兄弟，这样才能相互协作和帮助。
English: If a monarch wishes to revitalize the country and eliminate the scourge, he must have ministers who are of the same mind and spirit to assist each other, just like the head and limbs of a person, the father and son and brother in a family, so that they can cooperate and help each other.

古文：今陛下选于众以图任，遂能捍御大敌，可谓得人矣。
现代文：现在陛下选择人才加以任用，于是能够抵御敌人，捍卫国家，可以说得上是得人。
English: Now, His Majesty selects and appoints people who are able to resist the enemy and defend the country, so to speak.

古文：然臣愿陛下待以至诚，无事形迹，久任以责成功，勿使小人得以间之，则君臣之美，垂于无穷矣。
现代文：然而臣希望陛下对他们以至诚相待，没有大的过错，则长久任用以责令取得事业成功，不要让小人乘机加以离间，如此则君臣的美德，将传于无穷后世。
English: However, I hope that His Majesty will treat them with the utmost sincerity, and if there is no major fault, he will appoint them for a long time to ensure the success of the cause, and not let the villain take the opportunity to separate them. In this way, the virtue of the monarchs and ministers will be passed on to future generations.

古文：何谓公选人才？
现代文： 什么是公选人材？
English: What is publicly elected personnel?

古文：夫治天下者，必资于人才，而创业、中兴之主，所资尤多。
现代文：大凡治理天下的人，必须得人才帮助，其中创业、中兴的君主，得人才的帮助尤其为多。
English: Those who govern the world must have the help of talents, among which the monarchs of entrepreneurship and ZTE are especially likely to have the help of talents.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：继体守文，率由旧章，得中庸之才，亦足以共治；至于艰难之际，非得卓荦瑰伟之才，则未易有济。
现代文：因为因循守成，大率都根据祖宗的旧制，得中庸人才，也足以共同治理。但在艰难之际，不是卓杰英伟的人才，则对于完成大业很难有什么补益。
English: Because according to the old system of the ancestors, most of them are based on the old system of the ancestors, and the mediocre talents are sufficient for common governance. However, in difficult times, if they are not outstanding and heroic talents, it is difficult to have any benefits for the completion of the great cause.

古文：是以大有为之主，必有不世出之才，参赞翊佐，以成大业。
现代文：因此，有大作为的君主，必定有绝世的人才出现，进行参谋和辅助，以完成大业。
English: Therefore, a monarch with great achievements must have extraordinary talents to appear, to advise and assist, in order to complete the great cause.

古文：然自昔抱不群之才者，多为小人之所忌嫉，或中之以黯暗，或指之为党与，或诬之以大恶，或擿之以细故。
现代文：然而自古怀有超群才能的人，多被小人所忌嫉，或者被中伤为昏暗无能，或者被指责为勾结党羽，或者被诬陷为犯有大恶罪，或者一些细微小节而被当成污点加以大肆宣扬。
English: However, since ancient times, people with superior talent have mostly been envied by villains, or slandered as dim and incompetent, or accused of colluding with the party, or framed as committing a great evil, or some minor points have been tarnished and publicized.

古文：而以道事君者，不可则止，难于自进，耻于自明，虽负重谤、遭深谴，安于义命，不复自辨。
现代文：以道义侍奉君主的人，达不到愿望就退，难于自我举荐，耻于自我表白，虽然遭受深重的诽谤和谴责，也不再自我辩白。
English: Those who have served the sovereign in a moral way, when they do not get what they want, fall back, find it difficult to recommend themselves, are ashamed to declare themselves, and although they are subjected to serious slander and condemnation, they no longer defend themselves.

古文：苟非至明之主，深察人之情伪，安能辨其非辜哉？
现代文：如果不是极为英明的君主，深察人情的真伪，怎么能辨别其为无辜呢？
English: How can he be innocent, unless he is a very wise prince, who is able to discern the true from the false?

古文：陛下临御以来，用人多矣，世之所许以为端人正士者，往往闲废于无用之地；而陛下寤寐侧席，有乏材之叹，盍少留意而致察焉！
现代文：陛下即位以来，用人很多，但世人称许为端人正士者，却往往被闲置不用；而陛下睡卧之间，叹息人才缺乏，为什么不稍稍加以留意以达到对人才的详尽了解呢？
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, many people have been employed, but those who are praised by the world as the best are often idle and unused; while His Majesty is sleeping, sighing talent is lacking, why not pay a little attention to achieve a detailed understanding of talent?

古文：何谓变革士风？
现代文： 什么是变革士风？
English: What is a change agent?

古文：夫用兵之与士风，似不相及，而实相为表里。
现代文：用兵与士风，看起来似乎没有联系，实际上两者是互为表里。
English: There seems to be no connection between the use of soldiers and the warrior ethos. In fact, the two go hand in hand.

古文：士风厚则议正而是非明，朝廷赏罚当功罪而人心服，考之本朝嘉祐、治平以前可知已。
现代文：士风厚朴则议论正直而是非分明，朝廷赏罚与功罪相称而人心信服，这一点考察本朝嘉、治平以前便可知道。
English: On the other hand, Shifu Atsuko discussed honesty, but not clearly, and the rewards and punishments of the imperial court were commensurate with the merits and demerits, and the people were convinced. This can be known by examining this morning before Jiaying and Jiping.

古文：数十年来，奔竞日进，论议徇私，邪说利口，足以惑人主之听。
现代文：几十年来，胆小保守之风日甚，议论照顾私情，提出不正的主张，足以使皇上迷惑。
English: For decades, timidity and conservatism had been on the rise, and talk of taking care of one's private affairs and making dishonest claims were enough to confuse the emperor.

古文：元祐大臣，持正论如司马光之流，皆社稷之臣也，而群枉嫉之，指为奸党，颠倒是非，政事大坏，驯致靖康之变，非偶然也。
现代文：元时的大臣，持正直意见的如司马光等人，都是国家社稷的大臣，可群臣却冤枉忌嫉他们，指斥他们为奸党，使是非颠倒，政事严重败坏，导致靖康之变，这不是偶然的。
English: It is no accident that the ministers of the Yuan Dynasty, such as Sima Guang and others who held honest opinions, were all ministers of the State Council, but the ministers unjustly envied them, accused them of being traitors, reversed the rights and wrongs, seriously corrupted political affairs, and led to the change of Yasukuni.

古文：窃观近年士风尤薄，随时好恶，以取世资，潝訿成风，岂朝廷之福哉？
现代文：臣个人观察到近年来士风非常浅薄，好恶随时而变，贪图取利，以讹传讹成风，这难道是朝廷的福吗？
English: The subject personally observed that in recent years, the style of scholars is very shallow, their likes and dislikes change at any time, they are greedy for profit, and it has become a fashion to pass down knowledge. Is this a blessing for the imperial court?

古文：大抵朝廷设耳目及献纳论思之官，固许之以风闻，至于大故，必须核实而后言。
现代文：大抵朝廷设置耳目和言论之官，固然曾允许过他们可以根据风闻进行弹劾，但对于大问题，则必须查清事实后才能发言。
English: Most of the time, the imperial court set up an officer of hearing, sight, and speech. Of course, they allowed them to impeach on the basis of hearsay, but for major issues, they must find out the facts before speaking.

古文：使其无实，则诬人之罪，服谗搜慝，得以中害善良，皆非所以修政也。
现代文：如果让他们可以不讲求事实，则他们会身藏邪恶，进献谗言，诬陷好人，中伤善良，这些都不是治理政事的方法。
English: If they are allowed not to seek the truth, they will hide evil, spread slander, frame good people, and defame the virtuous. These are not ways to govern.

古文：何谓爱惜日力？
现代文： 什么是爱惜日力？
English: What is "Love Nikko"?

古文：夫创业、中兴，如建大厦，堂室奥序，其规模可一日而成，鸠工聚材，则积累非一日所致。
现代文：创业、中兴，如同建造大厦，堂屋深处，其规模一天便可完成，但召集工人，准备材料，则不是一天便可以完成的。
English: Starting up a business, ZTE, is like building a building, its scale can be completed in one day, but gathering workers and preparing materials can not be completed in one day.

古文：陛下临御，九年于兹，境土未复，僣逆未诛，仇敌未报，尚稽中兴之业者，诚以始不为之规模，而后不为之积累故也。
现代文：陛下即位，至今九年，境土没有恢复，僭逆之臣没能诛杀，敌仇未报，中兴大业停滞不前，实在是因为开始不建造规模，而后不聚集人工和材料的缘故。
English: In the nine years since His Majesty's accession to the throne, the territory has not been restored, the rebellious ministers have not been able to fight and kill, the enmity has not been reported, and ZTE's great cause has stagnated. This is really due to the fact that it did not begin to build scale, and then did not gather labor and materials.

古文：边事粗定之时，朝廷所推行者，不过簿书期会不切之细务，至于攻讨防守之策，国之大计，皆未尝留意。
现代文：边防基本安定之时，朝廷所推行实施的，不过是一些有关簿书期会之类不合时务的小事，至于攻讨防守的策略，是国家大计，则都未曾留意。
English: When the border defense was basically stable, the measures implemented by the imperial court were nothing more than some small things that were out of step with the times, such as the book-signing ceremony. As for the strategy of attacking and defending, it was a national plan, but no attention was paid to it.

古文：夫天下无不可为之事，亦无不可为之时。
现代文：天下没有不能干的事，也没有不能干的时机。
English: There is nothing that cannot be done, and there is no time that cannot be done.

古文：惟失其时，则事之小者日益大，事之易者日益难矣。何谓务尽人事？
现代文：只是失去时机，则小事一天天变大，易事一天天变难。 什么是务尽人事？
English: It's just that if you lose the opportunity, the little things will get bigger and bigger day by day, and the easy things will get harder and harder day by day.

古文：夫天人之道，其实一致，人之所为，即天之所为也。
现代文：天道与人道，其实是一致的，人的行为，也就是上天的行为。
English: The way of heaven and the way of humanity are, in fact, one and the same. The behavior of man is the behavior of heaven.

古文：人事尽于前，则天理应于后，此自然之符也。
现代文：人完成属于自己的事务，则上天必与之相适应，这是自然的符合。
English: When a person accomplishes his or her own affairs, then heaven must adapt to it. This is a natural correspondence.

古文：故创业、中兴之主，尽其在我而已，其成功归之于天。
现代文：因此，创业、中兴的君主，尽力完成属于自己的事，而将成功归于上天。
English: Therefore, the monarchs of entrepreneurship and ZTE try their best to accomplish their own things, but attribute their success to God.

古文：今未尝尽人事，敌至而先自退屈，而欲责功于天，其可乎？
现代文：现在未曾完成人事，敌人一来自己就先委曲退让，却想求责上天成功，能行吗？
English: Now, before completing the personnel, when the enemy comes, he will first make concessions, but he wants to ask God for success, is it possible?

古文：臣愿陛下诏二三大臣，协心同力，尽人事以听天命，则恢复土宇，剪屠鲸鲵，迎还两宫，必有日矣。
现代文：臣希望陛下诏令二、三个大臣，同心协力，尽力完成人事以适应天命，则恢复疆土，剪除敌害，迎回二位先帝，必定为期不远。
English: I hope that His Majesty will issue a decree to appoint two or three ministers to work together and do their best to complete the personnel to meet the destiny, and then restore the territory, eliminate the enemy, and welcome back the two former emperors. It will certainly not take long.

古文：何谓寅畏天威？
现代文： 什么是寅畏天威？
English: What is ginger ale?

古文：夫天之于王者，犹父母之于子，爱之至，则所以为之戒者亦至。
现代文：上天对于君王，就像父母对于子女，爱之达到极致，则对他们的劝戒也达到极致。
English: Heaven is to kings, as parents are to their children, love to the utmost, and admonition to them to the utmost.

古文：故人主之于天戒，必恐惧修省，以致其寅畏之诚。
现代文：因此，君主对于上天的劝戒，必定恐惧反省，以达到真诚地敬畏。
English: Therefore, the monarch for heaven's exhortation, must fear reflection, in order to achieve a sincere awe.

古文：比年以来，荧惑失次，太白昼见，地震水溢，或久阴不雨，或久雨不霁，或当暑而寒，乃正月之朔，日有食之。
现代文：连年以来，天象混乱，太白星白天出现，发生地震和水灾，或者久阴不下雨，或者久雨不天晴，或者暑天寒冷，本是正月朔望日，却出现日食。
English: For years, the sky has been chaotic, too white stars have appeared during the day, earthquakes and floods have occurred, or it hasn't rained for a long time, or it hasn't rained for a long time, or it hasn't been sunny, or it's cold in the summer. Originally, it was the first day of the new month, but there was a solar eclipse.

古文：此皆天意眷佑陛下，丁宁反覆，以致告戒。
现代文：这些都是上天眷念保佑陛下，对陛下的反复叮咛，直至劝戒。
English: All of these are God's mercy and blessing to His Majesty, repeated exhortations to His Majesty, up to and including admonitions.

古文：惟陛下推至诚之意，正厥事以应之，则变灾而为祥矣。
现代文：希望陛下以至诚之心，修正过失之处以应天变，则天灾可变为吉祥。
English: I hope that His Majesty will sincerely correct the mistakes and respond to the changes in the weather, so that the natural disaster can be turned into good luck.

古文：凡此六者，皆中兴之业所关，而陛下所当先务者。
现代文： 所有这六个方面，都关系着中兴大业，是陛下应该先行实施的。
English: All these six aspects are related to ZTE's great cause, and should be implemented by His Majesty first.

古文：今朝廷人才不乏，将士足用，财用有余，足为中兴之资。
现代文： 现在朝廷人才不缺，将士够用，财用有剩余，足够用来完成中兴大业。
English: Now, there is no shortage of talent in the imperial court. There are enough soldiers, and there is a surplus of money, which is enough to complete the great cause of ZTE.

古文：陛下春秋鼎盛，欲大有为，何施不可？
现代文：陛下正年青气盛，想成就大事业，施行什么不行？
English: Your Majesty is young and vigorous. If you want to achieve great things, what can't you do?

古文：要在改前日之辙，断而行之耳。
现代文：关键在于改正以前的老路子，果断加以推行罢了。
English: The key lies in correcting the old ways and resolutely carrying them out.

古文：昔唐太宗谓魏征为敢言，征谢曰： 陛下导臣使言，不然，其敢批逆鳞哉。 今臣无魏征之敢言，然展尽底蕴，亦思虑之极也。
现代文：过去唐太宗说魏征敢言，魏征答谢说： 是陛下引导臣发表意见，不然，臣怎么敢指责陛下的过失呢？ 现在臣没有魏征敢言，但尽可能表明臣下的想法，则也是臣极力想做到的。
English: In the past, Tang Taizong said that Wei Zeng dared to speak, and Wei Zeng replied, "It was your majesty who guided me to express my opinion, otherwise, how could I dare to accuse your majesty's fault?" Now, the minister did not dare to speak, but as far as possible to show the thoughts of his subordinates, it was also what the minister wanted to do.

古文：惟陛下赦其愚直，而取其拳拳之忠。
现代文：希望陛下宽恕臣下的愚蠢和率直，而取臣下的拳拳忠心。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will forgive the stupidity and frankness of his subjects and win their loyalty.

古文：疏奏，上为赐诏褒谕。
现代文：李纲的奏书呈上，皇上阅后下诏给予嘉奖。
English: Li Gang's report was submitted, and after the emperor read it, he gave a commendation.

古文：除江西安抚制置大使兼知洪州。
现代文：李纲被授任为江西安抚制置大使兼知洪州。
English: Li Gang was appointed as the ambassador of Jiangxi pacification and construction and Zhihongzhou.

古文：有旨，赴行在奏事毕之官。六年，纲至，引对内殿。
现代文：朝廷传旨，令李纲赴朝廷奏事。绍兴六年，李纲到达朝廷，高宗在内宫召对。
English: The imperial court sent an order to Li Gang to go to the imperial court to report. Six years after Shaoxing, Li Gang arrived at the imperial court, and Gao Zong summoned him to the inner palace.

古文：朝廷方锐意大举，纲陛辞，言今日用兵之失者四，措置未尽善者五，宜预备者三，当善后者二。
现代文：当时朝廷正锐意于用兵进行讨伐，李纲劝阻，认为现在用兵有四个方面不当，有五个方面措置没有完备，有三个方面应该加以准备，有二个方面应该做好善后工作。
English: At that time, the imperial court was intent on using troops to carry out the crusade, but Li Gang dissuaded them, saying that the current use of troops was improper in four aspects, the measures were incomplete in five aspects, preparations should be made in three aspects, and the aftermath work should be done in two aspects.

古文：时宋师与金人、伪齐相持于淮、泗者半年，纲奏： 两兵相持，非出奇不足以取胜。
现代文：宋军与金人和伪齐军在淮河、氵四州一带相持达半年之久，李纲奏说： 两兵相持，非出奇进行袭击不能取胜，希望立即派遣骁将，从淮南联络岳飞作为掎角，进行夹击，大功可成。 
English: The Song army and the Jin people and the pseudo-Qi army have been fighting each other for half a year in the area of Huaihe and Shizhou, Li Gangsao said: The two soldiers are holding each other, it is not surprising that the attack can not win. I hope to immediately dispatch the general of the Song army, from Huainan to contact Yuefei as the angle of attack, to make a pincer attack, great success can be achieved.

古文：愿速遣骁将，自淮南约岳飞为掎角，夹击之，大功可成。 已而宋师屡捷，刘光世、张俊、杨沂中大破伪齐兵于淮、肥之上。车驾进发幸建康。
现代文：不久，宋军不断告捷，刘光世、张俊、杨沂中在淮河、淝水一带大败伪齐兵。
English: Soon, the Song Army continued to achieve success, and Liu Guangshi, Zhang Jun, and Yang Yizhong defeated the pseudo-Qi soldiers in the Huaihe and Surabaya areas.

古文：纲奏乞益饬战守之具，修筑沿淮城垒，且言： 愿陛下勿以去冬骤胜而自怠，勿以目前粗定而自安，凡可以致中兴之治者无不为，凡可以害中兴之业者无不去。要以修政事，信赏罚，明是非，别邪正，招徕人材，鼓作士气，爱惜民力，顺导众心为先。
现代文：皇上出发巡幸建康。李纲上奏请求更加修造战守器具，在淮河沿线修筑城垒，并且说： 希望陛下不要因为去年冬天多次胜利而放松自己，不要因为目前形势初步安定而自安，凡是可以实现中兴之治的都加以实施，凡是可能损害中兴大业的都加以清除，必须以修政事，信赏罚，明是非，区别邪恶与正直，招徕人才，振作士气，爱惜民力，顺应众心为先务。
English: The emperor set out on a tour to build prosperity. Li Gang made a report to the emperor, requesting that more military equipment be built and fortifications be built along the Huai River, and said: I hope that His Majesty will not relax because of the many victories last winter, and will not be complacent because the current situation is initially stable. Everything that can achieve the rule of ZTE will be implemented, and everything that may damage the great cause of ZTE will be eliminated. It is necessary to take political reform, reward and punishment, right and wrong, distinguishing evil and honesty, attracting talents, boosting morale, cherishing people's power, and conforming to the hearts of the people as the first priority.

古文：数者既备，则将帅辑睦，士卒乐战，用兵其有不胜者哉？ 
现代文：这几个方面已经具备，则将帅和睦，士卒乐于战争，用兵进行讨伐哪有不胜的呢？ 
English: If these aspects are already in place, how can there be victory without harmony between generals and soldiers, joy in war, and the use of soldiers for crusading?

古文：淮西郦琼以全军叛归刘豫，纲指陈朝廷有措置失当者、深可痛惜者及当监前失以图方来者凡十有五事，奏之。
现代文：驻守淮西的郦琼以所部叛投刘豫，李纲条列有关朝廷措置不当，非常令人痛惜以及应该吸取以前教训以为将来打算等共十五个方面的事情，用奏书呈上。
English: Zou Qiong, who was stationed in Huaxi, and Liu Yu, who defected from Shobu to Liu Yu, and Li Gang listed a total of fifteen aspects of the matter, such as the inappropriate measures of the imperial court, which were very regrettable, and that lessons should be learned from the past to plan for the future, and submitted them in a report.

古文：张浚引咎去相位，言者引汉武诛王恢为比。
现代文：张浚引咎解去宰相之职，有人将这比为汉武帝诛杀王恢之事。
English: Zhang Jun was blamed and dismissed from the post of prime minister. Some people likened this to Emperor Hanwu's assassination of Wang Hui.

古文：纲奏曰： 臣窃见张浚罢相，言者引武帝诛王恢事以为比。
现代文：李纲上奏说 ：臣了解到张浚罢相，有人将之比为汉武帝诛杀王恢。
English: Li Gang said in his report: The minister learned of Zhang Jun's dismissal, and some people compared it to Emperor Hanwu's assassination of Wang Hui.

古文：臣恐智谋之士卷舌而不谈兵，忠义之士扼腕而无所发愤，将士解体而不用命，州郡望风而无坚城，陛下将谁与立国哉？
现代文：臣担心智谋之士由此缄口不谈兵事，忠义之人抱肘而无处泄愤，将士瓦解而不听从命令，州郡望风撤逃而不再有人坚守城池，陛下将靠谁来立国呢？
English: The courtiers are worried that the wise men will not talk about military affairs, the loyal people will hold their elbows and have nowhere to vent their anger, they will disintegrate and disobey orders, the states and counties will flee and no one will hold the city. Who will His Majesty rely on to establish the country?

古文：张浚措置失当，诚为有罪，然其区区徇国之心，有可矜者。
现代文：张浚措置失当，确实有罪，然而他的区区报国之心，值得同情。
English: Zhang Jun is guilty of improper measures, but his lack of patriotism is worthy of sympathy.

古文：愿少宽假，以责来效。 
现代文：希望稍微给予宽谅，以责令他为朝廷效力。 
English: I hope he will be forgiven a little and be ordered to work for the imperial court.

古文：时车驾将幸平江，纲以为平江去建康不远，徒有退避之名，不宜轻动。
现代文：当时皇上准备巡幸平江，李纲认为平江离建康不远，空有退避之名，不应该轻易行动。
English: At that time, the emperor was preparing to tour the Pingjiang River, and Li Gang thought that the Pingjiang River was not far from Jiankang, and there was no name of retreat, and it should not be easy to act.

古文：复具奏曰：
现代文：又上奏说：
English: And again he intoned:

古文：臣闻自昔用兵以成大业者，必先固人心，作士气，据地利而不肯先退，尽人事而不肯先屈。
现代文： 臣听说自古以来用兵以成就大事业者，必须稳固人心，振作士气，占据有利地势而不肯先退却，尽力做好属于自己的事情而不肯先屈让。
English: The minister heard that since ancient times, those who use soldiers to achieve great things must stabilize people's hearts, boost morale, occupy advantageous positions without retreating first, and do their best to do their own things without giving in first.

古文：是以楚、汉相距于荥阳、成皋间，高祖虽屡败，不退尺寸之地；既割鸿沟，羽引而东，遂有垓下之亡。
现代文：因此楚、汉相持于荥阳、成皋之间，高祖虽然屡次失败，但不肯退却尺寸之地；割让了鸿沟之后，项羽引兵向东，于是有在垓下之战中的败亡。
English: Therefore, Chu and Han held each other between Shenyang and Chengdu. Although Gaozu repeatedly failed, he refused to retreat to the land of dimensions. After ceding the gap, Xiang Yu led the army to the east, so he was defeated in the battle under his command.

古文：曹操、袁绍战于官渡，操虽兵弱粮乏，荀彧止其退避；既焚绍辎重，绍引而归，遂丧河北。
现代文：曹操、袁绍战于官渡，曹操虽然兵弱粮乏，但荀阻止他退避；袁绍的辎重被烧毁后，引兵回撤，于是导致丧师于河北。
English: Cao Cao and Yuan Shao fought at Guandu. Although Cao Cao's army was weak and short of food, Zou prevented him from retreating. After Yuan Shao's baggage train was burned, he withdrew his troops, which led to the death of his division in Hebei.

古文：由是观之，今日之事，岂可因一叛将之故，望风怯敌，遽自退屈？
现代文：由此看来，今天之事，怎么能因为一个叛将的缘故，就望风畏敌，急忙自己退避屈让呢？
English: From this point of view, how can today's matter, because of a traitor, hope for the best, fear the enemy, and hasten to retreat and give in?

古文：果出此谋，六飞回驭之后，人情动摇，莫有固志，士气销缩，莫有斗心。
现代文：果真采用这个建议，军队撤回之后，人情动摇，人心不稳，士气衰退，没有斗志。
English: If this suggestion is really adopted, after the withdrawal of the army, people's feelings will be shaken, people's hearts will be unstable, morale will decline, and there will be no fighting spirit.

古文：我退彼进，使敌马南渡，得一邑则守一邑，得一州则守一州，得一路则守一路；乱臣贼子，黠吏奸氓，从而附之，虎踞鸱张，虽欲如前日返驾还辕，复立朝廷于荆棘瓦砾之中，不可得也。
现代文：我退敌人进，使敌人能够南渡长江，得一邑则守一邑，得一州则守一州；得一路则守一路；乱臣贼子，狡吏奸民，起而加以依附，如虎踞鸱飞，到那时陛下虽然想车驾返回，在荆棘瓦砾之中再建朝廷，也不可得了。
English: I pushed the enemy back and made it possible for the enemy to cross the Yangtze River to the south. If you get one township, you can keep one township; if you get one prefecture, you can keep one prefecture; if you get one road, you can keep one road; if you get a ruffian, a thief, a trickster, and a traitor, you can attach them like a vise. By that time, even if His Majesty wanted to drive back and rebuild the imperial court among the thorns and rubble, he could not do it.

古文：借使敌骑冲突，不得已而权宜避之，犹为有说。
现代文： 如果因为敌人骑兵冲突，不得已而暂且躲避，还说得过去。
English: If, as a result of enemy cavalry clashes, you have no choice but to take shelter for the time being, you can still get away with it.

古文：今疆埸未有警急之报，兵将初无不利之失，朝廷正可惩往事，修军政，审号令，明赏刑，益务固守。
现代文：现在疆场没有警报，兵将没有失利，朝廷正好可以以往事为戒，治理军政，慎重号令，严明赏罚，更加致力于防守。
English: Now, there is no alarm on the battlefield, the soldiers will not be defeated, and the imperial court can just take the past as a warning, govern military affairs, carefully issue orders, strictly reward and punish, and be more committed to defense.

古文：而遽为此扰扰，弃前功，挑后患，以自趋于祸败，岂不重可惜哉！
现代文：却急忙提出要躲避金人，使人心慌乱，这样抛弃前功，导致后患，自取失败，岂不太可惜了。 
English: However, he hastily proposed to evade the money man, which made people's hearts flustered. It would be a pity to throw away the previous work, lead to future suffering, and fail.

古文：八年，王伦使北还，纲闻之，上疏曰：
现代文：绍兴八年，王伦出使金朝返回，李纲得知，上疏说：
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, when Wang Lun returned from his mission to the Kim dynasty, Li Gang learned that Shang Soo said:

古文：臣窃见朝廷遣王伦使金国，奉迎梓宫。
现代文： 臣得知朝廷派遣王伦出使金国，奉迎二帝的棺木。
English: The vassal learned that the imperial court had sent Wang Lun to dispatch the coffin of the two emperors.

古文：今伦之归，与金使偕来，乃以 诏谕江南 为名，不著国号而曰 江南 ，不云 通问 而曰 诏谕 ，此何礼也？
现代文：现在王伦返回，与金国使者一起来，却以 诏谕江南 为名，不写 国号 而称 江南 ，不称 通问 却说 诏谕 ，这是什么礼节？
English: Now that Wang Lun has returned, he has come with the emissary of the State of Jin, but he calls himself "Jiangnan," without writing the country's name, and calls himself "Jiangnan" without writing the country's name, and does not call himself "Interrogation," but says "Dictate," what is the etiquette?

古文：臣请试为陛下言之。
现代文：请让臣试为陛下分析一下这个问题。
English: Please let me try to analyze this problem for Your Majesty.

古文：金人毁宗社，逼二圣，而陛下应天顺人，光复旧业。自我视彼，则仇雠也；自彼视我，则腹心之疾也，岂复有可和之理？
现代文：金人毁坏我宗社，逼迫二位先帝，幸而陛下顺应天意和民心，光复祖业，从我们看金人，金人是我们的仇敌；从金人看我们，则我们是金人的心腹之患，岂有再可讲和的道理？
English: The goldsmiths destroyed my ancestral home and persecuted the two former emperors. Fortunately, Your Majesty complied with the will of heaven and the hearts of the people and restored the ancestral heritage. From our point of view, the goldsmiths are our enemies; from their point of view, we are the scourge of the goldsmiths. Is there any reason to speak of peace?

古文：然而朝廷遣使通问，冠盖相望于道，卑辞厚币，无所爱惜者，以二圣在其域中，为亲屈己，不得已而然，犹有说也。
现代文：然而朝廷之所以络绎不绝地派遣使者去通问，卑辞厚礼，无所吝惜，是因为二位先帝在金国之中，为了亲人屈辱自己，是出于不得已才这样，这还算说得过去。
English: However, the reason why the imperial court continuously sent emissaries to ask questions, humbly and without any grudges, is because the two former emperors humiliated themselves for the sake of their relatives in the middle of the Golden Kingdom. They did so out of necessity, and this can be said to be acceptable.

古文：至去年春，两宫凶问既至，遣使以迎梓宫，亟往遄返，初不得其要领。
现代文：到去年春天，二位先帝去世的消息传来，朝廷派遣使者去迎回棺木，速去速回，开始时不得要领。
English: By last spring, when the news of the death of the two former emperors came, the imperial court sent an envoy to welcome back the coffins.

古文：今伦使事，初以奉迎梓宫为指，而金使之来，乃以诏谕江南为名。循名责实，已自乖戾，则其所以罔朝廷而生后患者，不待诘而可知。
现代文：现在王伦出使，开始以奉迎棺木为目的；可金国使者来，却以诏谕江南为名，循名责实，已自相矛盾，由此金人意图欺骗朝廷而制造后患，不待问而可知。
English: Now that Wang Lun has sent an envoy, the aim is to welcome the coffin; however, the envoy of the Kim kingdom has come, but in the name of the edict of the south of the Yangtze River, and in the name of truth, has contradicted itself. Therefore, the Kim people intend to deceive the imperial court and create future troubles, which can be known without question.

古文：臣在远方，虽不足以知其曲折，然以愚意料之，金以此名遣使，其邀求大略有五：必降诏书，欲陛下屈体降礼以听受，一也。
现代文： 臣远离朝廷，虽然不完全知道其中的详细情况，然而根据愚臣的猜测，金人以这个名义派遣使者，其强求大略有五个方面：必定颁降诏书，想要陛下屈体降礼以听命，这是其一。
English: The courtier was far away from the imperial court, and although he did not fully know the details, according to the guess of the foolish courtier, the Jin people sent an envoy in this name, and there were five aspects to their insistence: they must issue a surrender edict, and they want His Majesty to bow down and obey orders. This is one.

古文：必有赦文，欲朝廷宣布，班示郡县，二也。
现代文：必定有赦文，想要朝廷宣布，颁示给各郡县，这是其二。
English: There must be an amnesty document that the imperial court would like to announce and present to each county. This is the second.

古文：必立约束，欲陛下奉藩称臣，禀其号令，三也。
现代文：必定签定条约，想要陛下奉藩称臣，听其号令，这是其三。
English: He must sign a treaty, and he wants His Majesty to serve the clan as a vassal and obey its orders. This is the third.

古文：必求岁赂，广其数目，使我坐困，四也。
现代文：必定要求每年贡献财物，加大数目，使我们坐以受困，这是其四。
English: Fourth, we must ask for an annual contribution of wealth and increase the number of cranes, so that we will not be trapped.

古文：必求割地，以江为界，淮南、荆襄、四川，尽欲得之，五也。
现代文：必定要求割让土地，以长江为界，想完全占有淮南、荆襄、四川，这是其五。
English: They must demand the cession of land, with the Yangtze River as the boundary, and want to fully occupy Huainan, Jingxiang, and Sichuan, which is the fifth.

古文：此五者，朝廷从其一，则大事去矣。
现代文：这五个方面，朝廷如果答应其一个方面，则大势不可再挽回了。
English: If the imperial court agrees to one of these five aspects, the situation will be irreversible.

古文：金人变诈不测，贪婪无厌，纵使听其诏令，奉藩称臣，其志犹未已也。
现代文： 金人狡诈不测，贪婪无厌，即使听从他们的诏令，奉藩称臣，他们的心意仍不会满足。
English: Goldsmiths are cunning and greedy, and even if you obey their edicts and serve the clan, they will still not be satisfied.

古文：必继有号令，或使亲迎梓宫，或使单车入觐，或使移易将相，或改革政事，或竭取租赋，或朘削土宇。
现代文：必定会继续有号令，或者让陛下亲自前去奉迎棺木，或者让陛下单个人去朝觐，或者让陛下改换将相，或者让朝廷改革政事，或者拼命收取租赋，或者一步步侵占我疆土。
English: There will surely continue to be calls, either for His Majesty to personally go to meet the coffin, or for His Majesty to go to the hajj alone, or for His Majesty to change generals, or for the imperial court to reform government affairs, or to desperately collect rent, or to step by step encroach on our territory.

古文：从之则无有纪极，一不从则前功尽废，反为兵端。
现代文：听从他们则天下秩序大乱，如果有一个要求不听从，则前功尽废，反而为用兵制造了借口。
English: If they are obeyed, there will be chaos in the world. If they do not obey a request, their efforts will be wasted. Instead, they will create an excuse for the use of troops.

古文：以为权时之宜，听其邀求，可以无后悔者，非愚则诬也。
现代文：认为作为权宜之计，暂且听从金人的强求，可以不后悔的人，不是愚蠢就是欺佞。
English: Those who think that, as a stopgap measure, they can temporarily listen to the strong demands of the rich and have no regrets are either stupid or bullying.

古文：使国家之势单弱，果不足以自振，不得已而为此，固犹不可，况土宇之广犹半天下，臣民之心戴宋不忘，与有识者谋之，尚足以有为，岂可忘祖宗之大业，生灵之属望，弗虑弗图，遽自屈服，冀延旦暮之命哉？
现代文：如果是国家的势力薄弱，果真不能用以使自己振兴，出于不得已才采用权宜之计，还不无不可；何况疆土之广大仍有半壁天下，臣民之心都拥戴大宋，如果与有识之士一起谋划，还可以有所作为，怎么能够忘记祖宗的大业和生民的期望，不考虑也不打算，急忙自认屈服，希望苟延性命于旦夕之间呢？
English: If the power of the country is weak, and it really cannot be used to revitalize itself, it is necessary to resort to expedient measures out of necessity; moreover, the vast territory is still half the world, and the hearts of the subjects are all in favor of the Great Song Dynasty. If you plan together with people with insight, you can still make a difference. How can you forget the great cause of the ancestors and the expectations of the people, without considering or intending to, and hastily give in, hoping to prolong your life in the twilight?

古文：臣愿陛下特留圣意，且勿轻许，深诏群臣，讲明利害、可以久长之策，择其善而从之。
现代文： 臣希望陛下特别予以留意，不要轻易答应，诏令群臣，辨析其中利害和可以长久的计策，选择好的加以采纳实行。 
English: The minister hopes that His Majesty will pay special attention, not easily agree, and order the ministers to analyze the interests and long-term strategies, and choose the best one to adopt and implement.

古文：疏奏，虽与众论不合，不上以为忤，曰： 大臣当如此矣。 
现代文：奏疏呈上，其主张虽然与众人的议论不合，但皇上不把它当作是违抗，说： 大臣应该这样。 
English: When the report was submitted, the Emperor did not take it as defiance, saying, "This is how a minister should be," even though his proposal did not agree with the opinions of many people.

古文：九年，除知潭州、荆湖南路安抚大使，纲具奏力辞，曰： 臣迂疏无周身之术，动致烦言。
现代文：绍兴九年，李纲被任命为潭州知州、荆湖南路安抚大使，李纲上书极力推辞，他说 ：臣迂腐而不善于明哲保身，动辄上书烦扰皇上。
English: In the ninth year of Shaoxing, Li Gang was appointed as the pacification ambassador of Tanzhou, Zhizhou and South Jinghu Road. Li Gang strongly rejected the letter, saying: "The minister is pedantic and not good at self-preservation, and often troubles the emperor with the letter."

古文：今者罢自江西，为日未久，又蒙湔祓，畀以帅权。
现代文：现在臣刚从江西罢职不久，又承蒙恩赐，委以帅权。
English: Now, not long after retiring from Jiangxi Province, he has been given the power to command.

古文：昔汉文帝闻季布贤，召之，既而罢归，布曰： 陛下以一人之誉召臣，一人之毁去臣，臣恐天下有以窥陛下之浅深。
现代文：过去汉文帝听说季布贤能，将他召来，不久又将季布罢免，季布说： 陛下因为一个人的称誉而将臣召来，又因为一个人的毁誉将臣罢归，臣担心天下人由此窥测陛下的深浅。 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen heard of Qibu's ability, summoned him, and soon dismissed him. Qibu said, "Your Majesty summoned me because of a person's reputation, and dismissed me because of a person's disrepute. I'm worried that people around the world will spy on Your Majesty."

古文：顾臣区区进退，何足少多。
现代文：当然臣之进退不过一件区区小事，算不了什么。
English: Of course, a vassal's advancement or retreat is nothing more than a trifle, nothing at all.

古文：然数年之间，亟奋亟踬，上累陛下知人任使之明，实有系于国体。 诏以纲累奏，不欲重违，遂允其请。
现代文：然而，几年之间，臣频繁上下，不仅有损于陛下知人善任的英明，也有损于国体。 高宗下诏说由于李纲连续上书坚持推辞，不想过分违背其意愿，同意李纲的请求。
English: However, over the course of several years, the minister frequently went up and down, which not only harmed the wisdom of His Majesty's acquaintances, but also harmed the national identity. Gao Zong said that since Li Gang had persistently submitted a letter of resignation, he did not want to go too far against his wishes and agreed to Li Gang's request.

古文：次年薨，年五十八。
现代文：第二年，李纲去世，享年五十八岁。
English: The following year, Li Gang passed away at the age of 58.

古文：讣闻，上为轸悼，遣使赙赠，抚问其家，给丧葬之费。
现代文：讣告传来，皇上表示哀悼，派遣使者携带财物，抚慰李纲的家属，并给予丧葬费。
English: When the obituary was announced, the emperor expressed his condolences, sent an envoy to bring him property, comforted Li Gang's family, and paid the funeral expenses.

古文：赠少师，官其亲族十人。
现代文：李纲死后，被赠为少师，其亲族十人分别被朝廷授予不同官职。
English: After Li Gang's death, he was given the title of Junior Teacher, and ten of his relatives were awarded different official positions by the imperial court.

古文：纲负天下之望，以一身用舍为社稷生民安危。
现代文：李纲颇孚众望，一生心系社稷和百姓的安危。
English: Li Gang was well-liked by the public and was concerned about the safety of the society and the people throughout his life.

古文：虽身或不用，用有不久，而其忠诚义气，凛然动乎远迩。
现代文：虽然有时不被朝廷任用，即使被任用但时间不长，然而其忠诚义气，凛然震动远近。
English: Although he was sometimes not appointed by the imperial court, and even if he was appointed, it was not for a long time, nevertheless, his loyalty shakes the far and near.

古文：每宋使至燕山，必问李纲、赵鼎安否，其为远人所畏服如此。
现代文：每次朝廷派遣使者至燕山，金人必问李纲、赵鼎安否，李纲被金人所畏服由此可见一斑。
English: Every time the imperial court sent an envoy to Yanshan, the Jin people had to ask Li Gang and Zhao Ding whether they were safe. This shows that Li Gang was intimidated by the Jin people.

古文：纲有著《易传》内篇十卷、外篇十二卷，《论语详说》十卷，文章、歌诗、奏议百余卷，又有《靖康传信录》、《奉迎录》、《建炎时政记》、《建炎进退志》、《建炎制诏表札集》、《宣抚荆广记》、《制置江右录》。
现代文：李纲著有《易传》内篇十卷，外篇十二卷，《论语详说》十卷，文章、诗歌、奏议百余卷，还有《靖康传信录》、《奉迎录》、《建炎时政记》、《建炎进退志》、《建炎制诏表答刂集》、《宣抚荆广记》、《制置江右录》。
English: Li Gang is the author of "I Chuan," ten volumes of the inner part, twelve volumes of the outer part, ten volumes of "Analects in Detail," and more than one hundred volumes of articles, poems, and speeches, as well as "Letter on the Life of Yasuko," "Bong Ying Lu," "Political History at the Time of Jian Yan," "Jian Yan's Advancement and Retreat," "Jian Yan's Imperial Rescript," "Jian Yan's Imperial Rescript," "Jian Yan's Imperial Rescript," "Jian Yan's Imperial Rescript," "Jian Yan's Imperial Rescript," "Jian Yan'

