古文：太宗十一王世祖二子孝太宗王皇后生哀太子大器、南郡王大连，陈淑容生浔阳王大心，左夫人生南海王大临、安陆王大春，谢夫人生浏阳公大雅，张夫人生新兴王大庄，包昭华生西阳王大钧，范夫人生武宁王大威，褚修华生建平王大球，陈夫人生义安王大昕，硃夫人生绥建王大挚。
现代文：太宗王皇后生哀太子萧大器，南郡王萧大连；陈淑容生寻阳王萧大心；左夫人生南海王萧大临，安陆王萧大春；谢夫人生浏阳公萧大雅；张夫人生新兴王萧大庄；包昭华生西阳王萧大钧；范夫人生武宁王萧大威；褚脩华生建平王萧大球；陈夫人生义安王萧大昕；朱夫人生绥建王萧大挚。
English: Emperor Taizong's empress gave birth to the mourning prince Xiao Daqi, the south county king Xiao Dalian; Chen Shu Rong gave birth to the searching for the sun king Xiao Da Xin; the left lady's life was the South Sea king Xiao Da Lin, the Anlu king Xiao Da Chun; the Xie lady's life was the Liuyang king Xiao Da Ya; the Zhang lady's life was the emerging king Xiao Da Zhuang; the Baozhao Huasheng's was the Xiyang king Xiao Da Zhuang; the Fan lady's life was the Wu Ning king Xiao Da Wei; the Huasheng Jian

古文：自余诸子，本书不载。
现代文：其余众子的事迹，本书不记载。
English: The deeds of the other sons are not recorded in this book.

古文：浔阳王大心，字仁恕。
现代文：寻阳王萧大心字仁恕。
English: Xiao Daxin, the sun-seeking king, said, "I forgive you."

古文：幼而聪朗，善属文。
现代文：从小聪明颖悟，善于写文章。
English: Clever from childhood, good at writing articles.

古文：中大通四年，以皇孙封当阳公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：中大通四年，因皇孙身份而封为当阳公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Daizong, he was given the title of Dangyang Gong due to his status as the emperor's grandson.

古文：大同元年，出为使持节、都督郢、南、北司、定、新五州诸军事、轻车将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：大同元年，他出京任使持节、都督郢南北司定新五州诸军事、轻车将军、郢州刺史。
English: In the first year of Datong, he went to Beijing and was appointed as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the military governor of the North and South Divisions of the New Five Provinces, the general of the light vehicle, and the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：时年十三，太宗以其幼，恐未达民情，戒之曰： 事无大小，悉委行事，纤毫不须措怀。 
现代文：当时萧大心年纪衹有十三岁，太宗因为他年幼，担心他不能通达民情，告诫他说： 无论大事小事，全部交给主持事务的行府州事官员办理，一丝一毫不必多费心思。 
English: At that time, Xiao Daxin was only thirteen years old. Taizong was worried that he could not understand the people's feelings because he was young, and warned him: No matter how big or small, all matters should be handled by the provincial officials in charge of the affairs, and there is no need to worry about anything.

古文：大心虽不亲州务，发言每合于理，众皆惊服。
现代文：萧大心虽然不亲自管理州中事务，但他说出意见每每都符合事理。众人都惊叹佩服。
English: Although Xiao Daxin does not personally manage the affairs of the middle school, his opinions are always reasonable. Everyone is amazed and impressed.

古文：七年，征为侍中、兼石头戍军事。
现代文：大同七年，萧大心被征调为侍中、兼石头戍军事。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, Xiao Daxin was conscripted as an attendant, and also as a military officer.

古文：太清元年，出为云麾将军、江州刺史。
现代文：太清元年，他出京任云麾将军、江州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he went to Beijing to serve as the general of Yunnan and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：二年，侯景寇京邑。大心招集士卒，远近归之，众至数万，与上流诸军赴援宫阙。
现代文：太清二年，侯景进犯京城，萧大心招集士卒，远近的人都归附他，军队达到敷万人，他和长江上游诸路人马一同赶赴京城救援朝廷。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing invaded Beijing. Xiao Daxin called for soldiers. People from near and far joined him. The army reached 10,000 soldiers. He and all the people in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River rushed to Beijing to rescue the imperial court.

古文：三年，城陷，上甲侯萧韶南奔，宣密诏，加散骑常侍，进号平南将军。
现代文：太清三年，京城被攻陷，上甲侯萧韶南逃，向萧大心宣读皇上密韶，加赠萧大心为散骑常侍，进号为平南将军。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, the capital was captured, and Shangjia Hou Xiao Yan fled to the south, read the imperial secret to Xiao Daishin, and gave Xiao Daishin a free-riding attendant, and the promotion number was General Pingnan.

古文：大宝元年，封寻阳王，邑二千户。
现代文：大实元年，萧大心被封为寻阳王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Dashi era, Xiao Daxin was crowned the sun-seeking king, and two thousand households in the food village were created.

古文：初，历阳太守庄铁以城降侯景，既而又奉其母来奔，大心以铁旧将，厚为其礼，军旅之事，悉以委之，仍以为豫章内史。
现代文：以前，历阳太守庄铁率城投降侯景，不久又带着他母亲来投奔萧大心，萧大心因为庄铁是自己的旧部属，所以厚礼相待，率军打仗之事，全都交给庄铁管理，接着命庄铁为豫章内史。
English: In the past, Liyang Daju Zhuo Tie led the city to surrender to Houjing, and soon brought his mother to join Xiao Dashin. Because Zhuo Tie was his old subordinate, Xiao Dashin treated him with courtesy, and all matters of leading the army to war were handed over to Zhuo Tie's management. He then ordered Zhuo Tie to be the internal history of Yuzhang.

古文：侯景数遣军西上寇抄，大心辄令铁击破之，贼不能进。
现代文：侯景屡次派遣军队西进溯流而上，侵犯抢掠，萧大心就命令庄铁击破来进犯的叛军，叛军不能前进。
English: Hou Jing repeatedly sent troops westward upstream, invaded and plundered, and Xiao Dashin ordered Zhuang Tie to break the invading rebels, and the rebels could not advance.

古文：时鄱阳王范率众弃合肥，屯于栅口，待援兵总集，欲俱进。
现代文：当时鄱阳王萧范率领军队弃守合肥，驻扎在栅口，想等到援兵全都聚集之后，再一同进军。
English: At that time, King Xiao Fan of Shenyang led the army to abandon Hefei, stationed at the gate, and wanted to wait until all the reinforcements were gathered before marching together.

古文：大心闻之，遣要范西上，以湓城处之，廪馈甚厚，与戮力共除祸难。
现代文：萧大心听到这个消息，派人邀约萧范溯流而上向西进军，把湓城给萧范驻军，供给的粮食馈赠十分丰厚，两人同心协力扫平祸乱。
English: Upon hearing this news, Xiao Daxin sent someone to invite Xiao Fan to follow the river upstream and march westward, and to give Shucheng to Xiao Fan's garrison. The grain gifts provided were very plentiful, and the two of them worked together to smooth out the disaster.

古文：会庄铁据豫章反，大心令中兵参军韦约等将军击之，铁败绩，又乞降。
现代文：适逢庄铁占据豫章反叛，萧大心命令中兵参军韦约等人率军进击庄铁，庄铁大败，又请求投降。
English: When Zhuo Tie occupied Yuzhang and rebelled, Xiao Daxin ordered his soldiers to join the army, and Wei You and others led the army to attack Zhuo Tie. Zhuo Tie was defeated and asked to surrender.

古文：鄱阳世子嗣先与铁游处，因称其人才略从横，且旧将也，欲举大事，当资其力，若降江州，必不全其首领，嗣请援之。
现代文：鄱阳王世子萧嗣以前曾与庄铁交游，逭时他就向鄱阳王称赞庄铁，说庄铁才华横溢，深谙韬略，况且又是军中宿将，如果想要成就大业，就应藉助庄铁的力量。如果庄铁投降江州寻阳王，一定不能保住性命。萧嗣请求鄱阳王派兵救援庄铁。
English: Xiao Zhi, the son of the King of Shanyang, had previously traveled with Zhuo Tie. When he was young, he praised Zhuo Tie to the King of Shanyang, saying that Zhuo Tie was brilliant and profound, and moreover, he was a general in the army. If you want to achieve a great cause, you should use the power of Zhuo Tie. If Zhuo Tie surrendered to the King of Shanyang, he would not be able to save his life. Xiao Zi asked the King of Shanyang to send soldiers to rescue Zhuo Tie.

古文：范从之，乃遣将侯瑱率精甲五千往救铁，夜袭破韦约等营。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范听从了萧嗣的意见，于是派遣将领侯填率领五千精兵去援救庄铁，侯填夜间突袭攻破韦约等军营寨。
English: Xiao Fan, the king of Shenyang, listened to Xiao Zhi's advice and dispatched General Hou Fu to lead five thousand elite soldiers to rescue Zhuang Tie. Hou Fu raided Wei You and other military camps at night.

古文：大心闻之大惧，于是二籓衅起，人心离贰。
现代文：萧大心听到这个消息十分惊慌害怕，于是两位藩王之间产生裂痕，人心离散，各怀异志。
English: Xiao Daxin was very alarmed and scared when he heard this news. As a result, there was a rift between the two lords of the domain, their hearts were separated, and they harbored different ambitions.

古文：景将任约略地至于湓城，大心遣司马韦质拒战，败绩。
现代文：侯景手下的将领任约攻城略地直达湓城，萧大心派遣司马韦质率军抵抗，被打得大败。
English: Hou Jing's generals took the lead in attacking the city and went straight to Lucheng. Xiao Daxin sent Sima Wei to lead the army to resist and was defeated.

古文：时帐下犹有勇士千余人，咸说曰： 既无粮储，难以守固。若轻骑往建州，以图后举，策之上者也。 
现代文：当时萧大心手下还有一千余名勇士，大家都劝萧大心说： 逭裹既然没有粮食储备，就难以固守，假如率领轻骑去建州，以后再谋划重新振兴，这是上策。 
English: At that time, Xiao Daxin still had more than a thousand warriors under his command. They all advised Xiao Daxin, saying, "Since there is no grain reserve, it is difficult to hold fast. If you lead the light cavalry to Jianzhou, and then plan to revitalize, this is the best strategy."

古文：大心未决，其母陈淑容曰： 即日圣御年尊，储宫万福，汝久奉违颜色，不念拜谒阙庭，且吾已老，而欲远涉险路，粮储不给，岂谓孝子？
现代文：萧大心犹豫不定，未作决断，他母亲陈淑容说： 现在皇上年寿已高，太子身体健康，你久离朝廷，不顾念拜谒皇上太子，况且我年纪已老，你却想要我长途跋涉，走上艰险之路，粮食供给不足，造难道算是孝子?
English: Xiao Daxin hesitated, undecided, his mother Chen Shu Rong said: Now the emperor's age is high, the prince is in good health, you have been away from the court for a long time, you do not care to worship the crown prince, moreover, I am old, but you want me to trek long distances, take the arduous road, food supply is insufficient, so is it a filial son?

古文：吾终不行。 
现代文：我终究是不会启程的。 
English: I'm not leaving after all.

古文：因抚胸恸哭，大心乃止。
现代文：说完就拍胸痛哭，萧大心于是就留下未曾离去。
English: After saying that, he beat his chest and cried bitterly, and Xiao Da Xin stayed there and did not leave.

古文：遂与约和。
现代文：萧大心于是和任约议和。
English: As a result, Xiao Daxin negotiated a peace treaty with Ren.

古文：二年秋，遇害，时年二十九。
现代文：大实二年秋天，萧大心遇害，死时二十五岁。
English: Xiao Daxin was killed in the autumn of 1921, when he was 25 years old.

古文：南海王大临，字仁宣。
现代文：南海王萧大临字仁宣。
English: Nanhai King Xiao Dairin Zi Ren Xuan.

古文：大同二年，封宁国县公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：大同二年，他被封为宁国县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the second year of the same year, he was appointed as Ningguo County official, catering to 1,500 households.

古文：少而敏慧。
现代文：萧大临从小聪明颖慧。
English: Xiao Dairin has been clever and brilliant since childhood.

古文：年十一，遭左夫人忧，哭泣毁瘠，以孝闻。
现代文：他十一岁的时候，生母左夫人去世，他天天哭泣，以致身体衰弱瘠瘦，因此以孝而出名。
English: When he was eleven years old, his birth mother, Lady Zuo, died. He cried every day, and his body became weak and thin, so he became famous for his filial piety.

古文：后入国学，明经射策甲科，拜中书侍郎，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：后来萧大临进入国学，明经射策考试位居甲科，被授为中书侍郎，迁任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Later, Xiao Dairin entered the Chinese language and literature department, and was awarded the title of junior high school secretary, and was transferred to the Huangmen secretary.

古文：十一年，为长兼侍中。
现代文：大同十一年，任长兼侍中。
English: In the eleventh year of the same year, he was appointed chief and chamberlain.

古文：出为轻车将军，琅邪、彭城二郡太守。
现代文：后出京为轻车将军、琅邪彭城二郡太守。
English: Later, he went to Beijing as a general of light vehicles, and became the governor of two counties in Pengcheng.

古文：侯景乱，为使持节、宣惠将军，屯新亭。
现代文：侯景叛乱，萧大临被朝廷任为使持节、宣惠将军，驻扎新亭。
English: After the rebellion of Houjing, Xiao Dairin was appointed by the imperial court as the envoy of Xizhi Festival and the general of Xuan Hui, and stationed in Xinting.

古文：俄又征还，屯端门，都督城南诸军事。
现代文：不久他又被征调回京，驻扎端门，都督城南诸军事。
English: Soon after, he was transferred back to Beijing, stationed in Danmen, and became military governor of the southern part of the city.

古文：时议者皆劝收外财物，拟供赏赐，大临独曰： 物乃赏士，而牛可犒军。 
现代文：当时议论政事的人都劝谏萧大临收取民间财物，以备用作赏赐，萧大临却说： 财物祇能赏赐士人，而牛却可以犒劳军人。 
English: At that time, people who discussed political affairs advised Gong Xiao Dairin to collect folk wealth to be used as a reward, but Xiao Dairin said: Wealth can only reward scholars, but cattle can reward soldiers.

古文：命取牛，得千余头，城内赖以飨士。
现代文：命令收取牛，得到了一千余头，凭藉这些牛而得慰劳城中军士。
English: He was ordered to collect the cattle and received more than a thousand head of cattle, which was used to comfort the soldiers in the labor camp.

古文：大宝元年，封南海郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大宝元年，萧大临被封为南海郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of Dabao, Xiao Dairin was named the king of Nanhai County, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：出为使持节、都督扬、南徐二州诸军事、安南将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：后又出京任使持节、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、安南将军、扬州刺史。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to be appointed as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the military governor of Yangnan Xu Erzhou, the general of Annan, and the historian of Yangzhou.

古文：又除安东将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：又被任命为安束将军、吴郡太守。
English: He was also appointed General of Anzac and Governor of Wu County.

古文：时张彪起义于会稽，吴人陆令公、颍川庾孟卿等劝大临走投彪。
现代文：当时张彪在会稽组织义军反对侯景，吴人陆令公、颖剀座孟卿等人劝萧大临离郡投靠张彪。
English: At that time, Zhang Biao was in charge of organizing the rebel army to oppose Hou Jing, and Wu Renlu Rongguo, Yinglu Za Meng Qing and others advised Xiao Dairin to leave the county and support Zhang Biao.

古文：大临曰： 彪若成功，不资我力；如其挠败，以我说焉。
现代文：萧大临说： 亟彪假若成功，不会供给我们兵力；假若他遭受挫折失败，会把我当作脱身的筹码。
English: Xiao Dairin said: "If he succeeds, he will not provide us with troops; if he fails, he will use me as a bargaining chip.

古文：不可往也。 
现代文：不能去投靠张彪。 
English: You can't go to Zhang Biao.

古文：二年秋，遇害于郡，时年二十五。
现代文：大实二年秋天，萧大临在吴郡遇害，死时二十五岁。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Dashi, Xiao Dairin was killed in Wu County. He was 25 years old at the time of his death.

古文：南郡王大连，字仁靖。
现代文：卤郡王萧大连字仁靖。
English: Wang Xiao Dalian, also known as Renjing, from Halogen County.

古文：少俊爽，能属文，举止风流，雅有巧思，妙达音乐，兼善丹青。
现代文：他从小俊逸爽朗，擅长写文章，言谈举止文雅而有风度，常有一些出奇的见解，精通音乐，同时又善于绘画。
English: From a young age, he was cheerful, good at writing articles, spoke and behaved with elegance and grace, often had some surprising opinions, was proficient in music, and was also good at painting.

古文：大同二年，封临城县公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：大同二年，萧大连被封为临城县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the second year of Datong, Xiao Dalian was appointed as the public official of Lincheng County, with 1,500 households in food villages.

古文：七年，与南海王俱入国学，射策甲科，拜中书侍郎。
现代文：大同七年，他和南海王一同进入国学，射策考试同居甲科，拜为中书侍郎。
English: In the seventh year of the same year, he and Nanhai Wang entered the Chinese language school together, and lived together in Class A for the shooting test, and became a junior high school secretary.

古文：十年，高祖幸硃方，大连与兄大临并从。
现代文：大同十年，高祖巡幸塞立，萧大连与兄长萧大临一同随行。
English: In the 10th year of Datong, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to Xixili, accompanied by Xiao Dalian and his brother Xiao Dalin.

古文：高祖问曰： 汝等习骑不？ 
现代文：高祖问他们： 你们几个入学习骑术了吗? 
English: Gaozu asked them: How many of you have started learning to ride?

古文：对曰： 臣等未奉诏，不敢辄习。 
现代文：他们回答说： 我们没得到韶命，不敢擅自学习骑术。 
English: They replied: "We didn't have the guts to learn to ride.

古文：敕各给马试之，大连兄弟据鞍往还，各得驰骤之节，高祖大悦，即赐所乘马。
现代文：高担命人各给他们马匹试骑，萧大连兄弟二人坐在鞍上驱马往返，都掌握了驰驱的要领。高祖十分高兴，就把各人骑的马赏给了他们。
English: Gao Dairen gave each of them a horse to ride, and the two Xiao Dairen brothers sat in the saddle and drove the horse back and forth. They all mastered the essentials of driving. Gao Zu was very happy and rewarded them with the horse each of them rode.

古文：及为启谢，词又甚美。
现代文：他们呈上奏启拜谢，奏启的文字又很美。
English: They presented the opening prayer and thanksgiving, and the words of the opening prayer were beautiful.

古文：高祖佗日谓太宗曰： 昨见大临、大连，风韵可爱，足以慰吾年老。 
现代文：有一天高祖对太宗说： 昨天看到大临、大连，风度气质十分可爱，对于进入老年的我确实是个安慰。 
English: One day, Gao Zu said to Taizong, "Yesterday, I saw Dalin and Dalian. Their demeanor and temperament are very lovely. This is indeed a consolation for me as I enter old age.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎，转侍中，寻兼石头戍军事。
现代文：萧大连迁任给事黄门侍郎，转侍中，不久兼石头戍军事。
English: Xiao Dalian was transferred to the Yellow Gate as a waiter, and soon became a military officer.

古文：太清元年，出为使持节、轻车将军、东扬州刺史。
现代文：太遣元年，出京为使持节、轻车将军、东扬州刺吏。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, he went to Beijing for the Envoy Festival, the Light Vehicle General, and the East Yangzhou Assassin.

古文：侯景入寇京师，大连率众四万来赴。
现代文：侯景进犯京城，萧大连率领四万军队赶来救援。
English: Hou Jing invaded the capital, and Xiao Dalian led 40,000 troops to come to the rescue.

古文：及台城没，援军散，复还扬州。
现代文：台城被攻陷，援军散去，萧大连又回扬州。
English: Taicheng was captured, the reinforcements dispersed, and Xiao Dalian returned to Yangzhou.

古文：三年，会稽山贼田领群聚党数万来攻，大连命中兵参军张彪击斩之。
现代文：太清三年，会稽山贼田领群聚集数万人来进攻扬州，萧大连命中兵参军张彪迎击，斩杀了田领群。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, tens of thousands of people gathered to attack Yangzhou. Xiao Dalian hit Zhang Biao, who joined the army, and killed Tian Lianqun.

古文：大宝元年，封为南郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大实元年，萧大连被封为南郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Dashi era, Xiao Dalian was named the king of Nan County, with more than 2,000 households in the county.

古文：景仍遣其将赵伯超、刘神茂来讨，大连设备以待之。
现代文：侯景频频派遣手下将领趟伯超、刘神茂来攻打，萧大连布设守兵待敌。
English: Hou Jing frequently dispatched his generals, including Bo Chao and Liu Shenmao, to attack, while Xiao Dalian set up a garrison to wait for the enemy.

古文：会将留异以城应贼，大连弃城走，至信安，为贼所获。
现代文：正遇上手下将领留异率城投降叛贼，萧大连弃城逃跑，到信安，他被叛贼擒获。
English: Just as he was about to surrender to the rebels, Xiao Dalian abandoned the city and fled to Xin'an, where he was captured by the rebels.

古文：侯景以为轻车将军、行扬州事，迁平南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：侯景命萧大连为轻车将军、行扬州事，迁任平南将军、江州刺史。
English: Xiao Dalian, a general of light vehicles, was transferred to the post of the general of Pingnan Province and the post of the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：大连既迫寇手，恒思逃窜，乃与贼约曰： 军民之事，吾不预焉。候我存亡，但听钟响。 
现代文：萧大连困于叛贼手中之后，常常想着逃跑，于是与叛贼相约说： 率军治民之事，我不参预，要知道我的死活，祇要听我府中的钟声。 
English: After Xiao Dalian was trapped in the hands of the traitors, he often thought about escaping, so he made a deal with the traitors and said, "I will not take part in leading the army to govern the people. If you want to know whether I am alive or dead, just listen to the bells in my house."

古文：欲简与相见，因得亡逸，贼亦信之。
现代文：这是想要少和叛贼相见，藉此得以逃走，叛贼也相信了他，但逃跑没有成功。
English: It was to avoid meeting the traitor that he was able to escape, and the traitor believed him, but the escape did not succeed.

古文：事未果。二年秋，遇害，时年二十五。
现代文：大实二年秋天，萧大连遇害，死时二十五岁。
English: In the autumn of 1912, Xiao Dalian was murdered. He was 25 years old when he died.

古文：安陆王大春，字仁经。
现代文：安陆王萧大春字仁经。
English: An Lu Wang Xiao Dachun Zi Ren Jing.

古文：少博涉书记。
现代文：他从小广泛涉猎各种书籍。
English: Since he was a child, he has been involved in a wide range of books.

古文：天性孝谨，体貌环伟，腰带十围。
现代文：他天性恭谨孝顺，姿容美好，身体魁梧，腰带有十围。
English: He is naturally respectful and filial, has a beautiful appearance, a strong body, and a waistline of 10 cm.

古文：大同六年，封西豊县公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：大同六年，萧大春被封为西丰县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the sixth year of the Datong era, Xiao Dachun was appointed as the public official of Xifeng County, with 1,500 households in the food village.

古文：拜中书侍郎。
现代文：授任中书侍郎。
English: He was given the post of junior secretary.

古文：后为宁远将军，知石头戍军事。
现代文：后来任宁远将军，知石头戍军事。
English: He was later appointed as the general of Ningyuan. He knew the military well.

古文：侯景内寇，大春奔京口，随邵陵王入援，战于钟山，为贼所获。
现代文：侯景进攻京城，萧大春逃奔到京口，随着邵陵王援救京城，和叛贼在钟山交战，萧大春被叛贼擒获。
English: Hou Jing attacked the capital, Xiao Dachun fled to Jingkou, along with Shao Ling Wang to rescue the capital, and the traitors fought in Zhongshan, Xiao Dachun was captured by the traitors.

古文：京城既陷，大宝元年，封安陆郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：京城被攻陷之后，大宝元年，萧大春被封为安陆郡王，食邑二千户。
English: After the fall of the capital, in the first year of the Taibao era, Xiao Dachun was crowned the king of Anlu County, with a population of 2,000 households.

古文：出为使持节、云麾将军、东扬州刺史。
现代文：出京为使持节、云麾将军、东扬州刺史。
English: Going out of Beijing is the festival of carrying forward, the general of the clouds, and the history of the East Yangzhou.

古文：二年秋，遇害，时年二十二。
现代文：大实二年秋天，萧大春遇害，死时二十二岁。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Daxi, Xiao Dachun was killed. He was 22 years old at the time of his death.

古文：浏阳公大雅，字仁风。
现代文：浏阳公萧大雅字仁风。
English: Liu Yang Gong Xiao Da Ya Zi Ren Feng.

古文：大同九年，封浏阳县公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：大同九年，他被封为浏阳县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the ninth year of Datong, he was appointed as Liuyang County official, with 1,500 households in food villages.

古文：少聪警，美姿仪，特为高祖所爱。
现代文：萧大雅从小聪明机警，姿容美，风度好，高祖特别喜爱。
English: Xiao Daya has been smart and alert since childhood, with a beautiful appearance and good manners. Gao Zu is particularly fond of her.

古文：太清三年，京城陷，贼已乘城，大雅犹命左右格战，贼至渐众，乃自缒而下。
现代文：太清三年，京城被攻陷，叛贼已经登上城墙，萧大雅还是命令左右侍从迎战，攻来的叛贼逐渐增多，他才自己用绳子吊着从城墙上下来。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, the capital was invaded and the traitors had already climbed up the city wall. Xiao Daya still ordered his attendants to fight, and the number of invading traitors gradually increased. Only then did he hang himself from the city wall with a rope.

古文：因发愤感疾，薨，时年十七。
现代文：萧大雅因此含恨而得病去世，死时十七岁。
English: As a result, Xiao Daya became ill and passed away, at the age of seventeen.

古文：新兴王大庄，字仁礼。
现代文：新兴王萧大庄字仁礼。
English: Xinxing Wang Xiao Dazhuang Zi Renli.

古文：大同九年，封高唐县公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：大同九年，他被封为高唐县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the ninth year of Datong, he was appointed as the public official of Gaotang County, with 1,500 households in food villages.

古文：大宝元年，封新兴郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：去室元年，被封为新兴郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the year, it was named the emerging county king, with two thousand households in the county.

古文：出为使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、宣毅将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：出京任使持节、都督鱼涂塑诸军事、宣毅将军、南徐州刺史。
English: The festival of sending envoys to Beijing, the military, General Xuan Yi, and the history of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：二年秋，遇害，时年十八。
现代文：大宝二年秋天遇害，死时十八岁。
English: Dabao was killed in the autumn of the second year and was eighteen years old at the time of death.

古文：西阳王大钧，字仁辅。
现代文：西阳王萧大钩字仁辅。
English: Xiyang Wang Xiao Daihuak Zi Renju.

古文：性厚重，不妄戏弄。
现代文：他生性敦厚持重，不随便玩耍。
English: He has a strong character and doesn't play around.

古文：年七岁，高祖尝问读何书，对曰 学《诗》 。
现代文：七岁的时候，高祖曾经间他读了什么书，他回答说 学《诗》 。
English: When Gao Zu was seven years old, he answered that he wanted to learn "poetry."

古文：因命讽诵，音韵清雅，高祖因赐王羲之书一卷。
现代文：高祖就命他背诵，他背诵时声音清楚响亮，高祖就赏给他一卷王羲之写的字。
English: Gaozhu ordered him to recite, and when he recited, his voice was clear and loud. Gaozhu awarded him a scroll of characters written by Wang Xuanmen.

古文：大宝元年，封西阳郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大实元年，萧大钩被封为西阳郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Dashi era, Xiao Dahu was crowned the king of Xiyang County, with more than 2,000 households in the county.

古文：出为宣惠将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：出京任宣惠将军、丹阳尹。
English: Danyang Yin was appointed to the post of General Xuan Hui in Beijing.

古文：二年，监扬州，将军如故。
现代文：大实二年，他改任监扬州，将军之号不变。
English: In the second year of Dashi, he was reappointed as the supervisor of Yangzhou, and his title of general remained unchanged.

古文：至秋遇害，时年十三。
现代文：到遣年秋天，萧大钩遇害，死时十三岁。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Xiao Dahu was killed. He was 13 years old at the time of his death.

古文：武宁王大威，字仁容。
现代文：武宁王萧大威字仁容。
English: The King of Wu Ning, Xiao Dawei, is depicted as benevolent.

古文：美风仪，眉目如画。
现代文：仪容气质都很美，眉日像描过的一样。
English: Their appearance and temperament are all beautiful, and their eyebrows are just as drawn.

古文：大宝元年，封武宁郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大宝元年，他被封为武宁郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Taiho era, he was named the king of the county of Muning, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：二年，出为信威将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：大宝二年，出京为信威将军、丹阳尹。
English: In the second year of Dabao, he went to Beijing as General Xinwei and Danyang Yin.

古文：其年秋，遇害，时年十三。
现代文：这年秋天，萧大威遇害，死时十三岁。
English: In the autumn of that year, Xiao Dawei was killed. He was 13 years old at the time of his death.

古文：建平王大球，字仁珽。
现代文：建平王萧大球字仁珽。
English: Jianping Wang Xiao Daqiu Zi Renqiu.

古文：大宝元年，封建平郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大宝元年，他被封为建平郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of Dabao, he was named the king of Jianping County, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：性明慧夙成。
现代文：萧大球生性聪慧早熟。
English: Xiao Daqiu is intelligent and precocious.

古文：初，侯景围京城，高祖素归心释教，每发誓愿，恒云： 若有众生应受诸苦，悉衍身代当。 
现代文：当初，侯景围攻京城，高祖一向诚心信奉释教，每每发誓言、许心愿，常说： 若有众生应当遭受的各种苦难，全由我萧衍一人承担。 
English: At the beginning, when Hou Jing besieged the capital, Gao Zu always sincerely believed in the teachings of Confucius. Every time he swore an oath and made a wish, he often said, "If there are all kinds of sufferings that sentient beings should suffer, I, Xiao Yan, will bear all of them."

古文：时大球年甫七岁，闻而惊谓母曰： 官家尚尔，儿安敢辞？ 
现代文：当时萧大球年刚七岁，听到造话很吃惊，便对母亲说： 皇上尚且这样，我怎敢拒受苦难? 
English: At that time, Xiao Daqiu was just seven years old. He was very surprised to hear his father's words and said to his mother: "Even though the emperor is like this, how can I dare to refuse to suffer?

古文：乃六时礼佛，亦云： 凡有众生应获苦报，悉大球代受。 
现代文：于是在晨朝、日中、日没、初夜、中夜、后夜六时礼敬佛时，也说： 凡有众生应当遭受的苦难报应，全由我芦去壁代为承受。 
English: Therefore, when paying homage to the Buddha at six o'clock in the morning, during the day, at sunset, at the beginning of the night, in the middle of the night, and at the end of the night, he also said, "All the suffering and retribution that all living beings should suffer is borne by me.

古文：其早慧如此。
现代文：他就是这样年少时就聪明遇人。
English: That's how smart he was at a young age.

古文：二年，出为轻车将军、兼石头戍军事。
现代文：二年，出京任轻车将军、兼石头盛军事。
English: Two years later, he went to Beijing as a general of light vehicles, and also as a military commander.

古文：其年秋，遇害，时年十一。
现代文：这年秋天，萧大球遇害，死时十一岁。
English: In the autumn of that year, Xiao Daqiu was murdered. He was eleven years old at the time of his death.

古文：义安王大昕，字仁朗。
现代文：义安王萧大昕字仁朗。
English: The king of Yian, Xiao Daxi, is portrayed by Ren Lang.

古文：年四岁，母陈夫人卒，便哀慕毁悴，有若成人。
现代文：四岁的时候，母亲陈夫人去世，他因思念母亲而哀伤憔悴，如同成年人守丧。
English: When he was four years old, his mother, Mrs. Chen, passed away. He grieved for his mother as if he were an adult.

古文：及高祖崩，大昕奉慰太宗，呜咽不能自胜。左右见之，莫不掩泣。
现代文：高祖驾崩之后，在丧期内他去问候太塞，低声哭泣，不能自禁，见到这种情景的左右随从，也都人人掩面哭泣。
English: After Gao Zu passed away, during the period of mourning, he went to greet Tai Ce, weeping in a low voice, unable to restrain himself. When his followers on both sides saw this scene, they all hid their faces and wept.

古文：大宝元年，封义安郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大实元年，萧大听被封为义安郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Dashi era, Xiao Dahui was named the king of Yian County, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：二年，出为宁远将军、琅邪、彭城二郡太守，未之镇，遇害，时年十一。
现代文：左宣二年，出京为宁远将军、琅邪彭城二郡太守，他还未去任所就遇害，死时十一岁。
English: In the second year of Zuo Xuan, he went to Beijing to become the general of Ningyuan and the governor of the two counties of Ziyang and Pengcheng. He was killed before he could go to his post and died at the age of eleven.

古文：绥建王大挚，字仁瑛。
现代文：绥建王萧大挚字仁锳。
English: Jian Wang Xiao earnestly wrote the word "benevolence."

古文：幼雄壮有胆气，及京城陷，乃叹曰： 大丈夫会当灭虏属。 
现代文：他从小勇猛刚强，有勇气和胆量。京城被攻陷之后，他感慨地说： 大丈夫将要消灭这些贼虏。 
English: Ever since he was a child, he was brave and strong, with courage and daring. After the fall of the capital, he said with emotion: "It's alright, we're going to destroy these thieves."

古文：奶媪惊，掩其口曰： 勿妄言，祸将及！ 
现代文：奶母惊怕，掩住他的口对他说： 不要随便说话，否则祸事将要来临。 
English: The nurse, alarmed, covered his mouth and said to him, "Don't speak so freely, or something bad will happen to you."

古文：大挚笑曰： 祸至非由此言。 
现代文：萧大挚笑着说： 祸事来临，并不是由这话引起。 
English: Xiao said with a big smile, "The calamity is not caused by this word.

古文：大宝元年，封绥建郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：大宾元年，萧大挚被封为绥建郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Great Guest, Xiao Daxin was named the county king of Lijian, with 2,000 households in the county.

古文：二年，为宁远将军，遇害，时年十岁。
现代文：大实二年，任宁远将军，遇害，死时十岁。
English: In the second year of Dashi, General Ren Ningyuan was killed. He was ten years old at the time of his death.

古文：世祖诸男：徐妃生忠壮世子方等，王夫人生贞惠世子方诸，其愍怀太子方矩，夏贤妃生敬皇帝。
现代文：世祖众子：徐妃生忠壮世子萧方等；王去人生贞惠世子萧方诸；愍怀太子萧方矩，本书没有记载他的生母，他另外有传；夏贤妃生敬皇帝。
English: The sons of the world's ancestors: Xu Fei gave birth to the loyal and strong descendant Xiao Fang; the king gave birth to the virtuous and benevolent descendant Xiao Fang Zhu; he conceived the prince Xiao Fang, this book does not record his birth mother, he has another legend; Xia Xianfei gave birth to the emperor.

古文：自余诸子，并本书无传。
现代文：其他众子，本书都没有传。
English: This book was not passed on to any of his other children.

古文：忠壮世子方等，字实相，世祖长子也。
现代文：忠壮世子萧方等字实相，是世祖的长子。
English: Xiao Fang, the loyal and strong descendant, is the eldest son of the ancestor.

古文：母曰徐妃。
现代文：母亲是徐妃。
English: Her mother is Xu Fei.

古文：少聪敏，有俊才，善骑射，尤长巧思。
现代文：萧方等从小聪明，有卓越的才能，善于骑马射箭，特别长于想出一些奇巧的构思。
English: Xiao Fang and others were clever from childhood, had outstanding talents, were good at riding horses and archery, and were particularly good at coming up with some ingenious ideas.

古文：性爱林泉，特好散逸。
现代文：他生性喜爱山林泉石，特别喜欢闲散隐逸的生活。
English: By nature, he likes mountains, forests, springs and rocks, and especially likes a leisurely and secluded life.

古文：尝著论曰： 人生处世，如白驹过隙耳。
现代文：曾经撰写一篇论，论中说： 人生活在世上，衹是像白驹遇隙一样短暂罢了。
English: He once wrote a treatise that said: "Man's life on earth is as brief as the egret's flight.

古文：一壶之酒，足以养性；一箪之食，足以怡形。
现代文：一壶酒，足以怡养性情；一箪食，是以使身体安适。
English: A jug of wine is enough to nourish the disposition; a bowl of food is to make the body comfortable.

古文：生在蓬蒿，死葬沟壑，瓦棺石椁，何以异兹？
现代文：生活在蓬蒿之中，死后葬在沟壑襄，和睡瓦棺、用石椁，有什么不同呢?
English: What is the difference between living in a pagoda and being buried in a ravine after death, and sleeping in a tile coffin and using a stone coffin?

古文：吾尝梦为鱼，因化为鸟。
现代文：我曾经梦见自己变成鱼，接着变为乌。
English: I once dreamt that I turned into a fish, and then into wax.

古文：当其梦也，何乐如之；及其觉也，何忧斯类；良由吾之不及鱼鸟者，远矣。
现代文：处在梦中的乐趣，什么乐趣也比不上，等到醒来之后的忧虑，什么忧虑也没有这么沉重，实在是因为和鱼乌相比，我相差太远了。
English: The pleasure of being in a dream is incomparable, and the worries after waking up, no worries are so heavy, really because I am too far away compared to the fish.

古文：故鱼鸟飞浮，任其志性；吾之进退，恒存掌握。举手惧触，摇足恐堕。
现代文：所以鱼浮游、乌飞翔，任由自己的性情，而我的进退，常处在控制之中，举手担心触碰，动足害怕堕落。
English: Therefore, the fish swims and the cormorant flies, allowing their own temperament, and my advance and retreat are always under control, raising my hand is afraid of touching, moving my feet is afraid of falling.

古文：若使吾终得与鱼鸟同游，则去人间如脱屣耳。 
现代文：假如使我始终能和鱼鸟一同交游，那么我离开人间，无所顾念，如同脱去鞋履那么轻松而已。 
English: If I can always swim with the fishes and birds, then I can leave the world without any worries, just as easy as taking off my shoes.

古文：初，徐妃以嫉妒失宠，方等意不自安。世祖闻之，又恶方等，方等益惧，故述论以申其志焉。
现代文：当初，徐蛆因为嫉妒而失去皇上的宠爱，萧方等内心恐惧不安，世祖听说这种情况，又更讨厌萧方等，萧方等更加害怕，所以撰写逭篇论以申述自己的心志。
English: At first, Xu Xi lost the emperor's favor because of jealousy, and Xiao Fang and others were afraid and uneasy. When Shizu heard about this situation, he hated Xiao Fang and others even more, and Xiao Fang and others were even more afraid, so he wrote a three-part essay to express his thoughts.

古文：会高祖欲见诸王长子，世祖遣方等入侍，方等欣然升舟，冀免忧辱。
现代文：逢高祖想见众王的长子，世祖派萧方等入京侍奉高祖，萧方等高高兴兴地上船，希望藉此免受羞辱，消除忧虑。
English: Feng Gaozu wanted to see the eldest son of the kings. The ancestor sent Xiao Fang and others to enter Beijing to serve Gaozu. Xiao Fang and others boarded the ship happily, hoping to avoid humiliation and eliminate anxiety.

古文：行至繇水，值侯景乱，世祖召之，方等启曰： 昔申生不爱其死，方等岂顾其生？ 
现代文：船行至繇水，正值侯景叛乱，世祖召他回来，萧方等启奏说： 从前申生不吝惜生命，方等难道会顾念生命。 
English: When he sailed to Surabaya, it was the time of the Houjing Rebellion. The patriarch called him back, and Xiao Fang et al. said: In the past, Shen Sheng did not spare his life. Will Fang et al. think about life?

古文：世祖省书叹息，知无还意，乃配步骑一万，使援京都。
现代文：世祖读到萧方等的启奏，叹息不已，知道萧方等没有返回的打算，于是配给萧方等步兵骑兵一万人，命他救援京城。
English: The patriarch read the introduction of Xiao Fang and others, sighed deeply, and knew that Xiao Fang and others had no intention of returning, so he assigned 10,000 infantry and cavalry to Xiao Fang and others and ordered him to rescue the capital.

古文：贼每来攻，方等必身当矢石。
现代文：叛贼每次来进攻，萧方等必定冒着矢石，亲临战场。
English: Every time the traitors attack, Xiao Fang and others must face the challenge and come to the battlefield.

古文：宫城陷，方等归荆州，收集士马，甚得众和，世祖始叹其能。
现代文：宫城被攻陷，萧方等回到荆州，收聚人马，深得士众之心，世祖才为他的才能而感叹。
English: After the fall of Miyagi, Xiao Fang and others returned to Jingzhou, gathered men and horses, and won the hearts of the soldiers. The ancestors were amazed at his talent.

古文：方等又劝修筑城栅，以备不虞。
现代文：萧方等又劝勉大家修筑城墙栅栏，以备不虞。
English: Xiao Fang and others also exhorted everyone to build city walls and fences in case of danger.

古文：既成，楼雉相望，周回七十余里。
现代文：修成之后，城楼城堞相连，周围七十余里。
English: After completion, the castle towers are connected to each other, with a circumference of more than 70 miles.

古文：世祖观之甚悦，入谓徐妃曰： 若更有一子如此，吾复何忧！ 
现代文：世祖看到这种情景，十分高兴，进宫对徐妃说： 假若再有一个儿子有这样的才能，我还担忧什么。 
English: Seeing this scene, the patriarch was very happy. When he entered the palace, he said to Xu Fei: "If I had another son with such talent, what would I worry about?

古文：徐妃不答，垂泣而退。
现代文：徐妃不回答，流着眼泪离开了。
English: Xu Fei did not answer and left in tears.

古文：世祖忿之，因疏其秽行，榜于大阁。
现代文：世祖对此十分气愤，于是一条条列举徐妃不守礼法的行为，书写公布在大阁上。
English: The patriarch was very angry about this, so he listed all of Xu Fei's actions that did not comply with the etiquette, and published them in writing on the large cabinet.

古文：方等入见，益以自危。
现代文：萧方等进宫见到，更加感到危险，心悸不安。
English: When Xiao Fang saw them enter the palace, he felt even more dangerous and anxious.

古文：时河东王为湘州刺史，不受督府之令，方等乃乞征之，世祖许焉。拜为都督，令帅精卒二万南讨。
现代文：当时河东王任湘州刺史，不听从督府的命令，萧方等于是请求派自己去征讨河东王，世祖答应了他的要求，授任他为都督，命他率领二万精兵南进征讨。
English: At that time, the king of Hedong served as the governor of Hunan Province, and he did not obey the order of the governor's office. Xiao Fang even requested to send himself to conquer the king of Hedong. The ancestor agreed to his request, appointed him as the governor, and ordered him to lead twenty thousand elite soldiers to march south to conquer.

古文：方等临行，谓所亲曰： 吾此段出征，必死无二；死而获所，吾岂爱生。 
现代文：萧方等临行时，对自己亲近的朋友说： 我这次出征。定死无疑；死得其所，我怎么会吝惜生命。 
English: When Xiao Fang was about to leave, he said to his close friends: I am going to the front this time. There is no doubt that I will die; death has its place, how can I begrudge my life.

古文：及至麻溪，河东王率军逆战，方等击之，军败，遂溺死，时年二十二。
现代文：萧方等率军行至麻溪，河东王率军迎战，萧方等率军进击，被打败，萧方等被淹死，死时二十二岁。
English: Xiao Fang and others led the army to Maxi, the king of Hedong led the army to meet the battle, Xiao Fang and others led the army to attack, was defeated, Xiao Fang and others were drowned, and died at the age of twenty-two.

古文：世祖闻之，不以为戚。
现代文：世担听到萧方等的死讯，并不哀戚。
English: The world did not mourn when it heard of the death of Xiao Fang.

古文：后追思其才，赠侍中、中军将军、扬州刺史，谥曰忠壮世子，并为招魂以哀之。
现代文：后来世祖追念萧方等的才能，才追赠萧方等为侍中、中军将军、扬州刺史。谧为忠壮世子，并且为他招魂哀悼他。
English: Later, the ancestor remembered the talent of Xiao Fang and so on, and then he posthumously awarded Xiao Fang and so on as a chamberlain, a general of the Chinese army, and a historian of Yangzhou. He was a loyal and strong heir, and mourned him for his soul.

古文：方等注范晔《后汉书》，未就；所撰《三十国春秋》及《静住子》，行于世。
现代文：方等注范晔《后漠书》作注，未完成。他撰写的《三十国春秋》以及《静住子》，流传于世。
English: Fang et al. annotated Fan Zhao's "Book of the Desert," which was unfinished. His writings "The Spring and Autumn of the Thirty Kingdoms" and "Quiet Child" have been passed down to the world.

古文：贞惠世子方诸，字智相，世祖第二子。
现代文：贞惠世子萧方诸字智相，是世祖的第二个儿子。
English: Zhenhui's son, Xiao Fangzhu Zhi Xiang, was the second son of the patriarch.

古文：母王夫人。
现代文：生母是王夫人。
English: His biological mother is Mrs. Wang.

古文：幼聪警博学，明《老》、《易》，善谈玄，风采清越，辞辩锋生，特为世祖所爱，母王氏又有宠。
现代文：萧方诸从小聪明颖悟而且博学，通晓《老》、《易》，善于谈论玄学，风度清秀拔俗，言辞流畅，甚有锋芒。萧方诸特别受世祖喜爱，生母王氏又深得恩宠。
English: Xiao Fangzhu was clever, enlightened and erudite from an early age. He was familiar with "Lao" and "Yi," and was good at talking about metaphysics. His demeanor was refined and refined, and his words were smooth and very sharp. Xiao Fangzhu was especially loved by the ancestors, and his birth mother Wang was deeply favored.

古文：及方等败没，世祖谓之曰： 不有所废，其何以兴。 
现代文：到萧方等因军败死后，世祖对萧方诸说： 没有废弃，又哪会有兴盛。 
English: After the death of Xiao Fang and others due to military defeat, the ancestor said to Xiao Fang Zhu: There is no abandonment, and there will be prosperity.

古文：因拜为中抚军以自副，又出为郢州刺史，镇江夏，以鲍泉为行事，防遏下流。
现代文：就授任萧方诸为中抚军以作自己的储副，又让他出任郢州刺史，镇守江夏，命鲍泉任行府州事之职，以防范遏止叛军顺流而下。
English: He appointed Xiao Fangzhu as the vice-governor of Zhongfu to serve as his deputy, and also appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou, the governor of Jiangxia, and ordered Bao Quan to carry out the duties of the prefectural government to prevent and stop the rebels from going down the river.

古文：时世祖遣徐文盛督众军，与侯景将任约相持未决。方诸恃文盛在近，不恤军政，日与鲍泉蒲酒为乐。
现代文：当时世祖派徐文盛督率众军，与侯景手下将领任约相持不下，未决胜负，萧方诸倚仗徐文盛大军在附近，自己不关心军事政事，每天和鲍泉为挥蒲之戏及饮酒取乐。
English: At that time, the ancestor sent Xu Wensheng to lead the army, and he and the generals led by Hou Jing could not keep up with each other, and the victory was not decided. Xiao Fang and others relied on Xu Wensheng's large army in the vicinity. He did not care about military and political affairs. He and Bao Quan enjoyed the game of swinging paddles and drinking alcohol every day.

古文：侯景知之，乃遣其将宋子仙率轻骑数百，从间道袭之。
现代文：侯景得知这消息，于是就派遣手下将领宋子仙率领数百轻骑，从小道袭击萧方诸。
English: When Hou Jing learned of this news, he dispatched his subordinate general Song Zixian to lead hundreds of light cavalry to attack Xiao Fangzhu from the trail.

古文：属风雨晦冥，子仙至，百姓奔告，方诸与鲍泉犹不信，曰： 徐文盛大军在下，虏安得来？ 
现代文：那天正值风雨交加，天色昏暗，宋子仙率军直到辽夏，百姓跑去报告，芦友盏和饱星还不相信，说： 徐文盛大军守住下游的通道，贼虏怎么能来这裹? 
English: That day was a time of wind and rain, the sky was dark, Song Zixian led the army until Liao Xia, the people ran to report, Lu Youqin and Fengxing still did not believe, saying: Xu Wensheng's large army guarded the downstream channel, how could the thieves come here?

古文：始命闭门，贼骑已入，城遂陷，子仙执方诸以归。
现代文：这才命令关闭城门，但叛贼骑兵已经进了城门，辽夏城于是被攻陷，宋子仙擒获萧方诸而归。
English: It was only then that the order was given to close the city gates, but the renegade cavalry had already entered the city gates. Liaoxia City was then captured, and Song Zi Xianqi was defeated and forced to retreat.

古文：王僧辩军至蔡洲，景遂害之。
现代文：王僧辩率军到达蔡洲，侯景就杀害了萧方诸。
English: When the army led by Wang Sangye arrived in Caizhou, Houjing killed Xiao Fangzhu.

古文：世祖追赠侍中、大将军。
现代文：世祖追赠为侍中、大将军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Rank and Grand General.

古文：谥曰贞惠世子。
现代文：谧为贞惠世子。
English: He was the son of Zhen Hui.

古文：史臣曰：太宗、世祖诸子，虽开土宇，运属乱离；既拘寇贼，多殒非命。
现代文：史臣曰：太宗、世祖众子，虽然开土封王，但国运正值乱离之祸，他们都被寇贼拘禁，多数死于非命。
English: Shichen said, "Although Emperor Taizong and all the sons of the ancestors were enthroned as kings, the national movement was in turmoil. They were all detained by bandits, and most of them died a violent death.

古文：吁！
现代文：唉!
English: Alas!

古文：可嗟矣。
现代文：令人叹息啊!
English: What a sigh!

