古文：凡围战之道，围其四面，须开一角，以示生路，使敌战不坚，则城可拔，军可破。法曰： 围师必阙。 
现代文：凡是围攻城邑作战的法则，即使能够四面包围守城之敌，也要虚留一个缺口，向敌人显示有逃生之路，从而动摇敌人固守坚城的决心，待敌人争相出城逃命之时而击之，这样，既能够进攻占领城邑，又能消灭敌军。诚如兵法所说： 包围敌人时要留有缺口。 
English: According to the rules of siege warfare, even if the enemy can be surrounded on all sides, it is necessary to leave a gap to show the enemy a way to escape, so as to shake the enemy's determination to hold on to the fortified city, and wait for the enemy to rush out of the city to escape. In this way, it is possible to attack the occupied city and destroy the enemy army. As the military law says: When encircling the enemy, there must be a gap.

古文：汉末，曹操围壶关，攻之不拔。操曰： 城拔，皆坑之。 
现代文：东汉末年，曹操率军围攻壶关，久攻不克，曹操下令说： 城破之日，将城中人全部活埋。 
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Cao Cao and his army besieged Kuguan. Cao Cao ordered: "On the day the city is destroyed, bury everyone in the city alive."

古文：连月不下。
现代文：可是，连攻几个月还是攻不下该城。
English: But for several months in a row, they were unable to defeat the rebels.

古文：曹仁言于曹操曰： 围城必示活门，所以开其生路也。今公告之必坑，使人人自为守。
现代文：这时，曹仁向曹操建议说： 围攻城邑一定要虚留缺口，以示其有逃生之路，目的在于向敌人敞开生路以动摇其守城决心。
English: At this time, Cao Ren suggested to Cao Cao: When besieging a city, it is necessary to leave a gap to show that it has a way to escape. The purpose is to open a way to the enemy to shake their determination to defend the city.

古文：且城固而粮多，攻之则士卒伤，守之则延日久。
现代文：而今您却告诉他们只有死路一条，这样便迫使他们人人拼死守城。况且该城坚固而粮食充足，如果强攻就会造成将士伤亡，围困就会旷日持久。
English: But now you have told them that there is only one way out, so they are all forced to defend the city to the death. Moreover, the city is strong and well-fed, and if it is stormed, there will be casualties and the siege will last for a long time.

古文：今钝兵坚城下，攻必死之敌，非良策也。 
现代文：现在我们陈兵于坚城之下，以进攻拚死守城的敌人，这并不是行之有效的良策啊。 
English: Now we keep our soldiers under the fortified city, and attack the enemy to strangle the defenders of the city. This is not a good and effective strategy.

古文：操从之，乃拔其城。
现代文：曹操听后采纳了曹仁的建议，最后终于迫使守敌投降而进占了壶关城。
English: Cao Cao listened to and adopted Cao Ren's suggestion, and finally forced the enemy to surrender and occupied Juguan City.

