古文：桓公既霸，会诸侯于葵丘，而欲封禅。
现代文：桓公既成霸业，在葵丘大会诸侯，自己想要举行祭祀天地的封禅大典。
English: Having achieved hegemony, King Kan himself wanted to hold a grand ceremony to worship heaven and earth at the Kwai Chuk Assembly of Princes.

古文：管仲曰： 古者封泰山禅梁父者七十二家，而夷吾所记者十有二焉。
现代文：管仲说： 古代封泰山祭天，禅梁父山祭地的有七十二家，而我所能记得的不过只有十二家。
English: Guanzhong said, "In ancient times, there were seventy-two families who owned Mount Tai, but I only remember twelve.

古文：昔无怀氏封泰山，禅云云；羲封泰山，禅云云；神农封泰山，禅云云；炎帝封泰山，禅云云；黄帝封泰山，禅亭亭；颛顼封泰山，禅云云；帝喾封泰山，禅云云；尧封泰山，禅云云；舜封泰山，禅云云；禹封泰山，禅会稽；汤封泰山，禅云云；周成王封泰山，禅社首。
现代文：这就是古代的无怀氏封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；伏羲封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；神农封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；炎帝封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；黄帝封泰山祭天，禅亭亭祭地；颇项封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；帝倍封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；尧封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；舜封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；禹封泰山祭天，禅会稽山祭地；汤封泰山祭天，禅云云山祭地；周成王封泰山祭天，弹社首山祭地。
English: This is the ancient Wuhuai Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Fuxi Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Shennong Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Yan Emperor Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Yellow Emperor Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Pocho Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Dibai Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Zifeng Fongtai Mountain Festival, Zen Yunyun Mountain Festival; Zifeng Fongtai Mountain Festival,

古文：皆受命然后得封禅。 
现代文：他们都是承受天命然后才举行封禅大典的。 
English: They all received their fates before they held the Fuzen Grand Ceremony.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人北伐山戎，过孤竹；西伐大夏，涉流沙，束马悬车，上卑耳之山；南伐至召陵，登熊耳山以望江汉。
现代文：桓公说： 我北伐山戎，远过孤竹国；西伐大夏，涉渡流沙河，束战马，悬兵车，攀登卑耳山，南伐到了召陵，登熊耳山以望长江汉水。
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: Many people went to the north to conquer Mount Rong, and soldiers crossed the Lone Bamboo; to the west to conquer Mount Daxia, waded far into the quicksand, stopped the horse, and climbed Mount Biel; to the south to conquer Mount Zhaoling, and climbed Mount Xiong'er to overlook the Yangtze River and the Han River.

古文：兵车之会三，而乘车之会六，九合诸侯，一匡天下，诸侯莫违我。
现代文：与各诸侯国兵车之会有三次，乘车之会有六次，做到九合诸侯，一匡天下，各国诸侯没有敢违抗我的。
English: In order to quell the mutiny and other martial affairs, I have called together the warriors of the princes three times. In order to settle the political and diplomatic affairs, I have called together the soldiers of the princes six times, and the princes have called together nine times. I am the ruler of the world, and none of the princes dare to disobey me.

古文：昔三代受命，亦何以异乎？ 
现代文：这同古时夏商周三代承受天命，有什么不同呢？ 
English: How is it different from the previous three generations of emperors who were chosen by God?

古文：于是管仲睹桓公不可穷以辞，因设之以事，曰： 古之封禅，鄗上之黍，北里之禾，所以为盛；江淮之间，一茅三脊，所以为藉也；东海致比目之鱼，西海致比翼之鸟，然后物有不召而自至者十有五焉。
现代文：管仲看到不能用道理说服桓公，因而只好举出事实来，说： 古时举行封禅大典的国家，盛在祭器里的是郁山上的黍和北里长的禾；铺在地上作为垫席的是江淮之间特产的三脊茅草。东海送来比目的鱼，西海送来比翼的鸟，然后，不召而自至的东西还有十五种之多。
English: Guanzhong saw that he could not use reason to convince Huan Gong, so he had no choice but to cite the facts, saying: In ancient times, the countries that held the Fuzhen Grand Ceremony, the sacred vessels contained the yakitori on Ikuyama and the wheat grown in Kitazato; the mats on the ground were made of the tri-ridge thatch, a special product of the Huai River. The East Sea sent the flounder fish, the West Sea sent the birds with wings, and then there were as many as fifteen kinds of things that came without being invited.

