古文：◎河渠四
现代文：河渠四
English: Channel 4

古文：○运河下海运
现代文：运河下海运
English: Shipping under the canal

古文：江南运河，自杭州北郭务至谢村北，为十二里洋，为塘栖，德清之水入之。
现代文：长江南面的运河，从杭州北郭务到谢村北面，有十二里洋，有塘栖，德清之水流入其中。
English: The canal on the south side of the Yangtze River, from Hangzhou North Guowu to Xiecun North, has twelve miles of ocean, there is a pond, and Deqing water flows into it.

古文：逾北陆桥入崇德界，过松老抵高新桥，海盐支河通之。
现代文：越过北陆桥进入崇德地界，经过松老到达高新桥，海盐支河通到运河。
English: Cross the Hokuriku Bridge to enter the border of Chongde, pass through Songnlao to reach the High-tech Bridge, and the Haiyan Branch River leads to the canal.

古文：绕崇德城南，转东北，至小高阳桥东，过石门塘，折而东，为王湾。
现代文：绕过崇德城南，转而向东北，到达小高阳桥束面，经过石门塘，转而向东，是王湾。
English: Bypass the south of Chongde City, turn to the northeast, reach the bund face of Xiao Gaoyang Bridge, pass through Shimen Tong, turn to the east, is Wang Bay.

古文：至皂林，水深者及丈。
现代文：到了卑林，水深的地方达到一丈。
English: By the time we reached the lowlands, the water depth had reached the first floor.

古文：过永新，入秀水界，逾陡门镇，北为分乡铺，稍东为绣塔。
现代文：经过永新，进入秀水地界，越过陡门镇，向北为分乡铺，稍稍向东为绣塔。
English: Passing through Yongxin, entering the Xiushui land boundary, crossing the steep gate town, to the north is the branch township, and slightly to the east is the embroidered tower.

古文：北由嘉兴城西转而北，出杉青三闸，至王江泾镇，松江运艘自东来会之。
现代文：向北经由嘉兴城西转而再向北流，出了杉青三处闸门，到达王江泾镇，松江运输的船从束来会合于此。
English: To the north, it flows from the west of Jiaxing City and then flows northward, leaving the three gates of Sugiqing and reaching the town of Wangjiang, where the ships transported by the Songjiang River come from.

古文：北为平望驿，东通莺脰湖，湖州运艘自西出新兴桥会之。
现代文：向北是平望驿，向东到达莺脰湖，湖州运输船从西出于新兴桥会合于此。
English: To the north is Pingwanglu, to the east is Lugu Lake, and Huzhou transport ships meet here from the west at Xinxing Bridge.

古文：北至松陵驿，由吴江至三里桥，北有震泽，南有黄天荡，水势澎湃，夹浦桥屡建。
现代文：向北到松陵驿，经由昊江到三里桥，向北有震泽，向南有黄天荡，水势浩大，夹浦桥多次修建。
English: To the north to Songling Pass, through the Hao River to Sanli Bridge, to the north there are tremors, to the south there are yellow sky swings, the water potential is huge, and the Jiapu Bridge has been built many times.

古文：北经苏州城东鲇鱼口，水由塘入之。
现代文：向北经过苏州城东鲇鱼口，河水经由盘塘流入其中。
English: To the north, it passes through the East Eel Fish Mouth of Suzhou City, and the river water flows into it through the pond.

古文：北至枫桥，由射渎经浒墅关，过白鹤铺，长洲、无锡两邑之界也。
现代文：向北到达枫桥，从射渎经过游墅关，经过白鹤铺，是长洲、无锡两邑的地界。
English: Reaching Maple Bridge to the north, passing through Yuanshuaguan and Baihepu from Shigou, is the boundary between the two towns of Changzhou and Wuxi.

古文：锡山驿水仅浮瓦砾。
现代文：锡山驿水深仅可浮瓦砾。
English: Only floating rubble can be found in the water depth of Xishanluo.

古文：过黄埠，至洛社桥，江阴九里河之水通之。
现代文：经过黄埠，到达洛社桥，江阴九里河的水与此相通。
English: After passing Huangpu, it reaches Luoshe Bridge, and the water of the Jiangyin-Jiuli River flows into it.

古文：西北为常州，漕河旧贯城，入东水门，由西水门出。
现代文：西北为常州，漕河从前穿城而过，从柬水门进，经由西水门出去。
English: The northwest is Changzhou. The Caohe River used to pass through the city, entering from the Cambodian Water Gate and exiting through the West Water Gate.

古文：嘉靖末防倭，改从南城壕。
现代文：嘉靖末年，为防御倭寇入侵，改从南城护城河经过。
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, in order to defend against the invasion of Japanese pirates, it was changed to pass through the moat of Nancheng.

古文：江阴，顺塘河水由城东通丁堰，沙子湖在其西南，宜兴钟溪之水入之。
现代文：江阴，顺着塘河水经由城柬通过丁堰，沙子湖在它的西南，宜兴锺溪的水流入其中。
English: In the Yangtze River, the water of the Tang River flows along the Yangtze River, passing through the city of Kampot and the Ding Weir. The Sand Lake is in the southwest of it, and the water of the Yixing Creek flows into it.

古文：又西，直渎水入之，又西为奔牛、吕城二闸，常、镇界其中，皆有月河以佐节宣，后并废。
现代文：又向西，直渎水流入其中，又向西是奔牛、吕城二闸门，常州、镇江地界于其中，都有月河来辅助控制和排泄，后来一并废弃。
English: And to the west, the direct polluted water flowed into it, and to the west, the Fen Niu, Lucheng Second Gate, Changzhou, Zhenjiang land boundary, all of which had the Yuehe River to assist control and discharge, and were later abandoned together.

古文：其南为金坛河，溧阳、高淳之水出焉。
现代文：它的南面是金坛河，溧阳、高淳的水出于此。
English: To the south of it is the Jintan River, from which the waters of Poyang and Gaochun originate.

古文：丹阳南二十里为陵口，北二十五里为黄泥坝，旧皆置闸。
现代文：丹阳南二十里是陵口，向北二十五里是黄泥坝，从前都建置有闸门。
English: Twenty miles south of Danyang is Lingkou, and 25 miles north is Huangdi Dam. Both of these dams used to have gates.

古文：练湖水高漕河数丈，一由三思桥，一由仁智桥，皆入运。
现代文：练湖水高于漕河数丈，一处经由三思桥，一处经由仁智桥，都流入运河。
English: The water of the Lingshu Lake is higher than that of the Caohe River. It flows into the canal through the Sanshi Bridge in one place and the Ren Zhi Bridge in another place.

古文：北过丹徒镇有猪婆滩，多软沙。
现代文：向北经过丹徒镇，有猎婆滩多细软的浮沙。
English: Passing Dantu Town to the north, there is soft floating sand like that of Hoba Beach.

古文：丹徒以上运道，视江潮为盈涸。
现代文：丹徒以上的漕运河道，根据江水的涨落而或盈或涸。
English: The canals above Dantu are either swollen or dried up according to the flow of the river.

古文：过镇江，出京口闸，闸外沙堵延袤二十丈，可藏舟避风，由此浮於江，与瓜步对。
现代文：经过镇江，出京口闸，闸外沙堤绵延二十丈，可以藏舟避风，从这里泛舟于长江，与瓜步相对。
English: After passing through the Zhenjiang River, out of the Beijing Gate, the sand dike outside the gate stretches for twenty meters, you can hide the boat to avoid the wind, and from here you can raft on the Yangtze River, opposite the melon step.

古文：自北郭至京口首尾八百馀里，皆平流。
现代文：从北郭到京口首尾八百余里，全都是平稳水流。
English: There are more than eight hundred miles from Beigu to Kyoguchi, all of which are smooth water flows.

古文：历嘉而苏，众水所聚，至常州以西，地渐高仰，水浅易泄，盈涸不恒，时浚时壅，往往兼取孟渎、德胜两河，东浮大江，以达扬泰。
现代文：经过嘉兴和苏州，众多水流所聚集，到常州以西，地势逐渐高仰，水浅容易排泄，涨满和干涸不固定，时而疏通时而堵塞，常常同时取道孟渎、德胜两河，向东泛舟于大江，以到达扬州、泰州。
English: After passing through Jiaxing and Suzhou, where many water currents are gathered, to the west of Changzhou, the terrain is gradually elevated, the water is shallow and easy to discharge, the swelling and drying are not fixed, and it is sometimes dredged and sometimes blocked. Often, the two rivers of Mengfu and Desheng are taken at the same time, and the river is rafted to the east to reach Yangzhou and Taizhou.

古文：洪武二十六年尝命崇山侯李新开溧水胭脂河，以通浙漕，免丹阳输挽及大江风涛之险。
现代文：洪武二十六年，曾经命令崇山侯李新开通溧水胭脂河，用来通畅浙江漕运，避免丹阳运送物资和大江风浪的危险。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu, he ordered the Chongshan marquis Li Xin to open the Ershui-Ruzhi River, which was used to smooth the transportation of Zhejiang, to avoid the danger of transporting materials from Danyang and the stormy waves of the Yangtze River.

古文：而三吴之粟，必由常、镇。
现代文：而三昊的谷粮，必定经由常州、镇江。
English: However, Sanhao's grain must pass through Changzhou and Zhenjiang.

古文：三十一年浚奔牛、吕城二坝河道。
现代文：三十一年，疏浚奔牛、吕城二坝河道。
English: In the 31st year, the Bengiu and Lucheng Second Dam waterways were dredged.

古文：永乐间，修练湖堤。
现代文：永乐年间，修筑练湖堤岸。
English: In the Yongle years, the embankment of the lake was rebuilt.

古文：即命通政张琏发民丁十万，浚常州孟渎河，又浚兰陵沟，北至孟渎河闸，六千馀丈，南至奔牛镇，千二百馀丈。
现代文：就命令通政张跶调集民工十万，疏通常州孟渎河，又疏通兰陵沟，往北到达孟渎河闸，六干余丈，往南到达奔牛镇，一千二百余文。
English: He ordered Tongzheng Zhang Rong to mobilize 100,000 migrant workers, dredge the Menghu River in Zhouzhuang, and dredge the Lanling Ditch, reaching the Menghu River Gate in the north, with a length of six canals, and reaching the Benyu Town in the south, with a length of more than 1,200 miles.

古文：已，复浚镇江京口、新港及甘露三港，以达於江。
现代文：随后又疏通镇江京口、新港及甘露三港，使到达长江。
English: Subsequently, the Zhenjiang Jingkou, Xingang and Kanlu three ports were dredged to reach the Yangtze River.

古文：漕舟自奔牛溯京口，水涸则改从孟渎右趋瓜洲，抵白塔，以为常。
现代文：漕运之船从奔牛逆行于京口，河水干枯就改道从垂遗往右直奔瓜洲，到达白塔，以此为常规。
English: It is customary for rowing boats to sail from Bengiu in the opposite direction to Kyoguchi, and when the river is dry, to change the course from Dangye to the right and go straight to Guazhou, reaching Baita.

古文：宣德六年从武进民请，疏德胜新河四十里。
现代文：宣德六年，依从武进百姓的请求，疏通德胜新河四十里。
English: Six years after the proclamation of the People's Republic of China, in accordance with the request of the people of Wujin, 40 miles of Desheng New River were dredged.

古文：八年，工竣。
现代文：八年，工程竣工。
English: Eight years later, the project was completed.

古文：漕舟自德胜北入江，直泰兴之北新河。
现代文：漕运之船从德胜北进入长江，直达泰兴的北新河。
English: The rowing boat entered the Yangtze River from the north of Desheng and reached the North Xinhe River in Taixing.

古文：由泰州坝抵扬子湾入漕河，视白塔尤便。
现代文：从泰州坝到达扬子湾进入漕河，比照经由白塔来更加方便。
English: From Taizhou Dam to Yangtze Bay, it is more convenient to enter Caohe via the White Pagoda.

古文：於是漕河及孟渎、德胜三河并通，皆可济运矣。
现代文：于是，漕河及孟渎、德胜三河一起畅通，都可以通航运输了。
English: As a result, the Caohe River, the Menghuai River and the Desheng River all flow smoothly and can be transported by ship.

古文：正统元年，廷臣上言： 自新港至奔牛，漕河百五十里，旧有水车卷江潮灌注，通舟溉田。
现代文：正统元年，朝廷大臣上奏说： 从新港到奔牛，漕河一百五十里，从前有水车卷起长江潮水灌注其中，通行船只灌溉田地。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the Minister of the Imperial Court said in his report: From Xingang to Bengiu, the river is one hundred and fifty miles long. In the past, water wheels rolled up the Yangtze River tidal water and poured it in, and passing ships irrigated fields.

古文：请支官钱置车。 
现代文：请求支付官府之钱购置水车。 
English: Request for payment of government money for the purchase of water wheels.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令允许。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：然三河之入江口，皆自卑而高，其水亦更迭盈缩。
现代文：然而，三河的入江口处，都是由低而高，其水也是轮换涨满和退落。
English: However, at the entrance of the three rivers, they are all low and high, and their water is also rotated up and down.

古文：八年，武进民请浚德胜及北新河。
现代文：八年，武进百姓请求疏通德胜及北新河。
English: Eight years ago, the people of Wujin requested the dredging of the Desheng River and the Beixin River.

古文：浙江都司萧华则请浚孟渎。
现代文：浙江都司萧华则请求疏通孟渎。
English: Xiao Hua, the governor of Zhejiang Province, requested that Meng's misconduct be cleared up.

古文：巡抚周忱定议浚两河，而罢北新筑坝。
现代文：巡抚周忱决定疏浚两河，而停止北新的筑坝。
English: Governor Zhou Zhen decided to dredge the two rivers and stop the construction of new dams in the north.

古文：白塔河之大桥闸以时启闭，而常、镇漕河亦疏浚焉。
现代文：白塔河的大桥闸按时开关，而常州、镇江漕河也疏通了。
English: The bridge gate of Baita River was opened and closed on time, and the Changzhou and Zhenjiang Caohe Rivers were also dredged.

古文：景泰间，漕河复淤，遂引漕舟尽由孟渎。
现代文：景泰年间，漕河又被淤塞，于是，导引漕运船只全部经由孟演。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, the Caohe River was silted up again, so the guided rowing boats all passed through Mengyuan.

古文：三年，御史练纲言： 漕舟从夏港及孟渎出江，逆行三百里，始达瓜洲。
现代文：三年，御史练纲说： 漕运船只从夏港和孟滨到长江，逆水行驶三百里，纔到达瓜洲。
English: In the third year, the history syllabus said: Rowing ships from Xiagang and Mengbin to the Yangtze River, travel three hundred miles against the water, and arrive in Guazhou.

古文：德胜直北新，而白塔又与孟渎斜直，由此两岸横渡甚近，宜大疏淤塞。 
现代文：德胜正对北新，而白塔又与孟渎斜对，从这里两岸横渡很近，应当大力疏通淤塞。 
English: Desheng is directly opposite Beixin, while Baita is diagonally opposite Mengfu. From here, the two sides of the river are very close to each other. Efforts should be made to clear the blockage.

古文：帝命尚书石璞措置。
现代文：皇帝命令尚书石璞处置。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shuxu to dispose of the stone axe.

古文：会有请凿镇江七里港，引金山上流通丹阳，以避孟渎险者。
现代文：适逢有人请求开通镇江七里港，导引金山往上流到达丹阳，用来避免孟渎险阻。
English: At the right time, there was a request to open the seven-mile port of Zhenjiang, guide the gold mine upstream to Danyang, and use it to avoid Meng's malfeasance.

古文：镇江知府林鹗以为迂道多石，坏民田墓多，宜浚京口闸、甘露坝，道里近，功力省。
现代文：镇江知府林鸡认为迂回水道多石头，毁坏百姓田地坟墓多，应当疏通京口闸、甘露坝，河道里程不远，人力物力减省。
English: Lin Jian, the governor of Zhenjiang Province, believes that there are many stones in the bypass waterway, and many graves in the fields of the people have been destroyed. It is necessary to clear the Keikou Gate and the Kanlu Dam. The river is not far away, and the manpower and material resources are reduced.

古文：乃从鹗议。
现代文：于是依从林鸡的主张。
English: So he followed Lin Qian's suggestion.

古文：浙江参政胡清又欲去新港、奔牛等坝，置石闸以蓄泉。
现代文：浙江参政胡清又想放弃新港、奔牛等坝，修建石闸来蓄积泉水。
English: Zhejiang politician Hu Qing also wanted to abandon the Xingang, Bengiu and other dams and build a stone gate to store spring water.

古文：亦从其请。
现代文：也依从他的请求。
English: They also complied with his request.

古文：而浚德胜河与凿港之议俱寝。
现代文：而疏通德胜河与开通港口的主张一起停止。
English: But the dredging of the Desheng River and the opening of the port stopped at the same time.

古文：然石闸虽建，蓄水不能多，漕舟仍入孟渎。
现代文：然而，石闸虽然建立，蓄水却不能多得，漕运船只仍然进入孟渎。
English: However, although the stone sluice was built, the water storage was not enough, and the rowing boats still entered the monsoon delta.

古文：天顺元年，尚宝少卿凌信言，粮艘从镇江里河为便。
现代文：天顺元年，尚宝少卿凌信说，粮船经过镇江里河最是便利。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Shangbao Shaoqing Lingxin said that it was most convenient for grain ships to pass through the Zhenjiang River.

古文：帝以为然，命粮储河道都御史李秉通七里港口，引江水注之，且浚奔牛、新港之淤。
现代文：皇帝认为对，命令粮储河道都御史李秉开通七里港口，引导长江水注入其中，并且疏通奔午、新港的淤塞。
English: The emperor thought it was right, and ordered Li Bing, the governor of the grain storage and river channel, to open the Qili port, guide the Yangtze River water into it, and clear the blockage of Bengo and Xingang.

古文：巡抚崔恭又请增置五闸。
现代文：巡抚崔恭又请求增建五处闸门。
English: Superintendent Choi Kyong also requested the construction of five additional gates.

古文：至成化四年，闸工始成。
现代文：到成化四年，建闸工程纔完成。
English: The lock construction project will be completed in four years.

古文：於是漕舟尽由里河，其入二河者，回空之艘及他舟而已。
现代文：于是，漕运船只全部经由里河，其它进入二河的船，返空的船和其它船而已。
English: As a result, all the rowing boats passed through the Li River, while the other boats that entered the Erhe River, the boats that returned empty, and the other boats.

古文：定制，孟渎河口与瓜、仪诸港俱三年一浚。
现代文：制定制度，孟渎河口与瓜、仪各港都是三年进行一次疏浚。
English: A system has been established, and the dredging of the Menghuang estuary and the ports of Gua and Yi will be carried out once every three years.

古文：孟渎宽广不甚淤，里河不久辄涸，则又改从孟渎。
现代文：孟渎河宽广不很淤塞，里河不久就干枯了，则又改道从孟渎。
English: The Menghuang River is wide and not very silted. The Li River soon dried up, and then changed its course away from Menghuang.

古文：弘治十七年，部臣复陈夏港、孟渎远浮大江之害，请亟浚京口淤，而引练湖灌之。
现代文：弘治十七年，工部大臣又陈述夏港、孟渎速道航行大江的害处，请求赶快疏通京口淤塞，然后导引练湖水灌注其中。
English: In the 17th year of Hongzhi, the Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade also stated the harm of sailing the big river from Xiagang and Mengfu Expressway, requesting to quickly clear the silt in the Beijing mouth, and then guide the lake water to be poured into it.

古文：诏速行。
现代文：诏令迅速施行。
English: The edict went into effect immediately.

古文：正德二年复开白塔河及江口、大桥、潘家、通江四闸。
现代文：正德二年，又开通白塔河和江口、大桥、潘家、通江四闸。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the four gates of Baita River, estuary, bridge, Panjia and Tongjiang River were opened.

古文：十四年从督漕都御史臧凤言，浚常州上下里河，漕舟无阻者五十馀载。
现代文：十四年，依从督漕都御史臧凤的计策，疏通常州上下里河，漕运船只畅通无阻五十余年。
English: In the 14th year, in accordance with the strategy of the governor of the rowing capital, Shi Xifeng, the river upstream and downstream of the usual state was dredged, and the rowing vessels were unimpeded for more than 50 years.

古文：万历元年又渐涸，复一浚之。
现代文：万历元年，漕河又渐渐干涸，再一次疏通它。
English: In the first year of Wanli, the Caohe River gradually dried up again, and it was dredged again.

古文：岁贡生许汝愚上言： 国初置四闸：曰京口，曰丹徒，防三江之涸；曰吕城，曰奔牛，防五湖之泄。
现代文：岁贡生许汝愚上奏说： 建国之初设立四座闸门：叫做京口、丹徒的，防止三江水的干枯；叫做吕城、奔牛的，防止五湖水的排泄。
English: He said: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic, four gates were set up: the gates called Kyoguchi and Danto, to prevent the drying up of the water of the three rivers; the gates called Lucheng and Bengiu, to prevent the drainage of the water of the five lakes.

古文：自丹阳至镇江蓄为湖者三：曰练湖，曰焦子，曰杜墅。
现代文：从丹阳到镇江蓄积成为湖的有三处：叫做练湖、焦子、杜墅。
English: From Danyang to Zhenjiang, there are three places that have accumulated into lakes: they are called Lianhu, Jiaozi and Duwu.

古文：岁久，居民侵种，焦、杜二湖俱涸，仅存练湖，犹有侵者。
现代文：时间一久，居住的百姓侵占为田耕种，焦、杜二湖全部干涸，勉强保存练湖，还是有被侵占的。
English: For a long time, the people who lived there occupied the land and cultivated it. Lake Jiao and Lake Du Erhu have all dried up, and Lake Lianhu has been barely preserved. However, it has still been occupied.

古文：而四闸俱空设矣。
现代文：因而四座闸门全都是空设了。
English: As a result, all four gates are now empty.

古文：请浚三湖故址通漕。 
现代文：请求疏通三湖原来的地方来通行漕运。 
English: Request to dredge the original place of the three lakes to allow the passage of rowing boats.

古文：总河傅希挚言： 练湖已浚，而焦子、杜墅源少无益。 
现代文：总河傅希挚说： 练湖已经疏通，然而，焦子、杜墅水源很少，没有益处。 
English: General River Master Xizhong said: Lianhu has been dredged, however, there are few water sources for Jiaozi and Duwula, which is of no benefit.

古文：其议遂寝。未几，练湖复淤浅。
现代文：他的主张于是停止。不久，练湖又淤浅。
English: His advocacy then stopped. Soon, the lake became shallow again.

古文：五年，御史郭思极、陈世宝先后请复练湖，浚孟渎。
现代文：万历五年，御史郭思极、陈世宝先后请求恢复练湖，疏通孟渎。
English: In the past five years, Guo Siji and Chen Shibao have successively requested the restoration of the lake and the dredging of the lake.

古文：而给事中汤聘尹则请於京口旁别建一闸，引江流内注，潮长则开，缩则闭。
现代文：然而，给事中汤聘尹则请求在京口旁边另外修建一座闸门，导引长江水向内注入，潮水上涨就打开，退落就关闭。
English: However, in the middle of the matter, Tang Bin Yin requested that another gate be built next to the Beijing entrance to guide the Yangtze River water to flow inward, open when the tide rises, and close when it recedes.

古文：御史尹良任又言： 孟渎渡江入黄家港，水面虽阔，江流甚平，由此抵泰兴以达湾头、高邮仅二百馀里，可免瓜、仪不测之患。
现代文：御史尹良任又说： 孟渎通过长江流入黄家港，水面虽然广阔，长江水流很平稳，从这里到达泰兴而又到达湾头、高邮只有二百余里，可以避免瓜、仪不可揣测的灾难。
English: Grand Historian Yin Liangren also said: Meng Guo passed through the Yangtze River and flowed into Huangjiagang Port. Although the water surface is vast, the Yangtze River water flow is very stable. From here to Taixing and to Bay Head and Gaoyou is only more than two hundred miles, which can avoid the unpredictable disaster of melon and instrument.

古文：至如京口北渡金山而下，中流遇风有漂溺患，宜挑甘露港夹岸洲田十馀里，以便回泊。 
现代文：至于京口往北通过金山而下，水上遇风有被淹没的灾难，应当挖深甘露港两岸的洲田十余里，以便利于返回般只停泊。 
English: As for the Beijing exit going north through Jinshan, if there is a disaster of being submerged by the wind on the water, it is necessary to dig more than ten miles of soil on both sides of Shennanlu Port in order to facilitate the return.

古文：御史林应训又言： 自万缘桥抵孟渎，两厓陡峻，雨潦易圮，且江潮涌沙，淤塞难免。
现代文：御史林应训又说： 从万绿桥到孟渎，两岸山势峻峭，雨水大了容易垮塌，并且畏江潮水涌起泥沙，淤塞难免。
English: Gu Shilin also said in response to the training: From Wanling Bridge to Menghuang, the mountains on both sides of the river are steep, the rainwater is large and easy to collapse, and the tidal water of the Dangjiang River swells up mud and sand, and silting is inevitable.

古文：宜於万缘桥、黄连树各建闸以资蓄泄。 
现代文：应当在万绿桥、黄连树各建闸门用来帮助积蓄与排放。 
English: Gates should be built at Wanlingqiao and Huanglianshu to help with storage and discharge.

古文：又言： 练湖自西晋陈敏遏马林溪，引长山八十四溪之水以溉云阳，堤名练塘，又曰练河，凡四十里许。
现代文：又说： 练湖自从西晋陈敏阻遏马林溪水，导引长山八十四溪的水来灌溉云阳，堤命名为练塘，又叫做练河，总共四十里左右。
English: He also said: Lianhu Lake, since the Western Jin Emperor Chen Min dammed the water of Marin Creek and guided the water of the 84th Creek of the Changshan Mountains to irrigate Yunyang, the dike was named Liantang, also known as Lianhe River, a total of about forty miles.

古文：环湖立涵洞十三。
现代文：环绕湖边建立涵洞十三处。
English: Thirteen culverts will be built around the lake.

古文：宋绍兴时，中置横埂，分上下湖，立上、中、下三闸。
现代文：宋绍兴年间，中间设置横堤，分为上下湖，建立上、中、下三处闸门。
English: During the Song and Shaoxing dynasties, a dike was built in the middle of the lake, which was divided into the upper and lower lakes, and three gates were built at the top, middle and bottom.

古文：八十四溪之水始经辰溪冲入上湖，复由三闸转入下湖。
现代文：八十四溪的水开始经过辰溪冲入上湖，再经由三处闸门转流入下湖。
English: The water of the eighty-fourth stream began to rush into the upper lake through the Chen River, and then flowed into the lower lake through three gates.

古文：洪武间，因运道涩，依下湖东堤建三闸，借湖水以济运，后乃渐堙。
现代文：洪武年间，因为运道有阻滞，靠着下湖东堤建立三处闸门，凭借湖水来拯济运道，后来就逐渐被堵塞。
English: During the Hongwu era, because of the blockage of the transport channel, three gates were built along the east embankment of the lower lake to save the transport channel with the help of lake water. Later, it was gradually blocked.

古文：今当尽革侵占，复浚为湖。
现代文：现在，应当完全除去侵占，再疏浚为湖。
English: Now, the encroachment should be completely removed and then dredged as a lake.

古文：上湖四际夹阜，下湖东北临河，原埂完固，惟应补中间缺口，且增筑西南，与东北相应。
现代文：上湖四边夹着小山，下湖东北边临近河道，原堤完整牢固，祇应当修补中间缺口，并且在西南增筑堤，与东北堤岸相对应。
English: The four sides of the upper lake are surrounded by hills, the northeastern side of the lower lake is close to the river, the original dike is complete and solid, but the gap in the middle should be repaired, and the dike should be built in the southwest, corresponding to the northeastern embankment.

古文：至三闸，惟临湖上闸如故，宜增建中、下二闸，更设减水闸二座，界中、下二闸间。
现代文：至于三处闸门，只有靠近湖的上闸门还是像原先那样，应当增建中、下二闸门，再建立碱水闸二座，界于巾、下二闸门之间。
English: As for the three gates, only the upper gate near the lake is still the same as before, and the middle and lower two gates should be added, and then two alkali sluice gates should be established, bounded by the width and the lower two gates.

古文：共革田五千亩有奇，塞沿堤私设涵洞，止存其旧十三处，以宣泄湖水。
现代文：共除去土地五千多亩，堵塞沿着堤岸私自设立的涵洞，只保存其原来的十三处，用来排放湖水。
English: A total of more than five thousand mu of land was removed, and the privately built culverts along the embankment were blocked. Only the original thirteen places were preserved, which were used to discharge lake water.

古文：冬春即闭塞，毋得私启。
现代文：冬春就关闭，不能私自打开。
English: It is closed in winter and spring, and I cannot open it myself.

古文：盖练湖无源，惟藉潴蓄，增堤启闸，水常有馀，然后可以济运。
现代文：因为练湖没有了水源，只有依赖于蓄积，增筑堤岸打开闸门，湖水常常有余，然后可以用来补济运道。
English: Because the Lucheng Lake has no water source, it only depends on the accumulation, build an additional embankment to open the sluice gate, the lake water is often surplus, and then it can be used to supplement the transportation channel.

古文：臣亲验上湖地仰，八十四溪之水所由来，惧其易泄；下湖地平衍，仅高漕河数尺，又常惧不盈。
现代文：臣亲自查验上湖地势高仰，这是八十四溪之水流入上湖的来由，害怕它容易泄漏；下湖地势平坦宽广，仅仅高于漕河几尺，又常常害怕它不充满。
English: The minister personally inspected the upstream lake, which was elevated, which was the source of the water of the eighty-four streams flowing into the upstream lake, and was afraid that it was easy to leak; the downstream lake was flat and wide, only a few feet higher than the Caohe River, and was often afraid that it was not full.

古文：诚使水裕堤坚，则应时注之，河有全力矣。 
现代文：真正使湖水充足堤岸坚固，就应该随时灌注它，河流就有全力供运输行船了。 
English: To really make the lake water sufficient and the embankment strong, it should be poured at any time, and the river will have full capacity for transportation.

古文：皆下所司酌议。
现代文：都下交主管部门斟酌商议。
English: shall be submitted to the competent authorities for discussion at their discretion.

古文：十三年，镇江知府吴捴谦复言： 练湖中堤宜饬有司春初即修，以防冲决，且禁势豪侵占。 
现代文：万历十三年，镇江知府昊搦谦又说： 练湖中堤应当命令有关部门在春初就进行修治，以防止被冲垮，并且禁止有势力的豪强侵占。 
English: In the thirteenth year of Wanli, Zhenjiang prefect Hao Rongqian also said: The relevant departments should be ordered to repair the mid-lake dike in early spring to prevent it from being washed away, and to prohibit the powerful from encroaching.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十七年浚武进横林漕河。
现代文：十七年，疏通武进横林漕河。
English: In the seventeenth year, Wujin was dredged across the Lincao River.

古文：崇祯元年，浚京口漕河。
现代文：崇祯元年，疏通京口漕河。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, the Keikou Caohe River was dredged.

古文：五年，太常少卿姜志礼建《漕河议》，言： 神庙初，先臣宝著《漕河议》，当事采行，不开河而济运者二十馀年。
现代文：五年，太常少卿姜志礼建言《漕河议》，说： 神庙初年，臣的先人姜宝撰写《漕河议》，当权者采纳施行，没有开辟河道而能拯济运河二十多年。
English: In the fifth year, Jiang Zhili, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of China, proposed the "Caohe Proposal," saying: In the first year of the temple, Jiang Bao, the minister's ancestor, wrote the "Caohe Proposal," which was adopted and implemented by those in power, and could save the canal for more than 20 years without opening the river.

古文：后复佃湖妨运，岁累畚锸。
现代文：后来又租佃湖地妨碍运河，每年都要受疏浚运道的拖累。
English: Later, the canal was hindered by the leasing of the Lugu Lake area, which was dragged down by the dredging of the shipping channel every year.

古文：故老有言， 京口闸底与虎丘塔顶平 ，是可知挑河无益，蓄湖为要也。
现代文：年老有识的人说， 京口闸底与虎丘塔顶齐平 ，从这可以知道挖河毫无益处，积聚湖水最为重要。
English: Old and wise people say that the bottom of the gate of Jingkou and the top of the Tiger Hill Tower are flush, from which we can know that digging the river is of no benefit, and the accumulation of lake water is the most important.

古文：今当革佃修闸，而高筑上下湖围埂，蓄水使深。
现代文：现在，应当革除租佃，修建闸门，并且加高上下湖周围的小土堤，蓄积水使湖加深。
English: Now, it is necessary to remove levees, build sluice gates, and raise the small earthen dikes around the upper and lower lakes, so that the accumulated water will deepen the lake.

古文：且漕河闸座非仅京口、吕城、新闸、奔牛数处而已，陵口、尹公桥、黄泥坝、新丰、大犊山节节有闸，皆废去，并宜修建。
现代文：况且，漕河闸座不仅仅是京日、吕城、新闸、奔牛数处而已，陵口、尹公桥、黄泥坝、新丰、大犊山处处有闸座，全都已废弃，全都应当修建。
English: Moreover, the Caohe sluice gate is not just a few places in Beijing, Lucheng, Xinzha, and Bengniu. There are sluice gates in Lingang, Yingong Bridge, Huangdi Dam, Xinfeng, and Dafeng Mountain. All of them have been abandoned, and all of them should be built.

古文：而运道支流如武进洞子河、连江桥河、扁担河，丹阳简桥河、陈家桥河、七里桥河、丁议河、越渎河，胜村溪之大坝头，丹阳甘露港南之小闸口，皆应急修整。
现代文：而运道支流如武进洞子河、连江桥河、扁担河，丹阳简桥河、陈家桥河、七里桥河、丁议河、越渎河，滕村溪的大坝头，丹阳甘露港南的小闸口，都应该赶快修整。
English: But the tributaries of the Yunnan Expressway, such as the Wujin Dongzi River, the Lianjiang Bridge River, the Liantan River, the Danyang Jianqiao River, the Chenjia Bridge River, the Qiliqiao River, the Dingli River, the Yuezhong River, the dam head of the Tengcun Creek, and the small gate of the south of Danyang Kanlu Port, should be repaired as soon as possible.

古文：至奔牛、吕城之北，各设减水闸。
现代文：到了奔牛、吕城的北边，各建立减水闸。
English: When they arrived at Bengiu and the northern side of Lucheng, they each built sluice gates.

古文：岁十月实以土，商民船尽令盘坝。
现代文：每年十月，用土填塞坚实，商船民船全部令其回绕堤坝。
English: Every year in October, the dam is filled with soil, and all merchant ships and civilian vessels are forced to circle the dam.

古文：此皆旧章所当率由。
现代文：这都是所应当遵循的旧规。
English: These are the old rules that should be followed.

古文：近有欲开九曲河，使运船竟从泡港闸出江，直达扬子桥，以免瓜洲启闸稽迟者，试而后行可也。
现代文：近来，有人想开通九曲河，使运轮船只直接从泡港闸出于长江，直达扬子桥，以避免瓜洲开闸滞留的情况，试行以后施行是可以的。
English: Recently, some people have wanted to open the Jiuquan River, so that the transport vessels can directly reach the Yangtze River from the Bu Gang Lock to the Yangtze Bridge, so as to avoid the situation of Guazhou opening the lock. It is possible to implement it after the trial.

古文：回空粮艘及官舫，宜由江行，而於河庄设闸启闭。
现代文：返空粮船及官船，应当从长江通行，并且，在河庄建立闸门进行开关。
English: Return empty grain ships and government ships should pass from the Yangtze River, and a gate should be set up at the river village for switching.

古文：数役并行，漕事乃大善矣。 
现代文：多处工程一起施行，漕运之事就很容易了。 
English: When multiple projects are carried out together, it is easy to arrange transportation.

古文：议不果行。
现代文：其主张最终没有施行。
English: His proposal was ultimately not implemented.

古文：江漕者，湖广漕舟由汉、沔下浔阳，江西漕舟出章江、鄱阳而会於湖口，暨南直隶宁、太、池、安、江宁、广德之舟，同浮大江，入仪真通江闸，以溯淮、扬入闸河。
现代文：江漕，是指湖广漕运船只从汉水、沔水往下到浔阳，江西漕运船只出章江、鄱阳，然后在湖口会合，和南直隶宁、太、池、安、江宁、广德的船只，一起在大江航行，进入仪真通江闸，然后逆行于淮、扬进入闸河。
English: The term "river row" refers to the Hubei-Guangzhou rowboats traveling from Hanshui and Surabaya to Poyang, the Jiangxi rowboats traveling from Zhangjiang and Poyang and then meeting in Hukou, and the ships from Nanzhihuning, Tai, Chi, An, Jiangning and Guangde sailing together on the Yangtze River, entering the Yizhentong River Lock, and then traveling in the opposite direction from Huai and Yang to enter the Lock River.

古文：瓜、仪之间，运道之咽喉也。
现代文：瓜洲、仪真之间，是运道的最关键之处。
English: Between Guazhou and Yizhen is the most critical point of the career.

古文：洪武中，饷辽卒者，从仪真上淮安，由盐城泛海；饷梁、晋者，亦从仪真赴淮安，盘坝入淮。
现代文：洪武年间，运送军粮供应辽东兵士，从仪真往上到淮安，经由盐城泛舟在海上航行；运送军粮供应梁州、晋州的，也从仪真到淮安，回绕堤坝进入淮河。
English: During the Hongwu era, military grain was transported from Yizhen to Huai'an via Yancheng to supply soldiers in eastern Liaodong Province, and then sailed across the sea in rafts. Military grain was also transported from Yizhen to Huai'an to supply soldiers in Liangzhou and Jinzhou, and then entered the Huaihe River around the dam.

古文：江口则设坝置闸，凡十有三。
现代文：长江口建立堤坝修建闸门，总共十三处。
English: At the mouth of the Yangtze River, a total of 13 dams and gates have been built.

古文：浚扬子桥河至黄泥湾九千馀丈。
现代文：疏浚扬子桥河到黄泥湾九千多丈。
English: The dredging of the Yangtze Bridge River to Huangdi Bay is more than nine thousand meters high.

古文：永乐间，浚仪真清江坝、下水港及夹港河，修沿江堤岸。
现代文：永乐年间，疏浚仪真清江坝、下水港及夹港河，修筑沿江堤岸。
English: During the Yongle period, the dredging of the Zhenqing River dam, the sewage port and the Zhanggang River, and the construction of embankments along the river were completed.

古文：洪熙元年浚仪真坝河，后定制仪真坝下黄泥滩、直河口二港及瓜洲二港、常州之孟渎河皆三年一浚。
现代文：洪熙元年，疏浚仪真坝河，以后，规定制度，仪真坝往下到黄泥滩、直河口二港及瓜洲二港、常州的孟渎河全都每三年进行一次疏浚。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the Yizhenba River was dredged, and later, a system was established to dredge the Yizhenba River down to the Yellow Mud Beach, the Zhihekou Second Port and the Guazhou Second Port, and the Mengyao River in Changzhou every three years.

古文：宣德间，从侍郎赵新、御史陈祚请，浚黄泥滩、清江闸。
现代文：宣德年间，依从侍郎赵新、御史陈祚的请求，疏浚黄泥滩、清江闸。
English: During the Xuande era, he complied with the request of Zhao Xin, the chamberlain, and Chen Yao, the imperial historian, to dredge the Yellow Mud Beach and the Qingjiang Lock.

古文：成化中，建闸於仪真通江河港者三，江都之留潮通江者二。
现代文：成化年间，在仪真修建闸门连接长江河港的有三处，汀都蓄留潮水连接长江的闸门有二处。
English: During the Chenghua period, there were three places in Yizhen where locks were built to connect the Yangtze River ports, and two places in Tingdu where tidal water was stored to connect the Yangtze River.

古文：已而通江港塞。
现代文：不久，连接长江河港的三处被堵塞。
English: Soon, the three places connecting the Yangtze River ports were blocked.

古文：弘治初，复开之，既又於总港口建闸蓄水。
现代文：弘治初年，又开通它，不久，又在总港口修建闸门蓄积河水。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, it was opened again, and soon a sluice gate was built to store river water in the main port.

古文：仪真、江都二县间，有官塘五区，筑闸蓄水，以溉民田，豪民占以为业，真、扬之间运道阻梗。
现代文：仪真、江都二县之间，有官塘五处，修筑闸门蓄水，用来灌溉百姓田地，有财有势的人强占去把它作为家业，真、扬之间运道阻塞。
English: Between the two counties of Yizhen and Jiangdu, there are five official reservoirs. They built sluice gates to store water and use it to irrigate people's fields. Wealthy and powerful people forcibly occupied it as a family business. The transportation route between Zhen and Yang was blocked.

古文：嘉靖二年，御史秦钺请复五塘。
现代文：嘉靖二午，御史秦钹请求恢复五处官塘。
English: In the afternoon of the second day of Jiajing, the Grand Historian Qin Yu requested the restoration of five official ponds.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：万历五年，御史陈世宝言： 仪真江口，去闸太远，请於上下十数丈许增建二闸，随湖启闭，以截出江之船，尽令入闸，庶免迟滞。 
现代文：万历五年，御史陈世宝说： 仪真江口，距离闸门太远，请在上下十数丈左右增建二座闸门，根据湖水增减而开关，以便拦截出长江的船只，全都使其进入闸门，或许能避免滞留。 
English: In the fifth year of Wanli, the historian Chen Shibao said: Yizhen River mouth, the distance from the gate is too far, please build two additional gates about ten meters above and below, and switch them according to the increase and decrease of lake water, so as to intercept the ships out of the Yangtze River, all of which will enter the gate, and may be able to avoid detention.

古文：疏上，议行。
现代文：奏疏上呈，议定施行。
English: The minutes were submitted and agreed to be implemented.

古文：白塔河者，在泰州。
现代文：白塔河，在泰州。
English: Baita River, in Taizhou.

古文：上通邵伯，下接大江，斜对常州孟渎河与泰兴北新河，皆浙漕间道也。
现代文：往上通到邵伯，往下连接大江，斜对常州孟演河与泰兴北新河，都是浙江漕河的支河道。
English: Upstream to Shao Bo, downstream to connect the Dajiang River, obliquely to Changzhou Mengyuan River and Taixing Beixinhe River, all are tributaries of Zhejiang Caohe River.

古文：自陈瑄始开。
现代文：从陈管开始开通。
English: It will be opened from Chen Guan.

古文：宣德间，从赵新、陈祚请，命瑄役夫四万五千馀人浚之，建新闸、潘家庄、大桥、江口四闸。
现代文：宣德年间，依从赵新、陈祚的请求，命令陈瑝役使民工四万五千余人疏通它，建立新闸、潘家庄、大桥、江口四座闸门。
English: During the Xuande era, in accordance with the request of Zhao Xin and Chen Xuan, Chen Xuan ordered more than 45,000 migrant workers to clear it and build a new gate, Panjiazhuang, a bridge and four gates at the mouth of the river.

古文：正统四年，水溃闸塞，都督武兴因闭不用，仍自瓜洲盘坝。
现代文：正统四年，河水冲破堤防，闸门被堵塞，都督武兴因此关闭不用，仍然从瓜洲回绕堤坝。
English: In the fourth year of orthodoxy, the river broke through the dike, the gate was blocked, and the governor Wu Xing therefore closed and did not use it, still circling the dike from Guazhou.

古文：瓜洲之坝，洪武中置，凡十五，列东西二港间。
现代文：瓜洲的堤坝，洪武年间所修筑，总共十五处，排列于东西二港之间。
English: Guazhou's dikes, built during the Hongwu era, total fifteen, and are arranged between the east and west ports.

古文：永乐间，废东坝为厂，以贮材木，止存西港七坝。
现代文：永乐年间，废弃束坝成厂房，用来储存木材，只保存西港七坝。
English: During the Yongle era, the abandoned bund dams were converted into factory buildings and used to store timber. Only the seven dams in the West Port were preserved.

古文：漕舟失泊，屡遭风险。
现代文：漕运船只失去了停船靠岸的地方，多次遭受大风的危险。
English: Rowing boats lost their places to dock and were repeatedly exposed to the dangers of high winds.

古文：英宗初年，乃复浚东港。
现代文：英宗初年，纔又疏通东港。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Yeongjong, Donggang was dredged again.

古文：既而巡抚周忱筑坝白塔河之大桥闸，以时启闭，漕舟稍分行。
现代文：不久，巡抚周忱在白塔河的大桥闸修筑堤坝，按照一定的时间开关，漕运船只逐渐分开航行。
English: Soon after, the governor Zhou Zhen was busy building a dam at the bridge gate of the Baita River. According to a certain time switch, the rowing boats gradually sailed apart.

古文：自镇江里河开浚，漕舟出甘露、新港，径渡瓜洲；而白塔、北新，皆以江路险远，舍而不由矣。
现代文：自从镇江襄河开通，漕运船只出甘露、新港，直接渡过瓜洲；然而白塔、北新，都因为长珏路途危险遥远，舍弃而不经由那里。
English: Since the opening of the Zhenjiang Yanghe River, rowing vessels from Kamlu and Xingang have directly crossed Guazhou; however, Baita and Beixin have not passed through there because of the long and dangerous distance.

古文：卫漕者，即卫河。
现代文：卫漕，就是卫河。
English: Wei Cao, that is, Wei River.

古文：源出河南辉县，至临清与会通河合，北达天津。
现代文：源出于河南辉县，到达临清与会通河汇合，往北到达天津。
English: The source comes from Huixian County of Henan Province, reaches the confluence of the Tonghe River in Linqing Municipality, and goes north to Tianjin.

古文：自临清以北皆称卫河。
现代文：从临清以北都称为卫河。
English: From Linqing to the north, it is called Weihe.

古文：详具本《志》。
现代文：详情都记载于本《河渠志》。
English: The details are recorded in this "History of Rivers and Canals."

古文：白漕者，即通济河。
现代文：白漕，就是通济河。
English: Bai Cao is the mouth of the Tongji River.

古文：源出塞地，经密云县雾灵山，为潮河川。
现代文：源出于北方边境地区，经过密云县雾灵山，成为潮河川。
English: Its source is in the northern border area, and it flows through Wuling Mountain in Miyun County to become a tidal river.

古文：而富河、罾口河、七渡河、桑乾河、三里河俱会於此，名曰白河。
现代文：而富河、罾口河、七渡河、桑干河、三里河都汇合于此，名叫白河。
English: However, the Fu River, the Hukou River, the Shidu River, the Sangan River, and the Sanli River all converge here, and are called the White River.

古文：南流经通州，合通惠及榆、浑诸河，亦名潞河。
现代文：往南流经通州，汇合通惠及榆、浑各河，也叫潞河。
English: It flows southward through Tongzhou, and merges with the Tonghui and Hunka Rivers, also known as the Fen River.

古文：三百六十里，至直沽会卫河入海，赖以通漕。
现代文：三百六十里，到达直沽汇合卫河流入大海，依靠它来畅通漕运。
English: Three hundred and sixty miles, arriving at the confluence of the Wei River and the sea, relying on it for smooth paddling.

古文：杨村以北，势若建瓴，底多淤沙。
现代文：杨村以北，其水势居高流下，如高屋建瓴，河底多淤沙。
English: To the north of Yangcun, the water potential is high downstream, such as high-rise buildings, and the river bottom is mostly silt.

古文：夏秋水涨苦潦，冬春水微苦涩。
现代文：夏秋洪水来临苦于水淹，冬春河水细小苦于不通畅。
English: When the summer and autumn floods come, it suffers from flooding, and in winter and spring, the river water is small and suffers from being impassable.

古文：冲溃徙改颇与黄河同。
现代文：冲毁堤防、改道不定大致与黄河相同。
English: The situation is roughly the same as that of the Yellow River.

古文：耎儿渡者，在武清、通州间，尤其要害处也。
现代文：更儿渡，在武清、通州之间，是格外重要的地方。
English: Jiaodu, between Wuqing and Tongzhou, is an extremely important place.

古文：自永乐至成化初年，凡八决，辄发民夫筑堤。
现代文：从永乐到成化初年，一共八次溃决，便派遣民工修筑堤岸。
English: From Yongle to Chenghua in the first year, a total of eight times, they sent migrant workers to build the embankment.

古文：而正统元年之决，为害尤甚，特敕太监沐敬、安远侯柳溥、尚书李友直随宜区画，发五军营卒五万及民夫一万筑决堤。
现代文：然而，正统元年的决堤，造成的灾害格外严重，专门敕令太监沐敬、安逮侯柳溥、尚书李友直根据情况筹划安排，派遣五个军营的兵士五万人及民工一万人修筑演决的堤岸。
English: However, the disaster caused by the break of the dike in the first year of orthodoxy was particularly serious. Eunuchs Mu Kei, An Fang Hou Liu Ye and Shangshu Li You Zhi were specially ordered to make plans and arrangements according to the situation, and 50,000 soldiers from five military camps and 10,000 migrant workers were dispatched to build the demonstration embankment.

古文：又命武进伯朱冕、尚书吴中役五万人，去河西务二十里凿河一道，导白水入其中。
现代文：又命令武进怕朱冕、尚书昊中役使五万人，离河玺整二十里处开凿河道一条，导引白水流入其中。
English: He also ordered Wu Jinbei, Zhu Guanyin and Shang Shuhao to send fifty thousand people to dig a river channel twenty miles away from the river and guide the white water to flow into it.

古文：二工并竣，人甚便之，赐河名曰通济，封河神曰通济河神。
现代文：二处工程一起竣工，人们都很便利，赐予河名叫做通济，赐予河神叫做通济河神。
English: The two projects were completed at the same time, which was very convenient for people. The name given to the river is called Tongji, and the name given to the river god is called Tongji River God.

古文：先是，永乐二十一年筑通州抵直沽河岸，有冲决者，随时修筑以为常。
现代文：在此之前，永乐二十一年，修筑通州到直沽的河岸，有被冲决的，随时修筑作为常规。
English: Prior to this, in Yongle's 21st year, the riverbanks from Tongzhou to Zhouzhuang were built. Some were washed away, but they were built at any time as a general rule.

古文：迨通济河成，决岸修筑者亦且数四。
现代文：等到通济河完成，决堤而修筑好的也有多次。
English: By the time the Tongji River was completed, it had broken through the levee several times.

古文：万历三十一年从工部议，挑通州至天津白河，深四尺五寸，所挑沙土即筑堤两岸，著为令。
现代文：万历三十一年，依从工部的主张，挖通通州到天津白河，深四尺五寸，所挖沙土便在两岸筑堤，用文字写定着为命令。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, in accordance with the proposal of the Ministry of Works, it was dug through Tongzhou to Tianjin Baihe, with a depth of four feet and five inches. The excavated sand was used to build a dike on both sides. It was written as an order.

古文：大通河者，元郭守敬所凿。
现代文：大通河，是元郭守敬所开凿。
English: Datong River was excavated by Yuan Guo Shoujing.

古文：由大通桥东下，抵通州高丽庄，与白河合，至直沽，会卫河入海，长百六十里有奇。
现代文：从大通桥往东行，到达通州高丽庄，与白河汇合，到达直沽，汇合卫河流入大海，长一百六十多里。
English: Heading east from Datong Bridge, it reaches Tongzhou Gaoli Township, merges with Baihe River, and reaches Zhiyao, where the two rivers meet and flow into the sea. It is more than 160 miles long.

古文：十里一闸，蓄水济运，名曰通惠。
现代文：每隔十里建立一座闸门，蓄积水流拯济运道，其名叫做通惠。
English: A sluice gate is built every ten miles to store water and create a lifeline, known as the Tonghui.

古文：又以白河、榆河、浑河合流，亦名潞河。
现代文：又因为白河、榆河、浑河合流，也叫做潞河。
English: And because of the confluence of the Baihe, Luohe and Hunhe, it is also called the Luohe.

古文：洪武中渐废。
现代文：洪武年间逐渐废弃。
English: It was gradually abandoned during the Hongwu era.

古文：永乐四年八月，北京行部言： 宛平昌平西湖、景东牛栏庄及青龙华家瓮山三闸，水冲决岸。 
现代文：永乐四年八月，北京行部说： 宛平昌平西湖、景柬牛栏庄及青龙华家瓮山三处闸门，被水冲决堤岸。 
English: In August of the fourth year of Yongle, the Beijing Administration Department said: The three gates of Wanping Changping West Lake, Jingkang Cattle Farm and Qinglong Huajia Lushan were washed away by the water.

古文：命发军民修治。
现代文：命令派遣军民进行修治。
English: The order was given to send soldiers and civilians to carry out the repairs.

古文：明年复言： 自西湖、景东至通流，凡七闸，河道淤塞。
现代文：第二年又说： 从西湖、景束到通流，共计七处闸门，河道淤塞。
English: The next year, he said: "From the West Lake and Jingsu to the flow, there are a total of seven gates, and the river is silted up.

古文：自昌平东南白浮村至西湖、景东流水河口一百里，宜增置十二闸。 
现代文：从昌平东南的白浮村到西湖、景束流水河口一百里，应当增设十二处闸门。 
English: From Baifu Village in the southeast of Changping to the West Lake and the mouth of the Jingzhu River, it is necessary to add 12 gates.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从其主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：未几，闸俱堙，不复通舟。
现代文：不久，闸门全都被堵塞，不再通行船只。
English: Soon, all the locks were blocked, and no more ships could pass.

古文：成化中，漕运总兵官杨茂言： 每岁自张家湾舍舟，车转至都下，雇值不赀。
现代文：成化年间，漕运总兵官杨茂说： 每年从张家湾停止用船运粮，再用车转运到京都，雇金不可估量。
English: During the Chenghua period, Yang Mao, the chief officer of the rowing transport, said: "Every year, we stop transporting grain by boat from Zhangjiagang, and then use cars to transport it to Kyoto. The wage is immeasurable.

古文：旧通惠河石闸尚存，深二尺许，修闸潴水，用小舟剥运便。 
现代文：旧通惠河石闸门还存在，深二尺左右，修建闸门蓄积水流，用小船分载转运很便利。 
English: The old stone sluice gate of Tonghui River still exists, with a depth of about two feet. The construction of the gate accumulates water flow, and it is very convenient to transfer by boat.

古文：又有议於三里河从张家湾烟墩桥以西疏河泊舟者。
现代文：又有主张在三里河从张家湾畑墩桥以西疏通河流停靠船只的。
English: There are also proponents of dredging the Sanli River from Zhangjiawan to the west of Hatan Bridge to allow ships to dock.

古文：下廷臣集议，遣尚书杨鼎、侍郎乔毅相度。
现代文：下交朝廷大臣集中商议，派遣尚书杨鼎、侍郎乔毅观察测量。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court held intensive discussions and dispatched Shangshu Yangding and chamberlain Qiao Yi to observe and measure.

古文：上言： 旧闸二十四座，通水行舟。
现代文：上奏说： 原先有闸门二十四座，通水行船。
English: The prelude says: Originally there were twenty-four locks, allowing ships to pass through.

古文：但元时水在宫墙外，舟得入城内海子湾。
现代文：但是，元朝时水在宫廷围墙之外，船只能够进入城内海子湾。
English: However, during the Yuan Dynasty, the water was outside the palace walls, and ships were able to enter Haizi Bay inside the city.

古文：今水从皇城金水河出，故道不可复行。
现代文：现在，水从皇城金水河流出，原先的河道不能再通行。
English: Now, water flows from the Imperial City Jinshui River, and the original river can no longer be used.

古文：且元引白浮泉往西逆流，今经山陵，恐妨地脉。
现代文：并且，元时人导引白浮泉往西逆流，现在经过皇陵，担心妨碍地脉。
English: Moreover, in the Yuan Dynasty, people guided the Baifu Spring westward against the current, and now it passes through the imperial mausoleum, fearing that it would interfere with the earth vein.

古文：又一亩泉过白羊口山沟，两水冲截难引。
现代文：又一亩泉经过白羊口山沟，两条水流被冲断很难导引。
English: Another mu of spring has passed through the Baiyokou ravine, and two streams have been broken off, making it difficult to guide.

古文：若城南三里河旧无河源，正统间修城壕，恐雨多水溢，乃穿正阳桥东南洼下地，开壕口以泄之，始有三里河名。
现代文：丽城南三里河原先役有河流的源头，正统年间修筑护城河，担心雨水多了河水泛滥，于是，开通正阳桥东南低下之地，打开护城河口来排放河水，纔有三里河之名。
English: The Nan Sanli River in Licheng originally served as the source of the river. During the period of orthodoxy, a moat was built, and it was feared that the river would flood if there was too much rain. Therefore, the south-eastern part of Zhengyang Bridge was opened, and the mouth of the moat was opened to discharge the river water, giving rise to the name Sanli River.

古文：自壕口八里，始接浑河。
现代文：从护城河口八里，开始连接浑河。
English: Eight miles from the mouth of the moat, it begins to connect to the Hun River.

古文：旧渠两岸多庐墓，水浅河窄，又须增引别流相济。
现代文：原先，渠道两岸多有庐墓，水浅河窄，又必须增引另外的水流来贯通。
English: Originally, most of the graves on both sides of the channel were of skeletons, the shallow river was narrow, and additional water flow had to be brought in to pass through.

古文：如西湖草桥源出玉匠局、马跑等地，泉不深远。
现代文：如西湖草桥源出于玉匠局、马跑等地，泉水不深水流不远。
English: For example, the source of the West Lake Grass Bridge comes from the Jade Craftsmen's Bureau, Ma Lan and other places, and the spring water is not deep and the stream is not far away.

古文：元人曾用金口水，汹涌没民舍，以故随废。
现代文：元人曾经引用金口水，其水汹涌淹没百姓房屋，因此随即就废弃。
English: The founder once used gold mouth water, and its water flooded people's houses violently, so it was immediately abandoned.

古文：惟玉泉、龙泉及月儿、柳沙等泉，皆出西北，循山麓而行，可导入西湖。
现代文：只有玉泉、龙泉及月儿、柳沙等泉，全都出于西北，顺着山脚流行，可以导引流入西湖。
English: Only Yuquan, Longquan, Yue'er, Liusha and other springs, all from the northwest, are popular along the foot of the mountain and can be guided to flow into the West Lake.

古文：请浚西湖之源，闭分水清龙闸，引诸泉水从高梁河，分其半由金水河出，馀则从都城外壕流转，会於正阳门东。
现代文：请求开通西湖的水源，关闭分流湖水的清龙闸，导引各泉水从高梁河，分流其二分之一经由金水河流出，其余则从都城外护城河流转，在正阳门束面汇合。
English: Request to open the water source of the West Lake, close the Qinglong sluice of the diversion of lake water, guide the springs from the Gaoliang River, divert one-half of it through the Jinshui River, and the rest from the moat outside the capital, and converge at the Zhengyang Gate.

古文：城壕且闭，令勿入三里河并流。
现代文：城外护城河暂且关闭，使其不要流入三里河合流。
English: The moat outside the city was temporarily closed to prevent it from flowing into the confluence of the Sanli River.

古文：大通桥闸河随旱涝启闭，则舟获近仓，甚便。 
现代文：大通桥闸河随着旱涝而开关，那么，船只就能够靠近粮仓，非常便利。 
English: Datong Bridge sluice switches with drought and flood, then the ships can be close to the granary, which is very convenient.

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：皇帝依从他的主张。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：方发军夫九万修浚，会以灾异，诏罢诸役。
现代文：刚刚派遣兵士役夫九万人进行修治疏通，适逢有灾异发生，诏令停止各处劳役。
English: Having just dispatched 90,000 soldiers to carry out repairs and dredging, when a natural disaster occurred, the emperor ordered the suspension of forced labor everywhere.

古文：所司以漕事大，乃命四万人浚城壕，而西山、玉泉及抵张家湾河道，则以渐及焉。
现代文：主管部门认为漕运之事重大，于是，命令四万人疏通城外护城河，而西山、玉泉以及到张家湾河道，也已经从中得到好处了。
English: The competent department considered the matter of rowing transport to be important, so it ordered forty thousand people to clear the moat outside the city, and Xishan, Yuquan and the river to Zhangjiawan have also benefited from it.

古文：越五年，乃敕平江伯陈锐，副都御史李裕，侍郎翁世资、王诏督漕卒浚通惠河，如鼎、毅前议。
现代文：过了五年，于是诏令平江伯陈锐，副都御史李裕，侍郎翁世资和王诏督促漕运兵士疏通通惠河，依照杨鼎、乔毅前面的主张。
English: Five years later, the emperor ordered the governor of the Pingjiang River, Chen Rui, the vice-governor of the capital, Li Yu, and his attendants, Weng Shizhi and Wang Zhaozhu, to urge the rowing soldiers to clear the Hui River, in accordance with the previous opinions of Yang Ding and Qiao Yi.

古文：明年六月，工成，自大通桥至张家湾浑河口六十馀里，浚泉三，增闸四，漕舟稍通。
现代文：第二年六月，工程竣工，从大通桥到张家湾浑河口六十多里，疏通泉水三处，增建闸门四座，漕运船只逐渐畅通。
English: In June of the following year, the project was completed. It is more than sixty miles from the Datong Bridge to the mouth of the Hun River in Zhangjiawan. Three springs have been dredged, four additional gates have been built, and the passage of rowing boats has gradually improved.

古文：然元时所引昌平三泉俱遏不行，独引一西湖，又仅分其半，河窄易盈涸。
现代文：然而，元朝时所导引的昌平三处泉水全被断绝不流通，仅仅导引一西湖之水，又只分流其中二分之一，河道狭窄容易被盗开而河水干涸。
English: However, the three springs of Changping that were guided by the Yuan Dynasty were all cut off and did not circulate. Only one of the West Lake's water was guided, and only half of it was diverted. The river was narrow and easily stolen, and the river dried up.

古文：不二载，涩滞如旧。
现代文：不到两年，像原先那样不通畅。
English: Less than two years later, it is not as smooth as it used to be.

古文：正德二年尝一浚之，且修大通桥至通州闸十有二，坝四十有一。
现代文：正德二年，曾经疏通过一次，并且，修治大通桥到通州闸十二处，拦河坝四十一处。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, there was a narrow passage once, and the repair of the Datong Bridge to the Tongzhou Gate was 12 places, and the barrage dam was 41 places.

古文：嘉靖六年，御史吴仲言： 通惠河屡经修复，皆为权势所挠。
现代文：嘉靖六年，御史昊仲说： 通惠河屡次经过修复，都被有权有势的人所阻止。
English: In the sixth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Mi Shi Haozhong said: Tonghui River has been repaired many times, but it has been blocked by powerful people.

古文：顾通流等八闸遗迹俱存，因而成之，为力甚易，岁可省车费赀二十馀万。
现代文：祇是通流等八处闸门遗迹还在，凭借遗迹而修成它，成功很容易，每年可以节省车费二十多万。
English: Only eight locks, including the sluice gate, are still standing. With the help of the relics, it was easy to complete the project and save more than 200,000 yuan in transportation costs every year.

古文：且历代漕运皆达京师，未有贮国储於五十里外者。 
现代文：而且历代漕运都是到达京师，没有把储藏的国粮储备在五十里以外的情况。 
English: Moreover, all previous generations of rowing transport reached the Beijing Division, and there was no situation in which the stored grain reserves were more than fifty miles away.

古文：帝心以为然，命侍郎王軏、何诏及仲偕相度。
现代文：皇帝心里认为这样对，命令侍郎王軏、何诏及昊仲共同观察测量。
English: The emperor thought this was right in his heart, and ordered his attendants Wang Xi, He Zhao and Hao Zhong to jointly observe and measure.

古文：軏等言： 大通桥地形高白河六丈馀，若浚至七丈，引白河达京城，诸闸可尽罢，然未易议也。
现代文：王軏等说： 大通桥地势高于白河六丈多，假若挖深到七丈，导引白河到达京城，各处闸门可以全部取消，然而，不容易议定。
English: Wang Wei and others said: Datong Bridge is more than six feet higher than the Baihe River. If it is dug to seven feet deep and guides the Baihe River to the capital, all gates can be canceled. However, it is not easy to reach an agreement.

古文：计独浚治河闸，但通流闸在通州旧城中，经二水门，南浦、土桥、广利三闸皆闤阓衢市，不便转挽。
现代文：计划祇是疏通修治河闸，但是，通流闸在通州旧城中，经过二处永门，南浦、土桥、广利三座闸门都在街市，不便于转运。
English: The plan is only to dredge and repair the sluice gate, but the sluice gate is in the old city of Tongzhou, passing through two Yongmen, and the three gates of Nampo, Doqiao and Guangli are in the city market, which is inconvenient for transportation.

古文：惟白河滨旧小河废坝西，不一里至堰水小坝，宜修筑之，使通普济闸，可省四闸两关转搬力。 
现代文：只有白河靠近旧小河废坝西边，不足一里就到堰水小坝，应当修筑它，使其通到普济闸，可以省去四座闸门两座城门转运之力。 
English: Only Baihe, close to the west side of the old small river waste dam, is less than a mile away from the weir dam. It should be built so that it can pass to the Puzi gate, which can save the four gates and two city gates from being transported.

古文：而尚书桂萼言不便，请改修三里河。
现代文：然而，尚书桂萼说不方便，请求改修三里河。
English: However, Shang Shuxue calyx said it was inconvenient and requested the renovation of Sanlihe.

古文：帝下其疏於大学士杨一清、张璁。
现代文：皇帝交付他的奏章给大学士杨一清、张璁。
English: The emperor delivered his plaques to the scholars Yang Yixing and Zhang Ye.

古文：一清言： 因旧闸行转搬法，省运军劳费，宜断行之。 
现代文：杨一清说： 利用旧闸门使用转运的办法，省去运粮军的辛劳和耗费，应当决断施行这个办法。 
English: Yang Yiching said: The method of using the old gate to use transshipment will save the labor and expense of the grain transport army, and this method should be resolutely implemented.

古文：璁亦言： 此一劳永逸之计，萼所论费广功难。 
现代文：张璁也说： 这是一劳永逸的办法，桂萼所说的办法耗费多成功困难。 
English: Zhang Jun also said: This is a once-and-for-all method, and the method mentioned by Gui Caly is more expensive and more difficult to succeed.

古文：帝乃却萼议。
现代文：皇帝就拒绝了桂萼的主张。
English: The emperor rejected Katsura's claim.

古文：明年六月，仲报河成，因疏五事，言： 大通桥至通州石坝，地势高四丈，流沙易淤，宜时加浚治。
现代文：第二年六月，昊仲报告河道修成，接着上疏陈述五件事，说： 大通桥到通州石坝，地势高出四丈，流沙容易淤积，应当随时加以疏通修治。
English: In June of the following year, Haozhong reported the completion of the river channel, followed by Shangso stating five things, saying: Datong Bridge to Tongzhou Rock Dam, the terrain is high, quicksand is easily silted up, and should be cleared and repaired at any time.

古文：管河主事宜专委任，毋令兼他务。
现代文：管河主事应当专门委任，不要让他兼管其它事情。
English: The person in charge of the river should be specially appointed, and he should not be allowed to handle other matters.

古文：官吏、闸夫以罢运裁减，宜复旧额。
现代文：官吏和管理闸门的人因为停止运输而被裁减的，应当恢复到原先的人数。
English: If the number of officials and people in charge of gates has been reduced due to the suspension of transportation, it shall be restored to the original number.

古文：庆丰上闸、平津中闸今已不用，宜改建通州西水关外。
现代文：庆丰上闸、平津中闸现在已经不使用，应当改建通州西水关之外。
English: The Qingfeng Upper Lock and the Pingjin Middle Lock are no longer in use, and should be rebuilt outside the Tongzhou West Water Gate.

古文：剥船造费及递岁修艌，俱宜酌处。 
现代文：驳船制造费用以及每年的修治，都应当酌情处理。 
English: The cost of building the barge, as well as annual repairs, should be dealt with as appropriate.

古文：帝以先朝屡勘行未即功，仲等四阅月工成，诏予赏，悉从其所请。
现代文：皇帝认为前朝多次勘测施行都没有达到成功，昊仲等经过四个月治理工程就成功，诏令给予奖赏，全部依从他的请求。
English: The emperor believed that the previous government's multiple surveys and implementation were not successful. Hao Zhong and others succeeded in the governance project after four months, and the imperial edict gave a reward, all in accordance with his request.

古文：仲又请留督工郎中何栋专理其事，为经久计。
现代文：昊仲又请求保留督工郎中何栋专门管理这件事，作为长久之计。
English: Haozhong also requested that several buildings be reserved for the special management of this matter, as a long-term plan.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九年擢栋右通政，仍管通惠河道。
现代文：九年，提升何栋为右通政，仍然管理通惠河河道。
English: Nine years later, he was promoted to the right of Tongzheng and still managed the Tonghui River.

古文：是时，仲出为处州知府，进所编《通惠河志》。
现代文：这时，昊仲出任处州知府，进献所编撰的《通惠河志》。
English: At this time, Hao Zhong served as the prefectural governor of the prefecture, and presented the "Tonghui River Chronicle" compiled by him.

古文：帝命送史馆，采入《会典》，且颁工部刊行。
现代文：皇帝命令送到史馆，搜集编入《会典》，并且颁布工部刊行。
English: The emperor ordered it to be sent to the history museum, collected and compiled into the "Code," and promulgated and published by the Ministry of Industry.

古文：自此漕艘直达京师，迄於明末。
现代文：从此以后，漕运船只直达京城，直到明朝末年。
English: From then on, rowing boats reached the capital directly until the end of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：人思仲德，建祠通州祀之。
现代文：百姓思念昊仲的功德，在通州修建祠庙祭祀他。
English: Thinking of Haozhong's merits, the people built an ancestral temple in Tongzhou to worship him.

古文：蓟州河者，运蓟州官军饷道也。
现代文：蓟州河，是运送蓟州军粮的河道。
English: The Luzhou River is the channel for transporting Luzhou army rations.

古文：明初，海运饷蓟州。
现代文：明朝初年，海运军粮到蓟州。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, military grain was transported by sea to Ganzhou.

古文：天顺二年，大河卫百户闵恭言： 南京并直隶各卫，岁用旗军运粮三万石至蓟州等卫仓，越大海七十馀里，风涛险恶。
现代文：天顺二年，大河卫百户闵恭说： 南京同直隶各卫，每年用旗军运送军粮三万石到蓟州等卫粮仓，越过大海七十多里，风浪危险可怕。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, the great river guard, the hundred households, said: "Nanjing, together with the direct subordinates of the guards, annually uses the flag army to transport military grain of thirty thousand stones to the defense grain silos such as Zhangzhou, crossing the sea for more than seventy miles, and the wind and waves are dangerous and terrible.

古文：新开沽河，北望蓟州，正与水套、沽河直，袤四十馀里而径，且水深，其间阻隔者仅四之一，若穿渠以运，可无海患。 
现代文：新开通的沽河，北面对着蓟州，正好与水套、沽河相对，南北相距四十多里而路途径直，并且水深，这中间阻挡隔绝的地方只有四分之一，假若开通沟渠用来运输军粮，可以没有海运的忧患。 
English: The newly opened Li River, facing Luzhou to the north, is just opposite the Shuitou and Li River. The distance between the north and south is more than forty miles, but the road is straight and the water is deep. The area blocked in the middle is only a quarter. If the trench is opened to transport military grain, there will be no worries about shipping.

古文：下总兵都督宋胜、巡按御史李敏行视可否。
现代文：下交总兵都督宋胜、巡按御史李敏巡行视察可否施行。
English: Song Sheng, the subordinate commander-in-chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and Li Min, the inspector-in-chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, went on a tour to inspect whether it could be implemented.

古文：胜等言便，遂开直沽河。
现代文：宋胜等说很方便。于是开通直沽河。
English: Song Sheng and others said it was very convenient, so they opened the Zhouzhuang River.

古文：阔五丈，深丈五尺。
现代文：宽五丈，深一丈五尺。
English: Five feet wide and five feet deep.

古文：成化二年一浚，二十年再浚，并浚鸦鸿桥河道，造丰润县海运粮储仓。
现代文：成化二年第一次疏浚，二十年再次疏浚，并且疏通鸦鸿桥河道，建立丰润县海运军粮储藏粮仓。
English: It was dredged for the first time in the second year of Chenghua, and dredged again in the 20th year, and the river channel of the Raven Bridge was dredged, and a grain storage silo for seaborne military grain in Fengrun County was established.

古文：正德十六年，运粮指挥王瓒言： 直沽东北新河，转运蓟州，河流浅，潮至方可行舟。
现代文：正德十六年，运粮指挥王瓒说： 直沽东北的新河，转运蓟州军粮，河流水浅，潮水到达纔可以行驶船只。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, the commander of grain transportation, Wang Qian, said: "The Xinhe River in the northeast of Zhoushan is used for the transshipment of Zhangzhou military grain. The river is shallow, and the tide can reach the boat.

古文：边关每匮饷，宜浚使深广。 
现代文：边关常常缺乏军粮，应当疏通使其水深河宽。 
English: There is often a shortage of military food at the border, and it should be dredged to make the river deeper and wider.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：初，新河三岁一浚。
现代文：原先，新河每隔三年疏通一次。
English: Originally, the Xinhe River was dredged every three years.

古文：嘉靖元年易二岁，以为常。
现代文：嘉靖元年，改为每隔二年疏通一次，将其作为常规。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, it was changed to be dredged once every two years, making it a regular practice.

古文：十七年浚殷留庄大口至旧仓店百十六里。
现代文：十七年，疏通殷留庄大口到旧仓店一百一十六里。
English: In the seventeenth year, the dredging of the large mouth of Yinliuzhuang to the old warehouse store was one hundred and sixteen miles.

古文：丰润环香河者，浚自成化间，运粟十馀万石以饷蓟州东路者也。
现代文：丰润环香河，疏通于成化年间，运送粮食十多万石，供给蓟州东路的军队。
English: Fengrun Huanxiang River, dredged in the Chenghua years, transported more than 100,000 kilos of grain to supply the army of Zhangzhou East Road.

古文：后堙废，饷改蓟州给，大不便。
现代文：后来，因堵塞而废弃，军粮改由蓟州供给，很不方便。
English: Later, it was abandoned due to congestion, and the supply of military food was changed from Zhangzhou, which was very inconvenient.

古文：嘉靖四十五年从御史鲍承荫请，复之，且建三闸於北济、张官屯、鸦鸿桥以潴水。
现代文：嘉靖四十五年，依从御史鲍承荫的请求，恢复它，并且建立三座闸门在北济、张官屯、鸦鸿桥，用来蓄积水流。
English: In the 45th year of Jiajing, in accordance with the request of the imperial historian Bao Chengyin, it was restored, and three gates were built in Beiji, Zhangguantun and Raven Bridge to accumulate water flow.

古文：昌平河，运诸陵官军饷道也。
现代文：昌平河，是运送各守护皇陵官兵军粮的水道。
English: The Changping River is the waterway that transports the grain for the officers and soldiers guarding the imperial tombs.

古文：起巩华城外安济桥，抵通州渡口。
现代文：起于巩华城外安济桥，到达通州渡口。
English: It started from Anji Bridge outside Gonghua City and reached Tongzhou Ferry Port.

古文：袤百四十五里，其中淤浅三十里难行。
现代文：长一百四十五里，其中淤塞水浅三十里很难行驶。
English: It is one hundred and forty-five miles long, of which the silted water is thirty miles shallow, making it difficult to travel.

古文：隆庆六年大浚，运给长陵等八卫官军月粮四万石，遂成流通。
现代文：隆庆六年，大力疏浚，运送给长陵等八卫军队每月军粮四万石，于是完成流通。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, it was vigorously dredged and delivered to the Changling and other Eight Guards Armies with a monthly military grain of 40,000 koku, thus completing the circulation.

古文：万历元年复疏巩华城外旧河。
现代文：万历元年，又疏通巩华城外的旧河道。
English: In the first year of Wanli, the old river outside Gonghua City was dredged.

古文：海运，始於元至元中。
现代文：海运，开始于元至元年间。
English: Shipping, which began in the period from the Yuan Dynasty to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：伯颜用朱清、张瑄运粮输京师，仅四万馀石。
现代文：伯颜任用朱清、张管运输粮食到京城，仅仅四万多石。
English: Bo Yan appointed Zhu Qing and Zhang Guan to transport grain to Beijing, with a mere 40,000 koku.

古文：其后日增，至三百万馀石。
现代文：这以后一天天增多，达到三百多万石。
English: After that, it increased day by day, reaching more than three million stones.

古文：初，海道万三千馀里，最险恶，既而开生道，稍径直。
现代文：当初，海运航道一万三千多里，最危险可怕，随后，开辟新的航道，稍微捷近。
English: At first, the sea route was more than 13,000 miles long, the most dangerous and terrible. Later, a new route was opened, which was slightly faster and closer.

古文：后殷明略又开新道，尤便。
现代文：后来，殷明略又开通新的航道，尤其方便。
English: Later, Yin Ming slightly opened a new channel, which is particularly convenient.

古文：然皆出大洋，风利，自浙西抵京不过旬日，而漂失甚多。
现代文：然而，都出于大海，如果风向有利，从浙江西到达京师不超过十天，但是，倾覆损失太多。
English: However, they are all out of the sea. If the wind direction is favorable, it will take no more than ten days to reach Beijing from west Zhejiang. However, there are too many capsizing losses.

古文：洪武元年，太祖命汤和造海舟，饷北征士卒。
现代文：洪武元年，太祖命令汤和制造海船，运送军粮供给北征的兵士。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the great-grandfather ordered Tang He to build a ship to transport military supplies to the soldiers of the Northern Expedition.

古文：天下既定，募水工运莱州洋海仓粟以给永平。
现代文：天下安定以后，征召水工运送莱州洋海仓储的粮食以供给永平。
English: After the country was stabilized, water workers were conscripted to transport grain stored in the Laizhou Ocean to supply Yongping.

古文：后辽左及迤北数用兵，於是靖海侯吴祯、延安侯唐胜宗、航海侯张赫、舳舻侯朱寿先后转辽饷，以为常。
现代文：后来，速左及其以北多次用兵，于是，靖海侯昊祯、延安侯唐胜宗、航海侯张赫、舳胪侯朱寿先后转运辽东的军粮，把它作为常规。
English: Later, He Zuo and those north of him used soldiers many times. Therefore, Jinghai Hou Hao, Yan'an Hou Tang Shengzong, Navigation Hou Zhang He, and Handan Hou Zhu Shou successively transported military grain from Liaodong, and took it as a routine.

古文：督江、浙边海卫军大舟百馀艘，运粮数十万。
现代文：督促江苏、浙江靠近海边的卫军大船一百余艘，运送军粮数十万石。
English: He urged Jiangsu and Zhejiang to send more than a hundred warships close to the coast to transport hundreds of thousands of kilos of grain.

古文：赐将校以下绮帛、胡椒、苏木、钱钞有差，民夫则复其家一年，溺死者厚恤。
现代文：赐给将校以下绮帛、胡椒、苏木、钱钞各有差别，役夫便免除其家一年的赋税，淹死的人优厚抚恤。
English: There are different amounts of straw, pepper, cedar wood, and money given to officers and below. A servant's family is exempted from paying taxes for one year, and those who drown receive a generous pension.

古文：三十年，以辽东军饷赢羡，第令辽军屯种其地，而罢海运。
现代文：三十年，因为辽塞军粮有盈余，只足命令辽东兵士在驻地耕种其地，从而停止海运。
English: Thirty years ago, because Liaosai had surplus military grain, it was enough to order Liaodong soldiers to cultivate their land in the garrison, thus stopping the shipping.

古文：永乐元年，平江伯陈瑄督海运粮四十九万馀石，饷北京、辽东。
现代文：永乐元年，平江伯陈逭督促海运运粮四十九万余石，供应北京、辽东。
English: In the first year of the Yongle era, Pingjiang farmer Chen Xun urged the maritime transportation of grain of more than 490,000 stone to supply Beijing and Liaodong.

古文：二年，以海运但抵直沽，别用小船转运至京，命於天津置露囤千四百所，以广储蓄。
现代文：二年，因为海运只能到达直沽，另用小船转运到京城，命令在天津设置露天粮囤一千四百所，用来扩大储蓄。
English: In the second year, because the sea transport can only reach Zhiyao, and the small boats are used to transport to Beijing, it was ordered to set up 1,400 open-air granaries in Tianjin to expand savings.

古文：四年定海陆兼运。
现代文：四年，决定海运陆运同时运输。
English: Four years later, it was decided to transport by sea and land at the same time.

古文：瑄每岁运粮百万，建百万仓於直沽尹儿湾城。
现代文：陈琼每年运粮一百万石，在直沽尹儿湾城修建百万石仓。
English: Chen Qiong transports one million stone grain every year, and builds a million stone warehouse in Yin'er Bay City, Zhoushan.

古文：天津卫籍兵万人戍守。
现代文：天津卫籍兵一万人驻守。
English: Ten thousand Tianjin guardsmen were stationed there.

古文：至是，命江南粮一由海运，一由淮、黄，陆运赴卫河，入通州，以为常。
现代文：到这时，命令江南粮食一部分经由海运，一部分经由淮河、黄河，再陆运到卫河，进入通州，把它作为常规。
English: At this time, it was ordered that the grain from the southern part of the Yangtze River should be transported by sea, by the Huaihe River and the Yellow River, and then by land to Weihe and enter Tongzhou, and it was considered normal.

古文：陈瑄上言： 嘉定濒海，当江流之冲，地平衍，无大山高屿。
现代文：陈坛上奏说： 嘉定靠近海边，正当长江水流的要冲，地势平坦，没有大山高地。
English: It was recited on the altar: "Jiading is close to the sea, just as the Yangtze River is about to rush, the terrain is flat, and there are no large mountains or highlands.

古文：海舟停泊，或值风涛，触坚胶浅辄败。
现代文：海船停泊，有的遇到大风大浪，碰到坚石搁浅就损坏。
English: Ships are anchored, some encounter high winds and waves, and are damaged when they run aground on hard rocks.

古文：宜於青浦筑土为山，立堠表识，使舟人知所避，而海险不为患。 
现代文：应当在青浦用土筑成小山，树立险情标志，使驾船的人知道有所避免，而海上险要之处不会成为灾难。 
English: It is necessary to build a hill with soil in Qingpu and set up danger signs so that boat drivers know what to avoid, and dangerous places at sea will not become a disaster.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令依从他的奏请。
English: He complied.

古文：十年九月，工成。
现代文：十年九月，工程竣工。
English: In September 2010, the project was completed.

古文：方百丈，高三十馀丈。
现代文：方圆一百丈，高三十余丈。
English: It is 100 meters in circumference and more than 30 meters tall.

古文：赐名宝山。
现代文：赐名叫宝山。
English: It was given the name of Baoshan.

古文：御制碑文纪之。
现代文：皇帝撰写碑文记其事。
English: The emperor wrote an inscription to record the event.

古文：十三年五月复罢海运，惟存遮洋一总，运辽、蓟粮。
现代文：永乐十三年五月，又停止海运，只保存一个遮洋总，运送供给辽束、蓟州的粮食。
English: In May of the thirteenth year of Yongle, the sea transport was stopped again, and only one ocean-going general cargo was preserved, transporting grain to supply Liaozhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：正统十三年减登州卫海船百艘为十八艘，以五艘运青、莱、登布花钞锭十二万馀斤，岁赏辽军。
现代文：正统十三年，削减登州卫海船，将一百艘碱焉十八艘，用五艘运送青州、莱州、登州的布花钞锭十二万余斤，每年赐给辽东兵士。
English: In the 13th year of orthodoxy, the number of Liaodong naval vessels was reduced from one hundred to eighteen, and five ships were used to transport more than 120,000 catties of cloth banknotes from Qingzhou, Laizhou and Danzhou, which were given to Liaodong soldiers every year.

古文：成化二十三年，侍郎丘浚进大学衍义补，请寻海运故道与河漕并行，大略言： 海舟一载千石，可当河舟三，用卒大减。
现代文：成化二十三年，侍郎丘浚呈上《大学衍义补》，请求寻找海运故道，与河运同时进行，大致是说： 海船一艘装运千石，大略相当于河船三只的装运量，使用的运粮兵大量减少。
English: In the 23rd year of the Chenghua era, the chamberlain, Yau Dung, submitted to the "University Yanyi Supplement" a request to find the old way of shipping, and to carry out river transportation at the same time, roughly saying: One sea ship shipped a thousand stones, roughly equivalent to the shipment volume of three river ships, and the number of grain carriers used was greatly reduced.

古文：河漕视陆运费省什三，海运视陆省什七，虽有漂溺患，然省牵卒之劳、驳浅之费、挨次之守，利害亦相当。
现代文：河运比起陆运的费用减省十分之三，海运比起陆运减省十分之七，即使有被淹没的灾难，然而灭省牵引役卒的辛劳、驳船捞浅的费用，以及顺着次序的守护，利与害也相抵。
English: The cost of river transportation is three-tenths less than that of land transportation, and the cost of sea transportation is seven-tenths less than that of land transportation. Even if there is a flood disaster, the cost of eliminating the toil of the provincial towing officers, the cost of the barge dredging, and the protection of the order, the benefits and harms are also offset.

古文：宜访素知海道者，讲求勘视。 
现代文：应当寻求一向懂得海运的人，请求探测考察。 
English: You should seek out someone who has always been familiar with shipping and request a survey.

古文：其说未行。
现代文：他的主张没有施行。
English: His suggestion was not implemented.

古文：弘治五年，河决金龙口，有请复海运者，朝议弗是。
现代文：弘治五年，黄河在金龙口决堤，有人请求恢复海运，朝廷议定不同意。
English: In the fifth year of the Hongzhi era, the Yellow River burst its banks in Jinlongkou. There was a request to resume shipping, but the imperial court agreed to disagree.

古文：嘉靖二年，遮洋总漂粮二万石，溺死官军五十馀人。
现代文：嘉靖二年，遮洋总漂役军粮二万石，淹死官军五十余人。
English: In the second year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the total amount of military rations drifted across the ocean was 20,000 koku, drowning more than 50 officers and soldiers.

古文：五年停登州造船。
现代文：五年，停止登州造船。
English: In five years, the shipbuilding in Danzhou will be stopped.

古文：二十年，总河王以旂以河道梗涩，言： 海运虽难行，然中间平度州东南有南北新河一道，元时建闸直达安东，南北悉由内洋而行，路捷无险，所当讲求。 
现代文：嘉靖二十年，总河王以旃因为河道阻塞，说： 海运虽然难以行驶，然而，中间平度州东南有南北新河一道，元时建闸直达安束，南北全从内洋通行，道路捷近又无危险，所以应当重视。 
English: In the 20th year of Jiajing, the general river king Yixuan said: "Although it is difficult to travel by sea, there is a north-south new river in the southeast of the middle Pingdu Prefecture. When the gate was built in the Yuan Dynasty, it went straight to Anzhu. The north and south are all accessible from the inland ocean. The road is fast and there is no danger, so it should be valued.

古文：帝以海道迂远，却其议。
现代文：垒帝认为海上运道迂回，拒绝了他的建议。
English: Emperor Yudi considered the sea route to be a detour and rejected his suggestion.

古文：三十八年，辽东巡抚侯汝谅言： 天津入辽之路，自海口至右屯河通堡不及二百里，其中曹泊店、月坨桑、姜女坟、桃花岛皆可湾泊。 
现代文：嘉靖三十八年，辽东巡抚侯汝谅说： 天津进入辽东之路，从海口到右屯河通堡不到二百里，其中曹泊店、月坨桑、姜女坟、桃花岛都可以进港湾停泊。 
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Jiajing, the inspector of Liaodong Province, Hou Rucheng, said: Tianjin has entered the road of Liaodong Province, and it is less than two hundred miles from Haikou to Utunhe Fort. Among them, Cao Baotian, Yuexuan Mulberry, Jiangnian Tomb, and Peach Blossom Island can all enter the harbor and berth.

古文：部覆行之。
现代文：工部回复可以施行。
English: The ministry's reply can now be implemented.

古文：四十五年，顺天巡抚耿随朝勘海道，自永平西下海，百四十五里至纪各庄，又四百二十六里至天津，皆傍岸行舟。
现代文：四十五年，顺天巡抚耿随朝探测海上运道，从永平西面下海，一百四十五里到纪各庄，又四百二十六里到天津，都是靠近海岸行船。
English: In 45 years, Sun Tien's inspector Geng went to the west coast of Yongping to explore the sea transport route, sailing 145 miles to Jigaozhuang and 426 miles to Tianjin, all of which were close to the coast.

古文：其间开洋百二十里，有建河、粮河、小沽、大沽河可避风。
现代文：其间开洋一百二十里，有建河、粮河、小沽、大沽河可以避风。
English: In the meantime, there are 120 miles of open ocean, and Jianhe, Grainhe, Xiaoju, and Dayuhe can be sheltered from the wind.

古文：初允其议，寻以御史刘翾疏沮而罢。
现代文：开始，允许他的主张，不久，因为御史刘翱上奏阻止而罢除。
English: At first, his proposal was allowed, but he was soon removed from his post because the Imperial Historian Liu Xuan blocked it.

古文：是年，从给事中胡应嘉言，革遮洋总。
现代文：这年，依从给事中胡应嘉的计策，革除遮洋总。
English: This year, in accordance with Hu Yingjia's strategy in giving things, the general shade was removed.

古文：隆庆五年，徐、邳河淤，从给事中宋良佐言，复设遮洋总，存海运遗意。
现代文：隆庆五年，徐州、邳州河流淤塞，依从给事中宋良佐的计策，又设置遮洋总，保存海运遗意。
English: In the fifth year of Longqing, the rivers of Xuzhou and Ganzhou were silted up, and in accordance with the strategy of Song Liangzuo, who was in charge of the matter, a total sea barrier was set up to preserve the maritime heritage.

古文：山东巡抚梁梦龙极论海运之利，言： 海道南自淮安至胶州，北自天津至海仓，岛人商贾所出入。
现代文：山东巡抚梁梦龙极力论述海运的便利，说： 海运之道南从淮安到胶州，北从天津到海仓，是岛人商人出入之地。
English: Liang Menglong, the governor of Shandong, tried his best to discuss the convenience of sea transportation, saying: The sea transportation route from Huai'an to Jiaozhou in the south and from Tianjin to Haicang in the north is the entry and exit place for island merchants.

古文：臣遣卒自淮、胶各运米麦至天津，无不利者。
现代文：臣派遣士卒从淮安、胶州各运米麦到天津，没有不顺利的。
English: The vassal dispatched officers and men from Huai'an and Jiaozhou to transport rice and wheat to Tianjin, and everything went smoothly.

古文：淮安至天津三千三百里，风便，两旬可达。
现代文：淮安到天津三千三百里，风顺，二十天就可以到达。
English: Huai'an is 3,300 miles from Tianjin, and it takes only 20 days to get there.

古文：舟由近洋，岛屿联络，虽风可依，视殷明略故道甚安便。
现代文：船经由近洋，岛屿连绵，即使遇大风可以依傍，比起殷明略故道更安全方便。
English: The ship passes near the ocean, the islands are continuous, even if there is a strong wind, it is safer and more convenient than the old way.

古文：五月前风顺而柔，此时出海可保无虞。 
现代文：五月之前，风顺而又湿和，此时出海可以保证无忧虑。 
English: Before May, the wind is smooth and wet, and sailing at this time is guaranteed to be worry-free.

古文：命量拨近地漕粮十二万石，俾梦龙行之。
现代文：命令酌量拨出附近地区漕粮十二万石，使梁梦龙施行此事。
English: Liang Menglong was ordered to allocate 120,000 koku of grain from the nearby area.

古文：六年，王宗沐督漕，请行海运。
现代文：隆庆六年，王宗沐督促漕运，请求施行海运。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, Wang Zong Mudu urged the rowing transport, requesting the implementation of sea transport.

古文：诏令运十二万石自淮入海。
现代文：韶令运送十二万石粮从淮河入海。
English: The imperial edict ordered the transportation of 120,000 koku of grain from the Huaihe River to the sea.

古文：其道，由云梯关东北历鹰游山、安东卫、石臼所、夏河所、齐堂岛、灵山卫、古镇、胶州、鳌山卫、大嵩卫、行村寨，皆海面。
现代文：这条运道，从云梯关往东北经过鹰游山、安柬卫、石臼所、夏河所、齐堂岛、灵山卫、古镇、胶州、鳌山卫、大嵩卫、行村寨，全都经过海面。
English: This transportation route, from Yuntiguan to the northeast, passes through Yingyou Mountain, Angkham Mountain, Stone Mill, Xiahe Mountain, Qidang Island, Lingshan Mountain, Guzhen, Jiaozhou, Lushan Mountain, Dasong Mountain, and Xingcun Village, all of which pass through the sea.

古文：自海洋所历竹岛、宁津所、靖海卫，东北转成山卫、刘公岛、威海卫，西历宁海卫，皆海面。
现代文：从海洋所经过竹岛、宁津所、靖海卫，往东北转向到成山卫、刘公岛、威海卫，往西经过宁海卫，全都经过海面。
English: From the Oceanographic Station, it passed through Takeshima, Ningjin Station, and Jinghaiwei, and turned to the northeast to Chengshanwei, Liu Gongdao, and Weihaiwei, and westward through Ninghaiwei, all of which passed through the sea.

古文：自福山之罘岛至登州城北新海口沙门等岛，西历桑岛、〈山母〉屺岛，自〈山母〉屺西历三山岛、芙蓉岛、莱州大洋、海仓口；自海仓西历淮河海口、鱼儿铺，西北历侯镇店、唐头塞；自侯镇西北大清河、小清河海口，乞沟河入直沽，抵天津卫。
现代文：从福山之罘岛到登州城北新海口沙门等岛，往西经过桑岛、坶屺岛；从坶屺向西经过三山岛、芙蓉岛、莱州大洋、海仓口；从海仓向西经过淮河海口、鱼儿铺，住西北经过侯镇店、唐头塞；从侯镇西北的大清河、小清河海口，乞沟河进入直沽，到达天津卫。
English: From Fushan's Zhudao Island to the islands of Shamen and other islands in the new estuary north of Dengzhou, westward through Mulberry Island and Zhudao Island; from Zhudao to the west through Sanshan Island, Furong Island, Laizhou Ocean, and Haicangkou; from Haicang to the west through the estuary of the Huaihe River and fish shops, and northwest through Houzhen and Tangtousai; from the estuary of the Daqing River and Xiaoqing River in the northwest of Houzhen, and the Beggou River into Zhiyao, reaching Tianjin Wei.

古文：凡三千三百九十里。
现代文：总共三千三百九十里。
English: A total of three thousand three hundred ninety miles.

古文：万历元年，即墨福山岛坏粮运七艘，漂米数千石，溺军丁十五人。
现代文：万历元年，即墨福山岛毁坏运粮船七只，沉没谷米数千石，淹死士兵十五人。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, seven grain ships were wrecked on Mount Mofu Island, sinking thousands of kilos of grain and drowning fifteen soldiers.

古文：给事、御史交章论其失，罢不复行。
现代文：给事、御史一起上奏章纠弹其过失，停止不再施行。
English: Together with the matter and the history, the chapter was written to correct its mistake, and the suspension will no longer be enforced.

古文：二十五年，倭寇作，自登州运粮给朝鲜军。
现代文：二十五年，倭寇兴起，从登州运粮供给进入朝鲜的兵士。
English: In the 25th year of the Joseon Dynasty, the wako (Japanese pirates) emerged and began transporting grain from Dongju to supply soldiers entering North Korea.

古文：山东副使於仁廉复言： 饷辽莫如海运，海运莫如登、莱。
现代文：山东副使于仕廉又说： 运送军粮到辽东不如经海运，海运不如经登州、莱州。
English: Yu Shillian, deputy envoy of Shandong Province, also said: It is not as good to transport military grain to Liaodong Province by sea, and it is not as good as by sea to Dengzhou and Laizhou Province.

古文：盖登、莱度金州六七百里，至旅顺口仅五百馀里，顺风扬帆一二日可至。
现代文：登州、莱州渡过金州六七百里，到旅顺口只有五百余里，顺风扬帆一二日就可以到达。
English: Dangzhou and Laizhou have passed through Jinzhou for six or seven hundred miles, and it is only five hundred miles to Lashunkou, which can be reached in one or two days sailing with the wind.

古文：又有沙门、鼍矶、皇城等岛居其中，天设水递，止宿避风。
现代文：又有沙门、灶矶、皇城等岛处于其中，天然设立海水传送，停留住宿可避海风。
English: There are also islands such as Shamen, Vesta, and Imperial City, which are located in the middle of the island. They are naturally set up to transport seawater, and the accommodation can be sheltered from the sea breeze.

古文：惟皇城至旅顺二百里差远，得便风不半日可度也。
现代文：由于皇城到旅顺二百里略远，得到顺风不足半日就可以渡过。
English: Since the Imperial City is slightly more than two hundred miles away from Lushun, it takes less than half a day to get a tailwind.

古文：若天津至辽，则大洋无泊；淮安至胶州，虽仅三百里，而由胶至登千里而遥，礁碍难行。
现代文：假若从天津到辽东，则大洋无停泊之处；淮安到胶州，虽然只有三百里，但从胶州到登州千里之逮，礁石阻碍难以行驶。
English: If you go from Tianjin to Liaodong, there is no place to moor in the ocean; Huai'an to Jiaozhou, although only three hundred miles, but from Jiaozhou to Danzhou thousands of miles away, the reef obstacles are difficult to travel.

古文：惟登、莱济辽，势便而事易。 
现代文：只有从登州、莱州渡海到辽东，水势便利而运输容易。 
English: Only from Dengzhou and Laizhou across the sea to Liaodong, the water potential is convenient and easy to transport.

古文：时颇以其议为然，而未行也。
现代文：当时，全都认为他的主张是对的，然而没有施行。
English: At the time, everyone agreed that his proposal was right, but it was not implemented.

古文：四十六年，山东巡抚李长庚奏行海运，特设户部侍郎一人督之，事具《长庚传》。
现代文：四十六年，山东巡抚李长庚奏请施行海运，特地设立户部侍郎一人督促这事，其事具载于《李长庚传》。
English: In 1946, Shandong Governor Li Chang Genso requested the implementation of maritime transport, and specially set up a household attendant to supervise this matter, the details of which are contained in "Biography of Li Chang Genso."

古文：崇祯十二年，崇明人沈廷扬为内阁中书，复陈海运之便，且辑《海运书》五卷进呈。
现代文：崇祯十二年，崇明人沈廷扬担任内阁中书，又陈述海运的方便，并且辑录《海运书》五卷进呈。
English: In the 12th year of Chongzhen, Shen Tingyang, a native of Chongming, served as the cabinet secretary, and also stated the convenience of shipping, and compiled the "Shipping Book" in five volumes.

古文：命造海舟试之。
现代文：命令制造海船试用。
English: An order was issued to build a sea vessel for trial use.

古文：廷扬乘二舟，载米数百石，十三年六月朔，由淮安出海，望日抵天津。
现代文：廷扬驾驶二只海船，装运米粮数百石，十三年六月初一，从淮安出海，十五日到达天津。
English: On the first day of June in the thirteenth year, Ting Yang sailed from Huai'an on two ships, loaded hundreds of kilos of rice grain, and arrived in Tianjin on the fifteenth day.

古文：守风者五日，行仅一旬。
现代文：等侯适当的风势用了五日，运行仅仅十天。
English: It took five days to wait for the right wind conditions, and only ten days to operate.

古文：帝大喜，加廷扬户部郎中，命往登州与巡抚徐人龙计度。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，提升沈廷扬户部郎中，命令前往登州与巡抚徐人龙谋划。
English: The emperor was very pleased, promoted Shen Ting as a junior member of the Yang household department, and ordered him to go to Dengzhou to plan with the governor Xu Renyong.

古文：山东副总兵黄荫恩亦上海运九议，帝即令督海运。
现代文：山东副总兵黄荫恩也上奏海运的九条意见，皇帝立即命令他监督海运。
English: Huang Ying'en, deputy commander-in-chief of Shandong, also raised nine opinions on shipping, and the emperor immediately ordered him to supervise shipping.

古文：先是，宁远军饷率用天津船赴登州，候东南风转粟至天津，又候西南风转至宁远。
现代文：在此之前，宁远的军粮都是用天津船运到登州，等待东南风转运米粮到天津，又等待西南风再转运到宁远。
English: Prior to this, the military grain from Ningyuan was transported by Tianjin ship to Danzhou, waiting for the southeast wind to transport the rice grain to Tianjin, and then waiting for the southwest wind to transport it to Ningyuan.

古文：廷扬自登州直输宁远，省费多。
现代文：沈廷扬从登州直接运送到宁逮，节省费用多。
English: Shen Tingyang was transported directly from Danzhou to Ningbo, saving a lot of costs.

古文：寻命赴淮安经理海运，为督漕侍郎朱大典所沮，乃命易驻登州，领宁远饷务。
现代文：不久，命令他到淮安治理海运，被督漕侍郎朱大典所阻止，还是命令他改驻登州，统领宁速军粮的事务。
English: Soon, he was ordered to go to Huai'an to manage the shipping, but he was stopped by Zhu Dadian, the steward of the overseer, and he was ordered to relocate to Dengzhou to lead the affairs of Ningbo Military Grain.

古文：十六年加光禄少卿。
现代文：十六年，加光禄少卿。
English: Sixteen years later, he became Shokei Kaguroku.

古文：福王时，命廷扬以海舟防江，寻命兼理粮务。
现代文：福王时期，命令沈廷扬用海船防御长江，不久，又命令他兼理军粮事务。
English: During the time of King Fu, he ordered Shen Tingyang to defend the Yangtze River with seagoing vessels. Soon, he also ordered him to be in charge of military grain affairs.

古文：南都既失，廷扬崎岖唐、鲁二王间以死。
现代文：南都已经失去，沈廷扬艰难历经于唐、鲁二王之间而死。
English: The southern capital had already been lost, and Shen Tingyang died after a hard struggle between the Tang and Lu kings.

古文：当嘉靖中，廷臣纷纷议复海运，漕运总兵官万表言： 在昔海运，岁溺不止十万。
现代文：在嘉靖年间，朝廷大臣纷纷建议恢复海运，漕运总兵官万表说： 在从前的海运，每年沉没粮食不止十万。
English: During the Jiajing period, the ministers of the imperial court suggested the resumption of maritime transport, and the chief officer of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army said: In the former maritime transport, more than 100,000 tons of grain were sunk every year.

古文：载米之舟，驾船之卒，统卒之官，皆所不免。
现代文：装运稻米的船只，驾驶船只的士卒，统领士卒的官吏，都不能幸免。
English: The ships transporting the rice, the officers driving the ships, and the officers commanding the officers were not spared.

古文：今人策海运辄主丘浚之论，非达於事者也。 
现代文：今人谋划海运总是坚守丘浚的论说，不是通达事理的人。 
English: Nowadays, people who plan maritime transport always adhere to the theory of dredging, and are not rational people.

