古文：楚州人陷河神謇宗儒滑能柳晦刘山甫尔朱氏李仲吕新昌坊民裴氏女
现代文：楚州人陷河神謇宗儒滑能柳晦刘山甫尔朱氏李仲吕新昌坊民裴氏女
English: The people of Chuzhou are from the Zaghe Shen Zong, the Jue Neng Liu, the Liu Shanshu, the Zhu clan, the Li Zhonglu, the Xinchang, the Fang Min, and the Pei clan.

古文：夏候祯徐焕罗弘信李嶢
现代文：夏候祯徐焕罗弘信李嶢
English: Xia Huanqian, Xu Huanluo, Hongxin Liqian

古文：楚州人
现代文：楚州人
English: People from Chuzhou

古文：近楚泗之间，有人寄妻及奴婢数人于村落。
现代文：湖北泗水附近，有个人让妻子和几个奴仆寄住在一个村庄里，自己在外地游历了几年。
English: Near Surabaya, Hubei Province, there was a man who had his wife and several servants stay in a village while he traveled abroad for several years.

古文：客游数年，一日归至。
现代文：一天他回到村庄，村里的人们都招呼着带着贺礼到这人家去看望。
English: One day he returned to the village, and the people of the village all invited him to visit this person's house with a gift.

古文：村中长少，相率携酒访之，延入共饮，酒酣甚乐。村人唯吹笛为《乐神曲》。
现代文：他就把人们请到家里一同饮酒。大家喝得十分酣畅。还有人吹笛子。吹的是《乐神曲》，大家随着音乐载歌载舞。
English: He invited people to his home to drink together. Everyone drank very well. There was also someone playing the flute. It was "The Divine Comedy," and everyone sang and danced to the music.

古文：殆欲彻曙，忽前舞者为著神下语云：大王欲与主人相见，合与主人论亲情。
现代文：直到天亮时，忽然前面一个跳舞者被大神附体了。大神借舞者的口说，大王要和主人相见，并要与主人共议亲事。
English: Until dawn, when suddenly one of the dancers in front of him was possessed by the great god. The great god spoke through the dancer, saying that the great king wanted to meet his master and discuss the matter of marriage with him.

古文：此子大惊，呵斥曰：神道无欺，我且无儿女，与汝何亲情？
现代文：主人大惊，生气地大声说，大神不应该欺侮人。我并没有儿女，怎么和你论亲事？
English: The owner was shocked and angrily shouted, "God shouldn't bully people. I don't have any children, so how can I talk to you about family matters?"

古文：神曰：我合聘得君妻，可速庄梳，少顷既来迎娶。
现代文：神说，我应该娶你的老婆为妻，让她快快梳妆，稍等片刻，我就会来迎娶她。
English: God said, I should marry your wife, let her dress quickly, wait a minute, I will come and marry her.

古文：此子大怒，村人各散，以为舞者村人，醉言无识。
现代文：主人大怒，客人们也都各自散去，都认为是那个跳舞的人喝醉了胡言乱语，不一会儿，天就亮了。
English: The host was furious, the guests dispersed, thinking that the dancer was drunk and talking nonsense, and soon it was daylight.

古文：少顷即天明，忽闻门外马嘶鸣。此子大怪，欲出自叱之。
现代文：主人忽然听见门外有马的嘶叫声，感到非常奇怪，想出去把马赶跑。
English: The owner suddenly heard a horse neighing outside the door, felt very strange and wanted to go out and drive the horse away.

古文：乃见一胡神，紫衣多髯。身长丈余，首出墙头。
现代文：一出屋，就看见一个胡人模样的神，穿着紫衣，胡子很长，身高一丈多，头伸出比墙头还高。
English: As soon as he came out of the house, he saw a god in the form of a goose, dressed in purple, with a long beard, more than a foot tall, and with his head sticking out higher than the top of the wall.

古文：唤曰：娘子可发去也。
现代文：这神大喊，娘子，该上路了！
English: The god shouted, "Girl, it's time to hit the road!"

古文：此子不知所以，其妻于室中仆倒而卒。
现代文：主人不知道怎么回事，他的妻子在屋里一头栽在地上就死去了。
English: The owner did not know what had happened, but his wife fell to the ground in the house and died.

古文：陷河神
现代文：陷河神
English: The God of the Fallen River

古文：陷河神者，雟州雟县有张翁夫妇，老而无子。
现代文：陷河神的事是说，雟州雟县有家姓张的，老头老太太两口人，没有儿子。
English: The story of the river god is that there is an old man and an old woman in Zhang County, Zhangzhou with the surname Zhang. They have two children but no son.

古文：翁日往溪谷采薪以自给。
现代文：靠老头每天到山谷里砍柴度日。
English: He relies on his old man to chop wood in the valley every day.

古文：无何，一日，于岩窦间刃伤其指。
现代文：有一天，老头砍柴时被岩缝的锋利石头碰伤了手指，流了不少血，血滴落在石上一个小坑里。
English: One day, when the old man was chopping wood, a sharp stone from a crevice in the rock injured his finger. He bled profusely, and the blood dripped into a small pit in the rock.

古文：其血滂注，滴在一石穴中，以木叶窒之而归。他日复至其所，因抽木叶视之，仍化为一小蛇。
现代文：老头就用树叶把小坑盖上了。过了两天老头又经过这地方。拿开树叶看，竟变成一条小蛇。
English: The old man covered the hole with leaves. Two days later, the old man passed by the spot again. When he took the leaves off, he saw that it had turned into a small snake.

古文：翁取于掌中，戏玩移时。
现代文：老头把小蛇放在手掌上，喜爱地玩了半天，那小蛇也好象依依不舍地不愿离去。
English: The old man put the small snake on the palm of his hand and played with it for half a day. The small snake seemed to be reluctant to leave.

古文：此物眷眷然，似有所恋，因截竹贮而怀之。
现代文：老头就砍了一截竹筒，把小蛇装进去，揣在怀里回家了。
English: The old man cut a bamboo tube, put the little snake in it, carried it in his arms and went home.

古文：至家则啖以杂肉，如是甚驯扰。经时渐长。一年后，夜盗鸡犬而食。
现代文：以后，老头就用一些碎肉喂这蛇，蛇也很驯熟了，从不扰乱什么，然而蛇随着时间越长越大，一年后，常在夜里出来把鸡、狗之类的吃掉。
English: After that, the old man fed the snake with some minced meat. The snake was also very tame and never disturbed anything. However, the snake grew bigger and bigger with time. A year later, it often came out at night to eat chickens, dogs and the like.

古文：二年后，盗羊豕。
现代文：二年后，就偷吃羊和猪。
English: Two years later, he was stealing sheep and pigs.

古文：邻家颇怪失其所畜，翁妪不言。
现代文：邻居们丢了家养的畜类，都十分奇怪，老头和老太太也不吱声。
English: Neighbors lost their livestock, all very strange, and the old man and old woman did not say a word.

古文：其后县令失一蜀马，寻其迹，入翁之居，迫而访之，已吞在蛇腹矣。令惊异，因责翁蓄此毒物。
现代文：后来，县令丢了一匹四川马，跟着马蹄印找到了老头家里，加紧追查，才知道马竟被蛇吞在肚里了，县令大惊，责骂老头怎么养了这么个恶毒的东西。
English: Later, the county magistrate lost a Sichuan horse and followed the hoofprints to find the old man's home. He stepped up the investigation, only to find out that the horse had actually been swallowed by a snake. The county magistrate was shocked and scolded the old man for raising such a vicious thing.

古文：翁伏罪，欲杀之。
现代文：老头只好认罚，想杀掉这条大蛇。
English: The old man had to admit his guilt and wanted to kill the snake.

古文：忽一夕，雷电大震，一县并陷巨湫，渺弥无际，唯张翁夫妇独存。
现代文：一天晚上，雷电大作，整个一个县突然都变成了一个大湖，湖水无边无际，只有老头老太太活着。
English: One night, thunder and lightning hit, and an entire county suddenly turned into a large lake. The lake was boundless, and only the old man and old woman were still alive.

古文：其后人蛇俱失，因改为陷河县，曰蛇为张恶子。
现代文：后来老头老太太和大蛇也都不知那里去了。从此这个县就改名叫陷河县，人们把那蛇叫做张恶子。
English: Later, the old man, the old woman, and the snake all went to an unknown place. From then on, the county was renamed Zage County, and people called the snake Zhang Yanzi.

古文：尔后姚苌游蜀，至梓潼岭上，息于路旁。有布衣来，谓苌曰：君宜早还秦，秦人将无主。
现代文：后来姚苌到四川去，走到梓潼岭上，在路旁休息，见有一个老百姓走过来对他说，先生最好快点回陕西去吧，秦地的人将失去君王，你应该去那里统治百姓。
English: Later, Yao Xuan went to Sichuan, walked to Zizhuangling, and rested on the roadside. He saw a commoner come up to him and said, "Sir, you'd better hurry back to Shaanxi. The people of Qin will lose their king. You should go there to rule the people."

古文：其康济者在君乎？
现代文：姚苌问他的姓名，那人说，我就是张恶子。
English: When Yao Yao asked his name, the man said, "I am Zhang Yanzi."

古文：因命使至蜀，求之弗获，遂立庙于所见之处，今张相公庙是也。
现代文：将来你别忘了我就行。姚苌回到秦地，果然在长安称了帝。称帝后姚苌派人到四川寻访张恶子，没有找到，就在遇见张恶子的地方立了一座庙，这就是现在的张相公庙。
English: Don't forget me in the future. Yao Wei returned to Qin and was crowned emperor in Chang'an. After being crowned emperor, Yao Wei sent people to Sichuan to look for Zhang Xiangzi. When he couldn't find him, he built a temple in the place where he met Zhang Xiangzi, which is now the Zhang Xianggong Temple.

古文：僖宗幸蜀日。其神自庙出十余里，列伏迎驾。
现代文：后来僖宗因为叛乱巡幸四川，张相公庙中的神在十几里外列队迎接。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong went on a tour of Sichuan because of the rebellion, and the gods in Zhang Xianggong Temple lined up more than a dozen miles away to welcome him.

古文：白雾之中，仿佛见其形，因解佩剑赐之，祝令效顺，指期贼平。
现代文：在雾气蒙蒙中，好像看见张恶子本人现形了。僖宗就解下自己的佩剑赐给他，并希望他为自己效力。
English: In the mist, it was as if he saw Zhang Xizong himself appear. He unsheathed his sword and gave it to Zhang Xizong, hoping that Zhang Xizong would use it to his advantage.

古文：驾回，广赠珍玩，人莫敢窥。
现代文：不久叛乱被平息，圣驾回京，僖宗送给张恶子很多珍宝，人们都不敢偷看。
English: Soon the rebellion was quelled, and the saint returned to Beijing. Emperor Taizong gave Zhang Xizi many precious treasures, and people did not dare to look at them.

古文：王铎有诗刊石曰：夜雨龙抛三尺匣。春云凤入九重城。
现代文：王铎有首刻在石碑上的诗说，夜雨龙抛三尺匣，春云凤入九重城。
English: Wang Qian has the first poem engraved on the stone monument, saying that the night rain dragon throws a three-foot box, and the spring clouds and phoenixes enter the nine-tiered city.

古文：謇宗儒
现代文：謇宗儒
English: Zongru Zou

古文：黔南军校姓謇者，不记其初名。
现代文：贵州南部有个姓謇的军官，不知他原名叫什么。
English: In the southern part of Guizhou, there is an officer with the surname Zou. I don't know what his original name was.

古文：性鲠直，贫而乐。
现代文：此人为人正直，虽然很贫穷但生活得很快乐。
English: He was an honest man who, though poor, lived a happy life.

古文：所居邻宣父庙，家每食，必先荐之。如是累年。
现代文：他家紧挨着孔子庙，每顿饭都要先分出一些去庙里给孔子上供，长年都这样做。咸通二年，异寇入侵。
English: His house is right next to the Confucius Temple, and every meal must first allocate some to go to the temple to feed Confucius, which has been done for many years. In the second year of Hamdangdong, the invaders invaded.

古文：咸通二年，蛮寇侵境，廉使阅兵，择将未获。
现代文：廉使检阅军队，要找一个带兵剿寇的将领，没有找到合适的人。
English: An army inspector was looking for a general to lead his troops against the marauders, but he couldn't find the right person.

古文：謇忽梦一人，冠服若王者，谓曰：我则仲尼也。媿君每倾心于吾，吾当助若。
现代文：姓謇的军官夜里忽然梦见一个人，看衣帽像一位王，对他说，我就是孔仲尼，你一直对我敬重关怀使我很感动，所以我要帮助你。
English: An officer surnamed Zou suddenly dreamed of a person in the night, looking at the clothes and hats like a king, and said to him, I am Kongzhongni, I have been touched by your respect and concern for me, so I want to help you.

古文：乃更名宗儒，自此富贵矣。
现代文：你以后改名叫謇仲儒就会富贵了。
English: If you later change your name to Zou Zhongru, you will become rich and famous.

古文：既觉，喜而请行，兼请易名。
现代文：他梦醒后很高兴。就向主帅请求率兵平寇，并请求改名为宗儒。
English: He was very happy when he woke up from his dream. He asked the coach to lead the soldiers to Pingko, and asked to change his name to Zong Ru.

古文：是时人尽难之，忽闻宗儒请行，遂遣之。
现代文：主帅正为找不到将领为难，忽然听说宗儒主动请战，就派他带兵平寇。
English: The commander-in-chief was having a hard time finding a general, when he suddenly heard that Zong Ru had volunteered to fight, and sent him to lead the soldiers to Ping Kou.

古文：一战而大破蛮寇，余孽皆遁。
现代文：謇宗儒一战就击溃了贼寇，剩下的也纷纷逃窜。
English: Shizong Ru defeated the bandits in a single battle, and the rest fled.

古文：黔帅表上其功，授朗州刺史。
现代文：主帅上来为宗儒请功，朝廷就任命宗儒为朗州刺史。
English: The head coach came up to ask for the merit of Zong Ju, and the imperial court appointed Zong Ju as the chief historian of Lanzhou.

古文：秩满诣京师，累迁司农卿，赐赍复多。数年卒官。
现代文：任期满后又调入京城，升任司农卿，宫中的赏赐和俸银也更多了，几年后，謇宗儒死在任上。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he was transferred to the capital, promoted to the post of Secretary of Agriculture, and the rewards and salaries in the palace also increased. A few years later, Shizong Ju died in office.

古文：滑能
现代文：滑能
English: Sliding ability

古文：唐咸通中，翰林待诏滑能，棋品最高。
现代文：唐代咸通年间，翰林院有个待诏叫滑能，棋下得非常好。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiantong of the Tang Dynasty, Hanlin Academy had a pupil named Skid, who was very good at playing chess.

古文：有张生者，年可四十，来请对局。
现代文：有个张生，一天来请求和滑能下棋。
English: One day, a student named Zhang came to ask if he could play chess with Shuling.

古文：初饶一路，滑生精思久之。方下一子，张随手应之，或起行庭际。
现代文：张生一开始就胜了一着，滑能就苦苦思考，想了很久才下一个棋子，张生立刻就对上一个。
English: Zhang Sheng won from the very beginning. He thought long and hard before moving a piece, and he immediately moved to the previous one.

古文：候滑生更下，又随应之。
现代文：有时张生起来到院里散着步等滑能往棋盘上落子。后来黄巢造反，攻入长安，僖宗逃往四川。
English: Sometimes Zhang Sheng would get up and walk around the courtyard to see if he could slide the pieces onto the board. Later, Huang Chao rebelled and invaded Chang'an, and Shizong fled to Sichuan.

古文：及黄寇犯阙，僖宗幸蜀，滑将赴行在，欲取金州路入，张曰：不必前适，某非棋客，天帝命我取公棋耳。
现代文：滑能赶去皇帝的行宫护驾，想走金州这条路入川。张生说，你不必去了，我并不是棋手，是天帝命我来请你去下棋的。
English: He wanted to take the Jinzhou road to enter the river. Zhang Sheng said, "You don't have to go. I'm not a chess player. It's the Emperor's command that I invite you to play chess."

古文：滑惊愕，妻子啜泣，奋然而逝。
现代文：滑能大惊，妻子儿女都哭了起来，滑能不声不响地就死了。
English: He was so shocked that his wife and children burst into tears. He died quietly.

古文：柳晦
现代文：柳晦
English: Yanagisawa

古文：柳晦，河东人，少有文学，始以癊补。
现代文：柳晦是河东人，少年时就有文才。一开始是继承祖上的袭职作官，后来做到朝廷的拾遗官。
English: Liu Yue is from the eastern part of the river, and he had literary talent when he was a boy. At the beginning, he was an official who inherited the post from his ancestor, and later he became the official who collected the remains of the imperial court.

古文：咸通末，官至拾遗，因上疏不纳，乃去官，庐于终南山。
现代文：因为有一次给皇帝上书没被采纳，自动罢了官，隐居在终南山中。
English: Because he once wrote a letter to the emperor that was not accepted, he was automatically dismissed from his post and lived in seclusion in the southern mountains.

古文：一日入城，访故友于宣阳里。
现代文：一天柳晦进城到宣阴里看朋友，路见一个乞丐向他讨吃，他就给了乞丐。
English: One day, Liu Yu entered the city and went to see a friend in Xuanyin. On the way, he saw a beggar asking him for food, and he gave the beggar some money.

古文：忽遇一人求食，晦与之。
现代文：那乞丐拿到东西不吃只是闻了好几次，柳晦很奇怪，问是怎么回事。
English: The beggar didn't eat what he got, he just sniffed it several times, it was very strange, he asked what was going on.

古文：此人但三嗅而已，晦怪而问之，答曰：吾阴府掌事者，蒙君设食，深愧于心。
现代文：乞丐说，我是阴间管事的。
English: The beggar said, I am the steward of the underworld.

古文：君自此三年，当为相。
现代文：蒙你赏给我食物，心里十分感激。三年后，你会当宰相的。
English: I am very grateful to you for giving me food. In three years, you will be the prime minister.

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：晦未之信也。
现代文：柳晦听后并不相信。
English: After listening to it, Yanagisawa did not believe it.

古文：及黄巢犯阙，求能檄者，或荐晦。
现代文：后来黄巢攻入京城长安，要找一个能写讨伐唐僖宗的文告的人，有人推荐柳晦的文章好。
English: Later, when Huang Chao invaded the capital Chang'an, he needed to find someone who could write a proclamation to fight against Tang Xizong. Some people recommended Liu Yue's article.

古文：巢乃驰骑迎之，逼使为檄。
现代文：黄巢就派人把柳晦接了来，逼着柳晦写了讨伐文告。
English: Huang Chao sent someone to summon Liu Bei and forced him to write a crusade proclamation.

古文：檄达行在，僖宗知晦所作，乃曰：晦自求退，非朕遗弃。何讪谤之甚耶？
现代文：文告传到僖宗的行宫，僖宗一看就知道是柳晦写的，就说，柳晦当初是自己不愿当官，并不是朕不用他，为什么对朕如此恶毒的诽谤攻击呢？
English: The message reached the palace of Emperor Taizong, and Emperor Taizong knew at a glance that it was written by Liu Bei. He said that Liu Bei originally did not want to be an official, not that I did not use him, why such a vicious slanderous attack on me?

古文：贼平，议不赦。
现代文：黄巢之乱平息后，柳晦被判不赦的大罪。
English: After the Yellow Nest Rebellion subsided, Liu Hui was convicted of an unforgivable crime.

古文：巢命晦为中书舍人，寻授伪相。
现代文：原来黄巢曾任命柳晦为中书舍人，后来又拜他当了伪朝的宰相。
English: Originally, Huang Chao had appointed Liu Gao to be the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy, and later worshiped him as the prime minister of the pseudo-Dynasty.

古文：刘山甫
现代文：刘山甫
English: Liu Shanfu

古文：唐彭城刘山甫，中朝士族也。
现代文：唐朝时彭城人刘山甫，乃是当朝世家子。
English: Liu Shanfu, a resident of Pengcheng during the Tang Dynasty, was a descendant of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：其父官于岭外，侍从北归，舟于青草湖。
现代文：父亲在岑外作官，刘山甫侍护着父亲回北方。有一天把船停在青草湖中，上岸游玩。
English: His father was working as an official outside the court, and Liu Shanfu accompanied his father back to the north. One day, he parked the boat in Qingcao Lake and went ashore to play.

古文：登岸，见有北方天王祠，因诣之。
现代文：看见岸边有个北方天王祠，就走进祠里。
English: When he saw the Northern Heavenly King's Shrine on the shore, he walked into the shrine.

古文：见庙宇摧颓，香火不续。
现代文：一看庙宇破败不堪，也没有香火。
English: At a glance, the temple is dilapidated and there is no incense.

古文：山甫少有才思。因题诗曰：坏墙风雨几经春，草色盈庭一座尘。
现代文：刘少甫从少年时就颇有才气，就在一块木板上题了一首诗说，坏墙风雨几经春，草色盈庭一座尘。
English: Liu Shao Fu was very talented since he was a young boy. He wrote a poem on a wooden board, saying, "Bad walls, wind and rain, go through several springs, and the grass color in the yard is a dust."

古文：自是神明无感应，盛衰何得却由人。
现代文：自是神明天感应，盛衰何得却由人。
English: It is God who inspires tomorrow, but it is man who determines the rise and fall of things.

古文：是夜梦为天王所责。
现代文：这天夜里，他在船中梦见天王来责怪他说，我不是天王，是南岳神。
English: That night, on the boat, he dreamed that the king of heaven came to rebuke him, saying, "I am not the king of heaven, but the god of Nanyue.

古文：俄而惊觉。网浪暴起，殆欲沉溺，遽起悔过，令撤诗板，然后方定。
现代文：这里是我管的地盘，你为什么说三道四的侮辱我？刘山甫顿时惊醒，湖上突然掀起狂风大浪。山甫后悔自己的过错，忙叫人撤掉那块题诗的木板，湖上立刻风平浪静。
English: This is my territory, why are you insulting me? Liu Shanfu suddenly woke up, the lake suddenly whipped up a storm. Shanfu regretted his mistake, quickly asked someone to remove the board with the poem, and the lake immediately calmed down.

古文：尔朱氏
现代文：尔朱氏
English: The Lzhu clan

古文：咸通中，有姓尔朱者，家于巫峡，每岁贾于荆益瞿塘之壖。
现代文：唐代咸通年间，有个姓尔朱的人，家住四川巫峡。每年往来于荆州、益州、瞿塘之间经商。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Er Zhu, who lived in Wuxia, Sichuan, and went back and forth between Jingzhou, Yizhou, and Qutang every year to do business.

古文：有白马神祠，尔朱尝祷焉。
现代文：有个白马神庙，尔朱每次经过都进庙祭祀。
English: There is a temple dedicated to the White Horse, and every time Er Zhu passes by, he goes to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：一日，自蜀回，复祀之，忽闻神语曰：愧子频年相知，吾将舍此境，故明言与君别尔。客惊问：神安适耶？
现代文：有一天，从四川回来，又到庙里烧香，忽然听见神开口说：你长年祭祀我，我很感动。我马上要离开这里了，所以和你告别。尔朱惊讶地问，大神要到哪里去？
English: One day, after returning from Sichuan, he went to the temple again to burn incense, and suddenly heard God open His mouth and say, "You have been worshiping Me for many years, and I am very moved. I am about to leave here, so I am bidding you farewell." Er Zhu asked in surprise, "Where is the Great God going?"

古文：曰：吾当为湖南城隍神，上帝以吾有薄德于三峡民，遂此升擢耳。
现代文：神说，我要到湖南去当城隍神。上天因为我在这里为三峡老百姓积了一些功德，所以才提升了我。
English: God said, I want to go to Hunan Province to be the god of the city. Because I have accumulated some merits for the people of the Three Gorges here, God has promoted me.

古文：然天下将乱，今天子亦不久驭世也。
现代文：然而天下就要大乱，当今的皇帝也管不了多久的朝政了。
English: However, the whole world will be in turmoil, and the current emperor will not be able to manage the imperial government for long.

古文：尔朱复惊曰：嗣君谁也？
现代文：尔朱又惊讶地问，那谁来当皇上呢？
English: Lzhu was surprised and asked, "Then who will be the emperor?"

古文：曰：唐德尚盛。
现代文：神说，唐朝的气数还很盛。
English: The god said that the qi of the Tang Dynasty was still very strong.

古文：客请其讳，神曰：固不可泄。
现代文：尔朱请神说出新皇帝的名字，神说，这个不能泄漏。
English: Lzhu asked God to reveal the name of the new emperor. God said, "This cannot be divulged."

古文：客恳求之，乃曰：昨见天符，但有双日也。
现代文：尔朱再三恳求，神才说，昨天我看见天符，说将会有两个皇上了。
English: After repeated entreaties, the god finally said, "Yesterday I saw a heavenly sign that there will be two emperors.

古文：语竟，不复言。
现代文：说罢，就再也不出声了。
English: Once you say it, you never say it again.

古文：是岁懿皇升遐，僖宗以晋王即位。
现代文：果然，这年懿皇死去，僖宗由晋王而即位当了皇帝。
English: Sure enough, Emperor Yao died that year, and Emperor Yao Zong ascended the throne from King Jin.

古文：李仲吕
现代文：李仲吕
English: Li Zhonglu

古文：姑臧李仲吕，咸通末，调授汝之鲁山令。
现代文：姑臧的李仲吕在咸通末年调任汝州的鲁山县当县令。
English: At the end of the Hamdang period, Li Zhonglu of Guzhen was transferred to be the county magistrate of Luzhan County in Ruzhou.

古文：为政明练，吏不敢欺。
现代文：他办事精明练达，手下的人都不敢有欺压百姓的事。
English: He is shrewd and experienced in his work, and none of his subordinates dare to oppress the people.

古文：遇旱，请祷群望，皆不应。
现代文：这年大旱，老百姓祈祷求雨望天企盼，始终没有雨。
English: In this year of drought, the common people prayed for rain, looked to the heavens and hoped, but there was still no rain.

古文：仲吕乃洁齐斋，自祷于县二十里鲁山尧祠，以所乘乌马及驺人张翰为献。
现代文：于是李仲吕就沐浴吃素，亲自到离县城二十里的鲁山尧祠去求雨，并向神许愿，如果神能感应下了雨，愿拿自己黑马和侍从张翰作祭礼。
English: Therefore, Li Zhonglu took a bath and became a vegetarian. He personally went to the Lu Mountain Ancestral Shrine, 20 miles from the county seat, to pray for rain, and made a wish to God that if God could sense rain, he would take his black horse and his attendant Zhang Han to make a sacrifice.

古文：祭毕，将下山，云雾暴起，及平泽而大雨，仆马皆暴殒。于是仲吕复设祭，图仆马于东壁。
现代文：求雨结束后，刚要下山，突然阴云四合，接着下起了大雨，连河都涨平了，李仲吕的马和侍从果然都突然死亡。
English: After he finished praying for rain, he was just about to descend the mountain, when suddenly the clouds gathered, followed by a heavy rain. Even the river was flat, and Li Zhonglu's horse and servant died suddenly.

古文：新昌坊民
现代文：新昌坊民
English: Xinchangfangmin

古文：青龙寺西廊近北，有绘释氏部族曰毗沙门天王者，精新如动，祈请辐凑。
现代文：青龙寺西廊的北端的壁画上，有一个佛门毗沙门天王像，画得十分精彩，象要活了似的，所以到这个神前祈祷的人特别多。
English: On the wall painting at the northern end of the west corridor of Qinglong Temple, there is a Buddha Gate standing next to the Shamen Heavenly King statue. The painting is very wonderful, as if it were about to come to life, which is why so many people come to pray before this god.

古文：有居新昌里者，因时疫，百骸绵弱，不能胜衣，医巫莫能疗。
现代文：有一个住在新昌里的坊民，因为得了传染病，病得骨瘦如柴，连衣服都撑不起来，不论是医生还是巫师都没治好。
English: There was a villager in Xinchangli who was so emaciated from an infectious disease that he couldn't even hold up his clothes. Neither the doctor nor the sorcerer could cure him.

古文：一日，自言欲从释氏，因肩置绘壁之下。
现代文：一天，这人自称要皈依佛门，家人就把他抬到庙里去，放在那个毗沙门天王的画像下。
English: One day, the man said he wanted to become a Buddhist monk, so his family carried him to the temple and placed him under the image of Vishamonten.

古文：厚施主僧，服食于寺庑。
现代文：他给了庙里主持很丰厚的布施，就吃住都在庙里。
English: He gave a very generous donation to the temple, and he ate and slept in the temple.

古文：逾旬，梦有人如天王之状，持筋类绠，以食病者。
现代文：过了十天，梦见有个人象画上的天王，给了他一根象绳子似的筋，让他吃下去。
English: Ten days later, he had a dream that a man resembled the king in the painting and gave him a piece of string to eat.

古文：复促迫之。
现代文：他咬不动，天王就强迫他吃。
English: When he could not bite, the king forced him to eat.

古文：咀嚼坚韧，力食袤丈，遽觉绵骨木强。
现代文：终于努力吃下去一丈筋，立刻觉得软绵绵的骨头象木棍似地硬了。
English: Finally, I tried to eat down to a full-length muscle, and immediately felt that the soft bones were as hard as sticks.

古文：又明日能步，又明日能驰，逾月以力闻。
现代文：第二天就能走，第三天就能跑。过了一个月，他成了远近闻名的大力士。
English: The next day he could walk, and on the third day he could run. A month later, he became a famous wrestler.

古文：先是禁军悬六钧弓于门，曰：能引起半者，倍粮以赐，至满者又倍之。
现代文：有天他路过禁军营门，看见营门上挂着一张一百八十斤的弓，说是凡能把弓接开一半的，赏给三百六十斤粮，能拉满弓，赏赐更加一倍。
English: One day he passed by the gate of the forbidden camp and saw a 180-kilo bow hanging on the gate of the camp. It was said that anyone who could connect the bow in half would be rewarded with 360 kilos of grain, and anyone who could pull the bow full would be rewarded twice as much.

古文：民应募，随引而满，于是服厚禄以终身。裴氏女
现代文：这人就应募去拉弓，一拉就把弓拉满了。于是赏他终身享受厚禄。裴氏女
English: This man was recruited to draw the bow, and once he had drawn it, he had filled it up. So he was rewarded with a generous stipend for life.

古文：唐黄巢之乱，有朝士裴某，挈妻子，南趋汉中。
现代文：唐代黄巢之乱时，有一个姓裴的京官，带着妻子和女儿，向南往汉中逃跑。
English: During the Yellow Nest Rebellion in the Tang Dynasty, there was a Beijing official surnamed Pei who fled south to the Han Dynasty with his wife and daughter.

古文：才发京都，其室女暴亡，兵难挥霍，不暇藏瘗。
现代文：刚离开京城，他的女儿突然死去。当时兵荒马乱，顾不上埋葬，继续逃亡。
English: He had just left the capital when his daughter died suddenly. At the time, there was a war, so he couldn't afford to bury her and continued to flee.

古文：行及洛谷，夜间其女有言，不见其形。
现代文：走到洛谷，夜里忽然听见女儿说话，但看不见女儿本人。
English: When he reached Lok Valley, he suddenly heard his daughter talking in the night, but he couldn't see her.

古文：父母诘之，女云：我为浐水神子强暴，诱我归其家。
现代文：父母问她，她说，我被浐水神的儿子施暴非礼，并把我骗到他家。
English: When my parents asked her, she said that I had been abused by the son of the god of water and that he had tricked me into going to his house.

古文：其父责怒，以妄杀生人，遽笞之。兼逊谢抚慰，令人送来。
现代文：他父亲浐水神大怒，责骂他儿子杀害无辜的生人，抽了他一顿鞭子，并向我赔罪安慰，派人送我再托生人间。
English: His father was furious with the god of water, scolded his son for killing innocent people, whipped him, apologized to me and sent someone to bring me back to life.

古文：而旦夕未有所托。
现代文：可是一时半晌我还投不了胎，所以女儿想暂时跟着父母往南走。
English: But for a while I couldn't have a baby, so my daughter wanted to go south with her parents for a while.

古文：且欲随大人南行，俾拔茅为抱致于箱笥之中，庶以魂识依止。饮食语言，不异于常。尔后又言已有生处，悲咽告辞而去。
现代文：然后就哭着和父母告别走了。
English: Then she cried and said goodbye to her parents and left.

古文：夏侯祯
现代文：夏侯祯
English: Xia Houyi

古文：汝州鲁山县西六十里，小山间有祠，曰灵女观。
现代文：汝州鲁山县城西六十里的小山间有座祠堂，叫女灵观，里面只供奉着一尊女神像。
English: Sixty miles west of the city in Lushan County, Ruzhou, there is a small shrine in the mountains called the Nyo-Ryo-Kwan, in which only one statue of the goddess is worshipped.

古文：其像独一女子焉，低鬟嚬蛾，艳冶而有怨慕之色。
现代文：看那女神，双鬟低垂双眉微皱，十分娇艳美丽，但脸上有一种愁怨的神色。
English: Look at that goddess. Her cheeks hang low and her eyebrows are slightly furrowed. She is very beautiful, but her face has a sad look.

古文：祠堂后平地，左右围数亩，上擢三峰，皆十余丈，森如太华。
现代文：女灵观后是平地，左右围地有几亩大，上面有三座山拔地而起，都有十多丈高，象太华山一样壮观。
English: After watching the female spirit, it is a flat land. The surrounding land on the left and right is several mu in size, and there are three mountains rising above it, all of which are more than ten meters high, as spectacular as Mount Taihua.

古文：父老云，大中初，斯地忽暴风疾雨，一夕而止，遂有此山。其神见形于樵苏者曰：吾商於之女也，帝命有此百里之境。
现代文：当地老人说，过去没有这三座山，是大中年间，当地忽然来一阵狂风暴雨，下了一夜，雨停之后，地上耸起了这三座山，女神现形对打柴的人说，我是商於的女儿，天帝让我到这里管辖周围百城的地方。
English: The local old man said that these three mountains did not exist in the past, but in the middle ages, there was a sudden storm in the area. It rained for one night, and after the rain stopped, these three mountains rose up on the ground. The goddess said to the woodcutter, "I am the daughter of a merchant, and the emperor asked me to come here to govern the surrounding hundred cities."

古文：可告乡里，立祠于前山，山名女灵，吾持来者也。
现代文：你告诉这里的老百姓，让他们为我在山前立一个祠庙，这山就是我带来的，所以名字就叫 女灵山 吧。
English: Tell the people here to build an ancestral temple for me in front of the mountain. I brought this mountain with me, so let's call it Jungling Mountain.

古文：咸通末，县主簿皇甫枚，因时祭，与友人夏侯祯偕行。
现代文：咸通末年，鲁山县的主簿皇甫枚要到女灵观去祭祀，带着朋友夏侯祯同行。
English: At the end of the year of Hamdang, the chief bookkeeper of Luzhan County, the Empress Dowager, wanted to go to a memorial service for a deceased woman. She brought her friend Xia Houyu along.

古文：祭毕，与祯纵观。
现代文：祭祀完毕，两个人在庙里游览。
English: After the ritual, the two went on a tour of the temple.

古文：祯独眷眷不能去，乃索卮酒酹曰：夏侯祯少年无有匹偶，今者仰睹灵姿，愿为庙中扫除之隶，既舍爵乃归。
现代文：夏侯祯看着女灵神像，恋恋不舍地不愿离去，并要了一杯酒，洒酒对女神祝祷说，我夏侯祯年少没有配偶，今天见到女神这样娇艳美丽，甘愿在庙里当一个洒扫庙堂的奴仆来侍奉女灵神。
English: Xia Houyi looked at the statue of the female spirit god, reluctantly unwilling to leave, and asked for a glass of wine, sprinkled wine to the goddess and said, "I Xia Houyi is young and has no spouse, today I saw the goddess so delicate and beautiful, I am willing to serve the female spirit god in the temple as a slave to sweep the temple hall."

古文：其夕，夏侯生惝恍不能寐，若为阴物所中。
现代文：祝告完毕扔酒杯就走了。这天晚上，夏侯祯恍惚惚不能入睡，好象中了什么阴邪。
English: After the congratulation, he threw a glass of wine and left. That night, Xia Houya was in a trance and couldn't fall asleep, as if he was under the influence of some evil.

古文：其仆来告，枚走视之，则目瞪口噤，不能言矣。
现代文：他的仆人跑去告诉皇甫枚，皇甫枚急忙跑去看，只见夏侯祯已经目瞪口呆不能说话了。
English: His servant ran to tell the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager hurried to see, only to find that Xia Houya was too stunned to speak.

古文：谓曰：得非女灵乎？
现代文：皇甫枚就问，是女灵神在作怪吗？
English: The Empress Dowager asked, "Is it the Female Spirit God who is doing the spooking?"

古文：祯颔之。
现代文：夏侯祯点了点头。
English: Xia Houjun nodded.

古文：枚命吏祷之曰：夏侯祯不胜酉斝之余，至有慢言，渎于神听，今疾作矣。
现代文：皇甫枚就叫一个官员到女灵神像前祷告说，夏侯祯多喝了几杯，不胜酒力，才在神像前胡言乱语，说了些对神大不敬的话。
English: The Empress Dowager then called an official to pray in front of the statue of the female spirit, saying that Xia Houya had drunk a few more glasses, more than enough alcohol, before he spoke nonsense in front of the statue and said some words that were disrespectful to the gods.

古文：岂降之罚耶？抑果其请耶？
现代文：现在他已经病倒了，这是神因为怪罪而惩罚他呢，还是接受了他的请求要召他去侍奉呢？
English: Now that he is sick, is God punishing him for sinning, or has he accepted his request to call him to serve?

古文：若降之罚，是以一言而毙一国士乎？
现代文：如果是降罪惩罚他，这是因为一句话而害了一个对国家有用的读书人。
English: If he is punished with a reduced sentence, it is because of a sentence that harmed a reader who was useful to the country.

古文：违好生之德，当专戳之辜，帝岂不降鉴，而使神滋虐于下乎？
现代文：神这样做，就违背了佑护生灵的道德准则，杀害了一个无辜的人。这事上帝必然会明察，上帝能允许女神这样残害生灵吗？
English: In doing so, God violated the moral code of blessing and protecting sentient beings and killed an innocent person. God will surely see this. Can God allow a goddess to destroy sentient beings in such a way?

古文：若果其请，是以一言舍贞静之道，播淫佚之风；念张硕而动云軿，顾交甫而解明珮。
现代文：如果是神接受了夏侯祯的请求准备把他接到身边，这就更会助长了淫邪之风，因为夏侯祯一句话神就玷污了自己的妇道贞洁，象传说中的仙女为张硕而乘云车下凡与之幽会，神女为交甫所诱惑而解下衣上的佩玉完情。
English: If the god had accepted Xia Houyi's request and was preparing to receive him, this would have further encouraged the trend of sexual immorality, because Xia Houyi's god had defiled his own chastity with a single word, like the fairy in the legend who took Zhang Shuo for a tryst under a cloud, and the goddess who was seduced by the priest and unbuttoned her blouse.

古文：若九阍一叫，必贻帏箔不修之责言。
现代文：如果女灵神真要和夏侯祯结合，我们将向天帝申告。那时天帝一定会责备您不贞洁不守妇道的。
English: If the female spirit god really wants to unite with Xia Houyao, we will declare it to the heavenly emperor. At that time, the heavenly emperor will certainly blame you for being unchaste and not following the women's way.

古文：况天下多美丈夫，何必是也？
现代文：何况天下的美丈夫多得是，何必一定要盯上夏侯祯呢？
English: Besides, there are so many beautiful husbands in the world, why do you have to keep an eye on Xia Houjun?

古文：神其听之。
现代文：请女灵神还是听从我的劝告吧。
English: I implore you to listen to my advice.

古文：奠讫，夏侯生康豫如故。
现代文：祭告以后，夏侯祯果然康复，和没事一样了。
English: After the announcement, Xia Houyao recovered, and everything was fine.

古文：徐焕
现代文：徐焕
English: Xu Huan

古文：弋阳郡东南，有黑水河，河岸有黑水将军祠。
现代文：弋阳郡的东南有条黑水河，河岸上有座黑水将军祠。
English: In the southeast of Fenyang County, there is a black water river, and there is a black water general's shrine on the riverbank.

古文：太和中，薛用弱自仪曹郎出守此郡，为政严而不残。
现代文：太和年间，薛用弱由仪曹郎调任弋阳郡守。他政令很严但十分公正平和。
English: During the Taihe era, Xue Yingwen was transferred from Yi Cao Lang to be the governor of Shenyang County. His government was very strict but very fair and peaceful.

古文：一夕，梦赞者曰：黑水将军至。
现代文：一天晚上，他梦见黑水庙的执事说黑水将军到了，就赶快请了进来。
English: One night, he dreamed that the deacon of the Black Water Temple said that the Black Water General had arrived, and he quickly invited him in.

古文：延之，乃魁岸丈夫，须目雄杰，介金附鞬。
现代文：一看，黑水将军是一个身材魁伟的大丈夫，而且十分威严，穿着铠甲，腰挎箭袋。
English: At first glance, Blackwater General is a big man, and very dignified, wearing armor, with a quiver of arrows at his waist.

古文：既坐，曰：某顷溺于滋水，自以秉仁义之心，得展上诉于帝。
现代文：请他坐下后，黑水将军说，我生前是在黑水河里淹死的。我觉得我一生秉正刚直讲求仁义，就向上帝请求放还。
English: After asking him to sit down, the Blackwater general said, "I drowned in the Blackwater River. I feel that I have been righteous and upright all my life, and I ask God to release me."

古文：帝曰： 尔阴位方崇，遂授此任 郎中可为立祠河上，当保佑斯民。
现代文：上帝说我在阴界的官运很盛，就任命我当了黑水神。请郡守大人在河岸上给我立个祠庙，我就可以祐护这一带的百姓。
English: God said that I was very successful in the netherworld, and appointed me as the Black Water God. Please ask the county governor to build me a temple on the riverbank, so that I can protect the people in this area.

古文：言许而寤。
现代文：薛用弱答应后就醒了，于是就下令建庙设祭。
English: After weakly agreeing, Xue woke up and ordered a temple to be built and a festival to be held.

古文：遂命建祠设祭，水旱灾沴，祷之皆应。
现代文：从此不论水旱灾害，凡是到庙里祈祷都很灵验。
English: Since then, regardless of floods and droughts, it is always effective to go to the temple to pray.

古文：用弱有葛谿宝剑，复梦求之，遂以为赠。
现代文：薛用弱有一把葛谿宝剑，黑水将军托梦说很喜欢这剑，薛用弱就把剑赠给了神。
English: Xue Yibei had a sword of Ge Yibei. Blackwater General Tomoe said that he liked this sword very much. Xue Yibei gave the sword to God.

古文：仍刳神前柱，并匣置之，外设小扉，加扃銡焉。
现代文：他让人把庙里的柱子上挖了个槽，把宝剑装在个匣子里放进柱子，外面设个小门，用锁锁上。
English: He had someone dig a groove in a pillar in the temple, put the sword in a box and put it in the pillar, set up a small door outside and locked it with a lock.

古文：乾符戊戌岁，大理少卿徐焕，以决狱平允，授弋阳郡。
现代文：乾符戊戌年，大理少卿徐焕由于执法公正办案有功，被任为戈阳刺史。
English: In the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 6

古文：秋七月出京，时方淋霪，东道泥泞。
现代文：秋天七月出京赴弋阳上任，就赶上连绵的秋雨，往东去的道路十分泥泞。
English: When he left Beijing for Shenyang in the fall of July to take office, he was caught in the continuous autumn rain, and the road to the east was very muddy.

古文：历崤函，度东周，由许蔡，略无霁日。
现代文：徐焕经崤山、函谷关，过东周一直走到许蔡，天仍不放晴。
English: Xu Huan passed through Lushan and Hanyu Pass, and went all the way to Xu Cai after the Eastern Zhou Dynasty. The weather was still cloudy.

古文：既渡长淮，宿于嘉鹿馆，则弋阳之西境也。
现代文：后来渡过淮河住在嘉鹿的旅店，这就算到了弋阳的西边县境了。
English: Later, I crossed the Huaihe River and stayed at a hotel in Jialu, which is the western county border of Shenyang.

古文：时方苦雨凄风，徒御多寒色。
现代文：当时仍然是凄风苦雨不断袭来，仆从和侍卫们都冻得受不了。
English: It was still raining heavily, and the servants and guards were freezing.

古文：焕具酒祈之，其夕乃霁。
现代文：徐焕就到黑水神庙去祭祀，当晚就雨过天晴了。
English: Xu Huan went to the Black Water Temple to offer sacrifices, and that night the rain stopped and the sky cleared.

古文：焕由是加敬，每春秋常祀，必躬亲之。
现代文：徐焕对黑水神就更加崇敬了。上任后，每到春秋两次大的祭典，徐焕都是亲自参加。
English: Xu Huan revered the Black Water God even more. After taking office, every spring and autumn, Xu Huan personally participated in two major festivals.

古文：明年冬十月，贼党数千人，来攻郡城。焕坚守，城不可拔，乃引兵西入义阳。
现代文：第二年冬天十月，有几千名叛军来攻打弋阳郡城，徐焕坚守，叛军始终攻不下来，只好转向西面去攻义阳。
English: In the winter of October of the following year, several thousand rebels came to attack the county seat of Poyang. Xu Huan held out, but the rebels were never able to take it, so they had to turn west to attack Yiyang.

古文：时有无赖者，以庙剑言于贼裨将。
现代文：当时有个无赖，把薛用弱将宝剑藏在黑水神庙的事告诉了叛军的副将。
English: At that time, a scoundrel told the vice-commander of the rebel army about Xue's weak attempt to hide the sword in the Black Water Temple.

古文：将乃率徒，破柱取去。
现代文：副将就带着人进了庙，劈开柱子把宝剑拿走了。
English: The vice-commander took the man into the temple, split the pillar and took the sword away.

古文：既而晓出纵掠，气雾四合，莫知所如。
现代文：拂晓时，这股叛军四处烧杀抢掠，突然被弥天大雾裹住，不知道该往哪里走。
English: At dawn, the rebels, who had been looting and burning, were suddenly enveloped in a thick fog and didn't know where to go.

古文：忽遇一樵童，遂执之，令前导。
现代文：忽然遇见一个砍柴的少年，叛军就抓住少年，让他带路。
English: Suddenly encountering a young boy who was chopping wood, the rebels grabbed the boy and made him lead the way.

古文：既越山雾开，乃义营张周寨也。
现代文：少年带着叛军翻过山后，浓雾顿时消散，一看竟来到平叛的义军将领张周的军营前。
English: After the boy took the rebels over the mountain, the thick fog suddenly dissipated, and at a glance he came to the military camp of the rebel general Zhang Zhou.

古文：卒与贼遇，尽杀之，张周亲擒其首，解其剑，复归诸庙，至今时享不废。
现代文：张周率领义军杀出营来，把叛军全部消灭，并活捉了叛军的首领那个副将，缴获了那把宝剑，又送回庙里，现在黑水将军庙的香火仍然终年不断。
English: Zhang Zhou led the rebels out of the camp, wiped out all the rebels, and captured the vice-general, the leader of the rebels, alive, captured the sword, and sent it back to the temple. The incense of the Black Water General Temple is still burning all year round.

古文：罗弘信
现代文：罗弘信
English: Luo Hongxin

古文：中和年，魏博帅罗弘信，初为本军步射小校，掌牧圉之事，曾宿于魏州观音院门外，其地有神祠，俗号白须翁。
现代文：中和年间，魏博的军事长官是罗弘信。
English: During the Sino-Japanese War, the military commander of Weibo was Luo Hongxin.

古文：巫有宗千者，忽诣弘信谓曰：夜来神忽有语，君不久为此地主。
现代文：弘信最初只是本军里的一个小军官，管放牧军马的差事。他曾住在魏州观间院门外，随近有个神庙，庙里供的神当地人都叫他白头翁。有一天一个叫宗千的巫师忽然来找罗弘信说，神夜里忽然对我说你不久会当本地的主管官。
English: At first, Hongxin was just a petty officer in the army, in charge of herding horses. He used to live outside the gate of Guanzhong Courtyard in Weizhou, and there was a temple nearby. The local people called him Baotouong. One day, a sorcerer named Zongqian suddenly came to Luo Hongxin and said, "In the middle of the night, God suddenly told me that you would soon become the local supervisor."

古文：弘信怒曰：欲危我耶？
现代文：弘信生气的说，你想害我呀？
English: Hongxin said angrily, "Are you trying to hurt me?

古文：他日，复以此言来告，弘信因令密之。
现代文：过了两天巫师又来说那话，弘信就让他千万保密。
English: Two days later, the sorcerer said it again, and Hironobu told him to keep it a secret.

古文：不期岁，果有军变，推弘信为帅。
现代文：不到一年，军队里果然发生了哗变，推举弘信当统领。
English: Less than a year later, there was indeed a mutiny in the army, and Hironobu was elected commander.

古文：弘信状貌丰伟，多力善射，虽声名未振，众已服之。
现代文：弘信生得魁伟雄健，力大无比，又善射箭，所以当时虽然只是个无名的小军官，大家却都很敬服他。
English: Hironobu was born with great stamina, great strength, and good at archery, so although he was just an unknown petty officer at the time, everyone admired him.

古文：累加至太尉临淮王。
现代文：后来，弘信果然作了太尉临淮王。
English: Later, Hironobu did indeed become the first lieutenant of Lin Huaiwang.

古文：李嶢
现代文：李嶢
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐乾宁中，刘昌美为夔州刺史。
现代文：唐代乾宁年间，刘晶美去四川夔州上任当刺史。
English: During the Qianning period of the Tang Dynasty, Liu Jingmei went to Bozhou, Sichuan, to take up the post of chief secretary.

古文：属夏潦，峡涨湍险。
现代文：当时夏天发洪水，三峡水涨又急又险。
English: At that time, there was a flood in the summer, and the Three Gorges water rose rapidly and dangerously.

古文：里俗云：滟滪大如马，瞿塘不可下。于是行旅辍棹以候之。
现代文：当地有句俗话说，滟滪大如马，瞿塘不能下，江上不能行船，于是刘昌美只好停了船等候水退。
English: There is a local saying that the dragonfly is as big as a horse, you can't go down Qutang, and you can't sail on the river, so Liu Changmei had to stop the boat and wait for the water to recede.

古文：学士李嶢，挈家，自蜀沿流，将之江陵。
现代文：有个学士名叫李嶢，带着家眷从四川沿江行船要去江陵。
English: There was a bachelor named Li Yan, who took his family from Sichuan along the river to go to Gangneung.

古文：昌美以水势正恶，止之。嶢忽遽而行，俄尔舟复。一家溺死焉。
现代文：刘昌美说水势又急又大，劝他等等再走，李嶢却急忙地走了，不一会儿船就翻了，全家都被淹死。
English: Liu Changmei said that the water was very fast and big, and advised him to wait before leaving, but Li Yao hurriedly left, and soon the boat capsized, and the whole family was drowned.

古文：唯乳妪一人，隔夜为骇浪推送江岸而苏。
现代文：只有一个奶妈第二天被大浪推到岸上，幸免于难。
English: Only one wet nurse survived being pushed ashore by a large wave the next day.

古文：先是永安盐灶户陈小奴，棹空船下瞿塘。见崖下有一人，裹四缝帽，著窄白衫，青裤，执铁棘梨。问嶢行程，自云迎候。
现代文：在此以前，永安的盐贩子陈小奴，划着一只空船从瞿塘过来，看见江边山崖下有一个人，戴着四缝帽，穿着很紧的白衣服，手里拿着铁蒺藜，问学士李嶢要到哪里去，说正在迎接他。
English: Before this, Chen Xiaonong, a salt trader from Yong'an, came from Qutang in an empty boat and saw a man at the foot of the cliff by the river, wearing a four-seam hat, tight white clothes, and a shovel in his hand. He asked the scholar Li Qian where he was going and said that he was meeting him.

古文：及乳妪既苏，亦言于刺史云，李学士至一官署上事，朱门白壁，寮吏参贺。
现代文：后来那奶妈苏醒后也对刘昌美说，李学士被领到一个官府去上任，那官府红门白墙，很多官员都来迎接李学士，并向他拜贺。
English: Later, after the wet nurse woke up, she also told Liu Changmei that Li Shihai was led to a government office to take office. The red door and white wall of the government office, many officials came to meet Li Shihai and congratulate him.

古文：又闻云，此行无乳妪名，遂送出水。
现代文：后来奶妈听到有人说，这一行人的名单里，没有这个奶妈子。于是奶妈就被送出了江面，冲到了岸上。
English: Later, the wet nurse heard someone say that this wet nurse was not on the list of the party. So the wet nurse was sent out of the river and washed ashore.

