古文：春，正月，吴汉破公孙述将魏堂、公孙永于鱼涪津，遂围武阳。述遣子婿史兴救之，汉迎击，破之，因入犍为界；诸县皆城守。
现代文：起，止，一共十一年。汉光武帝建武十二年春季，正月，吴汉在鱼涪津打败公孙述的将领魏党、公孙永，随后包围武阳县。公孙述派遣女婿史兴救援。吴汉迎击，打败史兴，于是进入犍为郡内。郡内各县都闭城坚守。
English: It lasted for a total of eleven years. In the spring and the first month of the twelfth year of Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, Wu Han defeated Gongsun Sui's general Wei Party, Gongsun Yong, in Uluotsu Jin, and then surrounded Wuyang County. Gongsun Sui sent his son-in-law Shi Xing to rescue. Wuhan counterattacked and defeated Shi Xing, and then entered the county. All counties in the county were closed.

古文：诏汉直取广都，据其心腹。
现代文：刘秀命令吴汉径直夺取广都，占据敌人心腹。
English: Liu Xiu ordered Wu Han to directly seize the capital and occupy the enemy's inner circle.

古文：汉乃进军攻广都，拔之，遣轻骑烧成都市桥。
现代文：吴汉于是进军广都，占领该地，又派遣轻骑兵烧毁成都市桥。
English: Wu Han then marched into Guangdu, occupied the place, and dispatched light cavalry to burn Chengdu City Bridge.

古文：公孙述将帅恐惧，日夜离叛，述虽诛灭其家，犹不能禁。
现代文：公孙述的将帅十分恐惧，日夜逃离叛变。尽管公孙述诛杀了叛离逃亡将领的全家，还是不能禁止。
English: The general was so afraid that he fled from the mutiny day and night. Although his son-in-law killed the entire family of the defecting general, the mutiny could not be stopped.

古文：帝必欲降之，又下诏喻述曰： 勿以来歙、岑彭受害自疑，今以时自诣，则宗族完全。
现代文：刘秀一定要公孙述投降，又一次下诏告诉公孙述说： 不要因来歙、岑彭两个人被害的事而自己疑虑，现在及时投降，家族就可以保全。
English: Liu Xiu must tell Gongsun to surrender, and once again issued an edict to tell Gongsun to surrender, saying: Don't doubt yourself because of the two people who were killed in Laiwu and Taipeng. Surrender now in time, and your family will be safe.

古文：诏书手记，不可数得。 
现代文：诏书和亲笔信，不可能屡屡得到。 
English: Imperial edicts and personal letters cannot be obtained repeatedly.

古文：述终无降意。
现代文：公孙述始终没有投降的意思。
English: Gongsun Sui never had any intention of surrendering.

古文：秋，七月，冯骏拔江州，获田戎。
现代文：秋季，七月，东汉将军冯骏攻陷江州，俘获田戎。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Eastern Han Dynasty general Feng Yu invaded Jiangzhou and captured Tian Rong.

古文：帝戒吴汉曰： 成都十馀万众，不可轻也。
现代文：刘秀告诫吴汉说： 成都有十余万大军，不能轻视。
English: Liu Xiu admonished Wu Han, saying: Chengdu has more than one hundred thousand troops, which cannot be taken lightly.

古文：但坚据广都，待其来攻，忽与争锋。
现代文：只可坚守广都，等待敌人来攻，千万不要和敌人一争高下。
English: You can only hold fast to the vast expanse and wait for the enemy to attack. Do not compete with the enemy.

古文：若不敢来，公转营迫之，须其力疲，乃可击也。 
现代文：如果敌人不敢来攻，你就移动军营逼迫他们，等到敌人精疲力尽，才可发起攻击。 
English: If the enemy does not dare to attack, you move the camp to pursue them, and wait until the enemy is exhausted before launching an attack.

古文：汉乘利，遂自将步骑二万进逼成都；去城十馀里，阻江北营，作浮桥，使副将武威将军刘尚将万馀人屯于江南，为营相去二十馀里。
现代文：而吴汉却乘着胜利，自己率领步、骑兵二万人进逼成都，离城十余里，隔江在北岸扎营，架浮桥，命副将武威将军刘尚率领一万余人在江南屯兵，军营相隔二十余里。
English: Wu Han, on the other hand, took advantage of the victory, marched into Chengdu at his own pace with 20,000 cavalry and forced his way. He was more than ten miles away from the city, camped on the north bank of the river and built a pontoon bridge. Vice Admiral Wu Wei General Liu Shang led more than 10,000 people in the south of the river, and the military camps were separated by more than 20 miles.

古文：帝闻之大惊，让汉曰： 比敕公千条万端，何意临事勃乱！
现代文：刘秀听说以后十分震惊，责备吴汉说： 我不久前告诫你千言万语，怎料想事到临头就乱来！
English: Liu Xiu was very shocked after hearing this, and scolded Wu Han, saying, "I warned you not long ago in so many words, how can you expect things to be chaotic when the time comes!

古文：既轻敌深入，又与尚别营，事有缓急，不复相及。
现代文：你既然轻敌深入，又和刘尚分别扎营，一旦发生危急，就不再能互相顾及。
English: If things are urgent, it will be too late.

古文：贼若出兵缀公，以大众攻尚，尚破，公即败矣。
现代文：敌人如果出兵牵制你，用主力攻击刘尚，刘尚失败，你也就失败了。
English: If a thief sends troops to hold you back, but attacks Liu Shang with soldiers, Liu Shang will be broken, and the public will be defeated.

古文：幸无它者，急引兵还广都。 
现代文：幸而还没有其他变故，你要火速率军返回广都。 
English: Fortunately, there have been no other changes, and you want the fire rate army to return to Guangdu.

古文：诏书未到，九月，述果使其大司徒谢丰、执金吾袁吉将众十许万，分为二十馀营，出攻汉，使别将将万馀人劫刘尚，令不得相救。
现代文：诏书还未到达，已进入九月。公孙述果然派大司徒谢丰、执金吾袁吉率领军队大约十万人，分成二十余营，攻打吴汉；另派其他将领率领一万余人牵制刘尚，使他不能救援。
English: The imperial edict had not yet arrived, and it was already September. Gongsun Xiu sent the grand vizier Xie Feng and the regent Jinwu Yuanji to lead an army of about 100,000 people, divided into more than 20 battalions, to attack Wuhan; he also sent other generals to lead more than 10,000 people to restrain Liu Shang, so that he could not be rescued.

古文：汉与大战一日，兵败，走入壁，丰因围之。
现代文：吴汉大战了一整天，兵败，退回到营垒。谢丰趁机包围。
English: One day after the battle between Wu Han and Shu soldiers, he was defeated and went into the military camp. As a result, Xie Feng was surrounded.

古文：汉乃召诸将厉之曰： 吾与诸君逾越险阻，转战千里，遂深入敌地，至其城下，而今与刘尚二处受围，势既不接，其祸难量；欲潜师就尚于江南，并兵御之。
现代文：于是吴汉召集将领们，勉励他们说： 我和你们各位越过险阻，转战千里，才深入敌境，进逼城下。可是现在和刘尚分别困在两地，既然不能互相援救，大祸不可估量。我准备悄悄率军到南岸和刘尚会师，合力抵抗敌人。
English: Then Wu Han called together the generals and exhorted them: "I and all of you overcame many obstacles and traveled thousands of miles before we penetrated deep into the enemy territory and forced our way under the city. But now Liu Shang and I are trapped in two different places, and since we can't help each other, the disaster is immeasurable. I'm ready to quietly lead the army to the south bank to join Liu Shang's division and work together to resist the enemy.

古文：若能同心一力，人自为战，大功可立；如其不然，败必无馀。
现代文：如果能够同心协力，人人全力奋战，可以建立大功业；否则的话，定会一败涂地。
English: If we can make concerted efforts and fight with all our strength, we can build a great cause; otherwise, we will surely fail.

古文：成败之机，在此一举。 
现代文：成败的关键，在此一举。 
English: The key to success or failure now lies in this action.

古文：诸将皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：将领们都说： 听您的吩咐！ 
English: After listening, the generals said in unison: Yes!

古文：于是飨士秣马，闭营三日不出，乃多树幡旗，使烟火不绝，夜，衔枚引兵与刘尚合军。
现代文：于是犒劳士兵，喂饱战马，关闭营门，三天不出。并多多竖立旌旗，使烟火不断。入夜，吴汉悄悄率领军队与刘尚会合。
English: So he rewarded the hard-working soldiers, fed the war horses, closed the camp gate, and did not come out for three days. He also erected many banners, so that the fireworks continued. In the evening, Wu Han quietly led the army to meet with Liu Shang.

古文：丰等不觉，明日，乃分兵拒水北，自将攻江南。
现代文：谢丰等没有发觉。第二天，兵分两路，一路在江北据守，谢丰自己率军进攻江南。
English: Xie Feng and others did not notice. The next day, the soldiers were divided into two groups, one of which defended the northern part of the river, while Xie Feng led the army to attack the southern part of the river.

古文：汉悉兵迎战，自旦至晡，遂大破之，斩丰、吉。
现代文：吴汉投入所有兵力迎战，从早晨打到下午，大败敌军，斩杀谢丰、袁吉。
English: Wu and Han devoted all their forces to the battle, fought from morning to afternoon, defeated the enemy, and killed Xie Feng and Yuan Ji.

古文：于是引还广都，留刘尚拒述，具以状上，而深自谴责。
现代文：于是率军返回广都，留下刘尚抗拒公孙述。吴汉把情况一一向刘秀报告，深刻地谴责自己。
English: As a result, he was banished back to Guangzhou, leaving Liu Shang to refuse to report to his grandson, report to Guangwu, and deeply self-condemn.

古文：帝报曰： 公还广都，甚得其宜，述必不敢略尚而击公也。
现代文：刘秀回答说： 你回到广都，最恰当不过。公孙述必定不敢绕过刘尚而攻打你。
English: Guangwu replied, "It is very appropriate for you to go back to Guangdong. Gongsun Su will not dare to ignore Liu Shang and attack you."

古文：若先攻尚，公从广都五十里悉步骑赴之，适当值其危困，破之必矣！ 
现代文：他如果先攻打刘尚，你从广都救援，五十里的路程，出动全部步兵骑兵赶赴，这时正是敌军危险困顿的时候，打败他们是必定的！ 
English: If he attacks Liu Shang first, and you come to the rescue from Guangdu, a distance of fifty miles, and dispatch all infantry and cavalry to rush there, then it is precisely when the enemy army is in a perilous predicament, and defeating them is inevitable!

古文：正是汉与述战于广都、成都之间，八战八克，遂军于其郭中。
现代文：自此，吴汉和公孙术在广都和成都之间交战，八战八胜，东汉大军终于进入成都外城。
English: Since then, Wu Han and Gongsunshu have been fighting in Guangdong and Chengdu, with eight battles and eight victories. The Eastern Han army finally entered the outer city of Chengdu.

古文：臧宫拔绵竹，破涪城，斩公孙恢；复攻拨繁、郫，与呈汉会于成都。
现代文：臧宫占领绵竹，又攻陷涪城，斩杀公孙恢。又接连攻克繁县、郫县，和吴汉大军在成都会师。
English: Lugu Palace occupied Mianzhu, and also invaded Lucheng, and killed Gongsun Hui, and successively conquered Shengxian County, Shixian County, and the Wu and Han armies in Chengdu.

古文：李通欲避权势，乞骸骨；积二岁，帝乃听上大司空印绶，以特进奉朝请。
现代文：李通想避开权势，请求退休。过了两年，刘秀才允许他交出大司空的印信绶带，要他以特进身分参加朝会。
English: Li Tong wanted to avoid power and asked to retire. It took two years for Liu Xiu to allow him to hand over Daishi Kuang's stamped letterhead and ask him to join the Imperial Court Council as a special envoy.

古文：后有司奏封皇子，帝感通首创大谋，即日，封通少子雄为召陵侯。
现代文：后来，有关部门上奏章请封皇子爵位，刘秀感念李通首先拥戴他谋划大事功绩，当天，封李通的幼子李雄为召陵侯。
English: Later, the relevant departments made a petition to confer the title of crown prince and viscount on Liu Xiu. Liu Xiu was impressed by Li Tong's great achievements. On the same day, Li Xiong, the youngest son of Li Tong, was conferred the title of mausoleum lord.

古文：公孙述困急，谓延岑曰： 事当奈何！ 
现代文：公孙述危困窘迫，对延岑说： 事情应当怎么办？ 
English: Describing the perilous predicament, Gongsun said to Yan Rong: What should be done?

古文：岑曰： 男儿当死中求生，可坐穷乎！
现代文：延岑说： 男子汉应当死里逃生，怎么能坐着等死？
English: Yan Xun said: A man should escape from death, how can he sit and wait for death?

古文：财物易聚耳，不宜有爱。 
现代文：财物容易聚敛，不应爱惜。 
English: Wealth is easily amassed and should not be cherished.

古文：述乃悉散金帛，募敢死士五千馀人以配岑。
现代文：于是公孙述散发所有的黄金、绢帛，招募敢死队五千余人分配给延岑。
English: As a result, Gongsun Su distributed all the gold and money and recruited a death squad of more than 5,000 people to be assigned to Yancheng.

古文：岑于市桥伪建旗帜，鸣鼓挑战，而潜遣奇兵出吴汉军后袭击破汉，汉堕水，缘马尾得出。
现代文：延岑在成都市桥先布疑阵，树立旌旗，擂鼓向东汉军队挑战。同时悄悄派出奇兵绕到吴汉军队的后面，打败吴汉军。吴汉堕马落水，抓着马尾才脱离险境。
English: Yan Kui challenged the Eastern Han army at the bridgehead in Chengdu by spreading doubt, raising a banner and beating a drum. At the same time, he quietly sent a special soldier to go around the back of the Wuhan army and defeat the Wuhan army. Wuhan fell into the water and grabbed the horse's tail to get out of danger.

古文：汉军馀七日粮，阴具船，欲遁去。
现代文：吴汉的军队只剩下七天用的粮草，秘密准备战船，打算撤退。
English: Wu Han's army had only seven days of grain and grass left, and secretly prepared warships, planning to retreat.

古文：蜀郡太守南阳张堪闻之，驰往见汉，说述必败，不宜退师之策。
现代文：蜀郡太守南阳人张堪听说以后，火速前往求见吴汉，陈述公孙述必然灭亡、不应退军的策略。
English: After hearing the news, Zhang Kan, the governor of Nanyang in Shu County, rushed to visit Wu Han to explain the strategy that Gongsun Shu would inevitably perish and should not retreat.

古文：汉从之，乃示弱以挑敌。
现代文：吴汉接受他的意见，于是故意示弱，挑动敌人出战。
English: Wu Han accepted his opinion, so he deliberately showed weakness and provoked the enemy to go to war.

古文：冬，十一月，臧宫军咸阳门；戊寅，述自将数万人攻汉，使延岑拒宫。
现代文：冬季，十一月，臧宫进驻成都咸阳门。戊寅，公孙述亲自率领数万人攻打吴汉，派延岑抗击臧宫。
English: In winter, in November, Gong Gong was stationed in Chengdu Xianyang Gate. Wu Yin and Gong Sun personally led tens of thousands of people to attack Wuhan and sent Yan Xuan to fight Gong Gong.

古文：大战，岑三合三胜，自旦及日中，军士不得食，并疲。
现代文：双方展开大战，延岑三战三胜，从早晨打到中午，官兵得不到饭食，全都感到疲劳。
English: The two sides launched a great war, won three victories in three battles, fought from morning to noon, the officers and soldiers could not get food, and they all felt tired.

古文：汉因使护军高午、唐邯将锐卒数万击之，述兵大乱；高午奔陈刺述，洞胸堕马，左右舆入城。
现代文：吴汉于是派遣护军高午、唐邯率领精锐部队数万人攻打公孙述，公孙述的军队大乱。高午直奔阵前，猛刺公孙述，公孙述胸被刺穿，掉下战马，左右将他抬入城中。
English: Wu Han then dispatched the escort Gao Wu, and Tang Xi led tens of thousands of elite troops to attack Gong Sun Su. Gong Sun Su's army was in chaos. Gao Wu rushed to the front, stabbed Gong Sun Su, pierced Gong Sun Su's chest, threw him off his horse, and carried him into the city.

古文：述以兵属延岑，其夜，死；明旦，延岑以城降。
现代文：公孙述把军队交给延岑，当夜去世。第二天，延岑献城投降。
English: Gongsun Su handed over the army to Yancheng and died that night. The next day, Yancheng surrendered.

古文：辛巳，吴汉夷述妻子，尽灭公孙氏，并族延岑，遂放兵大掠，焚述宫室。
现代文：辛巳，吴汉诛杀公孙述的妻子儿女，屠杀公孙氏家族，长幼不留。并将延岑灭族，然后纵兵大肆掳掠，焚烧公孙述宫室。
English: Sincerely, Wu Han Rong killed Gong Sun Su's wife and children, slaughtered Gong Sun's family, and did not leave the eldest and youngest. He will exterminate the tribe, and then the soldiers will plunder and burn Gong Sun Su's palace.

古文：帝闻之怒，以谴汉。
现代文：刘秀听说以后大怒，因此谴责吴汉。
English: Hearing this, Guangwu flew into a rage and denounced Wu Han.

古文：又让刘尚曰： 城降三日，吏民从服，孩儿、老母，口以万数，一旦放兵纵火，闻之可为酸鼻。
现代文：又谴责刘尚说： 成都城投降已经三天，官民都服从归顺。连同孩子和母亲，人口数以万计，一旦纵兵放火，听到的人都会酸鼻掉泪。
English: He also condemned Liu Shang, saying: "It has been three days since the surrender of Chengdu City, and all officials and citizens have surrendered. Together with children and mothers, the population is tens of thousands. Once the soldiers set fire, everyone who hears it will have a sour nose and shed tears.

古文：尚宗室子孙，尝更吏职，何忍行此！
现代文：你是汉宗室子弟，又曾经当过官吏，怎么忍心做出这种事！
English: You are the son-in-law of the Han dynasty, and you were once an official, how can you bear to do such a thing!

古文：仰视天，俯视地，观放麑、啜羹，二者孰仁？
现代文：仰视苍天，俯视大地，比较秦西巴释放小鹿、乐羊吃他儿子的肉羹，这两个人谁仁义？
English: Looking up at the sky, looking down at the earth, comparing Qin Xiba's release of the fawn and Le Yang's eating of his son's meat soup, who are these two people benevolent?

古文：良失斩将吊民之义也！ 
现代文：你们真是失掉了斩杀敌将、拯救百姓的道义！ 
English: You really have lost the morality of killing the enemy general and saving the people!

古文：初，述征广汉李业为博士，业固称疾不起。
现代文：当初，公孙述征召广汉人李业当博士，李业坚持说有病而不肯接受。
English: At first, Gongsun Shu summoned the Han Chinese Li Ye as a doctor. Li Ye insisted that he was ill and refused to accept.

古文：述羞不能致，使大鸿胪尹融奉诏命以劫业， 若起则受公侯之位，不起，赐以毒酒。 
现代文：公孙述因不能把李业召来而感到羞耻，派大鸿胪尹融拿着诏书胁迫李业： 你如果接受职位就封公侯，如果不接受职位就赐予毒酒。 
English: Gongsun Shu felt ashamed because he couldn't summon Li Ye to the capital, so he sent the great giant Zhao Yin Rong with an edict to coerce Li Ye: If you accept the position, you will be given the title of prince, and if you don't accept the position, you will be given poisoned wine.

古文：融譬旨曰： 方今天下分崩，孰知是非，而以区区之身试于不测之渊乎！
现代文：尹融解释说： 当今天下分崩离析，谁知道什么是是和非，而敢用区区身体去试探不可测的深渊？
English: Yin Rong explained: When everything is falling apart, who knows what is right and wrong, but dares to use the body to explore the unfathomable abyss?

古文：朝廷贪慕名德，旷官缺位，于今七年，四时珍御，不以忘君；宜上奉知己，下为子孙，身名俱全，不亦优乎！ 
现代文：朝廷仰慕您的名望品德，给您留下官位，到现在已七年了。
English: It has now been seven years since the Imperial Court admired your reputation and character and left you an official post.

古文：业乃叹曰： 古人危邦不入，乱邦不居，为此故也。
现代文：四季进贡的山珍美味，不会忘记送给您。您应该让奉知己，下为子孙，性命和名誉都可保全，这样做不是上策吗？ 
English: They will not forget to give you the mountain delicacies of the four seasons. Isn't it the best policy that you should let your confidants and descendants serve you, so that your life and reputation can be preserved?

古文：君子见危授命，何乃诱以高位重饵哉！ 
现代文：李业于是叹息说： 古人说，危险之邦不进入，混乱之邦不居住，我正是为了这个缘故。
English: Li Ye then sighed and said, "The ancients said, 'Do not enter a dangerous country, and do not live in a chaotic country.' This is exactly why I am here.

古文：融曰： 宜呼室家计之。 
现代文：君子遇到危险而肯献出生命，为什么竟用高官厚禄引诱呢？ 尹融说： 应该叫家人来商量。 
English: If a gentleman is willing to give his life in the face of danger, why should he be lured by a high-ranking official's generous salary? Yin Rong said: You should ask your family members to discuss it.

古文：业曰： 丈夫断之于心久矣，何妻子之为！ 
现代文：李业说： 大丈夫决心断绝仕途已经很久了，为什么要和妻子儿女商量？ 
English: Li Ye said, "It's been a long time since my husband decided to give up his career. Why should I discuss it with my wife and children?

古文：遂饮毒而死。
现代文：于是饮毒酒而死。
English: He died from drinking poison.

古文：述耻有杀贤之名，遣使吊祠，赙赠百匹，业子翚逃，辞不受。
现代文：公孙述耻于背上杀死贤才的名声，派使者吊丧祭祀，赠送一百疋绢帛助丧。李业的儿子李逃跑，推辞不接受。
English: The great-grandson said that he was ashamed of the reputation of killing a wise man on his back, sent an emissary to the funeral service, and presented a hundred pennies to help the funeral. Li Ye's son Li ran away and did not accept the resignation.

古文：述又骋巴郡谯玄，玄不诣；亦遣使者以毒药劫之，太守自诣玄庐，劝之行，玄曰： 保志全高，死亦奚恨！ 遂受毒药。
现代文：公孙述又聘请巴郡人谯玄，谯玄不接受任命。
English: According to Gongsun, he also hired a Ba County man, Zou Xuan, but Zou Xuan did not accept the appointment.

古文：玄子瑛泣血叩头于太守，愿奉家钱千万以赎父死，太守为请，述许之。
现代文：公孙述也派使者用毒药相威胁。太守亲自到谯玄家拜访，劝他动身，谯玄说： 坚持我的志向，保全我的气节，死又有何遗憾！ 于是接受毒药。
English: Gongsun Su also sent an emissary to threaten him with poison. The Emperor himself paid a visit to Yu Xuan's house and advised him to leave. Yu Xuan said: "Hold fast to my aspirations, preserve my morals, what a pity it would be to die!" So he accepted the poison.

古文：述又征蜀郡王皓、王嘉，恐其不至，先系其妻子，使者谓嘉曰： 速装，妻子可全。 
现代文：谯玄的儿子谯瑛通哭，向太守磕头，情愿捐献家产一千万钱，以赎父亲的死罪。太守为此请示公孙述，公孙述应允。公孙述又征召蜀郡人王皓、王嘉，怕他们不来，先拘捕他们的妻子儿女。使节对王嘉说： 赶快整理行装，妻子儿女可以保全。 
English: Yu Xuan's son, Yu Ying, cried all the way to the eunuch of Shantou, and was willing to donate ten million yuan of his family's wealth to atone for his father's death. The eunuch asked his great-grandson for this, and his great-grandson agreed. The great-grandson also summoned Wang Xuan and Wang Jia from Shu County, fearing that they would not come, and arrested their wives and children first. The envoy said to Wang Jia, "Hurry up and pack your things, so that your wife and children can be safe."

古文：对曰： 犬马犹识主，况于人乎！ 
现代文：王嘉回答说： 狗、马还认识主人，何况人呢？ 
English: Wang Jia replied: Dogs and horses still know their owners, let alone humans.

古文：王皓先自刎，以首付使者。
现代文：王皓先自刎而死，使者用首级上报。
English: Wang Xuan committed suicide first and gave his head to the messenger.

古文：述怒，遂诛皓家属。
现代文：公孙述大怒，于是诛杀王皓的家属。
English: The grandson was so angry that he killed Wang Yao's family members.

古文：王嘉闻而叹曰： 后之哉！ 
现代文：王嘉听说后叹息说： 我走在后面了！ 
English: Upon hearing this, Wang Jia sighed and said, "I'm a step late!

古文：乃对使者伏剑而死。
现代文：于是面对使节用剑自杀而死。
English: He fell on his sword before the messenger and died.

古文：犍为费贻不肯仕述，漆身为癞，阳狂以避之。
现代文：犍为郡人费贻，不肯做公孙述的官，身涂油漆成为癞疮，假装疯狂以逃避做官。
English: As a county resident, he refused to be an official as described by his father-in-law, painted his body to become acne, and pretended to be crazy to avoid being an official.

古文：同郡任永、冯信皆托青盲以辞征命。
现代文：同郡人任永、冯信全都假托患青光眼而辞谢征召。
English: Ren Yong and Feng Xin, both from the same county, resigned their enlistment on the pretext of suffering from glaucoma.

古文：帝既平蜀，诏赠常少为太常，张隆为光禄勋。
现代文：刘秀平定蜀地后，下诏追赠常少为太常，追赠张隆为光禄勋。
English: After Liu Xiu conquered and settled Shu, the following edict posthumously awarded Zhang Rong with the Guanglu Honor.

古文：谯玄已卒，祠以中牢，敕所在还其家钱，而表李业之闾。
现代文：谯玄已经去世，用羊、猪各一头祭祀，命令当地官府还给他家赎死的钱。在李业家所居地的里门刻石，表彰他的节操。
English: He ordered the local government to return the ransom money to his family. A stone was engraved on the inner door of the Li family residence to commend his self-restraint.

古文：征费贻、任永、冯信，会永、信病卒，独贻仕至合浦太守。
现代文：征召费贻、任永、冯信，正巧任永、冯信病逝，只有费贻官至合浦太守。
English: Fei Yao, Ren Yong and Feng Xin were conscripted, but Zheng Qiao, Ren Yong and Feng Xin died of illness. Only Fei Yao Guan and Hepu Taishu survived.

古文：上以述将程乌、李育有才干，皆擢用之。
现代文：刘秀因公孙述的将领程乌、李育有才干，一齐提拔任用。
English: Liu Xiu was promoted and appointed because the generals Cheng Wu and Li Yu were talented as described by Gongsun.

古文：于是西土咸悦，莫不归心焉。
现代文：于是蜀地上下喜悦，百姓无不归顺。
English: As a result, both the West and the East felt happy and did not hesitate to return.

古文：初，王莽以广汉文齐为益州太守，齐训农治兵，降集群夷，甚得其和。
现代文：起初，王莽任命广汉人文齐当益州郡太守。文齐劝导农民耕田，训练军队，招降各部夷人，郡内十分和平。
English: At first, Wang Mang appointed the Guanghan humanist Qi to be the governor of Yizhou County. Wen Qi advised farmers to cultivate fields, trained the army, and recruited barbarians from all parts of the country. The county was very peaceful.

古文：公孙述时，齐固守拒险，述拘其妻子，许以封侯，齐不降。
现代文：公孙述时代，文齐据守险要。公孙述拘捕他的妻子儿女，向他许愿封做侯爵，文齐不肯投降。
English: In Gongsun Su's time, Wenqi was in a precarious position. Gongsun Su arrested his wife and children and made him promise to make him a marquis. Wenqi refused to surrender.

古文：闻上即位，间道遣使自闻。
现代文：后来他听说刘秀即位，派人从小路到洛阳，为自己呈上奏章。
English: Later, when he heard that Liu Xiu was enthroned, he sent someone from Xiaolu to Luoyang to present the music for himself.

古文：蜀平，征为镇远将军，封成义侯。
现代文：蜀郡平定后，刘秀征召文齐当镇远将军，封成义侯。
English: After Shu was settled, Guangwu conscripted him as the general of Zhenyuan and made him the marquis of Chengyi.

古文：十二月，辛卯，扬武将军马成行大司空事。
现代文：十二月辛卯，杨武将军马成代理大司空职务。
English: In December of Xinwu, Yangwu General Ma Cheng took up the post of acting commander of the air force.

古文：是岁，参狼羌与诸种寇武都，陇西太守马援击破之，降者万馀人，于是陇右清静。
现代文：这一年，参狼羌部落和其他羌人部落侵犯武都。陇西太守马援，击败羌军，一万余人投降，于是陇右一带平安无事。
English: In that year, the Zhengrou and other Hun tribes invaded the capital of Wu, and the Western Hun Empress Ma Yuan defeated the Hun army, and more than 10,000 people surrendered. As a result, there was no trouble in the Hun right area.

古文：援务开恩信，宽以待下，任吏以职，但总大体，而宾客故人日满其门。
现代文：马援的宗旨是要对人有恩德，讲求信誉，对下宽厚，任用官吏职责分明，自己只总揽大局。因此，宾客故旧每天都挤满大门。
English: The purpose of Ma'an is to be kind to people, to seek credibility, to be generous to the next, to appoint officials with clear responsibilities, and to take care of the overall situation. Therefore, guests have always crowded the gate every day.

古文：诸曹时白外事，援辄曰： 此丞、掾之任，何足相烦！
现代文：各部门主管有时向他报告外面的公事，马援就说： 这是丞、掾分内的事，哪值得麻烦我！
English: The heads of various departments sometimes report to him on external business affairs, and Ma Yuan said: This is a matter within the division of powers, which is worth bothering me!

古文：颇哀老子，使得遨游。
现代文：可怜可怜我这老头子，让我能够游乐玩耍。
English: Pity the old man, make leisure fun.

古文：若大姓侵小民，黠吏不从令，此乃太守事耳。 
现代文：如果豪强大姓侵犯小民，或者狡猾的官吏枉法，这才是太守的事。 
English: If a great and powerful family infringes on the rights of the little people, or if a cunning official abuses the law, this is a matter for the emperor.

古文：傍县尝有报雠者，吏民惊言羌反，百姓奔入城，狄道长诣门，请闭城发兵。
现代文：邻县曾有人报私仇，官民震惊，传言羌人反叛，百姓跑到城内。狄道县长上门，请求关闭城门征调军队。
English: In neighboring counties, there were people who took personal revenge, shocking officials and citizens. Rumors spread that people were rebelling, and people ran to the city. The head of Dido County came to the door, requesting that the city gate be closed and the army be conscripted.

古文：援时与宾客饮，大笑曰： 虏何敢复犯我！
现代文：当时马援正和宾客喝酒，大笑说： 羌人怎么敢再来侵犯我？
English: At the time, Ma Yuanzheng was drinking with guests and laughed loudly, saying, "How dare that man come to violate me again?

古文：晓狄道长，归守寺舍。良怖急者，可床下伏。 
现代文：告诉狄道县长，回去守在官舍，害怕得太厉害的话，可以伏在床底下。 
English: Tell Dido, the head of the county, to go back and stay in the government house. If you are too scared, you can hide under the bed.

古文：后稍定，郡中服之。
现代文：后来，情况逐渐安定，全郡人都佩服马援。
English: Later, the storm calmed down, and the people in the county were all impressed by Ma Yuan's courage.

古文：诏： 边吏力不足战则守，追虏料敌，不拘以逗留法。 
现代文：刘秀下诏： 边疆官吏如果没有力量交战就采取守势；追击敌人时要估量敌人的情况，或远或近，不要拘泥于军法中的 逗留法 。 
English: Liu Xiu issued the following edict: If frontier officials do not have the strength to fight, they should take a defensive position; when pursuing the enemy, they should estimate the enemy's situation, whether far or near, and should not adhere to the "staying" method in military law.

古文：山桑节侯王常、牟平烈侯耿况、东光成侯耿纯皆薨。
现代文：山桑节侯王常、牟平烈侯耿况、东光成侯耿纯都已去世。
English: Prince Wang Chang, Muping Martyr Prince Geng Cang, and Dongguang Prince Geng Chun have all passed away.

古文：况疾病，乘舆数自临幸，复以弇弟广、举并为中郎将。
现代文：耿况患病时，刘秀好几次亲自探望，又任命耿的弟弟耿广、耿举同时担任中郎将。
English: When Geng Guo fell ill, Liu Xiu personally visited him several times, and also appointed Geng's younger brothers Geng Guang and Geng Jiu to serve as vice generals.

古文：弇兄弟六人皆垂青紫，省侍医药，当世以为荣。
现代文：耿兄弟六人，全都身佩青紫色印信绶带，在病榻前控视、侍奉汤药，当世认为是荣耀。
English: The six Geng brothers, all wearing the blue-and-purple seal ribbon, watched and served soup medicine in front of the sickbed, which was considered an honor in their day.

古文：卢芳与匈奴、乌桓连兵，数寇边。
现代文：卢芳和匈奴、乌桓的军队联合，多次侵犯边境。
English: The armies of Lu Fang, the Xiongnu, and the Wuhuan united and repeatedly violated the border.

古文：帝遣骠骑大将军杜茂等将兵镇守北边，治飞狐道，筑亭障，修烽燧，凡与匈奴、乌桓大小数十百战，终不能克。
现代文：刘秀派遣骠骑大将军杜茂等率军镇守北方边境，整修飞狐道，修筑碉堡，建造烽火台。和匈奴、乌桓大大小小共打了数十上百次战斗，始终不能取胜。
English: Liu Xiu dispatched the cavalry general Du Mao and other troops to defend the northern border, renovate the flying fox road, build bunkers, and build bonfires. He fought dozens and hundreds of battles with the Xiongnu and the Wuhuan, large and small, and was always unable to win.

古文：上诏窦融与五郡太守入朝。
现代文：刘秀诏令窦融和五郡太守到京都洛阳朝见。
English: Liu Xiu Zhao ordered Dou Rong and the five county governors to meet in the morning in Luoyang, Kyoto.

古文：融等奉诏而行，官属宾客相随，驾乘千馀两，马牛羊被野。
现代文：窦融等接到诏令后动身前往，官属和兵客跟随，车队有一千多辆，马牛羊遍野。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Dou Rong and others set off, followed by officials and soldiers. There were more than a thousand vehicles in the convoy, and horses, cattle and sheep were everywhere.

古文：既至，诣城门，上印绶。
现代文：到达以后，窦融前往城门，奉上印信绶带。
English: After arriving, Dou Rong went to the city gate and presented a stamped letter with an umbilical cord.

古文：诏遣使者还侯印绶，引见，赏赐恩宠，倾动京师。
现代文：刘秀下诏派使者发还侯爵印信绶带。接见窦融，对他的赏赐恩宠轰动了洛阳。
English: Liu Xiu Zhao sent an envoy to return the marquis's stamped letter and sash. Luoyang was thrilled to receive Dou Rong and bestow his grace upon him.

古文：寻拜融冀州牧。
现代文：不久，刘秀任命窦融当冀州牧。
English: Soon after, Liu Xiu appointed Dou Rong as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：又以梁统为太中大夫，姑臧长孔奋为武都郡丞。
现代文：又任命梁统当太中大夫，姑臧县长孔奋当武都郡丞。
English: He also appointed Liang Tong as the grand vice-premier, and Kong Fen, the governor of Guzheng County, as the county magistrate of Wudu County.

古文：姑臧在河西最为富饶，天下未定，土多不修检操，居县者不盈数月，辄致丰积；奋在职四年力行清洁，为众人所笑，以为身处脂膏不能自润。
现代文：姑臧县在河西是最富饶的地方，当时全国还未平定，士人多不检点，没有节操，在县长的位置上不满几个月就积累起大量财富。孔奋在职四年，行为清正廉洁，被众人所讥笑，认为他身在油脂之中却不能滋润自己。
English: Guzheng County was the richest place in Hexi, when the whole country was not yet pacified. There were many unscrupulous and unprincipled officials, and they accumulated a large amount of wealth in less than a few months in the position of county governor. Kong Fen was in office for four years, his behavior was upright and honest, and he was ridiculed by many people, who thought that he was covered in grease but could not moisturize himself.

古文：及从融入朝，诸守、令财货连毂，弥竟川泽；唯奋无资，单车就路，帝以是赏之。
现代文：等到跟随窦融到京都洛阳，各郡守、县令的钱财货物装了一车又一车，布满平川洼泽，唯独孔奋没有财产，只乘一辆车上路。刘秀因此奖赏他。
English: By the time he followed Dou Rong to Kyoto's Luoyang, every county governor and county magistrate had loaded up car after car with money and goods, filling Hirakawa Waza. However, Kong Fen had no property and only took one car on the road. Liu Xiu rewarded him for this.

古文：帝以睢阳令任延为武威太守，帝亲见，戒之曰： 善事上官，无失名誉。 
现代文：刘秀任命睢阳县令任廷当武威太守。刘秀亲自召见，告诫他说： 好好侍奉长官，不要丢掉名誉。 
English: Liu Xiu personally summoned him and admonished him: "Serve your superior well and don't lose your honor."

古文：延对曰： 臣闻忠臣不和，和臣不忠。
现代文：任延回答说： 我听说忠诚的臣子与人不和睦，与人和睦的臣子不忠诚。
English: Ren Yan replied, "I have heard that a loyal retainer does not get along with people, and a retainer who gets along with people is not loyal.

古文：履正奉公，臣子之节；上下雷同，非陛下之福。
现代文：履行正道，奉公守法，是臣子的节操。如果下级对上级随声附和，那不是陛下的福分。
English: It is the duty of a vassal to follow the right path and obey the law. It is not His Majesty's good fortune if his subordinates follow his orders.

古文：善事上官，臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：陛下说要好好侍奉长官，我不敢接受。 
English: Serve your superiors well. Your vassals dare not take orders from you.

古文：帝叹息曰： 卿言是也！ 
现代文：刘秀叹息说： 你说得对呀！ 
English: Liu Xiu sighed and said: You are right!

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武十三年春，正月，庚申，大司徒侯霸薨。
现代文：建武十三年春季，正月庚申，大司徒侯霸去世。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year of Jianwu, in the first month of Goshun, the great scholar Houba passed away.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 郡国献异味，其令太官勿复受！
现代文：戊子，刘秀下诏： 各郡、封国进贡山珍海味，太官不能再接受。
English: Wu Zi, Liu Xiu issued an edict: all counties and fiefdoms should pay tribute to the mountain's rare seafood, and the eunuch could no longer accept it.

古文：远方口实所以荐宗庙，自如旧制。 
现代文：远方进献祭祀宗庙食物，则依照旧例。 
English: For those who come from far away to offer sacrificial food to their ancestral temples, the old rules still apply.

古文：时异国有献名马者，日行千里，又进宝剑，价直百金。
现代文：当时外国有进献良马的，可日行千里；又有人进献宝剑，价值一百两黄金。
English: At that time, some foreign countries donated fine horses, which could travel thousands of miles in a day; others donated swords, worth one hundred and two gold.

古文：诏以剑赐骑士，马驾鼓车。
现代文：刘秀下诏，把宝剑赏赐给骑士，让良马去驾皇家的鼓车。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict, awarding the sword to the knight and letting the good horse drive the royal drum car.

古文：上雅不喜听音乐，手不持珠玉，尝出猎，车驾夜还，上东门候汝南郅恽拒关不开。
现代文：刘秀平素不喜欢听音乐，手不持珍珠宝玉。有一次外出打猎，车驾夜里返回，上东门候汝南人郅恽拒绝开门。
English: Liu Xiuping does not like to listen to music and does not hold pearls and precious stones. Once he went out hunting and drove back at night. When he went to the east gate, the people of Runan refused to open the door.

古文：上令从者见面于门间，恽曰： 火明辽远。 遂不受诏。
现代文：刘秀命随从在门缝间和郅恽见面，郅恽说： 灯火太远，看不清是谁。 于是不接受诏命。
English: Liu Xiu's attendant met Zou in the cracks of the door, and Zou said, "The lights are too far away, so I can't see who it is." So he didn't accept the imperial edict.

古文：上乃回，从东中门入。
现代文：刘秀只好返回，从东中门进城。
English: Liu Xiu had no choice but to return and enter the city through the East Middle Gate.

古文：明日，恽上书谏曰： 昔文王不敢槃于游田，以万民惟正之供。
现代文：第二天，郅恽上书规劝说： 从前，周文王不敢沉溺于狩猎，全身心地为万民服务。
English: The next day, he wrote a book to persuade: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wen did not dare to indulge in hunting and devoted himself to serving the people.

古文：而陛下远猎山林，夜以继昼，其如社稷宗庙何！ 
现代文：可是陛下远到山林中打猎，夜以继日，这对社稷和宗庙有什么好处呢？ 
English: But what is the benefit of His Majesty hunting far away in the mountains and forests, day and night, for the community and the ancestral temple?

古文：书奏，赐恽布百匹，贬东中门候为参封尉。
现代文：奏章呈上后，刘秀赏赐郅恽一百匹布，贬逐东中门候当参封县尉。
English: After the report was submitted, Liu Xiu rewarded Zou with one hundred pieces of cloth and promoted Dongzhongmen to the rank of Sangfeng County Lieutenant.

古文：二月，遣捕虏将军马武屯虖沱河以备匈奴。
现代文：二月，刘秀派遣捕虏将军马武屯军滹沱河，以防备匈奴。
English: In February, Liu Xiu dispatched the captive general Ma Wutun's army to Minhe to be prepared for the Xiongnu.

古文：卢芳攻云中，久不下。
现代文：卢芳进攻云中，久攻不下。
English: Lu Fang's attack floundered for a long time.

古文：其将随昱留守九原，欲胁芳来降；芳知之，与十馀骑亡入匈奴，其众尽归随昱，昱乃诣阙降。
现代文：卢芳的将领随昱在九原留守，想胁迫卢芳投降东汉。卢芳得知后，与十余名骑兵卫士逃入匈奴地区。卢芳的部众全都属随昱所有，随昱于是到洛阳投降。
English: Lu Fang's generals stayed behind in Jiuhara to try to coerce Lu Fang into surrendering to the Eastern Han. When Lu Fang learned of this, he fled with more than ten cavalry guards into the Hun area. All of Lu Fang's men belonged to Lu Fang, so Lu Fang went to Luoyang to surrender.

古文：诏拜昱五原太守，封镌胡侯。
现代文：刘秀下诏，任命随昱当五原太守，封为镌胡侯。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict, appointing Su Zou as the Fifth Empress Dowager of the Five Dynasties and crowning him as the Prince of Zhou.

古文：硃祜奏： 古者人臣受封，不加王爵。 
现代文：朱祜上奏章说： 古时候，臣子受封，不是直系皇族，不封王爵。 
English: Zhu Xi said: In ancient times, courtiers were not directly related to the imperial family, and they were not given the title of prince.

古文：丙辰，诏长沙王兴、真定王得、河间王邵、中山王茂皆降爵为侯。
现代文：丙辰，刘秀下诏，长沙王刘兴、真定王刘得、河间王刘邵、中山王刘茂，都降爵为侯。
English: Hsin Chen, Liu Xiu, Changsha King Liu Xing, Zhending King Liu De, Hema King Liu Shao, Zhongshan King Liu Mao, were all demoted to marquess.

古文：丁巳，以赵王良为赵公，太原王章为齐公，鲁王兴为鲁公。
现代文：丁巳，改封赵王刘良为赵公，太原王刘章为齐公，鲁王刘兴为鲁公。
English: Ding Si changed the titles of Zhao King Liu Liang to Zhao Gong, Taiyuan King Liu Zhang to Qi Gong, and Lu King Liu Xing to Lu Gong.

古文：是时，宗室及绝国封侯者凡一百三十七人。
现代文：这时，刘氏皇族以及原封国撤销而由后世继承爵位的，共一百三十七人。
English: At this time, the Liu royal family and the original feudal state were revoked, and the peerage was inherited by future generations, a total of 137 people.

古文：富平侯张纯，安世之四世孙也，历王莽世，以孰谨守约保全前封；建武初，先来诣阙，为侯如故。
现代文：富平侯张纯，是张安世的四世孙，曾经历王莽时代，因敦厚谨慎守法而能保全爵位。建武初年，张纯先来归附，照旧为侯。
English: Zhang Chun, Fuping marquis, is the fourth generation grandson of Zhang An, who experienced the Wang Mang era and was able to preserve his title because he was prudent and law-abiding. In the first year of Jianwu, Zhang Chun was the first to be annexed, and he is still a marquis.

古文：于是有司奏： 列侯非宗室不宜复国。 
现代文：现在主管部门上奏： 侯爵中除非刘姓宗室，不应恢复封国。 
English: Now, the competent department has issued a notice: the marquis should not restore the fief unless the family name is Liu.

古文：上曰： 张纯宿卫十有馀年，其勿废！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 张纯在宫禁中值宿警卫已十余年，不要废除。 
English: Liu Xiu said: Zhang Chun has been a guard on duty at the palace for more than ten years. Don't abolish it.

古文：更封武始侯，食富平之半。
现代文：改封为武始侯，封地为富平县的一半。
English: His fief was changed to Wuhihou, and his fief was half of Fuping County.

古文：庚午，以绍嘉公孔安为宋公，承休公姬常为卫公。
现代文：庚午，封绍嘉公孔安为宋公，承休公姬常为卫公。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Gong An, the lord of Shao Jia, was named Song Gong, and the retired lord, Ji Chang, was named Wei Gong.

古文：三月，辛未，以沛郡太守韩歆为大司徒。
现代文：三月辛未，刘秀任命沛郡太守韩歆当大司徒。
English: In March Xinwei, Liu Xiu appointed Han Qi, the governor of Pei County, as the grand steward.

古文：丙子，行大司空马成复为扬武将军。
现代文：丙子，代理大司空职务的马成又担任杨武将军。
English: In addition, Ma Cheng, who acted as acting commander of the air force, also served as General Yang Wu.

古文：吴汉自蜀振旅而还，至宛，诏过家上冢，赐谷二万斛；夏，四月，至京师。
现代文：吴汉从蜀地整军返回，到达宛城。刘秀下诏，准许他到家乡祭祀祖坟，赐谷二万斛。夏季，四月，吴汉回到洛阳。
English: Wu Han returned from the Shu army reorganization and arrived at Wancheng. Liu Xiu issued an edict, allowing him to go to his hometown to worship the ancestral tomb and giving him 20,000 mu. In the summer, in April, Wu Han returned to Luoyang.

古文：于是大飨将士，功臣增邑更封凡三百六十五人，其外戚、恩泽封者四十五人。
现代文：于是刘秀举行盛大宴会犒赏将士。有功之臣封土调整增加的，共计三百六十五人。外戚及加恩分封的，有四十五人。
English: As a result, Liu Xiu held a grand banquet to reward the soldiers. Of the meritorious vassals whose fiefs were adjusted and increased, a total of three hundred and sixty-five were awarded. Of those whose fiefs were divided between maternal relatives and paternal grandsons, there were forty-five.

古文：定封邓禹为高密侯，食四县；李通为固始侯，贾复为胶东侯，食六县；馀各有差。
现代文：封邓禹为高密侯，辖地四个县。封李通为固始侯、贾复为胶东侯，辖地都是六个县。
English: Deng Yu was assigned to Gaomi, with jurisdiction over four counties; Li Tong was assigned to Gushi, and Jia Fu was assigned to Jiaodong, with jurisdiction over six counties.

古文：已殁者益封其子孙，或更封支庶。
现代文：其他侯爵的封地各有等差。对已经死去的，加封他的子孙，或改封其宗族旁支。
English: The fiefs of the other marquesses are equally divided. In the case of a deceased marquess, the fiefs of his descendants are added, or the fiefs of other branches of his family are changed.

古文：帝在兵间久，厌武事，且知天下疲耗，思乐息肩，自陇、蜀平后，非警急，未尝复言军旅。
现代文：刘秀在军旅中时间很长，厌倦战争，而且知道天下百姓疲惫贫困，渴望休息。自从陇、蜀平定之后，除非有危险紧急的情况，未曾再谈论军事。
English: Liu Xiu spent a long time in military travel, was tired of war, and knew that the people of the world were tired and poor, and longed for rest. Since the fall of Shu and Shu, unless there is a dangerous emergency, there has been no talk of military.

古文：皇太子尝问攻战之事，帝曰： 昔卫灵公问陈，孔子不对。
现代文：皇太子曾向他请教打仗的事，刘秀说： 从前卫灵公请教战争的事，孔子不肯答复。
English: The crown prince once asked him for advice on war, Liu Xiu said: "Confucius refused to answer when I asked him for advice on war.

古文：此非尔所及。 
现代文：这不是你应该问的。 
English: That's not what you should be asking.

古文：邓禹、贾复知帝偃干戈，修文德，不欲功臣拥众京师，乃去甲兵，敦儒学。
现代文：邓禹、贾复知道刘秀决定放下武器，用礼乐教化进行统治，不愿功臣们身在洛阳而拥有重兵，于是二人交出军权，潜心研究儒家经典。
English: Deng Yu and Jia Fu knew that Liu Xiu had decided to lay down arms and use ritual music to govern, and they did not want their heroes to have heavy troops in Luoyang, so the two handed over military power and concentrated on studying Confucian classics.

古文：帝亦思念，欲完功臣爵土，不令以吏职为过，遂罢左、右将军官。
现代文：刘秀也考虑到功臣们今后的去向，想保全他们的爵位和封地，不让他们因为职务而有过失，于是撤销左将军、右将军的官职。
English: Liu Xiu also considered the future direction of the heroes, and wanted to preserve their titles and fiefs, and not let them make mistakes because of their duties, so he revoked the official positions of the left and right generals.

古文：耿弇等亦上大将军、将军印绶，皆以列侯就第，加位特进，奉朝请。
现代文：耿等也交出大将军、将军的印信绶带，全都以侯爵的身份离开朝廷，回到自己的宅第。他们被加以特进之衔，定期参加朝会。
English: Geng and others also handed over the great general and the general's seal and ribbon, and all left the imperial court as marquesses and returned to their homes. They were given the title of special promotion and regularly attended the imperial court.

古文：邓禹内行淳备，有子十三人，各使守一艺，修整闺门，教养子孙，皆可以为后世法，资用国邑，不修产利。
现代文：邓禹性格敦厚，有十三个儿子，让他们各自研习一种技能。他治家的严谨，对子孙的教育，都可以作为后世效法的榜样。家里的开支取自封地的收入，不从其他产业营利。
English: Deng Yu is a man of strong character. He has thirteen sons, and has each of them learn a skill. The rigor with which he manages the family and the education of his children and grandchildren can be used as an example for future generations. The family's expenses are taken from the income of the fief, and they do not profit from other industries.

古文：贾复为人刚毅方直，多大节，既还私第，阖门养威重。
现代文：贾复刚毅正直，有大节。回到宅第以后，关起门来修身养性。
English: Jia Fu Gang Yi is honest and has a big section. After returning to his home, he closed the door to improve his health.

古文：硃祜等荐复宜为宰相，帝方以吏事责三公，故功臣并不用。
现代文：朱祜等举荐贾复，认为他适宜做宰相，而刘秀正责成三公整顿官吏制度，所以一律不任用功臣。
English: Zhu Xi and others recommended Jia Fu, believing that he was suitable to be the prime minister, while Liu Xiuzheng ordered the three generals to rectify the official system, so no meritorious minister was appointed.

古文：是时，列侯唯高密、固始、胶东三侯与公卿参议国家大事，恩遇甚厚。
现代文：这时，侯爵中只有高密侯邓禹、固始侯李通、胶东侯贾复三人和三公九卿一起议论国家大事，恩宠特别深厚。
English: At this time, among the marquesses, only Gaomi Marquis Deng Yu, Gushi Marquis Li Tong, Jia Dong Marquis Jia Fu and the three people discussed national affairs with the three princes and nine nobles, and the grace was particularly profound.

古文：帝虽制御功臣，而每能回容，宥其小失。
现代文：刘秀虽然控制功臣，但往往能维护包容他们，原谅他们的小过失。
English: Although the emperor restricts his meritorious vassals, he is always tolerant of their tricks and forgives their minor faults.

古文：远方贡珍甘，必先遍赐诸侯，而太官无馀，故皆保其福禄，无诛谴者。
现代文：远方进贡珍味美食，一定先赏赐所有诸侯，而太官都没有多余的，因此功臣全都保持他们的爵位财产，没有被诛杀或谴退的。
English: Distant tribute, delicacies and food, must first reward all the princes, and the eunuchs have nothing to spare, so the heroes all keep their titles and property, without being killed or expelled.

古文：益州传送公孙述瞽师、郊庙乐器、葆车、舆辇，于是法物始备。
现代文：益州把公孙述的盲人乐师、祭祀用的乐器、用五采羽毛编成篷盖的车，以及帝王后妃专用的各种车辆等，送到洛阳，于是帝王仪伏所用的器物才开始完备。
English: It was not until the imperial palace began to be completed that the imperial grandson's reciters, suburban temple musical instruments, chariots, and minarets were transferred from Yizhou to the palace.

古文：时兵革既息，天下少事，文书调役，务从简寡，至乃十存一焉。
现代文：当时战事已经平息，天下少事，各种公文的往来和差役的调遣，力求从简从少，只有从前的十分之一。
English: At that time, the war had calmed down, there were few things in the world, and the circulation of various official documents and the dispatch of dispatchers were only one-tenth of what they used to be.

古文：甲寅，以冀州牧窦融为大司空。
现代文：甲寅，刘秀任命冀州牧窦融当大司空。
English: A Yin, Liu Xiu appointed Jizhou Mu Dou Rong as the chief secretary.

古文：融自以非旧臣，一旦入朝，在功臣之右，每召会进见，容貌辞气，卑恭已甚，帝以此愈亲厚之。
现代文：窦融因自己不是刘秀的旧臣，一旦入朝，官位在那些功臣之上，所以朝会晋见，神情和言辞都十分卑谦，刘秀因此更加亲近厚待他。
English: Because Dou Rong was not Liu Xiu's former vassal, once he entered the court, his official rank was higher than those of the meritorious vassals, so the court would meet him, and his demeanor and words were very humble. As a result, Liu Xiu treated him more kindly.

古文：融小心，久不自安，数辞爵位，上疏曰： 臣融有子，朝夕教导以经艺，不令观天文，见谶记，诚欲令恭肃畏事，恂恂守道，不愿其有才能，何况乃当传以连城广土，享故诸侯王国哉！ 
现代文：窦融小心翼翼，内心却总是不安，几次请求辞去官职和爵位。他上书说： 我有儿子，每天早晚用儒家经典教导他。不让他学习天文，不准他研究预知祸福的谶记，只想让他恭敬怕事，恪守正道，不愿他有才能，何况竟要把连接几个城市的广大土地传给他，让他享受继承诸侯王国呢！ 
English: Dou Rong was careful, but his heart was always uneasy. He asked several times to resign from his official position and peerage. He wrote: I have a son, I teach him Confucian classics every morning and evening. I don't want him to study astronomy, I don't want him to study the foreknowledge of calamity and fortune, I just want him to be respectful, adhere to the right path, and I don't want him to have talent. What's more, I want to pass on the vast land connecting several cities to him, and let him enjoy inheriting the princely kingdom!

古文：因复请间求见，帝不许。
现代文：因此又请求单独晋见刘秀。刘秀不准。
English: Therefore, he also requested to see Liu Xiu alone. Liu Xiu was not allowed.

古文：后朝罢，逡巡席后，帝知欲有让，遂使左右传出。
现代文：后来，有一次朝会完毕，窦融在席位后面徘徊，刘秀知道他要谈辞职的事，就让左右传旨催他离开。
English: Later, after the meeting was over and Dou Rong had carefully retreated to his seat, Di Zhi Dou Rong again wanted to give in, so he sent Dou Rong out.

古文：它日会见，迎诏融曰： 日者知公欲让职还土，故命公暑热且自便。
现代文：几天以后，有一天刘秀见到窦融，对他说： 那天，我知道你要辞职，归还封土，所以让左右告诉你，天气太热，暂且去自己凉快一下。
English: On the second day of the meeting, Ying Dou Rong said: A few days ago, Zhi Gong wanted to resign and return to his hometown, so let you go home on a hot day and take a break.

古文：今相见，宜论它事，勿得复言。 
现代文：今天见面，应当谈论别的事，不能再说辞职。 
English: When we meet today, we should talk about something else, not about resigning.

古文：融不敢重陈请。
现代文：于是窦融不敢再提这件事。
English: So Dou Rong did not dare to mention the matter again.

古文：王月，匈奴寇河东。
现代文：五月，匈奴侵犯河东郡。
English: In May, the Huns invaded the county of Hedong.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武十四年
现代文：建武十四年
English: Built in 14th year of Kenmu

古文：夏，邛谷王任贵遣使上三年计，即授越巂太守。
现代文：夏季，邛王任贵派使者呈递三年的计簿，报告人口、赋税、治安等情况。
English: In the summer, the king of Qi, Ren Gui, sent an envoy to present a three-year account book, reporting on the population, taxation, security and other conditions.

古文：秋，会稽大疫。
现代文：刘秀任命任贵当越太守。秋季，会稽郡瘟疫流行。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Ren Gui as the governor of Yueyang. In autumn, plague broke out in Heji County.

古文：莎车王贤、鄯善王安皆遣使奉献。
现代文：莎车王贤、鄯善王安都派使者进贡。
English: Zhangche Wangxian and Juxian Wangan both sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：西域苦匈奴重敛，皆愿属汉，复置都护；上以中国新定，不许。
现代文：西域各国被匈奴的大量征敛所苦，都愿归属汉朝，愿朝廷重新设置都护。刘秀因为中原刚刚平定，不肯应许。
English: The countries in the western region were suffering from the massive collection of taxes by the Huns, and they all wanted to belong to the Han Dynasty, and they wanted the imperial court to re-establish the protection of the capital. Liu Xiu refused to promise because the Central Plains had just been pacified.

古文：太中大夫梁统上疏曰： 臣窃见元帝初元五年，轻殊死刑三十四事，哀帝建平元年，轻殊死刑八十一事；其四十二事手杀人者，减死一等。
现代文：太中大夫梁统上书说： 我看到，元帝初元五年，死罪减刑的有三十四件。哀帝建平元年，死罪减刑的有八十一件，其中四十二件是亲手杀人，而作减死一等判决。
English: Liang Tong, the First Vice-Premier, said in his letter: I saw that in the first five years of the Yuan Dynasty, the death penalty was commuted in thirty-four cases. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the death penalty was commuted in eighty-one cases, of which forty-two were homicides committed with one's own hands, and the death penalty was commuted to a first-class sentence.

古文：自是以后，著为常准，故人轻犯法，吏易杀人。
现代文：从此以后，成为惯例，所以人们轻率犯法，官吏轻视杀人。
English: From then on, it became common practice for people to break the law carelessly and for officials to treat homicide lightly.

古文：臣闻立君之道，仁义为主，仁者爱人，义者正理。
现代文：我听说做君主的道义，是以仁义为主。仁是爱人，义是坚持原则。
English: I heard that the moral of being a monarch is based on benevolence and righteousness. Benevolence is to love others, and righteousness is to adhere to principles.

古文：爱人以除残为务，正理以去乱为心；刑罚在衷，无取于轻。
现代文：爱人就要以除暴为目的，坚持原则就要以消灭祸乱为中心。设置刑罚在于适中，不能偏轻。
English: Lovers should aim to eliminate violence, and adhering to the principle should be centered on eliminating the scourge. The penalty should be moderate and should not be too light.

古文：高帝受命，约令定律，诚得其宜，文帝唯除省肉刑、相坐之法，自馀皆率由旧章。
现代文：高祖承受天命，制订法令，确实都很恰当。文帝只取消了肉刑和连坐法，其余全都遵循旧制。
English: Emperor Wenzong only abolished corporal punishment and the joint sitting method, and the rest all followed the old system.

古文：至哀、平继体，即位日浅，听断尚寡。
现代文：到哀帝、平帝继位，在位时间短，处理案子还很少。
English: By the time Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping succeeded to the throne, they had only been on the throne for a short time, and there were very few cases to deal with.

古文：丞相王嘉轻为穿凿，亏除先帝旧约成律，数年之间百有馀事，或不便于理，或不厌民心，谨表其尤害于体者，傅奏于左。
现代文：丞相王嘉轻率地穿凿附会，删减先辈君王的既定法律规章，几年之间有一百余件事，有的不合道理，有的不得民心。我谨把其中对大体为害最严重的，附在后边，向您陈奏。
English: There are more than a hundred things, some unreasonable and some unpopular, that the prime minister Wang Jia has done in the past few years. I would like to attach the most serious of them to the back and explain them to you.

古文：愿陛下宣诏有司，详择其善，定不易之典。 
现代文：希望陛下命令主管部门，仔细选择好的律条，制订一部不容更改的法典。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will order the competent authorities to carefully select good laws and formulate a code that cannot be changed.

古文：事下公卿。
现代文：刘秀把梁统的奏章交给公卿讨论。
English: Liu Xiu submitted Liang Tong's report to the nobles for discussion.

古文：光禄勋杜林奏曰： 大汉初兴，蠲除苛政，海内欢欣；及至其后，渐以滋章。果桃菜茹之馈，集以成赃，小事无妨于义，以为大戮。
现代文：光禄勋杜林上奏说： 汉朝初兴时，废除苛政，四海之内欢欣鼓舞。等到以后，法令逐渐增多，连果桃、菜蔬之类的馈赠，都集中起来成为赃物。小的事不妨害大义，也要判处死刑。
English: "At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, when the oppressive government was abolished, the whole country rejoiced. Later, the laws and regulations gradually increased, and even gifts such as fruits and vegetables were concentrated and became stolen goods. Small things do not harm the greater good, and they are also sentenced to death.

古文：至于法不能禁，令不能止，上下相遁，为敝弥深。
现代文：以至于发展到有法不禁，有令不止，上下互相掩护逃避，弊病更加严重。
English: So much so that it has developed to the point where there is no way out, there are too many orders, and the top and bottom cover each other to escape, and the malady is even more serious.

古文：臣愚以为宜如旧制，不合翻移。 统复上言曰： 臣之所奏，非曰严刑。《经》曰： 爰制百姓，于刑之衷。 
现代文：我认为应沿袭原有的法令条文，不宜于重新制订修改。 梁统又上奏说： 我所奏请的，并不是说要有严刑峻法。《书经》上说： 治理百姓，刑法要适中。 
English: I believe that the provisions of the original laws and regulations should be followed, and it is not appropriate to reformulate and amend them. Liang Tong also submitted a report saying: What I have submitted is not to say that there should be severe punishment. "The Book" said: To govern the people, the criminal law should be moderate.

古文：衷之为言，不轻不重之谓也。
现代文：适中的意思是不轻也不重。
English: The meaning of this is that it is neither light nor heavy.

古文：自高祖至于孝宣，海内称治，至初元、建平而盗贼浸多，皆刑罚不衷，愚人易犯之所致也。
现代文：从高祖到宣帝，天下被称为治平，到元帝、哀帝时，盗贼渐渐增多，都是因为刑罚不适中，愚昧的人轻视犯法所造成的。
English: From Emperor Gaozu to Emperor Xuan, the world was said to be pacified. From Emperor Yuan to Emperor Paidei, the number of thieves gradually increased. All of this was caused by the fact that the punishments were inadequate, and ignorant people despised breaking the law.

古文：由此观之，则刑轻之作，反生大患，惠加奸轨，而害及良善也！ 
现代文：由此看来，减轻刑罚的作法，反而酿成大祸。对奸诈不轨的人施恩，就是伤害善良的人。 
English: From this point of view, the practice of mitigating punishments has, on the contrary, brought about a great disaster. To be kind to treacherous and devious people is to harm good people.

古文：事寝，不报。
现代文：这件事情被搁置，没有再交付讨论。
English: The matter was shelved and not brought up for discussion again.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武十五年春，正月，辛丑，大司徒韩歆免。歆好直言，无隐讳，帝每不能容。
现代文：建武十五年春季，正月辛丑，免去大司徒韩歆的职务。韩歆性格刚直，说话不隐讳，刘秀往往不能容忍。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of Jianwu, in the first month of the year, he removed Han Xiu from the post of Daishi. Han Xiu had a straightforward personality and spoke openly, which Liu Xiu often could not tolerate.

古文：歆于上前证岁将饥凶，指天画地，言甚刚切，故坐免归田里。
现代文：韩歆在刘秀面前有根有据地说天下将有严重的饥馑荒年出现，并指天划地，言辞非常激烈，因此被免职，回归故里。
English: Han Wei said in front of Liu Xiu that there would be a serious famine in the world, and pointed to the sky, the rhetoric was very intense, so he was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：帝犹不释，复遣使宣诏责之；歆及子婴皆自杀。
现代文：韩歆走后，刘秀仍然不能消气，又派使者宣读诏书责备他。韩歆和儿子韩婴全都自杀。
English: After Han Xuan left, Liu Xiu still could not calm down and sent an envoy to read out an edict to reprimand him. Han Xuan and his son Han Yiming both committed suicide.

古文：歆素有重名，死非其罪，众多不厌；帝乃追赐钱谷，以成礼葬之。
现代文：韩歆平素享有重名，无罪被逼死，人多不服，刘秀于是追赠钱谷，以完整的礼仪安葬他。
English: Han Xuan always enjoyed a high reputation. He was forced to die without being guilty, and many people were not satisfied. Liu Xiu then gave Qiangu a posthumous gift and buried him with complete etiquette.

古文：臣光曰：昔高宗命说曰： 若药弗瞑眩，厥疾弗瘳。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：从前，商王武丁对傅说说： 如果药物不能使人感到昏眩，疾病就不能痊愈。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: In the past, the merchant king Wuding said to Fu: If the medicine cannot make people feel dizzy, the disease cannot be cured.

古文：夫切直之言，非人臣之利，乃国家之福也。
现代文：激烈直率的话，对臣子不利，却是国家的福分。
English: Fierce directness is not good for the vassal, but it is a blessing for the country.

古文：是以人君夙夜求之，唯惧弗得闻。
现代文：所以君王日夜寻求这样的话，唯恐听不到。
English: Therefore the king sought for the words day and night, but they were not to be heard.

古文：惜乎，以光武之世而韩歆用直谏死，岂不为仁明之累哉！
现代文：可惜呵，在光武帝时代，韩韵竟因直言进谏而死，岂不是仁义圣明的缺欠吗！
English: It's a pity, isn't it, that in the era of Emperor Guangwu, Han Yun died as a result of speaking his mind, isn't that a lack of benevolence, righteousness, and holiness?

古文：丁未，有星孛于昴。
现代文：丁未，有异星出现在昂宿。
English: On the 29th, the comet appeared in Oshuku.

古文：以汝南太守欧阳歙为大司徒。
现代文：刘秀任命汝南太守欧阳歙当大司徒。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Ouyang Xuan, the eunuch governor of the south, as the grand steward.

古文：匈奴寇钞日盛，州郡不能禁。
现代文：匈奴的侵扰掠夺一天比一天厉害，州、郡无力禁止。
English: The intrusion and plunder of the Xiongnu are becoming more and more severe day by day, and the state and county are powerless to prohibit it.

古文：二月，遣吴汉率马成、马武等北击匈奴，徙雁门、代郡、上谷吏民六万馀口置居庸、常山关以东，以避胡寇。
现代文：二月，派遣吴汉率领马成、马武等北上打击匈奴。迁徙雁门郡、代郡、上谷郡的官民六万余人，安置到居庸关、常山关以东，以避开匈奴的骚扰。
English: In February, Wu Han, led by Ma Cheng and Ma Wu, was dispatched to the north to fight the Huns. More than 60,000 officials and civilians from Ganmen County, Dai County and Shanggu County were relocated to Juyong Pass and the east of Changshan Pass to avoid the harassment of the Huns.

古文：匈奴左部遂复转居塞内，朝廷患之，增缘边兵，部数千人。
现代文：匈奴左部于是又转移到边塞以内居住。朝廷为此担忧，在边塞增派武装部队，每个据点达数千人。
English: The left part of the Huns then moved to live within the border fortress. The court was worried about this and sent additional armed forces to the border fortress, with thousands of men at each post.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，封皇子辅为右翊公，英为楚公，阳为东海公，康为济南公，苍为东平公，延为淮阳公，荆为山阳公，衡为临淮公，焉为左翊公，京为琅邪公。
现代文：夏季，四月丁巳，刘秀封皇子刘辅为右翊公，刘英为楚公，刘阳为东海公，刘康为济南公，刘苍为东平公，刘延为淮阳公，刘荆为山阳公，刘衡为临淮公，刘焉为左翊公，刘京为琅邪公。
English: In the summer, in April, Prince Liu Xiufeng's son Liu Fu was the Duke of Zuoying, Liu Ying was the Duke of Chu, Liu Yang was the Duke of Donghai, Liu Kang was the Duke of Jinan, Liu Cang was the Duke of Dongping, Liu Yan was the Duke of Huaiyang, Liu Jing was the Duke of Shanyang, Liu Heng was the Duke of Linhuai, Liu Yan was the Duke of Zuoying, and Liu Jing was the Duke of Shanzhai.

古文：癸丑，追谥兄縯为齐武公，兄仲为鲁哀公。
现代文：癸丑，刘秀追封大哥刘为齐武公，二哥刘仲为鲁哀公。
English: Liu Xiu followed his elder brother Liu as the Prince of Qiwu, and his second brother Liu Zhong as the Prince of Luye.

古文：帝感縯功业不就，抚育二子章、兴，恩爱甚笃。
现代文：刘秀感念大哥刘功业未成。抚育刘的两个儿子刘章、刘兴，十分宠爱。
English: Liu Xiu misses his elder brother Liu's unfulfilled career. He is very fond of raising Liu's two sons, Liu Zhang and Liu Xing.

古文：以其少贵，欲令亲吏事，使章试守平阴令，兴缑氏令。
现代文：因为他们年轻而地位尊贵，想让他们亲身体验了解行政事务，派刘章暂时代理平阴县令，刘兴暂时代理缑氏县令。
English: Because they were young and held a high position, he wanted them to experience and understand administrative affairs firsthand, so he sent Liu Zhang to temporarily serve as the magistrate of Pingyin County, and Liu Xing to temporarily serve as the magistrate of Jixi County.

古文：其后章迁梁郡太守，兴迁弘农太守。
现代文：后来刘章升任梁郡太守，刘兴升任弘农太守。
English: Later, Liu Zhang was promoted to Liang County Governor, and Liu Xing was promoted to Hongnong Governor.

古文：帝以天下垦田多不以实自占，又户口、年纪互有增减，乃诏下州郡检核。
现代文：刘秀因为全国的耕地面积自行申报，多不据实，并且户口、年龄都有增减，于是下诏，令各州郡进行检查核实。
English: Liu Xiu, because the amount of cultivated land in the whole country was self-declared, but it was not confirmed, and the household registration and age had increased and decreased, therefore issued an edict, ordering each state and county to carry out inspection and verification.

古文：于是刺史、太守多为诈巧，苟以度田为名，聚民田中，并度庐屋、里落，民遮道啼呼；或优饶豪右，侵刻赢弱。
现代文：当时州刺史、郡太守多行诡诈，投机取巧，他们胡乱地以丈量土地为名，把农民聚集到田中，连房屋、乡里村落也一并丈量，百姓挡在道路上啼哭呼喊；有的官吏优待豪强，侵害苛待贫弱的百姓。
English: At that time, the prefect of the prefecture and the county magistrate were often deceitful and opportunistic. In the name of measuring land, they randomly gathered farmers to the field, and even measured houses and rural villages. The people stood on the road, crying and shouting. Some officials favored the powerful and abused the poor and weak.

古文：时诸郡各遣使奏事，帝见陈留吏牍上有书，视之云： 颍川、弘农可问，河南、南阳不可问。 
现代文：当时各郡各自派使者呈递奏章，刘秀发现陈留郡官吏的简牍上面有字，看到上面写的是： 颖川、弘农可以问，河南、南阳不可问。 
English: At that time, each county sent its own envoys to submit the score, and Liu Xiu found that the Chenliu County official's letterhead had words on it, and saw that it said: Yingchuan and Hongnong can ask, but Henan and Nanyang cannot ask.

古文：帝诘吏由趣，吏不肯服，抵言 于长奉街上得之 ，帝怒。
现代文：刘秀责问陈留的官吏是怎么回事，官吏不肯承认，抵赖说 是在长寿街上捡到的。 刘秀大怒。
English: Liu Xiu scolded and asked the officials of Chenliu what was going on. The officials refused to admit it and said that it was found on Longevity Street. Liu Xiu was furious.

古文：时东海公阳年十二，在幄后言曰： 吏受郡敕，当欲以垦田相方耳。 
现代文：当时东海公刘阳只有十二岁，在帐子后面说： 那是官吏接受郡守下的指令，将要同其他郡丈量土地的情况作比较。 
English: At that time, Liu Yang, the governor of the East China Sea, was only twelve years old. He said behind the curtain: "It was the officials receiving orders from the county governor, and they were going to compare the situation of land measurement with other counties."

古文：帝曰： 即如此，何故言河南、南阳不可问？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 既然这样，为什么说河南、南阳不可问？ 
English: Liu Xiu said: Since this is the case, why is it said that Henan and Nanyang cannot be asked?

古文：对曰： 河南帝城，多近臣；南阳帝乡，多近亲；田宅逾制，不可为准。 
现代文：刘阳回答说： 河南是京都，有很多陛下亲近的臣僚；南阳是陛下的故乡，有很多皇亲国戚。他们的田地住宅都超过规定，不能做标准。 
English: Liu Yang replied: Henan is Kyoto, there are many ministers who are close to His Majesty; Nanyang is His Majesty's hometown, there are many relatives of the emperor. Their field houses exceed the regulations and cannot be made standard.

古文：帝令虎贲将诘问吏，吏乃实首服，如东海公对。
现代文：刘秀命虎贲中郎将责问陈留官吏，那个官吏才据实承认，正像东海公刘阳所回答的一样。
English: Liu Xiu's viceroy, Tigress, will interrogate the Chenliu official, and that official will only admit to the truth, just as the East Sea Lord Liu Yang answered.

古文：上由是益奇爱阳。
现代文：刘秀于是更加喜爱刘阳。
English: Liu Xiu loved Liu Yang even more.

古文：遣谒者考实二千石长吏阿枉不平者。
现代文：认为他不同寻常。刘秀派遣谒者对二千石官员中循私枉法的行为进行考察核实。
English: Liu Xiu dispatched an inspector to investigate and verify the illegal behavior of the 2,000-koku official.

古文：冬，十一月，甲戌，大司徒歙坐前为汝南太守，度田不实，赃罪千馀万，下狱。
现代文：冬季，十一月甲戌，有大司徒欧阳歙因先前在汝南太守任内丈量土地作弊，获赃款一千余万，被逮捕下狱。
English: In the winter, in November in Jiaxing, a senior official, Ouyang Zheng, was arrested and sent to prison for fraudulently obtaining more than ten million yuan of stolen money while he was in charge of surveying land in the south of the country.

古文：歙世授《尚书》，八世为博士，诸生守阙为歙求哀者千馀人，至有自髡剔者。
现代文：欧阳歙家世代教授《尚书》，有八代人是博士。学生门徒守在宫门外替欧阳歙求情的有一千余人，甚至有人把自己的头发剃掉，自处髡刑。
English: Eight generations of Ouyang Xuan's family have been professors of Shangshu, and eight generations have been doctors. There are more than a thousand student disciples waiting outside the palace gate to intercede on behalf of Ouyang Xuan. Some have even shaved off their hair and beaten themselves.

古文：平原礼震年十七，求代歙死。
现代文：平原人礼震才十七岁，请求替欧阳歙去死。
English: Li Zhen, a seventeen-year-old from the plains, requested to die for Ouyang Xuan.

古文：帝竟不赦，歙死狱中。
现代文：刘秀终究未赦免，欧阳歙死在狱中。
English: In the end, Liu Xiu was not pardoned, and Ouyang Xuan died in prison.

古文：十二月，庚午，以关内侯戴涉为大司徒。
现代文：十二月庚午，刘秀任命关内侯戴涉当大司徒。
English: In the afternoon of December, Liu Xiu appointed Guanai Houdei as the chief disciple.

古文：卢芳自匈奴复入居高柳。
现代文：卢芳从匈奴地区又返回内地，住在高柳。
English: Lu Fang returned to the inland from the Xiongnu region and lived in Gaoliu.

古文：是岁，骠骑大将军杜茂坐使军吏杀人，免。
现代文：这年，骠骑大将军杜茂因指使军官杀人而被免职。
English: In the same year, General Doumao was removed from his post for ordering the murder of an officer.

古文：使扬武将军马成代茂，缮治障塞，十里一候，以备匈奴。
现代文：命杨武将军马成代替杜茂的职务。马成修缮要塞，每隔十里有一个烽燧，以防备匈奴进犯。
English: He ordered Yangwu General Ma Cheng to take the place of Du Mao. Ma Cheng repaired the fortress, building a moat every ten miles to prevent the Huns from invading.

古文：使骑都尉张堪领杜茂营，击破匈奴于高柳。
现代文：刘秀命骑都尉张堪率领杜茂的部队，在高柳击败匈奴。
English: Liu Xiu ordered the cavalry captain Zhang Kan to lead Du Mao's troops to defeat the Xiongnu in Gaoliu.

古文：拜堪渔阳太守。
现代文：任命张堪为渔阳太守。
English: Zhang Kan was appointed governor of Yuyang.

古文：堪视事八年，匈奴不敢犯塞，劝民耕稼，以致殷富。
现代文：张堪任职八年，匈奴不敢进犯边塞。他鼓励百姓从事农业生产，使他们生活富足。
English: Zhang Kan held office for eight years, the Xiongnu did not dare to invade the border fortress. He encouraged the people to engage in agricultural production, so that they could live a prosperous life.

古文：百姓歌曰： 桑无附枝，麦穗两歧。张君为政，乐不可支！ 
现代文：百姓用歌颂他： 桑树无繁枝，麦子两穗多，张君当太守，百姓真安乐。 
English: The people praised him with songs: The mulberry tree has no branches, the wheat has more than two ears, Zhang Jun is the governor, and the people are truly happy.

古文：安平侯盖延薨。
现代文：安平侯盖延去世。
English: Anping Hougeyan passed away.

古文：春，二月，征侧与其妹征贰反，九真、日南、合浦蛮俚皆应之，凡略六十五城，自立为王，都麊泠。
现代文：交趾泠县雒将的女儿征侧，十分层悍勇猛。交趾太守苏定用法律约束她，征侧怨恨。建武十六年春季，二月，征侧和她的妹妹征贰反叛。九真、日南，合浦的蛮人全都起来响应，共攻占六十五个城。征侧自立为王，建都泠。
English: In the spring of 16th year of Jianwu, in February, Zhengxiang and her sister Zhengxiang rebelled. The barbarians of Jiu Zhen, Nichinan, and Hapu all rose up in response, occupying a total of sixty-five cities. Zhengxiang became independent and built a capital.

古文：交趾剌史及诸太守仅得自守。
现代文：交趾郡刺史和各郡太守仅能自守。
English: The county magistrate and the governor of each county can only defend themselves.

古文：三月，辛丑晦，日有食之。
现代文：三月，辛丑晦，出现日食。
English: In March, the weather is gloomy and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，九月，河南尹张亻及及诸郡守十馀人皆坐度田不实，下狱死。
现代文：秋季，九月，河南尹张和各郡太守十余人，都因丈量土地中作弊，被逮捕入狱处死。
English: In the autumn and September, Yin Zhang of Henan Province and more than ten governors of counties were arrested and sentenced to death for cheating in land measurement.

古文：后上从容谓虎贲中郎将马援曰： 吾甚恨前杀守、相多也！ 
现代文：后来，刘秀语气和缓地对虎贲中郎将马援说： 我十分悔恨先前杀了很多太守和相。 
English: Later, Liu Xiu said to Vice Admiral Ma Yuan, the vice admiral of Tigress, in a gentle tone: I deeply regret having killed so many emperors and empresses.

古文：对曰： 死得其罪，何多之有！
现代文：马援回答说： 他们的死和罪过相当，有什么多不多呢？
English: Ma Yuan replied, "Their deaths are commensurate with their crimes. How much is too much?

古文：但死者既往，不可复生也！ 
现代文：只是已经死了的人，不能再复生了。 
English: Only those who are already dead cannot be revived.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：刘秀大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：郡国群盗处处并起，郡县追讨，到则解散，去复屯结，青、徐、幽、冀四州尤甚。
现代文：各郡、封国的盗贼处处并起，郡县追击征剿，军队到时盗贼就散开，军队离开后又重新屯聚集结，青州、徐州、幽州、冀州四个州尤其厉害。
English: Thieves in all counties and provinces of the country were everywhere at the same time. Counties and counties began to pursue the requisitioners. When the army arrived, the thieves dispersed. After the army left, they regrouped. The four provinces of Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yuzhou and Jizhou were particularly severe.

古文：冬，十月，遣使者下郡国，听群盗自相纠擿，五人共斩一人者，除其罪；吏虽逗留回避故纵者，皆勿问，听以禽讨为效。
现代文：冬季，十月，朝廷派使节到各郡、封国，听凭盗贼们自相检举攻击。五个人共同斩杀一个人，免除五个人的罪。即使官吏畏怯逗留、逃避、故意放纵盗贼，也一律不追究，允许以擒贼讨贼立功。
English: In the winter, in October, the imperial court sent envoys to each county, to seal the country, to listen to the thieves' self-reporting attacks. Five people jointly killed one person, and exempted five people from the crime. Even if the officials stay timidly, escape, and deliberately indulge the thieves, they will not be investigated at all, and they are allowed to make a contribution by encouraging the thieves.

古文：其牧守令长坐界内有盗贼而不收捕者，又以畏忄耎捐城委守者，皆不以为负，但取获贼多少为殿最，唯蔽匿者乃罪之。
现代文：州、郡太守、县令县长在所辖界内有盗贼而不拘捕，或因畏惧懦弱弃城放弃职责的，全都不予处罚，只看捕获盗贼的多少来排列先后名次。仅对窝藏盗贼的人才加罪。
English: If a prefecture, county magistrate, or county magistrate fails to arrest a thief within their jurisdiction, or abandons their duties out of fear or cowardice, they will not be punished, but will be ranked according to the number of thieves they have caught. Only the person who harbors the thief will be punished.

古文：于是更相追捕，贼并解散，徙其魁帅于它郡，赋田受禀，使安生业。
现代文：于是，大捕盗贼，盗贼全部解散。把他们的头领迁徙到其他郡，给他们土地，供应粮食，使他们安心生产。
English: As a result, the thieves were all disbanded. Their leaders were moved to other counties, and they were given land and food supplies so that they could produce with peace of mind.

古文：自是牛马放牧不收，邑门不闭。
现代文：从此以后，放牧的牛马晚上不用牵回，城门夜间不用关闭，一片升平景象。
English: From then on, the grazing cattle and horses do not have to be brought back at night, and the city gate does not have to be closed at night.

古文：卢芳与闵堪使使请降，帝立芳为代王，堪为代相，赐缯二万匹，因使和集匈奴。
现代文：卢芳和闵堪派使者请求投降。刘秀封卢芳为代王，任命闵堪当代相，赏赐绸缎二万匹，让他为朝廷安抚匈奴，建立和睦的关系。
English: Lu Fang and Yan Kham sent envoys to request surrender. Liu Xiufeng made Lu Fang the acting king, appointed Yan Kham as the contemporary minister, and rewarded him with twenty thousand silks and yarns, asking him to pacify the Huns for the imperial court and establish a harmonious relationship.

古文：芳上疏谢，自陈思望阙庭；诏报芳朝明年正月。
现代文：卢芳上书谢恩，并说自己思念想往朝廷。刘秀下诏回答卢芳，让他明年正月来朝见。
English: Lu Fang wrote a letter of thanks and said that he missed going to the imperial court. Liu Xiu replied that Lu Fang should come to the imperial court in the first month of next year.

古文：初，匈奴闻汉购求芳，贪得财帛，故遣芳还降。
现代文：起初，匈奴听说汉朝悬赏捉拿卢芳，因贪图得到财帛，所以送回卢芳让他投降。
English: At first, the Xiongnu heard that the Han Dynasty was offering a reward for the capture of Lu Fang, and because they were greedy for money, they sent Lu Fang back to let him surrender.

古文：既而芳以自归为功，不称匈奴所遣，单于复耻言其计，故赏遂不行。
现代文：后来卢芳以自动归附为功，不说是匈奴所遣，匈奴单于也耻于提到当初的谋划，因而汉朝没有进行赏赐。
English: Later, Lu Fang took credit for the automatic annexation, not to say that he was sent by the Xiongnu, but the Xiongnu was ashamed to mention the original plan, so the Han Dynasty did not reward.

古文：由是大恨，入寇尤深。
现代文：匈奴从此大为愤恨，入境侵扰得更厉害。
English: From then on, the Huns were very angry, and the intrusion into the country became even more severe.

古文：马援奏宜如旧铸五铢钱，上从之；天下赖其便。
现代文：马援上奏建议，应当按旧币制铸造五铢钱。刘秀赞同。百姓都因这一措施而感到方便。
English: Liu Xiu agreed with Ma Yuan's suggestion that the five-baht coin should be minted according to the old currency system. The people all felt convenient because of this measure.

古文：卢芳入朝，南及昌平，有诏止，令更朝明岁。
现代文：卢芳入朝，南下到达昌平。刘秀下诏命他停止，改为明年朝见。
English: Lu Fang entered the imperial court and went south to Changping. Liu Xiu ordered him to stop and see him in the morning of the next year.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武十七年春，正月，赵孝公良薨。
现代文：建武十七年春季，正月，赵孝公刘良去世。
English: In the spring of 17th year of Jianwu, the first month, Zhao Xiaogong Liu Liang passed away.

古文：初，怀县大姓李子春二孙杀人，怀令赵熹穷治其奸，二孙自杀，收系子春。
现代文：当初，怀县大姓李子春的两个孙子杀人，怀县县令赵深入追究凶犯，两个孙子自杀，李子春被捕入狱。
English: At first, two grandsons of Li Zichun, the eldest son of Wai County, committed murder. Wai County ordered Zhao to thoroughly investigate the murderer. Two grandsons committed suicide, and Li Zichun was arrested and jailed.

古文：京师贵戚为请者数十，熹终不听。
现代文：洛阳的皇亲国戚有数十人替李子春说情，赵始终不答应。
English: Dozens of imperial relatives in Luoyang interceded on Li Zichun's behalf, but Zhao always refused.

古文：良无复言。既薨，上追思良，乃贳出子春。
现代文：及至刘良病重，刘秀到他家探望，问他有什么话要说。刘良说： 我一向和李子春交往深厚。现在他犯罪，怀县县令赵要杀他，我愿乞求饶他一命。 
English: When Liu Liang became seriously ill, Liu Xiu visited his home and asked him what he had to say. Liu Liang said: I have always had a deep relationship with Li Zichun. Now he has committed a crime, and the county magistrate of Huai County, Zhao, wants to kill him. I would like to beg him to spare his life.

古文：迁熹为平原太守。
现代文：刘秀说： 官吏尊奉法律，不能歪曲。
English: Liu Xiu said, "Officials must respect and abide by the law and must not distort it.

古文：二月，乙未晦，日有食之。
现代文：请另外说其他的愿望。 刘良不再说话。
English: Please say other wishes in addition. Liu Liang stopped talking.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，上行幸章陵；五月，乙卯，还宫。
现代文：刘良去世后，刘秀追念刘良，才赦免释放了李子春，提拔赵为平原太守。二月乙未晦，出现日食。夏季，四月乙卯，刘秀前往章陵。五月乙卯，返回洛阳皇宫。
English: After Liu Liang's death, Liu Xiu paid tribute to Liu Liang, pardoned and released Li Zichun, and promoted Zhao to be the governor of the plain. In February, a solar eclipse occurred. In the summer, in April, Liu Xiu went to Zhangling. In May, he returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：六月，癸巳，临淮怀公衡薨。
现代文：六月癸巳，临淮怀公刘衡去世。
English: In June, Liu Heng passed away.

古文：妖贼李广攻没皖城，遣虎贲中郎将马援、骠骑将军段志讨之。
现代文：盗贼李广攻陷皖城。朝廷派虎贲中郎将马援、骠骑将军段志征讨。
English: The thief Li Guang attacked and captured Handan City. The imperial court sent the vice-chancellor of the Tiger Clan to enlist the help of the horse and the cavalry of the general Duan Zhi.

古文：秋，九月，破皖城，斩李广。
现代文：秋季，九月，攻破皖城，斩杀李广。
English: In the autumn, in September, they broke through Shicheng and killed Li Guang.

古文：郭后宠衰，数怀怨怼，上怒之。
现代文：郭皇后失宠，常怀有怨恨，刘秀对她很生气。
English: Empress Guo fell out of favor and often harbored resentment. Liu Xiu was very angry with her.

古文：冬，十月，辛巳，废皇后郭氏，立贵人阴氏为皇后。
现代文：冬季，十月辛巳，废黜皇后郭氏，立贵人阴氏皇后。
English: In the winter, in October, the empress Guo clan was deposed and the empress Guiren clan was established.

古文：诏曰： 异常之事，非国休福，不得上寿称庆。 
现代文：下诏说： 这是一件异常的事，不是国家之福，不准祝福庆贺。 
English: The next edict said: This is an unusual event, not a blessing for the country, and no congratulations or celebrations are allowed.

古文：郅恽言于帝曰： 臣闻夫妇之好，父不能得之于子，况臣能得之于君乎！
现代文：郅恽对刘秀说： 我听说夫妇之间的私情，做父亲的尚且不能干涉儿子，何况我们做臣子的，能够干涉君王吗？
English: Zou said to Liu Xiu, "I have heard that there is a private affair between husband and wife. As a father, I cannot interfere with my son. Moreover, as courtiers, can we interfere with the king?

古文：是臣所不敢言。
现代文：所以，我不敢说什么。
English: This was a point that the courtiers dared not mention.

古文：虽然，愿陛下念其可否之计，无令天下有议社稷而已。 
现代文：尽管如此，希望陛下考虑是否可行，不要让天下人议论社稷而已。 
English: Even so, I hope that His Majesty will consider whether this is feasible, and not let people around the world talk about the Ancestor Society.

古文：帝曰： 恽善恕己量主，知我必不有所左右而轻天下也！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 你善于用自己的心揣度君王，知道我一定会适当处理，不会轻视天下人的反应。 
English: Liu Xiu said: You are good at using your heart to figure out the monarch, knowing that I will definitely deal with it appropriately, and will not despise the reaction of the world.

古文：帝进郭后子右翊公辅为中山王，以常山郡益中山国，郭后为中山太后，其馀九国公皆为王。
现代文：刘秀封郭后的儿子右翊公刘辅为中山王，把常山郡并入中山国。封郭后为中山太后。其余九位皇子，全从公爵晋封为王。
English: After Liu Xiu was enthroned, his son Liu Fu, the Duke of the Right Hand, became the King of Zhongshan and merged Changshan County into Zhongshan Province. After the enthronement, he became the Empress Dowager of Zhongshan. The remaining nine princes were all crowned by the Duke.

古文：甲申，帝幸章陵，修园庙，祠旧宅，观田庐，置酒作乐，赏赐。
现代文：十月甲申，刘秀前往章陵。修葺先人墓园祭庙，祭祀旧宅，巡视田地农舍，摆设酒宴，演奏乐曲，进行赏赐。
English: In October, Liu Xiu went to Zhangling. He repaired the cemetery and temple of his ancestors, worshiped the old house, inspected the fields and farmhouses, arranged a wine banquet, played music, and gave awards.

古文：时宗室诸母因酣悦相与语曰： 文叔少时谨信，与人不款曲，唯直柔耳，今乃能如此！ 
现代文：当时刘氏宗室的伯母、姑母、婶娘们因喝酒喝得酣畅高兴，在一起说： 刘秀小时候谨慎守信，和人交往不殷勤应酬，仅知柔和而已，今天竟能如此！ 
English: At that time, Liu Xiu's aunts, uncles, and daughters-in-law, who were drinking wine, were very happy and said together: "When Liu Xiu was a child, he was careful to keep his word, he did not socialize with people, he was only gentle, but today he can do so!

古文：帝闻之，大笑曰： 吾治天下，亦欲以柔道行之。 
现代文：刘秀听说以后，大笑说： 我治理天下，也要推行柔和之道。 
English: After hearing this, Liu Xiu laughed loudly and said, "I want to govern the world, but I also want to promote the soft way.

古文：十二月，还自章陵。
现代文：十二月，刘秀从章陵回到洛阳。
English: In December, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang from Zhangling.

古文：是岁，莎车王贤复遣使奉献，请都护；帝赐贤西域都护印绶及车旗、黄金、锦绣。
现代文：这一年，莎车王贤又派使者进贡，请求设置都护。刘秀赐给贤西域都护印信绶带，以及车辆、旗帜、黄金、绵绣。
English: In the same year, Liangche Wangxian also sent an envoy to pay tribute and request the establishment of a capital guard. Liu Xiu gave Xian the western capital guard seal letter and ribbon, as well as vehicles, flags, gold, and embroidery.

古文：敦煌太守裴遵上言： 夷狄不可假以大权；又令诸国失望。 
现代文：敦煌太守裴遵上书说： 对于夷狄，不可以授给他们大权，而且这样做会使其他各国失望。 
English: Pei Zun, the governor of Dunhuang, said in a letter: For the Yidi, they should not be granted great power, and doing so would disappoint other countries.

古文：诏书收还都护印绶，更赐贤以汉大将军印绶；其使不肯易，遵迫夺之。
现代文：刘秀于是下诏书收回都护印信、绶带，把大将军印信、绶带改赐给贤。莎车使者不肯交换，裴遵强行夺回。
English: Liu Xiu then issued an edict to take back the imperial seal and sash, and instead gave the imperial seal and sash to Xian. The messenger refused to exchange them, and Pei Zun forcibly took them back.

古文：贤由是始恨，而犹诈称大都护，移书诸国，诸国悉服属焉。
现代文：贤从此开始怨恨，而仍诈称是西域都护，向西域各国发送文书，各国全都服从、归附。
English: Xian began to hold a grudge, but still falsely claimed to be the protector of the Western Regions and sent documents to the countries in the Western Regions. All countries obeyed and acceded.

古文：匈奴、鲜卑、赤山乌桓数连兵入塞，杀略吏民；诏拜襄贲令祭肜为辽东太守。
现代文：匈奴、鲜卑、赤山乌桓多次联合军队攻入边塞，屠杀官吏百姓，大肆掠夺。刘秀下诏任命襄贲令祭肜当辽东太守。
English: The combined armies of the Xiongnu, the Xianbei, and the Akashan Wuhu repeatedly invaded the border fortress, massacred officials and civilians, and plundered extensively. Liu Xiu Zhao appointed Xiang Rong Rong to be the governor of Liaodong.

古文：肜有勇力，虏每犯塞，常为士卒锋，数破走之。
现代文：祭肜勇猛有力，每当蛮族侵犯边境，他总是身先士卒，多次打败击退来犯者。
English: Sacrificing his courage and strength, whenever the barbarians invaded the border, he always led the way, repeatedly defeating and repelling the invaders.

古文：肜，遵之从弟也。
现代文：祭肜是祭遵的堂弟。
English: Saizan is Saizun's cousin.

古文：征侧等寇乱连年，诏长沙、合浦、交趾具车船，修道桥，通障谿，储粮谷，拜马援为伏波将军，以扶乐侯刘隆为副，南击交趾。
现代文：征侧等连年为寇作乱，朝廷命长沙、合浦、交趾等郡准备车辆船只，修筑道路、桥梁，打通山间溪谷的道路，储备粮食。任命马援当伏波将军、扶乐侯刘隆当副统帅，南征交趾。
English: The imperial court ordered the counties of Changsha, Hepu, and Jiaozi to prepare vehicles and ships, build roads and bridges, open roads between mountains and valleys, and stockpile grain. Ma Yuan was appointed as General of Fubao, Liu Long as Deputy Commander-in-Chief of Fule County, and Jiaozi for the Southern Expedition.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武十八年二月，蜀郡守将史歆反，攻太守张穆，穆逾城走；宕渠杨伟等起兵以应歆。帝遣吴汉等将万馀人讨之。
现代文：建武十八年二月，蜀郡守将史歆反叛，攻打太守张穆，张穆越城逃跑。宕渠人杨伟等起兵响应史歆。刘秀派遣吴汉等率领一万余人进行讨伐。
English: In February of the 18th year of the Jianwu era, Shu County Governor Shi Yan rebelled, attacked Zhang Mu, the Tai governor, and Zhang Mu fled across the city. Yang Wei, a canal man, raised an army in response to Shi Yan. Liu Xiu sent Wu Han and others to lead more than 10,000 people in a crusade.

古文：甲寅，上行幸长安；三月，幸蒲坂，祠后土。
现代文：甲寅，刘秀前往长安。三月，到达蒲坂，祭祀后土神。
English: Jia Yin and Liu Xiu went to Chang'an. In March, they arrived in Pusan and worshipped the soil god.

古文：马援缘海而进，随山刊道千馀里，至浪泊上，与征侧等战，大破之，追至禁谿，贼遂散走。
现代文：马援缘着大海推进，沿山开道一千余里，抵达浪泊。同征侧等交战，大败征侧，追到禁，征侧部众于是四散奔逃。
English: With the help of horses, they pushed through the sea and traveled more than a thousand miles along the mountain road, arriving at Nampo. They fought with the same side, defeated the same side, chased them to the forbidden, and the people of the same side scattered and fled.

古文：夏，四月，甲戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏季，四月甲戌，刘秀返回洛阳。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：戊申，上行幸河内；戊子，还宫。
现代文：戊申，刘秀前往河内郡。戊子，返回洛阳皇宫。
English: Wu Shen, Liu Xiu went to Hanoi County. Wu Zi, returned to Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，发生旱灾。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：卢芳自昌平还，内自疑惧，遂复反，与闵堪相攻连月，匈奴遣数百骑迎芳出塞。
现代文：卢芳从昌平返回后，内心疑虑恐惧，于是再度反叛，同闵堪互相攻击，连战数月。匈奴派数百名骑兵接卢芳到塞外。
English: After Lu Fang returned from Changping, his heart was full of doubts and fears, so he rebelled again, and they attacked each other for several months. The Xiongnu sent hundreds of cavalry to pick up Lu Fang outside of Serbia.

古文：芳留匈奴中十馀年，病死。
现代文：卢芳留在匈奴，十余年后，病死。
English: Lu Fang stayed in Xiongnu and died of illness more than ten years later.

古文：吴汉发广汉、巴、蜀三郡兵，围成都百馀日，秋，七月，拔之，斩史歆等。
现代文：吴汉征调广汉、巴、蜀三郡的部队，包围成都一百余天。秋季，七月，攻陷成都，斩杀史歆等。
English: Wu Han mobilized troops from the three counties of Guanghan, Ba and Shu, and besieged Chengdu for more than 100 days. In autumn and July, he captured Chengdu and killed Shi Yan.

古文：汉乃乘桴沿江下巴郡，杨伟等惶恐解散。
现代文：吴汉于是乘筏顺江而下，抵达巴郡。扬伟等惊恐瓦解。
English: Wu Han then took the raft down the river and arrived in Bashun. Yang Wei and others panicked and collapsed.

古文：汉诛其渠帅，徙其党与数百家于南郡、长沙而还。
现代文：吴汉诛杀了叛军首领，把他们的党羽数百家迁到南郡、长沙，然后返回。
English: Wu Hanzhong killed the rebel leaders, moved hundreds of their followers to Nan County and Changsha, and then returned.

古文：冬，十月，庚辰，上幸宜城；还，祠章陵；十二月，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月庚辰，刘秀前往宜城。返回时，在章陵祭祀父祖。十二月，回到洛阳。
English: In winter, in October, Gengchen, Liu Xiu went to Yicheng. When he returned, he held a memorial service for his ancestors in Zhangling. In December, he returned to Luoyang.

古文：是岁，罢州牧，置刺史。
现代文：这一年，撤销州牧，设置刺史。
English: This year, he went to the provincial capital to set a new record.

古文：五宫中郎将线纯与太仆硃浮奏议： 礼，为人子，事大宗，降其私亲。
现代文：五官中郎将张纯和太仆朱浮上奏上建议： 按照礼制，既做某人的儿子，就应尊奉大宗，降低自己父母亲的地位。
English: The middle-ranking official brought Zhang Chun and the eunuch Zhu Yu up to make a suggestion: According to the etiquette, even if you are someone's son, you should respect others and lower the status of your parents.

古文：当除今亲庙四，以先帝四庙代之。 
现代文：应当撤除现在章陵的四座父祖祭庙，用陛下即位前四位先帝的祭庙代替。 
English: The four ancestor temples now in Zhangling should be removed and replaced with the temples of the four emperors before His Majesty's accession to the throne.

古文：大司徒涉等奏 立元、成、哀、平四庙。 
现代文：大司徒戴涉等上奏： 请建立元帝、成帝、哀帝、平帝四座祭庙。 
English: Daishi Tutu Dai Wanzhong et al. Prelude: Please build the four temples of Yuan Di, Cheng Di, Lai Di, and Ping Di.

古文：上自以昭穆次第，当为元帝后。
现代文：刘秀认为，按照宗族的辈份，他应是元帝刘的后代。
English: Liu Xiu believes that according to the lineage of the clan, he should be a descendant of Emperor Liu.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武十九年春，正月，庚子，追尊宣帝曰中宗。
现代文：建武十九年春季，正月庚子，刘秀追尊宣帝刘询为中宗。开始在太庙祭祀昭帝、元帝。
English: In the spring of the 19th year of the Jianwu era, in the first month of the Geng Zi era, Liu Xiu chased the venerated Emperor Xuanzong to become a member of the Middle Sect. He began to offer sacrifices to Emperor Zhao and Emperor Yuan in the Great Temple.

古文：始祠昭帝、元帝于太庙，成帝、哀帝、平帝于长安，舂陵节侯以下于章陵；其长安、章陵，皆太守、令、长侍祠。
现代文：在长安祭祠成帝、哀帝、平帝，在章陵祭祀刘秀高祖父舂陵节侯刘买及以下的先人。长安、章陵两地的祭庙，全由当地太守、县令、县长负责侍奉祭祀。
English: At the Chang'an Festival Shrine, Emperor Chengdi, Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping are enshrined, and at the Zhangling Temple, Liu Xiu Gao's grandfather, Prince Liu Bei, and the following ancestors are enshrined. At the festival temples in Chang'an and Zhangling, the local daimyos, county magistrates and county governors are responsible for serving the sacrifices.

古文：马援斩征侧、征贰。
现代文：马援诛斩征侧、征贰姐妹。
English: Ma Yanzhang and Zheng Zheng are on the same side, and Zheng Zheng's sisters are in the middle.

古文：妖贼单臣、傅镇等相聚入原武城，自称将军。
现代文：贼寇单臣、傅镇等聚众进入原武城，自称将军。
English: Thieves and bandits such as Shanchen and Fu Zhen gathered a crowd and entered the original Wucheng, claiming to be generals.

古文：诏太中大夫臧宫将兵围之，数攻不下，士卒死伤。
现代文：刘秀下诏，命太中大夫臧宫率兵包围原武城，屡次攻城不克，士兵有不少伤亡。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict, ordering the Grand Master, Doctor Gong Gong, and his soldiers to encircle the original Wucheng, repeatedly attacking the city, and there were many casualties among the soldiers.

古文：帝召公卿、诸侯王问方略，皆曰： 宜重其购赏。 
现代文：刘秀召集公卿、诸王询问方略，众人都说： 应该提高悬赏价格。 
English: Liu Xiu summoned the nobles and kings to inquire about the strategy, and everyone said: the price of the reward should be raised.

古文：东海王阳独曰： 妖巫相劫，势无久立，其中必有悔欲亡者，但外围急，不得走耳。
现代文：唯独皇子东海王刘阳说： 这群人被妖师、巫师所胁迫，势必不能长久。其中一定有后悔想逃跑的，只是外面围攻太急，不能逃走罢了。
English: However, Prince Liu Yang, King of the East Sea, said: "This group of people is being coerced by shamans and wizards, and it is bound to be short-lived. Some of them must have regretted wanting to escape, but the outside siege is too urgent, and they can't escape.

古文：宜小挺缓，令得逃亡，逃亡，则一亭长足以禽矣。 
现代文：应该稍稍放松，让他们能够逃亡。逃亡溃散，有一个亭长就可以对付了。 
English: There should be a little bit of a relaxation so that they can escape, escape and disperse, and there is a leader who can deal with it.

古文：帝然之，即敕宫彻围缓贼，贼众分散。
现代文：刘秀认为说得很对，命臧宫撤围，放走贼兵，于是贼军四散。
English: Liu Xiu thought he was right and ordered to withdraw the siege of the Imperial Palace and let the bandits go, so the bandits dispersed.

古文：夏四月，拔原武，斩臣、镇等。
现代文：夏季，四月，攻陷原武城，斩杀单臣、傅镇等。
English: In the summer of April, Genbu was conquered, and Shanchen and Fuzhen were killed.

古文：马援进击征侧馀党都阳等，至居风，降之；峤南悉平。
现代文：马援进军追击征侧余党都阳等，追到居风，都阳等投降，峤南全部平定。
English: Ma'an marched in pursuit of the rest of the party in Doyang, etc., and caught up to Jiufeng. Doyang surrendered, and all of southern Hunan was pacified.

古文：援与越人申明旧制以约束之，自后骆越奉行马将军故事。
现代文：马援向越人申明原有的制度，约束他们。从此以后，南越土著一直奉行马援的规定。
English: Ma'an affirmed the original system to the Viets and constrained them. Since then, the South Vietnamese indigenous people have been following the rules of Ma'an.

古文：闰月，戊申，进赵、齐、鲁三公爵皆为王。
现代文：闰四月戊申，赵公刘栩、齐公刘章、鲁公刘兴都晋封为王。
English: In April, Zhao Gong, Liu Tuo, Qi Gong, Liu Zhang, and Lu Gong, Liu Xing, were all crowned as kings.

古文：郭后既废，太子畺意不自安。
现代文：郭皇后被废，皇太子刘强心不自安。
English: Empress Guo was deposed and Crown Prince Liu Qiang was not at ease.

古文：郅恽说太子曰： 久处疑位，上违孝道，下近危殆，不如辞位以奉养母氏。 
现代文：郅恽劝告太子说： 长久地处在不稳定的位置上，上违背孝道，下靠近危险。不如辞去太子之位，以奉养母亲。 
English: Zou advised the crown prince, "If you are in a precarious position for a long time, violating filial piety at the top and approaching danger at the bottom, it is better to resign the position of crown prince and support your mother.

古文：太子从之，数因左右及诸王陈其恳诚，愿备籓国。
现代文：刘强听从劝告。多次托刘秀左右亲信和诸王表达他的诚意，希望退居藩国。
English: Liu Qiang listened to the advice. He repeatedly asked Liu Xiu's close friends and the kings to express his sincerity and hope to retire to the country.

古文：上不忍，迟回者数岁。
现代文：刘秀不忍心这样做，迟疑徘徊了几年。
English: Liu Xiu could not bear to do so and hesitated for several years.

古文：六月，戊申，诏曰： 《春秋》之义，立子以贵。
现代文：本年六月戊申，刘秀下诏： 《春秋》大义，选立继承人，以身份高贵为标准。
English: In June of this year, Liu Xiu issued the following edict: "Spring and Autumn" is a great virtue, and the successors will be selected with noble status as the standard.

古文：东海王阳，皇后之子，宜承大统。
现代文：东海王刘阳是皇后之子，应该继承皇位。
English: East Sea King Liu Yang, the son of the empress, should succeed to the throne.

古文：皇太子畺，崇执谦退，愿备籓国，父子之情，重久违之。
现代文：皇太子刘强，坚决谦让，愿退居藩国。出于父子之情，难以长久违背他的愿望。
English: The crown prince Liu Qiang, resolutely humble, is willing to retire to the domain. Out of father-son feelings, it is difficult to go against his wishes for a long time.

古文：其以畺为东海王，立阳为皇太子，改名庄。 
现代文：今封刘强为东海王；立刘阳为皇太子，改名刘庄。 
English: Now Liu Qiang is the king of the East Sea; Liu Yang is the crown prince, and his name is changed to Liu Zhuang.

古文：袁宏论曰：夫建太子，所以重宗统，一民心也，非有大恶于天下，不可移也。
现代文：袁宏论曰：设立太子，为的是尊重宗法统绪，统一民心，如果不是对天下有重大罪恶，就不该变动。
English: Yuan Hong said: The establishment of the crown prince is to respect the unification of the patriarchal law and the unity of the people's hearts. If there is no major evil to the world, it should not be changed.

古文：世祖中兴汉业，宜遵正道以为后法。
现代文：光武帝中兴汉家大业，应当遵循正道以作为后世的楷模。
English: Emperor Guangwu, in promoting the great cause of the Han Dynasty, should follow the right path as a model for future generations.

古文：今太子之德未亏于外，内宠既多，嫡子迁位，可谓失矣。
现代文：如今太子的德行对外无所亏损，对内又多得恩宠，将嫡子改易位次，可以说是一个失误了。
English: Nowadays, the virtue of the crown prince has not lost anything to the outside world, and he has gained a lot of grace to the inside. It can be said that it was a mistake to change the position of the legitimate son.

古文：然东海归籓，谦恭之心弥亮；明帝承统，友于之情愈笃。
现代文：然而东海王刘强归于藩王地位，谦恭的心更加豁亮；明帝刘庄承继大统，对兄弟的情谊更加深厚。
English: However, Liu Qiang, the king of the East Sea, was relegated to the status of the king of the domain, and his heart was more humble; Ming Emperor Liu Zhuang succeeded to the throne, and his friendship with his brother was more profound.

古文：虽长幼易位，兴废不同，父子兄弟，至性无间。
现代文：虽然长幼位置改变，一兴一废结局不同，但是父子兄弟之间，存在着真情，没有隔阂。
English: Although the position of the eldest son and the youngest son has changed, and the outcome of one success and one failure is different, but between the father and son brothers, there is a true feeling, and there is no gap.

古文：夫以三代之道处之，亦何以过乎！
现代文：即使以三代之道来处理，又怎能超过呢！
English: Even if it is handled in the manner of the three generations, how can it exceed it!

古文：帝以太子舅阴识守执金吾，阴兴为卫尉，皆辅导太子。
现代文：刘秀任命皇太子刘庄的舅父阴识代理执金吾，任命另一位舅父阴兴当卫尉，一齐辅导太子。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Crown Prince Liu Zhuang's uncle Yin Zhi to act as agent to guide King Wu, and appointed another uncle, Yin Xing, to be a bodyguard, and together they tutored the prince.

古文：识性忠厚，入虽极言正议，及与宾客语，未尝及国事。
现代文：阴识天性忠厚，在朝廷中虽然直言正谏，但等到和宾客们一起谈话时，从不涉及国事。
English: Although he is outspoken at court, when he talks with guests, he never touches on state affairs.

古文：帝敬重之，常指识以敕戒贵戚，激厉左右焉。
现代文：刘秀敬重他，常常指着他告诫皇亲贵戚，勉励左右仿效。
English: Emperors respected him, often referring to Yin consciousness as a warning to their noble relatives, and as an incentive to the left and right.

古文：兴虽礼贤好施，而门无游侠，与同郡张宗、上谷鲜于裒不相好，知其有用，犹称所长而达之；友人张汜、杜禽，与兴厚善，以为华而少实，但私之以财，终不为言。是以世称其忠。
现代文：阴兴虽然礼贤下士，乐于助人，但宾客中没有豪杰侠客。他和同郡人张宗、上谷人鲜于裒关系不好，但知道他们对国家有用，仍然称赞其长处推荐他们做官。友人张汜、杜禽，和阴兴交往很深，阴兴认为他们华而不实，都只在钱财上帮助他们，始终不替他们说话，所以世人称赞他对国家的忠诚。
English: Although Yin Xing is a virtuous corporal and is willing to help others, there are no heroes among the guests. He has a bad relationship with his fellow county people Zhang Zong and Shangtani people, but he knows that they are useful to the country and still praises their strengths and recommends them to be officials. Friends Zhang Zong and Du Yi have a deep relationship with Yin Xing. Yin Xing thinks that they are flashy and insincere. They only help them with money and never speak for them, so the world praises his loyalty to the country.

古文：上以沛国桓荣为议郎，使授太子经。
现代文：刘秀任命沛国人桓荣当议郎，命他教授太子儒家经典。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Han Rong, a citizen of Pei Province, as a member of the council and ordered him to teach the prince the Confucian classics.

古文：车驾幸太学，会诸博士论难于前，荣辨明经义，每以礼让相厌，不以辞长胜人，儒者莫之及，特加赏赐。
现代文：刘秀亲自到太学，召集众博士在他面前讨论问题，提出质疑。桓荣辩析和阐述经典的精义，每每以礼让的态度使人折服，不以言辞锋利压倒对方，其他儒家学者都赶不上他。刘秀对他特加赏赐。
English: Liu Xiu personally went to Taixu and gathered a group of doctors to discuss the issue and raise questions in front of him. Huan Rong analyzed and expounded the essence of the classics, always with a courteous attitude, and did not overwhelm the other side with sharp words. Other Confucian scholars could not keep up with him. Liu Xiu gave him a special reward.

古文：又诏诸生雅歌击磬，尽日乃罢。
现代文：刘秀又命学生们一面击磬，一面唱儒家的雅歌。
English: Liu Xiu also ordered the students to beat gongs and sing Confucian hymns.

古文：帝使左中郎将汝南钟兴授皇太子及宗室诸侯《春秋》，赐兴爵关内侯。
现代文：一整天才结束。刘秀让左右郎将汝南人钟兴教授皇太子和宗室诸侯爵读《春秋》，封钟兴为关内侯。
English: It took a whole day to finish. Liu Xiu had his right and left hand men read "Spring and Autumn" to Crown Prince Zhongxing, a professor from Yunnan Province, and his family members, the marquesses, and appointed Zhongxing as the Guanai marquess.

古文：兴辞以无功，帝曰： 生教训太子及诸王侯，非大功邪？ 
现代文：钟兴以自己没有功劳而推辞。刘秀说： 你教训太子和亲王侯爵，不是大功劳吗？ 
English: Liu Xiu said: Isn't it a great achievement for you to teach the crown prince and the prince marquis?

古文：兴曰： 臣师少府丁恭。 
现代文：钟兴说： 我是从师于少府丁恭。 
English: Zhong Xing said: I am a disciple of Shaofu Ding Gong.

古文：于是复封恭，而兴遂固辞不受。
现代文：刘秀于是又封丁恭为关内侯。而钟兴则坚决推辞，没有接受。
English: Liu Xiu then made Ding Gong the governor of Guanai, but Zhong Xing firmly refused and did not accept.

古文：陈留董宣为雒阳令。
现代文：陈留人董宣担任洛阳令。
English: Chen Liu Ren and Dong Xuan served as Luoyang leaders.

古文：湖阳公主苍头白日杀人，因匿主家，吏不能得。
现代文：刘秀的姐姐湖阳公主的奴仆白天杀人，就藏在公主家里，官吏不能逮捕他。
English: Liu Xiu's sister, Princess Huyang's manservant, hid in the princess's house when he committed a murder during the day, so officials couldn't arrest him.

古文：及主出行，以奴骖乘。
现代文：后来公主出门，让这奴仆陪同乘车。
English: Later, the princess went out and asked the servant to accompany her in the car.

古文：宣于夏门亭候之，驻车叩马，以刀画地，大言数主之失。叱奴下车，因格杀之。
现代文：董宣在夏门亭等候，叫车停下，上前扣住了马缰绳，用刀划着地，大声数落公主的过失，怒喝那奴仆下车，接着就杀死了他。
English: Dong Xuan waited at the Summer Gate Pavilion, ordered the car to stop, went up and grabbed the reins of the horse, slashed the ground with a knife, loudly counted the princess's faults, angrily shouted at the servant to get off the car, and then killed him.

古文：主即还宫诉帝，帝大怒，召宣，欲棰杀之。
现代文：公主立即回宫告诉了刘秀。刘秀大怒，召董宣前来，要用刑杖把他打死。
English: The princess immediately returned to the palace and told Liu Xiu. Liu Xiu was furious and summoned Dong Xuan to come and beat him to death with a cane.

古文：宣叩头曰： 愿乞一言而死。 
现代文：董宣叩头说： 我请求说句话再死。 
English: Dong Xuan bowed and said, "I beg you to say one sentence before you die."

古文：帝曰： 欲何言？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 打算说什么？ 
English: Emperor Guangwu said, "What do you want to say?

古文：宣曰： 陛下圣德中兴，而纵奴杀人，将何以治天下乎？
现代文：董宣说： 陛下圣德，复兴汉室，却放纵奴仆杀人，将怎么治理天下呢？
English: Dong Xuan said: Your majesty's holiness, reviving the Han dynasty, but allowing slaves to kill, how will you rule the world?

古文：臣不须棰，请得自杀！ 
现代文：我不等着被打死，请让我自杀吧！ 
English: I'm not waiting to be beaten to death, please let me kill myself!

古文：即以头击楹，流血被面。
现代文：就头撞大柱，流了一脸血，刘秀命太监拽住他。
English: He hit his head on a pillar and blood streamed down his face.

古文：帝令小黄门持之，使宣叩头谢主，宣不从。
现代文：后来让董宣叩头向公主道歉，董宣不服从，就叫人使劲按他的脑袋。
English: Later, he made Dong Xuan bow and apologize to the princess. When Dong Xuan disobeyed, he ordered someone to press his head hard.

古文：强使顿之，宣两手据地，终不肯俯。
现代文：董宣两手撑着地面，到底不肯低头。
English: Dong Xuan braced the ground with both hands and refused to bow his head.

古文：主曰： 文叔为白衣时，藏亡匿死，吏不敢至门；今为天子，威不能行一令乎？ 
现代文：公主对刘秀说： 你当平民百姓的时候，窝藏逃犯，官吏不敢上门来找；现在当了皇帝，威权就不能行使在一个县令的身上吗？ 
English: The princess said to Liu Xiu: When you were a commoner, you hid fugitives, and officials did not dare to come looking for them; now that you are emperor, can't you exercise your authority over a county magistrate?

古文：帝笑曰： 天子不与白衣同。 
现代文：刘秀笑着说： 天子跟平民不同！ 
English: Emperor Guangwu smiled and said, "The Son of Heaven cannot be like the common people."

古文：因敕： 强项令出。 
现代文：接着命令： 硬脖子县令出去！ 
English: Then the order: Get the hard-necks out of the county!

古文：赐钱三十万，宣悉以班诸吏。
现代文：刘秀赏钱三十万，董宣都分给了手下官吏。
English: He gave Dong Xuan 300,000 yuan, and Dong Xuan gave all of it to his officials.

古文：由是能搏击豪强，京师莫不震慓。
现代文：从此他能够打击豪强，京城的人，无不震惊害怕。
English: Since then, he has been able to strike the heroic and powerful, the people of Beijing, all shocked and afraid.

古文：九月，壬申，上行幸南阳；进幸汝南南顿县舍，置酒会，赐吏民，复南顿田租一岁。
现代文：九月壬申，刘秀前往南阳。又前往汝南郡南顿县，设置盛大酒宴，赏赐官民，下令免除南顿县田租一年。
English: In September of Jinshin, Liu Xiu went to Nanyang. He also went to Nantong County, Runan County, to set up a grand wine banquet, reward officials and citizens, and ordered to exempt Nantong County from land rent for one year.

古文：父老前叩头言： 皇考居此日久，陛下识知寺舍，每来辄加厚恩，愿赐复十年。 
现代文：父老们上前叩头，说： 陛下的父亲住在本县时间很长，陛下对本县的官俯衙门也很熟悉，每次圣驾来临都赐予厚恩。愿陛下免除本县田租十年。 
English: The patriarchs prostrated themselves and said, "Your Majesty's father has lived in this county for a long time, and Your Majesty is familiar with the officials of this county. Every time a saint comes to this county, Your Majesty bestows great grace. May Your Majesty be exempt from paying land rent in this county for ten years."

古文：帝曰： 天下重器，常恐不任，日复一日，安敢远期十岁乎！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 帝王之位是天下大器，常常担心不能胜任，过一天是一天，怎么敢远推到十年呢？ 
English: Liu Xiu said: The throne of the emperor is the world's great instrument, often worried about not being competent, one day is one day, how dare to push it to ten years?

古文：吏民又言： 陛下实惜之，何言谦也！ 
现代文：大家又说： 陛下实际是吝惜，为什么要说谦恭的话呢？ 
English: They also said, "Your Majesty is actually a miser, why would you say such a humble thing?"

古文：帝大笑，复增一岁。
现代文：刘秀大笑。于是又增加一年。
English: Liu Xiu laughed loudly. So he added another year.

古文：进幸淮阳、梁、沛。
现代文：接着，刘秀前往淮阳县、梁郡、沛国。
English: Emperor Guangwu marched to Huaiyang, Liang, Pei and other places.

古文：西南夷栋蚕反，杀长吏；诏武威将军刘尚讨之。
现代文：西南夷栋蚕部落反叛，诛杀地方官员。刘秀下诏，命武威将军刘尚讨伐。
English: The Yidong Silkworm Tribe in Southwest Yunnan rebelled and killed local officials. Liu Xiu issued an edict and ordered General Wuwei Liu Shang to fight.

古文：路由越巂，邛谷王任贵恐尚既定南边，威法必行，己不得自放纵，即聚兵起营，多酿毒酒，欲先劳军，因袭击尚。
现代文：大军路过越郡，邛谷王任贵害怕刘尚平定南方边境以后，朝廷的政令和法律必定得以推行，而自己不能再随心所欲，为所欲为，于是聚集军队，筑起营寨，酿制了大量毒酒，想先用毒酒慰劳军队，然后进攻袭击。
English: A large army was passing through Yue County. Shibuya King Ren Gui was afraid that after Liu Shang settled the southern border, the imperial decrees and laws would certainly be implemented, and he would no longer be able to do whatever he wanted. So he gathered troops, built a camp, and brewed a large amount of poisoned wine. He wanted to first use poisoned wine to comfort the troops, and then attack.

古文：尚知其谋，即分兵先据邛都，遂掩任贵，诛之。
现代文：刘尚得知了他的阴谋，即刻分兵先去攻取邛都，然后袭击任贵，把他诛杀。
English: Liu Shang learned of his plot and immediately dispatched troops to capture Shendu first, and then attacked Ren Gui and killed him.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武二十年
现代文：建武二十年春季，二月戊子，刘秀返回洛阳皇宫。
English: In the spring of the 20th year of Jianwu, in February, Wu Zi and Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：春，二月，戊子，车驾还宫。夏，四月，庚辰，大司徒戴涉坐入故太仓令奚涉罪，下狱死。帝以三公连职，策免大司空窦融。
现代文：夏季，四月庚辰大司徒戴涉被指控陷害前太仓令奚涉，被逮捕入狱，处死。刘秀认为三公的职务相连，颁策书免去大司空窦融的职务。
English: In the summer, in April, Gengchen Daishi Tutu Dai Wanzong was accused of meddling with the former Taicang Ruling, arrested, imprisoned and executed. Liu Xiu believed that the duties of the three princes were connected, and the policy document removed the duties of Daishi Ku Dou Rong.

古文：广平忠侯吴汉病笃，车驾亲临，问所欲言，对曰： 臣愚，无所知识，惟愿陛下慎无赦而已。 
现代文：广平忠侯吴汉病重，刘秀亲往探望，问他有什么话要说。吴汉回答说： 我愚昧没有知识，只希望陛下特别谨慎，不要赦免罪犯而已。 
English: Guangping Zhonghou Wu Han was seriously ill. Liu Xiu personally went to visit him and asked him what he had to say. Wu Han replied: "I am ignorant and have no knowledge. I only hope that Your Majesty will be particularly cautious and not pardon the criminal."

古文：五月，辛亥，汉薨；诏送葬如大将军霍光故事。
现代文：五月辛亥，吴汉去世。刘秀下诏，命隆重安葬，礼仪如同安葬大将军霍光的旧例。
English: In May, Xinhai, Wu Han passed away. Liu Xiu issued an edict ordering a grand funeral, and the etiquette was the same as the old example of the funeral of General Huo Guang.

古文：汉性强力，每从征伐，帝未安，常侧足而立。
现代文：吴汉性格刚强有力。每当跟随刘秀出征，刘秀没有安顿好，他就总是小心地侍立。
English: Wu Han has a strong and powerful personality. Whenever Liu Xiu went to the front with him and Liu Xiu did not settle well, he always stood by him carefully.

古文：诸将见战陈不利，或多惶惧，失其常度，汉意气自若，方整厉器械，激扬吏士。
现代文：将领们看到战斗形势不利，多数人惊慌失措，失去常度，而吴汉却神态自若，同时加紧准备兵器，激励官兵的士气。
English: When the generals saw that the battle situation was unfavorable, most people panicked and lost their composure, but Wu Han behaved with self-confidence, while stepping up the preparation of weapons and encouraging the morale of officers and soldiers.

古文：帝时遣人观大司马何为，还言方修战攻之具，乃叹曰： 吴公差强人意，隐若一敌国矣！ 
现代文：刘秀有时派人去看吴汉在干什么，回报就说正在准备作战进攻的装备。刘秀于是叹息说： 吴汉比较令人满意，他的威重使人感到就像一个敌国。 
English: Sometimes Liu Xiu would send someone to see what Wu Han was doing, and in return they would say that he was preparing equipment for a military attack. Liu Xiu then sighed and said: Wu Han is more satisfactory, his dignity makes people feel like an enemy country.

古文：每当出师，朝受诏，夕则引道，初无办严之日。
现代文：吴汉每次出征，早上接到命令，晚上就踏上征途，从来没有时间准备行装。
English: Every time Wu Han went to war, he received orders in the morning and set out in the evening. He never had time to prepare for the journey.

古文：及在朝廷，斤斤谨质，形于体貌。
现代文：及至在朝廷，他处处谨慎，表现在举止和态度上。
English: Wait until you get back to the Imperial Court, carefully inspect it, and form it into a figure.

古文：汉尝出征，妻子在后买田业，汉还，让之曰： 军师在外，吏士不足，何多买田宅乎！ 
现代文：有一次吴汉率军出征，妻子儿女在后方购置田产。吴汉回来，责备她说： 军队在外，官兵供给不足，为什么要大量购置田地房舍呢！ 
English: Once, when Wu Han led an army to go to war, his wife and children went to buy farmland in the rear. When Wu Han returned, he reproached her: The army is out, the supply of officers and soldiers is insufficient, why buy a large number of farm buildings!

古文：遂尽以分与昆弟、外家。
现代文：阴兴叩头，流着眼泪，坚决推辞。
English: Yin Xing kowtowed, shed tears, and resolutely refused.

古文：至诚发中，感动左右，帝遂听之。
现代文：他说： 我不敢爱惜自己的生命，实在是担心有损于陛下的圣德，所以不能随便冒充。 
English: He said, "I dare not spare my own life. I am really afraid of offending Your Majesty's holiness, so I can't just pretend.

古文：太子太傅张湛，自郭后之废，称疾不朝，帝强起之，欲以为司徒，湛固辞疾笃，不能复任朝事，遂罢之。
现代文：诚意发自内心，感动了刘秀左右的侍从，刘秀于是依从了他。太子太傅张湛，自从郭皇后被废之后，便称病不再上朝。刘秀勉强他上朝，要任命他当司徒。张湛说自己病得很重，不能再担任朝廷官员，坚决推辞。
English: His sincerity from the bottom of his heart moved the attendants around Liu Xiu, and Liu Xiu then obeyed him. Prince Zhang Zhan, since the Guo Empress was abolished, said that he was sick and would no longer go to the imperial court. Liu Xiu reluctantly forced him to go to the imperial court and wanted to appoint him as a tutor. Zhang Zhan said that he was very ill and could no longer serve as an official of the imperial court, and firmly declined.

古文：六月，庚寅，以广汉太守河内蔡茂为大司徒，太仆硃浮为大司空。
现代文：于是刘秀把他免职。六月庚寅，刘秀任命广汉太守河内人蔡茂当大司徒，任命太仆朱浮当大司空。
English: Therefore, Liu Xiu dismissed him from his post. In June, Liu Xiu appointed Cai Mao, the Guanghan governor of Hanoi, as the grand steward, and appointed Zhu Fu, the eunuch, as the grand steward.

古文：壬辰，以左中郎将刘隆为骠骑将军，行大司马事。
现代文：壬辰，任命左中郎将刘隆当骠骑将军，代理大司马的职务。
English: Imjin, appointed Zuo Zhong Lang to be Liu Long's cavalry general, acting as the chief steed.

古文：乙未，徙中山王辅为沛王。
现代文：乙未，刘秀把中山王刘辅改封沛王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Fu, the king of Zhongshan, was transferred to be the king of Pae.

古文：以郭况为大鸿胪，帝数幸其第，赏赐金帛，丰盛莫比，京师号况家为 金穴 。
现代文：任命郭况当大鸿胪。刘秀多次到郭况家，赏赐金帛，丰盛无比，洛阳人称郭况家是 金穴 。
English: Liu Xiu visited Guo Zhung's home many times and rewarded him with gold ingots, which were incomparably rich. Luoyang people said that Guo Zhung's home was a gold mine.

古文：秋，九月，马援自交趾还，平陵孟冀迎劳之。
现代文：秋季，九月，马援从交趾返回，平陵人孟冀迎接、慰劳他。
English: In the autumn, in September, Ma Yuan returned from Khotse. Meng Ji, a resident of Pingling, greeted and consoled him.

古文：援曰： 方今匈奴、乌桓尚扰北边，欲自请击之，男儿要当死于边野，以马革裹尸还葬耳，何能卧床上，在儿女子手中邪！ 
现代文：马援说： 现在匈奴、乌桓还在侵扰北部边疆，我想请求出兵讨伐。男子汉只应当战死在疆场，用马革裹尸送回家乡安葬罢了，怎么能躺在床上，死在女人手中呢？ 
English: Ma Yuan said: Now that the Xiongnu and Wuhuan are still invading the northern frontier, I would like to request the dispatch of troops for a crusade. A man should only die in battle on the battlefield and be wrapped in horse leather and sent home for burial. How can he lie in bed and die at the hands of a woman?

古文：冀曰： 谅！
现代文：孟冀说： 确实如此！
English: Meng Jie said: This is indeed the case!

古文：为烈士当如是矣！ 
现代文：做烈士就应当这样！ 
English: This is how a martyr should be!

古文：冬，十月，甲午，上行幸鲁、东海、楚、沛国。
现代文：冬季，十月甲午，刘秀前往鲁国、东海国、楚国、沛国。
English: In the winter, at noon on October 1, Liu Xiu went to the provinces of Lu, Donghai, Chu and Pei.

古文：十二月，匈奴寇天水、扶风、上党。
现代文：十二月，匈奴入侵天水、扶风、上党。
English: In December, the Xiongnu invaded Tianshui, Fufeng and Shangdang.

古文：壬寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：壬寅，刘秀返回洛阳皇宫。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Guangwu returned to Luoyang.

古文：马援自请击匈奴，帝许之，使出屯襄国，诏百官祖道。
现代文：马援请求攻打匈奴，刘秀准许，让马援出兵驻屯襄国，下诏命令百官祭祀路神，为马援饯行。
English: Ma Yuan requested to attack the Xiongnu, Liu Xiu gave permission, let Ma Yuan send troops to be stationed in Xiangguo, and issued an edict ordering hundreds of officials to sacrifice to the god of the road and march for Ma Yuan.

古文：援谓黄门郎梁松、窦固曰： 凡人富贵，当使可复贱也；如卿等欲不可复贱，居高坚自持。
现代文：马援对黄门郎梁松、窦固说： 一个人富贵以后，还可以回到贫贱地位。如果你们不希望再贫贱，就要身居高位而自己谨慎小心。
English: Ma Yuan said to Huangmen Lang Liang Song and Dou Gu: After a person is rich, he can still return to a poor status. If you do not want to be poor again, you should be in a high position and be careful.

古文：勉思鄙言！ 
现代文：请考虑我说的话！ 
English: Think about what I'm saying!

古文：松，统之子；固，友之子也。
现代文：梁松是梁统的儿子，窦固是窦友的儿子。
English: Liang Song is the son of Liang Tong, Dou Gu is the son of Dou You.

古文：刘尚进兵与栋蚕等连战，皆破之。
现代文：刘尚进兵和栋蚕等交战，连战连捷。
English: Liu Shangjin fought against Dong Silkworm and others, and the battle was a success.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武二十一年
现代文：建武二十一年
English: The 21st year of Jianwu

古文：春，正月，追至不韦，斩栋蚕帅，西南诸夷悉平。
现代文：春季，正月，刘尚追击到不韦县，斩杀栋蚕。西南夷人地区全都平定。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Liu Shang chased them to Buwei County and killed a large number of silkworms. The southwest barbarian regions were all pacified.

古文：乌桓与匈奴、鲜卑连兵为寇，代郡以东尤被乌桓之害。
现代文：乌桓和匈奴、鲜卑的军队联合起来进行侵扰。代郡以东受乌桓部落的伤害，尤其严重。
English: The Wuhuan, Xiongnu and Xianbei armies joined forces to invade, and the Wuhuan tribes east of Dayi County were particularly hard hit.

古文：其居止近塞，朝发穹庐，暮至城郭，五郡民庶，家受其辜，至于郡县损坏，百姓流亡，边陲萧条，无复人迹。
现代文：乌桓部落的居住地接近边塞，早晨从他们的帐篷中出发，傍晚就能抵达城郭，沿边五郡的百姓，家家户户受到侵害。以至于郡县遭到破坏，人民流亡，边境萧条，不见人烟。
English: The residence of the Wuhuan tribe is close to the border fortress. They set out from their tents in the morning and can reach the castle in the evening. The people of the five counties along the border have been violated, so that the counties have been destroyed, the people have fled, the border is depressed, and there are no people.

古文：秋，八月，帝遣马援与谒者分筑保塞，稍兴立郡县，或空置太守、令、长，招还人民。
现代文：秋季，八月，刘秀派遣马援和谒者分别修筑城堡要塞，逐渐恢复郡县，在有些地方虚设太守、县令、县长，招集百姓返回故乡。
English: In the autumn, in August, Liu Xiu sent Ma'an and Xing respectively to build castles and fortresses, and gradually restored counties and prefectures. In some places, he set up false governors, county magistrates and county governors, and called on the people to return to their hometowns.

古文：乌桓居上谷塞外白山者最为强富，援将三千骑击之，无功而还。
现代文：乌桓部落中，以聚居在上谷郡塞外白山地区的最为强悍富庶。马援率领三千名骑兵袭击，不能取胜，返回。
English: Among the Wuhuan tribes, the most powerful and affluent were those who lived in the Baishan area of Shanggu County. Ma'an led three thousand cavalrymen to attack, failed to win, and returned.

古文：鲜卑万馀骑寇辽东，太守祭肜率数千人迎击之，自被甲陷陈。
现代文：鲜卑部落一万余骑兵侵犯辽东郡。辽东太守祭肜率领数千人迎击。祭肜亲自身穿盔甲上阵冲杀。
English: More than ten thousand cavalrymen of the Xianbei tribe invaded Liaodong County. Liaodong's grand marshal Saigu led thousands of people to counterattack. Saigu's relatives themselves wore armor to fight and kill.

古文：虏大奔，投水死者过半，遂穷追出塞。
现代文：鲜卑骑兵大举奔逃，落水而死的超过一半，祭肜于是穷追至塞外。
English: The lowly cavalrymen fled in great haste, and more than half of them fell into the water and died. The sacrificial bowl was then chased out of the country.

古文：虏急，皆弃兵裸身散走。
现代文：鲜卑人在急迫中，全都抛弃武器，赤身裸体四散逃命。
English: In their desperation, all of the Xianbei abandoned their weapons and fled naked.

古文：是后鲜卑震怖，畏肜，不敢复窥塞。
现代文：从此以后，鲜卑人感到震恐，畏惧祭肜，不敢再窥伺边塞。
English: Since then, the people of Xianbei have been shocked and frightened, afraid of the sacrificial fire, and no longer dare to peep into the border.

古文：冬，匈奴寇上谷、中山。
现代文：冬季，匈奴进犯上谷、中山。
English: In winter, the Xiongnu invaded Shanggu and Zhongshan.

古文：莎车王贤浸以骄横，欲兼并西域，数攻诸国，重求赋税，诸国愁惧。
现代文：莎车王贤逐渐骄横跋扈，想要兼并西域，不断进攻邻国，索求沉重的赋税，西域各国忧虑恐惧。
English: Zhang Che Wang Xian gradually became arrogant, wanted to annex the western region, constantly attacked neighboring countries, demanded heavy taxes, and the countries in the western region were worried and afraid.

古文：车师前王、鄯善、焉耆等十八国俱遣子入侍，献其珍宝；及得见，皆流涕稽首，愿得都护。
现代文：于是车师前王国、鄯善国、焉耆国等十八国，同时派他们的王子到洛阳充当人质，奉献珍宝。等到晋见皇帝刘秀时全都痛哭流涕地叩头，希望汉朝再派西域都护。
English: As a result, eighteen countries, including the former Kingdom of Kashi, the Kingdom of Shanshan, and the Kingdom of Yan, sent their princes to Luoyang at the same time to serve as hostages and offer precious treasures. When Jin met Emperor Liu Xiu, they all bowed their heads in tears, hoping that the Han Dynasty would once again send protection to the Western Regions.

古文：帝以中国初定，北边未服，皆还其侍子，厚赏赐之。
现代文：刘秀因中原刚刚安定，北方异族还未顺服，所以让各国的人质全都返回，赏赐他们丰厚的礼物。
English: Liu Xiu, because the Central Plains had just been stabilized and the northern alien race had not yet submitted, let all the hostages of various countries return and rewarded them with rich gifts.

古文：诸国闻都护不出，而侍子皆还，大忧恐，乃与敦煌太守檄： 愿留侍子以示莎车，言侍子见留，都护寻出，冀且息其兵。 
现代文：西域各国听说汉朝不肯派出都护，而让人质全都返回，十分忧愁恐惧，于是给敦煌太守裴遵呈送公文： 希望您留下我们的人质，向莎车国宣称：人质已被留下，汉朝的都护不久就会出关，望暂且停止军事行动。 
English: Western countries heard that the Han Dynasty did not want to send the capital guards, but let all the hostages return. They were very sad and afraid, so they sent an official letter to Dunhuang Governor Pei Zun: I hope you will keep our hostages and declare to the Shache country: The hostages have been left behind, the Han Dynasty's capital guards will soon leave the customs, and we hope to temporarily stop military operations.

古文：裴遵以状闻，帝许之。
现代文：裴遵将情况奏报，刘秀应允。
English: Pei Zun reported the situation, and Liu Xiu agreed.

古文：世祖光武皇帝中之下建武二十二年
现代文：建武二十二年
English: Jianwu 22 years old

古文：春，闰正月，丙戌，上幸长安；二月，己巳，还雒阳。
现代文：春季，闰正月丙戌，刘秀去长安。二月己巳，返回洛阳。
English: In the spring, during the leap year, Liu Xiu went to Chang'an. In February, he returned to Luoyang.

古文：夏，五月，乙未晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，五月乙未晦，出现日食。
English: In the summer, in late May, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，九月，戊辰，地震。
现代文：秋季，九月戊辰，发生地震。
English: In autumn, in September, there was an earthquake in Wucheng.

古文：冬，十月，壬子，大司空硃浮免。
现代文：冬季，十月壬子，免去大司空朱浮的职务。
English: In the winter, in October, Ren Zi, relieved of the duties of Daishi Ku Zhu Fu.

古文：癸丑，以光禄勋杜林为大司空。
现代文：癸丑，任命光禄勋杜林当大司空。
English: 丑, appointed Guanglu Du Lin as the Chief of Air Staff.

古文：初，陈留刘昆为江陵令，县有火灾，昆向火叩头，火寻灭；后为弘农太守，虎皆负子渡河。
现代文：起初，陈留人刘昆当江陵令，县里发生火灾，刘昆对着烈火磕头，大火随即熄灭。后来刘昆当弘农太守，郡中老虎都背着幼虎渡过黄河远去。
English: At first, Liu Kun, a Chen resident, was the governor of Jiangling, and a fire broke out in the county. Liu Kun stood against the blaze, and the fire was immediately extinguished. Later, Liu Kun was the governor of Hongnong, and the tigers in the county all carried their young tigers across the Yellow River.

古文：帝闻而异之，征昆代林为光禄勋。
现代文：刘秀听说以后感到惊奇，征召刘昆代替杜林当光禄勋。
English: After hearing this, Liu Xiu was surprised and called up Liu Kun to replace Du Lin as Guanglu.

古文：帝问昆曰： 前在江陵，反风灭火，后守弘农，虎北渡河，行何德政而致是事？ 
现代文：刘秀问刘昆： 以前你在江陵，转变风向，扑灭烈火；后在弘农任太守，老虎向北渡过黄河。你推行的什么德政，竟至发生这样的事？ 
English: Liu Xiu asked Liu Kun: In the past, when you were in Jiangling, you changed the wind direction and put out the fire; later, when you were the governor of Hongnong, the tiger crossed the Yellow River to the north. What kind of virtuous politics did you implement that caused such a thing to happen?

古文：对曰： 偶然耳。 
现代文：刘昆回答： 不过是偶然碰上罢了。 
English: Liu Kun replied: It was just a chance encounter.

古文：左右皆笑，帝叹曰： 此乃长者之言也！ 
现代文：左右侍从都忍不住笑起来。刘秀叹息说： 这才是年高有德的人说的话。 
English: The attendants on both sides couldn't help but laugh. Liu Xiu said with a sigh: This is what a person of age and virtue says.

古文：顾命书诸策。
现代文：下令把这件事记载在史书上。
English: Have the person on either side of you write in the book.

古文：是岁，青州蝗。
现代文：这一年，青州发生蝗灾。
English: This year, a locust plague occurred in Qingzhou.

古文：匈奴单于舆死，子左贤王乌达鞮侯立；复死，弟左贤王蒲奴立。
现代文：匈奴单于舆去世。儿子左贤王乌达侯继位，不久又去世。乌达候的弟弟左贤王蒲奴继位。
English: Xiongnu died in Mya. His son Zuoxian Wang Uda Hou succeeded to the throne and died soon after. Uda's brother Zuoxian Wang Punu succeeded to the throne.

古文：匈奴中连年旱蝗，赤地数千里，人畜饥疫，死耗太半。
现代文：匈奴所辖地区连年发生旱灾、蝗灾，数千里荒无生机，人和牲畜因饥饿和瘟疫流行，已死去多半。
English: In the areas under the jurisdiction of the Huns, droughts and locust plagues have occurred year after year, leaving thousands of miles barren and lifeless. Most people and livestock have died from starvation and plague.

古文：单于畏汉乘其敝，乃遣使诣渔阳求和亲；帝遣中郎将李茂报命。
现代文：匈奴单于畏惧东汉朝廷乘其疲惫进行攻击，就派使节到渔阳请求和亲。刘秀派遣中郎将李茂回报。
English: The Xiongnu alone, fearing that the Eastern Han Dynasty would take advantage of their exhaustion to attack, sent envoys to Yuyang to request a reconciliation. Liu Xiu sent Zhong Lang to return Li Mao.

古文：乌桓乘匈奴之弱，击破之，匈奴北徙数千里，幕南地空。
现代文：乌桓部落乘着匈奴汗国衰落，发起攻击，击败匈奴。匈奴向北迁徙数千里，沙漠以南地区成为一片空地。
English: The Wuhuan tribe took advantage of the decline of the Xiongnu Khanate to launch an attack and defeat the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu migrated thousands of miles north, and the area south of the desert became a wasteland.

古文：诏罢诸边郡亭候、吏卒，以币帛招降乌桓。
现代文：刘秀下诏撤销沿边各郡亭候和边防官兵。又用金钱和绢帛招降乌桓部落。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict to revoke the pavements and border guards of the counties along the border. He also used money and trickery to subjugate the Wuhuan tribe.

古文：西域诸国侍子久留敦煌，皆愁思亡归。
现代文：西域各国充当人质的王子长期留在敦煌，都愁眉不展，因思乡而逃回本国。
English: Princes from Western countries who had been held hostage in Dunhuang stayed there for a long time. They were sad and homesick, so they fled back to their home countries.

古文：莎车王贤知都护不至，击破鄯善，攻杀龟兹王。
现代文：莎车王贤知道东汉朝廷不会派都护来，于是出兵击败鄯善，击杀龟兹国王。
English: Knowing that the Eastern Han Dynasty would not send a military escort, Zakka Wangxian dispatched troops to defeat Gongshen and kill Kuez King.

古文：鄯善王安上书： 愿复遣子入侍，更请都护；都护不出，诚迫于匈奴。 
现代文：鄯善王安给汉朝上书说： 愿意再派王子到洛阳做人质，再次请求汉朝廷派都护。如果汉朝廷不派都护，只能被迫向匈奴屈服。 
English: The virtuous Wang An wrote to the Han Dynasty: I am willing to send another prince to Luoyang to be a hostage, and again request the Han Dynasty to send a tutelary. If the Han Dynasty does not send a tutelary, it can only be forced to yield to the Xiongnu.

古文：帝报曰： 今使者大兵未能得出，如诸国力不从心，东西南北自在也。 
现代文：刘秀回答说： 现在使节和军队无力派遣，如果西域各国感到力不从心，东西南北，何去何从，自己选择。 
English: Liu Xiu replied: At present, envoys and troops are unable to be dispatched. If the countries in the western region feel unable to do so, the countries in the east, west, south and north can choose where to go.

古文：于是鄯善、车师复附匈奴。
现代文：于是鄯善国、车师国又归附匈奴。
English: As a result, Shizen Province and Chashi Province were annexed by the Huns.

古文：班固论曰：孝武之世，图制匈奴，患其兼从西国，结党南羌，乃表河曲，列四郡，开玉门，通西域，以断匈奴右臂，隔绝南羌、月氏。
现代文：班固论曰：汉武帝时代，图谋制服匈奴。担忧匈奴吞并西域各国，同西羌各部落结成联盟。于是在黄河以西设立四郡，打开玉门关，打通通往西域的道路，以此切断匈奴右臂，隔绝匈奴同南羌、月氏各部落的交通。
English: Pan Gu said: In the era of Emperor Hanwu, there was an attempt to subdue the Xiongnu. They were worried that the Xiongnu would annex the countries in the western region and form an alliance with the tribes in the western Yunnan. Therefore, they set up four counties west of the Yellow River, opened the Yumen Pass, and opened the road to the western region. In this way, they cut off the right arm of the Xiongnu and cut off the communication between the Xiongnu and the tribes in the southern Yunnan and the Yue.

古文：单于失援，由是远遁，而幕南无王庭。
现代文：单于失去外力援助，因此不得不逃向远方，浩瀚沙漠以南没有匈奴王庭。
English: However, having lost the support of the countries of the Western Region and the Xiongnu, they fled far away. There was no royal court of the Xiongnu south of the desert.

古文：遭值文、景玄默，养民五世，财力有馀，士马强盛。
现代文：西汉文帝、景帝时代长期宁静，人民休养生息，历经五朝，财富有余，兵强马壮。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, the era of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, there was long-term tranquility, and the people were able to rest and recuperate. After the Five Dynasties, there was more than enough wealth, and the army was strong.

古文：故能睹犀布、玳瑁，则建珠厓七郡；感蒟酱、竹杖，则开牂柯、越巂；闻天马、蒲陶，则通大宛、安息；自是殊方异物，四面而至。
现代文：所以看到南方的犀布、瑁，就设置珠崖等七郡；为酱、竹杖所动，就设置柯、越两郡；听说天马、葡萄，则远交大宛、安息。从此各方的珍奇物品，从四面八方进入中国。
English: Therefore, seeing the rhinoceros and dragonfly in the south, they set up seven counties such as the pearl cliff; moved by the sauce and bamboo cane, they set up two counties of Ke and Yue; and heard that the heavenly horse and grapes were sent to Dawan and Banshu. From this, the rare goods from all sides entered China from all directions.

古文：于是开苑囿，广宫室，盛帷帐，美服玩。
现代文：于是，朝廷开辟园林，扩建宫殿，帷帐豪华，衣服玩物艳丽。
English: As a result, the imperial court opened up gardens, expanded the palace, the curtains were luxurious, and the clothes were gaudy.

古文：设酒池肉林，以飨四夷之客，作鱼龙角抵之戏，以观视之。
现代文：建立酒池肉林以款待远道而来的各国使节宾客，又作 鱼龙  角抵 的游戏来观赏。
English: It was built to entertain the envoys of various countries who came from afar, and it was also used as a game to watch the arrival of fish and dragon.

古文：及赂遗赠送，万里相奉，师旅之费，不可胜计。
现代文：加上贿赂馈赠，万里相送，所耗军旅费用，不可胜计。
English: There are also countless rewards and gifts, thousands of miles of supplies, and military expenses.

古文：至于用度不足，乃榷酒酤，筦盐铁，铸白金，造皮币，算至车船，租及六畜。
现代文：以至于国库开支不足，只好实行酒专卖、盐专卖、铁专卖。铸造白金币、鹿皮币。连坐车乘船，以及饲养牛羊猪狗等六畜，都要征税。
English: As a result, the state treasury was so short of funds that it had no choice but to introduce a monopoly on the sale of alcohol, salt and iron, mint platinum and deerskin coins, impose a tax on travel by car and boat, as well as on the rearing of six types of livestock, including cattle, sheep, pigs and dogs.

古文：民力屈，财用竭，因之以凶年，寇盗并起，道路不通，直指之使始出，衣绣杖斧，断斩于郡国，然后胜之。
现代文：用尽民力，财源枯竭。接着又发生灾荒，盗贼蜂起，道路断绝。为此，朝廷派出使节，穿着锦绣的衣服，手持代表权力的斧钺，到各郡各封国惩罚诛斩，而后才克服了困难局面。
English: After the exhaustion of the people's strength and the depletion of financial resources, followed by the occurrence of natural disasters, the rise of thieves, and the interruption of roads, the imperial court sent envoys, wearing embroidered clothes and holding the axe and sickle of representative power, to the counties and fiefdoms to punish the beheading, and then overcame the difficult situation.

古文：是以末年遂弃轮台之地，而下哀痛之诏，岂非仁圣之所悔哉！
现代文：所以到汉武帝末年，决心放弃新疆轮台，颁下哀痛的诏书。这难道不是表示仁圣之君的悔意吗？
English: At the end of Emperor Wu's life, he gave up the Yalongdae Tunden and issued a painful edict. Isn't this something that a benevolent sage would have repented of?

古文：且通西哉，近有龙堆，远则葱岭，身热、头痛、悬度之厄，淮南、杜钦、扬雄之论，皆以为此天地所以界别区域，绝外内也。
现代文：再说通使西域，距离近的有龙堆，距离远的则有葱岭，那里有身热、头痛、悬度等险恶地段，按照刘安、杜钦、扬雄的看法，都认为那里是天地用以划分疆界、隔绝内外之处。
English: In addition, according to Liu An, Du Qin and Yang Xiong, in the western region, there is a dragon heap in the near distance, and a cucumber ridge in the far distance, where there are dangerous areas such as body heat, headache and suspense. According to Liu An, Du Qin and Yang Xiong, they all think that there is a place where heaven and earth are used to divide the boundaries and isolate the inside and outside.

古文：西域诸国，各有君长，兵众分弱，无所统一，虽属匈奴，不相亲附；匈奴能得其马畜、旃罽而不能统率，与之进退。
现代文：西域各国，各有君王，士兵分散力弱，无法统一。虽然归附匈奴，却并不心悦诚服。匈奴能得到他们的马匹牲畜、毛织品，但却不能统率他们的军队，和他们共进退。
English: The countries of the western region, each with their own monarchs and weakly distributed soldiers, could not be unified. Although they joined the Huns, they were not satisfied. The Huns could get their horses, livestock, and woolen goods, but they could not lead their armies and advance and retreat with them.

古文：与汉隔绝，道里又远，得之不为益，弃之不为损，盛德在我，无取于彼。
现代文：西域各国和西汉朝廷互相隔绝，又路途遥远。得到它，对汉室没有利益；丢弃它，对汉室没有损害。盛大的恩德出自汉室，汉室对他们却没任何索取。
English: The Western countries and the Western Han Dynasty are isolated from each other and are far away. If they get it, it is of no benefit to the Han Dynasty; if they discard it, it is of no harm to the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty owes the Western countries a great debt of gratitude, but the Western Han Dynasty did not ask for anything from them.

古文：故自建武以来，西域思汉威德，咸乐内属，数遣使置质于汉，愿请都护。
现代文：所以，自从光武帝刘秀以来，西域各国思念汉朝的威望高德，全都乐意归降，多次派出使节，把王子送到汉朝充当人质，请求设置都护。
English: Therefore, ever since the Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu, the countries of the Western Regions have been thinking about the prestige and virtue of the Han Dynasty, and they are all willing to surrender. They have repeatedly sent envoys to the Han Dynasty to take the prince as a hostage and request the establishment of the capital protection.

古文：圣上远览古今，因时之宜，辞而未许；虽大禹之序西戎，周公之让白雉，太宗之却走马，义兼之矣！
现代文：圣明的皇帝纵览古今，因时机还没有成熟，推辞而没有承诺。从前，虽然有大禹的善待西戎部落，周公的退回白野鸡，汉文帝的不接受千里马，而刘秀的做法，却包含了上述所有的意义。
English: In the past, although there was Dayu's kind treatment of the Xirong tribe, Zhou Gong's return to the White Pheasants, Emperor Hanwen's non-acceptance of Chollima, and Liu Xiu's approach, it contained all of the above meanings.

