古文：凡战之道，位欲严，政欲栗，力欲窕，气欲闲，心欲一。
现代文：作战一般的原则，位置要严格规定，号令要森严，行动要敏捷，士气要沉着，意志要统一。
English: According to the general principles of combat, the position should be strictly defined, the order should be strict, the action should be agile, the morale should be calm, and the will should be unified.

古文：凡战之道，等道义，立卒伍，定行列，正纵横，察名实。
现代文：作战的方法，要根据人们的德才分成等级，授予适当的职位，建立军队各级的编制，规定行列的次序，调整纵横队列，并检查是否名副其实。
English: According to the method of warfare, it is necessary to classify people according to their virtues and talents, award appropriate positions, establish the composition of the army at all levels, determine the order of the ranks, adjust the vertical and horizontal queues, and check whether they are worthy of the name.

古文：立进俯，坐进跪。畏则密，危则坐。
现代文：采用立阵时前进要弯腰，采用坐阵时移动用膝行，军队有畏惧心理时，队形要密集。情况危急时，要用坐阵。
English: When adopting the standing formation, it is necessary to bend forward, and when adopting the sitting formation, it is necessary to move with the knees. When the army is afraid, the formation should be dense. When the situation is critical, it is necessary to use the sitting formation.

古文：远者视之则不畏，迹者勿视则不散。
现代文：对远处的敌人观察清楚了就不会惶恐；对近处的敌人，要目中无敌，就会集中精力，进行战斗。
English: If you have a clear view of the enemy in the distance, you will not panic; if you are invincible in the eyes of the enemy in the vicinity, you will concentrate and fight.

古文：位，下左右，下甲坐，誓徐行之，位逮徒甲，筹以轻重。
现代文：士卒在布阵中的位置，按左、右、行、列分布。屯兵驻止时用坐降。
English: The positions of the soldiers in the deployment are distributed according to the left, right, row, and column. When the soldiers are stationed, they should sit down.

古文：振马躁，徒甲畏亦密之，跪坐、坐伏，则膝行而宽誓之。起、躁，鼓而进，则以铎止之。
现代文：从容下达命令，要规定每个甲士和徒手的具体位置，兼顾各种兵器使用的轻重缓急，如果车震马躁，士卒畏惧，就应靠拢使队形密集，采用跪阵或坐阵，将领膝行前去用宽和的言词告诫他们，使他们镇定下来。
English: To issue orders calmly, it is necessary to specify the specific position of each armored and unarmed soldier, taking into account the priorities of the use of various weapons. If the vehicle is shaky and the soldiers are afraid, they should move closer together to make the formation dense, using kneeling or sitting, and the general should kneel to warn them with broad words and calm them down.

古文：衔枚、誓、糗、坐，膝行而推之。
现代文：当士卒衔枚、受命或吃饭时，都应坐下实施，必须移动时，用膝行移动。
English: When receiving an order, receiving an order or eating, you should sit down. When you have to move, you should move with your knees.

古文：执戮禁顾，噪以先之。
现代文：在战场上要用杀戮来严禁顾盼不前，并高声喝令他们前进。
English: On the battlefield, it is necessary to use killing to strictly prohibit looking forward, and shout loudly to make them move forward.

古文：若畏太甚，则勿戮杀，示以颜色，告之以所生，循省其职。
现代文：如果士卒畏惧太甚，就不要再行杀戮，而应和颜悦色地把立功求生的办法告诉他们，使之各尽其职，完成任务。
English: If the soldiers are too afraid, they should not kill any more, but should kindly tell them how to make a living, so that they can fulfill their duties and complete their tasks.

古文：凡三军：人戒分日；人禁不息，不可以分食；方其疑惑，可师可服。
现代文：三军之中，对小部队下达的号令，半天以内就要执行；对个别人员下达的禁令，要立即执行，甚至不等吃完饭就要执行；要乘敌人尚在疑惑不定的时候，用兵袭击，就可征服它。
English: Among the three armies, the orders issued to small units should be implemented within half a day; the bans issued to individual personnel should be implemented immediately, even without waiting for the meal to be completed; when the enemy is still in doubt, it is necessary to attack with soldiers to conquer it.

古文：凡战：以力久，以气胜。
现代文：一般作战：凡兵力充实就能持久，士气旺盛就能取胜。
English: General operations: If the military strength is sufficient, it can last, and if the morale is strong, it can win.

古文：以固久，以后胜，本心固，新气胜。
现代文：营阵坚固就能持久，军队处于危地反能取胜。士卒真心求战就能稳固，朝气蓬勃就能取胜。
English: A solid battalion can last a long time, an army in a state of rebellion can win, a soldier who sincerely seeks war can be stable, and a youthful vigor can win.

古文：以甲固，以兵胜。
现代文：用盔甲防护自己，用兵器战胜敌人。
English: Protect yourself with armor and defeat your enemies with weapons.

古文：凡车以密固，徒以坐固，甲以重固，兵以轻胜。
现代文：兵车密集就能巩固，步兵用坐阵就能巩固，铠甲要厚重才能坚固，兵器要轻锐应手才能取胜。
English: Armored vehicles can be consolidated by crowding them, infantry can be consolidated by taking up positions, armor needs to be thick to be strong, and weapons need to be light to be effective in order to win.

古文：人有胜心，惟敌之视。
现代文：人们都有了求胜之心，这时就应该着重研究敌情是否能打。
English: People all have the desire to win, and at this time, we should focus on whether the enemy situation can be fought.

古文：人有畏心，惟畏之视。
现代文：人们都有畏惧之心，这时就应着重研究他们是畏惧敌人呢，还是畏惧将帅？
English: People are afraid, so we should focus on whether they are afraid of the enemy or the commander-in-chief.

古文：两心交定，两利若一。
现代文：把求胜之心和畏惧之心都研究清楚，把两方面的有利条件都发挥出来。
English: We should clearly study both the desire to win and the fear of losing, and give full play to the favorable conditions in both aspects.

古文：两为之职，惟权视之。
现代文：而对这两方面情况的掌握，就全在于将帅的权衡。
English: And the mastery of these two aspects of the situation is all about the balance of the general.

古文：凡战：以轻行轻则危，以重行重则无功，以轻行重则败，以重行轻则战，故战相为轻重。
现代文：一般作战：使用小部队对敌小部队可能有危险，使用大部队对敌大部队就可能不成功，使用小部队对敌大部队就要失败，使用大部队对敌小部队就要迅速决战，所以作战是双方兵力的对比和较量。
English: General operations: the use of a small force against a small enemy force may be dangerous, the use of a large force against a large enemy force may not be successful, the use of a small force against a large enemy force will fail, and the use of a large force against a small enemy force will lead to a quick decisive battle, so the operation is a comparison and contest of the forces of both sides.

古文：舍谨甲兵，行慎行列，战谨进止。
现代文：驻军时要注意严整战备，行军时要注意行列整齐，作战时要注意进止有节。
English: When garrisoning, attention should be paid to strict preparation for battle, when marching, attention should be paid to neat ranks, and when fighting, attention should be paid to advance and halt.

古文：凡战，敬则慊，率则服。
现代文：凡是作战，谨慎从事就能达到目的，以身作则就能服众。
English: Whenever you fight, you can achieve your goal if you are cautious, and you can serve the public by leading by example.

古文：上烦轻，上暇重。
现代文：将帅急躁烦乱就命轻率行事，将帅从容不迫就会遇事持重。
English: If the general is impatient and agitated, he will act rashly. If the general is unhurried, he will be heavy-handed.

古文：奏鼓轻舒鼓重。
现代文：鼓点紧就是号令急速前进，鼓点缓就是号令徐缓前进。
English: A tight beat is an order to advance rapidly, a slow beat is an order to advance slowly.

古文：服肤轻，服美重。
现代文：服装薄而轻行动就敏捷，服装厚而重行动就迟钝。
English: If the clothing is thin and light, the action will be agile; if the clothing is thick and heavy, the action will be sluggish.

古文：凡马车坚，甲兵利，轻乃重。
现代文：只要兵车坚固，甲胄兵器精良，虽是小部队也能起大部队的作用。
English: As long as the chariots are sturdy and the armor and weapons are sophisticated, even a small force can play the role of a large force.

古文：上同无获，上专多死，上生多疑，上死不胜。
现代文：将领喜欢随声附和，就不会有所成就。将领喜欢专横武断，就会多所杀戮。将领贪生怕死，就会疑虑重重。将领只知拼命，就不能取得胜利。
English: If a general likes to follow the crowd, he will not achieve anything. If a general likes to be arbitrary, he will kill a lot. If a general is greedy for life and death, he will be full of doubts. If a general only knows how to fight, he will not be able to win.

古文：凡人，死爱，死怒，死威，死义，死利。
现代文：人们有为感恩而效死的，有因激怒而拼死的，有被威逼而拼死的，有因仗义而效死的，有因贪利而拼死的。
English: People have died in the service of gratitude, in the service of anger, in the service of intimidation, in the service of righteousness, and in the service of greed.

古文：凡战，教约人轻死，道约人死正。
现代文：一般作战，用法令约束人，只能使人们不敢怕死，用道义感动人，才能使人们愿意为正义而死。
English: General warfare, using laws and regulations to restrict people, can only make people afraid of death, using morality to move people, in order to make people willing to die for justice.

古文：凡战：若胜，若否。若天，若人。
现代文：一般作战。或者胜利，或者失败，都取决于是否顺应天时，顺应人心。
English: General operations. Either victory or defeat depends on whether they conform to the times and the will of the people.

古文：凡战：三军之戒，无过三日；一卒之警，无过分日；一人之禁，无过瞬息。
现代文：凡是作战：对全军下达的号令，三天以内就要贯彻执行；对百人小部队下达的号令，半天以内就要贯彻执行；对个别人员的指示，要立即执行。
English: In all operations: orders issued to the whole army should be carried out within three days; orders issued to small units of one hundred men should be carried out within half a day; and instructions to individual personnel should be carried out immediately.

古文：凡大善用本，其次用末。
现代文：进行战争，最好的方法是用谋略取胜，其次才是用攻战取胜。
English: In waging war, the best way is to win by stratagem, and the next best is to win by attack.

古文：执略守微，本末惟权。战也。
现代文：必须掌握全局的形势，抓住具体环节，以决定是用谋略取胜还是以攻战取胜，这是作战时应该权衡的问题。
English: It is necessary to grasp the overall situation and grasp the specific links to decide whether to win by strategy or to win by attacking. This is a question that should be weighed when fighting.

古文：凡胜，三军一人，胜。
现代文：凡是胜利，都是由于全军团结得像一个人，才能取得。
English: All victories are won when the whole army is united as one.

古文：凡鼓，鼓旌旗，鼓车，鼓马，鼓徒，鼓兵，鼓首鼓足，七鼓兼齐。
现代文：一般指挥部队的鼓点，有命令旗帜开合的，有命令兵车驰驱的，有命令战马奔驰的，有命令步兵前进的，有命令交兵接刃的，有命整齐队形的，有命令起坐行动的。这七种鼓点都必须规定齐全。
English: The drumbeats of the general commanding troops include the command to open and close the flag, the command to drive the chariot, the command to gallop the warhorse, the command to advance the infantry, the command to engage the enemy, the command to form an orderly formation, and the command to move. These seven types of drumbeats must be fully specified.

古文：凡战，既固勿重。
现代文：凡是作战，战斗力强就不要过于持重。
English: Whenever you fight, don't put too much emphasis on having a strong fighting force.

古文：重进勿尽，几尽危。凡战，非陈之难，使人可陈难，非使可陈难，使人可用难，非知之难，行之难。
现代文：即使兵力雄厚、进攻时也不要把力量一次用尽，凡是把力量用尽了的都很危险一般作战；不是布阵难，而是使吏卒熟习阵法难。不是使吏卒熟习阵法难，而是使他们灵活运用难。总之，不是懂得阵法难，而是实际运用难。
English: Even if you have a strong army, you should not exhaust your strength all at once when attacking. If you exhaust your strength, it is very dangerous to fight in general. It is not difficult to set up a formation, but it is difficult to make officers and men familiar with the formation. It is not difficult to make officers and men familiar with the formation, but it is difficult to make them use it flexibly. In short, it is not difficult to understand the formation, but it is difficult to actually use it.

古文：人方有性，性州异，教成俗，俗州异，道化俗。
现代文：各地的人各有其性格，性格随各州而不同。教化可以形成习俗，习俗也是各州不同。
English: People everywhere have their own character, and their character varies from state to state. Education can form customs, and customs also vary from state to state.

古文：凡众寡，既胜若否。
现代文：通过道德的教化就能统一习俗。
English: Through moral education, customs can be unified.

古文：兵不告利，甲不告坚，车不告固，马不告良，众不自多，未获道。
现代文：不论兵力大小，打了胜仗要和没有打胜仗一样不骄不懈。凡是不讲求兵器锋利，不讲求盔甲坚韧，不讲求车辆牢固，不讲求马匹良好，不努力扩充兵员，都是没有掌握打胜仗的道理。
English: Regardless of the size of the army, it is necessary to be as unpretentious and unremitting when winning a battle as when not winning a battle. Anyone who does not pay attention to the sharpness of weapons, does not pay attention to the toughness of armor, does not pay attention to the solidity of vehicles, does not pay attention to the quality of horses, and does not make efforts to expand the number of soldiers, has not grasped the reason for winning the war.

古文：凡战，胜则与众分善。
现代文：凡是作战，胜利了要与众人分享荣誉。
English: In any battle, if you win, you should share the glory with everyone.

古文：若将复战，则重赏罚。
现代文：如果还要再进行战斗，就要着重赏罚。
English: If you want to fight again, you should focus on rewards and punishments.

古文：若使不胜，取过在己。
现代文：假使没有取得胜利，就要把错误归于自己。
English: If you don't win, blame yourself.

古文：复战，则誓以居前，无复先术。
现代文：再战时，要决心身先士卒，不重复使用上次的战法。
English: In the second war, we must be determined to lead the way and not repeat the tactics of the last war.

古文：胜否勿反，是谓正则。
现代文：无论胜败都不要违反这个原则?
English: No matter whether you win or lose, don't violate this principle?

