古文：孟子自齐葬于鲁，反于齐，止于嬴。
现代文：孟子从齐国到鲁国安葬母亲后返回齐国，住在嬴县。
English: Mencius went from Qi Province to Lu Province to bury his mother and then returned to Qi Province to live in Yu County.

古文：充虞请曰： 前日不知虞之不肖，使虞敦匠事。
现代文：他的学生充虞请教说： 前些日子承蒙老师您不嫌弃我，让我督办棺木。
English: His pupil asked for advice, saying: "A few days ago, thanks to my teacher, you didn't reject me and let me supervise the coffin.

古文：严，虞不敢请。
现代文：当时大家都很忙碌，我不敢来请教。
English: Everyone was so busy at the time, I didn't dare to ask for advice.

古文：今愿窃有请也，木若以美然。 
现代文：现在我想把心里的疑问提出来请教老师：棺木似乎太华丽了些吧！ 
English: Now I want to ask my teacher a question: does the coffin seem too ornate?

古文：曰： 古者棺椁无度，中古棺七寸，椁称之。
现代文：孟子回答说： 上古对于棺律用木的尺寸没有规定；中古时规定棺木厚七寸，椁木以与棺木的厚度相称为准。
English: Mencius replied, "In ancient times, there was no regulation for the size of the coffin wood; in medieval times, the coffin was specified to be seven inches thick, and the wood of the coffin was to be proportionate to the thickness of the coffin.

古文：自天子达于庶人。非直为观美也，然后尽于人心。
现代文：从天子到老百姓，讲究棺木的质量并非仅仅是为了美观，而是要这样然后算尽了人子的孝心。
English: From the gods to the people, the quality of the coffin is not only for the sake of beauty, but also for the sake of human filial piety.

古文：不得，不可以为悦；无财，不可以为悦。
现代文：受礼法限制不能用上等木料做棺椁，当然不能够称心；没有钱不能用上等木料做棺椁，也不能够称心。
English: Restricted by the etiquette law, you can't use high-grade wood to make coffins, of course, you can't be satisfied; if you don't have money, you can't use high-grade wood to make coffins, you can't be satisfied.

古文：得之为有财，古之人皆用之，吾何为独不然？
现代文：既为礼制所允许，又有财力，古人都会这么做，我怎么就不可以呢？
English: It is both allowed by the etiquette and has financial resources, the ancients would do it, why can't I?

古文：且比化者，无使土亲肤，于人心独无恔乎？吾闻之也，君子不以天下俭其亲。 
现代文：况且，这样做不过是为了去世的人遗体不接触泥土，难道孝子之心就不可以有这样一点满足吗？我听说过：君子不因为天下大事而俭省应该用在父母身上的钱财。 
English: Moreover, this is only done so that the remains of the deceased do not touch the soil. Is it not possible for the heart of a filial son to have such a little satisfaction? I have heard that a gentleman does not save money that should be spent on his parents because of world events.

