古文：《传》曰： 礼义廉耻，国之四维；四维不张，国乃灭亡。 
现代文：《传》曰： 礼义廉耻，是治理国家的四个准则；这四个准则没有确立，国家就会灭亡。 
English: "Biography" said: Courtesy, honesty and integrity are the four principles of governing the country; if these four principles are not established, the country will perish.

古文：善乎，管生之能言也！
现代文：管仲的话说得多好啊！
English: What a nice thing to say, Guan Zhong!

古文：礼义，治人之大法；廉耻，立人之大节。
现代文：礼义是治理国人的根本法则，廉耻是人们立身的根本节操。
English: Etiquette is the fundamental rule for governing the people of the country, and shamelessness is the fundamental discipline for people to stand up.

古文：盖不廉，则无所不取；不耻，则无所不为。
现代文：大概没有糜洁，人们就无所不取；没有羞耻，人们就无所不焉。
English: Probably, if there is no chastity, people will take anything; if there is no shame, people will take anything.

古文：人而如此，则祸乱败亡，亦无所不至，况为大臣而无所不取，无所不为，则天下其有不乱，国家其有不亡者乎！
现代文：像这样做人，那么灾祸动乱、失败灭亡，也就无所不至，何况做大臣的人却无所不取、无所不焉，那么天下还有不乱、国家还有不亡的吗！
English: If people like this exist, then disasters, upheaval, failure, and destruction will be omnipresent, and what's more, ministers will be omnipresent, omnipresent, so will there still be no turmoil in the world, and will the country still not perish?

古文：予读冯道《长乐老叙》，见其自述以为荣，其可谓无廉耻者矣，则天下国家可从而知也。
现代文：我读冯道写的《长乐老叔》，见他自述引以为荣，他可说是没有廉耻的人了，那么天下国家就由此可知了。
English: When I read "Changle Lao Cun" written by Feng Dao, I saw that he was proud of himself. He could be said to be a man without shame, so the countries of the world can be known from this.

古文：予于五代，得全节之士三，死事之臣十有五，而怪士之被服儒者以学古自名，而享人之禄、任人之国者多矣，然使忠义之节，独出于武夫战卒，岂于儒者果无其人哉？
现代文：我在五代发现三个保全节操的士人，十五个为国事而死的臣子，而奇怪那些身穿儒服的士人以学古自称，却有很多人享受别人的俸禄、在别人的国家中任职，但却使忠义的节操，只是出自武夫士兵，难道在儒士中果真就没有这样的人吗？
English: In five generations, I found three scholar-soldiers who preserved discipline, and fifteen courtiers who died for national affairs. It is strange that those scholar-soldiers dressed in Confucian clothes claimed to study ancient times, but there were many people who enjoyed other people's salaries and served in other people's countries, but the discipline of loyalty only came from warrior soldiers. Is there really no such person among the Confucians?

古文：岂非高节之士恶时之乱，薄其世而不肯出欤？
现代文：难道不是节操高尚的士人憎恶时代的动乱，鄙薄这样的世道而不愿出来吗？
English: Wasn't it the case that the virtuous and noble nobles abhorred the turmoil of the times and despised such a world and didn't want to come out of it?

古文：抑君天下者不足顾，而莫能致之欤？
现代文：抑或是掌管天下的君主不值得顾念，而没有人能够使他们出来吗？
English: Or are the princes of the earth not to be feared, and there is no one to deliver them?

古文：孔子以谓： 十室之邑，必有忠信。 
现代文：孔子认为： 十家人的城邑，必定有忠信之人存在。 
English: Confucius thought: In a city of ten families, there must be some loyal people.

古文：岂虚言也哉！
现代文：难道是没有根据的空话吗？
English: Is it just empty words without any foundation?

古文：予尝得五代时小说一篇，载王凝妻李氏事，以一妇人犹能如此，则知世固尝有其人而不得见也。
现代文：我曾读到五代时的一篇小说，记载王凝的妻子李氏的事情，作为一个妇人还能这样，就可推知世上确曾有这样的人而汝能被发现。
English: I once read a novel from the Five Dynasties, which recorded the story of Wang Xuan's wife, Li. If a woman can do this, it can be inferred that there was indeed such a person in the world and you can be found.

古文：凝家青、齐之间，为虢州司户参军，以疾卒于官。
现代文：王凝住在青、齐二州间，任虢州司卢参军，因病死在任上。
English: Wang Geng lived in Qing and Qi between the two states. He was assigned to Shilou in Zhangzhou to join the army, but died of illness while in office.

古文：凝家素贫，一子尚幼，李氏携其子，负其遗骸以归。
现代文：王凝家素来贫穷，一个儿子还年幼，李氏带着她的儿子，背着他的遗骸回乡来。
English: The Wang Rong family had always been poor, and one son was still young. Ms. Li brought her son back to her hometown, carrying his remains on her back.

古文：东过开封，止旅舍，旅舍主人见其妇人独携一子而疑之，不许其宿。
现代文：向东经过开封时，在旅舍停下，旅舍主人见这个妇人独自带着一个孩子因而怀疑她，不准她留宿。
English: While passing through Kaifeng to the east, he stopped at a hostel. The hostel owner saw the woman alone with a child and became suspicious of her and did not allow her to stay.

古文：李氏顾天已暮，不肯去，主人牵其臂而出之。
现代文：李氏看天色已晚，不愿离去，主人就拉着她的手臂把她拖出去。
English: Ms. Li saw that it was too late and did not want to leave, so her master pulled her arm and dragged her out.

古文：李氏仰天长恸曰： 我为妇人，不能守节，而此手为人执邪？
现代文：李氏仰天痛哭说： 我是妇人，难道不能守节，而让逭只手被人拉扯吗？
English: "I'm a woman, can't I keep the festival and let my hand be pulled by someone?

古文：不可以一手并污吾身！ 
现代文：不能因这只手而一并沾污了我的身子！ 
English: I can't get this hand all over my body!

古文：即引斧自断其臂。
现代文：就拿来斧头自己砍断了手臂。
English: So he took an axe and chopped off his own arm.

古文：路人见者，环聚而嗟之，或为弹指，或为之泣下。
现代文：看到此事的过路人都团聚在一起替她感叹，有的为她伤心，有的为她悲泣落泪。
English: Passers-by who saw the incident gathered together to mourn for her. Some were sad for her, while others shed tears for her.

古文：开封尹闻之，白其事于朝，官为赐药封疮，厚恤李氏，而笞其主人者。
现代文：开封尹获知这事后，向朝廷报告，官府为她赐药治伤，丰厚地抚恤李氏，而鞭打那个旅舍主人。
English: After Kaifeng Yin learned of this, he reported to the imperial court, and the government gave her medicine to treat her injuries, generously supported the Li family, and whipped the innkeeper.

古文：呜呼，士不自爱其身而忍耻以偷生者，闻李氏之风，宜少知愧哉！
现代文：唉，不能自爱而忍辱偷生的士人，听说李氏的风范后应该略感羞愧吧！
English: Alas, the scholar who cannot love himself and endures the humiliation of stealing a living, should be a little ashamed after hearing of Li's demeanor!

古文：○冯道冯道，字可道，瀛州景城人也。
现代文：冯道字可道，瀛州景城人。
English: Feng Daozhe is a native of Jingcheng, Zhangzhou.

古文：事刘守光为参军，守光败，去事宦者张承业。
现代文：事奉刘守光任参军，刘守光失败后，去事奉宦官张承业。
English: Liu Shouguang was appointed to serve in the army, and after Liu Shouguang failed, Zhang Chengye, a eunuch, was appointed to serve.

古文：承业监河东军，以为巡官，以其文学荐之晋王，为河东节度掌书记。
现代文：张承业监理河东军，委任他为巡官，因他有文学才能而向晋王推荐，任河东节度掌书记。
English: Zhang Chengye supervised the Hedong Army, appointed him as an inspector, recommended him to Jin Wang because of his literary talent, and appointed him as the secretary of the Hedong Festival.

古文：庄宗即位，拜户部侍郎，充翰林学士。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，拜为户部侍郎，充翰林学士。
English: Tang Zhuangzong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the head of the household and the scholar of the Hanlin School.

古文：道为人，能自刻苦为俭约。
现代文：冯道为人能够刻苦节俭。
English: Feng Dao is a hardworking and thrifty person.

古文：当晋与梁夹河而军，道居军中，为一茅庵，不设床席，卧一束刍而已。
现代文：当晋和梁在黄河两岸驻军时，冯道在军中，修了一间茅屋，没有铺床席，就躺在一堆草上睡觉而已。
English: When Jin and Liang were stationed on both sides of the Yellow River, Feng Dao was in the army. He built a hut and slept on a pile of grass without making a bed.

古文：所得俸禄，与仆厮同器饮食，意恬如也。
现代文：所得到的俸禄，拿来和仆人们同饮同食，心神安逋自如。
English: He used the salary he received to eat and drink with his servants, and his mind was at ease.

古文：诸将有掠得人之美女者以遗道，道不能却，置之别室，访其主而还之。
现代文：有将领抢来别人的美女送给冯道，冯道不能推脱，就把她安置在别的房屋中，查访她的主人而送她囤去。
English: A general snatched someone else's beautiful woman and gave it to Feng Dao. Feng Dao couldn't resist, so he placed her in another house, visited her master and sent her away.

古文：其解学士居父丧于景城，遇岁饥，悉出所有以赒乡里，而退耕于野，躬自负薪。
现代文：他解除学士的职务在景城为父亲服丧，遇上饥荒年，拿出所有的财物周济乡里，而在野外耕作，亲自背柴打草。
English: He was relieved of his duties as a bachelor to attend his father's funeral in Jingcheng, and when he encountered a famine year, he took out all his belongings to help the countryside, and cultivated in the field, personally carrying firewood and weeding.

古文：有荒其田不耕者与力不能耕者，道夜往，潜为之耕。
现代文：有荒着田不耕种，以及无力耕种的人，冯道趁晚上去，偷偷为他们耕种。
English: There are fields that are left uncultivated, and people who are unable to farm. Feng Dao takes advantage of the evening to secretly farm for them.

古文：其人后来愧谢，道殊不以为德。
现代文：田主后来羞愧告谢，冯道并不认为有什么恩德。
English: The farmer later said he was ashamed to thank him, and Feng Dao did not think there was any benefit.

古文：服除，复召为翰林学士。
现代文：服完丧，又召为翰林学士。
English: After the funeral, he was called to be a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：行至汴州，遇赵在礼作乱，明宗自魏拥兵还，犯京师。
现代文：走到汴州，碰上趟在礼作乱，唐明宗从魏州率兵返回，侵犯京师。
English: When he went to Bozhou, he ran into the Li Zuo Rebellion. Tang Mingzong returned from Weizhou with an army and invaded the capital.

古文：孔循劝道少留以待，道曰： 吾奉诏赴阙，岂可自留！ 
现代文：孔循劝说冯道暂时留下等待时机，冯道说： 我奉诏书奔赴朝廷，难道能擅自停留！ 
English: Confucius persuaded Feng Dao to stay and wait for the right time. Feng Dao said, "I rushed to the imperial court according to the imperial edict. How can I stay without permission?"

古文：乃疾趋至京师。
现代文：于是迅速赶到京师。
English: As a result, he quickly arrived in Kyoto.

古文：庄宗遇弑，明宗即位，雅知道所为，问安重诲曰： 先帝时冯道何在？ 
现代文：唐庄宗被杀害，唐明宗登位，素来知道冯道的所作所为，询问安重诲说： 先帝时冯道在哪里供职？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong was killed, Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne. He had always known what Feng Dao had done, and asked An Chongyuan: Where did Feng Dao work during the reign of the previous emperor?

古文：重诲曰： 为学士也。 
现代文：安重诲说： 任学士。 
English: An Rong said, "Become a bachelor."

古文：明宗曰： 吾素知之，此真吾宰相也。 
现代文：唐明宗说： 我素来了解他，他真是我的宰相啊。 
English: Tang Mingzong said: I have known him for a long time, he is really my prime minister.

古文：拜道端明殿学士，迁兵部侍郎。
现代文：拜冯道为端明殿学士，升任兵部侍郎。
English: Baifong Dao became a scholar of the Duanming Palace, and was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department.

古文：岁馀，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：一年多后，拜为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: A little more than a year later, he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and became a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：天成、长兴之间，岁屡丰熟，中国无事。
现代文：天成、长兴年间，连年五谷丰登，中原平安无事。
English: During the years of Tiancheng and Changxing, the number of grain crops increased year after year, and the Central Plains remained peaceful.

古文：道尝戒明宗曰： 臣为河东掌书记时，奉使中山，过井陉之险，惧马蹶失，不敢怠于衔辔；及至平地，谓无足虑，遽跌而伤。
现代文：冯道曾告诫唐明宗说： 我任河东掌书记时，奉命出使中山，经遇险要的井陉时，怕马绊倒，不敢放松马勒和缰绳，到平地后，以为不必担心，却突然跌倒受伤。
English: Feng Dao once admonished Tang Mingzong, saying: "When I was appointed as the secretary of the East River, I was ordered to dispatch Zhongshan. When passing through the well in distress, I was afraid of the horse tripping and did not dare to loosen the bridle and reins. After reaching the flatland, I thought there was no need to worry, but I suddenly fell and was injured.

古文：凡蹈危者虑深而获全，居安者患生于所忽，此人情之常也。 
现代文：凡是身历险境的人忧虑深远而获得保全，身居平安的人，祸患就生于疏忽，这是人之常情。 
English: All who live in danger are preserved by far-reaching worries, and those who live in peace are born of negligence. This is human nature.

古文：明宗问曰： 天下虽丰，百姓济否？ 
现代文：唐明宗问道： 天下虽然丰收，百姓受益了吗？ 
English: Tang Mingzong asked: Although the harvest is bountiful, have the people benefited?

古文：道曰： 谷贵饿农，谷贱伤农。 
现代文：冯道说： 粮食贵了就会让农夫挨饿，粮食贱了就会损伤农夫的利益。 
English: Feng Dao said: If grain is expensive, it will make farmers go hungry, and if grain is cheap, it will damage the interests of farmers.

古文：因诵文士聂夷中《田家诗》，其言近而易晓。
现代文：因而朗诵文人聂夷中的《田家诗》，诗的语言浅近易懂。
English: As a result, he recited "Tanjia Shi" by the literati Zou Yizhong, and the language of the poem was simple and easy to understand.

古文：明宗顾左右录其诗，常以自诵。
现代文：唐明宗回头让手下人记下这首诗，常常自己朗诵。
English: Tang Mingzong asked his subordinates to write down the poem and often recited it himself.

古文：水运军将于临河县得一玉杯，有文曰 传国宝万岁杯 ，明宗甚爱之，以示道，道曰： 此前世有形之宝尔，王者固有无形之宝也。 
现代文：水运军将在临河县得到一只玉杯，杯上的铭文是 传国宝万岁杯 ，唐明宗很喜欢这个玉杯，拿给冯道看，冯道说： 这不过是前代有形的实物罢了，称王的人原本有无形的法宝。 
English: The water transport army will get a jade cup in Linhe County. The inscription on the cup is "National Treasure Long Live Cup." Tang Mingzong liked this jade cup very much. He showed it to Feng Dao. Feng Dao said, "This is just a tangible object of the previous generation. The person who proclaimed the king originally had an intangible magic treasure."

古文：明宗问之，道曰： 仁义者，帝王之宝也。
现代文：唐明宗问他是什么，冯道说： 仁义就是帝王的法宝。
English: Tang Mingzong asked him what it was, and Feng Dao said: "Righteousness is the magic weapon of the emperor.

古文：故曰： 大宝曰位，何以守位曰仁。  
现代文：因此说： 大实是帝位，怎样保持帝位叫仁。  
English: Therefore, it is said: Dazhi is the imperial throne, how to maintain the imperial throne is called Ren.

古文：明宗武君，不晓其言，道已去，召侍臣讲说其义，嘉纳之。
现代文：唐明宗是个武人出身的君主，不懂他的话，冯道离去后，习来侍臣替他讲解冯道说的意思，称许并接受了。
English: Tang Mingzong was a warrior-turned-monarch, and he did not understand what Feng Dao said. After Feng Dao left, a courtier came to explain the meaning of Feng Dao's words to him, praised and accepted.

古文：道相明宗十馀年，明宗崩，相愍帝。
现代文：冯道做唐明宗的宰相十多年，唐明宗去世，又做唐愍帝的宰相。
English: Feng Dao was the prime minister of Tang Mingzong for more than ten years. When Tang Mingzong died, he became the prime minister of Emperor Qianlong.

古文：潞王反于凤翔，愍帝出奔卫州，道率百官迎潞王入，是为废帝，遂相之。
现代文：潞王在凤翔反叛，唐愍帝出逃到卫州，冯道率百官迎接潞王进京，这就是唐废帝，于是又做他的宰相。
English: Shao Wang rebelled in Fengxiang, Tang Shao Di fled to Weizhou, and Feng Dao led hundreds of officials to welcome Shao Wang to Beijing. This was Tang's dethronement of the emperor, so he also became his prime minister.

古文：废帝即位，愍帝犹在卫州，后三日，愍帝始遇弑崩。
现代文：唐废帝登位时，唐愍帝还在街州，三天后，唐愍帝纔遇害身死。
English: When Emperor Tang Wulai ascended the throne, Emperor Tang Xuan was still in Jiezhou. Three days later, Emperor Tang Xuan was killed and died.

古文：已而废帝出道为同州节度使，逾年，拜司空。
现代文：不久唐废帝让冯道出任同州节度使，一年多后，拜为司空。
English: Soon after, Emperor Tang appointed Feng Dao as the envoy of the festival in the same province, and more than a year later, he was appointed as the secretary of the festival.

古文：晋灭唐，道又事晋，晋高祖拜道守司空、同中书门下平章事，加司徒，兼侍中，封鲁国公。
现代文：晋消灭唐，冯道又在晋做官，晋高祖拜冯道为守司空、同中书门下平章事，加司徒，兼侍中，封为鲁国公。
English: Jin eliminated Tang, and Feng Dao became an official in Jin. The ancestor of Feng Dao, who was promoted to a high rank, was the guardian of Siku, the book keeper of Tongzhong, the assistant of Siku, and the attendant, and was given the title of Lu Guogong.

古文：高祖崩，道相出帝，加太尉，封燕国公，罢为匡国军节度使，徙镇威胜。
现代文：晋高祖去世，冯道做晋出帝的宰相，加授官为太尉，封为燕国公，罢焉匡国军节度使，调任镇守威胜。
English: After the death of Emperor Jingu, Feng Dao became the prime minister of Emperor Jingu, was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, was given the title of Yan Guoguo, was appointed as the commander of the Kuang Kuang Army, and was transferred to the post of town guard of Weisheng.

古文：契丹灭晋，道又事契丹，朝耶律德光于京师。
现代文：契丹消灭晋，冯道又事奉契丹，在京师朝拜耶律德光。
English: Khitan annihilated Jin, while Feng Dao served Khitan and worshipped Yelu Deguang in Beijing.

古文：德光责道事晋无状，道不能对。
现代文：耶律德光责备冯道事奉后晋没有成绩，冯道无言以对。
English: Yelu Deguang reproached Feng Dao for having no achievements after serving Jin. Feng Dao was speechless.

古文：又问曰： 何以来朝？ 
现代文：又问道： 为什么前来朝拜？ 
English: He also asked: Why did you come to the morning worship?

古文：对曰： 无城无兵，安敢不来。 
现代文：回答说： 无城无兵，怎敢不来。 
English: He replied, "Without a city and without soldiers, how dare you not come?"

古文：德光诮之曰： 尔是何等老子？ 
现代文：耶律德光讥诮他说： 你是怎样一个老头子？ 
English: "What kind of an old man are you?

古文：对曰： 无才无德痴顽老子。 
现代文：回答说： 无才无德的痴顽老头子。 
English: He replied: "A stupid old man with no talent and no morals."

古文：德光喜，以道为太傅。
现代文：耶律堡光很高兴，任命冯道为太傅。
English: The Light of Yerushalayim was pleased and appointed Feng Dao as Taifu.

古文：德光北归，从至常山。
现代文：耶律德光北归，冯道跟随到常山。
English: Yelu Deguang returned to the north, and Feng Dao followed him to Changshan.

古文：汉高祖立，乃归汉，以太师奉朝请。
现代文：汉高祖登位，他纔回到汉，以太师奉朝请。
English: Han Gaozhu ascended to the throne, he returned to Han, and he was invited by the emperor.

古文：周灭汉，道又事周，周太祖拜道太师，兼中书令。
现代文：周消灭汉，冯道又在周做官，周太祖拜冯道为太师，兼中书令。
English: Zhou annihilated Han, and Feng Dao became an official in Zhou. Zhou's great-great-grandfather made Feng Dao his grand-master and the second-in-command.

古文：道少能矫行以取称于世，及为大臣，尤务持重以镇物，事四姓十君，益以旧德自处。
现代文：冯道年轻时就能匡正自己的行为而获得世人的称赞，等到担任大臣后，尤其致力于稳重处世待物，事奉四姓十个君主，越来越以旧德自居。
English: When he was young, Feng Dao was able to rectify his behavior and won the praise of the world. When he became a minister, he was particularly committed to dealing with the world steadily, serving four surnames and ten monarchs, and becoming more and more old-fashioned.

古文：然当世之士无贤愚皆仰道为元老，而喜为之称誉。
现代文：但当时的士人无论贤愚都景仰冯道焉元老，而喜欢称誉他。
English: However, the scholars of that time, whether they were wise or foolish, all admired Feng Daoyan, and liked to praise him.

古文：耶律德光尝问道曰： 天下百姓如何救得？ 
现代文：耶律德光曾问冯道说： 怎样纔能拯救天下的百姓？ 
English: Yerutdeguang once asked Feng Dao, "How can I save the people of the world?"

古文：道为俳语以对曰： 此时佛出救不得，惟皇帝救得。 
现代文：冯道用玩笑话回答说： 这样的时代佛出来了也不能救，只有皇帝能救。 
English: Feng Dao replied jokingly, "In such a time, even if a Buddha comes out, he cannot save us. Only the emperor can save us."

古文：人皆以谓契丹不夷灭中国之人者，赖道一言之善也。
现代文：人们都认为契丹投有杀尽中原人，是靠冯道这一句话说得好。
English: People all think that the Khitan invasion killed all the Central Plains people, and that it was because of Feng Dao's words.

古文：周兵反，犯京师，隐帝已崩，太祖谓汉大臣必行推戴，及见道，道殊无意。
现代文：周兵反叛，侵犯京师，汉隐帝已死，周太祖认为汉的大臣必定会拥戴自己，及至见到冯道时，冯道根本没有这个意思。
English: Zhou soldiers rebelled, encroached on the Beijing division, Emperor Han died, Zhou Taizu believed that the Han ministers would certainly support themselves, and when he saw Feng Dao, Feng Dao did not have this intention at all.

古文：太祖素拜道，因不得已拜之，道受之如平时，太祖意少沮，知汉未可代，遂阳立湘阴公赟为汉嗣，遣道迎赟于徐州。
现代文：周太祖素来对冯道下拜，这次也迫不得已对他下拜，冯道接受下拜就跟平常一样，周太祖的雄心逐渐沮丧，知道汉不能取代，于是假装立湘阴公刘簧为汉的继承人，派冯道去徐州迎接刘赞。
English: Zhou Taizu had always bowed to Feng Dao, but this time he was forced to bow to him. Feng Dao accepted the bow as usual. Zhou Taizu's ambition gradually became frustrated. He knew that Han could not be replaced, so he pretended to appoint Xiangyin Prince Liu Rene as Han's heir and sent Feng Dao to Xuzhou to meet Liu Zan.

古文：赟未至，太祖将兵北至澶州，拥兵而反，遂代汉。
现代文：刘餮还没到，周太祖率兵北到澶州，举兵反叛，于是取代漠。
English: Before Liu Bei arrived, Zhou Taizu led his army north to Bozhou, raised an army to rebel, and then replaced the desert.

古文：议者谓道能沮太祖之谋而缓之，终不以晋、汉之亡责道也。
现代文：议事的人说冯道能够挫败周太祖的阴谋而延缓它，始终不拿晋、汉的灭亡责备冯道。
English: The negotiators said that Feng Dao could frustrate Zhou Taizu's plot and delay it, and never blamed Feng Dao for the destruction of Jin and Han.

古文：然道视丧君亡国亦未尝以屑意。
现代文：但冯道对丧君亡国的事也从未在意。
English: However, Feng Dao never cared about the loss of the emperor and the country.

古文：当是时，天下大乱，戎夷交侵，生民之命，急于倒悬，道方自号 长乐老 ，著书数百言，陈己更事四姓及契丹所得阶勋官爵以为荣。
现代文：当这个时候，天下大乱少数民族交相侵略，百姓的生命，比身体倒挂还危急，冯道偏偏自称 长乐老 ，著书几百言，陈述自己历事四姓君主以及在契丹得到的阶勋官爵，引以为荣。
English: At this time, when the world was in turmoil due to the invasion of ethnic minorities, and the lives of the people were even more critical than being hung upside down, Feng Dao was proud to call himself Changle Lao, write hundreds of words, and describe his personal history as a monarch with four surnames and the rank of Lord in Khitan.

古文：自谓： 孝于家，忠于国，为子、为弟、为人臣、为师长、为夫、为父，有子、有孙。
现代文：自称： 孝顺家人，忠于囱家，做儿子、做兄弟、做臣子、做师长、做丈夫、做父亲、有儿子、有孙子。
English: Self-described: Filial to his family, loyal to the chimney family, a son, a brother, a vassal, a teacher, a husband, a father, a son, a grandson.

古文：时开一卷，时饮一杯，食味、别声、被色，老安于当代，老而自乐，何乐如之？ 
现代文：时而翻开一卷书，时而饮下一杯酒，品尝饮食、鉴赏音乐、享受颜色，在当代平安年老，老而自乐，有什么快乐能像这样？ 
English: Open a book now and then, drink a glass of wine now and then, taste food, appreciate music, enjoy colors. In today's safe old age, old and self-satisfied, what kind of happiness can be like this?

古文：盖其自述如此。
现代文：他的自述大抵如此。
English: That's pretty much how he describes himself.

古文：道前事九君，未尝谏诤。
现代文：冯道以前事奉九个君主，都不曾直言规劝。
English: Feng Dao had previously served nine monarchs, and none of them had spoken to him directly.

古文：世宗初即位，刘旻攻上党，世宗曰： 刘旻少我，谓我新立而国有大丧，必不能出兵以战。
现代文：周世宗刚登位，刘曼进攻上党，周世宗说： 刘曼小看我，以为我刚登位而国家有大丧，必定不能出兵迎战。
English: Zhou Shizong had just ascended to the throne when Liu Man attacked the party. Zhou Shizong said: Liu Man looked down on me, thinking that I had just ascended to the throne and that the country was in great sorrow, so he must not send troops to fight.

古文：且善用兵者出其不意，吾当自将击之。 
现代文：而且善于用兵的人常常出其不意，我应当亲自率兵攻打他。 
English: Moreover, those who are good at using soldiers are often taken by surprise, and I should personally lead an army to attack him.

古文：道乃切谏，以为不可。
现代文：冯道于是恳切劝阻，认为不行。
English: Feng Dao then earnestly dissuaded him, saying that it was not possible.

古文：世宗曰： 吾见唐太宗平定天下，敌无大小皆亲征。 
现代文：周世宗说： 我见唐太宗平定天下，敌人无论大小都亲自出征。 
English: Zhou Shizong said: I saw Tang Taizong pacify the world, and the enemies, no matter how big or small, personally went to war.

古文：道曰： 陛下未可比唐太宗。 
现代文：冯道说： 陛下不能和唐太宗比。 
English: Feng Dao said: His Majesty cannot be compared to Emperor Tang.

古文：世宗曰： 刘旻乌合之众，若遇我师，如山压卵。 
现代文：周世宗说： 刘曼的军队是乌合之众，如果遇上我的军队，就像高山压在乌蛋上一样。 
English: Zhou Shizong said: Liu Man's army is a rabble. If they meet my army, it will be like a mountain pressing down on a blackbird's egg.

古文：道曰： 陛下作得山定否？ 
现代文：冯道说： 陛下能使山不动吗？ 
English: Feng Dao said, "Can Your Majesty move the mountain?

古文：世宗怒，起去，卒自将击旻，果败旻于高平。
现代文：周世宗发怒，起身离去，最终还是亲自率兵攻打刘曼，果然在高平打败刘曼。
English: Zhou Shizong got angry, got up and left. In the end, he personally led the troops to attack Liu Man and defeated Liu Man in Gaoping.

古文：世宗取淮南，定三关，威武之振自高平始。
现代文：周世宗攻取淮南，平定三关，威武精神的振奋就从高平开始。
English: Zhou Shizong conquered Huainan and pacified the three passes, and the enthusiasm of the martial spirit began from Gaoping.

古文：其击旻也，鄙道不以从行，以为太祖山陵使。
现代文：他攻打刘曼，看不起冯道，不让他随行，任命他为周太祖山陵使。
English: He attacked Liu Man, looked down on Feng Dao, refused to let him accompany him, and appointed him as the envoy to the tomb of Zhou Taizu.

古文：葬毕而道卒，年七十三，谥曰文懿，追封瀛王。
现代文：安葬完周太祖后冯道就死了，享年七十三岁，谧号叫文懿，追封为瀛王。
English: After the burial of Zhou Taizu, Feng Dao died at the age of seventy-three. His posthumous name was Wen Qi, and he was posthumously crowned the King of Qi.

古文：道既卒，时人皆共称叹，以谓与孔子同寿，其喜为之称誉盖如此。道有子吉。
现代文：冯道死后，当时的人都共同称赞叹息，认为他和孔子寿命相同，当时人大抵就是这样喜欢为他延誉。冯道有个儿子冯吉。
English: After the death of Feng Dao, the people at that time all praised the sigh, thinking that he and Confucius had the same life expectancy. At that time, people mostly liked to extend their reputation for him in this way. Feng Dao had a son, Feng Ji.

古文：○李琪兄掞李琪，字台秀，河西敦煌人也。
现代文：李琪字台秀，河西墩煌人。
English: Li Qizhidaixiu, a brilliant person from Hexi.

古文：其兄珽，唐末举进士及第，为监察御史。
现代文：他的哥哥李埏，在唐末考中进士，任监察御史。
English: His elder brother, Li Xi, was promoted to a scholar in the final examination of the Tang Dynasty, and was appointed as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：丁内艰，贫无以葬，乞食而后葬。
现代文：遭逢母亲的丧事，贫穷无法安葬，靠乞讨然后安葬。
English: After his mother's death, he was too poor to bury her, so he begged for money to pay for her funeral.

古文：珽饥卧庐中，闻者哀怜之。
现代文：李埏饿得躺在家中，听说此事的人都哀怜他。
English: Li Yao lay at home, so hungry that everyone who heard about it felt sorry for him.

古文：服除，还拜御史。
现代文：服完丧，回朝拜为御史。
English: After the funeral, it was time to return to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：荆南成汭辟掌书记。
现代文：荆南成油征召他为掌书记。
English: Jing Nancheng oil called him to be the secretary.

古文：吴兵围杜洪，梁太祖遣汭与马殷等救洪。
现代文：昊兵包围杜洪，梁太祖派成油和马殷等人救援杜洪。
English: Hao soldiers surrounded Du Hong. Liang Taizu sent Chengyou and Ma Yin to rescue Du Hong.

古文：汭以大舟载兵数万，珽为汭谋曰： 今一舟容甲士千人，糗粮倍之，缓急不可动，若为敌人縻之，则武陵、武安必为公之后患。
现代文：成油用大船载兵几万人，李埏为成油出谋说： 如今一艘船载甲兵一千人，干粮加倍，紧急时不能行动，如果被敌人牵制，那么式陵、武安必定成为你的后患。
English: In order to make oil, large ships were used to carry tens of thousands of soldiers. Li Wei, the strategist for oil production, said: Today, a ship carries a thousand armored soldiers, and the dry grain is doubled. In an emergency, you can't act. If you are held back by the enemy, then Shiling and Wu'an will surely become your future troubles.

古文：不若以劲兵屯巴陵，壁不与战，吴兵粮尽，则围解矣。 
现代文：不如率强兵屯驻巴陵，坚守营垒不和他们作战，昊兵粮食耗尽后，就解围了。 
English: It would be better to garrison Baling with strong soldiers, hold fast to the camp and not fight with them. After the soldiers ran out of food, they would lift the siege.

古文：汭不听，汭果败，溺死。
现代文：成油没有采纳，果然失败，死在水中。
English: The conversion to oil was not adopted, and it failed, dead in the water.

古文：赵匡凝镇襄阳，又辟掌书记。
现代文：赵匡凝镇守襄阳，又征召他焉掌书记。
English: Zhao Kuangge was appointed to guard Xiangyang, and he was also called up to serve as secretary.

古文：太祖破匡凝，得珽，喜曰： 此真书记也。 
现代文：梁太祖攻破赵匡凝，得到李埏，高兴地说： 这人是真正的书记。 
English: Liang Taizu defeated Zhao Kuangning and got Li Yao, happily saying: This person is a real secretary.

古文：太祖即位，除考功员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：梁太祖登位，授任考功员外郎、知制诰。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne and appointed Gairo and Zhisheng Yao as examiners.

古文：珽度太祖不欲先用故吏，固辞不拜，出知曹州。
现代文：李埏估计梁太祖不想先用过去的官吏，坚决推辞不受命，出京治理曹州。
English: Li Yu estimated that Liang Taizu did not want to first use the past officials, resolutely refused to accept the order, and went to Beijing to govern Caozhou.

古文：曹州素剧难理，前刺史十馀辈，皆坐废，珽至，以治闻。
现代文：曹州素来事务繁多难以治理，以前的刺史十多人，都因罪废置，李埏到后，以善于治理闻名。
English: Caozhou has always been difficult to manage due to its many and varied affairs. More than ten people with criminal records in the past have all been disposed of for their crimes. After Li Rong arrived, he was known for his good governance.

古文：迁兵部郎中、崇政院直学士。
现代文：升任兵部郎中、崇政院直学士。
English: He was promoted to Hyobu no roju (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs) and became a direct graduate of the Imperial Academy of Sciences.

古文：许州冯行袭病，行袭有牙兵二千，皆故蔡卒，太祖惧为变。
现代文：许州冯行袭患病，冯行袭有牙兵两干人，都是过去的蔡州兵，梁太祖怕发生兵变。
English: Xu Zhou Feng Xingqi fell ill, Feng Xingqi had two tooth soldiers, both of whom were former Cai Zhou soldiers. Liang Taizu was afraid of a mutiny.

古文：行袭为人严酷，从事魏峻切谏，行袭怒，诬以赃下狱，欲诛之。
现代文：冯行袭为人严刻残酷，从事魏峻直言劝谏，冯行袭发怒，用贪污受贿罪诬陷使他入狱，想杀掉他。
English: Feng Xingyuan was a stern and cruel person, engaged in Wei Jun's straight-talking persuasion, Feng Xingyuan was angry, framed him for corruption and bribery, and wanted to kill him.

古文：乃遣珽代行袭为留后。
现代文：于是派李埏接替冯行袭任留后。
English: Therefore, Li Ye was sent to succeed Feng Xinghai after he left the post.

古文：珽至许州，止传舍，慰其将吏，行袭病甚，欲使人代受诏，珽曰： 东首加朝服，礼也。 
现代文：李埏到达许州，住在客舍中，慰问许州将吏，冯行袭病重，想派人代替他接受诏书，李埏说： 头朝东面加朝服，这是礼仪。 
English: Li Lan arrived in Huzhou and stayed in a guest house to offer condolences to the Huzhou generals. Feng Xingan was seriously ill and wanted to send someone to accept the imperial edict in his place. Li Lan said, "It is etiquette to wear the imperial robe with the head facing east.

古文：乃即卧内见行袭，道太祖语，行袭感泣，解印以授珽。
现代文：于是去卧室里见冯行袭，转述梁太祖的话，冯行袭感动得哭泣，解下印绶交给李埏。
English: So he went to the bedroom to see Feng Xinguo, to paraphrase the words of Liang Taizu. Feng Xinguo was moved to tears, and he opened the seal and handed it to Li Yong.

古文：珽乃理峻冤，立出之，还报太祖，太祖喜曰： 珽果办吾事。 
现代文：李埏于是审理魏峻的冤案，立即放他出狱，回去报告梁太祖，梁太祖高兴地说： 李埏果然能替我办事。 
English: Li Hong then tried Wei Jun's unjust case, immediately released him from prison, and went back to report to Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu said happily: Li Hong can really do things for me.

古文：会岁饥，盗劫汴、宋间，曹州尤甚，太祖复遣珽治之。
现代文：恰逢逭年饥荒，盗贼在汴、宋二州间抢劫，曹州尤其严重，梁太祖又派李埏去治理。
English: The famine in the Year of the Rooster coincided with the robberies between the two states of Shu and Song, Caozhou was particularly serious, and Liang Taizu sent Li Yong to govern.

古文：珽至索贼，得大校张彦珂、珽甥李郊等，及牙兵百馀人，悉诛之。
现代文：李埏到任后搜索盗贼，抓到大校张彦珂、李埏的外甥李郊等人，以及牙兵一百多人，全部杀掉。
English: After Li Qiye took office, he searched for the thieves and caught the senior colonel Zhang Yanke, Li Qiye's nephew Li Jiao and others, as well as more than a hundred dental soldiers, and killed them all.

古文：召拜左谏议大夫。
现代文：宣召拜任为左谏议大夫。
English: He was called up to serve as a doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：太祖幸河北，至内黄，顾珽曰： 何谓内黄？ 
现代文：梁太祖去河北，到达内黄，回头对李埏说： 为什么叫内黄？ 
English: Liang Taizu went to Hebei, arrived in Neihuang, and turned back to Li Yao and said: Why is it called Neihuang?

古文：珽曰： 河南有外黄、下黄，故此名内黄。 
现代文：李埏说： 河南有外黄、下黄，因此这里叫内黄。 
English: Li Wei said: Henan has outer yellow and lower yellow, so it is called inner yellow.

古文：太祖曰： 外黄、下黄何在？ 
现代文：梁太祖说： 外黄、下黄在哪里？ 
English: Liang Taizu said: Where is the outer yellow and the lower yellow?

古文：珽曰： 秦有外黄都尉，今在雍丘；下黄为北齐所废，今在陈留。 
现代文：李埏说： 秦有外黄都尉，在今天的雍丘；下黄被北齐废置，在今天的陈留。 
English: Li Zhe said: Qin had the governor of the Outer Yellow River, today's Yongqiu; Lower Yellow River was abandoned by Northern Qi, today's Chen.

古文：太祖平生不爱儒者，闻珽语大喜。
现代文：梁太祖一生不喜欢儒士，听了李埏的话非常高兴。
English: Liang Taizu disliked Confucianism all his life. He was very happy to hear Li Yao's words.

古文：友珪立，除右散骑常侍，侍讲。
现代文：朱友珪登位，授任右散骑常侍，侍讲。
English: Zhu Youkai ascended to the throne and was awarded the title of Right Hand Cavalryman, Master of Ceremonies.

古文：袁象先讨贼，珽为乱兵所杀。
现代文：袁象先讨伐贼军，李埏被乱兵杀死。
English: Yuan Xiang was the first to fight against the bandit army, and Li Yao was killed by the soldiers.

古文：琪少举进士、博学宏辞，累迁殿中侍御史，与其兄珽皆以文章知名。
现代文：李琪年轻时考中进士、博学宏辞科，几次升任至殿中侍御史，和他的哥哥李埏都以文章闻名。
English: When he was young, Li Qi passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was well-versed in the subject of macro-diction. He was promoted several times to the post of palace attendant, and he and his brother, Li Yao, were both famous for their articles.

古文：唐亡，事梁太祖为翰林学士。
现代文：唐灭亡，事奉梁太祖为翰林学士。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he served Liang Taizu and became a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：梁兵征伐四方，所下诏书，皆琪所为，下笔辄得太祖意。
现代文：梁兵四方征伐，所下达的诏害，都是李琪写的，落笔就合梁太祖的心意。
English: Liang's military campaigns in four directions and the imperial edicts he issued were all written by Li Qi, and the final stroke of the pen was in accordance with Liang Taizu's will.

古文：末帝时，为御史中丞、尚书左丞，拜同中书门下平章事，与萧顷同为宰相。
现代文：鋈末帝时，任御史中丞、尚书左丞，拜为同中书门下平章事，和萧顷同任宰相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xizong, he held the posts of Gushi Chujo and Shang Shuzo Zuo Rong, and he was the second-highest-ranking official under Shang Shuzo, and the same position as Xiao He as the prime minister.

古文：顷性畏慎周密，琪倜傥负气，不拘小节，二人多所异同。
现代文：萧顷性格胆小谨慎周密，李琪豪爽自负、不拘小节，两人多有不同。
English: Xiao He is timid, cautious and meticulous, while Li Qi Hao is proud and unconstrained. The two of them are quite different.

古文：琪内结赵岩、张汉杰等为助，以故顷言多沮。
现代文：李琪在朝廷内结交趟岩、张汉杰等人作为佐助，因此萧顷的话多被阻挠。
English: Li Qi made friends with Watan Rock, Zhang Hanjie and others in the imperial court as assistants, so Xiao He's words were mostly blocked.

古文：顷尝掎摭其过。
现代文：萧顷曾指摘李琪的过失。
English: Xiao He once pointed out Li Qi's fault.

古文：琪所私吏当得试官，琪改试为守，为顷所发，末帝大怒，欲窜逐之，而岩等救解，乃得罢为太子少保。
现代文：李琪偏袒的官吏应当担任试官，李琪改试为守，被萧顷告发，梁末帝大怒，想放逐他，而趟岩等人救解，纔得以罢为太子少保。
English: The official whom Li Qiye favored should serve as an examiner, Li Qiye changed the exam for protection, was denounced by Xiao Yao, Emperor Liang was furious and wanted to banish him, and Wai Yan and others came to the rescue, and Zou was able to become a minor prince.

古文：唐庄宗灭梁，得琪，欲以为相，而梁之旧臣多嫉忌之，乃以为太常卿。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁，得到李琪，想让他做宰相，而凿的旧臣大多忌恨他，于是任命焉太常卿。
English: Tang Zhuangzong eliminated Liang, got Li Qi, wanted him to be prime minister, and most of the old ministers hated him, so he appointed Yan Taizhong.

古文：迁吏部尚书。
现代文：升任吏部尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：同光三年秋，天下大水，京师乏食尤甚，庄宗以硃书御札诏百僚上封事。
现代文：同光三年秋，天下大水成灾，京师缺粮尤其严重，唐庄宗用朱笔御札下诏让百官上书奏事。
English: In the autumn of the same year, the world was flooded, and the shortage of grain in Beijing was particularly serious. Tang Zhuozong issued an imperial decree with a red pen to let hundreds of officials report the matter.

古文：琪上书数千言，其说漫然无足取，而庄宗独称重之，遂以为国计使。
现代文：李琪上书几千字，他的意见漫无边际没有可取之处，而唐庄宗偏偏看重他的意见，于是任命他为国计使。
English: Li Qi wrote several thousand words, his opinions were rambling and had no merit, but Tang Zhuangzong valued his opinions, so he appointed him as the state planner.

古文：方欲以为相，而庄宗崩。
现代文：正想任命他为宰相，而唐庄宗逝世。
English: He was about to appoint him as prime minister when Tang Zhuozong passed away.

古文：明宗入洛阳，群臣劝进，有司具仪，用柩前即位故事。
现代文：唐明宗进入洛阳，群臣劝说明宗登位，官府准备礼仪，用灵柩前登位的旧例。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of Tang entered Luoyang, a group of courtiers persuaded Emperor Jingzong to ascend to the throne, the government prepared the etiquette, and used the coffin to ascend to the throne.

古文：霍彦威、孔循等请改国号，绝土德。
现代文：霍彦威、孔循等人请求改换国号，不再承袭土德。
English: Huo Yanwei, Kong Cui and others requested to change the name of the country and no longer inherit the name of the motherland.

古文：明宗武君，不晓其说，问何谓改号，对曰： 庄宗受唐锡姓为宗属，继昭宗以立，而号国曰唐。
现代文：唐明宗是个武人出身的君主，不懂他们的意思，问什么叫改号，回答说： 唐庄宗接受唐的赐姓成为唐的宗族，接续唐昭宗而登位，因而国号为唐。
English: Tang Mingzong was a warrior-turned-monarch. He didn't understand what they meant. When asked what the name change meant, he replied: "Tang Zhuangzong accepted the surname of Tang and became the clan of Tang. He succeeded Tang Zhaozong and ascended the throne. Therefore, the country's name is Tang."

古文：今唐天命已绝，宜改号以自新。 
现代文：如今唐的天命已经断绝，应改变国号自我更新。 
English: Now that Tang's destiny has been broken, the country should change its name and renew itself.

古文：明宗疑之，下其事群臣，群臣依违不决。
现代文：唐明宗对此疑虑，把这事交给群臣讨论，群臣或赞成或反对意见不统一。
English: Tang Mingzong was doubtful about this and referred the matter to his ministers for discussion. The ministers were not unanimous in their approval or disapproval.

古文：琪议曰： 殿下宗室之贤，立功三世，今兴兵向阙，以赴难为名，而欲更易统号，使先帝便为路人，则茕然梓宫，何所依往！ 
现代文：李琪议论说： 殿下是宗室的贤人，三代立功，现在兴兵来朝，以奔赴国难为名，而想改变国号，使先帝成为路人，那么孤独的棺木，去哪里依托！ 
English: Li Qi commented: His highness is the sage of the family, three generations of meritorious service, now he is raising an army to come to the DPRK, in the name of rushing to the national disaster, but he wants to change the country's name, so that the former emperor becomes a passerby, so lonely coffin, where to go!

古文：明宗以为然，乃发丧成服，而后即位。
现代文：唐明宗赞同他的看法，于是穿上丧服发丧，然后登位。
English: Tang Mingzong agreed with his opinion, so he put on mourning clothes to mourn, and then ascended the throne.

古文：以琪为御史中丞。
现代文：任命李琪为御史中丞。
English: Li Qi was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：自唐末丧乱，朝廷之礼坏，天子未尝视朝，而入阁之制亦废。
现代文：自从唐末丧乱以来，朝廷的礼仪败坏，天子不曾上朝，而入阁的制度也废弃了。
English: Since the chaos at the end of the Tang Dynasty, the etiquette of the imperial court has deteriorated, the emperor has never ascended to the throne, and the system of entering the cabinet has been abandoned.

古文：常参之官日至正衙者，传闻不坐即退，独大臣奏事，日一见便殿，而侍从内诸司，日再朝而已。
现代文：常参官每天到正衙，听说不坐衙就退下，只有大臣奏报事情，每天在便殿接见一次，而侍从内各司，每天两次朝拜而已。
English: The permanent staff officers go to the main hall every day, and when they hear that they do not have to sit in the main hall, they withdraw. Only the ministers report things, and they are received once a day in the hall, while the attendants from various departments only worship twice a day.

古文：明宗初即位，乃诏群臣，五日一随宰相入见内殿，谓之起居。
现代文：唐明宗刚登位，就下韶害给群臣，五天一次随宰相到内殿进见，叫做起居。
English: As soon as Emperor Mingzong of Tang ascended the throne, he issued an edict to his courtiers, and once every five days he accompanied the prime minister to the inner hall for inspection, which is called "journeying."

古文：琪以谓非唐故事，请罢五日起居，而复朔望入阁。
现代文：李琪认为这不是唐的旧例，请求废除五日起居，而恢复每月初一、十五入哄的旧例。
English: Li Qi believed that this was not the old practice in Tang, and requested that the old practice of moving in on the first day of the month and moving out on the fifteenth day of the month be abolished.

古文：明宗曰： 五日起居，吾思所以数见群臣也，不可罢。
现代文：唐玥宗说： 五日一起居，是我想藉以多次召见群臣的缘故，不能废弃。
English: Tang Yanzong said, "Living together for five days is something I can't give up because I want to use it to summon my retainers many times.

古文：而朔望入阁可复。 
现代文：而每月初一、十五入栏可以恢复。 
English: However, on the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month, the entry column can be restored.

古文：然唐故事，天子日御殿见群臣，曰常参；朔望荐食诸陵寝，有思慕之心，不能临前殿，则御便殿见群臣，曰入阁。
现代文：但唐的旧例，天子每天到殿堂接见群臣，叫 常参 ；初一、十五向各陵墓进献祭食，有思慕先人的心情，不能到前殿，就到便殿接见群臣，叫 入合 。
English: But the old example of Tang, the heavenly son went to the hall every day to receive the courtiers, called "Changsan"; on the first day and the fifteenth day of the first month, he went to the mausoleums to offer sacrifices, and he was in the mood to think about the ancestors. If he could not go to the front hall, he went to the hall to receive the courtiers, and called "Yuhei."

古文：宣政，前殿也，谓之衙，衙有仗。
现代文：宣政是前殿，叫做 衙 ，衙有仪仗。
English: Xuan Zheng is the front hall. It is called,  has a ceremonial battle.

古文：紫宸，便殿也，谓之阁。
现代文：紫宸是便殿，叫做 合 。
English: Zijie is a toilet, called He.

古文：其不御前殿而御紫宸也，乃自正衙唤仗，由阁门而入，百官俟朝于衙者，因随以入见，故谓之入阁。
现代文：皇帝不到前殿而到紫宸，是从正衙叫来仪仗，从合门进入，百官在前殿候朝，因而跟随进见，因此叫 入合 。
English: The emperor did not go to the front hall but went to Zizhi. He called for a ceremonial battle from Zhengzhou and entered from the closing gate. Hundreds of officials were waiting for the morning in the front hall, so they followed the advance, so they called the entrance.

古文：然衙，朝也，其礼尊；阁，宴见也，其事杀。
现代文：但前殿是朝廷，礼仪尊严；便殿是宴见宾客的地方，礼仪简单。
English: But the vestibule is the imperial court, the dignity of etiquette; the hall is a place to meet guests, the etiquette is simple.

古文：自乾符已后，因乱礼阙，天子不能日见群臣而见朔望，故正衙常日废仗，而朔望入阁有仗，其后习见，遂以入阁为重。
现代文：自从干符以后，因为动乱而礼仪阙失，天子不能每天接见群臣而在初一、十五接见，因此前殿日常废弃仪仗，而初一、十五到便殿进见却有仪仗，后来习以为常，就把到便殿进见看得更重要。
English: From the time of the Hanfu, because of the turmoil, the etiquette was lost. The emperor could not receive the courtiers every day, but received them on the first day and the fifteenth day of the month. Therefore, the front hall abandoned the ceremonial battle on a daily basis, but on the first day and the fifteenth day of the month, there was a ceremonial battle to enter the hall. Later, it was considered normal, and it was considered more important to enter the hall.

古文：至出御前殿，犹谓之入阁，其后亦废，至是而复。
现代文：至于到前殿，还叫做 入合 ，后来也废弃了，到这时纔恢复。
English: As for the vestibule, it was also called "Uchiai" (入合) and was later abandoned, but has since been restored.

古文：然有司不能讲正其事。
现代文：但有关部门不能论正此事。
English: However, the relevant departments cannot correct the matter.

古文：凡群臣五日一入见中兴殿，便殿也，此入阁之遗制，而谓之起居，朔望一出御文明殿，前殿也，反谓之入阁，琪皆不能正也。
现代文：大凡群臣五天一次到中兴殿进见，这是在便殿，是入合流传下来的制度，而叫做 起居 ；初一、十五到文明殿，这是在前殿，反而叫做 入合 ，李琪都不能纠正。
English: A large number of ministers visit the Zhongxing Hall once every five days, but this is in the toilet hall, which is a system handed down from generation to generation, and is called moving in; on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month, they go to the Civilization Hall, which is in the front hall, but is called moving in, and Li Qi can't correct it.

古文：琪又建言： 入閤有待制、次对官论事，而内殿起居，一见而退，欲有言者，无由自陈，非所以数见群臣之意也。 
现代文：李琪又建议说： 入合有待制、次对官议论事情，而内殿起居，见一面就退出，想进言的人，无法自己陈述，不符合希望多次见到群臣的本意。 
English: Li Qi also suggested that: the entry and exit are pending, and the second-ranking officials discuss the matter, but the inner hall gets up and withdraws at the first sight, and those who want to make a statement cannot make a statement on their own, which is not in line with the intention of hoping to see the ministers many times.

古文：明宗乃诏起居日有言事者，许出行自陈。
现代文：唐明宗于是下诏在起居日有事要谈的人，准许自行出列陈述。
English: Tang Mingzong therefore decreed that anyone who had something to talk about on the day of the sitting should be allowed to make a statement on their own.

古文：又诏百官以次转对。
现代文：又下诏百官依次轮流奏对。
English: After that, the hundred officials took turns to play in pairs.

古文：是时，枢密使安重诲专权用事，重诲前驱过御史台门，殿直马延误冲之，重诲即台门斩延而后奏。
现代文：这时，枢密使安重诲专权管事，安重诲的侍从骑兵经过御史台门口时，殿直马延误撞了他，安重诲就在御史台门口杀掉马延然后上报。
English: At this time, the privy council put An Chongyun in charge of the exclusive power. When An Chongyun's attendant cavalry passed through the gate of Gushidai, the palace straight horse bumped him. An Chongyun killed Mayen at the gate of Gushidai and then reported it.

古文：琪为中丞，畏重诲不敢弹纠，又惧谏官论列，乃托宰相任圜先白重诲而后纠，然犹依违不敢正言其事。
现代文：李琪任中丞，惧怕安重诲而不敢弹劾纠察他，又怕谏官议论，于是托宰相任圜先告诉安重诲然后纠察此事，但还是模棱两可不敢直言其事。
English: Li Qiren, fearing An Chongyun, did not dare to impeach and picket him, and was afraid of eunuchs discussing the matter. Therefore, Minister-in-charge Ren Ren first told An Chongyun and then picketed the matter, but he was still ambiguous and did not dare to speak out.

古文：豆卢革等罢相，住圜议欲以琪为相，而孔循、郑珏沮之，乃止。
现代文：豆卢革等人罢相，任圆拟议任命李琪做宰相，而孔循、郑珏阻挠此事，于是作罢。
English: Zhu Ruge and others resigned, Ren Yuan proposed to appoint Li Qi as prime minister, but Kong Cui and Zheng Qi obstructed the matter, so they resigned.

古文：迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：李琪升任尚书右仆射。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：琪以状申中书，言《开元礼》 仆射上事日，中书、门下率百官送上。 
现代文：李琪上书申告中书，称《开元礼》 仆射上报事情那天，中书、门下率领百官送呈 。
English: Li Qi submitted a written report to the Central Committee, saying that the "opening ceremony" was reported on the same day, and the Central Committee and its subordinates led hundreds of officials to submit the report.

古文：中书下太常，礼院言无送上之文，而琪已落新授，复举上仪，皆不可。
现代文：中害下达给太常征询意见。礼院说《开元礼》没有 送上 之文，而李琪已解除新近任命的职务，再次提出上述礼仪，都没有同意。
English: The court of etiquette said that the "Lunar New Year" did not send a letter, and Li Qi had been relieved of his newly appointed duties, and the above etiquette was proposed again, but they did not agree.

古文：明宗讨王都，已破定州，自汴还洛，琪当率百官至上东门，而请至偃师奉迎。
现代文：唐明宗讨伐王都，攻破定州后，从汴州返回洛阳，李琪应当率领百官到上柬闩，而请求到偃师迎接。
English: After the Tang and Ming dynasties' crusade against Wangdu and the conquest of Dingzhou, Li Qi returned to Luoyang from Bozhou. Li Qi should have led hundreds of officials to Shanghainese capital, and requested to be greeted by Bozhi.

古文：其奏章言 败契丹之凶党，破真定之逆城 ，坐误以定州为真定，罚俸一月。
现代文：他的奏章说 打败契丹凶党，攻破真定逆城 ，因误把定州写成真定，罚一个月的俸禄。
English: His report said that he defeated the Khitan evil party and broke through the anti-Zhending city, and he was fined one month's salary for mistakenly writing Dingzhou as Zhending.

古文：霍彦威卒，诏琪撰神道碑文。
现代文：霍彦威去世，下诏书让李琪撰写神道碑碑文。
English: After the death of Huo Yanwei, Li Qi was ordered to write a Shinto inscription.

古文：彦威故梁将，而琪故梁相也，叙彦威在梁事不曰伪，为冯道所驳。
现代文：霍彦威是梁的旧将，而李琪过去是梁的宰相，叙述霍彦威在梁的事情不称 伪梁 ，被冯道驳回。
English: Huo Yanwei is Liang's old general, and Li Qi was Liang's prime minister in the past. The story of Huo Yanwei in Liang is not called "False Liang" and was rejected by Feng Dao.

古文：琪为人重然诺，喜称人善。
现代文：李琪为人讲信用，喜欢称赞别人的善行。
English: Li Qi is a trustworthy person and likes to praise the good deeds of others.

古文：少以文章知名，亦以此自负。
现代文：年轻时以文章出名，也因此自负。
English: When he was young, he was famous for his articles, which made him conceited.

古文：既贵，乃刻牙版为金字曰 前乡贡进士李琪 ，常置之坐侧。
现代文：显贵后，就在牙板上刻下金字 前乡贡进士李琪 ，时常放在座旁。
English: After he became prominent, he engraved the gold characters 前乡贡进士李琪 on the dental plate, and often placed it next to the throne.

古文：为人少持重，不知进退，故数为当时所沮。
现代文：为人缺乏稳重，不懂进退处世的原则，因此多次受到当时人的诋毁。
English: Because he lacked stability and did not understand the principle of advancing and retreating in life, he was repeatedly slandered by the people of that time.

古文：以太子太傅致仕，卒，年六十。
现代文：以太子少傅退休居家，去世，享年六十岁。
English: Prince Etsuko Shofu retired to his home and died at the age of 60.

古文：○郑珏
现代文：郑珏，唐代宰相郑綮的孙子。
English: Zheng Qi, the grandson of the Tang Dynasty Prime Minister Zheng Qi.

古文：郑珏，唐宰相綮之诸孙也。
现代文：父亲郑徽，任河南尹张全义的判官。
English: His father, Zheng Hui, was the judge of Yin Zhang Quan Yi in Henan Province.

古文：其父徽，为河南尹张全义判官。珏少依全义居河南，举进士数不中，全义以珏属有司，乃得及第。
现代文：郑珏年轻时依附张全义住在河南，多次考进士不中，张全义把郑珏嘱托给有关部门，纔得以考中。
English: When he was young, Zheng Rong lived in Henan with Zhang Quanyi. He failed the entrance examination several times. Zhang Quanyi entrusted Zheng Rong to the relevant departments, and Zheng Rong passed the examination.

古文：昭宗时，为监察御史。
现代文：唐昭宗时，任监察御史。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang, he served as the inspector general of history.

古文：梁太祖即位，拜左补阙。
现代文：梁太祖登位，拜为左补阙。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and was worshipped as the Left Complementary Deity.

古文：梁诸大臣以全义故数荐之，累拜中书舍人、翰林学士奉旨。
现代文：梁众大臣因张全义的缘故多次推荐他，几次升迁任中书舍人、翰林学士奉旨。
English: Because of Zhang Quanyi, Liang's ministers recommended him many times, and he was promoted several times to the posts of middle school librarian and Hanlin scholar.

古文：末帝时，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：梁末帝时，拜为中书侍郎、同中害门下平章事。
English: During the reign of the last Emperor Liang, he served as the attendant of Zhongshu and the disciple of Tongzhongye under the command of Pingzhang.

古文：唐庄宗自郓州入汴，末帝闻唐兵且至，惶恐不知所为，与李振、敬翔等相持恸哭，因召珏问计安出，珏曰： 臣有一策，不知陛下能行否？ 
现代文：唐庄宗从郫州进入汴州，梁末帝听说唐兵快到了，惊惶恐惧不知所措，和李振、敬翔等人相抱痛哭，因而召郑珏询问有什么计策，郑珏说： 我有一个计策，不知陛下能否实行？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou from Zhangzhou. When Emperor Liang heard that the Tang soldiers were about to arrive, he was overwhelmed with panic and fear. He and Li Zhen, Qian Xiang and others hugged each other and cried bitterly. Therefore, he called Zheng Yao to ask what strategy to use. Zheng Yao said: I have a strategy, I don't know if His Majesty can implement it.

古文：末帝问其策如何，珏曰： 愿得陛下传国宝驰入唐军，以缓其行，而待救兵之至。 帝曰： 事急矣，宝固不足惜，顾卿之行，能了事否？ 
现代文：梁末帝问他的计策怎样，郑珏说： 希望得到陛下的传国宝驰马进入唐军，以便延缓他们的行军速度，而等待救兵到来 皇帝说： 事情危急了，传国宝固然不值得吝惜，只是你这一去，能不能了结这事？ 
English: Liang Mu Di asked him what his plan was, Zheng Yao said: I hope to get His Majesty's national treasure horse to enter the Tang army, in order to slow down their marching speed, and wait for the arrival of rescuers. The emperor said: Things are critical, although the national treasure is not worth begrudging, but if you go, can you end this matter?

古文：珏俯首徐思曰： 但恐不易了。 
现代文：郑珏低头慢慢考虑说： 只怕不容易了结这事。 
English: Zheng Yao bowed his head and said slowly: I'm afraid it won't be easy to end this.

古文：于是左右皆大笑。
现代文：于是旁边的人都大笑起来。
English: Everyone around burst out laughing.

古文：庄宗入汴，珏率百官迎谒道左。
现代文：唐庄宗进入汴州，郑珏率领百官在路旁谒见。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou, Zheng He led hundreds of officials to meet him on the side of the road.

古文：贬莱州司户参军，量移曹州司马。
现代文：贬为莱州司户参军，酌情调任曹州司马。
English: He was demoted to Laizhou Sifu and transferred to Caozhou Sima as appropriate.

古文：张全义为言于郭崇韬，复召为太子宾客。
现代文：张全义在郭崇韬面前替他说话，又召为太子宾客。
English: Zhang Quanyi spoke for him in front of Guo Chongyi and was also invited to be the prince's guest.

古文：明宗即位，欲用任圜为相，而安重诲以圜新进，不欲独相之，以问枢密使孔循。
现代文：唐明宗登位，想任用任圜做宰相，而安重诲因任圜刚刚进用，不愿让他单独做宰相，拿这事询问枢密使孔循。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he wanted to appoint Renjun as prime minister, but An Chongyi, who had just been promoted, did not want him to be prime minister alone, so he asked the Privy Councilor Kong Xuan about it.

古文：循尝事梁，与珏善，因言珏故梁相，性谨慎而长者，乃拜珏平章事。
现代文：孔循曾在梁做官，和郑珏关系好，因而说郑珏是过去梁的宰相，性格谨慎而又年长，于是拜郑珏为平章事。
English: Kong Cun had been an official in Liang, and had a good relationship with Zheng Qi. Therefore, he said that Zheng Qi was the prime minister of Liang in the past, and his character was cautious and elderly. Therefore, it was a trivial matter to pay homage to Zheng Qi.

古文：明宗幸汴州，六军家属自洛迁汴，而明宗又欲幸鄴都，军士愁怨，大臣颇以为言。
现代文：唐明宗进入汴州，六军家属从洛阳迁到汴州，而唐明宗又想去邺都，土兵们愁闷埋怨，大臣们不断谏阻。
English: Tang Mingzong entered Bozhou, the families of the six armies moved from Luoyang to Bozhou, and Tang Mingzong wanted to go to Bozhou, the soldiers were sad and complained, and the ministers constantly resisted.

古文：明宗不省，上下汹汹，转相动摇，独珏称赞，以为当行。
现代文：唐明宗并不醒悟，上下议论纷纷，相互动摇，惟独郑珏称赞，认为应当去。
English: Tang Mingzong did not wake up, the discussion went up and down, and they were mutually shaken, but Zheng Yao praised it and thought that it should go.

古文：赵凤极言于安重诲，重诲惊惧，入见明宗切谏，乃诏罢其行。而珏又称赞之，以为宜罢。
现代文：趟凤向安重诲极力谏阻，安重诲震惊害怕，入见唐明宗急切谏阻，纔下诏不去而郑珏又加以称赞，认为应当不去。
English: Wafeng strongly resisted An Chongzhen, An Chongzhen was shocked and afraid, and Nyusi Tang Mingzong was eager to resist, and issued an edict not to go, while Zheng He praised it and thought that it should not go.

古文：珏在相位既碌碌无所为，又病聋，孔循罢枢密使，珏不自安，亟以疾求去职。
现代文：郑珏身居相位既碌碌无为，又耳聋，孔循罢枢密使，郑珏心里不安，急忙藉生病请求离任？
English: Zheng Rong is in a phase of both idleness and deafness. Confucius followed the imperial envoy, Zheng Rong was uneasy in his heart, and hurriedly requested to leave the post due to illness?

古文：明宗数留之，珏章四上，乃拜左仆射致仕，赐郑州庄一区。
现代文：唐明宗多次挽留他，郑珏四次上书，于是拜为左仆射辞官居家，赏赐郑州的庄园一处。
English: Tang Mingzong detained him several times, Zheng Yao wrote to him four times, and then he was rewarded with a manor house in Zhengzhou.

古文：卒，赠司空。
现代文：去世，赠司空。
English: He died of illness and was succeeded by Stut.

古文：○李愚李愚，字子晦，渤海无棣人也。
现代文：李愚字子晦，渤海无棣人。
English: Li Yu's characters are obscure, and there are no famous people in Bohai.

古文：愚为人谨重寡言，好学，为古文。
现代文：李愚为人谨慎厚重，沉默寡言，好学，善作古文。
English: Li Gou was a prudent person, taciturn, studious, and good at writing ancient texts.

古文：沧州节度使卢彦威以愚为安陵主簿，丁母忧解去。
现代文：沧州节度使卢彦威任李愚为安陵主簿，为母亲服丧解职离去。
English: At the Cangzhou Festival, Lu Yanwei was appointed as the chief librarian of Li Gu's tomb, and was relieved of his duties to attend to his mother's funeral.

古文：后游关中，刘季述幽昭宗于东内，愚以书说韩建，使图兴复，其言甚壮。
现代文：后来游历关中，刘季述把唐昭宗幽囚在束内，李愚写信游说韩建，要他图谋复兴，言辞十分雄壮。
English: Later, he traveled to Guanzhong, where Liu Jizhong imprisoned Tang Zhaozong, and Li You wrote a letter to Han Jian, asking him to seek revival. His words were very powerful.

古文：建不能用，乃去之洛阳。举进士、宏词，为河南府参军。
现代文：韩建役能采用，于是李愚离开前去洛阳考取进士、宏词科，任河南府参军。
English: Han Jianyong was able to adopt it, so Li Gu left and went to Luoyang to take the entrance examination and the Hongzhe subject, and was appointed to join the army in Henan Province.

古文：白马之祸，愚复去之山东，与李延光相善，延光以经术事梁末帝为侍讲，数称荐愚，愚由此得召。
现代文：白马之祸，李愚又前往山东，和李延光相处很好，李延光以经街在梁末帝那里任侍讲，多次称赞推荐李愚，李愚因此受到召用。
English: Due to the misfortune of the white horse, Li Gu went to Shandong again, and got along very well with Li Yanguang. Li Yanguang served as an attendant speaker at Emperor Liangmu, praised and recommended Li Gu many times, and Li Gu was therefore summoned.

古文：久之，拜左拾遗、崇政院直学士。
现代文：遇了很久，拜为左拾遣、崇政院直学士。
English: It took a long time, and he became a left-leaning scholar and a direct graduate of the Supreme People's Court.

古文：衡王友谅，末帝兄也，梁大臣李振等皆拜之，独愚长揖，末帝以责愚曰： 衡王朕拜之，卿独揖，可乎？ 
现代文：衡王朱友谅，是梁末帝的哥哥，銮大臣李振等人都对他下拜，惟独李愚只作长揖，梁末帝因此责问李愚说： 衡王，我都对他下拜，你仅仅作揖，行吗？ 
English: Heng Wang Zhu You is the elder brother of Liang Mingdi. Li Zhen, the Minister of Mines, and others all bowed down to him, but Li Gu only made the long bow. Liang Mingdi therefore rebuked Li Gu, saying: Heng Wang, I bow down to him, you only make the bow, is that okay?

古文：愚曰： 陛下以家人礼见之，则拜宜也。臣于王无所私，岂宜妄有所屈？ 
现代文：李愚说： 陛下按家人的礼节见他，那么下拜是应该的；我对他没有什么私亲，难道该随便下拜吗？ 
English: Li Yu said, "Your Majesty met him according to the etiquette of family members, so bowing down is proper; I have no personal relationship with him, should I bow down casually?"

古文：坐言事忤旨，罢为邓州观察判官。
现代文：因论事违背皇帝的意旨，罢焉邓州观察判官。
English: Due to the fact that the case was against the emperor's will, the Dengzhou observation and adjudication officer resigned.

古文：唐庄宗灭梁，愚朝京师，唐诸公卿素闻愚学古，重之，拜主客郎中、翰林学士。
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁，李愚到京师朝拜，唐的公卿士大夫素来知道李愚学古，很看重他，拜为主客郎中、翰林学士。
English: Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Liang, Li Gu went to Beijing to pay homage to his teacher. Tang's noblemen and scholars had always known Li Gu Xuegu, and they valued him very much. They paid homage to him as the main guest, and the scholar of Hanlin.

古文：魏王继岌伐蜀，辟愚都统判官。
现代文：魏王李继岌伐蜀，征用李愚为都统判官。
English: The Wei king, Li Jie, razed Shu to the ground and expropriated Li Gu to become the magistrate of the capital.

古文：蜀道阻险，议者以谓宜缓师待变而进，招讨使郭崇韬以决于愚，愚曰： 王衍荒怠，乱国之政，其人厌之。
现代文：蜀道艰难险阻，议事的人认为应当缓兵等待时机进攻，招讨使郭崇韬拿这事请李愚决断，李愚说： 王衍荒淫懈怠，当政乱国，那里的人讨厌他。
English: Shu Road was difficult and dangerous, and the people in charge of the meeting thought that they should delay the troops and wait for the opportunity to attack. They invited Guo Chongxuan to take this matter and ask Li Yu to make a decision. Li Yu said: Wang Yan is wild and lazy, when the country is in political turmoil, the people there hate him.

古文：乘其仓卒，击其无备，其利在速，不可缓也。 
现代文：趁他仓猝，攻其不备，利于速战，不能延缓。 
English: Take advantage of his haste, attack his unpreparedness, is conducive to rapid war, can not be delayed.

古文：崇韬以为然，而所至迎降，遂以灭蜀。
现代文：郭崇韬认为他说得对，而所到之处都迎按他们并投降，于是消灭蜀。
English: Guo Chongzhen thought that he was right, and everywhere they went, they were welcomed and surrendered, so they destroyed Shu.

古文：初，军行至宝鸡，招讨判官陈乂称疾请留，愚厉声曰： 陈乂见利则进，知难则止。
现代文：当初，军队到达宝鹦时，招讨判官陈父推说有病请求留下，李愚高声说： 陈父见利而进，知难而退。
English: At the beginning, when the army arrived at Bao Piao, the recruiting judge Chen Fuxiong suggested that he was sick and asked him to stay. Li Yu said in a loud voice: Chen Fuxiong advanced when it was advantageous and retreated when it was difficult.

古文：今大军涉险，人心易摇，正可斩之以徇。 
现代文：如今大军跋涉天险，人心容易动摇，正好杀掉他示众。 
English: Nowadays, a large army is trudging through natural peril, people's hearts are easily shaken, just kill him and show the public.

古文：由是军中无敢言留者。
现代文：从此军中没有人敢说要留下。
English: From then on, no one in the army dared to say that they wanted to stay.

古文：明宗即位，累迁兵部侍郎承旨。
现代文：唐明宗登位，多次升迁任兵部侍郎承旨。
English: Emperor Mingzong of Tang ascended to the throne, and he was promoted several times to the position of Hyobu Jiro Shoji.

古文：明宗祀天南郊，愚为宰相冯道、赵凤草加恩制，道鄙其辞，罢为太常卿。
现代文：唐明宗在南郊祭天，李愚为宰相冯道、赵凤起草加恩制诰，冯道看不起他的文辞，降他为太常卿。
English: Tang Mingzong held a divine service in the southern suburb, and Li Yu drafted an amnesty decree for Prime Minister Feng Dao and Zhao Feng. Feng Dao despised his words and demoted him to Tai Changqing.

古文：任圜罢相，乃拜愚中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任园罢相，于是拜李愚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: He was dismissed from the position of garden, so Bai Liwu became the secretary of the middle school, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：愚为相，不治第宅，借延宾馆以居。
现代文：李愚任宰相，不修建宅第，而借延宾馆居住。
English: Li Yu was appointed prime minister, but instead of building a residence, he rented a hotel to live in.

古文：愚有疾，明宗遣宦官视之，见其败毯敝席，四壁萧然，明宗嗟叹，命以供帐物赐之。
现代文：李愚患病，唐明宗派宦官探望他，看见他用的破旧毡席，四壁萧然，唐明宗感叹不已，命令拿供宴会使用的帷帐赐给他。
English: When Li You fell ill, a eunuch from the Tang and Ming Dynasties visited him. He saw the dilapidated banquet hall he was using. The walls were rusty. The Tang and Ming Dynasties were filled with regret and ordered to give him a curtain for the banquet.

古文：潞王反，犯京师，愍帝夜出奔。
现代文：潞王反叛，侵犯京师，唐愍帝连夜出逃。
English: Emperor Xian rebelled and invaded Beijing, and Emperor Tang fled overnight.

古文：明日，愚与冯道至端门，闻帝已出，而硃弘昭、冯赟皆已死，愚欲至中书候太后进止，道曰： 潞王已处处张榜招安，今即至矣，何可俟太后旨也？ 
现代文：第二天李愚和冯道到端门，听说皇帝已经出逃，而朱弘昭、冯餮都已死去，李愚想到中害去等待太后确定去留，冯道说： 潞王已到处张榜招安，现在就快到了，怎能等太后的命令？ 
English: The next day, Li Gu and Feng Dao arrived at the front gate. They heard that the emperor had fled, and that Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Xuan had both died. Li Gu thought of going to wait for the empress dowager to decide to stay. Feng Dao said, "King Xuan has been posting everywhere to invite peace, and now it's almost time. How can I wait for the empress dowager's order?"

古文：乃相与出迎。
现代文：于是一道出去迎接潞王。
English: So they all went out to meet the king.

古文：废帝入立，罢道出镇同州，以刘昫为相。
现代文：唐废帝登位，罢免冯道，让他出守同州，任命刘呦为宰相。
English: Emperor Tang ascended the throne, dismissed Feng Dao, sent him to Tongzhou, and appointed Liu Ye as prime minister.

古文：昫性褊急，而愚素刚介，动辄违戾。
现代文：刘啕气量狭小、性情急躁，而李愚素来刚强耿直，动不动就连逆刘晌。
English: Liu Xuan is short of stamina and quick-tempered, while Li Yu has always been strong and upright, and even goes against Liu Xuan at every turn.

古文：昫与冯道姻家，愚数以此诮昫，两人遂相谊诟，乃俱罢。
现代文：刘啕和冯道是亲家，李愚多次拿这点讥诮刘晌，两人于是相互指责大骂，因而都被罢免。
English: Liu Wei and Feng Dao are relatives. Li Gu repeatedly took this to ridicule Liu Wei, and the two then accused each other of swearing, so they were both dismissed.

古文：愚守左仆射。
现代文：李愚任左仆射。
English: Li Guren shoots with his left.

古文：是时，兵革方兴，天下多事，而愚为相，欲依古以创理，乃请颁《唐六典》示百司，使各举其职，州县贡士，作乡饮酒礼，时以其迂阔不用。
现代文：当时，战争刚刚爆发，天下多事，而李愚任宰相，想按照古代的制度来治理国家，于是请求颁布《唐六典》给各部门，让他们各尽其职，州县贡举士人，行乡饮酒礼，当时认为这样做太迂腐而未采用。
English: At that time, the war had just broken out and there were many things going on in the world, and Li Yuren, the prime minister, wanted to govern the country according to the ancient system, so he requested the promulgation of the "Tang Six-Book" to all departments, so that they could perform their duties, the state and county tribute, and the township drinking ceremony. At that time, it was considered that this was too pedantic and was not adopted.

古文：愍帝即位，有意于治，数召学士，问以时事，而以愚为迂，未尝有所问。
现代文：唐愍帝登位，着意治国，多次召集学士，询问时事，而觉得李愚迂腐，不曾问他什么。
English: When Emperor Tang Xuan ascended to the throne, he was intent on governing the country. He repeatedly summoned scholars to inquire about current affairs. However, he thought Li Yu was being pedantic and never asked him anything.

古文：废帝亦谓愚等无所事，常目宰相曰： 此粥饭僧尔！ 
现代文：唐废帝也认为李愚等人无所事事，常常看着宰相说： 这是喝稀饭的和尚！ 
English: Emperor Tang Wulai also thought that Li Gu and others were idle, and often looked at the prime minister and said: This is a monk who drinks porridge!

古文：以谓饱食终日，而无所用心也。
现代文：藉此说他饱食终日，无所用心。
English: By this he meant that he had eaten all day and had no intention of doing anything else.

古文：清泰二年，以疾卒。
现代文：清泰二年因病去世。
English: He died of illness in the second year of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：○卢导卢导，字熙化，范阳人也。
现代文：卢导字熙化，范阳人。
English: Lu Du's character Xihua, Fan Yangren.

古文：唐末举进士，为监察御史。
现代文：唐末考中进士，任监察御史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of junior high school student in the final examination of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：唐亡事梁，累迁左司郎中、侍御史知杂事，以病免。
现代文：唐灭亡后事奉梁，多次升迁任左司郎中、侍御史知杂事，因病免职。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he served as a minister, and was promoted several times to the position of left secretary, middle secretary, and attendant, but was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：唐明宗时，召拜右谏议大夫，迁中书舍人。
现代文：唐明宗时，召拜为右谏议大夫，升任中书舍人。
English: When he was a member of the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was called to serve as the right-hand lamasery doctor, and was promoted to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：潞王从珂自凤翔以兵犯京师，愍帝出奔于卫州。
现代文：潞王李从珂从凤翔率兵侵犯京师，唐愍帝出逃到卫州。
English: The warlord Li Zongke led his troops to invade Beijing, and the Tang dynasty emperor fled to Weizhou.

古文：宰相冯道、李愚集百官于天宫寺，将出迎潞王于郊，京师大恐，都人藏窜，百官久而不集，惟导与舍人张昭先至。
现代文：宰相冯道、李愚在天官寺召集众官员，准备到郊外迎接潞王，京师十分恐惧，人们都逃亡隐藏起来，众官员很久聚集不起来，只有卢导和舍人张略先到。
English: The prime ministers, Feng Dao and Li Gu, gathered all the officials in the Temple of Heaven and prepared to go out to the suburbs to meet the king. The Beijing division was very afraid. People fled and hid. The officials could not gather for a long time. Only Lu Du and She Ren Zhang arrived a little earlier.

古文：冯道请导草笺劝进，导曰： 潞王入朝，郊迎可也，若劝进之事，岂可轻议哉！ 
现代文：冯道让卢导起草笺表劝潞王登位，卢导说： 潞王入朝，到郊外迎接可以，至于劝他登位的事，难道可以随便议论吗！ 
English: Feng Dao asked Lu Dao to draft a petition to persuade Emperor Gong to ascend to the throne. Lu Dao said: Emperor Gong has entered the imperial court, you can go to the suburbs to greet him. As for the matter of persuading him to ascend to the throne, can you discuss it casually?

古文：道曰： 劝进其可已乎？ 
现代文：冯道说： 劝他登位可以作罢吗？ 
English: Feng Dao said: Can we stop trying to persuade him to ascend to the throne?

古文：导曰： 今天子蒙尘于外，遽以大位劝人，若潞王守节不回，以忠义见责，其将何辞以对？
现代文：卢导说： 如今天子在外逃亡蒙受风尘，匆匆就把皇位拿来劝他人即位，如果潞王守节不改变主意，反而用忠义责备我们，那我们用什么话回答？
English: Lu said: "If today's son has fled abroad and suffered from the wind and dust, and hastily took the throne to persuade others to take the throne, if Shao Wang Shoujie does not change his mind, but instead reproaches us with loyalty, then what words should we use to answer?

古文：且上与潞王，皆太后子也，不如率百官诣宫门，取太后进止。 
现代文：而且皇上和潞王，都是太后的儿子，不如率领众官员去官门，听太后的吩咐。 
English: Moreover, both the emperor and the king were sons of the empress dowager. It would be better to lead the officials to the official gate and listen to the orders of the empress dowager.

古文：语未终，有报曰： 潞王至矣。 
现代文：话未说完，有人报告说： 潞王到了。 
English: Before he had finished speaking, someone reported: "The king of the baboons has arrived."

古文：京城巡检使安从进催百官班迎，百官纷然而去。
现代文：京城巡检使安从进催促案官员列队迎接，众官员纷纷前去。
English: The Beijing Municipal Patrol Inspection sent a line of officials to meet the officials of the urging case, and the officials went forward one after another.

古文：潞王止于正阳门外，道又促导草笺，导对如初。李愚曰： 吾辈罪人，卢舍人言是也。 
现代文：潞王在正阳门外停下，冯道又催卢导起草笺表劝潞王登位，卢导像起初那样回答李愚说： 我们是罪人，卢舍人的话是对的。 
English: Shao Wang stopped outside the Zhengyang Gate. Feng Dao also urged Lu Dao to draft a petition to persuade Shao Wang to ascend to the throne. Lu Dao replied to Li Yu as he did at the beginning: "We are sinners. The words of the Lushe people are right."

古文：导终不草笺。
现代文：卢导最终没有起草笺表。
English: In the end, Lu did not draw up a schedule.

古文：导后事晋为吏部侍郎。
现代文：卢导后来事奉晋任吏部侍郎。
English: Lu Du later served the Jin Dynasty as a chamberlain in the cadre department.

古文：天福六年卒，年七十六。
现代文：天福六年去世，享年七十六岁。
English: Tianfu died six years later at the age of seventy-six.

古文：○司空颋司空颋，贝州清阳人也。
现代文：司空颁，贝州清阳人。
English: He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and hails from Beizhou, Qingyang.

古文：唐僖宗时，举进士不中，后去为罗绍威掌书记。
现代文：唐僖宗时，考进士不中，后来离去任罗绍威的掌书记。
English: At the time of Tang Xizong, he failed to pass the entrance examination, and later left to serve as the secretary of Roshaowi.

古文：绍威卒，入梁为太府少卿。
现代文：罗绍威死，去梁任太府少卿。
English: When Roshowei died, Liang was appointed as Taifu Shaoqing.

古文：杨师厚镇天雄，颋解官往依之。
现代文：杨师厚镇守天雄，司空颠辞官前去依附他。
English: Yang Shihou guarded Tianxiong, and Siku Bijieguan went to attach him.

古文：师厚卒，贺德伦代之。张彦之乱，命判官王正言草奏诋斥梁君臣，正言素不能文辞，又为兵刃所迫，流汗浃背，不能下笔。
现代文：杨师厚死，贺德伦代任张彦作乱时，命令判官王正言起草奏书诋毁梁的君臣，王正言素来不擅长文辞，又被刀尖逼迫，汗流浃背，不能下笔。
English: When Yang Shih Hou died and He Delun took the place of Zhang Yan to make a disturbance, he ordered the judge Wang Zhengyan to draft a report to slander Liang's vassals. Wang Zhengyan has never been good at rhetoric, and was persecuted by the point of a knife, sweating profusely, unable to write.

古文：彦怒，推正言下榻，诟曰： 钝汉辱我！ 
现代文：张彦发怒，把王正言推下床榻，骂道： 蠢漠羞辱我！ 
English: Zhang Yan became angry and pushed Wang Zhengyan off the bed, scolding him: "You fool, you have humiliated me!

古文：顾书吏问谁可草奏者，吏即言颋罗王时书记，乃驰骑召之。
现代文：望着文字官吏询问谁能起草奏书，官吏们就说司空颠是罗王时的掌书记，于是驰马召他。
English: Looking at the script, the officials asked who could draft the report, and the officials said that Sikuubi was the secretary of the king of Luo, so they called him.

古文：颋为乱兵劫其衣，以敝服蔽形而至，见彦长揖，神气自若，挥笔成文，而言甚浅鄙，彦以其易晓，甚喜，即给以衣服仆马，遂以为德伦判官。
现代文：司空颐被乱兵抢走衣服，就用破衣服遮蔽形体来到，他见了张彦作长揖，神态自如，挥笔成文，而言辞十分浅近鄙俚，张彦因他写得通俗易晓，非常高兴，就赏给他衣、仆人、马匹，于是任他为贺德伦的判官。
English: Sikyong was robbed of his clothes by the ruffians, so he came with torn clothes to cover his body. When he met Zhang Yan, he was dressed in a long robe, his demeanor was relaxed, he waved his pen to write, and his words were very shallow and almost contemptuous. Zhang Yan was very happy because he could write in an easy-to-understand manner, so he gave him a robe, servants, and horses, and then appointed him as the judge of Hedren.

古文：德伦以魏博降晋，晋王兼领天雄，仍以颋为判官。梁、晋相距河上，常以颋权军府事。颋为郭崇韬所恶，崇韬数言其受赂。
现代文：贺德伦以魏博向晋投降，晋王兼领天雄，仍旧任司空颇为判官梁、晋在黄河对峙，常常让司空龋代理军府事司空颊为郭崇韬所憎恶，郭崇韬多次说他受贿。
English: He Delun surrendered to the Jin with Wei Bo, the Jin king and leader of Tianxiong, and still appointed Sikyong Pu as the judge of Liang and Jin in the Yellow River confrontation. He often let Sikyong Pu, the acting secretary of the military government, be hated by Guo Chongyi. Guo Chongyi repeatedly said that he was bribed.

古文：都虞候张裕多过失，颋屡以法绳之。颋有侄在梁，遣家奴召之，裕擒其家奴，以谓通书于梁。庄宗族杀之。
现代文：都虞候张裕常有过失，司空颇多次绳之以法，司空颐有个侄子在梁，派家奴去召他，张裕抓到他的家奴，说他和梁通信，唐庄宗把他灭族。
English: Zhang Yu, the prefectural governor, was often at fault. Siku was brought to justice many times. Siku had a nephew in Liang and sent a family slave to summon him. Zhang Yu caught his family slave and said that he was corresponding with Liang. Tang Zhuangzong exterminated him.

