古文：所谓踵军者，去大军百里，期于会地，为三日熟食，前军而行。
现代文：所谓踵军，通常与大军相距约一百里，按期到达会战地点，它应携带三天干粮，在大军的前面行进，还要预先规定好行动的信号，接到信号后就开始行动。
English: The so-called heel army is usually about a hundred miles away from the main army and arrives at the battle site on schedule. It should carry three days of dry rations and march in front of the main army. It should also pre-determine the signal for action and start the action after receiving the signal.

古文：为战，合之表，合表乃起。
现代文：踵军开始行动之前，应搞赏士卒，以激发他们的战斗意志。
English: Before the heel army begins to act, it is necessary to reward the soldiers in order to stimulate their will to fight.

古文：踵军飨士，使为之战势，是谓趋战者也。兴军者，前踵军而行，合表乃起。
现代文：这就是踵军向战场前进的方法。兴军，在踵军的前面行进，接到前进的信号就开始出发。
English: This is how the Heel Army advanced to the battlefield. The Xing Army, marching in front of the Heel Army, received the advance signal and began to set off.

古文：去大军一倍其道，去踵军百里，期于会地，为六日熟食，使为战备。
现代文：它与大军的距离比距踵军远一倍，与踵军相距约一百里，也要按期到达会战地点，并应携带六天干粮，到达后作好战斗准备，同时派出分手占领附近要点。
English: It is twice as far away from the main army as the heel army, and about a hundred miles away from the heel army. It should also arrive at the battle site on schedule, and should carry six days of dry rations. After arrival, it should be ready for battle, and at the same time send troops to occupy key points nearby.

古文：分卒据要害，战利则追北，按兵而趋之。踵军遇有还者，诛之。
现代文：战斗有利就追击败退的故人，后续部队要急速跟进策应他们。踵军遇有从兴军逃回的应予惩办。
English: If the battle is favorable, they should pursue the retreating dead, and the follow-up troops should quickly follow up and deal with them. In the event that the Heel Army escapes from the Xing Army, they should be punished.

古文：所谓诸将之兵在四奇之内者胜也。
现代文：一般地说，将领善于指挥这四部分军队，使它们相互配合，首尾相应，就能胜利地行军作战了。
English: Generally speaking, generals are good at commanding these four parts of the army, making them cooperate with each other and corresponding to each other, so that they can march and fight successfully.

古文：兵有什伍，有分有合，豫为之职，守要塞关梁而分居之。战，合表起，即皆会也。
现代文：军队有什伍的编制，有分散有集中，事先区分任务，据守要害、关卡、桥梁，到了战期，根据号令向规定的地点会合。
English: Armies are organized in groups, dispersed, and concentrated. They distinguish their tasks in advance, guard key points, checkpoints, and bridges, and meet at designated places according to orders in wartime.

古文：大军为计日之食，起，战具无不及也。令行而起，不如令者有诛。
现代文：大军应按规定及时补充粮食和各种物资，接到命令就开始行动，不按照命令行事的应予惩办。
English: The large army should timely replenish grain and various materials in accordance with regulations, start operations upon receiving orders, and those who do not act in accordance with orders should be punished.

古文：凡称分塞者，四境之内，当兴军踵军既行，则四境之民无得行者。
现代文：凡宣布戒严的地区，在它的范围之内，当兴军、踵军已经出发，而主力还未出发的时候，境内的民众，一概不许通行。
English: In all areas where martial law has been declared, within its scope, when the Xing Army and the Heel Army have set out, but the main force has not yet set out, the people in the territory are not allowed to pass.

古文：奉王之军命，授持符节，名为顺职之吏。
现代文：奉有君主命令并持有符节的，叫做传达任务的军官，这种人才准通行。
English: Those who have received the sovereign's order and hold the insignia, called the officers who convey the task, are allowed to pass.

古文：非顺职之吏而行者，诛之。
现代文：不是传达任务的军官而擅自行动的应予惩罚。
English: Those who act without authorization and are not the officers who conveyed the mission should be punished.

古文：战，合表起，顺职之吏乃行，用以相参。
现代文：当主力出发以后，传达任务的军官才离开这个地区，回去参与军务。
English: Only after the main force had left did the officer who had conveyed the mission leave the area and return to take part in military affairs.

古文：故欲战，先安内也。
现代文：总之要进行战争，必须首先安定内部的秩序。
English: In short, in order to wage war, the internal order must first be stabilized.

