古文：夫设情有宅，置言有位；宅情曰章，位言曰句。
现代文：创作的时候要把意境设置在恰当的地方，语言要放在合适的位置上；情景设置在恰当的地方叫做 章 ，语言放在合适位置上叫做 句 。
English: When creating, the artistic conception should be set in the right place, and the language should be placed in the right place; the scene setting in the right place is called a chapter, and the language placed in the right place is called a sentence.

古文：故章者，明也；句者，局也。
现代文：所谓 章 ，就是明白；所谓 句 ，就是分界。
English: The so-called chapter is to understand; the so-called sentence is to demarcate.

古文：局言者，联字以分疆；明情者，总义以包体。区畛相异，而衢路交通矣。
现代文：分界语言，连接字词才能够分成各个单位，明确情境，概述所包含的思想并把它融入到既定的体裁里，即便章句二者的界限不同，它却能够像道路一般相互连接。
English: A demarcated language, a connecting word, is one that can divide into units, define a situation, summarize the ideas involved and integrate them into an established genre, even if the boundaries of the two clauses are different, it can be connected like a road.

古文：夫人之立言，因字而生句，积句而为章，积章而成篇。
现代文：人们所谓的写作，是用字词组成句，句多了成章，章多了成篇。
English: People's so-called writing is to use words to form sentences, more sentences to form chapters, and more chapters to form articles.

古文：篇之彪炳，章无疵也；章之明靡，句无玷也；句之清英，字不妄也。振本而末从，知一而万毕矣。
现代文：全篇之所以能够文采焕发，是因为章没有瑕疵的缘故；章之所以能够文笔华丽，是因为句没有瑕疵的缘故；句之所以清新秀美，是因为字没有混乱的缘故；就好比震动树的根本而树叶也会随之晃动一样，知道根本的原则就能够概括全部的事例。
English: The reason why the whole article is able to shine is because the chapter is without flaws; the reason why the chapter is able to write splendidly is because the sentence is without flaws; the reason why the sentence is clean and beautiful is because the words are not confused; just like shaking the root of the tree and the leaves will shake with it, knowing the fundamental principle can summarize all the cases.

古文：夫裁文匠笔，篇有大小；离章合句，调有缓急；随变适会，莫见定准。
现代文：韵文和散文创作，篇幅大小不一；分离章整合句，调子也是有缓有急；随着内容的变化而适当的调配，并没有固定的标准。
English: The creation of rhymes and prose varies in length; the separation of chapters and the integration of sentences, the tone is also slow and urgent; the appropriate deployment as the content changes, and there is no fixed standard.

古文：句司数字，待相接以为用；章总一义，须意穷而成体。
现代文：不管句子的字数是多少，只有将字词连接起来才能够起到作用；一章讲述了一个意思，只有让意思明确才算是一个完整的段落。
English: No matter how many words there are in a sentence, it only works if the words are connected; a chapter tells a story, and a paragraph is complete only if the story is clear.

古文：其控引情理，送迎际会，譬舞容回环，而有缀兆之位；歌声靡曼，而有抗坠之节也。
现代文：其中所要掌控的情理，有时宕开有时承接，就好比跳舞来回旋转一般，要有行列位置；又好像声色美妙的歌曲一样，带有高低清浊的节奏。
English: Among them, the mood to be controlled, sometimes staggering and sometimes undertaking, is like dancing and spinning back and forth, with a queue position; it is also like a beautiful song, with a high and low clear rhythm.

古文：寻诗人拟喻，虽断章取义，然章句在篇，如茧之抽绪，原始要终，体必鳞次。
现代文：检验诗人的比拟譬喻时，虽然会有断章取义，然而每一章一句都在整篇之内，就好像剥茧抽丝，有开始就要有结束，好像紧密的鱼鳞排列一般有秩序。
English: When examining the poet's simile, although there will be out-of-context, but each chapter and sentence are within the whole text, it is like peeling and pulling threads, there must be a beginning and an end, like a close arrangement of fish scales, there is generally order.

古文：启行之辞，逆萌中篇之意；绝笔之言，追媵前句之旨；故能外文绮交，内义脉注，跗萼相衔，首尾一体。
现代文：刚开始的行文言辞，就应该为中篇的写作埋下隐线，最后结尾的字词，要和前句的意思相呼应才行；如果能做到文字如交织的花纹，内涵融会贯通，好比花萼和子房的连接，首尾形成一体。
English: The words at the beginning of the sentence should be hidden for the writing of the middle part, and the words at the end should echo the meaning of the previous sentence. If you can make the words like interwoven patterns, the connotation will be integrated, like the connection between the calyx and the ovary, and the whole will form a whole.

古文：若辞失其朋，则羁旅而无友，事乖其次，则飘寓而不安。
现代文：如果言辞匹配不恰当，那么就好比在异乡的旅客般孤苦无依，叙述事情的顺序颠倒，就好比旅居在外的人一样无法安定。
English: If the words don't match, it's like being a stranded traveler in a foreign land, and if the order of events is reversed, it's like being a wanderer in a foreign land.

古文：是以搜句忌于颠倒，裁章贵于顺序，斯固情趣之指归，文笔之同致也。
现代文：所以造句的时候不要颠倒秩序，断章的时候看重行文顺序，这原本就是情意表达的最终归宿，韵文和散文的写作要求也是这样的。
English: Therefore, do not reverse the order when composing a sentence, and pay attention to the line order when breaking the chapter. This is originally the final destination of the expression of feelings, and the writing requirements of rhymes and prose are also like this.

古文：若夫章句无常，而字有条数，四字密而不促，六字格而非缓，或变之以三五，盖应机之权节也。
现代文：至于散文，虽没有固定的句式，其中的字却有一定的规律：四字句比较紧凑但不促迫，六字句虽然较长，但不松散；有时变化为三字句、五字句，是情景变化的需要。
English: As for prose, although there is no fixed sentence form, the characters in it have certain rules: four-character sentences are relatively compact but not forced, six-character sentences, although longer, are not loose; sometimes they change to three-character sentences and five-character sentences, which is the need for changes in the situation.

古文：至于诗颂大体，以四言为正，唯《祈父》《肇禋》，以二言为句。
现代文：至于诗体、颂体的一般格式，大都是以四言为主。但《诗经·小雅·祈父》中以 祈父 二字成句，《诗经·周颂·维清》中以 肇禋 二字成句。
English: As for the general format of the poem and ode, most of them are mainly composed of four words. However, in the "Shijing, Xiaoya, Pray for Father," the two words "Prayer for Father" are composed, and in the "Shijing, Zhou Song, Weiqing," the two words "Zhao Xi" are composed.

古文：寻二言肇于黄世，《竹弹》之谣是也；三言兴于虞时，《元首》之诗是也；四言广于夏年，《洛汭之歌》是也；五言见于周代，《行露》之章是也。
现代文：查二字句的作品开始于黄帝时期，如《弹歌》这个歌谣就是；三字句的作品产生于虞舜时期，传为帝舜所作《元首》歌便是；四字句的作品发展于夏代，传为太康之弟在洛水边所作《五子之歌》就是；五字句的作品出现在周代，《诗经·召南》中《行露》篇就有部分五言句。
English: The two-character works began in the Yellow Emperor's period, such as the ballad "Pin Song"; the three-character works originated in the Yu Xi period, such as the "Fuhrer" song passed down to the Emperor; the four-character works developed in the Xia Dynasty, such as the "Song of the Five Sons" passed down to the brother of Taikang at the Luo waterside; the five-character works appeared in the Zhou Dynasty, and there are some five-character works in the "Song of the South."

古文：六言七言，杂出《诗》、《骚》；两体之篇，成于西汉。
现代文：六字、七字的句子，在《诗经》、《楚辞》中已搀杂出现；整篇文字或七字的作品，到两汉时期才完成。
English: Six-character and seven-character sentences have been mixed in "Shijing" and "Chu Ci"; the whole text or seven-character work was completed in the Han Dynasty.

古文：情数运周，随时代用矣。
现代文：随着发展中内容不断复杂，各种句式就根据不同的情况而更换使用了。
English: With the development of increasingly complex content, various sentence patterns have been replaced and used according to different situations.

古文：若乃改韵从调，所以节文辞气。
现代文：至于改换韵脚，变动音调，是为了调节文章的语气。
English: As for changing the rhyme, changing the tone, it is to adjust the tone of the article.

古文：贾谊、枚乘，两韵辄易；刘歆、桓谭，百句不迁；亦各有其志也。
现代文：贾谊和枚乘的辞赋，是两韵一换；刘歆和桓谭的作品，则是一韵到底：这就是各人的爱好不同了。
English: The diction of Jia Yi and Shi Xuan is a change of two rhymes; the works of Liu Bei and Guan Tan are a rhyme to the end: this is the difference in each person's hobbies.

古文：昔魏武论赋，嫌于积韵，而善于资代。
现代文：从前曹操论赋，不满于同韵的重复，而主张善于变换。
English: In the past, Cao Cao was dissatisfied with the repetition of the same rhyme, but advocated being good at transformation.

古文：陆云亦称 四言转句，以四句为佳 。
现代文：陆云也说： 四言句的转变，以四句一换为好。 
English: Lu Yun also said: The change of four sentences, it is better to change four sentences.

古文：观彼制韵，志同枚、贾。
现代文：他对用韵的意见，和枚乘、贾谊相同。
English: His opinion on the use of rhyme is the same as that of Shi Xuan and Jia Yi.

古文：然两韵辄易，则声韵微躁；百句不迁，则唇吻告劳。
现代文：但两韵一换，声调音韵略嫌急促；如较长的辞赋一韵到底，读起来又会使人感到疲劳。
English: However, when the two rhymes are interchanged, the tone rhyme seems to be a little hasty; if the longer phrase is a rhyme to the end, it will make people feel tired when reading.

古文：妙才激扬，虽触思利贞，曷若折之中和，庶保无咎。又诗人以 兮 字入于句限，《楚辞》用之，字出于句外。
现代文：才情昂扬的作者，虽然运思顺畅，怎如折中用韵，不疏不密，可保不出大的毛病。《诗经》的作者把 兮 字写入句内，《楚辞》中用 兮 字，常常在句子之外。
English: A talented author, although the operation of thought is smooth, how to use rhyme in the fold, not sparse, not dense, can not guarantee a big problem. The author of the "Song of Songs" wrote the words into the sentence, and the words in the "Analects of Confucius" were often outside the sentence.

古文：寻兮字承句，乃语助馀声。
现代文：查究用 兮 字组成句子，只是为了辅助语气的声音。
English: Investigate the use of 兮 characters to form sentences, just to complement the tone of voice.

古文：舜咏《南风》，用之久矣，而魏武弗好，岂不以无益文义耶！
现代文：从舜帝的《南风歌》以来， 兮 字的运用已很长久了。曹操讨厌用 兮 字，大概是他认为对作品的内容没有什么益处吧。
English: It has been a long time since Emperor Gao's "Song of the South Wind" was written, and Cao Cao disliked the use of the character "xi," probably because he thought it was not beneficial to the content of the work.

古文：至于 夫惟盖故 者，发端之首唱； 之而于以 者，乃札句之旧体； 乎哉矣也 者，亦送末之常科。
现代文：至于 夫 、 惟 、 盖 、 故 等，是句子开头的发语词； 之 、 而 、 于 、 以 等，是插入句中的常用语； 乎 、 哉 、 矣 、 也 等，则是用于句末的老话头。
English: As for husband, 惟,盖, 故, and so on, they are the pronouns at the beginning of the sentence; 之, 而, 于, 以, and so on, are the common words in the insertion sentence; 乎, 哉, 矣, 也, and so on, are the old words used at the end of the sentence.

古文：据事似闲，在用实切。
现代文：对于说明事理，这些虚词本身似乎没有具体意义，但在句子中的作用却是很必要的。
English: For the explanation of the matter, these imaginary words themselves do not seem to have a specific meaning, but their role in the sentence is very necessary.

古文：巧者回运，弥缝文体，将令数句之外，得一字之助矣。
现代文：高明的作者加以灵活运用，组合成完整的作品，将使若干个句子，靠一虚词的帮助而很好地联系起来。
English: Skillful authors use it flexibly and combine it into a complete work, making several sentences well connected with the help of an imaginary word.

古文：外字难谬，况章句欤。
现代文：既然虚字还惟恐其不妥，何况所有的章句呢？
English: Since the use of fictitious characters is so abominable, how much more so are all the chapters?

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：断章有检，积句不恒。
现代文：处理章节有一定的法度，积字成句却没有常规。
English: There are certain rules for dealing with chapters, but there is no rule for word-building sentences.

古文：理资配主，辞忌失朋。
现代文：章节的内容应该配合主旨，每个句子的文辞应该避免不连贯。
English: The content of the chapter should be consistent with the theme, and the wording of each sentence should avoid incoherence.

古文：环情革调，宛转相腾。
现代文：围绕内容来安排音韵，就能紧密结合而相互发扬。
English: By arranging the musical rhyme around the content, they can be closely combined and mutually developed.

古文：离合同异，以尽厥能。
现代文：根据实际划分章句，以此尽力发挥出章句的作用。
English: According to the actual division of chapters, we will try our best to play the role of chapters.

