古文：垣崇祖张敬儿
现代文：垣崇祖字敬远，是下邳人。
English: Kaki, who revered his ancestor and respected others, was from Shimotsuke.

古文：垣崇祖，字敬远，下邳人也。族姓豪强，石虎世，自略阳徙之于邺。
现代文：族姓豪强，石虎的时代，从略阳迁徙到邺。
English: Gao Qiang, the era of the stone tiger, migrated from Liaoyang to Shandong.

古文：曾祖敞，为慕容德伪吏部尚书。
现代文：其曾祖垣敞，曾任慕容德伪吏部尚书。
English: His great-great-great-grandfather, Murong De, was a member of the Ministry of False Officials.

古文：祖苗，宋武征广固，率部曲归降，仍家下邳，官至龙骧将军、汝南新蔡太守。
现代文：祖父垣苗，在宋武帝征讨广固时，率部下归降，便在下邳安家，官至龙骧将军、汝南、新蔡太守。
English: Grandfather Gaki Miao, who led his subordinates to surrender during Emperor Songwu's campaign to conquer Guanggu, settled down in Shimonoseki and rose to the ranks of General Longyu, Runan, and the new Empress Dowager Cai.

古文：父询之，积射将军，宋孝武世死事，赠冀州刺史。
现代文：父亲垣询之，为积射将军，宋孝武帝时为国捐躯，赠冀州刺史。
English: His father, who was a general in the Song Dynasty, died for the country during the reign of Emperor Song Xiaowu, and was given the title of "Hebei Provincial Historian."

古文：崇祖年十四，有干略，伯父豫州刺史护之谓门宗曰： 此儿必大成吾门，汝等不及也。 
现代文：垣崇祖四岁时，就很有才能和谋略了，他的伯父豫州刺史垣护之对宗族人说： 这孩子必将使我们门户大发光彩，你们都赶不上他。 
English: When he was four years old, he was very talented and cunning. His uncle, Yu Zhou Zhi Qigong, said to the clan: "This child will surely make our door shine brightly. You all can't catch up with him."

古文：刺史刘道隆辟为主簿，厚遇之。
现代文：刺史刘道隆聘请崇祖做主簿，待遇很优厚。
English: Liu Daolong, the secretary, hired Chong Zu to be the chief accountant, and the treatment was very generous.

古文：除新安王国上将军。
现代文：后被任命为新安王国上将军。
English: Later, he was appointed as a general of the Xin'an Kingdom.

古文：景和世，道隆求出为梁州，启转崇祖为义阳王征北行参军，与道隆同行，使还下邳召募。
现代文：景和时期，刘道隆请求出任梁州，并启禀皇上要求转任崇祖为义阳王征北行参军，与道隆同行，被派还下邳召募人马。
English: In the Jinghe period, Liu Daolong requested to be appointed as Liangzhou, and Emperor Qizong asked to be transferred to Chongzu to join the army for the northward march of King Yiyang, and to accompany Daolong. He was also sent to gather recruits.

古文：明帝立，道隆被诛。
现代文：明帝即位后，道隆被诛。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Duolong was banished.

古文：薛安都反，明帝遣张永、沈攸之北讨，安都使将裴祖隆、李世雄据下邳。
现代文：薛安都反叛时，明帝派遣张永、沈攸之北讨，薛安都使其部将裴祖隆、李世雄占据下邳。
English: When Xue Andu rebelled, the Ming Emperor sent Zhang Yong and Shen Yue to the North, and Xue Andu sent his subordinates Pei Zulong and Li Shixiong to occupy the Lower Yangtze.

古文：祖隆引崇祖共拒战，会青州援军主刘弥之背逆归降，祖隆士众沮败，崇祖与亲近数十人夜救祖隆，与俱走还彭城。
现代文：祖隆招崇祖来共同抗战，正赶上有青州援军主将刘弥之背逆归降，祖隆的士卒沮丧败北，崇祖和亲近数十人夜救祖隆，并和他一起逃回彭城。
English: Zulong recruited Chong Zu to join the war of resistance. Just in time, Liu Ya, the leader of the reinforcements from Qingzhou, turned his back and surrendered. Zulong's soldiers were frustrated and defeated. Chong Zu and dozens of people close to him rescued Zulong at night and fled back to Pengcheng with him.

古文：虏既陷徐州，崇祖仍为虏将游兵琅邪间不复归，虏不能制。
现代文：敌虏既攻陷了徐州，崇祖仍为虏率领游兵在琅笽一带，不能回来，虏也不能制约他。
English: Even though the enemy had invaded and occupied Xuzhou, Chong Zu still led the guerrillas in the area of Handan. He could not return, and the captors could not restrain him.

古文：密遣人于彭城迎母，欲南奔，事觉，虏执其母为质。
现代文：崇祖暗中派人到彭城迎取其母，打算南逃，事情败露，虏便扣住其母作人质。
English: Chong Zu secretly sent someone to Pengcheng to meet his mother, intending to escape to the south, but the plan was foiled and he held his mother hostage.

古文：崇祖妹夫皇甫肃兄妇，薛安都之女，故虏信之。
现代文：崇祖的妹夫皇甫肃的兄妇，是薛安都的女儿，故此虏很信任皇甫肃。
English: The elder brother and sister of Emperor Fushu, the brother-in-law of Emperor Chongzhu, were daughters of Xue Andu, so this prince trusted Emperor Fushu very much.

古文：肃仍将家属及崇祖母奔朐山，崇祖因将部曲据之，遣使归命。
现代文：皇甫肃便带着家属和崇祖的母亲逃往朐山，崇祖于是带领部下占据了朐山，并派使者归顺朝廷。
English: Empress Dowager Sui then fled to Shaoshan with her family members and the mother of Emperor Chong Zu. Emperor Chong Zu then led his men to occupy Shaoshan and sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：太祖在淮阴，板为朐山戍主，送其母还京师，明帝纳之。
现代文：太祖当时在淮阴，便行文任命垣崇祖为朐山戍主，并把他的母亲送到京城，明帝接受了。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was in Huaiyin, so he wrote a letter to the emperor, appointing Gaki Chongzu as the lord of Lushan, and sent his mother to the capital, where the emperor accepted.

古文：朐山边海孤险，人情未安。
现代文：朐山靠近海边，形势孤险，人心未安。
English: Lushan is close to the seaside, the situation is perilous, and people's hearts are not at ease.

古文：崇祖常浮舟舸于水侧，有急得以入海。
现代文：崇祖便经常在水边浮以舟舸，如遇紧急情况便可以乘船入海。
English: Chongzu often floated on the water's edge with a raft, and in case of emergency, he could take a boat into the sea.

古文：军将得罪亡叛，具以告虏。
现代文：军中有得罪的将领叛逃，把情况都报告了虏方。
English: The guilty generals in the army defected and reported the situation to the Mongolian side.

古文：虏伪城都将东徐州刺史成固公始得青州，闻叛者说，遣步骑二万袭崇祖，屯洛要，去朐山城二十里。
现代文：虏伪囗豕城都将东徐州刺史成固公刚得了青州，听叛者之说，便派步兵骑兵二万人袭击崇祖，兵驻洛要，离朐山城仅二十里。
English: When the rebels heard that Cheng Guogong had just won Qingzhou, he sent twenty thousand infantry and cavalry to attack Chongzu. The soldiers were stationed in Luoyang, only twenty miles from Lushan City.

古文：崇祖出送客未归，城中惊恐，皆下船欲去。
现代文：崇祖当时送客人还没回来，城中惊恐，都下到船上准备入海去。
English: At that time, Chongzu had not yet returned from seeing off his guests, and the city was terrified. Everyone got on the boat and prepared to go to sea.

古文：崇祖还，谓腹心曰： 贼比拟来，本非大举，政是承信一说，易遣诳之。
现代文：崇祖回来，对心腹说： 贼方刚才来，本不是要大举进攻，只是要证实一下叛者所说的情况，很容易迷惑。
English: When Chong Zu returned, he said to his confidant, "The bandits just came, but they didn't mean to attack in a big way. They just wanted to confirm what the rebels said. It's easy to be fooled.

古文：今若得百余人还，事必济矣。
现代文：现在如果有百余人回来，事情就好办了。
English: Now, if more than a hundred people come back, things will be easier.

古文：但人情一骇，不可敛集。
现代文：但人心一害怕，便不能集中。
English: But when people are scared, they can't concentrate.

古文：卿等可急去此二里外大叫而来，唱 艾塘义人已得破虏，须戍军速往，相助逐退 。 
现代文：你们赶紧到离此二里外处大叫而来，高叫 艾塘义人已攻破敌虏，正等着戍军速往，相助逐退 。 
English: You should hurry and come to a place two miles away from here to shout, shouting that the righteous people of Aitang have defeated the enemy and are waiting for the enemy army to hurry and help them retreat.

古文：船中人果喜，争上岸。崇祖引入据城，遣羸弱入岛，令人持两炬火登山鼓叫。
现代文：船中人听了果然大喜，又争相上岸，崇祖带领他们入据城上，把老弱之人都送到岛上。又令人持着两个火炬登上山头，擂鼓呼叫。
English: The people in the boat were overjoyed when they heard the news, and they all rushed to the shore. Chongzu led them to the castle, and sent the weak and the old to the island. He also had people hold two torches and climb up the hill, beating drums and shouting.

古文：虏参骑谓其军备甚盛，乃退。
现代文：虏方参骑以为这边军备甚盛，于是退去。
English: The cavalrymen thought that this side was heavily armed, so they retreated.

古文：崇祖启明帝曰： 淮北士民，力屈胡虏，南向之心，日夜以冀。
现代文：垣崇祖上启明帝说： 淮北一带的士民，受胡虏所蹂躏，人心向往南方，日夜盼望得到解救。
English: Emperor Qiming, the ancestor of Emperor Qizong, said: The scholar-citizens in the area of Huaibei were ravaged by the Khuriks, and their hearts yearned for the south, hoping day and night to be rescued.

古文：崇祖父伯并为淮北州郡，门族布在北边，百姓所信，一朝啸咤，事功可立。
现代文：我的父亲、伯父都曾在淮北州郡任职，我们垣氏的门族分布在北方边境一带，老百姓对我们怀有信任，一旦号召起来，就可以成就事功。
English: My father and uncle both served in Huaibei County. We, the members of the Qi clan, are distributed around the northern border. The people have confidence in us. Once we are called upon, we can achieve great things.

古文：第名位尚轻，不足威众，乞假名号，以示远近。 
现代文：不过我现在名位还轻，不足以威服众人，我请求朝廷借给我名号，我也好对远近之人发号施令。 
English: However, I am not powerful enough to intimidate everyone, so I am asking the Imperial Court to lend me a title so that I can issue orders to people near and far.

古文：明帝以为辅国将军、北琅邪兰陵二郡太守。
现代文：明帝便任命他为辅国将军、北琅笽、兰陵南齐书二郡太守。
English: Emperor Ming then appointed him as an auxiliary general of the country and the governor of the two counties of Beilun and Lanling Nanqishu.

古文：亡命司马从之谋袭郡，崇祖讨捕斩之。
现代文：逃亡分子司马从之来袭击郡城，被垣崇祖抓住砍了脑袋。
English: The fugitive Sima attacked the county seat from there, and was caught and beheaded by Taki.

古文：数陈计算，欲克复淮北。
现代文：他还多次献计献策，打算克复淮北。
English: He also repeatedly proposed plans to recover Huaibei.

古文：时虏声当寇淮南，明帝以问崇祖。
现代文：这时虏方声言要寇掠淮南，明帝便向崇祖询问怎么办？
English: At this time, the Mongolian side claimed that it wanted to invade Huainan, and the Ming Emperor asked the Emperor what to do.

古文：崇祖因启： 宜以轻兵深入，出其不意，进可立不世之勋，退可绝其窥窬之患。 
现代文：崇祖启禀说： 最好是轻兵深入，打他个出其不意，这样进可以建立奇勋，退可以让他们死了这条心。 
English: Chongzu Qixuan said: It is best to go deep into a light soldier and hit him by surprise. In this way, you can build a miracle, and retreat can let them die this heart.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：明帝批准了他的方案。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：崇祖将数百人入虏界七百里，据南城，固蒙山，扇动郡县。
现代文：垣崇祖带领数百人深入敌境七百里，占据南城，巩固蒙山，号召郡县。
English: He led hundreds of people seven hundred miles deep into the enemy territory, occupied Nancheng, consolidated Mengshan, and called on counties.

古文：虏率大众攻之，其别将梁湛母在虏，虏执其母，使湛告部曲曰： 大军已去，独住何为！ 
现代文：虏方率大军前来攻打，崇祖的别将梁湛母亲被虏方扣着，虏方把梁母绑了来，要梁湛对部下说： 大军已去，我们还留在这有什么用！ 
English: Liang Zhan led a large army to attack. Don't let Liang Zhan's mother be detained by the enemy. The enemy tied up Liang Zhan's mother and told Liang Zhan to say to his subordinates: The large army has left, what's the use of us staying here!

古文：于是众情离阻，一时奔退。
现代文：于是人心动摇，一下子都逃退了。
English: So the hearts of the people were shaken, and they all fled at once.

古文：崇祖谓左右曰： 今若俱退，必不获免。 
现代文：崇祖对左右说： 今天我们要是全退了，一定都没好结果。 
English: Chong Zu said to the left and right, "If we all withdraw today, it will not be a good result."

古文：乃住后力战，大败追者而归。
现代文：于是留在后头和敌人大战，终于把追兵打得大败而回。
English: So he stayed behind and fought with the enemy, finally defeating the pursuers and returning.

古文：以久劳，封下邳县子。
现代文：朝廷考虑到崇祖长期劳苦有功，封他为下邳县子。
English: The imperial court considered the long-term hard work and merits of Chongzu and made him the first son of Jiaozuo County.

古文：泰豫元年，行徐州事，徙戍龙沮，在朐山南。
现代文：泰豫元年，垣崇祖主管徐州，把防守点改在龙沮。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, the leader of Xuzhou, Gao Chongzu, changed the defensive point to Longzheng.

古文：崇祖启断水注平地，以绝虏马。帝以问刘怀珍，云可立。
现代文：崇祖上启皇上要求放水进入平地，用来阻挡虏方的马匹，明帝征求刘怀珍的看法，怀珍说可以。
English: Emperor Chongzhuangqi requested that water be released into the flat land to block the horses of the horse-riding party. Emperor Ming solicited Liu Huizhen's opinion, and Huizhen said yes.

古文：崇祖率将吏塞之，未成。
现代文：崇祖便率将吏堵河水，不成功。
English: Chong Zu then led the officials to block the river, but without success.

古文：虏主谓伪彭城镇将平阳公曰： 龙沮若立，国之耻也，以死争之。 
现代文：虏主帅对伪彭城镇将平阳公说： 龙沮若是弄成了，简直是我国的耻辱，拼死也要争过来。 
English: Head coach Rui told the pseudo-Peng township leader Pingyang Gong: If the dragon depression is made, it is simply a disgrace to our country, and we must fight to the death.

古文：数万骑掩至。
现代文：于是率数万骑兵包抄上来。
English: As a result, he led tens of thousands of cavalry to encircle them.

古文：崇祖马槊陷阵不能抗，乃筑城自守。
现代文：垣崇祖的马和槊都陷在战阵中无法对抗，只好退回来筑城自守。
English: The horse and donkey of Kakitsuzo were caught in the battle and could not fight back, so they had to retreat back to the castle to defend themselves.

古文：会天雨十余日，虏乃退。
现代文：正赶上老天下雨一连十多日，敌虏只得退去。
English: It was raining for more than ten days in a row, and the enemy had to retreat.

古文：龙沮竟不立。
现代文：不过龙沮最后也没弄成。
English: In the end, however, the dragon did not make it.

古文：历盱眙、平阳、东海三郡太守，将军如故。
现代文：后来垣崇祖又任盱眙、平阳、东海三郡太守，将军之职仍旧。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong's ancestor was also appointed as the governor of the three counties of Min, Pingyang and the East China Sea, but his position as a general was still the same.

古文：转邵陵王南中郎司马，复为东海太守。
现代文：转任邵陵王南中郎司马，又任东海太守。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shao Ling Wang Nanzhong Lang Sima, and also served as the governor of the East China Sea.

古文：初，崇祖遇太祖于淮阴，太祖以其武勇，善待之。
现代文：当初，垣崇祖在淮阴碰上了太祖，太祖看他很武勇，就待他很友好。
English: At first, he met the great-grandfather in Huaiyin. The great-grandfather thought he was very brave and treated him very kindly.

古文：崇祖谓皇甫肃曰： 此真吾君也！
现代文：崇祖对皇甫肃说： 这个人才真正是我们的君主啊！
English: Chong Zu said to Emperor Fusao: This man is truly our sovereign!

古文：吾今逢主矣，所谓千载一时。 
现代文：我今天算是碰上真主了！正是所谓千载一时呀！ 
English: I met God today! It was a once-in-a-lifetime moment!

古文：遂密布诚节。
现代文：于是便暗中表现忠诚。
English: So they secretly show their loyalty.

古文：元徽末，太祖忧虑，令崇祖受旨即以家口托皇甫肃，勒数百人将入虏界，更听后旨。
现代文：元徽末年，太祖有忧虑，便令崇祖接受指示，把家小托付给皇甫肃，带领数百人将入虏境，等待命令。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Taizu was worried, so he ordered Emperor Chongzu to accept the instruction, entrust the family to Emperor Fushu, and lead hundreds of people to enter the territory, waiting for the order.

古文：会苍梧废，太祖召崇祖领部曲还都，除游击将军。
现代文：赶上废除苍梧王，太祖便召崇祖率领部下回京来，授他为游击将军。
English: In time for the abolition of King Cangwu, the great-grandfather summoned Chongzhu to lead his subordinates back to Beijing and appointed him as a guerrilla general.

古文：沈攸之事平，以崇祖为持节、督兖青冀三州诸军事，累迁冠军将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：沈攸之事件平定后，垣崇祖被任命为持节、督兖、青、冀三州诸军事，先后迁任冠军将军、兖州刺史。
English: After the incident of Shen You was settled, Gao Chongzu was appointed to the military of the three states of Ji Jie, Du Qian, Qing and Hebei, and successively transferred to the title of champion general and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖践阼，谓崇祖曰： 我新有天下，夷虏不识运命，必当动其蚁众，以送刘昶为辞。
现代文：太祖做皇帝后，对崇祖说： 我刚刚统治天下，夷虏不懂得天命已经归我，必然会兴师动众，以送刘昶为借口前来扰乱。
English: After the great-grandfather became emperor, he said to the great-grandfather: I have just ruled the world, and the barbarians do not understand that the fate of the world has already fallen to me. They will inevitably stir up the masses and use the excuse of sending Liu Bei to come and disturb.

古文：贼之所冲，必在寿春。
现代文：而贼方的第一个攻击目标必然是寿春。
English: And the first target of the thief's attack is bound to be Shuchun.

古文：能制此寇，非卿莫可。 
现代文：而能够对付他们的，非你莫可。 
English: And you're the only one who can deal with them.

古文：徙为使持节、监豫司二州诸军事、豫州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：于是崇祖移任使持节、监豫、司二州诸军事、豫州刺史，将军仍旧。
English: As a result, Chongzu was transferred to the post of envoy to hold the festival, supervise and administer the military affairs of the two states, and record the history of the two states, but he remained a general.

古文：封望蔡县侯，七百户。
现代文：封为望蔡县侯，食邑七百户。
English: He was given the title of the lord of Wang Cai County, with 700 households in the food village.

古文：建元二年，虏遣伪梁王郁豆眷及刘昶马步号二十万，寇寿春。
现代文：建元二年，虏方派遣伪梁王郁豆眷和刘昶，率骑兵步兵号称二十万人，来寇寿春。
English: In the second year of the first century, the Rui side dispatched the pseudo-Liang Wang Yudou's relatives and Liu Ye, leading cavalry infantry known as 200,000 people, to invade Shuchun.

古文：崇祖召文武议曰： 贼众我寡，当用奇以制之。
现代文：垣崇祖召集文武人员商议说： 敌众我寡，只能出奇制胜。
English: Gao Chongzu called together the literary and military personnel for discussion and said, "Since we have few enemies, we can only win by surprise."

古文：当修外城以待敌，城既广阔，非水不固，今欲堰肥水却淹为三面之险，诸君意如何？ 
现代文：应当修筑外城以待敌，城既广阔，没有水便不坚固，现在准备筑堰肥水，然后把城淹成三面之险，诸位认为怎样？ 
English: It is necessary to build an outer city to await the enemy. The city is so vast that it is not strong without water. What do you think about building a dam to store water and then flooding the city on three sides?

古文：众曰： 昔佛狸侵境，宋南平王士卒完盛，以郭大难守，退保内城。
现代文：众人说： 当年佛狸入侵，宋南平王士卒充足，由于郭大难守，便退保内城。
English: Many people said: In the year of the Buddha's invasion, Song Nanping Wang Shizhu was sufficient, and because Guo Da was difficult to defend, he withdrew from the inner city.

古文：今日之事，十倍于前。
现代文：今天的情形，难度十倍于前。
English: Today's situation is ten times more difficult than before.

古文：古来相承，不筑肥堰，皆以地形不便，积水无用故也。
现代文：自古以来守此城者之所以不筑肥水之堰，都是考虑到地形不便，积水也没用呀。
English: The reason why those who have guarded this city since ancient times have not built a weir for fertilizing water is due to the fact that the terrain is inconvenient and stagnant water is useless.

古文：若必行之，恐非事宜。 
现代文：如果一定要这样，恐怕不会合适的。 
English: If it has to be that way, I'm afraid it won't be appropriate.

古文：崇祖曰： 卿见其一，不识其二。
现代文：崇祖说： 你这是只见其一，不识其二。
English: Chong Zu said, "You only see one side, you don't know the other side."

古文：若舍外城，贼必据之，外修楼橹，内筑长围，四周无碍，表里受敌，此坐自为擒。
现代文：如果放弃外城，贼方必然占据着，他们可以外修楼橹，内筑长围，而我们四周没有屏障，表里受敌，这等于自己坐等着被擒。
English: If we give up the outer city, the thieves will inevitably occupy it. They can build towers on the outside and a long perimeter on the inside, but we have no barrier around us. We are surrounded by enemies on the outside and on the inside. This is tantamount to sitting and waiting to be captured.

古文：守郭筑堰，是吾不谏之策也。 
现代文：因此，守郭筑堰决策已定，不允许任何人谏阻！ 
English: Defending the outer city, building a dam, this is a strategy that I have absolutely no room to dissuade.

古文：乃于城西北立堰塞肥水，堰北起小城，周为深堑，使数千人守之。
现代文：于是在城西北立堰堵塞肥水，堰北又筑起小城，周围挖掘深堑，使数千人在那儿守着。
English: As a result, a dam was built in the northwest of the city to block the fertilized water, and a small city was built in the north of the dam, and a deep ditch was dug around it, so that thousands of people guarded there.

古文：崇祖谓长史封延伯曰： 虏食而少虑，必悉力攻小城，图破此堰。
现代文：崇祖对长史封延伯说： 敌虏心贪而欠考虑，必然全力攻打小城，企图破坏此堰。
English: Chongzu said to Changshi Feng Yanbo: If the enemy is greedy and inconsiderate, he will inevitably attack the small city with all his might in an attempt to destroy this weir.

古文：见堑狭城小，谓一往可克，当以蚁附攻之。
现代文：看到此堑狭城小，便以为可以一战而克，便会像蚂蚁一样围着攻打。
English: Seeing the small size of this narrow city, they thought that they could defeat it in one battle, and then they would attack it like ants.

古文：放水一激，急逾三峡，事穷奔透，自然沈溺。
现代文：我放水一激，水急超过三峡，等他们无处逃奔时，便自然沉溺水里。
English: I let the water rush, the water rushes beyond the Three Gorges, and when they have nowhere to escape, they naturally drown in the water.

古文：此岂非小劳而大利邪？ 
现代文：这岂不是小劳而大利么？ 
English: Wouldn't that be a win-win situation?

古文：虏众由西道集堰南，分军东路肉薄攻小城。
现代文：虏众由西道集中在堰南，分军从东路肉搏攻小城。
English: The attackers were concentrated in the south of the weir from the west road, and the detachment attacked the small town in hand-to-hand combat from the east road.

古文：崇祖著白纱帽，肩舆上城，手自转式。
现代文：垣崇祖头戴白纱帽，乘肩舆上城，打着手式指挥。
English: With a white gauze cap on his head, he rode into town on the shoulders of his father, leading the way.

古文：至日晡时，决小史埭。
现代文：到天黑时，便扒开了小史埭。
English: By nightfall, they had opened the small quarry.

古文：水势奔下，虏攻城之众，漂坠堑中，人马溺死数千人，众皆退走。
现代文：水奔泻而下，敌虏攻城之众，漂附到堑中，淹死数千人，剩下的都退去了。
English: The water rushed down, the enemy attacked the city, drifted into the raft, drowned thousands of people, and the rest retreated.

古文：初，崇祖在淮阴见上，便自比韩信、白起，咸不信，唯上独许之，崇祖再拜奉旨。
现代文：当初，崇祖在淮阴，见了皇上便自称是韩信、白起，别人都不信，只有皇上称许他，崇祖便再拜接受他的指示。
English: At the beginning, Chongzu was in Huaiyin. When he saw the emperor, he claimed to be Han Xin and Bai Qi, but others did not believe him. Only the emperor praised him, and Chongzu bowed again to accept his instructions.

古文：及破虏启至，上谓朝臣曰： 崇祖许为我制虏，果如其言。
现代文：等到破虏的启文送到京师，皇上对朝臣们说： 崇祖曾答应为我对付敌虏，果如其言。
English: When the imperial edict on the destruction of the enemy was sent to the emperor in Beijing, the emperor said to his courtiers: "The revered ancestor had promised to fight the enemy for me, and his words came true.

古文：其恒自拟韩、白，今真其人也。 
现代文：他一向自比韩信、白起，今天看来真不愧是啊！ 
English: He has always compared himself to Han Xin and Bai Rong, and today it seems that he really is!

古文：进为都督号平西将军，增封为千五百户。
现代文：于是进崇祖为都督号平西将军，增封食邑为一千五百户。
English: As a result, Jin Chongzu was named the governor of Pingxi General, and the number of counties and townships increased to 1,500.

古文：崇祖闻陈显达李安民皆增给军仪，启上求鼓吹横吹。
现代文：崇祖听说陈显达、李安民都增加了军仪，便上启皇上要求鼓吹横吹。
English: When Chong Zu heard that Chen Xianda and Li Anmin had both increased their military decorations, he went to the emperor and asked him to do the same.

古文：上敕曰： 韩、白何可不与众异！ 
现代文：皇上说： 韩信、白起怎么能不特别优待呢！ 
English: The emperor said: Han Xin, how can you not give special preferential treatment to Baiqi!

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：于是配给他鼓吹一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：崇祖虑虏复寇淮北，启徙下蔡戍于淮东。
现代文：垣崇祖考虑到敌虏还会来寇掠淮北，便请示皇上把下蔡戍区移到淮东。
English: Considering that the enemy would also invade and plunder Huaibei, he asked the emperor to move the Lower Caiwu District to Huaidong.

古文：其冬，虏果欲攻下蔡，既闻内徙，乃扬声平除故城。
现代文：这年冬天，敌虏果然要攻打下蔡，听说内移了，便声言要荡平下蔡城故城。
English: This winter, the enemy really wanted to attack Lower Cai, and when they heard that it had moved inland, they declared that they wanted to level the Lower Cai Old Town.

古文：众疑虏当于故城立戍，崇祖曰： 下蔡去镇咫尺，虏岂敢置戍；实欲除此故城。
现代文：众人以为敌虏会在故城建立据点，崇祖说： 下蔡离我的镇所近在咫尺，敌虏岂敢设立据点；他们其实是要除去故城。
English: People thought that the enemy would establish a foothold in the old town, but Chongzu said: Lower Cai is close to my town, how dare the enemy establish a foothold; they actually want to remove the old town.

古文：政恐奔走杀之不尽耳。 
现代文：我正担心他们逃走不能让我把他们斩尽杀绝呢。 
English: I'm worried that if they escape I won't be able to finish them off.

古文：虏军果夷掘下蔡城，崇祖自率众渡淮与战，大破之，追奔数十里，杀获千计。
现代文：虏军果然来掘平下蔡城，崇祖亲自率众渡过淮河与敌决战，大破敌人，又追杀数十里，杀死和俘虏了数千人。
English: The invading army did indeed come to dig down Caicheng, and Chongzu personally led the crowd across the Huaihe River to fight the enemy, defeated the enemy, chased the enemy for dozens of miles, and killed and captured thousands of people.

古文：上遣使入关参虏消息还，敕崇祖曰： 卿视吾是守江东而已邪？
现代文：皇上派的使者入关了解敌情回来汇报了崇祖的战况，皇上下敕给崇祖说： 你看我是那种只守江东一隅的君主么？
English: The emissary sent by the emperor went into the pass to understand the enemy's situation, came back and reported the situation of the war to Chongzu. The emperor said to Chongzu: Do you think I am the kind of monarch who only guards the eastern corner of the river?

古文：所少者食，卿但努力营田，自然平殄残丑。 
现代文：我现在最缺的南齐书是粮食，你只管给我努力经营田地，到时候自然会把残敌收拾了。 
English: What I lack the most right now is grain. You just have to work hard to manage the fields for me, and by that time, I will have eliminated the remaining enemies.

古文：敕崇祖修治芍陂田。
现代文：指示崇祖整治芍陂一带田地。
English: He instructed Chongzu to rectify the fields in the area.

古文：世祖即位，征为散骑常侍、左卫将军。
现代文：世祖即位后，调崇祖任散骑常侍、左卫将军。
English: After the ancestor ascended to the throne, the revered ancestor was transferred to the position of straggler, general of the Left Division.

古文：俄诏留本任，加号安西。
现代文：不久又下诏让他留在本任上，加号安西将军。
English: Soon after, he was allowed to remain in his post, becoming General Anxi.

古文：仍迁五兵尚书，领骁骑将军。
现代文：随后迁任五兵尚书，领骁骑将军。
English: Subsequently, he was transferred to the post of the five soldiers Shangshu, leading the cavalry general.

古文：初，豫章王有盛宠，世祖在东宫，崇祖不自附结。
现代文：当初，豫章王有盛宠，世祖做太子，崇祖并不主动去巴结。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Yuanzhang had a great favorite, the ancestor was the crown prince, and Emperor Chongzhu did not take the initiative to go to patronize.

古文：及破虏，诏使还朝，与共密议。世祖疑之，曲加礼待，酒后谓崇祖曰： 世间流言，我已豁诸怀抱，自今已后，富贵见付也。 
现代文：后来破虏，世祖诏他还朝，并与他密议，便开始怀疑他，于是对崇祖特意礼待，酒后对崇祖说： 外边有些流言，我也干脆挑明了，从今以后，我的富贵就指望你了。 
English: Later, after breaking the seal, the ancestor said that he was still alive, and began to suspect him after having a secret discussion with him, so he treated the ancestor with special courtesy. After drinking, he said to the ancestor: There are some rumors outside, I simply pointed it out, from now on, my wealth is counting on you.

古文：崇祖拜谢。
现代文：崇祖拜谢。
English: Take a moment to thank your ancestors.

古文：崇祖去后，上复遣荀伯玉口敕，以边事受旨夜发，不得辞东宫。
现代文：崇祖走后，皇上又派荀伯玉口头传达命令：由于边地有事，要他连夜出发，不得和太子辞别。
English: After the departure of Chongzu, the emperor sent Zou Bo-yu to verbally convey the order: due to the border situation, he was asked to leave overnight, and he was not allowed to say goodbye to the prince.

古文：世祖以崇祖心诚不实，衔之。
现代文：世祖便以为崇祖心不诚实而怀恨在心。
English: The patriarch held a grudge against him, believing that he was dishonest.

古文：太祖崩，虑崇祖为异，便令内转。
现代文：太祖死后，世祖怕崇祖有异心，便调他回来任职。
English: After the death of the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather was afraid that the great-grandfather had a different intention, so he transferred him back to his post.

古文：永明元年四月九日，诏曰： 垣崇祖凶诟险躁，少无行业。
现代文：永明元年四月九日，下诏说： 垣崇祖凶诟险躁，少无行业。
English: On April 9th, the first year of the Yongming era, the following edict was issued: "Gaki Chongzu was a fierce and dangerous man, with little to no profession.

古文：昔因军国多虞，采其一夫之用。
现代文：过去由于军国麻烦很多，便让他出些武力。
English: In the past, due to the many troubles of the military state, he was allowed to use force.

古文：大运光启，频烦升擢，溪壑靡厌，浸以弥广。去岁在西，连谋境外，无君之心，已彰遐迩。
现代文：随着皇运上升，他也不断受到提拔封赏，但他贪得无厌。去年在西边，和外国勾结，其无君之心，已昭然若揭。
English: With the rise of the imperial fortune, he was constantly promoted and rewarded, but he was insatiably greedy. Last year in the west, colluding with foreign countries, his tyrannical heart has been revealed.

古文：特加遵养，庶或悛革。
现代文：但朝廷对他特别优待，希望他能改悔。
English: However, the imperial court gave him special preferential treatment, hoping that he would repent.

古文：而猜贰滋甚，志兴乱阶，随与荀伯玉驱合不逞，窥窬非觊，构扇边荒，互为表里。
现代文：岂料他野心更甚，要谋反作乱，又与荀伯玉同谋不轨，企图互为表里、内外呼应。
English: However, his ambition was even greater. He wanted to rebel and cause chaos, and conspire with Zou Bo-yu to do the same. They tried to echo each other both internally and externally.

古文：宁朔将军孙景育究悉奸计，具以启闻。
现代文：这些罪状已由宁朔将军孙景育调查清楚，报告了皇上。
English: These crimes have been investigated and cleared up by the Ningshuo general Sun Jingyu and reported to the emperor.

古文：除恶务本，刑兹罔赦。
现代文：除恶要除根，垣崇祖罪在不赦。
English: To eliminate evil, it is necessary to uproot it, and the sin of worshipping ancestors is unforgivable.

古文：便可收掩，肃明宪辟。 
现代文：杀了后便把他埋掉，以严肃法纪。 
English: After killing him, they buried him, with strict discipline.

古文：死时年四十四。
现代文：死时四十四岁。
English: He was forty-four when he died.

古文：子惠隆，徙番禺卒。
现代文：儿子垣惠隆，被流放到番禺，死在那里。
English: His son, Kakie Huilong, was exiled to Panyu and died there.

古文：张敬儿，南阳冠军人也。
现代文：张敬儿，是南阳冠军人。
English: Zhang Jing'er is the champion of Nanyang.

古文：本名苟儿，宋明帝以其名鄙，改焉。
现代文：原名苟儿，宋明帝觉得这名字太鄙俗了，便给他改为敬儿。
English: Originally named Gong'er, Song Mingdi thought this name was too vulgar and changed it to Jing'er.

古文：父丑，为郡将军，官至节府参军。
现代文：其父张丑，曾任郡将军，官至节府参军。
English: His father, Zhang Ushi, was a county general who rose through the ranks to join the army.

古文：敬儿年少便弓马，有胆气，好射虎，发无不中。
现代文：张敬儿年少时便善于骑射，有胆气，尤其喜欢射虎，每发必中。
English: When Zhang Jing'er was young, she was good at riding and shooting, had courage, especially liked to shoot tigers, and was always in the middle of every shot.

古文：南阳新野风俗出骑射，而敬儿尤多膂力，求入队为曲阿戍驿将，州差补府将，还为郡马队副，转队主。
现代文：南阳新野一带的风俗常常培养出会骑射的人，而张敬儿尤其有臂力，于是请求加入军队做曲阿戍的驿将，后来州里调任府将，回到本郡任马队副主，又转任队主。
English: The customs of the Nanyang-Xinyang area often cultivate people who can ride and shoot horses, and Zhang Jing'er is particularly strong-armed, so he asked to join the army to be the grandmaster of the grandma's music. Later, he was transferred to the prefecture as the prefectural general, returned to the county as the deputy leader of the horse team, and then became the leader of the team.

古文：稍官宁蛮府行参军。
现代文：稍后又任宁蛮府行参军。
English: Later, he was assigned to Ningban Prefecture to join the army.

古文：随同郡人刘胡领军伐襄阳诸山蛮，深入险阻，所向皆破。
现代文：跟随同郡人刘胡领着军队去讨伐襄阳一带诸山蛮部，深入险阻，所向无敌。
English: He followed Liu Hu, a fellow county resident, to lead the army to fight against the barbaric mountains around Xiangyang. They went deep into the dangerous obstacles and were invincible.

古文：又击湖阳蛮，官军引退，蛮贼追者数千人，敬儿单马在后，冲突贼军，数十合，杀数十人，箭中左腋，贼不能抗。
现代文：又去攻打湖阳蛮，官军引退时，蛮贼数千人追赶，张敬儿一个人骑马在后，冲突贼军，数十次交锋，杀死数十人，左腋被箭射中，但蛮贼也不敢和他对抗。
English: He also went to attack the Hoyang Barbarians. When the official army retreated, thousands of barbarian thieves chased after him, and Zhang Jing'er rode behind alone. He clashed with the thief army, fought dozens of times, and killed dozens of people. His left shin was hit by an arrow, but the barbarian thieves did not dare to fight him.

古文：平西将军山阳王休祐镇寿阳，求善骑射人。
现代文：平西将军山阳王刘休镇守寿阳，到处选求善射之人。
English: The general of Pingxi, the king of Shanyang, Liu Xiu, guarded Shouyang, and selected good shooters from everywhere.

古文：敬儿自占见宠，为长兼行参军，领白直队。
现代文：张敬儿主动应选，受到宠爱，为长兼行参军，领白直队。
English: Zhang Jing'er took the initiative to be selected, was favored, and joined the army at the same time as her father, leading the white straight team.

古文：泰始初，除宁朔将军，随府转参骠骑军事，署中兵。
现代文：泰始初年，升任宁朔将军，随府转参骠骑军事，代理中兵。
English: In the first year of Taishi, he was promoted to Ningshuo General, transferred to the cavalry military with the government, and became an acting soldier.

古文：领军讨义嘉贼，与刘胡相拒于鹊尾州。启明帝乞本郡，事平，为南阳太守，将军如故。
现代文：率军讨伐义嘉贼，在鹊尾洲和刘胡相拒，上启明帝请求主管本郡，事情平定后，任南阳太守，将军仍旧。
English: He led the army to fight against the Yijia bandits. In Shanweizhou, he and Liu Hu rejected each other. Shangqi Mingdi requested to be in charge of the county. After the matter was settled, he was appointed as the governor of Nanyang and remained a general.

古文：初，王玄谟为雍州，土断敬儿家属舞阴，敬儿至郡，复还冠军。
现代文：当初，王玄谟主管雍州，把张敬儿的家属统一编定为舞阴户籍，张敬儿到南阳上任后，又把他们都恢复回冠军来。
English: At first, Wang Xuanmu, the head of Yongzhou, unified the family members of Zhang Jing'er as the household registration of Muyin. After Zhang Jing'er took office in Nanyang, he restored them all to the championship.

古文：三年，薛安都子柏令、环龙等窃据顺阳、广平，略义成、扶风界，刺史巴陵王休若遣敬儿及新野太守刘攘兵攻讨，合战，破走之。
现代文：泰始三年，薛安都的儿子薛伯令、薛环龙等窃据顺阳、广平，搔扰到义成、扶风界内，刺史巴陵王刘休若派遣张敬儿和新野太守刘攘兵联合攻讨，交战后，对方被攻破败走。
English: In the first three years of the Tai Dynasty, Xue Andu's sons, Xue Boling and Xue Huanlong, stole the territories of Shunyang and Guangping, and intruded into Yicheng and Fufeng. Liu Xiu, the king of Jinshi-Balin, sent Zhang Jing'er and Liu Jiao, the grand marshal of Xin'an, to jointly attack them. After the battle, the other side was defeated and fled.

古文：徙为顺阳太守，将军如故。
现代文：张敬儿移任顺阳太守，将军之职仍旧。
English: Zhang Jing'er was transferred to the position of Shunyang governor-general, but the position of general remained.

古文：南阳蛮动，复以敬儿为南阳太守。
现代文：南阳蛮部闹事，朝廷又任命张敬儿为南阳太守。
English: Nanyang barbarians rioted, and the imperial court appointed Zhang Jing'er as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：遭母丧还家。朝廷疑桂阳王休范，密为之备，乃起敬儿为宁朔将军、越骑校尉。
现代文：他母亲去世，回到家中，朝廷怀疑桂阳王刘休范欲有不轨，暗中作防备，便起用张敬儿为宁朔将军、越骑校尉。
English: After his mother died and he returned home, the imperial court suspected Guiyang King Liu Xiufan of having an illicit affair, and secretly took precautions, appointing Zhang Jing'er as the general of Ningshuo and the captain of Yue cavalry.

古文：桂阳事起，隶太祖顿新亭。贼矢石既交，休范白服乘舆往劳楼下，城中望见其左右人兵不多，敬儿与黄回白太祖曰： 桂阳所在，备防寡阙，若诈降而取之，此必可擒也。 
现代文：桂阳王事件暴发，张敬儿隶属太祖驻军新亭，贼兵发箭攻打，刘休范穿着白衣服乘舆前往慰劳部下，城上人看到他带的卫兵不多，张敬儿和黄回便对太祖说： 桂阳王现在那里，防备不足，我们若去诈降乘机把他拿下，不成问题。 
English: The Guiyang King incident broke out. Zhang Jing'er was a member of the Grandfather's garrison in Xinting. Rogue soldiers attacked with arrows. Liu Xiufan, dressed in white, went to comfort his subordinates. People in the city saw that he did not have many guards. Zhang Jing'er and Huang Hui said to the Grandfather: Guiyang King is there now, the protection is insufficient. If we go to defraud and take him down, there will be no problem.

古文：太祖曰： 卿若能办事，当以本州相赏。 
现代文：太祖说： 你们若能干成此事，我就把本州作赏品。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "If you can do this, I'll give you Honshu as a reward."

古文：敬儿相与出城南，放仗走，大呼称降。休范喜，召至舆侧，回阳致太祖密意，休范信之。
现代文：张敬儿和黄回等便出了城南，丢了兵器，跑向桂阳王那里，边跑边喊投降，刘休范见状大喜，召他们到舆边，黄回假意报告太祖的机密，刘休范便相信不疑。
English: Zhang Jing'er and Huang Hui left the south of the city, lost their weapons, and ran to King Guiyang, shouting surrender as they ran. Liu Xiufan was overjoyed to see the situation and called them to the public side. Huang Hui pretended to report the secret of the great ancestor, and Liu Xiufan believed it without any doubt.

古文：回目敬儿，敬儿夺取休范防身刀，斩休范首，休范左右数百人皆惊散，敬儿驰马持首归新亭。
现代文：黄回向张敬儿使了个眼色，敬儿便夺取了刘休范的防身刀，斩了他的首级，他身边数百人都惊慌散去，张敬儿等带着人头驰马回到新亭。
English: Huang Hui winked at Zhang Jing'er. Jing'er then grabbed Liu Xuan's defensive knife and cut off his head. Hundreds of people around him panicked and dispersed. Zhang Jing'er and others returned to Xinting on horseback with the head.

古文：除骁骑将军，加辅国将军。
现代文：升任骁骑将军，加辅国将军。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Cavalry and the additional title of General of Auxiliary Troops.

古文：太祖以敬儿人位既轻，不欲便使为襄阳重镇。敬儿求之不已，乃微动太祖曰： 沈攸之在荆州，公知其欲何年作？
现代文：太祖考虑到张敬儿人位较轻，不宜立即就让他去主管襄阳重镇，可是张敬儿请求不已，并打动太祖的心事，说： 沈攸之在荆州，您知道他想干什么事？
English: The great-grandfather considered that Zhang Jing'er was a lesser person, and it was not appropriate to immediately let him take charge of the important town of Xiangyang. However, Zhang Jing'er pleaded endlessly, and moved the great-grandfather's heart, saying: "Shen Youzhi is in Jingzhou, do you know what he wants to do?

古文：不出敬儿以防之，恐非公之利也。 
现代文：您如果不把敬儿我安排到那里去防御他，恐怕对您也不利吧。 
English: If you don't arrange for me to go there to defend him, I'm afraid it will be bad for you.

古文：太祖笑而无言，乃以敬儿为持节、督雍梁二州郢司二郡军事、雍州刺史，将军如故，封襄阳县侯，二千户。
现代文：太祖便笑而无言，任命张敬儿为持节、督雍、梁二州郢、司二郡军事、雍州刺史，将军之职仍旧，封他为襄阳县侯，食邑二千户。
English: The great-grandfather laughed and was speechless. He appointed Zhang Jing'er as the military governor of Jishie, the governor of Yongyang, the governor of Liang Erzhou, the military governor of Si Er County, and the military governor of Yongzhou. He still held the position of a general. He was named the governor of Xiangyang County, with a population of 2,000 households.

古文：部伍泊沔口，敬儿乘舴艋过江，诣晋熙王燮。
现代文：张敬儿把部队停泊在沔口，自己带了几个人乘舴艋小船过江，去拜谒晋熙王刘燮。
English: His troops anchored at the estuary, and Zhang Jing'er crossed the river in a small boat to meet with the king of Jinxi, Liu Xuan.

古文：中江遇风船覆，左右丁壮者各泅走，余二小吏没舱下，叫呼 官 ，敬儿两掖挟之，随船覆仰，常得在水上，如此翻覆行数十里，方得迎接。
现代文：船至江中遇风翻覆了，身边的强壮兵丁都各自泅水而去，只剩下两个小吏淹没在船舱下，正在呼叫 官 ，张敬儿用两掖挟着二吏，随着船翻来仰去，总能在水面上，就这样下去十里，才被营救上来。
English: The boat capsized in the wind in the middle of the river. The strong soldiers around them all jumped into the water and went away. Only two minor officers were left, submerged under the cabin. They were calling out to the officers. Zhang Jing'er held the two officers between her legs. As the boat turned over and over, she was always able to stay on the surface of the water. She went down ten miles in this way before she was rescued.

古文：失所持节，更给之。
现代文：朝廷给他的节也丢了，只得再给他一个。
English: I threw away the letter I had with me and sent him a new one.

古文：沈攸之闻敬儿上，遣人伺觇。
现代文：沈攸之听说张敬儿上来了，便派人去侦察情况。
English: When Shen Youzhi heard that Zhang Jing'er was coming up, he sent someone to investigate the situation.

古文：见雍州迎军仪甚盛，虑见掩袭，密自防备。
现代文：看到雍州的迎接军仪盛大，便担心被张敬儿袭击，暗中作了防备。
English: Seeing the grand military ceremony in Yongzhou, he worried about being attacked by Zhang Jing'er and secretly made preparations.

古文：敬儿至镇，厚结攸之，信馈不绝。
现代文：张敬儿来到镇所，却主动和沈攸之拉关系，书信赠送之类不断。
English: Zhang Jing'er came to the town hall, but she took the initiative to pull the relationship with Shen You, constantly giving away letters and the like.

古文：得其事迹，密白太祖。
现代文：终于探得了沈攸之的秘密，暗中报告了太祖。
English: Finally, he found out Shen Yuanzhi's secret and secretly reported it to his great-grandfather.

古文：攸之得太祖书翰，论选用方伯密事，辄以示敬儿，以为反间，敬儿终无二心。
现代文：沈攸之得到太祖的书信，讨论选任地方文官的问题，沈攸之经常把信拿给敬儿看，实际上是想打动敬儿进行反间，张敬儿始终没有二心。
English: Shen Youzhi obtained the great-grandfather's letter and discussed the issue of the election of local civil servants. Shen Youzhi often showed the letter to Jing Er. In fact, he wanted to impress Jing Er to rebel. Zhang Jing Er always had no second thoughts.

古文：元徽末，襄阳大水，平地数丈，百姓资财皆漂没，襄阳虚耗。
现代文：元徽末年，襄阳发大水，平地数丈深，老南齐书百姓的财产全都漂没了，襄阳也损失重大。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a big flood in Xiangyang, and the flat land was submerged. The property of the old Nanqishu people was all lost, and Xiangyang also suffered heavy losses.

古文：太祖与攸之书，令赈贷之，攸之竟不历意。
现代文：太祖写信给沈攸之，让他进行赈贷，沈攸之根本不放在心上。
English: The great-grandfather wrote to Shen Youzhi and asked him to lend money, but Shen Youzhi did not care at all.

古文：贤子元琰获免虎口，及凌波西迈，吾所发遣。犹推素怀，不畏嗤嗤。
现代文：张敬儿和沈攸之的司马刘攘兵关系亲密，后来苍梧王被废，张敬儿疑心沈攸之会乘机起兵，暗中询问刘攘兵，刘没说什么，只是送给张一对马镫子，张敬儿心中明白便有所防备了。
English: Zhang Jing'er and Shen Youzhi's Sima Liu Jiao'er had a close relationship. Later, when Cang Wu Wang was abolished, Zhang Jing'er, suspicious of Shen Youzhi's association, took the opportunity to raise an army and secretly interrogate Liu Jiao'er. Liu did not say anything, but gave Zhang a pair of riding mules. Zhang Jing'er knew in her heart and was prepared.

古文：足下尚复灭君臣之纪，况吾布衣之交乎？遂事不谏，既往难咎。今六师西向，为足下忧之。
现代文：升明元年，沈攸之反叛，派使者报告张敬儿，张敬儿慰劳接待十分周到，为使者摆了酒席，对他说： 沈公特别派您来，说明您是特别被重视的人物。 
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, when Shen You rebelled, he sent an emissary to report to Zhang Jing'er. Zhang Jing'er received the emissary in a very thoughtful manner. He set up a banquet for the emissary and said to him, "Shen Gong specially sent you here to show that you are a person who is highly valued."

古文：敬儿告变使至，太祖大喜，进号镇军将军，加散骑常侍，改为都督，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：于是列出仪仗，在厅前把使者杀了，然后集合部队，侦察沈攸之的动向，准备袭击江陵。张敬儿派往京师报告反叛使者到达后，太祖大喜，给张敬儿进号镇军将军，加散骑常侍，改为都督，并配给鼓吹一部。
English: So he drew up a list of honorable battles, killed the envoy in front of the hall, and then assembled troops to reconnoitre Shen Youyou's movement and prepare to attack Jiangling. Zhang Jing'er was sent to the Beijing division to report the arrival of the rebel envoy, and the great-grandfather was overjoyed, giving Zhang Jing'er the title of general of the township army, plus the loose riding of the regular attendants, changed to the governor, and assigned to the propaganda department.

古文：攸之于郢城败走，其子元琰与兼长史江乂、别驾傅宣等守江陵城。
现代文：沈攸之在郢城败走后，他的儿子沈元琰和兼长史江、别驾傅宣等守江陵城。
English: After Shen Youzhi was defeated and fled from Gancheng, his son Shen Yuan Ronghe and his sons Changshi Jiang and Beiji Fu Xuan guarded Gangneung City.

古文：敬儿军至白水，元琰闻城外鹤唳，谓是叫声，心惧欲走。
现代文：张敬儿的大军来到白水，沈元琰听到城外鹤鸣，便疑为官军叫声，心里惧怕想逃走。
English: Zhang Jing'er's large army came to Baishui. When Shen Yuanjun heard the cranes outside the city, he suspected that they were the cries of the government army. He was afraid and wanted to run away.

古文：其夜，乂、宣开门出奔，城溃，元琰奔宠州，见杀。
现代文：当夜，江、傅宣开了城门而逃，城中防守于是崩溃，沈元琰逃向宠州，被杀。
English: That night, Jiang and Fu Xuan opened the city gate and fled. As a result, the defense in the city collapsed. Shen Yuanjun fled to Jiuzhou and was killed.

古文：百姓既相抄敓，敬儿至江陵，诛攸之亲党，没入其财物数十万，悉以入私。
现代文：百姓们互相抢夺，张敬儿来到江陵，诛杀了沈攸之的亲信党羽，抄没他们的财产数十万，全归他自己了。
English: The people robbed each other, Zhang Jing'er came to Gangneung, killed Shen Youyou's trusted party members, and confiscated hundreds of thousands of their property, all of which belonged to him.

古文：攸之于汤渚村自经死，居民送首荆州，敬儿使盾擎之，盖以青伞，徇诸市郭，乃送京师。
现代文：沈攸之在汤渚村自缢而死，当地居民把他的头送到荆州，张敬儿让人把头放在盾牌上，用青纟散盖着，在城中示众后，送往京师。
English: Shen Youzhi hanged himself in Tangzhu village and died. Local residents sent his head to Jingzhou. Zhang Jing'er had his head placed on a shield and covered with barley grass. After being shown to the public in the city, he was sent to Beijing.

古文：进号往西将军，爵为公，增邑为四千户。
现代文：朝廷给张敬儿进号征西将军，晋封公爵，增加食邑为四千户。
English: The imperial court gave Zhang Jing'er the title of General of the Western Expedition and the title of Duke of the Jin Dynasty, and increased the food villages to four thousand households.

古文：敬儿于襄阳城西起宅，聚财货。
现代文：张敬儿在襄阳城西大造宅第，聚敛财货。
English: Zhang Jing'er collects money and goods at the construction site of the West University of Yangyang.

古文：又欲移羊叔子堕泪碑，于其处立台，纲纪谏曰： 羊太傅遗德，不宜迁动。 
现代文：又想把羊叔子的堕泪碑移走，在那儿建台，主簿官谏止说： 羊太傅的遗德，不宜迁动。 
English: He also wanted to remove the fallen tears monument of Yang Shuzi and build a platform there, but the chief bookkeeper said, "It is not appropriate to move Yang Taifu's legacy.

古文：敬儿曰： 太傅是谁？
现代文：张敬儿说： 太傅是谁？
English: Zhang Jing'er said: Who is Taifu?

古文：我不识也。 
现代文：我不认得他。 
English: I didn't recognize him.

古文：敬儿弟恭儿，不肯出官，常居上保村中，与居民不异。
现代文：张敬儿的弟弟张恭儿，不愿出来做官，一直住在上保村中，和居民一样。
English: Zhang Jing'er's younger brother, Zhang Jing'er, who did not want to become an official, has always lived in Shangbo Village, just like the residents.

古文：敬儿呼纳之甚厚，恭儿月一出视敬儿，辄复去。
现代文：张敬儿把他叫来，送给他很多东西。恭儿一个月来看一回敬儿，来了便回去。
English: Zhang Jing'er called him and gave him a lot of things. Gong'er came to see Jing'er once a month, and when she came, she went back.

古文：恭儿本名猪儿，随敬儿改名也。
现代文：恭儿的本名为猪儿，是随着张敬儿改名而改名的。
English: Gong'er's real name is "Pig" and she changed her name along with Zhang Jing'er.

古文：初，敬儿既斩沈攸之，使报随郡太守刘道宗，聚众得千余人，立营顿。
现代文：当初，张敬儿斩了沈攸之，派人报告随郡太守刘道宗，道宗聚众千余人，安营扎寨。
English: At first, Zhang Jing'er cut off Shen Youzhi and sent someone to report to the county governor Liu Daozong. Daozong gathered more than a thousand people and set up camp.

古文：司州刺史姚道和不杀攸之使，密令道宗罢军。
现代文：司州刺史姚道和没有杀掉沈攸之的使者，暗中让刘道宗撤去军队。
English: Yao Daozong, the governor of Shizhou, and the envoys who did not kill Shen Youzhi secretly asked Liu Daozong to withdraw the troops.

古文：及攸之围郢，道和遣军顿堇城为郢援，事平，依例蒙爵赏。
现代文：后来沈攸之部众围困郢城，姚道和派军驻在堇城为郢城增援，事件平定后，按例受到了爵赏。
English: Later, Shen Youyou's troops besieged Lucheng, and Yao Daohu sent troops stationed in Lucheng to reinforce Lucheng. After the incident was settled, he received a knighthood as usual.

古文：敬儿具以启闻。
现代文：这些情况张敬儿都在启书中报告了太祖。
English: Zhang Jing'er reported all of this to Taizu in her initiation letter.

古文：建元元年，太祖令有司奏道和罪，诛之。
现代文：建元元年，太祖命令有关部门揭发姚道和的罪状，把他杀了。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, Taizu ordered the relevant departments to expose Yao Daohe's crimes and killed him.

古文：道和字敬邕，羌主姚兴孙也。
现代文：道和字敬邕，是羌主姚兴的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of Yao Xing.

古文：父万寿，伪镇东大将军，降宋武帝，卒于散骑侍郎。
现代文：其父姚万寿，曾任伪镇东大将军，投降了宋武帝，时为散骑侍郎。
English: His father, Yao Wanshou, was once a general of the pseudo-town of Dongdae, surrendered to Emperor Songwu, and was a horseman.

古文：道和出身为孝武安北行佐，有世名，颇读书史。
现代文：姚道和开始任孝武帝的安北行佐，很有名声，读了不少书史。
English: Yao Daowu and Anbei Xingzuo, who began to serve Emperor Xiaowu, are very famous and have read a lot of book history.

古文：常诳人云： 祖天子，父天子，身经作皇太子。 
现代文：他经常骗人说： 我祖父是天子，父亲是天子，我也曾做过皇太子。 
English: He often lied and said, "My grandfather is the Son of Heaven, my father is the Son of Heaven, and I was once a crown prince."

古文：元徽中为游击将军，随太祖新亭破桂阳贼有功，为抚军司马，出为司州，疑怯无断，故及于诛。
现代文：元徽中任游击将军，跟随太祖在新亭破桂阳王的叛军有功，升为抚军司马，出任司州刺史，此人疑怯无断，所以导致被杀。
English: He was a guerrilla general in the Yuan Hui Dynasty. He followed his great-grandfather to Xinting to defeat the rebel army of King Guiyang. He was promoted to the post of Sima of the Fuzhou army and served as the secretary of the history of the state. This person was suspiciously timid, so he was killed.

古文：三年，征敬儿为护军将军，常侍如故。
现代文：升明三年，调张敬儿为护军将军，常侍之职仍旧。
English: Three years after ascending the throne, Zhang Jing'er was transferred to the position of general of the escort, but the position of the attendant remained.

古文：敬儿武将，不习朝仪，闻当内迁，乃于密室中屏人学揖让答对，空中俯仰，如此竟日，妾侍窃窥笑焉。
现代文：张敬儿本是武将，不懂得朝廷的礼仪，听说要到朝内做官，便把人都赶开，自己在密室中学习揖让答对之礼，对着设想的皇上空位，起来跪下，一天到晚。他的妾侍们都偷看暗笑。
English: Zhang Jing'er was originally a military commander who did not understand the etiquette of the imperial court. When he heard that he was to become an official in the imperial court, he drove everyone away. He studied the etiquette of giving and receiving in a secret room. Faced with the imagined emperor's vacancy, he stood up and knelt down, all day long. His concubines and attendants peeked and smiled.

古文：太祖即位，授侍中，中军将军。
现代文：太祖做了皇帝后，授给张敬儿侍中、中军将军之职。
English: After the great-grandfather became the emperor, he gave Zhang Jing'er the position of an aide-de-camp and general of the Chinese army.

古文：以敬儿秩穷五等，一仍前封。
现代文：由于张敬儿的爵位待遇已达到官员的最高级别，便只能仍旧。
English: Since Zhang Jing'er's peerage treatment has reached the highest level of officials, it can only remain.

古文：建元二年，迁散骑常侍，车骑将军，置佐史。
现代文：建元二年，迁任散骑常侍、车骑将军，设置佐史。
English: In the second year of the founding of the Republic of China, he was transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, carriage riding general, and set up Sashi.

古文：太祖崩，敬儿于家窃泣曰： 官家大老天子，可惜！
现代文：太祖驾崩，张敬儿在家里哭道： 官家大老天子，可惜！
English: After the death of her great-grandfather, Zhang Jing'er cried at home: "What a pity, officials!

古文：太子年少，向我所不及也。 
现代文：太子年少，以前我跟他没接触呀！ 
English: The prince is young, I haven't had any contact with him before!

古文：遗诏加敬儿开府仪同三司，将拜，谓其妓妾曰： 我拜后，应开黄阁。 
现代文：太祖在遗诏中加张敬儿开府仪同三司，他准备拜职的时候对其妓妾说： 我拜职后，就该开设办公厅啦！ 
English: In his last will and testament, the great-grandfather added Zhang Jing'er to the list of three officials who should open the government. When he was preparing to take the oath of office, he said to his concubine: "After I take the oath of office, it's time to open an office!"

古文：因口自为鼓声。
现代文：又在口中摹拟鼓声。
English: He was also mimicking the sound of a drum in his mouth.

古文：既拜，王敬则戏之，呼为褚渊。
现代文：拜职后，王敬则和他开玩笑，呼他为褚渊。
English: After taking the oath of office, Wang Jing joked with him, calling him "the abyss."

古文：敬儿曰： 我马上所得，终不能作华林阁勋也。 
现代文：张敬儿说： 我这是靠马上拼来的，终究不能去做华林阁勋吧！ 
English: Zhang Jing'er said, "I got this by fighting right away, after all, I can't become a Waring Gexun!"

古文：敬则甚恨。
现代文：王敬则很是记恨他这话。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, remembered his words with hatred.

古文：敬儿始不识书，晚既为方伯，乃习学读《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：张敬儿不曾读过书，晚年既然做了这么大的官，才开始学习读《孝经》、《论语》。
English: Zhang Jing'er had never read a book, and since she became such a high-ranking official in her later years, she only began to learn to read "The Book of Filial Piety" and "The Analects."

古文：于新林慈姥庙为妾乞儿祝神，自称三公。
现代文：在新林慈姥庙为妾求子祷神时，自称三公。
English: When praying to God for a concubine at the Xinlin Grandmother's Temple, he called himself the Three Princes.

古文：然而意知满足，初得鼓吹，羞便奏之。
现代文：但心中也知道该满足了，开始被配给鼓吹时，他还不好意思马上就演奏。
English: But he also knew in his heart that it was time to be satisfied, and when he began to be assigned to preach, he was too embarrassed to play right away.

古文：初娶前妻毛氏，生子道文。
现代文：张敬儿先是娶前妻毛氏，生了儿子张道文。
English: Zhang Jing'er first married his ex-wife, Mao, and had a son, Zhang Daowen.

古文：后娶尚氏，尚氏有美色，敬儿弃前妻而纳之。
现代文：后来又娶尚氏，尚氏长得很美，敬儿便抛弃了前妻娶了她。
English: Later, she married Mr. Shang again. Mr. Shang was very beautiful, so Jing'er abandoned his ex-wife and married her.

古文：尚氏犹居襄阳宅不自随，敬儿虑不复外出，乃迎家口悉下至都。
现代文：尚氏还是住在襄阳宅中不愿随他来京城，敬儿考虑到以后不可能出任外官了，就把家属全都接到京城来了。
English: Mr. Shang was still living in his Yangyang residence and did not want to come to Beijing with him. Considering that it would be impossible for him to serve as a foreign minister in the future, Jing'er brought all his family members to Beijing.

古文：启世祖，不蒙劳问，敬儿心疑。
现代文：张敬儿上启世祖，没有受到慰问，心中便有些不安。
English: Zhang Jing'er, the founder of Jiaqi, did not receive any condolences and felt a little uneasy.

古文：及垣崇祖死，愈恐惧，妻谓敬儿曰： 昔时梦手热如火，而君得南阳郡。元徽中，梦半身热，而君得本州。今复梦举体热矣。 
现代文：后来垣崇祖被杀，张敬儿更加恐惧，他的妻子对他说： 早先我梦见你手热如火，你便得了南阳郡；元徽中，梦见你半身发热，你便得了本州；今天我梦见你全身发热了呢。 
English: Later, Zhang Jing'er was even more afraid when his father-in-law was killed. His wife said to him, "Earlier, I dreamt that your hand was as hot as fire, and you won Nanyang County; in the original emblem, I dreamed that half of your body was hot, and you won Honshu; today, I dreamed that your whole body was hot."

古文：有阉人闻其言，说之。事达世祖。
现代文：有太监听了这话，便传开来，被世祖知道了。
English: When some spies overheard this, the news spread, and the patriarch learned about it.

古文：敬儿又遣使与蛮中交关，世祖疑其有异志。
现代文：张敬儿又派人和蛮部联系，世祖便怀疑他有野心。
English: Zhang Jing'er also sent someone to contact the barbarians, and Shizu suspected that he had ambitions.

古文：永明元年，敕朝臣华林八关斋，于坐收敬儿。
现代文：永明元年，世祖让朝臣都到华林苑举行关斋，在座上把张敬儿抓了起来。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the founder of the dynasty had his courtiers hold a banquet at Hua Lin Yuan, and Zhang Jing'er was arrested at the banquet.

古文：敬儿左右雷仲显知有变，抱敬儿而泣。
现代文：敬儿身边的雷仲显知道出事了，抱着敬儿哭泣。
English: Lei Zhongxian, who was with Jing Er, knew that something had happened and held her crying.

古文：敬儿脱冠貂投地曰： 用此物误我。 
现代文：张敬儿把帽子脱下扔到地上，说： 都是这玩艺儿害了我！ 
English: Zhang Jing'er took off her hat and threw it on the ground, saying, "It's all this play that has harmed me!

古文：少日，伏诛。
现代文：没过几天，张敬儿就被诛杀了。
English: A few days later, Zhang Jing'er was beaten to death.

古文：诏曰： 敬儿蠢兹边裔，昏迷不脩。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 张敬儿本系愚蠢的边地后生，傻乎乎什么教养也没有。
English: The imperial edict said, "Zhang Jing'er is a stupid offspring of the backwoods, with no education at all.

古文：属值宋季多难，颇获野战之力。
现代文：赶上了宋末多难，很能为朝廷打仗。
English: It was difficult to catch up with the end of the Song Dynasty, but it was possible to fight for the imperial court.

古文：拔迹行伍，超登非分。
现代文：于是得到提拔，任军队要职。
English: As a result, he was promoted to a high-ranking position in the army.

古文：而愚躁无已，矜伐滋深。
现代文：然而他愚躁不已，愈加傲慢自处。
English: However, he remained impatient and became more and more arrogant.

古文：往莅本州，久苞异志。
现代文：过去在本州做官，就久怀异心。
English: In the past, when he was an official in Honshu, he harbored dissent for a long time.

古文：在昔含弘，庶能惩革。
现代文：先帝对他宽宏大量，指望他能有所悔悟改正。
English: The former emperor was magnanimous towards him and hoped that he would repent and reform.

古文：位班三槐，秩穷五等，怀音靡闻，奸回屡构。去岁迄今，嫌贰滋甚。
现代文：又给他晋爵提南齐书职，位极人臣，没听到他的感激，反而屡有奸谋。去年至今，越来越猖獗。
English: He also gave him a knighthood and the post of secretary, an extremely high-ranking official, and instead of hearing his gratitude, he repeatedly plotted against him. Since last year, it has become increasingly rampant.

古文：镇东将军敬则、丹阳尹安民每侍接之日，陈其凶狡，必图反噬。
现代文：镇东将军敬则、丹阳尹安民每次被接见时，总是要说到他的凶暴狡猾，必然要反咬一口。
English: Every time Zhendong General Jing Ze and Danyang Yin Anmin were received, they always wanted to talk about his ferocious cunning, and they would inevitably bite back.

古文：朕犹谓恩义所感，本质可移。
现代文：朕仍然觉得他可以被恩义感化，改变本质。
English: I still feel that he can be influenced by gratitude and change his nature.

古文：顷者已来，衅戾遂著，自以子弟在西，足动殊俗，招扇群蛮，规扰樊、夏。
现代文：谁料近来更加明目张胆，以为自己的子弟亲信都在西边，可以左右当地，便勾结鼓动群蛮，骚扰樊、夏一带。
English: Who would have guessed that recently they have been more blatant, thinking that their children and relatives are all in the west and can control the localities, and then colluding to incite the crowd to harass the areas around Handan and Xia.

古文：假托妖巫，用相震惑，妄设征祥，潜图问鼎。
现代文：并假托妖巫，威吓和迷惑人们，狂妄地说有什么征兆祥瑞，暗中谋取夺权篡位。
English: And pretending to be witches and wizards, intimidating and confusing people, arrogantly saying that there are any signs of auspiciousness, secretly seeking to seize power and usurp power.

古文：履霜于开运之辰，坚冰于嗣业之世，此而可忍，孰不可容！
现代文：我的皇业才开始不久，正是渡过艰险走向巩固的时期，是可忍，孰不可忍！
English: My imperial career has just begun. It is a period of overcoming hardships and moving toward consolidation. It can be endured, but it cannot be endured!

古文：天道祸淫，逆谋显露。
现代文：上天是要惩罚这样的谋逆之徒的。
English: Heaven is going to punish such traitors.

古文：建康民汤天获商行入蛮，备睹奸计，信驿书翰，证验炳明。
现代文：建康之民汤天获到蛮地行商，对张敬儿的奸计看得一清二楚，使者书信，铁证如山。
English: Tang Tian, a member of the Jiankang people, was allowed to travel to the countryside to do business. He saw Zhang Jing'er's treachery clearly. The emissary's letter is a mountain of evidence.

古文：便可收掩，式正刑辟；同党所及，特皆原宥。 
现代文：应立即将张敬儿正法，收尸埋掉；其同党和有牵连的人，一概宽宥。 
English: Zhang Jing'er should be brought to justice immediately, and his body should be buried; his party members and those involved should all be pardoned.

古文：子道文，武陵内史，道畅，征虏功曹，道固弟道休，并伏诛，少子道庆，见宥。
现代文：张敬儿之子张道文，任武陵内史，张道畅，任征虏功曹，张敬儿之子张道休，也都被诛。小儿子张道庆被宽大处理。
English: Zhang Jing Er's son Zhang Daowen, who was in charge of the internal history of Wuling, Zhang Daochang, who was in charge of the conscription, and Zhang Daohu, Zhang Jing Er's son, were also executed. Zhang Daoqing, the youngest son, was treated leniently.

古文：后数年，上与豫章王嶷三日曲水内宴，舴艋船流至御坐前覆没，上由是言及敬儿，悔杀之。
现代文：此后数年，皇上和豫章王萧嶷在三月三日曲水内宴时，舴艋船流到皇上座前翻覆了，皇上因而说到张敬儿，很后悔杀了他。
English: Several years later, the emperor and Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi held a banquet on the third day of the third month of March. The small boat of Yuanzhang flowed to the front of the emperor's seat and covered it. The emperor spoke of Zhang Jing'er, regretting that he should not have killed him.

古文：恭儿官至员外郎。在襄阳闻敬儿败，将数十骑走入蛮中，收捕不得。
现代文：张恭儿官至员外郎，在襄阳听说张敬儿被杀，带着数十骑逃到蛮部中，官府逮捕不得。
English: Zhang Jing'er, the official's younger brother, heard in Xiangyang that Zhang Jing'er had been killed and fled with dozens of horsemen to the middle of the barbarian camp. The authorities were not allowed to arrest him.

古文：后首出，上原其罪。
现代文：后来他出来自首，皇上宽免了他。
English: Later he came out and turned himself in, and the Emperor pardoned him.

古文：史臣曰：平世武臣，立身有术，若非愚以取信，则宜智以自免。
现代文：史臣曰：承平时代的武臣，要想保住功名富贵那是要讲究策略的：如果不能用愚笨得到人主的信任，那么就要凭智慧来自我保护以免遭祸。
English: Shichen said: In order to retain the fame and fortune of a warrior in the Heping era, it is necessary to pay attention to strategy. If you can't use stupidity to gain the trust of the master, then you must use wisdom to protect yourself from disaster.

古文：心迹无阻，乃见优容。
现代文：一定要使自己和上司之间能进行必要沟通，才能受到优厚待遇。
English: You must be able to establish the necessary communication between yourself and your boss in order to receive preferential treatment.

古文：崇祖恨结东朝，敬儿情疑鸟尽，嗣运方初，委骨严宪。
现代文：垣崇祖得罪了太子，张敬儿在天下平定后受怀疑，国运起来不久，都被收审正法。
English: Gaki Chongzu offended the crown prince, Zhang Jing'er was suspected after the world was pacified, and soon after the national movement began, they were all tried and punished.

古文：若情非发愤，事无感激，功名之间，不足为也。
现代文：如果不是受不了人情事态的激发感动，而招致不幸，仅仅因为功名问题，是不至于弄到这个地步的。
English: If it weren't for the fact that I couldn't stand the excitement of the human situation and the state of affairs, causing misfortune, I wouldn't have gotten to this point just because of the problem of my reputation.

古文：赞曰：崇祖为将，志怀驰逐。
现代文：赞曰：垣崇祖做将军，很愿意冲锋陷阵。
English: Praise: As a general, he was very willing to charge into battle.

古文：规搔淮部，立勋豫牧。
现代文：平定淮河一带的骚扰，在豫州牧上立有功勋。
English: The pacification of the harassment along the Huaihe River is a great achievement in the pasture of Yuzhou.

古文：敬儿莅雍，深心防楚。
现代文：张敬儿坐镇雍州时，很卖力地防备荆楚。
English: When Zhang Jing'er was sitting in the town of Yongzhou, she tried very hard to prevent Jing Chu from leaving.

古文：岂不劬劳，实兴师旅。
现代文：他不顾辛苦和劳累，为国家振兴了军队。
English: He revitalized the army for the country in spite of hard work and fatigue.

古文：烹犬藏弓，同归异绪。
现代文：走狗烹良弓藏，两人情形不同，但结局无异。
English: The two men were in different situations, but the outcome was the same.

