古文：泉企字思道，上洛丰阳人也。
现代文：泉企字思道，是上洛丰阳人。
English: Quanqi Zi Si Dao is from Shangluo Fengyang.

古文：世雄商洛。
现代文：世代称雄于商洛地区。
English: It has been dominant in the Shangluo area for generations.

古文：曾祖景言，魏建节将军，假宜阳郡守，世袭本县令，封丹水侯。
现代文：曾祖父泉景言，在魏朝为建节将军，代理宜阳郡守，世代袭任本县县令，封爵位丹水侯。
English: His great-grandfather, Quan Jingyan, was the general of Jianjie in the Wei Dynasty, acting as the governor of Yiyang County, and successively served as the county magistrate of this county, and was knighted as the Dan Shui Hou.

古文：父安志，复为建节将军、宜阳郡守，领本县令，降爵为伯。
现代文：父亲泉安志，复为建节将军、宜阳郡守，领本县令，爵位降为伯爵。
English: His father, Quan Anzhi, was reinstated as Jianjie general, Yiyang county governor, leading county magistrate, and his title was reduced to count.

古文：企九岁丧父，哀毁类于成人。
现代文：泉企九岁父亲去世，悲哀毁形如同成人。
English: When Quanqi's nine-year-old father died, he was as sad and disfigured as an adult.

古文：服阕袭爵。
现代文：服丧期满继嗣爵位。
English: After the period of mourning is over, the title of heir to the throne is lost.

古文：年十二，乡人皇平、陈合等三百余人诣州请企为县令。
现代文：十二岁时，家乡人皇平、陈合等三百多人到州中请求任命泉企为县令。
English: At the age of twelve, more than three hundred people from his hometown, including Wang Ping and Chen He, went to the middle school to request the appointment of Quan Ke as the county magistrate.

古文：州为申上，时吏部尚书郭祚以企年少，未堪宰民，请别选遣，终此一限，令企代之。
现代文：州府申报到朝廷，当时的吏部尚书郭祚认为泉企年纪小，没有治理民众的能力，要求另外选派，祇任一任，然后由泉企接替任县令。
English: The prefectural government reported to the imperial court that Guo Jian, the then-head of the personnel department, believed that Quanqi was too young and did not have the ability to govern the people, and requested that another person be appointed, but only for one term, after which Quanqi would take over as county magistrate.

古文：魏宣武帝诏曰： 企向成立，且为本乡所乐，何为舍此世袭，更求一限。 遂依所请。
现代文：魏宣武帝下诏说： 泉企向来如同成人，而且为乡人拥戴，为何要舍去世袭的人，另外任一任县令。 于是同意所请以泉企为县令。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Wei Dynasty issued an edict saying: Quanqi has always been like an adult, and it is supported by the villagers, so why should the people who attack it be spared, and any other county magistrate. So they agreed to the request to make Quanqi the county magistrate.

古文：企虽童幼，而好学恬静，百姓安之。
现代文：泉企虽然年纪幼小，却喜好学习且性情平和宁静，百姓生活安定。
English: Although Quanqi is young, it likes to study and has a peaceful and quiet disposition, and the people's life is stable.

古文：寻以母忧去职。
现代文：不久由于母亲的丧事去职。
English: He left the post shortly afterwards due to the death of his mother.

古文：县中父老复表请殷勤，诏许之。
现代文：县中父老又呈上表章申请泉企连任，诏令允许。
English: The parents and elders of the county also submitted the above form to apply for the re-election of Quanqi, which was allowed by the imperial edict.

古文：起复本任，加讨寇将军。
现代文：丧期未满便恢复原职，加讨寇将军。
English: Before the period of mourning was over, he was reinstated to his original post and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：孝昌初，又加龙骧将军、假节、防洛州别将，寻除上洛郡守。
现代文：孝昌初年，又加龙骧将军、假节、防洛州别将，不久任上洛郡守。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he also became the general of Garongye, the false festival, and the leader of the anti-Laos Prefecture, and was soon appointed the governor of Shangluo County.

古文：及萧宝夤反，遣其党郭子恢袭据潼关。
现代文：当萧宝夤反叛时，派遣他的部众郭子恢袭取潼关。
English: When Xiao Baojun rebelled, he sent his subordinate Guo Zi to invade Shiguan.

古文：企率乡兵三千人拒之，连战数日，子弟死者二十许人，遂大破子恢。
现代文：泉企率领乡兵三千人拒敌，一连交战数天，有二十多名子弟战死，终于将王拯打得大败。
English: Quanqi led 3,000 local soldiers to resist the enemy, and they fought for several days in a row. More than 20 of his sons and brothers died in the battle. Finally, Wang Zheng was defeated.

古文：以功拜征虏将军。
现代文：由于功劳拜授征虏将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Conscript General for his services.

古文：宝夤又遣兵万人趣青泥，诱动巴人，图取上洛。
现代文：实夤又派遣军队万人前往青泥，引诱煽动巴人，企图取得上洛。
English: Then, he sent an army of ten thousand men to Qingde, lured and incited the Ba people, and attempted to take Shangluo.

古文：上洛豪族泉、杜二姓密应之。
现代文：上洛地方豪族泉、杜二姓秘密接应。
English: Shangluo local strongman Quan, Du Er's surname secretly accepted.

古文：企与刺史董绍宗潜兵掩袭，二姓散走，宝夤军亦退。
现代文：星企与刺史董绍宗秘密进行大规模袭击，二姓溃散逃走，宝夤军因此亦退军。
English: Xingqi and the assassin Dong Shaozong secretly carried out a large-scale attack, the two families scattered and fled, and the Baojun Army also withdrew.

古文：迁左将军、淅州刺史，别封泾阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：迁升左将军、淅州刺史，另外封泾阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General of the Left, and was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Jishi. In addition, he was awarded the title of Biao of Biyang County, and there were 500 households in the food village.

古文：永安中，梁将王玄真入寇荆州。
现代文：永安年间，梁将王玄真前来侵略荆州。
English: During the Yongan era, Liang brought Wang Xianzhen to invade Jingzhou.

古文：加企持节、都督，率众援之。
现代文：加泉企持节、都督，率众前往支援。
English: Kaizumi Keshi Festival, the governor, led the crowd to support.

古文：遇玄真于顺阳，与战，大破之。
现代文：于顺阳遭遇玄真，与之交战，大破之。
English: In Shunyang, he encountered Xuan Zhen, fought with him, and defeated him.

古文：除抚军将军、使持节，假镇南将军、东雍州刺史，进爵为侯。
现代文：授抚军将军、使持节，代理镇南将军、束雍州刺史，爵位进为侯爵。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the General Staff, the title of Envoy, the title of Acting General of Zhenan, the title of Marshal, and the title of Marshal.

古文：部民杨羊皮，太保椿之从弟，恃托椿势，侵害百姓。
现代文：部民杨羊皮，太保杨椿的堂弟，依仗杨椿权势，侵害百姓。
English: Yang Yangpi, a member of the Ministry of the People and a cousin of Yang Qin, the Tai Po, relied on Yang Qin's power to encroach on the people.

古文：守宰多被其凌侮，皆畏而不敢言。
现代文：守宰多受其欺凌侮辱，都不敢申诉。
English: Most of the guards were bullied and insulted, and they did not dare to complain.

古文：企收而治之，将加极法，于是杨氏惭惧，宗族诣合请恩。
现代文：泉企将杨羊皮拘捕归案，准备处以重刑，于是杨氏害怕，宗族到朝廷官署请恩谢罪。
English: Quanqi arrested Yang Yangpi and prepared to give him a heavy sentence. As a result, the Yang clan was afraid and went to the Imperial Household Agency to ask for a pardon.

古文：自此豪右屏迹，无敢犯者。
现代文：此后豪强大户屏迹，不敢犯法。
English: Since then, wealthy and powerful households have not dared to break the law.

古文：性又清约，纤毫不扰于民。
现代文：其性情清约，从不扰民。
English: His disposition is clean and he never disturbs people.

古文：在州五年，每于乡里运米以自给。
现代文：在州五年，所食粮食多从家乡运来。
English: During his five years in the state, most of the grain he ate was transported from his hometown.

古文：梁魏兴郡与洛州接壤，表请与属。
现代文：梁朝魏兴郡与洛州交界，上表请辖属。
English: Liangchao Weixing County is on the border with Lozhou, please refer to the table above.

古文：诏企为行台尚书以抚纳之。
现代文：诏令泉企为行台尚书对其安抚招纳。
English: The Emperor ordered Izumi Enterprise to recruit for the line, and the Emperor's edict was issued to appease and recruit them.

古文：大行台贺拔岳以企昔莅东雍，为吏民所怀，乃表企复为刺史，诏许之。
现代文：大行台贺拔岳以泉企往昔任职束雍，吏民欢迎他，于是上表复任泉企为刺史，诏令准许。
English: Dajangdai He Batyue used to work for Quanqi in the past, and the officials and people welcomed him. Therefore, the resumption of Quanqi's appointment to the upper table was allowed by the imperial edict.

古文：蜀民张国隽聚党剽劫，州郡不能制，企命收而戮之，阖境清肃。
现代文：蜀民张国隽聚众劫掠，州郡不能控制，星企下令捕获处死，全境清平宁静。
English: Shu Min Zhang Guozhen gathered a crowd to plunder, the state and county could not be controlled, the Star Enterprise ordered the capture and execution, and the whole territory was calm and quiet.

古文：魏孝武初，加车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：魏孝武初年，加车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Wei Xiaowu, he became a cavalry general and a doctor.

古文：及齐神武专政，魏帝有西顾之心，欲委企以山南之事，乃除洛州刺史、当州都督。
现代文：当齐神武专政时，魏帝想奔于西方，欲委托泉企以山南之事，便授其为洛州刺史、当州都督。
English: When the Qishenwu dictatorship was in power, Emperor Wei wanted to go to the West and wanted to entrust Quanqi with the affairs of Shannan, so he appointed him as the prefect of Luozhou and the governor of the state.

古文：未几，帝西迁，齐神武率众至潼关，企遣其子元礼督乡里五千人，北出大谷以御之。
现代文：不久，帝西迁，齐神武率众至潼关，泉企遣其子丞擅督率五千乡民，北出去登抵抗。
English: Soon, the imperial court moved to the west, Qi Shenwu led the crowd to Shaoguan, Quanqi sent his son, Jo, to lead five thousand villagers, and went to the north to resist.

古文：齐神武不敢进。
现代文：蛮圭蛆不敢进兵。
English: He dared not join the army.

古文：上洛人都督泉岳、其弟猛略与阳人杜窋等谋翻洛州，以应东军。
现代文：上洛人都督泉岳、其弟猛略和拒阳人丝蛮等在迢业谋反，以响应束军。
English: The Shangluo people, including the governor Quan Yue, his younger brother Meng Li and the Yang-rejectionist Si Man, plotted a rebellion in response to Shu's army.

古文：企知之，杀岳及猛略等，传首诣阙，而窋亡投东魏。
现代文：泉企知道后，杀：蛆及型匡等人，将首级送至朝廷，而杜茁逃亡投奔塞魏。
English: After Quanqi learned of this, Xizhao and Qiankuang and others sent their heads to the imperial court, while Du Du fled to Wei.

古文：录前后勋，授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：以其前后功勋，授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In recognition of his past and future achievements, he was awarded the title of General of Cavalry and the title of General of the Third Division of Cavalry.

古文：大统初，加开府仪同三司，兼尚书右仆射，进爵上洛郡公，增邑通前千户。
现代文：左铲初年，加开府仪同三司，兼尚书右仆射，晋爵为上洛郡公，食邑增至千户。
English: In the first year of the left-hand shovel, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions were added, and the Shangshu right-hand servant was shot, the Jinzhe was the Shangluo County official, and the food villages increased to a thousand households.

古文：企志尚廉慎，每除一官，忧见颜色。
现代文：泉企志尚清廉谨慎，每次授官，都面有忧容。
English: Quan Qizhi is clean, honest and prudent. Every time he is awarded a post, he looks worried.

古文：至是频让，魏帝手诏不许。
现代文：至此屡次推辞，魏帝手诏不许可。
English: At this point, he repeatedly declined, and Emperor Wei did not allow it.

古文：三年，高敖曹率众围逼州城，杜窋为其乡导。
现代文：三年，宣壹遭率领众军包围攻打州城，丝直为他做向导。
English: Three years later, Xuan led an army to encircle and attack the state capital, and Si Zhizhong served as his guide.

古文：企拒守旬余，矢尽援绝，城乃陷焉。
现代文：星企坚守十余日，因为箭矢和粮食用完没有援兵，城池被攻陷。
English: Xingke held out for more than ten days, because there were no reinforcements after the arrows and arrows and grain were used up, and the castle was captured.

古文：企谓敖曹曰： 泉企力屈，志不服也。 
现代文：星金对麦堕说：
English: Seikin said to Makidou:

古文：及窦泰被擒，敖曹退走，遂执企而东，以窋为刺史。
现代文： 我星企是因为力量武器耗尽不能防守而城破，心志不会服气。 当窦泰被擒时，敖曹退军离开，于是执住泉企束去，以杜茁任刺史。
English: When Dou Tai was captured, Cao Cao withdrew from the army, so he clung to Quan Qi and went away, leaving Du Du to make history.

古文：企临发，密诫子元礼、仲遵曰： 吾生平志愿，不过令长耳。
现代文：泉企临走的时候，秘密告诫儿子元礼、仲遵说： 我平生的志愿，不过是做个县令长。
English: When Quanqi was about to leave, he secretly admonished his sons, Yuan Li and Zhong Zun, saying: My lifelong wish is to be a county magistrate.

古文：幸逢圣运，位亚台司。
现代文：有幸遇到圣世国运，官位到了台司。
English: I was fortunate to encounter the Holy World National Games, and I was promoted to the position of stage manager.

古文：今爵禄既隆，年齿又暮，前途夷险，抑亦可知。
现代文：现在爵位官位都很高，年纪又老了，前途的平安危险，基本上可以知道。
English: Now the titles and ranks are very high, the age is old, and the future of peace and danger can basically be known.

古文：汝等志业方强，堪立功效。
现代文：你们前程远大，可以建功立业。
English: You have a great future ahead of you and can make great achievements.

古文：且忠孝之道，不可两全，宜各为身计，勿相随寇手。
现代文：且忠孝不可能两全，要考虑自身，不要共同陷于贼寇之手。
English: Moreover, loyalty and filial piety cannot be complete. We must consider ourselves and not fall into the hands of thieves.

古文：但得汝等致力本朝，吾无余恨。
现代文：衹要你们致力于本朝，我也就没有遗恨了。
English: If you want to devote yourself to this morning, I have no hatred left.

古文：不得以我在东，遂亏臣节也。
现代文：我不得已往东去，有损于臣节。
English: I had no choice but to go to the East, which was detrimental to the Emperor's Birthday.

古文：尔其勉之！ 乃挥涕而诀，余无所言，闻者莫不愤叹。
现代文：你们要勉励自己! 于是流着眼泪告别，其他的没有说什么。闻知的人都愤愤叹息。
English: You must encourage yourselves! So they bid farewell with tears, the others did not say anything. Those who knew them sighed with indignation.

古文：寻卒于邺。
现代文：不久在邺去世。
English: He died soon after in Handan.

古文：元礼少有志气，好弓马，颇闲草隶，有士君子之风。
现代文：元礼少年时便有志气，喜好骑射，草隶书法都很好，有士人君子风度。
English: When he was a young boy in the Yuan Dynasty, he had ambition, a liking for riding and shooting, his cursive handwriting was very good, and he had the demeanor of a gentleman.

古文：释褐奉朝请、本州别驾。
现代文：出仕任奉朝请、本州别驾。
English: If you are appointed to serve the Emperor, please stay away from Honshu.

古文：累迁员外散骑侍郎、洛州大中正、员外散骑常侍、安东将军、持节、都督，赐爵临洮县伯，进征东将军、金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
现代文：多次升迁任员外散骑侍郎、洛州大中正、员外散骑常侍、安束将军、持节、都督，赐临洮县伯爵位，晋为征东将军、金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted many times to the posts of non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer

古文：及洛州陷，与企俱被执而东。
现代文：到洛州陷落后，与泉企俱被捕押往东方。
English: After the fall of Lozhou, he and Quan Qi were arrested and driven to the East.

古文：元礼于路逃归。
现代文：元礼在路上逃回。
English: Yuanli fled back on the road.

古文：时杜窋虽为刺史，然巴人素轻杜而重泉。
现代文：当时杜窗虽然为刺史，但是旦人素来轻灶重星。
English: At that time, although the Du window was a bitter history, it was always a light stove and a heavy star.

古文：及元礼至，与仲遵相见，感父临别之言，潜与豪右结托。
现代文：当元礼来到，与使遵相见，感于父亲临别之言，秘密联合世族大户。
English: When the Lantern Festival came, he met with the envoy Zun and, inspired by his father's parting words, secretly united the great families of the world.

古文：信宿之间，遂率乡人袭州城，斩窋，传首长安。
现代文：两三日内，遂集合乡人袭击州城，斩杜帘，将首级传送星玄。
English: Within two or three days, the villagers gathered to attack the state capital, cut off the curtain, and sent the head to Xing Xuan.

古文：朝廷嘉之，拜卫将军、车骑大将军，世袭洛州刺史。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖，授卫将军、车骑大将军，世袭盗州刺史。
English: Awarded by the imperial court, awarded the general of the guard, the general of the cavalry, the history of the hereditary theft of the state.

古文：从太祖战于沙苑，为流矢所中，遂卒。
现代文：随从左担参加皇噬战役，为流矢所中，因此去世。
English: He participated in the battle of the Emperor Zhao from the left flank, and was in the middle of the stream of arrows, so he died.

古文：子贞嗣，官至仪同三司。
现代文：其子泉贞继嗣，官至仪同三司。
English: His son, Izumi no Sadamori, succeeded him as the third-ranking official in the Imperial Court.

古文：仲遵少谨实，涉猎经史。
现代文：仲遵年少便谨慎忠实，涉猎经史。
English: At a young age, Zhong Zun was prudent and faithful, dabbling in history.

古文：年十三，州辟主簿。
现代文：十三岁时，州征为主簿。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was conscripted by the state.

古文：十四，为本县令。
现代文：十四岁，任为本县令。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was appointed as the county magistrate.

古文：及长，有武艺。
现代文：长大后，武功很好。
English: When I grew up, I was good at martial arts.

古文：遭世离乱，每从父兄征讨，以勇决闻。
现代文：世道离乱，经常随从父兄征讨，以勇敢果断闻名。
English: He was disoriented by the world, often following his father and brother to fight, and was known for his courage and determination.

古文：高敖曹攻洛州，企令仲遵率五百人出战。
现代文：高产遭攻打渔州，星企令住遵率五百人出战。
English: High-yielding Yuzhou was attacked, and Star Enterprise ordered 500 people from Zun to fight.

古文：时以众寡不敌，乃退入城，复与企力战拒守。
现代文：当时因寡不敌众，乃退入城中，与星全力战守城。
English: At that time, due to being outnumbered, they retreated into the city and fought with the stars to defend the city.

古文：矢尽，以杖棒扞之，遂为流矢中目，不堪复战。
现代文：箭射完了，便以木棒御敌，因而被流矢射中眼睛，不能再战。
English: After the arrows were shot, he fought the enemy with a wooden stick. As a result, he was shot in the eye by a stray arrow and was unable to fight again.

古文：及城陷，士卒叹曰： 若二郎不伤，岂至于此。 
现代文：城陷落后，士卒叹息说： 如果三坚不受伤，岂至于如此。 
English: After the fall of the city, the officials sighed and said: "If the Three Pillars were not damaged, would it have come to this?"

古文：企之东也，仲遵以被伤不行。
现代文：泉企被迫往东，使遵因伤而没有随行。
English: Quanqi was forced to go east, and Zun was injured and did not accompany him.

古文：后与元礼斩窋，以功封丰阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：后舆元礼斩杜宜，以功封丰阳县伯爵位，食邑五百户。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty, Du Yi was awarded the title of count of Fengyang County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：加授征东将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：加授征束将军、邀业刺史。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of General of the Conscription Corps and invited to write history.

古文：及元礼于沙苑战没，复以仲遵为洛州刺史。
现代文：当孟擅战死于主堕，复以倥遵为洛州刺史。
English: When Meng Guanzhong died of the Lord's Fall, he was reinstated as the ruler of Luozhou.

古文：仲遵宿称干略，为乡里所归。
现代文：仲遵向来以才干谋略著称，为乡里所称赞。
English: Zhong Zun has always been known for his talent in strategy, and has been praised by the township.

古文：及为本州，颇得嘉誉。
现代文：及为本州刺史，颇得到嘉誉。
English: and made history in Honshu, and was highly commended.

古文：东魏北豫州刺史高仲密举成皋入附，太祖率军应之，别遣仲遵随于谨攻柏谷坞。
现代文：东魏北豫州刺史高仲密以成皋来归附，太祖率军接应，别遣仲遵随从于谨攻打柏谷坞。
English: Gao Zhongmi, the East Wei governor of North Henan Province, sent his troops to Chengdu to annex it. Emperor Taizu led the troops to accept the annexation, but he did not send his troops to attack Baiyun Dock.

古文：仲遵力战先登，擒其将王显明。
现代文：仲遵力战先登，擒获其将王显明。
English: Zhong Zunli entered the battle first and captured his general Wang Xianming.

古文：柏谷既拔，复会大军战于邙山。
现代文：攻克柏谷后，又会同大军参加邙山战役。
English: After conquering Kashiwa Valley, he participated in the Lushan Campaign with a large army.

古文：十三年，王思政改镇颍川，以仲遵行荆州刺史事。
现代文：十三年，王思政改至颖川镇守，以仲遵代理荆州刺史事务。
English: In the thirteenth year, Wang Sizheng was changed to Yingchuan town guard, acting as the representative of Jingzhou history affairs with Zhongzun.

古文：十五年，加授大都督，俄进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十五年，加授大都督，不久晋为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Fifteen years later, he was awarded the title of Grand Governor, and soon promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry, and the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：梁司州刺史柳仲礼每为边寇，太祖令仲遵率乡兵从开府杨忠讨之。
现代文：梁朝司州刺史柳仲礼经常侵犯边地，太祖令仲遵率领乡兵随开府杨忠征讨。
English: The Liang Dynasty's statesman Liu Zhongli often encroached on the borderlands, and the great-grandfather ordered Zhong Zun to lead the local soldiers to follow Yang Zhong to Kaifu.

古文：梁随郡守桓和拒守不降。
现代文：梁朝随郡守桓和拒守不降。
English: The Liang Dynasty followed the county to defend Kanwa and refused to surrender.

古文：忠谓诸将曰： 本图仲礼，不在随郡。
现代文：杨忠对诸将说： 本意是图谋仲礼，无意于随郡。
English: Yang Zhong said to the generals: The intention is to arrange a match, not to follow the county.

古文：如即攻守，恐引日劳师。
现代文：如果攻打，恐怕费时劳师。
English: If we attack, I'm afraid it will take a long time.

古文：今若先取仲礼，则桓和可不攻自服。
现代文：今若先取仲礼，则桓和可以不攻就会降服。
English: Now, if you take the mediation first, then Kanwa will surrender without attacking.

古文：诸君以为何如？ 仲遵对曰： 蜂虿有毒，何可轻也。
现代文：诸君以为怎样? 仲遵对答说： 蜂趸有毒，不可轻视。
English: What do you think? Zhong Zun replied, "Bee stings are poisonous and should not be taken lightly.

古文：若弃和深入，遂擒仲礼，和之降不，尚未可知。
现代文：如果不理会桓和而深入，就是擒获仲礼，桓和降还是不降，尚未可知。
English: If you ignore Kanwa and go deeper, you will be awarded the middle rank. Whether Kanwa will be demoted or not is not yet known.

古文：如仲礼未获，和为之援，首尾受敌，此危道也。
现代文：如果未能捕获仲礼，桓和为其援，首尾受敌，这是危险之道。
English: If you fail to capture Zhongli, Kanwa will support you and you will be defeated. This is a dangerous path.

古文：若先攻和，指麾可克。
现代文：如果先攻桓和指挥可定。
English: If we attack first, the outcome will be decided.

古文：克和而进，更无反顾之忧。 忠从之。
现代文：攻克桓和再进军，更无反顾之忧。 杨忠从之。
English: Conquering Kanwa and then marching forward, there was no need to worry about turning back. Yang Zhong followed suit.

古文：仲遵以计由己出，乃率先登城，遂擒和。
现代文：仲遵因为此计是自己所出，所以率先登城，擒获桓和。
English: Because this plan was his own, Zhong Zun took the lead in entering the city and won the battle.

古文：仍从忠击仲礼，又获之。
现代文：随后从杨忠攻击仲礼，又获之。
English: Subsequently, Yang Zhong attacked Zhongli and won again.

古文：进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，领本州大中正，复为三荆二广南雍平信江随二郢淅等十三州诸军事，行荆州刺史。
现代文：晋为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，领本州大中正，复为三荆二广南雍乎信江随二郢淅等十三州诸军事，代理荆州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the cavalry general, Kaifu Yi and three divisions, led the Honshu University Junior High School, and became the military of thirteen states such as Sanjing, Guangnan, Yonghu, Xinjiang, and Erqi, acting as the representative of Jingzhou.

古文：寻遭母忧，请终丧制，不许。
现代文：不久因母丧，请求终服丧制，没有允许。
English: Soon after, due to her mother's death, she requested to wear mourning clothes for the rest of her life, which was not allowed.

古文：大将军王雄南征上津、魏兴，仲遵率所部兵从雄讨平之。
现代文：大将军王雄南征上津、魏兴，仲遵率领所部兵随从王雄征讨平定。
English: The great general Wang Xiong marched south to conquer Shangjin and Weixing, and Zhong Zun led the troops of Shobu to follow Wang Xiong to conquer and subdue.

古文：遂于上津置南洛州，以仲遵为刺史。
现代文：于是在上津置南洛州，以仲遵马刺史。
English: Therefore, in Shangjin, Nanluozhou was placed, and the history of Zhongzun Spurs began.

古文：仲遵留情抚接，百姓安之，流民归附者，相继而至。
现代文：仲遵留心安抚，人民安定，归附的流民，相继而至。
English: Zhongzong paid attention to appeasing, stabilizing the people, and the returned exiles came one after another.

古文：初，蛮帅杜清和自称巴州刺史，以州入附。
现代文：当初，蛮帅杜清和自称巴州刺史，以州归附。
English: At first, Du Qinghe, a brute and self-proclaimed "Bazhou assassin," was attached to the prefecture.

古文：朝廷因其所据授之，仍隶东梁州都督。
现代文：朝廷以其所占据的地方授任他为刺史，仍隶属于束梁州都督。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the chief historian of the place he occupied, and he was still subordinate to the governor of Sokliang Prefecture.

古文：清和以仲遵善于抚御，请隶仲遵。
现代文：清和以仲遵善于抚御，请求隶属仲遵。
English: Qing He was good at caressing Zhong Zun, and asked to be subordinate to Zhong Zun.

古文：朝议以山川非便，弗之许也。
现代文：朝议认为山川阻隔不便，没有允许。
English: The imperial court considered the separation of mountains and rivers to be inconvenient and did not allow it.

古文：清和遂结安康酋帅黄众宝等，举兵共围东梁州。
现代文：清和因而交结安康酋帅黄众宾等人，举兵围攻东梁州。
English: As a result, Qing He allied with Ankang chieftain Huang Zhongbin and others to raise an army to besiege Dongliang Prefecture.

古文：复遣王雄讨平之。
现代文：又派遣王雄讨平之。
English: Wang Xiong was also dispatched to settle the dispute.

古文：改巴州为洵州，隶于仲遵。
现代文：改巴州为洵州，隶属于仲遵。
English: Changba Prefecture was renamed Zhangzhou and was subordinated to Zhongzong.

古文：先是，东梁州刺史刘孟良在职贪婪，民多背叛。
现代文：原先，东梁州刺史刘孟良在职时十分贪婪，民多背叛。
English: Originally, Liu Mengliang, the governor of Dongliang Prefecture, was very greedy when he was in office, and many people betrayed him.

古文：仲遵以廉简处之，群蛮率服。
现代文：仲遵为政清廉简约，群蛮相率而顺服。
English: Zhongzong adhered to the principle of cleanliness, simplicity and conformity.

古文：仲遵虽出自巴夷，而有方雅之操，历官之处，皆以清白见称。
现代文：仲遵虽然是巴地夷人，但操行雅正，任官所历之处，皆以清白名声被人称赞。
English: Although Zhong Zun is a Badi'i, he behaves with dignity and is praised for his clean reputation in all the places he has been appointed to.

古文：朝廷又以其父临危抗节，乃令袭爵上洛郡公，旧封听回授一子。
现代文：朝廷又!：其父临危抗节，因此令其袭封上洛郡公爵位，原来封爵转封一子。
English: The Imperial Court again!: His father was in a critical condition, so he was made Duke of Los Angeles County. He was the first son to be knighted.

古文：魏恭帝初，征拜左卫将军。
现代文：魏恭帝初年，征召拜为左卫将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was called up to serve as the General of the Left Division.

古文：寻出为都督金兴等六州诸军事、金州刺史。
现代文：不久出任都督金兴等六州诸军事、金州刺史。
English: He soon became the military governor of six states, including Jinxing, and the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：武成初，卒官，时年四十五。
现代文：武成初年，在官职上去世，时年四十五岁。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng, he died in office, at the age of forty-five.

古文：赠大将军、华洛等三州刺史。
现代文：追赠大将军、华洛等三州刺史。
English: posthumously awarded the grand general, hualo and other three states.

古文：谥曰庄。
现代文：谧号为庄。
English: His posthumous name was Sho.

古文：子端嗣。
现代文：其子星迺继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son Ryōgen.

古文：起家本县令，入为左侍上士。
现代文：初仕任本县县令，入朝为左侍上士。
English: He first served as the county magistrate of this county, and entered the imperial court as a left-hand officer.

古文：保定中，授帅都督，累迁仪同三司，出为纯州防主。
现代文：蝗年间，授帅都督，多次升迁至仪同三司，出外任面议防主。
English: During the locust years, he was given the title of grand marshal and governor of the capital, and was promoted several times to the third division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：建德末，位至开府仪同大将军。
现代文：建德末年，位至开府仪同大将军。
English: In the last years of the Jiande era, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi Tongtao.

古文：李迁哲字孝彦，安康人也。
现代文：李迁哲字茎彦，是堂尘人。
English: Li Qian Zhe Zi Zhi Yan, is a real person.

古文：世为山南豪族，仕于江左。
现代文：世代为山南豪族，在辽左为官。
English: He was born into a powerful family in Shannan and served as a magistrate in Liao Zuo.

古文：祖方达，齐末，为本州治中。
现代文：祖父立达，查塑末年，为本州治中。
English: My grandfather, Lida, was in the last years of his plastic surgery career and was a junior high school student in Honshu.

古文：父元真，仕梁，历东宫左卫率、东梁衡二州刺史、散骑常侍、沌阳侯。
现代文：父元真，在凿翅做官，历任束宫左卫率、塞凿蛮二州刺史、散骑常侍、浊压堡。
English: His father, Yuan Zhen, was an official in the Chisel Wing, and successively served as the head of the left palace guard, chiseled the history of two states, rode horseback, and guarded the castle.

古文：迁哲少修立，有识度，慷慨善谋画。
现代文：迁哲年少修身而有所成就，有见识气度，为人慷慨足智多谋。
English: Qian Zhe is young, self-cultivated, and accomplished. He is insightful and generous, resourceful and resourceful.

古文：起家文德主帅，转直合将军、武贲中郎将。
现代文：初仕任文德主帅，转任直合将军、武贲中郎将。
English: He was first appointed as head coach of Wende, and then transferred to General Zhaohai and General Takeuchi.

古文：及其父为衡州，留迁哲本乡，监统部曲事。
现代文：其父任职衡州，留迁哲在本乡，管理部曲。
English: His father worked in Hengzhou, and Zhe stayed in his hometown to manage the music club.

古文：时年二十，抚驭群下，甚得其情。
现代文：时年二十岁，管理群下，甚得其情。
English: He was 20 years old at the time, and under the management group.

古文：大同二年，除安康郡守。
现代文：大同二年，任安康郡守。
English: In the same year, he was appointed governor of Ankang County.

古文：三年，加超武将军。
现代文：三年，加超武将军。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to General Chaowu.

古文：太清二年，移镇魏兴郡，都督魏兴、上庸等八郡诸军事，袭爵沌阳侯，邑一千五百户。
现代文：太清二年，移至魏兴郡镇守，都督魏兴、上庸等八郡诸军事，袭爵沌阳侯，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, it was moved to Wei Xing County as the town guard, and the military of eight counties, including the governor of Wei Xing and Shangyong, attacked the lord of Chaoyang, and 1,500 households in the food village.

古文：四年，迁持节、信武将军、散骑常侍、都督东梁洵兴等七州诸军事、东梁州刺史。
现代文：四年，迁任持节、信武将军、散骑常侍、都督束梁洵兴等七州诸军事、束梁州刺史。
English: In the fourth year, he was transferred to the military of seven states, including Jisai, General Nobutake, Sanzhishi, and Governor Sokuryang Shuxing, and Sokuryang State.

古文：及侯景篡逆，诸王争帝，迁哲外御边寇，自守而已。
现代文：当侯景篡逆时，诸王争相称帝，迁哲抗御外寇，白守而已
English: When Hou Jing usurped the throne, the kings were competing to become emperor, and resisting foreign invaders. They were only defending themselves.

古文：大统十七年，太祖遣达奚武、王雄等略地山南，迁哲率其所部拒战，军败，遂降于武。
现代文：大统十七年，太祖派遣达奚武、王雄等人至山南略地，迁哲率部拒战，军队战败，因而向达圣逮投降。
English: In the 17th year of the Great Reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Taizu sent Dazhongwu, Wang Xiong and others to Shannan Rongdian, but Danzhe led his troops to resist the war. The army was defeated and surrendered to Dazhongwu.

古文：然犹意气自若。
现代文：但仍然意气自若。
English: But he remains in good spirits.

古文：武乃执送京师。
现代文：达奚武因此将他解送京师。
English: As a result, Dagongwu sent him to the capital.

古文：太祖谓之曰： 何不早归国家，乃劳师旅。
现代文：太祖对他说： 为何不早些回归国家，以至于劳动军队。
English: The great-grandfather said to him, "Why not return to the country earlier and join the labor army?"

古文：今为俘虏，不亦愧乎？ 答曰： 世荷梁恩，未有报效，又不能死节，实以此为愧耳。 太祖深嘉之，即拜使持节、车骑大将军、散骑常侍，封沌阳县伯，邑千户。
现代文：如今成为俘虏，不也羞愧吗? 回答说： 世代受梁朝恩典，未曾报效，又不能为保全气节而死，实在为此羞愧。 左担十分赞赏，当即拜为使持节、车骑大将军、散骑常侍，封沌阳县伯爵位，食邑千户。
English: Now that he is a prisoner, isn't he ashamed? He replied, "I am truly ashamed that I have been favored by the Liang Dynasty for generations, yet I have not been able to repay the favor, nor have I been able to die for the preservation of the qi dynasty. I greatly appreciated the left shoulder, and immediately paid homage to it as the auspicious festival, the general of chariot and cavalry, the attendant of horseback riding, the count of Chaoyang County, and the thousand households of food villages.

古文：魏恭帝初，直州人乐炽、洋州人田越、金州人黄国等连结为乱。
现代文：魏恭帝初年，直州人乐炽、洋州人田越、金州人黄国等结党造反。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, the people of Zhouzhou, Yanzhou, Tian Yue, Jinzhou and Huang Guo rebelled.

古文：太祖遣鴈门公田弘出梁汉，开府贺若敦趣直谷。
现代文：太祖遣雁门公田弘出梁汉，开府贺若敦直插直谷。
English: The great-great-grandfather sent Ganmen Konda Hiroshige to Lianghan, and Kaifu Heraotun to Naotani.

古文：炽闻官军至，乃烧绝栈道，据守直谷，敦众不得前。
现代文：乐炽闻知官军到来，将栈道全部烧掉，据守直谷，贺若敦的军队无法前进。
English: Le Blaze heard the arrival of the official army and burned down all the footpaths. Naotani was defended, and Horodun's army was unable to advance.

古文：太祖以迁哲信着山南，乃令与敦同往经略。
现代文：太祖以迁哲在山南地区信誉卓著，令他与贺若敦共同谋划。
English: The great-grandfather, Jianzhe, had an outstanding reputation in the Shannan region, so he and He Ruodong made a joint plan.

古文：炽等或降或获，寻并平荡。
现代文：乐炽等或投降或俘获，不久便平定了。
English: Le Blaze either surrendered or was captured, and was soon subdued.

古文：仍与贺若敦南出狥地。
现代文：于是与贺若敦往南占地。
English: As a result, he moved south to take up land with Horoadon.

古文：迁哲先至巴州，入其郛郭。
现代文：迁哲先到了巴州，攻入外城。
English: Qian Zhe went to Bazhou first and broke into the outer city.

古文：梁巴州刺史牟安民惶惧，开门请降。
现代文：梁朝巴州刺史牟安民害怕，开城门投降。
English: Liang Chaozhou stabbed Shi Muan, the people were afraid, opened the gate and surrendered.

古文：安民子宗彻等犹据琵琶城，招谕不下。
现代文：安民子宗彻等人据守琵琶城，招谕不肯投降。
English: Amanzo Suncho and others defended Biwa Castle and refused to surrender.

古文：迁哲攻而克之，斩获九百余人。
现代文：迁哲攻而克之，斩获九百余人。
English: Qian Zhe attacked and defeated it, gaining more than nine hundred people.

古文：军次鹿城，城主遣使请降。
现代文：军队到达鹿城，城主遣使请降。
English: The army arrived in Lucheng, and the lord of the city sent an envoy to ask them to surrender.

古文：迁哲谓其众曰： 纳降如受敌，吾观其使视瞻犹高，得无诈也？ 遂不许之。
现代文：迁哲对其众说： 纳降如受敌，我看其使者神色高傲，莫非是诈降? 于是不予受降。
English: Qian Zhe said to his people: "Accepting a surrender is like accepting an enemy's surrender. I see that his envoys have a haughty look. Is it not a betrayal? Therefore, they will not accept a surrender."

古文：梁人果于道左设伏以邀迁哲，迁哲进击，破之，遂屠其城，虏获千余口。
现代文：梁人果然于道旁设下埋伏袭击迁哲，迁哲进击，破之，遂屠其城，虏获一千多人。
English: Liang Ren indeed set up an ambush on the roadside to attack Qian Zhe, Qian Zhe advanced, broke it, then slaughtered his city and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：自此巴、濮之民，降款相继。
现代文：此后巴、濮之民，相继归降。
English: After that, the people of Ba and Handan surrendered one after another.

古文：军还，太祖嘉之，以所服紫袍玉带及所乘马以赐之，并赐奴婢三十口。
现代文：回师，太祖给予嘉奖，将自己的紫袍玉带和马赐给他，并赐三十名奴婢。
English: When he returned to his teacher, the great-grandfather gave him a commendation, gave him his purple robe, jade belt and horse, and gave him thirty slaves.

古文：加授侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，除直州刺史，即本州也。
现代文：加授侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，授任直州刺史，也就是本州。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Jizhong (vice-governor), Zhengyi (commander-in-chief) and Kaifu Yi (officer of ceremonies) as well as the title of Sanji (third-ranked official), and he was also awarded the title of Jizhong (official) of Zhoushou, that is, Honshu.

古文：仍给军仪鼓节。
现代文：给予军仪鼓节。
English: Give the military drum festival.

古文：令与田弘同讨信州。
现代文：令其与田弘共同征讨信州。
English: He ordered him and Tahiro to jointly conquer Shinshu.

古文：魏恭帝三年正月，军次并州。
现代文：魏恭帝三年正月，军队到达并州。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, the army arrived and annexed the state.

古文：梁并州刺史杜满各望风送款。
现代文：梁朝并州刺史挂迈各望风归附。
English: The Liang Dynasty annexed the state and the history of the state was attached to the wind.

古文：进围叠州，克之，获刺史冉助国等。
现代文：进围垦蛆，将之攻克，擒获刺史冉助国等人。
English: People such as Ran Zuo, who besieged and conquered Yunnan, and won the battle of Yunnan.

古文：迁哲每率骁勇为前锋，所在攻战，无不身先士卒，凡下十八州，拓地三千余里。
现代文：迁哲每次率领骁勇之士为前锋，攻战之时，必定身先士卒，攻下十八州，拓地三千余里。
English: Every time Qian Zhe led the brave men of Shandong Province as a forward, when attacking the battle, he must be the first to attack the eighteen states and open up more than three thousand miles.

古文：时信州为蛮酋向五子王等所围，弘又遣迁哲赴援。
现代文：当时信州为蛮酋向五子王等人围攻，旦弘又派迁哲前去增援。
English: At that time, Shinshu was besieged by barbarian chiefs such as Wuzi Wang, and Tan Hong also sent Qian Zhe to reinforce.

古文：比至，信州已陷。
现代文：等他到达时，信州已陷落。
English: By the time he arrived, Shinshu had fallen.

古文：五子王等闻迁哲至，狼狈遁走。
现代文：互王王等人间知暹哲来到，狼狈逃窜。
English: The king and the king's son came to know that Siam Zhe came, and they fled in panic.

古文：迁哲入据白帝。
现代文：迁蜇进驻白帝城。
English: Moved to Baidicheng.

古文：贺若敦等复至，遂共追击五子王等，破之。
现代文：贺羞錾等人又至，于是共同追击五子王等人，破之。
English: He Xinyi and others came again, so they jointly chased the five sons and others and broke them.

古文：及田弘旋军，太祖令迁哲留镇白帝，更配兵千人、马三百匹。
现代文：到旦丛回师，立狙令塑留下来镇守白帝，又配给一千士兵、三百匹马。
English: As soon as Conghuai's division arrived, they were ordered to stay behind to defend Baidu, and were given another thousand soldiers and three hundred horses.

古文：信州先无仓储，军粮匮乏。
现代文：值炒原先没有粮食储蓄，军粮匮乏。
English: Originally, there was no grain savings, and there was a shortage of military grain.

古文：迁哲乃收葛根造粉，兼米以给之。
现代文：迁哲收取葛根造粉，与米搭配作为军粮。
English: Qian Zhe collected kudzu root powder and mixed it with rice as military rations.

古文：迁哲亦自取供食。
现代文：迁哲自己也食用此食。
English: Qian Zhe himself also ate this food.

古文：时有异膳，即分赐兵士。
现代文：如果有美食，即分赐给兵士。
English: If there is food, it is given to the soldiers.

古文：有疾患者，又亲加医药。
现代文：患有疾病的，亲自服侍医药。
English: If you have a disease, you can take medicine in person.

古文：以此军中感之，人思效命。
现代文：因此军士感激，人人都愿意效命。
English: So the sergeant is grateful, and everyone is willing to die.

古文：黔阳蛮田乌度、田都唐等每抄掠江中，为百姓患。
现代文：黔阳蛮田乌度、田都唐等人经常在江中劫掠，成为百姓祸患。
English: Shanyang Manti Udu, Tiandu Tang and others often plundered the river and became a scourge to the people.

古文：迁哲随机出讨，杀获甚多。
现代文：迁哲抓住时机征讨，杀获甚多。
English: Qian Zhe seized the opportunity to recruit, and gained a lot.

古文：由是诸蛮畏威，各送粮饩。
现代文：从此诸蛮畏威，各送军粮。
English: Since then, they have been sending military food to each other.

古文：又遣子弟入质者，千有余家。
现代文：又遣送子弟为人质，有一千余家。
English: In addition, more than 1,000 families sent their children as hostages.

古文：迁哲乃于白帝城外筑城以处之。
现代文：迁哲于白帝城外筑城安置他们居住。
English: He moved them to build a city outside the White Emperor's city and settled them there.

古文：并置四镇，以静峡路。
现代文：并置四镇，以保证通路安全。
English: Four towns were placed side by side to ensure safe passage.

古文：自此寇抄颇息，军粮赡给焉。
现代文：此后劫掠很少出现，军粮得以接济。
English: After that, looting rarely occurred, and the army was able to buy food.

古文：世宗初，授都督信临等七州诸军事、信州刺史。时蛮酋蒲微为邻州刺史，举兵反。
现代文：世宗初年，授都督信临等七州诸军事、信州刺史其时蛮族酋长蒲微为邻州刺史，举兵反叛。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the military of the seven states, including the military governor of Shinshu, Nobuchika Shinshu, and the barbarian chieftain Puyi, who was the military governor of a neighboring state, raised an army and rebelled.

古文：迁哲将讨之，诸将以途路阻远，并不欲行。
现代文：迁哲将讨之，诸将都以路途险阻遥远，不想前去。
English: All the generals are reluctant to move forward, as the road ahead is too dangerous.

古文：迁哲怒曰： 蒲微蕞尔之贼，势何能为。
现代文：迁哲发怒说： 蒲微不过是一个小贼，凭何能为之。
English: Qian Zhe said angrily, "Pu Wei is just a petty thief, how can he do this?

古文：擒获之略，已在吾度中矣。
现代文：擒贼之策，我已成竹在胸。
English: I've got a plan for dealing with thieves in my head.

古文：诸君见此小寇，便有惮心，后遇大敌，将何以战！ 遂率兵七千人进击之，拔其五城，虏获二千余口。
现代文：你们见此小寇，就有害怕之心，日后遇到大敌，将何以战! 遂率兵七千进击，攻拔五城，虏获二千多人。
English: When you see this little robber, you will be afraid. When you encounter a big enemy in the future, what will you fight with? So he led seven thousand soldiers to attack, stormed five cities, and captured more than two thousand people.

古文：二年，进爵西城县公，增邑通前二千五百户。
现代文：二年，爵位进为西城县公，食邑增至二千五百产。
English: In the second year, the title of nobility was promoted to the public of Xicheng County, and the number of food villages increased to 2,500.

古文：武成元年，朝于京师。
现代文：武成元年，至京师朝见。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng, he went to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：世宗甚礼之，赐甲第一区及庄田等。
现代文：世宗礼遇很高，赐给一座甲第和庄田等。
English: The Sejong were treated with great courtesy, and were given a Kodai and a shoen.

古文：保定中，授平州刺史。
现代文：保定年间，授平州刺史
English: During the Baoding period, he was awarded the history of Pingzhou

古文：天和三年，进位大将军。
现代文：天和三年，进位大将军。
English: Ten days and three years later, he was promoted to general.

古文：四年，诏迁哲率金、上等诸州兵镇襄阳。
现代文：四年，诏令迁哲率金、上等诸州兵镇守襄阳。
English: In four years, the imperial edict transferred Zhezhu Jin and the superior Zhouzhou soldiers to guard Yangyang.

古文：五年，陈将章昭达攻逼江陵。
现代文：五年，陈朝将领章昭达攻逼江陵。
English: In the fifth year of the Chen dynasty, the general Zhaoda led the troops to attack and force Jiangling.

古文：梁主萧岿告急于襄州，卫公直令迁哲往救焉。
现代文：梁主萧嶎急告于襄州，卫公宇文直令迁哲前去救援。
English: Master Liang Xiaoqi made an urgent appeal in Xiangzhou, and Wei Gong Uwen directly ordered Qian Zhe to go to the rescue.

古文：迁哲率其所部守江陵外城，与陈将程文季交战，兵稍却，迁哲乃亲自陷阵，手杀数人。
现代文：迁哲率领所部驻守江陵外城，与陈将程文季交战，兵稍退，迁哲乃亲自冲锋陷阵，手杀数人。
English: Qian Zhe led the headquarters stationed in the outer city of Gangneung, and fought with Chen general Cheng Wenzhi. The soldiers retreated slightly, and Qian Zhe himself charged into the battle and killed several people.

古文：会江陵总管陆腾出助之，陈人乃退。
现代文：正好江陵总管陆腾出兵相助，陈人乃退兵。
English: It was just at that time that Lu, the governor of Gangneung, released his troops to help, and Chen Renyu withdrew.

古文：陈人又因水泛长，坏龙川宁朔堤，引水灌城。
现代文：陈人又因水位上涨，毁坏龙川宁朔堤，引水灌城。
English: Due to rising water levels, Chen Ren also destroyed the Longchuan-Ningshuo dike and diverted water to flood the city.

古文：城中惊扰。
现代文：城中惊慌骚乱。
English: There was panic and rioting in the city.

古文：迁哲乃先塞北堤以止水，又募骁勇出击之，频有斩获，众心稍定。
现代文：迁哲先堵住北堤止住河水，又招募骁勇之士出击，斩获颇多，众心稍为安定。
English: Qian Zhe first blocked the north dike to stop the river, and then recruited brave men to attack. He gained a lot, and the hearts of the people were slightly stable.

古文：俄而敌入郭内，焚烧民家。
现代文：接着敌人进入外城内，焚烧民房。
English: Then the enemy entered the outer city and set fire to houses.

古文：迁哲自率骑出南门，又令步兵自北门出，两军合势，首尾邀之，陈人复败，多投水而死。
现代文：迁哲率骑兵出南门，又令步兵从北门出击，两军合势，首尾相攻，陈人复败，很多都投水而死。
English: Qian Zhe led the cavalry out of the south gate, and ordered the infantry to attack from the north gate. The two armies joined forces and attacked one after the other. The Chen people were defeated, and many died from drowning.

古文：是夜，陈人又窃于城西堞以梯，登者已数百人。
现代文：当天夜晚，陈人又悄悄于城西以梯登城，登者已有数百人。
English: In the evening of the same day, Chen people quietly climbed up the ladder to the west of the city, and there were already hundreds of climbers.

古文：迁哲又率骁勇扞之，陈人复溃。
现代文：迁哲又率骁勇之士抵抗，陈人再次溃败。
English: Qian Zhe again led the brave men to resist, and Chen Ren was once again defeated.

古文：俄而大风暴起，迁哲乘闇出兵击其营，陈人大乱，杀伤甚众。
现代文：不久突然起了大风，迁哲乘夜出兵攻击其兵营，陈人混乱不堪，死伤甚众。
English: Soon after, a gale suddenly blew up, and Qian Zhe attacked his camp at night. The Chen people were in chaos, and many were killed and injured.

古文：陆腾复破之于西堤，陈人乃遁。
现代文：陆腾又在西堤击败陈军，陈人于是逃走。
English: Lu Teng defeated the Chen army at the West Bank, and the Chen people fled.

古文：建德二年，进爵安康郡公。
现代文：建德二年，爵位进为安康郡公。
English: In the second year of Jiande, he was promoted to the peerage of Ankang County.

古文：三年，卒于襄州，时年六十四。
现代文：三年，于襄州去世，时年六十四岁。
English: Three years later, he passed away in Xiangzhou at the age of 64.

古文：赠金州总管。
现代文：追赠金州总管。
English: Afterward, he presented it to the General Manager of Jinzhou.

古文：谥曰壮武。
现代文：谧号为壮武。
English: His nickname was Zhuangwu.

古文：迁哲累世雄豪，为乡里所率服。
现代文：迁哲世代为雄豪，为乡里所归附信服。
English: Qian Zhe's generation is heroic, and they are trusted by the township.

古文：性复华侈，能厚自奉养。妾媵至有百数，男女六十九人。
现代文：喜欢奢华，厚白奉养。妻妾多至一百多人，子女六十九人。
English: He loved luxury and lavish living. He had as many as a hundred wives and concubines and 69 children.

古文：缘汉千余里间，第宅相次。
现代文：沿汉水一千多里内，宅第相连。
English: More than a thousand miles along the Han River, the houses are connected.

古文：姬人之有子者，分处其中，各有僮仆、侍婢、奄阍守之。
现代文：妻妾生有儿子者，分别安顿其中，各有僮仆、侍婢、闯间侍候。
English: If the wife and concubine have sons, they will be settled separately, and each will have servants, maids, and waiters.

古文：迁哲每鸣笳导从，往来其间。
现代文：迁哲经常鸣笳开路，来往于这些住宅中。
English: Qian Zhe would often make his way to and from these residences.

古文：纵酒饮燕，尽生平之乐。
现代文：纵酒欢乐，尽平生快乐。
English: Drink and be merry, enjoy life to the full.

古文：子孙参见，或忘其年名者，披簿以审之。
现代文：子孙参见，往往忘记其姓名年龄，要阅簿册来审定。
English: Descendants, see, often forget their names and ages, and need to read the book to verify.

古文：长子敬仁，先迁哲卒。
现代文：长子堑仁，在堕之前去世。
English: The eldest son, Shingen, died before the downfall.

古文：第六子敬猷嗣，还统父兵，起家大都督。
现代文：第六子苞噬继嗣，统领父亲之兵，初入仕任大都督。
English: The sixth son became the heir, led his father's soldiers, and became the first to serve as grand governor.

古文：建德六年，从谯王讨稽胡有功，进爵仪同大将军。
现代文：亘塑六年，随从蔓延征讨擅翅有功，晋为仪同大将军。
English: After six years of hard work, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：迁哲弟显，位至上仪同大将军。
现代文：逼堑弟奎题，位至上仪同大将军。
English: He forced his younger brother, Kuiji, to become a general with the highest rank.

古文：杨干运字玄邈，傥城兴势人也。
现代文：杨干运字玄邈，是傥城兴势人。
English: Yang Ganyun, also known as Xuanzang, was an influential person in Lucheng.

古文：为方隅豪族。
现代文：为一方豪族。
English: for one side of the local ruling family.

古文：父天兴，齐安康郡守。
现代文：父天兴，齐朝安康郡守。
English: His father, Tian Xing, was the governor of Ankang County in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：干运少雄武，为乡闾所信服。
现代文：干运年少雄武，为乡里所信服。
English: The dry transport of young and strong, convinced by the township.

古文：弱冠，州辟主簿。
现代文：刚成年，州征召为主簿。
English: At the age of twenty, he was recruited by the prefectural government to serve as chief clerk.

古文：孝昌初，除宣威将军、奉朝请，寻为本州治中，转别驾，除安康郡守。
现代文：孝昌初年，授宣威将军、奉朝请，不久任本州治中，转任别驾，授予安康郡守。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he was awarded the title of General Xuanwei and Minister of the North, and shortly after, he was appointed as the provincial governor of Honshu, and was later transferred to the position of governor of Ankang County.

古文：大统初，梁州民皇甫圆、姜晏聚众南叛，梁将兰钦率兵应接之。
现代文：大统初年，梁州民皇甫圆、姜晏聚众叛投南方政权，銮将盐筮率兵接应。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Liangzhou Emperor Fuyuan and Jiang Qi rallied the people to rebel against the Southern regime, and Yan Zhe led the troops to meet them.

古文：以是汉中遂陷，干运亦入梁。
现代文：因此麨陷落，室哩亦入凿朝。
English: As a result, Shuri fell, and Muro-Ri also fell in the morning.

古文：梁大同元年，除飘武将军、西益潼刺史，寻转信武将军、黎州刺史。
现代文：銮去回元年，授飙武将军、西益潼刺史，不久转任信武将军、黎州刺史。
English: After returning to China in the first year of the year, he was awarded the titles of General Gao Wu and General Xi Yixuan, and was soon transferred to the titles of General Xinyu and General Li Zhou.

古文：太清末，迁潼南梁二州刺史，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：太清末年，迁任潼南梁二州刺史，加一部鼓吹。
English: At the end of the Qing Dynasty, he was transferred to serve as the chief historian of the two states in the southern part of Guizhou Province, as well as the chief propagandist.

古文：及达奚武围南郑，武陵王萧纪遣干运率兵援之，为武所败。
现代文：当达；爰武围攻直塑，武陵王蕴起遣茎运率兵增援，为达聂迭所败。
English: Dangda; Zengwu besieged Zhouzhuang, Wuling Wangyun dispatched reinforcements, but was defeated by Dadu.

古文：纪时已称尊号，以干运威服巴、渝，欲委方面之任，乃拜车骑将军、十三州诸军事、梁州刺史，镇潼州，封万春县公，邑四千户。
现代文：萧起此时已称尊号，因茎运在旦、逾有威名，欲委以方面重任，因而任为车骑将军、十三州诸军事、凿业刺史，镇守遣州，封为万春县公爵位，食邑四千户。
English: At this time, Xiaoqi had already been given the title of honor, because his pedigree was in Dan, he was more than prestigious, and he wanted to be entrusted with heavy responsibilities, so he was appointed as a chariot and cavalry general, the military of the thirteen states, the history of the industry, the town guard of the province, and the duke of Wanchun County, with 4,000 households.

古文：时纪与其兄湘东王绎争帝，遂连兵不息。
现代文：当时盖起与其兄湘柬王萧锂争帝位，于是接连交战。
English: At that time, Guiqi was competing with his brother, Hunan-Cambodian King Xiao Li, for the imperial throne, so they fought one after another.

古文：干运兄子略说干运曰： 自侯景逆乱，江左沸腾。
现代文：整运兄子扰监对整运说： 自从彊叛逆，逗左动荡。
English: An elder brother of a riot policeman said to the riot police: "Ever since you rebelled, the whole country has been in turmoil.

古文：今大贼初平，生民离散，理宜同心戮力，保国宁民。
现代文：如今大贼初平，民众离散，理应同心协力，保国安民。
English: Now that the bandits have been defeated and the people dispersed, we should make concerted efforts to protect the country and the people.

古文：今乃兄弟亲寻。取败之道也。
现代文：现在兄弟相争，是取败之道。
English: Now it's brothers against brothers, and it's a losing proposition.

古文：可谓朽木不雕，世衰难佐。
现代文：可以说是朽木不可雕，世衰难以辅助。
English: It can be said that dead wood can not be carved, and it is difficult to assist the decline of the world.

古文：古人有言 危邦不入，乱邦不居 ，又云 见机而作，不俟终日 ，今若适彼乐土，送款关中，必当功名两全，贻庆于后。 干运深然之，乃令略将二千人镇剑阁。
现代文：古人有言 危邦不入，乱邦不居 ，又说 见机而作，不俟终日，现在如果归附乐土，归于关中，必当功名两全，对后世也是可庆贺之事。 干运认为很对，令杨略率领二千人镇守韧阁。
English: The ancients had a saying, "A dangerous country cannot be entered, a chaotic country cannot be lived in," and also said, "It is done at the first opportunity, and it will not last forever." Now, if we return to the happy land and return to Guanzhong, we will have accomplished both merits, and it will be a matter of celebration for future generations. The dry run thought it was very right, and made Yang Liu lead two thousand people to guard Liange.

古文：又遣其婿乐广镇安州。
现代文：又派遣女婿乐广镇守安州。
English: He also sent his son-in-law, Le Guangzhen, to guard Anzhou.

古文：仍诫略等曰： 吾欲归附关中，但未有由耳。
现代文：告诫杨略等人说： 我准备归附关中，但是没有理由。
English: He warned Yang Luo and others, saying, "I am ready to join Guanzhong, but there is no reason.

古文：若有使来，即宜尽礼迎接。 会太祖令干运孙法洛及使人牛伯友等至，略即夜送。
现代文：如果有使者来，以最好的礼仪迎接。 正好太祖令干运之孙法洛和使臣牛伯友等到来，杨略当夜送至。
English: If an envoy comes, greet him with the best etiquette. Just as the great-grandfather ordered the arrival of the grandson of Gan Yun, Faro, and the envoy, Niu Biao You, Yang Luo sent him there that night.

古文：干运乃令使人李若等入关送款。
现代文：干运令使人李若等入关中归附。
English: The dry-carriage order made people such as Li Ruo fall into the customs.

古文：太祖乃密赐干运铁券，授使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中、梁州刺史、安康郡公。
现代文：太祖秘密赐给干运铁券，授使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中、梁州刺史、安康郡公。
English: The great-great-grandfather secretly gave the dry-transportation iron ticket, and conferred the title of commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief of the cavalry, commander-in-chief of the cavalry, commander-in-chief of the cavalry, commander-in-chief of the cavalry, commander-in-chief of the cavalry, commander-in-chief of the cavalry, and commander-in-chief of the cavalry.

古文：及尉迟迥令开府侯吕陵始为前军，至剑南，略即退就乐广，谋欲翻城。
现代文：当尉迟迥令开府侯吕陵始率领前军，到达剑阁时，杨略随即退兵投靠乐广，打算献城。
English: When Yang Liang ordered Luling, the lord of Kaifu, to lead the front army and arrived at Jiange, Yang Liang immediately withdrew to Leguang, intending to surrender the city.

古文：恐其军将任电等不同，先执之，然后出城见始。
现代文：恐怕其军将任电等人不同意，先将其逮捕，然后出城与侯吕陵始相见。
English: I am afraid that his army commander Ren Dian and others did not agree, first arresting him, and then going out of the city to meet with Hou Luling.

古文：始乃入据安州，令广、略等往报干运。
现代文：侯吕陵始进驻安州，令乐广、杨略等人往报干运。
English: Hou Luling began to reside in Anzhou, and Ling Leguang, Yang Liao and others went to the newspaper for dry transportation.

古文：干运遂降迥。迥因此进军成都，数旬克之。
现代文：干运于是降于尉迟迥尉迟迥因此进军成都，数旬便平定了。
English: Therefore, the dry transport was reduced to 尉迟, 尉迟 therefore marched into Chengdu, and the situation was settled in a few days.

古文：魏废帝三年，干运至京师。
现代文：垫庐壶三年，皇迤至京师。
English: It took three years to make the teapot, and it took the emperor three years to make it to the capital.

古文：太祖嘉其忠款，礼遇隆渥。
现代文：立钽嘉奖他忠诚款附，礼待优厚。
English: He was commended for his loyalty and treated with great courtesy.

古文：寻卒于长安，赠本官，加直巴集三州刺史、尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久于垦室去世，追赠本官，加直旦只三州刺史、尚书右仆射。
English: He died shortly after in his chamber and was posthumously awarded this post, and in addition to his post, he was only able to write the history of the Three Provinces and the history of Shangshu.

古文：子端嗣。
现代文：其子垄眯继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son Ryōgen.

古文：朝廷以干运归附之功，即拜端梁州刺史、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：朝廷以皇迤有归附的功劳，即任挝继为凿州刺史、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The imperial court attributed the merit to the imperial edict, that is, Lao was successively appointed as the chisel state engraving history, the chariot and cavalry general, and the three departments of ceremony.

古文：略亦以归附功，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：递亦以归附之功，授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In recognition of his contribution, he was also awarded the rank of General of Cavalry and the three ranks of the Order of the Garter.

古文：频从征讨。
现代文：多次参加征讨。
English: He took part in the campaign several times.

古文：建德末，位至开府仪同大将军，封上庸县伯。
现代文：建德末年，位至开府仪同大将军，封为亡庸县伯。
English: In the last years of the Jiande era, he was promoted to the general of the Kaifu ceremony, and was given the title of Puyang County magistrate.

古文：乐广亦授车骑大将军、仪同三司、安州刺史，封安康县公，邑一千户。
现代文：銮庐亦授车骑大将军、仪同三司、室业刺史，封为安康县公，食邑一千户。
English: Zou was also given the title of General of Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and was awarded the title of Ankang County Public Official.

古文：扶猛字宗略，上甲黄土人也。其种落号兽蛮，世为渠帅。
现代文：选面字塞坚，是上里囊人。其种落号称为白虎蛮，世代任渠帅。
English: The character "Cock Jian" on the obverse is a member of the Shangri-La clan. His birth name is called Baihuaban, and he has been a general for generations.

古文：猛，梁大同中以直后出为持节、厉锋将军、青州刺史，转上庸新城二郡守、南洛北司二州刺史，封宕渠县男。
现代文：圭迤，在凿塑大周年间以直后出为持节、厉锋将军、直业刺史，转任上卢钮继二郡守、直整韭司二州刺史，封宕渠县里爵位。
English: During the anniversary of the Great Chiseling and Sculpting Festival, Gui Xuan, with the title of "Immediately after the Great Chiseling and Sculpting Festival," "General Li Feng" and "Immediately after the Great Chiseling and Sculpting Festival," was transferred to the position of "Upper Lu Niu," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the Second County Governor," "Immediately after the

古文：及侯景作乱，猛乃拥众自守，未有所从。
现代文：当彊作乱时，迭猛拥众自守不从，因而独立不再依附他人。
English: When instigators create chaos, the crowd defends itself fiercely and does not obey, thus becoming independent and no longer dependent on others.

古文：魏大统十七年，大将军王雄拓定魏兴，猛率其众据险为堡，时遣使微通饷馈而已。
现代文：魏大统十七年，大将军王雄平定魏兴，扶猛率其众据险设立碉堡。当时衹是相互送些食物。
English: In the 17th year of the Wei Dynasty, the great general Wang Xiong defeated Wei Xing and led his troops to set up a bunker. At that time, they sent some food to each other.

古文：魏废帝元年，魏兴叛，雄击破之，猛遂以众降。
现代文：魏废帝元年，魏兴叛乱，被王雄击破，扶猛便率众归降。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the Wei Xing Rebellion was defeated by Wang Xiong, and Fu Meng then led the people to surrender.

古文：太祖以其世据本乡，乃厚加抚纳，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，加散骑常侍，复爵宕渠县男。
现代文：太祖因为他世代据其乡，所以厚加抚纳，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，加散骑常侍，爵位复为宕渠县男。
English: The great-grandfather, because his generation was based in his hometown, was awarded the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry, the title of General of Cavalry and the title of General of Cavalry.

古文：割二郡为罗州，以猛为刺史。
现代文：割出二郡为罗州，以扶猛为刺史。
English: Cut out two counties for Luozhou, with Fumeng as the stabbing history.

古文：令率所部千人，从开府贺若敦南讨信州。
现代文：令其率领所部千人，随从开府贺若敦南讨信州。
English: He was ordered to lead a thousand people from the headquarters and follow the governor, Heraodun, south to attack Shinshu.

古文：敦令猛别道直趣白帝。
现代文：贺若敦令扶猛另道直攻白帝城。
English: Horoadon ordered Fumutake to attack Baidicheng directly from another direction.

古文：所由之路，人迹不通。
现代文：所经的道路，没有人烟。
English: The road is deserted.

古文：猛乃梯山扪葛，备历艰阻。
现代文：扶猛就攀着葛藤爬山，历尽险阻。
English: Fu Meng climbed the mountain clinging to the rut, going through all the difficulties.

古文：雪深七尺，粮运不继，猛奖励士卒，兼夜而行，遂至白帝城。
现代文：雪深七尺，无法运输粮食，扶猛奖励士卒，兼夜行军，遂至白帝城。
English: The snow was seven feet deep, and it was impossible to transport grain. The soldiers were rewarded for their hard work, and they marched at night to reach Baidicheng.

古文：刺史向镇侯列阵拒猛。
现代文：刺史向镇侯布下军阵抗拒扶猛。
English: Shishi led the army to the town of Houbu and resisted fierce resistance.

古文：猛与战，破之，乘胜而进，遂入白帝城。
现代文：扶猛与其战，破之，乘胜前进，攻入白帝城。
English: Fu Meng fought with it, broke it, advanced with the victory, and entered Baidicheng.

古文：抚慰民夷，莫不悦附。
现代文：抚慰民夷，都乐于归附。
English: To appease the people, they are all willing to return.

古文：谯淹与官军战败，率舟师浮江东下，欲归于梁。
现代文：谯淹与官军战败，率领水师顺江束下，欲归奔梁朝。
English: He was defeated in the battle with the government army and led the sailors down the Shunjiang River, wanting to return to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：猛与敦等邀击，破之。
现代文：扶猛与贺若敦等伏击，将其击破。
English: Fu Meng and He Ruodong and others ambushed and defeated them.

古文：语在敦传。
现代文：此事在《贺若敦传》有记载。
English: This event is recorded in "Herod the Great's Biography."

古文：师还，以功进开府仪同三司。
现代文：班师而还，以功进位开府仪同三司。
English: He was a class teacher, and advanced to the third division with merit.

古文：俄而信州蛮反，猛复从贺若敦讨平之。
现代文：接着信州蛮造反，扶猛又随从贺若敦征讨平定。
English: Then, Shinshu rebelled violently, and Fu Meng followed Herodong to conquer and subdue it.

古文：又率水军破蛮帅文子荣于汶阳。
现代文：又率水军攻破蛮帅文子荣于汶阳。
English: He also led the navy to defeat the very handsome Wenzi Rong in Wenyang.

古文：进爵临江县公，增邑一千户。
现代文：晋爵为临江县公，增加食邑一千户。
English: Jinzhe is the official of Linjiang County, increasing the number of food villages by one thousand.

古文：武成中，陈将侯瑱等逼湘州，又从贺若敦赴救，除武州刺史。
现代文：武成年间，陈将侯填等进逼湘州，又随从贺若敦去救援，任武州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, Chen Zhaohui and others forced their way into Hunan, and followed He Ruodong to the rescue, serving as the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：后随敦自拔还，复为罗州刺史。
现代文：后来随贺若敦返回，再任罗州刺史。
English: Later, he returned with He Ruodong and was reappointed as the governor of Luozhou.

古文：保定三年，转绥州刺史，从卫公直援陈将华皎。
现代文：保定三年，转任绥州刺史，随从街公宇文直支援陈将华皎。
English: After three years in Baoding, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, and he followed Gaigong Yu Wenzhong to support Chen Zhaohua.

古文：时大军不利，唯猛所部独全。
现代文：当时大军不利，衹有迭猛所部独全。
English: At that time, the large army was unfavorable, and there was only one superior force.

古文：又从田弘破汉南诸蛮，前后十余战，每有功。
现代文：又随从田弘攻破漠南诸蛮，前后十余战，都立下功劳。
English: In addition, he followed in the footsteps of Tian Hong in defeating the barbarians in the south of the desert, and made great achievements in more than ten battles.

古文：进位大将军。
现代文：晋为大将军。
English: Promoted to the rank of general.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：阳雄字符略，上洛邑阳人也。
现代文：阳雄字元略，是上洛邑阳人。
English: Yangxiong, abbreviated as Yangxiong, is a Yang people from Shangluo.

古文：世为豪族。
现代文：世代为豪族。
English: They have been a powerful family for generations.

古文：祖斌，上庸太守。
现代文：祖父阳斌，任上庸太守。
English: His grandfather, Yang Bin, was appointed Shangyong Taishou.

古文：父猛，魏正光中，万俟丑奴作乱关右，朝廷以猛商洛首望，乃擢为襄威将军、大谷镇将，带胡城令，以御丑奴。
现代文：父亲阳猛，魏正光年间，万俟丑奴于关右作乱，朝廷以阳猛为商洛地区的首望，擢升为襄威将军、大谷镇将，带胡城令，以抗御丑奴。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Zhengguang, his father Yang Meng (阳猛) led a rebellion in Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong and Guanzhong.

古文：及元颢入洛，魏孝庄帝度河，范阳王诲脱身投猛，猛保藏之。
现代文：当元颢入洛时，魏孝庄帝渡回，范阳王元垄投奔区猛，旦妪加以保护。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luo, Wei Xiaozhuang Emperor passed back, Fan Yang Wang Yuan Rong rushed to the area, and Danzhong protected him.

古文：及孝庄反正，由是知名。
现代文：当耋基查反正，因此知名。
English: It's well-known because of that.

古文：俄而广陵王恭伪瘖疾，复来归猛，猛亦深相保护。
现代文：接着广陵王墓茎假装喑疾，来归附阳猛，阳猛亦深相保护。
English: Next, the stem of the tomb of Guangling Wang feigned illness to attach to Yang Meng, and Yang Meng was also deeply protected.

古文：魏孝武即位，甚嘉之，授征虏将军，行河北郡守，寻转安西将军、华山郡守。
现代文：魏孝武帝即位，大为嘉奖，授征虏将军，代理回韭虽守，不久转任安西将军、华山郡守。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu ascended the throne, he was greatly commended and awarded the title of General of Conscripts. Although he served as acting governor, he was soon transferred to General of Anxi and Governor of Huashan County.

古文：频典郡，颇有声绩。
现代文：多次在二郡任职，颇有声绩。
English: He has served in two counties several times, and has quite a track record.

古文：及孝武西迁，猛率所领，移镇潼关。
现代文：当孝武帝西迁时，阳猛率所部，移镇潼关。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, the Yangmang rate department moved to the town of Shaoguan.

古文：封合阳县伯，邑七百户。
现代文：封为郃阳县伯爵，食邑七百户。
English: He was given the title of Count of Fenyang County, with 700 households in his hometown.

古文：俄而潼关不守，猛于善渚谷立栅，收集义徒。
现代文：不久潼关失守，阳猛于善渚谷设立兵营，收集义徒。
English: Soon, Shinguan was out of defense, and Yang Meng set up a military camp in Zenzhu Valley to collect the righteous.

古文：授征东将军、扬州刺史、大都督、武卫将军，仍镇善渚。
现代文：授征束将军、扬州刺史、大都督、武卫将军，镇守善渚。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Conscription and Enlistment Corps, Yangzhou Chief Historian, Grand Governor, General of the People's Armed Forces, and Zhengu Zenzhu.

古文：大统三年，为窦泰所袭，猛脱身得免。
现代文：大统三年，被实泰袭击，阳猛脱身得免。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, he was attacked by Shitai and was able to escape.

古文：太祖以众寡不敌，弗之责也。
现代文：太祖以寡不敌众，未加责罚。
English: The great-grandfather took advantage of the situation and escaped punishment.

古文：仍配兵千人，守牛尾堡。
现代文：仍配给一千兵员，镇守牛尾堡。
English: One thousand soldiers were still assigned to guard Fort Niuwei.

古文：寻而太祖擒窦泰，猛亦别获东魏弘农郡守淳于业。
现代文：不久太祖擒获窦泰，阳猛亦擒获柬魏弘农郡守淳于业。
English: Not long after, Tai Zu was captured by Dou Tai, and Yang Meng was captured by Wei Hong Nong County Governor Jun Yue.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：赠华、洛、扬三州刺史。
现代文：追赠华、洛、扬三州刺史。
English: The three states of Hua, Luo and Yang were presented with the award.

古文：雄起家奉朝请，累迁至都督、直后、明威将军、积射将军。
现代文：阳雄出仕任奉朝请，多次升迁为都督、直后、明威将军、积射将军。
English: Yang Xiong was appointed to serve at the request of the imperial court, and was promoted to the governor of the capital several times, immediately followed by General Ming Wei and General Zesha.

古文：从于谨攻盘豆栅，复从李远经沙苑阵，并力战有功。
现代文：随从于谨攻打盘豆栅，又随从李远参预沙苑之战，都立下战功。
English: He followed Yu Zhen in attacking Pan Zuo Zi and Li Yuan in the Battle of Yuansha Yuan, both of whom achieved great military feats.

古文：封安平县侯，邑八百户，加冠军将军、中散大夫，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：封为安平县侯，食邑八百户，加冠军将军、中散大夫，给子丰厚的赏赐。
English: He was named the lord of Anping County, with 800 households in the food village, as well as the champion general and Zhongshan doctor, and his son was given a rich reward.

古文：后入洛阳，战河桥，解玉壁围，迎高仲密，援侯景，并预有战功。
现代文：后来进入洛阳，战于河桥，解救玉壁之围，迎接高仲密，支援侯景，都立下了战功。
English: Later, he entered Luoyang, fought in Heqiao, relieved the siege of Yubi, greeted Gao Zhongmi, and supported Houjing, all of which made war achievements.

古文：前后增邑四百五十户，世袭邑阳郡守。
现代文：前后增邑四百五十户，世袭邑阳郡守。
English: Four hundred and fifty households were added to the village, and the hereditary governor of the village Yang County was created.

古文：从大将军宇文虬攻克上津，迁通直散骑常侍、大都督，进仪同三司。
现代文：随从大将军宇文虬攻克上津，迁升通直散骑常侍、大都督，进位仪同三司。
English: He followed the great general Uwenshun in conquering Shangjin, and was promoted to the position of non-commissioned officer on horseback, grand governor, and advanced to the third division.

古文：陈将侯方儿、潘纯陀寇江陵，雄从豆卢宁击走之。
现代文：陈将侯方儿、潘纯陁侵犯江陵，阳雄随从豆卢宁将其击走。
English: Chen sent Hou Fang'er and Pan Chunhui to invade Jiangling, and Yang Xiong followed Doushuning to drive them away.

古文：除洵州刺史。俗杂賨、渝，民多轻猾。
现代文：授洵州刺史当地风俗卖、渝相杂，民多轻猾。
English: The local customs in Zhouzhuang County are complex and complicated, and the people are more frivolous.

古文：雄威惠相济，夷夏安之。
现代文：阳雄恩威并济，夷夏安之。
English: Yang Xiong was both benevolent and benevolent, and Yan Xiaan was also benevolent.

古文：蛮帅文子荣窃据荆州之汶阳郡，又侵陷南郡之当阳、临沮等数县。
现代文：蛮帅文子荣窃据荆州的汶阳郡，又侵陷南郡的当阳、临沮等数县。
English: The handsome Wen Zi Rong stole Wenyang County in Jingzhou, and invaded several counties including Dangyang and Lin De in Nan County.

古文：诏遣开府贺若敦、潘招等讨平之。
现代文：诏令开府贺若敦、潘招等人讨平。
English: He issued an imperial edict ordering the prefectures of He Ruodong, Pan Zhao and others to settle the dispute.

古文：即以其地置平州，以雄为刺史。
现代文：以其地设平州，以阳雄为刺史。
English: It is set in Pingzhou, with Yangxiong as the protagonist.

古文：进爵玉城县公，增邑通前一千六百户，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：晋爵为玉城县公，食邑增至一千六百户，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Jinzhe is the public official of Yucheng County, and the number of food villages has increased to 1,600, with the addition of the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：时寇乱之后，户多逃散，雄在所慰抚，民并安辑。
现代文：当时正于寇乱之后，民户大多逃散，阳雄在当地多加抚慰，民众安定。
English: At that time, just after the coup, most of the households fled. Yang Xiong comforted the local people, and the people were stable.

古文：征为载师中大夫，迁西宁州总管，以疾不拜。
现代文：征为载师中大夫，调任西宁州总管，因病未接受任命。
English: He was enlisted as a junior doctor, transferred to the post of the general manager of Xining Province, but did not accept the appointment due to illness.

古文：除通洛防主。
现代文：授通洛防主。
English: He was awarded the title of Lord of Luo Province.

古文：雄处疆埸，务在保境息民，接待敌人，必推诚仗信。
现代文：隧雄身处边地，一心保境安民，接待敌人，必定是推诚仗信。
English: Tunxiong is on the edge of the country, dedicated to the security of the country and the safety of the people, and the reception of the enemy must be a sincere letter.

古文：齐洛州刺史独孤永业深相钦尚，移书称美之。
现代文：查翅盗丛刺史独孤永业十分钦佩，致书大加称美。
English: He was very impressed by the fact that he was the only person in history to have been able to catch a winged thief in a thicket of thorns, and wrote a letter praising him.

古文：入为京兆尹，寻拜民部中大夫，进位大将军，俄转中外府长史。
现代文：征入为京兆尹，不久任为民部中大夫，晋升大将军，接着转任中外府长史。
English: He was conscripted as Jing Zhaoyun, and was soon appointed as a junior doctor of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, promoted to general, and then transferred to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：迁江陵总管、四州五防诸军事，改封鲁阳县公。
现代文：迁任江陵总管、四州五防诸军事，改封为鲁阳县公。
English: He was transferred to be the head of Jiangling and the military of the four states and five national defense regions, and his title was changed to Luyang County official.

古文：宣政元年，卒于镇。
现代文：宣政元年，在镇去世。
English: He died in the town in the first year of the proclamation of the Republic.

古文：大象初，追封鲁阳郡公，邑三千五百户，赠陈曹莒汴四州刺史。
现代文：大象初年，追封鲁阳郡公，食邑三千五百户，追赠陈曹莒汴四州刺史。
English: In the first year of the elephant, Ruyang County was awarded the county seat, 3500 households in the county were provided with food, and Chen Caoqi was awarded the history of the four states.

古文：谥曰怀。雄善附会，能自谋身，故得任兼出纳，保全爵禄。
现代文：谧号为怀阳雄善于附和应酬，能为自身着想。所以在京师内外任职，都能保全爵禄。
English: His posthumous name is Huaiyangxiong. He is good at socializing and entertaining, and can think for himself. Therefore, he can work both inside and outside the Beijing division to preserve his peerage.

古文：子长宽嗣。
现代文：其子长宽继嗣。
English: His son Nagahiro became the heir.

古文：官至仪同大将军。
现代文：官至仪同大将军
English: officials, dignitaries and generals

古文：席固字子坚，其先安定人也。
现代文：席固字子坚，祖先是安定人。
English: Shi Guoji Zijian, whose ancestor was a stable person.

古文：高祖衡，因后秦之乱，寓居于襄阳。
现代文：高祖席衡，因为后秦战乱，寓居于襄阳。
English: Gao Zu Shi Heng, because of the post-Qin War, lived in Xiangyang.

古文：仕晋，为建威将军，遂为襄阳着姓。
现代文：在晋朝为官，任建威将军，从而成为襄阳世族大姓。
English: He served as an official in the Jin Dynasty and was appointed as General Jian Wei, thus becoming the eldest member of the Xiangyang family.

古文：固少有远志，内明敏而外质朴。
现代文：席固少年时志存高速，内明敏而外质朴。
English: When he was a young man, he was a fast learner, bright on the inside and simple on the outside.

古文：梁大同中，为齐兴郡守。
现代文：梁朝大同年间，为齐兴郡守。
English: In the same year as Liang Chao, he became the governor of Qixing County.

古文：属侯景渡江，梁室大乱，固久居郡职，士多附之，遂有亲兵千余人。
现代文：当侯景渡江，梁室大乱，席固在郡任职时间很长，归附的士人很多，于是有千余亲兵。
English: When Lord Jing crossed the Yangtze River, there was a great turmoil in Liangshu. Xi Gu had served in the county for a long time, and there were many subordinate officials, so he had more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：梁元帝嗣位江陵，迁兴州刺史。
现代文：梁元帝于江陵嗣位，迁任兴州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was enthroned in Jiangling and transferred to Xingzhou.

古文：于是军民慕从者，至五千余人。
现代文：军民慕名附从者，多达五千多人。
English: More than five thousand people, including soldiers and civilians, followed him.

古文：固遂欲自据一州，以观时变。
现代文：席固因而欲自据一州，以观时变。
English: Therefore, he wants to be self-sufficient in one state and watch the time change.

古文：后惧王师进讨，方图内属。
现代文：后来惧怕王师进讨，方才阉谋归附。
English: Later, fearing Wang Shi's further discussion, they plotted to annex it.

古文：密谓其腹心曰： 今梁氏失政，扬都覆没，湘东不能复雠雪耻，而骨肉相残。
现代文：秘密对其心腹说： 今梁氏失政，扬都覆没，湘束不能为之雪耻，却骨肉相残。
English: The secret said to his confidant: Now Liang's government has failed, Yang has been overthrown, Hunan cannot be ashamed of it, but flesh and blood are bitter.

古文：宇文丞相创启霸基，招携以礼。
现代文：宇文丞相建树霸业，礼招人才。
English: Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Mr. Umenjo, is doing a great job of recruiting talent.

古文：吾欲决意归之，与卿等共图富贵。 左右闻固言，未有应者。
现代文：我已决定归附，与卿等共同圆谋富贵。 左右闻知此言，一时未有应者。
English: I've decided to join, and together with you and others, we'll plan for prosperity.

古文：固更谕以祸福，诸人然后同之。
现代文：席固又谕以祸福，诸人然后同意。
English: The seat is fixed and the oracle speaks of good and evil, and then everyone agrees.

古文：魏大统十六年，以地来附。
现代文：魏大统十六年，以地来归附。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification of the Wei Dynasty, it was annexed by land.

古文：是时太祖方欲南取江陵，西定蜀、汉，闻固之至，甚礼遇之。
现代文：当时太祖正欲南取江陵，西定蜀、漠，闻知席固归附，对他礼遇有加。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was eager to take Jiangling in the south, Dingshu in the west, and Mu in the west, and Wenzhishi firmly attached to him, and he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：乃遣使就拜使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、侍中、丰州刺史，封新丰县公，邑二千户。
现代文：派遣使者任命为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、侍中、丰州刺史，封新丰县公，食邑二千户。
English: The dispatched envoys were appointed as the envoy of the festival, the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the grand governor, the chamberlain, the Toyoshu scribe, the Fengxian official, and 2,000 households in the food villages.

古文：后转湖州刺史。
现代文：此后转任湖州刺史。
English: After that, he was transferred to the post of Huzhou chief historian.

古文：固以未经朝谒，遂蒙荣授，心不自安，启求入觐。
现代文：席固以未经上朝谒见，便得到这样的荣授，内心不安，请求入京朝觐。
English: Having received such an honor without having seen him at the imperial court ceremony, Shigoto was uneasy and requested to attend the imperial court ceremony.

古文：太祖许之。
现代文：太祖允许他入京。
English: His great-grandfather allowed him to enter the capital.

古文：及固至，太祖与之欢燕，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：当席固到京时，太祖与他欢宴，赏赐相当丰厚。
English: When Saigo arrived in Kyoto, the great-grandfather feasted with him, and the reward was quite rich.

古文：进爵静安郡公，增邑并前三千三百户。
现代文：晋爵为静安郡公，食邑增加至三千三百户。
English: Jing'an County was given the title of Jinjue, and the number of food villages was increased to 3,300.

古文：寻拜昌归宪三州诸军事、昌州刺史。
现代文：不久拜昌归宪三州诸军事、昌州刺史。
English: Soon, Baichang was returned to the Constitution, and the military of the three states and the history of Changzhou were formed.

古文：固居家孝友，为州里所称，莅官之处，颇有声绩。
现代文：席固在家中孝顺友悌，为乡里所称赞，任官职之处，颇有名声政绩。
English: He was praised by the village for his filial piety and loyalty at home, and was quite famous for his political achievements in his official position.

古文：保定四年，卒于州，时年六十一。
现代文：保定四年，在州任上去世，时年六十一岁。
English: Baoding for four years, died in state office, at the age of sixty-one.

古文：赠大将军、襄唐丰郢复五州刺史，谥曰肃。
现代文：追赠大将军、襄唐丰郢复五州刺史，谧号为肃。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of grand general, and his posthumous name was Suen.

古文：仍敕襄州赐其墓田。
现代文：敕令襄州赐其墓地。
English: He was given a cemetery plot by the Xiangzhou government.

古文：子世雅嗣。
现代文：其子世雅继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Seiya.

古文：世雅字彦文。
现代文：世雅字彦文。
English: Seya character Hikobun.

古文：性方正，少以孝闻。
现代文：性情方正，从少年时起便以孝顺闻名。
English: His disposition is upright, and he has been known for his filial piety since he was a boy.

古文：初以固功，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，除赞城郡守。
现代文：最初以席固之功，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，任赞城郡守。
English: At the beginning, he was appointed as the governor of Zancheng County for his contribution to strengthening the seat, as well as the general of chauffeuring and riding, and the three departments of ceremony.

古文：累迁开府仪同三司、顺直二州刺史。
现代文：数次升迁任开府仪同三司、顺直二州刺史。
English: He was promoted several times to Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Shunzhi and Shishi.

古文：大象末，位至大将军。
现代文：大象末年，位至大将军。
English: At the end of his life, he rose to the rank of general.

古文：世雅弟世英，亦以固功授仪同三司。
现代文：世雅弟世英，亦以席固之功授仪同三司。
English: Seya's younger brother, Seiyo, also received a seat at the award ceremony along with the other three.

古文：后至上开府仪同大将军。
现代文：后位至上开府仪同大将军。
English: Afterward, the highest Kaifu ceremony was held with the grand general.

古文：任果字静鸾，南安人也。
现代文：任果字静鸾，南安人。
English: Ren Guoji Jingyao, from Nan'an.

古文：世为方隅豪族，仕于江左。
现代文：世代为地方豪族，于逗左任官。
English: He was a member of a local powerful family for generations and served as an official in Zhiza.

古文：祖安东，梁益州别驾、新巴郡守、阆中伯。
现代文：祖父叁娄，凿塑益业别驾、新巴郡守、阎中伯。
English: Grandfather Yao, chiseled plastic benefit industry leader, Xinba county governor, Yan Zhongbo.

古文：父褒，龙骧将军、新巴南安广汉三郡守、沙州刺史、新巴县公。
现代文：父逊，龙骧将军、塞迫壶叁庐连三郡守、边州刺史、新巴县公
English: His father's descendant, General Long Hao, forced him to serve as the governor of three counties, the governor of Bianzhou, and the governor of Xinba County.

古文：果性勇决，志在立功。
现代文：任果性格勇敢有决断，志在立功。
English: Ren Guo's character is brave and decisive, and he aspires to do great things.

古文：魏废帝元年，率所部来附。
现代文：魏废帝元年，率领所部前来归附。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he led his troops to annex it.

古文：太祖嘉其远至，待以优礼。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他白远方而至，以优厚礼节接待。
English: The great-grandfather praised him for coming all the way from afar and received him with great courtesy.

古文：果因面陈取蜀之策，太祖深纳之。
现代文：任果因而面陈攻取蜀地的策略，太祖深纳之。
English: As a result, Ren Guo considered the strategy of conquering Shu, which was well received by Taizu.

古文：乃授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督、散骑常侍、沙州刺史、南安县公，邑一千户。
现代文：授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督、散骑常侍、沙州刺史、南安县公，食邑一千户。
English: He was awarded the title of Zhengzhi Jie, the general of chariot and cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, the grand governor, the regular attendant of horseback riding, the governor of Shazhou, the governor of Nan'an County, and a thousand households of food villages.

古文：及尉迟迥伐蜀，果时在京师，乃遣其弟岱及子悛从军。
现代文：尉迟迥征伐蜀地，任果当时在京城，派遣其弟任岱和其子任悛从军。
English: When Ren Guo was in Beijing at the time, he sent his younger brother and his son to join the army.

古文：太祖以益州未下，复令果乘传归南安，率乡兵二千人，从迥征蜀。
现代文：太祖因益州未能攻下，复令任果从驿道乘传车归南安，率领二干乡兵，随从尉迟迥征蜀。
English: The great-grandfather was unable to conquer Yizhou, so he ordered Ren Guo to take a train from Shandong to return to Nan'an, lead two local soldiers, and follow the lieutenant to conquer Shu.

古文：寻进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of grand general of cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：萧纪遣赵拔扈等率众三万来援成都，果从大军击破之。
现代文：萧纪派遣赵拔扈等人率众三万支援成都，任果随从大军将其击破。
English: Xiao Ji dispatched Zhao Bajun and others to support Chengdu with 30,000 people, and Ren Guo followed the large army to defeat it.

古文：及成都平，除始州刺史。
现代文：成都平定后，任始州刺史。
English: After Chengdu was pacified, he was appointed as the first governor of Shizhou.

古文：在任未久，果请入朝，太祖许之。
现代文：在任不久，任果请求入朝，太祖允许他入朝。
English: Shortly after taking office, Ren Guo requested to enter the imperial court, and Emperor Taizu allowed him to enter the imperial court.

古文：以其方隅首望，早立忠节，乃进爵安乐郡公，赐以铁券，听世相传袭。
现代文：以其是地方上的头等望族，很早便立下忠节，于是晋爵为安乐郡公，赐给赦罪免死铁券，可以世世代代相传袭。
English: Because he was the most prestigious local family, he established the Loyalty Festival very early, so Jinjie was the governor of Anle County and gave him the iron ticket of pardon and exemption from death, which could be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：并赐路车、驷马及仪卫等以光宠之。
现代文：并赐给路车、驷马及仪卫等以示荣耀恩宠。
English: He also bestowed the grace of glory on the carriage, horses and guards.

古文：寻为刺客所害，时年五十六。
现代文：不久为刺客所害，时年五十六岁。
English: He was assassinated soon after, at the age of fifty-six.

古文：史臣曰：古人称仁义岂有常，蹈之则为君子，背之则为小人，信矣。
现代文：史臣曰：古人称仁义并不是确定的，能够履行仁义则为君子，背道而行则是小人，此话可信。
English: Shichen said: The ancients said that benevolence and righteousness were not certain, and those who were able to fulfill benevolence and righteousness were gentlemen, while those who went in the opposite direction were villains. This is credible.

古文：泉企长自山谷，素无月旦之誉，而临难慷慨，有人臣之节，岂非蹈仁义欤。
现代文：星企在山谷中长大，素无名士的称誉，但是临难志气慷慨，有人臣之节，其所遵循的便是仁义之道。
English: Growing up in the valley, Xingke never had the reputation of being a celebrity, but he was generous in the face of adversity. He was a loyal subject, and he followed the path of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：元礼、仲遵聿遵其志，卒成功业，庶乎克负荷矣。
现代文：五擅、健遵能遵循其父之志，最终能成立功业，也是能够承担负荷。
English: Wu Xuan and Jian Zun can follow their father's wishes, and can eventually establish a career, and can also bear the load.

古文：李迁哲、杨干运、席固之徒，属方隅扰攘，咸翻然而委质，遂享爵位，以保终始。
现代文：李迁哲、杨干运、席固等人，扰攘一方，都能翻然归附，因而得享爵位，以保终始。
English: Li Qianzhe, Yang Ganyun, Qi Gu and others, on the other hand, were able to turn the tables, and thus received a knighthood, from the beginning to the end.

古文：观迁哲之对太祖，有尚义之辞；干运受任武陵，乖事人之道。
现代文：观迁哲对太祖，有尚义的言论；干运受任于武陵，有乖事入之道。
English: Guan Qian Zhe had some wise words to say about the great ancestor; Gan Yun was assigned to Wuling, and there was a way for him to do good deeds.

古文：若乃校长短，比优劣，故不可同年而语矣。
现代文：如果计较长短，比定优劣，实是不可同年而语。
English: If you compare the long and short, compare the pros and cons, it is really not the same.

古文：阳雄任兼文武，声着中外，抑亦志能之士乎。
现代文：阳雄任兼文武，声名著称朝野，也是一位志能之士。
English: Yang Xiong, also known as a scholar and military man, is also famous for his morning exercises. He is also a member of the Chinese People's Volunteers.

