古文：○宁宗三嘉定元年春正月戊寅，右谏议大夫叶时等请枭韩侂胄首于两淮以谢天下，不报。
现代文：嘉定元年春正月初八，右谏议大夫叶时等请求在两淮将韩青袅首示众，以谢国人，没得到回答。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of Jiading in the first year of the People's Republic of China, the request of the doctor Ye Shi and others to show Han Qing's head to the public in the two Huai, in order to thank the Chinese people, did not get an answer.

古文：辛巳，下诏求言。
现代文：十一日，下诏求言。
English: On the eleventh day, the next imperial edict was issued.

古文：壬午，王柟还自河南，持金人牒，求韩侂胄首。
现代文：十二日，夕冉从河南回来，拿着金人信件，要求得到韩青首级。
English: On the 12th, Yu Ran returned from Henan with a letter from Jinren, demanding the head of Han Qing.

古文：丙戌，叶时等复请枭侂胄首于两淮。
现代文：十六日，叶时等又请求在两淮袅韩青袅首示众。
English: On the 16th, Ye Shih and others also requested to show their heads at the Two Huaiyuan and Hanqing Dynasties.

古文：戊子，安定郡王伯栩薨。
现代文：十八日，安定郡王赵伯栩去世。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Bo Tuo, the king of Stable County, passed away.

古文：壬辰，以史弥远知枢密院事，以许奕为金国通谢使。
现代文：二十二日，任命史弥远为知枢密院事，任命许奕为金国通谢使。
English: On the 22nd, Shi Yiyuan was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Xu Yi was appointed as the Special Envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：二月戊申，追复赵汝愚观文殿大学士，谥忠定。
现代文：二月初八，追复赵汝愚为观文殿大学士，溢号忠定。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, Zhao Rugu was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and his name was changed to Zhongding.

古文：诏史官改绍熙以来韩侂胄事迹。
现代文：下诏史官改绍熙年间以来韩青事迹。
English: The following is a list of Han Qing's achievements since he became a historian during the reign of Emperor Xiao He.

古文：壬子，诏临安府振给流民。
现代文：十二日，下诏临安府贩给流民。
English: On the 12th, Lin'an was sold to the refugees.

古文：戊午，责授程松果州团练副吏、宾州安置。
现代文：十八日，贬降程松为果州团练副使，宾州安置。
English: On the 18th, Chengmong was demoted to vice-envoy of the Gozhou Rehearsal Team and resettled in Pennsylvania.

古文：是月，郴州黑风峒寇罗世传作乱，招降之。
现代文：这个月，郴州黑风酮攻打罗世传叛乱，招降他们。
English: This month, the Zhangzhou Black Wind Company attacked Luo Shixian's rebellion and invited them to surrender.

古文：三月癸酉，以毛自知首论用兵，夺进士第一人恩例。
现代文：三月初四，因毛自知首先建议用兵，削夺进士第一人恩例。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, Mao first proposed to use soldiers because of self-awareness, cutting the first person's example.

古文：戊子，下诏戒饬内外群臣。
现代文：十九日，下诏整治内外大臣。
English: On the 19th, the Minister of the Interior and Foreign Affairs was purged.

古文：复秦桧王爵、赠谥。
现代文：恢复秦桧王爵、赠溢。
English: Restoration of Qinhuangdao's royal title, gifts abound.

古文：己丑，王柟自军前再还行在，议以韩侂胄函首易淮、陕侵地。
现代文：二十日，夕冉从金军营前再次回到行在，建议函首韩青换回淮、陕被金侵占的土地。
English: On the 20th, Yu Ran returned from the front of Kim's military camp and proposed to Han Qing, the head of the letter, to exchange the land occupied by Kim for Huai and Shaanxi.

古文：辛卯，诏枭侂胄首于两淮。
现代文：二十二日，下诏在两淮袅韩青首级示众。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was announced to the public at the first level of the two Huaiyu and Hanqing.

古文：是春，子垍生。
现代文：这年春天，子赵自出生。
English: This spring, Zi Zhao Zong was born.

古文：夏四月丙辰，诏后省科别群臣奏疏可行者以闻。
现代文：夏四月十七日，下诏后省分类辨别大臣奏疏可行者上报朝廷。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the provincial classification after the edict was issued to distinguish the ministers from the feasible ones and reported to the imperial court.

古文：赠彭龟年宝谟阁直学士，落李沐宝文阁学士。
现代文：赠彭龟年宝漠阁直学士，免除李沐宝文阁学士职衔。
English: He presented Peng Guiren with the title of direct bachelor of Baoshang Academy, and exempted Li Mu from the title of bachelor of Baoshang Academy.

古文：戊午，再责授陈自强复州团练副使、雷州安置，仍籍其家。
现代文：十九日，陈自强又贬降为复州团练副使，雷州安置，并且籍没其家。
English: On the 19th, Chen Ziqiang was demoted to vice-envoy of the Fuzhou Reunification Exercise, resettled in Leizhou, and lost his family.

古文：闰月辛未，置拘榷安边钱物所。
现代文：闰四月初二，设置拘榷安边钱物所。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th lunar month, the detention center was set up.

古文：壬申，雨雹。
现代文：初三，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：癸未，子垍薨，追封肃王，谥冲靖。
现代文：十四日，儿子赵自逝世，追封为肃王，溢号冲靖。
English: On the 14th, his son Zhao Zi passed away, and he was posthumously crowned King Sui.

古文：诏大理、三衙、临安府及诸路阙雨州县决系囚，释杖以下。
现代文：下诏大理寺、三衙、临安府和各路缺雨州县处理审押囚犯，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: According to the edict, Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an Prefecture and all counties in Shuozhou District will handle prisoners under trial and release prisoners who have been sentenced to caning or less.

古文：甲申，诏自今视事，令皇太子侍立。
现代文：十五日，下诏从今以后审理国事让皇太子侍立于侧。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was decreed that from now on, the affairs of state would be handled with the crown prince standing at his side.

古文：乙酉，以钱象祖兼太子少傅，卫泾、雷孝友、林大中并兼太子宾客。
现代文：十六日，任命钱象祖兼太子少傅，卫径、雷孝友、林大中兼太子宾客。
English: On the 16th, Qian Xiangzu, the young tutor of the prince, Wei Jian, Lei Xiaotou, the junior of the Lin University, and the prince were appointed as guests.

古文：辛卯，以旱，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十二日，因早灾向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 22nd, due to the early disaster, he prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：癸巳，减常膳。
现代文：二十四日，减少平常饮食。
English: On the 24th, reduce your usual diet.

古文：乙未，蠲两浙阙雨州县贫民逋赋。
现代文：二十六日，免除两浙缺雨州县贫民拖欠赋税。
English: On the 26th, the poor people in two counties of Zhejiang and Yuzhou were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：命大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县决系囚。
现代文：命令大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县处理在押囚犯。
English: He ordered Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an and the two counties of Zhejiang to deal with the prisoners.

古文：丙申，幸太乙宫、明庆寺祷雨。
现代文：二十七日，到太乙宫、明庆寺祈祷降雨。
English: On the 27th, I went to Taiyi Palace and Mingqing Temple to pray for rain.

古文：丁酉，以旱，诏求言。
现代文：二十八日，因早灾下诏求言。
English: On the 28th, due to the early disaster, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：五月辛酉，赐礼部进士郑自成以下四百二十有六人及第、出身。
现代文：五月二十三日，赐礼部进士郑自成等四百二十六人及第、出身。
English: On May 23rd, 426 people including Zheng Zicheng, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were conferred the honorary titles and ranks.

古文：甲子，太白经天。
现代文：二十六日，太白星显现一天。
English: On the 26th, the white star appeared for one day.

古文：乙丑，以飞蝗为灾，减常膳。
现代文：二十七日，因飞蝗为灾，减少常量饮食。
English: On the 27th, due to the plague of flying locusts, he reduced his regular diet.

古文：丁卯，诏侍从、台谏疏奏阙政，监司、守令条上民间利害。
现代文：二十九日，下诏侍从、台谏奏陈缺政，监司、守令陈述民间利害。
English: On the 29th, the attendants of the imperial edict and the imperial rescript played Chen Shao Zheng, and the supervisors and keepers of the edict stated the interests of the people.

古文：六月庚午，金人归大散关。
现代文：六月初二，金国归还大散关。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Jin Guo returned the Great Sankuan.

古文：辛未，金人归濠州。
现代文：初三，金国归还壕州。
English: On the third day of the first month, Jin Guo returned to Hezhou.

古文：乙亥，卫泾罢。
现代文：初七，卫径被罢免。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Weidong was removed from his post.

古文：丙子，遣邹应龙贺金主生辰。
现代文：初八，派遣邹应龙祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, send the dragon to congratulate the birthday of the gold master.

古文：甲申，林大中薨。
现代文：十六日，林大中去世。
English: On the 16th, Lin Daozhong passed away.

古文：乙未，以蝗，祷于天地、社稷。
现代文：十七日，因蝗灾向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 17th, due to the locust plague, they prayed to heaven and earth, ancestral temples, and shrines.

古文：丙戌，诏侍从、两省、台谏举沿边守臣。
现代文：十八日，下诏侍从、两省、台谏官推举沿边守臣。
English: On the 18th day of the following month, the attendants, the two provinces, and the Taiwan eunuchs elected the border guards.

古文：辛卯，以史弥远兼参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命史弥远兼参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, Shi Yayuan was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：秋七月辛丑，诏吕祖泰特补上州文学。
现代文：秋七月初四，下诏吕祖泰特补上州文学。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, the following edict was issued: "Luzutete complements Shangzhou Literature."

古文：癸丑，以丘崈同知枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，任命丘击为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, he was appointed Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：壬戌，以飞蝗为灾，诏三省疏奏宽恤未尽之事。
现代文：二十五日，因飞蝗为灾，下诏三省疏陈没有做到的宽恤之事。
English: On the 25th, due to the plague of flying locusts, the three provinces issued an edict of clemency, which had not been done before.

古文：八月戊辰朔，发米振贫民。
现代文：八月初一，发米贩济贫民。
English: On the first day of August, rice traders went out to help the poor.

古文：辛未，丘崈卒。
现代文：初四，丘击去世。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Kuchaku passed away.

古文：甲戌，命侍从、台谏、两省详议会子折阅利害。
现代文：初七，命令侍从、台谏、两省官详细讨论会子折阅利害。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered his attendants, the governor of Taiwan, and the two provincial officials to have a detailed discussion on the distribution of interests.

古文：辛巳，以礼部尚书娄机同知枢密院事，吏部尚书楼钥签书枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命礼部尚书娄机为同知枢密院事，吏部尚书楼钥为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, the Rector of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and the Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：丙戌，诏礼部侍郎许奕、起居舍人曾从龙考订监司、守令所陈民间利害，择可行者以闻，其未上者趣之。
现代文：十九日，下诏礼部侍郎许奕、起居舍人曾从龙考订监司、守令所陈述民间利害，选择可行者上报朝廷，没有呈上的督促尽快呈上。
English: On the 19th day of the following month, Xu Yi, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department of the Imperial Rescript, and the person who lived in the residence had reported the interests of the people from the Dragon Examination Appointment Supervisor and the Guarding Order, and reported the choice to the Imperial Court. Those who did not submit were urged to submit as soon as possible.

古文：甲午，发米二十万，振粜江、淮流民。
现代文：二十七日，发米二十万，贩桌江淮流民。
English: On the 27th, the rice was distributed to 200,000 people, and the vendors' tables were filled with refugees from Jianghuai.

古文：九月辛丑，金使完颜侃、乔宇入见。
现代文：九月初四，金国使臣完颜侃、乔宁朝见宁宗。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of September, the envoys of the Kim dynasty were exhausted, and Jonin met with Ningzong.

古文：壬子，出安边所钱一百万缗，命江、淮制置大使司籴米振饥民。
现代文：十五日，出安边所钱一百万络，命令江、淮制置大使司来米贩济饥民。
English: On the 15th, he ordered Jiang and Huai to set up an ambassador to sell rice to the starving people.

古文：己未，诏以和议成谕天下。
现代文：二十二日，下诏告谕全国和议成功。
English: On the 22nd, the next imperial edict announced the success of the national peace conference.

古文：甲子，遣曾从龙使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十七日，派遣曾从龙出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 27th, a delegation was sent from Longyan to congratulate Jin Guo on the Spring Festival.

古文：乙丑，大风。
现代文：二十八日，刮大风。
English: On the 28th, a strong wind blew.

古文：赦沿边诸州。
现代文：赦免沿边各州。
English: Pardoning the border states.

古文：冬十月丙子，以钱象祖为左丞相，史弥远为右丞相。雷孝友知枢密院事仍兼参知政事，娄机参知政事，楼钥同知枢密院事。
现代文：冬十月初十，任命钱象祖为左承相，史弥远为右承相，雷孝友为知枢密院事并兼参知政事，娄机为参知政事，楼钥为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, Qian Xiangzu was appointed as the left successor minister, Shi Yiyuan as the right successor minister, Lei Xiaoyu as the privy councilor and also participated in the political affairs, Zou Ji as the privy councilor and the key to the building as the privy councilor.

古文：己卯，褒录庆元上书杨宏中等六人。
现代文：十三日，褒奖录用庆元年间上书的杨宏中等六人。
English: On the 13th, six people including Yang Hong, who submitted his application in the first year of the celebration, were awarded.

古文：庚辰，封伯柷为安定郡王。
现代文：十四日，封赵了朗兄为安定郡王。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Liang's brother was named the king of Ding'an County.

古文：辛巳，蔡琏除名，配赣州牢城。
现代文：十五日，蔡琏被除名，流配赣州牢城。
English: On the 15th, Cai Wei was removed from the list and sent to the Bozhou Detention Center.

古文：癸未，金遣使来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, Kim sent envoys to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：十一月丙辰，金主璟殂。
现代文：十一月二十日，金主完颜景去世。
English: On November 20th, the benefactor passed away.

古文：戊午，史弥远以母忧去位。
现代文：二十二日，史弥远因服丧离职。
English: On the 22nd, Shi Yiyuan left his post due to his death.

古文：十二月戊辰，钱象祖罢。
现代文：十二月初三，钱象祖被罢免。
English: On the third day of December, Qian Xiangzu was dismissed.

古文：庚午，四川初行当五大钱。
现代文：初五，四少初行当五大钱。
English: At the beginning of the fifth year, four less than the beginning of the fifth year is five times the money.

古文：升嘉兴府为嘉兴军。
现代文：升嘉兴府为嘉兴军。
English: Shang Jiaxing Prefecture became the center of the Jiaxing Army.

古文：再夺李沐三官、信州居住。
现代文：再次削夺李沐三官，信州居住。
English: Once again, Li Mu was stripped of his three posts and resided in Shinshu.

古文：戊寅，改命曾从龙使金吊祭。
现代文：十三日，改命曾从龙出使金国吊祭。
English: On the 13th, he changed his mission and sent an envoy from Longde to attend the national hanging ceremony.

古文：己卯，黎州蛮畜卜寇边。
现代文：十四日，黎州蛮畜卜攻打边境。
English: On the 14th, the barbarians from Lizhou attacked the border.

古文：己丑，遣宇文绍彭使金贺即位。
现代文：二十四日，派遣宁文绍彭出使金国祝贺金国新主即位。
English: On the 24th, Ning Wen and Shaopeng were dispatched to congratulate the new head of state on his enthronement.

古文：辛卯，蠲两淮州军二税一年。
现代文：二十六日，免除两淮州军二税一年。
English: On the 26th, the two Huai Zhou armies were exempted from the second tax for one year.

古文：是岁，江、淮制置司汰雄淮军归农，淮东拣刺八千余人以补镇江大军及武锋军之阙，淮西拣刺二万六千余人以为御前定武军。
现代文：这一年，江、淮制置司裁减雄淮军归家，淮东拣刺八千多人用来补充镇江大军和武锋军的缺额，淮西拣刺二万六千多人编为御前定武军。
English: In this year, the Jiang and Huai armies returned home, more than 8,000 men from the East Huai army were used to supplement the shortage of the Zhenjiang army and the Wu Feng army, and more than 26,000 men from the West Huai army were organized as the Imperial army.

古文：二年春正月庚子，诏内外有司疏陈节用之事。
现代文：嘉定二年春正月初六，下诏内外有关部门疏陈节用措施。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the second year of the Jiading Spring Festival, the relevant departments at home and abroad issued the following measures.

古文：辛丑，金遣裴满正来告哀。
现代文：初七，金国派遣裴满正来告哀。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the state of Jin dispatched Pei Manzheng to mourn.

古文：丁己，以楼钥参知政事，御史中丞章良能知枢同密院事，吏部尚书宇文绍节签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，任命楼钥为参知政事，御史中承章良能为同知枢密院事，吏部尚书宁文绍节为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, Lou Ke was appointed to be a member of the Privy Council, Zou Zhongzheng was appointed to be a member of the Privy Council, Shang Shuning and Wen Shao Jie were appointed to be members of the Privy Council.

古文：庚申，金遣蒲察知刚来献遗留物。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣蒲察知刚来进献遗留物。
English: On the 26th, the State of Jin dispatched Pu Chachang to bring in the leftovers.

古文：诏侍从、两省、台谏各举监司、郡守治行尤异者二三人。
现代文：下诏侍从、两省、台谏各举监司、郡守治行优异者二至三人。
English: There will be two to three persons from the Imperial Household Agency, two provinces, and Taiwan Province who are supervisors of the election, and county governors who are excellent in governance.

古文：二月己巳，金遣使来告即位。
现代文：二月初五，金国派遣使臣来报告金主即位的消息。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of February, the Kim dynasty dispatched envoys to report the news of Kim Il Sung's accession to the throne.

古文：庚午，黎州蛮寇边。
现代文：初六，黎州蛮攻打边境。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Lizhou attacked the border.

古文：壬午，以会子折阅日甚，诏侍从、两省以下各疏奏所见。
现代文：十八日，因会子贬值一天比一天厉害，下诏侍从、两省以下各自上疏陈述自己的见解。
English: On the 18th, as the devaluation of the yuan became more and more severe day by day, the lower eunuch, the two provinces and below each went up to state their own opinions.

古文：丁亥，罢法科试经义，复六场旧法。
现代文：二十三日，废罢法科考试经义，恢复六场旧法。
English: On the 23rd, the strike of the legal science examination was abolished, and six old laws were restored.

古文：戊子，大风。
现代文：二十四日，刮大风。
English: On the 24th, there was a strong wind.

古文：三月丙申，雨雹。
现代文：三月初三，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of March, hail fell.

古文：巳酉，诏民以减会子之直籍没家财者，有司立还之。
现代文：十六日，下诏：百姓因减会子之值籍没家财者，有关部门立即还给百姓。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: If the people have no family wealth due to the reduction of the membership of the association, the relevant departments will immediately return it to the people.

古文：戊午，禁两淮官吏私买民田。
现代文：二十五日，禁止两淮官吏私买民田。
English: On the 25th, the two Huai officials were prohibited from buying private land.

古文：庚申，命浙西及沿江诸州给流民病者药。
现代文：二十七日，命令浙西和沿江各州给流民生病者药品治病。
English: On the 27th, it ordered western Zhejiang and the provinces along the Yangtze River to provide the displaced people with medicines to treat their illnesses.

古文：辛酉，罢漳、泉、福三州、兴化军卖废寺田。
现代文：二十八日，废除漳、泉、福三州和兴化军出卖废寺田。
English: On the 28th, the three prefectures of Quan, Quan, and Fu were abolished, and the Xinghua Army sold the abandoned temple lands.

古文：壬戌，出内库钱十万缗为临安贫民棺槥费。
现代文：二十九日，出内库钱十万络作为临安贫民棺材费用。
English: On the 29th, 100,000 rupees were withdrawn from the treasury to pay for coffins for the poor in Lin'an.

古文：夏四月乙丑，诏诸路监司督州县捕蝗。
现代文：夏四月初二，下诏各路监司督促州县捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of summer, the superintendent of each road urged the county to catch locusts.

古文：戊辰，江、淮制置司言，放庐、濠二州忠义军归农。
现代文：初五，江、淮制置司报告说，放回庐州、壕州忠义军从事农业生产。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Jiang and Huai Zeji reported that the loyalist troops returned to Ganzhou and Hezhou were engaged in agricultural production.

古文：甲申，赐临安诸军死者棺钱。
现代文：二十一日，赐给临安各军死者棺材钱。
English: On the 21st, coffin money was given to the dead soldiers of each army in Lin'an.

古文：戊子，赐杨震仲谥曰节毅。
现代文：二十五日，赐给杨震仲溢号为节毅。
English: On the 25th, Yang Zhenzhong was given the honorary title of Xie Yi.

古文：五月丙申，史弥远起复。
现代文：五月初四，史弥远守丧未满三年被重新起用。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Shi Yanyuan was reappointed after less than three years of service.

古文：丁酉，以旱，诏诸路监司决系囚，劾守令之贪残者，戊戌，借补训武郎罗日愿谋为变，伏诛。
现代文：初五，因早灾下诏各路监司审理在押囚犯，弹勃贪残守令。初六，借补训武郎罗日愿阴谋叛乱，被处以死刑。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, due to an early disaster, the supervisors of each road were ordered to try the prisoners in custody, and the order to resist corruption was issued. In the sixth year of junior high school, the substitute tutor, Luo Rai, was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：庚子，诏侍从、两省、台谏各举监司、郡守有政绩才望者二人，以补郎官之阙。
现代文：初八，下诏侍从、两省、台谏官各自举荐有政绩、才能、声望的郡守、监司二人，以补充郎官之缺。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the lower eunuch, the two provinces, and the Taiwan eunuch each recommended two county governors and supervisors with political achievements, talents, and reputation to supplement the lack of officials.

古文：辛丑，申命州县捕蝗。
现代文：初九，重新命令州县捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he ordered the prefectures to catch locusts again.

古文：癸卯，诏两淮、荆襄守令以户口多寡为殿最。
现代文：十一日，下诏两淮、荆襄守令以户口多少作为考核治绩好坏的标淮。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following two decrees were issued, and the Jingxiang Shouling ordered to use the number of household accounts as the standard for assessing the good or bad performance.

古文：乙卯，释大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县杖以下囚。
现代文：二十三日，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 23rd, prisoners sentenced to caning or less were released from Dali Temple, Sanlu, Lin'an, and two counties in Zhejiang.

古文：除茶盐赏钱。
现代文：废除茶盐赏钱。
English: Abolish the tea and salt reward money.

古文：己未，以旱，诏群臣上封事。
现代文：二十七日，因早灾下诏大臣呈上密封章奏。
English: On the 27th, due to the early disaster, the Minister of Imperial Rescript presented a sealed chapter.

古文：庚申，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十八日，向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 28th, they prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：六月癸亥朔，命浙西诸州谕民种麻豆，毋督其租。
现代文：六月初一，命令浙西各州告谕百姓种植麻豆，不要督征租税。
English: On the first day of June, it ordered all the states in western Zhejiang to instruct the people to grow maple beans and not to collect taxes.

古文：诏台省及诸路监司速决滞狱。
现代文：下诏台省和各路监司迅速处理积滞案件。
English: The following prefectures and the various road supervision departments will quickly deal with the backlog cases.

古文：戊辰，奉安成肃皇后神御于景灵宫。
现代文：初六，恭敬安置成肃皇后神主于景灵宫。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, the deity of the Empress Cheng Su was respectfully placed in the Jingling Palace.

古文：己巳，遣俞应符贺金主生辰。乙酉，复祷雨于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：初七，派遣俞应符祝贺金主生日，二十三日，又向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷降雨。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, they sent a charm to congratulate the birthday of the gold master, and on the 23rd day, they prayed for rain to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：己丑，命江西、福建、二广丰稔诸州籴运以给临安，仍偿其费。
现代文：二十七日，命令江西、福建、二广丰收各州来米运给临安，并且偿还费用。
English: On the 27th, it ordered Jiangxi, Fujian and Erguang Harvesting Provinces to ship rice to Lin'an and reimburse the expenses.

古文：辛卯，京湖制置司言，放诸州新军及忠义人归农。
现代文：二十九日，京湖制置司报告说，放还各州新军和忠义人归农。
English: On the 29th, the Beijing Lake Construction Division reported that the new troops and loyalists were returned to farmers in each state.

古文：秋七月癸巳，命有司举行宽恤之政五条。
现代文：秋七月初二，命令有关部门实行五条宽恤措施。
English: On the second day of the seventh month of autumn, the relevant departments were ordered to implement five leniency measures.

古文：乙未，诏荒歉州县七岁以下男女听异姓收养，著为令。
现代文：初四，下诏荒歉州县七岁以下男女允许人家收养，颁布为法令。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the new year, the following edict was issued, permitting men and women under the age of seven in Arao County to be adopted.

古文：己亥，蠲信阳、荆门、汉阳军民赋。
现代文：初八，免除信阳、荆门、汉阳三军百姓赋税。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the people of Xinyang, Jingmen and Hanyang were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：壬寅，命两淮转运司给诸州民麦种。
现代文：十一日，命令两淮转运使供给各州百姓麦种。
English: On the 11th, it ordered two Huaihuai transshipment vessels to supply wheat seeds to the people of various states.

古文：癸卯，募民以振饥免役。
现代文：十二日，募民以贩给饥民免除差役。
English: On the 12th, people were recruited to sell rice to the hungry to be exempted from forced labor.

古文：八月甲子，听两淮诸州民行铁钱于沿江八州。
现代文：八月初三，允许两淮各州百姓在沿江八州通行铁钱。
English: On the third day of August, the people of the two Huai states were allowed to pass iron money in the eight states along the Yangtze River.

古文：乙丑，以安丙为四川制置大使，罢宣抚司。
现代文：初四，任命安丙为四川制置大使，废罢宣抚司。
English: On the fourth day of the freshman year, An Hii was appointed as the ambassador of Sichuan Province, and the proclamation and assistance department was abolished.

古文：甲戌，册皇太子。
现代文：十三日，册封皇太子。
English: On the 13th, he was crowned crown prince.

古文：丁丑，皇太子谒于太庙。
现代文：十六日，皇太子朝拜太庙。
English: On the 16th, the Crown Prince paid homage to the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊寅，诏皇太子更名询。
现代文：十七日，下诏皇太子改名为询。
English: On the 17th, the crown prince changed his name to "Sen."

古文：己卯，黎州蛮复寇边。
现代文：十八日，黎州蛮又攻打边境。
English: On the 18th, Lizhou attacked the border again.

古文：丙戌，发米十万石振两淮饥民。
现代文：二十五日，发米十万石贩济两淮饥民。
English: On the 25th, rice was given to 100,000 stonecutters to help the starving.

古文：九月己亥，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：九月初八，祭祀景灵宫。初九，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, a ritual is held at the Jingling Palace. On the 9th day of the 9th month, a ritual is held at the Grand Temple.

古文：庚子，朝享于太庙。辛丑，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：初十，在明堂合祭天地，举行大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a general amnesty was held in Myeongdong.

古文：丙午，增太学内舍生十员。
现代文：十五日，增太学内舍生十员。
English: On the 15th, ten students from Zengdai School left.

古文：癸丑，命吏部郎官刘龠等审定中外所陈会子利害，上于朝。
现代文：二十二日，命令吏部郎宫刘抓等审定中外官员陈述的关于会子利害的意见，上报朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the head of the Imperial Household Agency, Liu Cui, and others to verify the opinions of Chinese and foreign officials on the interests of Huizi and report them to the Imperial Court.

古文：己未，遣费培使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十八日，派遣费培出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 28th, Feipai sent an envoy to the People's Republic of China to congratulate the New Year.

古文：冬十月丁卯，命京湖制置司募逃卒及放散忠义以补厢、禁军阙。
现代文：冬十月初七，命令京湖制置司招募逃卒和放散忠义军用来补充厢军、禁军缺额。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the winter, he ordered the Beijing Lake Establishment Division to recruit deserters and disperse loyalist troops to supplement the shortage of vans and forbidden troops.

古文：丁丑，金遣使来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, Kim sent envoys to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：己丑，命两淮转运司给诸州民稻种。
现代文：二十九日，命令两淮转运司供给各州百姓稻种。
English: On the 29th, he ordered the two Huaihai transshipment departments to supply rice seeds to the people of each state.

古文：减公私房廊白地钱什之三。
现代文：减免公私房廊白地钱十分之三。
English: The deduction and exemption of public and private housing is three-tenths of the white money.

古文：十一月辛卯朔，沔州统制张林等谋作乱，事觉，贷死除名、广南羁管。
现代文：十一月初一，洒州统制张林等阴谋作乱，事情泄露，被免死除名，广南编管。
English: On the first day of November, Zhang Lin, the governor of Zhangzhou, and others conspired to create turmoil, the matter was leaked, he was removed from the list, and Guangnan was appointed as the governor.

古文：甲午，诏浙西监司募饥民修水利。
现代文：初四，下诏浙西监司招募饥民兴修水利。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Western Zhejiang Supervision Division issued an order to recruit starving people to build water conservancy.

古文：乙未，以岁饥罢雪宴。
现代文：初五，因饥荒废罢雪宴。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the snow banquet was cancelled due to famine.

古文：是月，郴州黑风峒寇李元砺作乱，众数万，连破吉、郴诸县，诏遣荆、鄂、江、池四州军讨之。
现代文：这个月，郴州黑风酮寇贼李元舫叛乱，部众数万人，接连攻破吉、郴州各县，下诏派遣荆、鄂、江、池四州军队讨伐。
English: This month, tens of thousands of people joined the rebellion led by Li Yuanqi, the black-browed bandit of Bozhou, and successively broke through the counties of Ji and Bozhou, and ordered the dispatch of the armies of Jing, E, Jiang and Chi to fight.

古文：十二月甲子，四川制置大使司调官军讨黎州蛮，败绩。
现代文：十二月初四，四川制置大使司调遣官军讨伐黎州蛮，失败。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the Sichuan Provincial Government dispatched the official army to fight against the Lishu barbarians, but failed.

古文：己巳，赐朱熹谥曰文。
现代文：初九，赐朱熹溢号为文。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, give Zhu Xi the exclamation mark as a sentence.

古文：乙亥，诏诸州毋籴职田租。
现代文：十五日，下诏各州不得来买职田租。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was decreed that the states were no longer allowed to buy farmland rent.

古文：丙戌，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：是岁，诸路旱蝗，扬、楚、衡、郴、吉五州、南安军盗起。
现代文：这一年，各路早灾、蝗灾，扬、楚、衡、郴、吉五州和南安军盗贼兴起。
English: In this year, the locust plague, the locust plague, the Yang, Chu, Heng, Jie, Ji Five Provinces and the Nan'an Army thieves arose.

古文：三年春正月甲辰，下诏招谕群盗。
现代文：嘉定三年春正月十五日，下诏招谕盗贼。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the spring of Jiading in the third year, the following edict invited thieves.

古文：又诏戒饬监司、郡守。
现代文：又下诏整治监司、郡守。
English: He also issued an edict to appoint a rectification supervisor and a county governor.

古文：丙午，雨土。
现代文：十七日，降土。
English: On the seventeenth day, the descent began.

古文：二月辛酉，黎州蛮复寇边。
现代文：二月初二，黎州蛮又攻打边境。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：庚午，诏楚州武锋军岁给累重钱，如大军例。
现代文：十一日，下诏楚州武锋军每年供给累重钱，像大军一样。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was announced that the Chuzhou Wufeng Army would be provided with a large amount of money every year, just like a large army.

古文：壬午，以工部侍郎王居安知隆兴府，督捕峒寇。
现代文：二十三日，任命工部侍郎王居安知隆兴府，督捕酮寇。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Juanzhang, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, was appointed to supervise the capture of keto-mosses in Longxingfu.

古文：三月丁酉，蠲都城及荒歉诸州民间逋负。
现代文：三月初九，免除都城和荒歉各州民间拖欠钱物。
English: On the 9th day of March, the capital city was exempted and the states apologized for the civil arrears.

古文：己亥，以湖南转运判官曹彦约知潭州，督捕峒寇。
现代文：十一日，任命湖南转运判官曹彦约知潭州，督捕酮寇。
English: On the 11th, Cao Yan, the judge of Hunan transshipment, was appointed to supervise the capture of keto-kangaroos in Zhitanzhou.

古文：庚子，赐彭龟年谥曰忠肃。
现代文：十二日，赐给彭龟年溢号为忠肃。
English: On the 12th, the year of the tortoise and the hare was given the name of Chung-soo.

古文：甲寅，诛楚州渠贼胡海。
现代文：二十六日，诛杀楚州盗贼首领胡海。
English: On the 26th, Hu Hai, the leader of the thieves in Chuzhou, was killed.

古文：丙辰，以久雨，释两浙州县系囚。
现代文：二十八日，因久雨不晴，释放两浙州县在押囚犯。
English: On the 28th, due to persistent rain, prisoners in custody in two counties in Zhejiang were released.

古文：夏四月癸亥，李元砺犯南雄州，官军大败。
现代文：夏四月初六，李嘟厉侵犯南雄州，官军大败。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, Li Yili invaded Nanxiong Prefecture, and the government army was soundly defeated.

古文：乙丑，决临安系囚，释杖以下。
现代文：初八，审理临安在押囚犯，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Lin'an prisoners in custody will be tried, and prisoners sentenced to caning or less will be released.

古文：丙寅，诏监司、守臣安集泰、吉二州民经贼蹂践者。
现代文：初九，下诏监司、守臣抚泰、吉二州百姓遭盗贼践踏者。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, the overseer of the Lower Zhao, the guardian of Futai, and the people of Jizhou were trampled by thieves.

古文：戊辰，出内库钱二十三万缗赐临安军民。
现代文：十一日，出内库钱二十三万络赐给临安府军民。
English: On the 11th day, 230,000 ryo from the treasury was given to the soldiers and civilians of Lin'an.

古文：己巳，诏临安府给细民病死者棺榇。
现代文：十二日，下诏临安府供给小民病死者棺材。
English: On the 12th, Lin'an Prefecture issued an order to provide coffins for those who died of minor illnesses.

古文：五月乙未，淮东贼悉平，诏宽恤残破州县。
现代文：五月初八，淮东盗贼全部平定，下诏宽免抚恤残破州县。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, all the thieves in Huaidong were subdued, and the remaining state counties were pardoned and exempted from pension.

古文：甲辰，以去岁旱蝗，百官应诏封事，命两省择可行者以闻。
现代文：十七日，因去年早灾、蝗灾，百官应诏上奏密封章疏，命令两省官选择可以实行者上报朝廷。
English: On the 17th, due to last year's early disaster and locust disaster, the hundred officials should issue a sealed seal and order the two provincial officials to choose the executor to report to the imperial court.

古文：乙巳，命沿海诸州督捕海寇。
现代文：十八日，命令沿海各州督捕海寇。
English: On the 18th, the governor of each coastal state was ordered to catch sea pirates.

古文：戊申，经理两淮屯田。
现代文：二十一日，经理两淮屯田。
English: On the twenty-first day, the manager went to Duahuai Tun Tian.

古文：庚戌，以江陵忠勇军为御前忠勇军。
现代文：二十三日，以江陵忠勇军为御前忠勇军。
English: On the 23rd, the Jiangling Loyal Army was designated as the Imperial Loyal Army.

古文：癸丑，以久雨，发米振贫民。
现代文：二十六日，因久雨不晴，发米贩济贫民。
English: On the 26th day, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, rice traders came to help the poor.

古文：六月丁己朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：壬戌，命有司举行宽恤之政十有九条。
现代文：初六，命令有关部门实行十九条宽恤百姓的措施。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the relevant departments were ordered to implement 19 measures of leniency for the people.

古文：癸亥，遣黄中贺金主生辰。
现代文：初七，派遣黄中祝贺金主生日。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Huang Zhong was dispatched to congratulate Jin Shuzhong on his birthday.

古文：己卯，加杨次山少保，封永阳郡王。
现代文：二十三日，加杨次山为少保，封为永阳郡王。
English: On the 23rd, Jia Yang Jishan was promoted to Shao Bao and crowned the King of Yongyang County.

古文：诏三衙、江上、四川诸军主帅核实军籍，期冒者以赃论。
现代文：下诏三衙、江上、四川各军主帅核实军籍，欺骗隐冒者以贪赃罪论处。
English: According to the following edict, the commanders of the armies in Sanqi, Jiangshang and Sichuan should verify their military status, and those who cheat and hide should be punished with the crime of embezzlement.

古文：是月，池州副都统许俊、江州副都统刘元鼎与李元砺战于江西，皆不利。知潭州曹彦约又与贼战，亦为所败，贼势愈炽。
现代文：这个月，池州副都统许俊、江州副都统刘元鼎与李顽厉战于江西，都失利；潭州知州曹彦约又与盗贼交战，也被打败，盗贼势力更加壮大。
English: This month, the deputy governor of Chizhou, Xu Jun, and the deputy governor of Jiangsu, Liu Yuanding, and Li Yuxi fought in Jiangxi, and both lost; the deputy governor of Tanzhou, Chizhou, Cao Yanyu, also fought with the thieves, and was also defeated, and the thieves' power became even stronger.

古文：秋七月辛卯，申严围田增广之禁。
现代文：秋七月初五，申严围田增广之禁。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was announced that it was strictly forbidden to expand the encircled fields.

古文：癸卯，定南班为三十员。
现代文：十七日，定南班为三十员。
English: On the 17th, the Dingnan class was increased to 30 members.

古文：八月乙亥，大风拔木。
现代文：八月二十日，大风拔起树木。
English: On August 20, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：是月，临安府蝗。
现代文：这个月，临安府发生蝗灾。
English: This month, a locust plague occurred in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：九月丙戌朔，诏三衙、江上诸军，升差将校必以材艺年劳，其徇私者，台谏及制置、总领劾之。
现代文：九月初一，下诏三衙、江上各军，升差将校必须按照才能武艺和年限功劳大小；有询私舞弊者，台谏和制置使、总领官弹勃。
English: On the first day of September, the Three Emperors' Resolutions were issued, and officers of the armies on the Yangtze River had to be promoted according to their ability in martial arts and the length of their service. Those who were found to have engaged in personal misconduct were stripped of their titles as well as their posts as commanders and commanders-in-chief.

古文：癸丑，遣钱仲彪使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十八日，派遣钱仲彪出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 28th, Qian Zhongbiao sent an envoy to the People's Republic of China to congratulate the New Year.

古文：冬十月壬申，雷。
现代文：冬十月十七日，打雷。
English: Winter, October 17th, thunder.

古文：金遣使来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：金国派遣使臣来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: China Sends Envoys to Congratulate Koreans on Rui Qing Festival.

古文：丁丑，推南雄州战殁将士恩。
现代文：二十二日，向南雄州战死将士施加恩惠。
English: On the 22nd, he bestowed favors on the fallen soldiers of Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：十一月癸巳，赏楚州平贼功。
现代文：十一月初九，赏赐平定楚州盗贼有功人员。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, the meritorious personnel who subdued the Chuzhou thieves were rewarded.

古文：乙巳，遣朝臣二人往两浙路与提举官议收浮盐。
现代文：二十一日，派遣朝臣二人前往两浙路与提举官商讨收浮盐问题。
English: On the twenty-first day, two courtiers were dispatched to the two Zhejiang roads to discuss the issue of collecting floating salt with the officials.

古文：是月，李元砺迫赣州、南安军，诏以重赏募人讨之。
现代文：这个月，李嘟厉攻逼赣州、南安军，下诏以重赏招募人讨伐李元舫。
English: This month, Li Yingli attacked and forced the Shanzhou and Nan'an armies, and issued an edict to reward the recruiters who fought against Li Yuanli.

古文：十二月丙辰，诏江、淮诸司严饬守令安集流民。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏江、淮各司严格要求守令安抚招集流民。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the Lower Yangtze River and Huai River Departments issued strict orders to pacify and gather the displaced people.

古文：戊午，娄机罢。
现代文：初四，娄机被罢免。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, he was dismissed.

古文：丙寅，湖南贼罗世传缚李元砺以降，峒寇悉平。
现代文：十二日，湖南盗贼罗世传绑缚李元砺出降，酮寇全部平定。
English: On the 12th, Luo Shixuan, a thief from Hunan Province, tied up Li Yuanxuan and forced him to surrender, and all the keto-kangaroos were subdued.

古文：辛巳，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：黎州蛮请降。
现代文：黎州蛮请求投降。
English: Lizhou made a bold request to surrender.

古文：是岁，临安、绍兴二府、严、衢二州大水，振之，仍蠲其赋。
现代文：这一年，临安、绍兴二府和严、瞥二州发生大水，贩济灾民，并且免除灾民赋税。
English: This year, the two prefectures of Lin'an and Shaoxing, as well as the two prefectures of Yan and Biao, were hit by floods. They offered relief to the victims and exempted the victims from paying taxes.

古文：四年春正月己丑，叙州蛮攻嘉定府利店砦，陷之。
现代文：嘉定四年春正月初五，叙州蛮进攻嘉定府利店寨，攻陷该寨。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the fourth year of the spring of Jiading, Shuzhou attacked the Li Dian Walled Village of Jiading Prefecture and captured the village.

古文：甲辰，以四川盐担钱对减激赏绢一年。
现代文：二十日，以四川盐担钱对减激赏绢一年。
English: On the 20th, Sichuan salt was used to pay for a one-year incentive.

古文：丙午，诏湖南、江西诸州经贼蹂践者，监司、守臣考县令安集之实，第其能否以闻。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：湖南、江西各州遭盗贼破坏者，监司、守臣考核县令安抚招集流民的效果，排列治绩好坏上报朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: the states of Hunan and Jiangxi were attacked by thieves and saboteurs, and the supervisors and guards examined the effectiveness of the county's order to pacify and recruit displaced people, and ranked the performance and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：二月乙卯，李元砺伏诛。
现代文：二月初二，李顽厉被处以死刑。
English: On February 2, Li Yingli was sentenced to death.

古文：壬戌，罗世传补官，寻复叛。
现代文：初九，罗世传补官，不久又叛乱。
English: In the early 9th century, Luo Shichuan was appointed as a supplementary official, but soon rebelled again.

古文：辛巳，罢广西诸州牛税。
现代文：二十八日，废除广西各州牛税。
English: On the 28th, the state cattle tax in Guangxi was abolished.

古文：闰月丁未，大风。
现代文：闰二月二十四日，大风。
English: On the 24th of leap February, a gale blew up.

古文：辛亥，诏诸路帅臣、监司、守令格朝廷振恤之令及盗发不即捕者，重罪之。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：各路帅臣、监司、守令抗拒朝廷贩济抚恤命令和盗贼兴起不立即督捕者，重治其罪。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: All officers and men, supervisors, and guards were ordered to resist the imperial court's order to give subsidies to peddlers and thieves, and those who did not immediately supervise and arrest them would be punished for their crimes.

古文：三月己未，临安府振给病民，死者赐棺钱。
现代文：三月初七，临安府贩给生病百姓，死者赐给棺材钱。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, Lin'an peddlers gave money to the sick people, and the deceased gave money to the coffin.

古文：丙子，沔州将刘世雄等谋据仙人原作乱，伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，洒州将领刘世雄等阴谋占据仙人原叛乱，被处以死刑。
English: On the 24th, Liu Shixiong, the general of Zhangzhou, and others conspired to occupy the Xianren Rebellion and were sentenced to death.

古文：夏四月甲申，禁两浙、福建州县科折盐酒。
现代文：夏四月初三，禁止两浙、福建州县科折盐酒。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, salted wine from Zhejiang and Fujian was banned.

古文：己丑，以吴曦没官田租代输关外四州旱伤秋税。
现代文：初八，以吴曦没官田租代输关外四州早灾地区秋税。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the autumn tax of the four prefectures affected by the earthquake was transferred to Wu Xi Meng Kangtian Rent.

古文：丙午，赐黑风峒名曰效忠。
现代文：二十五日，赐黑风酮名效忠。
English: On the 25th, he gave his allegiance to the Kuroshio clan.

古文：戊申，出内库钱瘗疫死者贫民。
现代文：二十七日，出内钱掩埋因疾疫而死的贫民。
English: On the 27th, they went out to bury the poor people who died from the disease.

古文：是月，四川制置大使司置安边司以经制蛮事，命成都路提刑李、潼川路安抚许奕共领之。
现代文：这个月，四川制置大使司设置安边司以处理与蛮人关系问题，命令成都路提刑李皇、撞川路安抚使许奕共同主管。
English: This month, the Sichuan Provincial Department for the Establishment of Ambassadors set up the Border Security Department to deal with the issue of relations with the barbarians, and ordered the Chengdu Road to punish Emperor Li and the Sichuan Road to pacify the co-head of Xu Yi.

古文：五月乙亥，赐礼部进士赵建大以下四百六十有五人及第、出身。
现代文：五月二十四日，赐给礼部进士赵建大以下四百六十五人及第、出身。
English: On May 24th, it was given to 465 people of various ranks and backgrounds, including Zhao Jianda, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：六月丁亥，遣余嵘贺金主生辰，会金国有难，不至而还。
现代文：六月初七，派遣余嵘祝贺金主生日，哈逢金国有难，不至而回。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, they sent the remaining urns to congratulate the birthday of the gold master. However, when the gold state was in difficulty, they did not come back.

古文：减京畿囚罪一等，释杖以下。
现代文：减轻京瓷囚犯罪刑一等，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: Mitigate the first-class criminal punishment of Kyocera prisoners, and release prisoners below the cane punishment.

古文：辛丑，更定四川诸军军额。
现代文：二十一日，改定四川各军军额。
English: On the 21st, the troop quotas of each army in Sichuan were revised.

古文：秋七月壬戌，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙寅，诏四川官吏尝受伪命者，自今毋得叙用。
现代文：十七日，下诏四川官吏曾经接受伪命者从今以后不得提拔任用。
English: On the 17th, it was decreed that officials in Sichuan who once accepted a false name would no longer be promoted.

古文：丁丑，诏军兴以来爵赏冒滥者听自陈，除其罪。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：军兴以来爵赏冒滥者允许自报，免除其罪。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: Since the rise of the military, those who have abused peerage rewards are allowed to report themselves and are absolved of their crimes.

古文：九月辛酉，叙州蛮寇边。
现代文：九月十二日，叙州蛮攻打边境。
English: On September 12th, Syria launched a brutal attack on the border.

古文：乙亥，罗世传为其党所杀。
现代文：二十六日，罗世传被其党所杀。
English: On the 26th, Luo Shichuan was killed by his own party.

古文：丁丑，遣程卓使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十八日，派遣程卓出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 28th, Cheng Zhuo sent an envoy to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：诏附会开边得罪之人，自今毋得叙用。
现代文：下诏：附会开启边祸得罪之人，从今以后不得提拔任用。
English: The following edict: Anyone who commits the sin of starting a side-effect of the affiliated association shall not be promoted or appointed from now on.

古文：冬十月甲辰，以金国有难，命江淮、京湖、四川制置司谨边备。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，因金国有难，命令江淮、京湖、四川制置司谨慎边防。
English: On the 26th day of October in winter, due to difficulties in the state of Jin, Jianghuai, Jinghu and Sichuan were ordered to set up departments to guard the border carefully.

古文：十一月己酉朔，日有食之。癸丑，赏平峒寇功。
现代文：十一月初一，日食。初五，赏赐平定酮寇之功。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, a reward was given for the achievement of subduing the keto mosquito.

古文：甲戌，申严诸军升差之制。
现代文：二十六日，申严各军升差之制。
English: On the 26th, the system of promotion and demotion for each army was strictly enforced.

古文：十二月辛巳，奉议郎张鎡坐扇摇国本除名、象州羁管。
现代文：十二月初三，奉议郎张滋因扇摇国本被除名，象州羁管。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Zhang Zhi, a member of the Legislative Yuan, was removed from his post and placed under the jurisdiction of the Xiangzhou Municipal People's Court.

古文：癸未，以会子折阅不行，遣官体访江、浙诸州。
现代文：初五，因会子贬值不再流行，派遣官员亲自访问江、浙各州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, because the devaluation of the yuan was no longer popular, officials were dispatched to personally visit Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.

古文：乙巳，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：是岁，金国有难，贺生辰使不至。
现代文：这一年，金国有难，祝贺生日使臣没到。
English: This year, due to difficulties in the Kim dynasty, the envoys did not come to congratulate him on his birthday.

古文：五年春正月己巳，诏诸路通行两浙倍役法，著为令。
现代文：嘉定五年春正月二十一日，下诏各路通行两浙倍役法，著为令。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Jiading, it was decreed that the road traffic would be doubled in each direction.

古文：壬申，赐李好义谥曰忠壮。
现代文：二十四日，赐给李好义溢号为忠壮。
English: On the 24th, Li Haoyi was given the title of "Loyal and Strong."

古文：二月壬午，罢两淮军兴以来借补官。
现代文：二月初五，废罢两淮军兴以来借补官。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, since the abolition of the two Huai Junxing, the loan officer came.

古文：三月庚戌，四川制置司遣兵分道讨叙州蛮，其酋米在请降。
现代文：三月初三，四川制置司派兵分道讨伐叙州蛮，酋首米在请降。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month, the Sichuan Construction Division sent soldiers to fight against the Shuzhou Barbarians in a separate way.

古文：戊辰，以久雨，诏大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县决系囚。
现代文：二十一日，因久雨不晴，下诏大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县审理在押囚犯。
English: On the twenty-first day, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the prisoners in custody in Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an Prefecture and two counties in Zhejiang Province will be tried.

古文：甲戌，以广东、湖南、京西盗平，监司、帅臣进职有差。
现代文：二十七日，因广东、湖南、京西盗贼平定，监司、帅臣进职不等。
English: On the 27th, as the bandits in Guangdong, Hunan and West Beijing were subdued, supervisors and senior officials were promoted.

古文：夏五月癸酉，安南国王李龙卒，以其子昊旵为安南国王。
现代文：夏五月二十八日，安南国王李龙去世，委任其子昊稽为安南国王。
English: On the 28th day of the 5th month of the summer, King Li Long of Annan passed away and appointed his son Hao Jian as King of Annan.

古文：诏州县见役人毋纳免役钱，役满复输。
现代文：下诏：州县现役人不纳免役钱，服役期满再输纳免役钱。
English: The following edict: State and county active officials do not receive duty-free allowance, and they will receive duty-free allowance after serving their term of service.

古文：六月癸未，遣傅诚贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初八，派遣傅诚祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, Fu Cheng was sent to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：乙酉，禁铜钱过江。
现代文：初十，禁止铜钱过江。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it was forbidden for copper money to cross the river.

古文：秋七月庚申，赏降叙州蛮功。
现代文：秋七月十六日，赏赐降服叙州蛮之功。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, the surrender of Suzhou was rewarded.

古文：戊辰，以雷雨毁太庙屋，避正殿减膳。
现代文：二十四日，因雷雨毁坏太庙屋舍，不上正殿处理政事，减少饮食。
English: On the 24th, due to thunderstorms, the temple's buildings were destroyed. He did not go to the main hall to deal with political affairs, and reduced his diet.

古文：八月甲戌朔，御后殿，复膳。
现代文：八月初一，到后殿，恢复饮食。
English: On the first day of August, go to the back hall and resume eating and drinking.

古文：九月丙午，太白昼见。
现代文：九月初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：己酉，有司上《续编中兴礼书》。
现代文：初六，有关部门呈上赎编中兴礼书。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the relevant departments submitted the redacted ZTE letter.

古文：庚戌，遵义砦夷杨焕来献马。
现代文：初七，遵义寨夷人杨焕来进献马。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Yang Huan from Zunyi Village came to offer horses.

古文：辛未，罢沿海诸州海船钱。
现代文：二十八日，废罢沿海各州海船钱。
English: On the 28th, the seagoing ship money of the coastal states was abolished.

古文：遣应武使金贺正旦。
现代文：派遣应武出使金国祝贺新春。
English: Sending an envoy to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：冬十月辛巳，诏诸路总领官岁举堪将帅者二三人，安抚、提刑举可备将材者各二人。
现代文：冬十月初九，下诏各路总领官每年推举可以担任将帅者二至三人，安抚使和提刑官推举可以备作将才者各二人。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, it was decreed that two to three generals could be elected each year, and two each of the pacifying envoy and the punishing officer could be elected.

古文：戊子，金遣使来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十六日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 16th, Kim sent envoys to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：戊戌，雷。
现代文：二十六日，打雷。
English: On the 26th, thunder.

古文：遣使吊祭安南。
现代文：派遣使臣吊祭安南国王。
English: Sending envoys to pay tribute to King Annan.

古文：十一月庚申，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：十一月十八日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On November 18th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：辛酉，朝飨于太庙。
现代文：十九日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 19th, the memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：壬戌，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：二十日，在圆丘祭祀天地，举行大赦。
English: On the 20th, an amnesty was held at the round mound to celebrate heaven and earth.

古文：十二月丁丑，再蠲濠州租税一年。
现代文：十二月初五，再免壕州租税一年。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, it will be exempted from Hezhou tax for another year.

古文：壬午，诏蠲州县横增税额。
现代文：初十，下诏免除州县横增税额。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the lower edict exempted the state and county from the horizontal tax increase.

古文：己亥，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：六年春正月庚申，宇文绍节卒。
现代文：嘉定六年春正月十八日，宁文绍节去世。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of spring in the sixth year of Jiading, Ning Wenshao died.

古文：诏侍从、台谏、两省官、帅守、监司各举实才二三人。
现代文：下诏侍从、台谏、两省官、帅守、监司分别推举有真才实学者二至三人。
English: Under the imperial edict, the attendants, the Taiwu, the two provincial officials, the marshals, and the supervisors separately selected two to three truly talented scholars.

古文：二月丁丑，太白昼见。
现代文：二月初六，太白星白天出现。
English: On the sixth day of the second lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙戌，有司上《嘉定编修吏部条法总类》。
现代文：十五日，有关部门呈上嘉定编修吏部条法总势。
English: On the 15th, the relevant departments submitted to Jiading the general situation of editing and revising the law on cadres and officials.

古文：乙未，诏宗室毋与胥吏通姻，著为令。
现代文：二十四日，下诏宗室不得与青吏结女昏，著为令。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an edict that the imperial family should not marry young officials.

古文：三月癸亥，楼钥罢。
现代文：三月二十二日，楼钥被罢免。
English: On March 22nd, Lou Ke was removed from office.

古文：夏四月丙子，以章良能参知政事。
现代文：夏四月初五，任命章良能为参知政事。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhang Liangxing was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：甲午，复法科试经义法，杂流进纳人不预。
现代文：二十三日，恢复法科考试经义法，杂流进纳人不参加考试。
English: On the 23rd, the law exam was resumed, and the miscellaneous fee-payers did not take the exam.

古文：五月丁卯，以旱，命大理、三衙、临安府决系囚。
现代文：五月二十七日，因早灾，命令大理寺、三衙、临安府审理在押囚犯。
English: On May 27th, due to the early disaster, Dali Temple, Samcheok and Linan Prefecture were ordered to try the prisoners.

古文：戊辰，修庆元六年以来宽恤诏令。
现代文：二十八日，修撰庆元六年以来宽恤诏令。
English: On the 28th, the decree of clemency since the 6th year of Qingyuan was revised.

古文：六月乙亥，诏刑部岁终上诸州未决之狱于尚书省，择其最久者罪之。
现代文：六月初六，下诏刑部年终向尚书省上报各州没有处理的狱案，选择其中拖得最久者治罪。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：丁丑，遣董居谊贺金主生辰，会金国乱，不至而还。
现代文：初八，派遣董居谊祝贺金主生日，恰遇金国内混乱，没有到就回国了。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he sent Dong Juyi to congratulate the birthday of the gold master, just in time for the chaos in the country, and returned to China without arriving.

古文：丁亥，复监司臧否守令及监司、郡守举廉吏所知法。
现代文：十八日，恢复监司考核守令好坏和监司、郡守推举廉吏所知法。
English: On the 18th, the method known to corrupt officials of supervisors' examination and supervision, and supervisors' and county supervisors' election of corrupt officials was resumed.

古文：丙申，诏三衙、江上诸军主帅各举堪将帅者二三人。
现代文：二十七日，下诏三衙、江上各军主帅各推举可以担任将帅者二至三人。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued, and the commanders of each army on the river were allowed to nominate two to three generals.

古文：八月己巳朔，诏诸路监司、帅臣举所部官吏之才行卓绝、绩用章著者。
现代文：八月初一，下诏各路监司、帅臣推举所属官吏中才行卓绝、政绩显著者。
English: On the first day of August, the supervisors of each road and the officials elected by the court nobles should nominate officials who are outstanding and have outstanding political achievements.

古文：庚午，知思州田宗范谋作乱，夔州路安抚司遣兵讨平之。
现代文：初二，知思州田宗范阴谋叛乱，夔州路安抚司派兵讨伐平定。
English: On the second day of the first semester, Chisuzhou Tian Zongfan plotted a rebellion, and the Luzhou Road Pacification Division sent troops to fight and quell it.

古文：是月，金人弑其主允济。
现代文：这个月，金人杀其主允济。
English: This month, Jinren killed his master, Yunzhi.

古文：九月甲辰，蠲京、湖诸州逋负二十八万余缗。
现代文：九月初七，免除京、湖各州拖欠钱物二十八万余络。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Beijing and Huzhou were exempted from more than 280,000 yuan in arrears.

古文：闰月戊辰朔，诏御史台置考课监司簿。
现代文：闰九月初一，下诏御史台设置考课监司簿。
English: On the 1st day of the 9th month of the leap year, the examination supervisor's book of the Imperial History Research Station was issued.

古文：丙戌，以金主新立，命四川谨边备。
现代文：十九日，因金主新登位，命令四川谨慎边防准备。
English: On the 19th, due to the new enthronement of the emperor, he ordered Sichuan to carefully prepare for border defense.

古文：己丑，诏湖北监司、守令振恤旱伤。
现代文：二十二日，下诏湖北监司、守令贩济抚恤早灾地区。
English: On the 22nd, the Hubei Supervisor and the Governor issued an order to raise money for the disaster-stricken areas.

古文：癸巳，雷。
现代文：二十六日，打雷。
English: On the 26th, thunder.

古文：甲午，史弥远等上《三祖下七世仙源类谱》、《高宗宝训》、《皇帝玉牒》、《会要》。乙未，大雷。
现代文：二十七日，史弥远等呈上三祖下七世仙源类谱、滴宗宝切卜、东皇帝玉牌、会要。二十八日，大雷。
English: On the 27th, Shi Miyuan and others presented the genealogy of the three ancestors of the seventh generation of the Xianyuan, the treasure of the Dizong, the East Emperor's jade plate, and the association.

古文：丙申，以雷发非时，下罪己诏。
现代文：二十九日，因打雷不是时候，宁宗下诏罪己。
English: On the 29th, due to the thunderstorm, it was not the right time for Ning Zong to leave.

古文：冬十月丁酉朔，申严互送之禁。
现代文：冬十月初一，申严互送的禁令。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the ban on sending gifts to each other was lifted.

古文：戊申，遣真德秀贺金主即位，会金国乱，不至而还。
现代文：十二日，派遣真德秀祝贺金主即位，时值金国内乱，不至而回。
English: On the 12th, Zhendexiu was dispatched to congratulate the emperor on his enthronement, but he did not return at the time of the Jin civil war.

古文：庚戌，遣李使金贺正旦，亦不至而还。
现代文：十四日，派遣李皇出使金国祝贺新春，也不至而回。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Li sent an envoy to congratulate Jin Guo on the Spring Festival, but he did not return.

古文：甲子，金遣使来告即位。
现代文：二十八日，金国派遣使臣来报告金主即位。
English: On the 28th, Kim sent an envoy to report Kim's accession to the throne.

古文：十一月癸未，虚恨蛮寇嘉定府之中镇砦。
现代文：十一月十七日，虚恨蛮攻打嘉定府中镇寨。
English: On November 17th, the Chinese army attacked the middle town of Jiading.

古文：十二月壬寅，蠲琼州丁盐钱。
现代文：十二月初六，免除琼州丁盐钱。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of December, the Qiongzhou Ding salt money will be exempted.

古文：癸亥，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：是岁，两浙诸州大水，振之。七年春正月丁卯朔，四川制置司遣提举皂郊博马务何九龄率诸将及金人战于秦州城下，败还。
现代文：嘉定七年春正月初一，四川制置司派提举皂郊博马务何九龄率各将领在秦州城下与金军作战，失败而还。十一日，章良能去世。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring of Jiading, the Sichuan Provincial Construction Division sent nine generals of different ages to fight against the Golden Army under the Qinzhou Castle, but they failed. On the 11th day, Zhang Liangneng died.

古文：丁丑，章良能薨。壬午，沔州都统王大才斩何九龄，枭首境上，以其事闻。
现代文：十六日，洒州都统王大才斩杀何九龄，在边境上袅首示众，然后上报朝廷。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the king of Surabaya only killed He Jiuling, showed his dagger to the public on the border, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：三月丁卯，以安丙同知枢密院事，成都府路安抚使董居谊为四川制置使。
现代文：三月初二，任命安丙为同知枢密院事，成都府路安抚使董居谊为四川制置使。
English: On the second day of March, An Hii was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and Chengdu prefectural road pacification envoy Dong Juyi was appointed as Sichuan envoy.

古文：庚辰，金国来督二年岁币。
现代文：十五日，金国来催索二年岁币。
English: On the 15th, Jin Guoqiao came to collect the two-year-old coins.

古文：戊子，金人来止贺正旦使。
现代文：二十三日，金国派人来制止祝贺正旦使。
English: On the 23rd, Kim sent someone to stop the congratulatory visit of Zhengdan envoy.

古文：夏四月癸卯，蠲福建沿海诸州贫民纳盐。
现代文：夏四月初九，免除福建沿海各州贫民纳盐。
English: On the ninth day of the fourth month of the summer, the poor in the coastal states of Fujian were exempted from salt.

古文：五月丁丑，太白经天。
现代文：五月十三日，太白星显现一天。
English: On May 13th, the white star appeared for one day.

古文：乙酉，赐礼部进士袁甫以下五百四人及第、出身。
现代文：二十一日，赐礼部进士袁甫等五百零四人及第、出身。
English: On the twenty-first day, five hundred and four people, including Yuan Fu, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were awarded.

古文：六月辛丑，以旱，命诸路州军祷雨。
现代文：六月初八，因早灾命令各路州军祈祷降雨。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, because of the early disaster, the state armies were ordered to pray for rain.

古文：甲辰，诏诸路监司、守臣速决滞讼。
现代文：十一日，下诏各路监司、守臣迅速处理积滞案件。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the supervisors of each road and the supervisors were ordered to quickly deal with the backlog of cases.

古文：丙午，蠲两浙路诸州赃赏钱。
现代文：十三日，免除两浙路各州赃赏钱。
English: On the 13th, the two Zhejiang provinces were exempted from the reward money.

古文：壬子，释大理、三衙及两浙路杖以下囚。
现代文：十九日，释放大理寺、三衙和两浙路杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 19th, Dali Temple, Sanqi and two Zhejiang Road cane prisoners were released.

古文：丁巳，置嘉定府边丁二千人以备蛮。
现代文：二十四日，设置嘉定府边丁二千人用来防备蛮人。
English: On the 24th, two thousand border guards were set up in Jiading to guard against the barbarians.

古文：秋七月甲子朔，以左谏议大夫郑昭先签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命左谏议大夫郑昭先为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Zheng Zhaoxian, the doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was appointed as the Signatory Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：戊辰，诏省吏毋授参议官。
现代文：初五，下诏省吏不授给参议官。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, provincial officials will no longer be granted to councillors.

古文：乙亥，金人来告迁于南京。
现代文：十二日，金国派来报告迁都南京。
English: On the 12th, Jin Guo sent a report on the relocation of the capital to Nanjing.

古文：庚寅，以起居舍人真德秀奏，罢金国岁币。
现代文：二十七日，采纳起居舍人真德秀上奏意见，停止输给金人岁币。
English: On the 27th, it adopted the suggestion of Zhendexiu, a layman, to stop losing to Jinren.

古文：是月，夏人以书来四川，议夹攻金人，不报。
现代文：同月，夏人送信给四川，商讨夹攻金国，没有得到回答。
English: In the same month, Xia sent a message to Sichuan to discuss attacking Jin, but received no reply.

古文：八月癸巳朔，罢关外四州所增方田税。
现代文：八月初一，废除关外四州所增方田税。
English: On the first day of August, the increased farmland tax in four prefectures outside Kansai was abolished.

古文：乙未，罢四川宣制司所补官。
现代文：初三，废罢四川宣制司所补官。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he was promoted to the post of assistant secretary of the Sichuan Propaganda Department.

古文：癸卯，复建宗学。置博士、谕各一人，弟子员百人。
现代文：十一日，又建置宗学，设置博士、谕各一人，弟子名额定为一百。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a religious school was also established, with a doctor and an oracle each, and the number of disciples was set at one hundred.

古文：金国复来督岁币。
现代文：金国又来督索岁币。
English: Jin Guo came again to ask for the old money.

古文：乙巳，太白经天。
现代文：十三日，太白星出现一天。
English: On the 13th, the white star appeared for one day.

古文：禁州县沮坏义役。
现代文：禁止州县阻挠破坏义役。
English: States and counties are prohibited from obstructing or sabotaging volunteer work.

古文：戊申，诏以安丙为观文殿学士、知潭州。
现代文：十六日，下诏任命安丙为观文殿学士、潭州知州。
English: On the 16th, the following edict appointed An Hii as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and Tanzhou Chizhou.

古文：九月壬戌朔，日有食之，太白昼见。
现代文：九月初一，日食，太白星白天显现。
English: On the first day of September, the solar eclipse, too white stars appear in the daytime.

古文：乙丑，史弥远等上《高宗中兴经武要略》。
现代文：初四，史弥远等呈上《高宗中兴经武要略。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Shi Yiyuan and others presented the "Gao Zong Zhongxing Jingwu Yoryu."

古文：戊寅，调殿前司兵增戍天长县。
现代文：十七日，增调殿前司军队戍守天长县。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the former commander of the Imperial Army was transferred to guard Tencho County.

古文：丙戌，以久雨，释大理、三衙、临安府杖以下囚。
现代文：二十五日，因久雨不晴，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 25th, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the prisoners of Dali Temple, Sanlu and Lin'an were released.

古文：庚寅，释两浙路杖以下囚。
现代文：二十九日，释放两浙路杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 29th, two prisoners below the Zhejiang road cane sentence were released.

古文：除茶盐赏钱。
现代文：废除茶盐赏钱。
English: Abolish the tea and salt reward money.

古文：冬十月壬辰朔，出内帑钱振临安府贫民。
现代文：冬十月初一，出内格钱贩济临安府贫民。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the Neige moneychangers came out to help the poor in Lin'an.

古文：十一月辛酉朔，遣聂子述使金贺正旦，刑部侍郎刘龠等及太学诸生上章言其不可，不报。
现代文：十一月初一，派遣聂子述出使金国祝贺正旦，刑部侍郎刘抓等和太学生上书议论不能如此，没有得到回答。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, dispatched couriers stated that Jin Guo congratulated Zheng Dan, and Liu Fang, the head of the criminal investigation department, and Tai students sent a letter to argue that this should not be the case, but they did not get an answer.

古文：丙戌，命浙东监司发常平米振灾伤州县。
现代文：二十六日，命令浙东监司发常平米贩济灾伤州县。
English: On the 26th, the East Zhejiang Supervision Department was ordered to dispatch rice traders to help disaster-hit Zhouzhou County.

古文：罢四川制置大使司所开盐井。
现代文：废罢四川制置大使司所开盐井。
English: The Abolition of the Sichuan System and the Establishment of an Ambassador's Office in Yanai.

古文：十二月甲午，复罢同安监铸钱。
现代文：十二月初四，又废除同安铸钱监。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the Tong'an Money Supervision Bureau was abolished.

古文：丁巳，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：是岁，黎州蛮畜卜始降。
现代文：这一年，黎州蛮畜卜始降。
English: In the same year, the number of wild animals in Lishu began to decline.

古文：八年春正月辛未，命师禹嗣秀王。
现代文：嘉定八年春正月十一日，命令赵师禹嗣秀王。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the eighth year of the Jiading Spring, he ordered Zhao Shi Yu Shi Xiu Wang.

古文：诏侍从、两省、台谏各举将材三人。
现代文：下诏侍从、两省、台谏官各举荐将才三人。
English: Under the edict, only three people were recommended by attendants, two provinces, and Taiwanese eunuchs.

古文：己卯，遣丁焴贺金主生辰。
现代文：十九日，派遣蜻祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 19th, a congratulatory letter was sent to Kim Jong Un on his birthday.

古文：戊子，申严销金铺翠之禁。
现代文：二十八日，申严以金银装饰物品的禁令。
English: On the 28th, the ban on the use of gold and silver as decorative items was strictly enforced.

古文：二月丙午，雷孝友罢。
现代文：二月十七日，雷孝友被罢免。
English: On February 17th, Lei Xiaoyu was dismissed.

古文：壬子，蠲平江等五郡逋负米，释其系囚。
现代文：二十三日，免除平江等五郡拖欠米，释放在押囚犯。
English: On the 23rd, Pingjiang and other five counties were exempted from rice arrears, and prisoners were released.

古文：己未，雨土。
现代文：三十日，降土。
English: On the 30th, the earth fell.

古文：三月辛酉，诏大郡岁举廉吏二人，小郡一人。
现代文：三月初二，下诏大郡每年举荐廉吏二人，小郡举荐一人。
English: On the second day of the third month of the year, two corrupt officials are recommended each year for large counties and one for small counties.

古文：乙亥，以旱，命诸路州县祷雨。
现代文：十六日，因早灾命令各路州县祈祷降雨。
English: On the 16th, due to the early disaster, all prefectures and counties were ordered to pray for rain.

古文：丙子，蠲临安府茶盐赏钱。
现代文：十七日，免除临安府茶盐赏钱。
English: On the 17th, the Lin'an prefectural tea salt reward money was exempted.

古文：释两浙诸州系囚。
现代文：释放两浙各州在押囚犯。
English: Release all prisoners in custody in the two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：辛巳，应贤良方正能直言极谏科何致坐妄造事端、营惑众听，配广西牢城。
现代文：二十二日，应试贤良方正能直言极谏科何致，因妄造事端、蛊惑众听，流配广州牢城。
English: On the 22nd, the virtuous Fang Zheng was put to the test for his ability to speak candidly about what had happened to him. He was thrown into a Guangzhou jail for creating trouble and misleading the audience.

古文：癸未，安定郡王伯柷薨。
现代文：二十四日，安定郡王赵了的兄去世。
English: On the 24th, Wang Zhao, the brother of Wang Zhao, the Prince of Ding'an County, passed away.

古文：丙戌，释江、淮阙雨州郡杖以下囚。
现代文：二十七日，释放江、淮缺雨州郡杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 27th, Jiang and Huai were released from Yuzhou County.

古文：乙巳，减临安及诸路杂犯死罪以下囚，释杖以下。
现代文：夏四月初六，到太一宫、明庆寺祈祷降雨。十二日，不上正殿，减少饮食。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to Taichung Palace and Mingqing Temple to pray for rain. On the 12th day, he did not go to the main hall and reduced his diet.

古文：五月辛未，雨。
现代文：十三日，向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷降雨。五月十三日，降雨。
English: On the 13th, they prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community for rain. On the 13th of May, it rained.

古文：己卯，命利州路安抚司招刺忠义人。
现代文：二十一日，命令利州路安抚司招刺忠义人。
English: On the 21st, he ordered the Lizhou Road Pacification Division to assassinate the loyalists.

古文：辛巳，御正殿，复膳。
现代文：二十三日，上正殿，恢复饮食。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Shangzheng Palace to resume his diet.

古文：癸未，复命有司祷雨。
现代文：二十五日，又命令有关部门祈祷降雨。
English: On the 25th, he also ordered the relevant departments to pray for rain.

古文：甲申，诏赃吏毋得减年参选，著为令。
现代文：二十六日，下诏赃吏不得减少年限参选，著为令。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: cadres must not reduce their term of service to participate in the election.

古文：乙酉，发米振粜临安府贫民。
现代文：二十七日，发米贩桌，接济临安府贫民。
English: On the 27th, the rice vendor's table was set up to help the poor in Lin'an.

古文：六月丙辰，诏两浙、江、淮路谕民杂种粟麦麻豆，有司毋收其赋，田主毋责其租。
现代文：六月二十八日，下诏两浙、江、淮路告谕百姓杂种粟麦麻豆，有关部门不得收其赋税，田主不得督责其租。
English: On June 28, the following edict was issued from the Zhejiang, Jiangsu and Huai'an roads, telling the people that the relevant departments should not collect taxes from the hybrid millet and barley beans, and the landlords should not supervise their rent.

古文：秋七月辛酉，以郑昭先参知政事，礼部尚书曾从龙签书枢密院事。
现代文：秋七月初四，任命郑昭先为参知政事，礼部尚书曾从龙为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zheng Zhaoxian was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Shang Shu of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：壬戌，诏四川立杨巨源庙，名曰褒忠。
现代文：初五，下诏四川立杨巨源庙，名为褒忠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Yang Jiuyuan Temple, named Baozhong, was built in Sichuan.

古文：戊辰，蠲两淮诸州今年秋税并极边五州明年夏税。
现代文：十一日，免除两淮各州今年秋税和极边五州明年夏税。
English: On the 11th, the two Huai states were exempted from this year's autumn tax and the five extreme states from next year's summer tax.

古文：癸酉，蠲临安、绍兴二府贫民夏税。丙子，发米三十万石振粜江东饥民。
现代文：十九日，发米三十万石贩桌江东饥民。
English: On the 19th, 300,000 stonecutters in Jiangdong distributed rice to the starving people.

古文：庚辰，诏弟搢更名思正，侄均更名贵和。
现代文：二十三日，下诏弟赵措改名为思正，侄赵均改名为贵和。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Zhao's younger brother Zhao Cao changed his name to Sizheng, and his nephew Zhao changed his name to Gui He.

古文：甲申，诏职田蠲放如民田，违者坐之。
现代文：二十七日，下诏职田免除租税如同民田，违者治罪。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that the fields of laborers would be exempt from tax, just like the fields of the common people, and offenders would be punished.

古文：八月己丑，赐张栻谥曰宣。
现代文：八月初二，赐张试溢号为宣。
English: On the second day of August, Zhang Jiayu was given the go-ahead.

古文：庚子，申严宗子训名法。
现代文：十三日，申严宗子训名法。
English: On the 13th, Shen Yan's son-in-law's name-giving ceremony took place.

古文：丁未，权罢旱伤州县比较赏罚。
现代文：二十日，暂时停罢早灾州县比较赏罚。
English: On the 20th, it temporarily suspended the awarding of rewards and punishments in the counties affected by the earthquake.

古文：己酉，禁州县遏籴。
现代文：二十二日，禁止州县遏来。
English: On the 22nd, the state and county governments were prohibited from doing so.

古文：是月，兰州盗程彦晖求内附，四川制置使董居谊却之。
现代文：这个月，兰州盗贼程彦浑要求内附朝廷，四川制置使董居谊拒绝。
English: This month, the Lanzhou thief Cheng Yanhun asked to annex the imperial court, and the Sichuan establishment forced Dong Juyi to refuse.

古文：九月己巳，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：九月十三日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On September 13th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：庚午，朝飨于太庙。
现代文：十四日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 14th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：辛未，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：十五日，在明堂合祭天地，举行大赦。
English: On the 15th, an amnesty was held in Myeongdong.

古文：乙亥，申严两浙围田之禁。
现代文：十九日，申严两浙围田的禁令。
English: On the 19th, the ban on the two Zhejiang enclosing fields was lifted.

古文：甲申，罢四川法科试。
现代文：二十八日，废罢四川法科试。
English: On the 28th, the Sichuan Law Examination was abolished.

古文：冬十月乙未，命六部各类赦书宽恤事，下诸路监司推行。
现代文：冬十月初十，命令六部各自编辑赦书宽恤措施，下发给各路监司推行。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, the six departments were ordered to edit their own amnesty letters for leniency measures and send them to the road supervision departments for implementation.

古文：壬寅，金遣使来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, Kim sent envoys to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：十一月丙辰朔，封伯泽为安定郡王。
现代文：十一月初一，封赵伯泽为安定郡王。
English: On the first day of November, Zhao Boze was crowned the king of Ding'an County.

古文：癸亥，遣施累使金贺正旦。
现代文：初八，派遣施累出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, an envoy from the People's Republic of China was dispatched to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：十二月己丑，诏杨巨源、李好义子孙各进一官。
现代文：十二月初五，诏令杨巨源、李好义子孙各进一官。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Yang Jiuyuan and Li Haoyi's descendants were each appointed to a post.

古文：辛亥，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

古文：是岁，两浙、江东西路旱蝗。
现代文：这一年，两浙、江东西路早灾、蝗灾。
English: This year, the two Zhejiang provinces and the east and west of the Yangtze River were hit by early disasters and locust plagues.

古文：九年春正月乙丑，赐吕祖谦谥曰成。
现代文：嘉定九年春正月十一日，赐吕祖谦溢号成。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of spring in the ninth year of Jiading, Lu Zuqian was given the title.

古文：置马军司水军。
现代文：设置马军司水军。
English: Set up a horse army division and a navy.

古文：乙亥，遣留筠贺金主生辰。丙子，命诸州招填军籍。
现代文：二十一日，派遣留箔祝贺金主生日，二十二日，命令各州招填军籍缺额。
English: On the twenty-first day, he sent a souvenir sheet to congratulate the gold owner on his birthday, and on the twenty-second day, he ordered each state to fill the vacancy of military registration.

古文：辛巳，罢诸路旱蝗州县和籴及四川关外科籴。
现代文：二十七日，废罢各路早蝗灾州县和来和四川关外科来。
English: On the 27th, the early locusts in Zhouzhou County and Sichuan Guan County were eliminated.

古文：二月甲申朔，日有食之。辛亥，东西两川地大震。
现代文：二月初一，日食。二十八日，东西两川发生大地震。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse. On the 28th, a major earthquake occurred in the East and West.

古文：三月乙卯，又震。
现代文：三月初二，又发生地震。
English: On the second day of March, another earthquake occurred.

古文：甲子，又震，马湖夷界山崩八十里，江水不通。
现代文：十一日，又地震，马湖夷界山崩八十里，江水不通。
English: On the 11th day of the month, there was another earthquake. A landslide occurred in the mountainous area of Ma Hui Jie, and the river was blocked.

古文：丁卯，又震。
现代文：十四日，又一次发生地震。
English: On the 14th, another earthquake occurred.

古文：壬申，又震。
现代文：十九日，又发生地震。
English: On the 19th, another earthquake occurred.

古文：丁丑，诏侍从、台谏、两省举堪监司者各二人。
现代文：二十四日，下诏侍从、台谏、两省官举荐可以担任监司者各二人。
English: On the 24th day of the following month, two persons each from the Imperial Household Agency, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and two provincial officials were recommended to serve as supervisors.

古文：夏四月戊戌，秦州人唐进与其徒何进等引众十万来归，四川制置使董居谊拒却之。
现代文：夏四月十五日，秦州人唐进与其徒何进等率众十万来归附，四川制置使董居谊拒绝。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, Tang Jin, a native of Qinzhou, and his disciple He Jin led hundreds of thousands of people to annexation, but the Sichuan government refused.

古文：五月癸酉，太白昼见。
现代文：五月二十一日，太白星白天显现。
English: On May 21, the Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：六月辛卯，西川地震。
现代文：六月初九，西川发生地震。
English: On the 9th of June, an earthquake occurred in Saikawa.

古文：壬辰，又震。
现代文：初十，又一次地震。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, another earthquake.

古文：乙未，又震，黎州山崩。
现代文：十三日，再次地震，黎州山崩。
English: On the 13th, there was another earthquake and landslide in Lizhou.

古文：戊申，振恤浙西被水州县，宽其租税。
现代文：二十六日，贩济抚恤浙西遭受水灾州县灾民，宽免他们的租税。
English: On the 26th, vendors donated to the victims of floods in Shuzhou County in western Zhejiang, and were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：秋七月戊辰，诏边县择才不拘常法，其余并遵三年之制。
现代文：秋七月十六日，下诏边境县择才不拘限常法，其余一律遵照三年之制。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, it was decreed that the selection of talents in border counties would not be restricted by the ordinary law, and the rest would follow the three-year system.

古文：九月甲申，诏两浙、江东监司核州县被水最甚者，蠲其租。
现代文：九月初四，下诏两浙、江东监司核实州县遭水灾最严重者，免除租税。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, the Zhejiang and Jiangdong Supervision Department issued the following decree to verify that those who suffered the most serious floods in the county would be exempt from tax.

古文：冬十月癸亥，西川地震。
现代文：十月十四日，西川地震。
English: October 14th, Nishikawa earthquake.

古文：甲子，又震。
现代文：十五日，又发生地震。
English: On the 15th, another earthquake occurred.

古文：丙寅，金遣使来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, Kim sent envoys to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：十一月庚寅，遣陈伯震使金贺正旦。
现代文：十一月十一日，派遣陈伯震出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On November 11, Chen Bochun sent an envoy to the People's Republic of China to congratulate the New Year.

古文：癸卯，以程彦晖攻围巩州，迫及川界，命利州副都统刘昌祖移驻西和州以备之。
现代文：二十四日，因程彦浑围攻巩州，逼迫川界，命令利州副都统刘昌祖移驻西和州予以防备。
English: On the 24th, because Cheng Yanhun besieged Gongzhou and forced the Sichuan border, he ordered Liu Changzu, the vice-governor of Lishu, to move to West Hezhou to be prepared.

古文：十二月丁巳，再给诸军雪寒钱。
现代文：十二月初九，再次给各军雪寒钱。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, cold snow money was again given to each army.

古文：乙亥，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate the new year.

