古文：起玄默摄提格，尽阏逢执徐正月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起玄默摄提格，尽阏逢执徐正月，凡二年有奇。
English: It's a strange thing to happen every two years.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝下天福七年春，正月，丁巳，镇州牙将自西郭水碾门导官军入城，杀守陴民二万人，执安重荣，斩之。
现代文：后晋高祖天福七年春季，正月，丁巳，镇州牙将从西廓水碾门引导官军入城，杀了守城民众两万人，抓住了安重荣，杀了他。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first month of the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the first

古文：杜重威杀导者，自以为功。
现代文：杜重威杀了引导入城的人，把入城据为自己的功绩。
English: Du Chongwei killed the person who led him into the city, claiming the entry into the city as his own achievement.

古文：庚申，重荣首至鄴都，帝命漆之，函送契丹。
现代文：庚申，安重荣的首级送到邺都，后晋高祖命令涂了漆防腐，装入匣中送往契丹。
English: The heads of Goshun and An Chongrong were sent to the capital city of Handan. Later, Jingu Gaozhu ordered that they be painted with anti-corrosion paint, packed in a box and sent to Qidan.

古文：癸亥，改镇州为恒州，成德军为顺国军。
现代文：癸亥，后晋朝廷更改镇州为恒州，改成德军为顺国军。
English: Later, the Jin court changed Zhenzhou to Hengzhou and the German army to Shunguo army.

古文：丙寅，以门下侍郎、同平章事赵莹为侍中，以杜重威为顺国节度使兼侍中。
现代文：丙寅，任用门下侍郎、同平章事赵莹为侍中，任用杜重威为顺国节度使兼侍中。
English: Cui Yin, appointed his subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji Zhao Ying as an attendant, and appointed Du Chongwei as Shunguo Jiedu envoy and attendant.

古文：安重荣私财及恒州府库，重威尽有之，帝知而不问。
现代文：安重荣的私财及恒州府库的资财，杜重威全部占有了，后晋高祖知道而不过问。
English: An Chongrong's private wealth and the wealth of the Hengzhou government treasury were all owned by Du Chongwei, and the late Jingu Gaozhu knew about it without asking.

古文：又表卫尉少卿范阳王瑜为副使，瑜为之重敛于民，恒人不胜其苦。
现代文：又上表举荐卫尉少卿范阳人王瑜为节度副使，王瑜替杜重威沉重地搜刮百姓，恒州人不堪其苦。
English: In addition, Wang Yu, who was recommended by the Lieutenant of the Guards, Fan Yang, to be the vice-envoy of the State Council, Wang Yu searched the people for Du Chongwei, and the people of Hengzhou were unbearable.

古文：张式父鐸诣阙讼冤。
现代文：张式的父亲张铎到朝廷诉冤，告发张彦泽杀害张式的惨状。
English: Zhang Xi's father, Zhang Hui, went to the imperial court to appeal for justice and denounce Zhang Yanze's killing of Zhang Xi.

古文：壬午，以河阳节度使王周为彰义节度使，代张彦泽。
现代文：壬午，任用河阳节度使王周为彰义节度使，替代了张彦泽。
English: In Renwu, Heyang appointed Wang Zhou as the Zhangyi festival envoy, replacing Zhang Yanzhe.

古文：闽主曦立皇后李氏，同平章事真之女也；嗜酒刚愎，曦宠而惮之。
现代文：闽主王曦立李氏为皇后，李后是同平章事李真的女儿；她嗜好喝酒，刚愎自用，王曦既宠爱她，又惧怕她。
English: The lord Wang Xi made Li the empress, and Li Hou was the daughter of Tongping Zhangji and Li Zhen; she was fond of drinking and had a strong will of her own. Wang Xi both loved and feared her.

古文：彰武节度使丁审琪，养部曲千人，纵之为暴于境内；军校贺行政与诸胡相结为乱，攻延州，帝遣曹州防御使何重建将兵救之，同、鄜援兵继至，乃得免。
现代文：彰武节度使丁审琪，豢养私属部曲千人，放纵他们在辖境内滥施暴行；军中小校贺行政与众胡人相勾结作乱，攻打延州，后晋高祖遣派曹州防御使何重建领兵去救援延州，同州、州的援兵也相继来到，延州才免除了厄难。
English: The festival of praising martial arts promoted Ding Xianqi, raised thousands of private soldiers, and allowed them to commit indiscriminate violence in the territory under their jurisdiction; the army's primary and secondary schools, He Administration, colluded with all the Hu people to make trouble and attacked Yanzhou. Later, Emperor Gaozhu sent Caozhou's defense force, He Reconstruction, to lead the troops to rescue Yanzhou. The reinforcements from the same state and the state also came one after another, and Yanzhou was spared from misfortune.

古文：二月，癸已，以重建为彰武留后，召审琪归朝。
现代文：二月，癸巳，朝廷任命何重建为彰武留后，召唤丁审琪还朝。
English: In February, the imperial court summoned Ding Xianqi to return to the court after appointing He Jianren as Zhang Wu Rui.

古文：重建，云、朔间胡人也。
现代文：何重建是云州和朔州之间的胡人。
English: What rebuilt is the Hu people between Yunnan and Shuozhou.

古文：唐左丞相宋齐丘固求豫政事，唐主听入中书；又求领尚书省，乃罢侍中寿王景遂判尚书省，更领中书、门下省，以齐丘知尚书省事；其三省事并取齐王璟参决。
现代文：南唐左丞相宋齐丘坚决要求参预政事的署理，南唐主李听任他进入中书省；宋齐丘又要求领管尚书省，南唐主便罢免了侍中寿王李景遂的判理尚书省，改为领管中书、门下省，任用宋齐丘主持尚书省事务；这三个省的事务都要取得齐王李的参与决策。
English: Song Qiqiu, the Southern Tang's Minister of the Left, insisted that he should be the one to participate in the pre-election political affairs, and the Southern Tang's Lord Li allowed him to enter the Central Song Province; Song Qiqiu also demanded to be in charge of the Shang Song Province, and the Southern Tang's Lord dismissed the judge of the Shang Song Province, Li Jingsui, to be in charge of the Central Song Province and the subordinate provinces, and appointed Song Qiqiu to preside over the affairs of the Shang Song Province; the affairs of these three provinces must obtain the participation of King Qi Li in decision-making.

古文：齐丘视事数月，亲吏夏昌图盗官钱三千缗，齐丘判贷其死；唐主大怒，斩昌图。
现代文：宋齐丘视事几个月后，自己的亲信官吏夏昌图盗取官钱三千缗，宋齐丘判处他可以免死；南唐主李大怒，斩了夏昌图。
English: According to Song Qiqiu, a few months after the incident, his close confidant, the official Xia Changtu, stole 3,000 yuan of official money. Song Qiqiu sentenced him to be spared from death; the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty, Li Da Rong, beheaded Xia Changtu.

古文：齐丘称疾，请罢省事，从之。
现代文：宋齐丘便称说自己有病，请求罢免尚书省的事务，南唐主答应了他的请求。
English: Song Qiqiu then said that he was ill and requested to be removed from the affairs of Shangshu Province. The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty agreed to his request.

古文：泾州奏遣押牙陈延晖持敕书诣凉州，州中将吏请延晖为节度使。
现代文：泾州奏报：朝廷遣派押牙陈延晖带着后晋高祖敕书到凉州去，州中将吏请求任用陈延晖为凉州节度使。
English: Bozhou Report: The imperial court sent Chen Yanyuan, an aide-de-camp, to Liangzhou with a letter from the founder of the Later Jin Gao, and the vice-admiral of the state requested that Chen Yanyuan be appointed as the festival envoy of Liangzhou.

古文：三月，闽主曦立长乐王亚澄为闽王。
现代文：三月，闽主王曦立长乐王王亚澄为闽王。
English: In March, the god of music, Wang Xi, established the god of music, Wang Yacheng, as the god of music.

古文：张彦泽在泾州，擅发兵击诸胡，兵皆败没，调民马千馀匹以补之。
现代文：张彦泽在泾州镇所时，擅自发兵袭击西北诸胡，兵众都打败失散了，又调集民间马千余匹来补充。
English: When Zhang Yanze was at the town hall of Zhangzhou, he sent troops to attack northwest Zhuhu without authorization. The soldiers were defeated and dispersed, and more than a thousand folk horses were mobilized to supplement them.

古文：还至陕，获亡将杨洪，乘醉断其手足而斩之。
现代文：回军到陕州后，抓获了逃走的将领杨洪，在酒醉中令人砍断他的手足，进而杀了。
English: After returning to Shaanxi, he captured the fleeing general Yang Hongjun and, while drunk, had him killed by cutting off his hands and feet.

古文：王周奏彦泽在镇贪残不法二十六条，民散亡者五千馀户。
现代文：王周代任彰义节度使以后，奏陈张彦泽在镇时贪暴残忍不法之事二十六条，民众失散逃亡的五千余户。
English: After Wang Zhou was appointed as the delegate of the Zhangyi Festival, Chen Zhangyanzhe reported 26 cases of corruption, cruelty and illegality in the town, and more than 5,000 households were dispersed and fled.

古文：彦泽既至，帝以其有军功，又与杨光远连姻，释不问。
现代文：张彦泽还朝，后晋高祖因为他有军功，又同杨光远连了姻亲，便没有究问。
English: Zhang Yanze was also in the morning, after the promotion of Gao Zu, because he had military merit, and he was distantly related to Yang Guang, he did not inquire.

古文：夏，四月，己未，右谏议大夫郑受益上言： 杨洪所以被屠，由陛下去岁送张式与彦泽，使之逞志，致彦泽敢肆凶残，无所忌惮。
现代文：夏季，四月，己未，右谏议大夫郑受益上书奏言： 杨洪之所以被屠戮，是由于陛下去年送交张式给张彦泽，使他得志逞凶，以致张彦泽敢于任意施行凶虐残暴，没有任何忌惮。
English: In the summer, in April, the Right Rev. Dr. Zheng Guobin wrote a speech: The reason why Yang Hong was slaughtered was because His Majesty sent Zhang Xi to Zhang Yanze last year, which made him determined to carry out the atrocity, so that Zhang Yanze dared to arbitrarily carry out the atrocity, without any fear.

古文：见闻之人无不切齿，而陛下曾不动心，一无诘让；淑慝莫辨，赏罚无章。
现代文：看见或者听说他的暴行之人，没有不切齿愤慨的，而陛下却一点也不动心，不做任何查究和责备；端正与阴邪不能分辩，奖励与惩罚没有章法。
English: No one who saw or heard of his outrages could fail to be outraged, but His Majesty was not at all moved, and did not make any investigation or reproach; there was no distinction between right and wrong, and there was no rule for reward and punishment.

古文：中外皆言陛下受彦泽所献马百匹，听其如是，臣窃为陛下惜此恶名，乞正彦泽罪法，以湔洗圣德。 
现代文：内外之人都说陛下接受张彦泽所献的马一百匹，才听任他这样做，我很替陛下惋惜承受这种恶劣的名声，请求陛下明正张彦泽的罪名依法惩办，用以洗刷天子的圣德。 
English: People at home and abroad say that His Majesty accepted a hundred horses donated by Zhang Yanze before allowing him to do so. I am very sorry for His Majesty to bear such a bad reputation, and I ask His Majesty to punish Zhang Yanze's crime according to the law, and to use it to cleanse the holiness of the heavenly son.

古文：疏奏，留中。
现代文：奏书上报以后，被扣押在朝廷之内。
English: After the report was reported, he was detained at the Imperial Court.

古文：受益，从谠之兄子也。
现代文：郑受益是郑从谠哥哥的儿子。
English: Zheng Conglu is the son of Zheng Conglu's elder brother.

古文：庚申，刑部郎中李涛等伏阁极论彦泽之罪，语甚切至。
现代文：庚申，刑部郎中李涛等匍匐在阁门之下极力论说张彦泽的罪行，语言十分恳切透彻。
English: Gao Shen, the vice-minister of the Department of Justice, Li Tao, and others argued about Zhang Yanzhe's crimes under the pavilion door, and the language was very earnest and thorough.

古文：辛酉，敕： 张彦泽削一阶，降爵一级。
现代文：辛酉，后晋高祖敕令： 削去张彦泽官秩一阶，降低封爵一级。
English: Xin Xi, after the promotion to the highest rank, the order of the ancestors: the first rank of Zhang Yan Ze's official rank was cut off, and the knighthood was reduced by one level.

古文：张式父及子弟皆拜官。
现代文：张式的父亲和他的子弟都拜受官职。
English: Zhang's father and his younger brother both held government posts.

古文：泾州民复业者，减其徭赋。 
现代文：泾州民众复营旧业的，减少他们的徭役、税赋。 
English: The people of Zhangzhou will resume their old businesses, reduce their taxes and duties.

古文：癸亥，李涛复与两省及御史台官伏阁奏彦泽罚太轻，请论如法。
现代文：癸亥，李涛又与中书、门下两省及御史台的官员伏阁上言，奏称对张彦泽的罪过惩罚太轻，请求依法论处。
English: Zou Hai, Li Tao and the officials of the People's Republic of China, the two provinces under their control and the Imperial Historian's Office made a public appeal, saying that the punishment for Zhang Yanzhe's crime was too light and requesting that it be dealt with according to the law.

古文：帝召涛面谕之。
现代文：后晋高祖召唤李涛入殿当面向他谕释。
English: After the enthronement, Emperor Gaozong summoned Li Tao to the hall of fame and gave him a face-to-face explanation.

古文：涛端笏前迫殿陛，论辨声色俱厉。
现代文：李涛双手捧着朝笏迫近殿阶，声色俱厉。
English: Li Tao approaches the steps of the palace with the morning meal in his hands, his voice rising sharply.

古文：帝怒，连叱之，涛不退。
现代文：后晋帝发怒，连声喝叱他，李涛也不退让。
English: Later, Emperor Jin became angry and even scolded him, but Li Tao did not give in.

古文：帝曰： 朕已许彦泽不死。 
现代文：后晋高祖说： 朕已经答应过张彦泽有罪可以免死。 
English: After the promotion, Gaozu said, "I have already promised Zhang Yanze that if he is found guilty, he will be spared death.

古文：涛曰： 陛下许彦泽不死，不可负；不知范延光铁券安在！ 
现代文：李涛说： 陛下答应过张彦泽可以不死，固然不能不算数，不知当年赐给范延光的铁券现在哪里！ 
English: Li Tao said, "Your Majesty promised Zhang Yanzhe that he could live forever. Of course, it can't be counted, I don't know where the iron certificate given to Fan Yanguang that year is now!"

古文：帝拂衣起，入禁中。
现代文：后晋高祖不高兴地拂衣而起，回到宫内，没有理他。
English: After the promotion, Gaozu brushed off his clothes in displeasure and returned to the palace, ignoring him.

古文：丙寅，以彦泽为左龙武大将军。
现代文：丙寅，任命张彦泽为左龙武大将军。
English: Cui Yin, appointed Zhang Yanze as General Zalongwu.

古文：汉高祖寝疾，以其子秦王弘度、晋王弘熙皆骄恣，少子越王弘昌孝谨有智识，与右仆射兼西御院使王翷谋出弘度镇邕州，弘熙镇容州，而立弘昌。
现代文：南汉高祖刘患病不起，因为他的儿子秦王刘弘度、晋王刘弘熙都骄横任性，少子越王刘弘昌孝顺谨慎，有智慧见识，与右仆射兼西御院使王谋划派出刘弘度镇戍邕州，刘弘熙镇戍容州，而立刘弘昌为太子。
English: Liu, the founder of the Southern Han Dynasty, could not bear the illness, because his sons, Qin King Liu Hongdu and Jin King Liu Hongxi, were both arrogant and headstrong. His younger son, Yue King Liu Hongchang, was prudent and prudent, and had wisdom and insight. He and his right-hand man, Xiyuan, sent Liu Hongdu to Bozhou and Liu Hongxi to Yongzhou, and made Liu Hongchang the crown prince.

古文：制命将行，会崇文使萧益入问疾，以其事访之。
现代文：制命将要下达施行，正好遇上崇文使萧益进宫问候疾病，便向他咨询这件事。
English: When the edict was about to be issued and implemented, it just so happened that Chongwen sent Xiao Yi into the palace to greet the illness, so he consulted him about this matter.

古文：益曰： 立嫡以长，违之必乱。 
现代文：萧益说： 立太子应该是长子，违背了这一条必然要导致混乱。 
English: Xiao Yi said: The crown prince should be the eldest son. Violation of this rule will inevitably lead to confusion.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是便停止下来。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：丁丑，高祖殂。
现代文：丁丑，南汉高祖刘去世。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the founder of the Southern Han Dynasty, passed away.

古文：高祖为人辨察，多权数，好自矜大，常谓中国天子为 洛州刺史 。
现代文：南汉高祖为人能分辨观察是非，有心计多权术，喜欢自己夸大，曾经讥讽中原朝廷的天子是 洛州刺史 。
English: The founder of the Southern Han Dynasty, Gao Zu, was a person who could distinguish between right and wrong, had a multi-power strategy, and liked to exaggerate himself. He used to ridicule the Central Plains Imperial Court as the son of heaven.

古文：岭南珍异所聚，每穷奢极丽，宫殿悉以金玉珠翠为饰。
现代文：岭南地区是珍宝异物所聚集之处，他往往极尽奢侈华丽的追求，宫殿全部用黄金、美玉、珍珠、翠作装饰。
English: Lingnan region is a place where foreign treasures are gathered. He often pursued luxury and splendor to the utmost, and his palaces were all decorated with gold, precious stones, pearls, and jade.

古文：用刑惨酷，有灌鼻、割舌、支解、刳剔、砲炙、烹蒸之法；或聚毒蛇水中，以罪人投之，谓之水狱。
现代文：使用的刑罚惨烈严酷，有灌鼻、割舌、肢解、刳剔、炮炙、烹蒸等办法；或者把毒蛇聚养在水中，把犯了罪的人投进去，称为 水狱 。
English: The punishments used are cruel and severe, including nose-piercing, tongue-cutting, dismemberment, flogging, cannon fire, steaming, etc.; or collecting poisonous snakes in water and throwing those who have committed crimes into it, which is called water hell.

古文：同平章事杨洞潜谏，不听。
现代文：同平章事杨洞潜劝阻他，高祖不听。
English: Tongping Zhang told Yang Dongqian to dissuade him, but Gao Zu did not listen.

古文：末年尤猜忌；以士人多为子孙计，故专任宦者，由是其国中宦者大盛。
现代文：到了末年他更加猜忌；以为士人往往替子孙着想，所以专任宦官，因此南汉国中宦官大为兴盛。
English: Towards the end of his life, he became even more suspicious; he thought that nobles often wanted to provide for their children and grandchildren, so they became full-time eunuchs. As a result, eunuchs flourished in Southern Han.

古文：秦王弘度即皇帝位，更名玢。以弘熙辅政，改元光天；尊母赵昭仪曰皇太妃。
现代文：秦王刘弘度即南汉皇帝位，改名刘玢；任用刘弘熙辅政，改年号为光天；尊奉其母赵昭仪为皇太妃。
English: Qin King Liu Hongdu, the emperor of the Southern Han Dynasty, changed his name to Liu Xi; appointed Liu Hongxi as a vice-president, and changed his era name to Guang Tian; honored his mother Zhao Zhaoyi as the Empress Dowager.

古文：契丹以晋招纳吐谷浑，遣使来让。
现代文：契丹因为晋朝招纳吐谷浑，遣派使者来责问。
English: Khitan dispatched an envoy to reprimand the Jin dynasty for recruiting Tugukhun.

古文：帝忧悒不知为计；五月，己亥，始有疾。
现代文：后晋高祖忧郁不知怎么办为好；五月，己亥，开始生病。
English: After being promoted to high school, Zu was depressed and didn't know what to do; in May, Ji Hai, began to fall ill.

古文：乙巳，尊太妃刘氏为皇太后。
现代文：乙巳，后晋高祖专奉太妃刘氏为皇太后。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gaozong made Princess Liu the empress dowager.

古文：太后，帝之庶母也。
现代文：太后是后晋帝父亲的妾，也就是后晋帝的生母。
English: The empress dowager was the concubine of Emperor Go-Jin's father, that is, Emperor Go-Jin's biological mother.

古文：唐丞相、太保宋齐丘既罢尚书省，不复朝谒。
现代文：南唐丞相、太保宋齐丘被罢免尚书省的官职以后，就不再上朝谒见。
English: After Song Qiqiu, the Minister of Southern Tang Dynasty and the Imperial Protector, was dismissed from his post at the Ministry of Education, he no longer went to the Imperial Court.

古文：唐主遣寿王景遂劳问，许镇洪州，始入朝。
现代文：南唐主李派寿王李景遂去慰劳问候他，答应他去镇戍洪州，这才开始入朝。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, sent the Shou Wang, Li Jing, to console and greet him, and promised him to go to the town of Shihongzhou. This was the beginning of his accession to the imperial court.

古文：唐主与之宴，酒酣，齐丘曰： 陛下中兴，臣之力也，奈何忘之！ 
现代文：南唐主李与宋齐丘宴会，酒喝的正痛快时，宋齐丘说： 陛下完成中兴大业，是我的力量啊，为什么把我忘了！ 
English: When the Southern Tang Dynasty Lord Li and Song Qiqiu were having a banquet and the wine was flowing, Song Qiqiu said: Your Majesty, it is my strength to complete the great cause of ZTE, why did you forget me!

古文：唐主怒曰： 公以游客干朕，今为三公，亦足矣。
现代文：南唐主发怒说： 阁下以游说谋士的身份作朕的客人，现在位至三公，也可以满足了。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said angrily, "Your excellency, who has been my guest as a lobbyist and adviser, can now be satisfied with your position as the Third Prince.

古文：乃与人言朕乌喙如句践，难与共安乐，有之乎？ 
现代文：可是你却跟人家说朕长的是鸟嘴像战国时的越王勾践一样，难于同朕共享安乐，有这样的话吗？ 
English: However, you have told people that I have a beak like King Yue at the time of the Warring States, and it is difficult to share happiness with me. Is there such a thing?

古文：齐丘曰： 臣实有此言。
现代文：宋齐丘说： 臣确实说过这个话。
English: Song Qiqiu said: The minister did indeed say this.

古文：臣为游客时，陛下乃偏裨耳。
现代文：臣当游说之客时，陛下不过是个偏将副官而已。
English: When a vassal is a lobbyist's guest, His Majesty is only an aide-de-camp.

古文：今日杀臣可矣。 
现代文：今天陛下可以把臣杀了哇！ 
English: Today, His Majesty can kill a vassal Wow!

古文：明日，唐主手诏谢之曰： 朕之褊性，子嵩平昔所知。
现代文：第二天，南唐主下手诏向他谢过说： 朕的性情褊颇，子嵩你素来是知道的。
English: The next day, the Lord of Southern Tang issued an edict thanking him, saying, "My disposition is good, as you know.

古文：少相亲，老相怨，可乎！ 
现代文：我们从小相亲相爱，老来却相怨，这样好吗？ 
English: We've loved each other since we were children, but we've always had a grudge against each other. Is that okay?

古文：丙午，以齐丘为镇南节度使。
现代文：丙午，南唐任命宋齐丘为镇南节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Song Qiqiu as the envoy of the Southern Zhen Festival.

古文：帝寝疾，一旦，冯道独对。
现代文：后晋高祖患病不起，一天早上，召来冯道独自对话。
English: After he was promoted to high priest, he fell ill and could not afford it. One morning, he summoned Feng Tao to have a one-on-one dialogue.

古文：帝命幼子重睿出拜之，又令宦者抱重睿置道怀中，其意盖欲道辅立之。
现代文：后晋高祖叫幼子石重睿出来拜见冯道，又命令宦官抱着石重睿放到冯道怀中，意思是要冯道辅立他为幼主。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong called his young son, Shi Chongrui, to come out to meet Feng Dao, and ordered the eunuch to hold Shi Chongrui and put him in Feng Dao's arms, meaning that Feng Dao should support him as the young master.

古文：六月，乙丑，帝殂。
现代文：六月，乙丑，后晋高祖石敬瑭去世。
English: In June, the second ugly, later promoted to high school, Zushi Jingyao passed away.

古文：道与天平节度使、侍卫马步都虞候景延广议，以国家多难，宜立长君，乃奉广晋尹齐王重贵为嗣。
现代文：冯道与天平节度使、侍卫马步都虞候景延广谋议，认为国家正处在困难多的时刻，应该立长子为嗣君，便拥立广晋尹齐王石重贵为继承人。
English: Feng Dao and Tianping Jiedu envoy, attendant guard Ma Bu, the capital of Jingyuan and Guanggu deliberated, believing that the country was in a difficult time, should set up the eldest son as the heir, and then set up Guangjin Yin Qi Wang Shiguang as the heir.

古文：是日，齐王即皇帝位。
现代文：这一天，齐王即皇帝位。
English: On this day, King Qi became emperor.

古文：延广以为己功，始用事，禁都下人毋得偶语。
现代文：景延广以为这是自己的功劳，开始弄权用事，禁止国都中的人相聚议论是非。
English: Jing Yanguang thought that this was his own merit and began to abuse his power, forbidding people in the capital to gather to discuss the rights and wrongs.

古文：初，高祖疾亟，有旨召河东度使刘知远入辅政，齐王寝之；知远由是怨齐王。
现代文：起初，后晋高祖石敬瑭病重时，有旨召唤河东节度使刘知远入朝辅政，齐王石重贵把旨压下不发，刘知远从此与齐王结下怨恨。
English: At first, when the late Jingu Gao's ancestor Shi Jingyao was seriously ill, he had the intention of summoning the Hedong Festival to make Liu Zhiyuan enter the imperial auxiliary government, but Qi Wangshi respected the intention and did not send it, and Liu Zhiyuan had a grudge with Qi Wang from then on.

古文：丁卯，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：丁卯，后晋出帝石重贵尊皇太后刘氏为太皇太后，皇后李氏为皇太后。
English: After Emperor Dingwu's abdication, Empress Dowager Liu was promoted to Grand Empress Dowager and Empress Dowager Li was promoted to Empress Dowager.

古文：闽富沙王延政围汀州，闽主曦发漳、泉兵五千救之。
现代文：闽国富沙王王延政围攻汀州，闽主王曦调发漳州、泉州兵五千人去救援。
English: Wang Yanzheng, the king of Fusha, besieged Tingzhou. Wang Xi, the king of Fusha, sent five thousand soldiers from Bozhou and Quanzhou to rescue the besieged city.

古文：又遣其将林守亮入尤溪，大明宫使黄敬忠屯尤口，欲乘虚袭建州；国计使黄绍颇将步卒八千为二军声援。
现代文：又遣派他的将领林守亮进入尤溪，派大明宫使黄敬忠屯驻尤口，准备乘着对方空虚时袭击建州；国计使黄绍颇领步兵八千人做林、黄二军的声援。
English: He also sent his general Lin Shouliang into Youxi, and sent Daming Palace to make Huang Jingzhong stay in Youkou to prepare to attack Jianzhou when the other side was empty; the state planned to make Huang Shoupo lead eight thousand infantrymen to support Lin and Huang's second army.

古文：秋，七月，壬辰，太皇太后刘氏殂。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬辰，后晋太皇太后刘氏去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the Empress Dowager Liu of the Later Jin Dynasty died in Imjin.

古文：闽富沙王延政攻汀州，四十二战，不克而归。
现代文：闽国富沙王王延政攻打汀州，经过四十二次战斗，攻不下来就回去了。
English: King Yan Zheng of Fusha attacked Tingzhou. After forty-two battles, he could not conquer it and went back.

古文：其将包洪实、陈望，将水军以御福州之师；丁酉，遇于尤口。
现代文：他的属将包洪实、陈望带领水军抵御福州的军队；丁酉，双方军队在尤口相遇。
English: His relatives Bao Hongsheng and Chen Wang led the navy to resist the army of Fuzhou; Ding Jun, the two armies met in Yucou.

古文：黄敬忠将战，占者言时刻未利，按兵不动；洪实等引兵登岸，水陆夹攻之，杀敬忠，俘斩二千级，林守亮、黄绍颇皆遁归。
现代文：尤口守将黄敬忠将要出城，占卜的人说时刻未到出战不利，便按兵不动；包洪实等引兵登岸，水陆两军夹攻他，杀了黄敬忠，俘虏和斩杀了二千人，林守亮和黄绍颇都逃回去。
English: The eulogist said that Huang Jingzhong was about to leave the city, and the soothsayer said that the time was not favorable for going to war, so he did not move his troops; Bao Hongsih and others brought troops ashore, and the two armies attacked him, killed Huang Jingzhong, captured and killed two thousand people, and Lin Shouliang and Huang Shaopu both fled back.

古文：庚子，大赦。
现代文：庚子，后晋朝廷实行大赦。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：癸卯，加景延广同平章事，兼侍卫马步都指挥使。
现代文：癸卯，加封景延广为同平章事，兼侍卫马步都指挥使。
English: At the same time, Jing Yanguang was awarded the title of Tongping, and he also served as an attendant and commander.

古文：勋旧皆欲复置枢密使，冯道等三表，请以枢密旧职让之；帝不许。
现代文：后晋朝廷的功勋旧臣都要求恢复设置枢密使，冯道等人三次上奏，请求把已经并归中书省的枢密旧职让还回去，出帝石重贵没有答应他们的请求。
English: The meritorious old courtiers of the Later Jin Dynasty demanded the restoration of the post of Privy Envoy, and Feng Dao and others appealed three times, requesting the return of the old post of Privy Envoy, which had already been transferred to the Central Book Ministry. However, Emperor Xuanzong did not agree to their request.

古文：有神降于博罗县民家，与人言而不见其形，闾阎人往占吉凶，多验，县吏张遇贤事之甚谨。
现代文：有个神降临在博罗县民家中，和人说话而看不见他的形貌，邻里间的人去找他占卜吉凶事情，往往应验，县吏张遇贤事奉他极为恭谨。
English: There is a god who descends on the homes of the people of Borough County. He talks to people without being able to see their faces. People in the neighborhood go to him for fortune-telling, which often comes true. The county official Zhang Yuxian serves him with great respect.

古文：时循州盗贼群起，莫相统一，贼帅共祷于神，神大言曰： 张遇贤当为汝主。 
现代文：当时，岭南循州一带盗贼群起，相互间不能统一，乱贼的首领共同向神祷告，那个神大声说： 张遇贤应当做你们的君主。 
English: At that time, a group of thieves arose in the area of Xuzhou in Lingnan Province, and they could not unite with each other. The leaders of the bandits prayed to God together. The god said in a loud voice: Zhang Youxian should be your monarch.

古文：于是群帅共奉遇贤，称中天八国王，改元永乐，置百官，攻掠海隅。
现代文：于是，众贼共同拥戴张遇贤，称为中天八国王，改年号为永乐，设置百官，攻取掠抢海边沿岸一带。
English: As a result, all the thieves jointly supported Zhang Youxian, known as the eighth king of the Middle Kingdom, changed the year name to Yongle, set up hundreds of officials, and captured and plundered the coastal areas along the coast.

古文：遇贤年少，无他方略，诸将但告进退而已。
现代文：张遇贤年纪尚轻，没有什么方略，所属诸将只是向他报告出去、回来罢了。
English: Zhang Yuxian is still young, there is no strategy, the subordinate generals just report to him and come back.

古文：汉主以越王弘昌为都统，循王弘杲为副以讨之，战于钱帛馆。
现代文：南汉国主刘玢任命越王刘弘昌为都统，循王刘弘杲为副都统去讨伐张遇贤，在钱帛馆交战。
English: The ruler of Southern Han, Liu Bei, appointed the king of Yue, Liu Hongchang, as the leader of the Southern Han, and the king of Yue, Liu Hongyi, as the vice-leader of the Southern Han, to fight against Zhang Youxian, and they fought at Qianyuan.

古文：汉兵不利，二王皆为贼所围；指挥使陈道痒等力战救之，得免。
现代文：南汉兵作战失利，二王都被贼兵所围困；指挥使陈道庠等力战去解救他们，才得免死。
English: The South Han soldiers lost the battle, and the two kings were besieged by the robber soldiers; the commander ordered Chen Daojun to fight to save them, and they were spared death.

古文：东方州县多为遇贤所陷。
现代文：南汉境内靠东边的州县多被张遇贤所攻陷。
English: Most of the eastern states and counties in Southern Han were conquered by Zhang Yu Xian.

古文：道庠，端州人也。
现代文：陈道庠是端州人。
English: Chen Daojun is from Danzhou.

古文：高行周围襄州逾年，不下。
现代文：高行周围攻襄州一年多，没能攻下。
English: Gao Xing surrounded Xiangzhou for more than a year, but failed to capture it.

古文：城中食尽，奉国军都虞候曲周王清言于行周曰： 贼城已危，我师已老，民力已困，不早迫之，尚何俟乎！ 
现代文：城中的粮食都吃用完了。奉国军都虞候曲周人王清向高行周进言说： 贼城已经危窘，我们的兵众已经疲惫，民力已经困乏，不早点逼迫他，还等待什么呢！ 
English: The food in the city was all used up. Wang Qing, who commanded the national army, said to Gao Xing, "The thief city is already in a critical situation, our soldiers are exhausted, and the people's strength is exhausted. If we don't persecute him sooner, what are we waiting for?

古文：与奉国都指挥使元城刘词帅众先登。
现代文：便与奉国都指挥使元城人刘词率领兵众带头登城。
English: Then, with the command of Fengguodu, Liu Zhi, a former citizen of the city, led the soldiers to take the lead in climbing the city.

古文：八月，拔之。
现代文：八月，攻破城池。
English: In August, the castle was breached.

古文：安从进举族自焚。
现代文：安从进全族自焚。
English: An Congjin's entire family self-immolated.

古文：甲子，以赵莹为中书令。
现代文：甲子，后晋朝廷任用赵莹为中书令。
English: Later, the Jin Dynasty court appointed Zhao Ying as the Chinese scribe.

古文：闽主曦遣使以手诏及金器九百、钱万缗、将吏敕告六百四十通，求和于富沙王延政，延政不受。
现代文：闽主王曦派使者用手诏及金器九百、钱万缗、将吏敕告六百四十通，向富沙王王延政求和，王延政不接受。
English: The warlord Wang Xi sent an envoy with a handshake and nine hundred pieces of gold, ten thousand talents of money, and six hundred and forty pieces of money to the magistrate to sue for peace from the king of Fusha, Wang Yan Zheng. Wang Yan Zheng did not accept.

古文：丙寅，闽主曦宴群臣于九龙殿。
现代文：丙寅，闽主王曦在九龙殿大宴群臣。
English: Cui Yin and his master Wang Xi are holding a grand banquet for their retainers at the Kowloon Palace.

古文：从子继柔不能饮，强之。
现代文：他的侄子王继柔不能饮酒，强迫他喝。
English: His nephew Wang Jirong could not drink alcohol and forced him to drink.

古文：继柔私减其酒，曦怒，并客将斩之。
现代文：王继柔暗中把酒减少，王曦发怒，连同客将一起杀了。
English: Wang Jirong secretly reduced the wine, Wang Xi was angry and killed the guest together with him.

古文：闽人铸永隆通宝大铁钱，一当铅钱百。
现代文：闽国铸 永隆通宝 大铁钱，一枚当铅钱百枚。
English: Yonglong Tongbao is a large iron coin minted in Shandong Province. One piece is worth a hundred pieces of lead.

古文：汉葬天皇大帝于康陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：南汉在康陵安葬天皇大帝刘，庙号高祖。
English: Emperor Liu of the Southern Han Dynasty, known as Gao Zu, was buried in Kangling.

古文：唐主自为吴相，兴利除害，变更旧法甚多。
现代文：南唐主李自从当吴国宰相以来，兴利除害，把旧的法规变更了很多。
English: Since he became the prime minister of the State of Wu, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li Xingli, has eliminated the harm and changed the old laws and regulations a lot.

古文：及即位，命法官及尚书删定为《升元条》三十卷；庚寅，行之。
现代文：及至他自己即位当皇帝，命令执法官及尚书省删定为《升元条》三十卷；庚寅，颁布施行。
English: When he ascended to the throne as emperor, he ordered the magistrate and the Ministry of Education and Culture to delete 30 volumes of the "Emperor's Articles of Accession," and Geng Yin promulgated and implemented them.

古文：闽主曦以同平章事候官余廷英为泉州刺史。
现代文：闽主王曦任用同平章事侯官人余廷英为泉州刺史。
English: The warlord Wang Xi appointed the court official Yu Tingying as Quanzhou's chief historian.

古文：廷英贪秽，掠人女子，诈称受诏采择以备后宫。
现代文：余廷英贪脏污浊，掠夺别人家的妇女，欺骗说是受了朝廷的诏命选取来供给皇家后宫使用的。
English: Yu Tingying, a woman who was corrupt and plundered other people's homes, lied and said that she was selected by the imperial command to supply the royal harem.

古文：事觉，曦遣御史按之。
现代文：事情被察觉后，王曦派遣御史去查究。
English: After the matter was discovered, Wang Xi sent Gu Shi to investigate.

古文：廷英惧，诣福州自归，曦诘责，将以属吏；廷英退，献买宴钱万缗。
现代文：余廷英害怕，到福州来自首，王曦责问他，将要交有关部门惩办；余廷英退出来后，贡献买宴钱万缗。
English: Afraid of Yu Tingying, he went to Fuzhou to turn himself in. Wang Xi scolded him, saying that he would be punished by the relevant departments. After Yu Tingying withdrew, he contributed a huge amount of money to buy a banquet.

古文：曦悦，明日召见，谓曰： 宴已买矣，皇后贡物安在？ 
现代文：王曦高兴，第二天就召见他，对他说： 宴已经买了，献给皇后的贡物在哪里啊？ 
English: Wang Xi was delighted and summoned him the next day and said to him: The banquet has been bought, where is the tribute to the empress?

古文：廷英复献钱于李后，乃遣归泉州；自是诸州皆别贡皇后物。
现代文：余廷英又献钱给李皇后，便仍把他派回泉州了；从此各州都另备贡礼送给皇后。
English: Yu Tingying also donated money to Empress Li, and still sent him back to Quanzhou; since then, each state has prepared another tribute to the queen.

古文：未几，复召廷英为相。
现代文：没过多久，又召命余廷英任为宰相。
English: Soon after, Yu Ting-ying was also appointed prime minister.

古文：冬，十月，丙子，张遇贤陷循州，杀汉刺史刘传。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙子，张遇贤攻陷循州，杀南汉刺史刘传。
English: In the winter, in October, Cun Zi, Zhang Youxian attacked and trapped Xuzhou, and killed Liu Chuan, the leader of the Southern Han Dynasty.

古文：楚王希范作天策府，极栋宇之盛；户牖栏槛皆饰以金玉，涂壁用丹砂数十万斤；地衣，春夏用角簟，秋冬用木绵。
现代文：楚王马希范建造天策府，楼宇的宏伟盛大达于极点，门窗栏槛都用金玉作装饰，涂刷墙壁用的朱红色的砂粉就用了几十万斤；铺盖地面用的地衣，春天和夏天用竹篾编织的席子，秋天和冬天用木棉纺织的布匹。
English: King Ma Xifan of Chu built Tianzhefu, the grandeur of the building reached its peak, the door and window sills were decorated with gold beads, and hundreds of thousands of pounds of vermilion powder were used to paint the walls; lichen was used to cover the floor, mats were woven with bamboo shoots in spring and summer, and cloth was woven with cotton in autumn and winter.

古文：与子弟僚属游宴其间。
现代文：与他的子弟及僚属游乐饮宴在其间。
English: He is pictured here with his children and other members of his entourage.

古文：十一月，庚寅，葬圣文章武明德孝皇帝于显陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：十一月，庚寅，后晋朝廷在显陵安葬圣文章武明德孝皇帝石敬瑭，庙号为高祖。
English: In November, Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty was buried in the Xianling Mausoleum.

古文：先是，河南、北诸州官自卖海盐，岁收缗钱十七万；又散蚕盐敛民钱。
现代文：过去，黄河南、北诸州官府私自贩卖海盐，每年可以收入钱十七万缗；又散派养蚕抱茧用的盐来搜刮民众的钱财。
English: In the past, government offices in the south of the Yellow River and north of Zhuzhou sold sea salt privately, earning 170,000 baht a year. They also distributed salt used for raising silkworms and cormorants to extort money from the public.

古文：言事者称民坐私贩盐抵罪者众，不若听民自贩，而岁以官所卖钱直敛于民，谓之食盐钱；高祖从之。
现代文：奏事的人上言说民众因卖私盐而犯法抵罪的人很多，不如听任他们自行贩卖，而把每年官府所卖的钱数直接用赋税形式向民间征收，叫做 食盐钱 ；晋高祖听从了这个意见。
English: The person who reported the matter said that there were many people who committed crimes by selling illegal salt, so it would be better to let them sell it on their own, and collect the amount of money sold by the government every year directly from the people in the form of a tax, called salt money; Jin Gaozu listened to this opinion.

古文：俄而盐价顿贱，每斤至十钱。
现代文：转眼之间盐价立即下降，每斤只卖十个钱。
English: In the blink of an eye, the price of salt dropped immediately, selling for only ten yuan per kilo.

古文：至是，三司使董遇欲增求羡利，而难于骤变前法，乃重征盐商，过者七钱，留卖者十钱。
现代文：到这时，三司使董遇想要增加超额的税赋，又难于突然改变以前的法度，便加重向盐商征税，经过这里的每斤收七钱，留在这里售卖的每斤收十钱。
English: At this time, the three departments of the State Council wanted to increase the excess tax, and it was difficult to suddenly change the previous law, so they increased the tax on salt merchants, collecting seven yuan per kilogram passed here, and collecting ten yuan per kilogram sold here.

古文：由是盐商殆绝，而官复自卖。
现代文：因此盐商私贩的便几乎没有了，而官府又恢复了自己的贩卖。
English: As a result, there are almost no private salt traders left, and the government has resumed its own sales.

古文：其食盐钱，至今敛之如故。
现代文：但是敛收 食盐钱 ，却至今照征如故。
English: However, the collection of salt money has increased, but it has remained the same.

古文：闽盐铁使、右仆射李仁遇，敏之子，闽主曦之甥也；年少，美姿容，得幸于曦。
现代文：闽国盐铁使、右仆射李仁遇是李敏的儿子，也是闽主王曦的外甥；年纪轻，容貌长得美好，受到王曦的宠幸。
English: He was the son of Li Min and the nephew of Wang Xi. He was a young man with a beautiful face and was favored by Wang Xi.

古文：十二月，以仁遇为左仆射兼中书侍郎，翰林学士、吏部侍郎李光准为中书侍郎兼户部尚书，并同平章事。
现代文：十二月，任用李仁遇为左仆射兼中书侍郎，另任用翰林学士、吏部侍郎李光准为中书侍郎兼户部尚书，二人都委授同平章事。
English: In December, Li Renyu was appointed as the left-hand servant and the junior secretary of the middle school, and Li Guangjun, the bachelor of Hanlin and the junior secretary of the personnel department, was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the household department. Both of them were awarded the same rank.

古文：曦荒淫无度，尝夜宴，光准醉忤旨，命执送都市斩之；吏不敢杀，系狱中。
现代文：闽主王曦荒淫无度，曾在举行夜宴时，因为李光准醉酒违背了闽主意旨，便命人把他绑起来送到市街上问斩；下边的官吏不敢杀他，拘留在牢狱里。
English: The eunuch lord Wang Xi was excessively debauched. Once, when holding a dinner party, because Li Guangjun's drunkenness violated the eunuch's will, he ordered someone to tie him up and send him to the city street for questioning. The officials below did not dare to kill him and detained him in prison.

古文：明日，视朝，召复其位。
现代文：第二天，闽主上朝视事，又召来恢复他的职位。
English: The next day, the tyrant came to inspect the situation and was called back to resume his position.

古文：是夕，又宴，收翰林学士周维岳下狱。
现代文：这天晚间，又举行宴会，把翰林学士周维岳又拘系下狱。
English: In the evening of the same day, another banquet was held, and Zhou Weiyue, a scholar of Hanlin, was once again detained and sent to prison.

古文：吏拂榻待之，曰： 相公昨夜宿此，尚书勿忧。 
现代文：下边的属吏扫干净了床接待他，并说： 昨天宰相爷也住在这里，尚书大人您不必忧虑。 
English: The subordinate official downstairs swept the bed clean to receive him, and said: Yesterday, the Prime Minister also lived here, so you don't have to worry about Mr. Shoshu.

古文：醒而释之。
现代文：闽主酒醒以后，果然也把他释放了。
English: After the drunkard sobered up, he was indeed released.

古文：他日，又宴，侍臣皆以醉去，独维岳在。
现代文：过了些日子，又举行宴会，陪侍的大臣都因醉酒散去，只有周维岳还在。
English: A few days later, another banquet was held, and the accompanying ministers dispersed due to drunkenness, leaving only Zhou Weidong.

古文：曦曰： 维岳身甚小，何饮酒之多？ 
现代文：闽主王曦说： 周维岳身材矮小，为什么他能喝那么多的酒？ 
English: The host, Wang Xi, said: Zhou Weiyue is short, why can he drink so much wine?

古文：左右或曰： 酒有别肠，不必长大。 
现代文：左右的人有的说： 能喝酒的人，另有盛酒的肠子，不必非长得高大不可。 
English: Some people around say: People who can drink alcohol and have a gut full of alcohol don't have to be tall.

古文：曦欣然，命捽维岳下殿，欲剖视其酒肠。
现代文：王曦听了很高兴，便命人把他揪拿下殿，想要把他割腹看他的酒肠。
English: Wang Xi was very happy to hear this, and ordered someone to take him to the palace, intending to have him disemboweled to see his guts.

古文：或曰： 杀维岳，无人复能侍陛下剧饮者。 
现代文：有人又说： 杀了周维岳，可就没有人能陪伴陛下放开量痛快饮酒了。 
English: Some people also said, "If you kill Zhou Weiyue, no one will be able to accompany your majesty to drink alcohol."

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：便又释放了他。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：帝之初即位也，大臣议奉表称臣告哀于契丹，景延广请致书称孙而不称臣。
现代文：后晋出帝石重贵初即位时，朝中大臣商讨要向契丹奉表称臣报告先帝死亡之哀，景延广主张写个信不上表，并且称孙不称臣。
English: Later, when Emperor Shigeki ascended the throne for the first time, the ministers of the two Koreas discussed whether to send a letter to the Khitan emperor to express their condolences for the death of the former emperor. Jing Yanquan advocated writing a letter instead of a letter, and said that Sun did not express his condolences.

古文：李崧曰： 屈身以为社稷，何耻之有！
现代文：李崧奏道： 屈身事胡是为了江山社稷，有什么可耻的！
English: Li Yuxuan said, "Bending over for Hu is for the sake of the country and society, what is shameful!

古文：陛下如此，他日必躬擐甲胄，与契丹战，于时悔无益矣。 
现代文：陛下这样做，他日必然落个亲身披甲带胄去同契丹打仗，那时再后悔可就没有用处了。 
English: If His Majesty does this, one day he will have to put on his armor and go to war with the Khitans. At that time, there will be no use in regretting.

古文：延广固争，冯道依违其间。帝卒从延广议。
现代文：景延广坚持自己的意见力争，冯道在其间含含糊糊不明确表态，出帝终于听从了景延广的意见。
English: Jing Yanguang insisted on his own opinions and fought hard, while Feng Dao made vague and unclear statements, and finally heeded Jing Yanguang's opinions.

古文：契丹大怒，遣使来责让，且言： 何得不先承禀，遽即帝位？ 
现代文：契丹接信后大怒，派使者来质问责备，并且说： 为什么不先来禀告，自己便骤然即位称帝？ 
English: After receiving the letter, Khitan flew into a rage and sent an envoy to demand accountability, saying, "Why didn't you come first to denounce me, and why did you suddenly proclaim yourself emperor?

古文：延广复以不逊语答之。
现代文：景延广又用不尊敬的话语回答他。
English: Jing Yanguang answered him again with disrespectful words.

古文：契丹卢龙节度使赵延寿欲代晋帝中国，屡说契丹击晋，契丹主颇然之。
现代文：契丹委任的卢龙节度使赵延寿想要代替晋主做中原的皇帝，多次劝说契丹进攻晋国，契丹主耶律德光认为他讲得很对。
English: The Lulong Festival appointed by the Khitan made Zhao Yanshou want to become the emperor of Central Plains in place of the Jin lord, and he repeatedly persuaded the Khitan to attack Jin. The Khitan lord, Yelu Deguang, thought he was right.

古文：齐王上
现代文：齐王上
English: Qi Wang Shang

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝下天福八年
现代文：后晋齐王天福八年
English: Later Jin Qi Wang Tianfu eight years

古文：春，正月，癸卯，蜀主以宣徽使兼宫苑使田敬全领永平节度使；敬全，宦者也，引前蜀王承休为比而命之，国人非之。
现代文：春季，正月，癸卯，后蜀主孟昶任用宣徽使兼宫苑使田敬全领受永平节度使；田敬全是个宦官，援引前蜀主王衍任用宦官王承休帅领秦州的例子比照着任命他，蜀国的人非难这种做法。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, in the middle of the year, the late Shu ruler Meng Wei appointed Tian Jingquan, the envoy of the imperial seal and the palace envoy, to receive the Yongping Festival envoy; Tian Jingquan was a eunuch, citing the example of the former Shu ruler Wang Yan's appointment of the eunuch Wang Chengyu as the commander of the Qin State and comparing his appointment, the people of Shu criticized this practice.

古文：帝闻契丹将入寇，二月，己未，发鄴都；乙丑，至东京。
现代文：后晋出帝听说契丹将要来入侵，二月，己未，从邺都出发，乙丑，到达东京大梁。
English: After the Emperor Jintao heard that the Khitans were going to invade, he set out from Shidu in February, and arrived in Tokyo-Dalian in February.

古文：然犹与契丹问遗相往来，无虚月。
现代文：但是，还同契丹互相遣派使者往来通问，没有一个月间断过。
English: However, envoys have been sent back and forth with the Khitan, and there has not been a month-long interruption.

古文：唐宣城王景达，刚毅开爽，烈祖爱之，屡欲以为嗣；宋齐丘亟称其才，唐主以齐王璟年长而止。
现代文：南唐宣城王李景达，为人刚毅开朗，烈祖李很喜爱他，几次想让他继承皇位，宋齐丘极力称赞他的才干，南唐主因为齐王李年纪居长而没有实行。
English: Li Jingda, the king of Xuancheng in Southern Tang, was a man of fortitude and cheerfulness. The martyr Li loved him very much and wanted him to succeed to the throne several times. Song Qiqiu praised his talent very much. The Lord of Southern Tang did not implement it because King Li of Qi was too old.

古文：璟以是怨齐丘。
现代文：李因此怨恨宋齐丘。
English: Li therefore resented Song Qiqiu.

古文：唐主幼子景逷，母种氏有宠，齐王璟母宋皇后稀得进见。
现代文：南唐主的小儿子李景逖的母亲种氏受到南唐主的宠爱，而齐王李的母亲宋皇后很少有机会能得到进见。
English: The mother of Li Jingyao, the youngest son of the Lord of Southern Tang, was favored by the Lord of Southern Tang, while the Queen of Song, the mother of King Li of Qi, rarely had the opportunity to gain insight.

古文：唐主如璟宫，遇璟亲调乐器，大怒，诮让者数日。
现代文：南唐主到李的宫中，碰上李在那里亲自调弄乐器，大为恼怒，责备了他好几天。
English: When the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty came to Li's palace and found Li himself playing a musical instrument, he was very angry and scolded him for several days.

古文：种氏乘间言，景逷虽幼而慧，可以为嗣。
现代文：种氏便借此机会进言，说李景逖虽然年幼，但很聪明，可以继承皇位。
English: Take this opportunity to make a speech, saying that although Li Jingyao is young, he is very smart and can inherit the throne.

古文：唐主怒曰： 子有过，父训之，常事也。
现代文：南唐主发怒说： 儿子有过失，父亲教训他，这是正常的事情。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang said angrily, "It is normal for a son to make a mistake and for his father to correct him.

古文：国家大计，女子何得预知！ 
现代文：国家的大谋略，女人怎么能参预过问！ 
English: How can a woman take part in the country's grand strategy!

古文：即命嫁之。
现代文：就下令把种氏嫁出去了。
English: and ordered the marriage of the two.

古文：唐主尝梦吞灵丹，旦而方士史守冲献丹方，以为神而饵之，浸成躁急。
现代文：南唐主曾经梦见自己吃了灵丹，天亮后方士史守冲献上丹方，南唐主以为应了神验而按丹方吃起来，慢慢地便形成了急躁的毛病。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty once dreamed that he had eaten the elixir of life. After the dawn, the Fang scholar Shishou Chong presented the elixir of life. The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty thought that he had met the divine test and ate it according to the elixir of life. Gradually, he developed the problem of impatience.

古文：左右谏，不听。
现代文：左右的人劝阻他，他都不听。
English: People around him tried to dissuade him, but he wouldn't listen.

古文：尝以药赐李建勋，建勋曰： 臣饵之数日，已觉躁热，况多饵乎！ 
现代文：南唐主曾经把药赐给李建勋，李建勋奏称： 我吃了几天，已经觉得身上躁热，何况经常吃它！ 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty once gave medicine to Li Jianxun, and Li Jianxun said: "I have eaten it for a few days, and I already feel feverish. What's more, I often eat it!"

古文：唐主曰： 朕服之久矣。 
现代文：南唐主说： 朕已经服药很长时间了。 
English: Nan Tang Lord said: I have been taking medicine for a long time.

古文：群臣奏事，往往暴怒；然或有正色论辨中理者，亦敛容慰谢而从之。
现代文：群臣奏告事情，往往遇上南唐主大发脾气；但是，有时遇上严正论说事情而且有道理的，也庄重地表示感谢而听从他。
English: When a group of courtiers reported a matter, they were often met with a temper tantrum by the Southern Tang ruler; however, when they were met with a serious and reasonable report, they also solemnly expressed their gratitude and obeyed him.

古文：唐主问道士王栖霞： 何道可致太平？ 
现代文：南唐主询问道士王栖霞： 什么道可以保证获得天下太平？ 
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty asked the Taoist Wang Qixia: What is the way to ensure world peace?

古文：对曰： 王者治心治身，乃治家国。
现代文：王道士回答说： 为帝王的要治心治身，才能治好国家。
English: Wang Taoist replied: "For the emperor, it is necessary to cure the mind and body in order to cure the country."

古文：今陛下尚未能去饥嗔、饱喜，何论太平！ 
现代文：现在陛下还没有能够消除 饿了嗔怪、饱了高兴 的性情，哪里谈得上天下太平！ 
English: Now, His Majesty has not yet been able to eliminate the hungry, strange, full of joy disposition, where to talk about world peace!

古文：宋后自帘中称叹，以为至言。
现代文：宋皇后在帘后称叹他的话，以为是至理明言。
English: Empress Song sighed at his words behind the curtain, thinking they were the truth.

古文：凡唐主所赐予，栖霞皆不受。
现代文：几是南唐主所所赐予的东西，王栖霞都不接受。
English: Wang Qixia did not accept anything given by the Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：栖霞常为人奏章，唐主欲为之筑坛。辞曰： 国用方乏，何暇及此！
现代文：王栖霞常常替别人向上天陈述奏章，南唐主要为他建造祝天的祭坛，王栖霞推辞说： 国家的度用正处在紧缺之时，哪有时间办这个事！
English: Wang Qixia often recited the music to the heavens for others, and the Southern Tang Dynasty mainly built an altar for him to celebrate the festival. Wang Qixia said, "The country is in a time of shortage, how can there be time to do this!

古文：俟焚章不化，乃当奏请耳。 
现代文：待等焚烧奏章不化，不能上闻于天的时候，我会奏请陛下建造的。 
English: I will ask His Majesty to build it when the incinerated music cannot be heard in the sky.

古文：驾部郎中冯延己，为齐王元帅府常书记，性倾巧，与宋齐丘及宣徽副使陈觉相结；同府在巳上者，延己稍以计逐之。
现代文：驾部郎中冯延己，为齐王元帅府掌书记，为人性格乘巧投机，与宋齐丘及宣徽副使陈觉相互勾结；同时在齐王府任职而名位在自己之上的，冯延己便小施计谋把他排挤出去。
English: The second-in-command of the cavalry, Feng Yanji, was the secretary in charge of the Qi Wang Marshal's Office. He was a man of great opportunism and colluded with Song Qiqiu and Chen Jue, the vice-envoy of Xuan Hui. At the same time, he was in the Qi Wang's Office, and his position was higher than his own, so Feng Yanji made a small plan to push him out.

古文：延已尝戏谓中书侍郎孙晟曰： 公有何能，为中书郎？ 
现代文：冯延己曾经对中书侍郎孙晟加以戏弄地说： 您有什么本事，当了中书郎？ 
English: Feng Yanji once teasingly said to Sun Yao, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, "What talent do you have to be the Chinese Academy of Letters?

古文：晟曰： 晟，山东鄙儒，文章不如公，诙谐不如公，谄诈不如公。
现代文：孙晟说： 我孙晟不过是山东的一个鄙陋的儒生，作文章比不上您，谈吐诙谐比不上您，谄媚狡诈比不上您。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "I, Sun Yat-sen, am nothing more than a lowly Confucian from Shandong. I am not as good as you at writing, not as good as you at wit and humour, and not as good as you at being charming and cunning.

古文：然主上使公与齐王游处，盖欲以仁义辅导之也，岂但为声色狗马之友邪！
现代文：但是，主上让您同齐王一起行动和居处，是想请您用仁义的言行去辅导他，怎么能只是成为声色狗马的朋友啊！
English: However, the Lord has allowed you to move and live with King Qi to ask you to counsel him with words and deeds of benevolence. How can you just be a friend of the loud-mouthed dog and horse!

古文：晟诚无能；如公之能，适足为国家之祸耳。 
现代文：我孙晟确实没有什么本事，然而您的本事，恰好是给国家造成灾祸而已啊。 
English: It's true that I, Sun Yat-sen, don't have any ability, but your ability just happens to be causing disaster to the country.

古文：延己，歙州人也。
现代文：冯延巳是歙州人。
English: Feng Yanmi is from Zhangzhou.

古文：又有魏岑者，亦在齐王府。
现代文：又有一个名叫魏岑的人，也在齐王府中。
English: There was also a man named Wei Wei, who was also in King Qi's palace.

古文：给事中常梦锡屡言陈觉、冯延己、魏岑皆佞邪小人，不宜侍东宫；司门郎中判大理寺萧俨表称陈觉奸回乱政；唐主颇感悟，未及去。
现代文：给事中常梦锡几次上言，说陈觉、冯延己、魏岑都是佞邪的小人，不适合让他们在东宫侍奉太子，司门郎中判大理寺萧俨上表指称陈觉奸邪乱政；南唐主很有些感受和觉察，但没有来得及去掉他们。
English: In the course of the matter, Chang Mengxi made several comments, saying that Chen Jue, Feng Yanji, and Wei Wei were all evil villains, and it was not suitable for them to serve the crown prince in the East Palace. Xiao Wei, the judge of Dali Temple, publicly accused Chen Jue of evil and chaotic politics; the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty had some feelings and awareness, but did not have time to remove them.

古文：会疽发背，秘不令人知，密令医治之，听政如故。
现代文：不久，南唐主背上长了痈疽，把消息封锁起来不让人知道，秘密地让医士来治疗，他上朝听取政事仍和原来一样。
English: Not long after, the lord of Southern Tang grew gangrene on his back. He blocked the news so that no one would know, and secretly asked a doctor to treat him. He went to the court to listen to political affairs, but it was still the same as before.

古文：庚午，疾亟，太医吴廷裕遣亲信召齐王璟入侍疾。
现代文：庚午，病情严重恶化，太医吴廷裕派亲信之人去把齐王李召入宫中侍奉疾病。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the condition of the illness seriously deteriorated, and the imperial physician Wu Tingyu sent a trusted person to summon King Li of Qi to the palace to serve the illness.

古文：唐主谓璟曰： 吾饵金石，始欲益寿，乃更伤生，汝宜戒之！ 
现代文：南唐主李对李说： 我服用金石丹药，本来是想延年益寿，哪知反而更加伤害生命，你可要警惕戒备这件事！ 
English: Southern Tang Lord Li said to Li: I take the drug, originally I wanted to prolong my life, but I know that it is more harmful to life. You should be alert to this matter!

古文：是夕，殂。
现代文：这天傍晚，便死去了。
English: That evening, he died.

古文：秘不发丧，下制： 以齐王监国，大赦。 
现代文：把丧事隐秘不宣布，下达制令： 任用齐王监国，实行大赦。 
English: He did not announce that the funeral would be held in secret, but issued an order: the appointment of Qi Wang to supervise the country, and the implementation of an amnesty.

古文：孙晟恐冯延己等用事，欲称遗诏令太后临朝称制。
现代文：孙晟怕冯延己等人把持朝政，想宣告：遵照先帝遗诏，命令太后临朝代行天子之事。
English: Sun Yat-sen was afraid that Feng Yanji and others would take control of the imperial government and wanted to announce: In accordance with the last will and testament of the former emperor, order the empress dowager to act on behalf of the emperor.

古文：翰林学士李贻业曰： 先帝尝云： 妇人预政，乱之本也。 安肯自为厉阶！
现代文：翰林学士李贻业说： 先帝曾经说过： 妇人干预政事，是致乱的根源 ，怎么肯自己开创恶端！
English: Li Yingye, a scholar of Hanlin, said: The former emperor once said: Women's intervention in political affairs is the root cause of chaos, how dare they create evil!

古文：此必近习奸人之诈也。
现代文：这必然是亲近中的奸人搞的欺诈行为。
English: This is bound to be a scam by someone close to the family.

古文：且嗣君春秋已长，明德著闻，公何得遽为亡国之言！
现代文：而且继嗣之君年事已长成，明德的声望很昭著，您为什么突然讲这种亡国的说法！
English: Moreover, the heir to the throne has grown old, and the reputation of wisdom and prudence is well known. Why are you suddenly talking about the idea of ruining the country?

古文：若果宣行，吾必对百官毁之。 
现代文：如果真的这样宣布施行，我一定要向百官揭露抵制这个做法。 
English: If it is really announced and implemented in this way, I will definitely expose and resist this practice to all officials.

古文：晟惧而止。
现代文：孙晟害怕而没有这样做。
English: Sun Yat-sen was afraid and did not do so.

古文：贻业，蔚之从曾孙也。丙子，始宣遗制。
现代文：李贻业是唐僖宗时宰相李蔚的曾侄孙。丙子，才宣布遗制。
English: Li Qiye was the great-nephew of Li Wei, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty. It was only after his death that the succession was announced.

古文：烈祖末年卞急，近臣多罹谴罚。
现代文：南唐烈祖李末年脾气急躁，近身的大臣往往遭到谴责和惩罚。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's founder Li was quick-tempered in his later years, and close ministers were often reprimanded and punished.

古文：陈觉称疾，累月不入，及宣遗诏，乃出。
现代文：陈觉称说有病，整月整月地不入朝门，及至宣告遗诏，才出来。
English: Chen Jue said that he was ill and would not enter the imperial gate for a whole month, and only came out when the last will and testament was announced.

古文：萧俨劾奏： 觉端居私室，以俟升遐，请按其罪。 
现代文：萧俨弹劾他奏称： 陈觉端坐在私人的居室，来等待先帝升仙，请朝廷按律治他的罪。 
English: Xiao Yu impeached him and said: Chen Juejun sat in a private room to wait for the former emperor to ascend to the throne, and asked the court to punish his crime according to the law.

古文：齐王不许。
现代文：齐王李不准。
English: Qi Wangli is not allowed to perform.

古文：自烈祖相吴，禁压良为贱，令买奴婢者通官作券。
现代文：自从南唐烈祖李在吴国当宰相，便禁止压迫良民作奴婢，命令买奴婢的人要通过官府立字为据。
English: Since the Southern Tang Dynasty's ancestor Li became the prime minister of the State of Wu, he forbade the oppression of good people as slaves and ordered those who wanted to buy slaves and maids to submit a written request to the government.

古文：冯延己及弟礼部员外郎延鲁，俱在元帅府，草遗诏听民卖男女；意欲自买姬妾，萧俨驳曰： 此必延己等所为，非大行之命也。
现代文：冯延己和他的弟弟礼部员外冯延鲁，都在元帅府供职，起草烈祖遗诏，听由民间卖儿女；他们想要自己买入姬妾。萧俨驳斥说： 这事必然是冯延己等人干的，不是先帝大行之前的命令。
English: Feng Yanji and his younger brother Feng Yanlu, a member of the etiquette department, both worked at the marshal's office, drafting the last will and testament of the martyrs, selling their children at the behest of the people; they wanted to buy their own concubines. Xiao Yu refuted: This must have been done by Feng Yanji and others, not by the order of the former emperor before the grand procession.

古文：昔延鲁为东都判官，已有此请；先帝访臣，臣对曰： 陛下昔为吴相，民有鬻男女者，为出府金，赎而归之，故远近归心。
现代文：以前，冯延鲁任东都留守判官时，已经有过这样的请求；当时先帝询问过我，我回答说： 陛下从前做吴国的宰相，民间有卖儿女的，您为了他们拿出府库中的金钱，把人赎出来，归还给他们的父母，因此远近都仰敬而归心于您。
English: In the past, when Feng Yanlu was staying in Dongdu as a magistrate, there was already such a request; at that time, the former emperor asked me, and I replied: Your Majesty, when you were the prime minister of the State of Wu, there were people who sold their children, and you took out the money in the treasury for them, ransomed them out, and returned them to their parents. For this reason, people near and far look up to and admire you.

古文：今即位而反之，使贫人之子为富人厮役，可乎？ 
现代文：现在您即位当皇帝而实行相反的办法，让穷人的子女去为富人做役使，这样合适吗？ 
English: Now that you are emperor, is it right to do the opposite, to make the children of the poor work for the rich?

古文：先帝以为然，将治延鲁罪。
现代文：先帝以为我说得对，将要治冯延鲁的罪。
English: The former emperor thought I was right and was going to punish Feng Yanlu.

古文：臣以为延鲁愚，无足责。
现代文：当时我以为冯延鲁愚蠢，不足以责备他。
English: At the time, I thought Feng Yanlu was too stupid to blame.

古文：先帝斜封延鲁章，抹三笔，持入宫。
现代文：先帝便把冯延鲁的奏章斜封了，抹了三笔，拿进宫去。
English: The former emperor then sealed Feng Yanlu's score diagonally, erased three strokes, and took it to the palace.

古文：请求诸宫中，必尚在。 
现代文：请您让人到诸宫中去寻求，必然还在。 
English: Please send someone to the palaces to look for it, it must still be there.

古文：齐王命取先帝时留中章奏千馀道，皆斜封一抹，果得延鲁疏。
现代文：齐王让人取出先帝时留在宫中的章奏千余道，都是斜封后一抹的，果然找到冯延鲁的上疏。
English: King Qi had people take out more than a thousand pieces of zhangso that had been left in the palace when the former emperor was alive. They were all sealed with a slanting seal and then wiped clean. Feng Yanlu's jangso was indeed found.

古文：然以遗诏已行，竟不之改。
现代文：然而，由于烈祖的遗诏已经施行，也就没有再做改变。
English: However, since the last will and testament of the martyrs has already been implemented, no further changes have been made.

古文：闽富沙王延政称帝于建州，国号大殷，大赦，改元天德。
现代文：闽国富沙王王延政在建州称帝，国号大殷，实行大赦，改年号为天德。
English: Wang Yanzheng, the king of Fusha, was proclaimed emperor in Jianzhou, the country's name was Da Yin, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Tiande.

古文：以将乐县为镛州，延平镇为镡州。
现代文：把将乐县改作镛州，延平镇改作镡州。
English: Rename Le County as Bozhou and Yanping Town as Bozhou.

古文：立皇后张氏。
现代文：把其妻张氏立为皇后。
English: He made his wife, Zhang, the empress.

古文：以节度判官潘承祐为吏部尚书，节度巡官建阳杨思恭为兵部尚书。
现代文：任用节度判官潘承为吏部尚书，节度巡官建阳人杨思恭为兵部尚书。
English: Pan Cheng, the judge of the festival, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, and Yang Sikyong, the inspector of the festival, was appointed as the secretary of the military department.

古文：未几，以承祐同平章事，思恭迁仆射，录军国事。
现代文：没有多久，把潘承任为同平章事，杨思恭调任仆射，掌握军国之事。
English: It did not take long for Pan Cheng to be appointed to Tongping, and Yang Sikyong to be transferred to Hubei to take charge of the military affairs.

古文：延政服赭袍视事，然牙参及接邻国使者，犹如籓镇礼。
现代文：王延政穿着帝王用的褚袍视事，但牙将参拜以及接见邻国的使者，还是实行藩镇的礼制。
English: Wang Yanzheng wore the imperial imperial robe to attend to the matter, but the envoys of neighboring countries will visit and receive the tooth, and the etiquette of the town will still be implemented.

古文：殷国小民贫，军旅不息。
现代文：殷国国小民贫，军事活动不停息。
English: Yin Guo Guo's small people are poor, and military activities continue unabated.

古文：杨思恭以善聚敛得幸，增田亩山泽之税，至于鱼盐蔬果，无不倍征，国人谓之 杨剥皮 。
现代文：杨思恭由于善于聚敛民财而获得宠幸，增收田亩山泽的税赋，乃至于鱼盐蔬果，没有不加倍征收的，闽国人称他为 杨剥皮 。
English: Yang Sikyong was favored because he was good at collecting people's wealth. He increased the tax on fields, acres, mountains and lakes. As for fish, salt, vegetables and fruits, there was nothing he did without doubling the tax. The people of Shandong Province called him Yang Peeling.

古文：三月，己卯朔，以中书令赵莹为晋昌节度使兼中书令；以晋昌节度使兼侍中桑维翰为侍中。
现代文：三月，己卯朔，后晋朝廷任用中书令赵莹为晋昌节度使兼中书令；任用晋昌节度使兼侍中桑维翰为侍中。
English: In March, the Later Jin Dynasty court appointed Zhao Ying as the Jinchang Festival Envoy and the Vice-Envoy, and appointed Sang Weihan as the Vice-Envoy.

古文：唐元宗即位，大赦，改元保大。
现代文：南唐元宗李即位，实行大赦，改年号为保大。
English: Southern Tang Dynasty's Yuan Zong Li ascends the throne, amnesty is implemented, and the name of the year is changed to Baoda.

古文：秘书郎韩熙载请俟逾年改元，不从。
现代文：秘书郎韩熙载请求等过了年后再改元，没有依从。
English: Secretary Lang Han Xizai's request to wait a year before changing the yuan was not complied with.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后，立妃钟氏为皇后。
现代文：尊崇皇后为皇太后，册立王妃钟氏为皇后。
English: The queen was revered as the empress dowager, and Princess Chung was proclaimed the empress.

古文：唐主未听政，冯延己屡入白事，一日至数四。唐主曰： 书记有常职，何为如是其烦也！ 
现代文：南唐国主李尚未听政视事，冯延己已经屡次入朝陈述政事，一天来几次，国主说： 书记有正常的职守，为什么这样烦琐啊！ 
English: Li, the head of the Southern Tang Dynasty, had not yet listened to the political situation, and Feng Yanru had repeatedly entered the DPRK to state the political situation. Several times a day, the head of the country said: The secretary has normal duties, why is it so cumbersome!

古文：唐主为人谦谨，初即位，不名大臣，数延公卿论政体，李建勋谓人曰： 主上宽仁大度，优于先帝；但性习未定，苟旁无正人，但恐不能守先帝之业耳。 
现代文：南唐国主为人谦虚谨慎，初即位，不呼唤大臣的名字，几次邀请公卿议论政治措施，李建勋对人说： 主上宽仁大度，比先帝为好；但是性格和习惯尚未定型，如果没有正派人辅佐，只怕不能守住先帝创立的基业。 
English: The ruler of the Southern Tang Dynasty was a modest and prudent person. When he first ascended the throne, he did not call ministers by their names. Several times, he invited nobles to discuss political measures. Li Jianxun said to people, "The Lord is generous and is better than the previous emperor. However, his character and habits have not yet been formed. If there is no decent person to assist him, he may not be able to keep the foundation created by the previous emperor."

古文：唐主以镇南节度使宋齐丘为太保兼中书令，奉化节度使周宗为侍中。
现代文：南唐国主任用镇南节度使宋齐丘为太保兼中书令，奉化节度使周宗为侍中。
English: The director of the Southern Tang Dynasty used the Zhenan Festival to make Song Qiqiu the Taibo and the middle secretary, and the Fenghua Festival to make Zhou Zong the chamberlain.

古文：唐主以齐丘、宗先朝勋旧，故顺人望召为相，政事皆自决之。
现代文：国主因为宋齐丘、周宗是先朝的功勋旧臣，所以顺从人望召他们为宰相，但政事都由自己作决定。
English: Because Song Qiqiu and Zhou Zong were meritorious former vassals of the previous dynasty, the sovereign obeyed the people's wish to appoint them as prime ministers, but made political decisions on his own.

古文：徙寿王景遂为燕王，宣城王景达为鄂王。
现代文：调徙寿王李景遂为燕王，宣城王李景达为鄂王。
English: Li Jingda, the king of Shou, became the king of Yan, and Li Jingda, the king of Xuancheng, became the king of Huan.

古文：初，唐主为齐王，知政事，每有过失，常梦锡常直言规正；始虽忿怼，终以谅直多之。
现代文：从前，南唐国主为齐王，知政事，每当有过失时，常梦锡常常率直上言来规劝更正他；开始虽然厌烦，最后总是原谅他直言而称赞他。
English: In the past, the ruler of Southern Tang was King Qi, who was in charge of political affairs. Whenever there was a mistake, Chang Mengxi often spoke frankly to persuade and correct him. Although he was bored at the beginning, he always forgave him and praised him in the end.

古文：及即位，许以为翰林学士，齐丘之党疾之，坐封驳制书，贬池州判官。
现代文：及至即位称帝，答应让他做翰林学士，宋齐丘的党羽忌恨他，加给他封驳皇帝制书的罪名，贬降为池州判官。
English: When he was enthroned as emperor, he promised to make him a scholar of Hanlin. Song Qiqiu's followers hated him, accused him of blocking the emperor's book production, and demoted him to judge of Chizhou.

古文：池州多迁客，节度使上蔡王彦俦，防制过甚，几不聊生，惟事梦锡如在朝廷。
现代文：池州这个地方在南唐辖境中有较多贬迁的官属，节度使上蔡人王彦俦防备控制他们很严厉，几乎不能维持生活，惟独对待常梦锡仍如他在朝廷时一样。
English: This place in Chizhou, in the territory under the jurisdiction of Southern Tang, had a relatively large number of demoted officials and subordinates. The strictness made the Shang Cai people Wang Yanxuan guard and control them very strictly, almost unable to maintain their lives, but they still treated Chang Mengxi as he was in the imperial court.

古文：宋齐丘待陈觉素厚，唐主亦以觉为有才，遂委任之。
现代文：宋齐丘对待陈觉素来厚重，南唐国主也认为陈觉是有本事的人，便委以重任。
English: Song Qiqiu had always treated Chen Jue with great respect. The ruler of Southern Tang also believed that Chen Jue was a capable person, and entrusted him with important duties.

古文：冯延己、延鲁、魏岑，虽齐邸旧僚，皆依附觉，与休宁查文徽更相汲引，侵蠹政事，唐人谓觉等为 五鬼 。
现代文：冯延己，冯延鲁、魏岑三个人虽然是齐王府的旧僚属，也都依附于陈觉，他们与休宁人查文徽互相勾结援引，把持败坏政事，南唐人把陈觉等人称作 五鬼 。
English: Although Feng Yanji, Feng Yanlu and Wei Wei were the three former subordinates of the Qi royal court, they also clung to Chen Jue. They colluded with the Shuning people to invoke the Chawen emblem to corrupt politics, and the South Tang people called Chen Jue and others the Five Ghosts.

古文：延鲁自礼部员外郎迁中书舍人、勤政殿学士，江州观察使杜昌业闻之，叹曰： 国家所以驱驾群臣，在官爵而已。
现代文：冯延鲁从礼部员外郎升迁为中书舍人、勤政殿学士，江州观察使杜昌业听说了，感叹地说： 国家用来驱使驾驭群臣的，就在于掌握官爵的任免。
English: Feng Yanlu was promoted from a member of the etiquette department to a member of the Chinese literature department and a scholar of the palace of diligence. Du Changye, who was told about this by Jiangzhou Observation, said with regret: What the state uses to drive and control its vassals is to control the appointment and removal of officials and nobles.

古文：若一言称旨，遽跻通显，后有立功者，何以赏之！ 
现代文：如果有一句话说中了主上的心意，便骤然把他提拔到通达显要的地位，那末以后再有立功于国家的人，拿什么来赏授他呢！ 
English: If a single utterance strikes the Lord's heart and suddenly elevates him to a position of great prominence, then what will be the reward of those who have rendered service to the state?

古文：未几，唐主以岑及文徽皆为枢密副使。
现代文：没过几天，南唐国主把魏岑和查文徽都提拔为枢密副使。
English: A few days later, the ruler of Southern Tang promoted Wei Wei and Chawen Hui to the position of Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：岑既得志，会觉遭母丧，岑即暴扬觉过恶，摈斥之。
现代文：魏岑得志以后，遇到陈觉遭逢母亲的丧事归里守孝，魏岑就揭露宣扬陈觉的过失和恶行，把他排斥掉。
English: After Wei Wei had achieved his goal, when he met Chen Jue, who was returning to his hometown to attend his mother's funeral, Wei Wei exposed and denounced Chen Jue's faults and evil deeds, and ostracized him.

古文：唐置定远军于濠州。
现代文：南唐在濠州设置定远军。
English: Southern Tang set up the Dingyuan Army in Zhangzhou.

古文：汉殇帝骄奢，不亲政事。
现代文：南汉殇帝刘玢骄横奢侈，不喜欢过问政事。
English: Emperor Liu Bei of the Southern Han Dynasty was arrogant and extravagant, and did not like to be involved in politics.

古文：高祖在殡，作乐酣饮；夜与倡妇微行，倮男女而观之。
现代文：南汉高祖刘还在丧殡之中，他就大作声乐酣饮；夜间同娼女鬼混，让男人和女子脱光衣服而加以观赏取乐。
English: The Southern Han Emperor Gaozhu Liu was still in the middle of a funeral, and he was busy making vocal music and drinking; at night, he was fooling around with prostitutes, letting men and women strip naked and watching them for fun.

古文：左右忤意辄死，无敢谏者；惟越王弘昌及内常侍番禺吴怀恩屡谏，不听。
现代文：左右的人有不合心意的往往弄死，没有人敢作劝谏；只有他的兄弟越王刘弘昌和内常侍番禺人吴怀恩多次进谏，不采纳。
English: Those around him who did not agree with him were often killed, and no one dared to offer advice; only his brother Liu Hongchang, the King of Yue, and Wu Huai'en, the inner chamberlain and watchman, repeatedly made suggestions, but they were not adopted.

古文：常猜忌诸弟，每宴集，令宦者守门，群臣、宗室，皆露索，然后入。
现代文：经常猜忌他的几个弟弟，每次邀集人参加宴会，就命宦官把守大门，君臣和宗室都要脱衣搜查，然后才能进门。
English: He was always suspicious of his younger brothers, and whenever he invited people to a banquet, he ordered a eunuch to guard the door, and the prince and his family had to strip and be searched before they could enter.

古文：晋王弘熙欲图之，乃盛饰声伎，娱悦其意，以成其恶。
现代文：晋王刘弘熙想要谋取他，便用盛妆打扮声妓，博取他的高兴，促使他更加作恶。
English: The Jin king, Liu Hongxi, wanted to win him over, so he dressed up as a courtesan to win his favor and encourage him to do more evil.

古文：汉主好手搏，弘熙令指挥使陈道庠引力士刘思潮、谭令禋、林少强、林少良、何昌廷等五人习手搏于晋府，汉主闻而悦之。
现代文：南汉主刘玢喜爱手搏，刘弘熙便命指挥使陈道庠引领力壮的武士刘思潮、谭令、林少强、林少良、何昌廷等五个人在晋王府中习练手搏，南汉主听说很高兴。
English: The Southern Han ruler Liu Bei loved hand-to-hand combat, and Liu Hongxi ordered five powerful warriors, Liu Shichao, Tan Ling, Lin Shaoqiang, Lin Shao Liang, He Changting and others, to be trained in hand-to-hand combat at the Jin royal palace. The Southern Han ruler was very pleased to hear this.

古文：丙戌，与诸王宴于长春宫，观手搏，至夕罢宴，汉主大醉。
现代文：丙戌，同诸王在长春宫宴饮，观赏手搏，直到夜晚才停止酒宴，南汉主大醉。
English: He feasted with the kings at the Changchun Palace, watched hand-to-hand combat, and did not stop the wine banquet until the evening. The Southern Han lord was very drunk.

古文：弘熙使道庠、思潮等掖汉主，因拉杀之，尽杀其左右。
现代文：刘弘熙命陈道庠、刘思潮等人拖拽南汉主，把他拉杀了，并把他的左右随从也都杀了。
English: Liu Hongxi ordered Chen Daojun, Liu Shichao and others to drag the Southern Han lord and kill him, as well as his right and left followers.

古文：明旦，百官诸王莫敢入宫，越王弘昌帅诸弟临于寝殿，迎弘熙即皇帝位，更名晟，改元应乾。
现代文：第二天早上，百官诸王不敢进入宫廷，越王刘弘昌带领诸弟来到南汉高祖刘的寝殿，迎接刘弘熙即皇帝位，改名为刘晟，把年号改为应乾。
English: The next morning, hundreds of officials and kings did not dare to enter the court. King Yue Liu Hongchang led his brothers to the bedchamber of Liu, the founder of the Southern Han Dynasty, to welcome Liu Hongxi, the emperor, changed his name to Liu Ye, and changed the year to Ying Qian.

古文：以弘昌为太尉兼中书令、诸道兵马都元帅，知政事，循王弘杲为副元帅，参预政事。
现代文：任命刘弘昌为太尉兼中书令、诸道兵马都元帅，主持政事；循王刘弘杲为副元帅，参预政事。
English: Liu Hongchang was appointed as a lieutenant and the second secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and marshal of the armies and horses of all the provinces, presiding over the political affairs; Gu Wang Liu Hongya was appointed as the deputy marshal, participating in the pre-election political affairs.

古文：陈道庠及刘思潮等皆受赏赐甚厚。
现代文：陈道庠及刘思潮等都受到很丰厚的赏赐。
English: Chen Daoxuan and Liu Shichao and others have received very rich rewards.

古文：闽主曦纳金吾使尚保殷之女，立为贤妃。
现代文：闽主王曦纳娶金吾使尚保殷之女，立为贤妃。
English: King Xi'na married the daughter of King Wu's envoy, Shang Bao Yin, and became a virtuous queen.

古文：妃有殊色，曦嬖之；醉中，妃所欲杀则杀之，所欲宥则宥之。
现代文：尚妃长得特别美貌，王曦很宠幸她；王曦喝醉酒时，尚妃所要杀的人就把他杀了，所要宽宥的人就把他放了。
English: Shangfei was particularly beautiful, and Wang Xi was very fond of her. When Wang Xi was drunk, those whom Shangfei wanted to kill killed him, and those whom he wanted to pardon released him.

古文：夏，四月，戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊申朔，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, the waxing gibbous moon, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：唐以中书侍郎、同平章事李建勋为昭武节度使，镇抚州。
现代文：南唐任用中书侍郎、同平章事李建勋为昭武节度使，镇守抚州。
English: Nantang appointed Li Jianxun, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Tongping Chapter, as the Shouwu Sectional Envoy and the town guard of Fuzhou.

古文：殷将陈望等攻闽福州，入其西郛，既而败归。
现代文：殷国将领陈望等进攻闽国的福州，进入其西廓，接着又打败仗而归去。
English: Yin generals such as Chen Wang attacked Fuzhou in Min, entered its western sector, and then defeated and returned.

古文：五月，殷吏部尚书、同平章事潘承祐上书陈十事，大指言： 兄弟相攻，逆伤天理，一也。
现代文：五月，殷国的吏部尚书、同平章事潘承上书陈奏十件事，大体上说： 兄弟之间互相攻战，违逆伤残天理，这是一。
English: In May, the leaders of Yin Province issued a document entitled "Ten Things," which basically said, "Brothers fighting against each other is a violation of the law of heaven.

古文：赋敛烦重，力役无节，二也。
现代文：赋税征敛过于烦重，调用劳役没有节制，这是二。
English: Tax collection is too cumbersome, and there is no restraint on the use of forced labor.

古文：发民为兵，羁旅愁怨，三也。
现代文：征集百姓服兵役，大家羁留在征途愁怨不尽，这是三。
English: This is the third time that the people are conscripted to serve in the military, and everyone is left behind on the journey with a lot of grievances.

古文：杨思恭夺民衣食，使归怨于上，群臣莫敢言，四也。
现代文：杨思恭掠夺民众衣食，让民众把怨恨归聚于主上，群臣不敢揭发指责，这是四。
English: Yang Sikyong plundered the people's food and clothing, so that the people concentrated their resentment on the Lord, and the ministers did not dare to expose the accusations. This is the fourth.

古文：疆土狭隘，多置州县，增吏困民，五也。
现代文：疆土狭隘，却过多设置州县，增添官吏，困扰百姓，这是五。
English: The territory is narrow, but too many prefectures and counties have been set up, officials have been added, and the people have been troubled.

古文：除道裹粮，将攻临汀，曾不忧金陵、钱塘乘虚相袭，六也。
现代文：修治道路，载运粮食，将要攻打汀州，却不考虑金陵的南唐、钱塘的吴越要乘着国家戍守虚乏来袭击，这是六。
English: They are repairing roads, transporting grain, and are going to attack Tingzhou, but they do not consider that Nantang in Jinling and Wuyue in Qiantang will attack by taking advantage of the lack of national defense. This is the sixth.

古文：括高赀户，财多者补官，逋负者被刑，七也。
现代文：搜求有钱的人，输财多的补授官职，逃欠征赋的判受刑罚，这是七。
English: There are seven punishments, including searching for rich people, awarding supplementary posts to those who have lost more money, and sentencing those who have evaded conscription.

古文：延平诸津，征果菜鱼米，获利至微，敛怨甚大，八也。
现代文：延平一带的的几条河道，征收果、菜、鱼、米等税，获得的利益很少，而招来怨恨却很大，这是八。
English: Several waterways in the Yanping area have levied taxes on fruits, vegetables, fish, rice, etc., and have gained little benefit, but have aroused great resentment. This is the eighth.

古文：与唐、吴越为邻，即位以来，未尝通使，九也。
现代文：我国同南唐、吴越相邻，建国称帝以来，没有通派使者，这是九。
English: Our country is adjacent to South Tang and Wu Yue. Since the founding of the empire, there has been no envoy sent. This is the ninth time.

古文：宫室台榭，崇饰无度，十也。 
现代文：宫室台榭，崇建华饰，没有节制，这是十。 
English: The palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace, the palace.

古文：殷王延政大怒，削承祐官爵，勒归私第。
现代文：殷主王延政大怒，削去了潘承的官爵，勒令他还归私第。
English: King Yan Zheng was furious and stripped Pan Cheng of his official title, ordering him to return to private life.

古文：汉中宗既立，国中议论詾詾。
现代文：南汉中宗刘晟自立以后，国内议论泛滥。
English: After the Southern Han Dynasty's Liu Bei became independent, there was a lot of discussion in China.

古文：循王弘杲请斩刘思潮等以谢中外，汉主不从。
现代文：循王刘弘杲请求杀刘思潮等人来向中外表白，汉主不依从。
English: Following the request of King Liu Hongyi to kill Liu Shichao and others to make a clear statement to China and the outside world, the Han ruler did not comply.

古文：思潮等闻之，谮弘杲谋反，汉主令思潮等伺之。
现代文：刘思潮等听说后，诬诉刘弘杲谋反，南汉主刘晟命令刘思潮等暗中侦察他。
English: After Liu Shichao and others heard about it, they falsely accused Liu Hongyi of plotting a rebellion. The South Han ruler Liu Shichao ordered Liu Shichao and others to secretly spy on him.

古文：弘杲方宴客，思潮与谭令禋帅卫兵突入，斩弘杲。
现代文：一天，刘弘杲正在宴客，刘思潮与谭令带领卫兵，突击而入，杀了刘弘杲。
English: One day, Liu Hongtao was at a banquet. Liu Shichao and Tan Ling led the guards, stormed in and killed Liu Hongtao.

古文：于是汉主谋尽诛诸弟，以越王弘昌贤而得众，尤忌之。
现代文：于是南汉主刘晟谋划把几个弟弟都杀了，以为越王刘弘昌贤能而得人心，更加忌恨他。
English: As a result, the Southern Han ruler Liu Bei plotted to kill several of his younger brothers, thinking that the Yue King Liu Hongchang was virtuous and popular, and hated him even more.

古文：雄武节度使齐王弘弼，自以居大镇，惧祸，求入朝；许之。
现代文：雄武节度使齐王刘弘弼自以为居处大镇，怕加祸，请求入归朝廷；南汉主准许了他。
English: The heroic military festival made the king of Qi, Liu Hongyi, think that he was living in a big town. Fearing further disaster, he asked to return to the imperial court; the lord of the Southern Han Dynasty allowed him.

古文：初，闽主曦侍康宗宴，会新罗献宝剑，康宗举以示同平章事王倓曰： 此何所施？ 
现代文：过去，闽主王曦侍奉康宗王昶宴会，遇上新罗国进献宝剑，康宗举起剑问同平章事王说： 这个可以干什么用？ 
English: In the past, the eunuch lord Wang Xi served the eunuch king Kangzong at a banquet. When he encountered the Silla Kingdom's sword offering, Kangzong held up his sword and asked the eunuch king: "What can this be used for?"

古文：倓对曰： 斩为臣不忠者。 
现代文：王回答说： 可以斩杀当臣子不忠于主上的人。 
English: And the king answered and said, He that is an enemy unto the LORD, let him die the death.

古文：时曦己蓄异志，凛然变色。
现代文：当时王曦已经怀有叛心，吓得连脸色都变了。
English: At that time, Wang Xi was already harboring a rebellious spirit, and he was so scared that even his face changed.

古文：至是宴群臣，复有献剑者，曦命发校冢，斩其尸。
现代文：到了王曦篡位后，宴请君臣时，又有进献宝剑的，王曦便命人发掘王的坟墓，用剑斩杀了他的尸首。
English: After Wang Xi usurped the throne, when he held a banquet for princes and ministers, there was also a sword offering, so Wang Xi ordered someone to excavate the king's grave and cut off his corpse with a sword.

古文：校书郎陈光逸谓其友曰： 主上失德，亡无日矣，吾欲死谏。 
现代文：校书郎陈光逸对他的朋友说： 主上没有道德，没有多久就会灭亡；我打算冒死进谏。 
English: School teacher Chen Guangyi said to his friend: "The Lord has no morals and will soon perish; I am going to risk my life to enter the coffin."

古文：其友止之，不从；上书陈曦大恶五十事。
现代文：他的朋友阻止他，不听。陈光逸上书谏说王曦大恶五十条。
English: His friends stopped him and wouldn't listen. Chen Guangyi wrote a letter saying that Wang Xi had committed fifty crimes.

古文：曦怒，命卫士鞭之数百，不死；以绳系其颈，悬诸庭树，久之乃绝。
现代文：王曦发怒，命令卫士鞭打他几百下，没有死；便用绳子绑住他的脖子，悬挂在庭院的树上，很长时间才断了气。
English: Wang Xi was angry and ordered the guards to give him hundreds of lashes, but he did not die. They tied a rope around his neck and hung him from a tree in the courtyard. It took a long time for him to die.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，诏以年饥，国用不足，分遣使者六十馀人于诸道括民谷。
现代文：秋季，七月，己丑，后晋出帝下诏，由于年岁饥荒，国家财用不足，分路派遣六十余使者，到诸道去搜求民间谷物。
English: In the autumn, in July, after the Emperor Jingu passed away, due to the famine of the year and the shortage of state funds, more than 60 emissaries were sent to various provinces to search for folk grains.

古文：吴越王弘佐初立，上统军使阚璠强戾，排斥异己，弘佐不能制；内牙上都监使章德安数与之争，右都监使李文庆不附于璠，乙巳，贬德安于处州，文庆于睦州。
现代文：吴越王钱弘佐刚刚继立，上统军使阚逞强霸道，排斥异己，钱弘佐辖制不了他；内牙上都监使章德安多次同他争执，右都监使李文庆也不依附于阚，乙巳，把章德安贬官到处州，李文庆贬到睦州。
English: Qian Hongzu, the king of Wuyue, had just succeeded to the throne. Shangtong's army had instigated Zhang De'an to be strong and domineering, and to exclude dissidents. Qian Hongzu could not control him. Zhang De'an, the inspector of the Inner Capital, repeatedly quarreled with him. Li Wenqing, the inspector of the Right Capital, did not adhere to Zhang De'an. Therefore, Zhang De'an was demoted to Zhuanzhou, and Li Wenqing was demoted to Muzhou.

古文：璠与右统军使胡进思益专横。
现代文：阚与右统军使胡进思更加专横。
English: and the United Right Forces made Hu Jinshi more tyrannical.

古文：璠，明州人；文庆，睦州人；进思，湖州人也。
现代文：阚是明州人；李文庆是睦州人；胡进思是湖州人。
English: Zhai is from Mingzhou; Li Wenqing is from Mutsu; Hu Jinshi is from Huzhou.

古文：唐主缘烈祖意，以天雄节度使兼中书令、金陵尹燕王景遂为诸道兵马元帅，徙封齐王，居东宫；天平节度使、守侍中、东都留守鄂王景达为副元帅，徙封燕王；宣告中外，约以传位。
现代文：南唐主李遵循烈祖李的意旨，任用天雄节度使兼中书令、金陵尹燕王李景遂为诸道兵马元帅，徙封为齐王，居住在东宫；任用天平节度使、守侍中、东都留守鄂王李景达为副元帅，徙封燕王；宣告中外，约定传位给他们。
English: The Southern Tang Lord Li, following the intention of the ancestor Li, appointed Tianxiong Jiedu Envoy and Chinese Writing Envoy, and Jinling Yinyan King Li Jing to be the marshal of the armies and horses of all provinces, and the migratory seal to be the king of Qi, living in the East Palace; appointed Tianping Jiedu Envoy, Keeper of the Middle Palace, and King of Eastern Capital Li Jingda to be the vice-marshal, and the migratory seal to be the king of Yan; announced to China and abroad, and it was agreed to pass the position to them.

古文：立长子弘冀为南昌王。
现代文：册立长子李弘冀为南昌王。
English: The eldest son, Li Hongji, was enthroned as the King of Nanchang.

古文：景遂、景达固辞，不许。
现代文：李景遂、李景达坚决辞让，没有答应。
English: Li Jingsui and Li Jingda resolutely refused to give in and did not agree.

古文：景遂自誓必不敢为嗣，更其字曰退身。
现代文：李景遂自己发誓，一定不敢做嗣王，把自己的字改为退身。
English: Li Jing then swore to himself that he would not dare to become the king's heir, and changed his name to "retire."

古文：汉指挥使万景忻败张遇贤于循州。
现代文：南汉指挥使万景忻在循州把张遇贤打败。
English: The Southern Han commander made Wan Jingsheng defeat Zhang Youxian in Xuzhou.

古文：遇贤告于神，神曰： 取虔州，则大事可成。 
现代文：张遇贤向神祷告，神说： 攻取虔州，大事就会成功。 
English: Zhang Yuxian prayed to God, and God said: "Conquer Qianzhou, and great things will come to pass.

古文：遇贤帅众逾岭，趣虔州。
现代文：张遇贤便带领兵众跨越南岭，北向虔州。
English: Zhang Yuxian then led the troops across the South Mountain Range and headed north to Qianzhou.

古文：唐百胜节度使贾匡浩不为备，遇贤众十馀万攻陷诸县，再败州兵，城门昼闭。
现代文：南唐百胜节度使贾匡浩不作防备，张遇贤的兵众十多万人攻陷所到诸县，又打败州属守兵，于是虔州守兵不得不把城门在白天也关闭起来。
English: Southern Tang's Festival of a Hundred Victories caused Jia Kuanghao to be unprepared, and Zhang Yu Xian's army of more than one hundred thousand people attacked and captured the castle to the counties, and defeated the state-owned guards, so the Qianzhou guards had to close the city gate during the day.

古文：遇贤作宫室营署于白云洞，遣将四出剽掠。
现代文：张遇贤在白云洞建造起宫室营署，派将领兵四出抢掠。
English: Zhang Youxian built a palace camp in Baiyun Cave and sent generals and soldiers to loot.

古文：匡浩，公鐸之子也。
现代文：贾匡浩是唐昭宗时贾公铎的儿子。
English: Jia Kuanghao was the son of Jia Gongyi during the reign of Emperor Zhaozong.

古文：八月，乙卯，唐主立弟景逷为保宁王。
现代文：八月，乙卯，南唐主李立他的幼弟李景逖为保宁王。
English: In August, Emperor Yi of Southern Tang appointed his younger brother, Li Jingyao, as King of Boryeong.

古文：宋太后怨种夫人，屡欲害景逷，唐主力保全之。
现代文：南唐主的母亲宋太后不满意李景逖的生母种夫人得宠，多次要害李景逖，南唐主极力把他保全下来。
English: The mother of the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty, Empress Dowager Song, was not satisfied with the fact that Li Jingyao's birth mother, Lady Lu, was favored. She repeatedly threatened to harm Li Jingyao, and the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty tried his best to save him.

古文：夏州牙内指挥使拓跋崇斌谋作乱，绥州刺史李彝敏将助之，事觉；辛未，彝敏弃州，与其弟彝俊等五人奔延州。
现代文：夏州牙内指挥使拓跋崇斌企图造反，绥州刺史李彝敏准备帮助他，事情被后晋朝廷发觉；辛未，李彝敏放弃了绥州，与他的弟弟李彝俊等五人逃奔延州。
English: The commander of the Inner Court of Xiazhou ordered Tuoba Chongbin to attempt to rebel, and the governor of Zhangzhou, Li Yimin, was ready to help him. The matter was discovered by the Later Jin court; however, Li Yimin gave up Zhangzhou and fled to Yanzhou with his brother Li Yujun and five others.

古文：九月，尊帝母秦国夫人安氏为皇太妃。
现代文：九月，后晋出帝石重贵尊他的生母秦国夫人安氏为皇太妃。
English: In September, after Emperor Jinshi was crowned, his birth mother, Lady Qin Guo An, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：妃，代北人也。
现代文：安太妃是代北人。
English: An Taifei is a representative of the North.

古文：帝事太后、太妃甚谨，多侍食于其宫，待诸弟亦友爱。
现代文：出帝侍奉太后、太妃很恭谨，对待几个弟弟也友爱。
English: After becoming emperor, she served the empress dowager. She was very respectful and treated her younger brothers kindly.

古文：初，河阳牙将乔荣从赵延寿入契丹，契丹以为回图使，往来贩易于晋，置邸大梁。
现代文：过去，河阳牙将乔荣，跟随赵延寿投归契丹，契丹任命他为回图使，在契丹和晋境之间往来贩卖贸易，在后晋京都大梁设置了官邸。
English: In the past, He Yang Ya sent Qiao Rong and Zhao Yan Shou to the Khitan Empire, and the Khitan Empire appointed him as the envoy to return to China. He traded between the Khitan Empire and Jin territory, and set up his official residence in Daliang, the capital of the Later Jin Dynasty.

古文：及契丹与晋有隙，景延广说帝囚荣于狱，悉取邸中之货。
现代文：待到契丹同晋国有了嫌隙时，景延广说服出帝把乔荣囚拘在牢狱里，把他府邸中的财宝都夺取过来。
English: When Khitan fell out with Jin, Jing Yanguang persuaded the emperor to keep Qiao Rong prisoner in prison and seize all the treasures in his palace.

古文：凡契丹之人贩易在晋境者，皆杀之，夺其货。
现代文：凡是契丹的人在晋国境内贩卖贸易者，都杀了，夺取其财货。
English: The Khitan killed all the traders in the territory of Jin and seized their goods.

古文：大臣皆言契丹有大功于晋，不可负。
现代文：晋国的大臣都上言说契丹有过大功，不能辜负。
English: The ministers of Jin all said that Khitan had made great contributions and could not live up to them.

古文：戊子，释荣，慰赐而归之。
现代文：戊子，释放了乔荣，慰问并赏赐他，让他归返契丹。
English: Wuzi released Qiaorong, consoled and rewarded him, and let him return to Qidan.

古文：荣辞延广，延广大言曰： 归语而主，先帝为北朝所立，故称臣奉表。
现代文：乔荣向景延广告辞，景延广说大话： 回去告诉你的主子，先帝高祖是北朝所扶立，所以向你们称臣上表章。
English: Qiao Rong advertised his resignation to Jing Yan, and Jing Yan Guan said loudly: Go back and tell your master that the former Emperor Gao Zu was founded by the Northern Dynasty, so I commend you to the Emperor.

古文：今上乃中国所立，所以降志于北朝者，正以不敢忘先帝盟约故耳。
现代文：现在的皇帝乃是中原自己所立，之所以还向北朝降低身份，正是因为不敢忘记先帝同北朝做过盟约的缘故。
English: The current emperor was established by Nakahara himself, and the reason why he lowered his status to the Northern Dynasty was precisely because he dared not forget that the former emperor had made a covenant with the Northern Dynasty.

古文：为邻称孙，足矣，无称臣之理。
现代文：作为邦自称为孙，已经足够了，没有再向北朝称臣的道理。
English: As a state, it is enough to call itself Sun, and there is no reason to call itself a vassal to the Northern Dynasty.

古文：北朝皇帝勿信赵延寿诳诱，轻侮中国。
现代文：北朝的皇帝不要听信赵延寿的诱骗，轻慢欺侮中原。
English: Emperors of the Northern Dynasty should not listen to Zhao Yanshou's trickery and bullying of Zhongyuan.

古文：中国士马，尔所目睹。
现代文：中原的兵将马队，是你亲眼看到的。
English: You have seen with your own eyes the troop of soldiers and horses marching across the Central Plains.

古文：翁怒则来战，孙有十万横磨剑，足以相待。
现代文：祖翁如果发怒来侵犯，孙儿有十万横磨凌厉的剑，足以用来相待。
English: If the ancestor attacks in anger, the grandchild has a hundred thousand sharpened swords, enough to treat each other.

古文：它日为孙所败，取笑天下，毋悔也！ 
现代文：以后如果被孙儿打败，被天下人取笑，可不要后悔呀！ 
English: In the future, if you are defeated by your grandchild and made fun of by the world, don't regret it!

古文：荣自以亡失货财，恐归获罪，且欲为异时据验，乃曰： 公所言颇多，惧有遗忘，愿记之纸墨。 
现代文：乔荣自己认为丢掉了货物和钱财，怕归来获罪，并且想替今后取得证据，就说： 您说的内容太多，怕遗忘了说不全，希望把您讲的话用纸墨记录下来。 
English: Qiao Rong himself thought that he had lost the goods and money, was afraid of returning and being punished, and wanted to obtain evidence for the future, he said: You said too much, I'm afraid I forgot to say it, I hope to record what you said with paper and ink.

古文：延广命吏书其语以授之，荣具以白契丹主。
现代文：景延广便让属吏记下他的话交给乔荣，乔荣就拿着证据把情况都告诉了契丹主。
English: Jing Yanguang then asked his subordinate to write down his words and give them to Qiaorong. Qiaorong then took the evidence and told the Qidan Lord everything.

古文：契丹主大怒，入寇之志始决。
现代文：契丹主耶律德光大怒，向中原发动进攻的心志便决定下来。
English: The Khitan lord Yerudok was furious and decided to launch an attack on the Central Plains.

古文：晋使如契丹，皆絷之幽州，不得见。
现代文：晋国使者来到契丹，都被执系在幽州，不能见到契丹主。
English: When the emissaries of the Jin Dynasty came to Khitan, they were all detained in Yuzhou and could not see the Khitan lord.

古文：桑维翰屡请逊辞以谢契丹，每为延广所沮。
现代文：桑维翰屡次请求用谦逊的语言向契丹道歉，往往被景延广所阻拦。
English: Sangveekhan's repeated requests for a humble apology to the Khitan were often blocked by Jing Yanquan.

古文：帝以延广为有定策功，故宠冠群臣；又总宿卫兵，故大臣莫能与之争。
现代文：出帝因为景延广有扶立他继位的功绩，所以恩宠比群臣都高；又总管宫廷宿卫将士，因此朝中大臣不敢同他争论。
English: The emperor was enthroned because of Jing Yan's extensive achievements in helping him succeed to the throne, so his favor was higher than that of the ministers; he was also in charge of the palace guards, so the ministers in the middle of the court did not dare to argue with him.

古文：河东节度使刘知远，知延广必致寇，而畏其方用事，不敢言，但益募兵，奏置兴捷、武节等十馀军以备契丹。
现代文：河东节度使刘知远，知道景延广必然要造反，但是怕景延广正在当权用事，不敢上言，只是更加募集兵丁，奏请设置兴捷、武节等十多个军，用以防备契丹。
English: The Hedong Festival made Liu Zhiyuan know that Jing Yanguang was bound to rebel, but he was afraid that Jing Yanguang was in power and did not dare to speak up, but he recruited more soldiers and asked to set up more than ten armies such as Xing Jie and Wuxi to prevent the Khitan.

古文：甲午，定难节度使李彝殷奏李彝敏作乱之状，诏执彝敏送夏州，斩之。
现代文：甲午，后晋定难节度使李彝殷奏报绥州刺史李彝敏作乱的情况，出帝下诏，拘执李彝敏押送夏州，把他杀了。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the reign of the Jin Dynasty, the emperor issued an imperial edict to detain Li Xuanmin for escorting Xia Zhou, and killed him.

古文：冬，十月，戊申，立吴国夫人冯氏为皇后。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊申，后晋出帝册立吴国夫人冯氏为皇后。
English: In winter, in October, in Wushan, the Empress Dowager of the State of Wu, Ms. Feng, was crowned as empress.

古文：初，高祖爱少弟重胤，养以为子；及留守鄴都，娶副留守安喜冯濛女为其妇。
现代文：从前，后晋高祖石敬瑭喜爱他的小弟弟石重胤，把他当作儿子来养育；后来石敬瑭留邺都时，聘娶副留守安喜人冯的女儿给石重胤做媳妇。
English: Once upon a time, after he was promoted to high school, his ancestor, Shi Jingyao, loved his little brother, Shi Chongyan, and raised him as his son. Later, when Shi Jingyao stayed in the capital, he hired the daughter of Feng, the deputy governor of Anhui Province, to be his daughter-in-law.

古文：重胤早卒，冯夫人寡居，有美色，帝见而悦之；高祖崩，梓宫在殡，帝遂纳之。
现代文：石重胤早死，冯夫人寡居，长得美，当时齐王石重贵看到他的婶母喜欢上了；后晋高祖驾崩，棺材还未殡葬，石重贵便把其婶母娶了过来。
English: Shi Shigetian died early, Mrs. Feng was widowed and grew up to be beautiful. At that time, Qi Wang Shigetian saw that his aunt liked him; after Jingu Gao's ancestor passed away, the coffin was not buried, and Shigetian married his aunt.

古文：群臣皆贺，帝谓冯道等曰： 皇太后之命，与卿等不任大庆。 
现代文：群臣都来祝贺，出帝石重贵对冯道等人说： 遵皇太后之命，同众卿不举办大庆。 
English: A group of courtiers came to congratulate, and Emperor Emeritus Shigeki said to Feng Dao and others, "In accordance with the order of the Empress Dowager, we will not hold a grand celebration.

古文：群臣出，帝与夫人酣饮，过梓宫前，醊而告曰： 皇太后之命，与先帝不任大庆。 
现代文：群臣退出，出帝与冯夫人酣饮为乐，经过高祖灵枢之前，用酒酹地而祷告说： 皇太后之命，同先帝不搞大庆。 
English: The group of courtiers withdrew, leaving the emperor and Mrs. Feng to enjoy a drink, and before passing through the spiritual center of Gaozhu, they prayed with wine and said: The empress dowager's order is not to celebrate with the former emperor.

古文：左右失笑，帝亦自笑，顾谓左右曰： 我今日作新婿，何如？ 
现代文：左右之人不觉失笑，出帝自己也发笑，对左右的人说： 我今天当了新女婿，怎么样？ 
English: People on both sides were unconsciously amused, and Emperor Emeritus himself laughed, saying to people on both sides, "I became the new son-in-law today, how is it?

古文：夫人与左右皆大笑。
现代文：冯夫人和左右都大笑。
English: Mrs. Feng and the others laughed loudly.

古文：太后虽恚，而无如之何。
现代文：皇太后虽然恼恨，也没有办法。
English: Although the Empress Dowager was angry, there was nothing she could do.

古文：既正位中宫，颇预政事。
现代文：冯夫人正位中宫之后，经常干预朝政。
English: After Mrs. Feng was enthroned as the second consort, she often intervened in court politics.

古文：后兄玉，时为礼部郎中、盐铁判官，帝骤擢用至端明殿学士、户部侍郎，与议政事。
现代文：她的哥哥冯玉，当时任礼部郎中、盐铁判官，少帝骤然把他提拔为端明殿学士、户部侍郎，同他议论政事。
English: Her brother, Feng Yu, was at that time a vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a judge of the Salt and Iron Court. The young emperor suddenly promoted him to be a scholar of the Duanming Palace and a chamberlain of the household, and discussed political affairs with him.

古文：汉主命韶王弘雅致仕。
现代文：南汉主刘玢命令韶王刘弘雅退休。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty, Liu Xuan, ordered Liu Hongya, the king of Xuan, to retire.

古文：唐主遣洪州营屯都虞候严恩将兵讨张遇贤，以通事舍人金陵边镐为监军。
现代文：南唐主李派遣洪州营屯都虞候严恩领兵讨伐张遇贤，任用通事舍人金陵人边镐为监军。
English: The lord of Southern Tang, Li, dispatched Hongzhou, the capital of Yingtun, to wait for Yan'en to lead the troops to fight against Zhang Youxian, and appointed Jinling people, who were reluctant to do anything, to supervise the troops.

古文：镐用虞州人白昌裕为谋主，击张遇贤；屡破之。
现代文：边镐用虔州人白昌裕为主持谋划的人，出击张遇贤，多次打败他。
English: Bentham used Bai Changyu, a native of Gyeongju, as the person in charge of the plan. He attacked Zhang Youxian and defeated him many times.

古文：遇贤祷于神，神不复言，其徒大惧。
现代文：张遇贤向神祷告，神不再讲话，他的徒众大为恐惧。
English: Zhang Yuxian prayed to God. God stopped speaking, and his disciples were terrified.

古文：昌裕劝镐伐木开道，出其营后袭之，遇贤弃众奔别将李台。
现代文：白昌裕劝边镐砍伐树木开辟出道路，从他们的营寨后面来袭击他们，张遇贤舍弃了他的徒众奔向别将李台。
English: Bai Changyu advised the border troops to cut down trees to open up a path and attack them from behind their camp. Zhang Yuxian abandoned his followers and ran to the other side of Li Tai.

古文：台知神无验，执遇贤以降，斩于金陵市。
现代文：李台知道求神没有应验，便擒拿张遇贤来投降，在金陵市街上把他斩杀。
English: Knowing that his supplication to God had not been answered, Li Tai took Zhang Yu Xian to surrender and beheaded him on the streets of Jinling.

古文：十一月，丁亥，汉主祀南郊，大赦，改元乾和。
现代文：十一月，丁亥，南汉主刘晟在南郊祭祀，实行大赦，改年号为乾和。
English: In November, Dinghai, the Southern Han Emperor Liu Bei made a sacrificial offering in the southern suburbs, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Qianhe.

古文：戊子，吴越王弘佐纳妃仰氏，仁诠之女也。
现代文：戊子，吴越王钱弘佐纳妃仰氏，是仰仁诠的女儿。
English: Wuzi, the daughter of the king of Wuyue, Qian Hongzana Yang, is the daughter of Yang Rinyu.

古文：初，高祖以马三百借平卢节度使杨光远，景延广以诏命取之。光远怒曰： 是疑我也。 
现代文：过去，后晋高祖石敬瑭把三百马匹马借给平卢节度使杨光远，景延广用出帝诏命向他索取，杨光远发怒说： 这是怀疑我啊！ 
English: In the past, Yang Guangyuan was angered by the fact that the late Jingu Gao's progenitor, Jingshi Jingyao, had lent three hundred horses to Pinglu Jiedu, which Yang Guangyuan used the imperial edict to obtain from him. Yang Guangyuan said angrily, "This is suspicious of me!

古文：密召其子单州刺史承祚，戊戌，承祚称母病，夜，开门奔青州。
现代文：暗中召唤他的儿子单州刺史杨承祚，戊戌，杨承祚声称母亲有病，夜间，打开城门奔向青州。
English: Yang Chengyao secretly summoned his son, Yang Chengyao, who claimed that his mother was ill. At night, Yang Chengyao opened the city gate and ran to Qingzhou.

古文：庚子，以左飞龙使金城何超权知单州。
现代文：庚子，后晋朝延任用左飞龙使金城人何超暂时主持单州事务。
English: Geng Zi, after the Jin Dynasty, appointed Zuo Feilong to temporarily preside over the affairs of the single state.

古文：遣内班赐光远玉带、御马、金帛，以安其意。
现代文：派遣内班使者去赏赐给杨光远玉带、御马，用来安抚他的心意。
English: Send an emissary to reward Yang Guangyuan with a jade belt and a horse to appease his mind.

古文：壬寅，遣侍卫步军都指挥使郭谨将兵戍郓州。
现代文：壬寅，派遣侍卫步军都指挥使郭谨领兵镇守郓州。
English: Ren Yin dispatched his bodyguards and marching troops and ordered Guo Jian to lead the troops to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：唐葬光文肃武孝高皇帝于永陵，唐号烈祖。
现代文：南唐在永陵安葬光文肃武孝高皇帝李，庙号烈祖。
English: Emperor Li of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, was buried in Yongling.

古文：十二月，乙巳朔，遣左领军卫将军蔡行遇将兵戍郓州。
现代文：十二月，乙巳朔，后晋派遣左领军卫将军蔡行遇领兵镇戍郓州。
English: In December, at the dawn of the new year, Emperor Jin dispatched General Cai Xing, the leader of the Left Division of the National Guard, to lead the troops to Bozhou.

古文：杨光远遣骑兵入淄州，劫刺史翟进宗归于青州。
现代文：杨光远派遣骑兵进入淄州，劫掠了刺史翟进宗还归青州。
English: Yang Guangyuan sent cavalry into Zhangzhou, and robbed and plundered Jishi Shujinzong and returned to Qingzhou.

古文：甲寅，徙杨承祚为登州刺史以从其便。
现代文：甲寅，朝廷调徙杨承祚为登州刺史，用来顺应他行事方便。
English: In A, the imperial court transferred Yang Chengtao to the State Council as a prelude to going to the State Council, which made it convenient to act in accordance with him.

古文：光远益骄，密告契丹，以晋主负德违盟，境内大饥，公私困竭，乘此际攻之，一举可取；赵延寿亦劝之。
现代文：杨光远更加骄纵，暗中陈告契丹，说晋主辜负恩德违背盟约，境内饥荒严重，公家和民间困乏穷竭，乘这个时候攻打，一举可以夺取晋室天下；投降契丹的赵延寿也劝说契丹南征。
English: Yang Guangyuan was even more arrogant. He secretly told the Khitan that the Jin ruler had betrayed the kindness and violated the covenant, that the famine in the territory was serious, and that the public and private sectors were exhausted. Taking advantage of this time to attack, he could seize the Jin dynasty in one fell swoop. Zhao Yanshu, who had surrendered to the Khitan, also persuaded the Khitan to march south.

古文：契丹主乃集山后及卢龙兵合五万人，使延寿将之，委延寿经略中国，曰： 若得之，当立汝为帝。 
现代文：契丹主耶律德光便聚集山后和卢龙的兵众共合五万人，让赵延寿统领他们，并委任赵延寿经略中原，说： 如果能夺得中原，定当立你当皇帝。 
English: The Khitan lord, Yerudoglu, gathered a total of fifty thousand soldiers from Shanhou and Lulong, let Zhao Yanshou lead them, and appointed Zhao Yanshou to manage the Central Plains, saying: If you can conquer the Central Plains, you will become emperor.

古文：又常指延寿谓晋人曰： 此汝主也。 
现代文：又常常指着赵延寿对晋国的人说： 这就是你们的皇帝。 
English: He often pointed to Zhao Yanshou and said to the people of Jin, "This is your emperor."

古文：延寿信之，由是为契丹尽力，画取中国之策。
现代文：赵延寿相信这个，因此替契丹尽力，谋划夺取中原的办法。
English: Zhao Yanshou believed this, so he did his best for Qidan and plotted a way to capture Zhongyuan.

古文：朝廷颇闻其谋，丙辰，遣使城南乐及德清军，征近道兵以备之。
现代文：后晋朝廷知道这种谋划，丙辰，派遣使者在南乐筑城及设置德清军，征调附近各道的兵力以防备契丹。
English: The Later Jin Dynasty court knew about this plan, and sent envoys to Nanle to build a city and set up a German-Qing army, and conscripted troops from nearby provinces to guard against the Khitan.

古文：唐侍中周宗年老，恭谨自守，中书令宋齐丘广树朋党，百计倾之。
现代文：南唐侍中周宗年老，恭谨自守，中书令宋齐丘广泛地树立自己的朋党，千方百计排挤他。
English: Zhou Zong, a middle-aged courtier of the Southern Tang Dynasty, was respectful and self-disciplined. He ordered Song Qiqiu to widely establish his own party and tried his best to oust him.

古文：宗泣诉于唐王，唐主由是薄齐丘。
现代文：周宗涕泣地诉陈于南唐主，南唐主因此轻慢宋齐丘。
English: Zhou Zong tearfully complained to Chen Yu, the Lord of Southern Tang, and the Lord of Southern Tang therefore treated Song Qiqiu with contempt.

古文：既而陈觉被疏，乃出齐丘为镇海节度使。
现代文：不久，陈觉被疏远，便把宋齐丘派出去当镇海节度使。
English: Soon, Chen Jue was alienated and sent Song Qiqiu out to be the envoy of the Zhenhai Festival.

古文：齐丘忿怼，表乞归九华旧隐，唐主知其诈，一表，即从之，赐书曰： 今日之行，昔时相许。
现代文：宋使丘很怨愤，上表要求回归九华山旧时隐居处，南唐主知道他的欺诈，只上一表，便批准他，并赐给他诏书说： 明天的行程，是从前应许的。
English: Song Zhiqiu was very indignant. He demanded to return to his former place of seclusion on Mount Jiuhuashan. The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty knew of his deceit, approved him with just one look, and gave him an edict saying, "Tomorrow's itinerary is what was promised before."

古文：朕实知公，故不夺公志。 
现代文：朕确实知道先生，因此不违背先生的志趣。 
English: I really know him, so I don't go against his wishes.

古文：仍赐号九华先生，封青阳公，食一县租税。
现代文：仍然赐给他封号：九华先生，封为青阳公，享受一县的租税。
English: He was still given a title: Mr. Jihua, named Qingyang, enjoying a county's tax.

古文：齐丘乃治大第于青阳，服御将吏，皆如王公，而愤邑尤甚。
现代文：宋齐丘便营建一处大的府第在青阳，旌旗兵马，武将文吏，都和王公一样，但是，忧郁更加厉害了。
English: Song Qiqiu then built a large palace in Qingyang. The banner-waving soldiers and horses, generals and clerics were all the same as Wang Gong, but the melancholy was even more severe.

古文：宁州酋长莫彦殊以所部温那等十八州附于楚；其州无官府，惟立牌于冈阜，略以恩威羁縻而已。
现代文：宁州酋长莫彦殊把他所属的温那等十八州归附于楚国；那些州没有官府，只是立碑牌在山冈或土堆之上，稍微施行些恩惠或威严，加以笼统牵制而已。
English: The chieftain of Ningzhou, Mo Yanshu, annexed the eighteen states to which he belonged, such as Winna, to the state of Chu; those states did not have government offices, but only erected plaques on mountains or mounds, imposed a little grace or majesty, and generally restrained them.

古文：是岁，春夏旱，秋冬水，蝗大起，东自海壖，西距陇坻，南逾江、湖，北抵幽蓟，原野、山谷、城郭、庐舍皆满，竹木叶俱尽。
现代文：这一年，春季、夏季干旱，秋季、冬季大水泛滥。蝗灾大起，东边从海边空地开始，西边到达陇山，南边跨过长江、淮河，北边至于幽州、蓟州，原野、山谷、城廓、庐舍都飞满了，竹叶、树叶都被吃光了。
English: This year, the spring and summer were dry, and the autumn and winter were flooded. Locust plagues were rampant. In the east, they started from the coastal open space, in the west they reached Lushan, in the south they crossed the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River, and in the north, as far as Yuzhou and Luzhou, the fields, valleys, city gates, and houses were all full of locusts, and the bamboo leaves and leaves were all eaten up.

古文：重以官括民谷，使者督责严急，至封碓硙，不留其食，有坐匿谷抵死者。
现代文：再加上官府搜刮民间谷物，使差督催责罚严苛而且紧急，以至封闭碓臼碾磨，不留口粮，有因为隐匿粮谷而犯罪抵命的。
English: In addition, the raiding of folk grains by the government made the punishment of the police superintendent severe and urgent, so that the mill was closed and no rations were left, and some people died for the crime of concealing grain.

古文：县令往往以督趣不办，纳印自劾去。
现代文：县令往往由于督催不上来，归还印信自己弹劾弃官逸去的。
English: The county magistrate often abdicates because the superintendent fails to urge him to do so, and returns the stamped letter to impeach himself.

古文：民馁死者数十万口，流亡不可胜数。
现代文：民众饥饿而死的达数十万口，流亡逃荒的不可胜计。
English: Hundreds of thousands of people died of starvation, and there were countless attempts to flee the country.

古文：于是留守、节度使下至将军，各献马、金、帛、刍粟以助国。
现代文：因此留守、节度使以下到将军，各自捐献马匹、金帛、粟草，用来帮助国家。
English: Therefore, the left-behinds, the festival-goers, and the generals each donated horses, gold ingots, and millet grass to help the country.

古文：朝廷以恒、定饥甚，独不括民谷。
现代文：后晋朝廷因为恒州、定州饥馑严重，特许不搜刮民间谷物。
English: Due to the severe famine in Hengzhou and Dingzhou, the court of the Later Jin Dynasty gave special permission not to collect folk grains.

古文：顺国节度使杜威奏称军食不足，请如诸州例，许之。
现代文：顺国节度使杜威奏称军粮不足，请求像各州一样搜求，朝廷准许。
English: The Shunguo Festival made Dewey report that there was a shortage of military rations and request that they be searched in the same way as the states, which was approved by the imperial court.

古文：威用判官王绪谋，检索殆尽，得百万斛。
现代文：杜威用判官王绪的谋略，检查索求几乎净尽，获得一百万斛。
English: Dewey used the judge Wang Xu's strategy to check the claims almost completely and obtained one million baht.

古文：威止奏三十万斛，馀皆入其家；又令判官李沼称贷于民，复满百万斛，来春粜之，得缗钱二百万，阖境苦之。
现代文：杜威只奏报三十万斛，其余都收进他的家里；又命令判官李沼向民间借贷的名义，又搜取百万斛，来春出售，得钱二百万缗，全境受其苦害。
English: Dewey only reported 300,000 baht, and the rest was collected in his home. He also ordered the judge Li Numa to collect another million baht in the name of borrowing from the people, and sell it next spring, gaining 2 million baht. The whole territory suffered from it.

古文：定州吏欲援例为奏，义武节度使马全节不许，曰： 吾为观察使，职在养民，岂忍效彼所为乎！ 
现代文：定州的官吏也想引援杜威在恒州的先例上奏，义武节度使马全节不准许，说： 我做观察使，职责在于养民，怎忍心学他那种做法啊！ 
English: The officials of Dingzhou also wanted to enlist Dewey's help in following the precedent of Hengzhou, but Ma Quanzhong was not allowed to do so, saying: I am an observer, my duty is to feed the people, how can I bear to learn his way!

古文：楚地多产金银，茶利尤厚，由是财货丰殖。
现代文：楚地多产金银，茶叶的利润尤其厚重，因此财赋货物的收入丰富。
English: Chu is rich in gold and silver, and the profits from tea are particularly high, so the income from goods is abundant.

古文：而楚王希范，奢欲无厌，喜自夸大。
现代文：然而楚王马希范，奢侈的贪欲无尽无休，喜欢自己夸大。
English: However, the king of Chu, Mahifan, whose extravagant greed is endless, likes to exaggerate himself.

古文：为长枪大槊，饰之以金，可执而不可用。
现代文：制作长枪大槊，用黄金作装饰，可以执举而不可用。
English: And they made coats of mail, and overlaid them with gold, so that they might be carried, but not used.

古文：募富民年少肥泽者八千人，为银枪都。
现代文：募集了八千多有钱人家的子弟长得丰满润泽的人，设为银枪都。
English: More than eight thousand children of rich families were recruited to grow up to be plump and well-groomed, and set up as silver gun capital.

古文：宫室、园囿、服用之物，务穷侈靡。
现代文：宫室、园囿、服用的东西，必求奢侈靡费到极点。
English: The palace, the garden, and the things that are used must be luxurious to the extreme.

古文：作九龙殿，刻沈香为八龙，饰以金宝，长十馀丈，抱柱相向；希范居其中，自为一龙，其襆头脚长丈馀，以象龙角。
现代文：建造九龙殿，用沉香木雕刻为八条龙，用金宝作饰物，长十多丈，绕柱相向；马希范坐在其中，自己作为一条龙，他戴的头，巾带一丈多长，用来象征龙角。
English: He built the Nine Dragons Hall, carved eight dragons with agate wood, and made ornaments with gold and silver. They were more than ten meters long and wound around the pillars facing each other. Ma Xifan sat in one of them, himself as a dragon, and the head he wore was a long scarf, used to symbolize the dragon's horns.

古文：用度不足，重为赋敛。
现代文：用度不足，便加重赋敛。
English: If the dosage is insufficient, it will increase the astringency.

古文：每遣使者行田，专以增顷亩为功，民不胜租赋而逃。
现代文：常常派遣使者查计田亩，专事增加顷亩来记功，民众负担不起租赋而逃走。
English: Envoys are often sent to calculate the number of mu of land, especially to increase the number of mu to record the merit. The people cannot afford the rent and flee.

古文：王曰： 但令田在，何忧无谷！ 
现代文：楚王却说： 只要田地在，何愁没有粮食吃！ 
English: But King Chu said, "As long as there is rice in the fields, I don't care if there is no food to eat!"

古文：命营田使邓懿文籍逃田，募民耕艺出租。
现代文：命令营田使邓懿文查核逃税的田亩，募集民众耕种出租。
English: Ying Tian ordered Deng Yuwen to inspect the tax-evading fields and recruit people to cultivate and rent them.

古文：民舍故从新，仅能自存，自西徂东，各失其业。
现代文：民众舍弃旧田而去租种新地，只够维持自己生存，从西到东，各自把营生之业丢失了。
English: From west to east, people have lost their livelihoods as they abandoned their old fields to lease new land to grow crops, with only enough to sustain themselves.

古文：又听人入财拜官，以财多少为官高卑之差。
现代文：又听任庶人捐钱拜官，按输钱多少作为买官高低的等级。
English: He also allowed commoners to donate money to worship officials, according to how much money they lost as a high and low level of buying officials.

古文：富商大贾，布在列位。
现代文：富商大贾，安排在有品阶的行列。
English: Wealthy merchants, arranged in ranks.

古文：外官还者，必责贡献。
现代文：在朝外做官又还朝为官的，必然要求他向朝廷作贡献。
English: Those who work as an official outside the imperial court and also work as an official in the imperial court are inevitably required to make contributions to the imperial court.

古文：民有罪，则富者输财，强者为兵，惟贫弱受刑。
现代文：老百姓犯罪，便有钱的捐财，强壮的当兵，只有贫穷体弱的受刑罚。
English: When ordinary people commit crimes, the rich donate money, the strong serve as soldiers, and only the poor and infirm are punished.

古文：又置函，使人投匿名书相告讦，至有灭族者。
现代文：又设立信箱，让人投入匿名信相互告发，以至有人因而被族灭全家的。
English: A mailbox was also set up for people to send anonymous letters to inform on each other, which led to a family being wiped out.

古文：是岁，用孔目官周陟议，令常税之外，大县贡米二千斛，中千斛，小七百斛；无米者输布帛。
现代文：这一年，采用孔目官周陟的建议，下令在正常租税之外，大县贡纳米二千斛，中县一千斛，小县七百斛；没有米的县输纳布帛。
English: This year, on the recommendation of the Confucian official Zhou Qi, it was ordered that in addition to the normal tax, the large counties should pay 2,000 baht, the middle counties 1,000 baht, and the small counties 700 baht; and the counties without rice should pay 2,000 baht.

古文：天策学士拓跋恒上书曰： 殿下长深宫之中，藉已成之业，身不知稼穑之劳，耳不闻鼓鼙之音，驰骋遨游，雕墙玉食。
现代文：天策学士拓跋恒上书说： 殿下生长在深宫之中，继承已经完成的家业，身体没有经历过种庄稼的辛劳，两耳没有听到过战争鼙鼓的声音，骑着马驰骋遨游，住的是雕梁画栋，吃的是山珍海味。
English: His Imperial Highness grew up in the deep palace, inheriting the completed family business, his body has not experienced the toil of planting crops, his ears have not heard the sound of war drums, he rides a horse, he lives in a carved and painted house, and he eats mountain and sea delicacies.

古文：府库尽矣，而浮费益甚；百姓困矣，而厚敛不息。
现代文：国家财政艰难，府库里空虚了，反而浪费越来越严重；人民生计困穷，却还不断加重赋敛。
English: The country's finances are in a difficult state. The treasury is empty, but waste is getting worse and worse. People's livelihoods are poor, but they continue to increase austerity.

古文：今淮南为仇雠之国，番禺怀吞噬之志，荆渚日图窥伺，溪洞待我姑息。
现代文：现在淮南的唐朝是敌对之国，番禺的南汉怀着吞并之心，荆渚的高氏天天在窥伺我们，溪洞的彭莫诸族期待我们的宽容。
English: At present, the Tang Dynasty in South Huai is a hostile country, the Southern Han Dynasty in Panyu is bent on annexation, the Gaos in Jingzhu are spying on us every day, and the Pengmo people in Xidong are expecting our tolerance.

古文：谚曰： 足寒伤心，民怨伤国。 
现代文：俗话说 足寒伤心，民怨伤国 。
English: As the saying goes, a cold foot brings a sad heart, and a grudge brings a sad country.

古文：愿罢输米之令，诛周陟以谢郡县，去不急之务，减兴作之役。无令一旦祸败，为四方所笑。 
现代文：希望能够停止输纳米谷的命令，杀周陟来向州县谢罪，去掉不急的事务，减少兴建的劳役，不要招致一旦祸败，被四方所耻笑。 
English: It is hoped that the order to stop the export of nano-valley can be carried out, and the crime of killing Zhou Xuan can be forgiven to the prefectures and counties, and the non-urgent matters can be eliminated, and the construction labor can be reduced, so as not to cause a disaster and be ridiculed by the four parties.

古文：王大怒。
现代文：楚王大怒。
English: Yan Wang flew into a rage.

古文：他日，恒请见，辞以昼寝。
现代文：过几天，拓跋恒请求谒见，楚王以白天睡觉推辞不见。
English: A few days later, Tuoba Heng requested to see him, but King Chu refused to see him, saying that he was sleeping during the day.

古文：恒谓客将区弘练曰： 王逞欲而愎谏，吾见其千口飘零无日矣。 
现代文：拓跋恒对客将区弘练说： 大王随心所欲而拒绝进谏，我等着看他一家千口飘零过不了日子了。 
English: Tuoba Heng said to the guest commander Gu Hongren: The great king does as he pleases and refuses to enter the cocoon, I can't wait to see his family of a thousand drift away.

古文：王益怒，遂终身不复见之。
现代文：楚王更加发怒，从此终身不再见他。
English: King Chu became even angrier and never saw him again.

古文：闽主曦嫁其女，取班簿阅视之；朝士有不贺者十二人，皆杖之于朝堂。
现代文：闽主王曦出嫁他的女儿，索取记载将吏朝见的名册来察看，朝士有十二人没有来朝贺，都在朝堂施行廷杖。
English: The lord of the castle, Wang Xi, was marrying off his daughter, and he asked for a list of the names of the officials who had visited the imperial court to inspect. Twelve members of the imperial court did not come to congratulate the emperor, but all of them carried out the imperial scepter in the imperial court.

古文：以御史中丞刘赞不举劾，亦将杖之，赞义不受辱，欲自杀。
现代文：因为御史中丞刘赞没有揭发弹劾这种人，也将要杖责他，刘赞义愤不甘受辱，准备自杀。
English: Because Liu Zan did not expose the impeachment of such a person, he will also have to scold him. Liu Zan was indignant and ready to commit suicide.

古文：谏议大夫郑元弼谏曰： 古者刑不上大夫，中丞仪刑百僚，岂宜加之棰楚！ 
现代文：谏议大夫郑元弼劝谏说： 古时候刑不上大夫。中丞是掌握百官刑罚制度的人，怎能对他打板子！ 
English: Zheng Yuanzhang, the doctor, said, "In ancient times, the punishment was not up to the doctor. Zhong Rong is a person who has mastered the penal system of a hundred officials. How can you beat him!

古文：曦正色曰： 卿欲效魏征邪？ 
现代文：王曦严厉地说： 你想效仿魏徵吗？ 
English: Wang Xi said sternly: Do you want to emulate Wei Zheng?

古文：元弼曰： 臣以陛下为唐太宗，故敢效魏征。 
现代文：郑元弼说： 我把陛下当作唐太宗，所以才敢效仿魏徵。 
English: Zheng Yuanzhang said: I regard Your Majesty as the Emperor of Tang Dynasty, so I dare to emulate Wei Zheng.

古文：曦怒稍解，乃释赞，赞竟以忧卒。
现代文：王曦怒气稍微缓解，才把刘赞释放了，刘赞竟然因此忧虑而死。
English: Wang Xi's anger eased slightly before he released Liu Zan, who died of worry.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝下开运元年
现代文：开运元年
English: The first year of operation

古文：春，正月，乙亥，边籓驰告： 契丹前锋将赵延寿、赵延照将兵五万入寇，逼贝州。 
现代文：春季，正月，乙亥，边防的藩镇向后晋朝廷派飞骑驰告： 契丹前锋将赵延寿、赵延照统领兵众五万人来侵犯，逼近贝州。 
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, in the second month of the Heian period, the border towns sent horseback to the imperial court to announce that the Khitan vanguard had invaded Zhao Yanshou and Zhao Yanzhao, leading 50,000 soldiers, and was approaching Bozhou.

古文：延照，思温之子也。
现代文：赵延照是赵思温的儿子。
English: Zhao Yanzhao is the son of Zhao Siwen.

古文：先是朝廷以贝州水陆要冲，多聚刍粟，为大军数年之储，以备契丹。
现代文：起先，后晋朝廷因为贝州是水陆要冲，便大量聚集粮草，是大举进军时的数年储存，用以防备契丹。
English: At first, because Bozhou was a land and water strategic point, the Later Jin Dynasty gathered a large amount of grain and grass, which was stored for several years to prevent Khitan invasion.

古文：军校邵珂，性凶悖，永清节度使王令温黜之。
现代文：军校邵珂，性格凶狠不讲理，永清节度使王令温贬黜了他。
English: Shao Ke, a military school student, had a fierce and unreasonable personality. Wang Lingwen humiliated him in the Yongqing Festival.

古文：珂怨望，密遣人亡入契丹，言 贝州粟多而兵弱，易取也。 
现代文：邵珂怨恨，暗中派人跑到契丹，说： 贝州粮食多而兵力弱，容易攻取。 
English: Out of spite, Shau Ke secretly sent someone to Khitan, saying, "Beizhou has a lot of grain, but its army is weak, so it is easy to capture.

古文：会令温入朝，执政以前复州防御使吴峦权知州事。峦至，推诚抚士；会契丹入寇，峦书生，无爪牙，珂自请，愿效死，峦使将兵守南门，峦自守东门。
现代文：适逢王令温入朝，执政者任用前复州防御使吴峦暂时主持州务，吴峦到达贝州，推诚对待将士；接着就赶上契丹兴兵侵犯，吴峦是个书生，没有爪牙，邵珂自己提出请求，愿意以死效力，吴峦让他领兵把守南门，自己把守东门。
English: At the time of Wang Ling Wen's accession to the imperial court, the ruler appointed the former Fuzhou defense to make Wu Gan temporarily preside over state affairs. Wu Gan arrived in Bay Province and treated the soldiers sincerely. Then he caught up with the invasion of the Khitan Xing soldiers. Wu Gan was a student and had no minions. Shau Ke himself made a request and was willing to work with death. Wu Gan let him lead the soldiers to guard the south gate and guard the east gate himself.

古文：契丹主自攻贝州，峦悉力拒之，烧其攻具殆尽。
现代文：契丹主亲自攻打贝州，吴峦用全力抗拒他，把他的攻城器具几乎都烧光了。
English: The Khitan lord himself attacked Bozhou, and Wu Gan resisted him with all his might, burning almost all of his siege equipment.

古文：己卯，契丹复攻城，珂引契丹自南门入，峦赴井死。
现代文：己卯，契丹又来攻城，邵珂引领契丹兵从南门进来，吴峦投井而死。
English: However, the Khitan came to attack the city again. Shao Ke led the Khitan soldiers to enter from the south gate, and Wu Xi threw himself into a well and died.

古文：契丹遂陷贝州，所杀且万人。
现代文：契丹便把贝州城攻取下来，所杀害的晋国军民几近万人。
English: Khitan then captured the city of Bozhou, killing nearly 10,000 Jin soldiers and civilians.

古文：庚辰，以归德节度使高行周为北面行营都部署，以河阳节度使符彦卿为马军左厢排陈使，以右神武统军丘甫遇为马军右厢排陈使，以陕府节度使王周为步军左厢排陈使，以左羽林将军潘环为步军右厢排陈使。
现代文：庚辰，后晋朝廷任用归德节度使高行周为北面行营都部署，河阳节度使苻彦卿为马军左厢排陈使，右神武统军皇甫遇为马军右厢排陈使，陕府节度使王周为步军左厢排陈使，左林羽将军潘环为步军右厢排陈使。
English: Geng Chen and the Later Jin Dynasty court appointed Gao Xing Zhou, who had returned to Germany, to be the commander of the northern army, and Heyang Xing Zhou to be the commander of the left platoon of the horse army, the right platoon commander of the horse army, and the right platoon commander of the right platoon of the right army, and the Shaanxi Xing Zhou to be the commander of the left platoon of the infantry army, and the left platoon commander of the infantry army to be the commander of the right platoon, and the left platoon commander of the infantry army to be the commander of the right pl

古文：太原奏契丹入雁门关。
现代文：太原奏报契丹进入雁门关。
English: Taiyuan reported that Qidan entered the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：恒、邢、沧皆奏契丹入寇。
现代文：恒州、邢州、沧州都报奏契丹来侵犯。
English: Hengzhou, Zhangzhou and Cangzhou all reported that they had been invaded by Khitan.

古文：成德节度使杜威遣幕僚曹光裔诣杨光远，为陈祸福，光远遣光裔入奏，称： 承祚逃归，母疾故尔。
现代文：成德节度使杜派威派其幕僚曹光裔去见杨光远，向他陈述依违朝廷的祸福，杨光远派曹光裔向后晋朝廷入奏，说： 杨承祚逃归青州，是因为母亲有病。
English: The Chengde Festival made Du Paiwei send his staff member Cao Guangxuan to Yang Guangyuan, and told him that Yang Guangyuan sent Cao Guangyuan to the imperial court, saying: Yang Chengyuan fled to Qingzhou because his mother was ill.

古文：既蒙恩宥，阖族荷恩。 
现代文：既然承蒙朝廷施恩原谅，合族都感谢朝廷的恩惠。 
English: Now that the imperial court has graciously forgiven us, we are all grateful for the court's favor.

古文：朝廷信其言，遣使与光裔复往慰谕之。
现代文：后晋朝廷相信了他的话，派遣使者同曹光裔一道再次去安抚告谕他。
English: The Later Jin Dynasty court believed his words and sent an envoy together with Cao Guangxiong to appease and advise him again.

古文：唐以侍中周宗为镇南节度使，左仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事张居咏为镇海节度使。
现代文：南唐任用侍中周宗为镇南节度使，左仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事张居咏为镇海节度使。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Zhou Zong, a middle-ranking courtier, as the envoy to the Southern Zhenhai Festival, and Zhang Jiuyong, a left-hand servant and a footman, as the envoy to the Southern Zhenhai Festival, and Zhang Jiuyong, a high-ranking courtier, as the envoy to the Southern Zhenhai Festival.

古文：唐主决欲传位于齐、燕二王。
现代文：南唐主李决定传位给他的弟弟齐、燕二王。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, decided to pass the throne to his younger brother Qi, the second king of Yan.

古文：翰林学士冯延己等因之欲隔绝中外以擅权。
现代文：翰林学士冯延己等因此想隔绝朝廷内外来把持权柄。
English: Therefore, Hanlin Scholar Feng Yanji and others wanted to isolate the imperial court from both inside and outside to control power.

古文：辛巳，敕： 齐王景遂参决庶政，百官惟枢密副使魏岑、查文徽得白事，馀非召对不得见。 
现代文：辛巳，南唐主下敕令： 齐王李景遂参与决定庶政，百官中只有枢密副使魏岑、查文徽可以向天子陈奏事情，其余的人除非召对，不得进见。 
English: Suddenly, the Lord of Southern Tang issued an imperial edict: King Li Jing of Qi was to participate in the decision-making of general affairs. Among the hundreds of officials, only the vice-ministers Wei Wei and Chawen Hui could report the matter to the Emperor. The rest of the people were not allowed to attend unless summoned.

古文：国人大骇。
现代文：国中人士大为惊骇。
English: People in the country were shocked.

古文：给事中萧俨上疏极论，不报。
现代文：给事中萧俨上疏极力争论，疏被压下不予上报。
English: During the incident, Xiao Yao and Shang Soso argued vigorously, and Soso was suppressed and not reported.

古文：侍卫都虞候贾崇叩阁求见，曰： 臣事先帝三十年，观其延接疏远，孜孜不怠，下情犹有不通者。
现代文：侍卫都虞候贾崇叩首阁门请求接见，说： 为臣侍奉先帝三十年，看到先帝接见疏远之人，辛勤专致不敢懈怠，下边的情状还有不能上达的。
English: Jia Chong, the attendant of the imperial guard, knocked on the door of the pavilion to request an audience, saying: I have served the former emperor for thirty years, and when I saw the former emperor receive the estranged person, I did not dare to slacken in my hard work and dedication, and the situation below is still unsatisfactory.

古文：陛下新即位，所任者何人，而顿与群臣谢绝？
现代文：陛下新即位，所依靠的是什么样人，便马上同群臣隔绝？
English: What kind of person does His Majesty rely on when he ascends the throne, and is immediately cut off from his courtiers?

古文：臣老矣，不复得奉颜色。 
现代文：为臣老了，不能再亲身得见陛下的颜色。 
English: As an elderly vassal, I can no longer see His Majesty's colors in person.

古文：因涕泗呜咽。
现代文：因而流泪满面，呜咽不已。
English: As a result, she burst into tears and sobbed uncontrollably.

古文：唐主感悟，遽收前敕。
现代文：南唐主感悟，急忙收回先前下的敕令。
English: The Southern Tang Emperor was impressed and hastily revoked the previous imperial order.

古文：唐主于宫中作高楼，召侍臣观之，众皆叹美。
现代文：南唐主在宫中建造高楼，召集侍臣观看，众人都叹赏赞美。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty built a high-rise in the palace, and summoned his courtiers to watch. Everyone admired and praised him.

古文：萧俨曰： 恨楼下无井。 
现代文：萧俨说： 只恨楼下没有修个井。 
English: Xiao Wei said: I just hate that there is no well downstairs.

古文：唐主问其故。
现代文：南唐主问他为什么。
English: The head of Southern Tang Dynasty asked him why.

古文：对曰： 以此不及景阳楼耳。 
现代文：回答说： 因为这个不如陈后主的景阳楼而已。 
English: He replied, "Because this is not as good as Emperor Chen's Jingyang Building."

古文：唐主怒，贬于舒州，观察使孙晟遣兵防之，俨曰： 俨以谏诤得罪，非有它志。
现代文：南唐主发怒，把他贬官到舒州，观察使孙晟派兵防备他。萧俨说： 我是因为直言进谏而得罪，不是有异志。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty became angry, demoted him to Shuzhou, and ordered Sun Yat-sen to send soldiers to guard him. Xiao Yat-sen said, "I was offended because I spoke the truth, not because I had a different opinion."

古文：昔顾命之际，君几危社稷，其罪顾不重于俨乎？
现代文：从前在顾命的时候，您老兄几乎把社稷引向危亡，那种罪过难道不比我萧俨更重吗？
English: Once upon a time, when he was trying to save his own life, your brother almost led the company into peril. Isn't that a more serious sin than mine?

古文：今日反见防邪！ 
现代文：今天你反而来防备我呀！ 
English: Today, on the contrary, you have come to protect me!

古文：晟惭惧，遽罢之。
现代文：孙晟惭愧惶恐，立即解除防设。
English: Sun Yat-sen was ashamed and frightened, and immediately dismantled the fortifications.

古文：帝遣使持书遗契丹，契丹已屯鄴都，不得通而返。
现代文：后晋出帝遣派使臣带着书信送给契丹，契丹已经屯驻邺都，不得通过而返回。
English: Later, Emperor Jin dispatched an envoy with a letter to Qidan. Qidan was already stationed in Shidu and was not allowed to return through Toru.

古文：壬午，以侍卫马步都指挥使景延广为御营使，前靖难节度使李周为东京留守。
现代文：壬午，后晋出帝任命侍卫马步都指挥使景延广为御营使，前静难节度使李周为东京留守。
English: In the morning of the 13th day of the 3rd month, after the Emperor Jinshi left the capital, he appointed the commander of the guards, Ma Budu, to make Jing Yanguang the envoy, and Li Zhou stayed in Tokyo due to the difficult situation.

古文：是日，高行周以前军先发。
现代文：这一天，高行周率领前军首先出发。
English: On this day, Gao Xingzhou led the vanguard to set out first.

古文：时用兵方略号令皆出延广，宰相以下皆无所预；延广乘势使气，陵侮诸将，虽天子亦不能制。
现代文：当时用兵的方略和号令都出自景延广，从宰相以下，都不能参预；景延广借着权势任性使气，凌侮诸将，即使是天子也不能制止他。
English: At that time, the strategy and orders for the use of troops came from Jing Yanguang, from the prime minister down, they could not participate in advance; Jing Yanguang used his power to be headstrong and humiliate the generals, even the Son of Heaven could not stop him.

古文：乙酉，帝发东京。
现代文：乙酉，后晋出帝从东京出发。
English: Emperor Go-Shintō departs from Tokyo.

古文：丁亥，滑州奏契丹至黎阳。
现代文：丁亥，滑州奏报契丹兵到达黎阳。
English: Dinghai, Slum reported that the Khitan soldiers arrived in Liyang.

古文：戊子，帝至澶州。
现代文：戊子，后晋出帝到达澶州。
English: Bo Zi, later promoted to emperor, arrived in Ganzhou.

古文：契丹主屯元城，赵延寿屯南乐；以延寿为魏博节度使，封魏王。
现代文：契丹主耶律德光屯驻元城，赵延寿屯驻南乐，契丹任命赵延寿为魏博节度使，封爵魏王。
English: The Khitan lord Yerutde Guangtun resided in Yuancheng, and Zhao Yanshutun resided in Nanle. The Khitan appointed Zhao Yanshutun as the Wei Bo Festival envoy, and he was knighted as the Wei King.

古文：契丹寇太原，刘知远与白承福合兵二万击之。
现代文：契丹侵犯太原，刘知远与白承福联合二万士兵迎击。
English: The Khitan invaded Taiyuan, and Liu Zhiyuan and Bai Chengfu combined with 20,000 soldiers to counterattack.

古文：甲午，以知远为幽州道行营招讨使，杜威为副使，马全节为都虞候。
现代文：甲午，后晋朝廷任命刘知远为幽州道行营招讨使，杜威为副招讨使，马全节为都虞候。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, the court of the Later Jin Dynasty appointed Liu Zhiyuan as the Yuzhou Road Campaign Recruiting Envoy, Dewey as the Deputy Recruiting Envoy, and Ma Quanzhong as the Capital Recruiting Envoy.

古文：丙申，遣右武卫上将军张彦泽等将兵拒契丹于黎阳。
现代文：丙申，派遣右武卫上将军张彦泽等统兵在黎阳抗拒契丹。
English: Bishen, dispatched the Right Division of the Imperial Guard General Zhang Yanze and other soldiers to resist the Khitan in Liyang.

古文：戊戌，蜀主复以将相遥领节度使。
现代文：戊戌，蜀主孟昶恢复用将相遥领节度使。
English: Wuzhen, Shu Lord Meng Wei restored the use of will be far away from the collar.

古文：帝复遣译者孟守忠致书于契丹，求修旧好。
现代文：后晋出帝再次遣派翻译孟守忠给契丹送信，要求恢复旧好。
English: Later, Emperor Jin dispatched the translator Meng Shouzhong again to send a letter to Khitan, demanding that the old friendship be restored.

古文：契丹主复书曰： 已成之势，不可改也。 
现代文：契丹主复信说： 已经形成的局势，不能改变了。 
English: The emir replied: The situation that has developed cannot be changed.

古文：辛丑，太原奏破契丹伟王于秀容，斩首三千级。
现代文：辛丑，太原奏报：在忻州秀容打败了契丹伟王，斩了敌人首级三千。
English: Xinxiu, Taiyuan Report: In Zhangzhou Xiurong defeated Khitan Wei Wang and beheaded three thousand of the enemy.

古文：契丹自鸦鸣谷遁去。
现代文：契丹兵从鸦鸣谷逃遁。
English: The Khitan soldiers fled from the Valley of the Raven.

古文：殷铸天德通宝大铁钱，一当百。
现代文：殷国铸造 天德通宝 大铁钱，一当百。
English: Yin Guo Casting Tiande Tongbao Large iron money, one hundred.

古文：唐主遣使遗闽主曦及殷主延政书，责以兄弟寻戈。
现代文：南唐主李派使者送书信给闽主王曦和殷主王延政，责备他们不该兄弟之间兴动干戈。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, sent an envoy to send a letter to the lord of Yin, Wang Xi, and the lord of Yin, Wang Yanzheng, reproaching them for starting a war between brothers.

古文：曦复书，引周公诛管、蔡，唐太宗诛建成、元吉为比。
现代文：王曦复信，引用周公诛除管叔、蔡叔和唐太宗诛除建成、元吉作比喻。
English: Wang Xi replied to the letter, quoting the analogy of Zhou Gongjun's removal of Uncle Guan, Cai Shu and Tang Taizong's removal of Jiancheng and Yuan Jizhi.

古文：延政复书，斥唐主夺杨氏国。
现代文：王延政复信，斥责南唐主篡夺杨氏天下。
English: Wang Yan Zheng replied to the letter and rebuked the Southern Tang Lord for usurping the Yang Dynasty.

古文：唐主怒，遂与殷绝。
现代文：南唐主发怒，便与殷国绝了交。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang became angry and broke off diplomatic relations with Yin.

古文：天平节度副使、知郓州颜衎遣观察判官窦仪奏： 博州刺史周儒以城降契丹，又与杨光远通使往还，引契丹自马家口济河，擒左武卫将军蔡行遇。 
现代文：天平节度副使、知郓州事颜派遣观察判官窦仪上奏后晋朝廷： 博州刺史周儒把城池向契丹投降，又同杨光远通使往来，引导契丹兵从马家口渡过黄河，擒去左武卫将军蔡行遇。 
English: Tianping Jiedu deputy envoy and Zhiyang Zhou Jian dispatched to observe the adjudicator Dou Yi after the report was made to the Jin court: Bozhou Jishi Zhou Ru surrendered the city to the Khitan, and communicated with Yang Guangyuan to guide the Khitan soldiers across the Yellow River from Majiakou to meet General Cai Xing of the Left Division.

古文：仪谓景延广曰： 虏若济河与光远合，则河南危矣。 
现代文：窦仪对景延广说： 北虏如果渡过黄河与杨光远联合，黄河以南就危险了。 
English: Dou Yi said to Jing Yanguang: "If the northern troops cross the Yellow River and unite with Yang Guangyuan, the south of the Yellow River will be in danger.

古文：延广然之。
现代文：景延广认为他说得对。
English: Jing Yanguang thought he was right.

古文：仪，蓟州人也。
现代文：窦仪是蓟州人。
English: Dou Yi is from Zhangzhou.

