古文：九嫔掌妇学之法，以教九御妇德、妇言、妇容、妇功，各帅其属而以时御叙于王所。
现代文：九嫔掌管有关妇人学习的法则，以教育女御作为妇人所应具有的德行、言辞、仪态、劳动技能，各率领所属的女御，按时依次到燕寝侍候王歇息。
English: The Nine Dynasties presided over the rules of women's study, educating the empresses on the virtues, words, manners, and labor skills that a woman should possess. The empresses led by their respective empresses went to Yanbei to wait for the king to rest.

古文：凡祭祀，赞玉赍，选后荐，彻豆笾。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，协助进献盛有黍稷的玉敦，协助王后进献和彻下豆与笾。
English: Wherever a religious service is held, they will assist in the offering of the yakitori yakitori yakitori yakitori yakitori yakitori yakitori yakitori yakitori.

古文：若有宾客，则従后。
现代文：如果有宾客，就跟从王后。
English: If there are guests, follow the Queen.

古文：大丧，帅叙哭者亦如之。
现代文：有大丧，也跟从并协助王后率领依尊卑次序排列哭位而哭。
English: There was a great mourning, and they also followed and assisted the queen in leading the queens to cry in the order of their rank.

古文：世妇掌祭祀。宾客、丧纪之事，帅女宫而澹攥为赍盛。
现代文：世妇掌管有关祭祀、招待宾客和丧事的事，率领宫中女奴洗涤和拭擦礼器，精选供祭祀用的谷物。
English: The lady-in-waiting was in charge of rituals, entertaining guests, and funerals, and led the palace maidservants in washing and wiping the ceremonial vessels and carefully selecting the grain for the rituals.

古文：及祭之日，莅陈女宫之具，凡内羞之物，掌吊临于卿大夫之丧。
现代文：到祭祀那天，亲临宫中女奴陈列祭器，以及所有房中的食物。负责哭吊卿大夫的丧事。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, the maidservant of the palace came in person to display the sacrificial vessels, as well as all the food in the room. She was responsible for the funeral of the weeping doctor.

古文：女御掌御叙于王之燕寝，以岁时献功事。
现代文：女御负责安排依次到燕寝陪侍王过夜。按每年的一定季节呈献劳动成绩。
English: The mistress is responsible for arranging for the servants to spend the night with the king in turn. According to a certain season of the year, they present their work results.

古文：凡祭祀，赞世妇。
现代文：凡祭祀协助世妇做事。
English: All sacrificial rites assist the women of the world in their work.

古文：大丧，掌沐浴。后之丧，持习翣。
现代文：王或王后死，负责为尸体洗头洗身。王后的丧事，负责掌萋。
English: When a king or queen dies, it is the duty of the priest to wash the head and body of the corpse. For the funeral of a queen, it is the duty of the palmist.

古文：従世妇而吊于卿大夫之丧。
现代文：跟从世妇前往吊唁卿大夫之丧。
English: Followed by the concubine, they went to pay their condolences to the bereaved family.

