古文：夫道者，覆天载地，廓四方，柝八极；高不可际，深不可测；包裹天地，禀授无形；原流泉淳，冲而徐盈；混混滑滑，浊而徐清。
现代文： 道 ，覆盖天承载地，拓展至四面八方，高到不可触顶，深至无法测底，包裹着天地，无形中萌育万物。像泉水从源头处渤涌出来，开始时虚缓，慢慢地盈满，滚滚奔流，逐渐由浊变清。
English: The Tao, covering heaven and earth, extends to all directions, high to the untouchable top, deep to the bottom, wrapping heaven and earth, invisibly germinating all things. Like spring water, it gushes out from the source, starts slowly, slowly fills up, rolls and flows, and gradually becomes clear.

古文：故植之而塞于天地，横之而弥于四海，施之无穷而无所朝夕；舒之幎于六合，卷之不盈于一握。
现代文：所以，它竖直起来能充塞天地，横躺下去能充斥四方，施用不尽而无盛衰；它舒展开来能覆盖天地四方，收缩卷起却又不满一把。
English: Therefore, when it is upright, it can fill heaven and earth; when it is lying down, it can fill the four directions, and the application is inexhaustible without rise and fall; when it is stretched out, it can cover the four directions of heaven and earth, but when it is rolled up, it is not enough.

古文：约而能张，幽而能明；弱而能强，柔而能刚；横四维而含阴阳，纮宇宙而章三光；甚淖而滒，甚纤而微；山以之高，渊以之深；兽以之走，鸟以之飞；日月以之明，星历以之行；麟以之游，凤以之翔。
现代文：它既能收缩又能舒展，既能幽暗又能明亮，既能柔弱又能刚强。它横通四维而含蕴阴阳，维系宇宙而彰显日月星辰。
English: It can both contract and expand, it can be both dark and bright, it can be both soft and strong. It transverses the four dimensions and contains yin and yang, it maintains the universe and highlights the sun, moon and stars.

古文：泰古二皇，得道之柄，立于中央；神与化游，以抚四方。
现代文：它是既柔靡又纤微。因此，山凭藉它才高耸，渊凭藉它才深邃，兽凭藉它才奔走，鸟凭藉它才飞翔，日月凭藉它才光亮，星辰凭藉它才运行，麒麟凭藉它才出游，凤凰凭藉它才翱翔。
English: It is both gentle and subtle. Therefore, the mountain can only rise high with it, the abyss can only be deep with it, the beast can only run with it, the bird can only fly with it, the sun and the moon can only shine with it, the stars can only move with it, the unicorn can only travel with it, and the phoenix can only soar with it.

古文：是故能天运地滞，轮转而无废，水流而不止，与万物终始。
现代文：远古伏羲、神农，掌握 道 的根本，立身于天地中央，精神与自然造化融合，以此安抚天下四方，所以使天能运行地能静凝，像轮绕轴转永不停息、水流低处永不休止，与天地万物共始同终。
English: Ancient Fuxi and Shennong, grasping the fundamentals of the Tao, stood in the center of heaven and earth, and the spirit and natural creation were fused to appease the four quarters of the world. Therefore, the heavenly energy can run and the earth can be stilled. Like the wheel around the axis, the rotation will never stop, and the water flow will never stop at the low point, and it will start and end with all things in heaven and earth.

古文：风兴云蒸，事无不应；雷声雨降，并应无穷；鬼出电入，龙兴鸾集；钧旋毂转，周而复帀；已雕已琢，还反于朴，无为为之而合于道，无为言之而通乎德；恬愉无矜而得于和，有万不同而便于性；神托于秋豪之末，而大宇宙之总。
现代文：恬静愉悦不矜不骄求得和谐，包容万有不求齐物合于天性。其神既依托于细微毫末之中，又扩充至广大宇宙之内。
English: Peaceful, joyful, not proud, seeking harmony, tolerant of all things, not seeking equality, conforms to nature. Its god is not only supported by the minutest things, but also extends to the vast universe.

古文：其德优天地而和阴阳，节四时而调五行；呴谕覆育，万物群生；润于草木，浸于金石；禽兽硕大，豪毛润泽，羽翼奋也，角觡生也，兽胎不贕，鸟卵不毈；父无丧子之忧，兄无哭弟之哀；童子不孤，妇人不孀；虹蜺不出，贼星不行；含德之所致也。
现代文：其德性使天地柔顺而阴阳和谐，四时节顺而五行有序。煦育万物，繁衍生长；滋润草木，浸渗金石；禽兽长得硕大肥壮，毫毛丰泽光亮，翅翼坚壮有力，骨角生长正常；走兽不怀死胎，飞禽孵蛋成鸟；父无丧子悲痛，兄无失弟哀伤；孩童不会成孤儿，女子不会成寡妇；异常虹霓不会出现，萤惑妖星不会运行。这都是广怀德泽所致。
English: Its virtues make the heaven and earth smooth and the yin and yang harmonious, the four seasons smooth and the five elements orderly. Nurture all things, multiply and grow; moisturize grasses and trees, soak in gold and stones; animals grow big and fat, the hair is shiny, the wings are strong and the horns of the bones grow normally; animals do not carry stillbirths, birds hatch eggs into birds; there is no father's grief for a lost son, no brother's grief for a lost brother; children will not become orphans, women will not become widows; abnormal rainbow will not appear, and the glowing star will not run. All of this is caused by

古文：夫太上之道，生万物而不有，成化像而弗宰。
现代文：至高无上的道，生育了万物却不占为己有，造就成物象却不自为主宰。
English: The supreme way gives birth to all things, but does not possess them; it creates images, but does not dominate them.

古文：跂行喙息，蠉飞蝡动，待而后生，莫之知德；待之后死，莫之能怨。
现代文：各种奔走、飞翔、蠕动、爬行的动物靠道而生，但都不知这是道的恩德；因道而死，但都不知怨恨道。
English: All kinds of running, flying, creeping and crawling animals rely on the Tao to live, but they do not know that this is the benevolence of the Tao; they die because of the Tao, but they do not know the way of resentment.

古文：得以利者不能誉，用而败者不能非；收聚畜积而不加富，布施禀授而不益贫；旋县而不可究，纤微而不可勤；累之而不高，堕之而不下；益之而不众，损之而不寡；斵之而不薄，杀之而不残；凿之而不深，填之而不浅。
现代文：而因道得利者也不赞誉 道 ，用道失败者也不非议 道 ；也不因收聚蓄积而富上加富、布施他人而越益贫穷；极其细微而无法探究，极其渺细而难以穷尽。累积它也不变高，堕减它也不会低；增益它也不见多，损减它也不会少；砍削它也不变薄，伤害它也不会残；开凿它也不见深，填充它也不见浅。
English: But neither is it praised by those who gain from it, nor condemned by those who lose from it; nor does it grow richer and richer by accumulating wealth, nor does it become poorer and poorer by giving to others; it is too subtle to be explored, too subtle to be exhausted; it does not become higher as it accumulates, nor does it become lower as it decreases; it does not gain more, nor does it lose less; it does not become thinner as it is cut, nor does it remain as it is damaged; it does not become deeper as it is cut, nor does it become shallower as it is filled.

古文：忽兮怳兮，不可为象兮；怳兮忽兮，用不屈兮；幽兮冥兮，应无形兮；遂兮洞兮，不虚动兮；与刚柔卷舒兮，与阴阳俛仰兮。
现代文：惚惚恍恍，难见形象；恍恍惚惚，功能无限；幽幽冥冥，感应无形；深邃混洞，运动不虚；随刚柔卷缩和舒展，和阴阳俯伏和仰升。
English: Dazed and dazed, it is difficult to see the image; dazed and dazed, the function is infinite; dim and dim, the induction is invisible; deep and muddled, the movement is not empty; with the rigid and flexible contraction and stretch, and the yin and yang pitching and rising.

古文：昔者冯夷、大丙之御也，乘云车，入云蜺；游微雾，骛怳忽；历远弥高以极往，经霜雪而无迹，照日光而无景；扶摇抮抱羊角而上，经纪山川，蹈腾昆仑；排阊阖，沦天门。
现代文：以前冯夷、大丙驾御，乘雷公之车，驾上六条彩虹为马，遨游于微朦的云雾之中，驰骋在邈茫迷朦之境，历远及高直到渺远之处；经过霜雪而不留印迹，日光照射而不映阴影；如飙风曲萦盘旋而上。经过高山大川，跨越昆仑之巅，推开天门，进入天宫。
English: In the past, Feng Yi and Tai Pi drove the imperial carriage, riding on Lei Gong's chariot, riding on six rainbows as horses, wandering in the misty clouds, galloping in the vast and hazy environment, traveling far and high until far away; passing through the frost and snow without leaving a mark, the sun shining without reflecting the shadow; circling up like a soaring wind. Passing through the Gaoshan River, crossing the Kunlun Peak, pushing open the Heavenly Gate, and entering the Heavenly Palace.

古文：末世之御，虽有轻车良马，劲策利锻，不能与之争先。
现代文：近世驾御，虽有轻捷车儿健骏良马，并有强劲鞭儿尖利鞭刺催赶，却无法与冯夷、大丙争高低优劣。
English: In the early modern times, although there were light express cars, strong horses, and strong whips, they could not compete with Feng Yi and Dai Bing in terms of quality.

古文：是故大丈夫恬然无思，澹然无虑；以天为盖，以地为舆；四时为马，阴阳为御；乘云凌霄，与造化者俱；纵志舒节，以驰大区；可以步而步，可以骤而骤；令雨师洒道，使风伯塌尘；电以为鞭策，雷以为车轮；上游于霄雿之野，下出于无垠之门，刘览偏照，复守以全；经营四隅，还反于枢。
现代文：所以大丈夫恬静坦然，无思无虑；以天为车盖，以地为车厢，以四季为良马，以阴阳为御手；乘白云上九霄，与自然造化同往。
English: Therefore, it is alright to ride calmly and serenely, without any thought or concern; to use the sky as a car cover, to use the earth as a carriage, to use the four seasons as a good horse, and to use the yin and yang as a guiding hand; to take the white cloud to climb the nine heavens, and to go with the natural creation.

古文：故以天为盖，则无不覆也；以地为舆，则无不载也；四时为马，则无不使也；阴阳为御，则无不备也。
现代文：放开思绪，随心舒性，骋天宇。可缓行则缓行，可疾驰则疾驰。令雨师清洒道路，唤风伯扫除尘埃；用电来鞭策，以雷做车轮；向上游于虚廓高渺区域，往下出入无所边际门户；虽然观览照视高渺之境，却始终保守着纯真；虽然周游经历四面八方，却仍然返还这 道 之根本。
English: Let go of your thoughts, be comfortable with your heart, and enjoy the sky. If you can walk slowly, walk slowly, if you can run fast, run fast. Let the rainmaker sprinkle the road, call the wind to sweep away the dust; use electricity to whip, use lightning to make the wheel; swim upstream in the vague and lofty region, and go down to the portal without any limit; although the observation shines on the lofty realm, it always maintains innocence; although the tour experiences all directions, it still returns to the root of this road.

古文：是故疾而不摇，远而不劳，四支不动，聪明不损，而知八绒九野之形埒者，何也？
现代文：所以，用天作车盖就没有什么不能覆盖了；以地做车厢就没有什么不能承载了；用四季作良马就没有什么不可驱使的了，用阴阳做御手就没有什么不完备的了。所以疾行而不摇晃，远行而不疲劳，四肢不疲惫，耳目不损伤而能知道整个宇宙天地的界域。
English: Therefore, using heaven as a car cover, there is nothing that cannot be covered; using earth as a carriage, there is nothing that cannot be carried; using the four seasons as a good horse, there is nothing that cannot be driven, and using yin and yang as a guiding hand, there is nothing incomplete. Therefore, traveling without shaking, traveling without fatigue, limbs without fatigue, ears and eyes without injury, and being able to know the entire universe, the boundaries of heaven and earth.

古文：执道要之柄，而游于无穷之地。
现代文：这是什么原因呢？是由于掌握了 道 的根本而畅游于无穷无尽之中。
English: What is the reason for this? It is because they have mastered the fundamentals of the Tao and are swimming in the boundless ocean.

古文：是故天下之事，不可为也，因其自然而推之；万物不变，不可究也，秉其要归之趣。
现代文：所以天下之事是不能有意人为地去做的，只能顺随事物的自然之性去推求；万物的变化是不能凭人的智慧去探究的，只能按事物发展趋势来把握其真谛。
English: Therefore, the things of the world cannot be intentionally and artificially done, and can only be inferred according to the nature of things; the changes of all things cannot be explored by human wisdom, and can only be grasped according to the development trend of things.

古文：夫镜水之与形接也，不设智故，而方圆曲直弗能逃也。
现代文：镜子和明净的水能映照物形，却并没有任何的奥妙的设置而使方、圆、曲、直等形状如实照映出来。
English: The mirror and the clear water are able to reflect the shape of the object, but there is no mysterious setting so that the square, round, curved, and straight shapes are faithfully reflected.

古文：是故响不肆应，而景不一设；叫呼仿佛，默然自得。
现代文：因此回音也不是声音要它回应，影子也不是物体特意设置，这回音呼声、影子恍惚都是自然而然出现的。
English: Therefore, the echo is not a sound to be responded to, nor is the shadow an object deliberately set up. This echo call and shadow trance all occur naturally.

古文：人生而静，天之性也；感而后动，性之害也；物至而神应，知之动也；知与物接，而好憎生焉。
现代文：人天生喜欢恬静，这是人的本性。是受到外物诱惑后才动情欲的，这样本性也就受到了伤害。与外物接触使精神感应，这是人的智虑活动所造成的。
English: People naturally like tranquility, which is human nature. It is only after being tempted by foreign objects that they become passionate, and this nature is also harmed. Contact with foreign objects causes spiritual induction, which is caused by human intellectual activities.

古文：好憎成形而智诱于外，不能反己，而天理灭矣。
现代文：智虑与外界事物接触后，好恶、爱憎之情也就产生，而好恶、爱憎之情一旦形成，这说明人的智虑已受外物迷惑，人也就不能返回本性而天理泯灭了。
English: After intellectual concerns come into contact with external things, likes and dislikes, love and hate feelings also arise, and once the likes and dislikes, love and hate feelings are formed, this shows that people's intellectual concerns have been confused by external things, and people can not return to nature and nature is annihilated.

古文：故达于道者，不以人易天；外与物化，而内不失其情。
现代文：所以，通达于道的人是不以人间利欲而改变天性的，即使外随物化而内心都不会丧失原有的本性。
English: Therefore, a person who has attained the Way does not change his nature for the sake of worldly gain. Even if he is materialized externally, he will not lose his original nature internally.

古文：至无而供其求，时骋而要其宿；小大修短，各有其具；万物之至，腾踊肴乱而不失其数。
现代文：要知道这 道 尽管虚无至极，但却能满足万物之需求，时时变化却能使万物归返自身。这 道 又具备应付万物的大小长短之能力，所以当万物纷至沓来、淆乱腾踊时， 道 都能处置有序。
English: It should be known that this Tao, although it is the ultimate nothingness, can meet the needs of all things, and although it changes from time to time, it can return all things to themselves. This Tao also has the ability to cope with the size and length of all things, so when all things come together and are confused and chaotic, the Tao can deal with them in an orderly manner.

古文：是以处上而民弗重，居前而众弗害，天下归之，奸邪畏之。
现代文：所以，得 道 者身居上位时民众不会感到有欺压之感，身处前列时民众不会感到有伤害之感，这样天下能归附他，奸邪要惧怕他。
English: Therefore, when the winner is at the top, the public will not feel a sense of oppression, and when the winner is at the front, the public will not feel a sense of injury. In this way, the world can adhere to him, and the evil should be afraid of him.

古文：以其无争于万物也，故莫敢与之争。
现代文：正因为他不和万物争先，所以也就没有什么能与他争。
English: Precisely because he does not compete with all things, nothing can compete with him.

古文：夫临不而钓，旷日而不能盈罗，虽有钩箴芒距，微纶芳饵，加之以詹何、娟嬛之数，犹不能与网署争得也。
现代文：到江边钓鱼，一整天也不能钓满一鱼篓。虽有锋利的钓钩、细纶的钓线、芳香的鱼饵，再加上有詹何、娟嬛那样的钓技，但所钓获的鱼还是无法与用大网捕捞的鱼相比。
English: If you go fishing along the river, you can't catch a full bait for a whole day. Although there are sharp hooks, fine fishing lines, fragrant baits, and fishing techniques such as jang ho and bait, the fish caught is still not comparable to the fish caught with a large net.

古文：射者杆乌号之弓，弯棋卫之箭，重之羿、逢蒙子之巧，以要飞鸟，犹不能与罗者竞多。
现代文：射手张开的是乌号之弓，搭上的是棋卫之箭，再加上有后羿、逢蒙那样的射技，但所射得的飞鸟还是无法与用罗网捕捉的鸟相比。
English: The archer opens the bow of the cuckoo, and the arrows of the chess guard are attached to it, plus the shooting skills such as having a dorsal fin and a hunchback, but the flying birds shot are still not comparable to the birds caught with a net.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以所持之小也。
现代文：因为钓鱼者、捕鸟者所用的器具太小。
English: Because the equipment used by anglers and bird catchers is too small.

古文：张天下以为之笼，因江海以为之署，又何亡鱼失鸟之有乎！
现代文：假如张开天穹作笼子、用江海做网罟，哪还会有漏网的鱼、飞逸的鸟？
English: If the vault of heaven were stretched out as a cage, and the rivers and seas were nets for catching fish, where would be the fish that slipped through the net, and the birds that flew away?

古文：故矢不若缴，缴不若无形之像。
现代文：所以说光箭不如具有丝绳的缴，而带有丝绳的箭又不如无形的天地之笼、江海之网。
English: Therefore, it is said that the light arrow is not as good as the arrow with a silk rope, and the arrow with a silk rope is not as good as the invisible cage of heaven and earth, the net of the river and sea.

古文：夫释大道而任小数，无以异于使蟹捕鼠、蟾蠩捕蚤，不足以禁好塞邪，乱乃逾滋。
现代文：这就是说放弃大道而用小技来治理天下，无异于用螃蟹捉老鼠、以蛤蟆捉跳蚤，不但不能禁止奸邪堵塞罪恶，反而会更加乱。
English: That is to say, giving up the high road and using small tricks to govern the world is no different from using a crab to catch mice and a centipede to catch fleas. Not only can we not prohibit evil and block evil, but it will be more chaotic.

古文：昔者夏鲧作三仍之城，诸侯背之，海外有狡心。
现代文：过去夏鲧修作高的城墙来防范，但结果反而是诸侯叛乱，海外各国也都生狡诈之心。
English: In the past, Xia Yao built high city walls to prevent this, but the result was a rebellion of princes, and overseas countries were also cunning.

古文：禹知天下之叛也，乃坏城平池，散财物，焚甲兵，施之以德，海外宾伏，四夷纳职，合诸侯于涂山，执玉帛者万国。
现代文：禹看到这点，就拆毁城墙，填平护城河，散发财物，焚烧兵器盔甲，广施仁德，结果四海臣服，夷族纳贡，禹在涂山会见成千上万带着玉器锦缎来朝会的诸侯。
English: Seeing this, Yu tore down the city walls, filled in the moat, distributed wealth, burned weapons and armor, and promoted benevolence. As a result, the four seas were subjugated, the barbarians were paid tribute, and Yu met with thousands of princes who brought jade brocades to the imperial court in Tuishan.

古文：故机械之心藏于胸中，则纯白不粹，神德不全，在身者不知，何远之所能怀！
现代文：所以胸中藏有机巧奸诈之心，这纯白的道也就不纯粹了，纯粹专一的德也就不完备了；处理自身都不理智了，还能安抚感化其他远处的事和人？
English: Therefore, there is a cunning and treacherous heart hidden in the chest, and this pure and white path is not pure, and the pure and single-minded virtue is not complete; it is not reasonable to deal with oneself, and can it appease and influence other distant things and people?

古文：是故革坚则兵利，城成则冲生，若以汤沃沸，乱乃逾甚。
现代文：所以皮革铠甲坚硬，这兵器也随之锋利，城墙一旦筑起，这攻城战车也随之产生；这些如同用开水浇入滚烫的水中一样，非但不能制止沸腾，反而使水沸腾得更厉害。
English: Therefore, the leather armor is hard, and the weapon is sharp, and the city wall is built, and the siege chariot is created; these are like pouring boiling water into scalding water, but instead of stopping the boiling, they make the water boil even more.

古文：是故噬狗，策蹄马，而欲教之，虽伊尹、造父弗能化。
现代文：所以以鞭打咬人的狗、用鞭打踢人的马而想调教好它们，但即使是伊尹、造父这样的人也无能为力，达不到教化的目的。
English: Therefore, dogs that bite people should be whipped, and horses that kick people should be whipped in order to teach them well, but even people like Yi Yin and Zou Fang are powerless and cannot achieve the goal of education.

古文：欲寅之心亡于中，则饥虎可尾，何况狗马之类乎！
现代文：如果心中不存害人的欲念，那么就是尾随饥饿的老虎也不可怕；更何况对付狗、马之类的动物！
English: If there is no desire to harm others, it is not scary to follow a hungry tiger, let alone deal with animals such as dogs and horses!

古文：故体道者逸而不穷，任数者劳而无功。
现代文：所以领悟道的人安安逸逸而没有办不到的事，玩弄巧诈之术的人辛辛苦苦却一事无成。
English: Therefore the prudent are at ease, and there is nothing too hard for them; but the workers of deceit labor in vain.

古文：夫峭法刻诛者，非霸王之业也；箠策繁用者，非致远之术也。
现代文：实行严刑苛法治理国家，不是成就霸王之业的人所应做的；用椎子、鞭子频频刺激坐骑，不是赶远路的方法。
English: Administering the country with severe punishments and harsh laws is not what a person who has achieved the cause of overlord should do; frequently stimulating the mount with a spindle and whip is not the way to catch up.

古文：离朱之明，察箴未于百步之外，不能见渊中之鱼；师旷之聪，合八风之调，而不能听十里之外。
现代文：离朱的眼力尽管能看百步之外的针尖，却看不到深渊中的鱼；师旷的耳力尽管能听辨各种声调，却听不见十里之外的声响。
English: Although the eye of a scholar can see the tip of a needle a hundred paces away, it cannot see the fish in the abyss; although the ear of a scholar can distinguish various tones, it cannot hear sounds ten miles away.

古文：故任一人之能，不足以治三亩之宅也；修道理之数，因天地之自然，则六合不足均也。
现代文：这就像单凭一人之能力不足以治理深宅大院一样。遵循道的规律，顺应天地自然，那么天地四方也不够他治理。
English: This is just like one person's ability is not enough to govern a mansion. If one follows the rules of the Tao and conforms to the nature of heaven and earth, then it is not enough for him to govern the four directions of heaven and earth.

古文：是故禹之决读也，因水以为师；神农之播谷也，因苗以为教。
现代文：所以夏禹疏通江河正是以顺随水流低处这一自然特性来进行的；神农播种五谷正是以循守苗之自长这一自然特性来耕作的。
English: Therefore, Xia Yu's dredging of rivers is carried out with the natural characteristic of following the low water flow; Shennong's sowing of grain is cultivated with the natural characteristic of following the self-growth of seedlings.

古文：夫萍树根于水，木树根于土；鸟排虚而飞，兽踱实而走；蛟龙水居，虎豹山处，天地之性也，两木相摩而然，金火相守而流；员者常转，窾者主浮，自然之势也。
现代文：浮萍生于水面，树木扎根土中，鸟凌空而飞，兽踩地而跑，蛟龙居于水中，虎豹生于山中，这些均是天地自然本性。两木互相摩擦就会起火，金与火相守则会熔化，圆的物件容易转动，空的器具容易飘浮，这也都是自然之势。
English: Duckweed is born on the surface of the water, trees take root in the soil, birds fly in the sky, beasts run on the ground, dragons live in the water, tigers and leopards are born in the mountains, these are the natural nature of heaven and earth. If two trees rub against each other, they will catch fire, gold and fire will melt, round objects are easy to rotate, empty utensils are easy to float, this is also a natural trend.

古文：是故春风至则甘雨降，生育万物；羽者妪伏，毛者孕育；草木荣华，鸟兽卵胎；莫见其为者，而功既成矣。
现代文：所以当春风吹拂甘露降临之时，万物就生长，长羽翼的开始孵卵，长毛发的开始怀胎，草木开花，鸟卵兽胎：这些并未发现春季在干什么而却恰恰在无形中化育万物。
English: Therefore, when the spring wind blows and the nectar falls, all things grow, the long wings begin to hatch eggs, the long hair begins to conceive, the plants and trees bloom, the bird eggs and animal fetuses: these do not find out what the spring is doing, but they just breed all things invisibly.

古文：秋风下霜，倒生挫伤；鹰雕搏鸷。昆虫蛰藏；草木注根，鱼鳖凑渊，莫见其为者，灭而无形。
现代文：同样，当秋风乍起霜降大地之时，草木就凋零，鹰雕搏击，昆虫伏藏，草木根部忙于吸储营养，鱼鳖开始凑潜深水之中：这些也并未发现秋季在干什么而却恰恰在悄然中挫灭万物。
English: In the same way, when the autumn wind suddenly rises and the frost falls to the ground, the plants wither, the eagles fight, the insects hide, the roots of the plants are busy absorbing and storing nutrients, and the fish hooks begin to dive into the deep water: these also did not find out what the autumn was doing, but they were just quietly destroying everything.

古文：木处棒巢，水居窟穴；禽兽有芄，人民有室，陆处宜牛马，舟行宜多水；匈奴出秽裘，于、越生葛絺；各生所急，以备燥湿，各因所处，以御寒暑，并得其宜，物便其所。
现代文：居于树上的筑巢，处于水中的靠窟，兽类卧草，人类居室；陆行适用牛马，水深适宜舟行；匈奴地产粗糙的皮毛，吴越地产透风的葛布：各自生产急需的东西来防备燥湿，各自依靠所处的环境来防御寒暑，并各得其所、各适其宜。
English: Nesting in a tree, nesting in a cave in the water, animal bedding, human living room; cattle and horses are suitable for overland travel, and the water depth is suitable for boat travel; rough fur from Xiongnu Real Estate, wind-permeable georgette cloth from Wuyue Real Estate: each produces what is urgently needed to prevent dryness and humidity, and each depends on the environment in which it is located to prevent cold and heat, and each has its own place and its own suitability.

古文：由此观之，万物固以自然，圣人又何事焉！
现代文：由此看来，万物均按其本性生存发展，那么，你人又何必去干预呢！
English: From this perspective, all things survive and develop according to their nature, so why do you have to intervene?

古文：九疑炎南，陆事寡而水事众，于是民人被发文身，以像鳞虫；短绻不绔，以便涉游；短袂攘卷，以便刺舟，因之也。
现代文：九嶷山以南的民众，从事陆地的活少而从事水中的活多，所以这里的民众剪发文身，模仿鱼龙形象；同样只围短裙不着长裤，以便于涉水游渡，着短袖衫或卷起袖子，以方便撑船，这些是由水上生活的特点所决定的。
English: The people south of Jiuyuan Mountain are less engaged in land activities and more engaged in water activities, so the people here cut their hair and tattoo to imitate the image of the fish and dragon; they also only wear short skirts without long pants to make it easier to wade, and wear short-sleeved shirts or roll up their sleeves to make it easier to prop up the boat. These are determined by the characteristics of water life.

古文：雁门之北，狄不谷食；贱长贵壮，俗尚气力；人不弛弓，马不解勒，便之也。
现代文：雁门以北的狄人不以谷类为主食，轻视老年人而看重青壮年，崇尚力量，不放下弓箭和不解下带嚼子的马笼头，这是由游牧生活的特点所决定的。
English: The Di people north of the Wild Goose Gate do not use cereals as their staple food, despise the elderly and value the young and strong, advocate strength, do not put down their bows and arrows, and do not untie the head of a horse cage with chewing gum, which is determined by the characteristics of nomadic life.

古文：故禹之裸国，解衣而入，衣带而出，因之也，今夫徙树者，失其阴阳之性，则莫不枯槁，故橘树之江北，则化而为枳；鸲鹆不过济，貈渡汶而死；形性不可易，势居不可移也。
现代文：所以禹到裸国去，脱掉衣服入境，出境后再穿上衣服，这是由当地的习俗所决定的。今天，移植树木的人，如果不顾树木对环境四时阴阳寒暖的适应性，那么其树没有不被弄死的。所以，橘移到江北就变成了枳，鸲鹆不能过济水，貉一过汶水便会死去。它们的形性特点是不能改变的，生活居处的环境是不能变移的。
English: Therefore, Yu went to the bare country, took off his clothes to enter the country, and put on his clothes again after leaving the country, which was decided by local customs. Today, if the people who transplanted trees did not pay attention to the adaptability of trees to the environment of four times yin and yang, then their trees would not be killed. Therefore, if the tangerine moved to the north of the river, it would become a dragonfly, the dragonfly could not pass the water, and the dragonfly would die once it passed the water. Their physical characteristics cannot be changed, and the environment where they live cannot be changed.

古文：是故达于道者，反于清净；究于物者，终于无为。
现代文：所以通达 道 的人必返于清净的天性，探究事物本性的人必归顺自然无为。
English: Therefore, those who are versed in the Tao must return to the pure nature, and those who explore the nature of things must follow nature and do nothing.

古文：以恬养性，以漠处神，则入于天门。
现代文：以恬静养性，用淡漠修神，就能进入天然的境界。
English: By cultivating one's nature with meditation and cultivating one's spirit with light, one can enter the realm of nature.

古文：所谓天者，纯粹朴素，质直皓白，未始有也杂糅者也。
现代文：所谓 天然 ，是指纯粹朴素，质真洁白，没有掺入杂质。
English: The so-called natural refers to pure simplicity, pure white, without any impurities.

古文：所谓人者，偶差智故，曲巧伪诈，所以俛仰于世人而与俗交者也。
现代文：所谓 人为 ，是指参差不正，虚伪奸诈，以此曲意逢迎与世交往。
English: The so-called "man-made" refers to the uneven, dishonest, hypocritical and treacherous, with this song meaning to meet and interact with the world.

古文：故牛歧蹄而戴角，马被髦而全足者，天也。络马之口，穿牛之鼻者，人也。
现代文：所以牛蹄分趾而头上长角，马蹄完整而颈上生鬃，这就是 天然 ；而用马笼头络着马嘴，用绳子穿过牛鼻，这就是 人为 。
English: Therefore, a cow's hoof is divided into toes and has a long horn on its head, a horse's hoof is complete and has a rust on its neck, which is natural; while a horse's head is wrapped around the horse's mouth with a cage, and a rope is used to pass through the cow's nose, which is artificial.

古文：循天者，与道游者也；随人者，与俗交者也。
现代文：遵循天然就必然与 道 遨游；顺从 人为 就必定与世俗交往。
English: To follow nature is to walk with nature; to follow man is to walk with the world.

古文：夫井鱼不可与语大，拘于隘也；夏虫不可与语寒，笃于时也；曲士不可与语至道，拘于俗，束于教也。
现代文：那井中小鱼，无法与它谈论大海，是由于它受环境的局限；生活在夏季的虫，无法与它谈论寒冬，是因为它受季节的限制；寡闻少见的书生，无法与他谈论大道，是由于他受习俗、教义的束缚。
English: The small fish in the well cannot talk to it about the sea because it is constrained by the environment; the insect living in the summer cannot talk to it about the cold winter because it is limited by the season; the little-known book student cannot talk to it about the highway because he is bound by custom and doctrine.

古文：故圣人不以人滑天，不以欲乱情，不谋而当，不言而信，不虑而得，不为而成，精通于灵府，与造化者为人。
现代文：所以，圣人是不会以 人为 的事去干扰 天然 ，不以欲念去扰乱本性；不用谋划就能将事处理得当，不必信誓旦旦就能显现信用，不必思虑就能得心应手，不必大动干戈就能大功告成；这是因为他精气与心灵融会贯通，和大道日夜相伴。
English: Therefore, a sage does not interfere with nature with artificial things, does not disturb nature with desires; he can handle things properly without planning, can show trust without swearing, can be handy without thinking, and can achieve great results without great efforts; this is because his spirit and soul are integrated, and he is accompanied by the highway day and night.

古文：夫善游者溺，善骑者堕，各以其所好，反自为祸。
现代文：善于游泳的人容易淹死，善于骑马的人常会落马摔伤，他们各因自己的爱好特长而招致灾祸。
English: Those who are good at swimming are likely to drown, and those who are good at riding are often injured when they fall off their horses. Each of them invites disaster because of their hobbies.

古文：是故好事者未尝不中，争利者未尝不穷也。
现代文：所以放纵情欲的人没有不伤损自身的，争名夺利的人没有不穷困潦倒的。
English: Therefore, those who indulge in lust do not harm themselves, and those who compete for fame and profit are not without hardships.

古文：昔共工之力，触不周之山，使地东南倾；与高辛争为帝，遂潜于渊，宗族残灭，继嗣绝把。
现代文：以前共工力大无比，一怒之下头撞不周山，使大地往东南倾斜，起因是与高辛氏争夺帝位，结果变成异物潜入深渊中，他的宗族也因此灭绝，后代死尽。
English: In the past, both of them had a great capacity for work. In a fit of anger, they hit their heads against the mountain, causing the earth to tilt to the southeast. The cause was the struggle for the imperial throne with the Gaoxin clan. As a result, they became foreign objects and dived into the abyss. As a result, his clan was also exterminated and his descendants died out.

古文：越王翳逃山穴，越人熏而出之，遂不得已。
现代文：越王翳为太子时，不愿继承王位而躲进山洞，但越国人用火将他熏出来，终于被迫为王。
English: When Yue Wangtao was crown prince, he did not want to inherit the throne and hid in a cave, but the Yue people smoked him out with fire and finally forced him to become king.

古文：由此观之，得在时，不在争；治在道，不在圣；土处下，不争高，故安而不危；水下流，不争先，故疾而不迟。
现代文：由此看来，有所得取决于时势，而不取决于争夺，治理天下取决于合道，而不取决于圣明。土处低而不争高，反而安全没有危险；水下流而不争先，反而迅流没有迟滞。
English: From this perspective, gaining something depends on the current situation, not on competition; governing the world depends on the right path, not on the holy light; the earth is low, not high, but there is no danger to safety; the water flows downstream, not ahead, but there is no delay in the rapid current.

古文：昔舜耕于历山，期年，而田者争处墝埆，以封壤肥饶相让；钓于河滨，期年，而渔者争处湍濑，以曲限深潭相予。
现代文：过去舜在历山亲自耕种，一年后，耕田者都争着要耕贫瘠的土地而把肥沃的土地让给他人。舜在江边钓鱼，一年后，渔民都争着要在水浅流急的地方打鱼而将河湾深潭让给别人。
English: In the past, cormorants used to cultivate themselves in Leshan. A year later, the farmers were competing to cultivate the barren land and give the fertile land to others. Cormorants fished at the riverside. A year later, the fishermen were competing to fish in the shallow and rapid water and give the deep river to others.

古文：当此之时，口不设言，手不指麾，执玄德于心，而化驰若神。
现代文：那时的舜既不喋喋不休地说教，也不指手划脚地干预，他只是保持自然无为的信念和德行而感化民众无比神速。
English: At that time, Zou did not preach incessantly, nor did he interfere in any way. He just maintained his natural belief and virtue and influenced the people very quickly.

古文：使舜无其志，虽口辩而户说之，不能化一人。
现代文：假如舜没有这种信念和德行，即使能言善辩而挨家挨户去劝说，也不能感化一人。
English: If you don't have this kind of belief and virtue, even if you can speak eloquently and go from house to house to persuade, you can't influence anyone.

古文：是故不道之道，莽乎大哉！
现代文：因此，不可言说的 道 ，能量真是浩大无限！
English: Therefore, the unspeakable Tao, the energy is truly vast and infinite!

古文：夫能理三苗，朝羽民，徙裸国，纳肃慎，未发号施令而移风易俗者，其唯心行者乎！
现代文：舜帝能治理三苗之乱，使羽国民众都来朝见，徙移裸国的习俗，接纳肃慎人，都未曾发号施令便能移风易俗，大概就是凭着这种自然无为的信念和德行来做事吧！
English: Emperor Qian was able to control the Three-Seedling Rebellion, make all the people of Yu come to the imperial court, migrate the customs of the naked country, and accept the prudent people. He was able to change the customs without giving orders. It is probably with this natural inaction of faith and virtue to do things!

古文：法度刑罚，何足以致之也？
现代文：靠法度刑罚哪能收到这样的效果？
English: How can a legal penalty have such an effect?

古文：是故圣人内修其本，而不外饰其未；保其精神，偃其智故，漠然无为而无不为也，澹然无治也而无不治也。
现代文：所以圣人注重内在本性的修养，而不修饰外表的枝节，保全精神，偃息奸巧，静漠无为按自然本性去办事，因而没有什么事办不成，坦然地不去刻意有为治理什么，反而什么都能治理好。
English: Therefore, sages pay attention to the cultivation of the inner nature, but do not decorate the outer branches, preserve the spirit, cultivate the spirit, and do nothing according to the natural nature, so nothing can be done, and do not deliberately do anything, but everything can be managed well.

古文：所谓无为者，不先物为也；所谓无不为者，因物之所为。
现代文：所谓自然无为，是指不超越事物的本性人为地去做；所谓没有什么事办不成，是说顺应了事物的本性。
English: The so-called natural inaction means that it does not go beyond the nature of things to do artificially; the so-called nothing can not be done means that it conforms to the nature of things.

古文：所谓无治者，不易自然也；所谓无不治者，因物之相然也。
现代文：所谓不去治理，是说不改变事物的本性；所谓没有什么治理不好，是指顺应于事物的必然性。
English: The so-called not to govern means not to change the nature of things; the so-called no bad governance means to comply with the inevitability of things.

古文：万物有所生，而独知守其根；百事有所出，而独知守其门。
现代文：万物都有其产生、生存的各种具体特性，百事都有其出现、存在的各种具体根据；圣人就是能掌握这些根本、关键的东西。
English: All things have various specific characteristics of their emergence and survival, and all things have various specific bases for their emergence and existence; a sage is able to grasp these fundamental and key things.

古文：故穷无穷，极无极，照物而不眩，响应而不乏，此之谓天解。
现代文：所以能探究无穷无尽的事物，并能照观事物而不会眩惑，因顺响应而不会困乏。这就叫知晓 天然 。
English: Therefore, to be able to investigate the infinite, to be able to look at things without being dazzled, and to be able to respond without being exhausted, is to know nature.

古文：故得道者，志弱而事强，心虚而应当。
现代文：所以得道之人意念柔顺而办事稳妥，心胸虚静而处事得当。
English: Therefore, a person who has attained the Way has a gentle mind and acts steadily, and a tranquil mind and acts properly.

古文：所谓志弱而事强者，柔毳安静，藏于不敢，行于不能；恬然无虑，动不失时；与万物回周旋转，不为先唱，感而应之。
现代文：所谓 志弱而事强 ，是说柔顺虚静，将自己隐藏在不敢有所作为之中，行动上好似无能为力，恬静无思无虑，举动不失时宜，顺随事物变化，不首先倡导，感而应顺事物。
English: The so-called "weak-willed but strong-minded" is to say that it is soft, smooth and quiet, hides itself in not daring to make a difference, seems to be powerless in action, is quiet and thoughtless, acts at the right time, follows the changes of things, does not advocate first, and responds to things.

古文：是故贵者必以贱为号，而高者必以下为基。
现代文：因此，高贵的总以谦卑的字眼来称呼自己，高大的总以低下的东西为基础。
English: Therefore, the noble always call themselves with humble words, and the high always base on the low.

古文：托小以包大，在中以制外；行柔而刚，用弱而强；转化推移，得一之道，而以少正多。
现代文：寄存于小处却能包容广大，保持于中间却能控制左右；行动看似柔弱而实际刚强，以此推移变化，掌握了 一 这道，就能以少制多。
English: Stored in a small place but can accommodate a wide range, maintained in the middle but can control the left and right; the action seems to be weak but actually strong, so it changes over time. If you master this one, you can do more with less.

古文：所谓其事强者，遭变应卒，排患扞难；力无不胜，敌无不凌；应化揆时，莫能害之，是故欲刚者，必以柔守之；欲强者，必以弱保之；积于柔则刚，积于弱则强；观其所积，以知祸福之乡。
现代文：所谓 事强 ，是说在遭变故、遇突变，排御患难时，没有什么力量不可战胜、没有什么敌手不可制服的；应顺变化揆度形势，没有什么能够伤害他。所以，要想刚强有力，必须保守柔弱。积聚柔弱就会刚强，观察这种积聚的过程、状况，就可以预知祸福之所在。
English: The so-called strength of cause and effect means that there is no invincible force, no enemy that cannot be subdued in the event of a change of circumstances, a sudden turn of events, or the elimination of adversity; there is nothing that can harm him in accordance with the changing situation. Therefore, if you want to be strong and powerful, you must maintain softness and weakness. The accumulation of softness and weakness will be strong. Observing the process and condition of this accumulation, you can predict where the evil and good are.

古文：强胜不若己者，至于若己者而同；柔胜出于己者，其力不可量。
现代文：以强力取胜，只能胜过力量不如自己的，碰到和自己一样刚强的就只能势均力敌了。而用柔术胜过力量大于自己的人，这种 柔力 才是无法计量的。
English: To win with strength, you can only beat someone whose strength is not as strong as your own. If you meet someone who is as strong as you, you can only beat someone who is of equal strength. But to beat someone who is stronger than you with jiu-jitsu, this kind of flexibility is beyond measure.

古文：故兵强则灭，木强则折，革固则裂，齿坚于舌而先之敝。
现代文：所以逞强军队一定会遭灭亡，如同坚硬木材容易折断，坚固皮革容易开裂一样，坚实的牙齿就比柔软的舌头先坏落。
English: Therefore a proud army is doomed to destruction, just as hard wood is easily broken and tough leather is easily cracked, and hard teeth are more likely to decay than a soft tongue.

古文：是故柔弱者，生之干也；而坚强者，死之徒也；先唱者，穷之路也；后动者，达之原也。
现代文：所以说 柔弱 才是生存的支柱，而 坚强 是 死亡 的同义语；首先倡导，容易导致穷途末路，随后而动，才是通达的源泉。
English: Therefore, softness and weakness are the pillars of survival, and strength is a synonym for death; advocating first, it is easy to lead to a dead end, and moving later is the source of access.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：凡人中寿七十岁，然而趋舍指凑，日以月悔也，以至于死。
现代文：大凡人中等寿命是七十岁，可是人们对自己的追求取舍、所作所为，每天都在自我悔恨，以至到死都是这样。
English: The average lifespan of an ordinary person is seventy years old, but people regret their pursuits, choices, and actions every day, even until death.

古文：故蘧伯玉年五十，而有四十九所非。
现代文：所以卫国蘧伯玉活了五十岁，觉得前四十九年都做得不对。
English: Therefore, when the empress dowager lived for fifty years, she felt that the first forty-nine years were not done correctly.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么会这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：先者难为知，而后者易为攻也，先者上高，则后者攀之；先者逾下，则后者蹶之；先者颓陷，则后者以谋；先者败绩，则后者违之。
现代文：因为先行者难以做得明智，后继者则容易取得成效；先行者爬上高处，后继者则可以跟着攀登而上，先行者越过低处，后继者则可以跟着踩踏前进，先行者跌进陷阱，后继者则可以考虑避免陷阱，先行者遭受失败，后继者则可以免蹈覆辙。
English: For the forerunner is difficult to do wisely, the successor is easy to achieve results; the forerunner climbs high, the successor can climb up, the forerunner crosses the low, the successor can follow the stampede, the forerunner falls into the trap, the successor can consider avoiding the trap, the forerunner suffers failure, and the successor can avoid the same mistake.

古文：由此观之，先者，则后者之弓矢质的也。犹錞之与刃，刃犯难而錞无患者，何也？
现代文：由此看来，先行者就是后继者射箭的箭靶，犹如那矛戟的柄套和锋刃，锋刃受损而柄套却安然无事，这是为什么呢？
English: From this point of view, the forerunner is the target of the successor's archery, just like the grip and blade of the spear. The blade is damaged, but the grip is safe. Why is this?

古文：以其托于后位也。
现代文：因为是这柄套处在后面位置的缘故。
English: This is because the handle set is in the back position.

古文：此俗世庸民之所公见也，而贤知者弗能避，也。
现代文：这些现象、道理，世俗庸民都知道，可是那些 贤达 却就是不能避免这一 争先 。
English: These phenomena and principles are well known to the common people, but the sages cannot avoid this competition.

古文：所谓后者，非谓其底滞而不发，凝结而不流，贵其周于数而合于时也。
现代文：这里所说的 居后 ，并不是指停滞不动、凝结不流，而是要求居后者言行符合道数、适宜时势。
English: The "staying behind" mentioned here does not mean stagnation, condensation and stagnation, but requires the latter to act in accordance with the number of roads and the appropriate situation.

古文：夫执道理以耦变，先亦制后，后亦制先。是何则？
现代文：如果能符合事物变化的道理和形势，那么先行者可以制驭后继者，后继者亦可以制驭先行者，这是什么道理呢？
English: If it is consistent with the principle and situation of things changing, then the forerunner can control the successor, and the successor can also control the forerunner. What is the reason for this?

古文：不失其所以制人，人不能制也。
现代文：因为这样的人掌握着驾御人的东西，所以别人就无法驾御他。
English: Because such a person controls what controls him, others cannot control him.

古文：时之反侧，间不容息；先之则太过，后之则不逮。
现代文：时间流逝快速短暂，快速短暂得呼吸间就引起变化，所以你如果争先便超越它太远，如果居后又难以赶上。
English: Time passes quickly and briefly, and rapid transience causes changes between breaths, so if you are ahead, you will surpass it too far, and if you are behind, it will be difficult to catch up.

古文：夫日回而月周，时不与人游，故圣人不贵尺之壁而重寸之阴，时难得而易失也。
现代文：日月不停地运转，时间不停地流逝而不迁就人。所以圣人不看重一尺长的玉璧而珍重一寸光阴，因为时机难得而易失。
English: The sun and the moon are in constant motion, time is constantly passing without accommodating people. Therefore, the sage does not value a foot-long gem and treasures an inch of time, because the opportunity is hard to get and easy to lose.

古文：禹之趋时也，履遗而弗取，冠挂而弗顾，非争其先也，而争其得时也。
现代文：夏禹为追随时机，鞋子掉了也顾不上拾取，头巾挂落了也顾不上回头看，他并不是和谁在争先后，只是争得时机而已。
English: Xia Yu is chasing opportunities. When his shoes fall off, he doesn't bother to pick them up. When his headscarf falls off, he doesn't bother to look back. He's not competing with anyone, he's just competing for opportunities.

古文：是故圣人守清道而抱雌节，因循应变，常后而不先，柔弱以静，舒安以定，攻大?坚，莫能与之争。
现代文：所以圣人固守清纯之道柔弱之节，因循变化，处后而不争先，柔弱而清静，安定而舒逸，然后能攻克巨大的难关，没有人能同他抗争。
English: Therefore, the sage adheres to the purity of the way of the weak and the weak, follows the changes, goes behind and does not compete, is weak and calm, stable and comfortable, and then can overcome the great difficulties, no one can fight with him.

古文：天下之物，莫柔弱于水，然而大不可极，深不可测；修极于无穷，远沦于无涯；息耗减益，通于不訾；上天则为雨露，下地则为润泽；万物弗得不生，百事不得不成；大包群生，而无好憎；泽及蚑蛲，而不求报；富赡天下而不既，德施百姓而不费；行而不可得穷极也，微则不可得把握也；击之无创，刺之不伤；斩之不断，焚之不然，淖溺流遁，错缪相纷，而不可靡散；利贯金石，强济天下；动溶无形之域，而翱翔忽区之上，遭回川谷之间，而滔腾大荒之野；有余不足与天地取与，授万物而无所前后。
现代文：天下万物，没有比水更柔软的。然而它大无边际，深不可测；长无尽头，远至无涯；它的生息消耗，减损增益无法计量；它蒸发上天成雨露，降落大地滋润草木。万物得不到它就不能生存，百事缺少了它就难以办成；它滋润万物而无偏心，恩泽小虫不求回报；它富足天下而不枯竭，德泽百姓而不耗损；它行踪不定而无法查清，细微柔软而无法把握；砍它不显痕迹，刺它不留印迹，斩它斩不断，烧它不起燃；它流遁消融，错杂纷绕而不消散；它锋利得能穿刺金石，它强大得能浮载天下；它动溶在无形之区域，游翔在迷茫之境界，激荡在山川之峡谷，奔腾在广袤之原野；它的多少，全由天地来决定，它施予万物恩泽而不分先后远近。
English: All things under heaven are not softer than water. However, it is boundless and unfathomable; it is endless and far-reaching; its growth and consumption, loss and gain are immeasurable; it evaporates into the sky to become rain and dew, and falls to the earth to moisturize plants. All things can not survive without it, and it is difficult to do without it; it moisturizes all things without eccentricity, and the insects do not seek return; it is rich in the world without exhaustion, and the people are not depleted; its whereabouts are uncertain and cannot be ascertained, and it is soft and cannot be grasped;

古文：是故无所私而无所公，靡滥振荡，与天地鸿洞；无所左而无所右，蟠委错蛲，与万物始终。
现代文：所以它没有私念也无公心，泛滥激荡和天地相通；它没有左也无右，纷绕错杂和万物始终。
English: Therefore, it has no selfishness and no public-mindedness, and is connected with heaven and earth; it has no left and no right, and is always entangled with all things.

古文：是谓至德。
现代文：这就是 水 的最高的德行。
English: This is the highest virtue of water.

古文：夫水所以能成其至德于天下者，以其淖溺润滑也，故老聃之言曰： 天下至柔，驰骋天下之至坚。
现代文：水之所以能获得天下最高的德行，全由于它生性柔软而润滑。所以老子说： 天下至柔，驰骋天下之至坚。
English: The reason why water can achieve the highest virtue in the world is because it is naturally soft and lubricated. Therefore, Lao Tzu said: The world is the softest, and the world is the strongest.

古文：出于无有，人于无间。
现代文：出于无有，入于无间。
English: Out of nothing, into nothing.

古文：吾是以知无为之有益。 
现代文：吾是以知无为之有益。 
English: I am a know-nothing.

古文：夫无形者，物之大祖也；无音者，声之大宗也。其子为光，其孙为水，皆生于无形乎！
现代文：无形是万物的祖始；无音是声音的祖先。无形的子孙是 光 和 水 ，光和水都由无形化育而成！
English: The invisible is the ancestor of all things; the soundless is the ancestor of sound. The invisible's descendants are light and water. Light and water are both bred from the invisible!

古文：夫光可见而不可握，水可循而不可毁。
现代文：这光看得见而抓不住，水摸得着而毁不掉。
English: The light can be seen but not grasped, the water can be felt but not destroyed.

古文：故有像之类，莫尊于水。
现代文：所以在有形物类中，没有比水更尊贵的了。
English: Therefore, among tangible things, there is nothing more precious than water.

古文：出生入死，自无踱有，自有踱无，而以衰贱矣。
现代文：至于那些有生也有死，从无到有从有到无以至衰亡的，就更被贱视了。
English: As for those who have life and death, from nothing to something, from something to nothing and then to decay, they are even more despised.

古文：是故清静者，德之至也；而柔弱者，道之要也。
现代文：所以清静是德的最高境界，柔弱是道的精华要害；虚无恬愉，万物之所用。
English: Therefore, tranquility is the highest realm of virtue, and gentleness is the essence of virtue; nothingness and pleasure are used by all things.

古文：虚无恬愉者，万物之用也；肃然应感，殷然反本，则沦于无形矣。所谓无形者，一之谓也。
现代文：肃然感应外界，毅然返于根本，就能进入无形的境界。所谓无形，就是达到浑然一体的状态。
English: By solemnly sensing the outside world and resolutely returning to the fundamentals, we can enter the invisible realm. The so-called invisible is to achieve a state of seamless integration.

古文：所谓一者，无匹合于天下者也。
现代文：所谓浑然一体，就是天下独一无二。
English: The so-called seamless whole is unique in the world.

古文：卓然独立，块然独处；上通九天，下贯九野；员不中规，方不中矩；大浑而为一叶，累而无根；怀囊天地，为道关门；穆忞隐闵，纯德独存；布施而不既，用之而不勤。
现代文：它卓然独立，昂然独处；它上通九天，下贯九野；圆而无法用规来度量，方而难以用矩来测量；浩大浑然为一体，积累成体而难见根底；它包裹天地为道之关键，静穆混沌独存纯德；它布施恩德而不会穷尽，作用万物而不会用尽。
English: It is supremely independent and arrogantly stands alone; it reaches up to nine heavens and down to nine fields; it is round but cannot be measured with a ruler, while it is square but difficult to measure with a moment; it is vast and blurred into one, and it is difficult to see the foundation when it accumulates into a body; it encircles heaven and earth as the key to the path, and pure virtue alone exists in stillness and chaos; it gives charity without exhausting it, and it acts on all things without exhausting them.

古文：是故视之不见其形，听之不闻其声，循之不得其身；无形而有形生焉，无声而五音鸣焉，无味而五味形焉，无色而五色成焉。
现代文：因此难以见到它的形状，无法听到它的声响和无法触摸它的身子。它无形却能产生有形，无声却能形成五音，无味却能生成五味，无色却能形成五色。
English: Therefore, it is difficult to see its shape, unable to hear its sound and unable to touch its body. It is invisible but can produce tangible, silent but can form five tones, tasteless but can produce five flavors, and colorless but can form five colors.

古文：是故有生于无，实出于虚；天下为之圈，则名实同居。
现代文：所以说有形来自无形，实体出自虚空。将天下栏成一圈，使名实同居一处。
English: Therefore, it is said that the tangible comes from the intangible, and the entity comes from the void.

古文：音之数不过五，而五音之变不可胜听也。味之和不过五，而五味之化不可胜尝也。色之数不过五，而五色之变不可胜观也，故音者，宫立而五音形矣。味者，甘立而五味亭矣；色者，白立而五色成矣；道者，一立而万物生矣。
现代文：音阶不过就是宫、商、角、徵、羽，但用这五音调配出来的声音却美妙动听；味道不过就是甜、酸、苦、辣、咸，但用这五味调配出来的味道却美味可口；颜色不过就是赤、黑、青、白、黄，但用这五色调配出来的颜色却美妙无比。所以就音调来说，宫调确立则五音便成；就味道来说，甜味确立则五味便成；就颜色来说，白色确立则五色便成；而对 道 来说， 一 之确立则万物就形成。
English: The musical scale is nothing but the palace, the merchant, the horn, the sign, and the feather, but the sound arranged with these five tones is wonderful and beautiful; the taste is nothing but sweet, sour, bitter, spicy, and salty, but the taste arranged with these five tastes is delicious; the color is nothing but red, black, blue, white, and yellow, but the color arranged with these five tones is incomparably beautiful. Therefore, as far as the tone is concerned, if the palace tone is established, the five tones will be formed; as far as the taste is concerned, if the sweetness is established, the five tastes will be formed; as far as the color is concerned

古文：是故一之理，施四海；一之解，际天地。
现代文：因此这 一 之原理放之四海而皆准， 一 之要义可运用于天地之间。
English: Therefore, the principle of the first is universally applicable, and the essence of the first can be applied between heaven and earth.

古文：其全也，纯兮若朴；其散也，混兮若浊。
现代文：它完整纯粹得像没有雕凿过的林木；它逸散开来像混沌的浊泥。
English: It is whole and pure, like an unhewn forest; it escapes and disperses like a chaotic ooze.

古文：浊而徐清，冲而徐盈；澹兮其若深渊，泛兮其若浮云。
现代文：浑浊而能渐渐澄清，由虚空慢慢盈实；它宁静如同莫测的深潭，飘荡若似空中的浮云；似有似无，似存似亡。
English: It is turbid, but can be gradually clarified; it slowly gains solidity from the void; it is calm as an unfathomable abyss, floating like a floating cloud in the sky; it seems to have nothing, to exist, and to die.

古文：若无而有，若亡而存。万物之总，皆阅一孔，百事之根，皆出一门。
现代文：万物无不例外来自 一 之死穴；百事根据理由出自 一 之门户。
English: All things, without exception, come from the pit of One; Pepsi, for a reason, comes from the portal of One.

古文：其动无形，变化若神；其行无迹，常后而先。
现代文：它活动时没有具体形状，变化奇妙；它行事时没有任何痕迹，常置身在后，却又常常领先。
English: When it moves, it has no specific shape and changes strangely; when it acts, there are no traces, it is always behind, but it is often ahead.

古文：是故至人之治也，掩其聪明，灭其文章；依道废智，与民同出于公。
现代文：所以得 道 者治理天下，闭塞目耳，灭毁纹彩，废弃智慧，依道而行，与民众一律公平对待。
English: Therefore, those who follow the Tao govern the world, close their eyes and ears, destroy the world, discard wisdom, follow the Tao, and treat everyone fairly.

古文：约其所守，寡其所求，去其诱慕，除其嗜欲，损其思虑。
现代文：他简化职守，减少追求，排除欲念，去掉嗜好，俭于思虑。
English: He simplifies his duties, reduces his pursuits, eliminates his desires, eliminates his hobbies, and is frugal in his thoughts.

古文：约其所守则察，寡其所求则得。
现代文：简化职守则容易明察，减少追求则容易满足。
English: Simplifying the code of conduct is easy to see, and reducing the pursuit is easy to meet.

古文：夫任耳目以听视者，劳形而不明；以知虑为治者，若心而无功。
现代文：相反，如果过分任用耳目视听则劳累身体且不明智；如果过分凭藉智虑理事则劳损心神且无功效。
English: On the other hand, if the ears, eyes, eyesight and hearing are used excessively, the body will be exhausted and unwise; if the mind is used excessively, the mind will be exhausted and ineffective.

古文：是故圣人一度循轨，不变其宜，不易其常，放准循绳，曲因其当。
现代文：因此圣人一贯遵循法度，不轻易改变适宜的常规，遵循法度准则，尽力依顺事物的本性。
English: Therefore, sages always follow the law, do not easily change the appropriate routine, follow the legal guidelines, and try their best to follow the nature of things.

古文：夫喜怒者，道之邪也；忧悲者，德之失也；好憎者，心之过也；嗜欲者，性之累也。
现代文：喜怒无常是对 道 的偏离；忧伤悲痛是对 德 的丧失；喜好憎恶是对 心 的伤害；所以嗜好欲念是天性的累赘。
English: To be capricious is a deviation from the path; to be sad and sorrowful is a loss of virtue; to love and hate is a wound to the heart; therefore, craving is a burden of nature.

古文：人大怒破阴，大喜坠阳；薄气发瘤，惊怖为狂；优悲多恚，病乃成积；好憎繁多，祸乃相随。
现代文：人大发脾气则会破坏阴气，人高兴过分则会损伤阳气；气短急迫导致喑哑，惊慌恐怖导致发狂；忧悲过分导致怨恨，疾病也由此积成；好恶太多，祸也就随之产生。
English: When people lose their tempers, it will destroy the yin, and when people are too happy, it will damage the yang; shortness of breath and urgency will lead to dumbness, panic and fear will lead to madness; excessive sadness will lead to resentment, and disease will also accumulate; too many likes and dislikes will lead to misfortune.

古文：故心不忧乐，德之至也；通而不变，静之至也；嗜欲不载，虚之至也；无所好憎，平之至也；不与物散，粹之至也。
现代文：所以圣人保持内心无忧乐，是 德 的最高境界；通达而不多变，是 静 的最高意境；无嗜好欲念，是 虚 的最高意境；没有爱憎，是 平和 的最高境界；精神不因物累，是 纯 的最高境界。
English: Therefore, it is the highest realm of virtue for a sage to keep his heart free from sorrow and joy; to be open-minded and not changeable is the highest state of mind for tranquility; to have no hobbies or desires is the highest state of mind for emptiness; to have no love or hatred is the highest state of mind for peace; and to have a spirit that is not burdened by material things is the highest state of mind for purity.

古文：能此五者，则通于神明。
现代文：能做到上述五点，就能与 神明 相通。
English: If you can achieve the above five points, you will be able to communicate with the gods.

古文：通于神明者，得其内者也。
现代文：和 神明 相通者，是有内性修养的人。
English: Those who are in communion with the gods are people with inner cultivation.

古文：是故以中制外，百事不废；中能得之，则外能收之。
现代文：所以用心性制外形，百事不废败；心性修养成功，就能保养外形。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to take care of the shape of the heart, so that everything is not wasted; if the heart is cultivated successfully, the shape can be maintained.

古文：中之得，则五藏宁，思虑平，筋力劲强，耳目聪明，疏达而不悻，坚强而不鞼，无所大过而无所不逮；处小而不逼，处大而不窕，其魂不躁，其神不娆；湫漻寂莫，为天下枭。
现代文：心性得到修养，人体五脏便安宁，思绪便平和，筋骨强劲，耳聪目明；通达而不乖乱，坚强而不折断；没有什么太过分也没有什么不及，处窄处不觉得逼迫，处宽处不觉得空旷；心神不急躁，精神不烦扰；清静恬淡可成天下之英豪。
English: If the mind is cultivated, the human body will be peaceful, the thoughts will be peaceful, the bones and sinews will be strong, the ears and eyes will be clear; it will be open and not disorderly, strong and not broken; nothing will be too much and nothing will be too little, the narrow place will not feel persecuted, the wide place will not feel empty; the mind will not be impatient, the spirit will not be disturbed; the quiet and light can become the world's heroes.

古文：大道坦坦，去身不远，求之近者，往而复反。
现代文：大道平坦，离你自身不远；在身边寻找，转个身就能得到。
English: The road is flat, not far from you; if you look around, you can turn around and get it.

古文：迫则能应，感则能动，物穆无穷，变无开像；优游委纵，如响之与景；登高临下，无失所秉；履危行险，无忘玄伏。
现代文：得道者，有逼迫就有反应，有感触便有举动；他深邃无穷，变化没有形迹；优游悠闲，委曲顺从，就像回响呼声，又如物影随形；居高临下而不失所秉之 道 ；遭遇危机而勿忘玄妙之 道 。
English: He who has attained the Way reacts when he is persecuted, and acts when he feels; he is profound and infinite, and there is no sign of change; he is easy-going and leisurely, and obeys orders and commands, just like the echo of a call, and follows his form like a shadow; he holds a high position without losing his way; he does not forget the mysterious way when he is in a crisis.

古文：能存之此，其德不亏。万物纷糅，与之转化，以听天下，若背风而驰，是谓至德，至德则乐矣。
现代文：能保持这 道 ，他的 德 就不会亏损；万物纷糅复杂，也能与之周旋变化；凭 道 处事，就像顺风奔跑轻松快捷，这就是最高的德性。
English: If he can keep to this way, his virtue will not be at a loss; all things are various and complex, and can also change with them; doing things according to the way is like running along the wind with ease and speed, which is the highest virtue.

古文：古之人有居岩穴而神不遗者，未世有势为万乘而日忧悲者。
现代文：有了这最高的德性，也就有了快乐。古代有人住在岩洞里，但他们的精神道德没有丧失。随着世道衰败，有人虽然身居高位却天天忧愁悲伤。
English: With this highest virtue, there is also happiness. In ancient times, some people lived in caves, but they did not lose their spiritual morality. With the decline of the world, some people, although they are in high positions, are sad and sad every day.

古文：由此观之，圣亡乎治人而在于得道；乐亡乎富贵而在于德和。
现代文：由此看来，圣明不在于治理人事，而在于得 道 ；快乐不在于富贵，而在于得到 平和 。
English: From this perspective, sanctity does not lie in managing people, but in obtaining the way; happiness does not lie in wealth, but in obtaining peace.

古文：知大己而小天下，则几于道矣。
现代文：懂得重视自身修养而看轻身外之物，那就接近于 道 了。
English: To know how to value self-cultivation and despise external things is to be close to the Way.

古文：所谓乐者，岂必处京台章华，游云梦沙丘，耳听《九韶》《六莹》，口味煎熬芬芳，驰骋夷道，钓射鹔鹴之谓乐乎？
现代文：所谓快乐，难道一定是住京台、章华，游玩云梦、沙丘，耳听《九韶》《六莹》这些古乐，口尝美味食品，奔驰在平坦大道上，或者钓射奇异鸟禽那种快乐吗？
English: The so-called happiness, does it have to be the happiness of living in Beijing and Taiwan, Zhang Hua, playing cloud dreams, sand dunes, listening to "Jiu Xuan" and "Liu Ying" ancient music, tasting delicious foods, driving a Mercedes on a flat avenue, or shooting exotic birds?

古文：吾所谓乐者，人得其得者也。
现代文：我说的 快乐 ，是指每个人能够获得他所应获得的东西。
English: When I say happiness, I mean that everyone can get what they deserve.

古文：夫得其得者，不以奢为乐，不以廉为悲，与阴俱闭，与阳俱开。
现代文：但这里所说的 能够获得他所应获得的东西 ，是不以奢侈为快乐，不以清廉为清苦；他能身处阴暗逆境能忍让避开，身处光明顺境能开放顺应。
English: However, what is said here about being able to obtain what he should obtain is not to take luxury as happiness, not to take dishonesty as suffering; he can tolerate and avoid being in a dark adversity, and be open and compliant in a bright prosperous environment.

古文：故子夏心战而臞，得道而肥，圣人不以身役物，不以欲滑和。
现代文：所以，子夏由于处在循道还是贪欲的思想斗争而枯瘦，又因由于得道循道而日益肥胖。圣人就是不让自身受外物役使，不以贪欲来搅乱中和天性。
English: Therefore, Zixia was thin due to the ideological struggle between the method and greed, and became increasingly fat due to the acquisition of the method. The sage does not allow himself to be used by external things, and does not use greed to disrupt the neutral and natural.

古文：是故其为欢不忻忻，其为悲不惙惙。
现代文：所以，他高兴时不忘乎所以，悲伤时不愁云满面。
English: Therefore, when he is happy, he does not forget about it, and when he is sad, he does not feel sad.

古文：万方百变，消摇而无所定，吾独慷慨遗物而与道同出，是故有以自得之也。乔本之下，空穴之中，足以适情，无以自得也。虽以天下为家，万民为臣妾，不足以养生也。
现代文：万物尽管变化莫测，我只管胸襟坦荡不予理睬而和道共进出。因此，能够自得快乐之性，即使住在深山老林之中，栖身空旷山洞之内，也足以惬意舒心；如果不能自得快乐之性，即使君临天下，以万民为己臣妾，也不足以保养心性。
English: Although all things are unpredictable, I just keep my mind open and ignore them, and go in and out with the Tao. Therefore, the ability to be happy by myself, even if I live in the middle of a deep mountain forest and live in an empty cave, is enough to comfort my heart; if I can't be happy by myself, even if I reign over the world and have all people as my subjects and concubines, it is not enough to maintain my heart.

古文：能至于无乐者，则无不乐，无不乐则至极乐矣。
现代文：能够达到 无乐 境界的人，就没有什么不快乐；无不快乐就是最大的快乐。
English: Those who can reach the state of no-satisfaction have no unhappiness; no unhappiness is the greatest happiness.

古文：夫建钟鼓，列管弦，席旃茵，傅旄象，耳听朝歌北鄙靡靡之乐，齐靡曼之色，陈酒行觞，夜以继日，强弩弋高鸟，走大逐狡兔：此其为乐也，炎炎赫赫，怵然若有所诱慕。
现代文：设置编钟组鼓，排列管弦乐队，铺上毡毯坐垫，陈列旄牛尾和象牙装饰的仪仗，耳听朝歌郊野的乐曲，眼看艳丽多姿的舞女，口品香甜的美酒，通宵达旦地饮酒取乐；或者用强弓硬弩来射杀高飞的鸟，用善跑的猎犬来追逐狡兔，这样作乐寻欢真是炽盛显赫，使人如醉如痴难忘这诱人的情景。
English: Setting up chimes and drums, arranging an orchestra, covering cushions with satin rugs, displaying ceremonial battles with cow tails and ivory decorations, listening to morning songs and country music, watching gorgeous and multi-faceted dancers, tasting sweet wine, and drinking all night long for fun; or using a strong bow and arrow to shoot high-flying birds, and using a good-running hound to chase cunning rabbits. This kind of music-hunting is really flamboyant, making people drunk and forget this attractive scene.

古文：解车休马，罢酒撤乐，而心忽然若有所丧，怅然若有所亡也。
现代文：然而，等到一旦遣散车马，停撤宴饮，心里就会感到惆怅若有所失。
English: However, as soon as the carriage and horses are dismissed and the banquet is stopped, the heart will feel a little lost.

古文：是何则？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：不以内乐外，而以外乐内；乐作而喜，曲终而悲；悲喜转而相生，精神乱营，不得须臾平。
现代文：因为这不是以内心的欢乐去感受外界欢快之境，而是以外界这种的欢快来刺激内心，所以奏乐则喜，曲终则悲，悲喜转换变化，扰乱了精神，没有片刻的平静。
English: Because this is not to feel the joy of the outside world with the joy of the heart, but to stimulate the heart with the joy of the outside world, so the music is happy, the ending is sad, and the sadness changes, disturbing the spirit, and there is no moment of calm.

古文：察其所以，不得其形，而日以伤生，失其得者也。
现代文：察其所以然，在于不懂 乐 之含义，因而日复一日地伤害着心性，丧失了本该有的平和本性。
English: The reason for this is that they do not understand the meaning of happiness, so they hurt their mind day after day and lose their original peaceful nature.

古文：是故内不得于中，禀授于外而以自饰也；不浸于肌肤，不侠于骨髓，不留于心志，不滞于五藏。
现代文：所以在你自身不能把持心性归向，只以外界刺激来装饰自我，这种外界刺激不可能浸滋肌肤，渗浃骨髓，不可能留存于心间，停滞于五脏的。
English: Therefore, you cannot turn your mindfulness to yourself, and only decorate yourself with external stimuli. This external stimulus cannot soak the skin, permeate the bone marrow, cannot remain in the heart, and stagnate in the viscera.

古文：故从外入者，无主于中，不止；从中出者，无应于外，不行。
现代文：所以从外界刺激感受到的欢乐不可能在心中占据地位，留下而不散逸；而从内部心性所产生的欢乐，因为不产生于外界的刺激，所以也不会散失。
English: Therefore, the joy felt from external stimuli cannot occupy a place in the mind and remain without dissipating; and the joy generated from the internal mind, because it is not generated from external stimuli, will not dissipate.

古文：故听善言便计，虽愚者知说之；称至德高行，虽不肖者知慕之。
现代文：因此我们可以看到：当听到良言妙计，蠢人也懂得喜悦；谈到高尚道德，品行恶劣者也知道仰慕。
English: We see, therefore, that even fools know how to rejoice when they hear good counsels, and when it comes to high morals, even scoundrels know how to admire them.

古文：说之者众，而用之者鲜；慕之者多，而行之者寡。
现代文：可是为什么喜欢良言妙计的多而真采纳的少、仰慕高尚道德的多而真实施的少，原因是这些人不能返诸心性。
English: But the reason why there are many who like fine words and tricks but few who actually adopt them, and why there are many who admire high morals but few who actually put them into practice, is that these people cannot return to their true nature.

古文：所以然者何也？不能反诸性也，夫内不开于中而强学问者，不入于耳而不著于心，此何以异于聋者之歌也？
现代文：那种不是从本性产生学习愿望的人而勉强去学习，所学的东西是不会进入耳中留于心里的，这不就像聋子唱歌？
English: For those who do not have a natural desire to learn, but learn reluctantly, what they learn does not enter their ears and remain in their hearts. Isn't this like a deaf person singing?

古文：效人为之而无以自乐也，声出于口，则越而散矣。
现代文：聋子唱歌只是仿效人而无法自得其乐，歌声一出口便很快就散逸了。
English: Deaf people only imitate others when they sing, and they cannot enjoy themselves. As soon as they sing, their voices quickly dissipate.

古文：夫心者，五藏之主也，所以制使四支，流行血气，驰骋于是非之境，而出入于百事之门户者也。
现代文：心是五脏的主宰，它控制着四肢的活动，使气血流通，并能辨别人间是非和弄清事物的原由。
English: The heart is the master of the five viscera. It controls the activities of the limbs, circulates qi and blood, and can distinguish right from wrong and find out the causes of things.

古文：是故不得于心而有经天下之气，是犹无耳而欲调钟鼓，无目而欲喜文章也，亦必不耳胜其任矣。
现代文：所以，假如不是从内心世界有所得而空有治理天下之气概，这就像没长耳朵而想调节钟鼓，没生眼睛而想观赏纹彩那样无法胜任的。
English: Therefore, if you do not have the spirit to govern the world from the inner world, it is as incompetent as if you do not have long ears and want to adjust the bell and drum, and do not have eyes and want to enjoy the patterns.

古文：故天下神器，不可为也，为者败之，执者失之。
现代文：所以 天下 是个神圣的东西，不可人为地去治理，人为地去治理就要败坏它，人为地去把持就会失去它。
English: Therefore, the world is a sacred thing. It should not be governed artificially. If it is governed artificially, it will be corrupted. If it is controlled artificially, it will be lost.

古文：夫许由小天下而不以己易尧者，志遗于天下也。
现代文：许由以天下为小而不愿接受尧让出的王位，是因为他将志向寄寓于整个天下。
English: Perhaps the reason why he did not want to accept the throne given to him by the emperor was that he had ambitions for the whole country.

古文：所以然者何也？
现代文：他之所以这样做的原因是什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：因天下而为天下也。天下之要，不在于彼而在于我，不在于人而在于我身。身得，则万物备矣。
现代文：他懂得要顺随自然来治理天下。要取得天道，不取决于他人而取决于自身。自身能够得道则万物均为我所备。
English: He understands that he must follow nature to govern the world. To obtain the heavenly way, he does not depend on others but on himself. If he can obtain the way, then everything is prepared for him.

古文：彻于心术之论，则嗜欲好憎外矣。
现代文：透彻地理解心性之术，这嗜欲好恶就不会侵入内心。
English: By thoroughly understanding the art of the mind, these cravings and aversions will not invade the mind.

古文：是故无所喜而无所怒，无所乐而无所苦。
现代文：所以这样的人无所谓喜也无所谓恶，无所谓乐也无所谓苦。
English: Therefore, such a person has neither joy nor evil, neither pleasure nor pain.

古文：万物玄同也，无非无是；化育玄耀，生而如死。
现代文：万物玄同，无所谓是与非，这均由天道来化育，生死一回事。
English: All things are the same, it does not matter whether they are right or wrong, they are all brought about by the heavenly way, and it is a matter of life and death.

古文：夫天下者亦吾有也，吾亦天下之有也；天下之与我，岂有间哉！
现代文：天下为我所有，我也为天下所有，我与天下之间哪有什么界限！
English: The whole world belongs to me, and I belong to the whole world. What is the boundary between me and the world?

古文：夫有天下者，岂必摄权持势，操杀生之柄，而以行其号令邪？
现代文：统治占据天下，哪里是一定要抓住权势、操生杀大权而发号施令？
English: Domination dominates the world, where is it necessary to seize power, to use the power to kill and to give orders?

古文：吾所谓有天下者，非谓此也，自得而已；自得则天下亦得我矣。吾与天下相得，则常相有，己又焉有不得容其间者乎？
现代文：我所谓的 天下 ，不是指这意思，而是指 自得 而已。 自得 则天下也就得到了我，我和天下融为一体：天下为我拥有，我为天下拥有，又怎么不能容身于天下呢！
English: What I call the kingdom of heaven does not mean this, but refers to self-sufficiency. Self-sufficiency means that the kingdom of heaven has obtained me, and I am one with the kingdom of heaven: the kingdom of heaven possesses for me, I possess for the kingdom of heaven, and how can I not contain myself in the kingdom of heaven!

古文：所谓自得者，全其身者也；全其身，则与道为一矣。
现代文：所谓 自得 ，是指保全自身的天性，能够保全自身天性的完美，便与 道 融合一体。
English: The so-called "self-sufficiency" refers to the preservation of one's own nature, and if one can preserve the perfection of one's own nature, then one is integrated with the Tao.

古文：故虽游于江浔海裔，驰要褭，建翠盖，目观《掉羽》《武》《象》之乐，耳听滔朗奇丽《激》《抮》之音，扬郑、卫之浩乐，结激楚之遗风，射沼滨之高鸟，逐苑圃之走兽，此齐民之所以淫泆流湎；圣人处之，不足以营其精神，乱其气志，使心怵然失其情性。处穷僻之乡，侧豁谷之间，隐于棒薄之中，环堵之室，茨之以生茅，蓬户瓮牖，揉桑为枢；上漏下湿，润浸北房，雪霜滖灖，浸潭苽蒋；逍遥于广泽之中，而仿洋于山峡之旁，此齐民之所为形植黎黑，忧悲而不得志也；圣人处之，不为愁淬怨忽，而不失其所以自乐也。
现代文：所以虽然游悠于江边海滩，驰骋骏马，乘坐华丽车子，眼观《掉羽》《武象》之类的乐舞，耳听激荡清朗奇丽婉转的乐曲，高奏郑卫名曲，吟诵清凄高亢的流传民曲，射猎湖泊岸边惊飞的鸟儿，逐猎苑囿内奔跑的野兽，这些是凡夫俗子沉湎放荡的事情，但是圣人置身于这样的环境，却不足以惑乱精神意志，受诱惑而失去本性；同样处穷乡僻壤，置深山溪谷，居草野丛林，住简房陋室，茅草盖顶，柴草编门，桑枝为枢，上漏下湿，阴冷卧室，雪霜铺压，菰蒋蔓延，漂游在沼泽之中，徘徊在山峡之旁，这些都可以使凡夫俗子形体黑瘦疲惫，忧忧寡欢而感不得志，但是圣人处在这种环境中不会忧愁怨恨，并不失掉内心的愉悦。
English: Therefore, although swimming on the riverside beach, galloping horses, riding in a gorgeous car, watching the music and dance of "Fallen Feather" and "Elephant Warrior," listening to the stirring clear and beautiful music, playing Zheng Wei's famous music, chanting the clear and high-pitched popular folk songs, hunting the birds that are startled on the shore of the lake, and chasing the wild animals that are running in the hunting grounds, these are the things that ordinary people indulge in. However, it is not enough for a saint to be in such an environment to confuse the spiritual will and lose his nature by temptation; the same is in the remote countryside, deep mountains

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：则内有以通于天机，而不以贵贱贫富劳逸失其志德者也。
现代文：在于他们内心已领悟天机，因而不因贵贱、贫富、劳逸的不同而丧失天性。
English: It lies in the fact that they have realized the divine opportunity in their hearts, and thus do not lose their nature due to the difference between high and low, rich and poor, and work and rest.

古文：故夫乌之哑哑，鹊之唶唶，岂尝为寒暑燥湿变其声哉！
现代文：这就像乌鸦哑哑、喜鹊喳喳，哪会因寒暑燥湿的变化而改变它们天生的叫鸣声！
English: It's like mute crows and mute magpies, which change their natural song due to changes in heat and humidity!

古文：是故夫得道已定，而不待万物之推移也，非以一时之变化，而定吾所以自得也。
现代文：因此，一旦已经坚定地得道，就不受外物变化的影响，不因外物一时变化而来决定自我得道的态度。
English: Therefore, once you have firmly gained the way, you will not be affected by the changes of external things, and you will not determine your own attitude of gaining the way because of the temporary changes of external things.

古文：吾所谓得者，性命之情，处其所安也。
现代文：我所说的 得 ，是指生命中的本性处在安适的位置上。
English: What I mean by "getting" is that the nature in life is in a comfortable position.

古文：夫性命者，与形俱出其宗，形备而性命成，性命成而好憎生矣，故土有一定之论，女有不易之行，规矩不能方圆，钩绳不能曲直。
现代文：生命和形骸一起出自 道 ；形骸具有了，生命也就诞生了。生命一旦形成，好恶之情也就容易产生。所以士人有固定的行为准则，女子有不变的行为原则，规矩使他们不能或方或圆，钩绳使他们不能或曲或直。
English: Life and the skeleton come from the Tao together; when the skeleton is formed, life is born. Once life is formed, likes and dislikes are easy to arise. Therefore, men have a fixed code of conduct, women have an unchanging code of conduct, rules make them unable to be square or round, and hooks make them unable to be crooked or straight.

古文：天地之永，登丘不可为修，居卑不可为短。
现代文：天地是无限的，所以登上山丘不能自以为站得很高，处在低处不必自以为地位卑微。
English: Heaven and earth are infinite, so when you climb a hill, you can't think that you are standing very high, and when you are in a low place, you don't have to think that you are in a low position.

古文：是故得道者，穷而不慑，达而不荣；处高而不机，持盈而不倾；新而不朗，久而不渝；入火不焦，入水不儒。
现代文：所以得道者，穷困时不颓惧，显达时不炫耀；处高位而不危险，持满时而不倾覆，新兴时不光耀亮朗，长久后不至于衰变；放入火中烧不焦，下到水中打不湿。
English: Therefore, those who have attained the Way are not afraid when they are poor, do not show off when they are advanced, are not dangerous when they are high, are not overturned when they are full, do not shine brightly when they are new, and do not decay after a long time; they are not scorched when they are put into the fire, and are not wet when they are put into the water.

古文：是故不待势而尊，不待财而富，不待力而强；平虚下流，与化翱翔。
现代文：所以不凭权势而尊贵，不靠财富而富有，不以有力而强大，平和虚静处下不争，与造化一起翱翔。
English: Therefore, do not rely on power to be noble, do not rely on wealth to be rich, do not rely on strength to be powerful, do not fight in peace and tranquility, and soar together with creation.

古文：若然者，藏金于山，藏珠于渊，不利货财，不贪势名。
现代文：如果这样的话，就能埋金子于山中，藏珍珠于渊底，不以钱财为利，不贪权势名位。
English: If so, you can bury gold in the mountains, hide pearls at the bottom of the abyss, do not use money for profit, and do not covet power and position.

古文：是故不以康为乐，不以慊为悲；不以贵为安，不以贱为危；形神气志，各居其宜，以随天地之所为。
现代文：所以不以康安为乐，不以清俭为苦；不把尊贵看成安逸，不把贫贱看作危难；形、神、气、志，各得其所，以顺随天地的运转变化。
English: Therefore, one should not take well-being as pleasure, nor frugality as suffering; one should not regard nobility as comfort, nor poverty as danger; form, god, spirit, and aspiration should each have their own place, so as to follow the movement and change of heaven and earth.

古文：夫形者生之舍也，气者生之充也，神者生之制也。
现代文：形体是生命的居舍；气血是生命的支柱；精神是生命的主宰。
English: The body is the abode of life; the qi and blood are the pillars of life; the spirit is the master of life.

古文：一失位则三者伤矣。
现代文：一旦它们失去各应处的地位作用，就会使三者都受到伤损。
English: Once they lose their respective status functions, all three will be damaged.

古文：是故圣人使人各处其位、守其职而不得相干也。
现代文：就像圣人让人各安于自己的地位，各司其职而不允许互相干扰。
English: Like a saint, he allowed everyone to remain in their own place, to do their own thing, and not to interfere with each other.

古文：故夫形者非其所安也而处之则废，气不当其所充而用之则泄，神非其所宜而行之则昧，此三者，不可不慎守也。
现代文：所以形体如果处于不适的环境就会伤残，气血如果运行不当就会泄失，精神如果使用不当就会昏昧。对此三者，人们不能不谨慎对待。
English: Therefore, if the body is in an uncomfortable environment, it will be crippled, if the qi and blood are improperly run, it will be lost, and if the spirit is improperly used, it will be dim. People should not be careless about these three.

古文：夫举天下万物，蚑蛲贞虫，蝡动蚑作，皆知其所喜憎利害者，何也？
现代文：天下万物，小至细微昆虫、爬虫，都有喜好憎恶，都知趋利避害，这是为什么呢？
English: All things under heaven, from the smallest to the tiniest insects and reptiles, have their likes and dislikes. They all know how to seek profit and avoid harm. Why is this?

古文：以其性之在焉而不离也。忽去之，则骨肉无伦矣。
现代文：因为它们的本性在身而没有离弃，如果一旦本性从形体中分离，那么骨肉形体也就不复存在了。
English: Because their nature is in them and has not been abandoned, if the nature is separated from the body, then the flesh-and-bone body will also cease to exist.

古文：今人之所以眭然能视，替然能听，形体能抗，而百节可屈伸，察能分白黑、视丑美，而知能别同异、明是非者，何也？
现代文：人之所以眼能看远，耳听声音，形体能承受重力，关节能伸屈，并能辨察黑白美丑，智慧理性能辨别是非异同，为什么呢？
English: Why is it that the human eye can see far, the ear can hear sound, the body can withstand gravity, the joints can flex, and can distinguish between black and white, beauty and ugliness, and the wisdom and rationality can distinguish between similarities and differences?

古文：气为之充而神为之使也。
现代文：是在于气血充满着形体、精神发挥着作用。
English: It is because the qi and blood fill the body, and the spirit plays a role.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：凡人之志各有所在而神有所系者，其行也足蹪趎埳、头抵植木而不自知也，招之而不能见也，呼之而不能闻也。耳目非去之也，然而不能应者，何也？
现代文：一般说来，人的各种志向行为都与精神相联系，如有人脚绊树桩洼坎跌倒、头撞直木而全无感觉，招手他看不见，叫喊他听不见，可眼睛耳朵并没有失去，但就是没有反映，为什么呢？
English: Generally speaking, people's various aspirational behaviors are all related to the spirit. For example, if someone trips over a tree stump, falls down, and hits his head against a straight tree without feeling anything, he can't see the beckoning, and he can't hear the shouting, but his eyes and ears are not lost, but there is no reflection, why?

古文：神失其守也。故在于小则忘于大，在于中则忘于外，在于上则忘于下，在于左则忘于右。
现代文：是因为他的精神失去了应有的司职功能，所以精神集中在小处就会忘掉大处，精神集中在里面就会忘掉外面，精神集中于上面就会忘掉下面，精神集中于左面就会忘掉右面。
English: It is because his spirit has lost its proper function as a steward. Therefore, if the spirit is concentrated in a small place, it will forget the big place. If the spirit is concentrated inside, it will forget the outside. If the spirit is concentrated above, it will forget the below. If the spirit is concentrated on the left, it will forget the right.

古文：无所不充，则无所不在。是故贵虚者，以豪末为宅也。
现代文：精神是无不充满又无所不在，所以说重视修养虚静平和之神的人就能将精神贯注到极细微的事物之中。
English: The spirit is all-pervading and omnipresent, so it is said that those who attach importance to cultivating the god of emptiness, tranquility and peace will be able to concentrate the spirit into very small things.

古文：今夫狂者之不能避水火之难而越沟渎之险者，岂无形神气志哉！
现代文：现在那些疯子不懂得避开水火的危害，敢跨越深沟险地，难道他们没有形、神、气吗？
English: Now those madmen do not know how to avoid the dangers of water and fire, dare to cross the deep ditch dangerously, do they not have a form, a god, a spirit?

古文：然而用之异也。
现代文：不是，但他们的神和气的运用与常人不一样。
English: No, but their use of God and qi is different from that of ordinary people.

古文：失其所守之位而离其外内之舍，是故举错不能当，动静不能中，终身运枯形于连嵝列埒之门而蹪蹈于污壑阱陷之中，虽生俱与人钧，然而不免为人戮笑者，何也？
现代文：他们的神、气失去了应有的职位，与形体分离了，因此他们的举止行为不能做得恰当，终身在坎坷不平的路上行尸走肉，而且不免跌进陷阱泥潭之中，虽然他们和常人一样活在世上，然而免不了被人羞辱耻笑，这是为什么呢？
English: Their god, qi, has lost its rightful position and is separated from the body, so they can't behave properly. They have been walking on a bumpy road all their lives, and they inevitably fall into a trap. Although they live in the world like ordinary people, they are inevitably humiliated and ridiculed. Why is this?

古文：形神相失也。
现代文：因为这些人形神彼此分离。
English: Because these gods are separate from each other.

古文：故以神为主者，形从而利；以形为制者，神从而害。
现代文：所以以神为主宰，形依从神则对人生命有利；反之，以形为制约，神依从形则对人生命有害。
English: Therefore, it is beneficial to human life to take God as the Lord and to follow God's form; on the other hand, it is harmful to human life to take God's form as a constraint and to follow God's form.

古文：贪饕多欲之人，漠于势利，诱慕于名位，冀以过人之智，植于高世，则精神日以耗而弥远，久淫而不还，形闭中距，则神无由入矣。
现代文：贪婪多欲的人，被权势迷惑，受名位引诱，希望超常人的智慧跻身于社会上层，那么他的精神每日耗损而偏离应处的位置，长久迷惑而不能返回本位，形体闭塞而内心不开窍，精神就无法进入。
English: If a greedy and lustful person is bewitched by power, seduced by fame, and hopes that the wisdom of extraordinary people will rise to the upper echelons of society, then his spirit will be worn out every day and deviate from the proper position, long confused and unable to return to the standard, the body will be blocked and the heart will not open, and the spirit will not be able to enter.

古文：是以天下时有盲妄自失之患，此膏烛之类也，火逾然而消逾亟。
现代文：所以天下常有愚昧狂妄者，患这类疾病者，如同膏烛之类，火烧得越厉害，这种膏烛就消融得越快。
English: That is why there are so many foolish and arrogant people in the world, and those who suffer from such diseases are like anointed candles. The more the fire burns, the faster the anointed candle melts away.

古文：夫精神气志者，静而日充者以壮，躁而日者牦以老。
现代文：精神恬静平和而日益充实，人的身体就强壮；反之，精神躁动烦恼而日益耗损，人的身体就衰老。
English: When the mind is calm, peaceful, and increasingly fulfilled, the human body is strong; on the other hand, when the mind is agitated, troubled, and increasingly worn out, the human body ages.

古文：是故圣人将养其神，和弱其气，平夷其形，而与道沈浮俛仰，恬然而纵之，迫则用之。其纵之也若委衣，其用之也若发机。
现代文：因此，圣人注重调养自己的精神，柔和气志，平稳身体，和大道一起运转变化，该恬静时就放松它，该急迫时就使用它；放松它就如同垂放衣服那样轻便，使用它就如同击发弓弩那样迅疾。
English: Therefore, the sage pays attention to cultivating his spirit, softening his spirit, stabilizing his body, and running changes along with the highway. Relax it when it is calm, use it when it is urgent; relax it as light as hanging clothes, use it as fast as firing a bow and arrow.

古文：如是则万物之化无不遇，而百事之变无不应。
现代文：这样的话，就没有什么不能相合万物的变化，没有什么不能适应万事的变动。
English: In this way, there is nothing that cannot adapt to the changes of all things, and nothing that cannot adapt to the changes of all things.

