古文：凿龟数策，兆曰 大吉 ，而以攻燕者，赵也。
现代文：钻烧龟甲、计算蓍草进行卜筮，兆象 大吉 ，因此攻打燕国的是赵国。
English: Drill and burn tortoise shell, calculate and weed for divination, and the omens are auspicious. Therefore, it is Zhao Province that attacks Yan Province.

古文：凿龟数筴，兆曰 大吉 ，而以攻赵者，燕也。
现代文：钻烧龟甲、计算蓍草进行卜筮，兆象 大吉 ，因此攻打赵国的是燕国。
English: Drill and burn tortoise shell, calculate and weed for divination, and the omens are auspicious, so the attack on Zhao is the attack on Yan.

古文：剧辛之事燕，无功而社稷危；邹衍之事燕，无功而国道绝。
现代文：剧辛效力燕国，无功可言，却导致国家危险；邹衍效力燕国，无功可言，却导致国家命脉断绝。
English: Yan Guo's painstaking efforts have no effect, but lead to national danger; Yan Guo's dilatory efforts have no effect, but lead to the severing of the national lifeline.

古文：赵代先得意于燕，后得意于齐，国乱节高。自以为与秦提衡，非赵龟神而燕龟欺也。
现代文：赵国先战胜燕国，后战胜齐国，国内混乱还趾高气扬，自以为和秦国势均力敌了，汗不是赵国的占卜灵验而燕国的占卜骗人。
English: Zhao first defeated Yan, and then defeated Qi. The chaos in the country was still in high spirits. They thought that they were on an equal footing with Qin. Khan was not the successful diviner of Zhao, but the deceiver of Yan.

古文：赵又尝凿龟数筴而北伐燕，将劫燕以逆秦，兆曰 大吉 。
现代文：赵国又曾通过卜筑而向北讨伐燕国，打算挟持燕国去抗拒秦国，兆象是 大吉 。
English: Zhao also tried to invade Yan to the north through Buqiu, intending to hold Yan hostage to resist Qin. The omen was auspicious.

古文：始攻大梁而秦出上党矣，兵至厘而六城拔矣；至阳城，秦拔鄴矣；庞援揄兵而南，则鄣尽矣。
现代文：才开始进攻燕的大梁，秦国就从上党出兵了；赵军进至厘地，自己的六个城已被秦国攻克了；赵军进至阳城，秦军攻占赵的邺地；等到庞援引兵往南救援时，鄣一带却又全被秦军占领了。
English: It was only when they began to attack Yan's Great Beam that Qin dispatched troops from the upper party; Zhao's army advanced to Lidi, and their six cities had been conquered by Qin; Zhao's army advanced to Yangcheng, and Qin's army conquered Zhao's Fengtian; when Pang called up soldiers to go south for rescue, the Fengtian area was completely occupied by Qin's army.

古文：臣故曰：赵龟虽无远见于燕，且宜近见于秦。
现代文：所以我说：赵国的占卜即使对攻打燕国缺乏远见，也应对秦攻赵有所预见。
English: So I said: Even if Zhao's divination lacked foresight in attacking Yan, it should have foreseen Qin's attack on Zhao.

古文：秦以其 大吉 ，辟地有实，救燕有有名。赵以其 大吉 ，地削兵辱，主不得意而死。又非秦龟神而赵龟欺也。
现代文：秦国根据自己的 大吉 ，开辟疆土既得实惠，救援燕国又得美名，赵国根据自己的 大吉 ，领土削减士兵受辱，赵王不能如愿以偿而死亡，这也并不是秦国的占卜灵验而赵国的占卜骗人。
English: Qin, according to his own Daxi, opened up the territory and gained real benefits, rescued Yan and gained a good name, Zhao, according to his own Daxi, reduced the territory and humiliated the soldiers, and Zhao Wang could not fulfill his wish and died. This is also not Qin's divination and Zhao's divination.

古文：初时者，魏数年东乡攻尽陶、卫，数年西乡以失其国，此非丰隆、五行、太一、王相、摄提、六神、五括、天河、殷抢、岁星非数年在西也，又非天缺、弧逆、刑星、荧惑、奎台非数年在东也。
现代文：开始时候，魏国几年间向东全部攻下了陶、卫，又有几年向西攻秦却丧失了许多国土，这不是丰隆、五行、太一、王相、摄提、六神、五括、天河、殷抢、岁星等吉、星有几年都处在西方，又不是天缺、弧逆、刑星、荧惑、奎台等凶星几年都处在东方。
English: At the beginning, Wei conquered all of Tao and Wei in the east in a few years, and attacked Qin in the west in a few years, but lost a lot of land. This is not the case of Fenglong, Wuxing, Taichi, Wang Xiang, Zhoti, Liuxin, Wuban, Tianhe, Yin Rob, Year Star, and other auspicious stars, which have been in the west for a few years, and it is not the case of Tian Que, Arc Inverse, Chastisement Star, Fu Zha, Kuidai and other evil stars, which have been in the east for a few years.

古文：故曰：龟筴鬼神不足举胜，左右背乡不足以专战。
现代文：所以说：卜筮鬼神不足以推断战争胜负，星体的方位变化不足以决定战争结果。
English: Therefore, it is said: divination is not enough to predict the outcome of the war, and the change of the position of the stars is not enough to determine the outcome of the war.

古文：然而恃之，愚莫大焉。
现代文：既然如此，却还要依仗它们，没有什么比这更愚蠢的了。
English: In that case, nothing could be more foolish than to rely on them.

古文：古者先王尽力于亲民，加事于明法。
现代文：古代先王致力于亲近百姓，从事于彰明法度。
English: The ancient emperors were committed to being close to the people and engaged in clarifying laws and regulations.

古文：彼法明，则忠臣劝；罚必，则邪臣止。忠劝邪止而地广主尊者，秦是也；群臣朋党比周以隐正道行私曲而地削主卑者，山东是也。
现代文：他们的法度彰明了，忠臣就受到鼓励，刑罚坚决了，奸臣就停止作恶，忠臣受到鼓励，奸臣停止作恶，因而国土拓展、君主尊贵的，秦国正是这样；群臣结党拉派来背离正道营私舞弊，因而国土丧失，君主卑下，山东六国正是这样。
English: Their laws were made clear, loyal retainers were encouraged, punishments were firm, traitorous retainers stopped doing evil, loyal retainers were encouraged, traitorous retainers stopped doing evil, and as a result, the country expanded and the monarch was honored. This was the case in Qin; the group of retainers formed a party and sent it to deviate from the right path and engage in selfish and corrupt practices, and as a result, the country was lost, and the monarch was humiliated. This was the case in the Six Kingdoms of Shandong.

古文：乱弱者亡，人之性也；治强者王，古之道也。
现代文：混乱弱小的衰亡，这是人事的一般规则；安定强盛的称王天下，这是自古以来的规律。
English: Confusion, weakness, and decline are the general rules for personnel; stability and strength reign supreme, and this has been the rule since ancient times.

古文：越王勾践恃大朋之龟与吴战而不胜，身臣入宦于吴；反国弃龟，明法亲民以报吴，则夫差为擒。
现代文：越王勾践依仗贵重的龟甲显示的吉兆同吴国打仗，结果没有胜利，自己成了俘虏去吴国服贱役；返国后抛弃龟甲，彰明法度亲近百姓以求报复吴国，结果吴王夫差被擒获了。
English: King Gou of Yue took advantage of the auspicious omens displayed by the valuable tortoise shell to fight against the State of Wu. As a result, there was no victory. He himself became a prisoner and went to the State of Wu to perform menial labor. After returning to the country, he abandoned the tortoise shell and approached the people to seek revenge on the State of Wu. As a result, King Fuchai of Wu was captured.

古文：故恃鬼神者慢于法，恃诸侯者危其国。曹恃齐而不听宋，齐攻荆而宋灭曹。
现代文：所以依使鬼神保佑的就会忽视法治，依仗别国援助的就会危害祖国，曹国依仗齐国而不服从宋国，齐攻楚时宋灭了曹。
English: Therefore, those who rely on the blessing of ghosts and gods will ignore the rule of law, those who rely on the assistance of other countries will endanger the motherland, Cao relied on Qi and did not obey Song, and Song destroyed Cao when Qi attacked Chu.

古文：邢恃吴而不听齐，越伐吴而齐灭邢。
现代文：邢国依仗吴国而不服从齐国越伐吴时齐灭了邢。
English: When Qi overran Wu, Shan relied on Wu instead of obeying Qi, and Qi annihilated Shan.

古文：许恃荆而不听魏，荆攻宋而魏灭许。
现代文：许国依仗楚国而不服从魏国，楚攻宋时魏灭了许。
English: Xu relied on Chu and disobeyed Wei. When Chu attacked Song, Wei annihilated Xu.

古文：郑恃魏而不听韩，魏攻荆而韩灭郑。
现代文：郑国依仗魏国而不服从韩国，魏攻楚时韩灭了郑，现在韩国弱小而衣仗大国，君主忽视法治而服从秦和魏。
English: Zheng relied on Wei and disobeyed Korea. When Wei attacked Chu, Han annihilated Zheng. Now Korea is weak and a great power. The monarch ignores the rule of law and obeys Qin and Wei.

古文：今者韩国小而恃大国，主慢而听秦、魏，恃齐、荆为用，而小国愈亡。
现代文：依仗齐和楚作维持手段。
English: Relying on Qi and Chu as a means of sustenance.

古文：故恃人不足以广壤，而韩不见也。
现代文：结果使本就弱小的韩国越发趋于灭亡。所以依仗别人不足以开拓疆土，而韩国却看不见这一点。
English: As a result, South Korea, which is already weak, is increasingly doomed. Therefore, relying on others is not enough to develop the territory, but South Korea does not see this.

古文：荆为攻魏而加兵许、鄢，齐攻任、扈而削魏，不足以存郑，而韩弗知也。
现代文：楚国为了攻打魏国而用兵许、郡，齐国攻打任、扈而侵夺魏地，这都不足以保存韩国，而韩国却不清楚。
English: In order to attack Wei, Chu invaded Wei with troops from Xu and Gu, and Qi invaded Wei with troops from Ren and Shun. This was not enough to save Korea, but Korea did not know it.

古文：此皆不明其法禁以治其国，恃外以灭其社稷者也。
现代文：这些都是不彰明法令来治理祖国，却依仗外国而导致祖国灭亡的例子。
English: These are all examples of not promulgating laws to govern the motherland, but relying on foreign countries to lead to the destruction of the motherland.

古文：臣故曰：明于治之数，则国虽小，富；赏罚敬信，民虽寡，强。
现代文：所以我说：懂得治理的办法，那么国家虽小，也可以富有；赏罚谨慎守信，民众虽少，也可以强大。
English: So I said: if you know how to govern, then a country can be rich even if it is small; if you reward and punish prudently and faithfully, the people can be strong even if they are few.

古文：赏罚无度，国虽大，兵弱者，地非其地，民非其民也。
现代文：赏罚没有标准，国家虽然很大，兵力衰弱的，土地不是自己的土地，民众不是自己的民众。
English: There is no standard for reward and punishment. Although the country is large, the military is weak. The land is not its own land, and the people are not its own people.

古文：无地无民，尧、舜不能以王，三代不能以强。人主又以过予，人臣又以徒取。舍法律而言先王以明古之功者，上任之以国。
现代文：没有土地和民众，尧舜也不能称王天下，夏、商、周三代也不能强盛，君主又因此过分地行赏，臣子又白白地得赏，对那些不顾法律而谈论先王明君功绩的人，君主却把国事委托给他。
English: Without land and people, Zou could not be called the king of the world, and Xia, Shang, and the three dynasties could not prosper. Therefore, the monarch rewarded excessively, and the courtiers were rewarded in vain. For those who talked about the merits of the former King Mingjun regardless of the law, the monarch entrusted the state affairs to him.

古文：臣故曰：是原古之功，以古之赏赏今之人也。
现代文：我所以说：这是指望有古代的功绩，却拿古代的赏赐标准去奖赏现在的空谈家。
English: So I say: This is expecting to have ancient merit, but taking the ancient reward standard to reward the current talker.

古文：主以是过予，而臣以此徒取矣。
现代文：君主因此过分地行赏，臣子因此白白地得赏。
English: As a result, the monarch rewarded excessively, and the vassal received the reward in vain.

古文：主过予，则臣偷幸；臣徒取，则功不尊。
现代文：君主过分地行赏，臣下就会苟且和侥幸；臣下白白地得赏，功劳就不再尊贵了。
English: If the monarch rewards excessively, the vassal will be cautious and lucky; if the vassal is rewarded in vain, the merit will no longer be honorable.

古文：无功者受赏，则财匮而民望；财匮而民望，则民不尽力矣。故用赏过者失民，用刑过者民不畏。
现代文：无功的人受赏，财力就会匮乏，民众就会抱怨；财厦民怨，民众就不会为君主尽力了，所以行赏不当的就会失去民众，用刑不当的民众就不再畏惧。
English: If people who have done nothing are rewarded, the financial resources will be scarce, and the people will complain; if people who are rich are angry, the people will not do their best for the monarch, so those who reward improperly will lose the people, and the people who use punishment improperly will no longer be afraid.

古文：有赏不足以劝，有刑不足以禁，则国虽大，必危。
现代文：有赏赐却不足以勉励立功，有刑罚却不足以禁止邪恶，那么国家即使很大，也一定很危险。
English: If there are rewards but not enough to encourage merit, and punishments but not enough to prohibit evil, then the state, even if it is large, must be very dangerous.

古文：故曰：小知不可使谋事，小忠不可使主法。
现代文：所以说：有小聪明的人不能让他谋划事情，有小忠诚的人不能让他掌管法令。
English: Therefore it is said: A man of little wisdom cannot be allowed to direct affairs, and a man of little fidelity cannot be put in charge of laws.

古文：荆恭王与晋厉公战于鄢陵，荆师败，恭王伤。
现代文：楚恭王和晋厉王在郡陵交战，楚军失利；恭王受伤。
English: Chu Gong Wang and Jin Li Wang fought in the County Mausoleum, the Chu army lost; Gong Wang was injured.

古文：酣战，而司马子反渴而求饮，其友竖谷阳奉卮酒而进之。
现代文：战斗正激烈时，司马官子反口渴要水喝，他的亲信侍仆谷阳捧了一卮酒给他。子反说： 拿走，这是酒。 
English: When the battle was in full swing, Sima Guanzi was thirsty and asked for water. His trusted servant, Gu Yang, brought him a bottle of wine. Guanzi said, "Take it, it's wine."

古文：子反曰： 去之，此酒也。 竖谷阳曰： 非也。 子反受而饮之。子反为人嗜酒，甘之，不能绝之于口，醉而卧。
现代文：侍仆谷阳说： 这不是酒。 子反接过来喝了，子反为人喜欢喝酒，觉得酒味甘甜，不能停下不喝，结果喝醉后睡着了。
English: The attendant, Gu Yang, said, "This is not wine. My son drank it one after the other. My son, on the other hand, likes to drink, thinks wine is sweet, and can't stop drinking it. As a result, he fell asleep after getting drunk.

古文：恭王欲复战而谋事，使人召子反，子反辞以心疾。
现代文：恭王想重新开战和他谋划战事，派人叫子反，子反借口心病而加以推辞。
English: King Gong wanted to restart the war and his war plans, so he sent someone to summon Zi Fang, but Zi Fang refused on the pretext that he was mentally ill.

古文：恭王驾而往视之，入幄中，闻酒臭而还，曰： 今日之战，寡人目亲伤。
现代文：恭王乘车前去看他，进入帐中，闻到酒气而返回，说： 今天的战斗，我自个眼睛受了伤。
English: King Gong went to see him in a car, entered the account, smelled the alcohol and returned, saying: "Today's battle, I injured my own eye.

古文：所恃者司马，司马又如此，是亡荆国之社稷而不恤吾众也。
现代文：我所依赖的是司马，司马又这般模样，这是不顾楚国的神灵，不关心我的民众。
English: What I rely on is Sima, and Sima looks like this, this is in spite of the gods of Chu, not caring about my people.

古文：寡人无与复战矣。 罢师而去之，斩子反以为大戮。
现代文：我不能和敌人重新开战了。 于是引兵离开郡陵，把司马子反处以极刑。
English: I couldn't go to war with the enemy again, so I led the soldiers away from the county tomb and sentenced Sima Zi to capital punishment.

古文：故曰：竖谷阳之进酒也，非以端恶子反也，实心以忠爱之，而适足以杀之而已矣。
现代文：所以说：侍仆谷阳进酒，并非本来就恨子反，而是真心地忠爱子反，但最终却恰好因此而害了他。
English: Therefore, it is said that the waiter, Gu Yang, did not hate his son, but he was truly loyal to him, but in the end, it was because of this that he was killed.

古文：此行小忠而贼大忠者也。故曰：小忠，大忠之贼也。
现代文：这便是行小忠而害大忠，所以说：小忠是对大忠的祸害。
English: This is the way of a lesser loyalist to the detriment of a greater loyalist, so it is said that a lesser loyalist is a scourge to a greater loyalist.

古文：若使小忠主法，则必将赦罪，赦罪以相爱，是与下安矣，然而妨害于治民者也。
现代文：如果让行小忠的人掌管法制，那就必然会赦免罪犯加以爱护，这样他同下面的人是相安了，但却妨害了治理民众。
English: If you put someone like Xing Xiaozhong in charge of the legal system, he will inevitably pardon and cherish criminals. In this way, he will be at peace with the people below, but he will hinder the governance of the people.

古文：当魏之方明《立辟》、从宪令行之时，有功者必赏，有罪者必诛，强匡天下，威行四邻；及法慢，妄予，而国日削矣。
现代文：当魏国正在彰明立法、从事法令建设的时侯，有功者必赏，有罪者必罚，强盛得可以匡正天下，威势达到四邻诸侯；等到法令懈怠，赏赐混乱，国家就日益衰弱了。
English: When the state of Wei was clarifying legislation and engaging in the construction of laws and regulations, the meritorious must be rewarded, the guilty must be punished, the strong can rectify the world, and the power can reach the four neighboring princes; when the laws and regulations are slack, and chaos is rewarded, the country will become increasingly weak.

古文：当赵之方明《国律》、从大军之时，人众兵强，辟地齐、燕；及《国律》满，用者弱，而国日削矣。
现代文：当赵国正在彰明国律、从事军队建设的时侯，人多兵强，攻占了齐、燕的土地；等到国律懈怠，执政者软弱，国家就日益衰弱了。
English: When Zhao was in the process of clarifying the national law and building an army, the people were more numerous and more powerful, and they conquered the land of Qi and Yan; when the national law was slack and the rulers were weak, the country became weaker and weaker.

古文：当燕之方明《奉法》、审官断之时，东县齐国，南尽中山之地；及《奉法》已亡，官断不用，左右交争，论从其下，则兵弱而地削，国制于邻敌矣。
现代文：当燕国正在彰明奉法、重视政府决策的时侯，东向把齐国作为自己的郡县，南向完全占领了中山的国土；等到奉法丢弃，政府决策不再实行，左右亲信相互争斗，君主听从臣下决策，于是兵力削弱，土地削减，国家也就受制于邻国了。
English: At a time when Yan's state was clearly enforcing the law and attaching importance to government decision-making, Dongxiang took Qi as its own county, and Nanxiang completely occupied Zhongshan's land; when the law was abandoned, government decision-making was no longer implemented, right and left cronies fought each other, and the monarch obeyed the decision-making of his subjects, the military strength was weakened, the land was reduced, and the country was also subject to neighboring countries.

古文：故曰：明法者强，慢法者弱。
现代文：所以说：严明法制的国家就强大，轻忽法制的国家就弱小。
English: Therefore, it is said that a country with a strict legal system is strong, and a country that neglects the legal system is weak.

古文：强弱如是其明矣，而世主弗为，国亡宜矣。
现代文：强弱对比是如此的分明，而当代君主却不实行，国家危亡真是活该了。
English: The contrast between the strong and the weak is so clear, but the contemporary monarch does not practice it. The country's peril is really worth it.

古文：语曰： 家有常业，虽饥不饿；国有常法，虽危不亡。 夫舍常法而从私意，则臣下饰于智能；臣下饰于智能，则法禁不立矣。
现代文：俗语说： 家里有固定产业，即使荒年也不会挨饿；国家有固定法制，即使危险也不会衰亡。 舍弃固定法制而顺从个人意志，臣下就会粉饰自己的智能；臣下粉饰自己的智能，法律禁令就站不住脚。
English: As the saying goes: If a family has a stable industry, it will not starve even in a year of famine; if a country has a stable legal system, it will not decline even if it is in danger; if a subject abandons a stable legal system and follows his own will, his intelligence will be whitewashed; if a subject whitewashes his intelligence, legal prohibitions will not stand.

古文：是亡意之道行，治国之道废也。
现代文：这样，随心所欲的做法就通行，以法治国的原则就废弃了。
English: In this way, the practice of doing as one pleases becomes the norm, and the principle of a state governed by the rule of law is abandoned.

古文：治国之道，去害法者，则不惑于智能，不矫于名誉矣。
现代文：治理国家的原则，舍弃危害法令的，就不会受智能的迷惑，不会被虚名所欺骗了。
English: If you abandon the principle of governing the country and the harmful laws, you will not be confused by intelligence and will not be deceived by false names.

古文：昔者舜使吏决鸿水，先令有功而舜杀之；禹朝诸候之君会稽之上，防风之君后至而禹斩之。
现代文：过去舜派官吏排泄洪水，早于命令而抢先立功的，舜把他杀了；禹在会稽山上接受诸侯国君的朝见，防风氏迟到而禹杀了他。
English: In the past, Zou sent officials to drain the flood, and killed those who made contributions before the order was issued; Yu received the imperial court of the princes and sovereigns on the summit of the mountain, and killed Feng who arrived late.

古文：以此观之，先令者杀，后令者斩，则古者先贵如令矣。
现代文：由此看来，先于命令的杀，后于命令的也杀，那么古代首先重视的是依法办事。
English: From this point of view, before the order to kill, after the order to kill, then the ancient first attention is to act in accordance with the law.

古文：故镜执清而无事，美恶从而比焉；衡执正而无事，轻重从而载焉。
现代文：所以镜子保持清亮而不受干扰，美丑就会因此显示出来；衡器保持平正而不受干，轻重就会因此衡量出来。
English: Therefore, if the mirror is kept clean and undisturbed, beauty and ugliness will be revealed; if the weighing instrument is kept flat and undisturbed, weight and weight will be measured.

古文：夫摇镜，则不得为明；摇衡，则不得为正，法之谓也。故先王以道为常，以法为本。
现代文：摇动镜子就不能保持明亮，摇动衡器就不能保持平正，说的就是 法 。 所以先王把道作为常规，把法作为根本。
English: Shaking the mirror will not keep it bright, shaking the balance will not keep it level, and that is the Fa. Therefore, the Ancestor King took the Way as the norm and the Fa as the foundation.

古文：本治者名尊，本乱者名绝。
现代文：法制严明，君主名位就尊贵；法制混乱，君主名位就丧失。
English: When the legal system is strict, the position of the monarch is respected; when the legal system is chaotic, the position of the monarch is lost.

古文：凡智能明通，有以则行，无以则止。
现代文：凡是智能高强的人，有依据就行动，没有依据就停止。
English: All intelligent and strong people act when there is a basis, and stop when there is no basis.

古文：故智能单道，不可传于人。
现代文：所以智能是偏道，不能传给人。
English: Therefore, intelligence is a side road and cannot be passed on to others.

古文：而道法万全，智能多失。
现代文：道和法是万全的，智能多有偏失。
English: The Tao and the Fa are all-perfect, but intelligence is often biased.

古文：夫悬衡而知平，设规而知圆，万全之道也。
现代文：悬挂衡器才知道乎不平，设置圆规才知道圆不圆，这是万全之道。
English: It takes a hanging scale to know if something is round or not, and a dial to know if something is round or not. This is the best way.

古文：明主使民饰于道之故，故佚而有功。
现代文：因为明君能使百姓用道来整伤自己，所以省力而有功。
English: Because Mingjun can make the people use the road to rectify themselves, so it saves effort and has merit.

古文：释规而任巧，释法而任智，惑乱之道也。
现代文：丢掉规矩而单凭技巧，放弃法治而单凭智慧，是使人迷惑混乱的办法。
English: To throw away discipline and rely on skill alone, to abandon the rule of law and rely on wisdom alone, is a confusing and confusing approach.

古文：乱主使民饰于智，不知道之故，故劳而无功。
现代文：昏君使民众用智巧粉饰自己，是不懂道的缘故，所以劳而无功。
English: It is because they do not understand the Tao that the dim prince makes the people use cleverness to whitewash themselves, so all their efforts are in vain.

古文：释法禁而听请谒群臣卖官于上，取赏于下，是以利在私家而威在群臣。
现代文：放弃法令而听从请托，群臣在上面出卖官爵，从下面取得报酬，所以利益归于私门而权势落于群臣。
English: Abandoning the decree and obeying the request, the ministers betrayed the officials and nobles at the top and received remuneration from below, so the profits went to the private sector and the power fell to the ministers.

古文：故民无尽力事主之心，而务为交于上。
现代文：所以百姓没有尽力侍奉君主的心意，而致力于结交大臣。
English: Therefore, the people did not try to serve the monarch's will, but devoted themselves to making friends with the minister.

古文：民好上交，则货财上流，而巧说者用。
现代文：百姓喜欢结交大臣，财货就向上流入大臣之手而花言巧语的人就被任用。
English: The people like to make friends with the minister, goods and money flow upward into the minister's hands, and the smooth talker is appointed.

古文：若是，则有功者愈少。
现代文：假如形成这种局面，有功的人就越来越少。
English: If this situation develops, there will be fewer and fewer meritorious people.

古文：奸臣愈进而材臣退，则主惑而不知所行，民聚而不知所道。
现代文：奸臣越来越得到进用而有才能的臣子遭到斥退，君主就会迷惑而不知道干什么好，百姓聚集起来也不知道往哪儿走。
English: Treacherous vassals are more and more promoted, and talented vassals are rejected. The monarch is confused and does not know what to do, and the people do not know where to go when they gather.

古文：此废法禁、后功劳、举名誉、听请谒之失也。
现代文：这是废法令、轻功劳、重名声、听请托的过失。
English: This is a waste of laws and regulations, light on merit, heavy on reputation, and a mistake of following orders.

古文：凡败法之人，必设诈托物以来亲，又好言天下之所希有。此暴君乱主之所以惑也，人臣贤佐之所以侵也。
现代文：凡是败坏法制的人，一定会设下骗局，假托有事来亲近君主，又喜欢谈论天下少见的东西，这就是暴君昏主受迷惑、贤人佐臣受侵害的原因。
English: Anyone who corrupts the legal system will certainly set up a scam, pretend to have something to get close to the monarch, and like to talk about things that are rare in the world. This is the reason why the tyrant is confused and the wise man Sasomi is infringed.

古文：故人臣称伊尹、管仲之功，则背法饰智有资；称比干、子胥之忠而见杀，则疾强谏有辞。
现代文：所以臣子称颂伊尹、管仲的功劳，违法弄智就有了根据；称颂比干、伍子胥的忠贞被杀，急切强谏就有了借口。
English: Therefore, if a courtier praised the merits of Yi Yin and Guanzhong, there would be a basis for illegal speculation; if a courtier praised the loyalty of Bi Gan and Wu Zixuan, and they were killed, there would be an excuse for eager speculation.

古文：夫上称贤明，不称暴乱，不可以取类，若是者禁。
现代文：前者称说君主贤明，后者说君主暴乱，不可以拿来类推，像这样的就应禁止。
English: The former said that the monarch was wise, the latter said that the monarch was a riot, it was impossible to draw an analogy, and such things should be banned.

古文：君子立法以为是也，今人臣多立其私智以法为非者，是邪以智，过法立智。
现代文：君主立法认为正确的，现在臣子多标榜个人智巧来否定国法，这就是用智巧来肯定奸邪，诋毁法制、标榜智巧。
English: The monarch's legislation is considered correct, but now the courtiers are more likely to flaunt personal cleverness to deny the national law. This is to use cleverness to affirm treason, discredit the legal system, and flaunt cleverness.

古文：如是者禁，主之道也。
现代文：像这样的应予禁止，这是做君主的原则。
English: That sort of thing should be banned, that's the principle of being a monarch.

古文：明主之道，必明于公私之分，明法制，去私恩。
现代文：做明君的原则，一定要明白公私的区别，彰明法制，舍弃私人恩惠。
English: The principle of making clear your position is that you must understand the difference between public and private, clarify the legal system, and abandon private favors.

古文：夫令必行，禁必止，人主之公义也；必行其私，信于朋友，不可为赏劝，不可为罚沮，人臣之私义也。
现代文：有令必行，有禁必止，是君主的公义；一定要实现自己的私利，在朋友中取得信任，不能用赏赐鼓励，不能用刑罚阻止，是臣子的私义。
English: There are orders that must be carried out, and prohibitions that must be stopped, which is the righteousness of the monarch; it is necessary to realize one's own selfish interests, to gain trust among friends, and cannot be encouraged with rewards or stopped with punishments. It is the selfishness of the courtiers.

古文：私义行则乱，公义行则治，故公私有分。
现代文：私义风行国家就会混乱，公义风行国家就会平安，所以公私是有区别的。
English: A country where selfishness prevails will be in chaos, while a country where righteousness prevails will be safe. Therefore, there is a difference between public and private.

古文：人臣有私心，有公义。
现代文：臣子有私心，有公义。
English: A vassal has selfishness and righteousness.

古文：修身洁白而行公行正，居官无私，人臣之公义也；污行从欲，安身利家，人臣之私心也。
现代文：修身廉洁而办事公正，做官无私，是臣子的公义；珐污品行而放纵私欲，安身利家，是臣子的私心。
English: It is the justice of a vassal to be self-disciplined, honest, and fair, and to be selfless in his official duties; it is the selfishness of a vassal to indulge his selfish desires and to be self-satisfied.

古文：明主在上，则人臣去私心行公义；乱主在上，则人臣去公义行私心。
现代文：明君在上，臣子就去私心行公义；昏君在上，臣子就去公义行私心。
English: When Emperor Ming was on the throne, his vassals went to selfishness to do justice; when Emperor Qiu was on the throne, his vassals went to righteousness to do selfishness.

古文：故君臣异心，君以计畜臣，臣以计事君，君臣之交，计也。
现代文：所以君臣不一条心，君主靠算计蓄养臣子，臣子靠算计侍奉君主，君臣交往的是算计。
English: Therefore, the sovereign and the vassal are not of the same mind. The sovereign relies on calculation to nurture the vassal, the vassal relies on calculation to serve the sovereign, and the sovereign and the vassal deal with calculation.

古文：害身而利国，臣弗为也；害国而利臣，君不为也。
现代文：危害自身而有利国家，臣子是不做的；危害国家而有利臣子，君主是不干的。
English: If a vassal harms himself and benefits the state, the vassal does nothing; if a vassal harms the state and benefits the state, the sovereign does nothing.

古文：臣之情，害身无利；君之情，害国无亲。
现代文：臣子的本心，危害自身就谈不上利益；君主的本心，危害国家就谈不上亲近。
English: If a vassal's original intention is to harm himself, there can be no talk of benefit; if a monarch's original intention is to harm the country, there can be no talk of closeness.

古文：君臣也者，以计合者也。
现代文：君臣关系是凭算计结合起来的。
English: The relationship between monarch and vassal is based on calculation.

古文：至夫临难必死，尽智竭力，为法为之。
现代文：至于臣子遇到危难一定拚死，竭尽才智和力量，是法度造成的。
English: As for the vassal, if he is in danger, he will certainly die, exhausting his talent and strength, which is caused by the law.

古文：故先王明赏以劝之，严刑以威之。
现代文：所以先王明定赏赐来加以勉励，严定刑罚来加以制服。
English: Therefore, the former king clearly decided to encourage them with rewards and to subdue them with severe punishment.

古文：赏刑明，则民尽死；民尽死，则兵强主尊。
现代文：赏罚分明，百姓就能拼死；百姓拼死，兵力就会强盛，君主就会尊贵。
English: If the reward and punishment are clear, the people can fight to the death; if the people fight to the death, the army will be strong, and the monarch will be honored.

古文：刑赏不察，则民无功而求得，有罪而幸免，则兵弱主卑。
现代文：刑赏不分明，百姓就会无功而谋取利益，有罪而侥幸免罚，结果是兵力弱小，君主卑下。
English: If the punishment and reward are not clear, the people will seek profit without merit, and the guilty will get away with impunity. As a result, the army is weak and the monarch is despised.

古文：故先王贤佐尽力竭智。
现代文：所以先王贤臣都竭力尽心。
English: That is why the wise men of the past did their best.

古文：故曰：公私不可不明，法禁不可不审，先王知之矣。
现代文：所以说，公私不可不明，法禁不可不察，先王是懂得这个道理的。
English: Therefore, the public and private must not be unclear, and the legal prohibition must not be ignored. The former king understood this principle.

