古文：兵有客之分，有主人之分。
现代文：用兵作战有客军和主军的分别。
English: There is a difference between the guest army and the main army in the use of soldiers.

古文：客之分众，主人之分少。
现代文：处于进攻地位的客军兵力必须比对方多，而处于守势的主军兵力较少。
English: The guest army in the offensive position must have more troops than the other side, while the main army in the defensive position has fewer troops.

古文：客倍主人半，然可敌也。
现代文：当客军兵力是主军兵力的一倍，主军兵力只有客军一半时，可以交战。
English: When the strength of the guest army is twice the strength of the host army, and the host army is only half the strength of the guest army, they can fight.

古文：负定者也。客者，后定者也。
现代文：客军当然是在主军之后进入阵地的。
English: Of course, the guest army entered the position after the main army.

古文：主人安地抚势以胥。
现代文：主军则已占据有利地形，严阵以待客军了。
English: The main army has already occupied the favorable terrain, and is waiting for the guest army.

古文：夫客犯隘逾险而至，夫犯隘退则刎颈，进不敢拒敌，其故何也？
现代文：而客军要攻破关隘，越过险阻，才能到达交战地点。进攻关隘后退就等于自杀，不敢前进抗拒放军，是什么原因呢？
English: But the guest army has to break through the narrow pass and cross the dangerous obstacles in order to reach the battle site. Attacking the narrow pass and retreating is tantamount to suicide. They dare not advance and resist the release of troops. What is the reason for this?

古文：势不便，地不利也。
现代文：这是因为形势不利，地形不好。
English: This is because the situation is unfavourable, the terrain is not good.

古文：势便地利则民自自退。所谓善者战，便势利地者也。
现代文：当形势有利，地形有利时，士兵自然会通常所说的善于用兵的人，就是会利用形势和地利的人。
English: When the situation is favorable and the terrain is favorable, soldiers will naturally be what is commonly called good soldiers, that is, people who can take advantage of the situation and location.

古文：带甲数十万，民有余粮弗得食也，有余居兵多而用兵少也，居者有余而用者不足。
现代文：带领数十万大军，哪怕百姓有余粮也不可能保证供给，养兵时觉得多，而用兵时却觉得少，养兵有余而用兵时兵力又不足。
English: Leading hundreds of thousands of troops, even if the people have surplus grain, it is impossible to ensure supply. When raising troops, they feel more, but when using troops, they feel less. When raising troops, there is surplus, but when using troops, there is insufficient troop strength.

古文：带甲数十万，千千而出，千千而□之万万以遗我。所谓善战者，善翦断之，如□会捝者也。
现代文：有军兵数十万，成千成千地出征，善于用兵作战的将领，必定善于分割截断放军，就像而会解脱的人一样。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of soldiers, thousands of them go to war, and the generals who are good at using soldiers to fight must be good at dividing and cutting off and releasing troops, just like those who will be liberated.

古文：能分人之兵，能按人之兵，则锱而有余。不能分人之兵，不能按人之兵，则数倍而不足。
现代文：能分散敌军兵力，善于抑制敌军兵力的将领，哪怕自己的兵力非常少，他用起来也会觉得有富余，而不会分散敌军兵力，不能抑制敌军兵力的将领，即使自己的兵力数涪于敌军，他仍然觉得不够用。
English: A general who is able to disperse the enemy's forces and is good at restraining the enemy's forces will feel that he has more than enough when he uses them, even if his own forces are very small, but he will not disperse the enemy's forces. A general who cannot restrain the enemy's forces will still feel that he is not enough even if his own forces are smaller than the enemy's.

古文：众者胜乎？
现代文：兵多就能取胜吗？
English: Can a large number of soldiers win?

古文：则投算而战耳。富者胜乎？
现代文：如果真是这样，那么用筹签算算双方的兵力就可知战争的结果了。富足就能取胜吗？
English: If this is true, then the outcome of the war can be known by calculating the number of troops on both sides. Can prosperity win?

古文：则量粟而战耳。
现代文：那么量量双方的粮食就可以知道战争的结果了。
English: Then the outcome of the war can be known by measuring the grain of both sides.

古文：兵利甲坚者胜乎？
现代文：兵器锐利，铠甲坚固就能取胜吗？
English: Can you win with sharp weapons and sturdy armor?

古文：则胜易知矣。
现代文：那么胜负就很容易预先知道了。
English: In that case, it is easy to know the outcome in advance.

古文：故富未居安也，贫未居危也；众未居胜也，少。
现代文：所以说，国家富足，不一定就安全，国家贫穷，不一定就有危险；兵多不一定就能取胜，兵少也不一定就会失败。
English: Therefore, when a country is rich, it is not necessarily safe, when a country is poor, it is not necessarily dangerous; when a country has many soldiers, it is not necessarily victorious, and when a country has few soldiers, it is not necessarily defeated.

古文：以决胜败安危者，道也。
现代文：决定胜败与安危的关键在于掌握用兵的规律。
English: The key to victory, defeat and safety lies in mastering the rules of using troops.

古文：敌人众，能使之分离而不相救也，受敌者不得相以为固，甲坚兵利不得以为强，士有勇力不得以卫其将，则胜有道矣。
现代文：敌军兵多，可以使敌军分散而不能相互救援，使敌军虽然铠甲坚固，兵器锐利，却不能发挥威力，军兵勇敢却不能保卫他们的将领，这就是掌握了致胜的途径了。
English: When there are many enemy soldiers, the enemy army can be dispersed and cannot come to each other's rescue; when the enemy army, although it has strong armor and sharp weapons, cannot exert its power; when the soldiers are brave but cannot protect their generals, this is the way to win.

古文：故明主、知道之将必先□，可有功于未战之前，故不失；可有之功于已战之后，故兵出而有功，入而不伤，则明于兵者也。
现代文：所以说，英明的君王和懂得用兵规律的将领必定事先交战之前就有把握取胜，这样的君王和将领就能万无一失；而在交战之中能取胜，出兵之后能建功立业，退兵之时不受损伤的将领，那就只能算是明白用兵的人而已。
English: Therefore, a wise king and a general who understands the rules of using troops must be sure to win before the war, and such a king and general can be foolproof; and a general who can win in the war, can make achievements after sending troops, and is not damaged when retiring, can only be regarded as a person who knows how to use troops.

古文：焉。为人客则先人作兵曰：主人逆客于境，客好事则使劳，三军之士可使毕失其志，则胜可得而据也。是以按左抶右，右败而左弗能救；按右扶左，左败而右弗能救。
现代文：使敌军疲劳，就可以便放军全军将士完全丧失斗志，那么，就有战胜敌军的把握了。所以钳制敌军左翼而攻击敌军右翼，就是要使其右翼失败时，左翼不能救援；钳制敌军右翼而攻击其左翼的战法，也是要使得放军左翼失败时右翼不能相救。
English: Therefore, to pin down the enemy's left wing and attack the enemy's right wing is to make the enemy's right wing fail, and the left wing cannot rescue; to pin down the enemy's right wing and attack the enemy's left wing is also to make the enemy's left wing fail, and the right wing cannot rescue.

古文：是以兵坐而不起，避而不用，近者少而不足用，远者疏而不能
现代文：这样作战，就是要使得敌军只能坐而待毙，不敢主动出去，只敢远避而不敢交锋，造成敌军近处兵力少，不够用，远处的兵力分散，不能支援，
English: To fight in this way is to make the enemy army can only sit and wait for death, dare not take the initiative to go out, only dare to avoid but dare not engage, resulting in the enemy army's nearby troops are few and not enough, the distant troops are scattered and can not support,

