古文：起旃蒙赤奋若，尽著雍执徐，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：孝惠皇帝下永兴二年
现代文：晋惠帝永兴二年
English: In the second year of Emperor Jingu's reign

古文：夏，四月，张方废羊后。
现代文：夏季四月，张方废黜羊皇后。
English: In the summer of April, Zhang Fang dethroned the Queen of Sheep.

古文：游楷等攻皇甫重，累年不能克，重遣其养子昌求救于外。
现代文：游楷等人攻打皇甫重，几年都没有攻克，皇甫重派他的养子皇甫昌到外边录求救援。
English: Youkai and others attacked Emperor Fuzhong, but they were not defeated for several years. Emperor Fuzhong sent his adopted son, Emperor Fuchang, to the outside world to ask for help.

古文：昌诣司空越，越以太宰颙新与山东连和，不肯出兵。
现代文：皇甫昌拜见司空司马越，司马越因为太宰司马新近与崤山以东地区联系和解，不肯出兵。
English: Emperor Fuchang paid a visit to Sifu Sima Yue. Sima Yue refused to send troops because Daza Sima had recently made peace with the area east of Lushan.

古文：昌乃与故殿中人杨篇诈称越命，迎羊后于金墉城。
现代文：皇甫昌就与以前为殿中人的杨篇一起，伪称奉司马越的旨意，从金墉城迎出羊皇后。
English: Emperor Fuchang, together with Yang Chen, who had previously been a person in the hall, falsely claimed that they were carrying out Ma Yue's will and welcoming the Queen of Sheep from Jinyuan City.

古文：入宫，以后令发兵讨张方，奉迎大驾。
现代文：进入皇宫后，用皇后的命令发兵讨伐张方，尊奉迎接皇帝大驾。
English: After entering the imperial palace, he sent an army to fight against Zhang Fang with the order of the empress, and was honored to meet the emperor.

古文：事起仓猝，百官初皆从之；俄知其诈，相与诛昌。
现代文：事情来得仓猝，朝廷各部门官员开始都跟随皇甫昌，不久知道是伪令，就一起杀了皇甫昌。
English: The matter came out of the blue, and officials from all departments of the imperial court began to follow Emperor Fuchang. They soon learned that it was a fake order, and together they killed Emperor Fuchang.

古文：颙请遣御史宣诏喻重令降，重不奉诏。
现代文：司马请求派御史向皇甫重宣布诏令，命令他投降。皇甫重不遵行诏令。
English: Sima requested the emperor to send an envoy to announce the imperial edict to the emperor and order him to surrender. The emperor did not comply with the imperial edict.

古文：先是城中不知长沙厉王及皇甫商已死，重获御史驺人，问曰： 我弟将兵来，欲至未？ 
现代文：开始时城里不知道长沙厉王司马和皇甫商已被杀死。皇甫重抓住来宣布诏令的御史马夫，询问说： 我弟弟带兵过来，快到了吗？ 
English: At the beginning, the city did not know that Wang Sima of Changsha Li and the merchants of the imperial court had been killed. The imperial court re-captured Sima Fu, who had come to announce the edict, and asked: My brother has brought soldiers, are they coming soon?

古文：驺人曰： 已为河间王所害。 
现代文：马夫说： 他已被河间王司马害死了。 
English: Maf said: He was killed by King Sima of Kawama.

古文：重失色，立杀驺人。
现代文：皇甫重大惊失色，当即杀掉马夫。
English: The crown prince was so shocked that he lost his temper and immediately killed the groom.

古文：于是城中知无外救，共杀重以降。
现代文：这样城里知道没有外援，就一起杀了皇甫重投降。
English: In this way, the city knew that there was no foreign aid, so they killed the emperor and surrendered.

古文：颙以冯翊太守张辅为秦州刺史。
现代文：司马命冯翊太守张辅担任秦州刺史。
English: Sima Min, Feng Xuan, Zhang Fu, the de facto ruler of Qin, served as the governor of Qin.

古文：六月，甲子，安丰元侯王戎薨于郏。
现代文：六月，甲子，安丰元侯王戎在郏县去世。
English: In June, Wang Rong, the former Prince of Anfeng, died in Jixian County.

古文：张辅至秦州，杀天水太守封尚，欲以立威；又召陇西太守韩稚，稚子朴勒兵击辅。辅军败，死。
现代文：张辅到秦州，杀了天水太守封尚，想以此建立权威。又要召陇西太守韩稚，韩稚的儿子韩朴带兵攻打张辅，张辅的军队失败，张辅被杀死。
English: Zhang Fu went to Qinzhou and killed Tianshui's eunuch Fong Shang, hoping to establish authority in this way. He also wanted to summon Han Wuchang, the eunuch Han Wuchang's son, to lead troops to attack Zhang Fu. Zhang Fu's army failed, and Zhang Fu was killed.

古文：凉州司马杨胤言于张轨曰： 韩稚擅杀刺史，明公杖钺一方，不可以不讨。 
现代文：凉州司马杨胤对张轨说： 韩稚擅自杀死刺史，您掌握一个地区的军事，不能不去征讨。 
English: Liangzhou Sima Yangyin said to Zhang Lai: Han Zhi has a history of suicide, you have the military of a region, you can't go without conscription.

古文：轨从之，遣中督护汜瑗帅众二万讨稚，稚诣轨降。
现代文：张轨听从了他的意见，派中军督护瑗率领二万人征讨韩稚，韩稚到张轨那里投降。
English: Zhang Railing listened to his opinion and sent the Chinese military governor, Guo Jun, to lead twenty thousand people to recruit Han Waki, and Han Waki surrendered to Zhang Railing.

古文：未几，鲜卑若罗拔能寇凉州，轨遣司马宋配击之，斩拔能，俘十馀万口，威名大振。
现代文：没有多久，鲜卑人若罗拔能进犯凉州，张轨派司马宋配阻击鲜卑人，杀了若罗拔能，俘虏十多万人，声威大振。
English: It did not take long before Zhang Liao sent Sima Song to block the invasion of Liangzhou by the Xiangbei people. He killed the Xiangbei people, captured more than 100,000 people, and became very powerful.

古文：汉王渊攻东赢公腾，腾复乞师于拓跋猗㐌，卫操劝猗㐌助之。
现代文：汉王刘渊攻打东赢公司马腾，司马腾又向拓跋猗求援助，卫操劝拓跋猗帮助司马腾。
English: Han king Liu Yuan attacked the East Win Company's Ma Teng, and Sima Teng asked Tuobao for assistance. Wei Du advised Tuobao to help Sima Teng.

古文：猗㐌帅轻骑数千救腾，斩汉将綦毋豚。
现代文：拓跋猗率领几千轻装的骑兵去救援司马腾，杀了汉将綦毋豚。
English: Tuoba Guo led several thousand light cavalry to rescue Sima Teng and killed Han general Zou Yibo.

古文：诏假猗㐌大单于，加操右将军。
现代文：诏令把拓跋猗封为大单于，加封卫操右将军。
English: The imperial edict sealed Tuobao as a great single, and sealed Wei as the right general.

古文：甲申，猗㐌卒，子普根代立。
现代文：甲申，拓跋猗去世，儿子拓跋普根代他立为大单于。
English: In Jiaxing, Tuoba Guo died, and his son Tuoba Puguang succeeded him as Grand Duke.

古文：东海中尉刘洽以张方劫迁车驾，劝司空越起兵讨之。
现代文：东海中尉刘洽因为张方劫持并强行迁移皇帝车驾，劝司空司马越发兵征讨张方。
English: Because Zhang Fang had hijacked and forcibly moved the emperor's chariot, the East Sea Lieutenant Liu Ciao persuaded the Secretary of the Air Force Sima Yue to send troops to recruit Zhang Fang.

古文：秋，七月，越传檄山东征、镇、州、郡云： 欲纠帅义旅，奉迎天子，还复旧都。 
现代文：秋季，七月，司马越在崤山以东的各征、镇、州、郡传布檄文说： 将集结带领正义之师，奉迎天子返回原来的都城。 
English: In the autumn, in July, Sima Yue spread the sermon in all the provinces, towns, prefectures and counties east of Lushan, saying, "We will gather and lead the righteous teachers to return to the original capital city to welcome the Son of Heaven."

古文：东平王楙闻之，惧；长史王修说楙曰： 东海，宗室重望；今兴义兵，公宜举徐州以授之，则免于难，且有克让之美矣。 
现代文：东平王司马听到后，惶恐不安。长史王对司马说： 东海王是宗室中声望最高的，现在兴起正义的军队，您应当把徐州交给他，那就可避免灾难，还享有克己谦让的美德。 
English: When Dongping King Sima heard this, he was alarmed. Changshi Wang said to Sima: Donghai King is the most prestigious in the family, and now a righteous army is rising. You should give Xuzhou to him, then you can avoid disaster and still enjoy the virtue of self-restraint.

古文：楙从之。
现代文：司马同意了。
English: Sima agreed.

古文：越乃以司空领徐州都督，楙自为兗州刺史；诏即遣使者刘虔授之。
现代文：司马越就以司空兼任徐州都督，司马自任兖州刺史，朝廷诏令立即派使者刘虔正式任命。
English: Sima Yue concurrently served as the governor of Xuzhou with Siku, and Sima himself served as the governor of Zhangzhou. The imperial court immediately sent an envoy, Liu Qian, to make an official appointment.

古文：是时，越兄弟并据方任，于是范阳王虓及王浚等共推越为盟主，越辄选置刺史以下，朝士多赴之。
现代文：这时，司马越兄弟都各占据一方重任，于是范阳王司马和王浚等人共同推举司马越作盟主，司马越则选择人才安排刺史以下的职务，朝廷的士人大多都投奔到司马越那里。
English: At this time, Sima Yue brothers each occupied one side of the important task, so Fan Yang Wang Sima and Wang Jun and others jointly elected Sima Yue as the leader, while Sima Yue selected talents and arranged positions below the history, and most of the court officials rushed to Sima Yue.

古文：成都王颖既废，河北人多怜之。
现代文：成都王司马颖被废黜后，河北人大多很怜悯他。
English: After the dethronement of Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, most people in Hebei felt very sorry for him.

古文：颖故将公师籓等自称将军，起兵于赵、魏，众至数万。
现代文：司马颖过去的部将公师藩等人自称将军，在赵、魏地区起兵，人数达到几万。
English: Sima Ying's former subordinate commander, Gongshi Han, and others called themselves generals and raised an army in the Zhao and Wei regions, numbering tens of thousands.

古文：初，上党武乡羯人石勒，有胆力，善骑射。
现代文：当初，上党武乡县羯人石勒，有胆识力量，善于骑马射箭。
English: At the beginning, Shangdang Wuxiang County's Xingren Shile had the courage and strength, and was good at riding and archery.

古文：并州大饥，建威将军阎粹说东嬴公腾执诸胡于山东，卖充军实。
现代文：并州严重饥荒，建威将军阎粹向东赢公司马腾献计，把各族胡人抓到崤山以东地区，卖了以后补充军粮。
English: And there was a severe famine in the state. General Yan Zi of Jianwei offered a plan to Ma Teng of Dongying Company to capture Hu people of all ethnic groups to the east of Lushan and sell them to supplement military grain.

古文：勒亦被掠，卖为茌平人师懽奴，懽奇其状貌而免之。
现代文：石勒也被抓住，卖给仕平人师欢作奴隶，师欢认为他的相貌奇特而放了他。
English: Shi Le was also captured and sold as a slave to the warden, Shi Huan, who thought his appearance was strange and released him.

古文：懽家邻于马牧，勒乃与牧帅汲桑结壮士为群盗。
现代文：师欢与放马场为邻，石勒就与放牧的首领汲桑聚集壮士成为强盗团伙。
English: As Shihuan is adjacent to a horse farm, Shiller and the leader of the herdsmen, Kuisang, gathered strong men to become a gang of robbers.

古文：及公师籓起，桑与勒帅数百骑赴之。桑始命勒以石为姓，勒为名。
现代文：等公师藩起兵后，汲桑和石勒率领几百骑士投奔到公师藩那里，汲桑让石勒以石作为姓，用勒作为名。
English: After the Kungshi clan raised an army, several hundred knights led by Kuisang and Shile rushed to the Kungshi clan. Kuisang asked Shile to use Shi as his surname and Le as his first name.

古文：籓攻陷郡县，杀二千石、长史，转前，攻鄴。
现代文：公师藩攻克了一些郡县，杀了二千石俸禄的郡守、长吏，转而向前，攻打邺城，平昌公司马模非常恐惧。
English: The Gongshi clan conquered some counties and prefectures, killed county governors and officials with a stipend of two thousand koku, and then moved forward to attack Shicheng. The Pyeongchang company was very afraid of Ma Meng.

古文：平昌公模甚惧；范阳王虓遣其将苟晞救鄴，与广平太守谯国丁绍共击籓，走之。
现代文：范阳王司马派他的部将苟去救邺城，与广平太守谯国人丁绍共同攻打并赶跑了公师藩。
English: King Sima of Fanyang sent his general Gou to rescue the city of Handan, and together with Ding Shao, the Guangping Empress Dowager of Handan, attacked and drove away the domain of Gongshi.

古文：八月，辛丑，大赦。
现代文：八月，辛丑，宣布大赦。
English: In August, Xinxiu announced an amnesty.

古文：司空越以琅邪王睿为平东将军，监徐州诸军事，留守下邳。
现代文：司空司马越以琅邪王司马睿任平东将军。监徐州诸军事的职务，在下邳留守。
English: Siku Sima Yue was appointed as the general of Pingdong by the evil king Sima Rui. He was in charge of the military affairs of Xuzhou and stayed in Jiaozuo.

古文：睿请王导为司马，委以军事。
现代文：司马睿请王导担任司马，将军队事务交给王导处理。
English: Sima Rui asked Wang Du to serve as Sima and handed over the military affairs to Wang Du.

古文：越帅甲士三万，西屯萧县，范阳王虓自许屯于荥阳。
现代文：司马越率领三万兵士，驻扎在西边的萧县。范阳王司马从许昌到荥阳驻扎。
English: Sima Yue led 30,000 soldiers and was stationed in Xiao County in the west. Fanyang Wang Sima was stationed from Xuchang to Fenyang.

古文：越承制以豫州刺史刘乔为冀州刺史，以范阳王虓领豫州刺史；乔以虓非天子命，发兵拒之。
现代文：司马越奉制书让豫州刺史刘乔任冀州刺史，让范阳王司马兼任豫州刺史。刘乔认为司马来不是天子的旨意，就发兵阻止司马。
English: Sima Yue asked Liu Qiao, the historian of Yuzhou, to be the historian of Jizhou, and Wang Sima, the historian of Fanyang, to be the historian of Yuzhou. Liu Qiao thought that Sima's coming was not God's will, so he sent troops to stop Sima.

古文：虓以刘琨为司马，越以刘蕃为淮北护军，刘舆为颍川太守。
现代文：司马以刘琨为司马，司马越以刘藩任淮北护军。刘舆任颍川太守。
English: Sima with Liu Ye as Sima, Sima Yue with Liu Han as Huaibei Protector. Liu Ying as the governor of Luanchuan.

古文：乔上尚书，列舆兄弟罪恶，因引兵攻许，遣其长子祐将兵拒越于萧县之灵壁，越兵不能进。
现代文：刘乔给朝廷上书，罗列刘舆兄弟的罪恶，就带兵攻打许昌，并派长子刘带兵在萧县的灵壁阻击司马越，司马越的军队不能前进。
English: Liu Qiao wrote a letter to the imperial court, listing the crimes of Liu Yue's brothers, and led troops to attack Xu Chang, and sent his eldest son Liu Qiao to lead troops to block Sima Yue at the spiritual wall of Xiao County. Sima Yue's army could not advance.

古文：东平王楙在兗州，征求不已，郡县不堪命。
现代文：东平王司马在兖州，不停地征收赋税，征发劳役，所属郡县不能忍受。
English: Dongping Wang Sima in Zhangzhou, constantly levied taxes, levied labor service, the county can not stand it.

古文：范阳王虓遣苟晞还兗州，徙楙都督青州。楙不受命，背山东诸侯，与刘乔合。
现代文：范阳王司马派苟返回兖州，调司马都督青州，司马不接受任命，背叛崤山以东的诸侯，与刘乔汇合。
English: Fan Yang Wang Sima Piguo returned to Bozhou and became the governor of Bozhou and the governor of Qingzhou. Sima did not accept the appointment and betrayed the lords east of Shaoshan to join Liu Qiao.

古文：太宰颙闻山东兵起，甚惧。
现代文：太宰司马听说崤山以东战事又起，非常恐惧。
English: Dazai Sima heard that the war had started again to the east of Shaoshan and was very afraid.

古文：以公师籓为成都王颖起兵，壬午，表颖为镇军大将军、都督河北诸军事，给兵千人；以卢志为魏郡太守，随颖镇鄴，欲以抚安之；又遣建武将军吕朗屯洛阳。
现代文：因为公师藩是为成都王司马颖而起兵，壬午，司马表奏任司马颖为镇东大将军，都督河北诸军事，配给一千兵士；任卢志为魏郡太守，随从司马颖镇守邺城，想以此抚尉并安定公师藩。又派建武将军吕朗到洛阳驻扎。
English: Because the Gongshi clan raised an army for the Chengdu king Sima Ying, in the morning, Sima Ying appointed Sima Ying as the general of the town of Dongdong, the military governor of Hebei Province, and distributed a thousand soldiers; appointed Lu Zhi as the governor of Wei County, and followed Sima Ying to guard the city of Shicheng, hoping to stabilize the Gongshi clan. He also sent General Jianwu Lulang to Luoyang.

古文：颙发诏，令东海王越等各就国，越等不从。
现代文：司马颙发布诏令，命令东海王司马越等人各自回到自己的封国，司马越等人不服从。
English: Sima Yu issued an imperial edict, ordering the East Sea King Sima Yue and others to return to their respective fiefdoms. Sima Yue and others did not obey.

古文：会得刘乔上事，冬，十月，丙子，下诏称： 刘舆迫胁范阳王虓，造构凶逆。
现代文：碰巧接到刘乔的上书。冬季，十月，丙子，司马颁布诏书，声称： 刘舆逼迫威胁范阳王司马，制造事端。
English: He happened to receive a petition from Liu Qiao. In the winter of October, Bing Zi and Sima issued an edict, claiming that Liu Yizhi had coerced and threatened Fan Yang Wang Sima to create an incident.

古文：其令镇南大将军刘弘、平南将军彭城王释、征东大将军刘准，各勒所统，与刘乔并力；以张方为大都督，统精卒十万，与吕朗共会许昌，诛舆兄弟。 
现代文：命令镇南大将军刘弘、平南将军彭城王司马释、征东大将军刘准，各自带领所辖军队，与刘乔并肩出力，任张方为大都督，率领十万精兵，与吕朗在许昌会合，诛讨刘舆兄弟。 
English: He ordered General Liu Hong of Zhennan, General Wang Simasong of Pengcheng of Pingnan, and General Liu Jun of the Eastern Expeditionary Force to each lead the army under their jurisdiction, to work side by side with Liu Qiao, to appoint Zhang Fang as the grand governor, to lead 100,000 elite soldiers, and to meet with Lulang in Xuchang to discuss Liu Miao's brothers.

古文：释，宣帝弟子穆王权之孙也。
现代文：司马释是宣帝司马懿侄子穆王司马权的孙子。
English: Sima Xie was the grandson of Emperor Xuanzong's nephew, Mu Wang Sima Quan.

古文：丁丑，颙使成都王颖领将军楼褒等，前车骑将军石超领北中郎将王阐等，据河桥，为刘乔继援。
现代文：丁丑，司马让成都王司马颖带领将军楼褒等人，前车骑将军石超带领北中郎将王阐等人据守河桥，作为刘乔的后续援军。
English: Ding Yuxi, Sima let Chengdu Wang Sima Ying lead the general Lou Bao and others, the front rower general Shi Chao led the north middle rower general Wang Yan and others to guard the river bridge, as Liu Qiao's follow-up reinforcements.

古文：进乔镇东将军，假节。
现代文：提升刘乔为镇东将军，发给符节。
English: Liu Qiao was promoted to the position of Zhendong General, and was given the insignia.

古文：刘弘遗乔及司空越书，欲使之解怨释兵，同奖王室，皆不听。
现代文：刘弘给刘乔及司空司马越去信，想使他们之间消解怨恨停止军事行动，共同辅佐王室，但双方都不理会。
English: Liu Hong sent a letter to Liu Qiao and Sikuo Sima Yue, hoping to resolve the grudge between them, stop military operations, and jointly assist the royal family, but both sides ignored it.

古文：弘又上表曰： 自顷兵戈纷乱，猜祸锋生，疑隙构于群王，灾难延于宗子。今夕为忠，明旦为逆，翩其反而，互为戎首。
现代文：刘弘又上奏表说： 自从近年战乱迭起，猜疑灾祸一起出现，疑忌仇隙在亲王们之间出现，灾难祸患延续于宗室后代身上，今天是忠于王室的，明天就成了反叛王室，是非反复变化无常，轮流成为兴起战事的首领。
English: Liu Hong also made a report, saying: Since the wars have been repeated in recent years, suspicions and calamities have appeared together, suspicions and vendettas have appeared between the princes, and the calamities have continued in the descendants of the royal family. Today, they are loyal to the royal family, and tomorrow they will become a rebel royal family. The rights and wrongs are changeable, and they take turns to become the leaders of the war.

古文：载籍以来，骨肉之祸未有如今者也，臣窃悲之！
现代文：有历史记载以来，骨肉相残的灾祸没有像现在这样的，我对此感到十分悲伤！
English: I am deeply saddened by the fact that, since recorded history began, the scourge of fratricide has never been as prevalent as it is today!

古文：今边陲无备豫之储，中华有杼轴之困，而股肱之臣，不惟国体，职竞寻常，自相楚剥。
现代文：现在边疆没有预防发生变动的储备，中原却有相当的困厄，辅助王室的重要大臣，不考虑国家的命运，却以竞争长短为能事，自相残杀。
English: At present, the frontiers have no reserves to prevent changes from occurring, but the Central Plains are in considerable trouble. The important ministers assisting the royal family, regardless of the fate of the country, are competing with each other and killing each other.

古文：万一四夷乘虚为变，此亦猛虎交斗自效于卞庄者矣。
现代文：万一四边夷人乘虚而制造变乱，这也正是两个猛虎相争斗而自然成为卞庄的猎物。
English: In the unlikely event that the barbarians on all sides take advantage of the situation and create chaos, this is exactly what happens when two tigers fight each other and naturally become the prey of the villain.

古文：臣以为宜速发明诏诏越等，令两释猜嫌，各保分局。
现代文：我认为应该赶快发布公开诏书，命令司马越等人，解除猜忌仇怨，各自保持自己所分管的职位和封地。
English: I think we should quickly issue a public edict, ordering Sima Yue and others to remove suspicions and grudges, and to maintain their positions and fiefs.

古文：自今以后，其有不被诏书，擅兴兵马者，天下共伐之。 
现代文：从今以后，如果有不接受诏令，擅自动用军队挑起事端的人，全国共同来讨伐他。 
English: From now on, if there is anyone who does not accept the imperial edict and arbitrarily uses the military to stir up trouble, the whole country will work together to fight him.

古文：时太宰颙方拒关东，倚乔为助，不纳其言。
现代文：当时太宰司马刚开始进抵关东地区，要倚靠刘乔作为帮助，因而不采纳刘弘的进言。
English: At that time, Dazai Sima had just begun to arrive in the Kanto region, and he had to rely on Liu Qiao for help, so he did not accept Liu Hong's advice.

古文：乔乘虚袭许，破之。
现代文：刘乔乘虚袭击许昌，一举攻克。
English: Liu Qiao took the opportunity to attack Xu Chang and defeated him in one fell swoop.

古文：刘琨将兵救许，不及，遂与兄舆及范阳王虓俱奔河北；琨父母为乔所执。
现代文：刘琨带兵救援许昌，已经来不及，于是和兄刘舆以及范阳王司马一起逃奔河北。刘琨的父母被刘乔抓住。
English: Liu Hui led soldiers to rescue Xu Chang, but it was too late, so he fled to Hebei with his brother Liu Ying and Fan Yang Wang Sima. Liu Hui's parents were caught by Liu Qiao.

古文：刘弘以张方残暴，知颙必败，乃遣参军刘盘为督护，帅诸军受司空越节度。
现代文：刘弘根据张方的残暴，知道司马一定要失败，便派参军刘盘为都护，带领所辖各军队接受司马越的指挥。
English: According to Zhang Fang's brutality, Liu Hong knew that Sima must fail, so he sent Liu Pan to join the army to protect the capital, leading the troops under his command to accept Sima Yue's command.

古文：时天下大乱，弘专督江、汉，威行南服。
现代文：这时天下大乱，刘弘专门督管江、汉地区，威势及于南方边远地区。
English: At this time, the whole country was in turmoil, and Liu Hong was in special charge of the Jiang and Han regions, and his power extended to the remote areas in the south.

古文：谋事有成者，则曰 某人之功 ；如有负败，则曰 老子之罪 。
现代文：谋划事情成功了，就说是某人的功劳。如果遇到失败，则称是自己的责任。
English: If the plan succeeds, it is said to be someone's merit. If it fails, it is said to be one's own responsibility.

古文：每有兴发，手书守相，丁宁款密。
现代文：每当兴师动众，亲笔写信给负责官员，详细叮咛嘱咐。
English: Whenever Xing Shi moved the crowd, he personally wrote a letter to the responsible official, and gave detailed instructions.

古文：所以人皆感悦，急赴之，咸曰： 得刘公一纸书，贤于十部从事。 
现代文：所以大家都很感动和舒畅，争相到他那儿。大家都说： 能够得到刘公一纸亲笔信，胜过做十个部从事。 
English: Therefore, everyone was very moved and comfortable, and rushed to him. Everyone said: To be able to get Liu Gong's own handwritten letter is better than doing ten things.

古文：前广汉太守辛冉说弘以从横之事，弘怒，斩之。
现代文：前广汉太守辛冉向刘弘游说割据称霸的事，刘弘发怒，把他杀了。
English: The former governor of Guanghan, Xin Ran, lobbied Liu Hong to get rid of the alleged tyrant, but Liu Hong got angry and killed him.

古文：有星孛于北斗。
现代文：有异星出现在北斗星旁。
English: A comet appears in the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：平昌公模遣将军宋胄趣河桥。
现代文：平昌公司马模派将军宋胄向河桥进兵。
English: The PyeongChang Company sent General Song Min to march into Heqiao.

古文：十一月，立节将军周权，诈被檄，自称平西将军，复立羊后。
现代文：十一月，立节将军周权，假称收到檄文，自称为平西将军，又重新立羊皇后。
English: In November, Zhou Quan, the general who established the festival, pretended to have received the letter, called himself General Pingxi, and re-established the Queen of Sheep.

古文：洛阳令何乔攻权，杀之，复废羊后。
现代文：洛阳令何乔攻打周权，把他杀了，又废黜羊皇后。
English: Luoyang ordered He Qiao to attack Zhou Quan, killed him, and deposed the Queen of Sheep.

古文：太宰颙矫诏，以羊后屡为奸人所立，遣尚书田淑敕留台赐后死。
现代文：太宰司马假称诏令，根据羊皇后多次被坏人拥立，派尚书田淑命令留守台署赐羊皇后死。
English: Dazai Sima pretended to be a decree, according to which the Queen of Sheep had been held up by bad people many times, and sent Shang Shuda Shu to order the stationmaster to let the Queen of Sheep die.

古文：诏书累至，司隶校尉刘暾等上奏，固执以为： 羊庶人门户残破，废放空宫，门禁峻密，无缘得与奸人构乱。众无愚智，皆谓其冤。
现代文：诏书几次传到，司隶校尉刘暾等人上奏，坚持认为： 羊庶人门庭早已破败，废黜放逐空宫，宫门禁卫戒备森严，没有条件能够与坏人勾结而制造变乱，大家无论愚蠢还是聪明，都说她很冤枉。
English: The imperial edict was delivered several times, and was read aloud by Liu Zhen, a lieutenant of the Imperial General Staff, and others, who insisted that: the court of the commoner has long been ruined, the palace has been dethroned and banished, the palace gate is strictly guarded, there are no conditions for colluding with bad people to create turmoil, and everyone, whether stupid or smart, said that she was very wronged.

古文：今杀一枯穷之人，而令天下伤惨，何益于治！ 
现代文：现在杀这样一个潦倒穷愁的人，而使天下悲伤，对社会安定有什么好处？ 
English: What is the benefit to social stability of killing such a despondent person now and making the whole world sad?

古文：颙怒，遣吕朗收暾。暾奔青州，依高密王略。
现代文：司马发怒，派吕朗拘捕刘暾，刘暾投奔青州，依靠高密王司马略。
English: Sima became angry and sent Lulang to arrest Liu Ye. Liu Ye fled to Qingzhou and relied on Gaomi Wang Sima Liu.

古文：然羊后亦以是得免。
现代文：但羊皇后也因此而得以免于一死。
English: But the sheep queen was also spared from death.

古文：十二月，吕朗等东屯荥阳，成都王颖进据洛阳。
现代文：十二月，吕朗等向东在荥阳驻扎，成都王司马颖进兵据守洛阳。
English: In December, Lü Lang and others were stationed eastward in Fenyang, and Chengdu Wang Sima Ying marched into Luoyang.

古文：刘琨说冀州刺史太原温羡，使让位于范阳王虓。
现代文：刘琨向冀州刺史太原人温羡游说，让他把职位让给范阳王司马。
English: Liu Wei lobbied Wen Qian, a native of Jizhou Zhishi Taiyuan, to let him give up his post to Fan Yang Wang Sima.

古文：虓领冀州，遣琨诣幽州乞师于王浚；浚以突骑资之，击王阐于河上，杀之。
现代文：司马兼领冀州后，派刘琨到幽州向王浚求兵。王浚派精锐骑兵帮助司马，在黄河上袭击王阐，把王阐杀了。
English: After Sima also gained Jizhou, he sent Liu Bei to Yuzhou to solicit troops from Wang Jun. Wang Jun sent elite cavalry to help Sima, attacked Wang Xuan on the Yellow River, and killed Wang Xuan.

古文：琨遂与虓引兵济河，斩石超于荥阳。刘乔自考城引退。
现代文：刘琨于是和司马率兵渡黄河，在荥阳杀了石超。刘乔从考城率兵撤退。
English: Liu Qi then crossed the Yellow River with Sima and killed Shi Chao in Shenyang. Liu Qiao withdrew from Kaocheng with his soldiers.

古文：虓遣琨及督护田徽东击东平王楙于廪丘，楙走还国。
现代文：司马派刘琨和都护田徽向东在廪丘攻打东平王司马，司马逃归封国。
English: Sima sent Liu Bei and the capital protector Tian Hui eastward to attack the Dongping King Sima in Mengqiu, and Sima fled back to the fief.

古文：琨、徽引兵东迎越，击刘祐于谯；祐败死，乔众遂溃，乔奔平氏。
现代文：刘琨、田徽带兵向东迎接司马越，在谯地攻打刘，刘兵败阵亡，刘乔的军队于是溃散，刘乔逃奔平氏县。
English: Liu Hui and Tian Hui led their troops to the east to meet Sima Yue, and attacked Liu in Shunde. Liu's troops were defeated and killed, and Liu Qiao's army was dispersed. Liu Qiao fled to Pingshi County.

古文：司空越进屯阳武，王浚遣其将祁弘帅突骑鲜卑、乌桓为越先驱。
现代文：司空司马越进军到阳武驻扎，王浚派他的部将祁弘带领鲜卑、乌桓精锐骑兵作为司马越的前锋。
English: Sima Yue, the commander of Sima Yue's cavalry, marched to Yangwu, where he was stationed, and Wang Jun sent his general Zou Hong to lead the Xianbei and Wuhuan elite cavalry as Sima Yue's vanguard.

古文：初，陈敏既克石冰，自谓勇略无敌，有割据江东之志。
现代文：当初，陈敏战胜石冰后，自以为勇猛谋略没有对手，产生在江东割据的想法。
English: At first, after Chen Min's victory over Shi Bing, he thought that there was no match for his bold strategy, and the idea of setting up a base in the east of the Yangtze River was born.

古文：其父怒曰： 灭我门者，必此儿也！ 
现代文：他父亲生气地说： 使我们家族灭绝的，一定是这个儿子！ 
English: His father said angrily: "This son must be the one who destroyed our family!"

古文：遂以忧卒。
现代文：于是忧郁而死。
English: So he died of melancholy.

古文：敏以丧去职。
现代文：陈敏因为丧事而离职。
English: Chen Min resigned because of the funeral.

古文：司空越起敏为右将军、前锋都督。
现代文：司空司马越起用陈敏为右将军、前锋都督。
English: Siku Sima Yueqi used Chen Min as the right general and the forward governor.

古文：越为刘祐所败，敏请东归收兵，遂据历阳叛。
现代文：司马越被刘打败，陈敏请求收兵东归，于是占据历阳反叛。
English: Sima Yue was defeated by Liu Shao, Chen Min requested to withdraw his troops to the east, so he occupied Liyang and rebelled.

古文：吴王常侍甘卓，弃宫东归，至历阳，敏为子景娶卓女，使卓假称皇太弟令，拜敏扬州刺史。
现代文：吴王常侍甘卓，抛弃官职东归，到历阳，陈敏为自己的儿子陈景娶甘卓的女儿，并让甘卓伪称皇太弟的命令，任命陈敏为扬州刺史。
English: Wu Wang often served Gan Zhuo, abandoned his official position and returned to Liyang. Chen Min married Gan Zhuo's daughter for his son Chen Jing, and had Gan Zhuo falsify the order of the emperor's younger brother and appoint Chen Min as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：敏使弟恢及别将钱端等南略江州，弟斌东略诸郡，江州刺史应邈、扬州刺史刘机、丹杨太守壬旷皆弃官走。
现代文：陈敏派弟弟陈恢以及部将钱端等人向南攻打江州，弟弟陈斌向东攻打各郡，扬州刺史刘机，丹阳太守王旷都弃城逃跑。
English: Chen Min sent his brother Chen Wei and the general Qian Duan and others to attack Jiangzhou to the south, his brother Chen Bin attacked the counties to the east, Yangzhou assassinated Liu Ji, and Danyang governor Wang Yu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：敏遂据有江东，以顾荣为右将军，贺循为丹杨内史，周𤣱为安丰太守，凡江东豪杰、名士，咸加收礼，为将军、郡守者四十馀人；或有老疾，就加秩命。
现代文：陈敏于是占据了江东地区，任命顾荣为右将军、贺循为丹阳内史、周为安丰太守，凡是江东地区的豪族英杰、名士，都加以收揽以礼相待，其中担任将军、郡守的有四十多人。如果有年老、有病的，也封给一定的给别。
English: Chen Min then occupied the Jiangdong region, appointing Gu Rong as the Right General, He Xun as the Danyang Inner Historian, and Zhou as the Anfeng Governor. All the heroes and celebrities in the Jiangdong region were treated with courtesy. Among them, there were more than forty people who served as generals and county governors. If there were old or sick people, they were also given a certain allowance.

古文：循诈为狂疾，得免，乃以荣领丹杨内史。
现代文：贺循假装疯病，得以逃脱，就让顾荣兼任丹阳内史。
English: He Xun pretended to be insane and was able to escape, so he let Gu Rong also serve as Danyang's internal historian.

古文：𤣱亦称疾，不之郡。
现代文：周也称病而不到郡。
English: Zhou also called in sick.

古文：敏疑诸名士终不为己用，欲尽诛之。
现代文：陈敏怀疑各位名士最终不能为自己服务，想把他们全部杀掉。
English: Chen Min suspected that the celebrities would eventually be unable to serve themselves and wanted to kill them all.

古文：荣说敏曰： 中国丧乱，胡夷内侮。观今日之势，不能复振，百姓将无遗种。
现代文：顾荣对陈敏说： 中原丧乱动荡，胡人、夷人欺辱内地，看今天的趋势，国家不会再重新振兴，百姓将难以生存下去。
English: Gu Rong said to Chen Min: The Central Plains have been in turmoil, the Hu people and the Yi people have bullied the inland. Looking at today's trend, the country will not be revitalized again, and it will be difficult for the people to survive.

古文：江南虽经石冰之乱，人物尚全，荣常忧无孙、刘之主有以存之。
现代文：江南地区虽然经过石冰的叛乱，但百姓与财物都还健全，我常常对没有孙权、刘备那样的领袖来使江南保存感到忧虑。
English: Although the south of the Yangtze River has gone through the rebellion of Shi Bing, the people and property are still sound. I often worry that there is no leader like Sun Quan and Liu Bei to preserve the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：今将军神武不世，勋效已著，带甲数万，舳舻山积，若能委信君子，使各得尽怀，散蒂芥之嫌，塞谗谄之口，则上方数州，可传檄而定；不然，终不济也。 
现代文：现在您超凡威武举世无双，功绩已经显赫，有数万武士，高大的战舰排列如群山。如果能在君子中获得信任，让他们心情舒畅，解开他们心中小小的疑忌，堵塞住谗言陷害或阿庚奉承之人的嘴，那么长江上游的几个州，都能用传布檄文的方式稳定，不然，终究不能成功。 
English: Now your extraordinary might is unparalleled in the world, your achievements have been outstanding, there are tens of thousands of samurai, tall warships lined up like mountains. If you can gain the trust of gentlemen, make them feel comfortable, solve their small and medium-sized doubts, and block the mouths of those who slander, frame, or flatter Agong, then several states in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River can be stable by spreading slander. Otherwise, it will not succeed.

古文：敏乃止。敏命僚佐推己为都督江东诸军事、大司马、楚公，加九锡，列上尚书，称被中诏，自江入沔、汉，奉迎銮驾。
现代文：陈敏让下属推举自己为都督江东诸军事、大司马，封为楚公、加九锡重礼，列上尚书，声称直接接到皇帝的诏令，从长江进入沔水，汉水流域，迎接皇帝大驾。
English: Chen Min asked his subordinates to nominate him as the military governor of the east of the Yangtze River, the grand steward, the crown prince of Chu, and the heavy salute of Jiuxi, and listed Shangshu, claiming to have directly received the emperor's edict, from the Yangtze River into the Surabaya and Han River basin, to welcome the emperor.

古文：太宰颙以张光为顺阳太守，帅步骑五千诣荆州讨敏。
现代文：太宰以张光为顺阳太守，帅步骑五千诣荆州讨敏。
English: Zhang Guang was appointed as the governor of Shunyang by the grand vizier, and he rode a five-thousand-cubic-meter horse through Jingzhou.

古文：刘弘遣江夏太守陶侃、武陵太守苗光屯夏口，又遣南平太守汝南应詹督水军以继之。
现代文：刘弘遣江夏太守陶侃、武陵太守苗光屯夏口，又遣南平太守汝南应詹督水军以继之。
English: Liu Hong sent Jiangxia Governor Tao Kan, Wuling Governor Miao Guang Tun Xia Kou, and Nanping Governor Runan Ying Zhandu's navy, and so on.

古文：侃与敏同郡，又同岁举吏。
现代文：太宰司马以张光任顺阳太守，率领步兵骑兵五千人到荆州讨伐陈敏。
English: Dazai Sima appointed Zhang Guang as the governor of Shunyang and led five thousand infantry and cavalry to Jingzhou to fight Chen Min.

古文：随郡内史扈怀言于弘曰： 侃居大郡，统强兵，脱有异志，则荆州无东门矣！ 
现代文：刘弘派江夏太守陶侃、武陵太守苗光在夏口驻扎，又派南平太守汝南人应詹督领水军来支援陶侃等人。陶侃与陈敏是同郡人，又同年被荐举为官吏。随郡内史扈怀对刘弘说： 陶侃在大郡任太守，统领强兵，倘若有异心，荆州就失去东大门了！ 
English: Liu Hong sent Tao Kan, the governor of Jiangxia, and Miao Guang, the governor of Wuling, to be stationed in Xiakou. He also sent Nanping's governor, Runan, to support Tao Kan and others by leading the navy under Zhan Du. Tao Kan and Chen Min were from the same county, and were promoted to officials in the same year. With the history of the county, he said to Liu Hong: Tao Kan was the governor of a large county and led a strong army. If there was any dissent, Jingzhou would lose the east gate!

古文：弘曰： 侃之忠能，吾得之已久，必无是也。 
现代文：刘弘说： 陶侃的忠心和才能，我了解他已很久了，一定不会这样。 
English: Liu Hong said, "I have known Tao Kan's loyalty and talent for a long time, and this is definitely not the case.

古文：侃闻之，遣子洪及兄子臻诣弘以自固，弘引为参军，资而遣之。曰： 贤叔征行，君祖母年高，便可归也。
现代文：陶侃听说后，派儿子陶洪和侄子陶臻到刘弘那儿，以使自己的地位稳固，刘弘作用陶洪等二人为参军，发给钱物让他们回去，说： 你们贤德的叔叔要征战出行，而祖母年事已高，你们应该回去。
English: After hearing this, Tao Kan sent his son Tao Hong and his nephew Tao Zhen to Liu Hong in order to consolidate his position. Liu Hong used Tao Hong and two others to join the army, gave them money and goods to let them go back, and said: Your virtuous uncle wants to go to war, and your grandmother is old, you should go back.

古文：匹夫之交，尚不负心，况大丈夫乎！ 
现代文：村野匹夫互相交往，尚且不负心，何况大丈夫呢！ 
English: The Murano horses interact with each other, and it's not a bad thing, and it's okay!

古文：敏以陈恢为荆州刺史，寇武昌；弘加侃前锋督护以御之。
现代文：陈敏让陈恢任荆州刺史，进犯武昌，刘弘让陶侃兼任前锋都护去抵御。
English: Chen Min let Chen Wei play the role of Jingzhou stabbing history and attacking Wuchang, Liu Hong let Tao Kan also play the role of striker to protect and defend.

古文：侃以运船为战舰，或以为不可。
现代文：陶侃以一般运输船作为战舰，有人认为不行。
English: Some people think it is wrong for Tao Kan to use a general transport ship as a warship.

古文：侃曰： 用官船击官贼，何为不可！ 
现代文：陶侃说： 用官船来打官贼，有什么不行？ 
English: Tao Kan said: What's wrong with using a government ship to fight government thieves?

古文：侃与恢战，屡破之；又与皮初、张光、苗光共破钱端于长岐。
现代文：陶侃与陈恢交战，多次把陈恢打败。又和皮初、张光、苗光在长岐共同打败钱端。
English: Tao Kan fought with Chen Wei and defeated him many times. He also defeated Qiantang together with Pichu, Zhang Guang and Miao Guang in Changqi.

古文：南阳太守卫展说弘曰： 张光，太宰腹心，公既与东海，宜斩光以明向背。 
现代文：南阳太守卫展对刘弘说： 张光是太宰司马的心腹，您既然倾向于东海王司马越，应该杀张光来表明您的立场。 
English: Nanyang Taigu Exhibition said to Liu Hong: Zhang Guang is the confidant of Dazai Sima, since you are inclined to the East Sea King Sima Yue, you should kill Zhang Guang to show your position.

古文：弘曰： 宰辅得失，岂张光之罪！危人自安，君子弗为也。 
现代文：刘弘说： 太宰的得失，怎么是张光的罪过，危害别人使自己安全，君子是不作这种事的。 
English: Liu Hong said: Dazai's gain and loss, how is Zhang Guang's sin, endangering others to make himself safe, a gentleman does not do such a thing.

古文：乃表光殊勋，乞加迁擢。
现代文：于是表奏张光的功勋，请求朝廷提拔。
English: So he extolled the merits of Zhang Guang and asked the imperial court for a promotion.

古文：是岁，离石大饥，汉王渊徙屯黎亭，就邸阁谷；留太尉宏守离石，使大司农卜豫运粮以给之。
现代文：这一年，离石地区灾荒严重。汉王刘渊迁到黎亭驻扎，使用邸阁粮谷，让太尉刘宏留守离石，派大司农卜豫运粮供给他。
English: In that year, the famine in the Liishi area was severe. Han King Liu Yuan moved to Liting and stationed there, using the granary of the mansion. He asked Lieutenant Liu Hong to stay in Liishi, and sent the chief farmer Bu Yu to transport grain to him.

古文：孝惠皇帝下光熙元年
现代文：光熙元年
English: In the first year of Guangxi

古文：春，正月，戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月，戊子朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the waxing gibbous moon, and a solar eclipse.

古文：初，太弟中庶子兰陵缪播有宠于司空越；播从弟右卫率胤，太宰颙前妃之弟也。
现代文：当初，太弟中庶子兰陵人缪播受到司马越的宠信。缪播堂弟右卫率缪胤，是太宰司马的前妃的弟弟。
English: At first, his younger half-brother, Lanling's son-in-law Miao Fan, was favored by Sima Yue. Miao Fan's cousin, Yuehui Yuetian, was the younger brother of Dazai Sima's former wife.

古文：越之起兵，遣播、胤诣长安说颙，令奉帝还洛，约与颙分陕为伯。
现代文：司马越起兵，派缪播、缪胤到长安劝说司马，让他侍奉惠帝返归洛阳。并相约与司马分地而治，共同辅佐王室。
English: Sima Yue raised an army and sent Miao Fan and Miao Yan to Chang'an to persuade Sima to serve Hui Emperor and return to Luoyang. They made a mutual agreement with Sima to rule separately and jointly support the royal family.

古文：颙素信重播兄弟，即欲从之。
现代文：司马一直信任看重缪播兄弟，当时就想听从他们的劝说。
English: Sima had always trusted and valued the Miao brothers and wanted to follow their advice.

古文：张方自以罪重，恐为诛首，谓颙曰： 今据形胜之地，国富兵强，奉天子以号令，谁敢不从，奈何拱手受制于人！ 
现代文：张方认为自己罪行很重，担心成为被诛杀的首犯，就对司马说： 现在我们占据形势险要的地方，国富兵强，挟天子发布号令，谁敢不服从，怎么能拱手被别人控制？ 
English: Zhang Fang thought that his crime was very serious, and he was afraid of becoming the first criminal to be killed, so he said to Sima: Now we occupy a place where the situation is critical, the country is rich and the army is strong, and the emperor has issued an order. Who dares to disobey, how can he be controlled by others?

古文：颙乃止。及刘乔败，颙惧，欲罢兵，与山东和解。恐张方不从，犹豫未决。
现代文：司马听后打消了与司马越联合的念头。等到刘乔兵败，司马畏惧，想停止军事行动，与崤山以东地区和解，但又耽心张方不听从，而犹豫不决。
English: After hearing this, Sima dismissed the idea of uniting with Sima Yue. When Liu Qiao was defeated, Sima was afraid and wanted to stop military operations and reconcile with the area east of Lushan, but he was worried that Zhang Fang would not listen and hesitated.

古文：方素与长安富人郅辅亲善，以为帐下督。
现代文：张方平素和长安豪富郅辅亲近要好，让他担任帐下督。
English: Zhang Fangping and Chang'an Gao Fu Rongfu should be close to each other, and let him serve as the accountant.

古文：颙参军河间毕垣，尝为方所侮，因说颙曰： 张方久屯霸上，闻山东兵盛，盘桓不进，宜防其未萌。
现代文：司马的参军河间人毕垣，曾经受到张方的侮辱，于是劝司马说： 张方在霸上驻兵很久了，听说崤山以东地区军队强盛，所以徘徊不前，应该在他萌生反心之前做好防备。
English: Bikaki, a member of the Kawama people who joined Sima's army, was once insulted by Zhang Fang, so he persuaded Sima to say: Zhang Fang has been stationed in the hegemony for a long time, and I heard that the army in the east of Lushan is strong, so he is not moving forward, and he should be prepared before he develops antipathy.

古文：其亲信郅辅县具其谋。 
现代文：张方的亲信郅辅对他的谋划全部了解。 
English: Zhang Fang's close confidant Yan Fu was fully aware of his plan.

古文：缪播、缪胤复说颙： 宜急斩方以谢，山东可不劳而定。 
现代文：缪播、缪胤又对司马进行劝说： 应当迅速杀了张方向天下谢罪，崤山以东地区不用兴兵就可以平定。 
English: Miao Han and Miao Yin also tried to persuade Sima: Zhang should be killed quickly in order to apologize to the world, and the area east of Lushan could be pacified without raising an army.

古文：颙使人召辅，垣迎说辅曰： 张方欲反，人谓卿知之。王若问卿，何辞以对？ 
现代文：司马派人召郅辅，毕垣迎上前对郅辅说： 张方想谋反，大家都说你知道这事，亲王如果问你，你将如何回答？ 
English: Sima sent someone to summon Miao Wei, and Bigaki stepped forward to say to Miao Wei: Zhang Fang wants to rebel, everyone says you know this, if the prince asks you, how will you answer?

古文：辅惊曰： 实不闻方反，为之奈何？ 
现代文：郅辅吃惊地说： 的确没有听说张方谋反，这怎么办？ 
English: Hao Yu said in surprise, "Indeed, I haven't heard that Zhang Fang is plotting a rebellion. What should I do?

古文：垣曰： 王若问卿，但言尔尔；不然，必不免祸。 
现代文：毕垣说： 亲王如果问你，你只能这样说，不然的话，一定免不了灾祸。 
English: Bigaki said, "If the prince asks you, you can only say this, otherwise, disaster will surely follow.

古文：辅入，颙问之曰： 张方反，卿知之乎？ 
现代文：郅辅入府，司马问他说： 张方谋反，你知道吗？ 
English: When Yan Fu entered the palace, Sima asked him, "Zhang Fang is plotting a rebellion, do you know that?"

古文：辅曰： 尔。 
现代文：郅辅说： 是的。 
English: Haenyu said: Yes.

古文：颙曰： 遣卿取之，可乎？ 又曰： 尔。 
现代文：司马说： 派你去抓他，行吗？ 郅辅又说： 行。 
English: Sima said, "Can I send you to catch him?" and He Fu said, "Yes."

古文：颙于是使辅送书于方，因杀之。辅既昵于方，持刀而入，守阁者不疑。方火下发函，辅斩其头。
现代文：司马于是派郅辅给张方送信，然后趁机杀掉张方，郅辅与张方关系亲密，拿刀进去时，守门的兵士也不怀疑，张方在灯旁揭启信封，郅辅抽刀砍掉了他的头。
English: Sima then sent Yan Fu to Zhang Fang to send a letter, and then took the opportunity to kill Zhang Fang. Yan Fu had a close relationship with Zhang Fang. When he took the knife to enter, the soldiers guarding the door did not doubt. Zhang Fang opened the envelope next to the lamp, and Yan Fu cut off his head with a knife.

古文：还报，颙以辅为安定太守。
现代文：回去报告，司马让郅辅任安定太守。
English: When he returned, he reported that Sima had appointed Gongfu as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：送方头于司空越以请和；越不许。
现代文：把张方的头送给司马越请求和解。但司马越不答应。
English: Zhang Fang's head was sent to Sima Yue to request a reconciliation, but Sima Yue did not agree.

古文：宋胄袭河桥，楼褒西走。
现代文：宋胄袭击河桥，楼褒向西逃窜。
English: Song Tao attacked Heqiao, while Loubao fled west.

古文：平昌公模遣前锋督护冯嵩会宋胄逼洛阳。
现代文：平昌公司马模派前锋督护冯嵩会同宋胄进逼洛阳。
English: The PyeongChang Company dispatched Feng Song, a forward overseer of the Ma Mok faction, together with Song Hao, to force Luoyang.

古文：成都王颖西奔长安，至华阴，闻颙已与山东和亲，留不敢进。
现代文：成都王司马颖向西逃奔长安，到达华阴，听说司马已经和崤山以东和解，便停下不敢前进。
English: Chengdu Wang Sima Ying fled westward to Chang'an and arrived in Huayin. Hearing that Sima had reconciled with the east of Lushan, he did not dare to move forward.

古文：吕朗屯荥阳，刘琨以张方首示之，遂降。
现代文：吕朗在荥阳驻扎，刘琨拿张方的头给他看，于是吕朗就投降了。
English: Lulang was stationed in Fenyang. Liu Ye took Zhang Fang's head to show him, and Lulang surrendered.

古文：甲子，司空越遣祁弘、宋胄、司马纂帅鲜卑西迎车驾，以周馥为司隶校尉、假节，都督诸军，屯渑池。
现代文：司空司马越派祁宏、宋胄、司马纂带领鲜卑人向西迎接皇帝大驾，任周馥为司隶校尉，掌持符节，都督诸军，在渑池驻扎。
English: Siku Sima Yue sent Juhang, Song Jiong and Sima Cao to lead the Xianbei people to the west to welcome the emperor. Zhou Jiong was appointed as the captain of the regiment, holding the festival, and the governor of the army, stationed in Dianchi.

古文：三月，惤令刘柏根反，众以万数，自称惤公。
现代文：三月，县令刘柏根反叛，有一万多人，自称公。
English: In March, the county magistrate Liu Bergen rebelled, and more than ten thousand people joined him, claiming to be public servants.

古文：王弥帅家僮从之，柏根以弥为长史，弥从父弟桑为东中郎将。
现代文：王弥带领家奴僮仆跟随他，刘柏根任王弥为长史，王弥的堂弟王桑担任东中郎将。
English: Wang Ya led his family's servants to follow him, Liu Baigen appointed Wang Ya as Long History, and Wang Ya's cousin Wang Sang served as East Vice Admiral.

古文：柏根寇临淄，青州都督高密王略使刘暾将兵拒之；暾兵败，奔洛阳，略走保聊城。
现代文：刘柏根进犯临淄，青州都督高密王司马略派刘暾带兵阻击他。刘暾兵败，逃奔洛阳，司马略退保聊城。
English: Liu Bei invaded Linyi. The governor of Qingzhou, Gaomi Wang Sima Liao, sent Liu Ye with soldiers to stop him. Liu Ye was defeated and fled to Luoyang, while Sima Liao retreated to Liaocheng.

古文：王浚遣将讨柏根，斩之。
现代文：王浚派部将讨伐刘柏根，把他杀了。
English: The dispatching department of Wang Jun led the crusade and killed Liu Bergen.

古文：王弥亡入长广山为群盗。
现代文：王弥逃进长广山做了强盗。
English: Wang Ya fled to Changguang Mountain and became a bandit.

古文：宁州频岁饥疫，死者以十万计。
现代文：宁州几年连续灾荒流行传染病。死了十万人。
English: In Ningzhou, there were several years of continuous disasters and epidemics of infectious diseases. One hundred thousand people died.

古文：五苓夷强盛，州兵屡败。
现代文：五苓夷人强盛，宁州军队屡次失败。
English: The Wuzhong people prospered, while the Ningzhou army repeatedly failed.

古文：吏民流入交州者甚众，夷遂围州城。
现代文：官吏百姓很多都流亡到交州，夷人趁机包围了州城。
English: Many officials and commoners fled to Jiaozhou, and the barbarians took advantage of the opportunity to encircle the city.

古文：李毅疾病，救援路绝，乃上疏言： 不能式遏寇虐，坐待殄毙。
现代文：李毅身患疾病，救援的道路已断绝，于是给朝廷上奏疏，说： 不能制止强盗作恶，只好坐等一死。
English: Li Yi was suffering from illness, and the road to rescue had been cut off, so he reported to the imperial court, saying: I can't stop the robbers from doing evil, so I have to wait for death.

古文：若不垂矜恤，乞降大使，及臣尚存，加臣重辟；若臣已死，陈尸为戮。 
现代文：如果朝廷不体谅救济，那么请求派来大使，我还活着，就对我施以重刑，如果我已死，就对我戮尸惩罚。 
English: If the imperial court does not consider relief, then I will ask for an ambassador to be sent, and if I am still alive, I will be severely punished, and if I am dead, I will be punished.

古文：朝廷不报，积数年，子钊自洛往省之，未至，毅卒。
现代文：朝廷没有答复。过了几年，李毅的儿子李钊从洛阳去探视他，还没有到，李毅就去世了。
English: The imperial court did not reply. A few years later, Li Yi's son, Li Xuan, went to visit him from Luoyang. Li Yi had not yet arrived when he died.

古文：毅女秀，明达有父风，众推秀领宁州事。
现代文：李毅的女儿李秀，精明通达具有父亲的风范，于是大家推举李秀来管理宁州事务。
English: Li Yi's daughter, Li Xiu, is a shrewd and accomplished person with her father's demeanor. Therefore, everyone recommended Li Xiu to manage the affairs of Ningzhou.

古文：秀奖厉战士，婴城固守。
现代文：李秀奖励战士，环城固守。
English: Li Xiu rewarded the soldiers, and the ring city held fast.

古文：城中粮尽，炙鼠拔草而食之。
现代文：城里粮食吃完了，就烧鼠拔草作为食物。
English: When they have eaten all the grain in the city, they burn mice to pull up weeds for food.

古文：伺夷稍怠，辄出兵掩击，破之。
现代文：等夷人稍微有些懈怠时，就发兵突然袭击，攻破了夷人的包围。
English: When the barbarians slacked off a bit, they launched a surprise attack and broke through the barbarian encirclement.

古文：范长生诣成都，成都王雄门迎，执版，拜为丞相，尊之曰范贤。
现代文：范长生到成都，成都王李雄到城门口迎接，拿着表示礼节的手板，任范长生为丞相，尊称他为范贤。
English: When Fan Changsheng arrived in Chengdu, the king of Chengdu, Li Xiong, greeted him at the gate of the city, holding a ceremonial hand board. He appointed Fan Changsheng as the prime minister and called him Fan Xian.

古文：夏，四月，己巳，司空越引兵屯温。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙巳，司空司马越率兵到温县驻扎。
English: In the summer, in April, Sifu Sima Yue led his troops to station in Wen County.

古文：初，太宰颙以为张方死，东方兵必可解。
现代文：起初，太宰司马以为张方一死，东方的战事一定能够停止。
English: At first, Dazaï Sima thought that with Zhang Fang's death, the war in the East would surely stop.

古文：既而东方兵闻方死，争入关，颙悔之，乃斩郅辅，遣弘农太守彭随、北地太守刁默将兵拒祁弘等于湖。
现代文：不久，东方的军队听说张方死了，争相进入关中，司马感到后悔，就杀了郅辅，派弘农太守彭随、北地太守刁默带兵在关东湖县阻击祁弘等人。
English: Soon after, the eastern army heard that Zhang Fang had died, and they scrambled to enter Guanzhong. Sima felt regret, so he killed Zou Fu, and sent the peasant deputy governor Peng Zui and the northern deputy governor Zou Miao with soldiers to block Zou Hong and others in Guandong Lake County.

古文：五月，壬辰，弘等击随、默，大破之。遂西入关，又败颙将马瞻、郭伟于霸水，颙单马逃入太白山。
现代文：五月，壬辰，祁弘等人把彭随、刀默打得惨败，于是西进入关，又在霸水打败司马的部将马瞻、郭伟，司马单枪匹马逃入太白山。
English: In May, Ren Chen, Zou Hong and others defeated Peng Sui and Shou Miao to a disastrous defeat, so Xi entered the pass, defeated Sima's subordinates Ma Zhan and Guo Wei in the water, and Sima fled single-handedly into the Taibai Mountain.

古文：弘等入长安，所部鲜卑大掠，杀二万馀人，百官奔散，入山中，拾橡实食之。
现代文：祁弘等人进入长安城，所部鲜卑人大肆抢掠，杀了二万多人，大臣官员们跑散，逃入山中，捡拾栎树子当饭吃。
English: Zou Hong and others entered Chang'an City, the subordinates of the headquarters looted and killed more than 20,000 people, the ministers and officials ran away, fled into the mountains, and picked up eucalyptus seeds to eat as a meal.

古文：己亥，弘等奉帝乘牛车东还。
现代文：己亥祁弘等人侍奉惠帝乘坐牛车东返。
English: Ji Hai Jianhong and other attendants of Hui Di took the ox-drawn carriage to return east.

古文：以太弟太保梁柳为镇西将军，守关中。
现代文：任太弟太保梁柳为镇西将军，据守关中。
English: His elder brother, Taibo Liangliu, was appointed as the general of Zhenxi, and was in charge of guarding the pass.

古文：六月，丙辰朔，帝至洛阳，复羊后。
现代文：六月，丙辰朔，惠帝到洛阳，恢复了羊皇后的地位。
English: In June, Hsin Chen Shuo and Hui Di went to Luoyang and resumed the position of the Queen of Sheep.

古文：辛未，大赦，改元。
现代文：辛未，宣布大赦，改年号为光熙。
English: On the 16th, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：马瞻等入长安，杀梁柳，与始平太守梁迈共迎太宰颙于南山。
现代文：马瞻等人又回到长安，杀了梁柳，与始平太守梁迈共同在南山迎接太宰司马。
English: Ma Zhan and others returned to Chang'an, killed Liang Liu, and together with Liang Mai, the governor of Shiheping, met Dazai Sima in Nanshan.

古文：弘农太守裴廙、秦国内史贾龛、安定太守贾疋等起兵击颙，斩马瞻、梁迈。
现代文：弘农太守裴、秦国内史贾龛、安定太守贾疋等人起兵攻打司马，杀了马瞻、梁迈。
English: Hongnong Daju Pei, Qin Guozhong Shi Jiaqi, Dingan Daju Jiaqi and others raised an army to attack Sima, killing Ma Zhan and Liang Mai.

古文：疋，诩之曾孙也。
现代文：贾疋是贾诩的曾孙。
English: Jia Wei is Jia Wei's great-grandson.

古文：司空越遣督护麋晃将兵击颙，至郑，颙使平北将军牵秀屯冯翊。
现代文：司空司马越派督护麋晃带兵攻打司马，到了郑县。司马派平北将军牵秀在冯翊驻扎。
English: Sima Yue, the governor of Sima County, sent his overseer and his bodyguard, Zhaokang, to attack Sima, and they arrived in Zheng County. Sima sent the general of Pingbei Province, Tuixiu, to be stationed in Fengye.

古文：颙长史杨腾，诈称颙命，使秀罢兵，腾遂杀秀，关中皆服于越，颙保城而已。
现代文：司马的长史杨腾，假称司马的命令，让牵秀停止军事行动，杨腾于是杀了牵秀，关中地区都归服司马越，司马仅仅保住长安城而已。
English: Sima's chief, Shi Yangteng, pretended to be Sima's order to stop the military action, Yang Teng then killed Sima Yue, and Guanzhong area all went to Sima Yue. Sima only saved Chang'an City.

古文：成都王雄即皇帝位，大赦，改元曰晏平，国号大成。
现代文：成都王李雄即皇帝位，宣布大赦，改年号为晏平，国号称为大成。
English: Chengdu King Li Xiong, that is, the emperor, announced an amnesty, changed the year name to Fenping, and the country name to Dacheng.

古文：追尊父特曰景皇帝，庙号始祖；尊王太后曰皇太后。
现代文：追尊父亲李特为景皇帝，定庙号为始祖，把王太后尊奉为皇太后。
English: His father, Li Te, was the emperor of Jing, and the temple was the founder, and the queen mother was revered as the queen mother.

古文：以范长生为天地太师；复其部曲，皆不豫征税。
现代文：以范长生为天地太师，让他部下的人免交赋税。
English: To take Fan Changsheng as the Great Teacher of Heaven and Earth, and let his subordinates be exempt from paying taxes.

古文：诸将恃恩，互争班位，尚书令阎式上疏，请考汉、晋故事，立百官制度，从之。
现代文：各位将领都倚仗李雄的恩德，互相争抢职位。尚书令阎式上奏疏，请求按照汉朝、晋朝的旧制，建立百官制度。
English: All generals relied on the benevolence of Li Xiong and competed with each other for positions. Shang Shuling sent a letter to Yan, requesting the establishment of a system of one hundred officials in accordance with the old system of the Han and Jin dynasties.

古文：秋，七月，乙酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：李雄采纳了。秋季，七月，乙酉朔，出现日食。
English: Autumn, July, spring equinox, solar eclipse.

古文：八月，以司空越为太傅，录尚书事；范阳王虓为司空，镇鄴；平昌公模为镇东大将军，镇许昌；王浚为骠骑大将军、都督东夷、河北诸军事，领幽州刺史。
现代文：八月，朝廷任司空司马越为太傅，录尚书事；任范阳王司马为司空，镇守邺城；任平昌公司马模为镇东大将军，镇守许昌；任王浚为骠骑大将军、都督东夷、河北诸军事，兼任幽州刺史。
English: In August, the imperial court appointed Sifu Ma Yue as Taifu and recorded the records; appointed Fan Yang Wang Sima as Sifu and the town guard of Lucheng; appointed PyeongChang Company's Ma Meng as the town commander of Dongdong and the town guard of XuChang; appointed Wang Jun as the general of the cavalry, the military governor of Dongyi and Hebei, and the military governor of Yuzhou.

古文：越以吏部郎颍川庚敳为军谘祭酒，前太弟中庶子胡母辅之为从事中郎，黄门侍郎河南郭象为主簿，鸿胪丞阮修为行参军，谢鲲为掾。
现代文：司马越任吏部郎庚为军咨祭酒，任前太弟中庶子胡母辅之为从事中郎，任黄门侍郎郭象为主簿，任鸿胪丞阮修为行参军，任谢鲲为掾。
English: Sima Yue was appointed as the official of the Department of Lang Geng for the military ceremony, as the former elder brother of the middle son of the middle son of Hu Muxin, he was engaged in the middle son, as the Yellow Gate waiter Guo Xiang as the main book, as the Hong Ying Zheng Ruan Xiu as the march to join the army, and as the Xie Xuan.

古文：辅之荐乐安光逸于越，越亦辟之。
现代文：胡母辅之向司马越推荐乐安人光逸，司马越也加以任用。
English: Hu Muxu recommended Le Anren Guangyi to Sima Yue, and Sima Yue also appointed him.

古文：敳等皆尚虚玄，不以世务婴心，纵酒放诞；敳殖货无厌；象薄行，好招权；越皆以其名重于世，故辟之。
现代文：庚等人都崇尚虚玄空淡，不把政务放在心上，纵酒放诞，庚聚敛财物贪得无厌，郭象品行轻薄，喜好贪图权位，司马越都因为他们名重于世，所以任用他们。
English: Geng and others are all advocates of the unreal, the obscure and the empty, do not take government affairs to heart, indulge in drinking, Geng gathers wealth and is insatiably greedy, Guo Xiang is frivolous, likes to covet power, Sima Yue are all appointed because they are more important than the world.

古文：祁弘之入关也，成都王颖自武关奔新野。
现代文：祁弘进入关中，成都王司马从武关逃奔新野。
English: Gong Hong entered Guanzhong, Chengdu Wang Sima fled from Wuguan to Xinyo.

古文：会新城元公刘弘卒，司马郭劢作乱，欲迎颖为主，治中顺阳；郭舒奉弘子璠以讨劢，斩之。
现代文：正遇到新城元公刘弘去世，司马郭劢搞叛乱，想把司马颖迎接来作首领。郭舒拥戴刘弘的儿子刘讨伐郭劢，把他杀了。
English: Facing the death of Liu Hong, the founding father of Xincheng, Sima Guozhen rebelled and wanted to welcome Sima Ying as the leader. Guo Shu supported Liu Hong's son Liu to fight Guozhen and killed him.

古文：诏南中郎将刘陶收颖。
现代文：朝廷诏令南中郎将刘陶拘捕司马颖。
English: The imperial court ordered Nan Zhongro to arrest Liu Tao and arrest Sima Ying.

古文：颖北渡河，奔朝歌，收故将士，得数百人，欲赴公师籓。九月，顿丘太守冯嵩执之，送鄴；范阳王虓不忍杀而幽之。
现代文：司马颖北渡黄河，逃奔朝歌，收拢旧部将士，聚集了几百人，想去找公师藩，顿丘太守冯嵩将司马颖抓住，押送到邺城，范阳王司马不忍心杀司马颖，把他幽禁起来。
English: Sima Ying crossed the Yellow River to the north, fled to the morning song, gathered several hundred soldiers from the old division, and wanted to go to the Gongshi clan. Dongqiu Governor Feng Song caught Sima Ying and escorted him to Lucheng. Fanyang King Sima could not bear to kill Sima Ying and imprisoned him.

古文：公师籓自白马南渡河，兗州刺史苟晞讨斩之。
现代文：公师藩从白马南渡黄河，兖州刺史苟讨伐并杀掉了公师藩。
English: The Gongshi clan crossed the Yellow River from the south of Baima, and fought and killed the Gongshi clan in Zizhou.

古文：进东赢公腾爵为东燕王，平昌公模为南阳王。
现代文：把东嬴公司马腾的爵位提升为东燕王，平昌公司马模的爵位提升为南阳王。
English: The peerage of Ma Teng of Dongguan Company was promoted to Dongyan Wang, and the peerage of Ma Miao of Pyeongchang Company was promoted to Nanyang Wang.

古文：冬，十月，范阳王虓薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，范阳王司马去世。
English: In winter, in October, Fan Yang Wang Sima passed away.

古文：长史刘舆以成都王颖素为鄴人所附，秘不发丧，伪令人为台使称诏，夜，赐颖死，并杀其二子。
现代文：长史刘舆因为过去邺城人一直归附司马颖，所以秘不发丧，派人假装成朝廷使者传宣假诏书，夜里赐司马颖死，并且杀了他的两个儿子。
English: Because the people of Zengcheng had always belonged to Sima Ying in the past, the chief historian Liu Ying secretly did not mourn, sent someone to pretend to be an imperial envoy to proclaim a false edict, and gave Sima Ying death in the night, and killed his two sons.

古文：颖官属先皆逃散，惟卢志随从，至死不怠，收而殡之。
现代文：司马颖的部属起先已全部逃散，只有卢志一直跟随，直到他死了也不懈怠，为司马颖收尸并安葬了他。
English: At first, all of Sima Ying's subordinates had fled. Only Lu Zhi followed him until he died and did not slack off. He collected Sima Ying's body and buried him.

古文：太傅越召志为军谘祭酒。
现代文：太傅司马越宣召卢志为军咨祭酒。
English: Grand Master Sima Yue called for Lu Zhi to be made into a military congratulatory drink.

古文：越将召刘舆，或曰： 舆犹腻也，近则污人。 
现代文：司马越打算召用刘舆，有人说： 刘舆这个人好比污垢，谁接近他就会沾上这污垢。 
English: The more Sima Yue planned to recruit Liu Yiwu, some people said: Liu Yiwu is like dirt, and anyone who gets close to him will be stained with this dirt.

古文：及至，越疏之。
现代文：等到刘舆来了，司马越就疏远他。
English: When Liu Yiwu arrived, Sima Yue distanced himself from him.

古文：舆密视天下兵簿及仓库、牛马、器械、水陆之形，皆默识之。
现代文：刘舆暗地查阅国家的军事簿籍资料以及仓库、牛马、器械、地理的情况，都默默记下来。
English: Liu Muxing surreptitiously looked up the country's military register data, as well as the situation of warehouses, cattle, horses, equipment, and geography, and silently wrote it down.

古文：时军国多事，每会议，自长史潘滔以下，莫知所对；舆应机辨画，越倾膝酬接，即以为左长史，军国之务，悉以委之。
现代文：当时军务国政事情繁多，每次讨论，从长史潘滔以下，谁也不知怎么办，而刘舆便按照情况分析策划，司马越虚心接受采纳，就让刘舆担任左长史，军务国政的事务，全部都交给刘舆。
English: At that time, there were a lot of military and political affairs, and no one knew what to do after each discussion, from Chang Shi to Pan Tao, but Liu Yuxin analyzed and planned according to the situation. The more modestly Sima accepted the adoption, he let Liu Yuxin serve as the left long history, and all military and political affairs were handed over to Liu Yuxin.

古文：舆说越遣其弟琨镇并州，以为北面之重；越表琨为并州刺史，以东燕王腾为车骑将军、都督鄴城诸军事，镇鄴。
现代文：刘舆劝说司马越派他弟弟刘琨镇守并州，以增强北方的防务，司马越就表奏刘琨为并州刺史，以东燕王司马腾任车骑将军，都督邺城诸军事，镇守邺城。
English: Liu Ming persuaded Sima Yue to send his brother Liu Ye to guard the town and annex the state in order to strengthen the defense of the north. Sima Yue presented Liu Ye as the history of annexing the state, with the East Yan King Sima Teng as the cavalry general, the military governor of the city, and the town guard of the city.

古文：十一月，己巳，夜，帝食饼中毒，庚午，崩于显阳殿。
现代文：十一月，己巳，夜间，惠帝吃麦饼中毒，庚午，在显阳殿驾崩。
English: In November, at night, Hui Di was poisoned by eating wheat cakes. At noon, he passed away at the Xianyang Palace.

古文：羊后自以于太弟炽为嫂，恐不得为太后，将立清河王覃。
现代文：羊皇后自以为是太弟司马炽的嫂子，担心当不成太后，打算拥立清河王司马覃。
English: The Queen of Sheep thought that she was the sister-in-law of her brother-in-law Sima Hui. She was worried that she would not become the empress dowager, and planned to support the Qing River King Sima Yu.

古文：侍中华混谏曰： 太弟在东宫已久，民望素定，今日宁可易乎！ 
现代文：侍中华混劝谏说： 太弟在东宫已经很久了，在百姓中的声望一直是确定的，今天难道还能改变吗？ 
English: The attendant of the Chinese mixer advised Zou, saying: My great-uncle has been in the East Palace for a long time, and his reputation among the people has always been certain. Can it be changed today?

古文：即露版驰告太傅越，召太弟入宫。
现代文：随即用不封口的公文迅速宣召太傅司马越，宣召皇太弟入宫。
English: He immediately used an open letter to quickly summon the grand tutor Sima Yue and the crown prince to the palace.

古文：后已召覃至尚书阁，疑变，托疾而返。
现代文：皇后也已宣召司马覃到尚书阁，司马覃怀疑会有变故，就称病回去了。
English: The empress had also summoned Sima Yi to Shang Shukou. Sima Yi suspected that there would be a change of fortune, so he called in sick.

古文：癸酉，太弟即皇帝位，大赦，尊皇后曰惠皇后，居弘训宫；追尊母王才人曰皇太后；立妃梁氏为皇后。
现代文：癸酉，太弟司马炽即皇帝位，宣布大赦，尊奉皇后为惠皇后，安排在弘训宫。追尊母亲王才人为皇太后。册立妃梁氏为皇后。
English: , the great-uncle Sima Blaze, that is, the emperor, announced an amnesty, honored the empress as the Empress Hui, and arranged in the Hongxun Palace. The revered mother Wang Cai was the empress dowager. The princess Liang was appointed as the empress.

古文：怀帝始遵旧制，于东堂听政。
现代文：怀帝司马炽开始遵奉旧制，在东堂听政。
English: Huai Di Sima Zhao began to follow the old system and listen to the government in the East Hall.

古文：每至宴会，辄与群官论众务，考经籍。
现代文：每到朝廷会集群臣宴会时，就与大臣官员们商讨各种政务，探讨经典的内容。
English: Whenever he attended a banquet with a large group of courtiers at the Imperial Court, he discussed various government affairs with the ministers and officials and explored the contents of the classics.

古文：黄门侍郎傅宣叹曰： 今日复见武帝之世矣！ 
现代文：黄门侍郎傅宣感叹道： 今天又看到了武帝的时代了。 
English: Huangmen waiter Fu Xuan was full of praise, saying, "Nowadays, we have seen the era of Emperor Wu!

古文：十二月，壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，壬午朔，出现日食。
English: In December, at the crack of dawn, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：太傅越以诏书征河间王颙为司徒，颙乃就征。
现代文：太傅司马越用诏书征召河间王司马为司徒，司马就前去接受征召。
English: Grand Master Sima Yue used an imperial edict to conscript Kawama Wang Sima as a disciple, and Sima went to accept the conscription.

古文：南阳王模遣其将梁臣邀之于新安，车上扼杀之，并杀其三子。
现代文：南阳王司马模派部将梁臣，在新安拦住司马，在车上把他掐死，并杀了他的三个儿子。
English: Nanyang King Sima Ma sent his subordinate Liang Chen to stop Sima in Xin'an, strangle him to death in his car, and kill his three sons.

古文：辛丑，以中书监温羡为左光禄大夫，领司徒；尚书左仆射王衍为司空。
现代文：辛丑，任中书监温羡为左光禄大夫，兼任司徒。任尚书左仆射衍为司空。
English: Xin Ug, appointed as the book supervisor in the middle, Wen En was the doctor of the left light, and also served as the steward. Appointed as the left servant of the book, Sho Yan was the steward.

古文：己酉，葬惠帝于太阳陵。
现代文：己酉，把惠帝安葬在太阳陵。
English: and buried Hui Di in the Sun Mausoleum.

古文：刘琨至上党，东燕王腾即自井陉东下。
现代文：刘琨到上党，东燕王司马腾就从井陉东下。
English: When Liu Ye went to the upper party, Dongyan Wang Sima Teng went from Jingye to the east.

古文：时并州饥馑，数为胡寇所掠，郡县莫能自保。
现代文：当时并州饥荒，多次遭到外族强盗的抢掠，各郡县没有能够保卫自己的。
English: At that time, there was famine in Yanzhou, and it was repeatedly plundered by foreign bandits. Counties and counties were not able to defend themselves.

古文：州将田甄、甄弟兰、任祉、祁济、李恽、薄盛等及使民万馀人，悉随腾就谷冀州，号为 乞活 ，所馀之户不满二万，寇贼纵横，道路断塞。
现代文：州属部将田甄、田甄弟田兰、任祉、祁济、李恽、薄盛等人以及官吏百姓一万多人，都随司马腾到冀州找饭吃，称为 乞活 ，剩下的不足两万户。强盗窃贼到处横行，道路交通阻断。
English: Tian Zhen, Tian Zhen's younger brother Tian Lan, Ren Zhi, Bao Zhi, Li Zhen, Bo Sheng and others from the provincial department, as well as more than 10,000 officials and ordinary people, all followed Sima Teng to Jizhou to look for food, known as begging, and the remaining less than 20,000 households. Robbers and thieves are rampant everywhere, and road traffic is blocked.

古文：琨募兵上党，得五百人，转斗而前。
现代文：刘琨在上党召募兵卒，聚集了五百人，转战向前，到达晋阳。
English: Liu Bei called for recruits in Shangdang, gathered five hundred men, turned the battle forward, and arrived in Jinyang.

古文：至晋阳，府寺焚毁，邑野萧条，琨抚循劳徠，流民稍集。孝怀皇帝上
现代文：官府房舍焚毁，城乡一片萧条，刘琨安抚慰劳，稍微聚集了一些流民。孝怀皇帝上
English: The buildings of the government office were burned down, and there was a depression in both urban and rural areas. Liu Bei pacified and comforted the laborers, and a few displaced people gathered.

古文：永嘉元年
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉元年丁卯，公元年
English: Emperor Huai Yongjia in the first year of Dingwu, AD

古文：春，正月，癸丑，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，癸丑，宣布大赦，改年号为永嘉。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, and the year of the pig, an amnesty was announced, and the year was changed to Yongjia.

古文：吏部郎周穆，太傅越之姑子也，与其妹夫御史中丞诸葛玫说越曰： 主上之为太弟，张方意也。
现代文：吏部郎周穆是太傅司马越姑母的儿子，他与妹夫御史中丞诸葛玫劝司马越说： 皇上当时成为太弟，是张方的意图。
English: The secretary, Zhou Mu, was the son of Emperor Zhang's aunt, Empress Dowager Sima Yue. He and his brother-in-law, Imperial Historian Zhuge Mei, persuaded Empress Sima Yue to say: It was Emperor Zhang's intention to become the Emperor's younger brother.

古文：清河王本太子，公宜立之。 
现代文：清河王本来是太子，您应当拥立他。 
English: Qinghe Wang was originally a prince, you should support him.

古文：越不许。
现代文：司马越不同意。
English: Sima Yue disagreed.

古文：重言之，越怒，斩之。
现代文：他们又向司马越说，司马越发怒，把他们杀了。
English: They also told Sima Yue that Sima Yue got angry and killed them.

古文：二月，王弥寇青、徐二州，自称征东大将军，攻杀二千石。
现代文：二月，王弥在青、徐二州作乱，自称征东大将军，攻杀郡守。
English: In February, Wang Ya wreaked havoc in the two prefectures of Qing and Xu, claiming to be the general who would conquer the East, and attacked and killed the county governor.

古文：太傅越以公车令东莱鞠羡为本郡太守，以讨弥，弥击杀之。
现代文：太傅司马越让公车令东莱人鞠羡担任本郡太守，以讨伐王弥，王弥把他打死了。
English: Sima Yue, the Tai Fu, let the bus make Donglai people envious to serve as the county's governor, in order to fight Wang Ya, who killed him.

古文：陈敏刑政无章，不为英俊所附；子弟凶暴，所在为患；顾荣、周等忧之。
现代文：陈敏处理刑罚政事都无章法，英杰们都不附从他。他的子弟凶恶残暴，当地把他们看作祸患。顾荣、周等人对此感到忧虑。
English: Chen Min's handling of penal and political affairs is without rules and regulations, and the heroes do not follow him. His sons are vicious and cruel, and the local people regard them as a scourge. Gu Rong, Zhou and others are worried about this.

古文：庐江内史华谭遗荣等书曰： 陈敏盗据吴、会，命危朝露。
现代文：庐江内史华谭给顾荣等人去信说： 陈敏窃据吴郡、会稽地区，性命像早晨的露水一样危险。
English: Hua Tan, a historian from Minjiang, sent a letter to Gu Rong and others, saying: Chen Minzhu, according to Wuxi County and Huiqi District, his life is as dangerous as the morning dew.

古文：诸君或剖符名郡，或列为近臣，而更辱身奸人之朝，降节叛逆之党，不亦羞乎！
现代文：你们或者拿着朝廷的符节在外统领名郡，或者曾为朝廷的近侍之臣，却玷污自己转而投身于奸邪的伪朝，变节投降于叛逆的败类，不耻辱吗？
English: Are you not ashamed that you either took the symbols of the imperial court with you to take the name of the county outside the imperial court, or that you were once a close vassal of the imperial court, but defiled yourself and turned to the treacherous pseudo-dynasty, defected and surrendered to the traitorous scum?

古文：吴武烈父子皆以英杰之才，继承大业。
现代文：吴武烈皇帝孙坚父子都是以英俊杰出的才能，继承大业。
English: Wu Wuling Emperor Sun Jian and his son were both handsome and outstanding talents, inheriting the great cause.

古文：今以陈敏凶狡，七弟顽冗，欲蹑桓王之高踪，蹈大皇之绝轨，远度诸贤，犹当未许也。
现代文：现在以陈敏的凶恶狡猾，七个弟弟的刁顽庸劣，想追随桓王孙策的高绝的足迹，踩着大皇帝孙权的非凡的轨道。认真思量一下各地群贤，都不会答应。
English: Now, with the vicious cunning of Chen Min and the stubborn mediocrity of his seven younger brothers, he wants to follow in the footsteps of the great King Sun Ce and tread on the extraordinary track of the great Emperor Sun Quan. If you seriously consider the sages around the world, they will not agree.

古文：皇舆东返，俊彦盈朝，将举六师以清建业，诸贤何颜复见中州之士邪？ 
现代文：现在皇帝车驾已东返洛阳，俊杰英才充满朝廷，将要动用六师来清理建业，你们还有什么脸重新见中州的人士呢？ 
English: Now that the emperor's chariot has returned to Luoyang in the east, and the imperial court is full of outstanding talents, and six divisions will be used to clean up the construction industry, do you have any face to see the people of Zhongzhou again?

古文：荣等素有图敏之心，及得书，甚惭，密遣使报征东大将军刘准，使发兵临江。己为内应，剪发为信。
现代文：顾荣等人一直有除掉陈敏的想法，等见到这封信后，非常羞惭，秘密派使者向征东大将军刘准报告，让他发兵到江边，自己作为内应，剪掉头发作为记号。
English: Gu Rong and others always had the idea of getting rid of Chen Min. After seeing this letter, they were so ashamed that they secretly sent an emissary to report to Liu Jun, the General of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, and asked him to send troops to the river, and cut off their hair as a sign.

古文：准遣扬州刺史刘机等出历阳讨敏。
现代文：刘准派遣扬州刺史刘机等人从历阳出发讨伐陈敏。
English: Liu Jun dispatched Yangzhou chief Liu Ji and others from Liyang to fight Chen Min.

古文：敏使其弟广武将军昶将兵数万屯乌江，历阳太守宏屯牛渚。
现代文：陈敏派他弟弟广武将军陈昶带领数万兵马在乌江县驻扎，历阳太守陈宏在牛渚驻扎。
English: Chen Min sent his younger brother, Guangwu General Chen Zhe, to lead tens of thousands of soldiers and horses stationed in Wujiang County, and Liyang Governor Chen Hong stationed in Niuhu.

古文：敏弟处知顾荣等有贰心，劝敏杀之，敏不从。
现代文：陈敏弟陈处得知顾荣等人有二心，劝陈敏杀掉他们，陈敏不同意。
English: Chen Min's younger brother, Chen Shide, learned that Gu Rong and others had double-mindedness and advised Chen Min to kill them. Chen Min did not agree.

古文：昶司马钱广，周同郡人也，密使广杀昶，因宣言州下已杀敏，敢动者诛三族。
现代文：陈昶的司马钱广是周的同郡人，周秘密地让钱广杀了陈昶，并宣称州城已杀掉陈敏，有敢乱动者诛杀三族。
English: Chen Min's Sima Qianguang was Zhou's compatriot. Zhou secretly had Qianguang kill Chen Min, and claimed that Zhoucheng had killed Chen Min, and that anyone who dared to disturb the situation would kill the three ethnic groups.

古文：广勒兵硃雀桥南；敏遣甘卓讨广，坚甲精兵尽委之。
现代文：钱广带兵停在朱雀桥南，陈敏派甘卓征讨伐钱广，把坚固的铠甲和精兵全都给了甘卓。
English: Qian Guang and his soldiers stopped at the south of Suzaku Bridge. Chen Min sent Gan Zhuo to conquer Qian Guang and gave him all the sturdy armor and elite soldiers.

古文：顾荣虑敏疑之，故往就敏。
现代文：顾荣考虑到陈敏的怀疑，所以就到陈敏那里。
English: Gu Rong considered Chen Min's suspicion, so he went to Chen Min.

古文：敏曰： 卿当四出镇卫，岂得就我邪！ 
现代文：陈敏说： 你应该四处走走镇定人心来保卫我。怎么能到我这儿来呢？ 
English: Chen Min said: You should walk around calmly to protect me. How can you come to me?

古文：荣乃出，与周共说甘卓曰： 若江东之事可济，当共成之。
现代文：顾荣于是就出去，与周一起劝说甘卓道： 如果江东地区的事情能够成功，我们就应该共同努力将事办成。
English: Gu Rong then went out and, together with Zhou, persuaded Gan Zhuo: If things in the east of the Yangtze River can be successful, we should work together to get things done.

古文：然卿观兹事势，当有济理不？
现代文：但是你分析一下事情的趋势，能够成功吗？
English: But if you analyze the trend of things, can you succeed?

古文：敏既常才，政令反覆，计无所定，其子弟各已骄矜，其败必矣。
现代文：陈敏才能平平，政令反覆无常，计略不确定，他的儿子兄弟个个骄纵自负，他一定要失败。
English: Chen Min's talent is mediocre, his decrees are capricious, his strategy is uncertain, and his sons and brothers are all arrogant. He must fail.

古文：而吾等安然受其官禄，事败之日，使江西诸军函首送洛，题曰 逆贼顾荣、甘卓之首 ，此万世之辱也！ 
现代文：而我们却安心地接受担任他的官职俸禄，等事情失败的时候，假如让长江以西地区各支军队把我们的首级装在盒子里送到洛阳，上边写着 叛逆贼寇顾荣、甘卓的首级 ，这真是万世的耻辱啊！ 
English: But we accept the salary of his official position with peace of mind. When things fail, let the armies west of the Yangtze River send our heads in a box to Luoyang, with the words "the heads of the traitorous thieves Kogurong and Ganzhuo" written on the top. This is truly a disgrace!

古文：卓遂诈称疾，迎女，断桥，收船南岸，与、荣及前松滋侯相丹杨纪瞻共攻敏。
现代文：甘卓于是假装称病，接回女儿，截断桥的交通，把船收回到南岸，与周、顾荣以及前松滋侯相丹扬人纪瞻一起攻打陈敏。
English: Gan Zhuo then pretended to be ill, took back his daughter, cut off the traffic on the bridge, brought the ship back to the south bank, and attacked Chen Min together with Zhou, Gu Rong, and Qizhan, who was a relative of Dan Yang, the former Prince of Songzhi.

古文：敏自帅万馀人讨卓，军人隔水语敏众曰： 本所以戮力陈公者，正以顾丹杨、周安丰耳；今皆异矣，汝等何为！ 
现代文：陈敏亲自带领一万多人征讨甘卓，甘卓手下的壮士隔水对陈敏的兵卒说： 原来所以为陈公效力，正是因为丹阳太守顾荣、安丰太守周而已，现在他们都改变了立场，你们这样是为什么？ 
English: Chen Min personally led more than ten thousand people to recruit Gan Zhuo, and Gan Zhuo's strong men across the water said to Chen Min's soldiers: Originally, they worked for Chen Gong precisely because Danyang was too protective of Gu Rong and Anfeng was too protective of Zhou, but now they have changed their position, why are you like this?

古文：敏众狐疑未决，荣以白羽扇麾之，众皆溃去。
现代文：陈敏的部众犹疑不定，顾荣挥动白羽扇，陈敏的部众都溃散离去。
English: Chen Min's subordinates hesitated, Gu Rong waved a white feather fan, and Chen Min's subordinates dispersed.

古文：敏单骑北走，追获之于江乘，叹曰： 诸人误我，以至今日！ 
现代文：陈敏一个人骑马向北逃跑，在江乘被追上抓住，感叹道： 这些人耽误了我，才到了今天这个地步！ 
English: Chen Min fled north alone on horseback and was caught in the river. He lamented, "These people delayed me until I got to this point today!

古文：谓弟处曰： 我负卿，卿不负我！ 
现代文：又对弟弟陈处说： 我辜负了你，你却没有辜负我！ 
English: He also said to his brother Chen: I failed you, but you didn't fail me!

古文：遂斩敏于建业，夷三族。
现代文：陈敏在建业被杀，夷灭三族。
English: Chen Min was killed in Jianye, wiping out three tribes.

古文：于是会稽等郡尽杀敏诸弟。
现代文：这样会稽等郡把陈敏的几个弟弟也都杀了。
English: In this way, the county auditor and others also killed several of Chen Min's younger brothers.

古文：时平东将军周馥代刘准镇寿春。
现代文：当时平东将军周馥代刘准镇守寿春。
English: At that time, the general of Pingdong, Zhou Ying, replaced Liu Junzhen to guard Shuchun.

古文：三月，己未朔，馥传敏首至京师。
现代文：三月，己未朔，周馥把陈敏的首级送往京城。
English: In March, before the new year, Zhou Qi sent Chen Min's head to Beijing.

古文：诏征顾荣为侍中，纪瞻为尚书郎。
现代文：朝廷诏令征召顾荣为侍中，纪瞻为尚书郎。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree to conscript Gu Rong as a chamberlain and Ji Zhan as a scholar.

古文：太傅越辟周为参军，陆玩为扌彖。
现代文：太傅司马越任命周为参军，陆玩为掾。
English: Grand Master Sima Yue appointed Zhou to join the army, and Lu Yu to be the commander.

古文：玩，机之从弟也。
现代文：陆玩是陆机的堂弟。
English: The land play is the cousin of the land machine.

古文：荣等至徐州，闻北方愈乱，疑不进，越与徐州刺史裴盾书曰： 若荣等顾望，以军礼发遣！ 
现代文：顾荣等人到徐州，听说北方更加乱了，迟疑不前，司马越给徐州刺史裴盾去信说： 如果顾荣等人左顾右盼，就按军法遣送他们！ 
English: Gu Rong and others went to Xuzhou, heard that the north was more chaotic, and hesitated to move forward. Sima Yue sent a letter to the Xuzhou magistrate Shi Pei Dun, saying: If Gu Rong and others look around, send them according to military law!

古文：荣等惧，逃归。
现代文：顾荣等人听说后非常恐惧，就逃回去了。
English: Gu Rong and the others were very frightened after hearing this, so they fled back.

古文：盾，楷之兄子，越妃兄也。
现代文：裴盾是裴楷哥哥裴康的儿子，司马越妃子的哥哥。
English: Pei Dun was the son of Pei Kai's brother Pei Kang, and the older brother of Sima Yue's concubine.

古文：西阳夷寇江夏，太守杨珉请督将议之。诸将争献方略，骑督硃伺独不言。
现代文：西阳夷人进犯江夏，太守杨珉请军事官员商讨对策，官员们争相提出计策，只有骑督朱伺一个人默不作声。
English: When the Xiyang barbarians invaded Jiangxia, Yang Hui, the governor-general, summoned military officials to discuss countermeasures. The officials scrambled to come up with a plan, but only Zhu Wei, the cavalry commander, remained silent.

古文：珉曰： 硃将军何以不言？ 
现代文：杨珉说： 朱将军为什么不说话？ 
English: Yang Hui said: Why doesn't General Zhu speak up?

古文：伺曰： 诸人以舌击贼，伺惟以力耳。 
现代文：朱伺说： 大家都是用口舌攻打贼寇，我只靠力量罢了。 
English: Zhu Wei said: Everyone is using their tongues to fight the bandits, I just rely on my strength.

古文：珉又问： 将军前后击贼，何以常胜？ 
现代文：杨珉说： 将军前后几次攻打贼寇，为什么能够常胜不败？ 
English: Yang Wei said: The general attacked the bandits several times before and after, why can he always win?

古文：伺曰： 两敌共对，惟当忍之；彼不能忍，我能忍，是以胜耳。 
现代文：朱伺说： 两军对垒，只应当忍耐，对方不能够忍耐，而我能忍耐，所以能够战胜他们。 
English: Zhu Wei said: When the two armies face each other, they should only be patient. The other side cannot be patient, but I can be patient, so I can defeat them.

古文：珉善之。
现代文：杨珉认为很对。
English: Yang Wei thought it was right.

古文：诏追复杨太后尊号；丁卯，改葬之，谥曰武悼。
现代文：诏令追复杨太后的尊号，丁卯，将太后改葬，定谥号为武悼。
English: The imperial edict restored the honorary title of Empress Dowager Yang, Dingwu, and the Empress Dowager Yang's funeral was changed to a military funeral.

古文：庚午，立清河王覃弟豫章王诠为皇太子。
现代文：庚午，立清河王司马覃的弟弟豫章王司马铨为皇太子。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Yu Zhang Wang Sima Yi, the younger brother of Li Qinghe Wang Sima Yi, became the crown prince.

古文：辛未，大赦。
现代文：辛未，宣布大赦。
English: Xinwei, the implementation of the amnesty.

古文：帝亲览大政，留心庶事；太傅越不悦，固求出籓。
现代文：怀帝司马炽亲自审察大政，对朝廷事务也很留心。太傅司马越对此不高兴，坚决要求出去作藩镇。
English: Waite Sima Blaze personally inspected the grand government and was also very attentive to the affairs of the imperial court. Taifu Sima Yue was not happy about this and insisted on going out to make a han town.

古文：庚辰，越出镇许昌。以高密王略为征南大将军，都督荆州诸军事，镇襄阳；南阳王模为征西大将军，都督秦、雍、梁、益四州诸军事，镇长安；东燕王腾为新蔡王，都督司、冀二州诸军事，仍镇鄴。
现代文：任高密王司马略为征南大将军，都督荆州诸军事，镇守襄阳；任南阳王司马模为征西大将军，都督秦、雍、梁、益诸军事，镇守长安；封东燕王司马腾为新蔡王，都督司、冀二州诸军事，仍然镇守邺城。
English: Gaomi Wang Sima Liao was appointed as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the military governor of Jingzhou, and the town guard of Xiangyang; Nanyang King Sima Miao was appointed as the general of the Western Expeditionary Army, the military governor of Qin, Yong, Liang, and Yi, and the town guard of Chang'an; East Yan King Sima Teng was appointed as the new King Cai, the military governor of Jingzhou, and the military governor of Hebei Province, and the town guard of Handan.

古文：公师籓既死，汲桑逃还苑中，更聚众劫掠郡县，自称大将军，声言为成都王报仇；以石勒为前驱，所向辄克，署勒扫虏将军，遂进攻鄴。
现代文：公师藩死后，汲桑逃回到苑中，转而聚众到各郡县去抢劫掠夺，自称大将军，声称要为成都王司马颖报仇，以石勒为先锋，所向披靡，又任石勒为代讨虏将军，接着进攻邺城。
English: After the death of the Gongshi clan, Qusang fled back to Yuanzhong. Instead, he gathered people to rob and plunder counties and counties. He called himself a great general and claimed to avenge Chengdu Wang Sima Ying. With Shi Le as the vanguard, he was invincible. He was also appointed as the general to fight against the captors on behalf of Shi Le, and then attacked Shicheng.

古文：时鄴中府库空竭，而新蔡武哀王腾资用甚饶。
现代文：当时邺城里仓库已空，而新蔡武哀王司马腾用度却很奢侈。
English: At that time, the warehouse in Shicheng was empty, but the new Cai Wuye Wang Simateng was very extravagant.

古文：腾性吝啬，无所振惠，临急，乃赐将士米各数升，帛各丈尺，以是人不为用。
现代文：司马腾品性吝啬，部下得不到什么好处，临到军情紧急时，就赐给将士每人几升米，一丈左右的布帛，所以部下都不为他所用。
English: Sima Teng is a miserly character, his subordinates do not get any benefits. When there is a military emergency, he will give each soldier a few liters of rice and a cloth of about one meter, so his subordinates are not used by him.

古文：夏，五月，桑大破魏郡太守冯嵩，长驱入鄴，腾轻骑出奔，为桑将李丰所杀。
现代文：夏季，五月，汲桑重创魏郡太守冯嵩，长驱直入，攻进邺城，司马腾轻装骑马出逃。被汲桑部将李丰杀死。
English: In the summer, in May, the Kuisang attacked Feng Song, the governor of Wei County, and drove straight into the city. Sima Teng fled lightly on horseback. Li Feng was killed by the Kuisang.

古文：桑出成都王颖棺，载之车中，每事启而后行。
现代文：汲桑起出成都王司马颖的棺材，装到车上，每件事都要向司马颖棺材祷告后才去办。
English: Kuisang picked up the coffin of Chengdu Wang Sima Ying and loaded it onto the car. Everything had to be done after praying to Sima Ying's coffin.

古文：遂烧鄴宫，火旬日不灭；杀士民万馀人，大掠而去。
现代文：接着焚烧了邺城王宫，大火十天都不灭。又杀掉一万多土人百姓，大肆抢掠后才离去。
English: Next, they burned the royal palace in Lucheng, and the fire did not go out for ten days. They also killed more than ten thousand local people, and only left after plundering and pillaging.

古文：济自延津，南击兗州。
现代文：在延津渡过黄河，向南攻打兖州。
English: He crossed the Yellow River at Yanjin and headed south to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：太傅越大惧，使苟晞及将军王赞等讨之。
现代文：太傅司马越非常惧怕，派苟和将军王赞去讨伐汲桑。
English: Daifu Sima Yue was very afraid, so he sent Gogol and General Wang Zan to fight the Qusang.

古文：秦州流民邓定、訇氐等据成固，寇掠汉中，梁州刺史张殷遣巴西太守张燕讨之。
现代文：秦州流民邓定、訇氐等人占据成固，进犯抢掠汉中，梁州刺史张殷派遣巴西太守张燕讨伐他们。
English: Qinzhou exiles Dangding, Zou and others occupied Chenggu, attacked and plundered Hanzhong, and Zhang Yan, the governor of Liangzhou, sent the Brazilian governor Zhang Yan to fight them.

古文：邓定等饥窘，诈降于燕，且赂之，燕为之缓师。
现代文：邓定等人饥饿困窘，假装向张燕投降，又贿赂张燕，张燕就为他们缓兵。
English: Dangding and others were starving and embarrassed. They pretended to surrender to Zhang Yan, and bribed Zhang Yan. Zhang Yan gave them a reprieve.

古文：定密遣訇氐求救于成，成主雄遣太尉离、司徒云、司空璜将兵二万救定。与燕战，大破之，张殷及汉中太守杜孟治弃城走。
现代文：邓定秘密派遣訇氐成汉求救，成汉君主李雄派太尉李离、司徒李云、司空李璜率领二万军队去救援邓定，与张燕交战，把张燕打得惨败，张殷和汉中太守杜孟治弃城而逃。
English: Dangding secretly sent his envoy to Chenghan to ask for help. Chenghan's monarch Li Xiong sent the twenty-thousand army to rescue Dangding, led by the captain Li Li Li, the commander Li Yun, and the commander Li Yan. They fought with Zhang Yan and defeated Zhang Yan. Zhang Yin and the Chinese imperial governor Du Meng abandoned the city and fled.

古文：积十馀日，离等引还，尽徙汉中民于蜀。
现代文：十几天后，李离等人带兵回师，把汉中百姓全部迁徙到蜀地。
English: A dozen days later, Li Li and others led the soldiers back to the division and moved all the Han Chinese people to Shu.

古文：汉中人句方、白落帅吏民还守南郑。
现代文：汉中人句方、白落带领部分官吏百姓回到南郑据守。
English: Hanzhong people Gu Fang and Bai Luo led some officials and people to return to Nan Zheng.

古文：石勒与苟晞等相持于平原、阳平间，数月，大小三十馀战，互有胜负。
现代文：石勒与苟在平原、阳平之间相持对垒几个月，大小三十余城，双方互有胜负。
English: Shiller and Gou have been competing against each other for several months between the plains and Yangping, more than 30 cities in size, and both sides have won and lost.

古文：秋，七月，己酉朔，太傅越屯官渡，为晞声援。
现代文：秋季，七月，己酉朔，太傅司马越在官渡屯兵驻扎，声援苟。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Tai Fu Sima Yue stationed troops in Guandu to show solidarity with the Guo.

古文：己未，以琅邪王睿为安东将军，都督扬州江南诸军事，假节，镇建业。
现代文：己未，朝廷任命琅邪王司马睿为安东将军、都督扬州江南诸军事，持符节，镇守建业。
English: Before long, the imperial court appointed the evil king Sima Rui as General Anton, the military governor of Yangzhou south of the Yangtze River, holding the sign festival and guarding the construction industry.

古文：八月，己卯朔，苟晞击汲桑于东武阳，大破之。
现代文：八月，己卯朔，苟在东武阳攻打汲桑，大败汲桑。
English: In August, at the dawn of the new year, Gou attacked Kuisang in Dongwuyang and defeated Kuisang.

古文：桑退保清渊。
现代文：汲桑撤退到清渊防守。
English: Kuisang retreated to Kiyomizu to defend.

古文：分荆州、江州八郡为湘州。
现代文：从荆州、江州分出八个郡，建立湘州。
English: The eight counties in Jingzhou and Jiangzhou are called Hunan.

古文：九月，戊申，琅邪王睿至建业。
现代文：九月，戊申，琅邪王司马睿到达建业。
English: In September, Wushin, the evil king, Sima Rui, arrived at Jianye.

古文：睿以安东司马王导为谋主，推心亲信，每事咨焉。
现代文：司马睿让安东司马王导作为主要谋士，对他推心置腹，非常信任，每件事都找王导咨询。
English: Sima Rui let Andong Sima Wangdu as the main adviser, put his heart and soul into him, trusted him very much, and consulted Wangdu for everything.

古文：睿名论素轻，吴人不附，居久之，士大夫莫有至者，导患之。
现代文：司马睿名望声誉一直很轻，吴地人们都不附从，在建业居住了很久，士大夫没有来拜访的，王导感到忧虑。
English: Sima Rui's fame and reputation have always been very light. People in Wu do not follow him. He has lived in Jianye for a long time. If the scholar did not come to visit, Wang Du was worried.

古文：会睿出观禊，导使睿乘肩舆，具威仪，导与诸名胜皆骑从，纪瞻、顾荣等见之惊异，相帅拜于道左。
现代文：正赶上司马睿出去观看禊祭，王导让司马睿乘上抬轿，安排了威严的仪仗。王导和名士们都骑马侍从，纪瞻、顾荣等人见了后感到惊异，一个跟着一个地在道路左边行拜礼。
English: Wang Du was just catching up with his boss Ma Rui to go out to watch the burnt offering. Wang Du let Sima Rui ride in the carriage and arranged a majestic ceremonial battle. Wang Du and the celebrities all rode as attendants. Ji Zhan, Gu Rong and others were surprised when they saw them, and one after another went to worship on the left side of the road.

古文：导因说睿曰： 顾荣、贺循，此土之望，宜引之以结人心。二子既至，则无不来矣。 
现代文：王导就劝说司马睿道： 顾荣、贺循，都是这个地区最具名望的人了，应当结交他们来收服人心，他们两人来了，就没有不来的人。 
English: Wang Du persuaded Sima Rui: Gu Rong and He Xun are the most prestigious people in this region, and it is necessary to make friends with them to win people's hearts. When they come, there is no one who does not come.

古文：睿乃使导躬造循、荣，二人皆应命而至。以循为吴国内史；荣为军司，加散骑常侍，凡军府政事，皆与之谋议。
现代文：司马睿就派王导亲自拜访贺循、顾荣，两个人都接受邀请而来到司马睿处，司马睿让贺循担任吴国内史，顾荣担任军司马，加授散骑常侍。军政事务，都与他们商议。
English: Sima Rui sent Wang Du personally to visit He Xun and Gu Rong. Both of them accepted the invitation and came to Sima Rui's office. Sima Rui asked He Xun to serve as Wu's domestic historian, Gu Rong to serve as military secretary, and Zhuo to serve as a straggler. Military and political affairs were all discussed with them.

古文：又以纪瞻为军祭酒，卞壶为从事中郎，周为仓曹属，琅邪刘超为舍人，张闿及鲁国孔衍为参军。
现代文：又让纪瞻担任军咨祭酒，卞担任从事中郎，周任仓曹属，琅邪人刘超任舍人，张和鲁国的孔衍任参军。
English: In addition, Ji Zhan served as the military ceremony wine, Zou served as the middle-ranking official, Zhou served as Cang Cao Zhen, Liu Chaoran, the evil-doer Liu Chaoran, and Zhang and Lu's Kong Yan joined the army.

古文：壶，粹之子；闿，昭之曾孙也。
现代文：卞是卞粹的儿子，张是张昭的曾孙。
English: Zou is the son of Zou Ji, and Zhang is the great-grandson of Zhang Zhao.

古文：王导说睿： 谦以接士，俭以足用，用清静为政，抚绥新旧。 
现代文：王导对司马睿说： 以谦逊的态度对待士人，通过节俭的办法保证用度的充足，以清静无为的原则处理政务，安抚以前的故旧部下与新结交的士人。 
English: Wang Du said to Sima Rui: Treat the scholars with a humble attitude, ensure sufficient consumption through frugal methods, handle government affairs with the principle of calm and inaction, and appease the old and old subordinates and the newly befriended scholars.

古文：故江东归心焉。
现代文：所以得到了江东地区人们的信任。
English: Therefore, it has gained the trust of people in the Jiangdong region.

古文：睿初至，颇以酒废事；导以为言。睿命酌，引觞覆之，于此遂绝。
现代文：司马睿刚来时，常常因为喝酒耽误事情，王导对此进行劝说，司马睿就命令人斟上酒，他接过酒杯后把酒倒掉，从此便戒了酒。
English: When Sima Rui first came, he often delayed things because of drinking. Wang Du persuaded him to do so. Sima Rui ordered someone to pour the wine. He took the glass and poured it out, and then quit drinking.

古文：苟晞追击汲桑，破其八垒，死者万馀人。
现代文：苟追击汲桑，攻破汲桑的八个营垒，打死一万多人。
English: He pursued the Kuisang, broke through the eight camps of the Kuisang, and killed more than ten thousand people.

古文：桑与石勒收馀众，将奔汉，冀州刺史谯国丁绍邀之于赤桥，又破之。
现代文：汲桑与石勒收拾残余部众，打算投奔刘汉，冀州刺史谯国人丁绍又在赤桥拦截，结果丁绍打败了他们。
English: Kuisang and Shi Le collected the remnants of the crowd and planned to go to Liu Han. Ding Shao, a native of Jizhou Zhisheng, intercepted them in Akabashi, and Ding Shao defeated them.

古文：桑奔马牧，勒奔乐平。
现代文：汲桑逃奔马牧，石勒逃奔乐平。
English: Kuisang fled to Mamu, Shile fled to Leping.

古文：太傅越还许昌，加苟晞抚军将军、都督青、兗诸军事，丁绍宁北将军，监冀州诸军事，皆假节。
现代文：太傅司马越返回许昌，给苟加官为抚军将军，都督青、兖诸军事，给丁绍加官为宁北将军、监冀州诸军事，都授给符节。
English: Grand Master Sima Yue returned to Xuchang, and conferred the Fu Festival to the Goga official as the general of the Fuzhong army, the governor of Qing and Shandong provinces as military officers, and the Ding Shouga official as the general of Ningbei and the military officers of Jianji Prefecture.

古文：晞屡破强寇，威名甚盛，善治繁剧，用法严峻。
现代文：苟多次打败强大的敌寇，威名远扬，他善于治理繁重复杂的事务，运用刑法严峻。
English: He repeatedly defeated powerful enemy raiders, and his reputation spread far and wide. He was good at managing heavy and complicated affairs, and was strict in applying criminal law.

古文：其从母依之，晞奉养甚厚。
现代文：他的姨母投靠他。苟非常周到地侍奉赡养。
English: His aunt came to live with him and was a very good provider.

古文：从母子求为将，晞不许，曰： 吾不以王法贷人，将无后悔邪！ 
现代文：姨母为她的儿子求职想做部将，苟不同意，说： 我不拿王法去宽贷别人，你可不要后悔呀！ 
English: My aunt, who was looking for a job for her son, who wanted to be a captain, vehemently disagreed, saying, "I don't take Wang Fa to give loans to others. Don't regret it!

古文：固求之，晞乃以为督护；后犯法，晞杖节斩之，从母叩头救之，不听。
现代文：姨母坚持为儿子求官，苟不得已让他担任督护。后来他犯了法，苟手持符节把他杀了，姨母叩头求救，苟不听。
English: His aunt insisted on applying for a position for her son, and had no choice but to let him serve as a supervisor. Later, he broke the law, and she killed him while holding a rune in her hand. Her aunt begged for help, but he wouldn't listen.

古文：既而素服哭之曰： 杀卿者，兗州刺史；哭弟者，苟道将也。 
现代文：后来苟又换上素净的衣服去哭他说： 杀你的，是兖州刺史，来哭弟弟的，是苟道将。 
English: Later, Gou changed into plain clothes again and went to cry. He said, "The one who killed you is Zhangzhou Zushi, and the one who came to cry for his brother is Gou Daojing."

古文：胡部大张㔨督、冯莫突等，拥众数千，壁于上党，石勒往从之，因说㔨督等曰： 刘单于举兵击晋，部大拒而不从，自度终能独立乎？ 
现代文：道将是苟的字。胡人首领部大张督、冯莫突等人，有部众几千人，在上党设置军垒，石勒去投奔他们。石勒对张督等人说： 单于刘渊举兵攻打晋朝，您抗拒而不随从，自己考虑一下能够最终独立吗？ 
English: The way will be the word of Gou. The Hu people's leaders, such as Zhang Cang, Feng Motu, and others, with a total of several thousand people, set up military fortifications in Shangdang, and Shi Le went to join them. Shi Le said to Zhang Cang and others: If Liu Yuan alone raised an army to attack Jin Dynasty, would you resist and not follow, and consider for yourself whether you can finally become independent?

古文：曰： 不能。 
现代文：张督等人回答说： 不能。 
English: Sudet answered: "Impossible.

古文：勒曰： 然则安可不早有所属！
现代文：石勒说： 那怎么能不早点找一靠山！
English: Shearer said: "How could I not have found a sponsor sooner?

古文：今部落皆已受单于赏募，往往聚议，欲叛部大而归单于矣。 
现代文：现在部落都已经接受了单于的赏赐招募，常常在一起商议，想背叛部下而投归单于了。 
English: Now that the clans have accepted the rewards and recruitment of the Shanyu, they often consult together and want to betray their subordinates and return to the Shanyu.

古文：㔨督等以为然。
现代文：张督等人认为说得对。
English: Zhang Du and others believe that Mao was right.

古文：冬，十月，督等随勒单骑归汉，汉王渊署㔨督为亲汉王，莫突为都督部大，以勒为辅汉将军、平晋王，以统之。
现代文：冬季，十月，张督等人随石勒骑马投归汉，汉王刘渊封张督为亲汉王，冯莫突为都督部大，任石勒为辅汉将军，并封平晋王，以统率他们。
English: In winter, October, Zhang Du and others rode with Shi Le to return to Han, Han King Liu Yuan appointed Zhang Du as the pro-Han king, Feng Motsu as the governor-general, appointed Shi Le as the auxiliary Han general, and appointed Ping Jin Wang to lead them.

古文：乌桓张伏利度有众二千，壁于乐平，渊屡招，不能致。
现代文：乌桓人张伏利度有二千部众，在乐平设置军垒，刘渊每次去招募，都没有成功。
English: Wu Huan's Zhang Fuli had two thousand troops and set up a military base in Leping. Liu Yuan's attempts to recruit soldiers were unsuccessful.

古文：勒伪获罪于渊，往奔伏利度；伏利度喜，结为兄弟，使勒帅诸胡寇掠，所向无前，诸胡畏服。
现代文：石勒假装在刘渊那里犯了罪，去投奔张伏利度，张伏利度很高兴，与石勒结拜成兄弟，派石勒带领各部胡人去抢劫，所向无敌，各部胡人都敬畏佩服。
English: Shi Le pretended that he had committed a crime at Liu Yuan's place and went to visit Zhang Fuli Du. Zhang Fuli Du was very happy. He became a brother with Shi Le and sent Shi Le to lead all the Hu people to rob. He was invincible, and all the Hu people were awed and admired.

古文：勒知众心之附己，乃因会执伏利度，谓诸胡曰： 今起大事，我与伏利度谁堪为主？ 
现代文：石勒知道大家的心都已归向自己，于是趁聚会时抓住张伏利度，对各部胡人说： 今天要干大事，我与张伏利度谁能够成为首领？ 
English: Shi Le knew that everyone's hearts had turned to him, so he took advantage of the gathering to seize Zhang Fuli Du and said to all the Hu people: Today we must do great things. Who can become the leader between me and Zhang Fuli Du?

古文：诸胡咸推勒。
现代文：各部胡人都推举石勒。
English: Hu people from all walks of life voted for Shi Le.

古文：勒于是释伏利度，帅其众归汉。
现代文：石勒于是放了张伏利度，率部众投归汉。
English: Shi Le then released Zhang Fuli Du and led the people to return to Han.

古文：渊加勒督山东征诸军事，以伏利度之众配之。
现代文：刘渊给石勒加职为督山东征讨诸军事，把张伏利度的部众交给石勒指挥。
English: Liu Yuan promoted Shi Le to the post of military governor of the Shandong Expedition, and gave Shi Le the command of his subordinates.

古文：十一月，戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，戊申朔，出现日食。
English: November, Wu Shenshuo, solar eclipse.

古文：甲寅，以尚书右仆射和郁为征北将军，镇鄴。
现代文：甲寅，朝廷任尚书右仆射和郁为征北将军，镇守邺城。
English: Emperor Jiajing appointed Shangshu's right-hand men, Jia and Yu, as Northern Expeditionary Generals and town guards.

古文：乙亥，以王衍为司徒。
现代文：乙亥，任王衍为司徒。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Wang Yan was appointed as a disciple.

古文：衍说太傅越曰： 朝廷危乱，当赖方伯，宜得文武兼资以任之。 
现代文：王衍对太傅司马越说： 朝廷出现危险变乱，应当依靠地方最高长官，找得文武兼备的人加以任用。 
English: Wang Yan said to the daifu Sima Yue: In the event of a dangerous disturbance in the imperial court, it is necessary to rely on the highest local officials and find people who are both literate and armed to be appointed.

古文：乃以弟澄为荆州都督，族弟敦为青州刺史，语之曰： 荆州有江、汉之固，青州有负海之险，卿二人在外而吾居中，足以为三窟矣。 
现代文：于是让弟弟王澄任荆州都督，族弟王敦为青州刺史，王衍告诉他们说： 荆州有江、汉的坚固，青州有靠海的险要，你二人在外面而我在朝中，足以成为狡兔的三窟了。 
English: So he appointed his younger brother Wang Cheng as the governor of Jingzhou and his younger brother Wang Dun as the governor of Qingzhou. Wang Yan told them: Jingzhou has rivers, Han is strong, Qingzhou has a close proximity to the sea, you two are outside and I am in the middle of the court, which is enough to become the three caves of the cunning rabbit.

古文：澄至镇，以郭舒为别驾，委以府事。
现代文：王澄到任所，让郭舒担任别驾，将都督府的事务都交给了他。
English: When Wang Cheng arrived at his post, he asked Guo Shu to act as his second-in-command and handed over all the affairs of the prefectural government to him.

古文：澄日夜纵酒，不亲庶务，虽寇戎交急，不以为怀。
现代文：王澄则日夜纵情喝酒，不亲理事务，虽然盗贼军情紧急，也不放在心上。
English: Wang Cheng, on the other hand, indulges in drinking day and night, does not attend to family affairs, and does not care about the urgent military situation of the thieves.

古文：舒常切谏，以为宜爱民养兵，保全州境，澄不从。
现代文：郭舒常常苦苦劝谏，认为应当爱护人民保养军队，这样来使州境稻两保全，王澄不采纳。
English: Guo Shu often tried to persuade Wang Cheng that it was necessary to protect the people and maintain the army in order to protect the state's borders, but Wang Cheng refused.

古文：十二月，戊寅，乞活田甄、田兰、薄盛等起兵，为新蔡王腾报仇，斩汲桑于乐陵。
现代文：十二月，戊寅，随司马腾 乞活 的州将田甄、田兰、薄盛等人起兵，为新蔡王司马腾报仇，在乐陵杀了汲桑。
English: In December, Wu Yin, along with Tian Zhen, Tian Lan, Bo Sheng and others from the state where Sima Teng was begging for a living, raised an army to avenge the new king, Sima Teng, and killed Kuisang in Leling.

古文：弃成都王颖棺于故井中，颖故臣收葬之。
现代文：把成都王司马颖的棺材丢弃到故井里，司马颖的故臣又收拾好棺材安葬了。
English: The coffin of Chengdu's Wang Sima Ying was thrown into the well, and Sima Ying's father-in-law packed up the coffin and buried it.

古文：甲午，以前太傅刘实为太尉，实以老固辞，不许。
现代文：甲午，朝廷任前太傅刘为太尉，刘以年事高坚决推辞，但不批准。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, the imperial court appointed Liu, a former taifu, as a taifu. Liu, with his advanced age, firmly declined, but did not approve.

古文：庚子，以光禄大夫高光为尚书令。
现代文：庚子，任光禄大夫高光为尚书令。
English: Geng Zi, Ren Guanglu, and Gao Guanglu, the doctor of Ren Guanglu, signed the document.

古文：前北军中候吕雍、度支校尉陈颜等，谋立清河王覃为太子；事觉，太傅越矫诏囚覃于金墉城。
现代文：前北军中侯吕雍、度支校尉陈颜等人密谋立清河王司马覃为太子，事情暴露，太傅司马越假称诏令把司马覃囚禁在金墉城。
English: Lyu Yong, a former middle vassal of the Northern Army, Chen Yan, a lieutenant of the Wudu detachment, and others conspired to make Sima Yu, the king of the Qing River, the crown prince. The affair was exposed, and the Taifu Sima Yue imprisoned Sima Yu in Jinyuan City under the pretense of issuing a royal edict.

古文：初，太傅越与苟晞亲善，引升堂，结为兄弟。
现代文：起初太傅司马越与苟关系很亲近，带他进入后堂，结拜为兄弟。
English: At first, Grand Master Sima Yue was very close to Gou, and took him into the back hall to make him a brother.

古文：司马潘滔说越曰： 兗州冲要，魏武以之创业。
现代文：司马藩滔对司马越说： 兖州地处险要，魏武帝从这儿创业。
English: Sima Fang said to Sima Yue: Zhangzhou is in a critical situation, Emperor Wei Wudi started business from here.

古文：苟晞有大志，非纯臣也，久令处之，则患生心腹矣。
现代文：苟有大志向，不是纯粹的臣下，让他在这里呆久了，就会成为心腹祸患。
English: He is ambitious and not a pure vassal. If he is allowed to stay here for a long time, he will become a source of trouble.

古文：若迁于青州，厚其名号，晞必悦。
现代文：如果把他调迁到青州，提高他的名号，苟一定高兴。
English: If he is transferred to Qingzhou and his reputation is enhanced, I will definitely be happy.

古文：公自牧兗州，经纬诸夏，籓卫本朝，此所谓为之于未乱者也。 
现代文：您亲自管理兖州，规划治理全国，藩卫朝廷，这就是所谓防患于未然。 
English: You personally manage Zhangzhou, plan and govern the whole country, and defend the imperial court. This is the so-called prevention in advance.

古文：越以为然。
现代文：司马越认为说得正确。
English: Sima Yue thinks this is correct.

古文：癸卯，越自为丞相，领兗州牧，都督兗、豫、司、冀、幽、并诸军事。
现代文：癸卯，司马越自任丞相，兼充州牧，都督兖、豫、司、冀、幽、并诸军事。
English: At the same time, Sima Yue appointed himself as chancellor, and also served as the provincial governor, and the governors of the capital were Yu, Yu, Ji, Ji, Yu, and the military.

古文：以晞为征东大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中、假节、都督青州诸军事，领青州刺史，封东平郡公。
现代文：让苟任征东大将军、开府仪同三司、加任侍中，授予符节，都督青州诸军事、兼青州刺史，封东平郡公。
English: Zhang Guo was appointed as the general of Dongda, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three offices, the additional appointment of the chamberlain, the awarding of the symbols, the military governor of Qingzhou, the official historian of Qingzhou, and the governor of Dongping County.

古文：越、晞由是有隙。
现代文：司马越、苟之间因此产生怨恨。
English: This caused resentment between Sima Yue and Gou.

古文：晞至青州，以严刻立威，日行斩戮，州人胃之 屠伯 。
现代文：苟到青州，以严刑酷法建立威严，每天都有杀戮，青州人称他为 屠伯 。
English: After arriving in Qingzhou, he established his authority with harsh punishments and cruel laws. There were killings every day. The people of Qingzhou called him "Tuo Bo."

古文：顿丘太守魏植为流民所逼，众五六万，大掠兗州，晞出屯无盐以讨之。
现代文：顿丘太守魏植迫于流民，聚众五六万人，到兖州大肆抢掠，苟出兵在无盐驻扎，来讨伐魏植。
English: Dongqiu Taishu Wei Zhi was pressed by the displaced people, gathered a crowd of fifty or sixty thousand people, went to Zhangzhou to plunder, and sent soldiers to settle in Wanshan to fight Wei Zhi.

古文：以弟纯领青川，刑杀更甚于晞。
现代文：让弟弟苟纯兼任青州刺史，苟纯刑罚杀戮比苟还要厉害。
English: Let brother Guochun concurrently serve as the history of Qingzhou, Guochun's punishment killing is more severe than Guochun's.

古文：晞讨植，破之。
现代文：苟讨伐魏植，打败了他。
English: He fought against Wei Zhi and defeated him.

古文：初，阳平刘灵，少贫贱，力制奔牛，走及奔马，时人虽异之，莫能举也。
现代文：当初，阳平人刘灵，年轻时贫穷低贱，力气大得能制服奔跑着的牛，跑起来能与奔马相比，当时的人们虽然认为他不同寻常，但却无人推举他。
English: At the beginning, Liu Ling, a Yangping man, was poor and humble when he was young, and his strength was so great that he could subdue a running ox, and his running could be compared to that of a galloping horse. Although people at the time thought he was unusual, no one nominated him.

古文：灵抚膺叹曰： 天乎，何当乱也！ 
现代文：刘灵抚胸感叹说： 天啊，为什么赶上乱世呢？ 
English: Liu Ling stroked his chest and sighed, "Oh my God, why do we have to catch up with the chaotic world?

古文：及公师籓起，灵自称将军，寇掠赵、魏。
现代文：等到公师藩起兵，刘灵自称将军，进犯抢掠赵、魏地区。
English: When the army of the Gongshi clan was raised, Liu Ling claimed to be a general and attacked and plundered the Zhao and Wei regions.

古文：会王弥为苟纯所败，灵亦为王赞所败，遂俱遣使降汉。
现代文：王弥被苟纯打败时，刘为也被王赞打败，于是他们都派使者向汉投降。
English: When Wang Mi was defeated by Gochun, Liu Bei was also defeated by Wang Zan, so they both sent envoys to surrender to Han.

古文：汉拜弥镇东大将军、青徐二州牧、都督缘海诸军事，封东莱公；以灵为平北将军。
现代文：汉王刘渊任命王弥为镇东大将军，青徐二州牧，都督缘海诸军事，封东莱公。任命刘灵为平北将军。
English: Han King Liu Yuan appointed Wang Ya as the general of the town of Dongda, Qing Xu as the governor of the two states, the military governor of the whole country, and the governor of Donglai, and appointed Liu Ling as the general of Pingbei.

古文：李钊至宁州，州人奉钊领州事。
现代文：李钊到宁州，州里的人们尊奉李钊兼理州刺史事务。
English: When Li Hongzhi came to Ningzhou, the people in Ningzhou honored Li Hongzhi and took charge of the state's historical affairs.

古文：治中毛孟诣京师，求刺史，累上奏，不见省。
现代文：治中毛孟到京城，请求朝廷委派刺史，多次上奏，没有被审理。
English: During the reign of Mao Meng, he went to Beijing and requested the imperial court to appoint a court historian. He appealed several times, but was not heard.

古文：孟曰： 君亡亲丧，幽闭穷城，万里诉哀，精诚无感，生不如死！ 
现代文：毛孟说： 州君已死，州城被围困，不远万里到朝廷倾诉悲哀，心意精诚而朝廷无动于衷，生不如死！ 
English: Mao Meng said: Guozhong is dead, the city of Guozhong is besieged, it is not far to the imperial court to pour out grief, the heart is sincere and the imperial court is indifferent, life is better than death!

古文：欲自刎，朝廷怜之，以魏兴大守王逊为宁州刺史，仍诏交州出兵救李钊。
现代文：就想自刎，朝廷怜惜他，让魏兴太守王逊任宁州刺史，同时诏令交州出兵救援李钊。
English: He wanted to commit suicide, but the imperial court took pity on him and allowed Wei Xing to appoint Wang Xun as the governor of Ningzhou to assassinate him. At the same time, the imperial edict ordered Jiaozhou to send troops to rescue Li Qian.

古文：交州刺史吾彦遣其子咨将兵救之。
现代文：交州刺史吾彦派他儿子吾咨带兵去救援李钊。
English: The governor of Jiaozhou, Shi Wuhang, sent his son, Wuzhe, to lead soldiers to rescue Li Yao.

古文：慕容廆自称鲜卑大单于。
现代文：慕容自称鲜卑大单于。
English: Murong claims to be a simple and humble person.

古文：拓跋禄官卒，弟猗卢总摄三部，与廆通好。
现代文：拓跋禄官去世，弟拓跋猗卢总管三部，与慕容结交友好。
English: After the death of Tuoba Lu, his younger brother Tuoba Lu, the head of the Third Department, became friends with Murong.

古文：永嘉二年
现代文：永嘉二年
English: The second year of Yongjia

古文：春，正月，丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月，丙午朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, New Year's Day, Mid-Autumn Festival, solar eclipse.

古文：丁未，大赦。
现代文：丁未，宣布大赦。
English: On March 11th, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：汉王渊遣抚军将军聪等十将南据太行，辅汉将军石勒等十将东下赵、魏。
现代文：汉王刘渊派遣抚军将军刘聪等十名将军向南占据太行，派辅汉将军石勒等十名将军向东到赵、魏地区。
English: Han King Liu Yuan dispatched General Liu Cong and ten other generals to occupy Taihang in the south, and sent General Shi Le and ten other generals to Zhao and Wei regions in the east.

古文：二月，辛卯，太傅越杀清河王覃。
现代文：二月，辛卯，太傅司马越杀死清河王司马覃。
English: In February, Xinwu, Taifu Sima Yue killed Qinghe Wang Sima Yao.

古文：庚子，石勒寇常山，王浚击破之。
现代文：庚子，石勒进犯常山，王浚击败了石勒。
English: Geng Zi and Shi Le attacked Changshan, and Wang Jun defeated Shi Le.

古文：凉州刺史张轨病风，口不能言，使其子茂摄州事。
现代文：凉州刺史张轨患风疾，不能说话，让他儿子张茂代理州政。
English: Zhang Liao, the statesman of Liangzhou, suffered from rheumatism and was unable to speak, so his son Zhang Mao became the acting governor.

古文：陇西内史晋昌张越，凉州大族，欲逐轨而代之，与其兄酒泉太守镇及西平太守曹祛，谋遣使诣长安告南阳王模，称轨废疾，请以秦州刺史贾龛代之。
现代文：陇西内史晋昌人张越，是凉州名门望族，想驱逐张轨后自己取代他的联位，与他哥哥酒泉太守张镇和西平太守曹商量，派使者到长安向南阳王司马模报告，说张轨因病残废，请求让秦州刺史贾龛取代他。
English: Zhang Yue, a member of the Jinchang dynasty in the history of western Fujian and a member of a prestigious family in Liangzhou, wanted to expel Zhang Railing and replace him with himself. He consulted with his brother, the Jiuquan governor Zhang Zhen, and the Xiping governor Cao, and sent an envoy to Chang'an to report to the Nanyang king Sima Miao that Zhang Railing was disabled due to illness, and requested that the Qin State governor Jia Wei replace him.

古文：龛将受之，其兄让龛曰： 张凉州一时名士，威著西州，汝何德以代之！ 
现代文：贾龛将要接受新职，他哥哥责备贾龛说： 凉州张轨是当代名士，威名传播于西州地区，你有什么德望来代替张轨呢？ 
English: Jia Wei is about to accept a new position. His brother scolded Jia Wei and said: Liangzhou Zhang Rail is a contemporary celebrity, and his fame has spread to the Xizhou region. What do you have to do to replace Zhang Rail?

古文：龛乃止。
现代文：贾龛于是没有去接受这个取务。
English: As a result, Jia Wei did not accept the assignment.

古文：镇、祛上疏，更请刺史，未报；遂移檄废轨，以军司杜耽摄州事，使耽表越为刺史。
现代文：张镇、曹向朝廷上奏章，请求另行任命刺史，没有回音。于是发布檄文废除张轨的职务，让军司杜耽代理州政，又让杜耽表奏任命张越为刺史。
English: Zhang Zhen and Cao petitioned the imperial court to appoint Zhang Yue as the chief historian, but there was no response. Therefore, an imperial edict was issued to abolish Zhang Guoli's post, let the military secretary Du Tan act as the state government, and let Du Tan appoint Zhang Yue as the chief historian.

古文：轨下教，欲避位，归老宜阳。
现代文：张轨下发告谕，想辞去职位，告老回故乡宜阳。
English: He issued a notice, saying that he wanted to resign from his post and return to his hometown of Yiyang.

古文：长史王融、参军孟畅蹋折镇檄，排阁入言曰： 晋室多故，明公抚宁西夏，张镇兄弟敢肆凶逆，当鸣鼓诛之。 
现代文：长史王融、参军孟畅用脚碎踏张镇的檄文，推开门进去说： 晋朝多变故，您安抚平定西夏地区，张镇兄弟胆敢肆意逞凶叛逆，应当鸣鼓诛讨他们。 
English: Wang Rong, the chief historian, and Meng Chang, a member of the army, trampled on Zhang Zhen's memorial with their feet, pushed open the door and said: "Since the Jin Dynasty is changeable, you should pacify the Xixia region. If Zhang Zhen's brothers dare to be rebellious, they should be beaten with drums.

古文：遂出，戒严。
现代文：说完出去，在城中戒严。
English: After that, martial law will be imposed in the city.

古文：会轨长子实自京师还，乃以实为中督护，将兵讨镇。
现代文：正赶上张轨的大儿子张从京城回来，于是就让张任中都护，带兵讨伐张镇。
English: Zhang's eldest son, Zhang, who was catching up with Zhang Rail, came back from Beijing, so he asked Zhang to be the protector of the capital and lead an army to fight against Zhang Town.

古文：遣镇甥太府主簿令狐亚先往说镇，为陈利害，镇流涕曰： 人误我！ 
现代文：并派张镇的外甥都督府主簿令狐亚先去说服张镇，向他陈说利害关系，张镇流着眼泪说： 有人坑害我！ 
English: He also sent Zhang Zhen's nephew, the chief accountant of the governor's office, to persuade Fuxia to go to Zhang Zhen first and tell him about the conflict of interest. Zhang Zhen shed tears and said, "Someone is undermining me!"

古文：乃诣实归罪。
现代文：于是到张那里认罪受罚。
English: So he went to Zhang to plead guilty and was punished.

古文：实南击曹祛，走之。
现代文：张向南攻打曹，曹败走。
English: Zhang went south to attack Cao, but Cao was defeated and left.

古文：朝廷得镇、祛疏，以侍中袁瑜为凉州刺史。
现代文：朝廷接到张镇、曹的那份奏章，就任命侍中袁瑜为凉州刺史。
English: When the imperial court received Zhang Zhen and Cao's report, they appointed Yuan Yu, the chamberlain, as the official historian of Liangzhou.

古文：治中杨澹驰诣长安，割耳盘上，诉轨之被诬。
现代文：州治中杨澹跃马奔向长安，割掉耳朵放在盘上，诉说张轨被诬陷的情况。
English: During the state administration, Yang Jieyue Ma ran to Chang'an, cut off his ear and put it on a plate, telling the situation that Zhang Rail was framed.

古文：南阳王模表请停瑜，武威太守张琠亦上表留轨；诏依模所表，且命诛曹祛。
现代文：南阳王司马模表奏停止任命袁瑜，武威太守张亦上奏表挽留张轨，朝廷诏令按照司马模所奏的办，并且诏令诛杀曹。
English: Nanyang King Sima Miao issued a proclamation to stop the appointment of Yuan Yu. Wuwei's grand vizier Zhang also issued a proclamation to hold back the appointment. The imperial court issued a proclamation in accordance with the proclamation issued by Sima Miao, and also issued a proclamation to kill Cao.

古文：轨于是命实帅步骑三万讨祛，斩之。
现代文：张轨于是命令张率领三万步兵和骑兵讨伐曹，把曹斩首。
English: Zhang Rail then ordered Zhang to lead thirty thousand infantry and cavalry to fight Cao and behead him.

古文：张越奔鄴，凉州乃定。
现代文：张越逃奔到邺城，凉州于是安定。
English: Zhang Yue fled to Licheng, and Liangzhou became stable.

古文：三月，太傅越自许昌徙镇鄄城。
现代文：三月，太傅司马越从许昌迁徙到鄄城镇守。
English: In March, Taifu Sima Yue moved from Xuchang to be the governor of Handan Town.

古文：王弥收集亡散，兵复大振。
现代文：王弥收拢聚集流亡逃散的残兵，军队重新大为振作。
English: Wang Ya gathered together the remnants of the exiled and dispersed soldiers, and the army was greatly invigorated.

古文：分遣诸将攻掠青、徐、兗、豫四州，所过攻陷郡县，多杀守令，有众数万；苟晞与之连战，不能克。
现代文：王弥又派遣部将们分别攻打抢掠青州、徐州、兖州、豫州等地，攻陷郡和县，把郡守、县令大多杀掉，聚集了几万部众。苟与王弥的军队接连交战，没有能够取胜。
English: Wang Ya also dispatched generals to attack and plunder Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Ganzhou, and Yuzhou, respectively, and captured counties and counties, killed most of the county governors and county magistrates, and gathered tens of thousands of followers. Gou and Wang Ya's army fought one after another, and were unable to win.

古文：夏，四月，丁亥，弥入许昌。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁亥，王弥攻入许昌。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Hai and Wang Ya invaded Xu Chang.

古文：太傅越遣司马王斌帅甲士五千人入卫京师，张轨亦遣督护北宫纯将兵卫京师。
现代文：太傅司马越派遣担任司马的王斌带领五千兵卒进京城防卫，张轨也派遣督护北宫纯带兵保卫京城。
English: Grand Master Sima Yue dispatched Wang Bin, who served as Sima, to lead five thousand soldiers into the defense of the capital, and Zhang Rail also dispatched the guard of the North Palace to protect the capital.

古文：五月，弥入自轘辕，败官军于伊北，京师大震，宫城门昼闭。
现代文：五月，王弥从辕出发，在伊水以北打败官军，京城大为震动，宫城门白天也关闭。
English: In May, Wang Ya set out from Handan and defeated the government army north of Yishui. The capital was greatly shaken, and the Miyagi Gate was closed during the day.

古文：壬戌，弥至洛阳，屯于津阳门。
现代文：壬戌，王弥到达洛阳，在津阳门驻扎。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River, Wang Ya arrived in Luoyang and stationed at the Tsuyang Gate.

古文：诏以王衍都督征讨诸军事。
现代文：诏令以王衍指挥征讨王弥的各项军事行动。
English: The imperial edict ordered Wang Yan to command the various military operations to subjugate Wang Ya.

古文：甲子，衍与王斌等出战，北宫纯募勇士百馀人突陈，弥兵大败。乙丑，弥烧建春门而东，衍遣左卫将军王秉追之，战于七里涧，又败之。
现代文：北宫纯招募一百多勇士突袭王弥兵阵，王弥的军队大败。乙丑，王弥放火烧建春门后向东逃窜，王衍派左卫将军王秉追击他，在七里涧交战，又打败了王弥。
English: Bei Gongjun recruited more than a hundred warriors to raid Wang Mi's army, and Wang Mi's army suffered a great defeat. Second, Wang Mi set fire to Jianchun Gate and fled to the east. Wang Yan sent the left guard general Wang Bing to chase him. They fought for seven miles and defeated Wang Mi.

古文：弥走渡河，与王桑自轵关如平阳。
现代文：王弥逃跑渡过黄河，与王桑从轵关到平阳。
English: Wang Mi fled across the Yellow River and went with Wang Sang from Shaoguan to Pingyang.

古文：汉王渊遣侍中兼御史大夫郊迎，令曰： 孤亲行将军之馆，拂席洗爵，敬待将军。 
现代文：汉王刘渊派侍中兼御史大夫到郊外迎接，命令说： 我将亲自去将军的府第，擦拭座席清洗酒爵，诚心诚意对待将军。 
English: Han King Liu Yuan sent an aide-de-camp and chief historian to the outskirts to meet the general, and ordered: I will personally go to the general's residence, wipe the seats, clean the wine glasses, and sincerely treat the general.

古文：及至，拜司隶校尉，加侍中、特进，以桑为散骑侍郎。
现代文：王弥到后，任他为司隶校尉、兼侍中，并授以特进职位。任王桑为散骑侍郎。
English: After Wang Ya's arrival, he was appointed as the first lieutenant of the Division of Cadets, and also as an attendant, and was given the position of special promotion. Wang Sang was appointed as a horseback cavalry attendant.

古文：北宫纯等与汉刘聪战于河东，败之。
现代文：北宫纯与汉刘聪的军队在河东交战，打败了刘聪。
English: Bei Gongjun fought with Han Liu Cong's army in Hedong and defeated Liu Cong.

古文：诏封张轨西平郡公，轨辞不受。
现代文：诏令封张轨为西平郡公，张轨推辞而不接受。
English: The imperial edict designated Zhang Rail as the county magistrate of Xiping County, but Zhang Rail refused to accept it.

古文：时州郡之使，莫有至者，轨独遣使贡献，岁时不绝。
现代文：当时各州郡都没有到京城的使者，只有张轨独自派遣使者进贡，每年都不中断。
English: At that time, there were no envoys from all prefectures and counties to the capital, only Zhang Railing alone sent envoys to pay tribute, every year without interruption.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，汉王渊寇平阳，太守宋抽弃郡走，河东太守路述战死；渊徙都蒲子。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲辰，汉王刘渊进犯平阳，太守宋抽丢下郡城逃跑，河东太守路述战死。刘渊迁都到蒲子县。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Jia Chen, the Han King Liu Yuan invaded Pingyang, the governor Song Yu abandoned the county seat and fled, and the governor of Hedong died in battle. Liu Yuan moved the capital to Puzi County.

古文：上郡鲜卑陆逐延、氐酋单征并降于汉。
现代文：上郡鲜卑人陆逐延、氐人酋长单征都向汉投降。
English: Shang County's Xianbei people were forced to leave the country, and the leaders of the Xiongnu people were forced to surrender to Han.

古文：八月，丁亥，太傅越自鄄城徙屯濮阳；未几，又徙屯荥阳。
现代文：八月，丁亥，太傅司马越从鄄城迁徙到濮阳驻扎，没有多久，又迁徙到荥阳驻扎。
English: In August, Dinghai, Taifu Sima Yue migrated from Fucheng to stay in Fenyang. Not long after, he also migrated to stay in Fenyang.

古文：九月，汉王弥、石勒寇鄴，和郁弃城走。
现代文：九月，汉国王弥、石勒进犯邺城，守将和郁弃城而逃。
English: In September, the Han kings Ya and Shile invaded Yingcheng, and Gu Zheng and Yu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：诏豫州刺史裴宪屯白马以拒弥，车骑将军王堪屯东燕以拒勒，平北将军曹武屯大阳以备蒲子。
现代文：诏令豫州刺史裴宪在白马驻扎以抵御王弥；车骑将军王堪在东燕驻扎以抵御石勒；平北将军曹武驻扎在大阳以护备蒲子。
English: He ordered the Yuzhou general Shi Pei Xian to be stationed in Baima to defend against Wang Ya; the cavalry general Wang Kan to be stationed in Dongyan to defend against Shi Le; and the general Cao Wu of Pingbei to be stationed in Dayang to defend against Pu Zi.

古文：宪，楷之子也。
现代文：裴宪是裴楷的儿子。
English: Pei Xian is the son of Pei Kai.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，汉王渊即皇帝位，大赦，改元永凤。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲戌，汉王刘渊即皇帝位，宣布大赦，改年号为永凤。
English: In winter, in October, in Jiaozuo, the Han king Liu Yuan, that is, the emperor, announced an amnesty and changed the year name to Yongfeng.

古文：十一月，以其子和为大将军，聪为车骑大将军，族子曜为龙骧大将军。
现代文：十一月，任命他儿子刘和为大将军，刘聪为车骑大将军，同族侄子刘曜为龙骧大将军。
English: In November, he appointed his son Liu He as grand general, Liu Cong as grand general of chariot and cavalry, and his nephew Liu You as grand general of dragon boat.

古文：壬寅，并州刺史刘琨使上党太守刘惇帅鲜卑攻壶关，汉镇东将军綦毋达战败亡归。
现代文：壬寅，并州刺史刘琨让上党太守刘带领鲜卑人攻打关，汉的镇东将军綦毋达战败而逃回。
English: Ren Yin, and the state chief Liu Wei let the party leader Liu Wei lead the Xianbei people to attack Guan, and Han's Zhendong General Wei escaped without being defeated.

古文：丙午，汉都督中外诸军事、大司马、领丞相右贤王宣卒。
现代文：丙午，汉国都督中外诸军事、兼丞相、右贤王刘宣去世。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Liu Xuan, the military governor of Han, the concurrent prime minister, and the king of right virtue, passed away.

古文：石勒、刘灵帅众三万寇魏郡、汲郡、顿丘，百姓望风降附者五十馀垒；皆假垒主将军、都尉印绶，简其强壮五万为军士，老弱安堵如故。
现代文：石勒、刘灵率领三万人进犯魏郡、汲郡、顿丘等地，五十多个村垒的百姓望风投降，石勒对全部村垒头目都授给将军、都尉的印章和绶带，并从百姓中挑选了五万强壮者作为兵士，对老弱病残的百姓仍让他们在原地安居。
English: Shi Le and Liu Ling led 30,000 people to invade Wei County, Kui County, Dongqiu and other places, and the people of more than 50 villages waited for the wind to surrender. Shi Le awarded the seals and ribbons of generals and captains to all village leaders, and selected 50,000 strong people from the people as soldiers. For the old, weak and sick people, they still let them live in the same place.

古文：己酉，勒执魏郡太守王粹于三台，杀之。十二月，辛未朔，大赦。
现代文：己酉，石勒在三台抓住并杀了魏郡太守王粹。十二月，辛未朔，宣布大赦。
English: In Ji'an, Shiller caught and killed Wang Zi, the governor of Wei County, in Sandai. In December, Xin Wei Shuo announced an amnesty.

古文：乙亥，汉主渊以大将军和为大司马，封梁王；尚书令欢乐为大司徒，封陈留王；后父御史大夫呼延翼为大司空，封雁门郡公；宗室以亲疏悉封郡县王，异姓以功伐悉封郡县公侯。
现代文：乙亥，汉主刘渊任大将军刘和为大司马，封为梁王。任尚书令欢乐为大司徒，封为陈留王。任皇后的父亲御史大夫呼延翼为大司空，封雁门郡公。宗室当中根据亲疏都封给郡县王，异姓长官根据战功都封予郡县公侯。
English: In the reign of Emperor Yihai, Liu Yuan, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, appointed General Liu He as the grand steward, and he was given the title of Liang Wang. He appointed Shang Shuling Zhuang as the grand steward, and he was given the title of Chen Liu Wang. The father of the reigning empress, Goshi Daifu Huan Ying, was the grand steward, and he was given the title of Ganmen County Prince. Among the royal families, according to their relatives, they were all given the title of county king, and according to their war exploits, they were all given the title of county prince.

古文：成尚书令杨褒卒。
现代文：成汉尚书令杨褒去世。
English: Chenghan Shang Shuling Yang Bo passed away.

古文：褒好直言，成主雄初得蜀，用度不足，诸将有以献金银得官者，褒谏曰： 陛下设官爵，当网罗天下英豪，何有以官买金邪！ 
现代文：杨褒喜欢直言，成汉主李雄刚刚占据蜀地时，费用不够，部将当中有因为捐献金银财物而得到职任的人，杨褒劝谏说： 陛下设置官职爵位，应该网罗天下的英雄豪杰，哪里有用官职换取金钱的道理？ 
English: Yang Bo liked to speak frankly. When the lord of the Han Dynasty, Li Xiong, had just occupied Shu, the expenses were not enough. Among the ministers, there were people who were appointed because of the donation of gold, silver and property. Yang Bo advised Zou to say: Your Majesty has set up official titles and ranks, and should catch the world's heroes and heroines. Where is the reason for using official positions in exchange for money?

古文：雄谢之。
现代文：李雄向他谢罪。
English: Li Xiong apologized to him.

古文：雄尝醉，推中书令杖太官令，褒进曰： 天子穆穆，诸侯皇皇。
现代文：李雄曾经喝醉了酒，让中书令杖打太官令，杨褒进言说： 天子威仪庄严，诸侯仪态端正。
English: Li Xiong once got drunk and let the Chinese characters "令杖" play "太官令." Yang Bao said: "Heavenly majesty is solemn, and the state of the princes is proper."

古文：安有天子而为酗也！ 
现代文：哪里有天子酗酒的道理！ 
English: Where is the reason for God's son to be an alcoholic!

古文：雄惭而止。
现代文：李雄感到惭愧而停止了酗酒。
English: Li Xiong felt ashamed and stopped drinking.

古文：成平寇将军李凤屯晋寿，屡寇汉中，汉中民东走荆沔。诏以张光为梁州刺史。
现代文：成汉的平寇将军李凤在晋寿驻扎，多次进犯汉中，汉中百姓向东逃难到荆州、沔阳一带，朝廷诏令任张光为梁州刺史。
English: The Genghis Khan's general Li Feng was stationed in Jin Shou and repeatedly invaded Hanzhong. The people of Hanzhong fled eastward to the areas of Jingzhou and Shenyang. The imperial court ordered Zhang Guang to make history in Liangzhou.

古文：荆州寇盗不禁，诏起刘璠为顺阳刺史，江、汉间翕然归之。
现代文：荆州的强盗窃贼不能禁绝，朝廷诏令起用刘璠为顺阳内史，于是，江、汉地区的百姓纷纷聚集归附刘。
English: The robbers and thieves in Jingzhou could not be stopped, and the imperial court issued a decree to use Liu Bei as the internal history of Shunyang. As a result, the people in the Jiang and Han regions gathered to join Liu.

