古文：索卢贞琅邪人胡勒颜畿余杭广曲阿人贺瑀食牛人丘友庾申李除
现代文：索卢贞琅邪人胡勒颜畿余杭广曲阿人贺瑀食牛人丘友庾申李除
English: Solu, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen, Zhen

古文：张导石长和古元之
现代文：张导石长和古元之
English: Zhang Guizhong and Gu Yuan

古文：索卢贞
现代文：索卢贞
English: Soluzhen

古文：北府索卢贞者，本中郎荀羡之吏也，以晋太元五年六月中病亡，经一宿而苏。
现代文：北府有位叫索卢贞的人，原是中郎将荀羡手下的官员，晋太元五年六月里病故了，但过了一夜突然又复活。
English: There was a person named Soluzhen in Beifu, who was originally an official under the command of Zhong Lang Zhaojun. He died of illness in June of the fifth year of the Jin Dynasty, but suddenly revived overnight.

古文：云，见羡之子粹，惊喜曰： 君算未尽。
现代文：说他在阴间看见了荀羡已死去的儿子荀粹。
English: He said that in the underworld he had seen his dead son, Xizir.

古文：然官须得三将，故不得便尔相放。
现代文：荀粹看见卢贞后又惊又喜地说， 你的阳寿还没到期，可是莫府需要选拔三名将军，所以我不敢私自行方便放掉你。
English: After seeing Lu Zhen, Hao Qi said with surprise and joy, "Your Yang Shou is not yet due, but Mo Prefecture needs to select three generals, so I dare not release you at my own convenience."

古文：君若知有干捷如君者，当以相代。 
现代文：不过你如果能推荐一个像你一样有才干的人，我就可以让他替换你，放你还阳。 
English: But if you can recommend someone who is as talented as you, I can have him replace you and let you go.

古文：卢贞即举龚颖。
现代文：卢贞就举荐了龚颖。
English: Lu Zhen recommended Liangying.

古文：粹曰： 颖堪事否？ 
现代文：荀粹问： 龚颖这人的才干怎么样？ 
English: Zou Zu asked: What is the talent of this person, Liangying?

古文：卢贞曰： 颖不复下己。 
现代文：卢贞说， 他一点也不比我差。 
English: Lu Zhen said, he is no worse than me.

古文：粹初令卢贞疏其名，缘书非鬼用，粹乃索笔，自书之，卢贞遂得出。
现代文：荀就让卢贞把龚颖的名字写下来，卢贞写了以后，荀羡一看他写的不是阴间通用的字，就要了笔亲自写下龚颖的名字，然后就放卢贞还阳了。
English: Yao asked Lu Zhen to write down the beautiful name. After Lu Zhen wrote it down, Yao envied that it was not a word commonly used in the underworld. He asked for a pen to write down the beautiful name himself, and then released Lu Zhen back to the sun.

古文：忽见一曾邻居者，死已七八年矣，为太山门主。
现代文：卢贞刚走出冥府，忽然遇见一位已死了七八年的邻居，现在是冥府太山门的门官。
English: Just after Lu Zhen walked out of the Hades, she suddenly met a neighbor who had been dead for seven or eight years, and is now the gatekeeper of the Hades Taishan Gate.

古文：谓卢贞曰： 索都督独得归耶？ 
现代文：这邻居对卢贞说， 索都督竟然独自被放回阳世了吗？ 
English: The neighbor said to Lu Zhen, was Sodudu alone returned to the sun?

古文：因嘱卢贞曰： 卿归，为谢我妇。我未死时，埋万五千钱于宅中大床下。
现代文：接着就拜托索卢贞说， 您还阳以后，请替我向我的妻子陪个罪，我生前曾偷偷在屋里的大床下埋了一万五千钱，想用这钱给女儿买副手镯子。
English: Then I asked Soluzhen to say, "After you return to the yang, please forgive my wife for me. During my lifetime, I secretly buried fifteen thousand dollars under the big bed in the house and wanted to use this money to buy my daughter a pair of pliers."

古文：我乃本欲与女市钏，不意奄终，不得言于妻女也。 
现代文：没想到我突然死了，没来得及告诉妻子和女儿。 
English: I didn't expect to die suddenly, before I could tell my wife and daughter.

古文：卢贞许之。
现代文：卢贞就答应了。
English: Lu Zhen agreed.

古文：及苏，遂使人报其妻。已卖宅移居武进矣。
现代文：卢贞还阳以后，就派人去告诉邻居的妻子，然而她已将原住的房子卖掉搬到武进去了。
English: After Lu Zhen returned to the sun, she sent someone to tell the neighbor's wife, but she had already sold the original house and moved to Wujin.

古文：因往语之，仍告买宅主，令掘之。果得钱如其数焉。即遣其妻与女市钏。
现代文：卢贞就亲自找到买房子的主人，把这事告诉他，并让他按说的地点挖掘，果然挖掘出了一万五千钱，于是就把钱给了邻居的妻子，给她女儿买了手镯。
English: Lu Zhen personally found the owner of the house to buy, told him about this, and asked him to dig at the said location. He successfully dug out 15,000 yuan, so he gave the money to the neighbor's wife and bought a bracelet for her daughter.

古文：寻而龚颖亦亡，时辈共奇其事。
现代文：不久，索卢贞向冥府推荐的那龚颖就死了。当时的人听说这件事后，都觉得十分奇怪。
English: Soon after, the beautiful horse that Soluzhen had recommended to Hades died, and people at the time thought it was very strange when they heard about it.

古文：琅邪人
现代文：琅邪人
English: 邪人

古文：琅邪人，姓王，忘名，居钱塘。
现代文：有个姓王的琅邪人，住在钱塘，忘了他名字是什么。
English: There was an evil man surnamed Wang who lived in Qiantang. I have forgotten his name.

古文：妻朱氏，以太元九年病亡，有三孤儿。
现代文：王某的妻子朱氏在晋代太元九年病故，留下三个孤儿。
English: Mr. Wang's wife, Ms. Zhu, died of illness in the ninth year of the Jin Dynasty, leaving three orphans.

古文：王复以其年四月暴死。
现代文：这年的四月，王某又突然死亡。
English: In April of this year, Wang died suddenly.

古文：因便送出，又活三十年。
现代文：王某死后看见二十多个穿黑衣的人拿着生死簿把他带到阴间一个白墙红门的宫殿里，宫殿里的官员们穿着红衣，系着白腰带，戴着黑帽扎着头巾，有的还穿着用珠玉连缀而成的袍服，都不像人世间的服饰。王某被官员们领到殿前，看见一个身材高大的人，穿的衣服好像是云雾似的，王某就向他磕头，并诉说妻子已经先死了，留下年幼的孩子，实在是太悲惨了，说着就痛哭起来。那位穿云衣的神被打动了，对王某说： 你的死是命中注定的，但念你的孤儿太可怜，我特别再多给你三年的阳寿吧。 王某仍然哭诉说： 三年的时间太短，我的孩子们仍然不能成人啊！ 这时那位神旁边有个人说， 你这个死鬼怎么这样痴？阴间的三年，就是阳世的三十年！ 接着就把王某放回人间，王某果然又活了三十年。
English: After Wang Mou's death, he saw more than twenty people dressed in black carrying a book of life and death and taking him to the underworld, to a palace with a white wall and a red door. The officials in the palace were dressed in red, wearing white belts, wearing black hats and headscarves, and some were also wearing robes made of jewels, which were not like the clothes of the world. Wang Mou was led by the officials to the front of the temple and saw a tall man dressed in clothes that looked like clouds. Wang Mou bowed his head to him and told him that his wife had died first, leaving behind young children. It was really too tragic. As he said this, he

古文：胡勒
现代文：胡勒
English: Hulot

古文：湖熟人胡勒，以隆安三年冬亡，三宿乃苏。
现代文：湖熟有个叫胡勒的人，隆安三年的冬天死去，过了三天又复活了。
English: There was a man called Hule who lived near the lake. He died in the winter of the third year of Longan and was resurrected three days later.

古文：云，为人所录，赭土封其鼻，以印印之，将至天门外。有三人从门出曰： 此人未应到，何故来？
现代文：他说被鬼抓去以后，用红泥堵住了鼻子并盖上了印记。胡勒被带到天门外时，见门里走出来三个人说， 这个人还不该来，怎么把他给抓来了？
English: He said that after he was caught by the ghost, he plugged his nose with red mud and stamped it. When Hule was taken outside the heavenly gate, three people came out of the door and said, This man should not have come, how did they catch him?

古文：且倮身无衣，不堪驱使。 
现代文：而且还光着身子连件衣服都没穿，能让他干点什么呢？ 
English: And he was naked, not even wearing any clothes. What could he do?

古文：所录勒者云： 下土所送，已摄来到。
现代文：抓胡勒的鬼说， 他是下面的土地神送来的，既然已经抓来了，就留下他。 
English: The ghost that caught Hule said, "He was sent by the land god below, and since he has already been caught, let him stay."

古文：当受之。 勒邻人张千载，死已经年，见在门上为亭长。
现代文：这时胡勒看见已经死了一年的邻居张千载也在这里，而且现在是天门上的亭长，就向他苦苦哀诉。
English: At this time, Hule saw that his neighbor Zhang Qizai, who had been dead for a year, was also here, and now he was the leader of the pavilion on the Heavenly Gate, and he complained bitterly to him.

古文：勒告诉之，千载入内，出语勒： 已语遣汝，便可去。 
现代文：张千载听后进了天门，不一会儿出来对胡勒说， 我已经替你求了情，现在答应放你回去，你可以去了。 
English: After listening, Zhang Qizai entered the Heavenly Gate, and soon came out to say to Hu Le, "I have begged for your forgiveness, and now I promise to let you go back, you can go."

古文：于是见人以杖挑其鼻土印封落地，恍惚而还。
现代文：于是鬼卒用棍子挑开封在胡勒鼻子上的红泥印，胡勒就恍恍忽忽地往回走。
English: So the policeman used a stick to pry open the red mud seal on Huller's nose, and Huller stumbled back.

古文：见有诸府舍门，或向东，或向南，皆白壁赤柱，禁卫严峻。
现代文：临走时看见天门附近有不少府宅，有的门朝东，有的门朝南，都是白墙红柱，警卫森严。
English: When he was about to leave, he saw many mansions near the Gate of Heaven, some facing east, some facing south, all with white walls and red pillars, and heavily guarded.

古文：始到门时，遥见千载叔文怀在曹舍料理文书。
现代文：他快到家门时，远远看见邻居张千载的叔叔张文怀在宅中的官房里整理文书，心想莫非张文怀也死了？
English: When he was about to reach his home, he saw Zhang Wenhuai, the uncle of his neighbor Zhang Qianlong, sorting out paperwork in the office in the house. He thought, "Could it be that Zhang Wenhuai is also dead?"

古文：文怀素强，闻勒此言，甚不信之。
现代文：胡勒还阳后，就对张文怀说了在阴曹看见他的事。
English: After Hule returned to the sun, he told Zhang Wenhuai that he had seen him in Yin Cao.

古文：后百余日，果亡。勒今为县吏。自说病时，悉脱衣在被中。及魂爽去，实倮身也。
现代文：胡勒现在是县衙的官员，据他自己说，他生病时脱光了衣服躺在被子里，所以鬼卒抓他到阴间去时，他才光着身子。
English: Hule, who is now an official at the county magistrate's office, said that when he was ill, he stripped off his clothes and lay in a quilt, so when the devil caught him and took him to the underworld, he was naked.

古文：颜畿
现代文：颜畿
English: Yanqi

古文：晋咸宁中，琅邪颜畿，字世都，得病，就医张瑳。死于瑳家。
现代文：晋代咸宁年间，琅琊有个姓颜名畿字世都的人，生病后请医生张瑳治疗，后来死在了张瑳家中。
English: During the Xianning Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty, there was a person with the surname Yan Naingqi and the name Shedu, who, after falling ill, asked the doctor Zhang Xi for treatment, and later died in Zhang Xi's home.

古文：家人迎丧，旐每绕树不可解。
现代文：颜家的人到张瑳家迎丧时，招魂幡常常缠在树上解不开。
English: When people from Yan's family come to Zhang Ye's house to mourn, the banner is often entangled in the tree and cannot be untied.

古文：乃托梦曰： 我寿命未应死，但服药太多，伤我五脏耳。
现代文：接着颜畿就给家人托梦说： 我寿数未到，本来不该死，由于吃药太多伤了五脏。
English: Next, Yanqi told her family members about the dream, saying, "I haven't reached my life expectancy yet, I shouldn't have died in the first place, because I took too much medicine, I hurt my internal organs.

古文：今当复活，慎无葬我。 
现代文：我会复活的，千万别把我埋葬。 
English: I'll come back to life. Don't bury me.

古文：乃开棺，形骸如故，微有人色。而手爪所刮摩，棺板皆伤。
现代文：家人就打开棺木，见颜畿尸体像活着时一样，而且气色也有些像活人，棺板上有被他手抠坏的手印。
English: The family opened the coffin and saw Yanqi's corpse as if he were still alive, and he also looked somewhat like a living person. There were handprints on the coffin board that had been damaged by his handcuffs.

古文：渐有气，急以绵饮沥口，能咽，饮食稍多，能开目，不能言语。
现代文：后来颜畿就渐渐能喘气了，家人赶块用丝绵沾了水润他的嘴，颜畿也能把水咽下去。后来就能睁眼了，吃东西也多一点了，只是不能说话。
English: Later, Yanqi was gradually able to gasp for breath. His family dipped a piece of silk into his mouth to moisten his mouth, and Yanqi was able to swallow the water. Later, he was able to open his eyes and eat a little more, but he couldn't speak.

古文：十余年，家人疲于供护，不复得操事。
现代文：就这样过了十多年，家里人疲于供养护理，不能再做别的事。
English: After more than ten years, the family is exhausted from providing care and cannot do anything else.

古文：其弟弘都，绝弃人事，躬自侍养。
现代文：这时他的弟弟弘都毅然辞去了公私事务，亲自来侍护他。
English: At this time, his younger brother Hongdu resolutely resigned from public and private affairs and personally came to attend him.

古文：以后便衰劣。卒复还死也。
现代文：然而颜畿却一天比一天衰弱，终于又死去。
English: However, Yanqi became weaker day by day and finally died.

古文：余杭广
现代文：余杭广
English: Yu Hangguang

古文：晋升平末，故章县老公有一女，居深山。
现代文：晋代升平末年，故章县一个老人有个女儿，他们一同住在深山里。
English: At the end of the Heian period, an old man in Zhang County had a daughter, and they lived together deep in the mountains.

古文：余杭广求为妇，不许。
现代文：余杭广向老人的女儿求婚，老人没有答应。
English: Yu Hangguang proposed marriage to the old man's daughter, but the old man did not agree.

古文：公后病死，女上县买棺，行半道，逢广。女具道情事。
现代文：后来老人病故，女儿到县里去买棺材时半路上碰见广某，就把老人的死讯说了，并说， 我自己一个孤女跑到县里去买棺材，实在是没有办法。
English: Later, the old man died of illness, and when her daughter went to the county to buy a coffin, she met Guang Mou on the way, and told her the news of the old man's death, and said, I myself am an orphan who went to the county to buy a coffin, there is really no way.

古文：女因曰： 穷逼，君若能往家守父尸，须吾还者，便为君妻。 
现代文：如果您能到我家去替我为父亲守灵，我从县里回来后，就嫁给你。 
English: If you can come to my house to hold a wake for my father, I will marry you when I return from the prefecture.

古文：广许之。女曰： 我栏中有猪，可为杀，以饴作儿。 
现代文：广某答应了，女子又说， 我家有一口猪，你可以把猪杀了，好招待帮忙办丧事的人。 
English: Guangmou agreed, and the woman said, My family has a pig, you can kill the pig to invite people to help with the funeral.

古文：广至女家，但闻屋中有鼓掌欣舞之声。
现代文：广某来到女子家，听见屋里有拍手歌舞的声音。
English: Guang came to the woman's home and heard the sound of clapping, singing and dancing in the house.

古文：广披离，见众鬼在堂，共捧弄公尸。
现代文：扒开篱笆一看，只见一群鬼正在摆弄老人的尸体。
English: Scraping open the fence, I saw a group of ghosts playing with the old man's corpse.

古文：广把杖大呼，入门，群鬼尽走。
现代文：广某就抄起一根棍子大喊着进了门，那群鬼都逃掉了。
English: Guang Mou picked up a stick and shouted into the door, and the group of ghosts all escaped.

古文：广守尸，取猪杀。
现代文：广某就守护着老人的尸体，并把猪杀了。
English: Guangmou guarded the old man's corpse and killed the pig.

古文：至夜，见尸边有老鬼，伸手乞肉。
现代文：到了夜里，又见一个老鬼在老人的尸体旁边，伸手向广某讨肉吃。
English: At night, he saw an old ghost next to the old man's corpse, reaching out to Guangmou for meat.

古文：广语老鬼，杀公者必是汝，可速还精神，我当放汝。
现代文：广某一把抓住老鬼的手臂，越抓越紧，老鬼想逃也逃不掉。这时就听外面那群鬼喊道， 老家伙太贪吃了，快点呀！ 
English: Guang Guan grabbed the old ghost's arm, and the more he grabbed, the tighter it got. The old ghost couldn't escape even if he wanted to. At this time, he heard the group of ghosts outside shouting, "The old guy is too greedy, hurry up!"

古文：汝若不还者，终不置也。老鬼曰： 我儿等杀公耳。 
现代文：广某对老鬼说， 这位老人一定是你杀的，你赶快让他还阳，我就放了你，不然的话，你休想逃脱我的手！ 老鬼求告说， 这老人不是我杀的，是我的儿子们杀的呀！ 
English: Guang Mou said to the old ghost, "You must have killed this old man. If you quickly return him to the sun, I will release you. Otherwise, you must not escape my hands!" The old ghost pleaded, "I did not kill this old man, my sons did!"

古文：即唤鬼子，可还之。公渐活，因放老鬼。
现代文：说罢就喊他的鬼儿子们，让他们快快放了老人。
English: As soon as you say it, call his ghost sons and ask them to quickly release the old man.

古文：女载棺至，相见惊悲，因取女为妇。
现代文：老人果然渐渐活转来了，广某就把老鬼放了。老人的女儿拉了棺材回来，一见父亲复活，又惊又悲。后来广某就娶她为妻了。
English: The old man gradually came back to life, and Guang Mou released the old ghost. The old man's daughter pulled the coffin back, and was shocked and sad to see her father resurrected. Later, Guang Mou married her.

古文：曲阿人
现代文：曲阿人
English: Quah people

古文：景平元年，曲阿有一人病死。见父于天上。
现代文：景平元年，曲阿县有个人病死了，在天上见到了他的父亲。
English: In the first year of Jingping, a man in Qua County died of illness and saw his father in heaven.

古文：谓父曰： 汝算录正余八牛，若此限竟死，便入罪谪中。
现代文：父亲对他说， 你命中的阳寿还有八年，你却提前死了，按规定你会获罪受到处分的。
English: His father said to him, "Your life expectancy is eight years, but you died prematurely. According to regulations, you will be found guilty and punished.

古文：吾比欲安处汝，职局无缺者，唯有雷公缺，当启以补其职。 
现代文：我想给你安排一个好位置使你免于罪谪，但府衙里没有缺额，现在只有一个雷公的缺，我想向上面请求让你补这个缺。 
English: I want to arrange a good position for you so that you can be free from sin, but there is no vacancy in the prefectural government, and now there is only one Lei Gong's vacancy, and I would like to ask you to fill this vacancy.

古文：即奏按入内，便得充此任。
现代文：父亲就向上司奏说，批准他担任雷公，并派他到辽东行雨。
English: His father told his superiors, approved him as Lei Gong, and sent him to Liaodong to make rain.

古文：令至辽东行雨，乘露车，中有水，东西灌洒。未至，于中路复被符至辽西。
现代文：这人就乘上装满了水的露车，在天上从东到西的向地下洒雨，还没洒完，又传来命令让他到辽西行雨。
English: This person took a trolley filled with water and sprinkled rain from east to west in the sky. Before it was over, he was ordered to rain in western Liaoning.

古文：事毕还，见父苦求还。云，不乐处职。
现代文：行雨回来后，这人向你父亲苦苦哀求放他回去，说实在不愿意干这个行雨的苦差使。
English: When the rain returned, the man pleaded with your father to let him go, saying that he really did not want to do this rain-making drudgery.

古文：父遣去，遂得苏活。
现代文：他父亲就放了他，于是这人就复活了。
English: And his father sent him away, and the man was restored to life.

古文：贺瑀
现代文：贺瑀
English: Hezheng

古文：会稽山阴贺瑀，字彦琚。曾得疾，不知人，惟心下尚温，居三日乃苏。
现代文：会稽山阴人贺瑀，字彦琚，有一次得了病，病得不省人事，只有心口还有点温热，三天后才苏醒。
English: He Xuan, a member of the Shan Yin people, once fell ill and was unconscious. Only his heart was still a little warm, and he did not wake up for three days.

古文：云，吏将上天，见官府。
现代文：苏醒后他说被一个官员带到天上，进了一座官府，府君的住宅十分森严。
English: After waking up, he said that he was taken to heaven by an official and entered a government office. The governor's residence was very strict.

古文：府君居处甚严，使人将瑀入曲房。房中有层架，其上有印及剑，使瑀取之。
现代文：府君派一个官员把他带进一间辟静隐密的屋子里，只见屋里是一层层的架格，上面放着官印和宝剑。
English: The prefect sent an official to take him into a quiet and secluded room, only to find that the room was a layer-by-layer framework, with the official seal and sword on top.

古文：及虽意所好，短不及上层，取剑以出。
现代文：那官员让他随意拿自己喜欢的东西，然后就走了。他很愿意拿放在上层的官印，但由于个子太矮，够不到上层，就拿了一把剑出来了。
English: The official let him take what he wanted and then left. He was happy to take the official seal that was on the upper floor, but since he was too short to reach the upper floor, he took a sword and left.

古文：问之： 子何得也？ 
现代文：官员问他拿了什么，他说拿了一把剑。
English: The officer asked him what he had, and he said he had a sword.

古文：瑀曰： 得剑。 吏曰： 恨不得印，可以驱策百神。
现代文：官员遗憾地说， 咳呀，你如果拿个官印，今后你就可以主使上百个神鬼。
English: The official said regretfully, Well, if you get an official seal, you will be able to control hundreds of gods and demons in the future.

古文：今得剑，唯使社公耳。 
现代文：如今你只拿了把剑，以后只能管管土地神而已。 
English: Now you've only got a sword, from now on you'll only be able to manage the land gods.

古文：疾既愈，每行，即社公拜谒道下，瑀深恶之。
现代文：后来贺瑀病好了，每当一出门，就会有个土地神站在路旁拜见，贺瑀特别讨厌。
English: Later, He Zheng recovered from his illness. Whenever he went out, there would be a land god standing by the road to greet him. He Zheng was particularly annoying.

古文：食牛人
现代文：食牛人
English: Cattle eater

古文：桓玄时，牛大疫，有一人食死牛肉，因得病亡。
现代文：桓玄叛乱之时，牛大都得了瘟疫。有一个人吃了瘟牛肉得病死了，后来又复活过来。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Kuan Xuan, most of the cattle got the plague. One person ate the plague beef and died of illness, and later came back to life.

古文：云，死时见人执录，将至天上。有一贵人问云： 此人何罪？ 对曰： 此坐食疫死牛肉。 
现代文：据这人说，他死后见一个人拿着生死牌把他带到天上，一个阴间的大官问他犯了什么罪，拘拿他的鬼卒回答说， 他犯了吃瘟牛肉的罪。 
English: According to the man, after his death, he saw a man with a life and death card take him to heaven. An official of the underworld asked him what crime he had committed, and his captor replied that he had committed the crime of eating plague beef.

古文：贵人云： 今须牛以转轮，肉以充百姓食，何故复杀之。 
现代文：大官说， 如今人世间的牛命该轮回转世，这些牛死后本该是供人们吃肉的，你们怎么竟把吃牛肉的人杀死带到阴间呢？ 
English: The high-ranking official said, "Nowadays, the lives of cattle in the human world should be reincarnated. After death, these cows should have been used for people to eat meat. How can you kill people who eat beef and take them to the underworld?"

古文：催令还。
现代文：大官命令赶快把他放还人间。
English: The magistrate ordered that he be released immediately.

古文：既更生，具说其事。于是食牛肉者，无复有患。
现代文：这人复活后向人们详细地说了他在阴间经历的事，于是吃瘟死的牛肉的人们再也没有得病的了。
English: The man came back to life and told the people in detail what he had experienced in the underworld, so the people who ate the plague-killed beef never got sick again.

古文：丘友
现代文：丘友
English: Kaotomo

古文：乌程丘友，尝病死，经一日活。
现代文：乌程有一个叫丘友的人，曾经病死，过了一天又活过来了。
English: In Wucheng, there is a man named Qiu You, who once died of illness, but came back to life a day later.

古文：云，将去上天，入大廨舍。见一人著紫帻坐。
现代文：他说死后被一个人带到天上，进了一座大府衙，看见一个戴紫头巾的官坐在堂上。
English: He said that after his death, he was taken to heaven by a man, entered a large mansion, and saw an official wearing a purple turban sitting in the hall.

古文：或告友，尔祖丘孝伯也，今作主录。
现代文：有人对丘友说，这是你的祖父丘孝伯，现在是这里的主录官，他告诉我你不应该死。
English: Someone said to Qiu You, this is your grandfather Qiu Xiaobing, who is now the chief recorder here, and he told me that you should not die.

古文：告人言友不应死，使人遣之，友得还去。出门，见其祖父母系一足，在门外树。
现代文：说完就派人送丘友还阳。丘友出了阴府的大门，看见自己的祖父和祖母用绳子挂着一只脚绑在树上。
English: After saying this, he sent someone to escort Qiuyou back to the sun. Qiuyou went out of the gate of the underworld and saw his grandfather and grandmother hanging by a rope with one foot tied to a tree.

古文：后一月亡。
现代文：丘友还阳后一个月，他的祖父母果然死了。
English: A month after Qiu You returned to the sun, his grandparents did indeed die.

古文：庾申
现代文：庾申
English: 申

古文：颍川庾某，宋孝建中，遇疾亡，心下犹温，经宿未殡，忽然而寤。
现代文：颍川有个姓庾的，宋孝建年间得病死去，但心口还温热，一夜没有殡葬，忽然苏醒过来。
English: Song Xiao Jian died of illness in the middle of the year, but his heart was still warm. There was no funeral for one night, and he suddenly woke up.

古文：说初死，有两人黑衣来，收缚之，驱使前行。见一大城，门楼高峻，防卫重复。
现代文：他说刚死之后看见两个穿黑衣的人来绑了他，赶着他来到一座大城，城的门楼很高，防卫很森严。
English: He said that just after he died, he saw two men in black come and tie him up and drive him to a big city with a high gate and a strong defense.

古文：将庾入厅前，同入者甚众。
现代文：他被带到一个大厅前，一起被带来的人不少。
English: He was taken to a hall, along with a number of other people.

古文：厅上一贵人南向坐，侍直数百，呼为府君。
现代文：只见堂上朝南坐着一个大官，周围有好几百名侍从，都称那位大官为府君。
English: I saw a high-ranking official sitting on the south side of the hall, surrounded by several hundred attendants, all of whom called the high-ranking official Fuchun.

古文：府君执笔，简阅到者。
现代文：府君手拿着笔，查点被带来的人。
English: Fuchun is holding a pen in his hand, counting the number of people who have been brought in.

古文：次至庾曰： 此人算尚未尽。 
现代文：点到庾某时，府君说， 这个人阳寿未到期。 
English: When the time came, Fu Jun said, "This person's Yang Shou has not expired.

古文：催遣之。
现代文：就催人放庾某还阳。
English: He urged people to release him.

古文：一人阶上来，引庾出，至城门，语吏差人送之。
现代文：一个人走上台阶带庾某出去，来到城门前，告诉把守城门的门官赶快派人把庾某送回阳间。
English: A person walked up the steps to take Xing Mou out, came to the front of the city gate, and told the gate officer guarding the city gate to quickly send someone to take Xing Mou back to the sun.

古文：门吏云： 须复白，然后得去。 
现代文：门官却说， 我得回府君那儿查一查，查明白了才能放他。 
English: The doorman said, however, that I had to go back to Fuchun's place to check and find out before he could be released.

古文：门外一女子，年十五六，容色闲丽。曰： 庾君幸得归，而留停如此，是门司求物。 
现代文：这时城门外有个女子，年纪有十五六岁，长得端庄秀丽，对庾某说， 你有幸能够生还，但门官却卡住不放你，这是向你要东西哩。 
English: At this time, there was a woman outside the city gate, aged fifteen or sixteen, dignified and beautiful, who said to Zou Mou, You are lucky to be able to survive, but the gatekeeper is stuck and won't let you go, this is to ask you for something.

古文：庾云： 向被录轻来，无所赍持。 
现代文：庾某说， 我被抓来时身上空空的，什么东西都没带，拿什么给他啊？ 
English: "When I was arrested, my body was empty and I didn't bring anything with me. What should I give him?

古文：女脱左臂三只金钏，投庾云： 并此与之。 
现代文：女子就下左臂上戴的三只金镯子扔给庾某说： 就把这给门官吧。 
English: The woman threw the three gold bracelets she was wearing on her lower left arm to Zou Mou and said: Just give this to the doorman.

古文：庾问女何姓，云： 姓张，家在茅渚，昨霍乱亡。 
现代文：庾某问女子姓什么，女子说姓张，家在茅渚住，昨天因为得了霍乱病死的。
English: Zou asked the woman what her surname was. The woman said that her surname was Zhang, that her family lived in Mao Nagi, and that she died of cholera yesterday.

古文：庾曰： 我临亡，遣赍五千钱，拟市材。若更生，当送此钱相报。 
现代文：庾某说， 我死前曾准备了五千钱，是准备买棺木的，如果我能复生，一定用这钱还报你。 
English: Zou said, "Before I died, I had prepared five thousand yuan to buy a coffin. If I can come back to life, I will definitely repay you with this money."

古文：女曰： 不忍见君艰厄，此我私物，不烦还家中也。
现代文：女子说， 我是不忍心看你在门官面前为难。金镯子是我私房的东西，就不麻烦你到我家去还了。 
English: The woman said, I can't bear to see you in trouble in front of the gatekeeper. The gold braid is my private property, so I won't bother you to return it to my house.

古文：瘐以钏与吏，吏受，竟不复白，便差人送去。
现代文：庾某把三个金镯子给了门官，门官就接受了，也不再说复查的事，立刻派人把庾某送出城来。
English: Zou gave the gatekeeper three gold ingots, and the gatekeeper accepted. He did not mention the matter of re-examination, and immediately sent someone to escort Zou out of the city.

古文：庾与女别，女长叹泣下。庾既恍惚苏。
现代文：庾某和那女子告别，女子长叹一声哭泣起来，庾某就恍恍然地苏醒了。
English: Zoumou said goodbye to the woman, and the woman began to cry with a long sigh. Zoumou suddenly woke up.

古文：至茅渚寻求，果有张氏新亡少女云。
现代文：后来他到茅渚去寻找，果然有个张家的少女得病后刚刚死去。
English: Later he went to Kuchizaki to look for it, and sure enough, a young girl from the Zhang family had just died after falling ill.

古文：李除
现代文：李除
English: Li Zhe

古文：襄阳李除，中时气死，其妇守尸。
现代文：襄阳人李除，得了流行的时疫而死，他的妻子在尸旁守灵。
English: Li Jie, a resident of Yangyang, died of the epidemic, and his wife kept vigil by his side.

古文：至夜三更，崛然起坐，搏妇臂上金钏甚剧，妇因助脱。既手执之，还死。
现代文：到夜里三更时分，李除突然硬邦邦地坐了起来，并用手急促地捋妻子手上的金镯子，妻子忙帮他把镯子脱下来，李除拿着镯子立刻又躺下死去。
English: At three o'clock in the morning, Li Jie suddenly sat up stiffly, and hastily rubbed the gold braid on his wife's hand with his hand. His wife quickly helped him take off the braid. Li Jie took the braid and immediately lay down to die.

古文：妇伺察之。
现代文：妻子仔细地观察李除。
English: His wife carefully watched Li Zhen.

古文：至晓，心中更暖，渐渐得苏。
现代文：到了早上，发现李除的心口变暖了，渐渐就苏醒过来。
English: In the morning, it was found that Li Jie's heart had warmed up, and he gradually woke up.

古文：既活云，吏将去，比伴甚多。
现代文：复活后，他对妻子说， 有个阴曹的官员把我带走，和我一起走的人很多。
English: After he came back to life, he told his wife, "A dirty official took me away, and many people went with me.

古文：见有行货得免者，乃许吏金钏，吏令还，故归取以与吏。
现代文：我看见有人给那官员送礼，官员就把他放了。我就对官员说我要送给他金镯子，官员就让我回来取了给他。
English: I saw someone giving the official a gift, and the official let him go. I told the official that I wanted to give him a gold ingot, and the official told me to come back and get it for him.

古文：吏得钏，便放令还。
现代文：他得了金镯子就把我放回来了。 
English: When the devil got the golden handcuffs, he let me back in.

古文：见吏取钏去，不知犹在妇衣内。
现代文：李除虽然看见那官员把金镯子拿走了，其实金镯子还在妻子的衣服里藏着。
English: Although Mr. Li saw the official take away the gold braid, the gold braid was still hidden in his wife's clothes.

古文：妇不敢复著，依事呪埋。
现代文：不过妻子不敢再戴那镯子了，就念了符咒把镯子埋掉。
English: However, the wife did not dare to wear the braid again, so she recited a spell to bury the braid.

古文：张导
现代文：张导
English: Zhang Du

古文：齐武帝建元元年，太子左率张导字进贤。少读书，老饵术。每食不过二味，衣服不修装。
现代文：齐武帝建元年间，张导任太子左率。他年轻时爱读书，老来常以秫米为食，并且每次吃饭都不超过两样菜，也很少作新衣服，十分节俭。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiwu in the first year of the Jianyuan Dynasty, Zhang Daoran became the crown prince. When he was young, he loved to read, often ate glutinous rice, and did not eat more than two dishes each time, and rarely made new clothes. He was very frugal.

古文：既得疾，谓妻朱氏曰： 我死后。棺足周身。敛我服，但取今著者，慎勿改易。 
现代文：后来他得了病，就对妻子说， 我死后，做的棺材只要能把我装进去就行，别做那个大的浪费木料，我的寿衣也用我现在穿的旧衣服就行。这是我的愿望，千万不要改变！ 
English: Later, when he fell ill, he said to his wife, "When I die, just make a coffin that can hold me. Don't be such a big waste of wood. My shroud can be made from the old clothes I'm wearing now. This is my wish. Don't change it!"

古文：及卒，子乾护欲奉遗旨。朱氏曰： 汝父虽遗言如此，不忍依其言。 
现代文：张导死后，他的儿子乾护本打算按他的遗愿办丧事，但张导的妻子朱氏说， 你父亲虽然有那样的遗言，但我实在不忍心按他说的那样办。 
English: After Zhang Du's death, his son Qian Rongpeng planned to carry out the funeral according to his last wishes, but Zhang Du's wife Zhu Shi said, "Although your father has such a last words, I really can't bear to do as he said."

古文：因别制四时服而敛焉。
现代文：张氏就另外作了四季的寿衣为张导装殓了。
English: In addition, Mr. Zhang made four seasons of shrouds to decorate the guide.

古文：敛后一月日，家人忽闻棺中呼乾护之声，人皆一时惊惧。及至殡棺，见导开目，乃扶出于旧寝。
现代文：一个月后，家里人忽然听见张导在棺材里喊儿子乾护的声音，都非常惊怕，将要埋棺时竟看见张导睁开了两眼，就忙把他扶出来送到他过去住的屋内。
English: A month later, the family suddenly heard Zhang Du shouting for his son's protection from inside the coffin. They were very frightened. Just as they were about to bury the coffin, they saw Zhang Du open his eyes. They hurriedly helped him out and took him to the house where he used to live.

古文：翌日，坐责妻曰： 我平生素俭，奈何违言，易我故服。 
现代文：第二天，张导坐起来责备妻子说， 我一辈子都十分节俭，你为什么不按我的遗言俭朴地料理我的丧事，竟把我身上的旧衣服换了下来？ 
English: The next day, Zhang Guo sat up and scolded his wife, saying, "I have been very frugal all my life. Why didn't you follow my last words and frugally prepare for my funeral, instead of changing the old clothes on my body?"

古文：谓子曰： 复敛我故服。 乾护乃取故衣敛之。
现代文：接着就命儿子乾护拿来旧衣服，把他身上的新寿衣换下来，重新装殓。
English: She then ordered her son, Qian You, to bring her some old clothes, change his new shroud, and re-decorate.

古文：敛后又曰： 但安棺中，后三日看之。若俨然，即葬。如目开，必重生矣。 
现代文：装殓后张导说， 你就让我在棺材里安放着吧，过三天再来看我，那时如果我脸色阴沉就把我埋葬，如果我眼睛睁开，那就是我复活了。 
English: After the decoration, Zhang Du said, "Let me be placed in the coffin, and come to see me again in three days. At that time, if I look gloomy, I will be buried. If I open my eyes, then I will be resurrected."

古文：后三日，乾护等启棺，见眼开，人皆惊喜，扶出遂生。
现代文：过了三天，乾护等家人打开棺木，见张导两眼睁着，全家又惊又喜，立刻把张导扶出棺材，果然真的死而复生。
English: After three days, Qian Rong and other family members opened the coffin and saw Zhang Du with his eyes open. The whole family was surprised and delighted. They immediately helped Zhang Du out of the coffin, and sure enough, he really died and came back to life.

古文：谓子曰： 地府以我平生修善著德，放再生二十年。 
现代文：张导对儿子说， 阴司见我一生行善积德，所以把我放回来再活二十年。 
English: Zhang Du said to his son, "My wife saw that I have been doing good deeds and accumulating virtues all my life, so she put me back to live for another twenty years."

古文：导后位至建德令而卒。
现代文：张导后来当了建德县令，死于任上。
English: Zhang Du later became the Jiande County magistrate and died in office.

古文：石长和
现代文：石长和
English: Stone long and

古文：赵石长和者，赵国高邑人也。
现代文：赵国高邑人石长和，十九岁时生病一个月后死去。
English: Shi Changhe, a native of Gao, Zhao Province, fell ill at the age of nineteen and died a month later.

古文：年十九，病月余卒。
现代文：他家很穷，还没有殡葬他，过了四天突然复活了。
English: His family was very poor and had not yet buried him when he suddenly came back to life four days later.

古文：家贫，未及殡殓。经四日而苏。
现代文：他说刚死以后，不知不觉的往东南走，看见前面离他五十步远的地方，有两个人在修路。
English: He said that just after his death, he unknowingly walked to the southeast and saw two people building a road fifty paces ahead of him.

古文：说初死时，东南行，见二人治道，在长和前五十步。
现代文：长和走得时快时慢，那两个人也随着他走路的速度时缓时急的修路，但始终保持着和长和相距五十步的距离。
English: Changwa walked fast and slow at times, and the two men also built the road with the speed of his walking, but always kept a distance of fifty paces from Changwa.

古文：长和行有迟疾，二人亦随缓速，常五十步。
现代文：而道路的两旁长满了象老鹰爪子一样的荆棘，只见很多人在荆棘里跋涉，遍体鳞伤，地上都是血。
English: And both sides of the road were covered with thorns like eagles' talons. I saw many people trudging through the thorns, with injuries all over their bodies and blood on the ground.

古文：而道之两边，棘刺森然，如鹰爪。见人甚众，群足棘中，身体伤裂，地皆流血。
现代文：这些人看见长和走在平坦的路上，都感叹的说， 看人家因为是信佛的人才能走在那么好的路上啊！ 
English: When these people saw him walking on a flat road, they all exclaimed, "Look, people can only walk on such a good road because they believe in Buddha!"

古文：见长和独行平道，俱叹息曰： 佛子独行大道中。 
现代文：长和再向前走，看见一片民屋和好几千间楼房，楼房很高。
English: Walking forward, I saw a block of private houses and several thousand buildings. The buildings were very tall.

古文：前至瓦屋，御楼可数千间，屋甚高。
现代文：楼上临窗坐着一个很高大魁伟的人，身穿有四条衣缝的黑袍子。
English: Upstairs, by the window, sat a tall, powerful man, dressed in a black robe with four seams.

古文：上有一人，形面状大，著皂袍四缝，临窗而坐。
现代文：长和拜见了他，楼上的人说， 石君来啦，我们已分别两千多年了！ 
English: When the chief priest and the elders saw him, the people upstairs said, "Shi Jun has come, we have been separated for more than two thousand years!"

古文：长和拜之，阁上人曰： 石君来耶，一别二千余年。 
现代文：长和听了这话，好像记起真和那人相识并在两千年前分别过似的。
English: When Nagakata heard this, it was as if he remembered that he and the man had actually met and parted ways two thousand years ago.

古文：长和便若忆得此别时也。相识中有冯翊牧孟丞夫妻，先死已积岁。
现代文：他相识的人中已经死去多年的孟丞夫妻，孟丞生前曾在冯翊作过州牧。
English: Among the people he met were Meng Rong and his wife, who have been dead for many years. Before his death, Meng Rong had served as the provincial governor of Fenghuang.

古文：阁上人曰： 君识孟丞不？ 长和答曰： 识。 
现代文：楼上的人这时问长和认不认识孟丞，长和说认识。
English: At this time, the people upstairs asked Changhe whether he knew Mengcheng. Changhe said that he did.

古文：阁上人曰： 孟丞生时不能精进，今恒为我司扫除之役。
现代文：楼上人说， 孟丞在人世间不能积德行善，所以死后在我这里当清扫杂役。
English: The man upstairs said, Meng Rong can't accumulate virtue and do good deeds in this world, so after his death, he will be a janitor here.

古文：孟妻精进，居处甚乐。 
现代文：孟丞的妻子生前积德行善，所以她现在住在福地十分快乐。 
English: Meng Rong's wife accumulated virtues and did good deeds during her lifetime, so she is very happy to live in a blessed land now.

古文：举手指西南一房曰： 孟妻在此也。 
现代文：说着用手指指西南一间房子说孟丞的妻子就住在那里。
English: He pointed to a house in the southwest and said Meng's wife lived there.

古文：孟妻开窗，见长和，厚相慰问，遍访其家中大小安否。曰： 石君还时，可更见过，当因附书也。 
现代文：这时孟妻打开了窗子，看见了长和，就十分热情地问候长和，并十分详细打听家里的老老少少是否平安，并说， 石君如果能回人间去，请再来和我见一见，我想托您给我家捎封信。 
English: At this time, Meng's wife opened the window and saw Changhe. She greeted Changhe very warmly and asked in great detail whether everyone at home was safe. She said, "Shi Jun, if you can return to the human world, please come and see me. I would like to ask you to write a letter to my family."

古文：俄见孟丞执帚提箕，自阁西来，亦问家消息。
现代文：不一会儿，长和又看见孟丞拿着扫帚提着簸箕从楼的西边走来，也向长和打听家里的情况。
English: A short while later, Nagakata saw Meng Rong coming from the west side of the building with a broom and hoe. He also asked Nagakata about the situation at home.

古文：阁上人曰： 闻鱼龙超精进，为信耳。
现代文：这时楼上的人说， 我听说鱼龙超修行得很好，是真的吗？
English: At this time, the person upstairs said, I heard that Yulong Chao was very well trained, is it true?

古文：何所修行？ 
现代文：他是怎样修行的呢？ 
English: How did he practice?

古文：长和曰： 不食鱼肉，酒不经口。恒转尊经，救诸疾痛。 
现代文：长和回答说， 他不吃鱼肉荤腥，不喝酒，持之以恒的在寺庙里诵经，平日常救危扶困解人疾苦。 
English: Changhe replied that he did not eat fish and did not drink alcohol. He constantly chanted sutras in the temple and helped the poor and the needy in his daily life.

古文：阁上人曰： 所传不妄也。 
现代文：楼上人说， 看来对他的传说是真实的了。 
English: The man upstairs said, It looks like the legend about him is true.

古文：语久之，阁上人问都篅主者，审案石君录，勿谬滥也。
现代文：又谈了很久，楼上人向旁边一个管人间寿数的人说， 你查一查石长和的寿数，千万别弄错了。 
English: After another long conversation, the person upstairs said to a person next to him who was in charge of human longevity, "Check the longevity of Shi Changhe, and don't make a mistake."

古文：主者按箓。余三十年。
现代文：那人查完后回答说， 石长和还有阳寿三十年。 
English: After the investigation, the man replied that Shi Changhe still had a life expectancy of 30 years.

古文：阁上人曰： 君欲归不？ 
现代文：楼上人问长和， 你想回人间吗？ 
English: The man upstairs asked Nagawa, "Do you want to return to the world?"

古文：长和对： 愿归。 
现代文：长和回答说， 想回 。
English: Nagakazu replied, "I want to go back."

古文：乃敕主者，以车骑两吏送之。
现代文：楼上人就指示管事的派人找两个官员送长和还阳。
English: The person upstairs then instructed the steward to send someone to find two officials to see off the mayor and return the sun.

古文：长和拜辞，上车而归。前所行道，更有传馆吏民饮食储峙之具。
现代文：长和拜谢辞别后上车往回走，见来时的路上增加了一些供过往官员和行人住宿和饮食的房舍器具。
English: After saying goodbye to Chang and Bai Xie, they got on the bus and walked back. On the way back, they added some accommodation and catering facilities for passing officials and pedestrians.

古文：倏忽至家，恶其尸，不欲附之，于尸头立。
现代文：不大一会儿，长和就回到了人间自己的家里。看见自己的尸体后心里十分厌恶，不想再让魂去附自己的肉身。
English: Not long after, Nagakazu returned to his home on earth. After seeing his own corpse, he was disgusted and did not want his soul to be attached to his body.

古文：见其亡妹于后推之，踣尸面上，因得苏。
现代文：这时长和已死的妹妹在他身后猛地一推，长和跌倒在自己尸体上，才得以还魂复活。
English: At this time, Nagatomo's dead sister suddenly pushed behind him, and Nagatomo fell on his own corpse, only to be able to revive his soul.

古文：法道人山，时未出家，闻长和所说，遂定入道之志。
现代文：当时，法山还没有出家，听了长和讲述阴间的事和积德修行的道理，才下决心出家学佛。
English: At that time, Fashan had not yet become a monk, and it was only after listening to the long lectures on the things of the underworld and the principles of accumulating virtue and practice that he made up his mind to become a monk and study Buddhism.

古文：法山者，咸和时人也。
现代文：法山道人是咸和年间的人。
English: The people of Foshan Taoism are from the Hanyuan era.

古文：古元之
现代文：古元之
English: Fumimoto no Sue

古文：后魏尚书令古弼族子元之，少养于弼，因饮酒而卒。
现代文：后魏尚书今古弼本家的孩子古元之，少时寄养在古弼家，由于贪酒而死。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, Gu Yuanzhi, a child of the Guzheng family, was fostered in the Guzheng family at a young age, and died due to alcoholism.

古文：弼怜之特甚，三日殓毕。追思，欲与再别，因命启棺，开已却生矣。
现代文：古弼十分疼爱这个孩子，装殓了三天之后，还想再看看他以作永别，就让人把棺材打开，一看，古元之竟然复活了。
English: Gudrun was very fond of this child. After three days of decoration, she still wanted to see him again as a farewell, so she had the coffin opened. At first glance, Gudrun had actually come back to life.

古文：元之云，当昏醉，忽然如梦，有人沃冷水于体，仰视，乃见一神人。衣冠绛裳蜺帔，仪貌甚俊。顾元之曰： 吾乃古说也，是汝远祖。
现代文：古元之说，他喝酒喝得昏沉沉地醉死过去，就像作梦一样。忽然有人往他身上洒冷水，抬头一看，看见一个神人，穿着深红的衣裳，披着彩虹般的披肩，相貌十分英俊，看着元之说： 我是你的远祖，叫古说。
English: Suddenly, someone sprinkled cold water on his body. Looking up, he saw a god-man, dressed in crimson robes, wearing a rainbow-like cape, very handsome. Looking at him, he said, "I am your distant ancestor, called Gu Say."

古文：适欲至和神国中，无人担囊侍从，因来取汝。 
现代文：我要到和神国去，没有人为我挑行李，所以把你召来了。 
English: I am going to the kingdom of God, and there is no one to carry my bags, so I have called you here.

古文：即令负一大囊，可重一钧。又与一竹杖，长丈二余，令元之乘骑随后，飞举甚速，常在半天。
现代文：说罢就让古元之背起一个大行囊，又给他一根丈二长的竹竿，让他骑上一匹马跟随在后面。
English: As soon as he said that, he asked Fumoto to carry a large bag on his back, gave him a two-meter-long bamboo pole, and let him ride a horse to follow behind.

古文：西南行，不知里数，山河逾远。歘然下地，已至和神国。
现代文：马跑得非常快，常常腾起在半空中，也不知跑了多少里地，过高山跨大河的跑了很远，突然就落下平地，原来已经到了和神国。
English: The horse ran very fast, often rising in mid-air, and I don't know how many miles it ran. It ran very far, over high mountains and across large rivers, and suddenly fell to flat land. Originally, it had reached the Kingdom of Heaven.

古文：其国无大山，高者不过数十丈，皆积碧珉。
现代文：这和神国里没有大山，最高的山也不过几十丈高，山上全是碧绿的玉石，石缝里生长着彩色的花草。
English: There are no large mountains in the Kingdom of God, and the highest mountain is only a few dozen meters high. The mountains are all made of turquoise jade, and colorful flowers and plants grow in the crevices of the stone.

古文：石际生青彩簵筱，异花珍果，软草香媚，好禽嘲哳。
现代文：到处都是奇异的花朵稀有的果子，绿茵茵的草地一望无际，各种珍禽在鸣婉啼叫。
English: Everywhere there are strange flowers, rare fruits, endless green meadows, and all kinds of rare birds singing and howling.

古文：山顶皆平整如砥，清泉迸下者，三二百道。
现代文：山顶都十分平坦，有好几百条清泉从山石缝中流着飞溅到山下。
English: The mountaintops are all very flat, with hundreds of clear springs flowing and splashing down from the cracks in the rock.

古文：原野无凡树，悉生百果及相思石榴之辈。每果树花卉俱发，实色鲜红，翠叶于香丛之下，纷错满树，四时不改。唯一岁一度暗换花实，更生新嫩，人不知觉。
现代文：田野上没有普通的树，全都是结满石榴和相思果的果树，每株果树都开着鲜花，结着鲜红的果子，掩映在一丛丛碧绿的树叶里，而且这些果树一年四季不凋零，只是每年自然而然的花开花落结出新果代替了旧果，人们都察觉不到。
English: There are no ordinary trees in the fields, they are all fruit trees full of pomegranates and acacias, each fruit tree has fresh flowers and bright red fruits, hidden in a clump of green leaves, and these fruit trees do not wither all year round, but every year the natural flowers bloom and fall to produce new fruits instead of old fruits, people do not notice.

古文：田畴尽长大瓠，瓠中实以五谷，甘香珍美，非中国稻梁可比。
现代文：田地里到处都生长着葫芦，葫芦里装满了五谷粮食，这些粮食特别香甜，人世间田地里的粮食没法和它相比。
English: Gourds grow everywhere in the fields, and the gourds are filled with grain. This grain is particularly sweet, and the grain in the fields of the world cannot be compared to it.

古文：人得足食，不假耕种。原顕滋茂，莸秽不生。
现代文：在这和神国中人人都能丰衣足食，而且不用辛劳地耕种，土地本身就十分肥沃湿润，一点杂草都不生长。
English: In this and God's kingdom, everyone can be well-fed and well-clothed, and there is no need to work hard at farming. The land itself is very fertile and moist, and no weeds grow at all.

古文：一年一度，树木枝干间，悉生五色丝纩，人得随色收取，任意纴织。异锦纤罗，不假蚕杼。
现代文：每年树木的枝干上会长出各种颜色的丝线，人们喜欢什么色的就从树上拿，然后用这丝线织成自己喜爱的绸缎，也不用养蚕，不用织布。
English: Every year, silk threads of various colors grow on the branches and trunks of trees. People take whatever color they like from the trees, and then use this silk thread to weave their favorite silk cocoon. There is no need to raise silkworms or weave cloth.

古文：四时之气，常熙熙和淑，如中国二三月。
现代文：一年四季和风吹拂，总是像人世间春天二三月时一样。
English: The four seasons of the year and the wind are always blowing, just like the spring of the world in February and March.

古文：无蚊虻蟆蚁虱蜂蝎蛇虺守宫蜈蚣蛛蠓之虫，又无枭鸱鵶鹞鸲鹆蝙蝠之属，及无虎狼豺豹狐狸蓦駮之兽，又无猫鼠猪犬扰害之类。
现代文：这里没有蚊子、苍蝇、蚂蚁、虱子、马蜂、蝎子、毒蛇、蜈蚣、蜘蛛、蠓虫之类的害虫，也没有老鹰、乌鸦、猫头鹰、鹞子、八哥等等鸟类和蝙蝠，也没有豺狼虎豹等凶猛的野兽，也没有猫、鼠、猪狗之类的动物。
English: There are no mosquitoes, flies, ants, lice, wasps, scorpions, venomous snakes, centipedes, spiders, aphids and other pests, no eagles, crows, owls, lice, starlings and other birds and bats, no ferocious beasts such as jackals, tigers and leopards, and no cats, mice, pigs and dogs.

古文：其人长短妍蚩皆等，无有嗜欲爱憎之者。
现代文：这个国里的人高矮美丑都一样，人们没有什么贪欲爱憎等等私欲。
English: People in this country are all the same height, weight, beauty, and ugliness. There is no such thing as greed, love, hatred, and other selfish desires.

古文：人生二男二女，为邻则世世为婚姻，笄年而嫁，二十而娶。人寿一百二十，中无夭折疾病喑聋跛躄之患。
现代文：每一对夫妻都生二男二女，邻居间世世代代通婚。女孩子一成人就出嫁，小伙子一到二十岁就娶妻，人们的寿命是一百二十岁，一辈子也不会发生疾病、夭亡、耳聋、哑吧、瞎眼、跛腿的事。
English: Every couple has two sons and two daughters. Neighbors have intermarried for generations. Girls get married as soon as they are of age, young men marry as soon as they are twenty. People live to be a hundred and twenty years old, and there is never any sickness, premature death, deafness, dumbness, blindness or lameness.

古文：百岁已下，皆自记忆。百岁已外，不知其寿几何。
现代文：百岁以下的人都能记得自己的年令，百岁以上的人，就不知道他到底多大岁数了。
English: People under the age of one hundred can remember their age, but people over the age of one hundred don't know how old they are.

古文：寿尽则歘然失其所在，虽亲族子孙，皆忘其人，故常无忧戚。
现代文：寿数到了的人会突然消失不知道去了哪里，他的家人亲友也很快就把他忘了，所以人们从来没有忧愁悲伤。
English: People who have reached their birthdays will suddenly disappear without knowing where they have gone, and their family and friends will soon forget them, so people have never been sad.

古文：每日午时一食，中间唯食酒浆果实耳。餐亦不知所化，不置溷所。
现代文：这里的人每天中午才吃一次饭，其它时间就仅仅喝点酒吃些水果，吃下去的东西也不知道消化到那里去了，因为这里从来没有厕所。
English: People here only eat once a day at noon, and the rest of the time they just drink wine and eat fruit. They don't even know where the food they eat goes after it is digested, because there is never a toilet here.

古文：人无私积囷仓，余粮栖亩，要者取之。
现代文：人们从来不存储粮食，多余的粮食都放在田地里，谁需要谁就去拿。
English: People never stored grain, excess grain was left in the fields, and whoever needed it went to get it.

古文：无灌园鬻蔬，野菜皆足人食。
现代文：这里的人也从来不种菜园子，遍野的菜就足够吃了。
English: People here have never grown a vegetable garden, and the vegetables from all over the countryside are enough to eat.

古文：十亩有一酒泉，味甘而香。
现代文：每十亩地里有一口泉，泉里全是酒，味道十分香醇。
English: There is a spring in every ten mu of land, the spring is full of wine, the taste is very mellow.

古文：国人日相携游览，歌咏陶陶然，暮夜而散，未尝昏醉。
现代文：这个国的人每天扶老携幼的到处游玩，到晚上就散去，也没有人会喝醉。
English: People in this country take their children and grandchildren out to play every day. They disperse in the evening, and no one gets drunk.

古文：人人有婢仆，皆自然谨慎，知人所要，不烦促使。
现代文：每个人都有仆人婢女，他们都十分理解主人的需要，周到的服侍，不用别人支使他们。
English: Everyone has servants and maidservants. They all fully understand the needs of their masters, serve them thoughtfully, and do not need others to support them.

古文：随意屋室，靡不壮丽。
现代文：房舍宅院也都十分华丽。
English: The houses and courtyards are also very ornate.

古文：其国六畜唯有马，驯极而骏，不用趋秣，自食野草，不近积聚。人要乘则乘，乘讫而却放，亦无主守。
现代文：这个国里家畜只有马，马都很驯服又很骏，而且从来不喂草料，只吃野草，平时也不把他们关在马厩里，而是要骑就抓来，骑完就放掉，没有人管它们。
English: The only domestic animals in this country are horses. The horses are very tame and docile, and they are never fed grass, only wild grass. They are not usually kept in stables, but are caught as soon as they are ridden and released when they are finished. No one controls them.

古文：其国千官皆足，而仕官不知身之在事，杂于下人，以无职事操断也。
现代文：这个国里各种官员无一不备，当官的人却没有公事可干，和老百姓们混在一起，因为从来没有什么公务要他们处理。
English: In this country, officials of all kinds are everywhere, and those in authority have no official business to do, and mingle with the common people, because they have never had any official business to deal with.

古文：虽有君主，而君不自知为君，杂于千官，以无职事升贬故也。又无迅雷风雨，其风常微轻如煦，袭万物不至于摇落。
现代文：这个国的皇帝也混在官员们中间，因为从来没有官员的升、降和处分的事需要皇上来处理。也从没有急风暴雨，风总是轻柔温暖的，什么也不会吹掉。
English: The emperor of this country is also mixed in with the officials, because there has never been an official's promotion, demotion, or punishment that needed to be handled by the emperor. There has never been a sudden storm, and the wind is always gentle and warm, and nothing will blow away.

古文：其雨十日一降，降必以夜，津润条畅，不有淹流。
现代文：每十天下一次雨，而且下雨一定是在夜里，下得河水通畅，但绝不会泛滥淹没什么。
English: It rains once every ten days, and it always rains at night, so the river flows smoothly, but it never floods.

古文：一国之人，皆自相亲，有如戚属，各各明惠。无市易商贩之事，以不求利故也。
现代文：全国的人都亲如一家，人人聪明贤德，也没有什么经商买卖的事，因为谁也不贪图小利。
English: The people of the whole country are as close as a family, everyone is wise and virtuous, and there is nothing to do with business and trade, because no one is greedy for small profits.

古文：古说既至其国，顾谓元之曰： 此和神国也。虽非神仙，风俗不恶。
现代文：古说对古元之说， 这就是和神国，虽然不是仙界，但风俗非常好。
English: The ancients said to the ancients, "This is the land of the gods. Although it is not a fairyland, the customs are very good."

古文：汝回，当为世人说之。
现代文：你回人间后，向人们说说这里的情形。
English: When you return to the human world, tell people about the situation here.

古文：吾既至此，回即别求人负囊，不用汝矣。 
现代文：我已经到这里了，以后会找别人给我当差役，不用你了。 
English: I'm already here, and I'll find someone else to be my agent in the future, I don't need you.

古文：因以酒令元之饮。
现代文：说罢就拿来酒请古元之喝。
English: As soon as you say it, bring some wine and ask Fumoto to drink it.

古文：饮满数巡，不觉沉醉，既而复醒，身已活矣。
现代文：元之喝得昏昏醉去，等醒来时，自己就复活了。
English: He drank himself into a stupor, and when he woke up, he came back to life.

古文：自是元之疏逸人事，都忘宦情，游行山水，自号知和子。
现代文：从这次到阴间去游历了和神国以后，古元之就对人间的世事人情看得越来越淡漠了，就连作官也觉得没有什么意思，就到处漫游，游山玩水，自己起了一个别号，叫 知和子 。
English: From this time, after traveling to the underworld and the kingdom of God, Gu Yuanzhi became more and more indifferent to the world's affairs and people's feelings. Even the officials did not find it interesting. He roamed everywhere, playing in the mountains and playing in the water. He gave himself a different name, called Zhizhi.

古文：后竟不知其所终也。
现代文：后来，谁也不知道他到底去了什么地方。
English: After that, no one knew where he had gone.

