古文：吴王夫差既许越成，乃大戒师徒，将以伐齐。
现代文：吴王夫差同意越国的求和之后，就大规模地整顿士卒，打算攻打齐国。
English: After agreeing to Vietnam's request for peace, Wu Wangfusha reorganized his troops on a large scale and planned to attack Qi.

古文：申胥进谏曰： 昔天以越赐吴，而王弗受。
现代文：伍子胥进谏说： 过去上天把越国送给吴国，而您没有接受。
English: Wu Ziqinqin said: In the past, God gave Yue Province to Wu Province, but you did not accept.

古文：夫天命有反，今越王勾践恐惧而改其谋，舍其愆令，轻其征赋，施民所善，去民所恶，身自约也，裕其众庶，其民殷众，以多甲兵。
现代文：天命也会有反复，现在越王勾践因为恐惧而改变了他的谋略，废弃错误的法令，减轻民众的税负，实施民众所喜欢的，除去民众所讨厌的，自己很节俭，让民众富裕起来。
English: Mandate of Heaven will also be repeated, now Yue Wang Gochun changed his strategy because of fear, abandoned the wrong laws, reduced the tax burden of the people, implemented what the people liked, removed what the people hated, he was frugal, and made the people rich.

古文：越之在吴，犹人之有腹心之疾也。
现代文：他的民众数量庞大，足以充实军队。越国对于吴国，就像一个人的心腹之患。
English: Its population is large enough to fill an army, and Viet Nam is like a personal problem for Wu.

古文：夫越王之不忘败吴，于其心也侙然，服士以伺吾闲。
现代文：越王不忘被吴国打败的前鉴，内心一直耿耿于怀。
English: Yue Wang did not forget the precedent of being defeated by the State of Wu, and his heart has always been troubled.

古文：今王非越是图，而齐、鲁以为忧。
现代文：他让士兵勤于操习，窥伺对我们报复的时机。现在您不考虑对付越国，却去操心征服齐国和鲁国的事。
English: He had his soldiers practice diligently, watching for opportunities to take revenge on us. Now, instead of dealing with Vietnam, you are worrying about conquering Qi and Lu.

古文：夫齐、鲁譬诸疾，疥癣也，岂能涉江、淮而与我争此地哉？
现代文：那齐国和鲁国如果比作疾病的话，只不过是疥癣一类的小病，它们难道会渡过长江和淮河来与我们争夺这儿的土地吗？
English: If Qi and Lu were diseases, they would be nothing more than minor ailments like ringworm. Would they cross the Yangtze and Huai Rivers to compete with us for land here?

古文：将必越实有吴土。
现代文：将来一定是越国才会夺占吴国的土地。
English: In the future, it will be Viet Nam that will occupy the land of Wu.

古文： 王其盍亦鉴于人，无鉴于水。
现代文： 您何不也以人为鉴，不要只是用水作镜子。
English: Don't just use water as a mirror.

古文：昔楚灵王不君，其臣箴谏以不入。
现代文：过去楚灵王不行君道，臣下的告诫劝谏都听不进去。
English: In the past, King Chuling did not act like a monarch, and he did not listen to the admonitions and advice of his subjects.

古文：乃筑台于章华之上，阙为石郭，陂汉，以象帝舜。
现代文：他在章华这个地方建造台榭，凿石为椁，引来汉水，仿效舜的陵墓。
English: At this place in Zhanghua, he built a platform, chiseled stone for the coffin, brought Chinese water, and imitated the coffin's mausoleum.

古文：罢弊楚国，以闲陈、蔡。
现代文：他使楚国疲惫不堪，还窥伺着消灭陈国和蔡国。
English: He has exhausted Chu, and is waiting to wipe out Chen and Cai.

古文：不修方城乏内，逾诸夏而图东国，三岁于沮、汾以服吴、越。
现代文：他不修内政，却想越过邻国去征服东方的诸侯，他化了三年时间才渡过沮河和汾河，想征服吴越两国。
English: He did not attend to domestic affairs, but wanted to go beyond the neighboring countries to conquer the Eastern principalities. It took him three years to cross the Deshehe River and the Min River, and he wanted to conquer the two countries of Wu and Yue.

古文：其民不忍饥劳之殃，三军叛王于乾谿。
现代文：他的民众再也忍受不了饥饿劳累的痛苦，全军在乾谿发动了叛乱。
English: His people could no longer bear the pain of hunger and fatigue, and the whole army launched a rebellion in Qianlong.

古文：王亲独行，屏营仿偟于山林之中，三日乃见其涓人畴。
现代文：楚灵王只身逃亡，惶惶不安地流窜于山林之中，三天后才碰见侍卫的涓人畴。
English: King Chuling fled alone and wandered through the mountains and forests in panic and anxiety. Three days later, he encountered a group of guards.

古文：王呼之曰： 余不食三日矣。 
现代文：楚灵王向他呼救说： 我已经三天没有吃东西了。 
English: Chu Ling Wang called for help and said, "I haven't eaten for three days.

古文：畴趋而进，王枕其股以寝于地。
现代文：畴赶快走到灵王面前，灵王枕着他的腿就在地上睡着了。
English: Zhen quickly walked up to the spirit king, and the spirit king fell asleep on the ground with his leg under his pillow.

古文：王寐，畴枕王以墣而去之。
现代文：灵王睡着后，畴用土块代替枕头抽身离去。
English: After the spirit king fell asleep, he used a clod of earth as a pillow to pull himself away.

古文：王觉而无见也，乃匍匐将入于棘闱，棘闱不纳，乃入芋尹申亥氏焉。
现代文：灵王醒后不见畴，就自己爬着想进棘城的大门，棘城的人不接纳他，最后总算被申亥收容。
English: After waking up, Ling Wang could not find his way, so he crawled to the gate of Thorn City. The people of Thorn City did not accept him, and he was finally taken in by Shen Hai.

古文：王缢，申亥负王以归，而土埋之其室。
现代文：灵王上吊自杀，申亥背着灵王的尸体回到家中，用土把他埋在屋内。
English: Lingwang hanged himself. Shen Hai returned home with Lingwang's body on his back and buried him in the house.

古文：此志也，岂遽忘于诸侯之耳乎？
现代文：这些应该牢记的事，难道很快就被诸侯们遗忘了吗？
English: Are these things, which should be kept in mind, soon forgotten by the princes?

古文： 今王既变鮌、禹之功，而高高下下，以罢民于姑苏。
现代文： 现在您改变了当年鮌和禹治水的功业，筑台修池以享乐，使民众为修姑苏台而疲惫不堪。
English: Now you have changed the water-control work of Yu and Yu that year, building a pond to enjoy, and making the people tired of the Buddha statue.

古文：天夺吾食，都鄙荐饥。
现代文：上天又用灾荒夺去了我们的食粮，都城边邑连年饥荒。
English: The heavens also took away our food with plagues, and the towns around the capital suffered from famine year after year.

古文：今王将很天而伐齐。
现代文：您违背天意而去攻打齐国，吴国的民众都要离弃你了。
English: If you go against the will of heaven and attack Qi, the people of Wu will abandon you.

古文：夫吴民离矣，体有所倾，譬如群兽然，一个负矢，将百群皆奔，王其无方收也。
现代文：国家的倾复，就像一群野兽那样，一个野兽中了箭，整群野兽都会逃去，您还有什么方法收拾局面呢。
English: The overthrow of a country is like a herd of wild animals. If one wild animal is hit by an arrow, the whole herd will flee. How else can you put things right?

古文：越人必来袭我，王虽悔之，其犹有及乎？ 
现代文：越国人必定会来侵袭我们，那时您即使后悔，还来得及吗？ 
English: The Vietcong are bound to invade us. At that time, even if you regret it, will it be too late?

古文：王弗听。
现代文：吴王不听劝谏。
English: Guoxi Wang did not listen.

古文：十二年，遂伐齐。
现代文：在他执政的第十二年起兵攻打齐国。
English: In the twelfth year of his reign, he began to attack Qi.

古文：齐人与战于艾陵，齐师败绩，吴人有功。
现代文：齐国与吴国军队在艾陵交锋，齐军战败，吴国暂时获得成功。
English: The armies of Qi and Wu clashed at Ailing, the Qi army was defeated, and Wu was temporarily successful.

