古文：起玄黓执徐，尽柔兆涒滩，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年。晋孝武帝太元十七年
English: It lasted for a total of five years, beginning in the 17th year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝下太元十七年
现代文：春季，正月，己巳朔，东晋实行大赦。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：春，正月，已巳朔，大赦。秦主登立昭仪陇西李氏为皇后。
现代文：前秦国主苻登册立昭仪、陇西人李氏为皇后。
English: Zhaoyi, the former empress of Qin, and Li, a native of Shaanxi, were registered as empresses.

古文：二月，壬寅，燕主垂自鲁口如河间、渤海、平原。
现代文：二月，壬寅，后燕国主慕容垂从鲁口前往河间、渤海、平原。
English: In February, in Ren'in, the ruler of Houyan, Mu Rongtu, traveled from Lukou to Hema, the Bohai Sea, and the plains.

古文：翟钊遣其将翟都侵馆陶，屯苏康垒。
现代文：翟钊派遣他的部将翟都侵犯馆陶，驻在苏康垒。
English: Zou sent his general Zou Du to invade Guantao and stationed him in Sukangye.

古文：三月，垂引兵南击钊。
现代文：三月，慕容垂带领部队向南袭击翟钊。
English: In March, Murongdeli led his troops to the south to attack Zeng.

古文：秦骠骑将军没弈干帅众降于后秦，后秦以为车骑将军，封高平公。
现代文：前秦骠骑将军没弈干率领他的部众向后秦投降。后秦任命他为车骑将军，封他为高平公。
English: The former Qin general did not have the courage to lead his subordinates to surrender to the Later Qin. The Later Qin appointed him as the general of chariot and cavalry and made him the first Gaoping.

古文：后秦主苌寝疾，命姚硕德镇李润，尹纬守长安，召太子兴诣行营。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌卧病不起，命令姚硕德去镇守李润，尹纬留守长安，并让太子姚兴来行营之中见面。
English: Afterward, the lord of Qin, Yao Xuan, fell ill and ordered Yao Shuo De to guard Li Run and Yin Wei to guard Chang'an, and let the prince Yao Xing come to meet him in the middle of the camp.

古文：征南将军姚方成言于兴曰： 今寇敌未灭，上复寝疾。
现代文：征南将军姚方成对姚兴说道： 现在来进犯的敌人还没有被消灭，皇上又卧病不起。
English: Yao Fangcheng, the general of the Southern Expedition, said to Yao Xing: The enemy that is now attacking has not yet been eliminated, and the emperor is ill.

古文：王统等皆有部曲，终为人患，宜尽除之。 
现代文：王统等人都拥有自己的部队，最终会成为我们的祸患，应该尽快把他们全部除掉。 
English: Wang Tong and others all have their own troops and will eventually become our scourge. We should get rid of them all as soon as possible.

古文：兴从之，杀王统、王广、苻胤、徐成、毛盛。
现代文：姚兴听从了他的话、杀掉了王统、王广、苻胤、徐成、毛盛。
English: Yao Xing obeyed his words and killed Wang Tong, Wang Guang, Yu Tan, Xu Cheng and Mao Sheng.

古文：苌怒曰： 王统兄弟，吾之州里，实无他志；徐成等皆前朝名将，吾方用之，奈何辄杀之！ 
现代文：姚苌听到这个消息，生气地说： 王统他们兄弟，跟我是同州同里的老乡，根本没有二心。徐成等人都是前朝的有名将领，我才重用他们，怎么能轻易地说杀就杀呢！ 
English: Upon hearing this news, Yao Yao said angrily: "Wang Tong and his brothers and I are fellow countrymen from the same province, and we have no hard feelings at all. Xu Cheng and others are famous generals from the previous dynasty, I just reuse them, how can I easily say kill them!

古文：燕主垂进逼苏康垒。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂向前进军威逼苏康垒。
English: Later, the lord of the Yan Kingdom, Murong, leaned down to the advancing army and forced Su Kang to retreat.

古文：夏，四月，翟都南走滑台。
现代文：夏季，四月，翟都向南撤退到滑台。
English: In the summer, in April, the pelicans all retreat south to the slide.

古文：翟钊求救于西燕，西燕主永谋于群臣，尚书渤海鲍遵曰： 使两寇相弊，吾承其后，此卞庄子之策也。 
现代文：翟钊向西燕请求救援，西燕国主慕容永与大臣们商议，尚书郎渤海人鲍遵说： 让这两个寇匪互相进攻、消耗力量，我们紧跟在他们背后，坐收渔翁之利，这是卞庄子当年所用过的策略。 
English: Zhai asked Xiyan for help. The ruler of Xiyan, Mu Rongyong, discussed with the ministers. Shang Shulang and Baozun, the man of the sea, said, "Let the two bandits attack each other and consume each other's strength. We will follow closely behind them and take advantage of the fisherman's advantage. This is the strategy that Zhai Zhuangzi used that year."

古文：中书侍郎太原张腾曰： 垂强钊弱，何弊之承！
现代文：中书侍郎太原人张腾则说： 慕容垂强大，而翟钊弱小，我们有什么好处可以得到呢？
English: Zhang Teng, a Taiyuan native who served as the chief scribe, said, "Murongdiao is strong, while Yao is weak. What benefits can we get?

古文：不如速救之，以成鼎足之势。
现代文：不如赶快去解救翟钊，这样还可以形成鼎足而立的局势。
English: It would be better to rescue them as soon as possible, so that a stable situation can be created.

古文：今我引兵趋中山，昼多疑兵，夜多火炬，垂必惧而自救。
现代文：现在我们带领部队奔袭后燕的都城中山，白天多设些疑兵，夜晚多点一些火把，慕容垂得知后一定会担心后方的安全而赶回来解围。
English: Now, we are leading our troops to attack Houyan's capital, Zhongshan. During the day, we will set up more suspicious soldiers, and at night, we will light more torches. After learning this, Murong Du will definitely worry about the safety of the rear and rush back to relieve the siege.

古文：我冲其前，钊蹑其后，此天授之机，不可失也。 
现代文：那时候，我们再迎击他们的前面，翟钊又可以跟在他们的背后骚扰，这是上天所给我们提供的绝好时机，万万不可失去。 
English: At that time, we will meet them in front, and we can harass them behind their backs. This is an excellent opportunity provided by God, which must not be lost.

古文：永不从。
现代文：慕容永没有听从他的话。
English: Murong never listened to him.

古文：燕大赦。
现代文：后燕实行大赦。
English: After Yan implemented an amnesty.

古文：五月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月，丁卯朔，出现日食。
English: In May, Dingushuo, a solar eclipse.

古文：六月，燕主垂军黎阳。临河欲济，翟钊列兵南岸以拒之。
现代文：六月，后燕国主慕容垂的部队抵达黎阳，来到黄河岸边准备渡河，翟钊则把部队布置在黄河南岸用来抗拒后燕军。
English: In June, the troops of Mu Rongtui, the lord of Houyan, arrived in Liyang and came to the shore of the Yellow River to prepare to cross the river, while Yao placed his troops on the south bank of the Yellow River to resist Houyan's army.

古文：辛亥，垂徙营就西津，去黎阳西四十里，为牛皮船百馀艘，伪列兵仗，溯流而上。
现代文：辛亥，慕容垂把大营迁到西津，距离黎阳四十里，制作牛皮战船一百多艘，假装着把军卒器械满载船上，逆水而上。
English: Xinhai and Murong moved the camp to Xijin, forty miles away from Liyang, made more than a hundred cowhide warships, and pretended to load the soldiers' equipment on the boat and go up against the water.

古文：钊亟引兵趣西津，垂潜遣中垒将军桂林王镇等自黎阳津夜济，营于河南，比明而营成。
现代文：翟钊急忙带领部队直扑西津防卫。慕容垂又暗中派遣中垒将军桂林王慕容镇等人率兵从黎阳渡口连夜渡河，在黄河南岸扎下大营，天亮的时候，后燕的大营已经全部构筑完成。
English: Zhai hurriedly led the troops to attack the Xijin defense. Murongdiao also secretly dispatched the middle general Guilin Wang Murongzhen and others to cross the river from the Liyang ferry overnight and set up a large camp on the south bank of the Yellow River. By dawn, Houyan's large camp had been fully constructed.

古文：钊闻之，亟还，攻镇等营；垂命镇等坚壁勿战。
现代文：翟钊听到这个消息后，急忙返回，进攻慕容镇等人的军营，慕容垂命令慕容镇等只许坚守防备，不许出战。
English: After hearing this news, Zou hurriedly returned and attacked the military camp of Murong Town and others. Murong Zhui ordered Murong Town and others only to stand on the defensive and not to go to war.

古文：钊兵往来疲暍，攻营不能拔，将引去；镇等引兵出战。骠骑将军农自西津济，与镇等夹击，大破之。
现代文：翟钊的兵马跑来跑去疲惫热燥不堪，攻打后燕军的营地难以取胜，正要带兵退走，慕容镇等人突然带兵从营地中杀出，与此同时，后燕骠骑将军慕容农从西津渡过黄河，与慕容镇等一起夹击翟钊，把他打得大败。
English: The exhausted soldiers and horses were running around, exhausted and hot. It was difficult to win the battle against the camp of Hou Yan's army. Just as they were about to lead the soldiers back, Murong Town and others suddenly led the soldiers out of the camp. At the same time, Hou Yan's cavalry, General Murong Nong, crossed the Yellow River from Xijin, and together with Murong Town and others, clamped down on Hou Yan and defeated him.

古文：钊走还滑台，将妻子，收遗众，北济河，登白鹿山，凭险自守，燕兵不得进。
现代文：翟钊回逃到滑台，携带妻子儿女，收集残兵败将，向北渡过黄河，登上了白鹿山，依靠山势险峻严密把守，后燕的部队无法进击。
English: He fled back to the slide, carrying his wife and children, collecting the remnants of the defeated soldiers, crossing the Yellow River to the north, and climbing up the White Deer Mountain. He relied on the steepness of the mountain to closely guard, and Houyan's troops could not attack.

古文：农曰： 钊无粮，不能久居山中。 
现代文：慕容农说： 翟钊没有军粮，一定不能长时间地在山中蜷缩。 
English: Murong Nong said: "If you don't have military food, you can't stay in the mountains for a long time.

古文：乃引兵还，留骑候之。
现代文：自己率领部队回营，仅留下一些骑兵等待观望翟钊的动静。
English: He led his troops back to camp, leaving only a few cavalry to wait and see what would happen.

古文：钊果下山；还兵掩击，尽获其众，钊单骑奔长子。
现代文：翟钊果然下了山，慕容农马上挥师回军突袭，把翟钊的部众全部俘获，只有翟钊一人骑马投奔长子。
English: Yao did indeed go down the mountain. Murong Nong immediately waved his division to return to the army for a surprise attack and captured all of Yao's subordinates. Only Yao rode to join his eldest son.

古文：西燕主永以钊为车骑大将军、兗州牧，封东郡王。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永任命翟钊为车骑大将军、兖州牧，并封他为东郡王。
English: Mu Rongyong, the ruler of Xiyan Province, appointed Zou as the general of chariot and cavalry and the herdsman of Xizhou, and made him the king of Dong County.

古文：岁馀，钊谋反，永杀之。
现代文：一年多之后，翟钊阴谋反叛西燕，慕容永把他杀了。
English: More than a year later, Zou plotted to rebel against Xiyan, and Murong Yong killed him.

古文：初，郝晷、崔逞及清河崔宏、新兴张卓、辽东夔腾、阳平路纂皆仕于秦，避秦乱来奔，诏以为冀州诸郡，各将部曲营于河南。
现代文：最初，郝晷、崔逞，以及清河人崔宏、新兴人张卓、辽东人夔腾、阳平人路纂等人都在前秦做官。前秦大乱时，他们为了躲避战乱，前来投奔东晋。
English: At first, Yao and Cui Gang, as well as Cui Hong from Qinghe, Zhang Zhuo from Xinxing, Yu Teng from Liaodong and Lu Xudao from Yangping, all served as officials in the former Qin Dynasty. When the former Qin Dynasty was in turmoil, they fled to the East Jin Dynasty to escape the turmoil.

古文：既而受翟氏官爵，翟氏败，皆降于燕，燕主垂各随其材而用之。
现代文：孝武帝下诏委任他们做了冀州几个郡的郡守，并带领他们各自的部队在黄河南岸驻扎。不久，他们又接受了翟辽的官职和爵位。
English: Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict appointing them as county governors of several counties in Jizhou and stationed their respective troops on the south bank of the Yellow River. Soon, they also accepted the official position and peerage of Gongliao.

古文：钊所统七郡三万馀户，皆按堵如故。
现代文：翟辽及他的家族失败后，他们又都投降了后燕，后燕国主慕容垂按照他们各自的才干，分别留用了他们。
English: After the failure of Gong Liao and his family, they all surrendered to Houyan, and the ruler of Houyan, Mu Rongtai, kept them separately according to their respective talents.

古文：以章武王宙为兗、豫二州刺史，镇滑台；徙徐州民七千馀户于黎阳，以彭城王脱为徐州刺史，镇黎阳。
现代文：翟钊过去所统辖的七个郡三万多户人家，都安居下来，像过去一样。慕容垂又任命章武王慕容宙为兖州、豫州两个州的刺史，镇守滑台；把徐州的居民七千多户迁移到黎阳，并任命彭城王慕容脱为徐州刺史，镇守黎阳。
English: More than 30,000 households in the seven counties under the control of the Liao dynasty lived in peace, just as in the past. Murong Li also appointed Zhangwu Wang Murong Cao as the chief historian of the two states of Zhangzhou and Yuzhou, and the town guard of Lijiang; relocated more than 7,000 households in Xuzhou to Liyang, and appointed Pengcheng Wang Murong De as the chief historian of Xuzhou and the town guard of Liyang.

古文：脱，垂之弟子也。
现代文：慕容脱是慕容垂的侄儿。
English: Murong Du is Murong Du's nephew.

古文：垂以崔廕为宙司马。
现代文：又任命崔荫为慕容宙的司马。
English: He also appointed Cui Yin as the Sima of Murongzhou.

古文：初，陈留王绍为镇南将军，太原王楷为征西将军，乐浪王温为征东将军，垂皆以廕为之佐。
现代文：当初，陈留王慕容绍做镇南将军，太原王慕容楷做征西将军，乐浪王慕容温做征东将军，慕容垂都是委派崔荫作为他们的辅佐。
English: At first, Chen Liu Wang Murong Shao was appointed as the Zhennan General, Taiyuan Wang Murong Kai was appointed as the Western General, Le Lang Wang Murong Wen was appointed as the Eastern General, and Murong Du was appointed by Cui Yin as their assistant.

古文：廕才干明敏强正，善规谏，四王皆严惮之；所至简刑法，轻赋役，流民归之，户口滋息。
现代文：崔荫精明强干，刚强正直，善于规劝主上的过失，因此，四位亲王都很害怕他。崔荫每到一个地方，都努力减少刑法，减轻田赋与劳役，使外出逃亡的难民渐渐地回来，当地的户口也越来越多。
English: The four princes were afraid of Cui Yin, who was shrewd, strong, and honest, and good at persuading them of their mistakes. Whenever Cui Yin went to a place, he tried to reduce the criminal law, lighten the land tax and labor service, and gradually bring back the refugees who had fled abroad. The number of local hukou was also increasing.

古文：秋，七月，垂如鄴，以太原王楷为冀州牧，右光禄大夫馀蔚为左仆射。
现代文：秋季，七月，慕容垂来到邺城，任命太原王慕容楷为冀州牧、右光禄大夫馀蔚为左仆射。
English: In the autumn, in July, Murong Du came to Lucheng and appointed the King of Taiyuan, Murong Kai, as the governor of Jizhou and the doctor of Uguanglu, Yu Wei, as his left-hand man.

古文：秦主登闻后秦主苌疾病，大喜，告祠世祖神主，大赦，百官进位二等，秣马厉兵，进逼安定，去城九十馀里。
现代文：前秦国主苻登听说了后秦国主姚苌生病，喜出望外，焚香禀告世祖苻坚的神位，又在国中实行大赦，并把文武百官的职位连升二级，喂饱战马，磨利武器，统领大军逼临安定，距离城池仅九十多里。
English: When the former Qin sovereign Yu Deng heard that the later Qin sovereign Yao Jun was ill, he was overjoyed. He burned incense and told the world that his ancestor Yu Jian had ascended to the divine throne. He also implemented an amnesty in the country, and promoted the positions of hundreds of civil and military officials to the second level, fed the war horses, sharpened the weapons, and led the army to stability, only more than ninety miles away from the city.

古文：八月，苌疾小瘳，出拒之。
现代文：八月，姚苌的病稍有好转，便率军出城与前秦军队对抗。
English: In August, Yao Jun's illness improved slightly, and he led his army out of the city to fight against the former Qin army.

古文：登引兵出营，将逆战，苌遣安南将军姚熙隆别攻秦营，登惧而还。
现代文：苻登带领军队冲出营地将要交战，姚苌却派遣安南将军姚熙隆从别的地方去进攻前秦的营地。苻登惧怕后营有失，连忙撤退。
English: Zhou Deng led the army to rush out of the camp to fight, but Yao Wei sent Annan's general Yao Xilong to attack Qin's camp from another place. Zhou Deng was afraid of losing the rear camp and quickly retreated.

古文：苌夜引兵旁出以蹑其后，旦而候骑告曰： 贼诸营已空，不知所向。 
现代文：姚苌在夜晚带领部队从侧翼迂回出来，紧跟在苻登部队的背后。天亮时，前秦的哨探骑兵回来报告，说： 贼兵的几个军营都已经空了，不知去向。 
English: During the night, Yao Jun led his troops out from the flanks and followed closely behind the Zhenden troops. At dawn, the former Qin's sentinel cavalry returned to report, saying, "Several military camps of the robber soldiers have been emptied, and I don't know where they have gone."

古文：登惊曰： 彼为何人，去令我不知，来令我不觉，谓其将死，忽然复来，朕与此羌同世，何其厄哉！ 
现代文：苻登大惊失色，说道： 姚苌这个家伙是个什么人，走的时候能让我不得知道，来的时候又能让我无从知觉，都说他快要死了，可却忽然之间又能出来和我对阵打仗。我与这个老羌贼同活在一个世上，是多么不走运的事情啊！ 
English: Zou Deng was stunned and said, "What kind of person is this guy Yao Wei? When he leaves, I can't help but wonder, but when he comes, he can make me unconscious. Everyone says he's about to die, but all of a sudden he can come out and fight me. I'm living in the same world as this old thief, how unlucky things are!

古文：登遂还雍，苌亦还安定。
现代文：于是，苻登只好撤兵回到雍城去了，姚苌也回到安定。
English: As a result, Zhen Deng had to withdraw his troops back to Yongcheng, and Yao Tong also returned to the stable.

古文：三河王光遣其弟右将军宝等攻金城王乾归，宝及将士死者万馀人。
现代文：后凉三河王吕光派他的弟弟右将军吕宝等，进攻西秦金城王乞伏乾归，吕宝及将士战死的有一万多人。
English: Later, Liang Sanhe King Luguang sent his younger brother, the Right General Lubao, and others to attack the West Qin Jincheng King to beg for his return. Lubao and his soldiers killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：又遣其子虎贲中郎将纂击南羌彭奚念，纂亦败归。
现代文：吕光又派遣他的儿子、虎贲中郎将吕纂进攻南部羌族部落首领彭奚念，吕纂也大败而归。
English: Lü Guang also sent his son, Tigress Chung Lang, to attack the southern Yi tribal leader, Peng Junnen. Lü Cong was also defeated and returned home.

古文：光自将击奚念于枹罕，克之，奚念奔甘松。
现代文：于是吕光亲自领兵去罕袭击彭奚念，获胜。彭奚念去投奔甘松。
English: As a result, Lü Guang personally led the troops to Han to attack Peng Jiannen and won. Peng Jiannen went to join Gan Song.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，荆州刺史王忱卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥，东晋荆州刺史王忱去世。
English: In the winter, October, Xinhai, East Jin Jingzhou Jishi Wang Zhen passed away.

古文：雍州刺史硃序以老病求解职，诏以太子右卫率郗恢为雍州刺史，代序镇襄阳。
现代文：东晋雍州刺史朱序因为年老多病，请求辞官。孝武帝下诏，任命太子右卫率郗恢为雍州刺史，代替朱序镇守襄阳。
English: Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict, appointing Prince Uwei to replace Zhu Xuan as Yangyang's garrison commander.

古文：恢，昙之子也。
现代文：郗恢是郗昙的儿子。
English: He is the son of the king.

古文：巴蜀人在关中者皆叛后秦，据弘农以附秦。
现代文：流亡到关中一带的巴蜀人全部背叛了后秦，占据了弘农并归附前秦。
English: The Bashu people who were exiled to the Guanzhong area all betrayed the Later Qin, occupied Hongnong and were annexed by the Former Qin.

古文：秦主登以窦冲为左丞相，冲徙屯华阴。
现代文：前秦国主苻登任命窦冲为左丞相，带兵转到华阴去驻扎。
English: The former Qin sovereign, Yu Deng, appointed Dou Chong as the minister of the left, and he and his soldiers were transferred to Huayin and stationed there.

古文：郗恢遣将军赵睦守金墉，河南太守杨佺期帅众军湖城，击冲，走之。
现代文：郗恢派遣将军赵睦据守金墉，河南太守杨期统率部队到湖城，袭击窦冲，并把窦冲赶走。
English: Emperor Gaozong dispatched General Zhao Mutsumo to guard Jinyu, and Yang Cui, the eunuch of Henan Province, led the troops to Hucheng, attacked Dou Chong and drove Dou Chong away.

古文：十一月，癸酉，以黄门郎殷仲堪为都督荆、益、宁三州诸军事、荆州刺史，镇江陵。
现代文：十一月，癸酉，东晋任命黄门郎殷仲堪为都督荆、益、宁三州诸军事，荆州刺史，镇守江陵。
English: In November, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Huangmen Lang Yin Zhongkan as the military governor of the three states of Jing, Yixing and Ning, the chief historian of Jing Province, and the town guard of Jiangling.

古文：仲堪虽有英誉，资望犹浅，议者不以为允。
现代文：殷仲堪虽然有很好的名声，但是资历、威望还浅，因此议论的人认为并不公允合理。
English: Although Yin Zhongkan has a good reputation, his qualifications and prestige are still shallow, so people who talk about it think it is not fair and reasonable.

古文：到官，好行小惠，纲目不举。
现代文：果然，殷仲堪到达任上后，喜欢行使小恩小惠，对大政方针缺乏有力切实的措施。
English: Sure enough, after Yin Zhongkang took office, he liked to exercise small favors, and lacked strong and practical measures for major policies.

古文：南郡公桓玄负其才地，以雄豪自处，朝廷疑而不用。
现代文：东晋南郡公桓玄仗恃自己的才能和显赫的家族地位，总把自己看作是英雄豪杰，朝廷对他怀有戒心而不重用。
English: Because of his talent and prominent family status, he always saw himself as a hero. The imperial court was wary of him and did not give him much importance.

古文：年二十三，始拜太子洗马。
现代文：二十三岁那年，他才开始在朝廷任太子洗马。
English: At the age of twenty-three, he began to serve as crown prince in the imperial court.

古文：玄尝诣琅邪王道子，值其酣醉，张目谓众客曰： 桓温晚途欲作贼，云何？ 
现代文：桓玄曾经去拜见琅邪王司马道子，当时正赶上司马道子酩酊大醉，他睁开醉眼对身旁的很多宾客说： 桓温到了晚年的时候，曾经打算要做贼，你们说怎么样呀？ 
English: Kuan Xuan once went to see the evil king Sima Daozi. At that time, he was driving his boss Ma Daozi who was very drunk. He opened his drunk eyes and said to many guests around him: When Kuan Wen was in his old age, he once planned to be a thief. What do you think?

古文：玄伏地流汗，不能起。
现代文：桓玄伏在地上，汗流浃背，站不起来。
English: Kuan Xuan lay on the ground, sweating profusely, unable to stand up.

古文：由是益不自安，常切齿于道子。
现代文：从此他越发忐忑不安，常常对司马道子痛恨得咬牙切齿。
English: From then on, he became more and more anxious, and often gritted his teeth in hatred of Sima Daozi.

古文：后出补义兴太守，郁郁不得志，叹曰： 父为九州伯，儿为五湖长！ 
现代文：后来，他补任义兴太守，但也还是感到怀才不遇而闷闷不乐，他叹息着说： 我的父亲曾是九州的盟主，而他的儿子却只不过是五湖的小头目！ 
English: Later, he was appointed as Yixing's successor, but he still felt sad and depressed. He sighed and said, "My father was the ruler of Kyushu, but his son is just the leader of the five lakes!"

古文：遂弃官归国，上疏自讼曰： 先臣勤王匡复之勋，朝廷遗之，臣不复计。
现代文：于是，他弃官回到封地。临行，他呈上一道奏章，为自己申辩道： 我父亲辅佐皇家，平定祸乱的功劳，朝廷把它遗忘了，我并不再作计较。
English: Therefore, he resigned his post and returned to his fiefdom. Before leaving, he presented a petition to defend himself, saying: My father assisted the royal family and did a great deal to quell the calamity, but the court has forgotten about it, so I will no longer meddle.

古文：至于先帝龙飞，陛下继明，请问谈者，谁之由邪？ 
现代文：但是，先帝登上宝座，陛下接着得以继承大统，这些事，请陛下问一问那些谈论的人，是靠谁得来的呀？ 
English: But, Your Majesty, please ask those who are talking about the former emperor's ascension to the throne, and Your Majesty's subsequent succession to the throne, who was responsible for these things?

古文：疏寝不报。
现代文：奏章被搁置下来，没有上报。
English: The score was shelved and not reported.

古文：玄在江陵，仲堪甚敬惮之。
现代文：桓玄在江陵，殷仲堪对他十分的恭敬畏惧。
English: Kuan Xuan was in Gangneung, and Yin Zhongkang was full of respect and awe for him.

古文：桓氏累世临荆州，玄复豪横，士民畏之，过于仲堪。
现代文：桓氏家族几代都在荆州镇守，桓玄尤其强豪专横，当地的官员、百姓都害怕他，甚于害怕殷仲堪。
English: The Huan family has been guarding the town of Jingzhou for several generations. Huan Xuan is especially powerful and domineering. Local officials and people are afraid of him, even more than they are afraid of Yin Zhongkan.

古文：尝于仲堪听事前戏马，以槊拟仲堪。
现代文：桓玄曾经在殷仲堪升堂办公之前在公堂外骑马取笑，并且用长矛假装向殷仲堪直刺。
English: Kuan Xuan used to ride a horse outside the courtroom to make fun of Yin Zhongkang before he was promoted to the office, and he pretended to stab Yin Zhongkang with a spear.

古文：仲堪中兵参军彭城刘迈谓玄曰： 马槊有馀，精理不足。 
现代文：殷仲堪的部将中军参军、彭城人刘迈对桓玄说： 战马和长矛的威力有余，但是于道理精义却有缺陷。 
English: Liu Mai, a Pengcheng native who joined the Chinese army as a talented general, said to Huan Xuan: "Horses and spears have more than enough power, but they are deficient in reason and essence.

古文：玄不悦，仲堪为之失色。
现代文：桓玄怫然不悦，殷仲堪也为此大惊失色。
English: Kuan Xuan was visibly displeased, and Yin Zhongkan was also shocked.

古文：玄出，仲堪谓迈曰： 卿，狂人也！
现代文：桓玄走出去之后，殷仲堪对刘迈说： 你是疯了！
English: After Kuan Xuan went out, Yin Zhongkan said to Liu Mai: You are crazy!

古文：玄夜遣杀卿，我岂能相救邪？ 
现代文：桓玄趁夜派出刺客来杀你，我怎么能救得了你呢？ 
English: Kuan Xuan sent assassins to kill you in the middle of the night. How could I save you?

古文：使迈下都避之；玄使人追之，迈仅而获免。
现代文：于是，他便让刘迈赶快到京城去躲避桓玄的报复。桓玄派人去追杀他，刘迈仅仅免得一死。
English: As a result, he asked Liu Mai to hurry to the capital to escape the revenge of Kuan Xuan. Kuan Xuan sent people to chase him, Liu Mai only avoided death.

古文：征虏参军豫章胡籓过江陵，见仲堪，说之曰： 桓玄志趣不常，每怏怏于失职，节下崇待太守，恐非将来之计也！ 
现代文：东晋征虏参军豫章人胡藩路过江陵，前去看望殷仲堪，劝解他说： 桓玄的志向兴趣不比常人，常常因为没有得到一个满意的职位而大为不满，您对他尊敬优待得似乎太过分了，这恐怕不是能够长期维持的办法吧！ 
English: Hu Han, a member of the Eastern Jin Dynasty's Yuzhang Clan, passed through Jiangling on his way to visit Yin Zhongkan and persuaded him: "Huan Xuan's aspirations and interests are no more than those of an ordinary person, and he is often very dissatisfied because he did not get a satisfactory position. Your respect and preferential treatment of him seems to be too excessive. I'm afraid this is not a long-term solution.

古文：仲堪不悦。
现代文：殷仲堪心中不大高兴。
English: Yin Zhongkang was very unhappy.

古文：籓内弟同郡罗企生为仲堪功曹，籓退，谓企生曰： 殷侯倒戈以授人，必及于祸。
现代文：胡藩的妻弟罗企生是殷仲堪手下的功曹。胡藩从殷仲堪那里出来，对罗企生说： 殷仲堪把长戈倒转过来，把木柄交给别人，自己一定遭难。
English: Hu Han's brother-in-law, Luo Qisheng, was a credit to Yin Zhongkang. Hu Han came out of Yin Zhongkang and said to Luo Qisheng: "Yin Zhongkang turned the crossbow upside down and gave the handle to someone else. He must be in trouble."

古文：君不早图去就，后悔无及矣！ 
现代文：你如果不早早地图谋去留，后悔可是来不及的呀！ 
English: If you don't map out a place to stay early, it's too late to regret it!

古文：庚寅，立皇子德文为琅邪王，徙琅邪王道子为会稽王。
现代文：庚寅，孝武帝立他的儿子司马德文为琅邪王，把原琅邪王司马道子改封为会稽王。
English: In Goyang, Emperor Xiaowu appointed his son Sima Dewen as the King of Evil, and changed the former King of Evil, Sima Daozi, to the King of Censors.

古文：十二月，燕主垂还中山，以辽西王农为都督兗、豫、荆、徐、雍五州诸军事，镇鄴。
现代文：十二月，后燕国主慕容垂回到都城中山，任命辽西王慕容农为都督兖、豫、荆、徐、雍五州诸军事，镇守邺城。
English: In December, Emperor Murong of Yan returned to Zhongshan, the capital city, and appointed Murong Nong, the king of West Liao, as the military governor of the five provinces of Yan, Yu, Jing, Xu, and Yong, to guard Yancheng.

古文：休官权千成据显亲，自称秦州牧。
现代文：休官部落的首领权千成据守显亲县，自称为秦州牧。
English: The leader of the retired tribe, Quancheng, is said to be guarding Xianxian County and calling himself Qinzhou Maki.

古文：清河人李辽上表请敕兗州修孔子庙，给户洒扫，仍立庠序，收教学者，曰： 事有如赊而实急者，此之谓也！ 
现代文：东晋清河人李辽上奏朝廷，请求下令南兖州府修建孔子庙，指定专门的人家负责日常洒扫；仍然开办学校，聘请教师，招收学生。
English: Li Liao, a native of Qinghe in the East Jin Dynasty, petitioned the imperial court to order the Nanluozhou government to build a Confucius Temple and designate a special person to be responsible for daily sweeping; he still opened schools, hired teachers, and enrolled students.

古文：表不见省。烈宗孝武皇帝下太元十八年
现代文：他说： 有的事情看起来好像可以作长久打算，实际上却需要尽快办理，指的就是这些事情。 
English: He said: "These are the things that look like they can be planned for a long time, but actually need to be dealt with as quickly as possible.

古文：春，正月，燕阳平孝王柔卒。
现代文：奏章呈上没有看见反应。太元十八年春季正月，后燕阴平孝王慕容柔去世。
English: There was no response to the petition. In the first month of the spring of the 18th year of the Taiyuan era, Houyan Pingxiao Wang Murongru passed away.

古文：权千成为秦所逼，请降于金城王乾归，乾归以为东秦州刺史、休官大都统、显亲公。
现代文：休官部落首领权千成被前秦逼迫，向西秦金城王乞伏乾归请求投降。乞伏乾归任命他为东秦州刺史、休官大都统，封为显亲公。
English: The retired tribal chieftain Quancheng was forced by the former Qin Dynasty to surrender to the Western Qin Dynasty's Jincheng King Qianfu Qianfu, who appointed him as the governor of Eastern Qin Province, the retired governor of the Grand Duchy of Qin, and was given the title of Xianxin.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，燕主垂加太子宝大单于；以安定王库傉官伟为太尉，范阳王德为司徒，太原王楷为司空，陈留王绍为尚书右仆射。
现代文：夏季四月，庚子，后燕国主慕容垂加封太子慕容宝为大单于。又任命安定王库官伟为太尉，范阳王慕容德为司徒，太原王慕容楷为司空，陈留王慕容绍为尚书右仆射。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zi, the lord of Houyan Province, Murong Trie, and the crown prince Murong Bao were appointed as the grand vizier. He also appointed Wang Guan Wei as the first lieutenant, Fan Yang Wang Murong De as the tutor, Taiyuan Wang Murong Kai as the secretary, and Chen Liu Wang Murong Shao as the secretary.

古文：五月，立子熙为河间王，朗为渤海王，鉴为博陵王。
现代文：五月，册立他的儿子慕容熙为河间王，慕容朗为渤海王，慕容鉴为博陵王。
English: In May, he appointed his son Murong Xi as the King of Kawama, Murong Lang as the King of Bohai, and Murong Jian as the King of Boling.

古文：秦右丞相窦冲矜才尚人，自请封天水王，秦主登不许。
现代文：前秦右丞相窦冲自恃其才，以为超人一等，他自己请求封他为天水王。苻登没有答应。
English: Former Minister of the Qin Dynasty, Dou Chong, prided himself on his talent and thought he was a superman. He himself asked to be named the King of Heaven and Water. Zou Deng did not agree.

古文：六月，冲自称秦王，改元元光。
现代文：六月，窦冲自己称秦王，改年号为元光。
English: In June, Dou Chong called himself Qin Wang and changed his name to Yuan Guang.

古文：金城王乾归立其子炽磐为太子。
现代文：西秦金城王乞伏乾归立他的儿子乞伏炽磐为太子。
English: Western Qin's Jincheng King Qibujian crowned his son Qibujangyan as crown prince.

古文：炽磐勇略明决，过于其父。
现代文：乞伏炽磐的武勇谋略和明智决断，都超过他父亲。
English: The brave stratagems and wise decisions of the Beggar Blaze surpass those of his father.

古文：秋，七月，秦主登攻窦冲于野人堡，冲求救于后秦。
现代文：秋季，七月，前秦国主苻登在野人堡进攻窦冲。窦冲向后秦求救。
English: In the autumn, in July, the former Qin sovereign Yu Deng attacked Dou Chong at the Wildling Fort. Dou Chong called for help from Hou Qin.

古文：尹纬言于后秦主苌曰： 太子仁厚之称，著于远近，而英略未著，请使击苻以著之。 
现代文：尹纬向后秦国主姚苌进言说： 太子姚兴仁慈敦厚的名声，远近闻名。但是他的英才伟略却没有广泛传扬开去，请您派他去攻击苻登来使他扬名立威吧！ 
English: Yin Wei said to the later Qin sovereign, Yao Xing, "Prince Yao Xing's reputation for benevolence is well-known far and wide. However, his great talent and strategy have not been widely spread. Please send him to attack Xing Deng to make him famous!

古文：苌从之。
现代文：姚苌听从了他的话。
English: Yao Yao obeyed his words.

古文：太子兴将兵攻胡空堡，登解冲围以赴之。
现代文：太子姚兴带兵去进攻胡空堡。苻登急忙解除对窦冲的围困，赶赴那里去解救。
English: Prince Yao Xing led the troops to attack Hu Kong Fort. Zhou Den hurriedly lifted the siege on Dou Chong and rushed there to rescue.

古文：兴因袭平凉。大获而归。
现代文：姚兴于是又进袭平凉，缴获了许多东西之后班师回朝。
English: Yao Xing then attacked Pingliang again, captured many things, and then returned to the imperial court.

古文：苌使兴还镇长安。
现代文：姚苌还是派姚兴回到长安去镇守。
English: Yao Zhen still sent Yao Xing back to Chang'an to guard the town.

古文：魏王珪以薛干太悉伏不送刘勃勃，八月，袭其城，屠之，太悉伏奔秦。
现代文：魏王拓跋因为薛干部落的首领太悉伏拒绝把刘勃勃送交给他，在八月，袭击了太悉伏的驻地，大肆杀戮。太悉伏逃奔到了前秦。
English: Wei King Tuoba, because the leader of the Xuegan tribe, Taisifu, refused to hand Liu Gong over to him, attacked Taisifu's residence in August and killed a large number of people. Taisifu fled to the former Qin.

古文：氐帅杨佛嵩叛，奔后秦，杨佺期、赵睦追之，九月，丙戌，败佛嵩于潼关。
现代文：东晋的氐族首领杨佛嵩叛变，逃到了后秦。杨期、赵睦追赶他。九月，丙戌，在潼关附近将杨佛嵩打败。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the leader of the Yi people, Yang Fusong, rebelled and fled to the Later Qin Dynasty. Yang Jie and Zhao Mutu chased after him. In September, He Jie defeated Yang Fusong near Shaoguan.

古文：后秦将姚崇救佛嵩，败晋兵，赵睦死。
现代文：后秦将领姚崇出兵搭救杨佛嵩，击败了晋军，杀死了晋将赵睦。
English: Later, the Qin general Yao Chong sent troops to rescue Yang Fusong, defeated the Jin army, and killed the Jin general Zhao Mutsu.

古文：冬，十月，后秦主苌疾甚，还长安。
现代文：冬季，十月，后秦国主姚苌病重，回到长安。
English: In the winter, in October, Yao Xuan, the ruler of the Later Qin Dynasty, fell seriously ill and returned to Chang'an.

古文：燕主垂议伐西燕，诸将皆曰： 永未有衅，我连年征讨，士卒疲弊，未可也。 
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂召集文武大臣议论讨伐西燕的计划，各位将领都说： 慕容永与我们并没有什么大的冲突。我国连续几年东征西讨，将士兵卒疲惫不堪，不可再发动战争。 
English: Later, the lord of Yan Province, Murong Li, convened the Minister of Culture and Martial Arts to discuss the plan to fight against Xiyan. All the generals said: Murong Yong has no major conflict with us. Our country has been fighting against the East and West for several years in a row, and our soldiers are exhausted. We must not start a war again.

古文：范阳王德曰： 永既国之枝叶，又僭举位号，惑民视听，宜行先除之，以壹民心。
现代文：范阳王慕容德却说： 慕容永是我慕容皇族的偏枝旁叶，他超越本分另立尊号，迷惑了老百姓的视听。我们应该先把他除掉，以使老百姓一心向着我们。
English: Fan Yang Wang Murongde, however, said: "Murong will always be a side branch of my Murong royal family. He overstepped his duty to set up a separate honorific, confusing the people's audio-visual. We should get rid of him first, so that the people can focus on us."

古文：士卒虽疲，庸得已乎！ 
现代文：虽然士卒将领的确很疲倦。
English: Although the officers and generals were indeed very tired.

古文：垂曰： 司徒意正与吾同。
现代文：但是又怎么能够罢手停战呢？ 慕容垂说： 司徒的意见正好和我的想法一样。
English: But how can an armistice be reached? Murongtli said: "Seto's opinion is exactly the same as mine.

古文：吾比老，叩囊底智，足以取之，终不复留此贼以累子孙也。 
现代文：我虽然已经老了，但是我拍一拍口袋，觉得剩下的这一点点智谋足够对付他们，总不能把这些蟊贼留下来连累我的子孙。 
English: Although I am already old, I pat my pocket and feel that the remaining little bit of wisdom is enough to deal with them, I can't leave these thieves to bother my children and grandchildren.

古文：遂戒严。
现代文：于是下令处于临战状态，严阵以待。
English: So he ordered to be in a state of alert, to be on the alert.

古文：十一月，垂发中山步骑七万，遣镇西将军丹杨王缵，龙骧将军张崇出井陉，攻西燕武乡公友于晋阳，征东将军平规攻镇东将军段平于沙亭。
现代文：十一月，慕容垂调动中山的步、骑兵七万人，派遣镇西将军、丹杨王慕容瓒，以及龙骧将军张崇等从井陉出发，在晋阳对西燕武乡公慕容友发起攻击；征东将军平规在沙亭进攻西燕的镇东将军段平。
English: In November, Murongtu mobilized 70,000 infantry and cavalry from Zhongshan, and dispatched Zhenxi General, Danyang King Murongtu, and Longyi General Zhang Chong from Jingyu to launch an attack on Xiyanwu Township Gong Murongyou in Jinyang; East Conquest General Ping Gu attacked Zhendong General Duan Ping of Xiyan in Shating.

古文：西燕主永遣其尚书令刁云、车骑将军慕容钟帅众五万守潞川。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永派遣他的尚书令刁云、车骑将军慕容钟统领大军五万据守潞川。
English: Murong Yong, the lord of Xiyan, dispatched his commander-in-chief, Murong Yun, and his cavalry general, Murong Zhong, to lead an army of fifty thousand to guard the Lugu River.

古文：友，永之弟也。
现代文：慕容友是慕容永的弟弟。
English: Murong You is Murong Yong's younger brother.

古文：十二月，垂至鄴。
现代文：十二月，慕容垂来到邺城。
English: In December, Muronglu came to Handan.

古文：己亥，后秦主苌召太尉姚旻、仆射尹纬、姚晃、将军姚大目、尚书狄伯支入禁中，受遗诏辅政。
现代文：己亥，后秦国主姚苌把太尉姚、仆射尹纬、姚晃、将军姚大目、尚书狄伯支等人召进宫中，要他们接受遗诏辅佐太子姚兴治理朝政。
English: After Ji Hai, the ruler of the Qin Dynasty, Yao Zhen, summoned the Tai Liang Yao, Fu Sha Yin Wei, Yao Jiao, General Yao Daime, Shang Shu Di Bozhi and others to the palace and asked them to accept the will of the assistant to the prince Yao Xing to govern the government.

古文：苌谓太子兴曰： 有毁此诸公者，慎勿受之。
现代文：姚苌对太子姚兴说： 如果有诋毁攻击这几位先生的人，你一定要慎重处理，不要听从他们的话。
English: Yao Zhen said to Prince Yao Xing: If there are people who slander and attack these gentlemen, you must deal with them carefully and not listen to them.

古文：汝抚骨肉以恩，接大臣以礼，待物以信，遇民以仁，四者不失，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：你如能做到用恩德来抚慰骨肉，用礼仪来对待大臣，用信义来处理一切事情，用仁慈来对待百姓，这四个方面都能不偏废的话，我就没有什么可担忧的了。 
English: If you can use benevolence to soothe your bones and flesh, treat ministers with etiquette, handle all matters with trustworthiness, and treat the people with benevolence, if all four aspects are not biased, I have nothing to worry about.

古文：姚晃垂涕问取苻登之策，苌曰： 今大业垂成，兴才智足办，奚所复问！ 
现代文：姚晃此时流着泪询问征服苻登的计策，姚苌说： 现在，我们的帝王大业马上就要完成了，姚兴的才智与谋略已经足可以胜任，还有什么必要再来问我呢！ 
English: At this time, Yao Xing shed tears and inquired about the strategy of conquering Shandong. Yao Xing said: Now, our emperor's great cause is about to be completed. Yao Xing's talent and strategy are already enough to be competent. What is the need to ask me again?

古文：庚子，苌卒。
现代文：庚子，姚苌去世。
English: Geng Zi, Yao Tong passed away.

古文：兴秘不发丧，以其叔父绪镇安定，硕德镇阴密，弟崇守长安。
现代文：姚兴不对外宣布，只是马上任命他的叔叔姚绪去镇守安定，派遣姚硕德去镇守阴密，并命令他的弟弟姚崇留守长安。
English: Yao Xing did not announce to the outside world, but immediately appointed his uncle Yao Xu to guard the town of Ding'an, sent Yao Shuo De to guard the town of Yinmi, and ordered his brother Yao Chong to stay to guard Chang'an.

古文：或谓硕德曰： 公威名素重，部曲最强，今易世之际，必为朝廷所疑，不如且奔秦州，观望事势。 
现代文：有人对姚硕德说： 您的威望名声历来就是最高的，您带领的部队也是最强壮的，现在正是皇帝即位、政权交接之际，您一定受到朝廷的怀疑。不如暂时前往秦州躲避一下，观望事态的发展变化。 
English: Someone said to Yao Shude: Your prestige and reputation have always been the highest, and the troops you lead are also the strongest. Now is the time of the emperor's enthronement and the transfer of power, you must be suspected by the imperial court. It is better to temporarily go to Qinzhou to avoid it and wait for the development of the situation.

古文：硕德曰： 太子志度宽明，必无它虑。
现代文：姚硕德说： 太子姚兴的心胸与度量宽宏明达，绝对不会有其他的想法和顾虑。
English: Yao Shude said: Prince Yao Xing's heart is generous and wise, and he will never have any other thoughts or concerns.

古文：今苻登未灭而骨肉相攻，是自亡也。
现代文：现在苻登还没有铲除，我们自家骨肉便先互相打起来，这是自取灭亡。
English: Now that banditry has not been eradicated, our own flesh and blood will fight each other first, which is self-defeating.

古文：吾有死而已，终不为也。 
现代文：我不过有一死罢了，却绝对不做那种事。 
English: I've only got one life to live and I'm not doing that.

古文：遂往见兴，兴优礼而遣之。
现代文：他便去晋见姚兴，姚兴对他非常尊敬，待遇也很优厚，并送他回去。
English: He went to Jin to see Yao Xing, Yao Xing respected him very much and treated him very well, and sent him back.

古文：兴自称是大将军，以尹纬为长史，狄伯支为司马，帅众伐秦。
现代文：姚兴自称大将军，任命尹纬为长史，狄伯支为司马，率众讨伐前秦。
English: Yao Xing claimed to be a great general, appointed Yin Wei as Changshi, Di Bozhi as Sima, and led the people to fight against the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝下太元十九年
现代文：太元十九年
English: Founded in 19th century

古文：春，正月，秦主登闻后秦主苌卒，喜曰： 姚兴小儿，吾折杖笞之耳。 
现代文：春季，正月，前秦国主苻登听说后秦国主姚苌已死，喜不自禁地说： 姚兴这个黄口乳儿，我折下一根树枝，就可以打他一顿。 
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, when the former Qin sovereign Yu Deng heard that the later Qin sovereign Yao Wei had died, he couldn't help but say with joy: Yao Xing, this yellow-lipped infant, if I break off a branch, I can beat him up.

古文：乃大赦，尽众而东，留司徒安成王广守雍，太子崇守胡空堡；遣使拜金城王乾归为左丞相、河南王，领秦、梁、益、凉、沙五州牧，加九锡。
现代文：于是，实行大赦，率领所有军队向东开进，只留下司徒、安成王苻广镇守雍城，太子苻崇留守胡空堡。苻登又派遣使者前去加授西秦国金城王乞伏乾归为左丞相，河南王，领秦、梁、益、凉、沙五州牧，加授九锡。
English: As a result, a general amnesty was implemented, and he led all the troops to the east, leaving only Sitou and Ancheng Wang Shiguangzhen to guard Yongcheng, and Prince Zhaozong to guard Hukuang Fort. Zhou Deng also sent an envoy to confer the West Qin State Jincheng King Qianfu Qian as Zuoying Minister, and the Henan King, Qin, Liang, Yi, Liang, Sha Wuzhou Maki, and confer Jiuxi.

古文：初，秃发思复鞬卒，子乌孤立。
现代文：当初，鲜卑部落的首领秃发思复去世，他的儿子秃发乌孤继位。
English: At first, the leader of the Xianbei tribe, Bald Hair Si Fu, died, and his son, Bald Hair Wukong, succeeded him.

古文：乌孤雄勇有大志，与大将纷陀谋取凉州。
现代文：秃发乌孤十分勇武雄健，胸怀大志。他和大将纷商议夺取凉州。
English: Bald-haired Wu Kuo was very brave, courageous, and ambitious. He and the general discussed the capture of Liangzhou.

古文：纷陀曰： 公必欲得凉州，宜先务农讲武，礼俊贤，修政刑，然后可也。 
现代文：纷说： 您如果一定要夺取凉州，就应该首先提倡并实际推广农耕，讲习武事，再礼贤下士，治理纲政与刑法，然后方可以采取行动。 
English: They said: If you want to conquer Liangzhou, you should first advocate and actually promote farming, martial arts training, corporal merit, governance and criminal law, and then you can take action.

古文：乌孤从之。
现代文：秃发乌孤听从了他的劝告。
English: The bald and black-haired man heeded his advice.

古文：三河王光遣使拜乌孤冠军大将军、河西鲜卑大都统。
现代文：后凉三河王吕光派遣使节任命秃发乌孤为冠军大将军、河西鲜卑大都统。
English: After the cooling, the king of the three rivers, Liguang, sent an envoy to appoint the bald-headed Wu Guo as the champion general, and the Hexi Xingbei Dadu was unified.

古文：乌孤与其群下谋之曰； 可受乎？ 
现代文：秃发乌孤同他的部下商议说： 可以接受吗？ 
English: The bald-headed Wu Kuo consulted with his subordinates and said, "Is this acceptable?"

古文：皆曰： 吾士马众多，何为属人？ 
现代文：部下都说： 我们的兵将马匹这样众多，为什么非要隶属于别人！ 
English: His subordinates all said: Our soldiers and horses are so numerous, why do they have to be subordinated to others!

古文：石真若留不对，乌孤曰： 卿畏吕光邪？ 
现代文：只有石真若留没有发言。秃发乌孤说： 你害怕吕光吗？ 
English: Only Shi Zhenru didn't speak. Bald-haired Wu Guo said, "Are you afraid of Lü Guang?"

古文：石真若留曰： 吾本根未固，小大非敌，若光致死于我，何以待之？
现代文：石真若留说： 我们的根本还没有稳固，与吕光相比，力量的大小相差太悬殊，如果吕光一定要消灭我们，我们能用什么办法来抗拒他呢！
English: Shi Zhenru said, "Our foundation is not yet stable. Compared with Lü Guang, the difference in the size of our strength is too great. If Lü Guang must destroy us, how can we resist him?"

古文：不如受，以骄之，俟衅而动，蔑不克矣。 
现代文：我看不如暂时接受他的加封，以此来使吕光自高自大，我们也好等待机会采取相应的行动，那样的话，我们就没有什么不能战胜的了。 
English: I don't see how temporarily accepting his sealing can make Lü Guang arrogant. We should also wait for the opportunity to take corresponding actions. In that case, there is nothing we can't overcome.

古文：乌孤乃受之。
现代文：秃发乌孤听从了他的劝告，接受了吕光的加封。
English: Bald-haired Wu Guo heeded his advice and accepted Luguang's seal.

古文：二月，秦主登攻屠各姚奴、帛蒲二堡，克之。
现代文：二月，前秦国主苻登进攻了屠各部落所占领的姚奴堡、帛蒲堡。
English: In February, the former ruler of Qin, Zheng Deng, attacked Yao Nubo and Zibo Fort, which were occupied by Tu and other tribes.

古文：燕主垂留清河公会镇鄴，发司、冀、青、兗兵，遣太原王楷出滏口，辽西王农出壶关，垂自出沙庭，以击西燕，标榜所趣，军各就顿。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂留下清河公慕容会镇守邺城，调动司州、冀州、青州、兖州的兵力，派遣太原王慕容楷从滏口出击，辽西王慕容农从壶关出击，慕容垂自己则从沙庭进发，共同征伐西燕。他故意地公开分派任务，并且使各支军队准备就绪。
English: Afterward, Mu Rongtai, the ruler of Yan Province, left the Qinghe Prince Mu Ronghui to guard Yan City, mobilized the troops of Sizhou, Jizhou, Qingzhou, and Zhangzhou, sent the Taiyuan King Mu Rongkai to attack from Hukou, the West Liaoning King Mu Rongnong to attack from Kuguan, and Mu Rongtai himself to advance from Shatian to jointly conquer Xiyan. He deliberately assigned tasks openly and made each army ready.

古文：西燕主永闻之，严兵分道拒守，聚粮台壁，遣从子征东将军小逸豆归、镇东将军王次多、右将军勒马驹帅众万馀人戍之。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永听到这个消息，派遣兵马分几路严密把守，把粮草物资等聚集在台壁，派自己的侄儿征东将军小慕容逸豆归、镇东将军王次多、右将军勒马驹等人率领一万多人保卫台壁。
English: Upon hearing this news, Murong Yong, the lord of Xiyan, dispatched soldiers and horses to closely guard several roads, gathered grain and grass materials, etc. on the platform wall, and sent more than 10,000 people to defend the platform wall, led by his nephew, the East Conquest General Murong Yidonggui, the East Conquest General Wang Jidao, and the Right Conquest General Lemajuan.

古文：夏，四月，秦主登自六陌趣废桥，后秦始平太守姚详据马嵬堡以拒之。
现代文：夏季，四月，前秦国主苻登从六陌进发到废桥，后秦始平太守姚详据守马嵬堡准备和他对抗。
English: In the summer, in April, the former Qin sovereign, Zheng Deng, marched from Liu Miao to Wasted Bridge, while the later Qin emperor, Shi Ping, guarded Yao Yu and prepared to confront him at the Fort of Horse.

古文：太子兴遣尹纬将兵救详，纬据废桥以待秦。
现代文：后秦太子姚兴派遣尹纬带领兵马前去营救姚详，尹纬占据废桥等待前秦部队来攻。
English: Later, the Qin prince Yao Xing sent Yin Wei to lead the soldiers and horses to rescue Yao Zhe, and Yin Wei occupied the abandoned bridge to wait for the former Qin troops to attack.

古文：秦兵争水，不能得，渴死者什二、三，因急攻纬。
现代文：前秦兵卒与后秦争夺饮水，没有能够得到，渴死的人有十分之二三。
English: The soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty fought with those of the later Qin Dynasty for drinking water, but were unable to obtain it, and two-thirds of them died of thirst.

古文：兴驰遣狄伯支谓纬曰： 苻登穷寇，宜持重以挫之。 
现代文：前秦更加急迫地向尹纬发动进攻。姚兴派狄伯支赶来叮嘱尹纬说： 苻登这家伙已是穷途末路的强盗，我们应该沉着、谨慎，有把握后将他打败。 
English: Qian Qin launched an attack on Yin Wei more urgently. Yao Xing sent Di Bozhi to come and admonish Yin Wei, saying, "This guy, Zou Deng, is a robber at the end of his rope. We should be calm, cautious, and confident before defeating him."

古文：纬曰： 先帝登遐，人情扰惧，今不因思奋之力以禽敌，大事去矣！ 
现代文：尹纬说： 先帝刚刚成仙而去，人心难免搔动惊惧。现在我们如果不因此想办法奋勇作战，克制强敌，我们的大业将一败涂地！ 
English: Yin Wei said: The former emperor has just passed away, and people's hearts are inevitably throbbing with fear. Now, if we don't find a way to fight bravely and restrain the strong enemy, our great cause will be completely defeated!

古文：遂与秦战，秦兵大败。
现代文：他与前秦部队决战，前秦部队大败。
English: He fought a decisive battle with the former Qin forces, and the former Qin forces were soundly defeated.

古文：其夜，秦众溃，登单骑奔雍。
现代文：当天夜晚，前秦的军队便溃不成军，苻登一人骑马逃奔雍城。
English: In the evening of the same day, the army of the former Qin Dynasty collapsed and failed to form an army, and Xudeng fled to Yongcheng on horseback.

古文：太子崇及安成王广闻败，皆弃城走；登至，无所归，乃奔平凉，收集遗众，入马毛山。
现代文：太子苻崇以及安成王苻广听说自己的军队失败，早已放弃城池逃走，等苻登来到这里时，已经没有地方可以投靠，于是，他又逃奔平凉，收集残兵败将，进入马毛山。
English: Hearing of the defeat of their own army, Prince Gong Chong and Ancheng Wang Bingguang had already abandoned the city and fled. By the time Gong Deng arrived here, there was no place to fall back on, so he fled to Pingliang to collect the remnants of the defeated soldiers and entered Ma Mao Mountain.

古文：燕主垂顿军鄴西南，月馀不进。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂驻扎在邺城西南，一个多月也没有向前推进。
English: Later, the lord of Yan, Murong Du, was stationed in the southwest of Lucheng, and did not advance for more than a month.

古文：西燕主永怪之，以为太行道宽，疑垂欲诡道取之，乃悉敛诸军屯轵关，杜太行口，惟留台壁一军。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永觉得很奇怪，以为是太行道路宽阔，怀疑慕容垂打算秘密通过来偷袭，于是他把几支军队统统地调集在轵关驻扎下来，封锁太行路口，只把镇守台壁的部队留下。
English: Mu Rongyong, the ruler of Xiyan, thought it was strange that the road to Taihang was so wide, and suspected that Mu Rongtai was planning to secretly pass through to make a sneak attack. Therefore, he mobilized several armies and stationed them all in Shaoguan to block the Taihang intersection, leaving only the troops guarding the platform wall.

古文：甲戌，垂引大军出滏口，入天井关。
现代文：甲戌，慕容垂率领大部队从滏口出兵，进入了天井关。
English: Armour-plated, Murong Zhuang led a large force to send troops from the gate and entered the ceiling.

古文：五月，乙酉，燕军至台壁，永遣从兄太尉大逸豆归救之，平规击破之。
现代文：五月，乙酉，后燕的军队到达台壁，慕容永派遣他的堂兄、太尉大慕容逸豆归领兵去解救，结果被后燕将领平归击败。
English: In May, when Emperor Yan's army reached the platform, Murong Yong sent his cousin, Lieutenant Murong Yidzu, to lead the troops to rescue them. As a result, he was defeated by Emperor Yan's general, Ping Gui.

古文：小逸豆归出战，辽西王农又击破之，斩勒马驹，禽王次多，遂围台壁。
现代文：小慕容逸豆归出列讨战，又被后燕辽西王慕容农打得大败，后燕军斩杀了西燕的右将军勒马驹，活捉了另一个将军王次多，于是，把台壁团团围住。
English: Xiao Murong Yidou was assigned to the line of battle, and was defeated by Hou Yan Liao Xi Wang Murong Nong. Hou Yan's army killed Xi Yan's right-hand general Lemajuan, captured another general Wang Jidou alive, and then surrounded the plateau wall.

古文：永召太行军还，自将精兵五万以拒之。
现代文：慕容永急忙把驻守太行的部众调回，他本人统领五万多人的精锐部队抵抗后燕。
English: Murong Yong hurriedly transferred his subordinates stationed in Taihang back, and he himself led more than fifty thousand elite troops to resist Houyan.

古文：刁云、慕容钟震怖，帅众降燕，永诛其妻子。
现代文：西燕驻守潞川的将军刁云、慕容钟等却被后燕的进攻气势所震慑，率领部众投降了后燕。慕容永杀死了他们的妻子儿女。
English: However, Western Yan's generals stationed in Luochuan, such as Gongyun and Murong Zhong, were shocked by Houyan's offensive momentum and led their subordinates to surrender to Houyan. Murong Yong killed their wives and children.

古文：己亥，垂陈于台壁南，遣骁骑将军慕容国伏千骑于涧下。
现代文：己亥，慕容垂在台壁以南的地区列开阵势，又派骁骑将军慕容国带领一千多骑兵埋伏在山涧之下。
English: At the same time, Murongtang set up a position in the area south of the platform wall, and sent the cavalry general Murong Guo to lead more than a thousand cavalry to ambush under the ridge.

古文：庚子，与永合战，垂伪退，永众追之，行数里，国骑从涧中出，断其后，诸军四面俱进，大破之，斩首八千馀级，永走归长子。
现代文：庚子，慕容垂与慕容永展开决战，慕容垂佯装败退，慕容永带兵追赶他，追了几里路，慕容国率领的骑兵部队从山涧中突然杀出，切断了慕容永的后路，后燕各支军队从四面八方一起向慕容永发起了进攻，把西燕的部队打得大败，杀死敌人达八千多人。慕容永仓惶逃回到长子。
English: Geng Zi, Murong Li and Murong Yong fought a decisive battle. Murong Li feigned defeat and retreated. Murong Yong led the troops to chase him and chased him for several miles. The cavalry troops led by Murong Guo suddenly came out of the mountains and cut off Murong Yong's rear path. The various troops of Houyan launched an attack on Murong Yong from all directions, defeating Xiyan's troops and killing more than eight thousand of the enemy. Murong Yong Cang panicked and fled back to his eldest son.

古文：晋阳守将闻之，弃城走。
现代文：西燕晋阳守将听说己方大败，弃城逃走。
English: Xi Yan, the governor of Jinyang, heard that his side had been defeated and abandoned the city.

古文：丹杨王瓚等进取晋阳。
现代文：后燕丹杨王慕容瓒等人夺取了晋阳。
English: Later, Yan Dan, Yang Wang, Murong Hui and others captured Jinyang.

古文：后秦太子先始发丧，即皇帝位于槐里，大赦，改元皇初，遂如安定。
现代文：后秦太子姚兴这时才宣布父亲姚苌已死，并在槐里即皇帝位。实行大赦，改年号为皇初。随后来到安定。
English: It was only then that Yao Xing, the later Qin prince, announced that his father, Yao Xi, had died and that he would become emperor in Qi. An amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to the beginning of the emperor's reign. Stability followed.

古文：谥后秦主苌曰武昭皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：追谥后秦国主姚苌为武昭皇帝，庙号为太祖。
English: After the persecution, the Qin sovereign, Yao Wei, became Emperor Wu Zhao, and his temple name was Taizu.

古文：六月，壬子，追尊会稽王太妃郑氏曰简文宣太后。
现代文：六月，壬子，孝武帝追尊自己的祖母，元帝司马睿的妃子郑氏为简文宣太后。
English: In June, Emperor Jinshi and Emperor Xiaowu conferred the title of Empress Dowager on Empress Zheng, the daughter-in-law of the former Emperor Sima Rui and the grandmother of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：群臣谓宣太后应配食元帝，太子前率徐邈曰： 宣太后平素之时，不伉俪于先帝。至于子孙，岂可为祖考立配！ 
现代文：很多大臣都说宣太后的牌位应该被尊放在元帝之侧，与元帝一起享受香火，太子前率徐邈却说： 宣太后活着的时候，并没有被作为先帝的婚配正室，到了作为子孙的人，我们怎么可以为祖先们做主安排妻室呢？ 
English: Many ministers said that the rank of Empress Dowager Xuan should be placed on the side of the Yuan Emperor and enjoy the incense together with the Yuan Emperor. However, the former leader of the princes, Xu Xi, said: When Empress Dowager Xuan was alive, she was not considered the legitimate wife of the former emperor. As descendants, how can we arrange wives for our ancestors?

古文：国学明教东莞臧焘曰： 今尊号既正，则罔极之情申；别建寝庙，则严祢之义显；系子为称，兼明贵之所由。
现代文：国学明教东莞人臧焘说： 现在，宣太后的尊号已经扶正，作为后代的无穷的孝思已经得到表达；为宣太后另建一座祭庙，尊重先辈祭庙的心情就已可以显现；把儿子的谥号加在母亲的谥号前面，能使人明白母亲得以荣耀尊贵的原因。
English: Dongguan Renjun, a scholar of Chinese classics, said: Now, Empress Xuan's honorific title has been rectified, and her infinite filial piety as a descendant has been expressed; if another temple is built for Empress Xuan, the sentiment of respecting the ancestors' temple can be revealed; if the son's nickname is added in front of the mother's nickname, it can make people understand the reason why the mother can be honored and respected.

古文：一举而允三义，不亦善乎？ 
现代文：这一个举动可以符合三方面的意义，不也是一件应该做的好事吗？ 
English: This one action can have three meanings. Isn't it also a good thing to do?

古文：乃立庙于太庙路西。
现代文：于是，在太庙路的西侧建立一座宣太后的祭庙。
English: As a result, a temple dedicated to Empress Dowager Xuan was built on the west side of Taimiao Road.

古文：燕主垂进军围长子。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂指挥部队包围了长子。
English: After that, Mu Rongtai, the lord of Yan, surrounded his eldest son with his commanding troops.

古文：西燕主永欲奔后秦，侍中兰英曰： 昔石虎伐龙都，太祖坚守不去，卒成大燕之基。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永打算投奔后秦，侍中兰英说： 当年石虎讨伐龙都，大燕国太祖慕容坚守城池不肯离去，终于成就了大燕国的基础。
English: Murong Yong, the lord of the Western Yan Kingdom, planned to go to the Later Qin, and Lan Ying, the attendant of the Central Yan Kingdom, said: In that year, the Stone Tiger fought the Dragon Capital, and Murong, the great ancestor of the Great Yan Kingdom, insisted on staying in the city and refused to leave, finally achieving the foundation of the Great Yan Kingdom.

古文：今垂七十老翁，厌苦兵革，终不能顿兵连岁以攻我也。
现代文：现在，慕容垂已经是一个七十老翁，他讨厌长年战争，终究不能成年累月地攻打我们。
English: Now, Murongtli is already a seventy-year-old man, he hates the long-term war, after all, he can't attack us for months on end.

古文：但当城守以疲之。 
现代文：我们只应该严密守城，拖垮敌人。 
English: All we have to do is hold the city tightly and defeat the enemy.

古文：永从之。
现代文：慕容永听从了他的意见。
English: Murong Yong followed his advice.

古文：秦主登遣其子汝阴王宗为质于河南王乾归以请救，进封乾归梁王，纳其妹为梁王后。
现代文：前秦国主苻登送他的儿子汝阴王苻宗作为人质，到河南王乞伏乾归那里去请求救助，并且加封乞伏乾归为梁王，并迎娶乞伏乾归的妹妹为梁王后。
English: The former ruler of Qin, Xing Deng, sent his son, King of Ruyin, Xizong, as a hostage to the King of Henan, Qianfu Qianfu, to go there to ask for help. Qianfu Qianfu was given the title of King of Liang and married to Qianfu Qianfu's sister, Queen of Liang.

古文：乾归遣前军将军乞伏益州等帅骑一万救之。
现代文：乞伏乾归派遗前军将军乞伏益州等人统领一万骑兵前去解救他。
English: Qianfu Gui sent the general of the former army, Qianfu Yizhou, and others to lead ten thousand cavalry to rescue him.

古文：秋，七月，登引兵出迎乾归兵。
现代文：秋季，七月，苻登带领兵马迎接乞伏乾归的部队。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhou Deng led the soldiers and horses to meet the troops who were begging to return home.

古文：后秦主兴自安定如泾阳，与登战于山南，执登，杀之。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴从安定直扑泾阳，与苻登在马毛山南激战。
English: Later, Yao Xing, the ruler of Qin, attacked Shenyang from Ding'an, and fought a fierce battle with Shen Deng in the south of Mount Ma Mao.

古文：悉散其部众，使归农业，徙阴密三万户于长安，以李后赐姚晃。
现代文：姚兴生俘了苻登，并把他杀掉了。他把苻登的部众全部解散，让他们回到家里去从事农事耕作，又把阴密的三万户居民迁到长安，把苻登的妻子李皇后赏赐给姚晃。
English: Yao Xing Sheng captured and killed Xudeng. He disbanded all of Xudeng's followers and let them go back to their homes to engage in farming. He also moved 30,000 residents to Chang'an and rewarded Yao Qiao with Xudeng's wife, Queen Li.

古文：益州等闻之，引兵还。
现代文：乞伏益州等人听到了这个消息，就带着部队回去了。
English: When the people of Yizhou and others heard the news, they went back with their troops.

古文：秦太子崇奔湟中，即帝位，改元延初。
现代文：前秦太子苻崇又跑到湟中，继承了帝位，改年号为延初。
English: Former Qin Prince Gong Chong also went to Shizhong, inherited the imperial throne, and changed his era name to Yanchu.

古文：谥登曰高皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：又追谥苻登为高皇帝，庙号太宗。
English: He was also crowned Emperor Gao and given the title of Emperor Taizong.

古文：后秦安南将军强熙、镇远将军杨多叛，推窦冲为主。
现代文：后秦安南将军强熙、镇远将军强多叛变，拥推窦冲为盟主。
English: Later, Qin Annan's general Qiangxi and Zhenyuan's general Qiangduo rebelled and supported Dou Chong as the leader.

古文：后秦主兴自将讨之，军至武功，多兄子良国杀多而降，熙奔秦州，冲奔汧川，汧川氐仇高执送之。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴亲自带兵前去讨伐，部队行进到武功的时候，强多的侄儿强良国杀死了强多归降。强熙则逃奔秦州，窦冲逃奔川，川氐族部落首领仇高抓住送还给后秦。
English: Later Qin ruler Yao Xing personally led the troops to go to the crusade. When the troops marched to Wugong, Qiangdu's nephew Qiangliang killed Qiangdu and surrendered. Qiangxi fled to Qinzhou, Douchong fled to Qianchuan, and the leader of the Chuanshi tribe, Qiu Gao, caught and sent back to Later Qin.

古文：三河王光以子覆为都督玉门以西诸军事、西域大都护，镇高昌，命大臣子弟随之。
现代文：后凉三河王吕光，任命他的儿子吕覆为都督玉门以西诸军事、西域大都护，镇守高昌，并命令大臣的子弟，随同前往。
English: After the cooling, the king of the Three Rivers, Luguang, appointed his son Lvhu to be the military governor west of Yumen, the protector of the western region, and the town guard of Gaochang, and ordered the minister's son to accompany him.

古文：八月，己巳，尊皇太妃李氏为皇太后，居崇训宫。
现代文：八月，己巳，孝武帝尊封皇太妃李氏为皇太后，居住在崇训宫。
English: In August, Emperor Xiaowu conferred the title of Empress Dowager on Empress Dowager Li, and she resided at the Chongxun Palace.

古文：西燕主永困急，遣其子常山公弘等求救于雍州刺史郗恢，并献玉玺一纽。
现代文：西燕国主慕容永被包围，局势危急，派他儿子常山公慕容弘等人去向东晋雍州刺史郗恢求救，并奉献一颗玉玺做为进见之礼。
English: Murong Yong, the lord of Xiyan, was besieged and the situation was critical. He sent his son, Changshan Gong Murong Hong, and others to East Jin, Yongzhou, to ask for help, and to offer a jade gong as a gift.

古文：恢上言： 垂若并永，为患益深，不如两存之，可以乘机双毙。 
现代文：郗恢上奏说： 慕容垂如果吞并了慕容永，会给我们带来更深的祸患，不如让他们二者暂时并存，我们也好寻找机会同时除掉他们两个。 
English: "If Mu Rongtai annexes Mu Rongyong, it will bring us a deeper disaster. It is better to let them coexist for a while, so that we can find an opportunity to get rid of both of them at the same time."

古文：帝以为然，诏青、兗二州刺史王恭、豫州刺史庾楷救之。
现代文：孝武帝以为他说得很对，便下诏调青、兖二州刺史王恭和豫州刺史庾楷前往解救慕容永。
English: Emperor Xiaowu thought that he was right, so he issued an edict to send Zhaozhong, Wang Gong and Yu Zhou to rescue Murong Yong.

古文：楷，亮之孙也。
现代文：庾楷是庾亮的孙子。
English: Zou Kai is the grandson of Zou Liang.

古文：永恐晋兵不出，又遣其太子亮为质；平规追亮，及于高都，获之。
现代文：慕容永担心晋国不肯出兵，又派他的太子慕容亮到东晋充当人质。后燕平规追捕慕容亮，追到高都把他抓住。
English: Worried that Jin Province would not send troops, Murong Yong sent his prince Murong Liang to Eastern Jin as a hostage. Later, Yan Ping Gu pursued Murong Liang and caught him in Gaodu.

古文：永又告急于魏，魏王珪遣陈留公虔、将军庾岳帅骑五万东渡河，屯秀容，以救之。
现代文：慕容永又向北魏告急。魏王拓跋派陈留公拓跋虔和将军庾岳统领骑兵五万人向东渡过黄河，集结在秀容一带救援慕容永。
English: Murongyong was also in urgent need of help from the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Wei King Tuoba sent Chen Ruigong Tuoba Kian and General Zou Yue to lead 50,000 cavalrymen to cross the Yellow River to the east and gather in the area of Xiurong to rescue Murongyong.

古文：虔，纥根之子也。
现代文：拓跋虔是拓跋纥根的儿子。
English: Tuoba Qian is the son of Tuoba Xuan.

古文：晋、魏兵皆未至，大逸豆归部将伐勤等开门内燕兵，燕人执永，斩之，并斩其公卿大将刁云、大逸豆归等三十馀人，得永所统八郡七万馀户及秦乘舆、服御、伎乐、珍宝甚众。
现代文：东晋和北魏援兵还没有来到的时候，大慕容逸豆归手下的将领伐勤等打开城门把后燕军放了进来。后燕将士抓住了慕容永并且把他杀了，又斩杀了慕容永的文臣武将如刁云、大慕容逸豆归等三十多人，吞并了慕容永所统辖的八个郡、七万多户居民以及前秦御用的车轿、服饰、歌女乐器、奇珍异宝不计其数。
English: When reinforcements from the Eastern Jin Dynasty and Northern Wei Dynasty had not yet arrived, Murong Yongzhu's generals, such as Faqin, opened the city gate to let Houyan's army in. Houyan's soldiers captured Murong Yongzhu and killed him, and killed more than 30 of Murong Yongzhu's vassals, such as Gongyun and Murong Yongzhu, and annexed the eight counties under Murong Yongzhu's jurisdiction, more than 70,000 residents, as well as the former Qin Dynasty's cars, clothing, song girl musical instruments, and countless treasures.

古文：燕主垂以丹杨王瓚为并州刺史，镇晋阳；宜都王凤为雍州刺史，镇长子。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂任命丹杨王慕容瓒为并州刺史，镇守晋阳，宜都王慕容凤为雍州刺史，镇守长子。
English: Later, the lord of Yan Province, Murong Li, appointed Danyang King Murong Xi as the governor of the annexed province and the town guard of Jinyang, and Yidu King Murong Feng as the governor of Yongzhou and the town guard's eldest son.

古文：永尚书仆射昌黎屈遵、尚书阳平王德、秘书监中山李先、太子詹事渤海封则、黄门郎太山胡母亮、中书郎张腾、尚书郎燕郡公孙表皆随才擢叙。
现代文：对于慕容永的尚书仆射昌黎人屈遵、尚书阳平人王德、秘书监中山人李先、太子詹事渤海人封则、黄门郎太山人胡母亮、中书郎张腾、尚书郎燕郡人公孙表等，慕容垂都根据他们的才能加以任用。
English: For Murong Yong's servants, Sho Changli, Qu Zun, Shang Shuyang Pingren, Wang De, Secretary Supervisor Zhongshan, Li Xian, Prince Zhan Zhi, Binhai, Hu Moliang, Huang Men Lang, Taishan, Zhong Shuro, Zhang Teng, Shang Shuro, Yan Gu, Rong Gongsunbo, etc., Murong Diao appointed them according to their talents.

古文：九月，垂自长子如鄴。
现代文：九月，慕容垂从长子来到邺城。
English: In September, Murong Tie came to Lucheng from his eldest son.

古文：冬，十月，秦主崇为梁王乾归所逐，奔陇西王杨定。
现代文：冬季，十月，前秦国主苻崇被梁王乞伏乾归驱逐，去投奔陇西王杨定。
English: In the winter, in October, the former Qin sovereign Zhaozong was expelled by the King of Liang, who begged him to return, and he went to fight for the King of Shanxi, Yang Ding.

古文：定留司马邵强守秦州，帅众二万与崇共攻乾归，乾归遣凉州牧轲弹、秦州牧益州、立义将军诘归帅骑三万拒之。
现代文：杨定留下司马邵疆把守秦州，亲自统领二万大军和苻崇一起进攻乞伏乾归，乞伏乾归则派遣凉州牧乞伏轲弹、秦州牧乞伏益州、立义将军越质诘归统领骑兵三万以抵抗。
English: Yang Ding left Sima Shaojiang to guard Qinzhou, and personally led the 20,000-strong army to attack together with Yu Chong to beg for surrender. To beg for surrender, Yang Ding sent Liangzhou to beg for surrender, Qinzhou to beg for surrender, Yizhou to beg for surrender, and Liyi to lead 30,000 cavalry to resist.

古文：益州与定战，败于平州。
现代文：乞伏益州与杨定展开激战，在平川一带被杨定打得大败。
English: Begging Yizhou and Yang Ding launched a fierce battle, and Yang Ding was defeated in the area of Pingchuan.

古文：轲弹、诘归皆引退，轲弹司马翟瑥奋剑怒曰： 主上以雄武开基，所向无敌，威振秦、蜀。
现代文：乞伏轲弹和越质诘归带着部队向后撤退。乞伏轲弹的司马翟气愤地拔出佩剑，咆哮着说： 我们主上依仗英雄武略，开创基业，所到之处无人抵挡，声威震撼秦、蜀地区。
English: Sima Yan, who had been begging, angrily pulled out his sword and roared: "Our lord relied on the hero Wu Liang to create the foundation, and no one resisted him wherever he went. His voice shook the Qin and Shu regions."

古文：将军以宗室居元帅之任，当竭力致命以佐国家。
现代文：将军您是乞伏家族的宗室，担任元帅的重任，本来应该竭尽全力拼死辅佐国家。
English: General, you are the family matriarch of a begging family, and it is an important duty to serve as a marshal. You should have done your best to assist the country.

古文：今秦州虽败，二军尚全，奈何望风退衄，将何面以见主上乎？
现代文：现在，秦州那里虽然战败，我们的两支大军还完整无损，怎么能够看见势头稍有不利便赶紧退逃，这样，还有什么脸面可以去见主上呢？
English: Now, although we have been defeated there in Qinzhou, our two great armies are still intact. How can we see that the momentum is slightly unfavorable and then hastily retreat? In this way, what other face can we show to the Lord?

古文：瑥虽无任，独不能以便宜斩将军乎？ 
现代文：我翟虽然没有什么重要职务和大权，难道就不能因为紧急情况，见机诛杀将军吗？ 
English: Although I do not have any important position or power, can't I kill the general in an emergency?

古文：轲弹谢曰： 向者未知众心何如耳。
现代文：乞伏轲弹道歉说： 先前，我不知道大家的心意怎样。
English: "In the past, I didn't know what everyone was thinking," he said, apologetically.

古文：果能如是，吾敢爱死？ 
现代文：如果真的能像你所说的那样，那么，我个人怎么敢贪生怕死！ 
English: If it really can be as you say, then how dare I personally be greedy for life and afraid of death!

古文：乃帅骑进战，益州、诘归亦勒兵继之，大败定兵，杀定乃崇，斩首万七千级。
现代文：于是率领骑兵挺进，与敌军作战，乞伏益州与越质诘归也率领部队，紧紧跟上，果然把杨定的兵马打得大败，杀死了杨定和苻崇，斩杀他们的部众一万七千多人。
English: So he led the cavalry to advance and fight with the enemy army, begged Yizhou and Yueqing to return and led the troops, followed closely, and finally defeated Yang Ding's soldiers and horses, killed Yang Ding and Yuzhong, and killed more than 17,000 of their followers.

古文：乾归于是尽有陇西之地。
现代文：乞伏乾归于是全部占有了陇西一带。
English: They all occupied the western part of Shaanxi Province.

古文：定无子，其叔父佛狗之子盛，先守仇池，自称征西将军、秦州刺史、仇池公，谥定为武王，仍遣使来称籓。
现代文：杨定没有儿子，他叔父杨佛狗的儿子杨盛，在此之前镇守仇池，这时他自称征西将军、秦州刺史、仇池公，追谥杨定为武王。他仍然派遣使节向东晋称为藩属。
English: Yang Ding did not have a son, but his uncle Yang Fugu's son Yang Sheng had previously been in charge of Quchi. At that time, he claimed to be the general of the Western Conquest, the governor of Qin, and the lord of Quchi, and pursued Yang as the warrior king. He still sent envoys to East Jin claiming to belong to the domain.

古文：秦太子宣奔盛，盛分氐、羌为二十部护军，各为镇戍，不置郡县。
现代文：前秦的太子苻宣也来投奔杨盛，把氐族人、羌族人划分为二十个护军单位，各自镇守保卫自己的家园，不设置郡县等行政区划。
English: The prince of the former Qin Dynasty, Xuan Xuan, also came to Yang Sheng, and divided the Yi people and the Yi people into twenty escort units, each guarding and defending their own homes, without setting up administrative divisions such as counties.

古文：燕主垂东巡阳平、平原，命辽西王农济河，与安南将军尹国略地青、兗。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂向东巡视阳平、平原，命令辽西王慕容农渡过黄河，与安南将军尹国一起发兵去夺取东晋所属的青州、兖州一带。
English: Afterward, the lord of Yan, Murong Dang, went to the east to inspect Yangping and the plains. He ordered the king of Liaoxi, Murong Nong, to cross the Yellow River and, together with Annan's general, Yin Guo, to send troops to seize the areas of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou that belonged to the Eastern Jin.

古文：农攻廪丘，国攻阳城，皆拔之。
现代文：慕容农进攻廪丘、尹国进攻阳城，都攻克了。
English: The Murong farmers attacked Shaoshan, and Yin attacked Yangcheng, and both were defeated.

古文：东平太守韦简战死，高平、太山、琅邪诸郡皆委城奔溃，农进军临海，遍置守宰。
现代文：东晋东平太守韦简在乱军中战死，高平、泰山、琅邪几个郡的统领长官却都抛弃守城脱逃。
English: Eastern Jin Dongping eunuch Wei Jian was killed in the chaos, but the leaders of several counties, including Gaoping, Taishan, and Xinyi, abandoned the defense of the city and fled.

古文：柔然曷多汗弃其父，与社仑帅众西走；魏长孙肥追之，及于上郡跋那山，斩曷多汗。
现代文：慕容农乘胜向海边进军，一路上设置了许多地方官员。北方沙漠中的柔然部落首领郁久闾曷多汗，抛弃他的父亲不管，与堂弟郁久闾社仑率领部众一起向西逃去。北魏将军长孙肥追击他们，追到上郡跋那山，斩杀了郁久闾曷多汗。
English: Murong farmers took advantage of the victory to march to the seashore, setting up many local officials along the way. The leader of the Juran tribe in the northern desert, Iku Jiuyong, abandoned his father and fled westward with his cousin, Iku Jiuyong, leading his followers. The eldest son of the Northern Wei general, Sun Hui, chased them, chased them to the upper county of Banya Mountain, and killed Iku Jiuyong.

古文：社仑收其馀众数百，奔疋候跋，疋候跋处之南鄙。
现代文：郁久闾社仑收集他的余众几百人，投奔堂兄郁久闾疋候跋，郁久闾疋候跋把他们安置在南方偏僻的地方。
English: Ikuhisa's followers gathered a few hundred of his followers and went to his cousin Ikuhisa, who settled them in a remote area in the south.

古文：社仑袭疋候跋，杀之；疋候跋子启跋、吴颉等皆奔魏。
现代文：郁久闾社仑恩将仇报，杀了郁久闾疋候跋。郁久闾疋候跋的儿子郁久闾启跋、郁久闾吴颉等人都去投奔北魏。
English: Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa's son, Ikuhisa

古文：社仑掠五原以西诸部，走度漠北。
现代文：郁久闾社仑于是大肆抢掠了五原以西的各个部落，然后向北穿过沙漠，到大漠以北去了。
English: Ikukyu Shosherun then plundered the tribes west of the Five Plains, and then went north through the desert to the north of the desert.

古文：十一月，燕辽西王农败辟闾浑于龙水，遂入临淄。
现代文：十一月，后燕辽西王慕容农在龙水地方击败了东晋的辟闾浑，随即进入临淄。
English: In November, Murong Nong, the late King of West Yan Liao, defeated the Eastern Jin's Bibi Yuhun in the Longshui region, and then entered Linyi.

古文：十二月，燕主垂召农等还。
现代文：十二月，后燕国主慕容垂把慕容农等随即征召回国。
English: In December, the ruler of Houyan Province, Murong Dui, immediately conscripted Murong farmers back to the country.

古文：秦主兴遣使与燕结好，并送太子宝之子敏于燕，燕封敏为河东公。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴派遣使节与后燕建立友好关系，并且把太子慕容宝的儿子慕容敏送回后燕国。后燕封慕容敏为河东公。
English: Yao Xing, the ruler of Later Qin, sent envoys to establish friendly relations with Later Yan, and sent Murong Min, the son of Prince Murong Bao, back to Later Yan. Later Yan made Murong Min the ruler of Hedong.

古文：梁王乾归自称秦王，大赦。
现代文：西秦梁王乞伏乾归自称秦王，实行大赦。
English: Western Qin Liang Wang begged Qian Qian to return to the self-proclaimed Qin King, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝下太元二十年
现代文：太元二十年
English: 20 years ago

古文：春，正月，燕主垂遣散骑常侍封则报聘于秦；遂自平原狩于广川、勃海、长乐而归。
现代文：春季，正月，后燕国主慕容垂派遣散骑常侍封则去后秦回访。于是，慕容垂自己从平原出发，在广川、勃海、长乐等地巡狩之后，回到中山。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the lord of Houyan Province, Murongdali, dispatched his rider and attendant, Changfu, to pay a return visit to Houqin. Therefore, Murongdali himself set out from the plains, and after hunting in Guangchuan, Bohai, Changle and other places, he returned to Zhongshan.

古文：西秦王乾归以太子炽磐领尚书令，左长史边芮为左仆射，右长史秘宜为右仆射，置官皆如魏武、晋文故事，然犹称大单于、大将军。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归任命太子乞伏炽磐领尚书令，左长史边芮为左仆射，右长史秘宜为右仆射，设置的文武百官等都按照魏武帝和晋文帝时的旧例，但却还依然称大单于、大将军等。
English: Western Qin King Qianfu Qianrui appointed the prince Qianfu Gaoyan to lead Shang Shuling, the left long history Bianlu was the left minion, and the right long history Shiyi was the right minion. The civil and military officials were set up according to the old example of Emperor Weiwu and Emperor Jinwen, but they were still called great single, great general and so on.

古文：边芮等领府佐如故。
现代文：边芮等人也都还像过去一样兼任大单于府、大将军府的官职。
English: As in the past, Bentham and others also served concurrently as officials of the Great Council of State and the Great Council of Generals.

古文：薛干太悉伏自长安亡归岭北，上郡以西鲜卑杂胡皆应之。
现代文：薛干部落的首领太悉伏，从后秦长安逃回到岭北。上郡以西地区的鲜卑族人和其他胡人都纷纷起来响应他。
English: The leader of the Xuegan tribe, Taishibu, fled back to Lingbei from Chang'an in the late Qin Dynasty. The Xianbei and other Hu people in the west of Shangxian County rose up in response to him.

古文：二月，甲寅，尚书令陆纳卒。
现代文：二月，甲寅，东晋尚书令陆纳去世。
English: In February, the Eastern Jin Emperor Shang Shuling Lu Na passed away.

古文：三月，庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，庚辰朔，出现日食。
English: In March, Geng Chen Shuo, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：皇太子出就东宫，以丹杨尹王雅领少傅。
现代文：东晋皇太子司马德宗从皇宫迁到太子东宫居住，孝武帝任命丹杨尹王雅兼任太子少傅。
English: East Jin Crown Prince Sima Dezong moved from the Imperial Palace to live in the East Prince's Palace, and Emperor Xiaowu appointed Danyang Yin Wangya as the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：时会稽王道子专权奢纵，嬖人赵牙本出倡优，茹千秋本钱唐捕贼吏，皆以谄赂得进。
现代文：这时，东晋会稽王司马道子独揽大权，奢侈放纵，不可一世。他的亲信赵牙本来是优伶的出身，另一个亲信茹千秋本来是钱塘地方的负责抓贼缉盗的小吏，他们都依靠贿赂、谄媚等得到提升。
English: At this time, Sima Daozi, the king of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, monopolized power and indulged in extravagance. His crony Zhao Ya was originally from a noble family, and another crony, Ru Qianqiu, was originally a petty official in charge of catching thieves in Qiantang. They all relied on bribery and flattery to get promoted.

古文：道子以牙为魏郡太守，千秋为骠骑咨议参军。
现代文：司马道子任命赵牙为魏郡太守，茹千秋为骠骑咨议参军。
English: Sima Daozi appointed Zhao Ya as the governor of Wei County, and Ru Qianqiu as a member of the cavalry.

古文：牙为道子开东第，筑山穿池，功用巨万。
现代文：赵牙为司马道子另建东第，堆积假山，挖掘水池，人工和资金，都耗费十分巨大。
English: Zhao Ya built another Dong Di for Sima Daozi, piled up rockery, excavated pools, labor and capital, all of which were very expensive.

古文：帝尝幸其第，谓道子曰： 府内乃有山，甚善；然修饰太过。 
现代文：孝武帝曾经到司马道子的府邸，对司马道子说： 住宅之中竟然有山，当然很好，但是修整装饰得太过分了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu once went to Sima Daozi's residence and said to Sima Daozi: It's great that there's a mountain in the middle of the house, but the decoration is too much.

古文：道子无以对。
现代文：司马道子无言以对。
English: Sima Daozi was speechless.

古文：帝去，道子谓牙曰： 上若知山是人力所为，尔必死矣！ 
现代文：孝武帝走了之后，司马道子对赵牙说： 如果皇上知道这山居然是用人力堆积成的，你一定就得死了！ 
English: After Emperor Xiaowu left, Sima Daozi said to Zhao Ya: "If the emperor knew that this mountain was actually built up by human effort, you would surely die!"

古文：牙曰： 公在，牙何敢死！ 
现代文：赵牙说： 有您在，我赵牙怎么能够死呢？ 
English: Zhao Ya said: With you here, how can I, Zhao Ya, die?

古文：营作弥甚。
现代文：他为司马道子营建居所游宫越来越严重。
English: It's getting more and more serious that he's building a residence for Sima Daozi.

古文：千秋卖官招权，聚货累亿。
现代文：茹千秋更是卖官鬻爵，招权纳贿，搜刮的钱财加在一起竟有上亿。
English: What's more, Ru Qianqiu sold official titles, solicited power and accepted bribes, and the money and wealth he collected added up to hundreds of millions.

古文：博平令吴兴闻人奭上疏言之，帝益恶道子，而逼于太后，不忍废黜，乃擢时望及所亲幸王恭、郄恢、殷仲堪、王珣、王雅等，使居内外要任以防道子。
现代文：博平令、吴兴人闻人上疏奏说出了这些情况，孝武帝便更加讨厌司马道子，只是迫于母亲的压力，没有下定决心罢黜。于是，他擢升那些在当时较有声望和与自己关系亲近的王恭、郗恢、殷仲堪、王、王雅等人，任命他们担当朝廷内外的重要官职，用来防备、牵制司马道子。
English: Emperor Xiaowu hated Sima Daozi all the more, but under pressure from his mother, he did not make up his mind to depose him. Therefore, he promoted those who were more prestigious and close to him at the time, such as Wang Jiong, Zou Wei, Yin Zhongkan, Wang and Wang Ya, and appointed them to important official positions inside and outside the imperial court, to guard and contain Sima Daozi.

古文：道子亦引王国及国宝从弟琅邪内史绪，以为心腹。
现代文：司马道子也把王国宝和王国宝的堂弟琅邪内史王绪等人作为心腹。
English: Sima Daozi also regarded Wang Guobao and Wang Guobao's cousin Zou Yanzhongshi Wang Xu and others as confidants.

古文：由是朋党竞起，无复向时友爱之欢矣；太后每和解之。
现代文：从此东晋朝廷内外党派、集团等一个接一个地出现，再也没有过去那样友爱团结的欢乐景象了。太后经常对孝武帝和司马道子进行劝解。
English: From then on, parties and groups inside and outside the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appeared one after another, and there was no longer the happy scene of friendship and unity as in the past. The empress dowager often advised Emperor Xiaowu and Sima Daozi.

古文：中书侍郎徐邈从容言于帝曰： 汉文明主，犹悔淮南；世祖聪达，负愧齐王。
现代文：中书侍郎徐邈心平气和地向孝武帝进言道： 汉文帝刘恒是一位英明的君主，还后悔自己处死淮南王刘长的事。世祖司马炎聪明豁达，也不能不对齐王司马攸深负愧疚。
English: Xu Xuan, the attendant of the imperial secretary, calmly said to Emperor Xiaowu: Emperor Liu Heng was a wise monarch, and he regretted that he had executed Liu Chang, the king of Huainan. Emperor Sima was very intelligent and open-minded, and he could not help but feel deeply guilty.

古文：兄弟之际，实为深慎。
现代文：兄弟之间的关系，实在应该更加慎重。
English: The relationship between brothers really should be handled more carefully.

古文：会稽王虽有酣媟之累，宜加弘贷，消散群议，外为国家之计，内慰太后之心。 
现代文：会稽王司马道子虽然有嗜酒好色的坏毛病，但也应当加以宽容担待，使大家的议论逐渐消失。对外是为了国家的长远利益，对内可以安慰太后对儿子的一片爱心。 
English: Although Wang Sima Daozi, the inspector of the Imperial Household Agency, has the bad habit of alcoholism and lechery, he should also be treated with tolerance so that everyone's discussion will gradually disappear. Externally, it is for the long-term interests of the country, and internally, it can comfort the Empress Dowager's love for her son.

古文：帝纳之，复委任道子如故。
现代文：孝武帝采纳了他的劝告，对司马道子恢复了与过去一样的信任。
English: Emperor Xiaowu accepted his advice and restored the same trust in Sima Daozi as in the past.

古文：初，杨定之死也，天水姜乳袭据上邽；夏，四月，西秦王乾归遣乞伏益州帅骑六千讨之。
现代文：当初，陇西王杨定战死的时候，天水人姜乳袭击并且占领了上。夏季，四月，西秦王乞伏乾归派遣乞伏益州率领骑兵六千前去讨伐姜乳。
English: In the beginning, when Yang Ding, the king of Western Qin, was killed in battle, the people of Tianshui attacked and occupied Jianglu. In the summer, in April, the king of Western Qin, Qianfu Qiangui, sent Qianfu Yizhou to lead six thousand cavalry to fight against Jianglu.

古文：左仆射边芮、民部尚书王松寿曰： 益州屡胜而骄，不可专任。必以轻敌取败。 
现代文：左仆射边芮、民部尚书王松寿说： 乞伏益州因为打了几次胜仗而骄傲起来，不可以单独交给他任务，那样，他一定会因为轻视敌人而遭到惨败。 
English: His left-hand man, Sha Bianjun, and the Minister of the People's Department, Shang Shu Wang Song Shou, said: Begging Yizhou to be proud of having fought several victorious battles, he should not be given the task alone. In that way, he will surely suffer a disastrous defeat because of his contempt for the enemy.

古文：乾归曰： 益州骁勇，诸将莫及，当以重佐辅之耳。 
现代文：乞伏乾归说： 乞伏益州骁勇善战，是其他将领赶不上的，应当派几位助手辅佐他便可以了。 
English: Qian Gui said, "Qian Gui is the bravest and best fighter in Yizhou. Other generals can't catch up with him. He should send a few assistants to help him.

古文：乃以平北将军韦虔为长史，左禁将军务和为司马。
现代文：于是，任命平北将军韦虔为长史，左禁将军务和为司马。
English: As a result, Pingbei General Wei Qian was appointed as Long History, and Zuo Jian as General Affairs and Sima.

古文：至大寒岭，益州不设部伍，听将士游畋纵饮，令曰： 敢言军事者斩！ 
现代文：兵至大寒岭，乞伏益州居然不按编制约束部队，听任将士们到处随便打猎，开怀痛饮，并且下令说： 有胆敢谈论作战方面事情的人，斩！ 
English: The soldiers went as far as the Great Cold Range, and begged Yizhou not to restrict the troops according to the establishment, to let the soldiers hunt everywhere, to drink heavily, and ordered: Those who dare to talk about combat matters, behead!

古文：虔等谏不听，乳逆击，大破之。
现代文：韦虔等苦苦相劝，乞伏益州拒不听从。
English: Wei Qian and others tried hard to persuade each other, but Yizhou refused to listen.

古文：魏王珪叛燕，侵逼附塞诸部。
现代文：果然姜乳趁机带兵迎头痛击，把乞伏益州部队打得大败。
English: As expected, Jianglu took advantage of the opportunity to lead the troops in a head-to-head battle, and inflicted a crushing defeat on the Yizhou troops.

古文：五月，甲戌，燕主垂遣太子宝、辽西王农、赵王麟帅众八万，自五原伐魏，范阳王德、陈留王绍别将步骑万八千为后继。
现代文：魏王拓跋背叛后燕，侵略威胁了靠近边塞的一些种族部落。五月，甲戌，后燕国主慕容垂派遣太子慕容宝、辽西王慕容农、赵王慕容麟统领八万人，从五原出发讨伐北魏，范阳王慕容德、陈留王慕容绍另外带领步、骑兵一万八千人作为后继部队。
English: Wei King Tuoba betrayed Houyan, and the invasion threatened some ethnic tribes near the border fortress. In May, Mu Rongtai, the ruler of Houyan, sent Prince Murong Bao, Liaoxi King Murong Nong, and Zhao King Murong Lin, leading 80,000 people, to fight against Northern Wei from Wuhuan, with Fanyang King Murong De and Chen Liu King Murong Shao leading the way, and 18,000 cavalry as the follow-up troops.

古文：散骑常侍高湖谏曰： 魏与燕世为昏姻，彼有内难，燕实存之，其施德厚矣，结好久矣。
现代文：散骑常侍高湖劝谏说： 魏与我们燕国几世以来都是姻亲关系，他们内部发生天灾人祸时，我们燕国总是帮助他们渡过难关。
English: Gao Hu, a strolling attendant, said: Wei and our Yan Guo have been in-laws for several generations. When natural disasters and man-made disasters occur within them, we, Yan Guo, always help them overcome difficulties.

古文：间以求马不获而留其弟，曲在于我，奈何遽兴兵击之！
现代文：我们对他们的恩德够深厚的了，与他们结成友好关系也已经很久了。
English: We are deeply indebted to them, and we have had friendly relations with them for a long time.

古文：拓跋涉珪沉勇有谋，幼历艰难，兵精马强，未易轻也。
现代文：中间虽然出现过向他们要马被拓跋拒绝而扣留了他的弟弟拓跋觚的事情，但那件事的错误和起因在我们这里，怎么能够突然调动军队进攻他们呢？
English: Although there was an incident in the middle when they asked for a horse and were refused by Tuoba and detained his brother Tuoba, but the mistake and cause of that incident was here, how could they suddenly mobilize an army to attack them?

古文：皇太子富于春秋，志果气锐，今委之专征，必小魏而易之，万一不如所欲，伤威毁重，愿陛下深图之！ 
现代文：何况拓跋沉稳勇武，极富谋略，从小就经历过许多艰难困苦，现在又兵强马壮，不应该轻视。皇太子固然年轻气壮，意志果断，势头正盛，但是现在把进攻魏的指挥大权完全交给他，他一定会轻视魏而简单地对付他们。最后的结果万一不像我们所想象的那样，可就使太子损伤了威望，同时又坏了大事，请陛下再仔细想想这件事！ 
English: What's more, Tuoba is calm, steady, brave, and extremely resourceful. He has experienced many hardships since he was a child, and now he has a strong army, which should not be despised. Of course, the crown prince is young and strong, his will is decisive, and the momentum is in full swing. But now that he has been given the command of the attack on Wei, he will definitely despise Wei and simply deal with them. If the final result is not as we imagined, it may damage the prince's prestige and at the same time ruin the big event. Please think about it carefully!

古文：言颇激切。垂怒，免湖官。
现代文：他的言辞也有些激烈，慕容垂十分生气。当即罢免了高湖的官职。
English: His words were also a bit heated, and Murongdiao was very angry. He immediately dismissed Gao Hu from his post.

古文：湖，泰之子也。
现代文：高湖是高泰的儿子。
English: Gao Hu is the son of Gao Tai.

古文：六月，癸丑，燕太原元王楷卒。
现代文：六月，癸丑，后燕太原元王慕容楷去世。
English: In June, King Murongkai of Taiyuan passed away.

古文：西秦王乾归迁于西城。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归把自己的都城迁到苑川西城。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Emperor Qian to move his capital to the West Castle of Yuanchuan.

古文：秋，七月，三河王光帅众十万伐西秦，西秦左辅密贵周、左卫将军莫者羖羝劝西秦王乾归称籓于光，以子敕勃为质。
现代文：秋季，七月，后凉三河王吕光统领十万大军讨伐西秦。西秦左辅密贵周、左卫将军莫者羝劝西秦王乞伏乾归向吕光称藩，并且把儿子乞伏敕勃送去作人质。
English: In the autumn, in July, after the cooling of the Three Rivers, King Liguang led a hundred thousand-strong army to fight against the Western Qin Dynasty. The Western Qin Dynasty's left assistant, Shigui Zhou, and left guard general could not persuade the Western Qin Dynasty's king to beg Qian to return to the Liguang Clan, and sent his son to beg Qibao as a hostage.

古文：光引兵还，乾归悔之，杀周及羖羝。
现代文：吕光带着部队回去了。乞伏乾归对此事深深懊悔，杀了密贵周和莫者羝。
English: Lü Guang went back with his troops. Begging for surrender, Qian Gui deeply regretted the matter and killed Miguo Zhou and Mo Zhaojun.

古文：魏张兗闻燕军将至，言于魏王珪曰： 燕狃于滑台、长子之捷，竭国之资力以来。有轻我之心。宜羸形以骄之，乃可克也。 
现代文：北魏长史张衮听说后燕的大军即将到来，向魏王拓跋献计说： 后燕国被滑台、长子两次战役的胜利冲昏了头脑，这次动员全国的人力物力来进攻我们，是有轻视我们的意思，我们应该表现我们的疲惫孱弱，以使他们更加骄纵，我们便可以攻克他们了。 
English: When Zhang Ye, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, heard that Houyan's army was about to arrive, he proposed a plan to the Wei King: Houyan's country was carried away by the victory of the two battles of the landslide and the eldest son. This time, the mobilization of manpower and material resources across the country to attack us was meant to despise us. We should show our tiredness and weakness to make them more arrogant, and then we can defeat them.

古文：珪从之，悉徙部落畜产西渡河千馀里以避之。
现代文：拓跋听从了他的计策，命令把所有的部落的牲畜资产全部迁到黄河以西一千多里以外的地方去躲避。
English: Tuoba listened to his strategy and ordered all the livestock assets of the tribe to be moved to a place more than a thousand miles west of the Yellow River to escape.

古文：燕军至五原，降魏别部三万馀家，收穄田百馀万斛，置黑城，进军临河，造船为济具。
现代文：后燕军队来到五原，收降了北魏其他部落的居民三万多户，收割杂粮一百多万斛，在那里设置了黑城，然后把大军开进到黄河边，打造船只，准备渡河用具。
English: After Yan's army came to the Five Plains, they collected more than 30,000 households of residents of other tribes in the Northern Wei Dynasty, harvested more than one million mu of miscellaneous grains, set up the Black City there, and then drove the large army to the Yellow River, built ships, and prepared river crossing equipment.

古文：珪遣右司马许谦乞师于秦。
现代文：拓跋派遣右司马许谦去向后秦请求援助。
English: Tuoba sent his right-hand man, Ma Xuqian, to request assistance from Houqin.

古文：秃发乌孤击乙弗、折掘等诸部，皆破降之，筑廉川堡而都之。
现代文：秃发乌孤攻击乙弗、折掘等部落，把他们全部攻破并且收降，修筑了廉川堡作为这个地方的中心据点。
English: Bald Wukong attacked Yifu, Odig and other tribes, defeated them all and retreated, and built Lianchuan Fort as the central stronghold of this place.

古文：广武赵振，少好奇略，闻乌孤在廉川，弃家从之。
现代文：广武人赵振，小的时候就喜欢奇谋异计。听说秃发乌孤在廉川，他便抛家舍业，前去做秃发乌孤的慕僚。
English: When he was a child, Zhao Zhen, a man of Guangwu, was fond of conjuring up strange schemes. When he heard that the bald-haired Wu Guo was in Lianchuan, he left his home and business and went to work as a colleague of the bald-haired Wu Guo.

古文：乌孤喜曰： 吾得赵生，大事济矣！ 
现代文：秃发乌孤为此喜不自禁地说： 我得到了这位赵先生，大事就算成功了！ 
English: For this reason, the bald-headed Wu Guo couldn't help but say with joy: I got this Mr. Zhao, it's a great success!

古文：拜左司马。
现代文：于是加封赵振为左司马。
English: As a result, Zhao Zhen was promoted to the post of left assistant secretary.

古文：三河王光封乌孤为广武郡公。
现代文：三河王吕光封秃发乌孤为广武郡公。
English: Liguang, the king of the Three Rivers, crowned the bald and dark-haired Wu as the ruler of Guangwu County.

古文：有长星见自须女，至于哭星。
现代文：有长尾彗星从须女星座出现，划到主哭泣、死丧的虚、危宿下。
English: A long-tailed comet appeared from the constellation of Musca, and sailed to the Lord's weeping, deathly void, and dangerous lodging.

古文：帝心恶之，于华林园举酒祝之曰： 长星，劝汝一杯酒。
现代文：晋孝武帝心里很讨厌它，便在华林园捧着酒杯祈祷上天说： 彗星，我劝你喝了这杯酒吧！
English: Emperor Jinxiao Wu hated it in his heart, so he went to the Hua Lin Garden with a glass of wine and prayed to the heavens, saying: Comet, I advise you to drink this glass of wine!

古文：自古何有万岁天子邪！ 
现代文：自古以来，哪有活到一万岁的天子呀？ 
English: Since ancient times, has there ever been a heavenly son who lived to be ten thousand years old?

古文：八月，魏王珪治兵河南。
现代文：八月，魏王拓跋在黄河南岸整顿自己的队伍。
English: In August, Wei Wang Tuoba reorganized his team on the south bank of the Yellow River.

古文：九月，进军临河。
现代文：九月，把部队开到黄河边。
English: In September, the troops were driven to the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：燕太子宝列兵将济，暴风起，漂其船数十艘洎南岸。魏获其甲士三百馀人，皆释而遣之。
现代文：后燕太子慕容宝把自己的部队排开正要渡河与北魏接战，突然狂风大作，把他们的几十艘战船刮到黄河南岸泊下，船上的三百多全副武装的士兵，全都被北魏军队俘虏，北魏把他们全都释放遣送回去。
English: Later Yan Prince Murong Bao was lining up his troops to cross the river to fight the Northern Wei Dynasty, when a sudden strong wind blew dozens of their warships to the south bank of the Yellow River. The more than three hundred fully armed soldiers on board were all captured by the Northern Wei Army, and the Northern Wei Dynasty released them all and sent them back.

古文：宝之发中山也，燕主垂已有疾，既至五原，珪使人邀中山之路，伺其使者，尽执之，宝等数月不闻垂起居，珪使所执使者临河告之曰： 若父已死，何不早归！ 
现代文：慕容宝从中山出发的时候，慕容垂已经患有疾病。等到了五原之后，拓跋派人守候在从中山来的那条路上，等待后燕的送信人路过，把他们一个个全部抓住。慕容宝等几个月都没有得到慕容垂的生活起居情况，拓跋却把俘虏的后燕国信差带到河边，命令他隔河告诉慕容宝说： 你的父亲已经死了，你为什么还不早点回去？ 
English: When Murong Bao set out from Zhongshan, Murong Diao was already suffering from illness. After reaching Wuhuan, Tuoba sent people to stand guard on the road coming from Zhongshan, waiting for Houyan's messengers to pass by, and caught them all one by one. Murong Bao did not get the living conditions of Murong Diao for months, but Tuoba took the captive Houyan messenger to the river and ordered him to cross the river to tell Murong Bao: Your father is dead, why don't you go back early?

古文：宝等忧恐，士卒骇动。
现代文：慕容宝等人忧虑恐惧，士兵也惊骇不安。
English: Murong Bao and others were worried and afraid, and the soldiers were also alarmed.

古文：珪使陈留公虔将五万骑屯河东，东平公仪将十万骑屯河北，略阳公遵将七万骑塞燕军之南。
现代文：拓跋派陈留公拓跋虔带领五万名骑兵驻扎在黄河东岸，派东平公拓跋仪带领十万骑兵屯据在黄河北岸，又派略阳公拓跋遵带领七万骑兵堵塞在后燕国军队的南边。
English: Tuoba sent Chen Liu Gong and Tuoba Qian to the east bank of the Yellow River with 50,000 cavalry, sent Dongping Gong and Tuoba Yi to the north bank of the Yellow River with 100,000 cavalry, and sent Liao Yang and Tuoba Zun to the south bank of the Yellow River with 70,000 cavalry.

古文：遵，寿乌之子也。
现代文：拓跋遵是拓跋寿鸠的儿子。
English: Tuoba Zun is the son of Tuoba Shoujun.

古文：秦兴遣杨佛嵩将兵救魏。
现代文：这时候，后秦国主姚兴也派遣杨佛嵩带兵前来营救北魏军。
English: At this time, the late Qin Emperor Yao Xing also sent Yang Fusong to bring soldiers to rescue the Northern Wei Army.

古文：燕术士靳安言於太子宝曰： 天时不利，燕必大败，速去可免。 
现代文：后燕有一个占卜算卦的术士，叫靳安。他对后燕太子慕容宝说： 现在天时对我们很不利，我们一定要大败，如果赶快撤退，可以免去这场大难。 
English: Houyan had a soothsayer and sorcerer named Yan'an. He said to Prince Murong Bao of Houyan, "The weather is very unfavorable to us now. We must be defeated. If we retreat quickly, we can avoid this great disaster."

古文：宝不听。
现代文：慕容宝拒不听从。
English: Murongbao refused to obey.

古文：安退，告人曰： 吾辈皆当弃尸草野，不得归矣！ 
现代文：靳安退出去后，告诉别人说： 我们都得把自己的尸首抛弃在这荒凉的原野之上，回不去了！ 
English: After withdrawing, Yan'an told the others: "We all have to leave our dead bodies on this desolate plain. We can't go back!"

古文：燕、魏相持积旬，赵王麟将慕舆嵩等以垂为实死，谋作乱，奉麟为主。
现代文：后燕与北魏两国互相对阵，僵持了二十多天，后燕赵王慕容麟的部将慕舆嵩等人认为慕容垂是真的死了，因此图谋进行叛乱，拥奉慕容麟为后燕国主。
English: Hou Yan and the two countries of Northern Wei opposed each other and stood in a stalemate for more than twenty days. The general of Hou Yan Zhao Wang Muronglin, Mu Myu Song, and others believed that Murong Lian was really dead, so they plotted a rebellion and supported Murong Lin as the ruler of Hou Yan.

古文：事泄，嵩等皆死，宝、麟等内自疑，冬，十月，辛未，烧船夜遁。
现代文：这事泄漏了消息，慕舆嵩等人都被处死，慕容宝与慕容麟之间产生了嫌隙怀疑。冬季，十月，辛未，后燕军自己焚烧战船，趁着黑夜的掩护撤退回国。
English: News of this leaked out, and Murong Bao and Murong Lin were both executed, creating a rift of suspicion between them. In the winter, in October, in the middle of October, Hou Yan's troops burned their own warships and took advantage of the cover of night to retreat back to China.

古文：时河冰未结，宝以魏兵必不能渡，不设斥候。
现代文：这时黄河上的冰还没有冻住，慕容宝以为北魏的部队一定不能渡过黄河来追击他们，没有派出侦察部队。
English: At this time, the ice on the Yellow River had not yet frozen, and Murong Bao thought that the Northern Wei forces would not be able to cross the Yellow River to pursue them, and did not send out reconnaissance troops.

古文：十一月，己卯，暴风，冰合。魏王珪引兵济河，留辎重，选精锐二万馀骑急追之。
现代文：十一月，己卯，突然狂风大作，黄河上的冰很快封死，魏王拓跋带兵过河，留下军用物资，挑选了二万多骑兵精锐部队，火速追赶后燕部队。
English: In November, when a sudden strong wind blew, the ice on the Yellow River was quickly sealed. Wei Wang Tuoba led the troops across the river, leaving behind military supplies. He selected more than 20,000 cavalry elite troops and quickly chased the Houyan troops.

古文：燕军至参合陂，有大风，黑气如堤，自军后来，临覆军上。
现代文：后燕部队走到参合陂，大风突起，一片黑气如同一道堤岸，从后燕军的后面压了上来，将后燕军全部覆盖。
English: When Houyan's troops went to the Jianhe Pass, a gale blew up, and a black cloud, like an embankment, pressed up from behind Houyan's troops, covering them completely.

古文：沙门支昙猛言于宝曰： 风气暴迅，魏兵将至之候，宜遣兵御之。 
现代文：佛教高僧支昙猛对慕容宝说： 风云突变，这是北魏部队就要追到的征兆，应该派兵准备抵御他们。 
English: Buddhist high priest Zhi Rongmeng said to Murong Bao: The wind and clouds have changed, this is a sign that the Northern Wei forces are about to catch up, and soldiers should be sent to prepare to resist them.

古文：宝以去魏军已远，笑而不应。
现代文：慕容宝以为现在离开北魏军已经很远，只是一笑置之。
English: Murong Bao thought that he was far away from the Northern Wei Army, but he just laughed it off.

古文：昙猛固请不已，麟怒曰： 以殿下神武，师徒之盛，足以横行沙漠，索虏何敢远来！
现代文：支昙猛坚持请求不停，慕容麟大怒说： 以我们殿下的神勇英明，加之军队力量的强大，那在沙漠上横行，梳发拖辫的素虏怎么敢跑这么远来追击我们！
English: Murong Lin said angrily, "With the bravery and valor of our royal highness and the strength of our army, how dare that sloppy-haired barbarian running amok in the desert come so far to chase us!"

古文：而昙猛妄言惊众，当斩以徇！ 
现代文：支昙猛胡说八道，扰乱军心，理应斩首示众！ 
English: Spouting nonsense and disturbing the morale of the army, he should be beheaded!

古文：昙猛泣曰： 苻氏以百万之师，败于淮南，正由恃众轻敌，不信天道故也！ 
现代文：支昙猛却哭着说： 苻家拥有百万雄师，但却在淮南遭到惨败，正是因为他们仗恃自己人多势众，轻视敌人，不相信天意的缘故啊！ 
English: However, the fierce supporter cried and said: The Xing family has a million male teachers, but they were defeated in Huainan, precisely because they rely on their own people, despise the enemy, and do not believe in the will of heaven!

古文：司徒德劝宝从昙猛言，宝乃遣麟帅骑三万居军后以备非常。
现代文：司徒慕容德劝慕容宝听信支昙猛的话，慕容宝才派慕容麟率领三万骑兵走在大军的最后，以防备非常事件的发生。
English: Szeto Murongde advised Murong Bao to listen to the fierce words of the tribune, and it was only then that Murong Bao sent Murong Lin to lead the thirty thousand cavalry to walk at the end of the army, in order to prevent the occurrence of extraordinary events.

古文：麟以昙猛赤妄，纵骑游猎，不肯设备。
现代文：慕容麟认为支昙猛的话是瞎说，成天放纵骑兵到处游猎，不肯设置哨卫防备。
English: Muronglin thought that it was nonsense to say that it was supported by fierce warriors. He indulged the cavalry in hunting all day long and refused to set up a sentry.

古文：宝遣骑还诇魏兵，骑和十馀里，即解鞍寝。
现代文：慕容宝派骑兵向西打探北魏军队的动静，这些骑兵也是只走出十几里地，便人卸甲、马解鞍地倒头睡觉去了。
English: Murong Bao sent cavalry to the west to investigate the movements of the Northern Wei army. These cavalry also only went out a dozen miles, then they unloaded their armor and saddled their horses and went to sleep.

古文：魏军晨夜兼行，乙酉，暮，至参合陂西。
现代文：北魏的军队不分昼夜兼程前进，乙酉，黄昏，追到了参合陂西边。
English: The Northern Wei army advanced both day and night, and at dusk, it caught up with the west side of Shenhe.

古文：燕军在陂东，营于蟠羊山南水上。
现代文：这时，后燕军在陂东，扎营在蟠羊山南面的河旁。
English: At this time, Hou Yan's army was in the east of Shaoshan and camped by the river in the south of Shaoshan.

古文：魏王珪夜部分诸将，掩覆燕军，士卒衔枚束马口潜进。
现代文：魏主拓跋连夜部署各个将领，偷袭后燕，让士卒们含着枚，扎紧马口，暗中接近后燕军。
English: Wei ruler Tuoba deployed various generals overnight to sneak attack Houyan, let the soldiers hold the sword, tighten the muzzle, and secretly approach Houyan's army.

古文：丙戌，日出，魏军登山，下临燕营。
现代文：丙戌，太阳一出来，北魏军已经登上了山头，下面对着后燕军大营。
English: Sure enough, as soon as the sun came out, the Northern Wei army had already climbed the mountain, facing the rear Yan army camp below.

古文：燕军将东引，顾见之，士卒大惊扰乱。
现代文：后燕军队向东进发时，回头发现北魏骑兵，后燕军惊慌失措，混乱不堪。
English: When Hou Yan's army was heading east, it turned back to find the Northern Wei cavalry. Hou Yan's army was panicked and confused.

古文：珪纵兵击之，燕兵走赴水，人马相腾，蹑压溺死者以万数。
现代文：拓跋趁势驱兵攻击，后燕军奔跑落水，人撞马踩，轧死淹死者数以万计。
English: Tuoba took advantage of the situation to drive the soldiers to attack, after Yan's army ran into the water, people hit horses and trampled on them, killing tens of thousands of drowned people.

古文：略阳公遵以兵邀其前，燕兵四五万人，一时放仗敛手就禽，其遗迸去者不过数千人，太子宝等皆单骑仅免。
现代文：略阳公拓跋遵的部队横阻在逃亡后燕军的前边，四五万后燕兵，马上统统放下武器束手就擒，逃出去的也不过几千人。太子慕容宝等人都是单人匹马逃出，得以幸免。
English: After the escape, the troops of Liangyang Gong Tuobazhun stopped in front of the Yan army, and the forty or fifty thousand Yan soldiers immediately laid down their weapons and tied their hands. Only a few thousand people escaped. Prince Murong Bao and others escaped alone and were spared.

古文：杀燕右仆陈留悼王绍，生禽鲁阳王倭奴、桂林王道成、济阴公尹国等文武将吏数千人，兵甲粮货以巨万计。
现代文：北魏军队杀死了后燕右仆射陈留悼王慕容绍，活捉了鲁阳王慕容倭奴、桂林王慕容道成、济阴公慕容尹国等文武官员几千人，至于缴获的兵刃、衣甲、粮草、辎重等更是以万万计算。
English: The Northern Wei army killed several thousand civil and military officials, including Emperor Yan Rong's right-hand man, Emperor Chen Rong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong's right-hand man, Emperor Murong

古文：道成，垂之弟子也。
现代文：慕容道成是慕容垂的侄儿。
English: Murong Dacheng is the nephew of Murong Duan.

古文：魏王珪择燕臣之有才用者代郡太守广川贾闰、闰从弟骠骑长史昌黎太守彝、太史郎辽东晁崇等留之，其馀欲悉给衣粮遣还，以招怀中州之人。
现代文：魏王拓跋选择后燕被俘的大臣中有才可用的人，如代郡太守广川人贾闰、贾闰的堂弟骠骑长史昌黎太守贾彝、太史郎晁崇等留了下来，其余的打算全部都发给衣服粮食，放他们回家，希望用这样的恩德来博得中州百姓的好感。
English: After Yan was captured, Wei King Tuoba chose some of the ministers who could be used, such as the acting county governor Guangchuan Jia Rong, Jia Rong's cousin Shichang Li, the governor of Jia Rong, the governor of Jia Rong, the governor of Jia Rong, the governor of Jia Rong, the governor of Jia Rong, and so on. The rest of the plans were all given clothes and grain, and they were allowed to go home, hoping to use such grace to win the favor of the people of Zhongzhou.

古文：中部大人王建曰： 燕众强盛，今倾国而来，我幸而大捷，不如悉杀之，则其国空虚，取之为易。
现代文：中部大人王建说： 后燕国势强大，人口众多，这次动员全国力量来进攻，我们侥幸获得这么大的胜利，不如把这些人全部杀掉，后燕的内部就是一片空虚，以后再攻打他们也就容易多了。
English: Wang Jian, an adult from central China, said: Houyan is a powerful country with a large population. This time, we mobilized the national forces to attack. We were lucky to win such a big victory. It is better to kill all these people. Houyan is empty inside. It will be much easier to attack them later.

古文：且获寇而纵之，无乃不可乎！ 
现代文：况且抓获了强盗而又把他们放掉，不是很有合情理吗？ 
English: Besides, isn't it reasonable to catch robbers and then let them go?

古文：乃尽坑之。
现代文：于是，北魏把所俘的后燕将士全部活埋了。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei buried all the captured Houyan soldiers alive.

古文：十二月，珪还云中盛乐。
现代文：十二月，拓跋返回不了云中的盛乐城。
English: In December, Tuoba will not be able to return to the shining city in the clouds.

古文：燕太子宝耻于参合之败，请更击魏。
现代文：后燕太子慕容宝以为自己在参合陂那次大败是奇耻大辱，请求再次进攻北魏。
English: Houyan Prince Murong Bao thought that his defeat at the Battle of Shenghe was a great disgrace and asked for another attack on Northern Wei.

古文：司徒德言于燕主垂曰： 虏以参合之捷，有轻太子之心，宜及陛下神略以服之，不然，将为后患。 
现代文：司街慕容德也向后燕国主慕容垂进言道： 魏虏因为参合陂的那场胜利，一定会产生轻视我们太子的心意。正应该运用陛下的神机谋略制服他们，不然，将会后患无穷。 
English: Sijie Murongde also said to Murongdian, the lord of Houyan, "Because of Wei Krup's victory in the Battle of Shenhe, he will surely despise our prince. It is time to use His Majesty's divine strategy to subdue them, otherwise, there will be endless suffering.

古文：垂乃以清河公会录留台事，领幽州刺史，代高阳王隆镇龙城；以阳城王兰汗为北中郎将，代长乐公盛镇蓟；命隆、盛悉引其精兵还中山，期以明年大举击魏。
现代文：慕容垂便委任清河公慕容会为录留台事，兼任幽州刺史，代替高阳王慕容隆镇守龙城。任命阳城王兰汗为北中郎将，代替长乐公慕容盛镇守蓟城。命令慕容隆与慕容盛全都带着他们的精锐部队回到中山，准备在明年大举进攻北魏。
English: Murong Trie then appointed the Qinghe Prince Murong Hui to record Taiwan affairs and concurrently serve as the Yuzhou historian, replacing the Goyang King Murong Long with the defense of Longcheng. He appointed the Yangcheng King Lanhan as the North Vice Admiral, replacing the Changle Prince Murong Sheng with the defense of Handan City. He ordered Murong Long and Murong Sheng to all return to Zhongshan with their elite troops and prepare to attack Northern Wei in a big way next year.

古文：是岁，秦主兴封其叔父绪为晋王，硕德为陇西王，弟崇为齐公，显为常山公。
现代文：这一年，后秦国主姚兴封他的叔父姚绪为晋王，封另一位叔叔姚硕德为陇西王，封他的弟弟姚崇为齐公，弟弟姚显为常山公。
English: In this year, Yao Xing, the ruler of the Later Qin Dynasty, appointed his uncle Yao Xu as the King of Jin, another uncle Yao Shuo De as the King of Shaanxi, his brother Yao Chong as the King of Qi, and his brother Yao Xian as the King of Changshan.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝下太元二十一年
现代文：太元二十一年
English: 21st year of the Taiyuan era

古文：春，正月，燕高阳王隆引龙城之甲入中山，军容精整，燕人之气稍振。
现代文：春季，正月，后燕高阳王慕容隆带领驻防龙城的兵士来到中山，军容精壮整齐，使后燕人的精神稍稍得到振奋。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, King Muronglong of Houyan Gaoyang led the soldiers stationed in Longcheng to Zhongshan. The soldiers were strong and neat, and the spirit of Houyan people was slightly invigorated.

古文：休官权万世帅众降西秦。
现代文：休官部落的首领权万世率领部众投降了西秦。
English: The leader of the retired tribe, Guo Wanzhong, led his followers to surrender to the Western Qin.

古文：燕主垂遣征东将军平规发兵冀州。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂派遣征东将军平规率领军队开往冀州。
English: Later, Mu Rongtai, the ruler of Yan, dispatched the general of the Eastern Expedition, Ping Gu, to lead the army to Jizhou.

古文：二月，规以博陵、武邑、长乐三郡兵反于鲁口，其从子冀州刺史喜谏，不听。
现代文：二月，平规率领博陵、武邑、长乐三个郡的部队在鲁口背叛了后燕。平规的侄儿冀州刺史平喜劝谏，平规不听。
English: In February, the troops of the three counties of Boling, Wuyi and Changle led by Pingfei betrayed Houyan in Lukou. Pingfei's nephew, Jizhou Jishi Pingxi, advised Yan, but Pingfei did not listen.

古文：规弟海阳令翰亦起兵于辽西以应之。
现代文：平规的弟弟海阳令平翰也在辽西起兵响应他的哥哥。
English: His younger brother, Haiyang Ling Pinghan, also raised an army in western Liaoning Province in response to his older brother.

古文：垂遣镇东将军馀嵩击规，嵩败死。
现代文：慕容垂派遣镇东将军馀嵩进攻平规，馀嵩战败而死。
English: Murongdol dispatched Zhendong General Yu Song to attack Pinggu, Yu Song was defeated and died.

古文：垂自将击规，军至鲁口，规弃众，将妻子及平喜等数十人走渡河，垂引兵还。
现代文：慕容垂亲自领兵攻打平规，刚刚到鲁口，平规便抛弃自己的部众，带着妻子儿女以及平喜等几十个人逃走，渡过黄河。慕容垂便带着部队回去了。
English: Murong Du personally led the troops to attack Ping Gu. As soon as he arrived in Lukou, Ping Gu abandoned his subordinates and fled with his wife and children, as well as dozens of people including Ping Xi, crossing the Yellow River. Murong Du then returned with his troops.

古文：翰引兵趣龙城，清河公会遣东阳公根等击翰，破之，翰走山南。
现代文：平翰带领着部队直指龙城，后燕清河公慕容会派遣东阳公慕容根等人进攻平翰，把他打得大败，平翰逃到了山南。
English: Pinghan led the troops straight to Longcheng, after which Yan Qinghe Gong Murong sent Dongyang Gong Muronggen and others to attack Pinghan, defeated him, and Pinghan fled to Shannan.

古文：三月，庚子，燕主垂留范阳王德守中山，引兵密发。逾青岭，经天门，凿山通道，出魏不意，直指云中。
现代文：三月，庚子，后燕国主慕容垂留下花阳王慕容德镇守中山，自己带着部队秘密出发，翻过青岭，途经天门，在山中奋力开凿，打通道路，出乎北魏的意料之外，大军直奔云中。
English: In March, Geng Zi, after Yan Guozhong Mu Rongtiao left Huayang King Mu Rongde to guard Zhongshan, he secretly set out with his troops, crossed the Qingling Mountains, passed through the Gate of Heaven, and struggled to excavate in the mountains and open the road. Unexpectedly for the Northern Wei Dynasty, the army went straight into the clouds.

古文：魏陈留公虔帅部落三万馀家镇平城；垂至猎岭，以辽西王农、高阳王隆为前锋以袭之。
现代文：北魏陈留公拓跋虔统领的部落约三万多户人家镇守在平城。慕容垂来到猎岭，让辽西王慕容农、高阳王慕容隆作为前锋部队突袭拓跋虔。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, more than 30,000 households of the tribe led by Chen Liu Gong and Tuoba Qian were garrisoned in Pingcheng. Murong Du came to Huiling, and let Liaoxi King Murong Nong and Goyang King Murong Long raid Tuoba Qian as the vanguard troops.

古文：是时，燕兵新败，皆畏魏，惟龙城兵勇锐争先。
现代文：这时，后燕部队刚刚遭到惨败，都很畏惧北魏，只有慕容隆统辖的龙城部队勇敢果决，个个争先。
English: At this time, Houyan's troops had just suffered a crushing defeat, and they were all afraid of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Only the Longcheng troops under the control of Muronglong were brave and decisive, and they were all vying for the lead.

古文：虔素不设备，闰月，乙卯，燕军至平城，虔乃觉之，帅麾下出战，败死，燕军尽收其部落。
现代文：拓跋虔平素经常不注意戒备，闰三月，乙卯，后燕军来到平城，拓跋虔才发觉，仓促之中率领他的部下出来接战，战败而死。后燕军收编了他的部落。
English: Tuoba Qianping often did not pay attention to the alert. In leap March, the Yanshan army came to Pingcheng. Tuoba Qianping only found out that he led his men out to fight in a hurry and died in defeat. The Yanshan army gathered his tribe.

古文：魏王珪震怖，欲走，诸部闻虔死，皆有贰心，珪不知所适。
现代文：王拓跋听到这个消息后，大为震惊恐惧，打算放弃都城逃走，其他部落听说了拓跋虔的死讯，都产生了二心。拓跋不知所措。
English: After hearing this news, Wang Tuoba was shocked and afraid, and planned to abandon the capital and flee. Other tribes heard the news of Tuoba Qian's death, and all had second thoughts. Tuoba was at a loss.

古文：垂之过参合陂也，见积骸如山，为之设祭，军士皆恸哭，声震山谷。
现代文：慕容垂率军路过参合陂的时候，看到那里依然尸骸堆积如山，于是摆下香案，为死难者祭奠，军士们也都跟着放声恸哭，哭声震撼着山谷。
English: When Mu Rongtui and his army passed through Sanghe County, they saw that the dead bodies were still piled up there, so they placed incense to pay tribute to the dead. The soldiers also cried loudly, and the cries shook the valley.

古文：垂惭愤呕血，由是发疾，乘马舆而进，顿平城西北三十里。
现代文：慕容垂见此惨状，心里既惭愧，又愤怒，因而吐血。从此他得了一场病，乘坐马拉的车继续前进，停扎在平城西北部三十里远的地方。
English: Seeing this, Murong was so ashamed and angry that he vomited blood. From then on, he fell ill and continued his journey in a horse-drawn carriage, stopping 30 miles northwest of Pingcheng.

古文：太子宝等闻之，皆引还。
现代文：太子慕容宝等人听到了这个消息后，都带兵从前方撤回。
English: After Prince Murong Bao and others heard the news, they all withdrew from the front with their soldiers.

古文：燕军叛者告于魏云 垂已死，舆尸在军。 
现代文：后燕军里有叛逃的人，跑到北魏说： 慕容垂已经死了，用车拉着他的尸首。 
English: Later, there were defectors from Yan's army who ran to Northern Wei and said, "Murongdiao is dead, drag his corpse with a cart."

古文：魏王珪欲追之，闻平城已没，乃引还阻山。
现代文：魏王拓跋打算去追击燕军，又听说平城已经沦陷，就带着部队回到阴山。
English: Wei King Tuoba planned to pursue Yan's army, and when he heard that Pingcheng had fallen, he returned to Yinshan with his troops.

古文：垂在平城积十日，疾转笃，乃筑燕昌城而还。
现代文：慕容垂在平城养病已满十天，病势却反而加重，在这里兴筑了燕昌城，便班师回朝。
English: Mu Rongtui had been recuperating in Pingcheng for ten days, but his condition worsened. He built Yanchang City here, and then returned to the North.

古文：夏，四月，癸未，卒于上谷之沮阳，秘不发丧。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸未，慕容垂在上谷的沮阳去世。
English: In the summer, in April, not long after, Murong passed away under the sun in Shangguan.

古文：丙申，至中山；戊戌，发丧，谥曰成武皇帝，庙号世祖。
现代文：后燕没有宣布这个消息。
English: Houyan did not announce the news.

古文：壬寅，太子宝即位，大赦，改元永康。
现代文：丙申，大军回到都城中山。戊戌，发布慕容垂已死的消息，追谥他叫成武皇帝，庙号世祖。
English: Bishen, the army returned to the capital Zhongshan. Wuzhen, released the news that Murong was dying, and called him Emperor Chengwu, the founder of the temple.

古文：五月，辛亥，以范阳王德为都督冀、兗、青、徐、荆、豫六州诸军事、车骑大将军、冀州牧，镇鄴；辽西王农为都督并、雍、益、梁、秦、凉六州诸军事、并州牧，镇晋阳。
现代文：壬寅，太子慕容宝即位，实行大赦，改年号为永康。五月，辛亥，后燕国主慕容宝任命范阳王慕容德为都督冀、兖、青、徐、荆、豫六州诸军事，车骑大将军，冀州牧，镇守邺城。辽西王慕容农为都督并、雍、益、梁、秦、凉六州诸军事，并州牧，镇守晋阳。
English: In May, Xinhai, after Yan Guozhong Mu Rong Bao appointed Fan Yang Wang Murongde as the military governor of the six states of Hebei, Shan, Qing, Xu, Jing, and Henan, the cavalry general, the Jizhou pastoralist, and the town guard of Shicheng. Liaoxi Wang Murong Nong was the military governor of the six states of Nian, Yong, Yi, Liang, Qin, and Liang, and the town guard of Jinyang.

古文：又以安定王库傉官伟为太师，夫馀王为太傅。
现代文：又任命安定王库官伟为太师，扶馀王馀蔚为太傅。
English: He also appointed the stable king, Ku Kuan Wei, as Grand Master, and the supporting king, Yu Wei, as Grand Master.

古文：甲寅，以赵王麟领尚书左仆射，高阳王隆领右仆射，长乐公盛为司隶校尉，宜都王凤为冀州刺史。
现代文：甲寅，任命赵王慕容麟兼任尚书左仆射，高阳王慕容隆兼任右仆射，长乐公慕容盛为司隶校尉，宜都王慕容凤为冀州刺史。
English: Jia Yin appointed Zhao Wang Murong Lin as the left assistant of Shang Shu, Gaoyang Wang Murong Long as the right assistant of Shang Shu, Changle Gong Murong Sheng as the lieutenant of Sili, and Yidu Wang Murong Feng as the historian of Jizhou.

古文：乙卯，以散骑常侍彭城刘该为徐州刺史，镇鄄城。
现代文：乙卯，东晋任命散骑常侍、彭城人刘该为徐州刺史，镇守鄄城。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Liu Jia, a knight errant and a resident of Pengcheng, as the governor of Xuzhou and the town guard of Lucheng.

古文：甲子，以望蔡公谢琰为尚书左仆射。
现代文：甲子，东晋任命望蔡公谢琰为尚书左仆射。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Wang Cai Gong Xiejun as Shang Shushi's left-hand man.

古文：初，燕主垂先段后生子令、宝，后段后生子朗、鉴，爱诸姬子麟、农、隆、柔、熙。
现代文：当初，后燕国主慕容垂的前妻段皇后生了儿子慕容令、慕容宝，他的继室小段皇后又生了儿子慕容朗、慕容鉴，但是，慕容垂偏爱其他姬妾生的儿子慕容麟、慕容农、慕容隆、慕容柔、慕容熙。
English: At first, the former wife of Emperor Murongdol, Empress Duan, gave birth to sons Murong Ling and Murong Bao, and his stepmother, Empress Duan, gave birth to sons Murong Lang and Murong Jian. However, Murongdol preferred sons of other concubines, Murong Lin, Murong Nong, Murong Long, Murong Rou, and Murong Xi.

古文：宝初为太子，有美称，已而荒怠，中外失望。
现代文：慕容宝刚刚当上太子时，还有比较好的名誉，但是不久便渐渐荒废倦怠，使朝廷内外大失所望。
English: When Murong Bao had just become crown prince, he still had a relatively good reputation, but soon he gradually became worn out and tired, causing great disappointment both inside and outside the court.

古文：后段后尝言于垂曰： 太子遭承平之世，足为守成之主；今国步艰难，恐非济世之才。
现代文：小段皇后曾经向慕容垂进言说： 太子如果生逢太平盛世，他足可以做一个很好的守住成业的君主。但是，现在国家举步艰难，太子恐怕不是一个拯世济民的干才。
English: Xiaodan's empress once said to Murongdiao: "If the prince was born in a peaceful and prosperous time, he could be a monarch who would do a good job. However, now that the country is in a difficult situation, the prince may not be able to save the world.

古文：辽西、高阳二王，陛下之贤子，宜择一人，付以大业。
现代文：辽西王与高阳王两人，是陛下您的贤能的儿子，应该从他们中间选择一个，把国家的大业托付给他。
English: Liao Xi Wang and Gaoyang Wang are two of Your Majesty's capable sons. You should choose one of them and entrust him with the great cause of the country.

古文：赵王麟奸诈强愎，异日必为国家之患，宜早图之。 
现代文：赵王慕容麟奸佞狡诈、强顽刚愎、以后总有一天一定会成为国家的大患，应该早日计划除掉他。 
English: Zhao Wang Muronglin is a treacherous, cunning, and strong-willed person. He will definitely become a great danger to the country one day in the future. It should be planned to get rid of him as soon as possible.

古文：宝善事垂左右，左右多誉之，故垂以为贤，谓段氏曰： 汝欲使我为晋献公乎？ 
现代文：慕容宝颇能善待结交慕容垂左右近臣，他们经常称赞太子，所以，慕容垂竟认为慕容宝贤明干练，便毫不客气地对小段皇后说： 你打算让我成为听信骊姬的谗言而杀了太子申生的晋献公吗？ 
English: Murong Bao was quite good at befriending the courtiers around Murong Diao, and they often praised the prince. Therefore, Murong Diao actually thought that Murong Bao was wise and capable, and he said to the Empress Xiaodan unceremoniously: Do you intend to make me the crown prince who killed Prince Shen Shensheng after listening to the advice of the concubine?

古文：段氏泣而退，告其妹范阳王妃曰： 太子不才，天下所知，吾为社稷言之，主上乃以吾为骊姬，何其苦哉！
现代文：小段皇后忍不住凄然落泪，退了出来告诉她的妹妹、范阳王慕容德的王妃说： 太子无才，这是天下人都知道的事。我为了考虑江山社稷而说出自己的看法，但主上却把我当成了进献谗言的骊姬，我是多么的冤枉痛苦啊！
English: Xiaodan's empress couldn't help but burst into tears. She retreated and told her sister, Fan Yang Wang Murongde's empress, saying: "The prince is not talented, this is something that everyone knows. I expressed my opinion in order to consider the country and society, but the Lord regarded me as a gossip. How unjustified and painful I was!

古文：观太子必丧社稷，范阳王有非常器度，若燕祚未尽，其在王乎！ 
现代文：我看太子一定会把江山社稷断送，而范阳王却有不比寻常的气度，如果我们燕国的气数还没有尽，莫非是应在范阳王身上吗？ 
English: I think that the crown prince will definitely send the Jiangshan company to the top, but Fan Yang Wang has a more than ordinary air. If we have not exhausted the amount of gas in Yan Guo, shouldn't it be on Fan Yang Wang?

古文：宝及麟闻而恨之。
现代文：慕容宝与慕容麟听到了这些话，对小段皇后恨之入骨。
English: When Murong Bao and Murong Lin heard these words, they hated Xiaodan the Empress.

古文：乙丑，使麟谓段氏曰： 后常谓主上不能守大业，今竟能不？
现代文：乙丑，慕容宝派遗慕容麟去面见小段皇后说： 您常说我们主上不能守住国家大业，你看现在能守不能？
English: Second Ugly, Murong Bao sent his widow, Murong Lin, to meet with the Empress Xiaodan and said, "You often say that our Lord cannot keep the great cause of the country. Do you think you can keep it now?

古文：宜早自裁，以全段宗！ 
现代文：您应该早日自己裁决，这样才能保全你们段家宗族的所有性命！ 
English: You should make your own decision as soon as possible, so that you can save all the lives of your family!

古文：段氏怒曰： 汝兄弟不难逼杀其母，况能守先业乎！
现代文：小段皇后大怒说： 你们兄弟这样轻易地逼杀继母，还谈什么能守先人的大业呢？
English: Xiaodan's empress said angrily, "Your brothers killed your stepmother so easily, how can you talk about protecting the great cause of your predecessors?

古文：吾岂爱死，但念国亡不久耳。 
现代文：我岂是贪生怕死，只是忧虑不久之后国家就要灭亡罢了。 
English: Am I greedy for life and afraid of death, only worried that the country will soon perish?

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是，她愤而自杀。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：宝议以段后谋废適统，无母后之道，不宜成丧，群臣咸以为然。
现代文：慕容宝认为小段皇后曾经谋划废黜太子的嫡传正统，没有了一个做母亲皇后的道义，因此不应该为她举办丧事。
English: Murong Bao believed that Xiaodan Empress had plotted to overthrow the legitimate legitimacy of the crown prince, and did not have the morality of being a mother empress, so she should not hold a funeral for her.

古文：中书令眭邃扬言于朝曰： 子无废母之义，汉安恩阎后亲废顺帝，犹得配飨太庙，况先后暖昧之言，虚实未可知乎？ 
现代文：朝中的文武百官都认为这样做很对。只有中书令眭邃在金殿之上动情地高声说： 作为儿子没有废黜母亲的义理。东汉王朝安思皇后阎氏亲手把顺帝贬废，死了之后仍然还能进入太庙，何况先皇后不过说了几句令人含糊不清的话，这事是虚是实都无法证实呢！ 
English: All the military and civilian officials of the dynasty thought that this was the right thing to do. Only Zhongshu Lingya said in a high-pitched voice above the Golden Hall: As a son, he did not dethrone his mother's righteousness. The Eastern Han Dynasty Anshi Empress Yan personally dethroned Emperor Shun and could still enter the Imperial Temple after her death. What's more, the previous empress only said a few ambiguous words, and it was impossible to confirm whether this was true or not.

古文：乃成丧。
现代文：于是，慕容宝为她举行了丧礼。
English: So, Murongbao held a funeral for her.

古文：六月，癸酉，魏王珪遣将军王建等击燕广宁太守刘亢泥，斩之，徙其部落于平城。
现代文：六月，癸酉，魏王拓跋派遣将军王建等人袭击后燕广宁太守刘亢泥，杀了他，并把他所属的部落迁到平城。
English: In June, the Wei king Tuoba sent the general Wang Jian and others to attack the Later Yan Guangning's governor Liu Bingdi, killed him, and moved his tribe to Pingcheng.

古文：燕上谷太守开封公详弃郡走。
现代文：后燕上谷太守开封公慕容详放弃自己的郡城逃走。
English: Later, Yan Shanggu, the governor of Kaifeng, gave up his county seat and fled.

古文：详，珪之曾孙也。
现代文：慕容详是慕容的曾孙子。
English: Murong Zhao is Murong Zhao's great-grandson.

古文：丁亥，魏贺太妃卒。
现代文：丁亥，北魏贺太妃去世。
English: Dinghai, Northern Wei He Taifei passed away.

古文：燕主宝定士族旧籍，分辨清浊，校阅户口，罢军营封廕之户，悉属郡县。
现代文：后燕国主慕容宝下令重新核定士族的旧有户籍，区分辨别居民附阶层的高低，审校查看住户与人口，撤销了那些受到军营保护照顾的户族，使他们全部归属郡县管辖。
English: Later, Mu Rongbao, the ruler of Yan, ordered to re-approve the old household registration of the warrior class, distinguish the high and low levels of the residents, check the households and the population, revoke those who were protected and cared for by the military camp, and make them all belong to the jurisdiction of the county.

古文：由是士民嗟怨，始有离心。
现代文：从此，士民对朝廷嗟叹怨恨之声越来越多，开始离心离德。
English: From then on, the people's resentment against the imperial court grew more and more, and they began to distance themselves from Germany.

古文：三河王吕光即天王位，国号大凉，大赦，改元龙飞。
现代文：后凉三河王吕光，登上了天王的宝座，定国号为大凉，实行大赦，改年号为龙飞。
English: After the Liangshan, the king of the three rivers, Luguang, ascended the throne of the heavenly king, the country code was set to Dairang, an amnesty was implemented, and the year code was changed to Longfei.

古文：备置百官，以世子绍为太子，封子弟为公侯者二十人，以中书令王详为尚书左仆射，著作郎段业等五人为尚书。
现代文：配备设置了文武百官，册立长子吕绍为太子，封自己的二十个儿子兄弟为公爵、侯爵。任命中书令王详为尚书左仆射，著作郎段业等五个人为尚书。
English: He appointed his eldest son, Lü Shao, as the crown prince, and made his twenty sons and brothers dukes and marquesses. He also appointed five people, including the king's secretary, Wang Zhaozhu, and the writer, Lang Duanye.

古文：光遣使者拜秃发乌孤为征南大将军、益州牧、左贤王。
现代文：吕光又派遣使者授秃发乌孤为征南大将军、益州牧，封为左贤王。
English: Luguang also sent an envoy to confer the title of Zuoxian King on Bald-faced Wu Guo, who was the general of the Southern Expedition and the herdsman of Yizhou.

古文：乌孤谓使者曰： 吕王诸子贪淫，三甥暴虐，远近愁怨，吾安可违百姓之心，受不义之爵乎？
现代文：秃发乌孤对来的使节说道： 吕天王的几个儿子全都贪婪淫邪，三个外甥凶暴狂虐，远近的百姓无不忧愁怨恨，我怎么可以违逆百姓的民心，接受这不义的官爵呢？
English: The bald-headed envoy said, "The sons of King Lu are all greedy and immoral, the three nephews are violent and brutal, and the people near and far are all sad and resentful. How can I go against the people's will and accept this unjust official and nobleman?

古文：吾当为帝王之事耳。 
现代文：我应当做一些帝王应该做的事了。 
English: I have to do what emperors have to do.

古文：乃留其鼓吹、羽仪，谢而遣之。
现代文：于是留下了使节所带来的那些乐队和仪仗，向使节道过歉意之后把他送回去了。
English: So he left the band and the trophies that the envoy had brought with him, apologized to the envoy and sent him back.

古文：平规收合馀党据高唐，燕主宝遣高阳王隆将兵讨之。
现代文：后燕叛将平规，收整、集中他的余党，占据了高唐。后燕国主慕容宝派遣高阳王慕容隆带兵前去讨伐。
English: After Yan rebelled, he leveled the playing field, consolidated and concentrated his remaining forces, and occupied Gaotang. After Yan, the ruler of the country, Murong Bao, sent the king of Goyang, Murong Long, to lead an army to fight.

古文：东土之民，素怀隆惠，迎候者属路。
现代文：东方地区的居民，一向怀念慕容隆的好处，所以欢迎等待他的人在道路上前后不绝。
English: Residents of the eastern region have always missed the benefits of Murong Long, so they welcome those who wait for him on the road.

古文：秋，七月，隆进军临河，规弃高唐走。
现代文：秋季，七月，慕容隆挥军来到黄河岸边，平规放弃高唐逃走。
English: In the autumn, in July, Murong Long waved his army to the shore of the Yellow River, abandoning Gaotang and fleeing.

古文：隆遣建威将军慕容进等济河追之，斩规于济北。
现代文：慕容隆派遣建威将军慕容进等人渡过黄河追击，在济北将平规斩首。
English: Murong Long dispatched Jian Wei General Murong Jin and others to cross the Yellow River to pursue and behead Ping Gu in North Jeju.

古文：平喜奔彭城。
现代文：平喜逃奔彭城。
English: Pingxi fled to Pengcheng.

古文：纳故中书令王献之女为太子妃。
现代文：东晋太子司马德宗，娶原中书令王献之的女儿为太子妃。
English: The Eastern Jin prince Sima Dezong married the daughter of the original Shurei Wang as the crown princess.

古文：献之，羲之之子也。
现代文：王献之是王羲之的儿子。
English: Wang Xianzhi is the son of Wang Xizhu.

古文：魏群臣劝魏王珪称尊号，珪始建天子旌旗，出警入跸，改元皇始。
现代文：北魏的文武大臣一致劝说魏王拓跋自称尊号，拓跋才开始制作天子才用的旌旗，出入时戒备森严，清除道路，禁止行人通行，改年号为皇始。
English: The civil and military ministers of the Northern Wei unanimously persuaded the Wei King Tuoba to call himself the honorable name. It was only after Tuoba began to make the banner used by the sons of heaven, the guard was strict when entering and leaving, the road was cleared, pedestrians were prohibited, and the year was changed to the beginning of the emperor.

古文：参军事上谷张恂劝珪进取中原，珪善之。
现代文：参军事、上谷人张恂进劝拓跋发兵去夺取中原，拓跋以为他说得很对。
English: Zhang Xijin, who was in the military and from the upper valley, advised Tuoba to send troops to seize the Central Plains. Tuoba thought he was right.

古文：燕辽西王农悉将部曲数万口之并州，并州素乏储彳侍。
现代文：后燕辽西王慕容农带领所统属的几万口部曲前往并州。
English: Later, Yan Liao and West King Murong Nong led tens of thousands of subordinate cadres to Anhui Province.

古文：是岁早霜，民不能供其食。又遣诸部护军分监诸胡，由是民夷俱怨，潜召魏军。
现代文：并州一向缺乏粮食储备，这一年又正赶上下霜较早，百姓无法供应这么多人的粮食，再加上慕容农派遣各部护军分头监视其他几处胡人部落，从此，汉人夷人对他都深怀怨恨，暗地里有人偷偷地去请北魏的部队前来。
English: And the state has always been short of grain reserves, and this year it was just in time for the early frost, so the people could not supply so much grain to so many people. Coupled with the fact that the Murong farmers sent guards from various ministries to monitor several other Hu tribes, from then on, the Han people harbored deep resentment against him. Someone secretly went to invite the troops of the Northern Wei Dynasty to come.

古文：八月，己亥，魏王珪大举伐燕，步骑四十馀万，南出马邑，逾句注，旌旗二千馀里，鼓行而进。
现代文：八月，已亥，魏王拓跋发重兵讨伐后燕国，步兵、骑兵共约四十多万人，从马邑向南进发，跃过句注山，军旗招展，迤逦两千多里，擂鼓前进。
English: In August, already in the winter, Wei Wang Tuo sent heavy troops to fight against Yan's country. A total of more than 400,000 infantry and cavalry marched southward from Mayi, jumping over the mountains, waving flags, marching more than two thousand miles, and marching with drums.

古文：左将军雁门李栗将五万骑为前驱，别遣将国封真等从东道出军都，袭燕幽州。
现代文：其中，左将军、雁门人李栗带领五万骑兵为前锋部队，又另外派遣将军封真等从东路跃过军都山，袭击后燕的幽州。
English: Among them, General Zuo and Li Li, a native of Ganmen, led fifty thousand cavalrymen as the vanguard force, and also dispatched General Feng Zhen and others to leap over the Capital of the Army from the East Road and attack Houyan's Yuzhou.

古文：燕征北大将军、幽、平二州牧、清河公会母贱而年长，雄俊有器艺，燕主垂爱之。
现代文：后燕征北大将军，幽、平二州牧，清河公慕容会母亲出身贫贱，但年纪最大，雄伟俊逸，器宇不凡，颇有才能，慕容垂很喜欢他。
English: After Yan Zheng, the general of Peking University, Yu, Ping, Erzhou Moo, Qinghe Gong, Murong Hui's mother was born poor, but he was the oldest, majestic and handsome, extraordinary and talented. Murong Hui liked him very much.

古文：宝之伐魏也，垂命会摄东宫事、总录，礼遇一如太子。
现代文：慕容宝讨伐北魏的时候，慕容垂曾命令慕容会摄管东宫太子府的事务，遇事全权处理，对他的待遇，跟对太子相同。
English: When Murong Bao was fighting against the Northern Wei Dynasty, Murong Zhuang ordered the Murong Association to take charge of the affairs of the East Palace and the Prince's Office, and to handle matters with full authority. His treatment was the same as that of the prince.

古文：及垂代魏，命会镇龙城，委以东北之任，国官府佐，皆选一时才望。
现代文：到慕容垂亲自带兵伐魏的时候，他又命令慕容会镇守龙城，把东北方面的所有军政事务全部交由他来处理，选派藩国和府衙官员都是在当时才能、声望最高的人。
English: When Murong Tie personally led the troops to Wei, he also ordered the Murong Association to guard Longcheng and to entrust all military and political affairs in the Northeast to him. The officials of the state and the prefectural government were the most talented and prestigious people at that time.

古文：垂疾笃，遗言命宝以会为嗣；而宝爱少子濮阳公策，意不在会。
现代文：慕容垂病重时，留下遗嘱，命令慕容宝一定让慕容会当他的继承人。但是慕容宝却喜爱小儿子濮阳公慕容策，而不看重慕容会。
English: When Murong fell seriously ill, he left a will, ordering Murong Bao to make sure that Murong Hui would be his heir. However, Murong Bao loved his youngest son, Shanyanggong Murong Zhe, and did not value Murong Hui.

古文：长乐公盛与会同年，耻为之下，乃与赵王麟共劝宝立策，宝从之。
现代文：长乐公慕容盛与慕容会同岁，觉得自己当他的部下为奇耻大辱，于是便和赵王慕容麟一起力劝慕容宝立慕容策为太子，慕容宝听从了他们的话。
English: Murong Sheng, the Prince of Changle, who was the same age as Murong Hui, felt that it was a great disgrace for him to be treated as a subordinate, so he and Zhao Wang Murong Lin worked hard to persuade Murong Bao to make Murong Ce the crown prince. Murong Bao obeyed their words.

古文：乙亥，立妃段氏为皇后，策为皇太子，会、盛皆进爵为王。
现代文：乙亥，慕容宝册立妃子段氏为皇后，册立慕容策为皇太子，慕容会、慕容盛都晋封为王。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Murong Treasure Book was compiled, and the Fizi Duan clan was designated as the empress, the Murong Sect was designated as the crown prince, and the Murong Sect and the Murong Sect were all promoted to the king.

古文：策年十一，素憃弱；会闻之，心愠怼。
现代文：慕容策这年才十一岁，一直愚昧懦弱。慕容会听到这个消息后，心里不免怨恨不满。
English: Murong Ke was only eleven years old at the time, and he had always been stupid and cowardly. Upon hearing this news, Murong Ke could not help but feel resentful and dissatisfied.

古文：九月，章武王宙奉燕方垂及成哀段后之丧葬于龙城宣平陵。
现代文：九月，章武王慕容宙护送后燕国主慕容垂以及成哀小段皇后的灵柩到龙城宣平陵安葬。
English: In September, King Murong of Zhangwu escorted the coffin of Queen Murongdui, the ruler of Houyan, and the coffin of Empress Chengmo to Longcheng Xuanping Mausoleum for burial.

古文：宝诏宙悉高阳王隆参佐、部曲、家属还中山，会违诏，多留部曲不遣。
现代文：慕容宝下诏给慕容宙，命他把高阳王慕容隆手下的慕僚官员、军队、家眷等人全部迁回都城中山。慕容会违背慕容宝的诏书，留下了许多慕容隆的部曲没有遣返。
English: Murong Bao issued an edict to Murong Chao, ordering him to relocate all Murong officials, troops, families and others under the command of Goyang King Murong Long back to the capital Zhongshan. Murong would violate Murong Bao's edict, leaving many of Murong Long's troops without repatriation.

古文：宙年长属尊，会每事陵侮之，见者皆知其有异志。
现代文：慕容宙年纪已经很老、辈份又高，慕容会却经常借机欺凌侮辱他。看见这种情况的人都知道这时候慕容会已经心怀不轨。
English: Murong Chao is already very old and senior, but the Murong Association often takes the opportunity to bully and insult him. Anyone who sees this situation knows that the Murong Association is already on the wrong track at this time.

古文：戊午，魏军至阳曲，乘西山，临晋阳，遣骑环城大噪而去。
现代文：戊午，北魏军开到阳曲，沿着西山，临近晋阳，派骑兵围绕晋阳城大声喧哗一阵又退了回来。
English: At noon, the Northern Wei army drove to Yangqu, along the West Mountain, near Jinyang, sent cavalry around Jinyang City, made a loud noise and retreated back.

古文：燕辽西王农出战，大败，奔还晋阳，司马慕舆嵩闭门拒之。
现代文：后燕辽西王慕容农领兵出战，被打得大败，奔逃回晋阳，后燕司马慕舆嵩紧闭城门拒绝慕容农进城。
English: Later, Yan Liao Xi Wang Murong led the peasants into battle, was defeated, and fled back to Jinyang. Later, Yan Sima Murong closed the city gate and refused to let the Murong farmers enter the city.

古文：农将妻子帅数千骑东走，魏中领将军长孙肥追之，及于潞川，获农妻子。
现代文：慕容农带着妻子儿女、统领着几千名骑兵向东逃去。北魏中领将军长孙肥追击他们，到了潞川终于追上，抓获了慕容农的妻子儿女。
English: Murong Nong took his wife and children and led several thousand cavalrymen to the east. The Northern Wei general Sun Hui chased them, and finally caught up with them at the Min River and captured Murong Nong's wife and children.

古文：燕军尽没，农被创，独与三骑逃归中山。
现代文：后燕军也全部被消灭，慕容农受了伤，只和三名骑兵一起逃回了中山。
English: Later, Yan's army was also completely wiped out. Murong Nong was injured and fled back to Zhongshan with only three cavalrymen.

古文：魏王珪遂取并州。初建台省，置刺史、太守、尚书郎以下官，悉用儒生为之。
现代文：魏王拓跋于是夺取了并州，第一次设置了朝廷办事机构，安排刺史、太守、尚书郎等以下的官吏，完全用读书人担当这些职务。
English: King Tuoba of Wei then seized the annexed states, and for the first time set up an office for the imperial court, arranging officials such as Sishi, Dazhu, Shang Shulang, and completely using readers to perform these duties.

古文：士大夫诣军门者，无少长，皆引入存慰，使人人尽言，少有才用，咸加擢叙。
现代文：士大夫到军营门口拜见，无论年龄大小，他都礼让到营中尽心慰抚，使他们每个人都能畅所欲言，只要稍稍有一些才能和可用之处，都加以任用。
English: The major-domo would meet them at the gate of the camp, and no matter how old they were, he would graciously go to the camp and comfort them, so that everyone could speak freely, and anyone with a little talent and availability could be appointed.

古文：己未，遣辅国将军奚收略地汾川，获燕丹杨王买得及离石护军高秀和。
现代文：己未，拓跋派遣辅国将军奚牧去攻取汾川，抓获了后燕丹杨王慕容买德和离石护军高秀和。
English: Not long after, Tuoba dispatched the auxiliary general Qimui to capture the Qianchuan River, and captured the queen of Yandan, Yang Wang Murongbai De, and Gao Xiuhe, the protector of Liishi.

古文：以中书侍郎张恂等为诸郡太守，招抚离散，劝课农桑。
现代文：拓跋任命中书侍郎张恂等人做了几个郡的太守，招徕并且抚慰过去流亡失散的农民回到自己的家园，鼓励并且奖赏他们种田养蚕。
English: Tuoba appointed Zhongshuizhirang Zhang Qian and others as the governors of several counties, invited and comforted the exiled farmers to return to their homes, and encouraged and rewarded them to farm and raise silkworms.

古文：燕主宝闻魏军将至，议于东堂。
现代文：后燕国主慕容宝听说北魏军就要打来，在东堂商议对策。
English: Later, Yan Guozhong Mu Rongbao heard that the Northern Wei Army was about to call, and discussed countermeasures in the East Hall.

古文：中山尹苻谟曰： 今魏军众强，千里远斗，乘胜气锐。若纵之使入平土，不可敌，宜杜险以拒之。 
现代文：中山尹苻谟说： 现在魏军人数众多，力量强大，而且能从千里之外前来作战，乘胜前进，锐不可当，如果放他们进入平原，我们便没有办法再抵挡了，我们应当依据险要地形对付他们。 
English: Zhongshan Yin Rongmo said: Now the Wei army is numerous and powerful, and it can come from thousands of miles away to fight. It is imperative to advance by winning. If they are allowed to enter the plain, we will have no way to resist. We should deal with them according to the dangerous terrain.

古文：中书令眭邃曰： 魏多骑兵，往来剽速，马上赍粮，不过旬日。
现代文：中书令眭邃说： 魏以骑兵为多，奔来驰往剽悍迅速，但是，他们在马上携带的粮草不过够十天左右的用度。
English: According to the Book of the Middle Kingdom, the Wei Dynasty had more cavalry and galloped faster and faster. However, the grain and grass they carried on horseback was only enough for about ten days.

古文：宜令郡县聚民千家为一堡，深沟高垒，清野以待之。彼至无所掠，不过六旬，食尽自退。 
现代文：我们应该命令各郡县把居民聚集在一起，一千户人家组成一个寨堡，深挖战壕，高筑壁垒，使原野上既无人迹又无粮草可取，等待他们的进犯，他们来到这里没有什么可抢劫的东西，最多不超过六十天，他们就会因为粮食用完而自行撤退回去。 
English: We should order the counties to gather their inhabitants together, a thousand families to form a stockade, dig deep trenches, build high ramparts, so that the field is both deserted and barren, and wait for their attack, they come here with nothing to rob, no more than sixty days, they will withdraw because they run out of food.

古文：尚书封懿曰； 今魏兵数十万，天下之勍敌也，民虽筑堡，不足以自固，是聚兵及粮以资之也。
现代文：尚书封懿说： 现在魏军有数十万人，这是天下最大的劲敌。居民即使修筑寨堡，也没有办法保卫自己的安全，这等于把兵马及粮食聚集在一起送给他们。
English: Shang Shufeng said: Now the Wei army has hundreds of thousands of people, which is the biggest rival in the world. Even if the residents build a castle, they have no way to protect their own safety, which is equivalent to gathering soldiers and horses and grain together to give them.

古文：且动摇民心，示之以弱。不如阻关拒战，计之上也。 
现代文：而且那样容易使民心动摇、暴露自己的虚弱，我看不如据守关隘，决一死战，这才是上策呀！ 
English: Moreover, it is so easy to shake the people's hearts and expose one's own weakness. I don't see how sticking to one's guns and fighting to the death is the best strategy!

古文：赵王麟曰： 魏今乘胜气锐，其锋不可当，宜完守中山，待其弊而乘之。 
现代文：赵王慕容麟说： 魏军现在乘胜而来，气势旺盛，正面锋芒无论如何也挡不住，我们应该全面地据守中山。等待他们出现漏洞和失策的时候再乘机反击。 
English: Zhao Wang Muronglin said: The Wei army is now taking advantage of the victory, the momentum is strong, the front line can not be stopped in any way, we should fully defend Zhongshan. Wait for them to have loopholes and blunders, and then take the opportunity to counterattack.

古文：于是修城积粟，为持久之备。
现代文：于是，后燕开始大规模地修筑城墙，储备粮食，做持久作战的准备。
English: As a result, Houyan began to build city walls on a large scale, stockpile grain, and prepare for long-term warfare.

古文：命辽西王农出屯安喜，军事动静，悉以委麟。
现代文：慕容宝又命令辽西王慕容农驻扎在安喜，而把军务交给慕容麟全权掌管。
English: Murong Bao also ordered Murong Nong, the king of West Liao, to stay in Anxi, and gave the military affairs to Murong Lin to take full control.

古文：帝嗜酒，流连内殿，醒治既少，外人罕得进见。
现代文：孝武帝非常喜欢喝酒，他经常在内殿里流连迷醉，头脑清醒的时间少了，宫外的人很难也很少能被允许进见。
English: Emperor Xiaowu liked to drink a lot. He often got drunk in the inner hall. He didn't have much time to clear his head. People from outside the palace were rarely allowed in.

古文：张贵人宠冠后宫，后宫皆畏之。
现代文：张贵人是后宫里最受宠幸的，后宫中人人都非常害怕她。
English: Zhang Guizhen is the most favored one in the harem, and everyone in the harem is very afraid of her.

古文：庚申，帝与后宫宴，妓乐尽侍；时贵人年近三十，帝戏之曰： 汝以年亦当废矣，吾意更属少者。 
现代文：庚申，孝武帝和后宫的嫔妃们一起宴饮，美女和乐队也都来在一旁侍候。这时张贵人年纪将近三十，孝武帝故意调笑她说： 你如果按照年龄来说，也应该废黜了，我的心意是更喜欢年轻的。 
English: Goshun, Emperor Xiaowu and the concubines of the harem feasted together, and the beautiful women and the orchestra also came to wait on the sidelines. At this time, Zhang Guiren was nearly thirty years old, and Emperor Xiaowu deliberately made fun of her and said: If you are according to your age, you should also be dethroned, my intention is to prefer the young.

古文：贵人潜怒，向夕，帝醉，寝于清暑殿，贵人遍饮宦者酒，散遣之，使婢以被蒙帝面，弑之，重赂左右，云 因魇暴崩 。
现代文：张贵人心中暗自气愤。到了晚上，孝武帝大醉，在清暑殿就寝。张贵人则拿酒赏赐所有的宦官，打发他们走开，然后，让贴身的服侍婢女用被子蒙住都孝帝的脸，弑杀了孝武帝，又用重金贿赂左右的侍从，声称是 睡梦中惊悸窒息突然死去 。
English: In the evening, Emperor Xiaowu was very drunk and went to bed in the Summer Palace. Zhang Guijin rewarded all the eunuchs with wine and sent them away. Then, he had a close-knit serving maid cover Emperor Xiaowu's face with a quilt and kill him. He also bribed his attendants with heavy money and claimed to have died suddenly from suffocation in his sleep.

古文：时太子暗弱，会稽王道子昏荒，遂不复推问。
现代文：当时太子司马德宗愚昧懦弱，会稽王司马道子也昏庸荒淫，便都不追究查问。
English: At that time, the prince Sima Dezong was stupid and weak, and the inspector Wang Sima Daozi was also stupid and vulgar, so they did not pursue the investigation.

古文：王国宝夜叩禁门，欲入为遗诏，侍中王爽拒之，曰： 大行晏驾，皇太子未至，敢入者斩！ 
现代文：中书令王国宝深夜前来，叩打禁宫的大门，打算进去替孝武帝撰写遗诏，侍中王爽拒绝了他的请求说： 皇上去世，皇太子还没有赶到，胆敢闯入的人，格杀勿论！ 
English: In the middle of the night, the emperor ordered Wang Guobao to come and knock on the gate of the Forbidden Palace, intending to enter and write the last will and testament for Emperor Xiaowu. The attendant, Wang Shuang, refused his request, saying: The emperor has died, the crown prince has not yet arrived, and anyone who dares to break in must be killed!

古文：国宝乃止。
现代文：王国宝才打消这个念头。
English: It took Kingdom Treasures to dispel that notion.

古文：爽，恭之弟也。
现代文：王爽是王恭的弟弟。
English: Wang Shuang is Wang Qiong's younger brother.

古文：辛酉，太子即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：辛酉，太子司马德宗即皇帝位，宣布大赦。
English: Xin Zheng, the prince, that is, the emperor, is the leader of the world.

古文：癸亥，有司奏： 会稽王道子宜进位太傅、扬州牧，假黄钺。 诏内外众事动静咨之。
现代文：癸亥，有关部门上奏道：会稽王司马道子应该晋升为太傅，任扬州牧，赐予黄钺，诏令朝中朝外的一切大小事务都要请示司马道子。
English: At that time, the relevant departments sent a report to the emperor, saying that the king of the imperial court, Sima Daozi, should be promoted to taifu, appointed Yangzhou herdsman, given the title of Huang Di, and ordered that all matters big and small in the dynasty and outside the dynasty should be referred to Sima Daozi.

古文：安帝幼而不慧，口不能言，至于寒暑饥饱亦不能辨，饮食寝兴皆非己出。
现代文：晋安帝司马德宗小的时候便不聪明机敏，有嘴不会说话，甚至到了连冷热饥饱也都不能分辨的程度，他喝水、吃饭、睡觉、起床都不能自己料理。
English: When he was a child, Sima Dezong of Jin'an was not smart and quick-witted. He had a mouth but could not speak, even to the extent that he could not distinguish between hot and cold food. He could not drink water, eat, sleep, or get up to cook for himself.

古文：母弟琅邪王德文，性恭谨，常侍左右，为之节适，始得其宜。
现代文：他的同母兄弟琅邪王司马德文，却性情谦恭谨慎，他经常在司马德宗的身边帮忙照顾，替他安排调度，使他的行事才勉强合理。
English: His half-brother, the evil-doer Sima Dewen, was gentle and prudent. He was always at Sima Dewen's side to take care of him and arrange his schedule, so that his actions were only reasonable.

古文：初，王国宝党附会稽王道子，骄纵不法，屡为御史中丞褚粲所纠。
现代文：当初，王国宝作为死党依附于会稽王司马道子，骄横放纵，不依法礼，几次被御史中丞褚粲纠举弹，劾，王国宝建筑自己的私房，可以和清暑殿相媲美。
English: At the beginning, Wang Guobao, as a die-hard party, adhered to Wang Sima Daozi, the party's inspector, was arrogant and indulgent, and did not follow the rules of etiquette. He was impeached and impeached several times. Wang Guobao built his own private house, which can be compared to Qingxiao Palace.

古文：国宝起斋，侔清暑殿，孝武帝甚恶之；国宝惧，遂更求媚于帝而疏道子，帝复宠昵之。
现代文：孝武帝很讨厌他。王国宝非常害怕，于是他便转而向孝武帝大献其媚，而对司马道子逐渐疏远，孝武帝因此又重新宠信亲近他。
English: Emperor Xiaowu hated him very much. Wang Guobao was very afraid, so he turned to flatter Emperor Xiaowu, and gradually distanced himself from Sima Daozi. As a result, Emperor Xiaowu became close to him again.

古文：道子大怒，尝于内省面责国宝，以剑掷之，旧好尽矣。
现代文：司马道子曾经为此怒不可遏，一次在朝见时当着大家的面直接指责申斥王国宝，甚至拔出佩剑，掷向王国宝，他们之间的多年的密切关系完全破裂。
English: Sima Daozi was so furious about this that he once directly accused and reprimanded Wang Guobao in front of everyone at a meeting with the emperor. He even pulled out his sword and threw it at Wang Guobao. Their close relationship of many years was completely broken.

古文：及帝崩，国宝复事道子，与王绪共为邪谄。
现代文：孝武帝驾崩后，王国宝重又投靠司马道子，与王绪一同邪佞、谄媚，司马道子再一次受到他的迷惑，把他当作心腹。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, the kingdom of Baoshu again relied on Sima Daozi, and together with Wang Xu, they were evil and charming. Sima Daozi was once again confused by him and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：道子更惑之，倚为心腹，遂参管朝权，威震内外，并为时之所疾。
现代文：于是，王国宝开始管理朝政大权，声威震动朝廷内外，同时受到了当时人的痛恨。
English: As a result, Wang Guobao began to manage the supreme political power of the dynasty, and his prestige shook both inside and outside the court. At the same time, he was hated by the people at that time.

古文：王恭入赴山陵，每正色直言，道子深惮之。
现代文：兖、青二州刺史王恭回来参加孝武帝的葬礼，经常面色严肃地直言告诫、劝谏，司马道子非常忌惮他。
English: Wang Gong, a member of the Second Prefectural Youth League, came back to attend the funeral of Emperor Xiaowu. He often looked serious and directly admonished and advised him. Sima Daozi was very afraid of him.

古文：恭罢朝，叹曰： 榱栋虽新，便有黍离之叹！ 
现代文：王恭退朝后，叹道： 房屋的梁椽虽然是新的，我却有了国家将亡的叹息！ 
English: After Wang Gong retired, he lamented: Although the beams of the house are new, I have the sigh of the country's impending doom!

古文：绪说国宝，因恭入朝，劝相王伏兵杀之，国宝不许。
现代文：王绪向王国宝建议说，趁王恭上朝，让相王司马道子伏兵杀了他，王国宝没有答应。
English: Wang Xu suggested to Wang Guobao that he take advantage of Wang Qiong's ascension to the throne to have his cousin Wang Sima Daozi ambush and kill him, but Wang Guobao did not agree.

古文：道子欲辑和内外，乃深布腹心于恭，冀除旧恶；而恭每言及时政，辄厉声色。
现代文：司马道子也曾经想多方调解，使朝廷内外团结一致，于是，对王恭推心置腹，希望能尽释前嫌，但是王恭每次谈到朝政时，经常是声色俱厉。
English: Sima Daozi also once wanted to mediate between multiple parties, so that there would be unity inside and outside the imperial court. Therefore, he put his heart and soul into Wang Qiong, hoping that he would be able to release his previous grudge. However, every time Wang Qiong talked about the imperial court, he was often belligerent.

古文：道子知恭不可和协，遂有相图之志。
现代文：司马道子知道王恭已经不可能妥协合作，于是便有了图谋陷害他的念头。
English: Sima Daozi knew that it was no longer possible for Wang Qiong to compromise on cooperation, so he had the idea of framing him.

古文：或劝恭因入朝以兵诛国宝，恭以豫州刺史庾楷士马甚盛，党于国宝，惮之，不敢发。
现代文：有人劝说王恭趁前去朝见皇帝的机会，动用部队杀了王国宝。王恭因为豫州刺史庾楷兵马精壮强盛，他与王国宝结为死党，对他心存顾忌不敢冒然动手。
English: Some people persuaded Wang Qiong to take advantage of the opportunity to go to see the emperor and use the troops to kill the treasure of the kingdom. Wang Qiong, because of the strength and vigor of the soldiers and horses in Henan Province, was a sworn enemy of the treasure of the kingdom, and he was afraid of him.

古文：王珣谓恭曰： 国宝虽终为祸乱，要之罪逆未彰，今遽先事而安，必大失朝野之望。
现代文：王对王恭说： 王国宝虽然最终一定会成为祸乱，但是他的罪恶和倒行逆施还没有大白于天下，现在如果先对他发动攻击，一定会使全国上下大失所望。
English: The king said to Wang Qiong: Although the treasure of the kingdom will eventually become a calamity, his evil and perfidy have not yet been revealed to the world. If you attack him first, you will surely disappoint the whole country.

古文：况拥强兵窃发于京辇，谁谓非逆！
现代文：况且你如果统领强悍的部队偷偷地在都城起事，谁能说你不是叛乱呢？
English: Moreover, if you secretly rise up in the capital at the head of strong troops, who can say that you are not a rebellion?

古文：国宝若遂不改，恶布天下，然后顺众心以除之，亦无忧不济也。 
现代文：王国宝如果仍然不思悔过自新，他的罪孽一定会很快地传遍全国，到了那时候，我们顺应民心来除掉他，也就不用忧虑不会成功了。 
English: If Wang Guobao still does not repent and reform himself, his sins will soon spread all over the country. At that time, we will follow the will of the people to eliminate him, and we do not have to worry about success.

古文：恭乃止。
现代文：王恭停止了除掉王国宝的准备。
English: Wang Qiong stopped his preparations to get rid of the royal treasure.

古文：既而谓珣曰： 比来视君一似胡广 。
现代文：后来，王恭对王说： 最近以来，我看你太像胡广了。 
English: Later, Wang Qiong said to Wang: Recently, I think you are too much like Hu Guang.

古文：珣曰： 王陵廷争，陈平慎默，但问岁晏何如耳！ 
现代文：王说： 王陵因为在皇帝面前争执，陈平经常在一旁谨慎小心，沉默不语，你只看结果如何罢了。 
English: Wang said, "Because Wang Ling and Chen Ping argued in front of the emperor, Chen Ping was always cautious and silent. You only have to look at the outcome.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，葬孝武帝于隆平陵。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲申，将孝武帝埋葬在隆平陵。
English: In winter, in October, in Jiaxing, Emperor Xiaowu was buried in the Longping Mausoleum.

古文：王恭还镇，将行，谓道子曰： 主上谅暗，冢宰之任，伊、周所难，愿大王亲万几，纳直言。
现代文：王恭准备返回京口镇守，临走的时候对司马道子说： 主上守丧，相国身上的任务更加繁重，恐怕即使是伊尹、周公也都难以做得很好。
English: Wang Qiong was preparing to return to the town of Jingkou, and said to Sima Daozi as he was about to leave: "Our lord is in mourning, and the tasks of our country are even more onerous. I'm afraid that even Yi Yin and Zhou Gong will find it difficult to do well.

古文：放郑声，远佞人。 国宝等愈惧。
现代文：希望您亲自料理军政要务，听取接受忠直坦率的不同意见，放弃对靡之音的爱好，疏远奸佞小人。 王国宝等人更加害怕。
English: I hope that you will personally attend to military and political affairs, listen to and accept the different opinions of loyal and frank leaders, give up the hobby of swearing, and alienate the traitors and villains.

古文：魏王珪使冠军将军代人于栗磾、宁朔将军公孙兰帅步骑二万，潜自晋阳开韩信故道。
现代文：魏王拓跋派遣冠军将军、代郡人于栗、宁朔将军公孙兰等二人率领步、骑兵共二万人，偷偷地从晋阳向东开辟修复韩信当年修筑使用过的栈道。
English: The Wei king Tuoba dispatched the champion general, the representative of the county in Yurong, the Ningshuo general Gongsun Lan and other two people led the way, with a total of 20,000 cavalry, to secretly open up from Jinyang to the east to repair the plank road used by Hanxin that year.

古文：己酉，珪自井陉趋中山。
现代文：已酉，拓跋带兵从井陉直奔中山。
English: Already exhausted, Tuoba led the soldiers from Jingye straight to Zhongshan.

古文：李先降魏，珪以为征东左长史。
现代文：李先投降了北魏，拓跋任命他为征东左长史。
English: Li Xian surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Tuoba appointed him as the leader of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：西秦凉州牧轲弹与秦州牧益州不平，轲弹奔凉。
现代文：西秦凉州牧乞伏轲弹与秦州牧乞伏益州二人发生冲突，乞伏轲弹投奔后凉国。
English: Western Qin's Liangzhou herdsmen and Qin's herdsmen and Yizhou herdsmen clashed, and Liangzhou's herdsmen and Yizhou's herdsmen fled to Liangguo.

古文：魏王珪进攻常山，拔之，获太守苟延，自常山以东，守宰或走或降，诸郡县皆附于魏，惟中山、鄴、信都三城为燕守。
现代文：魏王拓跋进军攻打常山，攻克后抓获了常山太守苟延。从常山以东，各地的驻守官吏或者逃跑或者开城投降，各郡县都归附北魏，只有中山、邺城、信都三座城池还为后燕国坚守。
English: The Wei king Tuoba marched into the army to attack Changshan, and captured the Changshan governor Gao Yan. From the east of Changshan, the stationed officials from all over the country either fled or surrendered, and all counties were annexed to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Only the three cities of Zhongshan, Shicheng, and Xindu still held out for Houyan.

古文：十一月，珪命东平公仪将五万骑攻鄴，冠军将军王建、左将军李栗攻信都。
现代文：十一月，拓跋命令东平公拓跋仪带领五万骑兵进攻邺城，命令冠军将军王建、左军将军李栗进攻信都。
English: In November, Tuoba ordered Dongping Gong Tuoba Yi to lead fifty thousand cavalry to attack Lucheng, and ordered the champion general Wang Jian and the left army general Li Li to attack Xindu.

古文：戊午，珪进军中山；己未，攻之。
现代文：戊午，拓跋亲自带兵挺进中山。己未，发起进攻。
English: In the afternoon, Tuoba personally led the troops to advance into Zhongshan. He did not hesitate to launch an attack.

古文：燕高阳王隆守南郭，帅众力战，自旦至晡，杀伤数千人，魏兵乃退。
现代文：后燕高阳王慕容隆据守南城，率领部众全力奋战，从早晨苦战到中午，杀伤敌兵几千人，北魏军队才败退下去。
English: Later, Yan Gaoyang King Murong Long defended Nancheng and led his troops to fight with all their strength. From the morning to noon, they fought hard and killed and wounded thousands of enemy soldiers. The Northern Wei army was defeated and retreated.

古文：珪谓诸将曰： 中山城固，宝必不肯出战。
现代文：拓跋对众将说： 中山城非常坚固，慕容宝一定不肯出城来与我们决战。
English: Tuoba said to the generals, "Zhongshan City is very strong. Murongbao will not leave the city to fight with us.

古文：急攻则伤士，久围则费粮，不如先取鄴、信都，然后图之。 
现代文：我们急切攻打会损兵折将，长期围困又要花费大量的粮草，不如先去夺取邺城、信都，得手之后再来想办法对付它。 
English: If we rush to attack, we will lose soldiers, and long-term siege will cost a lot of grain and grass. It is better to seize Shucheng and Xindu first, and then find a way to deal with it after success.

古文：丁卯，珪引兵而南。
现代文：丁卯，拓跋还兵向南开进。
English: Dingwu and Tuoba marched south.

古文：章武王寅自龙城还，闻有魏寇，驰入蓟，与镇北将军阳城王兰乘城固守。
现代文：后燕章武王慕容宙从龙城回京，途中听说有北魏大军进犯，赶快进蓟城，和镇北将军阳城王慕容兰一起据城固守。
English: After Yan Zhang Wu Wang Murong returned to Beijing from Longcheng, on the way he heard that the Northern Wei army had invaded, he hurried into Shicheng, and together with the Northern General Yangcheng Wang Muronglan, he firmly defended the city.

古文：兰，垂之从弟也。
现代文：慕容兰是慕容垂的堂弟。
English: Murong Lan is the cousin of Murong Zhuang.

古文：魏别将石河头攻之，不克，退屯渔阳。
现代文：北魏的别将石河头率军攻打，没有攻克，便退到渔阳驻扎。
English: The Northern Wei forces led by Shi Hetou attacked Toru, but failed to conquer him, and retreated to Yuyang.

古文：珪军于鲁口，博陵太守申永奔河南，高阳太守崔宏奔海渚。
现代文：拓跋把大军集结在鲁口。后燕博陵太守申永逃奔河南，高阳太守崔宏逃到海岛上避祸。
English: Tuoba gathered a large army in Lukou. Later, Yanbo Ling's eunuch, Shen Yong, fled to Henan, and Goyang's eunuch, Cui Hong, fled to the island.

古文：珪素闻宏名，遣吏追求，获之，以为黄门侍郎，与给事黄门侍郎张衮对掌机要，创立制度。
现代文：拓跋平日早就听说了崔宏的名声，便派遣骑兵前去追赶寻找，找到了崔宏，任命他为黄门侍郎，和给事黄门侍郎张衮一起共同执掌国家机要大事，制订国家的各种法令制度。
English: Tuoba had heard of Cui Hong's reputation long ago, so he sent cavalry to chase and find him. He found Cui Hong and appointed him as the Yellow Gate Attendant. Together with the Yellow Gate Attendant Zhang Jun, they jointly presided over the important events of the state apparatus and formulated various laws and regulations of the country.

古文：博陵令屈遵降魏，珪为中书令，出纳号令，兼总文诰。
现代文：博陵令屈遵投降北魏，拓跋也任命他为中书令，负责收发全国各地来往的公文和法令函件，并且负责撰写各种文告。
English: Boling ordered Qu Zun to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Tubas also appointed him as the Censer, responsible for receiving and sending official documents and legal letters from all over the country, and responsible for writing various announcements.

古文：燕范阳王德使南安王青等夜击魏军于鄴下，破之，魏军退屯新城。
现代文：后燕范阳王慕容德派遣南安王慕容青等人趁夜色的掩护在邺下袭击魏军，把魏军打败。北魏军队退到新城驻守。
English: Later, Yan Fanyang King Murongde dispatched Nan'an King Murongqing and others to take advantage of the cover of night to attack the Wei army and defeat the Wei army. The Northern Wei army retreated to Xincheng.

古文：青等请追击之，别驾韩竨曰： 古人先计而后战。
现代文：慕容青等人请求继续追击敌军，别驾韩说： 古代的人，先计划好了如何用兵，然后才按计划作战。
English: Murongqing and others asked to continue chasing the enemy army, but Han said: Ancient people first planned how to use soldiers, and then fought according to the plan.

古文：魏军不可击者四：悬军远客，利在野战，一也；深入近畿，顿兵死地，二也；前锋既败，后阵方固，三也；彼众我寡，四也。
现代文：这次魏军不可追打的原因有四点：第一，是对方远路而来，缺乏根基，在原野上作战对他们有利。第二，是敌军孤军深入，已经毫无退路可走，此时再打，恐怕要逼迫他们拚命。
English: There are four reasons why the Wei army cannot be chased this time: First, the other side came from a long way away, lacking a foundation, and it is advantageous for them to fight on the plain. Second, the enemy's lone army is deep, and there is no way out. If they fight again at this time, I am afraid they will be forced to fight for their lives.

古文：官军不宜动者三：自战其地，一也；动而不胜，众心难固，二也；城隍未修，敌来无备，三也。
现代文：第三，是敌人的前锋部队虽然已经遭到失败，但是他们的后队却仍然很整齐精壮。第四，是敌众我寡。我们的部队不应该轻易出动的原因也有三点：第一，我们是在自己的土地上作战，稍有挫折，兵士便易于溃散。第二，如果轻易出战却不能取胜，容易动摇军心。
English: Third, although the enemy's forward force has been defeated, their rearguard is still very neat and strong. Fourth, the enemy is few and far between. There are also three reasons why our troops should not be easily dispatched: First, we are fighting on our own land, and if there is a slight setback, the soldiers are easily dispersed. Second, if it is easy to go to war but cannot win, it is easy to shake the military spirit.

古文：今魏无资粮，不如深垒固军以老之。 
现代文：第三，我们的城池还没有来得及修整加固，敌兵冲来，我们缺少必要的防备和依托。
English: Thirdly, we have not yet had time to repair and strengthen our city, the enemy soldiers have rushed in, and we lack the necessary defense and support.

古文：德从之，召青还。青，详之兄也。
现代文：现在魏军中缺乏物资粮草，我们不如深挖战壕、高筑壁垒，稳住阵脚，安定军心，把敌人拖垮。 
English: At present, the Wei army is short of materials, grain and grass. It is better for us to dig deep trenches, build high barriers, stabilize the positions, stabilize the military spirit, and drag the enemy down.

古文：十二月，魏辽西公贺赖卢帅骑二万会东平公议攻鄴。
现代文：慕容德听从了他的话，命令慕容青赶紧回城。慕容青是慕容详的哥哥。十二月，北魏辽西公贺赖卢统率骑兵二万人，会同东平公拓跋仪一起，进攻邺城。
English: Murong De obeyed his words and ordered Murong Qing to return to the city as soon as possible. Murong Qing was the elder brother of Murong Yao. In December, the Northern Wei Liao Xi Gong He Lailu led 20,000 cavalrymen, together with Dongping Gong Tuoba Yi, to attack Lucheng.

古文：赖卢，讷之弟也。
现代文：贺赖卢是贺讷的弟弟。
English: Horatio is Horne's younger brother.

古文：魏别部大人没根有胆勇，魏王珪恶之。
现代文：北魏另有一支部落的首领没根，有胆气又很骁勇，魏王拓跋非常讨厌他。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, there was another leader of a tribe who was rootless, bold and very brave. The Wei King Tuoba hated him very much.

古文：没根惧诛，己丑，将亲兵数十人降燕，燕主宝以为镇东大将军，封雁门公。
现代文：没根害怕拓跋诛杀，己丑，带领着几十个亲信士兵投降了后燕。后燕国主慕容宝任命他为镇东大将军，封为雁门公。
English: He was not afraid to fight and kill, he was ugly, and led dozens of trusted soldiers to surrender to Houyan. The lord of Houyan, Murong Bao, appointed him as the general of Zhendong, and he was given the title of Wild Goose Gate.

古文：没根求还袭魏，宝难与重兵，给百馀骑。
现代文：没根请求回兵奇袭北魏，慕容宝不肯交给他大批部队，只给了他一百多名骑兵。
English: Mugen asked the returning soldiers to make a surprise attack on Northern Wei. Murong Bao refused to give him a large number of troops, and only gave him more than a hundred cavalry.

古文：没根效其号令，夜入魏营，至中仗，珪乃觉之，狼狈惊走；没根以所从人少，不能坏其大众，多获首虏而还。
现代文：没根更换了这些人的装束，伪装成魏兵，连夜进入北魏大营，来到中央大帐，拓跋这时才发觉，狼狈不堪地仓皇逃走。没根因为自己所带领的人很少，不能大批杀伤魏营的兵士，只是多抓了一些魏兵便撤回去了。
English: Mogan changed the costumes of these people, disguised as Wei soldiers, and entered the Northern Wei camp overnight and came to the central ledger. It was only then that Tuoba discovered that he had fled in a panic. Mogan could not kill a large number of soldiers in the Wei camp because of the small number of people he led, but he only caught a few more Wei soldiers and withdrew.

古文：杨盛遣使来请命。
现代文：杨盛派遣使节来到东晋请求归附。
English: Yang Sheng sent envoys to the Eastern Jin to request the annexation.

古文：诏拜盛镇南将军、仇池公。
现代文：安帝下诏，封杨盛为镇南将军、仇池公。
English: Emperor An issued an edict, naming Yang Sheng as the general of Zhenan and the lord of Qiuchi.

古文：盛表苻宣为平北将军。
现代文：杨盛随即又上奏章推荐苻宣为平北将军。
English: Yang Sheng then went on to recommend Gong Xuan as the general of Pingbei.

古文：是岁，越质诘归帅户二万叛西秦降于秦，秦人处之成纪，拜镇西将军、平襄公。
现代文：这一年，越质诘归率领自己的部属二万户，背叛了西秦，向后秦投降。后秦把他们安排在成纪地区，任命越质诘归为镇西将军，封平襄公。
English: In that year, Yue Jia Gui led 20,000 of his subordinates to betray the Western Qin Dynasty and surrender to the Later Qin Dynasty. The Later Qin Dynasty placed them in the Chengji area and appointed Yue Jia Gui as the general of Zhenxi, and penned him as Xianggong.

古文：秦陇西王硕德攻姜乳于上邽，乳帅众降。
现代文：后秦陇西王姚硕德在上地区进攻姜乳，姜乳率领部下投降。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, King Yao Shuo De led an attack on Jianglu in the upper region, and Jianglu led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：秦以硕德为秦州牧，镇上邽；征乳为尚书。
现代文：后秦便任命姚硕德为秦州牧，镇守上，并且任用姜乳为尚书。
English: Later, the Qin Dynasty appointed Yao Shuo De as the governor of Qin Province and the town guard, and appointed Jiang Yu as Shang Shu.

古文：强熙、权千成帅众三万共围上邽，硕德击破之，熙奔仇池，遂来奔。
现代文：强熙和权千成二人统领兵丁三万人包围了上，姚硕德打破了封锁，强熙逃奔仇池，不久又转而跑来投奔东晋。
English: Qiang Xi and Quan Qiancheng led a total of 30,000 soldiers to surround Ding, Yao Shuo De broke the blockade, Qiang Xi fled to Qianchi, and soon ran to Dongjin.

古文：硕德西去千成于略阳，千成降。
现代文：姚硕德挥军向西追击权千成来到略阳，权千成投降。
English: Yao Shuo De led the army to the west to pursue Quan Qiancheng and came to Liaoyang. Quan Qiancheng surrendered.

古文：西燕既亡，其所署河东太守柳恭等各拥兵自守。
现代文：西燕已经灭亡，原为它所统属的河东太守柳恭等人各自拥有军队固守地盘。
English: Xiyan has perished, and those who originally belonged to it, such as Liugong, the grand marshal of Hedong, each have their own army to hold their ground.

古文：秦主兴遣晋王绪攻之，恭等临河拒守，绪不得济。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴派遣晋王姚绪前去进攻，柳恭等人在黄河的沿岸设防据守，姚绪没有办法过河。
English: Later, the Qin sovereign Yao Xing sent the Jin king Yao Xu to attack, and Liu Qiong and others set up defenses along the coast of the Yellow River. Yao Xu was unable to cross the river.

古文：初，永嘉之乱，汾阴薛氏聚其族党，阻河自固，不仕刘、石。
现代文：当初，永嘉之乱时，汾阴的薛氏家族聚集同族、同党据守黄河险要，保卫家园，不去做刘氏与石氏的臣民。
English: At first, during the Yongjia Rebellion, the Xue family in Suyin gathered fellow tribesmen and party members to defend the Yellow River, defend their homeland, and not be subjects of the Liu and Shi clans.

古文：及苻氏兴，乃以礼聘薛强，拜镇东将军。
现代文：前秦苻氏兴起之后，对他们加以礼遇，延聘薛强出仕，任命他为镇东将军。
English: After the rise of the former Qin Hui clan, he treated them with courtesy, hired Xue Qiang to serve, and appointed him as the Zhendong General.

古文：强引秦兵自龙门济，遂入蒲阪，恭等皆降。
现代文：这时薛强引导后秦部队从龙门渡过黄河，进入蒲阪地区。柳恭等人投降后秦。
English: At this time, Xue Qiang led the Qin forces to cross the Yellow River from Longmen and enter the Busan area. Liu Qiong and others surrendered to the Qin.

古文：兴以绪为并、冀二州牧，镇蒲阪。
现代文：姚兴任命姚绪为并州、冀州二州牧，镇守蒲阪。
English: Yao Xing appointed Yao Xu as the governor of the two provinces of Anhui and Jizhou, and the town guard of Busan.

