古文：刘秉忠，字仲晦，初名侃，因从释氏，又名子聪，拜官后始更今名。
现代文：刘秉忠，字仲晦，初名侃，因信佛教改名子聪，任官后而名秉忠。
English: Liu Bingzhong, his first name Kuan, changed his name to Zicu because of his belief in Buddhism, and changed his name to Bingzhong after he was appointed.

古文：其先瑞州人也，世仕辽，为官族。
现代文：其祖籍瑞州，世为辽朝官宦大族。
English: His ancestral home was Seizhou, and he was a member of the Liao dynasty's official court nobles.

古文：曾大父仕金，为邢州节度副使，因家焉，故自大父泽而下，遂为邢人。
现代文：曾祖父任金朝邢州节度使，家居邢州，故自祖父刘泽始为邢州人。
English: His great-grandfather was an envoy of the Jin Dynasty to the Bozhou Festival and lived in Bozhou, so he was a Bozhou native since his grandfather Liu Zexu.

古文：秉忠生而风骨秀异，志气英爽不羁。
现代文：太祖十五年，木华黎攻取邢州，立都元帅府，任刘秉忠父刘润为都统，后改署州录事，又历任巨鹿、内丘两县提领。
English: In the fifteenth year of Taizu, Mu Huali conquered Luzhou, established the Marshal's Office, and appointed Liu Bingzhong's father, Liu Run, as the governor of Luzhou. Later, he was transferred to the post of prefectural governor, and the two counties of Jugu and Neiqiu were taken over by successive governors.

古文：八岁入学，日诵数百言。
现代文：刘秉忠自幼聪颖，八岁入学就能日诵文数百言。
English: Liu Bingzhong has been brilliant since he was a child. By the time he was eight years old, he could recite hundreds of words a day.

古文：年十三，为质子于帅府。十七，为邢台节度使府令史，以养其亲。
现代文：十三岁在帅府做人质，十七岁为邢台节度使府令史，以便于就近奉养其亲。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was a hostage in Shuaifu, and at the age of seventeen, he was made a prefectural governor for the Xingtai Festival, so that he could stay close to his relatives.

古文：居常郁郁不乐，一日，投笔叹曰： 吾家累世衣冠，乃汨没为刀笔吏乎！
现代文：秉忠为令史时常郁郁不乐，一日叹曰： 我家世代为官，宁愿沦为书记小吏吗？
English: In the course of history, Bingzhong was often depressed and unhappy. One day, he sighed and said, "My family has been in government for generations. Would you rather be reduced to a clerk?

古文：丈夫不遇于世，当隐居以求志耳。 
现代文：大丈夫生不逢时，只有隐退以待时而起。 
English: There is no right time to be born, only the right time to retire.

古文：即弃去，隐武安山中。
现代文：便弃官隐居于武安山中。
English: He resigned his post and went into seclusion in the mountains of Wu'an.

古文：久之，天宁虚照禅师遣徒招致为僧，以其能文词，使掌书记。
现代文：若干年后，被天宁寺虚照禅师收为徒弟。后又云游云中，留居南堂寺。
English: A few years later, he was accepted as an apprentice by the Zen master Hosho of Tennin-ji Temple. Later, he lived at Nando-ji Temple.

古文：秉忠于书无所不读，尤邃于《易》及邵氏《经世书》，至于天文、地理、律历、三式六壬遁甲之属，无不精通。论天下事如指诸掌。
现代文：元世祖即位之前，海云禅师奉召，路过云中时闻秉忠博学多才，邀与同行。拜见世祖后，世祖甚为称赞，多次垂询。秉忠于书无所不读，尤其深入研究《易经》及宋邵氏《经世书》，至于天文、地理、律历、占卜无不精通，天下事了如指掌。
English: Prior to the enthronement of the original ancestor, Haiyun Zen master was summoned, and when passing through the clouds, he heard that Bingzhong was loyal, knowledgeable and versatile, and invited him to accompany him. After meeting the ancestor, the ancestor was very praised and inquired many times. Bingzhong was loyal to books and read everything, especially in-depth study of "I Ching" and Song Shao's "Book of the Ages," and was proficient in astronomy, geography, rhythms and calendars, and divination, and knew everything about the world.

古文：世祖大爱之，海云南还，秉忠遂留藩邸。后数岁，奔父丧，赐金百两为葬具，仍遣使送至邢州。
现代文：世祖甚是宠爱，留其身边供职。后数年因父殁奔丧回家，世祖赐金百两为治葬之用，且遣使送至邢州。
English: The patriarch was very fond of him and kept him by his side while he was at work. A few years later, when his father passed away and he had to rush back home, the patriarch gave him two hundred taels of gold for his funeral and sent him to Zhangzhou.

古文：服除，复被召，奉旨还和林。上书数千百言，其略曰：
现代文：服丧期满，便召还至和林。秉忠至和林后上书数千百言，其大意是：
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was summoned back to Warim. After his death, Bingzhong wrote several thousand words to Warim, to the effect that:

古文：千载一时，不可失也。君之所任，在内莫大乎相，相以领百官，化万民；在外莫大乎将，将以统三军，安四域。内外相济，国之急务，必先之也。然天下之大，非一人之可及；万事之细，非一心之可察。
现代文：一、天生成吉思皇帝，统帅大军降诸国，不数年而取天下，但 以马上取天下，不可以马上治 ，昔周公以此辅佐其弟武王治理国家，愿大王效法周公，亦以此辅佐兄长当今皇上治理天下。二、皇帝治国，在内委任宰相，率领百官以理内政；对外委任大将，统领三军以安国土，内外相济，这当然是首要的。但天下之大，内外国事之多，非少数人所能顾及周到。
English: I. Emperor Jisi was born by nature, and he led a large army to subdue various countries, and took over the world in a few years. However, it is not possible to take over the world immediately. In the past, Zhou Gong assisted his brother King Wu to govern the country. May the great king follow the example of Zhou Gong, and also help his elder brother, the current emperor, to govern the world in this way. II. The emperor governs the country, appoints the prime minister, and leads hundreds of officials to handle domestic affairs; and appoints generals to lead the three armies to secure the country and help each other at home and abroad. Of course, this is the most

古文：当择开国功臣之子孙，分为京府州郡监守，督责旧官，以遵王法；仍差按察官守，治者升，否者黜。
现代文：应当选择开国功臣的子孙，分派到京府州县去监督旧官遵守王法。还要差官去检查，治理好的升官，不好的贬官。
English: It is necessary to select the descendants of the meritorious vassals who founded the country and assign them to Beijing, prefectures and counties to supervise the old officials' compliance with the royal law. It is also necessary to send officials to inspect, promote good governance, and demote bad governance.

古文：天下不劳力而定也。天下户过百万，自忽都那演断事之后，差徭甚大，加以军马调发，使臣烦扰，官吏乞取，民不能当，是以逃窜。
现代文：三、天下户过百万，因差役、军役及官吏压迫，人民逃亡，比原额减少一半或三分之一。应按现在户口确定差税，以后逃民复业后再行定夺。规定百官爵禄，廉洁者升，污滥者降，若有自行威福、滥杀生民者从严治罪。
English: Third, the number of households in the world exceeds one million. Due to the oppression of dispatched workers, military personnel and government officials, people have fled, reducing by half or one-third of the original amount. The difference tax should be determined according to the current account, and the decision should be made after the fugitive resumes work. The stipulation stipulates that the income of the officials should be increased, the honest should be increased, and the corrupt should be reduced. If there is self-confidence and indiscriminate killing of people, the crime should be strictly punished.

古文：宜比旧减半，或三分去一，就见在之民以定差税，招逃者复业，再行定夺。
现代文：四、对天下之民多施教化，现在已囚禁之人从宽赦免，明施教令。今后犯罪者均须审讯清楚后定罪，死罪须上报听候断决，这样才不致刑及无辜。
English: In the future, offenders must be convicted after a clear trial, and the death penalty must be reported for hearing and decision, so that they will not be punished and innocent.

古文：官无定次，清洁者无以迁，污滥者无以降。
现代文：五、天子以国为家，以民为子。国与民如鱼与水一般。
English: 5. The Son of Heaven regards the country as his home and the people as his children. The country and the people are like fish and water.

古文：可比附古例，定百官爵禄仪仗，使家足身贵。有犯于民，设条定罪。
现代文：今应清查官府所欠债务，若原系正当借贷，宜按合罕皇帝圣旨，一本一利由官府归还，若系非正当借贷，且无借据，以及息大于本者，一概豁免。六、人民纳公粮，就近输仓。
English: The debts owed by the government should now be investigated. If the original is a legitimate loan, it is appropriate to return the one-for-one profit by the government according to the emperor's will. If it is an illegitimate loan, and there is no IOU, and the interest is greater than the principal, it will be exempted.

古文：威福者君之权，奉命者臣之职。
现代文：各处行商坐贾的正税应按旧制，十五取一，禁止巧取横夺。
English: The positive tax of peddlers everywhere should be based on the old system, fifteen to one, and it is forbidden to take skillfully.

古文：今百官自行威福，进退生杀惟意之从，宜从禁治。
现代文：仓库收粮时，加耗不许超过规定。
English: When the warehouse collects grain, the grain consumption shall not exceed the regulations.

古文：奥鲁合蛮奏请于旧额加倍榷之，往往科取民间。
现代文：禁止奢华，帝王之后裔、功臣、大小官员的服饰各有规定，无官职之人不得穿官服，要减轻人民的赋税，差遣劝农官领导百姓勤务农桑，经营产业。
English: Luxury is prohibited. There are rules for the clothing of imperial descendants, meritorious warriors, and officials of all ranks. People without official posts are not allowed to wear official uniforms. The people's taxes should be reduced, and agricultural officials should be sent to persuade the leaders of the people to work in agriculture and manage industries.

古文：科榷并行，民无所措手足。宜从旧例办榷，更或减轻，罢繁碎，止科征，无从献利之徒削民害国。
现代文：七、宜遵照旧制，各地办学校，实行科举选士制度，开国功臣的子孙应入学校受教育，从中选拔有才能者加以任用。八、慎择县官。关西、河南地广土肥，由于战争，人民逃亡，应设官招抚。
English: Seventh, it is advisable to follow the old system, run schools in various regions, implement the examination system, and the descendants of the founding heroes should be enrolled in schools for education, and talented people should be selected from them to be appointed. Eighth, carefully select county officials. Kansai and Henan have vast fertile soil, and due to the war, people have fled, so officials should be appointed.

古文：鳏寡孤独废疾者，宜设孤老院，给衣粮以为养。
现代文：孤寡及残疾人，宜设孤老院，官府供给衣粮。
English: For widows and widowers and the disabled, it is advisable to set up an orphanage for the elderly, and the government should provide food and clothing.

古文：使臣到州郡，宜设馆，不得于官衙民家安下。
现代文：朝廷使臣到各地州郡，应设馆安置，不得住在官衙及百姓家中。
English: When imperial envoys go to various prefectures and counties, they should set up a residence and live there. They are not allowed to live in official residences or people's homes.

古文：孔子为百王师，立万世法，今庙堂虽废，存者尚多，宜令州郡祭祀，释奠如旧仪。
现代文：九、孔子为百王之师，宜令各地立庙祭祀，访察当地名儒，请他们按照传统礼仪祭祀上下神灵。
English: Nine, Confucius is the teacher of a hundred kings, and it is appropriate to order temples to be built in various regions, visit local famous Confucians, and ask them to offer sacrifices to gods and goddesses in accordance with traditional etiquette.

古文：近代礼乐器具靡散，宜令刷会，征太常旧人教引后学，使器备人存，渐以修之，实太平之基，王道之本。
现代文：今天下广远，虽是成吉思皇帝的威福造成的，也是天地神明的保佑。十、现在通行的辽历不准确，听说司天台改制新历，现新君即位，正须颁行。着手撰修《金史》，使一代君臣事业传之后世。
English: Today, it is far and wide, although it is caused by the blessing of Emperor Genghis Khan, it is also the blessing of the gods of heaven and earth. Ten, the Liao calendar that is currently in use is not accurate, it is heard that the Tiantai Dynasty has reformed the new calendar, and now the new prince has ascended the throne, it is time to issue it. Start writing the "Golden History," so that the cause of a generation of monarchs and ministers will be passed on to future generations.

古文：今天下广远，虽成吉思皇帝威福之致，亦天地神明阴所祐也。
现代文：十一、国家拨出一部分经费赡养那些生活困难的名士学者，其中若自有产业者，可免其赋税差役，使他们为国家尽其才能。十二、广开言路，不以人废言，也不以言废人，要使皇帝左右谏臣敢于直言，细致筹划。
English: Eleven, the state allocates a part of the funds to support those famous scholars who have difficulties in life, among whom, if they have their own industries, they can be exempted from taxation and service, so that they can make the best of their talents for the country.

古文：其余百官，不在员多，惟在得人焉耳。世祖嘉纳焉。又言： 邢州旧万余户，兵兴以来不满数百，凋坏日甚，得良牧守如真定张耕、洺水刘肃者治之，犹可完复。 
现代文：明君要分辨君子和小人，使贤者在位，能者在职。十三、将国内人民必须之盐场和矿冶交各路课税所管理，使好利之徒不能染指。禁止好利之徒依恃官势害民，使商贾与百姓和好交易，互不欺夺。十四、禁止私设牢狱，禁止鞭背之刑。若纪纲正于上，法度行于下，天下可不劳而治。官不在多，唯在得廉洁能干之人。世祖对这番议论，甚为赞赏，均加采纳。刘秉忠又上言道 ：邢州户口原有万余，自兴兵以来都不满数百，若派真定之张耕、氵名水之刘肃这样的良吏去治理，必定能恢复旧日盛况。 
English: The Ming Emperor wanted to distinguish between the gentleman and the ruffian, so that the wise man would be in power and the capable man would be in office. XIII, the salt fields and mines that were necessary for the people of the country were placed under the management of various taxation offices, so that the profiteers could not get their hands on them. The profiteers were prohibited from leaning on the official position to harm the people, the merchants and the people were reconciled and traded, and they did not bully each other. XIV, the private prison was prohibited, and the punishment of whipping was prohibited. If the discipline was on the top and the law was on the bottom, the world could be ruled

古文：朝廷即以耕为邢州安抚使，肃为副使。
现代文：于是朝廷派耕为邢州安抚使，肃为副使。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent Ko as the peace envoy to Bozhou and Su as the deputy envoy.

古文：由是流民复业，升邢为顺德府。
现代文：不久流民复业，升邢州为顺德府。
English: The exiles were soon reinstated, and Seongnam Province became Shunde Prefecture.

古文：至元元年，翰林学士承旨王鹗奏言： 秉忠久侍藩邸，积有岁年，参帷幄之密谋，定社稷之大计，忠勤劳绩，宜被褒崇。
现代文：宪宗三年、四年和九年，刘秉忠随世祖征大理、云南和伐宋时，力劝勿滥杀，故每克一城不妄戮一人，所至人民全活者不可胜计。中统元年世祖即位，采纳秉忠的建议，下诏建元纪年，设立中书省和宣抚司。朝廷旧臣、山林隐士都被录用。秉忠虽居于皇帝左右，但仍着旧服，当时人称他为 聪书记 。至元元年，翰林学士承旨王鹗奏言，秉忠早在陛下即位前就参与军国大事，有劳有功。
English: In the 3rd, 4th and 9th years of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Liu Bingzhong, when he and his ancestors went to conquer Dali, Yunnan and Song Dynasty, strongly advised against indiscriminate killing. Therefore, one person should not be killed in every city, so it is impossible to ensure that all the people are alive. In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the patriarch ascended the throne, adopted the suggestion of Bingzhong, issued the edict to establish the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and set up the Ministry of Literature and the Department of Propaganda. The old courtiers of the imperial court and the mountain hermits were recruited. Although Bingzhong lived

古文：圣明御极，万物惟新，而秉忠犹仍其野服散号，深所未安，宜正其衣冠，崇以显秩。 
现代文：今陛下即位，万象更新，而秉忠仍着旧装，我等于心不安。应正其衣冠，给以厚爵。
English: Now that His Majesty has ascended the throne, everything has been renewed, but I am uneasy because His Majesty is still wearing his old clothes. He should straighten his crown and give him a knighthood.

古文：帝览奏，即日拜光禄大夫，位太保，参领中书省事。诏以翰林侍读学士窦默之女妻之，赐第奉先坊，且以少府宫籍监户给之。
现代文：皇帝采纳，拜秉忠为光禄大夫，位至太保，参与领导中书省政事，并诏令以翰林侍读学士窦默之女为秉忠之妻，赐奉先坊为秉忠府第。
English: Adopted by the emperor, Bai Bingzhong became the doctor of Guanglu, was promoted to Taibo, participated in the leadership of the political affairs of the Central Book Ministry, and decreed that the daughter of Hanlin attendant and bachelor Dou Miao was the wife of Bingzhong, and granted Bosenbo as the residence of Bingzhong.

古文：初，帝命秉忠相地于桓州东滦水北，建城郭于龙冈，三年而毕，名曰开平。继升为上都，而以燕为中都。
现代文：秉忠受命后以天下为己任，凡国家大小事务，都知无不言，言无不尽，深得皇帝宠信。所推荐和提拔的人，后都为名臣。最初，帝命秉忠在桓州东滦水北之龙冈建城，三年而毕，名曰开平，是为上都，以燕京为中都。
English: After receiving the order, Bingzhong took the whole world as his responsibility. He knew everything about the affairs of all countries, large and small, and was deeply trusted by the emperor. The people he recommended and promoted later became famous ministers. At first, Emperor Bingzhong built a city in Longgang, in the north of Hanzhou, east of Lishui. After three years, it was named Kaiping. It was the upper capital, and Yanjing was the middle capital.

古文：十一年，扈从至上都，其地有南屏山，尝筑精舍居之。
现代文：至元四年，又命秉忠筑中都城，建立宗庙宫室。八年秉忠请建国号为 大元 ，以中都为大都，并为皇帝制定官制，朝见皇帝礼节、百官的服饰及俸禄等。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he also ordered Bingzhong to build the central capital city and establish the ancestral temple palace. In the eighth year, Bingzhong asked the founding of the country to be named Digen, with Zhongdu as the capital, and established the official system for the emperor, the etiquette for meeting the emperor, the clothing and salary of the hundred officials, and so on.

古文：秋八月，秉忠无疾端坐而卒，年五十九。
现代文：至元十一年，随帝至上都，在附近南屏山筑舍居住，八月忽然无病而卒，年五十九岁。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he followed the emperor to the capital and lived in a house in nearby Nanping Mountain. In August, he died suddenly without illness, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：帝闻惊悼，谓群臣曰： 秉忠事朕三十余年，小心慎密，不避艰险，言无隐情。
现代文：世祖闻耗惊悼，对群臣说 ：秉忠为朕尽忠三十余年，小心谨慎，不避艰险，言无隐情，其学问之深，惟朕知之。 
English: On hearing of his death, the patriarch was shocked and said to his courtiers, "He has been loyal to me for more than thirty years. He is careful and cautious, does not avoid difficulties, and has no hidden feelings. His knowledge is profound, but I know it.

古文：其阴阳术数之精，占事知来，若合符契，惟朕知之，他人莫得闻也。 出内府钱具棺敛，遣礼部侍郎赵秉温护其丧还葬大都。
现代文：令出内府钱安葬于大都。
English: Emperor Dezhnev ordered Qian to be buried in the capital.

古文：十二年，赠太傅，封赵国公，谥文贞。
现代文：十二年赠太傅，封赵国公，谥文贞。
English: In the twelfth year, Taifu was given, Zhao Guogong was given, and Zou Wenzhen was given.

古文：成宗时，赠太师，谥文正。
现代文：成宗时赠太保，谥文正。
English: When he became the head of the sect, he was given the title of Taibao and given the posthumous name of Wenzheng.

古文：平阳岁荒，民艰食，辄开仓以赈之，全活者众。
现代文：仁宗时又进封常山王。秉忠自幼好学，至老不懈，生活简朴，自号 藏春散人 。
English: At the time of Emperor Nianzong, he also became the King of Changshan. Bingzhong was eager to learn from a young age, and was tireless until old age. He lived a simple life and called himself Zangchun Sanren (藏春散人).

古文：年六十，卒于官。张文谦张文谦，字仲谦，邢州沙河人。
现代文：其诗潇洒闲淡，有文集十卷。张文谦，字仲谦，邢州沙河人。
English: Zhang Wenqian, Zhaozhong Qianqian, and Zhangzhou Shahe Ren are among the ten volumes of his poetry collection.

古文：幼聪敏，善记诵，与太保刘秉忠同学。
现代文：自幼聪敏，记忆力强，与太保刘秉忠同学。
English: He is bright and has a strong memory since he was a child. He is a classmate of Liu Bingzhong.

古文：世祖居潜邸，受邢州分地，秉忠荐文谦可用。
现代文：世祖即位前为藩王时，封邢州为分地，秉忠向世祖荐举文谦。
English: When the ancestor was the king of the domain before he ascended the throne, Fuzhou was a division of land, and Bingzhong recommended Zhu Wenjun to the ancestor.

古文：岁丁未，召见，应对称旨，命掌王府书记，日见信任。
现代文：定宗二年，世祖召见文谦，命他掌管王府书记，渐渐为世祖所信任。
English: Two years after the enthronement of King Sejong, King Sejong summoned King Wenqian and ordered him to be in charge of the secretary of the royal court. He gradually gained the King Sejong's trust.

古文：邢州当要冲，初分二千户为勋臣食邑，岁遣人监领，皆不知抚治，征求百出，民弗堪命，或诉于王府。
现代文：邢州地当要冲，初分二千户以供勋臣衣食，派去管理的人，皆不知如何治理，而是进行百般搜刮，人民承受不了，有人向王府申诉。
English: The land of Zhangzhou needed to be cleared. At first, 2,000 households were allocated to provide food and clothing for the nobles and courtiers. The people who were sent to administer the land did not know how to manage the land. Instead, they carried out all kinds of raids. The people could not bear it. Some people complained to the royal court.

古文：文谦与秉忠言于世祖曰： 今民生困弊，莫邢为甚。
现代文：文谦与秉忠一同去对世祖说： 今民生困苦，以邢州尤其严重。
English: Wen Qian went with Bingzhong and said to Shizuo, "The people's livelihood is in trouble now, and the situation in Zhangzhou is particularly serious.

古文：盍择人往治之，责其成效，使四方取法，则天下均受赐矣。 
现代文：何不择人去治理，责其成效，使各地向民间征取有一定限度和规定，这样，天下百姓都受到恩惠。 
English: Why not choose someone to govern and make it effective, so that all regions have certain limits and regulations for requisitioning from the people, so that the people all over the world are favored.

古文：于是乃选近侍脱兀脱、尚书刘肃、侍郎李简往。
现代文：于是选近侍脱兀脱、尚书刘肃、侍郎李简一同去治理。
English: As a result, close attendants were selected to govern together, including the chief steward, Liu Su, and the steward, Li Jian.

古文：三人至邢，协心为治，洗涤蠹敝，革去贪暴，流亡复归，不期月，户增十倍。
现代文：三人到邢州后，同心协力，除去弊政，革去贪暴。于是逃亡在外的相继返乡，不到一月，户增十倍。
English: After the three arrived in Zhangzhou, they made concerted efforts to eliminate maladministration and eliminate corruption. As a result, they fled abroad and returned home one after another. In less than a month, the household increased tenfold.

古文：由是世祖益重儒士，任之以政，皆自文谦发之。
现代文：从此，世祖更加重用儒生，让他们参与政务，这都是由文谦向皇帝建议的结果。
English: From then on, the patriarch made greater use of Confucians and allowed them to participate in government affairs, which was the result of the suggestion made by Wen Qian to the emperor.

古文：岁辛亥，宪宗即位。文谦与秉忠数以时务所当先者言于世祖，悉施行之。世祖征大理，国主高祥拒命，杀信使遁去。世祖怒，将屠其城。
现代文：宪宗元年，文谦与秉忠把当前首先要办的事陈奏于世祖，都予实行。世祖征大理，国王高祥抗拒不服，杀朝廷派去的使臣而逃跑了。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Wenqian and Bingzhong announced to the Emperor the first things that needed to be done at that time, and they were all carried out. The Emperor was determined to conquer the country, but King Gao Xiang was not satisfied and killed the envoy sent by the imperial court and ran away.

古文：文谦与秉忠、姚枢谏曰： 杀使拒命者高祥尔，非民之罪，请宥之。 
现代文：世祖大怒，要大肆屠杀大理城的居民。文谦与秉忠、姚枢极力谏阻道 ：杀使臣抗拒朝廷之命的是高祥，百姓无罪，请宽大。 
English: The ancestor was so angry that he wanted to massacre the residents of Dali on a large scale. Wen Qian, Bingzhong, and Yao Zu tried their best to stop him: Gao Xiang was the one who killed the envoy who resisted the order of the imperial court, the people were not guilty, please be lenient.

古文：由是大理之民赖以全活。
现代文：大理百姓因此保住性命。
English: As a result, the people of Dali were able to save their lives.

古文：己未，世祖帅师伐宋，文谦与秉忠言： 王者之师，有征无战，当一视同仁，不可嗜杀。 
现代文：宪宗九年，世祖率师伐宋，文谦与秉忠对世祖说： 王者之师，有征讨但无战争，对南方臣民当一视同仁，不可滥杀。 
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the dynasty led his disciples to the Song Dynasty. Wen Qian and Bingzhong said to the founder of the dynasty: "The king's disciple, there is a conscription but no war. Southern subjects should be treated equally and should not be killed indiscriminately."

古文：世祖曰： 期与卿等守此言。 
现代文：世祖道： 希望与卿等共同遵守。 
English: World Ancestor's Way: I hope to observe it together with you.

古文：既入宋境，分命诸将毋妄杀，毋焚人室庐，所获生口悉纵之。
现代文：入宋境后命诸将不准妄杀和烧毁房屋，所获人口一律释放。
English: After entering Song territory, the generals were not allowed to kill or burn houses, and all the captured people were released.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，立中书省，首命王文统为平章政事，文谦为左丞。
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位，设立中书省，首命王文统为平章政事，文谦为左丞。
English: In the first year of Zhongtong, the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne and established the Ministry of Chinese Literature. The first to be appointed was Wang Wenzhong, who was given the title of Pingzhang Zhengji, and Wen Qian was appointed as Zuo Zheng.

古文：建立纲纪，讲明利病，以安国便民为务。
现代文：建立纲纪，讲明利弊，以安国便民为宗旨。
English: The purpose is to establish a code of conduct, clarify the advantages and disadvantages, and make the country safer and more convenient for the people.

古文：诏令一出，天下有太平之望。
现代文：诏令一出，天下有太平之望。
English: As soon as the edict was issued, there was hope for world peace.

古文：而文统素忌克，谟谋之际，屡相可否，积不能平，文谦遽求出，诏以本官行大名等路宣抚司事。
现代文：而文统素好忌恨别人，在商议政务时，每每与文谦相互可否，意见不一，怀怨于心，因此文谦请求出京任职。诏令他以中书左丞之职行大名等路宣抚司事。
English: On the other hand, Wenzhong always hated others. When discussing government affairs, he and Wenzhong disagreed on whether or not to meet each other, and held grudges. Therefore, Wenzhong asked Wenzhong to serve in Beijing. He was ordered by the Great Council of State to serve as a magistrate in the same way as a daimyo (feudal lord).

古文：临发，语文统曰： 民困日久，况当大旱，不量减税赋，何以慰来苏之望？ 
现代文：临行，对文统说 ：民困苦已久，况又逢大旱，若不减税赋，何以满足百姓得以休养生息之希望？ 
English: On the way, he said to Wen Tong: The people have been suffering for a long time, and the situation is also a big drought. If taxes are not reduced, what can satisfy the people's hope of being able to rest and recuperate?

古文：文统曰： 上新即位，国家经费止仰税赋，苟复减损，何以供给？ 
现代文：文统说： 皇帝新即位，国家经费只是仰给于税赋，如果再行减免，国家所需如何供给？ 
English: Wen Ting said: Since the new emperor has ascended the throne, the state funds are only given to taxes. If further reductions and exemptions are made, how will the state be supplied?

古文：文谦曰： 百姓足，君孰与不足！
现代文：文谦说： 百姓足，君怎么会不足！
English: Wen Qian said: People's feet, how can you be short!

古文：俟时和岁丰，取之未晚也。 
现代文：等到风调雨顺的丰收之年，再行征收也不晚。 
English: Wait until the year of a good harvest, it is not too late to collect the tax.

古文：于是蠲常赋什之四，商酒税什之二。
现代文：于是减常赋的十分之四，商酒税减十分之二。
English: As a result, four-tenths of the regular tax was reduced, and the commercial liquor tax was reduced by two-tenths.

古文：二年春，来朝，复留居政府。
现代文：中统二年春，回到朝廷，留在政府工作。
English: In the spring of the second year of unification, he returned to the imperial court and remained in government work.

古文：始立左右部，讲行庶务，巨细毕举，文谦之力为多。
现代文：朝廷始设左右部，推行各项政治措施，事无大小都办得很好，其中文谦尽了很大力量。
English: The imperial court began to set up the left and right departments and implement various political measures. Everything was well done, and Wen Qian did a great job.

古文：三年，阿合马领左右部，总司财用，欲专奏请，不关白中书，诏廷臣议之，文谦曰： 分制财用，古有是理，中书不预，无是理也。
现代文：三年，阿合马领左右部，总管国家财政，凡事只由他奏请皇帝，不必禀告中书省。朝廷诏大臣们讨论此事，文谦说 ：分管财政，古代有这种制度，但说中书不干预其事，是没有道理的。
English: In the third year, Ahma was in charge of the left and right parts of the government, and was in charge of the national finance. He only had to report everything to the emperor, and did not have to report to the Ministry of the People's Republic of China. The ministers of the Imperial Court discussed the matter, and Wen Qian said: In charge of finance, there was such a system in ancient times, but it was unreasonable to say that the People's Republic of China did not interfere in the matter.

古文：若中书弗问，天子将亲莅之乎？ 
现代文：若中书不问，天子将亲自来处理吗？ 
English: If the Chinese text does not ask, will the Son of Heaven personally deal with it?

古文：帝曰： 仲谦言是也。 
现代文：世祖认为 仲谦说的是 。
English: The ancestor thought that what Zhong Qian said was.

古文：至元元年，诏文谦以中书左丞行省西夏中兴等路。
现代文：至元元年，诏令文谦以中书左丞之职巡察西夏中兴等路。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor ordered Wen Qian to inspect roads such as Xixia Zhongxing with the post of middle school secretary.

古文：羌俗素鄙野，事无统纪，文谦得蜀士陷于俘虏者五六人，理而出之，使习吏事，旬月间簿书有品式，子弟亦知读书，俗为一变。
现代文：羌族习俗素来与中原不同，办事无纲无纪，文谦从被俘人口中得蜀士五六人，让他们出来熟悉政事，一月之内，公文有格式，子弟也知读书，习俗为之一变。
English: The customs of the Yao people have always been different from those of the Central Plains. They have no formalities or discipline. Wen Qian obtained five or six scholars from the captive population to let them come out and familiarize themselves with political affairs. Within a month, the official documents had a format, and the children also knew how to read. The customs changed completely.

古文：浚唐来、汉延二渠，溉田十数万顷，人蒙其利。
现代文：又疏导唐来、汉延二渠，灌田十数万顷，百姓得其利。
English: He also diverted two canals in Tanglai and Hanyang to irrigate tens of thousands of hectares of farmland, benefiting the people.

古文：三年，还朝。诸势家言有户数千，当役属为私奴者，议久不决。
现代文：至元三年回朝，诸势家提出把数千户强迫为私家奴婢。此事久议不决。
English: After the return of the emperor in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, influential families proposed to force thousands of households to become private slaves. The matter was not resolved for a long time.

古文：文谦谓以乙未岁户帐为断，奴之未占籍者，归之势家可也，其余良民无为奴之理。
现代文：文谦认为，当以太宗七年为断，奴婢没有在官府户籍册上登记的，可归属于势家，其余良民无强迫为奴隶之理。
English: Wen Qian believed that when a family has been in existence for seven years, the slaves who are not registered in the official household register can be attributed to the powerful family, and the rest of the good people are not forced to be slaves.

古文：议遂定，守以为法。
现代文：议定之后，作为法律共同遵守。
English: Once agreed, they are jointly observed as law.

古文：五年，淄州妖人胡王惑众，事觉，逮捕百余人。
现代文：五年，淄州妖人胡王惑众，官府为此逮捕了百余人。
English: In five years, the government arrested more than a hundred people because the Jingzhou sorcerer Hu Wang deceived the public.

古文：丞相安童以文谦言奏曰： 愚民无知，为所诳诱，诛其首恶足矣。 
现代文：丞相安童转奏文谦之言： 愚民无知，故被妖人欺骗引诱，杀其首恶就可以了。 
English: Minister of Justice Ando paraphrased Wen Qian's words: The foolish people are ignorant, so they are deceived and lured by the evil spirits. All they have to do is kill the evil spirits.

古文：诏即命文谦往决其狱，惟三人坐弃市，余皆释之。
现代文：朝廷命文谦去处理此案，文谦只处决三人，其余释放。
English: The court ordered Wen Qian to deal with the case. Wen Qian only executed three people and released the rest.

古文：七年，拜大司农卿，奏立诸道劝农司，巡行劝课，请开籍田，行祭先农先蚕等礼。
现代文：至元七年，拜文谦为大司农卿。文谦奏请设立各道劝农司，巡行劝农，开垦荒田，举行祭先农、先蚕等礼。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Wenqian became the chief secretary of the Minister of Agriculture. Wenqian requested the establishment of agricultural secretaries in each province to persuade farmers, to go on a tour to persuade farmers, to reclaim wasteland, and to hold a ceremony to celebrate the first farmers and the first silkworms.

古文：复与窦默请立国子学。
现代文：又与窦默一同奏请设立国子学。
English: Together with Dou Mei, he also called for the establishment of Kuniko-gaku.

古文：诏以许衡为国子祭酒，选贵胄子弟教育之。
现代文：朝廷诏命许衡为国子祭酒，挑选贵族子弟进行教育。
English: The imperial edict ordered Xu Heng to be the national son's sacrificial wine, and selected aristocratic children to be educated.

古文：时阿合马议拘民间铁，官铸农器，高其价以配民，创立行户部于东平、大名以造钞，及诸路转运司，干政害民，文谦悉于帝前极论罢之。
现代文：当时，阿合马计划收民间之铁，由官铸造农具，以高价配售与民；创立行户部于东平、大名，印制钞票；所遣诸路转运司干政害民。文谦都将这些弊政在皇帝面前予以弹劾，请求废除。
English: At that time, Ahma planned to collect iron from the people, and the officials would cast agricultural tools and sell them to the people at a high price; he created the Household Department in Dongping and Daming, and printed banknotes; he sent the Road Transportation Department to interfere in politics and harm the people. Wen Qian impeached all these maladministration in front of the emperor and requested to abolish them.

古文：十三年，迁御史中丞。
现代文：十三年，升御史中丞。
English: Thirteen years later, he was promoted to Shoshi chujo.

古文：阿合马虑宪台发其奸，乃奏罢诸道按察司以撼之，文谦奏复其旧。然自知为奸臣所忌，力求去。
现代文：阿合马怕台谏官揭发其奸诈，奏请废除了各道按察司。文谦却奏请恢复，但他自知为奸臣所忌恨，力请辞去御史中丞之职。
English: Ahma feared that the Taiwanese eunuchs would expose his treachery, so he abolished all the provincial inspectors. However, he reinstated Wen Qian, but he knew that he was hated by his treacherous vassals, so he asked Wen Qian to resign from the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：会世祖以《大明历》岁久浸差，命许衡等造新历，乃授文谦昭文馆大学士，领太史院，以总其事。
现代文：当时世祖正因《大明历》成书年代已久，有差错，命许衡等制定新历法，于是授文谦为昭文馆大学士，领太史院以总管修新历之事。
English: At that time, the founder of the world was formulating a new calendar due to the fact that the "Great Ming Calendar" had been written for a long time, there were errors, and he ordered Xu Heng, etc. Therefore, Wen Qian was awarded the degree of Shouwen Academy, and led the Taiji Academy as the general manager to revise the new calendar.

古文：十九年，拜枢密副使。
现代文：十九年，拜枢密副使。
English: In 1919, he was promoted to Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：岁余，以疾薨于位，年六十八。文谦蚤从刘秉忠，洞究术数；晚交许衡，尤粹于义理之学。为人刚明简重，凡所陈于上前，莫非尧、舜仁义之道。数忤权幸，而是非得丧，一不以经意。
现代文：文谦早随刘秉忠研究占卜相命之术；晚年结交许衡，尤精于义理之学。为人刚直明快，凡所陈奏于皇帝者，无不是尧、舜仁义之道。多次违背权臣的意图，但把因此而蒙受的是非得失，全不放在心上。
English: Early on, Wen Qian studied the art of divination with Liu Bingzhong; in his later years, he befriended Xu Heng, who was particularly proficient in the study of the principles of justice. He was a straightforward and bright person, and everything he presented to the emperor was the way of benevolence and justice. He repeatedly violated the intentions of the powerful minister, but he did not care about the gains and losses he suffered as a result.

古文：家惟藏书数万卷。
现代文：家中只有藏书数万卷。
English: The family only has a collection of tens of thousands of volumes.

古文：尤以引荐人材为己任，时论益以是多之。
现代文：他尤以引荐人材为己任，时论更加肯定他。
English: He is especially responsible for recommending talent, and he is even more recognized by current opinion.

古文：累赠推诚同德佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封魏国公，谥忠宣。
现代文：累赠推诚同德佐运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封魏国公，谥忠宣。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Hero of the Satsuma Rebellion, Grand Master, Grand Master of the Imperial Household, Grand Master of the Three Departments, and Grand Officer of the State, and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master of the State of Wei and the title of Gongzhongxuan.

古文：祖天挺，元裕尝从之学。
现代文：郝经，字伯常，祖籍潞州，后迁居泽州。
English: He was born in Bozhou and moved to Zezhou.

古文：金末，父思温辟地河南之鲁山。
现代文：金末，父郝思温举家迁于河南鲁山避难。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, his father, Gong Siwen, moved the whole family to take refuge in Lushan, Henan Province.

古文：河南乱，居民匿窖中，乱兵以火熏灼之，民多死，经母许亦死。
现代文：河南兵荒马乱，居民躲藏于地窖中，乱兵用火熏，民多惨死，郝经母许氏亦遇难将死，幸经用蜂蜜和寒菹救活。
English: Henan soldiers and horses ran amok, residents hid in cellars, the soldiers used fire to smoke, and many people died miserably. Zou Jing's mother, Xu, was also killed and was about to die. Fortunately, she was saved by honey and cold soup.

古文：经以蜜和寒菹汁，决母齿饮之，即苏。时经九岁，人皆异之。
现代文：这时他才九岁，人称奇才。金亡后，郝经全家又迁居顺天。
English: At this time, he was only nine years old and was known as a prodigy. After Jin's death, the whole family moved to Shuntian.

古文：金亡，徙顺天。家贫，昼则负薪米为养，暮则读书。居五年，为守帅张柔、贾辅所知，延为上客。
现代文：经因家贫，白天打柴买米度日，夜间苦读，如此过了五年，为当地守将张柔、贾辅闻知，请去奉为上宾。
English: After five years of living in poverty, collecting firewood and buying rice during the day, and studying hard at night, local governors Zhang Rou and Jia Zuo Wenshi invited me to be their chief guest.

古文：二家藏书皆万卷，经博览无不通。
现代文：张、贾二家藏书万卷，郝经得有幸博览，无不精通。
English: Zhang and Jia's two families have a collection of tens of thousands of volumes of books, and they are fortunate enough to be well-versed in the classics.

古文：往来燕、赵间，元裕每语之曰： 子貌类汝祖，才器非常，勉之。 
现代文：其祖父之弟子元裕对他说 ：你貌似你祖父，才器非凡，望倍加努力。 
English: His grandfather's disciple, Motohiro, said to him, "You look like your grandfather. You have an extraordinary talent. I hope you will work harder."

古文：宪宗二年，世祖以皇弟开邸金莲川，召经，谘以经国安民之道，条上数十事，大悦，遂留王府。
现代文：宪宗二年，世祖以皇弟的身份在金莲川建立王府，召郝经去咨询治国安民之道。郝经进呈数十条，世祖大喜，因留用于王府。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, King Sejong, in his capacity as the younger brother of the emperor, established a royal palace in Jinlianchuan, and summoned the sutras to consult on the way to govern the country and ensure the safety of the people. The sutras were submitted in dozens, and King Sejong was overjoyed that they were used in the royal palace.

古文：是时，连兵于宋，宪宗入蜀，命世祖总统东师，经从至濮。
现代文：此时蒙古皇帝正调集各路军马攻宋，西路军由宪宗亲领入蜀，东路大军由世祖统领，郝经随世祖至濮州。
English: At this time, the Mongolian emperor was mobilizing all the armies to attack the Song Dynasty. The western army was led by Xianzong into Shu, and the eastern army was led by Shizuo, who followed Shizuo to Zhangzhou.

古文：会有得宋国奏议以献，其言谨边防，守冲要，凡七道，遂下诸将议。
现代文：有人提出取宋七条建议，世祖交诸将商议。郝经认为： 自古得天下者，以德不以力。
English: Some people suggested that the seven articles of the Song Dynasty should be taken, and the world's ancestors should be consulted. The Analects of Confucius held that: Since ancient times, those who have gained the world have done so through virtue.

古文：经曰： 古之一天下者，以德不以力。彼今未有败亡之衅，我乃空国而出，诸侯窥伺于内，小民凋弊于外。
现代文：今宋尚无败亡的迹象，而我军空国而出，恐诸侯乘虚于内，小民受苦于外。
English: Now there is no sign of defeat in the Song Dynasty, and our army is flying out of the country, fearing that the princes will take advantage of the void inside, and the commoners will suffer outside.

古文：经见其危，未见其利也。
现代文：臣郝经只见其危险的一面而未见有利的一面。
English: Vassals only see the dangerous side of it, but not the beneficial side.

古文：王不如修德布惠，敦族简贤，绥怀远人，控制诸道，结盟饬备，以待西师。
现代文：王不如屯兵不动，颁行德政，施恩于民，招贤纳士，笼络各地守臣，共同防御，等待西军进展。
English: It is better for the king not to move the garrison, to carry out a virtuous government, to be kind to the people, to recruit virtuous people, to entice courtiers from all over the country, to have a common defense, and to wait for the progress of the Western Army.

古文：上应天心，下系人望，顺时而动，宋不足图也。 
现代文：这样上合天心，下从民望，时至而动，可轻易夺取宋国。 
English: In this way, he could win the hearts and minds of the people and easily conquer the Song Dynasty.

古文：世祖以经儒生，愕然曰： 汝与张拔都议邪？ 
现代文：世祖见郝经不过一介书生，竟有如此高论，十分惊异，以为是事先与张柔商议过的。
English: The ancestor was surprised to see such a lofty opinion from a scholar who had only read the Analects of Confucius. He thought he had discussed it with Zhang Rong in advance.

古文：经对曰： 经少馆张柔家，尝闻其论议。此则经臆说耳，柔不知也。 
现代文：郝经解释道 ：经年少时曾寓居张柔家，曾听过他的高见，但现在是我自己想当然而已，张拔都并不知道。 
English: Gong Jing explained, "When I was young, I used to live in Zhang Rou's house. I used to listen to his lofty opinions, but now I just take them for granted. I don't even know Zhang Ba.

古文：进七道议七千余言。
现代文：随之又进呈七条建议，共七千余言。
English: This was followed by a further seven suggestions, totalling more than seven thousand words.

古文：乃以杨惟中为江淮荆湖南北等路宣抚使，经为副，将归德军，先至江上，宣布恩信，纳降附。
现代文：世祖任命杨惟中为江淮荆湖南北等路宣抚史，郝经为副使，将归德军先开至江上，宣布恩信，招纳归附宋人。
English: The founder of the world appointed Yang Weizhong as the ambassador of the history of the north-south and other routes of the Jianghuai-Jinghu River, and Zou Jing as the deputy envoy. He drove the German troops to the river first, announced the letter of credit, and recruited the Song people to be annexed.

古文：惟中欲私还汴，经曰： 我与公同受命南征，不闻受命还汴也。 
现代文：惟中欲私还汴京，郝经劝阻曰： 我与公同受命南征，不曾受命还汴。 
English: However, he wanted to go back to Beijing, but was dissuaded and said, "I was ordered to go to the south together with the public, but I was never ordered to return."

古文：惟中怒，弗听。
现代文：惟中大怒，不听劝阻。
English: However, he flew into a rage and would not be dissuaded.

古文：经率麾下扬旌而南，惟中惧谢，乃与经俱行。
现代文：经自率师南下，惟中又惧怕起来，与经一同南行。
English: Afterward, he went south with his teacher, but he got scared again and went south with his teacher.

古文：经闻宪宗在蜀，师久无功，进《东师议》，其略曰：
现代文：郝经闻知宪宗在蜀军事久无进展，于是向世祖进呈《东师议》，真大意是：
English: After hearing that there had been no progress for a long time in Shu military affairs, Zhi Zhenzong submitted the "Eastern Scholar's Proposal" to Shizuo Shizuo, the true meaning of which was:

古文：经闻图天下之事于未然则易，救天下之事于已然则难。
现代文：经闻取天下易，救天下则难。我朝曾以一旅之师，奋起于漠北，欲统一中国，马首所向，无坚不摧。
English: It is easy to take over the world, but it is difficult to save the world. I once rose up in the north of the desert as a traveling teacher, wanting to unify China. What Ma Shou is aiming for is indestructible.

古文：惟宋不下，未能混一，连兵构祸逾二十年。
现代文：灭金国，并西夏，占领荆襄，克复成都，平定大理，征服诸夷，得天下十分之八，惟宋未下，未能成就统一大业，连年用兵，迄今已二十年了。
English: It has been 20 years since the Qing Dynasty conquered Jin and Western Xia, occupied Jing and Xiang, recaptured Chengdu, pacified Dali, and conquered Zhuyi, gaining eight-tenths of the world, but failed to achieve the great cause of unification before the Song Dynasty, and continued to use troops.

古文：何曩时掇取之易，而今日图惟之难也？
现代文：为什么以往取胜易，而今完成统一大业难？
English: Why was it easy to win in the past, but now it is difficult to complete the great cause of unification?

古文：夫取天下，有可以力并，有可以术图。
现代文：取天下有两种策略，一是武力夺取，一是智谋夺取。
English: There are two strategies for conquering the world. One is to conquer by force, and the other is to conquer by cunning.

古文：并之以力则不可久，久则顿弊而不振；图之以术则不可急，急则侥幸而难成。故自汉、唐以来，树立攻取，或五六年，未有逾十年者，是以其力不弊，而卒能保大定功。
现代文：前者不可旷日持久，久则士气疲惫；后者不胜急，急则难以成功。从历史看，自汉、唐以来，以武力夺取，只费时五六年，未有超过十年者，所以军力不会疲惫，终能成功。
English: The former cannot last for a long time, and the morale will be exhausted for a long time; the latter is not urgent, and it is difficult to succeed. Historically, since the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, it has only taken five or six years to conquer by force, and it has not been more than ten years, so the military force will not be exhausted and will eventually succeed.

古文：晋之取吴，隋之取陈，皆经营比佽十有余年，是以其术得成，而卒能混一。或久或近，要之成功各当其可，不妄为而已。
现代文：晋之取吴，隋之取陈，经营十年有余，都是以智谋统一天下。无论时代之远近，其成功之道各取所当，不可任意行动。
English: Jinzhi took Wu, Sui took Chen, and they have been in business for more than ten years. They are all united by wisdom and strategy. No matter how far or near the times are, they all take their own paths to success, and they cannot act arbitrarily.

古文：国家建极开统垂五十年，而一之以兵，遗黎残姓，游气惊魂，虔刘劘荡，殆欲歼尽。自古用兵，未有如是之久且多也，其力安得不弊乎！且括兵率赋，朝下令而夕出师，躬擐甲胄，跋履山川，阖国大举，以之伐宋而图混一。
现代文：我国家建立五十年，一是用兵力取天下，百姓深受战乱之苦，自古用兵未有如此之久且多的，军力怎能不疲惫呢？今征兵收税，朝下令而夕出师，大王亲自披甲出征，跋涉山河，举全国之力以伐宋，企图统一天下。
English: In the fifty years since the founding of our country, the first is to use military force to take over the world, the people are deeply suffering from the turmoil of war. Since ancient times, the use of soldiers has not been so long and numerous, how can the military force not be exhausted? Now conscripted soldiers collect taxes, ordered by the morning and the evening division, the great king himself put on armor and went to war, trekked mountains and rivers, and raised the strength of the whole country to fight the Song Dynasty, in an attempt to unify the country.

古文：以志则锐，以力则强，以土则大，而其术则未尽也。
现代文：其志可谓坚定，其军力可谓强盛，所取得土地可谓广大，但仅只以力取胜，谋略未得施展。
English: Its aspirations can be said to be firm, its military strength can be said to be strong, and the land it has acquired can be said to be vast, but it can only win by force, and its strategy has not been carried out.

古文：苟于诸国既平之后，息师抚民，致治成化，创法立制，敷布条纲，上下井井，不挠不紊，任老成为辅相，起英特为将帅，选贤能为任使，鸠智计为机衡，平赋以足用，屯农以足食，内治既举，外御亦备。
现代文：如果在平定诸国之后，息师安民，施行教化，创立法度，上下井井有条，不紊不乱，再任老成者为丞相，用英勇善战者为将帅，选贤能为官吏，聚集智谋于参议机要，减轻人民的赋税，发展农业，内政治好了，国防也强了。
English: If, after the pacification of various countries, teachers and the people are pacified, education and enlightenment are carried out, a legal system is created, and the ups and downs are orderly and disorderly, the veteran is reappointed as the prime minister, the brave and good fighters are appointed as generals, the wise can be elected as officials, the wisdom is gathered in the senate, the people's taxes are reduced, agriculture is developed, domestic politics is good, and national defense is strong.

古文：如其不服，姑以文诰，拒而不从，而后伺隙观衅，以正天伐。自东海至于襄、邓，重兵数道，联帜接武，以为正兵。
现代文：如有不服者，先发文诰晓以大义，如拒绝不听，然后伺机征讨。从东海至襄、邓，屯驻重兵，军旗相望，此为正兵。
English: If there are those who do not accept, the first to issue a document is to act with great righteousness, if they refuse to listen, then wait for the opportunity to solicit. From the East China Sea to Xiang and Deng, the heavy troops are stationed, the flags are facing each other, this is the regular soldiers.

古文：自汉中至于大理，轻兵捷出，批亢抵胁，以为奇兵。
现代文：自汉中至大理，以轻骑速进，以为奇兵。
English: From the middle of the Han Dynasty to Dali, he advanced rapidly on horseback, thinking that he was an extraordinary soldier.

古文：帅臣得人，师出以律，高拱九重之内，而海外有截矣。
现代文：只要将帅得人，军纪严明，皇帝虽居九重深宫，天下即可整治。
English: As long as the general is handsome, the military discipline is strict, and the emperor is in a deep palace, the world can be rectified.

古文：是而不为，乃于间岁遽为大举，上下震动，兵连祸结，底安于危，是已然而莫可止者也。
现代文：若不如此，隔一岁就大举征伐，兵连祸结，上下震动，将如何得了。今东师未出，大王明智仁爱，何不事先讨论！
English: If this is not the case, what will happen if a large-scale campaign is launched every other year, and the soldiers are plagued with misfortune and are shaken up and down. Now that the East Division has not come out, the great king is wise and benevolent, why not discuss it in advance!

古文：东师未出，大王仁明，则犹有未然者，可不议乎！国家用兵，一以国俗为制，而不师古。
现代文：用兵之道在于按本国情况，不必遵行古制。我蒙古大军由于长期围猎，其聚如丘山，散如风雨，迅如雷电，捷如鹰鹘，出其不备，攻其不意，故得以破回鹘，灭西夏，败金兵，都是因为善用奇兵。
English: The way of using troops is according to the situation of the country, there is no need to follow the old system. Due to the long siege, our Mongolian army gathered like a hill, dispersed like wind and rain, swift as lightning, swift as an eagle's beak, and was caught unprepared and unawares. Therefore, we were able to break the back, destroy the Western Xia, and defeat the gold soldiers, all because of the good use of the miracle soldiers.

古文：不计师之众寡，地之险易，敌之强弱，必合围把槊，猎取之若禽兽然。聚如丘山，散如风雨，迅如雷电，捷如鹰鹘，鞭弭所属，指期约日，万里不忒，得兵家之诡道，而长于用奇。
现代文：其后由金、房绕出潼关之背以攻汴，自西和径入石泉、威、茂以取蜀，自临洮、吐蕃穿过西南以平大理，这些都是用奇兵的成功。其所以能出奇制胜，是因为关陇、江淮以北，多是平原旷野，便于骑兵驰骋，所向无敌。
English: After that, Jin and Fang went around the back of Shuguang to attack Shuguang, from West Heji into Shiquan, Wei and Mao to take Shu, and from Linfen and Tubo through the southwest to Pingdari. These were all successes with extraordinary soldiers. The reason why they were able to win unexpectedly was that north of Guanzhong and Jianghuai, there were mostly plains and deserts, which made it easy for cavalry to gallop, and they were invincible.

古文：西师既构，猝不可解，如两虎相斗，猝入于岩阻，见之者辟易不暇，又焉能以理相喻，使之逡巡自退？
现代文：如今大军进取巴蜀，那里大山深谷，险阻重重。皇上亲领百万之众，首尾万余里，运动困难。敌人则据险扼守，攻难守易，虽有奇谋秘略，不能施展，力无所用与无力一样，勇无所施与不勇无异，计不能行与无计相同，大军徘徊不能进，这便是强弩之末不能穿鲁缟的道理。
English: Today, the great army is advancing to Bashu, where there are many mountains and valleys, and many obstacles. The emperor's relatives lead millions of people, and it is difficult to move. The enemy is protected by danger, difficult to attack, and easy to defend. Although there are secret strategies, they cannot be used. Strength is the same as weakness, courage is no different from lack of courage, strategy cannot be the same as no strategy, and a large army cannot enter if it wanders. This is the reason why a strong army cannot cross the river.

古文：彼知其危，竭国以并命，我必其取，无由以自悔，兵连祸结，何时而已。殿下宜遣人禀命于行在所，大军压境，遣使喻宋，示以大信，令降名进币，割地纳质。
现代文：为今之计，应改正已造成的失误，防备未来的变化。攻蜀大军不能突然撤退，殿下最好遣人去请示于皇上，乘我大军压境之势，派人去劝说宋朝赔款割地。
English: For the present, we should correct the mistakes that have already been made and prepare for future changes. The attacking Shu army cannot suddenly retreat. Your highness had better send someone to ask the emperor for instructions, and take advantage of the pressure of our army on the border to send someone to persuade the Song Dynasty to allocate land for compensation.

古文：彼必受命，姑为之和，偃兵息民，以全吾力，而图后举，天地人神之福也。禀命不从，殿下之义尽，而后进吾师，重慎详审，不为躁轻飘忽，为前定之谋，而一之以正大，假西师以为奇而用吾正。
现代文：暂且息兵议和，保全我军势力，而后再图大举。如果皇上不采纳殿下意见，殿下也算是尽了自己的职责，然后再慎重详细规划进军方略，仍按前定之谋，以西路军为奇兵，以东路军为正兵。
English: If the Emperor does not accept His Imperial Highness's advice, then His Imperial Highness will have fulfilled his duty. Then, after carefully planning the military strategy in detail, he will still follow the predetermined strategy, with the West Route Army as the surprise army and the East Route Army as the main army.

古文：比师南辕，先示恩信，申其文移，喻以祸福，使知殿下仁而不杀，非好攻战辟土地，不得已而用兵之意。
现代文：东师南进之前，先文告宋朝，讲明祸福所在，使他们知道殿下有仁爱之心，不愿屠杀，非好攻战，是不得已而用兵。
English: Before the Eastern Division marched southward, they sent a letter to the Song Dynasty, explaining where the evil and the good lay, so that they knew that His Imperial Highness had a heart of benevolence, did not want to slaughter, was not eager to attack, and was forced to use troops.

古文：诚意昭著，恩信流行，然后阅实精勇，别为一军，为帐下之卒，举老成知兵者俾为将帅，更直宿卫，以备不虞。
现代文：殿下诚意昭著，恩信施行，然后挑选精勇兵将，组成一军，以老成善带兵者为将帅，作为殿下近卫军，以防不虞。
English: His Royal Highness's sincerity shines through, his gratitude is put into practice, and then he selects brave soldiers to form an army, with the veteran leading the soldiers as the commander, as His Royal Highness's bodyguard, just in case.

古文：其余师众，各畀侯伯，使吾府大官元臣分师总统，为战攻之卒。
现代文：其余由大官重臣分师统领，作为攻战部队。新招入部属不知打仗，可使他们在沿边筑垒，与敌郡县犬牙相错，以牵制敌军。
English: The rest of the division was led by the high-ranking officers and senior vassals as the attacking force. The newly recruited subordinates did not know how to fight, so they could build a fortress along the border and make a mistake with the enemy's county dog, in order to contain the enemy.

古文：使掣肘之计不行，妄意之徒屏息，内外备御无有缺绽，则制节以进。
现代文：老弱残兵，把他们编组起来，由素有重望的大臣领导为内地镇守之卒。这样内外布置周到，没有破绽，然后节制进军。
English: The old and weak remnants of the soldiers were grouped together, led by respected ministers as the guardians of the inland. In this way, they were carefully arranged inside and outside, without any flaws, and then marched into the army with restraint.

古文：既入其境，敦陈固列，缓为之行。
现代文：进入宋境之后，军队阵营严整，缓慢前进。
English: After entering the Song territory, the army camp was well-organized and advanced slowly.

古文：彼善于守而吾不攻，彼恃城壁以不战老吾，吾合长围以不攻困彼，吾用吾之所长，彼不能用其长。选出入便利之地为久驻之基，示必取之势。
现代文：我军要扬长避短。宋军恃城坚守，以不战而使我军疲惫，我军可长期围而不攻，使彼自困，选择出入便利地方屯驻重兵，表现出我军必然夺取的态势。
English: Our army should promote the strengths and avoid the weaknesses. The Song Army held fast to Shicheng and exhausted our army by not fighting. Our army could encircle and not attack for a long time, causing them to be trapped, choosing to enter and exit convenient places to station heavy troops, showing our army's inevitable capture.

古文：毋焚庐舍，毋伤人民，开其生路，以携其心，亟肄以疲，多方以误，以弊其力。兵势既振，蕴蓄既见，则以轻兵掠两淮，杜其樵采而遏其粮路，使血脉断绝，各守孤城，示不足取。
现代文：凡攻占的地方，要严禁军士焚烧庐舍及滥杀人民，开其生路，争取人心。军队士气振奋起来了，一切军需用品都准备充足了，然后以轻骑进攻两淮，截断宋军粮草，使血脉断绝，各守孤城。
English: In any place conquered, it is strictly forbidden for soldiers to burn houses and indiscriminately kill people, to open their way of life, and to win people's hearts. The army's morale has been invigorated, and all military supplies have been prepared in sufficient quantities. Then, with light riding, attack two Huai, cut off the Song army's grain and grass, sever the bloodline, and each keep a solitary city.

古文：即进大兵，直抵于江，沿江上下，列屯万灶，号令明肃，部曲严整，首尾缔构，各具舟楫，声言径渡。
现代文：随即大军南下，直抵长江北岸，沿江屯驻，号令严明，军纪整肃，首尾衔接，各备船只，扬言渡江。
English: Subsequently, the large army went south, straight to the north bank of the Yangtze River, stationed along the river, issued strict orders, rectified military discipline, connected end to end, prepared ships, and threatened to cross the river.

古文：彼必震垒，自起变故。
现代文：宋军必大为震惊，内部发生变故。
English: The Song army must have been greatly shocked, and internal changes occurred.

古文：是兵家所谓避坚攻瑕，避实击虚者也。
现代文：因为宋军精锐都在两淮，扼守长江的军队未曾经过战斗，只是恃长江天险，何能抵挡我身经百战的精锐之师。
English: Because the elite of the Song Army are in the two Huai, the army guarding the Yangtze River has never been in battle, but the Yangtze River is a natural hazard, how can I resist the elite of the elite who have been through a hundred wars.

古文：如欲存养兵力，渐次以进，以图万全，则先荆后淮，先淮后江。
现代文：我军在一处突破，其他则望风皆溃，其两淮之军亦不能回师救援。
English: Our army broke through in one place, while the others all collapsed, and their two armies could not come to the rescue of the division.

古文：彼之素论，谓 有荆、襄则可以保淮甸，有淮甸则可以保江南 。
现代文：这就是兵家所谓的避坚攻弱，避实击虚。宋军素来认为 ：有荆襄则可以保淮甸，有淮甸则可以保江南。 
English: This is what the soldiers call avoiding the strong and attacking the weak, and avoiding the real and attacking the false. The Song army has always believed that: if there is Jingxiang, it can protect Huaiadian, and if there is Huaiadian, it can protect the south of the river.

古文：先是，我尝有荆、襄，有淮甸，有上流，皆自失之。
现代文：我军万全之策是：前荆后淮，先淮后江。过去我军据有荆、襄、淮甸，占据长江上游，后来失守。
English: Our army's all-round strategy is: first Jing, then Huai, then Huai Houjiang. In the past, our army occupied the upper reaches of the Yangtze River with Jing, Xiang, and Huai Dian, but later lost the defense.

古文：今当从彼所保以为吾攻，命一军出襄、邓，直渡汉水，造舟为梁，水陆济师。
现代文：今日当以彼所保者为吾所攻，命一军出襄、邓，直渡汉水，造舟架桥，水陆并进。
English: Today, we should take him as the guarantor for our attack, order an army to go out, Deng, directly cross the Han River, build a boat bridge, and advance both on land and water.

古文：以轻兵掇襄阳，绝其粮路，重兵皆趋汉阳，出其不意，以伺江隙。
现代文：以轻骑取襄阳，绝宋军粮路；以重兵趋汉阳，出其不意，攻其不防。
English: Take Xiangyang on a light horse, the grain road of the Song Dynasty; take Hanyang with a heavy army, catch it by surprise, attack it unprepared.

古文：不然，则重兵临襄阳，轻兵捷出，穿彻均、房，远叩归、峡，以应西师。
现代文：或者以重兵攻襄阳，轻兵穿越均州、房州，远攻归州、峡州，以接应西路军。
English: Or attack Xiangyang with heavy troops, cross Junzhou and Fangzhou with light troops, and attack Guizhou and Xiaozhou from afar to meet the Western Route Army.

古文：如交、广、施、黔选锋透出，夔门不守，大势顺流，即并兵大出，摧拉荆、郢，横溃湘、潭，以成犄角。
现代文：如果交、广、施、黔遣兵出击，宋军夔门不守，西路大军顺流而下，占据荆、郢、湘、潭，与东路军形成掎角之势。
English: If the troops of Jiaotong, Guangxi, Shifang and Yunnan were sent to attack, the Song Army would not defend the Yamen, and the West Road Army would go down the river, occupy Jing, Yunnan, Hunan and Tan, and form a corner with the East Road Army.

古文：一军出寿春，乘其锐气，并取荆山。驾淮为梁，以通南北。
现代文：命一军出寿春，乘势夺取荆山，架桥于淮河以沟通南北。
English: He ordered an army to march out of Shouchun, seize Jing Mountain, and build a bridge across the Huaihe River to connect the north and the south.

古文：轻兵抄寿春，而重兵支布于钟离、合淝之间，掇拾湖泺，夺取关隘，据濡须，塞皖口，南入舒、和，西及于蕲、黄，徜徉恣肆，以觇江口。
现代文：派轻兵包抄寿春，重兵分布于钟离、合肥之间，占据濡须，堵住皖口，南入舒、和，西至蕲、黄，在乌江、采石间广布巡逻兵，侦察渡江之险易，经过从容策划，然后进军。
English: He sent light troops to encircle Shouchun, heavy troops were distributed between Zhongli and Hefei, occupied Wushu, blocked the estuary, went south to Shuxi, and west to Handan and Huanglong, and spread patrols in the Wujiang River and quarries to investigate the dangers of crossing the river. After careful planning, he then marched in.

古文：三道并出，东西连衡，殿下或处一军，为之节制，使我兵力常有余裕，如是则未来之变或可弭，已然之失一日或可救也。议者必曰：三道并进，则兵分势弱，不若并力一向，则莫我当也。
现代文：此所谓 溃两淮之腹心，抉长江之襟要 。一军出维扬，但由于通、泰、海门以及扬子江面均靠近宋朝京都，必有重兵防守，不宜立即进攻，当以重兵临维扬，又以轻兵出通、泰，直抵海门、瓜步、金山、柴墟河口，游骑上下，静观形势变化。以上三军并出，东西连成一气，殿下虽身居一军可节制各路。或有相反意见，认为三路大军并进，必然兵分势弱，不如三军合力向一方进攻，敌莫敢当。
English: This so-called "crushing the two Huai's henchmen" is to decide the neck of the Yangtze River. One army went out to Weiyang, but since Tong, Tai, Haimen and the Yangtze River were all close to Song Dynasty Kyoto, there must be heavy troops defending, and it is not appropriate to attack immediately. It is necessary to approach Weiyang with heavy troops, and go out to Tong, Tai with light troops, straight to Haimen, Guapu, Jinshan and Chaihu Estuary, and ride up and down, quietly watching the situation change. The above three armies went out together, east and west joined together, and although His

古文：会不知取国之术与争地之术异：并力一向，争地之术也；诸道并进，取国之术也。
现代文：此等意见是不知取国之术与争地之术不同。大军合力向一处进攻，这是争地之术；诸路军并进，是取国之术。
English: These opinions are based on the fact that the art of conquering a country is different from the art of fighting for territory. If a large army attacks a place with joint forces, this is the art of fighting for territory; if many armies march together, this is the art of conquering a country.

古文：昔之混一者，皆若是矣。
现代文：中国历代帝王统一天下，都是采取后一战略。
English: All the emperors in Chinese history adopted the latter strategy when they unified the country.

古文：晋取吴，则六道进；隋取陈，则九道进；宋之于南唐，则三面皆进。
现代文：如晋取吴是六道并进，隋取陈是九道并进，宋取南唐是三道并进。
English: For example, the conquest of Wu by Jin is a six-way parallel advance, the conquest of Chen by Sui is a nine-way parallel advance, and the conquest of Southern Tang by Song is a three-way parallel advance.

古文：未闻以一旅之众而能克国者，或者有之，侥幸之举也。岂有堂堂大国，师徒百万，而为侥幸之举乎？
现代文：没听说有一旅之师而能攻灭敌国者；或有，那也是侥幸成功，岂有堂堂大国，拥军百万，而图侥幸成功的吗？
English: Haven't you heard that there is only one man who can invade and destroy an enemy country; or is it also a fluke success, is there a big country with millions of troops, and is it a fluke success?

古文：况彼渡江立国，百有余年，纪纲修明，风俗完厚，君臣辑睦，内无祸衅，东西南北，轮广万里，亦未可小。自败盟以来，无日不讨军实而申警之，彷徨百折，当我强对，未尝大败，不可谓弱。
现代文：况宋朝自南渡以来，百有余年，纪纲严明，风俗淳厚，君臣和睦，内无祸害，土地广阔，不可小视。自盟约破坏之后，他们每日都在注重军事，时时警戒，把我们当作强敌对待，且从未大败过，岂可蔑视。
English: For more than a hundred years since its arrival in the south, the Song Dynasty has had a strict discipline, pure customs, and harmony between the emperor and the people. There is no evil within, and the land is vast, which should not be underestimated. Since the destruction of the covenant, they have been paying attention to the military every day, always on the alert, treating us as a strong enemy, and have never been defeated. How can they treat us with contempt?

古文：岂可蔑视，谓秦无人，直欲一军幸而取胜乎？
现代文：故英明君主之得天下，必有万全之策，不能以侥幸取胜。西路军出师已一年了，还未成功。
English: Therefore, for a wise monarch to conquer the world, there must be a perfect strategy, and victory cannot be won by chance. It has been a year since the Western Route Army left the division, and it has not yet succeeded.

古文：秦王问王翦以伐荆，翦曰： 非六十万不可。 
现代文：我国家全盛之力在于东路军，若东路军一举而下金陵，攻克临安是完全可能的。
English: The full strength of our country lies in the East Road Army. If the East Road Army descends on Jinling in one fell swoop, it is entirely possible to conquer Lin'an.

古文：秦王曰： 将军老矣。 命李信将二十万往，不克，卒畀翦以兵六十万而后举楚。盖众有所必用，事势有不可悬料而幸取者。
现代文：但因此而大量消耗了兵力，多费时日，以致进退两难，反让敌国有机可乘，到那时将悔之不及了。所以应详细筹划，慎重行事，以智取为上，这是保全实力，坐以取胜。
English: However, as a result, a large number of troops have been consumed and more time has been spent, resulting in a dilemma, and the enemy country has been given an opportunity, which will be regrettable at that time. Therefore, it is necessary to make detailed plans, act cautiously, and take wisdom as the top. This is to maintain strength and win.

古文：故王者之举必万全，其幸举者，崛起无赖之人也。
现代文：过去我朝征服各国，本以力胜，但如今形势不同，若措置失当，既不能挫败南朝英雄之气，服天下之心，又让那些心怀叵测的小人乘机离间，为之动摇。
English: In the past, the Southern Dynasty conquered countries by force, but now the situation is different. If the measures are improper, it will not be able to defeat the heroic spirit of the Southern Dynasty and win the hearts of the world, nor will it be able to let those small-minded people take the opportunity to break away and be shaken.

古文：呜呼！西师之出，已及瓜戍，而犹未即功。
现代文：愚臣不厌其烦地反复议论东路军的作战方略，着眼点不是已形成的局势，而是将来的局势。
English: The foolish minister tirelessly and repeatedly discussed the strategy of the Eastern Route Army, focusing not on the existing situation, but on the future situation.

古文：向在沙陀，命经曰： 时未可也。 
现代文：元军正当会师渡江，围攻鄂州之时，忽闻宪宗驾崩。
English: When the Yuan army was about to cross the Yangtze River and besiege Ezhou, Qian Zong died suddenly.

古文：又曰： 时之一字最当整理。 又曰： 可行之时，尔自知之。 
现代文：世祖召集诸将商议对策。郝经再上书曰：《易经》说： 只有圣人能知进退存亡，不偏不倚。 
English: The founder of the world called the generals together to discuss countermeasures. The sutra was re-issued, saying: "The I Ching says: Only a sage can know the right and wrong, and be impartial.

古文：大哉王言， 时乘六龙 之道，知之久矣。
现代文：殿下才智过人，刚毅果断，足以统御天下。且久知进退存亡之道理。
English: His Imperial Highness is wiser than anyone else, strong and resolute enough to rule the world, and he has long known the principles of advance, retreat, survival and death.

古文：自出师以来，进而不退，经有所未解者，故言于真定，于曹、濮，于唐、邓。
现代文：然自出师以来，进而不退，臣经很不理解。在真定，在曹、濮，在唐、邓，反复进言，均未蒙允准。
English: However, since he became a disciple, he has not retreated, and his vassals do not understand him. In Zhending, Cao, Yao, Tang and Deng, he repeatedly made suggestions, but they were not approved.

古文：亟言不已，未赐开允，乃今事急，故复进狂言。国家自平金以来，惟务进取，不遵养时晦，老师费财，卒无成功，三十年矣。
现代文：如今形势急迫，故再进狂言。国家自平金以来，只务进取，不蓄精养锐以待时机，以致用兵日久，费财巨大，且终无成效。
English: Now that the situation is urgent, it is time to re-enter the farce. Since Pingjin, the country has only been forging ahead, not waiting for the right time, so that the use of soldiers has been long, costly, and ultimately ineffective.

古文：蒙哥罕立，政当安静以图宁谧，忽无故大举，进而不退，畀王东师，则不当亦进也而遽进。
现代文：蒙哥罕即位后，本应休养生息，忽大举用兵，进而不退。付与殿下率领的东师也是不当再进而又进，认为是皇命不可违。
English: After Meng Guohan ascended the throne, he should have rested and recuperated, raised a large army, and advanced without retreating. The Eastern Division led by His Imperial Highness was also improperly advancing again and again, believing that the imperial order could not be violated.

古文：以为有命，不敢自逸，至于汝南，既闻凶讣，即当遣使，遍告诸帅，各以次退，修好于宋，归定大事，不当复进也而遽进。
现代文：大军至汝南，既闻皇上驾崩，理应立即遣使至各军统帅，相继退军，与宋议和，殿下回归京师，处理皇位继承大事，但仍旧进军，这是不当进而速进。
English: When it was learned that the emperor had died, a large army was sent to the south of the Ryukyus. It should have been immediately dispatched to the commanders of the various armies, withdrawn one after another, negotiated a peace with Song, returned to the capital, and dealt with the important matter of succession to the throne, but still marched in. This was improper and hasty.

古文：以有师期，会于江滨，遣使喻宋，息兵安民，振旅而归，不当复进也而又进。
现代文：大军会集于长江之滨以后，应遣使与宋议和，息兵安民，整顿队伍，准备北归，但仍进军，又是不当进而又进。
English: After the great army gathered on the banks of the Yangtze River, the envoy should be sent to discuss peace with Song, pacify the soldiers and the people, rectify the team, and prepare to return to the north, but still march into the army, but it is improper to enter and enter.

古文：既不宜渡淮，又岂宜渡江？
现代文：既不宜渡淮，又岂宜渡江？
English: It is not appropriate to cross the Huai River, but is it appropriate to cross the Tumen River?

古文：既不宜妄进，又岂宜攻城？
现代文：既不宜任便进军，又岂可攻城？
English: For is it not lawful for us to march forth at once, and take the city?

古文：若以机不可失，敌不可纵，亦既渡江，不能中止，便当乘虚取鄂，分兵四出，直造临安，疾雷不及掩耳，则宋亦可图。
现代文：如果认为机不可失，敌不可纵，那么既已渡江就不可中止，当乘虚取鄂州，然后分兵四出，直抵临安，使宋朝措手不及，灭掉宋国。
English: If you think that the opportunity cannot be lost and the enemy cannot be defeated, then once you have crossed the river, you should not stop. You should take advantage of the opportunity to take Ezhou, and then divide the troops into four and go straight to Lin'an, so that the Song Dynasty is caught off guard and the Song State is destroyed.

古文：如其不可，知难而退，不失为金兀术也。
现代文：如果达不到灭宋目的，则应知难而退。
English: If the goal of wiping out the Song Dynasty is not achieved, then it is necessary to retreat.

古文：师不当进而进，江不当渡而渡，城不当攻而攻，当速退而不退，当速进而不进，役成迁延，盘桓江渚，情见势屈，举天下兵力不能取一城，则我竭彼盈，又何俟乎？
现代文：大军不当进而进，江不当渡而渡，城不当攻而攻，当速退而不退，当速进而不进，徘徊于江边，耽误时日，暴露出我军的弱点。举天下兵力不能取一城，我军精疲力竭，敌军精神饱满，还有何期待？
English: A large army advances inappropriately, a river is crossed inappropriately, a city is attacked inappropriately, when retreating quickly, it does not retreat, when advancing quickly, it does not advance, it lingers on the edge of the river, delays time, and exposes the weaknesses of our army. The world's military strength cannot take a city, our army is exhausted, the enemy army is full of spirit, what else to expect?

古文：且诸军疾疫已十四五，又延引月日，冬春之交，疫必大作，恐欲还不能。
现代文：我军患病者十有四五，到冬春之交，瘟疫流行，那时恐怕想回师也不可能了。
English: Forty-five out of ten of our soldiers fell ill, and by the turn of the winter and spring, the plague was endemic. At that time, I'm afraid it would have been impossible to return to school.

古文：彼既上流无虞，吕文德已并兵拒守，知我国疵，斗气自倍。两淮之兵尽集白鹭，江西之兵尽集隆兴，岭广之兵尽集长沙，闽、越沿海巨舶大舰以次而至，伺隙而进。
现代文：宋朝上流既已无忧，吕文德集中兵拒守，他们知我国内政局不稳，斗志倍增，两淮之兵尽集于白鹭，江西之兵尽集于隆兴，岭广之兵尽集于长沙，闽、越沿海巨舶大舰相继而至，伺隙而进。
English: The upper reaches of the Song Dynasty were already secure. Lu Wende concentrated soldiers and refused to defend. They knew that the domestic political situation in China was unstable, and their fighting spirit increased. The soldiers of the two Huai were concentrated in Baiyun, the soldiers of Jiangxi were concentrated in Longxing, the soldiers of Lingguang were concentrated in Changsha, and the huge ships along the coast of Yunnan and Yue came one after another, waiting for a gap.

古文：如遏截于江、黄津渡，邀遮于大城关口，塞汉东之石门，限郢、复之湖泺，则我将安归？
现代文：如果堵住江、黄渡口，阻拦于大城关，扼守汉东之石门，封锁郢、复之湖泊航道，我军将如何北归？
English: How will our army return to the north if we block the Yangtze River and the Huangdu Port, block the Dasheng Pass, guard the Stone Gate of the Hantong, and block the navigation routes of the Yangtze River and the Fuxi Lake?

古文：无已则突入江、浙，捣其心腹。
现代文：不得已只有突入江、浙，捣其心腹。
English: He had no choice but to plunge into the Yangtze River and Zhejiang Province and strike at his heart's content.

古文：闻临安、海门已具龙舟，则已徒往；还抵金山，并命求出，岂无韩世忠之俦？
现代文：据闻，临安、海门已聚集战舰，是不能去的；如果还抵金山，拼命杀出归路，宋人中岂无韩世忠之辈？
English: It is said that Lin'an and Haimen have gathered warships and cannot go; if they still arrive at Jinshan and desperately fight their way back, will there be no Han Shizhong generation among the Song people?

古文：且鄂与汉阳分据大别，中挟巨浸，号为活城，肉薄骨并而拔之，则彼委破壁孤城而去，溯流而上，则入洞庭，保荆、襄，顺流而下，则精兵健橹突过浒、黄，未易遏也，则亦徒费人命，我安所得哉！区区一城，胜之不武，不胜则大损威望，复何俟乎！
现代文：鄂州与汉阳在大别山两头，中间有大河大湖，号为 活城 ，如果我军全力拔取，敌军必弃城逆流而上，入洞庭，保荆、襄，再顺流而下，突过浒、黄，我军亦难以截堵。为此鄂州区区一城，取之并不显示我军威力，不能取则大损我军威望。
English: Ezhou and Hanyang are located at the two ends of the Dabie Mountains, with a large river and a large lake in the middle, known as the "Living City." If our army pulls out with all its might, the enemy army will abandon the city and go upstream, enter Dongting, Baojing, Xiang, and then go downstream, and break through Fen and Huang. Our army is also difficult to block. For this reason, the capture of a city in Ezhou District does not show the power of our army, and if it cannot be taken, it will greatly damage the prestige of our army.

古文：虽然，以王本心，不欲渡江，既渡江，不欲攻城，既攻城，不欲并命，不焚庐舍，不伤人民，不易其衣冠，不毁其坟墓，三百里外不使侵掠。
现代文：殿下本不愿渡江，既渡江也不欲攻城，既攻城也不焚烧房屋，不伤百姓，不强迫汉人改换蒙古衣冠，不破坏汉人坟墓，禁止百城外侵掠民财。
English: His Imperial Highness originally did not want to cross the river, but after crossing the river, he did not want to attack the city, and after attacking the city, he did not burn houses, did not hurt the people, did not force the Han people to change their Mongolian clothes, did not destroy the graves of the Han people, and prohibited the plundering of people's wealth outside the city.

古文：或劝径趋临安，曰其民人稠夥，若往，虽不杀戮，亦被践蹂，吾所不忍。
现代文：虽有人劝殿下直趋临安，殿下认为： 临安人口稠密，若至临安，虽不杀人，人民也受践踏，于心不忍。
English: Although some people advised His Imperial Highness to go straight to Lin'an, His Imperial Highness thought: Lin'an is densely populated. If you go to Lin'an, even if you don't kill anyone, the people will be trampled on and you won't be able to bear it.

古文：岿然一仁，上通于天，久有归志，不能遂行耳。
现代文：若天与我，不必杀人；若天不与，杀人何益！ 终于不趋兵临安，仁慈之心上通于天。殿下本久有北归之意，只是因故不能成行。
English: If heaven is with me, there is no need to kill; if heaven is not with me, there is no benefit in killing! Finally, I do not seek peace, and my heart of mercy is connected to heaven. Your highness has long wanted to return to the north, but for some reason cannot do so.

古文：然今事急，不可不断也。
现代文：然为今事急，不可不做决断。
English: Of course, this is an urgent matter, and a decision must be made.

古文：宋人方惧大敌，自救之师虽则毕集，未暇谋我。
现代文：现在，宋朝正惧我大军压境，集师自救，还无暇向我进攻。
English: Now, the Song Dynasty is afraid of our great army pressing the border, and is gathering teachers to save itself. It has no time to attack me.

古文：第吾国内空虚，塔察国王与李行省肱髀相依，在于背胁；西域诸胡窥觇关陇，隔绝旭烈大王；病民诸奸各持两端，观望所立，莫不觊觎神器，染指垂涎。
现代文：而我国内空虚，塔察国王与李行省相互勾结，威胁后方；西域诸胡窥伺关陇，旭烈大王正远征在西方，与中国本土隔绝；企图夺取皇位者，大有人在。
English: But our country is empty, King Tacha and Li Xing Province are colluding with each other, threatening the rear; the Western Regions are watching the pass, and King Hu Lai is on an expedition in the West, isolated from mainland China; there are many people who are trying to seize the throne.

古文：一有狡焉，或启戎心，先人举事，腹背受敌，大事去矣。
现代文：狡诈之人说不定会兴兵作乱，使我腹背受敌，那时大事去矣。
English: A cunning person may start a riot and make me suffer at the hands of the enemy, and then it's all over.

古文：昨奉命与张仲一观新月城，自西南隅抵东北隅，万人敌，上可并行大车，排槎丳楼，缔构重覆，必不可攻，只有许和而归耳。断然班师，亟定大计，销祸于未然。
现代文：而且阿里不哥已据燕都，发布敕令，命脱里赤为断事官及行尚书省，号令诸道，已行皇帝之事。大王虽素有重望，且握重兵，但若阿里不哥声称受先帝遗诏，登基正位，下诏中原，行赦江北，那时大王欲归京师而不可能了。昨奉命与张仲一察看新月楼，见西南角到东北角，敌屯军万人防御坚固，必不可攻，只有许和息兵。殿下断然班师回朝，速定皇位大计，销祸于未然。
English: Moreover, according to Yan Du, Ali Bongo has issued the imperial edict, ordered Li Bongo to be the adjudicator and to carry out the promotion of the book ministry, and ordered all roads, and has carried out the emperor's affairs. Although the great king has high hopes and holds heavy troops, if Ali Bongo claims to have received the last emperor's will, ascended to the throne, issued the Central Plains, and forgave the north of the river, then the great king wants to return to Beijing and it is impossible. Yesterday, I was ordered to inspect the crescent tower with Zhang Zhong, see the southwest corner to the northeast corner, the enemy army of ten thousand people

古文：先命劲兵把截江面，与宋议和，许割淮南、汉上、梓夔两路，定疆界岁币。
现代文：可先命劲兵把截江面，与宋议和，允许他们割淮南、汉上及梓、夔两路，划定疆界，规定每年贡纳钱币。
English: He could first order his soldiers to cut the river and negotiate with Song, allowing them to cut off Huainan, Hanzhong, Zi and Qin, delineate the border, and stipulate the annual tribute.

古文：置辎重，以轻骑归，渡淮乘驿，直造燕都，则从天而下，彼之奸谋僣志，冰释瓦解。
现代文：然后留下辎重，轻骑渡淮，直抵燕都，如从天而降，一切奸谋冰释瓦解。
English: Then, leaving behind the weight of the yakitori, he rode lightly across the river and straight to Yandu, as if falling from the sky, and all the evil plots were dissolved.

古文：遣一军逆蒙哥罕灵舆，收皇帝玺。遣使召旭烈、阿里不哥、摩哥及诸王驸马，会丧和林。
现代文：遣一军从四川迎回蒙哥皇帝灵柩，接收皇帝宝玺，遣使召旭烈、阿里不哥、摩哥及诸王驸马，会集于和林，为大行皇帝治丧。
English: An army was sent from Sichuan to welcome back the coffin of Emperor Mengguo, to receive the coffin of Emperor Bao Rong, and to send envoys to summon Hu Rong, Alibengo, Mogo, and all the kings and queens to gather in Huanlin to mourn for the deceased emperor.

古文：差官于汴京、京兆、成都、西凉、东平、西京、北京，抚慰安辑，召真金太子镇燕都，示以形势。
现代文：差官至汴京、京兆、成都、西凉、东平、西京、北京各地，抚慰军民。召真金太子镇守燕都，并使他明了当前形势。
English: Officers went to Beijing, Beijing-Shanghai, Chengdu, Xiliang, Dongping, Xijing, and Beijing to comfort the soldiers and civilians. They summoned Prince Jin Zhen to guard Yandu, and made him understand the current situation.

古文：则大宝有归，而社稷安矣。
现代文：这样则皇位继承有人，国家安稳无忧。
English: In this way, there will be someone to succeed to the throne, and the country will be safe and secure.

古文：会宋守帅贾似道亦遣间使请和，乃班师。
现代文：这时，恰逢宋朝守帅贾似道亦遣使求和，世祖应允，乃班师北归。
English: At this time, it coincided with the Song Dynasty governor Shuai Jiaxindo also sent an envoy to sue for peace, the ancestor agreed, and Nao Banshi returned to the north.

古文：明年，世祖既位，以经为翰林侍读学士，佩金虎符，充国信使使宋，告即位，且定和议，仍敕沿边诸将毋钞掠。
现代文：第二年世祖即位，以郝经为翰林侍读学士，佩金虎符，任国信使至宋宣告世祖承继皇位，商定和议，令沿边诸将不得抢掠。
English: In the second year, the ancestor ascended the throne, with the sutra as the Hanlin attendant bachelor, the gold and silver tiger emblem, and the country's messenger to the Song Dynasty to announce the ancestor's succession to the throne, to negotiate a peace, and to order the border generals not to loot.

古文：经奏便宜十六事，皆立政大要，辞多不载。时经有重名，平章王文统忌之。
现代文：郝经南行前入辞世祖，并上奏议十六事，皆政务大要。郝经名声很大，遭平章王文统的妒忌。
English: He was the ancestor of the lineage who entered the priesthood before traveling to the south, and he reported and discussed 16 matters, all of which were important to government affairs. He had a great reputation and was envied by King Pingzhang.

古文：既行，文统阴属李璮潜师侵宋，欲假手害经。
现代文：王文统在郝经南行起程之后，暗中嘱咐李调兵攻宋，企图借宋人之手杀害郝经。
English: Wang Wentong secretly ordered Li to send troops to attack Song, and tried to use Song people to kill Gong Jing after Gong Jing started his journey south.

古文：经至济南，璮以书止经，经以璮书闻于朝而行。
现代文：郝经行至济南，李写信给郝经阻止他南行，郝经把李的信送呈朝廷，自己继续南下。
English: When Gongjing went to Jinan, Li wrote to Gongjing to stop him from going south. Gongjing presented Li's letter to the imperial court and continued to go south.

古文：宋败璮军于淮安，经至宿州，遣副使刘仁杰、参议高翿请入国日期，不报。
现代文：宋军败李军于淮安。郝经至宿州，遣副使刘仁杰、参议高寿羽去向宋朝商定入国日期，宋守将不上报其朝廷。
English: Song's army defeated Li's army in Huai'an. Zou Jing went to Suzhou and sent vice-envoy Liu Renjie and councillor Gao Shouyu to the Song Dynasty to agree on the date of entry into the country. Song Shou would not report to his imperial court.

古文：遗书宰相及淮帅李庭芝，庭芝复书果疑经，而贾似道方以却敌为功，恐经至谋泄，竟馆经真州。
现代文：经又致书宋宰相及淮帅李庭芝。李庭芝在回信中怀疑郝经南来的意图。贾似道正以抗敌有功自负，怕郝经到来后会揭穿他弄虚作假的阴谋，把郝经留住于真州。
English: He also wrote to Song chancellor and Huai general Li Tingzhi. In his reply, Li Tingzhi was suspicious of Jia's intention to come south. Jia was puffed up with the pride of having fought against the enemy. He was afraid that after Jia's arrival, Jia would expose his plot to deceive and keep Jia in Zhenzhou.

古文：又数上书宋主及宰执，极陈战和利害，且请入见及归国，皆不报。
现代文：郝经上表宋朝皇帝，申述他来议和的诚意，又多次写信给宋朝皇帝及宰相，极力陈述战和的利害，并请求入见宋朝皇帝和归国。这些都未上报宋朝皇帝。
English: He wrote to the Emperor of the Song Dynasty, expressing his sincerity to negotiate peace, and wrote to the Emperor and the Prime Minister of the Song Dynasty many times, stating the interests of war and peace, and requesting to see the Emperor of the Song Dynasty and return to the country. These were not reported to the Emperor of the Song Dynasty.

古文：驿吏棘垣钥户，昼夜守逻，欲以动经，经不屈。经待下素严，又久羁困，下多怨者。经谕曰： 向受命不进，我之罪也。
现代文：郝经所住的驿馆，被宋军严密把守，日夜巡逻，企图以此来动摇郝经南下到临安议和的决心。郝经不屈，对随从人员说： 如果我受命不南下，那是我的罪过。
English: The pavilion where Gong Jing lived was closely guarded by the Song army, patrolled day and night, in an attempt to shake Gong Jing's determination to go south to Lin'an to discuss peace. Gong Jing was unyielding and said to his entourage: If I am ordered not to go south, it is my fault.

古文：一入宋境，死生进退，听其在彼，我终不能屈身辱命。
现代文：我们一入宋境，死生进退，听宋朝处置，我决不屈服。
English: As soon as we enter the Song Dynasty, we will advance and retreat, and I will never give in to the Song Dynasty.

古文：汝等不幸，宜忍以待之，我观宋祚将不久矣。 
现代文：你们不幸也遭监禁，应耐心等待，我看宋朝的寿命不久了。 
English: Unfortunately, you have also been imprisoned. You should be patient and wait. I think the Song Dynasty's lifespan is short.

古文：居七年，从者怒斗，死者数人，经独与六人处别馆。又九年，丞相伯颜奉诏南伐，帝遣礼部尚书中都海牙及经弟行枢密院都事郝庸入宋，问执行人之罪，宋惧，遣总管段佑以礼送经归。
现代文：郝经在真州被软禁了十六年，至元十一年，丞相伯颜奉诏南伐，世祖遣礼部尚书中都海牙及郝经之弟行枢密院都事郝庸入宋，问宋朝关押元朝使臣之罪。宋朝廷害怕了，遣总管段佑送郝经归元。
English: Zou Jing was under house arrest in Zhenzhou for sixteen years. In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Minister of the Joseon Dynasty, Bao Yan, issued an edict to invade the south, and the Grandfather of Ceremonies, Shang Shu, sent the capital, The Hague, and Zou Jing's younger brother, Xing Zhiyong, to the Song Dynasty, to ask the Song Dynasty about the crime of imprisoning the envoys of the Yuan Dynasty. The Song Dynasty was afraid, and the head of the envoy department sent Zou Jing back to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：贾似道之谋既泄，寻亦窜死。
现代文：贾似道欺君误国的阴谋也被揭破，流放而死。
English: Jia Liangdao's plot to defraud the king and mislead the country was also uncovered, and he was exiled and died.

古文：经归，道病，帝敕枢密院及尚医近侍迎劳，所过父老瞻望流涕。
现代文：第二年夏，郝经回到朝廷，世祖赐宴，并咨询政务。七月病卒，年五十三岁，谥 文忠 。
English: In the summer of the following year, Zou Jing returned to the imperial court, where the patriarch gave a banquet and consulted on government affairs. Zou Wenzhong died of illness in July at the age of 53.

古文：明年夏，至阙，锡燕大庭，咨以政事，赏赉有差。
现代文：郝经在真州被软禁期间，曾做诗曰： 霜落风高恣所如，归期回首是春初，上林天子援弓缴，穷海累臣有帛书。 
English: During the period of house arrest in Zhenzhou, Zou Jing once wrote a poem: Frost falls, the wind is high everywhere, the time to return is early spring, the heavenly son comes to the forest to help the bow, and the poor sea has a bad book.

古文：秋七月，卒，年五十三，官为护丧还葬，谥文忠。
现代文：其忠诚如此。郝经为人注重气节，学问讲求实用。
English: This is how loyal he is. He is a person who pays attention to temperament, and his learning is practical.

古文：明年，宋平。
现代文：在被拘留十六年中，著书立说以垂后世，撰有《续后汉书》、《易春秋外传》、《太极演》、《原古录》、《通鉴书法》、《玉衡贞观》等书及文集，凡数百卷。
English: During the 16 years he was detained, he wrote books and essays to pass on to future generations, including "Continuation of the Later Han Dynasty," "Biography of Yi Chunqiu," "Taiji Performance," "Original Ancient Records," "Comprehensive Study of Calligraphy," "Tam Heng Zhen Gu" and other books and anthologies, totaling hundreds of volumes.

古文：诗多奇崛。
现代文：随从亦受学不浅。
English: His attendants were also well-educated.

