古文：乾为天、为圜、为君、为父、为玉、为金、为寒、为冰、为大赤、为良马、为瘠马、为驳马、为木果。
现代文：乾为天，这个天一是有形的天体运行，古人观察天地变化认为，在天成象，则在地成形。主动在天，随动在地。
English: The sky is the sky, and this sky is the movement of tangible celestial bodies. The ancients observed the changes in the heavens and the earth and believed that when the heavens formed, they formed on the ground. Active in the sky, moving on the ground.

古文：坎为水、为沟渎、为隐伏、为矫輮、为弓轮。其於人也，为加忧、为心病、为耳痛、为血卦、为赤。
现代文：为亟心，为任务重，内心困急。为下首，为低头沉吟，引重前行之马。为薄蹄，为长时间走路，蹄子磨薄的马。为曳，为拉扯劳作的马，周易：劳乎坎。其於舆也为眚。舆，车子。眚，毛病。在载重致远的车子来说，是屡遭风雨的破车。
English: For the anxious, for the task-heavy, for the anxious at heart. For the head-down, for the head-down, for the forward-moving horse. For the thin-hoofed, for the long-walking, the hoof-wearing horse. For the towing, for the pulling horse, Zhou Yi: laborious. It is also a bump in the road. A bump in the road. A bump in the road. A bump in the road. A bump in the road. For the car that carries a heavy load, it is a broken car that has been battered by wind and rain.

古文：其於马也，为美脊、为亟心、为下首、为薄蹄、为曳。
现代文：比喻饱经风霜的老人有智慧，老马识途。为通：为忧患多思，为人情练达，为智慧通达。为月、为盗。
English: The metaphor of the weather-beaten old man has wisdom, the old horse knows the way. For the pass: for the sorrowful, thoughtful, for the humane, for the wise. For the moon, for the thief.

古文：其於舆也，为多眚。
现代文：为月亮，烦恼消除，光明清凉。
English: For the moon, the troubles are eliminated, the light is cool.

古文：为通、为月、为盗。
现代文：为强盗，坎有隐忧，故强盗相机为乱。
English: As a robber, Kan has hidden worries, so the robber's camera is chaotic.

古文：其於木也，为坚多心。
现代文：其於木也，为坚多心。
English: He is also a woodworker and has many interests.

古文：离为火、为日、为电、为中女、为甲胄、为戈兵。其於人也，为大腹，为乾卦。
现代文：所以离为铠甲和头盔。为刀兵武器防护人体。为外面有壳的动物，如甲鱼螃蟹蚌壳乌龟等。其于人也，为大腹。
English: Therefore, it is armor and helmets. It is swords and weapons to protect the human body. It is animals with shells on the outside, such as turtles, crabs, tortoises, etc. In humans, it is the big belly.

古文：为鳖、为蟹、为蠃、为蚌、为龟。
现代文：在人这方面来说，是大心充实，有人性光明。腹，心也。为干卦。离为日，为热为干燥的现象。
English: In terms of people, it is the phenomenon that the big heart is full and the human nature is bright, the belly and the heart are also dry, the separation is a day, and the heat is dry.

古文：其於木也，为科上槁。
现代文：为指：为手指为指引方向。
English: Fingers: Use your fingers to guide the direction.

古文：艮为山、为径路、为小石、为门阙、为果苽、为阍寺、为指、为狗、为鼠、为黔喙之属。
现代文：为狗，狗看门，止陌生人入。为鼠，鼠小心谨慎，见危则止。为黔喙之属。黔，默也。喙，嘴也。虎豹默待物以嘴。万物见虎豹之类而止，明知山有虎，不向虎山行。
English: For dogs, dogs watch the door and stop strangers from entering. For mice, mice are cautious and stop when they see danger. For baboons, baboons are silent. Baboons are also silent. Baboons are also silent. Tigers and leopards wait for things with their mouths. All things see tigers and leopards and stop, knowing that there are tigers in the mountains and not going to the tiger mountains.

古文：其於木也，为坚多节。
现代文：其於木也，为坚多节。
English: It is also more solid than wood.

古文：兑为泽、为少女、为巫、为口舌、为毁折、为附决。
现代文：兑为口，为有漏的烦恼。
English: For the mouth, for the leaking troubles.

古文：其於地也，刚卤。
现代文：其於地也，刚卤。
English: It is also hard and brittle on the ground.

古文：为妾、为羊。
现代文：为妾、为羊。
English: A concubine, a sheep.

