古文：程寀任熊祥孔璠范拱张用直刘枢王翛杨伯雄萧贡温迪罕缔达张翰任天宠程寀，字公弼，燕之析津人。
现代文：程寀，字公弼，燕郡析津人。
English: Cheng Hao, Zhaogong Hao, a resident of Yan County.

古文：祖冀，仕辽广德军节度使。
现代文：祖父程冀，任辽的广德军节度使。
English: His grandfather, Cheng Jie, served as Liao's envoy to the Guangxi-German military festival.

古文：冀凡六男，父子皆擢科第，士族号其家为 程一举 。
现代文：程冀有六个儿子，父子都从科第出身任职，士族们称他家为 程一举 。
English: Cheng Jie has six sons. Both father and son were born and worked in Cody, and his family is called Cheng Yimou by the local people.

古文：冀次子四穆，辽崇义军节度使。
现代文：程冀的第二个儿子程四穆，是辽国的崇义军节度使。
English: Cheng Ji's second son, Cheng Si Mu, was a military attaché to the Liao Dynasty's Chongyi Army.

古文：寀，四穆之季子也。
现代文：程寀是四穆的小儿子。
English: Cheng Hao is the youngest son of Si Mu.

古文：自幼如成人。
现代文：他从小就像成年人一样。
English: He's been acting like an adult since he was a kid.

古文：及冠，笃学，中进士甲科，累迁殿中丞。
现代文：二十岁时，好学，中进士甲科，累迁至殿中丞。
English: At the age of twenty, he was eager to learn, entered Junior High School, and was promoted to Junior High School.

古文：天辅七年，太祖入燕，授尚书都官员外郎、锦州安昌令，累加起居郎，为史馆修撰，以从军有劳，加少府少监。
现代文：天辅七年，太祖入燕，被任命为尚书都官员外郎、锦州安昌县令，累加至起居郎，任史馆修撰，因为随军有功劳，加封少府少监。
English: In the seventh year of Tianshu, when the great-grandfather entered Yan, he was appointed as the official of Shangshu, the official of Anchang County of Jinzhou, and the resident of Kijiro. He was appointed as the editor of the history museum, and because of his merits in the army, he was appointed as the minor prefectural inspector.

古文：熙宗时，历翰林待制，兼右谏议大夫。
现代文：金熙宗时，程寀历任翰林待制，兼右谏议大夫。
English: During the reign of Kim Hee-jong, Choe Hyun-soo served as the director of the Hanlin Academy, and also as the doctor of the Right Division of the Academy.

古文：寀上疏言事，其略曰： 殿前点检司，古殿岩环卫之任，所以肃禁御，尊天子、备不虞也。
现代文：他上疏朝廷奏事，其大略说： 殿前点检司，自古承担殿堂环卫之责，用以使宫禁肃然，天子尊严，防备不测之事。
English: He wrote a report to the imperial court, which roughly said: "The front-of-the-hall inspector has been responsible for the protection of the hall since ancient times, and uses it to make the palace solemn, dignified, and prepared for unforeseen events.

古文：臣幸得近清光，从天子观时畋之礼。
现代文：臣下有幸得以接近皇上，跟从天子观阅田猎之礼。
English: The vassals were fortunate to be able to get close to the emperor and follow him to watch the hunting ceremony.

古文：比见陛下校猎，凡羽卫从臣，无贵贱皆得执弓矢驰逐，而圣驾崎岖沙砾之地，加之林木丛郁，易以迷失。
现代文：我近见陛下打猎时，所有羽卫之士和侍从之臣不分贵贱都能够手执弓矢驰马追逐，而圣驾驰骋于崎岖不平的沙砾之地，加之林木丛中，容易迷失。
English: When I saw His Majesty hunting up close, all the guards and attendants, both high and low, were able to hold a bow and arrow and chase the horse, while the saint galloped in the rugged sand and gravel, and in the woods, easily getting lost.

古文：是日自卯及申，百官始出沙漠，独不知车驾何在。
现代文：当天从卯时直至申时，百官才走出沙漠，唯独不知皇上车驾在什么地方。
English: On the same day, from dusk until dusk, hundreds of officials came out of the desert, but they did not know where the imperial car was.

古文：瞻望久之，始有骑来报，皇帝从数骑已至行在。
现代文：等候了许久，才有骑士来报，说皇帝已带几骑人马到了行宫。
English: After waiting for a long time, a knight came to report that the emperor had arrived at the imperial palace with several horsemen.

古文：窃惟古天子出入警跸，清道而行。
现代文：我私下认为，古代的天子出入警跸，清道以后才出行。
English: Privately, I believe that in ancient times, heavenly beings entered and left through the gate, and only left after the road was cleared.

古文：至于楚畋云梦，汉猎长杨，皆大陈兵卫，以备非常。
现代文：至于楚田猎于云梦，汉校猎于长杨，都大举陈列兵士护卫，以防备非常之事发生。
English: As for Chu Tian hunting in Yun Meng and Han Xue hunting in Chang Yang, they both displayed a large number of soldiers as guards to prevent anything unusual from happening.

古文：陛下膺祖宗付托之重，奈何独与数骑出入林麓沙漠之中，前无斥候，后无羽卫，甚非肃禁御之意也。
现代文：陛下身膺祖宗的重托，怎么能够和数骑人马独自进出于林间沙漠之中，前无斥候，后无羽林侍卫，实在不能体现出宫禁中那种庄严肃穆的气氛来。
English: How could His Majesty, with the weight of his ancestors on his shoulders, enter and leave the forest-desert alone with a few horsemen, with no scouts in front of him and no guards behind him, really not reflect the solemn atmosphere of the Imperial Palace.

古文：臣愿陛下熟计之。
现代文：微臣愿陛下深思熟虑。
English: We hope that Your Majesty will give this matter serious consideration.

古文：后若复猎，当预戒有司，图上猎地，具其可否，然后下令清道而行。
现代文：以后如再举行校猎，应当事先告诫有关人员，画好围猎场的地图，详细研究是否可行，然后下令清道再出行。
English: In the future, if school hunting is held again, the relevant personnel should be warned in advance, draw a map of the hunting ground, study in detail whether it is feasible, and then order the road to be cleared before traveling.

古文：择冲要稍平之地，为驻跸之所，简忠义爪牙之士，统以亲信腹心之臣，警卫左右。俟其麋鹿既来，然后驰射。
现代文：选择交通要道旁的比较平坦的地方，作为皇帝休息的处所，挑选忠义的心腹卫士，由亲信心腹近臣加以统率，在周围加以警卫，等候麋鹿到来之后，再骑上马追射。
English: Choose a relatively flat place next to a major traffic route as the emperor's resting place, select a loyal bodyguard, lead it by a close confidant, guard it around, wait for the elk to arrive, and then ride on a horse to chase it.

古文：仍先遣搜阅林薮，明立标帜，为出入之驰道。
现代文：还需事先派遣人员，搜索丛中林木，并清楚地设立标志，作为进出行走的道路。
English: It is also necessary to send people in advance to search for trees in the thicket and clearly set up signs as a path for walking in and out.

古文：不然，后恐贻宗朝社稷之忧。 
现代文：不然，只怕会留下让宗庙社稷忧虑之事。 
English: Otherwise, I'm afraid it will leave the family temple society with a lot of worries.

古文：又曰： 臣伏读唐史，追尊高祖以下，谥号或加至十八字。
现代文：他又说 ：臣下读《唐史》时，见追尊高祖以下的皇帝谥号，有的多至十八个字。
English: He also said, "When our subjects read "Tang History," they will see the imperial family names of emperors from Emperor Gaozu on down, some of which are as long as eighteen characters.

古文：前宋大中祥符间亦加至十六字，亡辽因之，近陛下亦受 崇天体道钦明文武圣德 十字。
现代文：前宋朝大中祥符年间谥号也多达十六个字，已灭亡的辽国也依照此例，近来陛下也接受了 崇天体道钦明文武圣德 十个字。
English: During the middle of the Song Dynasty and the middle of the Xiangfu Dynasty, the imperial seal also had as many as sixteen characters, and the Liao Dynasty, which had already perished, also followed this example. Recently, His Majesty also accepted the ten characters of "Chongzheng Daoqin Mingwenwu Shengde."

古文：臣窃谓人臣以归美报上为忠，天子以追崇祖考为孝。
现代文：臣私下认为，人臣以归美报上为忠，天子以追崇祖宗为孝。
English: Privately, the vassal believed that the vassal was loyal to returning to the United States, and the son of heaven was filial to pursuing the ancestor.

古文：太祖武元皇帝受命开基，八年之间，奄有天下，功德茂盛，振古无前，止谥 武元 二字，理或未安，何以示将来？
现代文：太祖武元皇帝接受天命开启帝基，八年之间，包有天下，功德茂盛，史无前例，却只谥为 武元 二字，理实未妥，怎么能昭示于未来？
English: The great-great-grandfather Emperor Wuyuan accepted the mandate of heaven to open the imperial foundation. In eight years, he covered the whole world, his merits were abundant, and there was no precedent in history. However, he only used the word "Wuyuan." The truth was not right. How could he show it to the future?

古文：臣愿诏有司定议谥号，庶几上慰祖宗在天之灵，使耿光丕烈，传于无穷。 
现代文：臣愿陛下诏令有关方面定议谥号，也许能够上慰祖宗在天之灵，使之光芒万丈，传至无穷。 
English: It is the wish of His Majesty's subjects to issue a decree to the relevant parties to make a final decision, which may be able to comfort the ancestors in the spirit of heaven and make them shine brightly and spread to infinity.

古文：又曰： 古者天子皆有巡狩，无非事者。
现代文：又说 ：自古以来天子都有巡狩四方的惯例，无不因事而行。
English: He also said, "Since ancient times, it has been the custom for the sons of heaven to patrol the four directions, and they do so without fail.

古文：或省察风俗，或审理冤狱，或问民疾苦，以布宣德泽，皆巡狩之名也。
现代文：或者视察民间风俗，或者审理各种冤狱，或访问民众疾苦，以布施恩德，这都是巡狩的含义。
English: Or inspecting folk customs, or hearing all kinds of unjust imprisonment, or visiting the people's sufferings, with charity, this is the meaning of the patrol.

古文：国家肇兴，诚恐郡国新民，逐末弃本，习旧染之污，奢侈诈伪，或有不明之狱，僣滥之刑，或力役无时，四民失业。
现代文：国家初兴，唯恐郡国新附民众，弃本逐末，仍依照旧时陋习，奢侈奸诈作伪，或者有审理不清的冤狱，官吏滥施刑罚，或者劳役无穷无尽，使四民各失其业。
English: In the early days of the country's development, the newly-enfranchised people of the county and the country were afraid of abandoning everything one by one and still following the old bad habits of extravagance, fraud and forgery, or unjust imprisonment with unclear trials, officials meting out punishment indiscriminately, or endless labor service, so that each of the four people lost their jobs.

古文：今銮辂省方，将宪古行事，臣愿天心洞照，委之长贰，厘正风俗，或置匦匣，以申冤枉，或遣使郡国，问民无告，皆古巡狩之事。
现代文：如今圣驾省察四方，将依照古代惯例行事，臣下愿天心洞照一切，委派大小官员，端正民风民俗，或者设立匣箱，以听人投诉申冤，或派遣使者巡视郡国，访问民情听理上告，这都是古代巡狩应办之事。
English: Now, the sacred driver will inspect the four directions and will act in accordance with the ancient practice. The vassals hope that Tenshin-dong will take care of everything, appoint officials of all ranks to rectify the folk customs, or set up a box to listen to people's complaints and redress grievances, or send emissaries to inspect the county and country, visit the people's feelings and listen to reasoned appeals. These are all things that the ancient patrol should do.

古文：昔汉昭帝问疾苦，光武求民瘼，如此则和气通，天下丕平可坐而待也。 
现代文：以前汉昭帝慰问民众疾苦，光武帝访求民众灾难，这样就民和气顺，天下太平可坐而待之了。 
English: In the past, Emperor Han Zhao used to offer condolences to the people for their sufferings, and Emperor Guangwu used to visit the people to ask for their misfortunes. In this way, the people were at peace, and the world was at peace.

古文：又曰： 臣闻，善医者不视他人之肥瘠，察其脉之病否而已；善计天下者不视天下之安危，察其纪纲理否而已。
现代文：又说： 臣听说，高明的医生不是观察人长的胖瘦，而是诊察他的脉络是否有病而已。善于观察天下形势的人不是光看天下是否安宁，而是看法令制度是否理顺而已。
English: He also said: I have heard that a skilled doctor does not look at a person's height and weight, but only examines his bloodline for diseases. A person who is good at observing the situation in the world does not just look at whether the world is peaceful, but whether the system is rational.

古文：天下者人也，安危者肥瘠也，纪纲者脉也，脉不病虽瘠不害，脉病而肥者危矣。
现代文：天下也就如同一个人，安危也就像人的胖瘦，法令制度就如同人的血脉，血脉没有毛病即使长得瘦也不要紧，血脉有病即使长得肥胖也是危险的。
English: The world is also like a person, safety is also like a person's fat and thin, the legal system is like a person's blood, the blood has no problem even if it grows thin, it does not matter, the blood has a disease even if it grows fat, it is dangerous.

古文：是故，四肢虽无故，不足恃也，脉而已矣。
现代文：所以，人的四肢虽然齐全无病，也不足以此而有恃无恐，关键在于血脉。
English: Therefore, although the human limbs are complete and disease-free, it is not enough to be fearless, the key lies in the blood.

古文：天下虽无事，不足矜也，纲纪而已矣。
现代文：天下虽然安宁，也不足以夸耀，关键还在于法制如何。
English: Although the world is peaceful, it is not enough to boast about it. The key lies in how the legal system is.

古文：尚书省，天子喉舌之官，纲纪在焉。
现代文：尚书省，是天子的喉舌之官，制定法制的机构。
English: The Ministry of Education is the mouthpiece of the Son of Heaven and the body that formulates the legal system.

古文：臣愿诏尚书省，戒励百官，各扬其职，以立纲纪。
现代文：臣下愿皇上诏令尚书省官员，严令和督责百官，各尽其职，以立国家法度。
English: It is the wish of the subjects that the Emperor should issue an edict to the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and issue strict orders and supervise the officials, so that each of them will do his duty to establish the national legal system.

古文：如吏部天官以进贤退不肖为任，诚使升黜有科，任得其人，则纲纪理而民受其赐，前代兴替，未始不由此者。 
现代文：如果吏部天官以举荐贤能，黜退不肖之徒为己任，就能使升降有章可循，选任合适官员，则法度立而民受其利，前代的兴亡，没有不是因此造成的。 
English: If the cadres and officials take it as their duty to recommend those who are capable and reject those who are not, they will be able to make the promotion and demotion have rules to follow and appoint suitable officials, then the law will be established and the people will benefit from it. The rise and fall of the previous generation was not caused by this.

古文：又曰： 虞舜不告而娶二妃。
现代文：又说 ：舜帝没有告知父母而娶了娥皇女英二妃。
English: He also said: "Emperor Zou married Empress E, the second wife, without telling his parents.

古文：帝喾娶四妃，法天之四星。
现代文：帝喾娶了四个王妃，以配合天上的四星。
English: The emperor married four princesses to match the four stars in the sky.

古文：周文王一后、三夫人，嫔御有数。
现代文：周文王有一位王后、三位夫人，嫔妃若干人。
English: King Zhouwen had a queen, three wives, and several concubines.

古文：选求淑媛以充后宫，帝王之制也。
现代文：所以选求淑女以充实后宫，是帝王的制度。
English: Therefore, it is the emperor's system to choose a lady to enrich the harem.

古文：然女无美恶，入宫见妒，陛下欲广嗣续，不可不知而告戒之。 
现代文：但是女子无论美丑，入宫以后容易产生嫉妒之心，陛下如果想要多子女，不能不知道这种情形并事先加以告诫。 
English: However, no matter how beautiful or ugly a woman is, she is prone to jealousy after entering the palace. If His Majesty wants to have more children, he must be aware of this situation and be warned in advance.

古文：又曰： 臣伏见本朝富有四海，礼乐制度，莫不一新。
现代文：又说 ：臣下见本朝富有四海之地，礼乐制度，无不粲然一新。
English: He also said, "Our vassals see that our country is rich in the four seas, and the ceremonial music system is completely new.

古文：宫禁之制，尚未严密，胥吏健卒之辈，皆得出入，莫有呵止，至淆混而无别。
现代文：但宫禁中的制度，尚未严密。普通吏人兵士之流，都能任意出入其中，没有人加以检查，以至于好坏混杂而无区别。
English: However, the system of confinement in the palace was not yet strict. Ordinary officials and soldiers could enter and leave it at will, and no one checked them, so that there was no distinction between good and bad.

古文：虽有阑入之法，久尚未行，甚非严禁卫、明法令之意，陛下不可不知而必行。 
现代文：虽然制定一些禁令，但久未执行，实在不符合严格禁卫、申明法令的本意，这种情况，陛下不能不知道，一定要严加执行。 
English: Although some prohibitions have been formulated, they have not been implemented for a long time, which is really inconsistent with the intention of strictly prohibiting and affirming laws and regulations. This situation, His Majesty must know, must be strictly implemented.

古文：疏奏，上嘉纳之，于是始命有司议增上太祖尊谥。
现代文：他奏疏送上以后，皇帝十分赞赏并加以采纳，于是命令有关部门商议增上太祖谥号的事情。
English: After he was sent up, the emperor was very appreciative and accepted it, so he ordered the relevant departments to discuss the matter of adding Taizu's posthumous name.

古文：皇统八年十二月，由翰林侍讲学士为横海军节度使，移彰德军节度使。
现代文：皇统八年十二月，程寀由翰林侍讲学士改任横海军节度使，又转为彰德军节度使。
English: In December of the eighth year of imperial reunification, Cheng Yao was transferred from the Hanlin Attendant Lecturer to the Vice-Admiral of the Navy, and then to the Vice-Admiral of the German Army.

古文：卒官，年六十二。
现代文：死于任上，当年六十二岁。
English: He died in office at the age of 62.

古文：寀刚直耿介，不谄奉权贵以希苟进，有古君子之风云。
现代文：程寀为人刚直耿介，不阿谀奉承权贵以希图进取，有古代君子的风度。
English: Cheng Yu is a straightforward person. He does not flatter the powerful with the hope of making progress. He has the demeanor of an ancient gentleman.

古文：任熊祥，字子仁。
现代文：任熊祥，字子仁。
English: Ren Xiongxiang, A-Zi Ren.

古文：八代祖圜，为后唐宰相。
现代文：他八代祖任圜，是后唐的宰相。
English: His eighth-generation ancestor, Ren Qi, was the prime minister of the later Tang Dynasty.

古文：圜孙睿，随石晋北迁，遂为燕人。
现代文：任圜的孙子任睿，跟随石晋北迁，因而成为燕人。
English: Ren Rui, the grandson of Ren Hui, followed Shi Jin and moved north, thus becoming a Swallow Man.

古文：熊祥登辽天庆八年进士第，为枢密院令史。
现代文：任熊祥是辽国天庆八年的进士，当了枢密院令史。
English: Ren Xiongxiang was a member of the Liao Dynasty for eight years and became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：太祖平燕，以其地畀宋，熊祥至汴，授武当丞。
现代文：金太祖平燕以后，将燕郡给了宋人，任熊祥因而到了汴京，被任命为武当郡丞。
English: After King Taizu Pingyan, Yan County was given to the Song people, and Ren Xiongxiang came to Beijing and was appointed Wudang County Commissioner.

古文：宋法，新附官不厘务，熊祥言于郡守杨皙曰： 既不与事，请止给半俸以养亲。 
现代文：宋朝法令规定，刚归附的官员不理政务，任熊祥便对郡守杨皙说： 既然不参预政务，请求只给我半俸来奉养双亲。 
English: According to the Song Dynasty decree, officials who had just been annexed did not handle government affairs, so Ren Xiongxiang said to the county governor Yang Wei: Since I do not participate in pre-government affairs, I only request half salary to support my parents.

古文：皙虽不许，而喜其廉。
现代文：杨皙虽然没有答应，但很喜欢他的清廉。
English: Although Yang Wei did not agree, he liked his integrity.

古文：金人取均、房州，熊祥归朝，复为枢密院令史。
现代文：金人攻占了均州和房州以后，任熊祥又到了金朝，重新被任命为枢密院令史。
English: After the Jin conquered Junzhou and Fangzhou, Ren Xiongxiang returned to the Jin Dynasty and was reappointed as the Privy Council's leading historian.

古文：时西京留守高庆裔摄院事，无敢忤其意者，熊祥未尝阿意事之。
现代文：当时，西京留守高庆裔代管枢密院事，没有人敢于违抗他的命令，任熊祥也不阿谀奉承他。
English: At that time, no one dared to disobey his order, and Ren Xiongxiang did not flatter him.

古文：其后杜充、刘筈同知燕京行省，法制未一，日有异论，熊祥为折衷之。
现代文：后来杜充、刘薚同知燕京行省，法制不统一，经常产生异议，任熊祥经常在中间调解处置。
English: Later, Du Chong and Liu Tongzhi went to Yanjing Province, but the legal system was not unified, and they often raised objections. Ren Xiongxiang was often in the middle to mediate.

古文：历深、磁州刺史，开封少尹，行台工部郎中，同知汴京留守事。
现代文：后来他历任深州、磁州刺史，开封少尹，行台工部郎中，同知汴京留守事。
English: Later, he successively held the posts of shenzhou and magnetized state chief historian, kaifeng shaoyin, and hongtai engineering department junior secretary, and he also stayed in Beijing.

古文：天德初，为山东东路转运使，改镇西军节度使。
现代文：天德初年，任山东东路转运使，又改任镇西军节度使。
English: In the first year of Tiande, he was appointed as the Shandong East Road Transfer Envoy, and then changed to the Zhenxi Army Festival Envoy.

古文：是时，诏徐文、张弘信讨东海县，弘信逗遛，称疾不进，决杖二百。
现代文：当时，朝廷命令徐文、张弘信讨伐东海县，张弘信有意逗留，宣称有病不肯前去，被责打二百杖。
English: At that time, the imperial court ordered Xu Wen and Zhang Hongxin to invade Donghai County. Zhang Hongxin deliberately stayed, declared that he was ill and refused to go, and was beaten with two hundred canes.

古文：熊祥被诏为会试主文，以 事不避难臣之职 为赋题。
现代文：任熊祥被任命为会试主考官，他以 事不避难臣之职 作为赋题。
English: Ren Xiongxiang was appointed as the chief examiner of the examination. He used his position as a non-refugee minister as an assignment.

古文：及御试，熊祥复以 赏罚之令信如四时 为赋题，海陵大喜，以为翰林侍读学士。
现代文：当在朝廷御试时，他又以 赏罚之令信如四时 作为试题，海陵王大喜，任命他为翰林侍读学士。
English: When he took the imperial examination at the imperial court, he also took "Order of Reward and Punishment" as a test topic, which made King Hailing very happy and appointed him as the Hanlin Attendant Bachelor.

古文：大定初，起为太子少师。
现代文：大定初年，他出任太子少师。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he became the prince's junior teacher.

古文：时契丹贼窝斡窃号，北鄙用兵未息，上以为忧，诏公卿百官议所以招伐之宜。
现代文：当时契丹贼人窝斡窃用王号，北部连连用兵不止，皇帝深感忧虑，下令公卿百官商议进行招抚或讨伐的意见。
English: At that time, the Khitan thief's den was using the king's name, and the north was using soldiers more than once. The emperor was deeply worried and ordered the nobles and officials to discuss the idea of appeasement or crusade.

古文：众皆异议，熊祥徐进曰： 陛下以劳民为忧，用兵为重，莫若以恩信招怀之。 
现代文：众人有不同看法。任熊祥进言说： 陛下忧虑劳困民众，连连用兵，不如用恩惠和信义来招抚感化他。 
English: Many people have different opinions. Ren Xiongxiang said: His Majesty is worried about the poor and working people, so he is using soldiers one after another. It is better to use grace and faithfulness to entice and influence him.

古文：上问： 孰可使者？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：谁可以充当使者？ 
English: The emperor asked: Who can act as a messenger?

古文：对曰： 臣虽老，凭国威灵，尚堪一行。 
现代文：任熊祥说 ：微臣虽然年老，但凭借国家的威灵，还能充任前往。 
English: Ren Xiongxiang said: Although Weixin is old, with the help of the country's spirit, he can still serve as minister.

古文：上曰： 卿老矣，无烦为此。 
现代文：皇帝说： 卿已年老，不需再烦你了。 
English: The emperor said, "Sir, you are already old, so I don't need to bother you anymore.

古文：迁山东路转运使，改中都路转运使。
现代文：大定七年，又告退回家。任熊祥以事奉母亲孝顺而闻名。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, he returned home. Ren Xiongxiang is famous for serving his mother with filial piety.

古文：大定四年，卒于官。王翛，字翛然，涿州人也。
现代文：母亲去世时，他已经七十岁了，停食三天，人人都称赞他。
English: When his mother died, he was seventy years old. He fasted for three days, and everyone praised him.

古文：登皇统二年进士第，由尚书省令史除同知霸州事。
现代文：后死于家中。王翛，字翛然，涿州人。皇统二年中进士，由尚书省令史任同知霸州事。
English: Later, he died at home. Wang Qian, who was a native of Zhangzhou, was promoted to the position of scholar in the second year of imperial unification, and was appointed by the Minister of Education and Culture to be in charge of the affairs of Zhiba Prefecture.

古文：累迁刑部员外郎。坐请嘱故人奸罪，杖四十，降授泰定军节度副使。
现代文：累迁至刑部员外郎，因为替故人说情而获罪，被责打四十杖，降任泰定军节度副使。
English: He was successively transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department, where he was found guilty of interceding on behalf of the deceased, beaten with forty canes, and demoted to the position of deputy envoy of the Tai Ding Army.

古文：四迁大兴府治中，授户部侍郎。
现代文：四迁而任大兴府治中，被任命为户部侍郎。
English: He was transferred four times and held the position of Dakei prefectural governor, and was appointed as the head of the household.

古文：世宗谓宰臣曰： 王翛前为外官，闻有刚直名。
现代文：金世宗对宰臣说 ：王袺过去当外地官员时，以刚直而闻名。
English: Kim Sejong said to the Vice-Minister, "Wang Ye was known for his uprightness when he was a foreign official.

古文：今闻专务出罪为阴德，事多非理从轻。
现代文：而今听说专门替人减免罪刑以积阴德，各种事情他都不按法令而从轻处理。
English: But now I hear that he has specialized in reducing and pardoning crimes and punishments for people by accumulating virtue. He does not follow the law and treats all kinds of things lightly.

古文：又巧幸偷安，若果刚直，则当忘身以为国，履正以无偏，何必卖法以徼福耶？ 
现代文：又善于侥幸以偷安，如果真是刚直的话，就应当为国家而忘记自身，公正而不偏颇，何必卖法来求得福佑呢？ 
English: If they are truly upright, they should forget themselves for the sake of the country, be fair and not biased, why do they have to sell the law to seek blessings?

古文：寻命赈济密云等三十六县猛安人户，冒请粟三万余石，为尚书省奏夺官一阶，出为同知北京留守事。
现代文：不久任命他去赈济密云等三十六县猛安的民户，他多请了三万多石的粟米，被尚书省参奏而降了一阶官阶，出任同知北京留守事。
English: Soon, he was appointed to go to 36 counties of Meng'an, such as Qiji Miyun, and he invited more than 30,000 kilos of millet. He was sent to Shangshu Province, but was demoted to the first rank, and served as Tongzhi's representative in Beijing.

古文：上曰： 人多言王翛能官，以朕观之，凡事不肯尽力，直一老奸耳。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：人们多认为王袺是名有才干的官员，依我看法，他凡事不肯尽力去办，只不过是个老奸巨猾的人罢了！ 
English: The emperor said, "Most people think that Wang Yao is a famous and talented official. In my opinion, he is not willing to do his best in everything, but he is just a cunning person!"

古文：二十四年，迁辽东路转运使。
现代文：大定二十四年，改任辽东路转运使。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Dading, he was reappointed as Liaodong Road Transfer Envoy.

古文：岁余，改显德军节度使。
现代文：一年多以后，又改任显德军节度使。
English: A little more than a year later, he was reassigned to the post of military attaché to Germany.

古文：以前任转运使拽辱仓使王祺致死，追两官解职，敕杖七十，降授郑州防御使。
现代文：因为他在转运使的任上曾强扯硬拉侮辱仓使王祺致死，追降两级官阶解除现职务，并被命令打七十杖，降任郑州防御使。
English: Because he had bullied and humiliated Wang Qi to death when he was the transfer envoy, he was demoted two ranks and relieved of his current duties, and was ordered to fight seventy staffs and demoted to Zhengzhou defense envoy.

古文：章宗即位，擢同知大兴府事。
现代文：金章宗即位，又提升为同知大兴府事。
English: Emperor Jinzhang ascended to the throne, and was promoted to Tongzhi Daxing Prefecture.

古文：审录官奏，翛前任显德洁廉刚直，军吏敛迹，无讼狱。
现代文：审录官员上奏说，王袺在担任显德军节度使时，廉洁刚直，军吏们都服从命令，遵纪守法，没有发生争执诉讼。
English: The interrogating officer said in his report that when Wang Hui served as the commander of the Xian German Army, he was honest and upright, the military officials all obeyed orders, followed discipline and abided by the law, and there was no dispute or lawsuit.

古文：迁礼部尚书，兼大理卿。
现代文：于是，被提升为礼部尚书，兼任大理卿。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and concurrently assumed the post of Darichiro.

古文：使宋还，会改葬太师广平郡王徒单贞。
现代文：他出使宋朝回国之后，正值朝廷要改葬太师广平郡王徒单贞。
English: After he returned to China from the Song Dynasty, it was time for the imperial court to change the funeral of the Grand Master Wang Tuxanzhen of Guangping County.

古文：贞，章宗母孝懿皇后父也。
现代文：徒单贞是金章宗母亲孝懿皇后的父亲。
English: Tsuchizan Zhen was the father of Emperor Jinzhangzong's mother, Empress Xiaojun.

古文：帝欲用前代故事，班剑、鼓吹、羽葆等仪卫。
现代文：皇帝打算引用前代旧例，赐予班剑、鼓吹和羽葆等仪仗护卫。
English: The emperor intends to invoke the old precedent of the previous generation and bestow upon everyone a ceremonial escort such as a sword, a trumpet and a feather.

古文：宰臣以贞与弑熙宗诛死，意难之。
现代文：宰臣因为徒单贞是因参与刺杀金熙宗而被杀的，感到很为难。
English: Zai Zhen felt very embarrassed because Tushanzhen was killed for participating in the assassination of Kim Xizong.

古文：于是诏下礼官议。
现代文：于是，皇帝下诏让礼官们提出看法。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict asking the etiquette officials to come up with an opinion.

古文：翛言： 晋葬丞相王导，给前后羽葆、鼓吹、武贲、班剑百人。
现代文：王袺上奏说 ：晋朝埋葬丞相王导时，给予前后部的羽葆、鼓吹、武贲、班剑百人。
English: Wang Xuan Shangsoo said: When the Jin Dynasty buried the prime minister Wang Tao, they gave feathers, drums, weapons and swords to one hundred people in the front and back.

古文：唐以来，大驾卤簿有班剑，其王公以下卤簿并无班剑，兼羽葆非臣下所宜用，国朝葬大臣亦无之。 
现代文：唐朝以来，皇帝的仪仗使用班剑，王公以下的大臣使用的仪仗并无班剑，兼用羽葆也不是适宜臣子使用的，国朝以来埋葬大臣也没有采用过。 
English: Since the Tang Dynasty, the emperor's ceremonial use of the sword, the use of the minister below the prince did not have a sword, and the use of feathers was not suitable for the use of the vassal, and the burial of the minister has not been used since the dynasty.

古文：上先知唐葬大臣李靖等皆用班剑、羽葆，怒曰： 典故所无，固可从，然用之亦不过礼。 
现代文：皇帝事先已经知道唐朝在安葬大臣李靖等人时都用了班剑和羽葆，便生气地说： 过去典故没有的，固然可以遵从，但使用了也并不过礼。 
English: The emperor had already known in advance that the Tang Dynasty had used the ban sword and feather duster in the funeral of the Minister of Li Jing and others, and he said angrily: Although it is possible to follow the allusions that were not there in the past, it is not rude to use them.

古文：一日，诏翛及谏议大夫兼礼部侍郎张暐诣殿门，谕之曰： 朝廷之事，汝谏官、礼官即当辩析。
现代文：有一天，章宗诏令王袺和谏议大夫兼礼部侍郎张日韦到殿门来，对他们说： 朝廷中的事情，你们这些谏官、礼官也应当加以争辩和分析。
English: One day, Emperor Zhang Zong gave an order to Wang Qian and Zhang Rongwei, the eunuch and etiquette officer, to come to the palace gate and said to them: "You eunuchs and etiquette officers should also argue and analyze the things in the imperial court.

古文：且小民言可采，朕尚从之，况卿等乎？
现代文：小民百姓的言论可以采纳的，我尚且听从，何况你们呢？
English: I still listen to what the common people have to say, but how about you?

古文：自今议事，毋但附合尚书省。 
现代文：自今以后在朝中议事，不能够都附和尚书省的意见。 
English: From now on, all the opinions of the Ministry of Monastic Affairs cannot be included in the deliberations of the North Korean government.

古文：明昌二年，改知大兴府事。
现代文：明昌二年，改任知大兴府事。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of Chida Shingfuji.

古文：时僧徒多游贵戚门，翛恶之，乃禁僧午后不得出寺。
现代文：当时许多僧人喜欢到各贵戚家里去游串，王袺十分厌恶，于是禁止僧人午后走出寺院。
English: At that time, many monks liked to visit the homes of their relatives. Wang Yao was so disgusted that he forbade the monks to leave the temple in the afternoon.

古文：尝一僧犯禁，皇姑大长公主为请，翛曰： 奉主命，即令出之。 
现代文：曾经有位僧人违犯了禁令，皇姑大长公主来替他求情，王袺说： 有皇帝的命令，立即可以放掉他。 
English: Once there was a monk who violated the ban, and the imperial aunt, the eldest princess, came to intercede for him. Wang Yao said, "If there is an order from the emperor, he can be released immediately."

古文：立召僧，杖一百死，京师肃然。
现代文：于是，他立即召来这位僧人，打了一百杖致死，从此京城肃然。
English: As a result, he immediately summoned the monk and beat him to death with a hundred canes. From then on, the capital was in mourning.

古文：后坐故出人罪，复削官解职。
现代文：后来，他又因故意放纵罪人而获罪，又被削去官职。
English: Later, he was found guilty of deliberately indulging criminals and was removed from his post.

古文：明年，特授定海军节度使。
现代文：第二年，皇帝特别任命他为定海军节度使。
English: In the following year, the emperor specially appointed him as the chief envoy to the naval festival.

古文：谕旨曰： 卿赋性太刚，率意行事，乃自陷于刑。
现代文：并对他说： 你的性格过于刚直，随着自己心意办事，因而自陷于刑罚。
English: And he said unto him, Because thou hast a stout neck, and hast walked in the imagination of thine heart, thou art come into the condemnation.

古文：若殿年降叙，念卿入仕久，颇有执持，故特起于罪谪之中，授以见职。
现代文：你在年底被降职，我念你任职日久，颇有主见，所以特地把你从遭罪贬谪之中提拔起用，授以现职。
English: You were demoted at the end of the year. I read that you had been in office for a long time and were quite assertive, so I specifically promoted you from the position you were demoted from and gave you your current position.

古文：且彼岁歉民饥，盗贼多，须用旧人镇抚，庶得安治。
现代文：况且那个地方年成歉收，民众饥荒，盗贼众多，你必须仍用熟悉情况的旧人加以镇守和安抚，才能使地方安宁和得到治理。
English: Moreover, that place has poor harvest every year, the people are starving, and there are many thieves. You must still use the old people who are familiar with the situation to guard and pacify, in order to make the place peaceful and get governed.

古文：勉昼乃心，以图后效。 
现代文：希望你尽力而为，以图后效。 
English: I hope you'll do your best to make a difference.

古文：未几，表乞致仕。
现代文：不久，他便上表请求退休。
English: Soon after, he put in his notice to retire.

古文：上曰： 翛能干者，得力为多。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：王袺是个能干的人，国家的事情他出力很多。 
English: The emperor said: Wang Yao is a capable person, and he has contributed a lot to the affairs of the country.

古文：不许。
现代文：因而不许可。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：复申请，从之。泰和七年，卒，年七十五。
现代文：以此而论，并没有根据所定居的都城而改变五岳的祭祀山名。 
English: On this basis, the names of the five sacred mountains were not changed according to the capital city in which they were settled.

古文：翛性刚严，临事果决，吏民惮其威，虽豪右不敢犯。承安间，知大兴府事阙，诏谕宰臣曰： 可选极有风力如王翛辈者用之。 其为上所知如此。
现代文：后来也就确定不改变祭祀的山岳。范拱曾经说 ：礼官应当遵守礼法，法官应当遵守法令，像汉代的张释之可以说是能够真正守法的人了！ 
English: Later, it was also determined not to change the sacrificial mountain. Fan Gong once said: the etiquette officer should abide by the etiquette, the judge should abide by the law, like Zhang Xizhi in the Han Dynasty, it can be said to be a person who can truly abide by the law!

古文：杨伯雄，字希云，真定藁城人。八世祖彦稠，后唐清泰中为定州兵马使。
现代文：所以他所说的意见也就成了确定不可改变的。大定九年，他又再次退休，死在家中，年纪七十四岁。杨伯雄，字希云，真定藁城人。八世祖杨彦稠，后唐清泰年间，任定州兵马使。
English: In the ninth year of Dading, he retired again and died at home, at the age of seventy-four. Yang Buxiong, surnamed Xiyun, was from the city of Zhending, and his eighth-generation ancestor, Yang Yanchong, was appointed as an envoy of the State of Dading during the late Tang and Qing Dynasty.

古文：后随晋主北迁，遂居临潢。
现代文：后来跟随后晋国君北迁，便居住在临潢。
English: Later, Jin Guojun moved north and lived in Linyi.

古文：父丘行，太子左卫率府率。
现代文：他的父亲杨丘行，任太子左卫率府率。
English: His father, Yang Qiu Xing, was appointed by the crown prince as the head of the left guard.

古文：伯雄登皇统二年进士，海陵留守中京，丘行在幕府，伯雄来省视，海陵见之，深加器重。
现代文：杨伯雄在皇统二年中进士，海陵王留守中京时，杨丘行在那里当幕府官员。杨伯雄前来省亲，海陵王见到之后，十分器重他。
English: Yang Buxiong became a scholar in the second year of imperial unification, while Hai Ling Wang stayed in Beijing, where Yang Qiu Xing served as a shogunate official. When Yang Buxiong came to the provincial capital, Hai Ling Wang held him in high esteem.

古文：久之，调韩州军事判官。
现代文：过了许久，他被调任韩州军事判官。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to Korea as a military judge.

古文：有二盗诈称贾贩，逆旅主人见欺，至州署陈诉，实欲劫取伯雄。
现代文：有两个盗贼装成商人，说是受到旅店主人的欺负，一同跑来州衙中陈诉，其实是想挟迫杨伯雄。
English: Two thieves pretended to be businessmen, saying that they were bullied by the owner of the inn, and ran together to the state middle school to file a complaint. In fact, they wanted to blackmail Yang Buxiong.

古文：伯雄心觉其诈，执而诘之，并获其党十余人，一郡骇服。
现代文：杨伯雄细心地觉察到他们的奸诈，便将他们抓起来审问，一起抓获了他们的同党十多人，一郡人都惊讶和敬服。
English: Yang Boxiong carefully noticed their treachery and arrested them for interrogation. Together, they arrested more than ten of their fellow party members. The whole county was surprised and impressed.

古文：迁应奉翰林文字。
现代文：又升任应奉翰林文字。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Feng Hanlin.

古文：是时，海陵执政，自以旧知伯雄，属之使时时至其第，伯雄诺之而不往也。
现代文：当时，海陵王执政，他自以为和杨伯雄是旧相识，便吩咐他时常到自己家里走走。
English: At that time, Hailing Wang was in power. He thought that he and Yang Boxiong were old acquaintances, so he ordered him to come to his home often.

古文：他日海陵怪问之，对曰： 君子受知于人当以礼进，附丽奔走，非素志也。 
现代文：杨伯雄应许了但并不去。有一天，海陵王很奇怪地问他为什么，他回答说： 君子受知于人就应当以礼而进，依附于别人四处钻营，不是我平素的性格。 
English: Yang Buxiong promised but didn't go. One day, King Hailing asked him why in a very strange way. He replied, "It is not my usual character that a gentleman, once he is known by others, should proceed with courtesy, clinging to others and drilling camps everywhere.

古文：由是愈厚待之。
现代文：从此，海陵王更加厚待他。
English: From then on, King Hailing treated him more generously.

古文：海陵篡立，数月，迁右补阙，改修起居注。
现代文：海陵王篡位自立后，过了几个月，提升他担任右补阙，改任修起居注。
English: After Hailing Wang usurped the throne and became independent, a few months later, he was promoted to serve as the right assistant magistrate and was reappointed as the chief magistrate.

古文：海陵锐于求治，讲论每至夜分。
现代文：海陵王急于求得国家大治，经常和他谈论到深夜。
English: King Hailing was anxious to achieve national prosperity, and often talked with him late into the night.

古文：尝问曰： 人君治天下，其道何贵？ 
现代文：曾经问道： 国君治理天下之道，以什么为贵？ 
English: He once asked: What is the most important thing for a sovereign to govern the world?

古文：对曰： 贵静。 
现代文：杨伯雄回答说 ：贵静。 
English: Yang Boxiong replied, "Be quiet."

古文：海陵默然。
现代文：海陵王听后沉默不语。
English: Hailing Wang was silent after listening.

古文：明日，复谓曰： 我迁诸部猛安分屯边戍，前夕之对，岂指是为非静邪？ 
现代文：第二天，又问他说： 我迁徙了诸部猛安分别驻守边境戍镇，前夜的回答是不是认为这种做法不合乎静的？ 
English: The next day, I asked him again: I have relocated the various departments of the People's Liberation Army to separately garrison the border town of Handan. Did the previous night's answer think that this practice was not in line with tranquility?

古文：对曰： 徙兵分屯，使南北相维，长策也。
现代文：回答说： 移兵以分驻边境，使之能够南北相互联系，这是国家长久之计。
English: He replied: It is a long-term plan of the country to move troops to separate the border so that it can be connected to the north and south.

古文：所谓静者，乃不扰之耳。 
现代文：我所说的静，是指不扰民。 
English: When I say quiet, I mean not disturbing people.

古文：乙夜，复问鬼神事。
现代文：二更时分，又询问杨伯雄有关鬼神的事情。
English: Two minutes later, he also asked Yang Boxiong about ghosts and gods.

古文：伯雄进曰： 汉文帝召见贾生，夜半前席，不问百姓而问鬼神，后世颇讥之。
现代文：杨伯雄进言说 ：汉文帝召见贾谊，夜半时分，向前移动坐席，不询问有关百姓的事情而问鬼神之事，后世人颇以此来讥笑他。
English: Yang Bo Xiong said: Emperor Han Wen summoned Jia Rong, and at midnight, he moved the table forward and asked about ghosts and gods without asking about the people. Later, the world used this to mock him.

古文：陛下不以臣愚陋，幸及天下大计，鬼神之事，未之学也。 
现代文：陛下如果不认为我学识浅陋愚昧无知的话，希望能够问及治理天下的大计，鬼神之事我不曾学过。 
English: Your Majesty, if you do not think that my knowledge is shallow, stupid and ignorant, I hope to be able to ask about the grand plan for governing the world. I have never studied the matter of ghosts and gods.

古文：海陵曰： 但言之，以释永夜倦思。 
现代文：海陵王说 ：你只管随便说说，以减轻夜间的困倦罢了。 
English: King Hailing said, "Just say whatever you want to say to relieve your sleepiness at night."

古文：伯雄不得已，乃曰： 臣家有一卷书，记人死复生，或问冥官何以免罪，答曰，汝置一历，白日所为，暮夜书之，不可书者是不可为也。 
现代文：杨伯雄无可奈何，便说： 臣下家里有一卷书，里面写有人死后复活的故事。
English: Yang Buxiong couldn't help but say, "There is a book in my vassal's house, in which there is a story about someone being resurrected after death.

古文：海陵为之改容。
现代文：人们便问地狱中的官员，怎样给以免罪。
English: People ask the officials in hell how to avoid sin.

古文：夏日，海陵登瑞云楼纳凉，命伯雄赋诗，其卒章云： 六月不知蒸郁到，清凉会与万方同。 
现代文：回答说，你设一本日历，把白天所做的事情，在夜里记录下来，凡是不能写上去的就是不应当做的事情。 海陵王听后，脸色变得庄重起来。夏天时，海陵王登上瑞云楼乘凉，他让杨伯雄作诗。诗的末章写道： 六月不知蒸鰘到，清凉会与万方同。 
English: He replied, "If you set up a calendar, you can record what you do during the day and what you don't do at night, and what you can't write down is what you shouldn't do." After listening to this, King Hailing's face became solemn. In the summer, when King Hailing ascended to Ruyun Tower to enjoy the cool weather, he asked Yang Boxiong to write a poem. The last chapter of the poem reads, "I don't know when June will arrive, but the cool weather will be the same everywhere."

古文：海陵忻然，以示左右曰： 伯雄出语不忘规戒，为人臣当如是矣。 
现代文：海陵王看后很高兴，拿给身边的人看并说： 伯雄一说话就忘不了进行规劝，当臣子的就是应当这样啊！ 
English: King Hailing was very happy when he saw it. He showed it to the people around him and said, "When Hakuo speaks, he can't forget to give advice. That's what a courtier should do!"

古文：再迁兵部员外郎。
现代文：再迁为兵部员外郎。
English: Relocated again to become a member of the military.

古文：丁父忧，起复翰林待制，兼修起居注。
现代文：守父丧，服终起任翰林待制，兼修起居注。
English: He attended his father's funeral, and after his service he was assigned to the Hanlin trainee system. He also studied and lived in Shunde.

古文：迁直学士，再迁右谏议大夫，兼著作郎，修起居注如故。
现代文：迁任直学士，再改任右谏议大夫兼任著作郎，修起居注如故。
English: He was transferred to the post of direct bachelor, and then he was reassigned to the post of doctor of the Right Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, concurrently serving as the author's son.

古文：皇子慎思阿不薨，伯雄坐与同直者窃议被责，语在《海陵诸子传》。
现代文：皇子慎思阿不去世，伯雄因和他一起值班的同僚私下议论而获罪受责罚，话语写在《海陵诸子传》中。
English: Prince Shinsia did not die, and Hakuo was punished for having a private discussion with a colleague who was on duty with him. The words are written in "The Tale of the Sons of Hailing."

古文：海陵议征江南，伯雄奏： 晋武平吴，皆命将帅，何劳亲总戎律？ 
现代文：海陵王商议南征江南时，杨伯雄上奏说： 晋武帝平吴时也都是任命将帅出征，何必亲自总领军队？ 
English: When King Hailing was discussing the southern conquest of the south of the Yangtze River, Yang Po-hsiung said: When Emperor Jinwu was in Pingwu, he also appointed generals to go to war. Why did he have to personally lead the army?

古文：不听。
现代文：海陵王不听劝谏。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：乃落起居注，不复召见。
现代文：于是，免除了他修起居注的官职，也不再召见他。
English: As a result, he was relieved of his official duties as a resident commentator, and he was no longer summoned.

古文：大定初，除大兴少尹，丁母忧。
现代文：大定初年，被任命为大兴府少尹，因服母丧而离职。
English: In the first year of Dading, he was appointed as Daxingfu Shao Yin, but left the post due to his mother's death.

古文：显宗为皇太子，迁东宫官属，张浩荐伯雄，起复少詹事，兄子蟠为左赞善，言听谏从，时论荣之。
现代文：显宗当皇太子时，挑选东宫的属官，张浩向他推荐杨伯雄，于是在服满后被起用任少詹事。杨伯雄哥哥的儿子蟠担任左赞善，他们进谏时言听计从，当时的舆论都以此为荣。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was crown prince, he selected the subordinate officials of the East Palace. Zhang Hao recommended Yang Boxiong to him, so he was appointed as a minor official after completing his service. Yang Boxiong's brother's son, Zou, served as Zuo Zanzan. When they entered the palace, they listened to the words and followed the plan. The public opinion at that time was proud of this.

古文：集古太子贤不肖为书，号《瑶山往鉴》，进之。
现代文：杨伯雄收集了古代的太子贤能的和不肖的事迹，写成一部书，书名叫《瑶山往鉴》，进献给朝廷。
English: Yang Buxiong collected the virtuous and disgraceful deeds of the ancient princes and wrote a book called "Lushan Zongxian," which was dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：及进《羽猎》、《保成》等箴，皆见嘉纳。
现代文：这本书和他又进献的《羽猎》、《保成》等箴言，都受到朝廷的嘉奖和采纳。
English: This book and the proverbs he also contributed, such as "feather hunting" and "guaranteeing success," were both praised and adopted by the imperial court.

古文：复为左谏议大夫、翰林直学士。
现代文：又被任命为左谏议大夫、翰林直学士。
English: He was also appointed as Zuo Jianli Doctor and Hanlin Zhouzhuang Scholar.

古文：会太子詹事阙，宰相复举伯雄。
现代文：正遇到太子詹事职务缺人，宰相又举荐杨伯雄担任。
English: Prince Zhanji was facing a shortage of personnel for the post, and the prime minister recommended Yang Buxiong to take the post.

古文：上曰： 伯雄不可去朕左右，而东宫亦须辅导。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：伯雄不能离开我的身边，而东宫也需要他去辅导。 
English: The emperor said, "Hakuo cannot leave my side, and the East Palace also needs his guidance."

古文：遂以太子詹事兼谏议。
现代文：于是任命他为太子詹事兼谏议大夫。
English: Therefore, he was appointed as Prince Zhan's secretary and doctor of consultation.

古文：六年，上幸西京，欲因往凉陉避暑，伯雄率众谏官入谏。
现代文：大定六年，皇帝巡幸西京，准备顺道到凉陉去避暑。杨伯雄领着谏官们一起进宫劝谏。
English: In the sixth year of Dading, the emperor went on a tour of the western capital, preparing to go to Liangyao to escape the summer heat. Yang Po-hsiung led the eunuchs to the palace to persuade him.

古文：上曰： 朕徐思之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：让我再慢慢考虑。 
English: The emperor said: Let me think about it.

古文：伯雄言之不已，同列皆引退，久之乃起。
现代文：而杨伯雄仍然劝说个不停。同僚们都已经引退出去了，杨伯雄又过了很长时间才起身告退。
English: But Yang Boxiong still kept persuading. His colleagues had all retired, and it took Yang Boxiong a long time to get up and leave.

古文：是年，至凉陉，徼巡果有疏虞。
现代文：当年到了凉陉，在巡行过程中果然出现了疏漏和失误。
English: When it came to the parade, there were indeed omissions and mistakes during the procession.

古文：上思伯雄之言，及还，迁礼部尚书，谓近臣曰： 群臣有干局者众矣，如伯雄忠实，皆莫及也。 
现代文：皇帝又回想起杨伯雄说过的话，当回宫以后，任命他为礼部尚书，并对身边的近臣们说： 群臣之中有才干有气度的人不少，但没有人像伯雄那样忠实。 
English: The emperor recalled what Yang Buxiong had said. When he returned to the palace, he appointed him as the etiquette official, and said to the courtiers around him: Among the courtiers, there are many talented and dignified people, but no one is as faithful as Buxiong.

古文：上谓伯雄曰： 龙逄、比干皆以忠谏而死，使遇明君，岂有是哉！ 
现代文：皇帝又对伯雄说： 龙逄、比干都是因为忠谏而死的，如果他们能够遇到明君，怎么会这样呢！ 
English: The emperor also said to Hakuo, "Longjing and Bi Gan both died because of their loyalty. If they were able to meet Ming Jun, how could this have happened?

古文：伯雄对曰： 魏徵愿为良臣，正谓遇明君耳。 
现代文：杨伯雄回答说 ：魏征愿意成为良臣，正是因为他认为自己遇到明君啊！ 
English: Yang Boxiong replied: Wei Zheng is willing to become a good minister, precisely because he thinks he has met Ming Jun!

古文：因顾谓宰相曰： 《书》曰： 汝无面从，退有后言。 
现代文：于是，皇帝对着宰相们说： 《尚书》上说： 你们不要当面表示听从，离开以后又另有说法。 
English: Therefore, the emperor said to the prime ministers: "The Shangshu said: You should not obey in person, and then say something else after you leave.

古文：朕与卿等共治天下，事有可否，即当面陈。
现代文：我和你们一起治理天下，事情可不可行，应当立即当面陈说。
English: I am governing the world together with you. This is not feasible. You should say this to my face immediately.

古文：卿等致位卿相，正行道扬名之时，偷安自便，徼幸一时，如后世何？ 
现代文：卿等位居卿相，正是行道扬名之时，如偷安自便，侥幸于一时，如何向后世交代？ 
English: It is precisely when the street becomes famous that the nobles and aristocrats are in high positions. If they take advantage of the situation and get lucky for a moment, how will they be handed down to future generations?

古文：群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：群臣都高呼万岁。
English: The courtiers in the hall cheered loudly.

古文：十二年，改沁南军节度使，召为翰林学士承旨。
现代文：大定十二年，杨伯雄改任为沁南军节度使，又召回朝廷任翰林学士承旨。
English: In the twelfth year of Dading, Yang Buxiong was reappointed as the military envoy of the Southern Song Dynasty and recalled to the imperial court to serve as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：丞相石琚致仕，上问： 谁可代卿者？ 
现代文：丞相石琚退休时，皇帝问他： 谁能替代你？ 
English: When the chancellor Shi Yan retired, the emperor asked him: Who can replace you?

古文：琚对曰： 伯雄可。 
现代文：石琚回答说 ：伯雄可以。 
English: Ishizuchi replied, "Hakuo can sing."

古文：时论以琚举得其人。
现代文：当时人议论都认为石琚举荐得人。
English: At that time, it was widely believed that Shi Hao was a recommended candidate.

古文：复权詹事，伯雄知无不言，匡救弘多。
现代文：朝廷又任命杨伯雄代理詹事职务。他知无不言，提出了许多匡助朝政的好见解。
English: The imperial court also appointed Yang Boxiong as Zhan's deputy. He knew everything and put forward many good opinions to help the imperial government.

古文：后宫僚有诡随者，人必称杨詹事以愧之。
现代文：后来宫廷中的官员有狡诈善变的人时，人们便必定以称赞杨詹事的正直来使他羞耻。
English: Later, when the officials in the court were cunning and fickle, people would praise Yang Zhan's honesty to shame him.

古文：除定武军节度使，改平阳尹。
现代文：后被任命为定武军节度使，改任平阳尹。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief of staff of the Dingwu army, and changed his post to Pingyang Yin.

古文：正隆末，群盗蜂起，州郡往往罹害，独济南赖伯渊保全。
现代文：起先，张浩曾经在平阳任职，有仁政。杨伯雄当了平阳尹后，百姓们都称颂他，并说： 前有张，后有杨。 
English: At first, Zhang Hao had served in Pingyang and had benevolent politics. When Yang Boxiong became the successor of Pingyang Yin, the people praised him and said, "Before there was Zhang, there was Yang."

古文：大定三年，致仕，卒于家。
现代文：又改任河中尹。死时六十五岁，谥为庄献。
English: He was also reappointed as Kawachu Yin. He was sixty-five years old at the time of his death.

古文：萧贡，字真卿，京兆咸阳人。
现代文：他的弟弟叫伯杰和伯仁，族兄名伯渊。萧贡，字真卿，京兆咸阳人。
English: His younger brothers are named Bo Jie and Bo Ren, and his elder brothers are named Bo Yuan, Xiao Gong, Zhenqing, and Jingzha Xianyang.

古文：大定二十二年进士，调镇戎州判官，泾阳令，泾州观察判官。
现代文：大定二十二年，中进士。调为镇戎州判官、泾阳县令、泾州观察判官。
English: In the 22nd year of Dading, he was promoted to middle-ranking officer. He was transferred to the judge of Wuzhou Town, the county magistrate of Fenyang County, and the judge of Fenyang County.

古文：补尚书省令史。
现代文：补为尚书省令史。
English: His appointment to the post of Minister of Education and Culture is now history.

古文：旧例，试补两月，乃补用。
现代文：依照旧规定，必须试补两个月以后才正式补用。
English: According to the old regulations, it is necessary to try it for two months before officially using it.

古文：贡至数日，执政以为能，即用之。
现代文：萧贡到尚书省只试用几天，上司就认为他有才干，当即正式补用他。
English: Xiao Gong had only been on probation in Shangshu for a few days, but his boss thought he was talented and immediately made him an official substitute.

古文：擢监察御史。
现代文：后晋升为监察御史。
English: He was promoted to inspector general of history.

古文：提刑司奏泾州有美政，迁北京转运副使。
现代文：提刑司上奏说，萧贡在泾州时有美政，因而被升任北京转运副使。
English: The chief prosecutor said that Xiao Gong was promoted to the post of deputy envoy of Beijing for transit when he was in Ganzhou.

古文：亲老，归养。
现代文：双亲年老，便回家归养。
English: When the parents are old, they return home to be raised.

古文：左丞董师中、右丞杨伯通荐其文学，除翰林修撰。
现代文：左丞董师中、右丞杨伯通举荐萧贡有文学才能，被任命为翰林修撰。
English: Xiao Gong, who had literary talent, was recommended by the middle-ranked disciple of the left-ranked disciple Dong Shi and the middle-ranked disciple of the right-ranked disciple Yang Bertong, and was appointed as Hanlin Shuxing.

古文：上书论： 比年之弊，人才不以器识、操履，巧于案牍，不涉吏议者为工。
现代文：萧贡上书朝廷说： 近年的弊端，在于选拔人才不注意器度见识和品行，只要善于写文书、不涉及吏议的就是能干。
English: Xiao Gong said in a letter to the imperial court: The drawback in recent years is that the selection of talents does not pay attention to the degree of insight and conduct, as long as they are good at writing documents and do not involve officials, they are competent.

古文：用人不务因才授官，惟泥资叙。
现代文：用人时不注意因才任职，只拘泥于资格加以任用。
English: When appointing people, they do not pay attention to the reason for the appointment, but only to the qualifications.

古文：名器不务慎与，人多侥幸。
现代文：爵名重器的赐予不慎重，人人怀有侥幸之心。
English: The bestowal of a peerage is not a matter of prudence, but a matter of luck.

古文：守令不务才实，民罹其害。
现代文：选用守令不重视真才实学的人员，民众遭受其害。
English: The people are suffering from the selection of officials who do not attach importance to true talent and real learning.

古文：伏望擢真才以振浇俗，核功能以理职业，慎名器以抑侥幸，重守令以厚邦本。
现代文：希望朝廷提拔真才以振改浅薄的习俗，考核功绩才能以确定职务功业，慎用名器以抑止侥幸之心，注重守令的选用以厚邦本。
English: It is hoped that the imperial court will promote true talents to shake up the shallow customs, appraise merits to determine the duties and achievements, carefully use famous instruments to deter the spirit of chance, and pay attention to the selection of orders to maintain a solid foundation.

古文：然后政化可行，百事可举矣。 
现代文：然后政令和教化可行，百事可举了！ 
English: Then government decrees and indoctrination are possible, and Pepsi can be raised!

古文：诏词臣作《唐用董重质诛郭谊得失论》，贡为第一，赐重币四端。
现代文：皇帝下诏让文臣们写一篇《唐用董重质诛郭谊得失论》，萧贡所写的被评为第一名，获得皇帝赏赐的上等缯帛四端。
English: The emperor issued an edict asking the scholars to write an article entitled "The Tang Dynasty's Use of the Dong as a Weapon to Win Friends and Defeat Enemies," which was written by Xiaogong and was rated as the first, and was awarded the first-class four-pointed star by the emperor.

古文：贡论时政五弊，言路四难，词意切至，改治书侍御史。
现代文：萧贡评论当时治政方面的五弊、开言路方面的四难，言辞恳切，被改任为治书侍御史。
English: Xiao Gong commented on the five drawbacks in governance and the four difficulties in speech-making at that time, and his words were earnest. He was reassigned to the post of secretary of history.

古文：丁父忧，起复，改右司员外郎，寻转郎中，迁国子祭酒，兼太常少卿，与陈大任刊修《辽史》。
现代文：守父丧，服丧期满重新任用，后改任右司员外郎，不久又转任郎中，升国子祭酒，兼太常少卿，他与陈大任一起修订《辽史》。
English: After his father's death, he was re-appointed at the end of the mourning period, and then he was re-appointed as the right secretary, the outer brother, and soon he was re-appointed as the middle brother, the ascending son of the country, the sacrificial wine, and the minor lord. He revised the "Liao History" together with Chen Dairen.

古文：改刑部侍郎，历同知大兴府事、德州防御使，三迁河东北路按察转运使。
现代文：又改任刑部侍郎，历任同知大兴府事、德州防御史，三次升迁任河东北路按察转运使。
English: He was also appointed as an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and successively held the posts of Tongzhi Daxing Prefecture Affairs and Texas Defense History, and was promoted three times to the Northeast Heze Road Inspection and Transportation Envoy.

古文：大安末，改彰德军节度事。
现代文：大安末年，改任彰德军节度使。
English: At the end of the Taian era, he was reassigned as the military attaché of the Changde Army.

古文：坐兵兴不能守城，亡失百姓，降同知通远军节度使。
现代文：因 兵起不能守住城池，亡失百姓 的罪名，被降为同知通远军节度事。
English: Due to the fact that the soldiers could not hold the city and lost the people, they were reduced to spending the day with their friends.

古文：未几，改静难军节度使，历河东北路、南京路转运使、御史中丞，户部尚书。
现代文：不久，又改任静难军节度使，历任河东北路、南京路转运使、御史中丞、户部尚书。
English: Soon, he was also appointed as the festival envoy of the Jingnan Army, and successively served as the Northeast Heze Road and Nanjing Road transfer envoy, the Gushizhongzheng, and the Hubei Shangshu.

古文：南京戒严，坐乏军储，诏释不问。
现代文：南京戒严时，被指责军储物资缺乏治罪，皇帝下诏释放他不予追究。
English: When Nanjing was under martial law, he was accused of a lack of military supplies. The emperor issued an edict releasing him from prosecution.

古文：兴定元年，致仕。
现代文：兴定元年退休。
English: He retired in the first year of Xingding.

古文：元光二年卒，谥文简。
现代文：元光二年去世，谥为文简。
English: Yuan Guang died two years later and was succeeded by Wen Jian.

古文：贡好学，读书至老不倦，有注《史记》一百卷。
现代文：萧贡好学，读书到老也不倦怠，注有《史记》一百卷。
English: Xiao Gong was fond of learning and never tired of reading until he was old. He had annotated one hundred volumes of "Histories."

古文：温迪罕缔达，该习经史，以女直字出身，累官国史院编修官。
现代文：温迪罕缔达，通习经史，从女真字开始任官，累迁至国史院编修官。
English: Wendy Han Jida, a student of history, began her career as an official from the beginning, and gradually moved to the editor-in-chief of the National History Academy.

古文：初，丞相希尹制女直字，设学校，使讹离剌等教之。
现代文：起初，丞相希尹创造了女真字，并设立学校，让讹离剌等人任教。
English: At first, the prime minister, Xi Yin, created the female character of truth, and set up a school to teach people such as Zou Yixuan.

古文：其后学者渐盛，转习经史，故纳合椿年、纥石烈良弼皆由此致位宰相。
现代文：后来读的人越来越多了，他就转为学习经史。原先纳合椿年、纥石烈良弼都是从这条路后来直当到丞相的。
English: Later, as more and more people began to read, he switched to studying the history of scripture. Originally, Nahua Tsubaki and Shishile Liangyao both went straight from this path to become prime ministers.

古文：缔达最号精深。
现代文：温迪罕缔达被认为是最精深此道的。
English: Wendy Handaida is considered to be the best in the business.

古文：大定十二年，诏缔达所教生员习作诗、策，若有文采，量才任使，其自愿从学者听。
现代文：大定十二年，朝廷下诏要缔达所教的学生学习做诗和策文，如果写得有文采的，就根据才学加以任用，自愿继续学习的也听从选择。
English: In the twelfth year of Dading, the imperial court decreed that the students who had been taught by Da Da should be allowed to study poetry and composition. If they wrote well, they would be appointed according to their ability. Those who continued to study voluntarily would also be subject to selection.

古文：十三年，设女直进士科。
现代文：大定十三年，设女真进士科。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taisho era, there was a new entrance exam for women.

古文：是岁，徒单镒等二十七人登第。
现代文：当年，徒单镒等二十七人中进士。
English: In that year, 27 people, including Tushan Zou, were promoted.

古文：十五年，缔达迁著作佐郎，与编修官宗璧、尚书省译史阿鲁、吏部令史张克忠译解经书。
现代文：十五年，温迪罕缔达升任著作佐郎，和编修官宗璧、尚书省译史阿鲁、吏部令史张克忠一起翻译和注释经书。
English: In the fifteenth year, Wendy Han Jida was promoted to the post of Shosha Saro, and translated and annotated the scriptures together with the editor-in-chief Zong Bi, the translator Shi Aru of the Ministry of Literature, and the secretary Shi Zhang Kezhong.

古文：累迁秘书丞。
现代文：累迁任秘书丞。
English: He was gradually promoted to secretary.

古文：十九年，改左赞善，以母老求养。
现代文：大定十九年，改任左赞善，因母亲年老请求离职归养。
English: In the 19th year of Dading, he was transferred to Zuo Zanzan, because of his mother's request to retire due to her old age.

古文：兴定元年，迁武胜军节度使，改吏部尚书，知开封府。坐纵军人家属出城，当杖，诏解职。
现代文：显宗派内直丞六斤对温迪罕缔达说： 赞善，开始时并未任命你当这个官职，皇上对我说： 我得到一个出类拔萃的人才，学问博通，应该让他来辅导你有关德义方面知识。 
English: Emperor Xian said to Wendy Han Jida: "Praise be to God, I did not appoint you to this post at the beginning. The emperor said to me: I have gained an outstanding talent with a wide range of knowledge, and I should let him tutor you in the knowledge of virtue and righteousness."

古文：四年，复知开封府，复坐以事嘱警巡使完颜金僧奴，降为郑州防御使。
现代文：过了几天，任命你当了赞善。我自以为亲身受到有关德义方面的教益，不胜欣喜。你现在还不能离去，不要心中为难。 过了许久，转任翰林待制，死于任上。
English: A few days later, you were appointed as a zanzan. I thought that I was personally benefited by the teachings on morality and was overjoyed. You can't leave now, don't be troubled. After a long time, he was transferred to Hanlin and died in office.

古文：未几，复为知开封府事。
现代文：明昌五年，追赠为翰林学士承旨，谥为文成。
English: In the 5th year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, he was posthumously awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar, and was awarded the title of Wencheng.

古文：张翰，字林卿，忻州秀容人。
现代文：张翰，字林卿，忻州秀容人。
English: Zhang Han, Zilin Qing, Zhangzhou Xiurong.

古文：大定二十八年进士，调隰州军事判官。
现代文：大定二十八年中进士，调任隰州军事判官。
English: In the 28th year of Dading, he was promoted to the post of military judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：有诬昆弟三人为劫者，翰微行廉得其状，白于州释之。
现代文：有人诬告一家兄弟三人拦路抢劫，张翰暗访得知真实情况，就向州里说明并释放了他们。
English: Someone falsely accused a family of three brothers of roadblock robbery. Zhang Han made an undercover visit and learned the true situation. He explained to the state and released them.

古文：历东胜、义丰、会川令，补尚书省令史，除户部主事，迁监察御史。
现代文：历任东胜、义丰、会川县令，补任尚书省令史，又任户部主事，升为监察御史。
English: He successively served as the governor of Dongsheng, Yifeng, and Aikawa counties, and was also appointed as the governor of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, as well as the head of the Household Department, and was promoted to the supervisory governor.

古文：丁母忧，服阕，调山东路盐使。
现代文：服母丧，服终，调任山东路盐使。
English: After the funeral of his mother and the end of his service, he was transferred to Shandong Road Salt Envoy.

古文：丁父忧，起复尚书省都事、户部员外郎。
现代文：服父丧，起复任尚书省都事、户部员外郎。
English: After attending his father's funeral, he was reinstated as a member of the Household Department of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：大安间，平章政事独吉思忠、参知政事承裕行省戍边，翰充左右司郎中，论议不相协。处置乖方，翰屡争之不见省。
现代文：大安年间，平章政事独吉思忠、参知政事承裕行省戍守边境，张翰任左右司郎中，由于意见不一致，处置不得法，张翰多次力争不被采纳。
English: During the Taian era, the border was guarded by the Taira clan's political advisor, Doji Shizhong, and the governor's political advisor, Chengyu Xingguo, while Zhang Han served as the left and right secretary. Due to the disagreement, the decision was not legal, and Zhang Han tried many times not to be accepted.

古文：承裕就逮，卫绍王知翰尝有言，召见抚慰之。
现代文：承裕被逮捕后，卫绍王知道张翰事先已经提过不同看法，便召见他并加以安慰。
English: After Cheng Yu was arrested, Wei Shao Wang knew that Zhang Han had raised a different opinion in advance, so he summoned him and consoled him.

古文：改知登闻鼓院，兼前职，迁侍御史。
现代文：改任知登闻鼓院，仍兼原来职务，又升为侍御史。
English: He was reassigned to the Chidoven Drum Academy, still holding his original position, and was also promoted to Samurai Historian.

古文：贞祐初，为翰林直学士，充元帅府经历官。
现代文：贞初年，任翰林直学士，充元帅府经历官。
English: In the first year of Zhen, he was appointed as Han Lin Zhi Bao, and served as an experienced officer of the Marshal's Office.

古文：中都戒严，调度方殷，改户部侍郎。
现代文：中都戒严时，调度有方，改任户部侍郎。
English: When the capital was placed under martial law, he was reassigned to the position of household attendant.

古文：宣宗迁汴，翰规措扈从粮草至真定，上书言五事： 一曰强本。谓当裒兵徒、徙豪民，以实南京。
现代文：金宣宗迁都汴京，张翰规划筹措粮草并随从至真定，他上书皇帝进言五事： 一为强本，也就是要聚集兵士、迁徙豪强，以充实南京。
English: Jin Xuan Zong moved the capital to Beijing, Zhang Han planned to raise grain and grass and followed to Zhending. He sent a letter to the emperor with five suggestions: One is a strong book, that is, to gather soldiers and migrate heroes to enrich Nanjing.

古文：二曰足用。谓当按蔡、汴旧渠以通漕运。
现代文：二为足用，也就是说应当依照蔡州、汴河的旧渠道来通漕运。
English: The second is for foot use, that is to say, it should be in accordance with the old channels of Caizhou and Luohe.

古文：三曰防乱。谓当就集义军假之官印，使相统摄，以安反侧。
现代文：三为防乱，就是应当聚集义军，发给官印，让他们相互统帅，以使内部安定不致反复。
English: The third is to prevent turmoil, that is, it is necessary to gather the rebels, send them to the official seal, and let them command each other, so that internal stability will not be repeated.

古文：四曰省事。谓县邑不能自立者宜稍并之，既以省官，且易於备盗。
现代文：四为省事，是说县、邑不能自保的应当加以合并，既可减少官员人数，又便于防盗。
English: The fourth is to save trouble, that is, counties and towns that cannot protect themselves should be merged, which can reduce the number of officials and facilitate anti-theft.

古文：五曰推恩。谓当推恩以示天子所在称幸之意。 
现代文：五为推恩，也就是应当广施恩惠，以示天子所在地值得庆幸的意思。 
English: The number five is a sign of grace, which means that you should be generous with your favors to show that the location of the heavenly son is worthy of congratulation.

古文：上略施行之。
现代文：皇帝略加施行了。
English: The emperor imposed a slight increase.

古文：翰雅有治剧才，所至辄办。
现代文：张翰一向善于治理烦难的事务，每到一处就办理得有条不紊。
English: Zhang Han has always been good at managing troublesome affairs, and he handles everything in an orderly manner.

古文：迁河平军节度使、都水监、提控军马使，俄改户部尚书。
现代文：升任河平军节度使、都水监、提控军马使，不久又改为户部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the military governor of Hebei Province, the water inspector of the capital, and the commander of the horse control army, and was soon changed to the head of the household.

古文：是时，初至南京，庶事草略，翰经度区处，皆有条理。
现代文：当时，刚迁都南京，各种事情正是草创阶段，张翰处置得有条有理。
English: At that time, the capital of Nanjing had just been moved, and all kinds of things were in the pioneering stage. Zhang Han handled everything in an orderly manner.

古文：是岁卒，谥达义。
现代文：当年去世，谥为达义。
English: He died the same year, and his name became known as "Da Yi."

