古文：骁勇善射，交通豪侠。
现代文：刘武周，河间郡景城县人。
English: Liu Wu Zhou, a resident of Jingcheng County, Hama County.

古文：其兄山伯每诫之曰： 汝不择交游，终当灭吾族也。 
现代文：父亲刘匡，搬迁到马邑县。刘武周勇猛迅捷善于骑射，跟强横任侠之徒交往密切。他的哥哥刘山伯每每警告他说 ：你不加选择地交朋结友，最终会犯灭族大罪的。 
English: His father, Liu Kuang, moved to Mayi County. Liu Wu Zhou was brave and swift, good at riding and shooting, and was in close contact with the strong and arrogant knights. His brother, Liu Sanbo, warned him every time: "If you make friends indiscriminately, you will eventually commit the great crime of exterminating the people."

古文：数詈辱之。
现代文：多次辱骂他。
English: He was repeatedly verbally abused.

古文：武周因去家入洛，为太仆杨义臣帐内，募征辽东，以军功授建节校尉。
现代文：刘武周因此离家到洛阳，替太仆卿杨义臣当士卒，应召入伍征讨辽东，凭战功被任命为建节校尉。
English: As a result, Liu Wuzhou left home and went to Luoyang, where he served as a soldier for Yang Yixin, the Great Servant of the Emperor. He was drafted into the army to fight in Liaodong, and was appointed as a Jianjie lieutenant for his military exploits.

古文：还家，为鹰扬府校尉。
现代文：回到家乡河间郡，任鹰扬府校尉。
English: He returned to his hometown, Kawama County, and was appointed captain of Yingyang Prefecture.

古文：太守王仁恭以其州里之雄，甚见亲遇，每令率虞候屯于阁下。
现代文：郡太守王仁恭认为他是本郡的杰出人才，非常信任优待他，每每叫他带领侍从们居住在小门内的屋子里。
English: The county governor, Wang Rengong, considered him to be an outstanding talent of the county. He trusted him very much and treated him well. He often asked him to lead his attendants to live in the house inside the small gate.

古文：因与仁恭侍兒私通，恐事泄，又见天下已乱，阴怀异计，乃宣言于郡中曰： 今百姓饥饿，死人相枕于野，王府尹闭仓不恤，岂忧百姓之意乎！ 
现代文：趁便跟王仁恭的侍女私通，害怕事情败露，又见天下已经动乱，暗藏野心，就在郡中散布说： 现在百姓饿得要命，田野上死人压着死人，王府尹关着粮仓不愿救济，哪管百姓的死活啊！ 
English: He took the opportunity to fornicate with Wang Rengong's maid. Fearing that the affair would be exposed, and seeing that the world was already in turmoil, he spread his hidden ambitions throughout the county, saying: "Nowadays, the people are starving to death, the dead are crushing the dead in the fields, and Wangfujin is shutting down the grain silos and refusing to provide relief. Who cares about the people's life and death!

古文：以此激怒众人，皆发愤怨。
现代文：用这些话激怒了群众，都发泄着愤怒怨恨。
English: With these words, he enraged the masses, and they all vented their anger and resentment.

古文：武周知众心摇动，因称疾不起，乡闾豪杰多来候问，遂椎牛纵酒大言曰： 盗贼若此，壮士守志，并死沟壑。
现代文：刘武周见民心已经动摇，就诈称生病不起床，老家的强横凶顽之徒都来问候，于是杀牛打酒大吃大喝口出狂言说： 造反才能像这样生活，英雄好汉就要坚守志向，一起死在溪谷山沟也在所不辞。
English: When Liu Wuzhou saw that the people's hearts had been shaken, he pretended to be ill and did not get up. The strong, cruel and stubborn people in his hometown all came to greet him, so he killed cows, drank wine, ate a lot of food, and shouted a rant saying: To live like this, you have to rebel. Heroes must stick to their ambitions, and they must die together in the valleys and ravines.

古文：今仓内积粟皆烂，谁能与我取之？ 
现代文：如今仓库里堆积的粟米都要烂了，谁敢跟我去拿来？ 
English: Now the corns piled up in the warehouse are all rotten. Who will dare to bring them with me?

古文：诸豪杰皆许诺。
现代文：这班人都赞同响应。
English: The group all agreed to respond.

古文：与同郡张万岁等十余人候仁恭视事，武周上谒，万岁自后而入，斩仁恭于郡，持其首出徇郡中，无敢动者。
现代文：他跟同郡的张万岁等十多人瞅准王仁恭正在处理公务，刘武周就去禀告事情，张万岁从背后溜进来，在郡厅斩杀了王仁恭，拿着他的首级到郡城宣传展示，没有人敢动一动。
English: He and more than ten people, including Zhang Wanlai from the same county, suspected that Wang Rengong was handling official business, and Liu Wuzhou went to report the matter. Zhang Wanlai sneaked in from behind and killed Wang Rengong at the county hall, and took his head to the county to promote and display. No one dared to move.

古文：于是开廪以赈穷乏，驰檄境内，其属城皆归之，得兵万余人。
现代文：于是开仓放粮救济贫苦百姓，在郡内发送快报，所属各县都归附了他，得到士卒一万多人。
English: As a result, he opened a warehouse to distribute grain for the relief of poor people, and sent an express in the county. All the counties he belonged to were attached to him, and he gained more than 10,000 soldiers.

古文：武周自称太守，遣使附于突厥。
现代文：刘武周自称太守，派遣使者去投靠突厥。
English: Liu Wuzhou claimed to be the emperor and sent emissaries to the Turks.

古文：隋雁门郡丞陈孝意、虎贲将王智辩合兵讨之，围其桑乾镇。
现代文：隋朝雁门郡丞陈孝意、虎贲将王智辩联合兵力讨伐他，包围了他的桑干镇。
English: Chen Xiaoyi, the county magistrate of Yanmen County of the Sui Dynasty, and Tigress combined forces to fight Wang Zhiyan and surrounded his Sangkang Town.

古文：会突厥大至，与武周共击智辩，隋师败绩。
现代文：碰上突厥派来大队人马，同刘武周一起打王智辩，隋军战败。
English: Encountering a large contingent of men and horses sent by the Turks, he and Liu Wuzhou fought a battle of wits, and the Sui army was defeated.

古文：孝意奔还雁门，部人杀之，以城降于武周。
现代文：陈孝意逃回雁门，部下杀了他，献城投降刘武周。
English: Chen Xiaoyi wanted to escape back to the Wild Goose Gate, but his subordinates killed him and surrendered the city to Liu Wuzhou.

古文：于是袭破楼烦郡，进取汾阳宫，获隋宫人以赂突厥，始毕可汗以马报之，兵威益振。
现代文：于是突袭攻克了楼烦郡，进军夺取了汾阳宫，抓来隋朝的宫女去贿赂突厥，始毕可汗用马答谢他，士气更加高涨。
English: As a result, the surprise attack conquered Loudui County, marched into and seized the Poyang Palace, captured the Sui Dynasty's concubine to bribe the Turks, and the first Khan thanked him with a horse, and morale rose even higher.

古文：及攻陷定襄，复归于马邑。
现代文：于是攻克了定襄，又回到马邑县。
English: So he conquered Dingxiang and returned to Mayi County.

古文：突厥立武周为定杨可汗，遗以狼头纛。因僭称皇帝，以妻沮氏为皇后，建元为天兴。
现代文：突厥把刘武周立为定杨可汗，把有狼头图徽的大旗送给他，他就僭越自称皇帝，把妻子沮氏当作皇后，年号定为天兴。
English: The Turks made Liu Wu Zhou Li Ding Yang Khan and gave him a large flag with a wolf's head emblem. He arrogantly called himself an emperor, treated his wife De Di as an empress, and set the year as Tianxing.

古文：以卫士杨伏念为左仆射，妹婿同县人苑君璋为内史令。
现代文：任命卫士杨伏念为左仆射，妹夫同县人苑君璋为内史令。
English: He appointed Yang Fuxian, a guard, as his left-hand man, and his brother-in-law, Zhenyuan Junyao of the same county, as his secretary of internal history.

古文：先是，上谷人宋金刚有众万余人，在易州界为群盗，定州贼帅魏刀兒与相表里。
现代文：在这之前，上谷郡人宋金刚聚集了一万多人，在易州的边境地区结伙抢掠，定州的叛军首领魏刀儿跟他里外勾结。
English: Prior to this, more than ten thousand people from Shanggu County, Song Jingang, gathered in the border area of Yizhou to loot, and the rebel leader of Dingzhou, Wei Touer, colluded with him inside and outside.

古文：后刀兒为窦建德所灭，金刚救之，战败，率余众四千人奔武周。
现代文：后来魏刀儿被窦建德消灭了，宋金刚去援救他，吃了败仗，带领剩下的四千人投奔了刘武周。
English: Later, Wei Tiao'er was eliminated by Dou Jiande, Song Jingang went to rescue him, suffered a defeat, and led the remaining four thousand people to Liu Wuzhou.

古文：武周闻金刚善用兵，得之甚喜，号为宋王，委以军事，中分家产遗之。
现代文：刘武周一直听说宋金刚善于带兵打仗，得到他十分高兴，称他为宋王，把军事事务派给他管，平分出一半家产送给他。
English: Liu Wuzhou had always heard that Song King Kong was good at leading soldiers into battle. He was very pleased to get him, called him King Song, put him in charge of military affairs, and gave him an equal share of half of the family property.

古文：金刚亦深自结纳，遂出其妻，请聘武周之妹。
现代文：宋金刚也用重礼结交刘武周，于是抛弃自己的妻子，要求娶刘武周的妹妹为妻。
English: Song King Kong also befriended Liu Wuzhou with a heavy gift, so he abandoned his wife and asked to marry Liu Wuzhou's sister.

古文：又说武周入图晋阳，南向以争天下。
现代文：又怂恿刘武周设法夺取晋阳，跟南边的各武装集团争夺天下。
English: In addition, Liu Wuzhou tried to seize Jinyang and compete with the armed groups in the south.

古文：武周授金刚西南道大行台，令率兵二万人侵并州，军黄虵镇。
现代文：刘武周任命宋金刚为西南道大行台，命令他率领两万士卒进犯并州，驻扎黄蛇镇。
English: Liu Wuzhou appointed Song Jingang as the governor of Southwest Province, and ordered him to lead twenty thousand soldiers to invade and annex the province, and stationed in Huanghe Town.

古文：又引突厥之众，兵锋甚盛，袭破榆次县，进陷介州。
现代文：又接来突厥的人马，锐气很高，突袭攻克了榆次县，进而攻下了介州。
English: The Turkish soldiers and horses followed, their spirits were high, and they made a surprise attack to conquer Ganzi County, and then they conquered Jiezhou.

古文：高祖遣太常少卿李仲文率众讨之，为贼所执，一军全没。
现代文：唐高祖派遣太常少卿李仲文率领人马讨伐他，被宋金刚拘捕，全军覆没。
English: Emperor Gaozhu of Tang dispatched the too-frequent minor general Li Zhongwen to lead the troops to fight against him. He was arrested by Song Jinguang, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：仲文后得逃还。
现代文：李仲文后来逃回唐朝。
English: Li Zhongwen later fled back to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：复遣右仆射裴寂拒之，战又败绩。
现代文：再派右仆射裴寂抵御他，一打又被战败。
English: He then sent his right-hand man, Sho Pei Jia, to defend against him, but he was defeated again.

古文：武周进逼，总管齐王元吉委城遁走，武周遂据太原。
现代文：刘武周继续进逼，总管齐王李元吉丢下太原城悄悄逃跑了。刘武周于是攻占了太原。
English: Liu Wuzhou continued to push forward, and the general manager of Qi Wang, Li Yuanji, left Taiyuan City and quietly fled. Liu Wuzhou then captured Taiyuan.

古文：遣金刚进攻晋州，六日，城陷，右骁卫大将军刘弘基没于贼。
现代文：派宋金刚进军攻打晋州，打了六天城被攻破，右骁卫大将军刘弘基被杀。
English: He sent Song King Kong to attack Jinzhou, and after six days the city was defeated, and Liu Hongji, the right guard general, was killed.

古文：进取浍州，属县悉下。
现代文：刘武周继续进军攻占浍州，浍州所辖各县全部夺取。
English: Liu Wuzhou continued to invade and occupy Ganzhou, capturing all the counties under the jurisdiction of Ganzhou.

古文：夏县人吕崇茂杀县令，自号魏王，以应贼。
现代文：夏县人吕崇茂杀死县令，自称魏王，响应刘武周。
English: Xia County man Lü Chongmao killed the county magistrate, calling himself Wei Wang, in response to Liu Wuzhou.

古文：河东贼帅王行本又密与金刚连和，关中大骇。
现代文：河东叛军首领王行本跟宋金刚秘密建立友好关系，唐朝廷非常震惊。
English: The Tang court was very shocked when Wang Xingben, the leader of the rebel army in Hedong, secretly established friendly relations with Song King Kong.

古文：高祖命太宗益兵进讨，屯于柏壁，相持者久之。
现代文：高祖命令太宗扩充兵力进军讨伐，滞留在柏壁，很长时间相持不下。
English: Gaozu ordered Taizong to expand his army and go on a crusade, but he stayed at Kashiwabi and could not hold out for a long time.

古文：又命永安王孝基、陕州总管于筠、工部尚书独孤怀恩、内史侍郎唐俭进取夏县，不能克，军于城南。
现代文：又命令永安王李孝基、陕州总管于筠、工部尚书独孤怀恩、内史侍郎唐俭进军攻打夏县，不能取胜，在夏县城南扎营。
English: He also ordered the Yongan King Li Xiaoji, the General Manager of Shaanxi Province Yu Yu, the Minister of Industry Shang Shuxu, and the Minister of History Tang Jian to attack Xia County, but they could not win and camped in the south of Xia County.

古文：崇茂与贼将尉迟敬德袭破孝基营，诸军并陷，四将俱没。
现代文：吕崇茂与叛军将领尉迟敬德突袭攻取李孝基的营地，各路军队都被打败，四位将领一起被杀。
English: Lü Chongmao and the rebel general Lieutenant Chi Jingde led a raid to capture Li Xiaoji's camp. All the armies were defeated, and the four generals were killed together.

古文：敬德还浍州，太宗邀击于美良川，大破之。
现代文：尉迟敬德返回浍州，太宗在美良川阻击，大败尉迟敬德。
English: Lt. Chi Jingde returned to Zhangzhou, and Taizong resisted in the Miragawa River. Lt. Chi Jingde suffered a great defeat.

古文：敬德与贼将寻相又援王行本于蒲州，太宗复破之于蒲州。
现代文：尉迟敬德和叛军将领寻相又到蒲州去援救王行本，太宗又在蒲州打败了他们。
English: Sub-lieutenant Kyongde and rebel general Seongjong also went to Bushu to rescue Wang Xingpen, and Taejong defeated them in Bushu.

古文：高祖亲幸蒲津关，太宗自柏壁轻骑谒高祖于行在所。
现代文：高祖亲自视察蒲津关，太宗轻装骑马从柏壁到高祖住地拜见。
English: Gaozu personally inspected Putsenguan, and Taizong rode lightly on horseback from Baekbi to visit Gaozu's residence.

古文：宋金刚遂围绛州。
现代文：宋金刚就包围绛州。
English: Song King Kong then encircled Bozhou.

古文：及太宗还，金刚惧而引退。
现代文：等到太宗返回，宋金刚畏惧就带领部队撤退了。
English: When Taizong returned, Song Jingang was afraid and led his troops to retreat.

古文：武周复攻李仲文于浩州，频战皆败，又馈运不属，贼众大馁，于是金刚遂遁。
现代文：刘武周在浩州再次进攻李仲文，多次战斗都失败了，加之粮草运输接不上，士卒们极端饥饿，于是宋金刚就悄悄跑了。
English: Liu Wuzhou attacked Li Zhongwen again in Huzhou. Many battles failed. In addition, grain and grass transportation could not be connected, and the soldiers were extremely hungry. So Song King Gang quietly ran away.

古文：太宗复追及金刚于雀鼠谷，一日八战，皆破之，俘斩数万人，获辎重千余两。
现代文：太宗又在雀鼠谷追上了宋金刚，一天之内战斗八次，次次打败宋金刚，活捉、杀死几万人，缴获军用物资一千多车。
English: Taizong also caught up with Song King Kong in Sparrow Mouse Valley. They fought eight times in one day, defeated Song King Kong the second time, captured and killed tens of thousands of people alive, and seized more than a thousand vehicles of military supplies.

古文：金刚走入介州，王师逼之。
现代文：宋金刚跑到介州，唐军紧追不放。
English: Song King Kong ran to Jiezhou, and the Tang army chased after him.

古文：金刚尚有众二万，出其西门，背城而阵，太宗与诸将力战破之，金刚轻骑遁走。
现代文：宋金刚还有两万人马，从西门出城，背靠城池摆开阵式，太宗和各将领奋力作战打败了他，宋金刚轻装溜走。
English: Song King Kong also had twenty thousand horses. He left the city from the west gate and set up a formation with his back to the city. Taizong and the generals fought hard to defeat him, and Song King Kong slipped away lightly.

古文：其骁将尉迟敬德、寻相、张万岁收其精兵，举介州及永安来降。
现代文：他的骁勇将领尉迟敬德、寻相、张万岁集合自己的精悍士卒，献出介州和永安投降唐朝。
English: His valiant generals and lieutenants Chi Jingde, Huo Xiang and Zhang Wanling gathered their brave soldiers and surrendered the provinces of Jiezhou and Yongan to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：武周大惧，率五百骑弃并州北走，自乾烛谷亡奔突厥。
现代文：刘武周大为惊慌，带领五百人马丢下并州向北逃跑，从乾烛谷逃亡突厥。
English: Liu Wuzhou was greatly alarmed, and led five hundred men and horses to flee northward, fleeing from the Turks.

古文：金刚复收其亡散以拒官军，人莫之从，与百余骑复奔突厥。
现代文：宋金刚又收集逃散的士卒抵御唐军，人们不跟他干，伙同一百多人也跑到突厥。
English: Song King Kong also gathered the scattered soldiers to resist the Tang army. People did not follow him, and more than a hundred people also ran to Turku.

古文：太宗进平并州，悉复故地。
现代文：太宗进军平定并州，全部收复原有地盘。
English: Emperor Taizong marched into the province to pacify and annex it, and all the original territory was recovered.

古文：开道自初起至灭，凡八岁。
现代文：没过多久，宋金刚背叛突厥逃跑，即将回到老家上谷郡，被追来的骑兵抓住，处以腰斩。
English: Not long after, Song King Kong betrayed the Turks and fled. He was about to return to his hometown, Shanggu County, when he was caught by the pursuing cavalry and beheaded.

古文：以其地为妫州。
现代文：刘武周也想设法回到老家马邑县，消息泄露，被突厥杀死。
English: Liu Wuzhou also tried to return to his hometown in Mayi County, but the news leaked out and he was killed by the Turks.

古文：刘黑闼，贝州漳南人。
现代文：刘武周从起兵到被杀，共六年时间。刘黑闼，贝州漳南县人。
English: It took Liu Wu Zhou a total of six years from the time he raised an army to the time he was killed. Liu Heyao is from Beizhou's Yinan County.

古文：无赖，嗜酒，好博弈，不治产业，父兄患之。
现代文：他狡诈蛮横，爱喝酒，喜欢走六博下围棋，不干事，长辈为他伤脑筋。
English: He is cunning and rude, loves to drink, likes to go six-pointers and play Go, is not an officer, and his elders are worried about him.

古文：与窦建德少相友善，家贫，无以自给，建德每资之。
现代文：年轻时跟窦建德相友好，家境贫困缺吃少穿，窦建德往往资助他。
English: When he was young, he was friendly with Dou Jiande. His family was poor, and he was short of food and clothing. Dou Jiande often helped him.

古文：隋末亡命，从郝孝德为群盗，后归李密为裨将。
现代文：隋朝末年逃亡在外，跟随郝孝德聚众抢劫，后来归附李密当裨将。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, he fled abroad, followed Zou Xiaode to gather a crowd to rob, and was later attached to Li Mitang.

古文：密败，为王世充所虏。
现代文：李密失败后，被王世充俘虏。
English: After Li Mi's defeat, he was captured by Wang Shichong.

古文：世充素闻其勇，以为骑将。
现代文：王世充一直听说他勇猛强悍，让他当了骑将。
English: Wang Shichong had always heard that he was brave and strong, so he became a cavalry general.

古文：见世充所为而窃笑之，乃亡归建德，建德署为将军，封汉东郡公，令将奇兵东西掩袭。
现代文：他看着王世充干的一些事就偷偷笑话他，于是就逃离王世充去投靠窦建德，窦建德给了他将军的头衔，汉东郡公的封号，命令他率领一支突袭部队四出偷袭。
English: He watched Wang Shicheng do some things and secretly laughed at him, so he fled from Wang Shicheng to rely on Dou Jiande. Dou Jiande gave him the title of general, the official seal of Handong County, and ordered him to lead a raiding force to sneak out.

古文：黑闼既遍游诸贼，善观时变，素骁勇，多奸诈。
现代文：刘黑闼跟各叛军首领打遍了交道，善于观察时局变化，一向勇猛强悍，非常奸险狡诈。
English: Liu Hefei has had extensive dealings with the leaders of various rebel forces, is good at observing changes in the current situation, has always been brave and strong, and is very devious and cunning.

古文：建德有所经略，必令专知斥候，常间入敌中觇视虚实，或出其不意，乘机奋击，多所克获，军中号为神勇。
现代文：窦建德有了什么谋划，必然命令他一个人负责侦察，经常乘隙钻进敌方偷看虚实，有时出乎对方意料之外，乘机猛攻，战果丰硕，部队里把他叫作 神勇将军 。
English: If Dou Jiande had any plan, he would certainly order him to be in charge of reconnaissance alone. He would often take advantage of a gap to sneak into the enemy to peek at the truth. Sometimes he would surprise the other side, take advantage of the opportunity to attack, and achieve fruitful results. In the army, he was called General Shenyong.

古文：及建德败，黑闼自匿于漳南，杜门不出。
现代文：到窦建德失败后，刘黑闼躲藏在漳南县老家，闭门不出。
English: After Dou Jiande's defeat, Liu Hecun hid in his hometown in Yinan County and did not come out.

古文：会高祖征建德故将，范愿、董康买、曹湛、高雅贤等将赴长安，愿等相与谋曰： 王世充以洛阳降，其下骁将公卿、单雄信之徒皆被夷灭，我辈若至长安，必无保全之理。
现代文：适逢高祖发出诏书敦促窦建德的将领范愿、董康买、曹湛、高雅贤等人到长安去，范愿等人一起商议说： 王世充献出东都洛阳投降唐朝，他手下的将领杨公卿、单雄信一类人都被消灭了，我们这些人如果到长安去，必然没有活命的理由。
English: At the right time, Gao Zu issued an imperial edict urging Dou Jiande's generals Fan Zheng, Dong Kangmai, Cao Zhan, Gao Ya Xian and others to go to Chang'an. Fan Zheng and others discussed together and said: Wang Shichong surrendered the eastern capital Luoyang to the Tang Dynasty, and his generals Yang Gongqing, Shan Xiongxin and others were eliminated. If we go to Chang'an, we will certainly have no reason to live.

古文：且夏王往日擒获淮安王，全其性命，遣送还之。
现代文：再说我们的夏王往日捉住淮安王李神通，保全了他的性命，送他回了唐朝。
English: Besides, our Xia Wang once captured Huai'an Wang Li Shengtong, saved his life, and sent him back to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：唐家今得夏王，即加杀害，我辈残命，若不起兵报仇，实亦耻见天下人物。 
现代文：唐朝如今得到夏王，就杀害掉，我们这些人残存性命，如果不起兵报仇，实在是无脸再见天下英雄豪杰。 
English: Now that the Tang Dynasty has obtained Xia Wang, they will kill him. Those of us who are still alive, if we do not avenge ourselves, are really shameless. Goodbye, world hero.

古文：于是相率复谋反叛。
现代文：于是一起再策划造反。
English: So they plotted together to rebel again.

古文：卜以刘氏为主吉，共往漳南，见建德故将刘雅告之，且请。
现代文：卜卦显示请姓刘的人当首领吉利，就一起到漳南县，会见窦建德原将领刘雅告诉他上述情况，并且请他出山。
English: The divination showed that the person surnamed Liu should be the leader of Geely, so they went to Yinan County together to meet Dou Jiande's former general Liu Ya to tell him the above situation, and asked him to leave the mountain.

古文：雅曰： 天下已平，乐在丘园为农夫耳。
现代文：刘雅说 ：天下已经太平，我乐意在田园当农夫。
English: Liu Ya said: The world has become peaceful, I am happy to be a farmer in the countryside.

古文：起兵之事，非所愿也。 
现代文：起兵的事，不是我的心愿。 
English: It is not my wish to raise an army.

古文：众怒，杀雅而去。
现代文：大家火了，杀掉刘雅走了。
English: Everyone was enraged. They killed Liu Ya and left.

古文：范愿曰： 汉东公刘黑闼果敢多奇略，宽仁容众，恩结于士卒。
现代文：范愿说： 汉东郡公刘黑闼果断勇敢足智多谋，宽厚仁爱能够容人，跟士卒们建立了深厚感情。
English: Fan Zhengyi said: Liu Heixuan, the public official of Hantong County, is resolute, brave, resourceful and resourceful. His generous and benevolent love can accommodate people, and he has established deep feelings with the soldiers.

古文：吾久常闻刘氏当有王者，今举大事，欲收夏王之众，非其人莫可。 
现代文：我早就听说姓刘的应当有人做王侯，如今要干大事，想招集夏王的原班人马，非这个人不可。 
English: I have long heard that someone with the surname Liu should be the prince, and now I want to do something big. If I want to recruit Xia Wang's original team, it must be this person.

古文：遂往诣黑闼，以告其意。
现代文：于是来到刘黑闼家里，说明意图。
English: So he came to Liu Heyao's home to explain his intentions.

古文：黑闼大悦，杀牛会众，举兵得百余人，袭破漳南县。
现代文：刘黑闼十分高兴，备办筵席招集众人，领着一百多人起兵，突袭打下漳南县城。
English: Liu Heyao was very happy. He prepared a banquet to gather people and led more than a hundred soldiers to launch a surprise attack on the county seat of Yinan.

古文：贝州刺史戴元详、魏州刺史权威合兵击之，并为黑闼所败，元详及威皆没于阵。
现代文：贝州刺史戴元详、魏州刺史权威联合兵力攻打刘黑闼，一起被刘黑闼打败，戴元祥和权威都死在阵地上。
English: Bei Zhou and Wei Zhou jointly attacked Liu Heihe and were defeated by Liu Heihe. Dai Yuanxiang and the authorities both died on the battlefield.

古文：黑闼尽收其器械及余众千余人，于是范愿、高雅贤等宿旧左右渐来归附，众至二千人。
现代文：刘黑闼缴获了他们的全部武器装备和剩下的一千多名士卒，这时范愿、高雅贤等老朋友老同事逐渐前来归附，队伍到了两千人。
English: Liu Heyao captured all their weapons and equipment and the remaining more than one thousand soldiers. At this time, old friends and colleagues such as Fan Zheng and Gao Yaxian gradually came to join them, and the team reached two thousand.

古文：武德四年七月，设坛于漳南，祭建德，告以举兵之意，自称大将军。
现代文：高祖武德四年七月，刘黑闼在漳南县设置祭坛，祭奠窦建德，向他禀告造反报仇的心愿，自称大将军。
English: In July of the fourth year of Gao Zuwude's reign, Liu Heyao set up an altar in Yinan County to pay tribute to Dou Jiande, telling him of his desire to rebel and take revenge, and calling himself a great general.

古文：淮安王神通、将军秦武通、王行敏前后讨之，皆为所败。
现代文：淮安王李神通、将军秦武通、王行敏先后讨伐他，都被打败。
English: Huai'an King Lishentong, General Qin Wutong, and Wang Xingmin successively fought against him and were all defeated.

古文：于是移书赵、魏，其建德将士，往往杀官吏以应。
现代文：于是移送文书到赵州、魏地，那里的原窦建德的将士们纷纷杀掉官吏来响应。
English: As a result, the documents were transferred to Zhao Prefecture and Wei Province, where Gen Dou Jiande's soldiers responded by killing officials one after another.

古文：黑闼北连怀戎贼帅高开道，兵锋甚锐，进至宗城，有众数万。
现代文：刘黑闼到北边联合怀戎的叛军首领高开道，军队的气势猛烈，进发到宗城时，有几万人。
English: Liu Heixuan went to the north to unite with Gao Kaido, the rebel leader of Wai Rong. The army's momentum was fierce, and there were tens of thousands of people when they marched into the capital.

古文：黎州总管李世勣不能拒，弃城走保洺州。
现代文：黎州总管李世责力抵挡不了，丢下宗城逃去守卫氵名州。
English: Li Shili, the head of Li Prefecture, could not resist and left the capital to go and guard Yunnan.

古文：黑闼追击破之，步卒五千人，皆殁于阵，世勣与武通仅以身免。
现代文：刘黑闼追击打败了他，五千名步兵，都死在阵地上，李世责力和秦武通只是保住了自己的性命。
English: Liu Heyao's pursuit defeated him. Five thousand infantrymen died on the battlefield. Li Shili and Qin Wudong only saved their own lives.

古文：黑闼又征王琮为中书令，刘斌为中书侍郎，以掌文翰。
现代文：刘黑闼又征召王琮任中书令，刘斌任中书侍郎，掌管文书公务。
English: Liu Heixuan also conscripted Wang Qian to serve as the secretary of the Central Committee, and Liu Bin to serve as the secretary of the Central Committee, in charge of clerical duties.

古文：遣使北连突厥，颉利可汗遣俟斤宋耶那，率胡骑从之。
现代文：派遣使者联合北方的突厥，颉利可汗派遣俟斤宋耶那率领骑兵部队跟随刘黑闼。
English: He sent an envoy to unite the Turks in the north, and the Qili Khan dispatched the warlord Song Jena to lead a cavalry force to follow Liu Heyao.

古文：黑闼军大振，进陷相州。半岁，悉复建德故地。
现代文：刘黑闼部队的士气大为振奋，进军攻克了相州，半年时间全部收复了窦建德原有的地盘。
English: The morale of Liu Hefei's troops was greatly invigorated. They marched into and conquered Xiangzhou, and recovered all of Dou Jiande's original territory in half a year.

古文：兗州贼帅徐圆朗举齐、兗之地以附于黑闼，其势益张。
现代文：兖州的叛军首领徐圆朗拿齐州、兖州的地盘归附刘黑闼，他的声势更加强大。
English: The rebel leader of Zhangzhou, Xu Yuanlang, took the territory of Qizhou and Zhangzhou to Liu Heyao, and his voice was even more powerful.

古文：五年正月，黑闼至相州，僭称汉东王，建元为天造。
现代文：高祖武德五年正月，刘黑闼到相州，僭越自称汉东王，年号定为天造。
English: In the first month of Gao Zuwude's fifth year, Liu He Rong went to Xiangzhou. He claimed to be the king of the Han Dynasty, and the year of his birth was set as the Year of Heavenly Creation.

古文：以范愿为左仆射，董康买为兵部尚书，高雅贤为右领军，又引建德时文武悉复本位，都于洺州。
现代文：任命范愿为左仆射，董康买为兵部尚书，高雅贤为右将军，还请来窦建德时候的文武官员全部恢复原来的职务，在氵名州建都。
English: He appointed Fan Rongyan as the left-hand man, Dong Kangmai as the military commander, and Gao Yaxian as the right-hand man. He also invited all the civil and military officials from the time of Dou Jiande to resume their original duties and build the capital in Shennang Prefecture.

古文：其设法行政，皆师建德而攻战勇决过之。
现代文：他们建立法规主持政务，全部照搬窦建德，但作战的勇猛果断超过了他。
English: They established laws and regulations and presided over government affairs, all of which were copied from Dou Jiande, but the bravery and decisiveness of the war surpassed him.

古文：于是太宗又自请统兵讨之，师次卫州，黑闼数以兵挑战，辄为官军所挫。
现代文：于是太宗又主动请求统帅军队讨伐刘黑闼，队伍驻扎在卫州，刘黑闼多次派兵挑战，都被唐军挫败。
English: As a result, Taizong also took the initiative to request the commander of the army to fight Liu Heihe, the team was stationed in Weizhou, and Liu Heihe repeatedly sent troops to challenge, all of which were defeated by the Tang army.

古文：黑闼惧，委相州，而退保于列人营。
现代文：刘黑闼害怕，放弃相州，撤退到列人营设防守卫。
English: Liu Heixuan was afraid, gave up on Xiangzhou, and retreated to Lianren to set up a defensive perimeter.

古文：时洺水县人请为内应，太宗遣总管罗士信入城据守，黑闼又攻陷其城，士信死之，遂据洺州。
现代文：这时氵名水县的人要求当刘黑闼的内应，太宗派遣总管罗士信进城据守，刘黑闼又攻克氵名水县城，罗士信死于这次战斗，刘黑闼于是据守氵名州。
English: At this time, the people of Zhang Mingshui County requested that the Taizong dispatch the general manager Luo Shixin to enter the city and defend it. Liu Heixin also conquered the city of Zhang Mingshui County. Luo Shixin died in this battle, and Liu Heixin then defended Zhang Mingshou.

古文：三月，太宗阻洺水列营以逼之，分遣奇兵，断其粮道。
现代文：三月，太宗依仗氵名水的险要，一字儿摆开军营来威逼刘黑闼，分别派遣突袭部队，截断他的运粮通道。
English: In March, Taizong, relying on the perilous situation of Yan Mingshui, set up a military camp to intimidate Liu Heyao, and separately dispatched raiding troops to cut off his grain transportation channel.

古文：黑闼又数挑战，太宗坚壁不应，以挫其锋。
现代文：刘黑闼又多次挑战，太宗坚守壁垒不应战，来挫伤他的锐气。
English: Liu Heyao challenged him many times, and Taizong held on to the barrier to frustrate him.

古文：黑闼城中粮尽，太宗度其必来决战，预拥洺水上流，谓守堤吏曰： 我击贼之日，候贼半度而决堰。 
现代文：刘黑闼城里的粮食吃光了，太宗料定他必然要来决战，预先堵住氵名水上游，对守堤的官员说： 战斗打响的时候，等敌人过河走到河中间就挖开堤坝。 
English: Liu Heyao had run out of food in the city, and Taizong assumed that he would have to come for a decisive battle. He blocked the upper reaches of the Ermei River in advance, and said to the officials guarding the dike: "When the battle begins, wait for the enemy to cross the river and get to the middle of the river, then dig up the dike."

古文：黑闼果率步骑二万渡洺水而阵，与官军大战，贼众大溃，水又大至，黑闼众不得渡，斩首万余级，溺死者数千人。
现代文：刘黑闼果然率领步兵骑兵两万人要过氵名水摆阵，跟唐军大战，叛军溃不成军，河水又汹涌而来，刘黑闼的人马无法过河，被杀死一万多人，被淹死几千人。
English: Liu Hefei did indeed lead 20,000 infantry and cavalry to cross the Yunnan-Mianyang Water, and fought with the Tang army. The rebels were defeated and could not form an army, and the river was raging again. Liu Hefei's men and horses could not cross the river, and more than 10,000 people were killed, and several thousand were drowned.

古文：黑闼与范愿等以千余人奔于突厥，山东悉定。
现代文：刘黑闼和范愿等带着一千多人逃往突厥，山东全部平定。
English: Liu Heixuan and Fan Jian fled to Turkey with more than a thousand people, and Shandong was completely pacified.

古文：太宗遂引军于河南以讨徐圆朗。
现代文：太宗于是带领军队到河南讨伐徐圆朗。
English: Taizong then led the army to Henan to fight against Xu Yuanlang.

古文：六月，黑闼复借兵于突厥，来寇山东。
现代文：当年六月，刘黑闼又向突厥借来军队，侵犯山东。
English: In June of that year, Liu Hefei borrowed troops from the Turks and invaded Shandong.

古文：七月，至定州，其旧将曹湛、董康买先亡在鲜虞，复聚兵以应黑闼。
现代文：七月，到了定州，他原来的将领曹湛、董康买以前逃亡在鲜虞，现在又招集人马响应刘黑闼。
English: In July, when he arrived in Dingzhou, his former generals Cao Zhan and Dong Kangbei, who had previously fled in great danger, now called for reinforcements in response to Liu Heyao.

古文：高祖遣淮阳王道玄、原国公史万宝讨之，战于下博，王师败绩，道玄死于阵，万宝轻骑逃还。
现代文：高祖派遣淮阳王李道玄、原国公史万宝讨伐他，在下博交战，唐军战败，李道玄死在战场，史万宝轻装骑马逃回去了。
English: Gao Zu sent Li Daoxuan, the king of Huaiyang, and Shi Wanbao, the prince of the original country, to fight against him. They fought in Lower Bo, the Tang army was defeated, Li Daoxuan died on the battlefield, and Shi Wanbao fled back lightly loaded on horseback.

古文：由是河北诸州尽叛，又降于黑闼，旬日间悉复故城，复都洺州。
现代文：从此河北各个州县全部叛变，又投降刘黑闼，十天时间全部收复原有城镇，又在氵名州建都。
English: From then on, all the prefectures and counties in Hebei rebelled and surrendered to Liu Heyao. It took ten days to recover all the original towns, and the capital was built in Shennan Prefecture.

古文：十一月，高祖遣齐王元吉击之，迟留不进。
现代文：十一月，高祖派遣齐王李元吉攻打，他行动迟缓不愿进军。
English: In November, Gaozu dispatched Qi King Li Yuanji to attack, but he was slow and unwilling to march.

古文：又令隐太子建成督兵进讨，频战大捷。
现代文：高祖又命令隐太子李建成督率部队进军讨伐，连打几仗大获胜利。
English: Gao Zu also ordered the Hidden Prince Li Jiancheng to lead the troops into the crusade, and won several battles in a row.

古文：六年二月，又大破之于馆陶，黑闼引军北走。
现代文：武德六年二月，又在馆陶大败刘黑闼，刘黑闼带领队伍向北逃跑。
English: In February of the sixth year of Wude's reign, he again defeated Liu Heyao in the Pavilion Tao. Liu Heyao led the team to flee to the north.

古文：建成与元吉合千余骑屯于永济渠，纵骑击之，黑闼败走，命骑将刘弘基追之。
现代文：李建成和李元吉联合组成一千多人的骑兵部队聚集在永济渠，一阵猛烈冲刺，刘黑闼败逃，命令骑将刘弘基追击。
English: Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji jointly formed a cavalry force of more than a thousand people gathered in Yongji Canal, a fierce sprint, Liu Heixuan fled, and ordered the cavalry commander Liu Hongji to pursue.

古文：黑闼为王师所蹙，不得休息，道远兵疲，比至饶阳，从者才百余人，众皆馁，入城求食。
现代文：刘黑闼受唐军威逼，得不到休息，路途遥远士卒疲劳，到饶阳时，跟着他的才一百多人，大家都饥肠辘辘，想进城弄东西吃。
English: Liu Heixuan was bullied by the Tang army and couldn't get any rest. He was exhausted from the long journey. When he arrived in Raoyang, there were only a hundred or so people with him. Everyone was hungry and wanted to go into the city to get something to eat.

古文：黑闼所署饶州刺史葛德威出门迎拜，延之入城。
现代文：刘黑闼委任的饶州刺史诸葛德威出城大礼迎接，请他们进城。
English: Liu Heixuan's appointed Raozhou bard Zhuge Dewei came out of the city to welcome them, and invited them to enter the city.

古文：黑闼初不许，德威谬为诚敬，涕泣固请。
现代文：刘黑闼开始不同意，诸葛德威假装真诚恭敬，哭着坚持邀请。
English: Liu Heyao began to disagree, Zhuge Dewei pretended to be sincere and respectful, crying and insisting on the invitation.

古文：黑闼乃进，至城傍，德威勒兵执之，送于建成，斩于洺州，山东复定。
现代文：刘黑闼才走进城门，诸葛德威就指挥部队拘捕了他，送给李建成，在氵名州斩杀，山东又平定了。
English: Liu Heixuan walked into the city gate, Zhu Dewei commanded the troops to arrest him, sent him to Li Jiancheng, killed him in Shannianzhou, and leveled Shandong.

