古文：武侯问曰： 严刑明赏，足以胜乎？ 
现代文：武侯问道： 赏罚严明就足以打胜仗了吗？ 
English: Wuhou asked: Is strict reward and punishment enough to win the war?

古文：起对曰： 严明之事，臣不能悉。虽然，非所恃也。
现代文：吴起答： 赏罚严明这件事，我不能详尽地说明，虽然这很重要，但不能完全依靠它。
English: Wu Qian replied: I cannot explain this matter of strict reward and punishment in detail. Although it is very important, it cannot be completely relied on.

古文：夫发号布令而人乐闻，兴师动众而人乐战，交兵接刃而人乐死。
现代文：发号施令，人们乐于听从，出兵打仗，人们乐于参战，冲锋陷阵，人们乐于效死。
English: Give orders, people are willing to obey, send troops to fight, people are willing to fight, charge into battle, people are willing to die.

古文：此三者，人主之所恃也。 
现代文：这三点，才是君主所应该依的。 
English: These three points are what the monarch should be guided by.

古文：武侯曰： 致之奈何？ 
现代文：武侯说： 怎样才能做到呢? 
English: Wuhou said, "How can we do that?

古文：对曰： 君举有功而进飨之，无功而励之。 
现代文：吴起答： 您选拔有功人员，举行盛大宴会款待他们，这对无功的人也是一种勉励。 
English: Wu Qida: You have selected meritorious personnel and held a grand banquet to entertain them. This is also a kind of encouragement to those who are not meritorious.

古文：于是武侯设坐庙廷，为三行，飨士大夫。
现代文：于是武侯设席于祖庙，分三排坐位宴请士大夫。
English: As a result, Wuhou set up a table in the ancestral temple and held a three-row seated banquet for the scholar-doctor.

古文：上功坐前行，肴席兼重器、上牢；次功坐中行，肴席器差减；无功坐后行，肴席无重器。
现代文：立上等功的坐前排，用上等酒席和珍贵餐具，猪、牛、羊三杜俱全。二等功的坐中排，酒席、餐具较为差些。没有功的坐后排，只有酒席，没有贵重餐具。
English: In the front row of the first-class seat, the first-class wine table and precious tableware are used, and pigs, cattle and sheep are fully equipped. In the middle row of the second-class seat, the wine table and tableware are relatively poor. In the back row of the first-class seat, there is only the wine table, and there is no valuable tableware.

古文：飨毕而出，又颁赐有功者父母妻子于庙门外，亦以功为差。
现代文：宴后出来，又在庙门外赏赐有功人员的父母妻子，也按功劳大小而分差列。
English: After the banquet, the parents and wives of the meritorious personnel were rewarded outside the temple gate, and they were also ranked according to their merits.

古文：有死事之家，岁使者劳赐其父母，著不忘于心。
现代文：对于死难将士的家属，每年派人慰问、赏赐他们的父母，表示心里没有志记他们。
English: For the families of the soldiers who died, they sent people every year to console and reward their parents, indicating that they had no intention of remembering them.

古文：行之三年，秦人兴师，临于西河。魏士闻之，不待吏令，介胄而奋击之者以万数。
现代文：这个办法实行了三年之后，秦国出兵到达魏国的西河边境，魏国的士卒听到这一消息，不待官吏的命令，就自动穿戴盔甲奋勇抗敌的数以万计。
English: Three years after the implementation of this method, the Qin dispatched troops reached the West River border of Wei. When the Wei soldiers heard this news, without waiting for the orders of officials, they automatically wore armor and bravely resisted the enemy by tens of thousands.

古文：武侯召吴起而谓曰： 子前日之教行矣。 
现代文：于是武侯召见吴起说： 您以前教我的办法，现在见到成效了。 
English: So Wuhou summoned Wu Qi and said, "The methods you taught me before are now bearing fruit.

古文：起对曰： 臣闻人有短长，气有盛衰。
现代文：吴起说： 我听说人有短处有长处，士气也有盛有衰。
English: Wu Qi said: I have heard that people have strengths and weaknesses, and morale also has its ups and downs.

古文：君试发无功者五万人，臣请率以当之。脱其不胜，取笑于诸侯，失权于天下矣。
现代文：您不妨试派五万名没有立过功的人，让我率领去抵挡秦军，如果不胜，就会被诸侯讥笑，丧失权威于天下了。
English: You may as well try to send fifty thousand people who have not made any contribution, let me lead them to resist the Qin army. If they do not win, they will be ridiculed by the princes and lose their authority in the world.

古文：今使一死贼伏于旷野，千人追之，莫不枭视狼顾。
现代文：譬如现在有一个犯了死罪的盗贼，隐伏在荒郊旷野，派一千人去追捕他，没有一个不瞻前顾后的。
English: Now suppose there is a thief who has committed a capital crime and is hiding in the wilderness. Send a thousand men after him, and not one of them will look back.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：忌其暴起而害己。
现代文：是怕他突然跳出来伤害了自己。
English: Afraid he'd jump out and hurt himself.

古文：是以一人投命，足惧千夫。
现代文：所以一个人拼命，足使千人畏惧。
English: Therefore, one man's desperate struggle is a thousand men's fear.

古文：今臣以五万之众，而为以四贼，率以讨之，固难敌矣。 
现代文：现在我这五万人都象那个盗贼一样，率领他们去征讨敌人，敌人就很难抵挡了。 
English: Now I have these fifty thousand people like that thief, and I lead them to conquer the enemy, and the enemy is difficult to resist.

古文：于是武侯从之，兼车五百乘，骑三千匹，而破秦五十万众，此励士之功也。
现代文：于是武侯采纳了吴起的意见，并加派战车五百辆，战马三十匹，大破秦军五十万人。这就是激励士气的效果。
English: As a result, Wuhou adopted Wu Qi's opinion and dispatched an additional 500 chariots, 30 war horses, and 500 thousand people to defeat the Qin army. This is the effect of encouraging morale.

古文：先战一日，吴起令三军曰： 诸吏士当从受。车骑与徒，若车不得车，骑不得骑，徒不得徒，虽破军皆无。 
现代文：在作战的前一天，吴起命令三军说： 众吏士应当听从命令去和敌人战斗，无论车兵、骑兵和步兵，如果车兵不能缴获敌人的战车，骑兵不能俘获敌人的骑兵，步兵不能俘获敌人的步兵，即使打败敌人，都不算有功。 
English: On the day before the battle, Wu Qi issued an order to the three armies, saying, "All officials should obey the order to fight the enemy, no matter whether they are chariots, cavalry or infantry. If the chariots cannot capture the enemy's chariots, the cavalry cannot capture the enemy's cavalry, and the infantry cannot capture the enemy's infantry, even if they defeat the enemy, they are not considered to have made any contribution.

古文：故战之日，其令不烦而威震天下。
现代文：所以作战的那天，他的号令不多，却战果辉煌，威震天下。
English: Therefore, on the day of the battle, his orders were not many, but the results of the battle were brilliant, and the world was shaken.

