古文：公孙绰王安国尼妙寂李文敏樊宗谅荥阳氏
现代文：公孙绰王安国尼妙寂李文敏樊宗谅荥阳氏
English: His great-grandson, Wang An Guo Ni Miaozhi, Li Wenmin, Zong Ye, and Zong Ye Yang

古文：公孙绰
现代文：公孙绰
English: Gongsun Zhuo

古文：唐王屋主簿公孙绰，到官数月，暴疾而殒。
现代文：唐朝王屋县主簿名叫公孙绰，到任没几个月，突然得急病死了，还没来得及埋葬。
English: The chief bookkeeper of Wangya County in the Tang Dynasty was named Gongsun Cao. He had only been in office for a few months when he suddenly fell ill and died before he could be buried.

古文：未及葬，县令独在厅中，见公孙具公服，从门而入。惊起曰： 与公幽显异路，何故相干？ 
现代文：这一天，县令独自一人在厅堂里，忽见公孙绰穿着官服，从门外进来，县令很吃惊，起来说： 我和你现在是阴阳两界，什么原因来找我？ 
English: On this day, the county magistrate was alone in the hall, when he suddenly saw Gongsun Chuo, wearing an official uniform, enter from outside the door. The county magistrate was very surprised and stood up and said: I and you are now yin and yang, what is the reason for coming to me?

古文：公孙曰： 某有冤，要见长官请雪，尝忝僚佐，岂遽无情！
现代文：公孙说： 我有冤屈，现在邀见你请你为我昭雪，不才曾愧在你的部下，难道这么快就没有情面了吗？
English: The grandson-in-law said, "I have a grievance. Now that I have been invited to see you, I would like you to clear it up for me. Wasn't it only once that I was ashamed to be one of your subordinates? Isn't it too soon to lose face?

古文：某命未合尽，为奴婢所厌，以利盗窃。
现代文：我的寿数本来没尽，但因奴婢们讨厌我，我死了才利于他们盗窃。
English: My life span was not complete, but because the slaves and maids hated me, I died to facilitate their theft.

古文：某宅在河阴县，长官有心，倘为密选健吏，赍牒往捉，必不漏网。
现代文：我的家在河阴县，长官果有心为我报仇，请选派得力的衙役，秘密地带着你的命令去抓捕，一定不会让他们漏网。
English: My home is in Hexin County. If the chief has the heart to take revenge for me, please select a strong agent and secretly take your order to arrest them. I will not let them slip through the net.

古文：宅堂檐从东第七瓦垅下，有某形状，以桐为之，钉布其上，已变易矣。 
现代文：我的房檐从东数第七条瓦垅下面，有我的人形，用桐木刻制的，上面钉着钉子，已经有所变化了。 
English: My eaves from the east number seven tile below, there is my human form, carved in paulownia wood, with nails on top, has changed.

古文：言讫而没。
现代文：说完就没有影了。
English: After that, there was no shadow.

古文：令异甚，乃择强卒素为绰所厚者，持牒并书与河阴宰，其奴婢尽捕得，遂于堂檐上搜之，果获人形，长尺余，钉绕其身。
现代文：县令很惊异，就挑选了几个强健的吏卒，都是平时公孙绰对他们厚待的，带着密令书信送给河阳县县宰，把公孙家的奴婢都抓起来了。又到屋堂的檐上去搜查，真的找到了人形，大约有一尺多长，周身都钉着钉子，有的木质渐渐变成了肉质，敲击它还能发出声音。
English: The county magistrate was very surprised, so he selected a few strong officials, all of whom were treated well by Gongsun in ordinary times, and sent a secret letter to the county magistrate of Heyang County, arresting all the slaves and maids of Gongsun's family. He also went to the roof of the house to search, and really found a doll, about more than a foot long, with nails all around. Some wood gradually turned into flesh, and it could make a sound when knocked.

古文：木渐为肉，击之哑然有声，绰所贮粟麦，以俟闲居之费者，悉为所盗矣。县遂申府，奴婢数人，皆殪枯木。王安国
现代文：公孙绰家贮藏的以备将来退居时用的粮食等物，全都被他们盗走了。县令于是申报到州府，那几个做恶的奴婢都被杖杀。王安国
English: They stole all the grain and other items that the Gongsun Biao family had stored in preparation for their future retirement. The county government then reported to the state capital, and the evil-doing slaves and maids were all killed with a cane. Wang Anguo

古文：泾之北鄙农人有王安国者，力穑，衣食自给。
现代文：泾河北边偏僻农村有个叫王安国的庄稼人。他勤劳耕种，衣食都能自给。
English: There is a farmer named Wang An Guo in a remote rural area on the north side of the Bohai River. He cultivates diligently and is self-sufficient in food and clothing.

古文：唐宝历三年冬，夜有二盗窬墙而入，皆执利刃。安国不敢支梧，而室内衣裘，挚之无孑遗。
现代文：唐敬宗宝历三年冬天的一个晚上，有两个强盗跳墙进了王安国家，都拿着利刀，安国不敢出声，室内的衣物，被贼人抢劫一空。
English: On a winter's night in the third year of Tang Jingzong's reign, two robbers jumped over a wall into Wang An Guo's home. Both of them were holding sharp swords. Wang An Guo did not dare to utter a word. The clothes in the room were completely robbed by the thieves.

古文：安国一子，名何七，年甫六七岁，方眠惊起，因叫有贼，登时为贼射，应弦而毙。
现代文：安国有一个儿子，名叫何七，刚六七岁，正睡觉被惊醒，就大叫有贼，立刻被贼人射了一箭，应弦而死。
English: An Guo had a son named He Qi, just six or seven years old, who was sleeping when he was woken up and shouted that there was a thief. He was immediately shot with an arrow by the thief and died as a result.

古文：安国闾外有二驴紫色者，亦为攘去。
现代文：安国的屋外有两头紫色的驴，也被贼人牵去。
English: There are two purple donkeys outside An Guo's house, which were also taken away by the thieves.

古文：迟明，村人集聚，共商量捕逐之路。
现代文：黎明，村里人都集聚在他家，共同商量抓贼的办法。
English: At dawn, everyone in the village gathered at his house to discuss how to catch the thief.

古文：俄而何七之魂登房门而号： 我死自是命，那复多痛，所痛者，永诀父娘耳。 
现代文：不一会儿，何七的魂灵踏着房门大声哭泣说： 我死是命里该着，不必过多悲伤，我悲伤的是我再也见不到父亲和母亲了。 
English: After a while, seven souls came to the door, crying loudly and saying, "I deserve to die. Don't be too sad. I'm sad because I'll never see my father and mother again."

古文：遂冤泣久之。邻人会者五六十人，皆为雪涕。
现代文：哭泣了很长时间，邻居来聚集的有五六十人，都被感动的哭了。
English: They cried for a long time. Fifty or sixty people gathered from the neighborhood, and they were all moved to tears.

古文：因曰： 勿谋追逐。明年五月，当自送死。 
现代文：何七说： 不要想抓贼的办法了，明年五月，他们自己就会来送死。 
English: He Qi said, "Don't think about how to catch the thief. Next May, they will come to send him to his death."

古文：乃召安国，附耳告之名氏，仍期勿。
现代文：于是就召呼安国，贴着耳朵告诉他贼人的名字，希望他不要泄露出去。
English: So he called out to Ankoku and told him the name of the thief, hoping he wouldn't reveal it.

古文：洎麦秋，安国有麦半顷，方收拾，晨有二牛来，蹊践狼籍，安国牵归，遍谓里中曰： 谁牛伤暴我苗？
现代文：到了麦熟时，安国有半顷麦子，正要收割，一天早晨有两头牛来到麦地，把麦子践踏得不象样子，安国就把牛牵回家，问遍了村里的人，说： 谁家的牛把我家的麦子踩坏了？
English: When the wheat was ripe, Anguo had half a hectare of wheat, which was about to be harvested. One morning, two cows came to the wheat field and trampled the wheat in an unusual way. Anguo took the cow home and asked everyone in the village, saying: "Who's cow trampled my family's wheat?"

古文：我已系之，牛主当赍偿以购；不尔，吾将诣官焉。 
现代文：我已经栓住了，牛的主人应该拿东西作赔偿换回牛，不然的话，我就要报告官府了。 
English: I have tied it up. The owner of the cow should give something as compensation in exchange for the cow, otherwise I will report it to the authorities.

古文：里中共往，皆曰： 此非左侧人之素畜者。 
现代文：村里人都来了，都说： 这两头牛不是咱们左邻右舍所养的。 
English: All the villagers came and said, "These two cows were not raised by our neighbors.

古文：聚视久之，忽有二客至曰： 我牛也。昨暮惊逃，不虞至此，所损之田，请酬倍资而归我畜焉。 
现代文：大家聚在一起看了很长时间，忽然有两个外村的人来到了，说： 是我们的牛，昨天晚上受惊逃跑，没想到跑到这里来，所损坏的麦子，请让我加倍赔偿来换回我的牛。 
English: Everyone gathered together and watched for a long time. Suddenly, two people from outside the village arrived and said, "It's our cow. It was frightened and ran away last night. I didn't expect it to come here. The damaged wheat, please let me double the compensation to replace my cow."

古文：共里人诘所从，因验契书，其一乃以紫驴交致也。安国即醒何七所谓，及询名姓皆同，遂缚之，曰： 尔即去冬射我子尽我财者。 
现代文：村里人就问他们从哪里来，又检查他们买牛的文契，其中一头牛是用紫色的驴换来的，安国就想起了何七的话，等到问他们叫什么名字，和何七说的一样，于是就把他们绑起来，说： 你们就是去年冬天射死我儿子抢去我的财物的人。 
English: The villagers asked them where they came from, and also checked their deed of purchase of cattle. One of the cattle was exchanged for a purple donkey. An Guo remembered He Qi's words, and asked them what their names were, the same as He Qi said, so he tied them up and said: "You are the people who shot my son last winter and robbed me of my belongings."

古文：二盗相顾，不复隐，曰： 天也命也，死不可逭也。 
现代文：两个强盗互相看了看，就不再隐瞒了。说： 真是命里注定啊！死是不可逃避的。 
English: The two robbers looked at each other, no longer holding back, and said: "It's fate! Death is inevitable."

古文：即述其故，曰： 我既行劫杀，遂北窜宁庆之郊，谓事已积久，因买牛将归岐上，昨牛抵村北二十里，徘徊不进，俟夜黑，方将过此。
现代文：然后就说了为什么到这里来。
English: Then he told me why he came here.

古文：既寐，梦一小儿五岁许，裸形乱舞，纷纭相迷，经宿方寤。
现代文：说： 我们杀人抢劫之后，立刻逃到宁庆的郊区，考虑到事情已经很久了。
English: He said: "After the murder and robbery, we immediately fled to the suburbs of Ningqing. Considering the circumstances, it has been a long time.

古文：及觉，二牛之縻纼不断，如被解脱，则已窜矣。因踪迹之，由径来至此。去冬之寇，讵敢逃焉。 里人送邑，皆准于法。
现代文：因此才出来买牛要回到岐上，但昨天到了这村子北边二十多里的地方，牛就徘徊不往前走了，等到天黑，才过了这个地方，晚上睡觉时梦到一个小孩大约有五岁，光着身子乱跳，把我们弄得迷迷糊糊，过了一宿才醒，醒后去看牛，只见系着两头牛的绳子没有断，好象被解开似的，牛已经跑得不见影了，我们顺着牛蹄印找到这里来。去年冬天的贼寇，那里敢逃跑。 村里人把二盗贼送到城里，都受到了法律的惩罚。
English: That's why I came out to buy a cow to go back to Qishan, but when I arrived at a place more than 20 miles north of this village yesterday, the cow wandered and did not move forward. I waited until dark to pass this place. At night, when I was sleeping, I dreamed of a child about five years old, jumping around naked, making us confused. I woke up after a night, and after waking up I went to see the cow. I saw that the rope tying the two cows was not broken, as if it had been untied. The cow had run out of sight, and we followed the cow's hoofprints to find it here. Last winter's

古文：尼妙寂
现代文：尼妙寂
English: Ni Miaojia

古文：尼妙寂，姓叶氏，江州浔阳人也。
现代文：尼姑妙寂，姓叶，江州浔阳人。
English: Nun Myaojia, surnamed Ye, from Shenyang, Jiangsu Province.

古文：初嫁任华，浔阳之贾也。
现代文：当初嫁给任华，是浔阳的商人。
English: She was originally married to Ren Hua, a merchant from Shenyang.

古文：父升，与华往复长沙广陵间。
现代文：她的父亲叶升，和任华经常往返在长沙和广陵之间作生意。
English: Her father, Ye Sheng, and Ren Hua often travel back and forth between Changsha and Guangling to do business.

古文：唐贞元十一年春，之潭州不复。
现代文：唐朝贞元十一年的春天，去潭州没有返回，过了归期已经几个月了。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, he did not return to Tanzhou, and it has been several months since he was due to return.

古文：过期数月，妙寂忽梦父，被发裸形，流血满身，泣曰： 吾与汝夫，湖中遇盗，皆已死矣。
现代文：有一天，妙寂忽然梦到了父亲，他披散着头发，光着身子，满身是血。哭着说： 我和你丈夫，在湖中遇上强盗，都已经死了。
English: One day, Myoja suddenly dreamed of her father, his hair disheveled, naked, and covered in blood, crying, "I and your husband have been killed by robbers in the lake.

古文：以汝心似有志者，天许复仇，但幽冥之意，不欲显言，故吾隐语报汝，诚能思而复之，吾亦何恨！ 妙寂曰： 隐语云何？ 
现代文：我平时看你是个意志坚强，有志向的人，上天允许由你替我们报仇，但神灵的意思，不想明白地说出来，所以我用隐语告诉你，如果真能明白而报了仇，我也就没有遗恨了。 妙寂问： 隐语怎么说？ 
English: I usually see you as a strong-willed and ambitious person. Heaven allows you to take revenge for us, but I don't want to say the meaning of the gods clearly, so I will tell you in a cryptic way. If I can really understand and take revenge, I will have no hatred left.

古文：升曰： 杀我者，车中猴，门东草。 
现代文：叶升说： 杀我的人是，车中猴，东门草。 
English: Ye Sheng said, "The person who killed me is the monkey in the car, Dongmen Cao.

古文：俄而见其夫，形状若父，泣曰： 杀我者，禾中走，一日夫。 
现代文：不一会又见她的丈夫，形貌和父亲一样。哭着说： 杀我的人是禾中走，一日夫。 
English: In a little while she saw her husband, who looked just like her father, and she wept and said, "He who killed me is a murderer.

古文：妙寂抚膺而哭，遂为女弟所呼觉。
现代文：妙寂抚着丈夫的肩痛哭一场，于是被她妹妹叫醒了。
English: Miao Jie stroked her husband's shoulder and cried bitterly, then was woken up by her sister.

古文：泣告其母，阖门大骇，念其隐语，杳不可知。
现代文：她哭着告诉母亲，全家都很惊慌，念那隐语，一点儿也不知道其中的意思。
English: In tears, she told her mother that the whole family had panicked, reciting the cryptic phrase without any idea of what it meant.

古文：访于邻叟及乡闾之有知者，皆不能解。
现代文：遍访了邻居中的老人，乡里的聪明智慧的人，都解不出来。
English: The old people in the neighborhood and the clever and wise people in the countryside who visited all over couldn't figure it out.

古文：秋诣上元县，舟楫之所交处，四方士大夫多憩焉。而又邑有瓦棺寺，寺上有阁，倚山瞰江，万里在目，亦江湖之极境，游人弭棹，莫不登眺。吾将缁服其间，伺可问者，必有醒吾惑者。
现代文：秋天到上元县去，这里是各地舟船交汇的地方，四方的官员名士多在这里休息，再加上城内有瓦官寺，寺上有阁楼，靠山俯瞰大江，万里远的景色尽收眼底，这也是江湖中最秀美的地方，游人行船到这里，没有不登楼远眺的，妙寂想我穿上僧尼的黑衣服到那里，寻找可问的人，一定会有解开我疑惑的人。
English: If you go to Shangyuan County in autumn, this is the place where boats from all over the country meet. Many officials and celebrities from the four directions rest here. In addition, there is a Wakan Temple in the city, the temple has an attic, the mountain overlooks the river, and the view from thousands of miles away is as far as the eye can see. This is also the most beautiful place in Jianghu. Tourists travel by boat here, and there is no one who does not climb the tower and look far away. I would like to put on the black clothes of monks and nuns and go there to find someone to ask. There will definitely be someone who can solve my doubts.

古文：于是褐衣上元，舍力瓦棺寺，日持箕帚，洒扫阁下，闲则徙倚栏槛，以伺识者。
现代文：于是穿上粗布衣服到上元去，在瓦官寺干活，整天拿着扫帚，洒扫楼阁，有空就倚着栏槛，等待能解谜的人。
English: So he put on a coarse cloth and went to Shangyuan. He worked at the Wakan Temple, holding a broom all day and sweeping the pavilion. When he had time, he leaned on the threshold and waited for someone who could solve the riddle.

古文：见高冠博带，吟啸而来者，必拜而问。
现代文：看见戴高帽系宽带一边走一边吟唱的人，一定跪拜而问。
English: If you see a person wearing a wide-brimmed hat and chanting while walking, you must kneel down and ask.

古文：居数年，无能辩者。
现代文：过了几年，没有遇到解开谜团的人。
English: Years later, no one has been able to solve the mystery.

古文：十七年，岁在辛巳，有李公佐者，罢岭南从事而来，揽衣登阁，神彩隽逸，颇异常伦。
现代文：到了贞元十七年，是辛巳年。有个叫李公佐的人，辞掉了岭南从事来到上元，揽衣登上阁楼，神彩英俊豪放，和平常人很不一样。
English: In the 17th year of Zhengyuan, the Year of the Snake, a man named Li Gongzuo quit his job in Lingnan and came to Shangyuan. He put on a jacket and went up to the attic. He was very handsome and bold. He was very different from ordinary people.

古文：妙寂前拜泣，且以前事问之，公佐曰： 吾平生好为人解疑，况子之冤恳，而神告如此，当为子思之。 
现代文：妙寂就上前哭着拜见，并且把梦中的事说出来问他。公佐说： 我平生就喜欢给人解疑，况且你的冤恨太大，再说神灵告诉了这些，我应该为你想一下。 
English: Myojak stepped forward, weeping, to pay his respects, and asked him to tell him what had happened in the dream. The counsellor said, "I've always liked to answer people's questions, and your grudge is too great. Besides, the gods told me all this, so I should think about it for you."

古文：默行数步，喜招妙寂曰： 吾得之矣。
现代文：说罢低头默默地走了几步，高兴地告诉妙寂说： 我想出来了，杀你父亲的叫申兰。
English: After saying this, he bowed his head and walked a few steps in silence, happily telling Miaojie, "I figured it out. The one who killed your father is called Shen Lan."

古文：杀汝父者申兰，杀汝夫者申春耳。 妙寂悲喜呜咽，拜问其说。
现代文：杀你丈夫的叫申春。 妙寂悲喜交加呜咽着，请他说明怎么讲法。
English: The one who killed your husband is called Shen Chun. With a mixture of sadness, joy and sobbing, I asked him to explain how to teach the Fa.

古文：公佐曰： 夫猴申生也，车去两头而言猴，故申字耳。草而门，门而东，非兰字耶！
现代文：公佐说： 猴是申年生的，车字去两头又说猴，所以是个申字；草而门，门而东，不是蕳字吗？
English: The official said, "Monkey was born in the year of the Monkey, and the word "car" means "monkey" at both ends, so it is a Monkey word; Grass and door, door and east, isn't it a Monkey word?

古文：禾中走者，穿田过也，此亦申字也。一日又加夫，盖春字耳。
现代文：禾中走，就是穿田过，这也是个申字，一日又加夫，就是春字啊。
English: To walk through the hay is to walk through the field, which is also a Shen word, and to walk through the hay is a Spring word.

古文：鬼神欲惑人，故交错其言。 
现代文：鬼神想要迷惑人，所以拆开来说。 
English: Ghosts and gods want to confuse people, so they take things apart.

古文：妙寂悲喜，若不自胜，久而掩涕拜谢曰： 贼名既彰，雪冤有路，苟或释惑，誓报深恩，妇人无他，唯洁诚奉佛，祈增福海。
现代文：妙寂听后又悲又喜，好象不能自禁了，过了很长时间才擦了眼泪拜谢说： 贼人的名字已经知道了，昭雪冤恨有了门路，你为我解除了疑惑，我发誓要报你的大恩。但我作为一个女人没有别的办法，只有诚心诚意信奉佛祖，祈祷你福如东海。 
English: After listening to Myojie, she was both sad and happy, as if she couldn't help herself. It took her a long time to wipe away her tears. Bai Xie said, "The name of the thief has already been known, and there is a way out for Zhao Xue's grudge. You have cleared my doubts, and I swear to repay your great kindness. But as a woman, I have no other choice but to sincerely believe in Buddha and pray for you to be blessed like the East Sea.

古文：初，泗州普光王寺有梵氏戒坛，人之为僧者必由之，四方辐辏，僧尼繁会，观者如市焉。
现代文：后来，在泗州的普光寺有个梵氏戒坛。当僧尼的人一定要到那里去，四面八方的人都象车辐条向着车轴那样去那里，僧尼也频繁地聚会，参观的人象到菜市一样。
English: Later, there was a Buddhist altar in the Fuguang Temple in Luzhou. Monks and nuns had to go there, and people from all over the world went there like spokes of a car going toward the axle. Monks and nuns also frequently gathered there, and people visiting it were like visiting a vegetable market.

古文：公佐自楚之秦，维舟而往观之。
现代文：公佐从楚地到秦地去，坐了一条船去那里参观。
English: The commissar went from Chudi to Qindi and took a boat to visit there.

古文：有一尼，眉目朗秀，若旧识者，每过必凝视公佐，若有意而未言者。
现代文：看见有一个尼姑，眉清目秀，好象以前见过，每次经过她都目不转睛地看着公佐，好象有话要说的样子。
English: I saw a nun, her eyebrows clear and bright, as if I had seen her before, and every time she passed by, she kept looking at him intently, as if she had something to say.

古文：久之，公佐将去，其尼遽呼曰： 侍御贞元中不为南海从事乎？ 公佐曰： 然。 
现代文：时间长了，公佐要离开了，那尼姑急忙招呼他说： 您难道不是贞元年间的南海从事吗： 公佐说： 是呀！ 
English: Time was running out, and the colonel was about to leave. The nun hurriedly called out to him and said, "Weren't you engaged in the South China Sea during the reign of Emperor Zhen Yuan?" The colonel said, "Yes!

古文： 然则记小师乎？ 
现代文：妙寂说： 那么你记得我吗？ 
English: Miaojia said, "So, do you remember me?"

古文：公佐曰： 不记也。 
现代文：公佐说： 不记得了。 
English: The inspector said: I don't remember.

古文：妙寂曰： 昔瓦官寺阁求解车中猴者也。 
现代文：妙寂说： 我就是当年在瓦官寺阁楼上求你解车中猴的人。 
English: Myojaku said, "I was the one who asked you to free the monkey from the train in the attic of Wakan-ji Temple that year."

古文：公佐悟曰： 竟获贼否？ 
现代文：公佐想起来了说： 你最终抓获了贼人了没有？ 
English: The inspector remembered and said: Have you finally caught the thief?

古文：对曰： 自悟梦言，乃男服，易名士寂，泛佣于江湖之间。
现代文：妙寂回答说： 自从明白了梦中的话后，我就女扮男妆，改名士寂，到处给别人作工。
English: Miaojia replied, "Ever since I understood the words in the dream, I've been dressing up as a woman, changing my name to Zhixia, and working for others everywhere.

古文：数年，闻蕲黄之间有申村，因往焉。
现代文：几年后，听说蕲黄之间有个申村。
English: A few years later, it was heard that there was a Shen village between Zhenhuang.

古文：流转周星，乃闻其村北隅有名兰者。默往求佣，辄贱其价，兰喜召之。
现代文：因此就去了那里，走访了十多天，才听说这个村北角有个叫申兰的，就前去要求给他家做佣人，不图赚钱，申兰听说后高兴地收留了我。
English: Therefore, I went there and visited for more than ten days, until I heard that there was a man named Shen Lan in the north corner of the village. I went to ask him to be a servant for his family, not trying to make money. After hearing this, Shen Lan happily took me in.

古文：我又闻其从父弟有名春者，于是勤恭执事，昼夜不离。见其可为者，不顾轻重而为之，未尝待命。
现代文：不久又听说他的堂弟有个名叫申春的，于是我就非常勤奋地给他干活，不分昼夜地干，只要看到可以干的活，也不管轻重，不等主人发话，申兰家很器重我。
English: Soon after, I heard that his cousin had a son named Shen Chun, so I worked very diligently for him, day and night. As long as I saw work that could be done, it didn't matter how important it was. I didn't have to wait for my master to say something. The Shen Lan family held me in high regard.

古文：兰家器之，昼与郡佣苦作，夜寝他席，无知其非丈夫者。
现代文：白天我和那些佣人勤苦地劳作，夜晚不同他们睡在一起，没有人知道我不是男人。
English: During the day I work diligently with those servants, but at night they sleep with me, and no one knows that I am not a man.

古文：逾年，益自勤干，兰逾敬念，视士寂，即目视其子不若也。
现代文：过了一年，我更加勤劳肯干，申兰越加对我好，看待我比他的儿子都好。
English: After a year, I am more diligent and willing to work, and Shen Lan is more kind to me and treats me better than his son.

古文：兰或农或商，或畜货于武昌，关锁启闭悉委焉。
现代文：申兰有时务农，有时经商，有时也到武昌去贩牲畜，全家的钥匙都交给我，因此我就能查看他的柜子。
English: Shen Lan sometimes works in agriculture, sometimes in business, and sometimes goes to Wuchang to sell livestock. He gave me the keys to the whole family, so I could check his cabinet.

古文：因验其柜中，半是己物，亦见其父及夫常所服者，垂涕而记之。
现代文：那柜子里有一半是我们家的东西，也看见了我父亲和我丈夫平常穿的衣服，我流着眼泪记下了。
English: Half of the things in the cupboard belonged to our family, and I also saw the clothes my father and my husband used to wear, and I wrote them down with tears.

古文：而兰春叔出季处，未尝偕出，虑其擒一而惊逸也，衔之数年。
现代文：然而申兰和申春一个在家一个在外，不一同出入，我怕抓到一个惊跑了另一个，这事压了几年。
English: However, Shen Lan and Shen Chun were at home and away at the same time, and did not go out together. I was afraid that I would catch one of them and the other would run away. This situation lasted for several years.

古文：永贞年重阳，二盗饮既醉，士寂奔告于州，乘醉而获。
现代文：到了永贞年重阳节，二贼喝醉了酒，我趁机跑到州府告发了他们，乘着两人醉酒未醒，抓获了他们。
English: When it came to the Yongzheng Double Ninth Festival, the two thieves were drunk. I took the opportunity to run to the state capital and denounce them. I caught them while they were still drunk.

古文：一问而辞伏就法，得其所丧以归，尽奉母而请从释教，师洪州天宫寺尼洞微，即昔时受教者也。
现代文：一经审问就招供伏法，我收回了被他们抢去的财物，全部交给了母亲，并请求让我出家。我的师傅是洪州天宫寺的尼姑洞微，也就是过去教诲过我的人。
English: After being interrogated, I confessed to practicing Fupo. I recovered all the property they had stolen from me, gave it all to my mother, and asked to be ordained. My teacher was the nun Dong Wei from the Temple of Heaven in Hongzhou, who had taught me in the past.

古文：妙寂一女子也，血诚复仇，天亦不夺。
现代文：妙寂不过是一个女子，赤诚复仇，老天也成全了我的志向，梦中的话，在您的帮助下，弄明白了，才能够和仇人不共戴天。
English: Miraculous silence is just a woman, red-hearted revenge, God has also fulfilled my ambition, the words in the dream, with your help, understand, only to be able to share the sky with the enemy.

古文：遂以梦寐之言，获悟于君子，与其仇者，得不同天，碎此微驱，岂酬明哲。梵宇无他，唯虔诚法象，以报效耳。 
现代文：就是粉身碎骨也报答不尽您对我的恩情。出家人在寺庙里没有别的办法，只有虔诚地供奉佛祖来报答您了。 
English: I cannot repay your kindness to me even if I were to be crushed to pieces. Monastics have no other way to repay you in the temple but to make a pious offering to the Buddha.

古文：公佐大异之，遂为作传。
现代文：公佐听说非常惊异，就给她作了传记。
English: The colonel was so surprised to hear this that he wrote a biography of her.

古文：大和庚戌岁，陇西李复言游巴南，与进士沈田会于蓬州。田因话奇事，持以相示，一览而复之。
现代文：大和庚戌年，陇西李复言游在巴南，和进士沈田在蓬州相会，沈田谈到奇闻怪事，就把传记给他看，他看一遍就能复述。
English: In the 7th year of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 7th month of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16

古文：录怪之日，逐纂于此焉。
现代文：在写志怪的时候，就把它编在这本书里。
English: When writing about Shiki, I compiled it into this book.

古文：李文敏
现代文：李文敏
English: Li Wenmin

古文：唐李文敏者，选授广州录事参军。将至州，遇寇杀之，沈于江，俘其妻崔氏。
现代文：唐朝的李文敏，被选派作广州录事参军，上任时刚要到达州府，遇到强盗被杀害了，尸体沉到江里，他的妻子崔氏也被强盗抓去。
English: Tang Dynasty's Li Wenmin, who was selected to join the army as a Guangzhou recorder, was just about to arrive at the state capital when he took office. He was killed by robbers, his body sank into the river, and his wife, Cui, was also captured by the robbers.

古文：有子五岁，随母而去。
现代文：李文敏有个儿子才五岁，随着母亲。
English: Li Wenmin has a five-year-old son with his mother.

古文：贼即广州都虞候也。
现代文：贼寇就是广州的都虞候。
English: Kleptocracy is the capital of Guangzhou.

古文：其子渐大，令习明经，甚聪俊，诣京赴举下第，乃如华州。
现代文：文敏的儿子渐渐长大了，就让他习诵明经。他很聪明英俊。这一年到京城赶考，没有考中，就去了华州。
English: As Wenmin's son grew up, he asked him to learn to recite the Ming Dynasty sutra. He was very smart and handsome. This year, he went to Beijing to catch up with the exam. He didn't pass the middle school exam, so he went to Huazhou.

古文：及渭南县东，马惊走不可制，及夜，入一庄中，遂投庄宿，有所衣天净纱汗衫半臂者，主妪见之曰： 此衣似顷年夫人与李郎送路之衣，郎既似李郎，复似小娘子。 
现代文：走到渭南县以东的时候，他骑的马受惊狂奔控制不住。到了晚上，进了一个小村庄，就住在了这个庄里，文敏的儿子穿着一件半袖的天净纱汗衫，房东老太太看见就说： 这件衣服好象当年夫人送李郎在路上穿的衣服，你长得象李郎，又象他的小娘子。 
English: When he got to the east of Yinan County, the horse he was riding could not be controlled. In the evening, he entered a small village and lived in this village. Wenmin's son was wearing a short-sleeved sky-cleaning yarn sweatshirt. The old landlady saw it and said, "This dress is like the dress that my wife sent Li Lang to wear on the road. You look like Li Lang, and like his little daughter."

古文：取其衣视之，乃顷岁制时，为灯烬烧破，半臂带犹在其家，遂以李文敏遭寇之事说之。
现代文：她拿起衣服看了看，就说这是当年做衣服时被灯火烧破了，半片臂带还在她家里。于是就把李文敏遭贼冠的事说给他听。
English: She picked up the dress and looked at it, and said that it was burned by the lights when she was making the dress, and half of the armband was still in her house. So she told him about Li Wenmin being robbed.

古文：此子罢举，径归问母，具以其事对，乃白官。
现代文：文敏的儿子听后，决定不考举人了，直接回去问自己的母亲，母亲说的和那老太太说的完全相符。
English: After listening to this, Wenmin's son decided not to take the test, and went straight back to ask his mother. What his mother said was exactly the same as what the old lady said.

古文：官乃擒都虞候，系而诘之，所占一词不谬，乃诛之。
现代文：他就报告了官府，官府派人擒拿都虞候，捆绑后审问他，所说的供词与事实一点儿也不差。就杀了他。
English: He reported it to the authorities, who sent someone to wait for the fugitive, tied him up and interrogated him. The confession he gave was not at all different from the truth. They killed him.

古文：而给其物力，令归渭南焉。
现代文：又判给了文敏儿子一些财物，让他回渭南去了。
English: He also awarded some property to Wenmin's son, and let him go back to southern Anhui Province.

古文：樊宗谅
现代文：樊宗谅
English: I'm sorry.

古文：唐樊宗谅为密州刺史。
现代文：唐朝时有个樊宗谅任密州刺史。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar named Zongzheng who was allowed to write about the history of Mizhou.

古文：时属邑有群盗，提兵入邑甿殷氏家，掠夺金帛，杀其父子，死者三人。
现代文：当时属辖的城镇有一群盗贼。
English: There was a group of thieves in the town at that time.

古文：刺史捕之甚急，月余不获。
现代文：拿着兵器进入城镇的种田百姓殷家。掠夺去了金银布匹等财物，并杀了殷家父子，共三口。
English: A farmer named Yin, who entered the town with weapons, plundered gold, silver, cloth, and other property, and killed three members of the Yin family, a father and son.

古文：有钜鹿魏南华者，寓居齐鲁之间，家甚贫，宗谅命摄司法掾。
现代文：刺史命令紧急追捕，但过了一月有余仍然没有查获。有个钜鹿人叫魏南华的，居住在齐鲁两地之间，家中很贫穷，宗谅命他作法官带领部下捉拿。
English: There was an elk man named Wei Nanhua, who lived between the two places in Qilu. His family was very poor, so he was ordered to be a judge and lead his subordinates to capture the elk.

古文：一夕，南华梦数人皆被发，列诉于南华曰： 姓殷氏，父子三人，俱无罪而死，愿明公雪其冤。 
现代文：一天晚上，南华梦到几个人都披散着头发，并排站在面前告诉南华说： 我们姓殷，父子三人都是无罪而死，希望明公为我们报仇。 
English: One night, Nanhua dreamed of several people with their hair hanging loose, standing side by side in front of him, telling Nanhua: "Our family name is Yin. All three of us, father and son, died without guilt. I hope Ming Gong will take revenge for us."

古文：南华曰： 杀汝者为谁？ 
现代文：南华说： 杀你们的人是谁呢？ 
English: Nanhua said: Who are the people who killed you?

古文：对曰： 某所居东十里，有姓姚者，乃贼之魁也。 
现代文：回答说： 在我们家东面大约十里的地方有个姓姚的，就是盗贼的魁首。 
English: He replied, "About ten miles to the east of our house, there is a man named Yao, who is the leader of the thieves.

古文：南华许诺，惊寤。
现代文：南华答应了他们，然后惊醒了。
English: Nanhua agreed and then woke up.

古文：数日，宗谅谓南华曰： 盗杀吾甿，且一月矣，莫穷其迹，岂非吏不奉职乎！
现代文：又过了几天，宗谅对南华说： 无故杀了我们种田百姓。已经有一个多月，莫非你的部下不尽职尽责吗？
English: A few days later, Zongren said to Nanhua: "You killed our farmers for no reason. It's been more than a month, aren't your subordinates doing their duty?"

古文：尔为司法官，第往验之。 
现代文：你作为司法官，应该亲自前去探察。 
English: You, as a magistrate, should go and see for yourself.

古文：南华驰往，未至，忽见一狐起于路旁深草中，驰入里人姚氏所居。
现代文：南华骑一匹快马前去，还没到现场，忽然看见一个狐狸从路边的深草中跳起来，跑到姚氏住的地方，后面叫喊着追赶的有上百人。
English: Nanhua rode a fast horse to the scene, but before he arrived, he suddenly saw a fox jump up from the deep grass on the roadside and run to where Yao lived. Behind him, there were hundreds of people shouting and chasing him.

古文：噪而逐者以百数，其狐入一穴中，南华命以锸发之，得金帛甚多，乃群盗劫殷氏财也。
现代文：那只狐钻入一个洞里。南华命人用锹掘洞，挖出来很多金银布匹，原来是那群盗贼抢劫殷家的财物。
English: The fox burrowed into a hole. Nanhua ordered a man to dig a hole with a pickaxe and dug out a lot of gold and silver cloth. It turned out that the group of thieves robbed the property of the Yin family.

古文：即召姚氏子，讯其所自，目动词讷，即收劾之，果盗之魁也。
现代文：南华立即召来姚家的人，审讯他这些财物是哪里来的。姚家人眼睛乱转支吾着说不出话来。南华就把他下狱，一经拷问那人果然是盗贼的魁首。
English: Nanhua immediately summoned someone from Yao's family to interrogate him about where the stolen goods came from. Yao's family members were speechless as their eyes rolled back in their heads. Nanhua then sent him to prison. After being tortured, the man turned out to be the ringleader of the thieves.

古文：自是尽擒其支党，且十辈。
现代文：从此全部抓获了他的同伙，有十个人。
English: Since then, all ten of his accomplices have been arrested.

古文：其狐虽匿于穴中，穷之卒无所见也，岂非冤魂之所假欤！
现代文：那只狐狸虽然藏在洞里，努力搜查也再没有看见，难道不是冤魂借它来引导的吗？
English: Although the fox was hidden in the cave, it was never seen again after a diligent search. Wasn't it an evil spirit that used it as a guide?

古文：时大和中也。
现代文：那时正是唐文宗大和年间。
English: At that time, it was during the reign of Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：荥阳氏
现代文：荥阳氏
English: The Shenyang Clan

古文：唐盈州令将之任，夜止属邑古寺。
现代文：唐朝盈州县令将赴任，夜晚住在辖区内城镇的古庙里。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the county magistrate of Yingzhou County would go to work and spend the night in an ancient temple in the town under his jurisdiction.

古文：方寝，见老妪，以桐叶蒙其首，伛偻而前。
现代文：刚刚躺下睡觉，见一老年妇人，用桐树叶蒙着脸，伛偻着走到县令面前。
English: I had just lay down to sleep when I saw an elderly woman, her face covered with a paulownia leaf, stumbling up to the county magistrate.

古文：令以拄杖拂其叶，妪俯拾而去，俄亦复来。
现代文：县令用拄杖拂掉盖在她头上的叶子，老妇人俯身拾起来就走了。
English: The county magistrate whisked away the leaves covering her head with a cane. The old woman bent down, picked them up and walked away.

古文：如是者三，久之不复来矣。
现代文：不一会，又返回来，象这样反复了三次。过了很久不再来了。
English: After a while, it came back again, and repeated like this three times. After a long time, it didn't come again.

古文：顷有衰裳者，自北户升阶，褰帘而前曰： 将有告于公，公无惧焉。 令曰： 是何妖物？ 
现代文：又过了一会，有一个穿麻布衣服的人，从北门上台阶，掀起帘子走到县令面前说： 我有话要对你说，请你不要害怕。 县令说： 你是哪来的妖怪？ 
English: After a while, a man dressed in linen came up the steps from the north gate, lifted the curtain and walked up to the county magistrate and said, "I have something to tell you, please don't be afraid." The county magistrate said, "Where did you come from, you monster?

古文：曰： 实鬼也，非妖也，以形容衰瘵，不敢干谒。
现代文：那人回答： 我其实是鬼，并不是妖怪。因为我现在的容貌太难看，不敢贸然拜见。
English: The man replied, "I am actually a ghost, not a monster, because my current appearance is too ugly for me to meet.

古文：向者窃令张奶少达幽情，而三遭柱杖之辱，老奶固辞，耻其复进，是以自往哀诉，冀不逢怒焉。
现代文：这以前我私下让张奶传达我的意思，然而她三次遭到你用拄杖污辱她，老奶坚决不再来了，她感到没脸再来，所以我只好亲自以痛苦的心情向你述说，希望你不要生气。
English: Before this, I privately asked Zhang Yu to convey my meaning, but she was insulted by you three times with a cane. She resolutely did not come again, she felt ashamed to come again, so I had to personally tell you with a painful heart, I hope you will not be angry.

古文：某荥阳氏子，严君牧此州，未逾年，锺家祸，乃护丧归洛，夜止此寺。
现代文：我是荥阳人，先父曾在此州作州牧，但未满一年家祸不断，父亲就去世了。
English: I am from Shenyang. My father used to be a state pastor in this state, but after less than a year of constant domestic troubles, my father passed away.

古文：继母赐冶葛花汤，并室妹同夕而毙。张奶将哭，首碎铁锤，同瘗于北墙之竹阴。
现代文：我们就护丧去洛阳，夜晚在此寺停留，继母给我们喝了野葛花汤，我和妹妹都在当晚被毒死，张奶要哭，也被她用铁锤打碎了脑袋，把我们埋在北墙边的竹林里。
English: We escorted the mourners to Luoyang, and stayed at this temple for the night. My stepmother gave us wild gooseberry soup to drink. My sister and I were both poisoned that night. Zhang Rong wanted to cry. She also smashed her head with a hammer and buried us in the bamboo grove by the north wall.

古文：某陇西先夫人即日诉于上帝，帝敕云： 为人之妻，已残戮仆妾，为人之母，又毒杀孤婴，居暗室，事难彰明，在天鉴，理宜诛殛。以死酬死，用谢诸孤。 
现代文：天帝说：她作为妻子，却残酷地杀害了奴婢；作为母亲，又毒杀孤苦的孩子。住在暗室里，事情很难明白，在天上都看得很清楚，按理应该处死她，用死报死来酬谢孤儿。
English: The Heavenly Emperor said, "As a wife, she cruelly murdered her slave and maidservant; as a mother, she poisoned her poor child. Living in a dark room, it is difficult to understand things, but in heaven everything is clear. By rights, she should be put to death, and the orphan should be rewarded with death.

古文：付司命处置讫报。
现代文：于是命令司命官处置然后回报。
English: He then ordered the magistrate to dispose of it and then return it.

古文：是日，先君复诉于上帝云： 某游魂不灵，乖于守慎，致令嚚室，害及孤孩，彰此家风，黩于天听，岂止一死，能谢罪名。
现代文：当天，我的父亲又报告上天说：我的游魂不灵，生性老实谨慎，以致后妻张狂，害了我的孩子，暴露了不好的家风，也有负于天教，仅仅一死哪能免除罪名。
English: On the same day, my father also reported to heaven, saying: My wandering soul is lifeless, my nature is honest and prudent, so that my second wife went berserk, harmed my children, exposed the bad family culture, and also failed to live up to the teachings of heaven. Only death can absolve the crime.

古文：某三任县令，再剖符竹，实有能绩，以安黎甿。
现代文：我三任县令，断案办公有些政绩，使百姓安居乐业，那曾想，我做的好事不得好报。
English: During my three terms as county magistrate, I had some achievements in the case-solving office, enabling the people to live and work in peace. I once thought that the good things I had done would not be well reported.

古文：岂图余庆不流，见此狼狈，悠扬丹旐，未越属城。长男既已无辜，孀妇又俾酬死，念某旅榇，难为瘗埋，伏乞延其生命，使某得归葬洛阳，获袝先人之莹阙，某无恨矣。 
现代文：遭到了这样丧天害理的事情，天魂游荡，未能回家，长男无辜而死，孀妇又被赐死，请考虑我的棺木正在途中，很难掩埋，请天帝延长她的寿命，能让我归葬在洛阳，与先人葬在一起，我就没有什么怨恨了。
English: Having suffered such a disastrous and unreasonable thing, my soul wandering, not being able to return home, my eldest son dying innocently, and my wife being given death again, please consider that my coffin is on the way, it is difficult to bury, please extend her life, let me be buried in Luoyang, buried with my ancestors, I have no resentment.

古文：明年继母到洛阳，发背疽而卒。上帝谴怒，已至如此，今某即无怨焉。所苦者，被僧徒筑溷于骸骨之上，粪秽之弊，所不堪忍。况妹为厕神姬仆，身为厕神役夫，积世簪缨，一日凌坠，天门阻越，上诉无阶，籍公仁德，故来奉告。 
现代文：第二年，我的继母回到洛阳背上生疮而死，上天的谴责，已经有了结果，现在我也没有什么怨恨了，感到痛苦的是，一些僧徒把厕所建在我的尸骨上，粪便污物，简直使我不能忍受，再说我妹妹是厕神的小妾，我又是厕神的奴仆，我家累世读书作官，而后代却受到如此摧残凌辱，天门难进，没法上天陈述。知你为人宽厚仁德，所以前来奉告。 
English: The following year, my stepmother returned to Luoyang and died of an ulcer on her back. Heaven's condemnation has come to fruition, and now I have no resentment. I am pained by the fact that some monks built a toilet on my bones. The excrement filth is almost unbearable. Moreover, my sister is the concubine of the toilet god, and I am the servant of the toilet god. My family has been studying and working as officials for generations, but the descendants have been so abused and humiliated. It is difficult to enter the gates of heaven, and it is impossible to go to heaven. Knowing that you are a generous and benevolent person, I

古文：令曰： 吾将奈何？ 
现代文：县令说： 我将怎么办呢？ 
English: The prefectural governor said, "What am I going to do?

古文：答曰： 公能发某朽骨，沐以兰汤，覆以衣衾，迁于高原之上，脱能赐木皮之棺，苹藻之奠，亦望外也。 令曰： 诺，乃吾反掌之易尔。 
现代文：回答说： 你如挖出我们的尸骨，用香汤洗一下，再盖上衣被，迁到高地，如能用野草野果来祭奠，那真是太好不过了。 县令说： 好，作这件事易如反掌。 
English: He replied, "If you dig up our bones, wash them with fragrant broth, cover them with a quilt, and move them to high ground, it would be wonderful if you could use wild plants and fruits to make a memorial.

古文：鬼呜咽再拜，令张奶密召鸾娘子同谢明公。
现代文：那鬼抽泣着一再拜谢，让张奶悄悄地找鸾娘子同来拜谢县令。
English: The ghost sobbed and repeatedly thanked him, and asked Zhang Rong to quietly find his daughter to come and thank the county magistrate.

古文：张奶遂至，疾呼曰： 郭君怒晚来轩屏狼藉，已三召矣。 
现代文：张奶马上就来了，大声召呼说： 郭君看到晚间家里没收拾很生气，已经召呼你三次了。 
English: Zhang Rong immediately came and called out loudly, saying: Guo Jun was very angry when he saw that there was no tidying up at home in the evening, and he has called you three times.

古文：于是可颜邞惶而去。
现代文：于是麻衣人急忙走了。
English: So the man in white robes hurried away.

古文：明旦，令召僧徒，具以所告。遂命土工，发溷以求之，三四尺，乃得骸骨，与改瘗焉。
现代文：第二天，县令找到那些和尚，找了些土工，挖掘厕所，仅挖到三四尺深就挖到了尸骨，改葬到别处去了。
English: The next day, the county magistrate found those monks, found some earthmovers, excavated the toilet, dug only three or four feet deep, dug up the bones, and reburied them elsewhere.

