古文：世传算茶有三说最便。
现代文：世传国家税茶的发卖有 三悦法 是最为便利的。
English: It is said that the Three Delights Method is the most convenient way to sell the national tax tea.

古文：三说者，皆谓见钱为一说，犀牙、香药为一说，茶为一说，深不然也。
现代文：所谓 三悦 ，都认为见钱是一悦，犀牛角、象牙和香药是一悦，茶是一悦，这是大不然的。
English: The so-called Three Delights all believe that seeing money is a pleasure, rhino horn, ivory and incense are a pleasure, and tea is a pleasure, which is highly unlikely.

古文：此乃三分法，其谓缘边入纳粮草，其价折为三分，一分支见钱，一分折犀象杂货，一分折茶尔，后又有并折盐为四分法，更改不一，皆非三说也。
现代文：这不过是一种三分法，指的是商民向沿边入纳粮草，官府的酬价用三种方式结算，一部分支现钱，一部分折算成犀牛角、象牙和其他杂货等，一部分折算成茶引支付。此后又有折算成盐引的方式，合起来就成为四分法，更改不一，而都不是所谓 三悦 。
English: This is nothing more than a three-point method, referring to the merchants' acceptance of grain and grass along the border, and the government's remuneration is settled in three ways: part of the payment is cash, part is converted into rhino horn, ivory and other sundries, and part is converted into tea lead payment. After that, it is converted into salt lead. Together, it becomes a four-point method, with different changes, but not the so-called three pleasures.

古文：然后召人入中。 便籴 者，次边粮草，商人先入中粮草，乃诣京师算请慢便钱、慢茶钞及杂货。 慢便钱 谓道路货易非便处， 慢茶钞 谓下三山场榷务。 直便 者，商人取便，于缘边入纳见钱，于京师请领。三说，先博籴，数足，然后听便籴及直便。
现代文：我在三司任职时，曾查到过所谓 三悦 的旧档案， 三悦 实际指的是下列三事：博籴是一悦，便籴是一悦，直便又是一悦。所谓博籴，是说最靠近敌国的第一线边境地区的粮草，每年的输入必定希望能够满足通常应需的数额，所以每年自中央三司下达计划数额给有关仓储机构，都先封存点检现钱、紧便钱和紧茶钞，然后召商人入中。所谓便籴，是说第二线边境地区的粮草，商人先纳粮草入中，再到京师结算请领慢便钱、慢茶钞及杂货。所谓直便，是说商人就便在沿边入纳现钱，然后到京师请领钞引及货物等。此种 三悦 的措施，是在先保证博籴的数量充足之后，才允许便籴及直便。
English: When I was working at the Third Division, I once looked up the old files of the so-called "Three Delights." "Three Delights" actually refers to the following three things: Boao is one delight, Bumrungrad is one delight, and Zibo is another delight. The so-called "Boao" refers to the grain and grass in the first-line border area closest to the enemy country. The annual input must hope to be able to meet the usual required amount. Therefore, every year, the planned amount issued by the Third Division of the Central Committee to the relevant storage institutions must first seal the point to store cash, tight money and tight tea banknotes, and then call the merchants into the

古文：以此商人竞趋争先赴极边博籴，故边粟常先足，不为诸郡分裂，粮草之价，不能翔踊，诸路税课，亦皆盈衍，此良法也。
现代文：因此，商人竞相趋鹜，争先恐后，都赶赴极边博籴，故边境粮草常能首先充实起来，不为内地州郡所分占。粮草的价格也因此不能飞涨腾越，各路的税收也都有盈余，这确实是个好办法。
English: As a result, merchants are rushing to the extreme Boao, so the border grain and grass can often be enriched first, and is not divided by the inland counties. Therefore, the price of grain and grass can not soar, and the taxes of all roads also have a surplus, which is really a good way.

古文：余在三司，方欲讲求，会左迁，不果建议。
现代文：我在三司，正打算讨论推行此法，适逢因事被降职，没有来得及向朝廷提出建议。
English: I was in the Third Division, planning to discuss the implementation of this law, when I was demoted due to an incident, and did not have time to make a recommendation to the Imperial Court.

古文：延州故丰林县城，赫连勃勃所筑，至今谓之赫连城。
现代文：延州旧丰林县城，是赫连勃勃时建筑的，至今还叫 赫连城 。
English: The former county seat of Fenglin County in Yanzhou, which was built during the heyday of Hereng, is still called Hereng.

古文：紧密如石，劚之皆火出。
现代文：其城墙结实得像石头，用镢头刨它会迸出火花。
English: Its walls are solid as stone, and if you scrape them with a hoe, sparks will fly.

古文：其城不甚厚，但马面极长且密。
现代文：城墙不甚厚，但马面很长而且密集。
English: The walls are not very thick, but the horseshoe is long and dense.

古文：予亲使人步之，马面皆长四丈，相去六七丈，以其马面密，则城不须太厚，人力亦难兼也。
现代文：我曾亲自派人量过，马面都长达四丈，相互间隔有六七丈。因为马面密集，所以城墙不必建得太厚，人力也难攻破。
English: I have personally sent someone to measure it, and the horse faces are all four meters long, separated by six or seven meters. Because the horse faces are dense, the city wall does not have to be built too thick, and it is difficult to break through the manpower.

古文：余曾亲见攻城，若马面长则可反射城下攻者，兼密则矢石相及，敌人至城下，则四面矢石临之。
现代文：我曾亲眼见过攻城，如果马面长，就可以用弓箭反射城下的攻城者；同时马面又密集，则箭矢、炮石的射程都能互相连接起来，敌人若攻至城下，就四面都有矢石交下而降到他们头上。
English: I have seen the siege of the city with my own eyes. If the horse is long, it can reflect the siege of the city under the city with bows and arrows. At the same time, if the horse is dense, the range of arrows and cannon stones can be connected with each other. If the enemy attacks under the city, there will be arrow stones on all sides and they will fall on their heads.

古文：须使敌人不能到城下，乃为良法。
现代文：必须使敌人到不了城下，才是守城的良法。
English: The best way to defend the city is to prevent the enemy from reaching the city.

古文：今边城虽厚，而马面极短且疏，若敌人可到城下，则城虽厚。终为危道。
现代文：如今边城的城墙虽厚，而马面都很短而且稀疏；如果敌人可以攻到城下，那么城墙虽厚，终究难免陷于危亡之地。
English: Today, although the city walls of the border city are thick, the horse faces are short and sparse; if the enemy can attack under the city, then although the city walls are thick, they will inevitably fall into a dangerous place.

古文：其间更多其角，谓之团敌，此尤无益。
现代文：现在的马面还有不少是建成圆角的，号称是为了 团敌 ，这尤其无益。
English: There are still a lot of horse faces with rounded corners, ostensibly for the sake of group competition, which is particularly unhelpful.

古文：全藉倚楼角以发矢石，以覆护城脚。
现代文：马面全凭借楼角发射矢石，以遮蔽保护城脚。
English: The horse's face is completely shielded by the corner of the building, protecting the foot of the city.

古文：但使敌人备处多，则自不可存立。
现代文：只要使敌人需要防备的地方多，他们即使到了城下无法存在立足。
English: As long as there are more places for the enemy to defend, they will not be able to establish a foothold even under the city.

古文：赫连之城，深可为法也。
现代文：赫连勃勃所建的城，非常值得效法。
English: The city built by Herlian vigorously is well worth emulating.

古文：旧校书官多不恤职事，但取旧书，以墨漫一字，復注旧字于其侧，以为日课。
现代文：过去校书官多不尽心于自己的职事，每天只是取来旧本书籍，找出一两个需要改正的字，用墨笔涂抹掉，并把自认为原文应该是哪个字的原字添注在旁边，就算完成了一天的任务。
English: In the past, many school librarians were not fully committed to their duties. Every day, they just took old books, found one or two words that needed to be corrected, erased them with an ink pen, and added the original word that they thought should be in the original, even if the task of the day was completed.

古文：自置编校局，只得以朱围之，仍于卷末书校官姓名。
现代文：自从嘉祐中置编校书籍局，只许用红笔圈出所要改正的字，并且每天都要在实际校读的页数的后面写上校书官的姓名。
English: Since the editor of the school book office was installed in Jiayu, only the words to be corrected were allowed to be circled with a red pen, and the name of the school librarian was written every day after the actual number of pages read.

古文：近歳邢、寿两郡，各断一狱，用法皆误，为刑曹所驳。
现代文：近年来邢州、寿州两地各判决了一件官司，应用法律都有失误，被刑曹驳回改判。
English: In recent years, Zhangzhou and Shoushou have each adjudicated a lawsuit, and the application of the law has made mistakes, and it was rejected by the criminal court to change the sentence.

古文：寿州有人杀妻之父母昆弟数口，州司以不道，缘坐妻子。
现代文：寿州有人杀了妻子的父母、兄弟几个人，州里主管刑法的官署以大逆不道为由连坐这个人的妻子。
English: A man in Shoushu killed his wife's parents and several of her brothers, and the state's criminal law authority arrested the man's wife on grounds of high treason.

古文：刑曹驳曰： 殴妻之父母，即是义绝，况其谋杀。不当復坐其妻。 
现代文：刑曹批驳说： 杀妻子的父母，也就是已经与妻子断绝了情义，何况这个人是谋杀，不应该再连坐他的妻子。 
English: "The parents of a wife-killer, that is to say, have already severed the relationship with the wife. Moreover, this person is a murderer and should no longer be allowed to live with his wife.

古文：邢州有盗杀一家，其夫妇即时死，唯一子明日乃死。
现代文：邢州有强盗杀了一家人，那家的夫妇俩当时就死了，只有儿子第二天才死。
English: A robber killed a family in Zhangzhou. The couple of that family died at that time, and only the son died the next day.

古文：其家财产户绝法给出嫁亲女。
现代文：他们家的财产因为户绝，官署便依法将其判给已经出嫁的亲生女儿。
English: Due to the death of their family, the government office legally awarded their family's property to their biological daughter, who had already married.

古文：刑曹驳曰： 其家父母死时，其子尚生，财产乃子物；出嫁亲女，乃出嫁姐妹，不合有分。 
现代文：刑曹批驳说： 这户人家父母死时，他们的儿子还活着，当时的财产就是儿子的财产。所谓出嫁的亲生女儿是出了嫁的姐妹，不应该得到这份财产。 
English: "When the parents of this family died, their son was still alive, and the property at that time was the property of the son. The so-called married biological daughter is the sister of the married one, and should not get this property.

古文：此二事略同，一失于生者，一失于死者。
现代文：这两件案子大致相同，一件对活着的人有失公正，一件对死去的人有失公允。
English: The two cases are much the same, one a miscarriage of justice for the living, the other for the dead.

古文：边城守具中有战棚，以长木抗于女墙之上，大体类敌楼，可以离合，设之顷刻可就，以备仓卒城楼摧坏或无楼处受攻，则急张战棚以监之。
现代文：边防地区的城堡上防守用的设施有一种叫战棚的，用长长的木料支撑在城墙垛子上面，大体上有点像城楼，可以拆卸或组装，架设起来一会儿就能完成，用来防备突然之间城楼损坏或者城墙上没有城楼的地方受到敌人攻击，这时就可以迅速架设起战棚居高临下地反击敌人。
English: There is a kind of defensive facility on the castle in the border area called the battlement. It is supported by long pieces of wood on the top of the battlements of the city wall. It is generally a bit like a city tower. It can be disassembled or assembled. It can be erected in a short time. It is used to prevent the city tower from being damaged suddenly or the place where there is no city tower on the city wall from being attacked by the enemy. At this time, the battlement can be quickly erected to counter the enemy.

古文：梁侯景攻台城，为高楼以临城，城上亦为楼以拒之，使壮士交槊，斗于楼上，亦近此类。
现代文：梁代侯景攻打台城时，架起高高的楼台用来从高处攻击城堡，而在城堡上的守军也架起楼台来抵御，双方的武士用长矛在楼台上交锋，也就跟战棚的用法相类似。
English: When Liang Dai Houjing attacked Taicheng, he set up a high platform to attack the castle from a high place, and the defenders on the castle also set up a platform to resist. The samurai on both sides used spears to fight on the platform, which is similar to the use of battlements.

古文：兵部员外郎谢涛知曹州，尽得其凶迹，逮系有司，具前后巨蟪状秦列，章下御史府按治。
现代文：防备敌人，不是仓促之间就能准备好的。近年来边防守臣中有人议论说，既然已经有了城楼，那么战棚就全都可以不要了，这种设想恐怕谋划得不够精到吧！鞠真卿任润州知州时，百姓中如有打架斗殴的，在依法判处应有的罪名之后，另外还要责令先动手的出钱给后动手的。
English: It is not possible to prepare for the enemy in a hurry. In recent years, some border defense officials have argued that since there is already a castle, then all battlements can be dispensed with. I am afraid that this idea is not well planned enough! When Ju Zhenqing was governor of Runzhou, if there was a fight among the people, after the appropriate crime was sentenced according to law, he would also be ordered to pay the money first and then start the fight.

古文：奸赃狼籍，遂论弃市，曹人皆相贺。因此有 告不干已事法 著于敕律。
现代文：那些市井小人们吝惜钱财，加上不甘心把钱送给对手，因此整天地争吵叫嚷、怒目相视，却不敢先动手打起来。
English: Those small-town people are stingy with money, and they are not willing to give money to their opponents, so they quarrel all day long, shouting and glaring at each other, but they dare not start fighting first.

古文：驿传旧有三等，日步递、马递、急脚递。
现代文：驿传的公文传递旧时有三个级别，分别叫做步递、马递、急脚递。
English: In the old days, there were three levels of document delivery, respectively called walking delivery, horse delivery, and express delivery.

古文：急脚递最遽，日行四百里，唯军兴则用之，熙宁中，又有金字牌急脚递，如古之羽檄也。
现代文：急脚递是最快的，每天要行四百里，只在军队行动有战事时才使用。熙宁年间，又有金字牌急脚递，如同古代插羽毛的紧急军事文书。
English: The express courier is the fastest, traveling four hundred miles a day, and is only used when there is a military operation. During the Xining period, there was also a gold-plate express courier, like an emergency military instrument with feathers in ancient times.

古文：以木牌朱漆黄金字，光明眩目，过如飞电，望之者无不避路，日行五百余时。
现代文：这种急脚递用红漆黄金字的木牌，光亮耀人眼目，随驿马飞驰有如闪电，望见的行人无不躲避，每天能行五百多里。
English: This kind of wooden sign with red lacquer and gold lettering, bright and dazzling, flies along with the horse like lightning, and all pedestrians avoid it, and can travel more than five hundred miles a day.

古文：有军前机速处分，则自御前发下，三省、枢密院莫得与也。
现代文：如果有军事前线需要紧急处置的机密事项，则金字牌自皇帝御前直接发出，三省、枢密院也不能参与。
English: If there is a confidential matter that requires urgent handling on the military front, the gold nameplate is issued directly from the emperor, and the three provinces and the Privy Council cannot participate.

古文：皇祐二年，吴中大饥，殍殣枕路，是时范文正领浙西，发粟及募民存饷，为术甚备，吴人喜竞渡，好为佛事。
现代文：皇祐二年，江浙一带发生大饥荒，饿死的人枕藉道路。是时范文正以前执政为杭州知州，发放官府存粮及募灾民服役以救灾，采取的措施甚为周备。吴人喜竞赛划船，又好做佛事。
English: In the second year of Emperor Yu, a great famine occurred in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and people who died of starvation took to the roads. It was when Fan Wenzheng was governor of Hangzhou and Zhizhou. The government distributed stored grain and recruited disaster victims to serve in disaster relief. The measures taken were very thorough. Wu people enjoyed rowing competitions and doing Buddhist rituals.

古文：希文乃纵民竞渡，太守日出宴于湖上，自春至夏，居民空巷出游。
现代文：希文于是放开禁忌让民众举行划船比赛，地方官员每天都到湖上宴集，自春至夏，居民也都空巷出游。
English: Xiwen then let go of the taboo and let the people hold a rowing race. Local officials went to the lake for banquets every day, and from spring to summer, residents also traveled the streets.

古文：又召诸佛寺主首，谕之曰： 饥歳工价至贱，可以大兴土木之役。 
现代文：又召集各佛寺的住持劝导说： 灾荒之年，工役的价钱最低，可以趁此大兴土木。 
English: The abbots of all Buddhist temples were also called together to persuade them: In a year of disaster and famine, the price of labor is the lowest, and you can take advantage of this to carry out large-scale construction.

古文：于是诸寺工作鼎兴。
现代文：于是各寺院土木工程大兴。
English: As a result, there was a boom in civil engineering projects at temples.

古文：又新敖仓吏舍，日役千夫。
现代文：他又重新翻盖粮仓和官舍，每天役使上千人。
English: He also rebuilt grain silos and official residences, and served thousands of people every day.

古文：监司奏劾杭州不恤荒政，嬉游不节，及公私兴造，伤耗民力，文正乃自条叙所以宴游及兴造，皆欲以发有馀之财，以惠贫者。
现代文：监司奏劾杭州不救济灾荒，嬉戏游乐无节制，及公私大兴土木、伤害消耗民力等事。文正因此自上条奏，陈述所以要宴会游乐及兴造工程等，都是为了征集社会上的余财以赈济贫民。
English: The supervisors accused Hangzhou of not providing relief for the disaster, playing and having fun without restraint, and public and private large-scale construction, harming and consuming people's power. Therefore, Wen Zheng played from the top, stating that the reason for the banquet and amusement and construction projects were all to collect surplus money from the society to help the poor.

古文：贸易饮食、工技服力之人，仰食于公私者，日无虑数万人。荒政之施，莫此为大。
现代文：从事货物贸易、饮食服务、手工技艺及其他靠出卖劳力为生的人，仰食于公家及富贵人家的，每天不下数万人，救济灾荒的措施，没有比这更重要的。
English: There is no more important measure for disaster relief than the tens of thousands of people who are engaged in trade in goods, catering services, handicrafts and other activities that depend on the sale of labor to make a living, and who depend on the public and rich people.

古文：是歳，两浙唯杭州晏然，民不流徙，皆文正之惠也。
现代文：这一年，两浙地区只有杭州秩序安定，民众没有逃荒外流的，这都是范公救灾的恩惠。
English: In this year, only Hangzhou in the two Zhejiang regions was orderly and stable, and the people did not flee to the countryside. This was all the boon of Fan Gong's disaster relief.

古文：歳饥发司农之粟，募民兴利，近歳遂著为令。
现代文：灾荒之年，发放国家粮仓的粮食，招募灾民兴修公益工程，近年已著录于令典成为制度。
English: In the year of disaster and famine, the distribution of grain from the national granary and the recruitment of disaster victims to build public welfare projects have been recorded in the decree and have become a system in recent years.

古文：既已恤饥，因之以成就民利，此先王之美泽也。
现代文：既能救济饥荒，又因此而成就利民事业，这也是先王泽及后世的一个优良的传统。
English: It is a fine tradition of Wang Ze and later generations to be able to relieve famine and thus achieve the cause of benefiting the people.

古文：庆历中，河决北都商胡，久之未塞，三司度支副使郭申锡亲住董作。
现代文：庆历年间，黄河在北京大名府的商胡决口，久未能堵住，三司度支副使郭申锡亲自前往督察治理。
English: During the Qinglian year, the Yellow River at the Shanghu mouth of Beijing Damingfu could not be blocked for a long time. Guo Shenxi, deputy chief of the Third Division of the State Council, personally went to inspect and control the situation.

古文：凡塞河决垂合，中间一埽，谓之 合龙门 ，功全在此。是时屡塞不合。
现代文：凡是堵塞黄河决口，将近合上中间的一埽叫做 合龙门 ，治决口的事功全在此举，而此时屡塞而不能合。
English: Whenever the Yellow River is blocked at its mouth, the middle bar close to the top is called the Hailong Gate, and the work of fixing the mouth is all done at this time, but at this time it is often blocked and cannot be closed.

古文：时合楷门埽长六十步。有水工高超者献议，以谓埽身太长，人力不能压，埽不至水底，矿河流不断，而绳缆多绝。
现代文：此时合龙门的埽长六十步，有水工高超提出建议，以为埽身太长，用人力不能把埽压下去，沉不到水底，所以河水不能断流，而缆绳多被冲断。
English: At this time, the gantry of the gantry is sixty paces long, and some hydraulic experts have suggested that the gantry body is too long, and the gantry cannot be pressed down by human power, and it cannot sink to the bottom of the water, so the river cannot be cut off, and the cable is mostly broken.

古文：今当以六十步为三节，每节埽长二十步，中间以索连属之，先下第一节，待其至底空压第二、第三。
现代文：当下应该把六十步的埽分成三截，每截埽长二十步，中间用绳索连接起来。施工时先下第一层，等埽沉到水底，再压第二层、第三层。
English: At the moment, the sixty-step raft should be divided into three sections, each section of the raft is twenty steps long, connected with a rope in the middle. During construction, the first layer should be lowered first, wait for the raft to sink to the bottom of the water, and then press the second layer and the third layer.

古文：旧工争之，以为不可，云： 二十步埽，不能断漏。徒用三节，所费当倍，而决不塞。 
现代文：旧水工和他争辩，以为这样做不行，说二十步的埽不能截断水流使它不漏，白白用三层，花费将增加一倍，而决口还是堵不住。
English: The old plumber argued with him that it was not possible to do so, saying that the twenty-step raft could not cut off the water flow so that it would not leak, and that it was useless to use three layers, the cost would double, but the breach could not be blocked.

古文：超谓之曰： 第一埽水信未断，然势必杀半。压第二埽，止用半力，水纵未断，不过小漏耳。第三节乃平地施工，足以尽人力。
现代文：高超对他们说： 第一层埽压下去，水流诚然未断，然而水势必然会减半；压第二层埽，只需用一半的力气，压好后水流纵然没全断，也不过是小漏了；等到压第三层，就是平地施工，足以尽人力了。
English: Gao Chao said to them: When the first layer of concrete is pressed down, the water flow is indeed unbroken, but the water potential will inevitably be halved; when the second layer of concrete is pressed down, only half of the force is needed, and even if the water flow is not completely broken after pressing, it is only a small leak; when the third layer of concrete is pressed down, it is a flat construction, and it is enough manpower.

古文：处置三节既定，即上两节自为浊泥所淤，不烦人功。 
现代文：在第三层处置完毕后，下面的两层即已自为水中的泥沙所淤，更不烦再用人力费功。 
English: After the disposal of the third layer is completed, the two layers below have been silted up by the sediment in the water, and it is no longer troublesome to use human effort.

古文：申锡主前议，不听超说。
现代文：郭申锡支持旧水工的方案，不采取高超的建议。
English: Guo Shenxi supports the plan of the old waterworks, and does not accept the superior suggestions.

古文：是时贾魏分帅北门，独以超之言为然，阴遣数千人于下流收漉流埽。
现代文：这时贾魏公为河北帅，驻大名府北门，独以高超的建议为对，于是他暗地里派出数千人，准备在下流截捞合龙失败后被冲走的埽。
English: At this time, Jia Weigong was the commander of Hebei Province, stationed in Damingfu Beimen, and he alone responded to the superb suggestion. Therefore, he secretly sent thousands of people to prepare for the rafts that were washed away after the failure of the downstream salvage.

古文：既定而埽果流，而河决愈甚，申锡坐谪。
现代文：申锡按旧水工的方案实施既毕，合龙的埽果然被冲走，而黄河的决口更加严重，申锡也因此过失而被谪官。
English: After the implementation of the plan of the old waterworks was completed, the flood of the dragon was washed away, and the Yellow River was even more serious. As a result of this mistake, Shen Xi was eunuched.

古文：卒用超计，商胡方定。
现代文：最后还是用高超的计策，商胡的决口才被堵住了。
English: In the end, it took a masterful strategy to block Shang Hu's escape.

古文：盐之品至多，前史所载，夷狄间自有十余种；中国所出，亦不减数十种。
现代文：宋代云梯食盐的种类极多，以往史书所记载的，在周边少数民族地区已自有十多种，中原地区所出产的也不下几十种。
English: There were many kinds of salt in Yunti during the Song Dynasty. According to historical records, there were more than ten kinds of salt produced in the surrounding ethnic minority areas, and dozens of kinds produced in the Central Plains.

古文：今公私能行者四种：一者 末盐， 海盐也，河北、京、东、淮南、两浙、江南东西、荆湖南北、福建、广南东西十一路食之。其次 颗盐 ，解州盐泽及晋、绛、潞、泽所出，京幾、南京、京西、陕西、河东、褒、剑等处食之。又次 井盐 ，凿井取之，盖、梓、利、夔四路食之。又次 崖盐 ，生于土崖之间，阶、成、凤等州食之。
现代文：现在官私通行的有四种：一种是 末盐 ，就是海盐，供河北路、京东路、淮南路、两浙路、江南东西路、荆湖南北路、福建路、广南东西路共十一路的人食用；其次是 颗盐 ，为解州盐泽及晋州、绛州、潞州、泽州所出产，供京幾路、南京路、京西路、陕西路、河东路及褒州、剑州等地的人食用；再次是 井盐 ，是靠凿井获取原料制造的，益州、梓州、利州、夔州四路的人食用这种盐；又次是 崖盐 ，出产于土崖之间，阶州、成州、凤州等州的人食用这种盐。
English: At present, there are four kinds of salt that are available to the public and private sectors: one is "salt powder," that is, sea salt, which can be consumed by the people of Hebei Road, Jingdong Road, Huainan Road, the two Zhejiang Roads, the east-west Road of Jiangnan, the north-south Road of Jinghu, Fujian Road, and the east-west Road of Guangnan; the second is "salt grain," which is produced by Lozhou Yanze and Jinzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Zezhou, and can be consumed by the people of Jingqi Road, Nanjing Road, West Beijing Road, Shaanxi Road,

古文：唯陕西路颗盐有定课，歳为钱二百三十万缗；自余盈虚不常，大约歳入二千余万缗。
现代文：各地食盐的生产，只有陕西路的颗盐有定额的税收，每年盐税钱为二百三十万缗；其余的税收额度多少不定，总计大约每年收入二千多万缗。
English: In the production of table salt around the country, only the salt of Shaanxi Road has a fixed amount of tax. The annual salt tax is 2.3 million baht; the rest of the tax amount is somewhat uncertain, with a total annual income of more than 20 million baht.

古文：唯末盐歳自抄三百万，供河北边籴；其他皆给本处经费而已。
现代文：这些缗钱，只有东南沿海的末盐每年单独发行盐钞三百万，其收入用于河北边防官兵的食盐供应；其他地方的盐税都不过用作本地官府的经费而已。
English: Only the salt mines on the southeast coast issue salt banknotes of up to 3 million yuan each year. The revenue is used to supply salt to the border guards in Hebei. The salt taxes in other places are only used to fund the local government.

古文：缘边籴买仰给于度支者，河北则海、末盐，河东、陕西则颗盐及蜀茶为多。
现代文：沿边籴买食盐的费用依靠三司度支部所掌管的中央财政的，河北则用海、末盐的税收，河东、陕西则以使用颗盐及蜀茶的税收为多。
English: The cost of buying salt along the border depends on the central finance managed by the three departments of the branch, Hebei uses the tax on sea and salt, and Hedong and Shaanxi use the tax on salt and Shu tea.

古文：运盐之法，凡行百里，陆运斤四钱，船运斤一钱，以此为率。
现代文：食盐的运费，规定凡行一百里，陆运每斤收四钱，船运每斤收一钱，以此为准。
English: The cost of transporting table salt is stipulated to be four yuan per kilo for land transportation and one yuan per kilo for sea transportation, whichever is the longest.

古文：太常博士李处厚知庐州慎县，尝有殴人死者，处厚往验伤，以糟灰汤之类薄之，者无伤迹，有一老父求见曰： 邑之老书史也。知验伤不见其迹，此易辨也。
现代文：太常博士李处厚担任庐州慎县县令时，曾有人被殴打致死。李处厚前往验伤，用了往尸体上涂敷糟肉、灰汤等办法，都没有办法查出伤迹。有一个老人求见，说： 我是县衙里的老文书，听说大人查不出尸体的伤迹，其实这不难辨别。
English: When Dr. Li Duanhou was serving as the county magistrate of Shen County, Zhangzhou, someone was beaten to death. Li Duanhou went to inspect the injuries and used methods such as smearing bad meat and ash soup on the corpse, but there was no way to detect the injuries. An old man asked to see him and said: I am an old clerk in the county magistrate. I heard that adults cannot detect the injuries of the corpse, but in fact it is not difficult to distinguish.

古文：以新赤油繖日中覆之，以水沃其尸，其迹必见。 
现代文：在正午的阳光下用一把新的红油伞罩住尸体，再往尸体上浇些水，那伤迹就一定会显现出来。 
English: Cover the body with a new red oil umbrella in the midday sun, and then pour some water on the body, and the wound will certainly appear.

古文：处厚如其言，伤迹宛然。
现代文：李处厚照他的话去做，尸体的伤迹清楚地显露了出来。
English: Mr. Li did as he was told, and the body's injuries were clearly visible.

古文：自此江，淮之间官司往往用此法。
现代文：从此以后，江淮一带诉讼验尸时往往使用这种方法。
English: Since then, this method has often been used in lawsuits and autopsies in the Jianghuai area.

古文：陕西颗盐，旧法官自搬运，置务拘卖。
现代文：陕西的颗盐，过去的办法是官府自行组织搬运，设置专门的机构购进和卖出。
English: In the past, Shaanxi's salt was transported by the government itself, and a special agency was set up to buy and sell it.

古文：兵部员外郎范祥始为钞法，令商人就边郡入钱四贯八百售一钞，至解池请盐二百斤，任其私卖，得钱以实塞下，省数十郡搬运之劳。
现代文：兵部员外郎范祥始创为钞法，使商人到边境州郡纳钱四贯八百，即售予一帖盐钞，到解州盐池换取食盐二百斤，任由他们私自贩卖，以收入的钞钱充实边塞的费用，同时省去了数十个州县搬运食盐的劳苦。
English: Fan Xiang, a member of the military department, originally created the banknote method, which enabled merchants to go to the border counties to pay four hundred and eight hundred yuan, that is, to sell one-thousand salt banknotes, and to go to the salt ponds of Leshou to exchange two hundred catties of salt. They were allowed to sell privately and use the banknotes to supplement the cost of the border fort. At the same time, the labor of transporting salt in dozens of states and counties was saved.

古文：异日辇车牛驴以盐役死者，歳以万计，冒禁抵罪者，不可胜数；至此悉免。
现代文：往日辇运拉车的牛和驴，每年因为盐运役使而死者达上万头，因为国家食盐专卖而犯禁抵罪的人不可胜数，这些情况至行钞法而都得以避免。
English: In the past, cattle and donkeys were used to pull carts. Every year, tens of thousands of people died as a result of salt transportation, and countless people committed crimes because of the state's monopoly on salt sales. All of these situations were avoided by the introduction of the Banknote Law.

古文：行之既久，盐价时有低昂，又于京师置都盐院，陕西转运司自遣官主之。
现代文：钞法实行既久，盐价时有高低，又于京师设置都盐院，由陕西转运司自行派遣官员主持供应出卖事务。
English: The banknote method has been implemented for a long time, and the price of salt has been high and low, and the capital salt institute has been set up in Beijing, and the Shaanxi Transportation Department has dispatched officials to preside over the supply and sale affairs.

古文：京师食盐，斤不足三十五钱，则敛而不发，以长盐价；过四十，则大发库盐，以压商利。
现代文：京师的食盐，如果每斤卖不到三十五钱，就敛藏入库而不发卖，以使盐价上涨；如果超过了四十钱，就大批发放库存的食盐，以抑制商人的暴利，使盐价保持稳定。
English: If the salt sold by Beijing merchants is less than 35 yuan per kilo, it will be stored in warehouses and not sold, so that the price of salt will rise; if it is more than 40 yuan, it will be distributed in large quantities to curb the profiteering of merchants and keep the price of salt stable.

古文：使盐价有常，而钞法有定数。行之数十年，至今以为利也。
现代文：而盐钞的发放是有定额的，推行数十年，国家至今赖以为利。
English: However, the issuance of salt banknotes is subject to a quota, which has been in place for decades, and the state has relied on it for profit ever since.

古文：河北盐法，太祖皇帝尝降墨敕，听民间贾贩，唯收税钱，不许官榷。
现代文：河北地区的盐法，太祖皇帝曾颁降手书的敕令，允许民间贩卖，只收税钱，不许官府专卖。
English: In the salt law of Hebei Province, the great-grandfather emperor once issued a written imperial decree, allowing private sales, only collecting tax money, and forbidding the government to sell exclusively.

古文：其后有司屡请闭固，仁宗皇帝又有批诏云： 朕终不使河北百姓常食贵盐。 
现代文：后来有关部门屡次奏请禁止私卖，仁宗皇帝又有手批的诏书说： 朕终不使河北百姓常食贵盐。 
English: Later, the relevant departments made repeated requests to ban the private sale, and Emperor Renzong also issued an edict saying: I will not let the people of Hebei eat expensive salt.

古文：献议者悉罢遗之。河北父老，皆掌中掬灰，藉火焚香，望阙欢呼称谢。
现代文：凡是建议禁绝私盐的官员都被罢职外放，河北父老都手捧灰土，借以点火焚香，望阙膜拜，欢呼称谢。
English: All the officials who proposed to ban the sale of salt were dismissed from their posts and sent abroad. The people of Hebei held the ashes in their hands, lit incense with them, worshipped the statue, and cheered and thanked.

古文：熙宁中，復有献谋者。
现代文：熙宁年间，又有人向皇上建议禁止私盐。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, another suggestion was made to the emperor to ban the smuggling of salt.

古文：余时在三司，求访两朝墨敕不获，然人人能诵其言，议亦竟寝。
现代文：我当时在三司，访求太祖、仁宗的手书敕令没有见到，然而人人能传诵那些话，禁止私盐的建议也最终被搁置。
English: I was in Sanji at the time, and I didn't see the handwritten edict to visit Taizu and Rinzong, but everyone could recite those words, and the proposal to ban salt smuggling was eventually shelved.

