古文：庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝，讳存勖，武皇帝之长子也。
现代文：庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝，讳名存勖，是武皇帝的长子。
English: Emperor Zhuangzongguang Shengxiao, also known as Emperor Zhuangzongguang, was the eldest son of Emperor Wu.

古文：母曰贞简皇后曹氏，以唐光启元年岁在乙巳，冬十月二十二日癸亥，生帝于晋阳宫。
现代文：母亲是贞简皇后曹氏，唐光启元年十月二十二日在晋阳宫生下庄宗。
English: His mother was Empress Zhengjian Cao, and he was born on October 22, the first year of the Tang Dynasty, in the Jinyang Palace.

古文：妊时，曹后尝梦神人，黑衣拥扇，夹侍左右。
现代文：曹后怀孕时曾梦见神仙穿黑衣执扇子在身旁伺候。
English: When Cao Hou was pregnant, she had a dream in which a black-clad fairy holding a fan was waiting for her.

古文：载诞之辰，紫气出于窗户。
现代文：生育时，紫气从窗户涌出。
English: When it's time to give birth, violet gas pours out of the window.

古文：及为婴兒，体貌奇特，沈厚不群，武皇特所钟爱。
现代文：庄宗在婴儿时体貌奇特，厚重沉着不同于常人，武皇十分钟爱。
English: When he was a baby, Zhuangzong had a peculiar appearance. He was heavy and heavy, unlike ordinary people. Emperor Wu was very fond of him.

古文：及武皇之讨王行瑜，帝时年十一，从行。
现代文：武皇讨伐王行瑜那年，庄宗十一岁，随父出征。
English: In the year of Emperor Wu's crusade against Wang Xingyu, Zhuozong was eleven years old and went to war with his father.

古文：初令入觐献捷，迎驾还宫，昭宗一见骇之，曰： 此兒有奇表。 
现代文：并开始让他入朝拜谒报捷，迎驾回宫，唐昭宗一见他便惊讶地说： 这孩子有异相。 
English: Tang Zhaozong was surprised to see him and said, "This child has a strange appearance."

古文：时人号曰 亚子 。
现代文：因而摸着他的背说 ：孩子将来是国家栋梁，不要忘了对我家忠孝。 
English: So he touched his back and said, "In the future, your child will be a pillar of the nation. Don't forget to be loyal to my family."

古文：贼平，授检校司空、隰州刺史，改汾、晋二郡，皆遥领之。
现代文：赐给鸿来鸠酒卮、翡翠盘。战事结束，被授以检校司空、隰州刺史，改任汾、晋二郡，都是隔很远监控。
English: At the end of the war, he was awarded the title of "school inspector" and "governor of Zhangzhou," and was transferred to the post of "superintendent of Zhangzhou" and "governor of Jinji County," all of which were remote monitoring posts.

古文：帝洞晓音律，常令歌舞于前。
现代文：庄宗精通音律，常让人在面前歌舞。
English: Shouzong is well-versed in musical rhythms and often has people sing and dance in front of him.

古文：十三习《春秋》，手自缮写，略通大义。
现代文：十三岁学习《春秋》，亲手抄写，略通大致的意思。
English: At the age of thirteen, he studied "Spring and Autumn," copied it by hand, and understood the general meaning of it.

古文：及壮，便射骑，胆略绝人，其心豁如也。
现代文：成年后便射箭骑马，胆量过人，心胸开阔。
English: After he became an adult, he took up archery and horseback riding. He was fearless and open-minded.

古文：武皇起义云中，部下皆北边劲兵，及破贼迎銮，功居第一。
现代文：武皇在云中起义，部下都是北方强兵，破贼迎驾，功劳最大，因此逐渐优宠士兵。
English: Emperor Wu was in the middle of an uprising, and his subordinates were all strong soldiers from the north, who fought against the bandits and made the greatest contribution. As a result, soldiers were gradually favored.

古文：由是稍优宠士伍，因多不法，或陵侮官吏，豪夺士民，白昼剽攘，酒博喧竞。
现代文：士兵常不守法，有时凌侮官吏，掠夺民众，白天抢劫，酗酒赌博喧哗竞闹。
English: Soldiers often do not abide by the law, sometimes insulting officials, plundering the people, daytime robbery, alcoholism, gambling, and noisy competition.

古文：武皇缓于禁制，惟帝不平之，因从容启于武皇，武皇依违之。
现代文：武皇不多禁止，而庄宗却看不过去，便从容劝告武皇，武皇犹豫不决。
English: Emperor Wu did not prohibit much, but Zhuangzong could not see past it, so he calmly advised Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu hesitated.

古文：及安塞不利之后，时事多难，梁将氏叔琮、康怀英频犯郊圻，土疆日蹙，城门之外，鞠为战场，武皇忧形于色。
现代文：等安塞一战失利之后，形势艰难，梁将军氏叔琮、康怀英频频侵犯边界，疆土越来越少，城门之外也踏成了战场，武皇忧形于色。
English: After the defeat in the First Battle of Ansai, the situation was difficult. General Liang's uncles and aunts and Kang Huaiying frequently violated the border, the territory became less and less, and outside the city gate also became a battlefield. Emperor Wu was worried.

古文：帝因启曰： 夫盛衰有常理，祸福系神道。
现代文：庄宗对武皇说： 盛衰有寻常的事理，祸福关系到神的旨意。
English: Zhuangzong said to Emperor Wu, "The rise and fall of things is a matter of common sense, and misfortune and good fortune are related to God's will.

古文：家世三代，尽忠王室，势穷力屈，无所愧心。
现代文：我家三代忠于唐王朝，势力有些削弱，无愧于心。
English: Three generations of my family have been loyal to the Tang Dynasty, but their power has been somewhat weakened.

古文：物不极则不反，恶不极则不亡。
现代文：物不到极点不会反复，恶不到极点不会消亡。
English: Things that are not extreme will not be repeated, and evils that are not extreme will not die out.

古文：今硃氏攻逼乘舆，窥伺神器，陷害良善，诬诳神祇。
现代文：现在朱氏攻击逼近皇帝，窥视皇位，陷害良善之人，欺骗神明之天。
English: Now the Zhu clan is attacking the approaching emperor, spying on the imperial throne, framing good people, and deceiving the gods.

古文：以臣观之，殆其极矣。
现代文：照我看，已到极点了。
English: As far as I'm concerned, we've reached the end of the line.

古文：大人当遵养时晦，以待其衰，何事轻为沮丧！ 
现代文：父亲应静养韬晦，等待他的衰落，哪用得着这么沮丧！ 
English: The father should keep a low profile, wait for his decline, what's the use of being so depressed!

古文：太祖释然，因奉觞作乐而罢。
现代文：太祖听了后放下心，又饮酒取乐。
English: After listening, the great-grandfather calmed down and went back to drinking for fun.

古文：及沧州刘守文为梁朝所攻，其父仁恭遣使乞师，武皇恨其翻覆，不时许之。
现代文：沧州刘守文受梁朝攻击，他的父亲刘仁恭派人来请救兵，武皇恨他反复无常，不想答应。
English: Liu Shouwen of Cangzhou was attacked by the Liang Dynasty. His father, Liu Rengong, sent someone to rescue him. Emperor Wu hated his capriciousness and did not want to agree.

古文：帝白曰： 此吾复振之道也，不得以嫌怨介怀。
现代文：庄宗说： 这正好是我们复兴的机会，不必介意以前的怨恨。
English: Zhuangzong said: This is exactly the opportunity for our revival, never mind the previous grudge.

古文：且九分天下，硃氏今有六七，赵、魏、中山在他庑下，贼所惮者，惟我与仁恭尔；我之兴衰，系此一举，不可失也。 
现代文：现在把天下分九份，朱氏现今占了六七份，赵、魏、中山在他手中，贼寇所害怕的，只有我们和刘仁恭了。我们的兴衰，在此一举，不可失去机会。 
English: The world is now divided into nine parts, the Zhu family now accounts for sixty-seven parts, Zhao, Wei, and Zhongshan are in his hands, and only we and Liu Rengong are feared by the thieves. Our rise and fall, in this one fell swoop, must not lose the opportunity.

古文：太祖乃征兵于燕，攻取潞州，既而丁会果以城来降。
现代文：太祖于是从燕地征兵，攻下潞州，不久丁会果然献城投降。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather recruited soldiers from Yanji and conquered Zhangzhou. Soon, Ding would surrender the city.

古文：天祐五年春正月，武皇疾笃，召监军张承业、大将吴珙谓曰： 吾常爱此子志气远大，可付后事，惟卿等所教。 
现代文：天祐五年一月，武皇病重，召见监军张承业、大将吴珙说： 我常爱这孩子志气远大，可接我的事业，希望请你们多加教导。 
English: In January of the 5th year of Tianyu, Emperor Wu was gravely ill. He summoned the military overseer Zhang Chengye and the general Wu Xi and said, "I have always loved this boy. He has a high spirit and can take over my career. I hope you will teach him a lot."

古文：及武皇厌代，帝乃嗣王位于晋阳，时年二十有四。
现代文：武皇死后，庄宗便在晋阳即王位，时年二十四岁。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu, Zhuangzong ascended the throne in Jinyang at the age of twenty-four.

古文：汴人方寇潞州，周德威宿兵于乱柳，以军城易帅，窃议忷忷，讹言播于行路。
现代文：那时汴军正侵犯潞州，周德威在乱柳驻兵，因军城换了元帅，引起议论纷纷，流言传播于道路。
English: At that time, the Shan army was invading Zhangzhou, and Zhou Dewei was stationed in Ganliu. Due to the change of marshal in the military city, there were many discussions, and rumors spread on the road.

古文：帝方居丧，将吏不得谒见，监军使张承业排闼至庐所，言曰： 夫孝在不坠家业，不同匹夫之孝。
现代文：庄宗正在服丧，将军官吏都不能进见，监军使张承业推开门闯进庄宗守丧的住所说 ：讲孝道在于不使家业败落，不能和一般人那样讲孝。
English: Zhuangzong was in mourning, and the soldiers and officials could not see him. Zhang Chengye, the supervisor of the army, pushed open the door and broke into Zhuangzong's mourning residence and said: "The way to preach filial piety is not to let the family business fail, and you can't preach filial piety like ordinary people."

古文：且君父厌世，嗣主未立，窃虑凶猾不逞之徒，有怀觊望。
现代文：再说先帝刚去世，继承者还没立稳，我担心凶狠狡猾的野心家会有邪念。
English: Besides, the former emperor has just passed away, and the successor is not yet stable. I am worried that the fierce and cunning careerists will have evil thoughts.

古文：又汴寇压境，利我凶衰，苟或摇动，则倍张贼势，讹言不息，惧有变生。
现代文：汴寇又乘我们有丧事侵压边界，如果军心动摇，则更添敌人气焰，流言不止，恐怕会生变乱。
English: The raiders will take advantage of our death to invade the border. If the military spirit is shaken, it will further embolden the enemy. Rumors will continue, and I am afraid there will be chaos.

古文：请依顾命，墨缞听政，保家安亲，此惟大孝。 
现代文：请遵从先帝遗命，穿丧服听政，保家安亲，这才是大孝。 
English: Please follow the last emperor's behest, wear mourning clothes, obey the government, and protect your family and relatives. This is what filial piety is all about.

古文：帝于是始听断大事，
现代文：庄宗于是开始听取报告决断国事。
English: Zhuangzong then began to listen to the report and decide on state affairs.

古文：时振武节度使克宁，即帝之季父也，为管内蕃汉马步都知兵马使，典握兵柄。
现代文：当时的振武军节度使李克宁是庄宗的叔叔，是管内蕃汉马步军都知兵马使，掌握兵权。
English: At the time of the Zhenwu Army Festival, Li Kening was Zhuangzong's uncle, and he was the commander of the Han Horse Infantry Corps, and he controlled the military power.

古文：帝以军府事让季父，曰： 兒年幼稚，未通庶政，虽承遗命，恐未能弹压。
现代文：庄宗把军府大事交给叔叔，说 ：侄儿年轻幼稚，不通政务，虽然继承王位，恐怕不能服众。
English: Zhuangzong entrusted the military affairs to his uncle, saying, "My nephew is young and naive, he is not familiar with government affairs, and although he will inherit the throne, I am afraid he will not be able to serve the public."

古文：季父勋德俱高，众情推伏，且请制置军府，俟兒有立，听季父处分。 
现代文：叔叔功勋道德都高，大家心服，暂请治理军务，等侄儿再大些，由叔叔安排。 
English: Uncle's merits and morals are high, everyone is satisfied, please manage the military affairs for the time being, and wait until the nephew is older, arranged by the uncle.

古文：克宁曰： 亡兄遗命，属在我兒，孰敢异议！ 
现代文：克宁说： 我死去的哥哥有遗命把政权交给侄儿，我怎敢说什么不同的话！ 
English: Knin said: "My dead brother left the power to his nephew, how dare I say anything different!"

古文：因率先拜贺。
现代文：便带头向庄宗拜贺。
English: He then took the lead in offering his congratulations to Zhuangzong.

古文：初，武皇奖励戎功，多畜庶孽，衣服礼秩如嫡者六七辈，比之嗣王，年齿又长，部下各绾强兵，朝夕聚议，欲谋为乱。
现代文：起初，武皇奖励有军功的人，收了很多义子，衣服礼节待遇和亲生儿子相同的有六七辈人，和庄宗相比，年龄大，部下多辖有强兵，经常聚在一起议论谋划叛乱。
English: At first, Emperor Wu rewarded people with military merits, received many godchildren, and there were six or seven generations of people who had the same clothing etiquette and treatment as their own sons. Compared with Zhuangzong, they were older, and their subordinates mostly had strong soldiers. They often gathered together to discuss and plan the rebellion.

古文：及帝绍统，或强项不拜，郁郁愤惋，托疾废事。
现代文：等到庄宗即位之后，有的不肯低头下拜，心里愤愤不平，推托有病不管事。
English: After the enthronement of Zhuangzong, some people refused to bow down and worship, and were resentful in their hearts, insisting that they were ill and did not care about anything.

古文：会李存颢以阴计干克宁曰： 兄亡弟立，古今旧事，季父拜侄，理所未安。 
现代文：李存颢私下挑动克宁，说： 兄亡弟立，古今已成惯例，叔叔拜侄儿，道理上讲不过去。 
English: Li Cunxu privately provoked Kenin, saying, "It has been customary for brothers to stand up for their brothers, and for uncles to stand up for their nephews. This cannot be justified.

古文：克宁妻素刚狠，因激怒克宁，阴图祸乱。
现代文：克宁妻子性格一向刚狠，也激怒克宁，阴谋叛乱。
English: The character of Knin's wife has always been tough, and she also infuriated Knin and plotted a rebellion.

古文：存颢欲于克宁之第谋害张承业、李存璋等，以并、汾九州归附于梁，送贞简太后为质。
现代文：李存颢想在克宁家里谋害张承业、李存璋等人，把并、汾九州归附给梁朝，送贞简太后为人质。
English: Li Cunxu wanted to assassinate Zhang Chengye, Li Cunxu and others in the Knin family, annex and annex Kyushu to the Liang Dynasty, and send Empress Dowager Jian as a hostage.

古文：时幸臣史敬熔者，亦为克宁所诱，尽得其情，乃来告帝。
现代文：克宁想激化事情，擅自杀大将李存质，要庄宗授自己为云州节度使，把蔚、朔、应三州划归自己，庄宗都允许了，然而也知道他的阴谋有一段时间了。克宁想趁庄宗到他家时起事。
English: Knin wanted to escalate the situation. He wanted to kill General Li Cunxue, and asked Zhuangzong to appoint him as the official of the Yunnan Festival. Zhuangzong allowed him to divide Wei, Shuo, and Ying into three states. However, he also knew that he had been plotting for some time. Knin wanted to take advantage of Zhuangzong's visit to his home to start a riot.

古文：帝谓张承业曰： 季父所为如此，无犹子之情，骨肉不可自相鱼肉，予当避路，则祸乱不作矣！ 
现代文：庄宗对张承业说： 叔叔这样做，没叔侄之情，骨肉不该自相残杀，我应避开道路，祸乱就起不来。 
English: Zhuangzong said to Zhang Chengye, "Uncle Zhang, if you do this, you will not have the feelings of an uncle and a nephew. Flesh and blood should not kill each other. I should avoid the road, so that there will be no calamity.

古文：承业曰： 臣受命先王，言犹在耳。
现代文：张承业说： 我受先王嘱托，先王的话还在耳边。
English: Zhang Chengye said: I was commissioned by the former king, and the words of the former king are still in my ears.

古文：存颢辈欲以太原降贼，王欲何路求生？
现代文：李存颢等人想将太原投敌，皇上还能有生路吗？
English: If Li Cunxu and others wanted to turn Taiyuan into an enemy, would the emperor still have a way out?

古文：不即诛除，亡无日矣。 
现代文：如不马上镇压，国家也没几天了。 
English: If there is no immediate crackdown, the country has only a few days to recover.

古文：因召吴珙、李存璋、李存敬、硃守殷谕其谋，众咸愤怒。
现代文：便召来吴珙、李存璋、朱守殷，告知叛乱者的阴谋，大家都很愤怒。
English: He then summoned Wu Gan, Li Cunxu, and Zhu Shouyin to inform them of the rebels' plot. Everyone was furious.

古文：二月壬戌，命存璋伏甲以诛克宁，遂靖其难。
现代文：二月二十一日，命李存璋埋伏甲士杀了李克宁，遂平定变乱。
English: On February 21, Li Cunxu ordered an ambush to kill Li Kening, which led to a mutiny.

古文：是月，唐少帝崩于曹州，梁祖使人鸩之也。
现代文：当月，唐少帝死于曹州，是梁太祖派人毒死的。
English: That month, Tang Shao Di died in Caozhou. It was Liang Taizu who sent someone to poison him.

古文：帝闻之，举哀号恸。
现代文：庄宗闻讯，举哀恸哭。
English: Zhuang Zong heard the news and wept bitterly.

古文：三月，周德威尚在乱柳，梁将李思安屡为德威所败，闭壁不出。
现代文：三月，周德威仍在乱柳，梁将李思安屡次被周德威打败，闭垒不出。
English: In March, Zhou Dewei was still in chaos. Li Si'an, the general manager of Liang Group, was repeatedly defeated by Zhou Dewei and could not close the base.

古文：是时，梁祖自将兵至泽州，以刘知俊为招讨使以代思安，以范君实、刘重霸为先锋，牛存节为抚遏，统大军营于长子。
现代文：这时，梁太祖亲自带兵到泽州，任命刘知俊为招讨使替代李思安，以范君萛、刘重霸为先锋，牛存节为抚遏，统帅大军宿营于长子。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu personally led the troops to Zezhou, appointed Liu Zhijun as the recruiting envoy to replace Li Si'an, with Fan Junyao and Liu Chongba as the vanguard, Niu Cunjie as the leader, and the commander of the army camped in the eldest son.

古文：四月，帝召德威军归晋阳。
现代文：四月，庄宗召周德威部队回晋阳。
English: In April, Zhuang Zong called Zhou Dewei's troops back to Jinyang.

古文：汴人既见班师，知我国祸，以为潞州必取，援军无俟再举，遂停斥候。
现代文：汴人见唐军回师，知国内有祸，以为可以攻下潞州，不须再派援军，便停止侦察。
English: Seeing the Tang army returning to the division and knowing that there was a disaster in the country, the people of Handan thought that they could capture Handan and did not need to send reinforcements, so they stopped reconnaissance.

古文：梁祖亦自泽州归洛。
现代文：梁太祖也从泽州回洛阳。
English: Liang Taizu also returned to Luoyang from Zezhou.

古文：帝知其无备，乃谓将佐曰： 汴人闻我有丧，必谓不能兴师，人以我少年嗣位，未习戎事，必有骄怠之心。
现代文：庄宗知道梁军没有准备，对将佐们说： 汴人听说我们有丧事，必然不能起兵，又以为我年轻即位，不熟悉军事，他们一定会骄傲松懈。
English: Zhuang Zong knew that Liang's army was unprepared, and said to his generals: "People have heard that we are in mourning, so they cannot muster an army. They also thought that I was young when I ascended the throne, and was not familiar with military affairs. They must be proud and lax.

古文：若简练兵甲，倍道兼行，出其不意，以吾愤激之众，击彼骄惰之师，拉朽摧枯，未云其易，解围定霸，在此一役。 
现代文：如果轻装快速行军，出其不意，凭我们愤激之众，攻击他们骄惰之师，拉朽摧枯，也不比这个容易。解潞州之围争夺霸位，就在这一仗。 
English: It would not be any easier than this if we were to march lightly and quickly, take the enemy by surprise, and with the help of our enraged people, attack their arrogant division and bring it to its knees. It is in this battle that the encirclement of Zhangzhou and the struggle for hegemony will be resolved.

古文：甲子，军发自太原。
现代文：二十四日，从太原发兵。
English: On the 24th, troops were dispatched from Taiyuan.

古文：己巳，至潞州北黄碾下营。
现代文：二十九日，到潞州北边黄碾扎营。
English: On the 29th, they set up camp at Huangning on the northern edge of Luzhou.

古文：五月辛未朔，晨雾晦暝，帝率亲军伏三垂岗下。诘旦，天复昏雾，进军直抵夹城。
现代文：五月一日，晨雾晦暗，庄宗率亲军埋伏在三垂岗下，天亮时，又大雾弥漫，进军直抵夹城。
English: On the first day of May, the morning fog was thick and dark. Zhuang Zong and his troops lay in ambush under the three hanging posts. At dawn, the fog was thick again, and they marched straight to Jiancheng.

古文：时李嗣源总帐下亲军攻东北隅；李存璋、王霸率丁夫烧寨，劚夹城为二道；周德威、李存审各分道进攻，军士鼓噪，三道齐进。
现代文：这时李嗣源带帐下亲军攻东北角，李存璋、王霸率丁夫放火烧寨，把夹城掘成两条道，周德威、李存审各带兵分道进攻，士兵鼓噪，三条道一齐进攻。
English: At this time, Li Siyuan led his pro-army to attack the northeast corner, Li Cunxu and Wang Ba led Ding Fu to set fire to the village, and dug the sandwiched city into two roads. Zhou Dewi and Li Cunxuan each led soldiers to attack in separate ways, and the soldiers were noisy. The three roads attacked together.

古文：李嗣源坏夹城东北隅，率先掩击，梁军大恐，南向而奔，投戈委甲，噎塞行路，斩万余级，获其将副招讨使符道昭洎大将三百人，刍粟百万。
现代文：李嗣源击破夹城东北角，率先掩杀过去，梁军大恐，向南逃窜，丢弃武器装备，堵塞道路。斩首万余，俘虏了副招讨使符道昭以下大将三百人，粮草百万。
English: Li Siyuan broke through the northeast corner of the city and took the lead in covering up the past. Liang's army was terrified and fled south, abandoning weapons and equipment and blocking roads. He decapitated more than 10,000 people, captured three hundred generals and a million grain and grass.

古文：梁招讨使康怀英得百余骑，出天井关而遁。
现代文：梁朝招讨使康怀英仅带百余骑兵从天井关逃走。
English: Liang Zhaozhong made Kang Huaiying escape from the ceiling pass with only a hundred or so cavalry.

古文：梁祖闻其败也，既惧而叹曰： 生子当如是，李氏不亡矣！
现代文：梁太祖听说败讯，害怕地叹道： 生儿子应当生这样的，李氏真不会亡了！
English: When Liang Taizu heard the bad news, he was afraid and sighed: A son should be born like this, the Li clan will never die!

古文：吾家诸子乃豚犬尔。 
现代文：我家几个儿子就像猪狗呀。 
English: My sons are like dogs.

古文：初，唐龙纪元年，帝才五岁，从武皇校猎于三垂岗，岗上有明皇原庙在焉。
现代文：早先在唐龙纪元年，庄宗才五岁时，随武皇在三垂岗打猎，岗上有唐玄宗庙。
English: Earlier, in the first year of the Tang and Dragon Dynasties, when Zhuangzong was only five years old, he went hunting with Emperor Wu at Sanzhuigang, where there was a Tang Xuan Zong Temple.

古文：武皇于祠前置酒，乐作，伶人奏《百年歌》者，陈其衰老之状，声调忄妻苦。
现代文：武皇在祠前摆酒席，奏乐曲，伶人奏《百年歌》，描述衰老状况，曲调凄苦。
English: Emperor Wu set up a banquet in front of the ancestral hall, played music, and the eunuchs played the "Hundred-Year Song," describing the aging condition, and the tune was miserable.

古文：武皇引满，捋须指帝曰： 老夫壮心未已，二十年后，此子必战于此。 
现代文：武皇满满地喝了一杯酒，捋着胡须指着庄宗说： 老夫壮心不已，二十年后，这孩子必将在此作战。 
English: Emperor Wu drank a full glass of wine, stroked his beard and pointed to Zhuangzong and said, "The old man is full of vigor. In twenty years, this child will surely fight here."

古文：及是役也，果符其言焉。
现代文：到这次开战，果然符合了武皇这句话。
English: With this outbreak of war, Emperor Wu's words have come true.

古文：是月，周德威乘胜攻泽州，刺史王班登城拒守。
现代文：这个月，周德威乘胜进攻泽州，刺史王班登城把守。
English: This month, Zhou Dewei took advantage of the victory to attack Zhezhou, and Zhi Shi Wang guarded Bandeng City.

古文：梁将刘知俊自晋、绛将兵赴援，德威退保高平。
现代文：梁将刘知俊从晋、绛率兵增援，周德威退守高平。
English: Liang sent Liu Zhijun to reinforce the troops led by Jin and Zou, while Zhou Dewei retreated to Gaoping.

古文：帝遂班师于晋阳，告庙饮至，赏劳有差。
现代文：庄宗遂回师晋阳，向祖庙祭告，饮酒庆贺，论功行赏。
English: Zhuangzong then returned to his master, Jinyang, and held a ceremony at the ancestral temple, drinking to celebrate and discussing the merits and rewards.

古文：乃下令于国中，禁贼盗，恤孤寡，征隐逸，止贪暴，峻堤防，宽狱讼，期月之间，其俗丕变。
现代文：于是下令全国，严禁贼盗，抚恤孤寡，征召隐逸之士，防止贪污强暴，加固堤防，宽松狱讼，个把月时间，民俗大变。
English: Then he ordered the whole country to strictly prohibit thieves and robbers, to give pensions to orphans and widows, to conscript secluded people, to prevent corruption and violence, to strengthen the dikes, to relax prison lawsuits, and in a month's time, folk customs changed dramatically.

古文：帝每出，于路遇饥寒者，必驻马而临问之，由是人情大悦，王霸之业，自兹而基矣。
现代文：庄宗每次外出，路上遇到饥寒的人，必会停马询问，因此人心大悦，王霸之业，从此有了基础。
English: Every time Zhuangzong went out, people who encountered hunger and cold on the road would stop their horses to inquire, so the people's hearts were greatly pleased, and Wangba's career had a foundation from then on.

古文：六月，凤翔李茂贞、邠州杨崇本合四川王建之师五万，以攻长安，遣使会兵于帝，帝遣张承业率师赴之。
现代文：六月，凤翔李茂贞、州杨崇本与西川王建的五万军队来攻长安，派遣使者向皇帝要求会兵，庄宗派张承业率军赴之。
English: In June, Fengxiang Li Maozhen, Zhou Yang Chongben and West River Wang Jian's fifty thousand troops came to attack Chang'an, sending an envoy to the emperor to request troops, Zhuang sect Zhang Chengye led the army to go.

古文：九月，邠、岐、蜀三镇复大举攻长安，遣李嗣昭、周德威将兵三万攻晋州以应之。
现代文：九月，岐、蜀三镇又大举进攻长安，派李嗣昭、周德威带三万兵攻晋州以接应。
English: In September, the three towns of Qi and Shu launched another large-scale attack on Chang'an, and sent Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewei with 30,000 soldiers to attack Jinzhou in response.

古文：德威与梁将尹皓战于神山北，梁人大败。
现代文：周德威与梁将尹皓在神山北面交战，梁军大败。
English: Zhou Dewei and Liang's general Yin Qi fought in the north of Kamiyama, and Liang's army was soundly defeated.

古文：是时，晋之骑将夏侯敬受以一军奔于梁，德威乃退保隰州。
现代文：这时，晋州骑兵将领夏侯敬受率领一支部队投梁，周德威便退兵保隰州。
English: At this time, the Jinzhou cavalry general Xia Hou Qianju led a troop to cast a beam, and Zhou Dewi then withdrew to Baozhou.

古文：《通鉴》引《庄宗实录》云：汴军至蒙坑，周德威逆战，败之，斩首三百级，杨师厚退保绛州。是役也，小将萧万通战殁，师厚进营平阳，德威收军而退。
现代文：天祐六年七月，岐二地主帅和梁朝叛将刘知俊都派人来报告，将大举进攻灵、夏两州，并攻占长安附近的地方，请庄宗出兵晋、绛，声张军势。八月，庄宗率军南征，先遣周德威、李存审、丁会率大军出阴地关，攻晋州，挖地道，攻取城墙二十多步宽，城中血战拒守。梁太祖派杨师厚领兵救援，周德威才收军退回。
English: In July of the 6th year of Tianyu, Liu Zhijun, the commander-in-chief of Qiji and Liu Zhijun, the traitor to the Liang Dynasty, both sent men to report that they would attack the Ling and Xia states in a big way and capture the places near Chang'an, and asked Zhuang Zong to send troops to Jin and Shun to proclaim the military situation. In August, Zhuang Zong led the army to the south, and sent Zhou Dewi, Li Cunxin, and Ding Hui to lead the army out of Yinji Pass, attack Jinzhou, dig a tunnel, capture the city wall more than 20 steps wide, and refuse to

古文：天祐七年秋七月，凤翔李茂贞、邠州杨崇本皆遣师来会兵，同讨灵、夏。
现代文：天祐七年七月，凤翔李茂贞、州杨崇本都派部队来会战以进攻灵、夏两州。
English: In July of the 7th year of Tianyu, Fengxiang Li Maozhen and Zhou Yang Chongben both sent troops to the battle to attack Ling and Xia two states.

古文：且言刘知俊三败汴军于宁州，灵、夏危蹙，岐、陇之师大举，决取河西。
现代文：刘知俊三次在宁州击败汴军，灵、夏形势危急，岐、陇的部队大举出动，决意攻占河西。
English: Liu Zhijun defeated the Wei army three times in Ningzhou, Ling and Xia were in a critical situation, and the troops of Qi and Wei made a big move and decided to capture Hexi.

古文：帝令周德威将兵万人，西渡河以应之。
现代文：庄宗令周德威带万余人，西渡黄河以接应。
English: Zhuang Zong ordered Zhou Dewei to take more than 10,000 people to the west of the Yellow River to receive them.

古文：是役也，刘知俊为岐人所构，乃自退。
现代文：这一仗，刘知俊被岐人拖住，于是自己退兵。
English: In this battle, Liu Zhijun was held back by the people of Qi, so he withdrew from the army.

古文：九月，德威班师。
现代文：九月，周德威回师。
English: In September, Zhou Dewei returned to his teacher.

古文：冬十月，梁祖遣大将李思安、杨师厚率师营于泽州，以攻上党。
现代文：十月，梁太祖派大将李思安、杨师厚率部在泽州宿营，以进攻上党。
English: In October, Liang Taizu sent generals Li Sian and Yang Shihou to camp in Zezhou to attack the Shang Party.

古文：十一月，镇州王镕遣使来求援。
现代文：十一月，镇州王派人来求援。
English: In November, Zhenzhou Wang sent someone to ask for help.

古文：是时，梁祖以罗绍威初卒，全有魏博之地，因欲兼并镇、定，遣供奉官杜廷隐、丁延徽督魏军三千人入于深、冀，镇人惧，故来告难。
现代文：这时，梁太祖因为罗绍威刚死，占有了魏博全地，还想兼并镇州、定州，派供奉官杜廷隐、丁延徽督促魏军三千人进入深州、冀州，镇州人恐惧，所以来告难。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu, because of the recent death of Luo Shaowei, occupied the whole land of Weibo, and also wanted to annex Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. He sent the officials Du Tingyin and Ding Yanhui to urge 3,000 Wei troops to enter Shenzhou and Jizhou. The people of Zhenzhou were afraid, so they came to complain.

古文：帝集军吏议之，咸欲按甲治兵，徐观胜负，惟帝独断，坚欲救之，乃遣周德威率军屯于赵州。
现代文：庄宗召集将军官吏商议此事，大家都想按兵不动，静观二者胜负，只有庄宗独断，决心救援，便派周德威率军在赵州驻扎。
English: Zhuang Zong called together the generals and officials to discuss the matter. Everyone wanted to stay put and wait for the outcome of the battle. However, Zhuang Zong decided to send Zhou Dewei and his army to Zhao Zhou.

古文：是月，行营都招讨使丁会卒。
现代文：这个月，行营都招讨使丁会去世。
English: This month, all of the camps are calling for the death of the Dinghui.

古文：十二月丁巳朔，梁祖闻帝军屯赵州，命宁国军节度使王景仁为北面行营招讨使，韩勍为副，相州刺史李思安为前锋，会魏州之兵以讨王镕；又令阎宝、王彦章率二千骑，会景仁于邢、洺。
现代文：十二月一日，梁太祖听说庄宗的部队驻在赵州，便命令宁国军节度使王景仁任北面行营招讨使，韩京力为副使，相州刺史李思安任前锋，会合魏州兵来进攻王。又令阎宝、王彦章率二千骑兵，和王景仁在邢、氵名会合。
English: On December 1, Liang Taizu heard that Zhuangzong's troops were stationed in Zhaozhou, so he ordered the Ningguo Army Festival to appoint Wang Jingren as the envoy to the north, Han Jingli as the deputy envoy, and Li Sian as the forward, to gather Wei soldiers to attack Wang. He also ordered Yan Bao and Wang Yanzhang to lead two thousand cavalry and meet with Wang Jingren in Kunming and Kunming.

古文：丁丑，景仁营于柏乡，帝遂亲征，自赞皇县东下。
现代文：二十一日，王景仁在柏乡扎营，庄宗遂亲自出征，从赞皇县东下。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Jingren set up camp in Baixiang, and Zhuangzong personally went to the east from Zanhuang County.

古文：辛巳，至赵州，与周德威兵合。
现代文：二十五日，到赵州，与周德威部会合。
English: On the 25th, he went to Zhaozhou to meet with Zhou Dewei.

古文：帝令史建瑭以轻骑尝寇，获刍牧者二百人，问其兵数，精兵七万。
现代文：庄宗令史建瑭带轻骑试探敌情，抓到打柴割草的二百人，问有多少兵，说有精兵七万。
English: Zhuangzong ordered Shi Jianxuan to test the enemy situation by riding lightly. He caught 200 people cutting grass and chopping wood. When asked how many soldiers there were, he said there were 70,000 elite soldiers.

古文：是日，帝观兵于石桥南。诘旦，进军，距柏乡一舍，周德威、史建瑭率蕃落劲骑以挑战，四面驰射，梁军闭壁不出，乃退。
现代文：这天，庄宗在石桥南面检阅部队，天亮进军到离柏乡三十里处，周德威、史建瑭率蕃族部落精锐骑兵挑战，四面奔驰射击，梁军闭城不出，于是只好退兵。
English: On this day, Zhuangzong reviewed the troops on the south side of the stone bridge. At dawn, he marched to a place 30 miles away from Baixiang. Zhou Dewi and Shi Jianyong led the elite cavalry of the Yi tribe to challenge and shoot on all sides. Liang's army could not close the city, so they had to withdraw.

古文：翼日，进军，距柏乡五里，遣骑军逼其营。
现代文：第二天进军到离柏乡五里的地方，派骑兵逼近敌营。
English: The next day, they marched to a place five miles away from Baixiang and sent cavalry to approach the enemy camp.

古文：梁将韩勍、李思安率步骑三万，铠甲炫曜，其势甚盛，分道以薄帝军。
现代文：梁将韩京力、李思安率步兵骑兵三万，铠甲闪闪发光，气势盛大，分几路迫近庄宗部队。
English: Liang sent Han Jingli and Li Sian to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry. Their armor glittered and their momentum was great, and they closed in on Zhuangzong's troops in several directions.

古文：德威且战且退，距河而止。
现代文：周德威且战且退，一直退过河停住。
English: Zhou Dewei fought and retreated, retreating all the way across the river to stop.

古文：既而德威侦知梁人造浮桥，乃退保高邑。
现代文：过一会儿，周德威侦察得知梁军在造浮桥，便退回据守高邑。
English: After a while, Zhou Dewei's reconnaissance learned that Liang's army was building a pontoon bridge, and then returned to Gaoyou.

古文：乙酉，致师于柏乡，帝祷战于光武庙。
现代文：二十九日，在柏乡挑战，庄宗在光武庙为战事祈祷。
English: On the 29th, in the challenge of Baoxiang, Zhuangzong prayed for the war in the Guangwu Temple.

古文：柏乡无刍粟之备，梁军以樵采为给，为帝之游军所获，由是坚壁不出，剉屋茅坐席以秣其马，众心益恐。
现代文：柏乡没有粮草储备，梁军靠野外打草维持，被庄宗的游击队伍抓获，梁军因此坚壁不出，剁房上茅草和座席来喂马，军心更加恐惧。
English: Baixiang had no grain and grass reserves, Liang's army was sustained by grazing in the field, and was captured by Zhuangzong's guerrilla team. As a result, Liang's army could not stand firm, and they had to feed their horses with thatch and seats on the stable, which made the soldiers even more afraid.

古文：天祐八年正月丁亥，周德威、史建瑭帅三千骑致师于柏乡，设伏于村坞间，遣三百骑直压其营。
现代文：天祐八年一月二日，周德威、史建瑭率三千骑兵到柏乡挑战，在村庄山坞之间设下埋伏，派三百骑兵直抵梁营。
English: On January 2, 1908, Zhou Dewei and Shi Jiankun led 3,000 cavalrymen to challenge Baoxiang, set up an ambush between the village docks, and sent 300 cavalrymen straight to Liangying.

古文：梁将怒，悉其军结阵而来，德威与之转战至高邑南，梁军列阵，横亘六七里。
现代文：梁将怒，出动全军摆好阵势，周德威与梁军转战到了高邑南边，梁军阵势横列六七里。
English: Liang will be angry, send out the whole army to set up a good position, Zhou Dewei and Liang's army will fight to the south of Gaoyou, Liang's army's position is 67 miles across.

古文：时帝军未成列，李存璋引诸军阵于野河之上，梁以五百人争桥，镇、定之师与血战，梁军败而复整者数四。帝与张承业登高观望，梁人戈矛如束，申令之后，嚣声若雷，王师进退有序，步骑严整，寂然无声。
现代文：这时庄宗军队还没列好阵势，李存璋引各军在野河上列阵，梁军用五百人争占桥梁，镇州、定州的部队与梁军血战，梁军接连四次被打败后又整合部队，庄宗与张承业登高观望，梁军的戈矛如林，命令发出，吼声如雷，庄宗的军队进退有序，步兵骑兵均很严整，悄然无声。
English: At this time, Zhuangzong's army had not yet set up a good formation. Li Cunxu led all the armies to line up on the wild river. Liang's army of five hundred people competed for the bridge. Zhenzhou and Dingzhou's troops fought a bloody battle with Liang's army. Liang's army was defeated four times in a row and then integrated the troops. Zhuangzong and Zhang Chengye climbed high to watch. Liang's spear was like a forest. Orders were issued and roars were like thunder. Zhuangzong's army advanced and retreated in an orderly manner. The infantry and cavalry were very neat and

古文：帝临阵誓众，人百其勇，短兵既接，无不奋力。
现代文：庄宗到部队中与大家立誓，士兵们勇气百倍，两军短兵相接后，没有不奋力的。
English: Zhuang Zong went to the troops and swore with everyone, the soldiers were a hundred times more courageous, and after the two armies were in close contact, there was no lack of effort.

古文：梁有龙骧、神威、拱宸等军，皆武勇之士也，每一人铠仗，费数十万，装以组绣，饰以金银，人望而畏之。
现代文：梁军有龙骧、神威、拱宸等军，都是勇士，每人铠甲兵仗费数十万钱，用锦锈金银装饰，别人望见都怕。
English: Liang's army consisted of Longyu, Shenwei, Gongyu and other soldiers, all of whom were warriors. Each of them spent hundreds of thousands of money on armor and armor, decorated with gold and silver, and others were afraid to see them.

古文：自巳及午，骑军接战，至晡，梁军欲抽退，尘埃涨天，德威周麾而呼曰： 汴人走矣！ 
现代文：从上午十点到十二点，骑兵交战，落日时分，梁军想撤退，尘土飞扬，周德威挥旗大喊： 汴人跑啦！ 
English: From ten o'clock in the morning to twelve o'clock, the cavalry engaged in battle. At sunset, Liang's army wanted to retreat, the dust was flying. Zhou Dewei waved the flag and shouted: "The barbarians have fled!"

古文：帝军齐噪以进，魏人收军渐退。
现代文：庄宗军队一齐鼓噪追击，魏人收军而退。
English: Zhuangzong's army made a noisy pursuit, and the Wei retreated.

古文：李嗣源率亲军与史建瑭、安金全兼北部吐浑诸军冲阵夹攻，梁军大败，弃铠投仗之声，震动天地，龙骧、神威、神捷诸军，杀戮殆尽。自阵至柏乡数十里，僵尸枕籍，败旗折戟，所在蔽地。
现代文：李嗣源率亲军与史建瑭、安金全以及北部吐谷浑各军冲锋夹攻，梁军大败，丢弃兵甲的声音响彻天地，龙骧、神威、神捷各军几乎被杀光了，从阵地到柏乡数十里路，死尸堆积，破旗断枪，遍地都是。
English: Li Siyuan led his own troops and the armies of Shi Jianqian, An Jinquan and the northern army of Tu Guhun charged and attacked. Liang's army was heavily defeated, and the sound of discarded armor resounded throughout the world. The armies of Longtao, Shenwei and Shengyet were almost completely killed. From the position to Baoshan Township, dozens of miles away, dead bodies piled up, flags were broken, and guns were everywhere.

古文：夜漏一鼓，帝军入柏乡，梁军辎重、帐幄、资财、奴仆，皆为帝军所有。
现代文：夜里一鼓时分，庄宗军队进入柏乡，梁军辎重、帐篷、资财、奴仆都被俘获。
English: At the stroke of midnight, Zhuangzong's army entered Baixiang. Liang's army baggage, tents, wealth, and servants were all captured.

古文：梁将王景仁、韩敬、李思安等以数十骑夜遁。
现代文：梁将王景仁、韩京力、李思安等带几十名骑兵连夜逃走。
English: Liang took Wang Jingren, Han Jingli, Li Sian and dozens of cavalrymen and fled overnight.

古文：是役也，斩首二万级，获马三千匹，铠甲兵仗七万，辎车锅幕不可胜计。
现代文：这一仗，斩首二万级，获马三千匹，铠甲兵器七万件，车辆、饭锅、帐幕不可计数。
English: In this battle, there were 20,000 decapitations, 3,000 horses, 70,000 armored weapons, and countless vehicles, cooking pots, and tents.

古文：擒梁将陈思权以下二百八十五人。
现代文：擒获梁将陈思权以下二百八十五人。
English: Two hundred and eighty-five people, including Liang Zhen and Chen Si Quan, were arrested.

古文：帝号令收军于赵州。既而梁人弃深、冀二州而遁。
现代文：庄宗下令在赵州收兵。不久，梁军放弃深、冀二州而逃。
English: Zhuang Zong ordered to gather troops in Zhaozhou. Soon, Liang's army abandoned Shenzhen and Jizhou and fled.

古文：初，杜廷隐之袭深、冀也，声言分兵就食。
现代文：原先杜廷隐袭击深州、冀州时，声言分兵就食。
English: Originally, when Du Tingyin attacked Shenzhou and Jizhou, he said that the division of troops would be a piece of cake.

古文：公立既出，指城闉而言曰： 开门纳盗，后悔何追，此城数万生灵，生为俘馘矣！ 
现代文：当时，王赶紧下令开关，命石公立转移部队到城外，杜廷隐便占据了城市。石公立出城后指着城头说： 开门揖盗，追悔莫及，这城里数万百姓将遭屠杀了！ 
English: At that time, the king hurriedly ordered a switch to be flipped, and Du Tingting secretly occupied the city. After leaving the city, Du Tingting pointed to the city and said: "Open the door and steal, there is no way to repent, tens of thousands of people in this city will be slaughtered!"

古文：予恭行天罚，罪止元凶，已外归明，一切不问，凡尔士众，咸谅予怀。 
现代文：于是丢掉战刀哭泣。几天内，杜廷隐闭城杀害镇兵几千人，遂登城墙坚守，下令石公立攻城，城中已有防备。
English: So he threw away his sword and wept. Within a few days, Du Ting closed the city and killed several thousand soldiers. He then climbed the city wall to hold out, and ordered the city to be besieged. The city was already prepared.

古文：帝御亲军南征。
现代文：到柏乡之战梁军失败，两州百姓全被掳走，老弱者全被活埋。
English: Liang's army failed in the Battle of Baixiang, the people of the two states were all taken away, and the old and weak were all buried alive.

古文：庚子，至洺州，梁祖令其将徐仁浦将兵五百，夜入邢州。
现代文：十三日，派史建瑭、周德威攻占邢州、魏州，先发出檄文传告。庄宗率亲军南征。十四日，到氵名州，梁太祖令将军徐仁浦带五百人夜入邢州。
English: On the 13th, he sent Shi Jianqian and Zhou Dewei to occupy Ganzhou and Weizhou, and first issued a proclamation. Zhuang Zong led the pro-army southward. On the 14th, in Zhanming Prefecture, Liang Taizu ordered General Xu Rimpu to enter Ganzhou with five hundred people at night.

古文：张承业、李存璋以三镇步兵攻邢州，遣周德威、史建瑭将三千骑，长驱至澶魏，帝与李嗣源率亲军继进。
现代文：张承业、李存璋率三镇步兵攻邢州，派周德威、史建瑭率三千骑兵长驱直入澶州、魏州，庄宗和李嗣源亲自率亲军随着前进。
English: Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu led the three-town infantry to attack Bozhou, and sent Zhou Dewi and Shi Jianxu led the three thousand cavalry to drive straight into Bozhou and Weizhou, Zhuang Zong and Li Siyuan personally led the pro-army to advance.

古文：二月戊午，师次洹水，周德威进至临河。
现代文：二月三日，部队到达洹水，周德威进军到临河。
English: On February 3, the troops arrived in Surabaya, and Zhou Dewei marched to Linhe.

古文：己未，魏帅罗周翰出兵五千，塞石灰窑口，周德威以骑掩击，迫入观音门。
现代文：四日，魏军主帅罗周翰出兵五千，守住石灰窑口，周德威用骑兵掩击，追入观音门。
English: On the fourth day, the commander of the Wei army, Luo Zhouhan, sent out five thousand soldiers to guard the lime kiln mouth. Zhou Dewei covered the attack with cavalry and chased into the Guanyin Gate.

古文：是日，王师迫魏州，帝舍于狄公祠西。
现代文：这一天，庄宗军逼近魏州，庄宗在狄公祠西面宿营。
English: On this day, Zhuangzong's army approached Weizhou, and Zhuangzong camped on the west side of Di Gongsi.

古文：周翰闭壁自固，帝军攻之，其城几陷。
现代文：罗周翰闭壁固守，庄宗军进攻，几乎攻陷该城。
English: Luo Zhouhan held fast to the closed wall, Zhuangzong's army attacked and almost captured the city.

古文：帝叹曰： 予为兒童时，从先王渡河，今其忘矣。
现代文：庄宗叹道 ：我在儿童时随先王渡黄河，现在差不多忘了。
English: Zhuang Zong sighed: When I was a child, I followed Wang to cross the Yellow River, but now I have almost forgotten.

古文：方春桃花水满，思一观之，谁从予者？ 
现代文：如今正春天桃花水涨满，很想观赏，谁愿跟我去？ 
English: Now that the peach blossoms are in full bloom in the spring, I really want to see them. Who would like to go with me?

古文：癸亥，帝观河于黎阳。
现代文：八日，庄宗在黎阳观黄河。
English: On the 8th, Zhuo Zong went to view the Yellow River in Liyang.

古文：是时，梁祖发兵万余将渡河，闻王师至，弃舟而退。
现代文：这时，梁太祖发兵一万多准备渡河，听说庄宗到了，弃船而退。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu sent more than ten thousand soldiers to prepare to cross the river. Hearing that Zhuang Zong had arrived, he abandoned the ship and retreated.

古文：黎阳都将张从楚、曹儒以部下兵三千人来降，立其军为左右匡霸使。
现代文：黎阳都将张从楚、曹儒带部下兵三千人投降，庄宗任他们为左右匡霸使。
English: Both Liyang and Zhang Congchu and Cao Ru surrendered with 3,000 soldiers under their command, and Zhuang Zong appointed them as the left and right imperial envoys.

古文：乙丑，周德威自临清徇地贝郡，攻博州，下东武、朝城。
现代文：十日，周德威从临清一路攻下贝郡，进攻博州，占领东武、朝城。
English: On the 10th, Zhou Dewei conquered Bei County all the way from Linqing, attacked Bozhou, and occupied Dongwu and Morning City.

古文：时澶州刺史张可臻弃城而遁，遂攻黎阳，下临河、淇门。
现代文：这时澶州刺史张可臻弃城而逃，庄宗于是进攻黎阳，攻占临河、淇门。
English: At this time, Zhang Kezhen abandoned the city and fled, so Zhuangzong attacked Liyang and captured Linhe and Qimen.

古文：庚午，梁祖在洛，闻王师将攻河阳，率亲军屯白马坡。
现代文：十五日，梁太祖在洛阳，听说庄宗军队将攻河阳，便亲自率军驻扎白马坡。
English: On the 15th, Liang Taizu was in Luoyang and heard that Zhuangzong's army would attack Heyang, so he personally led the army and stationed in Baima Po.

古文：壬申，帝下令班师。
现代文：十七日，庄宗下令回师。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhuangzong ordered the return of the division.

古文：帝至赵州，王镕迎谒。
现代文：庄宗到赵州，王迎接进见。
English: Zhuangzong went to Zhaozhou, and Wang greeted Jinming.

古文：翼日，大飨诸军。
现代文：第二天，犒劳各军。
English: The next day, the troops were exhausted.

古文：壬午，帝发赵州，归晋阳，留周德威戍赵州。
现代文：二十七日，庄宗从赵州出发，回到晋阳，留下周德威守赵州。
English: On the 27th, Zhuangzong set out from Zhaozhou and returned to Jinyang, leaving Zhou Dewei in charge of Zhaozhou.

古文：三月己丑，镇、定州各遣使言幽州刘守光凶僭之状，请推为尚父，以稔其恶。
现代文：三月五日，镇、定州各派人状告幽州刘守光凶狠僭越的劣迹，请推举他为尚父，让他的罪恶阴谋更加成熟。
English: On March 5th, the town and Dingzhou factions sued Yuzhou Liu Shouguang for his evil deeds. Please nominate him as the father, so that his evil plot will be more mature.

古文：是月，梁祖遣都招讨使杨师厚将兵三万屯邢州，帝令李嗣昭出师掠相、卫而还。秋七月，帝会王镕于承天军。
现代文：十一日，庄宗到晋阳宫，召监军张承业等各将议幽州之事，然后派牙将戴汉超带着亲笔诏令和六处州镇上书，推举刘守光为尚书令、尚父，刘守光因此凶焰更甚，遂邀集六镇接受册封。五月，六镇使者到幽州，梁朝使者也到了。这个月，梁太祖派都招讨使杨师厚带三万兵驻邢州，庄宗令李嗣昭出动到相州、卫州掠夺而回。七月，庄宗与王在承天军会合。
English: On the 11th day, Zhuang Zong went to the Jinyang Palace, summoned Zhang Chengye and other generals to discuss the Yuzhou matter, and then sent the commander Dai Hanchao with a handwritten edict and six counties to write a letter, nominating Liu Shouguang as Shang Shuling and Shang father. Liu Shouguang was even more furious, so he invited six towns to accept the canonization. In May, the six towns' emissaries went to Yuzhou, and the Liang Dynasty emissaries also arrived. This month, Liang Taizu sent to invite Yang Shihou to station 30,000 soldiers in Zhangzhou, and Zhuang Z

古文：镕，武皇之友也，帝奉之尽敬，捧卮酒为寿，镕亦捧酒醻帝。镕幼子昭诲从行，因许为婚。
现代文：王是武皇的朋友，庄宗对他十分尊敬，捧酒为他祝寿，王也捧酒答谢庄宗，王幼子王昭诲随行，因而为他约定婚事。
English: The king was a friend of Emperor Wu, and Zhuangzong respected him very much. He celebrated his birthday with a toast. The king also thanked Zhuangzong with a toast. The king's young son, Wang Zhaoyi, accompanied him, so they agreed to marry him.

古文：八月甲子，幽州刘守光僭称大燕皇帝，年号应天。
现代文：八月十三日，幽州刘守光僭称大燕皇帝，年号为应天。
English: On August 13th, Yuzhou Liu Shou Guangyao was named Emperor Dayan, and his era name was Yingtian.

古文：九月庚子，梁祖将亲军自洛渡河而北，至相州，闻帝军未出，乃止。
现代文：九月二十日，梁太祖率亲军从洛阳渡黄河北上，到相州，听说庄宗军没出动，便停住。
English: On September 20, Liang Taizu led his troops from Luoyang across the Yellow River to the north, to Xiangzhou. When he heard that Zhuang Zong's army did not move, he stopped.

古文：十月，幽州刘守光杀帝之行人李承勋，忿其不行朝礼也。
现代文：十月，幽州刘守光杀庄宗使者李承勋，因为李承勋对他不行朝礼而使他气愤。
English: In October, Liu Shuguang of Yuzhou killed the emissary of Zhuangzong, Li Chengxun, because Li Chengxun did not perform the morning ritual for him, which made him angry.

古文：十一月辛丑，燕人侵易、定，王处直来告难。
现代文：十一月二十一日，燕军入侵易、定二州，王处直来告急。
English: On November 21st, Yan's army invaded the two prefectures of Yi and Ding. Wang immediately panicked.

古文：十二月甲子，帝遣周德威、刘光浚、李嗣源及诸将率蕃汉之兵发晋阳，伐刘守光于幽州。
现代文：十二月十四日，庄宗派周德威、刘光浚、李嗣源以及各将率蕃汉士兵从晋阳出发，到幽州讨伐刘守光。
English: On December 14th, Zhuang Zong sent Zhou Dewei, Liu Guangjun, Li Siyuan and other generals and Han soldiers from Jinyang to Yuzhou to fight Liu Shuguang.

