古文：三十有一年春，取济西田。
现代文：三十一年春季，取得济水以西的田土。
English: In the spring of the 31st year, the farmland west of Jishui was acquired.

古文：公子遂如晋。
现代文：公子遂到晋国。
English: So he went to Jin Province.

古文：夏四月，四卜郊不从，乃免牲，犹三望。
现代文：夏季四月，四次占卜郊祭，都不吉利，就不举行郊祭，不杀牛，仍旧祭祀名山大川泰山、淮水、东海三处。
English: In the summer of April, the four times of the divination suburb festival were unlucky, so the suburb festival was not held, the cattle were not killed, and the famous mountains and rivers of Mount Tai, Huai Shui and the East China Sea were still sacrificed.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，杞伯姬来求妇。
现代文：冬季，杞伯姬来鲁国为儿子求取媳妇。
English: In the winter, Zou Boji came to Lu to solicit a daughter-in-law for her son.

古文：狄围卫。
现代文：狄人围攻卫国。
English: The Di besieged and defended the country.

古文：十有二月，卫迁于帝丘。
现代文：十二月，卫国国都迁到帝丘。
English: In December, the Imperial Palace was moved to Imperial Hill.

古文：三十一年春，取济西田，分曹地也。
现代文：三十一年春季，取得济水以西的田土，这本是分割给曹国的土地。
English: In the spring of the 31st year, the land west of Jishui was acquired, which was originally a land divided to Cao.

古文：使臧文仲往，宿于重馆。
现代文：派臧文仲前去，住在重地的宾馆里。
English: He sent Zou Wenzhong to go and live in a hotel in central China.

古文：重馆人告曰： 晋新得诸侯，必亲其共，不速行，将无及也。 
现代文：重地宾馆里的人告诉他说： 晋国新近得到许多诸侯国家为盟邦，必定亲近恭顺他的人，你不快点走，怕会赶不上。 
English: The people in the Chongji Hotel told him: "Jin has recently gained many vassal states as allies, and you must be close to those who obey him. If you don't hurry, you may not catch up."

古文：从之，分曹地，自洮以南，东傅于济，尽曹地也。
现代文：臧文仲听从了。分割曹国的土地，从洮水以南，东边挨着济水，都是曹国的土地。
English: Yu Wenzhong obeyed. Divide Cao's land, from south of Surabaya and east of Jishui, it is all Cao's land.

古文：襄仲如晋，拜曹田也。
现代文：襄仲到晋国去，拜谢取得曹国的田地。
English: Xiangzhong went to Jin Province and obtained the fields of Cao Province.

古文：夏四月，四卜郊不从，乃免牲，非礼也。
现代文：夏季，四月，四次占卜郊祭，都不吉利，就不举行郊祭，不杀牛，这是不合于礼的。
English: In summer, in April, the four times of the divination suburb festival are all unlucky, so the suburb festival will not be held, and the cattle will not be killed. This is not proper.

古文：犹三望，亦非礼也。
现代文：仍旧祭祀名山大川泰山、淮水、东海三处，这也是不合于礼的。
English: There are still three places of worship at the famous mountains and rivers of Taishan, Huai Shui and Donghai, which is also inappropriate.

古文：礼不卜常祀，而卜其牲日，牛卜日曰牲。
现代文：按礼制，不占卜常规的祭祀，而只是占卜使用的牺牲和日期。
English: According to the ritual system, there is no divination ritual, but only the sacrifice and date used for divination.

古文：牲成而卜郊，上怠慢也。望，郊之细也，不郊，亦无望可也。
现代文：牛，在占卜到好日子以后就改称牲，已经成为牲而还要占卜郊祭的吉凶，这是在上者侮慢大典、亵渎龟甲。望祭，是郊祭的细节，不举行郊祭，更不必举行对山川的望祭。
English: Cows, after divination to a good day, change their name to cattle, have become cattle and still have to divine the good and bad fortune of the suburban festival, which is to insult the great ceremony and desecrate the tortoise shell. The festival is a detail of the suburban festival, the suburban festival is not held, and it is not necessary to hold the festival of the mountains and rivers.

古文：秋，晋蒐于清原，作五军以御狄。
现代文：秋季，晋国在清原检阅军队，建立五个军来抵抗狄人。
English: In the autumn, Jin inspected the troops in Qingyuan and established five armies to resist the Di people.

古文：赵衰为卿。
现代文：赵衰被任命为卿。
English: Zhao Zhen was appointed as a noble.

古文：冬，狄围卫，卫迁于帝丘。卜曰三百年。
现代文：冬季，狄人包围卫国，卫国迁移到帝丘，占卜的结果是立国三百年。
English: In the winter, the Di people encircled the old country, and the old country moved to the Imperial Hill. The result of the divination was the 300th anniversary of the founding of the country.

古文：卫成公梦康叔曰： 相夺予享。 
现代文：卫成公梦见康叔说： 相夺走了我的祭献。 
English: Wei Chenggong saw Uncle Kang in a dream and said, "He took away my offering."

古文：公命祀相。
现代文：成公命令祭祀相。
English: Seigong ordered the sacrificial phase to begin.

古文：甯武子不可，曰： 鬼神非其族类，不歆其祀。
现代文：甯武子不同意，说： 不是同族人的祭祀，鬼神就不享用那种祭品。
English: Hao Wuxi disagreed, saying, "If it is not a sacrifice of fellow countrymen, the ghosts and gods will not enjoy that kind of sacrifice."

古文：杞、鄫何事？
现代文：杞国和鄫国为什么不祭祀？
English: Why aren't there any sacrificial rites in  and?

古文：相之不享于此，久矣，非卫之罪也，不可以閒成王、周公之命祀。请改祀命。 
现代文：相在杞国和卫国没有受到祭献很久了，这不是卫国的罪过，不能违反成王、周公所规定的祭祀，请求您改变祭祀相的命令。 
English: It is not a sin to defend the country, and we cannot violate the sacrificial rites prescribed by King Cheng and King Zhou and ask you to change the order of the sacrificial rites.

古文：郑洩驾恶公子瑕，郑伯亦恶之，故公子瑕出奔楚。
现代文：郑国的洩驾讨厌公子瑕，郑文公也很讨厌他，所以公子瑕逃亡到楚国。
English: Zheng Guo detested Gongzi Ke, and Zheng Wen Gong also detested him, so Gongzi Ke fled to Chu Guo.

