古文：明帝世宗明皇帝讳毓，小名统万突，太祖长子也。母曰姚夫人，永熙三年，太祖临夏州，生帝于统万城，因以名焉。
现代文：世宗明皇帝名毓，小名统万突，是太祖的长子母亲是姚夫人，北魏永熙三年，太祖到夏州，在统万城生下明帝，因此以这个地方作为他的名字。
English: Emperor Zongming is famous all over the world, and his name is famous everywhere. The mother of the eldest son of the great-grandfather is Mrs. Yao. In the third year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the great-grandfather went to Xiazhou and gave birth to Emperor Ming in Tongwancheng, so he took this place as his name.

古文：大统十四年，封宁都郡公。
现代文：北魏大统十四年，被封为宁都郡公。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification of the Northern Wei Dynasty, he was named Ningdu County Grand Duke.

古文：十六年，行华州事。
现代文：大统十六年，代理华州事务。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he acted as an agent for Huazhou affairs.

古文：寻拜开府仪同三司、宜州诸军事、宜州刺史。
现代文：不久官拜开府仪同三司、宜州诸军事、宜州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the prefectural government, the three departments, the military of Yizhou, and the history of Yizhou.

古文：魏恭帝三年，授大将军，镇陇右。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，被授为大将军，镇守陇西。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was awarded the title of general and became the town guard of Shaanxi.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进位柱国，转岐州诸军事、岐州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝即位后，进位柱国，改任岐州诸军事、岐州刺史。
English: After Emperor Xiaojun ascended the throne, he was promoted to the position of pillar state, and was reassigned to the military of Kishu Province and the history of Kishu Province.

古文：治有美政，黎民怀之。
现代文：治理地方有良好的政绩，百姓都怀念他。
English: He had a good track record in local governance, and the people all miss him.

古文：及孝闵帝废，晋公护遣使迎帝于岐州。
现代文：孝闵帝被废黜后，晋公宇文护派使者到岐州迎接明帝。
English: After Emperor Xiaohui was deposed, Emperor Jingu sent an envoy to Qizhou to meet Emperor Ming.

古文：秋九月癸亥，至京师，止于旧邸。
现代文：秋季九月癸亥日，抵达京师，住在宁都郡公旧宅。
English: In the autumn, on the day of the Year of the Pig in September, he arrived in Beijing and lived in the former residence of Ningdu County.

古文：甲子，群臣上表劝进，备法驾奉迎。
现代文：甲子日，群臣上表劝进，准备好皇帝车驾奉迎明帝。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, a group of courtiers went to the table to persuade the emperor to come, ready for the emperor to drive the car to welcome the Ming Emperor.

古文：帝固让，群臣固请，是日，即天王位，大赦天下。
现代文：明帝坚决辞让，群臣坚决请求，当天，即天王位，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Ming resolutely resigned, and the ministers resolutely requested that on the same day, that is, the throne of heaven, the world would be amnestied.

古文：乙丑，朝群臣于延寿殿。
现代文：乙丑日，在延寿殿朝见群臣。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month, he met with his retainers in the morning at Enju-den.

古文：冬十月癸酉，太师、赵国公李弼薨。
现代文：冬季十月癸酉，太师、赵国公李弼逝世。
English: In the winter of October, Grand Master and Zhao Guogong Li Yong passed away.

古文：己卯，以大将军、昌平公尉迟纲为柱国。
现代文：己卯曰，任命大将军、昌平公尉迟纲为柱国。
English: Jiwu said that the appointment of the general and the public officer Changping Chi Gang as the pillar country.

古文：乙酉，祠圆丘。
现代文：乙酉日，祭祀圆丘。
English: On the day of Acetylene, the round mound is worshipped.

古文：丙戌，祠方丘。
现代文：丙戌曰，祭祀方丘。
English: He said, "It's time to sacrifice Fangqiu."

古文：甲午，祠太社。
现代文：甲午曰，祭祀太社。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the ritual of Taisha is over.

古文：柱国、阳平公李远赐死。
现代文：柱国、阳平公李远被赐死。
English: The pillar of the country, Yangping Gong Li Yuan, was sentenced to death.

古文：是月，梁相陈霸先废其主萧方智而自立，是为陈武帝。
现代文：这月，梁的丞相陈霸先废黜梁主萧方智而自立为帝，造就是陈武帝。
English: This month, Liang's prime minister, Chen Baxian, deposed Liang's lord, Xiao Fangzhi, and established himself as emperor, creating Chen Wudi.

古文：十一月庚子，祠太庙。
现代文：十一月庚子日，祭祀太庙。
English: November Geng Zi Day, the ritual of the Great Temple is over.

古文：丁未，祠圆丘。
现代文：丁未日，祭祀圆丘。
English: On the eve of the New Year, the round mound is set up for worship.

古文：丁巳，诏曰： 帝王之道，以宽仁为大。
现代文：丁巳日，明帝下诏说： 帝王之道，以宽厚仁爱为大。
English: On the same day, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "The way of the emperor is to be generous and benevolent."

古文：魏政诸有轻犯未至重罪、及诸村民一家有犯乃及数家而被远配者，并宜放还。 十二月庚午，谒成陵。
现代文：在魏朝时那些轻犯而没有到重罪、以及那些因一家犯罪而牵连到几家流放远方的村民，都应释放返回。 十二月庚午日，明帝拜谒成陵。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, those who committed minor crimes but did not commit serious crimes, as well as those villagers who were involved in a crime that led to several families being exiled far away, should be released and returned.

古文：癸酉，还宫。
现代文：癸酉日，回宫。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：庚辰，以大将军、辅城公邕为柱国。
现代文：庚辰日，任命大将军、辅城公宇文邕为柱国。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, he appointed the great general, Fu Cheng Gong U Wenjun, as the pillar country.

古文：戊子，赦长安见囚。
现代文：戊子曰，赦免囚禁在长安的犯人。
English: Wushi said that the prisoners imprisoned in Chang'an would be pardoned.

古文：甲午，诏曰： 善人之后，犹累世获宥，况魏氏以德让代终，岂容不加隐恤。
现代文：甲午曰，明帝下诏说： 有德之人的后代，还可以历代获得宽赦，何况魏氏以德禅让帝位，岂可不加以怜恤。
English: On the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: The descendants of virtuous people can also be pardoned throughout the ages. Moreover, the Wei clan abdicated the throne by virtue of Zen, so they should not be pitied.

古文：元氏子女自坐赵贵等事以来，所有没入为官口者，悉宜放免。 二年春正月乙未，以大冢宰、晋公护为太师。
现代文：元氏子女自从因趟贵等谋反的事而获罪以来，所有没收入官籍的人，全部应当予以释放赦免。 明帝二年春季正月乙末日，任命大冢宰、晋公宇文护为太师。
English: Since the children of the Yuan family were convicted of treason, all those who have not received official registration should be released and pardoned.In the spring of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, on the last day of the first month of the second year, the Grand Empress Dowager Jin Gongwu was appointed as the Grand Master.

古文：辛亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：辛亥日，明帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Emperor Ming personally cultivated his ancestral fields.

古文：癸丑，立王后独孤氏。
现代文：癸丑日，立独孤氏为皇后。
English: On April Fool's Day, she crowned herself Empress.

古文：丁巳，雍州置十二郡。
现代文：丁巳日，在雍州设置十二郡。
English: On the same day, 12 counties were set up in Yongzhou.

古文：又于河东置蒲州，河北置虞州，弘农置陕州，正平置绛州，宜阳置熊州，邵郡置邵州。
现代文：又在河东设置蒲州，在河北设置虞州，在弘农设置陕州，在正平设置绛州，在宜阳设置熊州，在邵郡设置邵州。
English: It also set up Puzhou in Hedong, Yuzhou in Hebei, Shaanxi in Hongnong, Zhangzhou in Zhengping, Xiongzhou in Yiyang, and Shaoshou in Shao County.

古文：二月癸未，诏曰： 王者之宰民也，莫不同四海，一远近，为父母而子之。
现代文：二月癸末日，明帝下韶说： 君王治理百姓，没有不是使四海同心，使远近归一，像父母对待儿子一样的。
English: At the end of February, Emperor Ming decreed: "When a king governs the people, there is nothing like bringing the four seas together and uniting the far and the near, just as parents treat their sons.

古文：一物失所，若纳于隍。
现代文：一人失去处所，就像自己掉入壕沟一样。
English: Losing one's place is like falling into a trench.

古文：贼之境土，本同大化，往因时难，致阻东西。
现代文：贼人的境土，本来同样受到广远深入的教化，以前因为当时的灾难，致使东西阻隔。
English: The territory of the Thieves was originally subjected to the same far-reaching and in-depth indoctrination. Previously, because of the disaster at that time, things were blocked.

古文：遂使疆埸之间，互相抄掠。
现代文：于是使得在疆界之间，互相劫掠。
English: As a result, they plundered each other across the border.

古文：兴言及此，良可哀伤。
现代文：说到这裹，我非常哀伤。
English: Speaking of which, I'm very sad.

古文：自元年以来，有被掠入贼者，悉可放免。 自冬不雨，至于是月方大雪。
现代文：自从即位以来，有被掠入贼境的，可全部释放赦免。 自入冬以来没有下雨，到这个月才下大雪。
English: Since his accession to the throne, all those who have been abducted into the land of thieves can be released and pardoned. There has been no rain since the beginning of winter, and heavy snow has only fallen this month.

古文：三月甲午，齐北豫州刺史司马消难举州来附，遣柱国、高阳公达奚武与大将军杨忠率众迎之。
现代文：三月甲午曰，齐的北豫州刺史司马消难率全州军民前来归附，明帝派柱国、高阳公达奚武与大将军杨忠率众迎接。
English: On the afternoon of March 1st, the military and civilians of the whole state of North Henan Province, led by the military historian Sima Qiu, came to the annexation, and the Ming Emperor sent Zhuangguo, Gaoyang Gongda Xuanwu and General Yang Zhong to greet the crowd.

古文：改雍州刺史为雍州牧，京兆郡守为京兆尹。
现代文：改雍州刺史为雍州牧，改京兆郡守为京兆尹。
English: The governor of Yongzhou was changed to Yongzhou Mok, and the governor of Jingzhao County was changed to Jingzhao Yin.

古文：以广业、修城二郡置康州，葭芦郡置文州。
现代文：将广业、脩城二郡改置为康州，将葭芦郡设置为文州。
English: The two counties of Guangye and Fucheng will be changed to Kangzhou, and Huludao County will be changed to Wenzhou.

古文：戊申，长安献白雀。
现代文：戊申日，长安进献白雀。
English: On the day of Boshin, Chang'an advanced to present the white sparrow.

古文：庚申，诏曰： 三十六国，九十九姓，自魏氏南徙，皆称河南之民。
现代文：庚申日，下韶说： 三十六国，九十九姓，自从魏氏南迁后，都被称为河南之民。
English: On the day of the Genghis Khan's death, the lower jaw said: Thirty-six countries, ninety-nine surnames, since the Wei clan moved south, are all called the people of Henan.

古文：今周室既都关中，宜改称京兆人。 夏四月己巳，以太师、晋公护为雍州牧。
现代文：现在周室已经定都关中，应当改称为京兆人。 夏季四月己巳曰，任命太师、晋公宇文护为雍州牧。
English: Now that Zhou's office has been designated as the center of the capital, it should be renamed as the Beijing Zhaoren. In the summer of April, the Grand Master, Jin Gongyu Wengu, was appointed as the Yongzhou Patriarch.

古文：庚午，荧惑入轩辕。
现代文：庚午曰，火星侵入轩辕星。
English: On the morning of the 7th day of the 7th month, Mars will invade the constellation of Cancer.

古文：辛未，降死罪一等，五岁刑已下皆原之。
现代文：辛未日，降死罪一等，五年徒刑以下的都恕免其罪。
English: On the day of Xinwei, the death penalty was reduced to the first degree, and those who were sentenced to less than five years in prison were pardoned.

古文：甲戌，王后独孤氏崩。
现代文：甲戌曰，王后独孤氏驾崩。
English: Armour said, "Queen Doko is dead."

古文：甲申，葬敬后。
现代文：甲申日，下葬敬后。
English: On the day of Koshin, after the funeral.

古文：五月乙未，以大司空、梁国公侯莫陈崇为大宗伯。
现代文：五月乙末日，任命大司空、梁国公侯莫陈崇为大宗伯。
English: On the last day of the second month of May, Mo Chen Chong, the grand secretary of Ku and the prince of Liang, was appointed as the grand patriarch.

古文：六月癸亥，献哒遣使献方物。
现代文：六月癸亥日，嗽畦国派使者进献当地土产。
English: In June, on the day of the Year of the Boar, Hubei Province sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：己巳，板授高年刺史、守、令，恤鳏寡孤独各有差。
现代文：己巳日，给年事已高的人授荣誉职衔刺史、郡守、县令，按不同的等级抚恤鳏寡孤独的人。
English: On the same day, honorary titles such as shishi, county governor, and county magistrate were awarded to the elderly, and pensions were provided to widows, widowers and lonely people according to different levels.

古文：分长安为万年县，并治京城。
现代文：在长安分设万年县，与京兆尹一同将治所设在京城。
English: Wannen County was set up in Chang'an, and together with Jing Zhaoyun, the administrative center was set up in Beijing.

古文：辛未，幸昆明池。
现代文：辛末日，明帝前往昆明池。
English: On the last day of Xin, Mingdi went to Kunming Pool.

古文：壬申，长安献白乌。
现代文：壬申日，长安进献白色乌鸦。
English: On Jinshin Day, Chang'an presented white crows.

古文：遣使分行州郡，理囚徒，察风俗，掩骼埋胔。
现代文：派使者分别巡视各州郡，审理囚徒，视察风俗，掩埋死尸。
English: Envoys were sent to inspect the states and counties separately, try prisoners, inspect customs, and bury dead bodies.

古文：秋七月甲午，遣柱国、宁蜀公尉迟迥率众于河南筑安乐城。
现代文：秋季七月甲午日，派柱国、宁蜀公尉迟迥率领兵众在黄河南岸修筑安乐城。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the seventh month in autumn, he sent Zhu Guo and Ning Shu to lead the troops to build Anle City on the south bank of the Yellow River.

古文：丙申，顺阳献三足乌。
现代文：丙申日，顺阳进献三足乌鸦。
English: On the day of Yin Shen, Shun Yang presented three-legged crows.

古文：八月甲子，群臣上表称庆。
现代文：八月甲子曰，群臣上表庆贺。
English: In the words of August Kako, the courtiers came out to celebrate.

古文：诏曰： 夫天不爱宝，地称表瑞，莫不威凤巢阁，图龙跃沼，岂直日月珠连，风雨玉烛。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 上天不喜爱珍宝，地上显现祥瑞的征兆，无不是威仪的凤鸟巢居在楼阁，带有图案的神龙在沼池中腾跃，岂衹是曰月连珠，风雨和顺四时气畅。
English: Emperor Ming decreed: Heaven does not like precious treasures, the earth is showing signs of auspiciousness, there is nothing more majestic than a phoenix's nest in a castle, a dragon with a pattern is prancing in a swamp, the moon is said to be conjoined, wind and rain are smooth at four o'clock.

古文：是以钩命决曰 王者至孝则出 ，元命苞曰 人君至治所有 。
现代文：所以《钩命决》说 君王至孝则瑞兆出现，《元命苞》说 君王至治就会有瑞兆 。
English: Therefore, the "Hook of Fate" says that if the king is most filial, then auspicious signs will appear, and the "Origin of Life" says that if the king is most righteous, then auspicious signs will appear.

古文：虞舜烝烝，来兹异趾；周文翼翼，翔此灵禽。
现代文：虞舜兴盛，招来奇异的神物；周文繁盛，飞来神异的珍禽。
English: When the cedar flourishes, it brings forth strange gods; when the pomegranate flourishes, it brings forth strange birds.

古文：文考至德下覃，遗仁爰被，远符千载，降斯三足。
现代文：我的父亲文帝以至德广施万民，遗留的仁爱被及众生，他的仁德远应千载，因此降下这只三足乌鸦。
English: My father, Emperor Wen, was generous to all people, and his legacy of benevolence was passed down to all living beings. His benevolence should last for a thousand years. Therefore, he sent down this three-legged crow.

古文：将使三方归本，九州翕定。
现代文：将会使得三方归附，九州平定。
English: This will lead to the annexation of the three regions and the pacification of Kyushu.

古文：惟此大体，景福在民。
现代文：愿此大礼，给人民带来大福。
English: May this great gift bring great happiness to the people.

古文：予安敢让宗庙之善，弗宣大惠。
现代文：我怎敢谦让先人的美德，不宣示大的恩惠呢。
English: How dare I defer to the virtues of the ancients without proclaiming a great bounty?

古文：可大赦天下，文武官普进二级。 
现代文：可以大赦天下，文武官员都进宫二级。 
English: There can be a general amnesty for the whole country, and both civilian and military officials can enter the palace at the second level.

古文：九月辛卯，以大将军杨忠、大将军王雄并为柱国。
现代文：九月辛卯曰，任命大将军杨忠、大将军王雄一起为柱国。
English: In September, Xinwu said that he would appoint General Yang Zhong and General Wang Xiong as pillar countries.

古文：甲辰，封少师元罗为韩国公，以绍魏后。
现代文：甲辰曰，封少师元罗为韩国公，以继魏嗣。
English: According to Kao Chen, the young master Yuan Luo was appointed as the ruler of Korea to succeed Wei Zi.

古文：丁未，幸同州。
现代文：丁末日，明帝前往同州。
English: At the end of the day, Ming Di left for Tongzhou.

古文：过故宅，赋诗曰： 玉烛调秋气，金舆历旧宫。
现代文：经过故宅，赋诗说： 玉烛调秋气，金舆历旧宫。
English: After passing the former residence, Fu Shih said: "The autumn breeze is set by the jade candle, and the old palace is lit by the golden candle."

古文：还如过白水，更似入新丰。
现代文：还如过白水，更似入新丰。
English: It's still like crossing the white water, more like entering Xinfeng.

古文：霜潭渍晚菊，寒井落疏桐。
现代文：霜潭渍晚菊，寒井落疏桐。
English: The late chrysanthemum in the frost pond, the spruce in the cold well.

古文：举杯延故老，令闻歌大风。 
现代文：举杯延故老，令闻歌《大风》。 
English: Raising a glass to the old times, the song "The Great Wind" is played.

古文：冬十月辛酉，还宫。
现代文：冬季十月辛酉曰，回宫。
English: In winter, in October, it is time to go back to the palace.

古文：乙丑，遣柱国尉迟迥镇陇右。
现代文：乙丑曰，派柱国尉迟迥镇守陇西。
English: Second Ugly said that he would send a lieutenant to guard the western part of Shaanxi Province.

古文：长安献白兔。
现代文：长安进献白兔。
English: Chang'an will present a white rabbit.

古文：十二月辛酉，突厥遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月辛酉曰，突厥派使者进献当地土产。
English: In the middle of December, the Turks sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：癸亥，太庙成。
现代文：癸亥日，太庙建成。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, the Great Temple was completed.

古文：辛巳，以功臣琅邪贞献公贺拔胜等十三人配享太祖庙庭。
现代文：辛巳日，以功臣琅邪贞献公贺拔胜等十三人配享太祖庙庭。
English: On the day of Xin Si, thirteen people, including the heroes and heroines, the virtuous and virtuous, and the heroes and heroines, were allotted to enjoy the ancestral temple garden.

古文：壬午，大赦天下。
现代文：壬午日，大赦天下。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：武成元年春正月己酉，太师、晋公护上表归政，帝始亲览万机。
现代文：北周武成元年春季正月己酉曰，太师、晋公宇文护上表交还朝政，明帝开始亲自处理国家事务。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Northern Zhou Wucheng's reign, it was said that the Grand Master, Jin Gong Uwenguo, returned to the government, and Emperor Ming began to personally deal with state affairs.

古文：军旅之事，护犹总焉。
现代文：军事方面的事务，宇文护仍然掌握。
English: As for military affairs, Wu Wenguo is still in charge.

古文：初改都督诸州军事为总管。
现代文：北周开始将都督诸州军事改称为总管。
English: At the beginning of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the military governors of the various states were renamed to "governors-general."

古文：丙辰，封大将军、章武孝公导子亮为永昌公，翼为西阳公。
现代文：丙辰日，封大将军、章武孝公宇文导的儿子宇文亮为永昌公，宇文翼为西阳公。
English: On the 4th day of the month, Uwen Liang, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Liang, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du, the son of Uwen Du,

古文：三月癸巳，陈六军，帝亲擐甲冑，迎太白于东方。
现代文：三月癸巳日，陈列六军，明帝亲自穿着甲胄，在东方迎候太白星。
English: On March 30th, the Six Armies were displayed, and Emperor Ming himself, wearing armor, greeted the Taibai Star in the East.

古文：秦郡公直镇蒲州。
现代文：秦郡公宇文直镇守蒲州。
English: Gongyu Wenzhong, Qin County, is the town guard of Gushu.

古文：吐谷浑寇边，庚戌，遣大司马、博陵公贺兰祥率众讨之。
现代文：吐谷浑侵犯北周边境，庚戌，派大司马、博陵公贺兰祥率军讨伐吐谷浑。
English: Tugu Hun invaded the northern Zhou border, and Geng Zi sent the army led by Dai Sima and Boling Gong He Lanxiang to fight against Tugu Hun.

古文：四月戊午，武当郡献赤乌。
现代文：四月戊午日，武当郡进献赤乌。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of April, Wudang County presented red wax.

古文：甲戌，云。
现代文：甲戊曰，天上布满乌云。
English: The sky was covered with dark clouds.

古文：秦州献白马朱鬣。
现代文：秦州进献红鬃白马。
English: Qinzhou presented the Red Horse and the White Horse.

古文：五月戊子，诏曰： 皇王之迹不一，因革之道已殊，莫不播八政以成物，兆三元而为纪。
现代文：五月戊子，明帝下韶说： 虽然帝王的业迹不一样，因袭创新的途径也不相同，但没有不足施行八政以成就事业，确定三元而订立历数的。
English: In May, Emperor Ming said: Although the emperor's career is not the same, and the ways of innovation are not the same, there is no shortage of the implementation of the eight policies to achieve the cause, determine the three yuan and set the calendar.

古文：是以容成创定于轩辕，羲和钦若于唐世，鸿范九畴，大弘五法。
现代文：所以在黄帝时容成创立了历法，在唐尧时羲和敬顺天象，《鸿范》九畴，极力弘扬五行的法则。
English: Therefore, in the time of the Yellow Emperor, Rongcheng created the calendar, and in the time of the Tang Dynasty, Rongcheng and Keishun celestial, "Hong Fan" nine domains, and vigorously promoted the law of the five elements.

古文：易曰： 泽中有火，革，君子以治历明时。 故历之为义大矣。
现代文：《周易》说： 泽中有火，是变革之象，所以君子制定历法以阐明天时的变化。 所以历法的意义是伟大的。
English: "Zhou Yi" said: There is fire in the lake, it is a symbol of change, so the gentleman formulated a calendar to explain the change of tomorrow's time.

古文：但忽微成象，象极则差；分积命时，时积斯舛。
现代文：但是细微的事物形成象数，象数到了极至就出现差错；极短的时间积累起来确定时节，时节积累久了就产生舛错。
English: But subtle things form the image number, and when the image number reaches the extreme, there will be errors; very short time is accumulated to determine the season, and when the season is accumulated for a long time, there will be mistakes.

古文：开辟至于获麟，二百七十六万岁，晷度推移，余分盈缩，南正无闻，畴人靡记。
现代文：从天地初开到孔子获麟，共二百七十六万年的时间，随着时光的推移，其间时节的盈余损亏，掌管天文的南正没有听说过，推算历法的畴人没有记载过。
English: From the beginning of the world to Confucius's conquering of Lin, a total of 2.76 million years passed. As time passed, the surplus and deficit of the seasons during this period was not heard of by Nan Zheng, who was in charge of astronomy, and it was not recorded by the people in charge of calculating the calendar.

古文：暑往寒来，理乖攸序，敬授民时，何其积谬。
现代文：暑去寒来，时节的次序产生差错，将这种时令郑重地颁授给人民，是多么的错误。
English: It is a mistake to solemnly bestow this kind of season on the people.

古文：昔汉世巴郡洛下闳善治历，云后八百岁，当有圣人定之。
现代文：以前漠代巴郡人洛下闳善于推算历法，他说在八百年后，当会有圣人制定历法。
English: Luo Xiamen, a former resident of Mudaiba County, was good at calculating the calendar. He said that in eight hundred years, there would be a saint to establish the calendar.

古文：自火行至今，木德应其运矣，朕何让焉。
现代文：自火德运行到现在，木德正好应其气运，朕还谦让什么。
English: Since the fire virtue has been running to the present, the wood virtue is just in line with its air fortune, I am still modest about what.

古文：可命有司，傍稽六历，仰观七曜，博推古今，造我周历，量定以闻。 己亥，听讼于正武殿。
现代文：可让有关官员，参稽六历，仰观七曜，广泛地推演古今时节，制定出我周朝的历法，裁定后上报。 己亥日，明帝在正武殿听理诉讼。
English: It is possible to let the relevant officials participate in the six calendars, look up to the seven days of the week, extensively deduce the ancient and modern times, work out the calendar of my Zhou Dynasty, and report it after the ruling. On the day of Ji Hai, Emperor Ming heard the proceedings at the Zhengwu Palace.

古文：辛亥，以大宗伯、梁国公侯莫陈崇为大司徒，大司寇、高阳公达奚武为大宗伯，武阳公豆卢宁为大司寇，柱国、辅城公邕为大司空。
现代文：辛亥曰，任命大宗伯、梁国公侯莫陈崇为大司徒，大司寇、高阳公达奚武为大宗伯，武阳公豆卢宁为大司寇，柱国、辅城公宇文邕为大司空。
English: Xinhai said that the grand patriarch and prince of Liang Guo, Mo Chen Chong, was appointed as the grand steward, the grand steward of Guoyang, Gaoyang, Dadu Zhenwu, was appointed as the grand steward of Guoyang, the grand steward of Guoyang, Lunin, was appointed as the grand steward of Guoyang, and the grand steward of Zhuguo, Fucheng, Gongwenshan, was appointed as the grand steward of Guoyang.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 比屡有纠发官司赦前事。
现代文：乙卯日，明帝下韶说： 近来多有举发官员们在大赦以前的过失。
English: On the second day of the month, Emperor Ming said, "Recently, there have been a lot of mistakes made by officials before the amnesty.

古文：此虽意在疾恶，但先王制肆眚之道，令天下自新，若又推问，自新何由哉。
现代文：虽然这样做的用意在于痛恨邪恶，但也是因为先王制定了宽赦罪人的原则，使天下的罪人改过自新。如果又重新追问，让他们又如何自新呢。
English: Although the intention of doing this was to hate evil, it was also because the former king established the principle of forgiving sinners, so that the sinners of the world would reform. If they were asked again, how would they reform?

古文：如此之徒，有司勿为推究。
现代文：对于逭一类人，有关部门不要追究。
English: Relevant departments should not pursue the cases of those who fall into the first category.

古文：惟库厩仓廪与海内所共，汉帝有云 朕为天下守财耳 。
现代文：衹是仓库的粮食是天下人所共有，漠家天子说过 朕不过是替天下保守财产罢了 。
English: The grain in the storehouse is common to all the people of the world. The Son of Heaven said, "I am only the custodian of the wealth of the world."

古文：若有侵盗公家财畜钱粟者，魏朝之事，年月既远，一不须问。
现代文：如果有侵吞盗取公家财畜钱粟的，发生在魏朝的事，年月已久，一概不予追问。
English: If there is embezzlement and theft of public property and livestock money, the events that occurred in the Wei Dynasty have been going on for a long time, and will not be investigated.

古文：自周有天下以来，虽经赦宥，而事迹可知者，有司宜即推穷。
现代文：自固有天下以来，虽然经过宽赦，但事情可以知道的，有关部门应当追查清楚。
English: Since inheriting the throne, although they have been pardoned, things can be known, and the relevant departments should investigate clearly.

古文：得实之日，但免其罪，征备如法。 贺兰祥攻拔洮阳、洪和二城，吐谷浑遁走。
现代文：核实的时候，衹免除他们的罪行，但要依法罚其赔偿。 贺兰祥攻克洮阳、洪和二城，吐谷浑军逃走。
English: During the verification, Yu exempted them from the crime, but they should be punished according to the law for compensation.Helan Xiang conquered Poyang, Honghe and two cities, and the Tugu Hun army fled.

古文：闰月庚申，高昌遣使献方物。
现代文：闰五月庚申曰，高昌派使者进献土产。
English: At the end of May, Gaochang sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：六月戊子，大雨霖。
现代文：六月戊子，大雨连绵。
English: June Boshi, continuous heavy rain.

古文：诏曰： 昔唐咨四岳，殷告六眚，睹灾兴惧，咸寘时雍。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 从前唐尧咨询四岳，商汤请教六眚，看到灾难便戒惧，使百姓都繁衍和睦。
English: Emperor Ming decreed: Once upon a time, Tang Xuan consulted the Four Mountains, Shang Tang consulted the Six Mountains, and when he saw a disaster, he was afraid of it, so that the people all prospered and lived in harmony.

古文：朕抚运应图，作民父母，弗敢怠荒，以求民瘼。
现代文：朕应验图谶继承天运，作为百姓的父母，不敢懒惰放荡，以访求百姓疾苦。
English: As the parents of the people, we dare not be lazy and dissolute, and seek the suffering of the people.

古文：而霖雨作沴，害麦伤苗，隤屋漂垣，洎于昏垫。
现代文：而连绵的大雨制造灾害，损坏麦粮伤害禾苗，坍塌房屋冲毁城垣，以致百姓陷溺。
English: But the continuous heavy rain caused disasters, damaged wheat crops and harmed seedlings, collapsed houses and destroyed city walls, resulting in people drowning.

古文：谅朕不德，苍生何咎。
现代文：谅必是朕没有德行，百姓有何过错。
English: Forgive me if I am not virtuous, but what is the fault of the people?

古文：刑政所失，罔识厥由。
现代文：刑罚与政令有失误，但不知错在哪裹。
English: There was a mistake in the sentence and the decree, but I don't know where the mistake came from.

古文：公卿大夫士爰及牧守黎庶等，今宜各上封事，谠言极谏，罔有所讳。
现代文：公卿大夫士人以及牧守百姓等，现在都应各自呈递密封章奏，直言尽情劝谏，不要有所忌讳。
English: Court nobles, magistrates, and shepherds of the people should now each submit a sealed chapter and play, and frankly advise them to their heart's content, without any taboo.

古文：朕将览察，以答天谴。
现代文：朕将亲自览板考察，以报答上天的谴责。
English: I will personally inspect the display boards in order to repay Heaven's condemnation.

古文：其遭水者，有司可时巡检，条列以闻。 庚子，诏曰： 颍川从我，是曰元勋；无忘父城，实起王业。
现代文：对于遭受水灾的，有关官员要即时巡视查检，分条列举上报。 庚子，明帝下诏说： 在颖川跟随我的，可称为元勋；不要忘记父城，在那里其实已开创了帝王的事业。
English: For those affected by the flood, the relevant officials should immediately inspect and inspect, and report in sections. Geng Zi, the Ming emperor said: Follow me in Yingchuan, you can be called a hero; do not forget the father city, where the emperor's career has actually begun.

古文：文考属天地草昧，造化权舆，拯彼横流，匡兹颓运。
现代文：先父塞帝恰逢天下混乱的时候，开始创立帝王基业，挽救动荡的局势，匡正坠落了的魏运。
English: When the world was in turmoil, my father Seti began to establish the Imperial Foundation to save the turbulent situation and rectify the downfall of the Wei dynasty.

古文：赖英贤尽力，文武同心，翼赞大功，克隆帝业。
现代文：依仗英雄贤士们的竭力支持，文臣武将齐心协力，辅佐伟大的功业，最后成就了帝王大业。
English: Relying on the strenuous support of the heroes and sages, the scholar-warriors made concerted efforts to support the great cause, and finally achieved the great cause of the emperor.

古文：而被坚执锐，栉风沐雨，永言畴昔，良用怃然。
现代文：而披坚执锐、栉风沐雨，时常提及往昔，我内心实在感到茫然白失。
English: However, when I think about the past, I feel lost and confused.

古文：至若功成名遂，建国剖符，予惟休也。
现代文：至于功成名就、建国封赏，我衹是承受了前人的庇荫。
English: As for the achievement and fame, the founding of the country and the reward, we have inherited the shadow of the predecessors.

古文：其有致死王事，妻子无归者，朕甚伤之。
现代文：对于那些献身王事，妻子儿女无依无靠的人，朕深感悲伤。
English: I am deeply saddened for those who have devoted themselves to royal duties, leaving their wives and children without support.

古文：凡是从先王向夏州，发夏州从来，见在及薨亡者，并量赐钱帛，称朕意焉。 是月，陈武帝薨，兄子蒨立，是谓文帝。
现代文：凡是跟从先王到夏州，以及从夏州起事以来，现在及已经死亡的人，全都酌情赏赐钱帛，以表达朕的心意。 当月，陈武帝去世，他的兄子陈蓓继位，这就是陈文帝。
English: In order to express my heart's desire, all those who have followed the former king to Xiazhou, as well as those who have died since the uprising in Xiazhou, and those who are currently alive, will be given money as appropriate.In the same month, Emperor Chen Wudi died, and his brother Emperor Chen Jie succeeded to the throne, which is Emperor Chen Wen.

古文：秋八月己亥，改天王称皇帝，追尊文王为帝，大赦改元。
现代文：秋季八月己亥日，改称天王为皇帝，追尊文王为皇帝，大赦天下更改年号。
English: In the autumn, in August, on Ji Hai Day, it was renamed Tian Wang for the emperor, Sui Son Wen Wang for the emperor, and the whole world changed the year.

古文：壬子，以大将军、安城公宪为益州总管。
现代文：壬子曰，任命大将军、安城公字文宪为益州总管。
English: According to Minshi, Ancheng Gongzi Wenxian, a general, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：癸丑，增御正四人，位上大夫。
现代文：癸丑日，增设御正四人，位列上大夫。
English: On April Fool's Day, four gosho were added to the ranks of doctors.

古文：九月乙卯，以大将军、天水公广为梁州总管。
现代文：九月乙卯日，任命大将军、天水公宇文广为梁州总管。
English: On the second day of September, the general, Tianshui Gongyu Wenguang, was appointed as the chief administrator of Liangzhou.

古文：辛未，进封辅城公邕为鲁国公，安城公宪为齐国公，秦郡公直为卫国公，正平公招为赵国公。
现代文：辛末日，进封辅城公宇文邕为鲁国公，安城公字文宪为齐国公，秦郡公宇文直为卫国公，正平公字文招为趟国公。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Zifeng Fucheng Gongwu Wenzhong was Lu Guogong, Ancheng Gongzhi Wenzhong was Qi Guogong, Qin County Gongwu Wenzhong was Wei Guogong, and Zhengping Gongzhi Wenzhong was Wanzhong.

古文：封皇弟俭为谯国公，纯为陈国公，盛为越国公，达为代国公，通为冀国公，逌为滕国公。
现代文：封皇弟宇文俭为谯国公，宇文纯为陈国公，宇文盛为越国公，宇文达为代国公，宇文通为冀国公，宇文迪为滕国公。
English: The crown prince's younger brother, Uwenjian, is the governor of Shandong Province, Uwenjun is the governor of Chen Province, Uwen Sheng is the governor of Yue Province, Uwenda is the acting governor, Uwentong is the governor of Hebei Province, and Uwendi is the governor of Teng Province.

古文：进封天水公广为蔡国公，高阳公达奚武为郑国公，武阳公豆卢宁为楚国公，博陵公贺兰祥为凉国公，宁蜀公尉迟迥为蜀国公，化政公宇文贵为许国公，陈留公杨忠为国公，昌平公尉迟纲为吴国公，武威公王雄为庸国公。
现代文：进封天水公宇文广为蔡国公，高阳公达奚武为塑凰公，选区公亘鹰宴为楚凰公，博陵公昼适搓为凉国公，宁蜀公尉迟迥为蜀国公，化政公室主童为许国公，陈留公垄蝗为驴旦公，昌平公慰迟塑为呈旦公，逮盛公型!为卢厘尘。
English: Tianshui gong Yuwenguang was named Cai Guogong, Goyang gong Daqinwu was named Shouhuanggong, Guozhuang gong Wuhuan was named Chuhuanggong, Boling gong Rongshuang was named Liang Guogong, Ningshu gongfei Laiwu was named Shu Guogong, Huazheng gongfei was named Xu Guogong, Chenlu gong Liaoqinwu was named Jiaotan gong, Changping gonglui was named Shengdan gong, Fangsheng gong was named Lu Lichen.

古文：邑各万户。
现代文：食邑各一万户。
English: There are 10,000 households in each food village.

古文：冬十月甲午，以柱国、吴国公尉迟纲为泾州总管。
现代文：冬季十月甲午曰，任命柱国、吴国公尉迟纲为泾州总管。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st in winter, Zhu Guo and Wu Guo were appointed as the chief administrators of Zhangzhou.

古文：是月，齐文宣帝薨，子殷嗣立。
现代文：在遣月，齐文宣帝去世，他的儿子高殷继位。
English: At the time of the moon landing, Emperor Qibun died and was succeeded by his son Gao Yin.

古文：以柱国、蜀国公尉迟迥为秦州总管。
现代文：任命柱国、蜀国公尉迟迥为秦州总管。
English: He appointed Jiu Guo and Shu Guo's lieutenant Chi Xi as the general manager of Qin State.

古文：二年春正月癸丑朔，大会群臣于紫极殿，始用百戏焉。
现代文：北周武成二年春季正月癸丑初一，明帝在紫极殿大规模会见群臣，开始表演百戏。
English: In the spring of the second year of Northern Zhou Wucheng, on the first day of the first month of the year, Emperor Ming met with a large number of courtiers in the Purple Hall and began to perform a hundred plays.

古文：三月辛酉，重阳阁成，会群公列将卿大夫及突厥使者于芳林园，赐钱帛各有差。
现代文：三月辛酉日，重阳合建成，明帝在芳林园会见群公列将卿大夫及突厥使者，每人都赏赐钱帛多少不等。
English: On the second day of the third month, when the Chongyang Junction was completed, Emperor Ming met with a group of generals, generals and emissaries of the Turkic people in the Fanglin Garden. Each person was rewarded with varying amounts of money.

古文：夏四月，帝因食遇毒。
现代文：夏季四月，明帝因食物中毒。
English: In the summer of April, Ming Di died of food poisoning.

古文：庚子，大渐。
现代文：庚子日，病情加剧。
English: On the day of Geng Zi's death, his condition worsened.

古文：诏曰：
现代文：下诏说：
English: The next edict said:

古文：人生天地之间，禀五常之气，天地有穷已，五常有推移，人安得长在。
现代文：人生于天地之间，禀受五常之气，天地有穷尽，五常有变易，人怎么能长在。
English: Human beings are born between heaven and earth, and are subject to the five elements of nature. Heaven and earth are finite, and the five elements are changeable. How can a person endure?

古文：是以生而有死者，物理之必然。
现代文：所以有生就有死，这是事物的必然常理。
English: Therefore, if there is life, there will be death, which is the inevitable common sense of things.

古文：处必然之理，修短之间，何足多恨。
现代文：身处必然的常理，长短之间，有什么值得多有遗憾的。
English: In the midst of inevitable common sense, between long and short, what is worth more is regrettable.

古文：朕虽不德，性好典坟，披览圣贤余论，未尝不以此自晓。
现代文：我虽然没有多少德行，但天性喜欢典籍，阅览圣贤遣留下来的言论，没有不是以圣贤的言论来自我勉励的。
English: Although I don't have much virtue, I like classics by nature. When I read the sayings left behind by the sages, nothing comes from me without the encouragement of the sayings of the sages.

古文：今乃命也，夫复何言。
现代文：现在是命中注定的，又有什么可说的。
English: Now it's fated, what can I say.

古文：诸公及在朝卿大夫士，军中大小督将、军等，并立勋效，积有年载，辅翼太祖，成我周家。
现代文：诸公及在朝中的卿大夫士人，军中大小督将、军人等，都建立功勋，已有多年，辅佐太祖，成就了我周朝王室。
English: All the princes and high-ranking officials in the imperial court, military governors and generals, and soldiers have established meritorious achievements. For many years, they have assisted the great-grandfather and achieved the royal family of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：今朕缵承大业，处万乘之上，此乃上不负太祖，下不负朕躬，朕得启手启足，从先帝于地下，实无恨于心矣。
现代文：现在朕继承大业，位居皇帝之位，这也就在上没有辜负太祖，在下没有辜负朕自己，朕能够善终，在地下跟随先帝，心中确实没有什么可遣憾的了。
English: Now that I have succeeded to the great cause and am on the throne of the emperor, I have not failed my great-grandfather in the past, and I have not failed myself in the present. I can live a good life and follow the former emperor underground. In my heart, I really have nothing to regret.

古文：所可恨者，朕享大位，可谓四年矣，不能使政化循理，黎庶丰足，九州未一，二方犹梗，顾此怀恨，目用不瞑。
现代文：我所遗憾的，祇是我作为皇帝，已经四年了，不能使政治教化遵循常理，百姓富裕充足，九州没有统一，东西仍然阻塞，想到这些遣憾，不能瞑目。
English: My only regret is that I, as emperor, have been in power for four years and have not been able to make political education follow common sense, the people are rich enough, Kyushu has not been unified, and things are still blocked. When I think of these regrets, I can't stop my eyes.

古文：唯冀仁兄冢宰，洎朕先正、先父、公卿大臣等，协和为心，勉力相劝，勿忘太祖遗志，提挈后人，朕虽没九泉，形体不朽。
现代文：祇是希望仁兄冢宰，及朕的先正、先父、公卿大臣等，同心同意，相互努力劝勉，不要忘记太祖的遣志，提挈后人，朕虽在九泉之下，形体也会永不磨灭。
English: It is only to be hoped that Brother Yan Zai, and my predecessors, my father, and my noble ministers, will agree with one another and work hard to persuade each other not to forget the great-grandfather's mission, and the descendants of Tian Zai, although I am under the nine springs, my body will never be worn out.

古文：今大位虚旷，社稷无主。
现代文：现在帝位空虚，社稷无主。
English: Now the throne is empty, the society is without an owner.

古文：朕儿幼稚，未堪当国。
现代文：我的儿子年纪很小，不能负担国家重任。
English: My son is too young to carry the weight of the state.

古文：鲁国公邕，朕之介弟，宽仁大度，海内共闻，能弘我周家，必此子也。
现代文：鲁国公宇文邕，是我的弟弟，宽厚仁爱豁达大度，全国人民都是知道的，能使我周朝王室弘大的人，必定是他。
English: Lu Guogongyu Wenjun is my younger brother. He is generous, benevolent and open-minded. The whole country knows him. He must be the one who can make my Zhou Dynasty royal family prosper.

古文：夫人贵有始终，公等事太祖，辅朕躬，可谓有始矣，若克念世道艰难，辅邕以主天下者，可谓有终矣。
现代文：人贵在有始有终，你们事奉太祖，辅弼我，可以说是有始了，如果能够念及世道艰难，辅助宇文邕统治天下，就可以说是有终了。
English: A noble person has a beginning and an end. If you serve your grandfather and assist me, you can say that you have a beginning. If you can bear in mind the hardships of the world and assist Yu Wenzhong in ruling the world, you can say that you have an end.

古文：哀死事生，人臣大节，公等思念此言，令万代称叹。
现代文：哀悼死者事奉生者，这是人臣的大节，你们要思念这句话，让万代人称颂。
English: Mourning the dead and serving the living, this is the great festival of human beings. You should remember this sentence and let all generations praise it.

古文：朕禀生俭素，非能力行菲薄，每寝大布之被，服大帛之衣，凡是器用，皆无雕刻。
现代文：朕禀性节俭朴素，不能力行菲薄，经常睡粗布被子，穿粗帛衣服，所有器皿用具，都没有雕饰。
English: I am frugal and simple by nature. I cannot afford to be extravagant. I often sleep in a coarse quilt and wear coarse clothes. All my utensils and utensils are not decorated.

古文：身终之日，岂容违弃此好。
现代文：到死的时候，岂能违背放弃这种嗜好。
English: When it comes to death, how can you refuse to give up this hobby?

古文：丧事所须，务从俭约，敛以时服，勿使有金玉之饰。
现代文：丧事所需物品，一定要按简单节约原则办理，殓尸时用平常的衣服，不要使用有金玉装饰的衣物。
English: The items needed for the funeral must be handled according to the principle of simple economy. When burying a corpse, use ordinary clothes, do not use clothes decorated with gold beads.

古文：若以礼不可阙，皆令用瓦。
现代文：如果因为礼制而不能缺少，就都用瓦。
English: If you can't do without it because of etiquette, use a shingle.

古文：小敛讫，七日哭。
现代文：小殓完后，哭丧七天。
English: After the funeral, the mourning lasts for seven days.

古文：文武百官各权辟衰麻，且以素服从事。
现代文：文武百官暂时避免穿戴衰麻，穿素服服丧。
English: Civil and military officials should temporarily avoid wearing flabby clothes and wear plain clothes.

古文：葬日，选择不毛之地，因地势为坟，勿封勿树。
现代文：下葬的那天，选择一块不毛之地，因地势起坟，不要在坟上封土植树。
English: On the day of the burial, choose a barren area, dig a grave according to the terrain, and do not plant trees on the grave.

古文：且厚葬伤生，圣人所诫，朕既服膺圣人之教，安敢违之。
现代文：况且厚葬会损伤活着的人，这是圣人的警告，朕既然衷心信服圣人的教诲，怎敢违背。
English: Moreover, a lavish funeral would injure the living. This is the warning of the saint. Since I wholeheartedly believe in the teachings of the saint, how dare I go against them?

古文：凡百官司，勿异朕此意。
现代文：所有文武百官，都不要违背朕的心意。
English: All officers and men, do not go against my wishes.

古文：四方州镇使到，各令三日哭，哭讫，悉权辟凶服，还以素服从事，待大例除。
现代文：四方州镇使者到后，都让他们哭丧三天，哭丧完后，全部暂且除掉凶服，仍穿素服服丧，直到服丧期满。
English: After the arrival of the envoys from the town of Shifangzhou, they all let them mourn for three days. After the mourning was over, they all temporarily removed the evil clothes and still wore plain clothes to mourn until the mourning period was over.

古文：非有呼召，各按部自守，不得辄奔赴阙庭。
现代文：若没有朝廷的征召，都要留在各自的部门恪守职责，不得立即奔赴朝廷。
English: If they are not summoned by the imperial court, they must stay in their respective departments to abide by their duties, and must not immediately rush to the imperial court.

古文：礼有通塞随时之义，葬讫，内外悉除服从吉。
现代文：礼有随时通变的意义，下葬完毕，朝廷内外都除去丧服按照吉办事。
English: The meaning of etiquette is subject to change at any time. After the burial, both inside and outside the imperial court remove the mourning clothes and follow the etiquette.

古文：三年之内，勿禁婚娶，饮食一令如平常也。
现代文：三年之内，不要禁止结婚嫁娶，饮食一概像平常一样。
English: Within three years, do not forbid marrying and marrying, and eating and drinking will be as usual.

古文：时事殷猥，病困心乱，止能及此。
现代文：世事繁杂，病困，衹能到此为止。
English: Life is complicated, I'm sick, and I can't go on like this.

古文：如其事有不尽，准此以类为断。
现代文：如果还有事情没有讲完，都以此类推来决断。
English: If there is anything left to be said, it will be decided by such reasoning.

古文：死而近思，古人有之。
现代文：临死多考虑当前的事情，古人就有这样的。
English: The ancients had this habit of thinking more about the present when they were about to die.

古文：朕今忍死，书此怀抱。
现代文：朕现在临死挣扎，写下我的这些心意。
English: I'm dying to write these thoughts down.

古文：其诏即帝口授也。
现代文：这个诏书是皇帝口授的。
English: This edict was dictated by the emperor.

古文：辛丑，崩于延寿殿，时年二十七，谥曰明皇帝，庙称世宗。
现代文：辛丑，明帝在延寿殿去世，当时二十七岁，谧号称马明皇帝，庙号称作世塞。
English: Xinxiu, Emperor Ming died in the palace of Yan Shou, when he was twenty-seven years old. His nickname was Emperor Ma Ming, and his temple name was Shisei.

古文：五月辛未，葬于昭陵。
现代文：五月辛未，葬在昭陵。
English: He died in May and was buried in Zhaoling.

古文：帝宽明仁厚，敦睦九族，有君人之量。
现代文：明帝宽厚仁爱，亲厚和睦九族，有皇帝的度量。
English: The Ming Emperor was generous and benevolent, and he was close to and reconciled the nine ethnic groups. He had the measure of an emperor.

古文：幼而好学，博览群书，善属文，词彩温丽。
现代文：年幼时就喜欢学习，博览群书，善于写文章，词采温和华丽。
English: When he was young, he liked to study, read a lot of books, was good at writing articles, and his vocabulary was gentle and gorgeous.

古文：及即位，集公卿已下有文学者八十余人于麟趾殿，刊校经史。
现代文：等他即位后，在麟趾殿召集公卿以下有文才博学的八十多人，刊校经史典籍。
English: After he ascended to the throne, more than eighty people with literary talent and erudition, including court nobles, were gathered at Rinzi Palace to publish school classics.

古文：又捃采众书，自羲、农以来，讫于魏末，叙为世谱，凡五百卷云。
现代文：又拾采众书，从伏羲、神农以来，直至魏朝末年，写成《世谱》一书，共五百卷。
English: He also collected many books, from the time of Fuxi and Shennong to the end of the Wei Dynasty, to write a book of "Spectrum," a total of five hundred volumes.

古文：所着文章十卷。
现代文：所著文章有十卷
English: Authored ten volumes of articles

古文：史臣曰：世宗宽仁远度，叡哲博闻。
现代文：史臣曰：世宗宽厚仁爱大度，聪睿明哲博闻。
English: Shichen said, "Sejong is generous, benevolent and magnanimous. He is clever, wise and knowledgeable."

古文：处代邸之尊，实文昭之长。
现代文：在他身居王侯尊位时，就已是文帝第二代中的佼佼者。
English: When he held the title of prince, he was already the best of the second generation of Emperor Wen.

古文：豹姿已变，龙德犹潜，而百辟倾心，万方注意。
现代文：在他地位已变，还没登上帝位时，就已受到了百官的倾慕，万方的关注。
English: His status has changed. Even before he ascended to the throne, he was admired by hundreds of officials and received attention from all sides.

古文：及乎迎宣黜贺，入纂大宗，而礼貌功臣，敦睦九族，率由恭俭，崇尚文儒，亹亹焉其有君人之德者矣。
现代文：等到孝闵帝被废，明帝即皇帝位后，对功臣恭敬有礼，对亲族亲厚和睦，遵循恭敬节俭之道，崇尚文儒，勤勉不倦有帝王的品德。
English: After Emperor Xiaohui was deposed and Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he was respectful and courteous to meritorious officials, cordial and amicable to relatives, followed the path of respect and thrift, advocated Confucianism, and was diligent and tireless. He had the character of an emperor.

古文：始则权臣专制，政出私门；终乃鸩毒潜加，享年不永。
现代文：但在他开始即帝位时则有权臣专擅朝政，政治由权豪把持；最后又被施毒加害，享年不能长久。
English: However, at the beginning of his reign, the imperial court was dominated by powerful officials, and politics was controlled by the powerful. In the end, he was poisoned, and he did not live long.

古文：惜哉！
现代文：可惜啊!
English: What a shame!

