古文：元皇帝讳睿，字景文，宣帝曾孙，琅邪恭王觐之子也。
现代文：元皇帝名睿，字景文，是宣帝司马懿之曾孙，琅王牙恭王司马觐之子。
English: The former emperor Ming Rui, also known as Jingwen, was the great-grandson of Emperor Xuanzang and the son of King Zhaogong.

古文：咸宁二年生于洛阳，有神光之异，一室尽明，所藉藁如始刈。
现代文：咸宁二年生于洛阳，生时有奇异的神光，照得满屋通明，所垫的稿荐像刚割下的禾草。
English: Xianning was born in Luoyang in the second year of his life. When he was born, there was a strange light, shining brightly all over the house. The manuscript he was writing on looked like freshly cut grass.

古文：及长，白豪生于日角之左，隆准龙颜，目有精曜，顾眄炜如也。
现代文：长大以后，前额左边生有白毛，鼻梁很高，眉骨突起，目光有神，顾盼生光。
English: After growing up, the left side of the forehead has white hair, the bridge of the nose is high, the eyebrows protrude, the eyes are bright, and the gaze is bright.

古文：年十五，嗣位琅邪王。
现代文：十五岁时，嗣位为琅王牙王。
English: At the age of fifteen, he became the heir to the throne of Shao Wang Yao.

古文：幼有令闻。
现代文：少年即有好名声。
English: The boy has a good reputation.

古文：及惠皇之际，王室多故，帝每恭俭退让，以免于祸。
现代文：惠帝在位期间，王室多事，元帝常常保持恭俭退让的态度，因而免于遭祸。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hui, the royal family was full of events. Emperor Yuan often maintained an attitude of frugality and concession, thus avoiding misfortune.

古文：沈敏有度量，不显灼然之迹，故时人未之识焉。
现代文：平时沉着聪敏而有器量，不轻易显示自己的才华，所以还未被当时的人鉴识。
English: Usually calm, intelligent and resourceful, he does not easily show his talent, so he has not yet been recognized by the people of that time.

古文：惟侍中嵇绍异之，谓人曰： 琅邪王毛骨非常，殆非人臣之相也。 
现代文：只有侍中嵇绍认为他是奇才异人，曾对人说： 琅王牙王毛发骨相不同于常人，不是做人臣的人。 
English: Only the chamberlain, Yu Shao, thought that he was a strange genius, and once said to people: Yu Wang Yao Wang's hair and bones are different from ordinary people, and he is not a person who is a vassal.

古文：元康二年，拜员外散骑常侍。
现代文：元康二年，拜为员外散骑常侍。
English: In the second year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Bai became a non-member samurai.

古文：累迁左将军，从讨成都王颖。荡阴之败也，叔父东安王繇为颖所害。
现代文：升迁为左将军，参与讨伐成都王司马颖，荡阴之役王师失败，元帝的叔父东安王司马繇被司马颖杀害。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left and participated in the crusade against Wang Sima Ying in Chengdu. Wang Shih was defeated in the War of the Long Shadow, and Wang Simak, the uncle of the Yuan Emperor, was killed by Sima Ying.

古文：帝惧祸及，将出奔。
现代文：元帝害怕灾祸临头，想出奔他地。
English: The Yuan Emperor was afraid of the impending disaster and wanted to flee to another place.

古文：其夜月正明，而禁卫严警，帝无由得去，甚窘迫。
现代文：当天夜里月光明亮，警戒严密，元帝无法脱身，处境窘迫。
English: On the night of the same day, the moon was bright and the guard was tight. Yuan Di could not escape and was in a difficult situation.

古文：有顷，云雾晦冥，雷雨暴至，徼者皆驰，因得潜出。
现代文：过了一会儿，黑云蔽空，雷雨大作，巡逻的人都松懈了，因而才能暗地逃出。
English: After a while, with dark clouds in the sky and thunderstorms raging, the patrollers were too tired to escape.

古文：颖先令诸关无得出贵人，帝既至河阳，为津吏所止。
现代文：此前司马颖下令各关口不让贵人通过，元帝到了河阳，被渡口上的官吏阻拦。
English: Prior to this, Sima Ying had ordered that nobles should not be allowed to pass through each checkpoint. When the Yuan Emperor arrived in Hayao, he was blocked by officials on the ferry.

古文：从者宋典后来，以策鞭帝马而笑曰： 舍长！
现代文：侍从宋典从后面赶来，用鞭子把元帝的马打了一下笑着说： 舍长！
English: Song Dian's attendant came from behind, whipped the Yuan Emperor's horse with a whip and said with a smile: "Shechenang!

古文：官禁贵人，汝亦被拘邪！ 
现代文：官家禁止贵人通过，你也被拘留了么！ 
English: Officials have banned the passage of dignitaries. Have you been detained as well?

古文：吏乃听过。
现代文：官吏这才让元帝过去了。
English: It was only then that the officials allowed the former emperor to pass.

古文：至洛阳，迎太妃俱归国。
现代文：到了洛阳，迎接太妃一同回到封国。
English: When they arrived in Luoyang, they returned to the vassal state together to welcome Toifei.

古文：东海王越之收兵下邳也，假帝辅国将军。
现代文：东海王司马越在下邳收编军队准备西上时，给元帝加上辅国将军的称号。
English: When the East Sea king, Sima Yue, was assembling his army in Jiaozuo and preparing to go west, he gave the Yuan Emperor the title of General of the Auxiliary State.

古文：寻加平东将军、监徐州诸军事，镇下邳。
现代文：不久又加上平东将军、监徐州诸军事，镇守下邳。
English: Not long after, the military of General Pingdong and Inspector Xuzhou were added, and the town guard was removed.

古文：俄迁安东将军、都督扬州诸军事。
现代文：很快又迁为安东将军、都督扬州诸军事。
English: He was soon transferred to General Anton, the military governor of Yangzhou.

古文：越西迎大驾，留帝居守。
现代文：司马越西上迎接皇帝，让元帝留守东方。
English: Sima Yue went west to meet the emperor, leaving Yuan Di in the east.

古文：永嘉初，用王导计，始镇建鄴，以顾荣为军司马，贺循为参佐，王敦、王导、周顗、刁协并为腹心股肱，宾礼名贤，存问风俗，江东归心焉。
现代文：永嘉初年，采用了王导的计谋，开始镇守建邺，以顾荣为军司马，贺循为参佐，王敦、王导、周岂页、刁协都是腹心股肱之臣，尊重名贤，察访民情，江东士人百姓都心悦诚服。
English: In the first year of Yongjia, Wang Du adopted Wang Du's strategy and began to guard Jianye, with Gu Rong as the military secretary and He Cun as the counselor. Wang Dun, Wang Du, Zhou Xizhe and Zou Xie were all the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vass

古文：属太妃薨于国，自表奔丧，葬毕，还镇，增封宣城郡二万户，加镇东大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：遇太妃死于封国，上表奔丧，安葬完毕，回到建邺，增加宣城郡封地二万户，加镇东大将军、开府仪同三司职衔。
English: On the occasion of the death of the Empress Dowager Taifei, he went to the front to mourn, and after the funeral, he returned to Jianye, increased the fief of Xuancheng County by 20,000 households, and added the town of Dongdae General, the Kaifu ceremony and the three department titles.

古文：受越命，讨征东将军周馥，走之。
现代文：受司马越的指使，讨伐征东将军周馥，把周馥赶走。
English: At the behest of Sima Yue, he fought against Zhou Qi, the general of the Eastern Expedition, and drove him away.

古文：及怀帝蒙尘于平阳，司空荀籓等移檄天下，推帝为盟主。
现代文：怀帝被劫持到平阳时，司空荀藩等向天下发出檄文，推元帝为盟主。
English: When Emperor Huai was abducted to Pingyang, the Sikuo clan and others issued a proclamation to the world, promoting Emperor Yuan as the leader.

古文：江州刺史华轶不从，使豫章内史周广、前江州刺史卫展讨禽之。
现代文：江州刺史华轶不服从，荀藩使豫章内史周广、前江州刺史卫展讨伐并俘获了他。
English: When the governor of Jiangsu Province, Huayuan, disobeyed, the Wei clan sent the governor of Yuzhang Province, Zhou Guang, and the former governor of Jiangsu Province, Wei Zhan, to fight and capture him.

古文：愍帝即位，加左丞相。
现代文：愍帝即位后，加左丞相职。
English: After Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he was given the post of Minister of the Left.

古文：岁余，进位丞相、大都督中外诸军事。
现代文：一年多后，进位为丞相、大都督中外诸军事。
English: A little more than a year later, he was promoted to the position of chancellor and grand governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：遣诸将分定江东，斩叛者孙弼于宣城，平杜弢于湘州，承制赦荆扬。
现代文：派遣诸将分别平定江东，在宣城斩了叛将孙弼，在湘州平定了杜，按皇帝旨意在荆扬二州实行大赦。
English: He dispatched generals to pacify the east of the Yangtze River, executed the traitor Sun Yat-sen in Xuancheng, pacified Du in Hunan, and implemented an amnesty in the two states of Jingyang according to the emperor's will.

古文：及西都不守，帝出师露次，躬擐甲胄，移檄四方，征天下之兵，克日进讨。
现代文：西都长安陷落时，元帝出师远征，亲披甲胄传檄四方，征召天下兵马，约期进军。
English: When the western capital Chang'an fell, Emperor Yuan sent out an expeditionary force, personally donned armor and traveled to the four directions, called up soldiers and horses from all over the world, and marched to the appointed time.

古文：于时有玉册见于临安，白玉麒麟神玺出于江宁，其文曰 长寿万年 ，日有重晕，皆以为中兴之象焉。
现代文：这时在临安发现了玉册，在江宁发现一枚雕有麒麟的白玉神玺，印玺上刻有的文字是 长寿万年 ，太阳出现两重光圈，大家都以为这是国家将要中兴的征兆。
English: At this time, a jade book was found in Lin'an, and a white jade shrine with a carving of a unicorn was found in Jiangning. The words engraved on the seal were Longevity, and the sun appeared with a double aperture. Everyone thought that this was a sign that the country would be rejuvenated.

古文：建武元年春二月辛巳，平东将军宋哲至，宣愍帝诏曰： 遭运迍否，皇纲不振。
现代文：元帝建武元年春二月二十八日，平东将军宋哲到建康，宣读愍帝诏书说： 遭遇艰难的时运，皇家纲纪不振。
English: On February 28th, the spring of the first year of the Yuan Emperor Jianwu, the Pingdong General Song Zhe arrived in Jiankang, read out the imperial edict of Emperor Qian and said: Encountered a difficult time, the royal discipline was not strong.

古文：朕以寡德，奉承洪绪，不能祈天永命，绍隆中兴，至使凶胡敢帅犬羊，逼迫京辇。
现代文：朕因德望不厚，继承大业以后，不能使上天永保晋室，使王业中兴，以致凶暴的胡人敢于率犬羊之众，逼迫京师皇舆。
English: Due to my lack of virtue, after inheriting the great cause, I was unable to make the heavens eternally protect the imperial court and make the royal cause flourish, so that the ferocious Hu people dared to lead the crowd of dogs and sheep to persecute the imperial family in Beijing.

古文：朕今幽塞穷城，忧虑万端，恐一旦崩溃。
现代文：朕今幽囚于边塞穷城，忧虑万端，命在旦夕。
English: I am now a prisoner in the poor border town, full of worries, and my life is at stake.

古文：卿指诏丞相，具宣朕意，使摄万机，时据旧都，修复陵庙，以雪大耻。 
现代文：卿面见丞相，宣告朕意，使丞相总摄朝政，尽早克复旧都，修整宗庙陵墓，雪国家之大耻。 
English: He met with the prime minister and declared his intention to make the prime minister the regent of the dynasty, to restore the old capital as soon as possible, to repair the mausoleum of the family temple, to the great shame of the snow country.

古文：三月，帝素服出次，举哀三日。
现代文：三月，元帝穿白衣到郊外举行三日哀悼。
English: In March, Emperor Yuan dressed in white and went to the suburbs to hold a three-day mourning.

古文：帝慨然流涕曰： 孤，罪人也，惟有蹈节死义，以雪天下之耻，庶赎鈇钺之诛。
现代文：西阳王司马羕以及群僚参佐、州牧守将等请求元帝加上尊号，元帝不许。司马羕等誓死再三请求，元帝流着泪感叹道： 我是一个罪人啊！只有蹈节义而死，以雪天下之耻，或可赎失职的斧钺之罪。
English: Sima Yu, the king of Xiyang, as well as his colleagues, the counselor and the state shepherd, requested the Yuan Emperor to add the honorific title, but the Yuan Emperor would not allow it. Sima Yu and others repeatedly requested under oath, and the Yuan Emperor sighed with tears: I am a sinner! I can only die for the sake of justice, with the shame of the world, or the sin of the axe, which can be redeemed.

古文：吾本琅邪王，诸贤见逼不已！ 
现代文：我本是琅王牙王，如诸位贤人逼迫不已！ 
English: I used to be the King of Fangs, as you sages persecute me relentlessly!

古文：乃呼私奴命驾，将反国。
现代文：于是随即呼唤私人奴仆安排车辆，准备返回封国。
English: So he immediately called his personal servant to arrange a vehicle and prepare to return to the closed country.

古文：群臣乃不敢逼，请依魏晋故事为晋王，许之。
现代文：群臣这才不敢再强逼，又请按魏晋的前例，尊元帝为晋王，元帝答应了。
English: The courtiers did not dare to force him to do so, and they asked him to follow the precedent of the Wei and Jin dynasties, in which Emperor Yuan was the king of Jin. Emperor Yuan agreed.

古文：辛卯，即王位，大赦，改元。
现代文：初九，即王位，实行大赦，改年号为建武。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, that is, the throne, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Jianwu.

古文：其杀祖父母、父母，及刘聪、石勒，不从此令。
现代文：那些杀祖父母、父母的人，以及刘聪、石勒不在大赦之列。
English: Those who killed their grandparents and parents, as well as Liu Cong and Shi Le, are not included in the amnesty.

古文：诸参军拜奉车都尉，掾属驸马都尉。辟掾属百余人，时人谓之 百六掾 。
现代文：原来帐下的参军拜为奉车都尉，掾属拜为驸马都尉，提拔掾属百余人，当时人们称之为 百六掾 。
English: Originally, the army under the account was called Fengche Duifeng, and the subordinate was called Longma Duifeng, and more than a hundred subordinates were promoted. At that time, people called it the hundred and six counties.

古文：乃备百官，立宗庙社稷于建康。
现代文：于是设置百官，在建康建立宗庙和社稷。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials were set up to establish a family temple and shrine in Jiankang.

古文：时四方竞上符瑞，帝曰： 孤负四海之责，未能思愆，何徵祥之有？ 
现代文：当时各地竞相献吉祥之物，报吉祥之兆，元帝说： 我肩负四海重任，未能自责思过，有什么吉祥征兆可言。 
English: At that time, various regions competed to offer auspicious objects and announce auspicious signs. Emperor Yuan said: I shoulder the heavy responsibility of the four seas, and I have not been able to reproach myself for thinking about any auspicious signs.

古文：丙辰，立世子绍为晋王太子。
现代文：四月初四，立世子司马绍为晋王太子。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, Sima Shao, the heir to the throne, became the crown prince of Jin.

古文：以抚军大将军、西阳王羕为太保，征南大将军、汉安侯王敦为大将军，右将军王导都督中外诸军事、骠骑将军，左长史刁协为尚书左仆射。
现代文：以抚军大将军、西阳王司马为太保，征南大将军、汉安侯王敦为大将军，右将军王导为都督中外诸军事、骠骑将军，左长史刁协为尚书左仆射。
English: The general of the Fuzhou army, Xiyang Wang Sima, was Tai Bao, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Han'an Hou Wang Dun was the general, the right general Wang Du was the military and cavalry general, and the left general Shi Xie was Shang Shuxi Zuo Shu.

古文：封王子宣城公裒琅邪王。
现代文：封儿子宣城公司马裒为琅王牙王。
English: The son of the Xuancheng Company, Ma Jun, became the king of the king of the king of the king.

古文：帝优令答之。语在琨传。
现代文：六月十五日，司空、并州刺史、广武侯刘琨，幽州刺史、左贤王、渤海公段匹石单，领护乌丸校尉、镇北将军刘翰，单于、广宁公段辰，辽西公段眷，冀州刺史、祝阿子邵续，青州刺史、广饶侯曹嶷，兖州刺史、定襄侯刘演，东夷校尉崔毖，鲜卑大都督慕容磒等一百八十人上书劝元帝即皇帝位。元帝下书答复诸将，鼓励安慰他们，文在《刘琨传》。
English: On June 15th, 180 people, including Siku, Bianzhou, Guangwu, Yuzhou, Zuoxian, Bihai, Wumaru, Zhenbei, Danyu, Guangning, West Liaoning, Jizhou, Zhuazi, Qingzhou, Guangrao, Zhengzhou, Dingxiang, Dongyi, and Xianbei, sent letters to Emperor Yuan to persuade him to become emperor. Emperor Yuan replied to the generals, encouraging and consoling them, and the letter was published in "The Biography of Liu Bei."

古文：石勒将石季龙围谯城，平西将军祖逖击走之。
现代文：石勒部将石季龙围攻谯城，被平西将军祖逖击退。
English: Shi Le Department besieged Shijilong and besieged Lucheng, and was repulsed by Pingxi General Zu Xi.

古文：己巳，帝傅檄天下曰： 逆贼石勒，肆虐河朔，逋诛历载，游魂纵逸。
现代文：十八日，元帝向天下传递檄文说： 逆贼石勒，在河朔一带大肆掳掠，经历年讨伐，已惊魂不定，窜逸远方。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Yuan passed down a message to the world, saying: "The traitor Shile, who has plundered and pillaged extensively in the area of Hexuo, has been fighting for years. He has lost his nerve and fled far away.

古文：复遣凶党石季龙犬羊之众，越河南渡，纵其鸩毒。
现代文：然又遣其凶党石季龙率犬羊之众，渡河南犯，肆意毒害百姓。
English: However, he also sent his thugs, Shi Jilong and his dogs and sheep, across the river to commit crimes and wantonly poison the people.

古文：平西将军祖逖帅众讨击，应时溃散。
现代文：平西将军祖逖率众讨伐，立即溃散。
English: Pinxi General Zu Xi led the crusade and immediately dispersed.

古文：今遣车骑将军，琅邪王裒等九军，锐卒三万，水陆四道，迳造贼场，受逖节度。
现代文：今派遣车骑将军、琅王牙王司马裒等九军，精锐之卒三万，水陆四路并进，直捣贼穴，受祖逖节度。
English: Now we are dispatching nine armies, including the General of Chariots and Cavalry, the King of Armor, the King of Teeth, and the King of Horses, with 30,000 elite soldiers, marching along the four roads of land and water, striking directly at the thief's hole, and receiving the ancestral command.

古文：有能枭季龙首者。赏绢三千匹，金五十斤，封县侯，食邑二千户。
现代文：有能斩石季龙之首者，赏绢三千匹，金五十斤，封县侯，食邑二千户。
English: Those who can cut off the head of the stone dragon will be rewarded with three thousand yakitori, fifty pounds of gold, the title of county magistrate, and two thousand households of food villages.

古文：又贼党能枭送季龙首，封赏亦同之。 
现代文：贼党如能斩石季龙首送来，封赏同前面一样。 
English: If the thieves can cut off the head of Shijilong and send it back, the reward will be the same as before.

古文：七月，散骑侍郎硃嵩、尚书郎顾球卒，帝痛之，将为举哀。有司奏，旧尚书郎不在举哀之例。
现代文：七月，散骑侍郎朱嵩、尚书郎顾球死，元帝很悲痛，打算为他们举行哀悼仪式，有司奏请说，按旧制尚书郎不在举哀的范围。
English: In July, Zhu Song and Shang Shulang Gu Gu died. The Yuan Emperor was very sad and planned to hold a mourning ceremony for them. A sitar player please say that according to the old system, Shang Shulang is not within the scope of mourning.

古文：帝曰： 衰乱之弊，特相痛悼。 
现代文：元帝说： 国家衰乱造成社会风气不良，要特地为他们哀悼。 
English: Yuan Di said: The decline of the country has caused a bad social atmosphere, and we should specially mourn for them.

古文：于是遂举哀，哭之甚恸。
现代文：于是为他们举行哀悼仪式，元帝哭得很悲痛。
English: As a result, a mourning ceremony was held for them, and Emperor Yuan cried bitterly.

古文：丁未，梁王悝薨。
现代文：二十七日，梁王司马悝死。
English: On the 27th, Liang Wang Simasong died.

古文：以太尉荀组为司徒。
现代文：以太尉荀组为司徒。
English: It is led by the Eighth Rank Second Rank Group.

古文：弛山泽之禁。
现代文：放松了百姓进入山林湖泽进行渔猎的禁令。
English: The ban on people entering the mountains, forests and lakes for hunting and fishing has been relaxed.

古文：八月甲午，封梁王世子翘为梁王。
现代文：八月十五日，封梁王的世子司马翘为梁王。
English: On August 15th, King Liang's heir, Sima Gao, became King Liang.

古文：荆州刺史第五猗为贼帅杜曾所推，遂与曾同反。
现代文：荆州刺史第五猗为贼军首领杜曾所推举，于是与杜曾一起反叛。
English: Jingzhou Zishi the Fifth was chosen by Du Zeng, the leader of the Kleptocracy, so he and Du Zeng rebelled together.

古文：九月戊寅，王敦使武昌太守赵诱、襄阳太守硃轨、陵江将军黄峻讨猗，为其将杜曾所败，诱等皆死之。
现代文：九月二十九日，王敦使武昌太守赵诱、襄阳太守朱轨、陵江将军黄峻讨伐第五猗，被第五猗的部将杜曾打败，赵诱等人都战死。
English: On September 29th, Wang Dun sent the Wuchang governor Zhao Yu, the Xiangyang governor Zhu Lei, and the Lingjiang general Huang Jun to fight in the fifth column. They were defeated by the commander of the fifth column, Du Zeng, and Zhao Yu and the others died in the battle.

古文：石勒害京兆太守华谞。
现代文：石勒杀害京兆太守华讠胥。
English: Shi Le's murder of Beijing Zhaotai governor Huayuan.

古文：梁州刺史周访讨杜曾，大破之。
现代文：梁州刺史周访讨伐并大破杜曾。
English: Liangzhou stabbed Zhou Qi and defeated Du Zeng.

古文：十月丁未，琅邪王裒薨。
现代文：十月二十九日，琅王牙王司马裒死。
English: On October 29th, Sima Xuan, the King of Zhou, died.

古文：十一月甲子，封汝南王子弼为新蔡王。
现代文：十一月十六日，封汝南王之子司马弼为新蔡王。
English: On November 16th, Sima Yi, the son of King Runan, was named the new King Cai.

古文：丁卯，以司空刘琨为太尉。
现代文：十九日，以司空刘琨为太尉。
English: On the 19th, Liu Wei, the first lieutenant, was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：置史官，立太学。
现代文：朝中设置史官，建立太学。
English: The dynasty set up historians and established the Imperial Academy.

古文：是岁，扬州大旱。
现代文：这年扬州大旱。
English: Yangzhou was hit by a severe drought this year.

古文：太兴元年春正月戊申朔，临朝，悬而不乐。
现代文：大兴元年正月初一，临朝会见群臣，悬挂乐器而不演奏。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Daxing, Lin Cha met with a group of ministers, hung musical instruments and did not play.

古文：三月癸丑，愍帝崩问至，帝斩缞居庐。
现代文：三月初七，愍帝死的消息传来，元帝穿孝服居庐舍守丧。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the news of the death of Emperor Zou came. Emperor Yuan was dressed in filial piety and stayed at the imperial villa to observe the funeral.

古文：丙辰，百僚上尊号。
现代文：初十，群臣请求加皇帝尊号。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the courtiers requested to add the title of emperor.

古文：令曰： 孤以不德，当厄运之极，臣节未立，匡救未举，夙夜所以忘寝食也。
现代文：元帝下令说： 我因没有高德，正逢国家危难达到极点，未为国家尽为臣之节，没有匡救国家的举动，这就是我日夜不安废寝忘食的原因。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed: "Because I have no virtue, I am at the peak of the national crisis, I have not done my best for the country, and I have not taken any action to save the country. This is the reason why I am restless day and night and forget to eat and sleep.

古文：今宗庙废绝，亿兆无系，群官庶尹，咸勉之以大政，亦何敢辞，辄敬从所执。 
现代文：当今宗庙废绝，亿万人民无所依托，百官臣僚都勉励我担负国家政治重任，我不敢推辞，这就听从大家的意见。 
English: Today, ancestral temples have been abolished, hundreds of millions of people have nothing to rely on, and hundreds of government officials and ministers have encouraged me to shoulder the heavy responsibility of national politics. I dare not refuse, so I will listen to everyone's opinions.

古文：是日，即皇帝位。
现代文：当天即皇帝位。
English: He became emperor the same day.

古文：诏曰： 昔我高祖宣皇帝，诞应期运，廓开王基。景、文皇帝，奕世重光，缉熙诸夏。
现代文：下诏说： 昔日我高祖宣皇帝顺应天命，开辟皇家基业，景皇帝、文皇帝累世光大祖业，和谐华夏。
English: The following edict said: In the past, my great-great-grandfather Emperor Xuan followed the will of heaven and opened up the royal foundation, and Emperor Jing and Emperor Wen have been the great-great-great-grandfathers, and China has been harmonious.

古文：爰暨世祖，应天顺时，受兹明命。功格天地，仁济宇宙。
现代文：到了世祖，应天顺时，受禅即位，功劳齐于天地，仁德广济宇宙。
English: When he became the ancestor of the world, he was enthroned by Zen at a time when the heavens were favorable. His merits are equal in heaven and earth, and his benevolence extends to the universe.

古文：昊天不融，降此鞠凶，怀帝短世，越去王都。
现代文：然而老天不明，降下灾祸，怀帝远离故都，早死于异域。
English: However, unknown to Heaven, a calamity fell, and Emperor Huai was far away from the old capital and died in a foreign land.

古文：天祸荐臻，大行皇帝崩殂，社稷无奉。
现代文：天祸又降，大行皇帝去世，社稷无人供奉。
English: A natural disaster struck again, Emperor Da Xing died, and the community had no one to worship.

古文：肆群后三司六事之人，畴咨庶尹，至于华戎，致葺大命于朕躬。
现代文：群后三司六事之人，咨询于官吏百姓，华夏戎狄，一致归大命于朕身。
English: The person who is in charge of the following three departments and six matters, consults with the officials and the people, and the Chinese military, and unanimously entrusts the great command to me.

古文：予一人畏天之威，用弗敢违。
现代文：我一人畏天之威，因而不敢有违。
English: I'm the only one who fears the power of heaven, so I don't dare to go against it.

古文：遂登坛南狱，受终文祖，焚柴颁瑞，告类上帝。
现代文：遂登坛南面，受命继先帝之业，焚柴祭天，颁布瑞历。
English: He then ascended to the south side of the altar and was ordered to follow in the footsteps of the previous emperor, burning wood and offering sacrifices to the heavens, and promulgating the lunar calendar.

古文：惟朕寡德，缵我洪绪，若涉大川，罔知攸济。
现代文：只是朕德望微薄，继承此大业，如面对渺茫大江，不知如何渡过。
English: It's just that I don't have much of a moral compass. If I were to inherit this great cause, I'd be facing a vast ocean, and I wouldn't know how to cross it.

古文：惟尔股肱爪牙之佐，文武熊罴之臣，用能弼宁晋室，辅余一人。
现代文：只有你们这些股肱爪牙之士，文武熊罴之臣，方能帮助安定晋室，辅佐我一人。
English: You are the only ones who can help stabilize Jin's household, and you are the only one who can assist me.

古文：思与万国，共同休庆。 
现代文：希望与万国共同享受太平盛世。 
English: We hope to enjoy a peaceful and prosperous world together with all nations.

古文：于是大赦，改元，文武增位二等。
现代文：于是实行大赦，改年号，文武官员增爵位二等。
English: As a result, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, and civil and military officials were given second-class titles.

古文：庚午，立王太子绍为皇太子。
现代文：二十四日，立王太子司马绍为皇太子。
English: On the 24th, Crown Prince Sima Shao was appointed Crown Prince.

古文：其有政绩可述，刑狱得中，人无怨讼，久而日新，及当官软弱，茹柔吐刚，行身秽浊，修饰时誉者，各以名闻。
现代文：二十六日，下诏说： 昔日之为政者，以行动而不是以言辞感召人，以事实而不是以文采顺应天命。所以我清静寡欲而人自正其身。
English: On the 26th, he issued the following edict: In the past, I was a statesman, inspiring people with actions rather than words, and obeying the will of heaven with facts rather than poetry. Therefore, I am calm and modest, and I am self-righteous.

古文：令在事之人，仰鉴前烈，同心戮力，深思所以宽众息役，惠益百姓，无废朕命。远近礼贽，一切断之。 
现代文：其次听其言而观其行，以办事功效考核一个人的优劣。那些政绩显著，刑狱公正，百姓无怨恨攻诘之言，在位虽久而勤谨如初的人，以及那些当官软弱，欺软怕硬，行为污浊，弄虚作假以博得时誉的人，各公布他们的名字，使在职官吏，仰鉴前代楷模，齐心协力，牢记为政要宽缓，减轻徭役，使百姓得到实惠，不要废弃朕的诏命。断绝一切送礼的行为。 
English: Secondly, listen to his words and observe his deeds, and judge the merits and demerits of a person by the effectiveness of his work. Those who have remarkable political achievements, the punishment of prison is fair, the people have no resentment of the word of attack, and those who have been in power for a long time and are diligent as before, as well as those who are weak officials, bully soft, fear hard, act dirty, and deceive to gain current reputation, each publish their names, so that the serving officials, learn from the previous model, make concerted efforts, keep in mind that the government should be lenient, reduce the punishment, so that the people can get real benefits, do not abandon

古文：夏四月丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日蚀。
English: Summer, first day of April, solar eclipse.

古文：加大将军王敦江州牧，进骠骑将军王导开府仪同三司。
现代文：给大将军王敦加上江州牧的官职。骠骑将军王导进为开府仪同三司。
English: General Wang Dong was given the official post of Jiangzhou herdsman, and General Wang Duanjin, the cavalry general, was appointed to the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：戊寅，初禁招魂葬。
现代文：初二，开始禁止招魂葬。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the ban on funeral rites began.

古文：乙酉，西平地震。
现代文：初九，西平地震。
English: Early September, Xiping earthquake.

古文：五月癸丑，使持节、侍中、都督、太尉、并州刺史、广武侯刘琨为段匹磾所害。
现代文：五月初八，使持节、侍中、都督、太尉、并州刺史、广武侯刘琨被段匹石单杀害。
English: On the 8th day of the 5th month of the year, the envoy Jichijijie, the chamberlain, the governor, the captain, the governor of the state, and the governor of Guangwu, Liu Yao, were killed by Duan Pi Shizhong.

古文：六月，旱，帝亲雩。
现代文：六月，天旱，元帝亲自祭祀求雨。
English: In June, when there was a drought, Emperor Yuan personally performed a ritual to pray for rain.

古文：改丹阳内史为丹阳尹。
现代文：改丹杨内史为丹杨尹。
English: Change Danyang Inner History to Danyang Yin.

古文：甲申，以尚书左仆射刁协为尚书令，平南将军、曲陵公荀崧为尚书左仆射。
现代文：初九，以尚书左仆射刁协为尚书令，平南将军、曲陵公荀崧为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Shang Shuxu Zuo Minxiao Xie was appointed as Shang Shuling, and General Pingnan and Qu Ling Gongjun were appointed as Shang Shuling Zuo Minxiao.

古文：庚寅，以荥阳太守李矩为都督司州诸军事、司州刺史。
现代文：十五日，以荥阳太守李矩为都督司州诸军事、司州刺史。
English: On the 15th, Li Jian, the governor of Shenyang, was appointed as the military governor of Shizhou and the governor of Shizhou.

古文：戊戌，封皇子晞为武陵王。
现代文：二十三日，封皇子司马晞为武陵王。
English: On the 23rd, the crown prince Sima Yu was enthroned as King of Wuling.

古文：初置谏鼓谤木。
现代文：开始设置谏鼓和谤木。
English: Start setting up the gongs and drums.

古文：秋七月戊申，诏曰： 王室多故，奸凶肆暴，皇纲驰坠，颠覆大猷。朕以不德，统承洪绪，夙夜忧危，思改其弊。
现代文：秋七月初四，下诏说： 王室灾祸频繁，奸凶肆意暴虐，纲纪毁废，大道不行，朕以薄德之人，继承大业，日夜忧惧，欲革除其弊。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the next imperial edict said: The royal family is plagued by frequent disasters, the traitors are wantonly violent, the system of discipline is destroyed, and the road is not good. I am a person of poor virtue, inheriting a great cause, and I am worried day and night, and I want to eliminate its drawbacks.

古文：二千石令长当祗奉旧宪，正身明法，抑齐豪强，存恤孤独，隐实户口，劝课农桑。
现代文：郡守县令等地方官员，应奉行旧制，正身洁己，严明执法，抑制豪强，爱恤孤独，核实户口，劝勉督促农桑之事。
English: Local officials such as county governors and county magistrates should adhere to the old system, be upright and clean themselves, strictly enforce the law, restrain the brave and strong, love loneliness, verify the household registration, and encourage and urge the farmers.

古文：州牧刺史当互相检察，不得顾私亏公。长吏有志在奉公而不见进用者，有贪惏秽浊而以财势自安者，若有不举，当受故纵蔽善之罪，有而不知，当受暗塞之责。
现代文：州牧刺史应当互相检查，不得顾私损公，郡县长吏中有一心为公而不被提拔重用者，有为官贪婪行为污秽却因有财势安然无事者，如不推荐举报，则应受故意放纵恶人和掩蔽善人之罪，有上述情况而不知道，则应负昏暗不明之责。
English: The pastoral histories of the states should be checked against each other, and they should not be concerned with private losses and losses to the public. Among the county and prefectural officials, those who have a desire to serve the public and are not promoted and reused, those who are greedy and filthy but are safe and sound because of their financial situation, if they do not recommend reporting, they should be guilty of deliberately indulging the wicked and covering up the good, and if they do not know the above situation, they should be responsible for obscurity and obscurity.

古文：各明慎奉行。 
现代文：各官须明确审慎奉行此诏令。 
English: All officials shall strictly and prudently implement this edict.

古文：刘聪死，其子粲嗣伪位。
现代文：刘聪死，其子刘粲继伪皇帝位。
English: Liu Cong died, and his son Liu Ye succeeded him as pseudo-emperor.

古文：八月，冀、徐、青三州蝗。
现代文：八月，冀、徐、青三州发生蝗灾。
English: In August, locust plagues occurred in the three prefectures of Hebei, Xu and Qing.

古文：靳准弑刘粲，自号汉王。
现代文：靳准杀刘粲，自称汉王。
English: He was determined to kill Liu Bei and called himself the King of Han.

古文：冬十月癸未，加广州刺史陶侃平南将军。
现代文：冬十月初十，广州刺史陶侃加平南将军衔。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10

古文：刘曜僭即皇帝位于赤壁。
现代文：刘曜在赤壁僭即皇帝位。
English: Liu You was enthroned as emperor in Chibi.

古文：十一月乙卯，日夜出，高三丈，中有赤青珥。
现代文：十一月十三日，夜间日出，离地面三丈，日中有赤青色光晕。
English: On the 13th of November, at night, the sunrise was three meters above the ground, and there was a reddish-blue halo during the day.

古文：新蔡王弼薨。
现代文：新蔡王司马弼死。
English: The new Tsai Wang Simasong died.

古文：加大将军王敦荆州牧。
现代文：大将军王敦加荆州牧的职务。
English: General Wang Dongjia took over the post of Jingzhou's herdsman.

古文：庚申，诏曰： 朕以寡德，纂承洪绪，上不能调和阴阳，下不能济育群生，灾异屡兴，咎徵仍见。
现代文：十八日，下诏说： 朕以薄德之人，继承天下大业，上不能调和阴阳气候，下不能养育百姓，灾异现象频繁发生，不祥之兆多次出现。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the following edict was issued: "I am a man of poor virtue, inheriting the world's great cause, unable to reconcile the yin and yang climate, unable to nurture the people, frequent disasters, and ominous signs have appeared many times.

古文：壬子、乙卯，雷震暴雨，盖天灾谴戒，所以彰朕之不德也。
现代文：本月初十、十三，发生雷震和暴雨，这大概是上天以灾异进行谴责，用来显示朕的无德。
English: On the 10th and 13th of this month, thunderstorms and torrential rains occurred, which was probably condemned by heaven as a disaster, used to show my lack of virtue.

古文：群公卿士，其各上封事，具陈得失，无有所讳，将亲览焉。 
现代文：群公卿士，可各自秘密奏事，详细陈述政事得失，不要有所避讳，我将亲自阅读。 
English: Noble lords and ladies, each of you can make a confidential report, detailing the political gains and losses. Don't be shy, I will read it myself.

古文：新作听讼观。
现代文：新建了听讼观。
English: A new concept of hearing cases has been established.

古文：故归命侯孙皓子璠谋反，伏诛。
现代文：故归命侯孙皓之子孙璠谋反，被处死。
English: Therefore, it was ordered that Sun Yat-sen's son, Sun Yat-sen, plot a rebellion, and he was executed.

古文：十二月，刘聪故将王腾、马忠等诛靳准，送传国玺于刘曜。
现代文：十二月，刘聪故将王腾、马忠等杀靳准，将传国玺送给刘曜。
English: In December, Liu Cong killed Wang Teng, Ma Zhong and others, and sent the imperial edict to Liu You.

古文：武昌地震。
现代文：武昌地震。
English: Wuchang earthquake.

古文：丁丑，封显义亭侯焕为琅邪王。
现代文：初五，封显义亭侯司马焕为琅王牙王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the official seal of the Prince of Yijing, Hossima Hwan, was issued as the King of the Dragon King.

古文：己卯，琅邪王焕薨。
现代文：初七，琅笽王司马焕死。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, King Sima Huan died.

古文：癸巳，诏曰： 汉高经大梁，美无忌之贤；齐师入鲁，修柳下惠之墓。
现代文：二十一日，下诏说： 汉高祖经过大梁，赞扬信陵君之贤；齐军进入鲁国，修柳下惠之墓。
English: On the twenty-first day, the following edict was issued: Han Gaozhu passed the beam and praised the virtues of Xinlingjun; Qi troops entered Lu and repaired the tomb of Liu Shimo Hui.

古文：其吴之高德名贤或未旌录者，具条列以闻。 
现代文：吴地那些高德之士著名贤者有未被表彰录用者，都列出名单上报。 
English: In Wudi, those people of high moral character, famous sages, and those who have not been awarded, are all listed and reported.

古文：江东三郡饥，遣使振给之。
现代文：江东三郡发生饥荒，派遣使者救济灾民。
English: A famine occurred in three counties in the eastern part of the Yangtze River, and envoys were sent to help the victims.

古文：彭城内史周抚杀沛国内史周默以反。
现代文：彭城内史周抚杀了沛国内史周默造。
English: Pengcheng's local historian Zhou Fuzhi killed the national historian Zhou Mazuo.

古文：二年春正月丁卯，崇阳陵毁，帝素服哭三日；使冠军将军梁堪、守太常马龟等修复山陵。
现代文：二年春正月二十六日，崇阳陵崩塌，元帝穿白服哭了三天，使冠军将军梁堪、守太常马龟等修复陵墓。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the second year of Spring, the Chongyang Mausoleum collapsed, and Emperor Yuan, wearing a white robe, cried for three days, so that the champion general Liang Kan and the governor Taizang Ma Jie repaired the mausoleum.

古文：迎梓宫于平阳，不克而还。
现代文：派人到平阳迎接怀愍二帝的灵柩，受阻而还。
English: He sent people to Pingyang to welcome the coffin of Emperor Huai Rong II, but they were blocked and turned back.

古文：二月，太山太守徐龛斩周抚，传首京师。
现代文：二月，太山太守徐龛斩叛臣周抚，首级传到京师。
English: In February, the governor of Taishan, Xu Xi, beheaded the traitor Zhou Fu, and his head was sent to the capital.

古文：夏四月，龙骧将军陈川以浚仪叛。降于石勒。
现代文：夏四月，龙骧将军陈川占据浚仪反叛，投降石勒。
English: In the summer of April, Longyu's general Chen Chuan rebelled by seizing the dredge and surrendered to Shile.

古文：太山太守徐龛以郡叛，自号兗州刺史，寇济岱。
现代文：太山太守徐龛据本郡反叛，自称兖州刺史，侵扰济岱。
English: The governor of Taishan, Xu Ying, rebelled against the county and claimed to be the governor of Zhangzhou, invading Jizhou.

古文：秦州刺史陈安叛，降于刘曜。
现代文：秦州刺史陈安反叛，投降刘曜。
English: Qin Zhou assassinated Chen An, a rebel, and surrendered to Liu You.

古文：五月癸丑，太阳陵毁，帝素服哭三日。
现代文：五月十三日，太阳陵崩毁，元帝穿白服哭三日。
English: On May 13, the Sun Mausoleum collapsed, and Emperor Yuan wore a white robe and cried for three days.

古文：徐杨及江西诸郡蝗。
现代文：徐杨及江西诸郡发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in Xuyang and counties in Jiangxi.

古文：吴郡大饥。
现代文：吴郡发生大饥荒。
English: Wuxi County suffered from severe famine.

古文：平北将军祖逖及石勒将石季龙战于浚仪，王师败绩。
现代文：平北将军祖逖在浚仪与石勒部将石季龙交战，祖逖大败。
English: Zhu Xi, the general of Pingbei, fought against Shi Jilong, the general of Shi Le, in the battle of Dongyi. Zhu Xi was soundly defeated.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 天下凋弊，加以灾荒，百姓困穷，国用并匮，吴郡饥人死者百数。
现代文：二十二日，下诏说： 天下衰敝，灾荒又生，百姓贫困，国用匮乏，吴郡饥民饿死者以百数。
English: On the 22nd, the next edict said: The world is in decline, disaster and famine have arisen again, the people are poor, the country is in need, and hundreds of people in Wuxi County have died of starvation.

古文：天生蒸黎而树之以君，选建明哲以左右之，当深思以救其弊。
现代文：天生黎民又为他们设置君长，选拔明哲之人为左右辅臣，应当深思以救百姓之急。
English: Li Min by nature and set up princes for them, and select sages as right and left assistants, should think deeply to save the people's urgent needs.

古文：昔吴起为楚悼王明法审令，捐不急之官，除废公族疏远，以附益将士，而国富兵强。
现代文：昔日吴起为楚悼王审订法令，减裁不急需的官吏，废除疏远的公族，以增加将士的待遇，因而国富兵强。
English: In the old days, Wuqi reviewed the decrees for the Chu Miao King, reduced the number of officials who were not urgently needed, abolished the alienated public families, and increased the treatment of soldiers, so that the country was rich and strong.

古文：况今日之弊，百姓凋困邪！
现代文：何况国家有今日之衰敝，百姓又是如此贫困呢！
English: What's more, the country is in its current state of decay, and the people are so poor!

古文：且当去非急之务，非军事所须者皆省之。 
现代文：应当舍弃非急需的事务，不是军队所需要者都省去。 
English: Non-urgent matters should be discarded, and those that are not needed by the army should be omitted.

古文：甲子，梁州刺史访及杜曾战于武当，斩之，禽第五猗。
现代文：二十三日，梁州刺史周访在武当与杜曾交战，杀了杜曾，活捉第五猗。
English: On the 23rd, Liangzhou assassin Zhou Wei fought with Du Zeng in Wudang, killed Du Zeng, and captured the fifth cormorant.

古文：六月丙子，加周访安南将军。罢御府及诸郡丞，置博士员五人。
现代文：六月初七，周访加安南将军职衔，撤销御府及诸郡丞，设置博士员五人。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, Zhou Zigu Jiannan was promoted to the rank of general, the imperial government and county magistrates were revoked, and five doctoral candidates were set up.

古文：己亥，加太常贺循开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十八日，加给太常贺循开府仪同三司的头衔。
English: On the 28th, he was given the title of Taizhang He Xun Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：秋七月乙丑，太常贺循卒。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，太赏贺循死。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Taoyuan He Xun died.

古文：八月，肃慎献楛矢石砮。
现代文：八月，肃慎国来献木苦矢石弩。
English: In August, Shushan Province came to offer wood and stone arrowheads.

古文：徐龛寇东莞，遣太子左卫率羊鉴行征虏将军，统徐州刺史蔡豹讨之。
现代文：徐龛掳掠东莞，元帝派遣太子左卫率羊鉴兼征虏将军，统领徐州刺史蔡豹讨伐徐龛。
English: Xu Bei captured Dongguan, and the Yuan Emperor dispatched Prince Zuo Wei, led by Yang Jian, who was also a conscript general, to lead the Xuzhou Jishi Cai Leopard to fight against Xu Bei.

古文：冬十月，平北将军祖逖使督护陈超袭石勒将桃豹，超败，没于阵。
现代文：冬十月，平北将军祖逖使督护陈超袭击石勒部将桃豹，陈超兵败，死在战场。
English: In the winter of October, the Pingbei general Zu Xi sent the overseer Chen Chao to attack the Shilai general Taobao. Chen Chao was defeated and died on the battlefield.

古文：十一月戊寅，石勒僭即王位，国号赵。
现代文：十一月戊寅，石勒僭号称王，国号赵。
English: In November, Wu Yin, Shilou, became king, and the country's name was Zhao.

古文：十二月乙亥，大赦，诏百官各上封事，并省众役。
现代文：十二月初九，实行大赦，下诏让百官各秘密奏事，免去百姓各种徭役。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, a general amnesty was implemented, and it was decreed that all officials should report all secret matters, and the people should be exempted from all kinds of forced labor.

古文：鲜卑慕容廆袭辽东，东夷校尉、平州刺史崔毖奔高句骊。
现代文：鲜卑慕容磒袭击辽东，东夷校尉、平州刺史崔毖投奔高句骊。
English: Xianbei Murongqi attacked Liaodong, while Dongyi Captain and Pingzhou Zhi Shi Cuiqi went to Gaojunqi.

古文：是岁，南阳王保称晋王于祁山。三吴大饥。
现代文：这一年，南阳王司马保在祁山称晋王。三吴发生大饥荒。
English: In this year, Nanyang King Sima Bao was known as the King of Jin in Lushan. A great famine occurred in Sanwu.

古文：三年春正月丁酉朔，晋王保为刘曜所逼，迁于桑城。
现代文：三年春正月初一，晋王司马保为刘曜逼迫迁到桑城。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, Jin Wang Sima Bao forced Liu You to move to Kuangcheng.

古文：二月辛未，石勒将石季龙寇厌次，平北将军、冀州刺史邵续击之，续败，没于阵。
现代文：二月初六，石勒部将石季龙侵扰冒犬次，平北将军、冀州刺史邵续攻击石季龙，被石季龙打败，死于战场。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the year, Shi Le Department sent Shi Jilong to invade the dogs. General Pingbei and Jizhou Jishi Shao continued to attack Shi Jilong. They were defeated by Shi Jilong and died on the battlefield.

古文：三月，慕容廆奉送玉玺三纽。
现代文：三月慕容磒送来玉玺三枚。
English: In March, Murong Yao sent three jade necklaces.

古文：闰月，以尚书周顗为尚书仆射。
现代文：闰月，以尚书周岂页为尚书仆射。
English: Leap month, to Shangshu Zhou Huan page for Shangshu minions shot.

古文：夏四月壬辰，枉矢流于翼轸。
现代文：夏四月壬辰，枉矢星从翼轸星间流过。
English: In the summer, in April, in the morning, the stars flow between the stars.

古文：五月丙寅，孝怀帝太子诠遇害于平阳，帝三日哭。
现代文：五月初三孝怀帝太子司马诠在平阳被害，元帝哭吊三日。
English: At the beginning of May, Prince Sima Yi, the son of Emperor San Xiao Huai, was killed in Pingyang. Emperor Yuan cried for three days.

古文：庚寅，地震。
现代文：二十七日，地震。
English: On the 27th, an earthquake.

古文：是月，晋王保为其将张春所害。
现代文：这个月，晋王司马保被其部将张春杀害。
English: This month, Jin King Sima Bao was killed by his general Zhang Chun.

古文：刘曜使陈安攻春，灭之，安因叛曜。
现代文：刘曜使陈安攻击张春，并把张春消灭，陈安却乘机背叛刘曜。
English: Liu You ordered Chen An to attack Zhang Chun and annihilate him, but Chen An took the opportunity to betray Liu You.

古文：石勒将徐龛帅众来降。
现代文：石勒部将徐龛率众来投降。
English: Shi Le's division sent Xu Jun to lead the crowd to surrender.

古文：六月，大水。
现代文：六月，发大水。
English: In June, there is a lot of rain.

古文：丁酉，盗杀西中郎将、护羌校尉、凉州刺史、西平公张寔，寔弟茂嗣，领平西将军、凉州刺史。
现代文：初四，西中郎将、护羌校尉、凉州刺史、平西公张实被盗贼杀害，张实之弟张茂嗣位，任平西将军、凉州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, thieves killed Nishi no Nakachiro no shosho, Fusuma no shosho, Ryōshū no sashimi, and Hiraishi no kimi Zhangshi. Zhangshi's younger brother Zhang Shige succeeded him as Hiraishi no shosho and Ryōshū no sashimi.

古文：秋七月丁亥，诏曰： 先公武王、先考恭王临君琅邪四十余年，惠泽加于百姓，遗爱结于人情。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，元帝下诏说： 先公武王，先父恭王在琅王牙为君四十多年，恩惠加于百姓，仁爱之德存于人心。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of autumn, Emperor Yuan issued an edict saying, "Former Prince Wu and his father King Gong have reigned for more than forty years in Shandong Province. They have bestowed favor on the people, and the virtue of benevolence exists in the hearts of the people.

古文：朕应天符，创基江表，兆庶宅心，襁负子来。
现代文：朕应天命，创业于江南，万民归心，扶老携幼而来。
English: In accordance with my destiny, I will start a business in the south of the Yangtze River. All people will return to their hearts, and the elderly will be helped to bring their children with them.

古文：琅邪国人在此者近有千户，今立为怀德县，统丹阳郡。
现代文：琅王牙国人在江南者近千户，现将这些人集聚的地方设立一个怀德县，属丹阳郡。
English: There are nearly a thousand households in the south of the Yangtze River who are citizens of the Kingdom of Tonga. Now, the place where these people gather will be set up as a Huai De County, which belongs to Danyang County.

古文：昔汉高祖以沛为汤沐邑，光武亦复南顿，优复之科一依汉氏故事。 
现代文：昔日汉高祖以故乡沛为汤沐邑，光武帝也免除南顿的赋税徭役，对怀德县的优待豁免办法按照汉朝的例子。 
English: In the past, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty Gao used his hometown Pae for Tang Muyun, and Emperor Guangwu also exempted Nantong from paying taxes. The preferential treatment and exemption measures for Huai De County followed the example of the Han Dynasty.

古文：祖逖部将卫策大破石勒别军于汴水。加逖为镇西将军。
现代文：祖逖部将卫策在汴水大破石勒别军，祖逖加镇西将军衔。
English: Zu Xibe defeated the Shilebei army at the Battle of Surabaya, and Zu Xibe rose to the rank of general in the west of the town.

古文：八月戊午，尊敬王后虞氏为敬皇后。
现代文：八月二十六日，敬王后虞氏被尊为敬皇后。
English: On August 26th, the Queen Mother was honored as the Queen Mother.

古文：辛酉，迁神主于太庙。
现代文：二十九日，将神主迁入太庙。
English: On the 29th, the deity was moved to the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛未，梁州刺史、安南将军周访卒。
现代文：辛未，梁州刺史、安南将军周访死。
English: Xin Wei, Liang Zhou Zhishi, Annan General Zhou Qizong died.

古文：皇太子释奠于太学。
现代文：皇太子在太学祭奠先师孔子。
English: The Crown Prince pays tribute to his mentor Confucius at the Taigaku Festival.

古文：以湘州刺史甘卓为安南将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：以湘州刺史甘卓为安南将军、梁州刺史。
English: General Annan and the history of Liangzhou are depicted by the Xiangzhou sculptor Gan Zhuo.

古文：九月，徐龛又叛，降于石勒。
现代文：九月，徐龛又叛变，投降石勒。
English: In September, Xu Xi rebelled again and surrendered to Shile.

古文：冬十月丙辰，徐州刺史蔡豹以畏懦伏诛。
现代文：冬十月二十五日，徐州刺史蔡豹因畏缩不前被处死。
English: On the 25th day of winter in October, Cai Pan, the Xuzhou assassin, was put to death for not moving forward.

古文：王敦杀武陵内史向硕。
现代文：王敦杀了武陵内史向硕。
English: Wang Dun killed Wuling Naishi Xiang Shuo.

古文：四年春二月，徐龛又帅众来降。
现代文：四年春二月，徐龛又率众来投降。
English: In the spring and February of the fourth year, Xu Xi again led the crowd to surrender.

古文：鲜卑末波奉送皇帝信玺。
现代文：鲜卑末波奉送皇帝信玺。
English: Xianbei Mubo presented the imperial letter to the emperor.

古文：庚戌，告于太庙，乃受之。
现代文：二十一日，在太庙告祭先帝，接受印玺。
English: On the twenty-first day, he offered a sacrifice to the former emperor in the Great Temple and accepted the seal.

古文：癸亥，日斗。
现代文：癸亥，两日相斗。
English: Two boars, two days of fighting.

古文：三月，置周易、仪礼、公羊博士。
现代文：三月，设置《周易》、《仪礼》、《公羊》博士。
English: In March, "Zhou Yi," "Ritual," and "Ram" were set up.

古文：癸酉，以平东将军曹嶷为安东将军。
现代文：十四日，以平东将军曹嶷为安东将军。
English: On the 14th, the general of Pingdong, Cao Pi, became the general of Andong.

古文：夏四月辛亥，帝亲览庶狱。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，元帝亲自查阅百姓狱讼。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Yuan personally inspected the people's prison proceedings.

古文：石勒攻厌次，陷之。
现代文：石勒进攻并占据冒犬次。
English: Shearer attacks and occupies the byline.

古文：抚军将军、幽州刺史段匹磾没于勒。
现代文：抚军将军、幽州刺史段匹石单，死于石勒军中。
English: The general of the Fuzhu army, Yuzhou Zhan Shi Duan Pishi Shan, died in the army of Shi Le.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，天旱。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：庚申，诏曰： 昔汉二祖及魏武皆免良人，武帝时，凉州覆败，诸为奴婢亦皆复籍，此累代成规也。
现代文：初二，下诏说： 昔日汉高祖、光武帝和魏武帝都曾免除良人为奴婢者，我朝武帝时，占据凉州的异族统治者败亡，那些作奴婢的人也都恢复原籍，可见这是历代的成规。
English: On the second day of the first month, the next imperial edict said: In the past, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Guangwu and Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty had all exempted their loved ones from being slaves and servants. When I was Emperor Wu, the foreign rulers who occupied Liangzhou were defeated, and those who were slaves and servants also returned to their original countries. It can be seen that this is the rule of all ages.

古文：其免中州良人遭难为扬州诸郡僮客者，以备征役。 
现代文：现在有中州平民因遭难在扬州诸郡做僮客者，可恢复其平民身份，以备国家征战徭役之用。 
English: At present, the civilians from Zhongzhou who have been forced to work as porters in the counties of Yangzhou due to hardships can restore their civilian status to prepare for the national conscription for military service.

古文：秋七月，大水。
现代文：秋七月，发大水。
English: In autumn and July, there is a lot of rain.

古文：甲戌，以尚书戴若思为征西将军、都督司兗豫并冀雍六州诸军事、司州刺史，镇合肥；丹阳尹刘隗为镇北将军、都督青徐幽平四州诸军事、青州刺史，镇淮阴。
现代文：十七日，以尚书戴若思为征西将军、都督司兖豫并冀雍六州诸军事、司州刺史，镇守合肥；丹杨尹刘隗为镇北将军、都督青、徐、幽、平四州诸军事、青州刺史，镇守淮阴。
English: On the 17th, Shangshu Dai Raushi was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition,

古文：壬千，以骠骑将军王导为司空。
现代文：二十五日，以骠骑将军王导为司空。
English: On the 25th, Wang Du, the general of the cavalry, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：八月，常山崩。
现代文：八月，常山崩塌。
English: In August, Mount Cho collapsed.

古文：九月壬寅，镇西将军、豫州刺史祖逖卒。
现代文：九月壬寅，镇西将军、豫州刺史祖逖死。
English: In September, Renin, Zhenxi General, and Yuzhou assassin Zhu Xi all died.

古文：冬十月壬午，以逖弟侍中约为平西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：冬十月壬午，以祖逖之弟侍中祖约为平西将军、豫州刺史。
English: In the winter of October, in the morning, Zhu Xi's younger brother Zhu Yao served as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：十二月，以慕容廆为持节、都督幽平二州东夷诸军事、平州牧，封辽东郡公。
现代文：十二月，以慕容磒为持节、都督幽平二州东夷诸军事、平州牧，封辽东郡公。
English: In December, with Murongwu as the festival, the governor of Yuping and the two states of Dongyi were transferred to the military, Pingzhou Maki, and Liaodong County.

古文：永昌元年正月乙卯，大赦，改元。
现代文：永昌元年春正月初一，大赦，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongchang, the amnesty and the change of the year began.

古文：戊辰，大将军王敦举兵于武昌，以诛刘隗为名，龙骧将军沈充帅众应之。
现代文：十四日，大将军王敦以诛刘隗为名在武昌举兵，龙骧将军沈充率兵响应王敦。
English: On the 14th, the great general Wang Dun raised an army in Wuchang in the name of  Liu, and the general Long Yu Shen Cong led an army in response to Wang Dun.

古文：三月，徵征西将军戴若思、镇北将军刘隗还卫京都。
现代文：三月，召征西将军戴若思、镇北将军刘隗回京师护卫。
English: In March, Western General Dai Rausi and Northern General Liu Ye were summoned to escort the division back to Beijing.

古文：以司空王导为前锋大都督，以戴若思为骠骑将军，丹阳诸郡皆加军号。
现代文：以司空王导为前锋大都督，以戴若思为骠骑将军，丹杨诸郡郡守都加军衔。
English: With Siku Wangdu as the vanguard grand governor, Dai Rausi as the cavalry general, and Danyang as the county governor and military rank.

古文：加仆射周顗尚书左仆射，领军王邃尚书右仆射。
现代文：尚书周岂页加尚书左仆射，领军王邃加尚书右仆射。
English: Shangshu Zhou added Shangshu's left footman Zhao, and the leader Wang Yao added Shangshu's right footman Zhao.

古文：以太子右卫率周筵行冠军将军，统兵三千讨沈充。
现代文：以太子右卫率周艹延执行冠军将军事，率兵三千讨伐沈充。
English: Zhou Jianyan, the prince's right guard, became the champion of the military and led three thousand soldiers to attack Shenchong.

古文：甲午，封皇子昱为琅邪王。
现代文：甲午，封皇子司马昱为琅王牙王。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the crown prince Sima Yu was crowned the King of the Dragon King.

古文：刘隗军于金城，右将军周札守石头，帝亲被甲徇六师于郊外。
现代文：刘隗驻军于金城，右将军周札守石头城，元帝亲自披甲在郊外巡视六军。
English: Liu Bei stationed troops in Jincheng, the Right General Zhou Fuda guarded Stone City, and the Yuan Emperor personally put on armor to patrol the six armies in the suburbs.

古文：遣平南将军陶侃领江州，安南将军甘卓领荆州，各帅所统以蹑敦后。
现代文：派遣平南将军陶侃兼管江州，安南将军甘卓兼管荆州，各率所属军队从后面牵制王敦。
English: Send Pingnan General Tao Kan to be in charge of Jiangzhou and Annan General Gan Zhuo to be in charge of Jingzhou, and the troops belonging to each army to restrain Wang Dun from behind.

古文：四月，敦前锋攻石头，周札开城门应之，奋威将军侯礼死之。
现代文：四月，王敦前锋进石头城，周札开城门接应王敦军，奋威将军侯礼战死。
English: In April, Wang Dun's vanguard entered Stone City, Zhou Fuda opened the city gate to receive Wang Dun's army, and General Fenwei Houli died in battle.

古文：敦据石头，戴若思、刘隗帅众攻之，王导、周顗、郭逸、虞潭等三道出战，六军败绩。
现代文：王敦占据石头城，戴若思、刘隗率军攻石头城，王导、周岂页、郭逸、虞潭等三路出击，王师大败。
English: Wang Dun occupied Stone Town, Dai Rausi and Liu Ye led the army to attack Stone Town, and Wang Du, Zhou Qizhe, Guo Yiyi, Yu Tan and others launched a three-way attack. Wang Shi was defeated.

古文：尚书令刁协奔于江乘，为贼所害。
现代文：尚书令刁协逃到江乘，被贼军杀害。
English: Shang Shuling fled to the Yangtze River and was killed by the bandits.

古文：镇北将军刘隗奔于石勒。
现代文：镇北将军刘隗投奔石勒。
English: Zhenbei's general Liu Bei went to Benxi.

古文：帝遣使谓敦曰： 公若不忘本朝，于此息兵，则天下尚可共安也。
现代文：元帝派遣使者对王敦说： 公若还不忘晋朝，从此息兵，我们可以共同安定天下。
English: Emperor Yuan sent an envoy to Wang Dun saying, "If you don't forget the Jin Dynasty, then stop fighting and we can work together to stabilize the world."

古文：如其不然，朕当归于琅邪，以避贤路。 
现代文：如不能这样，朕将回到原来的封地琅王牙，以为贤者让路。 
English: If this is not possible, I will return to my original fiefdom and bite the king's teeth to make way for the wise men.

古文：辛未，大赦。
现代文：辛未，实行大赦。
English: Xinwei, the implementation of the amnesty.

古文：敦乃自为丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，封武昌郡公，邑万户。
现代文：王敦自己任命自己为丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，封武昌郡公，食邑万户。
English: Wang Dun self-appointed himself as chancellor, governor of the armies at home and abroad, recorded the records, was appointed governor of Wuchang County, and catered to tens of thousands of households.

古文：丙子，骠骑将军、秣陵侯戴若思，尚书左仆射、护军将军、武城侯周顗为敦所害。
现代文：丙子，骠骑将军、秣陵侯戴若思，尚书左仆射、护军将军、武城侯周岂页被王敦杀害。
English: Cun Zi, the general of the cavalry, the lord of Fuling, Dai Rocsi, the left-handed archer of Shangshu, the general of the escort, and the lord of Wucheng, Zhou Xizhe, were killed by Wang Dun.

古文：敦将沈充陷吴国，魏乂陷湘州，吴国内史张茂，湘州刺史、谯王承并遇害。
现代文：王敦将领沈充攻陷吴国，魏磖攻陷湘州，吴国内史张茂，湘州刺史、谯王司马承一起被杀。
English: Wang Dun's general Shen Chong invaded and conquered Wu, Wei Wei invaded and conquered Hunan, Wuzhong Jinshi Zhang Mao, Hunan Jinshi, and Wei Wang Sima Cheng were killed together.

古文：五月壬申，敦以太保、西阳王羕为太宰，加司空王导尚书令。
现代文：五月二十日，王敦以太保、西阳王司马为太宰，司空王导加尚书令职。
English: On May 20th, Wang Dun of Tai Po and Wang Sima of Xiyang were promoted to Dazai, and Siku Wangdu was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：乙亥，镇南大将军甘卓为襄阳太守周虑所害。
现代文：二十三日，镇南大将军甘卓被襄阳太守周虑杀害。
English: On the 23rd, Zhenan Grand General Gan Zhuo was killed by Xiangyang Governor Zhou Xian.

古文：蜀贼张龙寇巴东，建平太守柳纯击走之。
现代文：蜀地贼寇张龙侵扰巴东，建平太守柳纯将他赶走。
English: The Shu bandit Zhang Long invaded Badong, and the Jianping governor Liu Chun drove him away.

古文：石勒遣骑寇河南。
现代文：石勒派遣骑兵侵扰河南。
English: Shiller sent cavalry to invade Henan.

古文：六月，旱。
现代文：六月，天旱。
English: In June, there was a drought.

古文：秋七月，王敦自加兗州刺史郗鉴为安北将军。
现代文：秋七月，王敦给兖州刺史郗鉴加上安北将军职衔。
English: In the autumn of July, Wang Dun gave the title of Anbei General to Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Xuan.

古文：石勒将石季龙攻陷太山，执守将徐龛。
现代文：石勒部将石季龙攻陷太山，捉住守将徐龛。
English: Shi Le took Shi Jilong and captured Taishan, and captured the garrison commander Xu Yao.

古文：兗州刺史郗鉴自邹山退守合肥。
现代文：兖州刺史郗鉴从邹山退到合肥镇守。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi Shijian retreated from Shaoshan to Hefei Town.

古文：八月，敦以其见含为卫将军，自领宁、益二州都督。
现代文：八月，王敦以其兄王含为卫将军，自己领宁、益二州都督。
English: In August, Wang Dun appointed his brother Wang Han as the general of Wei, and himself as the governor of Liaoning and Yixing Provinces.

古文：琅邪太守孙默叛，降于石勒。
现代文：琅王牙太守孙默反叛，投降石勒。
English: The warlord Sun Mo rebelled and surrendered to Shile.

古文：冬十月，大疫，死者十二三。
现代文：冬十月，发生大瘟疫，病死者十之二三。
English: In the winter of October, a great plague broke out, and the number of people who died from the disease rose from two to three.

古文：己丑，都督荆梁二州诸军事、平南将军、荆州刺史、武陵侯王暠卒。
现代文：初九，都督荆梁二州诸军事、平南将军、荆州刺史、武陵侯王訥死。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the military governor of Jingliang and two states, the general of Pingnan, the governor of Jingzhou, and the governor of Wuling died.

古文：辛卯，以下邳内史王邃为征北将军、都督青徐幽平四州诸军事，镇淮阴。
现代文：十一日，以下邳内史王邃为征北将军、都督青、徐、幽、平四州诸军事，镇守淮阴。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following Yanai Shi Wang Qi was the general of the Northern Expedition, the military of the four states of Qing, Xu, Yu and Ping, and the town guard of Huaiyin.

古文：新昌太守梁硕起兵反。
现代文：新昌太守梁硕起兵反叛。
English: The governor of Xinchang, Liang Shuo, started a rebellion.

古文：京师大务，黑气蔽天，日月无光。
现代文：京师发生大雾，黑气蔽天，日月无光。
English: A heavy fog occurred in Beijing, black air covered the sky, and the sun and moon had no light.

古文：石勒攻陷襄城、城父，遂围谯，破祖约别军，约退据寿春。
现代文：石勒攻陷襄城、城父，进而包围谯，击破祖约别军，祖约退守寿春。
English: Shi Le captured Xiangcheng and Chengfu, and then encircled Yao, defeating Zu Yobie's army, and Zu Yobie retreated to Shuchun.

古文：十一月，以司徒荀组为太尉。
现代文：十一月，以司徒荀组为太尉。
English: In November, he was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant in the Stubbs group.

古文：己酉，太尉荀组薨。
现代文：己酉，太尉荀组死。
English: Ji Yao, Tai Lai Yao died.

古文：罢司徒，并丞相。
现代文：撤销司徒，其职司合并于丞相。
English: The position of sessho was abolished, and its duties were merged with those of chancellor.

古文：闰月己丑，帝崩于内殿，时年四十七，葬建平陵，庙号中宗。
现代文：闰月初十，元帝在内殿去世，终年四十七岁，葬于建平陵，庙号中宗。
English: On the tenth day of the leap month, Emperor Yuan died in the inner hall, at the age of forty-seven, and was buried in the Jianping Mausoleum.

古文：帝性简俭冲素，容纳直言，虚己待物。
现代文：元帝性格简朴俭省而恬淡，能容纳直言，虚心待人。
English: The character of the Yuan Emperor was simple, frugal and modest. He was able to tolerate frankness and treated people with a humble heart.

古文：初镇江东，颇以酒废事，王导深以为言，帝命酌，引觞覆之，于此遂绝。
现代文：开始镇守江东时，常因饮酒而荒废政事，王导殷切劝戒，元帝让王导斟了一杯酒，然后拿起杯子将酒倒掉，从此以后不再饮酒。
English: When he began to guard the eastern part of the Yangtze River, he often wasted political affairs due to drinking, and Wang Du earnestly admonished him. The former emperor asked Wang Du to pour a glass of wine, and then picked up the glass to pour out the wine. From then on, he would no longer drink.

古文：有司尝奏太极殿广室施绛帐，帝曰： 汉文集上书皁囊为帷。 
现代文：有司奏请太极殿广室挂上绛帐，元帝说： 汉文帝把群臣上书的黑色书袋收集起来做帷帐。 
English: A sitar player asked for a curtain to be hung in the hall of the Taiji Hall. Emperor Yuan said, "Emperor Han collected the black book bags from the courtiers to make the curtain.

古文：遂令冬施青布，夏施青綀帷帐。
现代文：于是令冬天用青布，夏天用青纱布做帷帐。
English: So the curtains were made of blue cloth in winter and blue gauze in summer.

古文：将拜贵人，有司请市雀钗，帝以烦费不许。
现代文：宫中将封贵人，有司请买雀钗为贵人作头饰，元帝以为费用高而不许。
English: In the palace, a dignitary was about to be crowned. A steward asked the emperor to buy a feather duster to make a headdress for the dignitary. The emperor thought the cost was too high and did not allow it.

古文：所幸郑夫人衣无文彩。
现代文：所宠爱的郑夫人衣著朴素无文采。
English: The beloved Mrs. Zheng is dressed plainly.

古文：从母弟王暠为母立屋过制，流涕止之。
现代文：元帝姨母的弟弟王訥为母亲建屋过于奢华，元帝流着泪劝阻了他。
English: Wang Yao, the younger brother of Emperor Yuan's aunt, built a house for his mother that was too luxurious. Emperor Yuan dissuaded him with tears.

古文：然晋室遘纷，皇舆播越，天命未改，人谋叶赞。
现代文：然而晋室遭乱，皇帝流亡，天命仍在晋室，谋臣和谐。
English: However, the imperial court was in turmoil, the emperor was in exile, and the Mandate of Heaven was still in the imperial court, seeking harmony among the ministers.

古文：元戎屡动，不出江畿，经略区区，仅全吴楚。
现代文：王师屡次出动，总打不出长江流域，治理区域狭小，仅能保全吴楚。
English: Wang Shi repeatedly dispatched, always can not hit the Yangtze River basin, the governance area is narrow, only able to preserve Wu Chu.

古文：终于下陵上辱，忧愤告谢。
现代文：终于使权臣犯上，身受其辱，忧愤而死。
English: Finally, he made a high-ranking official commit a crime, suffered humiliation, and died of grief.

古文：恭俭之德虽充，雄武之量不足。
现代文：谦恭节俭之德有余，而雄武之才不足。
English: The virtue of modesty, respect, and thrift is more than enough, but the talent of bravery is not enough.

古文：始秦时望气者云 五百年后金陵有天子气 ，故始皇东游以厌之，改其地曰秣陵，堑北山以绝其势。
现代文：秦始皇时有个望气者说： 五百年后金陵有天子气。 所以秦始皇就东游以压倒这天子气，并把金陵改为秣陵，挖断金陵北山以绝其地气。
English: At the time of Qin Shi Huang, a hopeful person said: "Five hundred years later, Jinling has the spirit of the son of heaven. Therefore, Qin Shi Huang traveled to the east to overcome this spirit of the son of heaven, and changed Jinling to Fuling, and excavated the northern mountain of Jinling to destroy its spirit.

古文：及孙权之称号。自谓当之。孙盛以为始皇逮于孙氏四百三十七载，考其历数，犹为未及；元帝之渡江也，乃五百二十六年，真人之应在于此矣。
现代文：孙权称帝时，自认为是应了秦时预言，孙盛认为从秦始皇到孙权才四百三十七年，未到五百年之数，到元帝渡江，是五百二十六年，天子之气应在此了。
English: When Sun Quan proclaimed himself emperor, he believed that he was responding to the prophecy of Qin Shi Huang. Sun Sheng believed that from Qin Shi Huang to Sun Quan was only 437 years, less than 500 years, and from Sun Quan to Yuan Di to cross the Yangtze River was 526 years. This was the time for the breath of the Son of Heaven.

古文：咸宁初，风吹太社树折，社中有青气，占者以为东莞有帝者之祥。由是徙封东莞王于琅邪，即武王也。
现代文：咸宁初年，太社树被风吹断，社中冒出青气，占卜者认为东莞有帝王之吉兆，于是将东莞王徙封为琅王牙王，这就是元帝的祖父琅王牙武王司马亻由。
English: In the first year of Xianning, the Taishe tree was blown down by the wind, and a green breeze arose in the company. The soothsayer believed that Dongguan had the auspicious sign of the emperor, so he sealed Dongguan Wang Yue as the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of

古文：及吴之亡，王濬实先至建鄴，而皓之降款，远归玺于琅邪。
现代文：灭吴之战，实是王浚先到建邺，而孙皓投降时，却把玉玺送给离建邺尚远的司马亻由军营。
English: In the battle to extinguish Wu, it was actually Wang Jun who arrived in Jianye first, but when Sun Yat-sen surrendered, he gave the Jade Scepter to the military camp of Sima Yu, which was still far away from Jianye.

古文：天意人事，又符中兴之兆。
现代文：天意和人事，都符合中兴的吉兆。
English: Both providence and personnel are in line with ZTE's auspicious signs.

古文：太安之际，童谣云： 五马浮渡江，一马化为龙。 
现代文：惠帝太安年间，有童谣说： 五马浮渡江，一马化为龙。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Hui, there was a children's rhyme that said, "Five horses float across the river, but one horse turns into a dragon."

古文：及永嘉中，岁、镇、荧惑、太白聚斗、牛之间，识者以为吴越之地当兴王者。
现代文：怀帝永嘉年间，岁、镇、荧惑、太白等星聚于斗、牛二星之间，识星象的人认为吴越之地当有王者兴起。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Yongjia, stars such as the Yearling, the Town, the Fluorescent, and the Taibai were gathered between the two stars of the Dragon and the Ox. Astrologers believed that a king should arise in the land of Wu Yue.

古文：是岁，王室沦覆，帝与西阳、汝南、南顿、彭城五王获济，而帝竟登大位焉。
现代文：这一年，中原王室倾覆，元帝与西阳王、汝南王、南顿王、彭城王南下渡江，而元帝终于即皇帝位。
English: In that year, the Central Plains royal family was overthrown, and Emperor Yuan went south to cross the Yangtze River with King Xiyang, King Runan, King Nantong, and King Pengcheng, and Emperor Yuan finally became emperor.

古文：初，玄石图有 牛继马后 ，故宣帝深忌牛氏，遂为二榼，共一口，以贮酒焉，帝先饮佳者，而以毒酒鸩其将牛金。
现代文：当初，《玄石图》上有 牛继马后 的话，所以宣帝司马懿深刻忌讳牛氏，于是做了个能装两种酒只有一个口的酒器，自己先饮好酒，而将毒酒斟给其大将牛金，将他毒死。
English: At first, there was a saying "Cow follows horse" on the "Map of the Black Stone," so Emperor Sima Qian deeply shunned the Cow Clan, so he made a drinking vessel that could hold two kinds of wine with only one mouth. He first drank the good wine, and then poured the poisoned wine to his general, Niu Jin, and poisoned him to death.

古文：史臣曰：维扬作宇，凭带洪流，楚江恆战，方城对敌，不得不推诚将相，以总戎麾。
现代文：而琅王牙恭王司马觐的妃子夏侯氏竟与一个姓牛的小吏私通而生了元帝，有人说这就是 牛继马后 的符应。史臣曰：以维扬之地为疆域，以长江洪流为依凭，楚江流域常有战祸，方城常作战场，不得不诚心信用将相，以统领军队。
English: However, Xia Hou, the concubine of King Jiaqing and King Sima Yi, had an illicit affair with a minor official surnamed Niu, which resulted in the birth of Emperor Yuan. Some people said that this was a symbol of Niu's succession to the throne. Shichen said: with the land of Weiyang as the territory, with the torrent of the Yangtze River as the basis, the Chujiang River basin is often plagued by war, and Fangcheng is often a battlefield, it is necessary to sincerely trust the generals to lead the army.

古文：楼船万计，兵倍王室，处其利而无心者，周公其人也。
现代文：拥有上万的战船，兵力成倍于王室，处在这样的地位而没有篡国之心的，就是周公那样的人。
English: With tens of thousands of warships and twice as many soldiers as the royal family, it is people like Zhou Gong who are in such a position and have no intention of usurping the country.

古文：威权外假，嫌隙内兴，彼有顺流之师，此无强籓之援。
现代文：国家的威权被外人藉用，仇隙在内部兴起，那边有乘势而来的军队，这边没有强大的封国作后援。
English: The authority of the state was borrowed by outsiders, and internal feuds arose. On the other side, there was an army that took advantage of the situation. On this side, there was no powerful vassal state to provide backup.

古文：商逢九乱，尧止八音，明皇负图，属在兹日。
现代文：商遭遇九乱，尧制止八音，明皇受命的祥瑞，就出现在此日。
English: Merchants encountered nine disturbances, the dragonfly stopped eight sounds, and the Ming Emperor ordered Xiang Rui to appear on this day.

古文：运龙韬于掌握，起天旆于江靡，燎其余烬，有若秋原。
现代文：运转大略于手掌之中，在江畔竖起顺天应命的大旗，余灰复燃，威势就如同火烧秋后的草原。
English: The operation is more or less in the palm of the hand, and a large flag is erected on the river bank in accordance with the order of the day, and the ashes are rekindled, and the power is like the grassland after the autumn.

古文：去缞绖而践戎场，斩鲸鲵而拜园阙。
现代文：除去丧服踏上战场，斩杀凶恶之人，而祭告先帝。
English: They took off their mourning clothes, stepped onto the battlefield, slaughtered the evil-doers, and worshipped the former emperor.

古文：镇削威权，州分江汉，覆车不践。贻厥孙谋。
现代文：削弱威权强盛的大臣，把江、漠等地州郡分小，吸取前人的教训，其谋划可保子孙安宁。
English: Weaken the authority of powerful ministers, divide the rivers, deserts and other counties into small ones, learn the lessons of predecessors, and plan to ensure peace for their children and grandchildren.

古文：其后七十余年，终罹敬道之害。
现代文：在他之后七十多年，终于被桓敬道所减。
English: More than seventy years after him, it was finally reduced by Kankyo-do.

古文：或曰： 兴亡在运，非止上流。 岂创制不殊，而弘之者异也。
现代文：有人说 兴亡在于命运，不仅仅靠有权势 ，可以说创立基业都一样，而继承光大者有所不同。
English: Some people say that success or failure depends on fate, not just on the powerful. It can be said that the foundation of the foundation is the same, but the inheritance of the great is different.

古文：赞曰：倾天起害，猛兽呈灾。
现代文：赞曰：像天塌下来一样灾害兴起，猛兽呈现祸殃。
English: Zang Zai said, "Disasters will arise like the sky falling down, and wild beasts will appear like a plague."

古文：琅邪之子，仁义归来，龚行赵璧，命箠荆台。
现代文：琅邪之子，有仁有义。行事恭谨如赵璧，定刑法于荆台。
English: There is kindness and righteousness in the son of wickedness. If you act respectfully like Zhao Bi, you will succeed in Jingdai.

古文：云瞻北晦，江望南开。
现代文：乌云遮蔽北方昏黑，长江望南天开云霁。
English: Dark clouds obscure the twilight in the north, and the Yangtze River looks to the south.

古文：晋阳御敌，河西全壤。
现代文：在晋阳抵御敌人，在河西保全国土。
English: Resist the enemy in Jinyang, and win the whole country in Hexi Bao.

古文：胡寇虽艰，灵心弗爽。
现代文：胡寇虽然猖獗，圣心不为之差失。
English: Although the cockerel is rampant, the Sacred Heart does not lose out.

古文：三方驰骛，百蛮从响。
现代文：三方奔驰来归，百蛮响应。
English: Three Mercedes-Benzes came and went, and there was a huge response.

古文：宝命还昌，金辉载明。
现代文：天命重新昌盛，太阳的光辉更加明亮。
English: The Mandate of Heaven is flourishing again, and the sun is shining more brightly.

古文：明后岐嶷，军书接要。
现代文：明皇帝年幼聪慧，把军事文书处理得有条不紊。
English: The young and clever Emperor Ming handled military documents in an orderly manner.

古文：莽首晨悬，董脐昏燎。
现代文：早晨悬挂起王莽的脑袋，晚上用董卓的肚脐燃灯。
English: In the morning, they hung Wang Mang's head, and in the evening, they used Dong Zhuo's navel to light a lamp.

古文：厥德不回，余风可劭。
现代文：他的功德不能重现，风范却可以勉励后人。
English: His merits cannot be reproduced, but his demeanor can inspire future generations.

