古文：两汉之世，事无大小，必谋之于众人，予前论之矣，然亦有持以藉口掩众议者。
现代文：西汉时期，无论事情大小，必定跟众人商议，这一点我前边已议论过，然而，也有拿这种方式人微言轻借口堵塞众人意见的情况。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, no matter how big or small a matter was, it was bound to be discussed with the people. I have already discussed this before. However, there were also cases in which people's opinions were blocked with the excuse that this was a way of being soft-spoken.

古文：霍光薨后，宣帝出其亲属补吏，张敞言： 朝臣宜有明言霍氏颛制，请罢三侯就第。
现代文：霍光死后，宣帝使其在朝中任要职的亲属出任地方官，张敞说： 朝臣之中应当有人公开议论霍氏专制朝政，请求罢免他三个封为列侯的子孙的爵位，让他们回家。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, Emperor Xuan made his relatives who held important positions in the court serve as local officials. Zhang Zhang said, "Among the courtiers, there should be someone who openly discusses the autocratic court politics of Huo Guang and requests that the titles of his three sons who were made princes be revoked and that they be allowed to return home."

古文：明诏以恩不听，群臣以义固争而后许之。
现代文：些下先降旨为了情义不能听取，群臣用义理坚持择谏，然后再答应他们。
English: Some of them declined to listen to the order for the sake of reason, and the ministers insisted on the choice of gong with reason, and then agreed to them.

古文：今明诏自亲其文，非策之得者也。 
现代文：如今陛下自已起草诏书，是失策的啊！ 
English: Now that His Majesty is drafting the edict himself, it's a bad move!

古文：哀帝欲封董贤等，王嘉言： 宜延问公卿、大夫、博士、议郎，明正其义，然后乃加爵土；不然，恐大失众心。
现代文：哀帝打算封授董贤等人官爵，王嘉说： 应请教公卿、大夫、博士、议郎，公开议论封授的意义，然后再加封爵位、土地；不然，恐怕大失众望。
English: Wang Jia said: "We should ask the nobles, doctors, doctors, and councilors to openly discuss the significance of the conferment, and then add the title and land; otherwise, I am afraid that the public's expectations will be greatly disappointed.

古文：暴平其事，必有言当封者，在陛下所从；天下虽不说，咎有所分，不独在陛下。
现代文：突然公开评议此事，必定有人说应当封授，陛下即便听从，天下人尽管不高兴，怨恨有人分担，不单在陛下身上。
English: When this matter is publicly discussed, there must be those who say that it should be sealed, whether or not His Majesty listens; even if people around the world are unhappy, the fault is shared, not just in His Majesty alone.

古文：前成帝初封淳于长，其事亦议。谷永以长当封，众人归咎于永，先帝不独蒙其讥。 
现代文：先前成帝刚要加封淳于长时，亦曾评议其事，谷永认为淳于长应当加封，众人把罪责归于谷永，先帝不致独自蒙受讥议。 
English: Previously, when Emperor Chengdu was about to add a seal to Jun Yuchang, he also commented on the matter. Gu Yong believed that Jun Yuchang should be added, and everyone attributed the blame to Gu Yong, so that the former emperor would not be subjected to ridicule alone.

古文：哀帝乃止。
现代文：哀帝于是暂停封授。
English: Emperor Ai suspended the conferment of the title.

古文：是知委曲迁就，使恩出君上，过归于下，汉代多如此也。
现代文：由此可知，委曲迁就，使恩泽出自君王，过失属于臣下，汉代大多如此。
English: From this, it can be seen that, in the Han Dynasty, it was mostly the case that favors came from the monarch and faults belonged to the vassals.

