古文：三十日早寒甚。
现代文：三十日早晨冷极了。
English: The morning of the 30th was extremely cold.

古文：初雾旋霁，而夫终不来。
现代文：起初下雾随即晴开，但差夫始终不来。
English: At first it was foggy, then it cleared up, but the police never came.

古文：盖此处铺司管理驿让的机构奸甚，惟恐余往归顺，以归顺远也。屡以安南彝人满道恐吓余。其土官岑姓，乃寨主也，以切近交彝，亦惟知有彝，不知有中国。
现代文：原来此处的铺司十分奸猾，唯恐我前去归顺州，屡次用满路都是安南夷人来恐吓我。这里的土司姓岑，是寨主，由于接近交夷，也唯知有夷人，不知有中国。
English: Originally, the shop steward here was very cunning. In order to frighten me from going to Shunzhou, he repeatedly threatened me with the fact that the entire road was full of Annan barbarians. The steward here, surnamed Zou, is the owner of the village. Because he is close to the barbarians, he only knows that there are barbarians, but does not know that there is China.

古文：彝人过，辄厚款之，视中国漠如也。
现代文：夷人路过，总是重重地款待他们，对中原来的人却漠然视之。
English: When barbarians pass by, they always treat them with great hospitality, but they are indifferent to the original people.

古文：交彝亦厚庇此寨，不与为难云。
现代文：交夷也重视庇护此寨，不与它为难。
English: Jiayi also attaches importance to protecting this village and does not have any difficulties with it.

古文：下午夫至，止八名。
现代文：我被客馆中的人所迷惑，并且担心恶梦应验，这天早上拈了三个阉请求于上天：一个从归顺州走，一个返回下雷州，一个取道向武州。
English: I was confused by the people in the guesthouse and worried that my nightmare would come true. That morning, I made three petitions to heaven: one to go from Shunzhou, one to return to Leizhou, and one to go to Wuzhou.

古文：少二名。及各夫又不赍ｊī携带蔬米，心知其为短夫，然无可再待理，姑就之行。
现代文：向上天虔诚祷告后抛出来决定去向，得到去向武州的阉。下午脚夫到了，只有八名。至于各个脚夫又不带米菜，心知他们是短途脚夫，然而没有可以再等下去的理由，姑且随他们上路。
English: After devoutly praying to the heavens, they cast out and decided where to go, and received the anchor to go to Wuzhou. In the afternoon, the porters arrived, only eight of them. As for the porters who did not bring rice, they knew that they were short-distance porters, but there was no reason to wait any longer, so they went on their way.

古文：从寨宅溯北来溪而上，半里，渡溪中土冈而行，于是溪分为两而复合。
现代文：从寨子宅第溯北来的溪流上行，半里，渡到溪流中的土冈上行，在这里溪流分为两条又重新会合。
English: Half a mile upstream from the northernmost stream of the Zhaizi residence, we crossed over to the earthen mound in the stream, where the stream split into two and then rejoined.

古文：取道于中又半里，渡其西夹冈者，回顾溪身自土山东峡来，而路出土山西峡上。
现代文：取道走中间又是半里，渡过那在西面夹住山冈的溪流，回头看去溪流从土山东面的峡中流来，而路通到土山西面的峡谷上。
English: In the middle of taking the path, it was another half-mile, crossing the stream that clamped the mountain on the west side. Looking back, the stream flowed from the gorge on the east side of the hill, and the road led to the canyon on the west side of the hill.

古文：二里，其峡穷，遂逾山陟坳。
现代文：二里，这条峡谷完了，就越过山冈登上山坳。
English: After two miles, this canyon is finished, and we cross the mountain ridge and climb up the ridge.

古文：一里，复东下而与大溪遇，乃溯溪北岸东北行。
现代文：一里，再向东下走而与大溪相遇，于是溯溪流北岸向东北行。
English: After one mile, I encountered a large stream while walking eastward, so I followed the north bank of the stream to the northeast.

古文：二里，有石山突溪北岸，其上藤树蒙密，其下路潆江潭，仰顾南北，俱土山高爽，而北山之巅，时露峭骨，而复突此石山当道，崚嶒欹侧，行路甚难。
现代文：二里，有石山突起在溪流北岸，石山上藤枝树丛浓密，山下道路回绕在江边，仰望南北，都是高大清朗的土山，而北山的山顶，不时露出陡峭的石骨，而又突起这座石山挡住道路，高峻突兀，歪斜倾侧，行路十分艰难。
English: For two miles, there is a rock mountain protruding on the north bank of the stream. The top of the rock mountain is densely covered with wisteria bushes. The road below the mountain goes around the river and looks up to the north and south. They are all tall and clear dirt hills. The top of the North Mountain, from time to time, exposes steep stone bones. However, this rock mountain protrudes and blocks the road. It is steep and jagged, and tilts sideways. It is very difficult to travel.

古文：然两旁俱芟树披茅，开道颇阔，始知此即胡润走镇安之道，正交彝经此所开也。
现代文：不过两旁的树丛茅草全被割除开了，道路开挖得十分宽阔，这才知道此路就是从胡润寨走向镇安府的路，正是交夷经过此地开挖的道路。
English: However, the scrub and thatch on both sides had all been cut away, and the road had been excavated very widely. It was only then that I knew that this road was the road from Hurunzhai to Zhen'anfu, and that it was the road that had been excavated through this place.

古文：余欲避交彝不往归顺，而反趋其所由之道，始恨为馆人所卖云。
现代文：我想躲避交夷不去归顺州，可反而取道他们所经由的路，方才悔恨被客馆中的人出卖了。
English: I didn't want to go back to Shunzhou to avoid the traffic, but instead I took the road they passed through, and only then did I regret being betrayed by the people in the inn.

古文：循石山而东北一里，见一老人采薪路旁，舆人与之语，遂同行而前。
现代文：沿石山往东北走一里，见一位老人在路旁采伐薪柴，轿夫与他交谈，便一同往前走。
English: Walking one mile northeast along Stone Mountain, he saw an old man cutting firewood on the side of the road. The driver struck up a conversation with him and they walked on together.

古文：半里，有树斜偃溪两岸，架桥因其杪，而渡溪之南，是为南陇村。
现代文：半里，有棵树斜倒在溪流两岸，就着树梢架了桥便渡到溪流的南面，这是南陇村。
English: Half a mile away, a tree leaned over on both sides of the stream, and a bridge was built over the treetops to cross to the south of the stream. This is Nanlu village.

古文：有数家在溪南，舆夫舆人老人家，遂辞出。
现代文：有几家人在溪南，轿夫把轿子抬入老人家，便告辞出去了。
English: There were several families in Hunan. The driver carried the palanquin into the old man's house and then left.

古文：余欲强留之，老人曰： 余村自当前送，但今日晚，请少憩以俟明晨，彼夫不必留也。 
现代文：我想强行挽留他们，老人说： 我们村自然应往前送，但今天晚了，请稍作休息以等待明天早晨，那些脚夫不必留了。 
English: I wanted to hold them back by force, the old man said: Of course, our village should send them forward, but it's late today, please take a short break to wait for tomorrow morning, those porters don't have to stay.

古文：余无可奈何，听其去。
现代文：我无可奈何，听任他们去了。
English: I had no choice but to let them go.

古文：时日色尚可行数里，而余从老人言，遂登其巢。
现代文：此时天色还可前行数里，但我听从老人的话，便登上了他的茅屋。
English: At this time, it was still light enough to walk several miles, but I followed the old man's advice and climbed up to his hut.

古文：老人煮蛋献浆。
现代文：老人煮蛋献水。
English: The old man boiled an egg and offered water.

古文：余问其年，已九十矣。
现代文：我问了他的年龄，已有九十岁了。
English: I asked him how old he was. He was ninety.

古文：问其子几人，曰： 共七子。
现代文：问他有几个儿子，说： 共有七子。
English: They asked him how many sons he had, and he said, "Seven."

古文：前四者俱已没，惟存后三者 其七子之母，即炊火热浆之妪，与老人齐眉者也。
现代文：前边的四个都已死了，唯有后面的三个存世。 他那七个儿子的母亲，就是烧火热水的老妇人，与老人相敬相爱。
English: Now the first four were dead, and the last three were alive: and the mother of his seven sons was a woman of a great age, and full of years, and of a sweet temper, and a beautiful countenance.

古文：荒徼绝域，有此人瑞年寿特高之人，奇矣，奇矣！
现代文：在这荒凉的人烟断绝的地方，有此等年寿特高的人，奇了，奇了！
English: Strange, strange, that in this desolate and deserted place, where there is no trace of human habitation, there are people of such extraordinary longevity!

古文：一村人语俱不能辨，惟此老能作汉语，亦下披发跣足，自下雷至胡润，其人半披发不束。并不食烟与槟榔，且不知太平、南宁诸流官地也。
现代文：一村人讲的话都听不懂，唯有这位老人能讲汉话，也不披发赤脚，并且不吃烟草与槟榔，而且不知道太平府、南宁府各处流官管辖的地方。
English: I can't understand a word the villagers are saying, except for this old man who can speak Chinese, doesn't wear his hair bare, doesn't eat tobacco or betel nuts, and doesn't know where the bureaucrats in Taiping and Nanning govern.

古文：老人言： 十六日交彝从此过，自罗洞往镇安，余走避山上，彼亦一无所动而去。 
现代文：老人讲： 十六日交夷从此路过，自罗洞前往镇安府，我逃避到山上，他们也一无所动便离开了。 
English: The old man said, "On the 16th day of the war, the enemy passed by here, and went from Luodong to Zhen'anfu. I fled to the mountains, and they left without doing anything.

古文：十一月初一日早雾，而日出丽甚。
现代文：十一月初一日早晨有雾，但太阳出来十分艳丽。
English: It was foggy in the morning on the first day of November, but the sun came out very brightly.

古文：自南陇东北行，一里，渡溪北岸。
现代文：自南面的土陇往东北行，一里，渡到溪北岸。
English: From the mound in the south to the northeast, one mile, to the northern shore of the creek.

古文：溯溪上二里，见其溪自东南山峡轰坠而下。
现代文：溯溪上行二里，见此溪自东南的山峡中轰鸣着坠下来。
English: Tracing the creek upstream for two miles, I saw this creek roaring down from the mountain gorge in the southeast.

古文：盖两峡口有巨石横亘如堰，高数十丈，阔十余丈，轰雷倾雪之势，极其伟壮，西南来从未之见也。
现代文：原来是峡口两侧有巨石横亘着如同堤坝，高数十丈，宽十多丈，雷霆轰鸣雪浪倾泻的气势，极其雄伟壮丽，到西南地区以来从未见到过。
English: Originally, there were huge boulders on both sides of the mouth of the gorge that stretched like dykes, dozens of meters high and more than ten meters wide, with the power of thunder and snow, extremely majestic and magnificent, which had never been seen since the southwest region.

古文：水由此下坠成溪西南去，路复由岭北山坞溯小水东北上。
现代文：水从此处下坠成溪向西南流去，路再由山峡北面的山坞溯小溪从东北向上延伸。
English: From here, the water falls into a stream to the southwest, and the road then extends from the north of the mountain gorge to the northeast.

古文：一里，坞穷，遂逾岭而上。
现代文：一里，山坞到了头，便翻越山岭而上。
English: After one mile, when the dock came to an end, they climbed over the mountains.

古文：一里，抵岭头，遇交彝十余人，半执线枪，俱朱红柄。半肩鸟铳，鸟铳管长，线管较短，身带藤帽而不戴，披发跣足，而肩无余物。
现代文：一里，到达岭头，遇上十多个交夷，一半握着线枪，一半肩扛鸟铣，身上带着藤帽却不戴上，披发赤脚，而肩上没有其他物品。
English: One mile, arrived at Lingtou, encountered more than ten cross-country, half holding a line gun, half shouldering a bird beak, wearing a cane hat but not wearing it, barefoot, and no other items on the shoulder.

古文：见余与相顾而过。
现代文：见了我与我互相望着走过去。
English: He saw me and we looked at each other and walked over.

古文：舆人与之语，云已打镇安而归，似亦诳语。
现代文：轿夫与他们交谈，说是已打下镇安府归来，似乎也是骗人的话。
English: When the driver spoke to them, he said that he had left the town and was returning to Anfu, which also seemed to be a lie.

古文：又行岭上半里，复遇交彝六七人，所执如前，不知大队尚在何所也。
现代文：又行走在岭上半里，再次遇上六七个交夷，握着的武器与先前的一样，不知大队人马还在什么地方了。
English: Walking again in the upper half of the ridge, I again encountered six or seven soldiers, holding the same weapons as before, and I don't know where the large group of men and horses are.

古文：从此下岭半里，复与溪遇，溯之而东又半里，溪自南来，路出东坳下，见一畴一坞，随之东北行。
现代文：从此处下岭半里，再次与溪流相遇，溯溪往东又走半里，溪水自南边流来，路通到东面的山坳下，见到一片田畴一个山坞，顺着山坞往东北行。
English: From here, walk down the ridge for half a mile, meet the stream again, trace the stream to the east and walk half a mile, the stream water flows from the south, the road leads to the east under the hawthorn, see a field and a dock, follow the dock to the northeast.

古文：一里，有桥跨大溪上，其溪北自石山腋中来，西南经此坞中，乃南转循山而北，出东坳之西。
现代文：一里，有座桥跨在大溪上，此溪自北面的石山侧旁流来，向西南流经此处山坞，于是向南转去沿着山往北流，流出东面山坳的西侧。
English: A mile away, there is a bridge over a large stream, which flows from the north side of the stone mountain, flows southwest through the dock here, and then turns south along the mountain to the north stream, flowing out of the west side of the east ridge.

古文：由桥之北溯溪北人，即镇安道，交彝所由也，渡桥南，循溪东北渡东来小溪北，为罗峒村；由小溪南循山东入，为向武道；又从东南山隙去，为上英、道。
现代文：由桥的北头溯溪向北进去，就是去镇安府的路，是交夷经过的道路；渡到桥南，顺溪流向东北渡过东来的小溪往北走，是罗桐村；由小溪南面沿着山向东进去，是去向武州的路；又从东南方的山缝中前去，是去上英恫、都康州的路。
English: Entering from the north end of the bridge to the north is the road to Zhen'anfu, which is the road passing through Jia'i; crossing to the south of the bridge, following the stream to the northeast, crossing the east-coming creek to the north is Luo Tong Village; entering from the south of the creek along the mountain to the east is the road to Wuzhou; and advancing from the mountain crevice in the southeast is the road to Shangyingwu and Dukangzhou.

古文：渡桥共半里，换夫于罗峒村。
现代文：过了桥共走半里，在罗桐村换夫。
English: After crossing the bridge, they walked a total of half a mile and changed their husbands in the village of Luo Tong.

古文：村倚坞北石山下。
现代文：村子紧靠在山坞北面的石山下。
English: The village is nestled under a rocky hill to the north of the dock.

古文：石峰之西，即镇安道所入；石峰之东，即向武道所逾，始得与交彝异道云。
现代文：石峰的西边，就是去镇安府路的入口处；石峰的东面，就是到向武州要穿越的的，这才得以与交夷分道而行了。
English: The west side of the stone peak is the entrance to Zhen'anfu Road; the east side of the stone peak is the one to cross to Wuzhou, which made it possible to separate from the intersection.

古文：待夫久之，村氓献蛋醴。
现代文：等换夫等了根久，村民献来了鸡蛋与甜酒。
English: After waiting for a long time, the villagers brought eggs and sweet wine.

古文：仍南渡东来小溪，循石山嘴转其南峡东向上，一里半，登陇上，于是复见四面石山攒合，而山脊中复见有下坠之洼。
现代文：仍向南渡过东来的小溪，沿石山山嘴转到它南边的峡谷向东上走，一里半，登到土陇上，于是又见四面的石山攒聚合拢，而且山脊中又见到有下坠的洼地。
English: Still heading south, I crossed the creek coming from the east, turned along the rocky promontory to the canyon on its southern side, walked eastward for a mile and a half, climbed onto the mound, whereupon I saw the rocky mountains on all sides gathering together, and I also saw depressions in the ridge.

古文：又一里半，盘陇而入，得数家焉，曰涌村。
现代文：又走一里半，绕着土陇进去，见到几家人在那里，叫涌村。
English: Walked another mile and a half, went around the mound, saw a few families there, called Chungchon.

古文：复换夫东行坞中，逾一小水，即罗峒小溪东来之上流。
现代文：又换了夫向东行走在山坞中，越过一条小溪，就是罗炯村从东面流来的小溪的上游。
English: She also changed her husband and walked eastward in the dockyard, crossing a stream, which is the upper reaches of the stream flowing from the east of Luoqi Village.

古文：二里，乃东北上岭。
现代文：二里，便向东北上岭。
English: After two miles, I headed northeast to Shangling.

古文：其岭颇峻，一里抵其坳，一里逾其巅。
现代文：此岭十分陡峻，一里抵达岭坳，一里越上岭头。
English: This ridge is very steep, one mile to reach the ridge crest, one mile over the ridge head.

古文：左右石崖刺天，峭削之极，而岭道亦崎岖蒙翳，不似向来一带宽辟矣。
现代文：左右的石崖刺入天空，峻峭陡削之极，而岭上的路也崎岖不平荒草密蔽，不如先前来时那一带宽阔了。
English: The stone cliffs on both sides pierce the sky, steep and precipitous, and the road on the ridge is also rugged and densely covered with wild grass. It is not as wide as the area when I came here before.

古文：逾岭，从岭上循东南石崖，平行其阴，又沿崖升陟者三里，渡一脊。
现代文：越过岭头，从岭上沿东南侧的石崖，平缓地走在岭头的北面，又沿石崖升登了三里路，越过一条山脊。
English: Crossing the ridge head, from the ridge along the southeast side of the stone cliff, I walked smoothly on the north side of the ridge head, and climbed the three-mile road along the stone cliff, crossing a ridge.

古文：脊东复起一崖，仍循之半里，乃东南下壑中，一里，抵其麓。
现代文：山脊东面又耸起一座山崖，仍沿着山崖走半里，于是向东南下到壑谷中，一里，到达山麓。
English: On the east side of the ridge, another cliff rose up. I still walked half a mile along the cliff, and then went southeast to the middle of the valley, one mile, and reached the foot of the mountain.

古文：于是东北行田陇间，又里许，环壑中村聚颇盛，是曰下峺，其水似从东南山峡去。
现代文：从这里往东北行走在田陇之间，又走一里左右，壑谷环绕之中村落十分繁荣，这里叫下硬，这里的水流似乎是从东南方的山峡中流去。
English: From here, walk to the northeast between the rice fields, walk another mile or so, the villages in the middle of the valley are very prosperous, here is called the lower hard, and the water flow here seems to flow from the mountain gorge in the southeast.

古文：乃饭而换夫，日将晡矣。
现代文：于是吃了饭换夫，将近下午兰五点钟了。
English: So we had dinner and changed husbands. It was nearly five o'clock in the afternoon.

古文：又东北上土山夹中，已渐北转，共二里，宿于上峺，而胡润之境抵是始尽。
现代文：又向东北上到土山峡谷中，不久渐渐向北转，共二里，住宿在上硬，而胡润寨的辖境在这里才到头。
English: They also went up to the northeast to the middle of the Tsuchiyama canyon, and soon gradually turned north, a total of two miles. The accommodation was in Shangharo, and the jurisdiction of Hurunzhai only ended here.

古文：初二日早无雾，而日丽甚。
现代文：初二日清早无雾，而太阳十分艳丽。
English: There was no fog in the early morning on the first two days, and the sun was very bright.

古文：晨餐甚早，村氓以鸡为黍。
现代文：早餐吃得非常早，村民用鸡肉当饭。
English: Breakfast was eaten very early, and the villagers had chicken for lunch.

古文：由上峺村北入山夹中，一里，登岭而上，其右多石峰，其左乃土脊。
现代文：由上硬村向北进入山峡中，一里，登岭而上，岭右有许多石峰，岭左是土山脊。
English: From the village of Shanghard to the north into the gorge, one mile, up the ridge, there are many stone peaks on the right side of the ridge, and the left side of the ridge is a dirt ridge.

古文：半里，逾脊北下，即多流溪水，塍路旁有流汩汩，反自外塍奔注山麓穴中。
现代文：半里，越过山脊向北下行，就是许多拖泥带水的田间小路，路旁有涂涂的流水，反而从土埂外面奔流到山麓下的洞穴中。
English: Half a mile over the ridge to the north is a series of muddy, water-logged farm tracks. There is running water on the side of the road, but it flows from the outside of the mound into a cave at the foot of the mountain.

古文：平下半里，又北行田陇间者一里，有村在路右峰下，是为南麓村。
现代文：平缓地下走半里，又向北行走在田亩间有一里，有村庄在路右的山峰下，这是南麓村。
English: Walk gently underground for half a mile, then walk northward, there is a mile between the fields, and there is a village under the peak on the right side of the road. This is Nanlucun Village.

古文：换夫北行二里，路右石峰之夹，路左土垅之上，俱有村落。
现代文：换夫后往北行二里，路右石峰的夹谷中，路左的土陇之上，都有村落。
English: After changing husbands, I drove north for two miles. In the valley between the stone peaks on the right side of the road, and on the mound on the left side of the road, there were villages.

古文：一小水溪界其间，有水如发，反逆流而南。
现代文：一条小溪隔在其中，有水细如发丝，反而逆流向南。
English: Separated by a small stream, with water as fine as hair, it flows in the opposite direction to the south.

古文：盖自度脊，东石、西土，山俱不断，此流反自外入，想潜坠地中者。
现代文：大概自从越过山脊，东面的石峰、西面的土山，山峰都是连接不断，这条溪流反而从山外流进来，推想是潜坠到地下的水流。
English: Probably since crossing the ridge, the stone peak in the east and the earthen hill in the west, the peaks are constantly connected, but this stream flows in from the outside of the mountain, presumably a submerged stream.

古文：候夫流畔久之，然腹痛如割。
现代文：在流水旁等脚夫等了很久，然而腹痛如刀割。
English: The porter waited by the running water for a long time, but his stomach hurt like hell.

古文：夫至，舆之行，顷刻难忍，不辨天高地下也。
现代文：脚夫到后，用轿抬着我走，腹痛难以忍受，辨不出天高地低了。
English: After the porter arrived, he carried me in a sedan. The abdominal pain was unbearable, and I couldn't tell which way was up.

古文：北行三里，有村在路左山下，复换夫行。
现代文：向北行三里，有个村庄在路左的山下，再次换了夫上路。
English: Three miles to the north, there is a village at the bottom of the hill on the left of the road, and it has changed hands again.

古文：于是石山复离立环绕，夹中陂陀高下，俱草茅充塞，无复旧塍。
现代文：从此地起石山再度成排矗立环绕，峡谷中倾斜的山坡高高低低，全是茅草充塞着，不再有先前的田亩了。
English: From here, the stone mountains once again rise in rows and surround the canyon. The sloping slopes in the canyon are high and low, all filled with thatch, and there are no more previous fields.

古文：东北八里，腹痛稍瘥，有村在路左右崖之内，呼而换夫。
现代文：向东北八里，腹痛稍稍缓解了些，有村庄在路左的石崖之内，呼叫着换了夫。
English: Eight miles to the northeast, the stomach ache eased a little, a village within the rocky cliff on the left of the road, calling for a change of husband.

古文：其处山夹向东北下，而路乃西北逾石坳。
现代文：此处的山峡向东北下延，而路便向西北翻越石山山坳。
English: Here, the mountain gorge stretches down to the northeast, while the road climbs over the stone mountain ridges to the northwest.

古文：始上甚崚嶒，半里，逾石山而上，其内皆土山。
现代文：开始上时十分高峻，半里后，越过石山往上走，那以内都是土山。
English: At the beginning, it was very steep, and after half a mile, it went up over the stone mountain, and it was all dirt mountain inside.

古文：又上半里，即西北行土山夹中一里，又平下者一里，循北坞而去一里，见小溪自西坞中来。
现代文：又上走半里，马上往西北行走在土山峡谷中一里，又平缓下行一里，沿北面的山坞而去又一里，见小溪从西边的山坞中流来。
English: Walk up another half mile, immediately walk northwest into the middle of the Tsuchiyama canyon for another mile, then gently descend for another mile, walk along the dock on the north side for another mile, and see the creek flowing from the dock on the west side.

古文：路涉溪左又北半里，舍溪，又西向折入土山峡半里，是为坪濑村。
现代文：路涉到溪流左岸又向北行半里，离开小溪，又向西折入土山峡谷中走半里，这是坪懒村。
English: The road wanders to the left bank of the stream and travels north for half a mile, leaves the stream, and turns west into the middle of the Dushan canyon for half a mile. This is Pinglao Village.

古文：时顾仆以候夫后，余乃候炊村巢。
现代文：此时顾仆由于等候脚夫走在后面，我便在村中茅屋里等着煮饭。
English: At this time, since the servants were waiting for the porter to walk behind, I waited in the village hut to cook rice.

古文：顾仆至，适饭熟，余腹痛已止，村氓以溪鲫为饷，为强啖饭一孟。
现代文：顾仆到时，恰好饭熟了，我的腹痛已止住了，村民用溪中的螂鱼当饭，为此勉强吃了一盂饭。
English: When Gu's servant arrived, just as the rice was ready, my stomachache had stopped. The villagers used the mantis fish in the stream as a meal, so I barely ate a bowl of rice.

古文：饭后夫至，少二名，以妇人代担。
现代文：饭后脚夫来到，少了二名，派妇女来代替挑夫。
English: After the meal, the porter arrived, two men were missing, and a woman was sent to replace the porter.

古文：复从村后西逾一坳，共一里，转出后坞，乃东向行。
现代文：再从村后向西越过一个山坳，共走一里，转出到后面的山坞，于是向东行。
English: Then, from the back of the village, we crossed a ridge to the west, walked a total of one mile, turned out to the dock behind, and then headed east.

古文：止坞，转而北，共一里，则前溪自南而来，复与之遇。
现代文：走到山坞，转向北，共行一里，就见先前的溪流从南边流来，再次与它相遇。
English: I walked to the dock, turned north, and after walking for a mile, I saw the previous stream coming from the south and met it again.

古文：循溪左北行十里，又转而西向入山峡半里，有村曰六月。
现代文：沿溪左往北行十里，又转向西走入山峡间半里，有个村庄叫六月。
English: There is a village called Junetsu, which is ten miles north along the left side of the stream, and half a mile west into the mountain gorge.

古文：候夫甚久，以二妇人代舆。
现代文：等换夫的时间非常久，派两个妇女来代替轿夫。
English: It took a long time to change husbands, so they sent two women to replace the coachman.

古文：仍从北山之半东向出峡，半里，乃逾岭北下，共一里，复从田塍东北行。
现代文：仍然从北山的半腰上向东走出山峡，半里，于是越过山岭向北下走，共一里，又从田野中往东北行。
English: He still walked half a mile eastward out of the mountain gorge from halfway up the north mountain, and then walked northward across the mountains for a total of one mile, and from the middle of the field to the northeast.

古文：已复与南来溪遇，仍溯其西北一里，有石峰峭甚，兀立溪东，数十家倚峰临溪。
现代文：不久再次与南来的溪流相遇，仍溯溪往西北行一里，有座石峰非常陡峭，兀立在溪东，数十家人背靠石峰面临溪流。
English: Soon, they met the stream coming from the south again, and still followed the stream to the northwest for one mile. There was a very steep stone peak, standing in the east of the stream. Dozens of families were facing the stream with their backs against the stone peak.

古文：溪之西，田畦环绕，辟而成坞，是曰飘峒，以石峰飘渺而言耶？
现代文：溪水的西面，田亩环绕，敞开成山坞，这里叫飘炯，是因为石峰飘渺才这样叫的吗？
English: On the west side of the stream, surrounded by acres of fields, it opens into a dock. It is called "Floating Rock" here. Is it because the stone peak is floating?

古文：土人呼尖山为 飘 。换夫，北陟岭半里，转而西入山峡，一里而下。
现代文：换夫后，向北登岭半里，转向西走入山峡，一里后下走。
English: After changing her husband, she walked half a mile north of Dengling, turned west into the gorge, and walked down after one mile.

古文：又西北一里半，有草茅数楹在西坞，寂无居人，是曰上控。
现代文：又往西北一里半，有数间茅草屋在西面山坞中，寂静无人住，这里叫上控。
English: Another mile and a half to the northwest, there are a few thatched cottages in the western dockyard, quiet and uninhabited. This is called the upper control.

古文：前冬为镇安叛寇王歪劫掠，一村俱空，无敢居者。
现代文：前年冬天被镇安府的叛贼王歪劫掠，一村全空了，无人敢居住。
English: In the winter of the previous year, it was plundered by the traitorous king of Zhen'anfu. One village was completely empty, and no one dared to live there.

古文：于是又北半里，折而东南入石山之夹，又半里，有上控居人移栖于此。
现代文：从这里又向北走半里，折向东南走入石山的峡谷中，又行半里，有上控的居民移居在此。
English: From here, walk another half-mile north, turn southeast into the canyon of Stone Mountain, walk another half-mile, and the residents with the upper control will move here.

古文：复换之行，已暮矣。
现代文：再次换夫上路，已经天黑了。
English: Another husband-swap on the road, it's getting dark.

古文：透峡东南向石山下，共一里，是曰陈峒。
现代文：穿过山峡向东南走到石山下，共一里，这里叫陈炯。
English: Through the mountain gorge to the southeast to the bottom of the stone mountain, a total of one mile, here called Chen Yu.

古文：峒甚辟，居民甚众，暗中闻声，争出而负舆。
现代文：陈炯十分开阔，居民非常多，黑暗中听见呼声，争着出来抬轿。
English: Chenxuan is very open and has a large number of residents. They heard shouts in the darkness and scrambled to come out and carry the sedan.

古文：又东一里，路北石山甚峭，其下有村，复闻声出换。
现代文：又向东一里，路北的石山非常陡峭，山下有村庄，又是听到呼声出来替换。
English: Another mile to the east, the stone mountain to the north of the road is very steep, there is a village at the bottom of the mountain, and the call is heard to replace it.

古文：又东一里，峭峰夹而成门，路出其中，是曰那峺，嵚ｑīｎ山高峻的样子崎殊甚。山峡，宿于那峺村。
现代文：又往东一里，陡峭的山峰夹成门状，路经由其中，这里叫那硬，地势特别高峻。走出山峡，住宿在那硬村。
English: Another mile to the east, the steep mountain peaks clamp into a gate shape, and the road passes through it. This place is called Naadol, and the terrain is particularly steep. I walked out of the gorge and stayed in Naadol village.

古文：是日共行三十五里，以屡停候夫也。
现代文：这天共走三十五里，是因为屡次停下来等候换夫。
English: I walked a total of thirty-five miles that day, because I stopped several times to wait for my husband to change.

古文：初三日天有阴云而无雨。
现代文：初三日天上有阴云却无雨。
English: On the first three days, there were dark clouds in the sky, but no rain.

古文：村夫昧爽即候行，而村小夫少，半以童子代舆，不及饭，遂行，以为去州近也。
现代文：村中的脚夫黎明就等着出发，可村小夫少，一半是用儿童来代替轿夫，来不及吃饭，便动身，以为离州城近了。
English: The porters in the village wait for the dawn to set off, but there are few village porters, and half of them use children to replace the porters. When it is too late to eat, they set off, thinking that they are close to the state capital.

古文：东行半里，当前有山巍耸。
现代文：向东行半里，正前方有石山巍然高耸。
English: Half a mile to the east, there is a towering stone mountain right in front of you.

古文：大溪自南峡中透出，经巍峰西麓，抵其北，折而捣巍峰北峡中东向去。
现代文：大溪从南边的峡中穿流而出，流经巍峨的高峰西麓，到达山峰北边，折头捣向巍峨高峰北面的峡谷中向东流去。
English: The large stream flows out of the gorge in the south, flows through the western foot of the towering peak, reaches the northern side of the peak, and flows eastward into the canyon north of the towering peak.

古文：路自西来，亦抵巍峰西麓，渡溪堰，循麓沿流，亦北折随峰东入北峡中。
现代文：路从西边来，也是到达巍峨高峰的西麓，渡过溪中的堤坝，顺着山麓沿着溪流，也向北折去随着山峰往东走入北面的峡谷中。
English: Coming from the west, the road also reaches the western foot of the towering peak, crosses the dam in the stream, follows the stream along the foot of the mountain, and turns north to follow the peak east into the canyon in the north.

古文：盖巍峰与溪北之峰峭逼成峡，溪捣其中，势甚险阻。
现代文：原来巍峨之峰与溪北的山峰险峻狭窄形成峡谷，溪流冲捣在峡中，地势十分险要。
English: Originally, the towering peak and the peak north of the creek formed a steep and narrow canyon. The stream was rushing in the canyon, and the terrain was very dangerous.

古文：巍峰东瞰溪西，壁立倒插，其西北隅倚崖阻水，止容一人攀隘东入，因而置栅为关，即北岸寨也。
现代文：巍峨之峰在东边俯瞰着溪流西面，墙壁样矗立倒插下来，它的西北角靠着山崖挡着水流，只容得下一个人攀着隘口向东进去，因而设置了栅栏作为关隘，就是北岸寨了。
English: On the east side, the towering peak overlooks the west side of the stream. It is like a wall standing upside down, and its northwest corner is against the cliff, blocking the water flow. Only the next person can climb the pass to the east, so a fence is set up as a pass, which is the North Bank Village.

古文：若山海之东扼，潼关之西悬，皆水冲山截，但大小异观耳，而深峭则尤甚焉。
现代文：好似山海关扼住东方，撞关高悬在西方，都是水流冲激山体截断，只不过是景观大小不同罢了，可深邃陡峭之势却尤其厉害。
English: It's as if the mountain passes are holding back the east and the crash barriers are hanging high in the west. It's all water rushing up and cutting off the mountains. It's just that the size of the landscape is different, but the steepness is particularly severe.

古文：去冬，交彝攻之不能克而去。
现代文：去年冬天，交夷攻打这里不能攻克便离开了。
English: Last winter, he left because he couldn't conquer this place.

古文：王歪纠来，掠上控而去。入隘门，其山中凹而南，再东复突而临水。
现代文：进入隘门，这里的山中间凹向南延伸，再往东去又突起并下临流水。
English: Entering the narrow gate, the hollow in the middle of the mountain here extends to the south, and further to the east it protrudes again and flows down.

古文：中凹处可容数百人，因结为寨，有大头目守云。
现代文：中间下凹之处可容纳数百人，就势建为寨子，有大头目守卫。
English: The hollow in the middle can accommodate hundreds of people, and it was built as a stockade, guarded by a large headman.

古文：过寨东，又南向循崖，再出隘门南下。
现代文：经过寨子东面，又向南沿着山崖走，再走出隘门向南下行。
English: After passing the east side of the stockade, walk south along the cliff, and then walk out of the narrow gate to the south.

古文：自渡溪入隘来，至此又半里矣。
现代文：自从渡溪进入关隘以来，到此又是半里路了。
English: Since crossing the creek into the pass, it's another half-mile to here.

古文：于是东向行山坞间，南北方山排闼成坞，中有平畴，东向宛转而去，大溪亦贯其中，曲折东行，南北两山麓时时有村落倚之。
现代文：于是向东行走在山坞间，南北的石山似门扇样排列成山坞，中间有平旷的原野，向东宛转而去，大溪也流贯在其中，曲折地向东走去，南北两面的山麓下时时有村落背靠着山。
English: As a result, I walked eastwards between the docks. The stone mountains to the north and south were arranged like a doorway into a dock. There was a flat plain in the middle, and I turned eastwards. A large stream also ran through it, and I walked eastwards in a zigzag manner. At the foot of the mountains to the north and south, there were always villages with their backs against the mountains.

古文：而那峺夫又不同前屡换，村小而路长，岂此处皆因附郭守险，不与乡村同例，一贵之十里之铺者耶？
现代文：而那硬村的脚夫又不同前面的屡次调换，村小而路长，莫非此处全是因为靠近城郭守卫险阻之处，与别的乡村的规定不一样，是一向重视的近城十里的站铺那样的地方吗？
English: And the porter of that hard village is different from the repeated transfers in front, the village is small and the road is long, isn't it all because it is close to the castle guard obstacle, and it is different from the rules of other villages, is it a place like the station house ten miles from the city that has always been valued?

古文：东北行平畴间，两涉大溪，随溪之西共东北五里，循路右山崖南转，始与溪别。
现代文：往东北行走在平坦的田野间，两次涉过大溪，顺大溪的西岸共向东北行五里，沿路右的山崖向南转，这才与大溪分手。
English: Walking to the northeast between flat fields, I waded across the creek twice. I followed the west bank of the creek for a total of five miles to the northeast, turning south along the cliff on the right of the road. This is when I parted ways with the creek.

古文：一里，乃换夫于路右村中，已望向武今作向都矣。
现代文：一里，就在路右的村子中换夫，已望得见向武州城了。
English: After one mile, I changed my husband in the village on the right side of the road, and I could already see Wuzhou City.

古文：税驾于向武铺司。
现代文：停宿在向武州绎站中。
English: The train stopped at Xiangwuzhou Station.

古文：此州直隶于省，而辖于右江，供应不给，刁顽殊其。
现代文：此州直接隶属于省里，但由右江道管辖，不供奉应差，特别刁猾顽固。
English: This prefecture is directly subordinate to the province, but it is under the jurisdiction of the Yangtze River. It does not provide services to other provinces, and it is particularly stubborn.

古文：投滕书，竞置不理。向武州官黄绍伦，加衔参将，其宅北向，后倚重峰，大溪在其北山峡中，志谓： 枯榕枯榕江，即今城江在州南。 
现代文：向武州州官是黄绍伦，加授了参将的衔头，他的府第向北，后面背靠重重山峰，大溪在他府第北面的山峡中，志书说： 枯榕江在州城南面。 不对。
English: The governor of Xiangwuzhou was Huang Shauren, who was given the additional title of general. His capital was to the north, with mountains behind it. Dashe was in a mountain gorge to the north of his capital. The history book said: "The Qianlong River is to the south of the city." Not true.

古文：非也。
现代文：半夜，下起雨来。
English: At midnight, it started to rain.

古文：夜半，雨作。初四日候夫司中，雨霏霏竟日。
现代文：初四日在骚站中等候派夫，整天雨势霏霏。
English: On the first four days of the month, there were waiting waiters at Suo Station, and it rained all day.

古文：赋投黄诗，往叩中军胡、谢。
现代文：写了呈递给黄绍伦的诗，前去叩拜中军胡某、谢某。
English: He wrote a poem to present to Huang Shoren, and went to pay homage to the Chinese soldiers Hu and Xie.

古文：二人皆贵池人，亦漫留之，为余通黄。
现代文：初五日冷极了，上午稍微晴开些。脚夫到了，只有六名。
English: The first five days were extremely cold, and the morning was a little clearer. The porter arrived, and there were only six of them.

古文：初五日寒甚，上午少霁。夫至，止六名。有周兵全者，土人之用事者也，见余诗辄携入，且谕夫去，止余少留。
现代文：有个叫周兵全的人，是土人中管事的人，见到我的诗立即带进衙门，并且吩咐脚夫离开了，阻拦我稍作停留。
English: A man named Zhou Bingquan, who was in charge among the natives, saw my poem and immediately brought it into the gate, and ordered the porter to leave, stopping me from stopping for a moment.

古文：下午，黄以启书札送蔬米酒肉。
现代文：下午，黄绍伦用信函送来菜米酒肉。
English: In the afternoon, Huang Shao Lun sent dishes, rice, wine and meat by letter.

古文：抵暮，又和余诗，以启来授。
现代文：到黄昏时，又作了应和我的诗，用信函送来。
English: Toward dusk, he composed another poem in response to mine, and sent it by letter.

古文：初六日凌晨起，天色已霁。
现代文：初六日凌晨起床，天色已晴开。
English: I got up early in the morning on the 6th day of the first month, and the sky had cleared up.

古文：饭后，周名高武，字文韬。复以翰文辞，书信至，留少停；余辞以夫至即行。
现代文：饭后周兵全又拿着书信来到，留我稍作停留；我用脚夫到了立即动身来推辞。
English: After the meal, Zhou Bingquan came again with a letter, leaving me to stay for a while; I used the porter to leave immediately to excuse myself.

古文：既而夫亦不至。
现代文：随后脚夫也不来。
English: Then the porter did not come.

古文：乃北向半里，觅大溪。
现代文：只好向北走半里，去找大溪。
English: I just had to walk half a mile north to find the creek.

古文：即枯榕江。随其支流而东，一峰圆起如独秀，有洞三层，西向而峙。
现代文：随着它的支流往东走，一座山峰圆圆地耸起如像独秀峰，有三层洞，向西屹立。
English: Along with its tributaries to the east, a mountain peak rises roundly like the Duxiu Peak, with a three-story cave, standing to the west.

古文：下洞深五丈，而无支窍，然轩爽殊甚。
现代文：下洞深五丈，又无旁洞，但特别轩敞明亮。
English: The lower cave is very deep, and there are no side caves, but it is particularly bright.

古文：而内外俱不能上通，仰睇中上二层飘渺，非置危梯，无由而达。
现代文：可是内外都不能通到上层，仰视中、上二层飘飘渺渺，不放置高梯，无法到达。
English: However, neither the inside nor the outside can reach the upper floor. Looking up, the middle and upper two floors float in the air, and cannot be reached without a ladder.

古文：已出洞，环其北东二麓，复半里矣。
现代文：不久出洞来，环绕山的北、东两面山麓，又走半里了。
English: Soon I came out of the cave and walked another half-mile around the northern and eastern foothills of the mountain.

古文：共一里，还抵寓。
现代文：共二里，返回寓所。
English: A total of two miles, back to the apartment.

古文：适夫至，欲行。
现代文：恰好脚夫到了，打算动身。
English: The porter had just arrived and was about to set off.

古文：周文韬来坐留，复促其幕宾梁文焕往携程仪至。
现代文：周文韬来坐着挽留，又催促他的同僚梁某前去带赠送的路费来。
English: Zhou Wenyi came to sit and stay, and urged his colleague Liang Mou to go and bring the free travel fare.

古文：乃作柬名帖，信札等的统称谢黄，装行李，呼夫速去。
现代文：于是写了书信感谢黄绍伦，装了行李，呼唤脚夫赶快离开。
English: So he wrote a letter of thanks to Huang Shoren, packed his luggage, and called the porter to leave quickly.

古文：及饭毕，而夫哄然散，无一人矣。
现代文：到吃完饭，脚夫却哄然一声散了伙，无一人了。
English: When the meal was over, the porter abruptly dispersed, leaving no one behind.

古文：盖余呼其去，乃促其起程，而彼误以为姑散去也。
现代文：原来我呼唤他们离开，是催促他们起程，而他们却误认为是暂且散伙离开。
English: It turned out that I had called them to leave, urging them to set off, but they mistook this for a temporary dispersal of the group.

古文：饭后，令顾仆往催其家，俱已入山采薪，更订期明早焉。
现代文：饭后，命令顾仆去他们家里催促，已全部进山砍柴去了，另外约定明早的日期。
English: After the meal, he ordered his servants to go to their house to urge them. They had all gone into the mountains to cut firewood, and another date was set for tomorrow morning.

古文：余乃散步四山，薄暮返铺司，忽一人至，执礼甚恭，则黄君令来留驾者，其意甚笃挚。
现代文：我于是到四周的山上散步，傍晚返回骚站，忽然有一个人来到，礼节十分恭敬，是黄君命令前来挽留的人，他的意思十分厚道诚挚。
English: So I went for a walk on the surrounding hills, and in the evening I returned to Suo Station. Suddenly, a man arrived, with very respectful etiquette. It was Huang Jun who ordered me to come and stay with him. His intention was very kind and sincere.

古文：余辞以名山念切，必不能留，托其婉辞。
现代文：我用思念名山的心切来辞谢，必定不能留下，托他婉言辞谢。
English: With my heart full of nostalgia for the famous mountain, I said thank you. I couldn't stay, so I asked him to say thank you.

古文：已而谢、胡各造谒，俱以主人来留，而前使又往返再三。
现代文：不久谢某、胡某各自登门拜见，都以主人的身份来挽留，而先前那个使者又再三往返。
English: Soon, Xie Mou and Hu Mou went to the door to see each other, and both of them stayed as the owner, while the previous messenger returned again and again.

古文：已而周文韬复同大头目韦守老者来谒， 守老 ，土音作 苏老 ，当道以守备假之。
现代文：随即周文韬又随同大头目韦守老者来拜见，  守老 ，土话读作 苏老 ，当权者把守备之职让他代理。
English: Immediately afterwards, Zhou Wenzhong went to visit Wei Shou Lao Zi with the leader Wei Shou Lao Zi. Shou Lao Zi is read as Su Lao in the local dialect. The person in power delegated the guarding duty to him.

古文：传谕谆谆，余俱力辞云。
现代文：诚恳传达了黄君的谕示，我全都竭力辞谢了。
English: I sincerely conveyed Huang Jun's instruction, and I tried my best to thank him.

古文：既暮，黄君复以酒米蔬肉至，又以手书悬留，俟疾起一晤，辞礼甚恭。
现代文：天黑之后，黄君再次送酒米菜肉来，又用亲笔信恳切挽留，等病好起床后见一次面，辞语礼节非常恭敬。
English: After dark, Huang Jun once again sent wine, rice, vegetables and meat, and also wrote a personal letter to earnestly retain, so that he would see him once after he got up, and his words were very respectful.

古文：余不能决而卧。
现代文：我不能决定便躺下了。
English: I couldn't decide so I lay down.

古文：初七日早寒彻骨，即余地禁寒不是过也。
现代文：初七日清晨寒冷彻骨，即便是我家乡寒食节时也不过如此了。
English: It was bone-chillingly cold on the morning of the seventh day of the first month of the year, even during the cold food festival in my hometown.

古文：甫晓，黄君又致鸡肉酒米。
现代文：天刚拂晓，黄君又送来鸡肉酒米。
English: Just before dawn, Huang Jun sent chicken rice wine again.

古文：余乃起作柬答之，许为暂留数日。
现代文：我于是起床写信答谢他，同意暂留数日。
English: I got up and wrote to thank him and agreed to stay for a few days.

古文：是日明霁尤甚，而州前复墟，余乃以所致生鸡僧代养，买蕉煮肉，酌酒而醉。
现代文：这天天特别明丽晴朗，而州衙前再次赶集，我便把送来的活鸡交给僧人代为饲养，买来香蕉煮了肉，斟酒喝醉了。
English: It was a particularly bright and sunny day, and the state fair was coming up again, so I gave the live chicken I had brought to the monks to raise, bought bananas to cook the meat, poured the wine and got drunk.

古文：初八日上午，周文韬复以黄君手柬至，馈青蚨即钱银为寓中资，且请下午候见。
现代文：初八日上午，周文韬又拿着黄君的亲笔信来到，赠送了铜钱作为在寓所中的费用，并且请在下午等候召见。
English: On the morning of the eighth day of the first month, Zhou Wenyi came again with Huang Jun's personal letter, presented copper money as a fee in the apartment, and asked to wait to be called in the afternoon.

古文：盖土司俱以夜代日，下午始起栉沐耳。
现代文：原来土司都是用夜晚来代替白天，下午才起床梳洗。
English: Originally, tozis used the night to replace the day, and only got up in the afternoon to freshen up.

古文：下午，文韬复来引见于后堂，执礼颇恭，恨相见晚。
现代文：下午，文韬又来引路在后堂相见，礼节十分恭敬，恨相见太晚。
English: In the afternoon, Wen Jiabao came again to lead the way to see each other in the back hall. The etiquette was very respectful, but it was too late to see each other.

古文：其年长余三岁，为五十五矣。
现代文：黄君的年龄大我三岁，有五十五了。
English: Huang Jun is three years older than I am, and he is fifty-five.

古文：初致留悃相留，余以参礼名山苦辞之。
现代文：最初表达了相留的诚意，我用参拜名山苦苦辞谢了他。
English: At first, I expressed my sincerity to stay with him, and I thanked him with a visit to a famous mountain.

古文：既曰： 余知君高尚，即君相不能牢笼，岂枳棘敢栖鸾凤？
现代文：随后说： 我知道先生高尚，如果先生不能屈居牢笼，荆棘丛中哪敢栖息莺凤？
English: Then he said, "I know that you are a noble man, but if you can't live in a cage, how can you live among thorns?

古文：惟是路多艰阻，虑难即前。
现代文：只是这条路上艰难险阻很多，担心很难马上前行。
English: However, there are many difficulties and obstacles on this road, and it is difficult to move forward immediately.

古文：乃布局手谈下围棋，各一胜负。余因以囊中所存石斋翁石刻并湛持翁手书示之，彼引余瞻钦锡奖额，上书 钦命嘉奖 四字，乃祟祯八年十月十五日为加参将向武知州黄绍伦立。时额门楣，匾额新装，悬于高楣，以重席袭护，悉命除去，然后得见。
现代文：恰好有归顺州的使者前来，我将写信让他在前边引路，并转发文书到归朝，或许可以到达。 而且胡润寨是他的女婿，也答应为我发文书。最终商定推迟一天与归顺州的使者同行。于是摆开棋盘下棋，各胜负一次。我于是把行李中存放着的石斋翁的石刻及湛持翁的亲笔字拿给他看，他领我瞻仰了钦赐嘉奖的匾额，此时匾额新近装修过，悬在高高的横媚上，用一层层席子套上保护着，命令全部除去，然后才能见到。
English: It so happened that an emissary from the surrendered state came to me. I would write to him and ask him to lead the way, and forward the document to the surrendered state, so that it might arrive. Moreover, Hurunzhai was his son-in-law, and he also agreed to send me a document. Finally, it was agreed to postpone the day to accompany the emissary from the surrendered state. So I set up a chessboard and played chess, with one win and one loss. I then showed him the stone carving of Shizhao Weng and the autograph letter of Zhan Zhiweng stored in my luggage. He led me to look at the plaque of

古文：久之返寓，日将晡矣。
现代文：很久后返回寓所，太阳将要西下了。
English: After a long time, I returned to my apartment. The sun was about to set.

古文：此地有三岩：当前者曰飘琅岩，即北面圆峰，累洞三层；中上二层不能上，时州官亦将缚梯缠架穷之。在上流者曰白岩寨，土音曰不汗，一作北岸。在治西数时，即来时临流置隘门处；在下流者曰百感岩，在治东北数里，枯榕江从此入。
现代文：文韬又拿着黄君的书信来致谢探望。初九日在向武州等使者。这一天阴云四布，想去百感岩，因为僧人外出没有实现。此地有三个岩洞：正当前方的叫飘琅岩，就是北面的圆峰，重叠着三层山洞；在上游的叫白岩寨，在州城西边数里，就是来时面临溪流设置了隘门之处；在下游的叫百感岩，在州城东北数里，枯榕江从此洞流进去。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the emissary waited for the messenger in Wuzhou. On this day, it was cloudy and overcast, and he wanted to go to the Hundred Senses Rock, because the monk did not go out. There are three caves here: the one in front is called the Floating Rock, which is the round peak in the north and overlaps with a three-story cave; the one upstream is called the White Rock Village, a few miles west of the state capital, which is the place where a narrow gate is set up to face the stream; the one downstream is called the Hundred Senses Rock, a few miles northeast of the state capital, and the

古文：此三岩黄将欲穷之，订余同行，余不能待也。
现代文：这三个岩洞黄绍伦都想穷究，约我同行，我不能等下去了。
English: Huang Shao Lun wanted to explore all three caves and asked me to go with him. I couldn't wait any longer.

古文：间晤胡中军尚并归顺使者刘光汉，为余言： 昔镇安壤甚广，共十三峒。
现代文：空闲时会晤了胡中军口尚及归顺州的使者刘光汉。他们对我讲： 从前镇安府的地域非常宽广，共辖十三个炯。
English: In my spare time, I met with Hu Zhongjunjunkou Shang and Liu Guanghan, the envoy who returned to Shunzhou. They told me: The area of the former Zhen'anfu was very wide, with a total of thirteen counties.

古文：今归顺、下雷各开立州治，而胡润亦立寨隶南宁。
现代文：今天归顺、下雷各自分开设立了州治，而且胡润也建了寨隶属南宁府。
English: Today, Guishun and Jiemei have set up state governance independently, and Hurun has also built a village affiliated to Nanning Prefecture.

古文：胡润之东有上英峒，尚属镇安，而旧镇安之属归顺者，今已为交彝所踞，其地遂四分五裂；然所存犹不小。
现代文：胡润寨的东面有上英蛔，还属于镇安府，可旧时镇安府划属归顺州的地方，今天已被交夷占据，它的辖地便四分五裂；然而存留着的仍然不小。
English: To the east of Hurunzhai, there is Shangying Township, which still belongs to Zhen'an Prefecture. However, in the past, Zhen'an Prefecture belonged to Shunzhou. Today, it has been occupied by the barbarians, and its jurisdiction has been torn apart; however, it is still not small.

古文：昔年土官岑继祥没，有子岑日寿存宾州，当道不即迎入，遂客死，嗣绝。
现代文：前些年土官岑继祥死后，有个儿子岑日寿在宾州，当权者不马上迎接进州，便客死他乡，继位人死绝。
English: A few years ago, after the death of the local government official Zou Jixiang, there was a son, Zou Nichou, in Pennsylvania. The authorities did not immediately welcome him into the state, the guest died in another country, and the successor died.

古文：其由镇安而分者，惟归顺为近，而胡润次之。田州、泗城同姓不同宗，各恃强垂涎，甚至假胁交彝，则田州其甚者也。 又言： 自归顺抵广南，南经富州，北经归朝。
现代文：那由镇安府划分出去的地方，唯有归顺州血缘算是近的，而胡润寨次一点，田州、泅城州同姓不是同一个祖宗，各自依仗武力垂涎继承权，甚至假借交夷威胁对方，那田州是其中最厉害的了。 又说： 自归顺州抵达广南府，南面要经过富州，北面要经过归朝。
English: Of the places divided by Zhen'an Prefecture, only Guishun Prefecture is considered to be close in blood, and Hurun Village is the next closest. Tianzhou and Lucheng Prefecture do not share the same ancestor, each relying on force to covet inheritance rights, and even threatening the other side under the pretense of friendship. Nantian Prefecture is the most powerful of them. It is also said that: from Guishun Prefecture to Guangnan Prefecture, the south side must pass through Fuzhou, and the north side must pass through Guizhou.

古文：归朝土官姓沈名明通，与叔构兵，既多扰攘，又富州乃其头目。
现代文：归朝的土司姓沈名明通，与叔父交战，骚乱既已很多，富州又是他的头目。
English: Returning to the imperial court, Toji, surnamed Shen Mingtong, was at war with his uncle. There were already many riots, and Fuzhou was his ringleader.

古文：今富州土官李宝之先所辖皆儸儸，彝之旧称，居高山峻岭之上，李能辑抚，得其欢心，其力遂强，齮齕其主，国初竟得窃受州印，而主沈反受辖焉。
现代文：现今富州土官李宝的祖先管辖的全是锣锣，居住在高山峻岭之上，李氏能安抚他们，得到他们的欢心，李氏的力量于是强大起来，倾轧他的主人，国朝初年竟然得以窃取了州印，而州主沈氏反而受他管辖了。
English: The ancestors of Li Bao, the local official of Fuzhou at present, ruled over all the cormorants. They lived high in the mountains. The Li clan was able to appease them and win their favor. As a result, the power of the Li clan became strong and overpowered its master. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, it was even able to steal the seal of the state, while the lord of the state, the Shen clan, was ruled by him.

古文：后黎兵逼归顺，敬宽复走归朝，而妻子留归顺，为黎逼索不已，竟畀黎去，故敬宽恨之。或言奸其妻，亦或有之。
现代文：所以至今两家不停地互相攻战，各自借交夷来泄愤，道路因此被阻。 周文韬名叫尚武，本来是归顺州人，对我说： 当初，高平莫敬宽被黎氏攻打，带着妻儿逃奔到归顺州，州官岑大伦接纳了他。后来黎氏的军队逼近归顺，莫敬宽又逃到归朝，可妻儿留在归顺州，被黎氏不停地强行索要，居然交给黎氏去了，因此莫敬宽怨恨。
English: So far, the two families have been fighting each other incessantly, each taking advantage of the other to vent their anger, and the road has been blocked. Zhou Wenyi, whose name is Shangwu, originally from Guishu, said to me: At first, Gaoping Mo Jingkang was attacked by the Li clan and fled to Guishu with his wife and children, and the state official Shida Lian accepted him. Later, the Li clan's army approached Guishu, and Mo Jingkang fled to Guizhong, but his wife and children remained in Guishu. They were constantly forced by the Li clan and were actually handed over to the Li clan.

古文：及返高平，渐获生聚，而镇安复从中为构罗织罪名，进行陷害，遂以兵围归顺。
现代文：及返回高平后，渐渐人口繁殖，财富积聚，而镇安府又从中勾结，便率军围攻归顺。
English: And after returning to Gaoping, the population gradually multiplied and wealth accumulated, and the Zhen'an government colluded with them and led the army to besiege Shun.

古文：自丙寅十二月临城围，丁卯三月城破，竟掳大伦以去。
现代文：自丙寅年十二月兵临围城，丁卯年三月城被攻破，竟然俘虏岑大伦而去。
English: Since the soldiers besieged the city in December of Heping Year, the city was breached in March of Dingwu Year, and the captives of Shida Lun went away.

古文：镇安复取归杀之。 初，围城急，州人以文韬读书好义，敛金千两，马四十匹，段五十端犹 匹 ，令随数人驰献交彝，说其退师。
现代文：镇安府又取回来杀了他。 当初，围城紧急时，州里人因为周文韬读过书喜爱行义，收集了千两黄金，四十匹马，五十匹绸缎，命令数人跟随骑马奔去献给交夷，劝说他们退兵。
English: At first, during the emergency of the siege, the people of the state, because Zhou Wenyi read books and liked to act righteously, collected one thousand and two gold, forty horses, and fifty silkworms, and ordered several people to follow on horseback and rush to the crossroads to persuade them to withdraw.

古文：交人狡甚，少退，受金，辄乘不备，复合围焉，城几为破。
现代文：交人非常狡猾，稍稍后退，接受了黄金，立即乘城中不防备，重又合围了州城，城几乎被攻破。
English: He was very cunning. He retreated a little, accepted the gold, immediately took advantage of the city's unpreparedness, and again surrounded the state capital. The city was almost breached.

古文：既抵城下，尽杀随行者，每晨以周悬竿上试铳恐之，逼之令降。
现代文：到达城下后，把随行的人尽数杀了，每天早晨把周文韬悬挂在高竿上试鸟铣来恐吓他，逼他命令投降。
English: After arriving at the city, he killed as many of the accompanying people as possible, and every morning he hung Zhou Wenyi on a pole to test the bird's beak to intimidate him and force him to surrender.

古文：悬数日，其老母自城上望之，乃缒城出。
现代文：悬吊了几天，他的老母亲从城上望见，便用绳子缝出城来。
English: After hanging for a few days, his old mother saw him from the top of the castle and used a rope to sew him out of the city.

古文：母抱竿而哭于下，子抱竿而哭于上，交人义之，为解悬索赎。
现代文：母亲抱住竿子在下边哭，儿子抱着竿子在上面哭，交人被他们母子的节义感动，为他解去悬吊之苦，索取赎金。
English: The mother held the pole and cried on the bottom, and the son held the pole and cried on the top. They were moved by their mother's and son's sacrifice, relieved him of the pain of hanging, and demanded a ransom.

古文：母曰： 儿去或可得银，余老妪何从办之？ 初释周行，不数步复留之。
现代文：母亲说： 儿子离开或许可得到银子，我一个老妇人从哪里去筹办赎金？  起初释放了周文韬让他走，不到几步又留下他。
English: The mother said, "If my son is allowed to leave, he may get some money. Where can I, an old woman, go to get ransom money?" At first, Zhou Wenyi released him and let him go, but after a few steps, he left him again.

古文：曰： 此老妪，宁足为质者！
现代文：说： 这个老女人，哪值得作人质！
English: He said: "This old woman doesn't deserve to be held hostage!

古文：必留子释母以取金。 
现代文：必定要留下儿子释放母亲以取得赎金。 
English: He must leave his son behind to free his mother in order to get the ransom.

古文：既而有识者曰： 观其母子至情，必非忍其母者。 
现代文：随即有个有识之士说： 观察他们母子的至亲情义，必定不是忍心他母亲死去的人。 
English: Then a man of insight said: To observe the closeness of their mother and son, it must not be the one who suffered the death of his mother.

古文：乃仍释周入城，以百二十金赎母归。
现代文：于是仍释放周文韬进城，用一百二十两黄金赎回母亲。
English: Therefore, he still released Zhou Wenyi into the city and redeemed his mother with one hundred and twenty-two gold coins.

古文：及城破，复一家悉缚去，编为奴者数月，母遂死其境。
现代文：到城被攻破时，又一家人全数被绑了去，编为奴隶有几个月的时间，母亲终于死在高平境内。
English: When the city was breached, another whole family was tied up and enslaved for several months, and the mother finally died in Takahira.

古文：后防者懈，得挈家而遁。
现代文：后来防守的人松懈，得以带领全家逃出来。
English: Later, a slack defender was able to lead the whole family out.

古文：昼伏夜行，经月走荒山中，得还归顺，妻子不失一人。
现代文：昼伏夜行，在荒山中逃奔了一个月，才返回归顺，妻儿不丢失一人。
English: Day and night, he fled for a month in the desolate mountains, only to return to submit. He did not lose a single wife or child.

古文：即与归顺遗目一二人同走当道，乞复其主。
现代文：立即与归顺遗下的一两个头目一同投奔当权者，乞求恢复他们的州主。
English: Immediately, those in power, together with one or two leaders left behind by those who had surrendered, came begging for the return of their statesmen.

古文：又遍乞邻邦共为援助，乃得立大伦子继纲延其嗣。
现代文：又遍求邻境各土司共同援助，这才得以立岑大伦的儿子岑继纲继承职位。
English: He also sought the mutual assistance of all the local magistrates in the neighboring regions. Only then was it possible to appoint Zou Dalun's son, Zou Jigang, to succeed him.

古文：而向武爱其义勇，留为头目，乃家向武。
现代文：而向武州喜爱他的节义英勇，留下来作头目，便在向武安了家。
English: But Xiang loved his bravery in Wuzhou and stayed to be the leader, so he settled in Xiang Wu'an.

古文：镇安岑继祥，乃归顺岑大伦之叔，前构勾结交彝破归顺，又取归杀之。
现代文：镇安府的岑继祥，是归顺州岑大伦的叔父，从前勾结交夷攻破归顺州，又把被交夷俘去的岑大化赎回杀了。
English: Zhen'anfu's Zou Jixiang was the uncle of Zou Dalun, who had surrendered to Shunzhou. Zou Jixiang had once colluded with Jia Yi to defeat and surrender to Shunzhou. Zou Jixiang also ransomed and killed Zou Da Hua, who had been captured by Jia Yi.

古文：未几，身死无嗣。
现代文：不多久，岑继祥死后身边没有子孙。
English: Soon after, Zou Jixiang died, leaving no descendants around him.

古文：应归顺第二子继常立，本州头目皆向之。
现代文：应该是归顺州的二儿子岑继常继承职位，本州的头目都向着他。
English: It should be the second son of the surrendered state, Zou Jijiang, who inherits the position, and the leaders of the state are all looking to him.

古文：后当道以州印畀继纲，而继常返初服。初十日天色明丽。
现代文：可田州、泅城州交相从旁边来争夺，竟然勾结借助境外的夷族，两州的百姓因而肝脑涂地。虽然争夺的形势还未定，可天道喜爱循环如此。初十日天色明朗艳丽。
English: However, Tianzhou and Licheng came to compete with each other from the side, and even colluded with the help of the foreign barbarians, so the people of the two states won. Although the situation of the competition is still undecided, the sky is like this. On the tenth day of the first month, the sky was bright and beautiful.

古文：未日则寒甚，日出则回和。
现代文：未出太阳则很冷，太阳一出就转暖了。
English: Before the sun rises, it is very cold, but it warms up as soon as the sun rises.

古文：先晚晤归顺使，刘光汉。言归朝、富州路俱艰阻，而交彝尤不可测，劝余无从此道。
现代文：头天晚上会晤了归顺州的使者，说去归朝、富州的路都艰险难走，而交夷尤其不可预测，劝我不要从这条路走。
English: On the evening of the day before yesterday, I met an emissary from Fuzhou, who said that the road to return to the DPRK and Fuzhou is arduous and difficult, and cross-strait relations are particularly unpredictable. He advised me not to take this road.

古文：余惑之，复阄于佛前，仍得南丹、独山为吉。
现代文：我对此疑惑不定，再次到佛前去拈阉，仍然得到走南丹卫、独山州吉利的阉。
English: I was uncertain about this, and when I went to see the Buddha again, I still got the impression that I was in the south of Danwei, in the mountains of Zhili.

古文：既午，周文韬传黄君命，言： 不从归顺、归朝，可另作田州、泗城书，觅道而去。 
现代文：中午以后，周文韬传达了黄君的命令，说： 不从归顺、归朝走，可另写给田州、泅城州的信，找路前去。 
English: After noon, Zhou Wenzhong conveyed Huang Jun's order, saying, "Don't go back to the North, but write another letter to Tianzhou and Licheng, and find a way forward."

古文：余素不顺田州，文韬亦言此二州俱非可假道者，遂决意从东。
现代文：我素来不相信田州，文韬也说起这两州都不是可以借道而走的地方，便决心从东走。
English: I have never believed in Tianzhou, and Wen Wei also said that these two states are not places where you can take a detour, so I decided to go from the east.

古文：是日此地复墟，以黄君所赐宋钱，选各朝者俱存其一，以其余市布为裹足，市鱼肉为蔬，又得何首乌之大者一枚。
现代文：这天此地又赶集，拿出黄君赐给的宋代铜钱，挑选各个朝代的都保存了其中的一枚，用其余的买布来作裹脚布，买来鱼肉作菜，又买到一个大的何首乌。
English: On this day, they rushed to collect the Song Dynasty copper money that Huang Jun had given to Wu, and selected one piece from each dynasty. They used the rest to buy cloth to make foot wraps, fish meat to make dishes, and a large head of cabbage.

古文：抵暮，黄君以绵衣、唐巾唐代帝王所戴的一种便帽，仍为士人所用、裙为赐。
现代文：到天黑时，黄君拿来绵衣、唐巾、绸裙作为赏赐。十一日天色明朗艳丽，拂晓寒中午暖。
English: When it got dark, Huang Jun brought cotton clothes, a Chinese towel, and a silk skirt as a reward. On the eleventh day, the sky was bright and beautiful, and it was warm at dawn and cold at noon.

古文：十一日天色明丽，晓寒午暖。
现代文：找信笺写信答谢黄君，可信笺找不到。
English: Looking for a letterhead to write a letter of thanks to Huang Jun, I couldn't find a credible one.

古文：觅帖小柬作启谢黄君，而帖不可得。当户居民有被焚者，远近俱升屋驱飞焰，携囊远置旷野中。
现代文：当门处有居民房屋被焚的，远近的人都登上屋顶驱灭飞舞的火焰，带着行李远远放在旷野中。
English: When a resident's house was set ablaze at the gate, people from near and far climbed onto the roof to extinguish the flying flames, taking their luggage with them and leaving it far away in the wilderness.

古文：又三十里为土上林县。向武西南三十里上英峒界有吉祥洞，前后通明，溪流其间，为韦守所居地。又东南十二里有定稔村，今作廷稔，有洞甚奇奥，俱有石丸、荔盆。
现代文：原来向武州无土城，而官民都是茅屋，唯有州衙的议事厅及后堂用瓦盖，所以火势容易蔓延燃烧。下午，用短折子回复了黄君。十二日天色明朗艳丽，拂晓寒冷中午暖和。独自再去琅山找岩洞，在西面抬头远望，不能上去便返回来。
English: Originally, there was no land in Wuzhou, and both the government and the people were huts. Only the meeting hall and the back hall of the State Council were covered with tiles, so the fire was easy to spread and burn. In the afternoon, Huang Jun replied with a short fold. On the 12th, the sky was bright and beautiful, the dawn was cold and the noon was warm. I went to Lushan Mountain alone to find a cave, looked up to the west, and returned if I couldn't go up.

古文：十三日同韦守老联骑往百感岩。
现代文：十三日同韦守老并肩骑马去百感岩。
English: On the 13th, he rode with Wei Shoulao to Baikangyan Rock.

古文：先径琅山东，回望见东面悬梯，乃新缚以升岩者。
现代文：先经过琅山东面，回头望见东面有高悬的梯子，是新近绑了去登岩洞的梯子。
English: After passing the eastern side of Lushan Mountain, I looked back and saw a high-hanging ladder on the eastern side. It was a newly tied ladder for climbing the cave.

古文：出百感岩，度横栈，未下梯，有岐东循崖。
现代文：出了百感岩，越过横架的栈道，未下梯子，有条岔道向东沿山崖延伸。
English: Out of the hundred-feeling rock, over the cross-beam footpath, before descending the ladder, there is a footpath extending eastward along the cliff.

古文：有岩在百感东，晚不及上。
现代文：有岩洞在百感岩东边，因天晚来不及上登。
English: There is a cave on the east side of Hyakkan Rock, but it is too late to go up.

古文：十四日韦守老再约游琅岩。
现代文：十四日韦守老再次相约去游琅山岩。
English: On the 14th, Wei Shoulao made an appointment to visit Shaoshan Rock again.

古文：余早饭，即先行，游毕，韦未至，余再往百感，游东上岩。
现代文：我早早吃过饭，立即先行，出了州城向北走半里，找到大溪，此溪就是枯榕江。
English: I had breakfast early, immediately ahead, out of the state capital to walk half a mile north, to find the creek, this creek is the Karakorum River.

古文：复从百感大岩内，暗中穿洞北，下百感村。
现代文：随它的支流向东去游琅山岩。游完后，韦守老还未到，我再去百感岩，游东边的上洞。又从百感岩的大洞内摸黑穿到洞北，下到百感村。
English: Following its tributary to the east, I swam to the Lushan Rock. After finishing the swim, Wei Shoulao had not yet arrived, so I went to the Hundred Senses Rock and swam to the east side of the upper cave. From the large cave of the Hundred Senses Rock, I walked through the darkness to the north of the cave and down to the Hundred Senses Village.

古文：矮僧净虚以酒来迎，遂溯水观水岩。
现代文：矮个子僧人净虚拿酒来迎接，于是逆水观赏了水洞。
English: The short monk Ching Hui welcomed them with wine, and they watched the cave from the opposite side of the water.

古文：外水深不得入，约明日缚筏以进。
现代文：外边水深不能进去，约好明天绑木筏进去。
English: The water outside is too deep to go in, so we made an appointment to tie a raft and go in tomorrow.

古文：遂一里，东北渡桥，由百感外村东南逾岭，二里，南出东来大路。
现代文：于是走一里，向东北走过桥，由百感外村向东南越岭，二里，往南走上东来的大路。
English: So I walked one mile, crossed the bridge to the northeast, crossed the ridge from the village of Baikan to the southeast, and walked two miles south to the main road coming from the east.

古文：西一里，入隘门，西向行月下，共五里，还铺舍。
现代文：向西一里，走入隘门，路过红石崖下，它北面的石山上有洞向南，十分空阔。在月光下向西行，共五里，返回骚站客馆。
English: One mile to the west, walk into the narrow gate, pass under the red stone cliff, there is a hole in the stone mountain north of it to the south, very open. Go west under the moonlight, a total of five miles, return to the So Station Guest House.

古文：十五日早起，晓寒午暖，晴丽尤甚。
现代文：十五日早晨起床，拂晓冷中午暖和，天气格外晴朗明丽。
English: I got up on the morning of the 15th. It was cold at dawn and warm at noon. The weather was exceptionally clear and bright.

古文：饭后仍往百感。
现代文：饭后仍去百感岩。
English: After dinner, I still went to Hyakkan-iwa.

古文：过琅岩不上，东渡南曲小溪，循东流，有岩在路北，其下则东分中流所入穴。
现代文：路过琅山岩未上去，向东渡过南曲的小溪，沿向东的溪流走，有岩洞在路北，它下面就是向东分出的中间的溪流流进去的洞穴。
English: Pass through the Lushan Rock before going up, cross the Nanquan Creek to the east, and walk along the stream to the east. There is a rock cave on the north of the road. Below it is the cave into which the middle stream flows, which branches off to the east.

古文：闻矮僧来言： 村氓未得州命，不敢缚筏。 
现代文：听矮个子僧人来说； 村民未得到州里的命令，不敢绑木筏。 
English: To hear the short monk tell it, villagers don't dare tie the rafts without an order from the state.

古文：阻余转。
现代文：劝阻我转回去。
English: to dissuade me from going back.

古文：乃仍至琅岩东北，观枯榕水、三分水。
现代文：于是仍来到琅山岩的东北方，观赏枯榕江、三分水。
English: As a result, I still came to the northeast of Lushan Rock to see the Qianlong River and the Three-Pointed Water.

古文：北为龙行村今作陇祥。
现代文：北面是龙行村。
English: To the north is Longgang Village.

古文：由其西南渡溪北，越村东，随所分北溪东入山隘。
现代文：由村子的西南方渡到溪北，越过村东，沿分出来的北溪向东走入山隘。
English: From the southwest of the village to the north of the stream, across the east of the village, along the branch of the North Stream to the east into the mountain pass.

古文：东北共五里，其水东向捣入山穴。
现代文：往东北共行五里，溪水向东捣人山下的洞穴中。
English: Five miles to the northeast, the stream rushes east into the cave under the mountain.

古文：穴崖上有洞，门俱西向，中甚暖，有白丹丸。
现代文：洞穴上的山崖上有洞，洞口都是向西，洞中非常温暖，有白舟丸。
English: There is a cave on the cliff above the cave, the entrance is to the west, the cave is very warm, and there is a white boat.

古文：还铺，复入见黄君手谈。
现代文：返回骚站，文进州衙见黄君下棋。
English: Returning to Suo Station, Wen Jinzhou saw Huang Jun playing chess.

古文：入夜，出小荔盆、石丸四，俱天成。
现代文：入夜后，拿出小荔枝盆、石丸四个，都是天然而成的。
English: After nightfall, he took out a small lychee basin and four stone circles, all of which were made naturally.

古文：十六日黄君命人送游水岩。
现代文：十六日黄君命人相递去游水洞。
English: On the 16th day, Huang Jun gave the order to go to the water cave.

古文：十七日黄君以镯送。
现代文：十七日黄君拿手镯相送。
English: On the seventeenth day, Huang Jun took the bracelet and sent it.

