古文：矣。救者至，又重败之。
现代文：救兵到达，又再度打败敌军。
English: The rescuers arrived and defeated the enemy again.

古文：故兵之大数，五十里不相救也。
现代文：所以，用兵的一项重要原则是，相距里就不能相互救援了。
English: Therefore, an important principle of the use of troops is that it is impossible to rescue each other at a distance.

古文：况近□□□□□数百里，此程兵之极也。
现代文：有几百里的距离，这样的距离已超过行军救援的极限了。
English: There are hundreds of miles of distance, such a distance has exceeded the limit of marching rescue.

古文：故兵曰：积弗如，勿与持久。
现代文：因此兵法说，当储备不如敌军时，不要和敌军打持久战。
English: Therefore, the law of war says that when the reserves are not as good as the enemy, do not fight a protracted war with the enemy.

古文：众弗如，勿与接和。
现代文：兵力不如敌军时，不要和敌军周旋。
English: When your forces are not as strong as the enemy's, don't negotiate with the enemy.

古文：□与□长。
现代文：不如敌军时，不要与敌军。
English: When you are not as good as the enemy, do not march with the enemy.

古文：习弗如，毋当其所长。五度既明，兵乃横行。故兵趋敌数。
现代文：不如敌军时，不要与敌军士兵训练不如敌军时，不要用这样的士兵去与敌军的长处抗争。
English: If you are not as good as the enemy, do not train with enemy soldiers. If you are not as good as the enemy, do not use such soldiers to fight against the enemy's strengths.

古文：一曰取粮。
现代文：统军将领如能懂得衡量这五项，并能恰当地把握分寸，那他带的军队就可以纵横驰骋了。所以兵法说：各种逼迫敌军的办法。第一是夺取敌军粮草。
English: If the general of the unified army can understand and measure these five things, and can properly grasp the balance, then the army he brings can run across the country. Therefore, the law of war says: various ways to persecute the enemy army. The first is to seize the enemy army's grain and grass.

古文：二曰取水。三曰取津。
现代文：第二是夺取敌军水源，第三是夺取敌军必经的渡口。
English: The second is to seize the enemy's water sources, and the third is to seize the ferry ports through which the enemy must pass.

古文：四曰取途。
现代文：第四是夺取敌军必经的道路。
English: The fourth is the road that must be taken to seize the enemy's army.

古文：五曰取险。
现代文：第五是夺占敌军必经的险要关隘。
English: The fifth is the perilous pass through which the enemy troops must pass in order to capture the city.

古文：六曰取易。
现代文：第六是夺取平坦开阔地带。
English: The sixth is to seize the flat and open areas.

古文：七曰曰取其所读贵。
现代文：第七是第八是第九是夺取敌军最珍视的东西。
English: The seventh, the eighth, and the ninth are the most precious things to capture from the enemy.

古文：凡九夺，所以趋敌也。
现代文：以上九项夺取，都可以逼迫敌军。
English: The capture of the above nine items can force the enemy army.

