古文：孝景皇帝子凡十三人为王，而母五人，同母者为宗亲。
现代文：孝景皇帝的儿子共有十三人受封为王，这十三人分别由五位母亲所生，同一母亲所生的为宗亲。
English: A total of thirteen sons of Emperor Xiaojing were crowned as kings. These thirteen sons were born to five different mothers, and those born to the same mother were the next of kin.

古文：栗姬子曰荣、德、阏于。
现代文：栗姬所生的儿子是刘荣、刘德、刘阏于。
English: The sons born to Kurihisa were Liu Rong, Liu De, and Liu Yu Yu.

古文：程姬子曰馀、非、端。
现代文：程姬所生的儿子是刘余、刘非、刘端。
English: Cheng Ji's sons are Liu Yu, Liu Fei and Liu Duan.

古文：贾夫人子曰彭祖、胜。
现代文：贾夫的所生的儿子是刘彭祖、刘胜。
English: Jia Fu's sons are Liu Peng Zu and Liu Sheng.

古文：唐姬子曰发。
现代文：唐姬所生的儿子是刘发。
English: Tang Ji's son is Liu Fa.

古文：王夫人兒姁子曰越、寄、乘、舜。
现代文：王夫人儿，姁所生的儿子是刘越、刘寄、刘乘、刘舜。
English: Mrs. Wang's son, the son born of Yu, is Liu Yue, Liu Ying, Liu Rong, and Liu Yao.

古文：河间献王德，以孝景帝前二年用皇子为河间王。
现代文：河间献王刘德在孝景帝前元二年以皇子的身份受封为河间王。
English: Liu De, the King of Kawama, was enthroned as the King of Kawama as a prince in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoqing.

古文：好儒学，被服造次必於儒者。
现代文：他喜好儒家的学问，衣著服饰言行举止都依仿儒生。
English: He likes Confucian learning, and his clothing, speech, and behavior are all based on Confucianism.

古文：山东诸儒多从之游。
现代文：山东的众儒生大多都归附于他。
English: Most of the Confucian students in Shandong have joined him.

古文：二十六年卒，子共王不害立。
现代文：他在位二十六年后去世，他的儿子恭王刘不害继位。
English: He died after 26 years on the throne and was succeeded by his son, King Gong Liu.

古文：四年卒，子刚王基代立。
现代文：刘不害在位四年去世，他的儿子刚王刘基继位。
English: Liu Fuxiong died four years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, Gang Wang Liu Ji.

古文：十二年卒，子顷王授代立。
现代文：刘基在位十二年去世，他的儿子顷王刘授继位。
English: Liu Ji died twelve years into his reign and was succeeded by his son, King Liu Ju.

古文：临江哀王阏于，以孝景帝前二年用皇子为临江王。
现代文：临江哀王刘阏于在孝景帝前元二年以皇子的身份受封为临江王。
English: Liu Ye, the Linjiang Lamenting King, was crowned as the Linjiang King as a prince in the 2nd year of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：三年卒，无後，国除为郡。
现代文：他在位三年去世，因为没有后代继承王位，封国废除，改为郡县。
English: He died three years into his reign, and since there were no descendants to succeed to the throne, the fiefdom was abolished and changed to a county.

古文：临江闵王荣，以孝景前四年为皇太子，四岁废，用故太子为临江王。
现代文：临江闵王刘荣在孝景帝前元四年被立为皇太子，四年后被废黜，以原太子的身份被封为临江王。
English: Liu Rong, the prince of Linjiang, was made crown prince in 4 BC, and was deposed four years later. He was crowned as the prince of Linjiang with the status of the original prince.

古文：四年，坐侵庙壖垣为宫，上徵荣。
现代文：他在位四年，因为侵占宗庙墙外的空地扩建宫殿获罪，天子征召他。
English: Four years into his reign, he was found guilty of encroaching on a vacant lot outside the walls of his ancestral temple to expand the palace, and was summoned by the emperor.

古文：荣行，祖於江陵北门。
现代文：刘荣应召出发，在江陵北门祭祀行路之神。
English: Liu Rong responded to the summons and set out to worship the god of the road at the north gate of Gangneung.

古文：既已上车，轴折车废。
现代文：上车之后。轴断车废。
English: After getting on the train, the axle broke and the train was scrapped.

古文：江陵父老流涕窃言曰： 吾王不反矣！ 
现代文：江陵父老认为这是不祥之兆，哭泣着私语道： 我们的君王恐怕回不来了！ 
English: The Gangneung patriarchs thought this was an ominous sign, weeping and whispering: I'm afraid our king won't come back!

古文：荣至，诣中尉府簿。
现代文：刘荣到了京城，前往中尉府接受审讯。
English: Liu Rong arrived in Beijing and went to the lieutenant's residence to be interrogated.

古文：中尉郅都责讯王，王恐，自杀。
现代文：中尉郅责问他，他因畏惧自杀而死。
English: Lieutenant Zou reprimanded him, saying that he died from the fear of committing suicide.

古文：葬蓝田。
现代文：埋葬在蓝田。
English: He was buried in Lantian.

古文：燕数万衔土置冢上，百姓怜之。
现代文：几万只燕子衔土放在他的坟墓上，百姓都哀怜他。
English: Tens of thousands of swallows covered his grave with soil, and the people mourned for him.

古文：荣最长，死无後，国除，地入于汉，为南郡。
现代文：刘荣在景帝诸子中年龄最大，死后没有儿子继承王位，封国废除，封地并入朝廷，成为南郡。
English: Liu Rong was the oldest of Emperor Jing's sons. After his death, there was no son to inherit the throne, and the fief was abolished. The fief was incorporated into the imperial court and became Nan County.

古文：右三国本王皆栗姬之子也。
现代文：以上所述三国的第一代国王都是栗姬的儿子。
English: The first kings of the three countries mentioned above were all sons of Kurihisa.

古文：鲁共王馀，以孝景前二年用皇子为淮阳王。
现代文：鲁恭王刘余，在孝景帝前元二年以皇子的身份受封为淮阳王。
English: Liu Yu, the King of Lu Gong, was crowned King of Huaiyang as a prince in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：二年，吴楚反破後，以孝景前三年徙为鲁王。
现代文：第二年，吴、楚七国反叛被平定后，在孝景帝前元三前改封为鲁王。
English: In the second year, after the rebellion of the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu was quelled, he was renamed the King of Lu before the reign of Emperor Xiaojing.

古文：好治宫室苑囿狗马。
现代文：他喜欢建造宫殿、苑，畜养犬马。
English: He likes to build palaces, gardens, and breed dogs and horses.

古文：季年好音，不喜辞辩。为人吃。
现代文：晚年喜好音乐，但是他不善辩说，说话口吃。
English: In his later years he liked music, but he was not good at arguing and stuttered when he spoke.

古文：二十六年卒，子光代为王。
现代文：他在位二十六年去世，儿子刘光继位为王。
English: He died in the 26th year of his reign, and his son, Liu Guang, succeeded to the throne.

古文：初好音舆马；晚节啬，惟恐不足於财。
现代文：刘光最初也喜欢音乐车马，晚年变得吝啬，唯恐财产不够用。
English: At first, Liu Guang also liked musical carriages and horses. In his later years, he became stingy, fearing that his property would not be enough.

古文：江都易王非，以孝景前二年用皇子为汝南王。
现代文：江都易王刘非，在孝景帝前元二年以皇子的身份受封为汝南王。
English: Liu Fei, the King of Jiangdu, was crowned as the King of Yunnan as a prince in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：吴楚反时，非年十五，有材力，上书原击吴。
现代文：吴、楚七国反叛时，刘非十五岁，有勇有谋，上书天子，志愿领兵攻打吴国。
English: When the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu rebelled, Liu Fei was fifteen years old. He was brave and resourceful, wrote a letter to the emperor, and volunteered to lead an army to attack Wu.

古文：景帝赐非将军印，击吴。吴已破，二岁，徙为江都王，治吴故国，以军功赐天子旌旗。
现代文：景帝赐给他将军印，令其攻打吴国，吴国被击败后，第二年，他被改封为江都王，治理吴国原有的封地，因为有军功受赐天子的旌旗。
English: Emperor Jing gave him the seal of generalship and ordered him to attack the State of Wu. After the defeat of the State of Wu, the next year, he was changed to the King of Jiangdu and governed the original fiefdoms of the State of Wu. Because of his military service, he was given the banner of the Son of Heaven.

古文：元光五年，匈奴大入汉为贼，非上书原击匈奴，上不许。
现代文：孝武帝元光五年，匈奴大举入侵汉境为寇，刘非又上书志愿攻打匈奴，天子没有答应。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Yuancheng, the Xiongnu invaded Han territory on a large scale. Liu Fei also wrote a letter to volunteer to attack the Xiongnu, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：非好气力，治宫观，招四方豪桀，骄奢甚。
现代文：刘非喜好使弄气力，建造宫殿，招纳各地豪杰侠士，骄奢至极。
English: Liu Fei liked to exert power, build palaces, recruit heroic knights from all over the country, and was extremely arrogant.

古文：立二十六年卒，子建立为王。
现代文：他在位二十六年去世，他的儿子刘建继位为王。
English: He died in the 26th year of his reign, and his son, Liu Jian, succeeded him as king.

古文：七年自杀。
现代文：刘建在位七年后自杀而死。
English: Liu Jian committed suicide after seven years on the throne.

古文：淮南、衡山谋反时，建颇闻其谋。
现代文：在淮南、衡山两国谋反时，刘建略知他们的图谋。
English: When Huainan and Hengshan plotted to rebel, Liu Jianliao was aware of their plot.

古文：自以为国近淮南，恐一日发，为所并，即阴作兵器，而时佩其父所赐将军印，载天子旗以出。
现代文：他认为自己的封国靠近淮南，恐怕一旦事发，被淮南王并吞，于是暗中制造兵器，并且经常佩带着天子赐给他父亲的将军印，载着天子的旌旗出巡。
English: He thought that his fiefdom was close to Huainan, and feared that if something happened, it would be annexed by the king of Huainan, so he secretly made weapons, and often wore the general's seal given to his father by the Son of Heaven, and went on patrol carrying the Son of Heaven's banner.

古文：易王死未葬，建有所说易王宠美人淖姬，夜使人迎与奸服舍中。
现代文：易王去世，尚未埋葬，刘建看上易王宠爱的美人淖姬，夜晚派人把淖姬接来，跟她在守丧的房舍中发生奸情。
English: Yi Wang died and has not yet been buried. Liu Jian fell in love with Yi Wang's favorite beauty, Hao Ji. At night, he sent someone to pick up Hao Ji and had an affair with her in the funeral home.

古文：及淮南事发，治党与颇及江都王建。
现代文：等到淮南王反叛事败露，朝廷惩治同党、涉嫌者，颇牵连到江都王刘建。
English: When the rebellion of King Huainan was exposed, the imperial court punished those suspected of being members of the same party, and Jiangdu King Liu Jian was implicated.

古文：建恐，因使人多持金钱，事绝其狱。
现代文：刘建恐慌，于是派人多持金钱，通过活动想平息这件讼案。
English: Liu Jian panicked, so he sent people to hold more money and tried to quell the lawsuit through activities.

古文：而又信巫祝，使人祷祠妄言。
现代文：他又相信巫祝，派人祭祀祷告，编造虚妄不经的话。
English: He also believed in witchcraft and fortune-telling, sent people to offer sacrifices and prayers, and fabricated false and worthless words.

古文：建又尽与其姊弟奸。
现代文：刘建还跟他的姊妹都有奸情。
English: Liu Jian also had an affair with his sister.

古文：事既闻，汉公卿请捕治建。
现代文：这些事被朝廷得知后，汉朝的公卿大臣请求逮捕刘建治罪。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of these events, the Han Dynasty's Minister of the Court requested the arrest of Liu Jianji.

古文：天子不忍，使大臣即讯王。
现代文：天子不忍心，派人臣去审讯他。
English: The emperor could not bear it and sent a courtier to interrogate him.

古文：王服所犯，遂自杀。
现代文：他招认了所有犯之罪，畏罪自杀。
English: He confessed to all his crimes and committed suicide.

古文：国除，地入于汉，为广陵郡。
现代文：于是封国废除，封地并入朝廷，成为广陵郡。
English: As a result, the fief was abolished and the fief was incorporated into the Imperial Court, becoming Guangling County.

古文：胶西于王端，以孝景前三年吴楚七国反破後，端用皇子为胶西王。
现代文：胶西于王刘端在孝景帝前元三年吴、楚六国反叛被击败后，以皇子的身份受封为胶西王。
English: Jiaosi Yu Wang Liu Duan was crowned King Jiaosi as a prince after the Wu and Chu Six Kingdoms Rebellion was defeated in the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：端为人贼戾，又阴痿，一近妇人，病之数月。
现代文：刘端为人残暴凶狠，又患有阳痿病，一接触女人，就要病几个月。
English: Liu Duan is a cruel and ferocious person. He also suffers from impotence. If he comes into contact with a woman, he will be ill for several months.

古文：而有爱幸少年为郎。
现代文：他有一个宠爱的少年，任为郎官。
English: He has a favourite boy as his steward.

古文：为郎者顷之与後宫乱，端禽灭之，及杀其子母。
现代文：这个年轻郎官不久与后宫有淫乱行为，刘端处死了他，并且杀死他儿子和母亲。
English: The young retainer was soon caught fornicating with the harem, and Liu Duan executed him, as well as killing his son and mother.

古文：数犯上法，汉公卿数请诛端，天子为兄弟之故不忍，而端所为滋甚。
现代文：刘端屡次触犯天子法令，汉朝的公卿大臣多次请求诛杀他，天子因为他是至极兄弟的缘故不忍心这样做，因而刘端的行为更加过分。
English: Liu Duan repeatedly violated Tianzi's edicts. The Han Dynasty's Minister of the Great Council of State repeatedly asked him to kill him. Tianzi could not bear to do so because he was a very close brother, so Liu Duan's behavior was even more excessive.

古文：有司再请削其国，去太半。
现代文：有关官员两次请求削夺他的国土，于是削夺了他的大半封地。
English: Officials twice petitioned to strip him of his lands, eventually taking away most of his fiefdom.

古文：端心愠，遂为无訾省。
现代文：刘端心里怀恨，于是对封国内的钱财不再计算管理。
English: Liu Duan harbored a grudge in his heart, so he no longer calculated and managed the money in the country.

古文：府库坏漏尽，腐财物以巨万计，终不得收徙。
现代文：府库全都倒塌破漏，腐坏的财物以亿万计算，最终也不加以收拾整理。
English: The prefectural treasuries have all collapsed and are leaking, and the rotting property is counted in the hundreds of millions. In the end, it will not be cleaned up.

古文：令吏毋得收租赋。
现代文：他又命令官吏不准收取租赋。
English: He also ordered officials not to collect rents.

古文：端皆去卫，封其宫门，从一门出游。
现代文：刘端又全部撤除警卫人员，封闭宫门，只留下一门，从那里出宫游荡。
English: Liu Duan also removed all the guards and closed the palace gate, leaving only one gate, from where he wandered out of the palace.

古文：数变名姓，为布衣，之他郡国。
现代文：屡次改换姓名，假扮为平民，到其他的郡国去。
English: They repeatedly changed their names, pretended to be civilians, and went to other counties and countries.

古文：相、二千石往者，奉汉法以治，端辄求其罪告之，无罪者诈药杀之。
现代文：凡前往胶西任相国、二千石级的官员，如果奉行汉朝法律治理政事，刘端总是找出他们的罪过报告朝廷；如果找不到罪过，就设诡计用药毒死他们。
English: All the officials who went to Jiaoxi to serve as foreign ministers and governors of the two-thousand-koku level, if they followed the laws of the Han Dynasty to govern political affairs, Liu Duan would always find out their sins and report to the imperial court; if they could not find any sins, they would set up a trick to poison them with medicine.

古文：所以设诈究变，彊足以距谏，智足以饰非。
现代文：他设诡计的办法穷极变化，强横足以拒绝他人的劝谏，智巧足以掩饰自己的过错。
English: His methods of trickery are extremely varied, he is strong enough to refuse the persuasion of others, and clever enough to cover up his mistakes.

古文：相、二千石从王治，则汉绳以法。
现代文：相国、二千石级官员如果遵从王法治理政事，就中其陷害，被朝廷以法治罪。
English: If an official of a partner country or a 2,000 koku official obeys the king's law and governs the affairs of state, he will be framed and the imperial court will charge him with a crime against the rule of law.

古文：故胶西小国，而所杀伤二千石甚众。
现代文：因此，胶西虽是小国，而被杀受伤害的二千石级官员却很多。
English: As a result, although Jiaoxi is a small country, there are many officials of 2,000 koku rank who have been killed or injured.

古文：立四十七年，卒，竟无男代後，国除，地入于汉，为胶西郡。
现代文：刘端在位四十七年去世，最后因为没有儿子继承王位，封国废除，封地并入朝廷，成为胶西郡。
English: Liu Duan died in the 47th year of his reign, and finally, because there was no son to inherit the throne, the fief was abolished, the fief was merged into the imperial court, and it became Jiaoxi County.

古文：右三国本王皆程姬之子也。
现代文：以上所述三国的第一代国王都是程姬的儿子。
English: The first generation of kings of the three countries mentioned above were all Cheng Ji's sons.

古文：赵王彭祖，以孝景前二年用皇子为广川王。
现代文：赵王刘彭祖，在孝景帝前元二年以皇子的身份受封为广川王。
English: Liu Pengzu, King of Zhao, was named King of Guangchuan as a prince in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：赵王遂反破後，彭祖王广川。
现代文：赵王遂反叛被击败后，彭祖被封为广川王。
English: After King Zhao's rebellion was defeated, Peng Zu was crowned King of Guangchuan.

古文：四年，徙为赵王。
现代文：在位第四年，改封为赵王。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, he changed his title to King Zhao.

古文：十五年，孝景帝崩。
现代文：在位第十五年，孝景帝去世。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, Emperor Xiao Jing died.

古文：彭祖为人巧佞卑谄，足恭而心刻深。
现代文：彭祖为人巧诈奸佞，卑下奉承，表面上谦卑恭敬讨好人，内心却刻薄阴毒。
English: Peng Zu is a cunning and treacherous person. He is humble and flattering. On the surface, he is humble and respectful to please good people, but his heart is mean and poisonous.

古文：好法律，持诡辩以中人。
现代文：喜好玩弄法律，用诡辩中伤人。
English: He likes to play with the law and use sophistry to hurt people.

古文：彭祖多内宠姬及子孙。
现代文：彭祖有很多宠爱的姬妾及子孙。
English: Peng Zu had many favorite concubines and descendants.

古文：相、二千石欲奉汉法以治，则害於王家。
现代文：相国、二千石级的官员如果想奉行汉朝法律治理政事，就会妨害赵王的利益。
English: If the officials of the partner country and the 2,000-koku level want to follow the laws of the Han Dynasty to govern political affairs, they will interfere with the interests of Zhao Wang.

古文：是以每相、二千石至，彭祖衣皁布衣，自行迎，除二千石舍，多设疑事以作动之，得二千石失言，中忌讳，辄书之。
现代文：为此每当相国、二千石级官员到任，刘彭祖便穿着黑布衣扮为奴仆，亲自出迎，清扫二千石级官员下榻的住所，多设惑乱之事来引动对方，一旦二千石级官员言语失当，触犯朝廷禁忌，就把它记下来。
English: For this reason, whenever a 2,000-cubic-metre-level official from the same country came to take office, Liu Pengzu would dress in black cloth and disguise himself as a servant. He would personally welcome him, clean the residence where the 2,000-cubic-metre-level official was staying, and set up more confusing things to attract the other side. As soon as the 2,000-cubic-metre-level official spoke improperly and violated the imperial taboo, he would write it down.

古文：二千石欲治者，则以此迫劫；不听，乃上书告，及汙以奸利事。
现代文：如果二千石级官员想奉法治事，他就以此相威胁；如果对方不顺从，就上书告发，并以作奸犯法图谋私利之事诬陷对方。
English: If a 2,000 koku-level official wants to follow the rule of law, he will threaten to do so; if the other party does not obey, he will report it in writing and frame the other party with the crime of treason for seeking personal gain.

古文：彭祖立五十馀年，相、二千石无能满二岁，辄以罪去，大者死，小者刑，以故二千石莫敢治。
现代文：刘彭祖在位五十多年期间，相国、二千石级官员没有能任满两年的，经常因罪免职，罪过大的被处死，罪过小的受刑罚，所以二千石级官员没有谁敢奉法治事。
English: During Liu Pengzu's reign of more than 50 years, officials of the same country and of 2,000 koku rank could not serve for more than two years. They were often removed from office for crimes, executed for major crimes, and punished for minor crimes. Therefore, no official of 2,000 koku rank dared to serve the rule of law.

古文：而赵王擅权，使使即县为贾人榷会，入多於国经租税。
现代文：赵王也就因此专擅大权，派遣使者到属县作专利买卖，其收入甚至超过了赵国的正常租税收入。
English: As a result, King Zhao was granted the exclusive right to send emissaries to counties to buy and sell patents, and their income even exceeded the normal tax income of Zhao.

古文：以是赵王家多金钱，然所赐姬诸子，亦尽之矣。
现代文：因此赵王家多有金钱，然而这些金钱也都赏赐给姬妾诸子而耗光了。
English: As a result, the Zhao royal family had a lot of money, but this money was also given to the concubines and their children, and it was all spent.

古文：彭祖取故江都易王宠姬王建所盗与奸淖姬者为姬，甚爱之。
现代文：刘彭祖娶了已故江都易王刘非的宠姬，即后来为刘建所夺取而相奸淫的那位淖姬，非常宠爱她。
English: Liu Pengzu married the late Jiangduyi King Liu Fei's favorite concubine, that is, the concubine whom Liu Jian later captured and committed adultery with. He was very fond of her.

古文：彭祖不好治宫室、禨祥，好为吏事。
现代文：刘彭祖不喜好营建宫室，也不迷信鬼神，而喜好做吏人做的事。
English: Liu Pengzu did not like to build a palace, nor did he believe in ghosts and gods, but he liked to do what officials did.

古文：上书原督国中盗贼。
现代文：上书天子，志愿督讨王国内的盗贼。
English: In a letter to the emperor, he volunteered to deal with thieves in the kingdom.

古文：常夜从走卒行徼邯郸中。
现代文：经常夜间带领走卒巡察于邯郸城内。
English: He often led patrols at night to inspect the city.

古文：诸使过客以彭祖险陂，莫敢留邯郸。
现代文：各往来使者以及过路旅客因为刘彭祖险诈邪恶，不敢在邯郸逗留。
English: Because of Liu Pengzu's treacherous and evil deeds, envoys and travelers did not dare to stay in Handan.

古文：其太子丹与其女及同产姊奸，与其客江充有卻。充告丹，丹以故废。
现代文：赵王彭祖的太子刘丹与他的女儿及同胞姐姐通奸。刘丹跟他的门客充有嫌怨，江充告发刘丹，刘丹因此被废黜。
English: Liu Dan, the prince of Zhao Wang Pengzu, committed adultery with his daughter and a compatriot sister. Liu Dan had a grudge against his concubine. Jiang Zong denounced Liu Dan, and Liu Dan was deposed as a result.

古文：赵更立太子。
现代文：赵国改立太子。
English: Zhao Guo was reinstated as crown prince.

古文：中山靖王胜，以孝景前三年用皇子为中山王。
现代文：中山靖王刘胜，在孝景帝前元三年以皇子的身份受封为中山王。
English: Liu Sheng, the King of Zhongshan, was crowned King of Zhongshan as a prince in the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：十四年，孝景帝崩。
现代文：在位第十四年，孝景帝去世。
English: In the fourteenth year of his reign, Emperor Xiao Jing died.

古文：胜为人乐酒好内，有子枝属百二十馀人。
现代文：刘胜这个人喜好饮洒，喜好女色，他的子孙有一百二十多人。
English: Liu Sheng is a man with a penchant for drinking and womanizing. He has more than one hundred and twenty descendants.

古文：常与兄赵王相非，曰： 兄为王，专代吏治事。
现代文：经常和他的哥哥赵王相互指责，说： 哥哥作为诸侯王，却专门替代下级官吏治理政事。
English: He and his elder brother, Zhao Wang, often accused each other, saying, "My elder brother, as the prince of princes, only replaced lower-level officials to manage political affairs.

古文：王者当日听音乐声色。 
现代文：为王的人应当每日听音乐享受歌舞女色。 
English: A king should listen to music every day and enjoy singing and dancing.

古文：赵王亦非之，曰： 中山王徒日淫，不佐天子拊循百姓，何以称为籓臣！ 
现代文：赵王也指责他，说： 中山王每天只知淫乐，不帮助天子抚慰百姓，有什么资格可以称为藩臣！ 
English: Zhao Wang also accused him, saying, "Zhongshan Wang only knows sexual pleasure every day, and does not help Tianzi to soothe the people. What qualifications does he have to be called a minister of the domain!"

古文：立四十二年卒，子哀王昌立。
现代文：刘胜在位四十二年去世，由儿子哀王刘昌继位。
English: Liu Sheng died in the 42nd year of his reign and was succeeded by his son, Liu Chang.

古文：一年卒，子昆侈代为中山王。
现代文：刘昌在位一年去世，由儿子刘昆侈继位为中山王。
English: Liu Chang died one year into his reign, and was succeeded by his son Liu Kunlian as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：右二国本王皆贾夫人之子也。
现代文：以上所述二国的第一代国王都是贾夫人的儿子。
English: The first kings of the two countries mentioned above were both sons of Lady Jia.

古文：长沙定王发，发之母唐姬，故程姬侍者。
现代文：长沙定王刘发，他的母亲唐姬，原来是程姬的侍女。
English: Changsha Ding Wang Liu Fa, his mother Tang Ji, was originally Cheng Ji's maid.

古文：景帝召程姬，程姬有所辟，不原进，而饰侍者唐兒使夜进。
现代文：景帝召幸程姬，适逢程姬来月事，不愿进侍，就把侍女唐儿加以装扮，使她夜晚侍奉皇上。
English: Emperor Jing summoned Cheng Ji. When Cheng Ji came to visit, she did not want to serve, so he dressed up the maid Tang Er and made her serve the emperor at night.

古文：上醉不知，以为程姬而幸之，遂有身。
现代文：皇上醉酒不知内情，以为是程姬，就和她同床了，于是有了身孕。
English: The emperor was drunk and did not know the inside story. He thought it was Cheng Ji, so he slept with her and became pregnant.

古文：已乃觉非程姬也。
现代文：事后皇上才发觉并不是程姬。
English: It was only afterwards that the emperor discovered that it was not Cheng Ji.

古文：及生子，因命曰发。
现代文：等生下儿子，就取名为刘发。
English: When she gave birth to a son, she named him Liu Fa.

古文：以孝景前二年用皇子为长沙王。
现代文：刘发在孝景帝前元二年以皇子的身份受封为长沙王。
English: Liu Fa was crowned the King of Changsha as a prince in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：以其母微，无宠，故王卑湿贫国。
现代文：因为他母亲身份微贱，不得天子宠爱，所以被封在低湿贫困的小国为王。
English: Because of his mother's lowly status and not being favored by the Son of Heaven, he was made king of a small country with low humidity and poverty.

古文：立二十七年卒，子康王庸立。
现代文：刘发在位二十七去世，儿子康王刘庸继位。
English: Liu Fa died on the 27th day of his reign and was succeeded by his son, Kang Wang Liu Yong.

古文：二十八年，卒，子鲋鮈立为长沙王。
现代文：刘庸在位二十八年去世，儿子刘鲋鮈继位为长沙王。
English: Liu Yong died in the 28th year of his reign, and his son Liu Ye succeeded him as the king of Changsha.

古文：右一国本王唐姬之子也。
现代文：以上所述一国的第一代国王是唐姬的儿子。
English: The first king of one of the countries mentioned above was the son of Tang Ji.

古文：广川惠王越，以孝景中二年用皇子为广川王。
现代文：广川惠王刘越，在孝景帝中元二年以皇子的身份受封为广川王。
English: Liu Yue, the Prince of Guangchuan Hui, was appointed as the Prince of Guangchuan in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：十二年卒，子齐立为王。
现代文：刘越在位十二年去世，儿子刘齐继位为王。
English: Liu Yue died twelve years into his reign, and his son Liu Qi Rong succeeded him as king.

古文：齐有幸臣桑距。
现代文：刘齐有一个宠幸臣子桑距。
English: Liu Qi had a favorite retainer, Mulberry.

古文：已而有罪，欲诛距，距亡，王因禽其宗族。
现代文：后来桑距犯了罪，刘齐想诛杀桑距，桑距逃跑了，刘齐于是擒灭了他的宗族。
English: Later, Sangqian committed a crime, Liu Qi wanted to kill Sangqian, Sangqian fled, Liu Qi then annihilated his clan.

古文：距怨王，乃上书告王齐与同产奸。
现代文：桑距因此怨恨刘齐，于是上书告发刘齐与同胞姊妹通奸。
English: As a result, Sanjia resented Liu Qi, so she wrote a letter to Liu Qi, accusing him of adultery with his brothers and sisters.

古文：自是之後，王齐数上书告言汉公卿及幸臣所忠等。
现代文：从此以后，刘齐为求自保，屡次上书告发汉朝公卿以及宠幸之臣所忠等人的罪行。
English: From then on, Liu Qi, in order to protect himself, repeatedly sent letters to denounce the crimes of the Han court nobles and his favorite vassal, Shorong.

古文：胶东康王寄，以孝景中二年用皇子为胶东王。
现代文：胶东康王刘寄，在孝景帝中元二年以皇子的身份受封为胶东王。
English: Jiaodong Kang Wang Liu Ying, in the middle of the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, was crowned the King of Jiaodong as a prince.

古文：二十八年卒。
现代文：在位二十八年后去世。
English: He died after 28 years on the throne.

古文：淮南王谋反时，寄微闻其事，私作楼车镞矢战守备，候淮南之起。
现代文：当淮南王谋划反叛时，刘寄暗中听说这件事，就私下制造楼车弓箭，做好了战、守的准备，等候淮南王起事。
English: When King Huainan was plotting a rebellion, Liu Yixing heard about it in the dark, and secretly made a carriage of bows and arrows, prepared for battle and defense, and waited for King Huainan to rise up.

古文：及吏治淮南之事，辞出之。
现代文：等到后来官吏审讯淮南王谋反之事时，在供辞中暴露出这件事。
English: Later, when the officials interrogated Huainan Wang for treason, he revealed the matter in his confession.

古文：寄於上最亲，意伤之，发病而死，不敢置後，於是上。
现代文：刘寄与皇上关系最亲密，心中为参与谋反而内疚哀痛，病情发作而死，不敢立传后之人，后来皇帝知道了这一情况。
English: Liu Huan had the closest relationship with the emperor. He felt guilty for participating in the conspiracy and died of illness. He did not dare to establish a successor. Later, the emperor learned of this situation.

古文：寄有长子者名贤，母无宠；少子名庆，母爱幸，寄常欲立之，为不次，因有过，遂无言。
现代文：刘寄有长子名贤，其母不受宠爱；小儿子名庆，其母受宠爱，刘寄曾经想立刘庆为传后之人，因为不合传承的次第，又因自己有罪过，终于不敢上言。
English: Liu Ying had the eldest son, Meixian, whose mother was not favored; the youngest son, Meiqing, whose mother was favored. Liu Ying once wanted to establish Liu Qing as the successor, because it was not in accordance with the order of succession, and because he was guilty, he finally did not dare to speak up.

古文：上怜之，乃以贤为胶东王奉康王嗣，而封庆於故衡山地，为六安王。
现代文：天子哀怜他，就封刘贤为胶东王，做康王的继承人，把刘庆封在过去衡山王的封地，称为六安王。
English: The Son of Heaven took pity on him and made Liu Xian the King of Jiaodong, the successor of King Kang, and made Liu Qing the King of Liuan, the former fief of King Hengshan.

古文：胶东王贤立十四年卒，谥为哀王。
现代文：胶东王刘贤在位十四年去世，赐谥号为哀王。
English: Liu Xian, King of Jiaodong, died 14 years into his reign, and was given the title of "King of Lamentation."

古文：子庆为王。
现代文：儿子刘庆继位为王。
English: His son Liu Qing succeeded him as king.

古文：六安王庆，以元狩二年用胶东康王子为六安王。
现代文：六安王刘庆在元狩二年以胶东康王儿子的身份被封为六安王。
English: Liu Qing, the King of Lu'an, was crowned as the King of Lu'an in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty as the son of King Jiaodongkang.

古文：清河哀王乘，以孝景中三年用皇子为清河王。
现代文：清河哀王刘乘在孝景帝中元三年以皇子的身份受封为清河王。
English: Liu Rong, the Lamenting King of the Qing River, was crowned the King of the Qing River as a prince in the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing.

古文：十二年卒，无後，国除，地入于汉，为清河郡。
现代文：在位十二年后去世，因没有儿子，封国被废除，封地归属朝廷，成为清河郡。
English: He died after twelve years on the throne, and because he had no son, the fiefdom was abolished, the fief belonged to the imperial court, and became Qinghe County.

古文：常山宪王舜，以孝景中五年用皇子为常山王。
现代文：常山宪王刘舜，在孝景帝中元五年以皇子的身份受封为常山王。
English: Liu Ye, the constitutional king of Changshan, was crowned King of Changshan as a prince in the middle of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：舜最亲，景帝少子，骄怠多淫，数犯禁，上常宽释之。
现代文：刘舜是景帝最宠爱的小儿子，骄纵怠惰，多有淫乱之事，屡犯法禁，天子常常宽恕赦免他。
English: Liu Ye was the favorite little son of Emperor Jing. He was arrogant and lazy, often committing adultery, and repeatedly breaking the law. Heaven often forgave and pardoned him.

古文：立三十二年卒，太子勃代立为王。
现代文：刘舜在位三十二年去世，他的太子刘勃继位为王。
English: Liu Bei died in the 32nd year of his reign, and was succeeded by his son Liu Bo.

古文：初，宪王舜有所不爱姬生长男棁。
现代文：原先，宪王刘舜有一个不被他宠爱的姬妾生下长男刘棁。
English: Originally, Emperor Xianwang Liu Ye had an eldest son, Liu Ye, who was born to a concubine who was not favored by him.

古文：棁以母无宠故，亦不得幸於王。
现代文：刘棁因为生母不被宠爱的缘故，也不得宪王喜欢。
English: Because Liu Ye's birth mother was not favored, he was not able to win the favor of the Emperor.

古文：王后脩生太子勃。
现代文：王后脩生太子刘勃。
English: The queen's twin son, Prince Liu Bo.

古文：王内多，所幸姬生子平、子商，王后希得幸。
现代文：宪王宫内的姬妾很多，他所宠幸的姬妾为他生下儿子刘平、刘商，王后很少得幸。
English: There were many concubines in the palace of King Gong, and his favorite concubine gave birth to his sons Liu Ping and Liu Shang. The queen was rarely lucky.

古文：及宪王病甚，诸幸姬常侍病，故王后亦以妒媢不常侍病，辄归舍。
现代文：等到宪王病重，那些被宠幸的姬妾常去侍候，王后因为嫉妒的缘故不常去问病侍疾，总呆在自己的屋子里。
English: When the king fell seriously ill, the favored concubines often waited on him. The queen, out of jealousy, did not often visit the sick, but always stayed in her own house.

古文：医进药，太子勃不自尝药，又不宿留侍病。
现代文：医生呈进医药，太子刘勃不亲自尝药，又不留宿王室侍疾。
English: The doctor presented the medicine, but Prince Liu Bo did not personally taste the medicine, nor did he stay overnight to attend the royal family.

古文：及王薨，王后、太子乃至。
现代文：等到宪王去世，王后、太子才赶到。
English: The queen and the prince did not arrive until after the death of the king.

古文：宪王雅不以长子棁为人数，及薨，又不分与财物。
现代文：宪王向来就不把刘棁做儿子看待，宪王死后，也不分财物给他。
English: Emperor Xianwang never regarded Liu Ye as his son, and after Emperor Xianwang's death, he did not give him any of his property.

古文：郎或说太子、王后，令诸子与长子棁共分财物，太子、王后不听。
现代文：郎官中有人劝谏太子、王后，让诸子和长子刘棁共同分财物，太子、王后不肯。
English: Some of the courtiers urged the crown prince and the queen to let the sons and the eldest son Liu Ye share the wealth, but the crown prince and the queen refused.

古文：太子代立，又不收恤棁。
现代文：太子继位之后，又不肯收纳抚恤刘棁。
English: After the prince succeeded to the throne, he refused to accept Liu Ye's pension.

古文：棁怨王后、太子。
现代文：刘棁因此怨恨王后、太子。
English: As a result, Liu Bei resented the queen and the prince.

古文：汉使者视宪王丧，棁自言宪王病时，王后、太子不侍，及薨，六日出舍，太子勃私奸，饮酒，博戏，击筑，与女子载驰，环城过市，入牢视囚。
现代文：汉朝使者来视理宪王丧事时，刘棁亲自告发宪王生病时，王后、太子不床前侍候，等到宪王去世，他们只守了六天就离开服丧的屋子，以及太子刘勃私下奸淫、饮酒取乐、赌赙为戏、击筑作乐，与女子乘车奔驰、穿城过市、进入监狱探看囚犯的种种事情。
English: When an envoy from the Han Dynasty came to attend the funeral of King Li Xianwang, Liu Ye personally reported that when King Li Xianwang was ill, the queen and the prince waited for him before going to bed, and when King Li Xianwang died, they only stayed for six days before leaving the funeral house, as well as Prince Liu Bo's private adultery, drinking for pleasure, gambling for play, building for fun, riding in a Mercedes with a woman, passing through the city, and entering a prison to visit prisoners.

古文：天子遣大行骞验王后及问王勃，请逮勃所与奸诸证左，王又匿之。
现代文：天子派遣大行令张骞核实王后的所作所为并审讯刘勃，请求逮捕与刘勃相奸淫的诸人作为佐证，刘勃又设法把他们藏匿起来。
English: Tianzi sent Zhang Ye to verify the queen's actions and interrogate Liu Bo, requesting the arrest of people who had sexual intercourse with Liu Bo as evidence. Liu Bo also tried to hide them.

古文：吏求捕勃大急，使人致击笞掠，擅出汉所疑囚者。
现代文：官吏大举搜捕，刘勃非常着急，派人拷打办案人员，擅自释放朝廷认为可疑而囚禁起来的人。
English: Officials carried out a large-scale search and arrest. Liu Bo was very anxious and sent people to torture the people handling the case, and to release without authorization those who the imperial court considered suspicious and imprisoned.

古文：有司请诛宪王后脩及王勃。
现代文：官员请求诛杀宪王王后脩和刘勃。
English: The officials asked him to kill Wang Guojun and Liu Bo.

古文：上以脩素无行，使棁陷之罪，勃无良师傅，不忍诛。
现代文：天子认为脩素来品行不端，致使刘棁告发她有罪，而刘勃犯罪是因为没有好的太师太傅的辅佐，不忍心诛杀。
English: Tianzi believed that it was because of her bad behavior that Liu Zhen accused her of a crime, while Liu Bo committed the crime because he did not have a good master's assistant and could not bear to fight.

古文：有司请废王后脩，徙王勃以家属处房陵，上许之。
现代文：官员又请求废黜王后脩，放逐刘勃，让他的家属和他一起迁居房陵，皇上答应了这一请求。
English: The officials also requested that the Empress Dowager be deposed, that Liu Bo be exiled, and that his family members be allowed to move into the mausoleum with him. The Emperor agreed to this request.

古文：勃王数月，迁于房陵，国绝。
现代文：刘勃为王只有几个月，被贬迁到房陵，封国绝灭。
English: Liu Bo had only been king for a few months when he was banished to a mausoleum and the state was abolished.

古文：月馀，天子为最亲，乃诏有司曰： 常山宪王蚤夭，后妾不和，適孽诬争，陷于不义以灭国，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：一个多月后，皇上顾念到宪王是最宠爱的小儿子，就下诏给官员说： 常山宪王早亡，王后与姬妾失和，嫡庶之间互相捏造罪名，互相争斗，因而陷于不义，封国绝灭，我很哀怜他。
English: After more than a month, the emperor, mindful of the fact that Emperor Xianwang was his favorite younger son, issued an edict to the officials, saying: Emperor Xianwang of Changshan died prematurely, the queen and her concubine fell out of harmony, the legitimate children fabricated accusations against each other and fought against each other, and thus fell into injustice and the state was abolished. I feel very sorry for him.

古文：其封宪王子平三万户，为真定王；封子商三万户，为泗水王。 
现代文：封宪王儿子刘平三万户，为真定王；封宪王儿子刘商三万户，为泗水王。 
English: The 30,000 households of Liu Ping, the son of King Fengxian, are the King of Zhending; the 30,000 households of Liu Shang, the son of King Fengxian, are the King of Lishui.

古文：真定王平，元鼎四年用常山宪王子为真定王。
现代文：真定王刘平在元鼎四年以常山宪王的儿子的身份被封为真定王。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Ping, the King of Zhengjing, was crowned King of Zhengjing as the son of the King of Changshan.

古文：泗水思王商，以元鼎四年用常山宪王子为泗水王。
现代文：泗水思王刘商，在元鼎四年以常山宪王儿子的身份被封为泗水王。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Shang, the king of Lishui, was crowned the king of Lishui as the son of Changshan Xianwang.

古文：十一年卒，子哀王安世立。
现代文：在位十一年后去世，他的儿子哀王刘安世继位。
English: He died after reigning for eleven years and was succeeded by his son, the late King Liu Anshi.

古文：十一年卒，无子。
现代文：哀王在位十一年后去世，没有儿子。
English: King Aye died eleven years into his reign, without a son.

古文：於是上怜泗水王绝，乃立安世弟贺为泗水王。
现代文：天子怜悯泗水王绝后，就立刘安世的弟弟刘贺为泗水王。
English: After the death of the king of Surabaya, Liu He, the younger brother of Liu Anshi, became the king of Surabaya.

古文：右四国本王皆王夫人兒姁子也。
现代文：以上所述四国的第一代国王都是王夫人儿姁的儿子。
English: The first generation of kings of the four kingdoms mentioned above were all sons of the wife of the king.

古文：其後汉益封其支子为六安王、泗水王二国。
现代文：后来汉朝又增封其枝属子孙为六安王、泗水王两国。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty also increased the fiefs of the descendants of its branches to the two countries of Lu'an Wang and Ershui Wang.

古文：凡兒姁子孙，於今为六王。
现代文：总计儿姁的子孙，到现在有六王。
English: Altogether, there are six kings among the descendants of Er Er.

古文：太史公曰：高祖时诸侯皆赋，得自除内史以下，汉独为置丞相，黄金印。
现代文：太史公说：汉高祖在位的时候，诸候的一切赋税都归诸候王所有，可以自行任命内史以下的官员，朝廷只为他们派遣丞相，授予金印。
English: Taishigong said, "When Emperor Gaozu was on the throne, all taxes paid by the vassals belonged to the vassal king. He could appoint officials below the rank of Inner Historian on his own. The imperial court only sent chancellors and awarded gold seals to them.

古文：诸侯自除御史、廷尉正、博士，拟於天子。
现代文：诸候王自行任命御史、廷尉正、博士，跟天子相类似。
English: Zhuxuo Wang appointed his own magistrate, court lieutenant, and doctor, similar to Tianzi.

古文：自吴楚反後，五宗王世，汉为置二千石，去 丞相 曰 相 ，银印。诸侯独得食租税，夺之权。
现代文：自从吴、楚等国反叛以后，在五宗为王的时代，朝廷为他们派遣二千石级的官员，撤除 丞相 ，改为 相 ，诸侯王只能享受封地以内的租税，他们的大权被朝廷剥夺。
English: Since the rebellion of Wu, Chu and other states, in the era of the five dynasties as kings, the imperial court dispatched officials of two thousand koku level for them, removed the chancellor and changed it to the minister, the princes could only enjoy the taxes within the fief, and their great power was deprived by the imperial court.

古文：其後诸侯贫者或乘牛车也。
现代文：之后，诸候王中穷困的只能乘坐牛车了。
English: After that, the poor among the kings could only travel by ox-drawn carriage.

