古文：羊祜杜预
现代文：羊祜杜预
English: Sheep's milk thistle

古文：羊祜，字叔子，泰山南城人也。
现代文：羊祜字叔子，泰山南城人。
English: The son of a shepherd, a native of Nancheng, Taishan.

古文：世吏二千石，至祜九世，并以清德闻。
现代文：世代为二千石的官，到羊祜已经九代，都以清廉有美德闻名。
English: Generations of officials of 2,000 koku, and nine generations up to Yang Xuan, are known for their integrity and virtue.

古文：祖续，仕汉南阳太守。
现代文：祖父羊续，任汉南阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Yang Zongli, was the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Han.

古文：父衟，上党太守。
现代文：父亲羊衟，任上党太守。
English: His father, Yang Jie, became the party's grand marshal.

古文：祜，蔡邕外孙，景献皇后同产弟。
现代文：羊祜是蔡邕的外孙，景献皇后的同母之弟。
English: Yang Mi is the grandson of Cai Mi and the half-brother of Queen Jingxian.

古文：祜年十二丧父，孝思过礼，事叔父耽甚谨。
现代文：羊祜十二岁父亲去世，服孝超过礼制，事奉叔父羊耽十分恭谨。
English: After the death of his father at the age of twelve, his filial piety exceeded the rules of etiquette, and he was very respectful in his service to his uncle, Yang Tan.

古文：尝游汶水之滨，遇父老谓之曰： 孺子有好相，年未六十，必建大功于天下。 
现代文：曾在汶水边游玩，遇见一老汉对他说： 这孩子有好相貌，年龄不到六十，必定在天下建立大功业。 
English: Once, when he was playing at the water's edge in Wenzhou, he met an old man who said to him, "This child is good-looking, under the age of sixty, and is sure to establish a great career in the world."

古文：既而去，莫知所在。
现代文：说完离去，没人知道他在何处。
English: He left, and no one knows where he is.

古文：及长，博学能属文，身长七尺三寸，美须眉，善谈论。
现代文：等到长大，博学能写文章，身高七尺三寸。须眉漂亮，善于谈论。
English: When he grows up, Erudite can write articles, is seven feet three inches tall, has a beautiful mustache, and is good at talking.

古文：郡将夏侯威异之，以兄霸之子妻之。
现代文：郡中将领夏侯威认为他不平常，把哥哥夏侯霸的女儿嫁给他。
English: County Lieutenant General Xia Houwei thought he was unusual and married the daughter of his brother Xia Houba to him.

古文：举上计吏，州四辟从事、秀才，五府交命，皆不就。
现代文：推荐他作计吏，州中四次征召他任从事、秀才，五府，他全都不去就任。
English: He was recommended to be an accountant, and he was called up four times in the middle of the state to be engaged, gifted, and five prefectures, but he did not go to take up the post.

古文：太原郭奕见之曰： 此今日之颜子也。 
现代文：太原郭奕见了他说： 这是今天的颜回啊。 
English: When Taiyuan Guo Yi saw him, he said, "This is today's Yan Hui."

古文：与王沈俱被曹爽辟。
现代文：和王沈都被曹爽征召。
English: Both he and Wang Shen were recruited by Cao Shuang.

古文：沈劝就征，祜曰： 委质事人，复何容易。 
现代文：王沈劝他应征，羊祜说： 把自己交付给人家去为别人做事，谈何容易。 
English: Wang Shen advised him to apply for conscription, and the shepherd said, "It's easy to talk about giving yourself to others and doing things for others.

古文：及爽败，沈以故吏免，因谓祜曰： 常识卿前语。 
现代文：等到曹爽失败，王沈以旧吏而幸免于难，于是对羊枯说： 常记得你以前的话。 
English: When Cao Shuang failed, Wang Shen used the old officials to survive, so he said to Yang Kui, "Always remember what you said before."

古文：祜曰： 此非始虑所及。 
现代文：羊枯说： 逭不是开始时所考虑到的。 
English: "It wasn't something we thought about at the beginning," says Yangkuchen.

古文：其先识不伐如此。
现代文：他就是这样有先见之明又自我夸耀。
English: That's how prescient and self-aggrandizing he is.

古文：夏侯霸之降蜀也，姻亲多告绝，祜独安其室，恩礼有加焉。
现代文：夏侯霸投降了蜀，姻亲与他绝交，惟有羊祜对妻室泰然相处，而且更加恩爱有礼。
English: Xia Houba surrendered to Shu, and his in-laws broke off relations with him. However, Yang Zheng treated his wife calmly, and was more gracious and courteous.

古文：寻遭母忧，长兄发又卒，毁慕寝顿十余年，以道素自居，恂恂若儒者。
现代文：不久母亲去世，长兄羊发又去世，居丧哀悼十余年，以操守纯朴自居，诚信的样子像个儒生。
English: Soon after, his mother passed away, and his eldest brother, Yangfa, also passed away. For more than ten years, he mourned his mother's death. He behaved with integrity and simplicity, and looked like a Confucian scholar.

古文：文帝为大将军，辟祜，未就，公车征拜中书侍郎，俄迁给事中、黄门郎。
现代文：文帝任大将军，征召羊祜，没有去，公车征任他为中书侍郎，不久升为给事中、黄门郎。
English: Emperor Wen was appointed as the great general, conscripted Sheepherd, but did not go, the bus conscripted him as the secretary of the Central Committee, and soon he was promoted to the secretary of the Central Committee and Huangmen.

古文：时高贵乡公好属文，在位者多献诗赋，汝南和逌以忤意见斥，祜在其间，不得而亲疏，有识尚焉。
现代文：当时高贵乡公好写文章，在官位的人多献诗赋，汝南和迪因为违背君意被斥责，羊祜处在他们中间，并不因此对人有亲有疏，有见识的人都赞赏他。
English: At that time, the noble townsmen were good at writing articles, people in official positions were more likely to offer poems, Runan and Di were reprimanded for violating the will of the king, and Yang Xuan was among them. Therefore, he was not close to people, and people with insight appreciated him.

古文：陈留王立，赐爵关中侯，邑百户。
现代文：陈留王即位，赐他关中侯的爵位，封邑一百户。
English: Chen Liu Wang ascended the throne, giving him the title of Guanzhong Marquis, with a hundred fiefs.

古文：以少帝不愿为侍臣，求出补吏，徙秘书监。
现代文：因为少帝而不愿为侍臣，羊祜请求出宫找职位补缺，改任秘书监。
English: Because the young emperor did not want to be a vassal, Yang Xi requested to leave the palace to find a position to fill the vacancy and was reassigned as a secretary supervisor.

古文：及五等建，封钜平子，邑六百户。
现代文：立五等爵位时，封为钜平子，封邑六百户。
English: When the fifth-class peerage was established, 600 households in the fief were given the fiefdoms.

古文：钟会有宠而忌，祜亦惮之。
现代文：钟会受宠而且猜忌，羊枯也怕他。
English: The bell is both loved and feared, and even the sheep are afraid of it.

古文：及会诛，拜相国从事中郎，与荀勖共掌机密。
现代文：钟会被诛，被任为相国从事中郎，与荀勖共同掌管中书大事。
English: He was appointed as the vice-governor of the neighboring country, and he and Zou jointly presided over the important events of Chinese literature.

古文：迁中领军，悉统宿卫，入直殿中，执兵之耍，事兼内外。
现代文：升为中领军，宿卫全由他统领，在宫中值勤，执掌禁军，事兼宫内外。
English: He was promoted to the middle leader of the army, and all the guards were led by him. He was on duty in the palace, in charge of the forbidden army, and in and out of the palace.

古文：武帝受禅，以佐命之勋，进号中军将军，加散骑常侍，改封郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：武帝接受惮让，羊祜因为有辅佐之功，进升为中军将军，加散骑常侍，改封郡公，食邑三千户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the offer, and because of his service as an aide, Yang Xuan was promoted to the rank of general in the Chinese army. He was also given the title of county magistrate, and had 3,000 households in his domain.

古文：固让封不受，乃进本爵为侯，置郎中令，备九官之职，加夫人印绶。
现代文：坚决推辞封爵，于是把爵位改为侯，设置郎中令，备有九官的职位，加夫人印绶。
English: He resolutely refused to be knighted, so he changed his title to marquess, set up a vice-regal position, prepared nine official positions, and added the post of lady seal.

古文：泰始初，诏曰： 夫总齐机衡，允厘六职，朝政之本也。
现代文：泰始初，诏令说： 统一管辖政权的枢要机构，公允地治理官府中治、教、礼等六种职务，是朝政的根本。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the imperial edict said: It is fundamental to the imperial government to unify the key institutions that govern the political power, and to fairly administer the six offices of government, education, and etiquette.

古文：祜执德清劭，忠亮纯茂，经纬文武，謇謇正直，虽处腹心之任，而不总枢机之重，非垂拱无为委任责成之意也。
现代文：羊祜品德清廉高尚，忠诚正直纯朴优秀，精通文武，一心为国，虽委以重任，但没有总管国家枢要，不符合我把责任交给大臣自己无为而治的本意。
English: Sheep and Goats are noble and virtuous, loyal and honest, simple and excellent, proficient in literature and martial arts, and devoted to the country. Although they are entrusted with important tasks, they do not have the head of the national key, which is not in line with my intention to give the responsibility to the minister to do nothing.

古文：其以祜为尚书右仆射、卫将军，给本营兵。 
现代文：任羊祜为左仆射、卫将军，赐给他本营兵士。 
English: He appointed Yang Xi as the left-hand gunner and the general of the guards, and gave him the soldiers of the base camp.

古文：时王佑、贾充、裴秀皆前朝名望，祜每让，不处其右。
现代文：当时王佑、贾充、裴秀都是前朝有名望之人，羊祜常谦让，不让自己的职位比他们高。
English: At that time, Wang You, Jia Chong, and Pei Xiu were all famous people in the former dynasty. Yang Xuan was often modest and did not allow his position to be higher than theirs.

古文：帝将有灭吴之志，以祜为都督荆州诸军事、假节，散骑常侍、卫将军如故。
现代文：皇帝有减吴的志向，任命羊祜为都督荆州诸军事、假节，散骑常侍、卫将军依旧。
English: The emperor had the ambition to reduce Wu, and appointed Yang Jie as the governor of Jingzhou. The military, festivals, horseback riding attendants, and guards were still the same.

古文：祜率营兵出镇南夏，开设庠序，绥怀远近，甚得江汉之心。
现代文：羊祜率军队出师镇守南方，开设学校，安抚远近，很得江汉人心。
English: Yang Hui led the army to defend the south, opened schools, and pacified far and near, which won the hearts of the Jiangxi and Han people.

古文：与吴人开布大信，降者欲去皆听之。
现代文：向呈人表示诚信，投降的人想离去都听便。
English: Show good faith to those who submit, and those who surrender can leave at their convenience.

古文：时长吏丧官，后人恶之，多毁坏旧府，祜以死生有命，非由居室，书下征镇，普加禁断。
现代文：当时长吏死于任上，下一任长吏忌讳，经常毁坏旧官府，羊枯认为死生白有定数，与居室无关，于是向镇守地下文书，普遍加以禁止。
English: At that time, the warden died in office, the next warden was a taboo, often destroyed the old government office, and the sheep thought that death and birth had a fixed number, and it had nothing to do with the living room, so it was generally prohibited from the town guard's underground documents.

古文：吴石城守去襄阳七百余里，每为边害，祜患之，竟以诡计令吴罢守。
现代文：吴国互球距塞坠七百余里，经常造成边境麻烦，差祜对此忧虑，竞用计谋让吴国守令放弃守备。
English: The distance between the two balls in Wu is more than seven hundred miles, which often causes trouble at the border. The officials are worried about this and use competitive strategies to make the Wu guards give up their guard.

古文：于是戍逻减半，分以垦田八百余顷，大获其利。
现代文：于是戍边兵士减半，分给士卒农田八百多顷，获利极大。
English: As a result, the number of soldiers was halved, and more than 800 hectares of farmland were allocated to the soldiers, which was extremely profitable.

古文：祜之始至也，军无百日之粮，及至季年，有十年之积。
现代文：差拈刚到任时，军队没有一百天的存粮，过了数年，有了十年的积蓄。
English: When Sasakawa first took office, the army did not have a hundred days of stored grain. A few years later, they had ten years of savings.

古文：诏罢江北都督，置南中郎将，以所统诸军在汉东江夏者皆以益祜。
现代文：下韶罢免江北都督，设南中郎将，把其所统率各军在汉东江夏的都补充给兰并。
English: He removed the governor of the northern Jiangxi Province from power, and appointed Nan Zhong Lang as his vice-commander, and added all the armies under his command in the eastern Jiangxi Province to that of Lan Xian.

古文：在军常轻裘缓带，身不被甲，铃閤之下，侍卫者不过十数人，而颇以畋渔废政。
现代文：圣揎在军中常轻装宽带，身不披镜甲，在居住地，侍卫的不过十几人，而且常因打猎捕鱼不料理政务。
English: In the army, Sheng Yao often carried a light broadband and did not wear a mirror armor. In his place of residence, there were only a dozen or so bodyguards, and he often did not attend to government affairs because of hunting and fishing.

古文：尝欲夜出，军司徐胤执棨当营门曰： 将军都督万里，安可轻脱！
现代文：曾经想晚上出门，军司徐胤拿着兵器挡在门前说： 将军都督万里，怎么能疏忽!
English: Once, when he wanted to go out at night, the military commander Xu Yin held a weapon in front of the door and said: General Du Du, how can you be negligent!

古文：将军之安危，亦国家之安危也。
现代文：将军的安危，也就是国家的安危。
English: The safety of the general is the safety of the country.

古文：胤今日若死，此门乃开耳。 
现代文：我如果今天死了，这个门才能开。 
English: If I die today, this door won't open.

古文：祜改容谢之，此后稀出矣。
现代文：羊祜笑着认错，此后很少出门。
English: The shepherd admitted his mistake with a smile and rarely went out after that.

古文：后加车骑将军，开府如三司之仪。
现代文：后来加车骑将军，开建府署设置僚属如同三司的礼制。
English: Later, they added carriage and cavalry generals, and began to build a government office to set up subordinates like the etiquette of the three divisions.

古文：祜上表固让曰： 臣伏闻恩诏，拔臣使同台司。
现代文：羊祜上表坚决辞让说： 我听到了韶书，提拔我如同台司。
English: The shepherd at the table resolutely gave up and said: I heard the sermon, and I was promoted as the stage manager.

古文：臣自出身以来，适十数年，受任外内，每极显重之任。
现代文：我自从任官以来，仅十几年，接受内外任命，经常是极显赫重要的职务。
English: Since I took office, just over a decade ago, I have received appointments both at home and abroad, often to very prominent and important positions.

古文：常以智力不可顿进，恩宠不可久谬，夙夜战悚，以荣为忧。
现代文：经常因为智力不能在短时间长进，恩宠不能长久地错误加在我身上，因此终日战悚，把荣耀当成忧虑。
English: Often, because intelligence cannot be developed in a short time, and grace cannot be wrongly bestowed on me for a long time, I am in a constant state of fear, and I regard glory as a worry.

古文：臣闻古人之言，德未为人所服而受高爵，则使才臣不进；功未为人所归而荷厚禄，则使劳臣不劝。
现代文：我听说古人有言，德行没有被别人信服而受高爵位，就使得有才的臣不能晋升；功劳没有被别人向往而享有丰厚的俸禄，就使有功之臣不再努力。
English: I have heard the ancients say that if one's virtue is not believed by others and one receives a high title, it will prevent talented ministers from being promoted; if one's merit is not desired by others and one receives a rich salary, it will prevent meritorious ministers from working hard.

古文：今臣身托外戚，事连运会，诫在过宠，不患见遗。
现代文：如今我因为是外戚，事情关连着时势，要防备的是过分受宠，不怕被遗忘。
English: Now, because I am a relative, things are related to the current situation. What I have to guard against is being overly favored, and I am not afraid of being forgotten.

古文：而猥降发中之诏，加非次之荣。
现代文：然而下了诏书，把不该给我的荣耀加在我身上。
English: However, an imperial edict was issued, bestowing on me an undeserved honor.

古文：臣有何功可以堪之，何心可以安之。
现代文：我有什么功劳可以承受，我有什么心情可以安心享有。
English: What merit can I bear, what mood can I enjoy with peace of mind.

古文：身辱高位，倾覆寻至，愿守先人弊庐，岂可得哉！
现代文：辱没了高位，倾覆很快就来到，那时再想守着先人的破房舍，又怎么可能呢!
English: The humiliation of the high position is gone, the overthrow is coming soon, and then how is it possible to guard the broken houses of the ancestors!

古文：违命诚忤天威，曲从即复若此。
现代文：违背皇命确实触犯了天威，而委曲顺从又会如此。
English: It is true that disobeying the imperial order violates the will of heaven, but so does obeying the command of the emperor.

古文：盖闻古人申于见知，大臣之节，不可则止。
现代文：听说古人因为被知遇而得以申张志向，维护大臣的节操，不愿就不勉强。
English: It is said that the ancients were able to declare their ambition and maintain the discipline of the minister because they were well-known. If they did not want to, they did not have to.

古文：臣虽小人，敢缘所蒙，念存斯义。
现代文：我虽是小人，因为蒙受恩典，便有这种想法。
English: Though I am a base man, I think this way because of the grace given me.

古文：今天下自服化以来，方渐八年，虽侧席求贤，不遗幽贱，然臣不尔推有德，达有功，使圣听知胜臣者多，未达者不少。
现代文：如今天下推行教化以来，仅有八年，虽然侧席求贤，不遣漏隐居或地位低下之人，然而我不能推举有德者，使功臣显贵，使皇上知道比我强的人多，未能显贵的人不少。
English: For example, it has only been eight years since the implementation of edification today, although the side seat is looking for a virtuous person, and people who live in seclusion or have a low status are not dismissed, however, I cannot nominate a virtuous person to make a meritorious person distinguished, so that the emperor knows that there are more people who are stronger than me, and there are many people who are not distinguished.

古文：假令有遗德于版筑之下，有隐才于屠钓之间，而朝议用臣不以为非，臣处之不以为愧，所失岂不大哉！
现代文：假如在市井中有遗漏的美德，在百姓中有隐居的贤才，而朝廷用我不认为是错误，我居高位不觉得惭愧，所损失的难道还不大吗!
English: If there are omitted virtues in the city and secluded sages among the people, but the imperial court does not think it is a mistake to use me, and I do not feel ashamed of being in a high position, is the loss not great?

古文：臣忝窃虽久，未若今日兼文武之极宠，等宰辅之高位也。
现代文：我愧居官位虽久，没有像今天这样兼有文武官位至极的宠幸，享有等同宰辅的高位。
English: Although I have been in office for a long time, I have not had the extreme privilege of holding both civil and military posts, enjoying a high position equal to that of vice-governor, as I do today.

古文：且臣虽所见者狭，据今光禄大夫李憙执节高亮，在公正色；光禄大夫鲁芝洁身寡欲，和而不同；光禄大夫李胤清亮简素，立身在朝，皆服事华发，以礼终始。
现代文：况且我的见识虽不宽，但据我所知现在的光禄大夫李意品德高尚，在职公正；光禄大夫鲁芝清廉寡欲，虽谦和却与众不同；光禄大夫李胤清廉简朴，在朝廷树立自己的形象，他们都白发事君，自始至终以礼侍奉。
English: Moreover, although my knowledge is not broad, but as far as I know, the current Guanglu doctor Li Yizhong is of high moral character and is fair in his work; Guanglu doctor Luzhi is honest and modest, although he is humble, he is different; Guanglu doctor Li Yin is honest and simple, and he has established his own image in the imperial court. They have all worked hard and served with courtesy from beginning to end.

古文：虽历位外内之宠，不异寒贱之家，而犹未蒙此选，臣更越之，何以塞天下之望，少益日月！
现代文：他们虽然也受宠而任内外之官，与我没有不同，但还未能受到如此恩遇，我若超过他们，用什么去满足天下的期望，又怎么对今后稍有益处!
English: Although they have also been favored and appointed as officials at home and abroad, they are no different from me, but they have not yet been so fortunate. If I surpass them, what will I use to meet the expectations of the world, and how will it be beneficial in the future?

古文：是以誓心守节，无苟进之志。
现代文：因此我发誓坚守节操，没有苟且升任之心。
English: Therefore, I swear to adhere to the principle of discipline and have no ambition to be promoted.

古文：今道路行通，方隅多事，乞留前恩，使臣得速还屯。
现代文：如今国家尚未安定，边境多事，请求保留先前的恩典，让我速回边境。
English: Now that the country is not yet stable and there are many problems at the border, I request that the previous grace be preserved and that I return to the border as soon as possible.

古文：不尔留连，必于外虞有阙。
现代文：如果留连于京城，必定外忧有失。
English: If you stay in the capital, you are bound to lose out.

古文：匹夫之志，有不可夺。 
现代文：匹夫之志，亦未可夺。 
English: The will to win is also hard to beat.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不许。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：及还镇，吴西陵督步阐举城来降。
现代文：等到返回任所，吴西陵督步阐以城来投降。
English: When he returned to his post, Wu Xiling gave up the city.

古文：吴将陆抗攻之甚急，诏祜迎阐。
现代文：吴将陆抗攻打很猛烈，诏令羊祜接应步阐。
English: Wu launched a fierce land-based counter-attack and ordered the sheep to march in step.

古文：祜率兵五万出江陵，遣荆州刺史杨肇攻抗，不克，阐竟为抗所擒。
现代文：羊祜率五万军队从江陵出发，派遣荆州刺史杨肇攻打陆抗，未能取胜，步阐终于被陆抗所俘。
English: Sheepherd led fifty thousand troops from Gangneung, dispatched Jingzhou cutter Yang Zhao to attack and fight the land resistance, failed to win, and was finally captured by the land resistance.

古文：有司奏： 祜所统八万余人，贼众不过三万。
现代文：有关官吏上奏： 羊祜率军八万多人，敌军不过三万。
English: The relevant officials reported: "Yang Xi led an army of more than 80,000 men, while the enemy army was only 30,000.

古文：祜顿兵江陵，使贼备得设。
现代文：羊枯在江陵调军迟缓，使敌军得以设防。
English: Yang Kui was slow to move his army in Gangneung, allowing the enemy to set up defenses.

古文：乃遣杨肇偏军入险，兵少粮悬，军人挫衄。
现代文：于是派杨肇以一部分军队涉入险境，兵少粮缺，军队受挫。
English: As a result, Yang Zhao sent a part of the army into a dangerous situation, the soldiers were short of food, and the army was frustrated.

古文：背违诏命，无大臣节。
现代文：违背了命令，没有大臣的节操。
English: He disobeyed orders and did not have the discipline of a minister.

古文：可免官，以侯就第。 
现代文：可以免官，以侯爵身份回家。 
English: He can be relieved of his duties and return home as a marquis.

古文：竟坐贬为平南将军，而免杨肇为庶人。
现代文：因罪最后被贬为平南将军，而罢免杨肇为平民。
English: For his crime, he was finally demoted to the rank of General Pingnan, while Yang Zhao was dismissed as a civilian.

古文：祜以孟献营武牢而郑人惧，晏弱城东阳而莱子服，乃进据险耍，开建五城，收膏腴之地，夺吴人之资，石城以西，尽为晋有。
现代文：羊祜鉴于孟献经营武牢因而郑人畏惧，晏弱驻守柬阳因而莱子顺服，便进占险要，开建五个城，收取肥沃的土地，夺得吴人的资财，石城以西，全归晋所有。
English: In view of the fact that Meng Jian was operating a military prison, which made the Zheng people afraid of him, and the Yao people were weak in garrisoning Khamyang, which made the Lai people obey him, the Yangs entered and occupied the key areas, built five cities, took over the fertile land, and seized the wealth of the Wu people. Everything west of Shicheng belonged to the Jin.

古文：自是前后降者不绝，乃增修德信，以怀柔初附，慨然有吞并之心。
现代文：从此前后投降的人不断，又宣扬德行信誉，以此安抚初来依附的人，慨然有吞并吴国的志向。
English: Those who had surrendered before and after continued to do so, and they also preached virtue and credibility to appease those who had come to rely on them for the first time, and they had the ambition to annex the State of Wu.

古文：每与吴人交兵，克日方战，不为掩袭之计。
现代文：每次与吴人打仗，公开交战之日才交战，不实施偷袭的计谋。
English: Every time they fought with the Wu people, they only fought on the day of the open battle, and did not implement the strategy of sneak attack.

古文：将帅有欲进谲诈之策者，辄饮以醇酒，使不得言。
现代文：将帅中有想要出诡计的，就给他们喝醇酒，使他们无法献计。
English: If one of the generals wanted to play a trick, he would give them alcohol so that they could not devise a plan.

古文：人有略吴二兒为俘者，祜遣送还其家。
现代文：有人俘虏了两名吴国少年，羊枯遣送他们回家。
English: Someone captured two young men from the State of Wu and sent them home empty-handed.

古文：后吴将夏详、邵顗等来降，二兒之父亦率其属与俱。
现代文：后来昱将夏姜、旦逝等来投降，两个孩子的父亲也率家属一同来附。
English: Later, Zou brought Xia Jiang and Tan Shou to surrender, and the father of the two children also came with his family.

古文：吴将陈尚、潘景来寇，祜追斩之，美其死节而厚加殡敛。
现代文：吴将陈尚、潘景来犯，羊枯追杀了他们，因赞美他们死得有节操而厚加殡殓。
English: Wu brought Chen Shang and Pan Jing to commit the crime, and Yang Kui chased and killed them. Because he praised them for having the courage to die, he gave them a heavy funeral tribute.

古文：景、尚子弟迎丧，祜以礼遣还。
现代文：潘景、陈尚的子弟来迎丧，羊祜按礼遣返他们。
English: The sons of Pan Jing and Chen Shang came to pay their respects, and the shepherds led them in a ceremonial procession.

古文：吴将邓香掠夏口，祜募生缚香，既至，宥之。
现代文：吴将邓香攻掠夏口，羊祜要求活捉邓香，捉到以后，赦免了他。
English: Wu captured Deng Xiang and took him to Xiakou. Sheep and Goats demanded that Deng Xiang be captured alive. After he was captured, he was pardoned.

古文：香感其恩甚，率部曲而降。
现代文：邓香很感激羊祜的恩德，率领部属来投降。
English: Deng Xiang was very grateful for the kindness of the shepherd and led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：祜出军行吴境，刈谷为粮，皆计所侵，送绢偿之。
现代文：羊祜出兵在吴国境内，每次割谷子作军粮，都计算清楚，送绢补偿。
English: In the territory of the State of Wu, every time that mutton was used to feed soldiers, it was calculated clearly, and the compensation was the best.

古文：每会众江沔游猎，常止晋地。
现代文：每次与众人在江沔游猎，常限制在晋的地域。
English: Every time I go hunting with a group of people along the Yangtze River, I am often restricted to the Jin region.

古文：若禽兽先为吴人所伤而为晋兵所得者，皆封还之。
现代文：如果禽兽先被吴人打伤而被晋兵得到，都还给他们。
English: If the animals were first wounded by the Wu people and then obtained by the Jin soldiers, they were all returned to them.

古文：于是吴人翕然悦服，称为羊公，不之名也。
现代文：于是吴人都心悦诚服，称他为羊公，不叫名字。
English: As a result, the people of Wu were so pleased with him that they called him the Sheep King, without giving his name.

古文：祜与陆抗相对，使命交通，抗称祜之德量，虽乐毅、诸葛孔明不能过也。
现代文：羊祜与陆抗相对，使者往来，陆抗称赞茎拈的德量，即使是乐毅、诸葛孔明也不能超过。
English: As opposed to the Sheep and Goat, the Messenger exchanges, and the Goat praises the virtue of the Goat, even if it is Le Yi and Zhuge Kongming.

古文：抗尝病，祜馈之药，抗服之无疑心。
现代文：陆抗曾生病，羊祜赠他药，陆抗服药而不起疑心。
English: Lu Qi had been ill, Yang Zhen gave him medicine, and Lu Qi took the medicine without hesitation.

古文：人多谏抗，抗曰： 羊祜岂鸩人者！ 
现代文：多数人都劝陆抗不要服用，陆抗说： 羊祜岂能是下毒药的人! 
English: Most of the people advised Lu Qi not to take it. Lu Qi said, "Could the shepherd really be the poisoner?"

古文：时谈以为华元、子反复见于今日。
现代文：当时的评论认为是华元、子反又出现在今天。
English: At that time, the comment was that it was Hua Yuan and Zi Fang who appeared today.

古文：抗每告其戍曰： 彼专为德，我专为暴，是不战而自服也。
现代文：陆抗经常告诫他的士兵说： 他专行德，我专行暴，这是不交战自己先服丫。
English: Lu Huan often admonished his soldiers, "He is dedicated to virtue, I am dedicated to violence. This is not fighting, but obeying oneself first."

古文：各保分界而已，无求细利。 
现代文：各自保住分界就是，不要苛求小利。 
English: Preserving the demarcation line for each other is, do not pursue small profits.

古文：孙皓闻二境交和，以诘抗。
现代文：孙皓听说双方边境和睦，因而责问陆抗。
English: Sun Yat-sen heard that the border between the two sides was peaceful, so he asked Lu Ji for help.

古文：抗曰： 一邑一乡，不可以无信义，况大国乎！
现代文：陆抗说： 一城一乡，不能没有信义，何况大国呢!
English: Lu Anti said: A city and a township cannot be without faith and righteousness, let alone a big country!

古文：臣不如此，正是彰其德，于祜无伤也。 
现代文：如果我不这样做，正是宣扬了羊枯的美德，对他没有伤害。 
English: If I don't do that, I'm just promoting the virtues of mutton, and I'm not doing him any harm.

古文：祜贞悫无私，疾恶邪佞，旬勖、冯紞之徒甚忌之。
现代文：羊祜忠诚无私，讨厌邪佞，荀勖、冯统一类人很忌恨他。
English: Sheep and goats are loyal and selfless, and they hate evil people, and people like Yao and Feng Rongyi hate him very much.

古文：从甥王衍尝诣祜陈事，辞甚俊辨，祜不然之，衍拂衣而起。
现代文：远房外甥王衍曾到羊祜那儿陈说事情，言辞很雄辩。羊祜却不以为然，王术拂衣而起。
English: Wang Yan, a distant cousin, once went to the Goat Herder to explain the situation, and his words were very eloquent. However, the Goat Herder did not agree, and Wang Jiu started to whip his clothes.

古文：祜顾谓宾客曰： 王夷甫方以盛名处大位，然败俗伤化，必此人也。 
现代文：羊祜看着宾客们说： 王夷甫正以盛名居高位，然而伤风败俗，必定是这个人。 
English: The shepherd looked at the guests and said, "Wang Yifu is holding a high position with a great reputation, but it must be this man who is corrupt.

古文：步阐之役，祜以军法将斩王戎，故戎、衍并憾之，每言论多毁祜。
现代文：接应步阐那一仗，羊枯根据军法将要杀王戎，因此王戎、王衍都怨恨他，常诋毁羊祜。
English: According to the laws of war, Wang Rong would be killed by Yang Wai in that battle. Therefore, Wang Rong and Wang Yan both resented him and often slandered Yang Xuan.

古文：时人为之语曰： 二王当国，羊公无德。 
现代文：当时的人为此说： 二王当权，羊公便受诋毁。 
English: The people of that time said about this: Two kings hold power, and the shepherd is slandered.

古文：咸宁初，除征南大将军、开府仪同三司，得专辟召。
现代文：咸宁初，任为征南大将军、开府仪同三司，有权征召官吏。
English: At the beginning of Xianning, he was appointed as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the head of the three departments of the government, and had the power to conscript officials.

古文：初，祜以伐吴必藉上流之势。
现代文：起初，羊祜认为讨伐吴国必定要凭藉上游的优势。
English: At first, Yang Xuan thought that he must rely on the advantage of the upstream to fight against Wu.

古文：又时吴有童谣曰： 阿童复阿童，衔刀浮渡江。
现代文：而当时吴国有童谣说： 阿童啊阿童，衔刀浮渡江。
English: At that time, the children's rhyme in Wuzhou said: "A-tong, A-tong, the sword floats across the river."

古文：不畏岸上兽，但畏水中龙。 
现代文：不怕岸上兽，就怕水中龙。 
English: Fear not the beasts on the shore, but the dragons in the water.

古文：祜闻之曰： 此必水军有功，但当思应其名者耳。 
现代文：羊祜听到后说： 这一定是说水军可以建功，应当考虑如何应上阿童这个名字。 
English: After hearing this, Yang Tao said: This must mean that the navy can make contributions and should consider how to respond to the name of Adong.

古文：会益州刺史王浚征为大司农，祜知其可任，浚又小字阿童，因表留浚监益州诸军事，加龙骧将军，密令修舟楫，为顺流之计。
现代文：适逢益州刺史王浚被征为大司农，羊祜知道他可以任用，王浚的小名叫阿童，于是上表留王浚监益州各军事，加龙骧将军，密令修造舟船，为顺流而下的计谋作准备。
English: At the right time, Wang Jun, the military governor of Yizhou, was conscripted as the chief farmer. Yang Lan knew that he could be appointed. Wang Jun's little name was Adong. Therefore, Wang Jun was left on the table to supervise the military of Yizhou, General Garong Jun, and secretly ordered to build a boat to prepare for the strategy down the river.

古文：祜缮甲训卒，广为戎备。
现代文：羊祜修缮兵器训练士卒，广泛地进行战争准备。
English: He repaired weapons and trained soldiers, and made extensive preparations for war.

古文：至是上疏曰： 先帝顺天应时，西平巴蜀，南和吴会，海内得以休息，兆庶有乐安之心。
现代文：到这时上疏说： 先帝顺应天时，在西部平定了巴蜀，在南部与吴会讲和，海内得以休生养息，百姓有了安乐的心。
English: At this time, Shang Zuo said: The former emperor obeyed the call of heaven, pacified Bashu in the west, made peace with Wuhui in the south, was able to rest and recuperate at sea, and the people had a happy heart.

古文：而吴复背信，使边事更兴。
现代文：然而吴国又违背信义，使边境战事又起。
English: However, the State of Wu again violated the principle of good faith and caused the border war to break out again.

古文：夫期运虽天所授，而功业必由人而成，不一大举扫灭，则众役无时得安。
现代文：运数虽然是上天授与的，而功业必定要由人来完成，不大举扫灭吴国，百姓就无法得到安宁。
English: Although the number of operations was bestowed by heaven, the work must be completed by people. If the state of Wu is not wiped out, the people will not be able to have peace.

古文：亦所以隆先帝之勋，成无为之化也。
现代文：也是为了使先帝的勋业更盛，完成无为而治的教化。
English: It was also in order to make the distinguished career of the former emperor more prosperous and to complete the indoctrination of doing nothing.

古文：故尧有丹水之伐，舜有三苗之征，咸以宁静宇宙，戢兵和众者也。
现代文：所以尧有丹水的讨伐，舜有三苗的征战，都是为了宁静天下，制止战争和乐大众。
English: Therefore, both Danshui's crusade and Sanmao's war are for the sake of world peace, to stop war and to make the public happy.

古文：蜀平之时，天下皆谓吴当并亡，自此来十三年，是谓一周，平定之期复在今日矣。
现代文：蜀被平定的时候，天下都说吴应一同灭亡，到现在已十三年了，可以说是一周，平定的日子又在今天了。
English: When Shu was pacified, the whole world said that Wu should perish together. Now it has been thirteen years, which can be said to be a week, and the day of pacification is today.

古文：议者常言吴楚有道后服，无礼先强，此乃谓侯之时耳。
现代文：议论的人常说吴楚有道而后臣服，无礼而先强大，逭说的是诸侯时代的事。
English: Commentators often say that Wu Chu was wise before he was submissive, impolite before he was powerful, and that he was talking about the time of the princes.

古文：当今一统，不得与古同谕。
现代文：如今一统天下，不能和古代相提并论。
English: Today's one-world government cannot be compared to that of ancient times.

古文：夫适道之论，皆未应权，是故谋之虽多，而决之欲独。
现代文：合乎道的言论，都没能顺应权变，因此谋略虽多，而做决定时希望仅有一个。
English: Words that are consistent with the Tao have not been able to adapt to the vicissitudes of power, so although there are many strategies, when making a decision, I hope there is only one.

古文：凡以险阻得存者，谓所敌者同，力足自固。
现代文：凡凭仗险阻得以生存的，是指敌对双方实力相同，力量足以自守。
English: Those who survive by fighting against all odds are those who have the same strength as the enemy and are strong enough to defend themselves.

古文：苟其轻重不齐，强弱异势，则智士不能谋，而险阻不可保也。
现代文：假如双方力量轻重不齐，强弱不一，那么智士也无法谋划，险阻也不能保全。
English: If the two sides have different strengths and weaknesses, then the wise men can not plan, and the obstacles can not be preserved.

古文：蜀之为国，非不险也，高山寻云霓，深谷肆无景，束马悬车，然后得济，皆言一夫荷戟，千人莫当。
现代文：蜀作为一个国家，并非不险，高山耸入云端，深谷不见日光，在险处按兵不动，就可以成事，都说是一人当关，千人莫开。
English: Shu, as a country, is not without danger. The high mountains rise into the clouds, the deep valleys do not see the sun, and if you do not move your troops in dangerous places, you can get things done. It is said that one person is the key, and a thousand people cannot be opened.

古文：及进兵之日，曾无籓篱之限，斩将搴旗，伏尸数万，乘胜席卷，径至成都，汉中诸城，皆鸟栖而不敢出。
现代文：等到进兵的时候，几乎没有屏障的限制，斩将拔旗，杀敌数万，乘胜席卷，一直打到成都，汉中各城，都龟缩不敢出动。
English: When it was time to march in, there was almost no barrier restriction. They would raise the flag, kill tens of thousands of enemies, sweep through with victory, and fight all the way to Chengdu and all the cities in Hanzhong. They did not dare to go out.

古文：非皆无战心，诚力不足相抗。
现代文：不是都无心交战，实在是力量不足以相对抗。
English: It's not that they're all fighting mindlessly, it's just that they're not strong enough to resist.

古文：至刘禅降服，诸营堡者索然俱散。
现代文：到刘禅投降，各地守卫堡垒的人都一哄而散。
English: By the time Liu Zhen surrendered, the people guarding the fortress from all over the country had scattered.

古文：今江淮之难，不过剑阁；山川之险，不过岷汉；孙皓之暴，侈于刘禅；吴人之困，甚于巴蜀。
现代文：如今江淮的难于攻打，超不过剑合；山川险阻，超不过岷汉；孙皓的暴虐，胜过刘挥；吴人的困苦，比巴蜀严重。
English: Nowadays, the Yangtze River and the Huai River are difficult to attack, but superior to the sword; the mountains and rivers are dangerous, but superior to the Han Dynasty; the tyranny of Sun Yat-sen is better than that of Liu Wei; the hardships of the Wu people are more serious than that of the Ba Shu.

古文：而大晋兵众，多于前世；资储器械，盛于往时；今不于此平吴，而更阻兵相守，征夫苦役，日寻干戈，经历盛衰，不可长久，宜当时定，以一四海。
现代文：而大晋的军队，多于以前；资储器械，强于过去。如今不在此时平定吴国，而继续拥兵相守，征集民夫劳苦徭役，每天寻思打仗，经历盛衰，不可能长久，应当适时决定，统一天下。
English: Now, instead of pacifying Wu at this time, we should continue to support each other, recruit people to work hard, think about war every day, experience the ups and downs, it is impossible to last long, and it should be decided in time to unify the country.

古文：今若引梁益之兵水陆俱下，荆楚之众进临江陵，平南、豫州，直指夏口，徐、扬、青、兗并向秣陵，鼓旆以疑之，多方以误之，以一隅之吴，当天下之众，势分形散，所备皆急，巴汉奇兵出其空虚，一处倾坏，则上下震荡。
现代文：如今要是调梁益的军队水陆并进，荆楚的军队进军到坛，平南、邃业的军队直指夏旦，俭、扰、壹、查的军队一同开往拯壁，用战鼓旆旗来迷惑敌人，用多方出兵使敌人错误判断，以偏居一隅的吴国，抵挡天下的军队，兵力分散，守备的地方都会告急。巴汉的奇兵攻打吴国的空虚之处，一处被攻破，上下都会震荡。
English: Nowadays, if the army of Liang Yi marches on land and water, and the army of Jing Chu marches on the altar, and the army of Pingnan and Xingye points straight to Shatang, and the army of Zhen, Zhan, Ying and Zha go to the wall together, confuse the enemy with war drums and flags, and make the enemy misjudge by sending out troops from multiple sides, the army of Wu, which is in a corner, will resist the world, and the troops will be dispersed, and the places to be guarded will be in a hurry. Bahan's soldiers attacked the emptiness of Wuxi, and one place was broken, and the

古文：吴缘江为国，无有内外，东西数千里，以籓篱自持，所敌者大，无有宁息。
现代文：吴沿江而守，没有内外，东西几千里，靠屏障来守备，他们的对手强大，没有安宁的时候。
English: Wu guards along the river, there is no inside and outside, thousands of miles from east to west, relying on barriers to guard, their opponents are strong, there is no peace.

古文：孙皓孙恣情任意，与下多忌，名臣重将不复自信，是以孙秀之徒皆畏逼而至。
现代文：孙皓性情放纵，对部下多猜忌，名臣重将不再自信，因此孙秀之类都畏逼向我们投降。
English: Sun Yat-sen's nature was indulgent, he was suspicious of his subordinates, and eminent vassals would no longer have self-confidence. Therefore, Sun Xiu and others were afraid to force us to surrender.

古文：将疑于朝，士困于野，无有保世之计，一定之心。
现代文：将领在朝廷受怀疑，士卒在郊野受劳顿，没有保全朝廷的计谋，没有坚定的信念。
English: The generals were suspected in the court, and the soldiers were exhausted in the countryside. They did not preserve the court's strategy and did not have a firm belief.

古文：平常之日，犹怀去就，兵临之际，必有应者，终不能齐力致死，已可知也。
现代文：平常的日子，还考虑是走是留，到了兵临城下，一定有响应的人，最终不会齐心协力为朝廷献身，现在已经可以知道了。
English: On an ordinary day, people still consider whether to go or stay, but when the soldiers come to the city, those who have a certain response will eventually not make a concerted effort to devote themselves to the imperial court, which can now be known.

古文：其俗急速，不能持久，弓弩戟盾不如中国，唯有水战是其所便。
现代文：吴国习俗是速战速决，不能持久，弓弩戟循等兵器不如中原大国，惟有水战是他们的长处。
English: The custom of the State of Wu was to fight and decide quickly, which could not be sustained. Weapons such as the bow and arrow were not as good as those of the Central Plains countries, but water warfare was their strength.

古文：一入其境，则长江非复所固，还保城池，则去长入短。
现代文：一旦攻入吴境，那么昼红就不再是险阻，撤兵保卫城池，就失去了长处暴露出短处。
English: Once the Wu territory is invaded, the Day Red will no longer be a dangerous obstacle, and the withdrawal of troops to defend the city will lose its advantages and expose its shortcomings.

古文：而官军悬进，人有致节之志，吴人战于其内，有凭城之心。
现代文：而我军深入敌境，人人都有早日完成大业的志向，吴人在境内作战，有据城守备之心。
English: But our army penetrated deep into the enemy territory, and everyone had the ambition to complete the great cause as soon as possible. The Wu people fought in the territory and had the heart to defend the city.

古文：如此，军不逾时，克可必矣。 
现代文：像这样，战争不会拖延，打胜仗是必然的。 
English: As such, the war will not be delayed, and winning the war is inevitable.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：皇帝完全采纳。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：会秦凉屡败，祜复表曰： 吴平则胡自定，但当速济大功耳。 
现代文：台远方面多次战败时，羊祜又上表说： 吴国平定胡人就自然平定了，应当快速完成统一大业。 
English: When the Taiyuan side was defeated many times, Yang Hui said, "Wu's defeat of the Hu people was natural, and the great cause of unification should be accomplished quickly."

古文：而议者多不同，祜叹曰： 天下不如意，恆十居七八，故有当断不断。
现代文：然而发表意见的人多有不同看法，羊祜叹息说： 天下的事情不如人意，常有十之七八。所以有当断而不断。
English: However, most of the people who expressed their opinions had different opinions, and the sheep moaned: Things in the world are not as good as people's expectations, often seven or eight times out of ten. Therefore, there is a need to make a decision and keep going.

古文：天与不取，岂非更事者恨于后时哉！ 
现代文：上天赐与而不去取，岂不是让经历此事的人在后遗憾吗! 
English: Heaven gives and does not take away, is it not a pity for those who go through this?

古文：其后，诏以泰山之南武阳、牟、南城、梁父、平阳五县为南城郡，封祜为南城侯，置相，与郡公同。
现代文：此后，韶书命令以泰山的南武阳、牟、南城、梁父、平阳五县为南城郡，封羊祜为南城侯，设置相，与郡公相同。
English: After that, the imperial edict ordered that the five counties of Nanbuyang, Mou, Nancheng, Liangzhu and Pingyang in Mount Tai should be Nancheng County, and Fongyang County should be Nancheng County, with the same status as the county seat.

古文：祜让曰： 昔张良请受留万户，汉祖不夺其志。
现代文：羊祜推辞说： 过去请求受封张良万户，漠高祖不违背他的意志。
English: He said: In the past, Zhang Liang Wanhu requested to be given the title, but he would not go against his will.

古文：臣受钜平于先帝，敢辱重爵，以速官谤！ 
现代文：我从先帝那裹受封钜平，怎么敢受重爵，招致因不称职而受到的责难! 
English: How dare I receive a title of nobility from the former emperor, leading to the reproach of being incompetent!

古文：固执不拜，帝许之。
现代文：坚决不接受，皇帝同意了他。
English: The emperor agreed to his refusal.

古文：祜每被登进，常守冲退，至心素著，故特见申于分列之外。
现代文：羊祜每次被升官进爵，常保持谦虚退让，至诚之心一向显而易见，因此比晋升更能得到美誉。
English: Each time he was promoted to the peerage, he always remained modest and conceded, and his sincerity was always obvious, so he could get more reputation than promotion.

古文：是以名德远播，朝野具瞻，搢绅佥议，当居台辅。
现代文：所以他名声美德远扬，朝廷内外都敬仰，士大人都奏议，羊祜应该任三公宰相。
English: As a result, his reputation for virtue spread far and wide, and he was admired both inside and outside the imperial court. The great scholars all proposed that Yang Xi should be appointed as the Third Prince's Prime Minister.

古文：帝方有兼并之志，仗祜以东南之任，故寝之。
现代文：皇帝正有兼并吴国的志向，依仗着羊祜在东南方任职，所以压下奏议。
English: The emperor had the ambition of annexing the State of Wu, and he relied on the yoke of sheep to hold office in the southeast, so he suppressed the petition.

古文：祜历职二朝，任典枢要，政事损益，皆谘访焉，势利之求，无所关与。
现代文：羊祜历任两朝大臣，掌管要职，政事中的利弊，都向他咨询，追求权势与财利的事，他一概不涉及。
English: The ministers of the two dynasties who held important positions and the pros and cons of political affairs consulted him, and he did not involve himself in the pursuit of power and financial interests.

古文：其嘉谋谠议，皆焚其草，故世莫闻。
现代文：他出色的谋略公正的议论，因为草稿被焚，所以世人并不清楚。
English: The world does not know his brilliant strategy and fair speech, because the draft was burned.

古文：凡所进达，人皆不知所由。
现代文：凡是他所奏报的，外人都不知缘由。
English: No outsider knows the source of anything he reports.

古文：或谓祜慎密太过者，祜曰： 是何言欤！
现代文：有人认为羊祜谨慎得太过分，羊祜说： 这是什么话!
English: Some people thought that the shepherd was being too cautious. The shepherd said, "What is this saying?

古文：夫入则造膝，出则诡辞，君臣不密之诫，吾惟惧其不及。
现代文：入宫则到国君膝下，出宫则不以实情相告，这是对君臣不保密的告诫，我惟恐做得不够。
English: Entering the palace is at the knees of the sovereign, leaving the palace is not to tell the truth, this is a warning to the monarchs and ministers not to keep secrets, I'm afraid I didn't do enough.

古文：不能举贤取异，岂得不愧知人之难哉！
现代文：不能推举贤人任用异才，岂不愧对知人之难!
English: It is not possible to nominate a wise man and appoint an exceptional talent. How difficult it is to get to know someone!

古文：且拜爵公朝，谢恩私门，吾所不取。 
现代文：况且受朝廷封爵，却向私门谢恩，这是我不能做的。 
English: Moreover, I cannot do this when I was knighted by the imperial court, but thank my private family.

古文：祜女夫尝劝祜 有所营置，令有归戴者，可不美乎？ 
现代文：羊祜的女婿曾劝说 置办一些家产，以备告老还乡，难道不好吗 ?
English: Isn't it a good thing that the son-in-law of Yang Hui once persuaded him to purchase some family property in preparation for returning to his hometown?

古文：祜默然不应，退告诸子曰： 此可谓知其一不知其二。
现代文：羊祜沉默不回答。事后告诉儿子们说： 这可以说是知其一不知其二。
English: The shepherd was silent and did not answer. Afterwards, he told his sons: This can be said to be knowing one thing and not knowing another.

古文：人臣树私则背公，是大惑也。
现代文：做臣的为了私欲就会背弃公心，这是一大困惑。
English: It is a great perplexity that a vassal would betray the public interest for the sake of his own selfish desires.

古文：汝宜识吾此意。 
现代文：你们应该知道我的意思。 
English: You know what I mean.

古文：尝与从弟琇书曰： 既定边事，当角巾东路，归故里，为容棺之墟。
现代文：曾写信给堂弟羊堡说： 安定了边境后，我将头戴角巾向东走，返回故乡，准备一块能容下棺材的墓地。
English: He once wrote to his cousin Yang Peng: "After the border is stabilized, I will wear a kerchief on my head and walk eastward, return to my hometown, and prepare a cemetery that can accommodate a coffin.

古文：以白士而居重位，何能不以盛满受责乎！
现代文：我以普通百姓的身份而居高位，怎么能因为追求富足而受责备啊!
English: I hold a high position as a commoner, how can I be blamed for pursuing wealth!

古文：疏广是吾师也。 
现代文：疏广是我的老师。 
English: Sokwang is my teacher.

古文：祜乐山水，每风景，必造岘山，置酒言咏，终日不倦。
现代文：羊祜喜爱山水，每逢好时光，必定去岘山，设酒赋诗，从早到晚不知疲倦。
English: Sheep and Goats love the mountains and rivers. Whenever there is a good time, they are bound to go to Lushan Mountain to drink wine and recite poetry. They never get tired from morning to night.

古文：尝慨然叹息，顾谓从事中郎邹湛等曰： 自有宇宙，便有此山。
现代文：曾感慨叹息，对从事中郎塑逦等人说： 自从有了宇宙，就有了造座山。
English: He once sighed with emotion and said to those who were engaged in churo molding: Since there was a universe, there has been a mountain to build.

古文：由来贤达胜士，登此远望，如我与卿者多矣！
现代文：从那以后贤人名士，登此山远望，如同你我这样的多了!
English: Since then, sages and celebrities have climbed this mountain to look far and wide, just like you and me!

古文：皆湮灭无闻，使人悲伤。
现代文：他们都随时而灰飞烟灭，使人想起来悲伤。
English: They all vanished in a puff of smoke, bringing back memories of sadness.

古文：如百岁后有知，魂魄犹应登此也。 
现代文：如果死后有知，魂魄也应登这座山。 
English: If there is knowledge after death, the soul should also climb this mountain.

古文：湛曰： 公德冠四海，道嗣前哲，令闻令望，必与此山俱传。
现代文：色隧说： 公之美德四海第一，道承前代哲人，美好的名望，必定和这座山一同流传下去。
English: Shih Chun said: The public virtue is the first in the world, the way inherits the previous generation of philosophers, and the beautiful reputation must be passed down together with this mountain.

古文：至若湛辈，乃当如公言耳。 
现代文：至于我们这些人，该像公所说的一样。 
English: As for the rest of us, we must do as we are told.

古文：祜当讨吴贼功，将进爵土，乞以赐舅子蔡袭。
现代文：羊祜因讨伐吴国有功，将加封爵位土地，他请求赐给他舅舅的儿子蔡袭。
English: He requested that his uncle's son, Cai Xi, be given the land, which would confer a title of nobility, because of his achievements in fighting against the state of Wu.

古文：诏封袭关内侯，邑三百户。
现代文：下韶封蔡袭为关内侯，食邑三百户。
English: Lower Jiaofeng Caihai is a Guanai village with 300 households.

古文：会吴人寇弋阳、江夏，略户口，诏遣侍臣移书诘祐不追讨之意，并欲移州复旧之宜。
现代文：吴人入侵弋阳、江夏，掠夺人口，下韶派遣侍臣传文书责问羊祜不追击讨伐的原因，并打算迁徙州府恢复原址。
English: The Wu people invaded Fenyang and Jiangxia, plundered the population, and sent courtiers to Yancheng to ask the reason why Yancheng did not pursue the crusade, and planned to relocate the state capital to restore the original site.

古文：祜曰： 江夏去襄阳八百里，比知贼问，贼去亦已经日矣。
现代文：羊祜说： 江夏距襄阳八百里，等到得知敌兵来犯，敌兵已经离去好几天了。
English: "Jiangxia is 800 miles away from Xiangyang. By the time we learned that the enemy soldiers had invaded, they had already been gone for several days," said the shepherd.

古文：步军方往，安能救之哉！
现代文：步兵赶去，怎么能救得了呢!
English: How can they be saved when the infantry is on its way?

古文：劳师以免责，恐非事宜也。
现代文：调动军队来避免责备，恐怕不合适吧。
English: I'm not sure it's a good idea to bring in the army to avoid blame.

古文：昔魏武帝置都督，类皆与州相近，以兵势好合恶离。
现代文：过去魏武帝设都督，一般都和州相近，因为兵势讲究集中忌讳分散。
English: In the past, Emperor Wu of Wei set up the capital, which was generally close to the state, because the military situation was concentrated and dispersed.

古文：疆埸之间，一彼一此，慎守而已，古之善教也。
现代文：战场上，力量彼此消长，谨慎防守就是了，这是古代的好经验。
English: On the battlefield, the strength of each other, prudent defense is, this is a good experience of ancient times.

古文：若辄徙州，贼出无常，亦未知州之所宜据也。 
现代文：如动辄迁移州府，敌兵出没无常，也不知州府设在何处适宜。 
English: If the prefectural government is moved frequently, the presence of enemy soldiers is uncertain, and it is not known where the prefectural government should be located.

古文：使者不能诘。
现代文：派去的侍臣不能责问。
English: The courtier sent out cannot be questioned.

古文：祜寝疾，求入朝。
现代文：羊祜患病，请求入朝。
English: Sheep's colt is ill and asks to go to the imperial court.

古文：既至洛阳，会景献宫车在殡，哀恸至笃。
现代文：到了洛阳，正赶上景献皇后灵车出殡，极度悲痛。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he was just in time to see the funeral procession of the queen's hearse. He was extremely sad.

古文：中诏申谕，扶疾引见，命乘辇入殿，无下拜，甚见优礼。
现代文：皇帝下韶晓谕羊拈，带病引见，命他乘车入殿，不必下拜，很是被优待礼遇。
English: The emperor's henchman told the shepherd that he was ill, and ordered him to take a car to enter the temple. He did not have to bow, and was treated with great courtesy.

古文：及侍坐，面陈伐吴之计。
现代文：就坐后，当面陈述讨伐吴国之计。
English: After he was seated, he openly stated his plan to invade the State of Wu.

古文：帝以其病，不宜常入，遣中书令张华问其筹策。
现代文：皇帝因为羊祜有病，不宜常入朝，派遣中书令张华向他问询计策。
English: As the emperor was not able to visit the imperial court often due to the illness of his sheep, he sent Zhang Hua to ask him for advice.

古文：祜曰： 今主上有禅代之美，而功德未著。
现代文：羊祜说： 如今皇上有禅代的美名，而功德还不昭著。
English: The shepherd said, "Nowadays, the emperor has the reputation of the Zen dynasty, but his merits are not well-known.

古文：吴人虐政已甚，可不战而克。
现代文：吴人暴虐已经到了极点，可以不战而胜。
English: The Wu people's brutality has reached the extreme, and they can win without a fight.

古文：混一六合，以兴文教，则主齐尧舜，臣同稷契，为百代之盛轨。
现代文：统一天下，兴盛礼乐法度，皇帝就与塞舜齐名，大臣和稷契同功，成为百代的楷模。
English: Under the unification of the country, the prosperity of the ritual and music law, the emperor and the emperor and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister and the minister.

古文：如舍之，若孙皓不幸而没，吴人更立令主，虽百万之众，长江未可而越也，将为后患乎！ 
现代文：如果舍弃伐吴，假如孙皓不幸死了，星人重新立了一位好君主，我们虽有百万军队，匡丝也无法跨越，将成为以后的祸患! 
English: If we abandon Wu, if Sun Yat-sen dies tragically, and the star people re-establish a good monarch, although we have a million troops, Kuang Si will not be able to cross over, and will become a future calamity!

古文：华深赞成其计。
现代文：张华完全赞成他的谋略。
English: Zhang Hua fully agreed with his strategy.

古文：祜谓华曰： 成吾志者，子也。 
现代文：羊祜对张华说： 完成我的志向的，是你。 
English: The shepherd said to Zhang Hua, "You are the one who will fulfill my ambition."

古文：帝欲使祜卧护诸将，祜曰： 取吴不必须臣自行，但既平之后，当劳圣虑耳。
现代文：皇帝打算让羊祜卧床监护诸将，茎拈说： 攻取县厘不一定要我亲自参与，平定之时，当使皇上费心。
English: The emperor planned to have the shepherd lie in bed and watch over the generals. Zhuge Li said, "It is not necessary for me to take part in the conquest of the county of Li. When it is settled, the emperor should be troubled.

古文：功名之际，臣所不敢居。
现代文：涉及功名的事，我不应居处其间。
English: I'm not supposed to be in the middle of anything that involves merit.

古文：若事了，当有所付授，愿审择其人。 
现代文：假如事情结束，应当有所托付授受，愿慎重地选择其人。 
English: If the matter is over, someone should be entrusted with it, and they should be willing to choose their person carefully.

古文：疾渐笃，乃举杜预自代。
现代文：病渐渐加重，于是推举杜预代替自己。
English: As his illness gradually worsened, Du Yuan was chosen to replace him.

古文：寻卒，时年五十八。
现代文：不久去世，时年五十八岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 58.

古文：帝素服哭之，甚哀。
现代文：皇帝穿素服为他哭泣，很悲哀。
English: The emperor, dressed in plain clothes, wept for him, very sad.

古文：是日大寒，帝涕泪沾须鬓，皆为冰焉。
现代文：这一天极冷，皇帝的鼻涕眼泪沾在胡须鬓发上，都结成了冰。
English: It was a bitterly cold day, and the emperor's snot and tears clung to the bristles of his beard, turning them to ice.

古文：南州人征市日闻祜丧，莫不号恸，罢市，巷哭者声相接。
现代文：南州人在赶集的日子听到羊拉的死讯，没有不痛哭的，关门歇业，街巷裹哭声不断。
English: When the people of Nanzhou heard the news of Yangla's death on the day of the fair, there was no one who did not weep bitterly. They closed their doors and closed their businesses, and the cries continued in the streets and alleys.

古文：吴守边将士亦为之泣。
现代文：吴国守卫边境的将士也为他哭泣。
English: The soldiers guarding the border of Wu also cried for him.

古文：其仁千所感如此。
现代文：他的仁义道德的感化力就是这样。
English: Such is the influence of his benevolence, righteousness and morality.

古文：赐以东园秘器，朝服一袭，钱三十万，布百匹。
现代文：赐他达官贵族专用棺木，朝服一套，钱三十万，布一百匹。
English: He was given a special coffin for officials and aristocrats, a set of imperial robes, 300,000 yuan in money, and 100 pieces of cloth.

古文：诏曰： 征南大将军南城侯祜，蹈德冲素，思心清远。
现代文：诏书说： 征南大将军南城侯羊祜，德行谦虚朴实，心境清廉悠远。
English: The imperial edict said: Nancheng Hou Yangsheng, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, was modest and simple, and his mind was pure and far-sighted.

古文：始在内职，值登大命，乃心笃诚，左右王事，入综机密，出统方岳。
现代文：开始在朝廷内任职，正值我接受天命，一心忠诚，佐助王事，在朝内执掌大权，在地方为一方统帅。
English: When I began to serve in the imperial court, it was at the time when I accepted my destiny to be a leader, to be loyal, to help the king, to hold power in the imperial court, and to be a commander in the local area.

古文：当终显烈，永辅朕躬，而奄忽殂陨，悼之伤怀。
现代文：应当长久地显赫，永远辅佐我，而忽然逝世，悼念他让人感伤。
English: He who should have been long celebrated, who should have been my constant companion, died suddenly, and it is sad to mourn him.

古文：其追赠侍中、太傅，持节如故。 
现代文：追赠侍中、太傅，持节如生前。 
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior and Grand Master, and celebrated the festival as if he were still alive.

古文：祜立身清俭，被服率素，禄俸所资，皆以赡给九族，赏赐军士，家无余财。
现代文：羊祜为人清廉俭朴，衾被衣服都很简朴，得到的俸禄，全都资助了族人，赏赐了军士，家中没有多余的财产。
English: Sheep donkeys are clean and frugal, and donkeys are dressed in simple clothes. All the salaries they receive are used to subsidize the tribesmen and reward the sergeants. There is no extra property in the family.

古文：遗令不得以南城侯印入柩。
现代文：留下遗嘱不许把南城侯印放入棺材中。
English: He left a will forbidding Nancheng Houyin to be placed in a coffin.

古文：从弟琇等述祜素志，求葬于先人墓次。
现代文：堂弟羊诱等人陈述羊祜平素的志向，请求把羊祜葬在祖先的墓地。
English: His cousin, Sheep Lure, and others stated Sheep Lure's true intentions and requested that Sheep Lure be buried in his ancestors' graveyard.

古文：帝不许，赐去城十里外近陵葬地一顷，谥曰成。
现代文：皇帝不许，赐离城十里以外靠近皇陵的葬地一顷，谧号成。
English: The emperor did not allow it, but granted one hectare of burial ground near the imperial mausoleum, ten miles outside the city.

古文：祜丧既引，帝于大司马门南临送。
现代文：羊祜出殡时，皇上在大司马门南送行。
English: At the time of the funeral of the Sheepherd, the Emperor was escorted south of the Great Horse Gate.

古文：祜甥齐王攸表祜妻不以侯敛之意，帝乃诏曰： 祜固让历年，志不可夺。
现代文：羊祜的外甥齐王司马攸表述羊祜妻子不按侯爵身份安葬羊祜的意思，皇帝下诏说： 羊祜坚决辞让了多年，志不可夺。
English: Qiwang Sima You, the nephew of Yang Hui, expressed the intention of Yang Hui's wife not to bury Yang Hui according to his marquis status. The emperor issued a decree saying: "Yang Hui has resolutely resigned for many years, and his will cannot be taken away.

古文：身没让存，遗操益厉，此夷叔所以称贤，季子所以全节也。
现代文：身死而谦让尚存，遣留下的操行更振奋人心，这正是伯夷叔齐所以被人称贤，季子所以能保全名节啊。
English: Although he died, he remained humble, and the deeds he left behind are even more inspiring. This is precisely why Uncle Boyi was hailed as a great man, and why Ji Zi was able to preserve the famous festival.

古文：今听复本封，以彰高美。 
现代文：如今听任恢复原来的封赐，以表彰美德。 
English: It has now been decided to restore the original award in recognition of his virtues.

古文：初，文帝崩，祜谓傅玄曰： 三年之丧，虽贵遂服，自天子达；而汉文除之，毁礼伤义，常以叹息。
现代文：当初，文帝去世时，羊祜对傅玄说： 三年服丧，虽然贵在按礼制服丧，从天子到庶人都不例外，然而汉文帝废除了，毁坏礼制伤害义理，我时常为此叹息。
English: At the time of Emperor Wen's death, Yang Xuan said to Fu Xuan: "Three years of mourning, although you are mourning according to the etiquette, from the emperor to the common people are no exception, but Emperor Wen abolished, destroyed the etiquette and hurt the principle, I often sigh for this.

古文：今主上天纵至孝，有曾闵之性，虽夺其服，实行丧礼。
现代文：如今上天使国君极孝，有曾参与盟翅的品性，虽然取消了丧服，还是实行丧礼。
English: Nowadays, the Supreme Angel Guojun is very filial and has the character of having participated in the alliance wing. Although the funeral dress has been canceled, the funeral ceremony is still carried out.

古文：丧礼实行，除服何为邪！
现代文：既然实行丧礼，又何必取消丧服呢!
English: Since a funeral is being held, why not take off the mourning clothes?

古文：若因此革汉魏之薄，而兴先王之法，以敦风俗，垂美百代，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：如果就此改革汉魏的薄丧，而复兴先王的法度，以此使风俗敦厚，百代留下美名，不也很好吗! 
English: Wouldn't it be great if we could reform the decrepitude of the Han and Wei dynasties, and revive the laws of the previous kings, so that the customs would be strong and leave a good name for hundreds of generations!

古文：玄曰： 汉文以末世浅薄，不能行国君之丧，故因而除之。
现代文：傅玄说： 汉文帝因为末世的浅薄，不能实行国君的丧礼，所以便废除了。
English: Fu Xuan said: Han Emperor Wen, because of the shallowness of the last century, could not carry out the funeral of the sovereign, so it was abolished.

古文：除之数百年，一旦复古，难行也。 
现代文：取消了几百年，一旦复古，很难实行。 
English: Canceled several hundred years ago, once retro, it is difficult to implement.

古文：祜曰： 不能使天下如礼，且使主上遂服，不犹善乎！ 
现代文：羊祜说： 不能使天下都实行丧礼，姑且使国君按礼服丧，不也可以吗! 
English: The shepherd said, "It is not possible for the whole world to carry out a funeral, let alone for the sovereign to be buried in ceremonial dress. Is it not possible?"

古文：玄曰： 主上不除而天下除，此为但有有父子，无复君臣，三纲之道亏矣。 
现代文：傅玄说： 国君不取消而天下取消，这是仅有父子之纲，不再有君臣之纲，三纲之道会受损害。 
English: Fu Xuan said: If the king does not cancel, the whole country will cancel. This is only the father-son principle, there is no longer the principle of ruler-subject, and the three principles will be damaged.

古文：祜乃止。
现代文：羊祜便作罢。
English: Let the sheep graze.

古文：祜所著文章及为《老子传》并行于世。
现代文：羊祜所写的文章及《老子传》都流传于世。
English: The articles written by Yang Xuan and "Lao Zi Biography" have been passed down to the world.

古文：襄阳百姓于岘山祜平生游憩之所建碑立庙，岁时飨祭焉。
现代文：襄阳百姓在岘山羊祜游览休息的地方树立石碑建造庙宇，每年按时祭祀。
English: The people of Xiangyang erect stone monuments and build temples in the places where they visit and rest, and hold annual sacrifices.

古文：望其碑者莫不流涕，杜预因名为堕泪碑。
现代文：看见石碑的人没有不落泪的，杜预便把石碑命名为堕泪碑。
English: There is no one who does not shed tears when they see the stone monument, so Du Pre named the stone monument as the Fallen Tears Monument.

古文：荆州人为祜讳名，屋室皆以门为称，改户曹为辞曹焉。
现代文：荆州人为羊祜的 祜 字避讳，屋室都称门而不称户，把户曹改为辞曹。
English: The people of Jingzhou shun the  character of 羊. They call the house a door instead of a house, and change the word 戶曹 to 辞曹.

古文：祜开府累年，谦让不辟士，始有所命，会卒，不得除署。
现代文：羊祜开建府署多年，谦让不征召属官，刚有所任命，正赶上他去世，未能在府署中任官。
English: It had been many years since the establishment of the prefectural office in Yangshuo, and he had not conscripted subordinate officers. He had just been appointed, but he died just in time and was not able to serve in the prefectural office.

古文：故参佐刘侩、赵寅、刘弥、孙勃等笺诣预曰： 昔以谬选，忝备官属，各得与前征南大将军祜参同庶事。
现代文：他的参佐刘侩、趟寅、刘弥、孙勃等人写信给杜预说： 过去因为选我们，使我们在官府中充数，让我们都能和前征南大将军羊祜一起共同参与国事。
English: His advisors Liu Wei, Wu Yin, Liu Mi, Sun Bo and others wrote to Du Yuanzhong, saying: In the past, because of our election, we were able to fill the number of people in the government office, so that we could all participate in national affairs together with the former Nantai general Yang Wei.

古文：祜执德冲虚，操尚清远，德高而体卑，位优而行恭。
现代文：羊祜品德谦虚，操行清高，德高而谦，位高而敬。
English: Sheep are modest in moral character, high in conduct, high in virtue but humble, high in rank but respectful.

古文：前膺显命，来抚南夏，既有三司之仪，复加大将军之号。
现代文：以前他接受了高位，来镇抚南夏，既享有三司的礼仪，又拥有大将军的称号。
English: In the past, he accepted a high position and came to Zhenfu Nanxia, enjoying both the etiquette of the three divisions and the title of general.

古文：虽居其位，不行其制。
现代文：虽然处在这样的高位，却不享用相应的礼制。
English: Although he is in such a high position, he does not enjoy the corresponding etiquette.

古文：至今海内渴伫，群俊望风。
现代文：至今天下仰慕思念，俊杰们想望他的风采。
English: To this day, people look up to him and admire his style.

古文：涉其门者，贪夫反廉，懦夫立志，虽夷惠之操，无以尚也。
现代文：与他共事者，贪婪的变得清廉，胆怯的树立了志向，就是伯夷、柳王墓的节操，也比不过他。
English: Those who worked with him, greedily became incorruptible, and fearlessly set an aspiration, that is, the integrity of Bo Yi and Liu Wang's tomb is no better than him.

古文：自镇此境，政化被乎江汉，潜谋远计，辟国开疆，诸所规摹，皆有轨量。
现代文：自从镇抚此地，教化遍及江汉，深谋远虑，拓展国家疆界，他所有的规划，都有法度。
English: Since he has been the governor of this place, he has spread enlightenment throughout Jianghan, he has thought out and expanded the national borders, and all of his plans are legal.

古文：志存公家，以死勤事，始辟四掾，未至而陨。
现代文：一心为国，勤政而置生死于度外，征召属官，未等到任他就去世。
English: He devoted himself to the country, devoted himself to politics, and died an extraordinary death. He was conscripted as a subordinate official, but died before he was appointed.

古文：夫举贤报国，台辅之远任也；搜扬侧陋，亦台辅之宿心也；中道而废，亦台辅之私恨也。
现代文：推举贤人报效国家，这是台辅的责任；搜求重用隐居的人才，也是台辅的心愿；半途而废，也是台辅的遗憾。
English: It is the responsibility of the Taiwan Affairs Office to nominate sages to serve the country; it is also the desire of the Taiwan Affairs Office to search for talents who live in seclusion; it is also the regret of the Taiwan Affairs Office to give up halfway.

古文：履谦积稔，晚节不遂，此远近所以为之感痛者也。
现代文：一生谦让，而到了晚年未能如意，这正是远近之人为他伤悲的原因。
English: He was humble all his life, but in his later years he failed to live up to expectations, which is why people near and far grieved for him.

古文：昔召伯所憩，爱流甘棠；宣子所游，封殖其树。
现代文：过去召伯休息过的地方，甘棠成了寄托爱心的东西；宣子游历过的地方，人们种树纪念。
English: In places where Zhao Bo rested in the past, the mandarin oranges have become objects of affection; in places where Xuan Zi traveled, people plant trees to commemorate.

古文：夫思其人，尚及其树，况生存所辟之士，便当随例放弃者乎！
现代文：思念其人，推及到树，更何况他生前所征召的人，难道就该根据成例舍弃他们!
English: To think of his people, even down to the trees, much less those whom he had called in his lifetime, should he, according to tradition, abandon them!

古文：乞蒙列上，得依已至掾属。 
现代文：乞求向上陈述，使那些人能如同己任属官。 
English: Begging to be promoted so that they can act as if they were their own subordinates.

古文：预表曰： 祜虽开府而不备僚属，引谦之至，宜见显明。
现代文：丝垂上表说： 芏茧虽然开建府署而不任属官幕僚，极度的谦让之心，是显而易见的。
English: The thread hanging from the table said: Although he started the construction of the government office and was not appointed as a staff member, his extreme humility is obvious.

古文：及扶疾辟士，未到而没，家无胤嗣，官无命士，此方之望，隐忧载怀。
现代文：他带病征召僚属，人没到任而他先去世。家中无人继承官府没有任命之官，这一带人们的心中，忧伤感怀。
English: He called up his colleagues due to illness, but they did not arrive and he died first. No one in his family succeeded to the government, and no official was appointed. People in this area are sad and emotional.

古文：夫笃终追远，人德归厚，汉祖不惜四千户之封，以慰赵子弟心。
现代文：对远逝的人诚信追思，人们的德行就归于敦厚，坠直担不惜四千户的封邑，来抚慰赵子弟人心。
English: Thinking back on the sincerity of those who have passed away, people's virtue is attributed to Tun Hou, who has directly borne the burden of four thousand households of fiefs to soothe the hearts of Zhao Zi's students.

古文：请议之。 
现代文：请求考虑此事。 
English: Request for consideration of the matter.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：下诏不准。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：祜卒二岁而吴平，群臣上寿，帝执爵流涕曰： 此羊太傅之功也。 
现代文：羊祜去世两年以后呈国被平定，大臣们为皇帝敬酒祝贺，皇帝拿着酒杯流着泪说： 这是羊友垡的功劳啊。 
English: Two years after his death, the country was pacified. The ministers toasted and congratulated the emperor. The emperor said with tears in his eyes, "This is the merit of Yang Youjun."

古文：因以克定之功，策告祜庙，仍依萧何故事，封其夫人。
现代文：于是把平定昱国的功绩，用策书祭告兰植庙，依照萧包的先例，策封他的夫人。
English: Therefore, he used his strategy book to praise Lan Zhi Temple for its achievements in the pacification of the Warring States, and followed Xiao Bao's example and promoted his wife.

古文：策曰： 皇帝使谒者杜宏告故侍中、太傅钜平成侯祜：昔吴为不恭，负险称号，郊境不辟，多历年所。
现代文：策书说： 皇帝派谒者杜宏告知已故侍中、太傅钜平成侯羊祜：过去吴国不恭敬，凭仗险阻妄称君号，边境不得开拓，已经经历了多年。
English: The policy book said: Du Hong, the emperor's emissary, told the late attendant, Taifu Yao Heisei Houyang Yao: In the past, Wu did not respect, arrogantly claimed the title of king by virtue of war and danger, and the border could not be opened up. It has been going on for many years.

古文：祜受任南夏，思静其难，外扬王化，内经庙略，著德推诚，江汉归心，举有成资，谋有全策。
现代文：羊枯受命在南夏任职，思虑的祸患，对外宣扬王道教化，在内谋划朝廷的重大决策，显示德行推行诚信，江汉人心归附，举措有成熟的谋略，设谋有完整的策划。
English: Yang Kui was appointed to serve in Nansha, the scourge of thought, propagating the royal way of enlightenment to the outside world, planning major decisions of the imperial court internally, showing the virtue of promoting integrity, the hearts of the Jianghan people are attached, the measures have mature strategies, and the plans have complete planning.

古文：昊天不吊，所志不卒，朕用悼恨于厥心。
现代文：上天没能让他的志向得以完成，我心中为此悼念遣憾。
English: Heaven did not allow his ambition to be fulfilled, and my heart is filled with sorrow and regret.

古文：乃班命群帅，致天之讨，兵不逾时，一征而灭，畴昔之规，若合符契。
现代文：于是命令群帅，执行上天的旨意讨伐，迅速出兵，一次出征就灭了吴，与过去的规划，十分符合。
English: Therefore, he ordered the commanders to carry out God's will and quickly dispatch troops. Wu would be destroyed in a single expedition, which was very much in line with the previous plan.

古文：夫赏不失劳，国有彝典，宜增启土宇，以崇前命，而重违公高让之素。
现代文：赏赐不遗漏功臣，国家有规制，应该增广封地，来表彰先前的命令，而又违背了公高洁谦让的宿愿。
English: The award does not omit the meritorious person, the state has a regulation, it should expand the fief to commend the previous order, but it violates the long-cherished wish of public nobility and modesty.

古文：今封夫人夏侯氏万岁乡君，食邑五千户，又赐帛万匹，谷万斛。 
现代文：现在封夫人夏侯氏万岁乡君，食邑五千户，另赐帛万匹，谷万斛。 
English: Now, the wife of the feudal lord, the Xia Hou clan, is a long-lived townsman, with five thousand households, another ten thousand horses, and ten thousand cows.

古文：祜年五岁，时令乳母取所弄金环。
现代文：羊祜五岁时，常叫奶妈给他拿他所玩的金环。
English: When he was five years old, he often asked his wet nurse to bring him the gold ring he was playing with.

古文：乳母曰： 汝先无此物。 
现代文：奶妈说： 你以前没有这东西。 
English: The wet nurse said: You didn't have this before.

古文：祜即诣邻人李氏东垣桑树中探得之。
现代文：羊祜就到邻居李氏束墙桑树中找到金环。
English: The shepherd found the golden ring in the mulberry tree of his neighbour, Mr. Li.

古文：主人惊曰： 此吾亡兒所失物也，云何持去！ 
现代文：主人吃惊地说： 这是我那死去的儿子丢的东西，为什么拿走! 
English: The owner was surprised and said, "This is what my dead son left behind, why did you take it?"

古文：乳母具言之，李氏悲惋。
现代文：奶妈把这件事情原委告诉她，李氏很悲伤。
English: The wet nurse told her about this incident, and Ms. Li was very sad.

古文：时人异之，谓李氏子则祜之前身也。
现代文：当时的人们对此惊异，说李氏的儿子是羊祜的前身。
English: At the time, people were surprised by this and said that the son of the Li clan was the predecessor of the Sheep and Goat.

古文：又有善相墓者，言祜祖墓所有帝王气，若凿之则无后，祜遂凿之。
现代文：又有善于看墓地风水的人，说羊祜祖墓的地方有帝王之气，要是在墓地开凿就没有后代，羊祜就开凿。
English: There are also people who are good at looking at the cemetery's feng shui, saying that the place where the ancestor's tomb is located has the spirit of the emperor. If there are no descendants in the cemetery, the tomb will be excavated.

古文：相者见曰 犹出折臂三公 ，而祜竟堕马折臂，位至公而无子。
现代文：相墓地的人看了说 还能出个断了臂的三公 ，而羊祜终究从马上摔下来折断了手臂，官位至公而没有儿子。
English: People at the graveyard read that the Three Princes could still come out with a broken arm, but the Goat Herder eventually fell off his horse and broke his arm, and he had the highest official rank but no son.

古文：帝以祜兄子暨为嗣，暨以父没不得为人后。帝又令暨弟伊为祜后，又不奉诏。
现代文：皇帝让羊枯哥哥的儿子羊暨继嗣，羊暨因为父亲已死不能做别人的后代，皇帝又命令羊暨的弟弟羊伊做羊祜的后人，又不接受。
English: The emperor asked Yang Jian, the son of Yang Jian's elder brother, to be the heir, and Yang Jian, because his father had died, could not be the offspring of others. The emperor also ordered Yang Jian's younger brother, Yang Yi, to be the descendant of Yang Jian, but he did not accept it.

古文：帝怒，并收免之。
现代文：皇帝发怒，一并收回诏令。
English: The emperor was furious and withdrew the edict.

古文：太康二年，以伊弟篇为钜平侯，奉祜嗣。
现代文：太康二年，令羊伊的弟弟羊篇为钜平侯，继嗣羊祜。
English: In the second year of Taikang, the younger brother of Yang Yi, Yang Zhen, became the prince of Jianping and the successor of Yang Xi.

古文：篇历官清慎，有私牛于官舍产犊，及迁而留之，位至散骑常侍，早卒。
现代文：羊篇做官清廉谨慎，有私牛在官家牛舍中生下牛犊，等到搬走时留下小牛。官位到散骑常侍，早死。
English: In the Sheep Chapter, officials were honest and prudent, and there was a cow that gave birth to a calf in the official cowshed, and left the calf when it was moved away. The official rank became a free rider, and died early.

古文：孝武太元中，封祜兄玄孙之子法兴为钜平侯，邑五千户。
现代文：孝武帝太元年间，封羊枯哥哥的玄孙之子法兴为钜平侯，食邑五千户。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu in the first year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Fa Xing, the son of the great-great-grandson of the elder brother of Guo Yangkui, was the lord of Suiping, which had 5,000 households.

古文：以桓玄党诛，国除。
现代文：因为与桓玄同党被杀，封地被取消。
English: Because he was killed together with Kuan Xuan, his fiefdom was abolished.

古文：尚书祠部郎荀伯子上表讼之曰： 臣闻咎繇亡嗣，臧文以为深叹；伯氏夺邑，管仲所以称仁。
现代文：尚书祠部郎荀伯子上表争辩说： 我听说咎繇没人继嗣，臧文为此深感遣憾；伯氏争夺封邑，管仲因此被称为仁义。
English: Shang Shuxu, the retainer of Guanzhong, argued at the table: I heard that Guanzhong did not have a successor, and Guanzhong deeply regretted this; the Bo clan competed for fiefs, and Guanzhong was therefore called Renyi.

古文：功高可百世不泯，滥赏无得崇朝。
现代文：功劳高可以百世不泯灭，赏赐无度不能长久。
English: High merit can never be extinguished, and endless rewards cannot last for a long time.

古文：故太傅、钜平侯羊祜明德通贤，国之宗主，勋参佐命，功成平吴，而后嗣阙然，烝尝莫寄。
现代文：已故太傅、钜平侯羊祜德性完美贤明，是国家所仰之人，有辅佐天命的勋绩，有设谋平定吴国的功劳，而没有后嗣，祭祀没有寄托。
English: The late Taifu, Zouping Houyang, was virtuous, perfect and wise. He was a person respected by the country. He had the merit of supporting the mission of heaven, and the merit of devising a plan to pacify the State of Wu. However, he had no heir, and there was no place for sacrifice.

古文：汉以萧何元功，故绝世辄继，愚谓钜平封宜同酂国。
现代文：汉朝因为萧何有头等大功，因而不使他后继无人，我认为钜平侯的封赐应当和邓国相同。
English: In the Han Dynasty, because of Xiao Hejun's first-class great achievements, there was no one to succeed him. I think that the conferment of the title of Yu Pinghou should be the same as that of Deng Guo.

古文：故太尉广陵公准党翼贼伦，祸加淮南，因逆为利，窃飨大邦。
现代文：已故太尉广陵公准偏私帮助贼人伦，给淮南造成祸害，因为叛逆反而得利，占有大块封地。
English: The late captain Guangling Gongzhen was biased to help the thieves and caused harm to Huainan. Because he was rebellious, he made a profit and occupied a large fief.

古文：值西朝政刑失裁，中兴因而不夺。
现代文：当时西朝的法规有失公正，中兴以后没有收回封邑。
English: At that time, the regulations of the Western Dynasty were unfair, and ZTE did not recover the fief.

古文：今王道维新，岂可不大判臧否，谓广陵国宜在削除。
现代文：如今王道革新，怎么能不分辨是非。我认为广陵国应该削除。
English: Nowadays, innovation is king, how can we not distinguish between right and wrong. I think Guangling should be deleted.

古文：故太保卫瓘本爵菑阳县公，既被横害，乃进茅土，始赠兰陵，又转江夏。
现代文：已故太保堑型的爵位本来是苗阳县公，遭迫害以后，就进升爵位，开始赠他兰陵，又转到江夏。
English: The late Taibao's title of nobility was originally that of county magistrate of Miaoyang County. After he was persecuted, he was promoted to the title of nobility, began to give him Lanling, and then transferred to Jiangxia.

古文：中朝名臣，多非理终，瓘功德无殊，而独受偏赏，谓宜罢其郡封，复邑菑阳，则与夺有伦，善恶分矣。 
现代文：中朝的名臣，很多人的封赠没有道理，卫罐的功德并不特出，而独受大赏，我认为应该收回他的封地，恢复在蕾阳的封地，这样就使得赠与和收回公平，区分了善恶。 
English: As a famous minister of the Chinese dynasty, the gift of many people is unreasonable. Wei Jian's merits are not outstanding, but he received a great reward. I think it is necessary to recover his fief and restore the fief in Lei Yang. In this way, the gift and the recovery are fair and distinguish between good and evil.

古文：竟寝不报。
现代文：最终未有结果。
English: In the end, nothing came of it.

古文：祜前母，孔融女，生兄发，官至都督淮北护军。
现代文：羊祜的前母，是孔融的女儿，生下长兄羊墅，官至都督进北护军。
English: The former mother of Yang Xuan was the daughter of Kong Rong. She gave birth to the eldest brother, Yang Zhu, who rose to the position of governor and entered the Northern Guard.

古文：初，发与祜同母兄承俱得病，祜母度不能两存，乃专心养发，故得济，而承竟死。
现代文：当初，芏登和圭姑的同母兄芏丞都生了病，芏拉的母亲考虑到不能同时照顾两个人，就专心照料羊发，羊发因而得活。而羊承终于死了。
English: At first, both Zhenden and Gui Gu's older half-brother, Zhenzheng, fell ill. Considering that Zhenden's mother could not take care of both of them at the same time, Zhenden's mother concentrated on taking care of Yangfa. Yangfa was able to survive as a result, but Yangsheng eventually died.

古文：发长子伦，高阳相。
现代文：羊发的长子羊伦，是高阳相。
English: Sheep-haired Lamb Lun, the eldest son, is a high yang phase.

古文：伦弟暨，阳平太守。
现代文：羊伦的弟弟羊暨，是垦瞪太守。
English: Yang Lun's younger brother, Yang Jie, is the Grand Prince of Zhaozan.

古文：暨弟伊，初为车骑贾充掾，后历平南将军、都督江北诸军事，镇宛，为张昌所杀，追赠镇南将军。
现代文：芏暨的弟弟圣伊，起初为车骑置立的属官，后来历任平南将军、都督江北诸军事，镇守宛，被张旦杀害，追赠为镇南将军。
English: Zou Ji's younger brother, Sheng Yi, was at first a subordinate officer of the chariot and cavalry, and later successively served as the general of Pingnan, the military governor of Jiangbei, and the town guard. He was killed by Zhang Dan and posthumously became the general of Zhennan.

古文：祜伯父秘，官至京兆太守。
现代文：羊拈的伯父芏垫，官至直韭太守。
English: Yang Xi's uncle, Zou Mat, rose through the ranks to the position of Dajian Dazhou.

古文：子祉，魏郡太守。
现代文：儿子芏扯，是丝塾太守。
English: My son is the dean of the silk school.

古文：秘孙亮，字长玄，有才能，多计数。
现代文：芏丛的孙子主台，字旦玄，有才能，多计谋。
English: The grandson of Zou Cong is the host, the words are profound, talented, and multi-strategy.

古文：与之交者，必伪尽款诚，人皆谓得其心，而殊非其实也。
现代文：有人与他交往，他一定装得非常热情坦率，人们都认为了解了他的心，然而根本不是真实的。
English: He must have come across as very warm and sincere, and people thought they knew his heart, but it wasn't true at all.

古文：初为太傅杨骏参军，时京兆多盗窃。
现代文：起初是太傅杨骏参军，当时京兆多发盗窃案。
English: At first, it was Tai Fu Yang Jie who joined the army. At that time, there were many thefts in Beijing.

古文：骏欲更重其法，盗百钱加大辟，请官属会议，亮曰： 昔楚江乙母失布，以为盗由令尹。
现代文：握坠打算加重刑法，盗百钱就判死刑，让官属一同商议。羊亮说： 过去楚江乙母丢失了布，认为偷盗是由于令尹。
English: Shirking plans to aggravate the criminal law, the theft of a hundred money will be sentenced to death, let the officials discuss together. Yang Liang said: In the past, the mother of Chujiang lost the cloth, and thought that the theft was due to Ling Yin.

古文：公若无欲，盗宜自止，何重法为？ 
现代文：公若是没有私欲，盗窃应该自然止息，为什么要加重刑法呢? 
English: If there is no selfishness in the public interest, theft should naturally cease. Why should the criminal law be strengthened?

古文：骏惭而止。
现代文：杨骏惭愧而作罢。
English: Embarrassed, Yang Zhen gave up.

古文：累转大鸿胪。
现代文：芏亮逐渐升任为大鸿胪。
English: Gao Liang was gradually promoted to Da Hongzhu.

古文：时惠帝在长安，亮与关东连谋，内不自安，奔于并州，为刘元海所害。
现代文：当时惠帝在童迭，蝗与鳃束合谋，自己内心不安，跑到差业，被刘元海杀害。
English: At that time, Hui Di was in Tongdian, the locusts conspired with the cocoons, and he was uneasy in his heart. He ran away and was killed by Liu Yuanhai.

古文：亮弟陶，为徐州刺史。
现代文：茎毫的弟弟芏迪，是涂州刺史。
English: Zhu Zhihao's younger brother, Qi Di, is a Tu Zhou scholar.

古文：杜预，字元凯，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：杜预字元凯，京兆杜陵人。
English: Du Yuanzhi Yuan Kai, Jingzha Du Lingren.

古文：祖畿，魏尚书仆射。
现代文：祖父杜畿，是魏尚书仆射。
English: His grandfather, Dugui, was a pupil of Wei Shang.

古文：父恕，幽州刺史。
现代文：父亲杜恕，是幽州刺史。
English: His father, Du Shun, was a famous poet in Yuzhou.

古文：预博学多通，明于兴废之道，常言： 德不可以企及，立功立言可庶几也。 
现代文：杜预学识广博，熟知国家兴衰之道，常说： 德不能指望达到，建功立言还有可能。 
English: Du Yueh has a wide range of knowledge and is familiar with the rise and fall of countries. He often said that virtue cannot be expected to be achieved, but it is still possible to make contributions.

古文：初，其父与宣帝不相能，遂以幽死，故预久不得调。
现代文：起初，他父亲与宣帝互不投合，于是免官后幽禁而死，因此杜预很久得不到调用。
English: At first, his father and Emperor Xuan did not see eye to eye, and as a result, he died in prison after being relieved of his duties. As a result, Du Yuan did not receive the call for a long time.

古文：文帝嗣立，预尚帝妹高陆公主，起家拜尚书郎，袭祖爵丰乐亭侯。
现代文：文帝继位，杜预娶皇帝的妹妹高陆公主，最初出任尚书郎，承袭祖爵丰乐亭侯。
English: When Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne, Du Yuan married the emperor's sister, Princess Gao Lu, and initially served as Shang Shuro, inheriting the ancestral title of Feng Le Ting.

古文：在职四年，转参相府军事。
现代文：在职四年，调任参相府军事。
English: After four years in office, he was transferred to the Military Staff of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：钟会伐蜀，以预为镇西长史。
现代文：钟会讨伐蜀，任命杜预为镇西长史。
English: The bell association fought against Shu, and appointed Du Yu as the town's west long history.

古文：及会反，僚佐并遇害，唯预以智获免，增邑千一百五十户。
现代文：钟会反叛，幕僚助手一并遇害，祇有杜预凭藉智慧免于难，增加食邑一千一百五十户。
English: The bell association rebelled, and the assistant of the staff was killed at the same time. Only Du Yueh was spared by his wisdom and increased the number of households by 1,150.

古文：与车骑将军贾充等定律令，既成，预为之注解，乃奏之曰： 法者，盖绳墨之断例，非穷理尽性之书也。
现代文：与车骑将军买充等人制定律令，完成以后，杜预为律令做注解，于是奏报说： 法律，是如同准绳墨斗一样的决断条例，不是穷尽理性的书籍。
English: He formulated the ritsuryo with the cavalry and cavalry general Maidong and others, and after it was completed, Du Yu made a commentary on the ritsuryo, so the report said: The law is a decision-making regulation like a yardstick, not an exhaustive rational book.

古文：故文约而例直，听省而禁简。
现代文：因此文辞简约条例率直，断决明白禁令简要。
English: Therefore, the regulation of concise wording is straightforward, and the injunction is clear and concise.

古文：例直易见，禁简难犯。
现代文：条例率直就容易分辨，禁令简要就难于违犯。
English: A straightforward ordinance is easy to distinguish, and a brief prohibition is difficult to violate.

古文：易见则人知所避，难犯则几于刑厝。
现代文：容易分辨人们就知道避免犯法，难于违犯就没人违法。
English: If it is easy to distinguish people, they will know to avoid breaking the law. If it is difficult to break the law, no one will break the law.

古文：刑之本在于简直，故必审名分。
现代文：刑法的根本就在于简要率直，因此就必须推究名分。
English: The essence of criminal law lies in simplicity and straightforwardness, so it is necessary to deduce the points.

古文：审名分者，必忍小理。
现代文：推究名分，必须要克制小的道理。
English: In the pursuit of fame, we must refrain from the principle of smallness.

古文：古之刑书，铭之钟鼎，铸之金石，所以远塞异端，使无淫巧也。
现代文：古代的刑书，刻在钟鼎上，铸在金石上，以便堵塞异端，使其无法诡辩。
English: The ancient book of punishments, engraved on the bell-tower, cast in stone, in order to stifle heresy and make it impossible to argue.

古文：今所注皆纲罗法意，格之以名分。
现代文：如今所注释的都是搜集法律的要义，根据名分推究。
English: Today's commentary is all about collecting the essentials of the law and extrapolating from them.

古文：使用之者执名例以审趣舍，伸绳墨之直，去析薪之理也。 
现代文：使用法的人依据名分条例来审定取舍，伸张法律的公正，摒除细碎的道理。 
English: According to the name regulation, the person who uses the law will determine the choice, advocate the fairness of the law, and eliminate the reason of the details.

古文：诏班于天下。
现代文：下诏书在天下颁布实行。
English: The following edict shall be promulgated and implemented throughout the country.

古文：泰始中，守河南尹。
现代文：泰始年间，任河南尹。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he held the post of Henan Yin.

古文：预以京师王化之始，自近及远，凡所施论，务崇大体。
现代文：杜预认为京师是王道教化的出发点，从近到远，所有政策措施，力求谶大体。
English: Du Yuanyuan believes that the Beijing division is the starting point of the royal road education, from near to far, all policies and measures, and strive to improve the overall situation.

古文：受诏为黜陟之课，其略曰； 臣闻上古之政，因循自然，虚己委诚，而信顺之道应，神感心通，而天下之理得。
现代文：奉韶制定罢免，升迁的法规大致是说： 我听说上古的政治，因循自然，自身清虚追求诚信，那么就有了诚信顺从之道；精神感化心灵沟通，就得到了天下至理。
English: The regulations on dismissal and promotion formulated by Bongju are roughly saying: I heard that ancient politics, following nature, pursues honesty with its own purity, then there is a way of honesty and obedience; spirit-inspired soul communication has gained the world's supreme reason.

古文：逮至淳朴渐散，彰美显恶，设官分职，以颁爵禄，弘宣六典，以详考察。
现代文：淳朴的风气逐渐消散，彰明美德显现恶行，设立官职，颁发爵位俸禄，宣布六典，以便详尽考察官员。
English: The austere atmosphere gradually dissipated. Virtues were highlighted and vices revealed. Official positions were established, knighthoods and salaries were awarded, and six awards were announced so that officials could be examined in detail.

古文：然犹倚明哲之辅，建忠贞之司，使名不得越功而独美，功不得后名而独隐，皆畴咨博询，敷纳以言。
现代文：然而仍要倚赖明哲的官吏，建立忠贞的机构，使名位不能超越功绩而过分显赫，使功劳不能落后于名位而埋没，都要广泛征求意见，令人陈述意见而加以采纳。
English: However, it is still necessary to rely on clever officials, establish a loyal institution, so that the fame cannot exceed the merit and be too prominent, so that the merit cannot lag behind the fame and be buried, and widely solicit opinions and make people express their opinions and adopt them.

古文：及至末世，不能纪远而求于密微，疑诸心而信耳目，疑耳目而信简书。
现代文：到了末世，不能治远就求助于条文细密，怀疑官吏就相信耳目，疑惑耳目就相信简书。
English: In the last days, if you can't cure far away, you can resort to detailed regulations, if you doubt officials, you can believe your eyes and ears, and if you doubt, you can believe your eyes and ears.

古文：简书愈繁，官方愈伪，法令滋章，巧饰弥多。
现代文：简书越是繁多，官吏们越是虚伪，法令细密，虚伪更多。
English: The more books there are, the more hypocrisy there is among officials. The more detailed the laws, the more hypocrisy there is.

古文：昔汉之刺史，亦岁终奏事，不制算课，而清浊粗举。
现代文：以往汉代的刺史，也是年终奏报述职，没有统一规定考查，政绩清浊仅列大概情况。
English: In the past, the history of the Han Dynasty was also a year-end report. There was no uniform regulation for examination, and only the general situation was listed.

古文：魏氏考课，即京房之遗意，其文可谓至密。
现代文：魏氏考核官吏，也就是京房的遣意，他的条文可以说是极细密。
English: Wei's assessment official, that is, Beijing's intention, his provisions can be said to be extremely detailed.

古文：然由于累细以违其体，故历代不能通也。
现代文：然而由于过于细碎就违背了本意，因而历代不能通行。
English: However, because it was too fragmented, it violated the original intention, so it was impassable throughout the ages.

古文：岂若申唐尧之旧，去密就简，则简而易从也。
现代文：不如申述唐尧的旧典，摒除细密而取简要，也就简而容易执行。
English: It is not as good as the old book of Tang Xuan, which is simple and easy to implement.

古文：夫宣尽物理，神而明之，存乎其人。
现代文：讲透事物的常理，心领神会而能够阐发，这是由人来实现的。
English: It is achieved by people who thoroughly explain the common sense of things, understand the mind and are able to explain.

古文：去人而任法，则以伤理。
现代文：排除了人而专用法，是不合道理的。
English: It is unreasonable to have a special law that excludes people.

古文：今科举优劣，莫若委任达官，各考所统。
现代文：如今科举的优劣，还不如委任显要官吏，各自考核所统辖之人。
English: Nowadays, the merits and demerits of the imperial examinations are not as good as appointing prominent officials, who are under the jurisdiction of their respective examination offices.

古文：在官一年以后，每岁言优者一人为上第，劣者一人为下第，因计偕以名闻。
现代文：任职一年以后，每年评出优秀的一人为上等，差劣的一人为下等，到时公布姓名。
English: After one year of service, an excellent person will be rated as superior and an inferior person will be rated as inferior, and their names will be announced at that time.

古文：如此六载，主者总集采案，其六岁处优举者超用之，六岁处劣举者奏免之，其优多劣少者叙用之，劣多优少者左迁之。
现代文：像这样六年，主管的人总集卷宗，对于六年来政绩优秀的越级任用，对六年来处于劣等的人奏报免职，对那些优多劣少的进用，劣多优少的降级。
English: For six years like this, the person in charge of the total set of files, for the six years of outstanding performance of the government, the over-level appointment, for the six years of inferior people, the report of dismissal, for those who are superior and inferior, the inferior and superior demotion.

古文：今考课之品，所对不钧，诚有难易。
现代文：如今考核政绩的品评，因为所任职的条件不一，确实有难易之分。
English: Today's assessment of political performance, because of the different conditions of service, is indeed difficult.

古文：若以难取优，以易而否，主者固当准量轻重，微加降杀，不足复曲以法尽也。
现代文：如果因为难而被认为优，因为易被认为劣，主管的人一定要衡量轻重，略加降等，不必完全曲就法规。
English: If it is considered superior because it is difficult, and inferior because it is easy, the person in charge must measure the weight, slightly increase or decrease, and do not have to completely follow the rules.

古文：《己丑诏书》以考课难成，听通荐例。
现代文：《己丑诏书》认为考核难于行得通，用共同推荐的方式。
English: "The Ugly Duckling Imperial Rescript" believes that the assessment is difficult to carry out, and uses the method of joint recommendation.

古文：荐例之理，即亦取于风声。
现代文：推荐的道理，也是出于传闻。
English: The reason for the recommendation is also based on hearsay.

古文：六年顿荐，黜陟无渐，又非古者三考之意也。
现代文：六年才推举，不是逐渐升降，又不符合古代三年一考核的本意。
English: It took six years to nominate candidates, which is not a gradual promotion and demotion, and does not conform to the original intention of the ancient three-year examination.

古文：今每岁一考，则积优以成陟，累劣以取黜。
现代文：如今每年一考核，积累了优的评定就升迁，积累了劣的评定就罢黜。
English: Nowadays, an assessment is made every year, and those who have accumulated excellent evaluations are promoted, while those who have accumulated poor evaluations are dismissed.

古文：以士君子之心相处，未有官故六年六黜清能，六进否劣者也。
现代文：以士君子之心相推求，不会出现六年六次黜退的清官，六次进升劣绩之官。
English: With the heart of a scholar and a gentleman, there will be no six-year, six-times-retired officials, and no six-times-promoted officials with inferior performance.

古文：监司将亦随而弹之。
现代文：监司也将会随时弹劾。
English: The supervisor will also be impeached at any time.

古文：若令上下公相容过，此为清议大颓，亦无取于黜陟也。 
现代文：假如上下官吏公然包容过失，那是舆论完全败坏，也就和黜退升迁的考核无关了。 
English: If officials at all levels openly tolerate negligence, that is a complete corruption of public opinion, and it has nothing to do with the assessment of promotion.

古文：司隶校尉石鉴以宿憾奏预，免职。
现代文：司隶校尉石鉴因原有怨恨弹劾杜预，杜预被免职。
English: Lieutenant Colonel Shi Jian impeached Du Yueh because of his original grudge, and Du Yueh was dismissed.

古文：时虏寇陇石，以预为安西军司，给兵三百人，骑百匹。
现代文：当时敌人侵犯陇右，任命杜预为安西军司，给他三百兵士，一百坐骑。
English: At that time, the enemy invaded Xizhou and appointed Du Yu as the Anxi military commander, giving him three hundred soldiers and one hundred horses.

古文：到长安，更除秦州刺史，领东羌校尉、轻车将军、假节。
现代文：到了长安，改任童业刺史，兼东羌校尉、轻车将军、假节。
English: When he arrived in Chang'an, he was reassigned to the position of children's education inspector, and also served as Donglu school captain, light vehicle general, and festival organizer.

古文：属虏兵强盛，石鉴时为安西将军，使预出兵击之。
现代文：适值敌兵强大，石鉴当时任安西将军，派杜预出击敌军。
English: The enemy soldiers were strong at the right time. Shi Jian, who was the general of Anxi at that time, sent Du Yu to attack the enemy.

古文：预以虏乘胜马肥，而官军悬乏，宜并力大运，须春进讨，陈五不可、四不须。
现代文：丝更认为敌军兵强马壮，而官军力量悬殊，应当集中兵力等待时机，到春天进兵讨伐，陈述了五条不可、四条不须的意见。
English: Si also believed that the enemy soldiers were strong and powerful, while the strength of the official army was extremely different, and it was necessary to concentrate the troops and wait for the opportunity to march into the spring, and stated five unacceptable and four unnecessary opinions.

古文：鉴大怒，复奏预擅饰城门官舍，稽乏军兴，遣御史槛车征诣廷尉。
现代文：石鉴大怒。又奏报丝预擅自修饰城门官舍，滞留耗费军需，派遣御史用槛车把杜预交付廷尉。
English: Shi Jian was furious. He also reported that Shi Jian had decorated the official residence at the city gate without permission, detained and consumed military supplies, and dispatched the imperial historian to deliver Du Jian to the court lieutenant.

古文：以预尚主，在八议，以侯赎论，其后陇右之事卒如预策。
现代文：因为杜预娶的是公主，在减轻刑罚的八议范围内，按以侯赎罪论处。后来陇右的事态最终如同杜预的预计。
English: Since Du Yueh married a princess, he was punished according to the principle of atonement within the scope of the Eight Suggestions for Mitigating Punishment. Later, the state of affairs in Xinghuo was ultimately as Du Yueh had predicted.

古文：是时朝廷皆以预明于筹略，会匈奴帅刘猛举兵反，自并州西及河东、平阳，诏预以散侯定计省闼，俄拜度支尚书。
现代文：那时朝廷都认为杜预擅长运筹谋划，匈奴统帅型猛发兵反叛时，从差州西到河东、平阳，诏令丝预以散侯身份在宫中设定计谋，不久任度支尚书。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that Du Yueh was good at operational planning and planning. When the Xiongnu commander-type troops rebelled, from the west of Shanzhou to the east of Hedong and Pingyang, he set up a strategy in the palace with the status of a samurai, and soon appointed Du Yueh to write a book.

古文：预乃奏立藉田，建安边，论处军国之要。
现代文：拄灵于是上奏立藉田，安定的边疆，以及治国之要事。
English: Therefore, Xingling made a speech on the establishment of a leased field, a stable frontier, and the important matters of governing the country.

古文：又作人排新器，兴常平仓，定谷价，较盐运，制课调，内以利国外以救边者五十余条，皆纳焉。
现代文：又奏请制作人排新器，兴建调节粮价的常平仓，规定谷物价格，核定食盐贩运，制定赋税条例，对内利于国家对外救助边塞一类建议五十多条，都被采纳。
English: It also requested the producers to install new equipment, build a grain storage warehouse to regulate grain prices, stipulate grain prices, approve salt trafficking, formulate tax regulations, and more than 50 suggestions for the country's foreign aid. All of them have been adopted.

古文：石鉴自军还，论功不实，为预所纠，遂相仇恨，言论喧哗，并坐免官，以侯兼本职。
现代文：石鉴从军中回朝廷，上报功劳不属实，被杜预弹劾，于是相互仇恨，吵阐不止，两人都坐罪免官，以侯爵兼任本职。
English: Shi Jian returned to the imperial court from the army, the reported merits were not true, and he was impeached by Du Yu. As a result, they hated each other and quarreled endlessly. Both of them were convicted and removed from office, with the marquis also taking on his duties.

古文：数年，复拜度支尚书。
现代文：几年后，又任度支尚书。
English: A few years later, he was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：元皇后梓宫将迁于峻阳陵。
现代文：元皇后的棺材将迁到峻阳陵。
English: The coffin of the former empress will be moved to the Jungyang Mausoleum.

古文：旧制，既葬，帝及群臣即吉。
现代文：旧的制度是，安葬以后，皇帝及群臣就服丧完毕。
English: The old system was that after the burial, the emperor and his courtiers had to complete their mourning.

古文：尚书奏，皇太子亦宜释服。
现代文：尚书上奏，皇太子也应除去丧服。
English: According to the protocol, the crown prince should also remove his mourning clothes.

古文：预议 皇太子宜复古典，以谅闇终制 ，从之。
现代文：杜预奏议 皇太子应恢复古代典章，应依皇帝服丧 ，听从了。
English: Du Prelude suggested that the crown prince should restore the ancient ceremony, and should follow the emperor's funeral, and obeyed.

古文：预以时历差舛，不应晷度，奏上《二元乾度历》，行于世。
现代文：杜预因为当时的历法有差错，与规的刻度不符，奏上《二元干度历》，流行于世。
English: Du Yu, because the calendar at that time was faulty and did not match the scale of the regulation, played the "two-dimensional dry calendar," which was popular in the world.

古文：预又以孟津渡险，有覆没之患，请建河桥于富平津。
现代文：杜预又因孟津渡口危险，有船只覆没的隐患，请求在富平津修河桥。
English: Du Yuan also requested that a river bridge be built in Fupingjin due to the danger of the Mengjin ferry crossing and the hidden danger of boats sinking.

古文：议者以为殷周所都，历圣贤而不作者，必不可立故也。
现代文：评议的人认为是殷周建都的地方，历代圣贤没有修建，必定有不能修建的原因。
English: The reviewers believe that the place where Yin Zhou built the capital was not built by the sages of all ages, and there must be a reason why it cannot be built.

古文：预曰：  造舟为梁 ，则河桥之谓也。 
现代文：杜预说：  造舟船建桥梁 ，说的就是在河上修桥的事。 
English: Du Yu said, "Building a boat is like building a bridge. It's like building a bridge over the river."

古文：及桥成，帝从百僚临会，举觞属预曰： 非君，此桥不立也。 
现代文：等到桥建成，皇帝与百官前往视察，举酒杯对杜预说： 不是你，这座桥建不起来。 
English: When the bridge was completed, the emperor and hundreds of officials went to inspect it, raised a glass to Du Yu and said, "It's not you, this bridge can't be built."

古文：对曰： 非陛下之明，臣亦不得施其微巧。 
现代文：杜预说： 若不是陛下的圣明，我也不能做出这一点成绩。 
English: Du Yu said, "If it wasn't for His Majesty's holy light, I wouldn't have been able to achieve this.

古文：周庙欹器，至汉东京犹在御坐。
现代文：周朝的盛水器，到汉东京时还在皇帝座侧。
English: The water container of the Zhou Dynasty was still on the side of the emperor's throne when he came to Han Tokyo.

古文：汉末丧乱，不复存，形制遂绝。
现代文：漠末战乱，不复存在，形状尺度也未能流传。
English: At the end of the war in the desert, it ceased to exist, and the shape scale could not be passed on.

古文：预创意造成，奏上之，帝甚嘉叹焉。
现代文：杜预创造性地造出来，向上奏报，皇帝很是高兴赞叹。
English: Du Pre creatively made it, reported it to the emperor, and the emperor was very pleased and amazed.

古文：咸宁四年秋，大霖雨，蝗虫起。
现代文：咸宁四年秋，大雨不停，蝗虫成灾。
English: Autumn in Xianning, heavy rain incessantly, locusts rampant.

古文：预上疏多陈农要，事在《食货志》。
现代文：杜预上疏陈述兴农要事，事情记载在《食货志》。
English: Du Yuanzhang So stated the important matters for the revitalization of agriculture, and the matter was recorded in the "Food Diary."

古文：预在内七年，损益万机，不可胜数，朝野称美，号曰 杜武库 ，言其无所不有也。
现代文：杜预在朝中七年，改革各类政务，不可胜数，朝廷内外称颂，称他为 杜武库 ，说没有他不参与成功的。
English: Du Yueh was in power for seven years and reformed all kinds of government affairs, which is countless. He was praised inside and outside the imperial court, and he was called Du Wu Ku, and it was said that there was no success without his participation.

古文：时帝密有灭吴之计，而朝议多违，唯预、羊祜、张华与帝意合。
现代文：当时皇帝暗中有灭掉吴国的计谋，而朝廷中的议论多与此违背，祇有杜预、羊祜、张华与皇帝的心意投合。
English: At that time, the emperor secretly had a plan to destroy the State of Wu, and most of the discussions in the imperial court were contrary to this. Only Du Yuan, Yang Xuan, and Zhang Hua agreed with the emperor.

古文：祜病，举预自代，因以本官假节行平东将军，领征南军司。
现代文：羊祜生病，推举杜预代替自己，于是以原有官职假节代平柬将军，兼征南军司。
English: When Yang Hui fell ill, Du Yu was elected to replace him, and he used his official leave to become the general of the Cambodian People's Army and the military commander of the South.

古文：及祜卒，拜镇南大将军、都督荆州诸军事，给追锋车，第二驸马。
现代文：羊祜死后，官拜镇南大将军、都督荆州诸军事，给追锋车、第二驸马。
English: After the death of Yang Qian, the officials paid tribute to the general of Zhennan and the military governor of Jingzhou, and gave them a chase car and a second steed.

古文：预既至镇，缮甲兵，耀威武，乃简精锐，袭吴西陵督张政，大破之，以功增封三百六十五户。
现代文：杜预到任后，修缮锁甲兵器，显示武力，挑选精锐，袭击吴西陵督张政，大败敌军，因为有功增加食邑三百六十五户。
English: After Du Yu arrived at the post, he repaired the armour-piercing weapons, showed force, selected the elite, attacked Wu Xiling Governor Zhang Zheng, and defeated the enemy army, because he had the merit of increasing the 365 households of food villages.

古文：政，吴之名将也，据要害之地，耻以无备取败，不以所丧之实告于孙皓。
现代文：张政是吴国的名将，占据要害之地，耻于未防备而失败，不把伤亡的实情告诉孙皓。
English: Zhang Zheng was a famous general of the State of Wu. He occupied a critical position, and was ashamed of failing to be prepared. He did not tell Sun Yat-sen the truth about the casualties.

古文：预欲间吴边将，乃表还其所获之众于皓。
现代文：杜预想离间吴国边防将领，于是上表送还所俘获的吴国兵士给孙皓。
English: Du expected to alienate the border guard generals of Wu, so he sent the captured Wu soldiers back to Sun Yat-sen.

古文：皓果召政，遣武昌监刘宪代之。
现代文：孙皓果然召见张政，派武昌监刘宪代替张政。
English: Sun Yat-sen indeed summoned Zhang Zheng and sent Wuchang Inspector Liu Xian to replace Zhang Zheng.

古文：故大军临至，使其将帅移易，以成倾荡之势。
现代文：因而大军到达时，使吴国正变换将帅，从而造成覆没。
English: As a result, when the large army arrived, Wu Guozheng was transformed into a general, resulting in annihilation.

古文：预处分既定，乃启请伐吴之期。
现代文：杜预安排妥当后，就奏请讨伐吴国的日期。
English: After Du's prearrangement was in place, he requested a date for the campaign against the State of Wu.

古文：帝报待明年方欲大举，预表陈至计曰： 自闰月以来，贼但敕严，下无兵上。
现代文：皇帝答覆说等明年方能大规模行动，杜预上表陈述上策说： 自闰月以来，敌军衹是警戒，下游没有兵员上调。
English: The emperor replied that large-scale operations would not be possible until next year, Du prefaced the above statement with the following: Since the leap month, the enemy troops have been on alert, and there has been no troop increase in the downstream.

古文：以理势推之，贼之穷计，力不两完，必先护上流，勤保夏口以东，以延视息，无缘多兵西上，空其国都。
现代文：以情理形势推论，敌人兵力缺乏，在力量不能保全两头时，必定先保护上流，尽力保护流以束，来苟且偷生，不会大规模派兵西进，使国都空虚。
English: Reasoning from the situation, the enemy is short of troops, and when the forces cannot protect both ends, they must first protect the upper stream, and try their best to protect the stream with bundles. They will not send large-scale troops to the west and make the country empty.

古文：而陛下过听，便用委弃大计，纵敌患生。
现代文：而陛下误听，于是弃置大计，放纵敌患。
English: However, His Majesty misheard and abandoned the grand plan, indulging the enemy.

古文：此诚国之远图，使举而有败，勿举可也。
现代文：伐吴的确是国家的长远之计，假如行动会导致失败，可以不行动。
English: The campaign is indeed a long-term strategy of the country. If action leads to failure, it is possible not to act.

古文：事为之制，务从完牢。
现代文：攻吴的方针，是务求稳妥。
English: The policy of attacking Wu is to strive for stability.

古文：若或有成，则开太平之基；不成，不过费损日月之间，何惜而不一试之！
现代文：如果一旦成功，就能开创太平的基业；不能成功，不过耗费一些时间，为什么不试一试呢!
English: If you succeed, you can create a peaceful foundation; if not, but it takes some time, why not try it!

古文：若当须后年，天时人事不得如常，臣恐其更难也。
现代文：假如等到后年，天时人事不会不变，我怕伐吴会更难了。
English: If we wait until the year after next, the weather and personnel will not change, I'm afraid it will be more difficult to cut Wu.

古文：陛下宿议，分命臣等随界分进，其所禁持，东西同符，万安之举，未有倾败之虑。
现代文：陛下先前的意见，是分别命令我们在自己镇守的疆界分头进军，对军队的约束，东西符节相同，这是万全之计，没有失败的忧虑。
English: His Majesty's previous opinion was to order us separately to march separately at the frontiers of our own garrisons, and the restrictions on the army were the same for east and west. This was a panacea, and there was no fear of failure.

古文：臣心实了，不敢以暧昧之见自取后累。
现代文：我心中确实了解，不敢用模糊不清的见解自找麻烦。
English: In my heart I do understand, and dare not trouble myself with vague opinions.

古文：惟陛下察之。 
现代文：请陛下考虑。 
English: Please consider it, Your Majesty.

古文：预旬月之中又上表曰： 羊祜与朝臣多不同，不先博画而密与陛下共施此计，故益令多异。
现代文：杜预十几天后又上表说： 羊祜与朝廷大臣多有不同，不先广为谋划而秘密地和陛下共同施行这一计谋，因而更招致不同意见。
English: A dozen days later, Du Yuan again made a public statement, saying: "Mang Jie is different from the ministers of the imperial court. He secretly carried out this scheme with His Majesty without first planning it widely, thus causing even more dissent.

古文：凡事当以利害相较，今此举十有八九利，其一二止于无功耳。
现代文：凡事应当比较利害，如今这一行动十有八九有利，其余一二也不过无功罢了。
English: Everything should be more advantageous, and now this action is advantageous in nine cases out of ten, and the remaining one or two are nothing but useless.

古文：其言破败之形亦不可得，直是计不出已，功不在身，各耻其前言，故守之也。
现代文：那些说到破败的情形也是不可能的，衹不过因为计谋不是出自自己，功劳不在自身，各以自己先前的言论为耻，所以坚持己见。
English: Those who speak of ruin are also improbable, but because the scheme is not their own, the credit is not theirs, each is ashamed of their previous statements, so they stick to their own opinion.

古文：自顷朝廷事无大小，异意锋起，虽人心不同，亦由恃恩不虑后难，故轻相同异也。
现代文：近来朝廷不论大事小事，都有不同意见，虽然因为人心不同，也因为自恃恩宠不考虑后果，于是轻易发表相同或相反的意见。
English: In recent times, the imperial court has had different opinions on both big and small matters, although it is easy to express the same or opposite opinions because of the difference in people's hearts and because of the grace of not considering the consequences.

古文：昔汉宣帝议赵充国所上，事效之后，诘责诸议者，皆叩头而谢，以塞异端也。
现代文：过去漠宣帝评议赵充国的上疏，事情应验以后，责问那些持异议的人，都叩头谢罪，以此来堵塞异端。
English: In the past, Emperor Mu Xuan judged the ascension of Zhao Chongguo, and after the matter was fulfilled, he scolded those who disagreed, and they all bowed their heads in apology, in order to block the heresy.

古文：自秋已来，讨贼之形颇露。
现代文：自从秋天以来，讨伐敌人的形势已经初步显露。
English: Since the autumn, the situation of the enemy's crusade has been initially revealed.

古文：若今中止，孙皓怖而生计，或徙都武昌，更完修江南诸城，远其居人，城不可攻，野无所掠，积大船于夏口，则明年之计或无所及。 
现代文：如果现在中止，孙皓因为害怕而出计谋，或许迁都到武昌，进一步完善修筑江南各城，把居民迁到远方，城攻不破，田野没东西可以掠夺，在夏口蓄积大船，那么明年的计划或许会落空。 
English: If we stop now, if Sun Yat-sen, out of fear, devises a plan, perhaps moving the capital to Wuchang, further improving the construction of cities in the south of the Yangtze River, moving residents to distant places, invading the city, plundering the fields, and accumulating large ships in Xiakou, then next year's plan may fail.

古文：时帝与中书令张华围棋，而预表适至。
现代文：当时皇帝正和中书令张华下围棋，而杜预的上表恰好送到。
English: At that time, the emperor was playing Go with Zhang Hua, and Du Yuan's gift just happened to be delivered.

古文：华推枰敛手曰： 陛下圣明神武，朝野清晏，国富兵强，号令如一，吴主荒淫骄虐，诛杀贤能，当今讨之，可不劳而定。 
现代文：张华推开棋盘拱手说： 陛下圣明神武，朝廷内外清平，国家富裕兵力强大，号令如一。吴国国君荒淫暴虐。诛杀贤能，现在伐吴，可以不费力就能成事。 
English: Zhang Hua pushed the chessboard aside and said, "Your majesty, the Holy Ming and the Divine Martial Arts are supreme, the imperial court is peaceful inside and outside, the country is rich and the military is strong, and the order is as follows. The king of Wu was a brutal tyrant. He killed the virtuous, and now he is in Wu, he can accomplish things without any effort.

古文：帝乃许之。
现代文：皇帝于是答应。
English: The emperor then consented.

古文：预以太康元年正月，陈兵于江陵，遣参军樊显、尹林、邓圭、襄阳太守周奇等率众循江西上，授以节度，旬日之间，累克城邑，皆如预策焉。
现代文：杜预在太康元年正月，在江陵陈兵，派遣参军樊显、尹林、邓圭、襄阳太守周奇等人率领军队沿辽西上，授予节制调度权，十天之间，连续攻克城邑，都如同杜预的预料。
English: In the first month of Taikang in the first year of the 21st century, Du Yueh sent soldiers from Jiangling to join the army and led the army along the west of Liaoning Province, and granted the right of restraint and dispatch. Within ten days, they continuously conquered cities and towns, all as Du Yueh expected.

古文：又遣牙门管定、周旨、伍巢等率奇兵八百，泛舟夜渡，以袭乐乡，多张旗帜，起火巴山，出于要害之地，以夺贼心。
现代文：又派遣牙门管室、且置、鱼垦等人率领奇兵八百人，以船夜渡，袭击乐乡，多竖旗帜，在巴山点火，在要害的地方活动，来涣散敌人的信心。
English: He also dispatched eight hundred special soldiers led by Ganmen Guanchong, Qiaojing, Yuyao and others to attack Le Township by boat and night ferry, erect more flags, light fires in Bashan, and carry out activities in key areas to dissipate the enemy's confidence.

古文：吴都督孙歆震恐，与伍延书曰： 北来诸军，乃飞渡江也。 
现代文：吴都督孙歆极为恐慌，给伍延写信说： 北方来的各路军队，是飞过江来的。 
English: Sun Yat-sen, the governor of Wu, was so alarmed that he wrote a letter to Wu Yan saying, "All the armies coming from the north have flown across the river.

古文：吴之男女降者者万余口，旨、巢等伏兵乐乡城外。
现代文：吴国的男女投降的有一万多人，旦置、互甚等人把军队埋伏在銮翅城外。
English: More than ten thousand men and women from the State of Wu surrendered, and many of them, including Dan Zi and others, ambushed the army outside the city of Yao Wing.

古文：歆遣军出距王浚，大败而还。
现代文：茎逖派军队出战王浚，大败回城。
English: Zhuge Liang sent troops to fight Wang Jun, but they were defeated and returned to the city.

古文：旨等发伏兵，随歆军而入，歆不觉，直至帐下，虏歆而还。
现代文：周旨等人的伏兵，跟随逐逖的军队入城，逊逖没发觉，直到军帐下，俘虏了彊歆回来。
English: The ambushed soldiers of Zhou Zhi and others followed the army that was chasing the cormorants into the city. The cormorants did not notice them until the cormorants were captured and brought back under the military ledger.

古文：故军中为之谣曰： 以计代战一当万。 
现代文：因此军中传出歌谣说： 用计诏吏代替打仗以一当万。 
English: As a result, a song was spread in the army saying: "Instead of fighting a war, let's use the imperial officials to make a fortune."

古文：于是进逼江陵。
现代文：于是进逼江陵。
English: So I went to the Jiangling Mausoleum.

古文：吴督将伍延伪请降而列兵登陴，预攻克之。
现代文：吴国督将鱼王假装投降而陈列军队登上城墙，杜预攻克。
English: The governor of Wu pretended to surrender to the fish king and displayed the army to climb the city wall and conquer Du Yue.

古文：既平上流，于是沅湘以南，至于交广，吴之州郡皆望风归命，奉送印绶，预仗节称诏而绥抚之。
现代文：平定上游以后，沅湘以南，直到交广，吴国的州郡都望风而降，奉送印绶，杜预持符节以皇命安抚他们。
English: After the upstream was pacified, the southern part of Fujian and Hunan, and as far as Jiaoguang, the prefectures and counties of Wuxi all looked to the wind, sent seal money, and the Du pre-held the festival to appease them with the imperial order.

古文：凡所斩及生获吴都督、监军十四，牙门、郡守百二十余人。
现代文：斩杀及活捉吴都督、监军十四人，牙门、郡守一百二十多人。
English: They killed and captured alive the governor of Wu and fourteen supervisors, as well as more than one hundred and twenty residents of Yamen and county governors.

古文：又因兵威，徙将士屯戍之家以实江北，南郡故地各树之长吏，荆土肃然，吴人赴者如归矣。
现代文：又凭仗军威，迁徙将士及屯田戍守之家充实江北，南郡过去的地方各设置长吏，荆地整肃，吴人来投奔的如同回家一样。
English: In addition, the north of the Yangtze River was enriched by the military prestige, the homes of the migrated soldiers and the tutelage of the tutelage, and the places where the Nan County had been set up in the past were cleaned up, and the Wu people came to flee as if they were going home.

古文：王浚先列上得孙歆头，预后生送歆，洛中以为大笑。
现代文：王辽先报上他得到的逊逖的头颅，而丝玺后送来活的孙歆，洛阳中把逭当为大笑话。
English: Wang Liao was the first to report the severed head of Sun Yat-sen that he had obtained, while Luoyang regarded Sun Yat-sen, who was sent back alive, as a big joke.

古文：时众军会议，或曰： 百年之寇，未可尽克。
现代文：当时众将集中商议，有人说： 百年的敌寇，不能彻底攻克。
English: At that time, the public will focus on deliberation, some people said: A hundred-year-old enemy, can not be completely overcome.

古文：今向暑，水潦方降，疾疫将起，宜俟来冬，更为大举。 
现代文：现在快到暑天了，雨水正多，疾病瘟疫将发生，应该等到冬天，再大行动。 
English: Now it's getting hot, it's raining a lot, diseases and plagues will occur, we should wait until winter before taking drastic action.

古文：预曰： 昔乐毅藉济西一战以并强齐，今兵威已振，譬如破竹，数节之后，皆迎刃而解，无复著手处也。 
现代文：杜预说： 过去凿塑凭藉渣西一仗就吞并了强大的齐国，如今军威已经振奋，势如破竹，几节之后，全都迎刃而解，不再有费力的地方了。 
English: Du Yu said, "In the past, Zhishu won a war with the help of Jiaxi and annexed the powerful state of Qi. Now, the military power has been invigorated and the momentum is unstoppable. After a few days, everything will be solved, and there will be no place for effort.

古文：遂指授群帅，径造秣陵。
现代文：于是指令群帅，直奔拯堕。
English: So I ordered the group leader to go straight to the rescue.

古文：所过城邑，莫不束手。
现代文：所经过的城邑，没有不放弃抵抗的。
English: There was not a town he passed through that did not give up the fight.

古文：议者乃以书谢之。
现代文：持异议的人于是写信谢罪。
English: The dissenters then wrote a letter of apology.

古文：孙皓既平，振旅凯入，以功进爵当阳县侯，增邑并前九千六百户，封子耽为亭侯，千户，赐绢八千匹。
现代文：被平定以后，振军凯旋，因有功进升爵位为当阳县侯，增加封邑加上以前的共九千六百户，封儿子杜耽为亭侯，千户，赐绢八千匹。
English: After being subdued, Zhenjun made a triumphant return and was promoted to the peerage as the lord of Dangyang County for his meritorious service. He increased the number of fiefs and added a total of 9,600 households to the previous one. His son Du Tan became the lord of a thousand households and was given 8,000 horses.

古文：初，攻江陵，吴人知预病瘿，惮其智计，以瓠系狗颈示之，每大树似瘿，辄斫使白，题曰： 杜预颈。 
现代文：当初，攻打江陵，吴人知道杜预颈上长有瘤子，怕他的谋略，把瓠绑在狗脖子上展示。每当大树艮了像瘤子的东西，就砍下去露出白色，写上 杜预颈 。
English: At the beginning of the attack on Jiangling, the Wu people knew that there was a lump on Du Yu's neck. Fearing his strategy, they tied a halter around the dog's neck and displayed it. Whenever a large tree had something like a lump, they cut it down to reveal the white and wrote Du Yu's neck.

古文：及城平，尽捕杀之。
现代文：等到攻下城，把那些人全部捕杀。
English: Wait until we've taken the city, then hunt them down and kill them all.

古文：预既还镇，累陈家世吏职，武非其功，请退。
现代文：杜预返回任所后，屡次陈述自己的家世官职，说武职不是他的擅长，请求退职。
English: After Du Yu returned to his post, he repeatedly stated his hereditary official position, said that military service was not his forte, and asked to retire.

古文：不许。
现代文：皇上不准许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：预以天下虽安，忘战必危，勤于讲武，修立泮宫，江汉怀德，化被万里。
现代文：杜预认为天下虽然安定，但忘了战争必定危险；于是努力讲授武备，建立学堂，江汉怀其恩德，教化影响到四面八方。
English: Du Yuanyuan thought that although the world was stable, he forgot that war must be dangerous. Therefore, he worked hard to teach military preparedness, establish a school, and the Jianghan had a benevolent attitude. Enlightenment affected all directions.

古文：攻破山夷，错置屯营，分据要害之地，以固维持之势。
现代文：攻破山夷，设置军屯营地，分别占据要害之地，稳固维持局势。
English: Break through the mountains and fields, set up military camps, occupy key areas separately, and firmly maintain the situation.

古文：又修邵信臣遗迹，激用淯诸水以浸原田万余顷，分疆刊石，使有定分，公私同利。
现代文：又修建邵信臣遗迹，阻遏溃、清几条河水来浇灌万余顷良田，划分田界刻石碑，使有规定，公私同时得利。
English: He also built the relic of Shao Xincheng, dammed and cleared several rivers to irrigate more than 10,000 hectares of good fields, and carved stone monuments to divide the fields, so that there were regulations and both public and private benefits.

古文：众庶赖之，号曰 杜父 。
现代文：百姓信赖他，称他为 杜父 。
English: The people trusted him and called him their father.

古文：旧水道唯沔汉达江陵千数百里，北无通路。
现代文：旧水道仅有沔汉通往江陵一千几百里，向北没有通路。
English: The old waterway only led from Shanhan to Jiangling for more than a thousand kilometers, and there was no passage to the north.

古文：又巴丘湖，沅湘之会，表里山川，实为险固，荆蛮之所恃也。
现代文：巴丘湖，沅湘交会的地方，内外有山川，确实险固，正是荆蛮所凭仗的。
English: Bachu Lake, the site of the Hunan Fair, has mountains and rivers both inside and outside. It is truly perilous, and it is precisely because of the jade that the barbarians have prevailed.

古文：预乃开杨口，起夏水达巴陵千余里，内泻长江之险，外通零桂之漕。
现代文：杜预开杨，从夏水到巴陵一千多里，对内泻除长江水险，对外沟通零桂的漕运。
English: Du Yuankai Yang, from Xia Shui to Baling more than a thousand miles, except for the Yangtze River water hazard, the external communication of zero Gui's rowing.

古文：南土歌之曰： 后世无叛由杜翁，孰识智名与勇功。 
现代文：南方歌颂他说： 后世没有叛乱因杜翁，谁能清楚智名与勇功。 
English: Nanfang eulogized him, saying: In the future, there will be no rebellion due to Duong, who can clearly understand the name of wisdom and courage.

古文：预公家之事，知无不为。
现代文：杜预对公家的事，知道的就没有不去做的。
English: As far as Du Yu knew about public affairs, there was nothing he would not do.

古文：凡所兴造，必考度始终，鲜有败事。
现代文：凡所兴建制定的，必定从头到尾考察，很少有失误。
English: Everything that is built and designed must be inspected from start to finish, and there are very few mistakes.

古文：或讥其意碎者，预曰： 禹稷之功，期于济世，所庶几也。 
现代文：有人讥讽他用心细碎，杜预说： 禹稷的功业，是希望救世，我做的也差不多。 
English: Some people mocked him for breaking his heart into small pieces, and Du Yu said: "Uguo's work is to hope for the salvation of the world, and what I do is similar.

古文：预好为后世名，常言 高岸为谷，深谷为陵 ，刻石为二碑，纪其勋绩，一沈万山之下，一立岘山之上，曰： 焉知此后不为陵谷乎！ 
现代文：杜预看重在后世留名，常说 高岸可以成为峡谷，深谷可以成为山陵 ，刻两块石碑，记载他的功绩，一块沉到万山之下，一块立在岘山之上，说： 谁知以后不会成为山陵深谷呢! 
English: Du Yuan attached great importance to leaving a name for future generations. He often said that the high coast can become a canyon, and the deep valley can become a mountain. He carved two stone tablets to record his achievements. One sank under the mountains, and the other stood on top of Mount Lushan. He said, "Who knows if it will become a mountain valley in the future?"

古文：预身不跨马，射不穿札，而每任大事，辄居将率之列。
现代文：杜预行不骑马，射不透甲，而每逢大事，就立身于将帅之列。
English: Du Yuanxing does not ride a horse, he cannot shoot through armor, and whenever there is a big event, he stands in the ranks of the generals.

古文：结交接物，恭而有礼，问无所隐，诲人不倦，敏于事而慎于言。
现代文：与人结交，恭敬有礼，问他事情无所隐瞒，诲人不倦，做事机敏而说话谨慎。
English: Make friends with people, be respectful and courteous, ask him about things without hiding anything, teach tirelessly, do things smartly and speak cautiously.

古文：既立功之后，从容无事，乃耽思经籍，为《春秋左氏经传集解》。
现代文：立功以后，从容无事，于是沉溺于经籍，作《春秋左氏经传集解》。
English: After his meritorious service, he had nothing to do, so he indulged in the scriptures and wrote "The Explanation of the Collection of Spring and Autumn Sayings of Zuo Shi."

古文：又参考众家谱第，谓之《释例》。
现代文：又参考各家谱系，作《释例》。
English: Reference was also made to various genealogical lines for the "explanatory examples."

古文：又作《盟会图》、《春秋长历》，备成一家之学，比老乃成。
现代文：又作《盟会图》、《春秋长历》，形成一家之学，快老了才完成。
English: He also wrote "The Map of the Alliance" and "Spring and Autumn Long Calendar," forming a family study, which was completed when he was getting old.

古文：又撰《女记赞》。
现代文：又撰《女记赞》。
English: She also wrote "Women's Praise."

古文：当时论者谓预文义质直，世人未之重，唯秘书监挚虞赏之，曰： 左丘明本为《春秋》作传，而《左传》遂自孤行，《释例》本为《传》设，而所发明何但《左传》，故亦孤行。 
现代文：当时评论的人说杜预的文义直率无华，世人未能看重，衹有秘书监挚虞赞赏，说： 左丘明本来是为《春秋》作传，而《左传》于是单独行于世。《释例》本来是为《传》撰写的，而所发挥阐明的岂止《左传》，因此也独行于世。 
English: At that time, commentators said that Du Yuan's literary straightforwardness was not brilliant, and the world did not attach importance to it. Some secretaries expressed their sincere appreciation, saying: Zuo Qiuming originally wrote a biography for "Spring and Autumn," and "Zo Zhuan" was therefore performed alone. "Interpretation Example" was originally written for "Zhuan," but it was not only "Zo Zhuan" that was explained, so it was also performed alone.

古文：时王济解相马，又甚爱之，而和峤颇聚敛，预常称 济有马癖，峤有钱癖 。
现代文：当时王迺懂得相马，又很爱马，而扭岖很能聚敛钱财，拄预常说 王渣有马癖，扭妪有钱癖 。
English: At that time, Wang Yao knew horse breeding, and loved horses very much, and wrestling was very able to collect money. He often said that Wang Jia had a horse addiction, and wrestling had a money addiction.

古文：武帝闻之，谓预曰： 卿有何癖？ 
现代文：亘适听说后，对拄预说： 你有何癖? 
English: After hearing this, Wangsu said to Zou Yu: What are your habits?

古文：对曰： 臣有《左传》癖。 
现代文：回答说： 我有《左传》癖。 
English: He replied, "I am addicted to "Zo Zhuan." "

古文：预在镇，数饷遗洛中贵要。
现代文：杜预在镇，多次馋赠洛阳的权贵要人。
English: Du Yuanyuan was in the town and repeatedly gave gifts to the powerful and important people in Luoyang.

古文：或问其故，预曰： 吾但恐为害，不求益也。 
现代文：有人间他原因，杜预说： 我怕他们坏事，不求得到好处。 
English: For some reason, Du Yu said: I am afraid of their bad things, and do not seek benefits.

古文：预初在荆州，因宴集，醉卧斋中。
现代文：杜预初到荆州，因为宴会，醉倒在屋中。
English: At the beginning of Du's visit to Jingzhou, because of the banquet, he fell down drunk in the house.

古文：外人闻呕吐声，窃窥于户，止见一大蛇垂头而吐。
现代文：外边的人听到呕吐声，偷偷向屋裹窥探，看到一条大蛇低头而吐。
English: People outside heard the vomit and secretly peeked into the house to see a large snake head down and vomit.

古文：闻者异之。
现代文：听说的人觉得怪异。
English: People who hear about it think it's weird.

古文：其后征为司隶校尉，加位特进，行次邓县而卒，时年六十三。
现代文：其后被征为司隶校尉，加位特进，出行到邓县时死去，时年六十三岁。
English: After that, he was enlisted as a Sili lieutenant and promoted to a special promotion. He died at the age of 63 when he traveled to Deng County.

古文：帝甚嗟悼，追赠征南大将军、开府仪同三司，谥曰成。
现代文：皇帝很是感叹悼念，追赠征南大将军、开府仪同三司，谧号成。
English: The emperor very much lamented and mourned, and posthumously awarded the general of Nanta University, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and the posthumous name.

古文：预先为遗令曰： 古不合葬，明于终始之理，同于无有也。
现代文：杜预事先立下遗嘱说： 古代不合葬，明白始终的道理，如同从有到无。
English: Du Yu made a will in advance, saying, "Ancient people should not be buried together. I understand the principle of consistency, as if from existence to non-existence.

古文：中古圣人改而合之，盖以别合无在，更缘生以示教也。
现代文：中古的圣人改为合葬，大概因为不在于别葬合葬，是凭藉活着的人来显示教化罢了。
English: The saints of the Middle Ages were buried together, probably because it was not a matter of not burying together, but of using living people to show enlightenment.

古文：自此以来，大人君子或合或否，未能知生，安能知死，故各以己意所欲也。
现代文：从那以后，大人君子或合葬或别葬，不能知道生，怎么能知道死，因而各自按自己的心意。
English: From then on, whether or not to be buried together, adults and gentlemen could not know life, how could they know death, so they each went their own way.

古文：吾往为台郎，尝以公事使过密县之邢山。
现代文：我过去作台郎时，曾经因为公事路过密县的邢山。
English: In the past, when I worked as a porter, I used to pass through Hatakeyama in Mie prefecture on business.

古文：山上有冢，问耕父，云是郑大夫祭仲，或云子产之冢也，遂率从者祭而观焉。
现代文：山上有坟，问农夫，说是郑大夫祭仲，或说是子产的坟，于是率随从的人祭奠观看。
English: There is a grave on the mountain. When he asked the farmer, he was told that it was the grave of Dr. Zheng Saizhong, or that it was the grave of his son, so he led his followers to watch the memorial.

古文：其造冢居山之顶，四望周达，连山体南北之正而邪东北，向新郑城，意不忘本也。
现代文：坟建造在山顶上，四面视野开阔，连接山体南北的正中而偏向东北，对着新郑城，表示不忘本。
English: The tomb was built on the top of the mountain, with a wide view in all directions, connecting the north and south of the mountain in the middle and leaning to the northeast, facing New Zhengcheng, indicating not to forget the book.

古文：其隧道唯塞其后而空其前，不填之，示藏无珍宝，不取于重深也。
现代文：隧道堵住坟后而空着前面，不填土，表示墓中没有珍宝，不采取深埋的方法。
English: The tunnel is blocked behind the tomb and is empty in front, without filling the soil, indicating that there is no treasure in the tomb, and no deep burial method is adopted.

古文：山多美石不用，必集洧水自然之石以为冢藏，贵不劳工巧，而此石不入世用也。
现代文：山上多有好看的石料而不用，一定要采集洧水自然之石来砌坟墓，用意是不耗费人工，而这些石料世间没有用处。
English: There are many good-looking stones on the mountain, but they are not used. It is necessary to collect the natural stone of Surabaya to build a tomb. The intention is not to use labor, and these stones are useless in the world.

古文：君子尚其有情，小人无利可动，历千载无毁，俭之致也。
现代文：君子称道这坟墓有情义，小人又无利可图，历经千年没有被毁坏，这是由于薄葬的缘故。
English: The nobles praised that the tomb was meaningful, and the villains were unprofitable. After thousands of years, it had not been destroyed, which was due to the thin burial.

古文：吾去春入朝，因郭氏丧亡，缘陪陵旧义，自表营洛阳城东首阳之南为将来兆域。
现代文：我去年春天入朝，因为郭氏丧亡，根据陪陵的旧章程，自己上表营建洛阳城束首阳以南为将来的墓地。
English: Last spring, when I entered the imperial court, because of the death of the Guo clan, according to the old regulations of the accompanying mausoleum, I set myself the task of building a cemetery for the future south of Luoyang City and Shouyang.

古文：而所得地中有小山，上无旧冢。
现代文：而所得到的地域正中有小山，上边没有旧坟。
English: However, the area obtained has a hill in the middle and no old graves on the top.

古文：其高显虽未足比邢山，然东奉二陵，西瞻宫阙，南观伊洛，北望夷叔，旷然远览，情之所安也。
现代文：它的高大虽然比不上邢山，然而东近二陵，西可以看到宫阙，南面可以看到伊水洛水，北面可以望见伯夷叔齐，地方空旷视野开阔，是安卧之地。
English: Although it is not as tall as Mount Lushan, it is close to the two mausoleums in the east, the palace can be seen in the west, the Yishui Luoshui can be seen in the south, and the Boyi Uncle Qi can be seen in the north. The place is open and has a wide view, and it is a place to sleep.

古文：故遂表树开道，为一定之制，至时皆用洛水圆石，开遂道南向，仪制取法于郑大夫，欲以俭自完耳。
现代文：因而就植树开道，按一定的制度营建。到时全部用洛水的圆石，开隧道向南，礼制模仿郑大夫，希望用薄葬来自我完善。
English: Therefore, the road was opened by planting trees and built according to a certain system. At that time, all the round stones of Luoshui were used, the tunnel was opened to the south, the etiquette was imitated by Dr. Zheng, and it was hoped that the thin burial would be perfected by itself.

古文：棺器小敛之事，皆当称此。 
现代文：棺器小殓等事宜，都应与此相称。 
English: Matters such as coffins and caskets should be commensurate with this.

古文：子孙一以遵之。
现代文：子孙完全遵从遗嘱。
English: The descendants fully complied with the will.

古文：子锡嗣。
现代文：儿子丝望继嗣。
English: His son Si wants to be his successor.

古文：锡字世嘏。
现代文：杜锡字世嘏。
English: Du Xi is a surname.

古文：少有盛名，起家长沙王乂文学，累迁太子中舍人。
现代文：年少时有名望，最初做官是长沙王义的文学，渐次迁升为太子中舍人。
English: He was famous when he was young. At first, he was a literary official of Changsha Wangyi. Gradually, he was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：性亮直忠烈，屡谏愍怀太子，言辞恳切，太子患之。
现代文：性情耿直忠烈，多次劝谏愍怀太子，言辞恳切，太子感到忧虑。
English: Geng Zizhong was a loyal person. He repeatedly advised the Prince of Huai, and his words were earnest. The Prince was worried.

古文：后置针著锡常所坐处氈中，刺之流血。
现代文：后来在杜锡常坐处的毛毡中放了针，把杜锡刺出了血。
English: Later, a needle was placed in the felt where Du Xi often sat, and blood was pricked out of Du Xi.

古文：他日，太子问锡： 向著何事？ 
现代文：过后，太子问杜锡： 近来你在做什么事? 
English: Afterward, the prince asked Du Xi: What have you been doing recently?

古文：锡对： 醉不知。 
现代文：杜锡回答说： 喝醉了不知道。 
English: Duthie replied: "I don't know about being drunk.

古文：太子诘之曰： 君喜责人，何自作过也。 
现代文：太子追问说： 你喜欢苛求别人，怎么自己也作错事呢。 
English: The prince asked, "You like to be hard on others, so why do you do wrong things yourself?"

古文：后转卫将军长史。
现代文：后来转任卫将军长史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Major General of the Guards.

古文：赵王伦篡位，以为治书御史。
现代文：赵王伦篡位，任他为治书御史。
English: Zhao Wanglun usurped the throne, appointing him as the chief historian.

古文：孙秀求交于锡，而锡拒之，秀虽衔之，惮其名高，不敢害也。
现代文：孙秀请求和杜锡交往，而杜锡拒绝了他，孙秀虽然怨恨，但怕他名望高，不敢加害于他。
English: Sun Xiu requested to associate with Du Xi, but Du Xi refused him. Although Sun Xiu was resentful, he was afraid of his high reputation and did not dare to harm him.

古文：惠帝反政，迁吏部郎、城阳太守，不拜，仍迁尚书左丞。
现代文：惠帝复位，升杜锡为吏部郎、城阳太守，不接受，改为尚书左丞。
English: Emperor Hui was restored to the throne, and Du Xi was promoted to the position of the secretary and the governor of Chengyang. This was not accepted, and the title was changed to Shangshu Zuo Rong.

古文：年四十八卒，赠散骑常侍。
现代文：四十八岁去世，追赠散骑常侍。
English: He died at the age of forty-eight, and was posthumously awarded the title of Sanzhi-Zenshi.

古文：子乂嗣，在《外戚传》。
现代文：儿子杜义继嗣，见《外戚传》。
English: For his son, Du Yi Heir, see "The Tale of the Maternal Relatives."

古文：史臣曰：泰始之际，人祇呈贶，羊公起平吴之策，其见天地之心焉。
现代文：史臣曰：泰始年间，人与神奉献赐与，羊公提出平定吴国之策，由此可见天地之心。
English: Shichen said, "During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, people and gods made offerings to each other, and Yang Gong proposed a plan to pacify the State of Wu. From this, the heart of heaven and earth can be seen.

古文：昔齐有黔夫，燕人祭北门之鬼；赵有李牧，秦王罢东并之势。
现代文：过去齐国有黔夫，燕人在北门祭鬼；赵国有李牧，秦王停止了向东吞并的势头。
English: In the past, the state of Qi had the woodcutter, and the Yan people worshipped ghosts at the north gate; the state of Zhao had Li Mu, and the Qin King stopped the momentum of annexation to the east.

古文：桑枝不竞，瓜润空惭。
现代文：以德报怨，消除旧恨。
English: Use virtue to settle old grudges and eliminate old hatreds.

古文：垂大信于南服，倾吴人于汉渚，江衢如砥，襁袂同归。
现代文：在南方显示诚信，在汉水边倾倒了吴人，江南平定，男女老幼一同归心。
English: Show integrity in the south, overthrow the Wu people at the Han River, pacify the south of the Yangtze River, and unite men, women and children.

古文：而在乎成功弗居，幅巾穷巷，落落焉其有风飚者也。
现代文：至于成功而不居功，系幅巾居穷巷，是个落落大方有气量的人。
English: As for success without merit, he is a down-to-earth, generous and energetic person.

古文：杜预不有生知，用之则习，振长策而攻取，兼儒风而转战。
现代文：杜预不是生而知之，用时就学，挥鞭攻城取邑，有儒将之风而转战。
English: Du Yueh was not born with knowledge, but learned with time. He used the whip to attack the city and take the town. He had the style of a Confucian general and turned to war.

古文：孔门称四，则仰止其三；《春秋》有五，而独擅其一，不其优欤！
现代文：孔门称道四大弟子，而杜预崇敬其中三人；《春秋》分为五家，而杜预擅长其中一家，难道不优秀吗!
English: Confucius praised the four great disciples, while Du Pre revered three of them; "Spring and Autumn" is divided into five schools, and Du Pre is good at one of them, isn't it excellent!

古文：夫三年之丧，云无贵贱。
现代文：三年的丧礼，不分贵贱。
English: Three years of funerals, no matter how high or low.

古文：轻纤夺于在位，可以兴嗟；既葬释于储君，何其斯酷。
现代文：地位低微的超过在位的，令人感叹；下葬后太子就除去丧服，也太残酷了。
English: It's amazing that a low-ranking person can outrank the reigning one. It's also cruel that the crown prince removed his mourning clothes after the funeral.

古文：徇以苟合，不求其正，以当代之元良，为诸侯之庶子，檀弓习于变礼者也，杜预其有焉。
现代文：随便顺从，不求正道，把当代最杰出的人，当作诸侯的庶子，檀弓学习变通礼仪的情况，杜预也有吧。
English: It is also the case in Duyuan that people casually obey, do not seek the right path, and regard the most outstanding contemporary people as the bastard sons of princes, and learn flexible etiquette with a sandal bow.

古文：赞曰：汉池西险，吴江左回。
现代文：赞曰：选水险阻，呈江回漩。
English: Zang said: The water diversion is dangerous, and the river is turning into a whirlpool.

古文：羊公恩信，百万归来。
现代文：芝茧恩惠信义，百万人归顺。
English: Zhisheng's benevolence and trustworthiness won the obedience of a million people.

古文：昔之誓旅，怀经罕素。
现代文：誓师出征，不求爵位。
English: Those who take the oath to go to war do not seek a peerage.

古文：元凯文场，称为武库。
现代文：杜预在文坛，可以称作无所不通。
English: Du Yu in the literary world, can be called omniscient.

