古文：戴颙，字仲若，谯郡铚人也。
现代文：戴颙字仲若，是谯郡钅至人。
English: He wears the Chinese character "仲若" and is the most famous person in the county.

古文：父逵，兄勃，并隐遁有高名。
现代文：父亲戴逵、兄长戴勃，都因隐逸而享有盛名。
English: His father, Dai Ye, and his brother, Dai Bo, both lived in seclusion and enjoyed a high reputation.

古文：颙年十六，遭父忧，几于毁灭，因此长抱羸患。
现代文：戴颙十六岁时，父亲去世，因守孝几乎毁坏了身体，因而长年生病虚弱。
English: When Dai Yao was sixteen years old, his father passed away. Due to his filial piety, he almost ruined his body. As a result, he was sick and weak for many years.

古文：以父不仕，复修其业。
现代文：他因为父死而没有做官，重操旧业。
English: Because his father was never an official, he also took the path of seclusion.

古文：父善琴书，颙并传之，凡诸音律，皆能挥手。
现代文：父亲善于弹琴写字，都传给了戴颙，所有的音乐，戴颙都能弹奏。
English: His father was good at playing the piano and writing, both of which were passed on to Dai Yao. Dai Yao can play all kinds of music.

古文：会稽剡县多名山，故世居剡下。
现代文：会稽剡县名山很多，所以他一生就居在剡县。
English: There are many famous mountains in Jixian County, so their ancestors have been in Jixian County for generations.

古文：颙及兄勃，并受琴于父。父没，所传之声，不忍复奏，各造新弄，勃五部，颙十五部。
现代文：戴颙和兄长戴勃都从父亲那里学琴，父亲死后，所传授的声乐，他们不忍心再弹奏，于是各自创作了新曲，戴勃作了五部，戴颙有十五部。
English: Both Dai Bo and his brother Dai Bo learned the piano from their father. After their father's death, they couldn't bear to play the vocal music he had taught them, so they each composed new pieces. Dai Bo composed five pieces, and Dai Bo had fifteen pieces.

古文：颙又制长弄一部，并传于世。
现代文：戴颙又作了一部长曲，这些乐曲都流传于世。
English: Dai Juan also composed a long piece of music, and these pieces of music have been passed down to the world.

古文：中书令王绥常携宾客造之，勃等方进豆粥，绥曰： 闻卿善琴，试欲一听。 
现代文：中书令王绥曾带宾客去拜访他，戴勃他们正在吃豆粥。王绥说： 我听说你们善于弹琴，想听一听。 
English: In the middle of the book, Wang Yao once brought guests to visit him, and they were eating bean porridge. Wang Yao said: I heard that you are good at playing the piano and would like to listen.

古文：不答，绥恨而去。
现代文：戴勃他们没有回答，王绥怀恨而去。
English: They ignored him, and Wang Yao left with hatred in his heart.

古文：桐庐县又多名山，兄弟复共游之，因留居止。
现代文：桐庐县也有很多名山，兄弟两人一起去游览，因而留居下来。
English: Tonglu County also has many famous mountains, and the two brothers went hiking together.

古文：勃疾患，医药不给。颙谓勃曰： 颙随兄得闲，非有心于默语。
现代文：戴勃生病，医药不足，戴颙对戴勃说： 我跟随兄长得以闲暇，并不是有意沉默。
English: Dave is sick, medicine is in short supply, Daiya said to Dave: I follow my brother to have leisure, I don't mean to be silent.

古文：兄今疾笃，无可营疗，颙当干禄以自济耳。 
现代文：兄长现在病重，无法求治。我应当去求官禄来接济我们。 
English: My brother is now seriously ill and cannot be cured. I should go and ask the government for money to help us.

古文：乃告时求海虞令，事垂行而勃卒，乃止。
现代文：于是上书当朝求取海虞令，事情将要办成时，戴勃去世，就此作罢。
English: Therefore, the petition was submitted in the morning to obtain a decree on the state of the sea, and when the matter was about to be completed, Dave died, so it was abandoned.

古文：桐庐僻远，难以养疾，乃出居吴下。
现代文：桐庐县地处偏僻，难以养病，于是他到吴地定居下来。
English: Tonglu is a remote and desolate place, and it is difficult to recover from illness, so they moved from there to Wuxian.

古文：吴下士人共为筑室，聚石引水，植林开涧，少时繁密，有若自然。
现代文：吴地读书人共同替他建房，搬运石头，开涧引水，栽植树木，不多时就长得茂盛繁密，就好像自然长成的一样。
English: The readers in Wu jointly built a house for him, transported stones, dug ditches to divert water, planted trees, and soon they grew lush and dense, just as if they had grown naturally.

古文：乃述庄周大旨，著《逍遥论》，注《礼记·中庸》篇。
现代文：于是戴颙论述庄周精要的思想，作《逍遥论》，注释《礼记》的《中庸》篇。
English: As a result, Dai Zhen discussed the thoughts of Zhuang Zhou's essence, and wrote "On Indulgence" and annotated the "Middle Way" chapter of "Rituals."

古文：三吴将守及郡内衣冠要其同游野泽，堪行便往，不为矫介，众论以此多之。
现代文：三吴守将和郡里士大夫邀请他一起野游，能走就去，不虚情假意，因此众人都赞美他。
English: The governor of Sanwu and the county magistrate invited him to go on a field trip with him. He went as soon as he could, without any pretense, so everyone praised him.

古文：高祖命为太尉行参军，琅邪王司马属，并不就。
现代文：高祖任命他做太尉行参军、琅笽王司马属，他都没就职。
English: Gaozu appointed him to be the first lieutenant to join the army, but he did not take up the post.

古文：宋国初建，令曰： 前太尉参军戴颙、辟士韦玄，秉操幽遁，守志不渝，宜加旌引，以弘止退。
现代文：宋国刚建，下令说： 前太尉行参军戴颙、辟士韦玄，保持隐逸节操，坚守志向，始终不渝，应该加以表彰，来弘扬隐逸谦让的美德。
English: Song Guogangjian ordered: "Former captains who join the army should wear a yakitori and keep a low profile. They should be commended for upholding the virtues of discretion and modesty.

古文：并可散骑侍郎，在通直。 
现代文：他们都适合在通直任散骑侍郎。 戴颙没有赴任。
English: They are all suitable for serving as horseback riding attendants in Tong Zhi. Dai Tong did not go to the post.

古文：不起。太祖元嘉二年，诏曰： 新除通直散骑侍郎戴颙、太子舍人宗炳，并志托丘园，自求衡荜，恬静之操，久而不渝。
现代文：太祖元嘉二年，下诏说： 新任通直散骑侍郎戴颙、太子舍人宗炳，都把志向寄托在山林田园，甘心住在茅屋，过简朴的生活。
English: In the second year of the great-grandfather Yuan Jia's reign, the following edict was issued: The newly-appointed Tsuchizhongzanzhong riding attendant Dai Zheng and the prince Zheren Zong Zheng have both set their aspirations on the mountains and forests of the countryside, and are willing to live in huts and live a simple life.

古文：颙可国子博士，炳可通直散骑侍郎。 
现代文：恬静的节操，长久不变。戴颙适合当国子博士，宗炳适合作通直散骑侍郎。 
English: Zou Jing's self-restraint has remained unchanged for a long time. Wearing a yakitori is suitable for being a Kuniko doctor, and Zou Jing is suitable for being a horseback riding attendant.

古文：东宫初建，又征太子中庶子。
现代文：东宫刚刚建造时，戴颙又被征召为太子中庶子。
English: When the East Palace had just been built, Dai Ye was called up again as the prince's middle child.

古文：十五年，征散骑常侍，并不就。
现代文：元嘉十五年，他又被征召为散骑侍郎，都不就职。
English: In the 15th year of Yuan Jia, he was once again conscripted as a horseback cavalryman, but he never took up the post.

古文：衡阳王义季镇京口，长史张邵与颙姻通，迎来止黄鹄山。
现代文：衡阳王刘义季镇守京口时，长史张邵与戴颙结为亲家，迎请他住在黄鹄山。
English: When King of Hengyang Liu Yizi was guarding Jingkou, Changshi Zhang Shao and Dai Yu became relatives and invited him to live in Huangpi Mountain.

古文：山北有竹林精舍，林涧甚美。
现代文：山的北面有竹林和精致的房屋，竹林和溪涧都很美，戴颙就在溪涧边住下来。
English: On the north side of the mountain, there are bamboo groves and exquisite houses. The bamboo groves and streams are very beautiful. Dai Yu lived on the edge of the stream.

古文：颙憩于此涧，义季亟从之游，颙服其野服，不改常度。
现代文：义季屡次跟从他游玩，他还是穿他的村野服装，不改变平常的习惯。
English: Yoshisue often follows him on his outings. He still wears his village clothes and does not change his usual habits.

古文：为义季鼓琴，并新声变曲，其三调《游弦》、《广陵》、《止息》之流，皆与世异。
现代文：他替义季弹琴，琴曲都是他新作或改编的曲子，其中三种曲调《游》、《广陵》、《止息》之类，都与世不同。
English: He plays the piano for Yiji, and the piano pieces are all his new or adapted pieces, of which three tunes, "You," "Guangling" and "Stop Breathing," are all different from the world.

古文：太祖每欲见之，尝谓黄门侍郎张敷曰： 吾东巡之日，当晏戴公山也。 
现代文：太祖每每想见他的时候，就对黄门侍郎张敷说： 我巡视东方的那一天，一定要在黄鹄山宴请戴公。 
English: Whenever the great-grandfather wanted to see him, he would say to the Yellow Gate waiter Zhang Shiki: "On the day I inspect the East, I must invite Dai Gong to a banquet on Huangpi Mountain."

古文：以其好音，长给正声伎一部。
现代文：因为他喜好音乐，太祖长期供应他一部正声伎。
English: Because Dai Shizuku loved music, he was given a class of pure tone Kabuki.

古文：颙合《何尝》、《白鹄》二声，以为一调，号为清旷。
现代文：戴颙把《何尝》、《白鹄》二部乐曲融合起来，以谱成一个曲调，称为《清旷》。
English: Dai Zheng fused the two pieces of music "He Tastes" and "White Heron" and composed them into one tune, called "Clear Space."

古文：自汉世始有佛像，形制未工，逵特善其事，颙亦参焉。
现代文：从汉代开始有佛像，它的形体制作不精巧。戴逵特别善长制作佛像，戴颙也参与制作。
English: There have been Buddha statues since the Han Dynasty, and their shapes are not elaborately made. Dai Yong is particularly good at making Buddha statues, and Dai Yong is also involved in the production.

古文：宋世子铸丈六铜像于瓦官寺，既成，面恨瘦，工人不能治，乃迎颙看之。
现代文：宋世子在瓦官寺用铜铸造一丈六尺高的佛像，已成，嫌铜像面太瘦，工人不能重新修治，于是迎请戴颙来看看。
English: Song's son had cast a six-foot-tall bronze Buddha statue in the Wakan Temple. It was finished, but the bronze statue's face was too thin for the workers to repair, so they invited Dai Yao to take a look.

古文：颙曰： 非面瘦，乃臂胛肥耳。 
现代文：戴颙说： 这不是脸面瘦小，而是臂胛肥大罢了。 
English: Dai Yao said, "It's not that my face is thin and small, it's just that my arms are big and fat.

古文：既错减臂胛，瘦患即除，无不叹服焉。
现代文：磨减臂胛以后，瘦小的毛病就消除了。众人无不叹服。
English: After the brace was reduced, the problem of being too thin was eliminated. Everyone was impressed.

古文：十八年，卒，时年六十四。
现代文：太祖元嘉十八年，戴颙去世，时年六十四岁。
English: In the eighteenth year of the great ancestor Yuan Jia, Dai Ye passed away at the age of sixty-four.

古文：无子。
现代文：没有子女。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：景阳山成，颙已亡矣。上叹曰： 恨不得使戴颙观之。 
现代文：景阳山修成时，戴颙已经死了，皇上叹息说： 遗憾的是不能使戴颙来观看啊！ 
English: When the construction of Jingyang Mountain was completed, Dai Yao was already dead. The emperor sighed and said, "Unfortunately, I can't make Dai Yao come and watch!"

古文：陶潜，字渊明，或云渊明，字元亮，寻阳柴桑人也，曾祖侃，晋大司马。
现代文：陶潜字渊明，有人说渊明字元亮，是寻阳柴桑人。他的曾祖陶侃，是晋代的大司马。
English: Tao Qian Zi Yuanming, some say Yuanming Zi Yuanliang, is a Chai San man from Huanyang. His great-grandfather, Tao Kan, was the grand steward of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：潜少有高趣，尝著《五柳先生传》以自况，曰：
现代文：陶潜青年时期便有非常高雅的志向，曾经写过《五柳先生传》自述，文章说：
English: In his youth, Tao Qian had a very high-brow aspiration. He once wrote "Mr. Woliu's Biography," a self-description. The article said:

古文：先生不知何许人，不详姓字，宅边有五柳树，因以为号焉。闲静少言，不慕荣利。好读书，不求甚解，每有会意，欣然忘食。
现代文：不知先生是哪里人，更不知姓甚名谁，他家旁边有五棵柳树，于是便以五柳先生作自己的名称，先生沉默寡言，不羡慕荣华富贵，喜欢读书，但总是不深究其中涵意，每当碰到有趣的地方，便欣然雀跃，几乎忘掉吃饭。
English: I don't know who he is, and I don't even know his last name. There are five willow trees next to his house, so he named himself Mr. Willow. He is taciturn, does not envy the rich and famous, likes to read, but always does not delve into the meaning of it. Whenever he encounters an interesting place, he jumps for joy and almost forgets to eat.

古文：性嗜酒，而家贫不能恆得。
现代文：生性爱酒。
English: Sex is like wine.

古文：亲旧知其如此，或置酒招之。造饮辄尽，期在必醉，既醉而退，曾不吝情去留。环堵萧然，不蔽风日，短褐穿结，箪瓢屡空，晏如也。
现代文：但家境贫困，不能经常喝酒，亲朋故友知道这个情况，往往摆酒招致先生，而先生每到必饮，每饮必醉，醉而后返。房子不能挡风，遮不住太阳，先生穿着短褂，打着草带，锅碗常空，但淡然处之，常作文章娱乐自己。
English: But the family is poor and cannot drink often. Relatives, friends and old friends know this situation and often invite Mr. with wine, but Mr. must drink every time he comes, and every time he drinks he must get drunk and return drunk. The house cannot block the wind and cannot cover the sun. Mr. wears a short jacket, wears a straw belt, and his pots and bowls are always empty, but he treats it indifferently and often amuses himself by writing articles.

古文：尝著文章自娱，颇示己志，忘怀得失，以此自终。
现代文：不时显示自己的志趣，忘记了成功和失败，用这些来安度余年。
English: Show your ambition from time to time, forget about success and failure, and use these to spend the rest of your life.

古文：其自序如此，时人谓之实录。
现代文：他介绍自己也是这样，当时人觉得这说的是实话。
English: That's how he introduced himself, and it felt like the truth at the time.

古文：亲老家贫，起为州祭酒，不堪吏职，少日，自解归。州召主簿，不就。
现代文：渊明年老，家庭贫穷，只好出门当本州的祭酒官，但是受不了那些杂事，几天时间，便辞官而归，州里请他当主簿，陶渊明没有应征。
English: Yuanyuan was old and his family was poor, so he had to go out to work as a sacrificial liquor officer in his home state. However, he couldn't stand those chores. After a few days, he resigned from the post and returned home. The state asked him to be the chief clerk, but Tao Yuanyuan didn't apply for the conscription.

古文：躬耕自资，遂抱羸疾，复为镇军、建威参军。谓亲朋曰： 聊欲弦歌，以为三径之资，可乎？ 
现代文：而是亲自耕田种地，以获得温饱，又带病再次外出当镇军，建威参军，他对亲朋好友说： 我姑且想出去干一干，作为交友的资财，可以吗？ 
English: Instead, he personally cultivated fields and cultivated land in order to obtain food and clothing, and went out again with illness to be a town soldier, Jian Wei joined the army. He said to his relatives and friends: I just want to go out and do something, as an asset for making friends, is it okay?

古文：执事者闻之，以为彭泽令。
现代文：州的长官听到这话，便用他当彭泽令。
English: When the governor of the state heard this, he used him as a pawn.

古文：公田悉令吏种秫稻。妻子固请种粳，乃使二顷五十亩种秫，五十亩种粳。
现代文：公家分给的田，渊明叫部下官吏种上秫稻，他的妻子儿女一定要他种上禾亢米，于是在其中的二顷，五十亩种秫稻，五十亩种禾亢稻。
English: Yuanming asked his subordinate officials to plant glutinous rice in the fields allocated by the public, and his wife and children insisted that he plant glutinous rice. Therefore, in two hectares, fifty mu of glutinous rice and fifty mu of glutinous rice were planted.

古文：郡遣督邮至，县吏白应束带见之。潜叹曰： 我不能为五斗米折腰向乡里小人。 
现代文：郡里派督邮来县里检查，县里的老官吏说应该整衣相见，陶潜感叹说： 我不能因为五斗米便折腰向乡里小人磕头。 
English: The county sent a postal inspector to inspect the county, and the old officials in the county said that they should dress up and meet each other. Tao Qian sighed and said: I can't bend my back to the villain in the village because of five buckets of rice.

古文：即日解印绶去职。赋《归去来》，其词曰：
现代文：当天便辞职，作赋《归去来兮辞》，词章说：
English: On the same day, he resigned and composed the poem "Return Home," the lyrics of which said:

古文：归去来兮，园田荒芜胡不归。
现代文： 回去吧，田园荒芜。为什么不回去呢？
English: Go back, the countryside is desolate. Why not go back?

古文：既自以心为形役，奚惆怅而独悲。
现代文：既然觉得自己的心灵被形体驱使，何必遗憾而独自悲叹。
English: Since you feel that your mind is driven by the body, why should you be sorry and lament alone.

古文：悟已往之不谏，知来者之可追。实迷途其未远，觉今是而昨非。
现代文：可喜的是，明白以往的岁月无法补救，但未来还是可以挽回，确实是迷路了，但还不是太远，只觉今天对而昨天错。
English: Happily, I understand that the past years cannot be remedied, but the future can still be saved. I am indeed lost, but not too far away. I just feel that today is right and yesterday was wrong.

古文：舟遥遥以轻飏，风飘飘而吹衣。问征夫以前路，恨晨光之希微。
现代文：船儿缓缓地前进，风儿轻轻吹动衣角，向农夫问前面的路程，恨黎明的光芒太微弱。
English: The boat slowly moves forward, the wind gently blows the corners of the clothes, asks the farmer the distance ahead, and hates the weak light of dawn.

古文：乃瞻衡宇，载欣载奔。僮仆欢迎，稚子候门。三径就荒，松菊犹存。
现代文： 突然看到了我的故居，高兴地奔跑，僮仆们在门前欢迎，小儿子在门口迎接，庭院的小路长满了野草，门内的青松和秋菊还在。
English: Suddenly I saw my former home and ran with joy. The servants welcomed me at the door, my youngest son greeted me at the door, the path in the courtyard was overgrown with weeds, and the young pine trees and chrysanthemums inside the gate were still there.

古文：携幼入室，有酒停尊。引壶觞而自酌，盼庭柯以怡颜。倚南窗而寄傲，审容膝之易安。园日涉而成趣，门虽设而常关。策扶老以流忄妻，时矫首而遐观，云无心以出岫，鸟倦飞而知还。景翳翳其将入，抚孤松以盘桓。
现代文：我带着幼子到屋里面去，看见满壶的美酒，拿起酒杯自斟自饮，又向外怡然地欣赏庭院，靠在南窗边上傲然自得，看卧室能不能住得舒服，每日到园中走走，兴味十足，大门虽然摆在那里，但常关着，不时地扶着手杖，流连四顾，时不时抬头望远而神游天外，云儿潇洒地卷过山头，鸟儿飞倦了回到窝巢，日影不断地向西移动，我抚摸着苍松不忍离去。
English: I went inside the house with my toddler and saw a jug full of fine wine. I picked up the wine glass and poured myself a drink. I looked out to enjoy the courtyard. I leaned against the south window and felt proud of myself. I wondered if I could live comfortably in the bedroom. I walked around the garden every day with great interest. Although the gate was there, it was often closed. From time to time, I held my cane and looked around. From time to time, I looked up into the distance and my mind wandered out of the sky. The clouds rolled over the mountain, the birds flew back to their nests, and the sun's shadow moved westward. I

古文：归去来兮，请息交而绝游，世与我以相遗，复驾言兮焉求。
现代文： 回去吧，让我同外界人断绝交游。世俗既然同我合不来，我再出去寻求什么呢？
English: Go back, let me cut off my relations with the outside world. Since the world does not agree with me, what should I go out to seek?

古文：说亲戚之情话，乐琴书以消忧。农人告余以上春，将有事于西畴。
现代文：我喜欢亲人们的絮语，沉浸在琴书中消除忧愁，农夫们告诉我春耕来了，将要到西边的田地上干活。
English: I like the whispers of my relatives. Immersing myself in piano books helps to dispel my sadness. The farmers tell me that spring has arrived and that they are going to work in the fields to the west.

古文：或命巾车，或棹扁舟。既窈窕以穷壑，亦崎岖而经丘。
现代文：有时开出简陋的牛车，有时驾一叶小舟，寻幽探隐，穷极沟壑，或者跋涉崎岖的绝壁，或者慢慢游过小山。
English: Sometimes they drive a simple ox-drawn cart, sometimes a small boat, searching for hidden places, extreme ravines, or trudging through rugged cliffs, or slowly swimming through hills.

古文：木欣欣以向荣，泉涓涓而始流。善万物之得时，感吾生之行休。
现代文：树木欣欣向荣地生长，溪水淙淙地流动，身与万物为一体，感叹我这一辈子可能会迅速完结。 算了吧！
English: The trees are thriving, the streams are flowing, I am one with everything, and I am lamenting the fact that my life may soon be over.

古文：已矣乎，寓形宇内复几时，奚不委心任去留，胡为遑遑欲何之。
现代文：寄生天地之间还有多长时间，何不随心所欲一任东西，何必惶惶想这想那。
English: How long is there between the parasitic heaven and earth, why not do whatever you want, why worry about this and that.

古文：富贵非吾愿，帝乡不可期。怀良辰以孤往，或植杖而耘耔。登东皋以舒啸，临清流而赋诗。
现代文：富贵不是我的梦想，帝王显贵朝廷是不需希望的，抓住良辰美景体味吧，或者扶起犁钯去耕耘吧，登上东边的小山临风长啸，俯视清辙的小河高声吟唱。
English: Rich and noble is not my dream, the emperors and dignitaries of the imperial court do not need to hope, seize the good times, enjoy the beautiful scenery, or help the plough to plough, climb the hill on the east side of the wind, look down at the clear stream and sing loudly.

古文：聊乘化以归尽，乐夫天命复奚疑。
现代文：姑且与天地为一体，听从命运的安排，再还有什么疑问的。 
English: Let alone being one with heaven and earth, obeying the arrangement of fate, there is still some doubt.

古文：义熙末，征著作佐郎，不就。
现代文：义熙末年，陶潜被任用为著作佐郎，他未应命。
English: Toward the end of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Tao Qian was appointed to be the scribe Saro, but he did not follow the order.

古文：江州刺史王弘欲识之，不能致也。
现代文：江州刺史王弘想认识他，但不能召奉他。
English: Wang Hong, a painter from Jiangzhou, wanted to get to know him, but couldn't find the opportunity.

古文：潜尝往庐山，弘令潜故人庞通之赍酒具于半道栗里要之。
现代文：陶潜曾到庐山，王弘叫渊明的老朋友庞通之带着美酒在半路上等他，陶潜有脚病，他叫一个门生二个儿子抬着床车。
English: Tao Qian once went to Lushan. Wang Hong asked Yuanming's old friend Pang Tongzhi to wait for him on the halfway with good wine. Tao Qian had a foot disease. He asked a protégé and his two sons to carry the bed cart.

古文：潜有脚疾，使一门生二兒舁篮舆，既至，欣然便共饮酌，俄顷弘至，亦无忤也。
现代文：碰到之后，便和庞通之喝起酒来，不久王弘到了，陶渊明也拉他一起喝起来，欢然相处。
English: After they met, they drank wine with Pang Tongzhi, and soon Wang Hong arrived, Tao Yuanming also pulled him to drink together, and they got along happily.

古文：先是，颜延之为刘柳后军功曹，在寻阳，与潜情款。后为始安郡，经过，日日造潜，每往必酣饮致醉。临去，留二万钱与潜，潜悉送酒家，稍就取酒。
现代文：之前颜延之当刘柳的后军功曹，在寻阳时和陶潜交情很好，后来当上了始安郡太守，经过寻阳，每天来看渊明，每次都酣饮而醉，临去时，留下二万钱给渊明，陶潜把它们全部送给卖酒人家，然后来取酒痛饮。
English: Before Yan Yanzhi, when Liu Liu was a post-war military hero, he had a good relationship with Tao Qian when he was looking for the sun. Later, he became the governor of Shi'an County. After looking for the sun, he came to see Yuanming every day, and every time he drank and got drunk. When he left, he left twenty thousand money to Yuanming. Tao Qian gave them all to the wine seller, and then came to get the wine and drink it.

古文：尝九月九日无酒，出宅边菊丛中坐久，值弘送酒至，即便就酌，醉而后归。
现代文：一次九月九日没有酒，到屋边菊花丛中坐了好久，恰遇王弘送酒来了，马上喝了起来，醉了之后便回去。
English: Once, on September 9, he had no wine and sat in the chrysanthemum bushes on the rooftop for a long time. Wang Hong happened to bring him some wine, and he immediately drank it. After he got drunk, he went back.

古文：潜不解音声，而畜素琴一张，无弦，每有酒适，辄抚弄以寄其意。贵贱造之者，有酒辄设，潜若先醉，便语客： 我醉欲眠，卿可去。 
现代文：陶渊明不懂音乐，但准备了一张普通的琴，其中没有琴弦，每次有酒兴，便抚琴而歌，表达他的心意，无论贵贱，凡是造访他的人，有酒便拿出来，陶潜要是先醉，便告诉客人： 我喝醉了想睡觉，你可以走了。 
English: Tao Yuan clearly did not understand music, but he prepared an ordinary piano, which had no strings. Every time he felt like drinking, he would stroke the piano and sing, expressing his thoughts. No matter how rich or poor, anyone who visited him would take out the wine. If Tao Qian got drunk first, he would tell the guests: I'm drunk and want to sleep, you can go.

古文：其真率如此。
现代文：他就是这么真诚坦率。
English: It's just so innocent and direct.

古文：郡将候潜值其酒熟，取头上葛巾漉酒，毕，还复著之。
现代文：浔阳郡的太守等候陶潜去喝酒，恰遇酒热了，陶潜便取下头上的葛巾装酒，回来之后又再戴上。
English: The abbot of Fenyang County was waiting for Tao Qian to go out for a drink. When the wine was hot, Tao Qian took off the cloth on his head and put it on again when he returned.

古文：潜弱年薄官，不洁去就之迹。自以曾祖晋世宰辅，耻复屈身后代，自高祖王业渐隆，不复肯仕。所著文章，皆题其年月，义熙以前，则书晋氏年号；自永初以来，唯云甲子而已。
现代文：陶潜做官不长，轻易辞职，自以为曾祖父陶侃是晋代的宰辅，以再在宋朝臣服效劳为耻，自从刘裕的王业渐渐兴隆之后，不再愿意出仕，他所写的文章都题上所写的年月，义熙以前，便写上晋朝年号，从永初以来都云甲子某某年而已。
English: Tao Qian had not been an official for long, he easily resigned, he thought that his great-grandfather Tao Kan was the second-in-command of the Jin Dynasty, he was ashamed to serve the Song Dynasty again, since Liu Yu's reign gradually flourished, he was no longer willing to serve, the articles he wrote were all written on the years, before Yixi, he wrote the year of the Jin Dynasty, since the beginning of time, it was only a certain year.

古文：与子书以言其志，并为训戒曰：
现代文：他给儿子们写信表达自己的观点，并且训诫他们，信是这样说的：
English: He wrote to his sons expressing his views and admonishing them, saying:

古文：天地赋命，有往必终，自古贤圣，谁能独免。子夏言曰： 死生有命，富贵在天。 
现代文： 天地产生了人，有出生便有死亡，从古以来的圣人贤人没有例外，子夏说得好： 死生都是命中注定，富贵完全由天意决定。 
English: Heaven and earth gave birth to human beings, and with birth comes death. The saints and sages from ancient times are no exception. Zi Xia said it well: Life and death are predestined by fate, and wealth is entirely determined by the will of heaven.

古文：四友之人，亲受音旨，发斯谈者，岂非穷达不可妄求，寿夭永无外请故邪。吾年过五十，而穷苦荼毒，家贫弊，东西游走。性刚才拙，与物多忤，自量为己，必贻俗患，僶俛辞世，使汝幼而饥寒耳。常感孺仲贤妻之言，败絮自拥，何惭兒子。
现代文：孔门弟子、亲自接受孔子的告诫，说这样的话，难道不是穷通不能随便操纵得了的，长寿与夭折永远不是人为所能控制得了的，我年岁超过五十，但备受穷困艰难的折磨，因为家庭贫困，奔走东西，性格刚正，才能低劣，和人往往不和，为自己细细思想，必然遭到世人的打击，于是悄然离开官场，却使你们幼年时便遭饥寒，常常感叹晏儒仲的贤妻的话，身抱破被而不忧虑，更何况是儿子们。
English: Disciple of Confucius, personally accept the admonition of Confucius, and say such words, isn't it true that the poor can't be easily manipulated, longevity and premature death are never humanly controllable, I am over fifty years old, but I suffer from poverty and hardship, because the family is poor, running things, upright personality, inferior talent, and people often don't get along, think carefully for yourself, and are bound to be hit by the world, so quietly leave the officialdom, but make you suffer from hunger and cold when you are young, often lament the words of the virtuous wife of Zhuzhong, and don't worry about breaking the qu

古文：此既一事矣。但恨邻靡二仲，室无莱妇，抱兹苦心，良独罔罔。
现代文：这也是其中一件事，遗憾的邻人中没有两仲子，家中没有安于贫贱的老莱子妻那样的老婆，抱着这样的苦心，非常遗憾。
English: This is also one of the things, regrettable neighbors do not have a two-step son, there is no wife at home like the poor wife of Laozi, holding such painstaking, very sorry.

古文：少年来好书，偶爱闲静，开卷有得，便欣然忘食。
现代文： 我自少年以来便喜爱读书，偶然在闲静无事的时候，打开书籍，从中获得快乐，每每忘掉吃饭。
English: Ever since I was a boy, I have loved reading. Occasionally, when there is nothing to do, I open a book, derive pleasure from it, and often forget to eat.

古文：见树木交廕，时鸟变声，亦复欢尔有喜。
现代文：一见树影疏疏，鸟啼声音破空而来，也很欢快雀跃。
English: At the sight of sparse tree shadows and the sound of birds chirping in the sky, they were also very happy.

古文：尝言五六月北窗下卧，遇凉风暂至，自谓是羲皇上人。
现代文：曾经说过五六月在北边窗子边乘凉，碰到凉风突然到来，便感觉自己成了羲皇时的安乐百姓。
English: He once said that if he was lying under a north-facing window in May or June and a cool breeze suddenly blew, he would consider himself to be as relaxed as the ancients.

古文：意浅识陋，日月遂往，缅求在昔，眇然如何。
现代文：我思虑浅薄，见识粗鄙，岁月流逝，思想当年，渺然无可奈何。
English: My thoughts are shallow, my insight is coarse, the years have passed, and the thoughts of that year are dim and helpless.

古文：疾患以来，渐就衰损，亲旧不遗，每以药石见救，自恐大分将有限也。恨汝辈稚小，家贫无役，柴水之劳，何时可免，念之在心，若何可言。
现代文： 从发病以来，我逐渐地衰弱下去，亲朋故友们没有忘记我们，每每以药相救，然而我认为我的生命恐怕不会很长了，只恨你们年纪幼小家中贫困没有人帮助，获得柴米油盐的辛劳何时可以免除，心中想起这些，又有什么话可说。
English: Since the onset of the disease, I have gradually weakened. My relatives, friends and old friends have not forgotten us, and they always use medicine to save me. However, I think that my life may not be very long. I only hate your young and poor families who have no one to help. When can I get rid of the hard work of obtaining fuel, oil and salt? When I think about this, I have something to say.

古文：然虽不同生，当思四海皆弟兄之义。鲍叔、敬仲，分财无猜；归生、伍举，班荆道旧，遂能以败为成，因丧立功。他人尚尔，况共父之人哉！
现代文：虽然你们不是一母所生，但想起四海之内皆兄弟，鲍叔、管仲划分财物互不猜疑，归生、伍举，在路上砍荆棘坐下，叙诉旧情，他的才能因败成功，因失而得，他人尚且如此，何况你们都是一父所生。
English: Although you are not born of the same mother, remember that you are all brothers in the four seas. Uncle Bao, Guanzhong, division of property, mutual non-suspicion, rebirth, promotion, sitting down on the road cutting thorns, telling the old story, his talent is successful because of defeat, because of loss, others are still the same, and you are all born of the same father.

古文：颍川韩元长，汉末名士，身处卿佐，八十而终，兄弟同居，至于没齿。
现代文：颍川人韩元长，是汉末名士。自身当了公卿，八十岁时去世，兄弟们仍然居住在一起，一直到死。
English: Han Yuan Chang, a native of Luochuan, was a famous man at the end of the Han Dynasty. He himself became a noble and died at the age of eighty. The brothers still lived together until their death.

古文：济北氾稚春，晋时操行人也，七世同财，家人无怨色。
现代文：济北人汜稚春是晋代的高尚人物，七代没有分家，家中人没有半点怨恨之色。
English: The Jibei people of Jizhichun were noble figures in the Jin Dynasty. There were no branch families in the seventh generation, and there was not a trace of resentment among the family members.

古文：告人曰： 我布衣草莱之人，少长垄亩，何枉轩冕之客。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 高山仰止，景行行止。 你们应该懂得啊，我还有什么话说。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Mountains rise and fall, scenery changes and changes." You should understand, I have nothing else to say.

古文：子真还，表荐之，征员外散骑侍郎，又不就。元嘉八年，卒，时年五十。
现代文：陶渊明又写了《命子诗》给儿子们。他在元嘉四年去世，享年六十三岁。
English: Tao Yuanming also wrote "Life-child Poem" for his sons. He died in the fourth year of the Yuan Jia, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：沈道虔，吴兴武康人也。少仁爱，好《老》、《易》，居县北石山下。
现代文：沈道虔，吴兴武康人，少年便非常仁厚，喜爱老、庄哲学，居住在县城北边的石山之下。
English: Shen Daoqian, Wu Xingwu Kangren, the boy is very benevolent, loves the old, Zhuang philosophy, lives under the stone mountain north of the county seat.

古文：孙恩乱后饥荒，县令庾肃之迎出县南废头里，为立小宅，临溪，有山水之玩。
现代文：孙恩之乱后发生饥荒，县令庾肃之迎接他出来到县城南边的废头里，为他建起小屋，前临小溪，那里有很美的山水。
English: After the Sun Yat-sen Rebellion, a famine occurred, and the county magistrate, Su Su, came out to the wasteland south of the county seat to meet him. He built a hut for him, in front of a stream, where there is a beautiful landscape.

古文：时复还石山精庐，与诸孤兄子共釜庾之资，困不改节。
现代文：沈道虔不时地回到石山旧舍，和那些成了孤儿的兄长的儿子们共用破旧的家物，不管多么困难，都不改变节操。
English: Shen Tao reverently returned to the old house in Shishan from time to time, and shared the dilapidated home with the sons of the orphaned brothers. No matter how difficult it was, they did not change the discipline.

古文：受琴于戴逵，王敬弘深敬之。郡州府凡十二命，皆不就。
现代文：从戴逵那里学会弹琴，王敬弘深深地敬仰他，本郡和本州一共十二次征用他，他都没有应命。
English: Wang Jinghong learned to play the piano from Dai Yao, and Wang Jinghong deeply admired him. He was requisitioned a total of twelve times by the county and the state, but he did not comply with his orders.

古文：有人窃其园莱者，还见之，乃自逃隐，待窃者取足去后乃出。
现代文：一次，有人偷了道虔家菜园的菜，沈道虔回来看到了，他自己便躲了起来，等偷菜的人拿够走后，沈道虔才出来。
English: Once, someone stole vegetables from the vegetable garden of the Daoqian family. Shen Daoqian came back and saw it. He hid himself. Shen Daoqian only came out after the thief had taken enough vegetables.

古文：人拔其屋后笋，令人止之，曰： 惜此笋欲令成林，更有佳者相与。 
现代文：有人拔他家屋后的竹笋，他便叫那人不要拔，说： 我希望竹笋长成竹枝。我另有更好的给你。 
English: When someone pulled up the bamboo stalk behind his house, he told the man not to pull it up, saying, "I want the bamboo stalk to grow into a branch. I have something better for you."

古文：乃令人买大笋送与之。
现代文：于是叫人买更大的竹笋送给那人，那位盗笋的人非常惭愧，坚决不要。
English: So he asked someone to buy a bigger bamboo raft and give it to the man. The man who stole the raft was very ashamed and decided not to take it.

古文：盗者惭不取，道虔使置其门内而还。常以捃拾自资，同捃者争穟，道虔谏之不止，悉以其所得与之，争者愧恧。后每争，辄云： 勿令居士知。 
现代文：沈道虔叫放在那人的屋里才出来。他常常以拾稻麦过日子，跟他一起拾麦的人抢麦穗，道虔劝他不要这样，那人不听，道虔便把自己的全部给他，争抢的人非常惭愧，以后每次争抢时总是说： 不要叫沈先生知道了。 
English: He often lived by picking up rice. The person who picked up the wheat with him would snatch the ears of wheat. Dao Qian advised him not to do this. The man did not listen, and Dao Qian gave him everything he had. The person who was snatching was very ashamed. From then on, every time there was a snatching, he would always say, "Don't let Mr. Shen know."

古文：冬月无复衣，戴颙闻而迎之，为作衣服，并与钱一万。
现代文：他冬天没有夹衣，戴听说便把他接来，为他做好衣服并送给他一万钱。
English: He didn't have a jacket in the winter, and Dai heard about it and took him in, made clothes for him and gave him ten thousand yuan.

古文：既还，分身上衣及钱，悉供诸兄弟子无衣者。
现代文：道虔回去之后，把自身的衣服和钱都送给了侄子中没有衣服的。
English: When Dao Qian returned, he gave his clothes and money to his nephew who had no clothes.

古文：乡里年少，相率受学。道虔常无食，无以立学徒。
现代文：乡中少年，成群地当他的学生，道虔常常没饭吃，无法建立学舍。
English: The boys in the village flocked to be his students, and Dao Qian often went without meals and was unable to build a schoolhouse.

古文：武康令孔欣之厚相资给，受业者咸得有成。太祖闻之，遣使存问，赐钱三万，米二百斛，悉以嫁娶孤兄子。
现代文：武康令孔欣之便周济了他很多物资，使他的学生得以成就学业，太祖听说，派人慰劳他，赐钱三万，大米二百斛。沈道虔把它们全部用作为兄弟孩子们嫁娶的费用。
English: Wu Kang ordered Kong Xinzhi to give him a lot of materials, so that his students could complete their studies. The great-grandfather heard that he sent someone to console him, giving him thirty thousand yuan and two hundred baht of rice. Shen Daoqian used all of them as wedding expenses for his brothers and children.

古文：征员外散骑侍郎，不就。
现代文：道虔接着被征调为员外散骑侍郎，他未应征。
English: Dogen was then conscripted as a non-commissioned officer, but he did not enlist.

古文：累世事佛，推父祖旧宅为寺。至四月八日，每请像。请像之日，辄举家感恸焉。
现代文：沈道虔家好几代信奉佛教，他便把祖父父亲原居住的故宅作寺庙，每年到四月初八，都请佛像，请像的那一天，他们便全家感叹悲痛。
English: Shen Daoqian's family has been practicing Buddhism for several generations. He turned his grandfather's former home into a temple. Every year, on the 8th day of the 4th month, they would bring Buddha statues. On the day they brought the statues, the whole family was overcome with grief.

古文：道虔年老，菜食，恆无经日之资，而琴书为乐，孜孜不倦。
现代文：沈道虔年老，吃的是素食，常常一天不能吃饱，他却以弹琴写字为乐，孜孜不倦。
English: Shen Tao is a pious old man, eats vegetarian food, often can not eat enough in a day, but he enjoys playing the piano and writing, tirelessly.

古文：太祖敕郡县令，随时资给。
现代文：太祖敕令本郡县随时供给。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the county to provide it at any time.

古文：子肃之，颇传其业，官至豫章郡丞。朱百年，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：元嘉二十六年去世，时年八十二岁。他的儿子沈慧锋，继承父亲的事业，被征为从事，他都没有从命。朱百年，会稽山阴人。
English: Yuan Jia died at the age of 82, in the 26th year of his reign. His son, Shen Huifeng, inherited his father's business and was conscripted to work in it, but he did not live up to his promise. Zhu Shibei was a member of the Shan Yin Society.

古文：祖恺之，晋右卫将军。
现代文：他祖父朱恺之，是晋朝的右卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Zhu Xizhi, was the Right Guard General of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父涛，扬州主簿。
现代文：父亲朱涛，是扬州主簿。
English: His father, Zhu Tao, was the chief accountant of Yangzhou.

古文：百年少有高情，亲亡服阕，携妻孔氏入会稽南山，以伐樵采箬为业。
现代文：朱百年少年时便有非常崇高的气节。他在守孝期间，携带妻子孔氏到会稽南山中，以采竹砍柴为生。
English: Zhu Centenary had a very noble temperament when he was a boy. During his filial piety, he took his wife Kong to the Nanshan Mountain to collect bamboo and chop wood for a living.

古文：每以樵箬置道头，辄为行人所取，明旦亦复如此。
现代文：每次他都把柴竹放在路边，总是被过路的人拿去。第二天照样如此。
English: Every time he put firewood and bamboo on the roadside, it was always picked up by passers-by, and the same thing happened the next day.

古文：人稍怪之，积久方知是硃隐士所卖，须者随其所堪多少，留钱取樵箬而去。
现代文：人们觉得这很奇怪，过了好久才知道是朱隐士卖的，拿的人根据竹柴的多少，留下钱拿走了。
English: People thought this was very strange. It took a long time to find out that it was Zhu Yinshi who sold the bamboo, and the person who took it left the money according to the amount of bamboo.

古文：或遇寒雪，樵箬不售，无以自资，辄自搒船送妻还孔氏，天晴复迎之。
现代文：有时遇到天寒下雪，柴竹卖不出去，他便无法生活，便亲自划船送妻子回娘家，天晴了再接回来。
English: Sometimes, when it's cold and snowy and he can't sell his firewood and bamboo, he can't make a living, so he paddles his wife back to his daughter's house himself, and picks her up again when the weather clears.

古文：有时出山阴为妻买缯彩三五尺，好饮酒，遇醉或失之。
现代文：有时他到山阴市上为妻子买绸缎三五尺。他很爱喝酒，遇到喝醉了便丢下绸缎。
English: Sometimes he would go to the Shanyin market to buy three to five feet of silk stockings for his wife. He liked to drink a lot, and when he got drunk, he would throw the silk stockings away.

古文：颇能言理，时为诗咏，往往有高胜之言。
现代文：他能读一些玄妙的东西，不时作一些诗，其中往往有惊人妙笔。
English: He could read something profound, and from time to time he wrote poetry, often of a surprising quality.

古文：郡命功曹，州辟从事，举秀才，并不就。
现代文：本郡征他为功曹，本州征他为从事，推荐他当秀才，他都未应任。
English: The county appointed him as a meritorious person, the state appointed him as an expert, and recommended him as a talented person, but he did not accept the appointment.

古文：隐迹避人，唯与同县孔觊友善。觊亦嗜酒，相得辄酣，对饮尽欢。
现代文：隐去形迹，避开人事，只与本县的孔觊友好，孔觊也好喝酒，二人相会便喝个够，总是非常尽兴。
English: He hides his true identity, avoids people, and is only friendly with Kong Hao in this county. Even though Kong Hao likes to drink, when the two meet, they drink a lot and are always very happy.

古文：百年家素贫，母以冬月亡，衣并无絮，自此不衣绵帛。
现代文：朱百年家境贫困，母亲是冬月去世的，衣服没有棉絮。从这以后朱百年便不穿绸缎棉帛。
English: Zhu Centenary's family was poor, his mother died in the winter, and his clothes did not have lint. From then on, Zhu Centenary did not wear silk and cotton socks.

古文：尝寒时就觊宿，衣悉夹布，饮酒醉眠，觊以卧具覆之，百年不觉也。
现代文：冬天某次要到孔觊那里拜访，他穿的全部是夹布衣服，喝酒后醉了睡在床上，孔觊用被子裹在他身上，百年不知道。
English: Once, when it was cold, he spent the night at Kong Yao's house, wearing only a jacket. When he fell asleep drunk, Kong Yao covered him with a quilt, and he did not notice it for a hundred years.

古文：既觉，引卧具去体，谓觊曰： 绵定奇温。 
现代文：他醒了之后，把被子挪开，对孔觊说： 棉絮一定特别暖和。 
English: After she woke up, she took the quilt off her body and said to Kong Hao, "The silk is really warm."

古文：因流涕悲恸，觊亦为之伤感。
现代文：于是泪流满面，悲痛万分。孔觊也为他伤感不己。
English: As a result, tears streamed down his face and he was overcome with grief. Kong Yao also felt sad for him.

古文：除太子舍人，不就。
现代文：朱百年被任命为太子舍人，他不应命。
English: He was summoned by the imperial court to resign as crown prince and not to take up the post.

古文：颜竣为东扬州，发教饷百年谷五百斛，不受。
现代文：颜竣当东扬州刺吏，命令送五百斛谷给他，他拒绝了。
English: Yan Shun, the East Yangzhou assassin, was ordered to give him five hundred rupees, but he refused.

古文：时山阴又有寒人姚吟，亦有高趣，为衣冠所重。
现代文：当时另有一个寒族人士姚吟，也有高洁的志趣，被士族们看重。
English: At that time, there was another person from the Kams, Yao Ying, who also had noble aspirations and was highly valued by the warrior class.

古文：义阳王昶临州，辟为文学从事，不起。
现代文：义阳王刘昶当本州刺史，征他为文学从事，他没有去。
English: Liu Xuan, the King of Yiyang, wanted him to be engaged in literature when he was writing the history of the province, but he did not go.

古文：竣饷吟米二百斛，吟亦辞之。
现代文：颜竣复赠姚吟二百斛米，姚吟也辞退了。
English: Yan Shun gave Yao Ying rice worth 200 baht, and Yao Ying didn't want it.

古文：百年孝建元年卒山中，时年八十七。
现代文：朱百年在孝建元年逝世山中，当年八十七岁。
English: Zhu Bicentennial died in the mountains in the first year of Xiao Jian, at the age of eighty-seven.

古文：蔡兴宗为会稽太守，饷百年妻米百斛，百年妻遣婢诣郡门奉辞固让，时人美之，以比梁鸿妻。
现代文：蔡兴宗当会稽太守，赠给朱百年的妻子一百斛米，百年的妻子派婢子坚决送还衙门。当时人们很称赞这种举动，把朱妻比作汉朝梁鸿的妻子。
English: Cai Xingzong, when he was the inspector-general of the association, presented his wife of 100 years with a hundred glutinous rice, and his wife of 100 years sent her servant to resolutely return the gate. At that time, people praised this action, comparing Zhu's wife to the wife of Liang Hong of the Han Dynasty.

古文：王素，字休业，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王素，字休业，是琅笽临沂人氏。
English: Wang Su, who has taken a leave of absence, is a member of the Lin family.

古文：高祖翘之，晋光禄大夫。
现代文：他高祖王翘之，是晋朝光禄大夫。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Wang Gezhi, was a doctor of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：素少有志行，家贫母老。
现代文：王素少年时便志气不凡。家庭贫困，母亲年老。
English: When Wang Su was a young boy, he had an extraordinary spirit. His family was poor and his mother was old.

古文：初为庐陵国侍郎，母忧去职。
现代文：刚开始当庐陵国侍郎，母亲去世，他便辞职，守孝期满，庐陵王刘绍当江州刺史，亲人旧友劝修整故居。
English: At the beginning, when he was the attendant of Fuling, his mother died, he resigned, the period of filial piety expired, Liu Shao, the king of Fuling, became the history of Jiangzhou, and relatives and old friends advised him to renovate the former residence.

古文：服阕，庐陵王绍为江州，亲旧劝素修完旧居，素不答，乃轻身往东阳，隐居不仕，颇营田园之资，得以自立。爱好文义，不以人俗累怀。
现代文：王素没有顺从，而是丢下家中财物到东阳，隐居不出，做一些田园事务，得以生存。他爱好文章，不因世俗琐事污染自己的高洁胸怀。
English: Wang Su did not obey, but left his family's belongings and went to Dongyang to live in seclusion and do some rural affairs in order to survive. He loved writing and did not pollute his noble mind with worldly trifles.

古文：世祖即位，欲搜扬隐退，下诏曰： 济世成务，咸达隐微，轨俗兴让，必表清节。
现代文：世祖即位后，想搜寻一些隐士。为此下诏书说： 处理事务，必须使隐居的人出来做官，移风易俗，必须表扬清正廉洁的人，我日夜寻求善良的人，想改变刻薄的风气。
English: After the ancestor ascended the throne, he wanted to search for some hermits. For this reason, the following edict said: To deal with affairs, it is necessary to make people who live in seclusion come out to be officials, to change customs, and to praise people who are clean and honest. I am looking for kind people day and night, and I want to change the mean culture.

古文：朕昧旦求善，思惇薄风，琅邪王素、会稽硃百年，并廉约贞远，与物无竞，自足皋亩，志在不移。宜加褒引，以光难进。并可太子舍子。 
现代文：琅笽人王素，会稽朱百年，都廉洁俭朴，坚贞淡泊，不和世人争利，在耕耘地中自得其乐，志气不变，应该加以褒奖推荐，让谦让的得到光荣，他们都可以当太子舍人。 
English: Wang Su, a hundred years old, is honest and frugal, steadfast and unpretentious, does not compete with the world for profits, enjoys himself in cultivating the land, and his aspirations remain unchanged. He should be commended and recommended, and those who are humble should be honored. They can all be princes.

古文：大明中，太宰江夏王义恭开府辟召，辟素为仓曹属；太宗泰始六年，又召为太子中舍人，并不就。
现代文：大明年中，太宰江夏王刘义恭开设府台，征召王素贤人，任命王素为仓曹部的官职。太宗泰始六年，王素又被召为太子中舍人，他都没有出来。
English: In the middle of the 19th century, Liu Yigong, the Dazai King of Jiangxia, set up a government office, conscripted Wang Su Xianren, and appointed Wang Su to the official post of Cang Cao. In the first six years of Taizong Tai, Wang Su was also called to be the prince's subordinate, but he did not come out.

古文：素既屡被征辟，声誉甚高。
现代文：王素既然多次被邀请出任，名声越来越响。
English: Since Wang Su has been invited to serve many times, his reputation is getting louder.

古文：山中有蚿虫，声清长，听之使人不厌，而其形甚丑，素乃为《蚿赋》以自况。
现代文：东阳山中有一种虫玄虫，声音清晰而又绵长，百听不厌，但长的形状很丑。王素于是作《虫玄赋》比拟自己。
English: There is a kind of insect in Dongyang Mountain, the sound is clear and long. I can't get tired of listening to it, but the long shape is ugly. Wang Su then compared himself with "Insect."

古文：七年，卒，时年五十四。
现代文：七年他逝世了，时年五十四岁。
English: He died seven years later, aged 54.

古文：时又有宋平刘睦之、汝南州韶、吴郡褚伯玉，亦隐身求志。
现代文：当时又有宋平人刘睦之、汝南人州韶、吴郡人褚伯玉也隐居自乐。
English: At that time, Song Ping's Liu Muxizhi, Yunnan's Zhu Xi, and Wu County's Zou Boyu also lived in seclusion to enjoy themselves.

古文：睦之居交州，除武平太守，不拜。
现代文：刘睦之居在高州，被任命为比平太守，他不赴任。
English: Liu Mutsuki lived in Gaozhou and was appointed the governor of Biping Province, but he did not take up the post.

古文：韶字伯和，黄门侍郎文孙也。筑室湖孰之方山，征员外散骑侍郎，征北行参军，不起。
现代文：州韶字伯和，是黄门侍郎州文的孙子，他在湖熟的方山建起居室，被征用为员外散骑侍郎、征北行参军，他没有出来。
English: He was the grandson of Huangmen's chamberlain, Zhu Wen. He built a living room on Fangshan Mountain in Hukou. He was requisitioned as a non-commissioned cavalryman and joined the army in the Northern Expedition. He did not come out.

古文：伯玉居剡县瀑布山三十余载，扬州辟议曹从事，不就。
现代文：伯玉隐居剡县的瀑布山三十多年，扬州府征他为议曹从事，他也未应命。
English: He has been living in seclusion on the Waterfall Mountain in Handan County for more than 30 years. The Yangzhou government asked him to be a councillor, but he did not follow the order.

